TWO LECTURES


ON


POPULATION,


DELIVERED BEFORE


THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


I\


EASTER TERM, 1828.


BY


NASSAU WILLIAM SENIOR,

I. ATE FELLOW OF MAGDALEN COLLEGE, A.M., PROFESSOR OF

POLITICAL ECOKOMV.


TO WHICH IS ADDED, A

CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE AUTHOR

' ASD THE

REV. T. R. MALTHUS.


LONDON :

SAUNDERS AND OTLKY, CONDUIT STREET.

1828.


ot)-i^ V- ^ ^ ^ • ^ • ^


■•//! /. •>■ > ■ "v '■ -f"-^''"" ^


^'f ,A


1


ADVERTISEMENT.


Mr. Malthus has honoured me with a
correspondence, which he has permitted me
to append to these Lectures.

I feel the disadvantageous contrast to
which I expose my own compositions by

their juxta-position to those of our most
eminent living philosophical writer; but
I also feel that nothing could justify me in
withholding from the public the instruc-
tion contained in Mr. Malthus's Letters.


LECTURE I.


POPULATION.

In the present and the following Lecture I
propose to consider the subject of Population.
A subject of which the details are almost end-
less, but the general principles few and plain.
It is indebted probably to the latter circum-
stance for the degree in which it has attracted
the public attention. The doctrines of rent,
of value, and of money, are each as important
as that of population, but they require the use
of highly abstract terms, and depend on long
chains of reasoning. They have, therefore,
been avoided or neglected by many who are
familiar, or suppose themselves to \)e familiar,

B


2 POPULATION.

with the simple laws of population. In my
introductory Lecture I sketched what appeared
to me an outline of those laws in the following
proposition : — " That the population of a given
district is limited only by moral or physical
evil, or by deficiency in the means of obtain-
ing those articles of wealth ; or, in other words,
those necessaries, decencies, and luxuries, which
the habits of the individuals of each class of the
inhabitants of that district lead them to require."
The only modification which subsequent re-
flection induces me to apply to this proposition
is, 'to substitute for the word *' deficiency," the
words, " the apprehension of a deficiency."
My reasons for this substitution are : first,

that the actual deficiency of necessaries is a
»
branch of physical evil ; and, secondly, that it

is not the existence of a deficiency, but the
ftar of its existence which is the principal
igheck to population, so far as necessaries are
concerned, . and the sole check as respects de-
cencies and luxuries.

But before I take this proposition in detail.


POPULATION. o

I feel that I ought to explain, as precisely as
I can, what I mean by the words, necessaries,
decencies, and luxuries; terms which have
been used ever since the moral sciences first
attracted attention in this country, but have
never, within my knowledge, been defined.

It is scarcely necessary to remind you, that
they are relative terms, and that some person
must always be assigned, with reference to
whom a given commodity or service is a luxury,
a decency, or a necessary.

By necessaries the», I express those things^
the use of which is requisite to keep a given
individual in the health and strength essential
to his going through his habitual occupations.

By decencies, those things which a given in*
dividual must use in order to preserve his e^t
isting rank in society.

Every thing else of which a given individual
makes use; or, in other words, all that portion
of his consumption which is not essential to
his health and strength, or to the preservation
of his existing-rank in society, I. term luxury.

B 2


4 POPULATION.

It is obvious, that when consumed by the
inhabitants of different countries, or even by
different individuals in the same country, the
same things may be either luxuries, decencies,
or necessaries.

Shoes are necessaries to all the inhabitants
of England. Our habits are such, that there
is not an individual whose health would not
suffer from the want of them. To the lowest
class of the inhabitants of Scotland they are
luxuries. Custom enables them to go bare-
foot without inconvenience and without degra-
dation. When a Scotchman rises from the
lowest to the middling classes of society they
become to him decencies. He wears them not
to preserve his feet, but his station in life. To
the highest classes, who have been accustomed
to them from infancy, they are as much neces-
saries as they are to all classes in England.
To the higher classes in Asia wine is a luxury,
and tobacco a decency. In Europe it is the
reverse. The Asiatic drinks, and the Eu-
ropean smokes, not in obedience but in oppo-


POPULATION. O

sition both to the rules of health, and to the
forms of society. But wine in Europe and
the pipe in Asia are among the refreshipents
to which a guest is entitled, and which it
would be as indecent to refuse in the one
country as to offer in the other.

It has been said that the coalheavers and
lightermen, and some others among the hard
working London labourers could not support
their toils without the stimulus of porter. If
this be true, porter is to them a necessary.
To all others it is a luxury. A carriage is a
decency to a woman of fashion, a necessary to
a physician^ and a luxury to a tradesman.

The question whether a given commodity is
to be considered as a decency or a luxury, is
obviously one to which no answer can be given,
unless the place, the time, and the rank of the
individual using it be specified. The dress
which in England was only decent one hundred
years ago, would be almost extravagant now;
while the house and furniture, which now
would afford only decent accommodation to a


ft POPULATION.

gentleman^ would then have been luxurious (or
a peer.

The causes which entitle a commodity to be
called a necessary^ are more permanent and
more general. They depend partly on the
habits in which the individual in question has
been brought up, partly on the nature of his
occupation, on the lightness or the severity of
the labours and hardships that he has to undergo^
and partly on the climate in which he lives.

Of these causes I have illustrated the two
first by the familiar examples of shoes and
porter. ^But the principal cause is climate.
The fuel, shelter, and raiment which are
essential to a Laplander's existence, would be
worse than useless under the tropics. And
as habits and occupations are very slowly
changed, and climate suffers scarcely any al'-
teration, the commodities which are necessary
to the different classes of the inhabitants of a
given district, may, and generally do, remain
for centuries unchanged^ while their decencies
{wd luxuries are continually varying.


POPULATION.


To recur, however^ to my original proposi>-
tion. I have stated, that the population of a
given district is Ihnited only by moral or phy-
sical evil, or by the apprehension of a de^
ficiency of .necessaries, decencies, or luxu-
ries.

It is now generally admitted, indeed it is
strange that it should ever have required to be
pointed out, that every species; of plant, or
animal, which is capable of increase, either
by generation, or by seed, must be capaUe of
a constantly increasing increase; every addir
tion to its uumbers being capable of affording
a source of still further additions, or, in other
words, that wherever there is a ca,p^tcity of
increase, it ipust be a oapacity of increase^ not
by mere addition, biit by multiplicati(Mi, or to
use the shorter form in which the proposition
is usually stated, not in an arithmetical, but
in a geometrical ratio. The rate jit which any
species of plant, or animal^ is ca[mble of inr
creasing, must depend on the average pow^r
of reproduction^ and the avenge length of


8 POPULATION.

existence of the individuals of which it is con-
stituted. Wheats we know^ is an annual, and
its average power of reproduction perhaps
about six for one. On that supposition the
produce of a single acre might cover the globe
in fourteen years.

The rate at which the human race is capable
of increasing, has been determined by obser-
vation. It has been ascertained, that for con-
siderable periods, and in extensive districts
under temperate climates, it has doubled every
twenty-five years.

The power of reproduction in the human
race, must, under similar climates, be. always
and every where the same. I say, under simi-
lar climates^ because the acceleration of pu-
berty which has been sometimes observed in
tropical countries, unless checked, as I believe
to be the case, by an earlier cessation of child-
bearing, would occasion increased fecundity.
And the United States of America, the dis-
tricts in which the rate of increase which I
liave mentioned has been most clearly ascer-


POPULATION. y

tained, are not remarkable for the longevity
of their inhabitants. We may infer, therefore,
that such^ at least, is the average power of
reproduction, and average duration of life in
the individuals constituting the human species^
that their number may double every twenty-
five years. At this rate the inhabitants of
every country would, in the course of every
five centuries, increase to above a million
times their previous number. At this rate, the
population of England, would, in five hundred
years, exceed twelve millions of millions. A
population which would approach the propor-
tion of a family to every square inch of
ground.

Such being the human powers of increase,
the question is^ by what checks is their ex-
pansion controlled? How comes it, that the
population of the world, instead of being now
a million times as great as it was five hundred
years ago, apparently has not doubled within
that time, and certainly has not quadrupled ?

Mn Malthus has divided the checks to po-


10 POPULATION.

puiation into the preventive and the positive^.
The first are those which limit fecundity, the
second, those which decrease longevity. The
first diminishes the number of births, the ser
cond increases that of deaths. And as fecun*
dity and longevity are the only elements of
the calculation, it is clear that Mr. Malthus's
division is ccichaustive.

The positive check to population is physical
evil. The preventive checks are promiscuous
intercourse, and abstinence from marriage.
The first is moral evil; the second is, with
very few exceptions, so few that they do not
afiect the result^ founded on an apprehended
deficiency of necessaries, decencies, or luxu^
ries, in other words, on prudence. All the
preventive and positive checks, may, therefore,
be distributed under prudence^ moral evil,
and physical evil. In the present lecture, I
shall consider the positive, in the subsequent
lecture the preventive^ checks.

We have seen that the positive checks to
population include all the causes which tend.


POPULATION. 11

in any way prematurely, to shorten the dura-
tion of human existence; such as unwhole**
some occupations, severe labqur, or exposure
to the seasons, bad or insufficient food or
clothings bad nursing of children, excesses of
all kinds^ the corruption of the air from natu-^
ral causes, or from large towns, wars, infanti^'
cide, plague, and famine. Of these, some
arise from the laws of nature, and others fVom
the crimes and follies of man; all are felt in
the form of physical evil, but the latter are Uie
result of moral evil.

The final and irresistible mode in which
physical evil operates, is the want of the ne-
cessaries of existence; death produced by
hardship or starvation. This is almost the
only check to the increase of the irrationd
animals^ and as man descends towards their
condition, he falls more and more under its
influence. In the lowest savage state it is the
principal and obvious check ; in a high state of
civilization it is almost imperceptible. But it is
' unperceived only in cotisequence of its substi-
tutes.


12 POPULATION.

We have seen that, as a general rule/ addi-^
tional labour employed in the cultivation of the
land within a given district, produces a less
proportionate return. And we have seen that
such is the power of reproduction and duration
of life in mankind, that the population of a given
district is capable of doubling itself at least
every twenty-five years, [it is clear, therefore^
that the rate at which the production of food is
capable of being increased, and that at which
population, if unchecked, would increase, are
totally difierent. Every addition made to the
quantity of food produced, makes, in general, a
further addition more difficult. Every addition
to the existing population, difi*uses wider the
-jN^ means of still further addition. Hf neither evil,
nor the fear of evil, checked the population of
England, it would amount in a century to
above two hundred millions/ Supposing it pos-
sible that we might be able to raise, or to
import the subsistence of two hundred mil-
lions of people, is it possible that a hundred
and twenty-five years hence w^ should be able to


POPULATION. 13

i

support four hundred millions ? or in a hundred
and fifty years, eight hundred millions ? ylt is
clear, however, that long before the first cen-
tury tad elapsed — long before the period at
which, if unchecked, we should have attained
two hundred millions, no excellence in our in-
stitutions^ or salubrity of climate, or unremit-
ting industry, could have saved us from being
arrested in our progress by a constantly in-
creasing want of subsistence. If all other
moral and physical checks could be got rid of,
if we had neither wars, nor libertinism, if our
habitations and employments and habits were
all wholesome, and no fears of indigence, or
loss of station prevented or retarded our mar-

«

riages, famine would soon exercise her prero-
gative of controlling, in the last resort, the
multiplication of mankind.

But though it be certain that the absence of
all other checks would only give room for the
irresistible influence of famine, it is equally
certain that such a state of things never has
existed, and never will exist)


14 POPULATION.


(


In the first place, the absence of all the other
moral and physical evils which retard popula-
tion, implies a degree of civilization not only-
high, hot higher than mankind have as yet en-
joyed. Such a society cannot be supposed to
want sagacity sufficient to foresee the evils of a
too rapidly increasing population, and prudence
sufficient to avert them, especially as that
prudence might be exercised even by those who
had no thought of public advantage, no . idea
of abstract reasoning, no care but for their pri-
vate welfare. In such a state, the preventive
check would be in full operation, and its force
is quite sufficient to render unnecessary even
the approach of any positive check. /

And secondly, it is impossible that a positive
check so goading and so remorseless as famine
should prevail without bringing in her train all
the others. Pestilence is her uniform com-
panion, and murder and war are her followers*
Whole bodies of men will not tamely lie down
to die, and witness, while they are perishing,
their wives and children and parents starving


POPULATION^ 15

around them. Where there is a diversity of
fortunes^ famine generally produces that worst
form of civil war, the insurrection of the pooc
against the rich. Among uncivilized nations it
produces those tremendous hostile migrations
in which a whole people throws itself across a
neighbouring frontier, and either perishes in
the attempt to obtain a larger or a more fertile
territory, or destroys the former possessors^ or
drives them out to be themselves aggressors in
turn.

In fact, almost all the positive checks by
their mutual reaction have a tendency to create
^ind aggravate one another : and the destruction
of those who perish immediately by one, may
generally be found to have been remotely oc-
casioned by one or more of the others. Among
nations imperfectly civilized, the widest and
most wasting of the positive checks is preda^
tory war. A district exposed to it must suffer
in their full force all the others. Mere fear of
invasion must keep them pent up in crowded
and consequently unwholesome towns ; it must


16 POPULATtON.

confine their cultivation to the fields in the
immediate neighbourhood of those towns ; and
if it do not destroy^ must so much impede their
commerce, as to render it useless as a source of
subsistence. And when the invasion does
come, it is often followed by the complete ex-
tirpation of the invaded community. This is
the check which has kept the whole of Africa,
the western parts of Asia, and the southern dis-
tricts of America in their comparatively unpeo-
pled state.

In his passage from Abyssinia to Sennaar,
Bruce crossed the territory of Atbara, subject
to the incursions of the Daveina Arabs, The
whole country seems to have been a scene of
desolation. He passed a night at Garigara, a
village of which the crops had been destroyed a
year before. The inhabitants had all perished
with hunger, and their remains were unburied
and scattered over the ground where the village
had stood. The travellers encamped among
the bones : no space could be found free from
them. His next stage was Teawa. " Its con-^


POPULATION. 17

sequence," he observes, '* was to remain only
^* till the Daveina Arabs should resolve to at-
** tack it ; when its corn-fields being burnt and
" destroyed in a night by a multitude of horse-
" men, the bones of its inhabitants, scattered
** upon the earth, would be all its remains, like
^* those of the miserable village of Garigara/'

Among the positive checks to the population
of uncivilized, or partially civilized nations^ the
next in importance to war is famine.

I have already observed, that there is so
much reaction among the positive checks, that
one of them alone is seldom experienced. But
when a people depends principally on that sub-
sistence which is most abundant, (and such is
the case among the nations in question,) the
mere variations of the seasons must, from time
to time, produce destructive want. Where
society is better constituted, the evil of these
variations is mitigated, partly from the super-
fluity of the more opulent classes, partly by
importation, and principally by a recurrence to
a less expensive diet ; but in a barbarous, and


18 POPULATION.

«

consequently a poor and uncommercial country,
they are the most frightful forms of national
calamity. The histories which we possess of
such countries, always particularize periods of
dearth as amongst the most memorable events
recorded. They seem in a constant oscilla-
tion, between the want endured by a popula-
tion that has increased to the utmost limits of
subsistence, and the plenty enjoyed by the
survivors, after that population has been
thinned by war, pestilence, or famine.

The remainder of the positive checks, such
as infanticide^ and unwholesomeness of cli-
mate, habits, or situation, appear rather to act
as substitutes for the preventive checks, than
to produce any actual diminution, or prevent
any actual increase.

Infanticide has been supposed to be rather
favourable to population, by opposing to the
prudential check to ma]:riage a mode of dis^
posing of its offspring, which may Appear easy
in contemplation, but from which the feelings
of the parents eventually recoil. The un-


POPULATION. 19

wholesomeness of some districts is unquestion-
ably such, as to keep them totally unpeopled,
or inhabited by strangers, whose numbers
must be constantly recruited. Such, for in-
stance, appears to be the case in the most
unhealthy parts of Italy ; and such is the case
with large manufacturing towns, even in the
most favourable climates, unless great skill and
great care are directed towards their clean-
liness and ventilation. And in a newly colo-
nized country, like the back settlements in
America, where the abundance of land, and
the constantly increasing meahs of subsistence,
would render any preventive check unneces-
sary, any cause diminishing longevity must
retard increase. But, with these exceptions,
unheiEtlthiness rather causes the successive
generations of mankind to pass more rapidly
away, than diminishes their actual number, [n
some of th^ healthiest districts of Switzerland,
the average annual mortality does not exceed
one in' fifty ; in many of the marShy villages of
Holland it exceeds one in twenty-three. But

c2


20 POPULATION.

it would be rash to expect the population of
the former to be more dense, or to increase more
rapidly, than that of the latter. The case is,
in fact, the reverse. In the Swiss villages of
which I have been speaking, the births are as
rare as the deaths : the population is thin and
stationary. Among the Dutch the births some-
what exceed the deaths: the population is
dense, and is increasing. It is obvious indeed,
that the proportion of annual births to the whole
number of people being given, the rate of in-
crease must depend on the proportion borne by
the annual deaths. And the proportion of
deaths to the whole number of people being
given, it must depend on the proportion borne
by the births; or, to use a shorter form of
expression, given the longevity, it must de-
pend on the fecundity; and given the fecun-
dity, it must depend on the longevity. If
both are given, the rate of increase may be
calculated ; but from only one the conclu-
sion must be the disjunctive. If the annual
births bear a large proportion to the existing


POPULATION. 21

number of people, we may conclude either that
the population is rapidly increasing, or that
the positive checks are in powerful operation.
On the other hand, from a small proportion of
annual deaths may be inferred either a rapid
increase of numbers, or a strong prevalence of
the preventive checks. The average duration
of life in England is greater than in the United
States of America ; but so much greater is the
force of the preventive checks, that the rate of
increase in America is double that in England.
Again, the average duration of life in the Swiss
villages that I have before referred to, is the
same as it is in England ; but the preventive
check in England, strong as it appears when
compared with its force in America, is so much
weaker than it is in some districts in Switzer-
land that with the same annual mortality the
population is in the one country stationary, in
the other rapidly progressive.

But although the average longevity in a
country affords no decisive evidence as to the
increasing or stationary number of its inhabi-


22 POPULATION.

tants, it is among the least deceitful tests of their
prosperity : far less so than that on which states-
men formerly relied, the number of births.
There is not an evil, moral or physical, which
has not a tendency, directly or indirectly, to
shorten life, but there are many which have a
direct tendency to increase fecundity. The
extraordinary duration of life in England, ex-
ceeding, as it does, the average of any other
equally extensive district, is a convincing proof
of the general excellence of our climate, our
institutions, and our habits.

In my next Lecture I shall consider the pre*
ventive checks to population.


LECTURE II.


POPULATION.


I OBSERVED in my last Lecture that the
expansive power of population is such that it
necessarily and inevitably will be restrained by
some check, positive or preventive. I then
considered the positive checks, and found them
to consist of the different modifications of phy-
sical evil.. In the present lecture, I propose to
consider the preventive checks. We have seen
that they are promiscuous intercourse and ab-
stinence from marriage.

The first does not appear to me to be of
sufficient importance to require much consider-


24 POPULATION.

ation. It is said to produce some effect in
checking the increase of the higher classes in
Otaheite, and in some of the other South Sea
Islands ; and it appears to produce the same
effect to a considerable extent among the West
Indian Negroes. But the nobility of the South
Seas scarcely deserve to be separately con-
sidered. And where the other forms of moral
and physical evil are accumulated as they are
among the West Indian slaves, it is probable
that the removal of this obstacle alone would
do little to facilitate their increase.

But with these exceptions, there are scarcely
any females whose fecundity is prevented or
diminished by promiscuous intercourse, except
those unhappy individuals whose only trade is
prostitution. And they form so small a pro-
portion of the population of the whole world,
that the check to population occasioned by
their unfruitfulness may safely be disregarded.

The only remaining check is abstinence
from marriage. You are of course aware that
by the word ^* marriage," I mean to express not


POPULATION. 25

the peculiar and permanent connexion which
alone^ in a Christian country, is entitled to
that name : but any agreement between a man
and woman to cohabit exclusively for a period,
and under circumstances likely to occasion
the birth of progeny. I observed, in my last
Lecture, that abstinence from marriage is al-
most uniformly founded on the apprehension
of a deficiency of necessaries, decencies, or
luxuries, or, in other words, on prudence.
Some cases certainly occur in which men re-
main unmarried^ although their fortunes are so
ample that the expenses of a family would be
unperceived. But the number of persons
so situated is so small, that they create an
eiception which would scarcely deserve at-
tention, even if this conduct were as common
among them, as it is in fact rare.

We shall scarcely, therefore, be led into error
if, in considering the preventive checks, we
confine our attention to prudence, and assume
that, as nothing but physical evil diminishes
the longevity of mankind^ nothing but an ap-


26 POPULATION.

prehended deficiency of luxuries, decencies,
or necessaries, prevents their fecundity."

The check from an apprehended deficiency
of luxuries is but slight The motives, per-*
baps I might say the instincts, that prompt
the human race to marriage, are too powerful
to be much restrained by the fear of losing
conveniences, unconnected with health or sta-
tion in society.

The fear of losing decencies, or perhaps
more frequently the hope to acquire, by a
longer accumulation during celibacy the means
of purchasing the decencies of a higher social
rank, is a check of far more importance. Want
of actual necessaries is seldom apprehended
by any except the poorest classes in any
country. And in England, though it some*
times is felt, it probably is anticipated by none.
When an Englishman stands hesitating be-
tween love and prudence, a family really starv-
ing is not among his terrors. Against actual
want he knows that he has the fence of the
poor laws. But, however humble his desires^


POPU£ATIONi 27

he cannot contemplate, without anxiety, a pro-f
bability that the income which supported his
social rank while single, may be insufficient to
maintain it when he i& married ; that he may
be unable to give to his children the advan-
tages of education which he enjoyed himself;
in short, that he may lose his caste. Men of
more enterprise are induced to postpone mar-
riage, not merely by the fear of sinking, but
also by the hope, that in an unencumbered
state they may rise. As they mount, the ho-
rizon of their ambition keeps receding, until
sometimes the time has passed away for realiz-
ing those plans of domestic happiness which
probably every man has formed in his youth.

There are few triter subjects of declamation
than the contrast between ancient simplicity
and modem luxury. Few virtues, however
useful," have received more applause than the
contented and dignified poverty, the indiffer-
ence to display, and the abstinence from unne-
cessary expense which all refined nations at-


28 POPULATION.

tribute to their ancestors. Few vices, how-
ever mischievous, have been more censured
than the ostentatious expenditure which every
succeeding generation seems to consider its
own peculiar characteristic.

It certainly appears, at first sight, that habits
of unnecessary expense, as they have a ten-
dency to diminish the wealth o( an individual,
must have the same efiect on the wealth of a
nation And, separately considered, it appears
clear that each act of unproductive consump-
tion, whatever gratification it may afibrd to
the consumer, must be pro tanto detrimental
to the rest of the community. It is so much
taken from the common stock and destroyed.
And, as the national capital is formed from
the aggregate savings of individuals, it is cer-
tain, that if each individual were to expend to
the utmost extent of his means, the whole ca-
pital of the country would be gradually wasted
away, and general misery would be the re-
sult. But it appears to me equally certain,


POPULATION. 29

that if each individual were to confine his ex-
penditure to mere necessaries, the result would
be misery quite as general and as intense.

We have seen that the powers of population,
if not restrained by prudence/ must inevit-
ably produce almost every form of moral and
physical evil. In the case which I am sup-
posing, the wants of society would be con-
fined to the food, raiment, and shelter, essen-
tial to the support of existence. And they
would all consist of the cheapest materials.
It may be worth while to trace some of the
consequences which would follow, if such a
change of the objects of human desire could
take place in England.

At present the cultivation of the land does
not employ more than a third of our popula-
tion, and a great part of the labourers so em-
ployed are producers of luxuries. Indeed, as
potatoes afford a food, five or six times as
abundant as corn, and more than twenty
times as abundant as meat, and as far as can
be judged from the appearance and powers of


30 POPULATION.

the lower Irish, quite as wholesome, meat and
corn may be considered as decencies or luxuries
to the extent in which they are more expensive
than potatoes. Nor is our present mode of
cultivation directed to the obtaining the largest
possible return. The object is always to ob-
tain the largest possible return that is con-
sistent with profitable farming, but in the
pursuit of this object, quantity of produce
is often sacrificed to economy of labour or
time.

If there were no desire for luxuries, both
the existing partition of the land and the
existing division of labour would be varied .
No family would wish to occupy more land
than the small spot necessary to afford them
potatoes and milk; and supposing them to
give to it the utmost nicety of garden culti-
vation, its management would still leave them
time to produce the coarse manufactures ne-
cessary for their own use. The whole of our
population would be agricultural. At present
the four millions so employed, although their


POPULATION. 31

labour is far from being directed to the pro-
duction of the greatest possible amount^ pro-
vides subsistence for the whole twelve mil-
lions. If all were so employed, and if quan-
tity of subsistence were their sole object, it
is probable, that in ordinary seasons the soil
of England could feed at least one hundred
millions of people. And in the absence of
any checks more powerful than those experi^
enced ia the United States of America, our
population might, in seventy-five years, amount
to one hundred millions. Indeed, it is pro-
bable, that under the circumstances which I
am supposing,. the increase in England would
be, for a considerable time, rather more rapid
than that which has taken place in America;
Preventive checks would not exist.; marriage
could not be hindered or even delayed by
prudence, since there could be no reason to
anticipate want ; the habit of early marris^es
would put an end to profligacy ; and as our
habits would be eminently healthy, the posi-
tive checks which even now affect us less than


32 POPULATION.

they do the inhabitants of America, or indeed
of any other extensive district, would be re-
duced to their minimum*

So far the picture is rather pleasing ; it exr
hibits a nation, not rich certainly, nor refined,
but supporting a very numerous population in
health and strength, and in the full enjoyment
of the many sources of happiness connected
with early marriage.

Supposing our population to have increased,
as would be the case by the beginning of the
next century, to one hundred millions, about
an acre and a half would be allotted to each
family; and, as I before observed, I think
that allotment might be sufficient. But it can
scarcely be supposed, that three roods would
be enough, which would be their allotment in
twenty-five years more, or granting that to be
enough, it cannot be supposed that at the end
of a further term of doubling a family of four
persons could live on the produce of a rood and
a half.

Sooner or later, therefore, the increase must


POPULATION. . 33

be checked^ and we have seen that prudence
is the only check that does not involve vice
or misery. But such is the force of the pas^
sions which prompt to marriage, and such is
each man's reliance on his own good conduct,
and good fortune, that the evils, whatever they
may be, the apprehension of which forms the
prudential check, are frequently incurred.
Where the evil is the loss of luxuries, or even
of decencies, it is trifling in the first instance,
and bearable in the second. But in the case
which I am supposing, the only prudential
check would be an apprehended deficiency of
necessaries ; and that deficiency, in the many
instances in which it would be incurred, would
be the positive check in its most frightful
form. It would be incurred not only in con-
sequence of that miscalculation of chances to
which all men are subject, and certainly those
not the least so, who are anxious to marry,
but through accidents against which no human
prudence can guard. A single bad harvest
may be provided against, but a succession of


34 POPULATION.

unfavourable seasons/ and such successions do
occur, must reduce such a people to absolute
famine. When such reasons affect a nation
indulging in considerable superfluous expen-
diture, they are relieved by a temporary sacri-
fice of that superfluity. The grain consumed
in ordinary years by our breweries and dis-
tilleries is a store always at hand to supply a
scarcity, and the same may be said of the
large quantity of food used for the support of
domestic animals, but applicable to human
subsistence. To these resources may be added
the importation from abroad of necessaries
instead of luxuries^ and the materials of
luxury ; of com, for instance, instead of wine.

It appears, therefore, that habits of consi-
derable superfluous expenditure afford the
only permanent protection against a population
pressing so closely on the means of subsist-
ence^ as to be continually incurring the. misery
of the positive checks. And as these habits
can exist only in an opulent society, it appears
to me equally elear,Othat (as a nation advances


POPULATION. 35

in opulence, the positive checks are likely to
be superseded by the preventive. If this be
true, the evil of a redundant population, or to
speak more intelligibly^ of a population too
numerous to be adequately and regularly sup-
plied -with necessaries, is likely to diminish in
the progress of improvement. As wealth in-
creases, what were the luxuries of one gene-
ration become the decencies of their suc-
cessors. Not only a taste for additional com-
fort atid convenience, but a feeling of degra-
dation in their absence becomes more and
more widely diffused. ) The increase, in many
respects, of the productive powers of labour,
must enable increased comforts to be enjoyed
by increased numbers, and ad it is the more
beneficial, so it appears to me to be the more
natural course of events^ that increased com-
fort should not only accompany, but rather
precede, increase of numbers.
\But I must admit that this is not the re-
ceived opinion. The popular doctrine cer-
tainly is, that population has a tendency to

d2


36 POPULATION.

increase beyond the means of subsistence/ or,
ia other words^ that, whatever be the existing
means of subsistence^ population has a ten-
dency fully to come up with them, and even
to struggle to pass beyond them, and is kept
back principally by the vice and misery which
that struggle, occasions.) I admit that popu-
lation has the power (considered abstractedly)
so to increase, and I admit, that, under the
influence of unwise institutions, that power
may be exercised, and the amount of sub-
sistence bear a smaller proportion than before
' to the number of people ; and that vice and
misery, more or less intense and diffused,
according to the circumstances of each case,


must be the result. (What I deny is, that,
under wise institutions, there is any tendency
to this. state of things. I believe the tendency
to be just the reverse!

As the subject is one of great interest and
importance, I will lay before you, to be com-
pared with my own views, those of Mr. Mal-
thus, Mr. M'Culloch, and Mr. Mill.


POPULATION. 37

" There are few states," observes Mr. Mal-
thus« ** in which there is not a constant
*' effort in the population to increase beyond
** the means of subsistence. This constant ef-
" fort as constantly tends to subject the lower
*^ classes of society to distress, and to prevent
** any great permanent melioration of their
** condition. These effects, in the present
** state of society, seem to be produced in the
" following manner. We will . suppose the
" means of subsistence in any country to be
** just equal to the easy support of its inha-
^f bitants. The constant effort towards popu-
** lation, which is found to act even in the most
" vicious societies, increases . the number of
" people before the means of subsistence are
" increased. The food, therefore, which be-
^^ fore supported eleven millions, must now be
''divided among eleven millions and a half.
" The poor, consequently, must live much
" worse, and many of them be reduced to se-
** vere distress. The number of labourers also
** being above the proportion of work in the


38 POPULATION.

** market, the price of labour must tend to fall,
** while' the price of provisions would, at the
** same time, tend to rise. The labourer,
'^ therefore, must do more work, to earn the
*' same as he did before. During this season
*' of distress the discouragements to marriage,
*' and the difficulty of rearing a family, are so
*^ great, that the progress of population is re-
" tarded. In the mean time, the cheapness of
** labour, the plenty of labourers, and the ne-*
*' cessity of an increased industry amongst
" them, encourage cultivators to employ more
'' labour upon their land, to turn up fresh soil,
*' and to manure and improve more completely
" what is already in tillage, till, ultimately, the
** means of subsistence may become, in the
'' same proportion to the papulation, as at the
** period from which we set out. The situation
" of the labourer being then again tolerably
** comfortable, the restraints to population are
" in some degree loosened ; and, after a short
'' period, the same retrograde and progressiviel
" movements, with respect to happiness, are
^* repeated." — Population, Book i. Chap. 2.


POPULATION, 39

And he afterwards repeats the same doctrine
more explicitly in the following words : —

^* According to the principle of population,
'' the human race has a tendency to increa3e
'' faster than food. It has, therefore, a con*
" stant tetidency to people a country fully up
'' to the limits of subsistence ; meaning, by
** these limits, the lowest quantity of food which
"will maintain a stationary population/ —
Book iii. Chap. 1, Note. t

Among the valuably notes which Mr. M'CuI-
loch has appended to his edition of the Wealth
of Nations, one of the most interesting treats of
population : and one of the objects of that note
is to show^ that the population of the United
States of America cannot continue to increase
for any very considerable period^ at the rate at
which it has increased during the last hundred

«

years.

I am perfectly convinced of the truth of this
position^ and I shall read to you the following
extract, not with any intention to oppose Mr.
M'CuUoch^s anticipations as to America, but


40 POPULATION.

because I am anxious to express my dissent to
what I conceive to be his general doctrine on
the subject of population ; and am also anxious,
by using his own words, to avoid the chance of
misrepresenting them.

'* It may be said, perhaps, that allowance
** m.ust be made for the effects of the improve-
** ments which may be supposed to take place
** in agricultural science in the progress of
^* society, or for the possible introduction, at
*' some future period, of new and more prolific
** species of crops. But it is easy to see, that
'* the influence of such improvements and
^^ changes must, supposing them to be realized
*^ in the fullest manner, be of very temporary
^^ duration ; and that it cannot affect the truth
** of the principle, that the power of increase in
*' the human species must always^ in the long run^
** prove an overmatch for the increase in the means
** of subsistence. Suppose, by some extraor-
*5 dinary improvement, the quantity of food,
** and other articles, required for the subsist-
** ence and accommodation of man, annually


POPULATION. 41

** produced in Great Britain, were suddenly
** doubled, the condition of all classes being, in
"consequence, signally improved, there would
** be less occasion for the exercise of moral re-
" straint ; the period of marriage would there-
" fore be accelerated, and such a powerful
" stimulus would be given to the principle of
" increase, that in a very short period the
'* population would be again on a level with
** the means of subsistence ; and there would
^* also, owing to the change which must have
" been made in the habits of the people, with
*^ respect to marriage, during the period that
" the population was rising to the level of the
" increased supply of food, be an extreme
** risk, lest it should become too abundant,
** and produce an increased rate of mortality.
** Although, therefore, it is not possible to
** assign any certain limits to the progress of
*' improvement, it is, notwithstanding, evident,
" that it cannot continue for any considerable
" period to advance in the same proportion
'' that population would advance,, supposing


€i


tit


C(


€€


42 POPULA^TION.

'* food were abundantly supplied. The cir-
cumstance of inferior lands, which require
a greater outlay of capital and labour to
'* make them yield the same supply as those
** that are superior, being invariably taken into
" cultivation in the progress of society, demon-
** strates, what is otherwise indeed sufficiently
• " obvious to every one, that, in despite of im-
** pcovements, the difficulty of adding to the
supplies of food is progressively augmented
as population becomes denser.
" Mr. Malthus has endeavoured ^ to show,
'' that while population has a power to increase
** indefinitely in a geometrical proportion, or in
'' the proportion of 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64,
** 128, 266, &c., doubling itself every flve-
'' and*- twenty years, the supplies of food and
** other necessary accommodations could not be
V made to increase faster during the isame pe-
** riods^ than in an arithmetical proportion, or
'' in the ratio of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
'' 8, &:c. But it is impossible to lay down any
*' fixed or qertain principle with respect to the


POPULATION. 43

*/ ratio of the increase of food. I should, ho^^

*' ever, be inclined to think, that the ratio stated

»

" by Mr. Malthus would be found to be too
''high for countries whose best lands have
'' already been brought under tillage. But
'' whether Mr. Malthus has t)ver or under
*' stated thb increase of food, is of no conse-
** quence to the theory of population, it ii^ at
** all events, unquestionably true on the one

«

" hand, that an increased difl&culty of obtain-*
" ing increased supplies of food, though occa*-
" sionally obviated for a while by new disco-
** veries and inventions, is uniformly experienced
** according as society advances, and population
''becomes denser; while, on the other hand;
" it is equally true, that the power to produce
" fresh human beings, a power capable of dou-
" bling the population every five and twenty
" years sustains no diminution. And hence it
" results, as was stated at the commencement
" of this note, that the natural tendency of po-
" pulation is to outrun production ; and that
" if this tendency be not counteracted by the


44 POPULATION.

*^ prevalence of moral restraint, it /must be
^** counteracted by want, misery, and increased
^' mortality/'— Vol. iv. p. 133.
• Mr. Mill's views are to be found in his dis-
cussioaof wages. Principles, S^c. Ch. ii. sec. 2.
" If it were,", he observes, " the natural
" tendency of capitaP (under which term Mr.
Mill designates the instruments of labour, the
materials .on which they are to be employed,
when produced by labour, and the subsistence
of the labourer) " to increase faster than popu-
" lation, there would be no diflSculty in pre-
*' serving a prosperous condition of the people.
" If, on the other hand, it were the natural
** tendency of populaticm to increase faster
*' than capital, the difficulty would be very
" great. There would be a perpetual tendency
" in wages to fall. The progressive fall of
" wages would produce a ^greater and a greater
" degree of poverty among the people, at-
" tended with its inevitable consequences,
" misery and vice. As poverty and its conse-
" quent misery increased^ mortality would


POPULATION. 45

also increase^ Of a numerous family born, a
certain number only, from want of the means
of well-being, would be reared. By what-
ever proportion the populatibn tended to in-
crease faster than capital, such a proportion
of those who were born would die c the ratio
of increase in capital and population would
then remain the same^ and the fall of wages
would proceed no further. That population
has a tendency to increase faster than, in
most places, capital has actually increased,
is proved incontestably^ by the condition of
the population in most parts of the globe. In
almost all countries, the condition of the
great body of the people is poor and misera-
ble. This would have been impossible, if
capital had increased faster than population.
In that case wages must have risen^ and
higher wages would have placed the labourer
above the miseries of want.
" This general misery of mankind is a fact
which can be accounted for, upon one of two
suppositions : either that there is a natural


46 POPULATION.

V tendency in population to increase faster than
'^ capital, or that capital has, by some means,
'' been prevented from increasing so fast as it
*^ has a tendency to increase. This, therefore,
" is an enquiry of the highest importance."

As the result of that enquiry Mr. Mill de-
cides the second alternative in the negative,
and consequently conceives himself to have
established the former, namely, that there is a
natural tendency in population to increase faster
than capital.

: I have nothing to do at present with those
portions of capital which consist of the mate-
rials and implements of labour. That they
have increased fai^ more than in proportion to
the increase of population, is almost too obvious
for remark. My present subject is the relative
increase of subsistence. A subject on which
Mr. M'CuUoch, and Mr. Mill, and I think also
Mr. Malthus, coincide.

If the present state of the world, compared
with its state at our earliest records, be one of
relative prosperity, Mr. Mill's reasoning is unan-


POPULATION, 47

Bwerable. If its means of subsistence continue
to bear the same proportion to the number of
its inhabitants^ it is clear that the increase of
subsistence and of numbers has been equal.
If its means of subsistence have increased much
more than the number of its inhabitants, it is
clear not only that Mr. Mill's proposition is
false^ but that the contrary proposition is true ;
and that the means of subsistence have a natu-
ral tendency to increase faster ths^ popula-
tion.

(Now, what is the picture presented by the
earliest records of those nations which are
now civilized? or, which is the same, what
is now the state of savage nations ? A state of
habitual poverty and occasional famine. A
scanty population, but still scantier means of
subsistence. Admitting^ and it must be ad-
mitted, that in almost all countries the condi-
tion of the great body of the people is poor
and miserable ; yet as poverty and misery were
their original inheritance, what inference can
w6 draw from the contmuance of their misery


48 POPULATION.

as to the tendency of their numbers to increase
more rapidly than their wealth ?J

iBut if a single country can be found in
which there is now less poverty than is uni-
versal in a savage state, it must be true, that
under the circumstances in which that country
has been placed, the means of subsistence
have a greater tendency to increase than the
population, j

Now this is the case in every civilized
country. Even Ireland, the country most
likely to afford an instance of what Mr. Mill
supposes to be the natural course of things,
poor and populous as she is, suffers less from
want with her eight millions of people, than
when her only inhabitants were a few septs of
hunters and fishers. In our early history,
famines, and pestilences the consequences of
famine, constantly recur. At present, though
our numbers are trebled or quadrupled, they
are unheard of.

The United States of America afford the
best aiscertained instance of great and conti-


POPULATION. 49

nued increase of numbers. They have af-
forded a field in which the powers of popula-
tion have been allowed to exhaust their energy;
but though exerted to their utmost they have
not equalled the progress of subsistence.
Whole colonies of the first settlers perished
from absolute want; their successors strug-
gled long against hardship and privation ; but
every increase of their numbers seems to have
been accompanied or preceded by increased
means of support.

^If it be conceded, that there exists in the
human race a natural tendency to rise from
barbarism to civilization, and that the means
of subsistence are proportionally more abun-
dant in a civilized than in a savage state, and
neither of these propositions can be denied,
it must follow that there is a natural tendency
in subsistence to increase in a greater ratio
than population.)

;:;fBut, although Mr. Malthus has perhaps
fallen into the exaggeration which is natural


50 POPULATION.

to a discoverer, his error, if it be one, does
not affect the practical conclusions which
place him, as a benefactor to mankind, on a
level with Adam Smith. Whether,, in the ab-
sence pf disturbing causes, it be the tendency
of subsistence or of population to advance
with greater rs^pidity, is a question of slight
importance, if it be acknowledged that human
happiness or misery depend principally on
their relative advance^ and that there are
causes, and causes within human control, by
which that advance can be regulated.
. These are propositions which Mr. Malthus
has established by facts and reasonings, which,
opposed as they were to longr rooted prejudice,
and assailed by every species of sophistry and
clamour, are now so generally admitted, that
they have become rather matter of allusion
than of formal statement. To explain what
are the causes of the relative increase of sub-
sistence and population is the principal object
of the practical branch: of political economy.


POPULATION. 51

and the practical and theoretic branches are so
interwoven, that my view of those causes is
necessarily dispersed throughout my Lectures.
I will only say at present that knowledge,
security of property, freedom of internal and
external exchange, and equal admissibility to
rank and power, are the principal causes which
at the same time promote the increase of sub-
sistence, and by elevating the character of the
people, lead them to keep at a slower rate the
increase of their numbers. And that restrictions
on exchange and commerce, artificial barriers
excluding the great majority of the commu-
nity from the chance of social eminence, and,
above all, ignorance and insecurity of person
or property, are the general causes which
both diminish the productiveness of labour,
and tend to produce that brutish state of im-
providence in which the power of increase,
unchecked by prudence, is always struggling
to pass the limits of subsistence, and is kept
down only by vice and misery. I use the ex-
pression general causes, to exclude those

£ 2


52 POPULATION.

causes which, being peculiar to certain nations,
require separate consideration. Such are the
superstitious desire of offspring in China, the
political motives to create freeholders in Ire-
land, and certain parts of the poor laws in
England. But omitting these details, fit may
be generally stated, that all that degrades the
character, or diminishes the productive power
of a people, tends to diminish the proportion
of subsistence to population, and vice ver^a^
And, consequently, that a population increas-
ing more rapidly than the means of subsist-
ence is, generally speaking, a symptom of
misgovernment indicating deeper-seated evils,
of which it is only one of the results. j


APPENDIX


APPENDIX


Lincoln's Inn«
March 15, 1829.

My dear Sib,

You perceive that I have used
your kind permission to lay before you my
Lectures on Population.

One of the principal objects of the Statute
requiring from the Professor of Political Eco-
nomy an annual publication^ must have been
that the public might know the sort of doc-
trines inculcated at Oxford. I have thought
it my duty, therefore, to publish them without
alteration. Under other circumstances, I
should have made some change in the lan-
guage in which I have attempted to represent


56 APPENDIX.

your opinion. They were written, and indeed
delivered, before I had had the advantage of
conversing with you on the subject of Popula-
tion; and I was misled by your use of the
word " tendency.'' I supposed you to believe,
that the desire of marriage, which tends to in-
crease Population, is a stronger principle, or,
in other words, a principle more efficacious in
its results than the desire of bettering our con-
dition, which tends to increase subsistence;
and, consequently, that in an old country,

with a people so fully supplied with necessaries
as to make it possible for population to in-
crease in a greater ratio than food, such an
increase would, in the a^bsence of disturbing
causes, be a more probable event than the op-
posite event ; namely, than an increase of
subsistence in a greater ratio than that of
population. I believe that I was led into this
error principally by the conduct of all those
writers who, since the appearance of your
work, have written on Population. The mul-
titudes who have followed^ and the few who


APPENDIX. 57

have endeavoured to oppose you, have all as-
sumed this to be your opinion. And yet when
I recur to your writings, I see how inconsist-
ent it is with your uniform statement, that the
pressure of population upon subsistence is al-
most always the most severe in the rudest
states of society, where the population is the
least dense, and the means of procuring sub-
sistence, supposing they were employed,
would be the greatest in proportion to that
population.

As the subject is of the utmost importance,
I will venture to state, for your correction, my
present impression as to your doctrine/ I
conceive you to hold, that an increase of popu-
lation in a greater ratio than that of subsistence,
is a probable event only under peculiar circum-
stances.) Such as those of America, where the
knowledge of an old people has, for a consi-
derable time, been applied to a continent pre-
viously almost unoccupied ; or those of France,
when the confiscation of the greater part of
the land operated like an agrarian law, and


58 APPENDIX.

the conscription falling on bachelors only, made
early marriage a precaution instead of an im-
providence. But that in an old country, under
wise institutions, in the absence, in short, of
disturbing causes, though population is likely
to increase, subsistence is likely to increase
still faster. In short, that the condition of a
people so circumstanced is more likely to be
improved than to be deteriorated. If I am
right in this view, the only difference between
us is one of nomenclature. You would still
say, that in the absence of disturbing causes,
population has a tendency to increase faster
than food, because the comparative increase of
the former is a mere compliance with our na-
tural wishes, the comparative increase of the
latter is all effort and self-denial. I should
still say^ that, in the absence of disturbing
causes, food has a tendency to increase faster
than population, because, in fact, it has gene-
rally done so, and because I consider the desire
of bettering our condition as natural a wish as
the desire of marriage.


APPENDIX. 59

After all, if I rightly understand you, the
difference between us is almost entirely verbal.
As to the facts of the case we are agreed.
And we agree too in believing, that an in-
crease of population in a greater proportion
than that of food so far from being, as before
the appearance of your Work it was supposed
to be, a remote evil, to occur only when the
world shall be a garden, is a danger constantly
besetting human society in every stage of
social existence, and much the most so in the
rudest stages^ and warded off only by con-
stant exertion and constant self-denial; and
that the rate at which capital can be made to
increase faster than population, or, in other
words, the rate at which social improvement
can proceed^, principally depends upon the
amount of that exertion and self-denial.

Believe me, my dear Sir,

Yours very sincerely,

NASSAU WILLIAM SENIOR.

Rev. T. R. M^lthvs.


60 APPENDIX.


£ast India College^
March 23, 1829.


Mr D£AR Sir,


I AM much obliged to you for

giving me the opportunity of seeing your
Lectures on Population, which I have read
with great interest.

The difference between us, as you justly ob-
serve, is chiefly verbal ; though there is still
some difference remaining as to facts.

To begin with the verbal difference. I
was certainly not aware, that in saying
that population had a tendency to increase
faster than food, I should be considered as
denying that it might practically at times
increase slower. If I had looked forward
to such an interpretation, I should certainly
not have used the expression ; because, as
you remark, there are numerous .passages


APPENDIX. 61

in my work, in which I state, that the pres-
sure of population upon food is often the
most severe in the rudest stages of society,
where the population is the least dense. The
meaning which I intended to convey by the
expression to which you object was, that popu-
lation was always ready, and inclined, to in-
crease faster than food, if the checks which
repressed it were removed; and that though
these checks might be such, as to prevent po-
pulation from advancing upon subsistence, or
even to keep it at a greater distance behind ;
yet, that whether population were actually in-
creasing faster than food, or food faster than
population, it was true that, except in new
colonies, favourably circumstanced, population
wai^ always pressing against food, and was
always ready to start off at a faster rate than
that at which the food was actually increasing.
This constant pressure of population against
food, which I have always considered as the
essence of the principle which I endeavoured
to explain in my work, appeared to me to be


1


62 APPENDIX.

distinctly proved by the universally acknow-
ledged fact, that whenever improvements in
agriculture, or the effects of some destructive
plague, loosened the restraints which kept
down the population, it made a start forward
at a greater rate than usual ; and that further,
notwithstanding the operation of the desire of
bettering our condition, there were the strongest
reasons to believe that the pressure in question
occasioned premature mortality in every old
country with which we were acquainted.

The cause of this pressure, I thought, might
be described by saying, that the human race
had a tendency to increase faster than food ;
and I own it appears to me, that in this posi-
tion, which it was the great object of my work
to prove, not only is the term tendency applied
in its most natural and ordinary sense ; but it
conveys a more instructive and useful mean-
ing than the one which you would substitute
for it, namely, that food has a tendency to in-^
crease faster than population ; a position
which, without further explanation, seems to


APPENDIX. 63

convey an incorrect impression of the laws
which regulate the increase of the human
race.

Your reasons for adopting this position are,
first, because you consider it as a fact, that
population has generally so increased; and,
secondly, because you consider the desire of
bettering our condition to be as natural a wish
as the desire of marriage. Your first reason
rests upon the assumption of a fact, which by no
means admits of being stated so generally as
you have stated it, as will be shown presently ;
and it is obvious, that a partial relief from a
pressure does not imply that a tendency to
press is overcome. In regard to your second

«

reason, it. appears to me that the desire of bet^
tering our condition, as far as it affects the
direct increase of food, is perfectly feeble, com-
pared with the tendency of population to in-
crease. The most intense desire of bettering
our condition, can do nothing towards making
food permanently increase, at the rate at which
population is always ready to increase ; and, in


64 APPENDIX.

fact, this desire, in reference to the increase of
food/ operates in a very trifling degree upon
the great mass of the labouring classes. They
are not the persons who accumulate farming
capital^ and employ it in agricultural improve-
ments, and the increase of subsistence. Ii^
this respect they are almost entirely passive.
In another respect, indeed, they are most
powerful. Though they cannot much acce-
lerate the increase of food, they are the obly
body of people who can essentially retard the
increase of population. But as this cannot be
effected without restraint and self-denial, to
which there is certainly a much less tendency
than to marriage, the practical result is such as
might be expected, namely, that although this
restraint and self-denial may prevent more mi-
sery and vice at one period than at another ;
though they are often more efficient in civilized
and populous countries, than in ignorant and
thinly peopled countries ; and though we may
hope that they will become still more efficient as
knowledge advances, yet as far as we can judge


APPENDIX. 65

from ktstory, there never has been a period of
any considerable length, when premature mor-
tality and vice, specifically arising from the pres-
sure of population against food, has not prevailed
to a considerable extent; nor, admitting the
possibility, or even the probability of these evils
being diminished, is there any rational prospect
of a near approach to their entire removal.

In all countries, and at all times, the food
wages of labour must be determined by the
demand and supply of labour compared with the
demand and supply of food. In no old country
that I have yet heard of, have the wages of labour^
so determined, been for any length of time such
as to maintain with ease the largest families.
Consequently, in all old states there will always
be a constant pressure specifically arising from
the tendeticy of .food to increase not being so
great as the tendency of population to increase.

And this brings me to our difference in re-
gard to facts. Taking your own application of
the term tendency y which I cannot think the
most natural one, I am compelled to say that


$6 APPENDIX.

both in your presen^t impression of my doctrine,
as given in yonr letter, and when you state as
a fact, that food has generally increased faster
than population, I am unable to go along with
you. flf food had increased faster than popula-
tion^ would the earth have been overspread
with people since the flood ? Would the great
migrations and movements of nations of which
we read hayerever taken place? J Would the
shepherds of Asia have been engaged in such a
constant struggle for room and food ? Would
the northern nations have ever overrun the Ro-
man empire of the west? Would the civilized
Greeks have been obliged to send out numerous
colonies ? Would these colonijeis ha^'B increased
with great rapidity for a certain period, and
then have become comparatirsly stationary?
/ Would histocy, in short, hiave been at all what

iJt^is?) . ; , ...

America is by no means the only instance, of
the knowledge of an old state being applied
to the comparatively unoccupied land of a new
one. And in all instances of this kind, where


APPENDIX. 67

the food has once been abundant, an actual in-
crease of population faster than food is not only
prd>able^ but absolutely certain. In fact, such
countries never could be well peopled, if this
did apt take place.

In old states^ the relative increase of popular
tion and food has always been found to be prac*
tically very variable. It is no doubt true that,
in every stage of society, there have been some
nations, where^ from ignorance and want of
foresight^ the labouring classes have lived very
miserably, and both the food and . popnlation
have been nearly stationary long before the re-
sources of the soil had approached towards ex^
haustion. Of these nations^ it might safely
have be^ai predicted, that in the prc^ess of
civilization and improvement, a period would
occur when food would increase faster than po-
pulation. On the other hand^ if, from favour-
able circumstances at any time, the people of a
country were very abundantly supplied, it might
as safely be predicted that, in their progress
towards a full population, a period would occur

f2


68 APPENDIX,

when population would increase faster than
food. It is absolutely necessary, therefore, to
know the actual condition in which a people is
living, in regard to subsistence, before we can
say whether food or population is likely to in-
crease the fastest. And this condition is cer-
tainly not determined exclusively by the state
of civilization and population ; but is very dif-
ferent in the same nation at different times ;
and sometimes food is comparatively more
abundant at an early period, and sometimes at
a later period. Taking only the last five or
six hundred years in Europe, it may be re-
marked, that the States of this more, improved
part of the world have been exposed . to great
losses of people by plague, pestilence, famine,
and war; and invariably after these losses,
population has increased faster than food. In
this country, for sixty years during the latter
half of the fifteenth century, and the early part
of the sixteenth, the labourer appears to have
earned nearly two pecks of wheat a-day. At
the end of the sixteenth century, he did not


APPENDIX. 69

earn so much. as three-fourths of a peck. Dur-
ing the sixteenth century, therefore, popula-
tion must practically have increased much
faster than food. From 1720 to 1750 the la-
bourer earned about a full peck of wheat a-
day. Since that period, I believe, he has
never for five years together earned so much
as a peck, hardly, indeed, so much as five-
sixths of a peck. Notwithstanding the po«
verty and misery of Ireland at an early period,
I am strongly disposed to believe, that about
the time when Arthur Young made his tour in
that country (1776 and 1778) food was de-
cidedly more abundant than it has been of
late years. With regard to what may be called
the present state of the nations of the Conti-
nent,, many of them seem to have increased
their food very rapidly since the revolutionary
war ; and this increase has been followed by
so very rapid an increase of population, that
it seems quite impossible it should continue.
There is some reason, indeed, to think from
the accounts of Mr. Jacob, that population is


70 APPENDIX*

now increasing faster than food. It appears^
then, that it cannot safely be assumed as a
fact/ that food has generally increased faster
than population.

If the population of Great Britain were to
go on increasing for two hundred years at the
rate at which it increased during the twenty
years between the census of 1800 and that
of 1820, it would be sixteen times, as great as
at presents It is not easy to believe that this
is possible. A retardation in the rate of in-
crease seems to be absolutely inevitable. And
the question is, whether we are entitled from
past experience to expect that this will take
place without some diminution of corn wages,
and some increased difficulty of maintaining a
family. At ^ events^. it is quite certain^ that
no desire,, however great, of increasing our
subsistence can keep us out of the reach of
the most miserable poverty, if we do not, at
the same time^ exercise the more efficient
power we poissess of restraining the progress of
population by prudential habits.


APPENaiXi 71

The rate at which social improvement fn*o*
ceeds, does not depend exclusively upon the
rate at which subsistence can be made to
increase faster than population. I look for'*
ward to the possibility, and even the probabi-
lity of the labouring classes bf society being
altogether in a better situation thisin they are
now^ when the means of a further increase of
food shall be nearly exhausted, and both ' sub-
sistence and population shall have come nearly
to a stand. But, it is obvious, that if this im-^
provement should be accomplished, it cannot
be by exertions to increase food, but by the
moral restraint which will diminish the misery
and vice constantly occasioned by the ten*"
d^Dcy of population to press against subsist*
ence. Consequently, in discussing our future
prospects of social improvement, it cannot but
lead to error, to lay down positions calculated
to direct the attention towards means which
must of n^ecessity be inefficient, while the na-
ture of the difficulty to be contended with,
and the only efficient means of contending


72 APPENDIX.

with it successfully, and of improving the con-
dition of society, are kept in the back ground.
Your position, that food has a tendency to in-
crease faster than population^ appears to me,
to be open to this objection, and therefore I
cannot approve of it.

I know you will excuse the frankness with
which I have stated my opinions. We do not,
of course, differ in the ends which we are
desirous of pronK)ting ; the diminution of mi-
sery and vice, and the increase of. happiness
and virtue^ We only differ in the mode of
treating the subject. The main part of the
question with me, relates to the cause of the
continued poverty and misery of the labouring
classes of society in all old states. This surely
cannot be attributed to the tendency of food
to increase faster than population. It may be
to the tendency of population to increase fjEister
than food.

Believe me, my dear Sir,

Very truly yours,

T. R. iMALTHUS.

N. W. Senior, Esq.


APPENDIX. 73


Lincoln's Inn,
March 26, 1829.

4

My DEAR Sir,

Pray accept my siDcerest thanks
for the reply with which you have honoured
my letter, and for the instruction which it has
afforded me.

1 find, however, that the differences between
us, though still I hope not greats are ra,ther
greater than I had imagined. I will venture
again to intrude on your attention, in the h(^
of making them still smaller.

First, as to the facts.

I must have expressed myself ill, if I have
led you to suppose that I assert any thing
like an 2/mt;er^a/ increase of the ..proportion of
subsistence to population. When I say that
subsistence has generally increased in a greater
ratio than population, I mean, that if we look
back through the history of the whole world.


74 APPENDIX.

and compare the state of each country at dis-
tinct periods of two hundred or three hundred
years, the cases in which food has increased
during the preceding period of two hundred or
three hundred years, in a greater ratio than
population, will be found to be more numerous
than those in which population hai$ increased
during the preceding period in a greater ratio
than food. I admit that this increase has not
been steady ; it has been subject to the oscil*
lati<xis which you have so well described.
The cesi^ation of a civil war, the acquisition of
a new and abundant material of food, mecha-
nical iQventions, enabling the importation of
a considerable supply of food at a less ex-
pense of labour than must have been employed
to produce it at home, improved modes of cul-
tivation and transport, and the change from
a rei^tricted to a free internal corn trade — each
of these causes would be sufficient to occasion
an immediate increase of food. In this coun-
try every one of them has been experieneed;
As each has begun to act, it hafs/no doubts


APPENDIX. 76

been followed by aa increase of population;
an increase which^ in many cases, cannot have
fidly shown itself until some time after the
cause increasing the supply of food had
been in full operation. Under such circum-
stances a retrograde movement must have
taken place. Still I apprehend that, in the
absence of disturbing causes, the retrc^^reuioii
would not be to the point at which food and
population relatively stood, before the first im*
provement took place. 1 conceive thei pro*
gross of human society to resemble the chil*^
dren's puzzle of a snail, which we are told
every day crawled up the wall four feet and
fell back three. If we had always fallen back
the whole four, we sl^ould still be ill^fed
savages^ earning a scanty subsistence by the
chase. And yet in England we have many
disturbing causes. We have the poor law»
to increase our numbers^ the com laws to pro-
hibit, under ordinary circumstances, the im*
portatipn of subsistence, and a commercisd
code by which the perverse ingenuity of cea^


76 APPENDIX.

tunes has laboured to fetter and misdirect our
industry..

. Secondly, As to the accuracy of our re-
spective forms of expression.

I fully admit/ that in all old countries, per-
haps in all countries whatever, population is
always pressing against food ; and that the
pressure not only prevents the increase which
would take place> if it could be removed, but
occasions premature mortality. But as society
advances in what appears to me to be our
natural course, for it is the course for which
nature has fitted us, this pressure generally,
though not universally, diminishes. The pro-
portion of those who now die in England from
want,, is probably less than it was two hundred
years ago; it certainly is less than it was six
hundred years ago. I still think myself,
therefore,, justified in saying, that there is a
tendency in the pressure to diminish. I admit
that human nature tends to marriage directly,
and to the increase of subsistence only indi-
rectly, and through the intervention of fore-


JiPPENDlX. 77

thought, is It may be said that, strictly speak-^
\ng, man has no natural tendency to produce
food^ &r to better his condition, hut to consume
food, and to have his condition bettered, and,
through the intervention of reason, to the ac-
complishment of these results. But reason,
in some degree or other, is as natural to man
as passion. On this ground I speak of man as
a rational animal, as having a tendency towards
the ends, which he pursues through the inter-
vention of forethought, as well as towards
those which he pursues at the dictates of pas-
sion J^ In this sense I speak of any people as
having a desire to increase their subsistence,-
(for that is what I mean when I speak of the
tendency of subsistence to increase,) stronger
than the desire which leads them to increase
their numbers.^

The third, and by far the most important
question, is the effect which your mode, or my
mode, of stating the law of population, is likely
to produce on the reader's liiind.
: I fully agree with you, that a statement


78 APPENDIX.

which should imply that the increase of food
can, in the absence of constant vigilance, re-
straint, and self-denial, exceed or even keep
pace with that of population, would lead to the
most mischievous error. I am grateful to you
for having drawn my attention to the possibility
of such a consequence being inferred from my
expressions, and I certainly shall take care to
prevent it for the future. I do not think that
kny thing which I have said would lead an at-
tentive reader to such a conclusion ; but after
all the number of a:ttentive readers is so small,
that no writer is justified in neglecting the idle
and the careless.

But while I admit that false and dangerous
inferences may be drawn from the naked and
unexplained proposition that food has a ten-
dency to increase faster than population, I must
add that inferences as false and as dangerous may
be drawn, and in fact have been drawn, from
the proposition that population has a tendency
to increase faster than food. Nothing can be
more accurate than your statement, *' that


APPENDIX. 79

popolation i& always ready abd inclined to in-
crease faster than food, if the checks which re-
press it are removed^'' But many, perhaps the
majority of your readers, adopt the proposition
without the qualification. They seem to be-
lieve that the expansive power of population is
a source of evil incapable not only of being
subdued, but even of being mitigated. They
consider man not as he is, but as he would be
if he had neither forethought nor ambition;
neither the wish to rise, nor the fear to sink, in
society. They deny the. possibility of perma-
nent improvement, and regard every partial
amelioration as a mere Sisyphaean labour.

A XX' oTt fiiXXot

aicpov vTTBpfiaXieiv, tot avotrrpixImaKf KpaToiig*

'' Were the whole mass of human suste-
"nanee," observjBs.a distinguished writer, " pro-
" duced by the soil now under cultivation to be
*' increased twofold by the efforts of human in-


80 APPENDIX.

" genuity and industry^ we may assert, as an
" undoubted truth, that the only effect, after
" the lapse of a few years, would be found to
" have been the multiplication in a like pro-
*' portion of the number of its occupants, with,
** probably at the same time, a far increased
'* proportion of misery and crime."

No one can doubt the anxiety of the eminent
person whom I have quoted, to promote the
welfare of mankind ; but the tendency of this
passage is to damp every attempt to make la-
bour more productive.

Unhappily there are many whom indolence
or selfishness, or a turn to despondency, make
ready recipients of such a doctrine. It fur-
nishes an easy escape from the trouble or ex-
pense implied by every project of improvement.
*' What use would it be," they ask, " to promote
an extensive emigration ? the whole vacuum
would be immediately filled up by the neces-
sary increase of population. Why should we
" alter the corn laws ? If food were for a time


44


4X


44


APPENDIX. 81

'' more abundant, there would be a proportionate
'' increase of population^ and we should be just
'' as ill off as before."

There are many also, particularly among
those who reason rather with their hearts than

>

their heads, who are unable to assent to these
doctrines, and yet believe them to be among
the admitted results of political economy. Such
persons apply to the whole science the argu-
mentum ah absurdo ; and instead of enquiring
into the accuracy of the reasoning, refuse to
examine the premises from which such ob-
jectionable conclusions are inferred.

Undoubtedly these opinions are not fair in-
ferences from your work ; they are, indeed,
directly opposed to the spirit of the greater
part of it ; but I think they must be considered
as having been occasioned by a misconception
of your reasonings. They are prevalent now :
before the appearance of your writings, they
were never hinted at. I trust, however, that,
unsupported as they are by your authority, they
will gradually wear away; and I anticipate

G


82 APPENDIX.

from their disappearance not merely the extin-
guishment of an error, but the removal of an
obstacle to the diffusion of political knowledge.

Believe me.

My dear Sir,

Yours, very sincerely,

N. W. SENIOR.

Bey. T. R, Malthus.


East India College,
March 31, 1829.


My Dear Sir,


We do not essentially differ as
to facts, when they are explained as you have
explained them in your last letteir. We are
also quite agreed that in the capacity of reason
and forethought, man is endowed with a power
naturally calculated to mitigate the evils occa-
sioned by the pressure of population against
food. We are further agreed that, in the pro-
gress of society, as education and knowledge


APPENDIX. 83

are extended, the probability is, that these evils
will practically be mitigated, and the condition
of the labouring classes be improved.

But is the passage which you have quoted
in your last letter, when taken with the context,
essentially inconsistent with these our opinions ?
It must be allowed, that it is not expressed with
sufficient caution. In pronouncing as an un-
doubted truth, that the only effect of doubling
the quantity of food in a country, would, after
the lapse of a few years, be found to have been
the multiplication in a like proportion of the
number of its occupants, with probably a far
increased propprtion of misery and crime, the
author has evidently gone too far ; but in what
appears to me to be the intended conclusion of
the passage, I am disposed to agree with him.

The two main propositions which I have en-
deavoured to prove from history and experience,
are, '* That population invariably increases
'' when the means of subsistence increase, unless
" prevented by powerful and obvious checks;"
and, " That these checks, and the checks which

G 2


84 APPENDIX.

" which keep the population down to the level
^' of the means of subsistence^ are, moral re-
" straint, vice, and misery."

Now 1 cannot but allow that it is a fair in-
ference from these propositions, that, if in any
country means of doubling the quantity of food
were suddenly discovered, population would in-
crease with extraordinary rapidity, so as to
overtake, or nearly to overtake, the food ; and
that the permanent condition of the labouring
classes would not depend upon such discovery,
but exclusively on the question of the final in-
crease of moral restraint, or the moral condition
of the population ; which I think is nearly the
substance of the passage which you have quoted,
when taken with the context.

In the same manner I must. allow that it fol-
lows from my principles, that if by a free trade,
corn were obtained much cheaper, and a labour-
ing family could really command a much larger
quantity of it, population would unquestionably
increase with greater rapidity than before, so as
to reduce the increased corn wages ; and that


APPENDIX. 85

the final condition of the labouring classes would
not depend on this change which had taken
place in the law, but upon the greater or less
prevalence of the moral checks to population
after the peculiar stimulus to its increase had
subsided ; and repeated experience has shown
that the facility of obtaining food at one period
is not necessarily connected with the formation
of more general habits of prudence subsequently.
It does not by any means follow from these
principles, that we should not use our utmost
endeavours to make two ears of wheat grow
where one grew before, or to improve our com-
mercial code by freeing it from restraints. An
increase of population is in itself a very decided
advantage, if it be not accompanied by an in-
creased proportion of vice and misery. And
the period during which the pressure of popu-
lation is lightened, though it may not be of
long duration, is a period of comparative ease,
and ought by no means to be thrown out of

r

our consideration. It is further to be ob-
served, that the experience of such a period
may sometimes operate in giving to the labour-


/


86 APPENDIX.

ing classes a taste for such a mode of living as
will tend to increase their prudential habits.
But it is obvious, that without this latter effect,
the pressure of poverty cannot be permanently-
lessened. And when the principal question is
distinctly respecting the permanent condition of
the great mass of the labouring classes^ as in '
the latter part of my Essay, the interests of
that body, which ought to be considered as the
main interests of society, imperiously require
that we should not call off their attention to
the chances of a great increase of food, but
endeavour by every proper means to direct

their view to the important and unquestionable
truth, that they can do much more for them-
selves than others can do for them, and. that
the only source of an essential and permanent
improvement of their condition, is the improve-
ment and right direction of their moral and re-
ligious habits.

I am, my dear Sir,

Very truly yours,
T. ROBT. MALTHUS.

N. W. Senior, Esq.


At>pENnik- 87

Lincoln's Inn^
April 9, 1 829.

My dear Sir,

Our controversy has ended, sis
I believe few controversies ever terminated
before, in mutual agreement. I think, how-
ever, that it may be well to close it by a few
remarks on the circumstances by which it
was occasioned.

It is obvious that the principal causes by
which the situation of a people can be im-
proved, are those which occasion the amount
of what is provided for their use to be in a
greater proportion than before to their num-
bers. It seems a consequence equally obvious,
that the principal means of improvement are
those which promote the production of subsist-
ence and prevent a corresponding multiplica-
tion of consumers.

But the old doctrine was, that an increase of
numbers is necessarily accompanied, not merely
by a positive, but by a relative increase of pro-
ductive power. Density of population was
supposed to be the cause and the test of pros-


88 APPENDIX.

perity; its increase to be the chief object of
our exertions, and depopulation to be a danger
constantly besetting us. And statesmen and
legislators were urged to stimulate population
with as much earnestness, and about as much
good sense, as they are now urged to stimulate
consumption.

Your work ,efFected a complete revulsion in
public opinion. You proved that additional
numbers, instead of wealth, may bring poverty.
That in civilized countries the evil to be feared
is not the diminution, but the undue increase
of inhabitants. That population, instead of be-
ing a torpid agent, requiring to be goaded by
artificial stimulants, is a power almost always
stronger than could be desired, and producing,
unless restrained by constant prudence and
self-denial, the worst forms of misery and
vice.

These views are as just as they are import-
ant. But they have been caricatured by most
of your followers. Because additional numbers
may bring poverty, it has been supposed that
they necessarily will do so. Because increased


APPENDIX. 89

means of subsistence may be followed and neu«
tralized by« a proportionate increase in the
number of the persons to be subsisted, it has
been supposed that such will necessiarily be the
case.

These were the doctrines which I found
prevalent when I began my Lectures.

The points of view in which we have respec-
tively considered the subject, have, perhaps^
been materially influenced by the state of public
opinion at the periods when we began to write.
You found the principle of population disre*
garded, or rather unkown; and justly think-
ing the prevalent erjors most mischievous,
you bestowed on them an almost exclusive
attention. I found that principle made the
stalking-horse of negligence and injustice, t^e
favourite objection to every project for render-
ing the resources of the country more produc-
tive ; and it is possible, that in replying to
those who appeared to me to exaggerate the
probable effects of its powers, and to neglect
the benefits to be derived from increased pro-


90 APPENDIX.

duction, I may' sometimes have undervalued
the former, and overrated the latter.

But, in fact, no plan for social improvement
can be complete, unless it embrace the means
both of increasing production, and of prevent-
ing populatlDn from making a proportionate
advance. The former is to be effected chiefly
by the higher orders in society ; the latter de-
pends entirely on the lower. As a means of
improvement, the latter is, on the whole, the
more efficient. It may be acted upon, or neg-
lected by every individual. But, in the pre-
sent fitate of public opinion, and of our com-
mercial and fiscal policy, perhaps more good
is to be done by insisting on the former. The
economist who neglects either, considers only
a portion of his subject.

Believe me, my dear Sir,
Yours very truly,

N. W. SENIOR.

Rev. T. R. Maltiius.


LONDON :
JDOTSON AND PALMES, 4*R1NT£KS, SAVOY-STRLET, STR4NP.


^'


\e/


THREE LECTURES


ON


THE COST OF


OBTAINING MONEY,


AND ON SOMK EFFECTS OF


PRIVATE AND GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY ;


DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,
IN TRINITY TERM, 1829.


By NASSAU WILLIAM SENIOR, A.M.

LATE FELLOW OP MAO. COL., PROF. OF POLITICAL ECON.


LO NDON:
JOHN MURRAY. ALBEMARLE-STREET.


MDCGCXXX.


LONDON :

Printed by William Clowbs,

Stamford Street.


ADVERTISEMENT.


The statute by which the Professorship of Political
Economy was founded^ requires the Professor to publish
a Lecture every year. In compliance with this requisi-
tion, I have selected, from the course delivered in June
1829, the portion which appeared to me least unfit for
separate publication. As a fragment it is necessarily
imperfect: my apology for presenting it to the Public is,
the necessity imposed on me by the statute.

N. W. SENIOR.


Lincoln's T?in,
January 15, 1S30.


LECTURE L


ON THE COST OF OBTAINING MONEY.


The average annual wages of labour in Hindostan
are from one pound to two pounds troy of silver
a year. In England they are from nine pounds
to fifteen pounds troy. In Upper Canada and
the United States of America, they are from
twelve pounds troy to twenty pounds. Within
the same time the American labourer obtains
twelve times^ and the English labourer nine
times as much silver as the Hindoo.

The difference in the cost of obtaining silver,
or, in other words, in the wages of labour in silver,
in different countries at the same period has
attracted attention^ though not perhaps so much
as it deserves, and various theories have been
proposed to account for it.

B


2 ON THE COST OF

It has been attributed to the different degrees
of labour requisite to obtain the necessaries of the
labourer. In Hindostan it has been said^ he
requires little clothing or fuel, and subsists on
rice^ of which he obtains a sufficient quantity with
little exertion. But how then do we account for
his wages in North America being twenty-rfive
per cent, higher than they are in England, while
the labour requisite to obtain necessaries is not
much more than half as great in the former
country as in the latter ? How do we account for
the low amount of wages in silver in China^ where
the labour necessary to obtain necessaries is pro-
verbially great ?

It has been attributed to the different densities
of population. In Hindostan and in Ireland, it
has been said, labourers multiply so rapidly, that
the market is overstocked with labour, and the
price falls from the increased supply. But if this
were an universal rule, as the population of Eng-
land has doubled in the last seventy or eighty
years, wages ought to have fallen, whereas they
have doubled or trebled in that interval. They
have kept on increasing in North America during


OBTAINING MONEV. 8

a still greater increase of population. They are,
perhaps, twice as high in Holland as in Sweden,
though the population of Holland is ten times as
dense as that of Sweden.

It has been attributed to the diflFerent pressure
of taxation : but taxation is nowhere so light as in
America, where wages are the highest. It is,
probably, heavier in Hindostan than in England^
yet wages are nine or ten times as high in Eng*
land as in Hindostan. So that it might seem
that wages are highest where taxation is lowest :
but, on the other hand, taxation is lighter in
France than in England, yet wages are lower,
and lighter in Ireland than in France, yet wages are
lower still. It appears, therefore, that there is no
necessary connexion between taxation and wages.

It has been attributed to the different rates of
profit. The average rate of profit in England is
supposed to be about one-tenth, or about eleveq
per cent, per annum* In Hindostan and America
it is higher. We will suppose it to be one-sixth,
or twenty per cent, per annum, which is probably
far too high an estimate. This difference would
aocount for the labourer, whose wages have beea

B 2


4 ON rnt cost op

advanced for a year, receiving nine-tenths of the
value of what he produces in England, and only
five-sixths in America and Hindostan, or rather is
only a different expression of the same fact, but
it does not afford even a plausible solution of the
present question.

If the difference in wages were solely occasioned
by a diflference in the rate of profit, whatever is
lost by the labourer would be gained by the capi-
talist, and the aggregate value in silver of a com-
modity produced by an equal expenditure of
wages and profits, or, in my nomenclature, by an
equal sum of labour and abstinence, would be
every where the same; and in that case, how
could both wages and profits be higher in North
America than in England ?

Taking North America as the standard, and
that the value in silver of the produce of a year's
labour of one man, his wages having been ad-
vanced for a year, is two hundred and eighty
ounces of silver, the value in silver in Hindostan
and in England, of the produce of a year's labour
of one man, his wages having been advanced for
a year, would also be two hundred and eighty


OBTAINING MONEY. O

ounces, and as the labourer receives only twenty-
four ounces of silver in Hindostan, and only one
hundred and eighty ounces in England, the Hindoo
capitalist must receive, on the sum advanced by
him in payment of wages, a profit of more than
two hundred and fifty-six ounces, or above cue'
thousand per cent, per annum ; and the English
capitalist more than one hundred ounces, being
more than sixty per cent, per anntim^ which we
know to have no resemblance to the fact. If my
statements and suppositions as to the average
wages of labour, and the average profits of capi-
tal in England, Hindostan, and America be cor-
rect, a commodity unaffected by any monopoly
produced by the labour of one man for a year^ his
wages having been advanced for a year, must sell
in Hindostan for from one pound two ounces, to two
pounds four ounces of silver; that is, for from twelve
to twenty-four ounces as the wages of the labour,
and from two to four ounces as the profit of the
capital employed. In England such a commodity
must sell for from about nine pounds nine ounces^
to about sixteen pounds three ounces. In America
for from fourteen pounds to twenty-three pounds


ON THE COST OF


four ounces. In other words, the same sum of
labour and abstinence, or, in other words, the
same sacrifice of ease and of immediate enjoy-
ment, obtains in America twenty-three pounds fouir
ounces ; in England sixteen pounds three oUtices ;
and in Hindostan two pounds four ounces. And
this difference is the phenomenon to which I am
calling your attention *.

It has been attributed to the different prices, ift
silver, of necessaries. Provisions, it is said, are
dearer, that is, exchange for more silver in
England than in France ; therefore, the labourer
Inust receive more silver to enable him to pur-
chase them. But provisions are cheaper in Am^
rica than in England, and yet the labourer re^
ceives much less silver in England than in Ame-
rica. TTie productiveness of the Worst soil cul-
tivated, the period for which capital is advanced,
and the rate of profit being given, it is clear that
the average price in silver of corti, must depiend
on the average wages in silver of labour, not th^
wages of labour on the price of com. On my
hypothesis, that the services of ail English 1^-

* See note at the end.


OBTAINING MONEY. "K

bourer fora yqar, his wages having been advanced
for a year, are worth about nine pounds nine ounces
of silver^ the corn produced by him in a yeaf on the
tyorst land, his wages having been advanced for a
yeat*, must be worth nine pounds nine ounces of
silver, and cannot be permanently worth eithel^
more of less. If his wages fall one-half, th^ rate
of profit remaining the same, the corn must bcl
worth four pounds ten ounces and a half If they
double^ it must be Worth nineteen pdUnds fixH
ounces. But in, all cases^ the productiveness of
the worst land cultivated, the period for which
wages are advanced, and the rate of profit re^
maining the same> the average amount in silver of
wages must regulate the average value in silver
of corn, and not the value in silver of com th6
amount of wages. To suppose the contrary, is in
faqt thfe vulgar error of putting the cart before
the horse, or mistaking the effect for the cause.
To use Adam Smith's illustration, ^^ It is not
" because one man keeps a coach while his ndgh-*
" bour walks a-foot, that the one is rich and the
^^ other is poor ; but because the one is rich he


8 ON THE COST OF

^* keeps a coach, and because the other is poor he
^* walks a- foot."

If the population of England should maintain
its present rate of advance ; if our numbers should
continue to increase at the rate of more than five
hundred persons every twenty-four hours^ and the
absolute prohibition of foreign corn, for which a
violent faction is now clamouring, should be con-
ceded, there can be no question that even though
wages should not rise, the price of corn would ad-
vance. The constantly increasing additional quan-
tity which must be raised to supply an annual addi-
tion of fifty thousand families, would be raised at a
constantly increasing proportionate expense. Ac-
cording to the theory which I am considering-, the
wages of the labourer would rise in proportion.
For what purpose would they rise? To enable him
to consume the same quantity as before, though
the whole quantity raised would bear a less pro^
portion than before to the whole number of pro-
ducers ? On such a supposition wages might be ten
guineas a day, and corn ten guineas a peck. Accord-
ing to the present administration of our poor-laws.


OBTAINING MONEY. 9

which allots to each individual a definite quantity of
corn, to be given by the landlord as relief when not
paid by the employer as wages, the whole amount
received by the labourer in the two forms of relief
and wages might rise, not indeed ad infinitum, but
until it had absorbed the whole amount of rent and
tithes, — ^had converted the landlords and clergy
into trustees for the poor. And this is the state
of things which, under the united influence of corn
laws, even such as they are now, poor laws, and an
increasing population, seems gradually approach-
ing. But in the absence of poor laws, what rea-
son would there be for expecting a rise in wages ?
Because the labourer would want more? But
would the labourer's wants give to the capitalist
the power or the will to pay him more? Does
the Manchester manufacturer pay his fine spin-
ners 30^. a week, and his coarse spinners 15^. be-
cause the fine spinner eats twice as much as the
coarse spinner? He pays the fine spinner 30^. be-
cause the produce of his labour is worth 30.?., and
a further sum equal to the average profit obtained
by a manufacturing capitalist, and because, if he
were to offer less, other capitalists would engage


10 ON TfiB OOCT OF

bis laboarers, and his machinery would stand
idle. While the labourer's services are worth 30s.
be will receive 30*., whatever be the price of
com. 1\3 suppose the contrary is to ooniuder the
labourer not as a free agent, but as a slave or
domestic animal, fed not according to his value
but his necessities.

All expaience shews that in the case which 1
have been supposing, the labourer's resource
would be, not to raise his wages, but to reduce his
ejipencUtnre. He must first give up his weekly
pittance of animal food. He must drink his tea
without sugar, and* surrender his |Hpe, and per«>
haps his beer. He must sink from wheat to rye,
or barley, or oatmeal, and from oatmeal to pota-
toes. He must look on the wheat which he would
raise, as he now does on the sheep and cattle that
he tends, as a luxury beyond his enjoyment. The
price o^ corn is nearly as high in Ireland as in
Englahd .; but have the wsLges of the Irish labourer
risen to enable him to coiisume it ? Did the eXpor*
tation of corn and cattle from Ireland ceaide even
during the rages of famitie^ and of t)i^tilenc6 oecft^
slotted by fambe ?


6MAimKQ Mblffit. 1 1

The only mode by which I can «icoount for th^
pheinomen^ which I have be^ de^ritMng is»
by 8a{>potsitig that the countrien whidh havi^ the
pfedouis tnetals to dispose of^ eithi^ as prdducerSi
of a)9 havingf a temporary superflaity at their own
current mte of prii^e^, ari^ willing to givd mora
tlian one<>foarth more for the exportable common
dities prodneed by this labour of one North Ame^
lican in a year, assisted by an advance of dapitld
eijual in value to his wages for a giv*tt peitbd,
than for the commodities produced by Ibfe labour
of one Englishman^ and more thaA ten timetl as
mudh as for the commodities produced by the
labour of one Hindoo, similarly circUmiitan^t^*
Or in other words^ that the diligence attd skill
with which English labour i^ applied enables th6
English labourer to produce in a year ifexportable
commodities equal in value to thode produced in a
year by dght Hindoos ; and that the diligence and
skill with which North American labour is applied,
inferior as they are perhaps to oUr oWn, yet by
the assistance of the fertile soil which he culti-
vates, enable the North American, labourer to
pf bduce exportable tiommoditt66 mot* than Otte-


12 ON THE COST OF

fourth more valuable than those produced by the
Englishman in a given period^ and more than
ten times more valuable than those produced by
the Hindoo. Or to use a still more concise ex-
pression^ that labour in England is eight times as
productive of exportable commodities as in Hin-
dostan^ and labour in North America is one-fourth
more productive of exportable commodities than
in England.

It is probable that the connexion between the
value^ in the precious metals^ of labour^ or, in
other words, money wages, and the cost of im-
porting the precious metals, may not appear so
dear to many of my hearers as it does to myself.
But I would ask those to whom it is not evident.
Whether England and France and the other
countries which use plate and money, without pos-
sessing mines, must not annually import a certain
quantity of the precious metals to supply the
annual wear of plate and money ? Whether they
must not obtain this supply directly or indirectly
from the countries possessing mines ? Whether
the average profits of the capitalists who employ
labourers to produce the commodities ia return for


OBTAINING MONEY. 13

which this supply is obtained, must not be the
same as the average profits of other capitalists in
the same country ? Whether the gold and silver
which these capitalists import are not sent by them
to the mint to be coined for their own benefit, or
exchanged for gold and silver previously coined ?
Whether the money thus obtained, after deduct-
ing what may be payable as rent, is not divided
into two portions, one of which is retained by the
capitalists as profit, and the other given to their
labourers, as wages? Whether their labourers
are likely to receive either more or less than any
other labourers in the same country, undergoing
equal toils ? Whether therefore the wages ob-
tained by the labourers, in return for whose labour
the precious metals are imported, do not regulate
the wages of all other labourers in the same
country? And whether the price, or, in other
words, the value in gold and silver of all those
commodities which are not the subjects of a mo-
nopoly, does not depend, in a country not possess-
ing mines, on the gold and silver which can be
obtained by exporting the result of a given quan-
tity of labour the current rate of profit, and, in


14 ON THE eq^T OP

e^eh individual cdse^ the amount of the ^ages
whioh have been paid^ s^nd the time for which
they have been advanced?

Iq fi^ct the portableneps of the preoiouf) i^etalp
^nd the universaUty of the demand for them renr
deF the whole commercial world one country, iij
which bullion is the money ^nd the inhabitants of
gs^ch nation fprm a distinct class of labourers. We
Imow th^t in the small market of every district the
femun^i^tion paid to the producer is in proportion
t^ the v^Im? produced. And consequently that if
on§ ms^it can by superior diligence^ or superior
l^kiUi or by the assistance of a larger capital, or
by deferring for a longer time his remuneration,
iir by any advantage natural or acquiredji Qcc^j^ion
ft more valuE^ble prpduct^ he will receive ft higher
rewards It is thus that a lawyer is better
p^id than a watchmaker, a watohm?tker thw a
weaver, a first-rate than an prdin^ry workman.
And for the same reason in the geners^l market of
Ihe world an Englishman is better paid than a
Frenchman, a Frenchman than ft Pple^ and a Pole
^an a Hindoo.

It bas been $hewn in the former J^ture^, thftt


OJITAimNQ MONIY. Id

in the mining countries all prices ultimately
depend on the' cost of producing the precious
metals ; that though the remuneration paid to the
miner is not identical with that received by other
producers, yet that it affords the scale- by which
the remuneration of all other producers is calcu-
lated. When once experience has ascertained the
comparative advantages and disadvantages of dif-
ferent occupations, they will continue to bear^ as to
wages, the same proportion to one another. A
fall in the cost of producing silver must raise the
wages of the miner. If those of the agriculturist
were not to rise in proportion, the miner's wages
would be more than in proportion to his sacrifices^
and they would be reduced by the consequent
competition. And on the other hand, mining
would be abandoned^ if, when the cost of pro-f
ducing silver was increased the wages in other
employments could be stationary. The mine
worked by England is the general market of the
world : the miners are those who produce those
oommodities by the exportation of which the pre-
cious metals are obtained, and the amount of the
precious metals^ which by a given exertion of


16 ON THE COST OF

labour, and advance of capital, they can obtain,
must afford the scale by which the remuneration
of all other producers is calculated.

If this reasoning be correct, and I have in vain
sought for a flaw in it, many important conse-
quences must be admitted.

In the first place it follows that the amount of
the income in money of each individual depends
on the prosperity of our foreign commerce. If the
worst land that can be profitably cultivated in
England will produce per acre, at an average,
two quarters of corn a-year, after deducting what
must be reserved for seed, the proprietor of an
estate of one hundred acres, producing at an
average, after the deduction of seed, four quarters
of com per acre, is entitled to two hundred quarters
as his rent. The value in money of [those two
hundred quarters must be the same as that of the
two hundred quarters which the farmer retains
and divides between himself and his labourers.
The value of those two hundred quarters must be
equal to the wages of the labourers after deducting
the farmer's profit for having paid those wages in
advance. And those wages, though not precisely


OBTAINING MONEY. ' 17

the same as the wages of the labourers who pro-
duce commodities for exportation^ must bear a
certain proportion to those wages. If the toils
undergone by the manufacturer are supposed to
be more severe by one-third than those of the
agriculturist, the agricultural labpurer will at an
average receive just two-thirds of the wages of
the manufacturer. If the foreign demand for
English manufactures be such as to occasion the
manufacturer to receive I5s. or about three ounces
of silver a week, the agriculturist will receive 10*.
or about two ounces of silver a week. We will
suppose that the farmer in question employs tea
labourers, whose wages are advanced for a year
before the produce is sold, and that the average
rate of profit is one-tenth, or about eleven per
cent, per annum. When wages are 10*. a week,
or 26/. a ye?ir per labourer, the wages of ten
labourers amount to 260/. a year ; making, with
the addition of one-tenth for profits 286/., which
must be the average price of the two hundred
quarters annually retained by the farmer to pay
his profit and his labourers' wages. And as the
landlord's two hundred quarters sell for the same


18 ON TBI coCT or

price, hi/5 rent must aleo be 286/. a year. But if
^ny improvement in the s^cill by wbifjh English
li^our is assi3ted should so raise the value in the
foreign market of English manufactures as to raise
the wages of manufiicturers from I5s. to 30f.
a week, the same effect would be produced as if, in
$L mining country, the cost of producing silver
were diminished by one-half. Though the labour
of the agricultural labourer would not become
more productive than before, yet fds wages would
also be doubled, or the former proportion founded
on the experience of the comparative disadvan^
tages of each occupation would not be preserved.
The wages of the labourers employed in raising
the two hundred quarters of corn retained by the
farmer and his labourers would rise from 260/. to
520/. a year : the profit on the advance of those
wages for a year must rise from 2!5/, to 52/., the
price of the two hundred quarters would be 572/.
Instead of 286/. ; and the price of the landlord's
two hundred quarters would of course also rise
from 286/. to 572/.

In the purchase of English labour and of those
English commodities ia which no improvement


OBTAINING MONBY. 19

had taken place^ the English landlord would find
his income unaltered, however raised in nominal
amount But hb power of purchasing those
English commodities, the production of which had
been facilitated, would be increased in proportioa
to that improvement. In the purchase of foreign
labour and foreign commodities, his income would
be doubled. He would be able to purchase
statues, pictures, and wines, which the proprietor
of an equal extent of equally fertile land in the
countries producing those commodities could not
aspire to. He would be able to travel as a Milor
Anglais, and drive the French and Italian aris-
tocracy from the first floor to the garret, or the
entresol. Little imagining that the greater part
of the value of what he called his patrimony waSt
in fact^ the creation of the chimneys and jenniei^ of
his neighbour, the manufacturer.

Such, in fact, were the events which actually
occurred in this country during the latter part of
the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth
century. The inventions of Arkwright and Watt,
by making English labour ten times, or more than
ten times as efficient in the production of j^xport^

c 2


20 ON THE COST OlP"

able commodities, doubled, or more than doubled
its value in the foreign market, and reduced to
one-half, or less than one-half, the cost in England
of obtaining the precious metals. It is true that
clinging to the restrictions and prohibitions of our
commercial code, we have, as yet, refused the
greater part of the advantages which Providence
seemed to press on our acceptance ; but cramped
as they are, and always have been, by our per-
verse legislation, the skill of our manufacturers
has, during the last sixly years, more than
doubled the rent of land and the income of every
class of producers.

It would be a painful task to trace the steps by
which the increasing embarrassments of commerce,
occasioned partly by our own adherence to the
barbarous policy called protection, and partly by
the retaliatory follies of other countries, by dimi-
nishing the market for English labour, are now
gradually lowering its price, increasing the cost of
obtaining the precious metals, and reducing the
income of every producer, while the public bur-
thens, nominally the same, are, for that very
reason, really in a state of constant increase.


OBTAINING MONEY. 21

It is a lamentable proof of the public ignorance
on these subjects^ that the general fall of prices^
or in other words, the increasing difficulty of ob-
taining the precious metals^ of which every one is
sensible^ should^ by almost every one, be attributed
to some cause of almost ridiculous inadequacy. It
has been attributed to our return to a metallic
currency, as if the subtraction of twenty millions
of sovereigns^ or less than four hundred thousand
pounds troy of gold, from the ten millions of
pounds troy of gold bullion, coin, and plate sup-
posed to be in use throughout the worlds that is
to say, the removal of one-twenty-fifth part, could
sensibly affect the value of gold. It has beea
attributed even to the substitution of gold and
silver for the three or four millions of one pound
notes lately called in, as if the value of the two
thousand millions sterling of gold and silver bul-
lion, coin, and plate, supposed to be in use
throughout the world, could be materially affected
by the subtraction of less than one-five-hundredth
part of it. It has been attributed to over produc-
tion. We have been told that our, agriculturists
apd rpaoijfacturers all produce too much ; as if it


S3 O*? THE OOdT OP

#erc possible that erery body could liave too
much of everything ; as if there were a single
family that would not like to spend 1000/. a year.
It has been attributed, which is nearly the same
Explanation, to the increased use of machinery, as
if it were possible that general embarrassmeiit
could be the result of the improved efficiency of
laboni' ; as if all men would be impoverished if
their force and their skill were doubled. It has
b6en attributed even to free trade^ as if anything
approaching to free trade had ever been conceded ;
Its if free trade were not specifically the cure of the
evil of which it is represented as the cause ; as if
the allowing every man to exert his industry in
the mode which he finds, from experience, to be
most productive would diminish its value ; as if
we could increase the incomes of the inhabitants
of Manchester, by forcing them to turn their
bleaching grounds into corn fields^ or those of the
neighbouring farmers, by forcing them to weave
their own shirts.

We are often told of the artificial state of the
country. The vagueness of that expression affords
a never-failing refuge to those who are pressed by


OBTAINING MONEY. 23

reasonings which they want sense to comprehend
or candour to admit. In one sense indeed we are
in an artificial state. We have succeeded in rais-
ing io an extraordineuy height the value of our
industry. We obtain the precious metals at much
less than their average cost throughout the world,
or even in the most civilized parts of it. This isr
not only the consequence of a great advantage, of
the superior productiveness of our industry, but
the cause of many other advantages. It enables
us to obtain the products of other countries so for
as our legislature allows us to receive them, so
far as they are not prohibited on account of their
cheapness, not merely at the expense of less labour
than it would cost to produce them, but often at
the expense df less labour than they cost in the
producing countries. While one Englishman can
produce calico worth one hundred and fifty ounces
of silver in the same time within which five Poles
can produce corn worth only one hundred and
forty ounces, it must be advantageous to Poland
to give for the calico produced by one Englishman
the com produced by five Poles.
It is probable that if public attention had been


24 ON THE COST OF

earlier drawn to these circumstances, if we had
sooner and more anxiously inquired into the
causes which have enabled us to obta'm the pre-
cious metals so much more easily than our neigh-
bours, our national conduct might have been
materially altered. We should have found that
these causes are not resolvable into any peculiar
local advantages, but principally into our compa-
ratively greater and more skilful use of machinery
and our better division of labour : and we should
have felt that the progressive improvement of our
rivals must quickly destroy our superiority if we
remain stationary, and diminish it if our advance
be less rapid, and that our progress can be main-
tained or accelerated only, by allowing our in-
dustry to flow with perfect liberty into the chan-
nels in which it is found to be most productive.

Unhappily these inquiries were not made. We
appear to have considered the comparative cheap-
ness of the precious metals a permanent gift of
nature, as little susceptible of diminution or in-
crease as the warmth of our climate. With more
than the rashness of a merchant who in his pros-
perity should allow his expenses to equal his


OBTAINING MONEY. 25

profits, we have subjected ourselves to the obli-
gation of perpetual money payments, which we
can support only while we continue not merely to
outstrip, but to distance the rest of Europe. By
encumbering commerce with every sort of vexa-
tious restraint, we have done our best to force our
own industry into the channels which are least
beneficial, and to force the industry of other na-
tions into those in which their concurrence is most
dangerous. By act of Parliament we have con-
verted our customers into our rivals, and then
complain of their competition.

Many economists have maintained that no coun-
try can be injured by the improvement of her
neighbours. If the continent, they say, should be
able to manufacture cottons with half the labour
which they now cost in England, the consequence
would be, that we should be able to import our
supply of cottons from Germany or France at a
less expense than it costs us to manufacture them,
and might employ a portion of our industry now
devoted to the manufacture of cottons, in procur-
ing an additional supply of some other commodi-
ties. These opinions have suph ?wi appearance of


S6 ON THE COOT OF

liberality, that I am sorry to dissent from them.
Bat it must be remembered that England and the
continent are competitors in the general market
of the world. Such an alteration would diminish
the cost of obtaining the precious metals on the
continent^ and increase it in England. The value
of continental labour would rise, and the value of
English labour would sink. They would ask more
mcmey for all those commodities, in the produce
tion of which no improvement had taken place, and
we i^ould have less to offer for them. We might
find it easier to obtain cottons, but we should find
it more difficult to import everything else*.

The last remark which occurs to me as con-
nected with the present subject, is one which I
somewhat anticipated in my first course t^ namely,
the absurdity of the opinion that the getierally high
rate of wages in England unfits us for competition
with foreign producers. It is obvious that our
power of competing with foreigners depends on
the efficiency of our labour, and it has appeared

* This reasoning bears materially on the question as to the ex^
portation of machinery,
t Sec Lccttttes on the Mercantile Theoiy of Wealth, p. 76.


OBTAININO liON»t. 07

that a high rate of wages is a necessary conse-
quence of that efficiency. It is true^ indeed^ that
if we choose to misemploy a portbn of our
laborers we must pay th^n^ not according to
the value of what they do produce, but according
to the value of what they might produce if th^y
labour were properly directed, if I caU in a 8ur-»
geon to cut my hair, I must pay him as a mr««
geon. So if I employ^ in throwing silk, a man
who could earn three ounces of silver a week by
spinning cotton, I must pay him three ounces of
silver a week though he cannot throw more silk
than could be thrown in the same time by an
Italian whose wages are <m\y an ounce and a half.
And it is true, also, that I can be supported in
such a waste by nothing but an artificial mono*
poly, or, in other words, that I shall be undernsold
by the Italian in every market fi*om which I can*
not exclude him by violence. But do these cir-
cumstances justify me in resorting to that violence ?
Do they justify me in imploring the l^slature to
direct that violence against my fellow-subjects ?
If that violence is relaxed, but not cfiscontinaed,
have I, or has the consumer, the more right to


IB ON THl COCT QF

price, hifi rent must also be 286/. a year. B^t if
any ioiprovement ia the skill by wbiph English
labour is assisted should so raise the value in the
foreign market of English manufactures as to raise
the wages of manufacturers from 15s. to 30#.
a week^ the same effect would be produced as if, in
a mining country, the cost of producing sgilver
were diminished by one-half. Though the labour
of the agricultural labourer would not become
more productive than before, yet his wages would
also be doubled^ or the former proportion founded
on the experience of the comparative disadvan-
tages of each occupation would not be preserved.
The wages of the labourers employed in raising
the two hundred quarters of corn retained by the
farmer and his labourers would rise from 260/. to
520/. a year : the profit on the advance of those
wages for a year must rise from 26/. to 52/., the
price of the two hundred quarters would be 572/.
instead of 286/. ; and the price of the landlord's
two hundred quarters would of course also rise
fj^om 286/. to 572/.

In the purchase of English labour and of those
English commodities ia which no improvement


OBTAININO MONBY. 19

had taken place^ the English landlord would find
bis income unaltered* however raised in nominal
amount But his power of purchasing those
English commodities, the productioB of which had
been facilitated, would be increased in proportion
to that improvement. In the purchase of foreign
labour and foreign commodities, his income would
be doubled. He would be able to purchase
statues, pictures, and wines, which the proprietor
of an equal extent of equally fertile land in the
countries producing those commodities could not
aspire to. He would be able to travel as a Milor
Anglais^ and drive the French and Italian aris-
tocracy from the first floor to the garret, or the
entresol. Little imagining that the greater part
<^ the value of what he called his patrimony was,
in fact, the creation of the chimneys and jeimiea of
his neighbour, the manufacturer.

Such, in fact, were the events which actually
occurred in this country during the latter part of
the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth
century. The inventions of Arkwright and Watt,
by making English labour ten times, or more than
ten times as efficient in the production of j^xport**

c 2


20 ON THE COST O^

able commodities, doubled, or more than doubled
its value in the foreign market, and reduced to
one-half, or less than one-half, the cost in England
of obtaining the precious metals. It is true that
clinging to the restrictions and prohibitions of our
commercial code, we have, as yet^ refused the
greater part of the advantages which Providence
seemed to press on our acceptance ; but cramped
as they are, and always have been, by our per-
verse legislation, the skill of our manufacturers
has, during the last sixty years, more than
doubled the rent of land and the income of every
class of producers.

It would be a painful task to trace the steps by
which the increasing embarrassments of commerce,
occasioned partly by our own adherence to the
barbarous policy called protection, and partly by
the retaliatory follies of other countries, by dimi-
nishing the market for English labour, are now
gradually lowering its price, increasing the cost of
obtaining the precious metals, and reducing the
income of every producer, while the public bur-
thens, nominally the same, are, for that very
reason, really in a state of constant increase.


OBTAINING HONIY. 31

jsitaatad for foreign commerce, perversely refiuie
lier advaotages; or^ like Spain, submit to them
only when inflicted by the smuggler. The home
trade is also, at this instant, the principal trade of
Great Britain; but whether necessarily, or na-
turally so, may be doubted.

As the British islands make but a small portion
of the globe, and that portion is remarkably uni-
form in soil, climate, and produce, it might have
been supposed that the market of the whole
world would have been more e^cten^ive and moi^
varied, than that of England, Ireland^ and Scot-^
land. The communication between the eastern
and southern coasts of Great Britain, and th^
western coast of Europe, ai¥l that between th^
western coasts of England, Ireland, and Scotland^
and the eastern coast of North America, is more
easy than that between most of our counties which
are not absolutely contiguous. The freight of 4
cask of wine from Oporto to London is raUier
less than the cost of its carriage from London to
Ojtford, It might Ijave been supposed that the
whole of our trade with those regions, so vast, so
accessible, and ^o varied, prodiicing so much that


32 ON THE COST OP

we want^ and wanting so much that we produce,
would be at least equal to the whole trade of our
diflferent provinces with one another. That it is not
so, is to be attributed to war and mischievous le-
gislation ; or^ in other words, to crime and to folly.
From the conquest to the present time, have our
legislators laboured to repel the advantages which
our situation and our habits have almost forced
upon us. In the earUer periods of our histoiy^
when our want was of manufactures, parliament
accumulated restriction on restriction^ and penalty
on penalty, until they had at length prohibited
the importation of almost every wrought article
then in ordinary use. And that exportation, or
at least one sort of exportation, might not be de-
stroyed by the absence of importation, they taxed
the whole community to raise annually sums
which, even now, would be called large, to pay a
bounty to exporters of corn ; or, in other words,
to pay, on the behalf of the foreign purchaser^ a
part of the price which he was prohibited from
paying in the mode most advantageous to us and
to himself. A conduct, of which the ' curious
absurdity could be paralleled only by that of a


OBTAINING MONEY. 33

nation which should, at the same time, prohibit
the importation of subsistence^ and endeavour
to raise funds to aid the emigration of its inha-
bitants.

After centuries of legislation and poverty, the
reformation, the revolution, and the inventions of a
few gifted individuals, raised us almost suddenly
to be the greatest manufacturers in the world ;
and, with our increasing population and pros-
perity, the price of corn rose until our former
situation was reversed : we became exporters
of manufactures, and importers of raw produce.
With perverse ingenuity, measures were adopted
to meet this alteration in our circumstances.
Because it became profitable to import corn,
its importation was prohibited; because we
were supposed not to be in want of manufactures,
their importation was allowed. It is of great
importance, as a part of the history of human folly,
to mark that these are the grounds on which the
public is generally called upon to approve of the
commercial legislation of the last fifteen years.
The ground on which the present limited admis-
sion of French silks (to take a single instance) is


34 ON THE COST OF

generally defended, is, that our silk manufacturers
can undersell or at least compete with the foreign
producers. Those who oppose Mr. Huskisson's
measures always expatiate on the quantity that
we import, and the low price at which it may be
obtained : those who defend them maintain that
the quantity imported is trifling, and cannot be
obtained at a less price than it could be produced
at home. In other words, the measure is defended
as useless, and opposed as beneficial. With simi-
lar perversity, those who defend the com laws try
to shew that wheat may be obtained from abroad
at 30^. a quarter, while those who oppose those
laws endeavour to prove that it could not be im-^
ported at less than 52$.

It is not enough to say that our barbarous
policy deprives us of many of the advantages
offered to us by nature ; in many cases it turns
her bounties into positive evils. There are
scarcely any articles of raw, or slightly manu-
factured produce, of which the price in Eng-
land does not exceed the average price throughout
Europe, except those articles which our soil and
our climate do not enable us to produce at home.


OBTAINING MONEY. 35

If coffee or sugar were of English growth, we
should soon have coffee laws and sugar laws, and
must submit to hear them defended on the ground
that the low taxation and superior fertility of other
countries make it necessary to protect the domestic
producer against foreign competition. This seems
to be the circumstance which makes the public sub^
mit so quietly to the apparently strange law which
prohibits the growth of tobacco in the British
islands. It seems felt that our only chance of
obtaining that commodity on fair terms is abso-
lutely to prohibit the owners of our own soil from
having anything to do with it. That, under these
circumstances, our home trade far exceeds our
foreign trade is true ; but it is true only in con-
sequence of laws introduced and perpetuated by
the prejudices of some, the avowed and arrogant
selfishness of others, and the ignorant supineness
of almost all. Is habitus animorumfuit, ut pessi-
mum f acinus auderent pauci, plures vellcrtt, omnes
paterentur.


D 2


LECTURE 11.


ON SOME EFFECTS OF PAPER MONEY.


In the last lecture, I considered the eflfects pro-
duced on the value of money iu any country by
the skill and diligence with which the labour of
that country is applied. These eflfects are gra-
dual and permanent. In this and the following
lecture, I shall consider some of the effects pro-
duced on the value of money in any country by
the use or disuse of the substitutes for money.
These eflfects are sudden but transitory.

If a country should suddenly adopts to a con-
siderable extent, any substitute for money ; if, for
instance, England, having previously prohibited
the issue of notes for small sums payable to
bearer, should suddenly legalise them, and notes
equal in value to one-third of the former metallic


EFFECTS OF PAPER MONET. 37

currency, which we will suppose to have been of
the value of forty-five millions sterling, should be
issued, either the issuers must, at the same time
that they issue their notes, export the money re-
ceived in exchange for them, or both the notes
and 'money must circulate together. If the first
mode were adopted, it is obvious that the real
exchange must be against England, lA almost
every quarter, until the export of money had
ceased. We should for a time be in the situa-
tion of a mining country, and as neither the pro-
ductiveness of our labour nor the amount of our
currency would be altered, the consequences would
be that some foreign commodities would be more
abundant during the continuance of the increased
importation-, — ^that our capital would be increased
by that portion of them which would be repm^
ductively employed, — and that we should be aWe
to turn to other purposes some of the labour and
capital formerly employed in supplying the wear,
of fifteen millions of specie — a saving perhaps of
150,000/. a year. These consequences would be
beneficial.
But unfortunately the business would be very


38 ON SOMB KFFBGTS

diffin^ently conducted. The issuers of notes are
sddom persons engaged in foreign commerce,
and they seldom issue them in immediate ex-
diange for money. Notes are generally ad«
▼meed as loans^ repayable^ at the earliest, in two
or three months^ and often in not less than two or
fliree years. In the case which I have put^ the
coin and the notes would at first probably cir-
culate tc^eth^. All prices would rise^ and they
would rise not merely to the extent of the excess
of money, but to the spirit of speculation which
such an excess would create. While the rise of
prices was going on, all purchases made for the
purposes of resale would be advantageous. Great
profits would be obtained^ and still greater ones
expected, and every man possessed of money or
credit would be eager only to become a pur-
chaser, feeling no doubt of his gains as a seller.
Such circumstances would obviously check our
exports and increase our imports. It would be-
come profitable in England to import many things
which^ when foreign and English prices bore their
former relation, would not bear the expenses of
transport ; it would no longer suit foreigners to


OF PAPER MONEY. 30

^

import from England many things which were
importable at our former prices.

The necessary consequences would be a gene-
rally unfavourable exchange^ and an export of
money. As long as the issue of notes continued
to exceed the export of money, prices would con-
tinue to rise^ and the apparent prosperity would
go on increasing. And, if we could suppose both
the issuers and the takers of notes utterly ignorant
or regardless of the consequences of what was
going on^ the issue might continue until ^he last
piece of metallic money had been exported. The
crash would then be instantaneous : as prices
would then be at their height, so would be the
profits on the exportation of money. Those
holders of notes who were sending money abroad,
would call on the issuers of notes for payment in
money ; and there being no money in the country,
every issuer of notes must stop payment No
more notes could be issued, and the existing ones
would lose their value. The country would be
without money^ and without the principal substi-
tute for money, credit. There would, at first, be
no such thing as price, but exchanges would be


40 ON SOME EFFECTS

performed by barter ; and we may be sure that
the discomfort and insecurity of a state of barter
would create an intense desire for money. The
holders of ^exportable ^oods would be eager to
send them off. The holders of bills on foreign
countries would require their remittances to be
made in money. Importation would of course
be suspended^ and the exchange would be in our
favour with all the world. Money would come
in from all quarters^ though, for several reasons,
less rapidly than it went out.

In the first place, the competition of our ex-
porting merchants would sink the prices of our
commodities abroad ; and secondly »^ the waste and
misapplication of capital, during the previous pe-
riod of prosperity and speculation, the difficulty of
obtaining supplies of foreign materials from abroad
during our subsequent adversity, and the interrup-
tion of that division of labour which is founded on
a general system of credit, would probably much
diniinish the productiveness of our labour.

The last circumstance, by diminishing the value
of English labour in the general market of the
world, would keep down, while it lasted, all our


OF PAPER MONEY. 41

money prices ; and it may be supposed^ there*
fore, that the same amount of money as circulated
before the issue of the notes took place would
not now be necessary. But^ during the absence
of credit^ money would be the only substitute for
barter. The exchanges in which it would be
necessary would be far more numerous^ and its
circulation far less rapid. If forty-five millions
sterling were necessary before, it is probable,
that, after such a panic as must have been
created by the events which I have supposed^
ninety millions would not be enough even to keep
up prices at three-fourths of their former amount.
It is impossible, however, that such a state of
things should occur, — ^that a whole country should
at once find itself drained of all its money, unless
the imprudence of individuals were heightened by
the still greater imprudence of government. In
the first place, no banker issues notes without
making some reserve of metallic money to meet
them. Even if the shock were unforeseen, and the
discredit of all the notes simultaneous, there would
be some money in the country to meet it And
in the second place, the shock could not be unfore^


42 ON 80MB BFFECT8

seen^ nor the discredit universal or simultaneous.
The credit, the prudence^ and the wealth of the
issuers of notes must be of every different degree.
In such a country as England^ there are some
bankers whom no individual would trust with
five hundred pounds^ and who might be reduced
to insolvency by an unexpected demand for one
thousand pounds^ and others^ who at a day*s notice
could draw hundreds of thousands from their own
resources^ and obtain millions from their con*
nexions. There are some who move in the
track which experience has shewn to be safe,
with the impassive regularity of mechanism ; and
others, who^ when extraordinary gain is suggested
to them, seem not only willing to encounter
chances, but to be deprived of the power of cal-
culating them.

It is impossible that the rise of prices and ex-
tension of speculation, which I have supposed^
could continue long, before accident or impru-
dence should expose some establishments to a
demand for money, which they would be unable
to answer; a general feeling of distrust would
follow^ and would cause a simultaneous demand


OP PAPER MONEY. 43

of money for notes, or, to use a word which the
unhappy experience of the year 1825 has ren-
dered familiar, a '^ run/ upon all those esta-
blishments whose character for riches did not
place their solvency above suspicion ; at firsts
indeed^ an indiscriminate run upon all. The first
effect of this would be to bring out the reserves
of money: the second would be the failure of
many establishments^ and the discredit of their
notes ; but many would probably stand it, and
suffer scarcely a momentary interruption of their
credit and circulation. Prices certainly would
fall^ the exchange would turn in our fevour^p
money would come in^ thousands would be ruined
irretrievably, and years might be necessary to
restore the country to its former state of settled
prosperity ; but all these effects would be produced
in a lower degree than in the extreme instance
with which I set out.

It will be observed^ that I have allowed nothing
f6r the general fall in the value of the precious
metals throughout the world, which might be ex-
pected to arise from the additional supply afforded
by the disuse of metallic mrniey in a single coun-


44 ON SOME EFFECTS

try. Some effect of this kind would be produced^
but it would be so slight, that it may safely be
disregarded.

The whole amount of the precious metals
throughout the worlds in bullion, coin, and plate,
has been supposed to be of the value of about
two thousand millions sterling. The whole me-
tallic currency of Great Britain and Ireland is
not supposed to exceed thirty millions ; it is
subject to much variation, but I believe it to
be usually less. Even if we were to export our
last sovereign, and our last shilling, how trifling
would be the effect in the general market of
the world, of an addition of thirty millions to
two thousand !

The power of individuals, therefore, to affect
the currency of a country is limited— that of a
government is not so.

Suppose that, at the commencement of the
panic imagined in my last instance, government
had taken one banking , company under its
protection — had forbidden it to pay its notes
in coin or in any other equivalent— had per-
mitted it to issue, and continue to issue, fresh


OF PAPER MONET. 45

notes to any amount — ^had directed that its notes
should be received in all payments to govern-
ment^ and in private transactions, as of equal
value with the money which they professed to
promise to pay, and had prohibited the exchange
of coined gold and silver, for more than an equal
nominal amount in notes^ —

It would be in the power of the banking com-
pany in question^ by lending to the dififerent banks
of the country a sufficient number of its own
notes, notes which would cost merely the expense
of making and stamping paper^ to relieve the dif-
ficulties of those which were tottering — ^to fill the
void of those which had fallen, and to enable all
those which had still a reserve of metallic money
to make use of it^ keeping the notes of the fa-
voured bank in its room. And it would also be
in its power, by still further increasing its issues^
either by way of loan, or by dividing them as
profits between its own partners, to keep up the
high prices, and the unfavourable exchange, until
the last piece of coined gold or silver had quitted
the kingdom.

It would be in its power, by still further increas-


46 ON BOMfi BPFfiCTB

ing its issuoi to raise prices as estimated in its
paper to any scale it thought fit. It would also
be in its power^ by diminishing its issues, to sink
tiiem to any poiint not lower than the metallio
prices of foreign countries* It could not sink
bread to a farthing a quartern loaf^ but it would
be able to raise it to a hundred pounds.

The real par of exchange between England and
foreign countries would be at an end. English
paper money, having neither intrinsic utility tior
ascertainable limitation of supply, would be inca-
pable of export. It stilly however, must be used
aa a medium of exchange, and as an expression
of value even in international transactions. The
Frendb exporter of wine to England must, in the
first instance, sell his wine for a certain quantity
of English notes of a given dencnninaticM). These
notes, as he could not export them, he must again
exchange for some other commodity in Eng^^
land ; and his profit, or loss, would depend on the
comparative values in France of that commodity,
and of hb wine, after deducting the expenses of
carriage. We have already seen that no com*
modities are so permai^nt in their value, so uni-


OP PAPER MONEY. 47

form in their quality^ or so easy of transport, as
gold and silver. The quantity of gold or silver
which they could purchase would unquestionably
be the standard by which he would estimate the
value of the English notes which he received for
his wine. This gold and ^ver would of course
be in an uncoined state^ or, in commercial lan^
guage^ bullion. If five French Napoleons tuid
four English sovereigns, while English sovereigns
existed, had each contained the same quantity^
say an ounce^ of gold bullion, the real par of ex*
change between England and France would of
course have been five Napoleons for four sove4
reigns. If four English notes> professing to pro^
mise to pay four sovereigns. Would purchase in
England only half an ounce of gold bullion, the
nominal exchange would be fifty per cent, against
England, or^ in other words^ a bill in France on
England for eight hundred sovereigns^ which, if
payable in coin, would haye sold in France hi
one thousand Napoleons, would sell for only five
hundred. And a bill in England on Frano^
which would have sold for four hundred coined
sovereign^ would sell for eight hundred pounds


48 ON SOME EFFECTS

payable in notes. And supposing the transac-
tions between England and France equal in
amount^ they would be adjusted by the exchange
of bills at this rate of exchange.

If, however, the exports from England to
France should exceed the value of the imports—
if, for instance* the French had to pay us five thou-
sand Napoleons, and we had to pay them notes
to the nominal value of four thousand sovereigns,
bills for two thousand five hundred Napoleons
would be capable of discharging the whole Eng-
lish debt. In that case, the remaining two thou-
sand five hundred must be sent from France in
gold ; and as all the English creditors would be
anxious to avoid the expense of transporting the
gold, they would be willing to purchase French
bills on England, which would entitle^ them to
obtain payment from their own countrymen, at
the rate of something more than eight sovereigns
for five Napoleons. Instead of being fifty percent,
against England, the nominal exchange might
therefore, for a time, be only forty-eight or forty-
nine per cent, against England.

And, by reversing the facts, we may suppose


OF PAPER MONEY. 49

it fifty-one or fifty-two ; fifty being always the cen-
tral point to which it would tend, while the quan-
tity of bullion contained in a Napoleon, and that
purchasable wi^h an English note, for a sovereign,
continued to bear the same proportion to one
another.

It may, however, be supposed that we should
have no bullion. While the exportation of our
coin was going on, we certainly should have none,
as it could not be our interest at the same time to
import bullion and export coin. But before our
export of coin began, we must have been in
the habit of importing from the mining countries
a certain quantity of bullion, to supply the wear
of coin and plate. After our export of coin had
ceased, we could have no difficulty in renewing
that intercourse. The bullion trade, as it is essen-
tially a trade of barter, would probably be the least
disturbed of all our foreign commercial relations.
There would still be the same demand for English
commodities in the mining countries;, and the same
supply of gold and silver offered in exchange for
them. To a very slight degree indeed, we should
probably obtain bullion on better terms than be-

B


40 ON SOME EFFECTS

performed by barter ; and we may be sure that
the discomfort and insecurity of a state of barter
would create an intense desire for money. The
holders of ^exportable ^oods would be eager to
send them oft'. The holders of bills on foreign
countries would require their remittances to be
made in money. Importation would of course
be suspended, and the exchange would be in our
favour with all the world. Money would come
in from all quarters, though, for several reasons,
less rapidly than it went out.

In the first place, the competition of our ex-
porting merchants would sink the prices of our
commodities abroad ; and secondly^ the waste and
misapplication of capital, during the previous pe-
riod of prosperity and speculation, the difficulty of
obtaining supplies of foreign materials from abroad
during our subsequent adversity, and the interrup-
tion of that division of labour which is founded on
a general system of credit, would probably much
diminish the productiveness of our labour.

The last circumstance, by diminishing the value
of English labour in the general market of the
world, would keep down, while it lasted, all our


OF PAPER MONEY. 41

money prices ; and it may be supposed^ there-
fore, that the same amount of money as circulated
before the issue of the notes took place would
not now be necessary. But^ during the absence
of credit, money would be the only substitute for
barter. The exchanges in which it would be
necessary would be far more numerous, and its
circulation far less rapid. If forty-five millions
sterling were necessary before, it is probable,
that, after such a panic as must have been
created by the events which I have supposed,
ninety millions would not be enough even to keep
up prices at three-fourths of their former amount.
It is impossible, however, that such a state of
things should occur, — ^that a whole country should
at once find itself drained of all its money, unless
the imprudence of individuals were heightened l^
the still greater imprudence of government. In
the first place, no banker issues notes without
making some reserve of metallic money to meet
them. Even if the shock were unforeseen, and the
discredit of all the notes simultaneous, there would
be some money in the country to meet it And
in the second place, the shock could not be unforot


42 ON SOMB EFFECTS

geen^ nor the discredit universal or simultaneous.
The credit, the prudence^ and the wealth of the
issuers of notes must be of every different degree.
In such a country as England^ there are some
bankers whom no individual would trust with
five hundred pounds^ and who might be reduced
to insolvency by an unexpected demand for one
thousand pounds^ and others^ who at a day^s notice
could draw hundreds of thousands from their own
resources^ and obtain millions from their con*
nexions. There are some who move in the
track which experience has shewn to be safe,
with the impassive regularity of mechanism ; and
withers, who^ when extraordinary gain is suggested
to them, seem not only willing to encounter
chances, but to be deprived of the power of cal-
culatingthem.

It is impossible that the rise of prices and ex-
tension of speculation, which I have supposed^
could continue long, before accident or impru-
dence should expose some establishments to a
demand for money, which they would be unable
to answer; a general feeling of distrust would
follow^ and would cause a simultaneous demand


OP PAPBR MONEY. 43

of money for sotes, or, to use a word which the
unhappy experience of the year 1825 has ren-
dered familiar, a '^ run,** upon all those esta-
blishments whose character for riches did not
place their solvency above suspicion ; at first,
indeed, an indiscriminate run upon all. The first
effect of this would be to bring out the reserves
of money: the second would be the failure of
many establishments, and the discredit of thdr
notes ; but many would probably stand it, and
suffer scarcely a momentary interruption of their
credit and circulation. Prices certainly would
fall, the exchange would turn in our &voup,
money would come in, thousands would be ruined
irretrievably, and years might be necessary to
restore the country to its former state of settled
prosperity ; but all these effects would be produced
in a lower degree than in the extreme instance
with which I set out.

It will be observed, that I have allowed nothing
f6r the general fall in the value of the precious
metals throughout the world, which might be ex-
pected to arise from the additional supply afibrded
by the disuse of metallic money in a single coun-


54 ON 60MS EFFECTS

gold currency, this effect could not be produced.
Our inconvertible paper currency would, therefore,
afford a new test of alterations in the value of gold.
With a metallic currency, if the cost of ob-
taining gold should increase five per cent., it pro*
baUy would be long before the fact would be ac-
knowledged. The fall of price in each particular
instance would be attributable to some fact con-^
aected with the commodity itself. Corn would
fall from three guineas to three pounds a quarter ;
it would be said that the harvest was better than
had been supposed. Labour would fall ; that would
be attributed by most reasoners to the fall in the
price of corn ; and the fall in the price of almost
all other articles would be attributed (and rightly
enough) to the fall in the price of labour. At the
same time, there is no doubt that some of the com-
modities, the supply of which depends on the sea-
sons, would rise, as no season is equally favourable
to all. This would help to keep the real fact out
of sight ; and it could be proved only by a very
wide induction, and after a considerable period.
With an inconvertible and stationary paper cur-


OF PAPER MONBT. Afl

rency, if other prioes remained unaltered^ and bul-
lion rose^ the fact would at once be attributed to
its true cause.

But if an increased cost of obtaining bulliout
and an increased issue of notes should be con-
temporaneous^ tbere would probaUy be consider-
able difficulty in apportbning the consequent rise
in the price of bullion between the two causes ;
and the difficulty of estimating the part to be
attributed to the increased expense of obtaining
bullion^ would be still greater if instead^ or con<^
temporaneously with the issue of notes^ there
should be an increased rapidity in their circular
tion^ or an increased use of credit^ or of balancing
accounts^ or of any other substitute for money.
When the use of these substitutes increases in a
country employing a metallic currency, they cause
a rise of prices^ an export of money, and then a
return of prices to their former level. In a country
possessing solely an inconvertible paper currency,
they must operate solely by producing a rise of
prices.

In my hypothesis, I have supposed a substi-
tution of ninety millions of paper for forty-five


66 ON SOME EFFECTS

millions of money. In such a case, the facts
would be so glaring, that no one could doubt that
the profuse issue of paper had occasioned almost
all the alterations observable in prices. But if
the issue had been gradual, and there had never
been more than sixty millions in notes at one time
in circulation, if the circulation of the inconver-
tible paper had lasted ten or twelve years ; and
if, during that time, variations, might have been
supposed to have occurred from time to time in the
expense of obtaining gold, in the rapidity of our
circulation, and in the use of substitutes for
money, much dispute would probably arise as to
the causes of the variations of the market price of
gold from its mint price, and as to the respective
force of those causes. Some would say that it
was not the paper which had fallen, but the gold
which had risen, or, in other words, that the
market price of gold was above its mint price,
not because more notes had been issued than the
amount of the metallic money previously in circu-
lation, but because the expense of obtaining gold
had subsequently increased. Others would con-
sider the rise of prices as principally occasioned


OF PAPER MONEY. . 57

by those improvements in banking and commerce,
which diminish the use and quicken the circulation
of money. And others probably would deny the
existence of either of the above causes, and attri-
bute the whole difference to the amount of the
issues of paper.

And history bears me out in saying that there
might exist a body who would deny the existence
of any difference at all, and who would, after
debate, solemnly resolve ^* that the notes of the
" Company have hitherto been, and are at this
" time, held, in public estimation, to be equivalent
^* to the legal coin of the realm ;" or, in other
words, that when eighty-nine guineas would pur-
chase twenty-four ounces of gold bullion, and
ninety-four pounds in notes would not purchase
twenty ounces, the notes were more valuable than
the guineas ; or, to put it in a different shape, that
when one hundred sovereigns would purchase one
hundred and thirty pounds in notes, yet that one
hundred and one pounds in notes were of more
value than one hundred sovereigns.

You must all have long been aware that in
my supposition of a country using a currency con*


58 ON SOME EFFECTS

sisting of inconvertible paper, I have been describ-
ing England during the continuance of the Bank
Restriction Act.

Before the memorable year 1797, the Bank of
England was, what it now is again, a corporation
of great wealth, issuing notes payable in gold,
and protected by no privilege from the necessity
of making that payment on demand. In the be-
ginning of that year, circumstances, which I will
not now attempt to explain, occasioned a run
upon the Bank, to which the Directors believed
their reserve of gold to be inadequate ; and in an
evil hour for the country, though a fortunate one
for the Bank, they begged the assistance of their
principal debtor, the Government. Silver and
gold Mr. Pitt had not, but he gave them an
order, restricting the Bank from paying its notes
in gold ; a restriction which, after some interlo-
cutory prolongations, was extended to six months
after a general peace, and which, in fact, continued
in force nearly a quarter of a century. This re^
striction removed the danger of bankruptcy ; but,
though it appeared to enable the B^nk to issue as
many of their notes as they pleased without the


OF PAPBR MONET. 59

possibility of being called on for immediate pay*
ment, yet as no one was obliged to take thero^ the
commercial existence of the corporation was in
danger of being destroyed. The value of bank
notes was, however^ for some time kept upon a
par with the gold which they represented^ partly
from habit^ partly from their being both received
and tendered in payment by Government, and
principally from their not being issued in a greater
amount than was necessary to replace the coin
which had been withdrawn.

Towards the year 1809, however, circumstances
occurred which, if our currency had been metallic,
would have occasioned a less amount of it to be
necessary. The interruption of our commerce by
the general extension of the war, and by Napo-
leon's decrees, subsequently aided by our own
orders in council, threw great difficulties in the
way of obtaining the precious metals from other
quarters. At the same time extraordinary impor-
tations of com, subsidies to foreign powers, and a
large government consumption abroad, part of
which was paid for in bills on England, drawn by
our own commissariat, and for all of which gold


60 ON SOME EFFECTS

was the readiest remittance, kept up a constantly
increasing demand for bullion. An unfavourable
exchange, an export of coin, and the increased
value and eflSciency of the portion retained, would
have been the consequences if our currency had
been metallic. Being inconvertible paper, the
consequences must have been a rise of the market
price of bullion over the mint price, and a de-
pression of the exchange at least in that propor-
tion, even if the amount of our paper had con-
tinued unaltered. On the contrary, it was in-
creased ; and the price of bullion, both causes
acting upon it in the same direction, continued to
rise. The exchange fell not only to the amount
of the difference between paper and gold, but still
lower, both because the foreign holder of a bill
on England could never be sure that bullion
would not rise still higher before he received
notes for his bill, and because the bills drawn
on England by government agents abroad were
thrown on the market without the caution or the
skill of men acting on their own account. I have
often wondered that, under such circumstances,
three years were suffered to elapse before any


OF PAPER MONEY. 61

English creditor endeavoured to enforce payment
either in gold^ or in notes estimated at the gold
they would purchase.

At lengthy however, in June^ 1811, Lord King^
probably with a view to demonstrate by an experi"
mentum crucis the real value of Bank of England
notes^ gave notice to his tenants that he would no
longer receive notes at par, but that his rents
must thenceforth be paid in guineas, or in an equal
weight of Portuguese gold coin, or in Bank of
England notes of a sufficient nominal value, to
purchase such an equal weight.

Lord King's attempt at practical reasoning met
with a practical answer. The 51 Geo. III. cap.
127, was passed, which made the buying or sell-
ing coin at a rate above its nominal value, or the
giving or receiving Bank of England notes at a
rate below their nominal value, a crime punish-
able by fine and imprisonment ; and prohibited a
distress for rent after a tender in Bank of England
notes of the amount due. Arrest for debt after
such a tender had before been prohibited.

The act seems liable, to be easily evaded, and
probably would have been so, if there had been


62 ON SOMB EFFECTS

any sudden and enormous depreciation of bank
notes ; if there had been a sudden issue, for in-
stance, suflScient to sink their value one-half. It
was, however, submitted to, with the exception of
a petty smuggling traffic, by which the remaining
guineas, except a few which were hoarded, were
gradually exported. I recollect, however, so late
as 1814 being oflFered 10,000 guineas for 14,000/.
in notes.

The Directors of the Bank abused their power
much less than could have been expected. It is
true they did not diminish their issues, when the
rise in the market price of gold shewed that an
increased use of the substitutes for money, or an
increased difficulty in obtaining gold, had made
them still more excessive. It is true, also, that
they did, after a time, increase their issues from
less than twenty-three millions and a half, the
amount in the beginning of 1811, to 28,979,876/.,
the amount towards the end of 1814; but such
conduct, injurious as it was, is a model of sobriety
and moderation when compared ^ith that of any
other individual or community invested with simi-
lar powers.


I'Ml^Mk'S,-


OF PAPER MONET. 63

At length a period arrived when peace had di-
minished our foreign expenditure^ and put an end
to our subsidies : trade had returned to regular
channels, and more regular, but, perhaps, lower
profits. All prices had fallen from the conver*
sion of unproductive into productive consumers ;
and^ in some main articles, from favourable sea*
sons^ great commercial losses in the preceding
years had diminished speculation and credit, and
bank notes were rising to a par, indeed had
almost reached a par, with gold* The restriction
act was gradually repealed, the market price sunk
fourpence halfpenny per ounce below the mint
price, and the subsequent disorders of our cur-
rency cannot be charged on the direct interference
of the legislature.

The 51 Geo. III. was passed to prevent bank
notes from being at an open discount. *^ The
^^ Bank," said Lord Stanhope who introduced it,
^^ is one of the bottom planks of the ship of Eng-
^^ land, and woe to us if we permit it to be bored
*' through." There can, I think, be little doubt
Tzoir, that an open discount in bank notes, a re-
cognised difference between paper and metallic


64 ON SOME EFFECTS

prices, would have been the best palliative of the
restriction act. It is not impossible that it might
have induced the Bank to reduce their issues, until
their paper had been at a par with gold. They
must have been anxious to save their notes from
avowed depreciation, and little as they admitted
that the amount of their notes had any thing to do
with their value, still they probably would have
tried the experiment of diminishing that amount^'
if it were only to shew their opponents the useless-
ness of such a measure ; and when they found
the plan succeed, perhaps even bank directors,
such as bank directors then were, might have been
convinced. If, however, their conduct had re-
mained unaltered, the public would have had the
power, and probably the will, to secure to them-
selves the use of a less variable currency . . Two
prices would have been established, one in gold,
the other in notes, diverging or approaching as
the price of guineas in notes rose or fell. Or
more probably, all prices would have been esti-
mated in guineas, and paid in notes according to
the discount of the day. The consequences of an
increased difficulty in obtaining gold, or of an


OF IPAPER MONET. 65

increased use of credit, or of the substitutes for
gold, would have been, that less gold would have
been sufficient. The power of arresting for any
debt payable in gold would indeed have been
suspended, or at least diminished, as the debtor
would have been able to protect himself by ten-
dering the amount in bank notes ; but it may be
questioned whether that would have been any
public injury: in all other respects we might
have returned to the state of things, before the
restriction- — and we should have escaped the tem-
porary evils produced by the restriction from
1811 to 1819, and the permanent ones which
have survived it. We should have escaped that
part of the variation of prices during those eight
years which is attributable to the varying issues
of bank notes ; and permanent contracts would not
have been entered into, when 1869/. in notes were
worth only thirty pounds of gold, to be performed
when they were worth forty pounds.

I have said that the bank directors exercised
their power with extraordinary moderation : I can-
not support this remark by comparing their con-
duct with that of any other individuals in a pre-

F


66 ON SOME EFFECTS OF PAPER MONEY.

cisely similar situation, because I am not aware that
the power of issuing notes having a forced drctila*
tion^ with a suspended liability of payment, and that
payment guaranteed only by the issuers, has in any
other instance been confided by the government of
^ country to any of its subjects. But that power has
often been assumed by the government itself, and
it is with the conduct of governments, therefore,
that we must compare that of the bank. The lowest
depreciation of bank notes, or, in other words,
the greatest difference between the market and
the mint price of gold, was thirty per cent, ; and a
part of this difference is probably to be attributed,
not to the original excess, but to the absence of
subsequent contraction, an imprudence on the part
Qf the bank, but a much less glaring one than
over issue.

. In the next Lecture we shall see what govern^
ments have done.


LECTURE III*^


ON SOME EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT

PAPER MONEY.


In the last Lecture I considered the effect on the
value of metallic money which can be produced
by paper money, issued by individuals. In the
present Lecture I shall consider the effects of paper
money issued by governments.

My first instance shall be taken from the cele*
brated Mississippi scheme of Law.

In the beginning of the year 1716^ the specie
circulating in France was supposed to amount to
about £40,000,000 sterling, or 800 millions of

* The following account of Law*s transactions is taken from Sir
James Steuart, book iv. part 2 ; Macphersqn's Conmierce, vol. iii.
p. 107 ; and Storch, vol. iv. note xvi.

The account of the financial transactions during the French
revolution is taken from Storch, vol. iv. note xvi., and from voL v.
of the History of the French Revolution, by M. A. Thiers.

The statements respecting the Russian, Danish, and Austrian
paper monies, are also taken from Storch, vol. iv. note xvi.

F 2


68 ON SOME EFFECTS

livres — the mark of silver, which is worth about
40 English shillings, being coined into 40 livres.
But for some previous years the quantity of silver
denominated a livre had been constantly varying ;
in 1715, the mark had been coined into 28 livres ;
in 1709 it had been coined into 40; in 1689
it had been coined into 28; and between 1689
and 1709 had been subject to constant alter-
ation. Under these circumstances Law established
a bank at Paris, called the General Bank^ issuing
notes payable on demand in livres of the same
weight and fineness as those which were current
at its institution ; promising^ in fact, to pay, not a
nominal, but an ascertained quantity of silver*.
The security afforded by this promise enabled the
bank in the course of three years to issue notes to
the amount of 59 millions of livres ; and if we
suppose that about 19 millions of livres were con-
sequently withdrawn from circulation, the notes
of the bank may be supposed to have raised the
whole currency of the kingdom to £41,000,000
sterling, or 840 millions of livres.

* The notes ran thus : '* The Company promises to pay the
bearer at sight livres in coin of the same weight and fine-
ness with the coin of this day."


OF GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY. 69

On the first of January, 1719, the Government,
that is, the Regent in the name of the King, took
possession of the bank. The first alteration was
in the form of the notes ; the words, *' of the same
weight and fineness" were omitted, and the note
no longer promised to pay any thing more definite
than so many livres ; being, in fact, a promise to
pay whatever the debtor thought fit, as the debtor
had the power, in fact was in the habit, of increas-
ing and diminishing the quantity of silver deno-
minated a livre according to his notions of expe-
diency. The next change was in the amount of
its issues.

The bank issued notes to the nominal amount

of millions of livres. '

On April 22, 1719 - - - 51

June 10, 1719 - - - 50

July 25, 1719 - - - 240

September 12, 1719 - - 120

October 24, 1719 - - - 120

December 29, 1719 - - 129

January— ,1720 . - - - 21

February — , 1720 - - 279

Total issued in eleven months - 1010 millions

of livres of the nominal value of rather more
than <£50 millions sterling; of which at least


70 ON SOME EFFECTS

600 millions must ha^e been in circulation at one
time. What part of the previously existing spede
remained in circulation^ is doubtful. It b dear,
however, that it could not hare been all with-
drawn, as no run was ever made upon the bank
for coin. Its notes, though they lost the pre*
mium which they had borne while the establish-
ment continued in Law's hands^ still exchanged
for coin at par. — I must now turn a little back-
wards in the story, and state^ that while the bank
was in the hands of Law and his partners, they
lecdved from the government the exdusive piivi-
l^e of trading to the West Indies and the French
possessions on the continent of America, (whence
the name of the Mississippi scheme has ever
since adhered to the whole of the transactions
ori^ating with Law,) to aH countries to the east
of the Cape of Good Hope, and had been incor-
porated under the name of ^^The Company of
the Indias.** The mint, which in France is a source
of profit, was afterwards made over to them, and
they obtained a lease from the crown, first of the
duties on tobacco, and afterwards of all those
duties which were usuallv leased under the old


OF GOVBRNMENT PAPER MONEY. 71

rigiine, and they were at last entrusted with the
reo^t of all the revenues of the state. In return
for these privileges^ besides the annual rents
for the duties leased to them^ they engaged to
lend the government 1^600 millions (£80 mil*
lions sterling) at three per cent. To enable
them to do thb, the bank was restored to tbem^
on the 22d of February^ 1720: their prooeed*
ings, however, were to be under the control of
government, and the King guaranteed the pay<-
ment of their notes. Five days after followed the
celebrated arrSt of the 27th February, 1720^
which prohibited any person or corporation from
possessing any bullion, or more than five hundred
livres (twenty-five pounds) in specie. The mo*t
extensive powers of search were given to the
police, and informers were rewarded wiUi all the
excess found.

At the same time the notes of the company were
not only made a legal tender, but the only legal
tender, and the payment of any sum beyond ninety<*
nine livres, (four pounds nineteen shillings) in
specie was made punishable by a fine of three
thousand livres. The object of these laws was.


72 ON SOME EFFECTS

of course, first to force all holders of specie to
qarry it to the bank to be exchanged for notes ;
secondly, to prevent their demanding payment
from the bank in specie, except for small sums j
and thirdly, to give a forced value to the notes, as
the only money that could be safely tendered, or
safely kept On the 5th of March, 1720,— ^a con-
siderable sum of specie having probably been re-
ceived by the bank in the mean time,— an arret
was made, directing the mark of silver to be worth
eighty livres. This, of course, enabled the bank
to pay whatever specie might be demanded by the
holders of their notes, at half the former expense.
This arret continued in force only a week, for it
was followed by that of the llth March, 1720,
which declared that on the 1st of April the mark
of silver was to be worth only seventy livres, and
on the 1st of May, sixty-five ; and all use of gold
and silver as a medium of exchange was pro-
hibited. As the bank received coin in the mean-
time at eighty livres the mark, this occasioned a
considerable influx of coin to their coffers, in anti-
cipation of its impending reduction ia value. In
three weeks they are said to have received 44


OF GOVERNMBNT PAPBR MONEY. 73

millions of livres^ worth nominally about one mil*
lion one hundred thousand pounds sterling.

The government and the bank seem now to
have supposed that the ordinary standards of
value, gold and silver, being got rid of, bank
paper would be unsusceptible of depreciation or
excess ; and between the beginning of March and
the 2nd of May, they issued notes of the nominal
value of 1,626,672,910 livres: being more than
double the whole average amount of the money of
the country. In the beginning of May, there were
in circulation, notes of the nominal value of
2,235,083,590 livres; being a nominal value
nearly three times as great as the 800,000,000
of coin for which they were substituted. Gold
and silver coin would, of course, have disappeared,
even if they had not been legally banished. Still,
for the purpose of small payments, there was a
circulation of small silver coins, and of copper, and
in these small coins the bank paid those notes of
ten livres which were presented to it. It may
appear singular, that this coinage of small silver
remained in the country. As the nominal value
of every commodity had been at least trebled in


74 ON SOME EFFECTS

France, we might have expected that the silver
would have been collected and exported, and that
the failure of the bank would have been occasioned
by their subsequent inability to pay silver for their
small-notes — and such, I think, would have been
the case, if the whole transaction had taken up a
longer time. But in less than three weeks after
the last issue of notes, the bank was murdered by
the government. If the government had not in-
terposed, it might have lived in apparent credit
for three months longer.

. The history of the Mississippi scheme is a proof
how ignorant the whole of a cultivated nation may
be of the necessary results of their actions.

It appears to us obvious, that when - the cur-
rency of the country was suddenly tripled, all
prices must have experienced at least an equal
rise. The Fr^ich government was so little pre*
pared for this result, that when it took place, they
resorted to the most violent means to correct it.
On the 21^ of May, an arret was issued, declaring
that the bank notes in circulation should in future
pass at only half their nominal value. Now this
was not, in fact^ a greater diminution of the value


OF GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY. 75

of the notes than the arrSt of the 5th of March pre«
ceding, which had directed the mark of silver to
be worth 80 livres, instead of 40. On the 4th
of Marcb^ the holder of 40 livres in notes could
demand of the bank a mark of «lver. On the
dth of March he could demand only ^ a mark.
So on the 20th of May, the holder of 65 livres in;
notes was entitled to a mark of silver. On the
21st, he was entitled to only ^ a mark. The first
operation diminished the value of the notes di-
rectly only as compared with silver. The second
diminished their value directly, not only in silver,
but in every thing else. The first was injurious to;
creditors ; the second to debtors. In the first casey
the holder of the notes, so far as he was a debtor,
could throw his loss, or much more than his loss^
upon his creditors ; in the second case, so far as he
was a creditor, he could reimburse himself, or muck
more than reimburse himself, from his debtors.
But in both cases, as between him and the bank»
he was equally defrauded ; and as the arret of the
5th of March had not interfered with the circu-
lation of the notes, the government probably ex-
pected that of the 21st of May to create as little


76 ON SOME EFFECTS

alarm. But they were mistaken. Though the
French public were too ignorant to perceive the
consequences of raising the nominal value of
silver, they understood those of sinking the no-
minal value of notes. Up to the 21st of May,
holders of commodities possessing intrinsic value
seem to have given them in exchange for the
notes, in blind confidence that others would do
the same. Others did not, in fact^ do the same^
for as prices kept risings the man who in Decem-
ber had sold a given quantity of com for one
thousand francs in notes^ would not have been
able in February to purchase an equal quantity of
corn, or of any other commodity, with the same
notes. Strange, however, as it may appear, the
deterioration of the notes in value does not appear
to have affected their circulation. All that people
looked to was nominal value, and while the notes
were called livres, nobody inquired what a livre
meant. But the instant the denomination was
altered ; the instant government declared that a
note for ten livres should be worth only five, the
baselessness of the paper fabric was detected.
The terror was as universal and as blind as the


OF GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY. 77

confidence bad been. To use Sir James Steuart*s
words^ on tbe 22d day of May, a man with
one hundred millions of bank notes might have
starved in the streets. The Regent and his mi-
nisters^ as much alarmed as the people at the
tremendous machinery they had set in motion^
tried the most arbitrary and the most inconsistent
expedients to control it. They revoked the
arret of the 21st of May, and at the same time
raised the denomination of the coin, by declaring
that the mark of silver should be worth 82^ livres.
To stop the run on the bank, they ordered its
payments to be suspended. And when 9000
livres in paper would purchase only 82J in silver,
an arrSt was issued, prohibiting any person from
refusing to take the notes at par, under a penalty
of double the value of the notes refused. Under
a similar forfeiture all persons were commanded
to bring back whatever funds they, had ex-
ported, and forbidden to make any investments
in foreign securities. All persons were forbidden
to meet together, and soldiers were employed to
prevent and disperse all assemblies of merchants
and brokers* And when it was found that confi-


78 ON SOME SFFECT8

dence could not be restored by forbidding people
to communicate their feari^^ and that the credit of
the notes was irretrievable^ the transaction was
wound up by the arret of the 10th of October,
1720, which, after providing, not for the payment,,
but for the investment, at a very low interest, of
the outstanding notes, declared that after the
1st of December following, they should have no
value.

The next great financial bubble of France was
the issue of Assignats. A few years before 1789,
the specie current in France had been estimated
at 2200 millions of livres, or about 88 millions
sterling. The revolutionary government pos-
sessed great wealth in confiscated property, but
wanted money. To . supply this want, and to
create a market for the confiscations, they issued
notes in the following form :

** National property Assign&t of 100 francs.''

These notes were a legal tender, and in that re-
spect resembled every other paper currency having
a forced circulation ; but they differed from all
others in not even professing to represent any spe-
cified thing. The words ^* National property"


OF GOVBRNMENT PAPER MONEY. T9

signified that their value might be obtained by pur-
chasing with them the confiscated property at the
auctions of such property, which were constantly,
occurring. But there was no reason why that value
should have been called 100 francs. It depended
on the comparative quantity of the property so pur-
chasable^ and the number of assign&ts issued. They
were first issued in May^ 1790^ and the amount
was fixed by law at 400 millions French, or
sixteen millions sterling. In September^ 1790,
1200 millions French had been issued ; in 1793,
3626 millions; in 1794, 8817 millions and a
half; in 1795> 19,699 millions and a half; and
on the 7th of September, 1796, the issue had
amounted to 45,579 millions, or about i^l,828,160
sterling*.

We have seen the consequences of the issue by
Law of paper of the nominal Talue of 2200 mil-
lions of livres, — we may conceive the conse-
quences of issuing 45,000 millions.

The value of assign fi,ts fell from day to day.
The prices of commodities rose in proportion,

• Storch, vol. iv. p» 16«,


80 ON SOME EFFECTS

not merely to the existing depreciation^ but to the
well-founded apprehension of a still further de-
preciation.

When the supply of a durable commodity is
suddenly increased^ the value falls, but not necesr
sarily in proportion to the additional supply.
Unless the causes of the additional supply are
ascertained to be permanent, most of the dealers
prefer holding their existing stocky in the hope
that the market may alter, to parting with it at a
certain loss. But when a commodity is perishable^
no loss can be. so complete, or so certain^ as to
retain it. A small increase of supply may create
such a competition among the sellers^ us to reduce
the price to nothing. A fish market might be so
over supplied as to reduce the sellers to give
away a portion of their stock, or even to pay
people to remove it from their stalls. Assignats
were a most perishable commodity. Every body
taxed his ingenuity to find ; employment for a
currency^ of which the value evaporated from hour
to hour. It was passed on as it was received^
as if it burned every one's hands who touched it.
Those who had never engaged in business, became


OF GOVBRNBCSNT PAPBR MONEY* 81

speculators. Others purchased estates^ built
houses^ or bought pictures and furniture. What
was yesterday an extravagance became a bargain
to-day. No one scrupled any expense^ even for
mere transitory pleasure, if it afforded a means
of investing or spending^ or in any way getting
rid of what he possessed in assigriS.ts *.

Those who depended on fixed money payments
were reduced to beggary, and beggary, at periods
of general distress^ is starvation. Every morning
there were found in the waters^ and on the shores
of the Seine, the bodies of wretches who had pre-
ferred death by suicide to death by hunger f.
The state of the labouring classes was scarcely
more tolerable. An increase in the rate of wages
is never contemporary^ even under the most favour-
able circumstances, with a forced depreciation of
money. The labourers, generally speaking, have
but weak means of combining to demand higher
wages/ or of persisting in their combination, if
the advance be refused ; while capitalists ai^
almost always combined to resist the advance, and

* Say, Traits d'Economie Politique, vol. i. 202.
t Storch, vol. iv. 163.


72 ON SOME EFFECTS

ft

of course, first to force all holders of specie to
parry it to the bank to be exchanged for notes ;
secondly, to prevent their demanding payment
from the bank in specie, except for small sums }
aad thirdly, to give a forced value to the notes, as
the only money that could be safely tendered, or
safely kept. On the 5th of March, 1720, — a con-
siderable sum of specie having probably been re-
ceived by the bank in the mean time, — an arret
was made, directing the mark of silver to be worth
eighty livres. This, of course, enabled the bank
to pay whatever specie might be demanded by the
holders of their notes, at half the former expense.
This arret continued in force only a week, for it
was followed by that of the 11th March, 1720,
which declared that on the 1st of April the mark
of silver was to be worth only seventy livres, and
on the 1st of May, sixty-five ; and all use of gold
and silver as a medium of exchange was pro-
hibited. As the bank received coin in the mean-
time at eighty livres the mark, this occasioned a
considerable influx of coin to their coffers, in anti-
cipation of its impending reduction in value. In
three weeks they are said to have received 44


OF GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY. 73

millions of livres^ worth nominally about one mil*
lion one hundred thousand pounds sterling.

The government and the bank seem now to
have supposed that the ordinary standards o(
value, gold and silver, being got rid of, bank
paper would be unsusceptible of depreciation or
excess ; and between the beginning of March and
the 2nd of May, they issued notes of the nominal
value of 1,626,672,910 livres: being more than
double the whole average amount of the money of
the country. In the beginning of May, there were
in circulation, notes of the nominal value of
2,235,083,590 livres ; being a nominal value
nearly three times as great as the 800,000,000
of coin for which they were substituted. Gold
and silver coin would, of course, have disappeared,
even if they had not been legally banished. Still,
for the purpose of small payments, there was a
circulation of small silver coins, and of copper, and
in these small coins the bank paid those notes of
ten livres which were presented to it. It may
appear singular, that this coinage of small silver
remained in the country. As the nominal value
of every commodity had been at least trebled in


74 ON SOBfE EFFECTS

France, we might have expected that the i^Iver
would have been collected and exported, and that
ihe failure of the bank would have been occasioned
*by their subsequent inability to pay silver for their
small-notes — and such, I think, would have been
the case, if the whole transaction had taken up a
longer time. But in less than three weeks after
the last issue of notes, the bank was murdered by
the government. If the government had not in-
terposed, it might have lived in apparent credit
for three months longer.

. The history of the Mississippi scheme is a proof
liow ignorant the whole of a cultivated nation may
be of the necessary results of their actions.

It appears to ns obvious, that when « the cur-
rency of the country was suddenly tripled, all
prices must have experienced at least an equal
rise. The French government was so little pre*
pared for this result, that when it took place, they
resorted to the most violent means to correct it*
On the 21st of May, an arret was issued, declaring
ihat the bank notes in circulation should in future
pass at only half their nominal value. Now this
was not, in fact, a greater diminution of the value


OF GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY. 75

of the notes than the arrSt of the 5th of March pre*
ceding, which had directed the mark of silver to
be worth 80 livres, instead of 40. On the 4th
of March, the holder of 40 livres in notes could
demand of the bank a mark of i^lver. On the
5th of March he could demand only ^ a mark.
So on the 20th of May, the holder of 65 livres in;
notes was entitled to a mark of silver. On the
21st, he was entitled to only ^ a mark. The first
(^eration diminished the value of the notes di-
rectly only as compared with silver. The second
diminished their value directly, not only in silver,
but in everything else. The first was injurious ta
creditors ; the second to debtors. In the first case,^
the holder of the notes, so far as he was a debtor,
could throw his loss, or much more than his loss^
upon his creditors ; in the second case, so far as he
was a creditor, he could reimburse himself, or muck
more than reimburse himself, from his debtors.
But in both cases, as between him and the bank»
he was equally defrauded ; and as the arret of the
5th of March had not interfered with the circu-
lation of the notes, the government probably ex-
pected that of the 21st of May to create as little


76 ON SOME EFFECTS

alarm. But they were mistakien. Though the
French public were too ignorant to perceive the
consequences of raising the nominal value of
silver, they understood those of sinking the no-
minal value of notes. Up to the 21st of May,
holders of commodities possessing intrinsic value
seem to have given them in exchange for the
notes, in blind confidence that others would do
the same. Others did not, in fact, do the.same^
for as prices kept rising, the man who in Decem-
ber had sold a given quantity of com for one
thousand francs in notes, would not have been
able in February to purchase an equal quantity of
corn, or of any other commodity, with the same
notes. Strange, however, as it may appear^ the
deterioration of the notes in value does not appear
to have affected their circulation. AU that people
looked to was nominal value, and while the notes
were called livres, nobody inquired what a livre
meant. But the instant the denomination was
altered ; the instant government declared that a
note for ten livres should be worth only five, the
baselessness of the paper fabric was detected.
The terror was as universal and as blind as the


OF GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY. 87

and ten per cent, for that of the retailers ; and
the aggregate of these sums was to be the price
of the commodity *. To diminish in some mear
sure the competition of purchasers^ the consumer
was forbidden to purchase from any one but the
retailer^ and the retailer from any one but the
wholesale dealer : even the quantity which each
might purchase was defined. The grocer was foiw
bidden to take more than twenty-five pounds of
sugar at once from the sugar merchant^ and the
seller of lemonade more than ten : and the au-
thorities gave to each intended purchaser a certi«
ficate specifying the amount that he might pur-
chase.

As the French subsist chiefly on breads the
bakers' shops were the principal subjects of legis-
lation. They were not to be entered without a cer-
tificate^ which at the same time was a test of the
good political principles of the bearer, and speci-
fied the quantity that he might purchase. A long
rope was extended from the counter into the
street which the file of candidates, (or purchase

* Thiers,vol. V. 321.


88 ON SOME EFFECTS

were to lay hold of, in order to ensure their en-
tering the shop in fair succession "^^ But it was
found that persons spent whole nights in the
street^ in vain attempts to make their entrance.
Sometimes the rope was cut through wantonness
or malice^ and the feeble were suffocated or tram-
pled to death in the consequent struggles; and
the disorder became the more frightful when, as
a remedy^ it was decreed that the last comers
should be served first. To prevent the closing
the shops, every person who, having been a year
in trade, discontinued or diminished his business,
was declared a suspected personf ; and this when
suspicion was imprisonment^ and imprisonment
the guillotine. At length, even the revolutionaiy
government seem to have felt the impossibility of
using fear instead of hope as the motive of produce
tipn and exchange. The assignS-ts, having sunk
below one three-hundredth part of their nominal
vs^lue^ were called in t, the government offering
to take them at one per cent, in payment of
a forced loan which, in violation of all resem-

♦ Thiers, voL v. 1 20. f lb. vol. v. 320.

J Storch, vol. iv. 164.


OF GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY. 89

blance to honesty, was imposed in money, and
to give mandats, a new species of paper money,
in exchange for them at the rate of three per
cent. The ultimate result was, that of the
whole 45,679,000,000, 12,744,000,000 were, ia
some way or other discharged: the remaining
32,835,000,000 of the nominal value of about
£1,313,000,000 sterling, about twice the amount
of our national debt, remained waste paper in the
holder's hands.

The mand^ts were of the nominal value, of
2,400,000,000 French, or about £96,000,000
sterling : they were directions to the authorities
to put the bearers into possession, without auc-*
tion, of a definite portion of the confiscated estates;
Such, however, were the comparative values in
money of the property and the mandats, that they
came out at a discount, and gradually sunk to less
than a seventieth of their nominal value. They
were issued on the 9th of June, 1796, and were
extinguished, partly in the purchase of confiscated
property, and partly in the payment of taxes,
before the end of the following September *.

* Slorch, vol. iv. 164, from whom the rest of the lecture is taken.


90 ON SOME EFFECTS

The length of the details into which I have been
led as to the paper currency of France, forces me
to pass quickly over the history of the other paper
currencies of the oontinent. Catherine II. gave
Russia a paper currency, and, by the moderation
of her issues, for ^ome time kept it at par ; but in
1814, the period at which Storch closes his narra-
tive, four roubles in paper were worth only one in
silver*.

The Bank of Copenhagen was founded in 1736.
Nine years afterwards the government freed it
from the obligation of paying its notes in full. In
1773, the king, thinking probably the privilege
of issuing an inconvertible paper money too
Valuable for a private corporation, took the bank
into his own hands. In October 18 13, a dollar
in silver was worth 1600 dollars in paper f .

The Austrian paper money owes its origin to
Maria Theresa. In 1810 a florin in silver was
worth thirteen florins in paper. In 1811 the go-
vernment called in the existing paper money, and
directed it to be exchanged, at one-fifth of its no-
minal value, for a new paper money; and in

* Storch, vol iv. 233. t lb. vol iv. 195.


OF GOVERNMENT PAPER MONEY. 91

1812, eight florins in paper were worth only one
in silver.

These examples are enough to show that the
depreciation of our paper money, great and disas-

«

trous as it was, was far less than has usually at-
tended an inconvertible paper currency ; and if on
any future war a new bank restriction is proposed^
I hope it will be recollected that the evils which
that unhappy measure actually produced, great as
they were and continue to be, bear no proportion
to those which the example of other nations shews
us to have been exposed to.


92 NOTE.


Note to page 6.

Few doctrines appear to me more evidently erroneous
thai) that any considerable variation in the amount of
wages can be compensated by a rise or fall of profits.
The usual supposition is, as I observed in the text, that
the capitalist, at an average, advances the wages of his
labourers for one year, and receives, afler deducting rent»
one-tenth of the value of what they produce. I am iu*
clined to think, that the average rate of profit is rather
greater, and the average period of advance rather less.
After making many inquiries on these subjects in Man-
chester, I found the general opinion to be, that the
manufacturing capitalist turns his capital, at an average,
twice in the year, and receives on each operation a
profit of 5 per cent. ; and that the shopkeeper, at an
average, turns his capital four times in a year, and re-
ceives on each operation a profit of about 3^ per cent.
On these data, the labourer's share would, of course, be
much greater than according to the ordinary estimate.
We will suppose, however, that estimate to be correct,
and that, after rent has been deducted, the labourer re-
ceives, at an average, nine-tenths of the value of what he
produces. Under these circumstances, a rise in the
amount of wages, amounting to one-tenth, or from 10s.
to 11». a week, if that rise is to be deducted from the
capitalist's share, would utterly destroy all profit what-


MOTE. 93

ever. A rise of one-fifth, or from IO9. to 128. a week,
would occasion to the capitalist a loss equal to the whole
amount of his former profit. A fall in wages of one-
tenth would double profits ; a fall of one-fiflh would treble
them. Now we know that general variations in the
amount of wages to the amount of one-tenth or one-fifth^
or to a greater extent, are not of unfrequent occurrence.
Yet who ever beard of their producing such an effect on
profits ?

And yet this doctrine has received the sanction both
of theoretic and practical men. Mr. Francis Place is
asked by the Committee on Artizans and Machinery
(First Report, p« 46)*, '* Do not the masters in conse-
^^ quence of a rise of wages raise their prices ? "

" No," he answers, " I believe there is no principle
^' of political economy better established than this of
" wages; increase of wages must come from profits." :

Did Mr. Place ever apply this doctrine when his men
asked for higher wages on a general mourning ? Even
the Committee appear to have taken this view of the
question. The subject is so important, that I will ven<p
ture to extract the following passage from the Report
made in the following Session : —

** Those eminent persons^ who, during the last fifty
" years, have reduced the rules that govern the opera-
'* tions of trade and industry to a science, undertake to
" show, by arguments and facts, that the effect of low
^^ wages is not a low price of the commodity to whiqb
^' they are applied, but the raising of the average rate of

* Sessipn of 1824^


04 NOTE.

'* profits in the country in which they exist. The ex-
" planation of this proposition occupies a large portion
" of the justly-celebrated work of the late Mr. Ricardo,
*• on the Principles of Political Economy ; and is also ably
«* set forth in the following evidence of Mr. M*Culloch,
^* to which your committee particularly desire to draw
'* the attention of the house :

** * Have you turned your attention to the effect of
** * fluctuations in the rate of wages on the price of com-
** • modities ? — I have.

" * Do you consider that when wages rise, the price
•* • of commodities will proportionally increase ? — I do
** * not think that a real rise of wages has any effect
•* * whatever, or but a very imperceptible one, on the
** * price of commodities.

" • Then, supposing wages to be really lower in France
<* * than in this country, do you think that that circum-
*^ * stance would give the French any advantage over us
•« * in the foreign market ? — No, I do not ; I do not think
" • it would give them any advantage whatever. I think
•' * it would occasion a different distribution of the pro-
" * duce of industry in France from what would obtain
" * in England, but that would be all. In France, the
*• ^ labourers would get a less proportion of the produce
** « of industry, and the capitalists a larger proportion.

^* • Could not the French manufacturer, if he gets his
'* • labour for less than the English manufacturer, afford
*• • to sell his goods for less ?— As the value of goods is
•* * made up wholly of labour and profit, the whole and
" * only effect of a French manufacturer getting his


NOTK» §5

** * labour for less than an English manufkcturfer, is to
** * enable him to make more profit than the English
•' ^ manufacturer can make, but not to lower the price
" * of his goods. The low rate of wages in France goes
** ^ to establish a high rate of profits in all branches of
" * industry in France.

" * What conclusion do you come to in making a
" ' comparison between wages in England and wages in
•• • Prance ? — I come to this conclusion, that if it be true,
** * that wages are really higher in England than in France^
** • the only effect of that would be to lower the profits
*' * oF capital in England below their level in France, biit
•• « that will have no effect whatever on the price of the
•* * commodities produced in either country.

" * When you say that wages do not affect prices, what
** * is it that does affect prices ? — An increase or diminu-
" • tion of the quantity of labour necessary to the produc-
" • tion of the commodity.

" * Supposing that there was a free export of ma-
" * chinery, so that France could get that machinery, do
" • you think that under those circumstances we should
" * retain those advantages which we possess at the
•* * present moment ? — Yes, we should ; for the export
" * of the machinery would not lower our wages, or
" * increase the wages in France, so that we should pre-
** * serve that advantage to the full extent that wehave it /^^ ^
" • at this moment.

** * Will you explain to the committee why you are of
" * opinion that the French manufacturer would not
<* * undersell the English, seeing that his profits are larger


•^


96 ^0T£.

*^ ' than the English manufacturer? — Because if he
" ' were to offer to undersell the English, he can only do
** ^ it by consenting to accept a less rate of profit on his
** * capital, than the other French capitalists are making
*' < on theirs, and I cannot suppose a man of common
^* ^ sense would act upon such a principle.

^< < Are the committee to understand, that although a
« ^ French manijfacturer pays half the wages to his men
^^ ^ in France, which our manufacturers do in England,
^' ^ yet that his wages being on a par, or a level, in

* general, with the other wages in France, will render
^ his profits on a par with them, and consequently he
'would not undersell the English merchant by lower-
^ ing his profits below the average rate of profits in

♦• * France ? — Precisely so. I believe, in point of fact,
" ' there is no such difierence ; but he could not under*
'^ ' sell the English manufacturer unless he took lower
'^ ' profits than all other producers in France were making.
' I might illustrate this by what takes place every day

* in England, where you never find the proprietor of
' rich land^ in order to get rid of his produce, ofiering
' it in Mark-lane at a lower rate than that which is got

** * by a farmer or proprietor of the very worst land in
' the kingdom.
•* * Would it not produce a larger sale if the French

* manufacturer were to sell at a less price ? — Supposing
" ' that to be so, the greater the sale the greater would
•« * be the loss of profit.' " *

* Report from Select Committee on Export of Tools and Machi- '
neiy. Session of 1825, pp. 13, 14,


it

CI


«<


it


note'. 97

I have extracted this passage rather as indicative of
the views of the Committee, than of those of Mr.
M*Culloch. Mr. M'CuUoch, as will appear on turning
to his evidence, meant by wages really high and really
I0W9 not a larger or a smaller amount, but a larger or
a smaller proportion. But the Committee appear to
have understood him to mean a larger or a smaller
amount

Mr. Bradbury had previously stated the common day
wages in France to be about half the wages paid in
England.

*

He was asked — ^* In what way do you consider that
*' lower wages in France give the French manufacturers
^< an advantage over English manufacturers ?

'• I conceive that, if they pay 3d. a pound for spin-
^' ning to the operative spinner^ and we pay 6c2., that
** would give them an advaiitage of 3d. a pound in the
'* cost.

'* You mean to say, that the French would be able to
** sell the article they make^ in consequence of pay-
'* ing lower wages, cheaper than the English could
** sell it?,

** They could afford it 3d. a pound cheaper.

** You mean to say, that, according to the rate of

wages paid^ the price of the article for which they are

paid is high or low ?

'^ It may be afforded higher or lower, I should ima*
'< gine, as the cost be more or less.

*^ Therefore, the whole reason and ground on which
" you think that low wages give them an advantage, is,

H


4«
«


98 NOTE.

'' that low wages contribute to enable them to sell the
*^ article cheaper than if they paid higher wages ?

*^ Yes ; labour constituting a material feature in the cost.

** You conceive that increased cost would be a loss to
** the party, if the price was not increased in proportion ?

" I should imagine so.

" Might not the profits of the proprietor be lessened 9

*' They might he lessened, which is in effect a loss,

** Might not that enable him to bear the loss which
** the difference of wages produces * ?

**Ifhe chose to make that sacrifice.

** Might not the profits be lessened until there were no
^< profits at all ? f

" Very easily I should think."— (Fifth Report of the
select Committee on Artizans and Machinery, p. 547,
549, 550.)

It was with reference to this evidence that Mr.


♦ In other words, ** Might not the loss enable him to bear the
" loss ? "

t This question appears to have come from a different interro-
gator. In justice to the clear and intelligent evidence of Mr. Brad-
buxy, I should observe that he was far from falling into the common
error, that a generally high rate of wages can be unfavourable to
a country. He set out by supposing that with the assistance of
English machineiy and English superintendents, the labour of the
French spinners might be as productive as that of the English
spinners. Under such circumstances, if their wages could remain
at one half of English wages, he believed that the French manu-
facturer could undersell the English manufacturer. Of the accu-
racy of this opinion I entertain no doubt, though, from the tenor
of the questions, it appears not to have met with the approbation
of the Committee.


NOTE. 99

M*Culloch was examined. His examination commences
thus :

•' Have you read the evidence which has been given
** before this Committee?

** I have read portions of it only.

" Have you read the evidence given by Mr. Bradbury?

'* A part of it.

" That part in which he conceives that foreigners have
<* an advantage over the English manufacturers in conse-
** quence of wages being lower in France ?

" Yes, I have read that."

And then follows the question :

*^ Have you turned your attention to the effect of fluc-
*^ tuations in the rate of wages on the price of com-
*'modities?»

Now if the committee understood Mr. M^Culloch to
mean, by high or low wages, not a great or small amount,
but a great or small proportion, his evidence and that of
Mr. Bradbury had nothing in common.

The whole of the confusion has arisen from a verbal
ambiguity. Mr. Ricardo has demonstrated that, in the
absence of natural or artificial monopoly, all that is pro-
duced is divided between the capitalist and the labourer,
and that, cceteris paribus^ the rate of profit depends on
the proportion of the produce which the capitalist receives
in return for having advanced, for a given time, the
jabourers' wages. This doctrine, though, like almost all
other truths in political science, when once stated^ almost
self-evident, is one of the most important discoveries of
modern times. It has given to the subject of profits the

H 2


100 NOTE.

clearness which the discoveries of Mr. Malthus and Sir
Edward West gave to that of rent. Most unfortunately,
however, Mr. Ricardo applied the terms high wxiges, and
a rise of wages, and low wages and a fall of wagesy to an
increase or diminution of the labourer*s proportion, whether
the amount of what he received were or were not dimi-
nished or increased.

** It is according to the division of the whole produce
** of the land of any particular farm between the three
'* classes of landlord^ capitalist, and labourer^ that we are
" to judge of the rise or fall of rent, profit, and wages,
" and not according to the value at which that produce
'* may be estimated in a medium which is confessedly
•* variable,

** It is not by the absolute quantity of produce ob-
** tained by either class that we can correctly judge of
** the rate of profit, rent, and wages, but by the quantity
^* of labour required to obtain that produce. By improve-
" ments in machinery and agriculture the whole produce
'* may be doubled ; but if wages, rent, and profit he also
** doubled, the three will bear the same proportiops to.
" one another as before, and neither could he $ai(l to
«* have relatively varied. But if wages partook not of the
^^ whole of this increase ; if they, instead of being dou-
*• bled, were only increased by one-half; if rent, instead
** of beiog doubled, were only increased thr^e-fourths,
•* and the remaining increase went to profit, it would, I
*' apprehend, be correct for me to say, that r^jnt apd wages
<* had fallen while profits had ri$en ; for if we had an
'' invariable standard by which to measure tl^e value of


NOTE. 101

<* this produce, we should find that a less value had fallen
'' to the class of labourers and landlords, and a greater to
** the class of capitalists, than had been given before.
'' We might find, for example, that though the absolute
" quantity of commodities had been doubled, they were
^^ -the produce of precisely the former quantity of labour,
" Of every hundred hats, coats, and quarters of com pro-

*' duced, if

** The labourers had before ... 25

•* The landlords 25

'* And the capitalists . . • 50

100
•* and if, after these commodities were double the

** quantity, of every one hundred

" The labourers had only ... 22

" The landlords ..... 22

" And the capitalists . . . . 56

100
*^ in that case I should say, that wages and rent had

** fallen and profits risen ; though, in consequence of the

*' abundance of commodities, the quantity paid to the

'^ labourer and landlord would have increased in the pro-

" portion of 25 to 44. Wages are to be estimated by

" their real value, viz., by the quantity of labour and

" capital employed in producing them, and not by their

*' nominal value either in coats, hats, money, or corn,

^* Under the circumstances I have just supposed, com-

*' modities would have fallen to half their former value,

•* and if mon^y had not varied, to half their former price.

** If, then, in this medium, which had not varied in value,

'' the wages of the labourer should be found to have


102 NOTE.

** fallen, it will not be less a real fall, because they might
•* furnish him with a greater quantity of cheap commo-
•' dities than his former wages *.*'

According to this nomenclature, if one labourer were
to receive 301, a year, and the produce of his labour to
sell at the end of the year for 40/., and another were to
receive 60Z. a year, and the produce of his labour to sell
for lOOZ., the first labourer would be said to receive higher
wages than the second ; and if the wages of the second
were to be altered from 601, to 40Z. a year, and the commo-
dity to sell for 50Z., the alteration must be termed a rise of
wages. According to this nomenclature, the wages of the
best workmen are always the lowest, for it is known to be
more profitable to employ them. This strange use of
words must have been perplexing, even if Mr. Ricardo's
language had been consistent. But it is almost impos-
sible to affix to terms of familiar use a perfectly new
meaning, and not from time to time to slide into the old
one. When Mr. Ricardo says, that ^' nothing can afiect
'• profits but a rise of wages," p. 118; that *^ whatever
** raises the wages of labour lowers the profits of stock,"
p. 231 ; that ** high wages invariably afiect the em-
" ployers of labour by depriving them of a' portion of
^^ their real profits," p. 129 ; that ** as the wages of labour
" fall the profits of stock rise, and they are together always
^^ of the same value," p. 499, he means by high wages a
large proportion. But when he speaks of the " encou-
" ragement which high wages give to the increase of
** population," pp. 88, 361 ; when he admits, that " on

• " Principles of Political Econ." p. 48—51.


NOTE. 103

** an increase of population wages fall," p. 494 ; he
means by high or low wages a large or small amount.

Mr. M*Culloch has stated, with great clearness, the
difference between proportional wages and real wages,
or wages estimated in money or in quantities of produce.
And he adds, with equal accuracy, " If the productive-
** ness of industry were to diminish, proportional wages
** might rise, notwithstanding that real wages, or the
*^ absolute amount of the produce of industry falling to
** the share of the labourer, might be diminished ; and if,
*^ on the other hand, the productiveness of industry were
'* to increase, proportional wages might be diminished^
** while real wages might, at the same time, be increased.*'
Principles, &c. p. 365. And he generally uses the words
^* high and low wages " to express, not a large or small
proportion, but a large or small amount. It is in this
sense that he contrasts (p. 353) the low wages of Hindos-
tan with the high wages of America. But is this use of
language consistent with his statement (p. 322) that the
high wages we pay to our workmen cause low profits ?
Or, is it consistent with the inferences drawn by the Com-
mittee from his evidence ?


Printed by William Clowes, Stamford Street.


WORKS

puBUSiirEri BY
Mr, MURRAY, ALBBMARLE-STREET, . . . •


Three LECTURES on the lated. By MICHAEL THOMAS .SAD-
COST of obtaining MONEY, and on some LER, M.P. Second E^iticw. • 8?o. 1&. "
Effects of PRIVATE and GOVERNMENT " Dwell in the land and verily thou ahalt.hefed."
PAPER MONEY. Delivered before the The ANCIENT GBOCiRA-
Univereity of Oxford, in Trinity Term, PHY of ASIA to the West of the CaJSfUsn
1829. By NASSAU WILLIAM SENIOR, Gates, and as connected with the Route of
A.M. late fellow, of Magdalen College, Pro- the Ten Thousand and the Expedition of
fessor of Political Economy. ' Alexander, illustrated by the Rev. JOHN
^, ^^ , m J r WILLIAMS, A.M., F.R.S'.E.. Rector of
The Nature and Tendency ot a the Edinburgh Academy, tna Vicar of
SINKIf^Q FUND 'investigated, and the Lampeter, Cardiganshire. Svo,
Fallacy of the Reasoning by which it has « ^he work is ingenious, often convindrig, W
been recommended is explained in three always well written." — Asiatic Journal,
Lettera to the DUKE of WELLINGTON. rj.y^^ GREEK GRAMMAR of
Svo. By the EARL of LAUDERDALE. AUGUSTUS MATTHIiE. Translated

A T^co k v 41^ T>DTXTr«T J"to English by the late Rev. E. V. BLOM-

AnESSAY on-the PRINCI- piELDf Fellow of Emmanuel College,

PLEofPpPULATTON; or a View of its Cambridge. Fourth Edition, thoroughly

past and present Effects oa Humaa Happl-. revised. 2 vols. 8v6. 30*.

ness; with an Inquiry into our Prospects /%'vt7/^i>n JT;nnirm t>
respecting ihe Aitore removal or tmtigatibn : ^^* UKL> ana L#UC HHj, Uy

of the Evils which it contains. ..By tbe Ke^. LORD GREN VILLE. Svo. 4«.

T.R. MALTHUS, late 'fellow of Jesus' Jhe CONSTITUTIONAL

CoUege, Cambridge, ai4 Pro«e9sor^{ His- nistORY of ENGLAND, from the Ac-

tory and Pobtical Economy i|i the East session of Henry VIL to tlfe Death of

India ColUgU, Hertfordsfeirii. AfifthEdn George IL By ttENRY HALtAM,Esq.

tion, with important Additions, and Correc- Second. Edition. ' 3 Vote. Svo. SQi,

tions. 3 .oU. 8vo. 36*. HISTORY of the MIDDLE

The PRINCIPLES of POLI- AGES.' By HEKRY HALLAM, Esq.

TICAL ECONOMY considerea, with a. Fifth Edition, & Ypl«. Svo. 36«.

View to their Practical Application. By The TRUE HISTORY of th^

the Rev. T. R. MALTHUS, F.R.S. Svo. STATE PRISONER, commonly called

^^•' "The Iron Mask," extracted from the

DEFINITIONS in POLITI- P^^r^^V^r^^^rL^^n^I^'^Vric ^I

CAL ECONOMY, preceded by an In- '^^ ?^?;. ^^^p^^^ ^^i^^fi5^^^^- ^

quiry into the Rules which ought to guide "^Edition. Post 8vo. 10*.6rf.

Political Economists in the Definition and The PUBLIC ECONOMY of

Application to their Terms ; with Remarks ATHENS. Containing an Account of the

on &e Deviations from their Rules in prac- Prices of Commodities, Rates of Profit, In-

tice. By the Rev. T. R. MALTHUS. terest. Wages, Labour, &c. of the Financial

Post Svo. 7ff. 6d. Administration, with Uie Peace and War

TT»T-iT AT».TT-*, • T^TTTTCi 1 Expcudlture ; of the different items of the

IRELAND; its liVILS, and Public Revenue, wiih a History of jh^Tri-

tbeir REMEDIES : being a Refutation of butes and Public Treasure ; or the Litur-

the Errors of the Emigration Committee gies, Property-Taxes, and Natural Wealth;

and others, touching that Country. To and of the Money-System of the Athenians,

which is prefixed a Synopsis of an Origi- To which is added, a Dissertation on the

nal Treatise, about to be published on the Silver Mines of Laurion. Translated from

Law of Population; developing the real the German of AUGUSTUS BOECKH,

principles on which it is universally regu- 2 vols. Svo. 1/. 6#.


THREE LECTURES


ON THE


RATE OF WAGES,


DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OP OXFORD,
IN EASTER TERM, 1830.


WITH A PREFACE

ON THB

CAUSES AND REMEDIES OP THE PRESENT

DISTURBANCES.


Bellique causas et vitia et modos -
TJnctaSy et incedis per ignes
l^lrppositos cineri dolosob


By NASSAU WILLIAM SENIOR,

OP MAODALEN COLLEQBj A.M. ;
LATE PROFESSOR OP POLITICAL ECONOIIT.


LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLESTREET.


HDCCCXX&.


LONDON:


PREFACE.


The following Lectures contain little that is not
well known to many of my readers, and still less
that is peculiarly and exclusively appropriate to
the present emergency. They were written and
delivered in a period of profound tranquillity;
but we are now in a state which may require the
exertions of every individual among the educated
classes, and many may have to assist in executing^
or even in originating measures for the relief of
the labouring population, who are not yet suffi-
ciently familiar with the principles according to
which that relief is to be afforded.

Under such circumstances, it has appeared to
me that advantage might be derived from a short
explanation of the ambiguities and fallacies which
most obscure the subject of wages — the most
difficult and the most important of all the branches
of political economy.

My principal object, however^ has been to draw
attention to the elementary proposition, that the
rate of wages depends on the extent of the fund
for the maintenance of labourers^ compared with

a 2


IV PREFACE.

the number of labourers to be maintained. This
proposition is so nearly self-evident, that it may
appear scarcely to deserve a formal statement ;
still less to be dwelt on as if it were a discovery.
It is true that it is obvious and trite ; but, perhaps,
on that very account^ its practical consequences
have been neglected. In the first place, if this
proposition be admitted^ many prevalent opinions
respecting the effects of unproductive consumption,
of machinery, and of free-trade, must be aban-
doned ; and to show this, is the object of the
second and third of the following Lectures. And
in the second place, it must also follow that the
rate of wages can be raised, or, what is nearly the
same, the condition of the labouring classes im-
proved, only by either increasing the fund for
their maintenance, or diminishing the number to
be maintained.

The principal means by which the fund for the
maintenance of labourers can be increased, is by
increasing the productiveness of labour. And
this may be done, —

First, By allowing every man to exert himself
in the way which, from experience, he finds most
beneficial ; by freeing industry from the mass of
restrictions, prohibitions, and protecting duties,
with which the Legislature, sometimes in well-
meaning ignorance, sometimes in pity, and some-


PREFACE. V

times in national jealousy, has laboured to crush
or misdirect her efforts ; and,

Secondly^ By putting an end to that unhappy
system which, in the southern counties, has disso-
ciated labour from subsistence — has made wages
not a matter of contract between the master and
the workman, but a right in the one, and a tax
on the other ; and, by removing the motives for
exertion, has rendered, as far as it has been pos-
sible, the labourer unworthy of his hire.

The only effectual and permanent means of pre-
venting the undue increase of the number to be
maintained, is to raise the moral and intellectual
character of the labouring population ; to im-
prove, or, I fear we must say, to create habits of
prudence, of self-respect, and of self-restraint ; to
equalize, as by nature they are equal, the wages
of the single and the married, and no longer to
make a family the passport to allowance. But
these are necessarily gradual measures — they are
preventive, not remedial. The only immediate
remedy for an actual excess in one class of the
population, is the ancient and approved one,
coloniam deducere.

It is of great importance to keep in mind, that
not only is emigration the sole immediate remedy,
but that it is a remedy preparatory to the adoption
and necessary to the safety of every other.


VI PREFACE.

The principal cause of the calamities that we
are witnessing, has been the disturbance which the
poor-laws^ as at present administered in the south
of England, have created in the most extensive
and the most important of all political relations,
the relation between the employer £^nd the
labourer.

The slave (using that word in its strict sense)
cannot choose his owner, his employment, or his
residence ; his whole services are the property of
another, and their value, however high, gives him
no additional clairti. On the other hand, he is
entitled to subsistence for himself and his family:
clothing, lodging, food, medical attendance — every-
thing, in short, which is necessary to keep hina
in health and strength is provided for him, from
the same motives, and with the same liberality,
that they are provided for the other domestic
animals of his master. He is bound to labour, and
has a right to be maintained. Extreme idleness
may subject him to the lash, but extraordinary dili-
gence cannot better his condition. He is equally
incapable of being benefited by self-restraint, or
injured by improvidence. While single, be re-
ceives a bare subsistence ; if he have a family,
his maintenance rises in precise proportion to his
wants ; the prudential check to population does
not exist, — it is kept down, if at all, by oppression


PEEFACB. VII

on the part of the master, or vice op that of the
sls^ve. This, notwithst?^nding the various degrees
of mitigation which have been introduced by
custom or by law, is^ in substance, the condition
of slaves, wherever slavery exists.

In such a country distress begins^ not^ as in the
case of a free country, with the lower orders, but
with the higher. A bad system, therefore, can
continue there much longer^ because the class
affected have farther tq fall ; and^ for the same
reason, the ruin, when it does come, is sudden
and irretrievable. While misgovernment, by
excessive or ill-placed taxation^ by commercial re-
strictions^ by allowing insecurity of person or pro-
perty, by applying any artificial stimulus to popu-
lation, or under any other of its numerous forms,
is gradually ws^stipg the surplus that belongs to
landlords apd capitalists, the slave population may
scarcely feel its effects. Subsistence is all they
are entitled tp, and that they must receive as long
as their labour produces it. But the instant that
surplus is gone, and distress reaches those whose
previous uiaintenance was only equal to their
necessities, what is there between them and abso-
lute destruction ? If the evils which have been
so Ipng accuniulating iu some of our West Indian
islands had affected a free country, the whole
population womH> Iqp^ ^S^f have ri^en to redress


viii PREFACE*

them. But, as yet, they have reached only the
slave-owner. He has found his property gradually
wasting away ; he has found that his slaves every
year consume a larger and a larger proportion of
what they produce ; but even still he has some-
thing to lose : and while that is the case, their
situation is unaffected. When the whole produce
has become only sufficient to feed the negroes, — a
time which, under the present system, is rapidly
advancing in some of the older islands, — ^the whites
must abandon them as a field for all the moral
and physical evil that slaves^ helpless by edu-
cation and desperate from want, will mutually
suffer and inflict*.

The freeman (using that term in its full meaning)
is the master of his exertions, and of his residence.:
He may refuse to quit the spot, or to change the
employment^ in which his labour has become un-
profitable. As he may refuse to labour at all, he
may ask for his services whatever remuneration
he thinks fit ; but as no one is bound to purchase
those services, and as no one is obliged to afford
him food, clothing, or any of the necessaries of
life, he is forced, if he would subsist, to follow
the trade, and dwell in the place, and exert the
diligence which will make his services worth pur-

* This is one of the modes in which slavery may be extinguished^
but it is a dreadful abuse of language to call it euthanasia^


PREFACE. IX

chasing ; and he is forced to offer them for sale,
by the same necessity which forces the capitalist
to offer him wages in exchange for them. And
the bargain is settled, like all other free bargains,
by the respective market values of the things
exchanged. As marriage has no tendency to
increase the value of his labour, it has no ten-
dency to increase his remuneration. He defers
it, therefore, till the savings made while he was
single afford a fund to meet the expenses of a
family ; and population is kept down by the only
check that is consistent with moral or physical
welfare — ^the prudential check.

To this state of things there is a near approach
among the labouring classes in the most advanced
districts of the continent of Europe, in the low-
lands of Scotland, and even throughout the Bri-
tish empire, among the best educated of those
classes who derive their chief subsistence from
their exertions, including professional persons,
domestic servants, skilled artisans, and that por-
tion of the shopkeepers whose profits are, in fact,
principally the wages of their labour.

The poor-laws, as administered in the southern
districts of England, are an attempt to unite the
irreconcilable advantages of freedom and servi-
tude. The labourer is to be a free agent, but
without the hazards of free agency ; to be free


X PREFACE.

from the coercion, but to enjoy the assured subsist-
ence of the slave. He is expected to be diligent,
though he has no fear of want ; provident, thqugh
his pay rises as his family increases ; attached to
a master who employs him in pursuance of a
vestry resolution ; and grateful for the allowance
which the magistrates order him as a right.

In the natural state of the relation between the
capitalist and the labourer, when the amount of
wages to be paid, and of work to be done, are the
subjects of a free and open bargain ; when the
l^^bourer obtains, and knows that he is to obtain,
just what his services are worth to his employer,
he must feel any fall in the price of his labour to
be an evil, but is not likely to complain of it a§
an injustice. Greater exertion and severer eco-
nomy are his first resources in distress; and what
they cannot supply, he receives with gratitude
from the benevolent. The connexipu between
him and his master has the kindliness of a volun-
tary association, in which each party is conscious
of benefit, and each feels that his own welfare
depends, to a certain extent, on the welfare of the
pther. But the instant wages cease tp be a bar-
gain — the instant the labourer is paid, qot accord-
ing to his value, but his wants, he ceases to be 4
freeman. He acquires the indolence, the improvi-
deqce, the rapacity, and the malignity, but not th?


^


PREFACE. XI

subordination of a slave. He is told that he has
a right to wages, but that he is bou7id to work.
Who is to decide how hard he ought to work^ or
how hard he does work ? Who is to decide what
amount of wages he has a right to ? As yet, the
decision has been made by the overseers and the
magistrates. But they were interested parties.
The labourer has thought 6t to correct that de-
cision. For the present be thinks that he has a
right to 2s. 3d. a day in winter^ and 2s. 6d. ii\
summer. And our only hope seems to be, that
the promise of such wages will bribe him into
quiet. But who can doubt that he will measure
his rights by his wishes^ or that his wishes will
extend with the prospect of their gratification?
The present tide may not complete the inundation,
but it will be a dreadful error if we mistake the
ebb for a permanent receding of the waters. A
breach has been made in the sea-wall, and with
every succeeding irrpptipn they will swell higher
and spread more widely. What we are suffering
is nothing to what we have to expect. Next year,
perhaps, the labourer will think it unjust that he
should have less than 4^. a day in winter and 5.5.
in summer ; — and >voe to the tyrants who deny
hin^ his right I

It is true^ that such a right could not be perma-
nently enforced ;— it is trqe^ \\idi if tl^e labourer


XU PREFACE,

burns the corn-ricks in which his subsistence for
the current year is stored — if he consumes in idle-
ness or in riot the time and the exertions on which
next year's harvest depends — if he wastes in ex-
travagant wageSj or drives to foreign countries, the
capital that is to assist and render productive his
labour, he will be the greatest sufferer in the com-
mon ruin. Those who have property may escape
with a portion of it to some country in which their
rights will be protected; but the labourer must
remain to enjoy his own works — to feel that the
real rewards for plunder and devastation are want
and disease.

But have the consequences of the present sys-
tem ever been explained to the labourer ? Is not
his right to good wages re-echoed from all parts of
the country ? Is he not told — * Dwell in the land,
and verily thou shalt be fed?' Does not the
Honourable Member, who has affixed this motto
to his work, assume, that the fund out of which the
labourer is to be fed is practically inexhaustible ?
And can words more strongly imply that his suf-
ferings arise from the i?yustide of his superiors ?
Have not even magistrates and landlords recom-
mended the destruction, or, what is the same, both
in principle and effect, the disuse of the very ma-
chines of which the object is to render labour
more efficient in the production of the articles


PREFACE. XIU

consumed by the labourer— in the production of
that very fund on the extent of which, compared
with the number to be maintained, the amount of
wages depends ? And is there any real difference
between this conduct and the burning of a rick*
yard ? Threshing-machines are the present ob-
jects of hostility, ploughs will be the next ; spadesi
will then be found to diminish employment; and
when it has been made penal to give advantage to
labour by any tool or instrument whatever, the last
step must be to prohibit the use of the right-hand.
Have sufficient pains been taken even to expose
the absurdity of what appears so obvious to the
populace — that the landlords ought to reduce their
rents and the clergy their tithes, and then the
farmer would give better wages ? If the farmer
had his land for nothing, still it would not be hia
interest to give any man more wages for a day's
work than his day's work was worth. He could
better afford it, no doubt, to be paid as a tax ; but
why should the farmer pay that tax more than the
physician or the shopkeeper ? If the farmer is to
employ, at this advanced rate of wages, only whon^
he chooses, the distress will be increased, since
he will employ only that smaller number whose
labour is worth their increased pay. If he is to
employ a certain proportion of the labourers,
however numerous, in his parish, h^ is, in fact, to


XIV PREFACE.

pay rent and tithes as before, with this difibtence
only, that they are to be paid to paupers, instead
of to the landlord and the parson ; and that the
payment is not a fixed but an indefinite sum, and
a sum which must every year increase in an acce-
lerated ratio, as the increase of population rushes
to fill up this new vacuum, till rent, tithes, profit^
and capital, are all eaten up, and pauperism piro-
duces what may be called its natural effects — for
fhey are the effects which, if unchecked, it must
ultimately produce — famine, pestilence, and civil
war.

That this country can preserve its prosperity,
or even its social existence, if the state of feeling
which I have described becomes universal among
the lower classes, I think no one will be bold
enough to maintain. That it is extensively preva-
lent, and that, under the present administration
of the poor-laws, it will, at no remote period,
become universal in the southern districts, appears
to me to be equally clear. But who, in the pre-
sent state of those districts, will venture to carry
into execution a real and effectual alteration of
the poor-laws ? Remove, by emigration, the pau-
perism that now oppresses those districts, and
such an alteration, though it may remain difficult,
will cease to be impracticable.

Again, the corn-laws, by their tendency to


PREFACE. Xt

raise the price of subsistence, by the ruin which
they have inflicted on the internal corn-trade, and
the stimulus which they have given to the increase
of the agricultural population, have without doubt
been amongst the causes of the present distress ;
and if, while the population of England and Walei^
continues to increase at the rate of 500 persons a
day, the introduction of foreign corn is subject,
under ordinary prices, to a prohibitive duty, those
laws will become every day more mischievous, and
less remediable. But the repeal of those laws,
however gradual (and only a gradual repeal can
be thought of), would, under the present pressure
of pauperism, tend to aggravate the agricultural
distress. Lighten that pressure, and we may gra-
dually revert to the only safe system — the system
of freedom.

This observation, indeed, is only one example of
a general rule. Nature has decreed that the road
to good shall be through evil — that no improve-
ment shall take place in which the general advan-
tage shall not be accompanied by partial suffering.
The obvious remedy is to remove those whose
labour has ceased to be profitable, to a country
tliat will afford room for their exertions. Few
inventions, during the present century, have con-
ferred greater benefits on the labouring classes
than that of the power-loom. By diminishing the


XVi PREFACE.

expense of clothings it has been a source, not
merely of comfort, but of health and longevity.
But its proximate effect was to spread ruin among
the hand-weavers ; to reduce almost all of them
to a mere subsistence, and many to the most
abject want. Ever since its introduction, thou-
sands have been pining away under misery, not
alleviated even by hope; with no rational expec-
tation, but that the ensuing year would be more
calamitous than the passing one : and this with-
out fault, without even improvidence. If it had
been thought that the removal of a fellow-creature
from misery to happiness is worth 12/., they might
now have formed a flourishing settlement in Bri-
tish America.

The hostility of many, coupled with the indiffer-
ence of almost all others, to any systematic plan of
emigration, is a ground for regret and alarm, con-
sidered not only as a cause, but as a symptom. It
is a lamentable proof of ignorance as to the real
state of the country, or of carelessness as to its
welfare, or of a determination to make no sacrifice
for its relief.

We are told that emigration would be expen-
sive, and again we are told that the vacuum would
be filled up.

It is true, that to remove a million of persons
might, perhaps, cost 12,000,000/. sterling ; that is


PREFACE. XVll

to say, might cost as much as the direct expenditure
of THREE months' WAR ; and that an expenditure
of 12,000,000/. sterling is an evil. But in the
first place^ it has been demonstrated* that this ex-
pense of keeping paupers at home is far greater
than that of their removal. It may be necessary
to repeat, though it has ojften been remarked
before, that the relief is afforded not only to those
individuals who emigrate, but to the much greater
number who remain. If there are 450 labourers
in a district which requires the full employment
and affords the full subsistence of only 400, all, or
nearly all, will be in distress, and by the emigra-
tion of fifty all will be relieved. And, in the
second place, even if the balance of expense were
on the side of removing a portion of our surplus
population, is no expense beyond that of their
mere keep to be feared from their presence ? If
the present insurrection spread (and it will spread
if the peasantry are told, as practically they have
been told, that for riot and rebellion three days'
imprisonment is the punishment, and a rise of
wages the reward) ; if the ravage of the country
reacts, as it will react, on the towns ; if, when

* See Mr. Wilmot Horton's * Causes and Remedies of Pauper-
ism,' fourth series.

Hie etiam fatis aperit Cassandra futuris
Ora Dei jussu non unquam credita Teucris.

b


XVIU PREFACE.

trade begins to languish^ the master manufacturers,
according to their late practice, dismiss their
workmen, and the manufacturing workmen, in
their turn, destroy machinery ; if the foundations,
not merely of our wealth, but of our existence,
are thus impaired, will twelve millions, or twenty
millions, or even a hundred millions sterling
represent the loss?

It is true, that if we adopt no preventive
measures, if we persist blindly in our course of
error, the temporary relief afforded by emigration
will come to an end, and the vacuum will, in
sixteen or seventeen years, be filled up. But is
it certain that we shall not profit by experience ?
Have we a right, or, rather, are we compelled, to
assume, as a link in the argument, that we and
our successors must be madmen? If a man has
been outrunning his income, is it quite certain
that we can do him no good by paying his debts,
on the ground that if he goes on in the same
thoughtless expenditure, he will again be involved
as deeply as ever ? And even granting that the
vacuum will be filled up, will it be nothing to
have obtained sixteen years' respite? — to have
weathered the existing storm ? — to have adjourned
the crisis to a period which may be more favour-
able, and cannot possibly be less so ?

We are told that the labourers form the strength


PREFACE. XIX

of the country, and that to diminish their number
is to incur voluntary feebleness. But does the
pauper, — the man whose labour is not worth his
subsistence, who consumes more than he produces
— does he add to the strength of the country ?
When I hear such remarks, I fancy myself stand-
ing by the bedside of an apoplectic patient, and
hearing the nurse and the friends prohibit the
lancet. ^ The blood/ says one, ^ is the support of
^ life : how can you think of diminishing it in his
' present state of weakness ?' ^ If you do dimi-
^ nish it,' cries out another, * with his habits of free
^ living, it will be renewed ; in a year the vacuum
* will be filled up.' But is it impossible that the
blood can be in excess ? Is it certain that his
habits are unchangeable ? Shall we let him die
now, lest we should have to bleed him again a
year hence?

It will be observed, that I have assumed that
the paupers are willing to emigrate. That they
have been so as yet, is unquestionable : I hope,
I had almost said I trust, that they still continue to
be so. But if they are allowed to fix the labour
they are to give, and the wages they are to re-
ceive; if they are to help themselves, while it
lasts, from the whole property of the country, it
is too much to expect that they will not prefer
idleness, riot, and plunder at home, to subsistence.


XX PREFACE.

however ample, to be earned by toil and hardship
abroad. But this only shows the danger, the
madness of delay. While we are deliberating,
or even before we have begun to deliberate, the
moment for applying the remedy is passing away.
Hitherto^ it has been common to defend every
existing practice as agreeable to common sense, in
opposition to the visionary schemes of political
theorists ; to plead experience in behalf of every-
thing that has long prevailed, and to deprecate
new experiments. It is high time that those who
profess to venerate experience should now, at
length, show that they can learn from it. To
what has common prejudice, reigning under the
title of common sense, brought us ? Have the
practical men who have hitherto administered our
system of poor-laws, saved us from being brought
to the very brink of ruin ? Or have they suggested
any effectual means for stopping our downward
career? Surely common sense, if there be any
such thing in the country, will now, at last, bear
witness to the truth of Bacon's maxim, that ^ he
who dreads new remedies, must expect new evils ! '

Lincoln s Inn, December 3, 1830.


LECTUKE I.


DEFINITION OF HIGH AND LOW

WAGES.


The labourers form the mass of every community.
The inquiry into th^ causes affecting wages is,
therefore, the most important branch of political
economy. In the following Lectures I propose,
first, to explain som^ ambiguities in the terms
high and low wages ; secondly, to state the proxi-
mate cause which regulates the amount of wages ;
and, lastly, to expose some prevalent errors re-
specting that cause ; leaving the remoter caiises,
the causes of the proximate cause, for discussion
in a subsequent course.

Wages are the remuneration received by the
labourer in recompense for having exerted his
faculties of mind and body ; and they are termed
high or low, in proportion to the extent of that
remuneration. That extent has been estimated

B


2 DEFINITION OF

by three diflferent measures; and the words high
and low wages have, consequently, been used in
three different senses.

First. Wages have been termed high or low^
according to the amount of money earned by the
labourer within a given period^ without any refer-
ence to the commodities whidi that money would
purchase ; as when we say that wages have risen
since the reign of Henry VIL, because the labourer
now receives \s. 6d. or 2*. a day, and then re-
ceived only A\d.

Secondly. They have been termed high or low,
according to the quantity and quality of the com-
modities obtained by the labourer, without any
reference to his receipts in money ; as when we
say that wages have fallen since the reign of
Henry VII., because the labourer then earned two
pecks of wheat a day, and now earns only one.

Thirdly. They have been termed high or low,
according to the share oi* proportion which the
labourer receives of the produce of his own labour,
without any reference to the total amount of that
produce.

The first nomenclature, that which measures


HIGH AND LOW WAGES. Sl

waged simply by their amount in money, is the
popular one. The second^ that which considers
wages simply with reference to the quantity and
quality of the commodities received by the
labourer, or, to speak more correctly, purchase*"
able with his money wages, was that generally
adopted by Adam Smith. The third, that which
considers wages as high or low, simply with refer«»
ence to the labourer's share or proportion of what
he produces, was introduced by Mr. Ricardo, and
has been continued by many of his followers.

This last use of the words high and low wages
has always appeared to me one of the most un-
fortunate of Mr. Ricardo's many innovations in
the language of political economy. In the first
place, it has a tendency to withdraw our attention,
even when we are considering the subject of
wages, from the facts which most influence the
labourer's condition. To ascertain whether his
wages are high or low, we ai'e desired to inquire^
not whether he is well or ill paid, — not whether
he is ill or well fed, or clothed, or lodged, or
warmed, but simply what proportion of what he
produces comes to his share. During the last
four or five years, many a hand-weaver has re-

B 2


4 DEFINITION OF

ceived only 8s. 3d. for producing, by a fortnight's
exertion, a web, that the capitalist has sold for
85. 4d. A coal-merchant often pays his men two
guineas a week, and charges his employers for
their services two guineas and a half. But, ac-
cording to Mr. Ricardo's nomenclature, the wages
of the weaver, at 4^. l^d. a week, are much
higher than those of the coal-heaver at two
guineas, since the weaver receives 99 per cent,
of the value of his labour, while the coal-heaver
had only 80 per cent.

And, even if the nomenclature in question were
free from this objection — even if the point on
which it endeavours to fix the attention were the
most important, instead of being the least im-
portant incident to wages, it still would be incon-
venient from its obscurity. No writer can hope
to be consistent in the use of familiar words in a
sense always different from their established mean-
ing, and often directly opposed to it; still less can
he hope to be always understood. Even Mr.
Ricardo, though he professes to mean by high
wages a great proportion^ has in several places
considered them as productive of consequences
which would follow only if they signified a great


HIGH AND LOW WAGES, O

amount. ^ And his followers and opponents have,
almost uniformly, supposed those words to mean a
great amount. • Since the publication of Mr.
Ricardo's work, it has been received as an axiom;
among the dabblers in political economy, that,
according to the established doctrines of the
science, high wages and high profits are incom-
patible; and, therefore, that either the leading
doctrines of political economy are false, or the
interests of the labourer and the capitalist are
always directly opposed to one another. The
former opinion has been adopted by the large
class who do not attend to what they read ; the
latter, by the still larger class who do not attend
to what they see.

The two other meanings of the words, high and
low wages, that which refers to the money, and
that which refers to the commodities, received by
the labourer, are both equally convenient, if we
consider the rate of wages at the same time and
place ; for then they both mean the same thing.
At the same time and place, the labourer who
receives the highest wages necessarily receives
the most commodities. But when we refer to
different places, or different times, the words high


6 DEFINrfldN dF

or low wages direct the attention to very different
ftubjects^ as we Understand them to mean more or
less in money, or more or less in commodities;
The differences which have taken place in the
amount of money wages at different times^ inform
us of scarcely anything but the abundance or
scarcity of the precious metals at those times:
facts which are seldom of much importance. The
differences in the amount of money wages in difffer-
ent places^ at the same time, are of much more im-
portance, since they indicate the different values
Of the labour of different countries in the general
hiarket of the world. But even these differences
afford no premises, from which the positive con^
dition of the labouring classes, in any country,
can be inferred, and but imperfect grounds for
estimating their relative condition. The only
data which enable us to ascertain the actual
^itiiittion of the labourers at any given time and
place, or their comparative situation at different
times and places, are the quantity and quality of
the commodities which form their wages, if paid
iii kind; or are purchaseable with their wages, if
fraid in money. And as the actual or comparative
situation of the labourer is the principal object of


HIGH AN1> LOW WAGES. T

the following inquiryi I shall use the word wages^
to express, not the money, but the Gommoditied^
which the labourer reedves ; and I shall consider
wages to rise as the quantity or quality of those
commodities is increased or improved^ and to fall
as that quantity or quality is diminished or dete-
riorated.

It is obvious, too, that the labourer's situation
does not depend on the amount which he receives
at any one time^ but on his average receipts during a
given period — during a week, a inonth, or a year ;
and that the longer the period taken^ the more
accurate will be the estimate. Weekly wage»
have, of course^ more tendency to equality than
daily ones, and annual than monthly ; and, if
we could ascertain the amount earned by a man
during five, or ten, or twenty years, we should
know his situation better than if we confined our
attention to a single year. There is, however,
so much difficulty in ascertaining the amount of
wages during very long periods, that> I thinks a
single year will be the best that we can take. li
comprehends what, in most cliniates, are very
different, summer and winter wages ; it compre-
hends also the period during which the most


8 DEFINITION OF

important vegetable productions come to maturity
in temperate climates, and on that account has
generally been adopted by political economists
as the average period for which capital is sup-
posed to be advanced.

I should observe that I include, as part of the
wages of the married labourer, those of his wife
and unemancipated children. To omit them would
lead to inaccurate estimates of the comparative
situation of the labourers in different countries, or
in different occupations. In those employments
which are carried on under shelter, and with the
assistance of that machinery which affords power,
and requires human aid only for its direction, the
industry of a woman, or a child, approaches in
efficiency to that of a full-grown man. A girl of
fourteen can manage a power-loom nearly as well
as her father ; but where strength, or exposure
to the seasons, are required, little can be done by
the wife, or the girls, or even by the boys, until
they approach the age at which they usually quit
their father's house. The earnings of the wife and
children of many a Manchester weaver or spinner
exceed, or equal, those of himself. Those of the
wife and children of an agricultural labourer, or


HIGH AND LOW WAGES, 9

of a carpenter, or a coal-heaver, are generally
unimportant — while the husband, in each case,
receives 15^. aweek; the weekly income of the
one family may be 30<s., and that of the other
only 17*. or 18s.

It must be admitted, however, that the work-
man does not retain the whole of this apparent
pecuniary advantage. The wife is taken from her
household labours, and a part of the increased
wages is employed in purchasing what might,
otherwise, be produced at home. The moral
inconveniences are still greater. The infant chil-
dren suffer from the want of maternal attention,
and those who are older from the deficiency of
religious, moral, and intellectual education, and
childish relaxation and amusement. The esta-
blishment of infant and Sunday schools, and laws
regulating the number of hours during which
children may labour, are palliatives of these evils,
but they must exist, to a certain degree, whenever
the labour of the wife and children is the subject
of sale ; and, though not, perhaps, strictly within
the province of political economy, must never be
omitted in any estimate of the causes affecting the
welfare of the labouring classes. ^


10 DEFINITION DP

Tlie kst preliminary point to which I have td
call your attention is^ the difference between the
rate of wages and the price of labour.

If men were the only labourers^ and if every
man worked equally hard, and for the same num-
ber of hours, during the year, these two expres-
Bions would be synonymous. If each man, for
Instance^ worked three hundred days during* each
year, and ten hours during each day, one-three-^
thousandth part of each man's yearly wages would
be the price of an hour's labour. But neither
of these propositions is true. The yearly wages
of a family often include, as we have seen, the
results of the labour of the vtife and children.
And few things are less uniform than the number
of working days during the year, or of working
hours during the day, or the degree of exertion
undergone during those hours.

The established annu^ holidays, ia Protestant
countries, are between fifty and sixty. In many
Catholic countries they exceed one hundred.
Among the Hindoos, they are said to occupy
nearly half the year. But these holidays are con-
fined to a certain portion of the population ; the
labour of a sailor, or a soldier, or a menial


HIGH AND LOW WAGES. ll

jservant, admits of scarcely any distinction of
days.

Again, in northern and southern latitudes, the
hours of out-door labour are limited by the dura-
tion of light ; and in all climates by the weather.
When the labourer works under shelter, the daily
hours of labour may be uniform throughout the
year. And, independently of natural causes, the
daily hours of labour vary in different countries^
and in different employments in the same country.
The daily hours of labour are, perhaps, longer
in France than in England, and, certainly, are
longer in England than in Hindostan. In Man-
chester, the manufacturer generally works twelve
hours a day; in Birmingham, ten: a London
shopman is seldom employed more than eight or
nine.

There is still more discrepancy between the
exertions made by different labourers in a given
period. They are often, indeed, unsusceptible of
comparison. There is no common measure of the
toils undergone by a miner and a tailor, or of
those of a shopman and an ironfounder. And
labour which is the same in kind, may vary in-
definitely in intensity. Many of the witnesses


12 DEFINITION OF

examined by the Committee on Artisans and
Machinery (Session of 1824) were English ma-
nufacturers, who had worked in France. They
agree as to the comparative indolence of the
French labourer, even during his hours of employ-
ment. One of the witnesses, Adam Young, had
been two years in one of the best manufactories
in Alsace. He is asked, ^ Did you find the spin-
ners there as industrious as the spinners in Eng-
land ?' and replies, ^ No ; a spinner in England
will do twice as much as a Frenchman, They get
up at four in the morning, and work till ten at
night ; but our spinners will do as much in six.
hours as they will in ten.'

' Had you any Frenchmen employed under
you V — ^ Yes ; eight, at two francs a day.'

^ What had you a day V — ^ Twelve francs.'

* Supposing you had had eight English carders
under you, how much more work could you have
done?' — * With one Englishman, I could have
done more than I did with those eight Frenchmen.
It cannot be called work they do : it is only look-
ing at it, and wishing it done.'

* Do the French make their yarn at a greater
expense ?' — ^ Yes ; though they have their


HIGH AND LOW WAGES. 13

hands for much less wages than in England/ —
pp. 580, 582.

Even in the same country, and in the same
employments, similar inequalities are constantly
observed. Every one is aware that much more
exertion is undergone by the labourer by task-
work than by the day-labourer ; by the indepen-
dent day-labourer than by the pauper ; and even
by the pauper than by the convict.

It is obvious that the rate of wages is less likely
to be uniform than the price of labour, as the
amount of wages will be affected, in the first
place, by any variations in the price, and, in the
second place, by any variations in the amount, of
the labour exerted.

The average annual wages of labour in England,
are three times as high as in Ireland ; but, as the
labourer in Ireland is said not to do more than
one-third of what is done by the labourer in Eng-
land, the price of labour may, in both countries,
be about equal. In England, the labourer by
task-work earns much more than the day-labourer;
but, as it is certainly as profitable to employ him,
the price of his labour cannot be higher. It may
be supposed, indeed, that the price of labour is


14 BEFINITION OF

everywh^re^ and at all tu»e^ Ute same i and, if
there were bo disturbing causes, — if all persons
k»ew perfectly well their own interest^ and strictly
followed it, and there were no difficulties in
moving capital and labour from place to plac6>
and from employment to employment,— the price
of labour, at the same time, toould be everywhere
the same. But these difficulties occasion the price
of labour to vary materially, even at the sfeime
time and place ; and variutiond, both iii the
amount of wages and in the price of labour at
different times> and in different places, are occa-
sioned, not only by these causes, but by others
which will be considered in a subsequent course.

These variations affect very differently the
labourer and his employer. The employer is
interested in keeping down the price of labour ;
but while that price remains the same, while iat
a given expense he gets a given amount of wqrk
done> his situation remains ufialtered. If a
farmer can get a field trenched for 12/. it is in-
different to him whether he pays the whole of that
sum to three capital workmen, or to four ordinary
ones. The three would receive higher wages
than the four, but as they would do proportiopably


HIGH AND LOW WAGES. 1$

pore work» their labour would oorae just 48 cheap.
If the three could be hired at 3/. lOi. a plece^
while the four required 31. a piece, though the
wages of the three would be higher, the priee of
the work done by them would be lower.

It is true that the causes which raise the amount
of the labourer's wages often raise the rate (^ the
capitalist's profits. If, by increased iiidt»try> one
man performs the work of two, both the amount
of wages and the rate of (Hrofits will generally ba
raised. But the rate of profit will be raised^ not
by the rise of wages, but in consequence of the
additional supply of labour having diminished its
price, or having diminished the period for which it
had previously been necessary to advance that price.

The labourer, on the other hand, is principally
interested in the amount of wages. The amount
of his wages being given, it is certainly his interest
that the price of his labour should be high, for on
that depends the degree of exertion imposed on
him. But if the amount of his wages be low, he
must be comparatively poor, if that amount be
high, he must be comparatively rich, whatever be
his remuneration for each specific act of exertion.-
In the one case he will have leisure and want, —


16 I>EFINITION OF

in the other, toil and abundance. I am far from
thinking that the evils of severe and incessant
labour, or the benefits of a certain degree of
leisure, ought to be left out in any estimate of
happiness. But it is not with happiness, but with
wealth, that I am concerned as a political econo-
mist; and I am not only justified in omitting,
but, perhaps, am bound to omit, all consider-
ations which have no influence on wealth. In
fact, however, wealth and happiness are very
seldom opposed. Nature, when she imposed
on man the necessity of labour, tempered his
repugnance to it by making long-continued in-
activity piainful, and by strongly associating with
exertion the idea of its reward. The poor and half-
employed Irish labourer, or the still poorer and
less industrious savage, is as inferior in happiness
as he is in income to the hard-worked English
artisan. The Englishman's industry may some-
times be excessive, his desire to better his condi-
tion may sometimes drive him on toils productive
of disease ill recompensed by the increase of his
wages, but that such is not generally the case may
be proved by comparing the present duration of
life in England with its former duration, or with


HIGH AND LOW WAGES. 17

its duration in other countries. It is generally
admitted, that during the last fifty years a marked
increase has taken place in the industry of our
manufacturing population, and that they are now
the hardest working labourers in the world* But
during the whole of that period the average
duration of their lives has been constantly in-
creasing, and appears still to increase : and
notwithstanding the apparent unhealthiness of
many of their occupations^ notwithstanding the
atmosphere of smoke and steam in which they
labour for seventy-two hours a week, they enjoy
longer life than the lightly-toiled inhabitants of the
most favoured soils and climates. The average
mortality among savage nations is the greatest that
is known. In the continent of Europe it is about
one in thirty-four* In England, about a century
ago, when more than half of our population was
agricultural^ it was supposed to be one in thirty ;
fifty years ago it was calculated at one in forty ;
thirty years ago at one in forty-seven; twenty
years ago at one in fifty-two. Now, when two-
thirds of our labourers are manufacturers, and
more than one-third dwell in cities, it is estimated
at one in fifty-eight,

c


LECTURE II.


POPULAR ERRORS ON THE CAUSES
AFFECTINCl WAGES.


Having in the last Lecture marked the distinction
which really exists between the price of labour
and the amount of wages, I shall for the future
consider every labouring family as consisting of th0
same number of persons, and exerting the samei
degree of industry. On that supposition, the
distinction between the price of labour arid the
amount of wages will be at an end; or rather, the
only distinction will be, that the former expression
designates the remuneration for each specific
exertion : the latter, the aggregate of all those
separate remunerationd, as summed up at the end
of each year. And the question to be answered
will be, what are the causes which decide what in
any given country, and at any given period, shall
be the quantity and quality of the commodities:
obtained by a labouring family during a year?;


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 19

The proximate cause appears to me to be clear.
The quantity and quality of the commodities ob-
tained by each labouring family during a year,
must depend on the quantity and quality of the
commodities directly or indirectly appropriated
during the year to the use of the labouring popu-
lation, compared with the number of labouring
families (including under that term all those who
depend on their own labour for subsistence) ; or,
to speak more concisely, on the extent of the fund
for the maintenance of labourers, compared with
the number of labourers to be maintained. This
proposition is so nearly self-evident, that if political
economy were a new science, I should assume it
without further remark. But I must warn you,
that this proposition is inconsistent with opinions
which are entitled to consideration, some from the
number, and others from the authority of those
who maintain them.

First. It is iticonsistent with the doctrine, that
the rate of wages depends on the proportion
which the number of labourers bears to the amount
of capital in a country. The word capital has
been used in so many senses, that it is difficult to

c 2


29 POPULAR ERRORS ON

state this doctrine precisely ; but I know of no
definition of that term which will not include many
things that are not used by the labouring classes ;
and if my proposition be correct, no increase or
diminution of these things €an directly affect
wages. If a foreign merchant were to come to
settle in this country, and bring with him a oargo
of raw and manufactured silk, lace, and diamonds,
that cargo would increase the capital of the
country; silks^ lace, and diamonds^ would be*
come more abundant, and the enjoyments of those
who use them would be increased ; but the enjoy*
ments of the labourers would not be directly
increased ; indirectly, and consequentially, they
might be increased. The silk might be re-ex*
ported in a manufactured state, and commodities
for the use of labourers imported in return ; and
then, and not till then, wages would rise; but
that rise would be occasioned not by the first ad-
dition to the capital of the country, which was
made in the form of silk, but by the substituted
addition made it} the form of commodities used
by the labourer.

Secondly, It is inconsistent with the doctrine,
that wages depend on the proportion borne by


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 21

the number of labourers to the revenue of the
society of which they are members. In the ex-
ample last suggested, of the introduction of a
new supply of lace or diamonds, the revenues of
those who use lace or diamonds would be in-
creased; but as wages are not spent on those
articles, they would remain unaltered. It is pos-
sible, indeed, to state cases in which the revenue
of a large portion of a community might be in-
creased, and yet the wages of the labourers might
fall without an increase of their numbers. I will
suppose the principal trade of Ireland to be the
raising produce for the English market ; and that
for every two hundred acres ten families were
employed in raising on half the land their own
subsistence, and on the remainder corn and other
exportable crops requiring equal labour. Under
such circumstances, if a demand should arise in
the English market for cattle, butchers-meat, and
wool, instead of corn, it would be the interest of
the Irish landlords and farmers to convert their
estates from arable into pasture. Instead of ten
families for every two hundred acres, two might
be sufficient : one to raise the subsistence of the
two, and the other to tend the cattle and sheep.


23 POPULAR ERRORS ON

The revenue of the landlords and the farmers
would be increased^ but a large portion of the
labourers would be thrown out of employment ; a
large portion of the land formerly employed in
producing commodities for their use would be
devoted to the production of commodities for the
u€ie of England ; and the fund for the mainte-
nance of Irish labour would fall, notwithstanding
the increase of the revenue of the landlords and

farmers.

Thirdh/. It is inconsistent with the prevalent
opinion^ that the non-residence of landlords,
funded proprietors, mortgagees, and other un-
productive consumers, can be detrimental to the
la,bouring inhabitants of a country that does not
6X>port raw produce.

In a country which exports raw produce, wages :
may be lowered by such non-residence. If an
Irish landlord resides on his estate, he requires
the services of certain persons who must also be
resident there to minister to his daily wants^ He.
must have servants, gardeners, and perhaps
gamekeepers. If he build a house, he must em-4
ploy resident masons and carpenters ; part of his.


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES, 23

furniture' he inay import, but the greater part of
it must be made in his neighbourhood ; a portion
of his land, or, what comes to the same thing, a;
portion of his rent, must be employed in pro*
dUcing food, clothing, and shelter for all the$ei
persons, and for those who produce that food;
plothing, and shelter. If he were to remove to
England, all these wants would be supplied bjr
Englishmen. The land and capital which was
formerly employed in providing the maintenieuicd
of Irish labourers, would be employed in: pro«
dueing corn an^d cattle to be exported to England
tp provide the subsistence of English labourers;
The whole quantity of commodities appropriated
to the use of Irish labourei'S woiild be diminished,
and that appropriated to the use of Englisb
labourers increased, and wages would^ conse^
quently, rise in England^ and fall in Ireland.

It id true that these effects would not be co<«
extensive with the landlord's income. While, in
Ireland, he must have consumed many foreigd
commodities. He must have purchased tea^^ winey
^nd sugar, and other things which the climate
^Tid the manufactures of Ireland do not affbrd,
and he must have paid for them, by sending corn


24 POPULAR ERRORS ON

and cattle to England. It is true^ also, that whila
in Ireland he probably employed a portion of hisL
land and of his rents for other purposes, from
which the labouring population received no bene*
fit, as a deer park^ or a pleasure garden^ or in
the maintenance of horses or hounds. On his»
removal that portion of his land which was a
park would be employed, partly in producing
exportable commodities, and partly in producing
subsistence for its cultivators; and that portion
which fed horses for his use might be employed
in feeding horses for exportation. The first of
these alterations would do good ; the second could
do no harm. Nor must we forget that, through
the cheapness of conveyance between England
and Ireland, a portion^ or perhaps all, of those
whom he employed in Ireland might follow him
to England ; and, in that case, wages in neither
country would be affected. The fund for the
maintenance of labourers in Ireland, and the num**
ber of labourers to be maintained, would both be
equally diminished, and the fund for the main-^
tenance of labourers in England^ and the number
of labourers to be maintained, would both be
equally increased.


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 25

But after making all these deductions, and they
are very greats from the supposed effect of thcJ
absenteeism of the Irish proprietors on the!
labouring classes in Ireland, I cannot agree with
Mr. M'CuUoch that it is immaterial. I cannot
but join in the general opinion that their return »
though it would not affect the prosperity of thei
British empire^ considered as a whole, would be
immediately beneficial to Ireland, though perhaps
too much importance is attached to it.

In Mr. M'CuUoch's celebrated examination be-
fore the Committee on the state of Ireland, (4th
Report, 814, Sess. 1825^) he was asked, 'Sup-
^ posing the largest export of Ireland were in
^ live cattle, and that a considerable portion of
^ rent had been remitted in that manner, does not
^ such a mode of producing the means of paying

* rent contribute less to the improvement of the
^ poor than any extensive employment of them in
^ labour would produce ?* — He replies, * Unless
^ the means of paying rent are changed when the
' landlord goes home, his residence can have no

* effect whatever.*

^ Would not,* he is asked^ * the population of
^ the country be benefited by the expenditure


26 POPULAR ERRORS ON

among them of a certain portion of the rent
which (if he had been absent) has (would have)
been remitted (to England) V * No/ be replies,
I do not see how it could be benefited in the
least. If you have a certain value laid out
against Irish commodities in the one cieise, you
will have a certain value laid out against them
in the other. The cattle are either exported to
England, or they stay at home. If they are ex-
ported, the landlord will obtain an equivalent
for them in English commodities; if they are
not, he will obtain an equivalent for them in Irish
commodities ; so that in both cases the landlord
lives on the cattle, or on the value of the cattle :
and whether he lives in Ireland or in England,
there is obviously just the very same amount of
commodities for the people of Ireland to subsist
upon.'

, This reasoning assumes that the landlord, while
resident in Ireland, himself personally devours all
the cattle produced on his estates ; for on no other
supposition can there be the very same amount of
commodities for the people of Ireland to subsist
upon,' whether tfadr cattle are retained in Ireland
or exported. '


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 27

But when a country does 7iot export raw pro-
duce^ the consequences of absenteeism are very
differient. Those who derive their incomes from
such a country cannot possibly spend them abroad
until they have previously spent them at home.

When a Leicestershire landlord is resident on
his estate, he employs a certain portion of his
land, or> what is the same^ of his rent^ in maintain-
ing the persons who provide for him those com-
modities and services, which must be produced on
the spot where they are consumed. If he should
remove to London, he would want the services of
Londoners^ and the produce of land and capital
which previously maintained labourers resident
in Leicester^ would be sent away to maintain
labourers resident in London. The labourers
would probably follow, and wages in Leicester-
shire and London would then be unaltered ; but
until they did so wages would rise in the one dis*
triot and fall in the other. At the same time^ as
the rise and fall would compensate one another, as
the fund for the maintenance of labour^ and ihe
number of labourers to be maintained, would each
remain the same, the same amount of wages
would be distributed among the same number of


28 POPULAR ERRORS ON

persons^ though not precisely in the satnae propor-
tion as before.

If he were now to remove to Paris, a new dis-
tribution must take place. As the price of raw
produce is lower in France than in England, and
the difference in habits and language between the
two countries prevents the transfer of labourers
from the one to the other^ neither the labourers
nor the produce of his estates could follow him.
He must employ French labourers^ and he must
convert his share of the produce of his estates^ or,
what is the same thing, his rent, into some ex-
portable form in order to receive it abroad. It
may be supposed that he would receive bis rent
in money. Even if he were to do so^ the English
labourers would not be injured, for, as they do not
eat or drink money, provided the same amount of
commodities remained for their use, they would
be unaffected by the export of money. But it is
impossible that he could receive his rent in money
unless he chose to suffer a gratuitous loss. The
rate of exchange between London and Paris is
generally rather in^^favour of London, and scarcely
ever so deviates from par between any two coun-
tries, as to cover the expense of transferring the


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 29

precious metals from the one to the other, ex-
cepting between the countries which do and those
which do not possess mines. The remittances from
England to France must be sent, therefore, in the
form of manufactures, either directly to France, or
to some country with which France has commercial
relations. And how would these manufactures be
obtained? Of course in exchange for the land-
lord's rent. His share of the produce of his
estates would now go to Birmingham or Sheffield,
or Manchester or London, to maintain the labour-
el's employed in producing manufactures, to be
sent and sold abroad for his profit. An English
absentee employs his income precisely as if he Vere
to remain at home and consume nothing but hard-
ware and cottons. Instead pf the services of gar*
deners and servants, upholsterers and tailors, he
purchases those of spinners and weavers and cut-
lers. In either case his income is employed in

maintaining labourers, though the class of labourers
is different ; and in either case, the whole fund
for the maintenance of labourers, and the number
of labourers to be maintained, remaining unaltered,
the wages of labour would not be affected.
But, in fact, that fund would be rather increased


30 POPUL/Ol ERRORS ON

in quantity and rather improved in quality. It would
be increased, because land previously employed as
a park^ ot* in feeding dogs and horses^ or hares and
pheasants, would now be employed in producing
food or clothing for men. It would be improved^
because the increased production of manufactured
commodities would occasion an increased divisiort
of labour, the use of more and better machinery,
and the other improvements which we long agd
ascertained to be its necessary accompaniments.

One disadvantage, and one only, it appears to
me, would be the result. The absentee in a great
measure escapes domestic taxation. I say in a
great measure, because he still remains liable, if
a proprietor of houses or of land, to those taxes
which fall upon rent : he pays, too, a part of thef
taxes on the materials of manufactures ; and if
it were our policy to tax income or exported com-
modities, he might be forced to pay to the public
revenue even more than his former proportion.
But, under our present systeni, which throws the
bulk of taxation on commodities produced for
internal consumption, he receives the greater part
of his revenue without deduction, and instead of
contributing to the support of the British Govern-


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 31

ment, contributes to support that of France or
Italy. This inconvenience, perhaps, about ba^
lances the advantages which I have just menr
tioned^ and leaves a community which exports
only manufactures, neither impoverished nor ent
riched by the residence abroad of its unproduc^
tive members.

I ought, perhaps, on this occasion again to
remind you, that it is to wealth and poverty that
my attention is confined. The moral eflfects of
absenteeism mufet never be neglected by a writer
who inquires into the causes which promote the
happiness of nations, but are without the province
of a political economist. Nor do I regret that
' they are so, for they form a subject on which it is
£atr more difficult to obtain satisfactory results. In
one respect, indeed, the moral question is the more
simple, as it is not complicated by the consider-*
ation whether raw produce or manufactures are
exported, or whether the non-resident landlord is.
glbroad, or in some town within his own country*'
If his presence is to be morally beneficial^ it must
be his presence on his own estate. To the inhabi-
tants of that estate^ the place to which he absents
himaelf is indifferent. Adam Smith believed h^


32 POPULAR ERRORS ON

residence to be morally injurious. The residence
of a court, he observe^ (book ii. chap. 3), ' in gene-
ral makes the inferior sort of people dissolute and
poor. The inhabitants of a large village, after
having made considerable progress in manu-
factures, have become idle in consequence of
a great lord having taken up his residence in
their neighbourhood.' And Mr. M'CuUocli, whose
fidelity and intelligence as an observer may be
relied on, states, as the result of his own expe-*
rience, that in Scotland the estates of absentees
are almost always the best managed. Much, of
course, depends on individual character ; but I am
inclined to believe, that in general the presence of
men of large fortune is morally detrimental, and
that of men of moderate fortune morally beneficial^
to their immediate neighbourhood. The habits of
expense and indulgence which, in different grada-^
tions, prevail among all the members of a great
establishment, are mischievous as examples, and
perhaps still more so as sources of repining and
discontent. The drawing-room and stable do
harm to the neighbouring gentry, and the house-
keeper's-room and servants'-hall to their inferiors.
But families of moderate income, including under


tHE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 33

that term incomes between 500/. and 2000/. a
year, appear to be placed in the station most
favourable to the acquisition of moral and intellec-
tual excellence^ and to its diffusion among their
associates and dependents. I have no doubt that
a well-regulated gentleman's family, removing
the prejudices, soothing the quarrels, directing
and stimulating the exertions, and awarding praise
or blame to the conduct of the villagers round
them, is among the most efficient means by which
the character of a neighbourhood can be im-
proved. It is the happiness of this country, that
almost every parish has a resident fitted by fortune
and education for these services ; and bound, not
merely by feelings of propriety, but as a matter of
express and professional duty, to their perform-
ance. The dispersion throughout the country of
so many thousand clerical families, each acting in
its own district as a small centre of civilization^ is
an advantage to which^ perhaps, we have been
too long accustomed to be able to appreciate its
extent.

Stilly however, I think that even the moral
effects of absenteeism have been exaggerated.
Those who declaim against the 12^000 English

D


34 POPULAR EHRORB ON

families supposed to be re^dent abroad^ sedm to
forget that not one*haIf, probably not one«-quarteri
of them^ if they were to return^ would dwell any**
where but in towns^ where their influence would be
wasted, or probably not even exerted^ What does
it signify to the Connaught, or Northumbrian, or
Devonshire peasant,, whether his landlord Jives
in Dublin, or London^ or Cheltenham^ or Rome 7
And even of those who would reside in the country^
how many would exerci&e that influence bene*
ficially? How many would be fox-hunters or
game-preservers, or surround themselves with
dependents whose example would more than coni-
pensate for the virtues of their masters ? Nothing
can be more rash than to predict that good ^ould
be the result of causes which are quite as capable
of producing evil.

The economical effects have been still more
generally misunderstood ; and I have often been
tempted to wonder that doctrines so clear as those
which I have been submitting to you> should be
admitted with reluctance even by those who feel
the proofs to be unanswerable, and should be
rejected at once by others as involving a paradox
too monstrous to be worth examination*


THE CAUSES AFFBOTING WAGES. KS

Miidb of this^ probably^ arises from a confusioti
of the economical with the moral part of the
^fu^stion. Many writers and readers of political
•econorty forget that wealth only is withiil the pro-
vince of that science ; and that the clearest proof
that absenteeism diminishes the virtue or the hap^
piness of the remaining members of a community
is no answer to arguments which aim only at
proving that it does not diminish their wealth*

Another source of error arises from the circum-
stance^ that when the landlord is present the gain
is concentrated^ and the loss diffused ; when he is
absent, the gain is diffused^ and the loss concen-
trated. When he quits his estatci we can put oUr
finger on the village tradesman and labourer who
lose his custom and employment. We Cannot
trace the increase of custom and employment that
is consequently scattered among millions of manu^*
facturers. When he returns^ we see that the
expenditure of 2000/. or 3000/, a year in a small
circle gives wealth and spirit to its inhabitants
We do not see, however clearly we may infer
it, that so much the less is expended in Maiif
Chester, Birmingham, or Leeds. The inhabitants
of his village attribute their gain and their loss to

D 2


36 POPULAR ERRORS ON

its causes ; and their complaints and acknow-
ledgments are loud in proportion to the degree
in which they feel their interests to be affected.
No sinorle manufacturer is conscious Ihat the
average annual export of more than forty millions
sterling has been increased or diminished to the
amount of two or three thousand pounds. And
even if aware of that increase or diminution^ he
would not attribute it to the residence in Yorkshire
or Paris of a given individual^ of whose existence
he probably is not aware. When to obvious and
palpable effects nothing is to be opposed but
inferences deduced by a long, though perfectly
demonstrative reasoning process, no one can doubt
which will prevail, both with the uneducated and
the educated vulgar.

Many persons, also, are perplexed by the con-
sideration, that all the commodities which are
exported as remittances of the absentee's income
are exports for which no return is obtained ; that
they are as much lost to this country as if they were
a tribute paid to a foreign state, or even as if they
were thrown periodically into the sea. This is
unquestionably true ; but it must be recollected,
that whatever is unproductively consumed^ is, by


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 37

the very terms of the proposition, destroyed^ with-
out producing any return. The only difference
between the two cases is^ that the resident land-
lord performs that destruction here ; the absentee
performs it abroad. In either case, he first pur-
chases the services of those who produce the
things which he, for his benefit^ not for theirs, is
to consume. If he stays here, he pays a man to
brush a coat, or clean a pair of boots, or arrange a
table — all which an hour after are in their former
condition. When abroad, he pays an equal sum
for the production of needles, or calicoes^ which
are sent abroad, and equally consumed without
further benefit to those who produced them. The
income of unproductive consumers, however paid,
is a tribute ; and whether they enjoy it here or
elsewhere, is their own concern. We know that
a man cannot eat his cake and have it ; and it is
equally true that he cannot sell a cake to another
and keep it for himself*

The last cause to which I attribute the slow
progress of correct opinions on this subject, is
their distastefulness to the most influential mem-
bers of the community. Nothing can be more
flattering to landlords, annuitants, mortgagees.


38 . POPULAR ERRORS ON WAGES.

and fundholdersj than to be told that their resi-
dence is of vital importance to the country. No-
thing can be more humiliating than to be assured
Ihat it is utterly immaterial to the rest of the com-
inimity whether they live in Brighton^ or London,
w Paris. Those who are aware how much our
judgment, even in matters of science, is influenced
Jby our wishes, will not be surprised at the preju^
dices against a doctrine which forbids the bulk of
^he educated class to believe that they are bene-
factors to their country by the mere fact of residing
within its shores.

I may appear, perhaps, to have dwelt too inueH
on a single subject ; but no prevalent error can
be effectually exposed until its prevalence haS;
l^een accounted for. And these are errors which
^re to be heard in every society, and often from
those whose genenU views in political economy
s^re correct. They may be called harmless errors,
but no error is, in fact, harmless ; and when there
is so much in our habits that really requires
alteration, we may lose sight of the real and tha
remediable causes of evil, while our attention is
misdirected to absenteeism.


LECTURE III.


POPULAR ERRORS ON THE CAUSES
AFFECTING WAGES, (concluded.)


I STATED in tb^ last LeptiJire, tb^t tbe quantity p^qct
quality of the commodities obtained by each labour-
ing family during the year^ must depend on the;,
quantity and quality of the commodities directly
or indirectly appropriated during tbe year to the
use of the labouring population, compared vfithr
the number of labouring families : or, to speak
more concisely, on the extent of the fund for the
maintenance of labourers, compared with the
number of labourers to be maintained; and I
observed, that this proposition is inconsistent with
many opinions entitled to consideration. Three
of those opinions I then examined; in the present
Lecture I shall consider the remainder.

Fourthly. It is inconsistent with the doctrine


40 POPULAR ERRORS ON

that the general rate of wages can, except in two
cases, be diminished by the introduction of ma-
chinery.

The two cases in which the introduction of
machinery can produce such an effect, are : first,
when labour is employed in the construction of
machinery, which labour would otherwise have
been employed in the production of commodities
for the use of labourers ; and, secondly, when the
machine itself consumes commodities which would
otherwise have been consumed by labourers, and
that to a greater extent than it produces them.

The first case is put by Mr. Ricardo, in his
chapter on Machinery; but in so detailed a form,
that, instead of reading it, I will extract its sub-
stance, with a slight variation of the terms. He
supposes a capitalist to carry on the business of a
manufacturer of commodities for the use of la-
bourers ; or, to use a more concise expression, the
business of a manufacturer of wages. He sup-
poses him to have been in the habit of commencing
every year with a capital consisting of wages for a
certaiiv number of labourers, which we call twenty-
six, and of employing that capital in hiring twenty


THE CAUSES AFFECTINa WAGES. 41

men, to reproduce during the year wages for the
whole twenty-six, and six to produce commodities
for himself. He now supposes him to employ
ten of his men during a year in producing, not
wages, but a machine, which^ with the aid of seven
men to keep it in repair and work it, will produce
every year wages for thirteen men. At the end
of the year the capitalist's situation would be un-
altered ; he would have wages for thirteen men,
the produce of the labour of his other ten men
during the year — and his machine, also the
produce of the labour often men during the year,
and therefore of equal value. And his situation
would continue unaltered. Every year his machine
would produce wages for thirteen men, of whom
seven must be employed in repairing and working
it, and six might as before be employed for the
benefit of the capitalist. But we have seen that,
during the year in which the machine was con-
structed only ten men were employed in producing
wages instead of twenty, and consequently that
wages were produced for only thirteen men, in-
stead of for twenty-six. At the end of that year,
therefore, the fund for the maintenance of labour
was diminished, and wages must, consequently.


42 POPULAR EEROBS ON

have fallen. It is of great impoiianoe to. recall}
lect, that tiie only reasoa for this fall was tW
diminution of the annual production. The twenty
men produced wages for twenty-six men : the
machine produces wages for only thirteen. The
vulgar error on this subject supposes the evil
to arise not from its true cause^ the expense of
constructing the machine^ but from the prodMctive
powers of that machine. So far is this from being
true^ that those productive powers are the sp^cifip
benefit which is to be set against the evil of its ^x^
pensiveness. If^ instead of wages for thirteen rpen^
the machine could produce wages for thirty^ it^
use^ as soon as it came into operation> would havp
increased, instead of diminishing the iVmd fqr thQ
maintenance pf labour. The same e^ept WQuld
have been produced^ if the machine could bavQ
been obtained without expanse ; or if the capitalist,'
instead of building it out of his cs^pital, had built
it out of his profits — if, instead of withdrawing ten^
men for a year from the production of wages^ h^
had employed in its construction^ durjng two ye^rs,
five of the men whom he is. supposed to have em-^
ployed in producing commodities for his own use.
In either case« the additional produce obtained


THE GAUSBS APFECTINO WAGES. 4|

froiii the raaohine would have been an additional
fand foi^ the maintenance of labour ; and wages
must, according to my elementary proposition;
bavfe risen.**

I have thought it necessary to state this possible
evil as a part of the theory of machinery, but I am
far from attaching any practical importance to it.
I do not believe that there exists upon record a
single instance in which the whole annual produce
hdB been dirpinished by the use of manimatt ma-
chinery. Partly in consequence of the expense of
constructing the greater part of machinery being
defrayed out of profits or rent, and partly in
consequence of the great proportion which the pro-
ductive powers of machinery bear to the expense
of its construction, its use is uniformly accom-
panied by an enormous increase of production.
The annual consumption of cotton wool in this
country, before the introduction of the spinning
jenny, did not amount to 100,000 lbs. ; it now
amounts to 190,000,000. Since the power-loom,
came into use, the quantity of cotton cloth manufac-*

♦ And yet it appears now to be thought, that wages may be
raited by the destruction or (what is the same in immediate efiect)
tl}e dispse of machiiles already constructed.


44 JPOPULAR ERRORS ON

tured for borne consumption has increased from
227>000^000 of yards (the average annual amount
between the years 1816 and 1820), to 400,000,000
of yards (the annual average from 1824 to
1828 (Huskisson's Speech, 1830). The number
of copies of books extant at any one period before
the invention of the printing-press^ was probably
smaller than that which is now produced in a
single day. Mr. Ricardo's proposition, therefore
(Princ. 474), that the use of machinery frequently
diminishes the quantity of the gross produce of a
country, is erroneous, so far as it depends on the
case which he has supposed, and of which I have
stated the substance.

The other exception^ that where the machine
itself consumes commodities vvhich would otherwise
have been consumed by labourers, and that to a
greater extent than it produces them, applies only
to the case of horses and working cattle, which may
be termed animated machines. We will suppose
a farmer to employ on his farm twenty men, who
produce annually their own subsistence, and that of
six other men producing commodities for the use
of their master. If five horses, consuming, we
will say, as much as eight men, could do the work


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 46

of teni it would be worth the farmer's while to
substitute them for eight of his men, as he would
be able to increase the number of persons who
ttork for his own benefit from six to eight. But
after deducting the subsistence of the horses, the
fund for the maintenance of labourers would be
reduced from wages for twenty-six men to wages
for eighteen. I cannot refuse to admit that such
cases may exist, or to deplore the misery that must
accompany them. They are, m fact, now occur-
ring in Ireland, and are occasioning miuch of
the distress of that country. They seem, indeed,
to be the natural accompaniments of a certain
period in the progress of national improvement.
In the early stages of society, the rank and even
the safety of the landed proprietor is principally
determined by the number of his dependents.
The best mode of increasing that number is to
allow the land, which he does not occupy as his
own demesne, to be subdivided into small tene-
ments/ each cultivated by one family, and just
sufficient for their support. Such tenants can of
course pay little rent, but they are enabled by
their abundant leisure, and forced by their abso-
lute dependence, to swell the retinue, and aid the
political influence, of their landlord in peace, and


46 POPULAR BRRORS ON

to follow his banner in public and private wsu".
Cameron, of Loohiel, whose rental did not etceed
500/. a year, carried with him into the rebdilion
of 1745, 800 men raised from his own tenatitry.
But in the progress of civilization, as wealth be-
comes the principal means of distinction and influ'^
ence> landowners prefer rent to dependents. To
obtain rent, that process of cultivation ihust be
employed which will give, not absolutely the
greatest amount of produce, but the greatest after
deducting the expenses. For this purpose a tract
of 500 acres, from which fifty families produced
their own subsistence, and produced scarcely any-
thing more^ may be converted into one farm, and
with the labour often famili^, and as many horses,
may produce the subsistence of only thirty families.
Fortunately, however, the period at which these
alterations take place is generally one of great
social improvement; so that, after a short interval,
the increased diligence and skill with which labour
is applied, occasion an increase of even the gross
produce* The fund for the maintenance of labour-
ers now becomes increased from two different
sources — \ydiily from the increased efficiency of
human labour when aided by that of horses and
cbHIq, and partly fktm the results of ck part of the


THE CAUiBS AFFEGTXNG WAGES. 47

liurnan labour set frea by the substitution of brutes.
Th^ ultimate consequences of such a change are
fiilways beneficial ) the change itself musti in
ges^eral^ b^ accompanied by* distress.

But with the exception of these two cases^ one
fif whioh produces only temporary effects, and the
other^ though apparently possible, seems never
Actually to occufi it appears to me clear that the
use of machinery must either raise the general rate
of wagesi or leave it unaltered.

When machinery is applied to the production
pf commodities whi^h are not intendedi directly or
indifectly> for the use of labourers, it ocoasiohs no
alteration in the general rate of wages }'~I say
the general rate of wages, because it may diminish
the rate of wages in some employments,-* dimi-
nution always compensated by a corresponding
increase in some others. I was shown at Bir*
minghaiii a small sdrew, which< in the manufao^
ture of corkscrews, performed the work of fifty*-
nine men; with its assistance. one man could cut a
spiral groove in as many corkscrew shanks as sixty
men could have cut in the same time with the
toola previously in use. As the use of corkscrews
is limitedi it is not probable that the demand for
them hasinfficiently increased toerutble tiie whole


48 POPULAR ERRORS ON

number of labourers previously employed in their
manufacture, to remain so employed after such an
increase in their productive power. Some of the
corkscrew-makers, therefore, must have been
thrown out of work, and the rate of wages in that
trade probably fell. But as the whole fund for
the maintenance of labourers, and the whole
number of labourers to be maintained remained
unaltered, that fall must have been balanced by a
rise somewhere else — a rise which we may trace
to its proximate cause, by recollecting that the
fall in the price of corkscrews must have left every
purchaser of a corkscrew a fund for the purchase
of labour, rather larger than he would have pos-
sessed if he had paid the former price.

If, however, machinery be applied to the pro^
duction of any commodity used by the labouring
population, the general rate of wages will rise.
That it cannot fall is clear, on the grounds which
I have just stated. If the improvement be great,
and the commodity not subject to a corresponding
increase of demand, some of the labourers for-
merly employed in its production will be thrown
out of employment, and wages, in that trade,
will fall — a fall which, as the whole fund for the
maintenance of labour is not diminished, must be


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 49

met by a correspondiDg rise in some other trade.
But. the fund will be increased by the additional
quantity produced of the commodity to which the
improvement has been applied : estimated in thsit
commodity, therefore, the general rate of wages,
or^ in other words, the quantity of commodities
obtained by the labouring population, will be in-
creased by the introduction of machinery ; esti-
mated in all others^ it will be stationary.

The example taken, from the manufacture of
corkscrews is as unfavourable to the eflFects of
machinery as can be proposed ; for the use of the
commodity is supposed to be unable to keep up
.with the increased production, and the . whole
number of labourers employed on it is, conse-
quently, diminished. This, however, is a very
rare occurrence. The usual effect of an increase
in the facility of producing a commodity is so to
increase its consumption as to occasion the em-
ployment of more, not less, labour than before.
. I have .already called your attention to the
eflFects .of machinery in the manufacture of cotton
and in printing. Each of these trades probably
employs ten times as. many labourers as it would
have employed if spinning jennies and types had

£


60 POFULiOl BRR0R8 OK ; .

not been invented. Under such circumstaneea
(and tbey are (he usual ones)^ thfe benefits of
machinery are riot alloyed by even partial iiioon^
tenlence.

Fifthly. Gosely connected with this mistake^
and occasioned by the same habit of attending
only to what is temporary and partial^ and
neglecting* what is permanent and general; of
dwdling on the evil that is (concentrated^ and
being insensible of the benefit that is diffused^ is
the common error of supposing that the general
rate of wages can be reduced by the importation
of foreign commodities. In fact, the opening of
a new market is precisely analogous to the intro^
duction of a new machine^ except that it is a
machine which it costs nothing to construct^ or to
keep up. If the foreign commodity be not con-
sumed by the labouring population^ its introduction
leaves the general rate of wages unaffected ; if it
be used by them^ their wages are raised as esti-
itlat^(d( ih that commodityi If the absurd laws
\Vhieh favour the wines of Portugal to the exclusion
of those of France were repealed, more labpurem
\iould be employed in producing commodities for


THE CAU81S AFFECTINQ WAGES. fit

the Frenob market^ and fewer for the PortaguesOi
Wages would temporarily fall in the one trdde^
and rise in the other. The clear benefit would
be derived by the drinkers of wine, who^ at the
same expense, would obtain more and better wine«
So if what are called the protecting duties oh
French silks were removed^ fewer labourers would
be employed in the direct production of silk, and
more in its indirect production, by the production
of the cottons, or hardware, with which it Would
be purchased. The wearers of silk would bd
the only class ultimately benefited; and, as the
labouriiig population neither wear silk nor drink
wine, the general rate of wslges would, in both
oases, remain unaltered. Bbt if the laWs whioh
prohibit our obtaining on the most advantageoUa
terms tea, and sugar, and corn, were altered, that
portion of the fund for the niaintenance of labodr^
which consists of corn, sugar, atid tea, wotild be
increased. And the general rate of Wages, as
estimated in the three most important articles of
food, would be raised.

Sixthly. The views which I have been endea^
touring to explain, are inconsistent with the coiri-^

E 2


52 POPULAR ERRORS ON

mon opinion, that the unproductive cohsuraptioii
of landlords and capitalists is beneficial to the
labouring classes, because it furnishes them with
employ mcjxt. The maintainers of this theory must
forget that it is not employment^ but food^ clothing,
shelter^ and fuel — in short, the materials of sub-
sistence and comfort, that the labouring classes
require. The word * employment * is merely a
concise form of designating toil, trouble, exposure,
and fatigue. All these^ per scy are evils^ and the
less of them that is required for obtaining a given
amount of subsistence and comfort^ — or, in other
words, the greater the facility of obtaining that
given amount^ the better, cceteris paribus ^ will be
the condition of the labouring classes ; indeed, of
all classes in the community. What occasions
the prosperity of a colony ? Not the deamess of
subsistence^ but its cheapness ; not the difficulty
of obtaining food^ clothing, shelter, and fuel, but
the facility. Now how can unproductive con-
sumption increase this facility? How can the
fund from which all are to be maintained be
augmented by the destruction of a portion of it ?
If the higher orders were to return to the customs
of a century ago, and cover their coats with gold


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 53

• >

lace, they might enjoy their own finery ; but how
would that benefit their inferiors? The theory
which I am considering, replies that they would be
benefited by being employed in making the lace.
It is true that a coat, instead of costing 5/., would
cost 55/. But what becomes now of the extra
50/. ? for it cannot be said that because it is not
spent on a laced coat, it does not exist. If a
landlord with 10,000/. a year spends it unpro-
ductively, he pays it away to those who furnish
the embellishments of his house and grounds, and
supply his table, his equipage, and his clothes.
Suppose him now to abandon all unproductive
expenditure, to confine himself to bare necessaries,
and to earn them by his own labour, the first con-
sequence would be, that those among whom he
previously spent his 10,000/. a-year would lose
him as an employer ; and beyond this the theory
in question sees nothing. But what would he do
with the 10,000/. which he would still annually
receive ? No one supposes that he would lock it
up in a box, or bury it in his garden. Whether
productively or unproductively, it still must be
spent. If spent by himself, as by the supposition
it would be spent productively, it must increase,


94 POPULAR BBR0R8 ON

tnd eve^ year still further increase the whole fund
tpplitoble to the use of the rest of the Gommuhity.
If not spent by himself^ it must be lent to some
other person» and by that person it must be spent
productively or unprdductively. He might, per-
baps> biiy with it property in the English funds ;
but whi^t becomes of it in the hands of the person
wh6 sells to him that funded property ? He might
buy with it French rentes; but in what form
Would the price of those rentes go to Paris ?^ — In
the fotro, as we have seen, of manufactured comr
jDodities. Quacunque via datup every man must
«pend bis ineome ; and the less he spends on him-
.sdlf^ the more remains for the rest of the world.

The last theory, inconsistent with my own
views^ to which I shall call your attention, is
that proposed by Mr. Ricardo in the following
passage; —

^ The labouring olass have no small interest in
^ the manner in which the net income of the
^ country is expended^ although it should^ in all
' caseSf be expended for the gratification and en-
• joyment of tboge who are fairly entitled to it,

/{fa landlord, or a capits^list^ exp6q4s Jii^


THE CAUSES^ AFFECTING WAGES. SS^

revenue in the manner of an ancient baron, in
the support of a great number of retainers or
menial servants, he will give emplpyment to
much more labour than if he expended it on fine
clothes or costly furniture.
^ In both eases the net revenue would be the
same, and so would be the gross revenue, but
the former would be reaUzed in different commo-
dities. If my revenue were 10,000/., the same'
quantity nearly of productive labour would be
employed, whether I realized it in fine clothes'
and costly furniture, &c. &c., or in a qusmtity of
food and clothing of the same value. If, how-
ever, I reaUzed my revenue in the first set of
commodities, no more labour would be oonst"'
quently employed : I should enjoy my furniture'
and my clothes^ and there would be an end of
them ; but if I realized my revenue in food and
clothing, and my desire was to employ menial
servants, all those whom I could so employ with
my revenue of 10,000/., or with the food and
^ clothing which it would purchase, would-be i6
^ be added to the former demand for labourers,'

• and this addition would take place only beeausd

* I chose tWs mode of expending my revenue. Aid


56 POPULAR ERRORS ON

' the labourers^ then^ are interested in the demand

* for labour, they must naturally desire that as

* much as possible should be diverted from expen-

* diture on luxuries, to be expended in the support

* of menial servants.

* In the same manner a country engaged in war,
^ and which is under the necessity of maintaining
*- large fleets and armies, employs a great many
^ more men than will be employed when the war
^ terminates, and the annual expenses which it
' brings with it cease.

' If I were not called upon for a tax of 500/.

* during the war, which is expended on men in the
^ situations of soldiers and sailors, I might pro-
^ bably spend that portion of my income on furni-

* ture, clothes, books, &c. &c., and whether it
^ was expended in the one way or the other, there

* would be the same quantity of labour employed
^ in production ; for the food and clothing of the

* soldier and sailor would require the same amount

* of industry to produce them as the more luxurious

* coinmodities : but, in the case of war, there

* would be the additional demand for men as
^ soldiers and sailors; and, consequently, a war
' which is supported out of the revenue, and not


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. S7

^ from the capital of a country, is favourable to
^ an increase of population.

* At the termination of the war, when part of
^ my revenue reverts to me, and is employed as
' before in the purchase of wine, furniture, or
^ other luxuries, the population which it before
^ supported, and which the war called into exist-
' ence, will become redundant, and by its effect
^ on the rest of the population, and its competition
' with it for employment, will sink the value of
' wages, and very materially deteriorate the con-
' dition of the labouring classes*/

Mr. Ricardo's theory is, that it is more bene-
ficial to the labouring classes to be employed in
the production of services than in the production
of commodities ; that it is better for them to be
employed in standing behind chairs than in making
chairs; as soldiers or sailors than as manufac-
turers. Now as it is clear that the whole quantity
of commodities provided for the use of labourers
is not increased by the conversion of an artisan
into a footman or a soldier, either Mr. Ricardo
must be wrong, or my elementary proposition is
false.

* Principles, &c., p. 475.


58 POPULAR BRRORt ON

Mr. Ricardo seems to have been ]ed to his con-
clusions by observing that the wedges of servants/
sailors » and soldiers are principally paid in kind —
those of artisans in money. He correctly states^
that if a man with 10^000/. a year spends his
income in the purchase of commodities for his
own use, he retains, after having made those'
purchases, no further fund for the maintenance of
labour ; but that if he spends it in the purchase
of commodities to be employed in maintaining
menial servants, he has, in those purchased com-
modities^ a new fund with which he can maintain
a ^rtain number of menial servants. It appeared
to hlra, therefore, that the landlord would, in the
latter case> be able to spend his income tvvlce
over ; to subsist twice as many persons as before.
It did not occur to him that the landlord^ by pur*
chasing himself the subsistence of his servants,
merely does for them what they would be able to
do better for themselves ; that^ instead of spending
his own income twice over, he merely takes oh
himself the business of spending theirs for them ^;

* He did not perceive that all that the landlord spends in pur-
chasing the subsistence and clothing of his servants is so -muck
deducted from what he would otherwise have to pay them in
money. ^


THE 0AUSB8 AFFfiOTING WAGES. £9

and that if he were to give to his servants the
value of their whole subsistence in money, the
whole body of labourers would be just as well
maintained as in the supposed case of his pur-^
chasing their subsistence, and then giving it to'
them ip e^ch^nge for their services. No one
would maintain that if it were the practice in
this country, as it is in India, to give to servants
board wages, the demand for labour would be
lessened ; or that if it were the practice, as it
is in semi-barbarous countries, to maintain ser^
v^nts to produce within their masters' walls the
commodities which we are accustomed to pur-,
chase from shops, the demapd for labour would
be increased. Still less could it be maintained,
that if those servants, instead of producing xjomr
modities, wer^ employed in following their mas-
ter's person, or mounting guard before his door,
such a change would create an additional demand
for men, and be favourable to an increase of
population.

So far am I from concurring in Mr. Ricardo's
opinion, that it is the interest of the labourer!^
that revenue should be spent rather on jseryiceia
than on commodities, tbSt I believe their interest


60 POPULAR ERRORS ON

to be precisely opposite. In the first place, the
labourer can generally manage better his own
income than it can be managed for him by his
master. If a domestic servant could earn as
wages the whole sum which he costs his master,
even if he were to spend it as he received it, he
would probably spend it with more enjoyment.
Secondly, the income spent on services is spent
in the purchase of what perishes at the instant of
its creation ; that spent on commodities often
leaves results which, when their first purchaser
has done with them, are serviceable to others. In
this country the poor are, to a great extent, clothed
with garments originally provided for their supe-
riors. In all the better class of cottages may be
found articles of furniture which never could have
been made for their present possessors. A large
portion of the commodities which now contribute
to the comfort of the labouring classes would
never have existed, if it had been the fashion in
this country, during the last fifty years, to prefer
retinue and attendance to durable commodities.
And, thirdly, the income employed on commodi-
ties is favourable to the creation of both material
and immaterial capital ; that employed on services


THE CAUSES AFFECTING WAGES. 61

is not. The duties of a servant are so easily
learned^ that he can scarcely be termed a skills
labourer ; his accumulations are small in amount^
and seldom turned to much advantage. The ar-
tisan learns a trade, in which every year adds to
his skill, and is taught mechanical and chemical
processes, often susceptible of indefinite improve-
ment, and in which a single invention may raise
the author to wealthy and diffuse prosperity over
a whole district^ or even a whole nation. An in-
dustrious artisan can often save a large portion of
his income, and invest it with great and immediate
profit. He purchases with his savings a small
stock of tools and materials, and by the vigilance
and activity which can be applied only to a small
capital^ renders every portion of it efficient. The
ancestors, and not the remote ancestors, of some of
our richest and our proudest families, the authors
of some of our most valuable discoveries, were
common mechanics. What menial servant has
in this country, and in modern times, been a public
benefactor, or even raised himself to affluence ?
Both history and observation show that those
countries in which expenditure is chiefly employed
in the purchase of services are poor, and those in
which it is employed on commodities are richt


69 POPULAR SRRORS ON WAGES.

Mr. Ricardo's theory as to the effects of war is
still more strikingly erroneous. It is^ in the first
plaoe^ open to all the objections which I have
already opposed to his views respecting menial
servants. The revenue which is employed in
maintaining soldiers and sailors would, even if
unproductively consumed^ maintain at least an
equal number of servants and artisans ; and that
portion of it which would have been employed in
the maintenance of artisans would (as we have
seen) have been far more beneficially employed*
The demand for soldiers and sailors is not, as he
terms itj an additional, it is merely a substituted
demand. But a great part of that revenue would
have been productively consumed. Instead of
employing some labourers in converting suburbs
into fortifications^ and forests into navies, to perish
by dry rot in harbour^ or by exposure at sea, and
others in walking the deck arid parading on the
rampart, it would have employed them in adding
more and more every year to the fund from which
their subsistence is derived. War is mischievous
to every class in the community ; but to none is
it such a curse as to the labourers.

THB END.


\b


'"'■ .••«•• • • ., . •


.«.


^''., ♦ •


The borrower must return this item on or before
the last date stamped below. If another t
places a recall for this item, the borrower will
be notified of the need for an earlier return.

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt
the borrower from overdue fines.


Harvard College Widener Library
Cambridge, MA 02I3S 617-495-2413


e handle with care.

Thank you for helping to preserve
library collections at Harvard.
