Sepharial (Walter Gorn Old), A Manual of Occultism (1911)
==========================================================================
Sepharial's encyclopedic handbook — astrology, palmistry, numerology, talismans, and divination. The classic Edwardian occult primer. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

1  MAIMUA^  C)F
OCCUI^riSM

SEPHARIAL


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2013


http://archive.org/details/manualofoccultis01seph


A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


A  MANUAL  OF
OCCULTISM

BY

"SEPHARIAL"

author  of

"the  manual  of  astrology,"  "  kabalistic  astrology,"
"the  kabala  of  numbers,"  etc.,  etc.


LONDON

WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Ltd.

I9I4


"  Sorcery  has  been  called  Magic :  but
Magic  is  Wisdom,  and  there  is  no  wisdom
in  Sorcery/"

Paracelsus.


INTRODUCTION


It  is  not  my  intention  in  these  pages  to  attempt
an  exposition  of  the  deeper  arcana  in  connection
with  the  various  subjects  treated  of;  but  rather  to
place  before  the  lay  reader  a  number  of  methods
by  means  of  which  he  will  be  able  to  demonstrate
to  his  own  satisfaction,  and  that  of  others,  that
there  is  a  deep  substratum  of  truth  in  what  is  usually
called  "  Occultism,"  and  that  the  occult  arts  are
sure  and  definite  means  of  exploring  them.

The  ancient  Hermetic  philosophers  were  well
aware  of  a  certain  subtile  correspondence  or  analogy
existing  between  the  superior  and  inferior  worlds,
the  world  of  causation  and  that  of  effects.  They
traced  a  connection  between  the  noumenal  and  the
phenomenal,  between  the  mind  of  man  and  his
bodily  condition,  between  the  spiritual  and  the
natural.  They  affirmed  all  this  in  a  trite  axiom  :
As  above,  so  below.  This  philosophy  extended  to
concrete  observations,  and  became  a  science  which
they  embodied  in  the  Doctrine  of  Correspondences.
The  hieroglyphic  writings  of  the  Chinese,  Egyptians
and  Assyrians  are  the  outcome  of  this  science,
portions  of  which  are  current  in  our  own  thought
and  language.    Thus  when  we  speak  of  commerce,


vi


INTRODUCTION


the  merchant  and  the  market,  we  are  going  back
to  traditional  knowledge  which  associated  the
"  winged  messenger  "  of  the  gods  with  the  ship  in
fuU  sail;  the  word  merx  (trade)  being  at  the  root
of  the  name  Mercury,  and  the  symbol  ^  the  hiero-
gljrph  for  all  that  the  name  imports.  We  call  the
Sun  *'he"  and  the  Moon  "she,"  tracing  unconsciously
a  subtile  correspondence  between  the  daj^  and  the
active  male  function  in  nature,  and  between  the
night  and  the  passive  female  function.  We  speak
of  jovial  men  and  infer  their  connection  with  the
planet  Jupiter;  and  all  our  destructive  and  hurtful
ideas  are  embodied  in  such  words  as  "to  mar,"
"  martial,"  "  murder,"  etc.,  linking  them  to  their
source  in  the  root  mama  (to  strike),  because  the
destructive  element  in  nature  is  represented  in  our
system  by  the  planet  Mars.

This  Doctrine  of  Correspondences  is  at  the  root
of  all  occult  interpretation.  It  is  our  human
presentation  of  the  Universal  Law  which  binds
the  Microcosm  to  the  Macrocosm  as  an  effect  to  its
antecedent  cause.  The  mystic,  the  poet  and  the
creative  artist  are  all  unconscious  interpreters  of
this  universal  law.  They  have  in  some  degree
the  universal  sense  by  which  their  souls  are  rendered
responsive  to  the  pulsations  of  Nature's  own  heart-
beat. The  sybil,  the  diviner  and  the  seer  are  in
even  closer  touch  with  the  Great  Life,  while  they  have
less  conscious  enjoyment  of  that  intimacy.  Others
there  are  who  reach  to  the  heart  of  things  by  a  clear
and  conscious  intellection,  understanding  what  they


INTRODUCTION


vii


see,  analyzing  and  interpreting  what  they  feel.
These  are  the  Occultists,  the  true  masters  of  the
secret  knowledge.  Here  it  is  perhaps  necessary  to
mark  the  distinction  which  exists  between  occult-
ism and  mediumism,  between  the  voluntary  conscious
effort  of  the  trained  intellect  and  the  automatic
functioning  of  the  natural  "  sensitive,"  in  their
respective  relations  to  the  occult  world.

The  Occultist  is  one  who  intelligently  and  con-
tinuously applies  himself  to  the  understanding  of
the  hidden  forces  in  nature  and  to  the  laws  of  the
interior  world,  to  the  end  that  he  may  consciously
co-operate  with  nature  and  the  spiritual  intelligences
in  the  production  of  effects  of  service  to  himself
and  to  his  fellow-beings.  This  entails  upon  him
a  close  study  of  the  mystery  and  power  of  sound,
number,  colour,  form;  the  psychological  laws
underlying  all  expression  of  faculty;  the  laws  of
sympathy  and  antipathy ;  the  law  of  vibration ;  of
spiritual  and  natural  affinity ;  the  law  of  periodicity,
of  cosmic  energy,  planetary  action;  occult  correspond-
ences, etc.  To  these  labours  he  must  bring  a  natural
gift  of  understanding,  an  unusual  degree  of  patience
and  devotion,  and  a  keen  perception  of  natural  facts.
The  Medium,  or  natural  sensitive,  is  one  who  holds
himself  in  negative  relations  to  the  interior  worlds,
and  submits  himself  to  the  operation  of  influences
proceeding  from  things  and  persons,  as  well  as
to  that  of  discarnate  intelligences.  The  medium
cultivates  an  unusual  degree  of  responsiveness  to
environment  and  to  the  emanations  (atomic,  mag-


viii


INTRODUCTION


netic  or  psychic)  and  suggestions  of  other  persons.
The  phenomena  developed  by  this  process  of
mediumism  include  automatism  (temporary  loss
of  control  over  the  motor  nerves),  as  in  the  pheno-
mena of  involuntary  speech  and  automatic  writing ;
hypercesthesia,  as  in  the  function  of  clairvoyance,
clairaudience,  psychometry,  etc.  ;  trance,  with  its
attendant  phenomena  of  unconscious  cerebration,
obsession,  and  a  variety  of  physical  effects  of  a
supernormal  character.  In  its  highest  manifesta-
tion, following  upon  the  "  crucifying  of  the  flesh,"
the  subjugation  of  the  passions,  and  a  process  of
intense  rehgious  aspiration,  mediumism  is  frequently
followed  by  spiritual  revelation  and  spontaneous
prophecy.  "  But  this  sort  cometh  not  but  by
fasting  and  prayer."

The  various  forms  of  divination  to  which  recourse
is  had  in  so-called  occult  circles  rest  largely  upon
the  exercise  of  a  faculty  which  is  compounded  of
occultism  and  mediumism.  They  are  seen  to  employ
the  automatic  faculty  in  conjunction  with  an  em-
pirical knowledge  of  certain  occult  methods  of
interpretation.

The  following  pages  are  intended  to  place  the  lay
reader  in  possession  of  some  of  the  principal  methods
of  the  occultists  and  mediums ;  and  although  nothing
of  a  purely  esoteric  nature  is  divulged,  it  will  never-
theless be  found  that  everything  necessary  to  an
initial  understanding  and  practice  of  the  various
occult  arts  is  included  in  this  work.  It  is  within
the  author's  purpose  to  place  so  much  information


INTRODUCTION


ix


at  the  disposal  of  the  student  as  will  effectually
debar  him  from  any  excuse  of  ignorance  concerning
the  psychic  powers  latent  in  man  and  the  verity
of  the  occult  sciences.  It  is  within  the  power  of
everybody  to  be  convinced,  and  to  convince  others,
while  he  who  perseveres  to  the  point  of  perfection  in
the  exercise  of  his  faculty  may  justly  be  dignified
by  the  name  of  Adept.  The  Magi  of  ancient  times
were  astrologers,  diviners  and  prophets  all,  and  he
who  would  aspire  to  their  high  degree  must  pursue
their  methods  and  live  their  life.  They  have
committed  to  us  the  following  maxims,  which  are
stiU  preserved  in  the  schools —

Know — Will — Dare — Keep  Silent  ;

and  as  to  the  rule  of  life  they  enjoin —

Right  Thought — Right  Feeling
Right  Speech — Right  Action
Right  Living.


CONTENTS


PART  I
THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES

CHAP.  PAQK

Introduction  .......  v-ix

ASTROLOGY— Section  I

I  THE  ALPHABET,   ETC  3

II     THE  ASPECTS  11

III  THE  SIGNS    .......  14

IV  THE  HOUSES  .  .  .  .  .  .21

ASTROLOGY— Section  II

I  MAKING  A  HOROSCOPE    .  .  .  .  .27

II  FOREIGN  HOROSCOPES     .  .  .  .  .34

ASTROLOGY— Section  III

I  PERSONAL  APPEARANCE  .  .  .  .  .37

II  THE  CONSTITUTION  .  .  .  .  .41

III  HEALTH         .......  42

IV  CHARACTER  .......  44

V     ACCIDENTS    .  .  .  .  .  .  .48

VI     THE  FORTUNES      .  .  .  .  .  .50

VII     THE  POSITION        .  .  .  .  .  .52

xi


xii

CONTENTS

CHAP.

PAGE

VIII

THE  OCCUPATION  .....

04:

IX

MARRIAGE  ......

0  t

X

PROGENY  ......

AA
OU

XI

TRAVELLING  ......

XII

FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES  ....

65

XIII

KIND  OF  DEATH  .....

67

astrology—Section  iv

I

THE  MEASURE  OF  TIME  ....

oy

II

EXAMPLE  OF  DIRECTIONS

1  O

III

SECONDARY  DIRECTIONS

7o

IV

TRANSITS  AND  ECLIPSES,  ETC.

QA

V

MUNDANE  ASTROLOGY  ....

91

VI

OTHER  METHODS    .           .           .  .

.  97

PALMISTRY

I

TYPES  OF  HANDS  .....

lUO

II

MOUNTS  OR  CUSHIONS  ....

111
ill

III

THE  PHALANGES  .....

lib

IV

THE  LINES  ......

1  1  o

V

NINE  PRINCIPAL  LINES  ....

.  123

VI

INCIDENTAL  MARKS  ....

.  134

THAUMATURGIC  ART

I

THE  KABALA  .....

II

THE  CALCULATORY  ART

1  AA

III

OF  EVIL  SPIRITS  .....

156

IV

man's  SPIRITUAL  FREEDOM

.  161

CONTENTS

xiii

CHAP.

PAGE

V

ON  TALISMANS  .....

.  166

VI

NUMEROLOGY  .....

.  178

HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  .

.  193

PART  II

THE  OCCULT  ARTS

I

Divination.  .....

.  213

II

THE  tarot  ......

.  218

III

Cartomancy  .....

.  233

IV

VARIOUS   METHODS  ....

.  240

V

Crystal-gazing  .....

.  247

VI

PRELIMINARIES  AND  PRACTICE

.  253

VII

VISIONS  AND  INTERPRETATIONS

260

VIII

SOME  EXPERIENCES  ....

.  264

IX

Geomancy  ......

.  269

X

CASTING  AND  JUDGING  THE  FIGURE

.  275

XI

SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  .

.  282

XII

PSYCHOMETRY        .          .  .

.  310

XIII

Dreams  ......

.  320

XIV

Sortileges  ......

.  333

ALCHEMY

.  344

PART  I


THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES

THE  VOLITIONAL  FACULTY— THE  WILL  AND
IMAGINATION  —  ADEPTSHIP  —  ASTROLOGY
—KABALISM— TALISMANS— NUMEROLOGY
—PALMISTRY— HYPNOTISM,
Etc.,  Etc.


B


»


ERRATA.

Paoe  7— lines  14-15:  for  "specific  gravities"  read
"  atomic  weights."

Page  8— line  3  et  scq  :  for  "  specific  gravities  "  read
"  atomic  weights."


A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


SECTION  1

CHAPTER  I
ASTROLOGY

The  astrologic  art  is  held  to  be  the  key  to  all  the
occult  sciences.  Certainly  it  is  the  most  ancient,
and  that  which  most  readily  lends  itself  to  scientific
demonstration.

Much  that  is  contained  in  this  and  the  following
chapters  is  traditional  knowledge,  but  some  portion
of  it  is  the  result  of  modern  discovery  and  experi-
ment. Thus  the  nature  and  significations  of  the
signs  of  the  zodiac  and  the  planets,  the  aspects
and  some  other  parts  of  the  groundw  ork  of  astrology,
have  come  down  to  us  from  times  immemorial;  but
the  methods  of  computing  the  periods,  the  exact
times  of  events,  together  with  some  methods  of  in-
terpretation, are  of  modern  or  comparatively  recent
origin.  Of  course,  all  that  is  known  of  Neptune
and  Uranus  is  the  result  of  modern  discovery.

3  B2


4  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  subject  before  us  can  be  divided  into  three
parts  : —

1.  The  alphabet.

2.  The  reading.

3.  Time  measures.

I  will  deal  in  this  chapter  with

The  Alphabet

This  includes  the  symbols  and  names  of  the  planets
and  the  signs,  their  groupings  and  dominions.  -

The  Planets  (including,  for  convenience  of
phrasing,  the  Sun  and  Moon)  are  nine  in  number.
Stated  in  the  order  of  their  distances  from  the  earth
they  are  as  follows  : —

])  The  Moon,  which  returns  to  the  same  place
in  the  zodiac  in  about  27  days,  and  to  its  conjunction
with  the  Sun  in  about  29  days.  Every  19  years
the  New  Moons  fall  in  the  same  part  of  the  zodiac.

The  Moon's  characteristic  is  change  or  mobility.

$  Venus,  which  returns  to  the  same  part  of  the
zodiac  about  the  same  date  in  8  years.  It  is  at  its
nearest  to  the  earth  when  in  inferior  conjunction
with  the  Sun.  Its  characteristic  is  placidity  or
peace.    It  is  called  by  the  Greeks  Aphrodite.

5  Mercury,  when  in  inferior  conjunction  with
the  Sun,  is  next  in  distance  from  the  earth.  It
returns  to  the  same  longitude  on  the  same  date
in  79  years.    Its  characteristic  is  activity.

O  The  Sun  is  the  chronocrater  of  our  system,
and  all  time  is  measured  by  its  apparent  movements.
It  has  an  apparent  motion  round  the  earth  in  24


ASTROLOGY


5


hours  and  4  minutes,  and  an  annual  motion  through
the  zodiac  in  365  days  5  hours  48  minutes  49  seconds.
The  earth  is  nearer  the  sun  than  it  used  to  be,  the
day  is  shorter,  and  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes
is  greater.  The  equinoxes  pass  through  each  sign
in  about  2,160  years.  The  vernal  equinox  is  now  in
the  constellation  Pisces,  and  in  about  700  years  will  be
in  Aquarius.  The  characteristic  of  the  Sun  is  vitality.

f  Mars  returns  to  the  same  part  of  the  zodiac
about  the  same  time  at  the  end  of  79  years.  Conse-
quently it  forms  its  conjunction  with  ^  in  the  same
part  of  the  zodiac  at  the  end  of  that  period.  Its
characteristic  is  energy.

%  Jupiter  returns  to  the  same  longitude  about
the  same  date  every  83  years.  It  is  called  the
Greater  Fortune.    Its  characteristic  is  expansion.

h  Saturn  has  a  period  of  59  years,  after  which
it  comes  to  the  same  longitude  about  the  same  date.
It  is  called  the  Greater  Infortune.  Its  characteristic
is  privation.

9  Uranus  has  a  synodic  period  of  84  years.  Its
characteristic  is  disruption.

Neptune  has  a  period  of  about  165  years  and
its  characteristic  is  chaos.

The  periods  of  the  planets  according  to  the
Chaldeans  are —

])  4  years,  ^  10  years,  $  8  years,  ©  19  years,  ^
15  years,  1L  12  years,  and  30  years.  Thus  the
D  rules  the  life  from  birth  to  4  years  of  age  and  is
succeeded  by  ^  up  to  14,  then  $  to  the  age  of  22,
followed  by  the  Sun  from  22  to  41,  to  which  ^


6  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


succeeds  until  56,  and  is  followed  by  ii,  who  rules
the  life  up  to  the  age  of  68,  the  last  30  years,  up  to
the  age  of  98,  being  dominated  by  Saturn.

These  are  the  periods  recited  by  Shakespeare  in
his  famous  passage  in  .45  You  Like  It,  beginning
"All  the  world's  a  stage,  and  all  the  men  and  women
merely  players."  Thus  the  J)  is  the  babe,  "mewling
and  puking  in  its  nurse's  arms."  ^  is  the
scholar,  $  the  lover,  ^  the  soldier,  u  the  judge
"  with  good  capon  lined,"  and  the  "  lean  and  slip-
pered pantaloon."'  The  last  stage  of  all  is  that  of  B
(disruption),  the  paralytic  senilit}^  of  which  condition
is  so  aptty  described  by  the  Bard.

Planetary  Colours.

Neptune. — Mauve,  lilac,  heliotrope  (admixtures
of  pale  blue  and  scarlet).

Uranus. — Grey,  black  and  white  mixed,  in  checks
or  stripes.

Saturn. — Dark  brown,  black.

Jupiter. — Violet,  purple.

Mars. — Scarlet,  crimson.

Sun. — Orange,  gold.

Venus. — Pale  blue,  turquoise.

Mercury. -^Indigo,  dark  blue.

Moon. — Opal,  iridescent  sheens,  yellow,  and  in
watery  signs  (s,  TT[,  :<)  sea  green.

Planetary  Numbers.
The  following  numbers  transmitted  by  John
Heydon  in  the  sixteenth  century  have  been  proved
correct  : —


ASTROLOGY


7


h  8,  ^3,  ^9,  96,  55;
0  (negative)  4,  (positive)  1,


7.


Planetary  Metals.
^  (unknown)  ;  ^  iron  ;

uranium  ;  9  copper ;

h  lead  ;  5  quicksilver ;

1^  tin  ;  ])  silver  ;

O  gold.

The  atomic  weights  of  the  ancient  metals  are  not
presumed  to  have  been  known  to  the  ancient  astrolo-
gers, yet  we  find  they  named  the  planets  and  ascribed
their  dominions  in  the  mineral  world  in  exact  accord-
ance with  the  facts  of  modern  science.  The  specific
gravities  of  the  various  pure  metals  known  to  them
are  contained  in  the  following  glyph  : —


D


8  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


This  seven-pointed  star  is  read  from  the  ray
marked      towards  the  left.    The  result  is —


6

iron,  specinc

gravity  56

V

coppei  J

,  uo

D

silver  ,

108

%

tin  ,

118

0

gold

196

quicksilver  ,

200

b

lead  ,

207.

Read  alternately  in  the  reverse  order  we  have


0

ruling

r  Sunday,

D

;>

Monday,

6

55

Tuesday,

5

55

Wednesday,

55

Thursday,

9

55

Friday,

1^

55

Saturday.

If  we  read  from  point  to  point  so  as  to  make  a
heptagram  or  seven-pointed  star,  or  a  star  of  seven
angles,  we  have  the  order  of  the  planets  according
to  the  Chaldean  system  :

b  ^  c?  0  9  5  ]).
Sympathies.

The  followmg  glyph  (see  page  9)  exhibits  at  a
glance  the  sympathies  and  antipathies  of  the
planets —

Thus  Saturn  is  opposed  to  the  Sun  and  Moon,
Jupiter  to  Mercury,  and  Venus  to  Mars.
This  is  exhibited  in  detail  by  reference  to  the


ASTROLOGY


9


Dominions

of  the  planets,  which  are  set  forth  in  the  following
schedule —

fp  governs  ^  and

opposed  to
0  governing  ^  and

'^l  governs  $  and

opposed  to
^  governing  n  and  np
(5  governs  y  and  Tr[

opposed  to
9  governing  £:=  and  y  .


The  "  Dominions  "  are  sometimes  called  "  Houses  "
from  domus,  a  house,  but  as  other  divisions  of  the


10  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


heavens  are  so  called,  I  prefer  to  use  the  term
"  dominions  "  to  describe  the  signs  of  the  zodiac
ruled  over  by  the  planets.

In  a  general  sense,  and  having  regard  to  the
specific  nature  of  each  planet,  Saturn  is  in  sympathy
with  Mars,  Mars  with  the  Sun,  Jupiter  with  the
Moon  and  Venus ;  while  Mercury  is  variable,  taking
its  radical  tincture  from  that  planet  to  which  it  is
in  closest  aspect  at  birth.

The  following  figure  shows  at  a  glance  the  signs
owned  or  ruled  by  the  planets  and  the  luminaries  : —


It  will  be  observed  that  each  planet  has  two  signs,
the  Sun  and  Moon  one  each.  Neptune  is  found  to
have  affinity  with  the  sign  x,  Pisces,  and  Uranus
with  ,  Aquarius ;  but  these  are  modern  empiricisms
and  for  some  time  must  be  received  with  caution.


CHAPTER  II


THE  ASPECTS

The  ancients  have  handed  dov/n  a  tradition  which
informs  us  that  the  triangle  is  a  symbol  of  the  spirit
and  is  efficacious  for  good,  while  the  cross  Avhich  is
formed  on  the  square  is  a  symbol  of  matter  and  is
of  evil  import.

In  practical  astrology  we  find  this  dictum  to  be
true.  Thus  the  aspect,  or  angular  distance  between
two  celestial  bodies,  or  points  of  the  zodiac,  is  the
means  by  which  we  determine  whether  a  planet
favours  our  fortunes  or  the  reverse.

The  trine  /\  aspect  of  120°  is  good,  and  produces
harmonizing  effects  whenever  andAvherever  it  occurs.

The  -)(-  sextile  aspect  of  60°  is  half  the  trine,  and  is
good  in  like  manner  but  in  less  degree.

The  V  semisextile  of  30°  is  similarly  propitious,
but  in  a  very  subsidiary  degree.  It  serves,  however,
to  turn  the  scales  when  the  influences  are  conflicting.

These,  then,  are  the  good  aspects : —
A        -X-  V
120°         60"^  30°
and  to  these  are  added  the  conjunctions  of  and
$  ,  and  of  5  when  in  good  aspect  to  another  planet.

The  evil  aspects  are  : —
11


12  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  opposition  t?  of  180'\  which  makes  for  dis-
union and  inharmonious  results.

The  0  sesquiquadrate  or  square  and  a  half
aspect  of  135"  is  powerful  for  evil.

The  □  square  or  quadrature  of  90°,  which  is  only
a  degree  less  evil  than  the  direct  opposition.

The  L  semisquare  of  45°,  which  is  similarly,  but
in  less  degree,  evil.

To  these  are  added  the  conjunctions  of  ^,  h
and  ,  together  with  ^  when  in  bad  aspect  to
another  body;  for  ^  is  the  interpreter  of  the
gods,  and  brings  to  us  the  message  of  that  sphere
with  which  it  is  found  in  association  at  any  time  we
may  consult  the  heavens.

The  astrological  aspects  are  found  to  be  those
angles  at  which  the  superior  metals  crystallize.
Water  crj^stallizes  at  an  angle  of  60°.  Again,  the
angles  or  complemental  angles  of  any  regular  poly-
gon which  may  be  inscribed  in  a  circle  will  be  found
to  be  comprehended  by  the  astrological  aspects.
Thus  our  earliest  progenitors  are  found  to  have
been  both  metallurgists  and  geometers.

The  evil  aspects  are  all  included  in  this  ancient
glyph :—


THE  ASPECTS


13


and  similarly  the  good  aspects  are  included  in
the  following  symbol,  known  as  "  the  seal  of
Solomon  "  : —


Seal.  Sigil.


Key,
4      9  2


3  5  7
8      1  I  6

The  key  was  found  engraved  on  the  back  of  the
Great  Tortoise,  discovered  b}^  Yaou,  the  Chinese
patriarch  and  ruler,  in  the  Yellow  River,  about
2,300  B.C.  It  forms  the  basis  of  interpretation  to  the
oldest  book  in  the  world,  known  as  the  Yih  King,  or
Book  of  Transformations.  It  is  used  by  the  Chinese
for  aU  purposes  of  divination,  and  is  the  basis  of
their  astrological  .system.

Besides  these  there  are  many  other  points  of
interest  vested  in  the  astrological  aspects,  and  as  I
shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  them  in  the  next
chapter  of  this  section,  1  will  pass  them  for  the
moment.


CHAPTER  III


THE  SIGNS

The  signs  of  the  zodiac  are  the  symbols  of  those
h'ving  forms  which  among  the  ancients  stood  for
certain  cosmic  prijiciples  and  evohitional  processes.
]n  the  zodiacal  scroll  the  gifted  interpreter  of
symbols  will  find  the  history  of  the  human  race
already  depicted.  The  typical  forms  represent
various  stages  of  human  evolution,  as  Avell  individual
as  rcicial.  But  w  e  are  not  now  concerned  with  these
esoteric  matters,  but  rather  with  the  exposition
of  astrological  principles.  Observe,  then,  that  the
zodiac  is  composed  of  asterisms  which,  in  the  year
25,400  B.C.,  corresponded  with  the  solar  signs
bearing  the  same  names.  The  signs  are  counted
from  the  vernal  equinox,  or  that  point  where  the
sun's  path  crosses  the  earth's  equator.  The  line
traversed  by  the  sun  in  its  annual  path  through  the
asterisms  is  called  The  Ecliptic.

This  ecliptic  circle  is  divided  into  twelve  equal
parts,  called  Signs,  which,  counted  from  the  vernal
equinox,  are  as  follows  :  SP  Aries,  y  Taurus,  U
Gemini,  ^  Cancer,  Leo,  fiJJ  Virgo,  =a  Libra,  \
Scorpio,  f  Sagittarius,  1^  Capricornus,  :r  Aquarius,
j{  Pisces.

14


THE  SIGNS


15


They  have  the  following  relationships  and  group-
ings

^  is  opposed  by  JX

n  „


The  Elemeyital  Natures  of  the  signs,  with  their
human  correspondences,  are  shown  in  the  following
tabular  scheme  : —


Element.
A  Fiery  signs
=  Aerial
V  Watery
+  Earthy  ,,


Sign.  Principle.

cp  a  ?  Spirit
11  ii  Mind

25  ITl  }{  Soul

y  -njj  vj  Body


Property,
Inspiration
Reason
Emotion

Sensation.


The  majority  of  the  planets  being  in  the  Fire
signs,  shows  that  the  life  is  expressed  chiefly  in  the
inspirational,  aspirational  and  intuitive  faculties.
In  Air  signs,  the  intellectual  life  will  be  dominant.
In  Water  signs  the  passional,  emotional  and  imagi-
native qualities  are  more  pronounced;  while  if  the
majority  of  the  planets  are  in  Earth  signs,  the  more
material,  matter-of-fact  and  sordid  aspects  of  the
nature  absorb  the  vital  powers.  These  groups  are
otherwise  known  as  the  igneous,  gaseous,  fluidic
and  mineral,  analogous  to  the  upward  evolution
of  the  material  universe,  which  is  counterbalanced


16  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


by  the  downward  involution  of  the  corresponding
immaterial  principles.

The  analysis  of  the  sign  groupings  shows  that  the
A  and  =  signs  are  related  to  the  formless  or  superior
universe,  while  the  V  and  +  signs  relate  to  the
inferior  or  formative  world.  Again,  it  will  be  noticed
the  air  and  fire  are  mutually  conformable,  ignition
depending  on  atmosphere ;  w^hile  similarly  water
is  necessary  to  the  earth  for  its  fertilization.  These
sets  of  signs  are  in  mutual  sextile  to  one  another.
Thus

SP  is  >(c  to  n  and  ;
y  is  >)<  to  25  and  ;
n  is  -^f  to  SP  and  ^  ;
and  25  is  >(c  to  y  and  VC^,

The  Constitutional  Natures  of  the  signs  are  derived
from  another  grouping.    They  are  known  as  the

□  Fixed  or  Basic  ;
/TN  Common  or  Flexed ;
A  Movable  or  Cardinal.

The}^  may  very  appropriately  be  expressed  as  the
acute  A ,  the  grave  □  and  the  circumflex  /tn  .

The  groupmg  for  this  division  of  the  signs  is
thus : —

Acute,  ^  qE

Grave,  «     SI  ^

Circumflex,    IT    ^     I  ^

When  the  majority  of  the  planets  are  found  at  the
birth  of  a  person  to  be  in
Fixed  Signs — the  nature  will  be  independent,


THE  SIGNS


17


self-reliant,  pivotal,  seK-centred,  original,  cautious,
firm  and  steadfast.

Common  Signs. — The  nature  is  versatile,  flexible,
complacent,  sjTiipatlietic,  suave,  and  capable  of
adapting  itself  to  changes  of  company  and  environ-
ment.

Movable  Signs. — The  nature  shows  ambition,
aptitude,  executive  abiHty,  capable  of  cutting  out
a  line  in  life  for  itself  and  making  headway  in  the
face  of  obstacles.

The  driving  power  is  represented  by  the  fixed
signs,  the  sharp  instrument  by  the  cardinal  or  acute
signs,  and  the  body  that  is  riven  or  shaped  is  denoted
by  the  common  or  flexed  signs.

The  thinkers,  philosophers,  inventors  and  origina-
tors are  of  the  basic  or  fixed  type.  The  pioneers,
the  executive,  the  partisans  and  zealots  are  of  the
acute  or  cardinal  type.  The  common  populace,  the
passive  crowd;  the  numerous  agents,  fetchers  and
carriers  of  business;  and  whomsoever  works  at  the
direction  and  under  the  leadership  of  others,  all  and
sundry  are  of  the  flexed  type.

The  hand  of  the  archer  is  fixed,  the  arrow  is  direct
and  acute,  and  the  bow  is  flexed.  These  correspond-
ences are  the  keys  to  the  interpretation  of  many
occult  mysteries.

Sex  of  Signs.

The  signs  are  alternately  male  and  female,
namely : —

c


18  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Male.  Female.

n  25

SI  w

—  ni

I  vy

^  ¥i

The  signs  are  divided  into  three  parts,  each  of  10°,
called  decanates.  These  are  related  to  the  superior,
middle  and  lower  regions  of  the  zones  governed  by
them,  or  to  which  they  correspond.  The  ancients
had  a  conception  of  the  macrocosm  under  the
image  of  a  man,  which  they  called  the  Grand  Man
or  Adam  Kadmon,  and  to  which  the  microcosm  or
individual  corresponded  more  or  less  perfectly  at  all
points.  The  zones  of  the  body  covered  by  the  signs
are,  in  this  scheme,  as  follows  : —

the  head ;  the  loins  ;

y  the  neck;  TT[  the  excretors;

n  the  arms ;  J  the  thighs ;

3d  the  breast ;  VJ  the  knees ;

the  heart;  cx:  the  shins;

VP^  the  bowels ;  ^  the  feet.

From  what  has  been  said  above  it  mil  be  seen
that  if  a  planet  is  in  it  has  its  location  in  the
superior  region  of  the  head,  while  one  in  the  17th
degree  of  TT)J  would  be  located  in  the  middle  region
of  the  bowels.  As  to  whether  it  be  upon  the  right
or  left  side  of  the  body  will  depend  on  the  location


THE  SIGNS


19


of  the  planet  in  the  heavens,  which  involves  a  know-
ledge of  the  Houses.  These  are  dealt  with  in  the
next  chapter.

If  in  the  1st,  3rd,  5th,  7th,  9th  or  11th  House,  the
left  side  in  a  male  and  the  right  side  in  a  female  is
denoted ;  and  mutatis  mutandis  if  in  one  of  the  other
Houses.  Thus  a  planet  in  n  5°  in  the  6th  House
would  denote  the  right  upper  arm  in  a  male  and  the
left  upper  arm  in  a  female.  This  example  will
doubtless  serve  for  all  others.

The  signs  are  also  said  to  have  dominion  over
certain  places  and  countries,  but  as  these  do  not
form  an  essential  part  of  the  doctrine  of  Nativities
which  I  am  noAV  considering,  I  may  be  allowed  to
pass  it  by.

The  signs,  however,  have  an  affinity  with  those
elements  to  which  they  belong  in  the  elemental
grouping,  and  this  will  be  found  of  practical  use  in
the  interpretation  of  horoscopes.

The  Lunar  Mansions  begin  at  ^  0°  and  are  13°
20'  each  in  extent.  The  Arabians  gave  them
specific  names  and  influences.  Modern  astrologers
have  for  the  most  part  given  them  little  attention.
Yet  they  are  at  the  root  of  the  Oriental  system  of
astrology,  and  are  by  them  known  as  the  Stations
of  the  Moon,  or  nakshatrams.  They  have  analogy
with  the  diurnal  motion  of  the  Moon.

The  Mansions  are  27  in  number,  each  of  800'
extent.  The  Moon  changes  its  signification  as  it
goes  from  one  to  another  Mansion.  The  critical
degrees,  or  points  of  change,  are  as  follows  : —


20


A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


T  SI  I


0°    0';  13°  20'
10°    0' ;  23°  20'
6°  40';  20°  0'
3°  20' ;  16°  40.


26°  40' ;


There  are  thus  nine  divisions  or  Mansions  in  each
120°.  The  Hindus  ascribe  a  specific  planetary
influence  to  each  of  them,  and  give  to  each  a  period
of  dominion  over  the  life.  (See  "  Hindu  Astrology/'
in  the  Manual  of  A  strology,  by  Sepharial.)

The  student  will  do  well  to  consult  also  the  system
which  divides  the  zodiac  into  28  parts,  each  quadrant
being  subject  to  a  sevenfold  division.


CHAPTER  IV


THE  HOUSES

If  you  face  the  south  where  the  sun  is  at  noon,
there  is  a  point  on  your  horizon  to  the  left,  one
immediately  over  your  head  and  another  on  your
horizon  to  the  right.  An  imaginary  circle  drawn
through  these  three  points  and  continued  round  the
earth  is  called  the  Prime  Vertical.  An  equal  division
of  this  circle  into  12  parts  gives  rise  to  what  are  called
the  Twelve  Houses.  They  are  numbered,  for  pur-
1  poses  of  reference,  from  the  east  horizon  below  the
'  earth  to  the  west  horizon,  and  thence  through  the
zenith  to  the  east  horizon  again.  The  diagram  on
the  next  page  will  perhaps  conve}'  the  idea  better
than  words.

The  horizon  east  forms  the  cusp  of  the  1st  House,
the  upper  meridian  forms  the  cusp  of  the  10th
House,  the  west  horizon  forms  the  cusp  of  the
7th  House,  and  the  lower  meridian  that  of  the
4th  House.

The  1st  and  7th  Houses  are  also  called  the

"  Ascendant  "  and  "  Descendant  "  respectively.

The  1st,  10th,  4th  and  7th  are  called  the  Angles.

The  2nd,  11th,  5th  and  8th  are  called  Succeedent.

The  3rd,  6th,  9th  and  12th  are  called  Cadent  Houses.
[  21
i


22  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Planets  in  the  Angles  of  a  horoscope  are  by  that
position  rendered  more  powerful  in  their  action
and  are  more  conspicuous  in  the  life  of  one  born
when  they  are  so  placed.    Many  planets  in  Cadent


/  7"//

6  \

\            /  3

\    ^  7

Houses  will  render  the  career  inconspicuous  and  in  a
measure  servile.  Many  planets  in  Siicceedent  Houses
are  an  indication  of  a  career  that  is  helped  by
persistent  endeavour.

Thus  the  angular  Houses  correspond  with  the
cardinal  signs,  the  succeedent  with  the  fixed  signs,
and  the  cadent  with  the  flexed  signs;  and  this


THE  HOUSES


23


correspondence  may  be  traced  throughout  the
circle,  with  the  1st  House,  y  with  the  2nd,
n  with  the  3rd,  and  so  on.

The  Kabala  of  the  Houses
shows  them  to  be  divided  into  four  groups,  viz.  : —

Individual,  1st,  5th,  9th ;

Possessive,  2nd,  6th,  10th;

Relative,  3rd,  7th,  11th;

Terminal,  4th,  8th,  12th.

Of  these,  among  the  Individual  group,  the  1st  is
external  and  relates  to  the  person  or  body  of  the
man;  the  5th  is  intermediate  and  has  relation  to  the
psychic  nature  or  soul ;  and  the  9th  is  internal  and  is
related  to  the  spiritual  nature  or  individuality.
Hence  all  the  Houses  are  either  physical  (1st,  2nd.
3rd  and  4th),  psychic  (5th,  6th,  7th  and  8th),  or
spiritual  (9th,  10th,  11th  and  12th.)

The  close  study  of  these  intimate  relationships  of
the  Houses  and  their  correspondence  with  the  signs
of  the  zodiac  is  the  most  profound  work  of  the
astrologer.  It  is  the  foundation  of  the  Avhole  art  of
correct  foreknowledge.

For  practical  purposes  we  may  brief  the  domina-
tions and  significations  of  the  Houses  as  follows  : —

Significations  of  the  Houses
The  1st  House  governs  the  body,  personal  appear-
ance, physical  well-being,  and  accidents  happening
to  the  person.


24         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  2nd  House  governs  the  personal  property,
money  in  hand,  personal  effects.

The  3rd  House  rules  the  personal  relations,  the  tie
of  consanguinity,  brothers  and  sisters ;  also  means  of
communication,  whether  by  vehicle,  letter  post,
telegraph  or  other  means  whatsoever.  It  denotes
cables,  bridges,  telegraph  wires,  viaducts  and  other
means  of  connection;  writings,  letters.

The  4th  House  governs  the  end  of  the  physical
life,  the  grave ;  material  products,  mines,  farming
produce;  land,  houses,  freeholds,  leases,  tenancies
and  hence  landlords.

The  5th  House  is  the  extension  of  the  1st  and
governs  the  psychic  nature;  progeny;  passions,
pleasures,  love  affairs;  hence  theatres,  places  of
amusement,  sport,  etc.  ;  the  younger  generation
and  such  things  and  persons  as  tend  to  their  well-
being.

The  6th  House  is  an  extension  of  the  2nd;  it
governs  the  food,  clothing,  servants,  personal  com-
forts, relative  possessions  generally;  also  the  work
or  profession  in  which  the  subject  engages;  what-
ever contributes  to  the  well-being  of  the  subject's
possessions.

The  7th  House  is  an  extension  of  the  3rd;  it
governs  the  tie  of  conjugality,  the  marriage
partner;  persons  in  contract;  rivals  (as  opposing
the  1st  House).

The  8th  House  is  an  extension  of  the  4th;  it
governs  the  dissolution  of  the  vital  forces;  death,
matters  relating  to  the  dead;  wills,  legacies,  etc.,  and


THE  HOUSES


25


(being  the  2nd  from  the  7th)  dowry  or  personalty
of  the  marriage  partner.

The  9th  House  is  an  extension  of  the  5th;  it
governs  the  spiritual  nature;  ''the  far-off  land,"
whether  it  be  that  across  the  ocean  or  beyond
the  veil,  teleological  subjects,  theology,  philosophy;
pubHcations;  the  law,  lawj^ers;  insurances;  dreams,
visions  and  other- world  experiences.

The  10th  House  is  an  extension  of  the  6th;  it
denotes  the  ambitions,  success,  attainments  of  the
subject;  honour,  credit,  public  esteem;  the  father
or  mother.  (The  10th  is  always  of  the  same  sex
as  the  1st,  and  in  a  female  horoscope  denotes  the
mother.)

The  11th  House  is  an  extension  of  the  7th,  and
denotes  the  tie  of  friendship ;  congeners ;  associates ;
syndicates,  companies,  leagues,  clubs,  associations
of  which  the  subject  is  a  member;  his  confederates
and  supporters.

The  12th  House  is  an  extension  of  the  8th,  and
denotes  privation,  confinement,  restraint;  the  hos-
pital, prison  or  other  place  of  detention;  seques-
tration, exile;  ambushes,  plots,  secret  enemies;  the
occult.

It  will  be  seen  that  many  other  interpretations
apply  to  the  House  by  reflection.  Thus  the  1st  being
the  subject  of  the  horoscope  and  the  7th  his  wife;
the  3rd  his  relatives  and  the  9th  his  wife's  relatives,
the  latter  house  comes  to  mean  brothers-  and  sisters-
in-law,  i.e.  marriage  relatives.


26  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  10th  being  the  father  and  the  4th  the  mother
(in  a  male  horoscope),  the  7th  is  the  maternal
grandfather  and  the  1st  the  maternal  grandmother.

The  6th  being  the  uncles  or  aunts  on  the  mother's
side  (i.  e.  maternal  aunts  or  uncles),  the  relatives  of
the  mother,  the  5th  (progeny)  from  the  6th  (i.  e.
the  10th  House)  will  denote  maternal  cousins.
Similarl}^  with  all  those  relations  which  "  a  man
may  not  marr}^,"  as  expounded  in  the  Book  of
Common  Prayer.

We  have  now  before  us  the  whole  of  the  alphabet
of  astrology,  and  may  now  proceed  to  frame  a
horoscope  and  read  it  by  the  language  of  the
heavens.

It  is  important  that  the  whole  of  the  planet arj^
natures  should  be  learned,  together  with  those  of
the  signs  and  the  significations  of  the  Houses,
before  the  next  step  is  taken.  When  the  alphabet
has  become  a  language,  that  language  may  be
interpreted.  Until  then  we  are  faced  only  by  dead
symbols.


SECTION  11


CHAPTER  I

MAKING  A  HOROSCOPE

For  the  practical  pursuit  of  astrology  a  horoscope
must  be  drawn  for  the  moment  of  a  birth.

It  is  of  first  importance  to  understand  clearly
what  is  meant  by  birth  "  in  the  astrological  sense.
Observe,  then,  that  there  are  three  stages  in  the
process  of  obstetrics  :  (1)  Extrusion,  (2)  Abscission,
(3)  Independent  and  sustained  breathing.  The
moment  of  birth  is  that  at  which  the  first  breath,
usually  accompanied  by  a  cry,  is  taken  and  followed
by  regular  breathing.  For  it  should  be  noted  that  a
spasmodic  breath,  followed  by  a  cry,  may  be  only
the  first  of  a  series  of  intermittent  breathings,
regular  breathing  being  established  only  after  a
considerable  interval.

The  beginning  of  regular  breathing  having  been
noted,  the  astrologer  may  thereafter  draw  a  correct
horoscope  of  the  birth.  This  horoscope,  which
shows  the  relative  positions  of  the  celestial  bodies
at  the  time  of  the  nativity  as  regards  one  another,
and  their  positions  as  seen  from  the  place  of  birth,
is  called  the  Radix.  It  is  the  root  from  which  springs

27


28  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


the  whole  tree  of  life.  It  represents  the  environ-
ment of  the  new  life,  the  conditions  under  which  the
incoming  soul  will  be  required  to  express  itself,  develop
its  powers,  and  gain  its  new  load  of  experience.

That  which,  as  environment,  presses  it  most
closely,  is  the  physical  body  with  all  its  hereditary
tendencies  and  acquired  habits.  Beyond  this  there
are  the  wills  of  other  units  of  life,  all  strivmg  towards
the  satisfaction  of  common  human  needs,  and
spurred  by  individual  ambitions.  The  horoscope  of
birth  is  in  this  sense  accidental  and  not  incidental,
and  cannot  be  consulted  in  any  matter  prior  to
the  act  of  birth,  nor  in  regard  to  the  essential
nature,  origin,  power  and  motive  of  the  soul.

There  is  a  system  of  horoscopy  which  claims  to  go
deeper,  and  to  concern  itself  wholly  with  the  evolu-
tion of  the  soul  and  its  migrations ;  but  this  has  no
part  in  my  present  scheme  and  may  be  conveniently
ignored.

In  order  to  draw  a  horoscope  of  the  birth,  it  will
be  necessary  to  obtain  (1)  an  Ephemeris  of  the
planets'  places  for  the  year  of  birth;  (2)  a  Table  of
Houses  for  the  place  of  birth,  or  an  approximate
latitude;  (3)  a  set  of  Transit  Tables  extending  over
a  hundred  years.

An  Ephemeris  is  an  astronomical  calendar  show-
ing the  positions  of  the  celestial  bodies  at  noon  each
day  throughout  the  year.  This  information  is
extracted  from  the  Nautical  Almanac  or  the  French
contemporary  Connaissance  de  Temps.  It  gives  the
geocentric  longitudes  and  the  latitudes  and  declina-


MAKING  A  HOROSCOPE  29


tions  of  the  bodies,  the  sidereal  time  of  the  day
corresponding  to  the  Sun's  true  Right  Ascension  at
noon;  and  the  aspects  formed  between  the  planets
(called  ''Mutual"  aspects)  and  also  the  solar  and
lunar  aspects.  Some  of  these  terms  need  explana-
tion to  the  lay  reader.

Geocentric  lo7igitude  is  the  position  of  a  body  in
the  ecliptic  as  seen  from  the  centre  of  the  earth.

Heliocentric  longitude,  from  which  geocentric  longi-
tude is  converted,  is  the  ecliptic  position  as  seen
from  the  Sun.  In  astrology  we  use  the  geocentric
longitudes  because  we  are  considering  the  action
of  the  planets  upon  the  earth  and  its  inhabitants.
If  we  lived  on  Mars  we  should  have  to  take  the
positions  as  seen  from  Mars.  The  ignorant  conten-
tion that  the  discovery  of  the  hehocentricity  of  the
system  invalidates  astrology  is  of  course  wijbhout
rational  foundation.

Declination  is  distance  from  the  equator  north
or  south.  It  corresponds  to  geographical  latitude.
The  line  apparently  traversed  by  a  star  or  planet
in  its  diurnal  passage  round  the  earth  is  called
the  "parallel  of  decUnation."

Latitude  of  a  celestial  body  is  distance  north  or
south  of  the  ecUptic.

Sidereal  time  is  the  Sun's  true  Right  Ascension  at
noon,  measured  on  the  equator  from  the  vernal
equinox  and  corrected  by  the  difference  between
Right  Ascension  and  mean  or  clock  time.  It  may
be  expressed  in  °,  or  in  h.,  m.,  s.,  the  circle  of
the  equator  being  equal  to  24  hours.


30  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Tables  of  Houses  are  computed  for  various
latitudes  (as  for  New  York,  Paris,  London,  Liver-
])ool,  etc.),  and  serve  for  all  places  of  the  same  or
approximate  latitude  as  these  towns,  whether  north
or  south  of  the  equator.  The  Tables  show  the  points
of  the  ecliptic  cut  by  the  cusps  of  the  Houses ;  thus
the  cusp  of  the  10th  House  is  the  same  as  the
meridian  of  longitude,  and  the  point  of  the  echptic
thereon,  at  the  time  for  which  the  calculation  is
made,  will  be  that  which  is  on  the  meridian  and
culminating.

Local  time  is  the  time  corresponding  to  Green-
wich time  at  any  moment.  The  correction  to  be
applied  to  Greenwich  time  in  order  to  find  the
local  time  is  4  mins.  for  every  degree  of  longitude
east  or  west.  If  east,  add  to  Greenwich  time;  if
west,  subtract  from  Greenwich  time  in  order  to  get
the  local  time.

With  the  ephemeris  in  hand,  turn  now  to  the
date  of  the  birth.

Against  this  date,  in  the  left-hand  column,  you  will
find  the  sidereal  time  at  noon.

To  this  sidereal  time  add  the  local  time  elapsed
since  the  preceding  noon,  together  with  an  equation
at  the  rate  of  10  sees,  for  each  hour.

The  sum  will  be  the  sidereal  time  on  the  mid-
heaven  at  the  time  of  birth.

Next  turn  to  the  Tables  of  Houses  for  the  latitude
of  the  place  of  birth  and  find  this  sidereal  time.
Against  it,  under  the  column  marked  10  (10th
House),  you  will  find  the  degree  of  the  ecliptic  which
is  on  the  meridian.    This  is  technically  called  the


MAKING  A  HOROSCOPE


31


"  midheaven."  In  the  next  column  (11)  you  will
find  the  degree  of  the  zodiac  which  is  on  the  cusp
of  the  11th  House.  In  the  next  column  that  which
is  on  the  cusp  of  the  12th  House.  In  the  next
column,  marked  "  Ascendant  "  or  "  Asc./'  you  have
the  degree  which  is  rising  in  the  east  ;  the  next
column  gives  the  degree  on  the  cusp  of  the  2nd
House,  and  the  last  column  that  which  is  on  the  *
cusp  of  the  3rd  House.

The  4th  House  will  hold  the  same  degree  of  the
opposite  sign  to  that  which  is  on  the  10th  cusp.
The  5th  cusp  holds  the  opposite  to  the  11th,  and  the
6th  the  opposite  to  the  12th,  and  so  on  to  the  7th.
8th  and  9th  cusps.  The  "  skeleton  "  figure  is  then
complete.

The  planets'  places  must  next  be  inserted,  and  as
the  ephemeris  is  constructed  for  Greenwich  mean
time,  the  Greemvich  time  of  the  birth  must  be  used
instead  of  the  local  time.  The  places  being  given
for  each  day  at  noon,  the  longitudes  can  readily  be
found  by  proportion  for  any  intermediate  hour.

For  the  purpose  of  illustration  we  may  take  the
horoscope  of  King  George  V.  The  King  was  born
on  the  3rd  of  June,  1865,  in  London,  at  1  hr.  18  mm.
a.m.  In  the  ephemeris  for  1865  we  find  against
the  2nd  of  June,  at  noon  preceding  the  birth —


H.  M.  s.


Sidereal  time

To  which  add  time  since

And  equation  at  10"  per  hour


4  43  52
13  18  0
2  13


S.T.  on  midheaven  at  birth     18    4  5


32  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


This  sidereal  time  corresponds  with  the  1st  degree  of
Capricorn,  which  therefore  occupies  the  midheaven.
The  skeleton  is  then  completed  from  the  Tables  of.
Houses  for  London ;  and  the  planets'  places  and  those
of  the  luminaries  are  taken  from  the  ephemeris
for  the  3rd  of  June,  at  1.18  a.m.,  and  in  effect  we
have  the  horoscope  as  follows  : —


1^         ;^i3  rr^ip

H
V3

25  10

\2.  26

29  0

2  e"  3  8

I         ;z^2o  ^14-

Aspects,  etc.
0  *       ^  c?,  A  D

D  c?  T,  0  5'  *  c?,  A0,  D^,  c?  Asc.
9  □  ?,A¥

3A,  2+  4i=,  0  V
3A,  3a,  3.7N

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  planets  are  in
"aspect"  to  one  another  when  at  birth  they  are
within  5  degrees  of  the  exact  angle;  and  the  lumi-
naries are  in  aspect  at  a  distance  of  7°  from  the
exact  angle;  and  that  angle  to  which  they  are
severally  nearest  must  be  taken  as  the  aspect  then
in  operation.    Thus,  with  the  Sun  in  T  0°  and  $  in


MAKING  A  HOROSCOPE


33


y  17°,  the  angle  is  47°,  which  is  nearest  the  z  semi-
square  of  45°.  The  Sun  is  then  semisquare  Mars.
•But  if  with  the  0  in  T  0°  Mars  should  be  in  y  23°,
at  an  angle  of  53°,  then  the  nearest  aspect  is  the
>[c  of  60°,  and  the  Sun  is  then  said  to  be  in  sextile
to  Mars.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  groupings  of  the
Signs  already  given  in  Chap.  II  will  be  of  much
use  in  the  computation  of  the  aspects ;  for  all  signs
of  the  same  Elemental  nature  are  in  trine  to  one
another ;  those  of  the  same  Constitutional  nature
are  in  square  aspect  to  one  another.

Any  form  of  horoscopical  figure  may  be  used,
and  each  has  its  advantages.  That  given  above
dispenses  with  the  circle  and  consists  of  a  series  of
straight  lines,  representing  the  celestial  sphere  on
a  Mercatorial  projection.


D


CHAPTER  II


FOREIGN  HOROSCOPES

Suppose  that  the  birth  took  place  abroad,  let  us
say  m  Berlin.  The  "  skeleton  "  is  set  for  the  local
time,  and  the  planets'  place  are  taken,  from  the
Greenwich  ephemeris,  for  the  corresponding  Green-
wich time.  The  Tables  of  Houses  used  must  be
those  for  the  latitude  of  Berlin.

In  aU  cases  the  Midheaven  is  calculated  for  local
time,  and  the  Tables  for  the  Houses  must  be  those
due  to  the  latitude  of  the  place.  And  in  aU  cases
where  the  Greenwich  ephemeris  is  used,  the  corre-
sponding Greenwich  time  is  employed  when  calcula-
ting the  planets'  places.

South  Latitude
When  the  figure  is  to  be  set  for  places  south  of
the  Equator,  calculate  the  Midheaven  for  local  time
as  before.  Then  add  12  hours  to  the  sidereal  time
on  the  Midheaven,  refer  to  the  tables  for  the  cor-
responding North  latitude,  and  take  the  opposite
signs  to  those  found  on  the  cusps  of  the  Houses,
retaining,  however,  the  same  degrees .

34


FOREIGN  HOROSCOPES  35


Thus,  if  a  birth  has  taken  place  in  latitude  51°
30'  south,  at  1.18  a.m.  on  the  3rd  of  June,  1865  (see
horoscope  of  King  George  V),  the  sidereal  time  on  the
Midheaven  is  found  to  be  18  h.  4  m.  5  s.  As  the  lati-
tude is  south  we  must  add  12  hrs.,  thus —

H.  M.  s.

S.T.  on  M.C.  at  birth  . .  ..1845
Add   12    0  0


30    4  5

Subtract  the  circle      . .        . .    24    0  0


S.T.  on  lower  meridian  . .      6    4  5

Referrmg  now  to  the  Tables  of  Houses  for
latitude  51°  30'  (London)  against  sidereal  time
6  h.  4  m.  5  s.,  you  wiU  find  1°.

Place  this  on  the  lower  meridian,  which  is  the  cusp
of  the  4th  House,  and  follow  with  ^  7°  on  the  5th
cusp,  Xtjl  T  on  the  6th,  ic=  0°  47'  on  the  Descendant,
or  7th,  zDz  25°  on  the  8th,  and  \  25°  on  the  9th  cusp,
as  you  find  them  in  the  Tables.  Then  complete  the
circle  by  inserting  the  same  degrees  of  the  opposite
signs  on  the  remaining  cusps.  ,  The  places  of  the
celestial  bodies  are  then  calculated  for  the  Greenwich
time  corresponding  to  the  local  time  of  the  place  of
birth.

The  student  who  finds  any  difficulty  in  following
these  instructions  will  probably  be  better  guided
by  carefully  following  some  of  the  many  examples

D  2


36  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


published  in  the  text-books,  manuals  and  guides,
which  are  very  plentiful  and  moderate  in  price.
C'esi  le  premier  pas  qui  coute,  it  is  true,  but  once  the
initial  stages  of  Astrology  are  passed  successfully,
a  world  of  fascinating  study  will  reward  the  careful
and  patient  worker.

Note. — It  should  be  observed  that  the  Midheaven
and  Ascendant  are  the  only  points  which  are
mathematically  determined  by  the  calculation  of  a
horoscope.  The  degrees  on  the  cusps  of  the  other
Houses  may  conveniently,  and  indeed  rationally,
be  allotted  by  dividing  the  entire  degrees  contained
in  each  quadrant  by  three  and  adding  the  result
to  the  degree  on  the  Midheaven,  or  the  Ascendant,
according  to  quadrant  involved.  This  is  the
method  I  myself  use  in  practice.


SECTION  111


READING  THE  HOROSCOPE
CHAPTER  I

PERSONAL  APPEARANCE

The  personal  appearance  at  maturity  is  to
be  judged  from  a  combination  of  the  following
elements  : —

1.  The  rising  sign.

2.  The  sign  occupied  by  its  ruler.

3.  Planets  in  the  rising  sign.

4.  Those  planets  in  exact  aspect  to  the  rising
degree.

Note  that  Saturn  rising  makes  the  complexion
darker  and  the  face  thinner.  Jupiter  rising  gives
a  fuller  habit.  Mars  rising  disposes  to  more
colour  or  ruddiness  and  increases  the  stature.
Thus  a  child  born  on  the  7th  of  July,  1909,  at  10.20
p.m.,  with  the  Moon  and  Mars  rising  in  Pisces,  showed
giant  proportions  before  she  was  a  year  old,  being
then  of  dimensions  equal  to  a  well-nourished  child
of  four  years.  The  Sun  rising  gives  a  fair  complexion
I     but  often  freckled  or  sunburnt  in  appearance.

1  37

I


38  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Venus  gives  a  beautiful  and  florid  type.  Mercury
gives  an  alert  look,  with  rather  small,  wizened
features.  The  Moon  gives  fulness  and  disposes  to
lymphatic  pallor.  Mars  rising  generally  gives  a
red  mark,  scar,  cut  or  mole  upon  the  face.  Chaucer
the  poet,  who  was  born  with  the  rising  of  Mars  in
Taurus,  says  of  himself  :  "  Yet  have  I  Martes  mark
upon  my  face."

There  are  usually  to  be  found  moles  or  marks
upon  that  part  of  the  body  which  is  ruled  by  the
rising  sign;  that  which  is  on  the  cusp  of  the  6th
House;  and  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon.  This  is
so  generally  the  case  that  I  have  frequently  used
these  marks  successful!}?-  in  planning  a  horoscope
where  the  time  of  birth  was  in  doubt.

Neptune  rising  usually  gives  blue  eyes,  with  a
mystical  expression.  When  this  is  absent,  the
deportment  is  often  limp  and  the  expression  drowsy
and  dazed.

Uranus  rising  gives  angularity  and  slenderness
to  the  body,  together  with  a  marked  hrusquerie  or
eccentricity  of  action.  ,

The  Typal  Forms
due  to  the  rising  of  the  twelve  signs  are  briefly
as  follows  : —

Aries. — Slender  figure,  lean  body,  long  neck,
broad  forehead,  narrow  chin,  curling  hair,  either
sandy  or  black.

Taurus, — Full  body,  strong  shoulders^  full  neck,
waving  brown  hair.


PERSONAL  APPEARANCE  S9


Gemini,  —  Tall,  well  formed;  long  limbs,  slender
hands,  long  nose,  rather  wide  mouth,  brown  hair,
generally  fine  and  straight.

Cancer. — Short  stature,  broad  chest,  rounded
features,  broAvn  hair,  usually  of  a  light  tinge;  full,
fleshy  body;  small  hands  and  feet.

Leo. — Tall,  well-developed  and  upright  figure;
curhng  or  wavy  hair,  florid  complexion  and  large
grey  eyes.

Virgo. — Lean  body,  large  forehead,  high  cheek-
bones, square  jaws,  long  upper  lip,  brown  hair.

Libra. — Elegant  figure,  oval  face,  neat  features,
good  complexion;  rich  brown  hair,  good  teeth  and
nails.

Scorpio. — Thick- set  figure,  sturdy  appearance,
swarthy  complexion,  wavy  or  curling  hair ;  glittering
bright  eyes.

Sagittarius. — Tall,  well-developed  figure;  high
forehead,  long  features ;  full,  expressive  eyes ;  brown
hair.

Capricornus. — Strong,  prominent  features,  mode-
rate or  small  stature;  dusky  complexion,  dark  hair,

Aquarius. — Well-developed  and  full  figure;  fine
complexion;  blue  eyes;  flaxen  or  light- brown  hair;
defective  teeth.

Pisces. — Small  but  full  figure,  small  hands  and
feet;  full  eyes;  pale,  dusky  complexion;  black,
straight  hair.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  pure  types  are  seldom  met
with,  but  when  a  planet  rises  in  its  own  sign  it  may
be  regarded  as  astrologically  pure,  if  at  the  same


40  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


time  no  planet  is  in  close  aspect  to  the  rising  degree.
There  remains,  however,  the  fact  of  heredity,  which
will  always  operate  towards  the  reproduction  of  the
family  type ;  so  that  it  becomes  a  matter  of  great
experience  and  skill  to  correctly  depict  a  person
from  the  horoscope  alone.  It  is  a  fact,  however,
that  astrologers  learn  to  recognize  the  various
zodiacal  types  with  great  facility.  King  George  V,
it  will  be  seen,  is  of  the  Aries  type,  blended  with  that
of  Leo  in  which  Mars  is  posited.  Neptune  is  rising,
and  the  King  early  espoused  the  naval  profession.
Many  of  the  King's  portraits  reflect  the  "drowsy"
look  peculiar  to  the  planet  Neptune.


\


CHAPTER  II

THE  CONSTITUTION

is  governed  by  the  Sun  and  the  rising  sign.  The

vital  signs  are  SP  SI  ^>  ^i^y  ^ig^^  ^^^^
vital ;  while  the  weakest  are  £5  VJ  'nj  and  .

The  0  well  aspected  shows  a  strong  constitution,
with  freedom  from  hereditary  taint  or  organic
disease.  When  badly  aspected  it  shows  organic
troubles  which  in  favouring  circumstances  will
readily  develop.  Hereditary  disorders  are  also  thus
discovered.

The  affliction  being  from  fixed  signs  shows  diseases
of  the  heart,  throat,  blood  and  excretory  system;
flexed  signs,  the  lungs,  bowels  and  nervous  system ;
cardinal  signs,  the  head,  loins,  stomach  and  skin.

Saturn  denotes  obstructions,  defects,  privations;
Jupiter  enlargements  and  congestion;  Mars  inflam-
matory action,  lesions  and  remedies  by  the  knife;
Uranus  shows  paralysis  and  rupture ;  Neptune  hyper-
sesthesia  and  neuropathic  conditions,  hysteria,  etc.,
and  all  insidious  wasting  diseases.  Venus  shows
defects  of  the  mucous  membrane  and  effects  of
poisonous  elements;  Mercury  nervous  disorders,
especially  of  the  voluntary  arc  of  nerves  and  the
cerebrum.  The  Moon  disposes  to  irregularities  and
lack  of  co-ordination  in  the  system.

41


CHAPTER  III


HEALTH

The  ])  is  the  chief  factor,  denoting  the  functional
powers.  When  badly  aspected  it  shows  functional
disorders  in  the  same  way  that  the  Sun  denotes
organic  disorders.  The  Sun  shows  incidental  and
the  Moon  accidental  effects.  The  one  is  inherited
and  the  other  acquired.  A  functional  derangement
may  excite  an  organic  disorder  and  become  a  chronic
illness.

When  the  constitution  is  weak  and  the  health
good  the  person  may  live  to  a  good  age,  but  the  first
serious  illness  may  kill.  When  the  constitution  is
strong  and  the  health  bad  much  sickness  may  be
endured  without  fatal  effect.

Consider,  then,  the  Sun  first  of  all,  in  regard  to  the
constitution ;  and  next  the  Moon,  in  regard  to  the
health.  When  the  Ascendant  is  weak,  and  both
the  luminaries  afflicted,  predict  a  short  life.  When
the  rising  sign  is  strong,  and  both  Sun  and  Moon  well
supported,  predict  a  long  life.  Moderate  years  are
the  result  of  mixed  influences.

When  maladies  are  indicated  by  a  planet  afflicting
the  0  or  ])  by  evil  aspect,  the  malady  will  be  of

42


HEALTH


43


the  nature  indicated  by  the  afflicting  planet,  and  the
part  of  the  body  affected  will  be  that  indicated  by
the  sign  it  occupies.  Thus  the  O  i^i  SI  square
to  (5  in  y  would  indicate  inflammatory  action  in
the  throat,  while  0  in  ^  in  square  to  h  in  Tl[
would  denote  obstructions  in  the  excretory  system,
appendicitis,  etc.

Children  born  when  a  malefic  planet  is  rising  and
close  to  the  Ascendant,  or  setting  in  opposition  there-
to, while  at  the  same  time  the  D  is  applying  to  an
ill  aspect  of  the  malefics,  seldom  live  beyond  infancy.
The  time  of  their  demise  in  such  case  can  usually
be  measured  by  the  number  of  degrees  between  the
])  and  its  complete  aspect  to  the  nearest  malefic,
accounting  one  month  for  each  degree.


CHAPTER  IV


THE  CHARACTER

Take  the  constitutional  groupings  of  the  signs
(Section  I,  chap,  iii)  and  see  whether  the  majority
of  the  bodies  are  in  fixed,  flexed  or  cardinal  signs.
Judge  of  the  mental  type  accordingly.

Next  observe  the  elemental  groupings  and  note
that  which  contains  the  majority  of  the  bodies;
and  from  this  }' ou  will  know  whether  the  character
will  be  expressed  on  spiritual,  mental,  psychic  or
physical  lines.  The  relative  groupings  will  there-
fore work  out  to  one  of  the  following  types  : —


^  A

□  =

V

□  V

^  V

□  +

These  sj^mbols  have  already  been  explained
(Section  I,  chap,  iii),  together  with  their  appHca-
tions,  so  that  there  is  no  need  to  repeat  them
here.

Thus,  if  the  majoritj^  of  the  planets  are  in  airy
44


THE  CHARACTER


45


signs,  and  next  in  watery  signs,  the  type  will  be  of
the  mental-psychic;  and  if  the  majority  are  also  in
acute  or  cardinal  signs,  you  will  get  the  pioneer,
with  the  initiative  and  progressive  tendency  working
along  intellectual  and  social  lines;  the  intellect
having,  however,  control  over  the  emotions.

The  individual  characteristics  are  contributed  by
those  planets  which  are  in  aspect  to  5  in  the  ])  ;
for  5  governs  the  rational  faculty  and  the  ])  the
natural,  as  Ptolemy  affirms.

Thus  the  manner  and  disposition,  the  expression
of  feeling,  and  the  domestic  and  social  traits  are
chiefly  shown  by  the  planetary  aspects  to  the  Moon ;
while  the  intellectual  and  business  faculties  are
shown  by  the  condition  of  Mercury.

Those  planets  which  at  birth  happen  to  be  on
or  near  the  Ascendant,  or  in  the  9th  or  3rd  Houses,
will  greatly  characterize  the  individual,  on  account
of  the  great  influence  these  parts  of  the  heavens
exert  upon  the  mind.

The  specific  characteristics  of  the  planets  and
luminaries  are  as  follows  : —

Neptune  :  subtlety,  planning  and  scheming.  A
tortuous  mind,  but  suave  manner.  Clever  at  plot
and  counterplot.  A  diplomat.  Disposed  to  the
drug,  nicotine  or  other  insidious  habit.  Fond  of
mysterious  and  detective  work.  Frequently  touched
with  a  mania  for  something.    A  possible  genius.

Uranus  :  inventive  faculty,  originality,  wayward-
ness, independence  of  spirit,  abruptness.

Saturn :   secretiveness,    caution,    reserve,  self-


46  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


control.,  temperance,  soberness;  philosophical,
thoughtful,  brooding,  melancholic,  faithful.  A  good
staunch  friend,  and  an  unrelenting  enemy.

Jupiter:  generous,  just,  sympathetic;  possessing
a  knowledge  of  human  nature;  joviality,  a  good
judgment,  fruitful  intellect ;  confidence  ;  sometimes
too  optimistic  and  even  bombastic.

Mars :  courageous,  daring,  energetic  ;  fond  of
exploits ;  enterprising ;  frank,  outspoken,  petulant,
zealous,  and  fond  of  freedom.

The  Sun :  proud,  dignified;  possessed  of  self-
confidence,  generosity  and  magnanimity;  disposed
to  the  grandiose  and  magnificent;  sometimes  vain
and  haughty,  yet  free  from  meanness,  and  loving
fair  play  and  transparency;  general^  honest  and
opposed  to  all  cliques  and  cabals.

Venus  :  gentle,  kind,  docile  and  persuasive ;  loving
music  and  the  fine  arts,  bright  and  joyous  scenes
jewels  and  flowers;  fond  of  pleasure,  and  frequently
self-indulgent.

Mercury :  active,  business-like  and  capable  in
affairs;  of  voluble  speech;  attentive  to  details
punctilious  and  easily  irritated;  loving  knowledge
for  its  own  sake;  accessible  and  communicative.

The  Moon :  changeful,  vacillating ;  versatile ;
imaginative  ;  romantic ;  loving  travel  and  change  of
scene;  sensitive  and  whimsical.

Judgment  as  to  character  is  first  made  by  the
grouping  of  the  signs  in  order  to  get  the  type  to  which
the  subject  belongs,  and  then  by  the  aspects  of  the
Moon  and  Mercury  to  determine  the  specific  traits


THE  CHARACTER


47


or  characteristics.  Planets  in  the  1st,  9th  and  3rd
Houses  have  a  very  marked  influence  on  the  expres-
sion of  character.

It  is  here  to  be  observed  that  the  same  indication
and  its  corresponding  trait  of  character  will  work
out  differently  in  persons  of  the  various  types.
Thus  c5  g  in  a  purely  emotional  type  is  liable
to  produce  dangerous  and  destructive  passions,
which  in  an  intellectual  type  would  find  expression
in  critical  diatribe  and  free-thought  ;  while  in  the
spiritual  type  it  would  beget  a  zealot;  and  in  the
material  type  a  violent  and  unscrupulous  firebrand,
a  maniac.

There  is  one  axiom  which  cannot  be  too  strongly
emphasized,  and  the  student  will  do  well  to  keep
it  always  before  him  :  The  planets  act  upon  us  only
in  terms  of  ourselves.

Mental  derangement  is  shown  by  the  affliction
of  ^,  or  ]),  in  IJj  J  f  or  TIJ^.  Acute  mania  is  shown
by  ^  d  (?  ^  >  epilepsy  by  ^  afflicted
by  .  But  in  such  case  there  will  be  no  remedial
aspect  from  the  benefic  planets  and  none  between
the  ]),  g  and  the  ascending  degree.


CHAPTER  V


ACCIDENTS

Disposition  to  accidents  is  shown  by  the  affliction
of  the  Ascendant  or  the  ])  by  the  adverse  aspects  of
the  violent  planets  h  and  $.  If  both  the  Sun
and  Moon  are  so  afflicted  and  the  afflicting  planet
be  elevated  above  the  luminaries,  there  is  liability
of  a  fatal  termination,  which  only  the  intervening
good  aspect  of      or  5  can  prevent.

Note  that  a  planet  intervenes  only  when  its  aspect
is  formed  before  that  of  the  afflicting  body.

MarswhQXi  so  afflicting  the  Ascendant  or  luminaries
disposes  to  accidents  by  fire;  also  cuts,  bleeding
wounds  and  abrasions.  In  human  signs  IJ>  — >
it  may  bring  operations  or  hurts  by  human  hands.
In  watery  signs,  scalds;  in  fiery  signs,  burns;  in
earthy  signs,  abrasions.

Saturn  thus  afflicting  denotes  falls,  fractures,
bruises,  blows  from  falling  objects,  etc.  In  earthy
signs  by  falls,  earthquakes,  explosions  of  mines,  etc.;
in  watery  signs,  drowning;  in  airy  signs,  by  falls
from  a  height ;  in  fiery  signs,  by  explosive  missiles,
etc.

Uranus    similarly    afflicting  denotes  ruptures,

48


ACCIDENTS


49


broken  bones,  compound  fractures,  accidents  by
machinery,  and  all  extraordinary  casualties.

Neptune  shows  danger  of  poisoning  by  drugs,
noxious  gases,  etc.

The  source  from  which  danger  emanates  is  to  be
seen  from  the  position  of  the  afflicting  planet,  as  if  $
be  in  the  6th  House,  the  hurt  will  come  from  physi-
cians (surgeons)  or  servants;  in  the  3rd,  on  short
journeys;  in  the  9th,  in  foreign  lands;  in  the  5th,
by  sport  or  play,  etc.  The  affliction  being  from  the
8th  House  is  especially  sinister,  as  it  threatens  a
fatality.

It  may  perhaps  be  well  to  note  in  these  days  of
extended  means  of  locomotion,  that  has  special
reference  to  hurts  proceeding  from  defective
machinery,  break-downs,  etc.  h  denotes  collisions,
$  firing  or  ignition,  and  when  these  planets  afflict
the  Ascendant  or  luminaries  from  aerial  signs,  the
danger  of  aviation  is  increased ;  in  watery  signs,
aquatics  should  be  avoided;  and  in  earthy  signs
motoring  will  add  to  the  peculiar  dangers  to  which
the  subject  will  be  liable.


CHAPTER  VI


THE  FORTUNES

The  luminaries  being  in  mutual  good  aspects,  and
the  D  otherwise  well  supported  in  the  horoscope  by
benefic  aspects,  shows  a  successful  career.  If  the
planets  are  chiefly  under  the  horizon  or  "  below  the
earth,"  as  it  is  otherwise  called,  then  success  comes
after  marriage,  or  late  in  life,  as  the  case  may  be.
But  if  above  the  horizon,  then  success  is  speedily
achieved.  Evil  planets  in  the  4th  House  near  the
lower  meridian  show  a  poor  termination  to  the  career,
even  after  a  life  of  much  success.  Saturn  in  the
Midheaven  will  bring  a  person  to  a  good  position
and  afterwards  denude  him  of  all  benefits.

Impediments  come  from  those  sources  indicated
by  the  Houses  occupied  by  the  malefic  planets  or
those  badly  aspecting  the  ]),  as  if  in  the  7th  by
marriage  or  contracts ;  in  the  8th  by  legacies ;  in  the
4th  by  mining,  farming  and  real  estate;  and  so  of
the  rest.  To  be  exceptionally  fortunate  the  planet
L\.  should  be  in  good  aspect  to  one  of  the  luminaries
and  angular,  especially  in  the  1st  or  10th.

A  benefic  planet  in  the  4th  House,  not  afflicted  by
adverse  aspect,  shows  a  successful  finish  to  the  career.

50


THE  FORTUNES


51


The  periods  of  good  and  ill  fortune  are  to  be
specifically  known  only  by  reference  to  the  "  Direc-
tional arcs  "  (see  "  Measure  of  Time  ").

Jupiter  in  good  aspect  to  Uranus  shows  legacies
and  windfalls,  while  the  same  in  good  aspect  to
Saturn  gives  promise  of  an  inheritance.  Planets  in
the  2nd  House  are  especially  to  be  regarded  in  this
matter,  as  that  House  has  reference  to  the  personal
possessions  and  generally  to  the  financial  status
of  the  subject.  The  luminaries  therein,  or  one  of
them,  well  aspected  by  9  »  ^^^-j  ^^^^  8^^^  financial
competence ;  as  also  i4-  or  9  therein,  free  from  afflic-
tion by  adverse  aspects.  The  malefics  therein,  or
the  luminaries  badly  aspected,  show  poverty  and
a  continual  struggle  for  a  competence.

Here  again  there  is  the  personal  equation  involved,
and  all  judgment  is  to  be  regulated  by  reference
to  the  sphere  of  life  into  which  the  subject  is  born,
his  responsibilities,  etc.  The  poverty  of  one  man
might  well  constitute  the  wealth  of  another  in
a  humbler  sphere  of  life.

The  planets  act  upon  us  in  terms  of  ourselves
and  in  proportion  to  the  measure  of  our  individual
powers.

Note. — In  a  female  horoscope  the  Q  will  replace
the  ]),  but  in  other  respects  the  rules  here  given  will
apply.


CHAPTER  VII


THE  POSITION

The  majority  of  the  planets  rising  between  the
4th  and  10th  eastward,  show  an  ambitious  and
aspiring  nature,  a  candidate  for  responsibiHty,  one
who  will  be  independent,  a  "  free  lance,"  and  restless
under  the  yoke  of  servitude.  Thus  placed,  the
planets  denote  effort  and  ambition  which  will  result
according  to  that  planet  w^hich  is  nearest  the  Mid-
heaven  and  on  the  oriental  side  of  it.

The  more  planets  there  are  in  angles,  the  1st,
10th,  7th  or  4th,  the  more  conspicuous  will  be  the
subject  in  his  sphere  of  life.  If  at  the  same  time  in
cardinal  signs,  he  will  be  an  epoch-making  man  or
remarkable  pioneer.

Planets  above  the  horizon  show  responsibility  and
some  degree  of  eminence.

Below  the  horizon  and  occidental,  there  is  less
prominence  in  the  life.

Benefic  planets  in  the  lOtli  House  (which  governs
the  credit,  honour  and  esteem)  will  contribute  their
aid  in  bringing  the  subject  to  a  position  of  influence
in  his  sphere  of  life.

The  end  of  life  is  shown  by  the  4th  House.  Malefic
52


THE  POSITION


53


planets  in  the  10th  bring  a  man  early  to  a  downfall,
but  if  in  the  4th  House  the  end  of  life  will  be  passed
in  tribulation  or  obscurity.

If  a  man  rises  by  patronage  there  will  be  indica-
tions of  it  in  the  11th  House;  and  the  horoscope  of
the  benefactor  will  show  marked  sympathy  with
that  of  his  beneficiary.

The  mundane  aspects  are  of  some  considerable
significance  in  this  matter,  for  planets  on  the  cusps
of  the  Houses  wiU  materially  affect  the  position  for
good,  inasmuch  as  they  are  then  in  -)f  or  A  to  the
Midheaven  or  Ascendant.  Perhaps  not  enough  has
been  made  of  these  mundane  aspects,  and  it  is  well
that  they  should  not  be  overlooked.  Placidus  de
Titus,  in  his  Primum  Mobile,  makes  them  the  basis
of  his  system  of  Prognostics.

Similarly  it  has  been  observed  that  when  planets
are  on  the  cusps  of  the  Lunar  Mansions,  the  person
then  born  rises  to  eminence  (Section  I,  chap.  iii.).

The  majority  of  planets  in  or  near  any  such
degrees,  viz.  the  1st,  13th  and  25th  of  the  cardinal
signs,  the  9th  and  22nd  of  the  fixed  signs,  or  the
4th  and  17th  of  the  common  signs,  denotes  one
born  to  distinction.  King  George  V  has  5  planets,
as  well  as  the  Midheaven  and  Ascendant,  close  to
such  degrees.


CHAPTER  VIIT


THE  OCCUPATION

This  is  to  be  judged  from  the  6th  House  and  the
planets  therein,  together  with  the  sign  on  its  cusp.

The  signs  have  affinity  with  those  things  ruled
by  the  Houses  to  which  they  correspond,  as  n  to
the  3rd  House,  ^  to  the  5th,  etc.

The  planets  have  their  own  significations  : —

Saturn  has  relation  to  minerals  and  heavy  bodies,
lead,  etc.

Jupiter  to  legal  affairs,  ecclesiastical  matters.
Mars  to  fire  and  iron,  fighting,  the  military  pro-
fession.

The  Sun  to  gold ;  civic  dignitaries,  the  Crown  and
its  officers,  ambassadors,  etc.

Venus  to  art,  music  and  matters  of  adornment.

Mercury  to  literature,  mercantile  pursuits  and
affairs  of  traffic.

The  Moon  to  public  employment,  catering,  retail
business,  etc.

Uranus  to  electrical  and  scientific  pursuits,  and
also  to  affairs  of  propaganda ;  the  civil  service  and
positions  of  civic  authority.

Neptune  to  psychological  and  mysterious  pursuits,
also  travelling  and  seafaring.

54


THE  OCCUPATION


55


These  are,  of  course,  but  loose  and  general  signifi-
cations. The  position  of  the  majority  of  the  planets
will  indicate  whether  the  life-work  should  be  along
spiritual,  mental,  social  or  mercantile  lines,  and
the  sign  on  the  6th  House,  the  position  of  its  ruler
and  the  nature  of  any  planet  in  the  6th  House,  will
guide  to  a  specific  occupation.

Fixed  signs  show  inventors  and  producers,
manufacturers.

Flexed  signs  purveyors  and  factors,  importers,
travellers.

Cardinal  signs  retailers,  dispensers,  organizers
and  directors,  managers  and  those  in  prominent
positions.

Some  illustrations  of  known  cases  may  serve  to
illustrate  the  manner  of  interpretation  : —

1.  ])  in      in  the  6th  House — a  dairy  company
manager.

2.  ^  in       on  6th  House — an  accountant  in  a
large  tea  importer's.

3.  U  on  6th  and  g  in  }{ — a  writer  on  occult

philosophy.

4.  l\.  in  y  in  the  6th — an  estate  agent.

5.  £ir,  in  the  6th,  with  9  in  y  — a  stockbroker.

6.  f  on  the  6th  and  4  in  ::::: — a  company
promoter.

7.  n  on  6th  and  g  in  — an  exploration
promoter.

8.  ]/)>  on  the  6th,  with  }^  in  y  — a  coal  merchant.

9.  9  in  ^  in  the  6th — an  artist.


56  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Judgment  on  the  choice  of  occupation  must  of
necessity  be  guided  by  a  number  of  considerations,
questions  of  aptitude,  education,  training,  sex,  etc.,
being  all  largely  involved.

Taking  all  the  planets  in  all  the  signs  we  have
but  108  possible  significations,  while  there  are
obviously  more  than  that  number  of  distinct  occupa-
tions. It  must  therefore  suffice  if  the  astrologer
can  give  some  hint  of  the  line  along  which  the
occupation  may  be  found.

Thus  fiery  signs  may  denote  spiritual  things
equally  with  those  in  which  the  element  is  the  chief
agent.

Airy  signs  all  mental  occupations  from  the  clerk
to  the  professor  of  philosophy,  as  well  as  all  those
trades  and  occupations  in  which  the  pneumatic  or
air  force  is  employed,  even  the  lately  developed
pursuit  of  aviation  and  aeronautics  generally.

Watery  signs  may  denote  the  social  or  emotional
side  of  business,  and  all  trades  in  which  the  watery
element  is  chiefly  employed,  as  in  navigation,  laundry
work,  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  beverages,  paint-
ing, etc.

Earthy  signs  may  denote  the  manual  and  practical
occupations,  equally  with  those  in  which  the  products
of  the  earth,  mining,  agriculture,  estate  development
and  similar  occupations  are  concerned.


CHAPTER  IX


MARRIAGE

On  this  most  important  of  all  questions  depend
many  very  vital  issues.  Not  only  is  the  moral  and
spiritual  welfare  of  the  contracting  parties  involved,
but  that  also  of  successive  generations.

It  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  treatise  to  con-
sider questions  of  expediency  or  fitness,  or  the  deeper
psychological  questions  of  fascination,  attraction
and  destiny.

Suffice  it  to  say  that  all  horoscopes  present  them-
selves to  the  expert  as  either  marriageable  or
misogynous.

The  indications  of  marriage  are  as  follows  : —
In  a  male  horoscope  the  Moon  (in  a  female  the
Sun)  being  oriental,  i.e.  in  the  S.E.  or  N.W.  quadrant,
and  increasing  in  distance  from  the  other  luminary,
shows  an  early  marriage.  Oriental  and  decreasing,
or  occidental  and  increasing,  marriage  at  a  more
mature  age.

But  if  occidental  and  decreasing  in  distance  from
the  other  luminary,  marriage  will  be  deferred  to  a
period  past  the  prime  of  life.

Venus  at  a  male  nativity  (Mars  at  that  of  a  female)
57


58  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

being  afflicted  by  Saturn  shows  disappointed  affec-'
tions  in  early  attachments;  by  Uranus,  romantic
attachment  followed  by  enforced  breach,  or
estrangement  and  rupture  of  relationship  by
exceptional  incidents ;  by  Mars  (Venus  in  a  female
case),  impulsive  attachments  of  a  passionate  and
dangerous  order  ;  by  Neptune,  deceptions  and  seduc-
tions, impositions  and  fraudulent  representations.

The  luminaries  being  in  square  or  opposition  to
one  another,  and  Venus  afflicted,  there  will  be  no
marriage.

The  5th  House  governs  all  considerations  of  love
affairs;  the  7th  House  those  of  marriage.

Saturn  brings  about  loss  of  the  partner  by  death,
or  it  militates  against  happiness  in  marriage  by
defects  of  nature,  by  jealousy,  coldness  and  suspicion.

Uranus  produces  rupture  of  the  marriage  tie,
divorce  or  separation,  and,  by  marked  eccentricity
of  the  partner,  tends  to  disturb  the  relationship.

Mars  shows  licence,  freedom,  frequent  quarrels
and  lack  of  forbearance  and  self-control.  It  fre-
quently leads  to  violence  and  fatality.

Neptune  deception  and  insidious  hurt.  The
partner  is  afflicted  mentally  or  has  unnatural  and
perverted  appetites  and  desires.  The  partner  may
have  a  legal  tie  already,  and  generally  has  a  history.

In  female  horoscopes  we  substitute  the  0  for  the
]),  and  Mars  for  Venus  ;  but  in  other  respects
judgment  is  made  for  both  sexes  alike.

Happiness  in  marriage  is  shown  by  the  0  being
•K-  or  A  D;  and  by  $  or  4,  well  aspected,  being


MARRIAGE


59


in  the  7th  House.  Also  if  the  planet  to  which  the
])  (male)  or  O  (female)  first  forms  an  aspect
(■)fj  A>  c?  ^^6)  softer  birth,  be  a  benefic  and
well-aspected,  or  any  planet  in  good  aspect  to  the
benefics,  there  will  be  harmony  in  marriage.

Unfortunate  and  unhappy  unions  take  place  when
the  D  (or  0  in  the  case  of  a  woman)  applies  by
evil  aspect  to  a  malefic  planet,  and  the  7th  House
is  occupied  by  a  malefic  or  a  planet  badly  aspected.

In  a  female  horoscope,  the  condition  after  marriage
may  be  fairly  predicted  by  reversing  the  horoscope
and  looking  at  it  from  the  point  of  view  that  the
Descendant  is  then  the  Ascendant  and  the  Mid-
heaven  the  Nadir.

The  marriage  partner  is  described  by  the  rules
of  the  7th  House  and  the  sign  it  occupies,  or  if  it  be
retrograde,  by  its  dispositor.

[N.B. — A  planet  is  said  to  dispose  of  another
when  the  latter  is  in  a  sign  it  rules.  Thus  ^  in
}{  is  disposed  of  hj  since  Jupiter  is  the  ruler
of  >{.]

A  man  is  most  frequently  attracted  to  a  woman
whose  sun  at  birth  occupies  the  place  of  Mars  in  his
horoscope ;  and  always  it  will  be  found  that  a  strong
attachment  is  the  result  of  this  or  a  similar  coinci-
dence of  the  planets  in  horoscopes  of  the  parties
involved.


CHAPTER  X


PROGENY  ^

The  5th  House  and  the  Uth  (being  the  5th  from
the  7th),  the  4th  House  and  the  10th,  are  regarded
in  this  matter.  The  Moon  governs  the  maternal
capacity,  and  the  4th  and  5th  Houses  are  those
which  give  succession.

In  a  male  horoscope  the  5th,  7th,  9th,  11th  repre-
sent the  succession  on  the  male  side;  the  4th,  6th,
8th,  10th  on  the  female  side.

In  a  female  horoscope  the  5th,  7th,  etc.,  denote
daughters,  and  the  4th,  6th,  etc.,  sons.

These  points  being  duly  noted,  see  if  the  4th,  5th,
10th  and  11th  are  free  from  malefic  planets.  If  so,
and  the  Moon  is  in  a  prolific  sign  I'l,  fljj,  then  there
will  be  progeny.  But  if  the  malefics  occupy  any  of
these  Houses  there  will  be  some  loss  of  progeny.

A  benefic,  or  the  ])  well  aspected  in  a  fruitful
sign  25,  'n[,  }{  and  in  the  5th  House,  shows  a  large
family.

Lack  of  progeny  is  shown  by  Saturn,  Uranus  or
Mars  in  the  5th  House  in  a  sterile  sign  ^,  l/)o);
or  the  ])  so  placed  in  any  House  and  afflicted  by
Saturn;  and  usually  Saturn  denies  succession  along

60


PROGENY


61


those  lines  indicated  by  its  House,  according  to  the
sex  of  the  horoscope.

It  has  been  argued  that  when  children  are  born  at
the  same  time,  the  potential  of  the  horoscopes  of
the  respective  parents  operates  for  a  difference  of
fortune.  Thus,  if  two  women  give  birth  to  progeny
at  the  same  time,  and  one  parent  has  %  in  the  5th
House,  while  the  other  parent  has  h  there  at  birth,
the  result  may  well  be  that  one  child  will  be  properly
developed  and  nourished,  while  the  other,  under  the
maternal  tradition  of  an  evil  Saturn,  will  be  puny
and  of  weak  vitality.  But  this  is  an  argument
which  by  the  premises  is  not,  in  fact,  in  accord  with
nature,  for  when  this  diversity  of  fortune  as  regards
progeny  is  shown  in  the  horoscopes  of  different
parents,  it  will  be  found  that  the  progeny  are  born
at  times  which  develop  influences  in  accord  with
the  potential  of  the  parental  horoscopes.

Twins  are  generated  by  those  in  whose  horoscopes
the  ])  is  in  a  double-bodied  sign  H,  or  a

planet  is  in  such  a  sign  in  the  5th  House  at  birth.

The  phenomenon  of  twin  births  is  a  complete
argument  for  the  truth  of  Astrology.  We  have  the
cases  of  the  Cloughs  of  Pudsey,  the  Webbs  who
played  the  two  Dromios  in  the  Comedy  of  Errors;
the  famous  Morrell  twins,  and  many  others  whose
lives  were  exactly  parallel  from  birth  onwards.
The  case  of  John  Hemming  the  ironmonger's  son,
who  was  born  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same
parish  of  St.  Martins-le-Fields  as  King  George  III,
proves  that  planetary  influence  is  more  significant


62  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


than  heredity.  For  John  Hemming 's  father  died,
and  he  succeeded  to  the  business  at  the  same  time
that  George  II  died  and  George  III  came  to  the
throne.  They  were  both  similarly  afflicted  by  tem-
porary loss  of  mental  faculty,  they  had  the  same
number  of  children,  and  they  died  on  the  same  day
and  nearly  at  the  same  hour.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  there  are  two  kinds  of
twins  :  monovates  and  biovates.    Monovates  ar
born  from  a  double  fertilization  within  the  same
amnion,  while  biovates  are  born  from  two  distinc
ova.    In  the  latter  case  we  may  look  for  a  grea
diversity  of  faculty  and  development.

The  fact  that  two  children  born  at  different  tim
of  the  same  parents,  brought  up  under  exactl
similar  conditions,  and  fed  at  the  same  board
develop  along  widely  divergent  lines,  goes  to  sho
that  heredity  may  count  for  something,  but  tha
planetary  influence  counts  for  a  great  deal  more.


CHAPTER  XI


TRAVELLING

The  signs  of  travelling  are  as  follows  : —

The  majority  of  the  planets  in  cardinal  and  com-
mon signs  (otherwise  called  movable  and  flexed),
or,  alternatively,  many  planets  in  angles  and  cadent
Houses,  show  travelling.

The  circumstance  of  travelling  is  judged  from  the
3rd  House  for  short  (inland)  journeys,  and  from  the
9th  House  for  voyages  and  long  journeys.

If  the  malefic  planets  are  in  these  Houses,  judge
evils  will  befall  of  the  nature  of  the  planet,  as  Saturn
delays,  impediments,  privations  ;  Mars  hurts  and
disputes,  fighting,  fires,  etc;  Uranus  Sb  breakdown,
sudden  calamities,  mechanical  defects,  etc ;  Neptune
ambushes,  plots,  betrayals,  frauds,  treacheries.

When  malefic  planets  occupy  these  Houses,  it  is
not  good  for  the  subject  to  travel.

By  regarding  the  threatening  planet  and  the
nature  of  the  sign  it  is  in  (fire,  air,  water,  earth),  you
may  predict  the  exact  nature  of  the  danger.  But
if  the  benefic  planets  are  in  the  9th  House,  benefits
will  arise  from  foreign  travel.

63


64         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Where  there  are  no  planets  so  placed,  regard  the
nature  of  the  rulers  of  the  signs  on  their  cusps,  the
aspects  they  receive,  and  judge  as  if  that  ruler  were
actually  in  the  House  itself.  Thus  if  no  planet  is
in  the  9th,  and  the  sign  on  the  cusp  is  Capricorn,
then  look  to  Saturn's  position  and  aspects.  If  in
the  8th  House  and  afflicted,  there  is  danger  of  death;
in  the  2nd,  well  aspected,  gain  will  follow  a  long  resi-
dence abroad;  and  so  of  the  rest.

Observe  that  Saturn  always  demands  the  "  time  "
consideration.  He  does  nothing  quickly,  but  he
rewards  patience.  Uranus,  on  the  other  hand,  acts
without  warning  either  in  rewarding  or  despoiling.
Mars  always  exacts  a  tussle,  and  you  must  work
strenuously  and  fight  hard  for  his  best  gifts.  Neptune
favours  a  scheme  or  plot,  and  dearly  loves  the
diplomat.

These  interpretations  may  be  read  into  other
sections  of  the  book  of  life.  They  do  not  specifically
or  solely  apply  to  travelling.

Planets  well  aspected,  especially  benefic  planets
in  the  1st,  4th  or  10th  Houses,  promise  success  in  the
land  of  one's  birth.  The  allurements  of  foreign
travelling  should  in  such  case  be  ignored.  This
matter  has  much  bearing  upon  the  question  of
emigration.


CHAPTER  XII


FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES

The  Moon  or  Mercury  well  aspected  will  give
many  friends;  benefic  planets  in  the  11th  House,
or  the  ruler  of  the  11th  House  well  aspected,  the
same.  The  O  in  good  aspect  to  the  D  always  gives
many  favours  and  general  success  through  friends.

The  case  is  quite  otherwise  if  you  find  these  signifi-
cators  badly  aspected  or  malefic  planets  in  the  11th
House.  Judge  of  the  effects  by  the  nature  of  the
planets  involved,  as  well  as  their  aspects.

The  7th  House  shows  rivals  and  open  enemies,
opponents  in  business,  etc.;  but  the  12th  House
shows  secret  enemies.

Malefic  planets  in  the  angles  of  the  horoscope
show  many  contentions  and  fatal  disputes.  Benches
there  denote  abundant  success  through  the  support
of  adherents  and  friends.

Sympathy  and  Antipathy
It  will  be  found  that  persons  whose  horoscopes
are  in  disagreement  will  inevitably  quarrel  or  oppose
one  another's  interests ;  while  those  whose  horoscopes
are  in  agreement  will  mutually  assist  one  another
and  evince  consistent  good-will.

05  F


66  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Some  of  these  relationships  may  be  localized  by
reference  to  the  positions  of  the  benefic  and  malefic
planets  in  a  horoscope.  Thus  if  ^  be  in  T  10°,  it
will  follow  that  any  person  born  on  or  near  the  1st
of  April  in  any  year  will  have  the  ©  Sun  at  his  or
her  birth  in  the  same  place  as  this  Saturn,  and  this
is  quite  sufficient  cause  for  him  whose  Saturn  it  is
to  avoid  all  persons  born  on  the  1st  of  April.

The  O  in  one  horoscope  on  or  in  good  aspect  to
the  D  in  another,  will  warrant  a  close  friendship.

When  $  in  one  horoscope  is  on  $  in  another,  and
they  are  of  opposite  sexes,  a  dangerous  passion  may
be  developed.

Nothing,  perhaps,  in  the  whole  system  of  astrology
can  answer  more  clearly  and  satisfactorily  to  the
test  of  experiment  than  this  matter  of  sympathy
and  antipathy  as  shown  by  the  relative  positions  in
two  horoscopes.  Did  space  permit,  it  would  be
possible  to  displaj^  the  foundations  of  every  great
feud  or  war  which  has  set  man  against  man  and
involved  the  fate  of  whole  empires  and  the  lives  of
thousands  of  men.  It  is  significant  that  everything
is  to  be  traced  back  to  the  relative  positions  of
the  planets  in  the  horoscopes  of  the  rival  kings
or  rulers.


CHAPTER  XIII


THE  KIND  OF  DEATH

The  positions  of  the  malefic  planets  must  be
considered,  especially  regarding  such  as  may  be  in
the  8th  or  4th  Houses,  or  those  which  may  afflict
the  O  or  ])  when  in  these  Houses.  The  nature  of
the  sign  occupied  by  the  afflicting  planet,  together
with  that  of  the  planet  itself,  will  determine  the
cause  of  death  (see  "  Constitution,"  Section  III,
chap.  ii.).

Violent  deaths  are  threatened  when  both  the
O  and  ])  are  separately  afflicted  by  a  malefic
i^>^)  ^  or  one  of  the  luminaries  has  a  double
affliction  by  the  conjunction  or  evil  aspect  of  the
malefics.

Saturn  thus  afflicting  brings  faUs,  crushing,  suffo-
cation.

Uranus  electrocution,  lightning-stroke,  sunstroke,
accidents  by  machinery,  and  suicide.

Mars  wounds  by  steel  and  iron,  burning,  ex-
plosions ;  scalding  by  virulent  acids ;  surgical
operation,  etc.

Neptune  ambushes  and  traps;  insidious  poisoning;
obsession,  etc.

.67  F3


68  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


As  regards  the  nature  of  the  signs  :  Fiery  signs
have  relation  to  electrical,  heat  and  other  pheno-
mena. Airy  signs  are  related  to  human  agency,
atmospheric  phenomena,  gaseous  effects.  Watery
signs  have  relation  to  the  passional  phases  of  human
life,  and  to  the  watery  element,  as  well  as  to  mfiam-
mable  oils,  petrol,  etc.  Earthy  signs  have  relation
to  mining  disasters,  matters  relating  to  the  earth
and  its  products,  coal  and  other  minerals,  earth-'
quakes  and  seismic  effects  generally.

A  violent  death  is  not  to  be  predicted  when,  the
O  or  J)  being  thus  afflicted  b}^  the  malefics,  there  is
an  interposing  ray  from  one  of  the  benefic  planets
i-l-  or  for  then  there  will  be  intervention  and
succour.  An  interposing  ray  proceeds  from  any
planet  which  throws  a  benefic  aspect  to  the  luminary
so  that  it  falls  between  the  malefic  aspect  and  the
luminary.  This  is  called  "  abscission  "  by  the  old
authors.  It  is  too  often  overlooked  by  modern
exponents.


SECTION  IV


THE  MEASURE  OF  TIME
CHAPTER  I

ON  DIRECTIONS

A  VARIETY  of  methods  have  been  employed  by
astrologers  at  different  periods  and  in  various
countries  to  ascertain  the  precise  time  at  which  the
portents  of  the  horoscope  will  find  fulfilment.

The  Hindus  divide  the  whole  fife  into  periods
called  dashas,  and  these  are  again  divided  into  huk-
this,  and  these  again  into  antarams;  so  that  a  very
close  calculation  may  be  made  by  this  means.  The
method,  however,  is  based  upon  the  Sayana  system
of  astronomy,  which  reckons  from  the  fixed  star
Revati  (?  Fomalhaut)  and  ignores  the  precession  of
the  equinoxes.  The  system  is  perfectly  consistent,
but  it  cannot  readily  be  applied  to  the  European
zodiac;  and  it  may  be  omitted  from  the  exposition
without  hurt  to  its  integrit3^  The  student  is  referred
to  the  work  of  Parashara  known  as  Pardshara
Hora  for  full  instruction  as  to  the  methods  of  this
system,  and  some  account  of  it  will  be  found  in
my  Manual  of  Astrology,

The  Chaldeans — and  after  them  the  Arabians —
69


70  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


took  account  of  the  progress  of  the  planets  and  the
luminaries  after  birth,  accounting  each  day  after
birth  as  a  year  of  life ;  and  from  the  aspects  formed
between  the  celestial  bodies  by  their  progress  among
themselves  and  as  regards  their  positions  at  the
birth,  they  judged  of  the  course  of  events.  This
system  is  the  one  most  in  vogue  among  astrologers
to-day,  and,  rightly  regarded,  it  is  undoubtedly  a
ready  means  to  a  correct  forecast  of  the  time  and
nature  of  events.

Claudius  Ptolemy  took  account  chiefly  of  the
rising  and  culmination  of  the  bodies  by  the  rotation
of  the  earth  on  its  axis,  whereby  the  bodies  are
carried  round  the  earth  forming  aspects  to  the
radical  positions.  The  measure  of  time  used  by  him
was  that  of  Right  Ascension,  accounting  4  mins.  or
1  degree  to  each  year  of  life.

The  analogy  between  this  system  and  that  of  the
Arabians  is  that  the  Sun's  progress  in  the  zodiac
after  birth  is  at  the  approximate  rate  of  1  degree
per  day,  which  is  accounted  as  1  year  of  life,  while
1  degree  of  Right  Ascension  is  also  equal  to  1  year
of  life.

Placidus  confirmed  this  system  and  added  the
mundane  aspects,  bringing  the  bodies  to  the  cusps
of  the  Houses  to  form  "  directions  "  to  the  Ascendant
and  Midheaven,  and  to  proportionate  distances
from  the  meridian  or  horizon  to  form  mundane
aspects  to  other  bodies  not  at  birth  upon  the  cusps.
In  this  system  one-third  of  the  semi-arc  of  a  planet
was  accounted  equal  to  one  House,  and  half  the


THE  MEASURE  OF  TIME  71


pemi-arc  was  equal  to  an  aspect  of  45°,  the  semi-
square.

The  method  I  have  advocated  for  many  years
and  have  consistently  used  in  practice  is  as  follows  : —

For  each  year  of  life  add  one  day  to  that  of  birth
and  set  the  figure  for  the  hour  and  place  of  birth.
This  will  give  the  progressed  Midheaven,  the  pro-
gressed Ascendant^  and  the  progressed  place  of
the  Sun.  The  aspects  formed  by  these  to  the
planets  at  birth  and  in  the  progress  will  constitute
Primary  Directions,  and  the  aspects  formed  by  the
progressed  planets  to  the  Midheaven,  Ascendant,
Sun  and  Moon  in  the  Radix  will  also  be  included  in
this  category.

This  system  has  the  advantage  of  calculating  the
Arcs  of  Direction  and  equating  them  by  the  Sun's
true  motion  at  the  same  time.  If  it  be  contended
that  the  arcs  thus  obtained  are  not  as  exact  as  those
obtained  by  spherical  trigonometry^,  inasmuch  as
they  only  measure  to  the  nearest  year  of  fulfilment,
I  would  ask  how  many  Arcs  calculated  by  the  latter
method  find  fulfilment  at  the  fractional  part  of  the
year  represented  by  the  minutes  of  a  degree  ?
"  Zadkiel  "  (Commander  Morrison,  R.N.)  frankly
admitted  that  the  influence  of  an  Arc  of  Direction
extended  over  a  considerable  period  and  that  it  was.
brought  into  effect  by  the  concurrence  of  Secondary
or  Lunar  Directions,  transits  and  eclipses.

Hence  the  experiences  of  "  Zadkiel  "  and  myself  are
entirely  in  accord,  and  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying
that  all  the  periodic  changes  in  life  may  be  accurately


72  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


foretold  by  reference  to  the  Primary  Arcs  formed  by
the  diurnal  progress  of  the  planets ;  while  the  precise
time  of  the  crises  and  the  specific  nature  of  events
may  be  known  by  reference  to  the  radical  import
of  the  planets  involved,  and  to  the  aspects  formed
by  the  Moon  in  its  progress.

The  Primary  Directions,  therefore,  will  com-
prise : —

1.  Aspects  formed  by  the  progressed  Midheaven

to  the  radical  and  progressed  places  of  the
planets.

2.  Similar   aspects  formed  by   the  progressed

Ascendant.

3.  Similar  aspects  formed  by  the  progressed  Sun.

4.  Aspects  formed  by  the  progressed  planets  to

the  Midheaven,  Ascendant,  Sun  and  Moon  in
the  Radix.

It  is  thus  possible  at  any  time  to  determine  the
influences  operating  in  a  horoscope.  Let  us  take
those  of  King  George  V  in  the  year  1911.


CHAPTER  II


EXAMPLE  OF  DIRECTIONS

Primary  Directions  in  Horoscope,  3rd  June,  1865
at  1.18  a.m.,  London.

Arc  for  1911  =  46  days,  or  July  19,  1865.

h.  m,  s.

Midheaven,  at  noon  18-7-'65         . .      7  49  10
Time  since  noon       . .        . .        . .     13  18  0

Equation  for  13  h.  18  m.  at  10"      . .  2  12


Midheaven  progressed        . .        . .    21    9  22

This  gives  the  Midheaven  in  15°  and  reference  to
the  Tables  of  the  Houses  for  London  shows  the
Ascendant  then  to  be  in  n  21°.  The  Sun's  progressed
position  is  2Z  27°.

We  thus  have  the  following  positions  : —

Midheaveri  P.  ^ts  15"  —ab  ^  Q  B.  —  §  5  F  —  ad

□  5  R,  ac^Q  DR.
Ascendant  P.  U  21°— ah  l  t—ad  A  f;)  R,  ^  ?  R,  (?  4  R.
Bun  P.  es  27°— ^  O  □  b

Sun  R.  n  12^— ad  ?  P,  a6  ^  ^  P.

[Note. — Progressed  p  sitions  are  marked  P,  and
Radical  positions  R.]

73


74  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


It  will  be  seen,  then,  that  the  Midheaven  is  depart-
ing from  a  good  aspect  of  the  1^1 1  will
be  exactly  in  opposition  to  5

Observe  that  ^  at  birth  was  on  the  cusp  of  the
2nd  House,  and  has  a  distinctly  financial  bearing
on  the  destiny.  Here  it  opposes  the  Midheaven.
Hence  there  will  be  disquieting  developments  in
financial  circles,  and  the  fiscal  position  will  be  such
as  to  create  anxiety  throughout  the  country.
Taurus^  wherein  Mercury  was  at  birth,  rules  Ireland,
and  Leo,  where  the  planet  is  situate  in  the  progress,
rules  Australia.  We  may  thus  expect  many  govern-
mental anxieties  to  arise  from  these  parts  of  the
King's  dominions.

The  Ascendant  is  approaching  the  good  aspect
of  Saturn,  which  will  contribute  to  the  advantage
of  the  Queen  at  a  near  date.  The  semi-square
of  Venus  about  the  same  time — namely,  three  years
hence — will  bring  a  bereavement ;  while  the  opposi-
tion of  Jupiter  a  year  later  will  produce  losses  through
the  interference  of  a  foreign  Power  and  troubles
in  Spain  (ruled  by  Sagittarius).

The  Sun  is  in  semi-square  aspect  to  its  own  place,
which  disposes  to  discord  in  the  capital  and  threatens
some  unpleasant  incidents  in  the  course  of  short
journeys.  There  may  also  be  dissensions  among
the  King's  relatives.  But  the  approach  of  Venus
to  the  radical  place  of  the  Sun  will  largely  operate
to  forfend  against  all  evils  of  health  or  estate,  and
will  in  due  course  contribute  to  the  King's  revenue.

The  Primary  Directions  are  therefore  mainly


EXAMPLE  OF  DIRECTIONS  75

beneficent.  It  will  be  seen  that  King  Edward  VII  died
under  the  influence  of  ©□!;),  and  Ascendant  l  $  ,
and  a  transit  of  Uranus  over  the  opposition  of  Sun  P,
following  the  lunar  eclipse  of  the  4th  June,  1909,  in
opposition  to  the  Q  ^  in  ^his  horoscope.

A  glance  at  the  Tables  of  Houses  will  reveal  the
fact  that  the  Ascendant  is  approaching  17  29°,  in
which  degree  the  malefic  planet  M  is  situate  at  birth ;
while  a  cursory  view  of  the  Ephemeris  for  1865  shows
the  Sun  at  the  same  time  close  to  the  place  of  Mars
in  the  horoscope  of  birth,  and  as  both  ^  and  h
will  then  be  in  the  early  degrees  of  Leo  in  transit
over  O  P  it  may  be  inferred  with  some  certainty
that  the  health  and  fortunes  of  the  King  will  then
be  jeopardized.  This  calculation  brings  out  the
year  1918  as  critical.  The  Midheaven  of  the  horo-
scope will  then  be  in  the  23rd  degree  of  Aquarius
where  1^1  is  in  transit,  the  Ascendant  in  Gemini  29^
being  in  the  longitude  held  by  ^  at  the  King's
birth.


CHAPTER  HI


SECONDABY  DIRECTIONS

It  has  been  seen  that  the  Primary  Directions
give  the  general  tone  of  the  life  at  any  specified  period
without  definition  of  time  or  circumstance.  The
features  are  lacking ;  we  have  only  the  general  out-
line. It  is  to  the  Lunar  Directions,  the  aspects
formed  month  by  month  in  the  Moon's  progress
after  birth,  that  we  must  look  for  the  details — or  at
least  some  considerable  part  of  them.

The  method  emploj-ed  in  calculating  the  Second-
ary or  Lunar  arcs  is  as  follows  : —

Take  the  age  of  the  subject  at  the  commencement
of  any  secular  year,  in  years,  months  and  days.
Call  the  3^ears  days^  multiply  the  months  by  2  and
call  them  hours  ^  and  the  days  by  4  and  call  them
minutes.    Thus  : —

yrs.    mths.  daj^s
1911       1         1  =  1st  Jan.,  1911.
1865  6         3  =  3rd  June,  1865.

45       6       28  =  45v.  6m.  28d.
 2  4

13h.    52  m.
Add  birth  time  1       18  a.m.

115       10  a.m.

To  convert  —  12  0

3       10  p.m.

^  When  this  amount  exceeds  24  hours,  subtract  24  hours  and
add  one  day  to  the  first  column.


SECO^DAEY  DIRECTIONS  77


We  therefore  add  45  days  to  the  date  of  birth,
and  take  the  Moon's  place  at  3.10  p.m.  on  that  day.

From  3rd  to  end  of  June  1865  =  27  days,  and
18  more  will  make  45  days  =  18th  July.

The  ])'s  longitude  on  this  day  at  3.10  p.m.  =  U  4  14'.

The  D's  diurnal  motion  at  this  time  is  13°  45'
which  we  divide  by  12  =  1°  9'  nearly,  since  1  day  =
1  year,  and  2  hours  =  1  month.  The  ])'s  directional
motion  is  therefore  1°  9'.

We  can  now  prepare  a  table  for  the  whole  year,
as  follows,  filling  in  the  ])'s  aspects  to  the  radical
and  progressed  places  of  the  planets,  thus  : —


1911.

Jan.

4"

11  14'

Feb.

5

23^  ^R^/ 5

March

6

32

April

7

41

May

8

50  Q  \  n:£h;l—[^

June

9

59  A  '^^RV/1— (5  ?Pn/i2

July

11

8_OP25,,3

Aug.

12

17(5©  Rn/3

Sept.

13

26^^PSl/4

Oct.

14

35

Nov.

15

44

Dec.

16

53

The  positions  of  the  planets  are  marked  R  (radical)
and  P  (progressive),  together  with  the  signs  they  are
in  and  the  House  they  occupy  in  the  Radix  or  Pro-
gress, as  the  case  may  be.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  D  completes  its


78  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


course  and  comes  again  to  its  own  place  at  the
nativity  after  27  days,  when  it  begins  again  to  form
the  same  series  of  aspects  to  the  radical  places  of  the
planets,  as  in  the  preceding  revolution.  But  the
solar  aspects  will  have  changed  entirely  and  do  not
repeat  themselves  for  365  years.  Meanwhile  the
Progress  has  carried  the  planets  into  different  signs,
and  in  some  cases  into  different  Houses  also;  giving
them  new  meanings  and  significations  and  bringing
them  into  play  under  entirely  different  relative
conditions.

The  interpretation  of  the  above  directions  must
have  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  planet,  the  House
and  the  sign  it  is  in.    Thus  : —

February  will  be  likely  to  develop  martial  stimulus ;
increase  of  military  strength;  success  in  arms  if
engaged  at  this  time;  successful  projects  and  enter-
prises; colonial  expansion  and  development ;  military
honours  may  be  given  to  a  Prince  of  the  Royal
House.

May  brings  some  danger  of  indisposition  to  the
Queen.  At  this  time  treaties  are  rescinded  or
impeded.

June  brings  naval  honours,  development  of  the
marine  interests;  favourable  interventions;  some
pageants,  festivities  or  celebrations;  a  prosperous
and  enjoyable  period;  felicitations  and  pleasures.

July  is  unfortunate  for  journeys  by  short  sea
passage.  The  health  of  His  Majesty  may  show
signs  of  reaction,  inducing  a  feverish  habit  and
some  passmg  derangement  of  the  digestive  organs.


SECONDARY  DIRECTIONS  79


August  gives  opportunity  for  beneficial  changes
and  journeys,  honours,  eclat,  conventions,  etc.,  in
the  capital.

September  gives  activity,  change  of  venue,  success-
ful journeys,  beneficial  administration  of  property.

It  is  particularly  to  be  noted  that  the  Lunar
Directions  are  subsidiary  to  the  Primary  Directions
in  force,  and  can  only  operate  to  produce  marked
effects  when  in  agreement.  Wlien  contrary  to  the
Primaries  they  may  pass  without  appreciable  varia-
tion of  the  fortunes.  The  tendency  indicated  by
the  Lunar  Directions  will,  however,  be  sufficientl}^  in
evidence  to  warrant  attention,  even  when  at  variance
with  the  Primaries.  A  good  period  under  Primary
influences  cannot,  however,  be  negatived  by  Second-
aries, but  only  temporarily  interrupted  during  the
sway  of  the  adverse  Lunar  configuration.

Thus  in  the  Royal  Horoscope  we  find  ^  coming
to  the  Sun's  radical  place,  and  in  June  1911  ])  <5  ?•
The  summer  season  wiU  therefore  in  every  way
comport  with  the  auspicious  influence  of  the  planet
Venus.

Observe,  also,  that  in  every  case  what  is  not
potential  cannot  be  expressed  from  the  horoscope;
nor  can  the  planets  dispose  after  a  manner  that  is
unnatural  to  the  subject,  but  in  all  cases  the  planets
evoke  that  which  is  potential  in  the  character  and
possible  in  the  circumstances.  It  is  in  this  sense
that  character  and  environment  shape  our  destiny
under  the  action  of  the  celestial  modifiers.


CHAPTER  IV


TRANSITS  AND  ECLIPSES

The  Transits  of  the  major  planets  i^",  1^1,  h ,  4,
are  of  great  importance.  They  are  capable  of  inter
fering  with  the  fulfilment  of  any  measure  of  good"
or  ill  fortune  indicated  by  the  "  Directions."'  The
most  marked  effects  follow  upon  transits  that  are
in  agreement  with  the  nature  of  current  directions.
The  word  "  effects  "  is  of  course  privileged  :  a  better
term  is  indications.  The  reason  for  this  is  that
a  planetary  transit  or  direction  may  operate  in  the
horoscope  of  a  man  to  indicate  the  death  of  his
father,  but  it  cannot  be  said  with  any  show  of  reason
that  it  caused  the  death,  and  it  is  an  open  question
whether  similar  positions  in  the  horoscope  of  the
parent  can  be  said  to  "  cause  "  his  demise.  It  is,
at  all  events,  a  point  on  which  I  am  not  prepared
to  dogmatize.

Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  certainly  the  fact  that  the
transits  of  the  major  planets  are  of  singular  value
in  this  system  of  prognostics.

The  points  of  the  horoscope  to  be  regarded  in
this  connection  are  the  longitudes  of  the  Midheaven,
Ascendant,  Sun  and  Moon,  both  in  the  Radix  and


TRANSITS  AND  ECLIPSES  81


Progress.  The  portent  of  such  a  transit  must  be
derived  from  the  House  in  which  the  planet  may  be
found :  (a)  in  the  Radix,  when  the  transit  is  over  a
radical  point;  (h)  in  the  Progress,  when  it  is  over  a
progressive  point.

The  stationary  positions  of  the  planets  when
coinciding  with  the  significant  points  of  the  horo-
scope are  of  special  significance  and  have,  in  the
estimation  of  most  astrologers,  a  value  equal  to
Primary  Directions.

The  transits  in  the  Royal  Horoscope  for  1911  are
as  shown  in  the  followmg  schedule  : —

Jan.

Feb.    $  6  M.C.—}^  5  0  P.
March

April  R.-4  <?  0  R.

May

June   $  ^  Asc.
July

Aug.   Ip  ^  O  P.
Sept.

Oct.    ^  stationary  6  Q  I^-

Nov.  O  P.

Dec.

The  most  important  of  these  are  ^  0  P,  which
is  in  operation  more  or  less  throughout  the  year,
and  the  stationary  position  of  Mars  close  to  the  Q  R
in  October.  These  will  undoubtedly  have  a  disturb-
ing effect  on  the  affairs  of  the  Empire,  and  as  Ijl  is
in  Capricorn  it  is  to  be  judged  that  India  will  be

G


82  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


the  scene  of  many  political  upheavals.    Affairs  o
State  will  not  go  smoothly  in  the  Peninsula,  an
the  political  insurgent  will  be  to  the  fore.  Foreig
affairs,  denoted  by  the  9th  House  of  the  Progress
will  give  rise  to  many  surprising  developments.

The  transits  of  Mars  are  less  significant,  bein
of  short  duration,  but  the  stationary  position  is  ver
critical  and  disposes  to  strained  relationships  an
frequently  threatens  war.

In  the  interpretation  of  planetary  positions  in
Royal  Horoscope  it  will  be  found  that  a  more  than
personal  signification  must  be  given  to  them ;  for  the
horoscope  of  a  king  is  representative  and  focal  as
much  as  personal.

Eclipses

The  lunations  or  conjunctions  and  syzyges  of
the  luminaries  recur  on  the  same  day  every  19  years.
During  the  course  of  the  year  the  lunations  gain
from  10  to  11  days  upon  the  calendar.  But  whether
a  new  Moon  constitutes  an  eclipse  of  the  Q ,  or  a  full
Moon  an  eclipse  of  the  Moon,  will  depend  upon  the
nearness  of  the  Moon  to  its  Node  at  the  time.  The
node  is  that  point  where  the  ])'s  path  crosses  the
ecliptic  or  path  of  the  Sun.

From  most  ancient  times  it  has  been  known  that
eclipses  recur  after  a  period  of  18  years  and  10  to  11
days.  Consequently,  we  know  that  the  eclipse
cycle  is  carried  forward  through  the  zodiac  at
the  rate  of  about  10°  in  18  years,  and  that  the
same  eclipse  recurs  after  an  interval  of  651  years,


TRANSITS  AND  ECLIPSES  83


when  the  eclipses  will  fall  in  the  same  part  of  the
zodiac.

Eclipses  falling  on  the  significant  points  of  a
horoscope  portend  evil.

Affecting  the  Midheaven,  they  are  disastrous  to
the  position,  honour  and  credit  of  the  subject.
On  the  Sun  they  threaten  male  life,  and  on  the  Moon
female  life;  and  are  dangerous  to  the  parents  or
such  as  may  be  of  the  indicated  sex,  as  well  as  to  the
subject  of  that  sex.  On  the  Ascendant,  eclipses
threaten  the  health  of  the  subject.  Falling  on  the
places  of  the  planets  they  show  hurts  of  the  nature
determined  by  the  planet  and  affect  the  affairs
governed  by  the  House  in  which  it  falls.

Thus  in  1909  there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  Sun  in
n  26^  which  fell  in  opposition  to  the  Ascendant  of
King  Edward's  horoscope,  and  in  the  same  month
there  was  a  total  eclipse  of  the  Moon  in  opposition
to  the  place  of  the  Sun  in  the  horoscope  of  the  Prince
of  Wales.  Thus  King  Edward's  health  was  threat-
ened, and  danger  to  the  father  was  shown  in  the
Prince's  horoscope.

Eclipses  do  not  operate  at  once,  but  are  brought
into  effect  at  a  time  proportionate  to  their  distance
from  the  horizon  at  the  time  of  the  ecliptic  con-
junction of  the  luminaries,  and  are  subsidiary  to  the
Primary  Directions  in  force  at  the  period.

Lunations

have  a  current  influence  in  regard  to  the  events  likely
to  happen  during   the  succeeding  month.  The

G  2


84  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


lunation  falling  in  good  aspect  to  the  radical  place
of  the  planets  shows  a  successful  month,  the  benefi
coming  from  the  source  indicated  by  the  Hous
in  which  the  planet  was  at  birth.

The  positions  of  the  planets  at  a  lunation  in  regar
to  the  positions  of  its  significators  (Midheaven
Ascendant,  Sun  and  Moon)  at  birth,  are  of  grea
importance,  and  can  freely  be  used  as  indicator
of  events  during  the  succeeding  month.

The  Diurnal  Horoscope

This  scheme  is  set  each  day  for  the  hour  an
minute  of  the  birth,  so  that  the  Sun  is  always  a
the  same  distance  from  the  meridian  as  at  th
nativity.

The  days  on  which  the  malefic  planets  cross  th
angles  of  the  figure,  and  those  on  which  the  radic
places  of  the  malefics  similarly  affect  the  meridia
and  horizon,  may  be  regarded  as  of  evil  import

Thus  on  the  6th  May,  1910,  the  diurnal  horoscop
of  King  George  V  showed  ^  5°  on  the  Midheave
and  etc  5°  rising.  Mercury  on  that  day  was  in  n  5
and  therefore  in  opposition  to  the  Midheave
while  the  place  of  Mars  at  birth  in  5°  was  setting
in  opposition,  therefore,  to  the  Ascendant  of  th
diurnal  horoscope.  At  the  birth  of  King  Georg
$  was  in  the  5th  House,  which  is  the  8th  from  th
10th,  showing  the  death  of  the  father.  King
Edward  died  near  midnight  of  that  day,  and  this
sad  event  was  very  clearly  anticipated  and  predicted.


TRANSITS  AND  ECLIPSES  85


In  King  Edward's  diurnal  horoscope  for  this  date
^  was  culminating  and  the  radical  place  of  ^
(Neptune)  was  setting.

The  diurnal  horoscope  may  often  be  used  to  correct
the  time  of  birth,  when  it  is  not  accurately  known,
providing  that  the  exact  date  of  some  important
event  is  given.

Thus  on  the  24th  June,  1902,  when  King  Edward
was  suddenly  taken  ill  on  the  eve  of  the  projected
Coronation  ceremony.  Mars  in  the  diurnal  horoscope
occupied  the  Midheaven,  and  from  this  circumstance
— taken  in  conjunction  with  the  recent  eclipse  of  the
Sun  in  opposition  to  the  Sun's  place  at  the  nativity —
the  opinion  was  freely  expressed  that  the  intended
ceremony  would  not  take  place  then.

Planetary  Conjunctions

Great  importance  is  attached  to  the  conjunctions
of  the  major  planets,  and  it  may  be  said  that  no
phenomenon  of  this  kind  ever  happens  but  it  is
attended  by  great  mutations  and  upheavals  in  the
political,  religious  and  physical  worlds.

The  conjunctions  of  Uranus  with  Neptune  recur
in  about  170  years,  the  last  being  that  in  Capricornus
in  1821,  and  the  next,  which  will  occur  in  the  same
sign,  does  not  happen  until  1991.

The  conjunctions  of  Ijl  and  occur  every  46th
year,  having  taken  place  in  1806,  1851-52,  and  1897,
the  next  being  in  the  sign  n  in  1942.

Those  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  occur  every  20th
year,  e.  g,  1821,  1842,  1861,  1881,  1901,  1921.


86         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  conjunctions  of  the  two  malefic  planets
and      which  being  of  opposite  nature  appear  to
produce  very  remarkable  and  violent  effects,  are
worth  more  than  cursory  notice.    They  almost
constitute  chronometric  or  historical  pointers.

Thus  in  November  1897  there  was  a  conjunction
of  \  and  ^  in  ^  ,  the  ruling  sign  of  Spain,  and  in
April  of  the  following  year  Spain  was  involved  in
the  disastrous  war  with  the  United  States  of  America,
by  which  Spain  lost  the  last  of  its  foreign  possessions
in  the  Philippines  and  was  heavily  indemnified.
In  December  of  1899  another  conjunction  occurred
and  the  following  year  King  Humboldt  of  Italy
was  assassinated.  Predictions  of  the  Hispano-
American  War  and  of  the  Red  Hand  in  Italy  may  be
found  in  "  Coming  Events  "  for  the  years  1897  and
1899.  At  the  end  of  1901  there  was  a  conjunction
in  the  sign  Capricomus.

In  December  1903  the  conjunction  took  place
in  Aquarius,  the  ruling  sign  of  Russia,  and  was
immediately  followed  by  the  Russo-Japanese  War
in  which  Russia,  represented  by  Aquarius,  was
defeated.

In  December  1905  the  conjunction  again  fell  in
Aquarius,  and  was  followed  by  the  terrible  massacre
on  "  Red  Sunday  "  at  Moscow.

In  December  1907  the  conjunction  was  in  Pisces,
the  ruling  sign  of  Portugal,  which  was  foUowed  by
the  assassination  of  the  King  and  Crown  Prince  of
Portugal  on  February  3rd,  1908.

In  December  1909  the  conjunction  took  place


TRANSITS  AND  ECLIPSES  87


in  V,  the  ruling  sign  of  England.  The  death  of
King  Edward  VII  followed  in  May  1910,  after  a
great  political  crisis  in  the  beginning  of  the  year.

The  next  conjunction  will  fall  in  y  ,  the  ruling
sign  of  Ireland,  in  the  month  of  August.  The  last
such  conjunction  took  place  in  1881,  the  year  of  the
Phoenix  Park  murders.  Who  can  doubt,  in  the  face
of  such  evidence  as  the  above,  that  a  period  of  great
distress  and  violence  will  ensue  ?  In  the  year  1913
the  greatest  conflagration  that  has  taken  place  since
the  Great  Fire  will  probably  be  recorded,  for  then
the  malefic  planets  are  conjoined  in  the  ruling  sign
of  London.  A  great  upheaval  will  also  doubtless
take  place  in  America.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  conjunctions  of  ^
and  ^  take  place  every  second  year,  when  they  are
one  sign  further  advanced  in  the  zodiac.

I  find  a  specific  reference  to  this  phenomenon
in  the  Works  of  Sir  George  Wharton,  edited  by
John  Gadbury,  wherein  Wharton  devotes  an  essay
to  Ireland's  War,  and  this  event  was  referred  to  the
conjunction  of  Saturn  and  Mars  in  B  14°  27',  on  the
12th  June,  1646  (O.S.).  In  1648  the  conjunction  fell
upon  the  28th  June  (O.S.),  and  was  in  n  (Gemini),  the
ruling  sign  of  London.  The  fate  of  King  Charles  I
and  the  Irish  Rebellion  are  in  strict  astrological
accord  with  these  positions  of  the  malefic  planets.
In  1650  the  conjunction  fell  in  Cancer,  the  ruling
sign  of  Scotland,  and  immediately  Cromwell  invaded
Scotland,  which  country  had  espoused  the  cause  of
Prince  Charles,  and  in  event  the  Reformer  accounted


88         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


for  3,000  killed  and  10,000  prisoners.  In  Holland,
also  ruled  by  Cancer,  there  were  at  this  time  terrible
inundations,  predicted  by  Mr.  Culpepper.

Dating  back  to  1644,  when  the  conjunction  fell
in  Aries,  the  ruling  sign  of  England,  we  find  the
decisive  battle  of  Marston  Moor,  the  bloodiest  of  the
whole  Revolution  in  England,  in  conformity  with  the
canons  of  astrology  and  the  reputation  of  the  malefic
planets.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  conjunctions  of  the  two
malefics  produce  sharp  and  sudden  calamities,
and  as  "  chronocraters  "  they  form  a  valuable
feature  in  celestial  revolutions.  After  265  years
the  conjunction  occurs  about  the  same  place  in  the
zodiac.    Thus  in  parallel  we  have  the  following  : —

1644-1909  Conjunction  in  Aries
1646-1911  „  Taurus

1648-1913  „  Gemini

1650-1915  „  Cancer

etc.       '  etc.

The  effects  of  the  conjunctions  of  Saturn  and
Jupiter  last  for  20  years,  those  of  Saturn  and  Mars
only  two  years ;  yet  the  latter  are  mostly  to  be  feared,
because  of  their  calamitous  nature,  their  swiftness
and  violence.  Great  mutations  and  reforms  are
inaugurated  under  the  influence  of  h  d  ^-,  religious
and  sectarian  strife  generally  follows  upon  ^-  d  S,  and
the  effects  are  seldom  prolonged  beyond  two  years
in  any  one  place  ;  while  the  influence  of  ^  is  of
a  violent,  revolutionary  and  sanguinary  nature.


TRANSITS  AND  ECLIPSES  89


It  is  rather  in  the  hope  of  stimulating  research
than  of  presenting  a  complete  case  for  astrology  that
the  foregoing  notes  have  been  introduced  to  these
pages.  Michael  Nostradamus  was  a  master  of
planetary  periods,  and  his  prophecies  are  among  the
most  remarkalDle  on  record.

Conclusion

The  doctrine  of  nativities  as  outlined  in  the  fore-
going pages  will  be  found  one  of  the  most  fascinating
and  instructive  studies  to  which  the  mind  of  man  can
be  directed.  Needless  to  say,  the  conviction  of
the  fact  of  interplanetary  action  and  that  of  planet-
ary action  in  human  life  cannot  fail  to  open  up
new  views  of  life  and  to  stimulate  deeper  thought
concerning  the  nature,  origin  and  destiny  of  the
soul  of  man.

Other  aspects  of  the  same  subject  are  to  be  found
in  State  Astrology,  which  concerns  the  destiny  of
nations  and  kingdoms,  the  condition  of  the  people,
and  matters  of  a  general  or  public  interest.  This
phase  of  astrology  is  chiefly  confined  to  the  writers
of  almanacs.

Astro-meteorology  is  now  in  a  position  to  success-
fully compete  with  any  system  of  weather  prediction
based  upon  observations.  Although  inadequate  to
an  unerring  forecast  of  the  daily  changes  of  weather,
it  can  with  great  accuracy  afford  remarkable  predic-
tion of  storm  periods  and  earthquakes,  and  has  the
advantage  of  not  being  limited  to  current  observa-
tions.   The  storm  and  earthquake  periods  are  given


90         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


in  the  almanacs  a  year  in  advance  of  the  event.
The  general  condition  of  the  weather  over  any  period
can  also  be  given  with  much  accuracy.

Horary  Astrology  is  a  method  of  divination  based
upon  the  fact  of  planetary  influence,  and  the  sym-
pathy existing  between  the  constituents  of  the
system  to  which  we  belong.  A  figure  is  set  for  the
moment  of  a  discovery,  the  receipt  of  a  letter  or
message,  the  origination  of  any  affair  whatsoever,
or  the  moment  of  an  impression  concerning  which
the  mind  may  be  anxious.  The  positions  and  aspects
of  the  planets  are  then  consulted  with  a  view  to
determine  the  outcome  of  such  a  matter.  It  was
used  as  a  system  by  William  Lilly  with  much  success,
and  is  still  in  vogue  to  some  extent  among  modern
astrologers.

To  know  the  measure  of  one's  soul  in  the  universe,
to  see  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  to  follow  the
line  of  least  resistance — this  is,  in  brief,  the  purport
of  Astrology.


I

CHAPTER  V

MUNDANE  ASTROLOGY

This  branch  of  the  subject  has  for  a  considerable
period  been  left  in  the  hands  of  the  almanac-makers;
but  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  anciently  it
held  a  place  of  great  importance  inasmuch  as  the
rulers  were  in  the  habit  of  looking  to  their  state
astrologers  for  intelligence  concerning  the  welfare
of  the  country  and  the  people.  The  astrologer  was
expected  to  give  timely  warning  of  eclipses,  of  the
probable  condition  and  yield  of  the  crops,  the  danger
of  intestine  or  foreign  warfare,  and  other  matters  of
moment  to  the  conduct  of  public  affairs.  In  the
Historical  Classic  of  China,  it  is  said  that  Hi  and  Ho,
the  Observer  and  Recorder  at  the  Observatory  of
Pekin,  failed  in  their  duty  to  give  due  warning  of  a
partial  eclipse  of  the  Sun  in  B.C.  2154,  which  occurred
in  the  constellation  Fang  (Caput  Scorpionis),  when
Chung-Kung  ruled  the  Yellow  Empire;  in  conse-
quence of  which  the  whole  country  was  thrown  into
a  state  of  confusion.  The  penalty  prescribed  by
the  Book  of  Regulations  was  death,  and  this  sentence
was  duly  carried  out,  it  having  been  proved  that  the
officials  named  had  neglected  their  duties  and  had

91


92         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


been  addicted  to  drink.  Thus  it  is  said  : — "  A
that  time  Hi  and  Ho  corrupted  their  principle
and  abandoned  themselves  to  wine;  the^^  neglecte
their  offices,  forsook  their  posts,  began  to  confus
the  celestial  laws  and  ignored  their  functions."

The  eclipse,  which  took  place  on  the  12th  October
2154  B.C.,  at  about  7.34  a.m.  at  Pekin,  is  of  consider
able  astronomical  interest,  being  probably  the  earlies
phenomenon  of  the  kind  on  record.    It  is  confirme
by  Tang  in  the  Kang-Muh.    The  Earl  of  Yin  a
this  time  proclaimed  the  virtue  of  ancient  rulers  in
observing  celestial  portents,  and  it  is  evident  tha
they  regulated  their  affairs  by  astrological  precept
They  recognized  the  scientific  importance  of  eclipses
and  made  extensive  observations  of  the  effects  which
followed  them.    Thej^  argued  from  physical  effects
to  moral  causes,  and  from  physical  causes  to  mora
effects,  and  held  a  rational  astrology  as  an  essentia
part  of  their  system  of  government.    In  the  Babylon
ian  Empire  also,  and  in  India  under  the  Rajas,  the
astrologer  held  an  important  position  in  the  affairs
of  state ;  and  even  at  this  day,  when  civilization  pre
tends  to  be  above  the  need  of  such  instruction,  we
find  the  Rajas  still  retain  their  court  astrologers
A  capable  people  can  deal  with  difficulties  as  they
arise,  but  a  wise  nation  would  already  be  prepared
The  day  cannot  be  far  distant  when  this  fact  will
be  brought  home  to  us,  for,  as  the  astute  Lord
Beaconsfield  once  said,  "  Nothing  is  so  likely  to
happen  as  the  unexpected."

In  Mundane  Astrology  judgment  is  made  from  th


MUNDANE  ASTROLOGY  93


positions  of  the  celestial  bodies  in  relation  to  any
place  or  centre  of  government  at  the  time  of  an
eclipse,  a  great  planetary  conjunction,  a  lunation,
or  a  solar  ingress.

The  Houses  bear  the  same  general  significance
as  in  the  horoscope  of  an  individual,  the  1st  House
being  representative  of  the  people  and  the  10th  of  the
government ;  the  other  Houses  being  in  similar  man-
ner related  to  the  same  things  as  are  denoted  in  the
individual  case.    Thus  : —

The  1st  House  denotes  the  people  and  their  general
condition  and  mood.

The  2nd  House  :  home  trade,  the  money  market.

The  3rd  House  :  railways,  bridges,  canals,  postal
service.

The  4th  House  :  farming  and  mining  interests,
the  crops,  coal  pits,  quarries,  etc;  the  Opposition
party  in  Parliament.

The  5th  House  :  the  rising  generation  ;  playhouses,
sports  ;  speculative  interests,  the  Stock  Exchange  ;
dependencies,  colonies,  etc.

The  6th  House  :  the  public  health,  sanitation,
food-stuffs  ;  the  national  service,  army,  navy  and
police.

The  7th  House  :  foreign  relations ;  belligerent
powers;  treaties.

The  8th  House  :  deaths,  probates,  losses.

The  9th  House :  foreign  lands  ;  the  high  seas ;
ecclesiastical  and  legal  professions ;  religious  affairs.

The  10th  House  :  the  King  and  his  government ;
the  prestige  of  the  country.


94


A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  11th  House:  the  Exchequer;  allies  of  the
country.

The  12th  House  :  prisons,  asylums  and  hospitals,
places  of  detention  ;  the  enemies  within  the  camp.

If  the  figure  is  drawn  for  a  solar  ingress,  the  posi-
tion and  aspects  of  the  Sun  must  be  taken  chief
notice  of,  especially  those  aspects  about  to  be
formed.  If  a  lunation,  the  Moon's  place  is  the  centre
of  influence,  as  also  at  an  eclipse.  At  a  planetarj^
conjunction  the  position  and  aspects  of  the  con-
joined bodies  must  be  taken  chief  notice  of.

All  eclipses  fulfil  their  portents  within  a  year,  but
the  effects  are  frequently  enduring.  According  to
ancient  writers,  the  effect  of  a  solar  eclipse  will
endure  for  as  many  years  as  there  are  digits  of  the
solar  disc  obscured,  the  totality  being  10  digits.
The  magnitude  of  a  solar  ecUpse  being  7-50,  the  effects
will,  by  this  computation,  endure  for  seven  and
a  half  years.  Similarly  the  magnitude  of  a  lunar
eclipse  will  determine  the  number  of  months  the
effects  will  endure.

But  I  have  found  that  a  crisis  directly  due  to  the
eclipse,  and  signified  by  it,  will  take  place  at  a  point
of  time  denoted  by  the  distance  of  the  luminary
from  the  horizon  it  last  crossed.  The  time  of  sun-
rise being  known,  and  also  the  time  of  a  visible
eclipse,  the  difference  in  hours  and  minutes  divided
by  2  will  give  the  number  of  months  and  days  from
the  date  of  eclipse  when  the  crisis  occurs.  If  the
ecHpse  be  invisible  because  of  it  taking  place  at
night,  the  time  of  sunset  must  be  taken  from  the


MUNDANE  ASTROLOGY


95


time  of  the  eclipse  and  the  difference  divided  by
2  will  give  the  months  and  days  which  must  elapse
before  the  chief  effects  are  seen.

The  Moon's  eclipses  are  similarly  dealt  with,  but
the  time  of  the  Moon's  rising  and  setting  must  be
takep  as  the  basis  of  the  calculation.

The  chief  effects  may  be  expected  in  that  part  of
the  world  where  the  luminary  is  immediately  over-
head at  the  time  of  greatest  obscuration;  but  also
those  places  at  which  the  eclipsed  body  is  just
rising,  setting,  or  on  the  lower  meridian  will  share
in  the  adverse  conditions  indicated  by  the  general
horoscope  for  that  time  and  place.

At  an  ingress,  as  that  of  the  Sun  to  the  cardinal
signs,  the  effects  indicated  usually  come  to  pass
when  the  Sun  in  its  progress  through  the  zodiac
comes  to  the  aspects  of  the  several  planets  in  the
horoscope  for  the  ingress.  Thus  when  a  planet  is
in  good  aspect  to  the  Sun  at  an  ingress,  or  promising
some  good  by  its  position  and  aspects,  such  will
come  into  effect  when  the  Sun  reaches  the  conjunc-
tion, sextile  or  trine  aspect  of  such  planet;  and
vice  versa  when  evil  is  threatened.

Earthquakes  usually  follow  immediately  on  an
eclipse,  especially  in  those  parts  where  the  luminary
is  at  the  zenith  at  the  time  of  eclipse.  Recurrences
may  be  looked  for  when  one  of  the  major  planets
passes  the  ecliptic  longitude  of  the  luminary  or
that  of  a  major  planet  at  the  time  of  the  eclipse.

Whatever  may  be  said  of  the  claims  of  this  subject
it  is  beyond  dispute  that  some  of  the  most  remarkable


96         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


events  in  the  history   of   our  times   have  bee
accurately  predicted  by  modern  astrologers.  Th
present  writer  is  responsible  for  the  successf
prediction  of  the  following     among  other  even
Avithin  recent  times  : — The  Chino-Japanese  War  an
the  outbreak  in  Korea;  the  Russo-Japanese  War
the  Hispano-American  War ;  the  Leiter  Wheat  Cor
ner;  the  Russian  insurrection;  the  South  Africa
War;  the  Portuguese  Rebellion  and  the  revolutio
ary  attempt  to  end  the  dynasty  by  the  assassinatio
of  the  King  of  Portugal  and  the  Crown  Prince;  th
General  Election  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  th
Tariff  Reform  effort  in  1910;  the  death  of  Kin
Edward  VII.    It  is  within  our  experience  also
that  the  principles  of  astrology  have  been  success-
fully applied  to  Stock  Exchange  fluctuations  and
other  speculative  matters;  and  indeed  there  are  few
departments  of  life  in  which  astrology  cannot  be
employed  with  conspicuous  success.


I


CHAPTER  VI
OTHER  METHODS

Horary  Astrology

The  name  horary  Qiora,  an  hour)  is  given  to  that
section  of  the  science  which  is  apphed  to  the  resolu-
tion of  questions  which  may  arise  in  the  mind.

A  figure  of  the  heavens  is  erected  for  the  time  at
which  news  comes  to  hand,  concerning  which  the
mind  is  troubled  and  anxious  to  know  the  upshot;
br  the  time  a  proposal  is  made ;  or  that  at  which  a
person  sets  forth  upon  a  journey  or  a  ship  sets  sail;
bhe  moment  a  thing  is  discovered  to  be  lost,  and
other  similar  contingencies.  In  all  these  schemes
bhe  1st  House  and  the  rising  sign  denote  the  querent
or  consultant,  and  the  matter  inquired  about  must
be  referred  to  its  proper  House,  as  set  forth  in  the
oreceding  first  section.

The  position  and  aspects  of  the  ruler  of  the  sign
Dccupying  that  House,  and  its  relations  to  the  ruler
if  the  Ascendant,  enable  us  to  determine  what
s  the  disposition  and  course  of  the  matter  and  how
t  will  affect  the  consultant.

In  the  pursuit  of  this  branch  of  astrology,
numerous  books  have  been  written  since  the  days

97  H


98  A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

of  William  Lilly,  who  wrote  in  the  17th  century,
under  the  patronage  of  Sir  Elias  Ashmole,  his
famous  work  Christian  Astrology.  Such  w^orks  being
always  accessible  to  the  student,  there  is  no  need
to  enter  fully  into  an  exposition  of  the  principles
of  Horary  Astrology.  The  terms  peculiar  to  this
system  clearly  indicate  an  Arabian  origin,  and  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  the  art  was  extensively
followed  by  them  to  the  exclusion  of  Genethliacal
Astrolog}^,  which  began  to  assume  a  coherent  form
under  the  hand  of  Claudius  Ptolemy,  the  famous
geographer  and  astronomer  of  Alexandria,  who  wrote
his  Tetrabihlos  (or  "  Four  Books  on  the  Influence  of
the  Stars  ")  in  the  3rd  centur}^  a.d.  Many  exponent-
of  astrology  prefer  the  horary  method,  because  it
allows  fuller  play  to  the  intuitive  faculty,  and  is
less  constrained  by  the  rigid  rules  of  art  than  the
more  precise  and  scientific  doctrine  of  nativities.
The  whole  system  of  Horary  Astrology  rests  upon  the
occult  sympathy  existing  between  man  and  nature
so  that  the  same  influences  which  dispose  the  mind
to  the  formulation  of  a  question  may  be  said  to
determine  its  answer.  I  am  quite  convinced  from
experience  that  there  is  much  that  is  both  fictitiou
and  erroneous  in  Horary  Astrology  as  expounded,
and  likewise  that  there  is  much  truth  in  the
general  statement  that  a  figure  of  the  heavens  set
for  the  moment  of  an  initiation  will  determine  the
result,


OTHER  METHODS


99


Kabalistic  Astrology

In  this  system  the  numerical  value  of  the  name  of
a  person  enters  as  a  factor  with  the  date  of  birth
into  the  calculation  of  the  horoscope.  The  Christian
and  surnames  having  been  converted  into  the  equi-
valent numerical  value,  they  are  added  to  the  sign
and  degree  of  the  zodiac  held  by  the  Sun  at  the
time  of  birth,  and  the  result  is  a  key  number  which,
when  added  to  the  year  of  birth  and  reduced  to  a
unit  value,  gives  the  sum  of  the  horoscope  answering
to  one  of  the  twenty-two  major  Arcana  of  the  Tarot,
from  which  prognostics  are  drawn  concerning  the
life  and  character  of  the  subject.  Entry  is  then  made
into  the  circle  of  that  planet  ruling  the  year  at  a
point  corresponding  to  the  Sun's  position  in  the
zodiac,  and  progression  is  made  by  means  of  the
several  values  of  the  sum  of  the  horoscope,  the  sur-
name, the  Christian  names,  the  position  of  the  Sun,
and  the  year  of  birth,  each  of  which  yields  a  point
corresponding  to  a  planet  in  a  Sign,  and  thus  the
horoscope  is  completed.

The  system  requires  that  the  Ascendant  of  the
horoscope  is  in  that  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun.  The
measure  of  time  is  made  by  profection,  i.  e.  the  suc-
cessive rising  of  the  Signs,  the  Ascendant  passing
through  one  Sign  each  year;  and  also  by  the  annual
conjunctions  in  the  Alfridary,  an  example  of  which
is  appended.  The  system  has  been  thoroughly
explained  in  my  Kabalistic  Astrology,  to  which  I  must
refer  the  student  for  further  particulars.

H  2


100        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Chinese  Astrology
The  Chinese  divide  the  heavens  into  eight  sections
They  draw  lots  by  means  of  reeds,  after  the  manner
of  the  geomantic  system,  there  being  twelve  lots
eight  of  which  are  included  in  the  figure  and  four  ar
stationed  at  the  cardinal  points.    They  then  judg
the  figure  according  to  the  principles  of  astrology
inasmuch  as  each  of  the  symbols  represents  a  certai
planetary  influence  and  each  section  of  the  figure
has  relation  to  certain  departments  of  civil  and
political  life.    The  more  modern  practitioners  divide
the  heavens  into  twelve  parts  corresponding  to  the
twelve  asterisms  of  the  zodiac,  and  employ  also
the  planetary  bodies.    At  best  the  method  amounts
to  little  more  than  a  process  of  divination,  with  the
signs  and  symbols  as  pointers  to  guide  the  intuition.

Hindu  Astrology
The  Hindus  emplo}^  the  same  signs  and  planets
as  ourselves,  but  they  add  also  Rahu  and  Ketu,
the  Dragon's  Head  and  Tail,  investing  them  with
specific  influences  and  ascribing  a  periodic  rule  to
them.

The  signs,  although  bearing  the  names  equivalent
to  ours,  are  counted  by  the  natural  asterisms  and
not  from  the  vernal  equinox.  The  Sun's  entry
into  Aries  {MesTidm  of  their  zodiac)  takes  place
about  20  days  after  our  equinox,  which  is  the
amount  due  to  precession  since  the  two  zodiacs
coincided  in  the  year  ad.  498.


OTHER  METHODS


101


The  signs  and  planets  are  as  follows  : —

rp  Mesham  Tuirrni

y  Vrishabha  TIL  Vrischika

n  Mithuna  f  Dhanu
2B  Katakam  Makaram
^  Simha  Kumbha

TljJ  Kanya  }{  Mina

^  S'ani,  H-  Guru  or  Brihaspati,  $  Kuja  or
Angarika,  O  Surya,  $  S'ukra,  ^  Budhan,
])  Chandra,  ^  Rahu,  ^  Ketu.

The  measure  of  time  is  effected  by  counting  from
the  asterism  or  naksJiatram  occupied  by  the  Moon  at
birth.  Each  asterism  is  under  the  rule  of  one  of  the
nine  "  planets,"  and  the  27  lunar  stations  are  thus
apportioned  to  them  at  the  rate  of  three  nakshatrams
of  13°  20'  each  to  every  planet.  The  whole  circle
is  divided  into  120  years,  the  successive  periods
of  the  planets  being  :  18  years,  1].  16  years,  \  19
years,  ^17  years,  t5  7  years,  $  20  years,  ©  6  years,
D  10  years,  $  7  years — in  all  120  years.  Thus
if  one  were  born  Avhen  the  Moon  was  in  the  middle
of  the  asterism  ruled  by  ^ ,  which  has  a  period  of
18  years,  he  would  continue  under  that  "  star  "  for
9  years,  and  in  his  10th  year  would  enter  the  period
of  4-  (Jupiter),  under  whose  influence  he  would
continue  for  16  years  and  then  pass  to  Saturn.

There  are  many  ramifications  of  this  system,  and
those  who  would  study  it  more  closely  are  recom-
mended to  read  Brihat  Jdtaka,  by  Varaha  Mihira,
Pardshara-hora  and  the  other  works  of  Parashara,  and


102       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


the  Brihat  Samhitd,  together  with  other  works  more
or  less  accessible  to  English  readers,  and  on  sale
at  most  Indian  booksellers'.

AlFRID  ARIES

There  are  Alfridaries  of  all  sorts  in  existence,  each
adapted  to  the  system  from  which  it  is  evolved.
An  example  of  one  from  the  Hebraic  system  is
appended.  The  idea  involved  is  that  the  celestial
bodies  rule  the  life  in  rotation,  beginning  with  the
]).  The  rotation  of  the  planets  in  the  reverse
direction  at  the  same  time  brings  another  influence
to  bear  upon  the  life,  so  that  at  any  given  period
of  the  life  there  is  a  double  influence  in  force,  the
combined  effects  of  which  are  said  to  determine  the
course  of  events  in  a  general  sense.

A  "  diurnal  "  horoscope  in  this  sense  is  one  that
is  generated  from  the  Sun,  Avhose  position  is  supposed
to  be  on  the  upper  meridian  ;  and  consequently
any  birth  taking  place  between  noon  and  midnight
is  under  the  Sun  and  takes  its  origin  from  the  left
side  of  the  Alf ridary ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  a  Moon
or  nocturnal  birth  is  one  that  happens  between
midnight  and  noon,  and  this  takes  its  origin  and
course  on  the  right  side  of  the  Alfridary.

The  planets  jointly  ruling  any  3'ear  of  the  life  are
taken  account  of  according  to  their  natural  relations
in  the  astrological  system,  and  particularly  in  the
horoscope  of  the  birth,  and  prognostications  are
made  in  accord  with  these  indications.


OTHER  METHODS  103


The  Alfridary.


P.M.

?

?

0

6

l

$

?

0

6

0

1

8

15

22

29

36

43

50

57

64

71

78

D

?

T

2

9

16

23

30

37

44

51

58

65

72

79

3

10

17

24

31

38

45

52

59

66

73

80

D

4

11

18

25

32

39

46

53

60

67

74

81

\

5

12

19

26

33

40

47

54

61

68

75

82

4

6

13

20

27

34

41

48

55

62

69

76

83

$

7

14

21

28

35

42

49

56

63

70

77

84

A  person  born  at  4  p.m.  is  under  the  ])  for  7  years,
in  conjunction  successively  with  ©,  ?,  5,]),  \
for  1  year  each;  then  passes  to  the  7-year  period  of  5,
under  the  same  order  of  annual  conjunctions.  At
46  he  is  in  the  period  of  ^  ,  and  the  sub-period  of
the  D.

A  person  born  at  2  a.m.  will  be  under  the  })  for
7  years,  with  the  annual  conjunction  of  ]),  5,  G>  (?>
4  and  \  in  rotation.  At  46  he  is  in  the  period
of  \  ,  and  the  sub-period  of  the  O .

These  examples  will  no  doubt  serve  for  the  use
of  the  table  in  any  case  that  may  be  required.

Ptolemy  made  use  of  a  species  of  Alfridary  in
which  he  ascribed  the  "  seven  ages  of  man  "  to
the  rule  of  the  planets  in  the  following  order  : —
i  4  years,  ^10  years,  ?  8  years,  Q  1^  years,  ^  15
years,  4  12  years,  \  30  years  ;  and  these  he  com-
bined with  the  ruler  of  the  profectional  ascendant  "
to  obtain  the  annual  conjunctions.

Shakespeare  makes  use  of  the  above  "  seven  ages


104       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


of  man"  in  his  play  As  You  Like  It,  where  the
melancholy  Jacques  is  represented  as  saying —  .jM

"  All  the  world's  a  stage,  ■
And  all  the  men  and  women  merely  players :  I
They  have  their  exits  and  their  entrances,  ■
And  each  man  in  his  time  plays  many  parts,
His  acts  being  seven  ages.''

These  ages  are  enumerated,  and  are  found  to  corre-
spond to  :  ])  the  infant,  ^  the  school-boy,  ?  the
lover,  $  the  soldier,  4  the  justice,  the  lean  and
slippered  pantaloon,  ending  the  story  with  the
senile  paralytic.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  Sun
period  is  omitted,  the  manly  ambitions  generated
under  the  solar  influence  being  given  definition  and
focus  in  the  period  of  Mars.

According  to  Ptolemj^,  a  person  born  with  Aries
rising  w^ould  be  under  the  Moon  and  Mars  for  the
first  year,  then  the  Moon  and  Venus,  then  Moon  and
Mercur}',  and  end  the  fourth  year  under  the  double
influence  of  the  Moon.  The  fifth  3'ear  would  come
under  ^  and  Q ;  the  sixth  under  ^'s  double
influence,  the  seventh  year  under  ^  and  $ ,  the
eighth  under  g  and  ^,  and  so  on  ;  each  year  being
governed  primarily  by  the  planet  of  the  period
and  secondarily  by  the  ruler  of  the  profectional
rising  sign.  Alfridaries  exist  among  the  Hindus  and
Mohammedans,  and  are  in  much  repute  with  the
Arabs.


PALMISTRY


CHAPTER  I

TYPES  OF  HANDS

The  science  of  Palmistry,  with  its  two  divisions
of  Cheirognomy  and  Cheiromancy,  properly  belongs
to  the  domain  of  Occultism  in  the  sense  that  has
already  been  indicated.  Although  in  its  popular
appHcation  it  is  certainly  to  be  regarded  as  a  means
of  divination,  yet  it  is  not  dependent  on  the  use  of
the  automatic  faculty  but  upon  an  empirical  know-
ledge of  the  significance  attachmg  to  the  lines  of
the  hand.  In  this  wa}'  it  may  be  regarded  as  upon
the  same  foundation  as  the  science  of  Astrology,
and  although  it  cannot  be  said  to  have  attained
the  same  degree  of  development,  it  does  neverthe-
less hold  a  hoiia  fide  certificate  for  a  certain  measure
of  reliability,  and  therefore  warrants  our  considera-
tion. The  outlines  of  the  subject  will  probably
suffice  to  indicate  the  methods  employed,  and  will
serve  to  guide  the  student  in  his  critical  work  of
testing  and  proving  the  claims  of  Palmistry  for
himself.

105


106        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

CHEIROGlSrOMY

is  that  section  of  Palmistry  which  deals  with
character  and  aptitude.  The  shape,  texture  and
development  of  the  hand  as  a  whole  is  consulted
for  this  purpose.

The  Three  Primary  Types  of  hand  are  the  Conical,
the  Square,  and  the  Spa  tula  te.

The  Conical  hand  is  that  in  which  the  finger-
tips are  tapered  and  pointed,  the  nails  being  of  the
filbert  shape,  smooth  and  well  arched.  The  fingers
from  the  root  to  the  tips  gradually  taper,  the
flesh  being  smooth  and  the  joints  small  and  well
covered.

With  this  t3^pe  of  hand  there  is  to  be  found  a  love
of  art  and  adornment;  the  subject  is  fond  of  embel-
lishments, and  possesses  what  is  known  as  the  florid
style.  The  tastes  are  refined,  and  the  nature  very
sensitive  to  environment.  The  beautiful  and  good-
looking,  the  pleasant  and  agreeable  attract  him
rather  than  the  useful  and  practical.  The  subject
is  little  suited  to  the  work-a-da}^  world  or  to  the
strenuous  competition  of  business  life.  Sports  have
no  attraction  for  him,  and  even  domestic  duties
are  positively  repulsive.  Yet  the  owner  of  the
conical  hand  will  be  found  to  make  much  of  culture,
refinement  and  good  taste.  You  will  find  many
of  these  people  among  the  cultivated  flowers  of  social
life  and  in  the  artistic  professions.

The  conical  hand  denotes  neatness,  order,  love
of  music,  flowers,  scents,  brightness,  gaiety,  beauty.


TYPES  OF  HANDS  107


It  is  essentially  Venusian,  and  may  easily  run  to
jself -indulgence  and  to  licence ;  but  all  that  it  pretends
to  is  good  taste,  refinement  and  sensitiveness.  It
lives  in  the  emotional  and  psychic.  Its  subjects  are
intuitive,  impressionable,  capricious,  and  frequently
impulsive  and  inspirational.  Feeling  predominates
over  judgment.  It  is  incapable  of  the  mathematical
faculty,  and  is  often  illogical.  It  is  not  found  in
connection  with  the  exact  sciences,  nor  any  handi-
craft except  millinery ;  but  art,  music  and  the  drama
are  well  represented  by  this  type.

The  Square  hand  is  usually  large  and  broad,  the
finger-tips  are  square,  the  thumb  of  fair  size;  and
there  is  a  degree  of  hardness  in  the  palm.

This  hand  belongs  to  those  who  have  a  love  of
order,  neatness,  punctuality  and  decision.  The
j  emotional  and  artistic  are  not  so  much  in  evidence,
but  the  logical  and  the  mathematical  faculties  are
prominent  characteristics.  In  art  they  are  disposed
to  exact  methods  rather  than  inspirational  effects,
and  are  critical  of  form  rather  than  colour.  Justice
is  a  strong  point  with  them.  Exactness,  precision
and  deliberation  are  essential  qualities  of  this  type.
They  are  not  carried  away  by  their  feelings,  nor  are
they  brusque  or  churlish,  but  observe  generally
the  path  of  moderation  in  all  things.  They  can,
however,  be  very  critical,  and  may  even  appear
narrow-minded  on  account  of  a  lack  of  elasticity
in  their  nature.  They  are  conservative  and  not
very  readily  open  to  the  reception  of  neAv  views
or  doctrines.    Self-restraint,  caution,  method  and


108        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


patience  are  the  chief  business  qualifications,  and
this  type  of  people  are  capable  of  gaining  their  ends
by  industry  and  staying-power  rather  than  by
ambitious  ventures  or  by  a  tour  de  force.  They  have
few  friends,  but  frequently  have  long  friendships
for  one  or  two  of  a  congenial  tj^pe.

They  make  good  lawyers,  accountants,  bankers
and.  secretaries,  and  many  of  this  type  are  to  be  found
in  the  educational  world  and  in  responsible  positions
of  the  commercial  world.

The  Spatulate  hand  is  known  by  the  spade-like
tips  of  the  fingers,  which  broaden  out  from  the
joint  to  the  extremit}^,  the  hand  being  fairly  large,
firm  and  muscular.

People  with  this  type  of  hand  are  possessed  of
practical  ambitions.  They  are  essentially  matter-
of-fact  and  utilitarian,  and  are  generally  hard
workers,  with  a  turn  for  mechanics  and  handicrafts.
They  are  possessed  of  much  determination  and  grit,
and  can  undertake  pioneer  work.  When  musical
they  prefer  instrumentation,  and  the  practical  side
of  art  also  attracts  them,  the  applied  arts  being
especially  followed  by  them.  Sculpture,  mechanics,
engineering,  building  and  architecture  claim  many
representatives  of  this  type.  The  character  is
honest  and  straightforward,  the  manner  brusque
and  sometimes  churlish.  These  people  are  capable
of  forcing  their  way  forward  and  making  headway
against  all  obstacles.  They  are  not  inventors,  but
are  very  capable  agents  and  exploiters  of  new
ideas.    They  stand  for  the  practical  as  against  the


TYPES  OF  HANDS


109


theoretical,  but  nevertheless  they  would  be  of  little
use  without  the  man  of  ideas  behind  them.

Mixed  Types

It  necessarily  follows  that  beside  the  Three
Primary  Types  indicated  above  there  are  many
hands  which  are  a  blend  of  two  or  all  of  them.  There

I  are  hands  in  which  one  finger  is  square,  another
conical,  and  the  other  spatulate.  In  a  case  like  this
a  little  attention  should  be  given  to  the  predomi-
nating type,  and  also  the  thumb  should  be  consulted.
The  thumb  being  short  in  the  first  phalanx,  from  the
tip  downwards  towards  the  root,  shows  a  not  very
pronounced  type  of  mind.  Such  show  aptitude  in
carrying  out  the  ideas  and  orders  of  others ;  but  to
be  inventors  and  leaders  there  must  be  a  good  length

j  of  the  first  and  second  phalanges.  A  small  thumb
— or  at  least  a  small  first  phalanx  with  a  mixed

<  type  of  fingers — indicates  a  useful  servant  but  an
indifferent  master,  and  one  of  no  originality  or
decision.  Versatility  is  the  chief  asset  of  this  mixed
type  of  hand,  and  such  people  frequentty  change

'  their  pursuits  and  take  on  a  new  set  of  ideas  with

;  every  fresh  suit  of  clothes  or  change  of  circumstance.

!    What  is  called  the  Philosophic  hand  is  known  by

I  the  protruding  joints  of  the  fingers,  the  long  middle
finger,  and  the  well-developed  thumb.  It  shows  a
love  of  philosophy,  a  desire  to  know  the  "  reason
why  "  and  the  "  way  how  "  a  thing  happens.  It  is
concerned  chiefly  with  the  imponderables  in  Nature,


110        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


and  has  a  taste  for  metaphysics,  logic,  and  analytical
methods.

They  love  truth  for  its  own  sake  and  beauty
on  account  of  its  harmonious  elements.  They  are
sincere,  care  little  for  the  practical  aspects  of  life,
and  are  quite  content  if  they  can  find  a  reason  for
things  as  they  are.  They  are  discoverers  of  k^v
and  principles,  elaborators  of  philosophical  system.- ,
they  are  very  rarely  practical  or  ambitious  in  a
worldly  sense ;  but  are  capable  of  dying  for  the  sake
of  their  beliefs.

The  Psychic  hand  is  allied  to  the  conical,  but  the
palm  is  long  and  narrow,  the  flesh  soft  and  the
fingers  long  and  tapering ;  while  the  thumb  is  very
pointed  and  small,  but  well  formed.

This  hand  denotes  a  sensitive,  impressionable
nature,  fine  nervous  organism,  quick  intuitive  mind
and  an  impractical,  idealistic  temperament.  Mediums,
psychometrists  and  inspirational  wTiters  are  the
most  representative  of  this  type.  It  is  frequently
found  allied  to  the  artistic  temperament,  and  it
has  all  the  flexibility^  w^eakness  and  enthusiasm  of
the  psychic  nature.  The  ty^pe  of  hand  referred
to  is  well  portra^'ed  by  Burne-Jones  in  his  figure
studies.


CHAPTER  II


THE  MOUNTS  OR  CUSHIONS

The  ancients  have  allocated  the  planets  to  the
several  Mounts,  or  Cushions,  which  are  to  be  found
in  every  well-developed  hand.  These  Mounts,  and
the  planets  associated  with  them,  are  as  follows  : —

1.  The  Mount  of  Jupiter  lies  at  the  root  of  the
forefinger  (called  the  Index,  because  it  is  that  used
for  indicating  or  pointing).

2.  The  Mount  of  Saturn  at  the  root  of  the  second
finger.

3.  The  Mount  of  Apollo,  or  the  Sun,  at  the  root
of  the  third  finger  or  anularis  (so  called  because  it
is  the  ring  finger).

4.  The  Mount  of  Mercury  at  the  root  of  the  little
finger  or  auricularis.

5.  The  Mount  of  Mars  lies  below  the  Mount  of
Mercury  on  the  "  percussion  "  of  the  hand,  between
the  lines  of  the  Heart  and  the  Head  (which  see).

6.  The  Mount  of  the  Moon  is  below  the  Mount  of
Mars,  between  the  extremity  of  the  Head  line  and
the  wrist.

7.  The  Mount  of  Venus  is  at  the  ^oot  of  the  thumb,
between  the  second  joint  of  the  thumb  and  the  wrist.

In  the  allowing  diagram  the  planetary  symbols
are  used  for  the  purpose  of  location.  A  study  of  the
ancient  distribution  of  these  symbols  will  show  that

111


112       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Fig.  1.


the  whole  art  of  Palmistry  is  based  upon  astrological
interpretations.

The  Significations  of  the  Mounts  answer  closely
to  the  astrological  natures  of  the  planets  which  are


THE  MOUNTS  OR  CUSHIONS  113

said  to  rule  them ;  and  it  may  be  said  that  the
;  characteristics  of  the  several  planets  are  found  to
'  be  prominent  features  in  the  character  of  a  person
in  whose  hand  they  are  found  to  be  well  developed.

Thus  Jupiter  well  developed  denotes  generosity,
sympathy,  love  of  justice,  conviviality,  nobility  of
disposition,  and  a  true  sense  of  religion.

Defective — The  nature  denotes  an  absence  of
these  qualities.

Excessive — Bombast,  pride,  ostentation,  extrava-
gance and  carelessness.

Saturn  well  developed  shows  caution,  carefulness,
watchfulness,  sincerity,  strong  attachment,  patience
and  thrift.

Defective — There  is  a  tendency  to  self-regard  only,
and  a  lack  of  the  sterling  qualities  which  inspire
confidence  in  others.    The  person  is  not  reliable.

Excessive — It  disposes  to  misanthropy,  melan-
choly and  miserliness.  There  is  a  tendency  to  religi-
ous mania  when  this  mount  exceeds  that  of  Jupiter,
tj  The  Sun  well  developed  shows  dignity,  sincerit}^,
'magnanimity,  love  of  the  fine  arts,  high  ideals,
great  projects.

Deficient — The  nature  is  proud,  assuming,  fre-
quently vain,  and  a  tendency  to  rely  upon  appear-
ances rather  than  upon  faculty  and  attainments,
and  to  play  the  showman  upon  all  occasions.

Excessive — It  denotes  a  tyrannous,  autocratic  and
despotic  character,  very  proud  and  haughty,  an  inor-
dinate ambition  and  love  of  power.  It  is  often  shown
by  a  love  of  pageants  and  great  shows,  and  when  art
is  followed  it  favours  the  colossal  and  magnificent.


114         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

Mercury  well  developed  shows  eloquence,  capacity
for  the  pursuit  of  literature,  activity,  alertness,  a
good  memory,  desire  for  knowledge,  inquisitiveness.
A  commercial  life  is  followed  with  much  intelligence
and  industry.

Defective — It  denotes  a  mean,  querulous  and
fretful  nature,  small  mental  power,  a  tendenc}^  to
spy  and  play  the  part  of  a  busybody,  a  "  picker-up
of  unconsidered  trifles,"  generally  cunning  arid
loquacious.

Excessive — The  mind  runs  to  the  material  side
of  Nature  for  aU  its  evidence ;  there  is  a  self-assertion
and  posit iveness  which  is  seldom  warranted.  The
nature  is  prolix  and  concerned  with  more  things
than  would  fill  an  encyclopsedia  or  stock  a  museum.
Such  people  make  a  business  of  their  hobbies  or  a
slavery  of  their  business.

The  Moon  well  developed  shows  a  romantic,
ideahst  nature,  fond  of  travelling,  with  a  disposition
to  the  mystical,  marked  intuitive  power,  sentimental
and  sometimes  dreamy.

Deficient — It  denotes  a  prosaic  and  worldly  nature,
not  affected  by  the  consciousness  of  the  larger
life  or  the  greater  universe,  and  quite  devoid  of  the
emotional  and  imaginative  powers.

Excessive — The  nature  is  fantastic,  given  to
exaggeration,  hypersensitive,  vacillating,  fickle  and
apt  to  be  carried  away  by  the  emotions.  Unless
Saturn  controls  and  the  Head  line  is  well  defined
there  is  danger  of  insanity.

Mars  weU  developed  shows  courage,  strength,
prowess,  freedom,  frankness  and  weU-defined  ambi-


THE  MOUNTS  OR  CUSHIONS  115


tions.  It  denotes  an  aspiring  and  enterprising
character,  willing  to  take  risks  and  showing  a
"  scorn  of  consequence  "  which  inspires  others  to
deeds  of  daring.

Deficient — The  nature  is  lacking  in  courage  and
the  manly  attributes,  and  will  never  be  a  pioneer
unless  it  be  in  the  religious  or  intellectual  worlds.
Yet  even  so  there  is  a  lack  of  zeal  and  fire  which  is
not  apt  to  be  convincing.  A  soldier  without  Mars
well  developed  may  be  set  down  as  a  dand^^

Excessive — The  temper  is  ungovernable,  the
projects  speculative  and  rash,  and  the  Avhole  nature
runs  to  overheated  determinism  and  impetuous
self-assertion.

Venus  well  developed  shows  a  refined,  genial  and
sociable  person,  kind  to  children,  fond  of  his  home,
gallant  to  women,  neat  and  orderly  in  his  person
and  menage,  fond  of  music  and  festivity,  bright
lights,  flowers,  sunshine  and  the  pleasures  of  society.

Deficient — There  is  a  lack  of  taste  and  refinement ;
the  person  and  home  are  disorder^  or  only  super-
ficially clean ;  there  is  a  lack  of  comradeship  and  a
distaste  for  social  life ;  the  friendships  are  of  acommer-

'  cial,  or  possibly  a  platonic,  nature,  but  never  infused
with  any  great  degree  of  affection.  The  beautiful  in
nature  and  art  does  not  make  any  appeal  to  him,

'  Excessive — The  nature  is  coarse  and  disposed  to
debauchery,  and  the  lower  sensual  appetites  are
allowed  to  have  full  sway.  The  sensuous  and  mate-
rial are  of  first  consideration,  and  all  the  powers  are
directed  to  the  attainment  of  luxuries  and  the
gratification  of  the  passions.

I  2


CHAPTER  III


THE  PHALANGES,  ETC.

The  three  sections  defined  by  the  joints  of  tl
thumb  and  fingers  are  called  phalanges.  The  rela-
tive length  and  shape  of  these  have  to  be  taken
into  consideration  when  estimating  character  and
aptitude,  and  chiefl}^  the  form  and  development  of
the  thumb.

The  first  phalanx  of  the  thumb  which  holds  the
nail  denotes  the  wdll-power;  the  second  phalanx
stands  for  the  intellect;  and  the  third,  which  sub-
tends the  Mount  of  Venus,  denotes  the  animal  part.
Wlien,  therefore,  you  find  a  long  and  broad  upper
phalanx,  3  ou  may  be  sure  there  is  plenty  of  deter-
mination and  self-reliance;  and  if  it  is  supported  by
a  long  second  phalanx  the  intellect  will  be  adequate
to  supplement  the  efforts  of  the  will  and  to  guide
it  into  useful  channels.

A  well-developed  thumb  is  inseparable  from  a
high  order  of  intelligence,  but  a  poorly  developed
thumb  is  an  indication  of  small  capacit}^,  an  incon-
stant, restless  and  credulous  character,  easily
swayed  by  the  opinions  of  others,  and  possessing
little  abilit}'  in  the  management  of  his  own  aft'airs.

Fingers  that  are  short  and  thick  show  an  abrupt
116


THE  PHALANGES


117


manner  and  wilful  nature,  with  very  little  foresight
or  diplomacy.  But  long  fingers,  especially  if  smooth
and  slender,  denote  a  character  that  is  subtle,  diplo-
matic and  astute,  attentive  to  details  and  capable
of  finesse.  With  a  short  first  phalanx  of  the  thumb,
this  type  of  hand  shows  deception.

A  person  who  carries  his  thumb  in  the  palm  of  the
hand,  with  the  fingers  bent  loosely  over  it,  is  one
whose  nervous  energy  is  fast  exhausting  itself  or
whose  intellect  is  embryonic.  This  is  the  custom
of  idiots,  of  paralytics  and  babes.  As  individuality
asserts  itself  the  thumb  is  unconsciously  protruded
more  and  more,  and  in  the  person  of  concentrated
ambition  it  is  found  most  frequently  folded  over  the
fingers,  or  standing  out  at  a  considerable  angle  from
the  hand.

Fingers  that  are  well  fleshed  and  thick  at  the  base
show  a  luxurious  nature,  and  if  they  lie  compact
and  close  together  they  show  a  selfish  and  self-
indulgent  nature,  and  frequentty  a  sordid  character.

Fingers  that  have  plenty  of  air-space  between
them  denote  a  careless  and  extravagant  nature,
but  frequent!}'  inquisitive.  If  allied  to  an  intellec-
tual t^'pe  of  hand,  in  which  the  Imuckles  are  large
and  the  second  phalanx  of  the  thumb  well  developed,
this  separation  of  the  fingers  shows  a  keen,  inquiring
mind.

Observe  that  the  shorter  and  broader  the  hand
the  more  dogged  and  resolute  the  character  will  be ;
while  long,  slender  hands  denote  a  more  subtle,
shifty  and  diplomatic  mind,  with  more  suavity  and


118        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

politeness  of  manner,  but  less  stability  of  character
Rugged  hands  show  a  rugged  and  straightforwa
nature,  a  love  of  Nature  and  an  abhorrence
social  observances  ;   a    short  and   rugged  han
denotes  a  blunt,  outspoken  and  determined  cha
acter.    But  smooth  hands  show  finesse,  suavity  an
gentleness,  with  a  love  of  refinement  and  a  respect
for  les  convenances;  while  if  they  are  long  and  smooth
there  will  be  subtlety  and  craft  in  the  character.

These  points  being  duly  considered,  the  character
of  any  mixed  type  of  hand  can  be  readily  estimated.
A  thorough  understanding  and  recognition  of  the
primary  types  is,  of  course,  essential  to  a  proper
use  of  the  art  of  Cheirognomy.

We  may  now  turn  our  attention  to  Cheiromancy,
which  appears  to  claim  more  general  mterest,
inasmuch  as  it  purports  to  define  the  circumstance
and  incident  of  life  by  the  lines  and  markings
of  the  hand.  Character,  as  defined  by  Cheirognomy,
must  alwaj^s  be  the  dommant  factor  in  human
destiny,  but  environment  and  incident,  as  Hmiting
the  expression  of  character  in  certain  direction-
and  at  the  same  time  developing  it  in  others,
certainly  also  of  great  importance.


CHAPTER  IV


THE  LINES

If  the  palm  of  the  hand  is  distended  it  will  be
found  that  the  normal  markings  take  a  definite
position  and  direction,  but  that  a  great  variety
exists  in  the  depth,  length,  direction,  colouring  and
clearness  of  these  lines  in  several  hands.  It  is  from
consideration  of  these  variations  from  the  normal
that  there  arises  the  wide  variety  of  differences  to
be  noted  in  character,  ability  and  fortune.  It  is
a  fact  sufficiently  well  known  not  to  need  special
comment  that  ability  is  not  the  only  measure  of
success,  and  that  character  bears  no  necessary
relation  to  fortune.  Consequently,  it  may  be  as-
sumed that  the  indications  relative  to  mind,  body
and  estate  are  to  be  sought  in  different  parts  of  the
same  hand.  That  this  is  so  will  sufficiently  appear
in  the  following  designation  of  the  lines.

The  main  lines  are  six  in  number,  comprising  : —

1.  The  Life  Line,  which  surrounds  the  Mount  of
Venus  at  the  root  of  the  thumb.

2.  The  Head  Line,  which  joins  the  Line  of  Life
inidvva}^  between  the  root  of  the  index  finger  and  the
thumb  and  stretches  across  the  hand  in  a  slightly

119

•

/


120        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


downward  direction  almost  to  the  percussion  o
the  hand.

3.  The  Heart  Line,  which  arises  on  the  percussio
of  the  hand  below  the  Mount  of  Mercury  and  pr
ceeds  across  the  hand,  terminating  on  or  beneat
the  Mount  of  Jupiter.

4.  The  Girdle  of  Venus,  which  begins  be  twee
the  index  and  second  fingers  and  follows  a  curv
course,  embracing  the  Mounts  of  Saturn  and  th
Sun  and  terminating  between  the  third  and  litt'
fingers.

5.  The  Line  of  Fate,  which  has  its  rise  at  the  wris
near  to  the  end  of  the  Life  Line,  and  proceed
sharply  upward  through  the  palm,  termmating  o
the  Mount  of  Saturn.

6.  The  Health  Line,  which  has  its  origin  near  th
wrist  by  the  Mount  of  the  Moon  and  procee^
upwards  to  the  Mount  of  Mercury- .

In  addition  to  these  there  are  found  in  some  han
the  Li7ie  of  Fortune,  arising  in  the  palm  of  the  han
and  running  upwards  to  the  Mount  of  Apollo,  an
the  Marriage  Line,  which  arises  on  the  percussio
of    the  hand  and  crosses  the  Mount  of  Mercury
Finally,  there  is  the  Bracelet,  consisting  of  one  o
more  lines   across  the  wrist  immediately  belo
the  natural  fold  of  the  wrist  at  the  root  of  th
hand.

The  meanings  of  these  lines  will  var}^  accordin
to  their  length,  definition  and  colour.  Whe
straight,  single,  deep  and  red  they  indicate  all  th
best  elements  of  character  and  destiny.


THE  LINES


121


Fig.  2.


The  Head  Line  governs  the  intellect,  the  mental
attainments  and  natural  aptitudes.


122        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

The  Heart  Line  governs  the  affections  and  emo-
tions, and  has  an  equal  influence  with  the  Head
Line  over  the  fortunes.

The  Life  Line  shows  the  constitution,  vital  powers,
and  the  probable  duration  of  life.

The  Fate  Line  denotes  the  course  of  destiny,  that
which  is  inevitable,  the  stages  and  crises  of  life.

The  Line  of  Fortune  has  relation  to  honours,
ambitions  and  attainments.

The  Girdle  of  Venus  denotes  the  degree  of  sensi-
bility possessed  by  the  person.

The  Health  Line  shows  the  condition  and  prob-
able course  of  the  health.

The  Lines,  Mounts  and  t}^es  of  fingers  are  all
shown  in  the  diagram  on  page  121,  which  will  serve
as  a  general  guide  to  the  reader  in  the  study  of
the  observations  made  in  the  course  of  this  brief
exposition.

In  some  abnormal  hands  the  lines  are  so  widely
different  from  the  general  direction  as  to  be  hardly
recognizable.  In  others  one  or  more  of  the  chief
lines  are  entirely  absent,  while  in  others  again  there
are  additional  lines.  Some  of  these  abnormalities
will  be  considered  in  due  course.


CHAPTER  V


THE  PRINCIPAL  LINES

1.  The  Life  Line.

When  clear  cut,  well  formed  and  free  from  inter-
secting Lines,  it  shows  a  good  constitution  and  a
probability  of  long  life.  But  it  should  encircle
the  whole  Mount  of  Venus  and  proceed  to  the  wrist
without  a  break.  Its  whole  span  is  equal  to  90  years,
the  count  beginning  at  the  source  above  the  thumb
and  proceeding  by  stages  of  5  or  6  years  to  the  middle
point  of  45.  Some  practice  is  required  before  the
student  can  successfully  use  these  time  indications.

When  the  Life  Line  is  chained,  crooked,  shallow^
or  pale,  it  denotes  delicate  health  and  a  feeble
constitution.  If  terminating  or  broken  off  sharply
without  continuation,  the  end  of  life  is  shown  at
an  age  corresponding  to  the  position  of  the  break
or  fracture  (see  Fig.  2).  When  both  hands  show  the
same  termination  or  fracture  it  ma}^  be  regarded  as
decisive,  but  otherwise  a  critical  illness  only  would
be  shown.

But  if  with  a  short  Life  Line  3  ou  find  also  indica-
tions of  strong  will-power  in  a  long  and  broad


124        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

first  phalanx  of  the  thumb,  and  a  twm  or  sister-
line  running  parallel  to  the  Life  Line  and  continuing
beyond  it,  then  the  crisis  may  be  overcome  by  will-
power or  the  care  and  protection  of  somebody  nearly
affected,  such  as  a  sister,  lover,  wife  or  mother.

A  line  coming  from  the  thumb,  cutting  through
the  Life  Line  and  proceeding  to  the  palm  of  the
hand,  denotes  a  great  illness  or  misfortune  which
produces  a  shock  to  the  system.

A  line  cutting  through  the  Life  Line  and  proceed-
ing on  to  the  Mount  of  Saturn  shows  a  fatal  illness,
and  is  especially  dangerous  in  the  case  of  a  woman
approaching  maternity  at  the  age  indicated.  The
point  at  which  the  line  cuts  the  Life  Line  must  be
taken  in  estimating  the  age  at  which  the  danger
is  threatened.

A  line  from  the  Life  Line  to  the  Mount  of  Jupiter
shows  an  ambition  realized,  success  and  fortune.

A  line  from  the  Life  Line  to  the  Mount  of  the
Sun  gives  fame,  celebrit}^  and  honours.

A  line  to  the  Mount  of  Mercury  denotes  success
in  commerce  or  science,  the  achievements  of  the
intellect.

In  a  general  sense  the  Mount  of  Venus  with  its
encircling  Life  Line  represents  the  vital  energy
and  the  hnes  coming  away  from  it  denote  the  Hnes
of  energy  along  which  the  vitality  will  be  utilized
and  expended.

A  line  going  out  on  to  the  Mount  of  the  Moon
from  the  Line  of  Life  shows  fantastic  pursuits,
frequent  travelling  and  change  of  life  and  occupation ;


THE  PRINCIPAL  LINES  125


but  in  an  artistic  hand  it  may  dispose  to  publicity
and  a  passing  recognition  of  the  person's  faculty.

2.  The  Heart  Line.

The  Heart  Line  denotes  the  quahty  and  direction
of  the  affections,  the  condition  of  the  vital  organ,
and  the  interests  in  which  the  mind  is  centred.

When  well  defined  and  unbroken,  single  and  free
from  blemish,  it  shows  a  sincere  nature  with  healthy
affections  and  a  nature  that  will  command  friendship
and  esteem.  The  longer  the  line  may  be  the  stronger
are  the  affections.

When  terminating  beneath  the  Mount  of  Apollo,
the  affections  are  inconstant  and  the  nature  vain;
and  if  the  Heart  Line  extends  to  the  Mount  of  Saturn
there  will  be  greater  constancy  but  a  fatality  or
disappointment  attaching  to  the  affections;  the
disposition  is  then  apt  to  be  marred  by  jealousy  and
mistrust.

When  the  Heart  Line  extends  to  the  Mount  of
Jupiter,  the  affections  will  be  true,  sincere  and
enduring,  and  if  the  line  forks  on  to  the  Mount,  it
shows  energy,  strength  of  purpose,  and  successful
pursuit  of  congenial  projects.

When  the  Heart  Line  turns  down  beneath  the
Mount  of  Jupiter  and  touches  the  Head  Line,  the
affections  will  be  under  the  control  of  the  mind,
and  the  nature  will  hence  be  more  practical;  and  if
at  the  same  time  it  throws  a  branch  upward  to  the
Mount  of  Jupiter,  there  will  be  a  successful  issue  to
the  fortunes  after  marriage.


126        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

If  the  Heart  Line  joins  the  Head  Line  beneath
the  Mount  of  Saturn  it  is  an  augury  of  a  sudden,  if
not  a  violent,  end.

Many  small  lines  cutting  across  the  line  of  the
Heart  shows  some  functional  disorder  of  the  corre-
sponding organ  of  the  bod} ,  and  if  the  Heart  Line
is  broken  beneath  the  Mount  of  Saturn  or  punctured
by  a  purple  or  dark  blue  pitmark,  it  shows  seizure
or  a  serious  heart  attack  which  ma}^  end  fatally

3.  The  Head  Line.

The  Head  Line  being  long,  clear  and  well  marked
shows  good  intellectual  ability  and  capacity  to  cope
successfully  with  the  problems  of  life.  The  Head
Line  is  best  when  starting  from  a  conjunction  with
the  Life  Line,  for  it  then  shows  that  the  intellect
is  not  dissociated  from  feeling  and  refinement.
When  separate  from  the  Life  Line  it  denotes  a  rash
and  impulsive  nature,  sometimes  egotistical  and
too  full  of  self-confidence.

A  fine  falling  from  the  Head  Line  and  going  on
to  the  Mount  of  the  Moon  shows  a  tendency  to
mysticism  and  a  love  of  exploration  and  discovery.

A  line  going  from  the  Head  Line  on  to  the  Mount
of  Mars  shows  rashness,  a  headstrong  character,
of  fevered  imagination  and  great  enterprise.

A  line  rising  to  the  jVIount  of  the  Sun  from  this
line  denotes  honours  and  success  through  tlie  use
of  the  mtellect.

A  line  joining  the  Head  and  Heart  Lines  denotes
an  intellect  that  is  swayed  by  the  affections  to  a


THE  PRINCIPAL  LINES  127


large  extent  and  is  capable  of  erring  on  the  side  of
generosity  when  its  judgment  is  appealed  to.

A  short  Head  Line  shows  a  practical  rather  than
an  intellectual  character.  It  also  threatens  a  short
life  by  nervous  derangement  if  terminating  under
Saturn  and  the  Life  Line  also  short.

A  line  running  up  from  the  Head  Line  to  Saturn
shows  a  fatalistic  tendency  or  a  fondness  for  philo-
sophy; but  there  is  a  menace  of  nervous  disorders.

A  double  Head  Line  shows  duplicity,  an  adven-
turer.

No  Head  Line  at  all  shows  an  impulsive  and  child-
like nature,  all  feeling  and  no  judgment,  and
frequently  subject  to  obsession.

A  break  in  the  Head  Line  shows  danger  of
concussion  or  cerebral  injury.

The  Head  Line  being  wavy  and  irregular  denotes
a  weak  and  irresolute  nature.

4.  The  Fate  Line,

This  line  shows  the  worldly  fortunes,  success  or
failure,  and  the  position  to  which  we  may  attain
in  our  sphere  of  life.  It  shows  the  inevitable  out-
come of  the  free  use  of  all  our  powers,  passions  and
tendencies.  It  is  capable  of  modification  as  the
powers  of  the  nature  are  brought  under  control
and  directed  into  useful  channels.  It  is  the  line
of  fatahty  only  in  the  sense  that  Jab  karoge  tab
saoge — As  you  sow,  so  you  will  reap.

The  Fate  Line  extends  to  a  greater  or  less  length
in  various  hands.    Its  length  has  a  relation  to  the


128        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

duration  of  life.  The  count  of  years  is  made  on  the
Fate  Line  from  its  origin  near  the  wrist  upwards.
Where  it  crosses  the  Head  Line  is  at  the  age  of  35
years.  At  the  Heart  Line  the  50th  year  is  reached.
By  subdividing  these  sections  any  required  age  may
be  discerned.  The  condition  of  the  Hne  at  various
stages  shows  the  fortunes  at  the  corresponding
period  of  the  life.

The  Fate  Line  may  not  always  start  from  or  near
the  wrist,  but  may  begin  on  the  Mount  of  the  Moon,
or  on  the  Life  Line,  the  Head  Line,  the  palm,  or
even  the  Heart  Line.

When  rising  from  the  wrist  in  a  straight  and  un-
broken line  direct  to  the  Mount  of  Saturn  it  showr*
success  in  hfe  and  a  good  fortune.

But  if  stopped  at  the  Head  Line  it  denotes  an
error  of  judgment  or  wrong  use  of  the  intellect
will  mar  the  progress  and  spoil  the  fortunes.  If
stopped  by  the  Heart  Line  there  will  be  a  romantic
episode  in  the  life  or  a  fatality  arising  out  of  an
affection  or  friendship.

When  starting  on  the  Mount  of  the  Moon  tlir
Fate  Line  denotes  success  through  the  influence  of
women  or  the  reverse,  according  to  its  own  character-
istics.

If  rising  in  the  Life  Line  it  shows  a  Fate  that  is
within  the  power  of  the  individual  to  possess  or  to
relinquish.

When  rising  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  between  the
Head  and  Heart  Lines,  in  what  is  called  the  Plain
of  Mars,  it  shows  many  crosses  and  struggles;  but


THE  PRINCIPAL  LINES  129


if  it  runs  well  up  on  to  Saturn  it  will  give  success
at  last.

The  Fate  Line  to  be  at  its  best  should  be  long,
clear  and  unbroken,  and  should  reach  the  root  of
the  second  finger,  but  should  not  go  beyond  it.

Wherever  the  Fate  Line  begins  to  take  a  clear
and  unbroken  course,  at  that  age  there  will  be  a
turn  in  the  fortunes  for  good,  and  this  will  be  con-
tinued as  long  as  the  Fate  Line  continues  clear  and
unaffected  by  cross  lines.

Ending  on  Jupiter's  Mount  it  shows  success
through  a  happy  marriage  or  an  inheritance.  When
ending  on  Sol  it  shows  honours  at  the  end  of  life.

5.  The  Health  Line,

This  hne  is  governed  by  the  functions  of  the  diges-
tive organs  and  liver,  in  the  same  way  as  the  Heart
Line  is  related  to  the  heart  and  the  Head  Line
to  the  nervous  system.

When  clearly  marked  and  unbroken  it  shows  good
health,  especially  if  it  rise  near  the  Life  Line  without
touching  it  and  proceeds  direct  to  the  Mount  of
Mercury.

In  some  hands  it  is  absent,  but  it  may  then  be
concluded  that  the  health  is  good  if  the  Life  Line
is  clear  and  long.

A  broken  Health  Line  or  an  island  (see  Chapter  VI)
or  a  black  spot  or  other  discoloration  of  the  line,
shows  a  serious  iUness,  frequent  attacks  of  dyspepsia
or  gastritis,  and  general  debility.


130       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


A  line  from  the  Health  Line  cutting  into  the  He
Line  shows  nervous  disorders.

A  line  from  the  Health  Line  crossing  the  Hea
Line  denotes  palpitation,  heart  affection.

A  line  from  the  Health  Line  cutting  into  the  L*
Line  denotes  venery  or  excess  of  the  passions  in  a
degree  detrimental  to  health;  the  constitution  i-
affected  by  dissipation  and  pleasure-seeking.  This
particularly  in  a  soft  hand  with  a  small  first
phalanx  to  the  thumb.

6.  The  Ring  of  Venus.

The  Girdle  or  Ring  of  Venus,  wherever  present,
shows  sensibility.  It  is  never  absent  from  the
poetic  hand.  In  the  intellectual  hand  it  shows
touchiness  and  a  worrying  disposition,  and  in  the
vital  hand  it  shows  restlessness.  lAHien  extending
on  to  the  Mount  of  Mercury,  it  denotes  the  study  of
Occultism,  and  a  mind  that  is  controlled  by  the
mysterious.

The  sole  meaning  of  the  Girdle  of  Venus  is
sensibility,  i.e.  capacity  to  suffer  or  enjoy.

7.  The  Line  of  Fortune.

This  line,  starting  from  a  variety  of  places,  is
identified  by  its  eventual  course  to  the  Mount  of
the  Sun,  which  it  crosses.

It  is  the  index  of  fame,  honour,  merit,  especially
in  art,  literature  and  science.

When  clear,  deep  and  straight  it  denotes  good


THE  PRINCIPAL  LINES  131


fortune.  If  there  is  more  than  one  Hne  on  the  Mount
of  Apollo,  there  Avill  be  natural  talent  and  ability
which  will  meet  with  recognition  in  high  quarters.

When  absent  from  the  hand,  there  will  be  mis-
fortune or  at  least  no  recognition  of  ability  and
endeavour.  Such  people  should  work  for  the  future
and  live  again  in  their  children.  What  they  sow,
others  may  reap.

Position  without  wealth  is  show^n  by  a  good  Line
of  Fortune  and  a  bad  Line  of  Fate.

When  the  Line  of  Fortune  rises  from  the  Moon
it  shows  gain  by  women  who  assist  the  career;
from  Venus,  by  art  and  the  dramatic  profession ;
from  Mars,  by  bold  enterprises,  pioneer  work  or
military  service;  from  the  Head  Lme,  by  the  use  of
the  intellect;  and  from  the  Heart  Line,  by  advan-
itageous  friendships  or  associations  of  an  artistic
nature;  while  if  rising  betw^een  the  Heart  and  Head,
it  may  give  success  through  dramatic  w-ork.

8.  The  Marriage  Line.

The  Marriage  Line  being  clear  cut  and  unbroken
is  an  index  of  a  deep  and  enduring  attachment  to
one  of  the  opposite  sex.

When  broken  it  show^s  an  engagement  or  attach-
ment which  does  not  reach  its  consummation.

When  the  Marriage  Line  splits  into  two  to  form  a
fork,  or  v/hen  a  line  from  the  Line  of  Fate  or  the
Heart  Line  cuts  through  it,  there  is  danger  of  separa-
wion  after  marriage,  and  if  a  lme  from  the  Moon

K  2


132       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

also  joins  the  indications,  there  will  be  divorce  and
publicity.

Two  marriage  lines  show  a  second  attachment.
The  evidence  of  several  lines  frequently  signifies  the
free  lance  or  coquette.

The  Line  of  Marriage  joining  the  Girdle  of  Venus
so  as  to  continue  it  to  the  percussion  of  the  hand  is
a  sign  of  idealism  which  marriage  does  not  satisfy.

Small  lines  running  up  from  the  Marriage  Line
to  the  root  of  the  little  finger  indicate  progeny,  the
number  being  shown  b}^  the  number  of  such  bars
or  striae.  But  these  are  not  necessarily  the  progeny
of  one  union,  as  may  be  the  case  where  two  marriages
are  denoted.

When  the  Line  of  Health  rises  on  the  Head  Line
in  a  cross  forming  a  star  with  the  Head  Line,
it  is  a  sign  of  an  anchorite;  and  if  the  Life  Line  at
the  same  time  is  exceptionally  near  the  root  of  the
thumb,  so  that  the  Mount  of  Venus  is  small,  there
will  be  no  marriage,  or  yet  a  barren  one.

9.  The  Bracelet.

This  is  also  called  the  Eascette.  It  consists  of
lines  below  the  fold  of  the  wrist  {i.e.  where  the
palm  joins  the  wrist)  and  parallel  to  it.  When
clearly  marked  it  is  an  additional  sign  of  a  long  and
useful  life.

Lines  coming  up  from  the  Rascette  to  the  Mount
of  the  Moon  and  crossing  it  to  some  extent  denote
voyages.  These  lines  may  be  seen  by  compressing  the
hand.


THE  PRINCIPAL  LINES  133


The  meaning  of  such  a  line  from  the  Bracelet
may  be  known  by  tracing  it  to  its  destination.
To  Jupiter,  it  is  highly  propitious;  to  Saturn,  sinister
and  dangerous ;  to  Venus,  likely  to  result  in  a  pleasant
association  or  profitable  alliance;  to  the  Sun,
honours;  to  Mercury,  good  business  and  a  possible
inheritance  or  windfall.

General  Note.
Never  read  the  lines  singly,  but  take  them  in  their
bearing  upon  one  another,  and  in  relation  always
to  the  type  of  hand  you  are  dealing  with.

It  is  very  seldom  that  we  find  a  strong  Head  Line
in  a  purely  psychic  hand,  but  it  would  be  by  no
means  remarkable  if  in  a  hand  of  this  type  the  Line
of  the  Head  is  altogether  absent.    But  it  should
not  thence  be  inferred  that  the  intellect  was  a
!  minus  quantity.    Madame  H.  P.  Blavatsky  had  the
pure  psychic  hand  with  but  a  single  line  stretching
across  the  palm.    Of  her  intellectual  powers  there
can  be  no  doubt,  while  her  spontaneous,  frank
I  and  ingenuous  nature  was  altogether  suggestive  of
f  a  strong  Heart  Line.    Possibty  Head  and  Heart
were  in  unusually  close  alliance.


CHAPTER  VI


INCIDENTAL  MARKS

Beside  the  principal  lines  to  which  reference
has  been  made  in  the  preceding  chapter,  it  will
be  found  that  there  are  a  number  of  other  markings,
either  isolated  or  affecting  the  lines  themselves.
These  are  in  the  nature  of  Triangles,  Crosses,  Squares,
Stars,  Grilles,  Islands  and  Spots.

The  Great  Triangle  embraces  the  space  enclosed
by  the  lines  of  Health,  Life  and  Head.  When  the
Triangle  is  well  formed,  distinct  and  embracing  a
large  space,  the  person  will  be  of  a  generous  and
upright  nature  with  wide  sympathies.

When  small  and  formed  by  broken  lines,  the
character  and  disposition  are  cramped  and  mean,
and  the  life  is  far  from  fortunate.  The  health  also
is  more  or  less  badly  affected.

When  there  are  crosses  within  the  area  of  the
Triangle  there  will  be  many  misfortunes  in  the  life,
and  the  person  will  occasion  many  enmities.

A  Star  therein  shows  eventual  success.

Lesser  triangles  about  the  hand  show  success  in
that  department  of  life  which  is  related  to  the  lines
or  mounts  affected.  Thus  a  triangle  formed  on  the
base  of  the  Head  Line  shows  intellectual  achieve-
ments»

134


INCIDENTAL  MARKS


135


A  Gross  is  bad  wherever  it  is  found,  and  especially
if  it  affects  the  principal  lines.

When  found  in  the  Great  Triangle,  it  shows  crosses
and  difficulties  in  early  life;  between  the  Head
and  Heart  Lines,  difficulties  and  misfortunes  in
middle  life;  and  above  the  Heart  Line,  similar
distress  in  the  latter  part  of  life.

A  Cross  on  a  mount  tends  to  vitiate  or  pervert
the  character  or  fortunes  in  the  direction  indicated
by  the  mount,  but  on  the  Mount  of  Jupiter  it  is
held  to  signify  domestic  happiness.  Nevertheless,
there  will  be  many  trials  and  vexations  to  be  shared
by  those  in  whose  ha/nds  this  sign  appears.

A  Cross  on  any  of  the  principal  lines  is  evil,  but
especially  when  on  the  Life  Line  and  the  Line  of
Fate.

A  Square  is  a  protection  wherever  it  is  found,
and  denotes  security  of  health  and  fortune  to  those
who  possess  it.  Consider  the  line  upon  which  it  is
formed,  or  the  mount  or  part  of  the  hand  where
it  may  be,  and  judge  accordingly;  remembering
always  that  it  is  a  protection.

Thus,  on  the  Head  Line,  it  would  denote  difficul-
ties surmounted  and  overcome  by  the  use  of  the
intelligence;  on  the  Heart  Line,  by  the  instrumen-
tality of  friends ;  on  the  Moon,  by  a  voyage  or  the
intervention  of  women.

The  Star  denotes  a  danger,  except  on  the  Mount
of  Jupiter,  where  it  shows  a  winning  hazard,  or


136       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


good  fortune  by  a  bold  stroke.  On  Mars  it  denotes
violence.  On  the  Moon,  a  dangerous  voyage  or  a
serious  trouble  through  women,  danger  from  the
populace.  On  Saturn,  a  fatality  by  violence.  On
the  Sun,  the  evils  of  inordinate  pride.  On  Venus,
disappointment  in  love.  On  Mercury,  cupidity
and  cunning.

A  star  on  the  principal  lines  must  be  regarded  as
a  menace  to  that  aspect  of  the  life  which  is  denoted
by  the  line  so  affected  :  as  the  Life  Line,  the  con-
stitution is  affected ;  the  Head  Line,  there  are  mental
troubles ;  the  Heart  Line,  social  affairs  are  adversely
affected,  etc.

The  Grille  (see  Fig.  1  on  Mount  of  Venus)  is  an
indication  of  excess.  When  found  on  any  mount
it  augments  the  activity  of  the  corresponding
characteristic.    Thus  : —

A  Grille  on  Jupiter  shows  extravagance  and  bom-
bast; on  Saturn,  great  misfortune  and  a  chequered
career,  ending  in  trouble;  on  the  Sun,  inordinate
love  of  display,  consuming  pride;  on  Mercury,
peculation,  theft,  cunning;  on  Venus,  disappointed
affections;  on  Mars,  danger  of  violent  action,  frenzy
and  woundings;  on  the  Moon,  a  wandering,  restless
nature,  and  sometimes  exile.

When  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  traversed  by  the
Line  of  Fate,  it  indicates  much  misfortune,  especially
at  that  period  of  the  life  denoted  by  the  position  of
the  Grille  as  measured  on  the  Fate  Line.

Islands  are  formed  by  the  splitting  and  joining


INCIDENTAL  MARKS


137


together  again  of  a  line  in  its  course.    The  period

embraced  by  this  Island  will  be  one  of  dangerous
i  sickness,  difficulty,  mental  incapacity,  social  ostra-
;  cism,  imprisonment,  etc.,  according  to  the  line  on

which  the  island  is  formed   and  the  attendant

indications.

A  small  Island  shows  a  difficult  crisis ;  a  long  Island
denotes  a  protracted  period  of  misfortune  or  sickness.

i  An  Island  is  frequently  the  sign  of  hereditary
disease,  either  functional  or  organic.  If  on  Jupiter's
Mount  it  shows  lung  disease ;  on  Sol,  the  heart  may
be  affected;  on  Saturn,  the  liver;  on  Mercury,  the
organs  of  speech  or  brain  are  affected ;  on  the  Moon,
the  stomach  is  deranged.

Frequently  the  Island  shows  some  mystery  attach-
ing to  the  career.  If  at  the  origin  of  the  Life  Line,
there  is  some  mystery  regarding  the  parentage,

i  and  if  at  the  same  time  the  Fate  Line  has  an  Island
at  its  source,  it  is  an  indication  of  illegitimacy.

When  the  Island  is  formed  on  any  of  the  principal
lines,  it  will  denote  danger  to  the  health  and  fortunes
from  some  malady  or  abuse  of  the  faculty  or  organ

;  involved  or  denoted  by  the  line.

t  An  Island  on  the  Head  Line  shows  occlusion  of
memory,  amnesia,  loss  of  mental  faculty  for  the
period  involved.  A  double  Head  Line  whose  ex-
tremities meet  so  as  to  enclose  a  continuous  Island
will  therefore  denote  chronic  nervous  affection  and
with  concomitant  signs  (such  as  degenerate  thumb
and  a  chained  Line  of  Fate)  will  denote  insanity.
An  Island  on  the  Line  of  Health  shows  a  long


138       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

illness,  debility,  and  a  delicate  constitution.  If
on  the  Mount  of  the  Moon  at  the  beginning  of  the
Health  Line,  it  shows  somnambulism  or  medium-
ship,  arising  out  of  an  abnormal  condition  of  the
sympathetic  nervous  system.

Similarly,  judgment  is  to  be  made  in  respect  of
other  indications  of  the  Island,  by  its  coincidence
with  the  mounts  or  lines.  On  the  Fate  Line  it
sometimes  denotes  imprisonment,  especially  if  the
Mount  of  Mercury  has  a  grille  or  cross  upon  it.

Spots  are  always  blemishes  and  denote  crises  and
dangers.  They  are  generally  red  or  purple,  but
sometimes  black.  They  show  dangers  affecting  the
Life,  Head,  Heart,  etc.,  according  to  the  Hne  or
mount  affected.  If  on  the  Fate  Line,  a  grave  and
sudden  crisis  in  the  fortunes.  On  the  Life  Line
a  spot  frequently  shows  hurt  or  injury  to  the  eyes,
sometimes  blindness.

Thus,  by  a  consideration  of  the  typal  form  of  a
hand,  its  mounts,  lines  and  incidental  markings,
you  may  certainly  define  much  of  the  character
and  destiny  of  an  individual.  But  nothing  is  abso-
lute in  the  future.  Changes  are  continually  taking
place,  not  only  in  the  main  lines  of  the  hand,  but  also
in  the  incidental  markings  of  the  mounts.  Thus
if  you  take  an  impression  of  the  hand  at  any  period
of  life,  and  another  successively  on  every  anniver-
sary, it  will  be  found  that  in  the  space  of  a  few  years
a  great  difference  is  to  be  detected.    You  will  see


INCIDENTAL  MARKS  139


islands  and  grilles  forming,  squares  and  crosses
coming  into  existence,  lines  breaking  up,  or  becoming
I  firmer  and  more  distinct.

The  hand  is,  in  fact,  a  mirror  of  the  interior  nature
and  expresses  very  intimately  the  realized  experience
of  the  soul,  whether  subconscious  or  conscious.
The  subconscious  experiences  well  up  into  conscious-
ness as  effects  springing  from  their  causes,  like
bubbles  which  detach  themselves  from  a  sub-
merged body  and  rise  to  the  surface.

The  connection  of  Palmistry  with  Astrology  will
be  obvious  to  any  student  of  both  subjects,  and
Astrology  affords  an  explanation  of  the  changes
taking  place  in  the  hand.  The  planets  at  birth  show
certainly  radical  tendencies,  while  their  progress  in
the  horoscope  thereafter  will  denote,  by  their
mutual  configurations,  the  changes  which  will  take
place  in  the  tendency  and  environment  of  the
life.

Hence,  Palmistry  is  effective  in  the  prediction  of
tendency  but  not  of  event,  because  it  has  not  the
means  of  calculating  the  future  configurations
of  the  planetary  bodies.


THE  THAUMATURGIC  ART

CHAPTER  I
THE  KABALA

The  Telesma,  or  Talisman,  was  anciently  held  in
great  esteem  by  the  Thaumaturgists.  We  find
evidence  of  its  universality  in  China,  India,  Egypt,
and  among  the  Semitic  nations,  the  Greeks  and
Romans,  as  well  as  among  the  ancient  populace  of
Central  America,  Peru,  Australasia,  and  the  islands
of  the  Pacific.  Indeed,  there  seems  every  reason
to  believe  that  the  telesmic  art  was  in  vogue  among
the  Atlanteans,  and  by  them  transmitted  to  the
surviving  nations.  It  comes  to  us  in  a  modified
form  from  the  Hebrews,  who  adapted  it  to  their
own  theological  S3''stem.  A  brief  account  of  the
principles  of  this  art  a.nd  its  methods  can  hardly
be  omitted  from  a  work  of  this  character,  inasmuch
as  it  is  directly  connected  with  Astrology  and  the
Power  of  Numbers,  and  forms  a  very  important
part  of  the  equipment  of  the  magus.

Necessarily  the  mind  of  man  must  have  concrete
methods  of  expression ;  the  most  common  and  limited
of  which  is  language.  Symbolism,  on  the  other
hand,  may  be  regarded  as  the  common  language

140


THE  KABALA


141


of  humanity,  as  also  it  is  that  of  the  gods.  The
universe  is  a  symbol;  so  also  is  man.  Colour,
Number,  and  Form — what  are  they  but  symbols  ?
A  circle,  a  triangle,  a  square,  a  cross — these  are  but
letters  in  an  universal  language,  the  only  natural
medium  by  which  we  can  compel  the  notice  of  the
gods.  Such  was  the  belief  of  the  Pythagoreans  and
the  Thaumaturgists  of  ancient  Greece.

I  The  Kabala,  or  secret  interpretation,  is  divided
into  three  sections  :  The  Gimetria,  the  Notaricon,
and  the  Temurah.  It  will  be  necessary  to  know  these
before  entering  upon  the  telesmic  art,  for  nothing

jis  brought  to  perfection  in  this  art  without  the
magical  use  of  names  and  numbers.

By  magical  use  we  are  to  understand  something
in  distinction  from  natural  use,  as  the  difference

I  between  the  supreme  power  of  the  creative  will  in
man  and  the  inherent  vegetative  power  of  the  soul
and  of  natural  bodies.

First,  then,  let  us  examine  the  principles  of  the
Kabala.  Man  is  the  subject  of  all  magical  considera-
tions, as  he  is  also  the  agent  of  all  magical  operations.
The  Kabalists  divide  Man  into  four  principles —
viz.  Spirit,  Mind,  Soul,  and  Body,  corresponding
to  the  four  "  elements  "  of  Fire,  Air,  Water,  and
Earth.  Of  these  the  Spirit  and  Mind  are  Formless,
and  the  Fluidic  Body  or  Soul  and  the  Physical
Body  are  Formative.  Yet  there  are  three  aspects
of  the  Spirit,  viz.  Life,  Will,  and  Effort,  and  three
aspects  of  the  Mind,  viz.  Perception,  Reason,  and
Memory.    So  also  the  properties  of  the  Soul  are


142         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

three:  Desire,  Imagination,  and  Emotion ;  and  of  tlu
Body  three:  Absorption,  Circulation,  and  Secretion.
For  in  one  aspect  Nature  is  volatile,  in  another  fixed
and  in  another  mutable.

Humanity  consists  of  three  orders  :  Lapsed  Souls,
Elementary  Souls,  and  Demoniacal  Souls.  We  dis-
tinguish between  the  Spirit  and  the  Soul.  TIk
Spirit  in  itself  is  of  Divine  origin,  a  scintilla  of  somt
spiritual  hierarchy  to  which  it  is  directly  related
and  from  which  it  receives  its  energy  and  directioii
These  "  imprisoned  lights  "  are  related  to  Dei*  \
through  the  spiritual  hierarchies  to  which  the\
severally  belong  and  of  which  the}^  are  the  earthl\
representatives.

The  Soul,  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  of  Divine
origin,  but  is  derived  mediately  from  the  nature-
essence  through  the  operation  of  the  Human
Imagination,  or — as  in  the  case  of  the  brute
creation — by  Desire  and  the  instinctual  sense.

Lapsed  Souls  are  such  as  have  fallen  from  tliei
first  estate  or  pristine  nature,  and  will,  by  regenera-
tion, eventually  regain  their  lost  heritage.

Elementary  Souls  are  such  as  have  come  into
human  generation  in  the  course  of  natural  evolution
or  by  magical  art,  and  of  these  the  Sylphides  are  such
as  neighbour  the  human  race  most  nearl}^  Coming
as  strangers  into  an  atmosphere  for  which  their
powers  are  not  yet  sufficiently  evolved,  they  are  bom
as  naturals,  simpletons  and  fools,  a  condition  whi-ih
is  successively  improved  during  their  human  in-
carnations.   Once  entangled  in  the  human  S3^stem


THE  KABALA


143


>f  evolution,  they  cannot  go  back.  By  this  human-
jby  of  theirs  they  acquire  an  immortality  not  other-
wise attainable.  Of  the  same  category  of  Elemen-
aries  are  the  Undines,  Salamanders,  and  Gnomes,
hese  names  being  related  to  the  elements  of  Water,
!<'ire  and  Earth,  as  Sylphs  to  that  of  Air.

Demoniacal  Souls  are  such  as  have  by  violence
,hrust  themselves  into  human  life  by  obsessions,
|»vershadowings  and  infestings  of  the  bodies  of  men,
yhether  in  frenzy  or  in  trance,  in  epilepsy  or  other
abnormal  conditions  of  the  mind  and  body.  They
.re  hke  robbers  who  take  possession  of  the  house
yhile  the  owner  is  away.  But  some  such  are  born
into  the  world  by  the  will  of  the  gods,  operating
')y  means  of  sidereal  influences,  for  the  fulfilling
i>f  large  destinies,  the  despoiling  and  punishing  of
jiations,  and  are  demons  from  their  birth.  Con-
i'eming  such  an  one  the  Christ  said  :  "  You  twelve
lave  I  chosen,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil,"  meaning
hat  Iscariot.  From  this  it  will  be  seen  that  not  all
liuman  forms  are  invested  with  human  souls.

Also  there  are  certain  times  and  seasons  when
tngels  and  archangels  are  temporarily  invested
vith  the  human  flesh  for  the  high  purposes  of  life,
•ome  as  teachers  and  prophets,  others  as  messengers
)f  peace ;  but  all  such  are  free  from  the  taint  of  the
oul  while  obeying  the  laws  of  their  mortal  selfhood,
l^et  acting  in  all  else  under  the  direct  inspiration
)f  the  Spirit.  Of  such  high  order  was  Melchizedek,
he  King  of  Righteousness,  "without  father  and
vithout  mother,  having  neither  beginning  of  life


144         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

nor  end  of  days,"  with  whom  Abraham  talked  a
recorded  in  the  Genesis.    Melchizedek  was,  in  fact
a  presentation  of  the  Christ,  a  great  and  might}
spirit  in  temporary  human  form  then  reigning  in
Chaldea   over  the  sons   and  daughters    of  the
Magi.

But  also  there  are  those  spirits  of  the  nature  of
Apollyon,  who  are  "  Princes  of  Darkness,"  and
whose  dominion  is  over  those  "  wandering  stars  for
whom  is  laid  up  the  blackness  of  darlmess  for  age
upon  ages."  These  malevolent  beings,  acting  undci
the  laws  of  their  own  nature,  do  from  time  to
time  manifest  in  human  form  for  a  more  speedy
judgment  of  the  world.  They  are  the  Caligula
and  Neros  of  the  world's  history.

The  earth  is  therefore  the  theatre  of  a  great  variety
of  different  souls,  and  is  such  because  it  is  in  equili-
brium between  the  Heavens  and  the  Hells,  and  ii
a  state  of  freedom  where  good  and  evil  may  com
mingle.  It  is  in  truth  the  Field  of  Armageddon
where  must  be  fought  out  the  great  battle  betweei
the  Powers  of  Light  and  the  Powers  of  Dark
ness.

The  Kabalists  mention  Seven  Heavens  and  Sevei
Hells,  presided  over  by  the  Seven  Archangels  anc
the  Seven  Princes  of  Evil.  The  i^rchangels  of  th'
Seven  Spheres  of  Light  are  :  Michael,  Gabriel
Kamiel,  Raphael,  Zadkiel,  Uriel,  and  Zophkiel
standing  for  the  Might,  Grace,  Zeal,  Saving  Power
Justice,  Splendour,  and  Mystery  of  God.  The*,
names  are  invoked  under  appropriate  symbols  hj


THE  KABALA


145


the  telesmic  art  of  which  the  Kabala  forms  an
essential  part.

Michael,  the  archangel  associated  with  the  Sun,
is  derived  from  the  syllables  Mi,  who ;  cah,  like ;  al,
god ;  i.e.  He  who  is  like  unto  God ;  or  Who  is  like
unto  him  ?  Gabriel,  from  Gibur,  power ;  Kamiel,
from  Chem  or  Kam,  heat ;  Raphael,  from  Raphah,
healing;  Zadkiel,  from  Zadok,  justice;  Uriel,  from
:  Aur,  light ;  and  Zophkiel,  from  Zophek,  a  secret.  As
spiritual  entities  they  are  the  express  embodiments
of  the  Divine  attributes,  though  while  unrevealed
to  us  they  continue  only  to  stand  for  certain  human
conceptions  of  the  Divine  Being  expressed  in  terms
of  human  character.  All  definition  is  limitation,
and  all  limitation  is  imperfection,  yet  God  is  the
only  Perfection  and  beyond  all  naming.


L


CHAPTER  II
THE  CALCULATORY  ART


As  already  indicated,  there  are  three  sections  of
the  Kabala,  and  these  may  now  be  examined  more


The  Gimetria  ascribes  to  each  letter  of  a  name  or
word  a  certain  numerical  value.  The  Kabalists
give  the  following  values  to  the  Hebrew  and  Chaldee
letters,  the  English  equivalents  being  substituted
and  the  order  retained  : —

Units— a  1,  b  2,  g  3,  d  4,  e  5,  v  6,  z  7,  ch  8,  th  9.
Tens— y  10,  k  20, 1 30,  m  40,  n  50,  s  60,  o  70,  p  SO,  ts  00.
Hundreds— q  100,  r  200,  sh  300,  t  400.
Finals- ch  500,  m  600,  n  700,  p  800,  ts  900.

Pythagoras  has  been  credited  with  having  pre-
served an  ancient  table  of  numbers,  together  with
their  meanings.    They  are  as  follows  : —

A  1  E  5  19


fully.


B  2
C  3
D  4


F  6
G  7
H  8


K  10
L  20
M  30


146


THE  CALCULATORY  ART


N  40
0  50
P  60
Q  70
R  80


S  90

T  100

U  200

X  300

Y  400


Z  500
Ch  600
V  700
Hi  800
Hu  900


W  1400

The  Interpretation

1.  Ambition,  Passion,  Purpose.

2.  Death,  Destruction.

3.  Destiny,  Faith,  ReHgion.

4.  Strength,  Stability,  Power.

5.  Marriage,  Happiness,  the  Stars.

6.  Completion,  Attainment.

7.  Rest,  Freedom,  the  Path.

8.  Protection,  Equity.

9.  Grief,  Wounding,  Anxiety.

10.  Success,  Logic,  Renovation.

11.  Offence,  Deception,  Strife.

12.  The  City,  a  Town,  a  Witness.

13.  Obliquity,  a  Crooked  Road.

14.  Sacrifice,  Surrender.

15.  Virtue,  Culture,  Piety.

16.  Luxury,  Sensuality,

17.  Misfortune,  Carelessness,  Loss.

18.  Vice,  Brutality,  Harshness.

19.  Folly,  Insanity.

20.  Wisdom,  Abnegation,  Austerity.

21.  Creation,  Mystery,  Understanding.

22.  Punishment,  Vengeance,  Calamity.

23.  Prejudice,  Ignorance.


14«       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


24.  Travelling,  Change.

25.  Intelligence,  Progeny.

26.  Beneficence,  Altruism.

27.  Bravery,  Firmness.

28.  Love,  Presents,  Gifts.

29.  News,  Information.

30.  Fame,  Marriage.

31.  Integrity,  Ambition.

32.  Union,  Embraces,  Marriage.

33.  Gentleness,  Chastity.

34.  Suffering,  Pain,  Recompense.

35.  Health,  Peace,  Happiness.

36.  Genius,  Profound  Intellect.

37.  Fidelity,  Domestic  Happiness.

38.  Malice,  Avarice,  Maiming.

39.  Honour,  Credit,  Laudation.

40.  Holiday,  Feast,  Weddings.

41.  Shame,  Disgrace.

42.  Short  and  Unhappy  Life.

43.  Churches,  Temples,  Worship.

44.  Sovereignty,  Elevation,  Power.

45.  Progeny,  Population.

46.  Production,  Fruitfulness.

47.  Long  and  happy  Life.

48.  Judgment,  a  Court,  the  Judge.

49.  Avarice,  mercenary  spirit.

50.  Relief,  Pardon,  Freedom.
60.  Loss  of  husband  or  wife.
70.  Science,  Initiation.

80.  Protection,  Recovery,  Convalescence.
90.  Aflaiction,  Grief,  Error,  Blindness.


THE  CALCULATORY  ART  149


100.  Divine  favour,  Angels,  Spirits.
200.  Hesitation,  Fear.
300.  Defence,  Philosoph}^  Belief.
400.  Distant  journeys.
500.  Holiness,  Virtue.
600.  Perfection.
700.  Power,  Dominion.
800.  Empire,  Conquest.
900.  Strife,  Eruption,  War.
1000.  Sympathy,  Mercy.

In  addition  to  these,  the  table  contains  some
specific  numbers,  namely  : —

81.  The  Adept.

120.  Honour,  Patriotism,  Praise.

215.  Grief,  Misfortune.

318.  Divine  messenger.

350.  Justice,  Confidence,  Hope.

360.  A  House,  Home,  Society.

365.  The  Science  of  the  Stars.

490.  Priesthood,  Ministration.

666.  An  Enemy,  Malice,  Plots.
1095.  Reserve,  Silence.
1260.  Annoyances,  Terrors.
1390.  Persecution.

Unfortunately,  the  method  to  be  followed  in  the
use  of  these  numbers  has  not  been  handed  down  to
us,  but  I  conceive  that  a  method  similar  to  the
Hebrew  notaricon  may  not  be  entirely  amiss.  Thus
the  name  of  the  great  Napoleon  is  enumerated —


/


150       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  sum  of  these  numbers  is  810,  which  is  equal
to  800  =  empire,  conquest,  and  10  =  success,  logic,
renovation.  The  words  "  empire,  conquest,  success,
and  renovation  "  have  certainly  a  singular  apposite-
ness  in  this  connection.  It  is  obvious,  however,
that  the  import  of  a  name  would  be  altered  by  change
from  one  language  into  another,  and  it  is  reasonable
to  presume  that  the  original  or  mother-tongue  in
each  case  must  be  adopted.

The  Gimeiria  ascribes  to  each  letter  a  definite
value,  as  we  have  already  seen.  The  sum  of  a  name
is  then  reconverted  into  letters  of  equivalent
value,  and  the  meaning  of  the  name  thus  derived.
Thus  we  read  that  an  angel  talked  with  John  of
Patmos,  who  would  have  fallen  down  and  wor-
shipped him  but  was  forbidden.  The  angel
speaks  of  himself  as  a  man,  one  of  the  "  keepers


N  40

a  1

p  60

0  50

1  20
e  5
o  50
n  40
e  5


B  2

u  200

o  50

n  40

a  1

p  60

a  1

r  80

t  100

e  5


271


539


THE  CALCULATORY  ART  151


of  the  sayings  in  the  Book."  The  word  "  man  "
in  Hebrew  is  Aish,  the  value  of  which  is

A  I    ilO    5^  300  =  311
and  the  name  of  the  great  recorder  is  Raphael —
R  200    ph  SO    a  I    Z  30  =311.

For  this  John  of  Patmos  was  of  the  Order  of  the
Recorders  and  of  the  Hierarchy  of  Raphael.

Of  the  Order  of  Calculators  and  Measurers  is  the
Intelligence  of  Sephery;  of  the  Order  of  Ordainers
and  Judges  is  the  Intelligence  of  Zadok;  and  these,
with  others,  are  extracted  from  holy  writ  wherein
their  offices  are  covertly  referred  to.

Therefore,  if  any  would  know  the  name  of  their
office,  let  them  take  the  sum  of  their  name  and
convert  it  by  the  Gimetria  according  to  the  rules
of  the  kabalistic  art.  Thus  the  name  Sepharial  "
I  of  the  Order  of  the  Sephery  is  thus  computed  : — -
S  60  ph  80  r  200  ?:  10  a  I  Z  30  =  381
which  is  equivalent  to  :  a  1  sh  300  ^9  80  =  381,  the
word  Asoph  being  from  the  root  Ashp  =  a  star-gazer
or  astrologer,  the  astrologers  of  Chaldea  being  known
as  the  Ashpim.

The  Notaricon  is  used  for  extracting  the  Divine
names,  and  those  of  angels  or  spirits  from  sacred
writ.  The  telesmic  art  requires  that  these  names
shall  be  emploj^ed  in  the  construction  of  Talismans,
as  by  their  correspondence  in  numerical  value  thej
have  a  compelling  influence  over  all  things  which
answer  to  the  same  root  value.

Thus  by  taking  the  letters  from  the  beginnings  of


152       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

words,  or  their  finals,  and  by  other  measures  of  a
secret  nature,  the  names  of  Spiritual  Powers  are
derived.  The  Divine  Being  is  of  infinite  power
and  presence,  and  therefore  His  names,  as  expressing
the  infinite  variety  of  powers,  intelligences  and
forms  within  the  universe,  can  never  be  exhausted.
The  kabalist,  therefore,  only  seeks  to  discern  those
which  are  of  ef&cacy  in  the  matter  in  hand.

From  a  certain  text  of  three  verses  in  Exodus
which  begin  with  the  words  :  Vayiso,  Vayiho,  and
Vayot  respectively^  the  seventy-two  Divine  names
are  derived.  These  are  the  Shemhamphore  corre-
sponding to  the  seventy-two  Elders  ruling  over  the
Church  Universal,  i.e.  the  Middle  Spiritual  Kingdom.
The  method  followed  in  this  case  is  as  follows  : —

The  first  verse  is  written  in  Hebrew  characters,
which  are  seventy-two  in  number,  from  right  to  left,
as  is  usual  with  Semitic  texts.  The  second  verse
is  written  from  left  to  right,  and  the  third  verse
from  right  to  left  as  usual,  the  Hebrew  text  being
used  throughout.  Then  by  reading  the  three  letters
which  fall  together  as  one  word,  we  have  seventy-
two  triliteral  words,  to  which  is  added  the  affix
of  the  sacred  names  El  or  Jah.  From  the  text
"  Thou  art  the  mighty  Lord  for  ever  "  is  derived
the  potent  name  Agla;  and  from  the  sacred  affirma-
tion "  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  God  "  we  derive
the  name  Yaya.    Thus  : —

Jehovah  Alohenu  Jehovah  Achad.

Likewise  from  the  text  "  One  source  of  His  unity


THE  CALCULATORY  ART  153


Dne  source  of  His  individuality,  His  vicissitude  is
Dne  "  we  have  the  magical  name  Ararita,  which  is
:ound  inscribed  on  the  Seal  of  Solomon  the  King.
From  the  text  Holy  and  blessed  is  He  "  we  derive
ihe  name  Hagaha.  From  the  sentence  in  the
Drophetic  blessing  of  Jacob  "  Until  Shiloh  come,"
.vhen  the  patriarch  was  predicting  the  fate  of
ludah,  we  have  the  name  Jesii.  The  well-informed
labalist,  however,  knows  that  this  text  has  reference
}0  the  rising  of  the  Star  Shuleh  in  the  constellation
)f  Scorpio;  for  Leo,  the  lion  of  Judah,  with  Cepheus
he  Lawgiver  beneath,  does  not  depart  from  the
^lidheaven  until  Scorpio  rises  in  the  East.

Again,  from  the  text  "  The  Lord  our  King  is  true  "
ve  have  the  word  Amen,

The  Temurah,  which  means  "  change,"  also  yields
ts  secret  interpretations  by  the  transposing  and
3xchanging  of  letters  according  to  the  rules  of  the
kabahstic  art  as  set  forth  in  the  Table  of  Tsiruph;
md  by  the  application  of  this  to  the  Gimetria  and
4otaricon,  we  derive  the  names  of  spirits  and  angels
v^hose  offices  are  expressed  in  the  texts  whence  they
re  derived.  Some  of  these  are  evil  and  are  referred
0  as  "  vessels  of  iniquity  "  and  "  vessels  of  wrath  "
jM  also  "  lying  spirits."

Every  man  is  beset  with  some  temptations  arising
rem  his  association  with  the  world  of  spirits,  every
;ood  ministration  implying  a  possible  evil  by  per-
version, to  which  evil  the  malevolent  forces  corre-
pond.  Thus  man  has  both  a  protecting  angel  and
,.n  assailant,  and  he  may  thus  incline  to  good  or  to


154       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

evil,  being,  while  in  the  middle  world,  in  a  state  ol
equilibrium  or  freedom.  Moreover,  it  is  said  that
preference  among  men  is  from  the  superior  power
of  the  spirits  attached  to  one  man  over  those  oi
another,  for  by  the  intensity  of  their  wills  these
men  are  able  to  link  themselves  with  the  powers  ol
good  or  evil  allied  to  them  by  nature.

Every  work  undertaken  by  man  has  a  twofold
presidency  of  spiritual  powers  attaching  to  it,  where-
by it  is  brought  to  perfection  or  overthrown
Among  the  kabalists  there  is  a  method  of  deriving
the  names  of  those  spirits  presiding  over  the  nativity,
The  figure  of  the  Heavens  being  erected,  the  lettei
of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  are  set  round  m  the  order
of  the  signs,  beginning  at  the  Ascendant ;  and  those
letters  which  fall  on  the  places  of  the  Sun,  the  Moon,
and  the  ruler  of  the  Ascendant  when  brought  to-
gether yield  the  name  of  the  presiding  angel  or
benefic  Intelligence.  But  the  same  calculation
made  from  the  Descendant  of  the  horoscope  yiel
the  name  of  the  evil  spirit  or  Cachodemon.  Othej
affirm,  however,  that  the  places  of  the  benefic  planets
must  be  employed,  together  with  that  of  the  ruler
of  the  Ascendant  for  the  Agathodemon;  while  the
places  of  the  malefics  with  that  of  the  ruler  of  the
Descendant  must  be  taken  account  of  to  compute
the  name  of  the  Cachodemon.  But  names  in  them-
selves bear  only  such  meanings  as  we  attach  to  them;
their  real  efficacy  consists  in  their  numerical
correspondence  with  the  nature  of  the  s3^mbols
employed  and  their  relation  to  the  purpose  in  hand,


THE  CALCULATORY  ART  155


nd  thus  in  their  confirming  the  mind  in  that  faith
nd  intention  without  which,  together  with  the
nited  action  of  the  will  and  imagination,  no  magical
ork  can  be  brought  to  completion.  For  the  will
the  male  force  and  the  imagination  the  female
ower  which,  by  their  union,  are  capable  of  creating
lat  which  is  desired.

The  evocations  within  the  magic  circle,  the  con-
irations  of  spirits  to  the  crystal,  the  construction  of
ilismans,  sigils,  seals  and  other  works  of  the
laumaturgic  art,  have  their  root  in  this  covert
greement  between  Nature  and  the  Soul  of  man,
hereby  Spirit  answers  to  matter  and  Force  to
)rm,  so  that  the  material  form  of  every  symbol
:ands  for  the  embodiment  of  a  corresponding
piritual  Force.


CHAPTER  III
OF  EVIL  SPIRITS


The  Prince  of  Darkness,  Beelzebub,  presides  over
nine  orders  of  infernal  spirits,  according  to  the
Kabalists.  These  spirits  are  the  tempters  of  man-
kind. The  Occultist  affirms  that  they  are  the  dis-
embodied spirits  of  evil-minded  men  confirmed  in
wickedness  by  the  perversity  of  their  wills.  Even
presuming  that  they  are  no  more  than  the  evil
thoughts  and  imaginings  of  embodied  humanity,
there  is  yet  nothing,  in  a  world  where  "  thoughts
are  things,"  to  prevent  such  from  taking  bodily
shape  and  substance  and  thus,  when  stimulated
by  the  force  of  men's  evil  desires,  becoming  active
powers  for  evil.

Everybody  has  read  of  Frankenstein's  Monster,
that  weird  output  of  the  imagination  of  the  beautiful
Mary  Shelley,  but  few  people  have  realized  that
the  story  embodies  a  great  occult  truth.  It  is
perhaps  not  difficult  to  trace  this  creation  of  the
daughter  of  Charles  Godwin.  One  has  but  to  study
his  work  on  The  Lives  of  the  Necromancers  to  be
confirmed  in  the  idea  that  what  the  father  sug-
gested the  daughter  elaborated  in  the  laboratory  of

156


OF  EVIL  SPIRITS  157


her  own  gifted  mind.  It  was  in  the  nature  of  a
competitive  essay,  and  gained  the  prize  of  publica-
tion. Study  this  story,  and  also  the  chapter  on
"  The  Dweller  on  the  Threshold  "  in  the  popular
novel  by  Bulwer  Lytton,  and  you  will  have  some
notion  of  the  experiences  of  those  who  are  capable
of  creating,  and  thereafter  of  being  obsessed  by,  the
images  of  their  own  minds.  Will  and  Desire  created
the  universe.  It  should  not  be  strange  that  it  may
create  something  equal  to  man  when  both  the  will
and  imagination  of  man  are  consciously  directed
to  the  process.

Of  the  Nine  Orders  of  Evil  Spirits,  the  first  is
that  of  False  Gods.  Here  we  have  the  concentrated
worship  and  imagination  of  thousands  directed  to
the  same  effect,  the  creation  of  "  gods."  We  have
knowledge  of  the  Saturnalias  and  Baldachinos,
the  Bacchanalias  and  orgies  of  the  heathen  world.
Such  a  god  was  that  Satan  who  tempted  the  man
Jesus.  Swedenborg  defines  the  difference  between
the  satans  and  the  devils  when  he  says  that  the
former  apply  themselves  to  the  minds  of  men,  in-
stilling false  doctrines  and  lies,  blinding  intelligence,
stimulating  pride  and  inciting  to  heresies  and
seditions ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  devils  are  such
as  apply  themselves  to  the  appetites,  and  by  their
affinity  with  the  emotional  faculty  (whence  they  have
their  origin)  seek  to  instil  lust,  greed,  avarice,  hatred,
and  every  kind  of  illicit  affection  and  perverted  or
depraved  appetite.  It  may  be  well  to  accept  this
distinction.


158        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  second  order  are  called  Lying  Spirits,  oi
which  sort  were  those  who  obsessed  the  prophet
Ahab  ;  and  over  these  is  set  a  spirit  called  Pytho,
who  is  the  father  of  lies.  These  spirits  apph
themselves  to  the  interiors  of  the  vocal  and  respira
tory  organs  by  means  of  the  brain  centres.  Some
such  are  to  be  heard  speaking  through  the  mouths  oi
persons  entranced,  such  as  demoniacs,  pythonesses
and  spirit  mediums.  Such  an  one  is  mention':
in  the  Bible  as  crying  out  in  pain  at  the  approach  oi
Jesus,  saying  :  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  Thee,  0
Son  of  David  ?  I  know  Thee  who  Thou  art !  "

The  third  order  of  evil  spirits  are  those  called
"  Vessels  of  Iniquity  "  and  "  Vessels  of  Wrath,'
who  are  the  inventors  of  all  vices  for  the  infesting
of  men  and  their  ruination.    Their  prince  is  called!
"  Belial,"  who  is  without  a  yoke,  being  a  renegade
and  disobedient  spirit  not  subject  to  control.  01,
this  order  are  the  violent  and  lawless,  murderers,  and
some  suicides  who  kill  themselves  in  frenzy.  Oi
this  order  St.  Paul  speaks  to  the  Corinthians,  saying
"  What   agreement   hath   Christ   with   Belial  ?
For  these  spirits  of  Belial  have  no  agreement  with
any,  being,  as  it  were,  the  Ishmaelites  of  the  under-
world.

The  fourth  order  of  evil  spirits  is  called  Tli
Revengeful,''  their  prince  being  called  Asmodeu,
who  is  the  occasion  of  judgment.    They  were  of  the
order  let  loose  upon  Egjrpt  in  the  visitation  by
plagues,  as  recorded  in  Exodus.

The  fifth  order  of  evil  spirits  is  called  "  The


OF  EVIL  SPIRITS


159


)eluders/'  whose  satan  is  called  Nahash,  the  chief
i)f  those  who  have  the  spirit  of  the  serpent.  These
'iause  signs  and  wonders  and  work  all  sorts  of  marvels
n  order  to  seduce  men's  minds  from  the  truth.
Phey  are  represented  by  the  Black  Magicians,  the
fvonder-workers  who  seek  to  efface  God  and  arrogate

0  themselves  the  power  to  control  the  spiritual
yorld.  In  reflected  degree  they  work  through  the
ininds  of  cheats,  forgers  and  charlatans.  That
)atan  who  tempted  Eve  is  of  this  order  of  the  Nahash
)r  Serpents.  Of  him  it  is  said  :  "  He  it  is  who
.educes  the  whole  world,  doing  great  signs  and
iiausing  fire  to  descend  from  heaven  in  the  sight
\>i  men,  seducing  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  by
hese  which  are  given  him  to  do,"  as  appears  in  the
\pocalypse.

1  The  sixth  order  is  that  of  the  "  Turbulents,"  pre-
sided over  by  Meririm,  the  Prince  of  the  Powers  of
he  Air.  It  is  they  who  affect  the  air  with  tempests,
corrupting  the  air  with  blights  and  poisonful  exhala-
l-ions,  destroying  crops  and  polluting  the  waters  of
he  earth.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  this  "  Prince  of  the
^wers  of  the  Air."  These  spirits  have  affinity
vith  the  thoughts  and  passions  of  men,  and  are
Invoked  by  the  turbulence  and  passions  of  men's
'ninds,as  may  be  seen  in  great  wars  and  revolutions.

The  seventh  order  is  that  of  "  the  Furies."
Cheir  Prince  is  called  Apollyon,  or  in  the  Hebrew
\baddon,  which  means  "  the  Destroyer."  They
ire  the  cause  of  madness,  frenzy,  murders,  massacres
ind  intestine  wars.


160       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  eighth  order  of  evil  spirits  is  called  "  The
Accusers  "  or  The  Inquisitors."  They  are  under
the  domuaion  of  one  called  Ashtaroth,  i.  e.  "  The
Searcher."  In  the  Greek  he  is  called  Diabolos,  or
the  Calumniator,  and  in  the  Apocalypse  is  referred
to  as  "  the  Accuser  of  the  Brethren,  accusing  them
night  and  day  before  the  face  of  God."  For  these
spirits  delight  in  persecuting  the  righteous,  searching
out  their  weaknesses  and  railing  against  them
because  of  their  imperfections.  The  common  fault-
finder is  well  within  the  category  of  those  who  owe
allegiance  to  Ashtaroth.

The  ninth  order  is  that  of  "  The  Tempters."
These  are  in  close  association  with  mankind,  and
one  of  their  number  is  present  with  those  who  are
in  any  way  subject  to  the  worldly  spirit  of  greed
and  avarice.  Their  prince  is  called  Mammon,  i.  e.
Covetousness.

These  nine  orders  of  evil  spirits  are  called  trans-
gressors, for  they  violate  the  commandments  which
in  the  Hebrews  are  but  nine  only,  and  not  ten  as
commonly  conceived:  the  first  and  second  of  the
"  Decalogue  "  being  one  only,  and  having  reference
to  the  worship  of  the  true  God  and  the  sin  of
the  making  of  false  gods,  whether  subjective  or
objective;  and  Beelzebub  is  that  supreme  False
God  whom  the  sinful  serve  by  error  under  what-
ever name  it  may  figure.


CHAPTER  IV


MAN'S  SPIRITUAL  FREEDOM

To  the  end  that  mankind  may  be  in  freedom  and
reserve  to  itself  the  power  to  cast  in  its  lot  Avith  the
good  or  evil  powers,  these  nine  orders  of  evil  spirits
are,  according  to  the  kabalists,  counterbalanced  by
a  corresponding  array  of  angelic  orders.  These
are  known  as  Cherubim,  Seraphim,  Thrones,  Do-
minions, Powers,  Virtues,  Principalities,  Archangels,
and  Angels.  These  Nine  Orders  are  otherwise
referred  to  as  the  Metratton,  they  who  stand
about  the  Throne  ";  the  Ophanim,  otherwise  called
the  Wheels  of  Life  (referred  to  by  Ezekiel);  and
the  Seven  Planetary  Spirits,  which  include  the
Archangels  and  their  hosts  of  subservient  angels.
These  by  their  representatives  are  set  over  mankind
for  his  government  and  well-being;  else  were  man
wholly  abandoned  to  the  machinations  of  evil
,  spirits.

!  In  the  apocryphal  book  of  Tobias  it  is  related
that  the  Archangel  Raphael  did  apprehend
Asmodeus,  and  bound  him  in  the  wilderness  of
Upper  Egypt.  It  has  been  thought  that  this  storjr
has  reference  to  the  presence  of  the  planet  Jupiter

161  M


162        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


in  the  sign  Gemini ;  for  Asmodeus  is  of  the  sphere  of
Jupiter's  evil  spirits,  and  Raphael  is  Mercury,  whose
sign  Gemini  is  said  to  rule  over  Egypt,  and  more-
over it  is  the  sign  of  Jupiter's  debility.  Ingenious
as  this  interpretation  may  be,  it  appears  to  rest
upon  the  association  of  Asmodeus  with  Jupiter,
which  may  very  well  be  the  case,  as  Asmodeus,  like
Jupiter,  is  related  to  the  office  of  the  Judges;  but
it  is  not  the  fact,  astrologically  speaking,  that
Gemini  rules  Upper  Egypt,  but  Capricorn,  or —
according  to  the  Egjrptian  zodiac — the  Crocodile.
Hence  the  Egyptians  were  called  the  Mizraim  (those
born  from  the  crocodile).

Concerning  the  sphere  of  Jupiter,  Hesiod  says :
"  There  are  thirty  thousand  of  the  spirits  of  Jupiter,
pure  and  immortal,  who  are  the  keepers  of  men  ou
earth  that  they  may  observe  justice  and  mercy,
and  who,  having  clothed  themselves  with  an  aerial
form,  go  to  and  fro  everywhere  upon  the  earth."

No  man  could  continue  in  safety,  it  is  said,  nor
any  woman  remain  uncorrupted,  and  none  coujd
come  to  the  end  designed  by  God,  but  for  the  assist-
ance given  them  by  the  benefic  spirits,  or  if  evil
spirits  were  alone  allowed  to  sway  men's  minds.
Thus  every  man  has  a  guardian  angel  and  a  good
demon,  as  Socrates  affirms,  and  likewise  there  are
spirits  of  evil  attaching  to  all  in  w  hom  the  passions
are  allowed  free  play ;  and  these  good  and  evil  forces
contend  for  the  victor}^,  the  decision  being  in  the
hands  of  the  man  whose  soul  is  the  coveted  prize.
For  man  is  in  the  middle  ground  of  equilibrium.


MAN'S  SPIRITUAL  FREEDOM  163


and  freedom  being  allied  to  both  the  superior  and
inferior  worlds  by  the  dual  aspect  of  his  mind,
being  stirred  by  passion  from  below  and  illumined
by  intelligence  from  above,  it  is  therefore  in  his
will  to  whom  the  victory  shall  be  given.

Therefore,  we  cannot  impute  evil  to  spirits  that
are  by  nature  evil,  neither  lay  our  failures  to  their
blame ;  nor  accuse  the  benevolent  spirits  of  any  lack
of  zeal,  seeing  that  it  is  by  our  own  consent  that  this
or  that  advantage  is  gained  by  the  powers  of  e\^il.
But  the  evil  powers,  once  overcome,  lose  their
influence  over  us  in  a  great  measure.  And  this
is  the  meaning  of  the  saying,  "  I  will  give  you  power
to  tread  upon  scorpions;  nevertheless,  rejoice  not
that  ye  have  power  over  the  spirits ^  but  that  your
name  is  written  in  heaven."

Thus  it  is  seen  that  evil  spirits  are  compared  to
scorpions,  and  that  they  may  be  rendered  ineffectual
and  harmless  b}^  the  power  of  the  celestial  name,
which  is  that  spiritual  or  "  new  name  "  which  is
written  upon  the  White  Stone,  as  is  said  in  the
Revelations.  The  Christ,  or  Man  made  Perfect,
is  Venus,  the  Light  Bearer  and  the  Messenger  of
Peace,  who  gives  his  qualities  to  the  overcoming
Df  evil,  and  "  To  him  that  overcometh  I  will  give
the  bright  and  morning  star."  Opposed  to  Venus
n  the  spheres  is  Mars,  the  god  of  war,  the  promoter
Df  strife  and  discord,  the  ruler  of  the  "  Scorpions."
He  rules  over  the  eighth  sphere  and  the  eighth  sign
)f  the  zodiac,  i.  e,  Scorpio,  which  is  associated
vith  the  House  of  Death,  the  terminal  house  of  the

iM  2


164        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


natural  soul.  When  good  spirits  and  powers  domi-
nate this  principle  in  man's  nature — i.  e.  the  Scorpio
principle — there  is  the  better  hope  of  a  deliverance
from  the  evil  of  these  spirits.

When  it  is  said  that  Michael  (the  Sun-Angel)
contended  with  Satan  (^.  e.  Saturn)  for  the  body  of
Moses,  we  understand  kabalistically  that  the  good
and  evil  principles  were  in  strife,  Saturn  contending
that  the  body  belonged  to  him  by  natural  agreement,
while  Michael  affirmed  that  he  had  redeemed  it
even  from  decay;  for  Moses  was  an  Initiate  of  the
cultus  of  Ammon-Ra,  and  his  name  denotes  not  only
drawn  forth  and  elected,  but  kabalistically  he  is
nominated,  for  he  was  one  of  those  named  and
appointed  to  a  typical  work.

This  association  of  the  spirits  with  man,  and  the
sympathies  and  antipathies  arising  therefrom,  is
the  reason  that  certain  men  are  naturally  friends
or  enemies  of  others.

A  certain  magician  warned  M.  Antoninus  of  his
friendship  with  Octavius  Augustus,  with  whom  he
was  accustomed  to  play,  Augustus  always  coming
oft"  the  conqueror.  The  magician,  it  is  said,  repri-
manded Antoninus  because  he  continued  to  consort
with  Augustus,  although  better  born,  more  skilful
and  older  than  he,  for,  the  magician  continued,
"  Thy  genius  doth  much  dread  the  genius  of  this
young  man  and  thy  fortune  flatters  his  fortune,
so  that,  unless  thou  shalt  shun  him,  it  appears  wholly
to  decline  to  him."  Thus  it  is  that  some  men  are
brought  to  positions  of  preference  and  power  irrespec-


MAN'S  SPIRITUAL  FREEDOM  165

\  tive  of  their  individual  merits,  because  the  genius
which  directs  them  and  presides  over  their  fortunes
is  more  powerful  than  that  of  their  rivals.  But  the
Genius  of  Fortune  is  not  that  of  Life,  nor  that  of
Intelligence,  these  three  being  distinct :  so  that  a
man  may  become  possessed  of  great  wealth  and  die
young,  or  show  remarkable  faculty  without  com-

,  mensurate  benefit.  Therefore  the  Genius  of  Fortune
and  Life  must  be  in  agreement  if  the  position  is
to  be  enjoyed,  while  that  of  the  Intelligence  and
Fortune  must  be  equally  well  disposed  if  the  full
reward  of  one's  labours  is  to  be  enjoyed.  Thus,
all  things  considered,  the  choice  must  be  in  regard
to  that  calling  or  profession  which  most  suitably
comports  with  the  Genius  of  Fortune.  This  is
taught  in  the  lioroscopical  science,  but  otherwise
is  kabalistically  determined  according  to  names
and  numbers.  These  things,  which  have  relation
to  the  freedom  of  man,  must  be  understood  by  those
who  would  make  election  of  times  and  seasons.
It  is  good  and  proper  to  know  whence  benefits  will
be  derived  and  whence  evil  will  assail  us  ;  also  those
days,  hours  and  seasons  which  are  proper  to  our
purposes,  and  those  again  which  are  incompatible  ;
so  that  between  that  which  is  good  and  that  which
is  evil  we  may  so  work  that  ultimately  we  may

:  prevail.


CHAPTER  V


ON  TALISMANS

On  the  back  of  the  Great  Tortoise  which  the  I
Emperor  Yaou  found  on  the  banks  of  the  Yellow
River  after  the  great  flood  of  2348  B.C.,  there  was
found  inscribed  a  square  of  numbers  which  is  now  '
of  universal  fame.    It  comes  to  us  through  the
Hebrew  Kabala  as  the  Seal  of  Saturn,  or  the  Table  j
of  Fifteen,  being  composed  of  the  figures  from  one
to  nine  so  arranged  that  every  way  it  adds  to  15.
But  the  Chinese  call  it  the  Pa^ao,  or  Eightfold  Path,
these  ways  or  paths  being  represented  by  the  num-
bers leading  from  the  central  figure,  which  represents
Man.    Thus  we  have  the  most  ancient  telesma  in
the  world,  the  mystic  Table  of  Saturn  : —


4

9

2


3

5

7

8

1

6

This  telesma  is  made  on  virgin  parchment,  or  lead,
which  is  the  metal  of  Saturn,  and  on  a  Saturday,
in  the  hour  of  Saturn,  being  the  first  and  eighth
hour  after  sunrise.    On  one  side  is  inscribed  tb

166


ON  TALISMANS


167


above  table  of  figures,  around  which  is  a  circle
enclosing  the  name  Agiol,  which  is  the  sum  of  the
numbers  included  in  the  table,  namely  45.    Thus  : —

A  1   g  3   i  10   a  I    1  30  =  45.

On  the  reverse  side  is  the  Sigil  of  Saturn  and  the
Seal,  together  with  a  text  importing  the  purpose
for  which  the  telesma  is  made.


The  Table  of  Jupiter  is  a  square  of  four,  comprising
the  numbers  from  1  to  16  in  such  form  that  each
way  shall  amount  to  34,  the  total  of  all  being  136.

The  Table  of  Mars  is  a  square  of  five,  from  1  to  25,
each  column  and  diagonal  amounting  to  65,  and  the
sum  of  all  to  325.

The  Table  of  the  Sun  is  a  square  of  six,  from  1  to
36,  the  sum  being  111  in  every  direction,  and  the
total  of  all  the  numbers  666.  This  is  the  mystical
number  which  stands  in  opposition  to  the  "  Number
of  the  Beast."

The  Table  of  Venus  is  a  square  of  seven,  comprising
the  numbers  from  1  to  49,  amounting  to  175  in  all
directions,  and  the  sum  of  all  the  figures  to  1225.

The  Table  of  Mercury  is  a  square  of  eight,  being


Sigil  of  Saturn.


168       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


numbers  from  1  to  64,  adding  to  260  in  all  directions,
the  sum  being  2080.

The  Table  of  the  Moon  is  a  square  of  nine,  adding
to  369  in  all  directions,  the  sum  of  the  numbers
being  3321.

Each  telesma  has  to  be  made  in  the  hour  and
on  the  day  ruled  by  the  planet,  when  the  Moon  is
increasing  in  light  and  in  good  aspect  to  the  ruler
of  the  hour.

An  illustration  of  the  method  of  employing  these
telesmas  may  be  cited.

If  the  position  is  to  be  improved,  take  the  influence
of  the  planet  Jupiter  and  on  a  Thursday  in  the
hour  of  Jupiter,  the  Moon  being  in  good  aspect
to  that  planet  and  increasing  in  light.  On  a  piece
of  tin,  silver  or  parchment,  inscribe  the  Table  of  Four,
and  over  it  the  name  of  the  Intelligence  of  Jupiter,
which  is  Jophial,  and  beneath  it  the  symbol  of  the
planet.  Enclose  these  in  a  circle  and  write  around
it  the  names  of  Aba,  Hevah,  Ahi,  Alab,  which  are
the  powers  of  its  numbers.  Close  them  with  another
circle.

On  the  reverse  side,  inscribe  the  planetary  seal,
and  the  sigil  of  the  planetary  intelligence,  and
enclose  them  in  a  circle.  Around  this  write  the  pur-
port of  the  telesma  in  a  verse  taken  from  Scripture
which  is  appropriate  to  the  operation  in  hand.
Close  all  in  a  circle.

The  telesma  thus  made  is  to  be  worn  upon  the
person  until  such  time  as  its  operation  is  effected,
when  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  "  dead  "  talisman,


ON  TALISMANS


169


and  thereafter  will  serve  for  no  other  person  or
purpose.

Now  in  order  to  complete  the  knowledge  of  this
telesmic  art,  the  following  sigils  are  given,  to  be
inscribed  on  the  reverse  side  to  the  table  of  numbers.


As  to  the  construction  of  the  magical  tables  of
numbers,  the  following  rules  are  to  be  followed  : —

For  evenly-even  squares,  i.  e.  such  as  have  4,
8  and  12  bases,  e.  g,  the  squares  of  Jupiter  and


170        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Mercury,  write  down  the  figures  in  their  natural
order,  as  here  : —

12     3  4
5      6      7  8
9    10    11  12
13    14    15  16

Now  draw  a  square  divided  into  16  cells.  Fill
in  the  numbers  in  this  order,  viz.  keep  the  coniers
as  they  are,  1,  4,  13,  and  16.  Transpose  the  figures
to  their  diagonal  opposites,  namely,  5  and  12,  9  and
8,  2  and  15,  3  and  14,  leaving  the  central  -quare
of  four  cells  in  their  natural  order.

You  will  then  have  a  square  in  which  the  numbers
are  so  disposed  that  they  add  up  to  34  in  any  direc-
tion, thus  : —


1

15

14

4

12

6

7

9

8

10

11

5

13

3

2

16

For  oddly-even  squares,  as  3  x  2  =  6,5  x  2  =  10,
7  X  2  =  14,  a  rather  different  method  is  employed.
Take  a  natural  square  of  six.  Keep  the  corner
numbers  1,  6,  31,  36  in  their  natural  places,  transfer
the  central  square  of  four  cells  to  their  diagonal
opposites,  namety,  15  and  22,  16  and  21.  Keep
the  comers  of  the  next  square,  8,  11,  26,  29,  in


ON  TALISMANS


171


their  natural  places.  We  now  have  the  square  in
this  condition  : —


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

22

21

17

18

19

20

16

15

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

1  32  33

34

35

36

showing  the  t\^o  diagonals  of  the  grand  square
completed.

Now  transpose  27  and  28,  then  lift  them  to  the
places  of  9  and  10,  bringing  these  down  to  replace
them.

Next  transpose  17  and  23,  and  carry  them  across
to  the  places  of  14  and  20,  bringing  these  latter  over
to  replace  them.

Next  transpose  12  and  30,  and  carry  them  across
to  the  places  of  7  and  25,  bringing  these  latter  back
to  replace  them.

Transpose  19  and  24,  leaving  13  and  18  in  their
natural  places.

Transpose  4  and  34,  leaving  3  and  33  in  their
natural  places.

Finally,  transpose  32  and  35,  and  carry  them  across


172        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM  I

to  the  places  of  2  and  5,  bringing  these  down
replace  them ;  you  will  then  have  the


Magic  Square  of  Sol,


1

35

3

34

32

6

30

8

28

27

11

7

13

23

22

21

14

18

24

17

16

15

20

19

12

26

9

10

29

25

32

2

33

4

5

36

All  squares  may  be  dealt  with  on  the  principle
which  is  here  followed.  It  will  be  of  interest  to
note  that  the  seals  of  the  planets  are  derived  from
the  numerical  sequence  of  their  tables.  Thus  in
the  square  of  three,  which  is  the  Table  of  Saturn,
if  you  draw  a  line  from  1  to  2  and  thence  to  3,  another
line  through  4,  5  and  6,  and  a  third  line  from  7  to
8  and  thence  to  9,  you  have  the  Seal  of  Saturn.
But  the  other  forms  of  the  seals  have  been  simplified
and  rendered  as  equivalent  glyphs.

Various  other  talismans  have  been  handed  down
to  us  beside  those  appropriate  to  the  planets.  Thus
w^e  have  the  most  Sacred  Seal  of  Solomon  the  Kiug.
which  is  a  square  of  four  inset  with  the  sacred  name
whose  letters  replace  the  figures,  the  same  being


ON  TALISMANS


173


nscribed  in  a  circle  within  which  are  written  the
vords :  Jehovah  eloahim  Jehovah  achad  (The
jord  our  God  is  the  only  Lord).

On  the  reverse  side  are  the  interlaced  triangles
,vith  the  symbol  of  Deity,  the  Yod  or  perfect  number
10  set  in  the  midst.

Another  telesma  attributed  to  Solomon  is  dis-
;)layed  on  page  174.

The  Seal  of  Solomon  is  shown  on  one  side  with
the  word  Berasit,  i.e.  "In  wisdom  "  or  "In  the
beginning  ";  and  on  tlie  reverse  side  is  the  name  of
Solomon  with  his  sigil  or  mystic  signature.

By  whatever  means  we  may  constrain  spiritual
forces  to  our  purpose,  whether  by  sigil,  charm,
telesma  or  invocation,  it  is  only  b}^  the  faith  of  the
operator,  aided  by  the  trained  will  and  imagination,
which  are  the  magical  faculties  of  the  human  soul.

Imagination  is  the  creative  or  formative  power
of  the  mind  by  which  a  matrix  or  mould  is  delivered
to  Nature  for  the  vitalizing  power  of  the  Will.
For  of  these  faculties  the  imagination  is  female
and  receptive,  while  the  will  is  masculine  and
projective.  Wliat  in  the  common  mind  operates
as  desultory  thought  and  desire,  the  thought  taking
form  and  the  desire  giving  life  to  it,  is  replaced  in
the  mind  of  the  magician  by  an  ardent  will  and
conscious  imagination  directed  to  the  creation  of
definite  things.  To  a  certain  extent,  all  lovers,  all
poets  and  artists  are  magicians  equally  with  the
makers  of  empires  and  the  reformers  of  the  religious
world.    They  have  definite  objects  in  view;  their


174        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Tlie  Seal  of  Solomon  the  King.


UJ


'1


\

1

1

n


ON  TALISMANS


175


naginations  are  fired  with  the  vision  of  a  thing
reatly  desired  of  them,  and  their  wills  are  potent
nd  effectually  directed  to  the  goal  of  their  ambitions,
'hese  are  the  people  whose  dreams  come  true.
)nly,  when  art  supplements  and  fixes  the  form,
iving  voice  to  the  powers  which  reside  in  Nature,
ailing  them  forth  to  defined  and  determined  uses,
heir  efficacy  is  brought  within  the  control  of  the
juman  will  as  raw  materials  wrested  from  the  bowels
f  the  earth  and  fashioned  for  a  purpose.
Paracelsus  conveys  this  same  teaching  when  he
ays  :  "  The  power  of  the  will  and  the  intention  of
he  soul  are  the  main  points  in  magic  as  in  medicine.
L  man  who  wishes  everybody  well  will  produce
ood  effects,  while  one  who  begrudges  everybody
U  that  is  good  and  who  hates  himself  may  experi-
nee  in  his  own  person  the  effects  of  his  poisonous
houghts."

That  the  magical  faculty  does  not  rest  with  the
ood  and  virtuous  alone  we  are  well  aware ;  for  the
lagical  power  is  inherent  in  every  human  soul,
nd  has  the  power  of  acting  not  only  immediately,
pen  bodies  that  are  present  to  the  sense,  by  means
f  the  subtle  powers  of  the  eye  and  the  breath,
>ut  also  at  a  distance,  upon  bodies  and  persons  more
emote,  by  means  of  the  desire  and  phantasy  of  the
oul  acting  upon  the  vital  principle  within  them,
lecognize  only  that  thoughts  are  things,  creatures
'f  life  when  animated  by  human  desire,  and  in  all
espects  obedient  to  their  creator  man,  and  what
linders  that  they  should  obey  the  behests  of  the


176        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


soul,  when  sufficiently  enforced  by  the  impelling
power  of  the  will  ?

Therefore,  we  may  see  that  it  is  motive  alone
which  distinguishes  good  from  evil  in  the  use  of
occult  forces.  That  which  links  the  mind  to  its
subject  is  thought;  that  which  gives  it  form  \^imagim-{
tion;  and  that  which  vitalizes  it  is  the  will.  The  willi
has  no  direct  relations  with  motive,  and  may  be
used  with  equal  power  for  good  or  evil.  WiU  is
but  the  vital  or  life-giving  power  to  thought.  Life
has  no  qualities  per  se,  though  potential  for  all
things;  but  it  gains  qualities  by  use  or  function.
Motive  determines  the  quality  of  our  thought,
inhering  in  and  tincturing  with  its  own  nature  every
mental  action.  The  motive  is  a  power  in  itself,
apart  from  the  act,  as  the  soul  is  a  thing  apart  from
the  body,  though  expressing  itself  therein.

Therefore  causes  that  are  brought  into  play  by
occult  means  will  differ  in  their  ultimate  effects
by  reason  of  the  motive  which  ensouls  them,
though  to  the  outward  eye  appearing  in  all  respects
identical.

Hence,  to  quote  the  words  of  a  modern  physician,
"  Whoever  undertakes  to  govern  and  direct  these
mysterious  powers,  attempts  a  bold  task.  Let
him  consider  well  that  he  is  penetrating,  as  far  as
is  possible,  into  the  highest  laws  of  Nature.  Never
let  him  enter  the  sanctuary  without  reverential
fear  and  the  most  profound  respect  for  the  principles
which  he  endeavours  to  set  in  operation."  Every
person  has  this  magical  faculty  within  him,  and  it


ON  TALISMANS


177


only  stands  in  need  of  waking  up.  There  is  no
limit  to  human  perfectibility  and  power,  and  nothing
which  can  be  conceived  of  by  the  human  mind
that  cannot  ultimately  be  realized  by  man.  There-
fore the  Magi  have  but  four  precepts  : —

Know — Will — Dare — Keep  Silent.


N


CHAPTER  VI


NUMEROLOGY

The  great  philosopher  of  Croton  declared  that
the  universe  was  built  upon  the  power  of  numbers.
The  divine  Plato  affirmed  the  same  thing  when
he  said  :  God  geometrizes."  To  understand  the
power  of  numbers,  their  properties  and  virtues,  i.^
the  first  ke}^  to  a  knowledge  of  the  magic  of  nature.
Number,  whether  expressed  as  quantity,  sound,
form  or  colour,  will  ultimately  be  found  to  deter-
mine all  sympathies  and  antipathies,  all  discord
and  harmony  between  natural  bodies  and  between
the  soul  of  Nature  and  that  of  man.  .To  under
stand  the  power  of  one's  own  soul  in  the  univerM
is  the  first  essential  of  the  magical  art.  To  knoi-
that  power,  one  must  know  his  number  and  thence
his  sympathies  and  antipathies  in  the  soul-world.
Name  and  quality,  what  are  these  but  number,
when  brought  to  the  last  equation  ?  By  the  right
use  of  numbers  all  magical  operations  are  effected,
and  by  the  perfect  knowledge  of  numbers  the
predictive  art  is  brought  to  its  perfection.

Daniel  the  Prophet  said  of  himself  m  Babylonia  :
"I,  Daniel,  found  out  by  the  books  the  numbers  of
the  3^ears,"  and  this  knowledge  was  not  foreign  to
the  great  astrologer  Michael  Nostradamus.

178


NUMEROLOGY


179


All  numbers  have  an  occult  relation  to  sounds.
Gaffarel  says  that  the  Hebrew  alphabet  was  invented
by  the  first  astronomers,  who  took  their  forms  from
lines  joining  the  stars  of  the  zodiacal  constellations
and  the  asterisms  north  and  south  of  the  Zodiac.
This  is  in  agreement  with  the  teaching  of  the  Kabal-
ists,  who  preferably  make  use  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet
in  all  magical  operations.  Each  letter  holds  a
signification  in  reference  to  the  three  worlds,  the
Natural,  the  Intellectual,  and  the  Divine,  in  three
degrees  : —

S  Self -dominion,  Austerity,  Selfishness.

3  Thought,  Science,  Ambition.

n  Tenderness,  Enjoyment,  Luxury.

1  Wisdom,  x4.bility,  Pride.

n  Reverie,  Repose,  Idleness.

1  Aspiration,  Freedom,  Self-indulgence.
T  Triumph,  Conquest,  Anger.

n  Justice,  Equilibrium,  Calculation.

12  Prudence,  Caution,  Fear.

^  Faith,  Learning,  Self -Confidence.

3  Force,  Eft'ort,  Violence.

b  Patience,  Investigation,  Indifi:"erence.

72  Hope,  Devotion,  Destruction.

2  Temperance,  Moderation,  Vacillation.
D  Occult  Science,  Eloquence,  Fatality.
"J  Veneration,  Belief,  Abandon.

5  Immortality,  Beauty,  Expression.
1*  The  Universe,  Reflection,  Error,
P  Religion,  Reason,  Vanity.
"1  Life,  Impulse,  Vegetation.
^  Existence,  Sensation,  Folly.
^  The  Absolute,  Truth,  Success.

xN  2


180        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

The  names  and  values  of  the  letters  have  already
been  given.  In  making  sigils  of  names,  the  quarter-
of  the  kabalistic  tables  are  taken  instead  of  the
letters  they  contain.  These  are  combined  to  foim
the  figure  or  sigil  which  contains  these  forms  in
combination  ;  thus  the  name  Jacob  is  defined  : —


By  permutations  and  combinations  of  numbers
many  choice  secrets  are  discovered,  not  only  in
relation  to  individuals  but  in  regard  also  to  nation-
and  the  world  in  general.  Such  combination
result  in  the  establishing  of  important  epochs
when  things  are  brought  to  their  climax  and  to
their  end,  or  when  a  new  order  of  things  arises
and  is  brought  to  its  issue.  If  we  examine  the
power  of  numbers  in  certain  weU-established  histori-
cal cases,  we  shall  have  quite  sufficient  evidence
to  warrant  our  thesis  that  Number  Hes  at  the  root
of  all  things.

Thus,  the  House  of  Valois  began  with  Philippe
and  ended  with  Henri.

Philippe  has  8  letters.

Henri  has  5  ,,

Henri  de  Valois  13


NUMEROLOGY  181

I    The   House    of    Brunswick   affords   a  similar

kabalism  : —

Ascension  of  George  I    .     .     .  1714

1  +  7  +  1  +  4  =  13

Ascension  of  George  II  .     .     .  1727

1  +  7  +  2  +  7  =  17

Stuart  Rebellion   1744

1  +  7  +  4  +  4  =  _^16

Ascension  of  George  III     .     .  1760

1  +  7  +  6  =  _  14

American  Rebellion  ....  1774

1  +  7  +  7  +  4  =  _19

French  Revolution  ....  1793

1  +  7  +  9  +  3=  __^20

The    Grand   Alliance  against

Napoleon   1813

Again,  the  history  of  France  affords  an  epoch
in  the

Fall  of  Robespierre  in   .     .     .  1794

1  +  7  +  9  +  4  =   21

Fall  of  Napoleon   1815

1  +  8+1  +  5  =  15

Fall  of  Charles  X     ....  1830

1  +  8  +  3  +  0  12


Death  of  Due  d'Orleans,  the

Heir- apparent   ....  1842

It  has  been  well  said  that  "  history  repeats  itself."
Nothing  perhaps  could  so  intimately  portray  this
fact  than  the  parallelism,  even  to  minute  details,
of  the  lives  of  St.  Louis  of  France  and  King  Louis
XVI  of  France,  as  here  ^et  forth  in  detail : —


182        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


1


Birth  of  St.  Louis,  April  23    .     .     .     .  1215

An  interval  of  years   539

Birth  of  Louis  XVI,  August  23    .     .     .  1754

Birth  of  Isabella,  sister  of  St.  Louis  .     .  1225

Interval   539

Birth  of  Elizabeth,  sister  of  Louis  XVI  .  1764

Death  of  Louis  VIII,  father  of  St.  Louis  1226

Interval   539

Death  of  the  Dauphin,  father  of  Louis  XVI  1765

Minority  of  St.  Louis  begins  ....  1226

Interval   53d

Minority  of  Louis  XVI  begins     .     .     .  1765

Marriage  of  St.  Louis   1231

Interval   539

Marriage  of  Louis  XVI   1770

Majority  of  St.  Louis  (King)  ....  1235

Interval   539

Accession  of  Louis  XVI   1774

St.  Louis  concludes  a  Peace  with  Henr}^  III  1243

Interval   539

Louis  XVI  concludes  a  Peace  with

George  III   1782

An  Eastern  Prince  sends  ambassador  to  St.

Louis,  desiring  to  become  a  Christian  1249

Interval   539

An  Eastern  Prince  sends  ambassador  to

Louis  XVI  with  the  same  object    .  1788


NUMEROLOCxY  18.3

Captivity  of  St.  Louis   1250

Interval   539

Captivity  of  Louis  XVI   1789

St.  Louis  abandoned   1250

Interval   539

Louis  XVI  abandoned   1789

Birth  of  Tristan  (Sorrow)   1250

Interval   539

Death  of  Dauphin   1789

Beginning  of  Pastoral  under  Jacob  .     .  1250

Interval   539

Beginning  of  the  Jacobins     .     .     .     .  1789

Death  of  Isabelle  d'Angouleme   .     .     .  1250

Interval   539

Birth  of  Isabelle  d'Angouleme    .     .     .  1789

Death    of    Queen    Blanche,    mother  of

St.  Louis   1253

Interval   539

End  of  the  White  Lily  of  France  .     .     .  1792

St.  Louis  desires  to  retire  and  become  a

Jacobin   1254

Interval   539

Louis  XVI  quits  life  at  the  hands  of

the  Jacobins    1793

St.    Louis    returns    to    Madeleine  in

Provence   1 254

Interval   539

Louis  XVI  interred  in  the  Cemetery  of

Madeleine  !^    .  1793


184        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


In  this  return  to  their  native  soil  the  two  remark-
able lives  of  these  remarkable  Kings  of  France  came
to  a  parallel  close.  It  would  of  itself  appear  to  afford
sufficient  grounds  for  a  belief  in  the  reincarnation
of  souls.  By  a  certain  numerical  valuation  of  the
name  St.  Louis,  which  is  composed  of  6154361
=  26  =  8,  it  is  found  equal  to  5  39  =  17  =  8,  the
number  of  years  between  the  two  kings.  Also
Louis  XVI  =63116  =  17,  which  again  yields  a
unit  value  of  8,  the  number  signifying  "  Cyclic
revolution  "  or,  according  to  the  Kabala,  "  Justice,
equilibrium,  the  balance."  Here  it  would  certainly
appear  that  St.  Louis  had  "  come  again  to  his
own."

The  law  of  periodicity  has  been  the  means  of
many  remarkable  scientific  observations,  and  the
law  of  cycles  has  been  applied  to  the  facts  of  history
with  some  startling  results,  as  we  have  already  seen.
It  has  been  shown  that  a  cyclic  wave  of  activity
extending  over  250  years  passes  from  one  quarter
of  the  world  to  another  with  regular  precision,
Thus :—

1750  B.C.,  Mongolian  Empire  established.
1500  B.C.,  Egyptian  ascendancy.
1250  B.C.,  Greek  epoch.
1000  B.C.,  Trojan  crisis.

750  B.C.,  Scythian  invasion.

500  B.C.,  Persian  Monarchy.

250  B.C.,  Alexandrian  epoch.

A.D.  0,     Christian  era.


NUMEROLOGY


185


A.D.   250,  The  Huns.

A.D.  500,  Persian  new  era,

A.D.  750,  Byzantine  Empire.

A.D.  1000,  Second   Roman  Empire.

The  Papacy.
A.D.  1250,  Chinese  incursion.
A.D.  1500,  Ottoman  Empire.
A.D.  1750,  Russian  Empire.
A.D.  2000,  British  Climacteric  ?

The  Minor  Key

The  following  simple  Kabalism  of  Numbers  has
been  given  for  purposes  of  divination  by  means  of
names  and  dates.    In  this  system —
One  denotes  individuality  and  possible  egotism,

self-reliance,  affirmation.
Two — Relationship,  psychic  attraction,  emotion-
alism, sympath}'  or  antipath}^,  doubt.
Three — Expansion,  increase,  intellectual  capacity,

riches  and  success.
Four — Realization,  property,  possessions,  posi-
tion and  credit,  materiality.
Five — Reason,  logic,  ethics,  travelling,  commerce,
j  utility.

Six — Co-operation,  marriage,   reciprocity,  sym-
pathy, play,  art,  music,  dancing.
Seven  —  Equilibrium,     contracts,  agreements,

treaties,  bargains,  harmony  or  discord.
Eight — Reconstruction,  death,  negation,  decay,
loss,  extinction,  going  out.
I  Nine — Penetration,    strife,    energy,  enterprise,
I      dividing,  anger,  keenness.


186        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


^  A  square  of  three,  which  gives  nine  compartments,
is  used  for  the  purpose  of  location.    Thus  :  —


4

9

2

3

5

7

8

1

6

The  date  of  a  person's  birth  being  the  18th  Jmie
'79,  the  figures  18679  are  marked,  and  the  character-
istics and  fate  are  discerned  b}^  these  numbers.
Thus  we  should  read  in  this  case  : —

"  You  have  much  self-confidence,  but  your
aspirations  and  expectations  do  not  turn  out  to
your  satisfaction.  You  feel  to  be  worthy  of  a
better  fate  than  falls  to  your  lot.  Beware  lest
pride  goes  before  a  fall.  You  feel  most  confident
when  least  secure.  Yet  you  ma}^  have  success
in  work  that  others  have  abandoned  as  useles>
You  have  sympathy,  and  are  especially  responsive
to  praise  and  sensitive  to  blame.  You  will  most
probably  marry.  The  fine  arts  and  social  life  have
their  attractions  for  you.  You  have  a  fine  sense
of  value  and  Avill  be  able  to  estimate  the  cost  ot
things.  You  would  make  a  good  contractor,  or
negotiator.  You  have  some  penetration  and
enterprise;  you  are  keen,  alert,  and  energetic."

And  of  course  much  more  that  is  true  could  be
said  if  the  individual  environment  were  known.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  century  is  not
included,  as  all  who  are  born  therein  have  this  in


NUMEROLOCxY


187


common.  Moreover,  the  figures  of  the  year  7  and
0  give  only  a  tendency  in  the  third  degree,  which
may  be  considered  weak.  The  figures  of  the  month
(June  =  6)  are  more  particular,  and  have  a  secondary
degree  of  efficacy;  while  the  day  of  the  month
becomes  of  primary  or  particular  significance.  It
here  stands  for  "  egotism  and  self-reliance,"  mth
"undoing."  Finally,  in  order  to  gain  the  bearing  of
the  whole  Kabalism,  we  must  add  together  the
figures  18679  =  31  =  4,  always  reducing  them  to
the  unit  value.  We  then  find  that  the  nature  is  a
practical  one,  "  seeking  material  realization,  yet  one
who  may  easily  grasp  the  shadow  and  lose  the  sub-
stance." The  sum  of  the  figures  composing  the  date
will  reinforce  am'  number  of  the  same  value  which
is  in  the  date,  so  that  a  secondary  or  tertiary  com-
prised in  the  month  or  year  will  thus  become  a
primar}'.  As  in  the  date  29th  January,  1864  =
29164  =  22  =  4,  we  find  that  there  is  a  practical
and  material  side  to  the  character  which  seeks
[Concrete  realization  of  its  projects;  the  number  4
being  in  the  sum  as  well  as  in  the  jes.T  of  the
date.

In  dealing  with  inanimate  objects  or  the  brute
creation  (as  ships,  horses,  etc.)  which  have  names
we  convert  the  letters  into  numbers  and  take
the  sum  of  them,  thence  deriving  our  prognostic
concerning  them.  But  this  is  an  art  attended  with
some  difficulties  and  many  pitfalls,  which  it  may  not
be  convenient  to  enumerate.


188        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

The  Secret  Progression


Some  years  ago  I  published  a  curious  Kabala
known  as  "  The  Secret  Progression,"  by  which
numbers  in  lotteries  and  other  affairs  apparenth
governed  by  chance  might  by  dihgence  be  discovered.
There  was  at  one  time  a  circle  of  occultists  who
had  their  head-quarters  at  a  certain  place  in  Italy.
Prominent  among  the  members  of  this  fraternity
was  Giuseppe  Balsamo,  Comte  di  Cagliostro,  whos.
wealth  (acquired  none  knew  how)  not  less  than  \n>
learning,  was  the  marvel  of  all  with  whom  he  had
relations.  For  a  short  time  he  dazzled  the  Court
of  Europe,  and  disappeared  with  the  suddenness  ot
a  meteor.  It  has  been  said  that  he  died  in  prison
by  poisoning,  but  I  am  not  now  concerned  with  his
history.  He  was  at  all  events  a  past  master  in  the
magic  of  Numbers,  as  is  evident  from  the  fact  that
on  three  separate  occasions  he  gave  Madame  de  la
Motte  the  winning  number  in  the  Paris  lotteries.

By  the  Kabala  of  the  Secret  Progression  it  is
possible,  when  a  series  of  numbers  is  known,  to
determine  the  next.  Some  years  ago  a  well-known
weekly  publication  instituted  a  Birth  Competition
which  was  to  predict  the  number  of  births  in  36
large  towns  of  Great  Britain  during  a  particular
week,  the  births  during  the  corresponding  week
for  five  successive  years  being  given.

Considering  this  to  be  a  good  opportunity  of
testing  the  method  of  the  Illuminati,  I  accordingly
took  the  problem  in  hand.


NUMEROLOGY


189


The  births  in  the  36  towns  during  the  specified
week  in  the  preceding  five  years  totalled  as  follows: —


Year

Il894

1895

1896

1897

1898

1899

Births

|6351

6906

6017

6715

6430''  ?

Taking  the  highest  and  lowest  of  these  totals,
6906  and  6017,  and  allowing  a  good  margin,  we  may
expect  to  find  the  required  number  between  6000
and  7000.  We  now  proceed  to  find  the  key  number.


1.  By  the  Minor  Differential.

1894-  6351      15  ,

1895-  6906  =  21  (  ~  ^  J  =  13

1896-  6017  =  14  (  +  3  }  =  12

1897-  6715  =  19^,  ~  ^  J  11

1898-  6430  =  13  {  +     }  =  10

1899-  ?     ^  17  ^  ~"  .

The  series  is  found  by  adding  together  the  integers
of  each  given  number,  thus  :  6351  =  6+  3  +  5+1
=  15.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  result  gives  13,  12,  11
10,  a  numerical  series  whose  intervals  are  equal.
We  therefore  require  a  number  whose  integers
added  =  17.

2.  By  the  Minor  Additive.

1894-  6351  =  15  )

1895-  6906  =  21  {      }  71

1896-  6017  =  14  {^^}  68

1897-  6715  =  19  (^^1  65

1898-  6430  =  13  I     I  62

1899-  ?    =  17  ^


190        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

Here  also  the  intervals  are  equal  in  the  final
series.    We  therefore  are  confirmed  in  the  know-
ledge that   the  required   number  belongs  to  th
series  of  17.


3.  By  the  Major  Differential.


1894-

6351

-  555  =

15

6

u

1895-

6906

-f  889  =

25  =

7  ,

1896-

6017

12

-  698  =

23  =

5

11

1897-

6715

+  285  =

15  =

6;

1898-

6430

-  ?

•?  ^

4

10

1899-

9

Again  the  intervals  are  made  equal  by  the  sup-
position of  the  figure  4.  The  number  required,
therefore,  is  one  which,  when  6430  is  taken  from  if
leaves  a  number  whose  integers  =  4,  13,  22,  or  31  —  -


4.  By  the  Major  Additive.


1894-

6351  ^

13,257

18  =

9

1895-

6906 1
6017  1

In

12,923  =

17  =

8

1896-

iu

12,732  =

15  =

1897-

6715^
6430  J

13,145

14  =

1898-

1899-

?  ^

12  =^

NUMEROLOGY


191


The  series  17,  14,  11,  8  shows  equal  intervais.
The  required  number,  therefore,  is  one  which,  added
bo  6430,  gives  a  sum  whose  figures  add  to  12,

Consequently,  we  now  know  that  the  number
is  one  whose  integers  add  to  17;  and  that  it  is  a
number  which,  being  added  to  6430,  yields  a  sum
^vhose  figures  add  to  12.

Having  ascertained  these  facts  concerning  the
hidden  or  unknown  number,  the  task  is  not  now  a
difficult  one  to  anybody  accustomed  to  handling
Hgures.

Between  6000  and  7000  there  are  only  70  numbers
whose  integers  add  to  17.

Between  6000  and  7000  there  are  only  31  num-
bers whose  figures  amount  to  12.

Of  these  31  numbers  there  are  only  14  numbers
whose  difference  of  6430  is  a  number  w^hose  figures
add  to  13.

Finally,  there  are  onl}^  7  numbers  within  these
[imits  which  exacth'  satisfy  all  the  conditions  of  the
Kabala  of  the  Secret  Progression.  These  are  :
6470,  6632,  6641,  6650,  6731,  6740,  and  6830.
By  the  third  process  the  Major  Differential  we  found
the  number  to  be  greater  than  6430,  so  that  the  field
oi  inquiry  was  limited  to  numbers  between  6430
ind  7000.  We  have  found  seven  numbers  which
ire  capable  of  satisfying  aU  the  conditions  imposed
by  the  different  processes,  and  since  the  master-key
is  not  to  be  di\nilged  w^e  must  be  content  with  a
statement  which  reduces  the  possible  number  of
chances  from  1000  to  7  only.


192        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM  'iPI


The  Registrar-General  returned  the  number  6731
A  moment's  study  will  show  how  exactly  it  fits  al
the  requirements  of  the  several  processes.

1.  Minor  Differential. — 6731  =  17,  which  com
pared  with  13  shows  the  latter  jnelds  4,  whicl
added  to  6  =  10.

2.  Minor  Additive. — 6731  =  17,  which  added  tcj
13  =  30,  which  added  to  32  62.

3.  Major  Differential. — If  from  6731  we  take  6430
we  have  301,  which  =  4.

4.  Major  Additive.— QIU  added  to  6430  =  1346L
which  yields  a  unit  value  of  12,  which  equals  3,
which  added  to  5  gives  8.

With  this  singular  and  unique  Kabalism  I  ma\
now  bring  the  subject  of  Numerology  to  a  do-
and  end  the  first  section  of  my  study  of  the  Occult ^
Sciences.


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM

I  It  will  no  doubt  be  questioned  whether  either
Hypnotism  or  Mesmerism  forms  any  legitimate  part
'oi  Occultism,  and  indeed  I  have  put  the  question
to  myself  before  finally  deciding  to  include  them.
My  reason  for  so  doing  is  that  formerly  the  whole
of  the  magnetic  art,  then  known  as  "  Fascination"
and  the  "Laying  on  of  Hands,"  was  an  essential
factor  in  the  curriculum  of  the  thaumaturgist.
Scripture  references  to  the  transmission  of  vital
energy  to  those  sick  or  dying,  or  even  dead  to  all
appearances,  are  numerous  and  well  known.  The
use  of  oil  as  a  medium  for  the  conveyance  and
retention  of  the  vital  or  magnetic  energy  is  also
noticed  and  is  commonly  in  use  in  India  and  other
parts  of  the  Orient  at  this  day.

Mesmerism  may  be  distinguished  in  a  popular
manner  from  Hypnotism  in  that  it  presumes  the
existence  of  an  effluvium  w^hich  is  in  the  nature
of  a  subtle  essence  capable  of  being  transmitted
from  one  body  to  another  under  the  direction  of
the  Will.  Paracelsus  calls  it  the  Archeus  or  Liquor
Vitse.  "  The  Archeus  is  an  essence,"  he  says,
"  which  is  distributed  equally  in  all  parts  of  the
body  if  the  latter  is  in  a  healthy  condition;  it  is
the  invisible  nutriment  from  which  the  body  draws

193  0


194       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


its  strength,  and  the  qualities  of  each  of  its  parts
correspond  to  the  nature  of  the  physical  parts
which  contain  it.  .  .  .  The  Archeus  is  of  a
magnetic  nature  and  attracts  or  repels  other  forces
belonging  to  the  same  plane.  The  individual
power  of  resistance  will  determine  how  far  a  man  i
subject  to  astral  influences.  The  vital  force  is  not
enclosed  in  man  but  radiates  around  him  like  a
luminous  sphere,  and  may  be  made  to  act  at  a
distance.  In  those  semi-material  rays  the  imagina-
tion may  produce  healthy  or  morbid  effects,  f-
may  poison  the  essence  and  cause  diseases,  or  i
may  purify  it  after  it  has  been  made  impure  and
so  restore  the  health.  ...  If  we  separate  the
vital  force  from  the  physical  form,  the  latter  will
die  and  putrefy  ;  and  by  impregnating  a  dying
body  with  vitality,  it  may  be  made  to  live  again."

Paracelsus  further  states  that  diseases  may  be
transmitted  from  one  person  to  another,  or  from
man  to  animal,  or  animal  to  plant,  by  means  of  the
magnetic  emanations,  and  Ave  have  ocular  demon-
stration that  this  is  a  belief  firmly  held  by  those
nations  of  the  East  among  whom  it  is  practised
The  story  of  the  Gadarene  swine  is  in  line  with  oiii
own  experience  of  the  epidemic  of  crime  which
follows  upon  the  death  of  a  renowned  criminal

If  a  person  dies,"  says  Paracelsus,  "  and  seriousl
desires  that  another  should  die  with  him,  his  imagina-
tion may  create  a  force  that  may  draw  a  menstruum
from  the  dead  body  to  form  a  corpus,  and  it  may  be
projected  b,y  the  impulse  given  to  it  by  the  thought
of  the  dying  person  toward  that  other  so  that  he


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  195

may  also  die.  Such  especially  may  be  the  case
with  a  woman  dying  of  puerperal  fever,  for  if  such
should  desire  that  the  whole  world  might  die  with
her,  an  epidemic  may  be  the  consequence  of  her
poisoned  imagination."

The  suggestion  in  this  case  has  regard  to  the  known
contagious  influence  of  the  corpse  of  a  woman  dying
of  puerperal  fever.  The  point,  however,  is  that
the  will  of  the  dying  person  is  capable  of  distributing
such  contagion.

I  have  cited  these  opinions  in  order  to  show  that
Mesmerism,  of  which  Paracelsus  was  undoubtedly
the  earliest  known  European  exponent,  has  little
in  common  with  the  beliefs  and  practice  of  the
Hypnotists.

The  Mesmerists,  or  those  who  believe  in  the
transmission  of  animal  magnetism,  whether  we
regard  it  as  the  Archeus  of  Paracelsus  or  the
Odyle  of  Reichenbach,  affirm  that  the  emanation
is  most  active  through  certain  channels — e.  g.  the
eyes,  the  lips,  and  the  finger-tips.

They  also  state  that  certain  natural  bodies,  such
as  oil  and  water,  are  capable  of  holding  the  magnet-
ism better  than  others;  while  vinegar  is  capable
of  augmenting  the  efflux  and  thus  of  increasing
the  transmission.  Volatile  spirits  are,  on  the
contrary,  completely  destructive  of  the  magnetic
transmission  and  storage.  Earth  and  clay  are
excellent  storage  mediums,  or  mumia  as  Paracelsus
would  call  them.

There  is  nothing  smgular  in  this,  if  we  reflect
that  all  the  forces  of  nature  of  which  we  have  any

0  2


196        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

knowledge  require  certain  media  through  which  to
operate.  Electrical  energy,  for  example,  cannot  be
conveyed  through  a  length  of  rope  or  wood,  but
only  through  a  natural  conductor  of  electricity,
such  as  steel  or  copper.  When  it  is  said  that  Jesus
spat  upon  the  ground  and  made  clay  and  anointed
the  eyes  of  the  man  who  was  blind  from  birth,
we  see  that  use  was  made  of  the  natural  odylic
power  of  the  saliva,  and  the  powerful  storage  medium
of  clay  or  earth.  The  rest  is  explained  by  the  power-
ful will  of  the  magician  as  expressed  completely
and  decisively  in  the  single  exclamation  Ephphatha  !

The  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  cure  of  sickness
is  one  phase  of  Mesmerism  or  Animal  Magnetism
of  which  there  is  abundant  evidence  and  which
conclusively  proves  the  existence  of  the  magnetic
fluid.  Touching  for  king's-evil  or  scrofula  was  in
use  among  our  own  kings  until  Rome  discounten-
anced any  delegation  of  its  powers.  "  Le  Roy  te
touche,  Dieu  te  guerys  "  (The  King  touches  thee
God  heals  thee)  had  brought  new  life  to  thousands
before  the  Divine  right  of  kings  was  assailed.

Dr.  James  Esdaile,  at  one  time  the  Presidency
Surgeon  at  Calcutta,  has  left  us  a  very  remarkable  |
series  of  cases  which  prove  the  surpassing  value  of  j
Mesmerism  in  the  medical  and  surgical  treatment
of  disease.  His  book  on  Natural  and  Mesmeric
Clairvoyance  is  among  the  best  upon  this  subject.
Incidental^,  he  mentions  two  phenomena  by  which
I  think  I  may  claim  complete  justification  for  the
inclusion  of  this  subject  in  a  work  upon  magic.

The  first  is  the  dislocation  of  the  senses.  Normal! \


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  197


each  of  the  senses  has  its  appropriate  organ,  as  the
eye,  ear,  nose,  etc.  They  are  not  in  themselves  the
only  organs  of  the  corresponding  senses  of  sight,
hearing,  smell,  etc.,  but  have  become  specialized
as  such.  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in
natural  and  induced  somnambulism,  the  whole
sensorium  may  be  transferred  to  the  finger-tips  or
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  or  even  the  soles  of  the  feet.
Fredrika  Wanner,  better  known  as  the  Seeress  of
Prevorst,  was  a  natural  somnambulist,  and  in  her
trances  was  particularly  sensitive  to  the  presence
of  other  persons,  discriminating  between  them  as
painful  or  soothing  to  her.  And  on  such  occasions
it  was  found  that  her  eyes  being  closed,  or  the  senses
incapable  of  being  affected  by  ordinary  stimuli,
she  could  see,  hear,  and  even  taste  by  means  of  the
epigastric  region.

Prof.  Dumas  is  quoted  by  Dr.  Esdaile  to  the
same  effect  : —

"It  is  possible  that,  by  a  singular  concourse
of  circumstances,  certain  organs  become  capable
of  exercising  properties  and  fulfilling  functions  to
which  they  have  hitherto  been  strangers  and  which
even  belonged  to  different  organs.  If  rare  and
extraordinary  facts  did  not  inspire  distrust,  I  could
allege  the  singular  transference  of  the  hearing  and
sight,  which,  abandoning  their  usual  seat,  have
appeared  to  be  transferred  to  the  stomach — so  that
sounds  and  colours  excited  there  the  same  sensations
as  are  ordinarily  conveyed  through  the  ears  and
eyes.  Five  years  ago  a  young  woman  from  the
department  of  Ardeche,  who  gave  an  example  of  a


198        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


very  strange  phenomenon,  came  to  Montpellier
to  consult  the  doctors  for  a  hysteric  affection
attended  with  catalepsy.  She  referred  all  the  sen-
sations of  sight,  hearing  and  smell  to  the  region
of  the  stomach,  the  appropriate  organs  being
insensible  to  the  usual  stimuh."

The  second  phenomenon  to  which  I  would  call
attention  is  the  transference  of  the  senses.  In  the
former  cases  we  have  the  dislocation  of  the  normal
centres  of  sensation  to  the  region  of  the  sympathetic
ganglion  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  now  we
may  consider  the  marvellous  fact  of  sensation  being
transferred  from  one  person  to  another.

Finding  a  specially  sensitive  subject  in  the  person
of  Babu  Lali  Mohun  Mitra,  a  young  Hindu  of  twenty-
two  years.  Dr.  Esdaile,  after  curing  him  of  a  loath-
some disease  for  which  he  had  come  to  the  hospital,
subjected  him  to  some  experimental  development.
He  would  place  his  watch  in  Mitra's  hand  and  with
a  few  passes  would  render  the  whole  arm  so  rigid
that  under  no  bribe  or  persuasion  or  threat  could
the  young  man  stir  a  finger  to  loose  the  watch
as  he  was  bidden.  "  Seeing  this  man's  extreme
sensibility,  I  thought  it  probable,''  says  Esdaile,
"  that  he  might  exhibit  community  of  taste  with
his  mesmerizer,  and  here  is  the  result  of  the  first
experiment  made  upon  him.  He  had  never  heard
of  such  a  thing  nor  had  I  even  tried  it  before.

"  One  day  that  the  Babu  came  to  the  hospital
to  pay  his  respects  after  getting  well,  I  took  him
into  a  side  room  and,  mesmerizing  him  till  he  could
not  open  his  eyes,  I  went  out  and  desired  the  native


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  199


assistant-surgeon  to  procure  me  some  salt,  a  slice
of  lemon,  a  piece  of  gentian,  and  some  brandy,  and
to  give  them  to  me  in  any  order  he  pleased  when  T
opened  my  mouth.  We  returned,  and,  blindfolding
Lali  Mohun,  I  took  hold  of  both  his  hands,  and
opening  my  mouth  had  a  slice  of  half-rotten  lime-
fruit  put  into  it  by  my  assistant.    Having  showed

,  it,  I  asked,  '  Do  you  taste  anything  ?  '  '  Yes ;  I
taste  a  nasty  old  lime,'  and  he  made  wry  faces  in

!  correspondence.  He  was  equally  correct  with  all
the  other  substances,  calling  the  gentian  by  its
native  name,  cheretea;  and  when  I  tasted  the  brandy
he  called  it  shrdb  (the  general  name  for  wine  and
spirits);  being  asked  what  kind,  he  said:  'What
I  used  to  drink — brandy.'  "

It  should  here  be  remarked  that  Dr.  Esdaile
had  cured  this  man  of  confirmed  brandy-drinking
as  well  as  of  his  terrible  disease.  As  to  the  local
rigidity  of  the  arm  of  the  patient  who  otherwise
had  full  and  perfect  control  of  his  faculties,  it  should
be  remarked  that  the  mesmerizer  can  not  only
saturate  his  patient  with  his  own  nervous  fluid,
but  also  determine  the  energy  to  various  parts  of
the  body  so  as  to  place  them  in  effect  beyond  the
patient's  control.  In  similar  manner  local  anaesthe-
sia or  insensibility  can  be  produced  at  the  will  of
the  operator.  When  the  volition  can  no  longer
act  upon  a  part  of  the  body,  it  is  found  that  its
sensibility  is  at  the  same  time  inhibited,  which  proves
that  volition  and  sensation  are  consentaneous.
When  voluntary  action  is  restored,  sensation  is.
simultaneously  developed  in  the  part.


200        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  nervous  fluid  not  only  follows  the  direction
of  the  will,  but  is  moreover  impressed  with  our
individuality,  both  physical  and  mental.  It  bear^
the  signature  of  our  thought,  it  carries  the  healthy
or  diseased  tendencies  of  our  body,  it  is  moved  by
our  will  and  coloured  by  our  desires  and  passions.
The  dictum  of  Lord  Bacon  :  "  The  human  mind
can  be  placed  in  communication  with  other  mind>
and  transmit  their  impressions,"  is  not  inclusiv*
enough  to  cover  the  phenomena  of  statuvolisny
animal  magnetism,  electro-biology,  mesmerism,  oi
by  whatsoever  name  we  may  indicate  the  use  of
this  mysterious  agent.  It  is  a  force  that  can  be  set
in  motion  at  any  time  and  made  to  operate  at  any
distance  apart  from  any  suggestion  of  the  effects
it  is  required  to  produce.  Herein  it  differs  entirely  1
from  the  "  hypnotic  suggestion  "  of  the  medical
schools  and  the  "  auto-suggestion  "  which  the  |
critical  writers  wholly  unskilled  in  the  knowledge
of  Occultism  bring  to  bear  as  explanation  of  even
fulfilled  prediction,  every  thaumaturgic  effect,  every
case  of  healing  which  is  in  distinction  from  the  known
and  approved  methods,  the  clinic  and  pharmacy,
of  the  medical  profession.

On  the  question  of  animal  magnetism,  either  as  a
psj^chological  or  a  therapeutic  agent,  the  Occultist
wdll  always  prefer  the  experience  of  such  men  as
Esdaile,  Gregory,  and  Baron  Du  Potet  to  the  un-
instructed  opinions  of  the  critic,  however  skilful
he  may  be  in  his  own  field  of  research  or  work.

Baron  Du  Potet,  in  his  Manual  de  VEtudiant
Magnetiseur,  says  :  "  Nature  herself  discovered  the


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  201


secret  to  me.  And  how  ?  By  producing  before
my  own  eyes,  without  waiting  for  me  to  search  for
them,  indisputable  facts  of  sorcery  and  magic.
And  what  is  it  determines  these  sudden  impulses,
these  raving  epidemics,  antipathies  and  cries,  the
convulsions  that  one  can  make  durable  ?  What  if
not  the  very  principle  we  employ,  the  agent  so
thoroughly  well  known  to  the  ancients  ?  What  you
call  nervous  fluid  or  magnetism  the  men  of  old  called
occult  force,  the  power  of  the  soul,  subjection,
magic  !  An  element  existing  in  nature,  unknown
to  most  men,  gets  hold  of  a  person  and  withers  and
breaks  him  down  as  the  raging  hurricane  does  the
bulrush.  It  scatters  men  far  apart,  it  strikes  them
in  a  thousand  places  at  the  same  time  without  their
perceiving  the  invisible  foe  or  being  able  to  protect
themselves.  But  that  this  element  should  choose
friends  and  elect  favourites,  obey  their  thoughts,
answer  to  the  human  voice  and  understand  the
meaning  of  traced  signs,  that  is  what  people  cannot
realize  and  what  their  reason  rejects,  and  that  is
what  I  saw;  and  I  say  it  here  most  emphatically
that  for  me  it  is  a  truth  and  a  fact  demonstrated
for  ever  !  "

I  And  this  is  a  phase  of  Animal  Magnetism  that
has  been  repeatedly  offered  as  the  only  intelligible
explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  sorcery  and  as
repeatedly  rejected  by  the  schools  that  have  no
knowledge  either  of  the  facts  or  the  agent  which
alone  is  capable  of  explaining  them.

According  to  the  experience  of  mesmerists,  the
magnetizer  can  communicate  his  fluid  to  a  variety  of


202        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


objects,  which  thus  become  conductors  or  agents  of
his  action  to  all  persons  with  whom  he  is  in  magnetic
relations.  These  agents  are  water,  oil,  woollen  and
cotton  materials,  trees,  etc.  Charles  Dickens  found
a  means  of  magnetizing  water  by  means  of  pieces  of
sugar  which  had  been  subjected  to  magnetization,
which  were  then  readily  distributed  among  th
old  country  folk  in  Kent.

Magnetized  water  is  one  of  the  most  powerful
agents  that  can  be  employed,  inasmuch  as  it  i
conveyed  at  once  to  the  stomach  and  thence  di>
tributed  throughout  the  system,  acting  upon  tin
circulation  and  the  digestion,  taking  in  turn,  accord-
ing to  tlie  immediate  needs  of  the  body,  the  place
of  anodyne,  diaphoretic,  prophylactic  and  purgative.
An  agent  of  such  universal  utility  is  necessarily
not  thought  very  highly  of  by  those  whose  busines
it  is  to  scare  Nature  into  obedience  by  cryptic  pre-
scriptions and  unnatural  concoctions.    Given  normal
health  and  a  desire  to  heal  the  sufferer,  you  ma .
take  a  vessel  of  water,  and  having  thoroughly
cleansed  the  hands,  dip  them  in  vinegar.  Shake
off  the  superfluous  moisture  by  flicking  the  hands
violent^  towards  the  ground.    Continue  so  to
until  the  finger-tips  tingle,  with  a  slight  streaming
sensation  down  the  forearm  and  hand.

Now  take  a  clean  glass  and  pour  into  it  some  fresh
cold  water,  which  must  not  have  been  boiled  or
heated  previously.  Place  the  glass  upon  the  left
hand  with  the  fingers  closed  around  it  to  stead}-
it,  and  with  the  right  hand  make  passes  from  above
the  glass  downwards  for  a  score  of  strokes  or  more.


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  203


'hen  bunch  the  finger-tips  above  the  mouth  of  the
ilass,  bringing  them  almost  in  contact  with  the
/ater,  and  impregnate  it  with  the  nervous  fluid  by
i,  sustained  effort  of  the  will  to  that  effect,  letting
he  mind  dwell  the  while  upon  the  result  you
tould  obtain.  A  glass  of  water  may  thus  be
reated  in  from  one  to  two  minutes.  Thus  given
0  the  patient  it  immediately  goes  to  work  and
)roduces  the  most  remarkable  results  without  in
jiy  way  complicating  matters,  as  may  be  readily
lone  b}^  the  administering  of  improper  drugs,  and
vithout  having  any  deleterious  reaction,  even  when
ised  as  a  soporific.

That  such  an  agent,  so  inoffensive,  so  natural
md,  above  all,  so  efficacious  and  sure,  should  have
'scaped  the  recognition  of  medical  men  appears
|;o  me  to  be  inexplicable,  except  on  the  grounds  of
complete  ignorance  of  its  properties  and  action.
[  do  not  pretend  to  explain  by  what  magical  process
:he  mind  of  man  is  capable  of  acting  upon  a  glass
3f  water  to  the  end  that  it  becomes  either  a  powerful
istringent  or  a  laxative,  or  an  anodyne,  or  a  stimu-
ant.  The  chemical  nature  of  the  water  remains
imchanged.  It  is  still  a  mechanical  compound  of
H.,0.  But  something  has  happened,  and  this
something  the  will  of  man  can  determine  while
yet  his  intellect  fails  to  understand.

\Vhat  I  am  now  saying  is  not  a  tradition  or  an
effort  of  the  imagination.  It  is  the  record  of  my
own  personal  experience..  Suggestion  ?  How  does
one  suggest  purgation  to  a  babe  that  is  teething,  or
peaceful  sleep  to  one  delirious  ?    The  suggestion,


204        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

if  there  is  one,  is  directed,  not  to  the  mind  of  th'
patient,  but  to  Nature  herself  ,  and  the  suggestion  o
an  intent  will  is  equivalent  to  a  command.    Id  tbj
use  of  magnetized  water  as  a  purgative,  no  coliJ
pains  are  felt  either  during  or  after  the  action'
As  an  anodyne  it  leaves  no  sense  of  depression  o
lassitude  behind  it;  while  as  a  tonic  it  is  not  accomii
panied  by  any  rise  of  temperature  nor  followed  b^"
the  slightest  constipation.

A  magnetic  subject  will  readily  distinguish  magi
netized  water  from  water  that  has  not  been  so  treated
and  I  have  known  persons  who  could  normally
distinguish  between  them,  though  at  first  I  wa
unwilling  to  believe  this  and  only  convinced  mysel
of  it  after  trying  a  number  of  tricks  to  discovei
if  there  were  a  possibility  of  suggestion  or  fancy
But  all  I  discovered  was  the  fact  that  in  some  re-
markable way  magnetic  water  could  be  distinguishec
by  its  taste.

But  whatever  agent  we  make  use  of  for  the  pur-
pose of  conveying  the  nervous  or  vital  fluid,  it  haj|
been  thought,  even  by  those  who  practise  magnetism
that  rapport  with  the  patient  must  first  have  beer
established.    This,  however,  is  not  the  case;  thougt
undoubtedly  it  is  more  certain  in  its  action  wher
magnetization  by  contact  has  preceded  the  use  oi|
an  agent.    The  agent  is  the  means  of  continuing
magnetization,  and  especially  of  attacking  diseas
that  are  internal  and  deep-seated  and  not  merel^^
nervous  or  superficial.    But  for  all  that,  there  isj
no  reason  whatsoever  why  magnetization  should
not  be  begun  by  means  of  a  suitable  agent.  Con-


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  205


ictual  magnetism  is  not  generally  effective  at  once,
lut  becomes  so  by  persistence,  the  action  being
umulative.  So  if  water  or  any  other  agent  is  per-
isted  with,  it  will  bring  about  the  desired  effect.  Of
his  I  am  quite  certain,  since  I  have  treated  persons
t  a  distance  by  this  means  alone,  never  having  set
yes  upon  them.  Yet  so  wonderful  is  the  sympathy
xisting  throughout  Nature,  that  I  have  been
iresently  conscious  of  changes  taking  place  in  my
iwn  body,  of  pains  and  sickness,  which  had  no
ither  origui  than  the  subtle  connection  of  sympathy
►etween  my  subject  and  myself  via  the  agent  I  had
mployed.  I  know  of  persons  who  are  capable  of
ommunicating  their  sensations  at  a  great  distance
0  one  with  whom  they  are  in  close  sympathy,
hough  nothing  in  the  nature  of  thought  trans-
erence  is  observable  between  them.  With  others
here  is  ready  communication  of  thought  or  of
uental  images  but  no  community  of  sensation.

Hypnotism  proposes  to  secure  the  same  results
IS  magnetization  by  mechanically-induced  trance
lupplemented  by  suggestion.  But  while  this  process
ends  itself  peculiarly  to  the  production  of  phe-
lomena,  and  is  extremely  useful  for  experimental
3urposes  and  psychic  research,  it  cannot  pretend
:o  have  the  same  therapeutic  value  as  magnetization,
nasmuch  as  it  does  nothing  to  reinforce  nature  or  to
supplement  depleted  vitality.  Where  insensibility
is  the  effect  aimed  at  it  is  equally  useful,  and  as  in  all
induced  somnambulism  the  automatic  and  subcon-
scious self  is  rendered  alert  and  active,  very  valuable
results  may  be  produced  by  hypnotic  suggestion.


206        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

If,  however,  you  induce  the  hypnotic  sleep  b
any  of  the  usual  methods  and  then  stand  asid
while  a  phonographic  record  film  is  set  in  actioi
to  voice  the  number  of  original  "  suggestions,"  th
effect  will  surprise  many  into  an  entirely  ne^
view  of  the  matter,  and  those  who  do  not  no^
believe  that  the  personal  factor  is  at  all  considerabl'
will  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  the  only  fac;
which  counts  for  anything  in  the  whole  proce
The  complete  insensibility  to  written  or  spokei
instructions,  other  than  those  which  pass  througl
the  mind  of  the  magnetizer,  is  in  itself  a  suggestio  '
which  the  upholders  of  the  non-magnetic  posit  i
would  do  well  to  ponder.    I  prefer,  however,  i
leave  the  schools  of  the  Salpetriere  and  Nancy  t
thresh  out  the  question  to  its  natural  and  inevitabll
conclusion.

Deleuze,  who  followed  the  teaching  of  Puyseguij
of  Mesmer,  Van  Helmont  and  Paracelsus,  has  som
excellent  admonitions  to  those  anxious  to  pract.^
Animal  Magnetism,  which  may  very  suitably  bl
quoted  in  conclusion  : —

"  Persons  who  follow  this  subject  may  be  dividefl
into  two  classes.

"  The  first  class  comprehends  those  who,  haviiijj
recognized  in  themselves  the  faculty  of  doing  goa
by  magnetism,  or  at  least  hoping  to  succeed  therein!
wish  to  make  use  of  it  in  their  families,  or  amon|
their  friends,  or  with  some  poor  patients,  but  who,
having  duties  to  fulfil  or  business  to  follow,  do  noj
magnetize  except  in  circumstances  where  it  appearil
to  them  necessary,  without  seeking  publicity,  withou


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  207


iny  motive  but  that  of  charity,  without  any  other  aim
han  that  of  curing  or  reUeving  suffering  humanity,
i  "  The  second  class  is  composed  of  men  who,
taving  leisure,  wish  to  join  in  the  practice  of  magnet-
ic, the  study  of  the  phenomena  it  exhibits,  to  enter
irgely  into  it,  to  establish  treatments  for  taking
are  of  several  patients  at  a  time,  to  form  pupils
apable  of  aiding  them,  to  have  somnambulists
j/ho  may  enlighten  them  to  examine  closely,  compare
lid  arrange  the  phenomena,  in  such  a  way  as  to
stablish  a  regular  code  of  laws  whose  principles
aay  be  certain,  and  whose  consequences,  extending
iaily,  may  lead  to  new  applications.
"  This  class  is  separated  from  the  preceding  by
great  number  of  degrees  which  must  be  successively
Qounted  before  one  can  find  oneself  situated  where
le  can  command  a  more  extensive  horizon.  I
herefore  advise  those  of  the  former  class  not  to
hink  of  passing  beyond  their  limits  unless  they
.re  masters  of  their  own  time  and  have  some  pre-
iminary  knowledge.  Their  lot  is  very  good;  they
-re  strangers  to  the  vanities  and  inquietudes  which
itend  new  attempts,  to  the  uncertainty  which
iprings  from  the  conflict  of  opinions  and  of  various
,)oints  of  view  under  which  things  are  presented  to
lis;  they  taste  without  mixture  or  distraction  the
,atisfaction  of  doing  good.  ...  As  to  the
)ersons  who  desire  to  belong  to  the  second  class,  I
idvise  them  to  consider  at  first  the  extent  of  the
rareer  they  will  have  to  run.  It  is  better  not  to
fnter  it  than  to  stop  in  the  midst  of  their  enterprise,
what  pertains  to  practice,  a  prudent  simplicity  is


208        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

preferable  to  science.  In  what  relates  to  theory,
imperfect  notions  expose  us  to  dangerous  errors.
The  labourer  who  cultivates  his  farm  as  his  fathers
did  before  him,  collects  every  year  the  price  of
his  labours.  Should  he  give  way  to  an  inclination
to  pursue  experimental  methods,  he  may  be  ruined
before  he  is  enlightened  by  his  own  experience."

Up  to  a  point  this  is  very  good  advice,  but  it  i-
doubtful  whether  any  amount  of  advice,  however
sound,  will  deter  men  from  making  experimeiV
and  sacrificing  both  life  and  fortune  to  the  satisfa^
tion  of  that  desire  for  knowledge  which  is  inherent
in  ever}^  active  and  well-developed  mind.  A.^
between  the  curative  and  experimental  practice  ol.
Mesmerism  and  Hypnotism  there  can  be  httkj
doubt  that  Mesmerism  as  understood  by  its  best
exponents  is  more  adapted  to  the  curative  method,
while  Hypnotism  is  peculiarly  adapted  to  the
development  of  experimental  psychology.  As  tcl
which  branch  of  the  subject  has  the  greater  clain
to  our  consideration,  is  a  matter  not  so  easil}j
answered,  seeing  that  a  profound  knowledge  olj
psychology  is  very  necessary  to  the  practice  oi
even  curative  magnetism,  and  the  more  we  knoT»
of  the  psychic  origin  of  disease  the  better  w(
shall  be  equipped  to  successfully  deal  with  morbici
conditions  as  they  arise.

Method  of  Magnetizing
These  brief  notes  on  the  subject  will  hardly  b(
complete  without  some  practical  instruction.  Tli«
following  method  of  inducing  the  mesmeric  slee|


HYPNOTISM  AND  MESMERISM  209


has  been  found  easy  and  reliable.  If  the  patient  is
able  to  sit  up,  place  him  in  a  comfortable  chair  with
fairly  upright  support  at  the  back.  Take  a  seat
opposite  to  him.  Take  hold  of  his  thumbs  and
bring  your  own  thumbs  into  the  palms  of  his  hands
iwith  a  gentle  pressure.  Now  engage  his  attention,
and  fix  your  eyes  steadily  on  his  for  five  minutes.
Allow  him  to  close  his  eyes  should  they  tire  mean-
while. At  the  end  of  five  minutes  let  his  hands
fall  loosely  into  his  lap,  rise  to  your  feet  and  place
your  hands  firmly  on  his  shoulders  for  a  few  moments.
Next  raise  your  hands  above  his  head  and  make
passes  downwards  along  the  arms  as  far  as  the
knees.  Do  this  for  five  minutes.  Now  take  his
right  hand  in  your  left,  as  at  first,  and  with  your
right  make  rapid  but  slight  shampoo  strokes  over
the  eyes.  These  strokes  are  made  with  the  hand
and  forearm  working  loosely  from  the  elbow,  and
require  practice;  the  palm  of  the  hand  barely
touches  the  closed  eyelids.  At  the  end  of  half  a
minute,  when  you  will  have  made  upwards  of  200
strokes,  give  a  slight  jerk  to  the  right  arm  of  the
patient  with  your  left,  and  press  with  the  right
thumb  between  his  eyes,  the  fingers  of  your  right
resting  on  the  top  of  his  head.

\  If  the  patient  has  surrendered  to^his  treatment
'it  will  be  found  that  the  arm,  if  lifted,  will  fall  back
when  loosed  as  a  dead  weight.  The  eyelid  being
raised,  the  pupil  of  the  eye  will  be  found  to  have
turned  upwards  and  inwards  to  the  root  of  the  nose.
The  breathing  wiU  be  soft  and  regular,  and  a  mild

warmth  and  moisture  will  pervade  the  skin.

p


210        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


That  will  suffice  for  the  first  sitting.  The  patient
may  be  roused  by  a  few  sidelong  passes  right  and
left  over  the  eyes,  and  by  blowing  into  them  or
wafting  a  fan  over  the  eyes.  A  few  upward  passes
must  then  be  made  from  the  knees  to  the  shoulders,
and  the  patient  invited  to  stand  up  and  thoroughly
shake  off  the  influence.

The  next  day  at  the  same  time  and  "place  (this  is
important)  proceed  as  before.  It  will  be  found  that
premonitory  s3^mptoms  of  the  magnetic  sleep  ^^ill
soon  be  developed.  The  patient  yawns,  shiver
and  flushes  in  turn  as  if  hot  and  cold  water  -wert
running  down  his  back ;  there  are  spasmodic  twitches
of  the  arms  and  legs,  the  latter  kicking  out  forcibly
from  time  to  time.  When  these  symptoms  appear
the  magnetic  sleep  rapidty  deepens  and  fascination '
or  rigid  catalepsy  may  be  induced.  For  curative
purposes  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  cataleptic
stage  should  be  reached,  for  once  the  magnetic  sleep
is  obtained,  the  patient  is  not  only  susceptible  to
curative  agency  but  also  is  capable  of  localizing  the
complaint  and  prescribing  a  method  of  treatment
which  the  magnetizer  should  do  all  in  his  power
to  carry  out.  For  surgical  purposes,  however,
catalepsy  and  complete  insensibility  are  essential,
but  my  readers  wdll  hardly  require  further  instnic
tion  under  this  head  than  is  to  be  found  in  the  w^ork^
by  Dr.  James  Esdaile  and  others  who  have  success-
fully applied  magnetism  to  clinical  practice.

*  The  state  in  which  the  phenomenal  side  of  the  automatic
faculty  is  conspicuously  displayed.


PART  II


THE  OCCULT  ARTS

ON  THE  ART  OF  DIVINATION  AND  THE  USE
OF  THE  AUTOMATIC  FACULTY— THE  SUB-
CONSCIOUS INTELLIGENCE—CLAIRVOY-
ANCl^,  PSYCHOMETRY,  DREAMS,  ETC.
TO  WHICH  IS  APPENDED  AN
ESSAY  ON  ALCHEMY


P  2


CHAPTER  I


DIVINATION

In  the  succeeding  sections  of  this  work  I  intend
to  deal  with  that  aspect  of  the  subject  of  Occultism
which  depends  for  its  evidence  on  the  exercise  of  the
mediumistic  or  divinatory  faculty.  What  has  been
said  in  Part  I  has  relation  to  the  exercise  of  a  pur-
posive faculty,  guided  by  intelligence  and  experience.
It  represents  Determinism  in  its  application  to  the
hidden  laws  of  Nature.  We  are  now,  however,
concerned  with  the  automatic  faculty,  the  intuitive
and  divinatory  process  of  the  human  mind.  Many
of  the  methods  by  which  the  automatic  faculty
finds  expression  are  allied  to  the  purposive  methods
of  the  Occult  arts.  Cartomancy  or  divination  by
cards,  for  instance,  can  only  be  effected  after  a
preliminary  understanding  of  the  meanings' attach-
ing to  the  cards ,  and  this  is  in  no  sense  an  automatic
or  unconscious  process,  but  a  voluntary  and  empirical
one.  We  do  not  begin  to  employ  the  automatic
faculty  until  we  shuffle  the  cards  with  a  view  to
ascertain  the  unknown  elements.  Even  the  dis-
position of  the  cards  for  this  purpose  is  a  purely
voluntary  empiricism.    It  controls  our  interpreta-

213


214        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


tion  and  our  prognostics.  The  construction  of  the
cards,  the  meanings  attached  to  them,  and  the
method  of  laying  them  out  for  a  divination  are  all
prejudicial  elements  of  the  art.  The  automatic
faculty  triumphs  over  these  limitations  in  the  simple
act  of  "  shuffling" — and  therein  lies  the  whole  secret
of  Nature.  Let  us  suppose  for  a  moment  that  we
decide  upon  a  certain  combination  of  cards  falling
together  that  they  shall  signify  Death.  The  odds
against  these  cards  coming  up  in  the  required  order
and  combination  are  thousands  to  one  on  any  occa-
sion. That  they  do  occasionally  turn  up  is  not,
however,  so  remarkable  as  that,  whenever  they  do,
a  death  immediately  follows,  and  the  faculty  of  the
Cartomante  lies  in  predicting  to  whom  that  judgment
is  determined.

In  seership  or  scrying  by  means  of  the  crystal,
etc.,  a  distinction  exists  between  the  purely  involun-
tary or  passive  use  of  the  faculty  of  clairvoj^ance
and  that  in  which  media  are  used.  Moreover,
some  passives  see  directly  and  describe  things  as
they  actually  are  or  will  be  at  the  time  indicated,
while  others  do  not  see  otherwise  than  by  symbols
which  require  rational  interpretation.

In  Geomancy  also  the  automatic  faculty  is  directed
by  definite  methods  and  is  supplemented  by  the  use
of  the  rational  faculty  in  the  process  of  interpreta-
tion. Marks  made  haphazard  in  the  sand  or  upon
a  piece  of  paper  have  no  meaning  for  those  who  are
ignorant  of  geomantic  symbolism,  so  that  inasmuch
as  the  symbols  gain  their  meaning  by  the  intention


DIVINATION


215


of  the  mind,  there  is  a  consent  between  the  rational
and  the  instinctual  faculties  in  man.  It  is  by  reason
of  this  consent  in  nature  that  the  methods  of
divination  we  are  about  to  consider  are  rendered
possible.

Nevertheless,  it  is  not  possible  to  apply  any
dogmatism  or  arbitrary  methods  to  the  interpreta-
tion of  s3rmbols.  We  cannot,  for  instance,  determine
that  a  flight  of  two  crows  is  a  symbol  of  death  and
one  of  seven  crows  a  marriage,  and  straightway
go  forth  to  observe  if  death  or  marriage  is  our
immediate  fate.  A  symbol  is  such  by  reason  of  its
analogy  and  correspondence  with  certain  principles
in  nature  which  are  reflected  in  our  minds.  Thus
we  may  speak  of  the  universe  as  a  symbol  of  the
Deity,  and  of  man  as  a  symbol  of  the  universe
(which  indeed  was  anciently  depicted  as  the  Grand
Man,  Adam  Kadmon,  etc.),  and  these  are  not  arbi-
trary relations  but  have  their  origin  in  a  natural
correspondence  which  exists  quite  apart  from  our
recognition  of  it.  The  symbol  is  the  means  by  which
we  express  our  recognition  of  that  relationship.
Figures  are  primarily  symbolical;  if  we  use  them
to  denote  quantities  it  is  a  mere  convention.  Every
material  form  is  a  symbol  of  the  forces  which
generated  it.

When  we  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  auto-
matic faculty,  we  have  to  suppose  a  superior  degree
of  intimacy  between  the  soul  of  Nature  and  that
of  the  individual  in  whom  the  divinatory  faculty  is
active.    It  is  undoubtedly  a  fact  that  the  more


216       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


practical  the  individual  may  be  the  less  intimate  are
his  relations  with  that  subconscious  or  submerged
part  of  his  nature  which  is  related  to  the  Universal
Soul.

Individual  consciousness  cannot  actively  engage
in  that  which  is  external  and  that  which  is  internal
at  one  and  the  same  time,  except  the  person  be  in
a  state  which  is  altogether  abnormal.  The  normal
mind  is  active  in  the  waking  consciousness  during
the  day  and  active  in  the  sleeping  consciousness
during  the  night.  The  waking  consciousness  is
otherwise  known  as  the  attentive  mind,  and  it  is
by  the  depolarization  of  this  that  sleep  is  induced.
In  certain  phases  of  hypnosis  both  aspects  of  the
mind  may  be  simultaneously  active  in  part,  and  the
same  phenomenon  is  observed  in  somnambulism.

The  following  diagrams  illustrate  (1)  the  normal
waking  consciousness,  (2)  the  normal  sleeping
consciousness,  (3)  the  hypnotic  or  somnambuHc
semi-consciousness,  and  (4)  permanent  dislocation
of  the  mental  axis  in  cases  of  insanity  : —


/  2.  3  ^


The  faculty  of  self-depolarization  and  of  diving
down  into  the  region  of  the  submerged  consciousness
appears  to  be  naturally  developed  in  the  genuine


DIVINATION


217


medium  and  the  diviner.  Others  may  induce  this
faculty  by  the  use  of  suitable  media  such  as  the
hypnotic  disc,  the  crystal  or  "  the  magic  mirror."
In  others,  again,  it  is  induced  only  by  hypnotic
treatment.

It  is  chiefly  when  in  doubt  that  we  make  our
appeal  to  it,  and  no  Divination  would  be  possible
without  its  consent  of  function.

It  has  been  affirmed,  with  some  show  of  reason,
that  the  subconscious  mind  is  the  intelligence  prin-
ciple of  the  evolving  human  entity,  and  that  it  is
the  storehouse  of  the  digested  memories  of  all  past
incarnations.  Others,  however,  affirm  that  it  is
nascent  and  rudimentary,  the  intelligence  of  the
animal  soul,  in  distinction  from  the  rational  prin-
ciple of  the  human  soul.  But  whatever  we  may
argue  concerning  its  status  and  functions  in  the
human  economy,  we  cannot  deny  that  its  powers
transcend  those  of  the  supraliminal  mind  and  that
its  association  with  the  Soul  of  things  is  far  more
intimate.

All  divination,  in  effect,  consists  in  the  ability
to  bring  into  the  region  of  our  normal  Avaking
consciousness  the  things  which  lie  hidden  in  the
womb  of  Time.  Some  of  the  means  by  which  this
is  effected  will  now  be  explained.


CHAPTER  II


THE  TAROT

Divination  by  means  of  cards  is  a  very  ancient
practice.  It  has  been  affirmed  that  the  cards  as
we  know  them  were  invented  for  the  purpose  of
beguihng  the  hours  of  a  feeble-minded  monarch.
My  only  comment  on  this  statement  is  that  any
king  who  believed  the  story  would  be  very  easily
beguiled.  I  do  not  presume  to  say  when  cards  were
first  used  for  gaming  purposes,  but  the  Tarot  from
which  ordinary  plajdng-cards  are  obviously  derived,
has  a  ver}^  ancient  origin  and  moreover  a  very
profound  one.  It  is  said  that  Hermes  the  Thrice  ||
Great  engraved  the  symbols  of  the  Tarot  upon  22
laminae  of  gold.  Various  expositions  of  the  Tarot
have  appeared  from  time  to  time,  and  aU  agree  in
tracing  a  connection  between  the  Twenty-two
Major  Keys  and  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,
beginning  with  Aleph.  Several  attempts  have  been
made  to  associate  the  sjmibols  of  the  Tarot  with  the
Three  Divine  Principles,  the  Twelve  Signs  and  the
Seven  Planets,  but  all  attempts  appear  to  me  fanciful.

In  addition  to  the  Twenty-two  Major  Keys
there  are  fifty-six  Minor  Keys,  and  these  are  the  same

218


THE  TAROT


219


as  the  ordinary  pack  of  52  cards,  with  the  exception
that  there  are  4  knights,  one  of  each  suit,  in  addition
to  the  knaves.  These  knights  or  heralds  precede
the  ace  of  each  suit.  Of  the  52  remaining  cards
we  have  four  suits  corresponding  to  the  four  seasons
of  the  year — Cups,  Batons,  Deniers  and  Swords,
otherwise  called  Hearts,  Clubs,  Diamonds  and
Spades.

These  are  disposed  as  follows  : —

Spring    .  .  .  Diamonds

Summer  .  .  .  Clubs

Autumn  .  .  .  Hearts

Winter    .  .  .  Spades

The  52  cards  correspond  to  the  52  weeks  of  the
solar  year.  Several  works  have  recently  appeared
setting  forth  the  meanings  of  the  Tarot  cards  and
the  methods  of  employing  them.

The  Tarot  Keys

Various  methods  have  been  invented  for  the  use
of  the  Tarot  cards,  which  those  who  desire  to  follow
the  art  of  divination  b}^  this  means  w^ill  find  fully
set  forth  in  the  works  of  Mons.  Encausse  (Papus),
L'Abbe  Constant  (Eliphas  Levi),  and  P.  Christian,
to  which  I  would  add  the  more  recent  work  by
Mr.  A.  E.  Waite.i

It  will  suffice  if  I  here  give  the  interpretation  of
the  22  Major  Arcana,  about  which  many  ingenious
theories  have  been  circulated  from  time  to  time.

^  The  Key  to  the  Tarot.    London  :  Wm.  Rider  &  Son,  Ltd.


220       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Every  Arcanum  has  a  threefold  application
having  relation  to  the  spirit,  soul  and  body  of  man
or  the  spiritual,  intellectual  and  material  worlds
according  to  those  Kabalists  who  have  attempted
an  exposition.    But  I  conceive  a  fourfold  applica-
tion, viz.  the  Spiritual,  the  Intellectual,  the  Psychic
or  Emotional  and  the  Material  or  Physical;  for  the
soul  of  man  has  two  distinct  aspects,  the  Nous,  or
mind,  and   the  Antinous^  or  passional  principle;
these  being  otherwise  referred  to  as  the  Higher  and
Lower  Self  or  the  Human  and  Animal  Man,  the  formo
or  Corpus  being  altogether  material  and  of  no  active
power  save  what  it  derives  from  the  aninial  soul^j
investing  it.    On  these  lines  the  following  interpre-
tation may  be  found  a  useful  key  to  the


1.  The  Magician — represented  b}^  a  figure  of  a
man  holding  a  baton  or  wand  over  the  three  sym-
bolical forms  :  the  Cup,  the  Sword  and  the  Denier.
Around  him  are  springing  up  roses  and  lilies.  Over
his  head  is  a  double  nimbus  in  the  form  of  the  figure
8.  This  is  the  magician,  he  who  is  master  of  the
four  worlds,  the  four  elements  and  the  four  principles,
who  is  capable  of  ^xercising  the  creative  will — an
adept.  \


In  the  Spiritual  world  he  stands  for  the  Creative


In  the  Intellectual  world  —  The  pure  volition.
Transformation;  resolution;  the  ability  to  propound
and  to  resolve  a  problem;  to  control  the  mind.


Twenty-two  Arcana


Will.


/


THE  TAROT


221


In  the  Psychic  world — Desire,  which  is  the  lower
jxpression  of  the  will ;  the  ability  to  generate  and  to
iestroy;  the  control  of  the  psychic  forces  and  the
nastery  of  the  passions.

In  the  Physical  world — The  control  of  the  ele-
ments; the  mastery  of  physical  forces;  the  power  to
acquire  and  to  dispose  of  the  material  benefits  of
life.    A  great  inventor.

2.  The  High  Priestess. — The  figure  of  a  woman
seated,  her  head  surmounted  by  a  solar  disc  between
horns.  On  her  breast  is  a  cross,  and  on  her  lap  the
Tora  or  Book  of  the  Law,  while  at  her  feet  is  the
lunar  crescent.  She  is  seated  between  the  pillars
of  the  temple  called  Jachin  and  Boaz — Security  and
Strength.  It  represents  Isis^  Maya  and  the  Virgin
Mother  of  the  world.  This  Arcanum  is  also  called
"  The  Door  of  the  Hidden  Sanctuary,"

In  the  Spiritual  world  it  denotes  the  Divine  Sophia,
the  creative  imagination,  the  universal  matrix,  in
and  through  which  the  supreme  will  is  manifested.

In  the  Intellectual  world. — The  Binary  or  reflection
of  Unity,  the  law  of  alternation,  the  pairs  of  opposites,
positive  and  negative,  etc. ;  the  reason,  which  weighs
and  balances,  discerning  by  comparison  of  known
things.

In  the  Psychic  world — Attraction  and  repulsion;
the  relations  of  the  sexes;  love  and  hatred.

In  the  Physical  world — Chemical  affinity  (as  acids
and  alkalis);  trade,  commerce,  interchange,  barter.
The  woman  related  to  the  man  for  the  furtherance
of  the  ends  of  destiny.


222        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


3.  The  Empress,  otherwise  Isis-Umnia.  A  female
figure  reclining.  She  holds  the  symbol  of  Power
in  her  hand,  and  at  her  feet  is  the  Ankh  or  sj^mbol
of  life — Venus.  At  her  feet  the  corn  springs  full-
eared  and  plentiful.  She  is  surrounded  by  the
beauties  of  nature.  She  represents  Nature  in
association  with  the  superior  world,  or  Super-nature.
She  is  the  first  product  of  the  Supreme  Will  and
Imagination,  the  progenj^  of  Divine  Wisdom  and
Love,  and  unites  in  herself  intelligence  and  power
in  their  highest  manifestation.

In  the  Spiritual  world  this  Arcanum  denotes
the  knowledge  of  the  two  worlds,  the  manifest  and
unmanifest;  the  past  and  future  united  in  the
eternal  Now.

In  the  Intellectual  world — Ideation,  the  productive
power  of  the  mind,  discrimination.

In  the  Psychic  world — The  art  of  generation,
fecundity,  parentage.

In  the  Physical  world — The  power  of  expansion,
of  multiplication;  growth,  development;  wealth,
plenty.

4.  The.  Stone  Cube,  also  known  as  the  Emperor,
A  man  of  mature  age  seated  upon  the  Chair  of  Initia-
tion, the  Masonic  Cube.  In  his  right  hand  is  the
sceptre  of  deific  power,  the  ansated  cross;  and  in  his
left  the  globe,  the  symbol  of  possession.

In  the  Spiritual  world  this  figure  represents  the
realization,  successively  and  continuously,  of  the
Divine  Virtues  in  oneself.

In  the  Intellectual  world — The  realization  of  the


THE  TAROT


223


idea  of  related  and  dependent  existence;  affirmation;
negation;  discussion  and  solution.

In  the  Psychic  world — Attainment  of  happiness
by  the  satisfaction  of  desires;  the  realization  of  the
dual  nature  in  male  and  female  successions.

In  the  Physical  world — The  realization  of  material
effects.  The  reward  of  effort  and  correct  judgment.
The  concrete.    Foundation,  establishment.

5.  The  Hierophant,  or  Master  of  the  Secrets.  On
his  head  is  the  Mitre,  in  his  left  hand  the  triple  Cross.
His  right  hand  is  uplifted  with  the  sign  of  the  Bene-
diction. At  his  feet  are  the  Keys  of  the  Kingdom,
which  unlock  the  Gates  of  Life  and  Death,  of  Heaven
and  Hell.    He  is  the  symbol  of  the  Grand  Master.

In  the  Spiritual  world  it  denotes  the  Universal
Law,  by  which  the  infinite  manifestations  of  the
Divine  Being  are  regulated.

In  the  Intellectual  world — Religion,  the  connection
between  the  Infinite  and  the  Finite,  the  One  and  the
many.

In  the  Psychic  world — The  regulation  of  the
passions  ;  self-control ;  discipline.

In  the  Physical  world — Liberty  within  the  limits
of  the  law;  direction  and  control  of  natural  forces.

6.  The  Two  Ways,  or  The  Lovers.  Beneath  the
outspread  hands  of  a  flaming  Cherub  stand  a  man
and  woman,  with  the  Tree  of  Life  and  the  Tree  of
Knowledge  upon  either  hand.  Around  the  Tree  of
Knowledge  the  Serpent  is  coiled.

In  the  Spiritual  world  this  Arcanum  symbolizes
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil;  the  conscience.


224        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Li  the  Intellectual  world — The  laws  of  Necessity
and  Liberty,  of  Duty  and  Privilege.

In  the  Psychic  world — The  choice  between  denial
or  consent  to  the  promptings  of  the  lower  nature.
The  determination  of  conduct.  The  experience  of
indulgence  and  abstention.  Instinct.

In  the  Physical  world — The  antagonism  of  natural
forces;  dissociation;  disintegration;  fractures,
divorce,  parting.

7.  The  Chariot  of  Osiris.  The  figure  of  the  Sun-
God  stands  in  a  car  drawn  by  two  sphinxes,  the
one  black  and  the  other  white.  It  represents  the
illumination  of  the  lower  nature  by  the  Higher  Self,
of  the  earth  by  the  solar  orb,  of  the  soul  by  the
Spirit.

In  the  Spiritual  world — The  sacred  Septenary,
the  ascendency  of  Spirit  over  Matter;  the  penetra-
tion of  the  mysteries  by  the  light  of  Divine
Intelligence.

In  the  Intellectual  world.  The  dispersal  of  doubt
and  error  by  the  light  of  the  intellect.  Mental
acumen.

In  the  Psychic  world.  The  dissemination  of  vital
energy  by  magnetic  vigour;  geniality  and  warmth
of  nature ;  vitality.

In  the  Physical  world — The  gamut  of  the  seven
senses.  Radiation;  energy;  force.  The  fulfilment
of  ambitions.

8.  Justice,  or  the  Sword  and  Balance.  Justice
is  seated  and  vested  in  the  robes  of  the  judge.
In  the  left   hand  she  holds  the  scales  evenly


THE  TAROT


225


balanced,  and  in  her  right  the  sword  uphfted.
She  represents  the  impartiality  of  Heaven,  and  pro-
claims that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  that
Heaven  has  no  favourites,  but  always  rewards
virtue  and  punishes  vice.

In  the  Spiritual  world — Divine  justice.

In  the  Intellectual  world  —  Pure  reason,  correct
judgment,  comparison,  equity.

In  the  Psychic  world — The  attainment  of  peace
and  happiness  by  moderation,  temperance  and
impartiality.

In  the  Physical  world — The  balance  of  forces.
The  law  of  equilibrium.  Attraction  and  repul-
sion. Compensation.  Sense  of  Value.  Rewards
and  punishments.

9.  The  Veiled  Lamp,  or  the  Hermit.  The  figure
of  a  sage  or  philosopher  carrying  a  lamp  in  one  hand
and  a  staff  in  the  other.  He  represents  the  pilgrim
soul,  the  seeker  after  truth.

In  the  Spiritual  world  it  denotes  the  realization
of  the  Divine  selfhood  b}^  manifestation  or
embodiment.

In  the  Intellectual  world — Prudence  and  circum-
spection, discrimination  of  true  and  false,  of  right
and  wrong;  classification.

In  the  Psychic  world — Selection,  choice,  likes  and
dislikes;  morality.

In  the  Physical  world — Molecular  construction;
science;  discovery;  distinction  of  caste;  order  and
arrangement;  carefulness,  caution.

10.  The  Sphinx,  or  Wheel  of  Fortune.    The  Rota

Q


226        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


or  Wheel  on  which  is  seated  the  Sphinx  upholding
the  sword.  Around  the  wheel  are  the  letters  of
the  law  as  defined  in  the  Tarot,  and  the  four  fixed
signs  of  the  Zodiac,  the  man,  lion,  bull  and  eagle.
It  represents  the  law  of  correlated  succession.

In  the  Spiritual  world  —  The  Law  of  Karma;
spiritual  cause  and  effect;  spiritual  selection.

In  the  Intellectual  world  —  The  rational  faculty;
mduction  and  deduction ;  connectedness ;  perception
of  relativity  and  time  intervals,  progression.

In  the  Psychic  world  —  The  regulation  of  the
emotions  and  passions  and  the  application  of  the
psychic  forces  by  the  moral  law.  Regime,  training,
orderhness.

In  the  Physical  world — The  law  of  action  and
reaction;  good  and  bad  fortune;  the  cyclic  law
of  events;  periodicity;  rise  and  fall;  revolution;
circulation.

N.B. — This  symbol  is  that  of  the  aspirant  to
Occult  Initiation.  The  symbols  of  the  man,  bull,
lion,  and  eagle  or  serpent  denote  the  four  maxims  :
Know,  Will,  Dare,  Keep  silent,  which  are  imposed
on  all  neophytes.  These  are  the  keys  to  the  attain-
ment of  power.

11.  The  Muzzled  Lion,  or  Strength.  A  woman
closing  the  mouth  of  a  lion  by  a  strength  which
demands  no  effort.

In  the  Spiritual  world — The  omnipotent.

In  the  Intellectual  world — Moral  and  intellectual
force  ;  the  determination  of  energy  to  the  accom-
plishment of  things  by  knowledge  of  the  law.


THE  TAROT


227


In  the  Psychic  world — The  use  of  the  psychic
forces  in  the  process  of  development;  the  conquest
of  the  animal  nature.

In  the  Physical  world — The  conservation  of
energy;  control  and  direction  of  force;  mastery
of  the  elements;  vitality;  rejuvenation.

12.  The  Sacrifice,  or  the  Hanged  Man.  A  man
with  a  golden  halo  is  suspended  b}^  one  foot  from  a
tree;  the  free  limb  being  placed  so  as  to  form  an
inverted  figure  t7.  It  represents  the  Divine  Giving-
forth,  the  revealed  law.

In  the  Spiritual  world — The  sacrifice  of  the  spirit
to  matter  for  the  ends  of  evolution.

In  the  Intellectual  world — The  laAV  of  repression ;
antagonism;  inversion  and  self-sacrifice.

In  the  Psychic  world  —  Madness,  offensiveness,
misanthrophy.

In  the  Physical  world — Depolarization;  reversal;
penalty;  reaction;  loss  and  undoing.

13.  The  Reaping  Skeleton,  or  Death.  The  figure
of  a  skeleton  riding  upon  a  horse,  to  whom  even
the  great  ones  of  earth  do  homage.  It  represents
the  Divine  Law  of  reversion,  the  going  back  of
things  to  their  source;  inbreathing.

In  the  Spiritual  world — It  denotes  manifestation
of  the  Divine  activity  and  life.  Creation  and
transformation.

In  the  Intellectual  world — The  law  of  action
and  reaction  ;  introspection  ;  inductive  reasoning  ;
ecstasy.

In  the  Psychic  world — Disappointment ;  denial

Q  2


228       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


of  affections  ;  reclusiveness  ;  deprivation  of  psychic
force  ;  catalepsy.

In  the  Physical  world — Death ;  ruin  ;  paralysis  ;
collapse  ;  nullity.

14.  The  Two  Urns,  or  Temperance.  An  angelic
figure  pours  pure  water  from  one  vessel  to  another.
On  his  forehead  is  the  symbol  of  Life,  and  on  his
breast  the  ineffable  name,  Adonai,  and  the  triangle
within  the  square.  It  represents  the  Divine  life
in  activity.

In  the  Spiritual  world  —  The  eternal  movement
of  life.

In  the  Intellectual  world — The  combination  of
ideas;  friendship;  sociolog}'.

In  the  Psychic  world  —  The  interplay  of  the
emotions;  reciprocal  affection;  intercourse;  social
life.

In  the  Physical  world  —  The  relations  of  the
sexes ;  chemical  combination ;  amalgamation ;  public
intercourse.

15.  Typhon,  or  The  Devil.  The  Evil  One  seated
upon  a  throne  in  the  Inferno,  his  footstool  an  iron
cube  to  which  male  and  female  devils  are  chained.
It  represents  the  spirit  of  Discord.

In  the  Spiritual  world — The  principle  of  evil,
the  refractory  will  opposed  to  the  predestined  order
of  things.

In  the  Intellectual  world — Magic,  mystery;  the
unknown;  controversy;  freethought;  fatahsm.

In  the  Psychic  world — Anger;  passion;  hatred;
malice  and  fear.


THE  TAROT


229


In  the  Physical  world — Antipathy ;  discord ;  strife ;
repulsion;  riot  and  lawlessness.

16.  The  Blasted  Tower,  or  the  Lightning  Flash.
A  toAver  struck  by  lightning.  A  crown  is  seen
falling  from  the  pinnacle,  and  also  two  men.

It  denotes  the  Divine  visitation.

In  the  Spiritual  world — The  overthrow  of  spiritual
pride;  the  descent  of  Typhon;  the  fall  of  the  angels.

In  the  Intellectual  world — The  pride  of  intellect
and  its  consequence ;  the  law  of  retribution ;  insanity.

In  the  Psychic  world  —  Psychic  repercussion;
ostentation  ;  the  humbling  of  the  autocrat.

In  the  Physical  world — Cataclysms;  earthquakes,
storms;  overthrow;  reversal;  ruin;  fatality;  sudden
death;  catastrophe;  accidents.

17.  The  Star  of  the  Magi,  or  the  Star.  A  female
figure  pouring  water  from  one  vessel  into  a  lake
and  from  another  upon  the  dry  land.  Above  her
are  the  seven  stars,  among  which  there  shines  the
great  Pole  Star  of  the  Magi.  It  represents  the
Divine  Expectancy.

In  the  Spiritual  world — Faith,  the  realization  of
Hope.  The  manifestation  of  the  unrevealed.  The
beatific  Vision.

In  the  Intellectual  world — Absolute  knowledge;
the  evidence  of  experience;  illumination;  astrology.

In  the  Psychic  world  —  Expectancy;  geniality;
sympathy;  charity;  optimism;  confidence.

In  the  Physical  world  —  Birth  ;  success  ;  relief  ;
sustenance.

18.  The  Twilight,  or  the  Moon.    A  night  scene,


230        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


the  luminar}'  distilling  dew  upon  the  earth,  while  a
dog  and  a  wolf  are  baying  the  moon  and  a  crab
is  crawling  from  the  water.  It  denotes  the  Great
Infinitude.

In  the  Spiritual  world — The  ab^'sm  of  the  Infinite;
the  womb  of  Time;  the  Divine  amplitude;  infinity;
spiritual  darkness.

Inthe  Intellectual  world — The  darkness  of  negation;
imbecilit}^;  lunacy;  vacuity;  time  and  space  as
distinguished  from  duration  and  distance.

In  the  Psychic  world — Doubt;  despair;  hesitancy;
vacillation  and  inconstancy.

In  the  Physical  world — Darkness;  emptiness;
denial;  enemies;  snares  and  ambushes.

19.  The  Resplendent  Light,  or  the  Sun.  A  child
with  the  banner  of  Life  seated  upon  a  white  horse.
The  child's  head  is  adorned  by  a  chaplet  of  flowers,
while  above  him  shines  a  brilliant  sun.  It  represents
the  Divine  Effulgence.

In  the  S piritual  world — It  is  the  supreme  Heaven ;
the  Presence  of  the  Divine  Being;  the  Kingdom  of
Heaven;  the  angelic  life.

In  the  Intellectual  world — The  first  principle;  the
origin  and  source  of  things;  the  laws  of  being.

In  the  Psychic  world — Vital  energy;  magnetic
power;  radiant  joy;  happiness;  benevolence.

In  the  Physical  world — Life ;  energy,  force ;  success,
honours;  elevation,  attainment.

20.  The  Resurrection,  or  the  Judgment.  The  Angel
of  Life  sounding  the  Trumpet^  while  the  dead  rise
from  their  tombs.  It  represents  the  Great  Vocation.


THE  TAROT


231


In  the  Spiritual  world  —  Spiritual  awakening;
the  call  to  the  Divine  Life  and  Presence ;  the  Divine
Consciousness.

In  the  Intellectual  world — Revelation  of  genius;
aspiration.

In  the  Psychic  world — Responsiveness;  activity;
conversion;  moral  regeneration;  new  regime.

In  the  Physical  world — Response  to  stimulus;
reflex  action;  elective  affinity;  elevation;  mission;
office;  utility;  work.

21.  The  Crown  of  the  Magi,  or  the  World,  In
the  centre  of  a  circle  is  seen  the  figure  of  a  woman,
representing  Nature.  The  circle  is  variously  a
serpent  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth,  representing
eternity,  and  a  wreath  of  laurels  denoting  conquest
or  attainment.  At  the  four  corners  are  seen  the
four  fixed  signs,  denoting  stability  and  endurance,
the  four  quarters  of  the  world  and  the  four  "elements."
It  denotes  immortality.

In  the  Spiritual  world  —  Divine  continuity.
Immortality.

In  the  Intellectual  world  —  The  mystery  of  the
ages.  Adeptship.  The  law  of  continuity.  Supreme
knowledge.

In  the  Psychic  world — Patience;  endurance;
steadfastness;  fidelity;  morality;  integrity;  perfect
satisfaction;  the  virtuous  enjoyment  of  all  dehghts.

In  the  Physical  world — Position;  power;  honour;
distinction;  wealth;  long  life;  happiness;  inheritance.

22.  The  Blind  Fool,  or  Folly.  A  vain  and  be-
dizened youth,  carrying  a  staff  and  bundle  upon  his


232       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


shoulder,  holds  in  his  hand  the  flower  of  daUiance.
With  haughty  mien  he  walks  blindly  to  the  vei^e
of  a  precipice.  It  is  the  symbol  of  the  Di^iDe
Inscrutability.

In  the  Spiritual  world  —  The  law  of  Divine
Necessity.

In  the  Intellectual  world  —  Fatalism;  egotism;
blind  credulity;  ignorance;  error.

In  the  Psychic  world  —  Unrestrained  passions;
selfishness;  vanity;  speculation.

In  the  Physical  world — Inconsequence;  blindness;
danger  ;  ruin  ;  detachment,  isolation  ;  conspicuous
folly.

These  interpretations  are  not  presumed  to  be
exhaustive  nor  to  follow  any  other  order  than  that
of  the  Tarot  cards,  which,  needless  to  say,  have  been
shuffled  considerably  since  their  delivery  to  the  world
by  the  thrice  great  Hermes.  They  represent  the
three  stages  of  Initiation,  with  their  ten,  seven
and  three  steps,  culminating  in  Attainment  (21)  or
Failure  (22).  He  who  can  so  dispose  the  symbols
of  the  Tarot,  or  Golden  Book  of  Hermes,  will  need
no  other  initiation  than  he  can  himseli  effect.


CHAPTER  III


CARTOMANCY

The  following  methods  have  reference  to  the
ordinary  pack  of  32  cards,  the  twos,  threes,  fours,
fives  and  sixes  being  rejected.

The  Shuffle
This  should  be  done  without  effort,  prejudice  or
design.  The  cards  should  lie  loosely  in  the  left
hand  while  the  right  manipulates  them,  the  mind
meanwhile  resting  intently  upon  the  object  desired
of  the  divination.  If  the  consultant  is  not  expert
at  shuffling,  so  that  it  cannot  be  done  automatically
and  without  the  attention  being  fixed  upon  it,  the
cards  should  be  laid  face  downwards  upon  a  table
and  mixed  by  a  light  circular  pressure  with  both
hands.  They  are  then  brought  together  to  form  a
pack.

The  Cut

The  cards  being  placed  face  downwards,  the  pack
must  be  cut  with  the  left  (the  passive)  hand  into
three  lots,  turning  them  face  upwards.

The  Cartomante
then  takes  the  lots  one  by  one,  taking  note  of  the
cards  which  lie  exposed  on  the  top  of  each  lot.

233


234        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  pack  is  then  put  together  in  the  same  order  as
before  the  Cut.

A  variet}^  of  methods  may  be  followed  in  laying
out  the  cards.  Much  depends  upon  the  object  in
view  as  to  what  method  should  be  employed.  It
will  doubtless  be  sufficient  if  I  recite  several  of  the
more  approved  methods,  leaving  the  reader  to  make
selection  of  one  or  more  of  them  as  occasion  may
require.

But  first  let  us  learn  the  meanings  of  the  cards.
The  Suits

Diamonds  have  relation  to  money,  profit,  loss.
They  are  governed  by  the  cards  which  are  in  touch
with  them.    In  questions  of  time  they  denote  speed.

Clubs  denote  business,  profession,  position;  mental
pursuits.

Hearts  govern  domestic  affairs,  social  relations,
love,  affection.

Spades  denote  sickness,  death,  loss,  disappoint-
ment, delay,  distance.
>

Time

Diamonds  de^pote  the  morning.
Clubs,  midday.
Hearts y  evening.
Spades,  night.

Complexions

Diamonds  show  very  fair  people,  with  flaxen  or
sandy  hair  and  blue  eyes.    If  aged,  white-headed,


CARTOMANCY


235


Cluhs  show  persons  of  medium  colour,  inclining
to  be  dark,  with  brown  hair  and  eyes.

Hearts  show  rather  fair  people,  with  fresh  com-
plexion, brown  hair  and  blue  or  grey  eyes.

Spades,  very  dark  people,  with  black  hair  and
dark  complexion,  deep  broAvn  eyes.

Position

Diamonds  show  officials  and  persons  in  authority;
also  very  old  people.

Clubs  show  professionals  and  such  as  live  by  the
use  of  their  intellect.

Hearts  denote  social  and  domestic  attendants;
also  lovers  and  friends.

Spades,  lawyers  (acting  under  diamonds) ;  widows,
widowers;  persons  in  mourning;  also  those  of  mean
caUing,  artisans,  etc.

Intervals

Diamonds  denote  speedy  effects.

Clubs,  punctuality.

Hearts,  leisurely  results.

Spades,  delay,  impediments  or  failure.

Sex

Kings  of  the  suits  stand  for  men  of  the  appro-
priate colouring  {see  "  Complexions  ").
Queens  represent  women.

Knaves  denote  the  thoughts  of  persons  indicated
by  the  king  or  queen  of  the  same  suit.


236       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

Specific  Meanings
Diamonds.

Seven  stands  for  a  gift,  jewellery,  children.
Eight,  roadway  journeys,  short  travels.
Nine,  speed,  sharpness;  wounds,  quarrels;  sudden
events.

Ten,  a  city,  town;  success.
Ace,  money;  a  ring;  a  letter.

Clubs.

Seven,  victory,  success;  achievement  by  intelli-
gence.

Eight,  papers,  documents;  a  firm  friend;  agree-
ments, contracts.

Nine,  merrymaking;  pleasure;  society.

Ten,  distant  journey  by  land;  business;  success
by  the  use  of  faculty;  surmounting.

Ace,  good  fortune;  success;  preferment.

Hearts.

Seven,  a  small  wish ;  slight  gratification ;  domestic
changes.

Eight,  clothes;  invitations;  love  and  courting;
furniture.

Nine,  the  wished-for  thing  ;  gratification;  joy.
Ten,  marriage;  a  fortunate  change;  success.
Ace,  the  house;  a  cot  or  cradle;  good  fortune.

Spades.

Seven,  an  upset;  a  removal;  disorder;  a  reversal.
Eight,  night-time;  sickness;  loss;  a  split  or  quarreL


CARTOMANCY


237


Nine,  disappointment ;  delay ;  death;  loss ;  undoing
and  failure.

Ten,  water  ;  a  voyage  ;  a  great  distance ;  things
remote.

Ace,  the  grave;  a  foundation;  a  post  or  position.

The  nine  of  Diamonds  is  called  the  "  Sword  "
and  "  the  curse  of  Scotland."  The  ace  of  Clubs
is  called  "  the  Horseshoe,"  and  other  cards  have
their  own  appropriate  symbolic  names.

Combinations

Every  card  has  its  own  specific  meaning,  but  is
capable  of  conveying  a  flexed  meaning  hy  combina-
tion with  other  cards.  Thus  you  may  have  a  clutch
of  two  or  three  cards  touching  one  another,  the  result
being  indicated  by  the  combined  meanings  of  the
cards  involved.  The  following  combined  meanings
will  aid  in  the  process  of  interpretation  : —

A  Clutch  of  Two.
Eight  of  Hearts  and  Ace  of  Diamonds,  an  affection-
ate letter ;  a  proposal  of  marriage ;  a  letter  of
invitation.

Seven  of  Clubs  and  Ten  of  Diamonds,  successful
business;  financial  victory.

Nine  of  Clubs  and  Ace  of  Spades,  a  will.

Seven  of  Spades  and  Ace  of  Hearts,  a  change  of
residence.

Eight  of  Diamonds  and  Ten  of  Spades,  a  wet
journey.


238       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM  ig|

Ten  of  Clubs  and  Ten  of  Spades,  a  long  voyage.
Nine  of  Diamonds  duad Seven  of  Spades, an  accident;
a  flight.

Nine  of  Diamonds  and  Nine  of  Spades,  death.

Eight  of  Hearts  and  Eight  of  Clubs,  a  contract.

Seven  of  Spades  and  Eight  of  Hearts,  a  change  of
clothes,  or  furniture.

Nine  of  Diamonds  and  Eight  of  Clubs,  a  writ;  a
summons,  or  telegram.

Similarly  all  pairs  of  cards  may  be  combined  to
form  a  reading.  The  meanings  derived  will  have
reference  to  any  person  indicated  by  the  Court  Card
they  may  touch.    In  this  respect

Cards  above  the  person  signified  denote  that  lo
which  he  is  striving.

Cards  below  denote  that  which  lies  at  his  feet,
things  accomplished.

Cards  to  the  left  show  what  is  thrown  away  or  to
be  avoided;  the  results  of  past  action;  antagonisms.

Cards  to  the  right  indicate  that  which  the  future
holds;  the  outcome  of  present  action.

A  Clutch  of  Three,

Three  Aces,  a  rise  in  position.

Three  Kings,  success.

Three  Queens,  scandal;  company.

Three  Knaves,  embarrassments.

Three  Tens,  a  rise  in  position.

Three  Nines,  delay,  if  including  the  Spade  Nine;
disappointment,  if  the  Heart  Nine  is  absent.  Other-
wise, speedy  success.


CARTOMANCY


239


Three  Eights,  success.

Three  Sevens,  an  upset;  derangement.

A  Clutch  of  Four,

Four  Aces,  a  denial ;  refusal.

Four  Kings,  a  court  case ;  a  meeting  ;  a  convention.

Four  Queens,  slander;  publicity.

Four  Knaves,  distraint ;  imprisonment ;  an  impasse.

Four  Tens,  great  success.

Four  Nines,  robbery;  bankruptcy;  failure;  dead
loss.

Four  Eights,  achievement ;  success ;  merrymaking.
Four  Sevens,  walled  in;  confinement;  stoppage.

Note. — A  preponderance  of  red  cards  in  any  com-
bination is  more  hopeful  than  if  they  were  black.

A  Run.

A  run  or  sequence  of  Diamonds  shows  financial
competence;  of  Hearts,  domestic  and  social  happi-
ness ;  of  Clubs,  good  business  and  intellectual  achieve-
ments; of  Spades,  illness,  misfortune,  failure.


CHAPTER  IV


VARIOUS  METHODS

1.  The  Wheel  of  Fortune

In  this  method  the  32  cards  only  are  used.  The
"  positions  "  correspond  to  the  twelve  astrological
Houses  (which  see),  and  have  the  same  significations. ^
The  cards  are  laid  out  in  the  order  indicated  by  the
numbers  in  the  following  diagram,  and  the  pairs
are  read  in  relation  to  their  positions.

The  13th,  14th,  15th  and  16th  cards  are  called
the  governing  cards.  The  17th  is  the  key  card.
The  three  cards  left  over  are  what  goes  out  of
the  life.

Diamonds  belong  to  the  1st  House;  Clubs  to  the
10th;  Hearts  to  the  7th;  and  Spades  to  the  4th.  The
ace  of  any  suit  is  in  its  strongest  position  when
occupying  its  own  House.  The  kings  are  in  best
position  when  they  are  the  governing  cards  of  their
own  angles,  e.  g.  the  King  of  Diamonds  in  the  13tb
position;  the  King  of  Clubs  in  the  14th;  the  King
of  Hearts  in  the  15th;  and  the  King  of  Spades  in
the  16th  position.

Each  of  the  Houses  can  be  occupied  by  one  of
two  cards,  which  will  then  be  in  position  of  greatest

240


VARIOUS  METHODS  241


strength;  and  the  angles  will  have  three  cards,
similarly  placed  in  positions  of  strength.    Thus  : —

1st  House  is  strengthened  by  Ace  of  Diamonds,
7  Hearts,  or  10  Spades.

2nd  House,  8  Hearts,  Jack  of  Spades.

3rd  House,  9  Hearts,  Queen  of  Spades.

4:th  House,  Ace  of  Spades,  10  Hearts,  or  7  Clubs.

5th  House,  Jack  of  Hearts,  8  Clubs.

6th  House,  Queen  of  Hearts,  9  Clubs.

1th  House,  7  Diamonds,  Ace  of  Hearts,  10  Clubs.

%th  House,  Jack  of  Clubs,  8  Diamonds.

Uh  House,  Queen  of  Clubs,  9  Diamonds.
l^th  House,  Ace  of  Clubs,  10  Diamonds,  7  Spades.
nth  House,  Jack  of  Diamonds,  8  Spades.
\2th  House,  Queen  of  Diamonds,  9  Spades.


The  Wheel.


B


242       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


The  cards  being  shuffled  and  cut,  they  are
out  as  shown  above.     The  cartomante  will  t
begin  the  interpretation,  by  giving  the  combin
meaning  of  cards  30,  31,  32,  throwing  them  away
of  no  further  consequence.

The  reading  of  the  future  begins  with  18 — 1 — 13;
the  pair  18 — 1  being  read  together  in  relation  to  13,
which  controls  the  combination.  This  pair  18 — 1
has  relation  to  the  Consultant.

Next  pair,  19 — 2,  is  read  in  connection  with
finance.  Next  pair,  20 — 3,  in  regard  to  letters  and
relations.

The  12  pairs  are  finally  exhausted  in  the  same  way.
The  key  card  is  that  which  for  the  time  being  domin-
ates the  life  and  fortunes,  the  means  by  which  succeai
or  failure  will  come,  and  if  a  Court  Card  a  person  (A
that  colouring  will  dominate  everything.  It  is  he
or  she  who  can  say  yes  or  no,  confirming  or  denyiJ
the  means.

If  the  cards  read  well  in  the  pairing,  and  appear
to  promise  good  fortune,  the  key  card  will  show  the
means  by  which  this  good  will  come,  and  vice  versa.

When  the  angles  or  cardinal  points — the  1st,  10th,
7th  and  4th  cards — are  good,  the  whole  fortune
will  be  greatly  enhanced  for  good.  But  when  evil
cards  occupy  these  positions,  any  good  will  not  be
of  a  permanent  or  secure  nature.

The  angular  cards,  1,  10,  7  and  4,  are  to  be  referred
to  the  governors,  numbers  13,  14,  15,  16,  respectively,
and  thence  to  the  key  card.

The  wheel  may  be  set  out  thrice  at  a  sitting.


VARIOUS  METHODS


243


Ally  questions  can  be  answered  from  the  second
tirage  or  setting,  after  the  general  prognostics  have
been  obtained.  In  answering  to  a  specific  question
the  cartomante  will  only  consult  those  sections
of  the  wheel  which  have  relation  to  the  matter
preferred.  Anything  in  the  nature  of  a  second
general  reading  is  to  be  avoided.  It  is  the  first
setting  of  the  Wheel  only  which  is  to  be  relied  on
for  a  true  prognosis.

2.  The  Star

The  Consultant's  card  is  first  taken  from  the
pack  and  set  in  the  centre  of  a  small  round  table.
This  card  will  answer  to  the  sex  and  colouring  of  the
Consultant.

The  latter  then  takes  the  31  cards  remaining  and
shuffles  them  thoroughly,  desiring  to  know  what
is  immediately  surrounding  him  or  her.  The  cards
are  cut.

The  cartomante  now  takes  the  cards  and  lays
them  out  as  shown  in  the  diagram  on  page  244,
where  C  is  the  Consultant.  The  rest  of  the  cards
are  then  laid  aside.

The  13th  card  is  laid  upon  the  top  of  C.  It  is
the  Court  of  Final  Appeal,  and  if  a  good  card,
especially  a  Heart,  it  will  give  a  hopeful  issue,
whatever  may  be  otherwise  predicable.

In  reading  from  the  Star  the  5th  and  7th  are
obstacles  and  are  to  be  read  together,  and  also  in
combination  with  or  reference  to  9  and  11.  They
have  a  bearing  upon  what  is  past.

K  2


244       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Cards  1  and  3  are  read  together,  and  in  reference
to  9  and  10.  These  cards  will  show  the  aspirations,
hopes  and  intentions  of  the  Consultant.

Cards  2  and  4  are  read  together,  and  referred  also
to  11  and  12;  the  augury  having  significance  in
regard  to  fortune  achieved,  the  present  condition
and  what  lies  at  the  feet  of  the  Consultant  as  his  own.

The  Star.


3


7

s

C

6

S

Cards  6  and  8  are  read  together  and  in  relation
to  10  and  12,  in  reference  to  what  is  coming;  the
future  ;  the  result  of  present  action.

After  the  general  reading  note  the  cards  touching
the  Consultant  or  centre  card  and  also  the  13th  card;
also  the  general  tone  of  the  cards  above  and  to  the
right.  For  if  the  cards  above  and  to  the  right  are
red  or  predominantly  so,  or  Clubs  touched  by  Hearts
or  Diamonds,  and  especially  if  the  13th  card  is  a


VARIOUS  METHODS  245


good  one,  then  you  may  safely  promise  the  attain-
ment of  the  ambitions  and  a  brilliant  future.

When  the  tirage  has  relation  to  a  specific  question,
the  Nine  of  Hearts  must  be  present  and  the  Nine
of  Spades  absent,  or  the  wish  will  fail  of  fulfilment
or  be  abandoned.

3.  The  Tablet

The  32  cards  are  all  employed  in  this  method  of
divination.  Aitev  shuffling  and  cutting  the  cards
are  laid  face  upwards  in  four  rows  of  eight  cards
each,  from  left  to  right,  working  downwards.

The  Consultant  being  found  by  the  sex  and  com-
plexion, the  count  is  made  from  this  to  the  ninth
card  in  every  direction,  the  cards  being  paired  up
and  read  together  with  those  which  lie  in  contact
with  them.

The  cards  surrounding  the  Significator  or  con-
sultant card  must  be  taken  special  note  of  as  indicat-
ing events  near  at  hand,  the  environment,  etc.

The  House-card  or  Ace  of  Hearts  is  then  taken,
and  the  count  made  from  it  in  the  same  wa^^,  to
find  out  what  fortune  attaches  to  the  home.  If
there  is  a  dominant  wish  the  Nine  of  Hearts  is  taken
as  Significator,  and  the  count  made  in  the  same
manner  as  before.  If  it  counts  up  to  the  Consultant
or  the  House-card,  there  will  be  realization  of  the
hopes  and  desires.

Count  can  also  be  made  from  the  left-hand  card
in  the  top  row  (that  which  was  first  laid  down).  The
ninth  card  in  every  case,  and  the  ninth  from  the


246        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


ninth  continuously,  are  noted  and  read  in  connection
with  those  touching  them.

Finally,  the  cards  are  taken  up  in  pairs,  the  1st
and  32nd,  the  2nd  and  31st,  and  so  on,  ending  with
the  16th  and  17th.  These  pairs  are  read  together
and  prognostics  drawn  from  their  combined
meanings.

Many  other  methods  of  laying  out  the  cards  are
in  vogue,  and  there  is  one  which  has  special  applica-
tion to  the  events  which  occur  from  day  to  day,
but  I  am  not  privileged  to  give  this  in  its  true  form,
and  must  therefore  content  myself  by  omitting  it
entirely.  The  above  methods  will,  however,  serve
for  all  practical  purposes,  and  will  be  found
to  contain  a  complete  justification  of  the  use  of
Cartomancy.


CHAPTER  V


CRYSTAL-GAZING

Fortunately  I  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  give
a  scientific  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  known
as  Clairvoyance.  The  facts  are  numerous ;  the
evidence  is  unimpeachable ;  and  the  exercise  of  the
faculty  is  too  well  attested  the  world  over  to  leave
any  manner  of  doubt  as  to  its  claim  to  a  place  in
the  category  of  occult  phenomena.

Two  facts,  however,  appear  to  have  been  estab-
lished in  regard  to  it,  viz.  :  (1)  The  faculty  is  not
normal  to  the  same  degree  in  all  persons;  (2)  in  those
in  whom  it  is  a  more  or  less  constantly  active  faculty
it  is  nevertheless  beyond  the  control  of  the  will.

The  function  of  the  brain — which  may  be  regarded
as  the  bulbous  root  of  a  nervous  plant  whose  branches
grow  downwards — is  duplex;  to  affect  and  to  be
affected.  In  its  active  or  positive  condition  it
affects  the  whole  of  the  nervous  and  muscular
processes  in  man,  finding  expression  in  vital  action.
In  its  passive  or  negative  condition  it  is  affected
by  impressions  coming  to  it  through  the  organs  of
sense,  the  results  being  expressed  by  nervous  and
mental  action.    It  is  this  latter  phase  of  brain

247


248       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


function  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  the  study
of  clairvoyance,  whether  natural  or  induced.

The  range  of  our  sense-perceptions  puts  us  con-
tinually in  relations  with  the  material  world,  or
rather  with  a  certain  part  of  it  only.  But  the  gamut
of  sensation  is  limited  in  us.  Many  insects,  birds
and  quadrupeds  have  keener  sense-organs  than  we.
The  photographic  plate  can  register  beyond  the
highest  range  of  our  sense  of  sight.  The  X-Rays
have  put  us  in  relations  with  a  new  order  of  impres-
sion-records quite  beyond  normal  sense  perception.
The  animalculse  and  microbic  life,  itself  microscopic,
have  yet  their  own  sense-organs  related  to  a  world
of  life  beyond  our  ken.  We  know  most  positively
that  Nature  does  not  cease  to  exist  where  we  cease
to  perceive  her.  Yet  there  are  people  foolish
enough  to  require  the  evidence  of  the  senses  in  proof
of  things  which  cannot  normally  be  perceived  and
who  would  scout  the  idea  that  visions  may  be  seen
in  a  crystal  unless  they  could  be  pointed  out  and
perceived  by  them.

The  relation  of  our  sense-organs  to  the  several
degrees  of  matter,  to  solids,  fluids,  gases,  etc.,  vary
very  considerably  with  different  persons.  The  aver-
age wool-sorter  would  leave  many  an  artist  behind
in  his  discrimination  of  colour-shades.  Odours  are
not  only  differently  sensed  by  various  individuals,
but  also  they  affect  people  differently.

The  perception  of  sound  also  affords  evidence  of
a  wide  range  of  variability  in  the  acoustic  sense.
Neither  is  it  wholly  a  matter  of  quantity.  Sounds,


CRYSTAL-GAZING


249


colours,  odours  and  flavours  have  a  qualitative
value  which  differs  with  the  individual  percipient.
Hence  arises  the  variety  of  "  tastes,"  of  likes  and
dislikes  observable  in  a  mixed  community.  The
experience  is  a  general  one,  but  the  principle  involved
appears  to  have  escaped  recognition  simply  because
it  is  a  psychological  and  not  a  materiail  or  physical
one.  But  to  come  to  the  practical  part  of  our
subject,  let  us  examine  first  of  all  what  we  under-
stand by  the  terms  Clairvoyance  and  Crystal-gazing.

Clairvoyance  or  Clear  Vision  may  be  natural  or
induced.  Natural  clairvoyance  is  more  common
among  certain  communities  than  others.  It  has
been  stated  that  the  inhabitants  of  basalt  territory
are  disposed  to  natural  clairvoyance,  which,  if  true,
would  certainly  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
faculty  is  normal  to  man  and  under  certain  favouring
conditions  will  become  active.  It  is  an  established
fact  that  certain  sensitive  persons  are  nervously
affected  by  the  presence  of  water,  and  this  has  been
utilized  by  some  for  the  purpose  of  finding  springs
and  underground  currents.  Such  persons  are  known
as  "  Dowsers."  If  these  are  affected  by  the  presence
of  underground  water  it  is  quite  reasonable  to  suggest
that  others  may  be  similarly  affected  by  the  presence
of  basaltic  rocks  beneath  the  surface  of  the  land.

Natural  clairvoyants,  then,  may  be  regarded  as
those  in  whom  the  faculty  is  more  or  less  persistent.
In  coming  into  a  locality  they  will  describe  things
which  have  already  taken  place  there  as  if  they  were
presently  conscious  of  them,  or  as  if  the  events  were


250       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


actually  taking  place  before  their  eyes.  At  other
times  they  will  describe  events  which  are  subse-
quently enacted.  There  appears  to  be  no  sense  of
time  attaching  to  the  vision.

Induced  clairvoyance  is,  in  effect,  nothing  more
than  the  faculty  of  natural  clairvoyance  brought
into  temporary  activity  by  suitable  excitation.

The  Crystal  is  a  ready  means  of  developing
clairvoyance  where  a  tendency  to  it  is.  known  to
exist.  It  is  clear  pellucid  quartz  or  beryl,  sometimes
oval  in  shape,  but  more  generally  spherical.  Baron
Reichenbach  credited  it  with  highly  magnetic
qualities  capable  of  producing,  in  a  suitable  subject,
a  state  analogous  to  the  ordinary  waking  trance
of  the  hypnotists.  Reichenbach  has  shown,  by  a
series  of  experiments  upon  sensitive  and  hypnotized
subjects,  that  metals  and  other  substances  produced
marked  effects  in  contact  with  the  human  body.
The  same  substance  was  found  to  affect  different
patients  in  diverse  manner.  The  hypnotic  experi-
ments of  Dr.  Charcot,  the  well-known  French  bio-
logist, have  also  demonstrated  the  rapport  existing
between  the  sensitive  and  foreign  bodies  in  contact;
as,  for  instance,  when  a  bottle  containing  poison
was  taken  at  random  from  among  a  number  of  others
and  placed  on  the  back  of  the  patient's  neck,  the
hypnotized  subject  would  at  once  develop  all  the
symptoms  of  poisoning  by  arsenic,  strychnine,prussio
acid,  etc.,  it  being  afterwards  ascertained  that
the  bottle  thus  applied  actually  contained  the  toxine
whose  effects  had  been  portrayed  by  the  subject.


CRYSTAL-GAZING


251


It  is  not,  therefore,  a  matter  of  surprise  that  the
crystal,  which  is  a  highly  "  magnetic  "  body  in  the
sense  that  Reichenbach  uses  the  term  "  odylic,"
should  produce  marked  effects  upon  a  certain  order
of  sensitives.  The  fact  that  it  does  not  act  similarly
upon  aU  subjects  seems  to  indicate  that  the  difference
is  not  in  its  action  but  in  the  predisposition  of  the
subject.  Where  the  Crystal  does  not  answer  it  is
often  found  that  the  black  concave  mirror  is  effective.
I  have  prepared  a  mirror  of  this  nature  after  the
recipe  of  Sir  Richard  Burton,  and  the  effects  have
fully  justified  the  claim  that  for  purposes  of  clair-
voyant development  the  "  Magnetic  Mirror "  is
not  to  be  surpassed.  A  bowl  of  water  has  been
found  effective  as  a  medium  in  some  cases,  and  we
learn  that  Jacob  Boehme,  while  engaged  in  his  work
as  a  cobbler,  was  suddenly  entranced  b}^  the  sight
of  the  sun's  rays  falling  on  a  vessel  containing  water.
From  that  time  his  interior  vision  was  opened,  and
we  have  in  consequence  a  number  of  remarkable
works  from  an  unlettered  man,  including  "  the
Aurora,"  "  the  Four  Complexions,"  "  the  Signatura
Rerum,"  and  other  works.

As  to  the  medium  employed  for  inducing  clair-
voyance, it  cannot  be  definitely  prescribed.  It
must  remain  a  matter  of  experiment  for  each
investigator.  The  degree  of  sensibility  to  stimulus
of  this  kind  differs  with  the  subject.  There  are
some  in  whom  the  psychic  faculties  are  more  active
than  in  others.  In  some  these  powers  are  hereditary,
in  others  they  are  developed  by  an  innate  tendency


252       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


aided  by  favouring  circumstances.  In  most  persons
the  natural  powers  take  a  more  practical  turn,  making
them  successful  in  mundane  affairs  rather  than  in
those  that  are  psychic  and  spiritual.  All  are  not
constituted  alike,  and  it  is  well  that  it  is  so.  The
distribution  of  natural  gifts  proceeds  from  the  celes-
tial world,  and  is  so  ordered  that  each  person  born
on  this  planet  may  take  his  part  in  the  economy  of
life.  The  spiritual  needs  of  mankind  are  included
in  this  economy,  and  there  are  born  into  the  world
from  time  to  time  those  who  are  specially  endowed
with  the  faculty  of  spiritual  interpretation,  with
psychic  gifts  such  as  clairvoyance,  telepathy,  psycho-
metry,  etc.,  such  persons  being  the  natural  channels
of  communication  between  the  superior  and  inferior,
or  the  internal  and  external  worlds.  They  are  to
humanity  what  a  certain  order  of  microbic  life  is
to  the  body  of  man — organic  interpreters,  translat-
ing the  elements  of  food  into  blood,  nerve,  fibre,
tissue,  etc.,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  their  being,
Among  any  people  who  are  alive  to  the  paramount
importance  of  maintaining  the  open  door  between
this  world  and  the  spiritual  universe,  such  media
are  cared  for  and  protected  and  suitable  conditions
are  supplied  for  the  exercise  of  their  faculty.  It
was  so  in  the  case  of  the  Sybils  among  the  Greeks;
it  is  thus  also  in  India  to-day.


CHAPTER  VI


PRELIMINARIES  AND  PRACTICE

In  the  practice  of  Clairvoyance  by  natural  means,
patience  is  very  necessary.  Admitting  that  the
germ  of  the  faculty  is  there,  Nature  requires  not
only  suitable  conditions,  but  also  adequate  time  in
which  to  display  her  powers.  Here  again  we  find
temperamental  differences ;  and  it  may  be  useful  in
this  place  to  indicate  by  what  means  and  by  what
persons  seership  may  most  readily  be  attained.

In  regard  to  the  subject,  medium  or  seer,  there
are  two  distinct  temperaments  in  which  the  faculty
may  be  expected  to  develop  very  readily.  There
is  the  nervous  temperament  associated  with  a  high
muscular  development,  classified  as  the  "mental
motive "  temperament.  It  is  characterized  by
great  activit}^  of  body  and  mind,  a  certain  nervous
tension  and  excitability,  prominent  features,  full
osseous  development,  prominent  brows,  intent  gaze,
and  sallow  complexion.  Mr.  Evan  Roberts,  who
figured  so  prominently  in  the  Welsh  Revival  of  1905,
is  a  characteristic  example  of  this  class  of  subjects.

The  other  class  in  whom  the  passive  temperament
is  present  and  to  whom  visions  come  by  reflection
as  images  mirrored  in  a  moveless  lake,  are  known

253


254        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

by  the  following  characteristics :  full  and  lymphatic
habit,  pale  or  delicate  complexion,  blue  e3^es,  straight
fine  hair,  small,  plump  and  cold  hands,  and  a  languid
disposition.

There  are  many  variants  from  these  two  main
types,  of  course,  but  they  are  cited  as  being  very
distinctive,  and  also  they  obtain  their  development
by  quite  opposite  means.

The  positive  seer  works  with  effort,  throwing  out
the  soul-images  by  the  power  of  the  will,  perceiving
them  with  more  or  less  accuracy,  and  thereafter
turning  them  over  in  the  mind,  reasoning  and
questioning  concerning  their  import  and  meaning.

The  passive  seer,  on  the  contrary,  works  not  at  all
and  makes  no  effort,  the  visions  coming  impercept-
ibly,  almost  unconsciously,  and  having  generally  a
literal  interpretation  or  fulfilment.

In  the  case  of  t]jp  positive  seer  the  visions  are
symbolical  and  seldom  capable  of  a  literal  applica-
tion, even  though  they  may  be  found  to  have  a
material  fulfilment.  With  the  passive  seer  it  is
otherwise,  the  visions  being  actual  visions  of  what
has  happened  or  will  thereafter  transpire.

Of  these  two  kinds  of  seership  the  passive  is  the
more  serviceable  because  more  perspicuous,  but  it
has  the  disadvantage  of  being  largely  under  the
control  of  external  influences,  and  so  frequently
incapable  of  being  exercised  at  all.

The  positive  type  of  seer  exercises  an  introspective
vision,  searching  inwardly  towards  the  soul-world
whence  revelation  proceeds.    The  passive  seer,  on


PRELIMINARIES  AND  PRACTICE  255


the  contrary,  remains  in  statu  quo,  open  to  impres-
sions coming  inwards  towards  the  perceptive  faculty,
but  making  no  effort  towards  them.  The  success
of  each  depends  upon  being  allowed  the  free  and
uninterrupted  exercise  of  that  method  which  is
natural  to  their  respective  temperaments.

In  practice  it  is  necessary  that  self-possession
and  confidence  in  one's  own  soul-power  should  be
maintained.  Faith  is  the  firm  rock  upon  which
all  revelation  must  rest.  Let  the  intention  be  pure
and  a  desire  for  Truth  constantly  present  in  the
mind.  Clairvoyance  is  not  an  undisputed  possession,
but  a  gift  of  the  Spirit,  and  accepted  as  such  in  a
spirit  of  humble  recognition  it  is  more  capable  of
proving  a  real  and  lasting  blessing  than  that  "  terror
of  the  soul  "  it  is  sometimes  seen  to  be.  And  if
under  the  best  conditions  the  quest  is  unsuccessful
after  a  prolonged  period  of  ^nest  trial,  it  must
be  taken  as  sufficient  evidence  that  the  faculty
of  Clairvoyance  is  not  in  the  category  of  one's  indi-
vidual powers.  Possibly  the  same  qualifications
brought  to  bear  along  some  other  line  of  psychic
development  will  result  in  a  commensurate  degree
of  success.

So  far,  then,  in  regard  to  the  preliminaries.  A
word  or  two  now  as  to  practice.

Having  obtained  a  good  rock  crystal  (the  glass
balls  sold  as  such  are  quite  useless)  or  a  black  con-
cave mirror  with  a  base  of  bitumen,  the  same
should  be  kept  out  of  the  Sun's  direct  rays,  and
when  not  in  use  may  be  conveniently  kept  in  a


256       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


black  velvet  or  silk  bag,  which  will  not  scratch  the
surface.

It  must  not  be  thought  that  the  visions  are  in
the  crystal  or  mirror  itself.  The}^  are  in  the  sub-
conscious mind  or  soul  of  the  seer;  but  the  mirror
serves  as  a  medium  for  visuaHzing  the  impressions
which  come  up  before  the  mind's  eye,  and  also
produce  inhibition  of  the  basilar  portion  of  the
brain  through  the  optic  thalami,  thus  placing  the
attentive  mind  in  a  passive  condition.  Etheric
perturbation  caused  by  combustion  disturbs  the
odylic  substance,  and  therefore  no  direct  rays  of
light  should  be  allowed  to  faU  on  the  mirror.  The
diffused  light  just  after  sunset  is  the  best  for  pur-
posing and  seering,  and  the  position  of  the  seer
should  be  facing  west  with  the  direct  light  on  the
back  of  the  mirror  and  only  reflected  rays  upon  its
surface.

If  by  artificial  hght,  the  gasaher,  candle  or  lamp
should  be  behind  the  mirror,  the  latter  being  between
the  light  and  the  seer.

The  crystal  or  mirror  must  be  in  contact  with  the  ^
sitter,  and  no  other  person  should  be  within  arm's  i
length.

A  person  seated  behind  the  seer  may  act  as
prompter  or  director  of  the  seance,  and  another
similarly  placed  may  act  as  recorder.  The  posi-
tions are  then  as  shown  in  the  diagram.


PRELIMINARIES  AND  PRACTICE  237


o


/


O


The  Director  will  maintain  an  even  and  quiet
tone,  suggesting  from  time  to  time  what  may  be
looked  for.    Thus  : —

Director.  There  is  a  house  in  S.  Street;  it  is
No.  17.  You  will  enter  by  a  gate  and  go  along  a
short  pathway  to  the  door,  which  is  of  a  green  colour.
You  will  go  through  the  door  and  along  the  vestibule.
Turn  into  the  room  on  the  left.  Now  tell  me  who
and  what  you  see  there.

The  direction  should  be  .  made  by  easy  stages,
and  no  step  should  be  taken  until  the  seer  confirms
the  previous  direction  by  saying,  "  Yes,  I  am
there,"  or  similar  form  of  assent.  The  director
will  then  know  how  the  seer  is  progressing.  The
"  push-off  "  is  very  necessary  in  the  early  stages  of


258        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


development,  and  the  above  suggestion  will  be
found  extremely  useful.

When  once  the  seer  is  "  on  the  move,"  so  to  speak,
he  can  be  left  to  himself  and  will  then  either  recoil
at  once  to  a  complete  consciousness  of  his  physical
surroundings  or  will  go  on  to  the  exercise  of  the
clairvoyant  faculty.

The  Recorder  will  make  notes  of  everything  that
is  said  during  the  seance;  and  the  results  should  be
tested  and  proved  so  that  imagination  may  not
pass  for  clairvoyance,  as  it  is  apt  to  do  before  the
faculty  is  really  developed.

At  no  time  during  the  seance  should  the  director
lose  psychic  touch  of  the  seer,  but  as  soon  as  a  direc-
tion is  satisfied  another  should  be  given  with,  as
far  as  possible,  a  connecting  link,  so  that  the  transi-
tions are  rendered  natural  and  not  abrupt.  Sudden
dislocations  are  apt  to  break  the  spell  under  which
the  seer  is  carried  away.

No  seance  should  last  more  than  fifteen  minutes,
and  sittings  should  be  made  at  the  same  time  of
day  and  in  the  same  place  repeatedly,  so  that  a
cumulative  effect  is  produced.  A  psychic  habit
is  induced  by  this  means,  and  it  is  extremely
valuable  in  all  functions  of  an  automatic
nature.

Visions  when  fully  developed  are  of  two  kiads,
Direct  and  Symbolic.  In  most  cases  it  wiU  be  found
that  answers  to  detached  questions  take  a  symbolic
form.  Passive  seers  usually  have  direct  visions,
and  positive  seers  favour  the  symbolic  form.  The


PRELIMINARIES  AND  PRACTICE  259


former  feels  first,  and  then  sees;  the  latter  first  sees,
and  then  thinks.

Special  attention  must  be  given  in  the  early  stages
to  the  important  process  of  direction.  During
the  process  of  abstraction  which  precedes  every
vision,  the  consciousness  is  gradually  withdrawn
from  the  physical  surroundings.  The  seer  forgets
that  he  is  in  this  or  that  place,  or  in  the  presence  of
this  or  that  person.  He  forgets  that  he  is  gazing
into  the  mirror  or  crystal.  He  hears  nothing
consciously  and  sees  nothing  save  that  which  is
passing  before  the  eyes  of  his  soul.  For  the  time
being  he  loses  sight  of  his  own  identity.  When,
therefore,  the  soul  is  suddenly  arrested  by  an
apparition  which  it  has  not  consciously  evoked,
the  reaction  is  apt  to  be  violent  and  rapid  and
frequently  carries  the  seer  back  to  his  normal
condition.

The  process  of  direction,  however,  if  properly
conducted,  tends  to  establish  a  condition  of  pre-
paredness in  the  seer  which  is  decidedly  beneficial.

If  there  is  a  suspicion  of  telepathic  communication
between  the  seer  and  the  director  or  recorder,  it
can  be  obviated  by  directing  the  seer  to  a  point
where  the  knowledge  of  those  present  at  the  seance
is  equally  nil.  All  independent  intelligence  com-
municated by  the  seer  can  be  subsequently  checked
and  tested.


£  2


CHAPTER  VII

VISIONS  AND  INTERPRETATIONS

The  passive  or  direct  vision  is  presumably  a
representation  of  the  actual  state  of  things
perceived,  whether  relating  to  the  past,  present,
or  future.  The  circumstantial  account  given  by
the  seer  is  sufficient  to  indicate  that  it  is  a  direct
vision.

The  symbolic  vision  is,  however,  fraught  with
many  difficulties  for  those  who  are  unacquainted
with  symbolism  and  the  method  of  interpretation.
Something,  therefore,  may  be  said  on  this  point.

Symbols  are  thought-forms  which  convey,  by  the
association  of  ideas,  a  definite  meaning  to  the  mind
which  perceives  them.  They  depend  entirely  upon
the  Laws  of  Thought  and  the  correspondence
between  the  spiritual  and  material  worlds,  between
the  subject  and  object  of  our  consciousness.

Among  the  ancients,  symbols  were  the  original
form  of  record,  of  communication,  and  of  writing.
The  hieroglyphics  of  the  Egyptians,  the  word-
pictures  of  the  Mayas  of  Central  America,  the  ideo-
graphic writing  of  the  Chinese  are  all  forms  of
symbolism  derived  from  natural  objects.  The
Hebrew  alphabet  is  quite  symbolical.    Any  letter

260


VISIONS  AND  INTERPRETATIONS  261


speaks  to  us  of  the  nomadic  people  who  were
^'  dwellers  in  tents."  Such  names  as  ox,  tent,
tent-door,  tent-peg,  camel,  fish,  fish-hook,  eye,
hand,  basket,  rope-coil,  ox-goad,  water,  are  names
of  letters  which  cannot  fail  to  convey  an  idea  of
the  primitive  Semites.  They  are  all  names  of
natural  objects,  and  they  are  all  symbols.  Bring
together  the  letters  yod  (hand),  daleth  (tent-door)
and  oin  (eye),  and  you  have  the  word  yedo.  The
hand  denotes  action,  power;  the  door,  an  entry,
initiation ;  the  eye,  sight,  perception,-- -literally,
opening  the  door  to  see;  ideographic  ally,  knowledge.
Similarly,  in  Chinese  the  words  for  wall,  face,  and
man,  when  brought  together  as  a  symbol,  indicate
a  wall-facing  man,  b}^  which  we  understand  a
prejudiced  and  bigoted  person,  one  who  will  not
see  or  enlarge  his  horizon.

All  symbols  may  be  interpreted  by  their  known
natures,  qualities  and  uses.  Thus  an  arm  will
signify  defence,  power,  protection;  a  mouth  speech,
revelation;  an  ear  news,  information;  if  distorted,
scandal,  abuse.  The  sun  prosperity,  life,  honours;
the  moon  crescent,  prosperity,  increase,  improve-
ment; when  gibbous,  loss,  decay,  decline.  The
sun  eclipsed,  death  of  a  man;  the  moon  eclipsed,
death  of  a  woman;  bread,  food,  sustenance,  know-
ledge, preservation;  and  these  are  all  natural  inter-
pretations. Every  symbol  has  reference  to  the
Three  Worlds,  the  physical,  intellectual,  and  spiritual,
i.e.  to  Nature,  Man,  and  God.

If  the  question  be  concerning  the  material  world,


262        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


a  ship  as  a  symbol  would  show  commerce,  trade
a  voyage,  good  or  bad  according  to  the  condition
of  the  ship ;  as  if  in  full  sail  under  a  clear  sky,  prosper-
ity is  signified;  if  in  distress  or  with  flagging  sails,
an  unfortunate  condition  is  signified.

If  the  question  has  relation  to  the  intellectual
world,  the  same  sj^mbol  would  denote  the  inter-
change of  ideas,  good  or  bad  news,  etc.;  if  to  the
superior  world,  the  same  symbol  would  denote  that
communication  with  the  spiritual  world  is  increasing
or  decreasing,  as  the  symbol  may  indicate.  A  pirate
ship  might  thus  refer  to  plunder,  slander,  infringe-
ment of  rights,  or  death.

Symbols  are  almost  infinite  in  number,  and  the
interpretation  of  them  requires  unprejudiced  skill,
but  they  are  nevertheless  an  important  subject
for  study,  and  the  use  of  the  Crystal  or  Mirror  by  a
positive  seer  can  hardly  be  beneficial  without  a
profound  understanding  of  this  subject.

Although  every  symbol  has  some  general  significa-
tion in  agreement  with  its  natural  qualities  and
uses,  yet  it  obtains  a  particular  meaning  in  relation
to  the  individual.  This  is  also  the  case  in  dreams,
where  every  person  is  a  natural  seer.  Few,  however,
pay  that  attention  to  dreams  which  their  source
and  nature  warrant.  The  Crystal  is  but  a  means
of  bringing  the  normal  dreaming  faculty  into
conscious  activity.

No  definite  rule  can  be  laid  down  as  to  the  inter-
pretation of  visions,  and  the  seer  or  seeress  will
be  found  the  best  interpreter.    Yet  the  differences


VISIONS  AND  INTERPRETATIONS  263


of  meaning,  whether  in  dreaming  or  visions,  of  any
particular  symbol  is  of  common  experience.  Thus
to  dream  of  a  naked  child  imports  trouble  to  some
people,  while  others  have  a  standard  dream  of
wading  in  water  whenever  trouble  is  to  be  faced.
To  dream  of  butcher's  meat  means  financial  troubles
to  some  people,  while  to  others  it  imports  gain  by
speculation.

The  controlling  factor  in  this  matter  is  probably
to  be  found  in  the  constitution  of  the  psychic  and
mental  faculties  of  the  seer  as  expressed  in  the
nativity.  A  great  deal  may  be  said  for  a  system  of
interpretation  that  has  for  its  basis  the  dominion
of  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  at  the  birth  of  an  individual
and  also  the  horary  positions  of  these  signs  at
the  time  of  the  visions  or  dreams  as  the  case
may  be.


CHAPTER  VIII
SOME  EXPERIENCES


It  may  serve  in  some  part  to  illustrate  the  fore-
going remarks  if  I  here  recite  some  experiences
which  have  come  within  my  knowledge  and  have
been  either  witnessed  by  me  or  have  been  the  result
of  my  own  exercise  of  the  faculty  of  induced
clairvoyance.  Being  of  a  positive  type  of  mind,
and  not  normally  clairvoyant,  the  visions  have
chiefly  been  of  a  symbolic  character.

A  lady  friend  came  to  me  in  June  1896  and
asked  me  to  look  at  the  Crystal  for  her,  as  her
mind  was  much  exercised  on  a  certain  point.  In
due  course  she  was  told  that  she  would  hear  news
from  abroad  concerning  the  birth  of  a  child  in  some
hot  country;  it  would  be  a  boy,  and  would  arrive
in  the  month  of  February  of  the  following  year.
This  was  not  at  all  what  the  lady  was  inquiring
about,  although  I  had  no  means  of  knowing  what
was  in  her  mind  as  no  intimation  of  any  sort  had
been  given  to  me  by  her.  Nevertheless,  she  did
hear  such  news,  and  in  February  1897  a  boy  was
born  to  the  lady's  sister  in  India,  the  late  Queen
Victoria  being  godmother  to  the  child.

I  next  told  her  that  on  a  certain  date,  while
264


SOME  EXPERIENCES  265


travelling,  she  would  meet  with  an  accident  to  the
right  leg.  On  that  day  my  friend  actually  slipped
between  the  platform  and  footboard  while  getting
into  a  train  and  suffered  severe  abrasion  of  the
shin  of  the  right  leg,  together  with  serious  muscular
strain  from  which  she  suffered  for  several  days.

It  was  further  said  that  this  lady  would  hear  some
good  news  concerning  her  son  in  connection  with
papers  and  a  contest.  This  was  to  happen  in  the
month  of  October,  and  at  that  time  her  son  passed
his  examination  for  the  military  college  with  honours.

As  an  illustration  of  the  direct  or  passive  vision,
the  following  is  of  interest  : —

Mrs.  H.  the  seeress  was  consulted  by  a  lady  of
some  ability  in  a  special  line  of  literature,  though
this  fact  Avas  not  within  the  knowledge  of  the
seeress.  The  lady  was  told  that  she  would  go  up
a  staircase  into  a  dingy  room  with  a  roll  of  papers
under  her  arm.  She  would  see  a  dark  man  who
was  thick-set  and  of  quiet  demeanour.  The  man
would  take  the  roll,  and  it  would  be  a  source  of
good  fortune  to  her  at  a  later  date.

These  circumstances  were  literally  fulfilled  by
the  lady  taking  a  manuscript  to  a  publisher,  who
accepted  and  published  it.  The  description  of  the
man  was  quite  accurate,  as  I  who  know  him  can
testify.

These  two  cases  will  serve  as  illustrations  of  the
two  orders  of  vision,  the  symbolic  and  the  literal.
The  symbolism  of  the  former  case  not  being  recorded,
however,  but  merely  the  interpretation  and  its


266        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

fulfilment,  it  will  be  of  interest  to  cite  another
instance  in  which  the  symbolism  is  preserved  : —

Vision. — A  public  square  is  seen  in  which  was
the  effigy  of  a  lamb  mounted  upon  a  pedestal.  A
flash  of  lightning  is  seen  to  strike  the  image,  melting
off  one  of  its  ears.  A  Catholic  priest  came  along
and  pointed  at  the  figure.

Interpretation. — A  member  of  the  community  to
which  the  consultant  belonged  would  thereafter
be  converted  to  the  Roman  Church.

Fulfilment. — B}^  the  next  mail  the  consultant
learned  that  such  was  the  case,  an  important
member  of  the  body  having  gone  over  to  the
Catholics  as  predicted.

Vision. — A  man  is  seen  dressed  in  black,  wearing
the  habit  of  a  judge.  He  holds  some  papers  which
he  endeavours  to  conceal  beneath  his  robe.  He
appears  unsuccessful.  The  papers  are  too  large.
A  snake  is  seen  at  his  feet.    It  rises  up  against  him.

Interpretation. — A  certain  man  who  is  indicated
by  his  profession  will  be  guilty  of  obscuring  the
truth  and  of  misrepresentation.  He  will  be  the
subject  of  criticism  from  a  source  that  is  not
suspected.

Fulfilment. — The  man  conspicuously  indicated
had  followed  the  legal  profession.  He  was  convicted
of  having  issued  misleading  and  fraudulent  testi-
monies with  intent  to  deceive.  Criticism  led  to
inquiry  and  conviction.

Vision. — The  same  man  is  seen  lying  on  a  bed.
He  is  m  extremis.


SOME  EXPERIENCES  267


Interpretation. — The  man  so  indicated  will  be
cut  off  by  death  three  years  from  this  time.

Fulfilment. — His  death  took  place  by  strangula-
tion due  to  a  throat  affection  exactly  three  years
from  that  date.

It  is  not  always  conspicuous  from  what  source
the  seer  derives  his  interpretations.  We  have  to
remember  that  the  condition  in  which  the  seer
voices  his  predictions  is  a  psychological  one,  whether
natural  or  induced,  and  in  that  state  natural  symbols
take  on  a  very  different  significance  to  that  Avhich
they  would  hold  in  the  normal  waking  consciousness.
It  is  similarly  the  case  with  dreams.  They  may
be  perspicuous  and  natural,  or  wholly  symbolical.
The  influence  they  have  upon  the  dreamer  while
asleep  bears  no  sort  of  relation  to  their  significance
to  the  waking  consciousness.  How  pregnant  with
meaning  and  how  important  and  real  they  appear
in  the  dreaming,  only  to  dissolve  into  ridiculous
triviahty  and  seeming  nonsense  the  moment  our
wide-awake  reason  is  brought  to  bear  upon  them  !
It  would  appear  that  between  the  visionary  and
waking  states  of  consciousness  there  is  a  complete
hiatus,  so  that  even  the  laws  of  thought  undergo
a  change  when  the  centre  of  consciousness  is  removed
from  the  inner  world  of  thought  and  feeling  to  the
outer  world  of  sense  and  action.

Not  infrequently  the  visionary  state  is  induced
by  excessive  emotion.  Some  persons  of  peculiarly
sensitive  nature  will  fall  into  the  clairvoyant  state
while  engaged  in  deep  thought.    This  is  akin  to


268        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


the  "  brown  study "  when  '*  a  penny  for  your
thoughts  "  is  Hkely  to  prove  a  good  investment
if  you  are  a  student  of  psychology.  In  such  cases
the  thread  of  thought  appears  to  be  broken  and  a
vision,  wholly  unrelated  to  the  subject  but  a  moment
ago  in  the  mind,  suddenly  appears  to  usurp  the  field
of  consciousness.  It  is  as  if  the  soul  of  the  sensitive,
while  probing  the  depths  of  thought,  suddenly
comes  into  contact  with  the  thin  partition  dividing
the  outer  world  of  thought  from  the  inner  world  of
knowledge,  the  domain  of  doubt  and  reason  from
that  of  intuition  and  direct  perception ;  and,  breaking
through  this  partition,  the  soul  emerges  into  the
field  of  light  be3^ond.  A  rapid  alternation  of  the
centre  of  consciousness  from  the  dream  or  psychic
state  to  the  waking  or  normal  state  will,  if  sustained,
assuredly  bring  about  the  phenomenon  known  as
clairvo3'^ance.  Swedenborg  claimed  to  have  been
simultaneously  conscious  in  two  worlds  for  days
together.  But  the  centre  of  consciousness  cannot
be  located  in  two  places  or  states  of  existence  at
one  and  the  same  time,  and  it  may  therefore
be  said  that  the  alternation  was  exceedingly  rapid
and  continuous,  giving  the  sensation  of  being
thus  divided  in  consciousness.  I  have  myself
experienced  this  condition  both  experimentally
and  naturally,  and  at  such  times  it  would  be  impos-
sible to  say  w  hether  I  was  in  this  or  that  of  the  two
bodies,  one  corporeal  and  the  other  ethereal,  through
which  I  was  conscious  of  functioning.


CHAPTER  IX


GEOMANCY

Probable  Chinese  Origin.

This  art  is  of  very  ancient  origin,  and  is  to  be
found  among  the  earliest  literary  monuments.  The
Yih  King,  or  Classic  of  Changes,  already  mentioned
in  the  course  of  this  work,  employs  it  in  the  ver}^
highest  connection.  It  would  appear  that  a  com-
plete system  of  occult  philosophy  is  founded  upon
the  changes  produced  by  the  interplay  of  two
Principles  in  Nature  which  they  call  the  Yin  and
the  Yang,  or  the  Light  and  Dark,  active  and
passive,  male  and  female  principles.  Thence  is
derived  the  Law  of  Alternation  "  figured  by  the
symbol —


There  is  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  ''the  One  pro-
duced the  Three,  the  Three  produced  the  Seven  ;  the
Seven  produced  the  Ten  ;  these  Ten  are  all  things."

269


270         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

The  symbols  or  Kwei  employed  by  the  Chinese
in  their  system  of  Geomancy  are  based  upon  the
square  of  three, which  in  our  section  on  Talismans
was  shown  to  be  the  exact  rephca  of  the  Hebrew
Table  of  the  planet  Saturn;  a  square  of  9  cells  in
which  the  numbers  add  to  15  in  all  directions.

The  philosophy  of  the  Yih  King  does  not  at  the
moment  concern  us,  although  it  is  an  exceedingly
fascinating  subject,  and  I  therefore  propose  to  pass
at  once  to  a  consideration  of  the  divinatory  method
employed  in  ancient  China  in  connection  with  "  the
Reeds  and  the  Tortoise."

On  the  back  of  the  Tortoise  which  stood  for  the
world  and  humanity,  and  in  a  particular  sense  was
symbolical  of  the  Chinese  Kingdom  and  its  people,
was  inscribed  the  famous  Key  of  the  Pa-Tao,  thus  : —


In  the  centre  is  the  figure  5,  which  stands  for  human-
ity, and  the  consultant.    Around  are  the  numbers


GEOMANCY


271


12346789,  which  represent  respectively  the
Five  Factors,  namely  water,  fire,  wood,  metal,  and
earth,  corresponding  to  the  five  planets  Mercury,
Mars,  Jupiter,  Venus,  and  Saturn.

Five  Faculties,  shape,  speech,  sight,  hearing,  and
thinking.

Eight  Regulators,  the  controllers  of  food,  of  pros-
perity and  public  works ;  the  minister  of  instruction,
the  sacrificer,  the  criminal  judge,  the  receiver  of
guests,  and  the  general  of  the  army.

Five  Disposers,  the  Zodiac,  the  Moon,  the  Sun,
the  planetary  hour,  and  the  planetary  aspects.

Three  Virtues,  impartial  justice,  rigid  rule,  and
temperate  government.

Examination  of  Doubts  concerning  the  five  divina-
tions and  the  two  prognostics.

General  Verifications  as  to  rain,  fine  weather,
heat,  cold  and  wind  in  their  seasons.

Five  Blessings,  long  Hfe,  wealth ;  tranquillity ;  love
of  virtue ;  foreknowledge  of  the  end  of  life ;  to  which
are  con  tasted  the  six  extremities.

The  Tortoise  being  set  in  the  midst,  reeds  to  the
number  of  36,  of  which  12  are  of  the  full  length  of  a
span  and  24  of  half-a-span  each,  are  taken  in  hand.
The  geomantic  marks  having  been  made,  the  corre-
sponding reeds  are  set  around  the  Tortoise  and
divination  is  made  according  to  the  positions
and  forms  resulting.  An  odd  number  is  repre-
sented by  a  long  reed  and  an  even  number  by
two  short  ones.  Thus  we  have  the  eight  primary
Kwei  : — -


272        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


1  5  =

2  =E  6  =

3  ^  1  =

4  =  8  ^

and  these  constitute  the  geomantic  figures  in  the
most  ancient  Chinese  system.  By  combining  1  witJi
2  3  4,  etc.,  successively,  2  with  13  4,  etc.,  and  so
on  throughout  the  entire  scale,  as  well  as  by  doubling
each  of  the  primary  forms,  they  obtained  64  distinct
Tcwei  to  each  of  which  a  definite  meaning  and  prog-
nostic was  attached.  By  this  means  they  guided
their  affairs  of  state  and  their  private  matters.
Similarly  they  divided  their  heavens  into  eight
equal  parts  and  attributed  similar  meanings  to  them,
judging  by  the  positions  of  the  planets  how  the
various  departments  of  the  public  service  would  be
conducted.  In  this  scheme  the  emperor  was  placed
in  the  centre  of  the  w^heel  of  eight  spokes,  being  the
neutral  point  about  which  the  wheel  of  the  law  was
said  to  revolve.

When  the  Tortoise  and  the  reeds  were  in  agree-
ment, the  result  was  adjudged  to  be  highly  good,  and
vice  versa.  The  Sun  stood  for  the  King,  the  Moon
for  the  Nobility,  the  planets  for  the  ofiicers  of
State,  and  the  stars  for  the  People.  The  Tortoise
represented  internal  affairs  and  the  reeds  external
matters.  The  Hebrews  are  also  kno^vn  to  have
evolved  a  system  of  divination  by  reeds  or  rods,
and  the  practice  of  geomancy  or  its  equivalent  is


GEOMANCY


273


found  among  all  ancient  civilizations.  It  is  not,
however,  my  intention  to  examine  these  at  the
present  time,  and  I  may  at  once  pass  on  to  an
exposition  of  the  system  in  vogue  among  Europeans.

The  Symbols

There  are  sixteen  geomantic  figures,  the  evolution
of  which  appears  to  have  been  lost  to  us,  but  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  they  are  all  traceable  to
the  Chinese  kwei  already  referred  to.  In  the
European  system  each  symbol  is  derived  from  four
lines  of  points,  one  point  denoting  an  odd  number
in  the  line  and  two  points  an  even  number.  Thus,
if  I  make  four  lines  of  points  : —

  12  points  =  00

  10     „  =00

  11     „  -=0

  9     „     =  o

I  then  derive  the  symbol  of  Fortuna  Major,  which
is  a  symbol  of  the  Sun  in  its  strongest  degree  of
influence.

The  seven  celestial  bodies  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,
the  Sun,  Venus,  Mercury,  and  the  Moon  have  each
two  symbols,  one  of  which  is  Dexter,  or  fortunate,
and  the  other  Sinister,  or  unfortunate.  The  Moon's
nodes  are  also  represented  by  the  Dragon's  Head
and  Tail,  each  of  which  has  a  separate  symbol.

The  geomantic  symbols  of  the  planets  and  the
nodes  are  as  follows  : —


274        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Sinister


Dexter


O

oo
o
o

O  O

O  O
O  O

O  ^

O  O  (^/V/'^o^J
O  O


O

o  o


o  o


o
o
o
o


Co/7/u/?c^^b


O
O
O
O  O


©


O  O
O  O


o  o
o


O


+


o
o

o  o

o

o  o
o  o
o

Q

o

o  o

o
.  o
o  o
o  o

o

o  o

o  o
o  o
o  o
o  o

o  o


o
o
o


The  Sixteen  Geomantic  Figures.


CHAPTER  X


CASTING   THE  FIGURE

A  GEOMANTic  figure  is  made  for  the  purpose
of  divination  by  making  haphazard,  in  the  sand
or  upon  a  piece  of  paper,  sixteen  lines  of  punctures
or  dots.  Before  making  these  lines,  the  mind
should  be  allowed  to  dwell  steadily  upon  the  question
to  be  resolved.  While  thus  immersed  in  the
question,  the  hand  should  be  allowed  automatically
to  make  the  lines  of  points.

When  sixteen  lines  of  points  have  thus  been  made,
the  number  of  points  in  each  line  is  to  be  counted.
If  even,  two  small  circles  are  made  at  the  end  of
the  line,  but  if  an  odd  number  of  points  are  in  the
line,  one  small  circle  must  be  set  against  it.  You
will  now  divide  the  sixteen  lines  into  groups  of  four
lines  each,  and  thus  will  be  derived  the  first  four
geomantic  symbols.

Examples.

.   12  even    O  O

  10   „      o  o

  11  odd         O  '

  9    „  O

  12  even    o  O

  7  odd  o

  13    „  o  ^

  11   „  _o__

  12  even    q  q

  10  o    O  3

  13  odd  o

 15    „  o

    12  even  q  q

  12    „  o  o

  13  odd         o  ^

  10  even  Q  O

275  T2


276       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Note. — The  whole  of  the  16  lines  of  points  must  be
completed  before  the  countmg  is  begun.  At  the  end
of  each  fourth  line  a  geomantic  symbol  is  formed,
and  this  may  be  separated  from  the  next  by  a  stroke
as  shown  above.  These  symbols  are  to  be  num-
bered 1  2  3  4  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  formed.

The  automatic  process,  on  which  the  divination
rests,  is  completed  from  the  moment  that  the
sixteen  lines  of  points  are  finished.  The  rest  of
the  process  is  an  empiricism  founded  upon  ancient
practice.  It  is  necessary  to  follow  the  method
closely,  or  the  whole  scheme  will  be  vitiated.

The  next  four  symbols,  Nos.  5,  6,  7,  8,  are  derived
from  the  combination  of  the  first  four.  Thus :
take  the  top  line  in  each  of  the  symbols  1  to  4.
This  will  form  the  5th  symbol.  Then  take  the
second  line  in  each  of  symbols  1  to  4,  and  this  will
give  the  6th  symbol.  Next  take  the  third  line
of  the  same  symbols  to  form  the  7th  symbol,  and
hnally  take  the  last  line  in  each  of  the  first  four  to
form  the  8th  symbol.

Thus  from  the  four  symbols  already  given  above
we  derive  symbols  5  to  8  as  follows  : —


S                   6  7  6

O  O  O  O  O  O

O  O                O  O  o

CO  O  O  O  o

o  c  o  o  o  o  o


The  next  four  symbols,  Nos.  9  to  12,  are  derived
by  reading  together  symbols  1  and  2,  3  and  4,  5  and  6,
7  and  8,  thus  : —


CASTING  THE  FIGURE


277


/

z

3

(5

r

o  o

U  U

O  (J

O  O

U  U

o

o

o  o

o

o  o

o  o

o  o

O

o

o

o

o

o

o

o  o

o  o

o

o

o

o

o

o  o

o  o

o  o

o

o  o

OO  CO  oo  oo

o  o  o            o  o  o

oo  oo  oo  oo

o  o            o  o  o  o


Reading  the  first  and  second  across,  we  find  4
points  in  the  top  line,  3  points  in  the  second  line,  2
in  the  third  line,  and  2  in  the  fourth  line.  These
give  us  the  9th  symbol.  The  others  are  formed  on
the  same  plan.

The  Two  Witnesses  are  now  formed  by  combining
symbols  9  and  10,  and  11  and  12,  in  the  same
manner,  and  from  the  13th  and  14th  sjonbols
thus  derived,  the  Judge  is  finally  evolved.  These,
in  the  illustration  before  us,  are  : —

o  o  o  o

hKness     O     O  O     O  /r/^y^ess.

o  o

/s

o  o

o  o

o  o

o  o


278        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

The  first  12  symbols  may  now  be  set  in  a  horo-
scopical  figure.

The  1st  symbol  is  to  be  placed  in  the  1st  House,
the  2nd  symbol  in  the  10th  House,  the  3rd  in  the
7th  House,  and  the  4th  in  the  4th  House,  etc.,  as
shown  below  : —

Positions  of  Symbols.
1st  symbol  in  the  1st  Houfee


2nd

10th

3rd

J)

7th

4th

?  5

4th

5th

J  5

2nd

6th

>  J

nth

7th

>>

8th

8th

>>

5th

9th

J  J

3rd

10th

55

12th

nth

55

9th

12th

55

6th

The  Left  Witness,  or  13th  symbol,  is  placed  on
the  left  of  the  horoscope  in  relation  to  the  1st  House;
the  Right  Witness,  or  14th  figure,  to  the  right  of  the
horoscope  in  relation  to  the  7th  House;  the  Judge,
over  the  head  of  the  horoscope  in  association  with
the  10th  House,  and  the  16th  symbol,  or  Appeal,
at  the  foot,  in  association  with  the  4th  House.

You  will  then  have  the  complete  figure  as  here
shown  : —


JUDGING  THE  FIGURE  279


Oeomantic  Horoscope.


o  o
o  o
o  o

o.p


o  o
o

o  o
o

'3


XK

-XL

31

IX

O  O

0  O

0  o

o  o

o

o  o

O  O

/o

o  o

o

^  o

o

c
'  o

O  0

'  o

o

o  o

o

o  o

o

o

o  o

o  o

o  o

o  o

o

o  o

o  o
o  '

o  o

o  o

o
o

O  8

o

o  o

o

o  o

o  o

o  o

o  o

o

T

u

in

xs:

3ZI

o  o
o

o  o
o


o  o
o

o  o
o

The  Arabic  figures  show  the  numbers  of  the
symbols  as  generated.  The  Roman  figures  denote
the  Houses.

Judging  the  Figure

The  status  or  nature  of  the  person  or  thing  about
which  inquiry  is  made  must  be  carefully  considered.
The  consultant  is  represented  by  the  1st  House,
and  the  person  inquired  about  is  denoted  by  the
7th  House,  if  unrelated  to  the  consultant.  The
significators  of  the  Houses  follow  the  same  plan  as
in  Astrology  (see  Part  I,  section  I,  chap.  vi.).

In  a  legal  suit  or  criminal  case  the  1st  is  the
prosecutor  and  the  7th  the  defendant.  In  a  match
or  contest,  the  challenger  is  denoted  by  the  1st
House  and  the  acceptor  by  the  7th.


280        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


If  the  question  concerns  gain  or  loss  it  must  be
referred  to  the  2nd  House ;  and  so  of  the  rest,  accord-
ing to  the  canons  of  Astrology;  for  let  it  be  under-
stood that  the  system  of  Geomancy  was  founded
upon  the  accredited  influences  of  the  planets,  the
symbols  taking  the  place  of  those  employed  by
astronomers,  and  the  method  of  computing  them
was  designed  to  replace  the  anciently  complex
process  of  finding  the  positions  of  the  celestial
bodies.

With  the  specimen  figure  before  us,  let  it  be  sup-
posed that  the  question  has  reference  to  a  suit  at
law.  Here  we  find  Fortuna  Major  in  the  1st  and
Caput  in  the  2nd,  showing  good  fortune  and  gain.
In  the  7th  there  is  Via  (a  malefic  indication),
denoting  that  the  course  of  affairs  is  adverse  to  the
defendant,  while  Cauda  in  the  8th  shows  his  financial
prospects  as  likely  to  suffer  by  this  suit.

The  witnesses  are  both  of  equal  strength,  being
denoted  in  such  case  by  Acquisitio.

The  Judge  (symbol  15)  is  repeated  in  the  5th
House  (which  is  the  11th  from  the  7th),  and  this
shows  the  Judge  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  the
defence.  But  nothing  can  overrule  Destiny,  and
the  16th  symbol,  derived  by  combining  the  15th
and  1st  symbols,  viz.  Populus  and  Fortuna  Major,
must  inevitably  give  the  verdict  to  the  Prosecutor.

Had  the  question  been  concerning  a  speculation,
then  Populus  in  the  5th  upheld  by  the  Judge,  with
the  1st  and  2nd  Houses  well  occupied,  is  sufficient
augury  of  a  successful  result.


JUDGING  THE  FIGURE  281


As  will  be  readily  seen  from  this  brief  exposition
of  practical  Geomancy,  the  basis  is  wholly  dependent
on  the  exercise  of  the  automatic  faculty;  but  like
most  of  the  divinatory  processes  it  is  linked  on  to
a  system  which  is  entirely  judicial.  It  has  the
advantage  of  being  free  from  all  complicated  or
intricate  calculations,  and  where  the  automatic
or  divinatory  faculty  is  actively  developed  it  can
be  safely  relied  upon  to  give  a  true  and  speedy
answer  to  all  questions  whatsoever.

Similar  in  many  respects  to  this  geomantic  art
is  the  Hebraic  method  of  divination  called  Kabalistic
Astrology,  of  which  I  have  already  given  a  complete
exposition  in  a  separate  volume,  so  that  there  is
perhaps  no  need  to  advert  to  it  in  this  place.

It  may  facilitate  the  process  of  judging  a  figure
if  I  here  give  an  interpretation  of  the  effects  due  to
the  positions  of  the  various  symbols  in  the  several
Houses  of  the  horoscope.  But  it  should  be  remem-
bered that  the  repetition  of  a  symbol  in  two  or  more
Houses  may  materially  alter  its  final  significance;
while  invariably  the  summation  of  the  figure  and
the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  is  in  the  hands
of  the  Judge;  or  if  there  be  any  element  of  doubt,
the  sixteenth  figure,  which  is  the  Appeal,  will  give  a
conclusive  verdict.


CHAPTER  XI
SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES

o  o

V  Tristitia  \

\.  In  the  1st  House  this  symbol  denotes  short
life  if  the  question  be  to  that  point;  but  not  other-
wise. Much  vexation,  sorrow  and  disappointment.
The  mind  is  melancholy  and  misanthropic,  brooding
and  taciturn.

2.  Acquisitiveness  is  strong.  Money  will  be
acquired  b}^  slow,  penurious  methods.  Losses  occur
through  forgetfulness,  displacement,  and  lack  of
initiative.    The  stolen  goods  will  not  be  returned.

3.  Relatives  are  few.  The  subject  will  outlive
his  kindred.  His  journeys  will  be  unfortunate.
Letters  will  be  delayed.

4.  The  house  will  prove  unfortunate.  Mining  and
real  estate  investments  will  cause  losses.  The  parent
wiU  not  survive  except  to  cause  trouble.  The  end
of  life  will  be  miserable.

5.  Children  are  denied.  Love  affairs  prove
unfortunate.  Speculations  will  cause  trouble  and
loss.    There  is  no  patrimony  or  inheritance.

6.  The  health  is  afflicted.    Servants  are  a  source

282


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  283


of  annoyance  and  trouble,  and  yet  difficult  to  get
rid  of.    The  occupation  is  not  profitable.

7.  Marriage  is  delayed.  The  wife  is  of  a  sickly
nature.  Contracts  are  fulfilled  after  delay  only,  and
generally  show  a  loss.  The  opponent  is  not  likely
to  succeed  except  he  takes  much  time  to  do  so.

8.  Death  is  the  result  of  a  protracted  illness.
There  will  be  no  dowry.  Legacies,  if  any,  will  be
the  occasion  of  trouble.

9.  The  dream  is  unfortunate,  denoting  grief  and
loss.  The  voyage  will  not  be  successful,  and  may
prove  dangerous.  Publication  will  prove  successful
only  after  a  long  time.  The  lawyer  will  cause
disappointment.

10.  The  credit  will  be  secure  but  not  large.  The
position  steady.  The  preferment  will  not  be
obtained.    Powerful  but  unpopular.

11.  Steadfast  friends,  but  some  bereavement.
A  friend  inquired  about  is  unhappy.  The  wish  will
not  be  granted  at  once,  or  if  obtained  will  prove
disappointing.

12.  Enemies  are  not  numerous  but  persistent.
The  prisoner  will  be  convicted.  The  secret  will  be
kept.    The  confinement  will  prove  unfortunate.

8°8  Career  h

1.  A  short  life.  A  cramped  and  impoverished
nature;  selfish  and  taciturn.

2.  Much  poverty.  The  property  will  be  lost,  or
hidden  away.  Goods  will  be  confiscated  or  seized.
Anything  lost  will  be  locked  away.


284        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


3.  Restraint  and  even  hatred  among  relations.
The  journey  will  be  very  unfortunate.  Letters
will  be  lost  or  detained.

4.  The  house  will  be  distrained  upon.  No  value
attaches  to  the  estate.  Minerals  cannot  be  worked.
The  end  of  life  will  be  in  an  asylum  or  other  place
of  detention.  There  will  be  dissension  with  the
parents.

5.  No  children  or  those  born  will  be  very  un-
fortunate. Speculations  will  prove  disastrous  and
may  leave  the  person  penniless.  Love  affairs  will
be  secret  and  unfortunate.

6.  The  sickness  will  be  enduring.  Servants  will
cause  loss.  Creature  comforts  will,  be  difficult  to
obtain.  The  occupation  will  be  sedentary  or  much
confined.

7.  There  is  no  love  between  the  partners  in
marriage.  Contracts  are  broken.  The  opponent
will  be  withheld  or  rendered  powerless.

8.  The  wife  will  have  no  dowry  or  it  will  be  tied
in  trust  or  chancery.  Death  takes  place  obscurely,
or  by  violence  and  in  solitude.  There  will  be  no
legacy.

9.  Exile;  the  traveller  will  not  return.  The
^  yage  will  not  be  fortunate,  and  the  ship  may  be
stranded.  The  dream  is  very  unfortunate,  and
denotes  privation  and  suffering.  Legal  affairs
cause  loss.    PubHcations  will  be  quite  unsuccessful.

10.  A  bad  master.  No  position,  credit  or  esteem.
Separation  or  estrangement  from  the  parents.

11.  A  paucity  of  friends.    Loss  of  those  associated.


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  285


The  wish  will  never  be  fulfilled.  The  advice  is
evil.

12.  Many  enemies.  Prisoners  will  be  detained.
The  confinement  will  be  dangerous  and  tedious.
Affairs  do  not  improve.  There  is  no  way  out  of
difficulty.

o

i§  Laetitia  L\.

1.  The  health  will  be  good.  The  person  jovial,
bright  and  winsome,  pleasant  and  kind  to  ail.  A
long  life.

2.  Financial  affairs  will  be  quite  satisfactory.
But  expenses  will  be  heavy.  Things  lost  will  be
recovered.    Prosperity  will  increase  with  time.

3.  Harmony  will  abound  betw^een  relatives,  but
they  will  die  before  the  subject  and  be  a  source  of
benefit  to  him.  Journeys  will  be  more  pleasant
than  profitable.  The  letter  will  be  satisfactory
and  may  cause  merriment.

4.  The  property  will  give  adequate  profits.  Agree-
ment and  affection  with  the  parents.    Mining  inter-
ests and  estate  investments  will  be  fairly  successful,
but  not  without  commensurate  expense.    The  end  of
life  will  show  a  competence  and  much  happiness.

.5.  Children  will  be  bright  and  happy  and  di^s;.-
tinguished  by  their  good  qualities.  A  son  will  be
born,  who  will  be  tall,  fair,  handsome  and  prosperous.
There  will  be  a  moderate  inheritance.  Speculations
will  be  satisfactory.  Love  affairs  will  proceed
smoothly.    The  affection  will  be  returned.

6.  Servants  will  be  honest  and  devoted.  The


286        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


health  will  be  good.  The  sickness  will  be  soon  over.
Food  and  clothing  will  be  adequate.  The  occupa-
tion should  be  moderately  remunerative.

7.  A  handsome  and  well-endowed  wife  is  shown.
Contracts  will  be  equitable  and  of  profit.  The
opponent  will  be  well  equipped  and  qualified,  and
may  win.

8.  The  wife  will  have  money  by  a  legacy.  You
will  have  money  left  to  you.  The  colleague  is
faithful  but  needs  watching.

9.  The  voyage  will  be  bright  and  prosperous.
The  traveller  is  well  and  happy.  The  lawyer  will
prove  satisfactory.  The  dream  is  auspicious  and
prognosticates  joy.    Publications  will  be  successful.

10.  Honours  will  be  attained.  The  position  will
be  influential,  and  the  credit  good.  High  patronage.
Good  social  standing.  The  parent  lives  to  a  good
age  and  is  respected.

11.  Many  friends.  Conviviality.  The  wish  will
be  fulfilled.  Associations  more  numerous  than
profitable.

12.  The  enemy  will  become  a  friend.  The  prisoner
will  be  liberated.  The  confinement  brings  happiness.
Good  fortune  attends  alienation  or  sequestration.

o°o  Acquisitio  l\.
1.  The  life  will  be  long  and  flourishing.  The
person  is  of  full  stature  and  well  developed  ;  fair
complexion.  The  person  will  prevail  by  influence
and  means.  Well-disposed  but  mindful  of  his  own
interests.


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  287


2.  Much  wealth.  You  will  gain.  The  goods  will
be  found.  Success  in  dealing  with  real  estate,
stocks  and  shares.

3.  Relatives  will  be  well  disposed  and  moderately
fortunate.  The  letter  will  bring  you  benefit.  The
journey  will  be  profitable.

4.  The  parent  will  live  long  and  be  very  prosperous.
The  property  will  extend  and  be  very  valuable.
Mining  interests  will  bring  profit.  The  end  of  life
will  be  very  fortunate  and  highly  prosperous.

5.  Few  children,  but  those  very  fortunate.
There  will  be  an  inheritance  of  considerable  value.
The  speculation  will  be  successful  and  profitable.
Love  affairs  will  succeed.

6.  The  sickness  will  be  a  long  and  difficult  one,
due  to  congestion  or  surfeit.  Servants  will  be  a
source  of  benefit.  The  occupation  will  be  profitable.
Creature  comforts  will  be  plentiful.

7.  A  rich  wife.  Will  probably  marry  again.
The  opponent  will  have  means  to  pursue  the  suit
and  will  gain  the  victory.  Contracts  will  be  highly
profitable.

8.  A  dowry  is  denoted.  Legacies  will  be  received.
Colleagues  are  staunch  and  faithful.

9.  The  voyage  will  be  prosperous.  The  lawyer
will  be  grasping  but  capable.  The  dream  denotes
gain  and  prosperity.  The  publication  will  be  highly
remunerative.

10.  High  position;  honours.  Good  credit.  The
parent  will  live  long.  The  judge  will  be  severe  but
just.


288        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


IL  Many  and  influential  friends  who  will  be  a
source  of  benefit.  The  wish  will  certainly  be  ob-
tained.   Profitable  alliances  and  good  advisers.

12.  The  prisoner  will  be  detained.  The  exile
will  not  return.  The  confinement  will  be  enduring
but  safe.

o

o°o  Pmr  f

o  -J

1.  Life  of  moderate  length.  Great  energy,  frank
and  open  character,  strong  temper.  Executive
ability.  A  good  soldier  or  pioneer.  Subject  to
fevers  and  wounds.

2.  Good  earning  capacity  and  always  busy,  but
not  able  to  save  money.  Speculative  and  rash.
Loss  by  theft  or  fire.  The  goods  will  not  be  recovered.
Disputes  on  financial  matters.

3.  Dangerous  journey.  An  irritating  letter.
Quarrels  with  relatives.

4.  Property  spoiled  by  fire  or  plunder.  Mining
interests  of  no  profit.  Disputes  with  a  parent.  The
end  of  life  unfortunate.

5.  No  inheritance.  Children  will  be  male.
Superior  achievements  among  the  progeny.  Specu-
lations hardly  successful.  Love  affairs  unfortunate
and  disputatious.

6.  The  health  suffers  from  a  fever.  Servants
will  be  thievish.  Creature  comforts  difficult  to
maintain.  The  occupation  is  in  fire,  iron  or
hardware.

7.  An  unfortunate  and  short-lived  wife.  Disputes
in  marriage.    Contracts  only  occasion  strife  and


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  289


rivalry.  The  opponent  is  strenuous  but  hardly
fortunate.

8.  Money  by  marriage  ;  a  small  legacy.  The
colleague  is  too  venturesome.  The  death  is  due  to
violence,  or  poison  by  acids.

9.  Dangerous  voyage.  A  dream  denoting  strife
and  loss.  The  lawyer  is  alert  and  active.  There
is  no  success  abroad.

10.  Position  attained  by  own  efforts.  Some
scandal.  The  parent  is  fairl}^  long-lived  but  of
contentious  mind.  Credit  good.  The  judge  will
show  asperity  and  hastiness.

11.  Friends  will  not  be  good  counsellors.  Dissen-
sions occur  with  associates.  The  wish  will  come
speedily  if  at  all.

12.  The  prisoner  will  be  freed.  The  exile  is  in
danger.  The  confinement  will  be  hazardous  and
painful.    The  distress  will  be  raised  with  loss.

8  8  Rubeus  ;J

1.  A  short  life  and  a  dangerous  one.  Violent
disposition,  unscrupulous.  Brusque  and  forceful
manner.    Ruddy  complexion.

2.  Loss  and  difficulty  in  finance  is  shown.  The
goods  will  not  be  retrieved.  Extravagance  will
result  in  need.    The  livelihood  is  precarious.

3.  Estrangement  from  relatives.  A  dang|prous
journey  and  accidental.  The  letter  will  be  disagree-
able and  offensive.

4.  The  parent  will  not  live  long,  and  will  be  of

u


290        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


ill-disposed  nature.  Mining  interests  will  fail.  The
house  is  in  danger  of  fire  or  accident.  Property
will  depreciate.

5.  Poor  and  ill-conditioned  progeny.  Dangerous
liaisons  or  love  affairs.  Speculations  very  ruinous.
No  inheritance.

6.  Poor  health.  Deceitful  servants.  Needy  sur-
roundings.   Arduous  but  ill-paid  work.

7.  A  bad  wife  of  irregular  habits.  Contracts
will  not  prove  remunerative.  The  opponent  will
lose  his  case.

8.  There  will  be  no  doAvry.  The  death  will  be
violent  and  ignominious.  No  legacy.  The  colleague
is  untrustworthy.

9.  The  voyage  will  be  highly  dangerous.  The
dream  is  of  sinister  import.  The  lawyer  is  not  to
be  trusted.    The  publication  will  fail.

10.  Without  hope  of  a  good  position.  Small
credit.  The  parent  is  irascible  and  badly  disposed.
The  judge  will  prove  adverse.

11.  Friends  are  of  low  degree.  Associates  not
advantageous.    The  wish  will  not  be  granted.

12.  Vindictive  enemies.  The  prisoner  will  be
punished.  The  confinement  will  be  unfortunate
and  dangerous.    The  exile  will  not  return.

88

o  Fortuna  Major  Q

1.  A  long  life.  Open,  honest  and  fearless  charac-
ter. A  tall  fair  person.  Very  fortunate  and  well
beloved.


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  291


2.  The  fortunes  will  be  excellent.  Riches.  The
lost  goods  will  be  recovered.

3.  The  journey  will  be  bright  and  prosperous.
Relatives  will  be  attached  and  noted  for  high
accomplishments.  The  letter  will  be  of  pleasant
import.

4.  The  parent  will  enjoy  long  life  and  be  distin-
guished. Property  will  be  increased  and  will  gain
in  value.  There  will  be  gold  found.  The  end  of
life  will  be  brilliant.

5.  A  rich  inheritance.  A  son  of  great  promise.
Favours  and  high  fortune  in  love  affairs.  Domestic
and  social  felicity.    Speculations  are  fortunate.

6.  Excellent  health.  The  sick  will  recover
quickly.  The  servant  is  loyal  and  faithful.  There
will  be  good  fare  and  fine  clothing.  The  occupation
may  be  artistic,  but  in  any  case  will  be  distinctive.

7.  A  wealthy  wife  and  one  who  is  beautiful,  but
not  very  long-lived.  The  opponent  will  lose  the
suit  or  contest.  Contracts  will  prove  moderately
profitable.

8.  A  dowry  is  shown.  A  rich  legacy.  The
colleague  is  faithful  but  proud.

9.  The  voyage  will  be  abundantly  successful.
The  dream  is  most  auspicious.  The  lawyer  will  be
distinguished  and  capable.  Publication  will  be
highly  successful.

10.  High  honours.  A  title.  Patronage  of
royalty.  An  excellent  position.  Sound  credit.  The
parent  will  live  to  old  age.  The  judge  is  perfectly
honourable.

U  2


292        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


IL  Friends  not  very  wealthy  but  sincere  and
of  good  position.  Advisers  not  fortunate  in  their
advice.    The  wish  will  be  granted,  but  not  fully.

12.  The  prisoner  will  be  released.  The  exile  will
return.  The  enemy  will  be  powerful.  The  confine-
ment highly  successful.

8  8  Fortuna  Minor  Q

1.  Good  vitality  but  some  feverish  ailments.
A  person  of  small  stature  but  proud.  Freckled  or
sunburnt  complexion.

2.  Moderate  means.  Prodigality.  Things  lost
will  not  be  recovered.

3.  Unfortunate  relatives.  An  unpleasant  letter.
The  journey  will  not  be  very  fortunate.

4.  There  is  nothing  to  sustain  the  value  of  property.
The  house  is  not  fortunate.  The  parent  is  of  short
life.  Mining  interests  are  slow  in  development
and  expensive.  The  end  of  life  will  be  moderately
fortunate.

5.  A  small  family,  mostly  boys.  The  child  to  be
born  will  be  male.  Love  affairs  are  not  fortunate,
but  honourable.  Speculations  will  hardly  be  success-
ful and  at  best  but  moderately  so.  There  will  be  a
meagre  inheritance.

6.  The  sick  will  continue  so  awhile.  The  health
is  indifferently  good.  The  servant  is  honest  but
lax.  Creature  comforts  will  be  moderately  abund-
ant. The  occupation  will  be  fairly  remunerative
and  honourable.


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  293


7.  A  happy  marriage  but  not  a  rich  one.  Wife
lives  to  middle  years.  The  opponent  is  not  very
influential  and  the  result  is  doubtful.  Contracts
will  be  carried  through  with  difficulty.

8.  A  small  dowry.  There  will  be  a  small  legacy.
The  colleague  is  hardly  reliable.

9.  The  voyage  is  troublesome  and  not  very  for-
tunate. The  dream  denotes  vexation.  The  lawyer
will  be  of  quite  moderate  ability,  but  honest.  The
publication  will  hardly  pay.

10.  Honours  of  minor  degree,  but  position  un-
stable. Credit  moderately  good.  The  parent  will
soon  die.  The  judge  will  be  overbearing  and
censorious.

11.  Friends  induce  to  bad  effects.  Associates
are  not  profitable.  The  wish  will  be  denied  or
very  much  delayed.

12.  The  prisoner  will  continue  in  custody.  The
exile  will  not  return.  Enemies  are  numerous,  but
of  low  degree.  The  confinement  will  hardly  be
fortunate  and  will  be  protracted.

Y  Puella  9

1.  The  life  will  be  happy,  peaceful  and  moderately
long.  A  fair  complexion,  graceful  and  slim  figure,
grey  or  blue  e^^es.

2.  Wealth  will  accumulate  but  much  will  be  spent
on  pleasure  and  finery.  Lost  things  will  be  restored.
Gain  by  women  and  gaming.

3.  Sisters  will  be  genial  and  kind.    The  letter


294        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


will  be  pleasant  and  will  contain  an  invitation.
The  journey  will  be  safe  and  moderately  fortunate.

4.  The  parent  will  be  beloved,  and  will  live  to
moderately  long  years.  The  mine  will  contain
silver  or  copper.  The  house  will  be  advantageous
and  very  pleasant.  Property  will  increase.  The
end  of  life  is  happy.

5.  A  small  inheritance.  Love  affairs  numerous
and  generally  of  good  effect.  Domestic  happiness.
Successful  speculations.    A  girl  is  born.

6.  The  health  is  weak  and  the  patient  in  a  bad  way.
Servants  will  be  of  irregular  habits  and  bad  charac-
ter. Creature  comforts  adequate,  but  tending  to
depreciate  and  diminish.

7.  A  beautiful  and  good  wife.  Contracts  will  be
very  profitable.  The  opponent  is  strong  and  has
support  from  women  of  position.

8.  A  small  dowry  soon  expended.  No  legacy
of  significance.  Death  by  poison.  The  colleague
should  not  be  trusted.

9.  The  dream  is  very  auspicious.  The  voyage
will  be  bright  and  fortunate.  The  lawyer  is  capable
and  will  be  sincere.    Publications  will  prosper.

10.  The  position  can  be  improved  or  ruined  by
women's  influence.  The  parent  is  of  sordid  charac-
ter.   The  credit  is  moderate  only.

11.  Friends  will  be  numerous  and  beneficial.
The  wish  will  be  granted  and  will  give  pleasure.
The  associates  are  fairly  fortunate.

12.  The  prisoner  will  be  set  free.  The  exile  is  in
great  prosperity.    The  enemy  will  be  a  woman  who


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  295


is  short  and  dark.  The  confinement  will  result
favourably  and  be  quite  normal.

o

o'^o  Amissio  $

1.  The  person  is  of  short  life,  ill-favoured  in
appearance,  and  distorted  in  character.

2.  There  will  be  loss  and  squandering  of  money.
Riches  will  diminish.  The  lost  goods  will  not  be
recovered.  Gaming  and  women  will  be  the  ruin
of  this  person.

3.  Few  and  uncongenial  relatives.  The  journey
will  be  unfortunate.  The  letter  will  speak  of  loss
or  be  the  occasion  of  loss.

4.  The  parent  has  a  short  life.  Property  will
diminish.  The  house  is  unhealthy.  Mining  in-
terests will  be  unfortunate  and  a  dead  loss.  End
of  life  penurious.

5.  No  inheritance  or  one  that  is  lost.  Love
affairs  disappointing.  Death  or  separation  comes
to  the  loved  one.  Speculations  will  be  ruinous.
Children,  if  they  live,  will  be  ill-favoured  and  de-
formed.

6.  The  health  is  bad.  The  patient  will  not  re-
cover. The  servant  will  cause  loss  and  trouble.
There  will  be  a  lack  of  comforts.  Occupation  mean
and  unprofitable.

7.  The  wife  will  soon  die  or  will  abscond.  Con-
tracts will  cause  loss.  The  opponent  lacks  means
and  will  lose  the  case.

8.  No  legacies,  no  dowry.  A  violent  death,  or
by  poison  in  the  system.  The  colleague  is  despicable*


296        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

9.  The  voyage  is  unfortunate  and  will  be  the  causey
of  loss.  The  dream  is  unfortunate  and  denotes
failing  health  and  fortune.  The  lawyer  will  be
extortionate  and  untrustworthy.

10.  Position  of  no  importance,  or  ruined  by
women.  No  credit.  The  parent  will  die  early.
Dishonour.    The  judge  will  be  adverse.

11.  Friends  will  be  ruinous  and  dissolute.  Advisers
and  associates  of  no  value.  The  wish  will  be
denied.

12.  The  prisoner  will  perish.  The  exile  is  aban-
doned to  his  fate.  The  confinement  will  be  danger-
ous and  disappointing  or  abortive.  The  enemy  is  a
low-minded  and  despicable  woman.

S  8

o°o  Alhus  ^

1.  A  sprightly,  active  and  intelligent  person,
talkative  and  a  busybody.  Li  danger  of  an
accident.    Sharp-witted  and  cunning.

2.  Gain  by  trade  or  the  use  of  the  intellect.
The  goods  lost  may  be  recovered  if  followed  up
quickly.

3.  Relatives  will  be  numerous  but  scattered.
The  journey  will  be  successful  but  worrying.  The
letter  is  about  business  and  will  be  satisfactory.

4.  The  parent  is  weak  and  irritable.  The  house
is  not  fortunate  and  very  unsettled.  Mining
interests  are  not  without  prospects  if  well  worked.
Quicksilver  or  silver  ore  may  be  found.  Property
will  be  a  contentious  matter  and  will  hardly  increase.
The  end  of  life  will  be  restless  and  unsettled.


I    SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  297

5.  No  inheritance  of  value.  Love  affairs  unsatis-
factory. Progeny  intelligent  but  few.  Speculations
not  very  fortunate  and  causing  anxiety.

6.  The  patient  will  recover.  The  health  is  good.
Servants  are  industrious  but  inquisitive  and
talkative.  A  mercantile  or  clerical  occupation.
Commensurate  creature  comforts,  food,  clothing,
etc.

7.  A  good  and  industrious  wife  with  some  artistic
faculty.  The  opponent  will  hardly  sustain  his
cause.  Contracts  will  prove  mainly  beneficial,  but
will  require  hard  work  and  alacrity.

8.  Disputes  will  occur  about  legacies.  A  small
dowry,  if  any,  and  that  soon  dissipated.  The  col-
league is  very  acute  and  cunning.

9.  The  voyage  will  not  be  fortunate.  The  dream
is  contentious  and  denotes  quarrelling.  The  lawyer
is  not  dependable.    The  publication  will  fail.

10.  The  position  is  hardly  assured.  Honours
attained  with  patience  and  industry.  Credit,  doubt-
ful. The  parent  will  live  long  but  is  very  aloof.
The  judge  will  be  stern  and  severe.

11.  Friends  will  be  numerous  and  beneficial.
The  wish  will  be  granted.  Associations  will  lead
to  business  and  profit.

12.  The  prisoner  has  no  hope.  The  exile  will
never  return.  The  enemy  is  a  trifler  and  has  no
position  or  influence.  The  confinement  will  be
unfortunate  and  anxious.  The  distraint  will  be
withdrawn  with  loss  to  you.


298        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

o  o

o^o  Conjunctio  g

1.  The  person  is  of  a  subtile  and  crafty  nature
of  mean  appearance,  small  sharp  features,  imfoi
tunate  and  dishonest.

2.  Gain  by  the  sharp  use  of  faculties ;  but  in  dang(
of  spurious  methods.  The  goods  will  not  be  found
or  returned.  The  financial  prospects  are  hazardous
and  chiefly  associated  with  litigation.

3.  Relatives  will  be  inimical.  The  journey  has
its  dangers  but  is  fairly  successful.  The  letter
proposes  a  meeting  or  understanding.

4.  The  parent  is  of  low  degree  and  of  short  life.
The  House  is  unfortunate.  Mining  prospects  are
hardly  good,  bringing  disputes  and  anxiety.  The
end  of  life  will  be  full  of  small  troubles  and  anxieties.

5.  The  child  will  be  a  girl.  The  progeny  are  few,
well  equipped  and  fairly  fortunate.  Speculations
are  not  profitable.  There  will  be  no  inheritance.
Love  affairs  cause  anxiety.

6.  The  health  is  rather  poor.  The  patient  may
recover  with  care  and  attention.  Servants  will  be
deceptive  and  gossiping.  There  will  be  anxiety  as
to  the  livelihood.

7.  The  wife  will  be  well-disposed  and  intelligent,
but  will  not  live  long.  The  opponent  will  fail.
The  contract  can  hardly  be  made  to  pay.

8.  There  will  be  no  dowry,  but  disputes  arise
about  the  wife's  money.  No  legacies,  but  quarrels
over  the  goods  of  the  dead.  The  colleague  is  beyond
all  trust,  being  crafty  and  deceitful.


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  299


9.  The  voyage  is  very  unfortunate.  The  dream
denotes  loss,  trouble  and  disputation.  The  lawyer
is  not  to  be  relied  upon,  and  will  seek  to  defraud.
The  pubHcation  has  no  chance  of  success.

10.  The  position  is  sustained  by  the  use  of  the
faculties,  but  there  are  no  honours.  The  credit
is  indifferent  and  liable  to  be  assailed.  The  judge
is  querulous  and  crotchet3^  The  parent  will  be  a
source  of  trouble.

11.  Friends  will  be  of  little  avail.  The  wish  will
not  be  attained.  Associates  are  not  the  best  ad-
visers; they  can  well  be  fewer  and  better.

12.  The  prisoner  is  condemned.  The  exile  will
remain  in  oblivion.  The  enemy  is  petty  and
vindictive.  The  confinement  will  be  dangerous.
Distraint  is  enforced  with  loss.

§  ViaD

1.  The  person  is  tall  and  slender  and  has  a  clear-
spoken  and  direct  manner.  A  long  and  successful
life.

2.  Gain  by  new  openings  and  enterprises.  Good
fortune.    The  lost  goods  will  be  recovered  if  followed.

3.  The  journey  will  be  successful  and  without
delays.  Relatives  are  few,  but  well  disposed.  The
letter  concerns  a  journey  and  will  be  fortunate.

4.  The  parent  is  well  favoured  and  will  travel
much.  The  house  is  fairly  fortunate.  The  pro-
perty will  be  cut  up.  Mining  is  fairly  successful.
Silver  may  be  found  in  small  quantity.  The  end
of  life  will  be  unsettled  and  changeful.


300        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


5.  Love  affairs  will  be  moderately  favourable.
The  child  will  be  a  male.  Progeny  few,  but  gifted.
Speculations  show  small  profits.  There  will  be  an
inheritance  for  partition.

6.  The  health  is  good.  The  patient  will  recover.
The  servant  is  useful  and  industrious.  The  liveli-
hood will  be  assured.  The  occupation  involves
travelling.

7.  A  good  and  capable  wife.  The  opponent  will
lack  support  but  will  proceed  successfully.  Con-
tracts will  be  carried  through.

8.  Only  a  small  dowry.  A  legacy  will  be  secured.
The  colleague  may  be  relied  upon.

9.  The  voyage  is  successful  and  smooth.  The
dream  denotes  a  journey  in  store  and  a  way  out  of
difficulties.  The  laAvyer  is  master  of  his  case.  The
publication  will  meet  with  a  ready  reception.

10.  The  parent  is  unfortunate  and  of  narrow
views  and  close  habits.  Honours  are  attained.
The  credit  is  good.  The  judge  will  be  impartial
but  impatient.

1 1 .  Friends  will  be  fortunate.  Associations  profit-
able.   The  wish  will  be  granted.

12.  The  exile  will  return.  The  prisoner  will
escape.  The  confinement  will  quickly  be  over.
The  enemy  is  a  dark,  slender  woman.  The  distraint
is  effected.

o  o

§§    PopuluS  J)

1.  The  person  is  fair,  short  and  of  full  figure.
Moderately  long  life.


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  301


2.  Changeful  but  increscent  fortunes.  Gain  by
public  service  or  publicity  in  some  capacity.  The
lost  goods  will  be  restored  in  part.

3.  Many  relatives,  but  also  many  troubles  with
them.  The  journey  is  good.  The  letter  is  concern-
ing a  public  affair,  and  is  of  good  import.

4.  The  parent  is  fortunate,  but  changeful.  There
will  be  gain  from  property.  The  house  is  fortunate.
Mining  interests  will  be  supported.  The  end  of
life  will  be  by  the  sea  or  in  the  midst  of  an  assembly.

5.  The  child  will  be  female.  Love  affairs  fickle
and  uncertain.  Speculations  fairly  successful.  A
small  inheritance  which  will  be  divided.

6.  The  health  will  be  uncertain  and  changeful.
A  dropsical  affection.  The  patient  is  in  danger  of
a  relapse.  The  servant  is  not  dependable.  The
occupation  is  connected  with  the  public  and  is
precarious.    The  livelihood  is  uncertain.

7.  The  wife  will  be  good  looking  and  pleasant,
but  fickle.  The  opponent  will  have  public  sympathy,
but  will  hardly  succeed.  Contracts  more  numerous
than  profitable.

8.  A  legacy  is  lost,  but  disputes  and  falls  into
Chancer}^  No  dowry.  The  colleague  is  vacillat-
ing and  inconstant.  Death  by  drowning  or  in  a
public  place.

9.  The  voyage  will  be  fairly  fortunate.  The
dream  denotes  publicity  and  increase.  The  lawyer
is  too  much  occupied  and  cannot  be  relied  upon.
The  publication  will  become  popular.

10.  The  position   is  unstable  and  the  credit


302        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


doubtful.  Honours  may  be  achieved  by  public  ai
or  recognition.  The  parent  is  unfortunate,  short
lived  and  very  restless.  The  judge  will  be  controUe
by  public  opinion.

11.  Friends  more  numerous  than  useful  or  depend
able.  Associates  will  change  with  circumstances
The  wish  will  be  granted  at  the  full  of  the  moon.

12.  The  prisoner  will  be  released  by  petition  o
not  at  all.  The  exile  will  come  back  to  his  country
The  distraint  will  not  be  effected.  The  confinemen
will  be  difficult  but  safe.  The  enemy  is  a  short
stout  and  fair  woman,  a  great  busybody.

f  Caput  ^

1.  The  person  is  tall  and  fair;  of  fortunate  an
honest  nature;  a  good  organizer.    Long  life.

2.  Abundant  means.  Gain  by  initiative  and  th
use  of  the  faculties.   The  lost  things  will  be  recovered

3.  Fortunate  relatives   and  well-disposed.  Th
journey  will  be  successful.    The  letter  makes
proposal  and  is  of  good  import.

4.  The  parent  is  fortunate  and  long-lived.  The
property  is  good.  The  house  is  desirable.  The  mines
will  yield  well  and  will  be  extended.  The  end  of
life  will  be  highly  fortunate.

5.  The  child  will  be  a  male.  Progeny  will  be
highly  fortunate.  Love  affairs  will  prosper.  The
speculation  is  sure  to  be  successful.  There  will  be
a  rich  inheritance.

6.  The  health  is  good.  The  patient  will  recover
quickly.    The  servant  will  be  faithful  and  trust-


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  303


worthy.  Livelihood  is  well  assured  and  abundant.
The  occupation  may  be  medical  and  will  be  fortunate.

7.  A  good  marriage,  but  bereavement;  and  more
than  one  marriage  is  denoted.  The  opponent  will
be  powerful  and  a  man  to  be  feared.  Contracts

I  will  be  profitable.

8.  A  rich  dowry.  Certain  legacies.  The  colleague
is  capable  and  will  benefit  you.    Death  by  snake  or

i insect  bite  or  poison.
9.  The  voyage  will  be  highly  fortunate.  The
dream  denotes  success  and  a  new  opening.  The
lawyer  will  do  himself  credit  and   benefit  you.
The  publication  will  be  well  received.

10.  Certain  honours.  High  patronage.  Good
credit.  The  parent  is  long-lived  but  impulsive  and
headstrong.  The  judge  will  be  impartial  and  just
and  inclining  to  a  good  cause.

11.  Faithful  and  good  friends.  Honourable  asso-
ciations.   The  highest  wish  will  be  obtained.

12.  The  prisoner  will  be  pardoned.    The  exile
(   will  return  quickly.    The  confinement  will  be  for-
tunate and  safe.    The  enemy  will  be  active  and
persistent.

o

o°o  Cauda  ^

1.  A  short  life  and  a  miserable  one.  The  person
is  of  poor  aspect  and  mean  disposition,  crabbed  and
vindictive.

2.  Poor  estate.  A  competence  earned  with  diffi-
culty. Failing  fortunes.  The  goods  will  not  be
recovered.


304        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


3.  Few  relatives  and  those  distant  or  unsympa-
thetic. The  journey  will  be  highly  dangerous  and
may  be  fatal.  The  letter  concerns  a  departure
and  is  unfortunate.

4.  The  parent  dies  early.  The  property  is  of
no  value.  The  mine  will  not  yield  anything.  The
house  is  fateful  and  may  be  demolished.  The  end
of  life  is  miserable.

5.  The  child  will  die  at  birth.  The  progeny  will
be  few  and  ill-favoured.  There  will  be  no  inherit-
ance. Speculations  will  ruin  you.  The  beloved
will  die  or  become  as  dead  to  you.

6.  The  health  is  very  bad,  the  excretory  system
is  imperfect.  The  patient  cannot  recover.  The
servant  is  wholly  undesirable  and  will  be  a  source
of  great  danger.  The  livelihood  is  poor.  The
occupation  is  menial  and  undesirable,  or  yet
nefarious.

7.  The  wife  will  be  ill-disposed  and  violent,  or
there  may  be  no  hope  of  marriage  at  all.  The
opponent  has  no  chance  of  success.  Contracts
will  never  be  completed  but  to  your  ruin.

8.  No  dowry  but  an  extravagant  wife.  Legacies
are  very  remote  from  you.  The  death  will  be  a
violent  one.  The  colleague  is  malicious  and  to  be
avoided  entirely.

9.  The  voyage  will  be  fatal.  The  dream  portends
dire  distress  and  trouble.  The  lawyer  will  fail  to
pursue  his  case.  The  publication  is  a  dead
failure.

10.  The  parent  is  shortlived  and  of  ill  repute.


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  305


Honours  are  distant  and  beyond  your  reach.  The
credit  is  assailed  and  cannot  be  upheld.  The  judge
will  be  malicious  and  will  exceed  his  functions.

11.  Friends  will  prove  ruinous  and  a  cause  of
danger.  Associations  unprofitable.  The  wish  is
denied .

12.  The  prisoner  will  perish  if  he  does  not  escape.
The  exile  will  never  return.  The  enem}^  is  very
malicious.  The  confinement  will  be  extremely
dangerous.

The  foregoing  interpretations  are  due  to  the  signifi-
cation of  each  of  the  symbols  in  the  Twelve  Houses,
and  will  apply  to  all  questions  which  are  proper  to
each  House.  Judgment  is  not,  however,  to  be  made
from  the  smgle  position,  but  must  also  take  into
account  the  duplicated  or  repeated  positions,  the
witnesses  and  the  judge.  Observe  that  the  13th
symbol  is  the  witness  for  the  inquirer  or  consultant ;
the  14th  for  the  opponent;  the  judge  is  impartial
and  is  related  to  the  10th  House,  while  the  16th
symbol  is  the  final  appeal  and  is  the  end  of  the
matter,  as  denoted  by  the  4th  House  to  which  it  is
related.  Any  question  can  be  answered  by  relating
it  to  its  proper  House  (see  "  Astrology,"  Part  I),
and  observing  what  symbol  falls  in  that  House,
how  it  is  sustained  by  the  witnesses,  or  reflected
in  other  parts  of  the  figure,  and  what  the  judge  may
determine.

The  Geomantic  art  is  by  rlo  means  an  easy  one
except  to  those  versed  in  the  nature  and  significa-


306        A  IVIANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


tion  of  the  symbols,  the  Houses,  and  the  planetary
affinities.

Some  attempt  has  been  made  by  Agrippa  and
others  to  introduce  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  into  the
Geomantic  scheme,  but  the  evident  disagreement
between  the  various  methods  submitted  clearly
shows  that  they  form  no  part  of  a  coherent  tradition.
It  will  be  found  in  practice  that  the  signs  normal  to
the  Houses  can  be  presumed  with  satisfactory  results;
the  1st  House  and  Aries,  the  2nd  and  Taurus,  and
so  on,  being  the  foundation  of  the  true  Geomantic
figure,  the  modifications  being,  of  course,  due  to
the  symbols  which  fall  into  them.

The  root  nature  of  the  symbols  should  be  known,
for  many  of  them  are  capable  of  considerable
variation  of  meaning,  according  to  the  Houses  they
faU  in,  the  corresponding  signs,  and  the  nature
of  the  question  to  be  resolved.

Root  Meanings  of  the  Symbols,

Career. — A  prison.  Denotes  privation,  confine-
ment, restriction,  inaction.    It  corresponds  to  ^  .

Tristitia. — Sorrow.  Denotes  grief,  disappoint-
ment, bereavement,  condemnation.  It  is  of  the
nature  of  \  .

Laetitia. — Joy.  Denotes  joviality,  success,  laugh-
ter, good  health,  and  confidence.  It  corresponds
to  4.

Acquisitio. — Obtaining.  Denotes  gain,  achieve-
ment, success,  fulfilment  and  expansion.  It  corre-
sponds to  ^..


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  307


Puer. — A  boy.  Denotes  impulse,  ardour,  zeal,
impetuosity  and  energy.    Corresponds  to  6.

Rubeus. — Redhead.  Denotes  a  rash,  passionate
and  fiery  nature;  accidents,  violence.  It  corre-
sponds to  6 .

Fortuna  Major. — Great  fortune.  Denotes  success,
honours,  illumination  and  protection.  It  corre-
sponds to  the  Sun  0.

Fortuna  Minor. — Lesser  fortune.  Denotes  the
above  in  less  degree;  benefits  conferred  rather  than
attained.    Corresponds  to  0.

Puella. — A  girl.  Denotes  pleasure,  gaiety,  bright-
ness, things  that  are  pretty  and  sweet,  attractive
but  elusive  schemes,  a  promise  but  not  a  certain
fulfilment.    It  corresponds  to  $  .

Amissio. — Loss.  Denotes  bereavement,  reversal,
expenditure,  loss  (whether  of  faculty,  position,
money,  etc.,  according  to  its  House),  and  is  un-
fortunate.   It  corresponds  to  ?  .

Alhus. — White  head.  Denotes  intelligence,  ex-
perience, wisdom,  judgment,  and  is  fortunate,  of
the  nature  of  ^.

Conjunctio. — Union.  Denotes  combination,  coun-
sel, coming  together,  support,  partnership,  marriage.
It  is  good  or  bad  according  to  the  House-sign
with  which  it  is  associated  in  the  figure.  Of  the
nature  ^.

Via. — A  way,  or  road.  Denotes  a  passage  or
way  through,  an  entrance  and  exit,  a  direct  course,
a  means  to  an  end,  connections,  singleness,  com-
munication.   Of  the  nature  of  the  New  Moon.


308        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM

Populus. — People.  Denotes  a  mass,  swelling,
gathering  together,  a  crowd,  plurality,  the  tide  of
opinion.  It  is  fortunate  and  of  the  nature  of  the
Full  Moon.

Caput. — ^The  head.  Denotes  entering  in,  accession,
increase,  ascending,  acquiring  and  absorbing.  Of
the  nature  of  the  Dragon's  Head  or  Moon's  Ascend-
ing Node  ^.

Cauda. — The  tail.  Denotes  going  out,  recession,
decrease,  descending,  losing  and  relinquishing.  Of
the  nature  of  the  Dragon's  Tail  or  Moon's  Descending
Node  15.

The  Pairs

It  will  be  observed  that  the  sixteen  symbols  are
brought  into  relations  as  eight  pairs  of  opposites.
Thus  :

Acquisitio        and  Amissio.
Laetitia  Tristitia.
Puer  Puella.
Albus  Rubeus.
Fortuna  Major        Fortuna  Minor.
Caput  Cauda.
Populus  Via.
Conjunctio  Career.

These  "  pairs  of  opposites,"  which  are  at  the  root
of  the  ancient  Chinese  system  of  Geomancy,  have
no  relation  to  the  natures  of  the  respective  planets
involved,  or  the  signs  or  Houses  ruled  by  them,  but
they  are  founded  upon  the  natural  antithesis  of


SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  309


certain  spiritual  principles  which  begin  with  the
yin  and  the  yang,  the  dark  and  light  sides  of  the
manifested  universe,  and  extend  to  all  the  relation-
ships of  the  cosmic  elements.  Those  who  would
pursue  the  subject  should  take  in  hand  the  text
of  the  Yih  King  with  the  commentary  by  Con-
fucius, who  said  of  this  great  work  that  if  he  lived
to  one  hundred  years  he  would  devote  thirty  to
the  study  of  it.  What  has  filtered  through  to
the  Occident  is  a  simple  but  practical  system
of  Geomancy  which  I  have  here  attempted  to
display.


CHAPTER  XII


PSYCHOMETRY

The  trained  occultist  is  capable  not  only  of  mani-
festing intense  psychic  activity  under  the  direction
of  his  will,  but  also  on  occasion  of  maintaining  a
perfect  passivit}^  which  enables  him  to  receive  and
register  impressions  of  a  subtile  nature  from  the
external  world  and  to  give  free  play  to  the  sub-
conscious side  of  the  mind-sphere.

The  psychometric  sense  is  that  by  which  we
receive  impressions  coming  to  us  imperceptibly
through  the  sense-organs.  The  functions  of  this
sense  imply  not  only  the  existence  of  a  subtile  aura
attaching  to  every  material  object,  but  also  the
ability  to  perceive  the  effects  produced  in  ourselves
by  attention  to  the  auric  emanations  of  such  objects.

The  occultists  affirm  the  existence  of  an  aura  to
every  solar  system,  to  every  planet  of  that  system,
and  to  every  person  or  thing  upon  that  planet.
This  aura  is  a  plastic  sensitized  medium  of  an
etheric  nature  which  interpenetrates  and  extends
beyond  every  material  body.  It  is  the  storehouse
of  every  experience  attaching  to  the  body  it  is
related  to.  A  piece  of  rock  will  thus  preserve
to  us  not  only  the  record  of  the  earth  of  which  it  is
a  part,  but  also  the  individual  record  of  its  detached

310


PSYCHOMETRY


311


existence;  and  this  will  be  the  case  with  every
minutest  particle,  in  less  degree  of  intensity,  of
any  body  whatsoever.  The  greater  the  mass  the
stronger  will  be  the  auric  emanation.  In  the  case
of  the  molecule,  the  aura  would  seem  to  correspond
with  the  heat-sphere;  but  unlike  the  aura,  the
size  of  the  heat- sphere  will  depend  on  the  elasticity
of  the  atoms  composing  it,  and  this  again  on  the
activity  of  its  electrons.

The  aura  which  surrounds  the  earth  has  been
called  Alkahest,  "  the  Astral  Light,"  and  the
Memoria  Mundi.  It  is  the  universal  library  of
fact  and  fiction  to  which  every  sensitive,  every
writer,  every  inventor,  every  occultist,  has  conscious
or  unconscious  access.  Not  only  does  it  contain
the  record  of  all  that  has  happened  in  the  world,
but  also  all  the  thoughts  that  have  been  projected
from  men's  minds,  and  all  the  plots  and  schemes
and  glorious  ideals  which  have  found  place  in  the
imaginations  of  sinners  and  saints  the  world  over.
This  recording  film,  this  cinemato-phonograph,  is
capable  of  reproducing  its  records  or  rather  we  are
capable  of  perceiving  them,  wherever  the  faculty
of  clairvoyance  or  clairandience  is  developed  to  a
sufficient  degree  to  be  able  to  penetrate  beyond  the
riot  of  auric  emanations  by  which  we  are  continually
and  immediately  surrounded.  But  even  without
either  clairvoyant  or  clairaudient  faculty,  we  may
contact  this  emanation  by  the  Psychometric  sense.

It  is  inferred  from  the  conditions  under  which
Psychometry  is  practised  that  the  range  of  this


312        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


sense  is  not  comparable  with  that  of  either  "  clear  "
seeing  or  hearing.  In  the  exercise  of  the  faculty  it
is  necessary  to  have  some  object  such  as  a  letter,
a  lock  of  hair,  a  glove,  belonging  to  the  person
concerning  whom  inquiry  is  made.

This  object  is  then  held  for  a  short  while  between
the  hands  of  the  psychometrist  or  "  Passive "
and  sometimes  it  is  raised  to  the  level  of  the  forehead
and  placed  between  the  eyes.

If  the  Passive  is  sufficiently  sensitive  to  get  en
rapport  with  the  subject,  there  will  arise  before
the  mind's  eye  a  series  of  pictures  or  scenes,  or  yet
only  vague  apperceptions  of  form,  colour,  distance,
locality,  time,  etc.  These  must  nevertheless  be  at
once  communicated  byword  of  mouth  to  a  Recorder,
however  detached  and  irrelevant  they  may  appear.
The  mind  of  the  Passive  must  be  kept  entirely  free
from  speculation,  reasoning  or  guessing.  If  the
automatic  facult}^  is  allowed  free  play  it  will  inevit-
ably lead  to  correct  impressions  after  it  has  been
allowed  a  certain  amount  of  free  exercise.

\^Tien  it  is  considered  how  seldom  in  daily  life
this  subconscious  self  is  allowed  to  function,  it  is
hardly  to  be  wondered  at  that  a  faculty  which  has
lain  dormant  since  childhood  should,  upon  being
aroused  by  the  will,  take  occasion  in  the  first  place
to  stretch  its  limbs  and  gather  its  forces.  Give  it
opportunity  and  time  in  which  to  carry  out  the
behests  of  the  Will,  and  it  undoubtedly  will  prove
itself  a  faithful  servant.

The  psychometric  sense  is  in  all  respects  analogous


PSYCHOMETRY


313


to  that  exercised  by  the  passive  seer  in  the  act  of
crystal-gazing  or  "scrying";  only  it  does  not
necessarily  or  generally  extend  to  vision,  but  rests
in  a  certain  apperception  or  "  impression  "  which
takes  no  definite  mental  form.

There  are,  moreover,  certain  difficulties  always
to  be  encountered  in  the  exercise  of  psychometry.
"  Clouding  "  may  result  from  a  state  of  incomplete
rapport,  which  does  not  always  rest  in  the  degree
of  sensitiveness  enjoyed  by  the  Passive.  It  may
well  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  glove  or  article
submitted  for  contact  has  not  sufficiently  strong
associations  with  the  person  to  whom  it  belongs.  A
letter,  for  instance,  has  frequently  but  slender
association  with  the  writer  of  it,  while  it  is  saturated
through  and  through  with  the  magnetism  of  the
recipient  owing  to  its  having  been  long  carried  about
by  him.

"  Overlapping  "  may  arise  from  cross-influences,
as  when  an  article,  long  in  the  possession  of  one
person,  is  given  as  a  memento  or  keepsake  to  another,
and  then  is  submitted  for  contact  b}^  the  Passive.
In  such  case  the  whole  of  the  later  associations  have
to  be  waded  through  and  obliterated  from  the  test
before  the  information  sought  concerning  the  original
possessor  can  be  arrived  at.  Meanwhile,  the
psychometric  sense  is  becoming  tired  and  blunted
in  its  perception,  so  that  little  that  is  to  the  actual
point  of  inquiry  may  be  elicited  at  first.  In  a  second
or  third  test  from  the  same  article  the  familiar
surface  ground  will  be  traversed  more  speedily  and


314         A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


there  is  then  every  likelihood  of  a  satisfactory
conclusion.

Obliquity  "  may  very  easily  result  from  the
error  of  apptying  remarks  concerning  one  set  of
impressions  to  the  wrong  person.  Thus  if  I  go  to  a
Passive  to  make  an  inquiry  about  a  person  named  A,
and  take  with  me  an  article  which  was  at  one  time
in  A's  possession,  but  has  some  time  been  held  b
me,  the  Passive  may  very  well  be  voicing  some
valuable  information  about  myself  while  I  am  erron-
eously trying  to  apply  it  to  the  subject  of  my  inquiry,
namely  A.  Until  therefore  the  Passive  has  given
some  unmistakable  indication  that  he  or  she  is
on  the  track  of  the  actual  point  of  inquiry,  care
must  be  exercised  in  the  interpretation  or  application
of  any  remarks  that  may  be  made.

It  is  usually  found  that  the  best  results  are  obtain-
able under  conditions  of  complete  isolation  both
physical  and  mental.  If  the  mind  of  the  Passive
is  troubled  about  his  own  affairs  or  is  labouring  under
the  least  degree  of  physical  discomfort,  there  will
be  a  surface-ripple  or  superficial  disturbance  of  the
mind-sphere  which  will  effectually  prevent  the
Passive  from  getting  down  to  those  still,  mysterious
depths  of  consciousness  in  which  the  secrets  of  the
ages  lie  hidden.

"  Misinterpretation  "  may  occur  in  cases  where
the  clairvoyant  faculty  lends  itself  to  the  psycho-
metric and  evolves  a  symbolic  figure  by  way  of
expression.

Thus  I  was  once  asked  to  psychometrize  an


PSYCHOMETRY


315


envelope  taken  haphazard  from  a  packet  of  papers
then  in  the  possession  of  Colonel  Olcott  at  Madras.
On  applying  the  envelope  to  my  forehead  I  was
presently  affected  with  a  sense  of  distance  and  some
degree  of  giddiness.  The  inference  was  that  I  was
in  contact  with  conditions  which  implied  estrange-
ment, loss  or  obscuration,  and*  that  the  position
referred  to  was  an  elevated  one  either  physically  or
spiritually.  Following  on  this  immediate  perception
I  saw  a  black  vault  like  an  ebon  sky  in  which  flamed
a  comet.  This  passed  away  and  nothing  more  was
seen  or  sensed.  I  suggested  that  the  comet  was  a
stranger  to  the  system,  implying  a  person  of  wander-
ing habits,  one  who  had  distinctive  merits  or  a
certain  celebrity — a  possible  "  cjniosure  for  wander-
ing eyes.''  And  then  comet — from  Latin  coma,  the
hair — was  there  an}^  suggestion  there  ?  Assuredly
there  was,  for  on  disclosure  I  saw  that  the  envelope
contained  a  lock  of  black  hair  which  I  was  told
was  that  of  Damodar  K.  Mavalankar,  a  young
student  of  Occultism,  who  had  been  fired  with  an
ambition  to  go  to  Tibet  and  who  last  was  heard  of
from  Darjeeling  before  crossing  into  Tibet.  In-
voluntarily there  sprang  to  m}^  mind  the  words  of
Tennyson  :  "  And  some  of  them  have  followed
wandering  fires,  lost  in  the  quagmire."  In  some  few
minds  there  still  lingers  a  belief — or  it  may  be  only  a
hope — that  the  pilgrim  will  one  day  return.

Another  instance  of  a  more  direct  sensing  owing
to  the  illumination  of  the  sjnubolic  element,  was
afforded  me  by  a  lady  who  had  an  eye  to  the  value


316        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


of  test  conditions.  This  lady  handed  me  a  box  of
some  three  inches  cube,  wrapped  around  with  a
paper  which  was  tied  and  sealed.  On  holding  this
in  my  hands  I  presently  perceived  a  wide  flowing
landscape  of  undulating  fields  on  which  were  cattle
grazing.  I  remarked  with  interest  that  the}^  were
of  milky  whiteness.  On  the  neck  of  one  of  superior
proportions  a  bell  was  hanging.  I  heard  this  bell
ring,  and  from  that  point  I  gathered  no  other  im-
pressions save  that  the  country  to  which  this
scene  belonged  was  Greece.

On  opening  the  package  at  request,  I  found  it
to  contain  the  box  first  mentioned,  and  within,
secure^  packed  and  stuffed  with  soft  paper— the
identical  cow-bell  of  which  I  had  received  both
clairvoyant  and  clairaudient  impression  !

Providing  the  student  is  willing  to  be  perfectly
honest  with  himself  and  frank  with  others,  there  is
nothing  that  should  prevent  him  from  acquiring
a  mass  of  first-hand  evidence  of  the  existence  and
exercise  of  this  psychometric  faculty.

I  would  particularly  recommend  a  reading  of
Denton's  The  Soul  of  Things  as  being  one  of  the
earliest  and  most  convincing  of  the  many  works
extant  dealing  with  this  subject.  i

Dowsing

The  psychometric  sense  is  very  clearly  displayed
in  the  process  of  water-finding  by  means  of  the
hazel-rod,  called  "  Dowsing."  The  following  account


PSYCHOMETRY  317


of  some  successful  experience  of  this  sort  will  prove
of  interest.

"  A  few  weeks  ago,"  says  the  Westminster  Budget
of  December  1893,  "  there  took  place  some  opera-
tions with  the  divining-rod  by  Mr.  S tears,  of  Hull,
who  was  called  to  Mr.  S.  Campion's  farm  at  East
Hesluton,  near  Malton,  to  search  for  a  water  supply.
At  that  time  he  marked  two  places  near  the  farm-
house where,  he  said,  the  presence  of  water  was
indicated  by  the  rod.  Since  then  Mr.  E.  Halliday,
plumber,  of  Malton,  has  bored  an  artesian  well  at
one  of  the  places  indicated  and  found  a  plentiful
supply  of  water  at  a  depth  of  87  feet,  after  going
through  sand,  clay  and  a  bed  of  what  Mr.  Halliday
says  is  quartz  and  lead  ore.  Mr.  Campion,  who
was  previously  without  a  supply  of  pure  water,  is
delighted  with  the  results  of  the  visit  of  the  diviner,
and  has  faith  in  the  power  of  the  rod.  These  and
other  experiments  were  conducted  in  the  presence
of  Julia  Lady  Middleton,  the  Hon.  Geoffrey  and
Mrs.  Dawnay,  Lord  Middleton 's  agent,  and  others.
Mr.  Stears  also  claims  to  be  able  to  locate  minerals
as  well  as  water,  and  affirms  that  not  one  person  in
ten  thousand  can  use  the  rod  successfully."

I  do  not  know  how  Mr.  Stears  arrives  at  his  figures,
and  I  do  not  suppose  that  one  person  in  ten  thou-
sand has  ever  attempted  to  employ  the  faculty.
As  a  fact  well  within  the  experience  of  students  of
Occultism,  and  fully  illustrated  nearly  a  century  ago
in  a  book  called  Welton's  Rod,  it  serves  but  to
enforce  the  fact  that  the  divinatory  faculty  extends


818       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


to  all  the  senses,  including  that  of  sight,  that  of
hearing,  of  smell,  of  touch,  and  even,  as  here,  the
nervous  sense  of  feeling,  which  is  not  the  same  as
touch,  but  is  an  auric  sense  extending  over  a  very
wide  area.

As  yet,  however,  the  majority  of  people  are
oblivious  of  the  fact  that  such  psychic  faculties
exist,  and  even  those  who  possess  them  and  have
them  in  something  like  working  order  are  conscious
of  having  but  little  control  over  them.  The  func-
tions of  the  higher  senses  are  as  yet  imperfectly
understood.  Every  sense  has  its  octave,  but
the  involuntary  functioning  of  any  "  sense  octave  "
is  apt  to  be  regarded  as  a  sign  of  insanity  by  those
who  have  no  knowledge  of  the  psychic  faculties.
Even  genius  has  been  related  to  insanity  and
Lombroso  and  Nordau  have  sought  to  prove  genius
is  often  a  form  of  insanity.  It  should  rather  be
regarded  as  an  exaltation  of  faculty  which  relates
its  subject  to  a  plane  of  consciousness  removed  from
one's  normal  experience  by  some  degrees.  Thus
while  new  centres  of  activity  are  being  opened  up,
and  are  as  yet  under  imperfect  control,  whole  areas
of  the  brain  are  left  in  neglect.  Hence,  to  the  casual
observer,  genius  is  not  distinguishable  from  some
incipient  forms  of  insanity.  The  eccentricity  of
genius  is  one  of  the  most  significant  indications  of
the  functioning  of  the  subconscious  part  of  the
mind.  In  just  the  same  way  the  opening  up  of
new  centres  of  activity  in  the  psychic  nature  of  man
is  frequently  attended  by  temporary  loss  of  control


PSYCHOMETRY


319


over  the  normal  brain  functions.  Loss  of  memory
(amnesia),  hysteria,  absent-mindedness,  unconscious
utterance  of  one's  thoughts,  illusions  and  hallucina-
tions, irritability,  indifference  to  one's  surroundings,
spasmodic  muscular  actions  and  similar  eccentri-
cities, are  among  the  products  which  signalize  the
evolution  of  the  newly-acquired  psychic  facult3^
These  s^'mptoms  will,  however,  subside  as  soon  as
the  new  faculty  has  been  established.  Nature  is
jealous  of  her  offspring,  and  all  her  forces  are  con-
centrated in  the  process  of  generation.  The  abnor-
malities incident  to  the  period  of  gestation  clearly
prove  this.  Once  her  end  is  attained,  however,
she  resumes  her  normal  functions.  Those  who  aim
at  the  development  of  psychic  faculties  must  there-
fore be  prepared  to  pay  toll  to  Nature,  according
gladly  whatever  she  demands  by  way  of  tribute.
"  The  universe  is  thine.  Take  what  thou  wilt,  but
pay  the  price."

And  what  is  the  price  of  seership,  of  the  divinatorj^
faculty,  of  any  of  these  superior  gifts  of  Nature  ?
What  is  it  worth  to  oneself  ?  That  is  the  price  we
may  be  expected  to  pay.


CHAPTER  XIII


DREAMS

According  to  the  Yoga  Philosophy  of  India,
the  states  of  consciousness  are  primarily  threefold  :
(1)  JagratUy  or  waking  consciousness;  (2)  Svapna,  or
sleeping  consciousness;  and  (3)  Sushupti,  or  spiritual
consciousness.  That  which  is  normal  to  the  dream-
life  is  svapna.  It  is  convenient  to  regard  the  ego
or  conscious  individual  as  a  thread  (sutrdtma,  the
thread-soul,  as  the  Hindus  call  it),  upon  which  is
a  bead  representing  the  centre  of  consciousness.
If  the  thread  be  divided  into  three  coloured  sections,
we  shall  then  have  the  three  planes  of  life  upon
which  the  centre  of  consciousness  can  function.
In  the  present  instance  we  are  concerned  with  the
middle  stage  or  plane,  that  of  dream-life.  There  is
a  neutral  or  nodal  point  separating  each  of  these
stages  of  consciousness  from  that  above  it.  As
regards  the  mass  of  people,  the  jagrata,  or  waking
consciousness,  is  the  norm.  But  in  mystics  and
visionaries  the  svapna,  or  dream-consciousness,  is
the  norm,  and  just  as  the  ordinary,  matter-of-fact
person  passes  in  sleep  from  jagrata  to  svapna,  so  the
visionary  to  whom  svapna  is  normal,  passes  in  sleep
to  sushupti.

320


DREAMS


321


This  being  understood  as  the  concomitant  result
of  variety  of  evolution  or  individual  development  as
distinguished  from  mere  intellectual  accomplishments,
we  may  next  consider  the  nature  and  cause  of  sleep
and  then  pass  to  a  study  of  dreams,  their  nature  and
significance.

During  the  activity  of  the  body  during  the  day
every  muscular  action,  every  mental  effort,  is  followed
by  the  breaking  down  of  a  number  of  minute  cells
all  of  which  discharge  their  vital  contents  into  the
system.  This  vital  content  of  the  cell  is  called  in
the  Yoga  philosophy  prdna.  It  is  like  an  electrical
charge.  So  long  as  it  remains  in  the  cell  it  can  be
used  and  directed  at  will  in  the  form  of  a  current
of  energy,  but  when  the  cell  is  broken  up  the  force
is  dissipated  into  the  free  ether  of  space,  and  goes
to  swell  the  sum  total  of  latent  energy  in  the  world.
When  this  process  of  breaking  down  has  gone  on  in  the
system  for  some  time,  the  body  is  flooded  with  the
vital  principle,  and  if  this  were  to  go  on  to  any  great
extent,  disease  and  death  would  be  the  inevitable
result.  Vitality  is  not  to  be  measured  by  the  amount
of  the  prdna  in  the  body,  but  by  the  amount  of
it  we  have  under  our  control.  There  is  a  good
deal  of  life  in  a  putrid  carcase,  but  none  of  it  is
co-ordinated  or  under  control.

For  the  purpose  of  reabsorbing  the  vitality  and
repairing  the  cellular  structure  of  the  exhausted
battery,  Nature  has  provided  that  exhaustion  shall
be  followed  by  sleep ;  as  day  is  followed  by  night  and
summer  by  winter.    When  the  powers  of  recupera-

Y


322       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


tion  become  impaired,  when  this  subtile  Archseus
passes  beyond  our  power  of  automatic  refreshing
then    age   and   disease   begin    to   assert  them
selves.

Ad  rem. — We  sleep  because  we  are  exhausted
we  awake  because  we  are  refreshed.  When  we  ar
asleep  we  dream,  because  the  immortal  soul  of  us
that  which  we  call  the  Man  (manas,  or  mind
never  sleeps,  since  it  is  never  exhausted,  and  th
transference  of  its  activity  and  of  its  dual  function
to  a  higher  or  more  interior  plane  of  consciousnes
is  the  cause  of  dreaming.

Of  what  nature,  then,  are  dreams  ?  Obviousl
they  are  only  the  perceptions  of  the  soul  in  it
middle  or  twilight  state  of  consciousness.  Dream
land  is  shadow-land,  neither  darkness  nor  pur
light,  but  a  chiaroscura  of  mingled  perceptions
Dreams  are  primarily  of  three  kinds  : —

(1)  Those  which  arise  as  memories  of  the  wakin
state  of  consciousness;  (2)  those  which  have  thei
origin  in  the  current  changes  of  thought  and  feelin
taking  place  in  the  dreaming  state;  and  (3)  thos
which  descend  as  illuminations  from  the  superio
plane  of  spiritual  consciousness.

These  three  kinds  of  dreams  may  be  called  th
memory  dream,  the  phantastic  dream,  and  the  clear
dream.  They  are  related  to  the  physical,  psychic
and  spiritual  principles  in  man.

The  transition  from  one  stage  to  another  is  calle
mutation,  and  the  sleeping  condition  is  then  know
as  the  higher  or  lower  mutative  sleep.    The  follow


DREAMS


323


ing  diagram  shows  the  various  stages  of  conscious'
ness  : —


Every  kind  of  dream  is  in  some  measure  illumina-
tive, for  even  though  the  dream  may  consist  entirely
of  our  memory-products,  it  is  the  selective  faculty
of  the  soul  which,  taking  a  little  here  and  a  little
there,  fashions  the  fabric  of  a  dream  and  builds  up
the  mosaic  from  the  multitude  of  detached  experi-
ences.   The  dream  thus  presented  to  the  mind


324        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


is  reflective  of  a  state  of  existence  which  is  interior
to  that  of  the  waking  perception  and  to  that  extent
instructive  to  it.  Excessive  or  indiscreet  feeding
will  cause  disturbed  dreams,  nightmare  and  a  sense
of  oppression,  and  this  instructs  us  that  even  though
mind  forms  matter,  it  is  certain  that  matter  condi-
tions mind,  and  that  undigested  or  unassimilated
food,  which  would  hardl}-  trouble  the  wakeful  mind,
becomes  a  source  of  impediment  to  the  soul  that
would  willingly  spread  its  wings  were  it  not  hindered
and  restrained  by  its  care  for  the  body.  A  good
tenant  cannot  go  away  upon  a  holiday  leaving  his
house  in  disorder,  for  should  he  do  so  it  would  be  a
constant  source  of  anxiety  to  him.  It  is  right  that
he  should  find  it  clean-swept  and  garnished  at  such
time  as  he  would  again  take  possession.

The  greater  number  of  dreams  are  of  this  psycho-
physiological nature  and  origin,  and  must  chiefly
be  interpreted  in  relation  to  the  body  or  those  mun-
dane events  which  bear  upon  the  immediate  personal
interests  of  the  dreamer.

Dreams  that  are  disconnected  from  the  physical
senses  are  in  the  nature  of  soul  images,  for  the
soul  thinks  in  symbols  and  understands  by  natural
interior  perception  of  their  significance.  Hence,
frequently  the  allegorical  or  symbolic  dream  carries
with  it  to  the  waking  perception  a  sense  of  its  true
significance.  All  true  dreams  can  be  interpreted
by  natural  correspondence,  and  anybody  who  is
versed  in  symbology,  not  as  an  archaeological  science
but  as  a  soul-language,   can  interpret  dreams.


DREAMS


325


But  in  order  to  apply  such  interpretations  to  the
individual  dreamer  it  is  necessary  to  know  to  what
order  in  the  sidereal  world  such  individual  may
belong.  In  so  far  as  the  individual  is  reflected
in  the  horoscope  of  birth  by  means  of  his  physical
persona,  it  becomes  possible  to  use  the  astrological
key  for  the  interpretation  of  dreams.

To  many  people  flowers  mean  sickness,  while  to
others  they  signify  jo}^  and  festivity.  A  probable
explanation  of  this  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that
certain  persons  are  in  the  habit  of  being  visited
with  gifts  of  flowers  during  illness,  and  there  is
hence  an  associated  idea  of  flowers  and  sickness;
while  others  not  so  fortunately  placed  as  to  be
recipients  of  floral  condolences  have  only  associated
flowers  with  the  brightest  days  of  their  lives,  for
flowers  belong  to  the  summer  days  and  to  the
country,  where  leisure  and  rest  are  usually  sought.

In  similar  manner  names  have  a  distinct  signi-
ficance when  closely  associated  with  events  of  our
waking  life .  Thus  I  know  a  lady  to  whom  any  name
with  the  syllable  nor  in  it  is  disastrous;  and
"  Normanhurst  "  was  lost  by  her  through  an  un-
fortunate financial  crisis;  "  Norma  "  was  the  name
of  a  fine  pedigree  St.  Bernard  dog  that  died  from
pneumonia  brought  on  by  careless  exposure  while
the  animal  was  with  the  veterinary  surgeon ;  "Norsa"
was  the  name  of  a  ship  christened  by  her  which
went  down  on  its  first  voyage;  "Norland"  was
the  name  of  a  place  in  which  her  child  was  rendered
speechless  through  a  faU  ;  and  I  regard  this  as


326        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


sufficient  reason  why,  without  being  able  to  ascribe
any  reason  for  her  prejudice,  the  name  of  Nora
puts  her  on  the  defensive  whenever  she  meets  a
person  of  that  name.  The  soul  in  the  dream-state
instinctively  surrounds  itself  with  the  images  of
those  things,  their  forms,  colours,  names,  which
in  waking  experience  have  been  associated  with
happiness  whenever  its  interior  state  is  a  happy  one ;
and,  on  the  contrary,  when  its  unclouded  perception
of  the  future  is  fraught  with  prognostics  of  evil
import,  it  throws  down  upon  the  brain  of  the  sleeping
personality  the  images  of  such  things  as,  within
the  experience  of  that  personality,  are  associated
with  danger  or  hurt  to  mind,  body  or  estate.
With  such  soHcitude  does  the  soul  watch  over  its
physical  instrument  that  it  will  forewarn  it  of  any
danger  that  is  likely  to  befall  it  providing  the
conditions  for  conveying  and  registering  such  a
message  are  present.

Similarly  the  Spirit  of  Man  watches  over  its
Psyche,  or  female  counterpart,  and  in  clear  dreaming
conveys  to  it  that  degree  of  spiritual  instruction  or
admonition  which  it  is  capable  of  receiving  or  of
which  it  has  present  need.

This  Spirit  has  its  own  imperishable  vehicle,  the
solar  body,  into  which  the  soul  or  lunar  body  is
merged  after  the  death  of  the  physical.  The
solar  body  is  called  the  "  golden  bowl,"  the  holy
grail;  the  lunar  body  or  thread-soul  is  called  the
"  silver  cord,"  and  the  physical  body  is  called

the  pitcher  "  and  the  vessel  of  clay.    Thus  in


DREAMS  327

Ecclesiastes  we  read  :  "  And  desire  shall  fail,  because
man  goetli  to  his  long  home,  and  the  mourners  go
about  the  streets  :  or  ever  the  silver  cord  be  loosed,
or  the  golden  bowl  be  broken,  or  the  pitcher  be
broken  at  the  fountain."

These  things  are  necessary  to  be  known  before  we
can  attempt  to  regulate  our  knowledge  concerning
the  nature  and  origin  of  dreams.

The  symbolism  of  dreams  has  therefore  a  three-
fold application :  a  material,  a  psychic,  and  a
spiritual  or  mental.  We  call  that  spiritual  which
arises  in  the  mind  from  the  illumination  of  the
spirit,  that  psychic  which  arises  from  the
emotions,  and  that  physical  which  has  its  origin
in  material  experiences.  The  spiritual  dream  is
distinguished  from  the  psychic  by  its  being
unattended  by  any  degree  of  emotion  as  doubt,
anxiety,  trouble  or  fear;  but  only  a  sense  of  great
beatitude,  the  mind  being  detached  from  the
vision  and  regarding  it  as  a  magnificent  spectacle.
The  psychic  dream,  on  the  contrary,  is  attended
by  a  distinct  emotional  disturbance,  and  if  the
dreamer  does  not  actually  take  an  active  part  in
the  scene  as  one  of  the  dramatis  personce,  it  at
least  identifies  itself  sympathetically  with  one  of
the  actors  and  experiences  by  repercussion  just  as
much  as  if  it  were  taking  an  active  part.  What  a
mother  feels  for  her  child  in  joy  or  sorrow,  in  pleasure
or  in  pain,  the  Psyche  feels  for  the  images  of  its
creation,  for  they  are  indeed  its  children.  It  is
^  rare,  but  nevertheless  certain,  fact  that  men


328        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


experience  in  their  physical  bodies  that  which  they
have  been  dreaming.  Thus  I  have  recently  read  of
a  man  who  dreamed  that  he  was  lying  upon  the
sands  exposed  to  a  burning  sun,  and  on  awaking
he  continued  to  experience  the  burning  sensation
in  his  face,  and  going  to  the  mirror  discovered  to
his  vast  astonishment  that  his  face  was  actually
and  most  thoroughly  sunburnt.  This  phenomenon
is  known  as  astral  repercussion.

I  once  saw  the  wraith  of  a  living  person  walk  into
the  room  where  I  was  sitting  in  company  with
others,  and  it  was  observed  that  the  wraith,  which
appeared  in  all  respects  a  figure  of  flesh  and  blood
and  properly  clothed,  knocked  his  head  against
the  projecting  corner  of  a  wardrobe  and  instantly
disappeared  in  thin  air.  The  next  morning  the
person  whose  wraith  we  had  seen  appeared  with
his  eye  bandaged  up  and  explained  that  he  had
a  bruised  swelling  and  must  have  been  stung  in
the  night  by  a  mosquito.  We,  however,  told  him  a
different  story.

Paracelsus  says  :  "  Artists  and  students  have
frequently  obtained  instruction  in  their  dreams
regarding  things  which  they  desired  to  learn.  The
imagination  was  thus  free  and  commenced  to
work  its  wonders.  It  attracted  to  it  the  Evestra
of  some  philosophers,  and  they  communicated  their
knowledge  to  them.

"  Such  occurrences  frequently  take  place,  but  it
often  happens  that  part  of  that  which  is  communi-
cated is  forgotten  on  awaking  to  the  outer  world.


DREAMS


329


In  such  case  it  is  necessary  to  observe  strict  silence,
not  to  speak  to  anybody,  nor  to  leave  the  room,
nor  take  any  note  of  things  ;  but  to  eat  nothing
and  remain  still ;  and  after  a  while  we  shall  remember
the  dream."

I  have  found  that  if,  on  awaking  frorq.  a  dream
part  of  which  is  obscure  or  forgotten,  I  continue
in  the  same  position,  keeping  my  eyes  closed  to  all
external  things,  and  then  go  over  the  dream  in  my
imagination,  the  missing  part  is  generally  restored,
as  if  I  had  dreamed  the  dream  all  over  again.
Every  one  knows  how  readily  a  disturbing  dream
may  be  dispelled  by  changing  the  position  of  the
body.  It  is  sometimes  more  convenient  to  change
the  position  of  the  mind.

"  The  astral  life,"  says  a  weU-known  occultist,

is  most  active  in  man  during  his  sleep.  The
sidereal  (solar)  man  is  then  awake  and  acts  through
the  evestrum  (or  astral  body),  causing  occasionally
prophetic  dreams,  which  the  person  will  remember
on  awaking.  But  there  are  also  elusive  dreams,
caused  by  other  influences,  and  man  must  therefore
use  his  reason  and  discrimination  to  distinguish
the  true  from  the  false."

But,  according  to  Paracelsus,  "  There  may  be
more  reliance  placed  in  dreams  than  in  the  revela-
tions of  the  necromantic  art;  because  the  latter
are  usually  false  and  deceptive,  and  although  the
element als  which  use  the  astral  bodies  of  the  dead
on  such  occasions  will  give  correct  answers  to
questions  and  often  confirm  their  assertions  with


330        A  IVIANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


oaths,  yet  no  implicit  confidence  can  be  placed  in
what  they  say  because  they  do  not  wish  to  speak
the  truth  nor  are  they  able  to  speak  it.

"  Therefore  the  patriarchs,  prophets  and  saints
preferred  visions  and  dreams  to  any  other  method
of  divination.  .  .  .  Supernatural  dreams  take
place  at  times  among  the  present  generation,  but
only  the  wise  pay  any  attention  to  them.  Others
treat  them  with  contempt,  although  such  dreams
are  true  and  do  not  deceive.

"  There  are  some  people  whose  natures  are  so
spiritual  and  their  souls  so  exalted  that  they  can
approach  the  highest  spiritual  sphere  when  their
bodies  are  asleep.  .  .  .  Dreams,  visions  and
omens  are  gifts  of  the  sidereal  man,  and  not  of  the
elementary  body.  .  .  .  The  elementary  body
has  no  spiritual  gifts,  but  the  sidereal  body  possesses
them  all.  Whenever  the  elementary  body  is  at
rest,  the  sidereal  body  is  awake  and  active,  because
the  latter  needs  neither  rest  nor  sleep ;  but  whenever
the  elementary  body  is  fuU}^  awake  and  active,
the  activity  of  the  sidereal  body  is  then  restrained,
and  its  free  movements  are  impeded  or  hindered
like  those  of  a  man  who  is  buried  ahve  in  a  tomb."

A  man  who  is  content  with  the  rushlight  of  his
own  reason  will  hardly  welcome  the  effulgent  rays
of  the  universal  sun.  What  benefit  can  such  people
derive  from  the  most  perspicuous  dream  ?

LocaHzation  of  dreams  is  a  very  remarkable
phenomenon.  Yet  almost  all  persons  have  some
select  spot,  some  haunt  to  which  they  repair  from


DREAMS


331


time  to  time  in  their  dreams.  It  is  always  the  same
place  and  thoroughly  well  known  to  the  dreamer,
though  quite  outside  all  waking  recognition.  At
such  places  one  meets  the  same  persons,  and  the
dream  is  continuous  of  that  which  preceded  it.
For  many  years  I  had  such  a  place  w^here  I  met
and  discussed  with  one  whose  name  I  afterwards
saw  in  an  old  Italian  book  of  biographies,  and  since
then  I  have  not  been  able  to  revive  the  experience  in
my  dreams.  But  I  know  that  in  some  cases  these
localizations  are  retrospective  and  are  reminiscent
of  a  former  life,  while  in  others  they  are  prospective
and  have  reference  to  a  place  and  environment
which  will  eventually  be  known  in  experience.^

"  The  interpretation  of  dreams,"  says  Paracelsus,
"  is  an  art  that  is  known  to  the  wise."  Many  books
proposing  to  interpret  dreams  have  appeared  from
time  to  time,  but  from  their  contents  it  is  readily
seen  that  they  are  designed  to  impress  the  ignorant
reader  or  to  express  the  ignorant  author,  for  by  no
rule  of  art  or  understanding  of  universal  symbolism
(which  is  the  only  language  known  to  the  soul  of
man)  can  the  interpretations  be  justified.  A  very
valuable  initiatory  w^ork  has  been  delivered  to  us  by
Emanuel  Swedenborg,  the  Swedish  seer,  in  his
Hieroglyphic  Key  to  Natural  and  Spiritual  Mysteries.
I  consider  it  a  misfortune  that  the  enhghtened  author
did  not  see  fit  to  extend  his  work,  but  so  much  as

1  See  the  Occult  Review,  August  1910,  in  which  many  remark-
able cases  are  given.


332       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


appears  is  of  the  utmost  value,  especially  when  the
sense  is  extended  beyond  the  ordinary  limit  of  the
mere  word.

The  present  work  does  not  permit  of  a  thorough
exposition  of  the  symbolism  of  dreams,  and  it  is
not  therefore  thought  advisable  to  attempt  the  task
of  formulating  a  system  of  interpretation.  Such  a
system,  however,  does  exist  and  has  been  reflected
in  all  the  scriptures  of  all  peoples  from  time
immemorial.  The  universe  and  man  are  consen-
taneous. There  is  an  universal  symbolism,  an
universal  language,  and — if  you  please — an  universal
Dream-book.    But  this  same^book  needs  reading.


CHAPTER  XIV
SORTILEGES

Among  all  the  methods  of  divination  which
have  found  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  uninitiated,
none  has  received  greater  recognition  than  that
of  sortileges  or  "  drawing  lots."  Admitting  the
sanctity  which  attaches  to  any  body  of  scripture
to  be  acknowledged  by  the  consultant,  what  method
of  obtaining  a  knowledge  of  the  will  of  Heaven
could  be  more  facile  or  more  dependable  than  to
take  haphazard  a  text  from  the  revealed  Word  ?

The  Bible  among  Christians,  the  Koran  among
Mohammedans,  and  the  religious  books  among
various  nations  have  been  consistently  used  for
purposes  of  divination  by  sortilege.  Various  of
the  religious  books  of  India  are  consulted  in  the
same  manner,  and  like  ourselves  they  have  books
constructed  for  purposes  of  divination.  In  all
sortileges  drawn  from  holy  writ  the  direct  action
of  the  divinatory  faculty  is  relied  upon,  and  the  lot
drawn  is  accepted  as  the  expressed  will  of  Heaven
in  regard  to  the  matter  about  which  the  inquiry
is  made;  the  belief  in  such  a  divination  being  that

333


334        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


the  Spirit  not  only  directs  the  mind  to  this  means
of  resolving  its  doubts,  but  also  guides  the  hand
to  an  appropriate  and  true  selection.

In  the  case  of  books  constructed  specially  for  the
purpose  of  divination,  of  which  there  are  a  great
number,  the  automatic  or  divinatory  faculty  is
by  means  of  numbers,  geomantic  points  and  other
intermediaries,  so  that  in  effect  the  diviner  is  guided
to  a  sortilege  or  oracular  sentence  which  is  designedly
in  apposition  to  the  question  and  presumed  to  satisfy
it,  being  favourable  or  otherwise  according  to  the
lot  or  number  involved.

The  usual  method  of  making  such  books  of  divma-
tion  is  to  formulate  a  certain  number  of  questions,
from  which  the  diviner  may  choose  such  as  answer
nearest  to  the  matter  in  hand,  and  then  to  arrange
a  codex  by  which  each  question  is  related  to  a  variety
of  answers,  so  that  at  some  point  or  other  in  the
process  the  automatic  faculty  may  avail  itself  of
the  element  of  "  chance."  Thus,  while  there  is  a
great  variety  of  methods,  the  principal  factor  in  all
cases  is  the  exercise  of  the  automatic  or  divinatory
faculty.

And  if  we  rightly  consider  the  matter  there  is  no
reason  why  such  sortileges  should  not  be  true  and
effective,  for  it  is  constantly  under  observation
that  problems  which  cannot  be  solved  by  the  volun-
tary exercise  of  the  faculties  will  be  speedily  and
successfully  surmounted  by  the  automatic  or
involuntary  action  of  the  brain.  Such  cases  are  on
record  in  connection  with  the  experience  of  som-


SORTILEGES


335


nambulism  or  sleep-walking,  from  which  it  appears
that  a  person  may  retire  to  sleep  with  the  mind  in  a
state  of  anxiety  concerning  some  problem  of  study,
some  article  lost,  some  circumstance  forgotten,  and
during  sleep  the  person  will  rise  from  his  bed
and  go  about  without  harm  or  danger  to  himself
and  accomplish  with  great  ease  that  which  had  been
upon  his  mind  before  falling  asleep.  The  morning
finds  the  problem  solved,  the  lost  article  restored,
the  forgotten  incident  carefully  set  down  in  Avriting.
These  facts  prove  two  things  :  (1)  that  the  soul  of
man  knows  more  than  it  can  impress  upon  a  tired
or  disturbed  brain ;  and  (2)  that  all  action  is  fol-
lowed by  reaction.  Concerning  the  first  of  these,  it
is  well  known  that  intuitive  knowledge  transcends
reason  and  that  instinct  surpasses  the  highest  use
of  the  senses.  What  intuition  is  to  the  mmd  of
man,  instinct  is  to  the  animal  soul.  Both  are  in
the  nature  of  direct  and  unerring  knowledge,  but
the  one  is  related  to  the  imponderable  and  the  other
to  the  material  world.  When  the  brain  is  at  rest,
and  when  Reason,  the  great  Doubter,  has  done  its
best  and  failed,  then  the  soul  is  able  to  throw  down
the  images  of  its  thought  upon  the  clear  and  unruffled
surface  of  the  mind,  as  if  it  should  say,  "  Be  still
and  know  that  I  am  the  lord  !  "

As  to  the  second  deduction  from  experience,  one
may  quote  Scripture  to  the  same  effect  :  Ask  and
ye  shall  receive;  seek  and  ye  shall  find;  knock
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  But  it  is  also
possible,  and  to  the  ordinary  mind  may  be  more


336       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


acceptable  to  cite  a  common  experience  of  every-
day life.  A  name  is  forgotten  which  it  is  important
should  be  recollected;  we  worry  over  it,  we  twist
and  turn  about  in  the  storehouse  of  the  memory  to
find  that  particular  name;  we  go  through  the
alphabet  in  the  hope  of  getting  a  lead-off  in  the  right
direction  from  the  initial  letter;  we  make  various
futile  attempts  at  a  combination  of  sounds;  but
all  to  no  purpose.  We  give  it  up  and  turn  for  dis-
traction to  some  other  theme.  No  sooner  has  the
attention  become  entirely  diverted  than,  spontan-
eously and  perfectly,  the  much-sought  name  springs
to  the  brain,  the  eye,  the  tongue  on  the  instant.

The  moral  of  this  is  :  When  you  have  ploughed
and  sown,  leave  the  harvest  to  Nature ;  or,  as  I  have
heard  it  otherwise  put  :  "  When  you  can't  crack  a
nut,  give  it  to  a  monkey,"  which  means,  I  take  it,
that  Nature  is  all-sufficient  and  that  what  she  can
make  she  can  break,  by  one  means  or  another.
And  this  is  the  faith  of  the  devout ;  for,  having  tried
by  all  rightful  means  to  compass  an  end,  and  finding
the  task  beyond  his  powers,  a  man  does  well  to  leave
the  issue  in  higher  hands.  By  doing  so  he  affirms
his  faith  in  the  beneficent  power  of  his  Creator.

An  instance  of  the  kind  of  sortileges  referred  to
as  "  indirect,"  may  be  found  in  the  "  Wheel  of
Pythagoras,"  though  it  is  difficult  to  trace  any
connection  between  this  and  the  philosopher  of
Croton.  A  person  desires  an  answer  to  a  question.
Such  answer  may  be  propitious  or  adverse,  of
immediate  fulfilment,  or  delayed,  according  to  the


SORTILEGES


337


quarter  of  the  heavens  to  which  the  divination
refers.

The  letters  of  the  alphabet  are  valued  for  this
purpose  as  follows  : —

2  Y  11  UN  21  G

3Z  12ELRP       26  C

4  A  F  S  13  X  28  H

6  BT  16  K

8  Q  18  DW

9  OUV  19  M

The  days  of  the  week,  with  their  corresponding
numbers  and  the  planets  governing  them,  together
with  their  numbers,  are  contained  in  the  following
Table  :—


SUN.

MON.

TUES,

WED.

THURS.

FRI.

106

52

52

102

31

68

45

34

45

39

114

78

45

55

0

D

6

?

h

In  order  to  effect  the  divination,  it  is  first  of  all
necessary  that  the  diviner  should  think  of  a  number,
and  set  it  down.  To  this  must  be  successively  added  :

1.  The  initial  of  the  Christian  name.

2.  The  number  of  the  day  of  the  week.

3.  The  number  of  the  planet  answering  to  the  day.
The  sum  of  these  four  numbers  is  then  to  be

divided  by  30,  and  with  what  remains  the  diviner
must  refer  to  the

z


338       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Wheel  of  Pythagoras.


If     /  3.  ^.p'

/<9.  20.  2/.  \  \\

/   9.  //.  /J./^

2^,  26.  2/.  \  U

I    ^  .6 .  /2.

p  p    p  ^  p  /9  \

\V      \ /P.  23,

2  9  30  /  II

If  the  number  is  found  in  the  1st  quarter  of  the
Heavens,  success  will  come  speedily.

If  in  the  2nd  quarter,  success  will  be  delayed.

If  in  the  3rd  quarter,  failure  will  be  met  with
speedily.

If  in  the  4th  quarter,  failure  will  attend  in  the
end,  and  after  delay.

Moreover,  the  four  quarters  correspond  to  the
seasons,  I  Spring,  II  Summer,  IV  Autumn,  III
Winter.


SORTILEGES


339


Also  to  the  four  physical  types,  I — tall  and  fair,
II — short  and  fair,  III — short  and  dark,  IV — tall
and  dark.

If  the  question  be  in  regard  to  time  of  day,  its
Spring  corresponds  to  the  morning,  the  Summer
to  the  afternoon,  the  Autumn  to  the  evening,  and
the  Winter  to  the  night.

Here  it  will  be  seen  that  the  divination  is  regulated
from  the  commencement  of  the  number  thought  of
in  connection  with  the  subject  of  inquiry.

When  in  India  I  learned  a  system  of  arudha,  i.  e.
the  undiscovered,  which  is  based  entirely  on  this
occult  law  of  the  geometrical  relations  of  thought.
By  means  of  this  I  have  constantly  been  able  to
find  things  that  were  lost  and  to  give  circumstantial
answers  to  questions  propounded,  to  define  the
nature  of  a  person's  thoughts  and  perform  many
other  apparently  marvellous  feats.  But  the  only
marvellous  thing  in  the  whole  matter  is  the  aforesaid
correspondence,  which  exists  between  a  person's
thoughts  and  the  number  which  spontaneously
springs  into  his  mind  in  association  with  such
thoughts.  An  instance  or  two  will  suffice  to  show
the  method  followed.

On  taking  our  places  at  table  one  evening,  my
vis-a-vis  suddenly  discovered  that  her  coral  necklace
with  pendants  in  gold  had  disappeared.  I  at  once
engaged  to  find  it  for  her.  After  dwelling  intently
on  the  image  of  the  thing  in  her  mind  she  gave  me
the  number  43.  I  then  said  she  had  been  a  short
journey  and  that  the  necklace  was  lost  at  a  place

Z  2


340       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


where  there  was  an  iron  fencing,  and  that  she  would
know  the  spot  by  the  fact  that  a  horse  was  standing
close  to  it.  I  assured  her  she  would  recover  the
articles,  and  on  learning  that  she  had  only  been  for
a  short  walk  of  a  mile  or  tAvo  along  the  riverside,
I  elected  to  go  in  search  of  the  thing  myself,  which
I  did  without  delay,  fearing  that  the  conditions
which  then  obtained  would  presently  alter.  Walk-
ing quickly  in  the  direction  indicated,  I  found
the  footpath  by  the  river  flanked  b}^  continuous
hedges  and  trees,  beyond  which  were  fields.  But
at  last  I  came  to  a  place  where  the  hedgerow  was
broken  and  some  old  iron  rails  had  been  set  to
fill  the  gap,  and  there  also  was  the  horse  with  his
head  over  the  railings.  It  was  now  quite  dusk,
and  I  had  to  strike  several  matches  in  succession
to  obtain  light  enough.  But  almost  the  first  thing
I  saw  was  the  broken  necklace,  not  much  scattered,
upon  the  ground ;  and  I  returned  with  it  in  complete
satisfaction.

Speaking  of  this  system  to  a  gathering  of  occult
students  on  a  recent  occasion,  I  was  asked  to  give
them  an  illustration  of  it.  I  therefore  asked  my
hostess  to  think  of  any  event  in  her  past  life,  as,
for  example,  marriage,  and  then  give  me  the  first
number  that  came  into  her  mind.  But  I  warned
her  not  to  think  of  her  marriage,  as  I  had  suggested
it.  Presently  she  gave  me  the  number  25.  I  was
surprised,  and  my  first  comment  was  that  she  had
thought  of  something  connected  with  her  marriage.
On  admitting  that  this  was  the  case,  I  said  it  con-


SORTILEGES


341


cemed  a  short  journej^  a  removal  from  the  house,
and  a  jewel  which  was  a  gold  ring  set  with  a  blue
stone,  most  probably  a  turquoise.

In  confirming  this  divination,  the  lady  informed
us  that  she  had  set  out  for  a  drive  with  her  husband,
starting  from  home,  and  had  met  with  an  accident,
in  which  she  lost  a  gold  ring  set  with  a  turquoise,
and  that  was  the  subject  of  her  thought.  The
ring  had  been  a  wedding  present.

Another  kind  of  sortilege  or  divination  akin  to  it,
but  somewhat  in  the  nature  of  a  Kabala,  is  contained
in  a  manuscript  by  Borri  written  in  old  Italian.
The  method  is  as  follows  : — A  question  of.  any  sort
being  written  down,  the  number  of  words  in  the
sentence  are  noted  and  successively  the  number  of
the  letters  in  each  of  the  words.  These  numbers
are  set  in  a  row,  and  are  then  added  by  pairs  from
right  to  left,  the  nines  being  excluded  and  the
remainders  set  down  in  a  second  row.  The  same
process  is  followed  out  continuously  until,  at  length
only  two  numbers  remain  to  be  added  together,  and
the  sum  of  them  gives  the  final  number,  which  may
be  1,  3,  5,  7,  or  9  on  the  one  hand,  or  on  the  other
2,  4,  6,  or  8.  If  the  number  be  odd,  the  result  is
adverse;  but  if  even,  the  augury  is  good.

An  example  will  serve  for  all  cases.  Let  the
question  be —

Will  my  operation  be  successful  ?  The  number  of
the  words  is  5,  and  the  number  of  letters  in  the  words
successively  are  4,  2,  9,  2,  1.  The  word  successful
has  ten  letters,  but  rejecting  the  nine,  1  is  left.  These


342        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


figures  are  then  set  out  in  order  from  left  to  right  :

5  4  2  9  2  ]
9  6  2  2  3
6  8  4  5
5  3  9
8  3
2

and  added  together  in  pairs,  rejecting  the  nines  when
the  sum  of  an}^  two  exceeds  that  number.  As  a
final  result  we  have  the  figure  2,  which  shows  that
the  operation  will  be  successful,  and  that  speedily ;
for  the  smaller  the  number  the  quicker  will  be  the
realization  of  the  good  or  evil  thus  prognosticated.

From  a  similar  configuration  Cagliostro,  following
the  methods  of  the  Illuminati,  would  have  foretold
that  the  winning  number  of  the  next  lottery  would
be  22,246;  but  his  method  was  more  complex  and
involved  the  extraction  of  a  series  of  numbers.
The  divination  in  the  above  example  rests  upon  the
unpremeditated  and  spontaneous  use  of  words
which  are  employed  to  express  the  question  in  mind.
It  is  perhaps  needless  to  add  that  the  forcing  of  a
sentence  by  studied  art  is  not  in  the  nature  of  an
appeal  to  the  automatic  or  subconscious  part  of
one's  nature,  and  no  reliance  can  be  placed  upon
an  answer  thus  obtained.  Neither  is  it  possible
to  successfully  engage  the  divinatory  faculty  upon
all  and  trivial  occasions.  The  use,  as  distinguished
from  the  abuse  of  the  faculty,  consists  in  its  employ-
ment only  upon  serious  occasions  and  concerning
issues  which  cannot  be  otherwise  known.


SORTILEGES


343


There  is  in  Nature  a  conspiracy  between  the
voHtional  faculty  and  the  rational  faculty,  and
another  between  the  automatic  faculty  and  the
intuitive  faculty,  and  these  alliances  are  set  in
opposition  to  each  other,  so  that  the  ascendency  of
the  one  means  the  subjugation  of  the  other.  This
being  understood,  and  also  that  the  Rational  Soul
and  the  Psyche  are  opposed  to  one  another  by
nature  and  constitution  and  method,  the  one  being
as  it  were  the  man  and  the  other  the  woman  within
us,  there  remains  to  us  the  choice  of  either.  But  in
the  Adept,  who  has  brought  his  nature  into  equili-
brium and  has  celebrated  the  Nuptials  of  the  Soul,
these  two  act  as  one  to  the  production  of  the  most
perfect  results.


ALCHEMY


It  has  always  been  within  the  scope  of  practical
magic  to  attempt  the  Magnum  Opus,  which  consists
in  the  production  of  the  Elixir  Vitce  and  the  Lapis
Philosophorum.  Those  who  have  failed  in  the
great  work  have  consoled  themselves  with  the  belief
that  there  is  an  alchemy  of  the  soul  of  greater
consequence  to  immortal  man  than  the  mere  trans-
mutation of  gross  metals.  Hence  we  have  the  two
schools,  everywhere  in  evidence  in  the  literature
of  this  subject,  the  Alchemists  who  claimed  that  all
metals  sprang  originally  from  a  single  menstruum
and  are  convertible  by  art ;  and  the  Higher  Alchem-
ists or  Mystics,  who  saw  in  the  principles  and  pre-
scriptions of  the  spagyric  art  nothing  but  a  sublime
system  of  spiritual  philosophy  having  direct  reference
to  the  spiritual  regeneration  of  man.

The  Alchemists  affirmed  that  the  ens  of  gold  or
silver  could  be  extracted  and  a  subtile  tincture  made
by  which  all  the  gross  metals  such  as  copper,  lead,
etc.,  could  be  impregnated  and  changed  to  the  pure
gold  or  silver,  copper  lending  itself  more  agreeably
to  the  tincture  of  gold  and  lead  to  that  of  silver.

344


ALCHEMY


845


They  affirmed,  moreover,  that  this  ens  of  gold  could
be  fixed  and  rendered  as  a  red  ''powder  of  projection"
which,  being  applied  alchemically  to  Mercury,  would
change  it  into  gold.

"  All  metals  in  the  earth  are  generated  from
Mercury,"  says  one  writer,  "  and  thus  Mercury  is
the  first  matter  or  prima  materia  of  all  metals."

Avicenna  illustrates  this  dictum,  to  which  he
gives  consent,  when  he  says  :  "As  ice,  which  by
heat  is  dissolved  into  water,  is  clearly  generated  out
of  water,  so  all  metals  may  be  resolved  into  Mercury,
whence  it  is  clear  that  they  are  generated  out  of  it."

Bernard  of  Trevisa  is  quoted  to  the  same  effect  : —

"  Similarly  quicksilver  is  the  substance  of  all
metals :  it  is  as  a  water  by  reason  of  the  homogeneity
which  it  possesses  with  vegetables  and  animals,
and  it  receives  the  virtues  of  those  things  which
adhere  to  it  in  decoction."  And  he  further  says  :
"  Gold  is  nothing  but  quicksilver  congealed  by  its
sulphur."

Elsewhere  he  says  :  "  The  solvent  differs  from  the
soluble  only  in  proportion  and  degree  of  digestion,
but  not  in  matter,  since  Nature  has  formed  the  one
out  of  the  other  without  any  addition,  even  as  by
a  process  equally  simple  and  wonderful  she  evolves
gold  out  of  quicksilver."

Now,  in  the  name  of  Occultism  I  affirm  that  the
conclusions  of  Bernard  Trevisan  are  as  fully  entitled
to  credence  among  the  scientific  as  that  of  Sir  William
Crookes,  whose  Protyle  or  Mother-substance  lies  at
the  base  of  all  modifications  of  matter,  and  is  respons-


346        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


ible  for  the  genesis  of  the  elements.  The  same
daring  thinker  has  been  credited  with  the  statement,
though  I  have  not  mj^self  seen  it,  that  it  is  scientific-
ally conceivable  that  we  may  take  copper  or  any
other  metal  and,  having  resolved  it  into  that  prime
element  from  which  it  is  a  differentiation,  thereafter
shunt  it  on  to  the  lines  which  make  for  gold.

The  alchemical  idea  is  that  all  metals  are  generated
from,  and  are  indeed  only  modifications  of,  a
primum  ens  or  original  matter,  and  that  they  are
mutually  convertible ;  the  medium  in  all  cases  being
Mercury,  which  is  the  coagulated  menstruum  of
this  Mother-substance.

Again  :  The  sages  have  it  that  gold  is  nothing
but  quicksilver  perfectly  digested  in  the  bowels  of  the
earth,  and  they  have  signified  that  this  is  brought
about  by  sulphur,  which  coagulates  the  Mercury  and
digests  it  by  its  own  heat.  Hence  the  sages  have
said  that  gold  is  nothing  hut  mature  quicksilver ^

Certainly  it  does  not  seem  improbable  that
chemical  science  should  be  able  to  bring  about  in
a  short  time  that  which  Nature  produces  in  the
course  of  years  or  even  ages.  And  the  alchemists
may  be  right  in  their  assertion  that  all  metals  have
a  common  base  in  Mercury,  and  that  this  Mercury
is  the  menstruum  of  all  metals,  and  itself  the  coagu-
late of  the  Prima  Materia.  We  do  not  know  cer-
tainly what  these  metals  are,  nor  by  what  process
they  are  delivered  to  us  by  Nature,  but  we  know

1  The  Alchemical  Writings  of  Edward  Kelly,  by  A.  E.  Waite.
London  :  Wm.  Rider  and  Son,  Ltd.


ALCHEMY


347


that  primarily  they  all  come  from  the  same  homo-
geneous and  universal  substance,  which  some  call
ether,  others  protyle,  the  elementum,  akasa,  primum
ens;  meaning,  in  effect,  one  and  the  same  thing.

The  honour  of  having  revived  the  principles  of
Alchemy  is  accorded  to  Hermes  the  Thrice  Great,
and  hence  it  is  called  the  Hermetic  Art.  According
to  Bernard  of  Trevisa,  Hermes  found  seven  tablets
of  stone  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Hebron,  on  which  the
principles  of  the  seven  liberal  arts  had  been  inscribed
before  the  flood.  From  Hebron  the  arts  penetrated
to  Persia,  Chaldaea,  and  Egypt ;  and  were  variously
called  by  them  Magia,  Kabala,  and  Sophia.

The  principles  of  Alchemy  have  a  dual  application,
the  spiritual  and  the  terrestrial ;  and  these  are  repre-
sented by  the  Triangle  and  the  Square,  or  the
Pyramid  and  the  Cube,  or  again  the  square  pyramid,
i.  e.  a  pyramid  with  a  square  base,  the  area  of  which
base  is  equal  to  the  area  of  a  circle  whose  radius  is
the  perpendicular  axis  of  the  pyramid.  Such  a
pyramid  is  that  which  was  completed  by  Khufu  or
Cheops  under  the  superintendence  of  one  of  the
Hyksoi.  "  The  One  emaned  the  Three,  the  Three
evolved  the  Seven,"  as  expressed  in  the  symbol
on  page  348.

When  reversed  we  find  the  Mason's  Apron,  part
of  the  insignia  of  the  craft,  but  the  fact  that  the
thing  is  worn  upside  down  need  not  trouble  us,  for
we  know  that  the  Little  Man  or  Microcosmos  is
but  the  inverted  reflection  of  the  Grand  Man  or
Macrocosmos.


348       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Alchemy  teaches  us  also  that  the  elements  are
mutually  convertible,  and  how  one  comes  to  pre-
dominate over  others  and  whence  the  substance  of
metals  is  generated.  The  Four  Elements  were
figuratively  spoken  of  as  Fire,  Air,  Water  and  Earth,
and  their  qualities  are  fourfold,  hot,  cold,  moist  and


dry.  Two  are  imponderable  and  two  heavy.  The
substance  of  all  metals  is  the  living  Mercury,  as
distinguished  from  quicksilver.  To  this  Nature
added  sulphur  and  also  salt,  and  these  three  things
digested  together  and  coagulated.

"  The  mineral  principles  are  living  Mercury  and
sulphur.  From  these  are  generated  all  metals  and
minerals,  of  which  there  are  many  species,  possessing
diverse  natures."


ALCHEMY


849


Gold  is  a  perfect  body,  of  pure,  clear  red  Mercury,
and  pure,  fixed,  red,  incombustible  sulphur."

Primum  Ens
Sulphur — Mercury — Salt
Gold

With  what  perfect  facility  the  writings  of  the
ancient  Alchemists  lend  themselves  to  the  higher
interpretation  may  be  illustrated  by  an  extract,
which  formed  part  of  the  treatise  written  for  the
edification  of  King  Rudolf  of  Hungary  by  Edward
KeUy  :—

"  When  the  soul  of  gold  has  been  separated  from
its  body,  or  when  the  body,  in  other  words,  has. been
dissolved,  the  body  of  the  Moon  should  be  watered
by  its  proper  menstruum  and  reverberated,  the
operation  being  repeated  as  often  as  is  necessary,
^.  e.  until  the  body  (of  the  Moon)  becomes  supple,
broken  up,  pure,  dissolved,  coagulated.  This  is
done,  not  with  common  fire,  but  with  that  of  the
Sages,  and  at  last  you  must  see  clearty  that  nothing
remains  undissolved.  For  unless  the  Moon  or
Earth  is  properly  prepared  and  entirely  emptied
of  its  soul,  it  will  not  be  fit  to  receive  the  Solar  seed ;
but  the  more  thoroughly  the  Earth  is  cleansed  of
its  impurity  and  earthiness,  the  more  vigorous  it
will  be  in  the  fixation  of  its  ferment.  This  earth
or  Moon  of  the  Sages  is  the  trunk  upon  which
the  solar  branch  of  the  Sages  is  engrafted.  This
earth  with  its  water,  putrefies  and  is  cleansed;  for


350        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


heat,  acting  on  a  dry  substance,  causes  whiteness.
Azoth  and  fire  wash  Laton,  or  earth,  and  remove
its  opacity."

Obviously,  the  Mystic,  who  has  no  sense  of  the
greed  of  gold  in  him,  who  regards  values  as  in  relation
only  to  their  ultimate  products,  and  finds  the  virtue
of  all  things  to  consist  only  in  their  uses,  may  be
justified  in  his  Higher  Alchem}^  He  reads  the
above  quotation,  not  literally,  but  allegorically,
and  paraphrases  in  accord  with  his  perceptions,
somewhat  as  follows  : —

When  the  spiritual  Soul  is  freed  by  death  from
the  body,  the  animal  soul  reverts  to  its  own  sphere
and  is  afterwards  reincarnated,  the  operation  taking
place  as  often  as  is  necessary,  in  fact,  until  it  has
become  so  highly  evolved  as  to  constitute  an  apt
matrix  for  the  implanted  germ  of  the  solar  body.
And  this  is  to  be  effected,  not  by  means  of  the  ter-
restrial, but  the  celestial  fire,  which  is  the  Fire  of  the
Holy  Spirit ;  and  at  length  it  will  come  to  pass,  after
many  incarnations,  that  the  Lunar  Body  or  astral  soul
will  be  purged  of  all  impurities.  For  unless  the  astral,
and  the  physical  by  means  of  the  astral,  is  entirely
emptied  of  its  soul  which  is  the  brute  or  passional
nature,  and  the  cupidity  of  the  lower  mind,  it  will
not  be  fit  to  receive  the  spiritual  seed.  But  the
more  completely  the  lower  nature  is  purged,  the  more
perfect  will  be  the  union  of  the  spiritual  soul  with
its  Psyche.  This  Psyche  is  the  stock  upon  which  is
engrafted  the  spiritual  branch  bearing  seed  fruit,
whose  seed  is  in  itself,  a  tree  springing  up  as  a  Tree


ALCHEMY


351


of  Life.  The  body,  with  its  astral  or  fluidic  counter-
part, putrefies  and  is  cleansed;  for  the  fire  of  the
Spirit,  acting  on  the  dry  substance  of  the  dead  body
of  Adam,  produces  in  it  a  whiteness  and  purity
and  renders  it  crystalline  by  the  removal  of  its  gross
elements.  Thus  the  whole  body  becomes  full  of
light,  spiritualized  and  free  from  corruption,  and  the
Psyche  partakes  of  the  immortality  of  the  Solar  Man.

The  key  to  this  interpretation  is  as  here  shown
in  the  glyph  of


The  Great  Resolvent.


0  Spiritual  Soul  or  Solar  Body.

])  Animal  Soul  or  Lunar  Body.
0  Terrestrial  Soul  or  Earth  Body.

$   The  Human  Soul  or  Intelligence  Principle.


Yet  it  would  be  altogether  foolish  to  presume  the


352       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


Higher  Alchemy  of  the  Mystic  to  be  the  only  possible
application  of  the  Arcana.  The  spiritual  interpreta-
tion infers  the  material  in  this  world  of  relativity.
The  one  is  based  upon  the  other.  They  are  in  apposi-
tion. The  salting  of  the  earth  is  the  work  of  the
Initiates  of  all  ages.  They  themselves  have  effected
the  Higher  Alchemy  of  the  Soul,  or  they  possess
the  key  to  the  lower  or  chemical  art,  for  they
know  the  correspondence  of  things  spiritual  and
natural.  If  the  Abbot  of  Glastonbury  essayed  the
Magnum  Opus  before  he  was  himself  prepared,  he
had  only  himself  to  blame  that  his  vessels  w^ere
overturned  by  the  elemental  forces  he  invoked
without  understanding ;  for  one  inversion  is  followed
by  another,  and  the  material  can  never  take  pre-
cedence of  the  spiritual  without  incurring  great
risk  of  hurt.  Hence,  the  admonition  :  Seek  ye  first
the  Kingdom  of  God  and  all  these  things  shaU  be
added  unto  you.

But  what  was  found  by  the  despoilers  included
only  a  manuscript  and  two  small  ivory  vessels,  one
containing  a  red  powder  and  the  other  a  white
powder ;  and  these,  for  the  sum  of  one  guinea,  passed
into  the  possession  of  Edward  Kelly,  who  afterwards
allied  himself  to  Dr.  Dee.  Then  later  on  we  find
these  two  colleagues  engaged,  under  the  patronage
of  King  Rudolph,  in  making  transmutation,  for
which  work  Kelly  obtained  the  distinctions  of  a
Marshal.  That  Kelly  was  no  Alchemist,  but  only
a  usurper  and  profligate  user  of  the  treasure  trove
of  Glastonbury,  appears  from  the  fact  that  "  the


ALCHEMY


353


powder,  diminished  by  excessive  projection,  became
exhausted;  it  was  squandered  still  further  in  futile
attempts  to  increase  it;  and  when  the  Emperor
(Rudolph)  commanded  his  guests  to  produce  it  in
becoming  quantity,  all  experiments  proved  failures.
.  .  .  The  impotence  of  the  exhausted  Alchemist
was  attributed  to  obstinacy,  and  the  guest  was
changed  into  a  prisoner  .  .  .  confined  in  a  dungeon
of  Zobeslau.  To  regain  his  liberty  he  promised
to  manufacture  the  stone,  on  condition  that  he
was  permitted  to  return  to  Prague  and  take
counsel  with  Dr.  Dee.  To  that  city  he  was  per-
mitted to  go  back,  but  his  house  was  guarded,  and
as  fresh  experiments  in  the  composition  of  the  trans-
muting powder  were  abortive  as  ever,  the  alchemist,
seized  with  rage,  made  a  futile  attempt  to  escape,
which  ended  in  the  murder  of  one  of  his  guards."  ^
This  incident  resulted  in  a  second  imprisonment,
and  although  at  the  instance  of  Dr.  Dee,  Queen
Elizabeth  was  pleased  to  claim  Kelly  as  her  subject,
the  King  of  Hungary  would  not  release  him,  but
held  him  on  the  grounds  of  the  murder  of  one  of
his  own  subjects.  From  this  second  incarceration
Kelly  attempted  to  escape  by  means  of  a  rope,
but  falling  from  a  height  he  sustained  injuries  which
led  to  his  death  at  the  age  of  forty-two.  Sir  Edward
Kelly  was  born  at  Worcester  on  the  1st  August
(O.S.),  1555,  at  about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,
and  those  who  care  to  examine  his  horoscope  will

1  Edward  Kelly :  Alchemy  and  the  Alchemist Sy  by  Louis
Figuier.

A  A


354       A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


observe  that  the  conjunction  of  Mars,  Uranus  and
Jupiter  in  the  Midheaven  is  in  singular  conformity
with  his  strange  and  eventful  career,  promising  as
it  does  a  rich  windfall  fraught  with  the  danger  of
the  Sword  in  the  Balance  !  Nor  is  it  possible
to  overlook  the  significance  of  the  planet  Neptune
in  opposition  from  the  lower  meridian,  with  its
sinister  indication  of  plots  and  schemes  directed
against  his  person  and  reputation;  in  which  event
one  sees  that  this  exploiter  of  treasure  trove  and
usurper  of  the  supreme  title  of  Adeptus  came  by
some  of  his  own  in  the  final  settling  of  accounts.
That  he  was  actually  possessed  of  the  Powder  of
Projection  and  the  method  of  Projection,  there
seems  no  reason  to  doubt,  for  else  he  had  not
been  able  to  satisfy  the  numerous  demands
of  his  royal  patron  and  newly-made  friends  at
Prague.  But  that  he  was  not  master  of  the  art
and  had  no  knowledge  or  means  of  increasing  the
Powder  of  Projection  or  making  more,  even  when
it  would  have  saved  his  life,  not  to  mention  the
satisfaction  of  his  own  cupidity,  is  also  a  matter
beyond  all  question.  His  writings  on  the  alchemical
art  are  chiefly  valuable  on  account  of  their  reference
to  the  writings  of  others.  There  is,  however,  the
great  probability  that  the  Book  of  St.  Dunstan,  as
it  is  called,  and  so  mentioned  by  Dr.  Dee,  in  connec-
tion with  "  the  powder  found  at  the  digging  in
England,"  is  the  original  manuscript  of  the  Glaston-
bury sage,  or  at  least  founded  upon  it,  and  so  of
much  value  to  the  purpose  of  this  inquiry.  There


ALCHEMY


355


seems  to  be  some  warrant  for  the  belief  that  Kelly
did,  so  far  as  his  knowledge  extended,  seek  to  satisfy
the  demands  of  King  Rudolph,  inasmuch  as  he
hoped  thereby  to  regain  his  liberty.  The  King,
however,  was  not  to  be  appeased  by  obscure  dis-
courses on  the  Hermetic  Art.  He  wanted  the  plain
rules  of  procedure  for  the  making  of  gold,  and  this
Kelly  could  not  give  him.  Yet  for  all  that  there  is
reason  to  think  that  he  probably  gave  him  of  his
best.

Beside  the  art  of  the  Transmutation  of  Metals,
the  Alchemic  Art  is  applied  to  the  production  of
certain  powerful  medicines,  including  the  Elixir
Vitce,  Paracelsus  has  stated  that  there  is  a  gold
which  can  be  rendered  permanently  fluid — an
aurum  potahile,  and  he  speaks  also  of  the  production
of  Tinctura  Physica  in  a  work  of  that  name.  He
has  left  us  a  prescription  for  the  making  of  the
magic  Electrum,  a  combination,  according  to
alchemic  art,  of  the  seven  "  primary  metals."  He
also  gives  instructions  for  the  making  of  the  Primum
Ens  Melissce  and  the  Primum  Ens  Sanguinis.  I  am
of  opinion  that  Paracelsus'  prescriptions  are  to  be
taken  literally,  but  some  of  his  commentators,  being
solicitous  of  popular  opinion  and  not  wishing  to  be
thought  crude,  advise  that  they  should  be  taken  in
an  occult  sense,  whatever  that  may  mean,  when  the
whole  process  is  in  itself  the  very  expression  of
practical  occultism.  Paracelsus  himself  affirms  that
he  had  seen  the  Electrum  Magnum  on  frequent
occasions,  and  he  recites  many  of  the  wonderful


356        A  MANUAL  OF  OCCULTISM


phenomena  produced  by  its  means.  When  the
learned  are  disposed  to  accept  Paracelsus  at  his
word  the  world  will  be  more  generously  disposed
concerning  this  great  philosopher,  who  stands  in
singular  distinction  from  the  majority  of  Initiates
in  his  freedom  from  all  ambiguity  and  obscurantism.
It  is  in  the  same  spirit  of  unfettered  freedom  of
thought  that  I  have  endeavoured  to  treat  of  some
aspects  of  Occultism  and  allied  subjects,  with,  I
trust,  no  greater  hurt  to  my  reputation  among
those  whose  opinion  I  value.


THE  END


Richard  Clay  &  Sons,  Limited,  London  and  Bungay.


SOME  PUBLICATIONS

OF

WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  LTD.


MATTER,  SPIRIT  AND  THE  COSMOS:  Some  Sug-
gestions as  to  a  Better  Understanding  of  the  Whence
and  the  Why  of  their  Existence.  By  H.  Stanley
Redgrove,  Author  of  "  On  the  Calculation  of  Thermo-
Chemical  Constants."  Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2S.  6d.  net.

"  Another  evidence  of  the  revolt  that  seems  to  be  gradually  rising
against  the  materialism  of  the  late  nineteenth  century.  As  a  student
of  science,  the  author  may  be  considered  as  at  least  an  unprejudiced
advocate  for  the  reality  of  spirit." — The  Scotstnan.

*' His  arguments  are  convincing  with  respect  to  the  whole  or
absolute  purpose  of  the  cosmos." — The  Academy.

*'The  writer's  conclusions  .  ,  .  have  been  arrived  at  by  processes  of
reasoning  which  are  undoubtedly  bold,  ingenious  and  original." — Light.

THE  TAROT  OF  THE  BOHEMIANS:  The  Most
Ancient  Book  in  the  World,  for  the  Exclusive  Use  of
Initiates.  By  Papus.  Translated  from  the  French  by
A.  P.  Morton.  New  edition,  revised  throughout,  with
introduction  by  A.  E.  Waite.  Crown  8vo,  ornamental
cloth  gilt,  gilt  tops,  384  pp.,  profusely  illustrated,  65.  net.

"Probably  the  most  complete  exposition  of  the  whole  subject  that
can  be  obtained  in  the  English  language." — Light.

"  Well  illustrated,  and  garbed  beautifully." — The  Theosophist.

*'  M.  Encausse's  very  considerable  learning  cannot  be  gainsaid," —
Manchester  Courier.


A  PACK  OF  78  TAROT  CARDS  :  Exquisitely  drawn
and  coloured,  from  new  and  original  designs  by
Pamela  Coleman  Smith.  Each  card  has  a  separate
allegorical  meaning.  This  is  without  question  the
finest  and  most  artistic  pack  that  has  ever  bee
produced.    Price  6^.  net,  post  free.

"  The  most  wonderful  pack  of  cards  that  has  ever  been  seen  since  th
days  when  Gringonneur  illuminated  three  packs  for  the  amusement  ol
King  Charles  VI.  of  France,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1392." — Arthu
Msichen  in  T.F.'s  JVeeHy.

THE  KEY  TO  THE  TAROT:  Giving  the  history  of  the
Tarot  Cards,  their  allegorical  meaning  and  the  methods
of  divination  for  which  they  are  adapted.  By  Arthur
Edward  Waite.  Royal  32mo.,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  net.
Essential  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Tarot  Cards.
The  Cards  and  Key  will  be  supplied  together  in  neaf
box  for  8^.  post  free.  *

YOUR  FORTUNE  IN  YOUR  NAME  OR  KABALISTIC
ASTROLOGY.  New  edition,  largely  revised.  Demy
8vo,  cloth  gilt,  96  pp.,  2S.  6d.  net.    By  "  Sepharial."

The  first  edition  of  this  popular  work  on  Kabalistic  Astrology  having
been  entirely  sold  out,  the  publishers  arranged  with  the  author  for  this
corrected  and  revised  edition  to  meet  the  public  demand.

A  MANUAL  OF  CARTOMANCY,  Fortune-Telling  and
Occult  Divination,  including  the  Oracle  of  Human
Destiny,  Cagliostro's  INIystic  Alphabet  of  the  Magi,  &c.,
&c.  Fourth  edition,  greatly  enlarged  and  revised,  by
Grand  Orient.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  252  pp.,
2S.  6d.  net.

"To  the  curious  in  such  matters  this  book  will  afford  much  interest-
ing information." — Fa//  Ma//.


Philosophy


JESU5:  THE  LAST  GREAT  INITIATE.  Translated
from  "Les  Grands  Inities"  of  Edouard  Schure,  by
F.  Roth  WELL,  B.A.    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

"  The  Light  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by  it,  but  the
world  knew  it  not." — ^JOHN  i.  lo.

"When  a  man  listens  to  the  Divine  Call  a  new  life  is  created  in  him,
now  he  no  longer  feels  himself  alone,  but  in  communion  with  God  and
all  truth  ready  to  proceed  eternally  from  one  verity  to  another.  In  this
new  life  his  thought  becomes  one  with  the  Universal  Will."

KRISHNA  AND  ORPHEUS,  the  Great  Initiates  of  the

East  and  West.    By  Edouard  Schur^.  Translated

by  F.  RoTHWELL,  B.A.    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

'*  M.  Schure  has  in  this  little  volume  admirably  succeeded  in  present-
ing the  two  subjects  of  his  research  most  vividly  to  the  reader's  mind.
It  is  impossible  to  rise  from  the  perusal  of  this  work  without  having
acquired  fresh  information  and  data  for  future  use.  Mr.  Rothwell,  so
far  as  the  fluency  and  crispness  of  his  English  can  prove  it,  has  made  an
admirable  translation." — Glasgow  Herald.

PYTHAGORAS,  and  his  System  of  Philosophy  (The
Delphic  Mysteries).  By  Edouard  Schure.  Translated
by  F.  Rothwell,  B.A.    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  net.
"Know  thyself,  and  thou  wilt  know  the  Universe  and  the  Gods." —
"A  thoughtful  history  and  exposition  of  the  great  teacher." — The
Scotsman.

"In  this  excellent  translation  the  reader  is  familiarised  with  the  life
and  philosophy  of  Pythagoras." — The  Daily  Express.

HERMES  AND  PLATO  :  The  Mysteries  of  Egypt  and
the  Mysteries  of  Eleusis,  by  Edouard  Schure.
Translated  by  F.  Rothwell,  B.A.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,
\s.  6d.  net.

"  Happy  is  he  who  has  passed  through  the  Mysteries.  He  knows  the
source  and  the  end  of  life." — Pindar.

"  M.  Schure  has  presented  a  picture  of  ancient  religious  indoctrin-
ation that  will  give  an  excellent  general  idea  of  the  scope  and  signifi-
cance of  the  Greek  and  Egyptian  mysteries." — Light.

"  To  not  a  few  the  book  will  be  an  introduction  to  a  new  writer,  an
acquaintance  which  they  will  be  anxious  to  deepen  into  friendship." —
Expository  Times,


RAMA  AND  MOSES:  The  Aryan  Cycle  and  the  Mission
of  Israel.  Translated  from  "  Les  Grands  Inities"  of
Edouard  Schur^,  by  F.  Rothwell,  B.A.  Crown  8vo,
cloth,  2s.  net.   N.B. — This  volume  completes  the  series.

WITH  THE  ADEPTS  :  An  Adventure  among  the  Rosi-

crucians.  By  Dr.  Franz  Hartmann.  New  and  Revised

Edition.    Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  i8o  pp.,  2s.  6d.  net.

"It  is  full  of  thought  on  the  higher  things  of  life,  and  attempts
seriously  to  grapple  with  many  mysteries  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well
as  that  which  is  to  be. " —  Woolwich  Pioneer.

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  SIMPLE  WAY.  By  Laotze
("  The  Old  Boy  ").  A  New  Translation  of  "  The  Tao-
Teh-King."  With  Introduction  and  Commentary  by
Walter  Corn  Old,  M.R.A.S.  Crown  Svo,  cloth,
25  net.

"Laotze  remains  a  prince  among  philosophers  .  .  .  and  is  still  as
good  reading  as  he  was  some  five  or  six  centuries  B.C." — The  Times.

**  An  excellent  translation  of  the  teachings  of  this  ancient  sage.  .  .  .
As  an  editor  and  expositor  Mr.  Old  is  both  well-informed  and  sympa-
thetic. ' ' — Glasgaiv  Herald.

OBERMANN.     By  Etienne  Pivet  de  Senancour.

Translated  from  the  French,  with  Biographical  and

Critical   Introduction  by  Arthur  Edward  Waite.

Crown  Svo,  6j.  net,  ornamental  cloth,  gilt  tops.

"  A  Spiritual  Autobiography,  rich  in  the  invitation  to  think,  alive
with  the  quest  of  truth,  and  yet  full  of  speculative  unrest.  .  .  .  The
value  of  this  edition  is  greatly  enhanced  by  the  critical  appreciation  with
which  Mr.  Waite  has  enriched  a  book  that  deserves  to  be  much  more
widely  known." — The  Standard.

*' An  excellent  translation." — The  Times.

*'  Mr.  Waite  must  be  well  known  as  a  learned  and  enchanting  Mystic  ;
even  those  who  are  not  mystics  or  even  thyrsus-bearers  hold  him  in
respect.    We  are  therefore  not  surprised  that  he  treats  Obermann  an
*  A  great  book  of  the  soul,'  and  .De  Senancour  as  a  'man  of  vision*!
belonging  at  his  best  to  eternity." — The  Daily  Chronicle.  I


W.  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited,  164  Aldersgate  Street,  London,  EX.


PUBLICATIONS  OF

William  Rider  &  Son,  Ltd


THE  NEW  THOUGHT  LIBRARY.

Crown  8vo.    Crimson  cloth  extra,  gilt  tops  3s.  6d.  net.


The  "  New  Thought  Library  "  has  been  designed  to  include  only
the  best  works  in  this  class  of  literature.  The  first  twelve  volumes
are  now  ready.


Have  you  a  Strong  Will  P  How  to  Develop  and
Strengthen  Will  Power,  Memory,  or  any  other  Faculty  or  At-
tribute of  the  Mind  by  the  Easy  Process  of  Self  Hypnotism.  By
Charles  Godfrey  Leland.  Fifth  edition,  containing  the
celebrated  correspondence  between  Kant  and  Hufeland,  and
an  additional  chapter  on  Paracelsus  and  his  Teaching.  Price
3s.  6d.  net.

The  Gift  of  the  Spirit.  A  Selection  from  the  Essays  of
Prentice  Mulford.  Reprinted  from  the  "White  Cross  Library."
With  an  Introduction  by  Arthur  Edward  Waite.  Third  Edition.
Price  3s.  6d.  net.    Bound  in  Red  Lamb-skin,  gilt  edges,  5s.  net.

The  Gift  of  Understanding.  A  further  Selection  from
the  Works  of  Prentice  Mulford.  Reprinted  from  the  "White
Cross  Library."  With  an  Introduction  by  Arthur  Edward  Waite.
Price  3s.  6d.  net.     Bound  in  Red  Lamb-skin,  gilt  edges,  5s.  net.

Essays  of  Prentice  Mulford.     Third  Series.  Price

3s.  6d.  net.

Essays  of  Prentice  Mulford.  Fourth  Series.  Completing
the  entire  set  of  the  Essays  published  in  America  under  the  title
of  "  Your  Forces  and  How  to  Use  Them."    Price  3s.  6d.  net.

These  four  volumes  constitute  by  far  the  best  Edition  of  the  Essays  of  Prentice
Mulford  published  in  the  English  language.  Special  care  has  been  taken  to  eliminate
the  errors  and  mistakes  with  which  the  American  edition  abounds.

The  Science  of  the  Larger  Life.  A  Selection  from
the  Essays  of  Ursula  N.  Gestefeld.    Price  3s.  6d.  net.

Every  Man  a  King,  or  Might  in  Mind  Mastery.  By  Orison
Swett  Marden.    Price  3s.  6d.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


4


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


New  Evidences   in   Psychical   Research.     Bv  J.

Arthur  Hill.  With  Introductory  Note  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.'R.S.
Crown  8vo.  cloth  gilt,  224  pp.,  3s.  6d.  net.

Christianity  and  Spiritualism.  (Christianisine  et
Spiritualisme.)  By  Leon  Denis.  Translated  by  Helen  Draper
Speakman.    Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d.  net.

The  writer  contends  that  Spiritualism  offers  tangible  proofs  of  immortality,  and
thus  carries  us  back  to  the  pure  Christian  doctrines.


Here  and  Hereafter,  f Apres  la  Mort.j  Being  a  Scien-
tific and  Rational  Solution  of  the  Problems  of  Life  and  Death,
and  of  the  Nature  and  Destiny  of  the  Human  Ego  in  its  Succes-
sive Lives.  Translated  by  George  G.  Fleurot  from  the  French  of
Leon  Denis.  Second  edition,  revised,  cloth  gilt,  cr-own  8vo,  352
pp.,  3s.  6d.  net.


Mors  Janua  Vitae  P  A  Discussion  of  Certain  Communi-
cations purporting  to  come  from  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.  Bv
H.  A.  Dallas.  With  Introduction  by  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S^
Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d.  net.


Colloquies  with  an  Unseen  Friend.  Edited  by
Walburga,  Lady  Paget.    Crown  8vo,  white  linen,  3s.  6d.  net.

Contents. — Reincarnation.  Atlantis.  Conditions  of  Communication  with  the
Invisible.  Historical  Sketches.  Humanitarianism  and  the  Advance  of  the  World.
The   French    Revolution   and  Secret  Societies.    War  and  Politics.     St.  Francis.


Death  :  Its  Causes  and  Phenomena.  By  Hereward
Carrington  and  John  R.  Aleader.  Ornamental  black' cloth,  gilt,
8|in.x5Jin.,  552  pp.,  8s.  6d.  net.

PrefacB".  PartI. — Physiological.  The  Scientific  .Aspect  of  Life  and  Death.
Trance.  Cutalsepy,  Suspended  Animation,  Premature  Burial.  Old  Age:  Its  Scientific
Study.  My  own  Theory  of  the  Nature  of  Death  (Herew  ard  Carrington).  My  own
Theory  of  the  Nature  of  Death  (John  R.  Meader).    General  Conclusions.

Part 2. — Historical :  The  Philosophical  Aspect  of  Death  and  Immortality.  The
Theological  Aspect  of  Death.   The  Common  Arguments  for  Immortality.

Part  3. — Psychological :  The  Moment  of  Death.  Death  Described  from  Beyond
the  Veil.  Death  Coincidences.  The  Testimony  of  Science — Psychical  Research.
On  the  Intra-Cosmic  Difficulties  of   Communication.    Conclusions.  Index.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  kow,  London,  EX.


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


5


Reincarnation  and  Christianity.  A  Discussion  of
the  relation  of  Orthodoxy  to  the  Reincarnation  Hypothesis.  By
a  Clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England.  Crown  8vo,  stiff  boards,
96  pp.,  1  s.  net.

Stranger  than  Fiction.  Being  Tales  from  the  Byways
of  Ghost  and  Folk-lore.  By  Mary  L.  Lewes.  Crown  8vo,  cloth
gilt,  234  pp.,  3s.  6d.  net.

Will  appeal  to  lovers  of  the  Uncanny  and  to  those  interested  in  Ghost-lore
generally.  There  are  chapters  devoted  to  Ghostly  Phenomena  ;  Corpse  Candles  and
the  Toili  (or  Phantom  Funeral  Processions) ;  Welsh  Fairies  ;  Wise  Men  ;  Witches  ;
Family  Curses  ;  Spectral  Animals  ;  etc,  etc.

A  Psychic  Autobiography.  By  Amanda  T.  Jones,
Author  of  "Uah,"  "Atlantis,"  "Rubaiyatof  Solomon,"  "Poems,"
"A  Prairie  Idyl,"  etc.  With  five  Portraits  and  an  Introduction  by
Prof.  James  H.  Hyslop,  Secretary  of  the  American  Society  for
Psychical  Research.    Crown  8vo,  456pp.    Price  4s.  6d.  net.

Shadows  Cast  Before.  Being  Records  of  Fulfilled
Predictions,  collected  and  edited  by  Claud  Field.  Crown  Svo,
223  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d.  net.

READY  SHORTLY.

Psychic  Science.  (La  Psychologic  Inconnue).  A  Contri-
bution to  the  Experimental  Study  of  Supernormal  Phenomena.
Translated  from  the  French  of  Emile  Boirac,  Correspondent  of
the  Institute,  Rector  of  the  Academy  of  Dijon.  Demy  Svo,  cloth
gilt,  6s.  net.

PHILOSOPHY.

The  Great  Initiates.  Complete  Edition  of  Edouard
Schure's  '  Les  Grands  Inities,"  with  an  Introduction  to  Esoteric
Teaching,  and  a  Frontispiece  Portrait  of  the  Author.  Translated
by  F.  Rothwell,  B.A.  Two  Volumes.  Crown  8v^/=t:loth  gilt,
7s.  6d.  net. — N.B.    Volumes  not  sold  singly.

Jesus:  The  Last  Great  Initiate.  Translated  from
"  Les  Grands  Inities"  of  Edouard  Schure,  by  F.  Rothwell,  B.A.
Crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

Krishna  and  Orpheus,  the  Great  Initiates  of  the  East
and  West.  By  Edouard  Schure.  Translated  by  F.  Rothwell,  B.A.
Crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


6


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


Pythagoras,  and  His  System  of  Philosophy,  (The  Delphic
Mysteries.)  By  Edouard  Schure.  Translated  bv  F.  Rothwell,
B.'A.    Crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

Hermes  and  Plato.,  The  Mysteries  of  Egypt  and  the
Mysteries  of  Eleusis,  bv  Edouard  Schure.  Translated  by  F.
Rothwell,  B.A.    Crown  8 vo,  cloth,  Is.  6d.  net.

Rama  and  Moses.  The  Aryan  Cycle  and, the  iMission  of
Israel.  Translated  from  "  Les  Grands  Inities  "  of  Edouard  Schure
by  F.  Rothwell,  B.A.    Crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

N.B. — This  volume  completes  the  series.

With  the  Adepts  :  An  Adventure  among  the  Rosicrucians.
By  Dr.  Franz  Hartmann.  New  and  Revised  Edition.  Crown  Svo,
cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d.  net.

The  Book  of  the  Simple  Way.  Bv  Laotze  (  The  Old
Boy").  A  New  Translation  of  "The  Tao-Teh  King."  With
Introduction  and  Commentary  by  Walter  Corn  Old,  M.R.A.S.
Crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

Obermann.  By  Etienne  Pivet  dc  Senancour.  Translated
from  the  French,  with  Biographical  and  Critical  Introduction  by
Arthur  Edward  Waite.  Crown  Svo,  423  pp.,  6s.  net,  ornamental
cloth,  gilt  tops.

The  Life  of  Louis  Claude  de  Saint-Martin,  the

Unknown  Philosopher,  and  the  Substance  of  his  Transcendental
Doctrine.    By  Arthur  Edward  Waitc,  Demy  Svo,  464  pp.,  6s.  net.

Psychic  Philosophy,  as  the  Focxdation  of  a  Religion
OF  Natural  Causes.  Bv  \'.  C.  Desertis.  With  Introduction
by  Prof.  A.  R.  Wallace,  O.'M.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.  New  and
cheaper  edition,  cloth  gilt,  crown  Svo,  421pp.,  3s.  6d.  net.

The  inferno.  By  August  Strindberg.  Translated  by  the
Rev.  Claude  Field.  An  autobiographical  work  by  the  celebrated
Swedish  author,  similar  in  character  to  Oscar  Wilde's  "  De
Profundis."    Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d.  net.

Select  Works  of  Plotinus,  Translated  from  the  Greek.
A  ilcw  edition  with  Preface  and  Bibliographv  by  G.  R.  S.  Mead,

B.  A.,  M.R.A.S.    Crown  Svo,  334  +  xxxviii  pp',  cloth,  3s.  6d.  net.

The  Wisdom  of  Plotinus.    A  Metaphysical  Study,  by

C.  J.  Whitby,  M.D.    120  pp.  crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  net.


Caihedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


7


The  World  We  Live  In.  By  E.  A.  Brackett,  with
Portrait  of  the  Author.  Crown  8vo,  121  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  gilt  tops,
2s.  net.

This  book  gives  a  singularly  clear  exposition  of  the  meaning  of  Life,  as  seen
through  the  spectacles  of  a  believer  in  Spiritualism.

The  Alternate  Sex,  or  the  Female  Intellect  in  Man  and
the  Masc  line  in  Woman.  By  Charles  Godfrey  Leland,  F.R.L.S.,
A.M.,  Harvard.  New  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,
2s.  6d.  net.

Yoga,  or  Transformation.  A  Comparative  Statement
of  the  various  Religions  and  Dogmas  concerning  the  Soul  and  its
Destiny,  and  of  Akkadian,  Hindu,  Taoist,  Egyptian,  Hebrew,
Greek,  Christian,  Mohammedan,  Japanese  and  other  Magic.  By
William  J.  Flagg.  Royal  8vo,  376  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  cheaper  edition,
6s.  net.

Occult  Science  in  India  and  among  the  Ancients.

With  an  account  of  their  Mystic  Initiations  and  the  History  of
Spiritism.  By  Louis  Jacolliot.  Translated  from  the  French  by
Willard  L.  Felt.  Royal  8vo,  276  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  gilt  tops,  cheaper
edition,  6s.  net.

The  Transparent  Jewel.  By  Mabel  Collins,  Author  of
"  Light  on  The  Path,"  etc.  Small  crown  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  tops,  2s.
net.  Bound  in  Red  Lamb-skin,  gilt  tops,  4-s.  6d.  net.  An  ex-
position of  Patanjali's  philosophy.

Science  and  the  infinite,  or  Through  a  Window  in  the
Blank  Wall.  By  Sydney  T.  Klein.  Crown  8vo,  183pp.,  cloth  gilt,
2s.  6d.  net.

Matter,  Spirit  and  the  Cosmos.  Some  Suggestions
towards  a  Better  Understanding  of  the  Whence  and  Why  of  their
Existence.  By  H.  Stanley  Redgrove,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  F.C.S.,
Author  of  "On  the  Calculation,  of  Thcrmo-Chemical  Constants."
Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d.  net.

A  Mathematical  Theory  of  Spirit.  By  H.  Stanley
Redgrove,  B.Sc.  Author  of  "  Matter,  Spirit  and  the  C  smos,"
"Alchemy:  Ancient  and  Modern,"  etc.  Large  crown  8vo,  cloth
gilt.    2s.  6d.  net.

HIGHER    LIFE  HANDBOOKS.

Crown  8yo.    Uniformly  Bound  in  Handsome  Dark  Green  Cloth.
Gilt  Ornamental  Design  and  Lettering.

Life  and  Power  from  Within.  By  W.  J.  Colville,
Author  of  "The  Law  of  Correspondences,"  "Elementary  Text
Book  of  Mental  Therapeutics,"  etc.,  etc.    189  pp.,  2s.  6d.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


8


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


The  Law  of  the  Rhythmic  Breath.  Teaching  the
Generation,  Conservation  and  Control  of  Vital  Force.  By  Ella
Adelia  Fletcher.    872  pp.,  4s.  6d.  net.

Paths  to  Power.  By  Floyd  B.  Wilson,  Author  of  "  Man
Limitless,"  "Through  Silence  to  Realization,"  "  The  Discovery
of  the  Soul."    229  pp.,  4s.  6d.  net.

Through  Silence  to  Realization  ;  or,  The  Human
Awakening.  By  Floyd  B.  Wilson,  Author  of  "  Paths  to
Power,"  "Man  Limitless,"  etc.    190  pp.,  3s.  6d.net.

The  Discovery  of  the  Soul  out  of  Mysticism,
Light  and  Progress.  By  Floyd  B.  Wilson,  Author  of
"  Paths  to  Power,"  "  Man  Limitless,"  etc.    247  pp.,  4s.  6d.  net.

MAGIC,    ALCHEMY    AND    OCCULT  SCIENCE.

Cosmic  Symbolism.  By  Scpharial.  Crown  8vo,  296pp,
cloth  gilt,  3s.  6d.  net.

This  worU  embodies  a  constructive  system  of  universal  symbology  applied  to
problems  of  science,  philosophy  and  relij^ion.  It  will  be  found  to  be  a  book  of
absorbing  interest  and  of  eminently  practical  value.

The  Tarot  of  the  Bohemians.  The  Most  Ancient
Book  in  the  W'orld,  for  the  Exclusive  Use  of  Initiates.  By  Papus.
Translated  from  the  French  by  A.  P.  Morton.  New  Edition.
Revised  throughout,  with  Introduction  by  A.  E.  Waite.  Cr.  8vo,
cloth  gilt,  gilt  tops,  384  pp.,  profusely  illstd.,  6s.  net.

A  Pack  of  78  Tarot  Cards.  Exquisitely  Drawn  and
Coloured  from  New  and  Original  Designs,  bv  Pamela  Coleman
Smith.  Each  Card  has  a  separate  allegorical  meaning.  This  is
without  question  the  finest  and  most  artistic  pack  that  has  ever
been  produced.    Price  6s.  net,  in  neat  blue  box,  post  free.

The  Key  to  the  Tarot.  Giving  the  History  of  the  Tarot
Cards,  their  allegorical  meaning  and  the  methods  of  divination  for
which  they  are  adapted.  By  Arthur  Edward  Waite.  Royal  32mo,
cloth  gilt,  2s.  net.  Essential  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Tarot
Cards.    The  Cards  and  Key  in  neat  red  box  8s.  post  free.

The  Pictorial  Key  to  the  Tarot.  Being  an  Enlarged
and  Revised  Edition  of  the  Key  to  the  Tarot,  with  seventy-eight
full-page  Reproductions  of  the  Tarot  Cards  facing  their  descriptive
matter,  and  considerable  additional  matter  dealing  specially  with
the  subject  of  Fortune-telling  by  means  of  the  Tarot.  By  A.  E.
Waite.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  gilt  tops,  340pp.  5s.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


9


The  Book  of  Ceremonial  Magic.  Including  the  Rites
and  Mysteries  of  Goetic  Theurgy,  Sorcery,  and  Infernal  Necro-
mancy. By  A.  E.Waite.  Crown  4to,  gilt  tops,  376pp.,  illustrated
with  about  180  engravings,  beautifully  bound  in  art  canvas,  with
design  in  gold,  price  15s.  net.

A  Manual  of  Occultism.  A  Complete  Exposition  of  the
Occult  Arts  and  Sciences,  by  "  Sepharial,"  Author  of  "A  Manual  of
Astrology,"  etc.,  etc.  With  numerous  Diagrams,  368pp.,  hand-
somely bound  in  cloth  gilt,  gilt  tops,  crown  8vo,  6s.  net.

Part  I. — The  Occult  Sciences,  comprising  Astrology,  Palmistry,  Thaumaturgy,
Kabalism,  Numerology,  Ta  ismans,  Hypnotism.

Part  II. — The  Occult  Arts,  comprising  Divination,  The  Tarot,  Cartomancy,
Crystal  Gazing,  Clairvoyance,  Geomancy,  Dreams,  Sortileges,  Alchemy.

Astrology  :   How  to  make  and  read  your  own  Horoscope.

By  "Sepharial."  New  Edition,  with  two  additional  Chapters,
crown  8vo,  126pp,  cloth,  1s.  net.

Hypnotism  and  Suggestion.  A  Practical  Handbook.
By  Edwin  Ash,  M.D.,  B.Sc.  London,  M.D.C.S.  New  and  cheaper
Edition.    Crown  8vo,  137pp  and  Index,  cloth.  Is.  net.

Hand  Reading.  By  an  Adept.  New  Edition  uniform  with
"Hypnotism  and  Suggestion"  with  Plates.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  1  s.  net.

A  Manual  of  Cartomancy,  Fortune-telling  and
Occult  Divination,  including  the  Oracle  of  Human  Destiny,
Cagliostro's  Mystic  Alphabet  of  the  Magi,  etc.,  etc.  Fifth
Edition,  with  new  sections.  The  French  Method  of  Telling  For-
tunes by  Cards  and  a  new  Oracle  called  "The  Heart's  Desire."
Crown  8vo,  cloth  278  pp.,  2s.  6d.  net.

The  Book  of  Destiny.  By  Grand  Orient,  Author  of
"  A  Manual  of  Cartomancy."  Containing  The  Great  Oracle  of
the  Gods.  The  Occult  Science  of  Jewels.  The  Worship  of
Destiny  in  Business  and  Pleasure.  The  Wheel  of  Wisdom.  The
Mystery  and  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  etc.,  etc.  Crown  8vo.,
cloth  gilt,  uniform  with  above,  about  280pp.,  2s.  6d.  net.

Numbers:  Their*  Meaning  and  Magic.  By  Isidore
Kosminsky.  With  frontispiece  portrait  of  Author.  New  and
Enlarged  Edition.  Re- written  throughout.  Crown  8vo.,  paper
wrappers.    1  s.  net.

Second  Sight.  A  Study  of  Natural  and  Induced  Clair-
voyance. By  "  Sepharial."  Crown  8vo,  96pp.,  cloth  boards,
1  s.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


10


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


Cheino's  Language  of  the  Hand.  A  Complete  Prac-
tical Work  on  the  Sciences  of  Cheirognomy  and  Cheiromancy,  con-
taining the  System,  Rules  and  Experience  of  Cheiro.  Fifty-five
Full-page  Illustrations  and  over  200  Engravings  of  Lines,  Mounts
and  Marks.  Drawings  of  the  Seven  Types  by  Theo  Dore.  Fifteenth
edition,  10|in.  x  8|in.,  artistically  designed  black  and  white  cover,
gilt  tops,  price  1  Os.  6d.  net.

Alchemy:  Ancient  and  Modern.  Being  a  brief  account
of  the  Alchemistic  Doctrines,  and  their  relations  to  Mysticism  on
the  one  hand,  and  to  recent  discoveries  in  Physical  Science  on  the
other  ;  together  with  some  particulars  regarding  the  most  noted
Alchemists.  By  H.  Stanley  Redgrove,  B. Sc.  (Lond.),  F.C.S.  With
16  full-page  illustrations.    Demy  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  4s.  6d.  net.

Your  Fortune  in  your  Name,  or  Kabaiistic  As-
trology. New  and  cheaper  Edition.  Demy  8vo,  cloth  gilt,
2s.  net.      By  "  Sepharial."

The  Kabala  of  Numbers.  A  Handbook  dealing  with
the  Traditional  Interpretation  of  Numbers  and  their  Predictive
Value.  By  "Sepharial,"  Author  of  "A  Manual  of  Occultism,"
"Kabaiistic  Astrology,"  "Prognostic  Astronomy,"  etc.,  etc.
168pp.,  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  net.

Geomancy.  By  Franz  Hartmann,  M.D.  Large  crown  8vo,
about  200  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  with  numerous  diagrams,  3s.  6d.  net.

This  book  is  a  Revised  Version  of  the  Treatise  on  Geomancy,  or  Sand-divining,
by  the  well-known  Austrian  Physician  and  Occultist,  following  the  lines  of  the  teach-
ing of  Cornelius  Agrippa.

The  History  of  Magic.  Including  a  clear  and  precise
exposition  of  its  Processes,  Rites  and  Mysteries.  By  Eliphas
Levi,  Author  of  "  Tranccndcntal  Magic,"  etc.,  etc.  Translated
by  Arthur  Edward  VVaitc.  556pp.,  medium  8vo,  cloth  gilt,
12s.  6d.  net.  Edition  dc  Luxe  printed  on  rag  paper,  bound
in  white  vellum,  gilt,  21s.  net.

MENTAL    PATHOLOGY    AND  THERAPEUTICS.

Health  for  Young  and  Old,  its  Principles  and
Pr£\ctice.  An  Unconventional  Manual.  By  A.  T.  Schofield,
M.D.,  M.R.C.S.,  author  of  "  Elementary  Hygiene,"  "  Hygiene
for  Schools,"  "  Fit  for  Work,"  "  Nervousness,"  "  How  to'  Keep
Fit,"  etc.    Crown  8vo,  272  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  price  3s.  6d.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


11


Elementary  Textbook  of  Mental  Therapeutics.

By  W.  J.  Colville,  author  of  "Creative  Thought,"  etc.,  with
Introduction.    Demy  8vo,  paper  covers,  80pp,  Is.  net.

The  Mastery  of  Death.  By  A.  Osborne  Eaves.  Author
of  "  The  Colour  Cure."    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

The  Art  of  Luck.  By  A.  Osborne  Eaves.  Author  of
"  The  Colour  Cure,"  etc.    Sin.  x  4fin.  paper  covers,  1  s.  net.

Psycho-Pathological  Researches.  Studies  in  Mental
Dissociation.  With  Text  Figures  and  10  Plates.  By  Boris  Sidis,
M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Director  of  the  Psycho-Pathological  Laboratory  of
New  York.    Royal  Svo,  329  pp.,  8s.  6d.  net.

Abnormal  Psychology.  By  Isador  H.  Coriat,  M.D.,
Senior  Assistant  Physician  for  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  System,
Boston  City  Hospital  ;  Neurologist  to  the  Mt.  Sinai  Hospital
Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  340  pp.,  5s.  net.

CONTENTS.

I.  The  Exploration  of  the  Subconscious. — What  is  the  Subconscious?
Automatic  Writing.  Testing  the  Emotions.  Analysing  the  Emotions.  Sleep.  Dreams.

II.  Diseases  of  the  Subconscious. — Losses  of  Memory.  Restoration  of  Lost
Memories.    The  Splitting  of  a  Personality.    Psycho-Epileptic  Attacks.

RIDER'S  MIND  AND  BODY  HAND-BOOKS.

These  Hand-books  deal  with  the  subject  of  mental  and  bodily
health  Id  the  new  light  of  psycho-therapeutics,  mental  healing  and
auto-suggestion.    The  following  volumes  are  now  ready:  —

Nature's  Help  to  Happiness.  By  John  Warren  Achorn,
M.D.    Small  crown  Svo,  55  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  Is.  net,  paper  6d.  net.

How  to  Rest  and  be  Rested.  By  Grace  Dawson.  46  pp.,
red  paper  cover,  6d.  net,  cloth  1s.  net.

The  Secret  of  Efficiency.  By  Grace  Dawson,  uniform
with  the  above,  cloth,  "Is.  net.

What  is  Health  P  By  Grace  Dawson,  Author  of  "  How  to
Rest."    Small  crown  Svo,  72pp,  Is.  net.

Nervousness.  A  Brief  and  Popular  Review  of  the  Moral
Treatment  of  Disordered  Nerves.  By  Alfred  T.  Schofield,  M.D.,
M.R.C.S.    Small  crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  8S  pp.,  1  s.  net.

The  Power  of  Self-Suggestion.  By  Rev.  Samuel
McComb,  D.D.    Small  crown  Svo,  72  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  Is.  net.

How  to  Keep  Fit.  An  Unconventional  Manual.  By
Alfred  T.  Schofield,  M.D.,  M.R.C.S.,  Author  of  "  Nervousness,"
etc.,  etc.    Small  crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  80  pp..  Is.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


12


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


Fnom  Passion  to  Peace  ;  or,  The  Pathway  of  the  Pure.
By  James  Allen,  Author  of  "The  Mastery  of  Destiny,"  "From
Poverty  to  Power,"  "  As  a  Man  Thinketh,"  etc.,  etc.  Small  crown
8vo,  cloth  gilt,  72  pp..  Is.  net.

Studies  in  Self-Healing;  or,  Cure  by  Meditation.  A
practical  application  of  the  principles  of  the  true  mystic  healing  of
the  ages.  By  Ernest  E.  Munday.  Small  crown  8vo,  79  pp.,  cloth
gilt,  1  s.  net.

The  Influence  of  the  Mind  on  the  Body.     By  Dr.

Paul  Dubois,  Professor  of  Neuro-Pathology  in  the  University  of
Berne,  Author  of  "The  Psychic  Treatment  of  Nervous  Disorders,"
"  Self-Control,  and  How  to  Secure  It,"  etc.  Translated  from  the
Fifth  French  Edition  by  L.  B.  Gallatin.  Small  crown  8vo,  64  pp.,
cloth  gilt,  1  s.  net.

Man,  King  of  Mind,  Body  and  Circumstance.  By

James  Allen,  Author  of  "As  a  Man  Thinketh,"  etc.,  etc.  Small
crown  8vo,  70  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  Is.  net.

Contents.— Forward.  The  Inner  World  of  Thoughts.  The  Outer  World  of
Things.  Habit:  Its  Slavery  and  its  Freedom.  Bodily  Conditions.  Poverty.  Man's
Spiritual  Dominion.    Conquest :  not  Resignation.

THEOLOGY.

The  Unescapable  Christ,  and  Other  Sermons.

An  Expression  of  the  New  Theology.  By  Rev.  Edward  W.  Lewis,
M.A.,  B.D.,  of  Grafton  Square  Congregational  Church,  Clapham,
Author  of  "  Some  Views  of  Modern  Theology."  Crown  8vo,  cloth,
3s.  6d.  net.

Some  Better  Thing  for  Us.  By  A.  S.  L.  Second  Im-
pression.   Demy  12mo,  cloth  gilt,  3s.  6d.  net.

Contents. — Faith:  A  Practical  Matter.  Fear:  Its  True  Function.  Truth  in
Relation  to  Life.  The  Law  which  Gendereth  Bondage.  Two  Points  of  View.  The
Threefold  Cord  of  Prayer.    Health,  Holiness  and  Power.

God  the  Beautiful.  An  Artist's  Creed;  and  The  Religion
of  Beauty  Contrasted  with  Buddhism.  .  By  E.  P.  B.  Second
Edition  (translated  into  Japanese  and  German).  Foolscap  8vo,
2s.  6d.  net.

Transformed  Hinduism.  By  the  Author  of  "God  the
Beautiful."    2  vols,  f'cap  8vo,  5s.  net.

Where  is  Heaven  P  Musings  on  the  Life  Eternal.  By
Emil  P.  Berg,  Author  of  "  God  the  Beautiful,"  etc.  161  pp.,
f'cap  8vo,  art  canvas,  gilt  tops,  2s.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row, 'London,  E.G.


WILLIAM  RIDER  iSc  SON,  Limited.


13


The  Chief  Scripture  of  India  (The  Bhagavad  Gita)
and  Its  Relation  to  Present  Events.  By  W.  L.  Wilmshurst,
Author  of  "Christianity  and  Science:  The  Latest  Phase,"  etc.
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

The  iVIessage  of  the  Sun,  and  the  Cult  of  the
Cross  and  the  Serpent.  By  Rev.  Holden  E.  Sampson
Crown  8vo,  1s.  6d.  net.

Christianity  and  Science— The  Latest  Phase.  By

W.  L.  Wilmshurst.  Crown  8vo,  92  pp.,  in  neat  brown  paper  cover
6d.  net,  cloth  1  s.  net.

Living  the  Life ;  or,  Christianity  in  Being.  By  Grace
Dawson,  Author  of  "  How  to  Rest  and  be  Rested."  Crown  Svo,
78  pp.,  cloth  gilt,  gilt  tops,  1s.  6d.  net ;  paper,  Is.  net.

A  Short  Study  of  Christianity  as  Christ  taught  it.

The  First  Christian  Generation.  Its  Records  and
Traditions.  Second  and  Cheaper  Edition.  By  James  Thomas,
Author  of  "Our  Records  of  the  Nativity,"  "The  Pantheon  at
Rome:  Who  Built  It?"  414pp.,  red  cloth,  gilt,  crown  8vo,
3s.  6d.  net.

The  New  God  and  other  Essays.  By  Ralph  Shirley,
Editor  of  "The  Occult  Review."  Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  248  pp.,
New  and  Cheaper  Edition,  2/-  net.

Contents. — The  New  God.  Prophets  and  Prophecies.  Prophecies  and  Antici-
pations. Julian  the  Apostate.  Mystical  Christianity.  The  Perfect  Way.  Relation-
ship of  Christianity  to  Gnostic  Faiths.  Early  Christian  Evidences.  Founders  of
Orthodox  Christianity.  Friedrich  Nietzsche.  The  Strange  Case  of  Lurancy  Vennum.
Cagliostro.

POETRY.

Strange  Houses  of  Sleep.  By  Arthur  Edward  Waite.
With  Frontispiece  Portrait  of  the  Author.  F'cap  4to,  parchment
gilt,  12s.  net.  Limited  Edition  of  250  copies,  signed  and
numbered.

Part  I.  Shadows  of  Sacraments.  Part  II.  The  Hidden  Sacrament  of  the  Holy
Graal.  Part  III.  The  Poor  Brother's  Mass  Book^  containing  a  Method  of  Assisting
at  the  Holy  Sacrifice  for  Children  who  are  not  of  this  World.  Part  IV.  The  Book
of  the  King's  Dole.

A  Book  of  Mystery  and  Vision.  By  Arthur  Edward
Waite.  Foolscap  4to,  with  Special  Cover  designed  by  Mary
Tourtel,  and  Frontispiece  by  Isabelle  de  Steiger.    7s.  6d.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


14


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


The  Brahman's  Wisdom.  Verses  translated  from  the
German  of  Friedrich  Ruckert.  By  Eva  M.  Martin.  Small  crown
8vo.  Bound  with  artistically  designed  cover  in  violet  and  lemon
cloth,  gilt.    Is.  6d.  net.

No  occultist  who  loves  beautiful  verse  should  miss  buying  this  unique  volume.

FICTION.

The  Sorcery  Club.  By  Elliott  O'Donnell,  Author  of
*'  Byways  of  Ghostland,"  etc.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  four  full  page
illustrations,  6s.

The  Gods  of  the  Dead.  By  Winifred  Graham,  Author
of  "Alary,"  "The  Star  Child,"  "Ezra  the  Mormon,"  etc.
Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  6s.

The  Weird  of  the  Wanderer.  By  Prospero  and
Caliban.    Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  6s.

The  Vampire.  By  Reginald  Hodder,  author  of  "The
Daughter  of  the  Dawn,"  etc.,  crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  6s.

Into  the  Unseen.  By  G.  H.  Lusty,  Crown  Svo.,  cloth
gilt,  6s.

The  Rake's  Progress.  By  Marjorie  Bowen,  Author  of
"  The  Viper  of  Milan,"  etc.    Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  J2s.net.

The  Priestess  of  Isis.  By  Edouard  Schure,  Author  of
"The  Great  Initiates,"  etc.  Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  New  Cheap
Edition,  2s.  net.

Possessed.     By    Firth    Scott,    Author  of    "  The  Last
Lemurian,"  "  The  Rider  of  VVaroona,"  "  The  Track  of  Midnight,'
Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  net.

Nyria.  By  Mrs.  Campbell  Praed,  author  of  "The  Insane
Root,  etc.    Crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

Dracula.  A  new  Edition  of  this  celebrated  and  thrilling
vampire  story.  By  Bram  Stoker.  Small  crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,
416pp.,  1  s.  net.

The  Jewel  of  Seven  Stars.  By  Bram  Stoker.  Uniform
w^ith  "Dracula,"  1s.  net.

The  Lair  of  the  White  Worm.  By  Bram  Stoker
author  of  "  Dracula."  Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  324  pp.,  6  coloured
illustrations,  6s.

The  Door  Ajar,  and  Other  Stories.  By  Virginia
Milward.    Crown  Svo,  cloth,  12S  pp.    Is.  net.

Contents. — The  Door  Ajar — The  Knife — Between  the  Leaves — The  Mills  of  God
—The  Little  Silver  Box—"  Das  Kind  "—A  Minor  Third.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.  15


The  Soul  of  the  Moot*.  A  Romance.  By  Stratford  D.
Jolly.    226  pp.,  crown  8vo,  illustrated,  cloth,  2s.  net.

A  novel  dealing  with  hypnotic  influence  and  occult  metamorphosis.

The  Living  Wheel.  By  T.  L.  Uniacke.  A  Drama  in  5
Acts.    Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d.  net.

This  story  of  a  Spiritual  Marriage  presents  strange  possibilities  of  union  between
those  who  are  of  necessity  separated  in  the  physical  body.

The  Twice- Born,  By  an  Ex- Associate  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research.    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  net.

Flaxius :  Leaves  from  the  Life  of  an  Immortal.  By
Charles  Godfrey  Lcland,  Author  of  "  The  Breitmann  Ballads,"  etc.
Crown  Svo,  3s.  6d.  net.

The  Life  and  Confession  of  Asenath,  narrating  how
the  All- Beautiful  Joseph  took  her  to  wife.  Crown  Svo,  paper
covers,  1  s.  net.    Exquisitely  printed  on  hand-made  paper.

THE  LIBRARY  OF  OCCULT  RECORDS.

Crown  8yo,  in  Artistically  Designed  Blue  Cloth,  Gilt  Lettering.
3s.  6d.  net  per  volume.

This  Library  is  designed  to  include  a  Selection  from  the  Best  Occult  and  Psychic
Stories  which  lay  claim  to  an  inspirational  origin.  No  fiction  of  the  ordinary  stamp
will  be  given  a  place  among  these  books.    The  following  volumes  are  now  ready: —

Through  the  Mists.  Leaves  from  the  Autobiography  of
a  Soul  in  Paradise.  Recorded  for  the  Author  by  Robert  James
Lees.    3s.  6d.  net.

The  Life  Elysian.  Being  more  Leaves  from  the  Auto-
biography of  a  Soul  in  Paradise.  Recorded  for  the  Author  by
R.  J.  Lees.    349  pp.,  3s.  6d.  net.

The  Car*  of  Phcebus.   By  R.  J.  Lees.  388pp.,  3s.  6d.  net.

The  Heretic.    By  Robert  James  Lees.   566pp.,  3s.  6d.  net.

An  Astral  Bridegroom.  A  Reincarnation  Study.  By
Robert  James  Lees.    404  pp.,  3s.  6d.  net.

Ida  Llymond  and  Her  Hour  of  Vision.  By  Hope
Cranford.    3s.  6d.  net.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.G.


16  WILLIAM  RIDER  &  SON,  Limited.


THE    SHILLING    LIBRARY    OF  PSYCHICAL

LITERATURE    AND  INQUIRY.

Demy  8vo,  Vols.  I,  II,  III,  IV,  1s.  net  each,  paper  covers;
1s.  6d.  net,  neatly  bound  in  green  cloth.

By  Edward  T.  Bennett,

Assistant  Secretary  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
1882-1902.

I.  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research:  Its  Rise
and  Progress,  and  a  Sketch  of  its  Work.

II.  Twenty  Years  of  Psychical  Research:  1882-

1901.

III.  Automatic  Speaking  and  Writing:  a  Study.

With  many  hitherto  Unpublished  Cases  and  Examples.

IV.  The  Direct    Phenomena  of  Spiritualism : —

"  Direct"  Writing,  Drawing,  Painting,  and  Music.

GLOBES  AND   MIRRORS   FOR  CRYSTAL  GAZING.

Medium  Size  Globe  (about  2^m[.  diameter),  4s.  6d.  post  free  in
United  Kingdom  ;  abroad,  5s.  Larger  size  globe,  superior  quality,
6/6  post  free  in  United  Kingdom,  abroad  7/-.  In  box  with
instructions  complete.

Handsome  Ebonite,  Highly  Finished  Fakir  Mirror,  with  Cover
complete,  with  full  instructions,  1  Os.  6d.  net,  post  free.  Smaller
ditto,  5s.  3d.  post  free.

THE  OCCULT  REVIEW.

A  Monthly  Journal  devoted  to  the  Investigation  of  the
Problems  of  Life  and  Death  and  the  Study  of  the
Truths  underlying  all  Religious  Beliefs.

Edited  by  RALPH  SHIRLEY.

ANNUAL  SUBSCRIPTION:
British  Isles,  Seven  Shillings,  post  free.
United  States  &  Canada,  $r75  cents.  Elsewhere,  8s.  or  its  equivalent.

AMERICA  :

International  News  Co.,  85  Duane  Street,  New  York.

INDIA-  ^  ^*  ^'  ^^'^EELER  &  Co.,  Calcutta.

(  The  "  Theosophist  "  Office,  Adyar,  Madras.


Cathedral  House,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


\


  y,.-'  "v^:*-
