Witchcrafts, strange and wonderfull: discovering the damnable practices of seven witches, against the lives of certaine noble personages, and others of this kingdome, as shall appeare in this lamentable history. ; With an approved triall how to finde out either witch or any apprentice to witch-craft..

[Transcribed from the EEBO-TCP keyboarded edition (CC0 1.0, textcreationpartnership). Original spelling retained.]

[page 2]

[page 2]

WITCHCRAFTS, Strange and Wonderfull.

MY meaning is not to make any contentious Arguments about the diſcourſes, diſtinction or definition of Witch-craft, the power of Deuills, the nature of Spirits, the force of Charmes, the ſecrets of Incantation, and ſuch like; becauſe the Scriptures are full of prohibitions to this purpoſe, and proclaimes death to the preſumptuous attempters of the ſame: Beſides, both Princes, (yea, our owne learned and moſt judicious King) Philoſophers, Poets, Chronologers, Hiſtoriographers, and many worthy Writers, have concurred and concluded in this; that divers impious and facinorous miſchiefes have beene effectuated through the inſtruments of the deuil, by permiſſion of God, ſo that the Actors of the ſame have carried away the opinion of the world, to doe that which they did by Witch-craft; or at leaſt to be eſteemed Witches, for bringing ſuch and ſuch things to paſſe: For howſoever, the learned have charactered delinquents in this kinde, by titles of ſundry ſorts, and moſt ſignificant attributes; as Pythoniſſae, dealing with artificiall charmes; Magi, anciently reputed ſo, for extraordinary wiſedome and knowledge in the ſecrets of Simples, and Hearbes; Chaldei famous for Aſtronomie, and Aſtrologie; Negromancers, for practiſing to raiſe dead bodies, and by them to foretell euents of the earth; Geomantici, for converſing with Spirits, and uſing Incantations; Genethliaci, for preſuming on the calculating of Nativities; or, if you will, aſſuming the credit of Figure-caſting; Ventriloqui, for ſpeaking with hollow voyces, as if they were poſſeſſed with Devills; Venefici, for dealing with poyſon, and either killings, or curing that way: For you muſt underſtand, however the Profeſſors aforeſaid, practiſe murther and miſchiefe;

[page 3]

yet many times, they pretend cures and preſervation; with many others, carrying the ſhew of great learning and admired knowledge; yet have they all but one familiar terme with us in Engliſh, called Witches. As for the conceit of Wiſe-men, or Wiſe-women, they are all meerely coſeners and deceivers; ſo that if they make you beleeve, that by their meanes you ſhall heare of things loſt or ſtolne, it is either done by Confederacie, or put off by protraction, to deceive you of your money.

Onely (as I ſaid before) there bee certaine men and women growne in yeares, and over-growne with Melancholie and Atheiſme, who out of a malicious diſpoſition againſt their betters or others thriving by them; but moſt times from a heart-burning deſire of revenge, having entertained ſome impreſſion of diſpleaſure, and unkindneſſe, ſtudie nothing but miſchiefe and exoticke practiſes of loathſome Arts and Sciences: yet I muſt needs ſay, that ſometimes the fained reputation of wiſedome, cunning, and to be reputed a dangerous & skilfull perſon, hath ſo prevailed with divers, that they have taken upon them indeed to know more than God ever afforded any creature, and to performe no leſſe than the Creator both of heaven and earth; making you beleeve with Medea, that they can raiſe tempeſts, turne the Sunne into blood, pull the Moone out of her Sphere, and ſaile ouer the Sea in a cockell ſhell, according to the Poet:

Flectere ſi neueam Superos, Acheronta movebo.
If Art doe faile to move the Gods
conſent unto my minde:
I will the Devils raiſe, to doe
what they can in their kinde.

But howſoever ſpeciall perſons are tranſported with an opinion of their owne worth, & prevailing in this kinde, yet by lamentable experience, we know too wel, what monſtrous effects have been produced, even to the horror of the hearers, and damnation, of their owne ſoules, by ſuch kinde of people: For as it is in the tale of the envious man, that put out one of his eyes to have his companion loſe both; ſo fareth it with them and worſe, to give away their ſoules to be revenged of their adverſaries

[page 3]

bodies, where in the monſtrous ſubtlety of the Devill is ſo apparent, that it is wonderfull one way to relate, and lamentable another way to obſerve the ſame. For no ſooner ſhall ſuch motives poyſon the inward conceit or apprehenſion of ſuch damnable caitiffes: But then ſteppeth forth the Devill, and not onely ſheweth them the way, but preſcribeth the manner of effecting the ſame, with facility and eaſineſſe, aſſuring that bee himſelfe Will attend them in ſome familiar ſhape of Rat, Cat, Toad, Bird, Cricket, &c. yea effectuate whatſoever they ſhal demand or deſire; and for their better aſſurance and corroboration of their credulity they ſhall have palpable and forcible touches of ſucking, pinching, kiſſing, cloſing, colling, and ſuch like. whereupon, without any feare of God or man, knowledge of Chriſt, hope of redemption, confidence of mercy, or true beliefe, that there is any other thing to be looked after but this preſent world; according to that Atheiſticall poſition of Epicurus: Ede, bibe, lude, poſt mortem nulla voluptas.
Eat, drinke, ſport, play, and take thy pleaſures reſt:
For after death who knowes what ſhall be beſt.
they admit of thoſe execrable conditions of commutation of ſoules for the entertaining of the ſpirits, and ſo fall to their abominable practiſes, continuing in the ſame till God laugh them to ſcorne, and will by no meanes ſuffer them to abuſe his holy Name, nor deceive others by their prophane lives any longer: Witneſſe for the generall, thoſe infinite Treatiſes of many of them convinced by Law, and condemned to death, to the fearefull example of all carnall and hypocriticall Chriſtians: but more eſpecially you may over-looke (if you pleaſe) that learned Diſcourſe of Daemonology, compoſed in forme of a Dialogue, by the high and mighty Prince, Iames by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, &c. and printed (as I take it) according to the copie of Edenburgh, 1603. As alſo a Treatiſe of Witch-craft made by that learned Mr. Alexander Roberts, Preacher at Kings-Linne in Norfolke, 1615, upon the diſcovery of the Witchcrafts of Mary Smith, wife of Henry Smith Glover, with her vocall contract between

[page 4]

the Devill and her ſelfe, in ſolemne termes, and ſuch like impoſturing filthineſſe; with many hurts and miſchiefes which thereby ſhe procured. As alſo a certaine diſcovery 1611. made by Iohn Cotta Doctor of Phyſicke in Northampton, of Empericks, women about ſicke perſons, Quackſalvars, and Fugitives, which ſeeme to worke iugling wonders; Surgeons, Apothecaries, practiſers by Spels, the true diſcovery of Witch-craft, eſpecially in the ſicke, with many inſtances of that kinde: Wizards, and ſervants of Phyſicians, who may be called, miniſtring helpers: To this he hath added, the Methodian learned deceiver, or heretick phyſician; Aſtrologers, Ephemerides-maſters, Conjecters by urine, Travellers: and laſt of all, the true Artiſt his right deſcription and election. As alſo a Dialogue concerning Witches and Witch-craft, compoſed by George Gifford, Miniſter of Gods word in Maldon, 1603. wherein the cunning of the Devill is diſcovered, both concerning the deceiving of Witches, and ſeducing of others into many great errors: As alſo an ancient Diſcourſe of the fearefull practiſes of foure notorious French Witches, with the manner of their ſtrange execution. As alſo the ſeverall and damnable practiſes of Mother Sutton of Milton Mills in the County of Bedford, and Mary Sutton her daughter, who were arraigned, condemned and executed for the ſame. As alſo, 1612. the wonderfull diſcovery of Witches in Lancaſhire, being 19. in number, notorious for many infamed actions, and conuicted before Sir Iames Altham, and Sir Edward Bromley, Barons of the Exchequer: together with the Arraignement and triall of Iennet Preſton at Yorke, with her fearefull execution for the murthering of Mr. Lister by Witch-craft, with infinite other relations concerning the generall conuiction of Witches, & their practiſes, & condemnation of the particular opinion of ſome men, who ſuppoſe there be none at all, or at leaſt, that they doe not perſonally or truely effect ſuch things as are imputed unto them, and which out of ſome dangerous impreſſion of Melancholy, Vaine glory, or ſome other diſeaſed operation, they aſſume to themſelves by reaſon of a former Contract with the Devill. And ſo much for the certainty of Story, and fearefulneſſe of the truth concerning

[page 4]

the damnable practiſes of Witches, and cunning of the Devill to deceiue them.

But yet becauſe the minde of man may be carried away with many idle conjectures, either that women confeſſed theſe things by extremity of torture, or that ancient examples are by this time forgotten (although the particulars are upon record, for the benefit of all poſterity:) Or that they were beſides themſelves, or ſubject to ſome weake device or other; rather to bring in queſtion the integrity of juſtice, than to make odious the lives of ſuch horrible offenders: I have preſumed to preſent on the Stage of verity, for the good of my Countrey, and the love of truth, the late wofull Tragedie of the deſtruction of the Right Honourable the Earle of Rutlands children, who (to his eternall praiſe) proceeded yet both religiouſly and charitably againſt the offenders, leaving their proſecution to the Law, and ſubmitting himſelfe and deplorable caſe to the providence of God, who afflicteth his beſt ſervants with puniſhments, and many times, ſendeth extraordinary vengeance as well on the innocent, as the bad deſerver, to manifeſt his glory: Therefore by way of Caution I aduiſe thee (gentle Reader) whatſoever thou art, to take heed how thou doeſt either deſpiſe the power of God in his creatures, or vilipend the ſubtletic and fury of the Devill, as Gods inſtrument of vengeance, conſidering that Truth in deſpight of gaine-ſayers will prevaile, according to that principle; Magna eſt veritas & praevalebit.

The Story followes.

AFter the Right Honourable Sir Francis Manners ſucceeded his brother in the Earledome of Rutland: and ſo not onely tooke poſſeſſion of Beaver Caſtle, but of all other his Demeanes, Lordſhips, Townes, Mannors, Lands, and Revenues appropriate to the ſame Earledome: he proceeded ſo honourably in the courſe of his life, as neither diſplacing Tenants, diſcharging Servants, nor denying the acceſſe of the poore; but welcomming of ſtrangers, and performing

[page 5]

all the duties of a noble Lord, that he faſtened as it were unto himſelfe the love and good opinion of the Countrey; wherein hee walked the more cheerfully and remarkably, becauſe his Honourable Counteſſe marched arme in arme with him in the ſame race: So that Beaver Caſtle was a continuall Palace of entertainement, and a dayly receptacle for all ſorts both rich and poore, eſpecially ſuch ancient people as neighboured the ſame: amongſt whom, one Ioan Flower with her daughters, Margaret and Phillip, were not onely releeved at the firſt from thence, but quickly entertained as Chair-women, and Margaret admitted as a continuall dweller in the Caſtle, looking both to the Poultrey abroad, and the Waſh-houſe within doores: In which life they continued with equall correſpondency, till ſomething was diſcovered to he noble Lady, which concerned the miſdemeanour of theſe women. And although ſuch Honourable perſons ſhall not want of all ſorts of people, either to bring them newes, tales, reports, or to ſerve their turne in all Offices whatſoever; ſo that it may well be ſaid of them, as it is of great Kings and Princes, that they have large hands, wide eares, and piercing ſights, to diſcover the unſwept corners of their remoteſt confines, to reach even to their fartheſt borders, and to underſtand the ſecrets of their meaneſt Subjects: yet in this matter, neither were they buſie-bodies, flatterers, malicious politicians, underminers, nor ſupplanters one of anothers good fortune: but went ſimply to worke, as regarding the honour of the Earle and his Lady, and ſo by degrees gave light to their underſtanding to apprehend their complaints. Firſt, that Ioane Flower the mother, was a monſtrous malicious woman, full of oathes, curſes, and imprecations irreligious and for any thing they ſaw by her, a plaine Atheiſt: beſides, of late dayes, her very countenance was eſtranged, her eyes were fiery and hollow, her ſpeech fell and envious, her demeanour ſtrange and exoticke, and her converſation ſequeſtred; ſo that the whole courſe of her life gave great ſuſpition that ſhe was a notorious Witch: yea, ſome of her neighbours dared to affirme, that ſhe dealt with familiar ſpirits, and terrified them all with curſes and threatning of revenge, if there were never

[page 5]

ſo little cauſe of diſpleaſure and unkindneſſe. Concerning Margaret, that ſhee often reſorted from the Caſtle to her mother, bringing ſuch proviſion as they thought was unbefitting for a ſervant to purloine, and comming at ſuch unſeaſonable houres, that they could not but conjecture ſome miſchiefe betweene them, and that their extraordinary riot and expences tended both to rob the Lady, and to maintaine certaine debauſht and baſe company, which frequented this Ioane Flowers houſe the mother, and ſpecially her youngeſt daughter. Concerning Phillip, that ſhe was lewdly tranſported with the love of one Thomas Sympſon, who preſumed to ſay, that ſhe had bewitched him; for he had no power to leave her, and was (as hee ſuppoſed) maruellouſly altered both in minde and bodie, ſince her acquainted company. Theſe complaints began many yeares before either their conviction, or publike apprehenſion: Notwithſtanding, ſuch was the honour of this Earle and his Lady; ſuch was the cunning of this monſtrous woman in obſervation towards them; ſuch was the ſubtlety of the Devill to bring his purpoſes to paſſe: ſuch was the effect of a damnable womans wit and malicious envy, that all things were carried away in the ſmooth channel of liking and good entertainment on every ſide, untill the Earle by degrees conceived ſome miſlike againſt her; and ſo, peradventure eſtranged himſelfe from that familiarity and accuſtomed conferences hee was wont to have with her: untill one Peake offered her ſome wrong; againſt whom ſhe complained, but found that my Lord did not affect her clamorous and malicious information: untill one Mr. Vavaſor abandoned her company, as either ſuſpicious of her lewd life, or diſtaſted with his owne miſliking of ſuch baſe and poore Creatures, whom no body loved but the Earles houſhold; untill the Counteſſe miſconceiving of her daughter Margaret, and diſcoverig ſome undecencies both in her life and neglect of her buſineſſe, diſcharged her from lying any more in the Caſtle, yet gave her forty ſhillings, a bolſter, and a mattreſſe of wooll; commanding her to goe home; untill the ſlackneſſe of her repayring to the Caſtle, as ſhe was wont, did turne her love and

[page 6]

liking toward this Honourable Earle and his Family, into hate and rancour: whereupon deſpighted to be ſo neglected, and exprobrated by her neighbours for her daughters caſting out of doores, and other conceived diſpleaſures, ſhee grew paſt all ſhame and womanhood, and many times curſed them all that were the cauſe of this diſcontentment, and made her ſo loathſome, to her former familiar friends & beneficiall acquaintance.

When the Devill perceived the in ficious diſpoſition of this wretch, and that ſhe and her daughters might eaſily be made inſtruments to inlarge his kingdome, and be as it were the executioners of his vengeance; not caring whether it lighted upon innocents or no, hee came more neerer unto them, and in plaine termes, to come quickly to the purpoſe, offered them his ſervice, and that in ſuch a manner as they might eaſily command what they pleaſed: For hee would attend you in ſuch pretty formes of Dog, Cat, or Rat, that they ſhould neither be terrified, nor any body elſe ſuſpitious of the matter. Vpon this they agree; and (as it ſhould ſee me) give away their ſoules for the ſervice of ſuch Spirits, as he had promiſed them; which filthy conditions were ratified with abominable kiſſes, and an odious ſacrifice of blood, not leaving out certaine charmes and conjurations, with which the Deuill deceived them, as though nothing could be done without ceremony, and a ſolemnity of orderly ratification. By this time doth Satan triumph, and goeth away ſatisfied to have caught ſuch fiſh in the net of his illuſions: By this time are thoſe women Devills incarnate, and grow proud againe in their cunning and artificiall power to doe what miſchiefe they liſted: By this time they learne the manner of Incantations, Spells, and Charmes: By this time they kill what Cattell they liſt, and under the covert of flattery and familiar entertainement, keepe hidden the ſtinging Serpent of malice, and a venomous inclination to miſchiefe: By this time is the Earle and his family threatned, and muſt feele the burthen of a terrible tempeſt, which from theſe womens deviliſh deviſes fell upon him, he neither ſuſpecting nor underſtanding the ſame: By this time both himſelfe and his honourable Counteſſe are many times subject to ſickneſſe and extraordinary

[page 6]

convulſions, which they taking as gentle corrections from the hand of God, ſubmit with quietneſſe to his mercy, and ſtudy nothing more, then a glorifie their Creator in heaven, and beare his croſſes on earth.

At laſt, as malice increaſed in theſe damnable women; ſo his family felt the ſmart of their revenge and inficious diſpoſition. For his eldeſt Sonne Henry Lord Roſſe ſickened very ſtrangely, and after a while died: and his next, named Francis Lord Roſſe, accordingly, was ſeverely tormented by them and moſt barbarouſly and inhumanely tortured by a ſtrange ſickeneſſe: not long after the Lady Katherine was ſet upon by their dangerous and divelliſh practiſes, and many times in great danger of life; through extreame maladies and unuſuall fits. Nay (as it ſhould ſeeme, and they afterward confeſſed) both the Earle and his Counteſſe were brought into their ſnares as they imagined, and indeed determined to keepe them from having any more children. Oh unheard of wickeneſſe and miſchievous damnation! Notwithſtanding all this did the noble Earle attend his Majeſty, both at New-Market before Chriſtmas, and at Chriſtmas at Whitehall; bearing the loſſe of his children moſt nobly, and little ſuſpecting that they had miſcarried by Witch-craft, or ſuch like inventions of the Devill, untill it pleaſed God to diſcover the villanous practiſes of theſe bad women, and to command the Devill from executing any further vengeance on innocents, but leave them to their ſhames, and the hands of Juſtice, that they might not onely be confounded for their villanous practiſes, but remaine as a notorious example to all ages of his judgement and fury. Thus were they apprehended about Chriſtmas; and carried to Lincolne Jayle, after due examination before ſufficient Juſtices of the Peace, and diſcreet Magiſtrates, who wondered at their audacious wickedneſſe; but Ioan Flower the mother, before conviction (as they ſay) called for bread and butter, and wiſhed it might never goe through her if ſhee were guilty of that whereupon ſhe was examined; ſo mumbling it in her month, never ſpake more words after, but fell downe and died as ſhe was carried to Lincolne Jayle, with an horrible excrutiation of ſoule and

[page 7]

body, and was buried at Ancaſter.

When the Earle heard of their apprehenſions, hee haſted downe with his brother Sir George, and ſometimes examining them himſelfe, and ſometimes ſending them to others; at laſt left them to the triall of the Law, before the Judges of Aſſize at Lincolne; and ſo they were convicted of murther, and executed accordingly, about the 11. of March, to the terror of all the beholders, and example of ſuch diſſolute and abhominable creatures: and becauſe yee ſhall have both cauſe to glorifie God for this diſcovery, and occaſion to apprehend the ſtrangeneſſe of their lives, and truth of their proceedings: I thought it both meet and convenient to lay open their owne Examinations and Evidences againſt one another, with the manner of their proceeding and revenges, with other particulars belonging to the true and plaine diſcovery of their villany and Witch-craft.

The Examination of Anne Baker of Bottesford in the County of Leiceſter Spinſter, taken March 1. 1618. by the right Honorable Francis Earle of Rutland, Sir George Manners Knight two of his Majeſties Iuſtices of the Peace for the County of Lincolne, and Samuel Fleming Doctor of Divinity, one of his Majeſties Iuſtices of the Peace for the County of Leiceſter aforeſaid.

SHee ſaith, That there are foure colours of Planets, Blacke, Yellew, Greene, and Blew: and that Blacke is alwayes Death, and that ſhe ſaw the Blew Planet ſtrike Thomas Fairebarne, the eldeſt ſonne unto William Fairebarne, of Bottesford aforeſaid by the Pinſold there, within the which time the ſaid William Fairebarne did beat her and brake her head, whereupon the ſaid Thomas Fairebarne did mend. And being asked who did ſend that Planet? anſwered it was not I.

Further ſhe ſaith, That ſhe ſaw a hand appeare unto her, and that ſhee heard a voyce in the aire ſaid unto her, Anne Baker, ſave thy ſelfe, for to morrow thou and thy Maſter muſt bee ſlaine: and the next day her Maſter and ſhe were in a Cart together; and ſuddenly ſhee ſaw a flaſh of fire, and ſhee ſaid her

[page 7]

prayers, and the fire went away and ſhortly after a Crow came and picked upon her cloathes, and ſhee ſaid her prayers againe, and bade the Crow goe to whom hee was ſent and the Crow went unto her Maſter, and did beat him to death, and ſhe with her prayers recovered him to life; but he was ſicke a fortnight after, and ſaith, that if ſhe had not had more knowledge then her Maſter, both hee and ſhee and all the Cattell had beene ſlaine.

Being examined concerning a childe of Anne Stannidge, which ſhee was ſuſpected to have bewitched to death; ſaith, the ſaid Anne Stannidge did deliver her childle into her hands, and that ſhe did lay it upon her skirt, but did no harme unto it: And being charged by the mother of the childe, that upon the burning of the haire and the pairing of the nailes of the ſaid childe, the ſaid Anne Baker came in and ſet her downe, and for one houres ſpace could ſpeake nothing, confeſſeth ſhe came into the houſe of the ſaid Anne Stannidge in great paine, but did not know of the burning of the haire and nailes of the ſaid childe; but ſaid ſhee was ſo ſicke that ſhee did not know whither ſhe went.

Being charged that ſhee bewitched Elizabeth Hough, the wife of William Hough to death, for that ſhe angred her in giving her almes of her ſecond bread; confeſſeth that ſhee was angry with her and ſaid ſhe might have given her of her better bread, for ſhe had gone too often on her errands, but more ſhe ſaith not.

This Examinate confeſſeth that ſhe came to Ioane Gylles houſe, her childe being ſicke, and that ſhee intreated this Examinate to looke on her childe, and to tell her whether it was foreſpoken or no, and this Examinate ſaid it was foreſpoken; but when the ſaid childe died ſhe cannot tell.

And being asked concerning Nortley carrying of his childe home unto his owne houſe, where the ſaid Anne Baker was, ſhe asked him who gave the ſaid childe that loafe, hee told her Anthony Gill, to whom this Examinate ſaid, he might have had a childe of his owne if hee would have ſought in time for it; which words ſhe confeſſed ſhe did ſpeake.

[page 8]

Being blamed by Henry Mills in this ſort; A fire ſet on you, I have had two or three ill nights: to whom ſhe made anſwere, you ſhould have let me alone then, which ſhe confeſſeth.

The ſaid Anne Baker, March 2. 1618. confeſſeth before Samuel Fleming Doctor of Divinity, that about 3. yeares agoe, ſhe went into Northamptonſhire, and that at her comming backe againe one Peakes wife and Denis his wife of Belvoyre told her that my young L. Henry was dead, and that there was a glove of the ſaid Lord buried in the ground; and as that glove did rot and waſt, ſo did the liver of the ſaid lord rot and waſt.

Further ſhe ſaid, March 3, 1618. before Sir George Manners Knight, and Samuel Fleming Doctor of Divinity, that ſhe hath a ſpirit which hath the ſhape of a white dogge, which ſhe calleth her good ſpirit.

Samuel Fleming teſt.

The Examination of Ioane Willimot, taken the 28. of February, in the 16. yeare of the reigne of our Soveraigne Lord Iames, over England King, &c. and over Scotland the 52. before Alexander Amcots Eſquire, one of his Majiſtise Iuſtices of the Peace of the ſaid Parts and County.

THis Examinat ſaith, That Ioane Flower told her that my Lord of Rutland had dealt badly with her, and that they had put away her daughter, and that although ſhee could not have her will of my Lord himſelfe, yet ſhe had ſpied my Lords Sonne, and had ſtrick on him to the heart. And ſhee ſaith, that my Lords ſonne was ſtricken with a white Spirit, and that ſhe can cure ſome that ſend unto her, and that ſome reward her for her paines, and of ſome ſhe taketh nothing.

Shee further ſaith, That upon Friday night laſt, her Spirit came to her and told her, That there was a bad woman at Deeping who had given her ſoule to the Devill: and that her ſaid Spirit did then appeare unto her in a more ugly for me then it had formerly done, and that it urged her much to give it ſomething, although it were but a piece of her girdle, and told her that it had taken great paines for her, but ſhee ſaith that ſhee

[page 8]

would give it nothing, and told it that ſhee had ſent it to no place, but onely to ſee how my Lord Roſſe did, and that her ſpirit told her, that he ſhould doe well.

The Examination of the ſaid Ioane Willimot, taken the ſecond day of March, in the yeare above ſaid, before the ſaid Alexander Amcots.

THis Examinate ſaith, That ſhee hath a Spirit which ſhee calleth Pretty, which was given unto her by William Berry of Langholme in Rutland ſhire, whom ſhe ſerved three yeares, and that her Maſter when hee gave it unto her, willed her to open her mouth, and hee would blow into her a Fairy which ſhould doe her good; and that ſhoe opened her mouth; and he did blow into her mouth and preſently after his blowing, there came out of her mouth a Spirit, which ſtood upon the ground in the ſhape and forme of a woman, which Spirit did aske of her her ſoule, which ſhee then promiſed unto it, being willed thereunto by by her Maſter. She further confeſſeth, That ſhe never hurt any body, but did helpe divers that ſent for her, which were ſtricken or fore-ſpoken: and that her Spirit came weekely to her and would tell her of divers perſons which were ſtricken and fore ſpoken. And ſhe ſaith, That the uſe which ſhee had of the Spirit was to know, how thoſe did which ſhee had undertaken to amend; and that ſhe did helpe them by certaine prayers which ſhee uſed, and not by her owne Spirit: neither did ſhe imploy her Spirit in any thing, but onely to bring word how thoſe did which ſhe had undertaken to cure.

And ſhe further ſaith, That her Spirit came unto her this laſt night (as ſhee thought) in the forme of a woman, mumbling, but ſhee could not underſtand what it ſaid. And being asked whether ſhee were not in a dreame or ſlumber when ſhee thought ſhe ſaw it, ſhe ſaid no, and that ſhe was as walking as at this preſent.

Alexander Amoors. Thomas Robinſon. teſt.

The Examination of Joane Willimot of Goadby in the County of Leiceſter widow, taken the 17. of March, 1618. by Sir

[page 9]

Henry Haſtings Knight, and Samuel Fleming Doctor of Divinity, two of his Majeſites Iuſtices of the Peace of the ſaid County of Leiceſter.

SHe ſaith, That ſhe told one Cookes wife, of Stathorne in the ſaid County Labourer, that Iohn Patchet might have had his child alive, if he would haue ſought forth for it in time, and if it were not death ſtricken in her wayes, and that Patchets wife had an evill thing within her, which ſhould make an end of her, and that ſhe knew by her girdle.

Shee ſaith further, That Gamaliel Greete of Waltham in the ſaid County Shepherd, had a Spirit like a white Mouſe put into him, in his ſwearing; and that if hee did looke upon any thing with an intent to hurt, it ſhould be hurt, and that he had marke on his left, arme, which was cut away; and that her owne Spirit did tell her all this before it went from her.

Further ſhee ſaith, That Ioane Flower, Margaret Flower, and ſhe, did meet about a weeke before Ioane Flowers apprehenſion in Blackborrow hill, and went from thence home to the ſaid Ioane Flowers houſe and there ſhee ſaw two Spirits, one like a Rat, and the other like an Owle; and one of them did ſucke under, her right eare, as ſhe thought: and the ſaid Ioane told her, that her Spirit did ſay, ſhe chould neither be hanged nor burnt.

Further, ſhe ſaith, That the ſaid Ioatie Flower did take up ſome earth and ſpit upon it, and did worke it with her finger, and put it up into her purſe, and ſaid, Though ſhe could not hurt the Lord himſelfe yet ſhe had ſped his ſonne, which is dead.

H. Haſtings. Samuel Fleming.

The Examination of Ellen Greene of Stathorne in the County of Leiceſter, taken the 17. of March 1618. by Sir Henry Haſtings Knight, and Samuel Fleming Doctor of Divinity.

SHe ſaith, That one Ioane Willimot of Goadby came about ſixe yeares ſince, to her in the Wowlds, and perſwaded this Examinate to forſake God, and betake her to the Devill, and ſhe would give her, two Spirits, to which ſhe gave her conſent and thereupon the ſaid Ioane Willimot called two Spirits, one in the likenes of a Kitlin, and the other of a Moldiwarp, the firſt the ſaid Willmot called Puſſe, the other Hiffe, hiffe, and they

[page 9]

preſently came to her, and ſhe departing left them with this Examinate, and they lept on her ſhoulder, and the Kitlin ſuckt under her right eare on her necke, and the Moldiwarp on the left ſide, in the like place. After they had ſuckt her, ſhee ſent the Kitlin to a Baker of that Towne, whoſe name ſhe remembers not, who had called her Witch and ſtricken her; and bade her ſaid Spirit goe and bewitch him to death: the Moldiwarp ſhe then bade goe to Anne Dawſe of the ſame Towne, and bewitch her to death, becauſe ſhee had; called this Examinate Witch, whore, jade, &c. and within one fortnight after they both died.

And further this Examinate ſaith, That ſhe ſent both her Spirits to Stonesby, to one Williſon a husband-man, and Robert Williman a husbandmans ſonne, and bade the Kitlin goe to Williſon and bewitch him to death, and the Moldiwarp to the other, and bewitch him to death, which they did; and within ten dayes they died. Theſe foure were bewitched while this Examinate dwelt at Waltham aforeſaid.

About three yeares ſince, this Examinate removed thence to Stathorne, where ſhe now dwelt: upon a difference betweene the ſaid Willimot and the wife of Iohn Patchet of the ſaid Stathorne Yeoman, ſhe the ſaid Willimot called her this Examinate to goe and touch the ſaid Iohn Patchets wife and her childe, which ſhe did, touching the ſaid Iohn Patchets wife in her bed, and the child in the Grace-wifes armes, and then ſent her ſaid Spirits to bewitch them to death, which they did, and ſo the woman lay languiſhing by the ſpace of a moneth and more, for then ſhe died; the child died the next day after ſhe touched it.

And ſhee further ſaith, That the ſaid Ioane Willimot, had a Spirit ſucking on her, under the left flanke, in the likeneſſe of a little white dogge, which this Examinate ſaith, that ſhee ſaw the ſame ſucking in Barley-harveſt laſt, being then at the houſe of the ſaid Ioane Willimot,

And for her ſelfe, this Examinate further ſaith, That ſhe gave her ſoule, the Deuill, to have theſe Spirits at her command; for a confirmation whereof, ſhe ſuffered them to ſucke her alwayes as aforeſaid, about the Change and full of the Moone.

H. Haſtings. Samuel Fleming.

[page 10]

The Examination of Philip Flower, ſiſter of Margaret Flower, and daughters of Ioane Flower, before Sir William Pelham, and Maſter Butler, Iuſtices of the Peace, February 4. 1618. Which was brought in at the Aſſizes as evidence against her ſiſter Margaret.

SHe ſaith, That her mother and her ſiſter maliced the Earle of Rutland, his Counteſſe, and cheir children, becauſe her ſiſter Margaret was put out of the Ladies ſervice of Laundry, and exempted from other ſervices about the houſe, whereupon her ſaid ſiſter; by the commandement of her mother, brought from the Caſtle the right hand glove of the Lord Henry Roſſe, which ſhe delivered to her mother; who preſently rubd it on the backe of her Spirit Rutterkin, then put it into hot boyling water, afterward ſhe pricked it often, and buried it in the yard, wiſhing the Lord Roſſe might never thrive, and ſo her ſiſter Margaret continued with her mother, where ſhe often ſaw the Cat Rutterkin leape on her ſhoulder, and ſuck her neck.

Shee further confeſſed, that ſhe heard her mother often curſe the Earle and his Lady, and thereupon would boyle feathers and blood together, uſing many Devilliſh ſpeeches and ſtrange geſtures.

The Examination of Margaret Flower.

SHe ſaith and confeſſeth, That about foure or five yeare ſince her mother ſent her, for the right hand glove of Henry Lord Roſſe, afterward that her mother bade her goe againe into the Caſtle of Bever, and bring downe the glove or ſome other thing of Henry Lord Roſſe, and ſhe askt what to doe? Her mother replied, to hurt my Lord Roſſe: whereupon ſhee brought downe a glove, and delivered the ſame to her mother, who ſtroked Rutterkin her Cat with it; after it was dipt in hot water, and ſo prickt it often, after which Henry Lord Roſſe fell ſicke within a weeke, and was much tormented with the ſame.

Shee further faith, That finding a glove about two or three yeares ſince of Francis Lord Roſſe, on a dunghill, ſhee delivered it to her mother, who put it into hot water and after tooke it out and rubd it on Rutterkin the Cat, and bad him goe upwards, and after her mother buried it in the yard, and ſaid a

[page 10]

miſchiefe light on him, but hee will mend againe.

Shee further ſaith, That her mother, and ſhee, and her ſiſter agreed together to bewitch the Earle and his Lady, that they might have no more children: and being demanded the cauſe of their malice and ill-will; ſhee ſaith, that about foure yeares ſince, the Counteſſe (growing into ſome miſlike with her) gave her forty ſhillings, a bolſter, and an attreſſe, and bade her lie at home, and come no more to dwell at the Caſtle; which ſhe not onely tooke in ill-part, but grudged at it exceedingly, ſwearing in her heart to be revenged. After this her mother complained to the Earle againſt one Peake, who had offred her ſome wrong, wherein ſhee conceived that the Earle tooke not her part, as ſhe expected, which diſlike with the reſt, exaſperated her diſpleaſure againſt him, and ſo ſhe watched an opportunity to bee revenged: whereupon ſhee tooke wooll out of the ſaid mattreſſe, and a paire of gloves, which were given her by Maſter Vavaſor, and put them into warme water, mingling them with ſome blood, and ſtirring it together, then ſhee tooke the wooll and gloves out of the water, and rubd them on the belly of Rutterkin her Cat, ſaying, the Lord and the Lady ſhould have more children, but it would be long firſt.

Shee further confeſſeth, that by her mothers commandment, ſhe brought to her a piece of a handkerchiefe of the Lady Katherine the Earles daughter, and her mother put it into hot water, and then taking it out, rubd it on Rutterkin, bidding him flie, and goe; whereupon Rutterkin whined and cried Mew: whereupon ſhe ſaid, that Rutterkin had no power over the Lady Katherine to hurt her.

Another Examination of Philip Flower, before Francis Earle of Rutland, Francis Lord Willoughby of Ersby, Sir George Manners, and Sir William Pelham.

SHee confeſſeth and ſaith, That ſhee hath a Spirit ſucking on her in the forme of a white Rat, which keepeth her left breaſt, and hath ſo done for three or foure yeares, and concerning the agreement betwixt her Spirit and her ſelfe, ſhee confeſſeth and ſaith, That when it came firſt unto her, ſhe gave her

[page 11]

ſoule to it, and it promiſed to doe her good, and cauſe Thomas Simpſon to love her, if ſhee would ſuffer it to ſucke her, which ſhe agreed unto; and ſo the laſt, time it ſuckt was on Tueſday at night, the 23. of February.

Margaret Flower, at the ſame time confeſſeth, that ſhe hath two familiar Spirits ſucking on her, the one white, the other blacke ſpotted; the white ſucked under her left breaſt, and the blacke ſpotted within the inward parts of her ſecrets. When ſhee firſt entertained them ſhee promiſed them her ſoule, and they covenanted to doe all things which ſhee commanded them, &c.

Shee further ſaith, That about the 30. of Ianuary laſt paſt, being Saturday, foure Devills appeared unto her in Lincolne Jayle, at eleven on twelve a clocke at midnight: The one ſtood at her beds feet, with a blacke head like an Ape, and ſpake unto her, but what, ſhe cannot well remember, at which ſhe was very angry becauſe hee would ſpeake no plainer, or let her underſtand his meaning: the other three were Rutterkin, Little Robin, and Spirit; but ſhe never miſtruſted them, nor ſuſpected her ſelfe till then.

THeſe Examinations and ſome others were taken and charily preſerved for the contriving of ſufficient evidences againſt them, and when the Judges of Aſſize came downe to Lincolne about the firſt wecke of March, being Sir Henry Hobert, Lord chiefe Juſtice of the Common-Pleas, and Sir Edward Bromely, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, they were preſented unto them, who not onely wondred at the wickedneſſe of theſe perſons, but were amazed at their practiſes and horrible contracts with the Devill to damne their owne ſoules: And although the Right Honourable Earle had ſufficient griefe for the loſſe of his children; yet no doubt it was the greater to conſider the maner, and how it pleaſed God to inflict on him ſuch a faſhion of viſitation: Beſides, as it amazed the hearers to underſtand the particulars, and the circumſtances of this devilliſh contract was it as wonderfull to ſee their deſperate

[page 11]

impenitency, and horrible diſtraction, according to the reſt of that ſort, exclaiming againſt the Devill for deluding them, and now breaking promiſe with them, when they ſtood in moſt need of his helpe.

Notwithſtanding all theſe aggravations, ſuch was the unparalleld magnanimity, wiſedome, and patience of this generous Noble-man, that he urged nothing againſt them more then their owne confeſſions, and ſo quietly left them to judiciall triall, deſiring of God mercy for their ſoules, and of men charity to cenſure them in their condemnation: but God is not mocked, and ſo gave them over to judgement, nor man ſo reformed, but for the Earles ſake, they curſed them to that place which they themſelves long before had bargained for.

What now remaines (gentle Reader) but for thee to make uſe of ſo wonderfull a ſtory, and remarkeable an accident, out of which, to draw to a conclusion, thou mayeſt collect theſe particulas: Firſt, that God is the ſupreame Commander of all things, and permitteth wonderfull actions in the World, for the triall of the godly, the puniſhment of the wicked, and his owne glory: of which man ſhall never attaine to know the reaſon or occaſion. Secondly, that the Devill is the meere ſervant and agent of God, to proſecute whatſoever he ſhall command rather then give leave unto; limiting him yet thus farre in his owne nature, that he can goe no further then the bounds within which he is hedged. Thirdly, that this God hath puniſhments, ad correctionem, that is to ſay, chaſtiſements of the godly, & Ad ruinam, Videlicet, judgements againſt the wicked, wherein yet man muſt diſclaime any knowledge, and forſake prejudicate opinions. For the very juſt ſhall be tried like gold, and no man exempted from caſtigation whom God doth love. Fourthly, that this Devill, though hee bee Gods inſtrument, yet worketh altogether by deceit: for as he was a lier from the beginning; ſo let no man truſt him, becauſe hee aimes at the confuſion of all mankinde, Fifthly, that the wicked (however they may thriue and proſper for a time) yet in the end are ſure to be payed home, either with puniſhment in this life or in the life to come, or both, as a finall reward of menſtrous impicty.

[page 12]

Sixthly, that man in his frailty muſt not preſume of proſperity, but prepare a kind of ſtooping under the hand of God, when it pleaſeth him to ſtrike or puniſh us. Seventhly, that there is no murmuring nor repining againſt God, but quietly to tolerate his inflictings, whenſoever they chance, of which this worthy Earle is a memorable example to all men and ages. Eightly, that the puniſhments of the wicked are ſo many warnings to all irregular ſinners to amend their lives, and avoid the judgement to come, by penitency, and newneſſe of life. Ninthly, that though man could bee content to paſſe over blaſphemies and offences againſt the Statutes of Princes, yet God will overtake them in their owne walkes, and pull them backe by the ſleeve into a ſlaughter-houſe, as here you know the evidences againſt theſe people tooke life and power from their owne Confeſſions. Tenthly, and laſt of all, that private opinion cannot prevaile againſt publike cenſures: for here you ſee the learned and religious Judges cried out with our Saviour, Ex ore tuo. Therefore though it were ſo, that neither Witch nor Devill could doe theſe things, yet Let not a Witch live, ſaith God, and Let them die (ſaith the Law of England) that have converſation with ſpirits, and preſume to blaſpheme the Name of God with ſpels and incantations. O then you ſonnes of men, take warning by theſe examples; and either divert your ſteps from the broad way of deſtruction, and irrecoverable gulfe of damnation, or with Ioſuahs counſell to Achan, Bleſſe God for the diſcovery of wickedneſſe, and take thy death patiently, as the prevention of thy future judgement, and ſaving innocents from puniſhment, who otherwiſe may be ſuſpected without a cauſe.

Vtinam tam facile vera invenire poſſem, quam falſa convincere.

The triall of a Witch.

Now as touching the triall and diſcovery of a Witch (then which these cannot be any preſident more neceſſary and behoovefull

[page 12]

for us) there are divers opinions holden; As ſome by the pricking of a ſharpe knife, naule, or other pointed instrument under the ſtoole or ſeate on which the Witch ſitteth (for thereon ſhee is not able to ſit or abide) others by ſcratching, or drawing of blood from the Witch, by either party that is grieved, or the next of blood to the ſame, and others by fire; as by burning any relique or principall ornament belonging to the ſuſpected Witch, which ſhall no ſooner bee on fire, but the Witch will preſently come running to behold it; and of theſe, trials have beene made both in Hartfordſhire, Northamptonſhire, and Huntingtonſhire; But the onély aſſured and abſolute perfect way to finde her out, is to take the Witch or party ſuſpected either to ſome Mildam, Pond, Lake or deepe River, and ſtripping her to her ſmocke, tie her armes acroſſe, onely let her legs have free liberty; then faſtening arope about her middle which with the helpe of by ſtanders may be ever ready to ſave her from drowning (in caſe ſhe ſinke) throw her into the water, and if ſhee ſwimme aloft and not ſincke, then draw her foorth, and have ſome honeſt and diſcreet women neere, which may preſently ſearch her for the ſecret marke of Witches, as Teates, blood-moales, moiſt warts, and the like, which found, then the ſecond time (binding her right thumbe to her left toe, and her left thumbe to her right toe) throw her into the water againe (with the aſſiſtance of the former rope to ſave her, if ſhee ſhould chance to ſincke) and if then ſhee ſwim againe and doe not ſincke you may moſt aſſuredly reſolve ſhe is a Witch: and of this many pregnant and true proofes have beene made, as namely by one Maſter Enger of Bedfordſhire, upon the perſon of Mary Sutton (a notable Witch) whom he caſt into his Mildam at Milton Mills, and found the effect as hath beene declared, and for her Witchcraft was there condemned and executed, and as this ſo I could recite a world of others in the ſame nature. But the trueth is ſo manifeſt that it needeth no flouriſh to adorne it.

FINIS.
