================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: Sextus Empiricus and Greek Scepticism
Creator: Mary Mills Patrick
Translator: Mary Mills Patrick (author and translator)
Edition: Cambridge: Deighton Bell & Co.; London: George Bell & Sons, 1899
Source: Internet Archive (sextusempiricus00patrgoog), Google Books scan of the 1899 edition
Public domain: Published 1899; public domain in the US and worldwide.
Artifact ID: sextus-empiricus-greek-scepticism-patrick-1899
================================================================================

Sextus Empiricus and Greek Scepticism.

The very aim of Pyrrhonism was an inconsistej
one. ^Arapa^ia was only another name for happines
and in one instance^ even, is given as fiZovrij and thus^
in spite of themselves, the Sceptics introduced a theory
of happiness. Pyrrho, like others of his time, sought
the highest good, and thought that he had found it in
drapa^uij the peace of mind that appears in other systems
of philosophy in other forms. The difference of aim
between the Pyrrhonists, Stoics, and Epicureans was
more apparent than real. To them all philosophy was
a path to lead to happiness. The method of Pyrrhonism
was, however, negative. Its strength consisted in its

< attacks on Dogmatism, and not in any positive aim of
its own, for its positive side could not^^^e recognised

, according to its own doctrines. Therefore there was

. no real development in Pyrrhonism, for a negative
thought cannot be developed.

We find, accordingly, from the time of Pyrrho to
Sextus, no growth in breadth of philosophical outlook,
only improvement in methods. Philosophical activity!
can never hav,e doubt as its aim, as that would form, as
we naye^pwrf/a psychological contradiction. The true]
essence of 'Pyrrhonism was passivity, but passivity cai
never lead to progress. Much of the polemical work oi
Pyrrhonism prepared the way for scientific progress by

, providing a vast store of scientific data, but progr^
was to the Pyrrhonists impossible. They sounded
own scientific death-knell by declaring the ir o
of science, and putting an end to all thp * ht of

The life of all scientific and philct,

' in the attempt to find the hidden trufiiaignet Op. at. p. 460.

. there was no truth, and there '^^


Critical EoDoiminaiion of Pyrrhonism. 99

progress is a law in the evolution of the human race, so '
Scepticism as a philosophy could never be a permanent .
growth^ any more than asceticism in religion can be a
lasting influence. Both of them are only outgrowths.
As the foundation principles of Scepticism were opposed
to anything like real growth^ it was a system that could
never originate anything. Pyrrho taught from the
beginning that the Sceptic must live according to law
and custom ; not^ however^ because one law or custom
is better than another in itself^ but simply for the sake
of peace. This basis of action was itself a death-blow
to all reform in social or political life. It was a selfish^
negative way of seeking what was^ after all, a positive
thing, the arapa^La that the Sceptic desired. Life with
the Pyrrhonist was phenomenal, and not phenomenal
simply in regard to the outer world, but also subjec*
tively, and no absolute knowledge of the subjective life
or of personal existence was possible.

The cause of the downfall of Pyrrhonism lay in the .
fact that it had nothing to ofier to humanity in the .
place of what it had destroyed. It made no appeal to
human sympathies, and ignored all the highest motives .
to human action. The especial materialistic standpoint
from which Pyrrhonism judged all that pertains to
knowledge and life shut out the ideal, and all possi- ,
bility of absolute truth. It was an expression of the
philosophic decadence of the age when it flourished, ,
and although it possessed some philosophic worth, yet ,
it bore in itself the causes of its decay. ,


PYEEHOFIO SKETCHES


BT


SEXTUS EMPIEIOUS.


BOOK I.


PYRRHONIC SKETCHES, Book I.

CHAPTER L

The Principal Differences between Philosophers.

It is probable that those who seek after anything
whatever, will either find it as they continue the search, 1
will deny that it can be found and confess it to be out of
reach, or will go on seeking it. Some have said, accordingly,
in regard to the things sought in philosophy, that they ^
have found the truth, while others have declared it impossible
to find, and still others continue to seek it. Those who
think that they have found it are those who are especially
called Dogmatics, as for example, the Schools of Aristotle
and Epicurus, the Stoics and some others. Those who have ^
declared it impossible to find are Clitomachus, Gameades,
with their respective followers, and other Academicians.
Those who still seek it are the Sceptics. It appears there-
fore, reasonable to conclude that the three principal kinds ^
of philosophy are the Dogmatic, the Academic, and the
Sceptic. Others may suitably treat of the other Schools,
but as for the Sceptical School, we shall now give an out-
line of it, remarking in advance that in respect to nothing
that will be said do we speak positively, that it must be
absolutely so, but we shall state each thing historically as
it now appears to us.

CHAPTER 11.
Ways of Treating Scepticism.

One way of treating the Sceptical philosophy is called 5
general, and the other special. The general method is that


104 Pyrrhoni-c Sketches by Sextus Empiricua.

by which we set forth the character of Scepticism, declaring
what its idea is, what its principles are, its mode of reason-
ing its criterion, and its aim. It presents also, the aspects
of doubt, oi rpoTToi rfj^ fVo^Q?, and the way in which we
should understand the Sceptical formulae, and thedistinctiou
between Scepticism and the related Schools of philosophy.

6 The special method, on the contrary, is that by which we
speak against each part of so-called philosophy. Let us then
treat Scepticism at first in the general way, beginning our
delineation with the nomenclature of the Sceptical SchooL

CHAPTER m.

Ths Nomenclature of ScepUdsm,

7 The Sceptical School is also called the "Seeking School,"*
from its spirit of research and examination ; the " Suspend-
ing School," from the condition of mind in which one is.
left after the search, in regard to the things that he has
examined ; and the " Doubting School," either because, as>
some say, the Sceptics doubt and are seeking in regard to
everything, or because they never know whether to deny
or affirm. It is also called the Pyrrhonean School^
because Pyrrho appears to us the best representative of
Scepticism, and is more prominent than all who before him
occupied themselves with it.

CHAPTER IV.
Whd is Scepticism f

8 The Bvvafu^ of the Sceptical School is to place the
phenomenal in opposition to the intellectual " in any way
whatever," and thus through the equilibrium of the reasons
and things {laoa0€V€ui r&v Xoytov) opposed to each
other, to reach, first the state of suspension of judgment^


Pyrrhonic {sketches by Sextus ETrvpiricus. 105

iiroxn* ^^^ afterwards that of imperturbability, aTa-
pa^ia. We do not use the word ivvafii^ in any 9
unusual sense, but simply, meaning the force of the system.
By the phenomenal, we understand the sensible, hence we
place the intellectual in opposition to it. The phrase *' in
any way whatever," may refer to the word Bvpa^ii^ in
order that we may understand that word in a simple sense
as we said, or it may refer to the placing the phenomenal
and intellectual in opposition. For we place these in
opposition to each other in a variety of ways, the phenomenal
to the phenomenal, and the intellectual to the intellectual,
or reciprocally, and we say "in any way whatever," in
order that all methods of opposition may be included. Or
" in any way whatever " may refer to the phenomenal and
the intellectual, so that we need not ask how does the
phenomenal appear, or how are the thoughts conceived, but
that we may understand these things in a simple sense. By
" reasons opposed to each other," we do not by any means 10
understand that they deny or affirm anything, but simply
that they offset each other. By equilibrium, we mean
equality in regard to trustworthiness and untrustworthiness,
so that of the reasons that are placed in opposition to each
other, one should not excel another in trustworthiness.
iiroxv is a holding back of the opinion, in consequence
of which we neither deny nor affirm anything, arapa^ia
is repose and tranquillity of soul. We shall explain how
drapa^ia accompanies i'Jrfyxfi when we speak of the aim.

CHAPTER V.
The Scefptic.

What is meant by a Pyrrhonean philosopher can be 11
understood from the idea of the Sceptical School. He is a
Pyrrhonean, namely, who identifies himself with this system.


106 Pyrrhcmc SketAes by Seaetas Bmpirieu8.


CHAPTER VL

The Origm of Se^pOaanL

12 Scepticism mroat in the b^imiiiig from the hope of
attaining aTvp«{ta; for mai of the greatest talent were per^
plezed by the eontradieti<»i of thii^s^ and being at a loss
what to be&Te^ b^an to qnestkni what things are tnie,
and what fslse^ hoping to attain mapa^ as a result of the
decision. The fundamental principle of the Sceptical sys-
tem is especially this» namely, to oppose erery argument
by one of equal weight, for it seems to us that in this way
we finally reach the position where we haye no dogmas.


CHAPTER Vn.

Does ike Seep^ Dogmaiiset

13 We say that the Sceptic does not dogmatise. We do
not say this, meaning by the word dogma the popular assent
to certain things rather than others (for the Sceptic does
assent to feelings that are a necessary result of sensation,
as for example, when he is warm or cold, he cannot say
that he thinks he is not warm- or cold), but we say this,
meaning by dogma the acceptance of any opinion in regard
to the unknown things investigated by science. For the

14 Pyrrhonean assents to nothing that is unknown. Further-
more, he does not dogmatise even when he utters the
Sceptical formulae in regard to things that are unknown,
such as " Nothing more,'' or " I decide nothing,'' or any of
the others about which we shall speak later. For the one
who dogmatises regards the thing about which he is said
to dogmatise, as existing in itself; the Sceptic does not
however regard these formulae as having an absolute


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextvs Empiricus. 107

existence,' for he assumes that the saying "All is feilse,"
includes itself with other things as false, and likewise the
saying "Nothing is true"; in the same way |* Nothing
more," states that together with other things it itself is
nothing more, and cancels itself therefore, as well as other
things. We say the same also in regard to the other
Sceptical expressions. In short, if he who dogmatises
assumes as existing in itself that about which he dogmatises, 15
the Sceptic, on the contrary, expresses his sayings in such a
way that they are understood to be themselves included,
and it cannot be said that he dogmatises in saying these
things. The principal thing in uttering these formulae is
that he says what appears to him, and communicates his
own feelings in an unprejudiced way, without asserting
anything in regard to external objects.


CHAPTER VIII.

Is Scepticism a Sect?

We respond in a similar way if we are asked whether 16
Scepticism is a sect or not If the word sect is defined as
meaning a body of persons who hold dogmas which are in
conformity with each other, and also with phenomena, and
dogma means an assent to anything that is unknown, then
we reply that we have no sect If, however, one means by 17
sect, a school which follows a certain line of reasoning based
on phenomena, and that reasoning shows how it is possible
to apparently live rightly, not understanding " rightly " as
referring to virtue only, but in a broader sense ; if, also, it
leads one to be able to suspend the judgment, then we
reply that we have a sect. For we follow a certain kind of
reasoning which is based upon phenomena, and which shows
us how to live according to the habits, laws, and teachings
of the fatherland, and our own feelings.


108 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus ETnpiricus.

CHAPTER IX.
Does the See^Hc Study Ncdvral Science 7

18 We reply similarly also to the question whether the
Sceptic should study natural science. For we do not study
natural science in order to express ourselves with confidenjg»'
regarding any of the dogmas that it teaches, but we take it
up in order to be able to meet every argument by one of
equal weight, and also for the sake of drapa^ia. In the
same way we study the logical and ethical part of so-called
philosophy.

CHAPTER X.

Do the Sceptics deny Phenomena?

19 Those who say that the Sceptics deny phenomena
appear to me to be in ignorance of our teachings. For as
we said before, we do not deny the sensations which we
think we have, and which lead us to assent involuntarily
to them, and these are the phenomena. When, however,
we ask whether the object is such as it appears to be,
while we concede that it appears so and so, we question,
not the phenomenon, but in regard to that which is asserted
of the phenomenon, and that is different from doubting
the phenomenon itself. For example, it appears to us

20 that honey is sweet. This we concede, for we experience
sweetness through sensation. We doubt, however, whether
it is sweet by reason of its essence, which is not a question
of the phenomenon, but of that which is asserted of the
phenomenon. Should we, however, argue directly against
the phenomena, it is not with the intention of denying
their existence, but to show the rashness of the Dogmatics.
For if reasoning is such a deceiver that it well nigh snatches
away the phenomena from before your eyes, how should
we not distrust it in regard to things that are unknown, so
as not to rashly follow it 1


Pyrrhonic SJcetcIies by Seodus Empi'i^ua. 109


CHAPTER XL

The Criterion of Scepticism,

It is evident that we pay careful attention to phenomena 21
from what we say about the criterion of the Sceptical
School. The word criterion is used in two ways. First,
it is understood as a proof of existence or non-existence, in
regard to which we shall speak in the opposing argument.
Secondly, when it refers to action, meaning the criterion to
which we give heed in life, in doing some things and
refraining from doing others, and it is about this that we
shall now speak. We say, consequently, that the criterion
of the Sceptical School is the phenomenon, and in calling 22
it so, we mean the idea of it. It cannot be doubted, as it
is based upon susceptibility and involuntary feeling. Hence
no one doubts, perhaps, that an object appears so and so,
but one questions if it is as it appears. Therefore, as we
cannot be entirely inactive as regards the observances of
daily life, we live by giving heed to phenomena, and in an
unprejudiced way. But this observance of what pertains 23
to the daily life, appears to be of four different kinds.
Sometimes it is directed by the guidance of nature, some-
times by the necessity of the feelings, sometimes by the
tradition of laws and of customs, and sometimes by
the teaching of the arts. It is directed by the guidance of 24
nature, for by nature we are capable of sensation and
thought ; by the necessity of the feelings, for hunger leads
us to food, and thirst to drink ; by the traditions of laws
and customs, for according to them we consider piety a
good in daily life, and impiety an evil ; by the teaching of
the arts, for we are not inactive in the arts we undertake.
We say all these things, however, without expressing a
decided opinion.


fti.-w jy iezTut Snutn


1


iriac b> tioB tf ^^jomaf the
L ^ :&ai tor viid » an ad all

^ "TJIwf AllU^i^-^rl* {Q Til lift "■fP or

.S3 - K-a. : .» -lie i i mntTTTti . cx tt::::gt 30 W da^sd.

... I—. ^J^ :ie Mm. if -ihit itx^at k ^T^pa{ii« in

1. . . _~ -c..:^ KETanr 3: loe -.piiixia, ami Hulsaliaa

7 ^.-^ 2a& ife impcHEK- f:'' m moa as kc beg^

. -irr-mtrf "vniist sc a^e aod vtkh aro fsfae, in

.-n- •^■" ^M^ M*- He met, however, vitk ewitik-

-.a- . lUSL -waipic. tad, being unable to jo^e, Iw

mi whSt bis jodgment was in ms-
t sjilflwnl, aa if by chaDce, in i^ard to
Fs- W wbo is <rf the opinMKi that
^ ._' X 7^>:=«r^N>i'K had br nature is always troabled,
J, mil 3t 2MB wG pnaaM those things that seem to
jj ,jM(, :b - nrtie* sue he is tortured by the things which
.e^ • 3tkac« wi. ami parsaes those that he thinks to
« jnn>. "-j^vmir acijiijred them, however, he falls into
_-- r- ^vrmr-MCiiiii, becaon he is excited beyond renson
.du. >i'~auuc soKorv fron fear of a change, and he does
.HH-vuuu^ ji 'jjs power to retain the things that seem to
• -.lift .3NM. Bm ka who is ondecided, on the contrary,
ri^^iciiit^ 'jan^ chat are good and bad by nature, neither
i.Y'jii. :wr xvfMK sBjthing eagerly, and is therefore in a
jtjtrH M ii^ia^M Foe that which is related of Apelles the
.^litax V ippyw rf to tite Sceptic It is said that as he was
ju<.u psi ""'^; a hone ke wished to represent the foam of
nu moiith ia. tha picture bnt he could not succeed in
40UU s^ and h* gare h np and threw the sponge at the
uutai'Sf wilah whidi he had wiped the colors from the


r^- ♦ *


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empirictis. Ill

painting. As soon, however, as it touched the picture it
produced a good copy of the foam. The Sceptics likewise 2&
hoped to gain arapa^ia by forming judgments in regard
to the anomaly between phenomena and the things of
thought, but they were unable to do this, and so they
suspended their judgment ; and while their judgment was
in suspension arapa^ia followed, as if by chance, as the
shadow follows a body. Nevertheless, we do not consider
the Sceptic wholly undisturbed, but he is disturbed by
some things that are inevitable. We confess that some-
times he is cold and thirsty, and that he suffers in such
ways. But in these things even the ignorant are beset in 30
two ways, from the feelings themselves, and not less also
from the fact that they think these conditions are bad by
nature. The Sceptic, however, escapes more easily, as he
rejects the opinion that anything is in itself bad by nature.
Therefore we say that the aim of the Sceptic is arapa^ia
in matters of opinion, and moderation of feeling in those
things that are inevitable. Some notable Sceptics have
added also suspension of judgment in investigation.

CHAPTER XIII.

Ths General Method of Scepticism,

Since wiB» have said that arapa^la follows the suspension 31
of judgment in regard to everything, it behooves us to
explain how the suspension of judgment takes place.
Speaking in general it takes place through placing things
in opposition to each other. We either place phenomena
in opposition to phenomena, or the intellectual in opposi-
tion to the intellectual, or reciprocally. For example, we 32
place phenomena in opposition to phenomena when we say
that this tower appears round from a distance but square
near by ; the intellectual in opposition to the intellectual,
when to the one who from the order of the heavens builds


110 Pyrrhanic Sketches by Sextua Evfipiricas,

CHAPTER XII.

What 18 the aim of Scepticism f

25 It follows naturally in order to treat of the aim of the
Sceptical School. An aim is that for which as an end all
things are done or thought, itself depending on nothing, or
in other words, it is th^ ultimatum of things to be desired*^
We say, then, that the aim of the Sceptic is arapa^ia in
those things which pertain to the opinion, and moderation

26 in the things that life imposes. For as soon as he began
to philosophise he wished to discriminate between ideas,
and to understand which are true and which are false, in
order to attain arapa^ia. He met, however, with contra*
dictions of equal weight, and, being unable to judge, he
withheld his opinion ; and while his judgment was in sus-
pension arapa^la followed, as if by chance, in regard to

27 matters of opinion. For he who is of the opinion that
anything is either good or bad by nature is always troubled,
and when he does not possess those things that seem to
him good he thinks that he is tortured by the things which
are by nature bad, and pursues those that he thinks to
be good. Having acquired them, however, he falls into
greater perturbation, because he is excited beyond reason
and without measure from fear of a change, and he does
everything in his power to retain the things that seem to

28 him good. But he who is undecided, on the contrary^
regarding things that are good and bad by nature, neither
seeks nor avoids anything eagerly,^ and is therefore in a
state of drapa^ta. For that which is related of Apelles the
painter happened to the Sceptic. It is said that as he was
once painting a horse he wished to represent the foam of
his mouth in the picture, but he could not succeed in
doing so, and he gave it up and threw the sponge at the
picture with which he had wiped the colors from the


/.-. <^' ^ *


Pyrrhonio Sketches by Sexlua Empiricua. Ill

painting. As soon, however, as it touched the picture it
produced a good copy of the foam. The Sceptics likewise 2&
hoped to gain arapa^ia by forming judgments in regard
to the anomaly between phenomena and the things of
thought, but they were unable to do this, and so they
suspended their judgment ; and while their judgment was
in suspension arapa^ia followed, as if by chance, as the
shadow follows a body. Nevertheless, we do not consider
the Sceptic wholly undisturbed, but he is disturbed by
some things that are inevitable. We confess that some-
times he is cold and thirsty, and that he suffers in such
ways. But in these things even the ignorant are beset in 30
two ways, from the feelings themselves, and not less also
from the fact that they think these conditions are bad by
nature. The Sceptic, however, escapes more easily, as he
rejects the opinion that anything is in itself bad by nature.
Therefore we say that the aim of the Sceptic is drapa^ia
in matters of opinion, and moderation of feeling in those
things that are inevitable. Some notable Sceptics have
added also suspension of judgment in investigation.

CHAPTER XIII.

The General Method of Scepticism.

Since we have said that drapa^la follows the suspension 31
of judgment in regard to everything, it behooves us to
explain how the suspension of judgment takes place.
Speaking in general it takes place through placing things
in opposition to each other. We either place phenomena
in opposition to phenomena, or the intellectual in opposi-
tion to the intellectual, or reciprocally. For example, we 32
place phenomena in opposition to phenomena when we say
that this tower appears round from a distance but square
near by ; the intellectual in opposition to the intellectual,
when to the one who from the order of the heavens builds


112 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seodus Empiricvs.

a tower of reasoning to prove tbat a providence exists, we
oppose the fact that adversity often falls to the good and
prosperity to the evil, and that therefore we draw the con-

33 elusion that there is no providence. The intellectual is
placed in opposition to phenomena, as when Anaxagoras
opposed the fact that snow is white, by saying tbat snow
is frozen water, and, as water is black, sqow must also be
black. Likewise we sometimes place the present in oppo-
sition to the present, similarly to the above-mentioned
cases, and sometimes also the present in opposition to the
past or the future. As for example, when someone pro-
poses an argument to us that we cannot refute, we say to

34 him, " Before the founder of the sect to which you belong
was born, the argument which you propose in accordance
with it had not appeared as a valid argument, but was
dormant in nature, so in the same way it is possible
that its refutation also exists in nature, but has not yet
appeared to us, so that it is not at all necessary for us to

35 agree with an argument that now seems to be strong.'' In
order to make it clearer to us what we mean by these

. oppositions, I will proceed to give the Tropes (rpoTrot),
through which the suspension of judgment is produced,
without asserting anything about their meaning or their
number, because they may be unsound, or there may be
more than I shall enumerate.

CHAPTER XIV.

The Ten Tropes.

36 Certain Tropes were commonly handed down by the
older Sceptics, by means of which iiroyfij seems to take
place. They are ten in number, and are called synony-
mously \6yoi and Tpiwoi. They are these: The first is
based upon the differences in animals; the second upon
the differences in men; the third upon the difference in


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empvncus. 113

the constitution of the organs of sense; the fourth upon
circumstances; the fifth upon position, distance, and place;
the sixth upon mixtures; the seventh upon the quantity
and constitution of objects ; the eighth upon relation ; the 37
ninth upon frequency or rarity of occurences; the tenth
upon systems, customs, laws, mythical beliefs, and dog-
matic opinions. We make this order ourselves. These 38
Tropes come under three general heads : the standpoint
of the judge, the standpoint of the thing judged, and the
standpoint of both together. Under the standpoint of the
judge come the first four, for the judge is either an animal,
or a man, or a sense, and exists under certain circumstances.
Under the standpoint of that which is judged, come the
seventh and the tenth. Under the one composed of both to-
gether, come the fifth and the sixth; the eighth and the ninth.
Again, these three divisions are included under the Trope 39
of relation, because that is the most general one ; it includes
the three special divisions, and these in turn include the
ten. We say these things in regard to their probable
number, and we proceed in the following chapter to speak
of their meaning.

The First Trope.

The first Trope, we said, is the one based upon the 40
differences in animals, and according to this Trope, different
animals do not get the same ideas of the same objects
through .the senses. This we conclude from the different
origin of the animals, and also from the difference in the
constitution of their bodies. In regard to the difference in
origin, some animals originate without mixture of the sexes,
while others originate through sexual intercourse. Of 41
those which originate without intercourse of the sexes,
some come from fire, as the little animals which appear in
the chimneys, others from stagnant water, as musquitoes,
•others from fermented wine, as the stinging ants, others

8


114 Pyrrkonic Sketches by Seoctvs Ew/pvricii8.

from the earth, others from the mud, like the frogs, others
from slime, as the worms, others from donkeys, as the
beebles, others from cabbage, as caterpillars, others from
fruit, as the gall insect from the wild figs, others from
putrified animals, as bees from bulls, and wasps from

42 horses. Again, of those originating from intercourse of
the sexes, some come from animals of the same kind, as in
most cases, and others from those of different kinds, aa
mules. Again, of animals in general, some are born alive»
as men, others from eggs, as birds, and others are bom a

43 lump of flesh, as bears. It is probable therefore, that the
inequalities and differences in origin cause great antipathies
in the animals, and the result is incompatibility, discord,
and conflict between the sensations of the different animals*

44 Again, the differences in the principal parts of the body^
especially in those fitted by nature to judge and to per-
ceive, may cause the greatest differences in their ideas of
objects, according to the differences in the animals them-
selves. As for example, those who have the jaundice
call that yellow which appears to us white, and those
who have bloodshot eyes call it blood-red. Accordingly,
as some animals have yellow eyes, and others blood-shot
ones, and still others whitish ones, and others eyes of other
colors, it is probable, I think, that they have a different

45 perception of colors. Furthermore, when we look steadily
at the sun for a long time, and then look down at a book,,
the letters seem to us gold colored, and dance around.
Now some animals have by nature a lustre in their eyes>
and these emit a fine and sparkling light so that they see at
night, and we may reasonably suppose that external things

46 do not appear the same to them as to us. Jugglers by
lightly rubbing the wick of the lamp with metal rust, or
with the dark yellow fluid of the sepia, make those whe
are present appear now copper-colored and now black,
acconling to the amount of the mixture used ; if this be


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricua. 115

so, it is much more reasonable to suppose that because of
the mixture of different fluids in the eyes of animals, their
ideas of objects would be different. Furthermore, when 47
we press the eye on the side, the figures, forms and sizes of
things seen appear elongated and narrow. It is therefore
probable that such animals as have the pupil oblique and
long, as goats, cats, and similar animals, have ideas different
from those of the animals which have a round pupil.
Mirrors according to their different construction, sometimes 48
show the external object smaller than reality, as concave
ones, and sometimes long and narrow, as the convex ones
do ; others show the head of the one looking into it down,
and the feet up. As some of the vessels around the eye 49
fall entirely outside the eye, on account of their protu-
berance, while others are more sunken, and still others are
placed in an even surface, it is probable that for this
reason also the ideas vary, and dogs, fishes, lions, men,
and grasshoppers do not see the same things, either of
the same size, or of similar form, but according to the
impression on the organ of sight of each animal respec-
tively. The same thing is true in regard to the other senses; 50
for how can it be said that shell-fish, birds of prey, animals
covered with spines, those with feathers and those with
scales would be affected in the same way by the sense of
touch ) and how can the sense of hearing perceive alike in
animals which have the narrowest auditory passages, and in
those that are furnished with the widest, or in those with
hairy ears and those with smooth ones ? For we, even, hear
differently when we partially stop up the ears, from what
we do when we use them naturally. The sense of smell 51
also varies according to differences in animals, since even
our sense of smell is affected when we have taken cold and
the phlegm is too abundant, and also when parts around
our head are flooded with too much blood, for we then
avoid odors that seem agreeable to others, and feel as


116 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus,

if we were injured by them. Since also some of the
animals are moist by nature and full of secretions, and
others are very full of blood, and still others have either
yellow or black bile prevalent and abundant, it is reason-
able because of this to think that odorous things appear

52 different to each one of them. And it is the same in
regard to things of taste, as some animals have the tongue
rough and dry and others very moist. We too, when we
have a dry tongue in fever, think that whatever we take
is gritty, bad tasting, or bitter; and this we experience
because of the varying degrees of the humors that are said
to be in us. Since, then, different animals have different
organs for taste, and a greater or less amount of the various
humors, it can well be that they form different ideas of the

53 same objects as regards their taste. For just as the same
food on being absorbed becomes in some places veins, in
other places arteries, and in other places bones, nerves, or
other tissues, showing different power according to the
difference of the parts receiving it ; just as the same water
absorbed by the trees becomes in some places bark, in other
places branches, and in other places fruit, perhaps a fig or

54 a pomegranate, or something else; just as the breath of
the musician, one and the same when blown into the flute,
becomes sometimes a high tone and sometimes a low one,
and the same pressure of the hand upon the lyre sometimes
causes a deep tone and sometimes a high tone, so it is
natural to suppose that external objects are regarded
differently according to the different constitution of the

55 animals which perceive them. We may see this more
y clearly in the things that are sought for and avoided by

animals. For example, myrrh appears very agreeable to
men and intolerable to beetles and bees. Oil also, which
is useful to men, destroys wasps and bees if sprinkled on
them ; and sea-water, while it is unpleasant and poisonous
to men if they drink it, is most agreeable and sweet to


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empiricua, 117

fishes. Swine also prefer to wash in vile filth rather than 56
in pure clean water. Furthermore, some animals eat grass .
and some eat herbs; some live in the woods, others eat
seeds ; some are carnivorous, and others lactivorous ; some
enjoy putrified food, and others fresh food; some raw
food, and others that which is prepared by cooking; and
in general that which is agreeable to some is disagreeable
and fatal to others, and should be avoided by them. Thus 57
hemlock makes the quail fat, and henbane the hogs, and
these, as it is known, enjoy eating lizards ; deer also eat
poisonous animals, and swallows, the cantharidae. More-
over, ants and flying ants, when swallowed by men, cause
discomfort and colic ; but the bear, on the contrary, what-
ever sickness he may have, becomes stronger by devouring
them. The viper is benumbed if one twig of the oak 58
touches it, as is also the bat by a leaf of the plane-tree.
The elephant flees before the ram, and the lion before the
cock, and seals from the rattling of beans that are being
pounded, and the tiger from the sound of the drum. Many
other examples could be given, but that we may not seem
to dwell longer than is necessary on this subject, we con-
clude by saying that since the same things are pleasant to
some and unpleasant to others, and the pleasure and dis-
pleasure depend on the ideas, it must be that different
animals have different ideas of objects. And since the 59
same things appear different according to the difference in
the animals, it will be possible for us to say how the
external object appears to us, but as to how it is in reality
we shall suspend our judgment. For we cannot ourselves
judge between our own ideas and those of other animals,
being ourselves involved in the difference, and therefore
much more in need of being judged than being ourselves
able to judge. And furthermore, we cannot give the 60
preference to our own mental representations over those
of other animals, either without evidence or with evidence,


118 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricus.

for besides the fact that perhaps there is no evidence, as
we shall show, the evidence so called will be either mani-
fest to us or not. If it is not manifest to us, then we
cannot accept it with conviction ; if it is manifest to us,
since the question is in regard to what is manifest to
animals, and we use as evidence that which is manifest to
us who are animals, then it is to be questioned if it is true

61 as it is manifest to us. It is absurd, however, to try to
base the questionable on the questionable, because the
same thing is to be believed and not to be believed, which
is certainly impossible. The evidence is to be believed in
so far as it will furnish a proof, and disbelieved in so far
as it is itself to be proved. We shall therefore have no
evidence according to which we can give preference to our
own ideas over those of so-called irrational animals. Since
therefore ideas differ according to the difference in animals,
and it is impossible to judge them, it is necessary to suspend
the judgment in regard to external objects.

Have the So-called Irrational Animals Reason?

62 We continue the comparison of the so-called irrational
animals with man, although it is needless to do so, for in
truth we do not refuse to hold up to ridicule the conceited
and bragging Dogmatics, after having given the practical
arguments. Now most of our number were accustomed to
compare all the irrational animals together with man, but

63 because the Dogmatics playing upon words say that the
comparison is unequal, we carry our ridicule farther,
although it is most superfluous to do so, and fix the dis-
cussion on one animal, as the dog, if it suits you, which
seems to be the most contemptible animal; for we shall
even then find that animals, about which we are speaking,
are not inferior to us in respect to the trustworthiness of

64 their perceptions. Now the Dogmatics grant that this


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricus. 119

animal is superior to us in sense perception, for he perceives
better through smell than we, as by this sense he tracks
wild animals that he cannot see, and he sees them quicker
with his eyes than we do, and be perceives more acutely by
hearing. Let us also consider reasoning, which is of two 65
kinds, reasoning in thought and in speech. Let us look
:first to that of thought. This kind of reasoning, judging
from the teachings of those Dogmatics who are now our
greatest opponents, those of the Stoa, seems to fluctuate
between the following things : the choice of the familiar,
and avoidance of the alien ; the knowledge of the arts that
lead to this choice ; and the comprehension of those virtues
that belong to the individual nature, as regards the feelings.
The dog then, upon whom it was decided to fix the argu- 66
ment as an example, makes a choice of things suitable to
him, and avoids those that are harmful, for he hunts for
food, but draws back when the whip is lifted up; he
possesses also an art by which he procures the things that
are suitable for him, the art of hunting. He is not also 67
without virtue ; since the true nature of justice is to give
to every one according to his merit, as the dog wags his
tail to those who belong to the family, and to those who
behave well to him, guards them, and keeps off strangers
and evil doers, he is surely not without justice. Now if he 68
has this virtue, since the virtues follow each other in turn,
he has the other virtues also, which the wise men say, most
men do not possess. We see the dog also brave in warding
off attacks, and sagacious, as Homer testified when he
represented Odysseus as unrecognised by all in his house,
and recognised only by Argos, because the dog was not
deceived by the physical change in the man, and had not
lost the ifHiVTaa-la KaToXrprTiKi] which he proved that he
had kept better than the men had. But according to 69
Chrysippus even, who most attacked the irrational animals,
the dog takes a part in the dialectic about which so much is


120 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricus,

said. At any rate, the man above referred to said that the
dog follows the fifth of the several non-apodictic syllogisms,
for when he comes to a meeting of three roads, after seeking
the scent in the two roads, through which his prey has not
passed, he presses forward quickly in the third without
scenting it. For the dog reasons in this way, potentially
said the man of olden time; the animal passed through
this, or this, or this ; it was neither through this nor this,

70 therefore it was through this. The dog also understands
his own sufferings and mitigates them. As soon as a sharp
stick is thrust into him, he sets out to remove it, by rubbing
his foot on the ground, as also with his teeth ; and if ever
he has a wound anywhere, for the reason that uncleansed
wounds are difficult to cure, and those that are cleansed are

71 easily cured, he gently wipes off the collected matter; and
he observes the Hippocratic advice exceedingly well, for
since quiet is a relief for the foot, if he has ever a wound in
the foot, he lifts it up, and keeps it undisturbed as much
as possible. When he is troubled by disturbing humours,
he eats gi*ass, with which he vomits up that which was

72 unfitting, and recovers. Since therefore it has been shown
that the animal that we fixed the argument upon for the
sake of an example, chooses that which is suitable for him,
and avoids what is harmful, and that he has an art by which
he provides what is suitable, and that he comprehends his
own sufferings and mitigates them, and that he is not
without virtue, things in which perfection of reasoning in
thought consists, so according to this it would seem that
the dog has reached perfection. It is for this reason, it
appears to me, that some philosophers have honoured them-

73 selves with the name of this animal. In regard to reason-
ing in speech, it is not necessary at present to bring the
matter in question. For some of the Dogmatics, even,
have put this aside, as opposing the acquisition of virtue,
for which reason they practiced silence when studying.


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextiis Empiricus, 121

Besides, let it be supposed that a man is dumb, no one
would say that he is consequently irrational. However,
aside from this, we see after all, that animals, about which
we are speaking, do produce human sounds, as the jay and
some others. Aside from this also, even if we do not 74
understand the sounds of the so-called irrational animals,
it is not at all unlikely that they converse, and that we do
not understand their conversation. For when we hear the
language of foreigners, we do not understand but it all
seems like one sound to us. Furthermore, we hear dogs 75
giving out one kind of sound when they are resisting some-
one, and another sound when they howl, and another when
they are beaten, and a diifferent kind when they wag their
tails, and generally speaking, if one examines into this, he
will find a great difference in the sounds of this and other
animals under different circumstances ; so that in all likeli-
hood, it may be said that the so-called irrational animals
partake also in spoken language. If then, they are not 76
inferior to men in the accuracy of their perceptions, nor in
reasoning in thought, nor in reasoning by speech, as it is
superfluous to say, then they are not more untrustworthy
than we are, it seems to me, in regard to their ideas.
Perhaps it would be possible to prove this, should we direct 77
the argument to each of the irrational animals in turn. As
for example, who would not say that the birds are distin-
guished for shrewdness, and make use of articulate speech ?
for they not only know the present but the future, and this
they augur to those that are able to understand it, audibly
as well as in other ways. I have made this comparison 78
superfluously, as I pointed out above, as I think I had
8u£Sciently shown before, that we cannot consider our own
ideas superior to those of the irrational animals. In short,
if the irrational animals are not more untrustworthy than
we in regard to the judgment of their ideas, and the ideas
are different according to the difference in the animals, I


122 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seostus Empiricus.

shall be able to say bow each object appears to me, but in
regard to what it is by nature I shall be obliged to suspend
my judgment.

The Second Trope.

79 Such is the first Trope of eiroxV' ^^^ second, we said
above, is based upon the differences in men. For even if
one assent to the hypothesis that men are more trustworthy
than the irrational animals, we shall find that doubt arises
as soon as we consider our own differences. For since
man is said to be composed of two things, soul and body,
we differ from each other in respect to both of these things;
for example, as regards the body, we differ both in form

80 and personal peculiarities. For the body of a Scythian
differs from the body of an Indian in form, the difference
resulting, it is said, from the different control of the
humors. According to different control of the humors,
differences in ideas arise also, as we represented under the
first Trope. For this reason there is certainly a great
difference among men in the choice and avoidance of
external things. The Indians delight in different things
from our own people, and the enjoyment of different
things is a sign that different ideas are received of the

81 external objects. We differ in personal peculiarities, as
some digest beef better than the little fish from rocky

' places, and some are affected with purging by the weak
wine of Lesbos. There was, they say, an old woman in
Attica who could drink thirty drachmas of hemlock without
daiiger, and Lysis took four drachmas of opium unhurt,

82 and Demophon, Alexander's table waiter, shivered when
he was in the sun or in a hot bath, and felt warm in the
shade ; Athenagoras also, from Argos, did not suffer harm
if stung by scorpions and venomous spiders ; the so-called
Psylli were not injured when bitten by snakes or by the
aspis, and the Tentyrites among the Egyptians are not


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua EmpvricvA. 123

liarmed by the crocodiles around them ; those also of the 83
Ethiopians who live on the Hydaspes river, opposite Meroe,
•eat scorpions and serpents, and similar things without
danger ; Rufinus in Chalcis could drink hellebore without
vomiting or purging, and he enjoyed and digested it as
43omething to which he was accustomed ; Chrysermos, the 84
Herophilian, ran the lisk of stomach-ache if he ever took
pepper, and Soterichus, the surgeon, was seized by purging
if he perceived the odor of roasting shad; Andron, che
Argive, was so free from thirst that he could travel even
through the waterless Libya without looking for a drink ;
Tiberius, the emperor, saw in the dark, and Aristotle tells
the story of a certain Thracian, who thought that he saw
the figure of a man always going before him as a guide.
While therefore such a dijQPerence exists in men in regard 85
to the body, and we must be satisfied with referring to a
few only of the many examples given by the Dogmatics, it
is probable that men also differ from each other in respect
to the soul itself, for the body is a kind of type of the soul,
as the physiognomical craft also shows. The best example
of the numerous and infinite differences of opinion among
men is the contradiction in the sayings of the Dogmatics,
not only about other things, but about what it is well to
43eek and to avoid. The poets have also fittingly spoken 86
about this, for Pindar said —

"** One delights in getting honors and crowns through storm-footed

horses,
Another in jMissing life in rooms rich in gold.
Another still, safe travelling enjoys, in a swift ship, on a wave of

the sea."

And the poet says —

" One man enjoys this, another enjoys that."
The tragedies also abound in such expressions, for instance,
it is said —

" If to all, the same were good and wise,
Quarrels and disputes among men would not have been."


124 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empiricus.

And again —

" It is awful indeed, that the same thing some mortals shonld please,.
And hj others be hated."

87 Since therefore the choice and the avoidance of things
depends on the pleasure and displeasure which they give^
and the pleasure and displeasure have their seat in perception
and ideas, when some choose the things that others avoid,. •
it is logical for us to conclude that they are not acted upon
similarly by the same things, for otherwise they would
have chosen or avoided alike. Now if the same things act
upon different men differently, on account of the difference
in the men, for this cause also suspension of the judgment-
may reasonably be introduced, and we may perhaps say
how each object appears to us, and what its individual
differences are, but we shall not be able to declare what it

88 is as to the nature of its essence. For we must either
believe all men or some men; but to believe all is to
undertake an impossibility, and to accept things that are
in opposition to each other. If we believe some only, let
someone tell us with whom to agree, for the Platouist
would say with Plato, the Epicurean with Epicurus, and
others would advise in a corresponding manner ; and so as
they disagree, with no one to decide, they bring us round

89 again to the suspension of judgment. Furthermore, he-
who tells us to agree with the majority proposes something,
childish, as no one could go to all men and find out what
pleases the majority, for it is possible that in some nations,
which we do not know the things which to us are rare are
common to the majority, and those things which happen*
commonly to us are rare. As for example, it might happen
that the majority should not suffer when bitten by venomous
spiders, or that fhey should seldom feel pain, or have other
personal peculiarities similar to those spoken of above. It \
is necessary therefore to suspend the judgment on account
of the differences in men.


y


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empiricus. 125


The Third Trope.

I

While, however, the Dogmatics are conceited enough 90
to think that they should be preferred to other men in the
judgment of things, we know that their claim is absurd,
for they themselves form a part of the disagreement ; and
if they give themselves preference in this way in the judg-
ment of phenomena, they beg the question before they
begin the judgment, as they trust the judgment to them-
selves. Nevertheless, in order that we should reach the 91
result of the suspension of judgment by limiting the
argument to one'Tnan, one who fot example they deem
to be wise, let us take up the third Trope. This is the
one that is based upon differences in perception. That the 92
perceptions differ from each other is evident. For example,
paintings seem to have hollows and prominences to the
sense of sight, but not to the sense of touch, and honey
to the tongue of some people appears pleasant, but un-
pleasant to the eyes; therefore it is impossible to say.
whether it is really pleasant or unpleasant. In regard
to myrrh it is the same, for it delights the sense of smell,
but disgusts the sense of taste. Also in regard to euphor- 93
bium, since it is harmful to the eyes and harmless to
all the rest of the body, we are not able to say whether
it is really harmless to bodies or not, as far as its own
nature is concerned. Kain-water, too, is useful to the eyeg^.^
but it makes the trachea and the lungs rough, just as oil
does, although it soothes the skin; and the sea-torpedo
placed on the extremities makes them numb, but is harm-
less when placed on the rest of the body. Wherefore we
cannot say what each of these things is by nature. It is
possible only to say how it appears each time. We could cite 94
more examples than these, but in order not to spend too
long in laying out the plan of this book we shall simply
say the following : Each of the phenomena perceived by us


126 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricus.

seems to present itself in many f onns, as the apple, smooth,
fragrant) sweet, yellow. Now it is not known whether it
has in reality only those qualities which appear to us, or if
it has only one quality, but appears different on account of
the different constitution of the sense organs, or if it haa
more qualities than appear to us, but some of them do not

95 affect us. That it has only one quality might be concluded
from what we have said about the food distributed in
bodies, and the water distributed in trees, and the breath
in the flute and syrinx, and in similar instruments ; for it
is possible that the apple also has only one quality, but
appears different on account of the difference in the sense

96 organs by which it is perceived. On the other hand, that
the apple has more qualities than those that appear to us,
can be argued in this way : Let us imagine someone bom
with the sense of touch, of smell, and of taste, but neither
hearing nor seeing. He will then assume that neither any-
thing visible nor anything audible exists at all, but only

97 the three kinds of qualities which he can apprehend. It is
possible then that as we have only the five senses, we
apprehend only those qualities of the apple which we are
able to grasp, but it may be supposed that other qualities
exist which would affect other sense organs if we possessed
them ; as it is, we do not feel the sensations which would

98 be felt through them. But nature, one will say, has
brought the senses into harmony with the objects to be
perceived. What kind of nature ? Among the Dogmatics
a great difference of opinion reigns about the real existence
of nature anyway ; for he who decides whether there is a
nature or not, if he is an uneducated man, would be
according to them untrustworthy ; if he is a philosopher,
he is a part of the disagreement, and is himself to be

99 judged, but is not a judge. In short, if it is possible that
only those qualities exist in the apple which we seem to
perceive, or that more than these are there, or that not


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricua. 127

even those which we perceive exist, it will he unknown to
us what kind of a thing the apple is. The same argument
holds for other objects of perception. If, however, the
senses do not comprehend the external world, the intellect
cannot comprehend it either, so that for this reason also it
will appear that the suspension of judgment follows in
regard to external objects.

The Fourth Trope.

In order to attain to iiroxv ^7 fixing the argument on 100
each separate sense, or even by putting aside the senses
altogether, we take up the fourth Trope of eTTo;^. This
is the one based upon circumstances, and by circumstances
we mean conditions. This Trope comes under consideration,
we may say, with regard to conditions that are according
to nature, or contrary to nature ; such as waking or sleep-
ing, the age of life, moving or keeping still, hating or loving,
need or satiety, drunkenness or sobriety, predispositions,
being courageous or afraid, sorrowing or rejoicing. For 101
example, things appear dijQTerent as they are according to
nature, or contrary to it ; as for instance, the insane and
those inspired by a god, think that they hear gods, while
we do not ; in like manner they often say that they per-
ceive the odor of storax or frankincense, or the like, and
many other things which we do not perceive. Water, also,
that seems lukewarm to us, if poured over places that are
inflamed, will feel hot, and a garment that appears orange-
coloured to those that have blood-shot eyes, would not look
so to me, and the same honey appears sweet to me, but
bitter to those who have the jaundice. If one should say 102;
that those who are not in a natural state have unusual ideas
of objects, because of the intermingling of certain humors,
then one must also say, that it may be that objects which
are really what they seem to be to those who are in an


128 PyrrJionic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus,

unnatural condition, appear dijQPerent to those who are in
health, for even those who are in health have humors that

103 are mixed with each other. For to give to one kind of
fluid a power to change objects, and not to another kind,
is a fiction of the mind ; for just as those who are in health
are in a condition that is natural to those who are in health,
and contrary to the nature of those who are not in health,
so also those who are not in health, are in a condition con-
trary to the nature of those in health, but natural to those
not in health, and we must therefore believe that they also

104 are in some respect in a natural condition. Furthermore,
in sleep or in waking, the ideas are different, because we do
not see things in the same way when we are awake as we
do in sleep ; neither do we see them in the same way in
sleep as we do when awake, so that the existence or non-
existence of these things is not absolute, but relative, that
is in relation to a sleeping or waking condition. It is there-
fore probable that we see those things in sleep which in a
waking condition do not exist, but they are not altogether
non-existent, for they exist in sleep, just as those things
which exist when we are awake, exist, although they do not

105 exist in sleep. Furthermore, things present themselves
differently according to the age of life, for the same air
seems cold to the aged, but temperate to those in their
prime, and the same color appears dim to those who are
old, and bright to those in their prime, and likewise the
same tone seems faint to the former, and audible to the

106 latter. People in different ages are also differently disposed
towards things to be chosen or avoided; children, for
example, are very fond of balls and hoops, while those in
their prime prefer other things, and the old still others,
from which it follows that the ideas in regard to the same

107 objects differ in different periods of life. Furthermore,
things appear different in a condition of motion and rest^
since that which we see at rest when we are still, seems to


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empiricua, 129


move when we are sailing by it. There are also differences 108
which depend on liking or disliking, as some detest swine
flesh exceedingly, but others eat it with pleasure. As
Menander said —

" how his face appears
Since he became such a man ! What a creature !
Doing no injustice would make us also beautiful."

Man3r'also that love ugly women consider them very beauti-
ful. Furthermore, there are differences which depend on 109
hunger or satiety, as the same food seems agreeable to those
who are hungry, and disagreeable to those who are satisfied.
There are also differences depending on drunkenness and
sobriety, as that which we consider ugly when we are sober
does not appear ugly to us when we are drunk. Again, 110
there are differences depending on predispositions, as the
same wine appears sourish to those who have previously
«aten dates or dried figs, but agreeable to those who have
taken nuts or chickpeas ; the vestibule of the bath warms
those who enter from without, but cools those who go out,
if they rest in it. Furthermore, there are differences de- 111
pending on being afraid or courageous, as the same thing
seems fearful and terrible to the coward, but in no wise so
to him who is brave. There are differences, also, depending
on being sad or joyful, as the same things are unpleasant
to the sad, but pleasant to the joyful. Since therefore 112
the anomalies depending on conditions are so great^ and ^
since men are in different conditions at different times, it
is perhaps easy to say how each object appears to each
man, but not so of what kind it is, because the anomaly
is not of a kind to be judged. For he who would pass
judgment upon this is either in some one of the conditions
mentioned above, or is in absolutely no condition whatever ;
but to say that he is in no condition at all, as, for example,
that he is neither in health nor in illness, that he is neither
moving nor quiet^ that he is not of any age, and also that

9


130 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricua,

113 he is free from the other conditions, is wholly absurd. But
if he judges the ideas while he is in any condition whatever^
he is a part of the contradiction, and, besides, he is no
genuine critic of external objects, because he is confused
by the condition in which he finds himself. Therefore
neither can the one who is awake compare the ideas of
those who are asleep with those who are awake, nor cani
he who is in health compare the ideas of the sick with
those of the well ; for we believe more in the things that
are present, and affecting us at present^ than in the things.

114 not present. In another way, the anomaly in such ideas,
is impossible to be judged, for whoever prefers one idea to
another, and one condition to another, does this either
without a criterion and a proof, or with a criterion and a
proof; but he can do this neither without them, for he
would then be untrustworthy, nor with them ; for if he
judges ideas, he judges them wholly by a criterion, and he

115 will say that this criterion is either true or false. But if it
is false, he will be untrustworthy ; if, on the contrary, he
says that it is true, he will say that the criterion is true
either without proof or with proof. If without proof, he
will be untrustworthy ; if he says that it is true with proof,
it is certainly necessary that the proof be true, or he will
be untrustworthy. Now will he say that the proof which
he has accepted for the accrediting of the criterion is true,

116 having judged it, or without having judged it ? If he says,
so without judging it, he will be untrustworthy ; if he has
judged it, it is evident that he will say that he has judged
according to some criterion, and we must seek a proof for
this criterion, and for that proof a criterion. For the proof
always needs a criterion to establish it, and the criterion
needs a proof that it may be shown to be true ; and a proof
can neither be sound without a pre-existing criterion that
is true, nor a criterion true without a proof that is shown

117 beforehand to be trustworthy. And so both the criterion


Pyrrhonic Sketdiea by Sextvs JSmpiricua. 131

and the proof are thrown into the dnydus in probanda, by
which it is found that they are both of them untrustworthy,
for as each looks for proof from the other, each is as un-
trustworthy as the other. Since then one cannot prefer
one idea to another, either without a proof and a criterion
or with them, the ideas that differ according to different
conditions cannot be judged, so that the suspension of
judgment in regard to the nature of external objects
follows through this Trope also.

Thb Fifth Trope.

The fifth Trope is that based upon position, distance, 118
and place, for, according to each of these, the same things
appear different, as for example, the same arcade seen
from either end appears curtailed, but from the middle it
looks symmetrical on every side : and the same ship appears
small and motionless from afar, and large and in motion
near by, and the same tower appears round from a distance,
but square near by. So much for distance. Now in refer- 119
ence to place, we say that the light of the lamp appears
dim in the sun, but bright in the dark; and the same
rudder appears broken in the sea, but straight out of it ;
and the egg in the bird is soft, but in the air hard ; and
the lyngurion is a fluid in the lynx, but is hard in the air ;
and the coral is soft in the sea, but hard in the air ; and a
tone of voice appears different produced by a syrinx, and
by a flute, and different simply in the air. Also in refer- 120
ence to position^ the same picture leaned back appears
smooth, and leaned forward a little seems to have hollows
and protuberances, and the necks of doves appear different
in color according to the difference in inclination. Since 121
then all phenomena are seen in relation to place, distance,
and position, each of which relation makes a great difference
with the idea, as we have mentioned, we shall be obliged


132 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empiricua.


by this Trope also to come to the suspension of judgment.
For he who wishes to give preference to certain ones of

122 these ideas will attempt the impossible. For if he simply
makes the decision without proof he will be untrustworthy.
If, however, he wishes to make use of a proof, should he
say that the proof is false, he contradicts himself, but if he
declares the proof to be true, proof of its proof will be
demanded of him, and another proof for that, which proof
also must be true, and so on to the regressus in infinitum.

123 It is impossible, however, to present proofs in infinitum^ so
that one will not be able to prove that one idea is to be
preferred to another. Since then one cannot either with-
out proof or with proof judge the ideas in question, the
suspension of judgment results, and how each thing appears
according to this or that position, or this or that distance,
or this or that place, we perhaps are able to say, but what
it really is it is impossible to declare, for the reasons which
we have mentioned.

Thb Sixth Trope.

124 The sixth Trope is the one based upon mixtures, accord-
ing to which we conclude that since no object presents
itself alone, but always together with something else, it is^
perhaps possible to say of what nature the mixture is, ol
the thing itself, and of that with which it is seen, but of
what sort the external object really is we shall not be able
to say. Now it is evident^ I think, that nothing from
without is known to us by itself, but always with some-
thing else, and that because of this fact it appears dijQTerent.

125 The color of our skin, for example, is different seen in
warm air from what it is in col^ and we could not say
what our color really is, only what it is when viewed
under each of these conditions. The same sound appears
different in rare air from what it is in dense, and


\


\

\

\


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Smpiricus. 133

are more overpowering in the warm bath and in the sun
than they are in the cold air, and a body surrounded by
water is light, but by air heavy. Leaving aside, however, 126
outer mixtures, our eyes have inside of them coatings and
humors. Since then visible things are not seen without
these, they will not be accurately comprehended, for it is
the mixture that we perceive, and for this reason those
who have the jaundice see everything yellow, and those
with bloodshot eyes bloody. Since the same sound appears
different in broad open places from what it does in narrow
and winding ones, and different in pure air and in impure,
it is probable that we do not perceive the tones unmixed ;
for the ears have narrow winding passages filled with
vaporous secretions, which it is said gather from places
around the head. Since also there are substances pre^ 127
sent in the nostrils and in the seat of the sense of taste,
we perceive the things smelled and the things tasted in
connection with them, and not unmixed. So that because
of mixture the senses do not perceive accurately what the
external objects are. The intellect even does not do this, 128
chiefly because its guides, the senses, make mistakes, and
perhaps it itself adds a certain special mixture to those
messages communicated by the senses; for in each place
where the Dogmatics think that the ruling faculty is situated,
we see that certain humors are present, whether one would
locate it in the region of the brain, in the region of the
heart, or somewhere else. Since therefore according to
this Trope also, we see that we cannot say anything re-
garding the nature of external objects, we are obliged to
suspend our judgment.

The Seventh Trope.

The seventh Trope is the one which, as we said, is based 129
upon the quantity and constitution of objects, constitution
commonly meaning composition. And it is evident that


1

\


134 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Erwpiricus.

we are obliged to suspend oar judgment according to this
Trope also in regard to the nature of things. As for
example, filings from the horn of the goat appear white
when they are seen separately and without being put
together; put together, however, in the form of a horn,
they look black. And the parts of silver, the filings that
is, by themselves appear Uack, but as a whole appear
white ; and parts of the Taenarus stone look white when

130 ground, but in the whole stone appear yellow; grains of
sand scattered apart from each other appear to be rough,
but put together in a heap, they produce a soft feeling ;
hellebore taken fine and downy, causes choking, but it

131 no longer does so when taken coarse; wine also taken
moderately strengthens us, but when taken in excess relaxes
the body ; food similarly, has a different effect according to
the quantity, at least, it often disturbs the body when too

132 much is taken, causing dyspepsia and discharge. We shall
be able here also to say of what kind the cutting from the
horn is, and what many cuttings put together are, of what
kind a filing of silver is, and what many of them put
together are, of what kind the tiny Taenarus stone, and
what one composed of many small ones is, and in regard
to the grains of sand, and the hellebore, and the wine, and
the food, what they are in relation, but no longer the nature
of the thing by itself, because of the anomaly in the ideas
which we have of things, according to the way in which they

133 flre put together. In general it appears that useful things
become harmful when an intemperate use is made of them,
and things that seem harmful when taken in excess, are not
injurious in a small quantity. What we see in the effect
of medicines witnesses especially to this fact, as an exact
mixture of simple remedies makes a compound which is
helpful, but sometimes when a very small inclination of
the balance is overlooked, the medicine is not only not

134 helpful, but very harmful, and often poisonous. So the


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus. 135

(^argument based upon the quantity and constitution of
Jjbjects, puts in confusion the existence of external objects.
V Therefore this Trope naturally leads us to suspend our
vjudgment, as we are not able to delcare exactly the nature
of external objects.

The Eighth Trope.

The eighth Trope is the one based upon relation, from 135
^ ^hich we conclude to suspend our judgment as to what
things are absolutely, in their nature, since every thing is
in relation to something else. And we must bear in mind
tihat we use the word is incorrectly, in place of appearSj
meaning to say, every thing appears to be in relation.
V^'^^s is said, however, with two meanings : first, that every
ihin^ is in relation to the one who judges, for the external
object, ue. the thing judged, appears to be in relation to
the judge ; the other way is that every thing is in relation
to the things considered together with it, as the relation of
the right hand to the left. But we came to the conclusion 136
above, that every thing is in relation to something, as for
example, to the one judging ; each thing appears in relation
to this or that animal, and this or that man, and this or
that sense, and in certain circumstances ; as regards things
considered together, also, each thing appears in relation to
this or that mixture, and this or that Trope, and this or
that composition, quantity and place. And in another way 137
it is possible to conclude that every thing is in rdation to
something, as follows : does the being in difference differ
from the being in relation, or not ? If it does not differ,
then it is the same as relation ; if it does differ, since every
thing which differs is in some relation, for it is said to be
in relation to that from which it differs, those things which
are in a difference are in a relation to something. Now 138
according to the Dogmatics, some beings belong to the
highest genera, others to the lowest species, and others to


136 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus.

both genera and species at the same time; all of these
are in relation to something, therefore every thing is in
relation to something. Furthermore, among things, some
things are manifest, and others are hidden, as the Dogmatics
themselves say, and the things that make themselves known^
to us are the phenomena, and the things that are mad<
known to us by the phenomena are the hidden things, foi
according to the Dogmatics, the phenomena are the outwan
appearance of the unknown; then that which makes known!
and that which is made known, are in relation to something : ^

139 every thing, therefore, is in relation to something. Ir
addition to this, some things are similar to each other ^^
and others are dissimilar, some are equal, and others are.
unequal. Now these things are in relation to something
therefore every thing is in relation to something, ,:mSA
whoever says that every thing is not in relation to some-
thing, himself establishes the fact that every thing is in

140 relation to something, for even in sajdng that every thing ,
is not in relation to something, he proves it in reference to •
us, and not in general, by his objections to us. In short,
as we have shown that every thing is in relation to some-
thing, it is then evident that we shall not be able to say
exactly what each object is by nature, but what it appears,
to be like in relation to something else. It follows from
this, that we must suspend our judgment regarding the
nature of things.

The Ninth Trope.

141 In regard to the Trope based on the frequency and
rarity of events, which we call the ninth of the series, we
give the following explanation: The sun is certainly &
much more astonishing thing than a comet, but because we
see the sun continually and the comet rarely we are se
much astonished at the comet that it even seems an omen^
while we are not at all astonished at the sun. If, however^


1


\


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus. 137


we should imagine the sun appearing at rare intervals, and
at rare intervals setting, in the first instance suddenly
lighting up all things, and in the second casting everything
into shade, we should see great astonishment at the sight.
An earthquake, too, does not trouble those who experience 142
it for the first time in the same manner as those who have
become accustomed to it. How great the astonishment of
a man who beholds the sea for the first time ! And the
beauty of the human body, seen suddenly for the first
time, moves us more than if we are accustomed to seeing
it. That which is rare seems valuable, while things that 14S
are familiar and easily obtained seem by no means so. If,
for example, we should imagine water as rare, of how much
greater value would it seem than all other valuable things !
or if we imagine gold as simply thrown about on the ground
in large quantities like stones, to whom do we think it would
be valuable, or by whom would it be hoarded, as it is now ?
Since then the same things according to the frequency or
rarity that they are met with seem to be now valuable and
now not so, we conclude Uiat it may be that we shall be able 144
to say what kind of a thing each of them appears to be
according to the frequency or rarity with which it occurs,
but we are not able to say what each external object is
absolutely. Therefore, according to this Trope also, we
suspend our judgment regarding these things.

The Tenth Trope.

The tenth Trope is the one principally connected with 145
morals, relating to schools, customs, laws, mythical beliefs,
and dogmatic opinions. Now a school is a choice of a
manner of life, or of something held by one or many, as
for example the school of Diogenes or the Laconians. A 146
law is a written contract among citizens, the transgressor
of which is punished. A custom or habit, for there is no


138 Pyrrhonic Sketchea by Sextua Empiriciba.

difference, is a common acceptance of a certain thing by
many, the deviator from which is in no wise punished.
For example, it is a law not to commit adultery, and it is

147 a custom with us to /Arf Sfffioaia ywai^el fiiyvva'dai. A
mjrthical belief is a tradition regarding things which never
took place, but were invented, as among others, the tales
about Cronus, for many are led to believe them. A dog-
matic opinion is the acceptance of something that seems to
be established by a course of reasoning, or by some proof,
as for example, that atoms are elements of things, and that
they are either homogeneous, or infinitesimal, or of some
other description. Now we place each of these things
sometimes in opposition to itself, and sometimes in oppo-

148 sition to each one of the others. For example, we place a
custom in opposition to a custom thus : some of the Ethio-
pians tattoo new-born children, but we do not, and the

^ Persians think it is seemly to have a garment of many
colors and reaching to the feet, but we think it not so. The
Indians ral^ ywai^l bqfMcrigf filywvraij but most of the

149 other nations consider it a shame. We place a law in
opposition to a law in this way : - among the Eomans he
who renounces his paternal inheritance does not pay his
father's debts, but among the Shodians he pays them in
any case ; and among the Tauri in Scythia it was a law to
offer strangers in sacrifice to Artemis, but with us it is

150 forbidden to kill a man near a temple. We place a school
in opposition to a school when we oppose the school of
Diogenes to that of Aristippus, or that of the Laconians to
that of the Italians. We place a mythical belief in oppo-
sition to a mythical belief, as by some traditions Jupiter is
said to be the father of men and gods, and by others
Oceanus, as we say —

" OceanuB father of the gods^ and Tethys the mother."

151 We place dogmatic opinions in opposition to each other»


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextvs Empiricus. 139

mrhen we say that some declare that there is only one
•element, but others that they are infinite in number, and
;flome that the soul is mortal, others that it is immortal ;
and some say that our affairs are directed by the providence
•of the gods, but others that there is no providence. We 152
place custom in opposition to other things, as for example
to a law, when we say that among the Persians it is the
•custom to practice appevofAi^iai^ but among the Romans
it is forbidden by law to do it ; by us adultery is forbidden,
but among the Massagetae indifference in this respect is
^Jlowed by custom, as Eudoxos of Cnidus relates in the
first part of his book of travels ; among us it is forbidden
jjurfTpcun fiiyvvcrdai, but among the Persians it is the
custom by preference to marry so ; the Egyptians marry
listers also, which among us is forbidden by law. Further, 153
we place a custom in opposition to a school, when we say
that most men avaxcopovvrc^ pnyvwovrai raU iaxn&p
•ywtu^^j 6 Sk KpaTrffs r§ ^iTnrap'xia Si^fio<ria, and Dio-
;genes went around with one shoulder bare, but we go
4u:ound with our customary clothes. We place a custom 154
in opposition to a mythical belief, as when the myths say
Ihat Cronus ate his own children, while with us it is the
•custom to take care of our children ; and among us it is the
-custom to venerate the gods as good, and not liable to evil,
but they are described by the poets as being wounded, and
also as being jealous of each other. We place a custom in 155
-opposition to a dogmatic opinion when we say that it is a
•custom with us to seek good things from the gods, but that
Epicurus says that the divine pays no heed to us; Aristippus
.also held it to be a matter of indifference to wear a woman's
robe, but we consider it shameful. We place a school in 156
•opposition to a law, as according to the law it is not allowed
to beat a free and noble born man, but the wrestlers and
boxers strike each other according to the teaching of their
-jnanner of life, and although murder is forbidden, the


140 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus,

157 gladiators kill each other for the same reason. We plac&
a mythical belief in opposition to a school when we say
that, althous;h the myths say of Hercules that in company
with Omphale —

" He carded wool, and bore servitade,"
and did things that not even an ordinary good man
would have done, yet Hercules' theory of life was noble.

158 We place a mythical belief in opposition to a dogmatic
opinion when we say that athletes seeking after glory as a
good, enter for its sake upon a laborious profession, but
many philosophers, on the other hand, teach that glory i»

159 worthless. We place law in opposition to mythical belief
when we say the poets represent the gods as working
adultery and sin, but among us the law forbids those things.

160 We place law in opposition to dogmatic opinion when we say
that the followers of Ghrysippus hold that it is a matter of
indifference to marry one's mother or sister, but the law

161 forbids these things. We place a mythical belief in oppo>
sition to a dogmatic opinion when we say that the poeta
represent Jupiter as descending and holding intercourse
with mortal women, but the Dogmatics think this wa&

162 impossible ; also that the poet says that Jupiter, on account
of his sorrow for Sarpedon, rained drops of blood upon the
earth, but it is a dogma of the philosophers that the divine
is exempt from suffering ; and they deny the myth of the
horse-centaurs, giving us the horse-centaur as an example

163 of non-existence. Now we could give many other examples-
of each of the antitheses mentioned above, but for a brief
argument, these are sufficient. Since, however, such anomaly
of things is shown by this Trope also, we shall not be able
to say what objects are by nature, but only what each
thing appears to be like, according to this or that school,,
or this or that law, or this or that custom, or according to>
each of the other conditions. Therefore, by this Trope
also, we must suspend our judgment in regard to the


M^rrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricus. 141

— ^ : — : — ; —

nature of ^sternal objects. Thus we arrive at ^iro-)(r} through
the ten Trapes.

CHAPTER XV.
The Five Tropes,
The later Sceptics, however, teach the following five 164
Tropes of iiroxv • first, the one based upon contradiction ; /

^(econd, the regressus in infinitum ; third, relation ; fourth,
the hypothetical ; fifth, the circvlus in jprohando. The one 165
based upon contradiction is the one from which we find,
that in reference to the thing put before us for investigation,
a position has been developed which is impossible to be
judged, either practically, or theoretically, and therefore,
as we are not able to either accept or reject anything, we
end in suspending the judgment. The one based upon the 166
regressus in infinitum is that in which we say that the proof
. brought forward for the thing set before us calls for another
proof, and that one another, and so on to infinity, sa that,
not having anything from which to begin the reasoning,
the suspension of judgment follows. The one based upon 167
relation, as we have said before, is that one in which the
object appears of this kind or that kind, as related to the
judge and to the things regarded together with it, but we
suspend our judgment as to what it is in reality. The one 168
based upon hypothesis is illustrated by the Dogmatics,
when in the regressus in infinitum they begin from something
that they do not found on reason, but which they simply
take for granted without proof. The Trope, circvlus in 169
probcmdo, arises when the thing which ought to prove the
thing sought for, needs to be sustained by the thing sought
for, and as we are unable to take the one for the proof of
the other, we suspend our judgment in regard to both.
Now we shall briefly show that it is possible to refer every
thing under investigation to one or another of these Tropes,
as follows : the thing before us is either sensible or intel-


t
t


142 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seodus Empiricul

170 lectual ; difference of opinion exists, however, as to what it.
is in itself, for some say that only the things of sense are>
true, others, only those belonging to the understandings
and others say that some things of sense, and some of
thought, are true. Now, will it be said that this difference
of opinion can be judged or cannot be judged ? If it cannot
be judged, then we have the result necessarily of suspension
of judgment, because it is impossible to express opinion in
regard to things about which a difference of opinion exists.

171 which cannot be judged. If it can be judged, then we ask
how it is to be judged ? For example, the sensible, for w&
shall limit the argument first to this — Is it to be judged by
sensible or by intellectual standards? For if it is to be
judged by a sensible one, since we are in doubt about the
sensible, that will also need something else to sustain it ;
and if that proof is also something sensible, something else
will again be necessary to prove it, and so on in infinitum.

172 If, on the contrary, the sensible must be judged by something:
intellectual, as there is disagreement in regard to the
intellectual, this intellectual thing will require also judg-
ment and proof. Now, how is it to be proved? If by
something intellectual, it will likewise be thrown into*
infinitwn ; if by something sensible, as the intellectual has
been taken for the proof of the sensible, and the sensible
has been taken for that of the intellectual, the circtdus in

173 probanda is introduced. If, however, in order to escape
from this, the one who is speaking to us expects us to take
something for granted which has not been proved, in order
to prove what follows, the hypothetical Trope is introduced,
which provides no way of escape. For if the one who
makes the hypothesis is worthy of confidence, we should in
every case be no less worthy of confidence in making a
contrary hypothesis. If the one who makes the assumption
assumes something true, he makes it suspicious by using
it as a hypothesis, and not as an established fact; if it is


Pyrrhymc Sketches by Sextua Empiricua. 143

false, the foundation of the reasoning is unsound. If a 174
hypothesis is any help towards a trustworthy result, let
the thing in question itself be assumed, and not something
else, by which, forsooth, one would establish the thing
under discussion. If it is absurd to assume the thing
questioned, it is also absurd to assume that upon which it
rests. That all things belonging to the senses are also in 175
relation to something else is evident, because they are in
relation to those who perceive them. It is clear then,
that whatever thing of sense is brought before us, it may
be easily referred to one of the five Tropes. And we come
to a similar conclusion in regard to intellectual things.
For if it should be said that there is a difference of opinion
regarding them which cannot be judged, it will be granted
that we must suspend the judgment concerning it. In 179-
case the difference of opinion can be judged, if it is judged
through anything intellectual, we fall into the regressus in
infinitum, and if through anything sensible into the drcvlus
inprdbando ; for, as the sensible is again subject to difference
of opinion, and cannot be judged by the sensible on account
of the regressus in infinitwm,, it will have need of the intel-
lectual, just as the intellectual has need of the sensible.
But he who accepts anything which is hjrpothetical again 17T
is absurd. Intellectual things stand also in. relation, because
the form in which they are expressed depends on the mind
of the thinker, and, if they were in reality exactly as they
are described, there would not have been any difference of
opinion about them. Therefore the intellectual also is
brought under the five Tropes, and consequently it is
necessary to suspend the judgment altogether with regard
to every thing that is brought before us. Such are the
five Tropes tai^ht by the later Sceptics. They set them
forth, not to throw out the ten Tropes, but in order to put
to shame the audacity of the Dogmatics in a variety of
ways, by these Tropes as well as by those.


144 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus.

CHAPTER XVI.

The Two Tropes.

178 Two other Tropes of iiroxv are also taught. For as it
appears that Qverj thing that is comprehended is either
comprehended through itself or through something else,
it is thought that this fact introduces doubt in regard to
all things. And that nothing can be understood through
itself is evident, it is said, from the disagreement which
exists altogether among the physicists in regard to sensible
and intellectual things. I mean, of course, a disagreement
which cannot be judged, as we are not able to use a sensible
or an intellectual criterion in judging it, for everything that
we would take has a part in the disagreement, and is un-

179 trustworthy. Nor is it conceded that anything can be
comprehended through something else ; for if a thing is
comprehended through something, that must always in
turn be comprehended through something else, and the
regressus in infinitum or the circuities in probanda follow. K,
on the contrary, a thing is comprehended through some-
thing that one wishes to use as if it had been comprehended
through itself, this is opposed to the fact that nothing can
be comprehended through itself, according to what we have
£aid. We do not know how that which contradicts itself
can be comprehended, either through itself or through
something else, as no critenon of the truth or of compre-
hension appears, and signs without proof would be rejected^
as we shall see in the next book. So much will suffice for
the present about suspension of judgment.

CHAPTER XVIL
Wh(U are Ihe Tropes for the overturning of Aetiology f

180 In the same manner as we teach the Tropes of iirax^^
some set forth Tropes through which we oppose the Dog-
matics, by expressing doubt in regard to the aetiology of


PyiThonic Sketches by Seostua Empiricus, 145

nfrhich they are especially proud. So Aenesidemus teaches
eight Tropes, by which he thinks that he can prove all
the dogmatic aetiology useless. The first of these Tropes 181
lie said, relates to the character of aetiology in general,
which does not give incontestable testimony in regard to
phenomena, because it treats of unseen things. The second
Trope istates that although abundant resources exist by
which to investigate the cause of a thing in question, some
Dogmatics investigate it in one way only. The third Trope 182
states that the Dogmatics assign causes which do not show
any order for things which have taken place in an orderly
manner. The fourth Trope states that the Dogmatics,
■accepting phenomena as they take place, think that they
■also understand how unseen things take place, although
perhaps the unseen things have taken place in the same
way as the phenomena, and perhaps in some other way
peculiar to themselves. The fifth Trope states that they 183
all, so to speak, assign causes according to their own
hypotheses about the elements, but not according to any
<iommonly accepted methods. The sixth states that they
often explain things investigated according to their own
hypotheses, but ignore opposing hypotheses which have
•equal probability. The seventh states that they often give 184
reasons for things that not only conflict with phenomena,
but also with their own hypotheses. The eighth states
that although that which seems manifest, and that which is
to be investigated, are often equally inscrutable, they build
up a theory from the one about the other, although both
•are equally inscrutable. It is not impossible, Aenesidemus 185
^aid also, that some Dogmatics should fail in their theories
of causality from other combinations of reasons deducible
from the Tropes given above. Perhaps also the five Tropes
of iTToxii are sufficient to refute aetiology, for he who pro-
poses a cause will propose one which is either in barmony
with all the sects of philosophy, with Scepticism, and with

10


146 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricua.

phenomena, or one that is not. Perhaps, however, it i»
not possible that a cause should be in harmony with them^
for phenomena and unknown things altogether disagree

186 with each other. If it is not in harmony with them, the
reason of this will also be demanded of the one who pro-
posed it ; and if he accepts a phenomenon as the cause of
a phenomenon, or something unknown as the cause of the-
unknown, he will be thrown into the regressm in infinitum ;
if he uses one cause to account for another one, into the
circulus in probanda; but if he stops anywhere, he will
either say that the cause that he proposes holds good so
far as regards the things that have been said, and introduce
relation, abolishing an absolute standpoint ; or if he accepts
anything by hypothesis, he will be. attacked by us. There-
fore it is perhaps possible to put the temerity of the Dog-
matics to shame in aetiology by these Tropes.

CHAPTER XVIII.

The Sceptical Formulae.

187 When we use any one of these Tropes, or the Tropes of
eiroxVj we employ with them certain formulae which show
the Sceptical method and our own feeling, as for instance,
the sayings, " No more," " One must determine nothing,"
and certain others. It is fitting therefore to treat of these
in this place. Let us begin with "No. more."

CHAPTER XIX.

The Formula "iVb m^e"

188 ^e sometimes express this as I have given it, and
sometimes thus, "Nothing more." For we do not accept
the " No more," as some understand it, for the examination
of the special, and " Nothing more " for that of the general,
but we use " No more " and " Nothing more " without any
difference, and we shall at present treat of them as one and


PyiThonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus. 147

the same expression. Now this formula is defective, for
as when we say a double one we really mean a double gar-
ment, and when we say a broad one we really mean a
broad road ; so when we say " No more " we mean really
no more than this, or in every way the same. But some 189
of the Sceptics use instead of the interrogation " No ? " the
interrogation "What, this rather than this?" using the
word " what " in the sense of " what is the reason," so that
the formula means, "What is the reason for this rather
than for this 1 " It is a customary thing, however, to use
an interrogation instead of a statement, as "Who of the
mortals does not know the wife of Jupiter ? " and also to
use a statement instead of an interrogation, as "I seek
where Dion dwells," and " I ask why one should admire a
poet." The word "what" is also used instead of "what
for" by Menander — "(For) what did I remain behind?"
The formula " Not more this than this " expresses our own igo
condition of mind, and signifies that because of the equality
of the things that are opposed to each other we finally
attain to a state of equilibrium of soul. We mean by
equality that equality which appears to us as probable, by
things placed in opposition to each other we mean simply
things which conflict with each other, and by a state of
equilibrium we mean a state in which we do not assent to
one thing more than to another. Even if the formula 191
" Nothing more " seems to express assent or denial, we do
not use it so, but we use it loosely, and not with accuracy,
either instead of an interrogation or instead of saying,
" I do not know to which of these I would assent, and to
which I would not." What lies before us is to express
what appears to us, but we are indifferent to the words by
which we express it. This must be understood, however,
that we use the formula " Nothing more " without affirm-
ing in regard to it that it is wholly sure and true, but we
present it as it appears to us.


148 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empiriciis.

CHAPTER XX.

Aphasia.

192 We explain Aphasia as follows: The word (fxia-L^; is used
in two ways, having a general and a special signification.
According to the general signification, it expresses affirma-
tion or negation, as " It is day" or " It is not day" ; accord-
ing to the special signification, it expresses an affimiation
only, and negations are not called <f>d<T€i<i, Now Aphasia
is the opposite of <f>daL^ in its general signification, which,
as we said, comprises both affirmation and negation. It
follows that Aphasia is a condition of mind, according to
which we say that we neither affirm nor deny anything.

193 It is evident from this that we do not understand by
Aphasia something that inevitably results from the nature
of things, but we mean that we now find ourselves in the
condition of mind expressed by it in regard to the things
that are under investigation. It is necessary to remember
that we do not say that we affirm or deny any of those
things that are dogmatically stated in regard to the un-
known, for we yield assent only to those things which
affect our feelings and oblige us to assent to them.

CHAPTER XXL

^^ Perhaps" and ^^It is possible^" and "It map be."

194 The formulae "Perhaps," and "Perhaps not," and "It
is possible," and "It is not possible," and "It may be," and
"It may not be," we use instead of "Perhaps it is," and
" Perhaps it is notj" and " It is possible that it is," and " It
is possible that it is not^" and " It may be that it is," and
" It may be that it is not." That is, we use the formula
" It is not possible " for the sake of brevity, instead of say-
ing " It is not possible to be," and " It may not be " instead


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seodus Evipiricua. 149

of " It may not be that it is," and " Perhaps not " instead
of "Perhaps it is not." Again, we do not here dispute 195
about words, neither do we question if the formulae mean
these things absolutely, but we use them loosely, as I said
before. Yet I think it is evident that these formulae
express Aphasia. For certainly the formula "Perhaps it
is " really includes that which seems to contradict it, i,e. the
formula " Perhaps it is not," because it does not affirm in
in regard to anything that it is really so. It is the same
also in regard to the others.


CHAPTER XXII.

iiroxv <^ ^^ Svspension of Judgment,

When I say that I suspend my judgment, I mean that 196
I cannot say which of those things presented should be
believed, and which should not be believed, showing that
things appear equal to me in respect to trustworthiness
and untrustworthiness. Now we do not affirm that they
are equal, but we state what appears to us in regard to
them at the time when they present themselves to us.
inroxn means the holding back of the opinion, so as neither
to affirm nor deny anything because of the equality of the
things in question.

CHAPTER XXIII.

The Formvla "/ determine Nothing."

In regard to the formula "I determine nothing," we 197
say the following : By " determine " we mean, not simply to
speak, but to give assent to an affirmation with regard to
some unknown thing. For it will soon be found that the
Sceptic determines nothing, not even the formula "I de-


150 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextua Empiricwa.

termine nothing," for this formula is not a dogmatic opinion,
that is an assent to something unknown, but an expression
declaring what our condition of mind is. When, for ex-
ample, the Sceptic says, '* I determine nothing," he means
this: "According to my present feeling I can assert or
deny nothing dogmatically regarding the things under
investigation," and in saying this he expresses what appears
to him in reference to the things under discussion. He
does not express himself positively, but he states what he
feels.

CHAPTER XXIV.

The Formula '^ Every thing is Undetermined"

198 The expression " Indetermination " furthermore shows
a state of mind in which we neither deny nor affirm posi-
tively anything regarding things that are investigated in a
dogmatic way, that is the things that are unknown. When
then the Sceptic says " Every thing is undetermined," he
uses " is undetermined," in the sense of " it appears unde-
termined to him." The words "every thing" do not
mean all existences, but those that he has examined of the
unknown things that are investigated by the Dogmatists.
By " undetermined," he means that there is no preference
in the things that are placed in opposition to each other,
or that they simply conflict with each other in respect to

199 trustworthiness or untrustworthiness. And as the one
who says " I am walking " really means " It is I that am
walking," so he who says ** Every thing is undetermined "
means at the same time, according to our teachings, "as
far as I am concerned," or " as it appears to me," as if he
were saying "As far as I have examined the things that
are under investigation in a dogmatic manner, it appears
to me that no one of them excels the one which conflicts
with it in trustworthiness or untrustwoithiness."


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricua. 151


CHAPTER XXV.

The Formula ^^ Every thing is Incomprehensible"

We treat the formula "Every thing is incomprehensible" 200
in the same way. For " every thing " we interpret in the
same way as above, and we supply the words " to me " so
that what we say is this: "As far as I have inspected
the unknown things which are dogmatically examined, it
appears to me that every thing is incomprehensible." This is
not^ however, to affirm that the things which are examined
by the Dogmatists are of such a nature as to be necessarily
incomprehensible, but one expresses his own feeling in
saying " I see that I have not thus far comprehended any
of those things because of the equilibrium of the things
that are placed in opposition to each other." Whence it
seems to me that every thing that has been brought forward
to dispute our formulae has fallen wide of the mark.

CHAPTER XXVI.

The Formulae "/ do not compr^end" and "/ do not

understand,"

The formulae "I do not comprehend " and "I do not 201
understand " show a condition of mind in which the Sceptic
stands aloof for the present from asserting or denying
anything in regard to the unknown things under investi-
gation, as is evident from what we said before about the
other formulae.

CHAPTER XXVIL

The Formula " To place an equal Statement in opposition

to every Statement"

Furthermore, when we say " Every statement may have 202
an equal statement placed in opposition to it," by " every,"
we mean all the statements that we have examined ; we
do not use the word "statement" simply, but for a


152 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empiricus,

statement which seeks to prove something dogmatically
about things that are unknown, and not at all one that
shows a process of reasoning from premises and con-
clusions, but something which is put together in any sort
of way. We use the word " equal " in reference to trust-
worthiness or untrustworthiness. "Is placed in opposi-
tion " we use instead of the common expression " to conflict

203 with," and we supply "as it appears to me." When therefore
one says, "It seems to me that every statement which I
have examined, which proves something dogmatically, may
have another statement placed in opposition to it which
also proves something dogmatically, and which is equal to>
it in trustworthiness and untrustworthiness," this is not
asserted dogmatically, but is an expression of human

204 feeling as it appears to the one who feels it. Soma
Sceptics express the formula as follows: "Every state-
ment should have an equal one placed in opposition to
it," demanding it authoritatively thus; "Let us place
in opposition to every statement that proves something
dogmatically another conflicting statement which also
seeks to prove something dogmatically^ and is equal to
it in trustworthiness and untrustworthiness." Naturally
this is directed to the Sceptics, but the infinitive should be
used instead of the imperative, that is, "to oppose" instead

205 of "let us oppose." This formula is recommended to the
Sceptic, lest he should be deceived by the Dogmatists and
give up his investigations, and rashly fail of the arapa^ia
which is thought to accompany i'7roj(i] in regard to every-
thing, as we have explained above.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
General Observations on the Formulae of the Sceptics,

206 We have treated of a sufficient number of these formulae
for an outline, especially since what we have said about


Pyi^rhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus, 153

those mentioned applies also to others that we have
omitted. In regard to all the Sceptical formulae, it must
be understood in advance that we do not affirm them to be
absolutely true, because we say that they can even refute
themselves, since they are themselves included in those
things to which they refer, just as cathartic medicines not
only purge the body of humors, but carry off themselves
with the humors. We say then that we use these formulae, 207
not as literally making known the things for which they
are used, but loosely, and if one wishes, inaccurately. It
is not fitting for the Sceptic to dispute about words,
especially as it contributes to our purpose to say that
these formulae have no absolute meaning; their meaning
is a relative one, that is, relative to the Sceptics. Besides, 208
it is to be remembered that we do not say them about all «
things in general, but about the unknown, and things that
are dogmatically investigated, and that we say what appears
to us, and that we do not express ourselves decidedly about
the nature of external objects. By this means I think that
every sophism brought against the Sceptical formulae can
be overturned. We have now shown the character of 209
Scepticism by examining its idea, its parts, its criterion
and aim, and also the Tropes of i'Jroxv, and by treating of
the Sceptical formulae. We think it therefore appropriate
to enter briefly into the distinction between Scepticism and
the nearly related schools of philosophy in order to more
clearly understand the Sceptical School. We will begin
with the philosophy of Heraclitus.

CHAPTER XXIX.

In what does the Sceptical School differ from the Philosophy

of Heraclitus ?

Now that this school differs from ours is evident, for 210


164 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricas.

Heraclitus expresses himself about many unknown things
dogmatically, which we do not, as has been said. Aenesi-
demus and his followers said that the Sceptical School is
the way to the philosophy of Heraclitus. They gave as a
reason for this that the statement that contradictory
predicates appear to be applicable to the same thing, leads
the way to the statement that contradictory predicates are
in reality applicable to the same thing ; and as the Sceptics
say that contradictory predicates appear to be applicable
to the same thing, the Heraclitans proceed from this to
the doctrine that such predicates are in reality applicable.
We reply to this that the statement that contradictory
predicates appear to be applicable to the same thing is not
a dogma of the Sceptics, but is a fact that presents itself
not only to the Sceptics, but to other philosophers, and to

211 all men. No one, for instance, would venture to say that
honey does not taste sweet to those in health, and bitter
to those who have the jaundice, so that the Heraclitans
start from a preconception common to all men, as do we
also, and perhaps the other schools of philosophy likewise.
If, however, they had attributed the origin of the statement
that contradictory predicates are present in the same
thing to any of the Sceptical teachings, as, for example, to
the formula "Every thing is incomprehensible," or "I
determine nothing," or any of the other similar ones, it
may be that which they say would follow ; but since they
start from that which is a common experience, not only to
us, but to other philosophers, and in life, why should one
say that our school is a path to the philosophy of Herac-
litus more than any of the other schools of philosophy, or
than life itself, as we all make use of the same subject

212 matter ? On the other hand, the Sceptical School may not
only fail to help towards the knowledge of the philosophy
of Heraclitus, but may even hinder it ! For the Sceptic
attacks all the dogmas of Heraclitus as having been


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus. 155

rashly given, and opposes on the one hand the doctrine of
conflagration, and on the other, the doctrine that contra-
dictory predicates in reality apply to the same thing, and
in regard to every dogma of Heraclitus he scorns his
dogmatic rashness, and then, in the manner that I have
before referred to, adduces the formulae " I do not under-
stand" and "I determine nothing," which conflict with
the Heraclitan doctrines. It is absurd to say that this
conflicting school is a path to the very sect with which
it conflicts. It is then absurd to say that the Sceptical
School is a path to the philosophy of Heraclitus.


CHAPTER XXX.

In what does the Sceptical School differ from the Philosophy

of Democritus?

The philosophy of Democritus is also said to have 213
community with Scepticism, because it seems to use the
same matter that we do. For, from the fact that honey
seems sweet to some and bitter to others, Democritus
reasons, it is said, that honey is neither sweet nor bitter,
and therefore he accords with the formula "No more,"
which is a formula of the Sceptics. But the Sceptics and
the Democritans use the formula "No more" differently
from each other, for they emphasise the negation in the
expression, but we, the not knowing whether both of the phe-
nomena exist or neither one, and so we differ in this respect.
The distinction, however, becomes most evident when 214
Democritus says that atoms and empty space are real, for
by real he means existing in reality. Now, although he
begins with the anomaly in phenomena, yet, since he says
that atoms and empty space really exist, it is superfluous,
I think, even to say that he differs from us.


156 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus.

CHAPTER XXXI.
In what does Scepticism differ from the Cyrenaic Philosophy T

215 Some say that the Cyrenaic School is the same as the
Sceptical, because that school also claims to comprehend
only conditions of mind. It differs, however, from it^
because, while the former makes pleasure and the gentle
motion of the flesh its aim, we make arapa^ia ours, and
this is opposed to the aim of their school. For whether
pleasure is presentor not, confusion awaits him whomaintaina
that pleasure is an aim, as I have shown in what I said
about the aim. And then, in addition, we suspend our
judgment as far as the reasoning with regard to external
objects is concerned, but the Cyrenaics pronounce the
nature of these inscrutable.

CHAPTER XXXIL

In what does Scepticism differ from the Philosophy of

Protagoras ?

216 Protagoras makes man the measure of all things, of
things that are that they are, and things that are not that
they are not, meaning by measure, criterion, and by things,
events, that is to say really, man is the criterion for all
events, of things that are that they are, and of things that
are not that they are not. And for that reason he accepts-
only the phenomena that appear to each man, and thus he

217 introduces relation. Therefore he seems to have community
with the Pyrrhoneans. He differs, however, from them,
and we shall see the difference after we have somewhat
explained how things seemed to Protagoras. He says, for
example, that matter is fluid, and as it flows, additions are
constantly made in the place of that which is carried away ;
the perceptions also are arranged anew and changed^


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seoctus Empiricua. 157

according to the age and according to other conditions of
the body. He says also, that the reasons of all phenomena 218
•are present in matter, so that matter can be all that it
appears to be to all men as far as its power is concerned.
Men, however, apprehend differently at different times,
according to the different conditions that they are in ; for
he that is in a natural condition will apprehend those
qualities in matter that can appear to those who are in a 219
natural condition, while on the contrary, those who are in
an unnatural condition will apprehend those qualities that
can appear to the abnormal. Furthermore, the same
reasoning would hold true in regard to differences in age,
to sleeping and waking, and each of the other different
conditions. Therefore man becomes the criterion of things
that are, for all things that appear to men exist for men,
and those things that do not appear to any one among
men do not exist. We see that he dogmatises in saying
that matter is fluid, and also in saying that the reasons for
all phenomena have their foundation in matter, while
these things are unknown, and to us are things regarding
which we suspend our judgment.

CHAPTER XXXm.

In what does Scepticism differ from the Academe

Philosophy ?

Some say further that the Academic philosophy is the 220
same as Scepticism, therefore it seems appropriate to me
to treat of that also. There have been, as the most say,
three Academies — the most ancient one, that of Plato and
his followers ; the second and middle one, that of Arcesilaus
and his followers, Arcesilaus being the pupil of Polemo ; the
third and new Academy, that of Carneades and Clitomachus
and their followers ; some add also a fourth, that of Philo
and Ch^rmides, and their followers ; and some count even a


158 Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricua.

fifth, that of Antiochus and his followers. Beginning then
from the old Academy, let us consider the difference between

221 the schools of philosophy mentioned. Now some have
said that Plato was a Dogmatic, others that he was a
Sceptic, and others that he was in some things a Sceptic
and in some things a Dogmatic. For in the fencing dialogues,
where Socrates is introduced as either making sport of
someone or contending against the Sophists, Plato has,
they say, a fencing and sceptical character, but he is
dogmatic when he expresses himself seriously, either

222 through Socrates or Timaeus or any such person. In
regard to those who say that he is a Dogmatic, or a
Dogmatic in some things and a Sceptic in others, it would
be superfluous, it seems to me, to speak now, for they
themselves grant that he is different from us. The ques-
tion as to whether he was really a Sceptic or not we treat
more fully in the Memoranda, but here we state briefly
that according to Menodotus and Aenesidemus (for these
especially defended this position) Plato dogmatises when
he expresses himself regarding ideas, and regarding the
existence of Providence, and when he states that the
virtuous life is more to be chosen than the one of vice.
If he assents to these things as true, he dogmatises ; or
even if he accepts them as more probable than otherwise
he departs from the sceptical character, since he gives a
preference to one thing above another in trustworthiness
or untrustworthiness ; for how foreign this is to us is

223 evident from what we have said before. Even if when
he performs mental gymnastics, as they say, he expresses
some things sceptically, he is not because of this a Sceptic.
For he who dogmatises about one thing, or, in short, gives
preference to one mental image over another in trust-
worthiness or untrustworthiness in respect to anything
that is unknown, is a Dogmatic in character, as Timon

224 shows by what he said of Xenophanes. For after having


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Seodus Empiricus. 15&

praised Xenophanes in many things, and even after having
dedicated his Satires to him, he made him mourn and
say—

" Would that I also might gain that mind profoand,
Ahle to look both ways. In a treacherous path have I been

decoyed.
And still in old age am with all wisdom unwed.
For wherever I turned my view
All things were resolved into unity ; all things, alway
From all sources drawn, were merged into nature the same."

Timon calls him somewhat, but not entirely, free from
vanity, when he said —

" Xenophanes somewhat free from vanity, mocker of Homeric deceit,
Far from men he conceived a god, on all sides equal.
Above pain, a being spiritualised, or intellect."

In saying that he was somewhat free from vanity, he meant
that he was in some things free from vanity. He called
him a mocker of the Homeric deceit because he had scoffed
at the deceit in Homer. Xenophanes also dogmatised, con- 22&
trary to the assumptions of other men, that all things are
one, and that Grod is grown together with all things, that
He is spherical, insensible, unchangeable, and reasonable,
whence the difference of Xenophanes from us is easily
proved. In short, from what has been said, it is evident
that although Plato expresses doubt about some things, so
long as he has expressed himself in certain places in regard
to the existence of unknown things, or as preferring some
things to others in trustworthiness, he cannot be, it seems
to me, a Sceptic. Those of the New Academy, although 22&
they say that all things are incomprehensible, differ from
the Sceptics, perhaps even in saying that all things are in-
comprehensible (for they assert decidedly in regard to this,
but the Sceptic thinks it possible that some things may be
comprehended), but they differ evidently still further from
us in their judgment of good and evil. For the Academi-
cians say that there is such a thing as good and evil, not


160 Pyrrhonic Sketches hy Sextua Empii^ictis,

as we say it, but more with the conviction that that which
they call good exists than that it does not ; and likewise in
regard to the evil, while we do not say anything is good
or evil with the conviction that it is probably so, but we Uve
our Uves in an unprejudiced way in order not to be

227 inactive. Moreover, we say that our ideas are equal to
each other in trustworthiness and untrustworthiness, as
far as their nature goes, while they say that some are
probable and others improbable. They make a difference
also between the improbable ones, for they believe that
some of them are only probable, others probable and un-
disputed, still others probable, undisputed, and tested. As
for example, when a coiled rope is lying in a somewhat
dark room, he who comes in suddenly gets only a probable

j228 idea of it, and thinks that it is a serpent ; but it appears to
be a rope to him who has looked carefully around, and
found out that it does not move, and that it is of such a
color, and so on, according to an idea which is probable
and undisputed. The tested idea is like this : It is said
that Hercules led Alcestis after she was dead back again
from Hades and showed her to Admetus, and he received
an idea that was probable and undisputed regarding
Alcestis. As, however, he knew that she was dead, his
mind drew back from belief and inclined to disbelief.

:229 ^ow those belonging to the New Academy prefer the idea
which is probable and undisputed to the simply probable
one. To both of these, however, they prefer that which is
probable, undisputed, and tested. If, however, both those
of the Academy and the Sceptics say that they believe
certain things, there is an evident difference between the

230 two schools of philosophy even in this ; for '' to believe " is
used in a different sense, meaning, on the one hand, not to
resist, but simply to accept without strong inclination and
approval, as the child is said to believe the teacher ; on the
other handy "to believe" is used to signify assenting to


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empvncua. 161

something with choice, and, as it were, with the sympathy
that accompanies strong will, as the prodigal follows the
one who chooses to live a luxurious life. Therefore, since
Cameades, Olitomachus, and their followers say that they
are strongly inclined to believe that a thing is probable, and
we simply allow that it may be so without assent, we differ 231
from them, I think, in this way. We differ from the New
Academy likewise in things concerning the aim ; for while
the men who say that they govern themselves according to
that School avail themselves of the idea of the probable in
life, we live according to the laws and customs, and our
natural feelings, in an unprejudiced way. We could say
more regarding the distinction between the two schools if
we did not aim at brevity. Nevertheless, Arcesilaus, who 232
as we said was the leader and chief of the Middle Academy,
seems to me to have very much in common with the
Pyrrhonean teachings, so that his school and ours are
almost one. For neither does one find that he expressed
an opinion about the existence or non-existence of any-
thing, nor does he prefer one thing to another as regards
trustworthiness or untrustworthiness ; he suspends his
judgment regarding all things, and the aim of his philo-
sophy is eiroxVi ^hich is accompanied by arapa^la^ and
this agrees with what we have said. But he calls the 233
particular instances of hroyfi bona, and the particular in-
stances of assent mala. The difference is that we say these
things according to what appears to us, and not affirma-
tively, while he says them as if speaking of realities, that
is, he says that hroyfi is in itself good, and assent an evil.
If we are to believe also the things that are said about him, 234
he appeared at first sight to be a Pyrrhonean, but he was
in truth a Dogmatic, for he used to test his companions by
the method of doubt to see whether they were gifted enough
to take in Plato's dogmas, so that he appeared to be a
Sceptic, but at the same time he communicated the doctrines

11


162 Pyrrhxmio Sketches by Sextus Empiricus.

of Plato to those of his companions who were gifted. Hence
Ariston also said about him —

" Plato in front, Pyrrhon behind, Diodoras in the middle,"

because he availed himself of the dialectic of Diodorus, but

235 was wholly a Platonist. Now Philo and his followers say
that as far as the Stoic criterion is concerned, that is to say
the <f>avTaaia /caraXtfTiTiKi], things are incomprehensible,
but as far as the nature of things is concerned, they are
comprehensible. Antiochus, however, transferred the Stoa
to the Academy, so that it was even said of him that he
taught the Stoic philosophy in the Academy, because he
tried to show that the Stoic doctrines are found in Plato.
The difference, therefore, between the Sceptical School and
the Fourth and Fifth Academy is evident.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
Is Empiricism in Medicine the same as Scepticism?

236 Some say that the medical sect called Empiricism is
the same as Scepticism. Yet the fact must be recognised,
that even if Empiricism does maintain the impossibility of
knowledge, it is neither Scepticism itself, nor would it
suit the Sceptic to take that sect upon himself. He could
rather, it seems to me, belong to the so-called Methodic

237 School. For this alone, of all the medical sects, does not
seem to proceed rashly in regard to unknovni things, and
does not presume to say whether they are comprehensible
or not, but is guided by phenomena, and receives from-
them the same help which they seem to give to the Scep-
tical system. For we have said in what has gone before,
that the every-day life which the Sceptic lives is of four
parts, depending on the guidance of nature, on the necessity
of the feelings, on the traditions of laws and customs, and

238 on the teaching of the arts. Now as by necessity of


Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus. 163

the feelings the Sceptic is led by thirst to drink, and
by hunger to food, and to supply similar needs in the
same way, so also the physician of the Methodic School is
led by the feelings to find suitable remedies; in constipation
he produces a relaxation, as one takes refuge in the sun
from the shrinking on account of intense cold ; he is led
by a flux to the stopping of it, as those in a hot bath who
are dripping from a profuse perspiration and are relaxed,
hasten to check it by going into the cold air. Moreover,
it is evident that the Methodic physician forces those
things which are of a foreign nature to adapt themselves
to their own nature, as even the dog tries to get a sharp
«tick out that is thrust into him. In order, however, that 239
I should not overstep the outline character of this work
by discussing details, I think that all the things that the
Methodics have thus said can be classified as referring to
the necessity of the feelings that are natural or those that
are unnatural. "Sesides this, it is common to both schools
to have no dogmas, and to use words loosely. For as the 240
Sceptic uses the formula ''I determine nothing," and ^'I
understand nothing," as we said above, so the Methodic
also uses the expressions "Community," and "To go
through," and other similar ones without over much care.
In a similar way he uses the word " Indication " undog-
matically, meaning that the symptoms of the patient
either natural or unnatural, indicate the remedies that
would be suitable, as we said in speaking of thirst, hunger,
and other things. It will thus be seen that the Methodic 241
School of medicine has a certain relationship to Scepticism
which is closer than that of the other medical sects,
speaking comparatively if not absolutely from these and
similar tokens. Having said so much in reference to the
schools that seem to closely resemble Scepticism, we con-
clude the general consideration of Scepticism and the
First Book of the Sketches.


/


CAMBRZSOE

PRIMTSD BT JONATHAN PALMKBi:

ALXXANDHA STBXST
