Sextus Empiricus, Vol. I: Outlines of Pyrrhonism (Bury, 1933) (Sextus Empiricus (R. G. Bury, trans.), 1933)
======================================================================
The primary source for ancient Pyrrhonist skepticism: Bury's Loeb translation of the Outlines of Pyrrhonism (Books I–III) with his introduction on the dogmatic philosophies (Heinemann/Putnam, 1933). Public domain: no copyright renewal found in the Stanford Copyright Renewal Database (renewal window 1960–61). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.183761).

| SEXTUS EMPIRICUS | 
WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY | 
Tue Rev. R. G. BURY, Lirt.D, 


FORMERLY SCHOLAR OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 


IN THREE VOLUMES 


I 


OUTLINES OF PYR 






ΨΥ SIDES Fi Oo =, 


πὶ 6 dA. 00} 
b 3 | Date Nr es | 


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD 
NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
MCMXXXIII 


Printed in Great Britain 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME I 


PAGE 


INTRODUCTION : 
I. The Earlier Dogmatic Philosophies . vii 
II. The Later Dogmatists ᾿ ‘ ~ xxi 
ΠῚ, Scepticism and the Sceptics ᾿ . Xxix 
IV. Text and Editions : : : . ΧΙΠῚ 
OUTLINES ΟΕ PYRRHONISM: 
Book I . . : ; ; 2 
Book II . ; . 150 
Book ΠῚ. : ; ᾿ . 894 


INTRODUCTION 


I. Tue Eartrer Dogmatic PHrLosoPpHies 


THE writings of Sextus contain not only an exposition 
of Scepticism but also a critique of the doctrines of 
“the Dogmatists.’’ The main task of the Sceptic is, 
in fact, to expose the folly of every form of positive 
doctrine ; and consequently the bulk of these works of 
Sextus is controversial. Scattered through his pages 
there are references to almost every known name in 
the history of ancient Greek thought, and without some 
previous acquaintance with the main outlines of that 
history it is hardly possible to appreciate the points 
or estimate the value of his arguments. Accordingly 
I give here, for the convenience of the reader, a short 
summary of the history of Greek philosophy. 

1. The Ionian Physicasts.—Of the School of Miletus 
the founder was Thales (circa 600 B.c.). He declared 
that the fundamental substance of which the world 
was made is water. His successor, Anaximander (circa 
570 B.c.), described that substance as “the boundless” 
(τὸ ἄπειρον), since out of it were formed ‘‘ countless ” 
(ἄπειροι) worlds. He regarded this primitive stuff as 
being in itself indeterminate, or of no one definite 
quality, and evolving into the forms of earth, fire, 
etc., by a process of “ separation”’ of hot from cold, 
moist from dry, etc. Also he called his primal sub- 


Vii 


INTRODUCTION 


stance “ divine.” Anaxtmenes (circa 540.3.c.), like 
Thales, took one definite element as his primary 
matter, but chose air, or vapour, instead of water. 
He explained the passage of this into other forms of 
matter as due to a process of “ condensation and 
rarefaction.” 

2. Heracleiteans and Eleatics.—In chronological order 
the first of the Eleatic School, Xenophanes of Colophon 
(circa 520 B.c.), comes before Heracleitus. He was 
less a philosopher than a religious reformer who de- 
claimed against traditional mythology and preached 
a pantheism which identified the One Universe with 
God. ᾿ 

As against this Unity of the Eleatic doctrine, which 
precludes diversity, Heracleitus of Ephesus (circa 490 
B.c.) declared that things are never one and the same 
but continually changing. Reverting to the view of 
the Milesians, he looked for one primary world- 
substance and found it in fire; this, as being also 
mind-stuff, he called “Reason” (λόγος) and God. 
By a kind of circular process (“ the upward and down- 
ward way .) the primal fire passes through the forms 
of air, water and earth, and returns to its own nature 
again. The World is “a harmony of opposites”’, since 
“War is father of all and king of all,” and conflict lies 
at the heart of things. “All things are in flux” 
(πάντα ῥεῖ), and since things have no permanent 
identity the reports of our senses are delusive, and 
opposite statements about an object may be equally 
true or false. In fact, to the eyes of God, life and 
death, good and evil, and all opposites are identical 
—there is no dividing line, and they are for ever 
passing into one another. Thus, as a Dogmatist 
who dissolves all dogma, Heracleitus is declaimed by 


Vill 


INTRODUCTION 


the Scepties as one of the pioneers of their tradition. 
(Cf. Pyrr. Hyp. i. 210 ff.) 

Parmenides of Elea (circa 470 8...) defended the 
unitary doctrine of Xenophanes as against the flux 
doctrine of Heracleitus. In his view “ only Being is,”’ 
and change, motion, and Becoming areillusions. The 
World is a single self-contained Sphere, uncreated and 
imperishable. In his great poem “On Nature” 
Parmenides calls this “‘ the Way of Truth ’’; but he 
follows it up by an account of the World and its 
constituents on the lines of current physical Science 
(especially that of the Pythagoreans) which he calls 
“ the Way of Opinion,” without giving any explana- 
tion of how the one “‘ Way ” can be related to the 
other. 

Zeno of Elea (circa 450 8.c.) supported the doctrine 
of the Unity of Being by attacking the notions of 
multiplicity and motion. These notions, he argued, 
are self-contradictory. As against the possibility of 
motion he is said to have evolved the arguments 
known as “The Achilles’ (and the tortoise) and 
“The Flying Arrow.” The kernel of his reasoning 
is that any quantum (as of space or time) must be 
regarded either as consisting of a plurality of in- 
divisible units or as itself divisible ad injfinztum ; but 
in the latter case, how can the sum of infinite parts 
make up a finite whole? and in the former, the 
unitary parts of the quantwm must themselves be 
quanta or magnitudes, and as such they cannot be 
indivisible. 

Melissus,the Samian admiral (circa 440 B.c.), likewise 
taught that Being is One, infinite, uncreate and ever- 
lasting, motionless and without void. 

Thus, in spite of their metaphysical dogmatism, the 


ix 


INTRODUCTION 


Eleatics were akin to the Sceptics in so far as they 
rejected the evidence of the senses and criticized the 
ordinary belief in the phenomenal world. 

3. Fifth-century Pluralists.—Hitherto the Cosmo- 
logists had attempted to explain the World by assuming 
either the Unity of its primal substance or its Unity 
as a static Totality (the Eleatics). And adirect contra- 
diction had arisen between the position of Heracleitus 
(“ Allis in motion ’’) and that of Parmenides (“ All is 
at rest’). We come next to a number of theorists 
who—though otherwise divergent—agree in adopt- 
ing a plurality of primary substances or principles to 
explain the world. Also, in relation to the opposing 
views of Heraclitus and Parmenides, they take up'a 
mediating position. 

Empedocles of Agrigentum (circa 450 B.c.) assumed 
as primary indestructible substances “four Roots of 
all things,’’ viz. the four elements, earth, air, fire and 
water. He explained all Becoming and change as due 
to the mixing and unmixing of these elements. As 
the motive forces effecting these opposite processes 
he assumed the two rival powers Love and Hate, or 
Harmony and Discord, which oust each other alter- 
nately from control of the World. When Love is in 
full control, all the ‘‘ roots’ are fused together in a 
compact mass forming the “ Sphere,” which he terms 
“a blessed god.”’ When Hate isin full control, all the 
‘roots ” are completely separated, each massed apart 
by itself. But in the world as we know it both forces 
are in play, so that its constituents are neither wholly 
in'union nor wholly in disunion. The nature of par- 
ticular things depends upon the proportion of the 
“roots ”’ of which they are composed. As regards 
knowledge, Empedocles declared that “΄ like is known 


x. 


INTRODUCTION 


by like,’”’ Gre and water in the eyes (for example) 
perceiving the fire and water in the objects of sight 
by means of effluences. He also regarded the blood 
as the seat of intelligence, it being the best mixture 
of all the elements. And he shared the Pythagorean 
belief in the transmigration of souls, saying that he 
himself had in times past been “ἃ bush and a bird 
and a mute sea-fish.”’ 

Anaxagoras of Clazomenae (circa 450 B.c.) lived 
mostly at Athens, where he was intimate with Pericles 
and Euripides, until he was condemned on a charge 
of atheism and escaped to Lampsacus. Like Empe- 
docles, he held that becoming and change are due 
to composition and decomposition of pritnary inde- 
structible substances : “‘ Nothing becomes and nothing 
perishes.”” But the primary substances (“ seeds of all 
things ’’) are not merely four but numberless, all 
existing forms of matter (bone, hair, gold, etc.) being 
equally ultimate. Originally “all things were to- 
gether,’’ in a chaotic mass of all kinds of matter, then 
‘* Reason (ous) came and set them in order.” That 
is Anaxagoras’s most important contribution to philo- 
sophy—the introduction of Reason or Intelligence as 
the Moving Cause and the principle of order and har- 
mony in the world. He described Nous as alone “ un- 
mixed,” and ordering the mixed mass of the world by 
setting up in it a vortex motion which disintegrates 
in mass.and unites like “seeds”’ of matter with 
ike. 

Leucippus of Miletus (?), the first Atomist, was 
probably a contemporary of Empedocles and Anax- 
agoras, but we know little that is definite about him. 
His views were developed by Democritus of Abdera 
(circa 420 Β.0.). He held that the World is made up of 


xi 


INTRODUCTION 


“the Full” and “the Empty,” 1.6. of solid,indivisible 
molecules of matter, the atoms, and empty space or 
void. The atoms differ only in size and shape, and 
the forms and qualities of visible objects depend on 
their atomic structure. The atoms are supposed to 
rain down through space and collide with one another 
owing to the differences inthe speed oftheirmovement, 
their speed varying in proportion to their size. As 
against Anaxagoras’s doctrine of Nous, the Atomists 
spoke of “ Necessity ᾿᾿ as the governing force of the 
World, allowing only mechanical causation. Sensation 
was explained as due to the reception through “ pores” 
of “images” projected from the atoms of the object 
perceived ; but the apparent qualities of objects have 
only “* conventional ”’ reality, the only true reals being 
the Atoms and the Void. No clear distinction is made 
between sense and thought, and we can make no 
assertion about the truth of sense-objects, since these 
depend on the state of the percipient and the arrange- 
ment of the atoms of which he is composed. Belief 
in gods is due to the “ images ”’ projected by certain 
anthropomorphic beings who dwell in the air. Know- 
ledge is of two kinds, “ genuine ”’ and “ dark,’’ the 
latter being that derived from the senses, the former 
that of the understanding which discerns the only 
real existents, the atoms and the void. Democritus 
appears also to have named “ Well-being,” or tranquil 
cheerfulness, as the ethical “ end ” or “ good.”’ The 
relation of Democriteanism to Scepticism is discussed 
by Sextus in Pyrr. Hyp. i. 213 ff. 

The Pythagoreans.—Pythagoras (circa 530 B.c.) was ἃ 
contemporary of Xenophanes, born at Samos, but 
mainly resident at Crotona in South Italy. There he 
founded a religious Order, and a Way of Life akin 


Xii 


INTRODUCTION 


to that of the Orphics in its asceticism, its belief in 
re-incarnation, and its precepts for the salvation of 
the soul from its “ body-tomb ” (σῶμα-σῆμα). But 
nothing is known of Pythagoras himself as scientist 
or philosopher, and as a philosophy Pythagoreanism 
seems to date from the fifth century, its chief exponent 
being Philolaus (circa 440 s.c.). Thus Pythagoreanism 
is,inthe main, contemporary with the other “ pluralist”’ 
systems mentioned above. The chief subjects culti- 
vated by the Pythagoreans were mathematics, music, 
medicine and gymnastics. Their main tenet was 
‘“ Things are numbers,” or “‘ The principles of things 
are the principles of numbers.” And, as all numbers 
are either odd or even, the world is made up of 
opposites, which can be arranged in ten classes. 
Even numbers are always divisible by 2 and so are 
named “ Unlimited ’’; and 1, being the primary odd 
number, may be called the “ Limit.” Regarded geo- 
metrically, 1 is the point, 2 the line, 3 the plane, 
4 the solid. They called 10 (the Decad) the perfect 
number, as being the sum of the first four numbers 
(“the Tetractys’’) and thus containing all the elements 
ofnumber. ‘* Harmony” is the principle which unites 
opposites and resolves cosmical as well as musical 
discords. The Universe consists of ten bodies (the 
heaven of fixed stars, the five planets, moon, sun, 
earth, “ counter-earth”’) revolving around the “ central 
fire ’’ or cosmic “‘hearth”’; it is surrounded by air 
which it breathes in and out. Its life lasts for a 
“ Great Year ” (10,000 years), at the end of which it 
starts anew on the same course; and in every such 
period history repeats itself. Soul was defined as a 
harmony, and the virtues identified with special 
numbers. 


xiit 


INTRODUCTION 


4. The Fifth-century Sophists—While the thinkers 
hitherto mentioned dealt mainly with the world of 
Nature, the group known as “ Sophists ’’ were chiefly 
concerned with Humanity. It was “the Age of 
Enlightenment’ in Greece, when old beliefs and 
customs were being challenged by a new spirit of 
doubt and inquiry. With the rise of democracy every 
citizen became a potential politician, and instruction 
to fit men for public life was in general demand. This 
demand the Sophists laid themselves out to supply. 
They were the professional Educators of the public, 
and what they taught was “ Virtue,” as they called it, 
i.e. civic excellence, and the arts which enable a man 
to succeed in life. And since, for a political career 
and to achieve success in the law-courts, debating 
power is of supreme importance, the art of Rhetoric 
is the most useful aid to “‘ Virtue ’’; and we find that 
the Sophists cultivated it in particular. The earliest 
of the Sophists was Protagoras of Abdera (circa 440 
B.C.) who resided for some time at Athens until he 
was convicted of impiety and had to flee. He is chiefly 
noted for his dictum—‘ Man is the measure of all 
things ; of what is, that it is; of what is not, that it 
is ποὺ ᾿᾿ (ef. Pyrr. Hyp. i. 216 ff.). This means that 
the individual man is the criterion of truth, and denies 
that there is any universal standard or any absolute 
truth. The subjective impressions of each man are 
true for him, but not necessarily for anyone else. 
Hence, all opinions are equally true, and falsehood 
has no meaning, and contradictory statements are 
both equally credible. But to reject objective truth 
is also to reject the possibility of knowledge, and this 
consequence of Protagoreanism was further developed 
by the second great Sophist, Gorgias of Leontini 


Xiv 


INTRODUCTION 


(circa 440 8.0.). His book ‘‘ On the Non-ent or Nature”’ 
essayed to prove (1) that nothing exists; (2) that if 
anything exists it is incognizable; (3) that even if 
cognizable it is incommunicable (cf. Pyrr. Hyp. ii. 59, 
64). In this we see the strongest possible expression of 
the agnostic tendency and a Scepticism more dogmatic 
than that of the professed Sceptics of a later age. 
Another important Sophist was Hippzas of Elis, the 
‘“ polymath,” who boasted of his ability to give an 
extempore lecture on any subject, and (like other 
Sophists) contrasted “law” or convention with 
“nature” or instinctive impulse. Of Prodicus of 
Ceos we. are told that he specialized in linguistics, 
the precise use of synonyms, and ethical discourses. 
Other Sophists of the eristic type, who helped to 
undermine religious belief and to promote intellectual 
anarchy, were Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, Crittas 
the Athenian (one of “ The Thirty ’’), and Diagoras of 
Melos. 

5. Socrates and the Minor Socratics.—Socrates (469- 
899 B.c.) was the contemporary of the Sophists and 
so far akin to them that he held that “ the proper 
study of mankind is man,” and was a humanist rather 
than a ppysicist. But his aim was exactly the reverse 
of theirs—to establish morality on a sound basis, 
instead of proclaiming the futility of the moral law. 
By means of the inductive method and definztion he 
sought to build up a system of conceptual knowledge 
which should possess objective truth, as contrasted 
with the merely subjective opinions derived from 
sense-perception. As an ethical teacher he preached 
‘* well-doing,”’ or right conduct, as the aim of life, 
and urged self-knowledge and self-control as things 
more valuable than any external goods, his most 


VOL. I b XV 


INTRODUCTION 


distinctive doctrine being that of the identity of 
knowledge and virtue, and of vice and ignorance ; 
for ‘‘ no man,” he said, “ is voluntarily wicked.”” But 
there is much uncertainty about the details of the 
teaching of Socrates, since the “ Socrates” of the 
Platonic dialogues is by no means always “the 
historie Socrates,’’ and the evidence of Xenophon 
(our other chief authority) does not appear to be 
altogether trustworthy. 

Four ‘‘ Minor Socratic’ Schools were formed by 
the disciples of Socrates. Eucleides of Megara founded 
the Megaric School in which, it would seem, Socratic 
tenets were combined with Eleatic doctrines, and the 
indirect method of proof was developed. Its interest 
was mainly in logic and dialectic ; and to, Eubuldes 
(Eucleides’ successor) is ascribed the invention of 
many logical puzzles (“the Liar,’’ Sorites, etc.). 
Curiously enough, although Sextus often refers to 
Diodorus Cronos (circa 300 8.c.), he hardly mentions 
the earlier Megarics, although many of the Sceptic 
arguments must have been borrowed from them. 
The Elean School was founded by Phaedo of Elis, 
whose teaching seems to have resembled that of 
Kuclides. It, too, is not referred to by, Sextus. 
Antisthenes founded the Cynic School. It subordinated 
logic and physics to ethics. Virtue, said Antisthenes, 
is the only good, all else is indifferent and of no 
account. Virtue is wisdom, self-control and self- 
sufficiency : the wise man cuts himself free from all 
earthly interests—pleasure, society, religion; he 
stands secure in himself, above all temptation. And, 
as in their Ethics, so in their Logic the Cynics stood 
for individuality and independence. Only identical 
judgements, they said, are possible ; contradiction is 


Xvi 


INTRODUCTION 


impossible and therefore knowledge equally so. Thus 
they reverted to the Sceptical position of Protagoras 
and Gorgias. Other notable Cynics were Dzogenes 
(circa 340 8.6.), famed for his blunt coarse speech and 
his contempt for civilized customs, and Crates (cf. 
Pyrr. Hyp. i. 72, 153). 

The Cyrenac School was founded by Aristippus of 
Cyrene, who was succeeded by his daughter Arete, 
and she by his grandson Aristippus. Later members 
of the School were Theodorus ‘‘ the atheist,’ Anniceris, 
Hegesias (“ the suasor mortis”’). Like the Cynics, the 
Cyrenaics concentrated on Ethical theory. The sum- 
mum bonum, they said, is Pleasure, and pleasure con- 
sists in ‘‘ smooth motion,’ pain being “‘ rough motion,” 
and the neutral state “‘immobility.”’ These are the 
three states of consciousness or psychic “ affections ”’ 
in which sensation consists and to which knowledge 
is confined. As the causes of these internal states 
are unknown, knowledge is wholly subjective, and 
each individual is his own standard of truth—the 
Protagorean position again. As the end of life is to 
gain from it the maximum of pleasurable sensations, 
the “Wise Man” of the Cyrenaics is he who best 
knows how to secure enjoyment from all possible 
sources, and to ward off discomfort and pain. Like 
the Cynics, the Cyrenaics stood for “‘ nature’’ as 
against ‘‘ convention,” but they interpreted nature 
in a very different way (cf. Pyrr. Hyp. i. 215, Adv. 
Log. i. 11). 

δ, Plat and the Old Academy.—The philosophy of 
Plato (427-347 8.0.) defies a brief summary. Only a 
few outstanding points can be mentioned. As against 
the Sophists, he maintained the possibility of know- 
ledge, and the existence of an objective standard of 


Xvii 


INTRODUCTION 


truth ; and by identifying the “ natural’ with the 
‘“‘yational ᾿᾿ he suppressed the Sophistic appeal from 
“law,” or convention, to “‘nature.”’ His theory of 
knowledge and of Being may be said to be based on 
a reconciliation of the rival doctrines of Heracleitus 
and Parmenides. Heracleitus was right in regarding 
the sense-world as being in a state of continual flux 
and therefore not a subject of knowledge, but he was 
wrong in treating it as the only world. Parmenides, 
too, was right in holding that the world as known 
must be changeless and self-identical, but he was 
wrong in trying to force this conception on the 
phenomenal world. There are, in fact, two distinct 
worlds and two distinct kinds of apprehension to deal 
with them. Sensation tells us of the phenomenal and 
gives rise to “ opinion’’; Reason and thought deal 
with objects supersensible. For the content of his 
“intelligible ᾿᾿ world Plato is indebted to Socrates’ 
theory of concepts. The general (Aristotelian) view 
is that by “ hypostatizing ” these concepts he framed 
his “ Ideas.” He presents the Ideas as the ultimate 
Realities, the only objects of knowledge in the strict 
sense. The logical method which deals with the Ideas 
is “ Dialectic,’’ which combines induction with de- 
duction. The supreme Idea is “the Good.” In the 
physical theory of the Timaeus, the ‘‘ Demiurge ” 
(God, or Mind) frames the Universe with a view to 
the most Good, by means of harmony and proportion. 
Ethics is interwoven with psychology ; the soul is a 
whole with three component parts or faculties 
(rational, spirited, appetitive), and is defined as “ the 
self-moving ’-—the source of all motion. Virtue is 
the “ goodness ” of the soul both as a whole and in 
each of its parts—so that virtue is fourfold (wisdom, 


INTRODUCTION 


courage, temperance, justice). Virtue in the State 
corresponds to that in the individual ; each class must 
be efficient and loyal, and all together must be united 
in harmony. Thus Plato’s Idealism contemplates the 
rule of Reason, acting for “the Best,” in all three 
spheres—that of the Individual, of the State, and of 
the Universe. How far it contains a Sceptical element 
is discussed in Pyrr. Hyp. i. 221 ff. 

Speustppus, the nephew of Plato, succeeded him as 
Head of the Academy (347-339 3.c.) and was in turn 
succeeded by Xenocrates (339-314 8.c.). Both seem 
to have amalgamated Idealism with the Pythagorean 
doctrine of Numbers. Polemo (314-270 B.c.) was the 
next Head of the School. Other noted members, or 
allies, of the Academy were Heracleides of Pontus, 
Phikp of Opus, Eudoxus of Cnidus, the astronomer, 
and the Pythagorean mathematician Archytas of 
Tarentum. The general character of their teaching 
was, it seems, in the direction of lowering the standard 
of the Idealism of Plato and adapting it to the interests 
of inferior minds. The most gifted of Plato’s disciples 
was undoubtedly Aristotle, the man who deserted the 
Academy to found a rival school of his own and to 
teach a revised Platonism. 

7. Aristotle and the Peripatetecs (cf. Pyrr. Hyp. iv. 
31, 136, 218). — Aristotle of Stageira (384-322 B.c.) 
joined the Academy in 367 s.c., and after Plato’s 
death, about 335 3.c., founded a School of his own in 
the Lyceum at Athens, lecturing as he walked about— 
whence the name “ Peripatetic ” (“ walking round ”’). 
Aristotle was the great systematizer in all branches 
of philosophy and science. In his Logical treatises 
(΄ Organon 12) he formulates the “‘ Categories,”’ or ten 
heads of predicables ; the rules for the conversion of 


XIX 


INTRODUCTION 


propositions ; the doctrine of the Syllogism, as based 
on the Laws of Contradiction and Excluded Middle; 
the meaning of Demonstration or Proof as concerned 
with necessary causes, and how First Principles, or 
axiomatic truths, are indemonstrable; problematic 
or imperfect syllogisms ; the various kinds of eristic 
argument or fallacy. In his Metaphysics he argues, 
as against Plato, that the Universals, the objects of 
knowledge, are not separate from the sensibles but 
in them. The first principles of Being are actuality 
and potency; and Cause is analysed into four kinds 
—material, formal, efficient and final. Form is the 
essence of things, and the object of cognition, and 
Form plus Matter compose the concrete substance. 
God is pure actuality, “thought thinking upon 
thought,” the primum mobile. In his Physics and 
Psychology he postulated Ether as a fifth element, 
and the Earth as stationary in the centre of the 
Cosmos. Life is the power of self-movement, of 
which Soul is the principle, it being the “form”’ or 
“entelechy ’* of the body. The faculties of Soul 
are five—nutritive, sensitive, appetitive, locomotive, 
rational. In sensation we receive “ the form with~- 
out the matter” of the percept; and besides the five 
external senses, each with its proper object, there 
are three internal senses, memory, imagination, and 
the central communis sensus, with its seat in the 
heart, by which we note and compare the several 
reports of the special senses. As the senses deal 
with the concrete and individual, so the Intellect 
deals with the abstract and universal; but though 
distinct from Senseit is dependent on it for its material, 


* 4,6. actuality or realization of what is otlierwise merely 
“* potential.” 


xx 


INTRODUCTION 


being of itself a tabula rasa. The intellect is also 
described as twofold, active and passive. His Ethics 
is chiefly notable for his doctrine of Virtue as consist- 
ing in “the Mean ” between two extremes, and for 
his preference of mental to moral virtues. Also, he 
included bodily goods (health, wealth, pleasure) as 
well as virtue in his description of the ethical “End” 
( Happiness’’). In his Poktical Theory he rejects 
Plato’s communism and abolition of private property, 
and regards the State as a means for the moral 
advancement of the citizens and as the guardian of 
justice. He also wrote treatises on biology and, 
aesthetics and rhetoric. Nt 

Theophrastus was Head of the Peripatetic School 
from 322 to 287 B.c., when he was succeeded by 
Strato, and he in turn by Lyco (269-225 z.c.). They, 
and other leading Peripatetics—such as Dicaearchus, 
the historian, and Aristoxenus, the musician—culti- 
vated the special sciences rather than the metaphysical 
and logical aspects of Aristotelianism, and empirical 
interests tended to outweigh theoretical in the later 
history of the School. 


II. Tae Later Doemartists 


On its theoretical and constructive side the philo- 
sophical movement which culminated in the architec- 
tonic systems of Plato and Aristotle came to an abrupt 
end. The philosophic Epzgonz of the post-Aristotelian 
age showed less breadth of vision and but little origin- 
ality of mind: the glory had departed from Israel. 
This was, no doubt, partly due to the depressing social 
and political conditions which prevailed in the Greek- 
speaking world during the third and following cen- 

xxi 


INTRODUCTION 


turies. These conditions tended to make m@n concen- 
trate their thoughts on purely human interests—the 
welfare, destiny, salvation of the individual—to the 
neglect of the other departments of philosophy and 
science. In so far as they were cultivated at all, those 
other departments came to be treated merely as the 
handmaids of Ethics, thus reviving the mainly human- 
istic attitude of the Sophists. Philosophy, in fact, 
became the substitute for an out-of-date and exploded 
Religion, and had for its aim, not the attainment of 
objective truth, but the provision of a subjective 
spiritual salvation from the manifold ills of life. Its 
task was no longer theoretical, but the very practical 
and urgent one of supplying distressed humanity with 
“arms against a sea of troubles,’ with shield and 
buckler against “ the slings and arrows of outrageous 
fortune.” Truth was now a matter for the heart 
rather than the head; philosophy, like faith, was to 
be judged by its “works”; it was bound to be 
pragmatical. To meet this situation two great Dog- 
matic systems were evolved, the Epicurean and the 
Stoic, and, to counter them, the system of the Sceptics. 
These three were contemporaneous, all dating from 
the end of the fourth century 8.6. 

1. The Epicureans.— Epicurus of Samos (341-270 
B.C.) founded his School in his garden (hence “‘ the 
Garden School”’) at Athens in 306 3.c. Epicurus 
reverted to Democritus for his Physics, and to 
Aristippus for his Ethics, being both an Atomist and 
a Hedonist. In his physical theory he followed 
Democritus closely, except in explaining the collision 
of atoms as due to slight arbitrary deviations from 
the straight line in their downward course. The Soul, 
he said, is material, composed (as are the gods) of a 


xxii 


INTRODUCTION 


finer sorteof atoms, and mortal. Sensation, with its 
immediate evidence (ἐνάργεια), is the only criterion of 
truth; itis effected by effluentimages (εἴδωλα, ἀπορροαί) 
from the external objects impinging on the sense- 
organs. The aggregation of several sensations forms 
the notion or concept (πρόληψις), and from notions 
arise opinion (δόξα) and conviction (ὑπόληψις). This 
theory of knowledge constitutes ‘‘ Canonic,” the 
Epicureans’ name for Logic. Physics and Logic were 
regarded as subordinate to Ethics, and in Ethics 
Epicurus, like Aristippus, held that the Good is 
Pleasure, but he defined pleasure rather differently— 
not as a satisfying ‘“‘ smooth motion ”’ but as a state 
of rest, ‘‘ painlessness,”’ or absence of all unsatisfied 
desire, or ‘‘ unperturbedness ” (ἀταραξία). Also he 
regarded freedom from mental distress, fear and 
prejudice, as even more important than bodily satis- 
faction; and it is the task of the “ Wise Man” 
(φρόνιμος), by means of a kind of hedonistic calculus, 
to estimate the comparative value of the different 
kinds of pleasurable affections (πάθη) so as to win for 
himself the maximum of mental satisfaction andrepose 
throughout his life. Virtue, and the special virtues, 
are of value only in so far as they contribute to this 
end. Right and wrong become matters of merely 
subjective feeling. Religion was abolished as the 
cause of intolerable mental “ perturbation,” and the 
gods were banished to the zntermundia. Lucretius’s 
great poem De Rerum Natura is our most complete 
exposition of Epicureanism. 

2. The Storcs.—Zeno of Citium, in Cyprus (350-258 
B.c.), started his School about 305 Β.6. in the “ Painted 
Porch ”’ (στοὰ ποικίλη) at Athens—whence the name 
‘* Stoic.”” He was succeeded by Cleanthes, author of 


ΧΧΗΣ 


INTRODUCTION 


the famous “ Hymn to Zeus,” who, in urn, was 
followed by Chrysippus of Cilicia (280-206 8.c.), who 
systematized the doctrines of the School. With 
Panaetius of Rhodes (180-111 B.c.), Posezdonius of 
Apamea (130-46 B.c.), and the later Stoics,the system 
tended to become more eclectic, with infiltrations of 
Peripatetic and Academic doctrine. The main tenets 
of Stoicism were briefly these :— 

In Physics they reverted to Heracleiteanism, and 
taught a materialistic monism. All that exists is 
corporeal: only body can act on body, therefore God 
is as much corporeal as the world, the soul as the body. 
The primal world-stuff is Fire, which by the.“ upward 
and downward way ”’ transforms itself into the other 
elements and produces the Cosmos, until finally, at 
the end of the “‘ Great World-Year,”’ it returns to its 
original form in the World-Conflagration (éxripwors) ; 
and this cyclical process of evolution goes on for ever. 
This primary matter has two aspects, active and 
passive: as “‘ artistic fiery vapour ”’ it is the Soul of 
the World, Reason (λόγος), Thought, Destiny, God. 
Hence the World, though wholly material, is rational : 
because governed and permeated by Logos (the divine 
“ Word.”’) it exhibits order, harmony and beauty, as 
the artistic products of creative design. But the 
Logos is also the Cosmic Law, which binds all things 
in the rigid nexus of cause and effect, the bonds of 
Destiny (εἱμαρμένη). Hence, too, there can be no 
freedom of the Will for the individual. The Divine 
Logos contains all the “seminal Logoi,”’ which are the 
active reproductive principles in all living creatures. 
Of the four elements, fire and air were contrasted as 
“ active’ with earth and water as “ passive,” and 
the forms and qualities of things were explained as 


XXiV 


INTRODUCTION 


due to the action of air or “ aeriform tension ”’ (τόνος). 
The unity of inorganic objects was ascribed to 
“ condition ᾿ (ἕξις), of plants to “ nature”’ (φύσις), of 
animals to “soul” (ψυχή). The souls of living crea- 
tures are parts of the Cosmic Soul, and consist of hot 
vapour or “ spirit” (πνεῦμα). Human souls (or at 
least those of the Wise) persist after death until the 
Ecpyrosis. The Soul has eight parts or faculties, viz. 
the five senses, the vocal, the generative, and the 
hegemonic or ruling. To this ‘ Regent Part” all 
the rest are attached, it being their source of motion, 
with its seat in the heart, whence the pneuma radiates 
to the various local organs. It is in the “ Regent 
Part,” too, that perception (presentations and 
impulses) takes place. 

For their Logic the Stoics were mainly indebted 
to Aristotle. They subdivided Logic into Rhetoric 
and Dialectic. All knowledge comes through the 
senses, the mind being a tabula rasa upon which sense 
impressions are made. The “‘presentation”’ (pavracia) 
is defined as “ an affection (πάθος) arising in the soul ”’ 
or ‘an impression (τύπωσις) on the soul” (Zeno) or 
“an alteration in the soul”’ (Chrysippus). Of these 
presentations some come through the senses, others 
are mental. How are we to distinguish between 
trustworthy and untrustworthy presentations ? What 
is the Criterion of truth? Here we come to the most 
distinctive feature of the Stoic doctrine. The 
Criterion, they said, is to be found in the subjective 
reaction of the percipient. If the presentation is 
true, proceeding from a real object, it wins the 
“assent”? or approbation (συγκατάθεσις) of the 
percipient ; such an “ apprehensive presentation ” 
(καταληπτικὴ φαντασία) constitutes the Criterion. In 


XKV 


INTRODUCTION 


the development of knowledge they distinguished 
four stages—sense-perception (aicGyovs), memory 
(μνήμη) or retained presentation of an absent object, 
experience (ἐμπειρία) formed by a plurality of like 
memories, notions (ἔννοιαι). ‘‘ Notions’? may be 
either involuntary—termed “common notions’ or 
“ concepts ”” (xrpoAjwers)—or voluntary, due to the 
reflex action of the mind. The “ concept ”’ is defined 
as “ the natural notion of universals.”” The reasoning 
faculty (λόγος) deals with “ notions,” and all notions, 
as substances, are corporeal. The concepts were 
classified under four heads, the Stoic Categories, viz. 
substance (ὑποκείμενον), essential quality (τὸ ποιόν), 
accidental quality (ras ἔχον), relation (πρός τί πως ἔχον). 
These they called “highest universals ” or summa 
genera (τὰ yevexdrara), and of these the first is also 
termed Being. In order to include alsa Non-being, 
another, still higher, category was postulated— 
“Something” (τό τι). All qualities, as gaseous 
currents (πνεύματα), are corporeal; but essential or 
intrinsic qualities or “‘ states ” (ἕξεις) are distinguished 
from imported or accidental qualities or ‘‘ conditions ” 
(σχέσεις). Under“ relation ” are classed all attributes 
which imply a connexion between co-existing objects. 

In their Ethics the Stoics followed the Cynics, 
declaring Virtue to be the only Good, and presenting 
the Ideal “Sage” as the embodiment of virtue. 
Like all the post-Aristotelian Schools they regarded 
Ethics as the crown of their philosophy to which 
Physics and Logic were merely adjuncts, since Ethics 
deals with the one thing needful—human happiness 
and the rules for its attainment. Happiness—the 
End (τέλος) or Good—they defined as ὁ Living in 
conformity with Nature” (ὁμολογουμένως τῇ φύσει), 


ΧΧΥῚ 


INTRODUCTION 


or withoat contravening the Cosmic ‘‘ Law ” which 
is Right Reason (Adyos), which means obeying God or 
Necessity. This subjection to the Law of the Logos is 
ultimately unavoidable, since ‘‘ volentem fata ducunt, 
nolentem trahunt.” Action in accordance with 
“ Nature ’’ is Virtue, which does not admit of increase 
or decrease and is termed a “ disposition ’’ (διάθεσις) 
rather than a “state” (ἕξις). The four virtues— 
wisdom, temperance, justice, courage—are defined 
as four forms of knowledge. Between the extremes 
of virtue and vice there is no middle state; but an 
important distinction was made between three classes 
of conduct—perfect moral actions (κατορθώματα), 
‘becoming’ actions or “duties” (καθήκοντα), 
‘undutiful ” or sinful actions (παρὰ τὸ καθῆκον). The 
first kind is peculiar to the Stoic “ Sage,” the second 
proper for those ‘progressing’? towards wisdom 
(προκόπτοντες). As the only “ goods” are the 
virtues and the only “ evils’ their opposite vices, 
there is a large class of things which come under 
neither of these heads: these ‘“ neutral ’’ things— 
such as life, health, wealth, beauty, pleasure, and 
their opposites—are, strictly speaking, “‘ indifferent ἢ 
(ἀδιάφορα). But, even so, they differ in value and 
were divided into two classes, ‘‘ the desirable and 
preferred ” (προηγμένα), and “the undesirable and 
unpreferred ᾿᾿ (dromponypeva). Non-rational affec- 
tions are the “passions”? or emotions (πάθη), of 
which there are four kinds—one being of the body, 
viz. involuntary sensuous feeling, and the other of 
the soul, viz. the rational emotion of the Sage, natural 
and involuntary states which are harmless, and vicious 
or morbid emotions. In all such mental passions there 
is an element of intellect and will as well as of feeling. 


XXVII 


INTRODUCTION 


The primary passions are four—desire, fear, pain 
and pleasure ; and one definition of passion is “* an ex- 
cessive impulse.”’ To give way to such an impulse is 
to “‘ assent ” to it, or approve of it by a perverted act 
of judgement, and hence “ passions” were called 
“judgements” by Chrysippus. The root of evil 
passions is “intemperance,” “a defection of the 
whole mind from right Reason,” and their fruits are 
the diseases of the soul we call vices and sins. The 
Ideal Wise Man or Sage, being moved only by 
rational emotions, is said to be “ passionless’’ (ἀπαθής). 
In him virtue and wisdom are personified. He only 
is happy and at peace with himself, unperturbed by 
fightings without or fears within, indifferent to 
externals, self-sufficient and self-controlled, master 
of his fate and captain of his soul. Their portrait of 
the Ideal Sage is one of the features of Stoicism 
which attracted world-wide attention, alike from 
critics and admirers of the School. Horace alludes to 
the sapiens more than once in his Satres, e.g. ii. 
7.83 ff. : 

quisnam igitur liber ? sapiens sibi qui imperiosus, 

quem neque pauperies neque mors neque vincula terrent, 

responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honores 

fortis, et in se ipso totus, teres atque rotundus. 
Of “τῆς Wise ”’ it was said also that all were friends 
of all and that they had all things in common and that 
the whole world was their city and their home 
(whence the term “ cosmopolitan ’’). They form one 
of the two classes into which mankind is divided— 
the “ good” (σπουδαῖοι) and the “bad” (φαῦλοὺ, 
the sheep and the goats. Here again we note the 
ingrained ethical dualism of the Stoic system. The 
“bad,” the poor in virtue, we have always with us, 


XXVill 


INTRODUCTION 


a multitude whom no man can number, but where 
shall wisdom be found and who exactly are the truly 
‘““wise’’? Socrates, they said, and Antisthenes and 
Diogenes approximated to the Ideal, but the perfect 
Sage is nowhere discoverable upon the earth ; either, 
then, he had his being in the far-off Golden Age or 
he remains for ever a ‘‘ pattern laid up in the heavens.” 

I have enlarged thus much upon the details of Stoic 
doctrine because it is the type of Dogmatism which 
the Sceptics criticized most frequently and most 
severely. We pass on now to the Sceptics themselves. 


III. Scepricism aND THE ScEPTICS 


A “ Sceptic,” in the original sense of the Greek 
term, is simply an “ inquirer” or investigator. But 
inquiry often leads to an impasse, and ends in in- 
credulity or despair of a solution, so that the 
“inquirer ’’ becomes a ‘‘ doubter”’ or a “ disbeliever,”’ 
and Scepticism receives its usual connotation. All 
down. the history of Greek philosophy we have found 
traces of sceptical thought in the repeated discredit- 
ing of sense-perception and the frequent insistence on 
the folly of vulgar opinion. But, with the exception 
of Sophists like Protagoras and Gorgias, all the philo- 
sophers agreed in assuming that truth existed and 
that knowledge of it was possible. When Scepticism 
was revived and reorganized under the name of 
‘ Pyrrhonism τ᾿ its main task was to challenge this 
assumption and to maintain, if not the impossibility 
of knowledge, at least the impossibility of positively 
affirming its possibility. Its watchword was “ Suspend 
judgement.’’s 

The history of Scepticism, as a definite tradition or 

xxix 


INTRODUCTION 


“School,” may conveniently be divideds into four 
periods or stages, viz. : 


(1) Practical Scepticism of Pyrrho of Elis (circa 860-- 
275 B.c.), and his pupil Timon of Phlius (circa 
315-225 B.c.). 

(2) Critical Scepticism and probabilism of the New 
Academy—Arcesilas of Pitane (circa 315-241 
B.c.) and Carneades of Cyrene (circa 213— 
129 s.c.). This ended in the Eclecticism of 
Philo and Antiochus (0b. 69 B.c.). 

(3) Pyrrhonism revived, systematized and developed 
dialectically by Aenesidemus (circa 100-40 B.c.) 
and Agrippa (ἢ first century A.D.). 

(4) Final development of Empiric Scepticism, cul- 
minating in Sextus Empiricus (circa 160-210 
A.D.). 


A brief account of each of these stages must here 
suffice. 

1. Pyrrho of Elis—in spite of some later traditions 
about him—was probably not at all a full-blown 
Sceptic, but rather a moralist of an austere and ascetic 
type—as Cicero represents him (Acad. Pr. ii. 130, 
De Fin. iv. 43, 49)—who cultivated insensibility to 
externals and superiority to environment. Probably 
he derived from Democritus a deep distrust of the 
value of sense-perception, but otherwise he seems to 
have been imbued with dogmatism, though it was the 
dogmatism of the will rather than of the intellect. 
We may fairly assume that the causes which led to 
the Scepticism of Pyrrho and his immediate followers 
were twofold—firrstly, the intellectual confusion which 
resulted from the number of conflictingdoctrines and 
rival schools, and secondly, the political confusion 
XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


and socialechaos which spread through the Hellenic 
world after Alexander’s death, together with the new 
insight into strange habits and customs which was 
given by the opening up of the East. The natural 
result of the situation at the close of the fourth 
century was to shake men’s belief in tradition and 
custom, to dissolve the old creeds and loyalties, and 
to produce the demand for a new way of salvation in 
the midst of a crumbling world. Pyrrho, it would 
seem, shared this attitude, and stood out as the 
apostle of disillusionment. He would not seek or 
promise “‘ happiness,” in the usual sense of the word, 
but he sought and taught the negative satisfaction of 
freedom from care and worry by the cultivation of a 
neutral, non-committal attitude towards all the prob- 
lems of life and thought. In self-defence he sought 
refuge within himself, there to achieve a self-centred 
“‘ apathy ” which his disciples were to acclaim, under 
the name of “ ataraxy,” as the Chief End of Man. 
Probably, then, the main, if not the only, interest 
of Pyrrho was in the ethical and practical side of 
Scepticism as the speediest cure for the ills of life. 
Timon of Phlius-spent the. latter part of his long 
life at Athens. In his earlier days he is said to have 
sat under Stilpo at Megara, as well as under Pyrrho at 
Elis. His admiration for the latter was unbounded, 
although it would seem that he did not copy his ascetic 
habits too closely. He was a voluminous writer of 
both prose and poetry—epics, tragedies, satires—but 
only a few fragments of two of his works have survived, 
viz. the “‘Images”’ or “ Illusions”? (Ἰνδαλμοῖ), and 
the “ Silli”’ or “‘ Lampoons”’ (2éAAot). The latter 
evidently became very popular because of its mordant 
wit. It consisted of three books, all deriding the 


VOL. I c ΧΧΧΙ 


INTRODUCTION 


professors of philosophy, and written in kexameters 
in the Homeric style, beginning thus : 


Come now, listen to me, ye polypragmatical Sophists. 


The second and third books were in the form of a 
dialogue between Timon and Xenophanes, in which 
the latter expresses his contempt for nearly all the 
rival schools of thought. It appears, then, that the 
only philosophers for whom Timon entertained any 
respect were the Eleatics, Democritus and Protagoras 
—the most severe critics of knowledge in the form of 
sense-perception. This exposure of the futility of 
philosophizing served to support the indifferentist 
attitude of Pyrrho ; and Timon by his writings (for 
Pyrrho wrote nothing) popularized the Sceptical view 
that the way to make the best of life is to eschew 
dogma and to cultivate mental repose. It is probably 
a mistake of Sextus (ddv. Math. iii. 2, vi. 66) to ascribe 
to Timon formal argumentation concerning “ hypo- 
theses’ and the “‘ divisibility of time,” considering 
his ridicule of dialectic and his avoidance of “ the 
strife of tongues ’’; and it is very doubtful whether 
he (or Pyrrho) invented or used any of the technical 
vocabulary of Scepticism (e.g. “‘ Suspension,” “ No 
more,” “‘ Equipollence ’’) which is commonly ascribed 
to him or his master. 

2. Scepticism in the New Academy (cf. Pyrr. Hyp. 
i. 220 ff.).—With Arcesilas Scepticism entered upon a 
new stage of development. It ceased to be purely 
practical, and became mainly theoretical. Arcesilas 
succeeded Crates as Head of the Academy about 
270 B.c. He appears to have been influenced by the 
Megarics as well as by Pyrrho, and was eminent as 
a dialectician and controversialist. His delight was 


ΧΧΧῚ 


INTRODUCTION 


to argue ἐπ utramque partem and balance argument 
against argument ; and he took up the position that 
to know we know is an impossibility, and to seek 
for absolute truth an absurdity. His polemic was 
chiefly directed against the Stoic epistemology and its 
doctrine of the ‘‘ apprehensive presentation ᾿᾿ as the 
Criterion.” He maintained that we can “assent ”’ 
to no sense-impression as carrying conviction and in- 
dubitably true, and that the objective realities are 
consequently incognizable, and we can only “‘ suspend 
judgement ”’ about them, unless we content ourselves 
with fallible “ opinion ”’ instead of scientific ‘‘ know- 
ledge.” But the Stoic “Sage” never “ opines” ; 
neither can he “ know ”’; therefore he must suspend 
judgement and turn Sceptic. False and true presenta- 
tions are indistinguishable : no valid criterion exists : 
we have no guide but opinion, and we can only think, 
believe, and act in accordance with what seems reason- 
able (εὔλογον) or probably right. Thus, while Pyrrho 
had renounced and Timon flouted the Dogmatics, 
Arcesilas started the practice of refuting them scien- 
tifically and systematically, and earned thereby the 
abuse of Timon for his lapse from pure Pyrrhonism. 
Carneades of Cyrene, like Arcesilas and Pyrrho, left 
no writings, but his views were preserved by his 
disciple Cleitomachus (Hasdrubal). He was a brilliant 
teacher, a formidable dialectician, and perhaps the 
most talented philosopher of the post-Aristotelian 
period. His energies were mainly devoted to negative 
criticism of the theories of the Dogmatists, especially 
the Stoics. He resumed and developed the arguments 
with which Arcesilas had attacked the Stoic theory of 
knowledge, and which Chrysippus had, in the mean- 
while, attempted to rebut. Neither the senses nor 


XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


the reason, he argued, can supply any infallible 
“eriterion ’’: there is no specific difference between 
false ‘‘ presentations ᾿᾿ and true: beside any true pre- 
sentation you can set a false one which is in no wise 
different. The dreamer, the drunkard, the madman 
have illusions of the truth of which they are convinced: 
you see two eggs or two hairs and cannot tell the 
one from the other : you cannot distinguish the true 
impression from the false, or assert that the one rather 
than the other is produced by a real object. It is in 
vain, then, to look to the senses for certainty ; and it 
is equally vain to look to the reason since it (as the 
Stoics held) is wholly dependent on the senses and 
based on experience. Logic, the product of the 
reasoning faculty, is discredited because of the number 
of insoluble fallacies for which it is responsible—such 
as “ The Liar ’’ (“‘ The Cretan says ‘I lie’: is he a 
liar? ’’), “The Cornutus”’ (“ Have you shed your 
horns—yes or no?’’), “ The Sorites”’ or Chain- 
argument (‘‘ How many grains make aheap? Take 
10, 20, 30, ete., away, is it stilla heap ?’’). Chrysippus 
when confronted with the Sorites in a dialectical dis- 
cussion is said to have called a halt and refused to 
answer, thus giving in to the Sceptic by “ suspending 
judgement.’’ Reason is thus found to be as fallible 
as sensation, and certitude impossible. 

Carneades also attacked the Ethical system of the 
Stoics, exposing their inconsistency in saying that 
Virtue is directed to choosing the prime objects of 
natural desire while denying to these objects the 
name of “ good.”” He criticized also their Theology, 
their doctrines of the Divine Nature, of Providence, 
of Divination and Prophecy. The Stoics were fond 
of appealing to the consensus genttum, or the universal 


XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


belief in “the existence of the gods: Carneades 
ridiculed that appeal. For how do we know that the 
belief is universal ? And why appeal to the multitude 
who—the Stoics tell us—are all fools? why call in 
ignorance as judge? And as to divination and prog- 
nostication, they rest on no principles of science but 
are mere quackery and tricks of the trade. The God 
of the Stoics is an incredible Being because he is 
composed of contradictory attributes. If He is to be 
infinite, omniscient, all-good, and imperishable, He 
cannot be either composite or corporeal or animate 
or rational or virtuous—all such qualities belonging 
to objects which lie in the sphere of becoming and 
perishing. In support of their theory of Providence 
the Stoics brought forward evidences of design in 
Nature. Carneades retorted by quoting cases of 
snake-bites and wrecks at sea. Reason, said the Stoics, 
is a gift of Providence to man: why then, replied 
Carneades, did not Providence see to it that the 
majority were endowed with a “right reason” 
instead of one that only enables them to outdo the 
brutes in brutishness? Only a few possess right 
reason; so the Stoic God must be miserly in his 
gifts | 

In all this the position of Carneades is purely 
agnostic. He does not wish to affirm a negative, 
but merely to show up the untenability of the Stoic 
dogmas, and to reassert as regards all departments 
of knowledge the impossibility of attaining absolute 
certitude. When the pretentious structure of the 
Stoics had been thus riddled by the arrows of Car- 
neades, their Ideal Sage must have appeared but as 
a figment tomany, and their anthropomorphic Deity 
as an incredible bundle of contradictions. 


XXXV 


INTRODUCTION 


But there was a constructive as well as a destructive 
side to the teaching of Carneades. He took over, 
modified, and developed the theory of Arcesilas that, 
despite the impossibility of objective knowledge, a 
sufficient ground for practical choice and action might 
be found in the “ reasonable (εὔλογον) or subjectively 
satisfying. He granted to the Stoics that some sense- 
impressions or opinions seem to the percipient superior 
to others, and this apparent superiority provided a 
sufficient reason for preference and consequential 
action. Impressions being thus subjectively dis- 
tinguishable, judgements may be graded in value as 
more or less “ persuasive ’’ or “ probable ’* (πιθανοῖ). 
Carneades then classified presentations in this way : 
(1) the apparently false; (2) the apparently true, 
which are of three grades—(a) the probable in itself; 
(6) the probable and “ uncontradicted’”’ (z.e. by 
accompanying conditions—dzrepiowugros) ; (c) the 
probable and uncontradicted and “‘closely scrutinized”’ 
or “tested” (διεξωδευμένη). These apparently true 
impressions produce varying degrees of “‘ conviction ” 
and deserve proportionate “assent ” (συγκατάθεσις) 
of a relative kind—the only kind of assent possible 
for the Sceptic who denies that objective certitude 
is attainable. In connexion with this doctrine of 
‘“ probabilism °*’ Carneades defended human freedom, 
in “‘ assent,’’ choice and action, as against the deter- 
minism of the Stoics with their rigid theory of Destiny 
and Necessity ; and he subjected their doctrine on 
this subject to a searching criticism which exposed its 
inherent inconsistency. 

With Carneades the dialectical Scepticism of the 
New Academy came to an end. His successors, Philo 
of Larissa (οὗ. circa 80 B.c.) and Antiochus of Ascalon 


XXXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


(ob. 69 B.c.j, surrendered his theory of nescience, and 
reverted to a more dogmatic position. Both were 
Eclectics—Antiochus so much so that he asserted the 
harmony, if not the practical identity, of the doctrines 
of the Academy with those of the Peripatetics and 
Stoics, and his teaching was a curious amalgam of 
them all. This tendency to doctrinal conflation con- 
tinued to characterize the philosophers of the succeed- 
ing generations till the rise of Neoplatonism, except- 
ing only those attached to the Epicurean School and 
the Later Sceptics. 

3. The first of the “ Later Sceptics,’’ who revived 
the original ‘‘ Pyrrhonism,’’ was Aenesidemus, a 
younger contemporary of Antiochus. Cnossus in 
Crete may have been his birthplace, Alexandria was 
where he taught. Though originally an Academic, 
he denounced Arcesilas and Carneades as dogmatists 
in disguise rather than true Sceptics, since we cannot 
know that knowledge is impossible. His treatise 
Pyrrhonean Discourses consisted of eight books 
in which he explained his dissent from the New 
Academy, and criticized in detail the logic, ethics, and 
physics of Stoicism. In another work, Introductory 
Outhne of Pyrrhonism, he set forth his famous 
“Ten Tropes,” or ‘‘ Modes” of procedure, for the 
refuting of Dogmatism in all its forms. Apparently 
the order in which they are drawn up was not fixed, 
since Sextus’s order differs from that of Diogenes 
Laertius ; nor does it seem to be governed by any 
logical principle. The Tropes themselves merely 
formulate arguments in favour of the relativity of 
knowledge, borrowed from earlier Sceptical teachers— 
Sophists, Megarics, Academics ; and, as Lotze says,” 


* Logic, τιχ, i, § 310 (English translation). 
ΧΧΧΥῚΪ 


INTRODUCTION 


‘“The ten tropes, or logical grounds of ‘doubt, all 
come to this, that sensations by themselves cannot 
discover to us what is the nature of the object which 
excites them.”’ 

Besides these ten Tropes, Aenesidemus (in his 
Pyrrhonean Discourses, bk. 5) summarized the argu- 
ments against causality and current theories of 
“cause” in his “ Hight (Aetiological) Tropes.” 
These form a list of fallacious methods of reason- 
ing about “cause.” His objections rest mainly 
on the assumption that “cause” is a thing in 
itself, and causality a real objective quality inherent 
therein. : 

Similarly he attacked the Stoic and Epicurean 
doctrine of “Signs ”’ (σημεῖο), or “ effects”? which 
point back to “ causes,” arguing that no phenomenon 
can safely be regarded as a“ βρη, because “‘ doctors 
differ ’’ in interpreting symptoms. 

But, to judge by several remarks of Sextus, Aenesi- 
demus was not consistent in his Scepticism. We are 
told that he regarded “the Sceptic system (ἀγωγή) 
as a road leading to the Heracleitean philosophy, on 
the ground that the (ceptic) view that opposites 
apparently belong to the same object is prefatory to 
the (Heracleitean) view that they really so belong.”’ 
We are told also that he held that the primary world- 
principle is air, which he identified with time and 
number; and that he explained the origin of the 
world in all its variety from this unitary substance 
by supposing it to be receptive of opposite qualities, 
and every whole self-identical in all its parts. He is 
also said to have reduced the six kinds of motion 
distinguished by Aristotle, and the ten of Plato, to 
two, viz. locomotion and alteration or transformation ; 


XXXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


and a peculiar theory of Soul, or reason (διάνοια), 
is ascribed to him, according to which the reason 
exists outside the body and is somehow inspired 
so that it can act from within through the senses. 
With the theory of reason as external, and therefore 
not individualized but “common” (κοινή), like the 
“ Logos” of Heracleitus, is connected the further 
theory, ascribed to Aenesidemus, that some pheno- 
mena appear alike to all men “‘in common,” while 
others appear different to different percipients, and 
that the former class are ‘‘true,”’ the latter “‘ false ”»— 
universality of experience thus being the “‘ Criterion” 
of truth, " 

How we are to reconcile this hybrid dogmatism 
with the undoubted Pyrrhonism of Aenesidemus is 
a puzzling question which has much exercised the 
historians of philosophy. It has been suggested that 
Sextus has misunderstood or misrepresented Aenesi- 
demus; or that Aenesidemus did ultimately pass 
over from the Sceptical to the Dogmatic position ; or 
that his apparent Dogmatism can be explained away 
as no real surrender of Scepticism but rather an uncon- 
scious yielding to the Eclectic influences of his intellec- 
tual environment. None of these suggestions seems 
wholly satisfactory; but perhaps the least difficult 
supposition is that Sextus is unintentionally mis- 
representing Aenesidemus by a loose use of language 
when he ascribes the dogmas mentioned above to 
“ Aenesidemus and his followers ” (οἱ περὶ τὸν Αἰνησί- 
δημον). If so, we may suppose that while Aenesi- 
demus may have given a start to the dogmatizing 
tendency by enlarging on the points of similarity 
between Scepticism and Heracleiteanism and claiming 
Heracleitus as a forerunner, certain of his adherents 


ΧΧΧΙΧ 


INTRODUCTION 


pushed that tendency to excess and indulged in an 
Eclectic dogmatism, after the fashion of Antiochus, 
which blended Scepticism with Heracleitean and Stoic 
doctrine. 

Of the successors of Aenesidemus we know no more 
than the names until we come to Agrippa, about a 
century later. To him is attributed the presentation 
of Sceptical theory in “five Tropes,” which are 
briefly these: (1) Based on the conflict among 
opinions (6 ἀπὸ τῆς διαφωνίας) ; (2) Every proof 
requires a fresh proof in endless regress (ὁ εἰς ἄπειρον 
ἐκβάλλων) ; (3) Based on the relativity of perceptions 
(6 ἀπὸ τοῦ πρός τι τρόπος); (4) Proof must not 
presuppose unproved premisses (ὁ ὑποθετικός); (5) 
Reasoning involves a vicious circle (ὁ διάλληλος τρόπος). 
Of these (1) and (3) resume and sum up the former 
“ten Tropes,’ which exhibited the fallibility of the 
senses and the relativity of perceptual knowledge ; 
while (2), (4) and (5) are directed against the Aristo- 
telian theory of “immediate” axioms (ἄμεσα) and 
the possibility of logical demonstration. 

Agrippa was followed by Zeuxippus, Zeuxis, and 
Antiochus, who remain mere names, though we ma 
suppose that they adhered to the tradition of dia- 
lectical Scepticism. 

4. The last stage in the history of Greek Scepti- 
cism is marked by its alliance with medical empiricism 
(cf. Pyrr. Hyp. i. 236 ff.). Menodotus of Nicomedia 
and Theodas appear to have been the first of these 
medical Sceptics, and we may date them about 
a.p. 150. Galen criticizes the views of both regarding 
medicine and natural science. Herodotus of Tarsus, 
who succeeded Menodotus, is thought to have 
belonged to the “ pneumatic’ rather than to the 


xl 


INTRODUCTION 


“ empiric”’ school of medicine ; but in any case he 
was the teacher of Sextus Empiricus. 

To one or other of the foregoing Sceptics we may 
probably attribute two further developments of 
doctrine, viz. a further reduction of the ‘“‘ Tropes ἡ 
to two (arguing against the possibility of either 
immediate or mediate certitude), and a new distinc- 
tion between “ commemorative ᾿᾿ (ὑπομνηστικά) and 
“indicative ᾿᾿ (ἐνδεικτικά) “signs” (cf. Pyrr. Hyp. 
11, 99). 

coe Empiricus (οἴγοα Α.Ὁ. 200) is our main authority 
for the history and doctrine of the Sceptic School. 
We know that he was a Greek physician and that 
he succeeded Herodotus as Head of the School, but 
we know little else about the details of his life. He 
seems to have resided for some time in Rome, and to 
have been acquainted with Athens and Alexandria. 
Although named “ Empiricus”” he seems to imply 
that he adhered rather to the “‘ methodic ” than to 
the “ empiric ” tradition in medicine. His surviving 
works are three—(1) “Outlines (ὑποτυπώσεις) of 
Pyrrhonism”’ in three books; (2) “ Against the 
Dogmatists” in five books,—1 and 2 “ Against 
the Logicians,” 3 and 4 “ Against the Physicists,” 
5 “Against the Ethicists”; (3) “Against the 
Schoolmasters’’ in six books—a book each against 
Grammarians, Rhetors, Geometers, Arithmeticians, 
Astrologers, Musicians, in this order. Other works 
ascribed to him are a treatise “On the Soul” and 
‘“ Notes on Medicine.”’ 

Of the surviving works the Hypotyposes, or “ Out- 
lines,” is a kind of summary of Scepticism, the first 
book stating and defending the Sceptic position, and 
the other two books attacking the Dogmatic position. 


xli 


INTRODUCTION 


The other two works are usually put togéther as a 
whole under the title Adversus Mathematicos—which 
we might construe “ Against the Professors of all 
Arts and Sciences,” —and they resume and expand 
the critical and polemical arguments of books 2 and 
8 of the “ Outlines.” 

Probably there is but little original matter in these 
works. Sextus was mainlya compiler: he drew freely 
on the writings of his predecessors, especially Aene- 
sidemus, Cleitomachus (for Carneades), and Meno- 
dotus. He was evidently interested in the history of 
thought, and provides us with much valuable informa- 
tion about the earlier Schools, although he is not 
wholly reliable. He writes mostly in a plain, dry 
style, enlivened but rarely by touches of humour. 
As a controversialist he studies fairness by quoting 
the opponent’s own views, often at great length ; but 
he wearies the reader by his way of piling argument 
upon argument for the mere sake of multiplying words 
—bad argument and good heaped together indiscrimi- 
nately. Obviously his books are not intended to be 
works of art, but rather immense arsenals stored with 
all the weapons of offence and defence of every con- 
ceivable pattern, old and new, that ever were forged 
on the anvil of Scepticism by the hammer blows of 
Eristic dialecticians. From these storehouses the 
Sceptic engaged in polemics may choose his weapon 
to suit his need ; for (as Sextus naively observes) the 
Sceptic is a “ philanthropic ’’ person who spares his 
adversary by using against him only the minimum of 
force necessary to bow] him over, so that the weakest 
and most flimsy arguments have their uses as well as 
the weightiest. Oris Sextus here the veiled humorist? 


ΧΙ 


INTRODUCTION 


IV. Text anp Epirions 


The text of Sextus is derived from two main sources 
—the Greek Manuscripts and a Latin Translation. 
For the Hypotyposes the most important Mss.—as 
described by the latest editor, Mutschmann—are : 


M = Monac. gr. 439, late fourteenth century, con- 
taining Pyrr. Hyp. 

L =Laur. 81. 11, dated a.p. 1465, containing all the 
works of Sextus. 

E =Parisinus 1964, late fifteenth century, contain- 
ing all Sextus (plus διαλέξεις). 

A =Parisinus 1963, dated 1534, containing all 
Sextus (plus διαλέξεις). 

B =Berol. Phill. 1518, dated 1542, nearly a dupli- 
cate of A. 


Of these, the last three seem to be closely akin, so 
that we have three main lines of ms. tradition, 
derived from the same Archetype, viz. M, L, and 
EAB. 

T denotes (in Mutschmann’s notation, which is 
here followed) the Latin Translation, which is pre- 
served in the ms. known as Parisinus lat. 14700 
(fol. 83-132). It contains the whole of Sextus except 
for two omissions, viz. p. 51, 11-26, and p. 145, 3-160, 
20. As it was first brought to light by C. Jourdain 
in 1888, earlier editors were ignorant of its existence, 
and it is only in the latest Teubner edition that 
its readings are reported. The Teubner editor, H. 
Mutschmann, dates it in the thirteenth century, and 
regards it as equal in importance to any of the Greek 
mss., and devived from an independent Archetype. 

There are three early editions of Sextus—by P. 

xlili 


INTRODUCTION 


and J. Chouet (Geneva, 1621); by J. A. Fabricius 
(Leipzig, 1718), incorporating the Latin version by 
H. Stephens (Paris, 1562), as well as additional Notes ; 
. by I. Bekker (Berlin, 1842), giving the text and index 
only. The first volume of the Teubner edition (con- 
taining Pyrr. Hyp.) was published in 1912, the second 
volume in 1914. 

A literal German version of the three books of 
Pyrr. Hyp., with an Introduction and useful Notes, 
by E. Pappenheim, appeared in 1877 (Leipzig) ; and 
an English version of Pyrr. Hyp., book i., is included 
in M. Patrick’s volume Sextus Empiricus and Greek 
Scepticism (Cambridge, 1899). The latest considerable 
contribution to the textual criticism of Sextus is 
Werner Heintz’s Studien gu Sextus Empiricus (Halle, 
1932). 

Of the three works of Sextus mentioned above 
(p. xli) the present volumes are planned to include 
the first two only—namely, “‘ Outlines of Pyrrhonism”’ 
in vol. 1, and “Against the Dogmatists” in vols. 
11. and iii. The third treatise (“ Against the School- 
masters ’’) is omitted as containing but little of 
genuine philosophical or scientific interest or import- 
ance that has not already been fully expounded in 
one or other of the previous treatises. 

The text in these volumes is based on that of Bekker. 
Bekker, it may be noted, omitted both the Tables of 
Contents prefixed to the several books in the mss. 
and the corresponding Chapter - headings, although 
the earlier editors had retained both. In these 
volumes the Chapter-headings are restored, for the 
convenience of the reader, while the Tables of Contents 
are, after Bekker, omitted, as a superfluous duplica- 
tion. 


xliv 


INTRODUCTION 


In addition to the accounts of Greek Scepticism 
given in the standard Histories of Ancient Philosophy, 
attention may be drawn to the special treatment of 
the subject in The Greek Sceptics by N. MacColl 
(1869); Les Sceptiques grecs by V. Brochard (1887), 
copious and clear; Die Geschichte des griechischen 
Skeptizismus by A. Goedeckemeyer (1905), good for 
details; Stoic and Epicurean by R. D. Hicks (1910), 
chapters 8 and 10; Stoics and Sceptics by Ἐν. Bevan 
(1913), less detailed, but scholarly, suggestive and 
interesting, and thus probably the best introduction to 
the subject for the general reader. 


The following abbreviations are used in the foot- 
notes on the text: 


L= ss. Laur. 85. 11. 
M= ,, Monac. 439. 
E= ,, Paris. 1964. 
A= ,, Paris. 1963. 
B= ,, Berol. Phill. 1518. 
T = Latin Translation. 
Fabr. = Fabricius. 
Bekk. = Bekker. 
Mutsch. =H. Mutschmann. 
Papp. = Pappenheim. 


τ 


xlv 


OUTLINES OF 
PYRRHONISM 


VOL. I 


IITPPQNEION 
ΥΠΟΤΥΠΩΣΕΩΝ 
TON ΕἸΣ TPIA ΤῸ ΠΡΩΤῸΝ 


A'.—IIEPI ΤῊΣ ANOTATO ΔΙΑΦΟΡΑ͂Σ TON ΦΙΛΟΣΟΦΙΩΝ 


1 Τοῖς ζητοῦσί τι πρᾶγμα ἢ εὕρεσιν ἐπακολουθεῖν 
εἰκὸς ἢ ἄρνησιν εὑρέσεως καὶ ἀκαταληψίας duodo- 
ο γίαν ἢ ἐπιμονὴν ζητήσεως. διόπερ ἴσως καὶ 
ἐπὶ τῶν κατὰ φιλοσοφίαν ζητουμένων ot μὲν εὑρη- 
κέναι τὸ ἀληθὲς ἔφασαν, ot δ᾽ ἀπεφήναντο μὴ 
δυνατὸν εἶναι τοῦτο καταληφθῆναι, ot δὲ ἔτι 
8 ζητοῦσιν. καὶ εὑρηκέναι μὲν δοκοῦσιν οἱ ἰδίως 
καλούμενοι δογματικοΐ, οἷον οἱ περὶ ᾿Αριστοτέλην 
καὶ ᾿Επίκουρον καὶ τοὺς στωικοὺς καὶ ἄλλοι τινές, 
ὡς δὲ περὶ ἀκαταλήπτων ἀπεφήναντο οἱ περὶ 
Κλειτόμαχον καὶ Καρνεάδην καὶ ἄλλοι ᾿Ακαδη- 
4 μαϊκοί, ζητοῦσι δὲ of σκεπτικοί. ὅθεν εὐλόγως 
δοκοῦσιν at ἀνωτάτω φιλοσοφίαι τρεῖς εἶναι, δογ- 
ματικὴ ᾿Ακαδημαϊκὴ σκεπτική. περὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν 
ἄλλων ἑτέροις ἁρμόσει λέγειν, περὶ δὲ τῆς σκεπ- 
τικῆς ἀγωγῆς ὑποτυπωτικῶς ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ἡμεῖς 
ἐροῦμεν, ἐκεῖνο προειπόντες ὅτι περὶ οὐδενὸς τῶν 
® See Introd. pp. xxsii ff. : 


ὃ “ Doctrine.”’ “‘ School,” ‘system ” or ‘‘ way” are other 
2 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM 
BOOK I 


Cuaprer I.—Or toe Main Dirrerence BETWEEN 
Puitosopuic Systems 


Tue natural result of any investigation is that the 1 
investigators either discover the object of search or 
deny that it is discoverable and confess it to be 
inapprehensible or persist in their search. So, too, 2 
with regard to the objects investigated by philosophy, 
this is probably why some have claimed to have dis- 
covered the truth, others have asserted that it cannot 
be apprehended, while others again go on inquiring. 
Those who believe they have discovered it are the 3 
“ Dogmatists,”” specially so called—Aristotle, for 
example, and Epicurus and the Stoics and certain 
others; Cleitomachus and Carneades and other 
Academics α treat it as inapprehensible: the Sceptics 
keep on searching. Hence it seems reasonable to 4 
hold that the main types of philosophy are three— 
the Dogmatic, the Academic, and the Sceptic. Of 
the other systems it will best become others to speak : 
our task at present is to describe in outline the 
Sceptic doctrine,? first premising that of none of our 
possible renderings of ἀγωγή. “ Procedure,” “way of 


thought,” “ trénd,”’ or “line of argument,” “ leading *’ (ἄγων) 
up to a definite goal, is rather what it connotes. 


3 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


λεχθησομένων διαβεβαιούμεθα ὡς οὕτως ἔχοντος" 
πάντως καθάπερ λέγομεν, ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὸ νῦν φαινό- 
μενον ἡμῖν ἱστορικῶς ἀπαγγέλλομεν περὶ ἑκάστου. 


B’..—TIEPI TON AOTON ΤῊΣ ΣΚΈΨΕΩΣ 


5 Τῆς σκεπτικῆς οὖν φιλοσοφίας 6 μὲν λέγεται 
καθόλου λόγος ὃ δὲ εἰδικός, καὶ καθόλου μὲν 
ἐν ᾧ τὸν χαρακτῆρα τῆς σκέψεως ἐκτιθέμεθα, 
λέγοντες τίς ἔννοια αὐτῆς καὶ τίνες ἀρχαὶ καὶ 
τίνες λόγοι τί τε κριτήριον καὶ τί τέλος, καὶ τίνες 
οἱ τρόποι τῆς ἐποχῆς, καὶ πῶς παραλαμβάνομεν 
τὰς σκεπτικὰς ἀποφάσεις, καὶ τὴν διάκρισιν τῆς 
σκέψεως ἁ ἀπὸ τῶν παρακειμένων αὐτῇ φιλοσοφιῶν, 

6 εἰδικὸς δὲ ἐν ᾧ πρὸς ἕκαστον μέρος τῆς καλου- 
μένης φιλοσοφίας ἀντιλέγομεν. περὶ τοῦ καθόλου 
δὴ πρῶτον διαλάβωμεν λόγου, ἀρξάμενοι τῆς 
ὑφηγήσεως ἀπὸ τῶν τῆς σκεπτικῆς ἀγωγῆς ὀνο- 
μάτων. 


Γ΄.--ΠΕΡῚ TON ONOMASIOQN ΤῊΣ ΣΚΕΠΤΙΚΗΣ 


7 Ἢ σκεπτικὴ τοίνυν ἀγωγὴ καλεῖται μὲν καὶ 
ζητητικὴ ἀπὸ ἐνεργείας τῆς κατὰ τὸ ζητεῖν καὶ 
σκέπτεσθαι, καὶ ἐφεκτικὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ μετὰ τὴν ζή- 
τήσιν περὶ τὸν σκεπτόμενον γινομένου πάθους, 
καὶ ἀπορητικὴ ATO ἀπὸ τοῦ “περὶ παντὸς ἀπορεῖν 
καὶ ζητεῖν, ὡς ἐνιοί φασιν, 7 ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀμηχανεῖν 
πρὸς συγκατάθεσιν 7) ἢ ἄρνησιν, καὶ Πυρρώνειος a ἀπὸ 
τοῦ φαίνεσθαι ἡμῖν τὸν Πύρρωνα σωματικώτερον 





α Cf. Introd. p. xxxvii; 88 36 f. infra. 
> Bks. IT. and III. belong to the ‘ special” part of the 
exposition. 


4, 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 47 


‘future statements do we positively affirm that the 
fact is exactly as we state it, but we simply record 
each fact, like a chronicler, as it appears to us at the 
moment. 


Cuarrer IT.—Or tur ARGUMENTS OF SCEPTICISM 


Of the Sceptic philosophy one argument (or branch 5 
of exposition) is called “ general,’ the other “ special.” 
In the general argument we set forth the distinctive 
features of Scepticism, stating its purport and prin- 
ciples, its logical methods, criterion, and end or aim; 
the “ Tropes,” also, or ‘‘ Modes,” which lead to sus- 
pension of judgement, and in what sense we adopt 
the Sceptic formulae, and the distinction between 
Scepticism and the philosophies which stand next to 
it. In the special argument we state our objections 6 
regarding the several divisions of so-called philo- 
sophy.®? Let us, then, deal first with the general 
argument, beginning our description with the names 
given to the Sceptic School. 


Cuaprer III.—Or tur NoMEnNcLATURE OF 
ScEPTICISM 


The Sceptic School, then, is also called “‘ Zetetic 7 
from its activity in investigation and inquiry, and 
“ Ephectic ” or Suspensive from the state of mind 
produced in the inquirer after his search, and 
“ Aporetic ” or Dubitative either from its habit of 
doubting and seeking, as some say, or from its 
indecision as regards assent and denial, and “‘ Pyrrho- 
nean ” from the fact that Pyrrho* appears to us to 


ὁ See Introd. pp. xxx f. 
5 


8 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


4 3 / ~ 4 ᾿ “~ f 
καὶ ἐπιφανέστερον τῶν πρὸ αὐτοῦ προσεληλυθέναι 


τῇ σκέψει. 


Δ΄.-ΤῇΆ ἘΣΤῚ ΣΚΈΨΙΣ 


Ἔστι δὲ ἡ σκεπτικὴ δύναμις ἀντιθετικὴ φαινο- 
μένων τε καὶ νοουμένων καθ᾽ οἱονδήποτε τρόπον, 
ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἐρχόμεθα διὰ τὴν ἐν τοῖς ἀντικειμένοις 
πράγμασι καὶ λόγοις ἰσοσθένειαν τὸ μὲν πρῶτον 
εἰς ἐποχήν, τὸ δὲ μετὰ τοῦτο εἰς ἀταραξίαν. 


7 \ Ἂν > A ~ > \ A , 
9 δύναμιν μὲν οὖν αὐτὴν καλοῦμεν οὐ κατὰ τὸ περί- 


10 


εργον ἀλλ᾽ ἁπλῶς κατὰ τὸ δύνασθαι: φαινόμενα δὲ 
λαμβάνομεν νῦν τὰ αἰσθητά, διόπερ ἀντιδιαστέλ- 
ομεν αὐτοῖς τὰ νοητά. τὸ δὲ “ Kal” οἱονδήποτε 
τρόπον ᾿᾿ δύναται προσαρμόζεσθαι καὶ τῇ δυνάμει, 
ἵνα ἁπλῶς τὸ τῆς δυνάμεως ὄνομα, ὡς εἰρήκαμεν, 
παραλαμβάνωμεν, καὶ τῷ “᾿ ἀντιθετικὴ φαινομένων 
τε καὶ νοουμένων ᾽᾽- ἐπεὶ γὰρ ποικίλως ἀντιτίθεμεν 
ταῦτα, ἢ φαινόμενα φαινομένοις ἢ νοούμενα νοου- 
μένοις ἢ ἐναλλὰξ ἀντιτιθέντες, ἵνα πᾶσαι αἱ ἄντι- 
θέσεις ἐμπεριέχωνται, λέγομεν “ καθ᾽ οἱονδήποτε 
τρόπον. ἢ καθ᾽ οἱονδήποτε τρόπον φαινομένων 
τε καὶ νοουμένων, ἵνα μὴ ζητῶμεν πῶς φαΐνε- 
ται τὰ φαινόμενα ἢ πῶς νοεῖται τὰ νοούμενα, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἁπλῶς ταῦτα λαμβάνωμεν. ἀντικειμένους δὲ 
λόγους παραλαμβάνομεν οὐχὶ πάντως ἀπόφασιν 
καὶ κατάφασιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἁπλῶς ἀντὶ τοῦ μαχομένους. 
ἰσοσθένειαν δὲ λέγομεν τὴν κατὰ πίστιν καὶ 


α i.e.“ opposites’’ includes, for the Sceptics, ‘‘ contraries ”” 
(e.g. ‘ All are wise”’ )( ‘* None are wise’’), as well as ‘‘ con- 
tradictories ” (e.g. ‘Some are wise” )( ἡ Norie are wise’’), 
whereas the Stoics used it of the latter only. 


6 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 7-10 


have applied himself to Scepticism more thoroughly 
and more conspicuously than his predecessors. 


Cuapter [V.—Wuat Scepricism Is 


Scepticism is an ability, or mental attitude, which 8 
opposes appearances to judgements in any way 
whatsoever, with the result that, owing to the equi- 
pollence of the objects and reasons thus opposed, we 
are brought firstly to a state of mental suspense and 
next to a state of “ unperturbedness ”’ or quietude. 
Now we call it an “‘ ability ’ not in any subtle sense, 
but simply in respect of its “being able.” By 
‘“ appearances ”’ we now mean the objects of sense- 
perception, whence we contrast them with the objects 
of thought or “judgements.’’ The phrase “in any 
way whatsoever ” can be connected either with the 
word " ability,” to make us take the word “ ability,” 
as we said, in its simple sense, or with the phrase 
“ opposing appearances to judgements’; for inas- 
much as we oppose these in a variety of ways— 
appearances to appearances, or judgements to judge- 
ments, or alternando appearances to judgements,— 
in order to ensure the inclusion of all these antitheses 
we employ the phrase “in any way whatsoever.” 
Or, again, we join “in any way whatsoever ’”’ to 
“ appearances and judgements ”’ in order that we may 
not have to inquire how the appearances appear or 
how the thought-objects are judged, but may take 
these terms in the simple sense. The phrase “‘ opposed 10 
judgements ”’ we do not employ in the sense of nega- 
tions and affirmations only but simply as equivalent 
to “ conflictirtg judgements.” * “ Equipollence ” we 
use of equality in respect of probability and improba- 

7 


ce) 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀπιστίαν ἰσότητα, ws μηδένα μηδενὸς προκεῖσθαι 
τῶν μαχομένων λόγων ὡς πιστότερον. ἐποχὴ δέ 
ἐστι στάσις διανοίας δι᾽ ἣν οὔτε αἴρομέν τι οὔτε 
τίθεμεν. ἀταραξία δέ ἐστι ψυχῆς ἀοχλησία καὶ 
γαληνότης. πῶς δὲ τῇ ἐποχῇ συνεισέρχεται ἡ 
ἀταραξία, ἐν τοῖς περὶ τέλους ὑπομνήσομεν. 


E’.—IIEPI TOY ΣΚΕΠΤΙΚΟΥ 


1 Kai ὁ ᾿Πυρρώνειος δὲ ,φιλόσοφος δυνάμει τῇ τῆς 
σκεπτικῆς ἀγωγῆς ἐννοίᾳ συναποδέδοται: ἔστι γὰρ 
6 μετέχων ταύτης τῆς δυνάμεως. 


® 


σ΄ ΠΕΡῚ APXON THE ΣΚΕΨΕΩΣ 


12 ᾿Αρχὴν δὲ τῆς σκεπτικῆς αἰτιώδη μέν φαμεν 
εἷναι τὴν ἐλπίδα τοῦ ἀταρακτήσειν" οὗ γὰρ μεγα- 
λοφυεῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων ταρασσόμενοι διὰ τὴν ἐν 
τοῖς πράγμασιν ἀνωμαλίαν, καὶ ἀποροῦντες τίσιν 
αὐτῶν χρὴ μᾶλλον συγκατατίθεσθαι, ἦλθον ἐ ἐπὶ τὸ 

ητεῖν τί τε ἀληθές ἐστιν ἐν τοῖς πράγμασι καὶ 
τί ψεῦδος, ὡς ἐκ τῆς ἐπικρίσεως τούτων ἀταρακ- 
τήσοντες. συστάσεως δὲ τῆς σκεπτικῆς ἐστὶν 
ἀρχὴ μάλιστα τὸ παντὶ λόγῳ λόγον ἴσον ἀντι- 
κεῖσθαι: ἀπὸ γὰρ τούτου καταλήγειν δοκοῦμεν εἰς 


τὸ μὴ δογματίζειν. 


Z'.—EI ΔΟΓΜΑΤΊΖΕΙ Ο ΣΚΕΠΤΙΚΟΣ 


13 «Λέγομεν δὲ μὴ δογματίζειν τὸν σκεπτικὸν οὐ 
κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνο TO σημαινόμενον τοῦ δόγματος καθ᾽ ὃ 
καὶ δόγμα elvat φασί τινες κοινότεροις τὸ εὐδοκεῖν 
τινὶ πράγματι (τοῖς γὰρ κατὰ φαντασίαν κατ- 


8 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 10-13 


bility, to indicate that no one of the conflicting judge- 
ments takes precedence of any other as being more 
probable. “‘Suspense’”’ is a state of mental rest 
owing to which we neither deny nor affirm anything. 
“ Quietude ” is an untroubled and tranquil condition 
fsoul. And how quietude enters the soul along with 
uspension of judgement we shall explain in our 
hapter (XII.) “ Concerning the End.” 


Cuaprer V.—Or tue Scepric 


In the definition of the Sceptic system there is also 1] 
mplicitly included that of the Pyrrhonean philosopher : 
is the man who participates in this “ ability.”’ 


Cuaprer VI.—Or tue Principues or SCEPTICISM 


The originating cause of Scepticism is, we say, the 12 
ope of attaining quietude. Men of talent, who were 
erturbed by the contradictions in things and in 
oubt as to which of the alternatives they ought to 
ccept, were led on to inquire what is true in things 
nd what false, hoping by the settlement of this 
uestion to attain quietude. The main basic principle 
Ε the Sceptic system is that of opposing to every 
roposition an equal proposition ; for we believe that 

a consequence of this we end by ceasing to dogma- 
Ze. 


Cuapter VII.—Dogs rue Scertic pogMATIZE ἢ 


When we say that the Sceptic refrains from dogma- 13 

zing we do not use the term “" dogma,” as some 
in the broader sense of “‘ approval of a thing ” 

or the Sceptic gives assent to the feelings which 


9 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ηναγκασμένοις πάθεσι συγκατατίθεται. ὃ σκεπτικός, 
οἷον οὐκ ἂν εἴποι θερμαινόμενος ἢ ψυχόμενος 
ὅτι δοκῶ μὴ θερμαίνεσθαι ἢ ψύχεσθαϊ)), ἀλλὰ μὴ 
δογματίζειν λέγομεν καθ᾽ ὃ δόγμα εἶναί φασί 
τινες τήν τινι πράγματι τῶν κατὰ τὰς ἐπιστήμας 
ζητουμένων ἀδήλων συγκατάθεσιν" οὐδενὶ γὰρ τῶν 
14 ἀδήλων συγκατατίθεται ὁ Πυρρώνειος. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 
ἐν τῷ προφέρεσθαι περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων τὰς σκεπτικὰς 
words, οἷον τὴν “οὐδὲν μᾶλλον ᾿ ἢ τὴν “ οὐδὲν 
ὁρίζω ᾿᾿ ἢ τινα τῶν ἄλλων περὶ ὧν ὕστερον λέξομεν, 
δογματίζει. ὁ μὲν γὰρ δογματίζων ὡς ὑπάρχον 
τίθεται τὸ πρᾶγμα ἐκεῖνο 6 λέγεται δογματίζειν, 
δ δὲ σκεπτικὸς τὰς φωνὰς τίθησι ταύτας οὐχ ws 
πάντως ὑπαρχούσας" ὑπολαμβάνει γὰρ ὅτι ὥσπερ 
Πα πάντα ἐστὶ ψευδῆ " φωνὴ μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων 
καὶ ἑαυτὴν ψευδῆ εἶναι λέγει, καὶ ἡ “᾿ οὐδέν ἐστιν 
ἀληθές ᾿ ὁμοίως, οὕτως καὶ ἡ ᾿ οὐδὲν μᾶλλον ” 
μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων καὶ ἕαυτήν φησι μὴ μᾶλλον εἶναι 
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τοῖς ἄλλοις ἑαυτὴν συμπεριγράφει. 
τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ -καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων σκεπτικῶν φωνῶν 
15 λέγομεν. πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ εἰ ὁ δογματίζων τίθησιν ὡς 
ὑπάρχον τοῦτο ὃ δογματίζει, ὁ δὲ σκεπτικὸς τὰς 
φωνὰς αὑτοῦ προφέρεται ὡς δυνάμει ὑφ᾽ ἕαυτῶν 
περιγράφεσθαι, οὐκ ἂν ἐν τῇ προφορᾷ τούτων 
δογματίζειν λεχθείη. τὸ δὲ μέγιστον, ἐν τῇ προ- 
φορᾷ τῶν φωνῶν τούτων τὸ ἑαυτῷ φαινόμενον 
λέγει καὶ τὸ πάθος ἀπαγγέλλει τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ἀδοξά- 
στως, μηδὲν περὶ τῶν ἔξωθεν ὑποκειμένων δια- 


βεβαιούμενος. 


« ΟἹ 88 187 ff. Αϑ ἴδετε explained, οὐδὲν μᾶλλον is elliptical 
for οὐδὲν μᾶλλον τόδε ἢ τόδε. 
> Lit. “ underlying things,”’ ὁ.6. the essences or reals which 


10 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 13-15 


are the necessary results of sense-impressions, and 
he would not, for example, say when feeling hot or 
cold “I believe that I am not hot or cold’’); but we 
say that “ he does not dogmatize ᾿᾿ using “‘ dogma ” 
in the sense, which some give it, of “ assent to one 
of the non-evident objects of scientific inquiry ” ; 
for the Pyrrhonean philosopher assents to nothing 


that is non-evident. Moreover, even in the act of 14 


enunciating the Sceptic formulae * concerning things 
non-evident—such as the formula ‘‘ No more (one 
thing than another),” or the formula “1 determine 
nothing,” or any of the others which we shall presently 
mention,—he does not dogmatize. For whereas the 
dogmatizer posits the things about which he is said to 
be dogmatizing as really existent, the Sceptic does 
not posit these formulae in any absolute sense ; for 
he conceives that, just as the formula “ All things are 
false ” asserts the falsity of itself as well as of every- 
thing else, as does the formula ‘“‘ Nothing is true,”’ 
so also the formula ‘‘ No more ”’ asserts that itself, 
like all the rest, is “‘ No more (this than that),” 
and thus cancels itself along with the rest. And 
of the other formulae we say the same. If then, 
while the dogmatizer posits the matter of his 
dogma as substantial truth, the Sceptic enunciates 
his formulae so that they are virtually cancelled by 
themselves, he should not be said to dogmatize in his 
enunciation of them. And, most important of all, in 
his enunciation of these formulae he states what 
appears to himself and announces his own impression 
in an undogmatic way, without making any positive 
assertion regarding the external realities.® 


lie behind, and’ give rise to, sensations or “ appearances ”’; 
cf. p. 30 note a. 


11 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


H’.—EI AIPESIN EXEI O ZKEIITIKO= 


/ A 3 “~ - 

16 “Ὁμοίως δὲ φερόμεθα καὶ ἐν τῷ ἐρωτᾶσθαι εἰ 
ἔχει αἵρεσιν ὃ σκεπτικός. εἰ μέν τις αἵρεσιν εἶναι 

λ f f la AA ~ 3 f 
éyes πρόσκλισιν δόγμασι πολλοῖς ἀκολουθίαν 

3) \ bd ? \ / \ / 
ἔχουσι πρὸς ἄλληλά re Kat φαινόμενα, καὶ λέγει 
δόγμα τινὶ ἀδήλῳ συγκατάθεσιν, φήσομεν μὴ ἔχειν 
17 αἵρεσιν. εἰ δέ τις αἵρεσιν εἶναι φάσκει τὴν λόγῳ 
τινὶ κατὰ τὸ φαινόμενον ἀκολουθοῦσαν ἀγωγήν, 

7 “-- ἴων ~ “ 

ἐκείνου τοῦ λόγου ὡς ἔστιν ὀρθῶς δοκεῖν ζῆν ὑπο- 
δεικνύοντος (τοῦ ὀρθῶς μὴ μόνον κατ᾽ ἀρετὴν 

4 9 > 9 / \ 9 Ve SN 3 f 
λαμβανομένου ἀλλ᾽ ἀφελέστερον) καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ ἐπέχειν 
δύνασθαι διατείνοντος, αἵρεσΐν φαμεν ἔχειν: ἀκο- 
λουθοῦμεν γάρ tur λόγῳ κατὰ τὸ φαινόμενον 
ὑποδεικνύντι ἡμῖν τὸ ζῆν πρὸς τὰ πάτρια ἔθη καὶ 

‘ “ 2 
τοὺς νόμους καὶ τὰς ἀγωγὰς καὶ τὰ οἰκεῖα πάθη. 


Θ΄.---Ἐ: ΦΥΣΙΟΛΟΤῈΙ O ΣΚΕΠΤΙΚΟΣ 


18. Παραπλήσια δὲ λέγομεν καὶ ἐν τῷ ζητεῖν εἰ 
φυσιολογητέον τῷ σκεπτικῷ" ἕνεκα μὲν γὰρ τοῦ 
μετὰ βεβαίου πείσματος ἀποφαίνεσθαι περί τινος 
τῶν κατὰ τὴν φυσιολογίαν δογματιζομένων οὐ 
φυσιολογοῦμεν, ἕνεκα δὲ τοῦ παντὶ λόγῳ λόγον 
ἴσον ἔχειν ἀντιτιθέναι καὶ τῆς ἀταραξίας amrd- 

os f ? \ \ A \ 
μεθα τῆς φυσιολογίας. οὕτω δὲ καὶ τὸ λογικὸν 
, A A oy] \ ~ x / r ¢ > 
μέρος Kal τὸ ἠθικὸν τῆς λεγομένης φιλοσοφίας ἐπ- 
ερχόμεθα. 





α Lit. “more smoothly’ or “ simply ἢ: Hence “in ἃ less 
restricted, more extensive, way.” 


12 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 16-18 


Cyaprer VIIT.—Has ruse Scepric A DOCTRINAL RULE? 


We follow the same lines in replying to the question 16 
“Has the Sceptic a doctrinal rule?” For if one 
defines a “‘ doctrinal rule” as “adherence to a number 
of dogmas which are dependent both on one another 
and on appearances,” and defines “dogma” as 
‘ assent to a non-evident proposition,” then we shall 
say that he has not a doctrinal rule. But if one 17 
defines “ doctrinal rule” as “‘ procedure which, in 
accordance with appearance, follows a certain line of 
reasoning, that reasoning indicating how it is possible 
to seem to live rightly (the word ‘rightly’ being 
taken, not as referring to virtue only, but in a wider 
sense 4) and tending to enable one to suspend judge- 
ment,” then we say that he has a doctrinal rule. 
For we follow a line of reasoning which, in accordance 
with appearances, points us to a life conformable to 
the customs of our country and its laws and institu- 
tions, and to our own instinctive feelings. 


Cuaptrer IX.—Dors tur Scepric DEAL WITH 
Puysics ὃ 


We make a similar reply also to the question 18 

“‘ Should the Sceptic deal with physical problems ? ” 
For while, on the one hand, so far as regards making 
firm and positive assertions about any of the matters 
dogmatically treated in physical theory, we do not 
deal with physics ; yet, on the other hand, in respect 
of our mode of opposing to every proposition an equal 
proposition and of our theory of quietude we do treat 
of physics. This, too, is the way in which we approach 
the logical and ethical branches of so-called “ philo- 
sophy.” 

13 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


I’.—EI ANAIPOTZI TA SPAINOMENA OI SKENTIKOL 


19 Οἱ δὲ λέγοντες ὅτι ἀναιροῦσι τὰ φαινόμενα ot 
σκεπτικοὶ ἀνήκοοί μοι δοκοῦσιν εἶναι τῶν παρ᾽ 
ἡμῖν λεγομένων" τὰ γὰρ κατὰ φαντασίαν παθητικὴν' 
ἀβουλήτως ἡμᾶς ἄγοντα εἰς συγκατάθεσιν οὐκ 
ἀνατρέπομεν, ὡς καὶ ἔμπροσθεν ἐλέγομεν: ταῦτα 
δέ ἐστι τὰ φαινόμενα. ὅταν δὲ ζητῶμεν εἶ τοιοῦτον 
ἔστι τὸ ὑποκείμενον ὁποῖον φαίνεται, τὸ μὲν ὅτι 
φαίνεται δίδομεν, ζητοῦμεν δ᾽ οὐ περὶ τοῦ φαινομέ- 
νου ἀλλὰ περὶ ἐκείνου ὃ λέγεται περὶ τοῦ φαινο- 
μένου: τοῦτο δὲ διαφέρει τοῦ ζητεῖν περὶ αὐτοῦ 

20 τοῦ φαινομένου. οἷον φαίνεται ἡμῖν - γλυκάζειν 
τὸ μέλι. τοῦτο συγχωροῦμεν: γλυκαζόμεθα γὰρ 
αἰσθητικῶς. εἰ δὲ καὶ γλυκύ ἐστιν ὅσον ἐπὶ τῷ 
λόγῳ, ζητοῦμεν" ὃ οὐκ ἔστι τὸ φαινόμενον ἀλλὰ 
περὶ τοῦ φαινομένου λεγόμενον. ἐὰν δὲ καὶ ἄντι- 
κρυς κατὰ τῶν φαινομένων ἐρωτῶμεν λόγους, 
οὐκ ἀναιρεῖν βουλόμενοι τὰ φαινόμενα τούτους 
ἐκτιθέμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιδεικνύντες τὴν τῶν δογματικῶν 
προπέτειαν" εἰ γὰρ τοιοῦτος ἀπατεών ἐστιν 6 λόγος 
ὥστε καὶ τὰ φαινόμενα μόνον οὐχὶ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν 
ἡμῶν ὑφαρπάζειν, πῶς οὐ χρὴ ὑφορᾶσθαι αὐτὸν ἐν 
τοῖς ἀδήλοις, ὥστε μὴ κατακολουθοῦντας αὐτῷ 
προπετεύεσθαι; 


1 παθητικὴν LMT: παθητικὰ EAB, Bekk. 





αν) 6. ““impressions’’ or “ presentations’? which cause 
** affections ’’ or δ feelings ’’ (πάθη), as described in § 18 supra. 
> Cf. § 213. 


14 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 19--20 


CuapTer X.—Do tue ScEPTICS ABOLISH 
APPEARANCES ? 


Those who say that “‘ the Sceptics abolish appear- 19 
ances,’’ or phenomena, seem to me to be unacquainted 
with the statements of our School. For, as we said 
above, we do not overthrow the affective sense- 
impressions * which induce our assent involuntarily ; 
and these impressions are “‘the appearances.”” And 
when we question whether the underlying object is 
such as it appears, we grant the fact that it appears, 
and our doubt does not concern the appearance itself 
but the account given of that appearance,—and that 
is a different thing from questioning the appearance 
itself. For example, honey ® appears to us to be 20 
sweet (and this we grant, for we perceive sweetness 
through the senses), but whether it is also sweet in 
its essence is for us a matter of doubt, since this is 
not an appearance but a judgement regarding the 
appearance. And even if we do actually argue 
against the appearances, we do not propound such 
arguments with the intention of abolishing appear- 
ances, but by way of pointing out the rashness of the 
Dogmatists ; for if reason is such a trickster as to all 
but snatch away the appearances from under our very 
eyes, surely we should view it with suspicion in the 
case of things non-evident so as not to display rashness 
by following it. 

°i.é. the “reason,” or logic, which serves to discredit 
phenomena may be used a fortiori to discredit ultra-sensible 


objects. Instead of “abolishing appearances” it really (as 
the Sceptics contend) abolishes itself. us 


15 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


IA’.—ILEPI TOY KPITHPIOY ΤῊΣ ZKENTIKHS 


21 “Ore δὲ τοῖς φαινομένοις προσέχομεν, δῆλον ἀπὸ 
τῶν λεγομένων ἡμῖν περὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου τῆς σκεπ- 
τικῆς ἀγωγῆς. κριτήριον δὲ λέγεται διχῶς, τό τε 
εἰς πίστιν ὑπάρ ἕως ἢ ἀνυπαρξίας λαμβανόμενον, 
περὶ οὗ ἐν τῷ ἀντιρρητικῷ λέξομεν λόγῳ, τό τε 
τοῦ πράσσειν, ᾧ προσέχοντες κατὰ τὸν βίον τὰ 
μὲν πράσσομεν τὰ δ᾽ οὔ, περὶ οὗ νῦν λέγομεν. 

99 κριτήριον τοίνυν φαμὲν εἶναι τῆς σκεπτικῆς ἀγωγῆς 
τὸ φαινόμενον, δυνάμει τὴν φαντασίαν αὐτοῦ οὕτω 
καλοῦντες" ἐν πείσει γὰρ καὶ ἀβουλήτῳ πάθει κει- 
μένη ἀζήτητός ἐστιν. διὸ περὶ μὲν τοῦ φαίνεσθαι 
τοῖον ἢ τοῖον τὸ ὑποκείμενον οὐδεὶς ἴσως ἀμφισβητεῖ, 
περὶ δὲ τοῦ εἰ τοιοῦτον ἔστιν ὁποῖον φαίνεται ζη- 
τεῖται. 

23 Τοῖς φαινομένοις οὖν προσέχοντες κατὰ τὴν 
βιωτικὴν τήρησιν ἀδοξάστως βιοῦμεν, ἐπεὶ μὴ 
δυνάμεθα ἀνενέργητοι παντάπασιν εἶναι. ἔοικε δὲ 
αὕτη ἡ "βιωτικὴ τήρησις τετραμερὴς εἶναι καὶ τὸ 
μέν τι ἔχειν ἐν ὑφηγήσει φύσεως, τὸ δὲ ἐν ἀνάγκῃ 
παθῶν, τὸ δὲ ἐν παραδόσει νόμων τε καὶ ἐθῶν, 

234 τὸ δὲ ἐ ἐν διδασκαλίᾳ τεχνῶν, ὑφηγήσει μὲν φυσικῇ 
καθ᾽ ἣν φυσικῶς αἰσθητικοὶ καὶ νοητικοί ἐσμεν, 
παθῶν δὲ ἀνάγκῃ καθ᾽ ἣν λιμὸς μὲν ἐπὶ τροφὴν 
ἡμᾶς ὁδηγεῖ δίψος δ᾽ ἐπὶ πόμα, ἐθῶν δὲ καὶ νόμων 
παραδόσει καθ᾽ ἣν τὸ μὲν εὐσεβεῖν παραλαμβάνο- 
μεν βιωτικῶς ὡς ἀγαθὸν τὸ δὲ ἀσεβεῖν ὡς φαῦλον, 
τεχνῶν δὲ διδασκαλίᾳ καθ᾽ ἣν οὐκ ἀνενέργητοί 
ἐσμεν ἐν αἷς παραλαμβάνομεν τέχναις. ταῦτα δὲ 
πάντα φαμὲν ἀδοξάστως. 


-“ 


« Of ii, 14 ff > Of, §§ 226, 237-238. 





16 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 21-24 


CuapTer XI.—Or ΤῊΣ Crirerion or SCEPTICISM 


That we adhere to appearances is plain from what 21 
we say about the Criterion of the Sceptic School. 
The word “ Criterion τ᾿ is used in two senses: in the 
one it means “the standard regulating belief in 
reality or unreality,”’ (and this we shall discuss in 
our refutation 4) ; in the other it denotes the standard 
of action by conforming to which in the conduct of 
life we perform some actions and abstain from others ; 
and it is of the latter that we are now speaking. The 22 
criterion, then, of the Sceptic School is, we say, the 
appearance, giving this name to what is virtually the 
sense-presentation. For since this lies in feeling and 
involuntary affection, it is not open to question. 
Consequently, no one, I suppose, disputes that the 
underlying object has this or that appearance; the 
point in dispute is whether the object is in reality 
such as it appears to be. 

Adhering, then, to appearances we live in accord- 23 
ance with the normal rules of life, undogmatically, 
seeing that we cannot remain wholly inactive. And 
it would seem that this regulation of life is fourfold, 
and that one part of it lies in the guidance of Nature, 
another in the constraint of the passions, another in 
the tradition of laws and customs, another in the 
instruction of the arts. Nature’s guidance is that by 24 
which we are naturally capable of sensation and 
thought ; constraint of the passions is that whereby 
hunger drives us to food and thirst to drink ; tradition 
of customs and laws, that whereby we regard piety 
in the conduct of life as good, but impiety as evil; 
instruction of the arts, that whereby we are not 
inactive in such arts as we adopt. But we make all 
these statements undogmatically. 


VOL. I c 17 


25 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


IB.—TI TO ΤΈΛΟΣ ΤῊΣ ZKEMTIKHS 


Τούτοις ἀκόλουθον dv εἴη καὶ περὶ τοῦ τέλους 
τῆς σκεπτικῆς ἀγωγῆς διελθεῖν. ἔστι μὲν οὖν 
τέλος τὸ οὗ χάριν πάντα πράττεται ἢ θεωρεῖται, 
αὐτὸ δὲ οὐδενὸς ἕνεκα, ἢ τὸ ἔσχατον τῶν ὀὁρεκτῶν. 
φαμὲν δὲ ἄχρι νῦν τέλος εἶναι τοῦ σκεπτικοῦ τὴν 
ἐν τοῖς κατὰ δόξαν ἀταραξίαν καὶ ἐν τοῖς Karnvay- 


26 κασμένοις μετριοπάθειαν. ἀρξάμενος γὰρ φιλο- 
A 


27 


28 


~ “᾿ 3 “ 
σοφεῖν ὑπὲρ τοῦ τὰς φαντασίας ἐπικρῖναι καὶ 
“a t 7 2 9 “" ’ \ “a 
καταλαβεῖν τίνες μέν εἰσιν ἀληθεῖς τίνες δὲ ψευδεῖς, 
“ 3 3 »“-ὖὈῴ 
ὥστε ἀταρακτῆσαι, ἐνέπεσεν εἰς τὴν ἰσοσθενῆ 
a ‘ / . 
διαφωνίαν, ἣν ἐπικρῖναι μὴ δυνάμενος ἐπέσχεν" 
ἐπισχόντι δὲ αὐτῷ τυχικῶς παρηκολούθησεν ἡ ἐν 
- a \ \ / 
τοῖς δοξαστοῖς ἀταραξία. ὁ μὲν yap δοξάζων τι 
“- ? 
καλὸν τῇ φύσει ἢ κακὸν εἶναι ταράσσεται διὰ 
παντός" καὶ ὅτε μὴ πάρεστιν αὐτῷ τὰ καλὰ εἶναι 
“A ~ ~ 7 
δοκοῦντα, ὑπό τε τῶν φύσει κακῶν νομίζει ποινὴ - 
~ Ya 
λατεῖσθαι Kai διώκει τὰ ἀγαθά, ὡς οἴεται: ἅπερ 
κτησάμενος πλείοσι ταραχαῖς περιπίπτει διά τε τὸ 
παρὰ λόγον καὶ τὸ ἀμέτρως ἐπαίρεσθαι, καὶ 
7 
φοβούμενος τὴν μεταβολὴν πάντα πράσσει ἵνα μὴ 
ἀποβάλῃ τὰ ἀγαθὰ αὐτῷ δοκοῦντα εἶναι. ὁ δὲ 
3 ~ A ~ \ ~ ~ 
ἀοριστῶν περὶ THY πρὸς THY φύσιν καλῶν ἢ κακῶν 
οὔτε φεύγει τι οὔτε διώκει συντόνως" διόπερ 
ἀταρακτεῖ. 
[2 > 3 “A ~ 
Ὅπερ οὖν περὶ ᾿Απελλοῦ τοῦ ζωγράφου λέγεται, 
τοῦτο ὑπῆρξε τῷ σκεπτικῷ. φασὶ γὰρ ὅτι ἐκεῖνος 
* Cf. Cic. De fin. i. 12. 42 “vel summum bonum vel 
ultimum vel extremum, quod Graeci τέλος nominant, quod 
ipsum nullam ad aliam rem, ad id autem res referuntur 
omnes.” Aristot. Hth. Nic. i. 1. 1 καλῶς ἀπεφήναντο τἀγαθὸν 
οὗ πάντ' ἐφίεταις ibid. 5 τέλος ἐστὶ τῶν πρακτῶν ὃ δί αὑτὸ 
βονλόμεθα, τἄλλα δὲ διὰ τοῦτο. 
18 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 25-28 


Cuapter XIJ.—Wuat 15 THe Enp or ScepricisM ? 


Our next subject will be the End of the Sceptic 25 
system. Now an “End” is “that for which all 
actions or reasonings are undertaken, while it exists 
for the sake of none’; or, otherwise, “‘ the ultimate 
object of appetency.’’* We assert still that the 
Sceptic’s End is quietude in respect of matters of 
opinion and moderate feeling in respect of things 
unavoidable. For the Sceptic, having set out to 26 
philosophize with the object of passing judgement 
on the sense-impressions and ascertaining which of 
them are true and which false, so as to attain quietude 
thereby, found himself involved in contradictions of 
equal weight, and being unable to decide between 
them suspended judgement ; and as he was thus in 
suspense there followed, as it happened, the state 
of quietude in respect of matters of opinion. For 27 
the man who opines that anything is by nature good 
or bad is for ever being disquieted: when he is 
without the things which he deems good he believes 
himself to be tormented by things naturally bad and 
he pursues after the things which are, as he thinks, 
good; which when he has obtained he keeps falling 
into still more perturbations because of his irrational 
and immoderate elation, and in his dread of a change 
of fortune he uses every endeavour to avoid losing 
the things which he deems good. On the other hand, 28 
the man who determines nothing as to what is natur- 
ally good or bad neither shuns nor pursues anything 
eagerly ; and, in consequence, he is unperturbed. 

The Sceptic, in fact, had the same experience which 
is said to have befallen the painter Apelles.? Once, 


ἡ Court painter to Alexander the Great (circa 350-300 B.C.). 
19 


29 


90 


91 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἵππον γράφων καὶ TOV ἀφρὸν τοῦ ἵππου μιμήσασθαι 
τῇ γραφῇ βουληθεὶς οὕτως ἀπετύγχανεν ὡς ἀπ- 
εἰπεῖν καὶ τὴν σπογγιὰν εἰς ἣν ἀπέμασσε τὰ ἀπὸ 
τοῦ γραφείου χρώματα προσρῖψαι τῇ εἰκόνι: τὴν 
δὲ προσα αμένην ἵππου ἀφροῦ ποιῆσαι μίμημα. 
καὶ οἱ σκεπτικοὶ οὖν ἤ) λπιζον μὲν τὴν ἄταρα tay 
ἀναλήψεσθαι διὰ τοῦ τὴν ἀνωμαλίαν τῶν φαινο- 
μένων τε καὶ νοουμένων ἐπικρῖναι, μὴ δυνηθέντες 
δὲ ποιῆσαι τοῦτο ἐπέσχον: ἐπισχοῦσι δὲ αὐτοῖς 
οἷον τυχικῶς ἡ ἀταραξία παρηκολούθησεν ὡς 
σκιὰ σώματι. οὐ μὴν ἀόχλητον πάντῃ τὸν σκεπ- 
τικὸν εἶναι νομίζομεν, ἀλλ᾽ ὀχλεῖσθαϊ φαμεν ὑπὸ 
τῶν κατηναγκασμένων" καὶ γὰρ ῥιγοῦν ποτὲ ὁμο- 
λογοῦμεν καὶ διψῆν καὶ τοιουτότροπά τινα πάσχειν. 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν τούτοις οἱ μὲν ἰδιῶται δισσαῖς συν- 
ἔχονται περιστάσεσιν, ὑπό τε τῶν παθῶν αὐτῶν 
καὶ οὐχ ἧττον ὑπὸ τοῦ τὰς περιστάσεις ταύτας 
κακὰς εἶναι φύσει δοκεῖν: ὁ δὲ σκεπτικὸς τὸ προσ- 
δοξάζειν ὅτι ἔστι κακὸν τούτων ἕκαστον ὡς πρὸς 
τὴν φύσιν περιαιρῶν μετριώτερον καὶ ἐν τούτοις 
ἀπαλλάσσει. διὰ τοῦτο οὖν ἐν μὲν τοῖς δοξαστοῖς 
ἀταραξίαν τέλος εἶναί φαμεν τοῦ σκεπτικοῦ, ἐν δὲ 
τοῖς κατηναγκασμένοις μετριοπάθειαν. τινὲς δὲ 
τῶν δοκίμων σκεπτικῶν προσέθηκαν τούτοις καὶ 
τὴν ἐν ταῖς ζητήσεσιν ἐποχήν. 


11΄.-- ΠΕΡῚ TON OAOSXEPON ΤΡΟΠῺΝ THE ἘΠΟΧΗΣ 


Ἐπεὶ δὲ τὴν ἀταραξίαν ἀκολουθεῖν ἐφάσκομεν 
τῇ περὶ πάντων ἐποχῇ, ἀκόλουθον ἂν εἴη λέγειν 








¢ Viz. Timon and Aenesidemus ; ef. Diog. Laert. ix. 107. 
20 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 28-31 


they say, when he was painting a horse and wished 
to represent in the painting the horse’s foam, he was 
so unsuccessful that he gave up the attempt and flung 
at the picture the sponge on which he used to wipe 
the paints off his brush, and the mark of the sponge 
produced the effect of a horse’s foam. So, too, the 29 
Sceptics were in hopes of gaining quietude by means 
of a decision regarding the disparity of the objects 
of sense and of thought, and being unable to effect 
this they suspended judgement ; and they found that 
quietude, as if by chance, followed upon their sus- 
pense, even as a shadow follows its substance. We do 
not, however, suppose that the Sceptic is wholly 
untroubled ; but we say that he is troubled by things 
unavoidable ; for we grant that he is cold at times 
and thirsty, and suffers various affections of that kind. 
But even in these cases, whereas ordinary people are 30 
afflicted by two circumstances,—namely, by the affec- 
tions themselves and, in no less a degree, by the belief 
that these conditions are evil by nature,—the Sceptic, 
by his rejection of the added belief in the natural 
badness of all these conditions, escapes here too with 
less discomfort. Hence we say that, while in regard 
to matters of opinion the Sceptic’s End is quietude, 
in regard to things unavoidable it is “ moderate affec- 
tion.” But some notable Sceptics? have added 
the further definition ‘“‘ suspension of judgement in 
investigations.” 


CuapTer XIIJ.—Or true cenerat Mopsrs LEADING 
TO SUSPENSION OF JUDGEMENT 


Now that’ we have been saying that tranquillity 31 
follows on suspension of judgement, it will be our 


21 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ὅπως ἡμῖν ἢ ἐποχὴ περιγίνεται. γίνεται τοίνυν 
αὕτη, ὡς ἂν ὁλοσχερέστερον εἴποι τις, διὰ τῆς 
ἀντιθέσεως τῶν πραγμάτων. ἀντιτίθεμεν. δὲ ἢ 
φαινόμενα φαινομένοις ἢ νοούμενα νοουμένοις ἢ 
82 ἐναλλάξ, οἷον φαινόμενα μὲν φαινομένοις, ὅταν 
λέγωμεν “᾿ ὃ αὐτὸς πύργος πόρρωθεν μὲν φαίνεται 
στρογγύλος ἐγγύθεν δὲ τετράγωνος, νοούμενα δὲ 
νοουμένοις, ὅταν πρὸς τὸν κατασκευάζοντα ὅτι 
ἔστι πρόνοια ἐκ τῆς τάξεως τῶν οὐρανίων, ἀντι- 
τιθῶμεν τὸ τοὺς μὲν ἀγαθοὺς δυσπραγεῖν πολλάκις 
τοὺς δὲ κακοὺς εὐπραγεῖν, καὶ διὰ τούτου συνάγω- 
88 μεν τὸ μὴ εἶναι πρόνοιαν" νοούμενα | δὲ φαινομένοις, 
ὡς ὁ ᾿Αναξαγόρας τῷ λευκὴν εἶναι τὴν χιόνα 
ἀντετίθει ὅτι ἡ χιὼν ὕ Op ἐστὶ πεπηγός, τὸ δὲ 
ὕδωρ ἐστὶ μέλαν, καὶ ἡ χιὼν ἄρα μέλαινά ἐστιν. 
καθ᾽ ἑτέραν δὲ ἐπίνοιαν ἀντιτίθεμεν ὁτὲ μὲν 
παρόντα παροῦσιν, ὡς τὰ προειρημένα, ore δὲ 
παρόντα παρεληλυθόσιν ἢ μέλλουσιν, οἷον ὅταν τις 
84 ἡμᾶς ἐρωτήσῃ λόγον ὃ ὃν λῦσαι οὐ δυνάμεθα, φαμὲν 
πρὸς αὐτὸν ὅτι, ὥσπερ πρὸ τοῦ γενέσθαι τὸν 
εἰσηγησάμενον τὴν αἵρεσιν ἣν μετέρχῃ, οὐδέπω ὁ 
κατ᾽ αὐτὴν λόγος ὑγιὴς ὧν ἐφαίνετο, ὑπέκειτο 
μέντοι ὡς πρὸς τὴν ύσιν, οὕτως ἐνδέχεται καὶ 
τὸν ἀντικείμενον τῷ ὑπὸ σοῦ ἐρωτηθέντι νῦν λόγῳ 
ὑποκεῖσθαι μὲν ὡς πρὸς τὴν φύσιν, μηδέπω δ᾽ 
ἡμῖν φαίνεσθαι, ὥστε οὐδέπω χρὴ συγκατατίθεσθαι 
ἡμᾶς τῷ δοκοῦντι νῦν ἰσχυρῷ εἶναι λόγῳ. 
8δ Ὑπὲρ δὲ τοῦ τὰς ἀντιθέσεις ταύτας ἀκριβέστερον 
ἡμῖν ὑποπεσεῖν, καὶ τοὺς τρόπους ὑποθήσομαι δι᾽ 
ὧν ἡ ἐποχὴ συνάγεται, οὔτε περὶ τοῦ πλήθους 


* Cf. 8118. > See Introd. p. xis cf. ii. 244. 
22 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 31-35 


next task to explain how we arrive at this suspension. 
Speaking generally, one may say that it is the result 
of setting things in opposition. We oppose either 
appearances to appearances or objects of thought to 
objects of thought or ‘alternando. For instance, we 32 
oppose appearances to appearances when we say 
“The same tower * appears round from a distance, 
but square from close at hand’’; and thoughts to 
thoughts, when in answer to him who argues the 
existence of Providence from the order of the heavenly 
bodies we oppose the fact that often the good fare 
ill and the bad fare well, and draw from this the infer- 
ence that Providence does not exist. And thoughts 33 
we oppose to appearances, as when Anaxagoras ὃ 
countered the notion that snow is white with the 
argument, “ Snow is frozen water, and water is 
black; therefore snow also is black.” With a 
different idea we oppose things present sometimes 
to things present, as in the foregoing examples, and 
sometimes to things past or future, as, for instance, 
when someone propounds to us a theory which we 
are unable to refute, we say to him in reply, “‘ Just 34 
as, before the birth of the founder of the School to 
which you belong, the theory it holds was not as yet 
apparent as a sound theory, although it was really 
in existence, so likewise it is possible that the 
opposite theory to that which you now propound is 
already really existent, though not yet apparent to 
us, so that we ought not as yet to yield assent to this 
theory which at the moment seems to be valid.” 

But in order that we may have a more exact under- 35 
standing of these antitheses I will describe the Modes 
by which suspension of judgement is brought about, 
but without making any positive assertion regarding 


23 


36 


37 


38 


39 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


οὔτε περὶ τῆς δυνάμεως αὐτῶν διαβεβαιούμενος" 
ἐνδέχεται γὰρ αὐτοὺς καὶ σαθροὺς εἶναι καὶ πλείους 
τῶν λεχθησομένων. 


IA’. ΠΕΡῚ TON AEKA TPOTION 


, nm 

Παραδίδονται τοίνυν συνήθως παρὰ τοῖς dpyato- 
τέροις σκεπτικοῖς τρόποι, δι ὧν ἡ ἐποχὴ συν- 
7’ “ 7 \ > f a \ / 
ἄγεσθαι δοκεῖ, δέκα Tov ἀριθμόν, ods Kat λόγους 
καὶ τόπους συνωνύμως καλοῦσιν. εἰσὶ δὲ οὗτοι, 

» ξ Ἁ \ A“ / 3 / 4 
πρῶτος 6 Tapa τὴν τῶν ζώων ἐξαλλαγήν, δεύτερος 
6 παρὰ τὴν τῶν ἀνθρώπων διαφοράν, τρίτος 6 παρὰ 
τὰς διαφόρους τῶν αἰσθητηρίων καταδκευάς, τέ- 
ταρτος ὁ παρὰ τὰς περιστάσεις, πέμπτος ὃ παρὰ 

\ Ν / 
Tas θέσεις καὶ τὰ διαστήματα καὶ τοὺς τόπους, 
ἕκτος ὁ παρὰ τὰς ἐπιμιξίας, ἕβδομος ὁ παρὰ τὰς 
ποσότητας καὶ σκευασίας τῶν ὑποκειμένων, ὄγδοος 
6 ἀπὸ τοῦ πρός τι, ἔννατος 6 παρὰ τὰς συνεχεῖς 
ἢ σπανίους ἐγκυρήσεις, δέκατος ὁ παρὰ τὰς ἀγωγὰς 
\ 
καὶ τὰ ἔθη καὶ τοὺς νόμους Kal Tas μυθικὰς πίστεις 
καὶ τὰς δογματικὰς ὑπολήψεις. χρώμεθα δὲ τῇ 
τάξει ταύτῃ θετικῶς. 
; \ ? ? oN / “~ € 

Τούτων δὲ ἐπαναβεβηκότες εἰσὶ τρόποι τρεῖς, ὁ 

ἀπὸ τοῦ κρίνοντος, 6 ἀπὸ τοῦ κρινομένου, ὁ ἐξ 
a ~ \ ~ 
ἀμφοῖν: τῷ μὲν γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ κρίνοντος ὑποτάο- 
¢ 

σονται οἱ πρῶτοι τέσσαρες (τὸ γὰρ κρῖνον ἢ ζῶόν 
ἐστιν ἢ ἄνθρωπος ἢ αἴσθησις καὶ ἔν τινι περι- 
στάσει), εἰς δὲ τὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ κρινομένου «ἀνάγον- 
Tat» ὁ ἕβδομος καὶ ὅ δέκατος, εἰς δὲ τὸν ἐξ 
ἀμφοῖν σύνθετον ὃ πέμπτος καὶ ὃ ἕκτος καὶ ὁ 
ww ὃ Ἁ δ A tA δὲ ς “a “Ὁ 
ὄγδοος καὶ ὃ ἔννατος. πάλιν δὲ οὗ τρεῖς οὗτοι 


1 «ἀνάγονταῷ add. Papp. 
94, 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 35-39 


either their number or their validity ; for it is possible 
that they may be unsound or there may be more of 
them than I shall enumerate. 


CyHaprer XIV.—ConceRNING THE Ten Mopes 


The usual tradition amongst the older Sceptics is 86 
that the “‘ modes ”’ by which “ suspension ”’ is supposed 
to be brought about are ten in number ; and they also 
give them the synonymous names of “ arguments ”’ 
and “ positions.” They are these: the first, based on 
the variety in animals ; the second, on the differences 
in human beings; the third, on the different struc- 
tures of the organs of sense; the fourth, on the 
circumstantial conditions ; the fifth, on positions and 
intervals and locations ; the sixth, on intermixtures ; 37 
the seventh, on the quantities and formations of the 
underlying objects ; the eighth, on the fact of rela- 
tivity ; the ninth, on the frequency or rarity of 
occurrence ; the tenth, on the disciplines and customs 
and laws, the legendary beliefs and the dogmatic 
convictions. This order, however, we adopt without 3g 
prejudice. 

As superordinate to these there stand three Modes 
—that based on the subject who judges, that on the 
object judged, and that based on both. The first four 
of the ten Modes are subordinate to the Mode based 
on the subject (for the subject which judges is 
either an animal or a man or a sense, and existent in 
some condition): the seventh and tenth Modes are 
referred to that based on the object judged: the 
fifth, sixth, eighth and ninth are referred to the Mode 
based on both subject and object. Furthermore, g9 


25 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀνάγονται εἰς τὸν πρός τι, ὡς εἶναι γενικώτατον 
μὲν τὸν πρός τι, εἰδικοὺς δὲ τοὺς τρεῖς, ὑποβεβη- 
κότας δὲ τοὺς δέκα. ταῦτα μὲν περὶ τῆς ποσό- 
τητος αὐτῶν κατὰ τὸ πιθανὸν λέγομεν" περὶ δὲ 
τῆς δυνάμεως τάδε. 

40 Πρῶτον ἐλέγομεν εἶναι λόγον καθ᾽ ὃν παρὰ τὴν 
διαφορὰν τῶν ζώων οὐχ αἱ αὐταὶ ἀπὸ τῶν αὐτῶν 
ὑποπίπτουσι φαντασίαι. τοῦτο δὲ ἐπιλογιζόμεθα 
ἔκ τε τῆς περὶ τὰς γενέσεις αὐτῶν διαφορᾶς καὶ 
ἐκ τῆς περὶ τὰς συστάσεις τῶν σωμάτων παρα 

41 λαγῆς. περὶ μὲν οὖν τὰς γενέσεις, ὅτι τῶν ζώων 
τὰ μὲν χωρὶς μίξεως γίνεται τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ συμπλοκῆς. 
καὶ τῶν μὲν χωρὶς μίξεως γινομένων τὰ μὲν ἐκ 
πυρὸς γίνεται ὡς τὰ ἐν ταῖς καμίνοις φαινόμενα 
ζωΐφια, τὰ δ᾽ ἐξ ὕδατος φθειρομένου ὡς κώνωπες, 
τὰ δ᾽ ἐξ οἴνου τρεπομένου ὡς σκνῖπες, τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ γῆς 
«ὡς τέττιγες}. τὰ δ᾽ ἐξ ἰλύος ὡς βάτραχοι, τὰ 
δ᾽ ἐκ βορβόρου ὡς σκώληκες, τὰ δ᾽ ἐξ ὄνων ὡς 
κάνθαροι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ λαχάνων ὡς κάμπαι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ 
καρπῶν ὡς ot ἐκ τῶν ἐρινεῶν ψῆνες, τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ ζώων 
σηπομένων ὡς μέλισσαι ταύρων καὶ σφῆκες ἵππων" 

42 τῶν δ᾽ ἐκ συμπλοκῆς τὰ μὲν ἐξ ὁμοιογενῶν ὡς τὰ 
πλεῖστα, τὰ δ᾽ ἐξ ἀνομοιογενῶν ὡς ἡμίονοι. πάλιν 
κοινῇ τῶν ζώων τὰ μὲν ζωοτοκεῖται ὡς ἄνθρωποι, 
τὰ δ᾽ φοτοκεῖται ὡς ὄρνιθες, τὰ δὲ σαρκοτοκεῖται 

43 ὡς ἄρκτοι. εἰκὸς οὖν τὰς περὶ τὰς γενέσεις av- 
ομοιότητας καὶ διαφορὰς μεγάλας ποιεῖν ἀντι- 
παθείας, τὸ ἀσύγκρατον καὶ ἀσυνάρμοστον καὶ 
μαχόμενον ἐκεῖθεν φερομένας. 

44 ᾿Αλλὰ καὶ ἡ διαφορὰ τῶν κυριωτάτων μερῶν 
τοῦ σώματος, καὶ μάλιστα τῶν πρὸς -τὸ ἐπικρίνειν 

1 ζὡς τέττιγες» addidi: <ws μῦς» cj. Fabr. 
26 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 39-44 


these three Modes are also referred to that of relation, 
so that the Mode of relation stands as the highest 
genus, and the three as species, and the ten as subordi- 
nate sub-species. We give this as the probable account 
of their numbers; and as to their argumentative 
force what we say is this : 

The Ferst argument (or Trope), as we said, is that 40 
which shows that the same impressions are not pro- 
duced by the same objects owing to the differences 
in animals. This we infer both from the differences 
in their origins and from the variety of their bodily 
structures. Thus, as to origin, some animals are pro- 41 
duced without sexual union, others by coition. And 
of those produced without coition, some come from 
fire, like the animalcules which appear in furnaces, 
others from putrid water, like gnats; others from 
wine when it turns sour, like ants; others from earth, 
like grasshoppers; others from marsh, like frogs; 
others from mud, like worms; others from asses, like 
beetles ; others from greens, like caterpillars ; others 
from fruits, like the gall-insects in wild figs ; others 
from rotting animals, as bees from bulls and wasps 
from horses. Of the animals generated by coition, 42 
some—in fact the majority—come from homogeneous 
parents, others from heterogeneous parents, as do 
mules. Again, of animals in general, some are born 
alive, like men; others are born as eggs, like birds ; 
and yet others as lumps of flesh, like bears. It is 43 
natural, then, that these dissimilar and variant 
modes of birth should produce much contrariety 
of sense-affection, and that this is a source of its 
divergent, discordant and conflicting character. 

Moreover, the differences found in the most impor- 44 
tant parts of the body, and especially in those of 


27 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


καὶ πρὸς τὸ αἰσθάνεσθαι πεφυκότων, μεγίστην 
δύναται ποιεῖν μάχην τῶν φαντασιῶν [παρὰ τὴν 
τῶν ζώων παραλλαγήν.᾽ of γοῦν ἱκτεριῶντες 
ὠχρά φασιν εἶναι τὰ ἡμῖν φαινόμενα λευκά, καὶ οἱ 
ὑπόσφαγμα ἔχοντες αἱμωπά. ἐπεὶ οὖν καὶ τῶν 
ww τὰ μὲν ὠχροὺς ἔχει τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς τὰ δ᾽ 
ὑφαίμους τὰ δὲ λευκανθίζοντας τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλην χροιὰν 
ἔχοντας, εἰκός, οἶμαι, διάφορον αὐτοῖς τὴν τῶν 
45 χρωμάτων ἀντίληψιν γίγνεσθαι. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐνατενί- 
σαντες ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον τῷ ἡλίῳ, εἶτα ἐγκύψαντες 
βιβλίῳ τὰ γράμματα χρυσοειδῆ δοκοῦμεν εἶναι καὶ 
περιφερόμενα. ἐπεὶ οὖν καὶ τῶν ζώων" τινὰ φύσει 
αμπηδόνα ἐν τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς ἐ ἔχει καὶ φῶς λεπτο- 
μερές τε καὶ «εὐκίνητον ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀποστέλλει, ὡς 
καὶ νυκτὸς ὁρᾶν, δεόντως ἂν νομίζοιμεν ὅτι μὴ 
46 ὅμοια ἡμῖν τε κἀκείνοις τὰ ἐκτὸς ὑποπίπτει. καί 
γε, οὗ γόητες χρίοντες τὰς ϑϑρυαλλίδας ἐ ἰῷ χαλκοῦ 
καὶ θολῷ σηπίας ποιοῦσιν ὁτὲ μὲν χαλκοῦς ὁτὲ δὲ 
μέλανας φαίνεσθαι τοὺς παρόντας διὰ τὴν βραχεῖαν 
τοῦ μιχθέντος παρασποράν. πολὺ δήπου εὐλογώ- 
τερόν ἐστι, χυμῶν διαφόρων ἀνακεκραμένων τῇ 
ὁράσει τῶν ζώων, διαφόρους τῶν ὑποκειμένων 
41 φαντασίας αὐτοῖς γίνεσθαι. ὅταν τε παραθλίψωμεν 
τὸν ὀφθαλμόν, ἐπιμήκη καὶ στενὰ φαίνεται τὰ εἴδη 
καὶ τὰ σχήματα καὶ τὰ μεγέθη τῶν ὁρατῶν. εἰκὸς 
οὖν ὅτι ὅσα τῶν ζώων λοξὴν ἔχει τὴν κόρην καὶ 
προμήκη, καθάπερ αἶγες. αἴλουροι καὶ τὰ ἐοικότα, 
διάφορα φαντάζεται τὰ ὑποκείμενα εἶναι, καὶ οὐχ 
οἷα τὰ περιφερῆ τὴν κόρην ἔχοντα ζῶα εἶναι αὐτὰ 
48 ὑπολαμβάνει. τά τε κάτοπτρα παρὰ τὴν διάφορον 


1 [παρὰ . . . παραλλαγήν] secl. Mutsch. 
28 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 44-48 


which the natural function is judging and perceiving, 
are capable of producing a vast deal of divergence 
in the sense-impressions [owing to the variety in the 
animals]. Thus, sufferers from jaundice declare that 
objects which seem to us white are yellow, while those 
whose eyes are bloodshot call them blood-red. Since, 
then, some animals also have eyes which are yellow, 
others bloodshot, others albino, others of other 
colours, they probably, I suppose, have different 
perceptions of colour. Moreover, if we bend down 45 
over a book after having gazed long and fixedly at 
the sun, the letters seem to us to be golden in colour 
and circling round. Since, then, some animals possess 
also a natural brilliance in their eyes, and emit from 
them a fine and mobile stream of light, so that they 
can even see by night,* we seem bound to suppose 
that they are differently affected from us by external 
objects. Jugglers, too, by means of smearing lamp- 46 
wicks with the rust of copper or with the juice of the 
cuttle-fish make the bystanders appear now copper- 
coloured and now black—and that by just a small 
sprinkling of extra matter. Surely, then, we have 
much more reason to suppose that when different 
juices are intermingled in the vision of animals their 
impressions of the objects will become different. 
Again, when we press the eyeball at one side the 47 
forms, figures and sizes of the objects appear oblong 
and narrow. So it is probable that all animals which 
have the pupil of the eye slanting and elongated— 
such as goats, cats, and similar animals—have impress- 
ions of the objects which are different and unlike the 
notions formed of them by the animals which have 
round pupils. Mirrors, too, owing to differences in 48 


« Cf. § 84. 
29 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


κατασκευὴν ὁτὲ μὲν μικρότατα δείκνυσι τὰ ἐκτὸς 
ὑποκείμενα, ὡς τὰ κοῖλα, ὁτὲ δ᾽ ἐπιμήκη καὶ 
στενά, ὡς τὰ κυρτά- τινὰ δὲ τὴν μὲν κεφαλὴν κάτω 
δείκνυσι τοῦ κατοπτριζομένου, τοὺς δὲ πόδας ἄνω. 

49 ἐπεὶ οὖν καὶ τῶν περὶ τὴν ὄψιν ἀγγείων τὰ μὲν 
ἐξόφθαλμα κομιδῇ πέπτωκεν ὑπὸ κυρτότητος, τὰ 
δὲ κοιλότερά ἐστι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐν ὑπτίῳ πλάτει βέβηκεν, 
εἰκὸς καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἀλλοιοῦσθαι τὰς φαντασίας, 
καὶ μήτε ἴσα τοῖς μεγέθεσι μήτε ὅμοια ταῖς μορ- 
φαῖς ὁρᾶν τὰ αὐτὰ κύνας ἰχθύας λέοντας ἀνθρώπους 
πάρνοπας, ἀλλ᾽ οἵαν ἑκάστου ποιεῖ τύπωσιν ἡ 
δεχομένη τὸ φαινόμενον ὄψις. : 

ὅ0 “Ὁ δὲ αὐτὸς καὶ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων αἰσθήσεων λόγος" 
πῶς γὰρ ἂν λεχθείη ὁμοίως κινεῖσθαι κατὰ τὴν 
ἁφὴν τά τε ὀστρακόδερμα καὶ τὰ σαρκοφανῆ καὶ 
τὰ ἠκανθωμένα καὶ τὰ ἐπτερωμένα ἢ λελεπιδω- 
μένα; πῶς δὲ ὁμοίως ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι κατὰ τὴν 
ἀκοὴν τά τε στενώτατον ἔχοντα τὸν πόρον τὸν 
ἀκουστικὸν καὶ τὰ εὐρυτάτῳ τούτῳ κεχρημένα, 
ἢ τὰ τετριχωμένα τὰ ὦτα καὶ τὰ Ψιλὰ ταῦτα 
ἔχοντα; ὅπου γε καὶ ἡμεῖς ἄλλως μὲν κινούμεθα 
κατὰ τὴν ἀκοὴν παραβύσαντες τὰ ὦτα, ἄλλως δὲ 

Bl ἣν ἁπλῶς αὐτοῖς χρώμεθα. καὶ ἡ ὄσφρησις δὲ 
διαφέροι ἂν παρὰ τὴν τῶν ζώων ἐξαλλαγήν" εἰ γὰρ 
καὶ ἡμεῖς ἄλλως μὲν κινούμεθα ἐμψυγέντες καὶ τοῦ 
φλέγματος πλεονάσαντος ἐν ἡμῖν, ἄλλως δὲ ἣν τὰ 
περὶ τὴν κεῤαλὴν ἡμῶν μέρη πλεονασμὸν αἵματος 


@ τὰ ὑποκείμενα (Lat. sub-stantia) is a favourite term with 
Sextus for the objective realities which ‘‘ underlie,”’ or lie 
behind, the subjective impressions of sense (phenomena): 
they are called ἐκτός as ‘“‘ outside’’ of and not dependent on 


30 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 48-51 


their construction, represent the external objects ¢ at 
one time as very small—as when the mirror is concave, 
—at another time as elongated and narrow—as when 
the mirror is convex. Some mirrors, too, show the 
head of the figure reflected at the bottom and the 
feet at the top. Since, then, some organs of sight 49 
actually protrude beyond the face owing to their 
convexity, while others are quite concave, and others 
again lie in a level plane, on this account also it is 
probable that their impressions differ, and that the 
same objects, as seen by dogs, fishes, lions, men 
and locusts, are neither equal in size nor similar in 
shape, but vary according to the image of each object 
created by the particular sight that receives the 
impression. 

Of the other sense-organs also the same account 50 
holds good. Thus, in respect of touch, how. could 
one maintain that creatures covered with shells, with 
flesh, with prickles, with feathers, with scales, are all 
similarly affected ? And as for the sense of hearing, 
how could we say that its perceptions are alike in 
animals with a very narrow auditory passage and 
those with a very wide one, or in animals with hairy 
ears and those with smooth ears? For, as regards this 
sense, even we ourselves find our hearing affected in 
one way when we have our ears plugged and in 
another way when we use them just as they are. 
Smell also will differ because of the variety in animals. 51 
For if we ourselves are affected in one way when we 
have a cold and our internal phlegm is excessive, and 
in another way when the parts about our head are 
filled with an excess of blood, feeling an aversion to 


the percipient. I render the term indifferently by “‘ objects,” 
“real objects ”’ or “realities,” and “underlying objects.” 
31 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ὑποδέξηται, ἀποστρεφόμενοι τὰ εὐώδη τοῖς ἄλλοις 
δοκοῦντα εἶναι καὶ ὥσπερ πλήττεσθαι ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν 
νομίζοντες, ἐπεὶ καὶ τῶν ζώων τὰ μὲν πλαδαρά τέ 
ἐστι φύσει καὶ φλεγματώδη, τὰ δὲ πολύαιμα 
σφόδρα, τὰ δ᾽ ἐπικρατοῦσαν καὶ πλεονάζουσαν 
ἔχοντα τὴν ξανθὴν χολὴν 3 ἢ τὴν μέλαιναν, εὔλογον 
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο διάφορα ἑκάστοις αὐτῶν φαίνεσθαι 
52 τὰ ὀσφρητά. καὶ τὰ γευστὰ ὁμοίως τῶν μὲν 
τραχεῖαν καὶ ἄνικμον. ,ἐχόντων. τὴν γλῶσσαν τῶν 
δὲ ἔ ἔνυγρον σ όδρα, εἴγε καὶ ἡμεῖς" ξηροτέραν ἐν 
πυρετοῖς τὴν “γλῶτταν σχόντες γεώδη καὶ κακό- 
χυμα ἢ πικρὰ τὰ προσφερόμενα εἶναι νομίζομεν, 
τοῦτο δὲ πάσχομεν καὶ παρὰ τὴν διάφορον ἐπι- 
κράτειαν τῶν ἐν ἡμῖν χυμῶν εἶναι λεγομένων. 
ἐπεὶ οὖν καὶ τὰ ζῶα διάφορον τὸ γευστικὸν αἰσθη- 
τήριον ἔχει καὶ διαφόροις χυμοῖς πλεονάζον, δια- 
φόρους ἂν καὶ κατὰ τὴν γεῦσιν φαντασίας τῶν 
δ8 ὑποκειμένων λαμβάνοι. ὥσπερ γὰρ ἡ αὐτὴ τροφὴ 
ἀναδιδομένη ὅπου μὲν γίνεται Ady ὅπου δὲ 
ἀρτηρία ὅπου δὲ ὀστέον ὅπου δὲ νεῦρον καὶ τῶν 
ἄλλων ἕκαστον, παρὰ τὴν διαφορὰν τῶν ὑποδεχο- 
μένων αὐτὴν μερῶν διάφορον ἐπιδεικνυμένη δύνα- 
pow, καὶ ὥσπερ τὸ ὕδωρ € ἕν καὶ μονοειδὲς ἀναδιδό- 
μενον εἰς τὰ δένδρα ὅπου μὲν γίνεται φλοιὸς ὅπου 
δὲ κλάδος ὅπου δὲ καρπὸς καὶ ἤδη σῦκον καὶ ῥοιὰ 
δά καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἕκαστον, καὶ καθάπερ τὸ τοῦ μουσ- 
ουργοῦ πνεῦμα ἕν καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ ἐμπνεόμενον τῷ 
αὐλῷ ὅπου μὲν γίνεται ὀξὺ ὅπου δὲ βαρὺ καὶ ἡ 
αὐτὴ ἐπέρεισις τῆς χειρὸς ἐπὶ τῆς λύρας ὅ ὅπου μὲν 
βαρὺν φθόγγον ποιεῖ ὅπου δὲ ὀξύν, οὕτως εἰκὸς 
καὶ τὰ ἐκτὸς ὑποκείμενα διάφορα θεωρεῖσθαι 


1 εἴγε x. ἡμεῖς MT: x. ἡμεῖς εἴγε L, Bekk. 
32 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 51-54 


smells which seem sweet to everyone else and regard- 
ing them as noxious, it is reasonable to suppose that 
animals too—since some are flaccid by nature and 
rich in phlegm, others rich in blood, others marked 
by a predominant excess of yellow or of black gall— 
are in each case impressed in different ways by the 
objects of smell. So too with the objects of taste ; 
for some animals have rough and dry tongues, others 
extremely moist tongues. We ourselves, too, when 
our tongues are very dry, in cases of fever, think the 
food proffered us to be earthy and ill-flavoured or 
bitter—an: affection due to the variation in the 
predominating juices which we are said to’ contain. 
Since, then, animals also have organs of taste which 
differ and which have different juices in excess, 
in respect of taste also they will receive different 
impressions of the real objects. For just as the same 
food when digested becomes in one place a vein, in 
another an artery, in another a bone, in another a 
sinew, or some other piece of the body, displaying a 
different potency according tothe differenceinthe parts 


52 


53 


which receive it;—and just as the same unblended 54 


water, when it is absorbed by trees, becomes in one 
place bark, in another branch, in another blossom, 
and so finally fig and quince and each of the other 
fruits ;—and just as the single identical breath of a 
musician breathed into a flute becomes here a shrill 
note and there a deep note, and the same pressure 
of his hand on the lyre produces here a deep note and 
there a shrill note ;—so likewise it is probable that the 
external objects appear different owing to differences 

VOL. I D 33 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


παρὰ τὴν διάφορον κατασκευὴν τῶν τὰς φαντασίας 
ὑπομενόντων ζώων. 

55 ᾿Εναργέστερον δὲ τὸ τοιοῦτον ἔστι μαθεῖν ἀπὸ 
τῶν αἱρετῶν τε καὶ φευκτῶν τοῖς ζώοις. μύρον 
γοῦν ἀνθρώποις μὲν ἥδιστον φαίνεται, κανθάροις 
δὲ καὶ μελίσσαις δυσανάσχετον- καὶ τὸ ἔλαιον τοὺς 
μὲν ἀνθρώπους ὠφελεῖ, σφῆκας δὲ καὶ μελίσσας 
ἀναιρεῖ καταρραινόμενον" καὶ τὸ θαλάττιον ὕδωρ 
ἀνθρώποις μὲν ἀηδές ἐστι πινόμενον καὶ φαρμα- 

56 κῶδες, ἰχθύσι δὲ ἥδιστον καὶ πότιμον. σύες δὲ 
ἥδιον βορβόρῳ λούονται δυσωδεστάτῳ ἢ ὕδατι 

ιειδεῖ καὶ “καθαρῷ. τῶν τε ζώων τὰ. μέν ἐστι 
ποηφάγα τὰ δὲ θαμνοφάγα τὰ δὲ ὑληνόμα τὰ δὲ 
σπερμοφάγα τὰ δὲ σαρκοφάγα τὰ δὲ γαλακτοφάγα, 
καὶ τὰ μὲν σεσηπυίᾳ χαίρει τροφῇ τὰ δὲ νεαρᾷ, 
καὶ τὰ μὲν ὠμῇ τὰ δὲ μαγειρικῶς ἐσκευασμένῃ. 
καὶ κοινῶς τὰ ἄλλοις ἡδέα ἄλλοις ἐστὶν ἀηδῆ καὶ 

57 φευκτὰ καὶ θανάσιμα. τὸ γοῦν κώνειον πιαίνει 
τοὺς ὄρτυγας καὶ ὁ ὑοσκύαμος τὰς bs, at δὴ χαί- 
ρουσι καὶ σαλαμάνδρας ἐσθίουσαι, ὡσπεροῦν ἔλαφοι 
τὰ ἰοβόλα ζῶα καὶ at χελιδόνες κανθαρίδας. οἵ 
τε μύρμηκες καὶ οἱ σκνῖπες ἀνθρώποις μὲν ἀηδίας 
καὶ στρόφους ἐμποιοῦσι καταπινόμενοι: ἡ δὲ 
ἄρκτος ἣν ἀρρωστίᾳ τινὶ περιπέσῃ, τούτους κατα- 

58 λιχμωμένη ῥώννυται. ἔχιδνα δὲ θιγόντος αὐτῆς 
μόνον φηγοῦ κλάδου καροῦται, καθάπερ καὶ νυ- 
κτερὶς πλατάνου φύλλου. φεύγει δὲ κριὸν μὲν 
ἐλέφας, λέων δὲ ἀλεκτρυόνα, καὶ ραγμὸν κυάμων 
ἐρεικομένων τὰ θαλάττια κήτη, καὶ τίγρις ψόφον 
τυμπάνου. καὶ ἄλλα δὲ πλείω τούτων ἔνεστι 
λέγειν- ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα μὴ μᾶλλον τοῦ δέοντος ἐνδιατρί- 
βειν δοκῶμεν, εἰ τὰ αὐτὰ τοῖς μέν ἐστιν ἀηδῆ τοῖς 


34 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 54-58 


in the structure of the animals which experience the 
sense-impressions. 

But one may learn this more clearly from the 55 
preferences and aversions of animals. Thus, sweet 
oil seems very agreeable to men, but intolerable to 
beetles and bees ; and olive oil is beneficial to men, 
but when poured on wasps and bees it destroys them ; 
and sea-water is a disagreeable and poisonous potion 
for men, but fish drink and enj oy it. Pigs, too, enjoy 56 
wallowing in the most stinking mire rather than in 
clear and clean water. And whereas some animals eat 
grass, others eat shrubs, others feed in woods, others 
live on seeds or flesh or milk; some of them, too, 
prefer their food high, others like it fresh, and while 
some prefer it raw, others like it cooked. And so 
generally, the things which are agreeable to some 
are to others disagreeable, distasteful and deadly. 
Thus, quails are fattened by hemlock, and pigs by 57 
henbane ; and pigs also enjoy eating salamanders, 
just as deer enjoy poisonous creatures, and swallows 
gnats. So ants and wood-lice, when swallowed by 
men, cause distress and gripings, whereas the bear, 
whenever she falls sick, cures herself by licking them 
up. The mere touch of an oak-twig paralyses the 58 
viper, and that of a plane-leaf the bat. The elephant 
flees from the ram, the lion from the cock, sea- 
monsters from the crackle of bursting beans, and the 
tiger from the sound of a drum. One might, indeed, 
cite many more examples, but—not to seem unduly 
prolix—if the same things are displeasing to some 


35 


59 


60 


61 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δὲ ἡδέα, TO δὲ HOD καὶ andes ἐν φαντασίᾳ Keira, 
διάφοροι γίνονται τοῖς ζώοις ἀπὸ τῶν ὑποκειμένων 
αντασίαι. 

Εἰ δὲ τὰ αὐτὰ πράγματα ἀνόμοια φαΐνεται παρὰ 
τὴν τῶν ζώων ἐξαλλαγήν, ὁποῖον μὲν ἡμῖν θεωρεῖ- 
ται τὸ ὑποκείμενον ἕξομεν λέγειν, ὁποῖον δὲ ἔστι 
πρὸς τὴν φύσιν ἐφέξομεν. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐπικρίνειν 
αὐτοὶ δυνησόμεθα τὰς φαντασίας τάς τε ἡμετέρας 
καὶ τὰς τῶν ἄλλων ζώων, μέρος καὶ αὐτοὶ τῆς 
διαφωνίας ὄντες καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τοῦ ἐπικρινοῦντος 
δεησόμενοι μᾶλλον ἢ αὐτοὶ κρίνειν δυνάμενοι. καὶ 
ἄλλως οὔτε ἀναποδείκτως δυνάμεθα πρδκρίνειν τὰς 
ἡμετέρας φαντασίας τῶν παρὰ τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζώοις 
γινομένων οὔτε μετ᾽ ἀποδείξεως. πρὸς γὰρ τῷ 
μὴ εἶναι ἀπόδειξιν ἴσως, ὡς ὑπομνήσομεν, αὐτὴ 
ἡ λεγομένη ἀπόδειξις ἤτοι φαινομένη ἡμῖν ἔσται 
ἢ οὐ φαινομένη. καὶ εἰ μὲν μὴ φαινομένη, οὐδὲ 
μετὰ πεποιθήσεως αὐτὴν προσησόμεθα' εἰ δὲ 
φαινομένη ἡμῖν, ἐπειδὴ περὶ τῶν φαινομένων τοῖς 
ζώοις ζητεῖται καὶ ἡ ἀπόδειξις ἡμῖν φαίνεται ζώοις 
οὖσι, καὶ αὐτὴ ζητηθήσεται εἰ ἔστιν ἀληθὴς καθό 
ἐστι φαινομένη. ἄτοπον δὲ τὸ ζητούμενον διὰ 
τοῦ ζητουμένου κατασκευάζειν ἐπιχειρεῖν, ἐπεὶ 
tid 4 3 A 4 Ἁ ἢ Ψ 3 4 
ἔσται TO αὐτὸ πιστὸν καὶ ἄπιστον, ὅπερ ἀμήχανον, 
πιστὸν μὲν ἧ βούλεται ἀποδεικνύειν, ἄπιστον δὲ 





@ See ii. 134 ff. where it is argued that logical demonstra- 
tion or “ proof” is ‘‘non-existent.’”’ The argument here is 
that, even if we grant the existence of “* proof’ in the abstract 
we cannot prove anything in the particular case before us— 
the question as to the superiority of our impressions to those 
of animals. For all proof must be either “‘ apparent’’ to us, 


or “ non-apparent’’: the latter kind we reject as incompre- 


36 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 58-61 


but pleasing to others, and pleasure and displeasure 
depend upon sense-impression, then animals receive 
different impressions from the underlying objects. 
But if the same things appear different owing to 
the variety in animals, we shall, indeed, be able to 
state our own impressions of the real object, but as 
to its essential nature we shall suspend judgement. 
For we cannot ourselves judge between our own 
impressions and those of the other animals, since we 
ourselves are involved in the dispute and are, there- 
fore, rather in need of a judge than competent to 
pass judgement ourselves. Besides, we are unable, 
either with or without proof, to prefer our own 
impressions to those of the irrational animals. For 
in addition to the probability that proof is, as we 
shall show,* a non-entity, the so-called proof itself will 
be either apparent to us or non-apparent. If, then, 
it is non-apparent, we shall not accept it with con- 
fidence ; while ifit is apparent to us, inasmuch as what 
is apparent to animals is the point in question and the 
proof is apparent to us who are animals, it follows 
that we shall have to question the proof itself as to 
whether it is as true as it is apparent. It is, indeed, 
absurd to attempt to establish the matter in question 
by means of the matter in question,® since in that 
case the same thing will be at once believed and 
disbelieved,—believed in so far as it purports to prove, 
but disbelieved in so far as it requires proof,—which 


hensible; the former ‘apparent’? proof is indecisive, its 
“ apparency”’ being relative to us, who are a species of 
animal, and thus involved in the dispute. Further, as 
relative to us the “‘apparent proof” is not absolute, and 

therefore not necessarily “true.” 
° This would be the fallacy of petitio principii, or “ argu- 

ing in a circle’’; of. §§ 117, 164. 
37 


59 


62 


63 


64 


65 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἧ ἀποδείκνυται. οὐχ ἕξομεν ἄρα ἀπόδειξιν δι᾽ ἧς 
προκρινοῦμεν τὰς ἑαυτῶν φαντασίας τῶν παρὰ τοῖς 
ἀλόγοις καλουμένοις ζώοις γινομένων. εἰ οὖν διά- 
φοροι γίνονται αἱ φαντασίαι παρὰ τὴν τῶν ζώων 
ἐ αλλαγήν, ἃς ἐπικρῖναι ἀμήχανόν ἐστιν, ἐπέχειν 
ἀνάγκη περὶ τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων. 

Ἔκ περιουσίας δὲ καὶ συγκρίνομεν τὰ ἄλογα 
καλούμενα ζῶα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις κατὰ φαντασίαν" 
καὶ γὰρ καταπαΐζειν τῶν δογματικῶν τετυφωμένων 
καὶ περιαυτολογούντων οὐκ ἀποδοκιμάζομεν μετὰ 
τοὺς πρακτικοὺς τῶν λόγων. of μὲν οὖν ἡμέτε- 
ροι τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἀλόγων ζώων ἁπλῶς εἰώθασι 
συγκρίνειν τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ: ἐπεὶ δὲ εὑρεσιλογοῦντες 
οἱ δογματικοὶ ἄνισον εἶναί φασι τὴν σύγκρισιν, 
ἡμεῖς ἐκ πολλοῦ τοῦ περιόντος ἐπὶ πλέον παίζοντες 
ἐπὶ evos ζώου στήσομεν τὸν λόγον, οἷον ἐπὶ κυνός, 
εἰ δοκεῖ, τοῦ εὐτελεστάτου δοκοῦντος εἶναι. εὑρή- 
σομεν «γὰρ καὶ οὕτω μὴ λειπόμενα ἡμῶν τὰ ζῶα, 
περὶ ὧν ὁ λόγος, ὡς πρὸς τὴν πίστιν τῶν φαινο- 

ένων. 

Ὅτι τοίνυν αἰσθήσει διαφέρει τοῦτο τὸ ζῶον 
ἡμῶν, οἱ δογματικοὶ συνομολογοῦσιν" καὶ γὰρ τῇ 
ὀσφρήσει μᾶλλον ἡμῶν ἀντιλαμβάνεται, τὰ μὴ 
ὁρώμενα αὐτῷ θηρία διὰ ταύτης ἀνιχνεύων, καὶ 
τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς θᾶττον ἡμῶν ταῦτα ὁρῶν καὶ τῇ 
ἀκοῇ αἰσθανόμενος ὀξέως. οὐκοῦν ἐπὶ τὸν λόγον 
ἔλθωμεν. τούτου δὲ ὁ μέν ἐστιν ἐνδιάθετος ὁ δὲ 
προφορικός. ἴδωμεν οὖν πρότερον περὶ τοῦ ἐνδια- 





4.2.6. 85 ἃ further, superfluous or jocular, kind of argument, 
which serves to “‘ cap” the serious treatment of the questions: 
ef. 8§ 63, 78. ὃ Esp. the Stoics. 

¢ The Stoic theory of logos thus distinguished between its 


38 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 61-65 


is impossible. Consequently we shall not possess a 
proof which enables us to give our own sense-impres- 
sions the preference over those of the so-called 
irrational animals. If, then, owing to the variety in 
animals their sense-impressions differ, and it is im- 
possible to judge between them, we must necessarily 
suspend judgement regarding the external under- 
lying objects. 

By way of super-addition,“ too, we draw comparisons 62 
between mankind and the so-called irrational animals 
in respect of their sense-impressions. For, after our 
solid arguments, we deem it quite proper to poke fun 
at those conceited braggarts, the Dogmatists.? As 
a rule, our School compare the irrational animals in 
the mass with mankind; but since the Dogmatists 63 
captiously assert that the comparison is unequal, we— 
super-adding yet more—will carry our ridicule further 
and base our argument on one animal only, the dog 
for instance if you like, which is held to be the most 
worthless of animals. For even in this case we shall 
find that the animals we are discussing are no wise 
inferior to ourselves in respect of the credibility of 
their impressions. 

Now it is allowed by the Dogmatists that this 64 
animal, the dog, excels us in point of sensation: as 
to smell it is more sensitive than we are, since by 
this sense it tracks beasts that it cannot see; and 
with its eyes it sees them more quickly than we do ; 
and with its ears it is keen of perception. Next let δ 
us proceed to the reasoning faculty. Of reason one 
kind is internal, implanted in the soul, the other 
externally expressed.¢ Let us consider first the 


two senses—internal reason, or conception, and the enuncia- 
tion of thought in the uttered word. 


39 


66 


67 


69 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


θέτου. otros τοίνυν κατὰ τοὺς μάλιστα ἡμῖν 
ἀντιδοξοῦντας νῦν δογματικούς, τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς 
στοᾶς, ἐν τούτοις ἔοικε σαλεύειν, τῇ αἱρέσει τῶν 
οἰκείων καὶ φυγῇ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων, τῇ γνώσει τῶν 
εἰς τοῦτο συντεινουσῶν τεχνῶν, τῇ ἀντιλήψει τῶν 
κατὰ τὴν οἰκείαν φύσιν ἀρετῶν «καὶ» τῶν περὶ 
τὰ πάθη. ὁ τοίνυν κύων, ἐφ᾽ οὗ τὸν λόγον ἔδοξε 
στῆσαι παραδείγματος ἕνεκα, αἵρεσιν ποιεῖται τῶν 
οἰκείων καὶ φυγὴν τῶν βλαβερῶν, τὰ μὲν τρόφιμα 
διώκων, μάστιγος δὲ ἀναταθείσης ὑποχωρῶν. 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τέχνην ἔχει ποριστικὴν. τῶν οἰκείων, τὴν 
θηρευτικήν. ἔστι δὲ οὐδ᾽ ἀρετῆς ἐκτός: τῆς γέ 
τοι δικαιοσύνης οὔσης τοῦ κατ᾽ ἀξίαν ἀποδο- 
τικῆς ἑκάστῳ, ὁ κύων τοὺς μὲν οἰκείους τε καὶ εὖ 
ποιοῦντας caivwy καὶ φρουρῶν τοὺς δὲ ἀνοικείους 
καὶ ἀδικοῦντας ἀμυνόμενος οὐκ ἔξω ἂν εἴη τῆς 
δικαιοσύνης. εἰ δὲ ταύτην ἔχει, τῶν ἀρετῶν 
ἀντακολουθουσῶν καὶ τὰς ἄλλας ἀρετὰς ἔχει, ἃς 
οὔ φασιν ἔχειν τοὺς πολλοὺς ἀνθρώπους οἱ σοφοί. 
καὶ ἄλκιμον δὲ αὐτὸν ὄντα ὁρῶμεν ἐν ταῖς ἀμύναις, 
καὶ συνετόν, ὡς καὶ Ὅμηρος ἐμαρτύρησεν, πουή- 
σας τὸν ᾽Οδυσσέα πᾶσι μὲν τοῖς οἰκείοις ἀνθρώποις 
ἀγνῶτα ὄντα ὑπὸ μόνου δὲ τοῦ “Apyou ἐπιγνω- 
σθέντα, μήτε ὑπὸ τῆς ἀλλοιώσεως τῆς κατὰ τὸ 
σῶμα τἀνδρὸς ἀπατηθέντος τοῦ κυνός, μήτε ἐκ- 
στάντος τῆς καταληπτικῆς φαντασίας, ἣν μᾶλλον 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἔχων ἐφάνη. κατὰ δὲ τὸν Xpvo- 
urmov τὸν μάλιστα ὁμιλοῦνταξ τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζώοις 
καὶ τῆς ἀοιδίμου διαλεκτικῆς μετέχει. φησὶ γοῦν 


1 «καὶ add. T. 
2 ὁμιλοῦντα ego: πολεμοῦντα GT, Bekk.: προσέχοντα Diels, 


40 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 65-69 


internal reason. Now according to those Dogmatists 
who are, at present, our chief opponents—I mean the 
Stoics—internal reason is supposed to be occupied 
with the following matters : the choice of things con- 
genial and the avoidance of things alien; the know- 
ledge of the arts contributing thereto; the appre- 
hension of the virtues pertaining to one’s proper 
nature and of those relating to the passions. Now 66 
the dog—the animal upon which, by way of example, 
we have decided to base our argument—exercises 
choice of the congenial and avoidance of the harmful, 
in that it hunts after food and slinks away from a 
raised whtp. Moreover, it possesses an art which 
supplies what is congenial, namely hunting. Nor is 67 
it devoid even of virtue; for certainly if justice 
consists in rendering to each his due,* the dog, that 
welcomes and guards its friends and benefactors but 
drives off strangers and evil-doers, cannot be lacking 
in justice. But if he possesses this virtue, then, since 68 
the virtues are interdependent, he possesses also all 
the other virtues ; and these, say the philosophers,? 
the majority of men do not possess. That the dog is 
also valiant we see by the way he repels attacks, and 
intelligent as well, as Homer too testified ὁ when he 
sang how Odysseus went unrecognized by all the 
people of his own household and was recognized only 
by the dog Argus, who neither was deceived by the 
bodily alterations of the hero nor had lost his original 
apprehensive impression, which indeed he evidently 
retained better than the men. And according to 69 
Chrysippus, who shows special interest in irrational 
animals, the dog even shares in the far-famed “‘ Dia- 


-_ * Cf, [Plato], Def”. 411 5. 
z.e. the Stoics. ¢ See Odyss. xvii. 300. 


41 


70 


71 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


αὐτὸν 6 προειρημένος ἀνὴρ ἐπιβάλλειν τῷ πέμπτῳ 
διὰ πλειόνων ἀναποδείκτῳ," ὅταν ἐπὶ τρίοδον 
ἐλθὼν καὶ τὰς δύο ὁδοὺς ὦ ἰχνεύσας δι᾿ ὧν οὐ διῆλθε 
τὸ θηρίον, τὴν τρίτην μηδ᾽ ἰχνεύσας εὐθέως ὁ ὁρμήσῃ 
δι᾿ αὐτῆς. δυνάμει. γὰρ τοῦτο αὐτὸν λογίζεσθαί 
φησιν ὁ 6 ἀρχαῖος ἤτοι τῇδε 1 ἢ τῇδε ἢ τῇδε διῆλθε 
τὸ θηρίον" οὔτε δὲ τῇδε οὔτε τῇδε: τῇδε ἄρα." 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἑαυτοῦ παθῶν ἀντιληπτικός τέ ἐστι 
καὶ παραμυθητικός" σκόλοπος γὰρ αὐτῷ κατα- 
παγέντος ἐπὶ τὴν ἄρσιν τούτου ὁρμᾷ τῇ τοῦ ποδὸς 
πρὸς τὴν γῆν παρατρίψει καὶ διὰ τῶν ὀδόντων. 
ἕλκος τε εἰ ἔχει που, ἐπεὶ τὰ μὲν ῥυπαρὰ ἕλκη 
δυσαλθῇ ἐστὶ τὰ δὲ καθαρὰ ῥᾳδίως θεραπεύεται, 
πράως ἀποψᾷ τὸν γινόμενον ἰχῶρα. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ 
“ἽἹπποκράτειον φυλάσσει μάλα καλῶς: ἐπεὶ γὰρ 
ποδὸς ἄκος ἀκινησία, εἴ ποτε τραῦμα ἐν ποδὶ 
σχοίη, μετεωρίζει τοῦτον καὶ ὡς οἷόν τε ἄσκυλτον 
τηρεῖ. ὀχλούμενός τε ὑπὸ χυμῶν ἀνοικείων πόαν 
ἐσθίει, μεθ᾽ ἧς ἀποβλύζων τὸ ἀνοίκειον ὑγιάζεται. 


72 εἰ τοΐνυν ἐφάνη τὸ ζῶον, ἐφ᾽ οὗ τὸν «λόγον ἐστή- 


σαμεν παραδείγματος ἕνεκα, καὶ αἱρούμενον τὰ 
οἰκεῖα καὶ τὰ ὀχληρὰ φεῦγον, τέχνην. τε ἔχον πορι- 
στικὴν τῶν οἰκείων, καὶ τῶν ἑαυτοῦ παθῶν ἄντι- 
ληπτικὸν καὶ παραμυθητικόν, καὶ οὐκ ἔξω ἀρετῆς, 
ἐν οἷς κεῖται ἡ τελειότης τοῦ ἐνδιαθέτου λόγου, 
τέλειος ἂν εἴη κατὰ τοῦτο ὁ κύων" ὅθεν μοι δοκοῦσί 


1 ἀναποδείκτῳ T, Prantl: -δείκτων mss., Bekk. 





# i.e. the Stoic logie, cf. ii, 94. 

ὃ The Stoics had five syllogisms which they termed 
anapodeictic, or “ indemonstrable,”’ since they required no 
proof themselves but served to prove others. The “ com- 


43 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 69-72 


lectic.*”’ This person, at any rate, declares that the 
dog makes use of the fifth complex indemonstrable 
syllogism ® when, on arriving at a spot where three 
ways meet, after smelling at the two roads by which 
the quarry did not pass, he rushes off at once by the 
third without stopping to smell. For, says the old 
writer, the dog implicitly reasons thus: “‘ The creature 
went either by this road, or by that, or by the other : 
but it did not go by this road or by that: therefore it 
went by the other.’’ Moreover, the dog is capable 70 
of comprehending and assuaging his own sufferings ; 
for when a thorn has got stuck in his foot he hastens 
to remove-it by rubbing his foot on the ground and 
by using his teeth. And if he has a wound anywhere, 
because dirty wounds are hard to cure whereas clean 
ones heal easily, the dog gently licks off the pus that 
has gathered. Nay more, the dog admirably observes 71 
the prescription of Hippocrates ὃ : rest being what 
cures the foot, whenever he gets his foot hurt he lifts 
it up and keeps it as far as possible free from pressure. 
And when distressed by unwholesome humours he 
eats grass, by the help of which he vomits what is 
unwholesome and gets well again. If, then, it has 72 
been shown that the animal upon which, as anexample, 
we have based our argument not only chooses the 
wholesome and avoids the noxious, but also possesses 
an art capable of supplying what is wholesome, and 
is capable of comprehending and assuaging its own 
sufferings, and is not devoid of virtue, then—these 
being the things in which the perfection of internal 
reason consists—the dog will be thus far perfect. 


Pe syllogism was of the form: ‘‘ Either A or B or C exists ; 
ut neither A nor B exists ; therefore C exists.” 
“ The famous physician, of Cos (circa 460-400 B.c.). 


43 


73 


74, 


76 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τινες τῶν κατὰ φιλοσοφίαν ἑαυτοὺς σεμνῦναι TH 
τοῦ ζώου τούτου προσηγορίᾳ. 

Περὶ δὲ τοῦ προφορικοῦ λόγου τέως μὲν οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἀναγκαῖον ζητεῖν" τοῦτον γὰρ καὶ τῶν δογ- 
ματικῶν ἔνιοι παρῃτήσαντο ὡς ἀντυπράττοντα τῇ 
τῆς ἀρετῆς ἀναλήψει, διὸ καὶ περὶ τὸν τῆς μαθήσεως 
χρόνον ἤσκησαν σιωπήν" καὶ ἄλλως, εἰ καθ᾽ ὑπό- 
θεσιν εἴη ἄνθρωπος ἐνεός, οὐδεὶς φήσει αὐτὸν εἶναι 
ἄλογον. ἵνα δὲ καὶ ταῦτα παραλίπωμεν, μάλιστα 
μὲν ὁρῶμεν τὰ ζῶα, περὶ ὧν 6 λόγος, καὶ ἀνθρω- 
πίνας προφερόμενα φωνάς, ὡς κίττας καὶ ἄλλα 
τινά. ἵνα δὲ καὶ τοῦτο ἐάσωμεν, εἰ καὶ μὴ 
συνίεμεν τὰς φωνὰς τῶν ἀλόγων καλουμένων ζώων, 
ὅλως οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπεικὸς διαλέγεσθαι μὲν ταῦτα 
ἡμᾶς δὲ μὴ συνιέναι: καὶ γὰρ τῆς τῶν βαρβάρων 
φωνῆς ἀκούοντες οὐ συνίεμεν ἀλλὰ μονοειδῆ 
ταύτην εἷναι δοκοῦμεν. καὶ ἀκούομεν δὲ τῶν 
κυνῶν ἄλλην μὲν φωνὴν προϊεμένων ὅταν ἀμύνων- 
Tat τινας, ἄλλην δὲ ὅταν ὠρύωνται, καὶ ἄλλην 
ὅταν τύπτωνται, καὶ διάφορον ἐπὰν catvwour. 
καὶ ὅλως εἴ τις εἰς τοῦτο ἀτενίσειεν, εὕροι ἂν 
πολλὴν παραλλαγὴν τῆς φωνῆς παρὰ τούτῳ καὶ 
τοῖς ἄλλοις ζώοις ἐν ταῖς διαφόροις περιστάσεσιν, 
ὥστε διὰ ταῦτα εἰκότως λέγοιτ᾽ ἂν καὶ τοῦ προ- 
φορικοῦ μετέχειν λόγου τὰ καλούμενα ἄλογα ζῶα. 
εἰ δὲ μήτε ἀκριβείᾳ τῶν αἰσθήσεων λείπεται τῶν 
ἀνθρώπων ταῦτα μήτε τῷ ἐνδιαθέτῳ λόγῳ, ἐκ 
περιουσίας δὲ εἰπεῖν μηδὲ τῷ προφορικῷ, οὐκ ἂν 





4 A sarcastic allusion to the Cynics; οὐ, Diog. Laert. vi. 
13, Introd. p. xvi. 


4:4, 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 72-76 


And that, I suppose, is why certain of the professors 
of philosophy have adorned themselves with the title 
of this animal. 

Concerning external reason, or speech, it is un- 73 
necessary for the present to inquire ; for it has been 
rejected even by some of the Dogmatists as being 
a hindrance to the acquisition of virtue, for which 
reason they used to practise silence ὃ during the period 
of instruction ; and besides, supposing that a man is 
dumb, no one will therefore call him irrational. But 
to pass over these cases, we certainly see animals— 
the subject of our argument—uttering quite human 
cries,—jays, for instance, and others. And, leaving 74 
this point also aside, even if we do not understand 
the utterances of the so-called irrational animals, still 
it is not improbable that they converse although we 
fail to understand them ; for in fact when we listen 
to the talk of barbarians we do not understand it, 
and it seems to us a kind of uniform chatter. More- 75 
over, we hear dogs uttering one sound when they are 
driving people off, another when they are howling, 
and one sound when beaten, and a quite different 
sound when fawning. And so in general, in the case 
of all other animals as well as the dog, whoever 
examines the matter carefully will find a great variety 
of utterance according to the different circumstances, 
so that, in consequence, the so-called irrational 
animals may justly be said to participate in external 
reason. But if they neither fall short of mankind in 76 
the accuracy of their perceptions, nor in internal 
reason, nor yet (to go still further) in external reason, 
or speech, then they will deserve no less credence 


» For the Pythagorean rule of silence (ἐχεμυθία) cf. Diog. 
Laert. viii. 10. eee) are 


45 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


"7 ἀπιστότερα ἡμῶν εἴη κατὰ τὰς φαντασίας. Kal 
ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου δὲ τῶν ἀλόγων ζώων ἴσως ἱστάντας 
τὸν λόγον ταῦτα ἀποδεικνύειν δυνατόν ἐστιν. οἷον 
γοῦν τίς οὐκ ἂν εἴποι τοὺς ὄρνιθας ἀγχινοίᾳ τε 
διαφέρειν καὶ τῷ προφορικῷ κεχρῆσθαι λόγῳ; 
οἵ γε οὐ μόνον τὰ παρόντα ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ ἐσόμενα 
ἐπίστανται καὶ ταῦτα τοῖς συνιέναι δυναμένοις 
προδηλοῦσιν, ἄλλως τε σημαίνοντες καὶ τῇ φωνῇ 
προαγορεύοντες. 

78 Τὴν δὲ σύγκρισιν ἐποιησάμην, ὡς καὶ ἔμπροσθεν 

9 
Nig aed ἐκ περιόντος, ἱκανῶς, ὡς οἶμαι, 
δείξας ἔμπροσθεν ὅτι μὴ δυνάμεθα προκρίνειν τὰς 
ἡμετέρας φαντασίας τῶν παρὰ τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζώοις 
γινομένων. πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μή ἐστιν ἀπιστότερα τὰ 
ἄλογα ζῶα ἡμῶν πρὸς τὴν κρίσιν τῶν φαντασιῶν, 
καὶ διάφοροι γίνονται φαντασίαι παρὰ τὴν τῶν 
ζώων παραλλαγήν, ὁποῖον μὲν ἕκαστον τῶν ὕπο- 
κειμένων ἐμοὶ φαΐνεται δυνήσομαι λέγειν, ὁποῖον 
\ » ΄“" ΄ \ \ ζ΄ > 4 
δὲ ἔστι τῇ φύσει διὰ τὰ προειρημένα ἐπέχειν 
ἀναγκασθήσομαι. 

79 Kat ὁ μὲν πρῶτος τῆς ἐποχῆς τρόπος τοιοῦτός 
ἐστι, δεύτερον δὲ ἐλέγομεν εἶναι τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς 
διαφορᾶς τῶν ἀνθρώπων: ἵνα γὰρ καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν 
καὶ συγχωρήσῃ τις πιστοτέρους εἶναι τῶν ἀλόγων 
ὦων τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, εὑρήσομεν καὶ ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇ 
ἡμετέρᾳ διαφορᾷ τὴν ἐποχὴν εἰσαγομένην. δύο 
τοίνυν εἶναι λεγομένων ἐξ ὧν σύγκειται ὃ ἄν- 
θρωπος, ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος, κατ΄ ἄμφω ταῦτα 
διαφέρομεν ἀλλήλων, οἷον κατὰ σῶμα ταῖς τε 

80 μορφαῖς καὶ ταῖς ἰδιοσυγκρισίαις. διαφέρει μὲν 





* Our word “idiosyncrasy’’ comes from ἰδιοσυγκρασία, a 
later form for ἰδιοσνγκρισία. σύγκρισις (or σύμμιξι5) is Anax- 


46 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 76-79 


than ourselves in respect of their sense-impressions. 
Probably, too, we may reach this conclusion by basing 77 
our argument on each single class of irrational animals. 
Thus, for example, who would deny that birds excel 
in quickness of wit or that they employ external 
reason? For they understand not only present 
events but future events as well, and these they fore- 
show to such as are able to comprehend them by 
means of prophetic cries as well as by other signs. 

I have drawn this comparison (as I previously 78 
indicated) by way of super-addition, having already 
sufficiently proved, as I think, that we cannot prefer 
our own sense-impressions to those of the irrational 
animals. If, however, the irrational animals are not 
less worthy of credence than we in regard to the 
value of sense-impressions, and their impressions vary 
according to the variety of animal,—then, although 
I shall be able to say what the nature of each of the 
underlying objects appears to me to be, I shall be 
compelled, for the reasons stated above, to suspend 
judgement as to its real nature. 

Such, then, is the First of the Modes which induce 79 
suspense. The Second Mode is, as we said, that based 
on the differences in men ; for even if we grant for 
the sake of argument that men are more worthy of 
credence than irrational animals, we shall find that 
even our own differences of themselves lead to sus- 
pense. For man, you know, is said to be compounded 
of two things, soul and body, and in both these we 
differ one from another. 

Thus, as regards the body, we differ in our figures 
and “‘idiosynerasies,”’ or constitutional peculiarities.4 


agoras’s term for the process of “‘ composition ” by which the 
world comes into being; οἱ Introd. p. xi. 


47 


81 


82 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


γὰρ κατὰ μορφὴν σῶμα Σκύθου ᾿ΪΙνδοῦ σώματος, 
τὴν δὲ παρα αγὴν ποιεῖ, καθάπερ φασίν, ἡ 
διάφορος τῶν χυμῶν ἐπικράτεια. παρὰ δὲ! τὴν 
διάφορον τῶν χυμῶν ἐπικράτειαν διάφοροι γίνονται 
καὶ at φαντασίαι, καθάπερ καὶ ἐν τῷ “πρώτῳ λόγῳ 
παρεστήσαμεν. ταῦτά τοι καὶ ἐν τῇ αἱρέσει καὶ 

ῥυγῇ τῶν ἐκτὸς διαφορὰ πολλὴ κατ᾽ αὐτούς ἐστιν" 
a ous γὰρ χαίρουσιν ᾿Ινδοὶ καὶ ἄλλοις οἱ καθ᾽ 
ἡμᾶς, τὸ δὲ διαφόροις χαίρειν τοῦ παρηλλαγμένας 
ἀπὸ τῶν ὑποκειμένων φαντασίας λαμβάνειν ἐστὶ 
μηνυτικόν. κατὰ δὲ ἰδιοσυγκρισίας διαφέρομεν ὡς 
ἐνίους κρέα βόεια πετραίων ἰχθυδίων ῥᾷον πέττειν 
καὶ ὑπὸ Λεσβίου οἰναρίου εἰς χολέραν περιτρέ- 
πεσθαι. nv δέ, φασίν, γραῦς ᾿Αττικὴ τριάκοντα 
ὁλκὰς κωνείου ἀκινδύνως προσφερομένη, Λῦσις δὲ 
καὶ μηκωνείου τέσσαρας ὁλκὰς ἀλύπως ἐλάμβανεν. 
καὶ Δημοφῶν μὲν ὁ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τραπεζοποιὸς ἐν 
ἡλίῳ γινόμενος ἢ ἐν βαλανείῳ ἐρρίγου, ἐν σκιᾷ δὲ 
ἐθάλπετο, ᾿Αθηναγόρας δὲ ὁ ᾿Αργεῖος ὑπὸ σκορ- 
πίων καὶ φαλαγγίων ἀλύπως ἐπλήσσετο, οἱ δὲ 
καλούμενοι Ψυλλαεῖς οὐδ᾽ ὑπὸ ὄφεων ἣ ἀσπίδων 


83 δακνόμενοι βλάπτονται, ot δὲ Τεντυρῖται τῶν 


> / > / \ ” / 2 
ἱγυπτίων οὐ βλάπτονται πρὸς [ἄνω κάτω] 
τῶν κροκοδείλων. ἀλλὰ καὶ Αἰθιόπων ot ἀντι- 
πέραν τῆς Μερόης παρὰ τὸν ᾿Αστάπουν" ποταμὸν 
οἰκοῦντες σκορπίους καὶ ὄφεις καὶ τὰ παραπλήσια 
ἀκινδύνως ἐσθίουσιν. καὶ Ρουφῖνος δὲ 6 ἐν 
i / 3 A 3 ” a ¢ 
Χαλκίδι πίνων ἐλλέβορον οὔτε ἤμει οὔτε ὅλως 
3 / 3 > ¢ “~ 7 / 
ἐκαθαίρετο, ἀλλ᾽ ὥς τι τῶν συνήθων προσεφέρετο 


84 καὶ ἔπεσσεν. Χρύσερμος δὲ ὁ “Hpodireuos εἴ ποτε 


1 δὲ MT: om. Bekk. 2 [ἄνω κάτω] om. T, Apelt. 
3 ᾿Αστάπουν T, Hercher: Ὑδάσπην Mss., Bekk. 


48 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 80--84 


The body of an Indian differs in shape from that of go 
a Scythian; and it is said that what causes the varia- 
tion is a difference in the predominant humours. 
Owing to this difference in the predominant humours 
the sense-impressions also come to differ, as we in- 
dicated in our First Argument.* So too in respect of 
choice and avoidance of external objects men exhibit 
great differences: thus Indians enjoy some things, 
our people other things, and the enjoymentof different 
things is an indication that we receive varying im- 
pressions from the underlying objects. In respect gy 
of our “idiosyncrasies,” our differences are such that 
some of us digest the flesh of oxen more easily than 
rock-fish, or get diarrhoea from the weak wine of 
Lesbos. An old wife of Attica, they say, swallowed 
with impunity thirty drams of hemlock, and Lysis 
took four drams of poppy-juice without hurt. Demo- gy 
phon, Alexander’s butler, used to shiver when he was 
in the sun or in a hot bath, but felt warm in the shade : 
Athenagoras the Argive took no hurt from the stings 
of scorpions and poisonous spiders; and the Psyl- 
laeans,? as they are called, are not harmed by bites 
from snakes and asps, nor are the Tentyritae® of Egypt 88 
harmed by the crocodile. Further, those Ethiopians 
who live beyond Lake Meroé?@ on the banks of the 
river Astapous eat with impunity scorpions, snakes, 
and the like. Rufinus of Chalcis when he drank 
hellebore neither vomited nor suffered at all from 
purging, but swallowed and digested it just like any 
ordinary drink. Chrysermus of Erophile was liable ρα 

* See § 52. 

» A tribe of N. Africa, ef. Hdt. iv. 173. 

- Tentyra was a town in Upper Egypt; cf. Juvenal xv. 


ade 
“In S. Egypt. The “ Astapous ” is the Blue Nile. 
VOL. I E 49 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πέπερι προσηνέγκατο, καρδιακῶς ἐκινδύνευεν. καὶ 
Σωτήριχος δὲ ὁ χειρουργὸς εἴ ποτε σιλούρων 
ἤσθετο κνίσσης, χολέρᾳ ἡλίσκετο. ᾿Ανδρων δὲ ὁ 

᾿Αργεῖος οὕτως ἄδιψος ἢ ἣν ὡς καὶ διὰ τῆς ἀνύδρου 
Λιβύης ὁδεύειν αὐτὸν μὴ ἐπιζητοῦντα ποτόν. 
Τιβέριος δὲ ὁ Καῖσαρ ἐν σκότῳ ἑώρα. ᾽Αρι- 
στοτέλης δὲ ἱστορεῖ Θάσιόν τινα ὃς ἐδόκει ἀν- 
θρώπου εἴδωλον προηγεῖσθαι αὐτοῦ διὰ παντός. 

85 Τοσαύτης οὖν παραλλαγῆς οὔσης ἐν τοῖς ἀνθρώ- 
ποις κατὰ τὰ σώματα, ἵνα ὀλίγα ἀπὸ πολλῶν τῶν 
παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς κειμένων ἀρκεσθῶμεν εἶπόν- 
τες, εἰκός ἐστι καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν τὴν ψυχὴν δια- 
φέρειν ἀλλήλων. τοὺς ἀνθρώπους" τύπος γάρ τίς 
ἐστι τὸ σῶμα τῆς ψυχῆς, ὡς καὶ ἡ φυσιογνωμονικὴ 
σοφία δείκνυσιν. τὸ δὲ μέγιστον δεῖγμα τῆς κατὰ 
τὴν διάνοιαν τῶν ἀνθρώπων πολλῆς καὶ ἀπείρου 
διαφορᾶς ἡ διαφωνία τῶν παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς 

εγομένων περί τε τῶν ἄλλων καὶ περὶ τοῦ τίνα 

86 μὲν αἱρεῖσθαι προσήκει. τίνα δὲ ἐκκλίνειν. δεόντως 
οὖν καὶ οἱ ποιηταὶ περὶ τούτων ἀπεφήναντο: ὃ μὲν 


γὰρ Πιίνδαρός φησιν 


3 7 7 9 3 ὔ Ὁ A 
ἀελλοπόδων μέν τιν᾽ εὐφραίνουσιν ἵππων τιμαὶ 
καὶ στέφανοι, 
\ 3 > ὔ / 7 
τοὺς δ᾽ ἐν πολυχρύσοις θαλάμοις βιοτά" 
͵ δὲ ’ OS No + Dok a Ἴ1 
τέρπεται δὲ Kai τις ἐπ᾽ oldu’ ἅλιον vat Bod [σῶς] 
διαστείβων. 
ξ \ \ f 
ὁ δὲ ποιητὴς λέγει 
a / 3 » > A 3 f μή 
ἄλλος γάρ τ᾽ ἄλλοισιν ἀνὴρ ἐπιτέρπεται ἔργοις. 
> \ \ ς / A ἴω / 3 / 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡ τραγῳδία μεστὴ τῶν τοιούτων ἐστί: 
λέγει γοῦν 
1 [σῶς] om. LMT. 
50 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 84-86 


to get a heart attack if ever he took pepper; and 
Soterichus the surgeon was seized with diarrhoea 
whenever he smelled fried sprats. Andron the Argive 
was so immune from thirst that he actually traversed 
the waterless country of Libya without needing a 
drink. Tiberius Caesar could see in the dark; and 
Aristotle ἃ tells of a Thracian who fancied that the 
image of a man was continually going in front of him. 
Seeing, then, that men vary so much in body—to 85 

content ourselves with but a few instances of the 
many collected by the Dogmatists—men probably 
also differ from one another in respect of the soul 
itself ; for the body is a kind of expression of the soul, 

as in fact is proved by the science of Physiognomy. 
But the greatest proof of the vast and endless differ- 
ences in men’s intelligence is the discrepancy in the 
statements of the Dogmatists concerning the right 
objects of choice and avoidance, as well as other 
things. Regarding this the poets, too, have expressed 86 
themselves fittingly. Thus Pindar says? : 


The crowns and trophies of his storm-foot steeds 
Give joy to one; yet others find it joy 

To dwell in gorgeous chambers gold-bedeckt ; 
Some even take delight in voyaging 

O’er ocean’s billows in a speeding barque. 


And the poet¢ says: “ One thing is pleasing to one 
man, another thing to another.” Tragedy, too, is 
full of such sayings ; for example : 


* See Aristot. Meteorol. iii. 4. 

> Fragm. 242 (Boeckh), Sandys’ Pindar, in Loeb Library, 
p. 610, copied by Horace, Odes, i. 1. 3 ff. 
es See Homer, Odyss. xiv. 228. Cf. Virgil, Hel. ii, 63 

trahit sua quemque voluntas’’; and ‘“‘ quot homines, tot 
sententiae.”’ 


51 


87 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


? Ὁ > Α A 3ἢ / > ὦ 
εἰ πᾶσι ταὐτὸν καλὸν ἔφυ σοφόν θ᾽ ἅμα, 
᾿ > Ἃ > , 2 7 3) 
οὐκ ἦν ἂν ἀμφίλεκτος ἀνθρώποις ἔρις, 


Ἁ 7 
καὶ πάλιν 


δεινόν γε ταὐτὸν τοῖς μὲν ἁνδάνειν βροτῶν 
τοῖς δ᾽ ἔχθος εἶναι. 


> \ SS e 7 \ ξ \ > ¢ ἴω \ 
ἐπεὶ οὖν ἡ αἵρεσις καὶ ἡ φυγὴ ἐν ἡδονῇ καὶ 
9 “~ > [4 ἐ \ ¢€ \ \ ς > -" , 
ἀηδισμῷ ἐστίν, ἡ δὲ ἡδονὴ καὶ 6 ἀηδισμὸς ἐν 
αἰσθήσει κεῖται καὶ φαντασίᾳ, ὅταν τὰ αὐτὰ οἱ 
\ | “- ς \ / > / ς “" 
μὲν αἱρῶνται οὗ δὲ φεύγωσιν, ἀκόλουθον ἡμᾶς 
> ’ v4 ON ¢ ᾽ὔ € A ~ " »“᾿ 
ἐπιλογίζεσθαι ὅτι οὐδὲ ὁμοίως ὑπὸ τῶν αὐτῶν 
“-- ΄-ὠ 
κινοῦνται, ἐπεὶ ὁμοίως ἂν τὰ αὐτὰ ἡροῦντο ἢ 
Ie 7 2 \ A > A / “ \ 
ἐξέκλινον. εἰ δὲ τὰ αὐτὰ διαφόρως κινεῖ παρὰ 
Ἂ ~ 3 > 
τὴν διαφορὰν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, εἰσάγουτ᾽ ἂν εἰκότως 
καὶ κατὰ τοῦτο ἡ ἐποχή, ὅ τι μὲν ἕκαστον φαίνεται 
τῶν ὑποκειμένων ὡς πρὸς ἑκάστην διαφορὰν ἴσως 
μοὶ / 
λέγειν ἡμῶν δυναμένων, τί δὲ ἔστι [κατὰ δύναμιν" 
ω > 

ws πρὸς τὴν φύσιν οὐχ οἵων τε ὄντων ἀποφήνασθαι. 


- δ 
88. ἤτοι γὰρ πᾶσι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις πιστεύσομεν ἢ τισίν. 


ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν πᾶσιν, καὶ ἀδυνάτοις ἐπιχειρήσομεν 
καὶ τὰ ἀντικείμενα παραδεξόμεθα- εἰ δὲ τισίν, 
εἰπάτωσαν ἡμῖν τίσι χρὴ συγκατατίθεσθαι: ὃ μὲν 
γὰρ Πλατωνικὸς λέξει ὅτι Ἰλάτωνι, 6 ᾿Ἐπι- 
/ \ 3 ΄ \ e a 3 ὔ 
κούρειος δὲ ᾿Επικούρῳ, καὶ of ἄλλοι ἀναλόγως, 
καὶ οὕτως ἀνεπικρίτως στασιάζοντες αὖθις ἡμᾶς 


2 A 2 \ / ε \ f ao 
89 εἰς THY ἐποχὴν περιστήσουσιν. ὃ δὲ λέγων ὅτι 


a f ~ / ad? 
τοῖς πλείστοις δεῖ συγκατατίθεσθαι παιδαριῶδές 
τι προσίεται, οὐδενὸς δυναμένου πάντας τοὺς ἀν- 
θρώπους ἐπελθεῖν καὶ διαλογίσασθαι τί τοῖς 


1 [κατὰ δύναμιν} 566], Mutsch., Papp. 
52 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 86-89 


Were fair and wise the same thing unto all, 
There had been no contentious quarrelling.? 


And again: 


Tis strange that the same thing abhorr’d by some 
Should give delight to others.® 


Seeing, then, that choice and avoidance depend on 87 
pleasure and displeasure, while pleasure and dis- 
pleasure depend on sensation and sense-impression, 
whenever some men choose the very things which 
are avoided by others, it is logical for us to conclude 
that they are also differently affected by the same 
things, since otherwise they would all alike have 
chosen or avoided the same things. But if the same 
objects affect men differently owing to the differences 
in the men, then, on this ground also, we shall reason- 
ably be led to suspension of judgement. For while 
we are, no doubt, able to state what each of the 
underlying objects appears to be, relatively to each 
difference, we are incapable of explaining what it is 
in reality. For we shall have to believe either all 88 
men or some. But if we believe all, we shall be 
attempting the impossible and accepting contradic- 
tories ; and if some, let us be told whose opinions we 
are to endorse. For the Platonist will say “‘ Plato’s ”’ ; 
the Epicurean, “ Epicurus’s”; and so on with the 
rest ; and thus by their unsettled disputations they 
will bring us round again to a state of suspense. 
Moreover, he who maintains that we ought to assent 89 
to the majority is making a childish proposal, since 
no one is able to visit the whole of mankind and 
determine what pleases the majority of them; for 
* From Eurip. Phoen. 499 ff. 


ἢ δ See Fragm. Trag. adesp. 462 (Nauck): perhaps from 
“ΤῸ, 


33 


90 


91 


92 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πλείστοις ἀρέσκει, ἐνδεχομένου τοῦ ἔν τισιν ἔθνεσιν, 
ἃ ἡμεῖς οὐκ ἴσμεν, τὰ μὲν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν σπάνια τοῖς 
πλείοσι προσεῖναι τὰ δὲ ἡμῶν τοῖς πολλοῖς συμ- 
Baivovra σπάνια ὑπάρχειν, ὡς τοὺς πολλοὺς μὲν 
ὑπὸ φαλαγγίων δακνομένους μὴ ἀλγεῖν τινὰς δὲ 
σπανίως ἀλγεῖν, καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν ἔμπροσθεν 
εἰρημένων ἰδιοσυγκρισιῶν τὸ ἀνάλογον. ἀναγκαῖον 
οὖν καὶ διὰ τὴν τῶν ἀνθρώπων διαφορὰν εἰσάγεσθαι 
τὴν ἐποχήν. 

"Ezret δὲ φίλαυτοί τινες ὄντες ot δογματικοί φασι 
δεῖν τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων ἑαυτοὺς προκρίνειν ἐν 
τῇ κρίσει τῶν πραγμάτων, ἐπιστάμεθα μὲν ὅτι 
ἄτοπός ἐστιν ἡ ἀξίωσις αὐτῶν (μέρος γάρ εἰσι 
καὶ αὐτοὶ τῆς διαφωνίας: καὶ ἐὰν αὑτοὺς προ- 
κρίνοντες οὕτω κρίνωσι τὰ φαινόμενα, πρὶν ἄρξα- 
σθαι τῆς κρίσεως τὸ ζητούμενον; συναρπάζουσιν, 
ἑαυτοῖς τὴν κρίσιν ἐπιτρέποντες), ὅμως δ᾽ οὖν ἵνα 
καὶ ἐπὶ ἑνὸς ἀνθρώπου τὸν λόγον ἱστάντες, οἷον 
τοῦ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ὀνειροπολουμένου σοφοῦ, ἐπὶ τὴν 
ἐποχὴν καταντῶμεν, τὸν τρίτον τῇ τάξει τρόπον 
ἐγχειριζόμεθα. 

Τοῦτον δὲ λέγομεν τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς διαφορᾶς τῶν 
αἰσθήσεων. ὅτι δὲ διαφέρονται αἱ αἰσθήσεις πρὸς 
eae πρόδηλον. αἱ γοῦν γραφαὶ τῇ μὲν ὄψει 
δοκοῦσιν εἰσοχὰς καὶ ἐξοχὰς ἔχειν, οὐ μὴν καὶ 
τῇ ἁφῇ. καὶ τὸ μέλι τῇ μὲν γλώττῃ ἡδὺ φαίνεται 
ἐπί τινων, τοῖς δ᾽ ὀφθαλμοῖς ἀηδές: ἀδύνατον οὖν 
ἐστὶν εἰπεῖν πότερον ἡδύ ἐστιν εἰλικρινῶς ἣ ἢ ἀηδές. 
καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ μύρου ὁμοίως: τὴν μὲν γὰρ ὄσφρησιν 


93 εὐφραίνει, τὴν δὲ γεῦσιν ἀηδίζει. τό τε εὐφόρβιον 


δ4 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 89-92 


there may possibly be races of whom we know nothing 
amongst whom conditions rare with us are common, 
and conditions common with us rare,—possibly, for 
instance, most of them feel no pain from the bites 
of spiders, though a few on rare occasions feel such 
pain ; and so likewise with the rest of the “ idiosyn- 
erasies ᾿ mentioned above. Necessarily, therefore, the 
differences in men afford a further reason for bringing 
in suspension of judgement. 

When the Dogmatists—a self-loving class of men— 90 
assert that in judging things they ought to prefer 
themselves to other people, we know that their claim 
is absurd ; for they themselves are a party to the 
controversy ; and if, when judging appearances, they 
have already given the preference to themselves, then, 
by thus entrusting themselves with the judgement, 
they are begging the question before the judgement 
is begun. Nevertheless, in order that we may arrive 91 
at suspension of judgement by basing our argument 
on one person—such as, for example, their visionary 
“Sage ’’4—we adopt the Mode which comes Third 
in order. 

This Third Mode is, we say, based on differences 
in the senses. That the senses differ from one 
another is obvious. Thus, to the eye paintings 92 
seem to have recesses and projections, but not so to 
the touch. Honey, too, seems to some ὃ pleasant to 
the tongue but unpleasant to the eyes ; so that it is 
impossible to say whether it is absolutely pleasant or 
unpleasant. The same is true of sweet oil, for it 
pleases the sense of smell but displeases the taste. 


* The ideal “‘ Wise Man”? of the Stoics; see Introd. p. Xxviii. 
ὃ For exceptions see 8 101. 


1 τὸ ζητούμενον T: τὰ φαινόμενα mss., Bekk. 
55 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐπεὶ τοῖς μὲν ὀφθαλμοῖς λυπηρόν ἐ ἐστι τῷ δὲ ἄλλῳ 
σώματι παντὶ ἄλυπον, οὐχ ἕξομεν εἰπεῖν πότερον 
ἄλυπόν ἐστιν εἰλικρινῶς τοῖς σώμασιν ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇ 
ἑαυτοῦ φύσει ἢ λυπηρόν. τό τε ὄμβριον ὕδωρ 
ὀφθαλμοῖς μέν ἐστιν ὠφέλιμον, ἀρτηρίαν δὲ καὶ 
πνεύμονα τραχύνει, καθάπερ καὶ τὸ ἔλαιον, καίτοι 
τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν ᾿παρηγοροῦν. καὶ ἡ θαλαττία 
νάρκη τοῖς μὲν ἄκροις προστεθεῖσα ναρκᾶν ποιεῖ, 
τῷ δ᾽ ἄλλῳ σώματι ἀλύπως παρατίθεται. διόπερ 
ὁποῖον μὲν ἔστι πρὸς τὴν φύσιν ἕκαστον τούτων 
οὐχ ἕξομεν λέγειν, ὁποῖον δὲ φαίνεται ἑκάστοτε 
δυνατὸν εἰπεῖν. ; 

94 Kai ἄλλα δὲ πλείω τούτων ἔνεστι λέγειν: ἀλλ᾽ 
ἵνα μὴ διατρίβωμεν διὰ τὴν πρόθεσιν [τοῦ τρόπου" 
τῆς συγγραφῆς, ἐκεῖνο λεκτέον. ἕκαστον τῶν 
φαινομένων ἡμῖν αἰσθητῶν ποικίλον ὑποπίπτειν 
δοκεῖ, οἷον τὸ μῆλον λεῖον εὐῶδες γλυκὺ ξανθόν. 
ἄδηλον οὖν πότερόν ποτε ταύτας μόνας ὄντως ἔχει 
τὰς ποιότητας, ἢ μονόποιον μέν ἐστιν παρὰ δὲ τὴν 
διάφορον κατασκευὴν τῶν αἰσθητηρίων διάφορον 
φαίνεται, ἢ καὶ πλείονας μὲν τῶν φαινομένων ἐ ἔχει 
ποιότητας, ἡμῖν δ᾽ οὐχ ὑποπίπτουσί τινες αὐτῶν. 

95 μονόποιον μὲν γὰρ εἶναι τοῦτο ἐνδέχεται λογίζεσθαι 
ἐκ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν ἡμῖν εἰρημένων περὶ τῆς εἰς τὰ 
σώματα ἀναδιδομένης τροφῆς καὶ τοῦ ὕδατος τοῦ 
εἰς τὰ δένδρα ἀναδιδομένου καὶ τοῦ πνεύματος τοῦ 
ἐν αὐλοῖς καὶ σύριγξι καὶ τοῖς παραπλησίοις 
ὀργάνοις" δύναται γὰρ καὶ τὸ μῆλον μονοειδὲς μὲν 
εἶναι, διάφορον δὲ θεωρεῖσθαι παρὰ τὴν διαφορὰν 
τῶν αἰσθητηρίων περὶ ἃ γίνεται αὐτοῦ ἡ ἀντίληψις. 

96 πλείονας δὲ τῶν φαινομένων ἡμῖν ποιοτήτων ἔχειν 
τὸ μῆλον ποιότητας δύνασθαι οὕτως ἐπιλογιζόμεθα. 


56 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 93-96 


So too with spurge*: since it pains the eyes but 93 
causes no pain to any other part of the body, we cannot 
say whether, in its real nature, it is absolutely painful 
or painless to bodies. Rain-water, too, is beneficial 
to the eyes but roughens the wind-pipe and the lungs; 
as also does olive-oil, though it mollifies the epidermis. 
The cramp-fish, also, when applied to the extremities 
produces cramp, but it can be applied to the rest of 
the body without hurt. Consequently we are unable 
to say what is the real nature of each of these things, 
although it is possible to say what each thing at the 
moment appears to be. 

A longer list of examples might be given, but to 94 
avoid prolixity, in view of the plan of our treatise, 
we will say just this. Each of the phenomena per- 
ceived by the senses seems to be a complex: the 
apple, for example, seems smooth, odorous, sweet and 
yellow. But it is non-evident whether it really 
possesses these qualities only ; or whether it has but 
one quality but appears varied owing to the varying 
structure of the sense-organs ; or whether, again, it 
has more qualities than are apparent, some of which 
elude our perception. That the apple has but one 95 
quality might be argued from what we said above? 
regarding the food absorbed by bodies, and the water 
sucked up by trees, and the breath in flutes and pipes 
and similar instruments ; for the apple likewise may 
be all of one sort but appear different owing to 
differences in the sense-organs in which perception 
takes place. And that the apple may possibly possess 96 
more qualities than those apparent to us we argue in 


* A species of plants with acrid, milky juice. 
> See § 53. 


1 [τοῦ τρόπου] secl. Mutsch. 





57 


97 


98 


99 


100 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐννοήσωμέν τινα ἐκ γενετῆς ἁφὴν μὲν ἔχοντα καὶ 
ὄσφρησιν καὶ γεῦσιν, μήτε δὲ ἀκούοντα μήτε 
ὁρῶντα. οὗτος τοίνυν ὑπολήψεται μήτε ὁρατόν τι 
εἶναι τὴν ἀρχὴν μήτε ἀκουστόν, ἀλλὰ μόνα ἐκεῖνα 
τὰ τρία γένη τῶν ποιοτήτων. ὑπάρχειν ὧν ἀντι- 
λαμβάνεσθαι δύναται. καὶ ἡμᾶς οὖν ἐνδέχεται τὰς 
πέντε μόνας αἰσθήσεις ἔχοντας μόνον ἀντιλαμ- 
βάνεσθαι, ἐκ τῶν περὶ τὸ μῆλον ποιοτήτων, ὧν 
ἐσμὲν ἀντιληπτικοί: ὑποκεῖσθαι δὲ ἄλλας οἷον τέ 
ἐστι ποιότητας, ὑποπιπτούσας ἑτέροις αἰσθητηρίοις, 
ὧν ἡμεῖς οὐ μετεσχήκαμεν, διὸ οὐδὲ ἀντιλαμβανό- 
μεθα τῶν κατ᾽ αὐτὰς αἰσθητῶν. ᾿ 

᾿Αλλ’ ἡ φύσις συνεμετρήσατο, φήσει τις, τὰς 
αἰσθήσεις πρὸς τὰ αἰσθητά. ποία φύσις, διαφωνίας 
τοσαύτης ἀνεπικρίτου παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς 
οὔσης περὶ τῆς ὑπάρξεως τῆς κατ᾽ αὐτήν; 6 γὰρ 
ἐπικρίνων αὐτὸ τοῦτο, εἰ ἔστι φύσις, εἰ μὲν ἰδιώτης 
εἴη, ἄπιστος ἔσται κατ᾽ αὐτούς, φιλόσοφος δὲ ὧν 
μέρος ἔσται τῆς διαφωνίας καὶ κρινόμενος αὐτὸς 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ κρυτής. πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ εἰ ἐγχωρεῖ" καὶ ταύτας 
μόνας ὑποκεῖσθαι παρὰ τῷ μήλῳ τὰς ποιότητας 
ὧν ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι δοκοῦμεν, καὶ πλείους τούτων 
ἢ πάλιν μηδὲ τὰς ἡμῖν ὑποπιπτούσας, ἄδηλον ἡ ἡμῖν 
ἔσται ὁποῖον ἔστι τὸ μῆλον. 6 δὲ αὐτὸς καὶ ἐπὶ 
τῶν ἄλλων αἰσθητῶν λόγος. τῶν αἰσθήσεων μέντοι 
μὴ καταλαμβανουσῶν τὰ ἐκτός, οὐδὲ ἡ διάνοια 
ταῦτα δύναται καταλαμβάνειν, ὥστε καὶ διὰ τοῦτον 
τὸν λόγον ἡ περὶ τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων ἐποχὴ 
συνάγεσθαι δόξει. 

Ἵνα δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ μιᾶς ἑκάστης αἰσθήσεως ἱστάντες 


1 εἰ ἐγχωρεῖ Heintz: ἐνεχώρει Μ58.: εἰ ἐνεχώρει T, Bekk. 
58 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 96-100 


this way. Let us imagine a man who possesses from 
birth the senses of touch, taste and smell, but can 
neither hear nor see. This man, then, will assume 
that nothing visible or audible has any existence, but 
only those three kinds of qualities which he is able 
to apprehend. Possibly, then, we also, having only 97 
our five senses, perceive only such of the apple’s 
qualities as we are capable of apprehending; and 
possibly it may possess other underlying qualities 
which affect other sense-organs, though we, not being 
endowed with those organs, fail to apprehend the 
sense-objects which come through them. 

“But,” it may be objected, “‘ Nature made the 98 
senses commensurate with the objects of sense.” 
What kind of “ Nature ” ? we ask, seeing that there 
exists so much unresolved controversy amongst the 
Dogmatists concerning the reality which belongs to 
Nature. For he who decides the question as to the 
existence of Nature will be discredited by them if 
he is an ordinary person, while if he is a philosopher 
he will be a party to the controversy and therefore 
himself subject to judgement and not a judge. If, 99 
however, it is possible that only those qualities which 
we seem to perceive subsist in the apple, or that a 
greater number subsist, or, again, that not even the 
qualities which affect us subsist, then it will be non- 
evident to us what the nature of the apple really is. 
And the same argument applies to all the other 
objects of sense. But if the senses do not apprehend 
external objects, neither can the mind apprehend 
them ; hence, because of this argument also, we shall 
be driven, it seems, to suspend judgement regarding 
the external underlying objects. 

In order that we may finally reach suspension by 100 


59 


101 


102 


108 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τὸν λόγον, ἢ καὶ ἀφιστάμενοι τῶν αἰσθήσεων, 
ἔχωμεν καταλήγειν εἰς τὴν ἐποχήν, παραλαμ- 
βάνομεν καὶ τὸν τέταρτον “τρόπον αὐτῆς. ἔστι δ᾽ 
οὗτος ὁ παρὰ τὰς περιστάσεις καλούμενος, περι- 
στάσεις λεγόντων ἡμῶν τὰς διαθέσεις. θεω- 
ρεῖσθαι δ᾽ αὐτόν φαμεν ἐν τῷ κατὰ φύσιν ἢ παρὰ 
φύσιν «ἔχειν», ἐν τῷ ἐγρηγορέναι ἢ καθεύδειν, 
παρὰ τὰς ἡλικίας, παρὰ τὸ κινεῖσθαι ἢ ἠρεμεῖν, 
παρὰ τὸ μισεῖν ἢ φιλεῖν, παρὰ τὸ ἐνδεεῖς εἶναι ἢ 
κεκορεσμένους, παρὰ τὸ μεθύειν a νήφειν, παρὰ 
τὰς προδιαθέσεις, παρὰ τὸ θαρρεῖν 7 7 δεδιέναι, [ἢ] 
παρὰ τὸ λυπεῖσθαι ἢ χαίρειν. οἷον παρὰ μὲν τὸ 
κατὰ φύσιν ἢ παρὰ φύσιν ἔχειν ἀνόμοια ὑποπίπτει 
τὰ πράγματα, ἐπεὶ οὗ μὲν φρενυτίζοντες καὶ οἵ 
θεοφορούμενοι δαιμόνων ἀκούειν δοκοῦσιν, ἡμεῖς 
δὲ οὔ. ὁμοίως δὲ ἀποφορᾶς στύρακος ἢ λιβανωτοῦ 
ἢ τινος τοιούτου καὶ ἄλλων πλειόνων ἀντιλαμ- 
βάνεσθαι πολλάκις λέγουσιν, ἡμῶν μὴ αἰσθανο- 
μένων. καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ ὕδωρ > εγμαίνουσι μὲν τόποις 
ἐπιχυθὲν ζεστὸν εἶναι δοκεῖ, ἡμῖν δὲ χλιαρόν. 
καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ ἱμάτιον τοῖς μὲν ὑπόσφαγμα ἔχουσι 
φαίνεται κιρρόν, ἐμοὶ δὲ οὔ. καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ μέλι 
ἐμοὶ μὲν φαίνεται γλυκύ, τοῖς δὲ ἰκτερικοῖς πικρόν. 
εἰ δέ τις λέγει ὅτι χυμῶν τινῶν παραπλοκὴ ἂν- 
οἰκείους φαντασίας ἐκ τῶν ὑποκειμένων ποιεῖ 
τοῖς παρὰ φύσιν ἔχουσι, λεκτέον ὅτι ἐπεὶ καὶ ot 
ὑγιαίνοντες χυμοὺς ἔχουσιν ἀνακεκραμένους, δύναν- 
ται οὗτοι τὰ ἐκτὸς ὑποκείμενα, τοιαῦτα ὄντα φύσει 
ὁποῖα φαίνεται τοῖς παρὰ φύσιν ἔχειν λεγομένοις, 
ἑτεροῖα φαίνεσθαι ποιεῖν τοῖς ὑγιαίνουσιν. τὸ γὰρ 
ἐκείνοις μὲν τοῖς χυμοῖς μεταβλητικὴν τῶν ὕποκει- 
1 <éyew> add. Mutsch. 
60 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 100-108 


basing our argument on each sense singly, or even 
by disregarding the senses, we further adopt the 
Fourth Mode of suspension. This is the Mode based, 
as we say, on the “circumstances,” meaning by 
‘circumstances’ conditions or dispositions.? And this 
Mode, we say, deals with states that are natural or 
unnatural, with waking or sleeping, with conditions 
due to age, motion or rest, hatred or love, emptiness 
or fulness, drunkenness or soberness, predispositions, 
confidence or fear, grief or joy. Thus, according as 
the mental state is natural or unnatural, objects pro- 
duce dissimilar impressions, as when men in a frenzy or 
in a state of-ecstasy believe they hear daemons’ voices, 
while we do not. Similarly they often say that they 
perceive an odour of storax or frankincense, or some 
such scent, and many other things, though we fail 
to perceive them. Also, the same water which feels 
- very hot when poured on inflamed spots seems luke- 
warm to us. And the same coat which seems of a 
bright yellow colour to men with blood-shot eyes does 
not appear so tome. And the same honey seems to 
me sweet, but bitter to men with jaundice. Now 
should anyone say that it is an intermixture of certain 
humours which produces in those who are in an 
unnatural state improper impressions from the under- 
lying objects, we have to reply that, since healthy 
persons also have mixed humours, these humours too 
are capable of causing the external objects—which 
really are such as they appear to those who are said 
to be in an unnatural state—to appear other than they 


101 


102 


are to healthy persons. For to ascribe the power of 103 


* 4.¢. the mental or physical state of the subject at the 
moment of perception. 


61 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μένων διδόναι δύναμιν, τούτοις δὲ μή, πλασματικόν 
ἐστιν, ἐπεὶ καὶ ὥσπερ ot ὑγιαίνοντες κατὰ φύσιν 
μὲν τὴν τῶν ὑγιαινόντων ἔχουσιν παρὰ φύσιν δὲ 
τὴν τῶν νοσούντων, οὕτω καὶ οἱ νοσοῦντες παρὰ 
φύσιν μὲν ἔχουσι τὴν τῶν ὑγιαινόντων κατὰ φύσιν 
δὲ τὴν τῶν νοσούντων, ὥστε κἀκείνοις πρός τι 
κατὰ φύσιν ἔχουσι πιστευτέον. 
104 Παρὰ δὲ τὸ ὑπνοῦν ἢ ἐγρηγορέναι διάφοροι yi- 
" povTat φαντασίαι, ἐπεὶ ὡς καθ᾽ ὕπνους φανταζό- 
μεθα, οὐ φανταζόμεθα ἐγρηγορότες, οὐδὲ ὡς φαν- 
ταζόμεθα ἐγρηγορότες, καὶ κατὰ τοὺς ὕπνους 
ανταζόμεθα, ὥστε «τὸ εἶναι αὐταῖς" “ἢ μὴ εἶναι 
γίνεται οὐχ ἁπλῶς ἀλλὰ πρός τι" πρὸς γὰρ τὸ 
καθ᾽ ὕπνους ἢ πρὸς ἐγρήγορσιν. εἰκότως οὖν καθ᾽ 
ὕπνους ὁρῶμεν ταῦτα ἃ ἐστιν ἐν τῷ ἐγρηγορέναι 
ἀνύπαρκτα, οὐκ ἐν τῷ καθάπαξ ἀνύπαρκτα ὄντα" 
ἔστι γὰρ καθ᾽ ὕπνους, ὥσπερ τὰ ὕπαρ ἔστιν, κἂν 
μὴ ἢ καθ᾽ ὕπνους. 
105 apa δὲ Tas ἡλικίας, ὅτι ὃ αὐτὸς ἀὴρ τοῖς μὲν 
γέρουσι ψυχρὸς εἶναι δοκεῖ τοῖς δὲ ἀκμάζουσιν 
3 A \ b] “~ on \ 
εὔκρατος, καὶ TO αὐτὸ χρῶμα τοῖς μὲν πρεσ- 
βυτέροις ἀμαυρὸν φαίνεται τοῖς δὲ ἀκμάζουσι κατα- 
κορές, καὶ φωνὴ ὁμοίως ἡ αὐτὴ τοῖς μὲν ἁμαυρὰ 
106 δοκεῖ «τυγχάνειν τοῖς δ᾽ ἐξάκουστος. καὶ παρὰ 
τὰς αἱρέσεις δὲ καὶ φυγὰς ἀνομοίως κινοῦνται ot 
ταῖς ἡλικίαις διαφέροντες" παισὶ μὲν γάρ, εἰ τύχοι, 
σφαῖραι καὶ τροχοὶ διὰ σπουδῆς εἰσίν, οἱ ἀκμά- 
ζοντες δὲ ἄλλα αἱροῦνται, καὶ ἄλλα οἱ γέροντες. 
ἐξ ὧν συνάγεται ὅτι διάφοροι γίνονται φαντασίαι 
ὑπὸ τῶν αὐτῶν ὑποκειμένων καὶ παρὰ τὰς 
διαφόρους ἡλικίας. 


1 «τὸ ὦ. Mutsch. 2 αὐταῖς Apelt: αὐτοῖς mss., Bekk. 
62 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 103-106 


altering the underlying objects to those humours, and 
not to these, is purely fanciful ; since just as healthy 
men are in a state that is natural for the healthy but 
unnatural for the sick, so also sick men are in a state 
that is unnatural for the healthy but natural for the 
sick, so that to these last also we must give credence 
as being, relatively speaking, in a natural state.¢ 


Sleeping and waking, too, give rise to different 104 


impressions, since we do not imagine when awake 
what we imagine in sleep, nor when asleep what we 
imagine when awake ; so that the existence or non- 
existence of our impressions is not absolute but 
relative, being in relation to our sleeping or waking 
condition. Probably, then, in dreams we see things 
which to our waking state are unreal,? although not 
wholly unreal ; for they exist in our dreams, just as 
waking realities exist although non-existent in dreams. 

Age is another cause of difference.° For the same 
air seems chilly to the old but mild to those in their 
prime ; and the same colour appears faint to older 
men but vivid to those in their prime ; and similarly 
the same sound seems to the former faint, but to the 
latter clearly audible. Moreover, those who differ in 
age are differently moved in respect of choice and 
avoidance. For whereas children—to take a case— 
are all eagerness for balls and hoops, men in their 
prime choose other things, and old men yet others. 
And from this we conclude that differences in age 
also cause different impressions to be produced by 
the same underlying objects. 


* This is aimed against the Stoic view that only the healthy, 
or normal, is “‘ natural.’’ 

Ὁ ἀνύπαρκτα (from ὑπάρχω, “ subsist’) is an Epicurean term 
for “‘ non-existent.’ 

ὁ For age as affecting character cf. Aristot. Rhet. 11. 12 ff. 


63 


105 


106 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


107 Παρὰ δὲ τὸ κινεῖσθαι ἢ ἠρεμεῖν ἀνόμοια 
φαίνεται τὰ πράγματα, ἐπεὶ ἅπερ ἑστῶτες ὁρῶμεν 
ἀτρεμοῦντα, ταῦτα παραπλέοντες κινεῖσθαι δοκοῦ- 

108 μεν. παρὰ δὲ τὸ φιλεῖν 7 μισεῖν, ὅτι κρέα ὕεια 
τινὲς μὲν ἀποστρέφονται καθ᾽ ὑπερβολὴν τινὲς δὲ 
ἥδιστα προσφέρονται. ὅθεν καὶ ὁ Μένανδρος ἔφη 


οἷος δὲ καὶ τὴν Slay εἶναι φαίνεται; 
ἀφ᾽ οὗ τοιοῦτος γέγονεν; οἷον θηρίον. 
τὸ μηδὲν ἀδικεῖν καὶ καλοὺς ἡμᾶς ποιεῖ. 


πολλοὶ «δὲ »Ϊ καὶ ἐρωμένας αἰσχρὰς ἔχοντες wWpato- 
109 τάτας αὐτὰς εἶναι δοκοῦσιν. παρὰ δὲ" τὸ πεινῆν 
ἢ κεκορέσθαι, ὅτι τὸ αὐτὸ ἔδεσμα τοῖς μὲν 
πεινῶσιν ἥδιστον εἶναι δοκεῖ τοῖς δὲ κεκορεσμένοις 
ἀηδές. παρὰ δὲ τὸ μεθύειν 7 νήφειν, ὅτι ἅπερ 
νήφοντες αἰσχρὰ εἶναι δοκοῦμεν, ταῦτα ἡμῖν με- 
110 θύουσιν οὐκ αἰσχρὰ φαΐνεται. παρὰ δὲ τὰς προ- 
διαθέσεις, ὅτι 6 αὐτὸς οἶνος τοῖς μὲν φοίνικας ἢ 
ἰσχάδας. προφαγοῦσιν ὀξώδης φαίνεται, τοῖς δὲ 
κάρυα ἢ ἐρεβίνθους προσενεγκαμένοις ἡδὺς εἶναι 
δοκεῖ, καὶ ἡ τοῦ βαλανείου παραστὰς τοὺς μὲν 
ἔξωθεν εἰσιόντας θερμαίνει, ψύχει δὲ τοὺς ἐξιόντας, 
lll εἰ ἐν αὐτῇ διατρίβοιεν. παρὰ δὲ τὸ φοβεῖσθαι ἢ 
θαρρεῖν, ὅτι τὸ αὐτὸ πρᾶγμα τῷ μὲν δειλῷ φοβερὸν 
καὶ δεινὸν εἶναι δοκεῖ, τῷ θαρραλεωτέρῳ δὲ οὐδα- 
μῶς. παρὰ δὲ τὸ λυπεῖσθαι ἢ χαίρειν, ὅτι τὰ 
αὐτὰ πράγματα τοῖς μὲν λυπουμένοις ἐστὶν ἐπαχθῆ 
τοῖς δὲ χαίρουσιν ἡδέα. 
1 «δὲ» cj. Bekk. 


@ Cf. Lucret. iv. 388. 
» Fragm. 518 (Kock). It is supposed that these lines were 
spoken by a maiden of her lover who had fallen into evil ways. 


64 





OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, 1. 107-111 


Another cause why the real objects appear different 107 
lies in motion and rest. For those objects which, 
when we are standing still, we see to be motionless, 
we imagine to be in motion when we are sailing 
past them. 

Love and hatred are a cause, as when some have 108 
an extreme aversion to pork while others greatly 
enjoy eating it. Hence, too, Menander said”: 

Mark now his visage, what a change is there 


Since he has come to this! How bestial ! 
*Tis actions fair that make the fairest face. 


Many lovers, too, who have ugly mistresses think 
them most beautiful.¢ 

Hunger and satiety are a cause ; for the same food 109 
seems agreeable to the hungry but disagreeable to 
the sated. 

Drunkenness and soberness are a cause; since 
actions which we think shameful when sober do not 
seem shameful to us when drunk. 

Predispositions are a cause; for the same wine 110 
which seems sour to those who have previously eaten 
dates or figs, seems sweet to those who have just 
consumed nuts or chick-peas ; and the vestibule ὅ of 
the bath-house, which warms those entering from 
outside, chills those coming out of the bath-room if 
they stop long in it. 

Fear and boldness are a cause; as what seems to 11] 
the coward fearful and formidable does not seem so 
in the least to the bold man. 

Grief and joy are a cause; since the same affairs 
are burdensome to those in grief but delightful to 
those who rejoice. 

* Cf. Horace, Sat. i. 3. 38. 
ὦ 2,6. the tepidarium, of moderate temperature. 
VOL. I F 65 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


/ 3 3) > , A Ἁ 4 
110 Tooatrns οὖν οὔσης ἀνωμαλίας καὶ παρὰ τὰς 
, . ἊΝ *\ 1 2 a ὃ ; 
διαθέσεις, καὶ ἄλλοτε ἄλλως ἐν ταῖς διαθέσεσι 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων γινομένων, ὁποῖον μὲν ἕκαστον 
κι ,ὔ 
τῶν ὑποκειμένων. ἑκάστῳ αίνεται ῥάδιον ἴσως 
εἰπεῖν, ὁποῖον δὲ ἐ ἔστιν οὐκέτι, ἐπεὶ καὶ ἀνεπίκριτός 
ἐστιν ἡ ἀνωμαλία. ὁ γὰρ ἐπικρίνων ταύτην ἦτοι 
ἔν τισι τῶν προειρημένων διαθέσεών ἐστιν ἢ ἐν 
οὐδεμιᾷ τὸ παράπαν ἐστὶ διαθέσει. τὸ μὲν οὖν 
, ¢ 3 +) lan ; 4 7 7 > 
λέγειν ὅτι ἐν οὐδεμιᾷ διαθέσει τὸ σύνολόν ἐστιν, 
οἷον οὔτε ὑγιαίνει οὔτε νοσεῖ, οὔτε κινεῖται οὔτε 
3 ~ 5 3} ¢ f > ’ 3 7 x 
ἠρεμεῖ, οὔτε ἔν τινι ἡλικίᾳ ἐστίν, ἀπήλλακται δὲ 
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων διαθέσεων, τελέως ἀπεμῴφαΐνει. 
εἰ δὲ ἔν τινι διαθέσει ὧν κρινεῖ τὰς φαντασίας, 
/ ” ~ ’ \ 2, > 3 
118 μέρος ἐσται τῆς διαφωνίας, καὶ ἄλλως οὐκ εἰλι- 
κρινὴς τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων ἐστὶ κριτὴς διὰ τὸ 
τεθολῶσθαι ταῖς διαθέσεσιν ἐν αἷς ἔστιν. οὔτε 
οὖν ὁ ἐγρηγορὼς δύναται συγκρίνειν τὰς τῶν 
? / “ on 
καθευδόντων φαντασίας ταῖς τῶν ἐγρηγορότων, 
οὔτε ὁ ὑγιαίνων τὰς τῶν νοσούντων ταῖς" τῶν 
ὑγιαινόντων" τοῖς γὰρ παροῦσι καὶ κινοῦσιν ἡμᾶς 
κατὰ τὸ παρὸν συγκατατιθέμεθα μᾶλλον ἢ τοῖς 
παροῦσιν. 
/ > a 
114 Kai ἄλλως δὲ ἀνεπίκριτός ἐστιν ἡ τῶν τοιούτων 
“Ὰ / Ἁ / / 
φαντασιῶν ἀνωμαλία. ὁ γὰρ προκρίνων φαντασίαν 
7 
φαντασίας καὶ περίστασιν περιστάσεως ἤτοι ἀκρί- 
τως καὶ ἄνευ ἀποδείξεως τοῦτο ποιεῖ ἢ κρίνων καὶ 
ἀποδεικνύς. ἀλλ᾽ οὔτε ἄνευ τούτων, ἄπιστος γὰρ 
ἔσται, οὔτε σὺν τούτοις. εἰ γὰρ κρινεῖ τὰς φαν- 
, / “a “- > \ 
115 τασίας, πάντως κριτηρίῳ κρινεῖ. τοῦτο οὖν τὸ 


1 ἄλλως MLT: ἄλλων Bekk. 
2 ταῖς T: καὶ τὰς mss., Bekk. 


66 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 112-115 


Seeing then that the dispositions also are the cause 112 
of so much disagreement, and that men are differently 
disposed at different times, although, no doubt, it is 
easy to say what nature each of the underlying objects 
appears to each man to possess, we cannot go on to 
say what its real nature is, since the disagreement 
admits in itself of nosettlement. For the person who 
tries to settle itis either in one of the afore-mentioned 
dispositions or in no disposition whatsoever. But to 
declare that he is in no disposition at all—as, for 
instance, neither in health nor sickness, neither in 
motion nor at rest, of no definite age, and devoid of 
all the other dispositions as well—is the height of 
absurdity. And if he is to judge the sense-impres- 
sions while he is in some one disposition, he will be a 
party to the disagreement,? and, moreover, he will 113 
not be an impartial judge of the external underlying 
objects owing to his being confused by the disposi- 
tions in which he is placed. The waking person, for 
instance, cannot compare the impressions of sleepers 
with those of men awake, nor the sound person those 
of the sick with those of the sound; for we assent 
more readily to things present, which affect us in the 
present, than to things not present. 

In another way, too, the disagreement of such 114 
impressions is incapable of settlement. For he who 
prefers one impression to another, or one “ circum- 
stance ” to another, does so either uncritically and 
without proof or critically and with proof; but he 
can do this neither without these means (for then he 
would be discredited) nor with them. For if he is to 
pass judgement on the impressions he must certainly 
judge them by a criterion; this criterion, then, he 115 


* Cf. § 90. 
67 


116 


117 


118 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


κριτήριον ἦτοι ἀληθὲς εἶναι λέξει ἢ ἢ ψευδές. ἀλλ' εἰ 
μὲν ψευδές, ἄπιστος ἔσται. εἰ δὲ ἀληθὲς εἶναι 
τοῦτο φήσει, ἦτοι ἄνευ ἀποδείξεως λέξει ὅτι 
ἀληθές ἐστι τὸ κριτήριον, ἢ μετὰ ἀποδείξεως. 
καὶ εἰ μὲν ἄνευ ἀποδείξεως, ἄπιστος é ἔσται" εἰ δὲ 
μετὰ ἀποδείξεως, πάντως δεήσει καὶ τὴν ἀπό- 
δειξιν ἀληθῆ εἶναι, ἐπεὶ ἄπιστος ἔσται. ἀληθῆ οὖν 
ἔξει τὴν ἀπόδειξιν τὴν εἰς τὴν πίστωσιν τοῦ 
κριτηρίου λαμβανομένην πότερον κεκρικὼς αὐτὴν 
ἢ μὴ κεκρικώς; εἰ μὲν γὰρ μὴ κρίνας, ἄπιστος 
ἔσται, εἰ δὲ κρίνας, δῆλον ὅτι κριτηρίῳ φήσει 
κεκρικέναι, οὗ κριτηρίου ζητήσομεν" ἀπόδει ιν, 
\ > NA Ν 
κἀκείνης κριτήριον. χρήζει γὰρ ἀεὶ καὶ ἡ ἀπό- 
δειξις κριτηρίου, ἵνα βεβαιωθῇ, καὶ τὸ κριτήριον 
ἀποδείξεως, ἵνα ἀληθὲς εἶναι δειχθῇ" καὶ οὔτε 
ἀπόδειξις ὑγυὴς εἶναι δύναται μὴ προὐπάρχοντος 
κριτηρίου ἀληθοῦς, οὔτε κριτήριον ἀληθὲς μὴ προ- 
πεπιστωμένης τῆς ἀποδεί εως. καὶ οὕτως ἐμ- 
πίπτουσιν εἰς τὸν διάλληλον τρόπον τό τε κριτήριον 
καὶ ἡ ἀπόδειξις, ἐ ἐν ᾧ ἀμφότερα εὑρίσκεται ἄ ἄπιστα" 
ἑκάτερον yap τὴν θατέρου πίστιν περιμένον ὁμοίως 
\ + 3 

τῷ λοιπῷ ἐστὶν ἄπιστον. εἰ οὖν μήτε ἄνευ ἀπο- 
δείξεως καὶ κριτηρίου μήτε σὺν τούτοις δύναταί 
τις προκρῖναι φαντασίαν φαντασίας, ἀνεπίκριτοι 
ἔσονται at παρὰ τὰς διαφόρους διαθέσεις διάφοροι 
γινόμεναι φαντασίαι, ὥστε εἰσάγεται ἡ περὶ τῆς 
φύσεως τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων ἐποχὴ καὶ ὡς 
ἐπὶ τούτῳ τῷ τρόπῳ. 

Πέμπτος ἐστὶ λόγος ὁ παρὰ τὰς θέσεις καὶ τὰ 
διαστήματα καὶ τοὺς τόπους" καὶ γὰρ παρὰ τούτων 
ἕκαστον τὰ αὐτὰ πράγματα διάφορα φαίνεται, οἷον 


68 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 115-118 


will declare to be true, or else false. But if false, he 
will be discredited ; whereas, if he shall declare it to 
be true, he will be stating that the criterion is true 
either without proof or with proof. But if without 
proof, he will be discredited ; and if with proof, it will 
certainly be necessary for the proof also to be true, 
to avoid being discredited. Shall he, then, affirm the 
truth of the proof adopted to establish the criterion 
after having judged it or without judging it? If 116 
without judging, he will be discredited ; but if after 
judging, plainly he will say that he has judged it by 
a criterion; and of that criterion we shall ask for a 
proof, and of that proof again a criterion. For the 
proof always requires a criterion to confirm it, and 
the criterion also a proof to demonstrate its truth ; 
and neither can a proof be sound without the previous 
existence of a true criterion nor can the criterion be 
true without the previous confirmation of the proof. 
So in this way both the criterion and the proof are 117 
involved in the circular process of reasoning,” and 
thereby both are found to be untrustworthy ; for 
since each of them is dependent on the credibility of 
the other, the one is lacking in credibility just as much 
as the other. Consequently, if a man can prefer one 
impression to another neither without a proof and a 
criterion nor with them, then the different impressions 
due to the differing conditions will admit of no settle- 
ment; so that as a result of this Mode also we are 
brought to suspend judgement regarding the nature 
of external realities. 

The fifth Argument (or Trope) is that based on 118 
positions, distances, and locations ; for owing to each 
of these the same objects appear different; for 


2 ΟἹ §§ 60, 122; ii. 34, 121, ete. 
69. 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


3 4 \ ~~ ¢ +f 3 ~ 
ἡ αὐτὴ στοὰ ἀπὸ μὲν τῆς ἑτέρας ἀρχῆς ὁρωμένη 
μύουρος φαίνεται ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ μέσου σύμμετρος 
πάντοθεν, καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ πλοῖον πόρρωθεν μὲν μικρὸν 
φαίνεται καὶ ἑστὼς ἐγγύθεν δὲ μέγα καὶ κινούμενον, 
καὶ ὃ αὐτὸς πύργος πόρρωθεν μὲν φαίνεται στρογ- 
γύλος ἐγγύθεν δὲ τετράγωνος. 

19 Tatra μὲν παρὰ τὰ διαστήματα, παρὰ δὲ τοὺς 

/ ¢ Ἁ “ “- 3 e ’ \ 9 A 
τόπους ὅτι TO λυχνιαῖον φῶς ἐν ἡλίῳ μὲν ἀἁμαυρὸν 
φαίνεται ἐν σκότῳ δὲ λαμπρόν, καὶ ἡ αὐτὴ κώπη 
ἐς \ / 2 \ 3 “ \ δ 
ἔναλος μὲν κεκλασμένη ἔξαλος δὲ εὐθεῖα, καὶ τὸ 
mov ἐν μὲν τῇ ὄρνιθι ἁπαλὸν ἐν ἀέρι δὲ σκληρόν 
7 . \ μ ἢ ρ > \ \ ¢ p \ > > We ἷ 
καὶ τὸ λυγγούριον ἐν μὲν Avyyt ὑγρὸν ἐν ἀέρι δὲ 

/ \ \ 7 > 7 \ ¢ \ 
σκληρόν, Kat τὸ κοράλιον ἐν θαλάττῃ μὲν ἁπαλὸν 
3 > 7 \ f \ Ἀ 5 7 Ν f 
ἐν ἀέρι δὲ σκληρόν, καὶ φωνὴ ἀλλοία μὲν φαίνεται 
ἐν σύριγγι γινομένη, ἀλλοία δὲ ἐν αὐλῷ, ἀλλοία δὲ 
ἐν ἀέρι am ῶς. 

120 Παρὰ δὲ τὰς θέσεις ὅτι ἡ αὐτὴ εἰκὼν ἐξυπτια- 
ζομένη μὲν λεία φαίνεται, ποσῶς δὲ ἐπινευομένη 

\ “ 
εἰσοχὰς καὶ ἐξοχὰς ἔχειν δοκεῖ. καὶ ot τράχηλοι 
δὲ τῶν περιστερῶν παρὰ τὰς διαφόρους ἐπικλίσεις 
διάφοροι φαίνονται κατὰ χρῶμα. 

121 ᾿Επεὶ οὖν πάντα τὰ φαινόμενα ἔν τινι θεωρεῖται 
καὶ ἀπό τινος διαστήματος ἢ κατά τινα θέσιν, ὧν 
ἕκαστον πολλὴν ποιεῖ παραλλαγὴν περὶ τὰς φαν- 

/ 7 
τασίας, ὡς ὑπεμνήσαμεν, ἀναγκασθησόμεθα καὶ 
διὰ τούτου τοῦ τρόπου καταντᾶν εἰς ἐποχήν. καὶ 
γὰρ ὁ βουλόμενος τούτων τῶν φαντασιῶν προ- 

122 κρίνειν τινὰς ἀδυνάτοις ἐπιχειρήσει. εἰ μὲν γὰρ 
ἁπλῶς καὶ ἄνευ ἀποδείξεως ποιήσεται τὴν ἀπόφασιν, 





¢ Cf. Lucret. iv. 428 ff. 
> “* Lyngurion,”’ so called from the belief that the stone 
was made of the urine of the lynx frozen or crystallized. 


70 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 118-122 


example, the same porch ὦ when viewed from one of 
its corners appears curtailed, but viewed from the 
middle symmetrical on all sides; and the same ship 
seems at a distance to be small and stationary, but 
from close at hand large and in motion ; and the same 
tower from a distance appears round but from a near 
point quadrangular. 

These effects are due to distances; among effects 
due to locations are the following : the light of a lamp 
appears dim in the sun but bright in the dark; and 
the same oar bent when in the water but straight 
when out of the water ; and the egg soft when inside 
the fowl but hard when in the air ; and the jacinth ὃ 
fluid when in the lynx but hard when in the air; 
and the coral soft when in the sea but hard when in 
the air; and sound seems to differ in quality according 
as it is produced in a pipe, or in a flute, or simply in 
the air. 

Effects due to positions are such as these : the same 
painting when laid flat appears smooth, but when 
inclined forward at a certain angle it seems to have 
recesses and prominences. The necks of doves, also, 
appear different in hue according to the differences in 
the angle of inclination. 

Since, then, all apparent objects are viewed in a 
certain place, and from a certain distance, or in a 
certain position, and each of these conditions produces 
a great divergency in the sense-impressions, as we 
mentioned above, we shall be compelled by this Mode 
also to end up in suspension of judgement. For in 
fact anyone who purposes to give the preference to 
any of these impressions will be attempting the 
impossible. For if he shall deliver his judgement 
simply and without proof, he will be discredited ; and 


11 


120 


121 


122 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἄπιστος ἔσται: εἰ δὲ ἀποδείξει βουλήσεται χρή- 
σασθαι, εἰ μὲν ψευδῆ λέξει τὴν ἀπόδειξιν εἶναι, 
ἑαυτὸν περιτρέψει, ἀληθῆ δὲ λέγων εἶναι τὴν ἀπό- 
δειξιν αἰτηθήσεται ἀπόδειξιν τοῦ ἀληθῆ αὐτὴν 
εἶναι, κἀκείνης ἄλλην, ἐπεὶ καὶ αὐτὴν ἀληθῆ εἶναι 
δεῖ, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. ἀδύνατον δέ ἐστιν ἀ- 

128 πείρους ἀποδείξεις παραστῆσαι: οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ μετὰ 
ἀποδείξεως δυνήσεται προκρίνειν φαντασίαν φαν- 
τασίας. εἰ δὲ μήτε ἄνευ ἀποδείξεως μήτε μετὰ 
ἀποδείξεως δυνατὸς ἔσται τις ἐπικρίνειν τὰς προ- 
εἰρημένας φαντασίας, συνάγεται ἡ ἐποχή, ὁποῖον 
μὲν φαίνεται ἕκαστον κατὰ τήνδε τὴν θέσιν ἢ κατὰ 
τόδε τὸ διάστημα ἢ ἐν τῷδε εἰπεῖν ἴσως δυναμένων 
ἡμῶν, ὁποῖον δέ ἐστιν ὡς πρὸς τὴν φύσιν ἀδυνα- 
τούντων ἀποφαίνεσθαι διὰ τὰ προειρημένα. 

124 “Ἄκτος ἐστὶ τρόπος 6 παρὰ τὰς ἐπιμιγάς, καθ᾽ 
ὃν συνάγομεν ὅτι ἐπεὶ μηδὲν τῶν ὑποκειμένων καθ᾽ 
ἑαυτὸ ἡμῖν αὐτὸ ὑποπίπτει ἀλλὰ σύν τινι, ὁποῖον 
μέν ἐστι τὸ μῖγμα ἔκ τε τοῦ ἐκτὸς καὶ τοῦ ᾧ συν- 
θεωρεῖται τάχα δυνατὸν εἰπεῖν, ὁποῖον δέ ἐστι τὸ 
ἐκτὸς ὑποκείμενον εἰλικρινῶς οὐκ ἂν ἔχοιμεν λέγειν. 
ὅτι δὲ οὐδὲν τῶν ἐκτὸς Kal” ἑαυτὸ ὑποπίπτει ἀλλὰ 
πάντως σύν τινι, καὶ ὅτι παρὰ τοῦτο ἀλλοῖον θεω- 

125 ρεῖται, πρόδηλον, οἶμαι. τὸ γοῦν ἡμέτερον χρῶμα 
ἀλλοῖον μὲν ὁρᾶται ἐν ἀλεεινῷ ἀέρι ἀλλοῖον δὲ 
ἐν τῷ ψυχρῷ, καὶ οὐκ ἂν ἔχοιμεν εἰπεῖν ὁποῖον 
ἔστι τῇ φύσει τὸ χρῶμα ἡμῶν, ἀλλ᾽ ὁποῖον σὺν 


ite 





* Cf, ii, 128, 

> i.e. the real (** external ’’) object of perecntoy (cf. p. 30 
note a) plus the physical conditions which accompany the 
act of perception; these latter may be either external (e.g. 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 122-125 


should he, on the other hand, desire to adduce proof, 
he will confute himself if he says that the proof is 
false, while if he asserts that the proof is true he will 
be asked for a proof of its truth, and again for a proof 
of this latter proof, since it also must be true, and so 
on ad infinitum.* But to produce proofs to infinity is 
impossible ; so that neither by the use of proofs will 123 
he be able to prefer one sense-impression to another. 
If, then, one cannot hope to pass judgement on the 
afore-mentioned impressions either with or without 
proof, the conclusion we are driven to is suspension ; 
for while we can, no doubt, state the nature which 
each object appears to possess as viewed in a certain 
position or at a certain distance or in a certain place, 
whatits real nature is we are, for the foregoing reasons, 
unable to declare. 

The Stxth Mode is that based on admixtures, by 124 
which we conclude that, because none of the real 
objects affects our senses by itself but always in 
conjunction with something else, though we may 
possibly be able to state the nature of the resultant 
mixture? formed by the external object and that 
along with which it is perceived, we shall not be able 
to say what is the exact nature of the external 
reality in itself. That none of the external objects 
affects our senses by itself but always in conjunction 
with something else, and that, in consequence, it 
assumes a different appearance, is, I imagine, quite 
obvious. Thus, our own complexion is of one hue 125 
in warm air, of another in cold, and we should not 
be able to say what our complexion really is, but 
only what it looks like in conjunction with each of 


atmospheric) or internal (e.g. peculiarities in the sense- 
organs of the percipient). 
73 


126 


127 


128 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἕκάστῳ τούτων θεωρεῖται. καὶ ἡ αὐτὴ φωνὴ 
ἀλλοία μὲν φαίνεται σὺν λεπτῷ ἀέρι ἀλλοία δὲ σὺν 
παχυμερεῖ, καὶ τὰ ἀρώματα ἐν βαλανείῳ καὶ ἡλίῳ 
π ηκτικώτερα μᾶλλόν ἐ ἐστιν ἢ ἐν ἀέρι καταψύχρῳ, 
καὶ τὸ σῶμα ὑπὸ ὕδατος μὲν περιεχόμενον κοῦφόν 
ἐστιν ὑπὸ δὲ ἀέρος βαρύ. 

Ἵνα δὲ καὶ τῆς ἔξωθεν ἐπιμιξίας ἀποστῶμεν, οἱ 
ὀφθαλμοὶ ἡ ἡμῶν ἔχουσιν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς καὶ χιτῶνας καὶ 
ὑγρά. τὰ οὖν ὁρατὰ ἐπεὶ μὴ ἄνευ τούτων θεω- 
ρεῖται, οὐ καταληφθήσεται πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν" τοῦ γὰρ 
μίγματος ἀντιλαμβανόμεθα, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οἱ μὲν 
ἰκτερικοὶ πάντα ὠχρὰ ὁρῶσιν, οἱ δ᾽ ὑπόσφαγμα 
ἔχοντες ὕφαιμα. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ φωνὴ ἡ αὐτὴ ἀλλοία 
μὲν φαίνεται ἐν ἀναπεπταμένοις τόποις ἀλλοία δὲ 
ἐν στενοῖς καὶ ἑλικοειδέσι, καὶ ἀλλοία μὲν ἐν 
καθαρῷ ἀέρι ἀλλοία δὲ ἐν τεθολωμένῳ, εἰκός ἐστι 
μὴ ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι ἡμᾶς εἰλικρινῶς τῆς φωνῆς" 
τὰ γὰρ ὦτα σκολιόπορά ἐστι καὶ στενόπορα καὶ 
ἀτμώδεσιν ἀποφορήσεσιν, αἱ δὴ ἀπὸ τῶν περὶ τὴν 
κεφαλὴν φέρεσθαι λέγονται τόπων, τεθολωμένα. 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν τοῖς μυξωτῆρσι καὶ ἐν τοῖς τῆς γεύσεως 
τόποις ὑλῶν ὑποκειμένων, μετ᾽ ἐκείνων ἀντιλαμ- 
βανόμεθα τῶν γευστῶν καὶ τῶν ὀσφρητῶν, ἀλλ᾽ 
οὐκ εἰλικρινῶς. wore διὰ τὰς ἐπιμιξίας at aic- 
θήσεις οὐκ ἀντιλαμβάνονται ὁποῖα πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν 
τὰ ἐκτὸς ὑποκείμενα ἔστιν. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἡ διάνοια, μάλιστα μὲν ἐπεὶ αἱ ὁδηγοὶ 
αὐτῆς αἰσθήσεις σφάλλονται" ἴσως δὲ καὶ αὕτη 
ἐπιμιξίαν τινὰ ἰδίαν ποιεῖται πρὸς τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν 
αἰσθήσεων ἀναγγελλόμενα: περὶ γὰρ ἕκαστον τῶν 
τόπων ἐν οἷς τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν εἷναι δοκοῦσιν ot 


14 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 125-128 


these conditions. And the same sound appears of 
one sort in conjunction with rare air and of another 
sort with dense air; and odours are more pungent 
in a hot bath-room or in the sun than in chilly air; 
and a body is light when immersed in water but 
heavy when surrounded by air. 

But to pass on from the subject of external ad- 126 
mixture,—our eyes contain within themselves both 
membranes and liquids. Since, then, the objects of 
vision are not perceived apart from these, they will 
not be apprehended with exactness ; for what we per- 
ceive is the resultant mixture, and because of this the 
sufferers frem jaundice see everything yellow, and 
those with blood-shot eyes reddish like blood. And 
since the same sound seems of one quality in open 
places, of another in narrow and winding places, and 
different in clear air and in murky air, it is probable 
that we do not apprehend the sound in its real 
purity ; for the ears have crooked and narrow pass- 
ages, which are also befogged by vaporous effluvia 
which are said to be emitted by the regions of the 
head. Moreover, since there reside substances in the 127 
nostrils and in the organs of taste, we apprehend the 
objects of taste and of smell in conjunction with 
these and not in their real purity. So that, because 
of these admixtures, the senses do not apprehend the 
exact quality of the external real objects. 

Nor yet does the mind apprehend it, since, in the 128 
first place, its guides, which are the senses , ZO wrong ; 
and probably, too, the mind itself adds a certain ad- 
mixture of its own to the messages conveyed by the 
senses ; for we observe that there are certain humours 
present in each of the regions which the Dogmatists 


* Cf. 88 44, 101 supra. 
75 


129 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δογματικοί, χυμούς τινας ὑποκειμένους θεωροῦμεν, 
εἴτε περὶ ἐγκέφαλον εἴτε περὶ καρδίαν εἴτε περὶ 
ὁτιδήποτε οὖν “μέρος τοῦ ζώου τοῦτο τίθεσθαι βού- 
λοιτό τις. καὶ κατὰ τοῦτον οὖν τὸν τρόπον ὁρῶμεν 
ὅτι περὶ τῆς φύσεως τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων οὐδὲν 
εἰπεῖν ἔχοντες ἐπέχειν ἀναγκαζόμεθα. 

Ἕβδομον τρόπον ἐλέγομεν εἶναι τὸν παρὰ τὰς 
ποσότητας καὶ σκευασίας τῶν ὑποκειμένων, σκευα- 
σίας λέγοντες κοινῶς τὰς συνθέσεις. ὅτι δὲ καὶ 
κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐπέχειν ἀναγκαζόμεθα περὶ 
τῆς φύσεως τῶν πραγμάτων, δῆλον. οἷον γοῦν 
τὰ ξέσματα τοῦ κέρατος τῆς αἰγὸς φαίνεται μὲν 
λευκὰ ἁπλῶς καὶ ἄνευ συνθέσεως θεωρούμενα, 
συντιθέμενα δὲ ἐν τῇ τοῦ κέρατος ὑπάρξει μέλανα 
θεωρεῖται. καὶ τοῦ ἀργύρου [ra μέρη] τὰ ῥινή- 
ματα κατ᾽ ἰδίαν μὲν ὄντα μέλανα φαίνεται, σὺν δὲ 


180 τῷ ὅλῳ ὡς λευκὰ ὑποπίπτει. καὶ τῆς Ταιναρείας 


151 


λίθου τὰ μὲν μέρη λευκὰ ὁρᾶται ὅταν λεανθῇ, σὺν 
δὲ τῇ ὁλοσχερεῖ ξανθὰ daiverar. καὶ αἱ ἀπ᾽ 
> / ? / “ “~ f 
ἀλλήλων ἐσκεδασμέναι ψάμμοι τραχεῖαν φαΐνον- 
ται, ὡς σωρὸς δὲ συντεθεῖσαι ἁπαλῶς κινοῦσι τὴν 
3 \ ¢ 3 a A \ \ A 
αἴσθησιν. καὶ ὃ ἐλλέβορος λεπτὸς μὲν καὶ χνοώδης 
προσφερόμενος πνιγμὸν ἐπιφέρει, κριμνώδης δὲ ὧν 
οὐκέτι. καὶ ὁ οἶνος σύμμετρος μὲν πινόμενος 
ῥώννυσιν ἡμᾶς, πλείων δὲ λαμβανόμενος παραλύει 
τὸ σῶμα. καὶ ἡ τροφὴ παραπλησίως παρὰ τὴν 
ποσότητα διάφορον ἐπιδείκνυται δύναμιν' πολλάκις 
γοῦν διὰ τὸ πολλὴ προσενεχθῆναι καθαιρεῖ τὸ σῶμα 


1 [τὰ μέρη] secl. Mutsch. 


¢ For the Stoic ἡγεμονικόν see Introd. Ὁ. xxv; for the 
dispute as to its location cf. Adv. Log. i. 313. 


76 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 128-131 


regard as the seat of the “ Ruling Principle ” *— 
whether it be the brain or the heart, or in whatever 
part of the creature one chooses to locate it. Thus, 
according to this Mode also we see that, owing to 
our inability to make any statement about the real 
nature of external objects, we are compelled to 
suspend judgement. 

The Seventh Mode is that based, as we said, on the 129 
quantity and constitution of the underlying objects, 
meaning generally by ‘‘ constitution ” the manner of 
composition. And it is evident that by this Mode 
also we are compelled to suspend judgement concern- 
ing the real nature of the objects. Thus, for example, 
the filings of a goat’s horn appear white when viewed 
simply by themselves and without combination, but 
when combined in the substance of the horn they 
look black. And silver filings appear black when they 
are by themselves, but when united to the whole 
mass they are sensed as white. And chips of the 130 
marble of Taenarum ὃ seem white when planed, but 
in combination with the whole block they appear 
yellow. And pebbles when scattered apart appear 
rough, but when combined in a heap they produce 
the sensation of softness. And hellebore if applied 
in a fine and powdery state produces suffocation, but 
not so when it is coarse. And wine strengthens us 131 
when drunk in moderate quantity, but when too 
much is taken it paralyses the body. So likewise 
food exhibits different effects according to the quan- 
tity consumed ; for instance, it frequently upsets the 
body with indigestion and attacks of purging because 


> Taenarum was the most southerly promontory of 
Laconia; its marble was yellowish green in colour (like 

serpentine). 
77 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


132 διά τε ἀπεψιῶν καὶ χολερικῶν παθῶν. ἕξομεν 
οὖν κἀνταῦθα, λέγειν ὁποῖόν ἐστι τοῦ κέρατος 
τὸ λεπτὸν καὶ ὁποῖον τὸ ἐκ πολλῶν λεπτομερῶν 
συγκείμενον, καὶ ὁποῖος μέν ἐστιν ὃ μικρομερὴς 
ἄργυρος ὁποῖος δὲ ὁ ἐκ πολλῶν μικρομερῶν συγ- 
κείμενος, καὶ ὁποία μὲν ἡ ἀκαριαία Ταιναρεία 
λίθος ὁποία δὲ ἡ ἐκ πολλῶν “μικρῶν συγκειμένη, 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ψάμμων καὶ τοῦ ἐλλεβόρου καὶ τοῦ 
οἴνου καὶ τῆς τροφῆς τὸ πρός τι, τὴν μέντοι 
φύσιν τῶν πραγμάτων καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν οὐκέτι διὰ τὴν 
παρὰ τὰς συνθέσεις τῶν φαντασιῶν ἀνωμαλίαν. 

1383 [Καθόλου γὰρ δοκεῖ καὶ τὰ ὠφέλιμα λυπηρὰ 
γίνεσθαι παρὰ τὴν κατὰ ποσότητα ἄμετρον αὐτῶν 
χρῆσιν, καὶ τὰ βλαβερὰ εἶναι δοκοῦντα ἐν τῷ καθ᾽ 
ὑπερβολὴν παραλαμβάνεσθαι ἀκαριαῖα μὴ λυπεῖν. 
μαρτυρεῖ δὲ τῷ λόγῳ μάλιστα τὸ κατὰ τὰς ἰατρικὰς 
δυνάμεις θεωρούμενον, ἐν αἷς ἡ μὲν πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν 
μῖξις τῶν ἁπλῶν φαρμάκων ὠφέλιμον ποιεῖ τὸ 
συντεθέν, ῥ ῥοπῆς δὲ βραχυτάτης ἐ ἐνίοτε παροραθείσης 
οὐ μόνον οὐκ ὠφέλιμον ἀλλὰ καὶ βλαβερώτατον 

134 καὶ “δηλητήριον πολλάκις. οὕτως ὁ κατὰ τὰς 
ποσότητας καὶ σκευασίας λόγος συγχεῖ τὴν τῶν 
ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων ὕπαρξιν. διόπερ εἰκότως. ἂν 
καὶ οὗτος ὁ τρόπος εἰς ἐποχὴν ἡμᾶς περιάγοι 
μὴ δυναμένους εἰλικρινῶς ἀποφήνασθαι περὶ εἰ) 
φύσεως τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων. 

135 ᾿Ογδοός € ἐστι τρόπος ὁ ἀπὸ τοῦ πρός τι, καθ᾽ ὃν 
συνάγομεν ὅτι ἐπεὶ πάντα ἐστὶ πρός σι, περὶ τοῦ 
τίνα ἐστὶν ἀπολύτως καὶ ὡς πρὸς τὴν φύσιν ἐφ- 
έξομεν. ἐκεῖνο δὲ χρὴ γινώσκειν ὅτι ἐνταῦθα, 
ὥσπερ καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις, τῷ ἔστι καταχρώμεθα ἀντὶ 


78 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 132-135 


of the large quantity taken. Therefore in these cases, 132 
too, we shall be able to describe the nature of the 
shaving of the horn and of the compound made up 
of many shavings, and that of the particle of silver 
and of the compound of many particles, and that of 
the sliver of Taenarean marble and of the compound 
of many such small pieces, and the relative natures’ 
of the pebbles, the hellebore, the wine and the food,— 
but when it comes to the independent and real nature 
of the objects, this we shall be unable to describe 
because of the divergency in the sense-impressions 
which is due to the combinations. 

As a general rule, it seems that wholesome things 133 
become harmful when used in immoderate quantities, 
and things that seem hurtful when taken to excess 
cause no harm when in minute quantities. What we 
observe in regard to the effects of medicines is the 
best evidence in support of our statement ; for there 
the exact blending of the simple drugs makes the 
compound wholesome, but when the slightest over- 
sight is made in the measuring, as sometimes happens, 
the compound is not only unwholesome but frequently 
even most harmful and deleterious. Thus the argu- 134 
ment from quantities and compositions causes con- 
fusion as to the real nature of the external sub- 
stances. Probably, therefore, this Mode also will 
bring us round to suspension of judgement, as we are 
unable to make any absolute statement concerning 
the real nature of external objects. 

The Exghth Mode is that based on relativity ; and 135 
by it we conclude that, since all things are relative, 
we shall suspend judgement regarding their inde- 
pendent and real essence. But this point we must 
notice — that here as elsewhere we use the term 


79 


186 


157 


138 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


~ 7 7 “~ / 4{{ , 
τοῦ φαίνεται, δυνάμει τοῦτο λέγοντες “ πρός τι 
ὔ é 22 ~ ἃ ~ } a 
πάντα φαίνεται. τοῦτο δὲ διχῶς λέγεται, ἅπαξ 

\ ς A “a 
μὲν ὡς πρὸς TO κρῖνον (τὸ yap ἐκτὸς ὑποκείμενον 
A , - , 
καὶ κρινόμενον πρὸς τὸ κρῖνον φαίνεται), καθ᾽ 
Ὁ \ ὔ 4 
ἕτερον δὲ τρόπον πρὸς τὰ συνθεωρούμενα, ὡς τὸ 
A 4 
δεξιὸν πρὸς TO ἀριστερόν. ὅτι δὲ πάντα ἐστὶ πρός 
2 4 e 
τι, ἐπελογισάμεθα μὲν Kat ἔμπροσθεν, οἷον κατὰ 
τὸ κρῖνον ὅτι πρὸς τόδε τὸ ζῶον καὶ τόνδε τὸν 
ἄνθρωπον καὶ τήνδε τὴν αἴσθησιν ἕκαστον φαίνεται, 
Α f \ 
καὶ πρὸς τοιάνδε περίστασιν, κατὰ δὲ τὰ συν- 
2 , 
θεωρούμενα, ὅτι πρὸς τήνδε τὴν ἐπιμιξίαν καὶ τόνδε 
\ 
τὸν τρόπον καὶ THY σύνθεσιν τήνδε καὶ τὴν ποσό- 
\ 
τητα καὶ τὴν θέσιν ἕκαστον φαίνεται. 
νι 3997 \ ? ΄ ᾽, Ψ / 3 \ 
Kai ἰδίᾳ δὲ ἐνδέχεται συνάγειν ὅτι πάντα ἐστὶ 
’ ” \ ? κι 
πρός τι; τόνδε τὸν τρόπον. πότερον διαφέρει τῶν 
/ \ \ \ “\ 3 2 4 2 7 
πρός τι τὰ κατὰ διαφορὰν ἢ οὔ; εἰ μὲν οὐ διαφέρει, 
> \ ~ 
καὶ αὐτὰ πρός τι ἐστίν’ εἰ δὲ διαφέρει, ἐπεὶ πᾶν TO 
διαφέρον πρός τι ἐστίν (λέγεται γὰρ πρὸς ἐκεῖνο 
οὗ διαφέρει), πρός τί ἐστι τὰ κατὰ διαφοράν. τῶν 
7 
τε ὄντων τὰ μέν ἐστιν ἀνωτάτω γένη κατὰ τοὺς 
3 
δογματικούς, τὰ δ᾽ ἔσχατα εἴδη, τὰ δὲ γένη καὶ 
A “~ 7 > ‘\ 
εἴδη" πάντα δὲ ταῦτά ἐστι πρός TL πάντα ἄρα ἐστὶ 


α The main point urged here is that no object can be 
apprehended in its purity. As perceived it is always con- 
ditioned by (1) the physical or mental state of the percipient 
(‘the thing which judges’’), and (2) by the ‘concomitant 
percepts’’ which accompany its emergence into the world of 
space and time. As thus conditioned, the object is no longer 
‘* absolute "ἢ but “‘ relative.” 

> Cf. § 39 supra. 

¢ Or “have a distinct existence of their own,” as opposed 
to a merely relative existence. This is a technical term for 


80 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 135-138 


“are” for the term “ appear,” and what we virtually 
mean is “all things appear relative.*”” And this state- 
ment is twofold, implying, firstly, relation to the 
thing which judges (for the external object which is 
judged appears in relation to that thing), and, in a 
second sense, relation to the acconipanying percepts, 
for instance the right side in relation to the left. 
Indeed, we have already argued ὃ that all things are 
relative—for example, with respect to the thing which 
judges, it is in relation to some one particular animal 
or man or sense that each object appears, and in 
relation to such and such a circumstance ; and with 
respect tothe concomitant percepts, each object 
appears in relation to some one particular admixture 
or mode or combination or quantity or position. 

There are also special arguments to prove the 
relativity of all things, in this way : Do things which 
exist “‘ differentially ’’ ὁ differ from relative things or 
not? Ifthey do not differ, then they too are relative ; 
but if they differ, then, since everything which differs 
is relative to something (for it has its name from its 
relation to that from which it differs), things which 
exist differentially are relative. Again,—of existing 
things some, according to the Dogmatists,“ are 
summa genera, others infimae species, others both 
genera and species; and all these are relative ; 
the class of objects which are “‘ self-existent,’’ ‘* absolute,”’ or 
‘* independent.”’ 

ὦ Including the Peripatetics, as well as the Stoics. A 
summum genus (e.g. ‘‘ Being’’) may be divided into genera 
(e.g. “ Animals,” ‘* Minerals’’), and these sub-divided into 
species (eg. ““Men,” “Dogs,” etc.), down to the injfimae 
species (6.0. ‘‘ Negroes ’’) which cannot be further subdivided. 
The intermediate species (e.g. “‘ Men’’) are both genera (in 


relation to their sub-species) and species (in relation to higher 
genera). 


VOL. I G 81 


136 


138 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


,ὔ 3 “-- 3 4 f > 4 \ 
πρός τι. ἔτι τῶν ὄντων τὰ μέν ἐστι πρόδηλα τὰ 
/ \ 
δὲ ἄδηλα, ws αὐτοί φασιν, Kal σημαίνοντα μὲν 
\ ~ 
τὰ φαινόμενα, σημαινόμενα δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν φαινομέ- 
\ eM” 2 \ > b] \ Can) 9 7 
νων τὰ ἄδηλα: ὄψις γὰρ κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς τῶν ἀδήλων 
“a 4 \ 
τὰ φαινόμενα. τὸ δὲ σημαῖνον καὶ TO σημαινό- 
a 4 
139 μενόν ἐστι πρός TL’ πρός TL ἄρα ἐστὶ πάντα. πρὸς 
τούτοις τῶν ὄντων τὰ μέν ἐστιν ὅμοια τὰ δὲ ἀν- 
όμοια καὶ τὰ μὲν ἴσα τὰ δὲ ἄνισα: ταῦτα δέ ἐστι 
A / 
πρός Tt πάντα ἄρα ἐστὶ πρός τι. Kal ὁ λέγων δὲ 
“ μὰ 
μὴ πάντα εἶναι πρός τι βεβαιοῖ τὸ πάντα εἶναι πρός 
τι" καὶ αὐτὸ γὰρ τὸ «μὴ» εἶναι πάντα πρός τι πρὸς 
¢€ “~ x ὃ / A . θ 5A ὃ 3 “Ὁ δ» 
ἡμᾶς εἶναι δείκνυσι, καὶ οὐ καθόλου, δι’ ὧν ἡμῖν 
ἐναντιοῦται. 
/ “᾿ 
140 Πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ οὕτω παριστάντων ἡμῶν ὅτι πάντα 
> \ 7 δῆλό 3 r A v4 ¢e “ ” 
ἐστὶ πρός τι, δῆλόν ἐστι λοιπὸν ὅτι ὁποῖον ἔστιν 
“ \ \ ¢ “~ 
ἕκαστον τῶν ὑποκειμένων κατὰ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ φύσιν 
\ 3 “ ‘4 , , > > ¢ ~ 
Kal εἰλικρινῶς λέγειν οὐ δυνησόμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ὁποῖον 
φαίνεται ἐν τῷ πρός τι. ἀκολουθεῖ τὸ περὶ τῆς 
“σ᾿ “ a 3 / 
φύσεως τῶν πραγμάτων δεῖν ἡμᾶς ἐπέχειν. 
\ A “. Ἁ ‘\ “A “ἢ 7 
111 ἹΠερὶ δὲ τοῦ κατὰ τὰς συνεχεῖς ἢ σπανίους 
4 “A if ~ 
συγκυρήσεις τρόπου, ὃν ἔννατον εἷναι λέγομεν τῇ 
τάξει, τοιαῦτά τινα διέξιμεν. ὃ ἥλιος πολλῷ δήπου 
4 , μ Ἅ ; 7 / J 7 
? ? > / 3 bd) 
EKTANKTLKWTEPOS ἐστιν ἀστέρος κομήτου: ἀλλ 
ἴω ~ \ 
ἐπεὶ TOV μὲν ἥλιον συνεχῶς ὁρῶμεν τὸν δὲ κομήτην 
Ul > Vv “~ ᾽ 4 
ἀστέρα σπανίως, ἐπὶ μὲν τῷ ἀστέρι ἐκπλησσόμεθα 
Ὶ é 4 a“ 
ὥστε Kal διοσημείαν αὐτὸν εἶναι δοκεῖν, ἐπὶ δὲ 
rn σε A ? > 
τῷ ἡλίῳ οὐδαμῶς. ἐὰν μέντοι ye ἐννοήσωμεν 
, 
τὸν ἥλιον σπανίως μὲν φαινόμενον σπανίως δὲ 
1 <uh> add. Papp. 
82 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 138-141 


therefore all things are relative. Further, some’'exist- 
ing things are “ pre-evident,’’% as they say, others 
non-evident ; and the apparent things are significant, 
but the non-evident signified by the apparent; for 
according to them “the things apparent are the 
vision of the non-evident.”’ But the significant and 
the signified are relative; therefore all things are 
relative. Moreover, some existent things are similar, 139 
others dissimilar, and some equal, others unequal ; 
and these are relative; therefore all things are rela- 
tive. And even he who asserts that not all things 
are relative confirms the relativity of all things, since 
by his arguments against us he shows that the very 
statement “ not all things are relative ’’ is relative to 
ourselves, and not universal. 

When, however, we have thus established that all 140 
things are relative, we are plainly left with the con- 
clusion that we shall not be able to state what is the 
nature of each of the objects in its own real purity, 
but only what nature it appears to possess in its 
relative character. Hence it follows that we must 
suspend judgement concerning the real nature of the 
objects. 

The Mode which, as we said, comes Ninth in order 141 
is based on constancy or rarity of occurrence, 
and we shall explain it as follows. The sun is, of 
course, much more amazing than a comet; yet 
because we see the sun constantly but the comet 
rarely we are so amazed by the comet that we even 
regard it as a divine portent, while the sun causes 
no amazement at all. If, however, we were to con- 
ceive of the sun as appearing but rarely and setting 


7 ᾿ ie superlatively, or wholly, manifest. Cf. Adv. Log. 
ii, 141. 
83 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


7 \ / \ 3 7ὔ 7 / 
dudpevov, καὶ πάντα μὲν ἀθρόως φωτίζοντα πάντα 
\ > ¢ 9 ’ὔ -- \ uv 
δὲ ἐξαίφνης. ἐπισκιάξζεσθαι ποιοῦντα, πολλὴν ἔκ- 
142 πληξιν ἐν τῷ πράγματι θεωρήσομεν. καὶ ὁ σεισ- 
μὸς δὲ οὐχ ὁμοίως θορυ εἰ τούς τε πρῶτον αὐτοῦ 
πειρωμένους καὶ τοὺς ἐν ἔθει τούτου γεγενημένους. 
/ \ 4 > , / / ἴων 
πόσην δὲ ἔκπληξιν ἀνθρώπῳ φέρει θάλασσα πρῶ- 
3 “ > ‘ A / ? > 
τον ὀφθεῖσα. ἀλλὰ καὶ κάλλος σώματος ἀνθρω- 
πίνου πρῶτον καὶ ἐξαίφνης θεωρούμενον συγκινεῖ 
μᾶλλον ἡμᾶς ἢ εἰ ἐν ἔθει τοῦ ὁρᾶσθαι γένοιτο. 
148 καὶ τὰ μὲν σπάνια τίμια εἶναι δοκεῖ, τὰ δὲ 
σύντροφα ἡμῖν καὶ εὔπορα οὐδαμῶς. ἐὰν γοῦν 
ἐννοήσωμεν τὸ ὕδωρ σπανίζον, πόσῳ ἂν τῶν 
τιμίων εἶναι δοκούντων ἁπάντων τιμιώτερον ἡμῖν 
φανείη. Ἃ ἐὰν ἐνθυμηθῶμεν τὸν χρυσὸν ἁπλῶς 
3 
ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἐρριμμένον πολὺν παραπλησίως τοῖς 
λίθοις, τῶι δόξομεν ἔσεσθαι τοῦτον τίμιον ἢ κατά- 
κλειστον οὕτως; 
> > Ἁ ra 
14 ᾿᾽Ἐπεὶ οὖν τὰ αὐτὰ πράγματα παρὰ Tas συνεχεῖς 
ἢ σπανίους περιπτώσεις ὁτὲ μὲν ἐκπληκτικὰ ἢ 
rd ey \ 3 ~ > “ 2 / 
τίμια ὁτὲ δὲ οὐ τοιαῦτα εἶναι δοκεῖ, ἐπιλογιζόμεθα 
ὅτι ὁποῖον μὲν φαίνεται τούτων ἕκαστον μετὰ 
συνεχοῦς περιπτώσεως ἢ σπανίας ἴσως δυνησό- 
μεθα λέγειν, ψιλῶς δὲ ὁποῖον ἔστιν ἕκαστον τῶν 
ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων οὐκ ἐσμὲν δυνατοὶ φάσκειν. 
καὶ διὰ τοῦτον οὖν τὸν τρόπον περὶ αὐτῶν ἐπ- 
ἔχομεν. 
15 Δέκατός ἐστι τρόπος, ὃς καὶ μάλιστα συνέχει 
\ 2 2 \ a” 
πρὸς τὰ ἠθικά, ὃ παρὰ Tas ἀγωγὰς Kal τὰ ἔθη 
καὶ τοὺς νόμους καὶ τὰς μυθικὰς πίστεις. καὶ τὰς 
δογματικὰς ὑπολήψεις. ἀγωγὴ μὲν οὖν ἐστὶν 
αἵρεσις βίου 7 Twos πράγματος περὶ ἕνα ἢ πολλοὺς 


84. 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 141-145 


rarely, and illuminating everything all at once and 
throwing everything into shadow suddenly, then we 
should experience much amazement at the sight. 
An earthquake also does not cause the same alarm 142 
in those who experience it for the first time and those 
who have grown accustomed to such things. How 
much amazement, also, does the sea excite in the 
man who sees it for the first time ! And indeed the 
beauty of a human body thrills us more at the first 
sudden view than when it becomes a customary 
spectacle. Rare things too we count as precious, 
but not what is familiar to us and easily got. Thus, 143 
if we should’suppose water to be rare, how much more 
precious it would appear to us than all the things 
which are accounted precious!* Or if we should 
imagine gold to be simply scattered in quantities 
over the earth like stones, to whom do we suppose 

it would then be precious and worth hoarding ? 

Since then, owing to the frequency or rarity of 144 
their occurrence, the same things seem at one time 
to be amazing or precious and at another time nothin 
of the sort, we infer that though we shall be able 
perhaps to say what nature appears to belong to each 
of these things in virtue of its frequent or rare 
occurrence, we are not able to state what nature 
absolutely belongs to each of the external objects. 

So because of this Mode also we suspend judgement 
regarding them. 

There is a Tenth Mode, which is mainly concerned 145 
with Ethics, being based on rules of conduct, habits, 
laws, legendary beliefs, and dogmatic conceptions. 

A rule of conduct is a choice of a way of life, 
or of a particular action, adopted by one person 


α Cf. Plato, Buthyd. 304 5. 
85 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


γινομένη, οἷον περὶ Διογένην ἢ τοὺς Λάκωνας" 

146 νόμος δέ ἐστιν ἔγγραφος συνθήκη παρὰ τοῖς πο- 
λυτευομένοις, ἣν 6 παραβαίνων κολάζεται, ἔθος δὲ 
ἢ συνήθεια (οὐ διαφέρει γάρ) πολλῶν ἀνθρώπων 
κοινὴ πράγματός τινος παραδοχή, ἣν ὃ “παραβὰς 
οὐ πάντως κολάζεται, οἷον νόμος ἐστὶ τὸ μὴ 
μοιχεύειν, ἔθος δὲ ἡμῖν τὸ μὴ δημοσίᾳ γυναικὶ 

147 μίγνυσθαι. μυθικὴ δὲ πίστις ἐστὲ πραγμάτων 
ἀγενήτων τε καὶ πεπλασμένων παραδοχή, οἷά 
ἐστιν ἄλλα τε καὶ τὰ περὶ τοῦ Κρόνου μυθευόμενα" 
ταῦτα γὰρ πολλοὺς εἰς πίστιν ἄγει. δογματικὴ δέ 
ἐστιν ὑπόληψις παραδοχὴ πράγματος δι ἀναλογισ- 
μοῦ 7 Twos ἀποδείξεως κρατύνεσθαι. δοκοῦσα, οἷον 
ὅτι ἄτομα, ἔστι τῶν ὄντων στοιχεῖα ἢ ὁμοιομερῆ ἢ 
ἐλάχιστα 4 τινα ἄλλα. 

148 ᾿Αντυτίθεμεν δὲ τούτων ἕκαστον ὁτὲ μὲν ἑαυτῷ 
ὁτὲ δὲ τῶν ἄλλων ἑκάστῳ. οἷον ἔθος μὲν ἔθει 
οὕτως. τινὲς τῶν Αἰθιόπων στίζουσι τὰ βρέφη, 
ἡμεῖς δ᾽ οὔ: καὶ Ἰ]έρσαι μὲν ἀνθοβαφεῖ ἐσθῆτι καὶ 
ποδήρει χρῆσθαι νομίζουσιν εὐπρεπὲς εἶναι, ἡμεῖς 
δὲ ἀπρεπές" καὶ ot μὲν ᾿Ϊνδοὶ ταῖς γυναιξὶ δημοσίᾳ 
μίγνυνται, οἱ δὲ πλεῖστοι τῶν ἄλλων αἰσχρὸν 

149 τοῦτο εἶναι ἡγοῦνται. νόμον δὲ νόμῳ οὕτως ἀντι- 
τίθεμεν. παρὰ μὲν τοῖς “Ῥωμαίοις ὃ τῆς πατρῴας 
ἀποστὰς οὐσίας οὐκ ἀποδίδωσι τὰ τοῦ πατρὸς 

g 4 δὲ τοῖς ‘Podiots πάντως amodidwouw: 
χρέα, mapa δὲ τοῖς ς ws a 
καὶ ἐν μὲν Ταύροις τῆς Σκυθίας νόμος ἦν τοὺς 
ξένους τῇ ᾿Δρτέμιδι καλλιερεῖσθαι, παρὰ δὲ ἡμῖν 

150 ἄνθρωπον ἀπείρηται πρὸς ἱερῷ φονεύεσθαι. ἀγω- 

α The Cynic philosopher. 


ὃ Democritus and Epicurus took the first view, Anaxagoras 
the second, Diodorus Cronos the third; ef. ili. 32. 


86 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 145-150 


or many—by Diogenes,* for instance, or the 


Laconians. A law is a written contract amongst the 146 


members of a State, the transgressor of which is 
punished. A habit or custom (the terms are equi- 
valent) is the joint adoption of a certain kind of action 
by a number of men, the transgressor of which is not 
actually punished ; for example, the law proscribes 
adultery, and custom with us forbids intercourse 


with a woman in public. Legendary belief is the 147 


acceptance of unhistorical and fictitious events, such 
as, amongst others, the legends about Cronos; for 
these stories win credence with many. Dogmatic 
conception “is the acceptance of a fact which seems 
to be established by analogy or some form of demon- 
stration, as, for example, that atoms are the elements 
of existing things, or homoeomeries, or minima,? or 
something else. 


And each of these we oppose now to itself, and now 148 


to each of the others. For example, we oppose habit 
to habit in this way: some of the Ethiopians tattoo 
their children, but we do not ; and while the Persians 
think it seemly to wear a brightly dyed dress reach- 
ing to the feet, we think it unseemly ; and whereas 
the Indians have intercourse with their women in 


public, most other races regard this as shameful. And 149 


law we oppose to law in this way : among the Romans 
the man who renounces his father’s property does 
not pay his father’s debts, but among the Rhodians 
he always pays them; and among the Scythian 
Tauri’ it was a law that strangers should be sacrificed 
to Artemis, but with us it is forbidden to slay a 


human being at the altar. And we oppose rule of 150 


° 4.¢. inhabitants of the Crimea; ef. Hdt. iv. 103, and 
Eurip. Iphigenia in Tauris. ; 
87 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


γὴν δὲ ἀγωγῇ, ὅταν τὴν Διογένους ἀγωγὴν ἀντι- 
τιθῶμεν τῇ τοῦ ᾿Αριστίππου ἢ τὴν τῶν Λακώνων 
τῇ τῶν ᾿Ιταλῶν. μυθικὴν δὲ πίστιν πίστει μυ- 
θικῇ. ὅταν ὅπου μὲν «λέγωμεν » τὸν Δία μυθεύε- 
σθαι πατέρα ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε ὅπου δὲ τὸν 
᾿Ωκεανόν, λέγοντες 


᾽Ὠκεανόν τε θεῶν γένεσιν καὶ μητέρα Τηθύν. 


161 δογματικὰς δὲ ὑπολήψεις ἀλλήλαις ἀντιτίθεμεν, 
ὅταν λέγωμεν τοὺς μὲν ἕν εἶναι στοιχεῖον ἄἅπο- 
φαίνεσθαι τοὺς δὲ ἄπειρα, καὶ τοὺς μὲν θνητὴν 
τὴν ψυχὴν τοὺς δὲ ἀθάνατον, καὶ τοὺς ἡ μὲν προνοίᾳ 
θεῶν διοικεῖσθαι τὰ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς τοὺς δὲ a ἀπρονοήτως. 

152 To ἔθος δὲ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀντιτίθεμεν, οἷον νόμῳ 
μέν, ὅταν λέγωμεν παρὰ μὲν Πέρσαις ἔθος εἶναι 
ἀρρενομιξίαις χρῆσθαι, παρὰ δὲ “Ῥωμαίοις ἀπαγο- 
ρεύεσθαι νόμῳ τοῦτο πράττειν, καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν 
τὸ μοιχεύειν ἀπειρῆσθαι, παρὰ δὲ Μασσαγέταις 
ἀδιαφορίας ἔθει παραδεδόσθαι, ὡς Ἐύδοξος ὃ 
Κνίδιος ἱστορεῖ ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τῆς περιόδου, καὶ 
wap ἡμῖν μὲν ἀπηγορεῦσθαι μητράσι μίγνυσθαι, 
παρὰ δὲ τοῖς Πέρσαις ἔθος εἶναι μάλιστα οὕτω 
γαμεῖν. καὶ παρ᾽ Αἰγυπτίοις δὲ τὰς ἀδελφὰς 

168 γαμοῦσιν, ὃ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἀπείρηται νόμῳ. ἀγωγῇ 
δὲ ἔθος ἀντυτίθεται, ὅταν οἵ μὲν πολλοὶ ἄνθρωποι 
ἀναχωροῦντες μιγνύωνται ταῖς ἑαυτῶν γυναιξίν, 6 
δὲ Κράτης τῇ “ἽἹππαρχίᾳ δημοσίᾳ: καὶ ὁ μὲν 
Διογένης ἀπὸ ἐξωμίδος περιήει, ἡμεῖς δὲ ὡς 


1 «λέγωμεν» add. T. 





@ Homer, 1]. xiv. 901. 
88 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 150-153 


conduct to rule of conduct, as when we oppose the 
rule of Diogenes to that of Aristippus or that of the 
Laconians to that of the Italians. And we oppose 
legendary belief to legendary belief when we say 
that whereas in one story the father of men and gods 
is alleged to be Zeus, in another he is Oceanos— 
“ Ocean sire of the gods, and Tethys the mother 
that bare them.’’* And we oppose dogmatic con- 151 
ceptions to one another when we say that some 
declare that there is one element only, others an 
infinite number ; some that the soul is mortal, others 
that it is immortal ; and some that human affairs are 
controlled by divine Providence, others without 
Providence. 

And we oppose habit to the other things, as for 152 
instance to law when we say that amongst the 
Persians it is the habit to indulge in intercourse with 
males, but amongst the Romans it is forbidden by 
law to do so; and that, whereas with us adultery is 
forbidden, amongst the Massagetae it is traditionally 
regarded as an indifferent custom, as Eudoxus of 
Cnidos ® relates in the first book of his Travels; and 
that, whereas intercourse with a mother is forbidden 
in our country, in Persia it is the general custom to 
form such marriages ; and also among the Egyptians 
men marry their sisters, a thing forbidden by law 
amongst us. And habit is opposed to rule of conduct 153 
when, whereas most men have intercourse with their 
own wives in retirement, Crates¢ did it in public 
with Hipparchia ; and Diogenes went about with one 
shoulder bare, whereas we dress in the customary 


ὃ Flourished about 360 3.c., famed as astronomer, geo- 
meter, legislator and physician. 
° A Cynic philosopher, circa 320 B.c. ; ef. iti, 24. 


89 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


154. εἰώθαμεν. μυθικῇ δὲ πίστει, ὡς ὅταν λέγωσιν ot 
μῦθοι ὅτι ὁ Kpovos κατήσθιεν αὑτοῦ τὰ τέκνα, 
ἔθους ὄντος ἡμῖν προνοεῖσθαι παίδων" καὶ παρ᾽ 
ἡμῖν μὲν συνήθεια ὡς ἀγαθοὺς καὶ ἀπαθεῖς κακῶν 
σέβειν τοὺς θεούς, τιτρωσκόμενοι δὲ καὶ φθονοῦντες 

155 ἀλλήλοις ὑπὸ τῶν ποιητῶν εἰσάγονται. δογματικῇ 
δὲ ὑπολήψει, ὅταν ἡμῖν μὲν ἔθος ἢ παρὰ θεῶν 
αἰτεῖν τὰ ἀγαθά, ὁ δὲ ᾿Επίκουρος λέγῃ μὴ ἐπι- 
στρέφεσθαι ἡμῶν τὸ θεῖον, καὶ ὅταν ὃ μὲν 
᾿Αρίστιππος ἀδιάφορον ἡ ἡγῆται τὸ γυναικείαν ἀμφι- 
έννυσθαι στολήν, ἡμεῖς δὲ αἰσχρὸν τοῦτο ἡγώ- 
μεθα εἶναι. 

156 ᾿Αγωγὴν δὲ ἀντιτίθεμεν νόμῳ μέν, ὅταν νόμου 
ὄντος μὴ ἐξεῖναι τύπτειν ἄνδρα ἐλεύθερον καὶ 
εὐγενῆ οἵ παγκρατιασταὶ τύπτωσιν ἀλλήλους διὰ 
τὴν ἀγωγὴν τοῦ κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς Biov, καὶ ὅταν 
ἀπειρημένου τοῦ ἀνδροφονεῖν οὗ μονομάχαι ἀν- 

157 αιρῶσιν ἀλλήλους διὰ τὴν αὐτὴν αἰτίαν. μυθικὴν 
δὲ πίστιν ἀγωγῇ ἀντιτίθεμεν, ἐπειδὰν “λέγωμεν ὃ ὅτι 
ot μὲν μῦθοι παρὰ τῇ ᾿Ομφάλῃ τὸν “Ἡρακλέα 


λέγουσιν 
εἴριά τε ξαίνειν καὶ δουλοσύνης ἀνέχεσθαι 


καὶ ταῦτα ποιῆσαι ἅπερ οὐδ᾽ ἂν μετρίως προῃρη- 
μένος ἐποίησεν ἄν τις, ἡ δὲ ἀγωγὴ τοῦ βίου τοῦ 
168 ᾿Ηρακλέους ἦν γενναία. δογματικῇ δὲ ὑπολήψει, 
ὅταν οὗ μὲν ἀθληταὶ ὡς ἀγαθοῦ τῆς δόξης ἄντι- 
ποιούμενοι ἐπίπονον ἀγωγὴ ὴν βίου δι᾿ αὐτὴν ἐπ- 
αναιρῶνται, πολλοὶ δὲ τῶν φιλοσόφων φαῦλον εἶναι 
159 τὴν δόξαν. δογματίζωσιν. τὸν δὲ νόμον ἀντιτίθεμεν 
μυθικῇ μὲν πίστει, ὅταν ol μὲν ποιηταὶ εἰσάγωσι 
τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ μοιχεύοντας καὶ ἀρρενομιξίαις 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 154-159 


manner. It is opposed also to legendary belief, as 154 
when the legends say that Cronos devoured his own 
children, though it is our habit to protect our children ; 
and whereas it is customary with us to revere the 
gods as being good and immune from evil, they are 
presented by the poets as suffering wounds and 
envying one another. And habit is opposed to 155 
dogmatic conception when, whereas it is our habit 
to pray to the gods for good things, Epicurus 4 
declares that the Divinity pays no heed to us; and 
when Aristippus ὃ considers the wearing of feminine 
attire a matter of indifference, though we consider 
it a disgraceful thing. 

And we oppose rule of conduct to law when, 156 
though there is a law which forbids the striking of 
a free or well-born man, the pancratiasts strike 
one another because of the rule of life they follow ; 
and when, though homicide is forbidden, gladiators 
destroy one another for the same reason. And we 157 
oppose legendary belief to rule of conduct when we 
say that the legends relate that Heracles in the house 
of Omphale “ toiled at the spinning of wool, endur- 
ing slavery’s burden,” ὁ and did things which no one 
would have chosen to do even in a moderate degree, 
whereas the rule of life of Heracles was a noble one. 
And we oppose rule of conduct to dogmatic concep- 158 
tion when, whereas athletes covet glory as something 
good and for its sake undertake a toilsome rule of 
life, many of the philosophers dogmatically assert 
that glory is a worthless thing. And we oppose law 159 
to legendary belief when the poets represent the gods 
as commiting adultery and practising intercourse with 

« Of, iii, 219. > Of, iii. 204. 
¢ Homer, Odyss. x. 423. 


91 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


3 ξ wm “~ 
χρωμένους, νόμος δὲ Tap ἡμῖν κωλύῃ ταῦτα πράτ- 
~ \ e / 4 e 4 4 
160 τειν, δογματικῇ δὲ ὑπολήψει, Grav of μὲν περὶ 
Χρύσιππον ἀδιάφορον εἶναι λέγωσι τὸ μητράσιν 
oh) +) “A ’ ¢€ A ὔὕ »- / 
ἢ ἀδελφαῖς μίγνυσθαι, ὃ δὲ νόμος ταῦτα κωλύῃ. 
161 μυθικὴν δὲ πίστιν δογματικῇ ὑπολήψει ἀντιτίθεμεν, 
ΦΨ e \ \ / \ ,ὔ ? 
ὅταν ot μὲν ποιηταὶ λέγωσι τὸν Δία κατελθόντα 
θνηταῖς γυναιξὶ μίγνυσθαι, παρὰ δὲ τοῖς δογματι- 
“ ~ > 
162 κοῖς ἀδύνατον τοῦτο εἶναι νομίζηται, καὶ ὁ μὲν 
\ , ¢ x Ἁ \ / \ > ἃ 
ποιητὴς λέγῃ ὅτι Ζεὺς διὰ TO πένθος τὸ ἐπὶ Lap- 
πηδόνι αἱματοέσσας ψεκάδας κατέχευεν ἔραζε, 
/ , / 2 3 ees \ “ 
δόγμα μέντοι φιλοσόφων ἀπαθὲς εἶναι τὸ θεῖον, 
καὶ ὅταν τὸν τῶν ἱπποκενταύρων μῦθον ἀναιρῶσιν, 
\ φ “ 
ἀνυπαρξίας παράδειγμα Tov ἱπποκένταυρον ἡμῖν 
φέροντες. 
168 Πολλὰ μὲν οὖν καὶ ἄλλα ἐνῆν καθ᾽ ἑκάστην τῶν 
7 
προειρημένων ἀντιθέσεων λαμβάνειν παραδείγματα- 
4 “ 
ὡς ἐν συντόμῳ δὲ λόγῳ ταῦτα ἀρκέσει. πλὴν 
τοσαύτης ἀνωμαλίας πραγμάτων καὶ διὰ τούτου 
lo “ \ 
τοῦ τρόπου δεικνυμένης, ὁποῖον μὲν ἔστι TO ὑποκεί- 
4 ¢ Ὡ - 
μενον κατὰ τὴν φύσιν οὐχ ἕξομεν λέγειν, ὁποῖον 
\ ,ὔ ‘ 
δὲ φαίνεται πρὸς τήνδε THY ἀγωγὴν ἢ πρὸς τόνδε 
Α 7 \ 4 / \ ” \ - ἢ 
τὸν νόμον ἢ πρὸς τόδε τὸ ἔθος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
ἕκαστον. καὶ διὰ τοῦτον οὖν περὶ τῆς φύσεως 
τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων πραγμάτων ἐπέχειν ἡμᾶς 
ἀνάγκη. οὕτω μὲν οὖν διὰ τῶν δέκα τρόπων 
> Ἂ 9 7 
καταλήγομεν εἰς τὴν ἐποχήν. 


02 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, 1. 159-163 


males, whereas the law with us forbids such actions ; 
and we oppose it to dogmatic conception when 160 
Chrysippus® says that intercourse with mothers or 
sisters is a thing indifferent, whereas the law forbids 
such things. And we oppose legendary belief to 161 
dogmatic conception when the poets say that Zeus 
came down and had intercourse with mortal women, 
but amongst the Dogmatists it is held that such a 
thing is impossible ; and again, when the poet relates? 162 
that because of his grief for Sarpedon Zeus “ let fall 
upon the earth great gouts of blood,” whereas it is 
a dogma of the philosophers that the Deity is im- 
passive ; and when these same philosophers demolish 
the legend of the hippocentaurs, and offer us the 
hippocentaur as a type of unreality.° 

We might indeed have taken many other examples 163 
in connexion with each of the antitheses above 
mentioned ; but in a concise account like ours, these 
will be sufficient. Only, since by means of this Mode 
also so much divergency is shown to exist in objects, 
we shall not be able to state what character belongs 
to the object in respect of its real essence, but only 
what belongs to it in respect of this particular rule of 
conduct, or law, or habit, and so on with each of the 
rest. So because of this Mode also we are compelled 
to suspend judgement regarding the real nature of 
external objects. And thus by means of all the Ten 
Modes we are finally led to suspension of judgement. 

* See Introd. pp. xxvii-xxvili; cf. iii. 205, 

> Homer, JI. xvi. 459. 


ὁ Cf. our use of “chimera” (lion+goat+dragon) for 
what is fantastic. 


93 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ΤΕ. ΠΕΡῚ TON ΠΈΝΤΕ TPOIION 


164 Oc δὲ νεώτεροι σκεπτικοὶ παραδιδόασι τρόπους 
τῆς ἐποχῆς πέντε τούσδε, πρῶτον τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς 
διαφωνίας, δεύτερον τὸν εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκβάλλοντα, 
τρίτον τὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ πρός τι, τέταρτον τὸν ὑπο- 

165 θετικόν, πέμπτον τὸν διάλληλον. καὶ 6 μὲν ἀπὸ 
τῆς διαφωνίας ἐστὶ καθ᾽ ὃν περὶ τοῦ προτεθέντος 
πράγματος ἀνεπίκριτον στάσιν παρά τε τῷ βίῳ 
καὶ παρὰ τοῖς φιλοσόφοις εὑρίσκομεν γεγενημένην, 
δι’ ἣν οὐ δυνάμενοι. αἱρεῖσθαί τι ἢ ἀποδοκιμάζειν 

166 καταλήγομεν εἰς ἐποχήν. ΩΣ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς εἰς 
ἄπειρον ἐκπτώσεως ἐστὶν ἐν ᾧ τὸ φερόμενον εἰς 
πίστιν τοῦ προτεθέντος πράγματος πίστεως ἑτέρας 
χρήζειν λέγομεν, κἀκεῖνο ἄλλης, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου, 
ὡς μὴ ἐχόντων ἡμῶν πόθεν ἀρξόμεθα τῆς κατα- 

167 σκευῆς τὴν ἐποχὴν ἀκολουθεῖν. ὁ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ 
πρός τι, καθὼς προειρήκαμεν, ἐν ᾧ πρὸς μὲν τὸ 
κρῖνον καὶ τὰ συνθεωρούμενα τοῖον ἢ τοῖον 
φαίνεται τὸ ὑποκείμενον, ὁποῖον δὲ ἔστι πρὸς τὴν 

168 φύσιν ἐπέχομεν. 6 δὲ ἐξ ὑποθέσεως ἔστιν ὅταν 
εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκβαλλόμενοι οἵ δογματικοὶ ἀπό τινος 
ἄρξωνται 6 οὐ κατασκευάζουσιν ἀλλ᾽ ἁπλῶς καὶ 
ἀναποδείκτως κατὰ συγχώρησιν λαμβάνειν ἀξιοῦ- 

169 σιν. 6 δὲ διάλληλος τρόπος συνίσταται ὅταν τὸ 
ὀφεῖλον τοῦ ζητουμένου πράγματος εἶναι βεβαιω- 
τικὸν χρείαν ἔχῃ τῆς ἐκ τοῦ ζητουμένου πίστεως" 
ἔνθα μηδέτερον δυνάμενοι λαβεῖν πρὸς κατασκευὴν 
θατέρου, περὶ ἀμφοτέρων ἐπέχομεν. 


α 7.e. those posterior to Aenesidemus; but the reference 
here is specially to Agrippa (see Introd. p. xl); ef. Diog. 
Laert. ix. 88. 


94 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 164-169 


Cuaprer XV.—Or toe ΕἾΝΕ Mopes 


The later Sceptics * hand down Five Modes leading 164 
to suspension, namely these: the first based on dis- 
crepancy, the second on regress ad infinitum, the 
third on relativity, the fourth on hypothesis, the fifth 
on circular reasoning. That based on discrepancy 165 
leads us to find that with regard to the object 
presented there has arisen both amongst ordinary 
people and amongst the philosophers an intermin- 
able conflict because of which we are unable either 
to choose a thing or reject it, and so fall back 
on suspension. The Mode based upon regress ad 166 
infinitum is that whereby we assert that the thing 
adduced as a proof of the matter proposed needs a 
further proof, and this again another, and so on ad 
infinitum, so that the consequence is suspension, as 
We possess no starting-point for our argument. The 167 
Mode based upon relativity, as we have already said,? 
is that whereby the object has such or such an appear- 
ance in relation to the subject judging and to the 
concomitant percepts, but as to its real nature we 
suspend judgement. We have the Mode based on 168 
hypothesis when the Dogmatists, being forced to 
recede ad infinitum, take as their starting-point some- 
thing which they do not establish by argument but 
claim to assume as granted simply and without 
demonstration. The Mode of circular reasoning is 169 
the form used when the proof itself which ought to 
establish the matter of inquiry requires confirmation 
derived from that matter ; in this case, being unable 
to assume either in order to establish the other, we 
suspend judgement about both. 


> See §§ 135 ff. 
95 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


A ~ \ va 
Ὅτι δὲ πᾶν τὸ ζητούμενον εἰς τούτους ἀνάγειν 
τοὺς τρόπους ἐνδέχεται, διὰ βραχέων ὑποδείξομεν 


170 Ψ 4 \ 3 3 / > “aN / 
οὕτως. τὸ προτεθὲν ἤτοι αἰσθητόν ἐστιν ἢ νοητόν, 


171 


172 


173 


e “a > a“ > / ¢ \ \ ‘ 
ὁποῖον δ᾽ ἂν ἢ, διαπεφώνηται: of μὲν yap τὰ 
3 A / A > 3 ~ ς \ 4 A 
αἰσθητὰ μόνα φασὶν εἷναι ἀληθῆ, of δὲ μόνα τὰ 
νοητά, οἱ δὲ τινὰ μὲν αἰσθητὰ τινὰ δὲ νοητά. 
πότερον οὖν ἐπικριτὴν εἶναι φήσουσι τὴν δια- 
/ \ 
φωνίαν 7 averixpirov; εἰ μὲν ἀνεπίκριτον, ἔχομεν 
7 “~ ~ 
ὅτι δεῖ ἐπέχειν: περὶ yap τῶν ἀνεπικρίτως δια- 
φωνουμένων οὐχ οἷόν τέ ἐστιν ἀποφαίνεσθαι. εἰ δὲ 
, / Ἂ 
ἐπικριτήν, πόθεν ἐπικριθήσεται πυνθανόμεθα. οἷον 
‘ ? , 
τὸ αἰσθητόν (ἐπὶ τούτου yap προτέρου στήσομεν 
‘ 4 / > ΄- “A 
τὸν λόγον) πότερον ὑπὸ αἰσθητοῦ ἢ ὑπὸ νοητοῦ; 
> A A 3 ι. “ ἴω 
εἰ μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ αἰσθητοῦ, ἐπεὶ περὶ τῶν αἰσθητῶν 
“- \ “ 
ζητοῦμεν, καὶ ἐκεῖνο ἄλλου δεήσεται πρὸς πίστιν. 
3 \ > “ 3 A », / \ κ᾿ , ww 
εἰ δὲ κἀκεῖνο αἰσθητὸν ἔσται, πάλιν Kal αὐτὸ ἄλλου 
“4 ~ / 
δεήσεται τοῦ πιστώσοντος, Kal τοῦτο μέχρις 
3 / ~ ‘ \ 
ἀπείρου. εἶ δὲ ὑπὸ νοητοῦ ἐπικρίνεσθαι δεήσει TO 
αἰσθητόν, ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ νοητὰ διαπεφώνηται, δεήσε- 
“a \ / 
ται Kal τοῦτο νοητὸν ὃν κρίσεώς TE καὶ πίστεως. 
εν ‘ A“ ? 
πόθεν οὖν πιστωθήσεται; εἰ μὲν ὑπὸ νοητοῦ, εἰς 
~ , > \ ΄-Ἔ 
ἄπειρον ἐκπεσεῖται ὁμοίως" εἰ δ᾽ ὑπὸ αἰσθητοῦ, 
~ fo ’ 
ἐπεὶ πρὸς μὲν τὴν πίστιν τοῦ αἰσθητοῦ παρελήφθη 
“~ “ , ς 
νοητὸν πρὸς δὲ τὴν τοῦ νοητοῦ πίστιν αἰσθητόν, ὁ 
διάλληλος εἰσάγεται τρόπος. 
3 \ “~ / € 4 Cc om 
Ei δὲ ταῦτα φεύγων, 6 προσδιαλεγόμενος ἡμῖν 





@ Of these views the first was maintained, ¢.g. by Prot- 
agoras and Epicurus, the second by Plato and Democritus, 
the third by Peripatetics and Stoics. 

» Lit. “the through-one-another mode” (of reasoning). 
This is the fallacy known as circulus in probando, by which 


96 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 169-173 


That every matter of inquiry admits of being 
brought under these Modes we shall show briefly in 
this way. The matter proposed is either a sense~ 170 
object or a thought-object, but whichever it is, it is an 
object of controversy ; for some say that only sensibles 
are true, others only intelligibles, others that some 
sensible and some intelligible objects are true.* Will 
they then assert that the controversy can or cannot 
bedecided? If they say it cannot, we have it granted 
that we must suspend judgement; for concerning 
matters of dispute which admit of no decision it is 
impossible to make an assertion. But if they say 
that it can*be decided, we ask by what is it to be 
decided. For example, in the case of the sense- 17] 
object (for we shall base our argument on it first), 
is it to be decided by a sense-object or a thought- 
object? For if they say by a sense-object, since we 
are inquiring about sensibles that object itself also 
will require another to confirm it; and if that 
too is to be a sense-object, it likewise will require 
another for its confirmation, and so on ad infinitum. 
And if the sense-object shall have to be decided by 172 
a thought-object, then, since thought-objects also are 
controverted, this being an object of thought will 
need examination and confirmation. Whence then 
will it gain confirmation? If from an intelligible 
object, it will suffer a similar regress ad infinitum ; 
and if from a sensible object, since an intelligible 
was adduced to establish the sensible and a sensible 
to establish the intelligible, the Mode of circular 
reasoning ὃ is brought in. 

If, however, our disputant, by way of escape from 173 


each of two propositions is used in turn to prove the truth of 
the other. 


VOL. I H ΟΥ̓ 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


κατὰ συγχώρησιν καὶ ἀναποδείκτως ἀξιώσειε λαμ- 
A ἴω “.Ἤ 
dvew τι πρὸς ἀπόδειξιν τῶν ἑξῆς, 6 ὑποθετικὸς 
/ 
εἰσάγεται τρόπος, ἄπορος ὑπάρχων. εἰ μὲν yap 
6 ὑποτιθέμενος πιστός ἐστιν, ἡμεῖς ἀεὶ τὸ ἀντι- 
κείμενον ὑποτιθέμενοι οὐκ ἐσόμεθα ἀπιστότεροι. 
A 3 \ 3 7 ς / ¢ ς f 
καὶ εἰ μὲν ἀληθές τι ὑποτίθεται ὁ ὑποτιθέμενος, 
a > A, “ > ¢ " > A / 
ὕποπτον αὐτὸ ποιεῖ, καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν αὐτὸ λαμβάνων 
3 A A \ “ 2 \ ~ 4 
ἀλλὰ μὴ μετὰ κατασκευῆς" εἰ δὲ ψεῦδος, σαθρὰ 
174 ἔσται ἡ ὑποβάθρα τῶν κατασκευαζομένων. καὶ εἰ 
μὲν ἀνύει τι τὸ ὑποτίθεσθαι πρὸς πίστιν, αὐτὸ τὸ 
ζητούμενον ὑποτιθέσθω, καὶ μὴ ἕτερόν τι δι οὗ 
δὴ κατασκευάσει τὸ πρᾶγμα περὶ οὗ ὁ λόγος" εἰ 
A 
δὲ ἄτοπόν ἐστι τὸ ὑποτίθεσθαι τὸ ζητούμενον, 
” 3} Α \ ¢ / 4 3 / 
ἄτοπον ἔσται καὶ TO ὑποτίθεσθαι TO ἐπαναβεβηκός. 
116 Ὅτι δὲ καὶ πρός τί ἐστι πάντα τὰ αἰσθητά, 
o~ v \ Ἁ ? 
δῆλον" ἔστι yap πρὸς τοὺς αἰσθανομένους. φανερὸν 
οὖν ὅτι ὅπερ ἂν ἡμῖν προτεθῇ πρᾶγμα αἰσθητόν, 
7 -ὦ 
εἰς τοὺς πέντε τρόπους ἀνάγειν τοῦτο εὐμαρές 
ἐστιν. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ περὶ τοῦ νοητοῦ ἐπιλογιζό- 
/ fo 
μεθα. εἰ μὲν yap ἀνεπικρίτως διαπεφωνῆσθαι 
λέγοιτο, δοθήσεται ἡμῖν τὸ δεῖν ἐπέχειν περὶ 
σι ? , 
116 αὐτοῦ. εἰ δὲ ἐπικριθήσεται ἡ διαφωνία, εἰ μὲν 
διὰ νοητοῦ, εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκβαλοῦμεν, εἰ δὲ ὑπὸ 
> “~ 3 \ 7 \ ‘ > \ 
αἰσθητοῦ, εἰς τὸν διάλληλον: τὸ yap αἰσθητὸν 
\ ~ 
πάλιν διαφωνούμενον, καὶ μὴ δυνάμενον δι᾿ αὑτοῦ 
> ~ 
ἐπικρίνεσθαι διὰ τὴν εἰς ἄπειρον ἔκπτωσιν, τοῦ 
“A Ψ Ἁ ~ ~ 
νοητοῦ δεήσεται ὥσπερ Kal TO νοητὸν TOD αἰσθητοῦ. 


α Lit. “without exit (or way of escape)’’; ἐ.6. it hope- 
lessly entangles the opponent. 
> 2,6. the super-ordinate, or more universal, proposition. 


98 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 173-177 


this conclusion, should claim to assume as granted 
and without demonstration some postulate for the 
demonstration of the next steps of his argument, 
then the Mode of hypothesis will be brought in, 
which allows no escape.* For if the author of the 
hypothesis is worthy of credence, we shall be no 
less worthy of credence every time that we make 
the opposite hypothesis. Moreover, if the author 
of the hypothesis assumes what is true he causes 
it to be suspected by assuming it by hypothesis 
rather than after proof; while if it is false, the 


foundation of his argument will be rotten. Further, 174 


if hypothesis conduces at all to proof, let the subject 
of inquiry itself be assumed and not some other thing 
which is merely a means to establish the actual 
subject of the argument ; but if it is absurd to assume 
the subject of inquiry, it will also be absurd to assume 
that upon which it depends.® 


It is also plain that all sensibles are relative ; for 175 


they are relative to those who have the sensations. 
Therefore it is apparent that whatever sensible object 
is presented can easily be referred to one of the Five 
Modes. And concerning the intelligible object we 
argue similarly. For if it should be said that it is a 
matter of unsettled controversy, the necessity of our 


suspending judgement will be granted. And if, on 176 


the other hand, the controversy admits of decision, 
then if the decision rests on an intelligible object we 
shall be driven to the regress ad infinitum, and to 
circular reasoning if it rests on a sensible ; for since 
the sensible again is controverted and cannot be 
decided by means of itself because of the regress ad 
infinitum, it will require the intelligible object, just 


as also the intelligible will require the sensible. For 177 


99 


177 


178 


179 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


διὰ ταῦτα δὲ ἐξ ὑποθέσεως ὁ λαμβάνων τι πάλιν 
ἄτοπος ἔσται. ἀλλὰ καὶ πρός τί ἐστι τὰ _vonra: 
πρὸς γὰρ τὸν νοοῦντα λέγεται, καὶ εἰ ἦν τῇ φύσει 
τοιοῦτον ὁποῖον λέγεται, οὐκ ἂν διεφωνήθη. 
ἀνήχθη οὖν καὶ τὸ νοητὸν εἰς τοὺς πέντε τρόπους, 
διόπερ ἀνάγκη περὶ τοῦ προτεθέντος πράγματος 
πάντως ἡμᾶς ἐπέχειν. 

Τοιοῦτοι μὲν καὶ οἱ παρὰ τοῖς νεωτέροις παρα- 
διδόμενοι πέντε τρόποι: οὗς ἐκτίθενται οὐκ ἐκ- 
βάλλοντες τοὺς δέκα τρόπους, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
ποικιλώτερον καὶ διὰ τούτων σὺν ἐκείνοις ἐλέγχειν 
τὴν τῶν δογματικῶν προπέτειαν. 


Is’.—TINEZ OI ATO ΤΡΟΠΟῚ 


Παραδιδόασι δὲ καὶ δύο τρόπους ἐποχῆς 
ἑτέρους" ἐπεὶ γὰρ πᾶν τὸ καταλαμβανόμενον ἤτοι 
ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ καταλαμβάνεσθαι δοκεῖ ἢ ἐξ ἑτέρου 
«ὑπομιμνήσκοντες ὅτι οὔτε ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ τι οὔτε ἐξ 
ἑτέρου » καταλαμβάνεται, τὴν περὶ πάντων ἀπορίαν 
εἰσάγειν δοκοῦσιν. καὶ ὅτι μὲν οὐδὲν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ 
καταλαμβάνεται, φασί, δῆλον ἐκ τῆς γεγενημένης 
παρὰ τοῖς φυσικοῖς περί τε τῶν alo ητῶν καὶ τῶν 
νοητῶν ἁπάντων, οἶμαι, διαφωνίας, ἣ δὴ ἀνεπί- 
κρυτός ἐστι μὴ δυναμένων ἡμῶν μήτε αἰσθητῷ 
μήτε νοητῷ κριτηρίῳ χρῆσθαι διὰ τὸ πᾶν, ὅπερ 
ἂν λάβωμεν, ἄπιστον εἶναι διαπεφωνημένον. διὰ 

1 <hrou. . .. ἑτέρου» add. T. 


2 For this final reduction of the “ Tropes’ to two—arguing 
against the possibility of either (1) immediate or (2) mediate 
certitude—see Introd. p. xli. 

> ** Physics,”’ as a branch of philosophy, was treated of by 
all the Schools alluded to in § 170 supra, which are specially 
here in mind. 

100 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 177-179 


these reasons, again, he who assumes anything by 
hypothesis will be acting illogically. Moreover, 
objects of thought, or intelligibles, are relative ; for 
they are so named on account of their relation to 
the person thinking, and if they had really possessed 
the nature they are said to possess, there would 
have been no controversy about them. Thus the 
intelligible also is referred to the Five Modes, so 
that in all cases we are compelled to suspend judge- 
ment concerning the object presented. 

Such thenare the Five Modes handed down amongst 
the later Sceptics ; but they propound these not by 
way of superseding the Ten Modes but in order to 
expose the rashness of the Dogmatists with more 
variety and completeness by means of the Five in 
conjunction with the Ten. 


Cuaprer XVI.—Or tar Two Mopss 


They hand down also Two other Modes leading 178 
to suspension of judgement.* Since every object of 
apprehension seems to be apprehended either through 
itself or through another object, by showing that 
nothing is apprehended either through itself or 
through another thing, they introduce doubt, as they 
suppose, about everything. That nothing is appre- 
hended through itself is plain, they say, from the 
controversy which exists amongst the physicists ὃ 
regarding, I imagine, all things, both sensibles and 
intelligibles ; which controversy admits of no settle- 
ment because we can neither employ a sensible 
nor an intelligible criterion, since every criterion 
we may adopt is controverted and therefore dis- 
credited. And the reason why they do not allow 179 


101 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δὲ τοῦτο οὐδ᾽ ἐξ ἑτέρου τι καταλαμβάνεσθαι συγ- 
χωροῦσιν. εἰ μὲν γὰρ τὸ ἐξ οὗ τι καταλαμβάνεται 
ἀεὶ ἐξ ἑτέρου καταλαμβάνεσθαι δεήσει, εἰς τὸν 
διάλληλον ἢ τὸν ἄπειρον ἐμβάλλουσι τρόπον. εἰ 
δὲ βούλοιτό τις λαβεῖν ὡς ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ καταλαμ- 
βανόμενόν τι ἐξ οὗ τι καταλαμβάνεται ἕτερον, 
ἀντιπίπτει τὸ μηδὲν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ καταλαμβάνεσθαι 
διὰ τὰ προειρημένα. τὸ δὲ μαχόμενον πῶς ἂν 
δύναιτο καταληφθῆναι. «ἢ. ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἢ ag’ 
ἑτέρου, ἀποροῦμεν, τοῦ κριτηρίου τῆς ἀληθείας ἢ 
τῆς καταλήψεως μὴ φαινομένου, σημείων δὲ καὶ 
δίχα ἀποδείξεως διατρεπομένων, καθάπερ ἐν τοῖς 
ἑξῆς εἰσόμεθα. 

Τοσαῦτα μὲν οὖν καὶ περὶ τῶν τρόπων τῆς 
ἐποχῆς ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ἀρκέσει λελέχθαι. 


1Z’.—TINES ΤΡΟΠΟῚ ΤῊΣ ΤΩΝ ΑἸΤΙΟΛΟΓΊΚΩΝ 
ΑΝΑΤΡΟΠῊΣ 


180 “Ὥσπερ δὲ τοὺς τρόπους τῆς ἐποχῆς παραδίδομεν, 
οὕτω καὶ τρόπους ἐκτίθενταί τινες καθ᾽ ods ἐν ταῖς 
κατὰ μέρος αἰτιολογίαις διαποροῦντες ἐφιστῶμεν 
τοὺς δογματικοὺς διὰ “τὸ μάλιστα ἐπὶ ταύταις 
αὐτοὺς μέγα φρονεῖν. καὶ δὴ Αἰνησίδημος ὀκτὼ 
τρόπους παραδίδωσι Kal? οὗς οἴεται πᾶσαν doy- 
ματικὴν αἰτιολογίαν ὡς μοχθηρὰν ἐλέγχων ἀποφή- 

181 νασθαι, ὧν πρῶτον μὲν εἶναί φησι καθ᾽ ὃν τρόπον 
τὸ τῆς αἰτιολογίας γένος ἐν ἀφανέσιν ἀναστρεφό- 
μενον οὐχ ὁμολογουμένην ἔχει τὴν ἐκ τῶν φαινο- 

1 καταλαμβάνεται TM: λαμβάνειν mss., Bekk. 
2 <> add. T. 


a See ii. 96 ff. 
102 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 179-181 


that anything is apprehended through something 
else is this: If that through which an object is 
apprehended must always itself be apprehended 
through some other thing, one is involved in a pro- 
cess of circular reasoning or in regress ad infinitum. 
And if, on the other hand, one should choose to 
assume that the thing through which another object 
is apprehended is itself apprehended through itself, 
this is refuted by the fact that, for the reasons already 
stated, nothing is apprehended through itself. But 
as to how what conflicts with itself can possibly be 
apprehended either through itself or through some 
other thing we remain in doubt, so long as the criterion 
of truth or of apprehension is not apparent, and signs, 
even apart from demonstration, are rejected, as we 
shall discover in our next Book. 

For the present, however, it will suffice to have said 
thus much concerning the Modes leading to suspen- 
sion of judgement. 


Cuaptrer XVII.—Or tus Mopes sy wHIcH THE 
AETIOLOGISTS ARE CONFUTED 


Just as we teach the traditional Modes leading to 180 
suspense of judgement, so likewise some Sceptics 
propound Modes by which we express doubt about 
the particular “ aetiologies,”’ or theories of causation, 
and thus pull up the Dogmatists because of the special 
pride they take in these theories. Thus Aenesidemus 
furnishes us with Eight Modes by which, as he thinks, 
he tests and exposes the unsoundness of every dog- 
matic theory of causation. Of these the First, he 181] 
says, is that which shows that, since aetiology as a 
whole deals with the non-apparent, it is unconfirmed 

103 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


/ 3 [4 ὃ 7 δὲ θ᾽ “a 4 
μένων ἐπιμαρτύρησιν' δεύτερον δὲ καθ᾽ ὃν πολλάκις 
~ ? 
εὐεπιφορίας οὔσης δαψιλοῦς ὥστε πολυτρόπως 
“ > 
αἰτιολογῆσαι τὸ ζητούμενον, καθ᾽ ἕνα μόνον τρό- 
182 πον τοῦτό τινες αἰτιολογοῦσιν: τρίτον καθ᾽ ὃν τῶν 
4 / 
τεταγμένως γινομένων αἰτίας ἀποδιδόασιν οὐδεμίαν 
3 ‘ 
τάξιν ἐπιφαινούσας" τέταρτον καθ᾽ ὃν τὰ φαινόμενα 
λαβόντες ὡς γίνεται, καὶ τὰ μὴ φαινόμενα νομΐ- 
7 " 
ζουσιν ὡς γίνεται κατειληφέναι, τάχα μὲν ὁμοίως 
“ ,ὔ “Ὁ 3 ~ 
τοῖς φαινομένοις τῶν ἀφανῶν ἐπιτελουμένων, τάχα 
3 4 ¢ t > > > , / > A 
183 δ᾽ οὐχ ὁμοίως ἀλλ᾽ iditalovTws: πέμπτον καθ᾽ ὃν 
, la 9 a ~ 
πάντες WS ἔπος εἰπεῖν κατὰ τὰς ἰδίας τῶν στοι- 
/ / 3 3 
χείων ὑποθέσεις ἀλλ᾽ οὐ κατά τινας κοινὰς καὶ 
¢ / 3 / 3 ~ Ὁ 9 
ὁμολογουμένας ἐφόδους αἰτιολογοῦσιν: ἕκτον καθ 
Δ λλ ‘ \ \ “ ts) / € θ / 
ὃν πολλάκις τὰ μὲν φωρατὰ ταῖς ἰδίαις ὑποθέσεσι 
/ ‘ 
παραλαμβάνουσιν, τὰ δὲ ἀντιπίπτοντα καὶ τὴν 
ef 
184 ἴσην ἔχοντα πιθανότητα παραπέμπουσιν: ἕβδομον 
> «a / / / “ν᾿ 
καθ᾽ ὃν πολλάκις ἀποδιδόασιν αἰτίας οὐ μόνον τοῖς 
φαινομένοις ἀλλὰ καὶ ταῖς ἰδίαις ὑποθέσεσι μαχο- 
7 37 3 ev 7 » > 7 
μένας" ὄγδοον καθ᾽ ὃν πολλάκις ὄντων ἀπόρων 
7 “᾿ “ 3 
ὁμοίως τῶν τε φαίνεσθαι δοκούντων καὶ τῶν ἐπι- 
a 9 ᾿ ~ 
ζητουμένων, ἐκ τῶν ὁμοίως ἁπόρων περὶ τῶν 
’ὔ la “- 7 
155 ὁμοίως ἀπόρων ποιοῦνται τὰς διδασκαλίας. οὐκ 
/ / / 
ἀδύνατον δέ φησι καὶ κατά τινας ἐπιμίκτους τρό- 
~ ᾽ 
πους, ἠρτημένους ἐκ τῶν προειρημένων, διαπίπτειν 
“ [4 
ἐνίους ἐν ταῖς αἰτιολογίαις. 
9 ‘a 3 “ δὴ 
Τάχα δ᾽ ἂν καὶ οἱ πέντε τρόποι τῆς ἐποχῆς aTrap- 
΄΄ι 4 “ ig 4 
κοῦσι πρὸς τὰς αἰτιολογίας. ATO. γὰρ σύμφωνον 
a / \ ~ 
πάσαις ταῖς κατὰ φιλοσοφίαν αἱρέσεσι καὶ TH 


a 


-πταοὔνὕὕ.. 





α See 88 164 ff. supra. 
104 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 181-185 


by any agreed evidence derived from appearances. 
The Second Mode shows how often, when there is 
ample scope for ascribing the object of investigation 
to a variety of causes, some of them account for it 
in one way only. The Third shows how to orderly 182 
events they assign causes which exhibit no order. 
The Fourth shows how, when they have grasped the 
way in which appearances occur, they assume that 
they have also apprehended how non-apparent things 
occur, whereas, though the non-apparent may possibly 
be realized in a similar way to the appearances, 
possibly they may not be realized in a similar way but 
in a peculiat way of their own. In the Fifth Mode it 188 
is shown how practically all these theorists assign 
causes according to their own particular hypotheses 
about the elements, and not according to any com- 
monly agreed methods. In the Sixth it is shown 
how they frequently admit only such facts as can 
be explained by their own theories, and dismiss 
facts which conflict therewith though possessing 
equal probability. The Seventh shows how they 184 
often assign causes which conflict not only with 
appearances but also with their own hypotheses. 
The Eighth shows that often, when there is equal 
doubt about things seemingly apparent and things 
under investigation, they base their doctrine about 
things equally doubtful upon things equally doubtful. 
Nor is it impossible, he adds, that the overthrow of 185 
some of their theories of causation should be referred 
to certain mixed Modes which are dependent on the 
foregoing. 

Possibly, too, the Five Modes of suspension @ may 
suffice as against the aetiologies. For if a person 
propounds a cause, it will either be or not be in accord 


105 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


/ ‘ A , > ἢ ? “A “A 5) 
σκέψει καὶ τοῖς φαινομένοις αἰτίαν ἐρεῖ τις ἢ οὔ. 
\ / \ w > 3 f 7 \ 
Kal σύμφωνον μὲν tows οὐκ ἐνδέχεται: τά TE γὰρ 

/ \ A +O λ / ὃ / ? 
186 φαινόμενα καὶ TA ἄδηλα πάντα διαπεφώνηται. εἰ 
\ “ > / \ ; \ > 7 
δὲ διαφωνεῖ, ἀπαιτηθήσεται καὶ ταύτης τὴν αὐτίαν, 
καὶ φαινομένην μὲν φαινομένης ἢ ἄδηλον ἀδήλου 
? ? 3 3 “A ? \ Ν 
λαμβάνων εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκπεσεῖται, ἐναλλὰξ δὲ 
αἰτιολογῶν εἰς τὸν διάλληλον. ἱστάμενος δέ που, 
ἊΨ > Ἂ - > ? / \ > #7 
ἢ ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς εἰρημένοις λέξει τὴν αἰτίαν συν- 
εστάναι, καὶ εἰσάγει τὸ πρός τι, ἀναιρῶν τὸ πρὸς 
τὴν φύσιν, ἢ ἐξ ὑποθέσεώς τι λαμβάνων ἐπι- 
’ὔ + Oe \ \ 7 27 
σχεθήσεται. ἔστιν οὖν Kat διὰ τούτων ἐλέγχειν 
“~ ~ ~ > 
tows τὴν τῶν δογματικῶν ἐν ταῖς αἰτιολογίαις 


προπέτειαν. 


IH’.—TIEPI ΤΩΝ ΣΚΕΠΤΊΚΩΝ ΦΩΝῺΝ 


> \ \ ¢ / ? “ \ “~ 

15] “Harel δὲ ἑκάστῳ χρώμενοι τούτων τε καὶ τῶν 
τῆς ἐποχῆς τρόπων ἐπιφθεγγόμεθα φωνάς τινας 
τῆς σκεπτικῆς διαθέσεως καὶ τοῦ περὶ ἡμᾶς 
πάθους μηνυτικάς, οἷον λέγοντες “od μᾶλλον ᾿᾽ 
“οὐδὲν ὁριστέον ᾿᾿ καὶ ἄλλας τινάς, ἀκόλουθον ἂν 
εἴη καὶ περὶ τούτων ἐξῆς διαλαβεῖν. ἀρξώμεθα 


δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς “᾿οὐ μᾶλλον. 


106 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 185-187 


with all the philosophical systems and with Scepticism 
and with appearances. Probably, however, it is im- 
practicable to propound a cause in accord with all 
these, since all things, whether apparent or non- 
evident, are matters of controversy. But if, on the 
other hand, the cause propounded be not in accord 
therewith, the theorist will be asked in turn for the 
cause of this cause, and if he assumes an apparent 
cause for an apparent, or a non-evident for a non- 
evident, he will be involved in the regress ad infinitum, 
or reduced to arguing in a circle if he grounds each 
cause in turn on another. And if at any point he 
makes a stand, either he will state that the cause is 
well-grounded so far as relates to the previous ad- 
missions, thus introducing relativity and destroying 
its claim to absolute reality, or he will make some 
assumption ea hypothest and will be stopped by us. 
So by these Modes also it is, no doubt, possible to 
expose the rashness of the Dogmatists in their 
aetiologies. 


Cuaprer XVIJI.—Or tur Sceptic Expressions 
oR FORMULAE 


And because when we make use of these Modes 
and those which lead to suspension of judgement we 
give utterance to certain expressions ¢ indicative of 
our sceptical attitude and tone of mind—such as 
“Not more,” ““ Nothing must be determined,” and 
others of the kind—it will be our next task to discuss 
these in order. So let us begin with the expression 
‘ Not more.”’ 


“ΟἹ §§ 14, 15 supra. 


107 


186 


187 


188 


[89 


190 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


1Θ΄.--ΠΕΡῚ ΤῊΣ “ΟΥ̓ MAAAON” SONS 
4 / e \ \ € ” / 
Ταύτην τοίνυν ore μὲν ws ἔφην προφερόμεθα, 
ὁτὲ δὲ οὕτως “᾿ οὐδὲν pa oe ov γάρ, ὥς τινες 
ὑπολαμβάνουσι, τὴν μὲν “ μᾶλλον᾽ ii ἐν ταῖς 
εἰδικαῖς ζητήσεσι παραλαμβάνομεν, τὴν δὲ ‘ ᾿ οὐδὲν 
μᾶλλον ᾿ ἐν ταῖς γενικαῖς, ἀλλ᾽ ἀδιαφόρως τήν τε 
“οὐ μᾶλλον ᾿ καὶ τὴν “οὐδὲν μᾶλλον ” προφερό- 
μεθα, καὶ νῦν ὡς περὶ μιᾶς διαλεξόμεθα. ἔστι μὲν 
οὖν αὕτη ἡ φωνὴ ἐλλιπής. ὡς γὰρ ὅταν λέγωμεν 
διπλῆ, δυνάμει φαμὲν ἑστία διπλῆ, καὶ ὅταν λέ- 
γωμεν πλατεῖα, δυνάμει. λέγομεν πλατεῖα ὁδός," 
οὕτως ὅταν εἴπωμεν “οὐ μᾶλλον, δυμάμει φαμὲν 
“οὐ μᾶλλον τόδε ἢ τόδε, ἄνω κάτω." τινὲς μέντοι 
τῶν σκεπτικῶν παραλαμβάνουσιν ἀντὶ [τοῦ πύσμα- 
2 ~ 2 \ / ~ / at / \ / 
τος" τοῦ οὔ τὸ τί μᾶλλον τόδε ἢ τόδε, τὸ τί παρα- 
λαμβάνοντες νῦν ἀντὶ αἰτίας, ἵν᾽ ἢ τὸ λεγόμενον 
= διὰ τί μᾶλλον τόδε ἢ τόδε; ᾿᾿ σύνηθες δέ ἐστι 
καὶ πύσμασιν ἀντὶ ἀξιωμάτων χρῆσθαι, οἷον 
τίς τὸν Διὸς σύλλεκτρον οὐκ οἷδε βροτῶν; 
καὶ ἀξιώμασιν ἀντὶ πυσμάτων, οἷον “ ζητῶ ποῦ 
οἰκεῖ Aiwy”’ καὶ “ πυνθάνομαι τίνος ἕνεκα χρὴ 
/ of 7 97 > Ν Ἁ \ / > \ 
θαυμάζειν ἄνδρα ποιητήν. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ τί ἀντὶ 
~ ‘ ’ / \ / 
τοῦ διὰ τί παραλαμβάνεται παρὰ Μενάνδρῳ: 
τί γὰρ ἐγὼ κατελειπόμην; 
δηλοῖ δὲ τὸ “᾿ οὐ μᾶλλον τόδε ἢ τόδε᾽᾽ καὶ πάθος 
1 πλατεῖα. .. πλατεῖα ὁδός Diels: πλατεῖαν. .. πλατεῖαν 


ὁδὸν mss., Bekk. 
2 [τοῦ πύσματος] del. ego. 


α 4.e. (perhaps) a two-storied house (taking ἑστία as mean- 
ing οἰκία). Fabric. proposed ἐσθής, διπλῆ then being = διπλοίς, 
“a double cloak.” πλατεῖα, “square,” lit. “broad, open, 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 188--190 


CyHapter XIX.—Or rur Expression “ΝΟΥ more” 


This expression, then, we sometimes enunciate 
in the form I have stated but sometimes in the form 
‘““ Nowise more.’’ For we do not, as some suppose, 
adopt the form “ Not more” in specific inquiries 
and ‘‘ Nowise more”’ in generic inquiries, but we 
enunciate both ‘ Not more”’ and ‘‘ Nowise more” in- 
differently, and we shall discuss them. now as identical 
expressions. This expression, then, is elliptical. For 
just as when we say “8 double ” we are implicitly 
saying “a double hearth,” ὁ and when we say “‘a 
square ” we are implicitly saying “a square road- 
way, so when we say “ Not more ” we are implicitly 
saying “‘ Not this more than that, up than down.” 
Some of the Sceptics, however, in place of the “‘ Not ” 
adopt the form “ (For) what this more than that,” 
taking the “ what” to denote, in this case, cause, 
so that the meaning is “ For what reason this more 
than that δ And it is a common practice to use 
questions instead of assertions, as for example—“ The 
bride of Zeus, what mortal knows her not?’’¢ And 
also assertions in the place of questions ; for instance 
— I am inquiring where Dion lives,” and “I ask 
you what reason there is for showing surprise at a 
poet.”” And further, the use of ‘‘ What ”’ instead of 
~ For what reason ” is found in Menander,¢ “ (For 


188 


189 


what was I left behind ?’’ And the expression “‘ Not 190 


more this than that” indicates also our feeling, where- 


ὃ The τί, here substituted for οὐ, is capable of meaning 
either “ what” (or ‘‘in what respect’) or ‘‘ why,” “for what 
cause or reason”’ (=d:d rl). Thus τί gives an interrogative 
form (πύσμα) to the formula, as distinct from the affirmative 
form (ἀξίωμα) with οὐ. 

¢ Kurip. Here. Fur. 1. ¢ Fragm. 900 (Kock). 


109 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἡμέτερον, καθ᾽ ὃ διὰ τὴν ἰσοσθένειαν τῶν ἀντι- 
κειμένων πραγμάτων εἰς ἀρρεψίαν καταλήγομεν, 
ἰσοσθένειαν" μὲν λεγόντων ἡμῶν τὴν «ἰσότητα 
τὴν" κατὰ τὸ φαινόμενον ἡμῖν πιθανόν, ἀντικεί- 
μενα δὲ κοινῶς τὰ μαχόμενα, ἀρρεψίαν δὲ τὴν πρὸς 
μηδέτερον συγκατάθεσιν. 

11 Ἢ γοῦν “οὐδὲν μᾶλλον ᾿᾿ φωνὴ κἂν ἐμφαίνῃ 
χαρακτῆρα. συγκαταθέσεως ἢ ἀρνήσεως, ἡμεῖς οὐχ 
οὕτως αὐτῇ χρώμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ἀδιαφόρως αὐτὴν παρα- 
λαμβάνομεν καὶ καταχρηστικῶς, ἤτοι ἀντὶ πύο- 
ματος ἢ ἀντὶ τοῦ λέγειν “ ἀγνοῶ τίνι μὲν τούτων 
χρὴ συγκατατίθεσθαι τίνι δὲ μὴ συγκατατίθεσθαι.᾽" 
πρόκειται ἡμῖν δηλῶσαι τὸ φαινόμενον ἡμῖν" κατὰ 
δὲ τὴν φωνὴν du ἧς αὐτὸ δηλοῦμεν ἀδιαφοροῦμεν. 

κἀκεῖνο δὲ χρὴ “γινώσκειν. ὅτι προφερόμεθα τὴν 

a οὐδὲν μᾶλλον ᾽ἢ φωνὴν οὐ διαβεβαιούμενοι περὶ 

τοῦ πάντως ὑπάρχειν αὐτὴν ἀληθῆ καὶ βεβαίαν, 

ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὸ φαινόμενον ἡμῖν καὶ περὶ αὐτῆς 
λέγοντες. 


Κι ΠΕΡῚ ΑΦΆΑΣΙΑΣ 


1952) Περὶ δὲ τῆς ἀφασίας λέγομεν τάδε. Φάσις 
καλεῖται διχῶς, κοινῶς τε καὶ ἰδίως, «κοινῶς μὲν 
ἡ δηλοῦσα θέσιν 7 ἢ ἄρσιν φωνή, οἷον “᾿ ἡμέρα ἔστιν, 
οὐχ ἡμέρα ἔστιν," ᾿ idiws δὲ ἡ ἡ δηλοῦσα θέσιν μόνον, 
καθ᾽ ὃ σημαινόμενον τὰ ἀποφατικὰ οὐ καλοῦσι 
φάσεις. ἡ οὖν ἀφασία ἀπόστασίς ἐστι τῆς κοινῶς 
λεγομένης φάσεως, 4 ὑποτάσσεσθαι λέγομεν τήν 
τε κατάφασιν καὶ τὴν ἀπόφασιν, ὡς εἶναι ἀφασίαν 


1 ἰσοσθένειαν Papp.: ἰσότητα Μ88., Bekk. 
2 «ἰσότητα τὴν» add. Papp. 


110 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 190-192 


by we come to end in equipoise because of the 
equipollence of the opposed objects ; and by “ equi- 
pollence ” we mean equality in respect of what seems 
probable to us, and by “opposed” we mean in 
general conflicting, and by “΄ equipoise ᾿᾿ ὦ refusal of 
assent to either alternative. 

Then as to the formula “‘ Nowise more,” even 191 
though it exhibits the character of a form of assent 
or of denial, we do not employ it in this way, but we 
take it in a loose and inexact sense, either in place 
of a question or in place of the phrase “ I know not 
to which of these things I ought to assent, and to 
which I ought not.”” For our aim is to indicate what 
appears to us; while as to the expression by which 
we indicate this we are indifferent. This point, too, 
should be noticed—that we utter the expression 
‘“ Nowise more’ not as positively affirming that it 
really is true and certain, but as stating in regard to 
it also what appears to us. 


CuapTrer XX.—Or ‘‘ Apuasia’”’ on NON-ASSERTION 


Concerning non-assertion what we say is this. The 192 
term “ assertion” has two senses, general and special; 
used in the general sense it indicates affirmation or 
negation, as for example “Τὺ is day,” “It is not 
day ’’; in its special sense it indicates affirmation 
only, and in this sense negations are not termed 
assertions. Non-assertion, then, is avoidance of asser- 
tion in the general sense in which it is said to include 
both affirmation and negation, so that non-assertion 


* This is the typical Sceptic’s attitude of complete mental 


neutrality, or “state of even balance” (ἀρρεψία, Diog. 
Laert. ix. 74). 


111 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πάθος ἡμέτερον δι᾽ ὃ οὔτε τιθέναι τι οὔτε ἀναιρεῖν 

193 φαμέν. ὅθεν δῆλόν ἐστιν ὅτι καὶ τὴν ἀφασίαν 
παρα λαμβάνομεν οὐχ ὡς πρὸς τὴν φύσιν τοιούτων 
ὄντων τῶν πραγμάτων ὥστε πάντως ᾿ἀφασίαν 
κινεῖν, ἀλλὰ δηλοῦντες ὅτι ἡμεῖς νῦν, ὅτε προ- 
φερόμεθα αὐτήν, ἐπὶ τῶνδε τῶν ζητουμένων τοῦτο 
πεπόνθαμεν. κἀκεῖνο χρὴ μνημονεύειν ὅτι μηδὲν 
τιθέναι μηδὲ ἀναιρεῖν φαμὲν τῶν κατὰ τὸ ἄδηλον 
δογματικῶς λεγομένων: τοῖς γὰρ κινοῦσιν ἡμᾶς 
παθητικῶς καὶ ἀναγκαστικῶς ἄγουσιν εἰς συγ- 
κατάθεσιν εἴκομεν. 


KA’.—ITEPI ΤΟΥ “TAXA,” KAI TOY “ἜΞΕΣΤΙ, ΚΑῚ 
TOY ‘*ENAEXETAT” 


194 To δὲ “ raya” καὶ “᾿ οὐ raya” καὶ “ ἔξεστι ᾽ 
\ sé > + 27 \ ἐς» / >?) ‘ ce , 
καὶ “οὐκ ἔξεστι ᾿᾿ καὶ “᾿ ἐνδέχεται ᾿᾿ καὶ “᾿ οὐκ 
ἐνδέχεται ᾿᾿ παραλαμβάνομεν ἀντὶ τοῦ τάχα μὲν 
ἔστιν τάχα δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν, καὶ ἔξεστι μὲν εἶναι 
ἔξεστι δὲ μὴ εἶναι, καὶ ἐνδέχεται μὲν εἶναι ἐν- 
δέχεται δὲ μὴ εἶναι, ὡς παραλαμβάνειν ἡ ἡμᾶς συν- 
τομίας χάριν τὸ μὴ ἐξεῖναι ἀντὶ τοῦ ἐξεῖναι μὴ 
εἶναι, καὶ τὸ μὴ ἐνδέχεσθαι ἀντὶ τοῦ ἐνδέχεσθαι μὴ 
εἶναι, καὶ τὸ οὐ τάχα ἀντὶ τοῦ τάχα μὴ εἶναι. 
᾽ὔ Ἁ 3 ~ > ~ > \ 2 7 
195 πάλιν δὲ ἐνταῦθα οὐ φωνομαχοῦμεν, οὐδὲ εἰ φύσει 
“. ~ ε A “A δὴ > > 
ταῦτα δηλοῦσιν ai φωναὶ ζητοῦμεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀδια- 
é 
φόρως αὐτάς, ὡς εἶπον, παραλαμβάνομεν. ὅτι 
μέντοι αὗται αἱ φωναὶ ἀφασίας εἰσὶ δηλωτικαΐ, 
πρόδηλον, οἶμαι. ὁ γοῦν λέγων “᾿ τάχα ἔστιν 
δυνάμει τίθησι καὶ τὸ μάχεσθαι δοκοῦν αὐτῷ, τὸ 
112 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 192-195 


is a mental condition of ours because of which we 
refuse either to affirm or to deny anything. Hence 193 
it is plain that we adopt non-assertion also not as 
though things are in reality of such a kind as wholly 
to induce non-assertion, but as indicating that we 
now, at the time of uttering it, are in this condition 
regarding the problems now before us. It must 
also be borne in mind that what, as we say, we 
neither posit nor deny, is some one of the dogmatic 
statements made about what is non-apparent; for 
we yield to those things which move us emotionally 
and. drive us compulsorily to assent. 


Cuapter XXI.—Or tue Expressions “‘ Peruaps,” 
** PossiBLy,’” anp ‘‘ MaysBr”’ 


The formulae “ perhaps ”’ and ‘“‘ perhaps not,” and 194 
“ possibly ’”’ and “ possibly not,” and “‘ maybe” and 
“maybe not,’ we adopt in place of ‘‘ perhaps it is 
and perhaps it is not,’ and “ possibly it is and 
possibly it is not,” and “maybe it is and maybe 
it is not,’ so that for the sake of conciseness 
we adopt the phrase “possibly not’ instead of 
possibly it is not,” and “maybe not” instead of 
“maybe it is not,” and “ perhaps not” instead of 
" perhaps it is not.” But here again we do not fight 195 
about phrases nor do we inquire whether the phrases 
indicate realities, but we adopt them, as I said, in 
a loose sense. Still it is evident, as I think, that 
these expressions are indicative of non-assertion. 
Certainly the person who says “ perhaps it is” is 
implicitly affirming also the seemingly contradictory 


* Cf. 8 13, 191 supra. 
VOL. I I 113 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


“~ ~ A 
τάχα μὴ εἶναι, TH μὴ διαβεβαιοῦσθαι περὶ τοῦ 
εἶναι αὐτό. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν λοιπῶν ἔχει. 


KB’,—TEPI TOY “ἘΠΕΧΩ 


1056 Τὸ δὲ “ éréxw ᾿᾿ παραλαμβάνομεν ἀντὶ τοῦ οὐκ 
ἔχω εἰπεῖν τίνι χρὴ τῶν προκειμένων πιστεῦσαι 
ἢ τινι ἀπιστῆσαι, δηλοῦντες ὅτι ἴσα ἡμῖν φαίνεται 
‘Tad πράγματα πρὸς πίστιν καὶ ἀπιστίαν. καὶ εἰ 
μὲν ἴσα ἐστίν, οὐ διαβεβαιούμεθα: τὸ δὲ φαινόμενον 
ἡμῖν περὶ αὐτῶν, ὅτε ἡμῖν ὑποπίπτει, λέγομεν. 
καὶ ἡ ἐποχὴ δὲ εἴρηται ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐπέχεσθαι τὴν 
διάνοιαν ὡς μήτε τιθέναι τι μήτε ἀναιρεῖν διὰ τὴν 
ἰσοσθένειαν τῶν ζητουμένων. 


ΚΙ".--ΠΕΡῚ TOY “ΟΥ̓ΔῈΝ OPIZQ” 


197 Περὶ δὲ τοῦ “οὐδὲν ὁρίζω ταῦτα φαμέν. 
¢ + / + A \ ξ λῶ f 
ὁρίζειν εἶναι νομίζομεν οὐχὶ TO ἁπλῶς λέγειν τι, 
> \ ‘ o Ed 4 Ἀ 
ἀλλὰ τὸ πρᾶγμα ἄδηλον προφέρεσθαι μετὰ συγ- 
καταθέσεως. οὕτω γὰρ οὐδὲν ὁρίζων ὁ σκεπτικὸς 

’ὔ e / 2 λ 3 A 4 ἐξ ? \ €¢ ¢ 2} 
τάχα εὑρεθήσεται, οὐδὲ αὐτὸ τὸ “᾿ οὐδὲν ὁρίζω ᾿᾿- 
3 7 > Ὰ € +X / > 2 
οὐ γάρ ἐστι δογματικὴ ὑπόληψις, τουτέστιν ἀδήλῳ 

¢ 3 A \ 7 € , 
συγκατάθεσις, ἀλλὰ φωνὴ πάθους ἡμετέρου δηλω- 
7 Ὁ > δ ξ \ ee 3A ce ff 32 
τική. ὅταν οὖν εἴπῃ 6 σκεπτικὸς “᾿ οὐδὲν ὁρίζω, 
om fF «¢ ? \ a f ~~ ¢ \ 
τοῦτό φησιν “᾿ ἐγὼ οὕτω πέπονθα viv ὡς μηδὲν 





«ΟἹ 88 7, 10 supra. 
114 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 195-197 


phrase “ perhaps it is not” by his refusal to make 
the positive assertion that “it is.” And the same 
applies to all the other cases. 


Cuaprer XXIJT.—Or tHe Expression 
‘I susPpEND JUDGEMENT ” 


The phrase “I suspend judgement’ * we adopt in 196 
place of “I am unable to say which of the objects 
presented I ought to believe and which I ought to 
disbelieve,” indicating that the objects appear to us 
equal as regards credibility and incredibility. As to 
whether they are equal we make no positive asser- 
tion; but what we state is what appears to us in 
regard to them at the time of observation. And the 
term “suspension ’”’ is derived from the fact of the 
mind being held up or “ suspended ”’ so that it neither 
affirms nor denies anything owing to the equipollence 
of the matters in question. 


Cuaptrer XXIII.—Or tie Expression 
““T DETERMINE NOTHING ”’ 


Regarding the phrase “1 determine nothing ” this 197 
is what we say. We hold that “to determine ”’ is 
not simply to state a thing but to put forward 
something non-evident combined with assent. For 
in this sense, no doubt, it will be found that 
the Sceptic determines nothing, not even the very 
proposition “ I determine nothing ’”’; for this is not a 
dogmatic assumption, that is to say assent to some~ 
thing non-evident, but an expression indicative of our 
own mental condition. So whenever the Sceptic says 
“1 determine nothing,” what he means is “I am 
now in such a state of mind as neither to affirm 

115 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῶν ὑπὸ τὴν “ζήτησιν τήνδε πεπτωκότων τιθέναι 
δογματικῶς ἢ ἀναιρεῖν. τοῦτο δέ φησι λέγων 
τὸ ἑαυτῷ φαινόμενον περὶ τῶν προκειμένων [οὐκ] 
ἀπαγγελτικῶς, «οὐ δογματικῶς »" μετὰ πεποι- 
θήσεως ἀποφαινόμενος, ἀλλ᾽ ὃ πάσχει διηγούμενος. 


KA’.—IIEPI ΤΟΥ “ΠΑΝΤᾺ ἘΣΤῚΝ AOPIZTA” 

198 Kat ἡ ἀοριστία δὲ πάθος διανοίας ἐστί, καθ᾽ 6 
οὔτε αἴρομέν τι οὔτε τίθεμεν τῶν δογματικῶς 
ζητουμένων, τουτέστι τῶν ἀδήλων. ὅταν οὖν λέγῃ 
6 σκεπτικὸς “πάντα ἐστὶν ἀόριστα, τὸ μὲν ἔστι 
λαμβάνει ἀντὶ τοῦ φαίνεσθαι αὐτῷ, πάντα δὲ λέγει 
οὐ τὰ ὄντα ἀλλ᾽ ἅπερ διεξῆλθε τῶν παρὰ τοῖς 
δογματικοῖς ζητουμένων ἀδήλων, ἀόριστα δὲ μὴ 
προύχοντα τῶν ἀντικειμένων ἢ κοινῶς μαχομένων 

199 κατὰ πίστιν ἢ ἀπιστίαν. καὶ ὥσπερ ὃ λέγων 

“περιπατῶ ᾿ δυνάμει φησὶν “᾿ ἐγὼ περιπατῶ,᾽ 
οὕτως ὁ λέγων. ὼ πάντα ἐστὶν ἀόριστα ‘i συσση- 
μαίνει καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς τὸ ὡς πρὸς ἐμέ 7 ὡς ἐμοὶ φαί- 
νεται, ὡς εἶναι τὸ λεγόμενον τοιοῦτον “doa ἐπ- 
ῆλθον τῶν δογματικῶς ζητουμένων, τοιαῦτά μοι 
φαίνεται ὡς μηδὲν αὐτῶν τοῦ μαχομένου προύχειν 
μοι δοκεῖν κατὰ πίστιν ἢ ἀπιστίαν. 


KB’.—ITEPI ΤΟΥ ‘‘TIANTA ἘΣΤῚΝ ΑΚΑΤΑΛΉΠΤΑ" 
200 Οὕτω δὲ φερόμεθα καὶ ὅταν λέγωμεν “ πάντα 
ἐστὶν ἀκατάληπτα᾽᾽" καὶ yap τὸ πάντα ὁμοίως 
1 [οὐκ] . .. «οὐ δογματικῶς» om. et add. T. 


* For “ opposed” and “ conflicting” see § 10 above. 

> i.e. the personal pronoun “I” is potentially, or implicitly, 
yee in the ending of the Greek verb (first person 
singular). ¢ Cf. 81. 


116 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 197-200 


dogmatically nor deny any of the matters now in 
question.”” And this he says simply by way of announ- 
cing undogmatically what appears to himself regard- 
ing the matters presented, not making any confident 
declaration, but just explaining his own state of mind. 


CuHapter XXIV.—Or tur Expression 
‘Att THiIncs ARE UNDETERMINED ἢ 


Indetermination is a state of mind in which we 198 
neither deny nor affirm any of the matters which are 
subjects of dogmatic inquiry, that is to say, non- 
evident. Soe whenever the Sceptic says “ All things 
are undetermined,’ he takes the word “‘ are’ in the 
sense of “ appear to him,” and by “ all things’ he 
means not existing things but such of the non-evident 
matters investigated by the Dogmatists as he has 
examined, and by “ undetermined ᾿᾿ he means not 
superior in point of credibility or incredibility to 
things opposed, or in any way conflicting.* And just 199 
as the man who says “ (I) walk about”’® is potentially 
saying “I walk about,’ so he who says “‘ All are 
undetermined ” conveys also, as we hold, the mean- 
ing “ so far as relates to me,” or “ as appears to me,” 
so that the statement amounts to this—‘‘ All the 
matters of dogmatic inquiry which I have examined 
appear to me to be such that no one of thent is 
preferable to the one in conflict with it in respect 
of credibility or incredibility.”’ 


Cuaprer XXV.—Or tue Expression 
“Aut Turnas are NoN—APPREEHENSIBLE ”’ 


We adopt a similar attitude when we say ‘“ All 200 
things are non-apprehensible.”*¢ For we give a 


5 
117 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


3 7 \ A 3 / / ξ > 
ἐξηγούμεθα καὶ τὸ ἐμοί συνεκδεχόμεθα, ὡς εἶναι 
τὸ λεγόμενον τοιοῦτον “᾿ πάντα ὅσα ἐφώδευσα τῶν 
~ / 
δογματικῶς ζητουμένων ἀδήλων φαίνεταί μοὶ 
3 / >) “ / 3 3 ᾽ 
ἀκατάληπτα. τοῦτο δέ ἐστιν οὐ διαβεβαιουμένου 
περὶ τοῦ τὰ παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς ζητούμενα 
φύσεως εἶναι τοιαύτης ὡς εἶναι ἀκατάληπτα, ἀλλὰ 
4 ¢ ~ 7 μὴ [4 3 Lyf / 
τὸ ἑαυτοῦ πάθος ἀπαγγέλλοντος, καθ᾽ 6, φησί, 
[ἡ 7 v4 a o~ 0." 7 3 [4 
ὑπολαμβάνω ὅτι ἄχρι νῦν οὐδὲν κατέλαβον ἐκείνων 
ἐγὼ διὰ τὴν τῶν ἀντικειμένων ἰσοσθένειαν- ὅθεν 
καὶ τὰ εἰς περιτροπὴν φερόμενα πάντα ἀπάδοντα 
Ά Ἔ x a : 
εἶναι δοκεῖ μοι τῶν ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀπαγγελλομένων. 


Κα'- ΠΕΡῚ TOY “AKATAAHUTO” ΚΑΙ “Ov 
KATAAAMBANQ” 

2901 Kal ἡ “᾿ ἀκαταληπτῶ ᾿᾿ δὲ καὶ ἡ “ οὐ καταλαμ- 

/ ᾽} Ἁ 7 > / ? ‘\ f ? 

Bavw”’ φωνὴ πάθους οἰκείου ἐστὶ δηλωτική, καθ 

ὃ ἀφίσταται 6 σκεπτικὸς ὡς πρὸς τὸ παρὸν τοῦ 

τιθέναι τι τῶν ζητουμένων ἀδήλων ἢ ἀναιρεῖν, ὡς 

ἔστι δῆλον ἐκ τῶν προειρημένων ἡμῖν περὶ τῶν 
ἄλλων φωνῶν. 


KZ'.—IIEPI TOY ΠΑΝΤῚ AOPOT AOTON IZON 
ANTIKEIZOAT 
999 “Orav δὲ λέγωμεν “᾿ παντὶ λόγῳ λόγος ἴσος 
> , 23 Ἁ \ ‘4 ~ ¢ jo ¢ ~ 
ἀντίκειται, παντὶ μὲν λέγομεν TH ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν διεξ- 
Ζ / f 3 ¢ ~ 3 \ ‘ 
ωὠδευμένῳ, λόγον δέ φαμεν οὐχ ἁπλῶς ἀλλὰ τὸν 
κατασκευάζοντά τι δογματικῶς, τουτέστι περὶ 
118 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 200-202 


similar explanation of the word “‘all,’’ and we 
similarly supply the words “to me,” so that the 
meaning conveyed is this—‘‘ All the non-apparent 
matters of dogmatic inquiry which I have in- 
vestigated appear to me non-apprehensible.’’ And 
this is the utterance not of one who is positively 
asserting that the matters investigated by the Dog- 
matists are really of such a nature as to be non- 
apprehensible, but of one who is announcing his own 
state of mind, “wherein,” he says, “I conceive that up 
till now I myself have apprehended nothing owing to 
the equipollence of the opposites ; and therefore also 
nothing that is brought forward to overthrow our 
position seems to me to have any bearing on what we 
announce.” 


Cuapter XXVI.—Or rur Expressions “I am 
Non-aPPREHENSIVE ” anp ‘‘ I APPREHEND NOT ”’ 


Both the expressions “I am non-apprehensive ” 201 
and “ I apprehend not ” are indicative of a personal 
state of mind, in which the Sceptic, for the time being, 
avoids affirming or denying any non-evident matter 
of inquiry, as is obvious from what we have said above 
concerning the other expressions. 


CuapterR XXVIJ.—Or tue Purasn “ To EVERY 
ARGUMENT an Equat ARGUMENT Is OPPOSED ’ 


When we say “ To every argument an equal argu- 202 
ment is opposed,” we mean “ to every argument 7 
that has been investigated by us, and the word 
““ argument ” we use not in its simple sense, but of 
that which establishes a point dogmatically (that is to 
say with reference to what is non-evident) and estab- 


119 


203 


204 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀδήλου, καὶ οὐ πάντως τὸν ἐκ λημμάτων καὶ 
ἐπιφορᾶς ἀλλὰ τὸν ὁπωσοῦν κατασκευάζοντα. 
ἴσον δέ φαμεν κατὰ πίστιν ἢ ἀπιστίαν, τό τε 
ἀντίκειται λαμβάνομεν ἀντὶ τοῦ μάχεται κοινῶς, 
καὶ τὸ “ὡς ἐμοὶ φαίνεται συνεκδεχόμεθα. 
ὅταν οὖν εἴπω “᾿ παντὶ λόγῳ λόγος ἴσος ἀντί- 
κειται,᾽᾿ δυνάμει τοῦτό φημι “᾿ παντὶ τῷ ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ 
ἐξητασμένῳ" λόγῳ, ὃς κατασκευάζει τι δογματικῶς, 
ἕτερος λόγος κατασκευάζων τι δογματικῶς, ἴσος 
αὐτῷ κατὰ πίστιν καὶ ἀπιστίαν, ἀντικεῖσθαι φαΐ- 
veTai prot, ὡς εἶναι τὴν τοῦ λόγου προφορὰν οὐ 
δογματικὴν ἀλλ᾽ ἀνθρωπείου πάθους ἀπαγγελίαν, 
ὅ ἐστι φαινόμενον τῷ πάσχοντι. 

ροφέρονται δέ τινες καὶ οὕτω τὴν φωνήν 
“παντὶ λόγῳ λόγον ἀντικεῖσθαι τὸν ἴσον, ἀξιοῦν- 
τες παραγγελματικῶς τοῦτο “᾿παντὲ λόγῳ δογ- 
ματικῶς τι κατασκευάζοντι λόγον δογματικῶς ζη- 
τοῦντα, ἴσον κατὰ πίστιν καὶ ἀπιστίαν, μαχόμενον 
αὐτῷ ἀντιτιθῶμεν,᾽᾿ ἵνα 6 μὲν λόγος αὐτοῖς ἢ πρὸς 
τὸν σκεπτικόν, χρῶνται δὲ ἀπαρεμφάτῳ ἀντὶ προσ- 
τακτικοῦ, τῷ ἀντικεῖσθαι ἀντὶ τοῦ ἀντιτιθῶμεν. 
παραγγέλλουσι δὲ τοῦτο τῷ σκεπτικῷ, μή πως 
ὑπὸ τοῦ δογματικοῦ παρακρουσθεὶς ἀπείπῃ τὴν 
περὶ αὐτοὺς" ζήτησιν, καὶ τῆς φαινομένης αὐτοῖς 
ἀταραξίας, ἣν νομίζουσι παρυφίστασθαι τῇ περὶ 
πάντων ἐποχῇ, καθὼς ἔμπροσθεν ὑπεμνήσαμεν, 
σφαλῇ προπετευσάμενος. 


1 ἐξητασμένῳ Heintz: ἐξητημένω ML: δητουμένῳ Bekk. 
2 αὐτοὺς cj. Heintz: αὐτοῦ Bekk.: αὐτῆς EAB. 





α 4.e. by the use of syllogisms. 
> As with Protagoras, who seems to have originated it. 


120 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 202-205 


lishes it by any method, and not necessarily by means 
of premisses and a conclusion. We say “ equal 
with reference to credibility or incredibility, and we 
employ the word “ opposed ”’ in the general sense of 
“ conflicting’; and we supply therewith in thought 
the phrase ‘“‘ as appears to me.”’ So whenever I say 203 
“ΤῸ every argument an equal argument is opposed,” 
what I am virtually saying is “To every argument 
investigated by me which establishes a point dogmati- 
cally, it seems to me there is opposed another argu- 
ment, establishing a point dogmatically, which is 
equal to the first in respect of credibility and in- 
credibility ’’’; so that the utterance of the phrase is 
not a piece of dogmatism, but the announcement of 
a human state of mind which is apparent to the person 
experiencing it. 

But some also utter the expression in the form 204 
“To every argument an equal argument is to be 
opposed,” 5 intending to give the injunction “ To 
every argument which establishes a point dogmatically 
let us oppose an argument which investigates dog- 
matically, equal to the former in respect of credibility 
and incredibility, and conflicting therewith’; for 
they mean their words to be addressed to the Sceptic, 
although they use the infinitive form “ to be opposed ” 
instead of the imperative ‘‘ let us oppose.” And they 205 
address this injunction to the Sceptic lest haply, 
through being misled by the Dogmatist, he may give 
up the Sceptic search, and through precipitancy 
miss the “ quietude’’? approved by the Sceptics, 
which they—as we said above ‘—believe to be de- 
pendent on universal suspension of judgement. 


“ The infinite is here used in a jussive sense. 
4 ΟἹ §§ 10, 25 ἔξ, . Of. § 29. 


12] 


206 


207 


208 


209 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


KH’.—ITAPAMHIMATA ὙΠῈΡ TON SKEMTIKON ΦΩΝΩΝ 


Περὶ τοσούτων ἀρκέσει τῶν φωνῶν ws ἐν tro- 
τυπώσει διεξελθεῖν, ἄλλως τε καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐκ τῶν 
νῦν ἡμῖν εἰρημένων δυνατόν ἐστι λέγειν καὶ περὶ 
τῶν παραλελειμμένων. περὶ πασῶν γὰρ τῶν σκεπ- 
τικῶν φωνῶν ἐκεῖνο χρὴ προειληφέναι ὅτι περὶ 
τοῦ ἀληθεῖς αὐτὰς εἶναι πάντως οὐ διαβεβαιού- 
μεθα, ὅπου γε καὶ ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν αὐτὰς ἀναιρεῖσθαι 
λέγομεν δύνασθαι, συμπεριγραφομένας ἐκείνοις 
περὶ ὧν λέγονται, καθάπερ τὰ καθαρτικὰ τῶν φαρ- 
μάκων οὐ μόνον τοὺς χυμοὺς ὑπεξαιρεῖ τοῦ σώ- 
ματος ἀλλὰ καὶ ἑαυτὰ τοῖς χυμοῖς συνεξάγει. 
φαμὲν δὲ καὶ ὡς οὐ κυρίως δηλοῦντες τὰ πράγ- 
ματα, ἐφ᾽ ὧν παραλαμβάνονται, τίθεμεν αὐτάς, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀδιαφόρως καὶ εἰ βούλονται καταχρηστικῶς" 
οὔτε γὰρ πρέπει τῷ σκεπτικῷ φωνομαχεῖν, ἄλλως 
τε ἡμῖν συνεργεῖ τὸ μηδὲ ταύτας τὰς φωνὰς 
εἰλικρινῶς σημαίνειν λέγεσθαι, ἀλλὰ πρός τι καὶ 
πρὸς τοὺς σκεπτικούς. πρὸς τούτοις κἀκείνου δεῖ 
μεμνῆσθαι ὅτι οὐ περὶ πάντων. τῶν πραγμάτων 
καθόλου φαμὲν αὐτάς, ἀλλὰ περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων καὶ 
τῶν δογματικῶς ζητουμένων, καὶ ὅτι τὸ φαινό- 
μενον ἡμῖν φαμὲν καὶ οὐχὶ διαβεβαιωτικῶς περὶ 
τῆς φύσεως τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων ἀποφαινόμεθα" 
ἐκ γὰρ τούτων πᾶν σόφισμα πρὸς φωνὴν ἐνεχθὲν 
σκεπτικὴν οἴομαι δύνασθαι διατρέπεσ αὐ. 

Ἐπεὶ δὲ τὴν ἔννοιαν καὶ τὰ μέρη καὶ τὸ κρι- 
τήριον καὶ τὸ τέλος, ἔτι. δὲ τοὺς τρόπους τῆς 
ἐποχῆς ἐφοδεύσαντες, καὶ περὶ τῶν σκεπτικῶν 

« Cf. § 195 supra. 


δ Suggesting that such attacks must involve the fallacy 
of ignoratio elenchi. 


122 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 206-209 


Cuapter XXVIII.—Suppirementary Notes on 
THe Scerptic EXPRESSIONS 


In a preliminary outline it will be sufficient to have 206 
explained the expressions now set forth, especially 
since it is possible to explain the rest by deductions 
from the foregoing. For, in regard to all the Sceptic 
expressions, we must grasp first the fact that we make 
no positive assertion respecting their absolute truth, 
since we say that they may possibly be confuted by 
themselves, seeing that they themselves are included 
in the things to which their doubt applies, just as 
aperient drugs do not merely eliminate the humours 
from the body, but also expel themselves along with 
the humours. And we also say that we employ them 207 
not by way of authoritatively explaining the things 
with reference to which we adopt them, but without 
precision and, if you like, loosely ; for it does not 
become the Sceptic to wrangle over expressions,* and 
besides it is to our advantage that even to these ex- 
pressions no absolute significance should be ascribed, 
but one that is relative and relative to the Sceptics. 
Besides this we must also remember that we do not 208 
employ them universally about all things, but about 
those which are non-evident and are objects of dog- 
matic inquiry ; and that we state what appears to us 
and do not make any positive declarations as to the 
real nature of external objects ; for I think that, as 
a result of this, every sophism ὃ directed against a 
Sceptic expression can be refuted. 

And now that we have reviewed the idea or purpose 209 
of Scepticism and its divisions, and the criterion and 
the end, and the modes, too, of suspension, and have 
discussed the Sceptic expressions, and have thus made 


123 


210 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


φωνῶν εἰπόντες, τὸν χαρακτῆρα τῆς σκέψεως 
ἐμπεφανίκαμεν, ἀκόλουθον ἡγούμεθα εἶναι καὶ τῶν 
παρακειμένων αὐτῇ φιλοσοφιῶν τὴν πρὸς αὐτὴν 
διάκρισιν συντόμως ἐπελθεῖν, ἵνα σαφέστερον τὴν 
ἐφεκτικὴν ἀγωγὴν κατανοήσωμεν. ἀρξώμεθα δὲ 
ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ἡρακλειτείου φιλοσοφίας. 


KO’,.—OTI ΔΙΑΦΈΡΕΙ H ZKENTIKH ATOTH ΤῊΣ 
HPAKAEITEIOY ΦΙΛΟΣΟΦΊΑΣ 


Ὅτι μὲν οὖν αὕτη διαφέρει τῆς ἡμετέρας ἀγωγῆς, 
πρόδηλον. ὁ μὲν γὰρ Ἡράκλειτος περὶ πολλῶν 
ἀδήλων ἀποφαίνεται δογματικῶς, ἡμεῖς δ᾽ οὐχί, 
καθάπερ εἴρηται. ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ περὶ τὸν Αἰνησίδημον 
ἔλεγον ὁδὸν εἶναι τὴν σκεπτικὴν ἀγωγὴν ἐπὶ τὴν 
ρακλείτειον φιλοσοφίαν, διότι προηγεῖται τοῦ 
τἀναντία περὶ τὸ αὐτὸ ὑπάρχειν τὸ τἀναντία περὶ 
τὸ αὐτὸ φαίνεσθαι, καὶ οἱ μὲν σκεπτικοὶ φαίνεσθαι 
λέγουσι τὰ ἐναντία περὶ τὸ αὐτό, οὗ δὲ Ἥρα- 
κλείτειοι ἀπὸ τούτου καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ ὑπάρχειν αὐτὰ 
μετέρχονται, φαμὲν πρὸς τούτους ὅτι τὸ τὰ ἐναντία 
περὶ τὸ αὐτὸ φαίνεσθαι οὐ δόγμα ἐστὶ τῶν σκετ- 
τικῶν ἀλλὰ πρᾶγμα οὐ μόνον τοῖς σκεπτικοῖς ἀλλὰ 
καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις φιλοσόφοις καὶ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις 
ὑποπῖπτον" οὐδεὶς γοῦν τολμήσαι ἂν εἰπεῖν ὅτι τὸ 
μέλι οὐ γλυκάζει τοὺς ὑγιαίνοντας ἢ ὅτι τοὺς 


ππαπηπποσσσο 





* For Heracleitus see Introd. p. viii; cf. ii. 59,63. For 
Aenesidemus see Introd. pp. xxxvii ff. 

δ i.e. the Sceptic view that the same thing apparently 
possesses opposite attributes or qualities is regarded as a 
step on the road to the Heracleitean view that it really 
possesses such qualities. But, as Sextus proceeds to argue, 


124 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 209-211 


clear the character of Scepticism, our next task is, 
we suppose, to explain briefly the distinction which 
exists between it and the philosophic systems which 
lie next to it, in order that we may more clearly 
understand the ‘“‘suspensive’”’ Way of thought. Let 
us begin with the Heracleitean philosophy. 


Cuaprer XXIX.—Tuat tue Scepric Way or 
THOUGHT DIFFERS FROM THE HrRACLEITEAN 
PHILOSOPHY 


Now that this latter differs from our Way of thought 210 
is plain at’once; for Heracleitus * makes dogmatic 
statements about many non-evident things, whereas 
we, as has been said, do not. It is true that Aenesi- 
demus and his followers used to say that the Sceptic 
Way is a road leading up to the Heracleitean philo- 
sophy, since to hold that the same thing is the subject 
of opposite appearances is a preliminary to holding 
that it is the subject of opposite realities, and while 
the Sceptics say that the same thing is the subject 
of opposite appearances, the Heracleiteans go on from 
this to assert their reality.2 But in reply to them we 
declare that the view about the same thing having 
opposite appearances is not a dogma of the Scepties 
but a fact which is experienced not by the Sceptics 
alone but also by the rest of philosophers and by 
all mankind ; for certainly no one would venture to 211 
say that honey ὁ does not taste sweet to people in 
sound health or that it does not taste bitter to those 


the ascription of apparently contradictory attributes to a 
thing is not peculiar to the Sceptics but common to all men, 
so that all others might equally well be regarded as Hera- 
cleiteans in the making. For the opposition of “ appear- 
ances” ef. §§ 32, 91 ff., 101 ff. ¢ Cf. § 101 supra. 


125 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἰκτερικοὺς ov πικράζει, ὥστε ἀπὸ κοινῆς τῶν ἂν- 
θρώπων προλήψεως ἄρχονται οἱ Ἡρακλείτειοι, 
καθάπερ, καὶ ἡμεῖς, ἴσως δὲ καὶ at ἄλλαι φιλοσοφίαι. 
διόπερ εἰ μὲν ἀπό Twos τῶν σκεπτικῶς λεγομένων 
ἐλάμβανον τὸ τἀναντία περὶ τὸ αὐτὸ ὑποκεῖσθαι, 
οἷον τοῦ “ πάντα ἐστὶν ἀκατάληπτα᾽ ἢ τοῦ 
“οὐδὲν δρίζω ᾽᾿ ἢ τινος τῶν παραπλησίων, ἴσως 
ἂν συνῆγον ὃ λέγουσιν: ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀρχὰς ἔχουσιν οὐ 

; ec oA > \ \ A a 7 \ 
μόνον ἡμῖν ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις φιλοσόφοις καὶ 
τῷ βίῳ ὑποπιπτούσας, τί μᾶλλον τὴν ἡμετέραν 
ἀγωγὴν ἢ ἑκάστην τῶν ἄλλων φιλοσοφιῶν ἢ καὶ 
τὸν βίον ὁδὸν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἡρακλείτειον φιλοσοφίαν 
εἶναι λέγοι τις ἄν, ἐπειδὴ πάντες κοιναῖς ὕλαις 
κεχρήμεθα; 

“Μήποτε δὲ οὐ μόνον οὐ συνεργεῖ πρὸς τὴν γνῶσιν 
τῆς Ἡρακλειτείου φιλοσοφίας ἡ σκεπτικὴ ἀγωγή, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀποσυνεργεῖ, εἴγε ὁ σκεπτικὸς πάντα τὰ 
ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἡρακλείτου δογματιζόμενα ὡς προπετῶς 
λεγόμενα διαβάλλει, ἐναντιούμενος μὲν τῇ ἐκπυ- 
pacer ἐναντιούμενος δὲ τῷ τὰ ἐναντία περὶ τὸ 
αὐτὸ ὑπάρχειν, καὶ ἐπὶ παντὸς δόγματος τοῦ “Hpa- 
κλείτου τὴν μὲν δογματικὴν προπέτειαν διασύρων, 
τὸ δὲ “‘ οὐ καταλαμβάνω᾽ ᾿ καὶ TO“ οὐδὲν ὁρίξω ᾿ 
ἐπιφθεγγόμενος, ὡς ἔφην ἔμπροσθεν' ὁ ὅπερ μάχεται 
τοῖς Ἥρακ εὐτείοις. ἄτοπον δέ ἐστι τὸ τὴν μαχο- 
μένην ἀγωγὴν ὁδὸν εἶναι λέγειν τῆς αἱρέσεως 
ἐκείνης ἣ ἢ μάχεται: ἄτοπον ἄρα τὸ τὴν σκεπτικὴν 
ἀγωγὴν ἐπὶ τὴν ᾿Ἡρακλείτειον φιλοσοφίαν ὁδὸν 
εἶναι λέγειν. 





α 2,6. general human experience and observation, derived 
from sense-impressions. 


126 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 211-212 


suffering from jaundice; so thatthe Heracleiteans start 
from the general preconception of mankind, just as 
we also do and probably all the other philosophies. 
Consequently, if they had derived their theory that 
the same thing is the subject of opposite realities 
from one of the Sceptic formulae, such as “ All things 
are non-apprehensible,” or “1 determine nothing,”’ 
or some similar expression, probably they would have 
reached the conclusion they assert; but since their 
starting-points are impressions experienced not by 
us only but by all the other philosophers and by 
ordinary people, why should anyone declare that our 
Way of thoughtisaroad to the Heracleitean philosophy 
any more than any of the other philosophies or even 
than the ordinary view, since we all make use of the 
same common material 4 ? 

Rather it is the case that the Sceptic Way so far 212 
from being anaid to the knowledge of the Heracleitean 
philosophy is actually an obstacle thereto, seeing that 
the Sceptic decries all the dogmatic statements of 
Heracleitus as rash utterances, contradicting his 
“ Eepyrosis,”’ ® and contradicting his view that the 
same thing is the subject of opposite realities, and in 
respect of every dogma of Heracleitus scoffing at his 
dogmatic precipitancy, and constantly repeating, as 
I said before, his own “1 apprehend not” and “I 
determine nothing,” which are in conflict with the 
Heracleiteans. Now it is absurd to say that a con- 
flicting Way is a road to the system with which it is in 
conflict ; therefore it is absurd to say that the Sceptic 


Way is aroad leading to the Heracleitean philosophy. 


> i.e. “ world-conflagration,’’ by which all things are 
resolved into the primal Fire. 


127 


218 


2 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


A’.—TINI ATA®EPEI] H ZKENTIKH ATOrH ΤῊΣ 
AHMOKPITEIOY ΦΙΛΟΣΟΦΊΑΣ 


᾿Αλλὰ καὶ ἡ Δημοκρίτειος φιλοσοφία λέγεται 
κοινωνίαν ἔχειν πρὸς τὴν σκέψιν, ἐπεὶ δοκεῖ τῇ 
αὐτῇ ὕλῃ ἡμῖν κεχρῆσθαι" ἀπὸ γὰρ τοῦ τοῖς μὲν 
γλυκὺ φαίνεσθαι τὸ μέλι τοῖς δὲ πικρὸν τὸν Δημό- 
Kperov ἐπιλογίζεσθαί φασι τὸ μήτε γλυκὺ αὐτὸ 
εἶναι μήτε πικρόν, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἐπιφθέγγεσθαι 
τὴν “᾿οὐ “μᾶλλον ᾿ φωνὴν σκεπτικὴν οὖσαν. δια- 
φόρως μέντοι χρῶνται τῇ οὐ μᾶλλον ”’ φωνῇ οἵ 
τε σκεπτικοὶ καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ Δημοκρίτου" ἐκεῖνοι 
μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ τοῦ μηδέτερον εἶναι τάττουσι τὴν 
φωνήν, ἡμεῖς δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ ἀγνοεῖν πότερον ἀμφότερα 


μ ᾽ / / 2 ΄σ΄- / v ‘ 
214 ἢ οὐθέτερόν τι ἔστι τῶν φαινομένων. ὥστε καὶ 


215 


κατὰ τοῦτο μὲν διαφέρομεν, προδηλοτάτη δὲ 
γίνεται ἡ διάκρισις ὅ ὅταν ὁ Δημόκριτος λέγῃ © ἐτεῇ 
δὲ ἄτομα καὶ κενόν᾽᾽" ἐτεῇ μὲν γὰρ λέγει ἀντὶ 
τοῦ ἀληθείᾳ: κατ᾽ ἀλήθειαν δὲ ὑφεστάναι λέγων 
τάς τε ἀτόμους καὶ τὸ κενὸν ὅτι διενήνοχεν ἡμῶν, 
εἰ καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς ἀνωμαλίας τῶν φαινομένων ἄρ- 
χεται, περιττόν, οἶμαι, λέγειν. 


AA',—TINI ΔΙΑΦΈΡΕΙ ΤῊΣ ΚΥΡΗΝΑΙΚῊΣ H ΣΚΈΨΙΣ 


Φασὶ δέ τινες ὅτι ἡ Κυρηναϊκὴ a ἀγωγὴ ἡ αὐτή ἐστι 
τῇ σκέψει, ἐπειδὴ κἀκείνη τὰ πά ἢ μόνα φησὶ κατα- 
λαμβάνεσθαι. : διαφέρει δὲ αὐτῆς, ἐπειδὴ ἐκείνη 
μὲν τὴν ἡδονὴν καὶ τὴν λείαν τῆς σαρκὸς κίνησιν 
τέλος εἶναι λέγει, ἡμεῖς δὲ τὴν ἀταραξίαν, 7 ἐναν- 
τιοῦται τὸ κατ᾽ ἐκείνους τέλος" καὶ γὰρ παρούσης 


1 καταλαμβάνεσθαι Pohlenz, Mutsch.: καταλαμβάνειν Mss., 
Bekk 


128 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 213-215 


Cuaprer XXX.—Wuerein THE Sceptic Way 
DIFFERS FROM THE DxeMocRITEAN PHILosopHy 


But it is also said that the Democritean 5 philo- 213 
sophy has something in common with Scepticism, 
since it seems to use the same material as we; for 
from the fact that honey appears sweet to some and 
bitter to others, Democritus, as they say, infers that 
it really is neither sweet nor bitter, and pronounces 
in consequence the formula “Not more,’ which is 
a Sceptic formula. The Sceptics, however, and the 
School of Democritus employ the expression “ Not 
more” in different ways; for while they use it to 
express the unreality of either alternative, we express 
by it our ignorance as to whether both or neither of 
the appearances is real. So that in this respect 214 
also we differ, and our difference becomes specially 
evident when Democritus says “ But in verity atoms 
and void” (for he says “In verity ” in place of “ In 
truth ’’); and that he differs from us when he says 
that the atoms and the void are in truth subsistent, 
although he starts out from the incongruity of appear- 
ances, it is superfluous, I think, to state. 


CHAPTER XX XI.—WHuHEREIN SCEPTICISM DIFFERS 
FROM CYRENAICISM 


Some assert that the Cyrenaic ὃ doctrine is identical 215 
with Scepticism since it too affirms that only mental 
states are apprehended. But it differs from Scepticism 
inasmuch as it says that the End is pleasure and the 
smooth motion of the flesh, whereas we say it is 
“ quietude,”’ which is the opposite of their End; for 

@ See Introd. pp. xi ff. 
® See Introd. p. xvii; cf. Adv. Log. i. 191 ff. 
VOL. I K 129 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῆς ἡδονῆς καὶ μὴ παρούσης ταραχὰς ὑπομένει 
ὁ διαβεβαιούμενος τέλος εἶναι τὴν ἡδονήν, ὡς ἐν 
τῷ περὶ τοῦ τέλους ἐπελογισάμην. εἶτα ἡμεῖς 
μὲν ἐπέχομεν ὅσον ἐπὶ τῷ λόγῳ περὶ τῶν ἐκτὸς 
e / ξ \ oe \ 3 4 7 
ὑποκειμένων, οἱ δὲ ζυρηναϊκοὶ ἀποφαίνονται φύσιν 
αὐτὰ ἔχειν ἀκατάληπτον. 


AB’.—TINI ATA®SEPEI ΤῊΣ TTPOTATOPHIOY ATOUVHE 
H ΣΚΈΨΙΣ 


216 Καὶ 6 Πρωταγόρας δὲ βούλεται πάντων χρη- 
μάτων εἶναι μέτρον τὸν ἄνθρωπον, τῶν μὲν ὄντων 
ὡς ἔστιν, τῶν δὲ οὐκ ὄντων ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν, μέτρον 
μὲν λέγων τὸ κρυτήριον, χρημάτων δὲ τῶν πραγ- 
μάτων, ὡς δυνάμει φάσκειν πάντων πραγμάτων 
κριτήριον εἶναι τὸν ἄνθρωπον, τῶν “μὲν ὄντων ὡς 
ἔστιν, τῶν δὲ οὐκ ὄντων ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν. καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο τίθησι τὰ φαινόμενα ἑκάστῳ μόνα, καὶ οὕτως 

217 εἰσάγει τὸ πρός τι. διὸ καὶ δοκεῖ κοινωνίαν ἔχειν 
πρὸς τοὺς Πυρρωνείους. διαφέρει δὲ αὐτῶν, καὶ 
εἰσόμεθα τὴν διαφοράν, ἐξαπλώσαντες συμμέτρως 
τὸ δοκοῦν τῷ Πρωταγόρᾳ. 

Φησὶν οὖν ὁ ἀνὴρ τὴν ὕλην ῥευστὴν εἶναι, ῥεού- 
σης δὲ αὐτῆς συνεχῶς προσθέσεις ἀντὶ τῶν ἀπο- 
φορήσεων γίγνεσθαι καὶ τὰς αἰσθήσεις μετακοσ- 
μεῖσθαί τε καὶ ἀλλοιοῦσθαι παρά τε ἡλικίας καὶ 

918 παρὰ τὰς ἄλλας κατασκευὰς τῶν σωμάτων. λέγει 
δὲ καὶ τοὺς λόγους πάντων τῶν φαινομένων ὑπο- 
κεῖσθαι ἐν τῇ ὕλῃ, ὡς δύνασθαι τὴν ὕλην ὅσον 
ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῇ πάντα εἶναι ὅσα πᾶσι φαίνεται. τοὺς 


* §§ 25 ff. supra. 
130 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 215-218 


whether pleasure be present or not present the man 
who positively affirms pleasure to be the End under- 
goes perturbations, as I have argued in my chapter 
“ Of the End.’’* Further, whereas we suspend 
judgement, so far as regards the essence of external 
objects, the Cyrenaics declare that those objects 
possess a real nature which is inapprehensible. 


CuapTer XXXII.—Wuerein ScepricisM DIFFERS 
FROM THE PRoTAGOREAN DoctTrRINE 


Protagoras ὃ also holds that “‘ Man is the measure 216 


of all things, of existing things that they exist, and of 
non-existing things that they exist not’’; and by 
“ measure ”’ he means the criterion, and by “‘ things ” 
the objects, so that he is virtually asserting that 
“ Man is the criterion of all objects, of those which 
exist that they exist, and of those which exist not 
that they exist not.” And consequently he posits only 
what appears to each individual, and thus he intro- 


duces relativity. And for this reason he seems also 217 


to have something in common with the Pyrrhoneans. 
Yet he differs from them, and we shall perceive the 
difference when we have adequately explained the 
views of Protagoras. 

What he states then is this—that matter is in flux, 
and as it flows additions are made continuously in the 
place of the effluxions, and the senses are transformed 
and altered according to the times of life and to all 
the other conditions of the bodies. He says also 
that the “‘ reasons ”’ of all the appearances subsist in 
matter, so that matter, so far as depends on itself, is 
capable of being all those things which appear to 

> See Introd. Ὁ. xiv. In his physical theory Protagoras 
follows Heracleitus. 

131 


9 


ed 


18 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δὲ ἀνθρώπους ἄλλοτε ἄλλων ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι παρὰ 
τὰς διαφόρους αὐτῶν διαθέσεις" τὸν μὲν γὰρ κατὰ 
φύσιν ἔχοντα ἐκεῖνα τῶν ἐν τῇ ὕλῃ καταλαμβάνειν 
ἃ τοῖς κατὰ φύσιν ἐ ἔχουσι φαίνεσθαι δύναται, τοὺς 
219 δὲ παρὰ φύσιν ἃ τοῖς παρὰ φύσιν. καὶ ἤδη παρὰ 
τὰς ἡλικίας καὶ κατὰ τὸ ὑπνοῦν ἢ ἐγρηγορέναι καὶ 
καθ᾽ ἕκαστον εἶδος τῶν διαθέσεων ὃ αὐτὸς λόγος. 
γίνεται τοίνυν κατ᾽ αὐτὸν τῶν ὄντων κριτήριον ὃ 
ἄνθρωπος" πάντα γὰρ τὰ φαινόμενα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις 
καὶ ἔστιν, τὰ δὲ μηδενὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων φαινόμενα 
οὐδὲ ἔστιν. 
᾿Ὁρῶμεν οὖν ὅτι καὶ περὶ τοῦ τὴν ὕλην ῥευστὴν 
εἶναι καὶ περὶ τοῦ τοὺς λόγους τῶν φαινομένων 
πάντων ἐν αὐτῇ ὑποκεῖσθαι δογματίζει, ἀδήλων 
ὄντων καὶ ἡμῖν ἐφεκτῶν. 


AI’.—TINI AIA®EPEI ΤῊΣ AKAAHMAIKHS 
ΦΙΛΟΣΟΦΊΑΣ Ἡ ZKEVIZ 


290 Φασὶ μέντοι τινὲς ὅτι ἡ ᾿Ακαδημαϊκὴ φιλοσοφία 
ἡ αὐτή ἐστι τῇ σκέψει: διόπερ ἀκόλουθον ἂν εἴη 
καὶ περὶ τούτου διεξελθεῖν. 

᾿Ακαδήμιαι δὲ “γεγόνασιν, ὡς «οὗ μὲν πλείους» 
φασί, [πλείους μὲν ἢ" τρεῖς, μία μὲν καὶ ἀρχαιο- 
τάτη ἡ τῶν περὶ Πλάτωνα, δευτέρα δὲ καὶ μέση 
ἡ τῶν περὶ ᾿Αρκεσίλαον τὸν ἀκουστὴν Todguwvos, 
τρίτη δὲ καὶ νέα ἡ τῶν περὶ Καρνεάδην καὶ 
Κλειτόμαχον" ἔνιοι δὲ καὶ τετάρτην προστιθέασι 
τῶν περὶ Φίλωνα καὶ Χαρμίδαν, τινὲς δὲ καὶ 

1 add. et om. 6 conj. Bekk. 





@ ζ,6.. in brief, all “ appearances ”’ (sensations, opinions, 
etc.) are due to inter-action between the matter of the 


132 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 218--220 


all.¢ And men, he says, apprehend different things at 
different times owing to their differing dispositions ; 
for he who is in a natural state apprehends those 
things subsisting in matter which are able to appear 
to those in a natural state, and those who are in a non- 
natural state the things which can appear to those in 
a non-natural state. Moreover, precisely the same 219 
account applies to the variations due to age, and to 
the sleeping or waking state, and to each several kind 
of condition. Thus, according to him, Man becomes 
the criterion of real existences ; for all things that 
appear to men also exist, and things that appear to 
no man have no existence either. 

We see, then, that he dogmatizes about the fluidity 
of matter and also about the subsistence therein of 
the “reasons ” of all appearances, these being non- 
evident matters about which we suspend judgement. 


CuarTer XXXIII.—Wuerein Scepticism DIFFERS 
FROM THE AcaDEMIC PurLosopry 


Some indeed say that the Academic philosophy ὃ is 220 
identical with Scepticism ; consequently it shall be 
our next task to discuss this statement. 

According to most people there have been three 
Academies—the first and most ancient that of Plato 
and his School, the second or middle Academy that 
of Arcesilaus, the pupil of Polemo, and his School, the 
third or New Academy that of the School of Carneades 
and Cleitomachus. Some, however, add as a fourth 
that of the School of Philo and Charmidas; and some 
percipient subject and the matter of the objective world, 
both of which are in constant flux. Thus “ matter” is 


potentially the “‘ phenomenon.” 
® See Introd. pp. xxxii f. 


133 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πέμπτην καταλέγουσι τὴν τῶν περὶ τὸν ᾿Αντίοχον. 
221 ἀρξάμενοι τοίνυν ἀπὸ τῆς ἀρχαίας ἴδωμεν τὴν 
διαφορὰν τῶν εἰρημένων φιλοσοφιῶν. 

Τὸν Πλάτωνα οὖν οἱ μὲν δογματικὸν ἔφασαν 
εἶναι, οἱ δὲ ἀπορητικόν, ot δὲ κατὰ μέν τι ἄπο- 
ρητικὸν κατὰ δέ τι δογματικόν: ἐν μὲν γὰρ τοῖς 
γυμναστικοῖς [pact] λόγοις, ἔνθα ὃ Σωκράτης 
εἰσάγεται ἤτοι παίζων πρός τινας ἢ ἀγωνιζόμενος 
πρὸς σοφιστάς, γυμναστικόν. τε καὶ ἀπορητικόν 
φασιν ἔχειν αὐτὸν χαρακτῆρα, δογματικὸν δὲ 
ἔνθα σπουδάζων ἀποφαίνεται ἤτοι διὰ Σωκράτους 

222 7) Τιμαίου ἤ τινος τῶν τοιούτων. περὶ μὲν οὖν 
τῶν δογματικὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι λεγόντων, ἣ ἢ κατὰ μέν 
ογματικὸν κατὰ δέ τι ᾿ἀπορητικόν, περισσὸν ἂν 
εἴη λέγειν νῦν" αὐτοὶ γὰρ ὁμολογοῦσι τὴν πρὸς 
ἡμᾶς διαφοράν' περὶ δὲ τοῦ εἰ ἔστιν εἰλικρινῶς 
σκεπτικὸς πλατύτερον μὲν ἐν τοῖς ὑπομνήμασι 
διαλαμβάνομεν, νῦν δὲ ὡς ἐν ὑποτυπώσει λέγομεν 
κατὰ Μηνόδοτον καὶ Αἰνησίδημον (οὗτοι γὰρ 
μάλιστα ταύτης προέστησαν τῆς στάσεως) ὅτι 
ὅταν ὁ Πλάτων ἀποφαίνηται περὶ ἰδεῶν ἢ περὶ 
τοῦ πρόνοιαν εἶναι ἢ περὶ τοῦ τὸν ἐνάρετον βίον 
αἱρετώτερον εἶναι τοῦ μετὰ κακιῶν, εἴτε ὡς ὑπ- 
ἄρχουσι τούτοις συγκατατίθεται, δογματίζει, εἴτε 
ὡς πιθανωτέροις προστίθεται, ἐπεὶ προκρίνει τι 
κατὰ πίστιν ἢ ἀπιστίαν, ἐκπέφευγε τὸν σκεπτικὸν 
χαρακτῆρα: ὡς γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο ἡμῖν ἐστὶν ἀλλό- 
τριον, ἐκ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν εἰρημένων πρόδηλον. 


1 λέγομεν T, cj. Bekk.: διαλαμβάνομεν mss. 





α i.e. those which aim at training the mind—subdivided 
(in Diog. Laert. iii. 49 ff.) into “ maeeutic” (“‘akin to the 


134 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 221-222 


even count the School of Antiochus as a fifth. Be- 221 
ginning, then, with the Old Academy let us consider 
how the philosophies mentioned differ <from ours>. 

Plato has been described by some as “ dogmatic,” by. 
others as “‘ dubitative,’’ and by others again as partly 
dogmatic and partly dubitative. For in his exercita- 
tory discourses,? where Socrates is introduced either 
as talking playfully with his auditors or as arguing 
against sophists, he shows, they say, an exercitatory 
and dubitative character ; but a dogmatic character 
when he is speaking seriously by the mouth either 
of Socrates or of Timaeus or of some similar personage. 
Now as regards those who describe him as a dogmatist, 299 
or as partly dogmatic and partly dubitative, it would 
be superfluous to say anything now; for they them- 
selves acknowledge his difference from us. But the 
question whether Plato is a genuine Sceptic is one 
which we discuss more fully in our ‘‘ Commentaries”’®; 
but now, in agreement with Menodotus ¢ and Aenesi- 
demus (these being the chief champions of this view), 
we declare in brief that when Plato makes state- 
ments about Ideas or about the reality of Providence 
or about the virtuous life being preferable to the 
vicious, he is dogmatizing if he is assenting to these as 
actual truths, while if he is accepting them as more 
probable than not, since thereby he gives a preference 
to one thing over another in point of probability or 
improbability, he throws off the character of a Sceptic ; 
for that such an attitude is foreign to us is quite plain 
from what has been said above. 
midwife’s art” or ‘‘ mental obstetrics ’’) and “‘ peirastic”’ (or 
“tentative,” δι. Lysis, Laches, Huthyphro, Meno). 

᾿ τ the five books Against the Dogmatists ; see Introd. 

- Xi. 
τ See Introd. p. xl. 
135 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


223 He δέ τινα Kat σκεπτικῶς προφέρεται, ὅταν, ὡς 
φασί, γυμνάζηται, οὐ παρὰ τοῦτο ἔσται σκεπτικός" 
6 γὰρ περὶ ἑνὸς δογματίζων, ἢ προκρίνων φαν- 

/ 
τασίαν φαντασίας ὅλως κατὰ πίστιν ἢ ἀπιστίαν 
«ἢ ἀποφαινόμενος »" περί τινος τῶν ἀδήλων, τοῦ 
ογματικοῦ γίνεται χαρακτῆρος, ὡς “δηλοῖ καὶ ὁ 
Τίμων διὰ τῶν περὶ Ξενοφάνους αὐτῷ λεγομένων. 

294 ἐν πολλοῖς γὰρ αὐτὸν ἐπαινέσας [τὸν Ξενοφάνην], 
ὡς καὶ τοὺς σίλλους αὐτῷ ἀναθεῖναι, ἐποίησεν 
αὐτὸν ὀδυρόμενον καὶ λέγοντα 

¢ \ 3 \ ,, lo / 9 ~ 
ὡς καὶ ἐγὼν ὄφελον πυκινοῦ νόου ἀντιβολῆσαι 
ἀμφοτερόβλεπτος" δολίῃ δ᾽ ὁδῷ ἐξαπατήθην 
πρεσ ὑγενὴς ἔτ᾽ ἐὼν καὶ ἀμενθήριστος" ἁπάσης 
σκεπτοσύνης. ὅππῃ γὰρ ἐμὸν νόον εἰρύσαιμι, 
εἰς ἕν ταὐτό τε πᾶν ἀνελύετο" πᾶν δ᾽ ἐὸν αἰεὶ 
πάντῃ ἀνελκόμενον μίαν εἰς φύσιν ἵσταθ᾽ ὁμοίην. 
ὃ Α lan ~ \ ¢ / > \ λέ \ ’ 
ta τοῦτο γοῦν καὶ ὑπάτυφον αὐτὸν λέγει, Kat οὐ 
/ + 3 @ \ 
τέλειον ἄτυφον, δι᾿ ὧν φησὶ 
ῬΦᾺ / ¢ / ς / 2 / 
Ξεινοφάνης ὑπάτυφος, ὁμηραπάτης ἐπισκώπτης, 
/ 
ἐκτὸς am ἀνθρώπων θεὸν ἐπλάσατ᾽ ἶσον ἁπάντῃ, 
«ἀτρεμῆ >* arene, gah ἠὲ νόημα. 
ὑπάτυφον μὲν yap εἶπε τὸν κατά τι ἄτυφον, ὁμηρ- 
απάτης δὲ ἐπισκώπτην, ἐπεὶ τὴν παρ᾽ Ὁμήρῳ 
“ 

225 ἀπάτην διέσυρεν. ἐδογμάτιζε δὲ ὁ Ξενοφάνης παρὰ 
τὰς τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων προλήψεις ὃ ἕν εἶναι τὸ 
πᾶν, καὶ τὸν θεὸν συμφυῆ τοῖς πᾶσιν, εἶναι δὲ 

~~ 4 > ~ \ 9 f A 
σφαιροειδῆ καὶ ἀπαθῆ καὶ ἀμετάβλητον καὶ Aoye- 
1 φἣ ἀποφαινόμενος» add. Papp. 

* [τὸν Ξ.] del. Kayser, Mutsch. 
8. ἀμενθήριστος Bergk: ἀπενθ. mss., Bekk. 


4 «ἀτρεμῇ» add. Diels. 
5 νρερώτερον Diels: νοερωτὸν mss., Bekk. 


136 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 223-225 


And if Plato does really utter some statements in a 223 
sceptical way when he is, as they say, ‘‘ exercising,’ 
that will not make him a Sceptic ; for the man that 
dogmatizes about a single thing, or ever prefers one 
impression to another in point of credibility or incredi- 
bility, or makes any assertion about any non-evident 
object, assumes the dogmatic character, as Timon ὦ 
also shows by his remarks about Xenophanes. For 224 
after praising him repeatedly, so that he even 
dedicated to him his Satires, he represented him as 
uttering this lamentation— 


Would that I too had attained a mind compacted of wisdom, 

Both ways casting my eyes; but the treacherous pathway 
deceived me, 

Old that I was, and as yet unversed in the doubts of the 
Sceptic. 

For in whatever direction I turned my mind in its questing 

All was resolved into One and the Same; All ever-existing 

Into one self-same nature returning shaped itself all ways. 


So on this account he also calls him “‘ semi-vain,’’ and 
not perfectly free from vanity, where he says— 


Aenophanes semi-vain, derider of Homer’s deceptions, 
‘ramed him a God far other than Man, self-equal in all ways, 
Safe from shaking or scathe, surpassing thought in his 
thinking. 

He called him “ semi-vain ” as being in some degree 
free from vanity, and “ derider of Homer’s decep- 
tions *’ because he censured the deceit mentioned in 
Homer.’ Xenophanes, contrary to the preconceptions 225 
of all other men, asserted dogmatically that the All 
is one, and that God is consubstantial with all things, 
and is of spherical form and passionless and unchange- 

¢ See Introd. Ὁ. xxxi; and for Xenophanes, ibid. p. viii. 

> e.g. Homer, Jl. ii. 114 where Agamemnon says of Zeus 
νῦν δὲ κακὴν ἀπάτην βουλεύσατ. Cf. Plato, Rep. 380 vp ff. 

137 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


; ¢ , oes Yoo , ἢ ¢ oA 
Kov' ὅθεν καὶ ῥᾷδιον τὴν Ξενοφάνους πρὸς ἡμᾶς 
Ν ? [4 \ 2 3 > “~ ? 
διαφορὰν ἐπιδεικνύναι. πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τῶν εἰρη- 
μένων πρόδηλον ὅτι κἂν περί τινων ἐπαπορῇ ὁ 
7) 2\\2 2 ν᾽» ? Ἃ \ ς 
Πλάτων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ ἔν τισι φαΐνεται 7) περὶ ὑπ- 
΄ 3 a 4 > 7 “Ἂ 
ἄρξεως ἀποφαινόμενος πραγμάτων ἀδήλων ἢ προ- 
κρίνων ἄδηλα κατὰ πίστιν, οὐκ ἂν εἴη σκεπτικός. 
226 Οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς νέας ᾿Ακαδημίας, εἰ καὶ ἀκατά- 
ληπτα εἶναι πάντα φασί, διαφέρουσι τῶν σκεπτικῶν 
ἴσως μὲν καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ λέγειν πάντα εἶναι 
3 / “~ A A tA ¢ 
ἀκατάληπτα (διαβεβαιοῦνται yap περὶ τούτου, ὃ 
δὲ σκεπτικὸς ἐνδέχεσθαι καὶ καταληφθῆναί τινα 
i , 1 ¢ A 2 > a 
προσδοκᾷ), διαφέρουσι δὲ ἡμῶν προδήλως ἐν TH 
τῶν ἀγαθῶν καὶ τῶν κακῶν κρίσει. ἀγαθὸν γάρ 
f > ¢ 3 oe \ \ \ % ¢ 
τί φασιν εἶναι οὗ ᾿Δκαδημαϊκοὶ καὶ κακὸν οὐχ ὡς 
ἡμεῖς, ἀλλὰ μετὰ τοῦ πεπεῖσθαι ὅτι, πιθανόν ἐστι 
Ζ΄ Δ 7 4 > \ ¢ ,ὔ a ‘ 
μᾶλλον ὃ λέγουσιν εἶναι ἀγαθὸν ὑπάρχειν ἢ τὸ 
ἐναντίον, καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ κακοῦ ὁμοίως, ἡμῶν ἀγαθόν 
τι ἢ κακὸν εἶναι λεγόντων οὐδὲν μετὰ τοῦ πιθανὸν 
, 4 5 ? > / iJ / 
εἶναι νομίζειν 6 φαμεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀδοξάστως ἑπομένων 
ῷ ~ ,ὔ φ \ > ὔ > 7 
22] τῷ βίῳ, iva μὴ avevépynror ὦμεν. Tas τε Pav 
a ; 
τασίας ἡμεῖς μὲν ἴσας λέγομεν εἶναι κατὰ πίστιν 
ἴω a“ \ 
ἢ ἀπιστίαν ὅσον ἐπὶ TH λόγῳ, ἐκεῖνοι δὲ τὰς μὲν 
Ἁ > / \ \ > / 
πιθανὰς εἶναί φασι ras δὲ ἀπιθάνους. 
\ ~ ~ \ 7 7 Ν \ 
Kai τῶν πιθανῶν δὲ λέγουσι διαφοράς" Tas μὲν 
ξ “ Ὰ 
γὰρ αὐτὸ μόνον πιθανὰς ὑπάρχειν ἡγοῦνται, τὰς 
A A \ 7 A} \ ‘ \ 
δὲ πιθανὰς καὶ διεξωδευμένας, Tas δὲ πιθανὰς Kat 





@ Carneades was the chief exponent of this ‘‘ probabilism ”’ ; 
see Introd. pp. xxxiii-xxxiv. 


138 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 225-227 


able and rational; and from this it is easy to show 
how Xenophanes differs from us. However, it is plain 
from what has been said that even if Plato evinces 
doubt about some matters, yet he cannot be a Sceptic 
inasmuch as he shows himself at times either making 
assertions about the reality of non-evident objects 
or preferring one non-evident thing to another in 
point of credibility. 

The adherents of the New Academy, although they 226 
affirm that all things are non-apprehensible, yet 
differ from the Sceptics even, as seems probable, in 
respect of this very statement that all things are 
non-apprehensible (for they affirm this positively, 
whereas the Sceptic regards it as possible that some 
things may be apprehended) ; but they differ from 
us quite plainly in their judgement of things good 
and evil. For the Academicians do not describe a 
thing as good or evil in the way we do; for they do 
so with the conviction that it is more probable @ that 
what they call good is really good rather than the 
opposite, and so too in the case of evil, whereas 
when we describe a thing as good or evil we do not 
add it as our opinion that what we assert is probable, 
but simply conform to life undogmatically that we 
may not be precluded from δον ἐγ. And as regards 227 
sense-impressions, we say 5 that they are equal in 
respect of probability and improbability, so far as 
their essence is concerned, whereas they assert 
that some impressions are probable, others im- 
probable. 

And respecting the probable impressions they 
make distinctions : some they regard as just simply 
probable, others as probable and tested, others as 


> Of. β 15, 23 f. 3 ii. 18. ¢ Of. § 117. 
139 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


περιωδευμένας καὶ ἀπερισπάστους. οἷον ἐν οἴκῳ 
σκοτεινῷ ποσῶς κειμένου σχοινίου ἐσπειραμένου 
πιθανὴ ἁπλῶς φαντασία γίνεται ἀπὸ τούτου ὡς 

228 ἀπὸ ὄφεως τῷ ἀθρόως ἐπεισελθόντι" τῷ μέντοι 
περισκοπήσαντι ἀκριβῶς καὶ διεξοδεύσαντι τὰ περὶ 
αὐτό, οἷον ὅτι οὐ κινεῖται, ὅτι τὸ χρῶμα τοῖόν 
ἐστι, καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἕκαστον, φαίνεται σχοινίον 
κατὰ τὴν φαντασίαν τὴν πιθανὴν καὶ περιωδευ- 
μένην. ἡ δὲ καὶ ἀπερίσπαστος φαντασία τοιάδε 
ἐστίν. λέγεται ὁ Ἡρακλῆς ἀποθανοῦσαν τὴν 
᾿Αλκηστιν αὖθις ἐξ ἄδου ἀναγαγεῖν καὶ δεῖξαι 
τῷ ᾿Αδμήτῳ, ὃ ὃς" πιθανὴν ἐλάμβανε φαντασίαν τῆς 
᾿Αλκήστιδος καὶ περιωδευμένην' ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἤδει 
ὅτι τέθνηκεν, περιεσπᾶτο αὐτοῦ ἡ διάνοια ἀπὸ 
τῆς συγκαταθέσεως καὶ πρὸς ἀπιστίαν ἔκλινεν. 

229 προκρίνουσιν οὖν οἵ ἐκ τῆς νέας ᾿ΑΚαδημίας τῆς 
μὲν πιθανῆς ἁπλῶς τὴν πιθανὴν καὶ περιωδευμένην 
φαντασίαν, ἀμφοτέρων δὲ τούτων τὴν πιθανὴν καὶ 
περιωδευμένην καὶ ἀπερίσπαστον. 

Bi δὲ καὶ πείθεσθαί τισιν οἵ τε ἀπὸ τῆς ᾽᾿Ακα- 
δημίας καὶ ot ἀπὸ τῆς σκέψεως “λέγουσι, πρό- 
δηλος. καὶ ἡ κατὰ τοῦτο διαφορὰ τῶν φιλοσοφιῶν. 

230 TO yap πείθεσθαι λέγεται διαφόρως, τό τε μὴ 
ἀντιτείνειν ἀλλ᾽ ἁπλῶς ἕπεσθαι ἄνευ σφοδρᾶς 
προσκλίσεως καὶ προσπαθείας, ὡς ὁ παῖς λέγεται 
πείθεσθαι τῷ παιδαγωγῷ: ἅπαξ δὲ τὸ μετὰ 
αἱρέσεως καὶ οἱονεὶ συμπαθείας κατὰ τὸ σφόδρα 
βούλεσθαι συγκατατίθεσθαί τινι, ὡς 6 ἄσωτος 


1 ὃς Τ΄: καὶ mss., Bekk. 





¢ διεξοδευμένας and περιοδευμένας mean literally “ gone all 
through” (or ‘‘all over’), hence ‘‘thoroughly inspected,” 


140 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 227-230 


probable, tested, and “‘irreversible.”* For example, 
when a rope is lying coiled up in a dark room, to one 
who enters hurriedly it presents the simply “ prob- 
able” appearance of being a serpent; but to the 228 
man who has looked carefully round and has investi- 
gated the conditions—such as its immobility and 
its colour, and each of its other peculiarities—it 
appears as a rope, in accordance with an impression 
that is probable and tested. And the impression that 

is also “irreversible” or incontrovertible is of this 
kind. When Alcestis had died, Heracles, it is said, 
brought her up again from Hades and showed her to 
Admetus, who received an impression of Alcestis that 
was probable and tested; since, however, he knew 
that she was dead his mind recoiled from its assent 
and reverted to unbelief.? So then the philosophers 229 
of the New Academy prefer the probable and tested 
impression to the simply probable, and to both of 
these the impression that is probable and tested and 
irreversible. 

And although both the Academics and the Sceptics 
say that they believe some things, yet here too the 
difference between the two philosophies is quite plain. 

‘or the word “believe” has different meanings : it 230 
means not to resist but simply to follow without 
any strong impulse or inclination, as the boy is said 
to believe his tutor; but sometimes it means to 
assent to a thing of deliberate choice and with a 
kind of sympathy due to strong desire, as when 
the incontinent man believes him who approves of 


“scrutinized”: ἀπερισπάστους, “not able to be drawn 
round ” (or ‘‘stripped off’), hence ‘‘ indubitable.” 

» This is a curious example of an “ irreversible ” impression. 
If the text is right, it looks as if Sextus was nodding. 


141 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πείθεται τῷ δαπανητικῶς βιοῦν ἀξιοῦντι. διόπερ 
ἐπειδὴ οὗ μὲν περὶ Kapveddnv καὶ Κλειτόμαχον 
μετὰ προσκλίσεως σφοδρᾶς πείθεσθαί τε καὶ 
πιθανὸν εἶναί τι φασίν, ἡμεῖς δὲ κατὰ τὸ ἁπλῶς 
εἴκειν ἄνευ προσπαθείας, καὶ κατὰ τοῦτο ἂν αὐτῶν 
διαφέροιμεν. 

281 ᾿Αλλὰ καὶ ἐν τοῖς πρὸς τὸ τέλος διαφέρομεν τῆς 
νέας ᾿Ακαδημίας: οἱ μὲν γὰρ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν κοσ- 
μεῖσθαι. λέγοντες ἄνδρες τῷ πιθανῷ προσχρῶνται 
κατὰ τὸν βίον, ἡμεῖς δὲ τοῖς νόμοις καὶ τοῖς ἔθεσι 
καὶ τοῖς φυσικοῖς πάθεσιν ἑ ἑπόμενοι βιοῦμεν ἀδοξά- 
στως. καὶ πλείω δ᾽ ἂν εἴπομεν πρὸς τὴν διάκρισιν, 
εἰ μὴ τῆς συντομίας ἐστοχαζόμεθ α. 

282. ὲὋ μέντοι ᾿Αρκεσίλαος, ὃν τῆς μέσης ᾿Ακα- 
δημίας ἐλέγομεν εἶναι προστάτην καὶ ἀρχηγόν, 
πάνυ μοι δοκεῖ τοῖς ἱυρρωνείοις κοινωνεῖν λόγοις, 
ὡς μίαν εἶναι σχεδὸν τὴν Kar’ αὐτὸν ἀγωγὴν καὶ 
τὴν ἡμετέραν: οὔτε γὰρ περὶ ὑπάρξεως ἢ ἀνυπ- 
ἀαρξίας τινὸς ἀποφαινόμενος εὑρίσκεται, οὔτε κατὰ 
πίστιν ἢ ἀπιστίαν ,“προκρίνει τι ἕτερον ἑτέρου, ἀλλὰ 
περὶ πάντων ἐπέχει. καὶ τέλος μὲν εἶναι τὴν 
ἐποχήν, ἡ συνεισέρχεσθαι τὴν ἀταραξίαν ἡμεῖς 

233 ἐφάσκομεν. λέγει δὲ καὶ ἀγαθὰ μὲν εἶναι τὰς κατὰ 
μέρος ἐποχάς, κακὰ δὲ τὰς κατὰ μέρος συγκατα- 
θέσεις. [ἤτοι πλὴν εἰ μὴ λέγοι τις ὅτι ἡμεῖς. μὲν 
κατὰ τὸ φαινόμενον ἡμῖν ταῦτα λέγομεν καὶ οὐ 
διαβεβαιωτικῶς, ἐκεῖνος δὲ ὡς πρὸς τὴν φύσιν, 
ὥστε καὶ ἀγαθὸν μὲν εἷναι αὐτὴν λέγειν τὴν ἐποχήν, 

934 κακὸν δὲ τὴν συγκατάθεσιν. εἰ δὲ δεῖ καὶ τοῖς 
περὶ αὐτοῦ λεγομένοις πιστεύειν, φασὶν ὅτι κατὰ 

a rE δὲ 29, OF ff. supra. > See 88 25 supra. 
¢ Of. § 226. @ Cf. §§ 23, 24. € Cf. § 220 supra. 
142 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 230-234 


an extravagant mode of life. Since, therefore, the 
followers of Carneades and Cleitomachus declare 
that a strong inclination accompanies their credence 
and the credibility of the object, while we “ say that 
our belief is a matter of simple yielding without any 
consent, here too there must be a difference between 
us and them. 

Furthermore, as regards the End (or aim of life) ® 231 
we differ from the New Academy; for whereas the 
men who profess to conform to its doctrine® use 
probability as the guide of life, we@ live in an un- 
dogmatic way by following the laws, customs, and 
natural affections. And we might say still more about 
this distinction had it not been that we are aiming at 
conciseness. 

Arcesilaus, however, who was, as we said,’ the 232 
president and founder of the Middle Academy, 
certainly seems to me to have shared the doctrines of 
Pyrrho, so that his Way of thought is almost identical 
with ours. For we do not find him making any asser- 
tion about the reality or unreality of anything, nor 
does he prefer any one thing to another in point of 
probability or improbability, but suspends judgement 
about all. He also says that the End is suspension— 
which is accompanied, as we have said, by “‘ quietude.” 

He declares, too, that suspension regarding particular 233 
objects is good, but assent regarding particulars bad. 
Only one might say that whereas we make these 
statements not positively but in accordance with what 
appears to us, he makes them as statements of real 
facts, so that he asserts that suspension in itself really 
is good and assent bad. And if one ought to credit 234 
also what is said about him, he appeared at the first 


143 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μὲν TO πρόχειρον Iluppwvewos ἐφαίνετο εἶναι, κατὰ 
δὲ τὴν ἀλήθειαν δογματικὸς ἦν: καὶ ἐπεὶ τῶν 
ἑταίρων ἀπόπειραν ἐλάμβανε διὰ τῆς ἀπορητικῆς 
εἰ εὐφυῶς ἔχουσι πρὸς τὴν ἀνάληψιν τῶν Πλατω- 
νικῶν δογμάτων, δόξαι αὐτὸν ἀπορητικὸν εἶναι, 
τοῖς μέντοι γε εὐφυέσι τῶν ἑταίρων τὰ Πλάτωνος 
παρεγχειρεῖν. ἔνθεν καὶ τὸν ᾿Αρίστωνα εἰπεῖν περὶ 
αὐτοῦ 


πρόσθε ἸΪλάτων, ὄπιθεν Πύρρων, μέσσος Διό- 
δωρος, 


διὰ τὸ προσχρῆσθαι τῇ διαλεκτικῇ τῇ κατὰ τὸν 
Διόδωρον, εἶναι δὲ ἄντικρυς Πλατωνικόν. 

235 Οἱ δὲ περὶ Φίλωνά φασιν ὅσον μὲν ἐπὶ τῷ 
στωικῷ κριτηρίῳ, τουτέστι τῇ καταληπτικῇ φαν- 
τασίᾳ, ἀκατάληπτα εἶναι τὰ πράγματα, ὅσον δὲ 
ἐπὶ τῇ φύσει τῶν πραγμάτων αὐτῶν καταληπτά. 
ἀλλὰ καὶ 6 ᾿Αντίοχος τὴν στοὰν μετήγαγεν εἰς 
τὴν ᾿Ακαδήμιαν, ὡς καὶ εἰρῆσθαι ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ ὅτι ἐν 
᾿Ακαδημίᾳ φιλοσοφεῖ τὰ στωικά- ἐπεδείκνυε γὰρ 
ὅτι παρὰ Ἰ]λάτωνι κεῖται τὰ τῶν στωικῶν δόγματα. 
ὡς πρόδηλον εἶναι τὴν τῆς σκεπτικῆς ἀγωγῆς 
διαφορὰν πρός τε τὴν τετάρτην καὶ τὴν πέμπτην 
καλουμένην ᾿Ακαδήμιαν. 


AA’,—EI H KATA THN ΤΑΤΡΙΚῊΝ EMITEIPIA H ATTH 
ἘΣΤῚ TH 2KEWVEI 


236 ᾿Επεὶ δὲ καὶ τῇ ἐμπειρίᾳ τῇ κατὰ τὴν ἰατρικὴν 
/ 
αἱρέσει τὴν αὐτὴν λέγουσί τινες εἶναι THY σκεπ- 








@ Ariston of Chios, a pupil of Zeno the Stoic. 
> The verse is a parody of Homer, 1]. vi. 181 (cf. Hesiod, 


144 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 234-236 


glance, they say, to be a Pyrrhonean, but in reality 
he was a dogmatist ; and because he used to test his 
companions by means of dubitation to see if they were 
fitted by nature for the reception of the Platonic 
dogmas, he was thought to be a dubitative philo- 
sopher, but he actually passed on to such of his 
companions as were naturally gifted the dogmas of 
Plato. And this was why Ariston? described him 
as “ Plato the head of him, Pyrrho the tail, in 
the midst Diodorus’”’®; because he employed the 
dialectic of Diodorus, although he was actually a 
Platonist. 

Philo® asserts that objects are inapprehensible 235 
so far as concerns the Stoic criterion, that is to say 
‘ apprehensive impression,”’ but are apprehensible so 
far as concerns the real nature of the objects them- 
selves. Moreover, Antiochus¢ actually transferred 
the Stoa to the Academy, so that it was even said 
of him that “In the Academy he teaches the Stoic 
philosophy ” ; for he tried to show that the dogmas 
of the Stoics are already present in Plato. So that 
it is quite plain how the Sceptic ‘‘ Way ”’ differs from 
what is called the Fourth Academy and the Fifth. 


Cuaprer XXXIV.—Wuetuer Mepicat Empiricism 
IS THE SAME AS SCEPTICISM 


Since some allege that the Sceptic philosophy 236 
is identical with the Empiricism of the Medical 


Theog. 323), who thus describes the Chimaera: πρόσθε λέων, 
ὄπιθεν δὲ δράκων, μέσση δὲ χίμαιρα (“‘ Lion the head of her, 
Dragon the tail of her, trunk of a She-goat’’). Diodorus 
Cronos was a Megaric philosopher (circa 300 B.c.). 

« See Introd. pp. xxxvi f. 


VOL. I L 145 


237 


238 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τικὴν φιλοσοφίαν, γνωστέον ὅτι εἴπερ ἡ ἐμπειρία 
ἐκείνη περὶ τῆς ἀκαταληψίας τῶν ἀδήλων δια- 
βεβαιοῦται, οὔτε ἡ αὐτή ἐστι τῇ σκέψει οὔτε 
ἁρμόζοι ἂν τῷ σκεπτικῷ τὴν αἵρεσιν ἐκείνην 
ἀναλαμβάνειν. μᾶλλον δὲ τὴν καλουμένην μέθοδον, 
ws ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ, δύναιτο ἂν μετιέναι" αὕτη γὰρ μόνη 
τῶν κατὰ ἰατρικὴν αἱρέσεων περὶ μὲν τῶν ἀδήλων 
δοκεῖ μὴ προπετεύεσθαι, πότερον καταληπτά ἐστιν 
ἢ ἀκατάληπτα λέγειν αὐθαδειαζομένη, τοῖς δὲ 
φαινομένοις ἑπομένη ἀπὸ τούτων λαμβάνει τὸ συμ- 
φέρειν δοκοῦν κατὰ τὴν τῶν σκεπτικῶν ἀκολου- 
θίαν. καὶ ἐλέγομεν γὰρ ἐν τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν ὅτι ὃ 
βίος 6 κοινός, ᾧ καὶ 6 σκεπτικὸς χρῆται, τετρα- 
μερής ἐστιν, τὸ μέν τι ἔχων ἐν ὑφηγήσει φύσεως, 
τὸ δ᾽ ἐν ἀνάγκῃ παθῶν, τὸ δ᾽ ἐν παραδόσει νόμων 
τε καὶ ἐθῶν, τὸ δ᾽ ἐν διδασκαλίᾳ τεχνῶν. ὥσπερ 
οὖν κατὰ τὴν ἀνάγκην τῶν παθῶν 6 σκεπτικὸς 
ὑπὸ μὲν δίψους ἐπὶ ποτὸν ὁδηγεῖται ὑπὸ δὲ λιμοῦ 
ἐπὶ τροφήν, καὶ ἐπί τι τῶν ἄλλων ὁμοίως, οὕτω 
καὶ ὁ μεθοδικὸς ἰατρὸς ὑπὸ τῶν παθῶν ἐπὶ τὰ 
κατάλληλα ὁδηγεῖται, ὑπὸ μὲν στεγνώσεως ἐπὶ 
τὴν χαύνωσιν, ὡς καταφεύγει τις ἀπὸ τῆς διὰ 
ψῦχος ἐπιτεταμένον πυκνώσεως ἐπὶ ἀλέαν, ὑπὸ 
δὲ ῥύσεως ἐπὶ τὴν ἐποχὴν αὐτῆς, ὡς καὶ οἱ ἐν 
βαλανείῳ ἱδρῶτι πολλῷ περιρρεόμενοι καὶ ἐκλυό- 
μενοι ἐπὶ τὴν ἐποχὴν αὐτοῦ παραγίνονται καὶ διὰ 


~ y A A A 3? / χὰ 
, Τοῦτο ἐπὶ τὸν ψυχρὸν ἀέρα καταφεύγουσιν. ὅτι 


δὲ καὶ τὰ φύσει ἀλλότρια ἐπὶ τὴν λύσιν' αὐτῶν 


1 λύσιν ego: φύσιν Μ58.. Bekk.: ἄρσιν Papp. 





« The later schools of Medicine were three: (1) the 
Dogmatic or Logical, which theorized about the “ non- 


146 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 236-238 


sect, it must be recognized that inasmuch as that 
Empiricism positively affirms the inapprehensibility of 
what is non-evident it is not identical with Scepticism 
nor would it be consistent in a Sceptic to embrace that 
doctrine. He could more easily, in my opinion, adopt 
the so-called ‘‘ Method ”’; for it alone of the Medical 237 
systems appears to avoid rash treatment of things 
non-evident by arbitrary assertions as to their ap- 
prehensibility or non-apprehensibility, and following 
appearances derives from them what seems beneficial, 
in accordance with the practice of the Sceptics. For 
we stated above ὃ that the common life, in which the 
Sceptic also shares, is four-fold, one part depending 
on the directing force of Nature, another on the 
compulsion of the affections, another on the tradition 
of laws and customs, and another on the training of 
the arts. So then, just as the Sceptic, in virtue of the 938 
compulsion of the affections, is guided by thirst to 
drink and by hunger to food, and in like manner to 
other such objects, in the same way the Methodical 
physician is guided by the pathological affections to the 
corresponding remedies—by contraction to dilatation, 
as when one seeks refuge in heat from the contraction 
due to the application of cold, or by fluxion to the 
stoppage of it, as when persons in a hot bath, dripping 
with perspiration and in a relaxed condition, seek to 
put a stop to it and for this reason rush off into the 
cool air. It is plain, too, that conditions which are 
naturally alien compel us to take measures for their 
evident’? causes of health and disease; (2) the Empiric, 
which regarded such causes as indiscoverable and confined 
itself to observation of evident facts; (8) the Methodic, which 
adopted an intermediate position, refusing either to affirm or 
one anoremaen ”* causes; ef. Introd. p. xl. 


14:7 


239 


240 


24] 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἰέναι καταναγκάζει, πρόδηλον, ὁ ὅπου γε καὶ ὁ κύων 
σκόλοπος αὐτῷ καταπαγέντος ἐπὶ τὴν ἄρσιν αὐτοῦ 
παραγίνεται. καὶ ἵνα μὴ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον λέγων 
ἐκβαίνω τὸν ὑποτυπωτικὸν τρόπον τῆς συγγραφῆς, 
πάντα οἶμαι τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν μεθοδικῶν οὕτω λεγόμενα 
ὑποτάσσεσθαι δύνασθαι τῇ ἐκ τῶν παθῶν ἀνάγκῃ, 
τῶν τε κατὰ φύσιν καὶ τῶν παρὰ φύσιν, πρὸς τῷ 
καὶ τὸ ἀδόξαστόν τε καὶ ἀδιάφορον τῆς χρήσεως 
τῶν ὀνομάτων κοινὸν εἶναι τῶν ἀγωγῶν. ws γὰρ ὁ ὁ 
σκεπτικὸς «ἀδοξάστως» χρῆται τῇ “οὐδὲν ὁρίζω ᾽᾿ 
φωνῇ καὶ τῇ “᾿οὐδὲν καταλαμβάνω,᾽᾽ καθάπερ εἰ- 
ρήκαμεν, οὕτω καὶ ὁ μεθοδικὸς κοινότητα λέγει καὶ 
διήκειν καὶ τὰ παραπλήσια ἀπεριέργως. οὕτω δὲ καὶ 
τὸ τῆς ἐνδείξεως ὄνομα ἀδοξάστως παραλαμβάνει 
ἀντὶ τῆς ἀπὸ τῶν φαινομένων παθῶν τῶν τε κατὰ 
φύσιν καὶ τῶν παρὰ φύσιν ὁδηγήσεως ἐπὶ τὰ κατ- 
ἄλληλα εἶναι δοκοῦντα, ὡς καὶ ἐπὶ δίψους καὶ ἐπὶ 
λιμοῦ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὑπεμίμνησκον. ὅθεν οἰκειό- 
τητά τινα ἔχειν τὴν ἀγωγὴν τὴν κατὰ ἰατρικὴν 
τῶν μεθοδικῶν πρὸς τὴν σκέψιν, μᾶλλον τῶν ἄλλων 
κατὰ ἰατρικὴν αἱρέσεων καὶ ὡς πρὸς σύγκρισιν 
ἐκείνων, οὐχ ἁπλῶς, ῥητέον ἐκ τούτων καὶ τῶν 
παραπλησίων τούτοις τεκμαιρομένοις. 

Τοσαῦτα καὶ περὶ τῶν παρακεῖσθαι δοκούντων 
τῇ κατὰ τοὺς σκεπτικοὺς ἀγωγῇ διεξελθόντες, ἐν 
τούτοις ἀπαρτίζομεν τόν τε καθόλου τῆς σκέψεως 
λόγον καὶ τὸ πρῶτον τῶν ὑποτυπώσεων σύνταγμα. 


1 «ἀδοξάστως» add. Mutsch. e T. 
* Or “ generic character.’ All diseases being referred to 


one or other of the two “ general’? morbid states, over- 
contraction or over-dilatation of the pores or passages of the 


148 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, I. 238-241 


removal, seeing that even the dog when it is pricked 

by a thorn proceeds to remove it. And in short—to 239 
avoid exceeding the limits proper to an outline of this 
kind by a detailed enumeration—I suppose that all 
the facts described by the Methodic School can be 
classed as instances of the compulsion of the affections, 
whether natural or against nature. 

Besides, the use of terms in an undogmatic and 
indeterminate sense is common to both systems. For 240 
just as the Sceptic uses the expressions “ I determine 
nothing ’’ and “1 apprehend nothing,” as we have 
said, in an undogmatic sense, even so the Methodic 
speaks of “‘ generality ’* and ‘‘ pervade’ and the like 
in a non-committal way. So also he employs the 
term “ indication ” in an undogmatic sense to denote 
the guidance derived from the apparent affections, or 
symptoms, both natural and contra-natural, for the 
discovery of the seemingly appropriate remedies— 
as, in fact, I mentioned in regard to hunger and thirst 
and the other affections. Consequently, judging 241 
from these and similar indications, we should say that 
the Methodic School of Medicine has some affinity 
with Scepticism ; and, when viewed not simply by 
itself, but in comparison with the other Medical 
Schools, it has more affinity than they. 

And now that we have said thus much concerning 
the Schools which seem to stand nearest to that of 
the Sceptics, we here bring to a conclusion both our 
general account of Scepticism and the First Book of 
our “ Outlines.” 
body, each of these “ general’’ states was said to “ pervade ”’ 
all the cases which exhibited the symptoms of that state. 


The “ genus te ervades’’ (its characteristics run through) 
its “ species ’’ and ‘‘ particulars.”’ 


149 


Β 


Α΄,-ΕΙ ΔΥΝΑΤΑῚ ΖΗΤΕΙΝ O ΣΚΕΠΤΙΚΟΣ ΠΕΡῚ ΤΩΝ 
ΛΕΓΟΜΈΝΩΝ ΠΑΡᾺ ΤΟΙ͂Σ ΔΟΓΜΑΤΊΚΟΙΣ 


/ 

1 ?Emet δὲ τὴν ζήτησιν τὴν πρὸς τοὺς δογματικοὺς 
μετήλθομεν, ἕκαστον τῶν μερῶν τῆς καλουμένης 
φιλοσοφίας συντόμως καὶ ὑποτυπωτικῶς ἐφοδεύ- 
σωμεν, πρότερον ἀποκρινάμενοι πρὸς τοὺς ἀεὶ 
θρυλοῦντας ὡς μήτε ζητεῖν μήτε νοεῖν ὅλως οἷός 
τέ ἐστιν ὃ σκεπτικὸς περὶ τῶν δογματιζομένων 

a \ 
2 παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς. φασὶ yap ws ἤτοι καταλαμβάνει ὁ 

‘ “~ “- 
σκεπτικὸς τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν λεγόμενα ἢ οὐ 
\ ἴων κὶ 

καταλαμβάνει: καὶ εἰ μὲν καταλαμβάνει, πῶς ἂν 
> , \ “Ὁ / f 9 3 ? 
dmopoin περὶ ὧν κατειληφέναι λέγει; εἰ δ᾽ ov 
7 » \ ε > i 9QN 
καταλαμβάνει, ἄρα περὶ ὧν οὐ κατείληφεν οὐδὲ 
f ¢ δ ¢ \ > 7 > / / 

8 olde, λέγειν. ὥσπερ yap ὁ μὴ εἰδώς, εἰ τύχοι, τί 
ἐστι τὸ καθ᾽ ὃ περιαιρουμένου ἢ τὸ διὰ δύο τροπι- 
κῶν θεώρημα, οὐδὲ εἰπεῖν τι δύναται περὶ αὐτῶν, 
οὕτως ὃ μὴ γινώσκων ἕκαστον τῶν λεγομένων 
παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς οὐ δύναται ζητεῖν πρὸς 





α i.e. the “ special” section of this Sceptical treatise, as 
distinguished from the “ general’’ exposition contained in 
Bk. I.; ¢f. i. 5, 6, 21. 

> i.e. Stoics and Epicureans. 

¢ This argument is not elsewhere mentioned ; possibly it 
refers to some form of the ‘* Sorites’’; οὐ § 253. But T has 


150 


BOOK II 


Cuaprer J.—Can Tue ScEPTIC INVESTIGATE THE 
STATEMENTS OF THE DoGMATISTs ? 


Since we have undertaken this inquiry in criticism 1 
of the Dogmatists,@ let us review briefly and in outline 
the several divisions of so-called philosophy, when we 
have first made reply to those who keep constantly 
repeating that the Sceptic is incapable of either 
investigating or in any way cognizing the objects 
about which they dogmatize. For they ὃ maintain 2 
that the Sceptic either apprehends or does not 
apprehend the statements made by the Dogmatists ; 
if, then, he apprehends, how can he be perplexed 
about things which he has, as he says, apprehended? 
Whereas if he apprehends not, then neither does he 
know how to discuss matters which he has not appre- 
hended. For just as he who is ignorant, for instance, 3 
of the arguments known as “‘ How far reduced ”’¢ or 
“ By two hypotheses,” ¢ is unable also to say anything 
about them, so the man who does not know each of 
the statements made by the Dogmatists is unable to 


“qui non novit . . . quid est omnis triangulus habet tres 
angulos equales duobus rectis.”” 
¢ The hypothetical syllogism ‘‘ by two hypotheses’ has 
its major premiss in double form; ¢.g. ‘‘ If A is, B is, and if 
A is not, B is; but A either is or is not; therefore B is.” 
Cf. §§ 131, 186 infra. 
151 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


αὐτοὺς περὶ ὧν οὐκ οἶδεν. οὐδαμῶς dpa δύναται 
ζητεῖν 6 σκεπτικὸς περὶ τῶν λεγομένων παρὰ τοῖς 

4 δογματικοῖς. οἱ δὴ ταῦτα λέγοντες ἀποκρινά- 
σθωσαν ἡμῖν πῶς λέγουσι νῦν τὸ καταλαμβάνειν, 
πότερον τὸ νοεῖν ἁπλῶς ἄνευ τοῦ καὶ ὑπὲρ τῆς 
ὑπάρξεως ἐκείνων περὶ ὧν ποιούμεθα τοὺς λόγους 
διαβεβαιοῦσθαι, ἢ μετὰ τοῦ [νοεῖν]: καὶ τὴν ὕπαρξιν 
ἐκείνων τιθέναι περὶ ὧν διαλεγόμεθα. εἰ μὲν γὰρ 
καταλαμβάνειν εἶναι λέγουσιν ἐν τῷ λόγῳ τὸ 
καταληπτικῇ φαντασίᾳ συγκατατίθεσθαι, τῆς κατα- 
ληπτικῆς. φαντασίας οὔσης ἀπὸ ὑπάρχοντος, κατ᾽ 
αὐτὸ τὸ ὑπάρχον ἐναπομεμαγμένης καὶ ἐναπεσῴφρα- 
γισμένης, οἵα οὐκ ἂν γένοιτο ἀπὸ μὴ ὑπάρχον- 
τος, οὐδὲ αὐτοὶ ͵ βουλήσονται τάχα μὴ δύνασθαι 
ζητεῖν περὶ ἐκείνων ἃ μὴ κατειλήφασιν οὕτως. 

5 οἷον γοῦν ὅταν 6 στωικὸς πρὸς τὸν ᾿Επικούρειον 
ζητῇ λέγοντα ὅτι διήρηται ἢ: οὐσία ἢ ὥς ὁ θεὸς 
οὐ προνοεῖ τῶν ἐν κόσμῳ ἢ ὅτι ἡ ἡδονὴ ἀγαθόν, 
πότερον κατείληφεν ἢ ἢ οὐ κατείληφεν; καὶ εἰ μὲν 
κατείληφεν, ὑπάρχειν αὐτὰ λέγων ἄρδην ἀναιρεῖ 
τὴν στοάν' εἰ δ᾽ οὐ κατείληφεν, οὐ δύναταί τι πρὸς 
αὐτὰ λέγειν. 

6 Τὰ δὲ παραπλήσια καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν ἄλλων 
αἱρέσεων ἀναγομένους λεκτέον, ὅταν τι ζητεῖν περὶ 
τῶν δοκούντων τοῖς ἑτεροδόξοις αὐτῶν ἐθέλωσιν. 

1 [νοεῖν] del. Heintz. 


* For this term in the Stoic epistemology see Introd. p. xxv. 
The argument is, in brief, that the Stoic cannot consistently 
criticize the Epicurean unless he allows that his “ appre- 
hensive impression”’’ of their dogmas is an impression of 
things which have no basis in reality, and this contradicts 
the Stoic definition of “ apprehensive impression.”’ 

ὃ It is uncertain to what “ division ’’ this refers—whether 


152 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 3-6 


criticize them concerning matters of which he has no 
knowledge. Thus the Sceptic is wholly incapable of 
investigating the statements made by the Dogmatists. 

Now let those who speak thus make answer and 4 
tell us in what sense they are now using the term 
‘ apprehend,” whether simply of mental conception 
without the further affirmation of the reality of the 
objects under discussion, or with the further assump- 
tion of the reality of the objects discussed. For 
if they say that “to apprehend ” means, in their 
argument, to assent to an “ apprehensive impres- 
sion, ὦ the apprehensive impression being derived 
from a real object and being an imprint or stamp upon 
the mind corresponding to the actual object, such as 
would not result from what is unreal, then probably 
not even they themselves will wish to allow their in- 
ability to investigate things which, in this sense, they 
have not apprehended. Thus, for example, when the 5 
Stoic criticizes the statement of the Epicurean that 
“ Being is divided,” ὃ or that ‘‘ God does not foreknow 
events in the Universe,” or that ‘“ Pleasure is the 
Good,”’ has he apprehended or has he not appre- 
hended? If he has apprehended these dogmas, by 
asserting their real truth he entirely overthrows the 
Porch ; while if he has not apprehended them, he is 
unable to say anything against them. 

And we must use a like argument against those 6 
who issue from any of the other Sects, whenever they 
desire to make any critical investigation of the tenets 
of those who differ from them in doctrine. Con- 
that of God from the world (Fabricius), of Body from Void 
(Zimmermann), of the “‘numberless worlds” from one 
another (Pappenheim), or (as seems simplest) of Body into 
numberless atomic fractions. For the dicta about ‘God ” 
and “ Pleasure”? ef. iii. 219. 

153 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ὥστε οὐ δύνανται περί τινος ζητεῖν πρὸς ἀλλήλους. 
μᾶλλον δέ, εἰ χρὴ μὴ ληρεῖν, συγχυθήσεται μὲν 
αὐτῶν ἅπασα ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν ἡ δογματική, συν- 
7 \ ? e \ / 
τόνως δὲ προσαχθήσεται ἡ σκεπτικὴ φιλοσοφία, 
δι a A a 
διδομένου τοῦ μὴ δύνασθαι ζητεῖν περὶ τοῦ μὴ 
’ὔ 
T οὕτως κατειλημμένου. 6 γὰρ περί τίνος ἀδήλου 
πράγματος ἀποφαινόμενός τε καὶ δογματίζων ἤτοι 
\ 3 \ 2 / \ > κων / 
κατειληφὼς αὐτὸ ἀποφαίνεσθαι περὶ αὐτοῦ λέξει 
Ἂ \ , 2\\> 2 \ \ , 
ἢ μὴ κατειληφώς. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν μὴ κατειληφώς, 
4 54 9 Ἁ 7 + > ᾽; A 
ἄπιστος ἔσται" εἰ δὲ κατειληφώς, ἤτοι αὐτόθεν καὶ 
ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ καὶ κατ᾽ ἐνάργειαν ὑποπεσὸν αὐτῷ 
“ν / / aN / ? 4 A 
τοῦτο λέξει κατειληφέναι ἢ διά τινος ἐρεύνης Kal 
8 ζητήσεως. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ περυιπτωτικῶς 
Kar ἐνάργειαν λέγοιτο ὑποπεσεῖν αὐτῷ καὶ κατ- 
εἰλῆφθαι τὸ ἄδηλον, οὕτως ἂν οὐδὲ ἄδηλον εἴη 
3 A “~ > 3 » 7 Ἁ ¢ 7 
ἀλλὰ πᾶσιν ἐπ᾽ ἴσης φαινόμενον καὶ ὁμολογούμενον 
καὶ μὴ διαπεφωνημένον. περὶ ἑκάστου δὲ τῶν 
ἀδήλων ἀνήνυτος γέγονε παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς διαφωνία: 
οὐκ ἄρα ἐξ ἕαυτοῦ καὶ κατ᾽ ἐνάργειαν ὑποπεσὸν 
3 ~ \ * ᾽ \ ¥ ¢ \ -- 
αὐτῷ κατειληφὼς ἂν εἴη τὸ ἄδηλον ὁ περὶ τῆς 
ς / 3 “~ / / \ 3 7 
ὑπάρξεως αὐτοῦ διαβεβαιούμενός τε καὶ ἀποῴφαινό- 
\ “ 
9 μενος δογματικός. εἰ δὲ διά τινος ἐρεύνης, πῶς 
οἷός τε ἦν ζητεῖν πρὸ τοῦ καταλαβεῖν ἀκριβῶς 
αὐτὸ κατὰ τὴν προκειμένην ὑπόθεσιν; τῆς μὲν 
΄ / A ~ 
yap ζητήσεως χρῃζούσης τοῦ πρότερον ἀκριβῶς 
~ \ 7 “~ \ Ὡ al 
κατειλῆφθαι τὸ μέλλον ζητεῖσθαι Kat οὕτω ζητεῖ- 
σθαι, τῆς δὲ καταλήψεως τοῦ ζητουμένου πράγ- 





2 For this distinction cf. i. 178 ff. 
154 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 6-9 


sequently they are debarred from indulging in any 
criticism of one another. Or rather—to avoid talking 
nonsense—practically the whole of Dogmatism will 
be confounded and the Sceptie philosophy will be 
firmly established once it is granted that it is im- 
possible to inquire regarding an object which is not, 
in this sense, apprehended. For he who makes a7 
dogmatic statement about a non-evident object will 
declare that he is making it either after having 
apprehended or after having not apprehended it. 
But if he has not apprehended it he will not gain 
credence ; while if he has apprehended it, he will 
say that he has apprehended the object directly and 
through itself and owing to the clear impression it 
has made on him, or else by means of some kind of 
search and inquiry.* But if he shall say that the 8 
non-evident object has impressed him and has been 
apprehended through itself, immediately and clearly, 
in this case the object would not be non-evident but 
apparent to all men equally, an acknowledged and 
uncontroverted fact. But about every single object 
that is non-evident there exists amongst them end- 
less controversy ; so that the Dogmatist who makes 
positive assertions about the reality of a non-evident 
object cannot have apprehended it because of its 
having made on him a direct and clear impression. 
If, on the other hand, his apprehension is a result of 9 
search, how was he in a position to make inquiry 
before he had accurately apprehended the object, 
without violating our present assumption ? For since 
the inquiry necessitates as a preliminary the existence 
of an accurate apprehension of that which is to be 
the subject of inquiry, while the apprehension of the 
subject of inquiry demands, in its turn, the previous 


155 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ματος δεομένης πάλιν αὐτῆς τοῦ προεζητῆσθαι 
πάντως αὐτό, κατὰ τὸν διάλληλον τρόπον τῆς 
ἀπορίας ἀδύνατον αὐτοῖς γίγνεται καὶ τὸ ζητεῖν 
περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων καὶ τὸ δογματίζειν, ἤν τε ἀπὸ 
τῆς καταλήψεως ἄρχεσθαι βούλωνταί τινες, μετ- 
αγόντων ἡμῶν αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖν αὐτὸ προ- 
εζητηκέναι πρὸ τοῦ κατειληφέναι, ἤν τε ἀπὸ τῆς 
ζητήσεως, ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖν πρὸ τοῦ ζητεῖν κατειληφέναι 
τὸ μέλλον ζητεῖσθαι. ὥστε διὰ ταῦτα μήτε κατα- 
λαμβάνειν αὐτοὺς δύνασθαί τι τῶν ἀδήλων μήτε 
ἀποφαίνεσθαι διαβεβαιωτικῶς ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν. ἐξ ὧν 
ἀναιρεῖσθαι μὲν τὴν δογματικὴν εὑρεσιλογίαν αὐτό- 
θεν, οἶμαι, συμβήσεται, τὴν ἐφεκτικὴν δὲ εἰσάγε- 
σθαι φιλοσοφίαν. 

10 Ki δὲ φήσουσι μὴ τοιαύτην λέγειν κατάληψιν 
ἡγεῖσθαι ζητήσεως προσήκειν, νόησιν δὲ ἁπλῶς, 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἀδύνατον [ἐν] τοῖς ἐπέχουσι περὶ τῆς 
ὑπάρξεως τῶν ἀδήλων ζητεῖν. νοήσεως γὰρ οὐκ 
ἀπείργεται ὁ σκεπτικός, οἶμαι, ἀπό τε τῶν παθη- 
ματικῶς ὑποπιπτόντων κατ᾽ ἐνάργειαν φαινομένων 
αὐτῷ λόγῳ γινομένης καὶ μὴ πάντως εἰσαγούσης 
τὴν ὕπαρξιν τῶν νοουμένων: οὐ γὰρ μόνον τὰ 
ὑπάρχοντα νοοῦμεν, ὡς φασίν, ἀλλ᾽ ἤδη καὶ τὰ 
ἀνύπαρκτα. ὅθεν καὶ ζητῶν καὶ νοῶν ἐν πῇ 
σκεπτικῇ διαθέσει μένει ὃ ἐφεκτικός" ὅτι γὰρ τοῖς 
κατὰ φαντασίαν παθητικὴν ὑποπίπτουσιν αὐτῷ, 
καθὸ φαίνεται αὐτῷ, συγκατατίθεται, δεδήλωται. 

11 ὅρα δὲ μὴ καὶ νῦν οἱ δογματικοὶ ζητήσεως ἀπείρ- 
γονται. οὐ γὰρ τοῖς ἀγνοεῖν τὰ πράγματα ὡς 


a Of. i. 61. > Of. i. 63, ii. 84. 





156 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 9-11 


existence of a complete inquiry into that subject, 
owing to this circular process of reasoning ὦ it be- 
comes impossible for them either to inquire concern- 
ing things non-evident or to dogmatize; for if some 
of them wish to make apprehension their starting- 
point we force them to grant that the object must 
be investigated before it is apprehended, while if 
they start from inquiry we make them admit that 
before inquiring they must apprehend the object of 
the inquiry, so that for these reasons they can neither 
apprehend any non-evident object nor make positive 
statements about them. From this there will follow 
automatically, as I think, the demolition of the 
Dogmatic sophistry ® and the establishment of the 
Suspensive philosophy. 

If, however, they say that it is not this kind of 10 
apprehension that ought, in their view, to precede 
inquiry, but simply mental conception, then it is no 
longer impossible for those who suspend judgement 
to inquire about the reality of things non-evident. 
For the Sceptic is not, I suppose, prohibited from 
mental conception which arises through the reason 
itself as a result of passive impressions and clear 
appearances and does not at all involve the reality 
of the objects conceived; for we conceive, as 
they say, not only of real things but also of unreal. 
Hence both while inquiring and while conceiving 
the Suspensive person continues in the Sceptical 
state of mind. For, as has been shown, he assents 
to what he experiences by way of subjective im- 
pression, according as that impression appears to 
him. But consider whether, even in this case, the 11 
Dogmatists are not precluded from inquiry. For 
to continue the investigation of problems is not 


157 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


EXEL πρὸς τὴν φύσιν ὁμολογοῦσι τὸ ζητεῖν ἔ ἔτι περὶ 
αὐτῶν ἀνακόλουθον, τοῖς δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀκριβὲς οἰομένοις 
ταῦτα γινώσκειν" οἷς «μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ πέρας ἤδη 
πάρεστιν. ἡ ζήτησις, ὡς ὑπειλήφασιν, οἷς δὲ τὸ 
ι ὃ πᾶσα συνίσταται. ζήτησις ἀκμὴν ὑπάρχει, 
τὸ νομίζειν ὡς οὐχ εὑρήκασιν. 

1. Οὐκοῦν ζητητέον ἡμῖν περὶ ἑκάστου μέρους 
τῆς καλουμένης 'λοσοφίας συντόμως ἐπὶ τοῦ 
παρόντος. καὶ ἐπεὲ πολλὴ γέγονε παρὰ τοῖς δογ- 
ματικοῖς διαφωνία περὶ τῶν μερῶν τῆς φιλοσοφίας, 
τῶν μὲν ἕν τῶν δὲ δύο τῶν δὲ τρία εἶναι λεγόντων, 
περὶ ἧς οὐκ ἂν εἴη προσῆκον πλείω νῦν διεξιέναι, 
τὴν δόξαν τῶν δοκούντων τελειότερον ἀνεστράφθαι 
κατὰ τὸ ἴσον ἐκθέμενοι κατ᾽ αὐτὴν προσάξομεν 
τὸν λόγον. 


Β΄, --ΠΟΘῈΝ APKTEON ΤῊΣ ΠΡῸΣ TOTS ΔΟΓΜΑΤΙΚΟΥΣ 
ZHTHSEQS 


135. Ol στωικοὶ τοίνυν καὶ ἄλλοι τινὲς τρία μέρη τῆς 
φιλοσοφίας εἶναι λέγουσι, λογικὸν φυσικὸν ἠθικόν" 
καὶ ἄρχονταί γε τῆς διδασκαλίας ἀ ἀπὸ τοῦ λογικοῦ, 
καίτοι πολλῆς καὶ περὶ τοῦ πόθεν ἄρχεσθαι δεῖ 
στάσεως γεγενημένης. οἷς ἀκολουθήσαντες ἀδο- 
ξάστως, ἐπεὶ τὰ ἐν τοῖς τρισὶ μέρεσι λεγόμενα 
κρίσεως χρήζει καὶ κριτηρίου, ὁ δὲ περὶ κριτηρίου 
λόγος ἐμπεριέχεσθαι δοκεῖ τῷ λογικῷ μέρει, ἀρξώ- 
μεθα ἀπὸ τοῦ περὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου λόγου καὶ τοῦ 
λογικοῦ μέρους. 





« Cf. Adv. Log. i. ad init. 
> The others mentioned in .ddv. Log. i. 16 are Plato, 
Xenocrates, and the Peripatetics; so too the Epicureans. 


158 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 11-13 


inconsistent in those who confess their ignorance 
of their real nature, but only in those who believe 
they have an exact knowledge of them; since for 
the latter the inquiry has already, as they suppose, 
reached its goal, whereas for the former the ground 
on which all inquiry is based—-namely, the belief 
that they have not found the truth—still subsists. 
Thus we have to inquire briefly, on the present 12 

occasion, concerning each several division of philo- 
sophy so called. And since there exists much dispute 
amongst the Dogmatists regarding the divisions of 
philosophy “—some saying there is one division, some 
two, some three—and it would not now be con- 
venient to discuss the question at length, we will 
explain fairly and impartially the view of those who 
seem to have treated it most fully, and take their 
view as the subject of our discourse. 


Craprer I].—Tue Srartine-point ror Criticism 
or THE DogMaTISTs 


The Stoics, then, and several others,® say that there 13 
are three divisions of philosophy, namely, Logic, 
Physics, and Ethics; and they begin their teaching 
with Logic,’ although the question of the right start- 
Ing-point is also a matter of much controversy. So 
we shall follow them in an undogmatic way; and 
since the subject matter of all three divisions requires 
testing and a criterion, and the doctrine of the 
criterion seems to be included in the division of 
Logic, we shall begin with the doctrine of the criterion 
and the division of Logic. 

ὁ So Chrysippus. Sextus treats of Logic in this Bk. ii., 
Physics in iii. 1-167, Ethics in iii. 167-278. 

159 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Τ΄.-- ΠΕΡῚ KPITHPIOY 


14 ᾿Ἐκεῖνο προειπόντες ὅτι κριτήριον μὲν λέγεται 
τό τε ᾧ κρίνεσθαί φασιν ὕπαρξιν καὶ ἀνυπαρξίαν 
καὶ τὸ ᾧ προσέχοντες βιοῦμεν, πρόκειται δὲ ἡμῖν 
νῦν περὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου τῆς ἀληθείας εἶναι Aeyo- 
μένου διαλαβεῖν" περὶ γὰρ τοῦ κατὰ τὸ ἕτερον 
σημαινόμενον ἐν τῷ περὶ τῆς σκέψεως λόγῳ διεξ- 
ήλθομεν. 

15 Τὸ κριτήριον τοίνυν περὶ οὗ 6 λόγος ἐστὶν 

ἔγεται τριχῶς, κοινῶς ἰδίως ἰδιαίτατα, κοινῶς 
μὲν πᾶν μέτρον καταλήψεως, καθ᾽ ὃ σημαινόμενον 
καὶ τὰ φυσικὰ οὕτω προσαγορεύεται κριτήρια, ὡς 
ὅρασις, ἰδίως δὲ πᾶν μέτρον καταλήψεως τεχνικὸν 
ὡς κανὼν καὶ διαβήτης, ἰδιαίτατα δὲ πᾶν μέτρον 
καταλήψεως τεχνικὸν ἀδήλου πράγματος, καθ᾽ ὃ 
τὰ μὲν βιωτικὰ οὐ λέγεται κριτήρια, μόνα δὲ τὰ 
λογικὰ καὶ ἅπερ οἱ δογματικοὶ φέρουσι πρὸς τὴν 

16 τῆς ἀληθείας κρίσιν. φαμὲν οὖν προηγουμένως 
περὶ τοῦ λογικοῦ κριτηρίου διεξιέναι. ἀλλὰ καὶ 
τὸ λογικὸν κρυτήριον λέγοιτ᾽ ἂν τριχῶς, τὸ ὑφ᾽ 

Ὁ \ \ 3 e A \ 3 Ω ξΙ|3ν e \ 
οὗ Kat TO dt οὗ καὶ TO καθ᾽ ὃ, οἷον ὑφ᾽ οὗ μὲν 
av 3 Ὁ \ # a\ / > ἃ 
ἄνθρωπος, dt οὗ δὲ ἤτοι αἴσθησις ἢ διάνοια, Kal” ὃ 

\ ¢ \ ~ / > ἃ ¢ 
δὲ ἡ προσβολὴ τῆς φαντασίας, καθ᾽ ἣν ὁ ἄνθρωπος 
ἐπιβάλλει κρίνειν διά τινος τῶν προειρημένων. 

1] Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἁρμόζον ἦν ἴσως προειπεῖν, ἵνα 
ἐννοήσωμεν περὶ οὗ ἡμῖν ἐστὶν ὃ λόγος" λοιπὸν δὲ 

* See i. chap. xi. 

> 23,6. standards of weight and measure (6.0. pound, pint, 
yard), 

¢ Cf. Adv. Log. i. 261. 


a Examples of these three criteria are—the carpenter, his 
rule, the “‘ applying ᾽ of his rule; cf. Adv. Log. i. 35 f. 


160 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 14-17 


Cuaptrer I[II.—Or tHe Criterion 


But first we must notice that the word “ criterion ”’ 14 
is used both of that by which, as they say, we judge 
of reality and non-reality, and of that which we use 
as the guide of life ; and our present task is to discuss 
the co-called criterion of truth, since we have already 
dealt with the criterion in its other sense in our 
discourse “‘ On Scepticism.”’ @ 

The criterion, then, with which our argument is 15 
concerned, has three several meanings—the general, 
the special, and the most special. In the “‘ general” 
sense it is used of every standard of apprehension, 
and in this sense we speak even of physical organs, 
such as sight, as criteria. In the “ special ’’ sense 
it includes every technical standard of apprehen- 
sion, such as the rule and compass. In the “ most 
special ’’ sense it includes every technical standard 
of apprehension of a non-evident object ; but in this 
application ordinary standards ὃ are not regarded as 
criteria but only logical standards and those which 
the Dogmatists employ for the judging of truth. We 16 
propose, therefore, in the first place to discuss the 
logical criterion. But the logical criterion also may 
be used in three senses°—of the agent, or the 
instrument, or the “ according to what’; the agent, 
for instance, may be a man, the instrument either 
sense-perception or intelligence, and the “ according 
to what ” the application of the impression “‘ accord- 
ing to ᾿᾿ which the man proceeds to judge by means 
of one of the aforesaid instruments.? 

It was appropriate, I consider, to make these pre- 17 
fatory observations so that we may realize what is 
the exact subject of our discourse; and it remains 


VOL. I M 161 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐπὶ τὴν avTippnow χωρῶμεν τὴν πρὸς τοὺς réyov- 
τας προπετῶς κατειληφέναι τὸ κριτήριον τῆς 
> ἢ 5΄.ν κα “᾿κ 3 / 

ἀληθείας, ἀπὸ THs διαφωνίας" ἀρξάμενοι. 


Δ΄.---Εἴ ΥΠΑΡΧῈΕῈΙ TI ΚΡΙΤΉΡΙΟΝ ΑΛΗΘΕΙΑΣ 


ig Τῶν διαλαβόντων τοίνυν περὶ κρυτηρίου οἱ μὲν 
εἶναι τοῦτο ἀπεφήναντο, ὡς οἱ στωικοὶ καὶ ἄλλοι 
τινές, of δὲ μὴ εἶναι, ὡς ἄλλοι τε καὶ ὃ Κορίνθιος 
Revuddns καὶ Ξενοφάνης 6 Κολοφώνιος, λέγων 

δόκος δ᾽ ἐπὶ πᾶσι τέτυκται" 

ἡμεῖς δ᾽ ἐπέσχομεν" πότερον ἔστιν ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν. 

19 ταύτην οὖν τὴν διαφωνίαν ἤτοι ἐπικρυτὴν εἶναι 
φήσουσιν ἢ ἀνεπίκριτον: καὶ εἰ μὲν ἀνεπίκριτον, 
αὐτόθεν εἶναι δώσουσι τὸ δεῖν ἐπέχειν, εἰ δὲ ἐπι- 
κρίνεται, τίνι κριθήσεται λεγέτωσαν, μήτε κριτή- 
ριον ὁμολογούμενον ἡμῶν ἐχόντων, μήθ᾽ ὅλως εἰ 

20 ἔστιν εἰδότων ἀλλὰ ζητούντων. καὶ ἄλλως, ἵνα 
ἡ γενομένη περὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου διαφωνία ἐπικριθῇ, P 
δεῖ κριτήριον ἡμᾶς ἔχειν ὡμολογημένον, δι᾿ οὗ 
δυνησόμεθα κρίνειν αὐτήν" καὶ ἵνα κριτήριον ὁμο- 
λογούμενον ἔχωμεν, δεῖ πρότερον ἐπικριθῆναι τὴν 
περὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου διαφωνίαν. οὕτω δὲ εἰς τὸν 
διάλληλον ἐμπίπτοντος τρόπον τοῦ λόγου ἄπορος 
ἡ εὕρεσις τοῦ κριτηρίου γίνεται, μήτε ἐξ ὑποθέσεως 
ἡμῶν ἐώντων αὐτοὺς κριτήριον λαμβάνειν, ἐάν τε 
κριτηρίῳ τὸ κριτήριον κρίνειν ἐθέλωσιν, εἰς ἀπει- 


1 διαφωνίας T: ἀληθείας mss., Bekk. 
2 ἐπέσχομεν Kayser: ἐπίσχωμεν mss., Bekk. 





@ Farlier than Democritus ; ef. Adv. Log. i. 53, 388. 
> Cf. 1. 224; ae g. i. 48, 110. 
¢ Cf. i. 164 Εἰ, 115 ff. 


162 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 17-20 


for us to proceed to our counter-statement aimed 
against those who rashly assert that they have appre- 
hended the criterion of truth, and we will begin with 
the dispute which exists about this question. 


Cyuapter IV.—Doers a Crirerion or Trutu 
REALLY EXIST ? 


Of those, then, who have treated of the criterion 18 
some have declared that a criterion exists—the Stoics, 
for example, and certain others—while by some its 
existence is denied, as by the Corinthian Xeniades,* 
amongst others, and by Xenophanes? of Colophon, 
who says—‘‘ Over all things opinion bears sway ”’ ; 
while we have adopted suspension of judgement as 
to whether it does or does not exist. This dispute,¢ 19 
then, they will declare to be either capable or 
incapable of decision; and if they shall say it is in- 
capable of decision they will be granting on the spot 
the propriety of suspension of judgement, while if 
they say it admits of decision, let them tell us whereby 
it is to be decided, since we have no accepted criterion, 
and do not even know, but are still inquiring, whether 
any criterion exists. Besides, in order to decide the 20 
dispute which has arisen about the criterion, we must 
possess an accepted criterion by which we shall be 
able to judge the dispute ; and in order to possess 
an accepted criterion, the dispute about the criterion 
must first be decided. And when the argument thus 
reduces itself to a form of circular reasoning the dis- 
covery of the criterion becomes impracticable, since 
we do not allow them to adopt a criterion by assump- 
tion, while if they offer to judge the criterion by a 


163 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


3 A 
ρίαν αὐτοὺς ἐκβαλλόντων. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ μὲν 
3 / “~ , 3 ‘4 4 \ 
ἀπόδειξις δεῦται Kpirnpiov ἀποδεδειγμένου τὸ δὲ 
7 3 f f 3 \ 4 
κριτήριον ἀποδείξεως κεκριμένης, εἰς TOV διάλληλον 
ἐκβάλλονται τρόπον. 
>? > ¢€ Ἁ A “~ « 4 
21 Oidpevor οὖν ἱκανὰ καὶ ταῦτα εἶναι δεικνύναι 
τὴν τῶν δογματικῶν προπέτειαν κατὰ τὸν περὶ 
τοῦ κριτηρίου λόγον, ἵνα καὶ ποικίλως αὐτοὺς ἐλέγ- 
χειν ἔχωμεν, οὐκ ἄτοπον προσκαρτερῆσαι τῷ 
τόπῳ. οὐ μὴν ἑκάστῃ τῶν περὶ κριτηρίου δοξῶν 
€ “~ 4 ? ~ 3 , 4 
ἁμιλληθῆναι προαιρούμεθα εἰδικῶς (ἀμύθητος yap 
ς f 7 \ 4 > > 7 Α 
ἡ διαφωνία γέγονεν, καὶ οὕτως εἰς ἀμέθοδον καὶ 
ξ »" ’ 3 o 3 a 3 2 > > ‘ 
ἡμᾶς λόγον ἐμπεσεῖν ἀναγκαῖον ἔσται), ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ 
τὸ κριτήριον περὶ οὗ ζητοῦμεν τρισσὸν εἶναι δοκεῖ, 
᾿ @ 33 e \ ‘ > Ὁ \ A > ὦ o 
τό τε ὑφ᾽ οὗ καὶ TO Sv οὗ Kal TO καθ᾽ 6, ἕκαστον 
7 3 / 3 7 κ \ > / % “~ 
τούτων ἐπελθόντες ἐν μέρει τὴν ἀκαταληψίαν αὐτοῦ 
παραστήσομεν: οὕτω γὰρ ἐμμέθοδος ἅμα καὶ 
“ Φ oA ς ᾽ὔ 3 > f \ > ‘ 
τέλειος ἡμῖν 6 λόγος ἔσται. ἀρξώμεθα δὲ ἀπὸ 
τοῦ ὑφ᾽ οὗ: δοκεῖ γάρ πως συναπορεῖσθαι τούτῳ 
καὶ τὰ λοιπά. 


Ε΄, ILEPI ΤΟΥ ὙΦ᾽ OF 


22 ἋὋ ἄνθρωπος τοΐυν δοκεῖ μοι, ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς 
λεγομένοις ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν, οὐ μόνον ἀκατά- 
ληπτος ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀνεπινόητος εἶναι. ἀκούομεν γοῦν 

“- A ἤ > f / ¢ 
τοῦ mapa Ἰλάτωνι Σωκράτους διαρρήδην ὁμο- 
λογοῦντος μὴ εἰδέναι πότερον ἄνθρωπός ἐστιν ἢ 
ἕτερόν τι. παριστάναι τε βουλόμενοι τὴν ἔννοιαν 
164 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 20-22 


criterion we force them to a regress ad infinitum. 
And furthermore, since demonstration requires a 
demonstrated criterion, while the criterion requires 
an approved demonstration, they are forced into 
circular reasoning. 

We suppose, then, that this is sufficient to expose 
the rashness of the Dogmatists in respect of their 
doctrine of the Criterion ; but in order to enable us 
to confute them in detail, it will not be out of place 
to dwell at length upon this topic. We do not, 
however, desire ‘to oppose their opinions about the 
criterion severally, one by one—for their contro- 
versy is endless, and to do so would necessarily involve 
us as well in a confused discussion,—but inasmuch as 
the criterion in question is three-fold (the agent, the 
instrument, and the “ according to what ’’), we shall 
discuss each of these in turn and exhibit the non- 
apprehensibility of each, since in this way our exposi- 
tion will be at once both methodical and complete. 
Let us begin with the agent; for the perplexity 
which attaches to this seems somehow to involve the 
rest as well. 


Cuapter V.—Or tue Criterion “ By wom,” 
orn AGENT 


Now “ Man” (if he is “ the agent ’’) seems to me, 
so far as regards the statements made by the Dog- 
matists, to be not only non-apprehensible but also in- 
conceivable. At least we hear the Platonic Socrates * 
expressly confessing that he does not know whether 
he is a man or something else. And when they wish 
to exhibit the concept of “‘ Man ” they disagree in 


α Cf. Plato, Phaedr. 229 = f., Theaet. 174 8. 
165 


2] 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


“~ ἴω \ “~ 
αὐτοῦ πρῶτον μὲν διαφωνοῦσιν, εἶτα καὶ dovvera 
λέγουσιν. 

2. “O pev γὰρ Δημόκριτός φησιν ὅτι ἀνθρωπός 
ἐστιν ὃ πάντες ἴσμεν. ὅσον δ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτῳ οὐ γνωσό- 
μεθα τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἐπεὶ καὶ κύνα ἴσμεν, καὶ παρὰ 

΄-΄. i A 
τοῦτο ἔσται καὶ ὃ κύων ἄνθρωπος. τινάς τε 
} 
ἀνθρώπους οὐκ ἴσμεν" διὸ οὐκ ἔσονται ἄνθρωποι. 
~ 7 Lyd ? AN om > 7 7 >] \ » 
μᾶλλον δέ, ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇ ἐννοίᾳ ταύτῃ, οὐδεὶς ἔσται 
ἄνθρωπος" εἰ γὰρ ἐκεῖνος μέν φησι δεῖν ὑπὸ πάντων 
γινώσκεσθαι τὸν ἄνθρωπον, οὐδένα δὲ ἄνθρωπον 
ἴσασι πάντες ἄνθρωποι, οὐδεὶς ἔσται κατ΄ αὐτὸν 
wv \ 7 “~ 3 ‘4 4 
24 ἄνθρωπος. καὶ ὅτι ταῦτα οὐ σοφιζόμενοι λέγομεν, 
~ \ \ 
ἐκ τῆς πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀκολουθίας daiverar. μόνα yap 
\ 
κατ᾽ ἀλήθειαν ὑπάρχειν φησὶν ὁ ἀνὴρ τὰ ἄτομα 
\ / 4 \ / a 
καὶ TO κενόν, ἅπερ φησὶν οὐ μόνον τοῖς ζώοις 
ἀλλὰ καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς συγκρίμασιν ὑπάρχειν, ὥστε 
ὅσον μὲν ἐπὶ τούτοις οὐκ ἐπινοήσομεν τὴν τοῦ 
ἀνθρώπου ἰδιότητα, ἐπειδὴ κοινὰ πάντων ἐστίν. 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἄλλο τι ὑπόκειται παρὰ ταῦτα" οὐκ ἄρα 
ἕξομεν δι’ οὗ τὸν ἄνθρωπον διακρῖναί τε ἀπὸ τῶν 
Ψ / \ 3 ~ foal ; 
ἄλλων ζώων καὶ εἰλικρινῶς νοῆσαι δυνησόμεθα. 

95 ‘O δ᾽ ’Emixoupéds φησιν ἄνθρωπον εἶναι τὸ 

τοιουτοὶ μόρφωμα μετὰ ἐμψυχίας. καὶ κατὰ τοῦ- 
? > A ¢ mM [4 >? ’ ε \ 

τον δέ, ἐπεὶ 6 ἄνθρωπος δείξει ἐμφανίζεται, ὁ μὴ 
3 A > \ 

δεικνύμενος οὐκ ἔστιν ἄνθρωπος. καὶ εἰ μὲν 

“ 2. AN 

γυναῖκα δείκνυσί tis, 6 ἀνὴρ οὐκ ἔσται ἄνθρωπος, 
3 \ vf ξ \ + ? 4 \ \ 
εἰ δὲ ἄνδρα, ἡ γυνὴ ἄνθρωπος οὐκ ἔσται. τὰ δὲ 
αὐτὰ ἐπιχειρήσομεν καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς διαφορᾶς τῶν 





@ Cf. 1. 213 ff. ; Adv. Log. i. 265. 
Ὁ Cf. Adv. Log.i. 267. Epicurus taught that truth is given 


166 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 22~25 


the first place, and in the second place they speak 
unintelligibly. 

Thus Democritus 5 declares that “‘ Man is that 23 
which we all know.”’ Then, so far as his opinion goes, 
we shall not know Man, since we also know a dog, and 
consequently Dog too will be Man. And some men 
we do not know, therefore they will not be men. Or 
rather, if we are to judge by this concept, no one will 
be aman; for since Democritus says that Man must 
be known by all, and all men know no.one man, 
no one, according to him, will be aman. And it is 24 
evident from the relevance of this criticism that we 
are not now arguing sophistically. For this thinker 
proceeds to say that “ Only the atoms and the void 
truly exist,” and these he says “ form the substrate 
not only of animals but of all compound substances,” 
so that, so far as depends on these, we shall not form 
a concept of the particular essence of ‘‘ Man,” seeing 
that they are common to all things. But besides 
these there is no existing substrate ; so that we shall 
possess no means whereby we shall be able to dis- 
tinguish Man from the other animals and form a 
precise conception of him. 

Again, Epicurus says that Man is “ This sort 25 
of a shape combined with vitality.” According 
to him, then, since Man is shown by pointing out, 
he that is not pointed out is not a man, and if anyone 
points out a female, the male will not be Man, while 
if he points out a male the female will not be Man. 
And we shall also draw the same inferences from the 
by sense-perception: the percept is the real “thing in 
itself’? ; hence we have no general concepts which can be 
logically “defined”? but only particular phenomena which 


are “indicated” or pointed out as ‘such and such, look 
you ”’ (τοιουτοί) : ef. Introd. p. xxiii. 
167 


26 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


περιστάσεων ἃς ἴσμεν ἐκ τοῦ τετάρτου τρόπου THs 
ἐποχῆς. 

Ἄλλοι ἔφασκον ἄνθρωπον εἶναι ζῶον λογικὸν 
θνητόν, νοῦ καὶ ἐπιστήμης δεκτικόν. ἐπεὶ οὖν 
δείκνυται ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τῆς ἐποχῆς τρόπῳ ὅτι 
οὐδέν ἐστι ζῶον ἄλογον, ἀλλὰ καὶ νοῦ καὶ ἐπι- 
στήμης δεκτικά ἐστι πάντα, ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς ὑπ᾽ 
αὐτῶν λεγομένοις οὐ γνωσόμεθα τί ποτε λέγουσιν. 


tA ᾽ ? ΄- id 7 ” > 
27 τά τε κείμενα ἐν TH ὅρῳ συμβεβηκότα ἤτοι κατ 


28 


39 7 ’ἤ al 7 > \ ἕν 9 
ἐνέργειαν λέγουσιν 7 δυνάμει. εἰ μὲν οὖν κατ 
ἐνέργειαν, οὐκ ἔστιν ἄνθρωπος ὁ μὴ ἐπιστήμην 
” , 3 \ \ 3 ~ / / 
ἤδη τελείαν ἀπειληφὼς καὶ ἐν τῷ λόγῳ τέλειος 
ὧν καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ ἀποθνήσκειν καθεστώς:" 
τοῦτο γὰρ τὸ ἐνεργείᾳ θνητόν ἐστιν. εἰ δὲ δυνάμει, 
” 
οὐκ ἔσται ἄνθρωπος οὔτε 6 τὸν λόγον ἔχων τέλειον 
οὔτε ὃ νοῦν καὶ ἐπιστήμην ἀνειληφώς" [καὶ] τοῦτο 
\ ~ 
δὲ τοῦ προτέρου ἐστὶν ἀτοπώτερον. 
Καὶ ταύτῃ ἄρα ἀσύστατος πέφηνεν ἡ ἐπίνοια τοῦ 
> 4 < \ é M4 > “ A 2 
ἀνθρώπου. ὁ γὰρ Ἰλάτων ὅταν ἀξιοῖ τὸν ἄνθρωπον 
εἶναι ζῶον ἄπτερον δίπουν πλατυώνυχον, ἐπι- 
/ ~ / 29 \ > A ? o. 
στήμης πολιτικῆς δεκτικόν, οὐδὲ αὐτὸς ἀξιοῖ δια- 
~ “A A 
βεβαιωτικῶς τοῦτο ἐκτίθεσθαι: εἰ yap Kat ὁ 
~ \ 
ἄνθρωπος ἕν τί ἐστι TOV κατ᾽ αὐτὸν γινομένων 
\ »Ἤ δὲ ὃ / + 10 / δὲ \ 
μὲν ὄντως δὲ οὐδέποτε ὄντων, ἀδύνατον δὲ περὶ 
»-ῤ 7 2, ~~ > f 
τῶν μηδέποτε ὄντων διαβεβαιωτικῶς ἀποφαίνεσθαι 
3 > / ὋΝ ¢ / > A \ 4 
Kar αὐτόν, οὐδὲ ὁ Πλάτων ἀξιώσει τὸν ὅρον 





« ΟἹ i. 100. 
δ Stoics and Peripatetics, cf, § 211 infra. 
¢ See i. 40 ff. 


168 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 25-28 


difference in the circumstances which we learn from 
the Fourth Mode of Suspension. 

Others ® used to assert that “‘ Man is a rational 98 
mortal animal, receptive of intelligence and science.”’ 
Now since it is shown by the First Mode of 
Suspension® that no animal is irrational but all 
are receptive of intelligence and science, so far 
as their statements go, we shall be unable to per- 
ceive what they mean. And the attributes contained 27 
in this definition are used either in an “ actual,” or 
full, or in a potential sense?; if in a full sense, 
he that has not already acquired complete science 
and is not rationally perfect and in the very act of 
dying—for this is to be mortal in the full sense of 
the word—is not a man. And if the sense is to be 
potential, then he will not be a man who possesses 
reason in perfection or who has acquired intelligence 
and science ; but this conclusion is even more absurd 
than the former. 

In this way, then, the concept of Man is shown to be 
one which it is impossible to frame. For when Plato ὁ 28 
declares that “ Man is a featherless two-footed animal 
with broad nails, receptive of political science,” not 
even he himself claims to affirm this positively ; for 
if Man is one of the class of things which, as he puts 
it,’ come into being but never possess absolute 
being, and if it is impossible, in his view, to make a 
positive declaration about things which never really 
exist, then even Plato will not claim to be taken as 


¢ The familiar Aristotelian distinction between “ actuality” 
and “ potentiality ’’ is here used by Sextus to confute the 
Peripatetics, ef. Introd. p. xx. 
a Cf. «ldv. Log. i. 281; Diog. Laert. vi. 40; [Plato], Def. 
! Ae 
7 Cf. Theaet. 152 τ, Tim. 27 Ὁ. 
169 


29 


90 


91 


32 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐκτίθεσθαι δοκεῖν ws διαβεβαιούμενος, ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ 
εἴωθεν κατὰ τὸ πιθανὸν λέγων. 

Ei μέντοι καὶ δοίημεν κατὰ συγχώρησιν ὅτι 
ἐπινοεῖσθαι δύναται ὃ ἄνθρωπος, ἀκατάληπτος 
εὑρεθήσεται. συνέστηκε μὲν γὰρ ἐκ ψυχῆς καὶ 
σώματος, οὔτε δὲ τὸ σῶμα καταλαμβάνεται τάχα 
οὔτε ἡ ψυχή: οὐδὲ ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἄρα. καὶ ὅτι μὲν 
τὸ σῶμα οὐ καταλαμβάνεται, δῆλον ἐντεῦθεν" τὰ 
συμβεβηκότα τινὶ ἕτερά ἐστιν ἐκείνου ᾧ συμ- 
βέβηκεν. ὅταν οὖν χρῶμα ἤ τι παραπλήσιον ἡμῖν 
ὑποπίπτῃ,. τὰ συμβεβηκότα τῷ σώματι εἰκὸς ἡμῖν 
ὑποπίπτειν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ αὐτὸ τὸ σῶμα. τό γέ Tou 
σῶμα τριχῇ διαστατὸν εἶναι λέγουσιν: ὀφείλομεν 
οὖν τὸ μῆκος καὶ τὸ πλάτος καὶ τὸ βάθος κατα- 
λαμβάνειν, ἵνα τὸ σῶμα καταλάβωμεν. εἰ γὰρ 
τοῦτο ἡμῖν ὑπέπιπτεν, ἐγινώσκομεν ἂν καὶ τὰ 
ὑπάργυρα χρυσία. οὐδὲ τὸ σῶμα apa. 

Ἵνα δὲ Kat τὴν περὶ τοῦ σώματος ἀμφισβήτησιν 
παρῶμεν, πάλιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος εὑρίσκεται ἀκατά- 
ληπτος διὰ τὸ ἀκατάληπτον εἶναι τὴν ψυχήν. ὅτι 
δὲ ἀκατάληπτός ἐστιν αὕτη, δῆλον ἐντεῦθεν: τῶν 
περὶ ψυχῆς διαλαβόντων, ἵνα τὴν πολλὴν καὶ 
ἀνήνυτον μάχην παρα. ἔπωμεν, οὗ μὲν μὴ εἶναι τὴν 
ψυχὴν ἔφασαν, ὡς οἱ περὶ τὸν Μεσσήνιον Δικαί- 
αρχον, ot δὲ εἶναι, of δὲ ἐπέσχον. ταύτην οὖν τὴν 
διαφωνίαν εἰ μὲν ἀνεπίκριτον εἶναι λέξουσιν οἵ 


176 γέ rot: the particles seem out of place here; read 
perhaps αὐτό τε τὸ. 





a Perchance,” one of the Sceptic formulae, cf. i. 194. 

δ i.e. 8, “ substance ”” in the Aristotelian sense, as aa 
guished from its“ attributes,”’ “‘ properties,”’ or δ accidents 
ef. Adv. Log. i. 283 ff. 


170 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 28-32 


putting forward this definition positively, but rather 
as making, in his usual way, a probable statement. 

But even if we should grant, by way of concession, 29 
that Man can be conceived, yet he will be found 
to be non-apprehensible. For he is compounded of 
soul and body, and neither body nor soul perchance ὦ 
is apprehended ; so that Man is not apprehended. 
Now that body is not apprehended is easily shown 30 
thus : the attributes of an object ὃ are different from 
the object whereof they are attributes. So when 
colour or any similar quality is perceived by us, what 
we perceive is probably the attributes of the body 
but not the body itself. Certainly the body, they say, 
exists in three dimensions ; we ought therefore to 
apprehend its length and breadth and depth in order 
to apprehend the body. For if we perceived depth °¢ 
we should also discern silver pieces under their 
coating of gold. Therefore we do not apprehend 
the body either. 

But, not to dwell on the controversy about the 31 
body, Man is also found to be non-apprehensible 
owing to the fact that his soul is non-apprehensible. 
That it is non-apprehensible is plain from this: of 
those who have treated of the soul—so that we may 
avoid dwelling on the long and endless controversy 
—some have asserted, as did Dicaearchus? the 
Messenian, that the soul has no existence, others 
that it has existence, and others have suspended 
judgement. If, then, the Dogmatists shall maintain 32 


° Lit. “this”? (τοῦτο: Mutsch. suggests ταῦτα), The argu- 
ment would be clearer if we inserted the words “‘ But we 
do not apprehend depth” after “body”; the text as it 
stands is too obscure to be sound. 
ee ne of Aristotle, ef. Adv. Log. i. 349; Cicero, Tuse. 
i. 10. 22. 


171 


94 


35 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δογματικοΐ, δώσουσιν. αὐτόθεν τὴν τῆς ψυχῆς 
ἀκαταληψίαν, εἰ δὲ ἐπικριτήν, τίνι ἐπικρινοῦσιν 
αὐτὴν εἰπάτωσαν. αἰσθήσει μὲν γὰρ οὐ δύνανται 
διὰ τὸ νοητὴν ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν εἶναι λέγεσθαι: εἰ δὲ 
λέξουσιν ὅτι διανοίᾳ, ἐροῦμεν ὅτι ἐπεὶ τῆς ψυχῆς 
τὸ ἀδηλότατόν ἐστιν ἡ διάνοια, ὡς δεικνύουσιν οἱ 
περὶ μὲν τῆς ὑπάρξεως τῆς ψυχῆς ὁμοφωνοῦντες 
περὶ δὲ τῆς διανοίας διαφερόμενοι, εἰ τῇ διανοίᾳ 
τὴν Ψυχὴν ἐθέλουσι καταλαμβάνειν καὶ τὴν περὶ 
αὐτῆς διαφωνίαν ἐπικρίνειν, τῷ μᾶλλον ζητουμένῳ 
τὸ ἧττον ζητούμενον ἐπικρίνειν τε καὶ βεβαιοῦν 
ἐθελήσουσιν, ὅπερ ἄτοπον. οὐδὲ τῇ διανοίᾳ τοίνυν 
ἐπικριθήσεται ἡ ἡ περὶ τῆς ψυχῆς διαφωνία. οὐδενὶ 
ἄρα. εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, καὶ ἀκατάληπτος ἐστίν. ὅθεν 
οὐδὲ ὁ ἄνθρωπος καταλαμβάνοιτ᾽ av. 

Ἵνα δὲ καὶ δῶμεν ὅτι καταλαμβάνεται ὁ av- 
θρωπος, μήποτε οὐκ ἂν ἐνδέχοιτο δεῖξαι ὅτι ὑπ᾽ 
αὐτοῦ κρίνεσθαι δεῖ τὰ πράγματα. 6 γὰρ λέγων 
ὅτι ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπου δεῖ κρίνεσθαι τὰ πράγματα, ἤτοι 
ἄνευ ἀποδείξεως τοῦτο λέξει ἢ μετὰ ἀποδείξεως. 
οὔτε δὲ μετὰ ἀποδείξεως" δεῖ γὰρ τὴν ἀπόδειξιν 
ἀληθῆ εἶναι καὶ κεκριμένην, διὰ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ ὑπό 
τινος κεκριμένην. ἐπεὶ οὖν οὐκ ἔχομεν εἰπεῖν ὁμο- 
λογουμένως ὑφ᾽ οὗ κριθῆναι δυνήσεται αὐτὴ ἡ 
ἀπόδειξις (ζητοῦμεν γὰρ τὸ κριτήριον τὸ ὑφ᾽ od), 
οὐ δυνησόμεθα τὴν ἀπόδει ιν ἐπικρίνειν, διὰ 33 
τοῦτο οὐδὲ TO κριτήριον περὶ οὗ 6 λόγος ἀπο- 
δεικνύναι. εἰ δὲ ἀναποδείκτως λεχθήσεται ὅτι ὑπὸ 
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου δεῖ κριθῆναι τὰ πράγματα, ἄπιστον 

@ Of. i. 115, 164 ff. Note that, in the context, the words 


“test,” δ judge, *” “ decide,’ are various renderings of κρίνω 
(whence κριτήριον). 


172 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 32-35 


that this dispute is incapable of decision, they will 
be admitting thereby the non-apprehensibility of the 
soul, while if they say it is capable of decision, let 
them tell us by what means they will decide it. For 
they cannot say “ by sense-perception,” since the 
soul is said by them to be an object of intelligence ; 
and if they shall say “ by the intellect,” we will say 
that inasmuch as the intellect is the least evident part 
of the soul—as is shown by those who agree about the 
real existence of the soul, though differing about the 
intellect,—if they propose to apprehend the soul and 33 
to decide the dispute about it by means of the in- 
tellect, they will be proposing to decide and establish 
the less questionable matter by the more questionable, 
which is absurd. Thus, neither by the intellect will 
the dispute about the soul be decided; therefore there 
is no means to decide it. And this being so, it is 
non-apprehensible ; and, in consequence, Man too 
will not be apprehended. 

But even supposing we grant that Man is appre- 34 
hended, it would not, probably, be possible to show 
that objects ought to be judged by him. For he who 
asserts that objects ought to be judged by Man will 
be asserting this either without proof or with proof.4 
Not with proof; for the proof must be true and 
tested, and therefore tested by some standard. 
Since, then, we are unable to make an agreed state- 
ment as to the standard by which the proof itself can 
be tested (for we are still inquiring about the criterion 
“ΒΥ whom ”’), we shall be unable to pronounce judge- 
ment on the proof, and therefore also to prove the 
criterion, which is the subject of discussion. And 35 
if it shall be asserted without proof that objects 
ought to be judged by Man, the assertion will be 


173 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἔσται, ὥστε ody ἕξομεν διαβεβαιοῦσθαι ὅτι τὸ ὑφ᾽ 
οὗ κριτήριόν ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος. ὑπὸ τίνος δὲ καὶ 
κριθήσεται ὅτι τὸ ὑφ᾽ οὗ κριτήριον ὁ ἄνθρωπος 
ἐστίν; οὐ γὰρ δὴ ἀκρίτως τοῦτο λέγοντες πιστευ- 
θήσονται. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπου, τὸ ζητού- 

86 μενον συναρπασθήσεται. εἰ δ᾽ ὑπὸ ἑτέρου ζώου, 
πῶς ἐκεῖνο πρὸς τὴν κρίσιν τοῦ ἄνθρωπον εἶναι τὸ 
κριτήριον παραλαμβάνεται; εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἀκρίτως, 
οὐ πιστευθήσεται, εἰ δὲ μετὰ κρίσεως, πάλιν ἐκεῖνο 
ὑπό τινος ὀφείλει κριθῆναι. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, 
μένει ἡ αὐτὴ ἀτοπία (τὸ ζητούμενον γὰρ διὰ τοῦ 
ζητουμένου κριθήσεται), εἰ δὲ ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπου, ὁ 
διάλληλος εἰσάγεται τρόπος" εἰ δὲ ὑπό τινος παρὰ 
ταῦτα ἄλλου, πάλιν ἐκείνου τὸ κρυτήριον ἀπαιτή- 
σομεν τὸ ὑφ᾽ οὗ, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο ἄρα οὐχ ἕξομεν λέγειν ὡς ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπου δεῖ 
κρίνεσθαι τὰ πράγματα. 

81] Ἔστω δὲ καὶ πεπιστώσθω τὸ δεῖν ὑπὸ τοῦ 
ἀνθρώπου κρίνεσθαι τὰ πράγματα. οὐκοῦν ἐπεὶ 
πολλὴ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐστὶ διαφορά, πρότερον οἱ 
Soyparikol συμφωνησάτωσαν ὅτι τῷδε τῷ ἀν- 
ρώπῳ δεῖ προσέχειν, εἶθ᾽ οὕτω καὶ ἡμᾶς αὐτῷ 
θέσθαι κελευέτωσαν. εἰ δ᾽ 


vf 
ἔστ᾽ ἂν ὕδωρ τε van καὶ δένδρεα μακρὰ τεθήλῃ, 


τοῦτο δὴ τὸ τοῦ λόγου, περὶ αὐτοῦ διαφωνήσουσιν, 
πῶς ἡμᾶς ἐπείγουσι προπετῶς τινὲ συγκατα- 
33 τίθεσθαι; ἣν γὰρ καὶ λέγωσιν ὅτι τῷ σοφῷ πιο- 
τευτέον, ἐρωτήσομεν αὐτοὺς ποίῳ σοφῷ, πότερον 
τῷ κατὰ Ἐπίκουρον ἢ τῷ κατὰ τοὺς Στωικοὺς ἢ 





« The fallacy of petitio principii, cf. 88 57, 60, 67 infra. 
174 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 35-38 


disbelieved, so that we shall be unable to affirm 
positively that the criterion “‘ By whom ” (or Agent) 
is Man. Moreover, who is to be the judge that the 
criterion of the Agentis Man? For if they assert this 
without a judgement (or criterion) they will surely not 
be believed. Yetif they say that a man is to be the 36 
judge, that will be assuming the point at issue 2; 
while if they make another animal the judge, in what 
way do they come to adopt that animal for the 
purpose of judging whether Man is the criterion? If 
they do so without a judgement, it will not be believed, 
and if with a judgement, it in turn needs to be judged 
by something. If, then, it is judged by itself, the 
same absurdity remains (for the object of inquiry will 
be judged by the object of inquiry); and if by Man, 
circular reasoning is introduced; and if by some 
judge other than these two, we shall once again in his 
case demand the criterion ‘‘ By whom,”’ and so on ad 
infinitum. Consequently we-shall not be in a position 
to declare that objects ought to be judged by Man. 
But let it be granted and established that objects 37 
ought to be judged by Man. Then, since there exists 
great difference amongst men, let the Dogmatists 
first agree together that this is the particular man to 
whom we must attend, and then, and only then, let 
them bid us also to yield him our assent. But if they 
are going to dispute about this “ long as the waters 
flow on and the tall trees cease not to burgeon ”’ (to 
quote the familiar saying),’ how can they urge us to 
assent rashly to anyone? For if they declare that 38 
we must believe the Sage, we shall ask them “‘ What 
Sage?” Is it the Sage of Epicurus or of the Stoics, 


> From the inscription on the tomb of Midas quoted in 
Plato, Phaedr. 264 Ὁ : cf. Tibullus i. 4. 60. 


175 


39 


40 


4] 


42 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῷ «Κυρηναϊκῷ ἢ τῷ Κυνικῷ: οὐχ ἕξουσι γὰρ 
συμφώνως εἰπεῖν. 

Ei δὲ ἀξιώσει. τις ἡμᾶς τῆς περὶ τοῦ σοφοῦ 
ζητήσεως ἀποστάντας ἁπλῶς τῷ συνετωτέρῳ τῶν 
ὄντων ἁπάντων πιστεύειν, πρῶτον μὲν καὶ περὶ 
τοῦ τίς συνετώτερός ἐστι τῶν ἄλλων διαφωνήσου- 
σιν, εἶτα κἂν δοθῇ συμφώνως δύνασθαι ληφθῆναι 
τίς ἐστι τῶν τε ὄντων καὶ τῶν γεγονότων συνε- 
TWTEPOS, οὐδ᾽ οὕτως ἔσται πίστεως οὗτος ἀξιος. 
ἐπεὶ γὰρ πολλὴ καὶ σχεδὸν ἄπειρός ἐστιν ἐπίτασίς 
τε καὶ ἄνεσις κατὰ σύνεσιν, φαμὲν ὅτι τούτου τοῦ 
ἀνθρώπου ὃ ὃν "λέγομεν εἶναι τῶν γεγονότων τε καὶ 
ὄντων συνετώτερον, ἕτερον “συνετώτερον ἐνδέχεται 
γενέσθαι. ὥσπερ οὖν τῷ νῦν εἶναι λεγομένῳ φρο- 
νιμωτέρῳ τῶν τε ὄντων καὶ τῶν γεγονότων διὰ 
τὴν σύνεσιν αὐτοῦ πιστεύειν ἀξιούμεθα, οὕτω καὶ 
τῷ μετ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐσομένῳ τούτου συνετωτέρῳ paA- 
λον τούτου χρὴ πιστεύειν. καὶ ἐκείνου γενομένου 
πάλιν ἄλλον ἐλπίζειν χρὴ συνετώτερον αὐτοῦ 
γενήσεσθαι, κἀκείνου ἄλλον, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. 
καὶ ἄδηλον πότερόν ποτε συμφωνήσουσιν ἀλλήλοις 
οὗτοι ἢ διάφωνα λέξουσιν. ,διόπερ κἂν τῶν γεγονό- 
τῶν τε καὶ ὄντων συνετώτερος εἶναι ὁμολογηθῇ 
τις, ἐπεὶ οὐκ ἔχομεν εἰπεῖν διαβεβαιωτικῶς ὅτι 
οὐδεὶς ἔσται τούτου ἀγχινούστερος (ἄδηλον γάρ), 
ἀεὶ δεήσει τὴν τοῦ μετὰ ταῦτα ἐσομένου συνετω- 
τέρου κρίσιν περιμένειν καὶ μηδέποτε συγκατα- 
τίθεσθαι τῷ κρείττονι. 

Ἵνα δὲ καὶ κατὰ συγχώρησιν δῶμεν ὅτι οὐδεὶς 
τοῦ ὑποτιθεμένου συνετοῦ συνετώτερος οὔτε ἔστιν 


1 cK. ἢ τῷ» add. Τ, 
176 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 38-42 


the Cyrenaic Sage or the Cynic? For they will be 
unable to return a unanimous answer. 

And if anyone shall demand that we should desist 39 
from our inquiry about the Sage and simply believe 
the man who is more sagacious than all others, then, 
in the first place, they will dispute as to who is more 
sagacious than the rest, and in the next place, even 
if it be granted that it can be unanimously agreed 
who the man is who is more sagacious than those of 
the present and the past, even so this man will not 
deserve credence. For inasmuch as sagacity is liable 40 
to a great, indeed almost incalculable, advance or 
decline in intensity, we assert that it is possible for 
another man to arise who is more sagacious than this 
man who, we say, is more sagacious than those of the 
past and present. So, then, just as we are requested 
to believe the man who is now said to be wiser than 
those of the present and the past because of his 
sagacity, so it is still more proper to believe his 
successor in the future who will be more sagacious 
than he. And when that successor has arisen, then 
it is right to expect that yet another will arise more 
sagacious than he, and so on ad infinitum. Nor is it 41 
evident whether all these men will agree with one 
another or contradict one another. And consequently, 
even when one of them is acknowledged to be more 
sagacious than those of the past and present, seeing 
that we are unable to affirm positively that no man 
will be more clever than he (this being non-evident), 
we shall always have to wait for the judgement of the 
more sagacious man of the future, and never give our 
assent to this superior person. 

And even should we grant, by way of concession, 42 
that no one either is, was, or will be more sagacious 


VOL. I N 177 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


οὔτε ἐγένετο οὔτε ἔσται, οὐδὲ ὡς πιστεύειν αὐτῷ 
προσήκει. ἐπεὶ γὰρ dduora of συνετοὶ φιλοῦσιν 
ἐν τῇ τῶν πραγμάτων κατασκευῇ τοῖς σαθροῖς 
παριστάμενοι πράγμασιν ὑγιῆ καὶ ἀληθῆ ταῦτα 
δοκεῖν εἶναι ποιεῖν, ὅταν τι λέγῃ οὗτος ὃ ἀγχίνους, 
οὐκ εἰσόμεθα πότερόν ποτε, ὡς ἔχει τὸ πρᾶγμα 
φύσεως, οὕτω λέγει, 7 ψεῦδος αὐτὸ ὑπάρχον ὡς 
ἀληθὲς παρίστησι καὶ ἡμᾶς πείθει φρονεῖν ὡς περὶ 
ἀληθοῦς, ἅτε δὴ συνετώτερος τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἁπάν- 
των ὑπάρχων καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐλέγχεσθαι 
μὴ δυνάμενος. οὐδὲ τούτῳ τοίνυν συγκαταθησό- 
μεθα ὡς ἀληθῶς τὰ πράγματα κρίνοντι, διὰ τὸ 
οἴεσθαι μὲν αὐτὸν ἀληθῆ «ἐνεῖναι »" λέγειν, οἴεσθαι 
δ᾽ ὅτι δι᾿ ὑπερβολὴν ἀγχινοίας τὰ ψευδῆ τῶν πραγ- 
μάτων ὡς ἀληθῆ βουλόμενος παριστᾶν ἅ φησι 
λέγει. διὰ ταῦτα μὲν οὖν οὐδὲ τῷ τῶν ἁπάντων 
ἀγχινουστάτῳ δοκοῦντι ὑπάρχειν ἐν τῇ κρίσει τῶν 
/ \ 7 

br χρὴ πιστεύειν. 

43 Hi δὲ φήσει τις ὅτι τῇ τῶν πολλῶν συμφωνίᾳ δεῖ 
προσέχειν, λέξομεν ὁ ὅτι τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι μάταιον. πρῶτον 
μὲν γὰρ σπάνιον ἴσως ἐστὶ τὸ ἀληθές, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο 
ἐνδέχεται ἕνα τῶν πολλῶν φρονιμώτερον εἶναι. 
εἶτα καὶ παντὶ κριτηρίῳ πλείους ἀντιδοξοῦσι τῶν 
κατ᾽ αὐτὸ συμφωνούντων: ot γὰρ ὁποιονοῦν ἀπο- 
λιπόντες κριτήριον ἕτερον τοῦ συμφωνεῖσθαι δο- 
κοῦντος παρά τισιν ἀντιδοξοῦσί τε αὐτῷ καὶ κατὰ 
πολὺ πλείους εἰσὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτοῦ συμφωνούντων. 

44 χωρὶς δὲ τούτων, οἱ συμφωνοῦντες ἤτοι ἐν δια- 
φόροις εἰσὶ διαθέσεσιν ἢ ἢ ἐν μιᾷ. ἐν διαφόροις μὲν 
οὖν οὐδαμῶς ὅσον ἐπὶ τῷ λεγομένῳ: πῶς γὰρ ἂν 


1 «ἐνεῖναῷ addidi: «εϊνα add. EBA. 
178 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 42-44 


than our hypothetical Sage, not even so is it proper 
to believe him. For since it is the sagacious above 
all who, in the construction of their doctrines, love 
to champion unsound doctrines and to make them 
appear sound and true, whenever this sharp-witted 
person makes a statement we shall not know whether 
he is stating the matter as it really is, or whether he 
is defending as true what is really false and persuading 
us to think of it as something true, on the ground that 
he is more sagacious than all other men and therefore 
incapable of being refuted by us. So not even to 
this man will we assent, as one who judges matters 
truly, since, though we suppose it possible that he 
speaks the truth, we also suppose that owing to his 
excessive cleverness he makes his statements with 
the object of defending false propositions as true. 
Consequently, in the judgement of propositions we 
ought not to believe even the man who is thought to 
be the most clever of all. 

And if anyone shall say that we ought to attend to 43 
the consensus of the majority, we shall reply that this 
is idle.* For, in the first place, truth is a rare thing, 
and on this account it is possible for one man to be 
wiser than the majority. And, next, the opponents 
of any criterion are more numerous than those who 
agree about it; for those who admit any kind of 
criterion different from that which seems to some to 
be generally agreed upon oppose this latter, and they 
are much more numerous than those who agree about 
it. And besides all this, those who agree are either 44 
in diverse dispositions ὃ or in one and thesame. Now 
they certainly are not in diverse dispositions so far as 
regards the matter under discussion ; else how could 


* Cf. Adv. Log. i. 327 ff. => Cf. 1. 100; Adv. Log. i. 333. 
179 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τὰ αὐτὰ ἔλεγον περὶ αὐτοῦ; εἰ δὲ ἐν μιᾷ, ἐπεὶ 
καὶ ὃ εἷς ὃ λέγων ἕτερόν τι μίαν ἔχει διάθεσιν καὶ 
οὗτοι πάντες οἱ συμφωνοῦντες μίαν, ὅσον ἐπὶ ταῖς 
διαθέσεσιν αἷς προσέχομεν οὐδὲ κατὰ πλῆθος 

45 εὑρίσκεται διαφορά τις. διόπερ οὐ χρὴ τοῖς πολ- 
λοῖς προσέχειν μᾶλλον ἢ τῷ ἑνί, πρὸς τῷ καὶ 
ἀκατάληπτον εἶναι, καθάπερ ἐν τῷ τετάρτῳ τρόπῳ 
τῆς σκέψεως ὑπεμνήσαμεν, τὴν κατὰ πλῆθος δια- 
φορὰν τῶν κρίσεων, ἀπείρων τῶν κατὰ μέρος 
ἀνθρώπων ὑπαρχόντων καὶ ἡμῶν μὴ δυναμένων 
ἁπάντων αὐτῶν τὰς κρίσεις ἐπελθεῖν καὶ ἀποφή- 
νασθαι τί μὲν οἱ πλείους τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἁπάντων 
ἀποφαίνονται τί δὲ of ἐλάττους. καὶ κατὰ τοῦτο 
οὖν ἄτοπος ἡ κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος πρόκρισις τῶν 
κρινόντων. 

46 Ei δ᾽ οὐδὲ τῷ πλήθει προσέξομεν, οὐχ εὑρήσομεν 
οὐδένα ὑφ᾽ οὗ κριθήσεται τὰ πράγματα, καίτοι 
τοσαῦτα κατὰ συγχώρησιν διδόντες. διόπερ ἐξ 
ἁπάντων τούτων ἀκατάληπτον εὑρίσκεται τὸ κρι- 
τήριον ὑφ᾽ οὗ κριθήσεται τὰ πράγματα. 

41 Συμπεριγραφομένων δὲ τούτῳ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
κριτηρίων, ἐπεὶ ἕκαστον αὐτῶν ἤτοι μέρος ἢ πάθος 
ἢ ἐνέργημά ἐστι τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, ἀκόλουθον μὲν ἦν 
ἴσως ἐπί τι τῶν ἑξῆς ἰέναι τῷ λόγῳ ὧς καὶ περὶ 
ἐκείνων ἱκανῶς εἰρημένον ἐν τούτοις" ἵνα δὲ μηδὲ 
τὴν εἰδικὴν ὡς πρὸς ἕκαστον ἀντίρρησιν φεύγειν 
ἐδ ΟΜ; ὀλίγα καὶ περὶ αὐτῶν = ἐπιμέτρου λέξο- 
rather to be to the second, in i. 89. 


> ἐξ ἐπιμέτρου, lit. ‘as extra-measure’’ or “‘ overplus”’ 
into the bargain.” 


180 


«is 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 44-47 


they have made identical statements about it? And 
if they are in one disposition, inasmuch as both the 
one man who makes a different statement is in one 
disposition and all these who agree together are also in 
one, so far as regards the dispositions in which we find 
ourselves, no difference is found even on the ground of 
numbers. Consequently we ought not to pay heed 
to the many more than to the one; besides the 45 
further fact that—as we pointed out in ‘‘ The Fourth 
Mode of Scepticism ’’*—the difference in judge- 
ments that is based on numbers is non-apprehensible, 
since individual men are innumerable and we are 
incapable of investigating and expounding the judge- 
ments of all of them—what it is the majority of 
all mankind affirm and what the minority. Thus, 
on this showing also, the preference given to 
men’s judgements on the ground of their numbers 
is absurd. 

But if we are not even to give heed to numbers, 46 
we shall not find anyone by whom objects are to be 
judged, in spite of our having granted so much by 
way of concession. Therefore, on all these grounds, 
the criterion “ By whom ”’ objects are to be judged 
is found to be non-apprehensible. 

And seeing that the other criteria are included in 47 
this one, since each of them is either a part or an 
affection or an activity of Man, our next task might 
perhaps have been to proceed in our discussion to one 
of the subjects which follows next in order, supposing 
that those criteria also have been sufficiently dealt 
with in what we have now said ; yet in order that we 
may not seem to be shirking the specific counter- 
statement proper to each case, we will exceed our 
brief® and deal with them also shortly. And we shall 


181 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μεν. πρότερον δὲ περὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου τοῦ δι᾽ οὗ 
καλουμένου διαλεξόμεθα. 


δ΄ -- ΠΕΡῚ TOY ΔΙ’ ΟΥ 


᾿ > \ 

48 Πολλὴ μὲν οὖν καὶ ἄπειρος σχεδὸν ἡ περὶ αὐτὸ 
γέγονε διαφωνία παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς- ἡμεῖς 
δὲ πάλιν τοῦ ἐμμεθόδου προνοούμενοι φαμὲν ὅτι, 

3 χχ 
ἐπεὶ κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἄνθρωπός ἐστι τὸ ὑφ᾽ οὗ κρίνεται 
΄, Ὁ @ 
τὰ πράγματα, οὐδὲν δὲ οὗτος ἔχοι ἂν δι᾿ οὗ κρίνειν 
/ “Ἠ 9 
δυνήσεται, καθάπερ καὶ αὐτοὶ συνομολογοῦσιν, ἢ 
3} \ / 2.4 ᾽ὔ [2 3) > 
αἴσθησιν καὶ διάνοιαν, ἐὰν δείξωμεν ὅτι οὔτε δι 
3 / 
αἰσθήσεως μόνης δύναται κρίνειν οὔτε διὰ μόνης 
“»Ἅ ’ 3 ~ 
τῆς διανοίας οὔτε δι᾿ ἀμφοτέρων αὐτῶν, συντόμως 
\ ς δι 
πρὸς ἁπάσας τὰς κατὰ μέρος δόξας εἰρήκαμεν: πᾶσαι 
\ lon > a“ 
yap δοκοῦσιν εἰς τὰς τρεῖς ταύτας ἀναφέρεσθαι 
3 ~ 
49 στάσεις. ἀρξώμεθα δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν αἰσθήσεων. 
Οὐκοῦν ἐπεὶ τινὲς μὲν κενοπαθεῖν τὰς αἰσθήσεις 
7 > \ Ν e ~ Φ- > / 
φασίν (οὐδὲν yap ὑποκεῖσθαι ὧν ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι 
δοκοῦσι), ot δὲ πάντα ὑποκεῖσθαι ὑφ᾽ ὧν οἴονται 
“Ὁ “ € \ \ \ ¢ ~ ‘\ \ 
κινεῖσθαι λέγουσιν, οἱ δὲ τὰ μὲν ὑποκεῖσθαι τὰ δὲ 
μὴ ὑποκεῖσθαι, τίνι συγκαταθησόμεθα οὐχ ἕξομεν" 
οὔτε γὰρ τῇ αἰσθήσει τὴν διαφωνίαν ἐπικρινοῦμεν, 
ἐπεὶ περὶ αὐτῆς ζητοῦμεν πότερον κενοπαθεῖ ἢ 
»-"ᾳ f 3 ¢ :΄͵ ’ > Ἁ Ἁ 
ἀληθῶς καταλαμβάνει, οὔτε ἑτέρῳ τινί, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ 
ἔστιν ἄλλο τι κριτήριον de οὗ χρὴ κρίνειν κατὰ 
f 
50 τὴν προκειμένην ὑπόθεσιν. ἀνεπίκριτον ἄρα Kal 





“ Of. Adv. Log. i. 343. 

ἡ a g. Heracleitus, Parmenides, Democritus ; ¢f. Adv. Log. i. 
196 ff. 

¢ Epicurus and Protagoras ; ¢f. Adv. Log. i. 204, 369. 

ὦ Peripatetics, Stoics, and Academics; cf. Adv. Log. i. 
369, 388. 


182 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 47-50 


discuss first the criterion “ By means of which ” (or 
Instrument) as it is called. 


Cuapter VI.—Or tee Criterion “ΒΥ MEANS OF 
wuicu ” (or [NsTRUMENT) 


Concerning this criterion * the controversy which 48 
exists amongst the Dogmatists is fierce and, one may 
say, unending. We, however,—with a view here also 
to a systematic treatment,—maintain that inasmuch 
as Man is, according to them, the criterion ‘“‘ By 
whom ” matters are judged, and Man (as they also 
themselves agree) can have no other instrument 
by means of which he will be able to judge except 
sense and intellect, then if we shall show that he is 
unable to judge by means of either sense alone or 
intellect alone or both conjoined, we shall have given 
a concise answer to all the individual opinions ; for 
they can all, as it seems, be referred to these three 
rival theories. Let us begin with the senses. 49 

Since, then, some? assert that the senses have 
~ empty ”’ impressions (none of the objects they seem 
to apprehend having any real existence), and others ¢ 
say that all the objects by which they suppose them 
to be moved are really existent, and others again ὦ 
say that some of the objects are real, some unreal, 
we shall not know whom we should assent to. For 
we shall not decide the controversy by sense-percep- 
tion, since it is regarding this that we are makin 
our inquiry whether it is illusory or apprehends truly, 
nor yet by anything else, seeing that there does not 
even exist any other criterion “ by means of which ”’ 
one ought to judge, according to the present hypo- 
thesis. So then the question whether the senses have 50 


183 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀκατάληπτον ἔσται πότερον κενοπαθεῖ ἡ αἴσθησις 
7 καταλαμβάνει τι" ᾧ συνεισέρχεται τὸ μὴ δεῖν 
ἡμᾶς τῇ αἰσθήσει μόνῃ “προσέχειν ἐν τῇ κρίσει τῶν 
πραγμάτων, περὶ ἧς οὐκ ἔχομεν εἰπεῖν εἰ καὶ τὴν 
ἀρχὴν καταλαμ, άνει τι. 
δ᾽'΄ ᾿Αλλ᾽ ἔστω κατὰ συγχώρησιν τὰς αἰσθήσεις 
ἀντιληπτικὰς εἶναι: οὐδὲν γὰρ ἧττον καὶ οὕτως 
ἄπιστοι εὑρεθήσονται πρὸς τὴν κρίσιν τῶν ἐκτὸς 
ὑποκειμένων πραγμάτων. at γοῦν αἰσθήσεις ὑπ- 
εναντίως κινοῦνται ὑπὸ τῶν ἐκτός, οἷον ἡ γεῦσις 
ὑπὸ τοῦ αὐτοῦ μέλιτος ὁτὲ μὲν πικράζεται ὁτὲ δὲ 
γλυκάζεται, καὶ ἡ ὅρασις τὸ αὐτὸ χρῶμα ὁτὲ μὲν 
δ2 αἱμωπὸν ὁτὲ δὲ λευκὸν εἶναι «δοκεῖ». 1 ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 
ἡ ὄσφρησις ἑαυτῇ συμφωνεῖ' τὸ γοῦν μύρον ὃ “μὲν 
κεφαλαλγικὸς ἀηδὲς εἶναί φησιν, 6 δὲ μὴ οὕτως 
ἔχων ἡδύ. καὶ οἱ θεόληπτοι δὲ καὶ οἱ φρενιτί- 
οντες ἀκούειν δοκοῦσί τινων διαλεγομένων αὐτοῖς, 
ὧν ἡμεῖς οὐκ ἐπακούομεν. καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ ὕδωρ τοῖς 
μὲν φλεγμαίνουσιν ἀηδὲς εἶναι δοκεῖ δι᾽ ὑπερβολὴν 
δ8 θερμότητος, τοῖς δ᾽ ἄλλοις χλιαρόν. πότερον οὖν 
πάσας τὰς φαντασίας ἀληθεῖς εἶναι φήσει τις, ἢ 
τάσδε μὲν ἀληθεῖς τάσδε δὲ ψευδεῖς, 7 ἢ καὶ ψευδεῖς 
ἁπάσας, εἰπεῖν ἀμήχανον, μηδὲν ἡμῶν ἐχόντων 
κρυτήριον ὡμολογημένον δι’ οὗ κρινοῦμεν ὃ προ- 
κρίνειν μέλλομεν, ἀλλὰ μηδὲ ἀποδείξεως εὐπο- 
ρούντων ἀληθοῦς τε καὶ κεκριμένης, διὰ τὸ μέχρι 
νῦν ζητεῖσθαι τὸ τῆς ἀληθείας κριτήριον, de’ οὗ 
καὶ τὴν ἀληθῆ ἀπόδειξιν ἐπικρίνεσθαι προσήκει. 
δά διὰ ταῦτα καὶ ὁ ἀξιῶν τοῖς μὲν κατὰ φύσιν ἔ ἔχουσιν 
[ἐν τούτοις)" πιστεύειν, τοῖς δὲ παρὰ φύσιν δια- 
κειμένοις μηδαμῶς, ἄτοπος ἔσται." οὔτε γὰρ 
1: «δοκεῖ» add. T. 2 ἐν τούτοις om. Stephanus. 
184 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 50-54 


illusory affections or apprehend some real object will 
be incapable of either decision or apprehension ; and 
there follows the corollary, that we must not attend 
to sensation alone in our judgement of matters, since 
regarding it we cannot so much as affirm that it 
apprehends anything at all. 

But let it be granted, by way of concession, that 51 
the senses are apprehensive ; yet, even so they will 
not be found any the less unreliable for judging the 
external real objects. For certainly the senses are 
affected in diverse ways by external objects—taste, 
for instance, perceives the same honey now as bitter 
and now as sweet; and vision pronounces the same 
colour now blood-red and now white.“ Nay, even 59 
smell is not consistent with itself; for certainly the 
sufferer from headache declares myrrh to be un- 
pleasant, while one who does not so suffer calls it 
pleasant. And those who are possessed or in a frenzy 
fancy they hear persons conversing with them whom we 
do not hear. And the same water seems to those in a 
fever to be unpleasant because of its excessive heat, 
but to all others tepid. Whether, then, one is to call 53 
all the appearances true, or some true and some false, 
or all false, it is impossible to say since we possess 
no agreed criterion whereby we shall judge the ques- 
tion we are proposing to decide, nor are we even 
provided with a proof that is true and approved, 
because we are still in search of the criterion of truth 
‘By means of which ”’ the true proof itself ought to 
be tested. For these reasons he also who asks us to 54 
believe those who are in a natural state, but not 
those whose disposition is non-natural, will be acting 
absurdly ; for he will not gain credence if he says 


α Of. i. 100 ff. 
185 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀναποδείκτως τοῦτο λέγων πιστευθήσεται, οὔτε 
ἀπόδειξιν ἀληθῆ καὶ κεκριμένην ἕξει διὰ τὰ 
προειρημένα. 

55 Εἰ μέντοι καὶ συγχωρήσειέ τις τὰς μὲν τῶν κατὰ 
φύσιν ἐχόντων φαντασίας εἶναι. πιστὰς τὰς δὲ τῶν 
παρὰ φύσιν διακειμένων ἀπίστους, καὶ οὕτως 
ἀδύνατος εὑρεθήσεται ἡ διὰ τῶν αἰσθήσεων μόνων 
κρίσις τῶν ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένων. ἡ ὅρασις γοῦν 
καὶ ἡ κατὰ φύσιν ἔχουσα τὸν «αὐτὸν »' πύργον ὁτὲ 
μὲν στρογγύλον ὁτὲ δὲ τετράγωνον εἶναι λέγει, 
καὶ ἡ γεῦσις τὰ αὐτὰ σιτία ἐπὶ μὲν τῶν κεκορεοσ- 
μένων ἀηδῆ ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν πεινώντων ἡδέα φησὶν 
εἶναι, καὶ ἡ ἀκοὴ παραπλησίως τῆς αὐτῆς φωνῆς 
νυκτὸς μὲν ὡς εὐμεγέθους ἀντιλαμβάνεται ἡμέρας 

56 δὲ «ὡς»: ἁμαυρᾶς, καὶ ἡ ὄσφρησις ἐπὶ μὲν τῶν 
πολλῶν “δυσώδη ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν βυρσοδεψῶν οὐδαμῶς 
τὰ αὐτὰ εἶναι δοκεῖ, καὶ ἡ αὐτὴ ἁφὴ εἰσιόντων 
μὲν ἡμῶν εἰς τὸ βαλανεῖον θερμαίνεται ὑπὸ τῆς 
παραστάδος, ἐξιόντων δὲ ψύχεται. διόπερ ἐπεὶ 
καὶ κατὰ φύσιν ἔχουσαι αἱ αἰσθήσεις ἑαυταῖς 
μάχονται, καὶ ἡ διαφωνία ἐστὶν ἀνεπίκριτος, ἐπεὶ 
μὴ ἔχομεν ὡμολογημένον «κριτήριον »" du οὗ 
κρίνεσθαι δύναται, τὰς αὐτὰς ἀπορίας ἀκολουθεῖν 
ἀνάγκη. καὶ ἄλλα δὲ λείῳ μεταφέρειν πρὸς τὴν 
τούτου κατασκευὴν ἐνδέχεται ἐκ τῶν προειρὴη- 
μένων ἡμῖν περὶ τῶν τῆς ἐποχῆς τρόπων. διόπερ 
οὐκ ἂν εἴη ἀληθὲς ἴσως τὸ τὴν αἴσθησιν μόνην 
δύνασθαι κρίνειν τὰ ἐκτὸς ὑποκείμενα. 

57 Οὐκοῦν ἐπὶ τὴν διάνοιαν μετέλθωμεν τῷ λόγῳ. 
ot τοίνυν ἀξιοῦντες τῇ διανοίᾳ μόνῃ προσέχειν ἐν 
1 ζαὐτὸν» add. Mutsch. 

2 <ws> add. cj. Bekk. 8 «κριτήριον» add. T. 
186 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 54-57 


this without proof, and, for the reasons given above, 
he will not possess a true and approved proof. 

And even were one to concede that the sense- 55 
impressions of those in a natural state are reliable, 
and those of men in a non-natural condition unreli- 
able, even so the judgement of external real objects 
by means of the senses alone will be found to be 
impossible. For certainly the sense of sight, even 
when it is in a natural state, pronounces the same 
tower ὦ to be at one time round, at another square ; 
and the sense of taste declares the same food to be 
unpleasant in the case of those full-fed, but pleasant 
in the case of those who are hungry ; and the sense 
of hearing likewise perceives the same sound as loud 
by night but as faint by day ; and the sense of smell 56 
regards the same objects as malodorous in the case 
of most people, but not so in the case of tanners ; 
and the same sense of touch feels warmth in the outer 
hall,? when we enter the bath-rooms, but cold when we 
leave them. Therefore, since even when in a natural 
state the senses contradict themselves, and their dis- 
pute is incapable of decision, seeing that we possess 
no accepted criterion by means of which it can be 
judged, the same perplexities must necessarily follow. 
Moreover, for the establishment of this conclusion we 
may derive still further arguments from our previous 
discussion of the Modes of Suspension.¢ Hence it 
would probably be untrue to say that sense-percep- 
tion alone is able to judge real external objects. 

Let us, then, proceed in our exposition to the in- 57 
tellect. Now those who claim ὦ that we should attend 


δ Cf. is 118. 
> Of. i. 110. ο See i. 36 ff. 
4 Cf. Adv. Log. i. 89 ff. 


187 


58 


59 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῇ κρίσει τῶν πραγμάτων πρῶτον μὲν ἐκεῖνο οὐχ 
ἕξουσιν δεικνύναι ὅτι καταληπτόν ἐστι τὸ εἶναι 
διάνοιαν. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ὁ μὲν Γοργίας οὐδὲν εἶναι 
φάσκων οὐδὲ διάνοιαν εἶναί φησι, τινὲς δὲ “ταύτην 
ἀποφαίνονται ὑπάρχειν, πῶς οὖν ἐπικρινοῦσι τὴν 
διαφωνίαν; οὔτε γὰρ διανοίᾳ, ἐπεὶ τὸ ζητούμενον 
συναρπάσουσιν, οὔτε ἄλλῳ τινί: οὐδὲν γὰρ ἄλλο 
εἷναί φασι κατὰ τὴν ὑπόθεσιν τὴν νῦν ὑποκειμένην, 
dv οὗ κρίνεται τὰ πράγματα. ἀνεπίκριτον ἄρα 
καὶ ἀκατάληπτον ἔσται πότερον ἔστι διάνοια ἢ 
οὐκ ἔστιν: ᾧ συνεισέρχεται. τὸ μὴ δεῖν μόνῃ τῇ 
διανοίᾳ προσέχειν ἐν τῇ τῶν πραγμάτων κρίσει, 
τῇ μηδέπω κατειλημμένῃ. 

᾿Αλλὰ κατειλήφθω ἡ διάνοια, καὶ ὡμολογήσθω 
τὸ εἶναι ταύτην καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν: λέγω ὅτι οὐ 
δύναται κρίνειν τὰ πράγματα. εἰ γὰρ μηδ᾽ éav- 
τὴν ἀκριβῶς ὁρᾷ, ἀλλὰ διαφωνεῖ περί τε τῆς 
οὐσίας αὑτῆς καὶ τοῦ τρόπου τῆς γενέσεως καὶ 
τοῦ τόπου ἐν ᾧ ἔστιν, πῶς ἂν δυνηθείη τῶν ἄλλων 
τι ἀκριβῶς καταλαμβάνειν; διδομένου δὲ καὶ τοῦ 
τὴν διάνοιαν κριτικὴν εἶναι τῶν πραγμάτων, οὐχ 

\ 

εὑρήσομεν πῶς κατ᾽ αὐτὴν κρινοῦμεν. πο ῆς γὰρ 
οὔσης τῆς “κατὰ διάνοιαν διαφορᾶς, ἐπειδὴ ἑτέρα 
μέν ἐστιν ἡ Γοργίου διάνοια, καθ᾽ ἦν φησι μηδὲν 
εἶναι, ἑτέρα δὲ ἡ Ἡρακλείτου, καθ᾽ ἣν λέγει πάντα 
εἶναι, ἑτέρα δὲ ἡ ἢ τῶν λεγόντων τάδε μὲν εἶναι τάδε 
δὲ μὴ εἶναι, πῶς ἐπικρίνωμεν τὴν τῶν διανοιῶν 
διαφορὰν οὐχ ἕξομεν, οὐδὲ δυνησόμεθα εἰπεῖν ὅτι 





See Introd. p. xv; οὐ, Adv. Log. i. 65. 
> i.e, whether in the head or breast or elsewhere; ef. ddv. 
Log. i. 313, 348. 


188 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 57-59 


to the intellect only in our judgement of things will, 
in the first place, be unable to show that the existence 
of intellect is apprehensible. For when Gorgias,® in 
denying that anything exists, denies also the exist- 
ence of intellect, while some declare that it has real 
existence, how will they decide this contradiction ? 
Not by the intellect, for so they will be assuming the 
matter in question ; nor yet by anything else, since, 
as they assert, according to our present assumption 
there exists nothing else by means of which objects 
are judged. So then the problem as to whether 
intellect does or does not exist will not admit of 
decision or apprehension; and from this it follows, 
as a corollary, that in the judgement of objects we 
ought not to attend to the intellect alone, which has 
not,as yet been apprehended. 

But let it be granted that the intellect has been 58 
apprehended, and let us agree, by way of assumption, 
that it really exists ; I still affirm that it cannot judge 
objects. For if it does not even discern itself accu- 
rately but contradicts itself about its own existence 
and the mode of its origin and the position in which 
it is placed,® how can it be able to apprehend any- 
thing else accurately? And even if it be granted 59 
that the intellect is capable of judging objects, we 
shall not discover how to judge according to it. For 
since there exists great divergence in respect of the 
intellect—for the intellect of Gorgias, according to 
which he states that nothing exists, is one kind, and 
another kind is that of Heracleitus, according to which 
he declares that all things exist, and another that of 
those who say that some things do and others do not 
exist—we shall have no means of deciding between 
these divergent intellects, nor shall we be able to 


189 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


~ “~ / a “ 
τῇ μὲν τοῦδε διανοίᾳ κατακολουθεῖν προσήκει τῇ 
“ \ 3 ~ ot A / \ / 
60 τοῦδε δὲ οὐδαμῶς. ἦν τε yap διανοίᾳ τινὶ κρίνειν 
τολμῶμεν, τῆς διαφωνίας μέρει συγκατατιθέμενοι 
¢ ’ὔ 
τὸ ζητούμενον συναρπάσομεν: ἤν τε ἑτέρῳ τινί, 
ψευσόμεθα ὅτι μόνῃ τῇ διανοίᾳ δεῖ κρίνειν τὰ 
πράγματα. 
\ 3 ἴω. \ / ~ € 43 in 
61 Λοιπὸν ἐκ τῶν περὶ Kpirnpiov τοῦ ὑφ᾽ οὗ Aeyo- 
μένου ῥηθέντων δεικνύναι δυνησόμεθα ὅτι μήτε 
τὴν ἀγχινουστέραν τῶν ἄλλων διάνοιαν εὑρεῖν 
δυνάμεθα, ὅτι τε ἂν εὕρωμεν τῶν τε γεγενημένων 
καὶ οὐσῶν διανοιῶν ἀγχινουστέραν διάνοιαν, ἐπεὶ 
δ la 3 > 7 / ¢ ἢ 3) > 
ἄδηλόν ἐστιν εἰ πάλιν ταύτης ἑτέρα ἔσται ἀγχι- 
62 νουστέρα, οὐ δεῖ προσέχειν αὐτῇ, ὅτι τε κἂν ὑπο- 
θώμεθα διάνοιαν ἧς ἐντρεχεστέρα οὐκ ἂν γένοιτο, 
οὐ συγκαταθησόμεθα τῷ δι᾽ αὐτῆς κρίνοντι, εὐλα- 
βούμενοι μὴ ψευδῆ τινὰ λόγον προφερόμενος διὰ 
τὸ ὀξυτάτης διανοίας μετεσχηκέναι δύναται ἡμᾶς 
/ v4 3 / > 3 on ? \ ~ ὔ 
πείθειν ὅτι ἀληθής ἐστιν. οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ τῇ διανοίᾳ 
μόνῃ δεῖ κρίνειν τὰ πράγματα. 
θ8 Λείπεταυ λέγειν ὅτι δι᾿ ἀμφοτέρων. ὃ πάλιν ἐστὶν 
ἀδύνατον: οὐ μόνον γὰρ οὐχ ὁδηγοῦσιν αἱ αἰ- 
7 \ / \ / 3 A A 
σθήσεις τὴν διάνοιαν πρὸς κατάληψιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
ἐναντιοῦνται αὐτῇ. ἀμέλει γοῦν ἐκ τοῦ τὸ μέλι 
~ \ A “ \ \ / ¢ 
τοῖσδε μὲν πικρὸν τοῖσδε δὲ γλυκὺ φαίνεσθαι 6 
\ A / 3 7 λ \ " \ ων f 
μὲν Δημόκριτος ἔφη μήτε γλυκὺ αὐτὸ εἶναι μήτε 
/ € 1 ¢€ 7 bd / 4 9 A ~ 
πικρόν, ὁ δὲ “Ἡράκλειτος ἀμφότερα. καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν 
LAA. 9 θ ? , A 3 θ ““ ¢ 3 4 r 4 
ἄλλων αἰσθήσεών τε καὶ αἰσθητῶν ὁ αὐτὸς λόγος. 
οὕτως ἀπὸ τῶν αἰσθήσεων ὁρμωμένη ἡ διάνοια 
\ 
διάφορά τε Kal μαχόμενα ἀποφαίνεσθαι ἀναγκά- 
100 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 59-63 


assert that it is right to take this man’s intellect as 
our guide but not that man’s. For if we venture 60 
to judge by any one intellect, by thus agreeing to 
assent to one side in the dispute we shall be assuming 
the matter in question; while if we judge by any- 
thing else, we shall be falsifying the assertion that 
one ought to judge objects by the intellect alone. 

Further, we shall be able to show, from the state- 61 
ments made concerning the criterion “By whom ”’ 
(as it is called), that we are unable to discover the 
intellect that is cleverer than all others; and also 
that if we should discover the intellect that is cleverer 
than past and present intellects we ought not to 62 
attend to it, since it is not evident whether yet 
another intellect may not arise which is cleverer than 
it; and further, that even if we assume an intellect 
which none could possibly surpass, we shall not 
assent to the man who judges by means of it, dread- 
ing lest he may put forward some false statement 
and succeed in persuading us of its truth because 
he possesses the keenest intellect. Neither, then, by 
the intellect alone ought we to judge objects. 

The only remaining alternative is judgement by 63 
means of both senses and intellect.¢ But this again is 
impossible ; for not only do the senses not guide the 
intellect to apprehension, but they even oppose it. For 
it is certain, at any rate, that from the fact that honey 
appears bitter to some and sweet to others, Demo- 
critus declared that it is neither sweet nor bitter, 
while Heracleitus said that itis both. And the same 
account may be given of all the other senses and 
sensibles. Thus, when it starts out from the senses, 
the intellect is compelled to make diverse and con- 


« Cf. Adv. Log. i. 354 ff. 
19] 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ζεται. τοῦτο δὲ ἀλλότριόν ἐστι κριτηρίου KaTa- 
ληπτικοῦ. 

64 Kira κἀκεῖνο λεκτέον" ἤτοι πάσαις ταῖς αἰσθή- 
σεσι καὶ ταῖς πάντων διανοίαις “κρινοῦσι τὰ πράγ- 
ματα ἢ τισίν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν πάσαις λέξει τις, ἀ- 
δύνατα ἀξιώσει τοσαύτης μάχης ἐν ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι 
καὶ ἐν ταῖς διανοίαις ἐμφαινομένης, ἄλλως τε καὶ 
ἐπεὶ τῆς Γοργίου διανοίας ἀπόφασίς ἐστι τὸ μὴ 
δεῖν μήτε αἰσθήσει μήτε διανοίᾳ προσέχειν, περι- 
τραπήσεται ὁ “λόγος. εἰ δὲ τισῷ, πῶς κρινοῦσιν 
ὅτι ταῖσδε μὲν ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι καὶ «τῇδε»" τῇ 
διανοίᾳ προσέχειν δεῖ ταῖσδε δὲ οὔ, μὴ ἔχοντες 
κριτήριον ὡμολογημένον dv οὗ τὰς διαφόρους 

65 αἰσθήσεις τε καὶ διανοίας ἐπικρινοῦσιν; ἣν δὲ 
λέγωσιν ὅτι τὰς αἰσθήσεις καὶ τὰς διανοίας τῇ 
διανοίᾳ καὶ ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι κρινοῦμεν, τὸ ζητού- 
μενον συναρπάζουσιν" περὶ γὰρ τοῦ εἰ δύναταί τις 
διὰ τούτων κρίνειν ζητοῦμεν. 

66 Eira κἀκεῖνο ῥητέον ὅτι ἤτοι ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι τάς 
τε αἰσθήσεις καὶ τὰς διανοίας κρινεῖ Tis,” ἢ ταῖς 
διανοίαις τάς τε αἰσθήσεις καὶ τὰς διανοίας, 7 
ταῖς τε αἰσθήσεσι τὰς αἰσθήσεις καὶ ταῖς διανοίαις 
τὰς διανοίας, ἢ ταῖς μὲν αἰσθήσεσι τὰς διανοίας 
τῇ δὲ διανοίᾳ Tas αἰσθήσεις. εἰ μὲν οὖν ταῖς 
αἰσθήσεσιν 7 τῇ διανοίᾳ ἀμφότερα κρίνειν ἐθελή- 
σουσιν, οὐκέτι δι᾽ αἰσθήσεως. καὶ διανοίας κρινοῦσιν 
ἀλλὰ δι᾿ ἑνὸς τούτων, ὅπερ ἂν ἕλωνται: καὶ παρα- 
κολουθήσουσιν αὐτοῖς αἱ ἔμπροσθεν εἰρημέναι 

67 ἀπορίαι. εἰ δὲ ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι τὰς αἰσθήσεις καὶ 

1 «τῇδε» add. cj. Bekk. 


2 κρινεῖ τις ego: κρίνεται L:: κρίνετε MEAB, Bekk.: κρινοῦσιν 
T, Mutsch. 


192 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 63-67 


flicting statements ; and this is alien to a criterion of 
apprehension. 

Then there is this also to be said: they will judge 64 
objects either by all the senses and by all men’s 
intellects or bysome. Butifaman shall say “ by all,” 
he will be claiming what is impossible in view of the 
immense discrepancy which obviously exists amongst 
the senses and the intellects; and moreover, by 
reason of the assertion of Gorgias’s intellect that “ we 
must not give heed either to sense or to intellect,” 
the man’s statement will be demolished. And if they 
shall say “ by some,” how will they decide that we 
ought to give heed to these senses and this intellect 
and not to those, seeing that they possess no accepted 
criterion by which to judge the differing senses and 
intellects ? And if they shall say that we will judge 65 
the senses and the intellects by the intellect and the 
senses, they are assuming the matter in question ; 
for what we are questioning is the possibility of 
judging by means of these. 

Another point we must make is this: either one 66 
will judge both the senses and the intellects by the 
senses, or both the senses and the intellects by the 
intellects, or the senses by the senses and the intellect 
by the intellects, or the intellects by the senses and 
the senses by the intellect. Ifthen they shall propose 
to judge both objects by the senses or by the intellect, 
they will no longer be judging by sense and intellect 
but by one of these two, whichever one they may 
choose, and thus they will be entangled in the per- 
plexities previously mentioned. And if they shall 67 
judge the senses by the senses and the intellects by 


VOL. I Oo 193 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῇ διανοίᾳ τὰς διανοίας ἐπικρινοῦσιν, ἐπειδὴ 
μάχονται καὶ αἰσθήσεις αἰσθήσεσι καὶ διάνοιαι 
διανοίαις, ἥντινα ἂν λάβωσιν ἀπὸ τῶν μαχομένων 
αἰσθήσεων πρὸς τὴν κρίσιν τῶν ἄλλων αἰσθήσεων, 
τὸ ζητούμενον συναρπάσουσιν" μέρος γὰρ τῆς 
διαφωνίας ὡς πιστὸν ἤδη λήψονται πρὸς τὴν τῶν 
68 ἐπ᾽ tons αὐτῷ ζητουμένων ἐπίκρισιν. ὁ δὲ αὐτὸς 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν διανοιῶν λόγος. εἰ δὲ ταῖς μὲν 
αἰσθήσεσι τὰς διανοίας ἐπικρινοῦσι τῇ διανοίᾳ δὲ 
τὰς αἰσθήσεις, 6 διάλληλος εὑρίσκεται τρόπος, 
καθ᾽ ὃν ἵνα μὲν αἱ αἰσθήσεις ἐπικριθῶσι δεῖ προ- 
κεκρίσθαι τὰς διανοίας, ἵνα δὲ αἱ διάνοιαι δοκιμα- 
69 σθῶσι, χρὴ προδιακρίνεσθαι τὰς αἰσθήσεις. ἐπεὶ 
οὖν μήτε ὑπὸ τῶν ὁμογενῶν τὰ ὁμογενῆ κριτήρια 
δύναται ἐπικρίνεσθαι “μήτε ὑπὸ ἑνὸς γένους ἀμφό- 
τερα τὰ γένη μήτε ὑπὸ τῶν ἑτερογενῶν ἐναλλάξ, 
οὐ δυνησόμεθα προκρίνειν διάνοιαν διανοίας ἢ 
αἴσθησιν αἰσθήσεως. διὰ δὲ τοῦτο οὐδὲ ἕξομεν 
διὰ τίνος κρινοῦμεν: εἰ γὰρ μήτε πάσαις ταῖς 
αἰσθήσεσι καὶ ταῖς διανοίαις κρίνειν δυνησόμεθα, 
μήτε εἰσόμεθα ποίαις μὲν δεῖ κρίνειν ποίαις δὲ μή, 
οὐχ ἕξομεν oe οὗ κρινοῦμεν τὰ πράγματα. 
Ὥστε καὶ διὰ ταῦτα ἀνύπαρκτον ἂν εἴη τὸ 
κριτήριον τὸ δι᾿ οὗ. 


Ζ2΄.---ἰ ΠΕΡῚ TOT ΚΑΘ᾽ ὁ 
Υ̓ Ων CEA \ a ᾽ > a 
70 “Idwuev οὖν ἑξῆς περὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου καθ᾽ ὃ 
κρίνεσθαι λέγουσι. τὰ πράγματα. “πρῶτον τοίνυν 
ἐκεῖνο ἔστιν εἰπεῖν περὶ αὐτοῦ ὅτι ἀνεπινόητός 
α ἢ ,4. the Stoics, ef. 8 16; Adv. Log. i. 35, 510. For the 


Sion too of ‘‘ presentation’’ and the ‘‘ Criterion’’ see 
Introd. p. xxv. 


194 





OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 67-70 


the intellect, then, since both senses conflict with 
senses and intellects with intellects, whichever of the 
conflicting senses they shall adopt for judging the 
rest of the senses, they will be assuming the matter 
in question ; for they will be adopting one section of 
the series in dispute, as being already reliable, to 
decide about the others which, equally with it, are in 
question. And the same argument applies to the 68 
intellects. And if they shall judge the intellects 
by the senses, and the senses by the intellect, this 
involves circular reasoning inasmuch as it is required 
that the intellects should be judged first in order that 
the senses may be judged, and the senses be first 
scrutinized in order that the intellects may be tested. 
Since, therefore, criteria of the one species cannot be 69 
judged by those of a like species, nor those of both 
the species by those of one species, nor conversely 
by those of an unlike species, we shall not be able to 
prefer intellect to intellect or sense to sense. And 
because of this we shall have nothing by which to 
judge ; for if we shall be unable to judge by all the 
senses and intellects, and shall not know either by 
which of them we ought and by which we ought not 
to judge, then we shall possess no means by which to 
judge objects. 

Consequently, for these reasons also the criterion 
“ΒΥ means of which” will have no real existence. 


Cuapter VIJ.—Or tur Criterion ‘‘ AccorpING 
TO WHICH ”’ 


Let us consider next the Criterion ‘“‘ According to 70 
which,” as they * say, objects are judged. In the first 
place, then, we may say this of it, that “‘ presentation ” 


195 


71 


72 


73 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐστι ἡ φαντασία. λέγουσι γὰρ φαντασίαν εἶναι 
τύπωσιν ἐν ἡγεμονικῷ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἡ ψυχὴ καὶ τὸ 
ἡγεμονικὸν πνεῦμά ἐστιν ἢ λεπτομερέστερόν τι 
πνεύματος, ὡς φασίν, οὐ δυνήσεταί τις τύπωσιν 
ἐπινοεῖν ἐν αὐτῷ οὔτε κατ᾽ εἰσοχὴν καὶ ἐξοχήν, 
ὡς ἐπὶ τῶν σφραγίδων ὁρῶμεν, οὔτε κατὰ τὴν 
τερατολογουμένην ἑτεροιωτικήν" οὐ γὰρ ἂν μνήμην 
τοσούτων ἀναδέξαιυτο θεωρημάτων ὅσα ,συνίστησι 
τέχνην, ἐν ταῖς ἐπιγινομέναις ἑτεροιώσεσι τῶν 
προὔποκειμένων ἀπαλειφομένων. εἰ μέντοι καὶ 
ἐπινοηθῆναι δύναιτο ἡ φαντασία, ἀκατάληπτος 
ἔσται" ἐπεὶ γὰρ πάθος ἐστὶν ἡγεμονικοῦ, τὸ δὲ 
ἡγεμονικὸν οὐ καταλαμβάνεται, ὡς ἐδείξαμεν, 
οὐδὲ τὸ πάθος αὐτοῦ καταληψόμεθ α. 

Εἶτα εἰ καὶ δοίημεν ὅτι καταλαμβάνεται ἡ φαν- 
τασία, οὐ δύναται κρίνεσθαι [καὶ] κατ᾽ αὐτὴν τὰ 
πράγματα" οὐ γὰρ δι᾿ ἑαυτῆς ἐπιβάλλει τοῖς ἐκτὸς 
καὶ φαντασιοῦται ἡ διάνοια, ὡς φασίν, ἀλλὰ διὰ 
τῶν αἰσθήσεων, at δὲ αἰσθήσεις τὰ μὲν ἐκτὸς 
ὑποκείμενα οὐ καταλαμβάνουσιν, μόνα δέ, εἰ ἄρα, 
τὰ ἑαυτῶν πάθη. καὶ ἡ φαντασία οὖν τοῦ πάθους 
τῆς αἰσθήσεως ἔσται, ὅπερ διαφέρει τοῦ ἐκτὸς 
ὑποκειμένου: οὐ γὰρ τὸ αὐτό ἐστι τὸ μέλι τῷ 
γλυκάζεσθαί με καὶ τὸ ἀψίνθιον τῷ πικράζεσθαι, 
ἀλλὰ διαφέρει. εἰ δὲ διαφέρει τοῦτο τὸ πάθος τοῦ 
ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένου, ἡ φαντασία ἔσται οὐχὶ τοῦ 
ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένου ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρου τινὸς διαφέροντος 
αὐτοῦ. εἰ οὖν κατὰ ταύτην κρίνει ἡ διάνοια, 


8 ee ΠΟ Ο i. 198, Adv. Log. i. 880 : Introd. 
p. XXv. Cf. § 81 infra, iii. 188: Introd. p. xxv. 

¢ The first of these views is ascribed to Cleanthes, the second 
to Chrysippus, ¢f. ddv. Log. i. 228, 372: Introd. p. xxv. 


196 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 70-73 


is inconceivable. They declare that “ presentation ” 
is an impression on “the regent part.”* Since, then, 
the soul, and the regent part, is breath or something 
more subtile than breath,° as they affirm, no one will 
be able to conceive of an impression upon it either 
by way of depression and eminence, as we see in 
the case of seals, or by way of the magical “ altera- 
tion ” they talk about °; for the soul will not be able 
to conserve the remembrance of all the concepts 
that compose an art, since the pre-existing concepts 
are obliterated by the subsequent “‘alterations.”’ Yet 71 
even if “‘ presentation ”’ could be conceived, it would 
still be non-apprehensible ; for since it is an affection 
of the regent part, and the regent part, as we have 
shown,* is not apprehended, neither shall we appre- 
hend its affection. 

Further, even were we to grant that the “ presenta- 72 
tion” is apprehended, objects cannot be judged 
according to it ; for the intellect, as they assert, does 
not make contact with external objects and receive 
presentations by means of itself but by means of 
the senses, and the senses do not apprehend external 
real objects but only, if at all, their own affections.¢ 
So then the presentation will be that of the affection 
of the sense, which is different from the external 
reality ; for honey is not the same as my feeling of 
sweetness nor gall the same as my feeling of bitter- 
ness, but a different thing. And if this affection differs 73 
from the external real object, the presentation will 
not be that of the external reality but of something 
else which is different therefrom. If, therefore, the 
intellect judges according to this, it judges badly and 


@ See §§ 57 ff. supra. 
ὁ 2,6. sensations or feelings. 


197 


74 


75 


76 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


φαύλως κρίνει καὶ οὐ κατὰ τὸ ὑποκείμενον. διόπερ 
ἄτοπόν ἐστι τὸ κατὰ τὴν φαντασίαν τὰ ἐκτὸς 
κρίνεσθαι λέγειν. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἔστιν εἰπεῖν ὅτι ἡ ψυχὴ κατα- 
λαμβάνει διὰ τῶν αἰσθητικῶν παθῶν τὰ ἐκτὸς 
ὑποκείμενα διὰ τὸ ὅμοια τὰ πάθη τῶν αἰσθήσεων 
εἶναι τοῖς ἐκτὸς ὑποκειμένοις. πόθεν γὰρ εἴσεται 
ἡ διάνοια εἰ ὅμοιά ἐστι τὰ πάθη τῶν αἰσθήσεων 
τοῖς αἰσθητοῖς, μήτε αὐτὴ τοῖς ἐκτὸς ἐντυγχάνουσα, 
μήτε τῶν αἰσθήσεων αὐτῇ τὴν φύσιν αὐτῶν δη- 
λουσῶν ἀλλὰ τὰ ἑαυτῶν πάθη, καθάπερ ἐκ τῶν 
τρόπων τῆς ἐποχῆς ἐπελογισάμην. ὥσπερ γὰρ ὁ 
ἀγνοῶν μὲν Σωκράτην εἰκόνα δὲ τούτου θεασάμενος 
οὐκ οἶδεν εἰ ὁμοία ἐστὶν ἡ εἰκὼν τῷ Σωκράτει, 
οὕτω καὶ ἡ διάνοια τὰ μὲν πάθη τῶν αἰσθήσεων 
ἐποπτεύουσα τὰ δὲ ἐκτὸς μὴ θεωροῦσα οὐδὲ εἰ 
ὁμοιά ἐστι τὰ τῶν αἰσθήσεων πάθη τοῖς ἐκτὸς 
ὑποκειμένοις εἴσεται. οὐδὲ καθ᾽ ὁμοίωσιν ἄρα 
δυνήσεται ταῦτα κρίνειν κατὰ τὴν φαντασίαν. 

᾿Αλλὰ δῶμεν κατὰ συγχώρησιν, πρὸς τῷ ἐπι- 
νοεῖσθαι τὴν φαντασίαν καὶ καταλαμβάνεσθαι, ἔτι 
καὶ ἐπιδεκτικὴν εἶναι τοῦ κρίνεσθαι κατ᾽ αὐτὴν τὰ 
πράγματα, καίτοι τοῦ λόγου πᾶν τὸ ἐναντίον 
ὑπομνήσαντος. οὐκοῦν ἦτοι πάσῃ φαντασίᾳ πι- 
στεύσομεν «καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν ἐπικρινοῦμεν, ἢ τινι" 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν πάσῃ, δῆλον ὅτι καὶ τῇ Ξενιάδου 
φαντασίᾳ πιστεύσομεν >” καθ᾽ ἣν ἔλεγε πάσας τὰς 
φαντασίας ἀπίστους εἶναι, καὶ “περιτραπήσεται ὁ 
λόγος εἰς τὸ μὴ εἶναι πάσας τὰς φαντασίας ὥστε 


1 «καὶ. .. πιστεύσομεν» add. T. 


α See i. 100 ff. > Cf. § 18 supra. 
198 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 73-76 


not according to reality. Consequently, it is absurd 
to say that external objects are judged according to 
the presentation. 

Nor, again, is it possible to assert that the soul 74 
apprehends external realities by means of the affec- 
tions of sense owing to the similarity of the affections 
of the senses to the external real objects. For how 
is the intellect to know whether the affections of the 
senses are similar to the objects of sense when it has 
not itself encountered the external objects, and the 
senses do not inform it about their real nature but 
only about their own affections, as I have argued 
from the Modes of Suspension?* For just as the man 75 
who does not know Socrates but has seen a picture of 
him does not know whether the pictures like Socrates, 
so also the intellect when it gazes on the affections of 
the senses but does not behold the external objects 
will not so much as know whether the affections of 
the senses are similar to the external realities. So 
that not even on the ground of resemblance will he 
be able to judge these objects according to the 
presentation. 

But let us grant by way of concession that in 76 
addition to being conceived and apprehended the 
presentation is also such that it admits of objects 
being judged according to it, although the argument 
points to an entirely opposite conclusion. In this 
case we shall either believe every presentation, or 
impression, and judge according thereto, or some one 
impression. But if we are to believe every impression, 
clearly we shall believe also that of Xeniades ὃ accord- 
ing to which he asserted that all impressions are un- 
trustworthy, and our statement will be reversed and 
made to say that all impressions are not of such a sort 


199 


77 


78 


79 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


καὶ Kar αὐτὰς κρίνεσθαι δύνασθαι τὰ πράγματα: 
εἰ δὲ τισίν, πῶς ἐπικρινοῦμεν ὅτι ταῖσδε μὲν ταῖς 
φαντασίαις πιστεύειν προσήκει ταῖσδε δὲ ἀπιστεῖν; 
εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἄνευ φαντασίας, δώσουσιν ὃ ὅτι παρέλκει 
ἡ φαντασία πρὸς τὸ κρίνειν, εἴγε χωρὶς αὐτῆς 
κρίνεσθαι δύνασθαι τὰ πράγματά τινα} λέξουσιν- 
εἰ δὲ μετὰ φαντασίας, πῶς λήψονται τὴν φαντα- 
σίαν ἣν παραλαμβάνουσι πρὸς τὴν τῶν ἄλλων φαν- 
τασιῶν κρίσιν; ἢ πάλιν αὐτοῖς ἄλλης φαντασίας 
δεήσει πρὸς τὴν κρίσιν [τῶν ἄλλων φαντασιῶν], : 
καὶ εἰς τὴν ἐκείνης κρίσιν ἄλλης, καὶ εἰς ἄπειρον. 
ἀδύνατον δὲ ἄπειρα ἐπικρῖναι" ἀδύνατον ἄρα εὑρεῖν 
ποίαις μὲν φαντασίαις ὡς κρυτηρίοις δεῖ χρῆσθαι 
ποίαις δὲ οὐδαμῶς. ἐπεὶ οὖν κἂν δῶμεν ὁ ὅτι κατὰ 
τὰς φαντασίας δεῖ κρίνειν τὰ πράγματα, ἑκατέ- 
pater περιτρέπεται ὁ λόγος, καὶ ἐκ τοῦ πάσῃ 
/ 

πιστεύειν καὶ ἐκ τοῦ τισὶ μὲν πιστεύειν ὡς κρι- 
τηρίοις τισὶ δὲ ἀπιστεῖν, συνάγεται τὸ μὴ δεῖν 
τὰς φαντασίας πρὸς τὴν κρίσιν τῶν πραγμάτων 
ὡς κριτήρια παραλαμβάνειν. 

Ταῦτα μὲν ἀρκεῖ vov εἰπεῖν ὡς ἐν ὑποτυπώσει 
καὶ πρὸς τὸ κριτήριον καθ᾽ ὃ κρίνεσθαι τὰ πράγ- 
ματα ἐλέγετο. εἰδέναι δὲ "χρὴ ὅτι οὐ πρόκειται 
ἡμῖν ἀποφήνασθαι ὅτι ἀνύπαρκτόν ἐστι τὸ κρι- 
τήριον τὸ τῆς ἀληθείας (τοῦτο γὰρ δογματικόν)" 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ οἱ SoyparuKot πιθανῶς οκοῦσι κατ- 
εσκευακέναι ὅτι ἔστι τι κριτήριον ἀληθείας, ἡμεῖς 
αὐτοῖς πιθανοὺς δοκοῦντας εἶναι λόγους ἀντεθή- 
καμεν, οὔτε ὅτι ἀληθεῖς εἰσὶ διαβεβαιούμενοι οὔτε 
ὅτι πιθανώτεροι τῶν ἐναντίων, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὴν φαινο- 

ee a ey ἄ. φ.} del. Papp. 
eas α -€f. § 103 infra, Adv. Log. i. 448. 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 77-79 


that objects can be judged according to them. And 77 
if we are to believe some, how shall we decide that 
it is proper to believe these and disbelieve those? 
For if they say we are to do so without presentation, 
they will be granting that presentation is superfluous 
for judging, inasmuch as they will be stating that 
objects can be judged without it; while if they say 
‘by the aid of presentation,” how will they select 
the presentation which they are adopting for the 
purpose of judging all the other presentations? Once 78 
again they will need a second presentation to judge 
the first, and a third to judge the second, and so on 
ad infinitum. But it is impossible to judge an infinite 
series ; and therefore it is impossible to discover what 
sort of presentations we ought to employ as criteria, 
and what we ought not. Seeing, then, that, even 
should we grant that one ought to judge objects 
according to presentations, whether we adopt the 
alternative of trusting all as criteria or that of trusting 
some and distrusting others, in either case the argu- 
ment is overthrown, and we are forced to conclude 
that we ought not to adopt presentations as criteria 
for the judging of objects. 

This is enough to say now, in our outline sketch, 79 
with reference to the criterion “ According to which,”’ 
as it was said, objects are judged. But one should 
notice that we do not propose to assert that the 
criterion of truth is unreal ὦ (for that would be dog- 
matism) ; but since the Dogmatists appear to have 
established plausibly that there really is a criterion of 
truth, we have set up counter-arguments which appear 
to be plausible ; and though we do not positively 
affirm either that they are true or that they are more 
plausible than their opposités, yet because of the 


201 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μένην ἴσην πιθανότητα τούτων τε τῶν λόγων καὶ 
τῶν “παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς κειμένων τὴν ἐποχὴν 
συνάγοντες. 


H’.—NEPI AAHOOTS ΚΑῚ ΑΛΗΉΘΕΙΑΣ 


80 Ei μέντοι καὶ δοίημεν καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν εἶναί τι 
τῆς ἀληθείας κριτήριον, ἄχρηστον εὑρίσκεται καὶ 
μάταιον, ἐὰν ὑπομνήσωμεν ὅτι, ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς 
λεγομένοις ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν, ἀνύπαρκτος μέν 

81 ἐστιν ἡ ἀλήθεια ἀνυπόστατον δὲ τὸ ἀληθές. ὑπο- 
μιμνήσκομεν δὲ οὕτως. λέγεται διαφέρειν τῆς 
ἀληθείας τὸ ἀληθὲς τριχῶς, οὐσίᾳ συστάσει δυνά- 
pet οὐσίᾳ μὲν ἐπεὶ τὸ μὲν ἀληθὲς ἀ ἀσώματόν ἐστιν 
(ἀξίωμα γάρ ἐστι καὶ λεκτόν), ἡ δὲ ἀλήθεια σῶμα 
(ἔστι γὰρ ἐπιστήμη πάντων ἀληθῶν ἀποφαντική, 
ἡ δὲ ἐπιστήμη πῶς ἔχον ἡγεμονικὸν ὥσπερ καὶ ἡ 
πῶς ἔχουσα χεὶρ πυγμή, τὸ δὲ ἡγεμονικὸν σῶμα- 

82 ἔστι γὰρ κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς πνεῦμα), συστάσει δὲ ἐπεὶ 
τὸ μὲν ἀληθὲς ἁπλοῦν τί ἐστιν, οἷον “᾿ ἐγὼ δια- 
λέγομαι," ἡ δὲ ἀλήθεια ἀπὸ [rAs| πολλῶν ἀληθῶν 

83 γνώσεων" συνίσταται, δυνάμει δὲ ἐπεὶ ἡ μὲν ἀλήθεια 
ἐπιστήμης ἔχεται, τὸ δὲ ἀληθὲς οὐ πάντως. 
διόπερ τὴν μὲν ἀλήθειαν ἐν μόνῳ σπουδαίῳ φασὶν 
εἶναι, τὸ δὲ ἀληθὲς καὶ ἐν φαύλῳ: ἐνδέχεται γὰρ 
τὸν φαῦλον ἀληθές τι εἰπεῖν. 


1 γνώσεων  : γνώσεως MSS. (THs... γν. Bekk.). 


“Οὐ ddv. Log. i. 38 ff. S. argues that, to go by the 
Stoics’ own statement, neither “ truth os (which is ‘‘ cor- 
poreal’ Ἢ nor “ the true’’ (particular “‘ judgement,” which is 

__ wacorporeal " has any real existence: he terms the former 

*“unreal,’’ or “ non-existent’? (avirapxros), the latter ‘‘ non- 
substantial” (ἀνυπόστατον). 


202 





OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 79-83 


apparently equal plausibility of these arguments and 
of those propounded by the Dogmatists we deduce 
suspension of judgement. 


Cuapter VIII.—Or tut Truse ann Trure 


Even were we to grant, by way of hypothesis, that 80 
a criterion of truth exists, it is found to be useless and 
vain if we recall that, so far as the statements of the 
Dogmatists go, truth is unreal and the true non- 
substantial. The passage we recall is this: ‘‘ The 81 
true is said to differ from truth in three ways—in 
essence, composition, potency. In essence, since the 
true is incorporeal (for it is judgement and “ expres- 
sion Ὁ), while truth is a body (for it is knowledge 
declaratory of all true things, and knowledge is a 
particular state of the regent part, just as the fist is a 
particular state of the hand, and the regent part is a 
body ; for according to them it is breath). In com- 82 
position, because the true is a simple thing, as for 
example ΠῚ converse,’ whereas truth is a compound 
of many true cognitions. In potency, since truth 83 
depends on knowledge but the true does not alto- 
gether so depend. Consequently, as they say, truth 
exists only in the good man, but the true in the bad 
man as well; for it is possible for the bad man to 
utter something true.” 


> Literally “‘the utterable’’ (lekton), or thought in its 
relation to speech; 2,6. the meaning or significance of a 
word or name (the idea or mental picture evoked by it) as 
distinguished from (1) the name itself, as uttered (φωνή), and 
(2) the real object, existing outside the mind (ἐκτός), denoted 
by the name: these two last were said (by the Stoics) to be 
** corporeal.” 

¢ Cf. Adv. Log. i. 41 ff. 


203 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


84 Ταῦτα μὲν of δογματικοί: ἡμεῖς δὲ πάλιν τῆς 
κατὰ τὴν συγγραφὴν προαιρέσεως στοχαζόμενοι 
πρὸς μόνον τὸ ἀληθὲς νῦν τοὺς λόγους ποιησόμεθα, 
ἐπεὶ συμπεριγράφεται τούτῳ καὶ ἡ ἀλήθεια, σύ- 
στημα τῆς τῶν ἀληθῶν γνώσεως eivar λεγομένη. 
πάλιν δὲ ἐπεὶ τῶν λόγων ot μέν εἶσι καθολικώ- 
τεροι, δι’ ὧν αὐτὴν τὴν ὑπόστασιν τοῦ ἀληθοῦς 
κινοῦμεν, οἱ δὲ εἰδικοί, δι’ ὧν δείκνυμεν ὅτι οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἐν φωνῇ τὸ ἀληθὲς ἢ ἐν λεκτῷ ἢ ἐν τῇ 
κινήσει τῆς διανοίας, τοὺς καθολικωτέρους ἐκ- 
θέσθαι μόνους ὡς πρὸς τὸ παρὸν ἀρκεῖν ἡγούμεθα. 
ὥσπερ γὰρ τείχους θεμελίῳ κατενεχθέντι καὶ τὰ 
ὑπερκείμενα, πάντα συγκαταφέρεται, οὕτω τῇ τοῦ 
ἀληθοῦς ὑποστάσει διατρεπομένῃ καὶ αἱ κατὰ 
μέρος τῶν δογματικῶν εὑρεσιλογίαι συμπεριγρά- 
φονται. 


& 


6’. —EI ἘΣΤΙ ΤΊ ΦΥΣΕΙ AAHOES 


85 Διαφωνίας τοίνυν οὔσης περὶ τοῦ ἀληθοῦς παρὰ 
τοῖς δογματικοῖς, ἐπεὶ τινὲς μέν φασιν εἶναί τι 
> 4 \ A A s 2 / 3 > / 
ἀληθὲς τινὲς δὲ μηδὲν εἶναι ἀληθές, οὐκ ἐνδέχεται 

Ἃ ’ > ~ > \ e / > , 
τὴν διαφωνίαν ἐπικρῖναι, ἐπειδὴ ὁ λέγων εἶναί τι 
ἀληθὲς οὔτε ἄνευ ἀποδείξεως τοῦτο λέγων πιστευ- 

͵ N \ ἢ ” . ee 2 
θήσεται διὰ τὴν διαφωνίαν: ἣν τε καὶ ἀπόδειξιν 
βούληται φέρειν, ἣν μὲν ψευδῆ ταύτην εἶναι συν- 

2 2 2} 3 “" \ ἃ > / 
ομολογήσῃ, ἄπιστος ἔσται, ἀληθῆ δὲ τὴν ἀπόδειξιν 
> ; 3 \ ,ὔ / > / / 
εἶναι λέγων εἰς τὸν διάλληλόν τε ἐμπίπτει λόγον 
καὶ ἀπόδειξιν αἰτηθήσεται τοῦ ἀληθῆ αὐτὴν ὑπ- 
άρχειν, καὶ ἐκείνης ἄλλην, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. 
ἀδύνατον δὲ ἄπειρα ἀποδεῖξαι: ἀδύνατον ἄρα 
γνῶναι καὶ ὅτι ἔστι τι ἀληθές. 
904 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 84--8ὅ 


Such are the statements of the Dogmatists. But 84 
we,—having regard here again to the plan of our 
treatise,—shall confine our present discussion to the 
true, since its refutation entails that of truth as well, 
it being defined as the “ system of the knowledge of 
things true.” Again, since some of our arguments, 
whereby we dispute the very existence of the true, 
are more general, others of a specific kind, whereby 
we prove that the true does not exist in utterance or 
in expression or in the movement of the intellect, we 
deem it sufficient for the present to set forth only 
those of the more general kind. For just as, when 
the foundation of a wall collapses, all the super- 
structure collapses along with it, so also, when, the 
substantial existence of the true is refuted, all the 
particular inventions of the logic of the Dogmatists 
are included in the refutation. 


CuapTer [X.—Dors Anyrurna TRUE REALLY EXIST ἢ 


Seeing, then, that there is a controversy amongst 85 
the Dogmatists regarding ‘“‘ the true,” since some 
assert that something true exists, others that nothing 
true exists, it is impossible to decide the controversy, 
because the man who says that something true exists 
will not be believed without proof, on account of the 
controversy ; and if he wishes to offer proof, he will 
be disbelieved if he acknowledges that his proof is 
false, whereas if he declares that his proof is true he 
becomes involved in circular reasoning and will be 
required to show proof of the real truth of his proof, 
and another proof of that proof, and so on ad infinitum. 
But it is impossible to prove an infinite series ; and so 
it is impossible also to get to know that something 
true exists. 

205 


86 


87 


88 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Kat μὴν τό τι, ὅπερ φασὶν εἶναι πάντων γενικώ- 
τατον, ἤτοι ἀληθὲς ἢ ψεῦδός ἐστιν ἢ οὔτε ἀληθὲς 
οὔτε ψεῦδος 1 ἢ καὶ ψεῦδος καὶ ἀληθές. εἰ μὲν οὖν 
ψεῦδος αὐτὸ εἶναι φήσουσιν, ὁμολογήσουσιν ὅτι 
ἔστι πάντα ψευδῆ. ὥσπερ γὰρ ἐπεὶ τὸ ζῶον 
ἔμψυχόν ἐστι, καὶ πάντα τὰ Da τὰ κατὰ μέρος 
ἔμψυχά ἐστιν, οὕτως εἰ τὸ γενικώτατον πάντων 
τό τι ψεῦδός ἐστι, καὶ πάντα τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἔσται 
ψευδῆ καὶ οὐδὲν ἀληθές. ᾧ συνεισάγεται τὸ μηδὲν 
εἶναι ψεῦδος" καὶ γὰρ αὐτὸ τὸ πᾶντα ἐστὶ ψευδῆ ” 
καὶ τὸ “᾿ ἔστι τι ψεῦδος ᾿᾿ τῶν πάντων καθεστὼς 
ψεῦδος ἔσται. εἰ δὲ ἀληθές ἐ ἐστι τό τι, πάντα ἔσται 
ἀληθῆ: ᾧ συνεισάγεται πάλιν τὸ Ἰδὲ εἶναι ἀληθές, 
εἴγε καὶ αὐτὸ τοῦτο τὶ ὑπάρχον, λέγω δὲ τὸ μηδὲν 
εἶναι ἀληθές, ἀληθές ἐστιν. εἰ δὲ καὶ ψεῦδός ἐστι 
καὶ ἀληθὲς τό τι, ἕκαστον τῶν κατὰ μέρος καὶ 
ψεῦδος ἔσται καὶ ἀληθές. ἐξ οὗ συνάγεται. τὸ 

μηδὲν φύσει ἀληθὲς εἶναι: τὸ γὰρ φύσιν ἔχον 
τοιαύτην ὥστε εἶναι ἀληθές, πάντως οὐκ ἂν εἴη 
ψεῦδος. εἰ δ᾽ οὔτε ψεῦδός ἐστιν οὔτε ἀληθὲς 70 
τι, ὁμολογεῖται ὁ ὅτι καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐπὶ μέρους μήτε 
ψευδῆ μήτε ἀληθῆ εἶναι λεγόμενα οὐκ ἔσται ἀληθῆ. 

καὶ διὰ ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἄδηλον ἡμῖν ἔσται εἰ ἔστιν 
ἀληθές. 

Πρὸς τούτοις ἤτοι φαινόμενά ἐστι μόνον τὰ 
ἀληθῆ, 7 ἄδηλα μόνον, ἢ τῶν ἀληθῶν τὰ μὲν 
ἀδηλά ἐ ἐστι τὰ δὲ φαινόμενα: οὐδὲν δὲ τούτων ἐστὶν 
ἀληθές, ὡς δείξομεν' οὐδὲν ἄρα ἐστὶν ἀληθές. εἶ 
μὲν οὖν φαινόμενα μόνον ἐστὶ τὰ ἀληθῆ, ἤτοι 
πάντα τὰ φαινόμενα λέξουσιν εἶναι ἀληθῆ ἢ τινά. 
καὶ εἰ μὲν πάντα, περιτρέπεται ὁ λόγος" φαίνεται 


« Cf. Adv. Log. ii. 32 ff.; Introd. Ὁ. xxvi. 
206 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 86-88 


Moreover, the “ something,”’ which is, they declare, 86 
the highest genus of all,* is either true or false 
or neither false nor true or both false and true. 
If, then, they shall assert that it is false they will 
be confessing that all things are false. For just as it 
follows because “ animal” is animate that all parti- 
cular animals also are animate, so too if the highest 
genus of all (“ something ’’) is false all the particulars 
also will be false and nothing true. And this involves 
also the conclusion that nothing is false ; for the very 
statements “all things are false,’’ and “ something 
false exists,’ being themselves included in the “ all,” 
will be false. And if the ‘‘ something ’’ is true, all 
things will be true; and from this again it follows 
that nothing is true, since this statement itself (I 
mean that “ nothing is true ”’) being “‘ something ”’ is 
true. And if the “something” is both false and 87 
true, each of its particulars will be both false and true. 
From which we conclude that nothing is really true ; 
for that which has its real nature such that it is true 
will certainly not be false. And if the “ something ”’ 
is neither false nor true, it is acknowledged that all 
the particulars also, being declared to be neither 
false nor true, will not be true. So for these reasons 
it will be non-evident to us whether the true exists. 

Furthermore, the true things are either apparent 88 
only, or non-evident only, or in part non-evident and 
in part apparent ; ὃ but none of these alternatives is 
true, as we shall show ; therefore nothing is true. If, 
however, the true things are apparent only, they will 
assert either that all or that some of the apparent are 
true. And if they say “all,” the argument is over- 


" Cf. Adv. Log. ii. 17 ff. By “true things’? are meant 
judgements or propositions which conform to fact. 


207 


89 ὑ 


90 


91 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


3 A ᾽ > 
γάρ τισι τὸ μηδὲν εἶναι ἀληθές. εἰ δὲ τινά, ἀν- 
επικρίτως μὲν οὐ δύναταί τις λέγειν ὅτι τάδε μέν 
ἐστιν ἀληθῆ τάδε δὲ ψευδῆ, κριτηρίῳ δὲ χρώμενος 
ἦτοι φαινόμενον εἶναι λέξει τοῦτο τὸ κρυτήριον ἢ 
ἄδηλον. καὶ ἄδηλον μὲν οὐδαμῶς: μόνα γὰρ 
ὑπόκειται νῦν ἀληθῆ τὰ φαινόμενα. εἰ δὲ φαινό- 
μένον, ἐπεὶ ζητεῖται τίνα μὲν φαινόμενά ἐστιν 
ἀληθῆ τίνα δὲ ψευδῆ, καὶ τὸ λαμβανόμενον φαι- 
νόμενον πρὸς τὴν κρίσιν τῶν φαινομένων πάλιν 
ἑτέρου δεήσεται κριτηρίου φαινομένου, κἀκεῖνο 
ἄλλου, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. ἀδύνατον δὲ ἄπειρα 
ἐπικρίνειν: ἀδύνατον ἄρα καταλαβεῖν εἰ φαινόμενά 
ἐστι μόνον τὰ ἀληθῆ. 

ς ’ δὲ \ € λέ aS 10 λ / εν 
Ὁμοίως ἐ καὶ ὁ λέγων τὰ ἄδηλα μόνον εἶναι 
ἀληθῆ πάντα μὲν οὐ λέξει εἶναι ἀληθῆ (οὐ γὰρ 
καὶ τὸ ἀρτίους εἶναι τοὺς ἀστέρας ἀληθὲς εἶναι 
λέξει καὶ τὸ περιττοὺς τούτους ὑπάρχειν)" εἰ δὲ 
τινά, τίνι κρινοῦμεν ὅτι τάδε μὲν τὰ ἄδηλά ἐστιν 
> - / \ “ἊΝ 
ἀληθῆ τάδε δὲ ψευδῆ; φαινομένῳ μὲν γὰρ οὐ- 
δαμῶς:" εἰ δὲ ἀδήλῳ, ἐπεὶ ζητοῦμεν" τίνα τῶν 
9 a 
ἀδήλων ἐστὶν ἀληθῆ καὶ τίνα ψευδῆ, δεήσεται Kal 
τοῦτο τὸ ἄδηλον ἀδήλου ἑτέρου τοῦ ἐπικρινοῦντος 
αὐτό, κἀκεῖνο ἄλλου, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. διόπερ 
+O \ 2} id > A > “~ 
οὐδὲ ἄδηλα μόνον ἐστὶ τἀληθῆ. 
’ f cf ~ 5 - A 7 3 
Λείπεται λέγειν ὅτι τῶν ἀληθῶν τὰ μέν ἐστι 
\ \ » ἢ \ \ “~ y 
φαινόμενα τὰ δὲ Onda: ἔστι δὲ Kal τοῦτο ἄτοπον. 
ἤτοι γὰρ πάντα τά τε φαινόμενα καὶ τὰ ἀδηλά 
1 καὶ Heintz: ἢ mss., Bekk. 
2 ἐπεὶ ζητοῦμεν T: ἐπιζητοῦμεν mss., Bekk. 


@ This is incorrect; on the hypothesis, non-evidents may 
also be true. 


208 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 88-91 


thrown; for it is apparent to some that nothing is 
true. If, again, they say “ some,” no one can assert 
without testing that these phenomena are true, those 
false, while if he employs a test or criterion he will 
say either that this criterion is apparent or that it is 
non-evident. But it is certainly not non-evident ; 
for it is now being assumed that the apparent objects 
only are true. And if itis apparent, since the matter 89 
in question is what apparent things are true and what 
false, that apparent thing which is adopted for the 
purpose of judging the apparent objects will itself in 
turn require an apparent criterion, and this again 
another, and so on ad infinitum. But it is impossible 
to judge an infinite series ; and hence it is impossible 
to apprehend whether the true things are apparent 
only. 

Similarly also he who declares that the non-evident 90 
only are true will not imply that they are all true (for 
he will not say that it is true that the stars ὃ are even 
in number and that they are also odd); while if 
some are true, whereby shall we decide that these 
non-evident things are true and those false? Certainly 
not by an apparent criterion ; and if by a non-evident 
one, then since our problem is which of the non- 
evident things are true and which false, this non- 
evident criterion will itself also need another to judge 
it, and this again a third, and so on ad infinitum. 
Neither, then, are the true things non-evident only. 

The remaining alternative is to say that of the true 91 
some are apparent, some non-evident ; but this too 
is absurd. For either all the apparent and all the 
non-evident are true, or some of the apparent and 


> A favourite example of the “ non-evident,” οἱ 8 97 infra, 
Adv. Log. ii. 147, ete. 


VOL. I Ῥ 209 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


3 3 “Ἀ aA 4 7 A A + 3 
ἐστιν ἀληθῆ, ἢ τινὰ φαινόμενα Kal τινὰ ἄδηλα. εἰ 
μὲν οὖν πάντα, πάλιν περιτραπήσεται ὁ λόγος, 
3 “~ S 7 \ ~ \ Εν 3 , 
ἀληθοῦς εἶναι διδομένου καὶ τοῦ μηδὲν εἶναι ἀληθές, 
λεχθήσεταί τε ἀληθὲς καὶ τὸ ἀρτίους εἶναι τοὺς 

92 ἀστέρας καὶ τὸ περιττοὺς τούτους ὑπάρχειν. εἰ 
δὲ τινὰ τῶν φαινομένων καὶ τινὰ τῶν ἀδήλων 
ἐστὶν ἀληθῆ, πῶς ἐπικρινοῦμεν ὅτι τῶν φαινομένων 
τάδε μέν ἐστιν ἀληθῆ τάδε δὲ ψευδῆ; εἰ μὲν διὰ 

/ 3 2, 3 ς 7 9 
φαινομένου, εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκβάλλεται 6 λόγος" εἰ 
\ > 3 / 3 \ \ \ 32 “ , 
δὲ δι ἀδήλου, ἐπεὶ Kal τὰ ἄδηλα δεῖται κρίσεως, 
πάλιν τοῦτο τὸ ἄδηλον διά τινος κριθήσεται; εἰ 
Ἁ Ἁ ΄ ¢ 7 ¢ + / 
μὲν διὰ φαινομένου, ὃ διάλληλος εὑρίσκεται τρόπος, 
> \ > 3 7 ς 9 » 3 7 ξ 7 

93 εἰ δὲ δι᾿ ἀδήλου, 6 εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκβάλλων. ὁμοίως 
\ A \ “~ > / 7 e \ \ > 7 
δὲ καὶ περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων λεκτέον: ὁ μὲν γὰρ ἀδήλῳ 
τινὶ κρίνειν αὐτὰ ἐπιχειρῶν εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκβάλλεται, 

6 δὲ φαινομένῳ ἢ ἀεὶ φαινόμενον προσλαμβάνων 
εἰς ἄπειρον, ἢ ἐπὶ ἄδηλον μετα aivwy εἰς τὸν 
διάλληλον. ψεῦδος ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ λέγειν τῶν ἀληθῶν 
τὰ μὲν εἶναι φαινόμενα τὰ δὲ ἄδηλα. 

94 ἘΠ οὖν μήτε τὰ φαινόμενά ἐστιν ἀληθῆ μήτε τὰ 
ἀδηλα μόνα, μήτε τινὰ μὲν φαινόμενα τινὰ δὲ 
ἄδηλα, οὐδέν ἐστιν ἀληθές. εἰ δὲ μηδέν ἐστιν 
ἀληθές, τὸ δὲ κριτήριον δοκεῖ πρὸς τὴν κρίσιν τοῦ 
ἀληθοῦς χρησιμεύειν, ἄχρηστον καὶ “μάταιόν ἐστι 
τὸ κριτήριον, κἂν Oper | αὐτὸ κατὰ συγχώρησιν 
ἔχειν τινὰ ὑπόστασιν. καὶ εἴγε ἐφεκτέον περὶ τοῦ 
εἰ ἔστι τι ἀληθές, ἀκόλουθόν ἐστι τοὺς λέγοντας 
¢ f 3 3 7 ~ ἃ 5 »Ἢ 
ὡς διαλεκτική ἐστιν ἐπιστήμη ψευδῶν καὶ ἀληθῶν 
καὶ οὐδετέρων προπετεύεσθαι. 





@ For this Stoic definition cf. §§ 229, 947: Adv. Hth. 187: 
it is ascribed to Poseidonius by Diog. Laert. vii. 62. 


210 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 91-94 


some of the non-evident. If, then, we say “ all,” the 
argument will again be overthrown, since the truth is 
granted of the statement “ nothing is true,” and the 
truth will be asserted of both the statements “ the 
stars are even in number” and “they are odd.”’ 
But if some of the apparent are true and some of the 92 
non-evident, how shall we judge that of the apparent 
these are true but those false? For if we do so 
by means of an apparent thing, the argument is 
thrown back ad infinitum ; and if by means of a thing 
non-evident, then, since the non-evidents also require 
to be judged, by what means is this non-evident thing 
to be judged? If by an apparent thing, we fall into 
circular reasoning ; and if by a thing non-evident, - 
into the regress ad infinitum. And about the non- 93 
evident we must make a similar statement; for he 
who attempts to judge them by something non- 
evident is thrown back ad infinitum, while he who 
judges by a thing apparent or with the constant 
assistance of a thing apparent falls back ad infinitum, 
or, if he passes over to the apparent, is guilty of 
circular reasoning. It is false, therefore, to say that 
of the true some are apparent, some non-evident. 

If, then, neither the apparent nor the non-evident 94 
alone are true, nor yet some apparent and some non- 
evident things, nothing is true. But if nothing is 
true, and the criterion seems to require the true for 
the purpose of judging, the criterion is useless and 
vain, even if we grant, by way of concession, that it 
possesses some substantial reality. And if we have 
to suspend judgement as to whether anything true 
exists, it follows that those who declare that “ dialectic 
is the science of things true and false and neither ”’ @ 
speak rashly. 


211 


95 


96 


97 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


᾿Απόρου δὲ τοῦ κριτηρίου τῆς ἀληθείας φανέντος, 
οὔτε περὶ τῶν ἐναργῶν εἶναι δοκούντων, ὅσον ἐπὶ 
τοῖς λεγομένοις ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν, ἔτι οἷόν τέ 
ἐστι διισχυρίζεσθαι, οὔτε περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων" ἐπεὶ 
γὰρ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐναργῶν ταῦτα καταλαμβάνειν ot 
δογματικοὶ νομίζουσιν, ἐὰν ἐπέχειν περὶ τῶν ἐναρ- 
γῶν καλουμένων ἀναγκαζώμεθα, πῶς ἂν περὶ τῶν 
ἀδήλων ἀποφαίνεσθαι τολμήσαιμεν; ἐκ πολλοῦ 
δὲ τοῦ περιόντος καὶ πρὸς τὰ ἄδηλα τῶν πραγ- 
μάτων ἰδίως ἐνστησόμεθα. καὶ ἐπειδὴ ταῦτα διὰ 
σημείου τε καὶ ἀποδείξεως καταλαμβάνεσθαι καὶ 
κρατύνεσθαι δοκεῖ, διὰ βραχέων ὑπομνήσομεν ὅτι 
καὶ περὶ τοῦ σημείου καὶ περὶ τῆς ἀποδείξεως 
ἐπέχειν προσήκει. ἀρξώμεθα δὲ ἀπὸ σημείου" 
καὶ γὰρ ἡ ἀπόδειξις τῷ γένει σημεῖον εἶναι δοκεῖ. 


I’.—JIEPI ΣΗΜΈΠΟΥ 


“- / f A \ \ 
Τῶν πραγμάτων τοίνυν κατὰ τοὺς δογματικοὺς 
\ } > ᾽ \ \ » \ ~ > ? 
τὰ μέν ἐστι πρόδηλα τὰ δὲ ἄδηλα, καὶ τῶν ἀδήλων 
\ ‘ , EA δ \ \ \ a 
τὰ μὲν καθάπαξ ἄδηλα τὰ δὲ πρὸς καιρὸν ἄδηλα 
\ \ / Ed \ / \ κυ / 
τὰ δὲ φύσει ἄδηλα. καὶ πρόδηλα μὲν εἶναί φασι 
‘ > ς ΄ > “ ς oA 2 é / ? 
τὰ ἐξ ἑαυτῶν εἰς γνῶσιν ἡμῖν ἐρχόμενα, οἷόν ἐστι 
Ἁ ¢ f Ss / ΔΨ “A \ / 
τὸ ἡμέραν εἶναι, καθάπαξ δὲ ἄδηλα ἃ μὴ πέφυκεν 
> A ¢ / / / ¢ \ 2 7ὔ 
εἰς τὴν ἡμετέραν πίπτειν κατάληψιν, ὡς τὸ ἀρτίους 


\ > / \ Ἁ \ Ψ»ἤἹ Ω \ 
98 εἶναι τοὺς ἀστέρας, πρὸς καιρὸν δὲ ἄδηλα ἅπερ τὴν 


φύσιν ἔχοντα ἐναργῆ παρά τινας ἔξωθεν περιστά- 
σεις κατὰ καιρὸν ἡμῖν ἀδηλεῖται, ὡς ἐμοὶ νῦν ἡ 


“- 





a Of. i. 62-63. 

> i.e. the Stoics. ‘* Pre-evident ’ =evident of themselves, 
self-manifesting ; οὗ. i. 138. 

¢ Cf. Adv. Log. ii. 141, 144, 316. & Cf. § 90 supra. 


212 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 95-98 


And since the criterion of truth has appeared to be 95 
unattainable, it is no longer possible to make positive 
assertions either about those things which (if we may 
depend on the statements of the Dogmatists) seem 


to be evident or about those which are non-evident ; 


for since the Dogmatists suppose they apprehend 
the latter from the things evident, if we are forced 
to suspend judgement about the evident, how shall 
we dare to make pronouncements about the non- 
evident? Yet, by way of super-addition,® we shall 96 
also raise separate objections against the non-evident 
class of objects. And since they seem to be appre- 
hended and confirmed by means of sign and proof, 
we shall show briefly that it is proper to suspend 
judgement also about sign and proof. We will 
begin with sign; for indeed proof seems to be a 
kind of sign. 


CHAPTER X.—CoNCERNING SIGN 


Of objects, then, some, according to the Dogma- 97 
tists,? are pre-evident, some non-evident ; and of the 
non-evident, some are altogether non-evident, some 
occasionally non-evident, some naturally non-evident. 
Pre-evident are, as they assert, those which come to 
our knowledge of themselves,* as for example the 
fact that it is day-time ; altogether non-evident are 


those which are not of a nature to fall within our 


apprehension, as that the stars ὦ are even in number ; 
occasionally non-evident are those which, though 9g 
patent in their nature, are occasionally rendered non- 
evident to us owing to certain external circumstances,° 


ὁ 4.6. distance in space. From this we infer that Sextus 


was not then residing at Athens. 


213 


99 


100 


101 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων πόλις, φύσει δὲ ἄδηλα τὰ μὴ ἔχοντα 
φύσιν ὑπὸ τὴν ἡμετέραν πίπτειν ἐνάργειαν, ὡς οἱ 
νοητοὶ πόροι" οὗτοι γὰρ οὐδέποτε ἐξ ἑαυτῶν φαΐί- 
νονται, ἀλλ᾽ εἰ ἄρα, ἐξ ἑτέρων καταλαμβάνεσθαι 
ἂν νομισθεῖεν, οἷον τῶν ἱδρώτων ἢ τινος παρα- 
πλησίου. τὰ μὲν. οὖν πρόδηλα μὴ δεῖσθαι σημείου 
φασίν. ἐξ ἑαυτῶν γὰρ αὐτὰ καταλαμβάνεσθαι. 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὰ καθάπαξ ἄδηλα ἅ ἅτε δὴ μηδὲ τὴν ἀρχὴν 
καταλαμβανόμενα. τὰ δὲ πρὸς καιρὸν ἄδηλα καὶ 
τὰ φύσει ἄδηλα διὰ σημείων μὲν καταλαμβάνεσθαι, 
οὐ μὴν διὰ τῶν αὐτῶν, ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν πρὸς καιρὸν 
ἄδηλα διὰ τῶν ὑπομνηστικῶν, τὰ δὲ φύσει ἄδηλα 
διὰ τῶν ἐνδεικτικῶν. 

Τῶν οὖν σημείων τὰ μέν ἐστιν ὑπομνηστικὰ 
κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς τὰ δ᾽ ἐνδεικτικά. καὶ ὑπομνηστικὸν 
μὲν σημεῖον καλοῦσιν ὃ συμπαρατηρηθὲν τῷ ση- 
μειωτῷ δι᾽ ἐναργείας ἅμα τῷ ὑποπεσεῖν, ἐκείνου 
ἀδηλουμένου, ἄγει ἡμᾶς εἰς ὑπόμνησιν τοῦ συμ- 
παρατηρηθέντος αὐτῷ καὶ νῦν ἐναργῶς μὴ ὑπο- 
πίπτοντος, WS ἔχει ἐπὶ τοῦ καπνοῦ καὶ τοῦ πυρός. 
ἐνδεικτικὸν δέ ἐστι σημεῖον, ὡς φασίν, ὃ μὴ συμ- 
παρατηρηθὲν τῷ σημειωτῷ δι᾿ ἐναργείας, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ 
τῆς ἰδίας φύσεως καὶ κατασκευῆς σημαίνει τὸ οὗ 
ἐστὶ σημεῖον, ὡσπεροῦν αἱ περὶ τὸ σῶμα κινήσεις 
σημεῖά εἰσι τῆς ψυχῆς. ὅθεν καὶ ὁρίζονται τοῦτο 
τὸ σημεῖον οὕτως “᾿ σημεῖόν ἐστιν ἐνδεικτικὸν 
ἀξίωμα ἐν ὑγιεῖ συνημμένῳ προκαθηγούμενον, 





a of. §§ 146, 318. For the “ pores” (or excretory “ ducts,” 
or “‘ passagres ἦγ 88 intelligible ’’ (νοητοί), or objects of thought 
as opposedto sense, cf. § 140, Adv. Log. ii. 306. 

ὃ The Stoic doctrine. Cf. “Ado. Log. ii. 151 ff., 156. 

° Cf. § 104 infra. As smoke “indicates”’ fire, so in the 


214 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 98-101 


as the city of Athens is now to me; naturally non- 
evident are those which are not of such a nature ὦ as 
to fall within our clear perception, like the intelligible 
pores ; for these never appear of themselves but may 
be thought to be apprehended, if at all, owing to 
other things, such as perspirations or something of 
the sort. Now the pre-evident objects, they say, do 
not require a sign, for they are apprehended of them- 
selves. And neither do the altogether non-evident, 
since of course they are not even apprehended at all. 
But such objects as are occasionally or naturally 
non-evident are apprehended by means of signs— 
not of course by the same signs, but by “sugges- 
tive ” signs in the case of the occasionally non-evident 
and by “indicative”? signs in the case of the 
naturally non-evident. 

Of the signs, then, according to them, some are 
suggestive, some indicative.? They term a sign 
‘ suggestive ’’ when, being mentally associated with 
the thing signified, it by its clearness at the time 
of its perception, though the thing signified remains 
non-evident, suggests to us the thing associated with 
it, which is not clearly perceived at the moment— 
as for instance in the case of smoke and fire. An 
“indicative ” sign, they say, is that which is not 
clearly associated with the thing signified, but signifies 
that whereof it is a sign by its own particular nature 
and constitution, just as, for instance, the bodily 
motions are signs of the soul. Hence, too, they define 
this sign as follows: ‘‘ An indicative sign is an ante- 
cedent judgement, in a sound hypothetical syllogism,° 
hypothetical syllogism—‘‘ If there is smoke, there is fire; 
but in fact there is smoke; therefore there is fire’’—the 


“ antecedent”? (or “‘if’’-clause) “‘ reveals” (or is a “sign” 
of) the *‘ consequent ”’ judgement “‘ there is fire.”’ 


215 


99 


100 


101 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


102 ἐκκαλυπτικὸν τοῦ λήγοντος. δυττῆς οὖν οὔσης 
τῶν σημείων διαφορᾶς, ὡς ἔφαμεν, οὐ πρὸς πᾶν 
σημεῖον ἀντιλέγομεν, ἀλλὰ πρὸς μόνον τὸ ἐνδεικ- 
τικὸν ὡς ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν πεπλάσθαι δοκοῦν. 
τὸ γὰρ ὑπομνηστικὸν πεπίστευται ὑπὸ τοῦ βίου, 
ἐπεὶ καπνὸν ἰδών τις σημειοῦται πῦρ καὶ οὐλὴν 
θεασάμενος τραῦμα γεγενῆσθαι λέγει. ὅθεν οὐ 
μόνον οὐ μαχόμεθα τῷ βίῳ ἀλλὰ καὶ συναγωνιζό- 
μεθα, τῷ μὲν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ πεπιστευμένῳ ἀδοξάστως 
συγκατατιθέμενοι, τοῖς δὲ «ὑπὸ» τῶν δογματικῶν 
ἰδίως ἀναπλαττομένοις ἀνθιστάμενοι. 

105. Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἥρμοΐζεν ἴσως προειπεῖν ὑπὲρ 
τῆς σαφηνείας τοῦ ζητουμένου": λοιπὸν δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν 
ἀντίρρησιν χωρῶμεν, οὐκ ἀνύπαρκτον δεῖξαι τὸ 
ἐνδεικτικὸν σημεῖον πάντως ἐσπουδακότες, ἀλλὰ 
τὴν φαινομένην ἰσοσθένειαν τῶν φερομένων λόγων 
πρός τε τὴν ὕπαρξιν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν ἀνυπαρξίαν 
ὑπομιμνήσκοντες. 


IA’,.—EI ἘΣΤῚ TI ΣΗΜΕΙ͂ΟΝ ENAEIKTIKON 


104 Τὸ σημεῖον τοΐνυν, ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς λεγομένοις περὶ 
αὐτοῦ παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς, ἀνεπινόητον ἐστίν. 
αὐτίκα γοῦν οἱ ἀκριβῶς περὶ αὐτοῦ διειληφέναι 
δοκοῦντες, of στωικοί, βουλόμενοι παραστῆσαι 
τὴν ἔννοιαν τοῦ σημείου, φασὶ σημεῖον εἶναι 
ἀξίωμα ἐν ὑγιεῖ συνημμένῳ προκαθηγούμενον, 
ἐκκαλυπτικὸν τοῦ λήγοντος. καὶ τὸ μὲν ἀξίωμά 
φασιν εἶναι λεκτὸν αὐτοτελὲς ἀποφαντὸν ὅσον ἐφ᾽ 
ἑαυτῷ, ὑγιὲς δὲ συνημμένον τὸ μὴ ἀρχόμενον 

1 «ὑπὸ» add. T, cj. Bekk. 
216 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 102-104 


which serves to reveal the consequent.” Seeing, 102 
then, that there are, as we have said, two different 
kinds of sign, we do not argue against every sign 
but only against the indicative kind as it seems to 
be invented by the Dogmatists. For the suggestive 
sign is relied on by living experience, since when a 
man sees smoke fire is signified, and when he beholds 
a scar he says that there has been a wound. Hence, 
not only do we not fight against living experience, 
but we even lend it our support by assenting undog- 
matically to what it relies on, while opposing the 
private inventions of the Dogmatists. 

These prefatory remarks it was, perhaps, fitting to 103 
make for the sake. of elucidating the object of our 
inquiry. It remains for us to proceed to our refuta- 
tion, not in any anxiety to show that the indicative 
sign is wholly unreal, but reminding ourselves of the 
apparent equivalence of the arguments adduced for 
its reality and for its unreality. 


CHaptrer XJI.—Dors an Inpicative Sign Exist? 


Now the sign, judging by the statements of the 104 
Dogmatists about it, is inconceivable. Thus, for 
instance, the Stoics, who seem to have defined it 
exactly, in attempting to establish the conception of 
the sign, state that “ A sign is an antecedent judge- 
ment in a valid hypothetical syllogism, which serves 
to reveal the consequent ᾿᾿ ; and “judgement ”’ they 
define as “ A self-complete expression * which is of 
itself declaratory ’’; and “ valid hypothetical syllo- 


* An “ expression,’ lekton (see Ὁ. 203 note δ), may be 
either “* deficient’’ (e.g. ‘‘ writes *’) or “‘ complete ”’ (¢.g. ‘“ he 
writes’); ef. § 81, Adv. Log. ii. 71. 

217 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


105 ἀπὸ ἀληθοῦς καὶ λῆγον. ἐπὶ ψεῦδος. τὸ γὰρ συν- 
ἡμμένον ἤτοι ἄρχεται ἀπὸ ἀληθοῦς καὶ λήγει ἐπὶ 
ηθές, οἷον “* εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, , φῶς ἔ ἔστιν, ἢ “ἄρχεται 
ἀπὸ ψεύδους καὶ λήγει ἐπὶ ψεῦδος, οἷον “ἰ εἰ 
πέταται ἡ γῆ, πτερωτή ἐστιν ἡ yh,” ἢ ἄρχεται 
ἀπὸ ἀληθοῦς καὶ λήγει ἐπὶ ψεῦδος, οἷον “εἰ ἔστιν 
ή γῆ. πέταται ἡ γῆ, ἢ ἄρχεται ἀπὸ ψεύδους καὶ 
λήγει ἐπὶ ἀληθές, οἷον εἰ πέταται ἡ γῆ, ἔστιν ἡ 
γῆ. τούτων δὲ μόνον τὸ ἀπὸ ἀληθοῦς ἀρχόμενον 
καὶ λῆγον ἐπὶ ψεῦδος μοχθηρὸν eivai φασιν, τὰ 
106 δ᾽ ἄλλα (bya. προκαθηγούμενον δὲ λέγουσι τὸ ἐν 
συνημμένῳ ἀρχομένῳ ἀπὸ ἀληθοῦς καὶ λήγοντι 
ἐπὶ ἁληθὲς “ἡγούμενον. ἐκκαλυπτικὸν δέ ἐστι τοῦ 
λήγοντος, ἐπεὶ τὸ “᾿ γάλα ἔχει αὕτη ᾿ τοῦ  Ke- 
κύηκεν αὕτη δηλωτικὸν εἶναι δοκεῖ ἐ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ 
συνημμένῳ “εἰ | γάλα ἐ ἔχει αὕτη, κεκύηκεν. αὕτη.᾽ 
107 Tatra “μὲν οὗτοι, ἡμεῖς δὲ λέγομεν πρῶτον ὅτι 
ἄδηλόν ἐστιν εἰ ἔστι τι λεκτόν. ἐπεὶ γὰρ τῶν 
δογματικῶν ot μὲν ᾿Επικούρειοί φασι μὴ εἶναί τι 
λεκτὸν of δὲ στωικοὶ εἶναι, ὅταν λέγωσιν οὗ στωικοὶ 
εἶναί τι λεκτόν, ἦτοι μόνῃ φάσει χρῶνται ἢ καὶ 
ἀποδείξει. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν φάσει, ἀντιθήσουσιν αὐτοῖς 
᾿Ἐπικούρειοι φάσιν τὴν λέγουσαν ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι 
τι λεκτόν" εἰ δὲ ἀπόδειξιν παραλήψονται, ἐπεὶ ἐξ 
ἀξιωμάτων συνέστηκε λεκτῶν ἡ ἀπόδειξις, ἐκ τῶν 
λεκτῶν δὲ συνεστῶσα οὐ δυνήσεται πρὸς πίστιν τοῦ 
λεκτὸν εἶναι παραλαμβάνεσθαι (6 yap μὴ διδοὺς 
εἷναι λεκτὸν πῶς συγχωρήσει σύστημα λεκτῶν 








α 2.6. with ἃ true antecedent, or “if” clause. Cf. generally 
Adv. Log. ii. 112, 245 ff., 449. 

ὁ For this stock example cf. Aristot. Anal. pr. 11.27, Rhet. 
i. 2.18; Plato, Menex. 237 x. 


218 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 104-107 


gism ” as one ‘“‘ which does not begin with truth ¢ 
and end with a false consequent.” For either the 105 
syllogism begins with the true and ends with the true 
(e.g. “If there is day, there is light’’), or it begins with 
what is false and ends in falsehood (like “ΤῈ the earth 
flies, the earth is winged’), or it begins with truth and 
ends in falsehood (like “ If the earth exists, the earth 
flies *"), or it begins with falsehood and ends in truth 
(like “If the earth flies, the earth exists’’), And 
they say that of these only that which begins with 
truth and ends in falsehood is invalid, and the rest 
valid. “‘ Antecedent,” they say, is “ the precedent 106 
clause in a hypothetical syllogism which begins in 
truth and ends in truth.” And it “serves to reveal the 
consequent,” since in the syllogism “If this woman 
has milk, she has conceived,” the clause “If this 
woman has milk ”’ seems to be evidential of the clause 
“ she has conceived.” ὃ 

Such is the Stoic doctrine. But we assert, firstly, 107 
that it is non-evident whether any ‘“ expression ” 
exists. For since some of the Dogmatists, the 
Epicureans, declare that expression does not exist, 
others, the Stoics, that it does exist, when the Stoics 
assert its existence they are employing either mere 
assertion or demonstration as well. If assertion, then 
the Epicureans will confute them with the assertion 
which states that no expression exists. But if they 
shall adduce demonstration, then since demonstra- 
tion is composed of expressed judgements, and 
because it is composed of expressions will be unable 
to be adduced to confirm the existence of expression 
(for how will he who refuses to allow the existence of 
expression grant the reality of a system compounded 


219 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


108 ὑπάρχειν ;)---διὰ τοῦ ζητουμένου τοίνυν τὸ ζητού- 


109 


110 


μενον. πιστοῦσθαι βούλεται ὁ ἐκ τῆς ὑπάρξεως τοῦ 
συστήματος τῶν λεκτῶν εἶναί τι λεκτὸν “πειρώμενος 
κατασκευάζειν. εἰ οὖν μήτε ἁπλῶς μήτε du ἀπο- 
δείξεως ἐνδέχεται παριστᾶν ὅτι ἔστι τι λεκτόν, 
ἄδηλόν ἐστιν ὅτι ἔστι τι λεκτόν. 
Ὁ / δὲ \ 3 3 2 67 4 / 
μοίως δὲ καὶ εἰ ἔστιν ἀξίωμα: λεκτὸν yap 
9 \ 3 / v4 \ \ 3 3 ¢ / 
ἐστι TO ἀξίωμα. μήποτε δὲ καὶ εἰ Kal” ὑπόθεσιν 
εἶναί τι λεκτὸν δοθείη, τὸ ἀξίωμα ἀνύπαρκτον εὑ“ 


ρίσκεται, συνεστηκὸς ἐκ λεκτῶν μὴ συνυπαρχόντων 


ἀλλήλοις. οἷον γοῦν ἐπὶ τοῦ “εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, 
φῶς ἔστιν, ὅτε λέγὼ τὸ “ ἡμέρα ἔστιν,᾽᾿ οὐδέπω 
ἔστι τὸ “᾿ φῶς ἔστιν, καὶ ὅτε λέγω τὸ ᾿ φῶς 
ἔστιν, οὐκέτι ἔστι τὸ “ἡμέρα ἔστιν. εἰ οὖν 
τὰ μὲν συγκείμενα ἔκ τινων ἀδύνατον ὑπάρχειν μὴ 
συνυπαρχόντων ἀλλήλοις τῶν μερῶν αὐτῶν, τὰ 
δὲ ἐξ ὧν σύγκειται τὸ ἀξίωμα οὐ συνυπάρχει 
ἀλλήλοις, οὐχ ὑπάρξει τὸ ἀξίωμα. 

"Iva δὲ καὶ ταῦτα παραλίπωμεν, τὸ ὑγιὲς συνὴμ»- 
μένον ἀκατάληπτον εὑρεθήσεται. ὁ μὲν γὰρ Φίλων 
φησὶν ὑγιὲς εἶναι συνημμένον τὸ μὴ ἀρχόμενον. ἀπὸ 
ἀληθοῦς καὶ λῆγον ἐπὶ ΤΠ δ οἷον ἡμέρας οὔσης 
καὶ ἐμοῦ διαλεγομένου τὸ “ i ἡμέρα ἔστιν, ἐγὼ 
διαλέγομαι,᾽᾽ ὁ δὲ Διόδωρος, ὃ τ ἐνεδέχετο μήτε 
ἐνδέχεται ἀρχόμενον ἀπὸ ἀληθοῦς λήγειν ἐπὶ ψεῦ- 

os” καθ᾽ ὃν τὸ μὲν εἰρημένον συνημμένον ψεῦδος 
εἶναι δοκεῖ, ἐπεὶ ἡμέρας μὲν οὔσης ἐμοῦ δὲ σιωπή- 
σαντος ἀπὸ ἀληθοῦς ἀρξάμενον ἐπὶ ψεῦδος κατα- 





* Cf. Adv. Log. ti. 80 ff. 
> The Stoic, see Introd. pp. xxxvi f.; of. ddv. Log, ii. 113 ff. 
Cf. i. 234, Adv. Log. ii. 115. 


220 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, ITI. 108--110 


of expressions ?),—it follows that the man who 108 
attempts to establish the existence of expression 
from the reality of the system of expressions is pro- 
posing to confirm the problematic by the problematic. 

If, then, it is impossible to establish either simply or 

by means of demonstration that any expression exists, 

it is non-evident that any expression exists. 

So, too, with the question whether judgement 
exists; for the judgement is a form of expression. 
And very possibly, even should it be granted by 109 
way of assumption that expression exists, judgement 
will be found to be non-existent, it being compounded 
of expressions not mutually co-existent.¢ Thus, for 
example, in the case of “ If day exists, light exists,” 
when I say “ day exists ” the clause “ light exists ἡ is 
not yet in existence, and when I say “ light exists ἡ 
the clause “ day exists’ is no longer in existence. 
If then it is impossible for things compounded of 
certain parts to be really existent if those parts do 
not mutually co-exist, and if the parts whereof the 
judgement is composed do not mutually co-exist, 
then the judgement will have no real existence. 

But passing over this objection, it will be found that 110 
the valid hypothetical syllogism is non-apprehensible. 
For Philo ὃ says that a valid hypothetical syllogism is 
“ that which does not begin with a truth and end 
with a falsehood,’ as for instance the syllogism “If 
it is day, I converse,” when in fact it is day and I am 
conversing ; but Diodorus ὁ defines it as “* that which 
neither was nor is capable of beginning with a truth 
and ending with a falsehood ”’; so that according to 
him the syllogism now mentioned seems to be false, 
since if it is in fact day but I have remained silent 
it will begin with a truth but end with a falsehood, 


221 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


111 λήξει, ἐκεῖνο δὲ ἀληθές ᾿ “εἰ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀμερῆ τῶν 
ὄντων στοιχεῖα, ἔστιν ἀμερῆ τῶν ὄντων στοιχεῖα us 
ἀεὶ γὰρ ἀπὸ ψεύδους ἀρχόμενον τοῦ “οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἀμερῆ τῶν ὄντων. στοιχεῖα " εἰς ἀληθὲς καταλήξει 

ce 
κατ᾽ αὐτὸν τὸ “᾿ ἔστιν ἀμερῆ τῶν ὄντων στοιχεῖα." 
οἱ δὲ τὴν συνάρτησιν εἰσάγοντες ὑγιὲς εἶναί φασι 
συνημμένον ὅταν τὸ ἀντικείμενον τῷ ἐν αὐτῷ 
λήγοντι μάχηται τῷ ἐν αὐτῷ ἡγουμένῳ" καθ᾽ ous 
τὰ μὲν εἰρημένα συνημμένα ἔσται μοχθηρά, ἐκεῖνο 

112 δὲ ἀληθές “ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστιν, ἡμέρα ἔστιν.᾽ οἱ δὲ 
τῇ ἐμφάσει κρίνοντές ασιν ὅτι ἀληθές ἐστι συν- 
ἡμμένον οὗ τὸ λῆγον ἐν τῷ ἡγουμένῳ περιέχεται 
δυνάμει" καθ᾽ οὗς τὸ “εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστιν, ἡμέρα 
ἔστι καὶ πᾶν διαφορούμενον [ἀξίωμα] συνημμέ- 
νον ἴσως ψεῦδος ἐ ἔσται" αὐτὸ γάρ τι ἐν ἑαυτῷ περι- 
ἔχεσθαι ἀμήχανον. 

118 Ταύτην τοίνυν τὴν διαφωνίαν ἐπικριθῆναι ἀμή- 
Xavov tows av εἶναι δόξει. οὔτε γὰρ ἀναποδείκτως 
προκρίνοντές τινα τῶν στάσεων τῶν προειρημένων 
πιστοὶ ἐσόμεθα οὔτε μετὰ ἀποδείξεως. καὶ γὰρ 
ἡ ἀπόδειξις ὑγιὴς εἶναι δοκεῖ ὅταν ἀκολουθῇ 
τῇ διὰ τῶν λημμάτων αὐτῆς συμπλοκῇ τὸ συμ- 
πέρασμα αὐτῆς ὡς λῆγον ἡγουμένῳ, οἷον οὕτως 
“εἰ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστιν, φῶς é ἔστιν" ἀλλὰ μὴν ἡμέρα ἔστιν" 
φῶς ἄρα ἔστιν. [εἴπερ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἐ ἔστιν" καὶ 


114 ἡμέρα ἔστι καὶ φῶς ἔστιν. ζητουμένου δὲ περὶ 
1. [εἴπερ ... ἔστιν] 556]. Papp.: T om. καὶ ἡμέρα. .. 
ἔστιν. 





α The opposite is ‘‘ diartesis,”” incoherence or incompati- 
bility, §§ 146, 152, 238 infra, Adv. Log. ii. 430. 
es Implication ” (emphasis) is power of signifying more 


222 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 111-114 


whereas the syllogism “ If atomic elements of things 111 
do not exist, atomic elements exist,’”’ seems true, 
since it begins with the false clause “ atomic elements 
do not exist’ and will end, according to him, with 
the true clause ‘‘ atomic elements exist.” And 
those who introduce “ connexion,” or “‘ coherence,’ ὦ 
assert that it is a valid hypothetical syllogism when- 
ever the opposite of its consequent contradicts its 
antecedent clause; so that, according to them, the 
above-mentioned syllogisms are invalid, whereas the 
syllogism “If day exists, day exists” is true. 
And those who judge by “ implication “ὃ declare 112 
that a hypothetical syllogism is true when its con- 
sequent is potentially included in its antecedent ; 
and according to them the syllogism (Ἢ If day exists, 
day exists,” and every such duplicated syllogism, 
will probably be false ; for it is not feasible that any 
object should itself be included in itself. 

Probably, then, it will not seem feasible to get this 113 
controversy resolved. For whether we prefer any one 
of the above-mentioned rival views without proof or 
by the aid of proof, in neither case shall we gain 
credence. For proof itself is held to be valid when- 
ever its conclusion follows the combination of its 
premisses as the consequent follows the antecedent ; 
thus, for example—“ If it is day it is light; but in 
fact it is day; therefore it is light”: [“Ifit is day it 
is light,” “it is day and also itis light.”]¢ But when 114 


than is explicitly expressed. An example of this “" potential 
inclusion ” is ‘‘ If a man exists, a beast exists.”’ 
¢ The words bracketed give an unintelligible form of 
syllogism, and the Greek text is evidently corrupt. Possibly 
we should read—“It is day; and if it is day it is light; 
therefore it is light’’—thus merely transposing the premisses 
of the preceding syllogism (¢f. § 137). 
223 


115 


116 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τοῦ πῶς κρινοῦμεν τὴν ἀκολουθίαν τοῦ λήγοντος 
πρὸς τὸ ἡγούμενον, ὃ διάλληλος εὑρίσκεται τρόπος. 
/ nn “-Ῥ 
ἵνα μὲν γὰρ ἡ κρίσις τοῦ συνημμένου ἀποδειχθῇ, 
\ a ων 
τὸ συμπέρασμα τοῖς λήμμασι τῆς ἀποδείξεως 
ἀκολουθεῖ, ὡς προειρήκαμεν" ἵνα δὲ πάλιν τοῦτο 
πιστευθῇ, δεῖ τὸ συνημμένον καὶ τὴν ἀκολουθίαν 
ἐπικεκρίσθαι. ὅπερ ἄτοπον. ἀκατάληπτον ἄρα τὸ 
ὑγιὲς συνημμένον. 
᾽Δλλ \ \ \ 7 3.) 7 > 
ἃ Kal TO προκαθηγούμενον ἄπορόν ἐστιν. 
A \ \ \ 
TO μὲν yap προκαθηγούμενον, ws φασίν, ἐστὶ τὸ 
/ 
ἡγούμενον ἐν τοιούτῳ συνημμένῳ, ὃ ἄρχεται ἀπὸ 
iN θ “~ \ Xr v4 > \ 3 ? ? \ 9 Xr / 
ἀληθοῦς καὶ λήγει ἐπὶ ἀληθές. εἰ δὲ ἐκκαλυπτικόν 
ἐστι τοῦ λήγοντος τὸ σημεῖον, ἤτοι πρόδηλόν ἐστι 
\ ἊΣ Ἂν», 5 \ a ῇ Pra 
τὸ λῆγον ἢ ἄδηλον. εἰ μὲν οὖν πρόδηλον, οὐδὲ 
~ 7 
τοῦ ἐκκαλύψοντος δεήσεται, ἀλλὰ συγκαταληφθὴή- 
“A ~ ͵ 
σεται αὐτῷ, καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν αὐτοῦ σημειωτόν, 
διόπερ οὐδὲ ἐκεῖνο τούτου σημεῖον. εἰ δὲ ἄδηλον, 
ἐπεὶ περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων διαπεφώνηται ἀνεπικρίτως 
ποῖα μέν ἐστιν αὐτῶν ἀληθῆ ποῖα δὲ ψευδῆ, καὶ 
oe > + ? ~ 3 ? Ela 3} 3 > 
ὅλως εἰ ἔστι τι αὐτῶν ἀληθές, ἄδηλον ἔσται εἰ εἰς 
ἀληθὲς λήγει τὸ συνημμένον. ᾧ συνεισέρχεται 
καὶ τὸ ἄδηλον εἶναι εἰ προκαθηγεῦται τὸ ἐν αὐτῷ 


e [4 Ὁ X A “~ / 3 
117 ἡγούμενον. ἵνα δὲ καὶ ταῦτα παραλίπωμεν, οὐ 


δύναται ἐκκαλυπτικὸν εἶναι τοῦ λήγοντος, εἴγε 
πρὸς τὸ σημεῖόν ἐστι τὸ σημειωτὸν καὶ διὰ τοῦτο 
συγκαταλαμβάνεται αὐτῷ. τὰ γὰρ πρός τι ἀλλή- 
λοις συγκαταλαμβάνεται" καὶ ὥσπερ τὸ δεξιὸν πρὸ 
τοῦ ἀριστεροῦ ws δεξιὸν ἀριστεροῦ καταληφθῆναι 





α Cf. 88 105 f. supra. 
Q24 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 114-117 


we inquire how we are to judge the logical sequence 

of the consequent in its relation to the antecedent, 
we are met with the argument in a circle. For in 
order to prove the judgement upon the hypothetical 
syllogism, the conclusion of the proof must follow 
logically from its premisses, as we said above; and, 

in turn, in order to establish this, the hypothetical 
syllogism and its logical sequence must be tested ; 
and this is absurd. So then the valid hypothetical 115 
syllogism is non-apprehensible. 

But the “ antecedent ”’ also is unintelligible. For 
the antecedent, as they assert, is “ the leading clause 
in a hypothetical syllogism of the kind which begins 
with a truth and ends ina truth.” * But if the sign 116 
serves to reveal the consequent, the consequent is 
either pre-evident or non-evident. If, then, it is 
pre-evident, it will not so much as need the thing 
which is to reveal it but will be apprehended alon 
with it and will not be the object signified thereby, 
and hence also the thing mentioned will not be a 
‘sign ” of the object. But if the consequent is non- 
evident, seeing that there exists an unsettled con- 
troversy about things non-evident, as to which of them 
are true, which false, and in general whether any of 
them is true, it will be non-evident whether the 
hypothetical syllogism ends in a true consequent. 
And this involves the further fact that it is non- 
evident whether the leading clause in the syllogism 
is the logical antecedent. But to pass over this 117 
objection also, the sign cannot serve to reveal the 
consequent, if the thing signified is relative to the 
sign and is, therefore, apprehended along with it. For 
relatives are apprehended along with each other; 
and just as ‘Sright ’’ cannot be apprehended as “ right 


VOL. I Q 225 


118 


119 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ov δύναται, οὐδὲ ἀνάπαλιν, Kal ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν 
πρός τι παραπλησίως, οὕτως οὐδὲ τὸ σημεῖον πρὸ 
τοῦ σημειωτοῦ «ὡς σημειωτοῦ»" καταληφθῆναι 
δυνατὸν ἔσται. εἰ δ᾽ οὐ προκαταλαμβάνεται τὸ 
σημεῖον τοῦ σημειωτοῦ, οὐδὲ ἐκκαλυπτικὸν αὐτοῦ 
δύναται ὑπάρχειν τοῦ ἅμα αὐτῷ καὶ μὴ μετ᾽ αὐτὸ 
καταλαμβανομένου. 

_ Οὐκοῦν καὶ ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς “κοινότερον λεγομένοις 
ὑπὸ τῶν ἑτεροδόξων ἀνεπινόητόν ἐστι τὸ σημεῖον. 
καὶ γὰρ πρός τι καὶ ἐκκαλυπτικὸν τοῦ σημειωτοῦ, 
πρὸς ᾧ φασὶν αὐτὸ εἶναι, τοῦτο εἶναι λέγουσιν. 
ὅθεν εἰ μὲν πρός τί ἐστι καὶ πρὸς τῷ σημειωτῷ, 
συγκαταλαμβάνεσθαι πάντως ὀφείλει τῷ σημειωτῷ, 
καθάπερ τὸ ἀριστερὸν τῷ δεξιῷ καὶ τὸ ἄνω τῷ 
κάτω καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πρός τι. εἰ δὲ ἐκκαλυπτικόν ἐστι 
τοῦ σημειωτοῦ, προκαταλαμβάνεσθαι αὐτοῦ πάν - 
τως ὀφείλει, ἵνα προεπιγνωσθὲν εἰς ἔννοιαν ἡμᾶς 
ἀγάγῃ τοῦ ἐξ αὐτοῦ γινωσκομένου πράγματος. 


120 ἀδύνατον δὲ ἐννοῆσαι πρᾶγμα μὴ δυνάμενον πρὸ 


121 


ἐκείνου γνωσθῆναι οὗ προκαταλαμβάνεσθαι ἀνάγκην 
ἔχει: ἀδύνατον ἄρα ἐπινοεῖν τι καὶ πρός τι ὃν καὶ 
ἐκκαλυπτικὸν ἐκείνου ὑπάρχον πρὸς ᾧ νοεῦται. τὸ 
δὲ σημεῖον καὶ πρός τί φασιν εἶναι καὶ ἐκκαλυπτικὸν 
τοῦ σημειωτοῦ" ἀδύνατον ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐπινοῆσαι τὸ 
σημεῖον. 

Πρὸς τούτοις κἀκεῖνο λεκτέον. διαφωνία γέγονε 
παρὰ τοῖς πρὸ ἡμῶν, τῶν μὲν λεγόντων εἶναί τι 


1 (ὡς σημειωτοῦ» add. T, ML corr? 
226 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 117-121 


of left’ before “ left,’ nor vice versa—and the same 
holds good of all other relative terms,—so neither will 
it be possible for the sign, as “ sign of signified,” to be 
apprehended before the thing signified.* And if the 
sign is not apprehended before the thing signified, 
neither can it really serve to reveal the actual thing 
which is apprehended along with itself and not after 
itself, 

Thus also, so far as we may judge by the’ usual 
statements of the dissenting philosophers (the 
Stoics), the sign is inconceivable. For they assert 
that it is both relative and serving to reveal the 
thing signified, in relation to which they say it was. 
Accordingly, if it is, relative and in relation to the 
thing signified it certainly ought to be apprehended 
along with the thing signified, as is “left” with 
“right,” “up” with “ down,” and the rest of the 
relative terms. Whereas, if it serves to reveal the 
thing signified, it certainly ought to be apprehended 
before it, in order that by being foreknown it may 
lead us to a conception of the object which comes to 


118 


119 


be known by means of it. Butitis impossible to form 120 


a conception of an object which cannot be known 
before the thing before which it must necessarily be 
apprehended ; and so it is impossible to conceive of 
an object which is both relative and also really serves 
to reveal the thing in relation to which it is thought. 
But the sign is, as they affirm, both relative and 
serving to reveal the thing signified; wherefore it is 
impossible to conceive of the sign. 

Furthermore, there is this also to be said. Amongst 
our predecessors there existed a controversy, some 


Cf. Adv. Log. ii. 163 ff. 
227 


121 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


σημεῖον ἐνδεικτικόν, τῶν δὲ μηδὲν εἶναι σημεῖον ἐν- 
δεικτικὸν φασκόντων. ὁ λέγων οὖν elval τι σημεῖον 
ἐνδεικτικὸν ἤτοι ἁπλῶς ἐρεῖ καὶ ἀναποδείκτως, 
ψιλῇ φάσει χρώμενος, ἢ μετὰ ἀποδείξεως. ἀλλ᾽ 
εἰ μὲν φάσει μόνῃ χρήσεται, ἄπιστος ἔσται, 
εἰ δὲ ἀποδεῖξαι βουλήσεται, τὸ ζητούμενον συν- 

122 αρπάσει. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἡ ἀπόδειξις τῷ γένει σημεῖον 
εἶναι λέγεται, ἀμφισβητουμένου τοῦ πότερον 
ἔστι TL σημεῖον ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν, ἀμφισβήτησις ἔσται 
καὶ περὶ τοῦ πότερον ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ἢ οὐδα- 
μῶς, ὥσπερ καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν ζητουμένου εἰ ἔστι 
ζῶον, ζητεῦται καὶ περὶ τοῦ εἰ ἔστιν ἄνθρωπος: 
ζῶον γὰρ 6 ἄνθρωπος. ἄτοπον δὲ τὸ ζητούμενον 
διὰ τοῦ ἐπ᾽ ἴσης ζητουμένου oF δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ ἀπο- 
δεικνύναι": οὐδὲ δι᾽ ἀποδείξεως ἄρα δυνήσεταί τις 

128 διαβεβαιοῦσθαι ὅτι ἔστι σημεῖον. εἰ δὲ μήτε 
ἁπλῶς μήτε μετὰ ἀποδείξεως οἷόν τέ ἐστι περὶ 
τοῦ σημείου διαβεβαιωτικῶς ἀποφαίνεσθαι, ἀδύ- 
νατόν ἐστι περὶ αὐτοῦ καταληπτικὴν ἀπόφασιν 
ποιήσασθαι" εἰ δὲ μὴ καταλαμβάνεται pera ἄκρι- 
βείας τὸ σημεῖον, οὐδὲ σημαντικὸν εἶναι λεχθή- 
σεταΐ τινος ἅτε δὴ μηδὲ αὐτὸ ὁμολογούμενον' διὰ 
δὲ τοῦτο οὐδὲ σημεῖον ἔσται. ὅθεν καὶ κατὰ τοῦ- 
τον τὸν ἐπιλογισμὸν ἀνύπαρκτον ἔσται τὸ σημεῖον 

1 3 
καὶ ἀνεπινόητον. 

1:4 "Ere μέντοι κἀκεῖνο ῥητέον. ἤτοι φαινόμενα 
μόνον ἐστὶ τὰ σημεῖα ἢ ἄδηλα μόνον, ἢ τῶν σημείων 
τὰ μέν ἐστι φαινόμενα τὰ δὲ ἄδηλα. οὐδὲν δὲ 
τούτων ἐστὶν iad οὐκ ἄρα ἔστι σημεῖον. 

@ Cf. 899: “ others ᾽ include some of the Academics 


and medical annie (cf. i. 236). 
> Cf. §$ 963 Adv. Log. ii. 178 ff 


228 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 121-124 


declaring that an indicative sign exists, others main- 
taining that no indicative sign exists. He, then, 
who asserts the existence of an indicative sign will 
assert it either simply and without proof, making a 
bald assertion, or by the aid of proof. But if he shall 
employ mere assertion he will not gain credence ; 
while if he shall propose to prove it he will be assum- 


ing the matter in question. For since proof is stated 122 


to come under the genus sign, seeing that it is dis- 
puted whether or not a sign exists, there will also be a 
dispute as to whether proof does or does not at all 
exist—just as, when we make, let us suppose, the 
inquiry “ Does animal exist ? ’’ we are inquiring also 
“ Does man exist ἢ ὦ But itis absurd to try to prove 
the matter in question either by means of what is 
equally in question or by means of itself. So that 
neither will one be able by means of proof to affirm 


positively that sign exists. And if it is not possible 123 


either simply or with the aid of proof to make a 
positive declaration about the sign, it is impossible 
to make an apprehensive affirmation ὁ concerning it; 
and if the sign is not apprehended with exactness, 
neither will it be said to be significant of anything, 
inasmuch as there is no agreement even about 
itself; and because of this it will not even be a sign. 
Hence, according to this line of reasoning also, the 
sign will be unreal and inconceivable. 

But there is this further to be said. Either the signs 
are apparent only or non-evident only, or some are 
apparent and some non-evident.? But none of these 
alternatives is valid ; therefore sign does not exist. 

‘ A curious expression, only used here by Sextus; it 
seems to mean “an affirmation which treats the thing as 
though it were apprehended.” 

* Cf. § 88; Adv. Log. ii. 171 ff. 

229 


»»ὦ 


24 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Ὅτι μὲν οὖν ἄδηλα οὐκ ἔστι πάντα τὰ σημεῖα, 
ἐντεῦθεν δείκνυται. τὸ ἄδηλον οὐκ ἐξ € ἑαυτοῦ φαί- 
νεται, ὡς Ob i δογματικοί φασιν, ἀλλὰ δι ἑτέρου ὑπο- 
πίπτει. καὶ τὸ σημεῖον οὖν, εἰ ἄδηλον εἴη, ἑτέρου 
δεήσεται σημείου ἀδήλου, ἐπεὶ μηδὲν φαινόμενόν 
ἐστι σημεῖον κατὰ τὴν προκειμένην ὑπόθεσιν, 
κἀκεῖνο ἄλλου, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. ἀδύνατον 
δὲ ἄπειρα σημεῖα λαμβάνειν" ἀδύνατον ἄρα τὸ 
σημεῖον καταληφθῆναι ἄδηλον ὄν. διὰ δὲ τοῦτο 
καὶ ἀνύπαρκτον ἔσται, μὴ δυνάμενον σημαίνειν 
τι καὶ σημεῖον εἶναι διὰ τὸ μὴ καταλαμβά- 
νεσθαι. 

125 Εἰ δὲ πάντα τὰ σημεῖα φαινόμενά., ἐστιν, ἐπεὶ 
καὶ πρός τί ἐ ἐστι τὸ σημεῖον καὶ πρὸς τῷ σημειωτῷ, 
τὰ δὲ πρός τι συγκαταλαμβάνεται ἀλλήλοις, τὰ 
σημειωτὰ εἶναι λεγόμενα σὺν τοῖς φαινομένοις 
καταλαμβανόμενα φαινόμενα ἔσται" ὥσπερ γὰρ 
ἅμα ὑποπιπτόντων τοῦ τε δεξιοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἀριστεροῦ 
οὐ μᾶλλον τὸ δεξιὸν τοῦ ἀριστεροῦ ἢ τὸ ἀριστερὸν 
τοῦ δεξιοῦ φαίνεσθαι λέγεται, οὕτω συγκαταλαμ.- 
βανομένων τοῦ τε σημείου καὶ τοῦ σημειωτοῦ οὐ 
μᾶλλον τὸ σημεῖον ἢ τὸ σημειωτὸν φαίνεσθαι 

126 ῥητέον. εἰ δὲ φαινόμενόν ἐστι τὸ σημειωτόν, οὐδὲ 
σημειωτὸν ἔσται μὴ δεόμενον τοῦ σημανοῦντος 
αὐτὸ καὶ ἐκκαλύψοντος. ὅθεν ὥσπερ ἀναιρουμένου 
δεξιοῦ οὐδὲ ἀριστερὸν ἔστιν, οὕτως ἀναιρουμένου 
τοῦ σημειωτοῦ οὐδὲ σημεῖον εἶναι δύναται, ὥστε 
ἀνύπαρκτον εὑρίσκεται τὸ σημεῖον, εἴπερ φαινό- 
μενα μόνα εἶναι λέγοι τις τὰ σημεῖα. 

12 Λείπεται λέγειν ὅτι τῶν σημείων τὰ μέν ἐστι 
φαινόμενα τὰ δὲ ἄδηλα" καὶ οὕτως δὲ ai ἀπορίαι 


230 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 124-127 


Now that all the signs are not non-evident is shown 
by the following argument. The non-evident does 
not become apparent of itself, as the Dogmatists 
assert, but is perceived by means of something else. 
The sign, therefore, if it were non-evident, would 
require another non-evident sign—since, according 
to the hypothesis assumed, there is no apparent sign 
—and this again a third, and so on ad infinitum. 
But it is impossible to grasp an infinite series of 
signs; and so it is impossible for the sign to be 
apprehended when it is non-evident. And for this 
reason it will also be unreal, as it is unable to signify 
anything and to be a sign owing to its not being 
apprehended. - 

And if all the signs are apparent, then, because 125 
the sign is a relative thing and in relation to the 
thing signified, and relatives are apprehended con- 
jointly,* the things said to be signified, being appre- 
hended along with what is apparent, will be apparent. 
For just as when the right and left are perceived 
together, the right is not said to appear more than 
the left nor the left than the right, so when the sign 
and the thing signified are apprehended together the 
sign should not be said to appear any more than the 
thing signified. And ifthe thing signified is apparent, 126 
it will not even be signified, as it requires nothing to 
signify and reveal it. Hence, just as when “ right ”’ 
is abolished there exists no “ left,’’ so when the thing 
signified is abolished there can exist no sign, so that 
the sign is found to be unreal, if one should declare 
that the signs are apparent only. 

It remains to declare that of the signs some are 127 
apparent, others non-evident ; but even so the diffi- 

* Cf. 88 119, 169. 
: 231 


128 


129 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


- Α , 
μένουσιν. τῶν τε γὰρ φαινομένων σημείων τὰ 
σημειωτὰ εἶναι λεγόμενα φαινόμενα ἔσται, καθὰ 
, \ ~ oN 
προειρήκαμεν, Kal μὴ δεόμενα τοῦ σημανοῦντος 
ὍΔ A! 7 € / 4 ΔΝ 3 “A 
οὐδὲ σημειωτὰ ὅλως ὑπάρξει, ὅθεν οὐδὲ ἐκεῖνα 
“- 4 
σημεῖα ἔσται, μηδὲν σημαΐνοντα: τά τε ἄδηλα 
-μ an 3 
σημεῖα χρήζοντα τῶν ἐκκαλυψόντων αὐτά, ἐὰν μὲν 
ξ A 10 ὁλ 7 θ λέ ? ” ? 
ὑπὸ ἀδήλων σημαίνεσθαι λέγηται, εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκ- 
7 “A / 
πίπτοντος τοῦ λόγου ἀκατάληπτα εὑρίσκεται καὶ 
ba} ~ 
διὰ τοῦτο ἀνύπαρκτα, Ws προειρήκαμεν: ἐὰν δὲ 
ὑπὸ φαινομένων, φαινόμενα ἔσται σὺν τοῖς φαινο- 
, “"᾿Ο ’ 
μένοις αὐτῶν σημείοις καταλαμβανόμενα, διὰ δὲ 
fo) \ 9. + > 
τοῦτο καὶ ἀνύπαρκτα. ἀδύνατον yap εἶναί τι 
los “a \ om” / > ? \ , ‘ 
πρᾶγμα ὃ Kat ἄδηλόν ἐστι φύσει Kal φαΐνεται, τὰ 
\ “A \ Ὄ 3 \ ¢ / + ¢ 
δὲ σημεῖα περὶ ὧν ἐστὶν 6 λόγος, ἄδηλα ὑπο- 
Ν 
τεθέντα, φαινόμενα εὑρέθη κατὰ τὴν περιτροπὴν 
τοῦ λόγου. 
᾽ > 7 ͵ \ a ? , 9 
Εἰ οὖν μήτε πάντα τὰ σημεῖα φαινόμενά ἐστι 
μήτε πάντα ἄδηλα, μήτε τῶν σημείων τινὰ μέν 
3 7, A \ + \ \ ~ 
ἐστι φαινόμενα τινὰ δὲ ἄδηλα, καὶ παρὰ ταῦτα 
QO \ + ς \ 3 / 3 7 4 
οὐδὲν ἔστιν, ὡς καὶ αὐτοί φασιν, ἀνύπαρκτα ἔσται 
έ ~ 
τὰ λεγόμενα σημεῖα. 


130 Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὀλίγα ἀπὸ πολλῶν ἀρκέσει viv 


εἰρῆσθαι πρὸς ὑπόμνησιν τοῦ μὴ εἶναι σημεῖον 
>? 4 LF atten \ s ‘ e ? ~ > / 
ἐνδεικτικόν" ἑξῆς δὲ καὶ τὰς ὑπομνήσεις τοῦ εἶναί 
τι σημεῖον ἐκθησόμεθα, ἵνα τὴν ἰσοσθένειαν τῶν 
ἀντικειμένων λόγων παραστήσωμεν. 


” > f f e Ν “A / 
ἤτοι οὖν onpaivovot τι ai κατὰ τοῦ σημείου 
232 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 127-130 


culties remain. For the things said to be signified 
by the apparent signs will, as we said before, be 
apparent and require nothing to signify them, and 
will not even be things signified at all, so that neither 
will the signs be signs, as not signifying anything. 
And as to the non-evident signs which need things 128 
to reveal them, if we say that they are signified by 
things non-evident, the argument will be involved in 
a regress ad infinitum, rendering them non-appre- 
hensible and therefore unreal, as we said before ¢; 
whereas, if they are to be signified by things apparent, 
they will be apparent, because apprehended along 
with their apparent signs, and therefore also unreal. 
For it is impossible for any object really to exist 
which is by nature both non-evident and apparent ; 
but the signs which we are discussing though assumed 
to be non-evident have been found to be apparent 
owing to the reversal of the argument.® 

If, therefore, the signs are neither all apparent nor 129 
all non-evident, nor yet some of the signs apparent 
and some non-evident, and besides these there is no 
other alternative, as they themselves affirm, then the 
so-called signs will be unreal. 

So then these few arguments out of many will be 180 
enough for the present to suggest to us the non- 
existence of an indicative sign. Next, we shall set 
forth those which go to suggest the existence of a 
sign, in order that we may exhibit the equipollence 
of the counter-balancing arguments. 

Hither, then, the phrases used in criticism of the 


* Cf. § 124 supra. 
> Ch. 88 185, 187. 
233 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


φωναὶ φερόμεναι 7 ἢ οὐδὲν σημαίνουσιν. καὶ εἰ μὲν 
ἄσημοί εἰσιν, πῶς ἂν κινήσειαν "τὴν ὕπαρξιν τοῦ 
1381 σημείου; εἰ δὲ σημαίνουσί τι, ἔστι σημεῖον. ἔτι 
ἦτοι ἀποδεικτικοί εἶσιν οἱ λόγοι of κατὰ τοῦ 
’ aA 3 3 / 9 3 9 A 3 > 
σημείου ἢ οὐκ ἀποδεικτικοί. GAA’ εἰ μὲν οὐκ ἀπο- 
εἰκτικοί, οὐκ ἀποδεικνύουσι τὸ μὴ εἶναι σημεῖον 
εἰ δὲ ἀποδεικτικοΐ, ἐπεὶ ἡ ἀπόδειξις τῷ γένει 
σημεῖόν ἐστιν, ἐκκαλυπτυτὴ οὖσα τοῦ συμπεράσ- 
ματος, ἔσται σημεῖον. ὅθεν καὶ συνερωτᾶται λόγος 
τοιοῦτος. εἰ ἔστι τι σημεῖον, ἔστι σημεῖον, καὶ εἶ 
\ 
μὴ ἔστι σημεῖον, ἔστι σημεῖον" τὸ γὰρ μὴ εἶναι 
σημεῖον δι᾽ ἀποδείξεως, ἣ δὴ ἔστι σημεῖον, δεί- 
κνυται. ἤτοι δὲ ἔστι σημεῖον ἢ, οὐκ ἔστι σημεῖον" 
132 ἔστιν ἄρα σημεῖον. τούτῳ δὲ τῷ λόγῳ παρά- 
κειται τοιοῦτος λόγος" εἰ οὐκ ἔστι τι σημεῖον, 
οὐκ ἔστι σημεῖον" καὶ εἰ ἔστι σημεῖον 6 φασιν οἵ 
δογματικοὶ σημεῖον εἶναι, οὐκ ἔστι σημεῖον: τὸ 
γὰρ σημεῖον περὶ οὗ ὁ λόγος, κατὰ τὴν ἐπίνοιαν 
αὐτοῦ καὶ πρός τι εἷναι λεγόμενον καὶ ἐκκαλυ- 
on ~ ’ὔ 
πτικὸν τοῦ σημειωτοῦ, ἀνύπαρκτον εὑρίσκεται, ὡς 
138 παρεστήσαμεν. ἤτοι δὲ ἔστι σημεῖον ἢ οὐκ ἔστι 
σημεῖον" οὐκ ἄρα ἔστι σημεῖον. 
Καὶ περὶ τῶν φωνῶν δὲ τῶν ὑπὲρ τοῦ σημείου 
᾽ 
αὐτοὶ ἀποκρινάσθωσαν οἱ δογματικοί, πότερον 
@ Cf. ddv. Log. ii. 279. The meaning of these sections, 
130-133, is briefly this: The Dogmatists argue (§§ 130-131) 
(1) that the Sceptics’ objections to “sign” must signify either 
something or nothing; if gothing, they have no force against 
it, while if they signify something they are signs themselves 
and so prove sign’s existence; (2) the arguments (λόγοι) 
against “‘sign’’ prove either something or nothing ; if 
nothing, they fail to prove the non-existence of “sign,” 


while if they prove something, they are ** proofs,”’ 2.6. a 
species of “‘sign,’’ and thus prove sign’s existence. Hence, 


234s 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 130-133 


sign signify something or they signify nothing.* But 
if they are non-significant how could they affect the 
reality of the sign ? While if they signify something, 
there exists a sign. Further, the arguments against 
the sign are either probative or non-probative ; but 
if they are non-probative they do not prove the non- 
existence of a sign; while if they are probative, 
since proof, as serving to reveal the conclusion, belongs 
to the genus sign, sign will exist. Whence this argu- 
ment also is propounded : “ If sign exists, sign exists ; 
and if sign exists not, sign exists; for the non- 
existence of sign is shown by proof, which is a form 
of sign. But sign either exists or exists not ; there- 
fore sign exists.”, And this argument is counter- 
balanced by the following argument: “If any sign 
does not exist, sign does not exist; and if sign is 
that which the Dogmatists declare sign to be, sign 
does not exist (for the sign under discussion, accord- 
ing to the conception of it and as stated to be both 
relative and serving to reveal the thing signified, is 
found to be unreal, as we have shown). But sign 
either exists or exists not; therefore sign does not 
exist.” 

Regarding also the phrases used in support of the 
sign,° let the Dogmatists themselves say in reply to our 
argument whether they signify something or signify 
whichever view we take—the Dogmatists’ that “‘ sign exists,”’ 
or the Sceptics’ that ‘sign exists not’’—we arrive at the 
same conclusion that “sign exists.” In § 132 we have the 
counter-argument of the Sceptics, ‘reversing’ that of the 
Dogmatists. 

® In this § 133 the Sceptics are replying to the first argu- 
ment of the Dogmatists (in § 130); the conclusion that ‘‘ the 
existence of sign’’ proves its ‘non-existence’? is based on 


the arguments in ὃ 132, which “ reverses’? that of the 
Dogmatists. 


235 


13] 


132 


133 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


σημαίνουσί τι ἢ οὐδὲν σημαίνουσιν. εἰ μὲν γὰρ 
οὐδὲν σημαίνουσιν, οὐ πιστοῦται τὸ εἶναι σημεῖον" 
εἰ δὲ σημαίνουσιν, ἀκολουθήσει αὐταῖς τὸ ,σημειω- 
τόν. τοῦτο δὲ Hv τὸ εἶναί τι σημεῖον" ᾧ ἕπεται τὸ 
«μὴ >” εἶναι σημεῖον, ὡς ὑπεμνήσαμεν, κατὰ τὴν 
τοῦ λόγου περιτροπήν. 

Πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ οὕτω πιθανῶν καὶ πρὸς τὸ εἶναι 
σημεῖον καὶ πρὸς τὸ μὴ εἶναι λόγων φερομένων, 
οὐ μᾶλλον εἶναι σημεῖον ἢ μὴ εἶναι ῥητέον. 


Β΄.---ΠΈΡΙῚ ΑΠΟΔΕΙΞΕΩΣ 


134 Φανερὸν μὲν οὖν ἐκ τούτων ὅτε οὐδὲ ἡ ἡ ἀπόδειξις 
ὁμολογούμενόν τι πρᾶγμα ἐστίν- εἰ γὰρ περὶ τοῦ 
σημείου ἐπέχομεν, καὶ ἡ ἀπόδει ις δὲ σημεῖόν τί 
ἐστι, καὶ περὶ τῆς ἀποδείξεως ἐπέχειν ἀνάγκη. 
καὶ γὰρ εὑρήσομεν τοὺς περὶ τοῦ σημείου λόγους 
ἡρωτημένους ἐφαρμόζεσθαι δυναμένους καὶ κατὰ 
τῆς ἀποδείξεως, ἐπεὶ καὶ πρὸς τι εἶναι δοκεῖ καὶ 
ἐκκαλυπτικὴ τοῦ συμπεράσματος, οἷς ἠκολούθει 
τὰ πρὸς τὸ σημεῖον ἡμῖν εἰρημένα σχεδὸν ἅπαντα. 

135 εἰ δὲ δεῖ καὶ ἰδίως περὶ ἀποδείξεως εἰπεῖν, συν- 
τόμως ἐπελεύσομαι τὸν περὶ αὐτῆς λόγον, πρό- 
τερον σαφηνίσαι πειραθεὶς διὰ βραχέων τί φασιν 
εἶναι τὴν ἀπόδειξιν. 

Ἔστιν οὖν, ὡς φασί, ἡ ἀπόδειξις λόγος du ὅμο- 
λογουμένων λημμάτων κατὰ συναγωγὴν ἐπιφορὰν 
ἐκκαλύπτων «ἄδηλον. σαφέστερον δὲ 6 λέγουσιν 
ἔσται διὰ τούτων. λόγος ἐστὶ σύστημα ἐκ λημμά- 


1 «μὴ» add. Kayser, Papp. 





* For this Sceptic formula ef. i. 188. 
236 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 133-135 


nothing. For if they signify nothing, the existence 
of sign is not confirmed; whereas if they signify 
something, the thing signified will follow them ; and 
it was “the existence of a sign.” And from this 
follows, as we have shown, the non-existence of 
sign, because of the reversal of the argument. 

In short, then, since such plausible arguments are 
adduced both for the existence and for the non- 
existence of sign, we must declare that sign is “‘ no 
more ”’* existent than non-existent. 


Cuaprer XII.—Or Proor 


Now it is plain from this that neither is proof a 134 


matter upon which there is agreement; for if we 
suspend judgement about the sign, and proof also is 
a sign, we must necessarily suspend judgement about 
proof likewise. And in fact we shall find that the 
arguments propounded concerning the sign can be 
adapted to apply to proof as well, since it seems to 
be both relative and serving to reveal the conclusion, 
and from these properties followed nearly all the 
results we mentioned in the case of the sign. If, 
however, one ought to devote a separate discussion 
to proof, I shall proceed to treat of it concisely after 
endeavouring first to explain shortly the definition 
they give of proof. 

Proof is, as they assert, “‘ an argument which, by 
means of agreed premisses, reveals by way of deduc- 
tion a non-evident inference.” What their statement 
means will be made clearer by what follows. ‘‘ An 
argument is a system composed of premisses and an 


> Cf. 88 96, 122, 181 supra; and for the next ten sections 
cf. Adv. Log. ii. 299 ff. 


237 


135 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


136 των καὶ ἐπιφορᾶς" τούτου δὲ λήμματα μὲν εἶναι 
λέγεται τὰ πρὸς κατασκευὴν τοῦ συμπεράσματος 
συμφώνως λαμβανόμενα. ἀξιώματα, ἐπιφορὰ δὲ [ἢ 
συμπέρασμα" τὸ ἐκ τῶν λημμάτων κατασκευα- 
ζόμενον ἀξίωμα. οἷον ἐν τούτῳ “εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, 
φῶς ἐ ἔστιν" ἀλλὰ μὴν ἡμέρα ἔστιν: φῶς ἄρα ἔστιν ᾿᾿ 
τὸ μὲν “᾿ φῶς ἄρα ἔστιν ᾿᾿ συμπέρασμά ἐστι, τὰ 

137 δὲ λοιπὰ λήμματα. τῶν δὲ λόγων of μέν εἶσι 
συνακτικοὶ οἵ δὲ ἀσύνακτοι, συνακτικοὶ μὲν ὅταν 
τὸ συνημμένον τὸ ἀρχόμενον μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ διὰ τῶν 
τοῦ λόγου λημμάτων συμπεπλεγμένου, λῆγον δὲ 
εἰς τὴν ἐπιφορὰν αὐτοῦ, ὑγιὲς ἦ, οἷον ὁ προειρη- 
μένος λόγος συνακτικός ἐστιν, ἐπεὶ τῇ διὰ τῶν 
λημμάτων αὐτοῦ συμπλοκῇ ταύτῃ “ἡμέρα ἔστι, 
καὶ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν ἀκολουθεῖ τὸ “΄ φῶς 
ἔστιν ᾿᾿ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ συνημμένῳ ᾿ “let? ἡμέρα € ἔστι, 
καὶ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν «' φῶς ἄρα ἔστιν». 
ἀσύνακτοι δὲ οἱ μὴ οὕτως ἔχοντες. 

- \ ~ ς ᾽ὔ 9 9 “A ¢ \ 

19g [ῶν δὲ συνακτικῶν οἱ μέν εἰσιν ἀληθεῖς οἱ δὲ 
οὐκ ἀληθεῖς, ἀληθεῖς μὲν ὅταν μὴ μόνον τὸ συν- 
ἡμμένον ἐκ τῆς τῶν λημμάτων συμπλοκῆς καὶ τῆς 
ἐπιφορᾶς, ὡς προειρήκαμεν, ὑγιὲς ἧ, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ 
συμπέρασμα καὶ τὸ διὰ τῶν λημμάτων αὐτοῦ συμ- 
πεπλεγμένον ἀληθὲς ὑπάρχῃ, ὃ ἐστιν ἡγούμενον 
ἐν τῷ συνημμένῳ. ἀληθὲς δὲ συμπεπλεγμένον € ἐστὶ 

τὸ πάντα ἔχον ἀληθῆ, ὡς τὸ “ ἡμέρα ἔστι, καὶ εἰ 
ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν. οὐκ ἀληθεῖς δὲ το μὴ 

139 οὕτως ἔχοντες. ὃ γὰρ τοιοῦτος λόγος ἡμέρας 
οὔσης “᾿εἰ νὺξ ἔστι, σκότος ἔστιν: ἀλλὰ μὴν νὺξ 
ἔστιν: σκότος ἄρα ἔστιν ᾿᾿ συνακτικὸς μέν ἐστιν, 

1 ἢ om. μ88.9. συμπέρασμα om. T. 
2 [el] secl. Riistow. 8 «φῶς dpa ἔστιν» add. Papp. 
238 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 136-139 


inference. The premisses of it are (it is said) the 136 
judgements adopted by consent for the establishment 
of the inference, and the inference is the judgement 
established by the premisses.”” For example, in the 
argument “‘ If it is day, it is light ; but it is in truth 
day ; therefore it is light,’ the clause “ therefore it 
is light ’’ is a conclusion, and the rest are premisses. 
And of arguments some are conclusive, some incon- 137 
clusive—conclusive when the hypothetical syllogism @ 
which begins with the combination made by the 
premisses of the argument and ends with its in- 
ference is valid; thus, for example, the argument 
just stated is conclusive since the combination of its 
premisses—‘‘ it is day ” and “if it is day, it is light ἢ 
—is followed by “‘ it is light ’’ in the syllogism “ it is 
day, and if it is day it is light ; therefore it is light.”’ 
But arguments that are not like this are inconclusive. 
And of the conclusive arguments some are true, 138 
some not true—true when not only the syllogism 
formed by the combination of the premisses and the 
inference is valid,® as we said above, but the con- 
clusion also and the combination of the premisses, 
which is the antecedent in the syllogism, is really 
true. And a combination is true when it has all its 
parts true, as in the case of “ It is day, and if it is 
day, it is light’; but those of a different kind are 
not true. For an argument such as this—‘‘ If it 15.139 
night, it is dark; but in fact it is night; therefore 
it is dark ’-—is indeed conclusive, since the syllogism 


ὦ τὸ συνημμένον, lit. ‘the combination ’’; cf. p. 246 note a, 
» “Valid ἢ refers only to logical form ; ‘‘ true’’ to content; 
cf. § 1389; Adv. Log. ii. 413. 


239 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐπεὶ τὸ συνημμένον τοῦτο bytes ἐστιν ““ [εἰ νὺξ 
ἔστι, καὶ εἰ νὺξ ἐ ἔστι, «σκότος ἔστι, » σκότος ἄρα 
ἔστιν,᾽᾽ οὐ μέντοι ἀληθής. τὸ ‘yap ἡγούμενον συμ- 
πεπλεγμένον ψεῦδός ἐ ἐστι, τὸ “νὺξ ἐ ἔστι, καὶ εἰ νὺξ 
ἔστι, σκότος ἔστι, ᾿ ψεῦδος ἔ ἔχον ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὸ “ νὺξ 
ἔστιν᾽ . ψεῦδος γάρ ἐστι συμπεπλεγμένον. τὸ ἔχον 
ἐν ἑαυτῷ ψεῦδος. ἔνθεν καὶ ἀληθῆ λόγον εἶναί φασι 
τὸν δι ἀληθῶν λημμάτων ἀληθὲς συνάγοντα συμ- 
πέρασμα. 

10 Πάλιν δὲ τῶν ἀληθῶν λόγων οἱ μέν εἰσιν ἀπο- 
δεικτικοὶ οὗ δ᾽ οὐκ ἀποδεικτικοί, καὶ ἀποδεικτικοὶ 
μὲν ot διὰ προδήλων ἄδηλόν τί συνάγοντες, οὐκ 
ἀποδεικτικοὶ δὲ οἱ μὴ τοιοῦτοι. οἷον ὃ μὲν τοιοῦ- 
τος λόγος “εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φώς ἔστιν" ἀλλὰ μὴν 
ἡμέρα ἔστιν" φῶς ἄρα ἔστιν "οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπο- 
δεικτικός" τὸ γὰρ φῶς εἶναι, ὅπερ ἐστὶν αὐτοῦ 
συμπέρασμα, πρόδηλόν. ἐστιν. ὁ δὲ τοιοῦτος : εἰ 
ἱδρῶτες ῥέουσι διὰ τῆς ἐπιφανείας, εἰσὶ νοητοὶ 
πόρου" ἀλλὰ μὴν ἱδρῶτες p ῥέουσι διὰ τῆς ἐπιφανείας" 
εἰσὶν ἄρα νοητοὶ πόροι ἀποδεικτικός ἐστι, τὸ 
συμπέρασμα ἔχων ἄδηλον, τὸ “᾿ εἰσὶν ἄρα νοητοὶ 
πόροι. 

11 Τῶν δὲ ἄδηλόν τι συναγόντων. οὗ μὲν ἐφοδευτι- 
κῶς μόνον ἄγουσιν ἡμᾶς διὰ τῶν λημμάτων ἐπὶ 
τὸ συμπέρασμα, οἱ δὲ ἐφοδευτικῶς ἅμα καὶ ἐκ- 
καλυπτικῶς. οἷον ἐφοδευτικῶς μὲν οἱ ἐκ πίστεως 
καὶ “μνήμης ᾿ἡρτῆσθαι δοκοῦντες, οἷός ἐστιν ὁ 
τοιοῦτος “εἴ τίς σοι θεῶν εἶπεν ὅτι πλουτήσει 
οὗτος, πλουτήσει οὗτος" οὑτοσὶ δὲ 6 θεός ’᾿ (δεί- 
κνυμι δὲ Kal? ὑπόθεσιν τὸν Δία) “ εἶπέ σοι ὅτι 

1 [εἰ] secl. Riistow. 
2 «σκότος ἔστὼ add. Riistow. 
24:0 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 139-141 


“it is night, and if it is night it is dark, therefore 
it is dark ᾿᾿ is a valid one, but, when it is day-time, it 
is not true. For the antecedent combination—‘ it is 
night, and if it is night it is dark ’—is false since it 
contains the falsehood “it is night’’; for the com- 
bination which contains a falsehood is false. Hence 
they also say that a true argument is that which 
deduces a true conclusion from true premisses. 

Of true arguments, again, some are “‘ probative,” 140 
some “ non-probative ” ; and the probative are those 
which deduce something non-evident by means of 
pre-evident premisses, the non-probative those not of 
this sort. For example, an argument such as this— 
“Tf it is day it is light ; but in fact it is day ; there- 
fore it is light ” is not probative ; for its conclusion, 
that “it is light,” is pre-evident. But an argument 
like this—“ If sweat pours through the surface, there 
are insensible pores®; but in fact sweat does pour 
through the surface; therefore there are insensible 
pores "—is a probative one, as its conclusion (“ there 
are therefore insensible pores ’’) is non-evident. 

And of arguments which deduce something non- 14] 
evident, some conduct us through the premisses to 
the conclusion by way of progression only, others 
both by way of progression and by way of discovery 
as well. By progression, for instance, are those 
which seem to depend on belief and memory, such 
as the argument “If a god has said to you that 
this man will be rich, this man will be rich ; but this 
god (assume that I point to Zeus) has said to you that 


* For this and the following sections ¢f. Adv. Log. ii. 305 ff. 
δ Cf. § 98 supra. 


VOL. I R 941 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πλουτήσει οὗτος" πλουτήσει ἄρα οὗτος “Ὁ συγ- 
κατατιθέμεθα γὰρ τῷ συμπεράσματι οὐχ οὕτως 
διὰ τὴν τῶν λημμάτων ἀνάγκην ὡς πιστεύοντες 

142 τῇ τοῦ θεοῦ ἀποφάσει. οἱ δὲ οὐ μόνον ἐφοδευ- 
τικῶς ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐκκαλυπτικῶς ἄγουσιν ἡμᾶς ἐπὶ 
τὸ συμπέρασμα, ὡς ὃ τοιοῦτος “εἰ “ῥέουσι διὰ τῆς 
ἐπιφανείας ἱδρῶτες, εἰσὶ νοητοὶ πόροι' ἀλλὰ μὴν 
τὸ πρῶτον' τὸ δεύτερον ἄρα ᾽᾽" τὸ γὰρ ῥεῖν τοὺς 
ἱδρῶτας ἐκκαλυπτικόν ἐστι τοῦ πόρους εἶναι, διὰ 
τὸ προειλῆφθαι ὅτι διὰ ναστοῦ σώματος ὑγρὸν οὐ 
δύναται φέρεσθαι. 

13. Ἢ οὖν ἀπόδειξις καὶ λόγος εἶναι ὀφείλει καὶ 
συνακτικὸς καὶ ἀληθὴς καὶ ἄδηλον “ἔχων συμ- 
πέρασμα [καὶ] ἐκκαλυπτόμενον ὑπὸ τῆς δυνάμεως 
τῶν λημμάτων, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο εἶναι λέγεται ἀπό- 
δειξις λόγος du ὁμολογουμένων λημμάτων κατὰ 
συναγωγὴν ἐπιφορὰν ἐκκαλύπτων. ἄδηλον. 

Διὰ τούτων μὲν οὖν σαφηνίζειν εἰώθασι τὴν 
ἔννοιαν τῆς ἀποδείξεως. 


11΄.-ΕἸ ἘΣΤῚΝ AMOAEISIZ 


144 Ὅτι δὲ ἀνύπαρκτός ἐστιν ἡ ἀπόδειξις, ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν 
ὧν λέγουσιν ἐπιλογίζεσθαι δυνατόν, ἕκαστον τῶν 
περιεχομένων ἐν τῇ ἐννοίᾳ διατρέποντα. οἷον γοῦν 
ὃ λόγος σύγκειται ἐξ ἀξιωμάτων, τὰ δὲ σύνθετα 
πράγματα οὐ δύναται ὑπάρχειν ἐὰν μὴ τὰ ἐξ 
ὧν “συνέστηκεν ἀλλήλοις συνυπάρχῃ, ὡς πρόδηλον 
ἀπὸ κλίνης καὶ τῶν παραπλησίων, τὰ δὲ μέρη τοῦ 

1 [καὶ] om. T. 


* See the definition of “proof” in §§ 135-136. It is with 
‘* hypothetical syllogisms ᾽᾽ that Sextus is here concerned. The 


242 





OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 141-144 


this man will be rich; therefore he will be rich ” ; 
for we assent to the conclusion not so much on account 
of the logical force of the premisses as because of our 
belief in the statement of the god. But some argu- 142 
ments conduct us to the conclusion by way of dis- 
covery as well as of progression, like the follow- 
ing: “ If sweat pours through the surface, there are 
insensible pores ; but the first is true, therefore also 
the second”; for the pouring of the sweat makes 
discovery of the fact of the existence of pores, 
because of the prior assumption that moisture cannot 
pass through a solid body. 

So, then, proof ought to be an argument which 143 
is deductive and true and has a non-evident con- 
clusion which is discovered by the potency of the 
premisses ; and because of this, proof is defined as 
“an argument which by means of agreed pre- 
misses discovers by way of deduction a non-evident 
inference.”’ It is in these terms, then, that they are 
in the habit of explaining the conception of proof. 


CuapTer XIII.—Dors Proor exist? 


That proof has no real existence may be inferred 144 
from their own statements, by refuting each of the 
assumptions implied in its conception. Thus, for 
instance, the argument is compounded of judgements, 
but compound things cannot exist unless its component 
elements mutually co-exist, as is pre-evident from 
the case of a bed and similar objects ; but the parts 


“component elements” of the syllogism (or “ argument’’) 
are the “ judgements” (or propositions) which go to form 
its “ premisses.”’ 


243 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


λόγου ἀλλήλοις οὐ συνυπάρχει. ὅτε yap λέγομεν 
τὸ πρῶτον λῆμμα, οὐδέπω ὑπάρχει οὔτε τὸ ἕτερον 
λῆμμα οὔτε ἡ ἐπιφορά" ὅτε δὲ τὸ δεύτερόν φαμεν, 
τὸ μὲν πρότερον λῆμμα οὐκέτι ὑπάρχει, ἡ δὲ 
ἐπιφορὰ οὐδέπω ἔστιν" ὅτε δὲ τὴν ἐπιφορὰν προ- 
φερόμεθα, τὰ λήμματα αὐτῆς οὐκέτι ὑφέστηκεν. 
οὐ συνυπάρχει ἄρα ἀλλήλοις τὰ μέρη τοῦ λόγου: 
ὅθεν οὐδὲ ὁ λόγος ὑπάρχειν δόξει. 

145 Χωρὶς. δὲ τούτων ὁ “συνακτικὸς λόγος ἀκατά- 
ληπτός ἐστιν" εἰ γὰρ οὗτος κρίνεται ἀπὸ τῆς τοῦ 
συνημμένου ἀκολουθίας, ἡ δὲ κατὰ τὸ συνημμένον 
ἀκολουθία ἀνεπικρίτως διαπεφώνηται καὶ ἔστιν 
ἴσως ἀκατάληπτος, ὡς ἐν O° περὶ σημείου λόγῳ 

ὑπεμνήσαμεν, καὶ 6 συνακτικὸς λόγος ἀκατάληπτος 

146 ἔσται. οἵ γε μὴν διαλεκτικοί φασιν ἀσύνακτον 
λόγον γίγνεσθαι ἤτοι παρὰ διάρτησιν ἢ παρὰ 
ἔλλευψιν. ἢ παρὰ τὸ κατὰ μοχθηρὸν ἠρωτῆσθαι 
σχῆμα ἣ κατὰ παρο κήν. οἷον κατὰ διάρτησιν 
μὲν ὅταν μὴ “ἔχῃ τὰ λήμματα ἀκολουθίαν πρὸς 

ἄλληλά τε καὶ τὴν ἐπιφοράν, ὡς ὁ τοιοῦτος “εἰ 
ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν: ἀλλὰ μὴν πυροὶ ἐν ἀγορᾷ 

147 πωλοῦνται" Δίων ἄρα περιπατεῖ. παρὰ € παρ- 
ολκὴν ὁ ὅταν εὑρίσκηται λῆμμα παρέλκον πρὸς τὴν 
τοῦ λόγου συναγωγήν, οἷον * εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς 
ἔστιν: ἀλλὰ μὴν ἡμέρα ἔστιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ Δίων περι- 

πατεῖ: φῶς ἄρα ἔστιν. ” παρὰ δὲ τὸ ἐν μοχθηρῷ 
ἠρωτῆσθαι σχήματι ὅταν μὴ ἢ τὸ σχῆμα τοῦ λόγου 
συνακτικόν, οἷον ὄντων συλλογισμῶν, ὡς φασί, 
τούτων “εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν: ἀλλὰ μὴν 
ἡμέρα ἔστιν" φῶς ἃ ἄρα ἔστιν,᾽ “" εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς 
ἔστιν. οὐχὶ δὲ φῶς ἔστιν: οὐκ ἄρα ἡμέρα ἔστιν, 
α 2,6. the Stoics, οὐ 88 166, 235. 
2411. 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 144-147 


of an argument do not mutually co-exist. For when 
we are stating the first premiss, neither the second 
premiss nor the inference is as yet in existence ; and 
when we are stating the second premiss, the first 
is no longer existent and the inference is not yet 
existent ; and when we announce the inference, its 
premisses are no longer in being. Therefore the parts 
of the argument do not mutually co-exist ; and hence 
the argument too will seem to be non-existent. 

But apart from this, the conclusive argument is 145 
non-apprehensible; for ifit is judged by the coherence 
of the hypothetical premiss, and the coherence in 
that premiss is a matter of unsettled dispute and is 
probably non-apprehensible, as we suggested in our 
chapter (xi.) “On the Sign,”’ then the conclusive 
argument also will be non-apprehensible. Now the 146 
Dialecticians 5 assert that an argument is inconclusive 
owing to inconsistency or to deficiency or to its being 
propounded in a bad form or to redundancy. An 
example of inconsistency is when the premisses are 
not logically coherent with each other and with the 
inference, as in the argument “ If it is day, it is light ; 
but in fact wheat is being sold in the market ; there- 
fore Dion is walking.”” And it is a case of redundancy 147 
when we find a premiss that is superfluous for the logic 
of the argument, as for instance “If it is day, it is 
light; but in fact it is day and Dion also is walking ; 
therefore it is light.” And it is due to the bad form 
in which it is propounded when the form of the argu- 
ment is not conclusive; for whereas the really syllo- 
gistic arguments are, they say, such as these: “ If it 
is day, it is light ; but in fact it is day ; therefore it 
is light’; and “ If it is day, it is light ; but it is not 
light ; therefore it is not day,’—the inconclusive 


245 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


e 


ὁ λόγος ἀσύνακτός ἐστιν οὗτος | εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, 
φῶς ἐ ἔστιν" ἀλλὰ μὴν φῶς ἔ ἐστιν" ἡμέρα ἄρα ἔστιν. 
148 ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἐπαγγέλλεται τὸ συνημμένον ὄντος" τοῦ 
ἐν αὐτῷ ἡγουμένου εἶναι καὶ τὸ λῆγον, εἰκότως 
τοῦ ἡγουμένου. προσλαμβανομένου ἐ ἐπάγεται καὶ τὸ 
ἦγον, καὶ τοῦ λήγοντος ἀναιρουμένου ἀναιρεῖται 
καὶ τὸ ἡγούμενον" εἰ γὰρ ἣν τὸ ἡγούμενον, ἣν ἂν 
καὶ τὸ λῆγον. τοῦ δὲ λήγοντος προσλαμβανομένου 
οὐ πάντως τίθεται καὶ τὸ ἡγούμενον" οὐδὲ γὰρ 
ὑπισχνεῖτο τὸ συνημμένον τῷ "λήγοντι ἀκολουθεῖν 
τὸ ἡγούμενον, ἀλλὰ τῷ ἡγουμένῳ τὸ λῆγον. μόνον. 
149 διὰ τοῦτο οὖν ὁ μὲν ἐκ συνημμένου καὶ τοῦ ἡγου- 
μένου τὸ λῆγον συνάγων συλλογιστικὸς εἶναι λέ- 
γεται, καὶ ὁ ἐκ συνημμένου καὶ τοῦ ἀντικειμένου 
τοῦ λήγοντος τὸ ἀντικείμενον τῷ ἡγουμένῳ συν- 
dye: ὁ δὲ ἐκ συνημμένου καὶ τοῦ λήγοντος τὸ 
ἡγούμενον συνάγων ἀσύνακτος, ὡς ὁ προειρημένος, 
παρὸ καὶ ἀληθῶν ὄντων τῶν λημμάτων αὐτοῦ 
ψεῦδος συνάγει, ὅταν λυχνιαίου φωτὸς ὄντος νυκτὸς 
λέγηται. τὸ μὲν yap “ei ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστι᾽ 
συνημμένον ἀληθές ἐστιν, καὶ ἡ “᾿ ἀλλὰ μὴν φῶς 
ἔστι ᾿᾿ πρόσληψις, 7 δὲ “ ἡμέρα dpa” ἐπιφορὰ 
150 ψευδής. κατὰ παράλειψιν δέ ἐστι μοχθηρὸς λόγος 
\ ‘ \ 


Ὁ 


ἐν ᾧ παραλείπεταί τι τῶν πρὸς τὴν συναγωγὴν 
τοῦ συμπεράσματος ᾿χρησιμευόντων" οἷον ὑγιοῦς 
ὄντος, ὡς οἴονται, τοῦ λόγου τούτου “᾿ ἤτοι ἀγαθός 
ἐστιν 6 πλοῦτος ἢ κακὸς 7 ἀδιάφορος" οὔτε δὲ 
κακός ἐστιν οὔτε ἀδιάφορος" ἀγαθὸς ἄρα ἐστίν;, 


1 gvros Heintz: ἐντὸς mss. Bekk. 





* i.e, (in Stoic terminology) definitely valid and con- 
clusive ; cf. § 163 infra. Note that the term συνημμένον 
(" combination **) mostly means the “ hypothetical, or major, 


246 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 147-150 


argument runs thus: “If it is day, it is light; but 
in fact it is light ; therefore it is day.’’ For since the 148 
major premiss announces that if its antecedent exists 
its consequent also exists, naturally when the ante- 
cedent is admitted the consequent also is inferred, 
and when the consequent is denied the antecedent 
also is denied; for if the antecedent had existed, 
the consequent also would have existed. But when 
the consequent is admitted, the antecedent is not 
necessarily admitted as well; for the major premiss 
did not promise that the antecedent should follow 
the consequent, but only the consequent the ante- 
cedent. 

Hence, the argument which deduces the conse- 149 
quent from the major premiss and the antecedent is 
said to be syllogistic,¢ and also that which deduces 
the opposite of the antecedent from the major premiss 
and the opposite of the consequent ; but the argu- 
ment which, like that stated above, deduces the ante- 
cedent from the major premiss and the consequent 
is inconclusive, so that it makes a false deduction, 
even though its premisses are true, whenever it is 
uttered by lamplight at night. For though the 
major premiss “If it is day, it is light’ is true, and 
also the minor premiss, “ but in fact it is light,” the 
inference “ therefore it is day” is false. And the 150 
argument is faulty by deficiency, when it suffers from 
the omission of some factor needed for the deducing 
of the conclusion: thus, for instance, while we have, 
as they think, a valid argument in “ Wealth is either 
good or bad or indifferent ; but it is neither bad nor 
indifferent ; therefore it is good,’’® the following 


premiss of a hypothetical syllogism,” but sometimes the 
whole syllogism. > Cf, iii. 177 ff. 
QAT 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


φαῦλός ἐστι παρὰ ἔλλειψιν οὗτος 6 “λόγος “ ἤτοι 
ἀγαθός ἐ ἐστιν ὁ ) πλοῦτος ἢ ἢ κακός" οὐκ ἔστι δὲ κακός" 

151 ἀγαθὸς ἄρα ἐστίν. ἐὰν οὖν δείξω ὅτι οὐδεμία 
διαφορὰ τῶν ἀσυνάκτων διακρίνεσθαι δύναται κατ᾽ 
αὐτοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν συνακτικῶν, ἔδειξα ὅτι ἀκατά- 
ληπτός ἐστιν ὁ συνακτικὸς λόγος, ὡς περιττὰς εἷναι 
τὰς κατὰ διαλεκτικὴν. αὐτοῖς φερομένας ἀπειρο- 
λογίας. δείκνυμι δὲ οὕτως. 

12 Ὃ κατὰ “διάρτησιν. ἀσύνακτος λόγος ἐλέγετο 
ἐγνωρίσθαι ἐ ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ἔχειν ἀκολουθίαν τὰ λήμματα 
αὐτοῦ πρὸς ἄλληλα καὶ τὴν ἐπι οράν. ἐπεὶ οὖν 
τῆς γνώσεως τῆς ἀκολουθίας ταύτης δεῖ προ- 
ἡγεῖσθαι τὴν κρίσιν τοῦ συνημμένου, ἀνεπίκριτον 
δέ ἐστι τὸ συνημμένον, ὡς ἐπελογισάμην, ἀδιά- 
Kptros ἔσται καὶ ὁ κατὰ διάρτησιν ἀσύνακτος 

168 λόγος. καὶ γὰρ 6 λέγων κατὰ διάρτησιν ἀσύν- 
ακτον elvai τινα λόγον, φάσιν μὲν προφερόμενος 
μόνην ἀντιτιθεμένην αὑτῷ φάσιν ἕξει τὴν ἀντι- 
κειμένην TH προειρημένῃ" ᾿ἀποδεικνὺς δὲ διὰ λόγου 
ἀκούσεται ὅτι δεῖ τὸν λόγον τοῦτον πρότερον 
συνακτικὸν εἶναι, εἶθ᾽ οὕτως ἀποδεικνύειν ὅτι ἀ- 
συνάρτητα τὰ Muara τοῦ διηρτῆσθαι λεγομένου 
λόγου. οὐ γνωσόμεθα δὲ εἰ ἔστιν ἀποδεικτικός, 
μὴ ἔχοντες συνημμένου. σύμφωνον κρίσιν, ἧ κρι- 
νοῦμεν εἰ ἀκολουθεῖ τῇ διὰ τῶν λημμάτων τοῦ 
λόγου συμπλοκῇ τὸ συμπέρασμα. καὶ κατὰ τοῦτο 
οὖν οὐχ ἕξομεν διακρίνειν τῶν συνακτικῶν τὸν 
κατὰ διάρτησιν μοχθηρὸν εἶναι λεγόμενον. 


4 Over 300 volumes, dealing with grammar and logic 
(“dialectic”), are ascribed to Chrysippus. 

ὃ With §§ 152-156 cf. Adv. Log. ii. 435 ff. 

¢ 4.e. the syllogism as a whole, which is a ‘“‘ combination ” 


248 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 150-153 


is faulty by way of deficiency: ‘‘ Wealth is either 
good or bad ; but it is not bad; therefore it is good.” 

If, then, I shall show that, according to them, it is 151 
impossible to distinguish any difference between the 
inconclusive and the conclusive arguments, I shall have 
shown that the conclusive argument is non-apprehens- 
ible, so that their endless disquisitions on “‘ dialectic’’4 
are superfluous. And I show it in this wise. 

It was said that the argument which is inconclusive 152 
owing to inconsistency is recognized by the want of 
coherence which marks its premisses in their relation 
both to each other and to the inference.® Since, then, 
the recognition of this coherence ought to be preceded 
by the judgement on the hypothetical syllogism,¢ and 
that syllogism, as I have argued, does not admit of 
judgement, the argument that is inconclusive through 
inconsistency will likewise be incapable of being dis- 
tinguished. For he who declares that any particular 153 
argument is inconclusive through inconsistency will, 
if he is merely uttering a statement, find himself 
opposed by a statement which contradicts his own ; 
while if he tries to prove it by argument, he will be 
told that this argument of his must itself be conclusive 
before he can prove that the premisses of the argu- 
ment said to be inconsistent are devoid of consistency. 
But we shall not know whether it is probative, since 
we have no agreed test of the syllogism whereby 
to judge whether the conclusion follows the logical 
connexion formed by the premisses. And thus, also, 
we shall be unable to distinguish the argument that 
is faulty through inconsistency from those that are 
conclusive. 


of premisses and conclusion, cf. ὃ 137; for another sense of 
the word ef. note on § 149. ν 


249 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


154 Τὰ δὲ αὐτὰ ἐροῦμεν πρὸς τὸν λέγοντα μοχθηρὸν 
εἶναι λόγον τινὰ παρὰ τὸ ἐν φαύ @ σχήματι ἠρω- 
τῆσθαι' ὁ γὰρ κατασκευάζων ὅτι μοχθηρόν τι 
σχῆμά ἐστιν, οὐχ ἕξει ὁμολογούμενον συνακτικὸν 

155 λόγον δι᾿ οὗ δυνήσεται συνάγειν ὅ φησιν. δυνάμει 
δὲ ἀντειρήκαμεν" διὰ τούτων" καὶ πρὸς τοὺς πει- 
ρωμένους παρ᾽ ἔλλειψιν ἀσυνάκτους λόγους εἶναι 
δεικνύναι. εἰ γὰρ 6 ἐντελὴς «καὶ» ἀπηρτισμένος 
ἀδιάκριτός ἐστι, καὶ 6 ἐν ἐλλείψει ἄδηλος ἔσται. 
καὶ ἔτι ὃ διὰ λόγου δεικνύναι τινὰ ἐλλιπῆ βουλό- 
μενος λόγον, μὴ ἔχων συνημμένου Κρίσιν ὧμο- 
λογημένην, δι᾽ ἧς κρίνειν δυνήσεται τὴν ἀκολουθίαν 
τοῦ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ λεγομένου λόγου, οὐ δυνήσεται 
κεκριμένως καὶ ὀρθῶς λέγειν ὅτι ἐλλιπής ἐστιν. 

156 ᾿Αλλὰ καὶ ὁ κατὰ παρολκὴν “λεγόμενος εἶναι 
μοχθηρὸς ἀδιάκριτός € ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποδεικτικῶν. 
ὅσον γὰρ ἐπὶ τῇ παρολκῇ καὶ οἱ θρυλούμενοι παρὰ 
τοῖς στωικοῖς ἀναπόδεικτοι ἀσύνακτοι εὑρεθή- 
σονται, ὧν ἀναιρουμένων ἡ πᾶσα διαλεκτικὴ ἄνα- 
τρέπεται" οὗτοι γάρ εἰσιν ous φασιν ἀποδείξεως 
μὲν μὴ δεῖσθαι πρὸς τὴν ἑαυτῶν σύστασιν, ἀπο- 
δεικτικοὺς δὲ ὑπάρχειν τοῦ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους συν- 
ἄγειν λόγους. ὅτι δὲ παρέλκουσιν, ἔσται σαφὲς 
ἐκθεμένων ἡμῶν τοὺς ἀναποδείκτους καὶ οὕτως ὅ 

αμεν ἐπιλογιζομένων. 

161] Πολλοὺς μὲν ἀναποδείκτους ὀνειροπολοῦσιν, πέντε 
δὲ τούτους μάλιστα ἐκτίθενται, εἰς ots of λοιποὶ 


ἴ ἀντειρήκαμεν T: ἀντειρήσομεν EAB: ἀντειρήσθω L, Bekk. 
2 τούτων T, cj. Bekk.: τοῦτο ss. 3 «καὶ add. Τ, 





4,6. those which need no proof as being self-evident ; 
ie aed s “ perfect syllogisms,”’ and i. 69; ddv. Log. ii. 
22 


250 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 154-157 


And we will make the same reply to the man who 154 
says that an argument is unsound owing to its being 
propounded in a faulty form; for he who maintains 
that a form is unsound will have no argument agreed 
to be conclusive whereby he will be able to draw the 
conclusion he states. And hereby we have also 155 
potentially refuted those who try to show that there 
are arguments which are inconclusive through de- 
ficiency. For if the complete and finished argument 
is indistinguishable <from others>, the deficient also 
will be non-evident. And, further, he who proposes 
to prove by argument that a certain argument is 
deficient, seeing that he has no agreed test of a 
hypothetical syllogism whereby he can judge the 
coherence of the argument he is talking about, will 
be unable to make a tested and true pronouncement 
that it is deficient. 

Moreover, the argument that is said to be faulty 156 
through redundancy is indistinguishable from those 
that are probative. For, so far as concerns redun- 
dancy, even the “ non-demonstrable ”’ arguments @ so 
much talked of by the Stoics will be found to be 
inconclusive, and if they are demolished the whole of 
dialectic is overturned ; for they are the arguments 
which, they say, need no proof to establish them, 
and themselves serve as proofs of the conclusiveness 
of the other arguments. And that they are re- 
dundant will be clear when we have set forth these 
non-probative arguments and thus confirm our state- 
ment by reasoning. 

Now there are, in their imaginings, many non- 157 
demonstrable arguments, but the five which they 
chiefly propound, and to which all the rest can, it 


251 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πάντες ἀναφέρεσθαι. δοκοῦσιν, πρῶτον τὸν ἐκ 
συνημμένου καὶ τοῦ ἡγουμένου τὸ λῆγον συν- 
άγοντα, οἷον “΄ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν" ἀλλὰ μὴν 
ἡμέρα ἔστιν' φῶς ἄρα cor.” δεύτερον τὸν ἐκ 
συνημμένου καὶ τοῦ ἀντικειμένου τοῦ λήγοντος τὸ 
ἀντικείμενον τοῦ ἡγουμένου συνάγοντα, οἷον “ εἰ 
ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν: οὐκ ἔστι δὲ φῶς" οὐκ ἄρα 

168 ἡμέρα ἔστιν. τρίτον τὸν ἐξ ἀποφατικοῦ συμ- 
πλοκῆς καὶ ἑνὸς τῶν ἐκ τῆς συμπλοκῆς τὸ ἄντι- 
κείμενον τοῦ λοιποῦ συνάγοντα, οἷον “" οὐχὶ ἡμέρα 
ἔστι καὶ νὺξ ἔστιν" ἡμέρα δὲ ἔστιν" οὐκ ἄρα vo 
ἔστιν. τέταρτον τὸν ἐκ διεζευγμένου καὶ ἑνὸς 
τῶν ἐπεζευγμένων τὸ ἀντικείμενον τοῦ λοιποῦ 
συνάγοντα, οἷον “᾿ ἤτοι ἡμέρα ἔστιν 1 νὺξ ἔστιν: 
ἡμέρα δὲ ἔστιν: οὐκ ἄρα νὺξ ἔστιν. πέμπτον τὸν 
ἐκ διεζευγμένου καὶ τοῦ ἀντικειμένου ἑνὸς τῶν 
ἐπεζευγμένων τὸ λοιπὸν συνάγοντα, οἷον “ Aros 
ἡμέρα ἔστιν ἢ νὺξ ἔστιν" οὐχὶ δὲ νὺξ ἔστιν: ἡμέρα 
ἄρα ἔστιν." 

159 Οὗτοι μὲν οὖν εἰσὶν οἱ θρυλούμενοι ἀναπόδεικτοι, 
πάντες δέ μοι δοκοῦσιν a ἀσύνακτοι εἶναι κατὰ mapon- 
κήν. αὐτίκα γοῦν, ἵνα ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου ἀρξώμεθα, 
ἦτοι ὁμολογεῖται 6 ὅτι ἀκολουθεῖ τὸ φῶς ἔ ἐστιν τῷ 

“ἡμέρα ἔστιν ᾿᾿ ἡγουμένῳ αὐτῷ ἐν τῷ “et ἡμέρα 
ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν ”’ συνημμένῳ, 7) ἄδηλόν ἐστιν. 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν ἄδηλόν ἐστιν, οὐ ὥσομεν τὸ συν- 
ἡμμένον ὡς ὁμολογούμενον" εἰ δὲ πρόδηλόν ἐστιν 
ὅτι ὄντος τοῦ “ἡμέρα ἔστιν ἐξ ἀνάγκης ἔστι καὶ 





5 Literally, the “ combination,”’ which here (as in § 104) 
means the hypothetical major premiss, of which the “‘if,”’ 
clause is the ‘* antecedent,” the other clause the “‘ consequent.” 


252 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 157--1δ9 


seems, be referred, are these. The first is that which 
deduces the consequent from the major premiss * and 
the antecedent, as for example “ If it is day, it is 
light ; butinfactitis day ; therefore itis light.’’ The 
second is that which deduces the opposite of the 
antecedent from the major premiss and the opposite of 
the consequent, as for example “If it is day, it is 
light ; but it is not light; therefore it is not day.” 
The third deduces from the negation of a coupled 158 
premiss° and <the affirmation of> one of its clauses the 
opposite of the other clause, as for example “ Itis not 
both night and day; but it is day; therefore it is 
not night.”” The fourth deduces from a disjunctive 
premiss and one of.its alternative clauses the opposite 
of the other, as for example “‘ Hither it is day or it is 
night; but it is day; therefore it is not night.” The 
fifth® deduces from a disjunctive premiss and the 
opposite of one of its clauses the other clause, as for 
example “ Hither it is day orit is night ; but it is not 
night ; therefore it is day.” 

These, then, are the much talked of non-demon- 159 
strable arguments, but they all seem to me to be 
inconclusive through redundancy. Thus for instance, 
to begin with the first, either it is agreed, or else it 
is non-evident, that in the major premiss “If it is 
day, it is light,” the clause “‘ it is light ’’ follows from 
its antecedent “itisday.” Βα this is non-evident, 
we shall not grant the major premiss as agreed ; 
if, however, it is pre-evident that if the clause “‘ it is 
day ” be true, the clause “ it is light ’’ will necessarily 


δ Φ,6. a premiss consisting of two clauses ‘‘ coupled’? by 
“and” (or “both... and’); a “‘conjunctive’’ premiss 
(as opposed to a “ disjunctive,”’ coupled by “ either. . . or’’). 

i, 69. 


¢ Cf i 


253 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


“φῶς gorw,” εἰπόντων ἡμῶν ὅτι ἡμέρα ἔστιν, 
συνάγεται καὶ τὸ φῶς ἔστιν, ὡς ἀρκεῖν τὸν τοιοῦτον 
λόγον “᾿ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἄρα ἔστιν, καὶ παρέλκειν 
τὸ “᾿ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν ag συνημμένον. 

160 Ὁμοίως δὲ φερόμεθα καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ δευτέρου ἀν- 
αποδείκτου. ἦτοι γὰρ ἐνδέχεται τοῦ λήγοντος μὴ 
ὄντος εἶναι τὸ ἡγούμενον, ἢ οὐκ ἐνδέχεται. ἃ 
εἰ μὲν ἐνδέχεται, οὐκ ἔσται ὑγιὲς τὸ συνημμένον" 
εἰ δὲ οὐκ ἐνδέχεται, ἅμα τῷ τεθῆναι τὸ “᾿ οὐχὶ τὸ 
λῆγον ᾿᾿ τίθεται καὶ τὸ “ οὐχὶ τὸ ἡγούμενον,᾽᾽ καὶ 
παρέλκει πάλιν τὸ συνημμένον, τῆς συνερωτήσεως 
τοιαύτης γινομένης “᾿οὐχὶ φῶς ἔστιν, οὐκ ἄρα 
ἡμέρα ἔστιν. : 

101] ‘O δὲ αὐτὸς λόγος Kal ἐπὶ τοῦ τρίτου avamo- 
δείκτου. ἦτοι γὰρ πρόδηλόν ἐστιν ὅτι οὐκ ἐν- 
δέχεται τὰ ἐν τῇ συμπλοκῇ συνυπάρξαι ἀλλήλοις, ἢ ἢ 
ἄδηλον. καὶ εἰ μὲν ἄδηλον, οὐ δώσομεν τὸ ἀπο- 
φατικὸν τῆς συμπλοκῆς" εἰ δὲ πρόδηλον, ἅμα τῷ 
τεθῆναι τὸ ἕτερον ἀναιρεῖται τὸ λοιπόν, καὶ 
παρέλκει τὸ ἀποφατικὸν τῆς συμπλοκῆς, οὕτως 
ἡμῶν ἐρωτώντων “ἡμέρα ἔστιν, οὐκ ἄρα νὺξ 
ἔστιν.᾽ 

1.2 Τὰ δὲ παραπλήσια λέγομεν καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ τετάρτου 
καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ πέμπτου ἀναποδείκτου. ἤτοι γὰρ 
πρόδηλόν ἐστιν ὅτι ἐν τῷ διεζευγμένῳ τὸ μὲν 
ἀληθές ἐστι τὸ δὲ ψεῦδος μετὰ μάχης τελείας, ὅπερ 
ἐπαγγέλλεται τὸ διεζευγμένον, ἢ ἄδηλον. καὶ εἰ 
μὲν ἄδηλον, οὐ δώσομεν. τὸ διεζευγμένον" εἰ δὲ 
πρόδηλον, τεθέντος ἑνὸς ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν φανερόν ἐστιν 
ὅτι τὸ λοιπὸν οὐκ ἔστιν, καὶ ἀναιρεθέντος ἕνὸς 

“ΑὮ example of the syllogismus decurtatus, which has but 
one premiss; ¢f. § 167. 


254 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 159-162 


be true also, then, once we have asserted that “ it is 
day,” the statement “it is light ” is also inferred, so 
that an argument in the form “ It is day, therefore 
it is light” is sufficient,* and the major premiss “If 
it is day, it is light ” is redundant. 

And in the case of the second non-demonstrable 160 
argument we make a similar objection. For it is 
either possible or impossible for the antecedent to be 
true when the consequent is not true. But if this 
is possible, the major premiss will not be valid; 
while if it is impossible, at the moment of positing 
‘‘ Not the consequent ”’ we posit also ‘‘ Not the ante- 
cedent,”” and the major premiss is redundant once 
again, the argument propounded being “It is not 
light, therefore it is not day.” 

The same reasoning applies also to the third non- 161 
demonstrable argument. For either it is pre-evident 
that it is impossible for the clauses in the coupled 
premiss mutually to co-exist, or else it is non-evident. 
And if it is non~evident we shall not grant the nega- 
tive of the coupled premiss ; but if it is pre-evident, 
at the moment of positing the one clause the other 
is annulled, and the negative of the coupled premiss 
is redundant when we propound the argument in the 
form “ It is day, therefore it is not night.” 

And we deal in like manner with the fourth non- 162 
probative argument and the fifth. For either it is 
pre-evident or it is non-evident that in the disjunctive 
premiss one clause is true, the other false, in complete 
contradiction, as the disjunctive proclaims. And if 
this is non-evident, we shall] not grant the disjunctive ; 
but if it is pre-evident, if one of its clauses be affirmed 
it is apparent that the other is not true, and if one 
is negated it is pre-evident that the other is true, so 


255 


168 


164 


165 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


/ id 3 4 a ¢ 3 “ ~ 
πρόδηλον ὅτι TO λοιπὸν ἔστιν, ὡς ἀρκεῖν συνερωτᾶν 
οὕτως “᾿ ἡμέρα ἔστιν, οὐκ ἄρα νὺξ gorw,” “ οὐχὶ 

Yd 
ἡμέρα ἔστιν, νὺξ dpa ἔστιν, καὶ παρέλκειν τὸ 
διεζευγμένον. 
7 A ‘4 3) A \ ~ 

Παραπλήσια δὲ λέγειν ἔνεστι Kal περὶ τῶν κατ- 
ηγορικῶν καλουμένων συλλογισμῶν, οἷς μάλιστα 
χρῶνται οἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ περιπάτου. οἷον γοῦν ἐν 

/ “ ‘4 {{ 4 / / \ \ 
τούτῳ τῷ λόγῳ “τὸ δίκαιον καλόν, τὸ καλὸν 
> / \ / + > / 37 ψΨ ¢ “ 
ἀγαθόν, τὸ δίκαιον dpa ἀγαθόν ᾿᾿ ἤτοι ὁμολογεῖται 
καὶ πρόδηλόν ἐστιν ὅτι τὸ καλὸν ἀγαθόν ἐστιν, ἢ 
> “A \ 3 3) > > Ἴ A 
ἀμφισβητεῖται καὶ ἔστιν ἄδηλον. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν 
3 7 3 b) ’ \ A “~ 7 
ἄδηλόν ἐστιν, οὐ δοθήσεται κατὰ τὴν τοῦ λόγου 
συνερώτησιν, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὐ συνάξει 6 συλ- 

, 3 \ / / ? Ὡ “" Φ “A 
ογισμός: εἰ δὲ πρόδηλόν ἐστιν ὅτι πᾶν ὅπερ ἂν 
> / “ 7 - 
ἦ καλόν, τοῦτο πάντως καὶ ἀγαθόν ἐστιν, ἅμα τῷ 
λεχθῆναι ὅτι τόδε τι καλόν ἐστι συνεισάγεται καὶ 

\ “ 

τὸ ἀγαθὸν αὐτὸ εἶναι, ὡς ἀρκεῖν τὴν τοιαύτην 
συνερώτησιν “᾿ τὸ δίκαιον καλόν, τὸ δίκαιον ἄρα 
ayabov,” καὶ παρέλκειν τὸ ἕτερον λῆμμα ἐν ᾧ τὸ 

4 > A Ἃ 7 e / \ \ 3 ~ 
καλὸν ἀγαθὸν εἶναι ἐλέγετο. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἐν τῷ 
τοιούτῳ λόγῳ “Σωκράτης ἄνθρωπος, πᾶς ἂν- 
θρωπος ζῶον, Σωκράτης ἄρα ζῶον, εἰ μὲν οὐκ 
ἔστι πρόδηλον αὐτόθεν ὅτι πᾶν ὅ τι περ ἂν H 
ἄνθρωπος, τοῦτο καὶ ζῶόν ἐστιν, οὐχ ὁμολογεῖται 
ἡ καθόλου πρότασις, οὐδὲ δώσομεν αὐτὴν ἐν τῇ 
συνερωτήσει. εἰ δὲ ἔπεται τῷ ἄνθρωπόν τινα εἶναι 
τὸ καὶ ζῶον αὐτὸν ὑπάρχειν, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἀληθής 
ἐστιν ὁμολογουμένως ἡ “᾿πᾶς ἄνθρωπος ζῶον ᾿᾽ 
πρότασις, ἅμα τῷ λεχθῆναι ὅτι Σωκράτης av- 

- > 
θρωπος συνεισάγεται Kat τὸ ζῶον αὐτὸν εἶναι, ὡς 
ἀρκεῖν τὴν τοιαύτην συνερώτησιν “ Σιωκράτης 
ἄνθρωπος, Σωκράτης ἄρα ζῶον, καὶ παρέλκειν 


256 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 162-165 


that it is sufficient to frame the argument thus—" It 
is day, therefore it is not night,” or “ It is not day, 
therefore it is night ’’; and the disjunctive premiss 
is redundant. 

One may also make similar observations on the so- 
ealled ‘‘ categorical’’ syllogisms, which are chiefly 
used by the Peripatetics.* Thus, for example, in the 
argument—‘‘ The just is fair, but the fair is good, 
therefore the just is good,’ ® either it is agreed and 
pre-evident that “ the fair is good,” or it is disputed 
and is non-evident. But if it is non-evident, it will 
not be granted in the process of deduction, and 
consequently the syllogism will not be conclusive ; 
while if it is pre-evident that whatsoever is fair is also 
without exception good, at the moment of stating 
that this particular thing is fair the fact that it is 
good is likewise implied, so that it is enough to put 
the argument in the form ‘“‘ The just is fair, therefore 
the just is good,” and the other premiss, in which it 
was stated that “ the fair is good,” is redundant. So 
too in an argument such as this—"* Socrates is a man ; 
every man is an animal; therefore Socrates is an 
animal,’’—if it is not at once pre-evident that what- 
soever is man is always also animal, the universal 
premiss is not agreed, and neither will we admit it in 
the process of deduction. But if the fact that he is a 
man is logically followed by the fact that he is also an 
animal, and in consequence the premiss “ Every man 
is an animal ”’ is by agreement true, at the moment of 
stating that “‘ Socrates is a man ” we admit therewith 
that he is also an animal, so that an argument in the 
form “‘ Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is an 

* Aristotle dealt only with this form of proof; later Peri- 
patetics with the hypothetical and disjunctive forms as well. 

> Cf. Plato, Aled. I. 116. 

VOL. I 5 257 


163 


164 


165 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


\ ce δὰ Μ θ ~ 22 / 
166 τὴν “πᾶς ἄνθρωπος ζῶον ᾿᾿ πρότασιν. παρα- 


167 


πλησίαις δὲ μεθόδοις καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων πρώτων 
κατηγορικῶν λόγων χρῆσθαι δυνατόν ἐστιν, ἵνα μὴ 
νῦν ἐνδιατρίβωμεν. 

ὴν ἐπεὶ παρέλκουσιν οὗτοι οὗ λόγοι ἐν οἷς τὴν 
ὑποβάθραν τῶν συλλογισμῶν ot διαλεκτικοὶ τίθεν- 
ται, ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇ παρολκῇ διατρέπεται πᾶσα ἡ 
διαλεκτική, μὴ δυναμένων ἡμῶν διακρῖναι τοὺς 
παρέλκοντας καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἀσυνάκτους λόγους ἀπὸ 
τῶν συνακτικῶν καλουμένων συλλογισμῶν. εἰ δὲ 
οὐκ ἀρέσκει τισὶ λόγους μονολημμάτους εἶναι, οὐκ 
εἰσὶν ἀξιοπιστότεροι ᾿Αντιπάτρου, ὃς οὐδὲ τοὺς 
τοιούτους λόγους ἀποδοκιμάζει. 

Διὰ ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἀνεπίκρυιτός ἐστιν 6 παρὰ τοῖς 
διαλεκτικοῖς συνακτικὸς καλούμενος λόγος. ἀλλὰ 
καὶ ὃ ἀληθὴς λόγος ἀνεύρετός ἐστι διά τε τὰ 
προειρημένα καὶ ἐπεὶ πάντως ὀφείλει εἰς ἀληθὲς 
ἤγειν. τὸ γὰρ συμπέρασμα τὸ ἀληθὲς εἶναι λεγό- 

? 


/ 3 / 
168 μενον ἤτοι φαινόμενόν ἐστιν ἢ ἄδηλον. καὶ φαινό- 


μενον μὲν οὐδαμῶς: οὐ γὰρ ἂν δέοιτο τοῦ διὰ τῶν 
λημμάτων ἐκκαλύπτεσθαι δι᾽ ἑαυτοῦ προσπῖπτον 
καὶ οὐχ ἧττον τῶν λημμάτων αὐτοῦ φαινόμενον. 
εἰ δὲ ἄδηλον, ἐπεὶ περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων ἀνεπικρίτως 
διαπεφώνηται, καθάπερ ἔμπροσθεν ὑπεμνήσαμεν, 
διόπερ καὶ ἀκατάληπτά ἐστιν, ἀκατάληπτον ἔσται 
καὶ τὸ συμπέρασμα τοῦ ἀληθοῦς εἶναι λεγομένου 
λόγου. εἰ δὲ [καὶ] τοῦτο ἀκατάληπτόν ἐστιν, οὐ 





* 4.¢. of the First Figure: the previous examples are cases of 
Barbara and Darii, so ‘the others’? would belong to 
Celarent and Ferio. But Heintz’s suggestion, τρόπων τῶν 
(for πρώτων), “the other figures,’ may well be right. 

> 2,4. Stoics and Peripatetics, οὐ § 146 supra. 


258 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 166--168 


animal ”’ is sufficient, and the premiss ὁ Every man is 

an animal” is redundant. And (not to dwell on the 166 
matter now) in the case of the other primary ¢ cate- 
gorical arguments also it is possible to employ similar 
methods of reasoning. 

Since, however, these arguments which the Dialec- 
ticians ὃ lay down as the foundations of their syllo- 
gisms are redundant, by reason of this redundancy 
the whole of Dialectic is thus far overthrown, seeing 
that we cannot distinguish the redundant, and conse- 
quently inconclusive, arguments from what are called 
the conclusive syllogisms. But if some persons dis~ 167 
approve of arguments being of a “‘ one-premiss form,” 
they deserve no more credence than does Antipater ° 
who does not reject such arguments. 

For these reasons, then, the argument named by 
the Dialecticians “ conclusive ” is not judged accept- 
able. But further, the “true ’ ὦ argument is indis- 
coverable both for the foregoing reasons ὁ and because 
it ought in all cases to end in truth. For the con- 
clusion which is said to be true is either apparent 
or non-evident. And it is certainly not apparent ; 168 
for it would not need to be disclosed by means of the 
premisses if it were perceptible of itself and no less 
apparent than its premisses. But if it is non-evident, 
then, since there is an unsettled dispute concerning 
things non-evident, as we mentioned above,’ and they 
are in consequence non-apprehensible, the conclusion 
also of the argument said to be true will be non- 
apprehensible. And if this is non-apprehensible, 

° A. of Tarsus was head of the Stoic School circa 150-30 
B.c.3 cf. Adv. Log. ii. 443 for Chrysippus on the “ curtailed 
syllogism.” 

@ Cf. § 148. 

¢ See 8ξ 85-94 supra, and § 138. 7 Of, § 116. 

259 


169 


170 


171 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


γνωσόμεθα πότερον ἀληθές ἐστι TO συναγόμενον 7 
ψεῦδος. ἀγνοήσομεν οὖν πότερον ἀληθής ἐστιν 6 
λόγος ἢ ψευδής, καὶ ἀνεύρετος ἔσται ὁ ἀληθὴς 
λόγος. 

Ἵνα δὲ καὶ ταῦτα παρῶμεν, 6 διὰ προδήλων 
ἄδηλον συνάγων ἀνεύρετός ἐστιν. εἰ γὰρ ἕπεται 
τῇ διὰ τῶν λημμάτων αὐτοῦ συμπλοκῇ ἡ ἐπιφορά, 
τὸ δ᾽ ἑπόμενον καὶ τὸ λῆγον πρός τί ἐστι καὶ πρὸς 
τὸ ἡγούμενον, τὰ δὲ πρός τι συγκαταλαμβάνεται 
ἀλλήλοις, ὡς παρεστήσαμεν, εἰ μὲν ἀδηλόν ἐστι 
τὸ συμπέρασμα, ἄδηλα ἔσται καὶ τὰ λήμματα, εἰ 
δὲ πρόδηλά ἐστι τὰ λήμματα, πρόδηλον ἔσται καὶ 
τὸ συμπέρασμα ἅτε συγκαταλαμβανόμενον αὐτοῖς 
προδήλοις οὖσιν, ὡς μηκέτι ἐκ προδήλων ἄδηλον 
συνάγεσθαι. διὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲ ἐκκαλύπτεται ὑπὸ 
τῶν λημμάτων ἡ ἐπιῴφορά, ἤτοι ἄδηλος οὖσα καὶ 
μὴ καταλαμβανομένη, ἢ πρόδηλος καὶ μὴ δεομένη 
τοῦ ἐκκαλύψοντος. εἰ τοίνυν ἡ ἀπόδειξις λόγος 
εἶναι λέγεται κατὰ συναγωγήν, τουτέστι συνακτι- 
κῶς, διά τινων ὁμολογουμένως ἀληθῶν ἐπιφορὰν 
ἐκκαλύπτων ἄδηλον, ὑπεμνήσαμεν δὲ ἡμεῖς ὅτι 
οὔτε λόγος τις ἔστιν οὔτε συνακτικὸς οὔτε ἀληθὴς 
οὔτε διά τινων προδήλων ἄδηλον συνάγων οὔτε 
ἐκκαλυπτικὸς τοῦ συμπεράσματος, φανερόν ἐστιν 
ὅτι ἀνυπόστατός ἐστιν ἡ ἀπόδειξις. 

Καὶ κατ᾽ ἐκείνην δὲ τὴν ἐπιβολὴν ἀνύπαρκτον ἢ 
καὶ ἀνεπινόητον εὑρήσομεν τὴν ἀπόδειξιν. ὃ γὰρ 
λέγων εἶναι ἀπόδειξιν ἤτοι γενικὴν τίθησιν ἀπό- 
δειξιν ἢ εἰδικήν τινα" ἀλλ᾽ οὔτε τὴν γενικὴν οὔτε 
εἰδυικὴν ἀπόδειξιν τιθέναι δυνατόν, ὡς ὑπομνήσο- 

α Of, 88 117 ff., 125. 

> Cf. 88 138, 143 ff. © OF Adv. Log. ii. 382 #. 

260 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 168-171 


we shall not know whether the deduction is true or 
false. Thus we shall be in ignorance as to whether the 
argument is true or false, and the “true” argument 
will be indiscoverable. 

But, to pass over these objections also, the argu- 
ment which deduces what is non-evident by means 
of pre-evident premisses is indiscoverable. For if the 
inference follows from the combination ofits premisses, 
and what follows and forms the consequent is relative 
and relative to the antecedent, and relatives are 
apprehended, as we have shown,* simultaneously,— 
then, if the conclusion is non-evident, the premisses 
also will be non-evident, while if the premisses are 
pre-evident the conclusion also will be pre-evident, 
as being apprehended along with the pre-evident 
premisses, so that no longer is there a deduction of 
what is non-evident from pre-evident premisses. And 
for these reasons, neither is the inference revealed by 
the premisses, as it is either non-evident and not 
apprehended, or pre-evident and not in need of any- 
thing to reveal it. So that if proof is defined ὃ as “an 
argument which by deduction, that is conclusively, 
reveals a non-evident inference by means of certain 
premisses agreed to be true,’ while we have shown 
that there exists no argument either conclusive or 
true or which deduces a non-evident conclusion by 
means of evident premisses or serves to reveal its 
conclusion,—then it is apparent that proof is without 
real existence. 

That proof is unreal, or even inconceivable, we shall 
discover also from the following line of attack. He 
who asserts the existence of proof posits either a 
general or a particular proof; but, as we shall suggest, 
it is not possible to posit either the general or the 


261 


169 


170 


171 


172 


178 


174 


175 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μεν" παρὰ δὲ ταύτας ἄλλο τι νοεῖν οὐκ ἐνδέχεται" 
\ 
οὐκ apa δύναταί τις ws ὑπάρχουσαν τιθέναι THY 
> f ¢ A > 4 > / > / 
ἀπόδειξιν. ἡ μὲν οὖν γενικὴ ἀπόδειξις ἀνυπό- 
στατός ἐστι διὰ τάδε. ἤτοι ἔχει λήμματά τινα 
f “ 
Kal τινα ἐπιφορὰν ἢ οὐκ ἔχει. καὶ εἰ μὲν οὐκ ἔχει, 
> \ > / 3 f > \ } / ” \ 
οὐδὲ ἀπόδειξις ἐστίν- εἰ δὲ λήμματά τινα ἔχει καὶ 
ἐπιφοράν τινα, ἐπεὶ πᾶν τὸ ἀποδεικνύμενον οὕτω 
καὶ ἀποδεικνύον ἐπὶ μέρους ἐστίν, εἰδικὴ ἔσται 
> / ? δ 3, Ἁ 5 / 
ἀπόδειξις" οὐκ ἄρα ἔστι Tis γενικὴ ἀπόδειξις. 
2 > b) \ > 2 δ \ \ > ~ + 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ εἰδική. ἦτοι yap τὸ ἐκ τῶν λημμάτων 
σὰ ~ ~ δ 
καὶ τῆς ἐπιφορᾶς σύστημα ἀπόδειξιν ἐροῦσιν, 7) 
τὸ “σύστημα τῶν λημμάτων μόνον" »οὐθέτερον δὲ 
τούτων ἐστὶν ἀπόδειξις, ὡς παραστήσω. οὐκ ἄρα 
ἔστιν εἰδικὴ ἀπόδειξις. τὸ μὲν οὖν σύστημα τὸ 
~ / \ a“ ~ 
ex τῶν λημμάτων καὶ THs ἐπιφορᾶς οὐκ ἔστιν 
~ . 
ἀπόδειξις πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι μέρος τι ἔχουσα ἄδηλον, 
, 
τουτέστι τὴν ἐπιφοράν, ἄδηλος ἔσται, ὅπερ ἄ- 
9 ‘\ 4 / > e 9 f 3 \ 
ToTOV: εἰ yap ἄδηλός ἐστιν ἡ ἀπόδειξις, αὐτὴ 
δεήσεται. τοῦ ἀποδείξοντος αὐτὴν μᾶλλον ἢ 
ἑτέρων ἔσται ἀποδεικτική. 
> \ > \ / [4 > Ἃ δὴ / 
Hira καὶ ἐπεὶ πρός τί φασιν εἶναι τὴν ἀπόδειξιν 
/ 

Kal πρὸς τὴν ἐπιφοράν, τὰ δὲ πρός TL πρὸς ἑτέροις 
νοεῖται, ὡς αὐτοί φασιν, ἕτερον εἶναι δεῖ τὸ ἀπο- 
“ὦ > A 
δεικνύμενον τῆς ἀποδείξεως" εἰ οὖν TO συμπέρασμά 
ἐστι τὸ ἀποδεικνύμενον, οὐ νοηθήσεται ἡ ἀπό- 
δειξις σὺν τῷ συμπεράσματι. καὶ yap ἦτοι συμ- 
βάλλεταί τι πρὸς τὴν ἀπόδειξιν ἑαυτοῦ τὸ συμ- 

4 kal 55 ας δος LAN > \ LAA 
πέρασμα ἢ οὐδαμῶς: ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν συμβάλλεται, 
ξ =~ 6 3 7 3 \ b] / 
ἑαυτοῦ ἔσται ἐκκαλυπτικόν, εἰ δὲ οὐ συμβάλλεται 

a ,ὔ 
ἀλλὰ παρέλκει, οὐδὲ μέρος τῆς ἀποδείξεως ἔσται, 
262 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 171-175 


particular proof ; and besides these no other can be 
conceived ; no one, therefore, can posit proof as really 
existing. Now the general proof is unreal for the 
following reasons. It either has or has not certain 
premisses and a certain inference. And if it has them 
not, itis not even proof ; while if it has premisses and 


an inference, then, since everything which proves or is’ 


proved in this way belongs to the class of “ particu- 
lars,’ @ proof will be particular ; therefore no general 
proof exists. Nor yet any particular proof. For they 
will describe as proof either the system made up of 
the premisses and the inference ὃ or only the system 
of the premisses ; but neither of these is proof, as I 
shall show ; therefore particular proof does not exist. 
Now the system composed of the premisses and the 
inference is not proof because, firstly, it contains a 
non-evident part—that is to say, the inference—and 
so will be non-evident, which is absurd; for if the 
proof is non-evident, instead of serving to prove other 
things it will itself be in need of something to prove it. 

Moreover, since they assert that proof is a relative 
thing and relative to the inference, and relatives, as 
they themselves affirm, are conceived in relation to 
other things, the thing proved must be other than 
the proof ; if, then, the thing proved is the conclusion, 
the proof will not be conceived along with the con- 
clusion. For the conclusion either contributes some- 
thing to its own proof or does not do so; but if it 
contributes, it will serve to reveal itself, while if it 
does not contribute but is redundant it will not be 
even a part of the proof, since we shall declare the 


« Cf. τὰ ἐπὶ μέρους, § 87 supra; “things of a partial char- 
acter ’’ as opposed to ‘‘ wholes” or genera. 
o Cf. § 135 supra. 


263 


μι 


72 


173 


174 


175 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐπεὶ κἀκείνην κατὰ παρολκὴν ἐροῦμεν εἶναι μοχ- 

116 θηράν. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ σύστημα τῶν λημμάτων 
μόνων ἀπόδειξις ὁ ἂν εἴη" τίς γὰρ ἂν εἴποι τὸ οὕτω 
λεγόμενον “ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν" ἀλλὰ μὴν 
ἡμέρα ἔστιν ᾿ ἢ λόγον εἶναι ἢ διάνοιαν ὅλως 
.amaprilew; οὐκ ἄρα οὐδὲ τὸ σύστημα τῶν λημ- 

/ / 3 / / ? 9h ε , \ x 
μάτων μόνον ἀπόδειξίς ἐστιν. οὐδὲ ἡ εἰδικὴ ἄρα 
3 / ς ’ἦ 7 3 \ 7 [1 > \ 
ἀπόδειξις ὑπόστασιν ἔχει. εἰ δὲ μήτε ἡ εἰδικὴ 
ἀπόδειξις ὑφέστηκε μήτε ἡ γενική, παρὰ δὲ ταύτας 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἐννοεῖν ἀπόδειξιν, ἀνυπόστατός ἐστιν ἡ 
ἀπόδειξις. 

Ww 3 7 A 3 / δι 3 / 

177. “Ere ἐκ τούτων τὸ ἀνυπόστατον τῆς ἀποδείξεως 
ἔνεστιν ὑπομιμνήσκειν. εἶ γὰρ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, 
ἦτοι φαινομένη φαινομένου ἐστὶν ἐκκαλυπτικὴ ἢ 
” 20 2 vy / “A / 
ἄδηλος ἀδήλου ἢ ἄδηλος φαινομένου ἢ φαινομένη 
ἀδήλου" οὐδενὸς δὲ τούτων ἐκκαλυπτιικὴ δύναται 

118 ἐπινοεῖσθαι- ἀνεπινόητος ἄρα ἐστίν. εἰ μὲν γὰρ 
φαινομένη φαινομένου ἐκκαλυπτική ἐστιν, ἔσται 
τὸ ἐκκαλυπτόμενον ἅμα φαινόμενόν τε καὶ ἄδηλον, 
φαινόμενον μὲν ἐπεὶ τοιοῦτον εἶναι ὑπετέθη, ἄδηλον 
δὲ ἐπεὶ δεῦται τοῦ ἐκκαλύψοντος καὶ οὐκ ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ 
¢ f δ᾽ “ἃ ~ 9 Δ ¥ 3 3 3 ‘\ 
ὑποπίπτει ἡμῖν σαφῶς. εἰ δὲ ἄδηλος ἀδήλου, αὐτὴ 

εήσεται τοῦ ἐκκαλύψοντος αὐτὴν καὶ οὐκ ἔσται 

179 ἐκκαλυπτικὴ ἑτέρων, ὅπερ ἀφέστηκε τῆς ἐννοίας 
τῆς ἀποδείξεως. διὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲ ἄδηλος προ- 

7 ὃ PA > > ὃ LAA’ δὲ ᾽ 
δήλου δύναται εἶναι ἀπόδειξις. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ πρό- 
3 4 3 \ \ / > , \ A / 

δηλος ἀδήλου" ἐπεὶ yap πρός τι ἐστίν, τὰ δὲ πρός 
τι ἀλλήλοις συγκαταλαμβάνεται, συγκαταλαμβανό- 
μενον τῇ προδήλῳ ἀποδείξει τὸ ἀποδείκνυσθαι 
λεγόμενον πρόδηλον ἔσται, ὡς περιτρέπεσθαι τὸν 
λόγον καὶ μὴ εὑρίσκεσθαι πρόδηλον τὴν ἀδήλου ἀπο- 


264 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 176-179 


proof to be faulty by reason of redundance. Nor yet 176 

will the system composed of the premisses by itself 

be proof; for who would maintain that a statement 

in the form “ If it is day, it is light ; but in fact it is 

day,” either is an argument or completely expresses 

a piece of reasoning? So then, neither does the 

system of the premisses alone constitute proof. There- 

fore the particular proof has no real existence either. 

But if neither the particular nor the general proof has 

real existence, and besides these one can conceive 

no other proof, then proof is without real existence. 
And it is possible to show the unreality of proof 177 

from these further considerations. If proof exists, 

either as apparent it serves to reveal what is apparent, 

or as non-evident what is non-evident, or as non- 

evident what is apparent, or as apparent what is 

non-evident ; but it cannot be conceived as serving 

to reveal any of these; therefore it is inconceivable. 

For if it as apparent serves to reveal the apparent, 178 

the thing revealed will be at once both apparent and 

non-evident—apparent because it was assumed to be 

such, and non-evident because it needs a revealer 

and is not clearly perceived by us of itself. And if 

as non-evident it reveals the non-evident, it will itself 

need something to reveal it and will not serve to 

reveal other things, which is foreign to the conception 

of proof. And for these reasons neither can there 179 

be a non-evident proof of the pre-evident ; nor yet 

a pre-evident proof of the non-evident; for since 

they are relatives, and relatives are apprehended 

together, that which is said to be proved, being 

apprehended together with its pre-evident proof, will 

be pre-evident, so that the argument is reversed and 

the proof probative of the non-evident is not found 


265 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δεικτικήν. εἰ οὖν μήτε φαινομένη φαινομένου ἐστὶν 

ς 9 7 ? 2 9 7 ᾽ 4 

ἡ ἀπόδειξις μήτε ἄδηλος ἀδήλου μήτε ἄδηλος προ- 

δήλου μήτε πρόδηλος ἀδήλου, παρὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲν 

εἶναι λέγουσιν, λεκτέον μηδὲν εἶναι τὴν ἀπόδειξιν. 
\ 4 3 “a / 7 

180 Πρὸς τούτοις κἀκεῖνο λεκτέον. διαπεφώνηται 

περὶ τῆς ἀποδείξεως: οἵ μὲν γὰρ μηδὲ εἶναι λέγουσιν 
3 / ς ν \ Ὁ > 7 ¢ \ 

αὐτήν, ws ot μηδὲν ὅλως εἶναι φάσκοντες, ot δὲ 

εἶναι, ὡς οἱ πολλοὶ τῶν δογματικῶν: ἡμεῖς δὲ μὴ 
~~ εν > N “\ \ > / \ » 

181 μᾶλλον εἶναι αὐτὴν ἢ μὴ εἶναι φαμέν. καὶ ἄλλως 
ἡ ἀπόδειξις δόγμα πάντως περιέχει, περὶ παντὸς 
δὲ δόγματος διαπεφωνήκασιν, ὥστε περὶ πάσης 
ἀποδείξεως ἀνάγκη εἶναι διαφωνίαν. εἰ γὰρ τῆς 
ἀποδείξεως τοῦ εἶναι κενὸν λόγου ἕνεκεν ὁμολογου- 
μένης καὶ τὸ εἶναι κενὸν συνομολογεῖται, δῆλον 
ὅτι οἱ ἀμφισβητοῦντες περὶ τοῦ εἶναι κενὸν Kat 
περὶ τῆς ἀποδείξεως αὐτοῦ ἀμφισβητοῦσιν: καὶ 
περὲ τῶν ἄλλων δογμάτων, ὧν εἰσὶν at ἀποδείξεις, 
6 αὐτὸς λόγος. πᾶσα τοίνυν ἀπόδειξις ἀμφισο- 
βητεῖται καὶ ἐν διαφωνίᾳ ἐστίν. 

18. Ἐπεὶ οὖν ἄδηλός ἐστιν ἡ ἀπόδειξις διὰ τὴν δια- 
φωνίαν τὴν περὶ αὐτῆς (τὰ γὰρ διάφωνα, καθὸ 
διαπεφώνηται, ἄδηλά ἐστιν), οὐκ ἔστιν ἐξ ἑαυτῆς 

“-- > > 5 > / 3 / Cc A / 
προῦπτος ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἀποδείξεως ὀφείλει ἡμῖν συνίστα- 
σθαι. ἡ οὖν ἀπόδειξις δι’ ἧς κατασκευάζεται ἡ 
ἀπόδειξις, ὁμολογουμένη μὲν καὶ προῦπτος οὐκ 
ἔσται (ζητοῦμεν γὰρ viv εἰ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ὅλως), 
διαφωνουμένη δὲ καὶ ἄδηλος οὖσα δεήσεται ἀπο- 

/ 4 3 ’ 3, \ 7 > la 
delEews ἄλλης, κἀκείνη ἄλλης, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. 


᾿ 





α ἢ, 6. is real, as opposed to phenomenal; so Xenophanes, 
Xeniades, Gorgias, cf. § 18. 

> For this Sceptic formula cf. i. 188. 

¢ The Epicurean proof of Void ran thus: “If motion 


266 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 179-182 


to be pre-evident. If, therefore, proof is neither 
apparent of the apparent, nor non-evident of the 
non-evident, nor non-evident of the pre-evident, nor 
pre-evident of the non-evident, and besides these, as 
they say, there is no other alternative, then we 
must declare that proof is nothing. 

Furthermore, there is this also to be said. Proof 180 
is a matter of controversy ; for some declare that it 
does not even exist, as do those who assert that 
nothing at all exists,* but others, including the 
majority of the Dogmatists, that it does exist; and 
we affirm that it is “no more’’® existent than non- 
existent. And besides, proof always contains a 181 
dogma, and they axe in dispute about every dogma, 
so that there must necessarily be dispute about every 
proof. For if (for the sake of argument) when the 
proof for the existence of void is accepted the exist- 
ence of void is likewise accepted,° it is plain that 
those who dispute the existence of void dispute its 
proof also ; and the same argument applies to all the 
other dogmas with which the proofs are concerned. 
Therefore every proof is questioned and is in dispute. 

Since, then, proof is non-evident, owing to the 182 
controversy which exists concerning it (for things 
controverted, in so far as controverted, are non- 
evident), its existence is not self-evident but needs 
to be established for us by proof. The proof, then, 
by which proof is established will not be evident and 
agreed (for we are now inquiring whether proof in 
general exists), and being thus in dispute and non- 
evident it will need another proof, and this again a 
third, and so on ad infinitum. But it is impossible to 


exists, Void exists; but motion does exist; therefore Void 
exists.” Cf. § 245, Adv. Log. ii. 329 ff. 
267 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀδύνατον δὲ ἄπειρα ἀποδεῖξαι" ἀδύνατον ἄρα παρα- 
στῆσαι ὅτι ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις. 

18. ᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐδὲ διὰ σημείου δύναται ἐκκαλύπτεσθαι. 
ζητουμένου γὰρ τοῦ εἰ ἔστι σημεῖον, καὶ ἀποδείξεως 
τοῦ σημείου δεομένου πρὸς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ ὕπαρξιν, ὃ 
δι’ ἀλλήλων εὑρίσκεται τρόπος, τῆς μὲν ἀποδείξεως 
σημείου δεομένης, τοῦ δὲ σημείου πάλιν ἀπο- 
δείξεως" ὅπερ ἄτοπον. διὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲ ἐπι- 
κρῖναι δυνατόν ἐστι τὴν περὶ τῆς ἀποδείξεως 
διαφωνίαν, ἐπεὶ χρήζει μὲν κριτηρίου ἡ ἡ ἐπίκρισις, 
ζητήσεως δὲ οὔσης περὶ τοῦ εἰ ἔστι κριτήριον, ὡς 
παρεστήσαμεν, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἀποδείξεως τοῦ 
κριτηρίου δεομένου τῆς δεικνυούσης ὅτι ἔστι τι 
κριτήριον, ὁ διάλληλος τρόπος τῆς ἀπορίας εὑρί- 

184 σκεται πάλιν. εἰ οὖν μήτε δι᾽ ἀποδείξεως μήτε 
διὰ σημείου μήτε διὰ κριτηρίου ἔστιν ὑπομνῆσαι 
ὅτι ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἐξ ἑαυτῆς πρόδηλός 
ἐστιν, ὡς παρεστήσαμεν, ἀκατάληπτον ἔσται εἰ 
ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις. διὰ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ ἀνύπαρκτος 
ἔσται ἡ ἀπόδειξις" νενόηται μὲν γὰρ σὺν τῷ ἀπο- 
δεικνύναι, ἀποδεικνύναν δὲ οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο μὴ 
καταλαμβανομένη. διόπερ οὐδὲ ἀπόδειξις ἔσται. 

135 Tatra μὲν ws ἐν ὑποτυπώσει καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἀπό- 
δειξιν ἀρκέσει λελέχθαι. οἱ δὲ δογματικοὶ τούναν - 
τίον κατασκευάζοντές φασιν ὅτι ἤτοι ἀποδεικτικοί 
εἰσιν οὗ κατὰ τῆς ἀποδείξεως ἠρωτημένοι λόγοι ἢ 
οὐκ ἀποδεικτικοί. καὶ εἰ μὲν οὐκ ἀποδεικτικοΐί, 
οὐ δύνανται δεικνύναι ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ ἀπόδειξις" εἰ 
δὲ ἀποδεικτικοί εἰσιν, αὐτοὶ οὗτοι τὴν ὑπόστασιν 


----ν 


« Cf. 88 104 ff., 121. 
> Cf. 88 48 ff. supra. ¢ Cf. 88 144 supra. 


268 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 182--18ὅ 


prove an infinite series ; therefore it is impossible to 
show that proof exists. 

But neither can it be revealed by means of a sign. 183 
For since it is a matter of inquiry whether sign 
exists, and since the sign needs proof to ensure its 
reality, we find ourselves involved in circular reason- 
ing—the proof requiring a sign, and the sign in turn 
a proof; which is absurd. And for these reasons 
neither is it possible to decide the controversy re- 
garding proof, seeing that the decision requires a 
criterion, but—because it is a matter of inquiry, as 
we have shown,® whether a criterion exists, and con- 
sequently the criterion needs a proof showing the 
existence of a criterion—we are again involved in 
the perplexity of circular reasoning. If, then, neither 184 
by proof nor by sign nor by criterion it is possible to 
show that proof exists, and it is not evident of itself 
either, as we have shown,’ then it will be non-appre- 
hensible whether proof exists. Consequently, proof 
will also be unreal; for it is conceived together with 
the act of proving, and were it not apprehended it 
would be unable to prove.4 Wherefore proof will not 
exist. 

Thus much it will be enough to say by way of 185 
outline and in criticism of proof. The Dogmatists, 
however, maintaining the opposite view assert that 
the arguments propounded against proof are either 
probative or not probative; and if they are not 
probative, they are incapable of showing that proof 
does not exist; while if they are probative, they 

ὦ 2,6. if “ proof’? is non-apprehensible it must also be 
unreal or non-existent, because non-apprehensible ‘‘ proof” 
is incapable of “‘ proving’’ anything, and ‘‘ proof’’ apart 
from “ proving ’’ is inconceivable—the ‘‘ conception ’”’ of the 
one necessarily implying the other. 


269 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


186 τῆς ἀποδείξεως ἐκ περιτροπῆς, εἰσάγουσιν. ὅθεν 
καὶ τοιοῦτον συνερωτῶσι λόγον" “ei ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, 
ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις" εἰ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, ἐ ἔστιν ἀπό- 
δειξις" ἦτοι δὲ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπό- 
δειξις- ἔστιν ἄρα ἀπόδειξις." ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς αὐτῆς 
δυνάμεως καὶ τοῦτον ἐρωτῶσι τὸν λόγον" " “τὸ τοῖς 
ἀντικειμένοις. ἑπόμενον οὐ μόνον ἀληθές ἐ ἐστιν ἀλλὰ 
καὶ ἀναγκαῖον: ἀντίκειται δὲ ταῦτα ἀλλήλοις 
‘oy 3 / 3 7 3 7 ? e ¢ 

ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις---οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, ὧν ἐκα- 

? > “ἌΝ \ S > 7 "“ »” 
τέρῳ ἀκολουθεῖ τὸ εἶναι ἀπόδειξιν: ἔστιν ἄρα 
ἀπόδειξις. 

187 “Eveore μὲν οὖν πρὸς ταῦτα ἀντιλέγειν, οἷον 
γοῦν, ἐπεὶ μὴ νομίζομέν τινα λόγον εἶναι ἀποδεικ- 
τικόν, καὶ τοὺς κατὰ τῆς ἀποδείξεως λόγους οὐ 

/ A > \ εν 3 A / 
πάντως φαμὲν ἀποδεικτικοὺς εἶναι ἀλλὰ φαΐνεσθαι 
Cc oA 7 ¢ \ \ > 3 > ἢ > AN 
ἡμῖν πιθανούς- of δὲ πιθανοὶ οὐκ ἐξ ἀνάγκης εἰσὶν 
3 \ 
ἀποδεικτικοί. εἰ δὲ dpa Kat ἀποδεικτικοί εἰσιν, 
Ψ ᾿] ᾽ὔ \ 3 o~ 
ὅπερ ov διαβεβαιούμεθα, πάντως καὶ ἀληθεῖς. 
> “ “ἄὟ 
ἀληθεῖς δέ εἰσι λόγοι δι᾽ ἀληθῶν ἀληθὲς συνάγοντες" 
> “-- 3 7 > 3 - φ 3 7 εν f 
οὐκοῦν ἀληθής ἐστιν αὐτῶν ἡ ἐπιφορά. ἦν δέ ye 
. ce ? 3) La > / 9? 3 \ Ld 37 
αὕτη “ οὐκ ἔστιν ἄρα ἀπόδειξις᾽᾽- ἀληθὲς ἄρα ἔστι 
\ ¢¢ > 3 9 ὔ Σ)» 3 o~ / 
188 τὸ ““ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ᾿᾿ ἐκ περιτροπῆς. δύναν- 
Α ξ \ ? \ \ / 
ται δὲ ot λόγοι καὶ καθάπερ τὰ καθαρτικὰ φάρ- 
μακα ταῖς ἐν τῷ σώματι ὑποκειμέναις ὕλαις ἑαυτὰ 
συνεξάγει, οὕτω καὶ αὐτοὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις λόγοις τοῖς 
ἀποδεικτικοῖς εἶναι λεγομένοις καὶ ἑαυτοὺς συμ- 
περιγράφειν. τοῦτο “γὰρ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπεμφαῖνον, 
9 \ 
ἐπεὶ Kal ἡ φωνὴ αὕτη ἡ “᾿ οὐδέν ἐστιν aAnbés”’ 





@ Lit. ‘‘ reversal’’ of the argument; οὐ § 128, Adv. Log. 
li. 463. 


270 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 185-188 


themselves involve the reality of proof by self- 
refutation.* Hence also they propound an argument 188 
in this form®: “If proof exists, proof exists ;, if 
proof exists not, proof exists ; but proof either exists 
or exists not; therefore proof exists.’’ With the 
same intention they propound also this argument : 
‘“ That which follows logically from contradictories is 
not only true but necessary; ‘proof exists’ and 
‘proof exists not’ are contradictories, and the 
existence of proof follows from each of them ; there- 
fore proof exists.”’ 

Now to this we may reply, for instance, that, because 127 
we do not believe that any argument is probative, 
we do not assert either that the arguments against 
proof are absolutely probative but that they appear 
to us plausible; but those that are plausible are 
not necessarily probative. Yet if they actually are 
probative (which we do not positively affirm) they 
certainly are also true. And true arguments are 
those which deduce what is true by means of true 
premisses ; wherefore their inference is true. Now 
the inference was this—‘ therefore proof does not 
exist’; therefore the statement “ proof does not 
exist ’’ is true by reversing the argument. And just 1g 
as purgative medicines expel themselves together 
with the substances already present in the body, so 
these arguments are capable of cancelling themselves 
along with the other arguments which are said to be 
probative. Nor is this preposterous, since in fact 


® Cf. § 131 for this hypothetical syllogism with double 
major premiss. Here, as there, the Dogmatists argue that 
the Sceptics’ proof that ‘‘ proof exists not”’ refutes itself, the 
very proof they employ being itself an “ existent ’’ proof. 

ὁ Cf. i. 206, Adv. Log. ii. 480. 


271 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


> / fan) 3» tA > ἴω > \ \ 
οὐ μόνον τῶν ἄλλων ἕκαστον ἀναιρεῖ, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
ἑαυτὴν ἐκείνοις συμπεριτρέπει. 
Ὅ τε λόγος οὗτος δύναται δείκνυσθαι ἀσύνακτος 
‘el ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις" εἰ οὐκ ἔστιν 
3 ὔ 32) 3 / tla \ 37 κλ % 
ἀπόδειξις, ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις" ἤτοι δὲ ἔστιν ἢ οὐκ 
3 \ 
ἔστιν: ἔστιν apa,’ Kat διὰ πλειόνων μέν, ws δὲ 
\ - “~ 
πρὸς TO παρὸν ἀρκούντως διὰ τοῦδε τοῦ ἐπιχειρή- 
[ΟῚ > 
189 ματος. εἰ ὑγιές ἐστι TO συνημμένον τοῦτο “᾿ εἰ 
3 3 ’ 37 > / 2) a \ 2 , 
ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, δεῖ TO ἀντικεί- 
~ “ 7 
μενον τοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ λήγοντος, τουτέστι τὸ “‘ οὐκ 
δ 3 / 22 7 m Cb 3 / a). 
ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, μάχεσθαι τῷ “᾿ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ᾿᾿" 
τοῦτο γάρ ἐστι τοῦ συνημμένου τὸ ἡγούμενον. 
> 
ἀδύνατον δέ ἐστι κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς, συνημμένον ὑγιὲς 
εἶναι ἐκ μαχομένων ἀξιωμάτων. συνεστώς. τὸ μὲν 
9 
γὰρ συνημμένον ἐπαγγέλλεται ὄντος τοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ 
Φ 
ἡγουμένου εἶναι καὶ τὸ λῆγον, τὰ δὲ μαχόμενα 
¢ 
τοὐναντίον, ὄντος τοῦ ἑτέρου αὐτῶν ὁποιουδήποτε 
ἀδύνατον εἶναι τὸ λοιπὸν ὑπάρχειν. ὄντος dpa 
ὑγιοῦς τοῦδε τοῦ συνημμένου “ εἰ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, 
ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ᾿᾿ οὐ δύναται ὑγιὲς εἶναι τοῦτο τὸ 
la 
συνημμένον “ei οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, ἔστιν ἀπό- 
190 δειξις.᾿ πάλιν δ᾽ αὖ συγχωρούντων ἡμῶν Kal? 
εὺ 
ὑπόθεσιν ὑγιὲς εἶναι τόδε τὸ συνημμένον “ εἰ οὐκ 
w 3 7 " > / a? / 
ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, δύναται συν- 
/ \ ¢¢ > ἡ > / +} m ¢¢ > "ἢ, 
υπάρχειν τὸ “᾿ εἰ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ᾿ τῷ “᾿ οὐκ ἔστιν 
9 / 4) > \ ’ 7; « / 3 
ἀπόδειξις. εἰ δὲ δύναται αὐτῷ συνυπάρχειν, οὐ 
~ 3 Ld lf 
μάχεται αὐτῷ. ev dpa τῷ “εἰ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, 
wv 3 / 22 ᾽ 
ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ᾿᾿ συνημμένῳ οὐ μάχεται τὸ ἀντι- 
/ ~ > ~ ~ ~ 
κείμενον τοῦ ev αὐτῷ λήγοντος TH ἐν αὐτῷ 
ε ν Ld \ ~ 
ἡγουμένῳ, ὥστε οὐκ ἔσται ὑγιὲς πάλιν τοῦτο TO 
> / ~ 
συνημμένον, ἐκείνου κατὰ συγχώρησιν ws ὑγιοῦς 
\ “- 
191 τιθεμένου. μὴ μαχομένου δὲ τοῦ “ οὐκ ἔστιν 
272 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 188-191 


the saying “ nothing is true ” not only refutes every 
other saying but also nullifies itself as well. 

And as regards this argument—“ If proof exists, 
proof exists; if proof does not exist, proof exists ; 
but it either exists or exists not ; therefore it exists ”’ 
—there are a number of ways by which it can be 
shown to be inconclusive, but for the moment the 
following method may suffice. If the hypothetical 189 
premiss “‘ If proof exists, proof exists”’ is valid, the 
contradictory of its consequent, namely “proof does 
not exist,’’ must conflict with “ proof exists,’’ for this 
is the antecedent of the hypothetical premiss. But, 
according to them, it is impossible for a hypothetical 
premiss to be valid when composed of conflicting 
clauses. For the hypothetical premiss promises 
that when its antecedent is true its consequent is 
also true, whereas conflicting clauses contrariwise 
promise that if either one of them is true the other 
cannot possibly be true. If therefore the premiss 
“If proof exists, proof exists ”’ is valid, the premiss 
“If proof exists not, proof exists’ cannot be valid. 
And again, conversely, if we grant by way of 190 
assumption that the premiss “If proof exists not, 
proof exists’ is valid, then the clause “If proof 
exists ’’ can co-exist with “ proof exists not.” But if 
it can co-exist with it, it is not in conflict with it. 
Therefore, in the premiss “If proof exists, proof 
exists,’ the contrary of its consequent is not in 
conflict with its antecedent, so that, conversely, 
this premiss will not be valid, as the former was 
posited, by agreement, as valid. And as the clause 191 
“proof exists ποὺ " is not in conflict with “ proof 


VOL. I ἣν 273 


198 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀπόδειξις ᾿᾿ τῷ “᾿ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις ᾿ οὐδὲ τὸ διεζευγ- 
3, ι 
μένον ὑγιὲς ἔσται τὸ “row ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις 7 
f 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις᾽᾽- τὸ yap ὑγιὲς διεζευγμένον 
σι a \ \ 
ἐπαγγέλλεται ἕν τῶν ἐν αὐτῷ ὑγιὲς εἶναι, τὸ δὲ 
λ \ a\ \ λ A 58 av on \ , Ἃ 
οὐποὸν Ἢ τὰ Aoura ψεῦδος ἢ ψευδῆ μετὰ μάχης. ἢ 
“ ΄-μ 
εἴπερ ὑγιές ἐστι τὸ διεζευγμένον, πάλιν φαῦλον 
ἢ 
εὑρίσκεται τὸ “εἰ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπόδειξις, ἔστιν 
ἀπόδειξις ᾿᾿ συνημμένον, ἐκ μαχομένων συνεστώς. 
οὐκοῦν ἀσύμφωνά τέ ἐστι καὶ ἀλλήλων ἀναιρετικὰ 
τὰ ἐν τῷ λόγῳ τῷ προειρημένῳ λήμματα: διόπερ 
3 ᾽» φ A ¢ / 3 3 δὲ id 2 A θ ~ 
οὐκ ἐστιν ὑγιὴς 6 λόγος. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ὅτι ἀκολουθεῖ 
Tt τοῖς ἀντικειμένοις δύνανται δεικνύναι, μὴ ἔχοντες 
κριτήριον ἀκολουθίας, ὡς ἐπελογισάμεθα. 
~ \ 
Ταῦτα δὲ ἐκ περιουσίας λέγομεν. εἰ γὰρ πιθανοὶ 
μέν εἰσιν ot ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀποδείξεως λόγοι (ἔστωσαν 
7 θ 4 δὲ \ ¢ ι 2 / λ / 
yap), πιθαναὶ δὲ καὶ ai πρὸς τὴν ἀπόδειξιν λεγό- 
μεναι ἐπιχειρήσεις, ἐπέχειν ἀνάγκη καὶ περὶ τῆς 
> ’ \ “~ > 9 7) a \ Ἂ 
ἀποδείξεως, μὴ μᾶλλον εἶναι ἀπόδειξιν ἢ μὴ εἶναι 
λέγοντας. 


1Δ΄, -- ΠΕΡῚ SYTAAOTISMON 

Διὸ καὶ περὶ τῶν θρυλουμένων συλλογισμῶν ἴσως 
περιττόν ἐστι διεξιέναι, τοῦτο μὲν συμπεριτρεπο- 
μένων αὐτῶν τῇ ὑπάρξει τῆς ἀποδείξεως (δῆλον 
γὰρ ὅτι ἐκείνης μὴ οὔσης οὐδὲ ἀποδεικτικὸς λόγος 
χώραν ἔχει), τοῦτο δὲ καὶ δυνάμει διὰ τῶν ἔμ- 
προσθεν ἡμῖν λελεγμένων ἀντειρηκότων ἡμῶν πρὸς 
αὐτούς, ὅτε περὶ τῆς παρολκῆς διαλεγόμενοι μέθ- 
οδόν τινα ἐλέγομεν δι’ ἧς ἐνδέχεται δεικνύναι ὅτι 





“568 88 145 ff. 
> Cf. 88 159-162 against the Stoics, and 163-166 against 
the Peripatetics. 


274 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 191--198 


exists,” the disjunctive “ Either proof exists or 
eproof exists not ”’ will not be valid; for the valid 
disjunctive promises that one of its clauses is valid, 
but the other or others false and contradictory. 
Or else, if the disjunctive be valid, the hypothetical 
premiss ‘If proof exists not, proof exists’ is, in 
turn, found to be fallacious, as composed of conflicting 
clauses. So then the premisses in the foregoing 
argument are discordant and mutually destructive ; 
wherefore the argument is not valid. And further, 
they are unable even to show that anything follows 
logically from the contradictories, since, as we have 
argued,” they possess no criterion of logical con- 
sequence or deduction. 

But this discussion is, in fact, superfluous. For if, 
on the one hand, the arguments in defence of proof 
are (let it be granted) plausible, while, on the other 
hand, the criticisms directed against proof are also 
plausible, then we must necessarily suspend judge- 
ment concerning proof also, and declare that proof is 
“no more ” existent than non-existent. 


Cuapter XIV.—Concernine SYLLOGISMS 


So then it is also superfluous, perhaps, to discuss 
in detail the much vaunted “ syllogisms,”’ since, for 
one thing, they are included in the refutation of the 
existence of “ proof” (for it is plain that if this is 
non-existent there is no place either for probative 
argument), and for another, we have implicitly con- 
tradicted them in our previous statements, when 
in discussing redundancy ® we mentioned a certain 
method by which it is possible to show that all the 

275 


192 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πάντες of ἀποδεικτικοὶ λόγοι τῶν τε στωικῶν Kal 
τῶν περιπατητικῶν ἀσύνακτοι τυγχάνουσιν ὄντες. 

194 ἐξ ἐπιμέτρου δὲ οὐ χεῖρον ἴσως καὶ ἰδίᾳ περὶ αὐτῶν 
διαλαβεῖν, ἐπεὶ μάλιστα ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς μέγα φρονοῦσιν. 
πολλὰ μὲν οὖν ἔστι λέγειν τὸ ἀνυπόστατον αὐτῶν 
ὑπομιμνήσκοντας" ὡς ἐν ὑποτυπώσει δὲ ἀρκεῖ τῇδε 
τῇ μεθόδῳ χρῆσθαι κατὰ αὐτῶν. λέξω δὲ καὶ νῦν 
περὶ τῶν ἀναποδείκτων- τούτων γὰρ ἀναιρουμένων 
καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ σύμπαντες λόγοι διατρέπονται, τὴν 
ἀπόδειξιν τοῦ συνάγειν am αὐτῶν ἔχοντες. 

195 Ἢ πρότασις τοίνυν αὕτη “᾿ πᾶς ἄνθρωπος ζῶον ᾿᾿ 
ἐκ τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἐπαγωγικῶς βεβαιοῦται: ἐκ 
γὰρ τοῦ Σωκράτην ἄνθρωπον ὄντα καὶ ζῶον εἶναι, 
καὶ Πλάτωνα ὁμοίως καὶ Δίωνα καὶ ἕκαστον τῶν 
κατὰ μέρος, δυνατὸν εἶναι δοκεῖ διαβεβαιοῦσθαι 
καὶ ὅτι πᾶς ἄνθρωπος ζῶόν ἐστιν, ὡς εἰ κἂν ἕν 
τι τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἐναντιούμενον φαΐνοιτο τοῖς 
ἄλλοις, οὐκ ἔστιν ὑγιὴς ἡ καθόλου πρότασις, οἷον 
γοῦν, ἐπεὶ τὰ μὲν πλεῖστα τῶν ζώων τὴν κάτω 
γένυν κινεῖ, μόνος δὲ ὃ κροκόδειλος τὴν ἄνω, οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἀληθὴς ἡ “᾿πᾶν ζῶον τὴν κάτω γένυν Kiet” 

196 πρότασις. ὅταν οὖν λέγωσι “ πᾶς ἄνθρωπος ζῶον, 
Σωκράτης δ᾽ ἄνθρωπος, Σωκράτης ἄρα ζῶον," 
ἐκ τῆς καθόλου προτάσεως τῆς “ πᾶς ἄνθρωπος 
ζῶον ᾿᾿ τὴν κατὰ μέρος πρότασιν συνάγειν βουλό- 
μενοι, τὴν “᾿ Σωκράτης ἄρα Cdov,” ἣ δὴ βεβαιω- 
τικὴ τῆς καθολικῆς προτάσεώς ἐστι κατὰ τὸν 
ἐπαγωγικὸν τρόπον, ὡς ὑπεμνήσαμεν, εἰς τὸν 


@ For the phrase ἐξ ἐπιμέτρου, “‘into the bargain,” cf. ὃ 47 
supra. 
276 


- 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 193-196 


probative arguments of the Stoics and the Peripa- 
tetics are really inconclusive. Yet perhaps it will not 194 
be amiss to go further“ and deal with them separately, 
especially since these thinkers pride themselves upon 
them. Now there is much that one can say by way 
of suggesting their unreality, but in an outline sketch 
it is sufficient to treat of them by the method which 
follows. And I will deal at present with the axiom- 
atic ὃ arguments ; for if these are destroyed all the 
rest of the arguments are overthrown as well, since 
it is from these that they derive the proof of their 
deductions. 

Well then, the premiss “‘ Every man is an animal ” 195 
is established by induction from the particular in- 
stances ; for from the fact that Socrates, who is a 
man, is also an animal, and Plato likewise, and Dion 
and each one of the particular instances,° they think 
it possible to assert that every man is an animal; 
so that if even a single one of the particulars should 
apparently conflict with the rest the universal premiss 
is not valid; thus, for example, when most animals 
move the lower jaw, and only the crocodile the upper,# 
the premiss ‘‘ Every animal moves the lower jaw ”’ is 
not true. So whenever they argue “ Every man is an 196 
animal, and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is 
an animal,’ proposing to deduce from the universal 
proposition “ Every man is an animal ”’ the particular 
proposition “‘ Socrates therefore is an animal,” which 
in fact goes (as we havementioned) to establish by way 
of induction the universal proposition, they fallinto the 


δ Or “non-demonstrable,” including here categorical 
syllogisms as well as those mentioned in § 157 supra. 
¢ Cf. Aristot. Anal. pr. ii. 23 on logical “ induction.” 
¢ Cf. Hdt. ii. 68; Aristot. Hist. An. iii. 7. 
277 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


διάλληλον ἐμπίπτουσι λόγον, τὴν μὲν καθολικὴν 
πρότασιν ou ἑκάστης τῶν κατὰ μέρος « ἐπαγωγικῶς 
βεβαιοῦντες, τὴν δὲ κατὰ μέρος » ἐκ τῆς καθολικῆς 


197 συλλογιστικῶς. “παραπλησίως δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ 


198 


199 


τοιούτου λόγου “᾿ Σωκράτης ἄνθρωπος, οὐδεὶς δὲ 
ἄνθρωπος τετράπους, Σιωκράτης ἄρα οὐκ ἔστι 
τετράπους ᾿ τὴν μὲν “ οὐδεὶς ἀνθρωπος τετρά- 
πους ᾿᾿ πρότασιν ἐκ τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἐπαγωγικῶς 
βουλόμενοι βεβαιοῦν, ἑκάστην δὲ τῶν κατὰ μέρος 
ἐκ τῆς “᾿οὐδεὶς ἄνθρωπος τετράπους ᾿᾿συλλογί- 
ζεσθαι θέλοντες, τῇ κατὰ τὸν διάλληλον ἀπορίᾳ 
περιπίπτουσιν. 

Ὁμοίως δὲ ἐφοδευτέον καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς τῶν 
παρὰ τοῖς περιπατητικοῖς λεγομένων ἀναποδείκ- 
των. ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς τοιούτους “εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, 
φῶς ἔστιν ᾽᾿- τό τε γὰρ “᾿ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστι " 
συνακτικόν ἐστιν, ὡς φασί, τοῦ “ φῶς ἔστι, τό 

“φῶς gore” μετὰ τοῦ “᾿ἡμέρα ἔ ἔστι ᾿ βεβαιωτι- 
κόν ἐστι τοῦ “ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστιν ᾽᾽" οὐ γὰρ 
ἂν ὑγιὲς ἐνομίσθη τὸ προειρημένον συνημμένον 
εἶναι, εἰ μὴ πρότερον τεθεώρητο συνυπάρχον ἀεὶ 
τὸ “᾿φῶς ἔστι τῷ “ ἡμέρα ἔστιν.᾽᾿ εἰ οὖν δεῖ 
προκατειληφέναι ὅτι ἡμέρας οὔσης “πάντως ἔστι 
καὶ φῶς εἰς τὸ συνθεῖναι τὸ “᾿ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς 
ἔστι ᾿᾿ συνημμένον, διὰ δὲ τοῦ συνημμένου τούτου 
συνάγεται τὸ [ὅτι] ἡμέρας οὔσης φῶς εἶναι, τὴν 
μὲν συνύπαρξιν τοῦ ἡμέραν εἶναι καὶ τοῦ φῶς εἶναι 
συνάγοντος τοῦ “ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἔστι ᾿᾿ συνημ- 
μένου ὅσον ἐπὶ τῷ mpoKeyieres ἀναποδείκτῳ, τὸ 
δὲ συνημμένον τῆς συνυπάρξεως τῶν προειρημένων 

1 <éraywyikas βεβαιοῦντες, τὴν δὲ κατὰ μέρος» supplevi: 
lacunam indic. Bek 
278 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 196-199 


error of circular reasoning, since they are establishing 
the universal proposition inductively by means of each 
of the particulars and deducing the particular proposi- 
tion from the universal syllogistically. So likewise in 197 
the case of such an argument as “ Socrates is aman, but 
no man is four-footed, therefore Socrates is not four- 
footed,’ by proposing to establish the premiss “ No 
man is four-footed ” by induction from the particular 
instances while wishing to deduce each several parti- 
cular from the premiss “‘ No man is four-footed,”’ they 
become involved in the perplexity of the circular 
fallacy. 

And a similar criticism may be passed upon the 198 
rest of the “ axiomatic’ arguments, as they are 
called by the Peripatetics ; and also upon arguments 
in the form “ If it is day, it is light.”’ For the pro- 
position “‘Ifitis day, it is light ’’ is capable, they say, 
of proving that “it is light,” and the clause “ it is 
light” in conjunction with “it is day’”’ serves to 
establish the proposition “If it is day, it is light.” 
For the hypothetical premiss stated above would not 
have been considered valid unless the constant co- 
existence of “it is light” with “it is day’ had already 
been observed. If, then, one has to apprehend 199 
beforehand that when there is day there certainly 
is light also, in order to construct the hypothetical 
premiss “If it is day, it is light,’ while by means 
of this premiss we deduce that when it is day it 
is light, the co-existence of the being of day and of 
night being proved (so far as depends on the axiom- 
atic argument before us) by the premiss “If it 
is day, it is light,”” and that premiss in turn being 
established by the co-existence of the facts aforesaid, 


279 


200 


201 


202 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


βεβαιούσης, κἀνταῦθα ὁ διάλληλος τρόπος τῆς 
ἀπορίας ἀνατρέπει τὴν ὑπόστασιν τοῦ λόγου. 
Ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ τοιούτου λόγου “εἰ 
ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἐ ἔστιν" οὐχὶ δὲ φῶς ἐ ἔστιν" οὐκ ἄρα 
ἡμέρα ἔστιν. ἐκ μὲν γὰρ τοῦ μὴ ἄνευ φωτὸς 
ἡμέραν θεωρεῖσθαι ὑγιὲς ἂν εἶναι νομισθείη τὸ “᾿ εἰ 
ἡμέρα ἔστι, φῶς ἐ ἔστι ᾿᾿ συνημμένον, ὡς εἴγε καθ᾽ 
ὑπόθεσιν ἡμέρα μὲν φανείη ποτὲ φῶς δὲ μή. 
ψεῦδος. ἂν λεχθείη τὸ συνημμένον εἶναι" ὅσον δὲ 
ἐπὶ τῷ προειρημένῳ ἀναποδείκτῳ τὸ μὴ εἶναι 
ἡμέραν φωτὸς μὴ ὄντος διὰ τοῦ “ εἰ ἡμέρα ἔστι, 
φῶς ἔστι " συνάγεται, ὥστε ἑκάτερον αὐτῶν πρὸς 
τὴν ἑαυτοῦ βεβαίωσιν χρήζειν͵ τοῦ τὸ ἕτερον βε- 
βαίως εἰλῆφθαι, ἵ ἵνα δι᾿ αὐτοῦ πιστὸν γένηται κατὰ 
τὸν διάλληλον τρόπον. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐκ τοῦ μὴ δύνα- 
σθαι ἀλλήλοις συνυπάρχειν τινά, οἷον ἡμέραν, εἶ 
τύχοι, καὶ νύκτα, τό τε ἀποφατικὸν τῆς συμπλοκῆς, 
τὸ “᾿οὐχ ἡμέρα ἔστι καὶ νὺξ ἔστι,᾽ καὶ τὸ δι- 
εζευγμένον, τὸ “᾿ ἦτοι ἡμέρα ἔστιν ἢ νὺξ ἔστιν, " 
ὑγυῆ νομίζοιτο ἂν εἶναι. ἀλλὰ τὸ μὴ συνυπάρχειν 
αὐτὰ βεβαιοῦσθαι νομίζουσι διά τε τοῦ ἀποφατικοῦ 
τῆς συμπλοκῆς καὶ τοῦ διεζευγμένου, λέγοντες 
οὐχὶ ἡμέρα ἔστι καὶ νὺξ ἔστιν" ἀλλὰ μὴν νὺξ 
ἔστιν" οὐκ ἄρα ἡμέρα ἔστιν. ᾿ἦτοι ἡμέρα ἔστιν 
ἢ νὺξ ἔστιν' ἀλλὰ μὴν νὺξ ἔστιν" οὐκ ἄρα ἡμέρα 
ἔστιν,᾽ a “οὐχὶ δὲ νὺξ Eorw- ἡμέρα ἄρα ἔστιν.᾽ 
ὅθεν ἡμεῖς πάλιν ἐπιλογιζόμεθα ὅτι εἰ μὲν πρὸς 
τὴν βεβαίωσιν τοῦ διεζευγμένου καὶ τοῦ τῆς συμ- 
πλοκῆς ἀποφατικοῦ χρήζομεν τοῦ προκατειληφέναι 
ὅτι τὰ ἐν αὐτοῖς περιεχόμενα ἀξιώματά ἐστιν 
ἀσυνύπαρκτα, τὸ δὲ ἀσυνύπαρκτα ταῦτα εἶναι συν- 


280 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 199-202 


—in this case also the fallacy of circular reasoning 
overthrows the substance of the argument. 

So likewise with an argument in the form “ If it is 200 
day, itis light ; but it is not light ; therefore it is not 
day.”’ For from the fact that we do not observe day 
without light the hypothetical premiss “If it is 
day, it is light ’’ might be considered to be valid ; 
just as if, should day, let us suppose, at some 
time appear, without the appearance of light, the 
premiss would be said to be false; but, so far as 
concerns the axiomatic argument aforesaid, the non- 
existence of day when light is non-existent is proved 
by the premiss “If it is day, it is light,’ so that 
each of these statements needs for its confirmation 
the secure grasp of the other in order thereby to 
become credible by means of circular reasoning. 
Moreover, from the fact that some things are 201 
unable to co-exist—take, for instance, if you like, day 
and night—both the conjunctive 4 negation ‘‘ Not day 
exists and night exists’ and the disjunctive “ Either 
day exists or night exists ’ might be considered to be 
valid. But they consider that their non-co-existence is 
established both by the negative of the conjunctive and 
by the disjunctive, arguing “‘ Not day exists and night 
exists ; but in fact night exists ; day therefore exists 
not’; and “ Hither it is day or it is night; but in 
fact it is night ; therefore it is not day,” or “ it is not 
night, therefore it is ἀν. Whence we argue again 202 
that if for establishing the disjunctive proposition and 
the negative of the conjunctive we require to appre- 
hend beforehand the fact that the judgements they 
contain are incapable of co-existence, while they 
believe that they are deducing this incapacity for 


¢ For the “‘conjunctive”’ or “coupled” premiss see § 158, note. 


281 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἄγειν δοκοῦσι διά τε τοῦ διεζευγμένου Kal τοῦ τῆς 
“A 3 “Ὁ ς 3 3 / 2 ᾽ 
συμπλοκῆς ἀποφατικοῦ, 6 δι’ ἀλλήλων εἰσάγεται 
τρόπος, μὴ δυναμένων ἡμῶν μήτε τοῖς προειρη- 
μένοις τροπικοῖς πιστεύειν ἄνευ τοῦ τὸ ἀσυνύπ- 
αρκτον τῶν ἐν αὐτοῖς περιεχομένων ἀξιωμάτων 
καταλαβεῖν, μήτε τὸ ἀσυνύπαρκτον αὐτῶν δια- 
βεβαιοῦσθαι πρὸ τῆς τῶν συλλογισμῶν διὰ τῶν 
908 τροπικῶν συνερωτήσεως. διόπερ οὐκ ἔχοντες πόθεν 
3 “- ᾽ A \ / la 
ἀρξόμεθα τῆς πίστεως διὰ TO παλίνδρομον, λέξομεν 
μήτε τὸν τρίτον μήτε τὸν τέταρτον μήτε τὸν 
πέμπτον τῶν ἀναποδείκτων ὅσον ἐπὶ τούτοις 
ὑπόστασιν ἔχειν. 
Τοσαῦτα μὲν καὶ περὶ συλλογισμῶν ἐπὶ τοῦ 
παρόντος ἀρκέσει λελέχθαι. 


IH’, —IIEPI ΒΠΑΓΩΓῊΣ 


/ 
204 Εὐπαραίτητον δὲ elvar νομίζω καὶ τὸν περὶ 
> o~ / > \ A \ ἴω 
ἐπαγωγῆς τρόπον. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἀπὸ τῶν κατὰ μέρος 
~ 7 > tans \ / 3, 
πιστοῦσθαι βούλονται δι᾿ αὐτῆς τὸ καθόλου, ἤτοι 
/ ? / 4 “~ 
πάντα ἐπιόντες τὰ KATA μέρος τοῦτο ποιήσουσιν 
κὰν / 3 3 > A 7 > / ¥ ¢ 3 
ἢ τινά. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν τινά, ἀβέβαιος ἔσται ἡ ἐπ- 
~ 3 “~ “~ 
aywyn, ἐνδεχομένου τοῦ ἐναντιοῦσθαι τῷ καθόλου 
τινὰ τῶν παραλειπομένων κατὰ μέρος ἐν τῇ ἐπ- 
“. 3 7 3 / 
αγωγῇ᾽ εἰ δὲ πάντα, ἀδύνατα μοχθήσουσιν, ἀπείρων 
~ A 
ὄντων τῶν κατὰ μέρος Kal ἀπεριορίστων. ὥσθ᾽ 
4 ς / > ? 7 
οὕτως ἑκατέρωθεν, οἶμαι, συμβαίνει σαλεύεσθαι 


τὴν ἐπαγωγήν. 


282 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 202-204 


co-existence by means of both the disjunctive and 
the negative conjunctive, we involve ourselves in 
circular reasoning, seeing that we are unable either 
to give credence to the aforesaid premisses without 
having apprehended the incapacity for co-existence 
of the judgements they contain, or to affirm 
positively that incapacity before concluding the 
syllogisms based on these premisses. Consequently, 203 
as we possess no principle on which to ground belief 
owing to the circular style of the argument, we shall 
declare that, so far as depends on these statements, 
neither the third nor the fourth nor the fifth of the 
‘“ axiomatic ”’ syllogisms * possesses valid substance. 

For the present, then, it will suffice to have said 
thus much concerning syllogisms. 


CuapTerR XV.—Concernine InpucTIoNn 


It is also easy, I consider, to set aside the method 204 
of induction. For, when they propose to establish 
the universal from the particulars by means of induc- 
tion, they will effect this by a review either of all 
or of some of the particular instances. But if they 
review some, the induction will be insecure, since 
some of the particulars omitted in the induction may 
contravene the universal; while if they are to review 
all, they will be toiling at the impossible, since the 
particulars are infinite and indefinite. Thus on both 
grounds, as I think, the consequence is that induction 
is invalidated. 


« For the “five non-demonstrable (or axiomatic) syllog- 
isms ’’ see 88 157-158 supra. 


283 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Is’,—TEPI OPQN 


205 ᾿Αλλὰ καὶ ἐπὶ τῇ περὶ ὅρων δὴ τεχνολογίᾳ μέγα 
φρονοῦσιν of δογματικοί, ἣν τῷ λογικῷ μέρει τῆς 
καλουμένης φιλοσοφίας ἐγκαταλέγουσιν. “φέρε οὖν 
καὶ περὶ ὅρων ὁ tya ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος εἴπωμεν. 

Πρὸς πολλὰ τοΐνυν χρησιμεύειν τοὺς ὅρους τῶν 
δογματικῶν δοκούντων, δύο τὰ ἀνωτάτω κεφάλαια 
<a>" περιληπτικὰ πάσης Tis}? λέγουσιν ἀναγ- 

206 κΚαιότητος αὐτῶν ἴσως εὑρήσεις- ἢ γὰρ ὡς πρὸς 
κατάληψιν ἢ ὡς πρὸς διδασκαλίαν ἐν πᾶσι παρα- 
δεικνύουσι τοὺς ὅρους ἀναγκαίους. ἐὰν οὖν ὑπο- 
μνήσωμεν ὅτι πρὸς οὐδέτερον τούτων χρησιμεύουοι, 
περιτρέψομεν, οἶμαι, πᾶσαν τὴν γεγενημένην περὶ 
αὐτῶν παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς ματαιοπονίαν. 

207 ,«Ἐὐθέως οὖν, εἰ ὁ μὲν ἀγνοῶν τὸ ὁριστὸν οὖχ 
οἷός τέ ἐστι τὸ μὴ γινωσκόμενον αὐτῷ ὁρίσασθαι, 
ὃ δὲ γινώσκων, εἶθ᾽ ὁριζόμενος οὐκ ἐκ τοῦ ὅρου 
τὸ δριστὸν κατείληφεν ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ προκατειλημμένῳ 
τούτῳ τὸν ὅρον ἐπισυντέθεικεν, πρὸς κατάληψιν 
τῶν πραγμάτων ὁ ὅρος οὐκ ἔστιν ἀναγκαῖος. καὶ 
γὰρ ἐπεὶ πάντα μὲν ὁρίζεσθαι θέλοντες καθάπαξ 
οὐδὲν ὁριζόμεθα διὰ τὴν εἰς ἄπειρον ἔκπτωσιν, 
τινὰ δὲ καταλαμβάνεσθαι καὶ δίχα τῶν ὅρων ὁμο- 
λογοῦντες οὐκ ἀναγκαίους πρὸς κατάληψιν τοὺς 
ὅρους ἀποφαίνομεν, καθ᾽ ὃν τρόπον τὰ μὴ ὁρισθέντα 
κατελήφθη δυναμένων ἡμῶν πάντα χωρὶς τῶν 

908 ὅρων καταλαμβάνειν, ἢ καθάπαξ οὐδὲν ὁρισόμεθα 
ἰδιὰ τὴν εἰς ἄπειρον ἔκπτωσιν] ἢ οὐκ ἀναγκαίους 
τοὺς ὅρους ἀποφανοῦμεν. 

1 «ἃ» add. T. 2 [4s] om. Mss. 
“ Cf. § 4 supra. 
284 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 205-208 


Cuapter XVI.—Concerning Derrinirions 


Further, the Dogmatists take great pride in their 205 
systematic treatment of definitions, which they include 
in the logical division of their Philosophical System, 
as they call it. So come and let us now make a few 
observations on definitions. 

Now while the Dogmatists hold that definitions 
have many uses, you will probably find that these fall 
under two main heads which, as they say, include all 
their necessary uses ; for, as they explain, definitions 206 
are necessary in all cases either for apprehension @ or 
for instruction. If, then, we shall show that they are 
of use for neither of these purposes, we shall, I think, 
bring to naught all the labour so vainly spent on them 
by the Dogmatists. 

So then, without preliminary, if, on the one hand, 207 
the man who knows not the object of definition is 
unable to define the object unknown to him, while, 
on the other hand, the man who knows and proceeds 
to define has not apprehended the object from its 
definition but has put together his definition to fit 
the object already apprehended, then the definition 
is not necessary for the apprehension of objects. And 
since, if we propose to define absolutely all things, 
we shall define nothing, because of the regress ad 
infimtum ; while if we allow that some things are 
apprehended even without definitions, we are declar- 
ing that definitions are not necessary for apprehen- 
sion, seeing that we are able to apprehend all things 
apart from definitions in the same way as the un- 
defined objects were apprehended,—then we shall 208 
either define absolutely nothing or we shall declare 
that definitions are not necessary. 


285 


209 


210 


21} 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Διὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲ πρὸς διδασκαλίαν αὐτοὺς 
εὕροιμεν ἂν ἀναγκαίους: ὡς γὰρ ὃ πρῶτος τὸ 
πρᾶγμα γνοὺς ἔγνω τοῦτο χωρὶς ὅρου, κατὰ τὸ 
παραπλήσιον καὶ ὁ διδασκόμενος αὐτὸ δύναται 
χωρὶς ὅρου διδαχθῆναι. ἔτι ἀπὸ τῶν ὁριστῶν 
ἐπικρίνουσι τοὺς ὅρους, καί φασι μοχθηροὺς ὃ ὅρους 
εἶναι τοὺς “περιέχοντάς τι τῶν μὴ προσόντων τοῖς 
ὁριστοῖς, ἦτοι πᾶσιν ἢ τισίν. διόπερ ὅταν εἴπῃ 
τις τὸν ἄνθρωπον εἶναι ζῶον λογικὸν ἀθάνατον 7 ἢ 
ζῶον λογικὸν θνητὸν γραμματικόν, ὅπου μὲν μη- 
δενὸς ὄντος ἀνθρώπου ἀθανάτου, ὅπου δὲ τινῶν 
μὴ γραμματικῶν ὄντων, φασὶ μοχθηρὸν, εἶναι τὸν 
ὅρον. τάχα μὲν καὶ ἀνεπίκρυτρί εἰσιν οἱ ὅροι διὰ 
τὴν ἀπειρίαν τῶν κατὰ μέρος, ἐξ ὧν ἐπικρίνεσθαι 
ὀφείλουσιν: εἶτα οὐκ ἂν καταληπτικοί τε καὶ δι- 
δακτικοὶ τούτων εἶεν ἐξ ὧν ἐπικρίνονται δηλονότι 
προεπεγνωσμένων, εἴγε ἄρα, καὶ προκατειλημμέ- 
νων. 

Πῶς δὲ οὐκ ἂν εἴη γελοῖον τὸ λέγειν ὡς οἱ ὅροι 
χρησιμεύουσι πρὸς κατάληψιν ἢ διδασκαλίαν ἢ 
σαφήνειαν ὅλως, ἀσάφειαν ἡμῖν ἐπεισκυκλοῦντες 
τοσαύτην; οἷον γοῦν, ἵνα τι καὶ ᾿παίξωμεν, εἴ τις 
παρά του βουλόμενος πυθέσθαι εἰ ἀπήντηται αὐτῷ 
ἄνθρωπος ἐπὶ ἵππου ὀχούμενος καὶ κύνα ἐφελκό- 
μενος, τὴν ἐρώτησιν. οὕτω πουήσαιτο “ὦ ζῶον 
λογικὸν ,»θνητόν, νοῦ καὶ ἐπιστήμης δεκτικόν, 
ἀπήντητό σοι ζῶον γελαστικὸν πλατυώνυχον, 
ἐπιστήμης πολιτικῆς δεκτικόν, ζώῳ θνητῷ χρε- 
μετιστικῷ τὰ σφαιρώματα ἐφηδρακός, ἐφ- 
ελκόμενον ζῶον τετράπουν ὑλακτικόν; ” πῶς οὐκ 
ἂν εἴη καταγέλαστος, εἰς ἀφασίαν οὕτω γνωρίμου 


α Cf. §§ 26, 28 for this definition of Man. 
286 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 208-211 


And for these reasons they are not necessary for 
instruction either, as we shall discover. For just as 
the man who first perceived the object perceived 
it apart from definition, so likewise the man who 
receives instruction about it can be instructed without 
definition. Moreover, they judge the definitions by 209 
the objects defined and declare those definitions to 
be faulty which include any attributes not belonging 
either to all or to some of the objects defined. Hence, 
whenever one states that man is “ a rational immortal 
animal” or “a rational mortal literary animal,”’ 
whereas no man isimmortal, and some are notliterary, 
such a definition they say is faulty. And it may be 210 
also that the definitions do not admit of judgement 
owing to the infinity of the particulars by which they 
ought to be judged; and consequently they will not 
convey apprehension and instruction regarding the 
objects whereby they are judged, which evidently 
have been known beforehand, if at all, and appre- 
hended beforehand. . 

And how could it be other than absurd to assert 
that definitions are of use for apprehension or instruc- 
tion or elucidation of any kind, when they involve us in 
such a fog of uncertainty ? Thus, for instance, to take 211 
a ridiculous case, suppose that one wished to ask 
someone whether he had met a man riding a horse 
and leading a dog and put the question in this form— 
“Ὁ rational mortal animal, receptive of intelligence 
and science, have you met with an animal capable of 
laughter, with broad nails and receptive of political 
science,* with his (posterior) hemispheres seated on a 
mortal animal capable of neighing, and leading a 
four-footed animal capable of barking ? ’—how would 
one be otherwise than ridiculous, in thus reducing the 


287 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


i 3 t 
πράγματος ἐμβαλὼν τὸν ἄνθρωπον διὰ τοὺς 
ὅρους; 

Οὐ ~ » εὺ Α ¢ a > \ / 

ὑκοῦν ἄχρηστον εἶναι TOV ὅρον ὅσον ἐπὶ τούτοις 

212 λεκτέον, εἴτ᾽ οὖν λό iva λέ διὰ f 
κτέον, εἴτ᾽ οὖν λόγος εἶναι λέγοιτο διὰ βραχείας 
7 3 ἢ lal ~ 

ὑπομνήσεως εἰς ἔννοιαν ἡμᾶς ἄγων τῶν ὑὕποτεταγ- 
? a “A / ~ 

μένων ταῖς φωναῖς πραγμάτων, ws δῆλόν ye (οὐ 
/ 3 “ἢ “-» A 4 

yap;) ἐκ τῶν μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἡμῖν εἰρημένων, εἴτε 
4 € 4 > A 
ὄγος ὁ τὸ τί ἦν εἶναι δηλῶν, εἴτε ὃ βούλεταί τις. 

A A 3 ~ 
καὶ yap τί ἐστιν ὁ ὅρος βουλόμενοι παριστᾶν εἰς 
> 4 e 
ἀνήνυτον ἐμπίπτουσι διαφωνίαν, ἣν διὰ τὴν προ- 

f o “~ »- “ 
αίρεσιν τῆς γραφῆς παρίημι νῦν, εἰ καὶ δοκεῖ δια- 
τρέπειν τοὺς ὄρους. 

οσαῦτα μὲν καὶ περὶ ὅρων ἀπόχρη μοι νῦν 


λελέχθαι. 


1Ζ΄. --- ΠΕΡῚ ΔΙΑΤΙΡΕΣΈΩΣ 


21. Ἐπεὶ δέ τινες τῶν δογματικῶν τὴν διαλεκτικὴν 
εἶναί φασιν ἐπιστήμην συλλογιστικὴν ἐπαγωγικὴν 
ὁριστικὴν διαιρετικήν, διελέχθημεν δὲ ἡμεῖς ἤδη 
μετὰ τοὺς περὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου καὶ τοῦ σημείου καὶ 
τῆς ἀποδείξεως λόγους περί τε συλλογισμῶν καὶ 
ἐπαγωγῆς καὶ περὶ ὅρων, οὐκ ἄτοπον ἡγούμεθα 
εἶναι καὶ περὶ διαιρέσεως βραχέα διαλαβεῖν. 
γίνεσθαι τοίνυν τὴν διαίρεσίν φασι τετραχῶς" 7 
γὰρ ὄνομα εἰς σημαινόμενα διαιρεῖσθαι ἢ ὅλον εἰς 
μέρη ἢ γένος εἰς εἴδη ἢ εἶδος εἰς τὰ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον. 

σα The Aristotelian definition of ‘‘ Definition,” the previous 
definition being probably Stoic. 

> The definition of ‘‘ Dialectic,” and also the four kinds of 
“ Division,” here mentioned are given by Alcinous, a second- 
century (a.p.) Eclectic. As used by Plato and Aristotle, 


** Division’? includes only the 3rd and 4th kinds (1,6. 
“logical”? as distinguished from grammatical (§ 214) and 


288 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 211-213 


man to speechlessness concerning so familiar an object 
because of one’s definitions ? 

So then we must declare that, so far as we may 
judge by this, the definition is useless, whether it be 212 
described as “‘ a statement which by a brief reminder 
brings us to a conception of the objects which underlie 
the terms,’’—as is plain (is it not?) from what we 
have said just a moment ago,—or as “ a statement 
declaratory of the essence,” ὦ or what you like. For 
in fact, in their desire to propound a definition of the 
definition they plunge into an endless controversy 
which I now pass over, because of the plan of my 
present treatise, although it seems to overthrow 
definitions. . ; 

So what I have said about definitions is enough 
for the present. 


Cuaptrer XVIJ.—Concerninae Division 


Inasmuch as some of the Dogmatists® affirm that 213 
Dialectic’ is “ἃ science dealing with syllogism, 
induction, definition and division,’ and, after our 
arguments concerning the criterion and the sign and 
proof, we have already discussed syllogisms and 
induction as well as definitions, we deem that it will 
not be amiss to treat shortly of “ division” also. 
Division then, as they allege, is effected in four ways : 
either a name, or word, is divided into its significations, 
or a whole into parts, or a genus into species, or a 


arithmetical (§§ 215-218) division). Logical ‘‘ division” is the 
process of defining a class-name by splitting it up into its 
component parts—the “genus ᾽᾽ into “ species,” the “‘ species” 
into particulars. By it we enumerate the classes of objects 
denoted by the name or term which is “ divided.”’ 


VOL, I U 289 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


id \ 3 \ / 3} 3 [4 / 
ὅτι δὲ οὐδενὸς τούτων ἔστιν ἐπιστήμη διαιρετική, 
ῥᾷάδιον ἴσως ἐπελθεῖν. 


1Η΄.--ΠῈΡῚ ΤῊΣ ΟΝΟΜΑΤῸΣ EIZ ZHMAINOMENA 
ATATPEZEQ2 


214 Εὐθέως οὖν τὰς ἐπιστήμας τῶν φύσει φασὶν 
εἶναι, τῶν θέσει δὲ οὐδαμῶς. καὶ εἰκότως" ἡ μὲν 
γὰρ ἐπιστήμη βέβαιόν τι καὶ ἀμετάπτωτον πρᾶγμα 
εἶναι θέλει, τὰ δὲ θέσει ῥᾳδίαν ἔχει καὶ εὐμετάπτω- 
Tov τὴν μεταβολήν, ταῖς ἐναλλαγαῖς τῶν θέσεων, 
ai εἰσιν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, ἑτεροιούμενα. ἐπεὶ οὖν τὰ ὀνό- 
ματα θέσει σημαΐνει καὶ οὐ φύσει (πάντες γὰρ ἂν 
συνίεσαν πάντα τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν φωνῶν σημαινόμενα, 
ὁμοίως “Ἕλληνές τε καὶ βάρβαροι, πρὸς “τῷ καὶ 
ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν εἶναι τὰ σημαινόμενα οἷς ἂν βουλώμεθα 
ὀνόμασιν ἕτέροις ἀεὶ δηλοῦν τε καὶ σημαίνεω), 
πῶς ἂν δυνατὸν εἴη διαιρετικὴν ὀνόματος εἰς 
σημαινόμενα ἐπιστήμην εἶναι; ἢ πῶς ἐπιστήμη 
σημαινόντων τε καὶ σημαινομένων, ὡς οἴονταί 
τινες, ἡ διαλεκτικὴ δύναυτ᾽ ἂν ὑπάρχειν; 


1Θ0΄.---ΠΈῈΡΙῚ ΟΛΟΥ ΚΑῚ ΜΈΡΟΥΣ 


215 Περὶ δὲ ὅλου καὶ μέρους διαλεξόμεθα μὲν καὶ 
ἐν τοῖς φυσικοῖς δὴ λεγομένοις, ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ παρόντος 
περὶ τῆς λεγομένης διαιρέσεως τοῦ ὅλου εἰς τὰ 
μέρη αὐτοῦ τάδε λεκτέον. ὅταν λέγῃ τις διαιρεῖσθαι 





α That ‘‘ names” exist ‘‘ by nature”? was held by Hera- 
cleitus, Cratylus, Stoics and Epicureans; Aristotle and the 
Sceptics took the other view. θέσει, “by convention” (or 
human ordinance), like the more usual νόμῳ, is opposed to 
290 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 213-215 


species into particulars. But it is probably easy to 
show that, on the contrary, in respect of none of these 
does a divisive science exist. 


Cuapter XVIII.—Concernine: tHE Division oF A 
Name into THINGS SIGNIFIED 


Now they at once assert that the sciences of natural 214 
objects exist whereas those of conventional objects 
have no existence, and that with reason. For science 
claims to be a thing that is firm and invariable, but 
the conventional objects are easily liable to change 
and variation, because their character is altered by 
the shifting of the conventions which depend upon 
ourselves. Since, then, the significance of names is 
based on convention and not on nature @ (for otherwise 
all men, barbarians as well as Greeks, would under- 
stand all the things signified by the terms, besides 
the fact that it is in our power at any time to point 
out and signify the objects by any other names we 
may choose), how would it be possible for a science 
capable of dividing a name into its significations to 
exist ? Or how could Dialectic really be, as some 
imagine, a “science of things which signify and are 
signified Ὁ 


Crapter XIX.—Concerninc WHoLE anp Part 


Whole and part we shall discuss in what we call 215 
our physical treatise,® but at present we have to deal 
with the so-called division of the whole into its parts. 
When a man says that the decad is being divided into 


φύσει, “by nature,’? much as we contrast the ‘“ artificial °’ 
with the ὁ natural.”’ 


> OF, ili. 82 ff.3 Adv. Phys. i. 297 #f., 330 ff, ii. 804, 
291 


216 


217 


218 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τὴν δεκάδα εἰς μονάδα καὶ δύο καὶ τρία καὶ τέο- 
σαρα, οὐ διαιρεῖται εἰς ταῦτα ἡ δεκάς. ἅμα γὰρ 
τῷ τὸ πρῶτον αὐτῆς ἀρθῆναι μέρος, ἵνα κατὰ 
συγχώρησιν νῦν τοῦτο δῶμεν, οἷον τὴν μονάδα, 
οὐκέτι ὑπόκειται ἡἧ' δεκάς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐννέα καὶ ὅλως 
ἕτερόν τι παρὰ τὴν δεκάδα. ἡ οὖν τῶν λοιπῶν 
ἀφαίρεσίς τε καὶ διαίρεσις οὐκ ἀπὸ τῆς δεκάδος 
γίνεται ἀλλ’ ἀπό τίνων ἄλλων, καθ᾽ ἑκάστην 
ἀφαίρεσιν ἑτεροιουμένων. 

Τάχα οὖν οὐκ ἐνδέχεται τὸ ὅλον διαιρεῖν εἰς τὰ 
λεγόμενα εἶναι αὐτοῦ μέρη. καὶ γὰρ εἰ διαιρεῦται 
τὸ ὅλον εἰς μέρη, ὀφείλει: τὰ μέρη ἐμπεριέχεσθαι 
τῷ ὅλῳ πρὸ τῆς διαιρέσεως, οὐ, περιέχεται δὲ ἴσως. 
οἷον γοῦν, ἵνα ἐπὶ τῆς δεκάδος στήσωμεν πάλιν τὸν 
λόγον, τῆς δεκάδος μέρος φασὶ πάντως εἶναι τὰ 
ἐννέα: διαιρεῖται γοῦν εἰς ἕν καὶ ἐννέα. ἀλλὰ καὶ 
τὰ ὀκτὼ ὁμοίως: διαιρεῖται γὰρ εἰς ὀκτὼ καὶ δύο. 
καὶ τὰ ἑπτὰ ὁμοίως καὶ ἕξ καὶ πέντε καὶ τέσσαρα 
καὶ τρία καὶ δύο καὶ ἕν. εἰ οὖν ταῦτα πάντα ἐν 
τῇ δεκάδι περιέχεται καὶ συντιθέμενα μετ᾽ αὐτῆς 
πεντεκαιπεντήκοντα γίνεται, ἐν τοῖς δέκα περι- 
ἔχεται πεντεκαυπεντήκοντα' ὅπερ ἄτοπον. οὐκοῦν 
οὔτε περιέχεται ἐν τῇ δεκάδι τὰ λεγόμενα αὐτῆς 
εἶναι μέρη, οὔτε ἡ δεκὰς εἰς ἐκεῖνα διαιρεῖσθαι 
δύναται ὡς ὅλον εἰς μέρη, ἃ μηδὲ ὅλως ἐν αὐτῇ 
θεωρεῦται. 

Τὰ δὲ αὐτὰ ἀπαντήσεται καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν μεγεθῶν, 
ὅταν τὸ δεκάπηχυ μέγεθος, εἰ τύχοι, διαιρεῖν 
ἐθέλοι τις. οὐκ ἐνδέχεται οὖν ἴσως διαιρεῖν οὐδὲ 
ὅλον εἰς μέρη. 

1 μονάδα T, cj. Bekk.: μίαν mss. 
2 ὀφείλει Heintz: φιλεῖ mss., Bekk. 
292 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 215-218 


one and two and three and four, the decad is not 
being divided into these. For as soon as its first part, 
say one, is subtracted—granting for the moment that 
this can be done—there no longer subsists the decad 
but the number nine, something quite different from 
the decad. Hence the division and the subtraction 216 
of the other parts is not made from the decad but 
from some other numbers, and these vary with each 
subtraction. 

Probably then it is impracticable to divide the 
whole into what are called its parts. For, in fact, if 
the whole is divided into parts, the parts ought to be 
comprised in the whole before the act of division, 
but probably they are not so comprised. Thus for 
example—to base our argument once more on the 
decad—they say that nine is certainly a part of the 
decad, since it is divided into one plus nine. But so 
likewise is the number eight, since it is divided into 
eight plus two; and so also are the numbers seven, 
six, five, four, three, two and one. If then all these 217 
numbers are included in the decad, and when added 
together with it make up fifty-five, then fifty-five is in- 
cluded in the number ten, whichis absurd. Therefore 
neither are its so-called parts included in the decad 
nor can the decad be divided into them, as a whole 
into parts, since they are not even seen in it at all. 

And the same objections will confront us in the case 218 
of magnitudes 5 also, supposing one should wish, for 
example, to divide the magnitude of ten cubits. 
Probably, then, it is not practicable to divide a whole 
into parts. 


* The subject of geometry, as numbers are of arithmetic. 


293 


219 


220 


221 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


K’.—IIEPI TENON KAI EIAQN 


Οὐκοῦν ὁ περὶ τῶν γενῶν Kal τῶν εἰδῶν ὑπο- 
λείπεται λόγος, περὶ οὗ πλατύτερον μὲν ἐν ἄλλοις 
διαλεξόμεθα, ὡς ἐν συντόμῳ δὲ νῦν ταῦτα λέξομεν. 
εἰ μὲν ἐννοήματα εἶναι τὰ γένη καὶ τὰ εἴδη λέ- 
γουσιν, αἱ κατὰ τοῦ ἡγεμονικοῦ καὶ τῆς φαντασίας 
ἐπιχειρήσεις αὐτοὺς διατρέπουσιν: εἰ δὲ ἰδίαν 
ὑπόστασιν αὐτοῖς ἀπολείπουσιν, τί πρὸς τοῦτο 
ἐροῦσιν; εἰ ἔστι τὰ γένη, ἤτοι τοσαῦτά ἐστιν ὅσα 
τὰ εἴδη, ἢ ἕν ἐστι κοινὸν πάντων τῶν εἰδῶν αὐτοῦ 
λεγομένων εἶναι γένος. εἰ μὲν οὖν τοσαῦτά ἐστι 
τὰ γένη ὅσα τὰ εἴδη αὐτῶν, οὐκετ᾽ ἂν εἴη κοινὸν 
γένος, ὃ εἰς αὐτὰ διαιρεθήσεζαι. εἰ δὲ ἕν εἶναι 
λέγοιτο ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς εἴδεσιν αὐτοῦ τὸ γένος, ἤτοι 
ὅλου αὐτοῦ ἕκαστον εἶδος αὐτοῦ μετέχει ἢ μέρους 
αὐτοῦ. ἀλλ᾽’ ὅλου μὲν οὐδαμῶς: ἀμήχανον γάρ 
ἐστιν ἕν τι ὑπάρχον ἄλλῳ καὶ ἄλλῳ κατὰ ταὐτὸ 
περιέχεσθαι οὕτως ὡς ὅλον ἐν ἑκάστῳ θεωρεῖσθαι 
τῶν ἐν οἷς εἶναι λέγεται. εἰ δὲ μέρους, πρῶτον 
μὲν οὐκ ἀκολουθήσει τῷ εἴδει τὸ γένος πᾶν, ὡς 
ὑπολαμβάνουσιν, οὐδὲ ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἔσται ζῶον ἀλλὰ 
μέρος ζώου, οἷον οὐσία, οὔτε δὲ ἔμψυχος οὔτε 
αἰσθητική. εἶτα μέντοι καὶ ἤτοι ταὐτοῦ λέγοιτο 
ἂν μετεσχηκέναι πάντα τὰ εἴδη μέρους τοῦ γένους 
αὐτῶν, ἢ ἑτέρου καὶ ἑτέρου. ἀλλὰ ταὐτοῦ μὲν οὐκ 
ἐνδέχεται διὰ τὰ προειρημένα. εἰ δὲ ἄλλου καὶ 





* No such discussion is to be found in the extant works of 
Sextus. 

δ i.e. the Stoics : cf. §§ 29 ff.,'70 f., Adv. Log. i. 370 ff. for 
the Sceptic criticisms. 

* This view is Plato’s, theformer Aristotle’s. The following 
objections are like those brought against the Platonic theory 


294: 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 219-221 


CuHaPpTerR XX.—Or GENERA AND SPECIES 


There still remains, then, the subject of genera and 219 
species, which we shall discuss more at large else- 
where,* but here we shall deal with them concisely. 
If, on the one hand, they ὃ assert that genera and 
species are mental concepts, our criticisms of the 
‘regent part ’’ and of “ presentation ” refute them ; 
whereas if they assign to them a substantiality of 
their own, how will they reply to this objection? If 220 
the genera exist, either they are equal in number to 
the species or else there is one genus common to all 
the species which are said to belong to it. If, then, 
the genera are equal in number to their species, there 
will no longer be a common genus to be divided into 
the species ; while if it shall be said that the genus 
exists as onein allits species, then each species partakes 
of either the whole or a part of it.¢ But it certainly 
does not partake of the whole; for it is impossible 
that what is one real object should be equally included 
in separate things in such a way as to appear as a 
whole in each of those things in which it is said to 
exist. And if it partakes of a part, then, in the first 
place, all the genus will not, as they suppose, accom- 
pany the species, nor will “man” be “ an animal” 
but a part of an animal—he will be substance, for 
example, but neither animate nor sensitive. Then, 221 
in the next place, all the species will be said to partake 
either of the same part of their genus or of different 
parts ; but to partake of the same part is impossible 
for the reasons stated above ; while if they partake 
ad ἐς participation ’’ by Aristotle and in the Parmenides of 

ato. 

ἃ 2,6. a part of the Genus is taken as meaning a part of its 
definition ; ¢f. § 224 for this definition of the genus ‘* animal.” 


295 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἄλλου, οὔτε ὅμοια ἀλλήλοις ἔσται τὰ εἴδη κατὰ 
γένος, ὅπερ οὐ προσδέξονται, ἄπειρόν τε ἔσται 
γένος ἕκαστον εἰς ἄπειρα τεμνόμενον οὐ μόνον τὰ 
εἴδη ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον, ἐν οἷς καὶ αὐτοῖς 
μετὰ τῶν εἰδῶν αὐτοῦ θεωρεῖται: οὐ γὰρ μόνον 
ἄνθρωπος ἀλλὰ καὶ ζῶον ὃ Δίων εἶναι λέγεται. εἰ 
δὲ ταῦτα ἄτοπα, οὐδὲ κατὰ μέρος μετέσχηκε τὰ 
εἴδη τοῦ γένους αὐτῶν évos ὄντος. 

222 «Ki δὲ μήτε ὅλου μετέσχηκεν ἕκαστον εἶδος τοῦ 
γένους μήτε μέρους αὐτοῦ, πῶς ἂν λέγοιτο ἕν 
εἶναι γένος ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς εἴδεσιν αὐτοῦ, ὥστε καὶ 
εἰς αὐτὰ διαιρεῖσθαι; τάχα οὐκ ἂν ἔχοι τις λέγειν 
μὴ οὐχὶ ἀναπλάσσων τινὰς εἰδωλοποιήσεις, aut ταῖς 
ἐκείνων αὐτῶν ἀνεπικρίτοις διαφωνίαις κατὰ τὰς 
σκεπτικὰς ἐφόδους περιτραπήσονται. 

223 Πρὸς δὲ τούτοις κἀκεῖνο λεκτέον. τὰ εἴδη τοῖα 
7 roid ἐστιν: τούτων τὰ γένη ἦτοι καὶ τοῖα καὶ 
τοῖα ἢ τοῖα μὲν τοῖα δὲ οὔ ἢ οὔτε τοῖα οὔτε τοῖα. 
οἷον ἐπεὶ τῶν τινῶν τὰ μέν ἐστι σώματα τὰ δὲ 
ἀσώματα, καὶ τὰ μὲν ἀληθῆ τὰ δὲ ψευδῆ, καὶ ἔνια 
μὲν λευκά, εἰ τύχοι, ἔνια δὲ μέλανα, καὶ ἔνια μὲν 
μέγιστα ἔνια δὲ σμικρότατα, καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ὁμοίως, 
τό τι λόγου ἕνεκεν, ὅ φασιν εἶναί τινες γενικώτατον, 

294 ἢ πάντα ἔσται ἢ τὰ ἕτερα ἢ οὐδέν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν 
οὐδέν ἔστιν ὅλως τό τι, οὐδὲ τὸ γένος, πέρας ἔχει 





α The stock name for a specimen of ‘‘ Man,” ef. i. 189, 
and §§ 227 ff. 

> e.g. the Platonic Ideas, ef. 111, 189. 

“ The argument here is that it is impossible to conceive a 
number of opposite qualities, such as are possessed by the 
multitude of species and particulars included in the ‘“‘ genus,”’ 
co-existing in the unity of the genus; while if they do not 
all co-exist in it, the “‘ genus’’ ceases to be inclusive of all 


296 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 221-224 


of different parts, the species will be generically 
dissimilar one to another (which they will not admit), 
and each genus will be infinite because cut up into 
infinite sections (not into the species only but also 
into the particulars, since it is actually seen in these 
along with its species; for Dion ὦ is said to be an 
animal as well as aman). But if these consequences 
are absurd, then not even by way of parts do the 
species partake of their genus, it being a unity. 

If, then, each several species partakes neither of 222 
the whole genus nor of a part of it, how can it be said 
that the one genus exists in all its parts so as to be 
actually divided into them? No one, probably, could 
make such a statement unless by concocting some 
imaginary entities,? which will be overturned, as the 
attacks of the Sceptics show, by the unsettled disputes 
of the Dogmatists themselves. 

Furthermore, there is this to be said.° The species 223 
are of this kind or of that kind: the genera of these 
species either are of both this kind and that kind, or 
of this kind but not of that kind, or neither of this 
kind nor of that kind. When, for instance, of the 
“somethings ”’ (or particulars) some are corporeal 
others incorporeal, and some true others false, and 
some (it may be) white others black, and some very 
large others very small, and so on with the rest, the 
genus “ something ” (to take it for the sake of argu- 
ment), which some regard as the summum genus, will 
either be all these or some of them or none. But 224 
if the “‘ something,” and the genus too, is absolutely 


its proper species and particulars; and if it includes none of 
the opposites, it is wholly unrelated to its particulars, and 
has no claim to be termed a “‘ genus.” 

¢ The Stoic view, cf. 88 86 f. supra. 


207 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἡ ζήτησις. εἰ δὲ πάντα εἶναι ῥηθείη, πρὸς τῷ 
ἀδύνατον εἶναι τὸ λεγόμενον, ἕκαστον τῶν εἰδῶν 
καὶ τῶν καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἐν οἷς ἐστὶ δεήσει πάντα 
εἶναι. ὡς γάρ, ἐπεὶ τὸ ζῶον, ὡς φασίν, οὐσία 
ἐστὶν ἔμψυχος αἰσθητική, ἕκαστον τῶν εἰδῶν αὐτοῦ 
καὶ οὐσία εἶναι λέγεται καὶ ἔμψυχος καὶ αἰσθητική, 
οὕτως εἰ τὸ γένος καὶ σῶμά ἐστι καὶ ἀσώματον 
καὶ ψευδὲς καὶ ἀληθὲς καὶ μέλαν, εἰ τύχοι, καὶ 
λευκὸν καὶ σμικρότατον καὶ μέγιστον καὶ τἄλλα 
πάντα, ἕκαστον τῶν εἰδῶν καὶ τῶν καθ᾽ ἕκαστον 
πάντα ἔσται’ ὅπερ οὐ θεωρεῖται. ψεῦδος οὖν καὶ 

295 τοῦτο. εἰ δὲ τὰ ἕτερα μόνα ἐστί, τούτων τὸ γένος 
τῶν λοιπῶν οὐκ ἔσται γένος, δἷον εἰ σῶμα τό τι, 
τῶν ἀσωμάτων, καὶ εἰ λογικὸν τὸ ζῶον, τῶν 
ἀλόγων, ὡς μήτε ἀσώματον τὶ εἶναι μήτε ἄλογον 
ζῶον," καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὁμοίως: ὅπερ ἄτοπον. 
οὐκοῦν οὔτε καὶ τοῖον καὶ τοῖον τὸ γένος, οὔτε 
τοῖον μὲν τοῖον δὲ ov, οὔτε μὴν οὔτε τοῖον οὔτε 
τοῖον δύναται εἶναι [γένος]: εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, οὐδὲ ἔστιν 
ὅλως τὸ γένος. 

Ki δὲ λέγοι τις ὅτι δυνάμει πάντα ἐστὶ τὸ γένος, 
λέξομεν ὡς τὸ δυνάμει τι ὃν δεῖ τι καὶ ἐνεργείᾳ 
εἶναι, οἷον οὐ δύναταί τις γραμματικὸς εἶναι εἰ μὴ 
καὶ" ἐνεργείᾳ. καὶ τὸ γένος οὖν εἰ δυνάμει πάντα 
ἐστίν, ἐρωτῶμεν αὐτοὺς τί ἐστιν ἐνεργείᾳ, καὶ 

1 ἕκαστον cj. Bekk.: καὶ mss. 


2 ζῶον post εἶναι mss., edd., transp. Papp. 
3 εἰ μὴ καὶ T: μή τις Mss., ὧν add. Bekk. 





« Aristotle regarded the relation of Genus to Species as 
that of Potentiality to Actuality, z.¢. of unrealized possibility 


298 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, ΤΙ, 224-225 


none of them, the inquiry comes to an end. And if 
we should say that it is all of them, then, besides the 
impossibility of such a statement, each of the species 
and of the particulars wherein it exists will have to 
be all. For just as when the genus “ animal ᾿ is, as 
they assert, “ an animate sensitive substance,’’ each 
of its species is said to be substance and animate and 
sensitive, so likewise if the genus is both corporeal 
and incorporeal and false and true and black, it may 
be, and white and very small and very large, and all 
the rest, each of the species and of the particulars will 
be all these—which is contrary to observation. So 
this too is false. But if the genus is some of them 225 
only, the genus ofthese will not be the genus of the 
rest; if, for instance, the genus “something ”’ is 
corporeal it will not be that of the incorporeal, and if 
the genus “ animal ”’ is rational it will not be that of 
the irrational, so that there is neither an incorporeal 
“something ’’ nor an irrational animal, and so like- 
wise with all other cases ; and thisis absurd. There- 
fore the genus cannot be either of both this and that 
kind, or of this kind but not of that, or of neither this 
kind nor that; and if this be so, neither does the 
genus exist at all. 

And if one should say that the genus is potentially 
all things,* we shall reply that what is potentially 
something must also be actually something, as, for 
instance, no one can be potentially literary without 
being so actually. So too, if the genus is potentially 
all things, what, we ask them, is it actually? And 
to what is real and determinate, or of the germinal to the 
fully evolved. As the “ actuality’? of the oak is implicit 


in the “ potency ’’ of the acorn, so the plurality of ‘‘ actual’’ 
particulars are implicit in the ‘“‘ potency’’ of the unitary 


** genus.” 
299 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


; 
οὕτω μένουσιν αἵ αὐταὶ ἀπορίαι. τἀναντία μὲν 
\ ? 3 7 > 3 [4 IAA? δὲ 
226 γὰρ πάντα ἐνεργείᾳ εἶναι οὐ δύναται. ἄλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 
τὰ μὲν καὶ ἐνεργείᾳ τὰ δὲ δυνάμει μόνον, οἷον σῶμα 
μὲν ἐνεργείᾳ, δυνάμει δὲ ἀσώματον. δυνάμει γάρ 
ἐστιν ὃ οἷόν τέ ἐστιν ἐνεργείᾳ ὑποστῆναι, τὸ δὲ 
σῶμα ἐνεργείᾳ ἀδύνατόν ἐστιν ἀσώματον γενέσθαι 
U4 ~ 
κατ᾽ ἐνέργειαν, ὥστε εἰ «τό TL λόγου χάριν σῶμά 
ἐστιν ἐνεργείᾳ, οὐκ ἔστιν ἀσώματον δυνάμει, καὶ 
τὸ ἀνάπαλιν. οὐκοῦν οὐκ ἐνδέχεται τὸ γένος τὰ 
μὲν ἐνεργείᾳ εἶναι τὰ δὲ δυνάμει μόνον. εἰ δὲ 
OA 4 ? A 9 ’ > \ e , 
οὐδὲν ὅλως ἐστὶν ἐνεργείᾳ, οὐδὲ ὑφέστηκεν. 
οὐκοῦν οὐδέν ἐστι τὸ γένος, ὃ διαιρεῖν εἰς τὰ εἴδη 
λέγουσιν. - 
ἬἝἜ \ “- θ 7 θ "7 Ὁ Ἁ 
997 τι καὶ τοῦτο θεάσασθαι ἄξιον. ὥσπερ γὰρ 
3 \ ¢ ? / > >AA 7 ὃ \ 7 ? 
ἐπεὶ ὁ αὐτός ἐστιν éEavdpos καὶ ἸΠάρις, οὐκ 
> ὃ ld 4 \ t¢ ᾿Αλέ ὃ m3) 5 Ἁ 
ἐνδέχεται τὸ μὲν ἔξανδρος περιπατεῖ ᾽᾿ ἀληθὲς 
> A \ ¢6 / am?) ~ “ 
εἶναι, τὸ δὲ “᾿]άρις περιπατεῖ ᾿᾿ ψεῦδος, οὕτως 
> t > ) 2 1 + 2 5 ; \ 
εἰ τὸ αὐτό ἐστι TO ἄνθρωπον; εἶναι Θέωνι καὶ 
Δίωνι, εἰς σύνταξιν ἀξιώματος ἀγομένη ἡ ἄνθρω- 
/ aN > \ “A “- > 9 2 7 
πος προσηγορία ἢ ἀληθὲς ἢ ψεῦδος ἐπ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων 
ποιήσει τὸ ἀξίωμα. οὐ θεωρεῖται δὲ τοῦτο τοῦ 
/ 
μὲν yap Δίωνος καθημένου Θέωνος δὲ περιπα- 
-- “- 279 oe \ 
τοῦντος τὸ “᾿ἄνθρωπος περιπατεῖ ἐφ᾽ ov μεν 
, 3 , > > 4> ον δὲ 50 > + 
λεγόμενον ἀληθές ἐστιν ep οὗ δὲ ψεῦδος. οὐκ ἄρα 
κοινή ἐστιν ἀμφοτέρων a ἄνθρωπος προσηγορία, 
καὶ ἡ αὐτὴ ἀμφοῖν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰ ἄρα, ἰδία ἑκατέρου. 


1 «τό τὼ add. Heintz. 
2 τὸ ἄνθρωπον T, cj. Papp.: τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ mss., Bekk. 


300 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 225-227 


thus we find that the same difficulties remain. For 
it cannot actually be all the contraries; nor yet can 226 
it be some of them actually and some only potentially 
—corporeal, for instance, actually and incorporeal 
potentially. For it is potentially that which it is 
capable of really being actually, but that which is 
actually corporeal is incapable of becoming incor- 
poreal in actuality, so that if, for example, the genus 
‘something ”’ is actually corporeal it is not potenti- 
ally incorporeal, and vice versa. It is impossible, 
therefore, for the genus to be some things actually 
and some only potentially. But if it is absolutely 
nothing actually, it has no substantial existence. 
Hence the genus, which they say they divide into 
the species, is nothing. 

And further, here is another point worthy of notice. 227 
Just as, because Alexander and Paris 5 are identical, 
it is impossible that the statement “Alexander walks ”’ 
should be true when “ Paris walks ”’ is false, so also if 
“ἢ manhood ”’ is identical for both Theon and Dion, 
the term “‘ man ”’ when introduced as an element in 
a judgement will cause the judgement to be equally 
true or false in the case of both. But this is not what 
we find ; for when Dion is sitting and Theon walking, 
the judgement “man walks ’’ is true when used of 
the one, but false of the other. Therefore the term ὃ 
““man ”’ is not common to them both and the same 
for both but, if applicable at all, it is peculiar to one 
of the two. 

* Two names of the son of Priam who carried off Helen 
to Troy. 

>“ Term,” ἦ.6. (in Stoic usage) ‘“‘common noun or 
appellative ’ (Diog. Laert. vii. 58). 


301 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


KA’.—ITEPI KOINON; SYMBEBHKOTON | 


228 Παραπλήσια δὲ λέγεται Kal περὶ τῶν κοινῶν 
συμβεβηκότων. εἶ γὰρ ἕν καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ συμβέβηκε 
Δίωνί τε καὶ Θέωνι τὸ ὁρᾶν, ἐὰν καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν 
φθαρῇ μὲν Δίων, Θέων δὲ περιῇ καὶ ὁρᾷ, ἤτοι τὴν 
ὅρασιν τοῦ ἐφθαρμένου Δίωνος ἄφθαρτον μένειν 
ἐροῦσιν, ὅπερ ἀπεμφαΐνει, ἢ τὴν αὐτὴν ὅρασιν 
ἐφθάρθαι τε καὶ μὴ ἐφθάρθαι λέξουσιν, ὅπερ a ἄτοπον" 
οὐκ ἄρα n Θέωνος ὃ ὅρασις ἡ αὐτή ἐστι Τῇ. Δίωνος, 

ἀλλ᾽ εἰ ἄρα, ἰδία ἑκατέρου. καὶ γὰρ εἰ ταὐτὸν 
συμβέβηκε Δίωνί τε καὶ Θέωνι τὸ ἀναπνεῖν, οὐκ 
ἐνδέχεται τὴν ἐν Θέωνι ἀναπνοὴν εἶναι, τὴν ἐν 
Δίωνι δὲ μὴ εἶναι: ἐνδέχεται δὲ τοῦ μὲν φθαρέντος 
τοῦ δὲ περιόντος" οὐκ ἄρα ἡ αὐτή ἐστιν. 

Περὶ μὲν οὖν τούτων ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον νῦν ἀρκέσει 
συντόμως λελέχθαι. 


ΚΒ΄.---ΠΕΡῚ ΣΟΦΙΣΜΑΤΩΝ 


229 Οὐκ ἄτοπον δὲ ἴσως καὶ τῷ περὶ τῶν σοφισ- 
μάτων ἐπιστῆσαι λόγῳ διὰ βραχέων, ἐπεὶ καὶ εἰς 
τὴν τούτων διάλυσιν ἀναγκαίαν εἶναι: λέγουσι τὴν 
διαλεκτικὴν. οὗ σεμνύνοντες αὐτήν. εἰ γὰρ τῶν τε 
ἀληθῶν καὶ ψευδῶν λόγων, φασῶ, ἐστὶν αὕτη 
διαγνωστική, ψευδεῖς δὲ λόγοι καὶ τὰ σοφίσματα, 
καὶ τούτων ἂν εἴη διακριτικὴ λυμαινομένων τὴν 
ἀλήθειαν φαινομέναις πιθανότησιν. ὅθεν ws βοη- 
θοῦντες οὗ διαλεκτικοὶ σαλεύοντι τῷ βίῳ καὶ τὴν 
ἔννοιαν καὶ τὰς διαφορὰς καὶ τὰς ἐπιλύσεις δὴ τῶν 





α The Stoics; cf. § 94 supra for the definition of Dialectic. 
302 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 228-229 


Cuaprer XXI.—Concrerninc ComMon PROPERTIES 


‘ 


Similar arguments apply also to the “ common 228 
properties.” For if vision is one and the same 
property in Dion and in Theon, then, suppose that 
Dion should perish and Theon survive and retain his 
sight, either they will assert that the vision of the 
perished Dion remains unperished, which is incredible, 
or they will declare that the same vision has both 
perished and not perished, which is absurd ; therefore 
the vision of Theon is not identical with Dion’s but, 
if anything, the vision of each is peculiar to himself. 
And if breathing is an identical property in Dion and 
Theon, it is impossible that breathing should exist 
in Theon and not exist in Dion; but this is possible 
when the one has perished and the other survives ; 
therefore it is not identical. 

However, as regards this subject, this concise state- 
ment will be sufficient for the present. 


Cuaprer XXII.—Concernine Sopuyisms 


It will not, perhaps, be amiss to give our attention 229 
for a moment to the subject of Sophisms, seeing that 
those who glorify Dialectic? declare that it is indis- 
pensable for exposing sophisms. For, they say, if 
Dialectic is capable of distinguishing true and false 
arguments, and sophisms are false arguments, it will 
also be capable of discerning these, which distort the 
truth by apparent plausibilities. Hence the dialec- 
ticians, by way of assisting life ὃ when it totters, strive 
earnestly to teach us the conception of sophisms, their 


δ 4,6. the views and conduct of ordinary people, cf. i. 23, 
165. 


303 


290 


231 


232 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


/ \ ~ ~ ἴω 
σοφισμάτων μετὰ σπουδῆς ἡμᾶς πειρῶνται διδά- 
oxew, λέγοντες σόφισμα εἶναι λόγον πιθανὸν καὶ 

7 ¢ / \ 3 Ἁ 
δεδολιευμένον ὥστε προσδέξασθαι τὴν ἐπιφορὰν 
” ~ a e , a No» “δ 
ἦτοι ψευδῆ ἢ ὡμοιωμένην ψευδεῖ ἢ ἄδηλον 7 
yA 3 / ὃ Ὁ o \ ε > A / 
ἄλλως ἀπρόσδεκτον, οἷον ψευδῆ μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ τούτου 
τοῦ σοφίσματος ἔχει “ οὐδεὶς δίδωσι κατηγόρημα 
πιεῖν. κατηγόρημα δέ ἐστι τὸ ἀψώνθιον πιεῖν" 

᾿ \ Ad ,ὔ 2 la a 9d \ @ 

οὐδεὶς dpa δίδωσιν ἀψίνθιον πιεῖν, ἔτι δὲ ὅμοιον 
σ΄ \ 

ψευδεῖ ws ἐπὶ τούτου “6 μήτε ἐνεδέχετο μήτε 

ἐνδέχεται, τοῦτο οὐκ ἔστιν ἄτοπον" οὔτε δὲ ἐνεδέ- 

KETO οὔτε ἐνδέχεται τὸ 6 ἰατρός, καθὸ ἰατρός ἐστι, 

φονεύει «οὐκ ἄρα ἄτοπόν ἐστι τὸ 6 ἰατρός, καθὸ 

3 ; 2 ; 1” x Or. » ef 

ἰατρός ἐστι, φονεύει». ἔτι" δὲ ἄδηλον οὕτως 
\ os 

“οὐχὶ καὶ ἠρώτηκά TL σε πρῶτον, καὶ οὐχὶ οἵ 

, “" 

ἀστέρες ἄρτιοί εἶσιν: ἠρώτηκα δέ τί σε πρῶτον" 
c wm 3 / > / ? 3? +4 \ 3 7 
οἱ ἄρα ἀστέρες ἄρτιοί eiow.” ἔτι δὲ ἀπρόσδεκτον 
bd « ξ , / / e 
ἄλλως, ὡς ot λεγόμενοι σολοικίζοντες λόγοι, οἷον 
cea / v f \ 4 ” 
ὃ βλέπεις, ἔστιν: βλέπεις δὲ φρενυτικόν: ἔστιν 
3, ? 93 eon co ™ + Cm \ 
ἄρα φρενιτικόν. ὃ ὁρᾷς, ἔστιν: ὁρᾷς δὲ φλεγ- 
μαίνοντα τόπον" ἔστιν ἄρα φλεγμαίνοντα τόπον.᾿᾽ 
Εἶτα μέντοι καὶ τὰς ἐπιλύσεις αὐτῶν [ὁρᾶν ἤτοι] 
παριστᾶν ἐπιχειροῦσι, λέγοντες ἐπὶ μὲν τοῦ πρώτου 
σοφίσματος ὅτι ἄλλο διὰ τῶν λημμάτων συγ- 
κεχώρηται καὶ ἄλλο ἐπενήνεκται. συγκεχώρηται 
γὰρ τὸ μὴ πίνεσθαι κατηγόρημα, καὶ εἶναι KaTn- 
/ \ > f ᾽ 3 » ἃ \ 3 / 
yopnua τὸ ἀψίνθιον πίνειν, οὐκ αὐτὸ τὸ ἀψίνθιον. 
διὸ δέον ἐπιφέρειν “᾿ οὐδεὶς ἄρα πίνει τὸ ἀψζνθιον 
1 «οὐκ. -. hoveve> add. cj. Bekk. 


α Or “meaningless.” The Stoics held that every ‘‘ judge- 
ment” or ‘‘ proposition” (ἀξίωμα) was significant; so the 


304 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 229-232 


differences and their solutions. They declare that a 
sophism is “a plausible argument cunningly framed 
to induce acceptance of the inference, it being either 
false or resembling what is false or non-evident or 
otherwise unacceptable.” It is false, for example, 230 
in the case of the sophism “ Nobody offers one a 
predicate. to drink; but ‘to drink absinth’ is a 
predicate ; nobody thereforé offers one absinth to 
drink.” Or again, it may resemble the false, as in 
this case—‘‘ What neither was nor is possible is not 
absurd®; but it neither was nor is possible for a doctor, 
qua doctor, to murder ; therefore it is not absurd that 
a doctor, gua doctor, should murder.” Or again, it 231 
may be non-evident, as thus—‘ It is not true both 
that I have asked you a question first and that the 
stars are not even in number; but I have asked you 
a question first ; therefore the stars are even.” Or 
again, it may be otherwise unacceptable, like the 
so-called solecistic® arguments, such 88-- That at 
which you look exists ; but you have a frenzied look ; 
therefore ‘ frenzied’ exists”’; or ““ What you gaze at 
exists ; but you gaze at an inflamed spot ; therefore 
‘at an inflamed spot’ exists.” 

Moreover, they attempt also to set forth solutions 232 
of the sophisms, saying in the case of the first sophism 
that one thing is established by the premisses and 
another inferred in the conclusion. For it is estab- 
lished that a predicate is not drunk and that “ to drink 
absinth”’ is a predicate, but not “absinth”’ by 
itself. Hence, whereas one ought to infer “ Nobody 
proposition “‘ this is not possible” is not ἄτοπον, in this sense 
of the word. 

δ i.e. ungrammatical, involving the use of an adjective for 


a noun, the accusative for the nominative case (as here τόπον 
for τόπος), and the like. Cf. Aristol. Soph. El. cc. 14, 32. 


VOL. I xX 305 


233 


234 


235 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πίνειν, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀληθές, ἐπενήνεκται, i οὐδεὶς 
ἄρα ἀψίνθιον. mivet,” ὅπερ ἐστὶ ψεῦδος, οὐ συναγό- 
μενον ἐκ τῶν συγκεχωρημένων λημμάτων. ἐπὶ 
δὲ τοῦ δευτέρου ὁ ὅτι δοκεῖ μὲν ἐπὶ ψεῦδος ἀπάγειν 
ὡς ποιεῖν τοὺς ἀνεπιστάτους ὀκνεῖν αὐτῷ συγ- 
κατατίθεσθαι, συνάγει δὲ ἀληθές, τὸ “οὐκ ἄρα 
ἄτοπόν ἐστι τὸ ὁ ἰατρός, καθὸ ἰατρός ἐστι, 
povever. οὐδὲν γὰρ ἀξίωμα ἄ ἄτοπόν ἐστιν, ἀξίωμα 
δέ ἐστι τὸ “ ὁ ἰατρός, καθὸ t ἰατρός ἐστι, φονεύει᾽᾽ : 
διὸ οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἄτοπον. ἡ δὲ ἐπὶ τὸ ἄδηλον 
ἀπαγωγή φασιν ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ γένους τῶν pera 
τόντων ἐστίν. μηδενὸς γὰρ προηρωτημένου κατὰ 
τὴν ὑπόθεσιν τὸ ἀποφατικὸν τῆς συμπλοκῆς ἀληθὲς 
γίνεται, ψευδοῦς τῆς συμπλοκῆς οὔσης παρὰ τὸ 
ἐμπεπλέχθαι ψεῦδος τὸ “ἠρώτηκά τί σε πρῶτον ’ 


ἐν αὐτῆ. μετὰ δὲ τὸ ἐρωτηθῆναι τὸ ἀποφατικὸν 
τῆς συμπλοκῆς, τῆς προσλήψεως ἀληθοῦς γινο- 
μένης, “ ἠρώτηκα δέ τί σε πρῶτον," διὰ τὸ 


ἠρωτῆσθαι πρὸ τῆς ᾿προσλήψεως τὸ ἀποφατικὸν 
τῆς συμπλοκῆς ἡ τοῦ ἀποφατικοῦ τῆς συμπλοκῆς 
πρότασις γίνεται ψευδὴς τοῦ ἐν τῷ συμπεπλεγμένῳ 

evdous γενομένου ἁληθοῦς: ὡς μηδέποτε δύνασθαι 
συναχθῆναι τὸ συμπέρασμα μὴ συνυπάρχοντος τοῦ 
ἀποφατικοῦ τῆς συμπλοκῆς τῇ προσλήψει. τοὺς 
δὲ τελευταίους, φασὶν ἔνιοι, τοὺς σολοικίζοντας 
λόγους ἀτόπως ἐπάγεσθαι" παρὰ τὴν συνήθειαν. 

Τοιαῦτα μὲν οὖν τινὲς διαλεκτικοί φασι περὶ 
σοφισμάτων (καὶ γὰρ ἄλλοι ἄλλα λέγουσι): ταῦτα 

1 ἔνιοι MT: ἔνθα L, Bekk. 
2 ἐπάγεσθαι T: ἐπάγειν mss., Bekk. 


* i.e. meaningless—a Stoic dictum. 
> 2,8. the third Sophism, in § 231. 


306 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IT. 232-235 


therefore drinks the ‘to drink absinth,’”’ which 
is true, the inference drawn is ‘“‘ Nobody therefore 
drinks absinth,’”’ which is false, as not deduced from 
the established premisses. And as regards the 233 
second sophism, they explain that while it seems to 
lead in a false direction, so that it makes the inatten- 
tive hesitate in assenting to it, its conclusion is true, 
namely “‘It is not therefore absurd that the doctor, 
gua doctor, should murder.” For no judgement 
is absurd,* and ‘‘ the doctor, gua doctor, murders ’’ 
is a judgement, so that neither is it absurd. And 234 
the method of leading up to the non-evident ὃ deals, 
they say, with the class of things that are variable.‘ 
For when, according to the assumption, no previous 
question has been asked, the negation of the con- 
junctive premiss is true, the conjunctive or major 
premiss being false because of its inclusion of the false 
clause “1 have asked you a question first.” But 
after the negation of the major has been asked, as the 
minor premiss ‘‘ ] have asked you a question first ”’ 
has become true, owing to the fact that the negation 
of the major has been asked before the minor premiss, 
the first clause in the negation of the major becomes 
false while the false clause in the major has become 
true ; so that it is never possible for the conclusion 
to be deduced if the negation of the major premiss 
does not co-exist with the minor premiss. And as 235 
to the last class—the solecistic arguments—some 
declare that they are introduced absurdly, contrary to 
linguistic usage. 

Such are the statements made by some of the 
Dialecticians concerning sophisms—though others 


¢ 4.¢, judgements which change from truth to falsehood ; 
cf. Diog. Laert. vii. 76. 


307 


286 


237 


238 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δὲ τὰς μὲν τῶν εἰκαιοτέρων ἀκοὰς tows δύναται 
γαργαλίζειν, περιττὰ δέ ἐστι καὶ μάτην αὐτοῖς 
πεπονημένα. καὶ τοῦτο δυνατὸν μὲν ἴσως καὶ ἀπὸ 
τῶν ἤδη λελεγμένων ἡμῖν ὁρᾶν" ὑπεμνήσαμεν γὰρ 
ὅτι μὴ δύναται τὸ ἀληθὲς καὶ τὸ ψεῦδος κατὰ τοὺς 
διαλεκτικοὺς καταλαμβάνεσθαι, ποικίλως τε ἄλλως 
καὶ τῷ τὰ μαρτύρια τῆς συλλογιστικῆς δυνάμεως 
αὐτῶν, τὴν ἀπόδειξιν καὶ τοὺς ἀναποδείκτους δια- 
τρέπεσθαι λόγους. εἰς δὲ τὸν προκείμενον τόπον 
ἰδίως καὶ ἄλλα μὲν πολλὰ λέγειν ἔνεστιν, ὡς δὲ 
ἐν συντόμῳ νῦν τόδε λεκτέον. 

Ὅσα μὲν σοφίσματα ἰδίως ἡ ἢ διαλεκτικὴ δύνασθαι 
δοκεῖ διελέγχειν, τούτων ἡ “διάλυσις ἄχρηστός 
ἐστιν" ὅσων δὲ ἡ ἢ διάλυσις χρησιμεύει, ταῦτα ὁ “μὲν 
διαλεκτικὸς οὐκ ἂν διαλύσειεν, οὗ δὲ ἐν ἑκάστῃ 
τέχνῃ τὴν ἐπὶ τῶν πραγμάτων παρακολούθησιν 
ἐσχηκότες. εὐθέως γοῦν, ἵνα ἑνὸς ἢ δευτέρου 
μνησθῶμεν παραδείγματος, ἐρωτηθέντος ἰατρῷ 
τοιούτου σοφίσματος “κατὰ τὰς νόσους ἐν ταῖς 
παρακμαῖς τήν τε ποικίλην δίαιταν καὶ τὸν οἶνον 

οκιμαστέον" ἐπὶ πάσης δὲ τυπώσεως νόσου πρὸ 
τῆς πρώτης διατρίτου πάντως γίνεται παρακμή᾽ 
ἀναγκαῖον ἄρα πρὸ τῆς πρώτης διατρίτου τήν τε 
ποικίλην δίαιταν καὶ τὸν οἶνον ὡς τὸ πολὺ παρα- 
λαμβάνειν "ὁ μὲν διαλεκτικὸς οὐδὲν ὁ ἂν εἰπεῖν ἔχοι 
πρὸς διάλυσιν τοῦ λόγου, καίτοι χρησίμην οὖσαν, 
6 δὲ ἰατρὸς διαλύσεται τὸ σόφισμα, εἰδὼς ὅτι 
παρακμὴ λέγεται διχῶς ἢ τε τοῦ ὅλου νοσήματος 
καὶ ἡ ἑκάστης ἐπιτάσεως μερικῆς ἀπὸ τῆς ἀκμῆς 





α Of. §§ 80 ff. supra. ὃ Of. ξβ 144 ff., 156 ff. 
¢ The ** Methodic ’’ School of medicine held that the pro- 
gress of a disease was marked by three-day periods of increas- 


308 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 235-238 


indeed make other statements; and what they say 
may be able, perhaps, to tickle the ears of the casual 
hearer, superfluous though it is and the result of vain 
labour on their part. Probably this can be seen from 
what we have said already @ ; for we have shown that 
truth and falsehood, according to the Dialecticians, 
cannot be apprehended, and that by a variety of 
arguments as well as by the refutation of their 
evidences for the validity of the syllogism, namely 
proof and axiomatic arguments.? And there are 236 
many other special objections bearing on the topic 
before us which we might mention, but now, for 
brevity’s sake, we mention only this one. 

As regards all the sophisms which dialectic seems 
peculiarly able to expose, their exposure is useless ; 
whereas in all cases where the exposure is useful, it 
is not the dialectician who will expose them but the 
experts in each particular art who grasp the con- 
nexion of the facts. Thus at the moment, to mention 237 
one or two examples, if a sophism such as this were 
propounded—" In diseases, at the stages of abate- 
ment, a varied diet and wine are to be approved ; 
but in every type of disease an abatement inevitably 
occurs before the first third day*; it is necessary, 
therefore, to take for the most part a varied diet 
and wine before the first third day,’’—in this case 
the dialectician would be unable to assist in exposing 
the argument, useful though the exposure would be, 
but the doctor will expose the sophism, since he 238 
knows that the term “ abatement ” is used in two 
senses, of the general “‘ abatement ”’ in the disease 
and of the tendency to betterment after the crisis in 


ing (up to the crisis) or decreasing severity: for the former 
they prescribed a light diet. 


309 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


e 4 \ \ a : a 
ῥοπὴ πρὸς τὸ κρεῖσσον, καὶ πρὸ μὲν τῆς πρώτης 
4 ~ 
διατρίτου ws TO TOAD γίνεται παρακμὴ ἡ THs ἐπι- 
τάσεως τῆς μερικῆς, τὴν δὲ ποικίλην δίαιταν οὐκ 
’ 3 “~ fond ων 
ἐν ταύτῃ δοκιμάζομεν ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῇ παρακμῇ τοῦ 
Ψ ¢ @ A ~ f \ 
ὅλου νοσήματος. ὅθεν Kat διηρτῆσθαι λέξει τὰ 
“Ὁ ¢ “. ἴων 
λήμματα τοῦ λόγου, ἑτέρας μὲν παρακμῆς ἐν τῷ 
/ ζω --ἑ 
προτέρῳ λήμματι λαμβανομένης, τουτέστι τῆς τοῦ 
? ων 
ὅλου πάθους, érépas δὲ ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ, τουτέστι 
τῆς μερικῆς. 
7 3 ,ὕ , Ἁ 7 
2890 IIdAw τε ἐπί τινος πυρέσσοντος κατὰ πύκνωσιν 
“~ c 
ἐπιτεταμένην ἐρωτηθέντος τοῦ τοιούτου λόγου “ τὰ 
ἐναντία τῶν ἐναντίων iduard ἐστιν" ἐναντίον δὲ 
τῇ ὑποκειμένῃ πυρώσει τὸ ψυχρόν: κατάλληλον 
os 7. 9? ¢ \ 
ἄρα τῇ ὑποκειμένῃ πυρώσει τὸ ψυχρόν ὁ μὲν 
λ \ € - ς ὃ \ > \ 6 ‘ ; A 
240 διαλεκτικὸς ἡσυχάσει, ὃ δὲ ἰατρὸς εἰδὼς τίνα μέν 
A 7 ’ὔ \ 
ἐστιν προηγουμένως προσεχῆ πάθη; Twa δὲ συμ- 
πτώματα τούτων, ἐρεῖ μὴ ἐπὶ τῶν συμπτωμάτων 
~ \ 
προκόπτειν τὸν λόγον (ἀμέλει γοῦν πρὸς τὴν ἐπί- 
ΦᾺ “A / 
yvow τοῦ ψυχροῦ πλείονα γίνεσθαι συμβαίνειν τὴν 
πύρωσιν) ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τῶν προσεχῶν παθῶν, καὶ τὴν 
font Ld \ 
μὲν στέγνωσιν εἶναι προσεχῆ, ἥτις οὐ τὴν πύκνωσιν 
ἀλλὰ τὸν χαλαστικὸν τρόπον τῆς ἐπιμελείας ἀπαιτεῖ, 
τὸ δὲ τῆς ἐπακολουθούσης θερμασίας οὐ προηγου- 
“ ἤ 58 δὲ \ LAA: > 
μένως προσεχές, ὅθεν μηδὲ τὸ κατάλληλον εἶναι 
δοκοῦν αὐτῇ. 
\ Ὁ \ > V\ - / “ f 
241 Kat οὕτως μὲν ἐπὶ τοῖς σοφίσμασι Tots χρησίμως 
3 ΄- \ / 3. Ψ 4 ξ 
ἀπαιτοῦσι τὴν διάλυσιν οὐδὲν ἕξει λέγειν ὃ διαλεκ- 





« Cf. Hippocrates, De flat. 2; for morbid “ contraction ”’ 
counteracted by “‘dilatation’’ or ‘“‘relaxation”’ cf. i. 238. 


310 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 238-241 


the strained local conditions, and this improvement 
in the local strain generally occurs before the first 
third day, but it is not for this but for the general 
abatement in the disease that we recommend the 
varied diet. Consequently he will say that the 
premisses are discordant, since one kind of “ abate- 
ment ”’ is adopted in the first premiss, namely that 
of the general condition, and another—that of the 
local condition—in the second premiss. 

Again, in the case of one who suffers from fever 239 
due to aggravated “ contraction’ or obstruction, if 
an argument is propounded in the form—*“ Opposites 
are cures of opposites  ; cold is the opposite of the 
present feverish condition; therefore cold is the 
treatment which corresponds to the present feverish 
condition,’—here again the dialectician will keep 
silence, but the doctor, since he knows what morbid 240 
states are fundamentally persistent and what are 
symptoms of such states, will declare that the argu- 
ment does not apply to the symptoms (not to mention 
the fact that the result of the application of cold is 
to aggravate the feverish condition) but to the per- 
sistent morbid states, and that the constipation is 
persistent but requires an expansive method of treat- 
ment rather than contraction, whereas the resultant 
symptom of inflammation is not fundamentally per- 
sistent, nor (consequently) is the state of cold which 
seems to correspond thereto. 

Thus, as regards sophisms the exposure of which 241 
is useful, the dialectician will not have a word to say, 
By ‘“‘ corresponding’ is meant the appropriate “ counter- 
acting’? remedy. The “persistent’’ or ‘“‘ deep-seated ”’ 
(προσεχῆ) morbid states are distinguished from the super- 
ficial ‘‘ symptoms” which the Methodic School disregarded 
as accidentals. 

311 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


€¢ 


TiKOS, ἐρωτήσας δὲ ἡμῖν τοιούτους λόγους “ εἰ 
οὐχὶ καὶ καλὰ κέρατα ἔχεις καὶ κέρατα ἔχεις, 
κέρατα ἔχεις" οὐχὶ δὲ καλὰ κέρατα ἔχεις καὶ κέρατα 
242 ἔχεις" κέρατα ἄρα ἔχεις.᾽ “ εἰ κινεῖταί τι, ἤτοι 
ἐν ᾧ ἔστι τόπῳ κινεῖται, ἢ ἐν ᾧ οὐκ ἔστιν" οὔτε 
δὲ ἐν ᾧ ἔστιν, μένει γάρ, οὔτε ἐν ᾧ μὴ ἔστιν" 
πῶς γὰρ ἂν ἐνεργοίη τι ἐν ἐκείνῳ ἐν ᾧ μηδὲ τὴν 
243 ἀρχὴν ἔστιν; οὐκ “ἄρα κινεῦταί πεν ἤτοι τὸ ὃν 
γίνεται ἢ τὸ μὴ ὄν. τὸ “μὲν οὖν ὃν οὐ γίνεται, 
ἔστι γάρ’ ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ μὴ ὄν" τὸ μὲν γὰρ γινό- 
μενον “πάσχει τι, τὸ δὲ μὴ ὃν οὐ πάσχει. οὐδὲν 
244 ἄρα γίνεται. “ἡ χιὼν ὕδωρ ἐστὶ πεπηγός" μέλαν 
δὲ τὸ ὕδωρ ἐστίν: μέλαινα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ χιών. 
Καὶ τοιούτους τινὰς ἀθροίσας ὕθλους συνάγει 
τὰς ὀφρῦς, καὶ προχειρίζεται τὴν διαλεκτικήν, καὶ 
πάνυ σεμνῶς ἐπιχειρεῖ κατασκευάζειν ἡμῖν ov 
ἀποδείξεων συλλογιστικῶν ὅτι γίνεταί τι καὶ ὅτι 
κινεῖταί τι καὶ ὅτι ἡ χιών ἐστι λευκὴ καὶ ὅτι κέρατα 
οὐκ ἔχομεν, καίτοι γε ἀρκοῦντος ἴσως τοῦ τὴν 
ἐνάργειαν αὐτοῖς ἀντιτιθέναι πρὸς τὸ θραύεσθαι τὴν 
διαβεβαιωτικὴν θέσιν αὐτῶν διὰ τῆς ἐκ τῶν 
φαινομένων ἰσοσθενοῦς αὐτῶν ἀντιμαρτυρήσεως. 
ταῦτά τοι καὶ ἐρωτηθεὶς φιλόσοφος τὸν κατὰ τῆς 
κινήσεως λόγον σιωπῶν περιεπάτησεν, καὶ οἱ κατὰ 
τὸν βίον ἄνθρωποι πεζάς τε καὶ διαποντίους στέλ- 
λονται πορείας κατασκευάζουσί τε ναῦς καὶ οἰκίας 


« The ceratiné or ‘‘ Horn-fallacy”’ (invented by the 
Megarics, cf. Diog. Laert. ii, 111, vi. 39) is generally put in 
a simpler form—“ If you have not lost anything, you have 
it; you have not lost horns, therefore you have horns”’ (a 
joke aimed at cuckolds, thinks Fabricius). Sextus’s com- 
plex syllogism seems much more clumsy (if the text is right). 


312 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 241-244 


but he will propound for us arguments such as these @ 
—‘ If it is not so that you both have fair horns and 
have horns, you have horns; but it is not so that 
you have fair horns and have horns; therefore you 
have horns.” “If a thing moves, it moves either in 242 
the spot where it is or where it is not ; but it moves 
neither in the spot where it is (for it is at rest) nor 
in that where it is not (for how could a thing be 
active in a spot where it does not so much as exist ἢ); 
therefore nothing moves.” δ ‘ Either the existent 243 
becomes or the non-existent ; now the existent does 
not become (for it exists); nor yet does the non- 
existent (for the becoming is passive but the non- 
existent is not passive) ; therefore nothing becomes.’’¢ 
““ Snow is frozen water; but water is black ; there- 244 
fore snow is black.” ὦ 

And when he has made a collection of such trash 
he draws his eyebrows together, and expounds 
Dialectic and endeavours very solemnly to establish 
for us by syllogistic proofs that a thing becomes, a 
thing moves, snow is white, and we do not have 
horns, although it is probably sufficient to confront 
the trash with the plain fact in order to smash up 
their positive affirmation by means of the equipollent 
contradictory evidence derived from appearances. 
Thus, in fact, a certain philosopher,’ when the argu- 
ment against motion was put to him, without a word 
started to walk about; and people who follow the usual 
way of life proceed on journeys by land and sea and 


> Cf. 8 245, iii. 7, and Adv. Gramm. 311, where this argu- 
ment is ascribed to Diodorus the Megaric. 

° In Adv. Log. i. 71 this argument is ascribed to Gorgias. 

¢ Anaxagoras held this notion about snow, cf. i. 33. 

9. Diogenes the Cynic (Diog. Laert. vi. 39); see iii. 66. 
Cf. Boswell’s story of how Dr. Johnson refuted Berkeley. 


313 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


καὶ παιδοποιοῦνται τῶν κατὰ τῆς κινήσεως καὶ 
245 γενέσεως ἀμελοῦντες "λόγων. φέρεται δὲ καὶ 
᾿Ηροφίλου τοῦ ἰατροῦ χαρίεν ᾿ἀπομνημόνευμα" 
συνεχρόνισε γὰρ οὗτος Διοδώρῳ, ὃς ἐναπειροκαλῶν 
τῇ διαλεκτικῇ λόγους διεξήει. σοφιστικοὺς κατά 
τε ἄλλων πολλῶν καὶ τῆς κινήσεως. ὡς οὖν ἐκ- 
βαλών ποτε ὦμον ὁ Διόδωρος ἧκε θεραπευθησόμενος 
ὡς τὸν ᾿Ἡρόφιλον, ἐχαριεντίσατο ἐκεῖνος πρὸς 
αὐτὸν λέγων © ᾿ ἦτοι ἐν ᾧ ἣν τόπῳ ὁ ὦμος ὧν ἐκ- 
πέπτωκεν, "ἢ ἐν ᾧ οὐκ ἦν; οὔτε δὲ ἐν ᾧ ἦν οὔτε 
ἐν ᾧ οὐκ ἦν' οὐκ ἄρα ἐκπέπτωκεν, ” ὡς τὸν σοφι- 
στὴν λιπαρεῖν ἐᾶν μὲν τοὺς τοιούτους λόγους, τὴν 
δὲ ἐξὶ ἰατρικῆς ἁρμόζουσαν. αὐτῷ προσάγειν θερα- 
246 πείαν. ἀρκεῖ γάρ, οἶμαι, τὸ ἐμπείρως τέ καὶ ἀδο- 
ξάστως κατὰ τὰς κοινὰς τηρήσεις τε καὶ προλήψεις 
βιοῦν, περὶ τῶν ἐκ δογματικῆς περιεργίας καὶ 
μάλιστα ἔξω τῆς βιωτικῆς χρείας. λεγομένων 
ἐπέχοντας. εἰ οὖν ὅσα μὲν εὐχρήστως ἂν ἐπιλυθείη, 
ταῦτα οὐκ ἂν διαλύσαιτο ἡ διαλεκτική, ὅσα δὲ 
ἐπιλύεσθαι δοίη τις ἂν ἴσως ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς σοφίσματα, 
τούτων ἡ διάλυσις ἄχρηστός ἐστιν, ἄχρηστός ἐστι 
κατὰ τὴν ἐπίλυσιν τῶν σοφισμάτων ἡ διαλεκτική. 
941 Kat ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν δὲ τῶν παρὰ τοῖς διαλεκτικοῖς 
λεγομένων ὁρμώμενός τις οὕτως ἂν συντόμως 
ὑπομνήσειε περιττὰ εἶναι τὰ περὶ τῶν σοφισμάτων 
παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς δὴ τεχνολογούμενα. ἐπὶ τὴν τέχνην 
τὴν διαλεκτικήν φασιν ὡρμηκέναι of διαλεκτικοὶ 
οὐχ ἁπλῶς ὑπὲρ τοῦ γνῶναι τί ἐκ τίνος συνάγεται, 





* A famous anatomist of Cos, circa 300 8.c. For Diodorus 
Cronos cf. i. 234. 

> This refers back to the end of § 244, § 245 being paren- 
thetic. 


314 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 244-247 


build ships and houses and beget children without pay- 
ing any attention to the arguments against motion 
and becoming. And we are told of an amusing retort 245 
made by the physician Herophilus@: he was a con- 
temporary of Diodorus who, being given to juggling 
with dialectic, used to promulgate sophistical argu- 
ments against motion as well as many other things. 
So when Diodorus had dislocated his shoulder he 
came to Herophilus to get treated, and the latter 
jestingly said to him—‘ Your shoulder has been put 
out either in the place where it was or where it was 
not; but it was put out neither where it was nor 
where it was not; therefore it has not been put 
out ”’; so that the Sophist begged him to leave such 
arguments alone and apply the treatment prescribed 
by medical art as suitable to his case. For ὃ it is, I 246 
think, sufficient to conduct one’s life empirically and 
undogmatically in accordance with the rules and 
beliefs that are commonly accepted, suspending judge- 
ment regarding the statements derived from dogmatic 
subtlety and furthest removed from the usage of 
life.c If, then, dialectic would fail to expose any of 
the sophisms which might usefully be exposed, while 
the exposure of all the sophisms which we might 
perhaps grant it capable of exposing is useless, 
then in respect of the exposure of sophisms dialectic 
is useless. 

Starting even from the actual statements made by 247 
the dialecticians one might show concisely in this wise 
that their technical arguments about sophisms are 
superfluous. The dialecticians assert that they have 
resorted to the art of dialectic not simply for the sake 
of ascertaining what is deduced from what but chiefly 


¢ The traditional Sceptic attitude, cf. i. 15, 23 ff., etc. 
315 


248 


249 


250 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


LAAG “ φ \ ~ ὃ 9 3 ὃ a 
ἀλλὰ προηγουμένως ὑπὲρ τοῦ δι’ ἀποδεικτικῶν 
᾽; \ 3 “- \ \ a ’ > 7 
λόγων τὰ ἀληθῆ καὶ τὰ ψευδῆ κρίνειν ἐπίστασθαι: 
λέγουσι γοῦν εἶναι τὴν διαλεκτικὴν ἐπιστήμην ἀλη- 
“". Α »“»“»Ἅ 
θῶν καὶ ψευδῶν καὶ οὐδετέρων. ἐπεὶ τοίνυν αὐτοί 
φασιν ἀληθῆ “λόγον εἶναι τὸν δι᾽ ἀληθῶν λημμάτων 
ἀληθὲς συνάγοντα συμπέρασμα, ἅμα τῷ ἐρω- 
τηθῆναι λόγον ψεῦδος ἔχοντα τὸ συμπέρασμα 
/ 
εἰσόμεθα ὅτι ψευδής ἐστιν καὶ οὐ συγκαταθησόμεθα 
αὐτῷ. ἀνάγκη γὰρ καὶ αὐτὸν τὸν λόγον ἤτοι μὴ 
εἶναι συνακτικὸν ἢ μηδὲ τὰ λήμματα ἔχειν ἀληθῆ. 
καὶ τοῦτο δῆλον ἐκ τῶνδε. ἤτοι ἀκολουθεῖ τὸ ἐν 
τῷ λόγῳ ψευδὲς συμπέρασμα τῇ διὰ τῶν λημ- 
7 > “a λ σι aN 3.9 2 λ θ “a LAA? 
μάτων αὐτοῦ συμπλοκῇ ἢ οὐκ ἀκολουθεῖ. a 
εἰ μὲν οὐκ ἀκολουθεῖ, οὐδὲ συνακτικὸς λόγος ἔσται: 
λέγουσι γὰρ συνακτικὸν γίνεσθαι λόγον ὅταν ἀκο- 
on ~ A ~ / 93 “κ᾿ ~ \ 
λουθῇ τῇ διὰ τῶν λημμάτων αὐτοῦ συμπλοκῇ τὸ 
ἐν αὐτῷ συμπέρασμα. εἰ δὲ ἀκολουθεῖ, ἀνάγκη 
καὶ τὴν διὰ τῶν λημμάτων συμπλοκὴν εἶναι ψευδῆ 
κατὰ τὰς αὐτῶν ἐκείνων τεχνολογίας- φασὶ γὰρ 
ὅτι τὸ ψεῦδος ψεύδει μὲν ἀκολουθεῖ, ἀληθεῖ δὲ 
’ “~ @ \ ς Ἁ A an \ 3 \ 
οὐδαμῶς. ὅτι δὲ 6 μὴ συνακτικὸς ἢ μὴ ἀληθὴς 
λόγος κατὰ αὐτοὺς οὐδὲ ἀποδεικτικός ἐστιν, δῆλον 
ἐκ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν εἰρημένων. 
> / 3 / / 3 = ag 7 ? 
Ei rowvv ἐρωτηθέντος λόγου ev ᾧ ψεῦδός ἐστι 
τὸ συμπέρασμα, αὐτόθεν γινώσκομεν ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἀληθὴς οὐδὲ συνακτικὸς 6 λόγος, ἐκ τοῦ συμ- 
πέρασμα ἔχειν ψευδές, οὐ συγκαταθησόμεθα αὐτῷ, 
κἂν μὴ γινώσκωμεν παρὰ τί τὸ ἀπατηλὸν ἔχει. 
a ‘ 0,3 φΦ 3 o~ ? \ \ ς Α ~ 
ὥσπερ yap οὐδ᾽ ὅτι ἀληθῆ ἐστὶ τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν ψηφο- 
παικτῶν γινόμενα συγκατατιθέμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ἴσμεν 


316 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 247-250 


for the sake of knowing how to discern the true and 
the false by means of probative arguments. Thus 
they declare that dialectic is ‘‘ the science of what is 
true and false and neither.’’ Since, then, they assert 248 
that a true argument is one which draws a true con- 
clusion by means of true premisses,* when an argu- 
ment is propounded which has a false conclusion we 
shall at once know that it is false and shall not yield 

it assent. For the argument itself must either be 
illogical or contain premisses that are not true. The 249 
following considerations show this clearly : The false 
conclusion in the argument either follows from the 
combination formed by its premisses, or it does not 

so follow. But if it does not so follow, neither will 
the argument be logically sound; for an argument, 
they say, is logically sound when its conclusion follows 
from the combination formed by its premisses. If, 
again, it does so follow, then—according to their own 
technical treatises—the combination formed by its 
premisses must necessarily be false; for they say that 
the false follows from the false and nohow from thetrue.? 
And from what we have already said ὁ it is plain that 250 
according to them the argument which is not logically 
sound or not true is not probative either. 

If, then, when an argument is propounded with a 
false conclusion we know at once that the argument 
is neither true nor logically sound, because of its false 
conclusion, we shall not assent to it, even if we fail 
to see wherein the fallacy lies. For just as we refuse 
our assent to the truth of the tricks performed by 
jugglers and know that they are deluding us, even 


“ Of. 88 137 ff. 
δ Of. Aristot. Anal. pr. ii. 2; Diog. Laert. vii. 81. 
° Cf. § 139. 
317 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ὅτι ἀπατῶσιν κἂν μὴ γινώσκωμεν ὅπως ἀπατῶσιν, 
οὕτως οὐδὲ τοῖς ψευδέσι μὲν πιθανοῖς δὲ εἶναι 
δοκοῦσι λόγοις πειθόμεθα, κἂν μὴ γινώσκωμεν 
ὅπως παραλογίζονται. 

251 Ἢ ἐπεὶ οὐ μόνον. ἐπὶ ψεῦδος ἀπάγειν τὸ σόφισμά 
φασιν" ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπὶ ἄλλας ἀτοπίας, κοινότερον 
οὕτω συνερωτητέον. 6 ἐρωτώμενος λόγος ἦτοι 
ἐπί τι ἀπρόσδεκτον ἡμᾶς ἄγει ἢ ἐπί τι τοιοῦτον 
ὡς χρῆναι αὐτὸ προσδέχεσθαι. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν τὸ 
δεύτερον, οὐκ ἀτόπως αὐτῷ συγκαταθησόμεθα" 
εἰ δὲ ἐπί τι ἀπρόσδεκτον, οὐχ ἡμᾶς τῇ ἀτοπίᾳ 
δεήσει συγκατατίθεσθαι προπετῶς διὰ τὴν πιθα- 
νότητα, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνους ἀφίστασθαι τοῦ λόγου τοῦ 
τοῖς ἀτόποις ἀναγκάζοντος συγκατατίθεσθαι, εἴγε 

μὴ ληρεῖν παιδαριωδῶς ἀλλὰ τἀληθῆ ζητεῖν, ὡς 

252 ὑπισχνοῦνται, προήρηνται. ὥσπερ γὰρ εἰ ὁδὸς 
εἴη ἐπί τινα κρημνὸν φέρουσα, ok ὠθοῦμεν αὑτοὺς 
εἰς τὸν κρημνὸν διὰ τὸ ὅδόν τινα εἶναι φέρουσαν 
ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀφιστάμεθα "τῆς ὁδοῦ διὰ τὸν 
κρημνόν, οὕτω καὶ εἰ εἰ λόγος εἴη ἐπί τι ὁμολογου- 
μένως ἄτοπον ἡμᾶς ἀπάγων, οὐχὶ τῷ ἀτόπῳ συγ- 
καταθησόμεθα διὰ τὸν λόγον, ἀλλ᾽ ἀποστησόμεθα 

958 τοῦ λόγου διὰ τὴν ἀτοπίαν. ὅταν οὖν οὕτως ἡμῖν 
συνερωτᾶται λόγος, καθ᾽ ἑκάστην πρότασιν ἐφ- 
ἔξομεν, εἶτα τοῦ ὅλου συνερωτηθέντος λόγου τὰ 
δοκοῦντα ἐπάξομεν. 

Kai εἴγε οἱ περὶ τὸν Χρύσιππον δογματικοὶ ἐν 
τῇ συνερωτήσει τοῦ σωρίτου προϊόντος τοῦ λόγου 
1 73 σόφισμά φασιν T: τοῖς σοφίσμασιν mss., Bekk. 


“ The fallacy of the “ Heap”? (acervalis), so-called because 
commonly framed thus: “* This is a heap of grain: take away 
one grain—two grains—three grains, and so on—is it still a 


318 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 250-253 


if we do not know how they do it, so likewise we 
refuse to believe arguments which, though seemingly 
plausible, are false, even when we do not know how 
they are fallacious. 
A'urther, since the sophism leads, they say, not only 
to falsehood but also to other absurdities, we must 
discuss it more at large. The argument propounded 
leads us either to an inadmissible conclusion or to one 
of such a sort that we must needs admit it. In the 
latter case we shall assent to it without absurdity ; 
but if it leads to what is inadmissible, it is not we that 
ought to yield hasty assent to the absurdity because 
of its plausibility, but it is they that ought to abstain 
from the argument.which constrains them to assent 
to absurdities, if they really choose to seek truth, as 
they profess, rather than drivel like children. Thus, 
suppose there were a road leading up to a chasm, we 
do not push ourselves into the chasm just because there 
is a road leading to it but we avoid the road because 
of the chasm ; so, in the same way, if there should be 
an argument which leads us to a confessedly absurd 
conclusion, we shall not assent to the absurdity just 
because of the argument but avoid the argument 


252 


because of the absurdity. So whenever such an 253 


argument is propounded to us we shall suspend 
judgement regarding each premiss, and when finally 
the whole argument is propounded we shall draw 
what conclusions we approve. 

And if the Dogmatists of the School of Chrysippus 
declare that when the “‘Sorites”’ “is being propounded 
heap?’’ Or ‘‘Does one grain make a heap? Or, if not, 
2,3,...¢grains?’’ The essence of the fallacy is that “aliquid 
minutatim et gradatim additur aut demitur”’ (Cicero, Lucull. 


16). In modern Logic “ Sorites *’ denotes a chain of syllogisms 
in which all the conclusions save the last are suppressed. 


319 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


φασὶ δεῖν ἵστασθαι καὶ ἐπέχειν, ἵνα μὴ ἐκπέσωσιν 
εἰς ἀτοπίαν, πολὺ δήπου μᾶλλον ἂν ἡμῖν ἀρ Cov 
εἴη σκεπτικοῖς οὖσιν, ὑποπτεύουσιν ἀτοπίαν, μὴ 
προπίπτειν κατὰ τὰς συνερωτήσεις. τῶν λημμάτων, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπέχειν καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἕως τῆς ὅλης συνεβῳ- 

254 τήσεως τοῦ λόγου. καὶ ἡμεῖς μὲν ἀδοξάστως G7 
τῆς βιωτικῆς τηρήσεως ὁρμώμενοι τοὺς ἀπατηλοὺς 
οὕτως ἐκκλίνομεν λόγους, of δογματικοὶ δὲ 
ἀδυνάτως ἕξουσι διακρῖναι τὸ σόφισμα ἀπὸ τοῦ 
δεόντως δοκοῦντος ἐρωτᾶσθαι λόγου, εἴγε χρὴ 
δογματικῶς αὐτοὺς ἐπικρῖναι καὶ ὅτι συνακτικόν 
ἐστι τὸ σχῆμα τοῦ λόγου καὶ ὅτι τὰ λήμματά ἐ ἐστιν 

255 ἀληθῆ 7 οὐχ οὕτως ἔχει" ὑπεμνήσαμεν γὰρ ἐμ- 
προσθεν ὅτι οὔτε τοὺς συνακτικοὺς λόγους δύνανται 
καταλαμβάνειν οὔτε ἀληθὲς εἶναί τι κρίνειν οἷοί 
τέ εἰσι, μήτε κρυτήριον μήτε ἀπόδειξιν ὁμολογου- 
μένως ἔχοντες, ὡς ἐκ τῶν λεγομένων ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν 
ἐκείνων ὑπεμνήσαμεν. παρέλκει οὖν ὅσον ἐπὶ 
τούτοις ἡ θρυλουμένη παρὰ τοῖς διαλεκτικοῖς περὶ 
τῶν σοφισμάτων τεχνολογία. 

256 Παραπλήσια δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς διαστολῆς τῶν 
ἀμφιβολιῶν λέγομεν. εἰ γὰρ ἡ ἀμφιβολία λέξις 
ἐστὶ δύο καὶ πλείω σημαίνουσα καὶ αἱ λέξεις 
σημαίνουσι θέσει, ὅσας μὲν χρήσιμόν ἐστιν ἀμφι- 
βολίας διαλύεσθαι, τουτέστι τὰς ἔν τινι τῶν ἐμ- 
πειριῶν, ταύτας οἱ καθ᾽ ἑκάστην τέχνην ἐγγεγυμ- 
νασμένοι διαλύσονται, τὴν ἐμπειρίαν ἐ ἔχοντες αὐτοὶ 
τῆς ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν πεποιημένης θετικῆς χρήσεως τῶν 
ὀνομάτων κατὰ τῶν σημαινομένων, ὃ δὲ διαλεκ- 

257 τικὸς οὐδαμῶς, οἷον ὡς ἐπὶ ταύτης τῆς ἀμφιβολίας 





α ΟἹ § 214. 
890 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 253-257 


they ought to halt while the argumentis still proceeding 
and suspend judgement, to avoid falling into absurdity, 
much more, surely, would it be fitting for us, who are 
Sceptics, when we suspect absurdity, to give no hasty 
approval of the premisses propounded but rather to 
suspend judgement about each until the completion 
of the whole series which forms the argument. And 254 
whereas we, by starting undogmatically from the 
observation of practical life, thus avoid these fallacious 
arguments, the Dogmatists will not be in a position 
to distinguish the Sophism from the argument which 
seems to be correctly propounded, seeing that they 
have to pronounce dogmatically that the form of the 
argument is, or is not, logically sound and also that 
the premisses are, or are not, true. For we have 255 
shown above that they are neither able to apprehend 
the logically valid arguments nor yet capable of 
deciding that a thing is true, since—as we have shown 
from their own statements—they possess neither a 
Criterion nor a Demonstration that commands general 
agreement. Thus far, then, the technical treatment 
of Sophisms so much talked of amongst the Dialec- 
ticians is otiose. 

And we say much the same regarding the distin- 256 
guishing of ambiguities. For if the Ambiguity is a 
word or phrase having two or more meanings, and it 
is by convention ὦ that words have meaning, then all 
such ambiguities as can be usefully cleared up—such, 
that is, as occur in the course of some practical affair— 
will be cleared up, not certainly by the dialectician, 
but by the craftsmen trained in each several art, as 
they have personal experience of the conventional 
way adopted by themselves of using the terms to 
denote the objects signified—as, for example, in the 257 


VOL. I Y 321 


258 


259 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


{{ 


ἐν ταῖς παρακμαῖς τὴν ποικίλην δίαιταν καὶ τὸν 
οἶνον δοκιμαστέον.᾽᾿ ἤδη δὲ καὶ κατὰ τὸν βίον ἄχρι 
καὶ τοὺς παῖδας ὁρῶμεν διαστελλομένους ἄμφι- 
βολίας, ὧν ἡ διαστολὴ χρησιμεύειν αὐτοῖς δοκεῖ. 
εἰ γοῦν τις ὁμωνύμους οἰκέτας ἔχων κελεύοι 
παιδίον “κληθῆναι αὐτῷ τὸν Μάνην, εἰ τύχοι, (τοῦτο 
γὰρ τοὔνομα τοῖς οἰκέταις ἔστω κοινόν) πεύσεται 
6 παῖς ποῖον. καὶ εἰ πλείονας καὶ διαφόρους τις 
οἴνους ἔχων. λέγοι τῷ παιδίῳ ““ ἔγχεόν μοι τοῦ 
οἴνου πιεῖν, ὁμοίως ὃ παῖς πεύσεται ποίου. 
οὕτως ἡ ἐν ἑκάστοις ἐμπειρία τοῦ χρησίμου τὴν 
διαστολὴν εἰσάγει. 

Ὅσαι μέντοι μὴ ἐν τινι τῶν βιωτικῶν ἐμπειριῶν 
εἰσὶν ἀμφιβολίαι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν δογματικαῖς οἰήσεσι 
κεῖνται καὶ εἰσὶν ἴσως ἄχρηστοι πρὸς τὸ ἀδοξάστως 
βιοῦν, περὶ ταύτας ἰδίως ὁ ὁ διαλεκτικὸς ἐ ἔχων ἀναγ- 
κασθήσεται καὶ ἐν αὐταῖς ὁμοίως. ἐπέχειν κατὰ 


) “ ἀδήλοις 












lt Ως ο ἐρὶ μὲν τούτων καὶ εἰσαῦθις 
διαλεξόμεθα: εἰ δέ τις δογματικὸς πρός τι τούτων 
ἀντιλέγειν ἐπιχειροίη, κρατυνεῖ τὸν σκεπτικὸν 
λόγον, ἐκ τῆς ἑκατέρωθεν ἐπιχειρήσεως καὶ τῆς 
ἀνεπικρίτου διαφωνίας τὴν περὶ τῶν ζητουμένων 
ἐποχὴν καὶ αὐτὸς βεβαιῶν. 

οσαῦτα καὶ περὶ ἀμφιβολιῶν εἰπόντες αὐτοῦ 
που περιγράφομεν καὶ τὸ δεύτερον τῶν ὕὑπο- 
τυπώσεων σύνταγμα. 

α Of. 8 237. 


> i.e. his special attitude, as a Dogmatist, towards ambigu- 
ities. 





322 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, II. 257-259 


case of the ambiguity “ In periods of abatement one 
should sanction a varied diet and wine.’’* And in 
the ordinary affairs of life we see already how people 
—ay, and even the slave-boys—distinguish ambi- 
guities when they think such distinction is of use. 
Certainly, if a master who had servants named alike 
were to bid a boy called, say, “ Manes ᾿᾿ (supposing 
this to be common name for a servant) to be sum- 
moned, the slave-boy will ask ‘‘ Which one ?”’ And 
if a man who had several different wines were to 
say to his boy “ Pour me out a draught of wine,” 


then too the boy will ask ““ Which one?” Thus it 258 


is the experience of what is useful in each affair that 
brings about the distinguishing of ambiguities. 

All such ambiguities, however, as are not involved 
in the practical experiences of life but in dogmatic 
opinions, and are no doubt useless for a life void of 
dogmatism,—concerning these the Dialectician, in 
his own peculiar position,? will be similarly forced, 
in view of the Sceptic attacks, to suspend judge- 
ment, in so far as they are probably linked up with 
matters that are non-evident and non-apprehensible, 
or even non-substantial. This subject, however, we 
shall discuss later on®; and if any Dogmatist should 
attempt to refute any of our statements he will be 
strengthening the Scepticargument by adding support 
to their suspension of judgement about the matters 
in question as a result of our mutual antagonism and 
interminable dissension. 

Having said thus much concerning ambiguities we 


now conclude therewith our Second Book of Outlines. -’ 


¢ No such discussion is to be found in the extant works of 
Sextus. 


$23 


Γ 


1 Περὶ μὲν τοῦ λογικοῦ μέρους τῆς λεγομένης 
φιλοσοφίας ὡς ἐν ὑποτυπώσει τοσαῦτα ἀρκούντως 
λέγουτο ἄν. 


A'.—ITEPI ΤΟΥ ΦΥΣΙΚΟΥ͂ ΜΕΡΟΥ͂Σ 


Κατὰ δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν “τρόπον “rhs συγγραφῆς καὶ 
τὸ φυσικὸν μέρος αὐτῆς ἐπιόντες od πρὸς ἕκαστον 
τῶν λεγομένων αὐτοῖς κατὰ τόπον ἀντεροῦμεν, 
ἀλλὰ τὰ καθολικώτερα. κινεῖν ἐπιχειρήσομεν, οἷς 
συμπεριγράφεται καὶ τὰ λοιπά. ἀρξόμεθα δὲ ἀπὸ 
τοῦ περὶ ἀρχῶν λόγου. 


B’.—IIEPI ΑΡΧΩΝ APAZTIKON 


Kai ἐπειδὴ παρὰ τοῖς πλείστοις συμπεφώνηται 
τῶν ἀρχῶν τὰς μὲν ὑλικὰς εἶναι τὰς δὲ δραστικάς, 
ἀπὸ τῶν δραστικῶν τὴν ἀρχὴν τοῦ λόγου ποιησό- 
μεθα: ταύτας γὰρ Kat κυριωτέρας τῶν ὑλικῶν 
φασὶν εἶναι. 


I’.—IIEPI ΘΕΟΥ͂ 


2 Οὐκοῦν ἐπεὶ θεὸν εἶναι δραστικώτατον αἴτιον of 
πλείους ἀπεφήναντο, πρότερον περὶ θεοῦ σκοπή- 
* For the Stoic division of “ Philosophy ” into three parts 
—logic, physics and ethics—see fi. 18. ὃ Cf. ii. 84. 
324 


BOOK II 


Concernine the logical division of what is called 1 
“ Philosophy ᾿᾿ 6 the foregoing account may suffice by 
way of outline. 


CuHapter I.—Or tar Puyvsican Drvisrton 


Pursuing the same method of exposition in our 
investigation of the Physical division of Philosophy, 
we shall not refute each of their statements in order, 
but we shall endeavour to overthrow those of a more 
general character © wherein the rest also are included. 

Let us begin with their doctrine of Principles.¢ 


Cuaprer II].—Or Erricrent PRINCIPLES 


Since it is agreed by most that of Principles some 
are material and some efficient, we shall make our 
argument start with the efficient ; for these, as they 
assert, are superior to the material. 


Cuaprer III.—Concernine Gop 


Since, then, the majority have declared that God 2 
is a most efficient Cause, let us begin by inquiring 
¢ «ὁ Principles,”’ or “ origins’ (ἀρχαί), which are assumed to 


explain existence: fundamental realities: here used prac- 
tically as a synonym for ‘‘ Causes ”’ (αἔτια). 


325 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


σωμεν, ἐκεῖνο προειπόντες ὅτι TH μὲν βίῳ κατ- 
ακολουθοῦντες ἀδοξάστως φαμὲν εἶναι θεοὺς καὶ 
σέβομεν θεοὺς καὶ προνοεῖν αὐτοὺς φαμέν, πρὸς 
δὲ τὴν προπέτειαν τῶν δογματικῶν τάδε λέγομεν. 

Τῶν ἐννοουμένων ἡμῖν πραγμάτων τὰς οὐσίας 
ἐπινοεῖν ὀφείλομεν, οἷον εἰ σώματά ἐστιν ἣ ἀσώ- 
ματα. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ εἴδη: οὐ γὰρ ay τις ἵππον 
ἐννοῆσαι δύναιτο μὴ οὐχὶ πρότερον τὸ εἶδος τοῦ 
ἵππου μαθών. τό τε ἐννοούμενον ἐννοεῖσθαί που 

8 ὀφείλει. ἐπεὶ οὖν τῶν δογματικῶν of μὲν σῶμά 
φασιν εἶναι τὸν θεὸν οὗ δὲ ἀσώματον, καὶ οἱ μὲν 
ἀνθρωποειδῆ οἱ δὲ οὔ, καὶ οὗ μὲν ἐν τόπῳ οἱ δὲ 
οὔ, καὶ τῶν ἐν τόπῳ οἱ μὲν ἐντὸς κόσμου οἱ δὲ 
ἐκτός, πῶς δυνησόμεθα ἔννοιαν θεοῦ λαμβάνειν 
μήτε οὐσίαν ἔχοντες αὐτοῦ ὁμολογουμένην μήτε 
εἶδος μήτε τόπον ἐν ᾧ εἴη; πρότερον γὰρ ἐκεῖνοι 
ὁμολογησάτωσάν τε καὶ συμφωνησάτωσαν ὅτι 
τοϊόσδε ἐστὶν ὁ θεός: εἶτα ἡμῖν αὐτὸν ὑποτυπω- 
σάμενοι οὕτως ἀξιούτωσαν ἡ ἡμᾶς ἔννοιαν θεοῦ λαμ- 
βάνεν. ἐς ὅσον δὲ ἀνεπικρίτως διαφωνοῦσιν, τί 
νοήσομεν ἡμεῖς ὁμολογουμένως παρ᾽ αὐτῶν οὐκ 
LA 
ἔχομεν. 

4 ᾿Αλλ᾽ ἄφθαρτόν τι, φασί, καὶ μακάριον ἐννοήσας, 
τὸν θεὸν εἶναι τοῦτο νόμιζε. τοῦτο δέ ἐστιν εὔηθες" 
ὡς γὰρ ὃ μὴ εἰδὼς τὸν Δίωνα οὐδὲ τὰ ΄συμβεβη- 
κότα αὐτῷ ὡς Δίωνι δύναται νοεῖν, οὕτως ἐπεὶ 


4 Cf. Adv. Phys.i. 18 ff. It is argued here (1) that God is 
not ‘“ conceived,” §§ 2-5; nor (2) “᾿ apprehended,”’ §§ 6-11. 
Cf. 8 918 infra. 

ὑ Literally * life” : of. 1. 28 £. 

¢ “* Substances’? in the logical sense, as opposed to 
“* properties.” 

4 The Stoies held God to be “ corporeal,”’ not “ of human 


326 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 2-4 


about God,? first premising that although, following 
the ordinary view,° we affirm undogmatically that 
Gods exist and reverence Gods and ascribe to them 
foreknowledge, yet as against the rashness of the 
Dogmatists we argue as follows. 

When we conceive objects we ought to form con- 
ceptions of their substances ¢ as well, as, for instance, 
whether they are corporeal or incorporeal. And also 
of their forms; for no one could conceive “‘ Horse ”’ 
unless he had first learnt the horse’s form. And 
of course the object conceived must be conceived 
<as existing> somewhere. Since, then, some of the 3 
Dogmatists assert that God is corporeal, others that 
he is incorporeal, and some that he has human form, 
others not, and some that he exists in space, others 
not ; and of those who assert that he is in space some 
put him inside the world, others outside ὦ; how shall 
we be able to reach a conception of God when we have 
no agreement about his substance or his form or his 
place of abode? Let them first agree and consent 
together that God is of such and such a nature, and 
then, when they have sketched out for us that nature, 
let them require that we should form a conception of 
God. But so long as they disagree interminably, we 
cannot say what agreed notion we are to derive 
from them. 

But, say they, when you have conceived of a Being 4 
imperishable and blessed, regard this as God. But 
this is foolish ; for just as one who does not know Dion 
is unable also to conceive the properties which belong 
to him as Dion, so also when we do not know the 
form,” “‘ inside the world ’’; the Epicureans, “‘ corporeal,”’ 
‘* of human form,” “‘ outside the world ”; Aristotle, ὁ" incor- 


poreal”’ and “ not in space.” Cf. § 218 infra. 
¢ 2,6. the Stoics and Epicurus, ef. § 219 infra. 


327 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


οὐκ ἴσμεν τὴν οὐσίαν τοῦ θεοῦ, οὐδὲ τὰ συμβεβη- 
κότα αὐτῷ μαθεῖν τε καὶ ἐννοῆσαι δυνησόμεθα. 
ὅ χωρὶς δὲ τούτων εἰπάτωσαν ἡμῖν τί ἐστι τὸ 
μακάριον, πότερον τὸ ἐνεργοῦν κατὰ ἀρετὴν καὶ 
προνοούμενον τῶν ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτὸ τεταγμένων, ἢ τὸ 
ἀνενέργητον καὶ μήτε αὐτὸ πράγματα ἔχον μήτε 
ἑτέρῳ παρέχον" καὶ γὰρ καὶ περὶ τούτου διαφωνή- 
σαντες ἀνεπικρίτως ἃ ἀνεννόητον ἡμῖν πεποιήκασι τὸ 
μακάριον, διὰ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ τὸν θεόν. 

6 Ἵνα δὲ καὶ ἐπινοῆται. 6 θεός, ἐπέχειν ἀνάγκη 
περὶ τοῦ πότερον ἔστιν ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς 
δογματικοῖς. τὸ γὰρ εἶναι τὸν θεὸν πρόδηλον μὲν 
οὐκ ἔστιν. εἰ -γὰρ ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ προσέπιπτεν, συν- 
εφώνησαν ἂν οἱ δογματικοὶ τίς ἐστι καὶ ποδαπὸς 
καὶ ποῦ: ἡ ἀνεπίκριτος δὲ διαφωνία πεποίηκεν 
αὐτὸν ἄδηλον ἡμῖν εἷναι δοκεῖν καὶ ἀποδείξεως 

7 δεόμενον. ὃ μὲν οὖν ἀποδεικνύων" ὅτι ἔστι θεός, 
ἤτοι διὰ προδήλου τοῦτο ἀποδείκνυσιν ἢ 7) δι᾿ ἀδήλου. 
διὰ προδήλου μὲν οὖν ᾿ οὐδαμῶς" εἰ γὰρ ἦν πρόδηλον 
τὸ ἀποδεικνύον ὅτι ἔστι θεός, ἐπεὶ τὸ ἀποδεικνύ- 
μένον πρὸς τῷ ἀποδεικνύντι νοεῖται, διὸ καὶ συγ- 
καταλαμβάνεται αὐτῷ, καθὼς καὶ παρεστήσαμεν, 
πρόδηλον ἔσται καὶ τὸ εἶναι θεόν, συγκαταλαμ- 
βανόμενον τῷ ἀποδεικνύντι αὐτὸ προδήλῳ ὄντι. 
οὐκ ἔστι δὲ πρόδηλον, ὡς ὑπεμνήσαμεν" οὐδὲ ἀπο- 

8 δείκνυται ἄρα διὰ προδήλου. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ δι᾿ ἀδήλου. 


1 ἀποδεικνύων T: λέγων Steph., Bekk.: om. mss. 





¢ The Epicurean Deity as contrasted with the Platonic 
and Stoic. Cf. Lucretius ii. 646 ff. : 
omnis enim per se divom natura necessest 


inmortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur 
semota ab nostris rebus seiunctaque longe. 


328 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 4-8 


substance of God we shall also be unable to learn 
and conceive his properties. And apart from this, let 5 
them tell us what a “ blessed ᾿᾿ thing is—whether it is 
that which energizes according to virtue and fore- 
knows what is subject to itself, or that which is void 
of energy and neither performs any work itself nor 
provides work for another.* For indeed about this 
also they disagree interminably and thus render 
‘“‘the blessed ” something we cannot conceive, and 
therefore God also. 

Further, in order to form a conception of God one 6 
must necessarily—so far as depends on the Dog- 
matists—suspend judgement as to his existence or 
non-existence. For the existence of God is not pre- 
evident.? For if God impressed us automatically, 
the Dogmatists would have agreed together regard- 
ing his essence, his character, and his place ; whereas 
their interminable disagreement has made him seem 
to us non-evident and needing demonstration. Νον 7 
he that demonstrates the existence of God does so by 
means of what is either pre-evident or non-evident. 
Certainly not, then, by means of the pre-evident ; 
for if what demonstrates God’s existence were pre- 
evident, then—since the thing proved is conceived 
together with that which proves it, and therefore is 
apprehended along with it as well, as we have estab- 
lished °—God’s existence also will be pre-evident, it 
being apprehended along with the pre-evident fact 
which proves it. But, as we have shown, it is not 
pre-evident ; therefore it is not proved, either, by a 
pre-evident fact. Noryetby whatisnon-evident. For 8 


δ 2,6. plainly manifest, self-evident, cf. i. 178. 
¢ Of. ii. 179, 198, 


329 


10 


11 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


\ \ δ, A 3 A ~ Φ 7ὔ 
τὸ γὰρ ἄδηλον τὸ ἀποδεικτικὸν τοῦ εἶναι θεόν, 
> ’ “ > \ \ 7 4 
ἀποδείξεως χρῇζον, εἰ μὲν διὰ προδήλου λέγουτο 
3 / > 4 a # > \ ,ὔ 
ἀποδείκνυσθαι, οὐκέτι ἄδηλον ἔσται ἀλλὰ πρόδηλον 
[τὸ εἶναι θεόν]. οὐκ ἄρα τὸ ἀποδεικτικὸν αὐτοῦ 
ἄδηλον διὰ προδήλου ἀποδείκνυται. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ διΐ 
ἀδήλου" εἰς ἄπειρον γὰρ ἐκπεσεῖται ὃ τοῦτο λέγων, 
αἰτούντων ἡμῶν ἀεὶ ἀπόδειξιν τοῦ φερομένου 
ἀδήλου πρὸς ἀπόδειξιν τοῦ προκειμένου. οὐκ ἄρα 
3 ¢ ff [4 3 / \ > f > 
ἐξ ἑτέρου δύναται ἀποδείκνυσθαι τὸ εἶναι θεόν. εἰ 

A ? > ς Ὁ» A / / ? ¢ 7? 
de μήτε ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ ἐστὶ πρόδηλον μήτε ἐξ ἑτέρου 
ἀποδείκνυται, ἀκατάληπτον ἔσται εἰ ἔστι θεός. 

3 A a / ς , » \ 3 

Eru καὶ τοῦτο λεκτέον. ὁ λέγων εἶναι θεὸν ἤτοι 
προνοεῖν αὐτὸν τῶν ἐν κόσμῳ φησὶν ἢ οὐ προνοεῖν, 
καὶ εἰ μὲν προνοεῖν, τοι πάντων ἢ τινῶν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ 
μὲν πάντων προυνόει, οὐκ ἢν ἂν οὔτε κακόν τι 
οὔτε κακία ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ: κακίας δὲ πάντα μεστὰ 

if “. 
εἶναι λέγουσιν: οὐκ ἄρα πάντων προνοεῖν λεχθή- 
σεται ὁ θεός. εἰ δὲ τινῶν προνοεῖ, διὰ τί τῶνδε 

A “ -~ A δ + Ν \ / 
μὲν προνοεῖ τῶνδε δὲ οὔ; ἤτοι yap καὶ βούλεται 
καὶ δύναται πάντων προνοεῖν, ἢ βούλεται μὲν οὐ 
ὃ / ὃ / aA ὃ ὔ \ 3 i ὃ / aN 3 
vvarat δέ, ἢ δύναταν μὲν οὐ βούλεται δέ, ἢ οὔτε 

, PY, 7 3 > 9 \ 1 3 ͵ 
βούλεται οὔτε δύναται. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν καὶ ἠβούλετο 
καὶ ἠδύνατο, πάντων ἂν προυνόει'" οὐ προνοεῖ δὲ 

/ 5 
πάντων διὰ τὰ προειρημένα: οὐκ ἄρα καὶ βούλεται 

\ / ὔ a“ ? \ / \ 
καὶ δύναται πάντων προνοεῖν. εἰ δὲ βούλεται μὲν 

3 7 / 3 / / ? o > ¢ 7 ἃ 
ov δύναται δέ, ἀσθενέστερός ἐστι τῆς αἰτίας δι᾽ ἣν 
οὐ δύναται προνοεῖν ὧν οὐ προνοεῖ" ἔστι δὲ παρὰ 


1 [τὸ ,. θεόν] del. Papp. 
330 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 8-1Ὸ 


if the non-evident fact which is capable of proving 
God’s existence, needing proof as it does, shall be said 
to be proved by means of a pre-evident fact, it will 
no longer be non-evident but pre-evident. Therefore 
the non-evident fact which proves his existence is not 
proved by what is pre-evident. Nor yet by what is 
non-evident ; for he who asserts this will be driven 
into circular reasoning when we keep demanding 
proof every time for the non-evident fact which he 
produces as proof of the one last propounded. Con- 
sequently, the existence of God cannot be proved 
from any other fact. But if God’s existence is neither 9 
automatically pre-evident nor proved from another 
fact, it will be inapprehensible. 

There is this also to be said. He who affirms that 
God exists either declares that he has, or that he has 
not, forethought for the things in the universe, and 
in the former case that such forethought is for all 
things or for some things. But ifhe had forethought 
for all, there would have been nothing bad and no 
badness in the world ; yet all things, they say, are full 
of badness ; hence it shall not be said that God fore- 
thinks all things. If, again, he forethinks some, why 10 
does he forethink these things and not those? For 
either he has both the will and the power to forethink 
all things, or else he has the will but not the power, or 
the power but not the will, or neither the will nor the 
power. But if he had had both the will and the 
power he would have had forethought for all things ; 
but for the reasons stated above he does not forethink 
all; therefore he has not both the will and the power 
to forethink all. And if he has the will but not the 
power, he is less strong than the cause which renders 
him unable to forethink what he does not forethink : 


331 


18 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


4 “~ > 7? A 3 θ / εν / 
τὴν θεοῦ ἐπίνοιαν τὸ ἀσθενέστερον εἶναί τινος 
αὐτόν. εἰ δὲ δύναται μὲν πάντων προνοεῖν, οὐ 

/ f / vn > , 3 \ 
βούλεται δέ, βάσκανος av εἶναι νομισθείη. εἰ δὲ 

tA / 3 7 \ ? / 3 
οὔτε βούλεται οὔτε δύναται, Kat βάσκανός ἐστι 
καὶ ἀσθενής, ὅπερ λέγειν περὶ θεοῦ ἀσεβούντων 
ἐστίν. οὐκ ἄρα προνοεῖ τῶν ἐν κόσμῳ 6 θεός. 

Ei δὲ οὐδενὸς πρόνοιαν ποιεῖται οὐδὲ ἔστιν αὐτοῦ 
ἔργον οὐδὲ ἀποτέλεσμα, οὐχ ἕξει τις εἰπεῖν “πόθεν 
καταλαμβάνει ὅτι ἔστι θεός, εἴγε μήτε ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ 
φαίνεται μήτε δι᾿ ἀποτελεσμάτων τινῶν καταλαμ- 
βάνεται. καὶ διὰ ταῦτα ἄρα ἀκατάληπτόν ἐστιν εἰ 
3 7 ? A / 9 ’ ἰ 3} 
ἔστι θεός. ἐκ δὲ τούτων ἐπιλογιζόμεθα ὅτι ἴσως 
ἀσεβεῖν ἀναγκάζονται οἱ διαβεβαιωτικῶς λέγοντες 
εἶναι θεόν" πάντων μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸν προνοεῖν λέγοντες 
κακῶν αἴτιον τὸν θεὸν εἶναι φήσουσιν, τινῶν δὲ ἢ 
καὶ μηδενὸς προνοεῖν αὐτὸν λέγοντες ἦτοι βάσκανον 
τὸν θεὸν ἢ ἀσθενῆ λέγειν ἀναγκασθήσονται, ταῦτα 
δέ ἐστιν ἀσεβούντων προδήλως. 


Δ΄. --ἰ ΠΕΡῚ ΑἸΤΊΟΥ 


“Ἵνα δὲ μὴ καὶ ἡμᾶς βλασφημεῖν ἐπιχειρήσωσιν 
οἱ δογματικοὶ δι᾽ ἀπορίαν τοῦ πραγματικῶς ἡμῖν 
ἀντιλέγειν, κοινότερον περὶ τοῦ ἐνεργητικοῦ αἰτίου 
διαπορήσομεν, πρότερον ἐπιστῆσαι πειραθέντες τῇ 
τοῦ αἰτίου ἐπινοίᾳ. ὅσον μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ τοῖς λεγο- 
μένοις ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐννοῆσαί τις τὸ 
αἴτιον δύναιτο, εἴγε πρὸς τῷ διαφώνους καὶ ἀλλο- 
κότους ἐννοίας τοῦ αἰτίου «ἀποδιδόναι», ἔτι καὶ 
τὴν ὑπόστασιν αὐτοῦ πεποιήκασιν ἀνεύρετον διὰ 

1 «ἀποδιδόναῳ add. T, Bekk. cj. 





e ive. by charging us with atheism. 
332 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 11-18 


but it is contrary to our notion of God that he should 11 
be weaker than anything. And if, again, he has the 
power but not the will to have forethought for all, he 
will be held to be malignant ; while if he has neither 
the will nor the power, he is both malignant and weak 
—an impious thing to say about God. Therefore 
God has no forethought for the things in the universe. 

But if he exercises no forethought for anything, and 
there exists no work nor product of his, no one will be 
able to name the source of the apprehension of God's 
existence, inasmuch as he neither appears of himself 
nor is apprehended by means of any of his products. 
So for these reasons we cannot apprehend whether 
God exists. And.from this we further conclude that 12 
those who positively affirm God’s existence are prob- 
ably compelled to be guilty of impiety ; for if they 
say that he forethinks all things they will be declaring 
that God is the cause of what is evil, while if they say 
that he forethinks some things or nothing they will 
be forced to say that God is either malignant or weak, 
and obviously this is to use impious language. 


Cuaptrer [V.—ConcerninG Cause 


To prevent the Dogmatists attempting also to 43 
slander us,* because of their inability to refute us 
in a practical way, we shall discuss the question of 
the efficient Cause more at large when we have first 
tried to give attention to the conception of Cause. 
Now so far as the statements of the Dogmatists are 
concerned, it would be impossible for anyone even to 
conceive Cause, since, in addition to offering dis- 
crepant and contradictory conceptions of Cause, they 
have rendered its substance also indiscoverable by 


333 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


14 τὴν περὶ αὐτὸ διαφωνίαν. of μὲν γὰρ σῶμα ot 


16 


δὲ ἀσώματον τὸ αἴτιον εἶναι φασίν. δόξαι δ᾽ ἂν 
αἴτιον εἶναι κοινότερον κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς δι’ ὃ ἐνεργοῦν 
γίνεται τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα, οἷον ὡς ὁ ἥλιος ἢ ἡ τοῦ 
ἡλίου θερμότης τοῦ χεῖσθαι τὸν κηρὸν ἢ τῆς χύσεως 
τοῦ κηροῦ. καὶ γὰρ ἐν τούτῳ διαπεφωνήκασιν, οἵ 
μὲν προσηγοριῶν αἴτιον εἶναι τὸ αἴτιον φάσκοντες, 
οἷον τῆς χύσεως, ot δὲ κατηγορημάτων, οἷον τοῦ 
χεῖσθαι. διό, καθάπερ εἶπον, κοινότερον ἂν εἴη 
τὸ αἴτιον τοῦτο δι᾿ ὃ ἐνεργοῦν γίνεται τὸ ἀπο- 
τέλεσμα. 

Τούτων δὲ τῶν αἰτίων οἱ μὲν πλείους ἡγοῦνται 
τὰ μὲν συνεκτικὰ εἶναι τὰ δὲ. συναΐτια τὰ δὲ 
συνεργά, καὶ συνεκτικὰ μὲν ὑπάρχειν ὧν παρόντων 
πάρεστι τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα καὶ αἰρομένων αἴρεται καὶ 
μειουμένων μειοῦται (οὕτω γὰρ τὴν περίθεσιν τῆς 
στραγγάλης αἴτιον. εἶναί φασι τοῦ πνιγμοῦ), συν- 
aittov δὲ ὃ τὴν ἴσην εἰσφέρεται δύναμιν ἑτέρῳ 
συναιτίῳ πρὸς τὸ εἶναι τὸ ,ἀποτέλεσμα (οὕτως 
ἕκαστον τῶν ἑλκόντων τὸ ἄροτρον βοῶν αἴτιον 
εἶναί φασι τῆς ὁλκῆς τοῦ ἀρότρου), συνεργὸν δὲ ὃ 
βραχεῖαν εἰσφέρεται δύναμιν καὶ πρὸς τὸ μετὰ 
ῥᾳστώνης ὑπάρχειν τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα, οἷον ὅταν δυοῖν 
βάρος τι βασταζόντων μόλις τρίτος τις προσελθὼν 
συγκουφίσῃ τοῦτο. 

"Ἔνιοι μέντοι καὶ παρόντα μελλόντων. αἴτια 
ἔφασαν εἶναι, ὡς τὰ προκαταρκτικά, οἷον τὴν ἐπι- 
τεταμένην ἡλίωσιν πυρετοῦ. τινὲς δὲ ταῦτα παρ- 
ῃτήσαντο, ἐπειδὴ τὸ αἴτιον πρός τι ὑπάρχον καὶ 





@ 4.0. Plato’s “‘ Ideas ” and the Pythagorean “* Numbers” 
cf. § 32, Adv. Phys. i. 364. 
> Cf. Plato, Cratyl. 413 4, Phileb. 262; Adv. Phys. i, 228. 


334 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 14-16 


their disagreement about it. For some affirm Cause 14 
to be corporeal, others incorporeal.* In the broad 
sense, a Cause would seem to be, according to them, 
‘That by whose energizing the effect comes about” ;? 
‘as, for example, the sun or the sun’s heat is the cause 
of the wax being melted or of the melting of the 
wax. Tor even on this point they are at variance, 
some declaring that Cause is causal of nouns, such as 
“ the melting,” others of predicates, such as ‘“‘ being 
melted.” Hence, as I said, in the broad sense Cause 
will be “ that by whose energizing the effect comes 
about.”’ 

The majority of them hold that of these Causes 15 
some are immediate,* some associate, some co- 
operant ; and that causes are ‘“‘ immediate ” when 
their presence involves the presence, and their re- 
moval the removal, and their decrease the decrease, 
of the effect (it is thus, they say, that the fixing on 
of the halter causes the strangling); and that an 
" associate ”’ cause is one which contributes a force 
equal to that of its fellow-cause towards the produc- 
tion of the effect (it is thus, they say, that each of the 
oxen which draw the plough is a cause of the drawing 
of the plough); and that a “‘ co-operant” cause is 
one which contributes a slight force towards the easy 
production of the effect, as in the case when two men 
are lifting a heavy load with difficulty the assistance 
of a third helps to lighten it. 

Some of them, however, have asserted further that 16 
things present are causes of things future, being 
“antecedents ”; as when intense exposure to the 
sun causes fever. But this view is rejected by some, 
on the ground that, since the Cause is relative to 


ὁ Cf. Adv. Phys. i. 1, 248. 
335 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πρὸς τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα ὃν οὐ δύναται προηγεῖσθαι 
αὐτοῦ ὡς αἴτιον. 
Ἔν δὲ τῇ περὶ αὐτῶν διαπορήσει τοιάδε λέγομεν. 


H’.—EI ἘΣΤῚ TI ΤΙΝῸΣ AITION 


7} 3 \ " ~ Ἁ bd) 
1] Πιθανόν ἐστιν εἷναι τὸ αἴτιον: πῶς γὰρ ἂν 

iv f 7 
αὔξησις γένοιτο, μείωσις, γένεσις, φθορά, καθόλου 

, “ “A \ “ > 
κίνησις, τῶν φυσικῶν re καὶ ψυχικῶν ἀποτελεσ- 

/ id los 7 
μάτων ἕκαστον, ἡ τοῦ παντὸς κόσμου διοίκησις, 

‘ 3, / 
τὰ ἄλλα πάντα, εἰ μὴ κατά τινα, αἰτίαν; Kal yap 

> \ \ 
εἰ μηδὲν τούτων ws πρὸς τὴν φύσιν ὑπάρχει, 

/ Ψ > ἡ Ul o~ 
λέξομεν ὅτι Sid Twa αἰτίαν πάντως φαίνεται ἡμῖν 

18 τοιαῦτα ὁποῖα οὐκ ἔστιν. ἀχλὰ καὶ πάντα ἐκ 

7 \ yf \ > \ 

πάντων καὶ ὡς ἔτυχεν ἂν ἦν μὴ οὔσης αἰτίας. 
“ 3 , 

οἷον ἵπποι μὲν ἐκ μυῶν, εἰ τύχοι, γεννηθήσονται, 

*\ 7 A y / \ > ~ 

ἐλέφαντες δὲ ἐκ μυρμήκων: καὶ ἐν μὲν ταῖς 

> ’ 7 2’ \ 3 , \ ? 

Αἰγυπτίαις Θήβαις ὄμβροι ποτὲ ἐξαίσιοι καὶ χιόνες 

δ + 7 A / ,ὔ Ἂ 

ἂν ἐγίνοντο, τὰ δὲ νότια ὄμβρων οὐ μετεῖχεν, εἰ 

\ f > 

μὴ αἰτία τις ἦν, du ἣν τὰ μὲν νότιά ἐστι δυσχείμερα, 

4 
19 αὐχμηρὰ δὲ τὰ πρὸς THY ἕω. Kal περιτρέπεται 
€ ὁ λέγων μηδὲν αἴτιον εἶναι: εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἁπλῶς 

\ \ Σ 
καὶ ἄνευ τινὸς αἰτίας τοῦτό φησι λέγειν, ἄπιστος 

\ a“ 
ἔσται, εἰ δὲ διά τινα αἰτίαν, βουλόμενος ἀναιρεῖν τὸ 

» / > 141 0. -¢ 2 «a ἢ ” 
αἴτιον τίθησιν, ἀποδιδοὺς" airiav δι᾿ ἣν οὐκ ἔστιν 
αἴτιον. 

1 ἀποδιδοὺς Kayser, Papp.: ἀποδιδόσθω μ85., Bekk. 

* Cf. § 25 infra. 

ὃ To mark the distinction between αἴτιον and αἰτία, I 
render the former by “Cause,” the latter by ‘“‘ cause.”’ 
The latter seems used mostly of the particular instance, 
the former of the general notion; or (as in §§ 19, 23, 24) 


the former of the cause of existence, the latter of the cause 
of cognition. 


336 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 16-19 


something existent and to a real effect, it cannot 
precede it as its cause.% 

As regards this controversy, our position is as 
follows : 


Cuapter V.—Dors ANYTHING CAUSE ANYTHING? 


That Cause exists is plausible; for how could 17 
there come about increase, decrease, generation, 
corruption, motion in general, each of the physical 
and mental effects, the ordering of the whole universe, 
and everything else, except by reason of some cause δὴ 
For even if none of these things has real existence,’ 
we shall affirm that,it is due to some cause that they 
appear to us other than they really are. Moreover, if 18 
cause were non-existent everything would have been 
produced by everything and at random. Horses, 
for instance, might be born, perchance, of flies, 
and elephants of ants; and there would have been 
severe rains and snow in Egyptian Thebes, while the 
southern districts would have had no rain, unless 
there had been a cause which makes the southern 
parts stormy, the eastern dry. Also, he who asserts 19 
that there is no Cause is refuted; for if he says that 
he makes this assertion absolutely and without any 
cause, he will not win credence; but if he says that 
he makes it owing to some cause, he is positing 
Cause while wishing to abolish it, since he offers us 
a cause to prove the non-existence of Cause. 


° Cf. Adv. Phys.i.201. “ These things,” being ‘“ appear- 
ances’ (or phenomena), may not really exist in the form 
in which they “‘ appear’ to us: the “ real’? may differ from 
the “ phenomenal,” but even so a “Cause” of that differ- 
ence must be assumed. 


VOL. I Ζ 337 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


“A \ > , 3 > \ ἢ 
Διὰ ταῦτα μὲν οὖν πιθανόν ἐστιν εἶναι τὸ αἴτιον’ 


Ω % \ \ 4 X > 7 / ,᾽ 
50 ὅτι δὲ καὶ τὸ λέγειν μὴ εἶναί τινός τι αἴτιον 


2} 


22 


29 


πιθανόν ἐστι, φανερὸν ἔσται λόγους ἡμῶν ἐκθε- 
μένων ὀλίγους ἀπὸ πολλῶν ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος πρὸς 
τὴν τούτου ὑπόμνησιν. οἷον γοῦν ἀδύνατόν ἐστι 
τὸ αἴτιον ἐννοῆσαι πρὶν τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα τούτου 
καταλαβεῖν ὡς ἀποτέλεσμα. αὐτοῦ: τότε γὰρ γνω- 
piloper ὅτι αἴτιόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀποτελέσματος, ὅταν 
ἐκεῖνο ws ἀποτέλεσμα καταλαμβάνωμεν. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 
τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα τοῦ αἰτίου ὡς ἀποτέλεσμα αὐτοῦ 
καταλαβεῖν δυνάμεθα, ἐὰν μὴ καταλάβωμεν τὸ 
αἴτιον τοῦ ἀποτελέσματος ὡς αἴτιον αὐτοῦ! τότε 
γὰρ καὶ ὅτι ἀποτέλεσμά ἐστι αὐτοῦ γινώσκειν 
δοκοῦμεν, ὅταν τὸ αἴτιον αὐτοῦ ὡς αἴτιον αὐτοῦ 
καταλάβωμεν. εἰ οὖν ἵνα μὲν ἐννοήσωμεν τὸ 
αἴτιον, δεῖ προεπιγνῶναι τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα, ἵνα δὲ 
τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα γνῶμεν, ὡς ἔφην, δεῖ προεπίστασθαι 
τὸ αἴτιον, ὁ διάλληλος τῆς ἀπορίας τρόπος ἄμφω 
δείκνυσιν ἀνεπινόητα, μήτε τοῦ αἰτίου ὡς αἰτίου 
μήτε τοῦ ἀποτελέσματος ὡς ἀποτελέσματος ἐπι- 
νοεῖσθαι δυναμένου" ἑκατέρου γὰρ αὐτῶν δεομένου 
τῆς παρὰ θατέρου πίστεως, οὐχ ἕξομεν ἀπὸ τίνος 
αὐτῶν ἀρξόμεθα τῆς ἐννοίας. διόπερ οὐδὲ ἀπο- 
φαίνεσθαι δυνησόμεθα ¢ ὅτι ἔστι τί τινος αἴτιον. 
Ἵνα δὲ καὶ ἐννοεῖσθαι δύνασθαι τὸ αἴτιον συγ- 
χωρήσῃ τις, ἀκατάληπτον ἂν εἶναι νομισθείη διὰ 
τὴν διαφωνίαν. ὃς μὲν γάρ φησιν εἶναί τί τινος 
αἴτιον, ἤτοι ἁπλῶς καὶ ἀπὸ μηδεμιᾶς ὁρμώμενος 
αἰτίας εὐλόγου τοῦτό φησι λέγειν, ἢ διά τινας 
αἰτίας ἐπὶ τὴν συγκατάθεσιν ταύτην ἰέναι λέξει. 
καὶ εἰ μὲν ἁπλῶς, οὐκ ἔσται πιστότερος τοῦ λέγον- 


398 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 19-23 


For these reasons, then, the existence of Cause is 
plausible. But that it is also plausible to say that 20 
nothing is the Cause of anything will be evident when 
we have set forth, to suit the occasion, a few of the 
many arguments which go to prove this case. Thus 
it is, for example, impossible to conceive the Cause 
before apprehending its effect as zts effect ; for we only 
recognize that it is causative of the effect when we 
apprehend the latter as an effect. But we cannot 21 
either apprehend the effect of the Cause as its effect 
unless we apprehend the Cause of the effect as zts 
Cause; for we think we know that it is its effect only 
when we have apprehended the Cause of it as its 
Cause. If, then, in order to conceive the Cause, we 22 
must first know the effect, while in order to know 
the effect we must, as I said, have previous knowledge 
of the Cause, the fallacy of this circular mode of 
reasoning proves both to be inconceivable, the Cause 
being incapable of being conceived as Cause, and the 
effect as effect. For since each of them needs the 
evidence of the other, we shall not be able to say 
which conception is to have the precedence. Hence 
we shall be unable to declare that anything is the 
Cause of anything. 

And even were one to grant that Cause can be 23 
conceived, it might be held to be inapprehensible 
because of the divergency of opinion. For he who 
says that there is some Cause of something either 
asserts that he makes this statement absolutely and 
without basing it on any rational cause, or else he will 
declare that he has arrived at his conviction owing 
to certain causes.” If, then, he says that he states it 
“ absolutely,” he will be no more worthy of credence 


α Cf., for the following arguments, i. 164. 
339 


24 


25 


26 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


€ ων A > \ μὲ 3 \ \ 
τος ἁπλῶς μηδὲν εἶναι μηδενὸς αἴτιον: εἰ δὲ Kal 
> 7 7 2 ἉᾺ > / 7 + / 
αἰτίας λέξει bv ἃς εἶναί τί τινος αἴτιον νομίζει, 
4 7 “-“ ~ > 
τὸ ζητούμενον διὰ τοῦ ζητουμένου παριστᾶν ἐπι- 
~ / 
χειρήσει: ζητούντων yap ἡμῶν εἰ ἔστι τί τινος 
~ > , 
αἴτιον, αὐτὸς ὡς αἰτίας οὔσης τοῦ εἶναι αἴτιον 
3 \ os 
αἴτιον εἶναι φησίν. καὶ ἄλλως, ἐπεὶ περὶ τῆς 
7 ~ ~ / / 
ὑπάρξεως τοῦ αἰτίου ζητοῦμεν, δεήσει πάντως 
\ \  “Ὅ ~ > + 
αὐτὸν καὶ τῆς αἰτίας τοῦ εἶναί τι αἴτιον αἰτίαν 
“ > a 3 / 
παρασχεῖν, κἀκεῖνης ἄλλην, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου. 
/ a 
ἀδύνατον δὲ ἀπείρους αἰτίας παρασχεῖν: ἀδύνατον 
3 “- ? on ¢ μή 7 
ἄρα διαβεβαιωτικῶς ἀποφῆναι ὅτι ἔστι τί τινος 
αἴτιον. 
‘ / 3) oN Ve ‘ \ 2) 3} λ 
IIpds τούτοις ἤτοι ὃν καὶ ὑφεστὼς ἤδη αἴτιον τὸ 
af “ ‘ > \ \ Yj \ 
αἴτιον ποιεῖ τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα, ἢ μὴ OV αἴτιον. καὶ 
4 μ᾿ A 10 a ? δὲ + ὃ “ > \ / 
μὴ ὃν μὲν οὐδαμῶς: εἰ δὲ ὄν, δεῖ αὐτὸ πρότερον 
ων \ “ 3 
ὑποστῆναι καὶ προγενέσθαι αἴτιον, εἶθ᾽ οὕτως 
% , A > > ~ 3 
ἐπάγειν τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα, ὅπερ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀπο- 
“~ 7’ 2) 3 > #F > > 5 \ / 
τελεῖσθαι λέγεται ὄντος ἤδη αἰτίου. GAA’ ἐπεὶ πρός 
/ 
τί ἐστι TO αἴτιον καὶ πρὸς TO ἀποτέλεσμα, σαφὲς 
4 \ / o- ~ 
ὅτι μὴ δύναται τούτου ὡς αἴτιον προὔποστῆναι" 
ΚΑ ON 3 3} \ 2 2 - ᾿ \ 
οὐδὲ ὃν ἄρα αἴτιον τὸ αὕτιον ἀποτελεῖν δύναται TO 
@ \ ” > \ A ba ἢ > “ 
οὗ ἐστὶν αἴτιον. εἰ δὲ μήτε μὴ ὃν αἴτιον ἀποτελεῖ 
/ 2», ΝΛ 5 ΄- \ IQA 3 ” 
τι μήτε OV, οὐδὲ ἀποτελεῖ TL. διὸ οὐδὲ αἴτιον ἔσται" 
” \ - 3 a“ 
ἄνευ yap τοῦ ἀποτελεῖν τι TO αἴτιον οὐ δύναται ὡς 
αἴτιον νοεῖσθαι. 
Ψ θ > »Ὰ , ,ὔ A uv ” 
Οθεν κἀκεῖνο λέγουσί τινες. TO αἴτιον ἦτοι 
; ie ΄ > , za) on 
συνυφίστασθαι δεῖ τῷ ἀποτελέσματι ἢ προῦφ- 
έ 3 f \ 
ἰστασθαι τούτου ἢ μετ᾽ αὐτὸ γίγνεσθαι. τὸ μὲν 
οὖν λέγειν ὅτι τὸ αἴτιον εἰς ὑπόστασιν ἄγεται μετὰ 
840 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 23-26 


than the man who asserts “ absolutely ”’ that nothing 
is a cause of anything; whereas if he shall mention 
causes on account of which he holds that something 
causes something, he will be attempting to support 
the matter in question by means of that matter itself ; 
for when we are examining the question whether 
anything is the Cause of anything, he asserts that 
Cause exists since there exists a cause for the existence 
of Cause. Besides, since we are inquiring about the 24 
reality of Cause, it will certainly be necessary for him 
to produce a cause for the cause of the existence of 
Cause, and of that cause yet another, and so on ad 
infinetum. But it is impossible to produce causes 
infinite in number. It is impossible, therefore, to 
affirm positively that anything is Cause of anything. 

Moreover, the Cause, when it produces the effect, 25 
either is and subsists already as causal or is non-causal. 
Certainly it is not non-causal; while if it is causal, it 
must first have subsisted and become causal, and 
thereafter produces the effect which is said to be 
brought about by it as already existing Cause. But 
since the Cause is relative and relative to the effect, 
it is clear that it cannot be prior in existence to the 
latter ; therefore not even as being causal can the 
Cause bring about that whereof it is Cause. And if it 26 
does not bring about anything either as being or as 
not being causal, then it does not bring anything 
about; and hence it will not be a Cause; for apart 
from its effecting something the Cause cannot be 
conceived as Cause. 

Hence some people argue thus: The Cause must 
either subsist along with its effect or before it or must 
come into being after it. Now to say that the Cause 
is brought into existence after the appearance of its 


341 


27 


28 


29 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τὴν γένεσιν τοῦ ἀποτελέσματος αὐτοῦ μὴ καὶ 
γελοῖον ἡ. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ προὔφίστασθαι δύναται τού- 
του" πρὸς αὐτὸ γὰρ νοεῖσθαι λέγεται, τὰ δὲ πρός 
τι φασὶν αὐτοί, καθὸ πρός τι ἐστίν, συνυπάρχειν 
καὶ συννοεῖσθαι ἀλλήλοις. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ συνυφίστα- 
σθαι" εἰ γὰρ ἀποτελεστικὸν αὐτοῦ ἐστί, τὸ δὲ 
γινόμενον ὑπὸ ὄντος ἤδη γίνεσθαι χρή, πρότερον 
δεῖ τὸ αἴτιον γενέσθαι αἴτιον, εἶθ᾽ οὕτως ποιεῖν τὸ 
ἀποτέλεσμα. εἰ οὖν τὸ αἴτιον μήτε προὐὔφίσταται 
τοῦ ἀποτελέσματος αὐτοῦ μήτε συνυφίσταται 
τούτῳ, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ «τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα > πρὸ αὐτοῦ 
γίνεται, μήποτε οὐδὲ ὑποστάσεως ὅλως “μετέχει. 
σαφὲς δὲ ἴσως ὅτι καὶ διὰ τούτων ἡ ἐπίνοια τοῦ 
αἰτίου πάλιν περιτρέπεται. εἶ γὰρ τὸ αἴτιον ὡς 
μὲν πρὸς τι οὐ δύναται τοῦ ἀποτελέσματος αὐτοῦ 
προεπινοηθῆναι, ἵνα δε ὡς αἴτιον τοῦ ἀποτελέσ- 
ματος αὐτοῦ νοηθῇ, δεῖ αὐτὸ προεπινοεῖσθαι τοῦ 
ἀποτελέσματος αὐτοῦ, ἀδύνατον δὲ προεπινοηθῆναί 
τι ἐκείνου οὗ προεπινοηθῆναί [τῇ οὐ δύναται, 
ἀδύνατον ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐπινοηθῆναι τὸ αἴτιον. 

"Ex τούτων οὖν λοιπὸν ἐπιλογιζόμεθα ὅτι εἰ 
πιθανοὶ μέν εἰσιν οἵ λόγοι καθ᾽ οὗς ὑπεμνήσαμεν 
ὡς χρὴ λέγειν αἴτιον εἶναι, πιθανοὶ δὲ καὶ οἱ παρ- 
ιστάντες ὅτι μὴ προσήκει. αἴτιον εἶναί τι ἀποφαΐί- 
νεσθαι, καὶ τούτων προκρίνειν τινὰς οὐκ ἐνδέχεται 
μήτε σημεῖον μήτε κριτήριον μήτε ἀπόδειξιν 
ὁμολογουμένως ἡμῶν ἐχόντων, ὡς ἔμπροσθεν 
παρεστήσαμεν, ἐπέχειν ἀνάγκη καὶ περὶ τῆς ὑπο- 
στάσεως τοῦ αἰτίου, μὴ μᾶλλον εἶναν ἢ μὴ εἶναί 


trp ἀποτέλεσμα add. 'T, Kayser: μετ αὐτὸ cj. Steph. 
εἰ T: ἐπεὶ Bekk.: om. mss. 


342 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 26--29 


effect wouldseem ridiculous. But neither can it subsist 
before the effect; for it is said to be conceived in rela- 
tion thereto, and they affirm that relatives, in so far as 27 
they are relative, co-exist with each other and are 
conceived together. Nor, again, can it subsist along 
with its effect; for if it is productive of the effect, 
and what comes into existence must so come by the 
agency of what exists already, the Cause must have 
become causal first, and this done, then produces its 
effect. If, then, the Cause neither subsists before its 
effect, nor subsists along with it, nor does the effect 
precede the Cause, it would seem that it has no 
substantial existence at all. Andit is clear probably 28 
that by these arguments the conception of Cause is 
overthrown again. For if Cause as a relative notion 
cannot be conceived before its effect, and yet, if it is 
to be conceived as causative of its effect, it must be 
conceived before its effect, while it is impossible for 
anything to be conceived before that which the con- 
ception of it cannot precede,—then it is impossible for 
the Cause to be conceived. 

From all this we conclude finally that—if the 29 
arguments by which it was shown @ that we ought to 
affirm the existence of Cause are plausible, and if the 
arguments which go to prove that it is improper to 
declare that any Cause exists are likewise plausible, 
and if it is inadmissible to prefer any of these argu- 
ments to the others, since, as we have shown above,® 
we confessedly possess neither sign nor criterion nor 
proof,—we are compelled to suspend judgement con- 
cerning the real existence of Cause, declaring that 
a Cause is “‘no more” existent than non-existent, 


« Of, 88 17 ff. 
> Cf. ii. 18, 104, 134 ff. 


343 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


3, / φῳ > \ a / ¢ \ 
τι αἴτιον λέγοντας ὅσον ἐπὶ Tots λεγομένοις ὑπὸ 
τῶν δογματικῶν. 


S’,—ILEPI TAIKQN APXON 


30 Περὶ μὲν οὖν τῆς δραστικῆς τοσαῦτα νῦν ἀρ- 
κέσει λελέχθαι: συντόμως δὲ καὶ περὶ τῶν ὑλικῶν 
καλουμένων ἀρχῶν λεκτέον. ὅτι τοίνυν αὗταί 
εἰσιν ἀκατάληπτοι, ῥάδιον συνιδεῖν ἐκ τῆς περὶ 
αὐτῶν γεγενημένης διαφωνίας _ παρὰ τοῖς δογ- 
ματικοῖς. Φερεκύδης μὲν γὰρ ὁ Σύριος γῆν εἶπε 
τὴν πάντων εἶναι ἀρχήν, θα ἧς δὲ 6 Μιλήσιος 
ὕδωρ, ᾿Αναξίμανδρος δὲ ὁ ἀκουστὴς τούτου τὸ 
ἄπειρον, ᾿Αναξιμένης δὲ καὶ -Διογένης 6 ᾿᾽Απολ- 
λωνιάτης ἀέρα, Ἵππασος δὲ ὁ Μεταποντῖνος πῦρ, 
Ξενοφάνης δὲ 6 Κολοφώνιος γῆν καὶ ὕδωρ, Oivo- 

᾿ \ ς ~ ~ 1 35 ¢ 4 ¢ ς 
muons δὲ ὁ Χῖος πῦρ καὶ ἀέρα, Ἵππων δὲ ὁ ‘Pn- 
γῖνος πῦρ καὶ ὕδωρ, ᾿Ονομάκριτος δὲ ἐν τοῖς 

81 ᾿Ορφικοῖς πῦρ καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ γῆν, οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν 

"μπεδοκλέα πρὸς τοῖς στωικοῖς πῦρ ἀέρα ὕδωρ 
γῆν--περὶ γὰρ τῆς “τερατολογουμένης ἀποίου παρά 
τισιν ὕλης, ἣν οὐδὲ αὐτοὶ καταλαμ άνειν δια- 
βεβαιοῦνται, τί δεῖ καὶ λέγειν; οἱ δὲ περὶ ᾿Αρισ- 
τοτέλη τὸν περιπατητικὸν πῦρ ἀέρα ὕδωρ γῆν, 

89 τὸ κυκλοφορητικὸν σῶμα, Δημόκριτος δὲ καὶ 
? / > / ? / \ ¢ 
Ἐπίκουρος arduous, “Avakaydpas δὲ ὁ KAalo- 

f Ls é f A ¢ > A 
μένιος ὁμοιομερείας, Διόδωρος δὲ ὁ ἐπικληθεὶς 

* With the following sections ¢f. fdv. Phys. i. 360 ff., 
ii. 310 ff. ; and for the arguments employed, i. 164. 

> Pherecydes, circa 650 B.c., was a semi-scientific cosmo- 
gonist ; Oenopides was an astronomer and mathematician of 
the fifth century B.c. ; Onomacritus was an Athenian religious 


oet, said to be the author of some of the Orphic hymns. 
or the other names see Introd. 


344 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 29-82 


if we are to judge by the statements made by the 
Dogmatists. 


Cuaprer VI.—Concerning Matrerirat PRINCIPLES 


So far, then, as concerns the efficient Principle this 30 
account will suffice for the present. But we must also 
give a brief account of what are called the Material 
Principles. Now that these are inapprehensible may 
easily be gathered from the disagreement which 
exists about them amongst the Dogmatists. For 
Pherecydes of Syros® declared earth to be the 
Principle of all things; Thales of Miletus, water ; 
Anaximander (his- pupil), the Unlimited; Anaxi- 
menes and Diogenes of Apollonia, air ; Hippasus of 
Metapontum, fire; Kenophanes of Colophon, earth 
and water ; Oenopides of Chios, fire and air ; Hippo 
of Rhegium, fire and water; Onomacritus, in his 
Orphica, fire and water and earth; the School of 31 
Empedocles as well as the Stoics, fire, air, water and 
earth—for why should one even mention that mys- 
terious “ indeterminate matter ’’ which some of them 
talk about,’ when not even they themselves are posi- 
tive that they apprehend it? The School of Aristotle 
the Peripatetic <take as their Principles» fire, air, 
water, earth, and the ‘‘revolving body’’¢; Democritus 32 
and Epicurus, atoms; Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, 
homoeomeries’; Diodorus, surnamed Cronos, minimal 


* For this “ formless ” or “ unqualified ’ primary matter 
of the Stoics οὐ Adv. Phys. i. 11, ii. 312. 

“ie. the quinta essentia, aether (αἰθήρ fr. del θεῖν, 
“ ever-speeding,”” Plato, Cratyl. 410 5, Aristot. De Caelo i. 3). 

δ 4.6. “things with like parts,’’ or ‘homogeneous sub- 
stances,’’ is Aristotle’s name for Anaxagoras’s “seeds of 
things,” or material “elements”; ¢f. Introd. p. xi. 


345 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Kpévos ἐλάχιστα καὶ ἀμερῆ σώματα, ᾿Ηρακλείδης 
δὲ ὁ [Ποντικὸς καὶ ᾿Ασκληπιάδης ὃ Βιθυνὸς ἀνάρ- 
μους ὄγκους, οἱ δὲ περὶ Πυθαγόραν τοὺς ἀριθμούς, 
οἱ δὲ μαθηματικοὶ τὰ πέρατα τῶν σωμάτων, 
Στράτων δὲ ὁ φυσικὸς τὰς ποιότητας. 

33 Τοσαύτης τοίνυν καὶ ἔτι πλείονος διαφωνίας 
γεγενημένης περὶ τῶν ὑλικῶν ἀρχῶν παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς, 
ἦτοι πάσαις συγκαταθησόμεθα ταῖς κειμέναις στά- 
σεσι καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις 7 ἢ τισίν. ἀλλὰ πάσαις μὲν οὐ 
δυνατόν: οὐ γὰρ δήπου δυνησόμεθα καὶ τοῖς περὶ 
᾿Ασκληπιάδην συγκατατίθεσθαι, θραυστὰ εἶναι τὰ 
στοιχεῖα λέγουσι καὶ ποιά, καὶ τοῖς περὶ Δημό- 
KpiTov, ἄτομα ταῦτα εἶναι φάσκουσι καὶ ἄποια, 
καὶ τοῖς περὶ ᾿Αναξαγόραν, πᾶσαν αἰσθητὴν ποιό- 

84 ΤηΤα περὶ ταῖς ὁμοιομερείαις ἀπολείπουσιν. εἰ δέ 
τινα στάσιν τῶν ἄλλων προκρινοῦμεν, ἦτοι ἁπλῶς 
καὶ ἄνευ ἀποδείξεως προκρινοῦμεν ἢ μετὰ ἀπο- 
δείξεως. ἄνευ μὲν οὖν ἀποδείξεως οὐ συνθησόμεθα" 
εἰ δὲ μετὰ ἀποδείξεως, ἀληθῆ δεῖ τὴν ἀπόδειξιν 
εἶναι. ἀληθὴς δὲ οὐκ ἂν δοθεΐη μὴ οὐχὶ κεκριμένη 
κριτηρίῳ ἀληθεῖ, ἀληθὲς δὲ κριτήριον εἶναι δεί- 

35 κνυται δι᾿ ἀποδείξεως κεκριμένης. εἰ τοΐνυν ἵνα 
μὲν ἡ ἀπόδειξις ἡ προκρίνουσά τινα στάσιν ἀληθὴς 
εἶναι δειχθῇ, δεῖ τὸ κριτήριον αὐτῆς ἀποδεδεῖχθαι, 
ἵνα δὲ τὸ κριτήριον ἀποδειχθῇ, δεῖ τὴν ἀπόδειξιν 
αὐτοῦ προκεκρίσθαι, ὃ διάλληλος εὑρίσκεται τρόπος, 
ὃς οὐκ ἐάσει προβαίνειν τὸν λόγον, τῆς μὲν ἀπο- 
δείξεως ἀεὶ κριτηρίου δεομένης ἀποδεδειγμένου, 

86 τοῦ κριτηρίου δὲ ἀποδείξεως κεκριμένης. εἰ δὲ 





@ Asclepiades (first century B.c.), a physician at Rome, 
held a theory of non-sensible, frangible “ masses”? (ὄγκοι) 
of matter always in motion; by collision with one another 


346 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 32-36 


and non-composite bodies; Heracleides Ponticus and 
Asclepiades the Bithynian,* irregular masses; the 
School of Pythagoras, the numbers; the Mathe- 
maticians, the limits of bodies ; Strato the Physicist, 
the qualities. 

Since, then, there exists amongst them as much 33 
divergence as this, and even more, regarding the 
Material Principles, we shall give assent either to all 
the positions stated, and all others as well, or to some 
of them. But to assent to all is not possible; for 
we certainly shall not be able to assent both to the 
School of Asclepiades, who say that the elements 
can be broken up and possess qualities, and to the 
School of Democritus, who assert that they are in- 
divisible and void of quality, and to the School of 
Anaxagoras, who leave every sensible quality at- 
tached to the homoeomeries. Yet if we shall prefer 34 
any one standpoint, or view, to the rest, we shall 
be preferring it either absolutely and without proof 
or with proof.2 Now without proof we shall not yield 
assent ; and if it is to be with proof, the proof must 
be true. But a true proof can only be given when 
approved by a true criterion, and a criterion is shown 
to be true by means of an approved proof. If, then, 35 
in order to show the truth of the proof which prefers 
any one view, its criterion must be proved, and to 
prove the criterion in turn its proof must be pre- 
established, the argument is found to be the circular 
one which will not allow the reasoning to go forward, 
since the proof keeps always requiring a proved 
criterion, and the criterion an approved proof. And 36 


these “‘ masses”? break in pieces, and when re-united become 
objects of sense. 
ὑ For this form of argument ¢/. ii. 183. 


547 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀεὶ TO κριτήριον κριτηρίῳ κρίνειν Kal THY ἀπόδειξιν 
ἀποδείξει ἀποδεικνύναι βούλοιτό τις, εἰς ἄπειρον 
ἐκβληθήσεται.") εἰ τοίνυν μήτε πάσαις ταῖς περὶ 
στοιχείων στάσεσι δυνάμεθα συγκατατίθεσθαι μήτε 
τινὶ τούτων, ἐπέχειν προσήκει περὶ αὐτῶν. 

87 Δυνατὸν μὲν οὖν ἴσως ἐστὶ καὶ διὰ τούτων μόνων 
ὑπομιμνήσκειν τὴν τῶν στοιχείων καὶ τῶν ὑλικῶν 
ἀρχῶν ἀκαταληψίαν: ἵνα δὲ καὶ ἀμφιλαφέστερον 
τοὺς δογματικοὺς ἐλέγχειν ἔχωμεν, ἐνδιατρίψομεν 
συμμέτρως τῷ τόπῳ. καὶ ἐπεὶ πολλαὶ καὶ σχεδὸν 
ἄπειροί τινές εἶσιν αἱ περὶ στοιχείων δόξαι, καθὼς 
ὑπεμνήσαμεν, τὸ μὲν πρὸς ἑκάστην λέγειν εἰδικῶς 
νῦν παραιτησόμεθα διὰ τὸν χαρακτῆρα τῆς συγ- 
γραφῆς, δυνάμει δὲ πρὸς πάσας ἀντεροῦμεν. ἐπεὶ 
γὰρ ἣν ἂν τις εἴπῃ περὶ στοιχείων στάσιν, ἤτοι 
ἐπὶ σώματα κατενεχθήσεται ἣ ἐπὶ ἀσώματα, ἀρκεῖν 
ἡγούμεθα ὑπομνῆσαι ὅτι ἀκατάληπτα μέν ἐστι τὰ 
σώματα ἀκατάληπτα δὲ τὰ ἀσώματα' διὰ γάρ 
τούτου σαφὲς ἔσται ὅτι καὶ τὰ στοιχεῖά ἐστιν 
ἀκατάληπτα. 


Ζ΄.---1 ΚΑΤΑΛΉΠΤΑ TA SQMATA 
38 Σῶμα row λέγουσιν εἶναί τινες 6 οἷόν τε 
ποιεῖν ἢ πάσχειν. ὅσον δὲ ἐπὶ ταύτῃ τῇ ἐπινοίᾳ 
ἀκατάληπτον ἐστι τοῦτο. τὸ μὲν γὰρ αἴτιον a- 
κατάληπτόν ἐστι, καθὼς ὑπεμνήσαμεν" μὴ ἔχοντες 
δὲ εἰπεῖν εἰ ἔστι τι αἴτιον, οὐδὲ εἰ ἔστι τι πάσχον 
εἰπεῖν δυνάμεθα: τὸ γὰρ πάσχον πάντως ὑπὸ 
1 ἀποδείξει MULT: δύ ἀποδείξεως ΒΟΚΚ, 
5. ἐκβληθήσεται T, Nauck: ἐμβὰ, mss., Bekk. 
* A favourite classification of the Stoies, ef. .lde. Phys. 
ii. 918. 
348 





OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 86--38 


should any one propose to approve the criterion by a 
criterion and to prove the proof by a proof, he will 
be driven to a regress ad infinitum. Accordingly, if 
we are unable to assent either to all the views 
held about the elements or to any one of them, it is 
proper to suspend judgement about them. 

Now though it is, perhaps, possible to show by 37 
these arguments alone the inapprehensibility of the 
elements and of the Material Principles, yet in order 
that we may be able to refute the Dogmatists in a 
more comprehensive manner we shall dwell on this 
topic at appropriate length. And since the opinions 
about the elements are, as we have shown, numerous 
and well-nigh infinite, we will excuse ourselves— 
because of the character of our present treatise— 
from discussing each opinion in detail, but will make 
answer to them allimplicitly. For since the elements, 
whatever view one takes of them, must be finally 
regarded either as corporeal or incorporeal,* we think 
it enough to show that corporeal things are inappre- 
hensible and incorporeal things inapprehensible; for 
thus it will be clear that the elements also are 
inapprehensible. 


Cuaprer VII.—Are Bopres aPPREHENSIBLE ? 


Some say that Body is that which is capable of 38 
being active or passive.’ But so far as this concep- 
tion goes it is inapprehensible. For, as we have 
shown, Cause is inapprehensible ; and if we cannot 
say whether any Cause exists, neither can we say 
whether anything passive exists; for what is passive 

> This definition is ascribed to Pythagoras in Adv. Phys. 

i. 258, 366. 
349 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


> 7? / 3 4 δὲ 2 \ ~ 

αἰτίου πάσχει. ἀκαταλήπτου δὲ ὄντος Kal τοῦ 
“~ ~ > ? 

αἰτίου Kal τοῦ πάσχοντος, διὰ ταῦτα ἀκατάληπτον 


» A \ A \ δὲ ~ > λέ 
39 €OTAL KAL TO σῶμα. τινες OE σῶμα ELAL Λέγοῦσι 


TO τριχῇ διαστατὸν μετὰ ἀντιτυπίας. σημεῖον μὲν 
γάρ φασιν οὗ μέρος οὐθέν, γραμμὴν δὲ μῆκος 
ἀπλατές, ἐπιφάνειαν δὲ μῆκος μετὰ πλάτους" ὅταν 
δὲ αὕτη καὶ βάθος προιπλάβῃ καὶ ἀντιτυπίαν, 
σῶμα εἶναι, περὶ οὗ νῦν ἐστὶν ἡμῖν ὁ λόγος, συν- 
εστὼς ἔκ τε μήκους καὶ πλάτόδεις καὶ βάθους καὶ 


40 ἀντιτυπίας. εὐμαρὴς μέντοι καὶ 0 πρὸς τούτους 


41 


λόγος. τὸ γὰρ σῶμα ἤτοι οὐδὲν πὰρὰ ταῦτα εἶναι 
λέξουσιν ἢ ἕτερόν τι παρὰ τὴν συγέλευσιν τῶν 
προειρημένων. καὶ ἔξωθεν μὲν "τοῦ μ αι, Καὶ 
τοῦ πλάτους καὶ τοῦ βάθους καὶ τῆς ἀντιτυπίας 
οὐδὲν ἂν εἴη τὸ σῶμα: εἰ δὲ ταῦτά ἐστι τὸ σῶμα, 
ἐὰν δείξῃ τις ὅτι ἀνύπαρκτά ἐστιν, ἀναιροίη ἂν 
καὶ TO σῶμα' τὰ γὰρ ὅλα συναναιρεῖται τοῖς 
ἑαυτῶν πᾶσι μέρεσιν. 

Ποικίλως μὲν οὖν ἔστι ταῦτα ἐλέγχειν" τὸ δὲ νῦν 
ἀρκέσει λέγειν ὅτι εἰ ἔστι τὰ πέρατα, ἤτοι γραμμαί 
εἰσιν ἢ ἐπιφάνειαι ἢ σώματα. εἰ μὲν οὖν ἐπι- 
φάνειάν τινα ἢ γραμμὴν εἶναι λέγοι τις, καὶ τῶν 
προειρημένων ἕκαστον ἤτοι κατὰ ἰδίαν ὑφεστάναι 
δύνασθαι λεχθήσεται ἢ μόνον περὶ τοῖς λεγομένοις 
σώμασι θεωρεῖσθαι. ἀλλὰ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν μὲν ὑπ- 
ἄρχουσαν ἦτοι γραμμὴν ἣ ἐπιφάνειαν ὀνειροπολεῖν 
ἴσως εὔηθες. εἰ δὲ περὶ τοῖς σώμασι θεωρεῖσθαι 
λέγουτο μόνον καὶ μὴ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ ὑφεστάναι τούτων 





@ Cf. ii. 30, wldv. Phys. i. 367, ii. 12. 
> In geometry “ Limits” (or “ boundaries”’) was used to 


350 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 38-41 


is certainly made passive by aCause. And when both 
the Cause and the passive object are inapprehensible, 
the result will be that Body also is inapprehensible. 
But some define Body as what has three dimensions 
combined with resistance or solidity. For they de- 
scribe the point as that which has no parts, the line 
as length without breadth, the surface as length with 
breadth ; and when this takes on both depth and 
resistance there is formed Body—the object of our 
present discussion—it being composed of length and 
breadth and depth and resistance. The answer, 
however, to these people is simple. For they will 
say either that Body is nothing more than these 
qualities, or that it is something else than the com- 
bination of the qualities already mentioned. Now 
apart from length and breadth and depth and solidity 
the Body would be nothing ; but if these things are 
the Body, anyone who shall prove that they are un- 
real will likewise abolish the Body; for wholes are 
abolished along with the sum of their parts. 

Now itis possible to disprove these dimensions in a 
variety of ways ; but for the present it will be enough 
to say that if the Limits ὃ exist, they are either lines 
or surfaces or bodies. If, then, one should affirm the 
existence of a surface or a line, then it will be affirmed 
that each of the afore-mentioned objects either can 
subsist of itself or is cognized solely in connexion 
with so-called Bodies. But to imagine either a line 
or a surface as existing of itself is doubtless silly. 
While if it should be said that each of these objects 
is cognized solely in connexion with the Bodies and 
has no independent existence, it will thereby be 


denote the lines or surfaces by which any magnitude is 
“ bounded.” 


351 


39 


4] 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἕκαστον, πρῶτον μὲν αὐτόθεν δοθήσεται τὸ μὴ ἐξ 
αὐτῶν γεγονέναι τὰ σώματα (ἐχρῆν γάρ, οἶμαι, 
ταῦτα πρότερον ὑπόστασιν καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰ ἐσχηκέναι, 
καὶ οὕτω συνελθόντα πεποιηκέναι τὰ σώματα), 
42 εἶτα οὐδὲ ἐν τοῖς καλουμένοις σώμασιν ὑφέστηκεν. 

Kat τοῦτο διὰ πλειόνων μὲν ἔστιν ὑπομιμνήσκειν, 
ἀρκέσει δὲ νῦν τὰ éx τῆς ἁφῆς ἀπορούμενα λέγειν. 
εἰ γὰρ ἅπτεται ἀλλήλων τὰ παρατιθέμενα σώματα, 
τοῖς πέρασιν αὑτῶν, οἷον ταῖς ἐπιφανείαις, ψαύει 
ἀλλήλων. at οὖν ἐπιφάνειαι ὅλαι μὲν δι᾿ ὅλων 
ἀλλήλαις οὐχ ἐνωθήσονται κατὰ τὴν ἁφήν, ἐπεὶ 
σύγχυσις ἔσται ἡ ἁφὴ καὶ 6 χωρισμὸς τῶν ἅπτο- 

43 μένων διασπασμός" ὅπερ οὐ θεωρεῖται. εἰ δὲ ἄλλοις 
μὲν μέρεσιν ἡ ἐπιφάνεια ἅπτεται τῆς τοῦ παρα- 
τιθεμένου αὐτῇ σώματος ἐπιφανείας, ἄλλοις δὲ 
συνήνωται τῷ σώματι οὗ ἐστὶ πέρας, ε * κ' οὐκ ἄρα 
οὐδὲ περὶ σώματι θεωρῆσαι δύναταί τις μῆκος καὶ 
πλάτος ἀβαθές, ὅθεν οὐδὲ ἐπιφάενιαν. 

“Ομοίως δὲ καὶ δύο ἐπιφανειῶν καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν 
παρατιθεμένων ἀλλήλαις κατὰ τὰ πέρατα αὐτῶν 
εἰς ἃ λήγουσι, κατὰ τὸ λεγόμενον αὐτῶν μῆκος 
εἶναι, τουτέστι κατὰ γραμμάς, αἱ γραμμαὶ αὗται, 
δι᾿ ὧν ἅπτεσθαι λέγονται ἀλλήλων at ἐπιφάνειαι, 
οὐχ ἑνωθήσονται μὲν ἀλλήλαις (συγχυθεῖεν γὰρ 
ἀν): εἰ δὲ ἑκάστη αὐτῶν ἄλλοις μὲν μέρεσι τοῖς 


1 The lacuna marked here is to denote that there is prob- 
ably an omission in the mss. (and Bekk.) of something 
corresponding to the insertion of T—“‘ (terminus) non erit sine 
profunditate differentibus eius partibus intellectis secundum 
profunditatem hac quidem cui opponitur tangenti hac autem 
secundum <quod> coniungitur corpori cuius est terminus.” 
Mutsch. inserts a Greek version of this in his text, and I give 
an English version between brackets. 


352 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 41-43 


granted, in the first place, that the Bodies are not 
generated from them (for if so, I suppose, these 
objects ought to have had independent existence first, 
and then have combined to form the Bodies) ; and 42 
further, they have no real existence even in the so- 
called Bodies. 

This can be shown by several arguments, but for 
the present it will suffice to mention the difficulties 
which arise from <the fact of> touch.* For if juxta- 
posed Bodies touch one another they are in contact 
with their Limits—for example, with their surfaces. 
The surfaces, then, will not be completely unified one 
with another as a result of touching, since otherwise 
touch would be fusion and the separation of things 
touching a rending apart; and this is not what we 
find. And if the surface touches the surface of the 43 
juxtaposed Body with some of its parts, and with 
other parts is united with the Body of which it is a 
limit, <it will not be without depth, since its parts 
are conceived as different in respect of depth, one 
part touching the juxtaposed Body, the other being 
that which effects its union with the Body whereof 
it is a limit>. Hence, even in connexion with Body 
one cannot imagine length and breadth without 
depth, nor, consequently, surface. 

So likewise when two surfaces are, let us imagine, 
juxtaposed along the limits where they come to an 
end, by way of what is called their “ length,” that is to 
say by way of their “ lines,” then these lines, by means 
of which the surfaces are said to touch each other, 
will not be unified (else they would be fused to- 
gether) ; yet if each of them touches the line which 


* For arguments based on “touch,” or contact, cf. Adv. 
Phys. i. 258 ff., Adv. Geom. 34 ff. 


VOL. I Qa 353 


44 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


κατὰ πλάτος ἅπτεται τῆς παρατιθεμένης αὐτῇ 
γραμμῆς, ἄλλοις δὲ συνήνωται τῇ ἐπιφανείᾳ ἧς 
ἐστὶ πέρας, οὐκ ἔσται ἀπλατής, ὅθεν οὐδὲ γραμμή. 
εἰ δὲ μήτε γραμμὴ ἔστιν ἐν σώματι μήτε ἐπι- 
φάνεια, οὐδὲ μῆκος ἢ πλάτος ἢ βάθος ἔσται ἐν 
σώματι. 

ΕΠ δέ τις σώματα εἶναι τὰ πέρατα λέγοι, σύν- 
τομος ἔσται ἡ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀπόκρισις. εἰ γὰρ τὸ 
μῆκος σῶμα ἐστίν, δεήσει τοῦτο εἰς τὰς τρεῖς 
αὐτοῦ μερίζεσθαι διαστάσεις, ὧν ἑκάστη σῶμα 
οὖσα πάλιν αὐτὴ διαιρεθήσεται εἰς διαστάσεις 
ἄλλας τρεῖς, at ἔσονται σώματα, καὶ ἐκεῖναι εἰς 
ἄλλας ὁμοίως, καὶ τοῦτο μέχρις ἀπείρου, ὡς 
ἀπειρομέγεθες γίνεσθαι τὸ σῶμα εἰς ἄπειρα μερι- 
ὄμενον᾽ ὅπερ ἄτοπον. οὐδὲ σώματα ἄρα εἰσὶν 
αἱ προειρημέναι διαστάσεις. εἰ δὲ μήτε σώματά 
εἶσι μήτε γραμμαὶ ἢ ἐπιφάνειαι, οὐδὲ εἶναι νομι- 
σθήσονται. 

᾿Ακατάληπτος δέ ἐστι καὶ ἡ ἀντιτυπία. αὖτ 
γὰρ εἴπερ καταλαμβάνεται, ἁφῇ καταλαμβάνοιτο 
ἄν. ἐὰν οὖν “δείξωμεν ὅτι ἀκατάληπτός ἐστιν ἡ 
ἁφή, σαφὲς ἔσται ὅτι οὐχ οἷόν τέ ἐστι καταλαμ- 
βάνεσθαι τὴν ἀντιτυπίαν. ὅτι δὲ ἀκατάληπτός 
ἐστιν ἡ ad, διὰ τούτων ἐπιλογιζόμεθα. τὰ 
ἁπτόμενα ἀλλήλων ἤτοι μέρεσιν ἀλλήλων ἅπτεται 
ἢ ὅλα ὅλων. ὅλα μὲν οὖν ὅλων οὐδαμῶς: évw- 
θήσεται γὰρ οὕτω καὶ οὐχ ἅψεται ἀλλήλων. ἀλλ᾽ 
οὐδὲ μέρεσι μερῶν' τὰ γὰρ «μέρη αὐτῶν ὡς μὲν 
πρὸς τὰ ὅλα μέρη ἐστίν, ὡς δὲ πρὸς τὰ μέρη 


46 ἑαυτῶν ὅλα. ταῦτα οὖν τὰ ὅλα, ἃ ἐστιν ἑτέρων 


μέρη, ὅλα μὲν ὅλων οὐχ ἅψεται διὰ τὰ προειρη- 


354 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 43-46 


lies next to it breadth-wise with some of its parts 
and by others is united with the surface of which it 
is a limit, it will not be without breadth, and, con- 
sequently, it will not be a line. But if there exists 
in Body neither line nor surface, neither length nor 
breadth nor depth will exist in Body. 

And should anyone assert that the Limits are 44 
bodies, he can be answered very shortly. For if 
length is a body, it must needs be divided into its 
three dimensions, and each of these, in turn, being a 
body will be divided into three other dimensions, 
which will be bodies, and these likewise into others, 
and so on ad infinitum, so that the Body comes to be 
of infinite size, being divided into an infinity of parts: 
this result is absurd, and therefore the dimensions 
aforesaid are not bodies. But if they are neither 
bodies nor lines nor surfaces, they will be held to have 
no existence. 

Solidity * also is inapprehensible. For if it is 45 
apprehended, it must be apprehended by touch. If, 
then, we shall prove that touch is inapprehensible, it 
will be clear that it is impossible for solidity to be 
apprehended. That touch is inapprehensible we 
argue as follows. Things which touch one another 
either touch with their parts or as wholes touching 
wholes. Now they certainly will not touch as wholes ; 
for then they will be unified instead of being in 
contact with one another. Nor yet through parts 
touching parts; for their parts, though in relation to 
the wholes they are parts, are wholes in relation 
to their parts. So these wholes, which are parts of 46 
other things, will not touch as wholes touching wholes, 


* Or “ resistance,” § 39; for this quality, as treated by 
Epicurus, cf. ddv. Phys. ii. 222. 
355 


47 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μένα, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ μέρεσι μερῶν: καὶ yap τὰ τούτων 
μέρη ὡς πρὸς τὰ ἑαυτῶν μέρη ὅλα ὄντα οὔτε ὅλα 
ὅλων ἅψεται οὔτε μέρεσι μερῶν. εἰ δὲ μήτε κατὰ 
ὁλότητα μήτε κατὰ μέρη γινομένην ἁφὴν κατα- 
λαμβάνομεν, ἀκατάληπτος ἔσται ἡ ἁφή. διὰ δὲ 
τοῦτο καὶ ἡ ἀντιτυπία. ὅθεν καὶ τὸ σῶμα: εἰ γὰρ 
οὐδέν ἐστι τοῦτο παρὰ τὰς τρεῖς διαστάσεις καὶ 
τὴν ἀντιτυπίαν, ἐδείξαμεν δὲ ἀκατάληπτον τούτων 
ἕκαστον, καὶ τὸ σῶμα ἔσται ἀκατάληπτον. 

Οὕτω μὲν οὖν, ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇ ἐννοίᾳ τοῦ σώματος, 
ἀκατάληπτόν ἐ ἐστιν εἰ ἔστι τι ᾿σῶμα' λεκτέον δὲ καὶ 
τοῦτο εἰς τὸ προκείμενον. τῶν ὄντων τὰ μέν φασιν 
εἶναι αἰσθητὰ τὰ δὲ νοητά, καὶ τὰ μὲν τῇ διανοίᾳ 
καταλαμβάνεσθαι τὰ δὲ ταῖς αἰσθήσεσιν, καὶ τὰς 
μὲν αἰσθήσεις ἁπλοπαθεῖς εἶναι, τὴν δὲ διάνοιαν 
ἀπὸ τῆς τῶν αἰσθητῶν καταλήψεως ἐ ἐπὶ τὴν κατά- 
ληψιν τῶν νοητῶν ἰέναι. εἰ οὖν ἔστι τι σῶμα, ἤτοι 
αἰσθητόν ἐστιν ἢ νοητόν. καὶ αἰσθητὸν μὲν οὐκ 
ἔστιν' κατὰ γὰρ συναθροισμὸν μήκους καὶ βάθους 
καὶ πλάτους καὶ ἀντιτυπίας καὶ χρώματος καὶ 
ἄλλων τινῶν καταλαμβάνεσθαι δοκεῖ, σὺν οἷς θεω- 
petra at δὲ αἰσθήσεις ἁπλοπαθεῖς εἶναι λέγονται 


> 2 a > OX \ s λέ ‘ σι 
48 ΠᾺΡ QUTOLS. εἰ δὲ VOYTOV ξὐνᾷν AEVETAL Τὸ σῶμα, 


δεῖ τι πάντως ὑπάρχειν ἐν τῇ φύσει τῶν πραγ- 
3 ;ὔ e ~ am’ 
μάτων αἰσθητόν, ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἡ τῶν σωμάτων νοητῶν 
” “- 
ὄντων ἔσται νόησις. οὐδὲν δὲ ἔστι παρὰ τὸ σῶμα 
καὶ τὸ ἀσώματον, ὧν τὸ μὲν ἀσώματον αὐτόθεν 
ΠῚ ἐστι, τὸ δὲ σῶμα οὐκ αἰσθητόν, ὡς ὑπ- 
ofa § 38. 
his means that each sense is specialized, so that it is 
cap ἘΠ of receiving only one kind of impression (6... the 
sight is affected by colour, but not by sound or solidity); 
cf. § 108. 
356 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 46-48 


for the reasons aforesaid, nor yet through parts 
touching parts; for their parts, too, being wholes 
relatively to their own parts, will not be in contact 
either as wholes with wholes or as parts with parts. 
But if we apprehend the occurrence of touch neither 
by way of wholeness nor by way of parts, touch will be 
inapprehensible. And, consequently, solidity also ; 
and, therefore, Body ; for if this is nothing more than 
the three dimensions plus Solidity, and we have 
proved that each of these is inapprehensible, Body 
also will be inapprehensible. 

Thus, then, if we are to judge by the conception @ of 
Body, it is inapprehensible whether any body exists ; 
and about this problem there is this also to be said. 47 
Of existing things some, they say, are sensible, others 
intelligible, and the latter are apprehended by the 
reason, the former by the senses, and the senses are 
“ simply-passive,”’ ® while the reason proceeds from 
the apprehension of sensibles to the apprehension 
of intelligibles. If then any body exists, it is either 
sensible or intelligible. Now itis not sensible ; for it 
is supposed to be apprehended as a conglomeration of 
length and depth and breadth and solidity and colour 
and various other things, along with which it is ex- 
perienced ; whereas, according to their statements, 
the senses are ‘‘ simply-passive.”” And if Body is said 48 
to be intelligible, there must certainly be pre-existent 
in the nature of things some sensible object from 
which to derive the notion of bodies, they being 
intelligible. But nothing exists save Body and the 
Incorporeal, and of these the Incorporeal is essenti- 
ally intelligible,¢ and Body, as we have shown, is not 

“1.6. in the view of the Stoies, but not of the Sceptics, 
for the inapprehensibility of the “ Incorporeal”’ is proved in 


§ 50 ad jin. 
357, 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


εμνήσαμεν. μὴ ὄντος οὖν ἐν TH φύσει τῶν mpay- 
μάτων αἰσθητοῦ τινὸς ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἡ νόησις ἔσται τοῦ 
σώματος, οὐδὲ νοητὸν ἔσται τὸ σῶμα. εἰ δὲ μήτε 
αἰσθητόν ἐστι μήτε νοητόν, παρὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲν 
ἔστι, λεκτέον ὅσον ἐπὶ τῷ λόγῳ μηδὲ εἷναι τὸ 
49 σῶμα. διὰ ταῦτα οὖν ἡμεῖς ἀντιτιθέντες τοὺς 
κατὰ τοῦ σώματος λόγους τῷ φαίνεσθαι [δοκεῖν " 
ὑπάρχον τὸ σῶμα, συνάγομεν τὴν περὶ τοῦ σώ- 
2 / 
ματος ἐποχήν. 

Τῇ δὲ τοῦ σώματος ἀκαταληψίᾳ συνεισάγεται 
καὶ τὸ ἀκατάληπτον εἶναι τὸ ἀσώματον. αἵ γὰρ 
στερήσεις τῶν ἕξεων νοοῦνται στερήσεις, οἷον 
ὁράσεως τυφλότης καὶ ἀκοῆς κωφότης καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν 
ἄλλων παραπλησίως. διόπερ ἵνα στέρησιν κατα- 
λάβωμεν, δεῖ τὴν ἕξιν ἡμᾶς προκατειληφέναι ἧς 
λέγεται στέρησις εἶναι ἡ ἡ στέρησις" ἀνεννόητος γάρ 
τις ὧν τῆς ὁράσεως οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο λέγειν ὅτι 
ὅρασιν ὅδε οὐκ ἔχει, ὅπερ ἐστὶ τὸ τυφλὸν εἶναι. 

50 εἰ οὖν στέρησις σώματός ἐστι τὸ ἀσώματον, τῶν 
δὲ ἕξεων μὴ καταλαμβανομένων ἀδύνατον τὰς 
στερήσεις αὐτῶν καταλαμβάνεσθαι, καὶ δέδεικται 
ὅτι τὸ σῶμα ἀκατάληπτόν ἐστιν, ἀκατάληπτον 
ἔσται καὶ τὸ ἀσώματον. καὶ γὰρ ἤτοι αἰσθητόν 
ἐστιν ἢ νοητόν. εἴτε δὲ αἰσθητόν ἐστιν, ἀκατά- 
ληπτόν ἐστι διὰ τὴν διαφορὰν τῶν ζώων καὶ τῶν 
ἀνθρώπων καὶ τῶν αἰσθήσεων καὶ τῶν περιστάσεων 
καὶ παρὰ τὰς ἐπιμιξίας καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν προειρη- 
μένων ἡμῖν ἐν τοῖς περὶ τῶν δέκα τρόπων" εἴτε 
νοητόν, μὴ ιδομένης αὐτόθεν τῆς τῶν αἰσθητῶν 
καταλήψεως, ἀφ᾽ ἧς ὁρμώμενοι τοῖς νοητοῖς ἐπι- 
βάλλειν δοκοῦμεν, οὐδὲ ἡ τῶν νοητῶν αὐτόθεν 

1 [δοκεῖν} om. T. 


358 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 48-50 


sensible. Since, then, no sensible object exists in the 
nature of things from which we can derive the notion 
of Body, Body will not be intelligible either. And if 

it is neither sensible nor intelligible, and besides these 
nothing else exists, we must declare that, so far as this 
argument goes, Body has no existence. Accordingly 49 
we, by thus opposing the arguments against Body to 
the apparent existence of Body, infer suspension of 
judgement concerning Body. 

The inapprehensibility of Body involves also that 
of the Incorporeal. For privations are conceived as 
privations of states or faculties, as, for example, blind- 
ness of sight, deafness of hearing, and similarly with 
the rest. Hence,.in order to apprehend a privation, 
we must first have apprehended the state of which 
the privation is said to be a privation ; for if one had 
no conception of sight one would not be able to assert 
that this man does not possess sight, which is the 
meaning of being blind. If then Incorporeality is 50 
the privation of Body, and when states are not appre- 
hended it is impossible for the privations of them to 
be apprehended, and it has been proved that Body 
is inapprehensible, Incorporeality also will be in- 
apprehensible. Moreover, it is either sensible or 
intelligible. And ifit is sensible, it is inapprehensible 
because of the variance amongst animals and men, 
the senses and the circumstances, and owing to the ad- 
mixtures and all the other things we have previously 
described in our exposition of the Ten Tropes.” If, 
again, it is intelligible, since the apprehension of 
sensibles, which is supposed to form the starting-point 
from which we attain to the intelligibles,® is not 
immediately given, neither will the apprehension of 


« Of, i, 36 ff. ® Of. ἢ. 10. 
359 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


κατάληψις δοθήσεται, διόπερ οὐδὲ ἡ τοῦ ἀσω- 
άτου. 

51 Ὃ τε φάσκων καταλαμβάνειν τὸ ἀσώματον ἤτοι 
αἰσθήσει τοῦτο παραστήσει καταλαμβάνειν ἢ διὰ 
λόγου. καὶ αἰσθήσει μὲν οὐδαμῶς, ἐπειδὴ al μὲν 
αἰσθήσεις κατὰ ἐπέρεισιν καὶ νύξιν ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι 
δοκοῦσι τῶν αἰσθητῶν, οἷον ἡ ὅρασις, ἐάν τε κατὰ 
ἔντασιν' γίνηται κώνου, ἐάν τε κατὰ εἰδώλων ἀπο- 
κρίσεις τε καὶ ἐπικρίσεις, ἐάν τε «κατ᾽ > ἀκτίνων 
ἢ χρωμάτων ἀποχύσεις, καὶ a ἀκοὴ δέ, ἦν τε ὁ 
πεπληγμένος ἀὴρ ἦν τε τὰ μόρια τῆς φωνῆς 
φέρηται περὶ τὰ ὦτα καὶ πλήττῃ τὸ ἀκουστικὸν 
πνεῦμα ὥστε τὴν ἀντίληψιν τῆς φωνῆς ἀπεργά- 
ζεσθαι. ἀλλὰ καὶ αἵ ὀδμαὶ τῇ ῥινὶ καὶ οἱ χυμοὶ 
αὖ τῇ γλώττῃ προσπίπτουσιν, καὶ τὰ τὴν ἁφὴν 

5 κινοῦντα ὁμοίως τῇ ἁφῇ. τὰ δὲ ἀσώματα ἐπ- 
ἔρεισιν τοιαύτην ὑπομένειν οὐχ οἷά τέ ἐστιν, ὥστε 
οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο τῇ αἰσθήσει καταλαμβάνεσθαι. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐδὲ διὰ "λόγου. εἰ μὲν γὰρ λεκτόν ἐστιν 

ὁ λόγος καὶ ἀσώματος, ὡς οἱ στωικοΐ φασιν, ὁ 
λέγων διὰ λόγου καταλαμβάνεσθαι τὰ ἀσώματα 
τὸ ζητούμενον -συναρπάζει. ζητούντων γὰρ ἡμῶν 
εἰ δύναται ἀσώματόν τι καταλαμβάνεσθαι, αὐτὸς 
ἀσώματόν τι λαβὼν ἁπλῶς διὰ τούτου τὴν κατά- 
ληψιν τῶν ἀσωμάτων ποιεῖσθαι θέλει. Kairos 
αὐτὸς 6 λόγος, εἴπερ ἀσώματός ἐστι, τῆς τῶν 
8 ζητουμένων ἐστὶ μοίρας. πῶς οὖν ἀποδείξει τις 


1 ἔντασιν Kayser: ἔνστασιν mss., Bekk. 
2 «κατ add. T, cj. Bekk. 


* The first of these theories of vision is that of Chrysippus 
(a cone of light connecting eye with object), the second that 
of Democritus and Epicurus, the third that of Empedocles, 
Pythagoreans, Plato (Tim 45 8) and Aristotle. 


360 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 50-53 


the intelligibles be given immediately, nor, conse- 
quently, that of Incorporeality. 

Also, he who asserts that he apprehends the In- 51 
corporeal will maintain that he apprehends it either 
by sense or by means of reason. Certainly not by 
sense, since it is supposed that the senses perceive 
the sensibles by way of ‘‘ impression ”’ and “‘ indenta- 
tion, —take sight, for instance, whether it occur by 
reason of the tension of a cone, or of the emissions and 
immissions of images, or by effusions of rays or 
colours*; and hearing too, whether it be the smitten 
air ὃ or the parts of the sound that are carried round 
the ears and smite the acoustic breath so as to effect 
the perception of sound. Smells also impinge on the 
nose and flavours on the tongue, and likewise objects 
of touch on the sense of touch. But incorporeals are 52 
incapable of submitting to impression of this kind, so 
that they could not be apprehended by sense. 

Nor yet by means of reason. For if the reason 
is “verbally expressible’? © and incorporeal, as the 
Stoics assert, he who says that incorporeals are 
apprehended by means of reason is begging the 
question. For when our question is—‘‘Can an 
incorporeal object be apprehended ? ’’ he assumes an 
incorporeal object and then, by means of it alone, 
claims to effect the apprehension of incorporeals. Yet 
reason itself, if it is incorporeal, belongs to the class 
of things which are in question. How, then, is one to 53 


» Cf. Plato, Tim. 67 8; Diog. Laert. vii. 158; ‘‘ acoustic 
breath ᾽ is Stoic for the air within the ear, cf. ii. 70. 

° For the Stoic theory of “‘ expression” (λεκτόν) ef. ii. 
81, 104, Logos (‘‘ reason” or ‘“‘ word.’’) is from the same stem 
as Lekton (“what can be put into words”’ or “‘ meaning’’) 
which—as contrasted with “ uttered words ”’—was termed by 
the Stoics “‘ incorporeal.” 


361 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ὅτι πρότερον τοῦτο τὸ ἀσώματον καταλαμβάνεται, 
φημὶ δὲ τὸν λόγον; εἰ μὲν γὰρ δι᾽ ἄλλου a ᾿ ἀσωμάτου, 
κἀκείνου ζητήσομεν τὴν ἀπόδειξιν τῆς καταλή- 
ψεως, καὶ τοῦτο μέχρις ἀπείρου" εἰ δὲ διὰ σώματος, 
ζητεῖται καὶ περὶ τῆς καταλήψεως τῶν σωμάτων' 
διὰ τίνος οὖν δείξομεν ὅτι καταλαμβάνεται τὸ 
σῶμα τὸ εἰς ἀπόδειξιν τῆς καταλήψεως τοῦ ἄσω- 
μάτου λόγου λαμβανόμενον; εἰ μὲν διὰ σώματος, 
εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκβαλλόμεθα, εἰ δὲ δι’ ἀσωμάτου, εἰς 
τὸν διάλληλον τρόπον ἐκπίπτομεν. μένοντος οὖν 
οὕτως ἀκαταλήπτου τοῦ λόγου, εἴπερ ἀσώματός 
ἐστιν, οὐκ ἂν δύναιτό τις λέγειν δι’ αὐτοῦ κατα- 
λαμβάνεσθαι τὸ ἀσώματον. ᾿ 
δ4 ἘΠ δὲ σῶμά ἐστιν 6 λόγος, ἐπεὶ καὶ περὶ τῶν 
σωμάτων διαπεφώνηται πότερον καταλαμβάνεται 
ἢ ov, διὰ τὴν λεγομένην συνεχῆ ῥύσιν αὐτῶν, ὡς 
μηδὲ τὴν τόδε" δεῖξιν ἐπιδέχεσθαι, μηδὲ εἶναι νο- 
μίζεσθαι (παρὸ καὶ ὁ Πλάτων γινόμενα μὲν ὄντα 
δὲ οὐδέποτε καλεῖ τὰ σώματα), ἀπορῶ πῶς ἐπι- 
κριθήσεται ἡ περὶ τοῦ σώματος διαφωνία, μήτε 
σώματι μήτε ἀσωμάτῳ ταύτην ὁρῶν ἐπικρίνεσθαι 
δυναμένην διὰ τὰς μικρῷ πρόσθεν εἰρημένας 
ἀτοπίας. οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ λόγῳ δυνατόν ἐστι κατα- 
55 λαμβάνειν τὰ ἀσώματα. εἰ δὲ μήτε αἰσθήσει 
ὑποπίπτει μήτε διὰ λόγου καταλαμβάνεται, οὐδ᾽ 
ἂν ὅλως καταλαμβάνοιτο. 
Εἰ τοίνυν μήτε περὶ τῆς ὑπάρξεως τοῦ σώματος 
μήτε περὶ τῶν ἀσωμάτων οἷόν τέ ἐστι διαβεβαιώ- 
σασθαι, καὶ περὶ τῶν στοιχείων ἐστὶν ἐφεκτέον, 


1 τόδε Apelt: τότε mss., Bekk. 





α The Heracleitean doctrine, cf. i.217 ff. 3 88 82, 115 infra. 
862 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 53-55 


prove that this particular incorporeal (I mean reason) 
is previously apprehended? For if it is by means of 
another incorporeal, we shall ask for the proof of its 
apprehension also, and so on ad infinitum ; whereas, if 
it is by means of a body, the apprehension of bodies 
is also in question; by what means, then, are we 
to prove that the body which is assumed in order to 
prove the apprehension of the incorporeal reason is 
itself apprehended? If by means of a body, we are 
plunged into infinite regress; while if we do so by 
means of an incorporeal, we are wrecked on circular 
reasoning. Reason, then, since it is incorporeal, re- 
maining thus inapprehensible, no one will be able to 
say that by means of it the incorporeal is appre- 
hended. 

But if reason is a body, inasmuch as about bodies 54 
also there is much controversy as to whether or not 
they are apprehended, owing to what is called their 
‘ continual flux,’ * which gives rise to the view that 
they do not admit of the title “ this ᾿᾿ and are non- 
existent—just as Plato ὃ speaks of bodies as “ becom- 
ing but never being,’”—I am perplexed as to how 
this controversy about Body is to be settled, as I see 
that it cannot be settled, because of the difficulties 
stated a moment ago, either by a body or by an 
incorporeal. Neither, then, is it possible to appre- 
hend the incorporeals by reason. And if they are 55 
neither objects of sense nor apprehended by means 
of reason, they will not be apprehended at all. 

If, then, it is impossible to be positive either 
about the existence of Body or about the In- 
corporeals, we must also suspend judgement con- 
cerning the Elements, and possibly about the things 


> Of. ii. 28. 
363 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τάχα δὲ καὶ περὶ τῶν μετὰ τὰ στοιχεῖα, εἴγε 
τούτων τὰ μὲν σώματα τὰ δὲ ἀσώματα, καὶ περὶ 
ἀμφοτέρων. ἠπόρηται. πλὴν ἀλλὰ τῶν τε δρασ- 
τικῶν ἀρχῶν καὶ τῶν ὑλικῶν διὰ ταῦτα ἐφεκτῶν 
οὐσῶν ἄπορός ἐστιν 6 περὶ ἀρχῶν λόγος. 


Η΄.--ΠΈΕΡῚ ΚΡΑΣΕΩΣ 


56 “να δὲ καὶ ταῦτα παραλίπῃ τις, πῶς ἄρα καὶ 
γίνεσθαί φασι τὰ συγκρίματα ἐκ τῶν πρώτων 
στοιχείων, μήτε θίξεως καὶ ἁφῆς “ὑπαρχούσης 
μήτε κράσεως ἢ μίξεως ὅλως; ὅτι μὲν γὰρ οὐδέν 
ἐστιν ἡ ἁφή, καὶ μικρῷ πρόσθεν ὑπέμνησα, ὅτε 
περὶ τῆς ὑποστάσεως τοῦ σώματος διελεγόμην' 
ὅτι δὲ οὐδὲ 6 τρόπος τῆς κράσεως ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς 
λεγομένοις ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν δυνατός ἐστι, διὰ βραχέων 
ἐπιστήσω. πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ λέγεται περὶ κράσεως, 
καὶ σχεδὸν ἀνήνυτοι. περὶ τοῦ προκειμένου σκέμ- 
ματός εἶσι παρὰ τοῖς δογματικοῖς στάσεις" ὅθεν 
εὐθέως ἅμα τῇ ἀνεπικρίτῳ διαφωνίᾳ καὶ τὸ ἀκατά- 
ληπτον τοῦ σκέμματος συνάγοιτ᾽ ἄν. ἡμεῖς δὲ νῦν 
τὴν πρὸς ἕκαστον αὐτῶν ἀντίρρησιν παραιτησάμενοι 
διὰ τὴν πρόθεσιν τῆς συγγραφῆς, τάδε λέξειν ἐπὶ 
τοῦ παρόντος ἀποχρώντως ὕπολαμ. άνομεν. 

57 Τὰ κιρνάμενα ἐξ οὐσίας καὶ ποιοτήτων συγκεῖ- 
σθαι φασίν. ἤτοι οὖν τὰς μὲν οὐσίας αὐτῶν pi- 





“ Yor the four (or five) “΄ elements ”’ ef. §§ 30, 31; for“ the 
things behind ” them (from the point of view of cognition), 
i.e. primary bodies or stuff, cf. § 32. 

δ i.e. the primary bodies out of which, as ‘‘ elements,” the 
(four) so-called ‘“‘ elements” (earth, air, fire, water) were 
said by the Stoics to be compounded. 

¢ For “touch” cf. 1. 50, 96, ili, 45-46. “‘ Mixture’’ (of 
solids as well as fluids) is a ‘wider term than “ blending.” 


364 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 55-57 


which lie behind the Elements % as well, seeing that 
of these some are bodies, others incorporeals, and 
both of these are matters of doubt. In fact, when 
both the active and the material Principles, for these 
reasons, call for suspense of judgement, the doctrine 
of Principles is open to doubt. 


Cuapter VIII.—Concernina Mixture 


But, to pass over these problems, how do’ they 56 
explain the production of the compounds from the 
primary elements,? when neither contact and touch 
nor mixture or blending ὁ has any existence at all? 
For that touch is nothing I showed a moment ago, 
when I was discussing the subsistence of Body ; and 
that the method of Mixture is equally impossible on 
their own showing, I shall briefly demonstrate. For 
there is much argument about Mixture, and the rival 
views held by the Dogmatists ὦ on the problem pro- 
pounded are well-nigh endless ; and hence we might 
straightway infer, along with the indeterminable con- 
troversy, the inapprehensibility of the problem. And 
we shall for the moment, owing to the design of our 
treatise, excuse ourselves from answering all their 
views in detail, deeming that the following remarks 
will amply suffice for the present. 

They declare that mixed things are composed of 57 
substance and qualities. If so, one must declare 

ἀ Especially Aristotle (De gen. et corr. i. 10) and the Stoics. 
The following argument is against the latter. As Aristotle 
Says, “‘ mixture’ effects some change, but nota total change, 
in the things mixed, which must be such as are capable of 
mutually affecting one another, and capable also of being 
easily decomposed into their constituent particles: he defines 
κ᾽ mixture’? as “the union of mixables which have undergone 
alteration.” 

365 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


γνυσθαι φήσει τις τὰς δὲ ποιότητας μηδαμῶς, ἣ 
τὰς “μὲν “ποιότητας ἀναμίγνυσθαι μηκέτι ὲ τὰς 
οὐσίας, ἢ μηθέτερον ἀναμίγνυσθαι θατέρῳ, 7 ἀμ- 
φότερα ἑνοῦσθαι ἀλλήλοις. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν οὔτε αἵ 
ποιότητες οὔτε at οὐσίαι ἀναμίγνυνται ἀλλήλοις, 
ἀνεπινόητος ἔσται ἢ κρᾶσις" πῶς γὰρ μία αἴσθησις 
ἀπὸ τῶν κιρναμένων γίνεσθαι συμβήσεται, εἴγε 
κατὰ μηδὲν τῶν προειρημένων μίγνυται ἀλλήλοις 

68 τὰ κιρνάμενα; εἰ δὲ αἵ μὲν ποιότητες ἁπλῶς παρα- 
κεῖσθαι λεχθεῖεν ἀλλήλαις αἱ δὲ οὐσίαι μίγνυσθαι, 
καὶ οὕτως ἄτοπον ἂν εἴη τὸ λεγόμενον' οὐ γὰρ 
κεχωρισμένων τῶν ποιοτήτων τῶν ἐν ταῖς κρά- 
σεσιν ἀντιλαμβανόμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς μιᾶς ἀπὸ τῶν 
κιρναμένων ἀποτελουμένης αἰσθανόμεθα. εἰ δὲ τὰς 
μὲν ποιότητας μίγνυσθαι λέγοι τις τὰς δὲ οὐσίας 
μηδαμῶς, ἀδύνατα λέξει" ἡ γὰρ τῶν ποιοτήτων 
ὑπόστασις ἐν ταῖς οὐσίαις ἐστίν, διόπερ γελοῖον 
ἂν εἴη λέγειν ὡς αἵ μὲν ποιότητες χωρισοθεῖσαι 
τῶν οὐσιῶν [Kall ἰδίᾳ μίγνυνταί που ἀλλήλαις, 
ἄποιοι δὲ αἵ οὐσίαι χωρὶς ὑπολείπονται. 

ὅ8 Λείπεται λέγειν ὅτι καὶ αἱ ποιότητες τῶν κιρνα- 
μένων καὶ at οὐσίαι χωροῦσι δι᾽ ἀλλήλων καὶ μιγνύ- 

os 3 ~ La o~ 
μεναι τὴν κρᾶσιν « ἀποτελοῦσιν. ὃ τῶν προειρη- 
μένων ἐστὶν ἀτοπώτερον" ἀδύνατος γάρ ἐστιν ἡ 
τοιαύτη κρᾶσις. οἷον γοῦν ἐὰν δέκα κοτύλαις 
ὕδατος κωνείου χυλοῦ ᾿κοτύλη μιχθῇ. παντὶ τῷ 
ὕδατι συνανακίρνασθαι ἂν λέγοιτο τὸ κώνειον εἰ 
γοῦν καί τι βραχύτατον μέρος τοῦ μίγματος λάβοι 
1 [καὶ] om. T, Creuzer. 





α Here “ blend ”’ is used merely as ἃ. synonym for ‘* mix.” 

> Chrysippus held that “ mixture’’ is not effected by 
superficial ‘juxtaposition ’”’ but by the mutual “‘ permeation ”’ 
366 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III, 57-59 


either that-their substances are blended® but not 
their qualities, or their qualities blended but not their 
substances any longer, or neither blended with the 
other, or both unified with each other. But if neither 
the qualities nor the substances are blended with one 
another, Mixture will be inconceivable ; for how will 
a single sensation result from the things mixed if the 
things mixed are blended with one another in none 
of the ways stated above? And if it should be said 58 
that the qualities are simply juxtaposed and the 
substances blended, even so the statement would be 
absurd ; for we do not perceive the qualities in the 
mixtures as separate objects but as a single sense- 
impression produced by the mixed things. And any- 
one who should assert that the qualities are blended, 
but the substances not, would be asserting the im- 
possible ; for the reality of the qualities resides in 
the substances, so that it would be ridiculous to 
assert that the qualities by themselves, in separation 
from the substances, are somehow blended with one 
another, while the substances are left apart void of 
quality. 

It only remains to say that both the qualities and 59 
the substances of the mixed things permeate one 
another ὃ and by their blending produce Mixture. 
But this is a more absurd view than any of the fore- 
going ; for such a mixture is impossible. Thus, for 
example, if a cup of hemlock juice were blended with 
ten cups of water, it will be said that the hemlock is 
mixed in with all the water ; for certainly if one were 
to take even the least portion of the mixture he would 


or “interpenetration’’ of the constituents of the mixture: 
““ qualities’ as well as substances he regarded as corporeal 
and thus capable of being ‘‘ penetrated.”’ 


367 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τις, εὑρήσει πεπληρωμένον α αὐτὸ τῆς τοῦ κωνείου 
60 δυνάμεως. εἰ δὲ ἐπιμίγνυται τὸ κώνειον παντὶ 
μέρει τοῦ ὕδατος καὶ παρεκτείνεται αὐτῷ ὅλον 
ὅλῳ κατά τε τὴν τῶν οὐσιῶν καὶ τῶν ποιοτήτων 
αὐτῶν δι᾽ ἀλλήλων δίοδον, ἵν᾿ οὕτως ἡ κρᾶσις 
γένηται, τὰ δὲ παρεκτεινόμενα ἀλλήλοις καθ᾽ ἅπαν 
μέρος τὸν ἴσον ἐπέχει τόπον, διὸ καὶ ἴσα ἀλλήλοις 
ἐστίν, ἴση ἔσται ἡ κοτύλη τοῦ κωνείου ταῖς δέκα 
κοτύλαις τοῦ ὕδατος, ὡς εἴκοσι κοτύλας ὀφείλειν 
εἶναι τὸ μῖγμα ἢ δύο μόνας, ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇδε τῇ 
ὑποθέσει τοῦ τρόπου τῆς κράσεως: καὶ κοτύλης 
πάλιν ὕδατος ταῖς εἴκοσι κοτύλαις ὅσον ἐπὶ τῷ 
- λόγῳ τῆς ὑποθέσεως ἐπεμβληθείσης τεσσαράκοντα 
κοτυλῶν ὀφείλει τὸ μέτρον. εἶναι 7 ἢ πάλιν δύο μόνων, 
ἐπειδὴ καὶ τὴν κοτύλην εἴκοσι κοτύλας ἐνδέχεται 
νοεῖν, ὅσαις παρεκτείνεται, καὶ τὰς εἴκοσι κοτύλας 
61 μίαν, ἧ συνεξισοῦνται. δυνατὸν δὲ οὕτω κατὰ μίαν 
κοτύλην ἐπεμβάλλοντα καὶ ὁμοίως συλλογιζόμενον 
συνάγειν ὅτι ai εἴκοσιν ὁρώμεναι τοῦ μίγματος 
κοτύλαι δισμύριαί που καὶ πρὸς ὀφείλουσιν εἶναι 
ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇ ὑποθέσει τοῦ τρόπου τῆς κράσεως, αἱ 
δὲ αὐταὶ καὶ δύο μόναι" ὅπερ ᾿ἀπεμφάσεως ὑπερ- 
βολὴν οὐκ ἀπολέλοιπεν. οὐκοῦν ἄτοπός ἐστι καὶ 
62 αὕτη ἡ ὑπόθεσις τῆς κράσεως. εἰ δὲ οὔτε τῶν 
οὐσιῶν μόνων μιγνυμένων ἀλλήλαις οὔτε τῶν 
ποιοτήτων μόνων οὔτε ἀμφοτέρων οὔτε οὐθετέρου 
δύναται γίνεσθαι κρᾶσις, παρὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲν 
οἷον τέ ἐστιν ἐπινοεῖν, ἀνεπινόητος ὁ τρόπος τῆς 
τε κράσεως καὶ ὅλως τῆς μίξεως ἐστίν. διόπερ 
εἰ μήτε κατὰ θίξιν παρατιθέμενα ἀλλήλοις τὰ 
καλούμενα στοιχεῖα μήτε ἀνακιρνώμενα ἢ μιγνύ- 
μενα ποιητικὰ τῶν συγκριμάτων εἶναι δύναται, 
868 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 60-62 


find it full of the potency of the hemlock. Yet if the 60 
hemlock is blended in with every particle of the water 
and is distributed as a whole over the whole volume 
of the water and through the mutual interpenetration 
of both their substances and their qualities, so that 
Mixture may in this way result; and if the things so 
distributed over each other in every particle occupy 
an equal space, so that they are equal to each other,— 
then the cup of hemlock will be equal to the ten cups 
of water, so that the blend must consist of twenty 
cups or of only two, according to the assumption now 
made as to the mode of Mixture. And if, again, a 
cup of water were poured into the twenty cups, 
then—according to,the theory assumed—the quantity 
is bound to be forty cups or, again, only two, since it 
is admissible to conceive either the one cup as all 
the twenty over which it is distributed, or the twenty 
cups as the one with which they are equalized. And 61 
by thus pouring in a cup at a time and pursuing the 
same argument it is possible to infer that the twenty 
cups seen in the blend must be twenty thousand and 
more, according to the theory of Mixture assumed, 
and at the same time only two—a conclusion which 
reaches the very height of incongruity. Wherefore 
this theory of Mixture also is absurd. 

But if Mixture cannot come about by the mutual 62 
blending either of the substances alone or of the 
qualities alone or of both or of neither, and it is 
impossible to conceive any other ways than these, 
then the process of Mixture and of blending in 
general is inconceivable. Hence, if the so-called 
Elements are unable to form the compounds either 
by way of contact through juxtaposition or by 


VOL. I 2B 369 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


€ ‘ ‘ 

ἀνεπινόητός ἐστιν ἡ κατὰ τοὺς δογματικοὺς φυσιο- 
\ ~ 

λογία καὶ ὅσον ἐπὶ τούτῳ TH λόγῳ. 


6'.—ILEPI ΚΙΝΉΣΕΩΣ 


63 ITpos | δὲ τοῖς προειρημένοις ἦν ἐπιστῆσαι τῷ 
περὶ τῶν κινήσεων λόγῳ, ᾧ καὶ ἀδύνατος ἂν 
εἶναι νομισθείη ἡ κατὰ τοὺς δογματικοὺς φυσιο- 
λογία. πάντως γὰρ κατά τινα κίνησιν τῶν τε 
στοιχείων καὶ τῆς δραστικῆς “ἀρχῆς ὀφείλει γίνε- 
σθαι τὰ συγκρίματα. ἐὰν οὖν ὑπομνήσωμεν ὅτι 
μηδὲν εἶδος κινήσεως ὁμολογεῖται, σαφὲς ἔσται ὅτι 
καὶ διδομένων καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν τῶν προειρημένων 
ἁπάντων μάτην ὃ καλούμενος φυσικὸς λόγος τοῖς 
δογματικοῖς διεξώδευται. 


1΄.--ΠΕΡῚ ΤῊΣ METABATIKHE ΚΙΝΉΣΕΩΣ 


64 Φασὶ τοίνυν ot δοκοῦντες ἐντελέστερον περὶ 
κινήσεως διειληφέναι ἕξ εἴδη ταύτης ὑπάρχειν, 
τοπικὴν μετάβασιν, φυσικὴν μεταβολήν, αὔξησιν, 
μείωσν, γένεσιν, οράν. ἡμεῖς οὖν ἑκάστῳ τῶν 
προειρημένων εἰδῶν τῆς κινήσεως κατ᾽ ἰδίαν ἐπι- 
στήσομεν, ἀπὸ τῆς τοπικῆς μεταβάσεως ἀρξά- 
μενοι. ἔστιν οὖν αὕτη κατὰ τοὺς δογματικοὺς καθ᾽ 
ἣν τόπον ἐκ τόπου περιέρχεται τὸ κινούμενον ἤτοι 
καθ᾽ ὁλότητα 7 ἢ κατὰ μέρος, ὅλον μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ τῶν 
περιπατούντων, κατὰ μέρος δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ τῆς περὶ 
κέντρῳ κινουμένης σφαίρας" ὅλης γὰρ αὐτῆς 
μενούσης ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ τόπῳ τὰ μέρη τοὺς τόπους 
ἀμείβει. 

1 ᾧ καὶ: καὶ ὡς Μ88., Bekk.: καὶ om. Steph. 
370 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 62-64 


mixture or blending, then, so far as this argument 
goes, the physical theory of the Dogmatists is in- 
conceivable. 


Crapter [X.—Concernine Motion 


In addition to the foregoing we might have dwelt 63 
on the argument about the kinds of motion, since 
this also might be held to render the physical theory 
of the Dogmatists impossible. For the formation of 
the compounds must certainly be due to some motion 
both of the elements and of the efficient Principle. 
If, then, we shall show that no one kind of motion is 
generally agreed upon, it will be clear that, even if 
all the assumptions mentioned above be granted, the 
Dogmatists have elaborated their so-called ‘‘ Physical 
Doctrine ”’ in vain. 


CuHaprer X.—ConcernING TRANSIENT Morion 


Now those who are reputed to have given the most 64 
complete classification of Motion assert that six kinds 
of it exist—local transition, physical change, increase, 
decrease, becoming, perishing.* We, then, shall deal 
with each of the aforesaid kinds of motion separately, 
beginning with local transition. According, then, to 
the Dogmatists, this is the motion by which the moving 
object passes on from place to place, either wholly 
or partially—wholly as in the case of men walking, 
partially as when a globe is moving round a central 
axis, for while as a whole it remains in the same place, 
its parts change their places. 


* Cf. Adv. Phys. ii. 37 ff.; Aristot. Phys. vii. 2, Categ. 
15a13; Plato, Laws, x. 894. 


571 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


65 Τρεῖς δέ, οἶμαι, γεγόνασιν at ἀνωτάτω περὶ 
κινήσεως στάσεις. ὃ μὲν γὰρ βίος" καί τινες τῶν 
φιλοσόφων εἶναι κίνησιν ὑπολαμβάνουσιν, μὴ εἶναι 
δὲ Παρμενίδης πε καὶ Μέλισσος καὶ ἄλλοι τινές. 
μὴ μᾶλλον δὲ εἶναι ἢ μὴ κίνησιν ἔφασαν οἱ σκεπ- 
τικοί: ὅσον μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ τοῖς φαινομένοις δοκεῖν 
εἶναι κίνησιν, ὅσον δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ φιλοσόφῳ λόγῳ μὴ 
ὑπάρχειν. ἡμεῖς οὖν ἐκθέμενοι τὴν ἀντίρρησιν τῶν 
TE εἶναι κίνησιν ὑπολαμβανόντων καὶ τῶν μηδὲν 
εἶναι κίνησιν ἀποφαινομένων, ἐὰν τὴν διαφωνίαν 
εὑρίσκωμεν ἰσοσθενῆ, μὴ μᾶλλον εἶναι ἢ μὴ εἶναι 
κίνησιν λέγειν ἀναγκασθησόμεθα ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς 

66 λεγομένοις. ἀρξόμεθα δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ὑπάρχειν αὐτὴν 

., λεγόντων. 

Οὗτοι δὴ τῇ ἐναργείᾳ μάλιστα ἐπερείδονται" εἰ 
γὰρ μὴ ἔστι, φασί, κίνησις, πῶς μὲν ἀπὸ ἀνατολῶν 
ἐπὶ δυσμὰς ὁ ἥλιος φέρεται, πῶς δὲ τὰς τοῦ ἔτους 
ὥρας ποιεῖ, παρὰ τοὺς πρὸς ἡμᾶς συνεγγισμοὺς 
αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰς ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀποστάσεις γιγνομένας; 
ἢ πῶς νῆες ἀπὸ λιμένων ἀναχθεῖσαι καταίρουσιν 
ἐπὶ λιμένας ἄλλους πάμπολυ τῶν προτέρων ἀφ- 
εστῶτας; τίνα δὲ τρόπον 6 τὴν κίνησιν ἀναιρῶν 
πρόεισι τῆς οἰκίας καὶ αὖθις ἀναστρέφει; ταῦτα 
δὴ τελέως ἀναντίρρητα εἶναι. διὸ καὶ τῶν κυνικῶν 
τίς ἐρωτηθεὶς κατὰ τῆς κινήσεως λόγον οὐδὲν ἀπ- 
εκρίνατο, ἀνέστη δὲ καὶ ἐβάδισεν, ἔργῳ καὶ διὰ 
τῆς évapyelas παριστὰς ὅτι ὑπαρκτή ἐστιν ἡ 
κίνησις. 

1 Bios T: Bias mss., Bekk. 





α Lit. “ by life,” cf. i. 165, 11. 244. 
» Such as Zeno and Diodorus Cronos, c/. ii. 242, 


372 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 65-66 


The main views held about motion are, I imagine, 65 
three. It is assumed by ordinary people * and by 
some philosophers that motion exists, but by Par- 
menides, Melissus and certain others ® that it does 
not exist ; while the Sceptics have declared that it is 
“no more ”’ existent than non-existent ; for so far as 
the evidence of phenomena goes it seems that motion 
exists, whereas to judge by the philosophic argument 
it would seem not to exist. So when we have ex- 
posed the contradiction which lies between those 
who believe in the existence of motion and those who 
maintain that motion is naught, if we shall find the 
counter-arguments of equal weight,° we shall be 
compelled to declare that, so far as these arguments 
go, motion is “ no more ”’ existent than non-existent. 
We shall begin with those who affirm its real 66 
existence. 

These base their view mainly on “ evidence.’’? If, 
say they, motion does not exist, how does the sun 
move from east to west, and how does it produce the 
seasons of the year, which are brought about by its 
approximations to us and its recessions from us? Or 
how do ships put out from harbours and cast anchor 
in other harbours very far distant from the first? And 
in what fashion does the denier of motion proceed 
from his house and return to it again? These facts 
are perfectly incontestable. Consequently, when one 
of the Cynics ὁ had an argument against motion put 
to him, he made no reply but stood up and began 
to walk, thus demonstrating by his action and by 
‘ evidence ” that motion is capable of real existence. 
aa Cf. i. 26 for “ equipollence’’ as leading to Sceptic 

suspension.” 

4 i.e. what is plainly obvious, ¢f. § 266. 

© OF. ii, 944. 

373 


67 


68 


69 


70 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Οὗτοι μὲν οὖν οὕτω δυσωπεῖν ἐπιχειροῦσι τοὺς 
τῆς ἐναντίας αὐτοῖς στάσεως ὄντας; of δὲ τὴν 
ὕπαρξιν τῆς κινήσεως ἀναιροῦντες λόγοις ἐπι- 
χειροῦσι τοιούτοις. εἰ κινεῖταί τι, ἤτοι ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ 
κινεῖται ἢ ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου, [τὸ 
γὰρ λεγόμενον ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ κινεῖσθαι] ἤτοι ἀναυτίως 
κινηθήσεται ἢ κατά τινα αἰτίαν. ἀναιτίως μὲν 
οὐδέν φασι γίνεσθαι" εἰ δὲ κατά τινα αἰτίαν κινεῖ- 
ται, ἡ αἰτία, καθ᾽ ἣν κινεῖται, κινητικὴ αὐτοῦ 
γενήσεται, ὅθεν εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκπίπτει κατὰ τὴν 
μικρῷ πρόσθεν εἰρημένην ἐπιβολήν. ἄλλως τε καὶ 
εἰ τὸ κινοῦν ἐνεργεῖ, τὸ δὲ ἐνεργοῦν. κινεῖται, 
κἀκεῖνο δεήσεται κινοῦντος ἑτέρου, καὶ τὸ δεύτερον 
τρίτου, καὶ μέχρις ἀπείρου, ws ἄναρχον γίνεσθαι 
τὴν κίνησιν" ὅπερ ἄτοπον. οὐκ ἄρα πᾶν τὸ κινού- 
μενον ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου κινεῖται. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ. 
ἐπεὶ γὰρ πᾶν τὸ κινοῦν ἤτοι προωθοῦν κινεῖ ἢ 
ἐπισπώμενον ἢ ἀνωθοῦν ἢ ἐνθλῖβον, δεήσει τὸ 
ἑαυτὸ κινοῦν κατά τινα τῶν προειρημένων τρόπων 
ἑαυτὸ κινεῖν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν προωστικῶς ἑαυτὸ κινεῖ, 
ἔσται ἐξόπισθεν ἑαυτοῦ, εἰ δὲ ἐπισπαστικῶς, ἔμ- 
προσθεν, εἰ δὲ ἀνωστικῶς, ὑποκάτω, εἰ δὲ ἐν- 
θλιπτικῶς, ἐπάνω. ἀδύνατον δὲ αὐτό τι ἑαυτοῦ 
ἐπάνω εἶναι ἢ ἔμπροσθεν ἢ ὑποκάτω ἢ ὀπίσω: 
ἀδύνατον ἄρα ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ τι κινεῖσθαι. εἰ δὲ μήτε 
ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ τι κινεῖται μήτε ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου, οὐδὲ 
κινεῖταί τι. 

Hi δέ τις ἐπὶ τὴν ὁρμὴν καὶ τὴν προαίρεσιν κατα- 
φεύγοι, ὑπομνηστέον αὐτὸν τῆς περὶ τοῦ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν 
διαφωνίας, καὶ ὅτι ἀνεπίκριτος αὕτη καθέστηκεν, 





* An Aristotelian phrase: freedom of choice was denied 
by fatalists, such as Democritus and the Stoics, 


374 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 66-70 


So these men attempt in this way to put to shame 
those who hold the contrary opinion ; but those who 67 
deny the existence of motion allege such arguments 
as these: If a thing is moved, it is moved either 
by itself or by another thing. But if it is moved by 
another, it will be moved either causelessly or owing 
to some cause. Nothing, they assert, is moved 
causelessly ; but if it is moved owing to some cause, 
the cause owing to which it moves will be what 
makes it move, and thus we are involved in an 
infinite regress, according to the criticism stated a 
little while ago. Moreover, if the movent thing 68 
is active, and what is active is moved, that movent 
thing will need another movent thing, and the 
second a third, and so on ad infinitum, so that the 
motion comes to have no beginning ; which is absurd. 
Therefore the thing that moves is not always moved 
by another. Nor yet by itself. Since every movent 
causes motion either by pushing forward or by draw- 
ing after or by pushing up or by thrusting down, what 
is self-movent must move itself in one of the aforesaid 
ways. But if it moves itself propulsively, it will be 69 
behind itself; and if by pulling after, it will be in 
front of itself; and if by pushing up, it will be below 
itself; and if by thrusting down, it will be above 
itself. But it is impossible for anything to be above 
or before or beneath or behind its own self; therefore 
it is impossible for anything to be moved by itself. 
But if nothing is moved either by itself or by another, 
then nothing is moved at all. 

And if anyone should seek refuge in the notions 70 
of ‘‘ impulse ” and “ purpose ’’ we must remind him of 
the controversy about “ what is in our power,” ¢ and 


375 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


κριτήριον ἡμῶν τῆς ἀληθείας ἄχρι viv οὐχ edpy- 
κότων. 

7 Ἔστι κἀκεῖνο λεκτέον. εἰ κινεῖταί τι, ἤτοι ἐν ᾧ 
ἔστι τόπῳ κινεῖται ἢ ἐν ᾧ οὐκ ἔστιν. οὔτε δὲ ἐν 
ᾧ ἔστιν" μένει γὰρ ἐν αὐτῷ, εἴπερ ἐν αὐτῷ ἔστιν" 
οὔτε ἐν ᾧ μὴ ἔστιν: ὅπου γάρ τι μὴ ἔστιν, ἐκεῖ 
οὐδὲ δρᾶσαί τι οὐδὲ παθεῖν δύναται. οὐκ ἄρα 
κινεῖταί τι. οὗτος δὲ ὁ λόγος ἐ ἔστι μὲν Διοδώρου 
τοῦ Κρόνου, πολλῶν δὲ ἀντιρρήσεων τετύχηκεν, 
ὧν τὰς πληκτικωτέρας διὰ τὸν τρόπον τῆς συγ- 
γραφῆς ἐκθησόμεθα μετὰ τῆς φαινομένης ἡμῖν 
ἐπικρίσεως. 

2 Φασὶν οὖν τινὲς ὅτι δύναταί τε ἐν ᾧ ἔστι τόπῳ 
κινεῖσθαι" τὰς γοῦν περὶ τοῖς κέντροις περιδινου- 
μένας σφαίρας ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ μενούσας τόπῳ κινεῖ- 
σθαι. πρὸς οὕς μεταφέρειν χρὴ τὸν λόγον ἐφ᾽ 
ἕκαστον τῶν μερῶν τῆς σφαίρας, καὶ ὑπομιμνή- 
σκοντας ὅτι ὅσον ἐπὶ τῷ λόγῳ “μὴ ἑ κατὰ μέρη 
κινεῖται, συνάγειν ὅτι μηδὲ ἐν ᾧ ἔστι τόπῳ κινεῦταί 

73 τι. τὸ δὲ αὐτὸ ποιήσομεν. καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ᾿λέγοντας 
ὅτι τὸ κινούμενον δυοῖν ἔχεται τόπων, τοῦ τε ἐν 
ᾧ ἔστι καὶ τοῦ εἰς ὃν φέρεται. πευσόμεθα γὰρ 
αὐτῶν πότε φέρεται. τὸ κινούμενον ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐν ᾧ 
ἔστι τόπου εἰς τὸν ἕτερον, dpa ὅτε ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ 
τόπῳ ἔστιν ἢ ὅτε ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ. ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε μὲν 
ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τόπῳ ἔστιν, οὐ μετέρχεται εἰς τὸν 
δεύτερον" ἔ ἔτι γὰρ ἐν τῷ “πρώτῳ ἔστιν" ὅτε δὲ οὐκ 

74 ἔστιν ἐν τούτῳ, οὐ μετέρχεται ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. πρὸς 
τῷ καὶ συναρπάζεσθαι τὸ ζητούμενον" ἐν ᾧ γὰρ 
μὴ ἔστιν, οὐδὲ ἐνεργεῖν ἐν αὐτῷ δύναται" οὐ γὰρ 


Of. ii. 18 ff. > Of. i. 245 
376 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 70-74 


how it is still unsettled, since hitherto we have failed 
to find a criterion of truth. 

Further, there is this also to be said. If a thing 71 
moves, it moves either in the place where it is or in 
that where it is not. But it does not move in the 
place where it is, for if it is in it, it remains in it; 
nor yet does it move in the place where it is not; 
for where a thing is not, there it can neither effect 
nor suffer anything. Therefore nothing moves. This 
argument is, in fact, that of Diodorus Cronos,° but it 
has been the subject of many attacks, of which we 
shall describe, owing to the character of our treatise, 
only the more formidable, together with a judgement 
of their value, as it seems to us. 

Some, then, assert that a thing can move in 72 
the place where it is; at any rate the globes which 
revolve round their axes move while remaining in the 
same place.¢ Against these men we should transfer 
the argument which applies to each of the parts of the 
globe, and, reminding them that, to judge by this 
argument, it does not move even in respect of its 
parts, draw the conclusion that nothing moves in the 
place where it is. And we shall take the same course 78 
in replying to those who declare that the moving 
thing occupies two places, that wherein it is and that 
whereto it shifts. For we shall ask them when the 
moving object shifts from the place wherein it is to 
the other place—whether while it is in the first place 
or while it isin the second. But when it is in the first 
place it does not pass over into the second, for it is 
still in the first ; and when it is not in this, it is not 
passing from it. And besides, the question is being 74 
begged ; for where it is not, there it cannot be active. 


© Cf. Adv. Phys. ii. 93, 103. 
377 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δήπου φέρεσθαι εἴς τινα τόπον συγχωρήσει τις 
ἐκεῖνο ἁπλῶς ὃ μὴ δίδωσι κινεῖσθαι. 

75 Τινὲς μέντοι κἀκεῖνο φασίν: τόπος λέγεται 
διχῶς, ὃ μὲν ἐν πλάτει, οἷον ὡς ἐμοῦ ἡ οἰκία, 6 δὲ 
πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν, ὡς λόγου χάριν ὁ περιτετυπωκώς 
μου τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν τοῦ σώματος ἀήρ. λέγεται οὖν 
ἐν τόπῳ κινεῖσθαι τὸ κινούμενον οὐκ ἐν τῷ πρὸς 
ἀκρίβειαν ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ κατὰ πλάτος. πρὸς ovs 
ἔνεστιν, ὑποδιαιροῦντας τὸν ἐν πλάτει τόπον, λέγειν 
ὅτι τούτου ἐν ᾧ μὲν ἔστι κυρίως τὸ κινεῖσθαι λεγό- 
μενον σῶμα, ὡς ἐν τῷ πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν αὐτοῦ τόπῳ, 
ἐν ᾧ δὲ οὐκ ἔστιν, ὡς ἐν τοῖς λοιποῖς μέρεσι τοῦ 
κατὰ πλάτος τόπου" εἶτα συνάγοντας ὅτι μήτε ἐν 
ᾧ ἔστι τόπῳ κινεῖσθαί τι δύναται μήτε ἐν ᾧ μὴ 
ἔστιν, ἐπιλογίζεσθαι ὅτι μηδὲ ἐν τῷ κατὰ πλάτος 
καταχρηστικῶς λεγομένῳ τόπῳ κινεῖσθαί τι δύ- 
ναται" συστατικὰ γάρ ἐστιν αὐτοῦ τό τε ἐν ᾧ ἔστι 
πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν καὶ ἐν ᾧ πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν οὐκ ἔστιν, 
ὧν ἐν οὐθετέρῳ κινεῖσθαί τι δύνασθαι δέδεικται. 

76 “Kowrnréov δὲ κἀκεῖνον τὸν λόγον. εἰ κινεϊταίτι, 
», Ὰ A la al “δ \ 
TOL κατὰ TO πρότερον πρότερον κινεῖται ἢ κατὰ 
ἄθρουν μεριστὸν διάστημα" οὔτε δὲ κατὰ τὸ πρότερον 
πρότερον δύναταί τι κινεῖσθαι, οὔτε κατὰ τὸ ἄθρουν 
μεριστὸν διάστημα, ὡς δείξομεν" οὐδὲ κινεϊταίτι ἄρα. 

@ Cf. 8ὲ 119, 191. “Ῥίδος" in the “exact” or narrow 
sense means the precise portion of space occupied by an 
object, as distinguised from ‘“‘place” in the ** broad” or 
“extended ’’ sense in which it includes surrounding portions 
of space. The latter sense of ‘place’? was adopted in order 


to make “motion in place’ feasible; but Sextus argues 


that it fails to do so. 

ὃ The following sections, 76-80, criticize two kinds of 
motion, (1) successive motion, by which the moving body 
occupies the first part of the intervening space first with its 


378 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 74-76 


For surely no one will allow that any object to which 
he does not grant motion at all can shift to any place. 
Some, however, make this statement: Place is 75 
used in two senses, the broad sense, as for example 
‘“my house,” and the exact sense,* as for instance 
‘‘ the air which enfolds the surface of my body.” So 
the moving object is said to move in place, “ place ”’ 
being used not in the exact sense but in the 
broad sense. To these we can reply by dividing up 
“place ’’ in the broad sense, and saying that in one 
part of it the body said to be moved properly exists, 
this being its own “ place ”’ in the exact sense, and in 
the other part it does not exist, this being the remain- 
ing portions of “ place ”’ in the extended sense ; next 
we shall argue that an object can move neither in 
the place where it is nor in that where it is not, and 
so conclude that nothing can move even in what is 
perversely termed “ place’ in the broad sense; for 
this is composed of the place wherein it is in the exact 
sense and the place wherein it is not, and it has been 
proved that a thing cannot move in either of these. 
We should also propound the following argument.® 76 

If a thing moves it moves either by way of orderly, 
or gradual, progression or by occupying the divisible 
interval all at once ; but in neither of these ways can 
a thing move, as we shall prove ; so that it does not 
move at all. 

own first part, next with its second part, and so on till all 
its parts have passed through all the parts of the “‘interval.”’ 
(Here it is assumed that both the moving body and the 
spatial distance, or ‘‘interval,”’ are divisible; but, argues 
Sextus, whether they are infinitely divisible or divisible only 
into a limited number of indivisible parts, in either case motion 
is found to be impossible.) (2) Momentaneous motion (§§ 78- 


79), by which the moving body passes into the whole of the 
interval in a single moment of time. 
379 


77 


78 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Ὅτι μὲν οὖν κατὰ TO πρότερον πρότερον οὐκ 
ἐνδέχεταί τι κινεῖσθαι, αὐτόθεν δῆλον. εἰ μὲν γὰρ 
εἰς ἄπειρον τέμνονται τὰ σώματα καὶ οἱ τόποι 
καὶ οἱ χρόνοι οἷς κινεῖσθαι λέγεται τὰ σώματα, οὐ 
γενήσεται κίνησις, ἀδυνάτου ὄντος τοῦ πρῶτόν τι 
ἐν ἀπείροις εὑρεθῆναι, ἀφ᾽ οὗ πρώτου κινήσεται τὸ 
κινεῖσθαι λεγόμενον. εἰ δὲ εἰς ἀμερὲς καταλήγει τὰ 
προειρημένα, καὶ ἕκαστον τῶν κινουμένων ὁμοίως 
τὸ πρῶτον ἀμερὲς τοῦ τόπου τῷ πρώτῳ ἑαυτοῦ 
ἀμερεῖ μετέρχεται χρόνῳ, πάντα τὰ κινούμενα 
ἔστιν ἰσοταχῆ, οἷον ὃ ταχύτατος ἵ ἵππος καὶ ἡ χε- 
λώνη: ὅπερ τοῦ προτέρου ἐστὶν ἀτοπώτερον. 
οὐκ ἄρα κατὰ τὸ πρότερον πβότερον γίνεται ἡ 
κίνησις. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐδὲ κατὰ τὸ ἄθρουν μεριστὸν διάστημα. 
εἰ γὰρ ἀπὸ τῶν φαινομένων, ὡς φασί, μαρτυρεῖσθαι 
τὰ ἄδηλα χρή, ἐπεί, ἵνα τις ἀνύσῃ σταδιαῖον 
διάστημα, δεῖ πρότερον αὐτὸν ἀνύσαι τὸ πρῶτον 
τοῦ σταδίου μέρος καὶ τὸ δεύτερον δεύτερον καὶ 
τὰ ἄλλα ὁμοίως, οὕτω καὶ πᾶν τὸ κινούμενον κατὰ 
τὸ πρότερον πρότερον κινεῖσθαι προσήκει, ἐπεί 
τοί γε εἰ ἀθρόως διιέναι τὸ κινούμενον λέγουτο 
πάντα τὰ μέρη τοῦ τόπου ἐν ᾧ κινεῖσθαι λέγεται, 
ἐν πᾶσιν ἅμα ἔσται τοῖς μέρεσιν αὐτοῦ, καὶ εἰ τὸ 
μὲν “Ψυχρὸν εἴη μέρος τὸ δὲ θερμὸν τοῦ δι οὗ 
ποιεῖται τὴν κίνησιν, ἢ τὸ μέν, εἰ τύχοι, μέλαν τὸ 
δὲ λευκὸν ὥστε καὶ χρώζειν τὰ ἐντυγχάνοντα 
δύνασθαι, τὸ κινούμενον ἔσται θερμόν τε ἅμα καὶ 


‘ 3, > 
79 ψυχρὸν καὶ μέλαν καὶ λευκόν: ὅπερ ἄτοπον. εἶτα 


\ 7 > / / f A 4 
Kat πόσον ἀθρόως διέξεισι τόπον TO κινούμενον 


380 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 76-79 


Now that a thing can not move in orderly progres- 
sion is plain on the face of it. For if bodies, and also 
the places and the times in which the bodies are said 
to move, are divided to infinity, motion will not occur, 
it being impossible to discover amongst the infinite 
any first thing wherefrom the object said to move will 
derive its initial movement. And if the aforesaid 77 
objects are reducible to atomic parts, and each of the 
moving things passes equally in an atomic period of 
time with its own first atom into the first atomic point 
of space, then all moving things are of equal velocity 
—the speediest horse, for instance, and the tortoise 7; 
which is a result even more absurd than the former. 
Therefore motion -does not take place by way of 
orderly progression. 

Nor yet by way of immediate occupation of the 
divisible interval. For if one ought, as they declare, 78 
to take the apparent as evidence for the non-apparent, 
since, in order to complete the distance of a stade 
a man must first complete the first portion of the 
stade, and secondly the second portion, and so on with 
the rest, so likewise everything that moves ought to 
move by way of orderly progression ; for surely if we 
should assert that the moving thing passes all at once 
through all the portions of the place wherein it is 
said to move, it will be in all the portions thereof at 
once, and if one portion of the place through which it 
has its motion should be cold, another hot, or, may- 
hap, one black, another white, so as to be able also to 
colour things in contact,—then the moving thing will 
be at once hot and cold and black and white, which is 
absurd. Next let them tell us how much space the 79 


@ Of, the Eleatic puzzle of “‘ Achilles * (and the tortoise) ; 
cf. Aristot. Phys. vi. 9. 


381 


80 


81 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


εἰπάτωσαν. εἰ μὲν yap ἀόριστον τοῦτον εἶναι 
φήσουσιν, προσδέξονταί τι κινεῖσθαι διὰ πάσης 
τῆς γῆς ἀθρόως: εἰ δὲ τοῦτο φεύγουσιν, δρισάτωσαν 
ἡμῖν τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ τόπου. τὸ μὲν γὰρ πρὸς 
ἀκρίβειαν ἐπιχειρεῖν ὁρίζειν τὸν τόπον οὗ πλέον 
διάστημα οὐδὲ κατὰ τὸ ἀκαριαῖον δυνήσεται δι- 
ελθεῖν τὸ κινούμενον ἀθρόως, πρὸς τῷ ἀποκληρω- 
τικὸν καὶ προπετὲς ἢ καὶ “γελοῖον ἴσως εἶναι, εἰς 
τὴν ἀρχῆθεν ἀπορίαν ἐμπίπτει: πάντα γὰρ ἔσται 
ἰσοταχῆ, εἴγε ἕκαστον αὐτῶν ὁμοίως κατὰ περι- 
ὡρισμένους τόπους τὰς μεταβάσεις τῶν κινήσεων 
ποιεῖται. εἰ δὲ φήσουσιν ὅτι μικρὸν μέν, οὐ πρὸς 
ἀκρίβειαν δὲ περιωρισμένον τόπων ἀθρόως κινεῖται 
τὸ κιψούμενον, ἐνέσται ἡμῖν κατὰ τὴν σωριτικὴν 
ἀπορίαν ἀεὶ τῷ ὑποτεθέντι μεγέθει ἀκαριαῖον προσ- 
τιθέναι μέγεθος τόπου. εἰ μὲν γὰρ στήσονταΐ που 
τοιαύτην ποιουμένων ἡμῶν συνερώτησιν, πάλιν 
εἰς τὸν ἀκριβῆ περιορισμὸν καὶ τὴν τερατείαν ἐκεί- 
νὴν ἐμπεσοῦνται" εἰ δὲ προσήσονται τὴν παραύξησιν, 
ἀναγκάσομεν αὐτοὺς σωγχωρεῖν ἀθρόως τι δύνα- 
σθαι κινηθῆναι διὰ τοῦ μεγέθους τῆς γῆς ἁπάσης. 
ὥστε οὐδὲ κατὰ ἄθρουν μεριστὸν διάστημα κινεῖται 
τὰ κινεῖσθαι λεγόμενα. εἰ δὲ μήτε κατὰ ἄθρουν 
μεριστὸν τόπον μήτε κατὰ τὸ πρότερον πρότερον 
KLWELTAL τι, οὐδὲ κινεῖταί τι. 

Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν καὶ ἔτι πλείω τούτων φασὶν οἱ 
τὴν μεταβατικὴν κίνησιν ἀναιροῦντες. ἡμεῖς δὲ 





ας CF. 8 117. This is further explained in -idv. Phys. i. 154: 
“If all is indivisible (time, bodies, and space), all moving 
bodies will be of equal velocity (¢.g. the sun and the tortoise), 
since an indivisible interval is completed by all alike in an 
indivisible moment of time.’’ In this § 79 the difficulties as 


382 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 79-81 


moving thing passes through all at once. For if they 
shall assert that it is limitless, they will be granting 
that a thing moves through the whole of the earth all 
at once; while if they shirk this conclusion, let them 
define for us the extent of the space. But, on the one 
hand, the attempt to define precisely the space or 
interval beyond which the thing moving all at once 
will be unable to advance so much as a hair’s-breadth 
is probably not merely presumptuous and rash or even 
ridiculous, but plunges us again into the original 
difficulty *; for all things will be of equal velocity, 
if each of them alike has its transitional movements 
over definite intervals of space. And if, on the other 80 
hand, they shall assert that the moving thing moves 
all at once through a space that is small but not 
precisely determined, it will be open to us to adopt 
the sorties argument ὃ and keep constantly adding a 
hair’s-breadth of space to the breadth assumed. And 
if, then, they shall make a halt anywhere while we 
are pursuing this argument, they will be reverting to 
the monstrous theory of precise definition as before ; 
while if they shall assent to the process of addition, 
we shall force them to grant that a thing can move 
all at once through the whole of the earth. Con- 
sequently, objects said to be in motion do not move 
by occupying a divisible interval all at once. But if 81 
a thing moves neither thus instantaneously nor by 
way of gradual progression, it does not move at all. 
These, and yet more than these, are the arguments 
used by those who reject transient motion. But we, 
regards the quantity of space passed through by the moving 
body on the momentaneous theory are exposed: it must be 
conceived either as (1) unlimited or (2) precisely limited, or 


(3) small, but not precisely limited; but all these views lead 
to absurdities. ’ Of. ii. 258. 
383 


82 


83 


84 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μήτε τοὺς λόγους τούτους μήτε τὸ φαινόμενον, 
ᾧ κατακολουθοῦντες εἰσάγουσι τὴν ὑπόστασιν τῆς 
κινήσεως, δυνάμενοι διατρέπειν, ὃ ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇ ἄντι- 
θέσει τῶν τε φαινομένων καὶ τῶν λόγων, ἐ ἐπέχομεν 
περὶ τοῦ πότερον ἔστι κίνησις ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν. 


TA’.—TEPI ΑΥ̓ΞΗΣΕΩΣ KAI ΜΕΙΩΣΕΩΣ 


Τῷ δὲ αὐτῷ χρώμενοι λογισμῷ καὶ περὶ αὐξή- 
σεώς τε καὶ περὶ μειώσεως ἐπέχομεν" ἡ γὰρ ἐν- 
άργεια δοκεῖ τὴν ὑπόστασιν αὐτῶν εἰσάγειν, ἣν 
ot λόγοι διατρέπειν δοκοῦσιν. ἢ θέασαι γοῦν: τὸ 
αὐξόμενον ὃν καὶ ὑφεστὼς εἰς μέγεθος ἐπιδιδόναι 
προσήκει, ὡς εἴγε ἑτέρῳ προσθέσεως γενομένης 
ἕτερον ηὐξηκέναι τις λέγοι, ψεύσεται. ἐπεὶ τοί- 
νυν ἡ οὐσία οὐδέποτε ἕστηκεν ἀλλ᾽ ἀεὶ ῥεῖ τε 
καὶ ἑτέρα ἀνθ᾽ ἑτέρας ἐπεισκρίνεται, τὸ ηὐξηκέναι 
λεγόμενον οὐκ ἔχει τὴν προτέραν οὐσίαν καὶ μετὰ 
ταύτης ἄλλην τὴν προστεθεῖσαν ἀλλ᾽ ὅλην ἑτέραν. 
ὥσπερ οὖν εἶ, λόγου χάριν, ξύλου τρυπήχεος ὄντος 
δεκάπηχυ ἕτερον ἀγαγών τις ηὐξηκέναι τὸ τρίπηχυ 
λέγοι, ψεύσεται διὰ τὸ ὅλον ἕτερον εἶναι τοῦτο 
ἐκείνου, οὕτω καὶ ἐπὶ παντὸς τοῦ αὔξεσθαι λεγο- 
μένου, τῆς προτέρας ὕλης ἀπορρεούσης καὶ ἑτέρας 
ἐπεισιούσης, εἰ προστίθεται τὸ προστίθεσθαι λεγό- 
μενον, οὐκ ἂν ,αὔξησίν τις εἴποι τὸ τοιοῦτον εἶναι, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ὅλου ἑ ἑτεροίωσιν. 

0 δὲ αὐτὸς καὶ περὶ τῆς μειώσεως λόγος" τὸ 
γὰρ μὴ ὑφεστὼς ὅλως πῶς ἂν μεμειῶσθαι λέγοιτο; 





α Cf. § 66. 
ῳ ΗΠ material substance, which Heracleitus and Plato said 
was “‘ in flux,” cf. i. 217 ff., ii. 28. 


384 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 81-84 


being unable to refute either these arguments or the 
apparent facts on which the view of the reality of 
motion is based, suspend our judgement—in view 
of the contradiction between appearances and argu- 
ments—regarding the question as to the existence 
or non-existence of motion. 


Cuapter XI.—Concernine IncreEASE AND DEcREASE 


Employing the same reasoning we suspend judge- 82 
ment also concerning both increase and decrease. 
For the outward evidence® seems to support their 
reality, which the arguments seem to refute. For 
just consider: That which increases must grow in 
size as a stable substance, so that it will be false 
for anyone to say that one thing increases when an 
addition is made to another. Since then substance ὃ is 
never stable but always in flux, one part supplanting 
another, the thing said to have increased does not 
retain its former substance together with the added 
substance but has its substance all different. Just 83 
as if, for example, when there is a beam three cubits 
long a man should bring another of ten cubits and 
declare that the beam of three cubits had increased, he 
would be lying because the one is wholly different from 
the other ; so too in the case of every object which is 
said to increase, as the former matter flows away and 
fresh matter enters in its place, if what is said to be 
added is added, one should not call such a condition 
increase but complete alteration. 

The same argument applies also to decrease.° For 84 
how could that which has no stable existence be said 


¢ Cf. Adv. Phys. i. 977 ff. 
VOL. I ς 385 


85 


86 


87 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


\ / f A 
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις, EL ἡ μὲν μείωσις γίνεται κατὰ 
9 / εξ A 2, Ἁ / ON , 
ἀφαίρεσιν ἡ δὲ αὔξησις κατὰ πρόσθεσιν, οὐδὲν δέ 

/ ~ 
ἐστιν οὔτε ἀφαίρεσις οὔτε πρόσθεσις, οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ 
ἡ μείωσις οὐδὲ ἡ αὔξησις ἔστι τι. 


18΄.---ΠΕΡῚ ΑΦΑΙΡΕΣΕΩΣ ΚΑῚ ΠΡΟΣΘΈΣΕΩΣ 


Ὅτι δὲ οὐδέν ἐστιν ἀφαίρεσις, ἐντεῦθεν ἐπιλογί- 
ζονται. εἰ ἀφαιρεῖταί τι ἀπό τινος, ἤτοι τὸ ἴσον 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ἴσου ἀφαιρεῖται ἢ τὸ μεῖζον ἀπὸ τοῦ 
ἐλάσσονος ἢ τὸ ἔλασσον ἀπὸ τοῦ μείζονος. κατὰ 
οὐδένα δὲ τῶν τρόπων τούτων ἀφαίρεσις γίνεται, 
ὡς παραστήσομεν' ἀδύνατος ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ἀφαίρεσις. 

Ὅτι δὲ κατ᾽ οὐδένα τῶν πρόειρημένων τρόπων 
ἡ ἀφαίρεσις γίνεται, δῆλον ἐντεῦθεν. τὸ ἀφαιρού- 
μενον amd τινος ἐμπεριέχεσθαι χρὴ πρὸ τῆς 
ἀφαιρέσεως τῷ ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἀφαιρεῦται. οὔτε δὲ τὸ 
ἴσον ἐν τῷ ἴσῳ περιέχεται, οἷον τὰ ἕξ ἐν τοῖς ἕξ’ 
μεῖζον γὰρ εἶναι δεῖ τὸ περιέχον τοῦ περιεχομένου 
καὶ τὸ ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἀφαιρεῖταΐ τι τοῦ ἀφαιρουμένου, ἵνα 
μετὰ τὴν ἀφαίρεσιν ὑπολείπηταί te τούτῳ: γὰρ 
διαφέρειν δοκεῖ τῆς παντελοῦς ἄρσεως ἡ ἀφαίρεσις" 
οὔτε τὸ μεῖζον ἐν τῷ μικροτέρῳ, οἷον τὰ ἐξ ἐν τοῖς 
πέντε: ἀπεμφαίνει γάρ. διὰ δὲ τοῦτο οὐδὲ τὸ 
ἔλασσον ἐν τῷ μείζονι. εἰ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς ἕξ περι- 
έχεται τὰ πέντε ὡς ἐν πλείοσιν ἐλάσσονα, καὶ ἐν 
τοῖς πέντε περισχεθήσεται τὰ τέσσαρα καὶ ἐν τοῖς 
τέτταρσι τὰ τρία καὶ ἐν τοῖς τρισὶ τὰ δύο καὶ ἐν 
τούτοις τὸ ἕν. ἕξει οὖν τὰ ἐξ πέντε τέσσαρα τρία 
δύο ἕν, ὧν συντεθέντων γίνεται ὁ πεντεκαίδεκα 
ἀριθμός, ὃς ἐν τῷ ἕξ περιέχεσθαι συνάγεται διδο- 
1 τούτῳ Mutsch.: τοῦτο mss., Bekk. 


386 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 84-87 


to have decreased? Besides, if decrease takes place 
by way of subtraction, and increase by addition, and 
neither subtraction nor addition is anything, then 
neither decrease nor increase is anything. 


CuapTer XII.—Concernina SUBTRACTION AND 
ADDITION 


That subtraction is nothing they argue thus: If 85 
anything is subtracted from anything, either equal 
is subtracted from equal, or greater from less, or 
less from greater. But in none of these ways does 
subtraction take place, as we shall show; therefore 
subtraction is impossible. 

That subtraction takes place in none of these ways 
is plain from what follows: What is subtracted from 
anything ought, before its subtraction, to be in- 
cluded in that from which it is subtracted. But the 86 
equal is not included in the equal—six, for instance, 
in six ; for what includes must be greater than what 
is included, and that from which the subtraction is 
made than what is subtracted, in order that there 
may be some remainder after the subtraction; for 
it is this which is held to distinguish subtraction 
from complete removal. Nor is the greater included 
in the less—six, for instance, in five; for that is 
irrational. And for this reason, neither is the less 87 
included in the greater. For if five is included in six, 
as less in greater, four will be included in five, three 
in four, two in three, and one in two. Therefore six 
will contain five, four, three, two, and one, which 
when put together form the number fifteen, and 
this we conclude is included in six, if it be granted 


* Cf. Adv. Phys. i. 297 ff. 
387 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μένου τοῦ τὸ ἔλασσον ἐν τῷ μείζονι περιέχεσθαι. 
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἐν τῷ πεντεκαίδεκα τῷ ἐν τῷ ἐξ 
ἐμπεριεχομένῳ ὃ τριακοντακαιπέντε ἀριθμὸς περι- 
ἔχεται καὶ κατὰ ὑπόβασιν ἄπειροι. ἄτοπον δὲ 
* τὸ λέγειν ἀπείρους ἀριθμοὺς ἐμπεριέχεσθαι τῷ ἕξ 
ἀριθμῷ: ἄτοπον ἄρα καὶ τὸ λέγειν ὅτι ἐν τῷ μεί- 
88 ζονι περιέχεται τὸ ἔλασσον. εἰ οὖν χρὴ τὸ ἀφ- 
αἱρούμενον ἀπό τινος περιέχεσθαι ἐν ἐκείνῳ ἀφ᾽ 
οὗ ἀφαιρεῖσθαι μέλλει, οὔτε δὲ τὸ ἴσον ἐν τῷ ἴσῳ 
περιέχεται οὔτε τὸ μεῖζον ἐν τῷ μικροτέρῳ οὔτε 
τὸ μικρότερον ἐν τῷ μείζονι, οὐδὲ ἀφαιρεῦταί τι 
> / 
ἀπό τινος. 
Kat μὴν εἰ ἀφαιρεῖταί τι ἀπό τινος, 7 ὅλον ἀπὸ 
ὅλου ἀφαιρεῖται 7 ἢ μέρος ἀπὸ μέρους ἣ ὅλον ἀπὸ 
89 μέρους ἢ μέρος ἀπὸ ὅλου. ὅ lov μὲν οὖν ἀφ- 
αἱρεῖσθαι λέγειν ἦτοι ἀπὸ ὅλου ἢ ἀπὸ μέρους ἀπ- 
εμφαΐίνει προδήλως, λείπεται δὲ λέγειν τὸ μέρος 
ἀφαιρεῖσθαι ἤτοι ἀπὸ ὅλου ἣ ἀπὸ μέρους" ὅπερ 
ἐστὶν ἄτοπον. οἷον γοῦν, ἵνα ἐπὶ ἀριθμῶν στή- 
σωμεν τὸν λόγον τοῦ σαφοῦς ἕνεκα, ἔστω δεκάς, 
καὶ ἀπὸ ταύτης ἀφαιρεῖσθαι λεγέσθω μονάς. 
αὕτη οὖν ἡ μονὰς οὔτε ἀπὸ ὅλης τῆς δεκάδος 
ἀφαιρεῖσθαι δύναται οὔτε ἀπὸ τοῦ λειπομένου 
μέρους τῆς δεκάδος, τουτέστι τῆς ἐννεάδος, ὡς 
παραστήσω" οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ ἀφαιρεῖται. 
90 Εἰ γὰρ ἡ μονὰς ἀπὸ ὅλης ἀφαιρεῦται τῆς δεκάδος, 
ἐπεὶ ἡ δεκὰς οὔτε ἕτερόν τί ἐστι παρὰ τὰς δέκα 
μονάδας οὔτε τις τῶν μονάδων ἀλλ’ ἡ συνέλευσις 


“4 The addition of the numbers1 ...5gives15; of 1... 4, 
10; of |... 3,6; of 1 and 2, 3; so we get the total 35 = 
1541046434 1 “of. Adv. Phys. i. 304 ff. But perhaps 
we should read 105 for 35 (ἑκατόν for τριάκοντα), aS 1... 14 
= 105. 


388 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 87-90 


that the less is included in the greater. So likewise 
in the fifteen which is included in the six there is 
included the number thirty-five,* and so on, step by 
step, to infinity. But it is absurd to say that infinite 
numbers are included in the number six ; and so it is 
also absurd to say that less is included in greater. 
If, then, what is subtracted from a thing must be 88 
included in that from which it is to be subtracted, 
and neither equal is included in equal, nor greater 
in less, nor less in greater, then nothing is subtracted 
from anything. 

Again, if anything is subtracted from anything, it 
is either a whole subtracted from a whole, or a part 
from a part, or a whole from a part, or a part from 
a whole. But to’say that a whole is subtracted 89 
from either a whole or a part is plainly nonsense. It 
remains, then, to say that a part is subtracted either 
from a whole or from a part ; which is absurd. Thus 
for example—basing our argument on numbers for 
the sake of clearness—let us take ten and suppose 
that from it one is subtracted. This one, then, cannot 
be subtracted either from the whole ten or from the 
remaining part of the ten, as I shall show ; therefore 
it is not subtracted at all.? 

For if the one is subtracted from the whole ten, 90 
since the ten is neither something other than the 
ten ones nor one of the ones, but the aggregate of 


> In what follows it is argued (§§ 90, 91) that 1 cannot be 
subtracted from a “whole 10,” 10 being ten ones, so that 
the subiracted 1 must be subtracted from each of those ones, 
including itself, and thus 10-1=0. Further, as the number 
1 (the **monad’’) is indivisible, it does not admit of sub- 
traction: and the 1 to be subtracted must fall into 10 parts, 
and thus be itself a 10, if it is subtracted 10 separate times 
from the units of the 10. 


389 


91 


92 


93 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πασῶν τῶν μονάδων, ἀπὸ ἑκάστης μονάδος ad- 

Cal > f € “ φ ? 1 «7 > ~ 
αἱρεῖσθαι ὀφείλει ἡ μονάς, iva ἀπὸ ὅλης ἀφαιρῆται 
τῆς δεκάδος. μάλιστα μὲν οὖν ἀπὸ μονάδος οὐδὲν 
δύναται ἀφαιρεῖσθαι. ἀδιαίρετοι γάρ εἰσιν αἱ 
μονάδες, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὐκ ἀφαιρεθήσεται ἡ 
μονὰς ἀπὸ τῆς δεκάδος οὕτως. εἰ δὲ καὶ δοίη τις 
ἀπὸ ἑκάστης τῶν μονάδων ἀφαιρεῖσθαι τὴν μονάδα, 
δέκα ἕξει μέρη ἡ μονάς, δέκα δὲ ἔχουσα μέρη 
δεκὰς" ἔσται. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπεὶ δέκα ἕ ᾿ ἕτερα μέρη ἀπο- 
λέλειπται, ἀφ᾽ ὧν ἀφήρηται τὰ τῆς μονάδος. λεγο- 
μένης δέκα μέρη, ἔσται τὰ δέκα εἴκοσι. ἄτοπον 
δὲ λέγειν τὸ ἕν δέκα εἶναι καὶ τὰ δέκα εἴκοσι καὶ 
τὸ ἀδιαίρετον κατὰ αὐτοὺς διαιρεῖσθαι. ἄτοπον 
ἄρα τὸ λέγειν ἀπὸ ὅλης τῆς δεκάδος ἀφαιρεῖσθαι 
τὴν μονάδα. 

> ~ 

Αλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ὑπολειπομένης ἐννεάδος 
ἀφαιρεῖται ἡ μονάς" τὸ μὲν γὰρ ad οὗ τι ἀφ- 
αἱρεῦται οὐ μένει ὁλόκληρον, ἡ δὲ ἐννεὰς μετὰ τὴν 
ἀφαίρεσιν ἐκείνης τῆς μονάδος ὁλόκληρος μένει. 
καὶ ἄλλως, ἐπεὶ ἡ ἐννεὰς οὐδέν ἐστι παρὰ τὰς 
3 f ? > A > \ ¢ 9. σὰ / 
ἐννέα μονάδας, εἰ μὲν ἀπὸ ὅλης αὐτῆς λέγοιτο 
> ~ ς 4 > 4 3 7 uv 
ἀφαιρεῖσθαι ἡ μονάς, evveddos adpaipeois ἔσται, 
εἰ δὲ ἀπὸ μέρους τῶν ἐννέα, εἰ μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν 
> # ‘ 3 \ a > / > \ 3 Ἁ 
ὀκτώ, τὰ αὐτὰ ἄτοπα ἀκολουθήσει, εἰ δὲ ἀπὸ 
τῆς ἐσχάτης μονάδος, διαιρετὴν. εἶναι φήσουσι 
τὴν μονάδα, ὅπερ ἄτοπον. οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ ἀπὸ τῆς 
ἐννεάδος ἀφαιρεῖται ἡ μονάς. εἰ δὲ μήτε ἀπὸ 
ὅλης τῆς δεκάδος ἀφαιρεῖται μήτε ἀπὸ μέρους 


1 δεκὰς T: μονὰς μ85., Bekk. 





* 3,6. the Dogmatists, who assumed the indivisibility of 
the “one.” In the next sections (92-93) it is shown that “a 


390 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 90-93 


the ones, the one ought to be subtracted from each 
of the ones in order to be subtracted from the whole 
ten. Now from a one, above all, nothing can be 
subtracted ; for the ones are indivisible, and on this 
account, the one will not be subtracted from the ten 
in this way. And even were we to grant that the 91 
one is subtracted from each of the ones, the one will 
contain ten parts, and as containing ten parts it will 
be aten. And further, since ten other parts remain, 
after the subtraction of the ten parts of the so-called 
one, the ten will be twenty. But it is absurd to say 
that the one is ten and the ten twenty, and to divide 
what, according to them,? is indivisible. Wherefore 
it is absurd to say that the one is subtracted from the 
whole ten. : 

Neither is the one subtracted from the remaining 92 
nine; for that from which anything is subtracted 
does not remain entire, but the nine does remain 
entire after the subtraction of that one. Besides, 
since the nine is nothing more than the nine ones, if 
it should be said that the one is subtracted from the 
whole nine, the sum subtracted will be nine, or if 
from a part of it, then in case it be eight the same 
absurd results will follow, while if the subtraction is 
made from the last one, they will be affirming the 
divisibility of the one, which is absurd. So then, 93 
neither from the nine is the one subtracted. But if 
it is neither subtracted from the whole ten nor from 


part cannot be subtracted from a part,”’ 7.¢., in the case of 
the “ Decad,”’ you cannot subtract 1 from 9: for 10 -- 1 still 
leaves an “ entire” 9; and if9=9 x I,and 1 is subtracted from 
each of the 9 ones, the subtracted 1 will be 1x9; and the 
same applies to subtraction of 1 from other “ parts”’ of the 
‘““Decad”’ (8, 7, 6, etc.), of which the last is 1, which, as 
indivisible, does not admit of subtraction. 


391 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


αὐτῆς, οὐδὲ μέρος ἀπὸ ὅλου ἢ μέρους ἀφαιρεῖ- 
σθαι δύναται. εἰ οὖν μήτε ὅλον ἀπὸ ὅλου τι 
ἀφαιρεῖται μήτε μέρος ἀπὸ ὅλου μήτε ὅλον ἀπὸ 
μέρους μήτε μέρος ἀπὸ μέρους, οὐδὲ ἀφαιρεῖταί τι 
ἀπό τινος. 

94 ᾿Αλλὰ καὶ ἡ πρόσθεσις τῶν ἀδυνάτων εἶναι παρ᾽ 
αὐτοῖς ὑπείληπται. τὸ γὰρ προστιθέμενον, φασίν, 
ἤτοι ἑαυτῷ προστίθεται ἢ τῷ προὔποκειμένῳ ἢ 
τῷ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν συνεστῶτι: τούτων δὲ οὐδέν ἐστιν 
ὑγιές: οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ προστίθεταί τι τινί. οἷον γοῦν 
ἔστω τι τετρακοτυλιαῖον πλῆθος, καὶ προστιθέσθω 
κοτύλη. ζητῶ τίνι προστίθεται" ἑαυτῇ μὲν γὰρ 
οὐ δύναται, ἐπεὶ τὸ μὲν προστιθέμενον ἕτερόν ἐστι 
τοῦ ᾧ προστίθεται, οὐδὲν δὲ ἑαυτοῦ ἕτερόν ἐστιν. 

95 ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τῷ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν, τοῦ τετρακοτυλιαίου καὶ 
τῆς κοτύλης" πῶς γὰρ ἂν προστεθείη τι τῷ μηδέπω 
ὄντι; καὶ ἄλλως, εἰ τῷ τετρακοτυλιαίῳ καὶ τῇ 
κοτύλῃ μίγνυται ἡ κοτύλη 7 προστιθεμένη, ἕξα- 
κοτυλιαῖον ἔσται πλῆθος ἀπὸ τοῦ τετρακοτυλιαίου 
καὶ τῆς κοτύλης καὶ τῆς προστιθεμένης κοτύλης. 

gg εἰ δὲ μόνῳ τῷ τετρακοτυλιαίῳ προστίθεται ἡ 
κοτύλη, ἐπεὶ τὸ παρεκτεινόμενόν τινι ἴσον ἐστὶν 
ἐκείνῳ ᾧ παρεκτείνεται, τῷ τετρακοτυλιαίῳ πλήθει 
ἡ κοτύλη παρεκτεινομένη διπλασιάσει τὸ τετρα- 
κοτυλιαῖον ὡς γίνεσθαι τὸ πᾶν πλῆθος ὀκτὼ 
κοτυλῶν' ὅπερ οὐ θεωρεῖται. εἰ οὖν μήτε ξἕαυτῷ 
προστίθεται τὸ προστίθεσθαι λεγόμενον μήτε τῷ 
προὕποκειμένῳ μήτε τῷ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν τούτων, παρὰ 
δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲν ἔστιν, οὐδὲ προστίθεται οὐδὲν 
οὐδενί. 


392 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III 93-96 


a part of it, no part can be subtracted from either a 
whole or a part. If, then, nothing is subtracted either 
as whole from whole or as part from whole, nor as 
whole from part or as part from part, then nothing 
is subtracted from anything. 

Moreover, addition is regarded by them @ as one of 94 
the impossibles. For, they say, that which is added 
is added either to itself or to what pre-exists or to 
the compound of both ; but none of these alternatives 
is sound; therefore nothing is added to anything. 
Suppose, for instance, a measure of four cups,’ and 
add to this a cup. To what, I ask, is it added? for 
it cannot be added to itself, since what is added must 
be other than that whereto it is added, but nothing 
is other than itself. Neither is it added to the com- 95 
pound of the four cups and the one cup; for how 
could anything be added to what does not yet exist ἢ 
Besides, if the added cup is blended with the four 
cups and the one cup, six cups will be the measure 
resulting from the four cups and the one cup and 
the added cup. And if the cup is added to the four 96 
cups alone, since that which is extended over any- 
thing is equal to that over which it extends, the cup 
which extends over the measure of four cups will 
double the four cups so that the whole measure 
becomes eight cups—a result contrary to experience. 
If, then, what is said to be added is neither added to 
itself nor to what pre-exists nor to the compound of 
these, and besides these there are no other alter- 
natives, then there is no addition of anything to 
anything. 

α ζ,6. the Sceptics. > Cf. § 59. 


393 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Il’Y,—IIEPI ΜΕΤΑΘΕΣΕΩΣ 


97 Τῇ δὲ τῆς προσθέσεως καὶ τῆς ἀφαιρέσεως καὶ 
τῆς τοπικῆς κινήσεως ὑποστάσει συμπεριγράφεται 
καὶ ἡ μετάθεσις" αὕτη γὰρ ἀπὸ τινὸς μέν ἐστιν 
ἀφαίρεσις τινὶ δὲ πρόσθεσις μεταβατικῶς. 


1Δ΄.--ΠΈΏΡῚ ΟΛΟΥ͂ ΚΑῚ MEPOTS 


98 Καὶ τὸ ὅλον δὲ καὶ τὸ μέρος. κατὰ μὲν γὰρ 
συνέλευσιν καὶ πρόσθεσιν τῶν μερῶν τὸ ὅλον 
γίγνεσθαι δοκεῖ, Kar’ ἀφαίρεσιν δὲ τινὸς ἢ τινῶν 
παύεσθαι τοῦ ὅλον εἶναι. καὶ ἄλλως δέ, εἰ ἔστι 
τι ὅλον, ἤτοι ἕτερόν ἐστι παρὰ τὰ μέρη αὐτοῦ ἢ 

99 αὐτὰ τὰ μέρη αὐτοῦ τὸ ὅλον ἐστίν. ἕτερον μὲν 
οὖν τῶν μερῶν οὐδὲν φαίνεται τὸ ὅλον εἶναι" ἀ- 
μέλει γοῦν ἀναιρουμένων τῶν μερῶν οὐδὲν ὑπο- 
λείπεται, ἵνα ἕτερόν τι παρὰ ταῦτα λογισώμεθα τὸ 
ὅλον. εἰ δὲ αὐτὰ τὰ μέρη τὸ ὅλον ἐστίν, ὄνομα 
ἔσται μόνον τὸ ὅλον καὶ προσηγορία κενή, ὑπό- 
στασιν δὲ ἰδίαν οὐχ ἕξει, καθάπερ οὐδὲ διάστασίς 
ἐστί τι παρὰ τὰ διεστῶτα οὐδὲ δόκωσις παρὰ τὰ 
δεδοκωμένα. οὐκ ἄρα ἔστι τι ὅλον. 

100 ᾿Αλλ’ οὐδὲ μέρη. εἰ γὰρ ἔστι μέρη, TOU τοῦ 
ὅλου ταῦτά ἐστι μέρη ἢ ἀλλήλων ἢ ἢ ἑαυτοῦ ἕκαστον. 
οὔτε δὲ τοῦ ὅλου, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ ἔστι τι παρὰ τὰ μέρη 
(καὶ ἄλλως τὰ μέρη οὕτως ἔσται μέρη ἑαυτῶν, 
ἐπεὶ ἕκαστον τῶν μερῶν συμπληρωτικὸν εἶναι 
λέγεται τοῦ ὅλου), οὔτε ἀλλήλων, ἐπεὶ τὸ μέρος 


4 Lit. “ is cancelled,” ef. i. 13. 
> Of. ii. 215 Ἐς, Adv. Phys. i, 330 ff. 


394 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 97--100 


CuaPTerR XIIT.—Concernina TRANSPOSITION 


Together with the existence of addition and sub- 97 
traction and local motion transposition also is 
abolished,* for this is subtraction from a thing and 
addition to a thing by way of transition. 


CuapTer XIV.—Concernina ΒΟ AND Part 


So too with both whole and part.? For the whole 98 
is held to come about by the combination and addition 
of the parts, and to cease from being a whole by the 
subtraction of one or more parts. Besides, if a whole 
exists, it is either other than its parts ¢ or its parts 
themselves form the whole. Now it is apparent that 99 
the whole is nothing other than its parts ; for certainly 
when the parts are removed there is nothing left, so 
as to enable us to account the whole as something else 
besides its parts. But if the parts themselves form 
the whole, the whole will be merely a name and an 
empty title,” and it will have no individual existence, 
just as separation 6 also is nothing apart from the 
things separated, or opinion apart from the things 
opined. Therefore no whole exists. 

Nor yet parts. For if parts exist, either they are 100 
parts of the whole, or of one another, or each one of 
itself. But they are not parts of the whole, since it 
is nothing else than its parts (and besides, the parts 
will on this assumption be parts of themselves, since 
each of the parts is said to be complementary to the 
whole) ; nor yet of one another, since the part is said 


¢ The view of Epicurus ; the Stoics said that the whole is 
neither the same as its parts nor different. 
@ Cf. ii. 214, 297. 
4 Cf. Adv. Phys. i. 344 f., ti. 97. 
395 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐμπεριέχεσθαι δοκεῖ ἐν ἐκείνῳ οὗ ἐστὶ «μέρος, Kal 
ἄτοπόν ἐστι λέγειν τὴν χεῖρα, εἰ τύχοι, ἐν τῷ ποδὶ 
101 περιέχεσθαι. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἕκαστον éavTod μέρος 
ἔσται: διὰ γὰρ τὴν περιοχὴν ἔσται τι ἑαυτοῦ μεῖζον 
καὶ ἔλαττον. εἰ οὖν μήτε τοῦ ὅλου μήτε ἑαυτῶν 
μήτε ἀλλήλων μέρη ἐστὶ τὰ λεγόμενα εἶναι μέρη, 
οὐδενός ἐ ἐστι μέρη. εἰ δὲ μηδενός ἐστι μέρη, οὐδὲ 
ἔστι μέρη" τὰ γὰρ πρός τι ἀλλήλοις συναναιρεῖται. 
αῦτα μὲν οὖν ἁπλῶς" εἰρήσθω κατὰ παρέκ- 
βασνΨ, ἐπειδὴ ἅπαξ ὅλου καὶ μέρους ἐπεμνήσθημεν. 


H’,.—NEPI ΦΥΣΙΚΗ͂Σ METABOAHS 


102 ᾿Ανυπόστατον δὲ εἶναι λέγουσί τινες καὶ τὴν 
καλουμένην φυσικὴν μεταβολήν, λόγοις ἐ ἐπιχειροῦν - 
τες τοιούτοις. εἰ μεταβάλλει τι, ἤτοι σῶμά ἐστι 
τὸ μεταβάλλον ἢ ἀσώματον" ἑκάτερον. δὲ τούτων 
ἠπόρηται" ἄπορος ἄρα ἔσται καὶ ὁ περὶ τῆς μετα- 

103 βολῆς λόγος. εἰ μεταβάλλει τι, κατά τινας ἐνερ- 
γείας αἰτίου καὶ πάσχον μεταβάλλει: «ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ 
ὡς πάσχον μεταβάλλει» "" διατρέπεται γὰρ ἡ τοῦ 
αἰτίου ὑπόστασις, ᾧ τὸ πάσχον συμπεριτρέπεται 

104 μὴ ἔχον ὑπὸ ὅτου πάθῃ. οὐδὲ μεταβάλλει τί ἄρα. 
[δ᾽ εἰ μεταβάλλει τι, ἤτοι τὸ ὃν μεταβάλλει ἢ τὸ 
μὴ ὄν. τὸ μὲν οὖν μὴ ὃν ἀνυπόστατόν. ἐστι καὶ 
οὔτε πάσχειν τι οὔτε δρᾶν δύναται, ὥστε οὐδὲ 


1 ἁπλῶς ego: ἄλλως μ58., Bekk. 
3 «ἀλλ, ,. μεταβάλλει addidi: «ὃ ἀδύνατον» add. Apelt. 





α Cf. §§ 86 ff. supra. The notion of “ part”’ involves that 
of a ‘whole’? which “includes’’ it, and of which it is 

** part.” 

> ** Part” and “whole” are ‘‘co-relative”’ notions, each 
implying the other, and relative things are ‘‘ apprehended 


396 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 100-104 


to be included @ in that whereof it is part, and it is 
absurd to assert that, say, the hand is included in 
the foot. Neither will each be a part of itself; for, 101 
because of the inclusion, it will be both greater and 
less than itself. If, then, the so-called parts are parts 
neither of the whole nor of themselves nor of one 
another, they are parts of nothing. But if they are 
parts of nothing, parts have no existence; for co- 
relatives are annulled together.® 

Let thus much be said, then, of a general character, 
by way of digression, seeing that once already we 
have dealt with the subject of whole and part. 


CHapter XV.—-Concernine Puysitcat CHaNncE 


Some, too, maintain that what is called ‘‘ physical 102 
change ”’ is non-real, and the arguments they employ 
are such as these °: Ifa thing changes, what changes 
is either corporeal or incorporeal ; but each of these 
is matter of dispute ; therefore the theory of change 
will also be disputable. If a thing changes, it changes 103 
through certain actions of a Cause? and by being 
acted upon. But it does not change by being acted 
upon, for the reality of Cause is refuted, and therewith 
is refuted also the object which is acted upon, as 
it has no agent to act upon it. Therefore nothing 104 
changes at all. If a thing changes, either what is 
changes or what is not. Now what is not is unreal 
and can neither act nor be acted upon at all, so that 


together,” the presence, or absence, of the one involving that 
of the other, cf. ii. 125, 175. 
¢ With this section cf. 88 38 ff., 49 and 64 where “ physical 
change ’’ is distinguished from “local transition’ and other 
kinds of ‘* motion.” 
@ Of. §§ 17 fff. ὁ With §§ 104-105 cf. 109 ff. 


397 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μεταβολὴν ἐπιδέχεται. εἰ δὲ τὸ ὃν μεταβάλλει, 
ἤτοι καθὸ 6 ov ἐστι μεταβάλλει ἢ ἢ καθὸ μὴ ὄν ἐστιν. 
10ὅ καθὸ μὲν οὖν μὴ ὄν ἐστιν, οὐ μεταβάλλει: οὐδὲ 
γὰρ οὐκ ov ἐστιν" εἰ δὲ καθὸ ὄν ἐστι μεταβάλλει, 
ἕτερον ἔσται τοῦ ὃν εἶναι, τουτέστιν οὐκ ὃν 
ἔσται. ἄτοπον δὲ τὸ λέγειν τὸ ὃν οὐκ ὃν γίνε- 
σθαι’ οὐκ ἄρα οὐδὲ τὸ ὃν μεταβάλλει. εἰ δὲ μήτε 
τὸ ὃν μεταβάλλει μήτε τὸ μὴ ὄν, παρὰ Tatra’ δὲ 
οὐδὲν ἔστι, λείπεται λέγειν ὅτι οὐδὲν μεταβάλλει. 
ι06 Ἔτι καὶ ταῦτά φασί τινες. τὸ μεταβάλλον ἔν 
τινι χρόνῳ μεταβάλλειν ὀφείλει" οὔτε δὲ ἐν τῷ 
παρῳχηκότι χρόνῳ μεταβάλλει τι οὔτε ἐν τῷ μέλ- 
λοντι, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἐν τῷ ἐνεστῶτι, ws δείξομεν" οὐκ 
ἄρα μεταβάλλει τι. ἐν μὲν οὖν τῷ παρεληλυθότι 
ἢ μέλλοντι χρόνῳ οὐδὲν μετα άλλει- τούτων γὰρ 
οὐθέτερος ἐνέστηκεν, ἀδύνατον δέ ἐστι Spay τι ἢ 
πάσχειν ἐν τῷ μὴ ὄντι καὶ ἐνεστηκότι χρόνῳ. 

107 ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἐν τῷ ἐνεστῶτι. ὁ γὰρ ἐνεστὼς χρόνος 
ἴσως μὲν καὶ ἀνύπαρκτός ἐστιν, ἵνα δὲ τοῦτο νῦν 
ὑπερθώμεθα, ἀμερής ἐστιν" ἀδύνατον δέ ἐστιν ἐν 
ἀμερεῖ χρόνῳ νομίζειν τὸν σίδηρον, εἰ τύχοι, ἀπὸ 
τῆς σκληρότητος εἰς μαλακότητα μεταβάλλειν ἢ 
τῶν ἄλλων μεταβολῶν ἑκάστην γίνεσθαι: παρα- 
τάσεως γὰρ αὗται φαίνονται χρήζειν. εἰ οὖν “μήτε 
ἐν τῷ παρεληλυθότι χρόνῳ μετα ἴλλει τι μήτε ἐν 
τῷ μέλλοντι μήτε ἐν τῷ ἐνεστῶτι, οὐδὲ μετα- 
βάλλειν τι ῥητέον. 

108 Πρὸς τούτοις, εἰ ἔστι τις μεταβολή, ἤτοι 
«αἰσθητή ἐστιν ἢ νοητή. καὶ αἰσθητὴ μὲν οὔκ 
ἐστιν' at μὲν γὰρ» αἰσθήσεις ἁπλοπαθεῖς εἰσίν, ἡ 

* οὐδὲ Pasquali: οὐ Bekk. 
5. ζαἰσθητὴ . . . γὰρ» add. cj. Bekk. 
398 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 104-108 


it does not admit of change either. And if what is 
changes, it changes either in so far as it is in being or 
in so far as it is not in being. Now in so far as it is 105 
not in being it does not change, for it is not even 
existent ; while if it changes in so far as it is existent, 
it will be other than existent, which means that it 
will be non-existent. But it is absurd to say that the 
existent becomes non-existent; therefore the existent 
does not change either. And if neither the existent 
nor the non-existent changes, and besides these there 
is nothing else, it only remains to say that nothing 
changes. 

Some also argue thus *: That which changes must 106 
change in a certain time ; but nothing changes either 
in the past or in the future, nor yet in the present, as 
we shall prove; nothing therefore changes. Noth- 
ing changes in the past or in the future, for neither 
of these times is present, and it is impossible to do 
or suffer anything in time that is not existent and 
present. Nor yet in time present. For the present 107 
time is probably also unreal,? and—even if we set 
aside this point—it is indivisible ; and it is impos- 
sible to suppose that in an indivisible moment of 
time iron, say, changes from hard to soft, or any one 
of all the other changes takes place; for they appear 
to require extension in time. If, then, nothing 
changes either in the past or in the future or in the 
present, we must declare that nothing changes at all. 

Further, if change exists at all <it is either sensible 108 
or intelligible ; but it is not sensible, since the senses> 
are specialized,° whereas change is thought to possess 

a Cf. §§ 144 ff. ; Aristot. Phys. vi. 6. 

ὃ This is shown later, in 88 144-145. 


¢ Lit. “ simply passive,’’ 7.e. each sense perceives only one 
class of objects, cf. § 47 supra. 
399 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δὲ μεταβολὴ συμμνημόνευσιν ἔχειν δοκεῖ τοῦ τε 
ἐξ οὗ μεταβάλλει καὶ εἰς 6 μεταβάλλειν λέγεται: 
εἰ δὲ νοητή ἐστιν, ἐπεὶ περὶ τῆς ὑπάρξεως τῶν 
νοητῶν ἀνεπίκρυτος γέγονε παρὰ τοῖς παλαιοῖς 
διαφωνία, καθάπερ ἤδη πολλάκις ὑπεμνήσαμεν, 
οὐδὲν ἕξομεν λέγειν οὐδὲ περὶ τῆς ὑπάρξεως τῆς 
μεταβολῆς. 


ς΄ --ΠΕΡῚ ΓΕΝΈΣΕΩΣ ΚΑῚ ΦΘΟΡᾺΣ 


109 Συμπεριτρέπεται μὲν οὖν καὶ ἡ γένεσις καὶ ἡ 
φθορὰ τῇ προσθέσει καὶ τῇ ἀφαιρέσει καὶ τῇ 
φυσικῇ μεταβολῇ" χωρὶς γὰρ τούτων οὔτε γένοιτο 
ἄν τι οὔτε φθαρείη, οἷον γοῦν ἀπὸ τῆς δεκάδος 
φθειρομένης, ὡς φασίν, ἐννεάδα γίνεσθαι συμβαίνει 
κατὰ ἀφαίρεσιν μονάδος, καὶ τὴν δεκάδα ἀπὸ τῆς 
ἐννεάδος φθειρομένης κατὰ πρόσθεσιν τῆς μονάδος, 
καὶ τὸν ἰὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ χαλκοῦ φθειρομένου κατὰ 
μεταβολήν. ὥστε ἀναιρουμένων τῶν προειρημένων 
κινήσεων ἀναιρεῖσθαι καὶ τὴν γένεσιν καὶ τὴν 
φθορὰν ἴσως ἀνάγκη. 

110 Οὐδὲν δὲ ἧττόν τινες κἀκεῖνα φασίν. εἰ ἐγεν- 
νήθη Σιωκράτης, ἤτοι ὅτε οὐκ ἦν Σωκράτης ἐγένετο 
Σωκράτης, ἢ ὅτε ἦν ἤδη Σωκράτης. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν 
ὅτε ἦν ἤδη γεγενῆσθαι λέγοιτο, δὶς ἂν εἴη γεγενη- 
μένος" εἰ δὲ ὅτε οὐκ ἦν, ἅμα καὶ ἦν “Σωκράτης 
καὶ οὐκ ἦν. ἣν μὲν τῷ γεγονέναι, ovK ἣν δὲ κατὰ 

111 τὴν ὑπόθεσιν. καὶ εἰ ἀπέθανε Σωκράτης, ἤτοι ὅτε 
ἔζη ἀπέθανεν 7 ὅτε ἀπέθανεν. καὶ ὅτε μὲν ἔζη, 
οὐκ ἀπέθανεν, ἐπεὶ ὁ αὐτὸς ἂν καὶ ἔζη καὶ ἐτε- 


* A peculiar Stoic expression, ¢f. ddv. Phys. i. 353 ff, ii. 64. 
> Cf, ii. 57 fF. i. 170. 


400 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, ITI. 108-111 


‘ concurrent recollection” * both of that from which 
it changes and that into which it is said to change. 
And if it is intelligible, then, since (as we have 
frequently pointed out already °) there exists among 
the ancients an unsettled controversy as to the reality 
of intelligibles, we shall also be unable to make any 
assertion about the reality of change. 


CuHapTer XVI.—Concernine Brecomine AND 
PerisHING 


Both becoming and perishing are included in the 109 
refutation of addition and subtraction and physical 
change ; for apart from these nothing would become 
or perish. Thus, for instance, it is as a result of 
the perishing of the ten, as they say, that the nine 
becomes by the subtraction of one, and the ten from 
the perishing of the nine by the addition of one ; 
and rust becomes from the perishing of bronze by 
means of change. Hence, if the aforesaid motions 
are abolished it is likely that becoming and perishing 
are also necessarily abolished. 

Yet none the less some argue also as follows ¢: 110 
If Socrates was born, Socrates became either when 
Socrates existed not or when Socrates already existed ; 
but if he shall be said to have become when he already 
existed, he will have become twice ; and if when he 
did not exist, Socrates was both existent and non- 
existent at the same time—existent through having 
become, non-existent by hypothesis. And if Socrates 111 
died, he died either when he lived or when he died. 
Now he did not die when he lived, since he would 


¢ Cf. Adv, Phys. i. 269, ii. 346 ff. 
VOL. I 2D 401 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


θνήκει: ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ὅτε ἀπέθανεν, ἐπεὶ "δὶς ἂν εἴη 
τεθνηκώς. οὐκ ἄρα ἀπέθανε Σωκράτης. τοῦτον 
δὲ τὸν λόγον οἷόν τέ ἐστιν ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου τῶν γίνεσθαι 
ἢ φθείρεσθαι λεγομένων ἱστάντα ἀναιρεῖν τὴν 

ἘΣ ΗΝ, καὶ τὴν φθοράν. 
1192 "Ἔνιοι δὲ καὶ οὕτω συνερωτῶσιν. εἶ γίνεταί τι, 
ἦτοι τὸ ὃν γίνεται ἢ τὸ μὴ ὄν. οὔτε δὲ τὸ μὴ ὃν 

“~ \ 3, 
γίνεται: τῷ γὰρ μὴ ὄντι οὐδὲν συμβεβηκέναι 

4 Ψ PAN! \ / > 3 0." ν ἡ 
δύναται, ὥστε οὐδὲ τὸ γίνεσθαι. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ ὄν. 
εἰ γὰρ γίνεται τὸ ὄν, ἤτοι καθὸ dv ἐστι γίνεται ἢ 
καθὸ οὐκ ὄν ἐστιν. καθὸ μὲν οὖν οὐκ dv ἐστιν, οὐ 
γίνεται. εἰ δὲ καθὸ ὄν ἐστι γίνεται, ἐπεὶ τὸ γινό- 
μενον. ἕτερον ἐξ ἑ ἑτέρου φασὶ γίνεσθαι, é ἕτερον ἔσται 
τοῦ ὄντος τὸ γινόμενον, ὅπερ ἐστὶν οὐκ ὄν. τὸ 

113 ἄρα γινόμενον οὐκ ὃν ἔσται, ὅπερ ἀπεμφαΐνει. εἶ 
\ 
οὖν μήτε TO μὴ ὃν γίνεται μήτε τὸ dv, οὐδὲ 
γίνεταί τι. 

Κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὲ οὐδὲ φθείρεται. εἰ “γὰρ φθεί- 
ρεταί τι, ἤτοι τὸ ὃν φθείρεται 1 ἢ τὸ μὴ ¢ ὄν. τὸ μὲν 
οὖν οὐκ ὃν οὐ φθείρεται: πάσχειν γάρ τι δεῖ τὸ 
φθειρόμενον. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ ὄν. ἤτοι γὰρ μένον 
ἐν τῷ ὃν εἶναι φθείρεται ἢ μὴ “μένον. καὶ εἰ μὲν 
μένον ἐν τῷ ὃν εἶναι, ἔσται τὸ αὐτὸ ἅμα καὶ ὃν 

»" > ay - ? 4 \ 3 / \ \ a 

114 kal οὐκ ὄν: ἐπεὶ yap οὐ φθείρεται καθὸ μὴ ὄν 
2 3 \ A > A \ ? / 
ἐστιν ἀλλὰ καθὸ ὄν ἐστιν, καθὸ μὲν ἐφθάρθαι 
λέγεται, ἕτερον ἔσται τοῦ ὄντος καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὐκ 
wv” Ad de i > “~ ΐ θ / θ λέ 
ὄν, καθὸ δὲ μένον ἐν τῷ εἶναι φθείρεσθαι λέγεται, 





* Cf. Adv. Phys. i ii. 326 ff.; Aristot. Phys. i. 8. 

> 4.é. it is (“‘ other” or) different after it has “ become” 
from what it was before it “‘ became’’: ‘‘ becoming ” involves 
a change of nature or character in the thing which under- 
goes the process. ° Cf. Adv. Phys. ii. 344 f. 


402 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 111-114 


have been at once both alive and dead; nor yet 
when he died, since he would have been dead twice. 
Therefore Socrates did not die. And by applying 
this argument in turn to each of the things said to 
become or perish it is possible to abolish becoming 
and. perishing. 

Some also argue thus?: If a thing becomes, 
either the existent becomes or the non-existent. 
But the non-existent does not become; for to the 
non-existent nothing can occur; neither, therefore, 
can becoming occur. Nor does the existent become. 
For if the existent becomes, it becomes either in so 
far as it is existent or in so far as it is non-existent. 
Now in so far as it is non-existent it does not become. 
But if it becomes in so far as it is existent, then, since 
they assert that what becomes becomes other from 
other,® what becomes will be other than the existent, 
and that is non-existent. Therefore what becomes 
will be non-existent, which is nonsense. If, then, 
neither the non-existent becomes nor the existent, 
nothing becomes at all. 

For the same reasons, neither does anything 
perish. For if anything perishes, it is either the 
existent that perishes or the non-existent. Now the 
non-existent does not perish, for what perishes must 
be a subject of action. Nor yet does the existent 
perish. For it must perish either while continuing in 
existence or while not so continuing. And if it be 
while continuing in existence, it will be at one and the 
same time both existent and non-existent ; for since 
it does not perish in so far as it is non-existent but 
in so far as it is existent, it will be other than the 
existent and therefore non-existent in so far as it is 
said to have perished, whereas in so far as it is said to 


403 


112 


114 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ὃν ἔσται. ἄτοπον δὲ τὸ λέγειν τὸ αὐτὸ εἶναι καὶ 
ὃν καὶ οὐκ ὄν" οὐκ “ἄρα μένον ἐν τῷ εἶναι φθείρεται 
τὸ ὄν. ᾿ εἰ δὲ οὐ “μένον ἐν τῷ εἶναι τὸ ὃν φθείρεται, 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὸ μὴ εἶναι περιίσταται πρῶτον, εἶθ᾽ 
οὕτως φθείρεται, οὐκέτι τὸ ὃν ἀλλὰ τὸ μὴ ὃν 

θείρεται-" ὅπερ ἀδύνατον εἶναι ὑπεμνήσαμεν. εἰ 
οὖν μήτε τὸ ὃν φθείρεται μήτε τὸ μὴ ὄν, παρὰ δὲ 
ταῦτα οὐδὲν ἔστιν, οὐδὲ φθείρεταί τι. 

Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὡς ἐν ὑποτυπώσει καὶ περὶ τῶν 
κινήσεων ἀρκέσει λελέχθαι, οἷς ἕπεται τὸ ἀν- 
ὕπαρκτον εἶναι καὶ ἀνεπινόητον τὴν κατὰ τοὺς 
δογματικοὺς φυσιολογίαν. 


17’.-- ΠΈΡΙ ΜΟΝῊΣ 


115 Ἑπομένως δὲ καὶ περὶ τῆς ὡς πρὸς τὴν φύσιν 
μονῆς ἠπόρησάν͵ τινες, λέγοντες ὅτι τὸ κινούμενον 
οὐ μένει, πᾶν δὲ σῶμα διαρκῶς κινεῖται κατὰ τὰς 
τῶν δογματικῶν ὑπολήψεις, ῥευστὴν εἶναι λεγόν- 
των τὴν οὐσίαν καὶ ἀεὶ διαφορήσεις τε καὶ προσ- 
θέσεις ποιουμένην, ὡς τὸν μὲν Πλάτωνα μηδὲ ὄντα 
λέγειν τὰ σώματα ἀλλὰ γινόμενα μᾶλλον καλεῖν, 
τὸν δὲ Ἡράκλειτον, ὀξείᾳ ποταμοῦ ῥύσει τὴν 

116 εὐκινησίαν τῆς ἡμετέρας ὕλης ἀπεικάζειν. οὐδὲν 
ἄρα σῶμα μένει. τό γε μὴν λεγόμενον μένειν 
συνέχεσθαι δοκεῖ ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ αὐτό, τὸ δὲ συν- 
εχόμενον πάσχει" οὐδὲν δὲ ἔστι πάσχον, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ 
αἴτιον, ὡς ὑπεμνήσαμεν' οὐδὲ μένει τι ἄρα. 

α Cf. § 
Bae.” ae ” as thé opposite of motion in general, not of 
locomotion only (as in the Stoic use of the term); cf. Adv. 


Pha ee ii. 245 ff. ¢ Of. §§ 51, 54 supra. 
“matter ’’ (in the ordinary sense) of ‘our’ * physical 


404 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 114-116 


perish while continuing in existence it will be existent. 
But it is absurd to say that the same thing is both 
existent and non-existent; therefore the existent does 
not perish while continuing in existence. And if the 
existent does not perish while continuing in existence 
but passes first into non-existence and then in this 
way perishes, it is no longer the existent that perishes 
but the non-existent ; and this we have shown to be 
impossible. If, then, neither the existent perishes nor 
the non-existent, and besides these there is nothing 
else, nothing perishes at all. 

This account of the motions? will suffice by way 
of outline, and therefrom it follows that the Physical 
Science of the Dogmatists is unreal and inconceivable. 


Cuaprer XVII.—Concernine Rest 


In like manner some have doubted about physical 115 
rest,’ saying that what is in motion is not at rest, but 
every body is constantly in motion according to the 
views of the Dogmatists who assert that Being is in 
flux ° and always undergoing effluxes and additions— 
just as Plato does not even speak of bodies as “‘ being” 
but rather calls them “ becoming,” and Heracleitus 
compares the mobility of our matter@ to the swift 
current of ariver. Therefore no body is atrest. What 116 
is said to be at rest is, in fact, held to be embraced 
by the things which surround it, and what is embraced 
is acted upon ; but nothing acted upon exists, since 
no causal activity exists, as we have shown®; there- 
fore nothing is at rest. 
universe, as distinct from any logical or metaphysical use of 


the term. 
¢ Cf. 88 13 ff., 103 supra. 


405 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


᾿Ερωτῶσι δέ τινες καὶ τοῦτον tov: λόγον. τὸ 
μένον πάσχει, τὸ δὲ πάσχον κινεῖται" τὸ ἄρα μένειν 

117 λεγόμενον κινεῦται" εἰ δὲ κινεῖται, οὐ μένει. ἐκ 
δὲ τούτων φανερόν ἐστιν ὅτι οὐδὲ τὸ ἀσώματον 
ἐνδέχεται μένειν. εἰ γὰρ τὸ μένον ᾿ πάσχει, τὸ δὲ 
πάσχειν σωμάτων ἐστὶν ἴδιον, εἴπερ ἄρα, καὶ οὐχὶ 
ἀσωμάτων, οὐδὲν [δὲ]: ἀσώματον οὔτε πάσχειν 
δύναται οὔτε μένειν: οὐδέν ἄρα μένει. 

118 Τοσαῦτα μὲν καὶ περὶ μονῆς εἰρήσθω. ἐπεὶ δὲ 
ἕκαστον τῶν προειρημένων οὐκ ἄνευ τόπου ἢ 
χρόνου ἐπινοεῖται, μετιτέον ἐπὶ τὴν περὶ τούτων 
σκέψιν" ἐὰν γὰρ ταῦτα δείξῃ τις ἀνυπόστατα, 
ἀνυπόστατον ἔσται καὶ διὰ Tatra ἐκείνων ἕκαστον. 
ἀρξώμεθα δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ τόπου. 


IH’.—IIEPI ΤΌΠΟΥ 


1190 Τόπος τοίνυν λέγεται διχῶς, κυρίως καὶ κατα- 
χρηστικῶς, καταχρηστικῶς μὲν [ὡς] ὃ ἐν πλάτει, 
ὡς ἐμοῦ ἡ πόλις, κυρίως δὲ ὃ πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν 
κατέχων, ὑφ᾽ οὗ περιεχόμεθα πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν. 
ζητοῦμεν οὖν περὶ τοῦ [τόπου] πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν. 
τοῦτον δὲ of μὲν ἔθεσαν οἱ δὲ ἀνεῖλον, οἱ δὲ 

190 ἐπέσχον περὶ αὐτοῦ. ὧν οὗ μὲν ὑπάρχειν αὐτὸν 
φάσκοντες ἐπὶ τὴν ἐνάργειαν καταφεύγουσιν. τίς 
γὰρ ἄν, φασί, λέξει μὴ εἶναι τόπον ὁρῶν τὰ μέρη 
τοῦ τόπου, οἷον τὰ δεξιὰ τὰ ἀριστερά, τὰ ἄνω τὰ 


1 [δὲ] sec]. Heintz. 





® Of. §'75 supra for this distinction between the “‘ broad”? 
and narrow or ὁ strict”’ senses of “‘ place.’’ In §§ 121-120 we 
have the popular arguments for space based on (1) observed 
facts as to “ the parts of space,’’ and the movement of bodies 


406 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 116-120 


Some, too, propound this argument: What is at 
rest is acted upon; but what is acted upon is in 
motion; therefore what is said to be at rest is in 
motion ; but if it is in motion, it is not at rest. And 117 
from this it is evident that neither does the incorporeal 
admit of being at rest. For if what is at rest is acted 
upon, and being acted upon is a property, if anything, 
of bodies and not of incorporeals, no incorporeal 
can either be acted upon or be at rest; therefore 
nothing is at rest. 

So much for the subject of rest. And since no one 118 
of the things we have mentioned is conceived apart 
from space or time, we must pass on to consider these; 
for if one should prove these to be unreal, then, 
because of them, ‘each of the others also will be un- 
real. Let us begin with space. 


Cuaptrer XVIII.—Concernine Space 


Space, or place, then, is used in two senses,* the 119 
strict and the loose—loosely of place taken broadly 
(as “‘my city’), and strictly of exactly containing 
place whereby we are exactly enclosed. Our inguiry, 
then, is concerned with space of the strict kind. This 
some © have affirmed, others denied; and others have 
suspended judgement about it. And of these, those 120 
who maintain its existence have recourse to the 
evidence of experience.° Who, they argue, could 
assert that space does not exist when he sees the parts 
of space, such as right and left, up and down, before 


in space; and (2) traditional language, which assumes the 
existence of space; (3) if body exists, space must also exist. 
> e.g. the Stoics and Peripatetics, cf. §§ 124, 131. 
¢ Cf. Aristot. Phys. iv. 1. 


407 


121 


122 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


κάτω, ἔμπροσθεν ὀπίσω, καὶ ἄλλοτε ἀλλαχοῦ 
γιγνόμενος, βλέπων τε ὅτι ἔνθα 6 ὑφηγητὴς 6 
ἐμὸς διελέγετο, ἐνταῦθα ἐγὼ νῦν διαλέγομαι, τόπον 
τε διάφορον καταλαμβάνων. τῶν κούφων φύσει καὶ 
τῶν φύσει βαρέων, ἔτι καὶ τῶν ἀρχαίων ἀκούων 
λεγόντων “ἤτοι μὲν γὰρ πρῶτα “χάος ἐγένετο᾽᾽; 
εἶναι γάρ φασι χάος τὸν τόπον ἀπὸ τοῦ χωρητικὸν 
αὐτὸν εἶναι τῶν ἐν αὐτῷ γινομένων. εἴγε μὴν ἔστι 
τι “σῶμα, φασίν, ἔσται καὶ 6 τόπος" ἄνευ γὰρ 
τούτου οὐκ ἂν εἴη τὸ σῶμα. καὶ εἰ ἔστι τὸ ὑφ᾽ 
οὗ καὶ τὸ ἐξ οὗ, ἔστι καὶ τὸ ἐν ᾧ, ὅπερ ἐστὶν 6 
τόπος" τὸ δὲ πρῶτον ἐν ἑκατέρῳ: τὸ ἄρα δεύτερον 
ἐν ἀμφοτέροις. 

Οἱ δὲ ἀναιροῦντες τὸν τόπον OUTE τὰ μέρη τοῦ 
τόπου διδόασιν εἶναι" μηδὲν γὰρ elva τὸν τόπον 
παρὰ τὰ τούτου μέρη » καὶ τὸν συνάγειν πειρώμενον 
ὅτι ἔστιν ὃ τόπος ἐκ τοῦ τὰ μέρη αὐτοῦ ὡς ὄντα 
λαμβάνειν, τὸ ζητούμενον δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ κατασκευάζειν 
βούλ εσθαι. ὁμοίως δὲ ληρεῖν καὶ τοὺς ἔν τινι τόπῳ 
γίνεσθαί τι ἢ γεγονέναι φάσκοντας, ὅλως μὴ διδο- 
μένου τοῦ τόπου. συναρπάζειν δὲ αὐτοὺς καὶ τὴν 
τοῦ σώματος ὕπαρξιν μὴ διδομένην αὐτόθεν, καὶ 
τὸ ἐξ οὗ καὶ τὸ ὑφ᾽ οὗ δείκνυσθαι ἀνύπαρκτα 
παραπλησίως τῷ τόπῳ. τὸν δὲ “Ησίοδον μὴ ἀξιό- 
χρεων εἶναι κριτὴν τῶν κατὰ φιλοσοφίαν. καὶ οὕτω 


------ 


α Herodotus of Tarsus, ¢f. Introd. pp. xl f. 

> Hesiod, Theog. 118. 

¢ “Chaos” is here absurdly | derived from χώρα, “room” 
(the Stoics connected it with yet, “to pour”’). It means, in 
fact, a “‘ cavity ’® or abyss (from χάσκειν, “to yawn’ 

“By which” is the “‘ efficient,’ ‘“‘ from which the 

κε material’? cause: the Stoics regarded both these as 

“‘ bodies,” and so involving the existence of space. 


408 





OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 120-128 


and behind.; and when he is now here, now there, 
and sees that where my teacher? was talking there 
I am talking now; and when he observes that the 
place of things naturally light is different from that of 
things naturally heavy ; and when, also, he hears the 121 
ancients declaring that “ Verily first of all came Chaos 
intoexistence’’’? For space, they say, is called Chaos 
from its capacity for containing ὁ what becomes within 
it. Then, too, if any body exists, space also exists ; 
for without it body would not exist. And if “‘that-by- 
which’’ exists, and “‘that-from-which,’’¢ there exists ; 
also “‘ that-in-which,’’ and this is space; but the first 
is in each of the two, therefore the second is in both.@ 
But those who deny space donot admitthe existence 122 
of the parts of space ; for space, they say, is nothing 
else than its parts, and he who tries to deduce the 
existence of space from the assumption that its parts 
exist is seeking to establish the matter in question by 
means ofitself. Equally silly is the language of those 
who assert that a thing becomes or has become in 
some place, when space in general is not admitted.’ 
And they also presume the reality of body, which 
is not self-evident; and, in much the same way as 
space, both that-from-which and that-by-which are 
proved to be unreal. Hesiod, too, is no competent 123 
judge of philosophical problems. And while thus 
¢ For the Stoic use of “‘first’ and “second ”’ in hypothetical 
syllogisms cf. ii. 104, 142. In the next sections (122-123) the 
arguments of the previous sections (120-121) are rebutted : 
(1) the “parts of space’’ are identical with space and in 
asserting their existence we are merely ‘‘ begging the ques- 
tion’’; (2) the reality of *‘ body,” or solid matter, as well as 
of the “ efficient’? and “‘ material’’ causes, is likewise pure 
assumption. In §§ 124-130 the special views of the Stoics are 


expounded and refuted; in §§ 131 ff. those of Aristotle and 
his School. 7 Cf. §§ 38 ff. supra. 


409 


124 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


διακρουόμενοι τὰ εἰς κατασκευὴν φερόμενα τοῦ 
εἶναι τόπον, ἤδη καὶ ποικιλώτερον κατασκευά- 
ζουσιν ὅτι ἀνύπαρκτός ἐστι, ταῖς ἐμβριθεστάταις 
εἶναι δοκούσαις τῶν δογματικῶν στάσεσι περὶ τοῦ 
τόπου προσχρώμενοι, τῇ τε τῶν στωικῶν καὶ τῇ 

΄΄“-ἢοῬ “ \ / “A 
TOV περιπατητικῶν, TOV τρόπον τοῦτον. 

Οἱ στωικοί φασι κενὸν μὲν εἶναι τὸ οἷόν τε ὑπὸ 
ὄντος κατέχεσθαι μὴ κατεχόμενον δέ, ἢ διάστημα 
ἔρημον σώματος, ἣ διάστημα ἀκαθεκτούμενον ὑπὸ 
σώματος, τόπον δὲ διάστημα ὑπὸ ὄντος κατεχό- 
μενον καὶ ἐξισαζόμενον τῷ κατέχοντι αὐτόν, νῦν 
ὃν καλοῦντες τὸ σῶμα, χώραν δὲ διάστημα κατὰ 
μέν τι κατεχόμενον ὑπὸ σώματος κατὰ δέ τι 
ἀκαθεκτούμενον, ἐνίων χώραν εἰπόντων εἶναι τὸν 
τόπον τοῦ μεγάλου σώματος, ὡς ἐν μεγέθει τὴν 
διαφορὰν εἶναι τοῦ τε τόπου καὶ τῆς χώρας. 


125 λέγεται οὖν ὅτι ἐπειδὴ διάστημα ὑπὸ σώματος 


/ 4 > \ / ~ ‘ 
κατεχόμενόν φασιν εἶναι τὸν τόπον, πῶς Kal Aéyou- 
\ x ~ ow 
ow αὐτὸν εἶναι διάστημα; πότερον τὸ μῆκος τοῦ 
aA / ἱ ͵ a\ \ 
σώματος ἢ τὸ πλάτος ἢ τὸ βάθος μόνον ἢ Tas 
“ 4 \ / 3 
τρεῖς διαστάσεις; εἰ μὲν γὰρ μίαν διάστασιν, οὐκ 
~ Ὄ >? / ᾿ ~ 
ἐξισάζεται 6 τόπος TH οὗ τόπος ἐστίν, πρὸς τῷ 
τ “~ / \ / εν cA 
καὶ μέρος τοῦ περιεχομένου TO περιέχον εἶναι, ὃ 
, 2 \ ¢ “ 4 
παντάπασιν ameudaiver. εἰ δὲ at τρεῖς διαστάσεις, 
/ ~ 
ἐπεὶ οὔτε κενὸν ὑπόκειται ἐν τῷ λεγομένῳ τόπῳ 
Ν 5} ~ , x , 1 Δ 1 2 
οὔτε ἄλλο σῶμα διάστασιν ἔχον, μόνον' δὲ τὸ ἐν 


1 μόνον Papp., Apelt: μένον mss., Bekk. 





¢ The argument is: “ἡ Interval” cannot mean one ‘‘ dimen- 
sion ’’ only (such as “‘length’’) since (by definition) ‘‘ Place ’’ 
must be “* equated ”’ to the “body ” which is in it and must 
therefore have all three dimensions; and further, the “‘ in- 


410 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 123-126 


rebutting the arguments that tend to establish the 
existence of space, they also demonstrate its unreality 
more elaborately by making use of what are held to 
be the most weighty views of the Dogmatists about 
space, namely those of the Stoics and Peripatetics, in 
the following fashion. 

The Stoics declare that Void is that which is capable 124 
of being occupied by an existent but is not so occupied, 
or an interval empty of body, or an interval un- 
occupied by body; and that Place is an interval 
occupied by an existent and equated to that which 
occupies it (“‘ existent’ being here the name they 
give to “ body ’’); and that Room is an interval partly 
occupied by body and partly unoccupied—though 
some of them say that Room is the Place of the large 
body, so that the difference between Place and Room 
depends on size. Their opponents then argue thus : 125 
When the Stoics define Place as an “ interval occupied 
by body,’’ in what sense do they call it an “‘ interval” ? 
Do they mean the length of the body or its width or 
its depth only, or all three dimensions? For if they 
.mean one dimension, the place is not equated with 
the object of which it is the place, and besides, that 
which includes is part of what is included, which is 
pure nonsense.” And if by “interval”’’ is meant the 126 
three dimensions, then, since in the so-called place 
there subsists neither a void nor another body which 
has dimensions, but only the body said to exist in 


cluding ”’’ place of one “‘ dimension ’’ would be less than the 
body of three dimensions which it “‘includes.’”? Nor can it 
be all three dimensions, since the body which is ‘in’? it is 
all these three dimensions and therefore identical with its 
** place’’—the thing contained with the thing which contains 
it. Thus “interval” and “‘place’’ are not explicable in 
terms of ‘‘ dimensions.”’ 


411 


127 


128 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


4 ~ a 7 3 n~ 
τόπῳ λεγόμενον εἶναι σῶμα 6° συνέστηκεν ἐκ τῶν 
wv ~ --ΟῬΙ Ά 
διαστάσεων (ἔστι γὰρ τοῦτο μῆκος καὶ πλάτος καὶ 

7 + 5 , Δ ᾿ ᾽ ) 
βάθος καὶ ἀντιτυπία, ἣ δὴ συμβεβηκέναι λέγεται 
A ζω / > A A ~ 
ταῖς διαστάσεσι ταῖς προειρημέναις), αὐτὸ TO σῶμα 

os \ \ \ ὔ 
ἔσται ἑαυτοῦ τόπος, καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ περιέχον καὶ 
Ω δ, 
περιεχόμενον, ὅπερ ἄτοπον. οὐκ ἄρα ἔστι τις 
/ ‘ \ “- 
διάστασις τόπου ὑποκειμένου. διὰ δὲ τοῦτο οὐδὲ 
/ 
ἔστι TL ὁ τόπος. 
> a δὲ \ Ὁ € λό 3 4 “a 
Epwrarat δὲ Kat οὗτος 6 λόγος. ἐπεὶ διπλαῖ 
΄“ > ~ 
at διαστάσεις οὐ θεωροῦνται καθ᾽ ἕκαστον τῶν ἐν 
ld s A 7 LAA’ “ “" Va 7 
τόπῳ εἶναι λεγομένων, ἀλλ᾽ Ev μῆκος καὶ ἕν πλάτος 
/ , on 
καὶ ἕν βάθος, πότερον μόνου τοῦ σώματός εἶσιν 
on 1 ᾽ ~ 
ai διαστάσεις αὗται ἢ μόνου τοῦ τόπου ἢ ἀμφο- 
7 9 3 > \ / “~ / 
τέρων; ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν μόνου τοῦ τόπου, οὐχ ἕξει τὸ 
“ i os ὃ 5 λ ὔ ὃ \ 10 30 / 
σῶμα ἴδιον μῆκος οὐδὲ πλάτος οὐδὲ βάθος οὐθέν, 
“ uf ‘ “~~ 
ὥστε οὐδὲ σῶμα ἔσται TO σῶμα, ὅπερ ἄτοπον. εἰ 
3 \ \ \ 
δὲ ἀμφοτέρων, ἐπεὶ TO κενὸν οὐδεμίαν ὑπόστασιν 
\ ᾿ ? > ¢ ie 
ἔχει παρὰ τὰς διαστάσεις, εἰ αἱ διαστάσεις at τοῦ 
~ > “ 
κενοῦ ὑπόκεινται ἐν TH σώματι συστατικαὶ οὖσαι 
΄-Ἥ “- A “ ~ ι 
αὐτοῦ τοῦ σώματος, τὰ τοῦ κενοῦ συστατικὰ καὶ 
σ΄ , 7 Ὡν 
τοῦ σώματος ἔσται συστατικά. περὶ μὲν γὰρ τῆς 
~ ? f of 
ὑπάρξεως THs ἀντιτυπίας οὐκ ἔστι διαβεβαιώσα- 
7 f 
σθαι, καθάπερ ἔμπροσθεν ὑπεμνήσαμεν: μόνων δὲ 
~ 7 
τῶν διαστάσεων φαινομένων κατὰ τὸ λεγόμενον 
Saat ¢ >A “~ ~ χω ~ 
σῶμα, αἵπερ εἰσὶ τοῦ κενοῦ καὶ αἱ αὐταὶ τῷ κενῷ, 
\ ” A o~ Ld 
κενὸν ἔσται TO σῶμα. ὅπερ ἄτοπον. εἰ δὲ μόνου 
“ / / 3 ς 
τοῦ σώματός εἰσιν αἱ διαστάσεις, οὐδεμία ἔσται 
/ / 7 
διάστασις τόπου, διόπερ οὐδὲ ὃ τόπος. εἰ τοίνυν 


1 ὃ Papp.: οὐ mss., Bekk. 
* Cf. § 39 supra. 
412 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 126-128 


place, and it is composed of the dimensions (for it is 
length and breadth and depth and solidity,* this last 
being said to be a property of the foregoing dimen- 
sions), the body itself will be its own place and at 
once both container and contained, which is absurd. 
Therefore no dimension of a subsisting place exists. 127 
And, consequently, place is nothing. 

This argument also is propounded.? Since the 
dimensions are not found to be twofold in the case of 
each of the objects said to exist in place, but there 
is one length, one breadth and one depth, do these 
dimensions belong to the body only, or to the place 
only, or to both? If they belong only to the place, 
the body will have no length or breadth or depth of 
its own, so that the body will not even be body, which 
is absurd. If they belong to both, then, since the 128 
Void has no reality apart from the dimensions, if the 
dimensions of the Void subsist in the body and serve 
to compose the body itself, the components of the 
Void will also be components of the body—for about 
the reality of solidity it is impossible to say anything 
positive, as we have shown above. And since in 
the case of the so-called body only those dimensions 
appear which belong to the Void and are identical 
with the Void, the body will be Void, which is absurd. 
And if the dimensions belong to the body only, there 
will be no dimension of place, and therefore no place 


ὃ This argument raises the question—since “‘body”’ and 
‘place’? coincide (spatially), to which of the two do the 
‘“‘dimensions”’ belong, as we cannot assume two sets of 
dimensions in the same place? To ascribe them to the 
“body ’’ annuls “‘ place’”’ and vice versa. 

¢ Of. 88 45 f.; the ‘‘ components ”’ of ‘‘ body ᾽ are the three 
“ dimensions.” 


413 


129 


130 


131 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


Kar οὐδένα τῶν προειρημένων τρόπων εὑρίσκεται 
τόπου διάστασις, οὐδὲ ἔστιν ὃ τόπος. 

Πρὸς τούτοις λέγεται ὅτι ὅτε ἔπεισι τῷ κενῷ τὸ 
σῶμα καὶ γίνεται τόπος, ἤτοι ὑπομένει τὸ κενὸν 
ἢ ὑποχωρεῖ ἢ φθείρεται. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν ὑπομένει, 
τὸ αὐτὸ ἔσται καὶ πλῆρες καὶ κενόν, εἰ δὲ ὑποχωρεῖ 
κινούμενον μεταβατικῶς ἢ φθείρεται μεταβάλλον, 
σῶμα ἔσται τὸ κενόν" σώματος γὰρ ἴδιά ἐστι ταῦτα 
τὰ πάθη. ἄτοπον δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ λέγειν κενὸν καὶ 
πλῆρες, ἢ ὅτι σῶμά ἐστι τὸ κενόν. ἄτοπον ἄρα 
τὸ λέγειν οἷόν τε εἶναι τὸ κενὸν ὑπὸ σώματος κατα- 
σχεθῆναι καὶ γενέσθαι τόπον. διὰ δὲ ταῦτα καὶ 
τὸ κενὸν ἀνυπόστατον εὑρίσκεται, εἴγε μὴ δυνατόν 
ἐστιν αὐτὸ κατασχεθῆναι ὑπὸ σώματος καὶ γε- 
νέσθαι τόπον: ἐλέγετο γὰρ κενὸν εἶναι ὃ οἷόν τε 
ὑπὸ σώματος κατασχεθῆναι. συμπεριτρέπεται δὲ 
τούτοις καὶ ἡ χώρα: εἴτε γὰρ 6 μέγας τόπος ἐστὶ 
χώρα, συμπεριγράφεται τῷ τόπῳ, εἴτε ἡ κατὰ μέν 
τι ὑπὸ σώματος κατεχομένη κατὰ δέ τι κενὴ διά- 
στασις, ἀμφοτέροις συναναιρεῖται. 

Tatra μὲν οὖν καὶ ἔτι πλείω πρὸς τὴν στάσιν 
τῶν στωικῶν περὶ τοῦ τόπου λέγεται" οἱ δὲ περι- 
πατητικοί φασιν εἶναι τόπον τὸ πέρας τοῦ περι- 
ἔχοντος, καθὸ περιέχει, ὡς ἐμοῦ τόπον εἶναι τὴν 
ἐπιφάνειαν τοῦ ἀέρος τὴν περιτετυπωμένην τῷ 
ἐμῷ σώματι. ἀλλ᾽ εἴπερ τοῦτό ἐστιν 6 τόπος, τὸ 
αὐτὸ καὶ ἔσται καὶ οὐκ ἔσται. ὅτε γὰρ μέλλει 
ἔν τινι τόπῳ γίνεσθαι τὸ σῶμα, καθὸ μὲν οὐδὲν 
δύναται γενέσθαι ἐν τῷ μὴ ὑπάρχοντι, δεῖ προ- 
ὕπάρχειν τὸν τόπον, ἵνα οὕτως ἐν αὐτῷ γένηται τὸ 
σῶμα, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἔσται 6 τόπος πρὶν ἐν αὐτῷ 
“4 Of. §§ 49 ff. ; and for the “ affections,” 88 38, 52, 117. 
41 4: 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 128-131 


either. If, then, no dimension of place is found in 
any of the ways described above, place does not exist. 

Further, it is argued that when the body occupies 
the Void and place comes about, the Void either 
remains or withdraws or perishes. But if it remains, 
the Plenum and the Void will be identical ; and if it 
‘withdraws by a movement of transition, or perishes 
by change, the Void will be a body; for these affec- 
tions are peculiar to body. But it is absurd to say 
either that Void and Plenum are identical or that the 
Void is body. Therefore it is absurd to say that the 
Void can be occupied by body and become place. 
For these reasons also the Void is found to be unreal, 
since it is impossible for it to be occupied by body and 
to become place; for Void was defined ὃ as “ that 
which is capable of being occupied by body.’”’ And, 
in the refutation of these, Room also is involved ; for 
it is annulled along with place if “‘room is the large 
place,”’ while if it is ‘‘ that which is partly occupied 
by body and partly empty extension,” its refutation 
is included in that of these two. 

These arguments, and others besides, are directed 
against the views about place held by the Stoics. 


9 


130 


The Peripatetics ὁ assert that place is “ the limit of 131 


what encloses in so far as it encloses,’ so that my 
place is the surface of the air that forms a mould 
round my body. But if this is place, the same thing 
will both be and not be. For when the bodyis about to 
become in a certain place, then, inasmuch as nothing 
can become in what is non-existent, the place must 
be pre-existent in order that the body may in this 
way become in it, and consequently the place will 


δ Cf. § 124, 
¢ Cf. Adv. Phys. ii. 30 ff.; Aristot. Phys. iv. 4, De cael. iv. 3. 
415 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


γενέσθαι τὸ ἐν τόπῳ σῶμα. καθὸ δὲ “περιτυπου- 
μένης τῆς τοῦ περιέχοντος ἐπιφανείας τῷ περι- 
εχομένῳ ἀποτελεῖται, οὐ δύναται ὑποστῆναι ὃ τόπος 
πρὸ τοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ γενέσθαι τὸ σῶμα, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο 
οὐκ ἔσται τότε. ἄτοπον δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ λέγειν καὶ 
εἶναί τι καὶ μὴ εἶναι: οὐκ ἄρα ἔστι τόπος τὸ πέρας 
τοῦ περιέχοντος, καθὸ περιέχει. 

132 Πρὸς τούτοις, εἰ ἔστι τι ὃ τόπος, ἤτοι γεννητός 
ἐστιν ἢ ἀγέννητος. ἀγέννητος μὲν οὖν οὐκ ἔστιν" 
περιτυπούμενος γάρ, φασίν, τῷ ἐν αὐτῷ σώματι 
ἀποτελεῖται. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ γεννητός: εἰ γὰρ ἔστι 
γεννητός, ἦτοι ὅτε ἐν τόπῳ ἐστὶ τὸ σῶμα, τότε 


Ὄ 


γίνεται ὁ τόπος ἐν ᾧ ἤδη λέγεται εἶναι τὸ ἐν τόπῳ, 

133 7 ἢ ὅτε οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ. οὔτε δὲ ὅτε ἐν αὐτῷ 
ἔστιν (ἔστι γὰρ ἤδη τοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ σώματος ὃ τόπος) 
οὔτε ὅτε οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ, εἴγε περιτυποῦται μέν, 
ὡς φασίν, τῷ περιεχομένῳ τὸ περιέχον καὶ οὕτω 
γίνεται τόπος, τῷ δὲ μὴ ἐν αὐτῷ ὄντι οὐδὲν δύνα- 
ται περιτυπωθῆναι. εἰ δὲ μήτε ὅτε ἐν τόπῳ ἐστὶ 
τὸ σῶμα, μήτε ὅτε οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ, γίνεται ὁ 
τόπος, παρὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲν ἔστιν ἐπινοεῖν, οὐδὲ 
γεννητός ἐστιν ὃ τόπος. εἰ δὲ μήτε γεννητός ἐστι 
μήτε ἀγέννητος, οὐδὲ ἔστιν. 

184 Κοινότερον δὲ καὶ ταῦτα δύναται λέγεσθαι. εἰ 
ἔστι τι ὃ τόπος, ἤτοι σῶμά ἐστιν ἢ ἀσώματον" 
ἑκάτερον δὲ τούτων ἀπορεῖται, ὡς ὑπεμνήσαμεν᾽ 
καὶ ὃ τόπος ἄρα ἐστὶν ἄπορος. ὁ τόπος πρὸς τῷ 
σώματι νοεῖται οὗ ἔστι τόπος" ἄπορος δέ ἐστιν ὁ 
περὶ τῆς ὑπάρξεως τοῦ σώματος λόγος" καὶ ὁ περὶ 
τοῦ τόπου ἄρα. ὁ τόπος ἑκάστου ἀΐδιος μὲν οὐκ 


416 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 131-134 


exist before the-body-in-the-place becomes therein. 
But inasmuch as it consists in the moulding of the 
surface of what encloses round the thing enclosed, 
place cannot be already subsisting before the body 
becomes within it, and therefore it will not be in 
existence then. But it is absurd to say that the same 
thing both is and is not ; therefore place is not “‘ the 
limit of what encloses in so far as it encloses.” 
Furthermore, if place is anything, it is either created 139 
or uncreate. Now itis not uncreate; for it is brought 
about, they say, by being moulded round the body 
within it. Nor yet is it created ; for if it is created, 
it is either when the body is in place that the place, 
in which the body in place is already said to be, 
comes into existence, or when the body is not in it. 
But it does not come into existence either when the 133 
body is in it (for the place of the body within it exists 
already), or when it is not in it, since, as they assert, 
the container is moulded round the contained and in 
this way place becomes, and nothing can be moulded 
round that which is not within it. But if place does 
not become either when the body is in place or when 
it is not therein, and no other alternatives are con- 
ceivable, then place is not created at all. And if it 
is neither created nor uncreate, it has no existence. 
These objections may also bestated more generally. 134 
If place is anything, it is either corporeal or incorpo- 
real; but each of these alternatives is, as we have 
shown, disputed ; therefore place isin dispute. Place 
is conceived in relation to the body whereof it is the 
place; but the doctrine of the reality of body is 
disputed, therefore that of place is likewise disputable. 


α The first objection is based on 88 38-56, the second also on 
§§ 38 ff., the third on §§ 109 ff. 


VOL. I Qk 41'7 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἔστιν, γίνεσθαι δὲ λεγόμενος dvurdctaros εὑρί- 
σκεται γενέσεως μὴ ὑπαρχούσης. 

185 "Eveort δὲ καὶ ἄλλα πλείω λέγειν, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα μὴ 
τὸν λόγον μηκύνωμεν, ἐκεῖνο ἐπακτέον ὅτι τοὺς 
σκεπτικοὺς ἐντρέπουσι μὲν οἱ λόγοι, δυσωπεῖ δὲ 
καὶ ἡ ἐνάργεια. διόπερ οὐθετέρῳ προστιθέμεθα 
ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς λεγομένοις ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπέχομεν περὶ τοῦ τόπου. 


1Θ΄.--ΠῈΡῚ XPONOY 


186 Τὸ δὲ αὐτὸ πάσχομεν καὶ ἐν τῇ περὶ τοῦ χρόνου 
ζητήσει: ὅσον μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ τοῖς φαινομένοις δοκεῖ 
τι εἶναι 6 χρόνος, ὅσον δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖς περὶ αὐτοῦ 
λεγομένοις ἀνυπόστατος φαίνεται. χρόνον γὰρ 
εἶναί φασιν οἱ μὲν διάστημα τῆς τοῦ ὅλου κινήσεως 
(ὅλον δὲ λέγω τὸν κόσμον), οἱ δὲ αὐτὴν τὴν κίνησιν 

“~ 7 3 ᾿ 7 4 ἊἌ Ψ / 
τοῦ κόσμου, ᾿Αριστοτέλης δέ, ἢ ὥς τινες Πλάτων, 
ἀριθμὸν τοῦ ἐν κινήσει προτέρου καὶ ὑστέρου, 

187 Στράτων δέ, ἢ ὥς τινες ᾿Αριστοτέλης, μέτρον 
κινήσεως καὶ μονῆς, ᾿Ἐπίκουρος δέ, καθὼς Δη- 
μήτριος ὁ Λάκων φησί, σύμπτωμα συμπτωμάτων, 
παρεπόμενον ἡμέραις τε καὶ νυξὶ καὶ ὥραις καὶ 
πάθεσι καὶ ἀπαθείαις καὶ κινήσεσι καὶ μοναῖς. 

* Cf. 88 66,831. ‘The Sceptics are here said to be “ put 
to shame,” or “confusion” (1.6. caused to hesitate in their 
judgement as to the nature of space) owing to the “ equi- 
pollence’’ of the arguments against space and those for it 
based on the obvious facts of experience. 

» The Stoics, ¢f. Diog. Laert. vii. 141. This definition is 
derived from the fact that Time is measured by the motions 
of the planets and stars which compose the Universe. 

° Aristot. Phys. iv. 10 mentions this (Platonic) definition, 
cf. Plato, Tim. 47 Ὁ ff. Aristotle says that our notion of time 
is derived from a sense of difference and of succession in our 


418 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 134-138 


The place ‘of each thing is not eternal, but if we say 
that it becomes it is found to be unreal as becoming 
does not exist. 

It is possible to adduce many other arguments. 135 
But in order to avoid prolonging our exposition, we 
may conclude by saying that while the Sceptics are 
put to confusion by the arguments, they are also put 
to shame by the evidence? of experience. Con- 
sequently we attach ourselves to neither side, so 
far as concerns the doctrines of the Dogmatists, but 
suspend judgement regarding place. 


CHAPTER, XIX.—Concernine Time 


Our attitude is the same with respect to the inquiry 136 
about time. For if we depend on appearances, time 
seems to be something, but if we depend on the 
arguments about it, it appears unreal. Some ?define 
time as ‘‘ the interval of the motion of the Whole” 
(meaning by ‘‘ Whole” the Universe), others ° as 
“the actual motion of the Universe’; Aristotle (or, 
as some say, Plato) as “the number of the prior 
and posterior in motion’’; Strato (or, as some say, 137 
Aristotle) as ‘‘ the measure of motion and rest ” ; 
Epicurus (according to Demetrius the Laconian %) as 
“ἐᾷ concurrence of concurrences, concomitant with 
days and nights and seasons and affections and non- 
affections and motions and rests.”” And, in point of 138 


thoughts and perceptions, which brings with it a distinction 
between ‘‘before’’ and “after’’—between “past,” “‘ present,” 
and “‘future.’? Thus “time” is a thing “ numbered”’ or 
“measured” by the conscious mind, and Aristotle defines 
it as “a numeration of motion in respect of priority and 
posteriority ’’ (Phys. iv. 11). 

@ An Epicurean, ¢f. ddv. Log. ii. 348. 


419 


188 


139 


140 


14] 


142 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


3 3 , ec 4 ~ > \ 3} > 
κατ᾽ οὐσίαν τε ol μὲν σῶμα αὐτὸν ἔφάσαν εἶναι, 
ξ € 4 \ > ,ὔ \ ‘ » ἃ 
ὡς ot περὶ τὸν Αἰνησίδημον, (μηδὲν γὰρ αὐτὸν 

»- \ “- 

διαφέρειν τοῦ ὄντος καὶ τοῦ πρώτου σώματος), οἱ 
δὲ ἀσώματον. ἤτοι οὖν πᾶσαι al στάσεις αὗταί 
3 > ὋΝ Bd lan “ A! \ \ 3 “ 
εἰσιν ἀληθεῖς, ἢ πᾶσαι ψευδεῖς, ἢ τινὲς μὲν ἀληθεῖς 
τινὲς δὲ ψευδεῖς: οὔτε δὲ πᾶσαι ἀληθεῖς ὑπάρχειν 

/ \ a “~ 
δύνανται (μάχονται yap αἱ πλεῖσται) οὔτε πᾶσαι 

κι > ~ ἴω 
ψευδεῖς εἶναι δοθήσονται ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν. 

\ 3 > ,ὔ “~ \ > \ on 
καὶ ἄλλως, εἰ δοθείη ψεῦδος μὲν εἶναι τὸ σῶμα 
3 \ A 
εἶναι τὸν χρόνον, ψεῦδος δὲ καὶ TO ὅτι ἀσώματός 
ἐστιν, αὐτόθεν δοθήσεται ἡ τοῦ χρόνου ἀνυπαρξία" 
παρὰ γὰρ ταῦτα οὐδὲν εἶναι δύναται ἕτερον. οὔτε 
[4 Ζ > 3 “ 7 \ “ \ 
tives μέν εἰσιν ἀληθεῖς τίνες ὃὲ ψευδεῖς δυνατὸν 

“a / 3 Foal 
καταλαβεῖν διά τε THY ἰσοσθενῆ διαφωνίαν Kal τὴν 
9 “ \ A \ 
ἀπορίαν τὴν κατὰ «τὸ» κριτήριόν τε Kal τὴν 
3 / [τὰ \ “ > \ Ψ ‘ 
ἀπόδειξιν. wore διὰ ταῦτα οὐδὲν ἕξομεν περὶ 

/ 
χρόνου διαβεβαιώσασθαι. 

> ‘ ~ 

ira, ἐπεὶ οὐκ ἄνευ κινήσεως ἢ καὶ μονῆς ὃ 
χρόνος ὑφεστάναι δοκεῖ, τῆς κινήσεως ἀναιρου- 
μένης, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῆς μονῆς, ἀναιρεῖται ὁ 

© / 
χρόνος. οὐδὲν δὲ ἧττον καὶ τάδε φασί τινες κατὰ 
~ ; ᾿ 
τοῦ χρόνου. εἰ ἔστι χρόνος, ἤτοι πεπέρασται ἢ 
bj 3 
ἄπειρός ἐστιν. ἀλλ εἰ μὲν πεπέρασται, ἀπό 
τινος χρόνου ἤρξατο καὶ εἴς τινα χρόνον Angee: 
διὰ δὲ τοῦτο ἣν ποτὲ χρόνος ὅτε οὐκ ἣν χρόνος, 
πρὸ τοῦ ἄρξασθαι αὐτόν, καὶ ἔσται ποτὲ χρόνος 
Μ ~ 
ὅτε οὐκ ἔσται χρόνος, μετὰ τὸ λῆξαι αὐτόν, ὅπερ 
ἄτοπον. οὐ τοίνυν πεπέρασται. 6 χρόνος. εἰ δὲ 
ἄπειρός ἐστιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ μέν τι αὐτοῦ λέγεται παρ- 
ῳχηκὸς τὸ δὲ ἐ ἐνεστὼς τὸ δὲ μέλλον, ὁ δ μέλλων καὶ 
ὁ παρῳχηκὼς ἤτοι εἰσὶν ἢ οὐκ εἰσίν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ οὐκ 
1 «τὸς add. Mutsch. 
420 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 138-142 


substance,-some have affirmed that it is corporeal— 
for instance, the School of Aenesidemus, arguing that 
it differs in nothing from Being and the prime body,— 
others,? that it is incorporeal. Either, then, all these 
theories are true, or all false, or some true and 
some false; but they cannot all be true (most of 
them being in conflict), nor will it be granted by the 
Dogmatists that all are false. And besides, should 
it be granted that the assertion of the corporeality 
of time is false, and that of its incorporeality like- 
wise false, then, zpso facto, the unreality of time will 
be granted; for it cannot be anything but one or 
other of these. Nor yet can we apprehend which 
theories are true, which false, owing to the equal 
weight ὃ of the rival opinions as well as the perplexity 
regarding the criterion and proof. Hence for these 
reasons we shall be unable to affirm anything posi- 
tively about time. 

Further, since time does not seem to subsist without 
motion or even rest, if motion is abolished, and 
likewise rest, time is abolished. None the less the 
following objections against time are made by some. 
If time exists, it is either limited or unlimited. But 
if it is limited, it began at a certain time and will end 
at a certain time. Consequently, there was once a 
time when time was not (before it began), and there 
will once be a time when time will not be (after it has 
ended) ; whichis absurd.? So then time is not limited. 
But if it is unlimited, since part of it is said to be 
past, part present, and part future, the future and 
past are either existent or non-existent. But if they 


α i.e, the Stoics. δ Cf 8. 
¢ ΟἹ ii. ec. 3-7, 12, 13. 
@ Cf. Aristot. Met. xii. 6. 
421 


139 


140 


14] 


142 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


εἰσίν, μόνου τοῦ ἐνεστῶτος ὑπολειπομένου, ὅς 
ἐστιν ἀκαριαῖος, πεπερασμένος ἔσται ὃ χρόνος καὶ 
ἀκολουθήσουσιν at ἀρχῆθεν ἀπορίαι. εἰ δὲ ὁ 
παρῳχηκὼς ἔστι καὶ ὁ μέλλων ἔστιν, ἐνεστὼς 
ἔσται ἑκάτερος αὐτῶν. ἄτοπον δὲ τὸ λέγειν ἐν- 
εστῶτα τὸν παρῳχηκότα καὶ τὸν μέλλοντα χρόνον᾽ 
οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ ἄπειρός ἐστιν ὁ χρόνος. εἰ δὲ μήτε 
ἄπειρος μήτε πεπερασμένος, οὐδὲ ἔ ἔστιν ὅλως χρόνος. 

143 Πρὸς τούτοις, εἰ ἔστιν ὁ χρόνος, ἤτοι μεριστός 
ἐστιν ἢ ἀμέριστος. ἀμέριστος μὲν οὖν οὐκ ἔστιν" 
διαιρεῖται γὰρ εἴς τε τὸν ἐνεστῶτα καὶ εἰς τὸν 
παρῳχηκότα καὶ εἰς τὸν μέλλοντα, ὡς αὐτοί φασιν. 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ “μεριστός. ἕκαστον γὰρ τῶν μεριστῶν 
καταμετρεῖται ὑπό τινος ἑαυτοῦ μέρους, καθ᾽ 
ἕκαστον μέρος τοῦ μετρουμένου γινομένου, τοῦ 
μετροῦντος, ὡς ὅταν δακτύλῳ πῆχυν μετρῶμεν. 
ὁ δὲ χρόνος οὐ δύναται καταμετρεῖσθαι ὑπό τινος 
ἑαυτοῦ μέρους. εἰ γὰρ ὁ ἐνεστὼς λόγου χάριν 
καταμετρεῖ τὸν παρῳχημένον, ἔσται κατὰ τὸν 
παρῳχηκότα καὶ διὰ τοῦτο παρῳχηκώς, καὶ ἐπὶ 
τοῦ μέλλοντος ὁμοίως μέλλων. καὶ ὁ μέλλων εἰ 
καταμετροίη τοὺς ἄλλους, ἐνεστὼς ἔσται καὶ 
παρῳχηκώς, καὶ ὁ ὁ παρῳχηκὼς παραπλησίως μέλ- 
λων ἔσται καὶ ἐνεστώς᾽ ὅπερ ἄπεμς αἕνει. οὐκοῦν 
οὐδὲ μεριστός ἐστιν. εἰ δὲ μήτε ἀμέριστος μήτε 
μεριστός, οὐδὲ ἐ ἔστιν. 

14 “O τε χρόνος λέγεται τριμερὴς εἶναι, καὶ τὸ μὲν 
παρῳχηκὼς τὸ δὲ ἐνεστὼς τὸ δὲ μέλλων. ὧν ὁ 
μὲν παρῳχηκὼς καὶ ὃ μέλλων οὐκ εἰσίν" εἰ “γὰρ 
εἰσὶ viv 6 τε παρῳχηκὼς καὶ 6 μέλλων χρόνος, 
ἔσται ἐνεστὼς ἑκάτερος αὐτῶν. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ 6 ἐν- 
εστώς. εἰ γὰρ ἔστιν 6 ἐνεστὼς χρόνος, ἤτοι ἀ- 
422 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 142-144 


are non-existent, and there remains only the present, 
which is momentary, time will be limited and the 
original difficulties? will follow. And if the past 
exists and the future exists, each of these will be 
present. But it is absurd to call past and future 
time present; neither, then, is time unlimited. But 
if it is neither unlimited nor limited, time does not 
‘exist at all. 

Further, if time exists it is either divisible or 143 
indivisible. Now itis not indivisible ; for it is divided, 
as they themselves declare, into present, past, and 
future. Yet it is not divisible either. For each 
divisible thing is measured by some part of itself, the 
measure coinciding with each part of the measured, 
as when we measure a cubit by a finger. But time 
cannot be measured by any part of itself. If, for 
instance, the present measures the past, it will 
coincide with the past and will therefore be past, 
and. similarly it will be future in the case of the 
future. And if the future should measure the rest, 
it will be present and past, and so likewise the past 
will be future and present; which is nonsense. 
Neither, then, is time divisible. But if it is neither 
indivisible nor divisible, it does not exist. 

Time, too, is said to be tripartite, partly past, partly 144 
present, and partly future. Of these the past and 
the future are non-existent ; for if past and future 
time exist now, each of them will be present. Neither 
is the present existent; for if present time exists 


“ e.g. that there was once a time when no time was. 


4.23 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μέριστός ἐστιν ἢ μεριστός. ἀμέριστος μὲν οὖν οὐκ 
ἔστιν. ἐν γὰρ τῷ ἐνεστῶτι χρόνῳ λέγεται τὰ 
μεταβάλλοντα μεταβάλλειν, οὐδὲν δὲ ἐν ἀμερεῖ 
χρόνῳ μεταβάλλει, οἷον ὃ σίδηρος εἰς μαλακότητα 
ἢ τῶν ἄλλων ὃ ἕκαστον. ὥστε οὐκ ἔστιν ἀμέριστος 

145 ὁ ἐνεστὼς χρόνος. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ μεριστός" εἰς ἐν- 
εστῶτας “μὲν γὰρ οὐκ ἂν μερισθείη, ἐπεὶ διὰ τὴν 
ὀξεῖαν p ῥύσιν τῶν ἐν κόσμῳ ἀνεπινοήτως ὃ ἐνεστὼς 
εἰς παρῳχηκότα μεταβάλλειν λέγεται: ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ 
εἰς παρῳχηκότα καὶ μέλλοντα: ἔσται γὰρ οὕτως 
ἀνύπαρκτος, τὸ μέν τι μηκέτι ὃν ἔχων μέρος ἑαυτοῦ, 

146 τὸ δὲ μηδέπω. ὄν. ὅθεν οὐδὲ τέλος τοῦ παρ- 
ῳχημένου καὶ ἀρχὴ τοῦ μέλλοντος εἶναι δύναται ὁ ὁ 
ἐνεστώς, ἐπεὶ καὶ ἔσται καὶ οὐκ ἔσται. ἔσται μὲν 
[οὖν] ὡς ἐνεστώς, οὐκ ἔσται δὲ ἐ ἐπεὶ μὴ ἔστιν αὐτοῦ 
τὰ μέρη. οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ μεριστός ἐστιν. εἰ δὲ μήτε 
ἀμέριστός ἐστιν ὃ ἐνεστὼς μήτε ᾿μεριοτός, οὐδὲ 
ἔστιν. μὴ ὄντος δὲ τοῦ ἐνεστῶτος μηδὲ τοῦ 
παρῳχημένου μηδὲ τοῦ μέλλοντος, οὐδὲ ἔστι τι 
χρόνος" τὸ γὰρ ἐξ ἀνυπάρκτων" συνεστὼς ἀνύπ- 
αρκτόν ἐστιν. 

141 Λέγεται κατὰ τοῦ χρόνου κἀκεῖνος ὁ λόγος. εἰ 
ἔστι χρόνος, ἤτοι γενητός ἐστι καὶ φθαρτὸς ἢ 
ἀγένητος καὶ ἄφθαρτος. ἀγένητος μὲν οὖν καὶ 
ἄφθαρτος οὐκ ἔστιν, εἴγε αὐτοῦ τὸ μὲν παρῳχηκέναι 
λέγεται καὶ μηκέτι εἶναι τὸ δὲ μέλλειν καὶ μηδέπω 

148 εἶναι. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ γενητὸς καὶ φθαρτός. τὰ γὰρ 
γινόμενα ἔκ τινος ὄντος γίγνεσθαι δεῖ καὶ τὰ 


1 ἀνεπινοήτως Kayser: ἀπερινοήτως mss., Bekk. 
7 rv” 3 Ρ 1 
2 ἀνυπάρκτων Kayser: ἀνυπάρκτου Μ58.. Bekk. 





« Of. Aristot. Phys. vi. 6. 
424 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 144-148 


it is either indivisible or divisible. Now it is not 
indivisible ; for what changes is said to change in 
the present time, but nothing changes in indivisible 
time *—iron, for instance, into softness, and so on. 
Hence present time is not indivisible. Neither 145 
is it divisible; for it could not be divided into a 
plurality of presents, since time present is said to 
change into time past imperceptibly owing to the 
rapid flux of the things in the Universe. Nor yet into 
past and future ; for so it will be unreal, having one 
part of itself no longer existent and the other part 
not yet existent. Hence, too, the present cannot be 146 
the end of the past and the beginning of the future, 
since then it will both be and not be existent ; for it 
will exist as present, but will not exist because its 
parts are non-existent. Therefore it is not divisible 
either. But if the present is neither indivisible nor 
divisible, it does not exist. And when neither the 
present nor the past nor the future exists, time too is 
non-existent ; for what is compounded of things unreal 
is unreal. 

This argument, too, is alleged against time: If 147 
time exists it is either generable and perishable or 
ingenerable and imperishable.? Now it is not in- 
generable and imperishable, since part of it is said 
to be past and no longer in existence, and part to be 
future and not yet in existence. Neither is it gener- 
able and perishable. For things generated must be 148 
generated from something existent, and things which 


> Time “‘ came into existence” (γέγονεν), said Plato (Tim. 
388): “ No,’’ said Aristotle (et. xii. 6). In §§ 147-148 I 
render γενητός (“‘capable of coming into existence”’) by 
*““generable,”’ and γίνεται by “15 generated’’; but in 8 148, 
and elsewhere, I usually render γίνεται by “᾿ becomes,” 

γινόμενα by ‘‘ becoming,”’ ete. 
425 


149 


150 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


φθειρόμενα εἴς τι ὃν φθείρεσθαι κατὰ τὰς τῶν 
δογματικῶν αὐτῶν ὑποθέσεις. εἰ οὖν εἰς τὸν 
παρῳχημένον φθείρεται, εἰς οὐκ ὃν φθείρεται, καὶ 
εἰ ἐκ τοῦ μέλλοντος γίνεται, ἐξ οὐκ ὄντος γίνεται: 
οὐθέτερος γὰρ αὐτῶν ἔστιν. ἄτοπον δὲ τὸ λέγειν 
τι ἐξ οὐκ ὄντος γίνεσθαι ἢ ἢ εἰς τὸ μὴ ὃν φθείρεσθαι. 
οὐκ ἄρα γενητὸς καὶ φθαρτός ἐστιν ὃ χρόνος. εἰ 
δὲ μήτε ἀγένητος καὶ ἀἄφθαρτός € ἐστι μήτε γενητὸς 
καὶ φθαρτός, οὐδὲ ὅλως ἐ ἔστιν. 

Πρὸς τούτοις, ἐπεὶ πᾶν τὸ γινόμενον ἐν χρόνῳ 
γίγνεσθαι δοκεῖ, εἰ γίνεται. ὃ χρόνος, ἐν χρόνῳ 
γίνεται. ἤτοι οὖν αὐτὸς ἐν ἑαυτῷ γίνεται ἢ ἕτερος 
ἐν ἑτέρῳ. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν αὐτὸς ἐν ἑαυτῷ, τὸ αὐτὸ καὶ 
ἔσται καὶ οὐκ ἔσται. ἐπεὶ γὰρ τὸ ἐν ᾧ τι γίγνεται 
τοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ γιγνομένου ὀφείλει προὔπάρχειν, ὁ 
γιγνόμενος ἐν ἑαυτῷ χρόνος, ἡ μὲν γίνεται, οὐδέπω 
ἔστιν, Ff) de ἐν ἑαυτῷ γίνεται, ἤδη ἔστιν. ὥστε 
οὐδὲ γίνεται ἐν ἑαυτῷ. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἐν ἑτέρῳ ἕτερος. 
εἰ γὰρ ὁ ἐνεστὼς ἐν τῷ “μέλλοντι γίγνεται, μέλλων 
ἔσται ὁ ἐνεστώς, καὶ εἰ ἐν τῷ παρῳχηκότι, map 
φχηκώς. τὰ δὲ αὐτὰ λεκτέον καὶ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
χρόνων. ὥστε οὐδὲ ἕ ἕτερος χρόνος ἐν ἑτέρῳ γίνεται 
χρόνῳ. εἰ δὲ “μήτε αὐτὸς ἐν ἑαυτῷ γίνεται μήτε 
ἕτερος ἐν ἑτέρῳ, οὐδὲ “γενητός ἐστιν ὃ χρόνος. 
ἐδείκνυτο δὲ ὅτι οὐδὲ ἀγένητός ἐστιν. μήτε οὖν 
γενητὸς ὧν pare ἀγένητος οὐδ᾽ ὅλως ἔ ἔστιν" ἕκαστον 
γὰρ τῶν ὄντων ἤτοι γενητὸν ἢ ἀγένητον εἶναι 
προσήκει. 


1 ἢ wey... ῃ δὲ Heintz: εἰ μὲν. . . εἰ δὲ uss., Bekk. 


426 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 148-150 


perish must perish into something existent, according 
to the postulates of the Dogmatists themselves. If, 
then, time perishes into the past, it perishes into a 
non-existent ; and if it is generated out of the future, 
it is generated out of a non-existent ; for neither of 
these is in existence. But it is absurd to say that 
anything is generated from a non-existent or perishes 
into the non-existent. Therefore time is not gener- 
able and perishable. But if it is neither ingenerable 
and imperishable nor generable and perishable, it does 
not exist at all. 

Further, since everything which becomes seems to 149 
become in time, time, if it becomes, becomes in time. 
Either, then, it becomes itself in itself or as one time 
in another. But if it becomes in itself, it will be at 
once both existent and non-existent. For since that 
within which a thing becomes must exist before the 
thing which becomes within it, the time which becomes 
in itself does not yet exist in so far as it becomes, 
but does already exist in so far as it becomes in itself.® 
Consequently it does not become in itself. Nor yet 150 
in another. For if the present becomes in the future, 
the present will be future, and if in the past, it will 
be past. And the same may be said of all the other 
times ; so that one time does not become in another. 
But if time neither becomes in itself nor as one time 
in another it is not generable. And it has been shown 
that it is not ingenerable either. Being, then, neither 
generable nor ingenerable, it is wholly non-existent ; 
for each existing thing is bound to be either generable 
or ingenerable. 


@ e.g. Aristotle, Epicurus, Poseidonius ; ef. Luer. i. 151. 
> Of. § 133 supra. 


427 


151 


152 


153 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


K’,—ITEPI APIOMOYT 


Ἢ \ δὲ ξ 7 ὃ a \ 4 9 ~ 
πεὶ δὲ ὁ χρόνος δοκεῖ μὴ ἄνευ ἀριθμοῦ θεω- 
ρεῖσθαι, οὐκ ἂν εἴη ἄτοπον καὶ περὶ ἀριθμοῦ 
7 σι yd \ \ > \ ~ ,ὔ 
βραχέα διεξελθεῖν. ὅσον μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ τῇ συνηθείᾳ 
\ 3 ΄ 5 “A / \ 3 \ > / 
καὶ ἀδοξάστως ἀριθμεῖν τί φαμεν Kal ἀριθμὸν εἶναί 
3 la ~ / 
TL ἀκούομεν: ἡ δὲ τῶν δογματικῶν περιεργία καὶ 
A / ~ 
τὸν κατὰ τούτου κεκίνηκε λόγον. αὐτίκα γοῦν οἵ 
\ “- a ~ 
ἀπὸ τοῦ Πυθαγόρου καὶ στοιχεῖα τοῦ κόσμου τοὺς 
δ θ Ἀ S / \ ~ er \ , 
ἀριθμοὺς εἶναι λέγουσιν. φασὶ γοῦν ὅτι τὰ φαινό- 
μενα ἔκ τινος συνέστηκεν, ἅπλᾷ δὲ εἶναι δεῖ τὰ 
“- 2 \ ‘\ “ ~ 
στοιχεῖα: ἄδηλα dpa ἐστὶ τὰ στοιχεῖα. τῶν δὲ 
257) \ 9 ? “ξ εν» 1 \ 
ἀδήλων τὰ μέν ἐστι σώματα, ὡς al ἄτομοι Kal 
¢ Ψ ἃ \ 3 7 \ 9 
ot ὄγκοι, τὰ δὲ ἀσώματα, ὡς σχήματα Kal ἰδέαι 
A + / Ὁ Ἁ 3 
καὶ ἀριθμοί. ὧν τὰ μὲν σώματά ἐστι σύνθετα, 
~ , \ tA A 
συνεστῶτα ἔκ τε μήκους Kal πλάτους καὶ βάθους 
\ 3 \ 7 if 
καὶ ἀντιτυπίας ἢ Kat βάρους. οὐ μόνον ἄρα 
2 3 } Ν 3 ὔ f 3 ‘ “ 3 \ 
ἄδηλα ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀσώματά ἐστι τὰ στοιχεῖα. ἀλλὰ 
καὶ τῶν ἀσωμάτων ἕκαστον ἐπιθεωρούμενον ἔχει 
4 > 7 aX \ Ψ 3 av 7 aN / 3 
τὸν ἀριθμόν: ἢ γὰρ ἕν ἐστιν ἢ δύο ἢ πλείω. δι 
ὧν συνάγεται ὅτι τὰ στοιχεῖα τῶν ὄντων εἰσὶν οἱ 
\ ~ ? 
ἄδηλοι Kat ἀσώματοι καὶ πᾶσιν ἐπιθεωρούμενοι 
? / \ 3 € “~ 5 3 Ψ AY \ et 
ἀριθμοί. καὶ οὐχ ἁπλῶς, ἀλλ᾽ 4 τε μονὰς καὶ ἡ 
“ / / 5. 
κατὰ ἐπισύνθεσιν τῆς μονάδος γινομένη ἀόριστος 
Ἀ / ξ Ά / ’ 
δυάς, ἧς κατὰ μετουσίαν at κατὰ μέρος γίγνονται 
1 αἱ ἄτομοι Papp.: οἱ ἀτμοὶ mss., Bekk. 


α With this chapter cf. Adv. Phys. ii. 248-309. In 88 159-156 
the Pythagorean doctrine of numbers as the primary con- 
stituents, or ‘*‘ elements,”’ of the Universe is expounded; in 


428 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 151-153 


Cuaprer XX.—Concerning NuMBER 


Since time, it seems, is not found apart from 151 
number, it will not be out of place to discuss number 
briefly. In the customary way we speak undog- 
matically ὃ of numbering a thing and hear number 
talked of as something which exists; but the extreme 
methods of the Dogmatists have provoked the attack 
upon number also. Thus, for example, the School of 152 
Pythagoras declare that numbers are also elements 
of the Universe. They assert, in fact, that pheno- 
mena are constructed from something, and that the 
elements must be simple; therefore the elements 
are non-evident. But of things non-evident, some are 
corporeal, like atorms and masses, others incorporeal, 
like figures® and forms and numbers. Of these 
the corporeal are composite, being constructed from 
length and breadth and depth and solidity, or even 
weight. The elements, therefore, are not only non- 
evident but also incorporeal. Moreover, each of the 153 
incorporeals involves the perception of number, for 
it is either one or two or more. Thus it is inferred 
that the non-evident and incorporeal numbers which 
are involved in all perception are the elements of 
existing things. Yet not simply <these numbers, 
but both the Monad also and the Indefinite Dyad 
which is generated by the expansion of the Monad, 
and by participation in which the particular dyads 


§§ 156-157 the Pythagorean proof that numbers are distinct 
from things numbered (“‘ numerables”’) is set forth; in§§ 158 ff. 
the Sceptical arguments against the Pythagorean doctrine of 
the real existence of numbers (as distinct from ‘‘ numerables”’) 
are developed. 

ὃ ΟἹ 1. 15. 

° i.e. δ᾽ the limits of bodies ’’ of 8 32 supra, ef. § 153. 

429 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


154 δυάδες δυάδες. ἐκ τούτων γὰρ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους 
γίγνεσθαι ἀριθμούς, τοὺς ἐπιθεωρουμένους τοῖς 
ἀριθμητοῖς, καὶ τὸν κόσμον κατασκευάζεσθαι 
λέγουσιν. τὸ μὲν γὰρ σημεῖον τὸν τῆς μονάδος 
ἐπέχειν λόγον, τὴν δὲ γραμμὴν τὸν τῆς δυάδος 
(δύο. γὰρ σημείων μεταξὺ θεωρεῖσθαι ταύτην), τὴν 
δὲ ἐπιφάνειαν τὸν τῆς τριάδος (ῥύσιν γὰρ εἶναί 
φασι τῆς γραμμῆς εἰς πλάτος ἐπ᾽ ἄλλο σημεῖον ἐκ 
πλαγίου κείμενον), τὸ δὲ σῶμα τὸν τῆς τετράδος' 
ἐπανάστασιν γὰρ γίγνεσθαι τῆς ἐπιφανείας ἐπί τι 

155 σημεῖον ὑπερκείμενον. καὶ οὕτω τά τε σώματα 
καὶ ὅλον τὸν κόσμον ἀνειδωλοποιοῦσιν, ὃ ὅντινα καὶ 
διοικεῖσθαί φασι κατὰ ἁρμονικοὺς λόγους, τόν τε 
διὰ τεσσάρων, ὅς ἐστιν ἐπίτριτος, ὡς ἔχει πρὸς τὰ 
ἐξ τὰ ὀκτώ, καὶ τὸν διὰ πέντε, ὅς ἐστιν ἡμιόλιος, 
ὡς ἔχει πρὸς τὰ ἐξ τὰ “ἐννέα, καὶ τὸν διὰ πασῶν, 
ὅς ἐστι διπλάσιος, ὡς ἔχει πρὸς τὰ ἐξ τὰ δώδεκα. 

156 Ταῦτά τε οὖν ὀνειροπολοῦσιν, καὶ ὅτι ἕτερόν τι 
ἐστὶν ὃ ἀριθμὸς παρὰ τὰ ἀριθμητὰ κατασκευάζουσι, 
λέγοντες ὅτι εἰ τὸ ζῶον κατὰ τὸν ἑαυτοῦ λόγον 
ἐστίν, εἰ τύχοι, ἕν, τὸ φυτόν, ἐπεὶ μή ἐστι ζῶον, 
οὐκ ἔσται ἕν - ἔστι δὲ καὶ <70 >” φυτὸν ἕν" οὐκ ἄρα 
τὸ ζῶον, «καθὸ ζῶον», & ἐστιν, ἀλλὰ κατά τι 
ἕτερον ἐπιθεωρούμενον ἔξωθεν αὐτῷ, οὗ μετέχει 

1 «τὸν add. Riistow. 


2 «καθὸ ζῶον», addidi: καθὸ ξῶόν ἐστιν, ἕν cj. Bekk.: «ὡς 
ζῷον», Mutsch. 





¢ The existence of the “ δἱουαθηΐαὶ ᾿᾿ numbers is said to be 
due to “ participation”’ in either the principle of “ Unity” 
(‘‘the Monad’’) or the principle of Duality (‘the indefinite 
Dyad*’)—odd numbers i in the first, even inthe second. These 
principles are the “ genera”’ of which odd and even numbers 
are “* particulars.” 
4:30 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 154-156 


become dyads.* For they say that it is from these 154 
that the rest of the numbers are generated—those, 
that is, which are involved in the perception of 
numerables—and the Universe is arranged. For the 
point presents the relation, or character, of the 
Monad,® and the line that of the Dyad (it being 
regarded as lying between two points), and the 
surface that of the Triad (for they describe it as a 
flowing of the line breadth-wise up to another point 
placed transversely), and the <solid> body that of the 
Tetrad ; for Body is formed by an ascension of the 
surface up to a point placed above. It is in this way 155 
that they image forth both the bodies and the whole 
Universe, which also they declare to be arranged 
according to harmonic ratios °—namely, that of the 

‘ By-Fours,” which is “ epitrite,”’ as is the ratio of 

8 to 6; and that of the “ By-Fives,” which is one 
and a half times, as is the ratio of 9 to 6; and that 

of the “ By-Alls,”’ which is double, as is the ratio of 

12 to 6. 

These are the fictions they imagine; and they 156 
also make out that number is something else apart 
from numerables, arguing that if “‘ animal” according 
to its proper definition is (say) one, the plant, since 
it is not an animal, will not be one; but the plant is 
one ; therefore the animal is not one <qua animal> but 
in virtue of some other attribute perceived outside 
itself, whereof each animal partakes and because 


δ de, it is an indivisible unit, and begins the line as the 
One begins the number-series ; ef. Adv. Phys. ii, 278. 
¢ The terms here used are those of the Pythagorean musical 
(““octave’’) system, and denote the ratios 4:3, 3:2, 2:1. 
Cf. Plato, Tim. 36 a; Adv. -trithm. 6-9, Adv. Mus. 46. 
; ὦ Or“ in its own essence,” apart from relation to anything 
else. 


43] 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἕκαστον καὶ γίνεται δι’ αὐτὸ ἕν. καὶ εἰ τὰ ἀριθ- 
μητά ἐστιν ὁ ἀριθμός, ἐπειδὴ ἄνθρωποί εἰσιν οἵἱ 
ἀριθμητοὶ καὶ βόες, εἰ τύχοι, καὶ ἵπποι, ἄνθρωποι 
καὶ βόες καὶ ἵπποι ἔσται 6 ἀριθμός, καὶ λευκὸς 
[ἀριθμὸς καὶ μέλας καὶ γενειήτης, εἰ τύχοιεν 

157 τοιοῦτοι τυγχάνοντες οἱ μετρούμενοι. ταῦτα δέ 
ἐστιν ἄτοπα" οὐκ ἄρα τὰ ἀριθμητά ἐ ἐστιν ὁ ἀριθμός, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἰδίαν ὑπόστασιν ἔχει παρὰ ταῦτα, καθ᾽ ἣν 
καὶ ἐπιθεωρεῖται τοῖς ἀριθμητοῖς καὶ ἔστι στοι- 
χεῖον. 

Οὕτως οὖν ἐκείνων συναγαγόντων ὅτι ἀριθμὸς 
οὐκ ἔστι τὰ ἀριθμητά, παρεισῆλθεν ἢ κατὰ τοῦ 
ἀριθμοῦ ἀ ἀπορία. λέγεται γὰρ ὅτι εἰ ἔστιν ἀριθμός, 
ἦτοι αὐτὰ τὰ ἀριθμητά ἐστιν 6 ᾿ἀριθμὸς ἢ ἕτερόν 
τι παρὰ ταῦτα ἔξωθεν" οὔτε δὲ αὐτὰ τὰ ἀριθμητά 
ἐστιν 3 ἀριθμός, ὦ ὡς ἀπέδειξαν ot [Πυϑαγορικοί, 
οὔτε ἕτερόν τι παρὰ ταῦτα, ὡς ὑπομνήσομεν" 
οὐδὲν ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ἀριθμός. 

158 “Ore δὲ οὐδὲν ἔξωθέν ἐστι παρὰ τὰ ἀριθμητὰ 6 
ἀριθμός, παραστήσομεν ἐπὶ τῆς μονάδος τὸν λόγον 
στήσαντες εὐσήμου διδασκαλίας ἕνεκεν. εἰ γὰρ 
ἔστι τι καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν ἡ μονάς, ἧς μετέχον ἕκαστον 
τῶν μετεχόντων αὐτῆς γίνεται ἕν, ἤτοι μία ἔσται 
αὕτη ἡ μονὰς ἢ τοσαῦται ὅσα τὰ μετέχοντα αὐτῆς 
ἐστίν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν. μία ἐστίν, πότερον ὅλης αὐτῆς 
μετέχει ἕκαστον τῶν μετέχειν αὐτῆς λεγομένων ἢ 
μέρους αὐτῆς; εἰ μὲν γὰρ πᾶσαν ἔχει τὴν μονάδα, 
εἰ τύχοι, ὁ εἷς ἄνθρωπος, οὐκέτι ἔσται μονὰς ἧς 
μεθέξει ὁ εἷς ἵππος ἢ ὁ εἷς κύων ἢ τῶν ἄλλων 

159 ἕκαστον ὃ λέγομεν εἶναι ἕν, ὥσπερ καὶ πολλῶν 


1 [ἀριθμὸς] om. M (? ἄνθρωπο»). 
432 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, IIT. 156-159 


of which it: becomes one. And if number is the 
numerables, since the numerables are men (say) and 
oxen and horses, number will be men and oxen and 
horses—and number will be white and black and 
bearded, if the objects counted should happen to be 
such. But these things are absurd ; therefore number 157 
is not the numerables, but it has a reality of its own 
apart from them whereby it is involved in the percep- 
tion of the numerables and is an element. 

So when they had thus concluded that number is 
not the numerables, there arose in consequence the 
dificulty about number. For it is argued that if 
number exists, number is either the actual numerables 
or something else apart from them; but number is 
neither the actual numerables, as the Pythagoreans 
have proved, nor something else apart from them, 
as we shall show ; number, therefore, is nothing. 

That number is nothing apart from the numerables 158 
we shall demonstrate by basing our argument on the 
Monad, for the sake of lucidity of exposition. Ifthe 
Monad, by partaking in which each of its participants 
becomes one, is in itself a real object, this Monad 
will be either one or as many as are its participants. 
But if it is one, does each of the things said to partake 
thereof partake of all of it or of a part of it? For 
if the one man (say) takes all the Monad, there will 
no longer exist a monad for the one horse to partake 
of, or the one dog or any one of all the other things 
which we declare to be one—just as, supposing there 159 


@ The argument here is that “‘ participation’ of things in 
the Monad involves either (1) the division of the Monad into 
an infinite number of parts (§§ 158-159), or (2) the multiplica- 
tion of the Monad into an infinite number of whole Monads 
(§§ 160-162), both which results violate the conception of the 
Monad as unique principle of Unity. 


VOL. I QF 488 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


¢ [4 ~ > / €) Vs \ δ 
ὑποτεθέντων γυμνῶν ἀνθρώπων, ἑνὸς δὲ ὀντος 
“-- > 
ἱματίου καὶ τοῦτο ἑνὸς ἀμφιασαμένου, γυμνοὶ 
΄-΄- Ἵ \ / 
μενοῦσιν" of λοιποὶ καὶ χωρὶς ἱματίου. εἰ δὲ μέρους 
“- “ / 
αὐτῆς μετέχει ἕκαστον, πρῶτον μὲν ἕξει τι μέρος ἡ 
‘ / / v4 ? \ ~ 
μονάς, καὶ ἄπειρά ye ἕξει μέρη, εἰς ἃ διαιρεῦται" 
~ 7} ee 
ὅπερ ἄτοπον. εἶτα ws τὸ μέρος THs δεκάδος, οἷον 
ἃ »"ΝἬ 
ἡ δυάς, οὐκ ἔστι δεκάς, οὕτως οὐδὲ τὸ μέρος τῆς 
᾽ 37 Ὡ \ \ ~~ OA / 
μονάδος ἔσται μονάς, διὰ δὲ τοῦτο οὐδὲ μεθέξει 
“- 7 “ὌΝ 
τι τῆς μονάδος. ὥστε οὐκ ἔστι μία ἢ μονὰς ἧς 
μετέχειν λέγεται τὰ κατὰ μέρος. 


160 Εἰ δὲ ἰσάριθμοι τοῖς ἀριθμητοῖς, ἐφ᾽ ὧν λέγεται 
\ \ 


161 


τὸ ἕν, at μονάδες εἰσὶν ὧν κατὰ μετοχὴν ἕκαστον 
τῶν κατὰ μέρος λέγεται ἕν, ἄπειροι ἔσονται αἱ 
μετεχόμεναι μονάδες. καὶ αὗται ἤτοι μετέχουσιν 
ἐπαναβεβηκυίας μονάδος ἢ μονάδων ἰσαρίθμων 
αὐταῖς, καὶ διὰ τοῦτό εἰσι μονάδες, ἢ οὐ μετ- 
έχουσιν ἀλλὰ χωρίς τινος μετοχῆς μονάδες εἰσίν. 
εἰ μὲν οὖν χωρὶς μετοχῆς μονάδες εἶναι δύνανται 
αὗται, δυνήσεται καὶ τῶν αἰσθητῶν ἕκαστον 
χωρὶς μονάδος μετοχῆς ἕν εἶναι, καὶ αὐτόθεν 
περυτρέπεται ἡ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν θεωρεῖσθαι λεγομένη 
μονάς. εἰ δὲ ἀπὸ μετοχῆς κἀκεῖναι μονάδες εἰσίν, 
ἦτοι μιᾶς μετέχουσι πᾶσαι ἢ μία ἑκάστη ἰδίας. 
καὶ εἰ μὲν πᾶσαι μιᾶς, ἤτοι κατὰ μέρος ἑκάστη 7 
ὅλης λεχθήσεται μετέχειν, καὶ μένουσιν αἱ ἀρχῆθεν 


> / > \ Fins \ > / »“- 
162 ἀτοπίαι: εἰ δὲ εΚαστη ἰδίας, καὶ EKEWWY τῶν 


¢ ¢ 7 ᾽ > ~ a 4 
μονάδων ἑκάστῃ μονάδα ἐπιθεωρεῖσθαι δεῖ, Kat 
“ > 
ταῖς ἐπιθεωρουμέναις ἐκείναις ἄλλας, καὶ μέχρις 
9 > ow 
ἀπείρου. εἰ οὖν ἵνα καταλάβωμεν ὅτι εἰσί τινες 


1 μενοῦσιν Mutsch.: μένουσιν mss., Bekk. 
2 + γῇ fad Mi ‘J 
οὗν cj. Bekk.: yap vss. 


43 4 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 159-162 


are a number of naked men, who possess only one 
garment amongst them, which one man had put on, 
all the rest will remain naked and without a garment. 
And if each thing partakes of a part of it, then, in 
the first place, the Monad will have a part, and parts, 
too, infinite in number into which it is divided ; which 
isabsurd. And further, just as the part of the Decad, 
such as the Dyad, is not a Decad, so neither will the 
part of the Monad be a Monad, and for this reason 
nothing will partake of the Monad. Hence the Monad 
whereof the particular objects are said to partake is 
not one. 
But if the monads, by participation in which each 160 
of the particular objects is called one, are equal 
in number to the numerables to which the term 
“one” is applied, the monads partaken of will be 
infinite in number. And these either partake of a 
superior ὦ monad or of monads equal in number to 
themselves, or else they do not so partake but are 
monads apart from any participation.. Yet if these 161 
can be monads without participation, each of the 
sensibles also will be able to be one without participa- 
tion in a monad, and so at once the monad said to be 
perceived as real in itself is overthrown. Whereas, if 
those monads are monads by participation, either they 
all partake of one monad, or each partakes of a monad 
of its own. And if all partake of one, each will be 
said to partake either of a part or of the whole, and 
the original difficulties will still remain ; but if each 162 
partakes of its own monad, we must posit a new 
_monad for each of those monads, and others again 
for the former, and so on ad infinitum. If then, in 
order to apprehend that there are certain self-sub- 


α de.“ Unity” as a summum genus, cf. i. 38. 
435 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰς μονάδες, ὧν κατὰ μετοχὴν ἕκαστον 
τῶν ὄντων ἐστὶν ἕν, δεῖ κατειληφέναι ἀπειράκις 
ἀπείρους νοητὰς μονάδας, ἀδύνατον δὲ καταλαβεῖν 
ἀπειράκις ἀπείρους μονάδας νοητάς, ἀδύνατον ἄρα 
ἐστὶν ἀποφήνασθαι ὅτι εἰσί τινες νοηταὶ μονάδες 
\ Lyd “~ 3, 

καὶ ἕκαστον τῶν ὄντων ἐστὶν ἕν κατὰ μετοχὴν 
ἰδίας μονάδος γινόμενον ἕν. 

163 ᾿Ατοπον ἄρα τὸ λέγειν ὅτι τοσαῦταί εἰσιν αἱ 
μονάδες ὅσα τὰ μετέχοντα αὐτῶν. εἰ δὲ μήτε μία 
ἐστὶν ἡ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν λεγομένη μονὰς μήτε τοσαῦται 
ὅσα τὰ μετέχοντα αὐτῆς ἐστίν, οὐδὲ ἔστιν ὅλως 
μονὰς καθ᾽ ἑαυτήν. ὁμοίως δὲ οὐδὲ τῶν ἄλλων 
ἀριθμῶν ἕκαστος καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν ἔσται" χρῆσθαι γὰρ 
ἔνεστιν ἐπὶ πάντων τῶν ἀριθμῶν τῷ λόγῳ, παρα- 
δειγματικῶς νῦν ἐπὶ τῆς μονάδος ἡρωτημένῳ. 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μήτε καθ᾽ ἑαυτόν ἐστιν ὁ ἀριθμός, ὡς 
ὑπεμνήσαμεν, μήτε αὐτὰ τὰ ἀριθμητὰ 6 ἀριθμός 
ἐστιν, ὡς ot ἀπὸ Πυθαγόρου παρέστησαν, παρὰ δὲ 
ταῦτα οὐδὲν ἔστι, λεκτέον μηδὲ εἶναι ἀριθμόν. 

164 [Πῶς δὲ καὶ γίνεσθαί φασιν ἐκ τῆς μονάδος τὴν 
δυάδα ot ἐξωθέν τι δοκοῦντες εἶναι τὸν ἀριθμὸν 
παρὰ τὰ ἀριθμητά; ὅτε γὰρ συντίθεμεν μονάδα 
ἑτέρᾳ μονάδι, ἤτοι προστίθεταί τι ταῖς μονάσιν 
ἔξωθεν, ἢ ἀφαιρεῖταί τι ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν, 7 οὔτε προσ- 
τίθεταί τι οὔτε ἀφαιρεῖται. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν οὔτε προσ- 
τίθεταί τι οὔτε ἀφαιρεῖται, οὐκ ἔσται δυάς. οὔτε 
γὰρ χωρὶς ἀλλήλων οὖσαι at μονάδες εἶχον τὴν 
δυάδα! ἐπιθεωρουμένην αὐταῖς κατὰ τὸν ἴδιον 
αὐτῶν λόγον, οὔτε νῦν τι αὐταῖς ἔξωθεν προσ-͵ 
γέγονεν, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ἀφήρηται, κατὰ τὴν ὑπόθεσιν. 


1 δυάδα Kayser, Papp.: μονάδα mss., Bekk. 
436 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 162-164 


sistent monads by participation in which each existing 
thing is one, it is necessary to apprehend an infinite 
infinity of intelligible monads, and to apprehend an 
infinite infinity of intelligible monads is a thing im- 
possible, then it is impossible to show that there are 
certain intelligible monads and that each existing 
thing is one through becoming one by participation 
in its own monad. 

It is absurd, therefore, to say that the monads are 163 
as numerous as the things which partake of them. 
But if the so-called self-subsistent monad is neither 
one nor as many as its participants, a self-subsistent 
monad does not exist at all. So likewise none of the 
other numbers will.be self-subsistent ; for one may 
apply to all the numbers the argument which has 
now been employed in the typical case of the monad. 
But if number is neither self-subsistent, as we have 
shown, nor consists in the actual numerables, as the 
Pythagoreans have demonstrated, and beyond these 
there is no other alternative, then we must declare 
that number does not exist. 

In what way, too, is the Dyad said to be generated 164 
from the Monad by those who believe that number 
is something else apart from the numerables? For 
when we combine a monad with another monad either 
something external is added to the monads, or some- 
thing is subtracted from them, or nothing is either 
added or subtracted. But if nothing is either added 
or subtracted, there will not be a Dyad. For neither 
did the monads, when existing apart from each other, 
contain the Dyad as involved in the perception of 
them, according to their own definition, nor has 
any addition now been made to them from without, 
just as, by hypothesis, nothing has been subtracted. 


487 


165 


166 


167 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ὥστε οὐκ ἔσται δυὰς ἡ σύνθεσις τῆς μονάδος πρὸς 
τὴν μονάδα, μήτε ἀφαιρέσεως μήτε προσθέσεως 
ἔξωθέν τινος γινομένης. εἰ δὲ ἀφαίρεσις γίνεται, 
οὐ μόνον οὐκ ἔσται δυάς, ἀλλὰ καὶ μειωθήσονται 
at μονάδες. εἰ δὲ προστίθεται αὐταῖς ἔξωθεν ἡ 
δυάς, ἵνα ἐκ τῶν μονάδων γένηται δυάς, τὰ δύο 
δοκοῦντα εἶναι τέσσαρα ἔσται: ὑπόκειται γὰρ μονὰς 
καὶ ἑτέρα μονάς, αἷς προστιθεμένης ἔξωθεν δυάδος 
ὃ τέσσαρα ἀριθμὸς ἀποτελοῖτο ἄν. ὃ δὲ αὐτὸς 
λόγος καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀριθμῶν τῶν κατὰ σύν- 
θεσιν ἀποτελεῖσθαι λεγομένων. 

Ki οὖν μήτε κατὰ ἀφαίρεσιν μήτε κατὰ πρόσ- 
θεσιν μήτε ἄνευ ἀφαιρέσεως καὶ προσθέσεως yiy- 
vovrat οἱ σύνθετοι λεγόμενοι εἶναι ἀριθμοὶ ἐκ τῶν 
ἐπαναβεβηκότων, ἀσύστατός ἐστιν ἡ γένεσις τοῦ 
κατ᾽ ἰδίαν καὶ παρὰ τὰ ἀριθμητὰ εἶναι λεγομένου 
ἀριθμοῦ. ὅτι δὲ οὐδὲ ἀγένητοι τυγχάνουσιν ὄντες 
οἱ κατὰ σύνθεσιν ἀριθμοί, δηλοῦσιν αὐτοὶ συν- 
τίθεσθαί τε αὐτοὺς καὶ “γίγνεσθαι φάσκοντες ἐκ 
τῶν ἐπαναβεβηκότων, οἷον τῆς τε μονάδος καὶ 
δυάδος τῆς ἀορίστου. οὐκοῦν οὐχ ὑφέστηκε κατ᾽ 
ἰδίαν 6 ἀριθμός. εἰ δὲ μήτε κατ᾽ ἰδίαν ὁ ἀριθμὸς 
θεωρεῖται μήτε ἐν τοῖς ἀριθμητοῖς ἔχει τὴν ὑπό- 
στασιν, οὐδὲ ἔστι τι 6 ἀριθμὸς ὅσον ἐπὶ ταῖς 
περιεργίαις ταῖς ὑπὸ τῶν δογματικῶν εἰσενήνεγ - 
μέναις. 

Τοσαῦτα μὲν καὶ περὶ τοῦ φυσικοῦ καλουμένου 
τῆς φιλοσοφίας μέρους ἀρκοῦντα ὡς ἐν ὑποτυπώσει 


λελέχθω. 


438 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 165-167 


Hence the combination of the monad with the monad 165 
will not be a dyad, as no addition or subtraction 
from without takes place. But if subtraction does 
take place, not only will there not be a dyad but the 
monads will even be diminished. And if the dyad is 
added to them from without, so that a dyad may be 
generated from the monads, the things which appear 

to be two will be four; for there exists already a 
monad and a second monad, and when an outside 
dyad is added to these the result will be the number 
four. And the same argument applies to all the 166 
other numbers which are said to be formed as a 
result of combination. 

If, then, the numbers which are said to be com- 
pounded from the superior? numbers are formed 
neither by subtraction nor by addition nor without 
subtraction and addition, the formation of the number 
which is said to be independent and apart from the 
numerables is non-composite. But they themselves 
make it clear that the numbers formed by combination 
are not ungenerated by asserting that they are com- 
pounded and generated from the superior numbers 
—from the monad, for example, and the Indefinite 
Dyad.2 So then number does not subsist of itself. 167 
But if number neither is conceived as self-existent, 
nor subsists in the numerables, then, to judge from 
the subtleties introduced by the Dogmatists, number 
is nothing. 

Let this, then, suffice as an account in outline of 
what is called the Physical section of philosophy. 


@ Cf. § 160 supra. > Cf. § 153 supra, 


4:39 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


KA’.—UEPI ΤΟΥ HOIKOYT MEPOTS ΤῊΣ ΦΙΛΟΣΟΦΊΑΣ 


168 Λείπεται δὲ τὸ ἠθικόν, ὅπερ δοκεῖ περὶ τὴν 
διάκρισιν τῶν τε καλῶν καὶ κακῶν καὶ ἀδιαφόρων 
καταγίγνεσθαι. ἵνα οὖν κεφαλαιωδῶς καὶ περὶ 
τούτου διαλάβωμεν, περὶ τῆς ὑπάρξεως τῶν τε 
ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν καὶ ἀδιαφόρων ζητήσομεν, τὴν 
ἔννοιαν ἑκάστου προεκθέμενοι. 


KB’.—IIEP] ΑΤΑΘΩΝ ΚΑῚ KAKON KAI AAIASOPQN 


> 
169 Φασὶν οὖν οἵ στωικοὶ ἀγαθὸν εἶναι ὠφέλειαν ἣ 
b] a 9 ’ὔ 3 / Α 7 Ἁ 
οὐχ ἕτερον ὠφελείας, ὠφέλειαν μὲν λέγοντες τὴν 
ἀρετὴν καὶ τὴν σπουδαίαν πρᾶξιν, οὐχ ἕτερον δὲ 
> 7 \ “ + \ \ / 
ὠφελείας τὸν σπουδαῖον ἄνθρωπον καὶ τὸν φίλον. 
3 ἴω 
ἡ μὲν γὰρ ἀρετή πως ἔχον ἡγεμονικὸν καθεστηκυῖα 
καὶ ἡ οπουδαία πρᾶξις ἐνέργειά τις οὖσα κατ᾽ 
3 Ἁ 4 / ? 2 / € \ “ 
apeTnvy ἀντικρύς ἐστιν ὠφέλεια, 6 δὲ σπουδαῖος 
δ \ « / > 4 > 4 / 
170 ἄνθρωπος καὶ 6 φίλος οὐχ ἕτερος ὠφελείας. μέρος 
μὲν γὰρ τοῦ σπουδαίου ἐστὶν ὠφέλεια, τὸ ἡγεμονι- 

A “~ a“ 
κὸν αὐτοῦ ὑπάρχουσα: τὰ δὲ ὅλα οὔτε τὰ αὐτὰ τοῖς 
μέρεσιν εἶναι λέγουσιν, οὐ γάρ ἐστιν ὃ ἄνθρωπος 

, ~ 
χείρ, οὔτε ἕτερα παρὰ τὰ μέρη, οὐκ ἄνευ yap τῶν 
μερῶν ὑφέστηκεν. διόπερ οὐχ ἕτερα τῶν μερῶν 

Ν Ψ f oe \ “ Ψ a4 
τὰ ὅλα λέγουσιν. ὅθεν τὸν σπουδαῖον ὅλον ὄντα 
ὡς πρὸς τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν ἑαυτοῦ, ὅπερ ἔφασαν ὠφέ- 

ς, 
λείαν, οὐχ ἕτερον ὠφελείας εἶναι λέγουσιν. 

® Lit. “ fair’? (honestum): the Stoies used καλόν as a 
synonym for ἀγαθόν “ good ” (honum), and jn this section the 
terms are used as synonymous. 

δ Or “regent part,” i.e, the mind, cf. i. 128, ii. 81; Introd. 
p. xxv. The doctrine that “the good man” is ‘ not other” 
than goodness (virtue or “ utility ’’) strikes one as curious. 
The Stoics, we must remember, regarded attributes or 


qualities as corporeal and parts of the “ substance” (οὐσία) 
440 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 168-170 


Cuapter XXI.—ConcerRNING THE ETHICAL 
Division or Purtosopry 


There remains the Ethical division, which is sup~ 168 
posed to deal with the distinguishing of things 
good,* bad, and indifferent. In order, then, to treat 
of this branch also in a summary way, we shall inquire 
into the reality of things good, bad, and indifferent, 
explaining first the conception of each. 


Cuaprer XXII.—Concernine Tuines Goon, Bap, 
AND INDIFFERENT 


The Stoics, then, assert that good is “‘ utility or not 169 
other than utility,” meaning by “ utility ” virtue and 
right action, and by “not other than utility” the 
good man and the friend. For “ virtue,’’ as consist- 
ing in a certain state of the ruling principle,’ and 
“ right action,” being an activity in accordance with 
virtue, are exactly “ utility’; while the good man 
and the friend are “not other than utility.” For 170 
utility is a part of the good man, being his ruling 
principle. But the wholes, they say, are not the 
same as the parts (for the man is not a hand), nor are 
they other than the parts (for without the parts they 
do not subsist). Wherefore they assert that the 
wholes are not other than the parts. Hence, since 
the good man stands in the relation of a whole to his 
ruling principle, which they have identified with 
utility, they declare that he is not other than utility. 


to which they belong—here the mind (“regent part’’) of 
“the good man.’ For the equation of “virtue” (or 
“ goodness ᾽) with “utility ᾿ (or “ benefit’’) as ‘‘ the source 
(or agency) from which benefit results”? see Diog. Laert. 
vii. 94. For Stoic Ethics ef. Introd. pp. xxvi ff. 

4.41] 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


»- ΄κ-- 4 3 7 
171 Ἐντεῦθεν καὶ τριχῶς τὸ ἀγαθόν φασι λέγεσθαι. 
> 
καθ᾽ ἕνα μὲν yap τρόπον φασὶν εἶναι ἀγαθὸν τὸ 
@ 473 Ὄ Κ 3 “a Δ \ 3 / , 3 
ὑφ᾽ οὗ ἔστιν ὠφελεῖσθαι, ὃ δὴ ἀρχικώτατόν ἐστι 
\ 3 7 33 ὦ \ > ἃ 7 3 
καὶ ἀρετή, καθ᾽ ἕτερον δὲ καθ᾽ 6 συμβαΐνει ὧφε- 
-“ φ \ 
λεῖσθαι, ὡς ἡ ἀρετὴ καὶ at κατ᾽ ἀρετὴν πράξεις, 
7 e “~ o~ 
κατὰ τρίτον δὲ τρόπον τὸ οἷόν τε ὠφελεῖν, τοῦτο 
* \ ~ 
δὲ Kal ἀρετὴν εἶναι Kal κατὰ ἀρετὴν πρᾶξιν καὶ 
“- f 
τὸν σπουδαῖον καὶ τὸν φίλον θεούς τε Kal σπου- 
7 Α \ 
δαίους δαίμονας, ws τὸ μὲν δεύτερον σημαινόμενον 
τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ἐμπεριληπτικὸν εἶναι τοῦ πρώτου ση- 
Ἁ f “Ὁ / ~ 
μαινομένου, TO δὲ τρίτον τοῦ δευτέρου καὶ τοῦ 
7 Ἁ , > \ > t > ¢ \ 
172 πρώτου. τινὲς δέ φασιν ἀγαθὸν εἶναι τὸ δι᾿ ἑαυτὸ 
¢ / LAA δὲ \ NA / 1 \ 2 
αἱρετόν, ἄλλοι δὲ τὸ συλλαμβανόμενον, πρὸς εὐ- 
\ 
δαιμονίαν ἢ τὸ συμπληρωτικόν: εὐδαιμονία δέ 
, 
ἐστιν, ὡς οἱ στωικοί φασιν, εὔροια βίου. 
~ / > \ 4 ~ A 
Τοιαῦτα μέν twa εἰς τὴν ἔννοιαν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ 
λ / ” ὃ x A 3 r ~ ow \ ὃ 3 ¢ \ 
173 λέγεται. εἴτε δὲ TO ὠφελοῦν εἴτε τὸ δι’ ἑαυτὸ 
αἱρετὸν εἴτε τὸ συνεργοῦν πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν ἀγαθόν 
\ 7, 3 
τις εἶναι λέγοι, οὐχὶ τί ἐστι TO ἀγαθὸν παρίστησιν, 
κ΄ ᾽ὔ > A 
ἀλλά τι τῶν συμβεβηκότων αὐτῷ λέγει. ὅπερ ἐστὶ 
’ “ ΄᾿ / 
μάταιον. ἤτοι yap μόνῳ τῷ ἀγαθῷ συμβέβηκε τὰ 
A ¢ > > 3 \ 
προειρημένα ἢ καὶ ἑτέροις. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν καὶ ἑτέροις, 
οὐκ ἔστι χαρακτηριστικὰ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ κοινοποιού- 
[ων > ~ ~ 
μενα, εἰ δὲ μόνῳ τῷ ἀγαθῷ, οὐκ ἐνδέχεται ἡμᾶς 
174 ἀπὸ τούτων νοεῖν τὸ ἀγαθόν: ὡς γὰρ ὁ ἀνεννόητος 
é ’ 
ἵππου οὔτε τὸ χρεμετίζειν τί ἐστιν oldev, οὔτε διὰ 
τούτου δύναται εἰς ἔννοιαν ἐλθεῖν ἵππου, εἰ μὴ 


1 συλλαμβανόμενον οἷ). Bekk.: συλλαμβάνον Mss. 





α ὁ 6. “ primary, fundamental, good ’’—the source of other 
goods. Good in the first sense is the central good, which 


442 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 171-174 


Hence also they assert that good has three mean- 171 
ings. In ome of its meanings, good, they say, is that 
by which utility may be gained, this being the most 
principal good ¢ and virtue; in another meaning, good 
is that of which utility is an accidental result, like 
virtue and virtuous actions; and thirdly, it is that 
which is capable of being useful; and such is virtue 
and virtuous action and the good man and the friend, 
and gods and good daemons; so that the second signi- 
fication of good is inclusive of the first signification, 
and the third of both the second and the first. But 172 
some define good as “what is to be chosen for its 
own sake’”’®; and others as “ that which contributes 
to happiness or. is supplementary thereto’; and 
happiness, as the Stoics declare, is “‘ the smooth 
current of life.”’ 

These, or such as these, are their statements with 
reference to the notion of the Good. But in describ- 118 
ing as good what is useful or what is choiceworthy 
for its own sake or what is contributory to happiness, 
one is not exhibiting the essence of the good but 
stating one of its properties. And this is senseless. 
For the properties aforesaid belong either to the good 
only or to other things as well. But if they belong to 
other things as well, they are not, when thus extended, 
characteristic marks of the good ; while if they belong 
only to the Good, it is not possible for us to derive 
from them a notion of the good. For just as the man 174 
who has no notion of “ horse” has no knowledge of 
what “‘ neighing ”’ is and cannot arrive thereby at a 
notion of “‘ horse,’ unless he should first meet with a 


expands into the second and third senses as into concentric 
circles—the third including the second, the second the first. 
® Of. Aristot. Rhet. i. 6; the other definition is Stoic. 


448 


176 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


πρότερον ἵππῳ χρεμετίζοντι ἐντύχοι, οὕτως ὁ διὰ 
τὸ μὴ εἰδέναι τὸ ἀγαθὸν ζητῶν τί ἐότιν ἀγαθόν, 
οὐ δύναται γινώσκειν τὸ ἰδίως αὐτῷ καὶ μόνῳ 
ὑπάρχον, ἵνα δι’ αὐτοῦ τὸ ἀγαθὸν αὐτὸ νοῆσαι 
δυνηθῇ. πρότερον γὰρ δεῖ μαθεῖν τὴν αὐτοῦ τοῦ 
ἀγαθοῦ φύσιν, εἶθ᾽ οὕτω συνεῖναι ὅτι ὠφελεῖ καὶ ὅτι 
δι᾿ αὑτὸ αἱρετόν ἐστι καὶ ὅτι εὐδαιμονίας ποιητικόν. 
ὅτι δὲ τὰ προειρημένα συμβεβηκότα οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἱκανὰ μηνῦσαι τὴν ἐπίνοιαν καὶ τὴν φύσιν τοῦ 
ἀγαθοῦ, δηλοῦσιν ἔργῳ ot δογματικοί. ὡς μὲν 
γὰρ ὠφελεῖ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ‘Kal ὅτι αἱρετόν ἐστι, παρὸ 
καὶ ἀγαθὸν εἴρηται τὸ οἱονεὶ ἀγαστόν, καὶ ὅτι 
εὐδαιμονίας ἐστὶ ποιητικόν, πάντες ἴσως συγ- 
χωροῦσιν" ἐρωτώμενοι δὲ τί ἐστιν ᾧ ταῦτα συμ- 
βέβηκεν, εἰς ἄσπειστον ἐμπίπτουσι -πόλεμον, οἵ 
μὲν ἀρετὴν λέγοντες, ot δὲ ἡδονήν, οἱ δὲ ἀλυπίαν, 
οἱ δὲ ἄλλο τι. καΐτοι εἰ ἐκ τῶν προειρημένων 
ὅρων ἐδείκνυτο τί ἐστι τὸ ἀγαθὸν αὐτό, οὐκ ἂν 
ἐστασίαζον ὡς ἀγνοουμένης τῆς τούτου duoecus. 

Οὕτω μὲν οὖν διαφέρονται περὶ τῆς ἐννοίας τοῦ 
ἀγαθοῦ οἵ δοκιμώτατοι δοκοῦντες εἶναι τῶν δογ- 
ματικῶν" ὁμοίως δὲ διηνέχθησαν καὶ περὶ τοῦ 
κακοῦ, λέγοντες κακὸν εἶναι βλάβην 1 q οὐχ ἕτερον 
βλάβης, of δὲ τὸ δι’ ἑαυτὸ φευκτόν, οἱ δὲ τὸ 
κακοδαιμονίας ποιητικόν. δι’ ὧν οὐχὶ τὴν οὐσίαν 
τοῦ κακοῦ ἀλλά τινα τῶν συμβεβηκότων ἴσως 
αὐτῷ “φάσκοντες εἰς τὴν προειρημένην ἐμπίπτουσιν 
“τ de 
42 2 a and § 184 A infra. 

Ὁ The Stoics said “ virtue,” Cyrenaics and Epicureans 
“ἢ pleasure,” some Peripatetics ‘‘ painlessness’’ (cf. Aristot. 


Rhet. i. 7). 
4,4. 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 174-176 


neighing horse, so too one who is seeking the essence 
of the good, because he has no knowledge of the 
good, cannot perceive the attribute which is peculiar 
to it alone in order that he may be enabled thereby 
to gain a notion of the good itself. For he must first 
learn the nature of the good itself, and then pass on 
to apprehend that it is useful, and that it is choice- 
worthy for its own sake, and that it is productive 
of happiness. But that the aforesaid attributes are 
not sufficient to indicate the concept and the real 
nature of the good is made plain by the practice of 
the Dogmatists. All, probably, agree that the good is 
useful and that it is choiceworthy (so that the good is 
said to be, as it were, “ the delightful” 4) and that it 
is productive of happiness ; but when asked what the 
thing is to which these properties belong, they plunge 
into a hopeless war, some saying it is virtue, others 
pleasure, others painlessness,? and others something 
else. And yet, if the essence of the good had been 
proved from the foregoing definitions, they would not 
have been at feud as though its nature were unknown. 

Such, then, is the discord amongst those who are 
reputed the most eminent of the Dogmatistsregarding 
the notion of the Good; and they have differed like- 
wise regarding Evil, some defining Evil as “ damage 
or not other than damage,° ” others as ‘“‘ what is to be 
shunned for its own sake,”’ others as “ what is pro- 
ductive of unhappiness.’’ But since they express by 
these phrases not the essence of evil but some of its 
possible attributes they are involved in the logical 
zmpasse mentioned above. 


¢ * Damage ” or “ harm °° being the opposite of “" utility ”’ 
or “‘ benefit ’”°—the Stoic definition of ‘‘ good.” 


4.4. 


175 


176 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


117 To δὲ ἀδιάφορόν φασι “λέγεσθαι μὲν τριχῶς, 
καθ᾽ ἕνα μὲν τρόπον πρὸς ὃ μήτε: ὁρμὴ μήτε 
ἀφορμὴ γίνεται, οἷόν ἐστι τὸ ἀρτίους εἶναι τοὺς 
ἀστέρας 7 τὰς ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς τρίχας, καθ᾽ ἕτερον 
δὲ πρὸς ὃ ὁρμὴ μὲν ἣ ἀφορμὴ ψίνεται, οὐ μᾶλλον 
δὲ πρὸς τόδε ἢ τόδε, οἷον ἐπὶ δυοῖν τετραδράχμων 
ἀπαραλλάκτων, ὅταν δέῃ τὸ ἕτερον αὐτῶν αἱρεῖ- 
σθαι: ὁρμὴ μὲν γὰρ γίϑεται πρὸς τὸ αἱρεῖσθαι τὸ 
ἕτερον αὐτῶν, οὐ μᾶλλον δὲ πρὸς τόδε ἢ τόδε. 
κατὰ τρίτον δ τρόπον φασὶν ἀδιάφορον εἶναι τὸ 
μήτε πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν μήτε πρὸς κακοδαιμονίαν 
συμβαλλόμενον, ὡς ὑγίειαν πλοῦτον: ᾧ γὰρ ἔστιν 
ὁτὲ μὲν εὖ ὁτὲ δὲ κακῶς “χρήσασθαι, τοῦτο ἀδιά- 
φορον εἶναι φασίν. περὶ οὗ 5 μάλιστα ἐ ἐν τοῖς ἠθικοῖς 

178 διαλαμβάνειν λέγουσιν. τίνα μέντοι καὶ περὶ ταύ- 
τῆς τῆς ἐννοίας δεῖ φρονεῖν, δῆλον καὶ ἐκ τῶν 
εἰρημένων ἡμῖν περί τε ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν. 

Otrw μὲν οὖν σαφές ἐστιν ὅτι οὐκ ἐπέστησαν 
ἡμᾶς τῇ ἐννοίᾳ τῶν προειρημένων ἕκάστου: οὐδὲν 
δὲ ἀπεικὸς πεπόνθασιν ἐν ἀνυποστάτοις τάχα 
πράγμασι σφαλλόμενοι. ὅτι γὰρ οὐδὲν τῇ φύσει 
ἐστὶν ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακὸν ἢ ἀδιάφορον, ἐντεῦθέν τινες 
ἐπιλογίζονται. 


KI’,—EI ἘΣΤῚ TI ΦΥΣΕΙ͂ ΑΤΑΘΟΝ KAI KAKON 
KAT AATAPOPON 


~ a ων / / 
179 To πῦρ φύσει ἀλεαῖνον πᾶσι φαίνεται ἀλεαντικόν, 
“~ / 
Kal ἡ χιὼν φύσει ψύχουσα πᾶσι φαίνεται ψυκτική, 
ἴων / “ 
Kal πάντα τὰ φύσει κινοῦντα ὁμοίως πάντας κινεῖ 
Χ \ 4 e / μή Κι \ 
τοὺς κατὰ φύσιν, ws φασίν, ἔχοντας. οὐδὲν δὲ 


« Uf i. 27, 





446 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 177-179 


The term “ indifferent,” they say, is used in three 177 
senses—in ome sense, of that which is an object of 
neither inclination nor disinclination, as for instance 
the fact that the stars or the hairs of the head are 
even in number ; in another sense, of that which is an 
object of inclination or disinclination, but not towards 
this particular object any more than towards that, as 
in the case of two indistinguishable tetradrachms, 
when one has to choose one of them ; for there arises 
an inclination to choose one of them, but not this 
one more than that one; and a third sense of the term 
“indifferent ἡ is, they say, “‘ that which contributes 
neither to happiness nor to unhappiness,”’ as health, 
or wealth ; for what a man may use now well, now 
ill, that, they say, is indifferent, and they claim to 
discuss it specially in their Ethics. But what view we 178 
ought to take regarding this conception is plain from 
what we have already said about things good and evil. 

Thus, then, it is plain that they have not guided 
us to a clear conception of the several things above- 
mentioned ; yet, in thus failing with regard to 
matters that, perhaps, have no real existence, their 
experience is by no means strange. For there 
are some who argue on the following grounds 
that nothing is by nature® either good or evil or 
indifferent. 


CuapTerR XXI.—Is Anytruine spy Nature Goon, 
Bap, on INDIFFERENT ? 


Fire which heats by nature appears to all as heat- 179 
ing, and snow which chills by nature appears to all as 
chilling, and all things which move by nature move 
equally all those who are, as they say, in a natural 


447 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῶν λεγομένων ἀγαθῶν πάντας κινεῖ ὥς ἀγαθόν, 
ὡς ὑπομνήσομεν᾽ οὐκ ἄρα ἔστι φύσει "ἀγαθόν. ὅτι 
δὲ οὐδὲν τῶν λεγομένων ἀγαθῶν πάντας ὁμοίως 


180 κιψεῖ, , δῆλον, φασίν. ἵνα γὰρ τοὺς ἰδιώτας παρῶμεν, 


18] 


182 


ὧν ot μὲν εὐεξίαν σώματος ἀγαθὸν εἶναι νομίζουσιν, 
οἱ δὲ τὸ λαγνεύειν, οἱ δὲ τὸ ἀδηφαγεῖν, ot δὲ οἶνο- 
φλυγίαν, οἵ be TO χρῆσθαι κύβοις, οὗ δὲ πλεονεξίαν, 
οἱ δὲ καὶ χείρω τινὰ τούτων, αὐτῶν τῶν φιλοσόφων 
τινὲς μὲν τρία γένη φασὶν εἶναι ἀγαθῶν, ὡς οἱ 
περιπατητικοί: τούτων γὰρ τὰ μὲν εἷναι περὶ ψυχὴν 
\ “ 
ws Tas ἀρετάς, Ta δὲ περὶ σῶμα ws ὑγίειαν Kal 
4 ? 4 \ \ 9 A e 7 “- ᾿ 
τὰ ἐοικότα, τὰ δὲ ἐκτὸς ὡς φίλους, πλοῦτον, τὰ 
παραπλήσια. οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς στοᾷς τριγένειαν μὲν 
καὶ αὐτοί φασιν εἶναι ἀγαθῶν: τούτων γὰρ τὰ μὲν 
εἶναι περὶ ψυχὴν ὡς τὰς ἀρετάς, τὰ δὲ ἐκτὸς ὡς 
A “a ’ \ \ 4 A \ 
τὸν σπουδαῖον Kat φίλον, τὰ δὲ οὔτε περὶ ψυχὴν 
οὔτε ἐκτός, οἷον τὸν σπουδαῖον ὡς πρὸς ἑαυτόν’ 
τὰ μέντοι περὶ σῶμα [ἢ ἐκτός], ἃ φασιν οἱ ἐκ τοῦ 
περιπάτου ἀγαθὰ εἶναι, ov φασιν ἀγαθά. ἔνιοι δὲ 
τὴν ἡδονὴν ἠσπάσαντο ὡς ἀγαθόν, τινὲς δὲ κακὸν 
Φ 4 ~ 
αὐτὴν ἄντικρυς εἶναι φασίν, ὥστε καί τινα τῶν ἐκ 
ce / ~ hal 
φιλοσοφίας ἀναφθέγξασθαι “ μανείην μᾶλλον ἢ 
ἡσθείην.᾽ 
Ki τοίνυν τὰ μὲν φύσει κινοῦντα πάντας ὁμοίως 
κινεῖ, ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς λεγομένοις ἀγαθοῖς οὐ πάντες 
¢ f , 3 ΄ 3 4 > é Α 
ὁμοίως κινούμεθα, οὐδέν ἐστι φύσει ἀγαθόν. Kat 
γὰρ οὔτε πάσαις ταῖς προεκκειμέναις στάσεσι 
¢ 
πιστεύειν ἐνδέχεται διὰ THY μάχην οὔτε τινί. ὁ 


1 [ἢ ἐκτός} del. Apelt. 





« Of. Plato, Laws iii. 697; Arisiot. #th. Vic. i. 8. 
418 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 179-182 


condition. . But none of the so-called “ goods,”’ as we 
shall show, moves all men as being good ; therefore 
no natural good exists. And that none of the so-called 
goods moves all men alike is, they assert, an evident 
fact. For, not to mention ordinary folk—of whom 180 
some regard right bodily condition as good, others 
chambering, others gluttony, others drunkenness, 
others gambling, others greed, and others still worse 
things,—some of the philosophers themselves (such as 
the Peripatetics) say that there are three kinds of 
goods’; of these some concern the soul, like the 
virtues, others the body, like health and similar 
things, while others are external, such as friends, 
wealth and the like. The Stoics themselves, too, 181 
assert that there is a trinity? of goods; of these some 
have to do with the soul, like the virtues, others are 
external, like the good man and the friend, while 
others are neither of the soul nor external, as for 
instance the good man in relation to himself; but 
they deny that the bodily states, which the Peripa- 
tetics declare to be goods, are goods. And some have 
accepted pleasure as a good, whereas some affirm 
that it is a downright evil, so that one professor of 
philosophy ° actually exclaimed, “ I would sooner be 
mad than merry.” 

If, then, things which move by nature move all 182 
men alike, while we are not all moved alike by the 
so-called goods, there is nothing good by nature. In 
fact it is impossible to believe either all the views 
now set forth, because of their conflicting character, 
or any one of them. For he who asserts that one 


δ Apparently a unique sense of the rare word τριγένεια 
(from τριγενής, “ thrice-born”’). 
¢ Antisthenes, the Cynic. 
VOL, I 2G 449 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


yap λέγων ὅτι τῇδε μὲν πιστευτέον - τῇ στάσει 
τῇδε δὲ οὐδαμῶς, ἐναντιουμένους τοὺς παρὰ τῶν 
ἀντιδοξούντων λόγους αὐτῷ ἔχων, μέρος γίνεται 
«τῆς.» διαφωνίας, καὶ τοῦ κρινοῦντος αὐτὸς 
δεήσεται διὰ τοῦτο μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων, ἀλλ’ οὐχ 
ἑτέρους κρινεῖ. μήτε οὖν κριτηρίου ὄντος ὅμο- 
ογουμένου μήτε ἀποδείξεως, διὰ THY ἀνεπίκριτον 
καὶ περὶ τούτων διαφωνίαν εἰς τὴν ἐποχὴν κατ- 
αντήσει, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὐχ ἕξει διαβεβαιοῦσθαι 
τί ἐστι τὸ φύσει ἀγαθόν. 

183 "Ere κἀκεῖνο λέγουσί τινες ὅτι ἀγαθόν ἐστιν ἤτοι 
τὸ αἱρεῖσθαι αὐτὸ ἢ ἐκεῖνο ὃ αἱρούμεθα. τὸ μὲν 
οὖν αἱρεῖσθαι οὐκ ἔστιν ἀγαθὸν κατὰ τὸν ἴδιον 
λόγον: οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἐσπεύδομεν "τυχεῖν ἐκείνου ὃ 
αἱρούμεθα, ἵνα μὴ ἐκπέσωμεν τοῦ ἔτι αὐτὸ αἱρεῖ- 
σθαι, οἷον εἰ ἀγαθὸν ἣν τὸ ἀντιποιεῖσθαι ποτοῦ, οὐκ 
ἂν ἐσπεύδομεν ποτοῦ τυχεῖν: ἀπολαύσαντες γὰρ 
τούτου τῆς ἀντιποιήσεως αὐτοῦ ἀπαλλαττόμεθα. 
καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ πεινῆν ὁμοίως καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ ἐρᾶν καὶ 
τῶν ἄλλων. οὐκ ἄρα τὸ αἱρεῖσθαι δι᾿ αὑτὸ αἱρετόν 
ἐστιν, εἰ μή γε καὶ ὀχληρόν: καὶ γὰρ ὁ πεινῶν 
σπεύδει μετασχεῖν τροφῆς, ὅπως ἀπαλλαγῇ τῆς 
ἐκ τοῦ πεινῆν ὀχλήσεως, καὶ 6 ἐρῶν ὁμοίως καὶ 
ὁ διψῶν. 

184 ᾿Δλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ αἱρετόν ἐστι τὸ ἀγαθόν. τοῦτο 
4 a δῇ / > e ~ “4 4 ¢ Ca 9 3 3 
γὰρ ἤτοι ἔξωθέν ἐστιν ἡμῶν ἢ περὶ ἡμᾶς. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ 
μὲν ἔξωθεν ἡμῶν, ἤτοι ποιεῖ περὶ ἡμᾶς ἀστείαν 
κίνησιν καὶ ἀποδεκτὸν κατάστημα καὶ ἀγαστὸν 
πάθος, ἢ οὐδαμῶς ἡμᾶς διατίθησιν. καὶ εἰ μὲν 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἡμῖν ἀγαστόν, οὔτε ἀγαθὸν ἔσται οὔτε 
1 «τῆς» add. cj. Bekk. 

«ΟἿ ii. 18 ἔξ, 134 ἢ 
450 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 182-184 


must believe this view, but not that, becomes a party 
to the controversy, since he has opposed to him the 
arguments of those who take the rival view, and 
therefore he himself, along with the rest, will need 
an adjudicator instead of pronouncing judgement on 
others. And as there does not exist any agréed 
criterion or proof “ owing to the unsettled controversy 
about these matters, he will be reduced to suspending 
judgement, and consequently he will be unable to 
affirm positively what the good by nature is. 

Further, it is asserted by some that Good is either 193 
the Choice? itself or that which we choose. Now Choice 
is not good according to its proper meaning ; else we 
would not have been hurrying to obtain that which 
we choose, for fear of losing the power of continuing 
to choose it ; for example, if the seeking to get drink 
were good, we would not have hurried to obtain 
drink ; for when we have enjoyed it we are quit of 
seeking to get it. So, too, with hunger and love and 
the rest. Choice, then, is not choiceworthy in itself, 
even if it is not actually disagreeable ; for in fact the 
hungry man hurries to partake of food in order to 
get quit of the discomfort due to his hunger ; and so 
likewise the man in love and the thirsty man. 

But neither is the good the choiceworthy. For this 194 
is either external to us or in connexion with us. But 
if it is external to us either it produces in us a sooth- 
ing motion and a welcome condition and a delightful 
feeling, or it does not affect us at all. And if it is not 
a delight to us it will not be good, nor will it attract 

> Literally, ‘‘the (act of) choosing”’ or “‘trying to get 
for oneself.’ ‘‘ Choice” (as the context shows) involves 
‘* desire’ and the striving for satisfaction. 

¢ For the connexion of “ good”’ (ἀγαθόν) with “ delightful’ 
(ἀγαστόν) cf. ὃ 175. 

451 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


emdgerau ἡμᾶς πρὸς τὸ αἱρεῖσθαι αὐτὸ οὔτε ὅλως 
αἱρετὸν ἔσται. εἰ δὲ [ἐγ᾽γίνεταί τι περὶ ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ 
τοῦ ἐκτὸς προσηνὲς κατάστημα καὶ ἀσμενιστὸν 
πάθος, οὐχὶ δι᾽ ἑαυτὸ αἱρετὸν ἔσται τὸ ἐκτός, ἀλλὰ 
διὰ τὴν περὶ ἡμᾶς ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ γινομένην διάθεσιν" 

185 ὥστε οὐ δύναται τὸ δι᾿ αὑτὸ αἱρετὸν ἐκτὸς εἶναι. 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ περὶ ἡμᾶς. ἤτοι γὰρ περὶ σῶμα εἶναι 
λέγεται μόνον 7) περὶ ψυχὴν μόνην ἢ περὶ ἀμφότερα. 

εἰ μὲν περὶ σῶμα μόνον, ἐκφεύ ETAL τὴν 
γνῶσιν ἡμῶν: ψυχῆς γὰρ at γνώσεις εἶναι λέγονται, 
τὸ δὲ σῶμα. ἄλογον εἶναί φασιν ὅσον ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῷ. 
εἰ δὲ καὶ μέχρι τῆς ψυχῆς διατείνειν λέγοιτο, τῇ 
τῆς ψυχῆς ἀντιλήψει καὶ τῷ ταύτης ἀγαστῷ πάθει 
δοκοίη ἂν αἱρετὸν εἶναι" τὸ γὰρ κρινόμενον ὡς 
αἱρετὸν τῇ διανοίᾳ κρίνεται κατὰ αὐτοὺς καὶ οὐκ 
ἀλόγῳ σώματι. 

186 Λείπεται λέγειν ὅ ὅτι περὶ ψυχὴν μόνην τὸ ἀγαθόν 
ἐστιν. καὶ τοῦτο δὲ ἐξ ὧν οἱ δογματικοὶ λέγουσιν 
ἀδύνατόν ἐστιν. ἡ γὰρ ψυχὴ τάχα μὲν καὶ ἀν- 
ὑπαρκτός ἐστιν" εἰ δὲ καὶ ὑπάρχει, ὅσον ἐφ᾽ οἷς 
λέγουσιν οὐ καταλαμβάνεται, καθὼς ἐπελογισάμην 
ἐν τῷ περὶ κριτηρίου λόγῳ. πῶς δ᾽ ἂν θαρροίη 
τις ἐν ἐκείνῳ τι γίνεσθαι λέγειν ὃ μὴ καταλαμβάνει; ͵ 

187 ἵνα δὲ καὶ ταῦτα παραλίπωμεν, πῶς ἄρα καὶ 
λέγουσιν ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ τὸ ἀγαθὸν γίνεσθαι; εἰ γοῦν 
ὁ ᾿Επίκουρος ἐν ἡδονῇ τίθεται τὸ τέλος καὶ φησὶ 
τὴν ψυχήν, ἐπεὶ καὶ πάντα, ἐξ ἀτόμων συνεστάναι, 
πῶς ἐν ἀτόμων σωρῷ δυνατὸν ἡδονὴν γίγνεσθαι 
καὶ συγκατάθεσιν ἢ κρίσιν τοῦ τόδε μὲν αἱρετὸν 
εἶναι καὶ ἀγαθὸν τόδε δὲ φευκτὸν καὶ κακόν, 
ἀμήχανον εἰπεῖν. 

: ¢ Cf. ii. 31 ff., which also deals with “ the Criterion.” 
452 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 184-187 


us to the choosing of it, nor will it be choiceworthy 
atall. And ifthere arises within us, from the external 
object, a congenial condition and an agreeable feeling, 
it is not for its own sake that the external object will 
be choiceworthy but for the sake of the internal con- 
dition which follows upon it ; so that what is choice- 185 
worthy in itself cannot be external. Nor can it be 
personal to us. For it is said to belong either to the 
body alone or to the soul alone or to both. But if it 
belongs to the body alone, it will elude our perception; 
for our perceptions are said to be properties of the 
soul, and they assert that the body, viewed by itself, 
is irrational. And if it should be said to extend to 
the soul also, it would seem to be choiceworthy owing 
to its affecting the soul and to the agreeable feeling 
therein ; for, according to them, what is judged to 
be choiceworthy is judged by the intellect and not 
by the irrational body. 

There remains the alternative that the good is in 186 
the soul only. But this, too, is impossible if we go by 
the statements of the Dogmatists. For the soul is, 
perhaps, actually non-existent *; and evenif it exists, 
judging by what they say it is not apprehended, as 
I have argued in my chapter ‘‘ On the Criterion.” 
How then could one venture to affirm that something 
takes place in a thing which he does not apprehend? 
But, to pass over these objections, in what manner 187 
does the good, according to them, come about in the 
soul? For certainly, if Epicurus makes the End con- 
sist in pleasure and asserts that the soul, like all else, 
is composed of atoms, it is impossible to explain how 
in a heap of atoms there can come about pleasure and 
assent or Judgement that this object is choiceworthy 
and good, that object to be avoided and evil. 


453 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


KA’.—TI ἘΣΤΙΝ H ΛΕΓΟΜΈΝΗ TEXNH ΠΈΡΙ BION 


« 
188 Πάλιν οἱ στωικοὶ περὶ ψυχὴν ἀγαθά φασιν εἶναι 
, 


189 


190 


/ / A 3 7 \ > 7 
τέχνας τινάς, τὰς ἀρετάς" τέχνην δὲ εἶναί φασι 
> , \ 
σύστημα ἐκ καταλήψεων συγγεγυμνασμένων, τὰς 
‘\ / “~ 
δὲ καταλήψεις γίγνεσθαι περὶ TO ἡγεμονικόν. πῶς 
ἐν 3 ~ Fa’ > 
οὖν ἐν τῷ ἡγεμονικῷ, πνεύματι κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς ὑπ- 
/ \ 3 
άρχοντι, ἐναπόθεσις γίνεται καταλήψεων καὶ ἀ- 
4 ᾿ es 
θροισμὸς τοσούτων ὡς γενέσθαι τέχνην, οὐχ οἷόν τε 
> a ΄᾿ A 
ἐννοῆσαι, τῆς ἐπιγινομένης τυπώσεως ἀεὶ τὴν πρὸ 
-- > 7 “- 
αὐτῆς ἀπαλειφούσης, ἐπεὶ χυτόν τέ ἐστι τὸ πνεῦμα 
? © ~ > ¢ 4 
καὶ ἐξ ὅλου κινεῖσθαι λέγεται καθ᾽ ἑκάστην τύπω- 
\ \ \ 7 > / / 
ow. τὸ yap τὴν LlAatwvos ἀνειδωλοποίησιν λέγειν 
> ~ > “--Ἠ \ \ 
ἐπιδεκτικὴν εἶναι δύνασθαι τοῦ ᾿ἀγαθοῦ, φημὶ δὲ 
4 ~ A ἢ ~ / \ 
τὴν κρᾶσιν τῆς ἀμερίστου Kal μεριστῆς οὐσίας Kal 
~ \ ~ ha) , 
τῆς θατέρου φύσεως καὶ ταὐτοῦ, ἢ τοὺς ἀριθμούς, 
/ ~ / 3 ΄ 5" \ ‘ 
τέλεον ληρῶδές ἐστιν. ὅθεν οὐδὲ περὶ ψυχὴν εἶναι 
δύναται τὸ ἀγαθόν. εἰ δὲ μήτε τὸ αἱρεῖσθαι αὐτὸ 
3 ‘ > 
ἀγαθόν ἐστι, μήτε ἐκτὸς ὑπόκειται τὸ δι’ αὑτὸ 
αἱρετόν, μήτε περὶ σῶμά ἐστι μήτε περὶ ψυχήν, 
¢ ? / 5.3 ΨΦ{Ψ wv 7 2 / 
ὡς ἐπελογισάμην, οὐδ᾽ ὅλως ἔστι τι φύσει ἀγαθόν. 
/ 
Διὰ δὲ τὰ προειρημένα οὐδὲ κακόν τι ἔστι φύσει" 
Ν ~ ~ 
Ta yap ἑτέροις δοκοῦντα εἶναι κακά, ταῦτα ἕτεροι 
ζ΄ ς 7 7 e > A > / 
διώκουσιν ὡς ἀγαθά, οἷον ἀσέλγειαν ἀδικίαν φιλ- 
, 
αργυρίαν ἀκρασίαν, τὰ ἐοικότα. ὅθεν εἰ τὰ μὲν 
* It is a mistake (of the mss.) to make a new chapter here, 
as §§ 188 ff. carry on the argument of 185 ff. about the con- 
nexion of “ good ”’ with the soul. The ‘‘ Art of Living ”’ is 
first dealt with in § 239. 
> Cf. Cie. Acad. iv. 7.22 “ars .. . ex multis animi per- 
ceptionibus constat.”” The virtues, said the Stoics, are “‘ arts” 
because they are forms of knowledge and consist in the use 
or ‘exercise “ἢ of a large number of perceptions or “‘ appre- 


hensions** related to one another in a systematic way. These 
45 4 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, ITI. 188--190 


Cyuaprer XXIV.—Wuart Is THE so-cALLED ART 
or Livine ὃ 4 


Again, the Stoics declare that goods of the soul 188 
are certain arts, namely the virtues. And an art, 
they say, is “ἃ system composed of co-exercised 
apprehensions,’ ® and the perceptions arise in 
the ruling principle. But how there takes place 
in the ruling principle, which according to them 
is breath,¢ a deposit of perceptions, and such 
an aggregation of them as to produce art, it is 
impossible to conceive, when each succeeding im- 
pression obliterates the previous one, seeing that 
breath is fluid and it is said to move as a whole at 
each impression. For it is perfect nonsense to say 189 
that Plato’s imaginary construction of the soul—I 
mean the mixture of the indivisible and the divisible 
essence and of the nature of the Other and of the 
Same,? or the Numbers—is capable of being receptive 
of the Good. Hence the good cannot belong to the 
soul either. But if the good is not choice itself, and 190 
what is choiceworthy in itself neither exists externally 
nor belongs to either body or soul—as I have argued, 
—then there does not exist at all any natural good. 

For the foregoing reasons also there exists no 
natural evil. For things which seem to some to be 
evil are pursued as goods by others—for instance, 
incontinence, injustice, avarice, intemperance, and the 
like. Hence, if it is the nature of things naturally 


“apprehensions’’ are “deposited”? in the mind which is 
conceived as an elastic fluid pneuma of which the whole 
moves when any part of itis moved, Cf. 88 241, 251 infra. 
¢ Of. i. 198, ii. 70. 
4 Cf. Plato, Tim. 35 ff. But “τὰς Numbers’”’ may refer to 
the Pythagorean theory. 


4.55 


191 


192 


193 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


φύσει πάντας ὁμοίως πέφυκε κινεῖν, τὰ δὲ λεγόμενα 
εἶναι κακὰ οὐ πάντας ὁμοίως κινεῖ, οὐδέν ἐστι 
φύσει κακόν. 

Ὁμοίως δὲ οὐδ᾽ ἀδιάφορόν ἐ ἐστί τι φύσει διὰ τὴν 
περὶ τῶν ἀδιαφόρων διαφωνίαν. οἷον γοῦν οἵ μὲν 
στωικοὶ τῶν ἀδιαφόρων φασὶ τὰ μὲν προηγμένα 
εἶναι τὰ δὲ ἀποπροηγμένα τὰ δὲ οὔτε προηγμένα 
οὔτε ἀποπροηγμένα, προηγμένα μὲν τὰ ἱκανὴν 
ἀξίαν ἔχοντα ὡς ὑγίειαν πλοῦτον, ἀποπροηγμένα 
δὲ τὰ μὴ ἱκανὴν “ἔχοντα ἀξίαν ὡς πενίαν νόσον, 
μήτε δὲ προηγμένα μήτε ἀποπροηγμένα ὡς τὸ 
ἐκτεῖναι ἢ συγκάμψαι τὸν δάκτυλον. τινὲς δὲ 
οὐδὲν τῶν ἀδιαφόρων φύσει προηγμένον ἢ ἀπο- 
προηγμένον εἶναι λέγουσιν" ἕκαστον γὰρ τῶν 
ἀδιαφόρων παρὰ τὰς διαφόρους περιστάσεις. ὁτὲ 
μὲν προηγμένον φαίνεσθαι ὁτὲ δὲ ἀποπροηγμένον. 
εἰ γοῦν, φασίν, οἱ μὲν πλούσιοι ἐπιβουλεύοιντο 
ὑπὸ τυράννου ot δὲ πένητες εἰρηνεύοιντο, πᾶς 
ἂν ἕλουτο εἶναι πένης μᾶλλον ἢ πλούσιος, ὡς 
ἀποπροηγμένον γίνεσθαι τὸν πλοῦτον. ὥστε ἐπεὶ 
ἕκαστον τῶν λεγομένων. ἀδιαφόρων οἱ μὲν ἀγαθὸν 
εἶναί φασιν οἱ δὲ κακόν, ἅπαντες δ᾽ ἂν ὁμοίως 
ἀδιάφορον αὐτὸ ἐνόμιζον εἷναι εἴγε ἀδιάφορον ἢν 
φύσει, οὐδέν ἐστι φύσει ἀδιάφορον. 

Οὕτως καὶ εἴ τις φύσει αἱρετὴν εἶναι λέγοι τὴν 
ἀνδρίαν διὰ τὸ τοὺς λέοντας φυσικῶς τολμᾶν καὶ 
ἀνδρίζεσθαι δοκεῖν, καὶ ταύρους, εἰ τύχοι, καὶ 
ἀνθρώπους τινὰς καὶ ἀλεκτρυόνας, λέγομεν ὅτι 
ὅσον ἐπὶ τούτῳ καὶ ἡ δειλία τῶν φύσει αἱρετῶν 
ἐστίν, ἐπεὶ ἔλαφοι καὶ λαγωοὶ καὶ ἄλλα πλείονα 


1 τολμᾶν καὶ Τ': τολμᾶν ἐπὶ τὸ Mss.: ὁρμᾶν ἐπὶ τὸ edd., Bekk. 
4δ6 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 190-198 


existent té move all men alike, whereas the things 
said to be ewil do not move all alike, nothing is 
naturally evil. 

Similarly there is nothing naturally indifferent, 
because of the divergence of opinion about things 
indifferent. The Stoics, for example, assert that of 
the indifferents some are preferred, some rejected, 
and others neither preferred nor rejected,*— the pre- 
ferred being such as have sufficient value, like health 
and wealth ; the rejected such as have not sufficient 
value, like poverty and sickness; while extending 
the finger or bending it in are cases of the neither 
preferred nor rejected. Some, however, maintain 
that none of the indifferents is by nature preferred or 
rejected ; for, owing to the differences in the circum- 
stances, each of the indifferents appears at one time 
preferred, at another rejected. For certainly, they 
argue, if the rich were being threatened with attack 
by a tyrant while the poor were being left in peace, 
everyone would prefer to be poor rather than rich, so 
that wealth would be a thing rejected. Consequently, 
since of each of the so-called indifferents some say 
that it is good, others bad, whereas all alike would 
have counted it indifferent had it been naturally 
indifferent, there is nothing that is naturally in- 
different. 

So also, should anyone declare that courage is 
naturally choiceworthy because lions seem to be 
naturally bold and courageous, bulls too, it may be, 
and some men and cocks, we reply that, as for that, 
cowardice also is one of the things naturally choice- 
worthy, since deer and hares and many other animals 


a Of. Introd. p. xxvii, Cic. De jin. iii. 15 f., iv. 9, 16. 
4.57 


191 


192 


193 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ζῶα φυσικῶς em αὐτὴν ὁρμᾷ. Kat ot πλεῖστοι 
δὲ τῶν ἀνθρώπων δειλοὶ θεωροῦνται: σπανίως 
μὲν γάρ τις ὑπὲρ πατρίδος ἑαυτὸν ἐπέδωκεν εἰς 
θάνατον [βλακευσάμενος]} ἢ ἄλλως θερμόν τι 
τυφωθεὶς ἔδοξέ τις διαπράττεσθαι, 6 δὲ πλεῖστος 
ὅμιλος τῶν ἀνθρώπων πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα ἐκκλίνει. 

194 Ὅθεν καὶ οἱ ᾿Επικούρειοι δεικνύναι νομίζουσι 
φύσει αἱρετὴν εἶναι τὴν ἡδονήν" τὰ γὰρ ζῷά φασιν 
ἅμα τῷ γενέσθαι, ἀδιάστροφα ὄντα, ὁρμᾶν μὲν 

196 ἐπὶ τὴν ἡδονὴν ἐκκλίνειν δὲ ἀλγηδόνας. καὶ πρὸς 
τούτους δὲ ἔστι λέγειν ὅτι τὸ ποιητικὸν κακοῦ 
οὐκ ἂν εἴη φύσει ἀγαθόν. ἡ δέ γε ἡδονὴ κακῶν 
ἐστὶ ποιητική" πάσῃ γὰρ ἡδογῇ παραπέπηγεν 
ἀλγηδών, ἧ ἐστι κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς φύσει κακόν. οἷον 
γοῦν ἥδεται ὁ μέθυσος ἐμφορούμενος οἴνου καὶ ὁ 
γαστρίμαργος τροφῆς, καὶ ὃ Adyvos ἀφροδισίοις 
ἀμέτροις χρώμενος" ἀλλὰ ταῦτα καὶ πενίας καὶ 
νόσων ἐ ἐστὶ ποιητικά, ἅπερ ἀλγεινά ἐ ἐστι καὶ κακά, 
ὡς φασίν. οὐκ ἄρα φύσει ἀγαθόν ἐστιν ἡ ἡδονή. 

196 παραπλησίως δὲ καὶ τὸ ποιητικὸν ἀγαθῶν οὐκ 
ἔστι φύσει κακόν, ἡδονὰς δὲ ἀποτελοῦσιν ἀλγηδόνες" 
καὶ γὰρ ἐπιστήμας ἀναλαμβάνομεν πονοῦντες, καὶ 
πλούτου καὶ ἐρωμένης οὕτως ἐγκρατὴς γίνεταί τις, 
καὶ ὑγίειαν περιποιοῦσιν αἱ ἀλγηδόνες. οὐκ ἄρα 
ὁ πόνος φύσει κακόν. καὶ γὰρ εἰ φύσει ἀγαθὸν 
μὲν ἦν ἡ ἡ ἡδονὴ φαῦλον δὲ ὁ πόνος, πάντες ἂν 
ὁμοίως διέκειντο περὶ αὐτῶν, ὡς ἐλέγομεν" ὁρῶμεν 
δὲ πολλοὺς τῶν φιλοσόφων τὸν μὲν πόνον καὶ τὴν 
καρτερίαν αἱρουμένους, τῆς ἡδονῆς δὲ καταῴφρο- 
νοῦντας. 


1 [βλακευσάμενος] delevi, post ἀνθρώπων transp. Apelt. 
458 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 193-196 


are naturally impelled thereto. The majority of 
men, too, shew themselves to be cowardly ; for it is 
rare for a man to give himself up to death for the sake 
of his country,* or to seem inspired to do any other 
daring deed, the great majority of mankind being 
averse to all such actions. 

Hence, also, the Epicureans suppose themselves to 
have proved that pleasure is naturally choiceworthy ; 
for the animals, they say, as soon as they are born, 
when still unperverted, seek after pleasure and avoid 
pains. But to these we may reply that what is pro- 
ductive of evil cannot be naturally good ; but pleasure 
is productive of evils ; for to every pleasure there is 
linked a pain, and,pain, according to them, is a natural 
evil. Thus, for example, the drunkard feels pleasure 
when filling himself with wine, and the glutton with 
food, and the lecher in immoderate sexual intercourse, 
yet these things are productive of both poverty and 
sickness, which, as they say, are painful and evil. 
Pleasure, therefore, is not a natural good. Similarly, 
too, what is productive of good is not naturally evil, 
and pains bring about pleasures ; it is, in fact, by toil 
that we acquire knowledge, and it is thus also that 
a man becomes possessed both of wealth and of his 
lady-love, and pains preserve health. Toil, then, is 
not naturally evil. Indeed if pleasure were naturally 
good, and toil bad, all men, as we said, would have 
been similarly disposed towards them, whereas we 
see many of the philosophers choosing toil and hard- 
ship and despising pleasure. 


α The word bracketed in the Greek text (Sdaxevoduevos) 
means “being lazy, or spiritless,”’ and is obviously out of 
place here, though it would fit well enough in the next 
clause (as Apelt suggests). 


459 


194 


195 


196 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


e , 2 ON / \ ξ \ > 2 
197 “Ὁμοίως δ᾽ ἂν περιτρέποιντο καὶ οἱ TOP ἐνάρετον 
βίον φύσει ἀγαθὸν εἶναι λέγοντες ἐκ τοῦ τινὰς τῶν 
~ \ 3 4 “~ ¢€ a , ¢€ 9 os 
σοφῶν τὸν μεθ᾽ ἡδονῆς αἱρεῖσθαι βίον, ὡς ἐκ τῆς 
παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐκείνοις διαφωνίας τὸ φύσει τι τοῖον 
ἢ τοῖον εἶναι διατρέπεσθαι. 
2 δ 3 ΕΣ 3} " A / \ 
198 Οὐκ ἄτοπον δ᾽ ἂν ἴσως εἴη πρὸς τούτοις καὶ 
3 - -" 
εἰδικώτερον ἐπιστῆσαι διὰ βραχέων ταῖς ὑπολήψεσι 
ταῖς περὶ αἰσχρῶν καὶ οὐκ αἰσχρῶν ἀθέσμων τε 

‘\ ΄ι “~ > 
καὶ οὐ τοιούτων Kal νόμων καὶ ἐθῶν καὶ τῆς εἰς 
θεοὺς εὐσεβείας καὶ τῆς περὶ τοὺς κατοιχομένους 
ὁσιότητος καὶ τῶν ἐοικότων: καὶ γὰρ οὕτω περὶ 
τῶν πρακτέων ἣ μὴ πολλὴν εὑρήσομεν ἀνωμαλίαν. 

~ a 7 on ᾿ \ 
1099 Οἷον γοῦν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν αἰσχρόν, μᾶλλον δὲ καὶ 
/ / fon > Ἁ 
παράνομον νενόμισται τὸ τῆς ἀρρενομιξίας, παρὰ 
Γερμανοῖς δέ, ὡς φασίν, οὐκ αἰσχρὸν ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἕν 

~ \ , 
τι τῶν συνήθων. λέγεται δὲ καὶ παρὰ Θηβαίοις 

A “A \ 
TO παλαιὸν οὐκ αἰσχρὸν τοῦτο εἶναι δόξαι, καὶ τὸν 

“- - 3 
Μηριόνην τὸν Κρῆτα οὕτω κεκλῆσθαί φασι δι 

” “~ “~ ” A Ἁ 3 / 
ἔμφασιν τοῦ Κρητῶν ἔθους, καὶ τὴν ᾿Αχιλλέως 
πρὸς Πάτροκλον διάπυρον φιλίαν εἰς τοῦτο ἀν- 
€ 
200 ἄγουσι τινές. καὶ τί θαυμαστόν, ὅπου γε καὶ οἱ 
3 A ~ onl / 
ἀπὸ τῆς κυνικῆς φιλοσοφίας καὶ οἱ περὶ τὸν Kurvéa 

7 / 
Ζήνωνα καὶ Κλεάνθην καὶ Χρύσιππον ἀδιάφορον 

fon A , 
τοῦτο εἶναι φασίν; καὶ τὸ δημοσίᾳ γυναικὶ μίγ- 
oe ee ἀκ ΕΘΌΌ ον ee ee ee 

* e.g. the Cyrenaics. 

6 Of. the examples in i. 145 ff. ‘“‘ Amongst us”’ here, and 
throughout this chapter (as in i. 145 ff.), means “amongst 
the Greeks” and refers in special to the laws or customs 
of Athens, 

¢ Prob. not “ Germans,’’ but a Persian tribe, cf. i. 152. 

- 4 4.4. Μηριόνης is derived from μηρός (“ thigh’); φῇ, §245 
infra. 6. Cf. Plato, Symp. 180 a. 


7 Of. 88 205, 245; and i. 148, 153, 160 for what follows. 
The repellent features of Stoic ethical theory mentioned in 


460 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 197-200 


And so,*too, those who assert that the virtuous life 197 
is naturally good might be refuted by the fact that 
some of the sages choose the life which includes 
pleasure,* so that the claim that a thing is by nature 
of this sort or that is contradicted by the divergence of 
opinion amongst the Dogmatists themselves. 

And perhaps it may not be amiss, in addition to 198 
what has been said, to dwell more in detail, though 
briefly, on the notions concerning things shameful and 
not shameful, unholy and not so, laws and customs, 
piety towards the gods, reverence for the departed, 
and the like. For thus we shall discover a great 
variety of belief concerning what ought or ought not 
to be done. 

For example,’ amongst us sodomy is regarded as 199 
shameful or rather illegal, but by the Germani,’ they 
say, itis not looked on as shameful but as a customary 
thing. It is said, too, that in Thebes long ago this 
practice was not held to be shameful, and they say 
that Meriones the Cretan was so called by way of 
indicating the Cretans’ custom,’ and some refer to 
this the burning love of Achilles for Patroclus.¢ And 200 
what wonder, when both the adherents of the Cynic 
philosophy and the followers of Zeno of Citium, 
Cleanthes and Chrysippus, declare that this practice 
is indifferent?’ MHaving intercourse with a woman, 


this chapter are passed over in most expositions of Stoicism, 
though confirmed by Plutarch (De Stoic. repugn.). We may 
ascribe them to the ‘Back to Nature”? movement, which 
the early Stoics shared with the Cynics. The dictum “ Live 
according to Nature’’ might be taken to mean “ Disregard 
conventional morals,” “Cease to repress your natural 
instincts.”?> But, as Sextus says in § 249, they did not (like 
some of the Cynics) carry out in practice these shocking 
theories. 


461 


201 


202 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


νυσθαι, Kaito. παρ᾽ ἡμῖν αἰσχρὸν εἶναι δοκοῦν, 
παρά τισι τῶν ᾿Ϊνδῶν οὐκ αἰσχρὸν εἶναι νομίζεται: 
μίγνυνται γοῦν ἀδιαφόρως δημοσίᾳ, καθάπερ καὶ 
περὶ τοῦ φιλοσόφου Kpdryros ἀκηκόαμεν. ἀλλὰ 
καὶ TO τὰς γυναῖκας ἑταιρεῖν Tap ἡμῖν μὲν ai- 
σχρόν ἐστι καὶ ἐπονείδιστον, παρὰ δὲ πολλοῖς τῶν 
Αἰγυπτίων εὐκλεές: φασὶ γοῦν ὅτι αἱ πλείστοις 
συνιοῦσαι καὶ κόσμον ἔχουσι περισφύριον, σύνθημα 
τοῦ παρ᾽ αὐταῖς σεμνολογήματος. παρ᾽ ἐνίοις 
δὲ αὐτῶν at κόραι πρὸ τῶν γάμων τὴν προῖκα ἐξ 
ἑταιρήσεως συνάγουσαι γαμοῦνται. καὶ τοὺς στωι- 
κοὺς δὲ ὁρῶμεν οὐκ ἄτοπον εἶναι λέγοντας τὸ 
ἑταίρᾳ συνοικεῖν ἢ τὸ ἐξ ἑταίρας ἐργασίας διαζῆν. 

᾿Αλλὰ καὶ τὸ ἐστίχθαι παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν αἰσχρὸν 
καὶ ἄτιμον εἶναι δοκεῖ, πολλοὶ δὲ Αἰγυπτίων καὶ 


203 Σαρματῶν στίζουσι τὰ γεννώμενα. τό τε ἐλλόβια 


ἔχειν τοὺς ἄρρενας παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν αἰσχρόν ἐστι, 
3 > 7 \ “ / Ψ \ / 

map ἐνίοις δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων, ὥσπερ Kai Σύροις, 

3 / \ 

εὐγενείας ἐστὶ σύνθημα. τινὲς δὲ ἐπιτείνοντες TO 
os \ “ »“» / 

σύνθημα THs εὐγενείας, Kal Tas ῥῖνας τῶν παίδων 

/ ? a > / \ 

τιτρώσκοντες κρίκους am αὐτῶν ἀργυρέους ἢ 

΄΄ ~ Cc oA i) / / 

χρυσοῦς ἀπαρτῶσιν, ὃ map ἡμῖν οὐκ ἂν ποιήσειέ 


904 τίς, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ἀνθοβαφῆ καὶ ποδήρη τις ἄρρην 


~ o~ , \ 
ἐνταῦθα dv audiéoato ἐσθῆτα, Kalrol mapa 
Cand 3 c¢ “A > ~ 
Πέρσαις εὐπρεπεστάτου τοῦ map ἡμῖν αἰσχροῦ 
“- Ἁ , \ 
τούτου δοκοῦντος εἶναι. καὶ παρὰ Διονυσίῳ δὲ 
nw ~ ? on / 
τῷ τῆς Σικελίας τυράννῳ τοιαύτης ἐσθῆτος [1λά- 
τωνι καὶ ᾿Αριστίππῳ τοῖς φιλοσόφοις προσενεχ- 
, ξ \ ? 2 f > A 
θείσης 6 μὲν Πλάτων ἀπεπέμψατο, εἰπὼν 
462 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 200-204 


too, in public, although deemed by us to be shameful, 
is not though} to be shameful by some of the Indians ; 
at any rate they couple publicly with indifference, like 
the philosopher Crates, as the story goes. Moreover, 201 
prostitution is with us a shameful and disgraceful 
thing, but with many of the Egyptians it is highly 
esteemed ; at least, they say that those women who 
have the gréatest number of lovers wear an orna- 
mental ankle-ring as a token of their proud posi- 
tion. And with some of them the girls marry after 
collecting a dowry before marriage by means of 
prostitution. We see the Stoics also declaring that 
it is not amiss to keep company with a prostitute or 
to live on the profits of prostitution. 

Moreover, with us tattooing is held to be shameful 202 
and degrading, but many of the Egyptians and 
Sarmatians tattoo their offspring. Also, it is a 203 
shameful thing with us for men to wear earrings, but 
amongst some of the barbarians, like the Syrians, it is 
a token of nobility. And some, by way of marking 
their nobility still further, pierce the nostrils also of 
their children and suspend from them rings of silver 
or gold—a thing which nobody with us would do, just 204 
as no man here would dress himself in a flowered 
robe reaching to the feet, although this dress, which 
with us is thought shameful, is held to be highly 
respectable by the Persians. And when, at the Court 
of Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily, a dress of this 
description was offered to the philosophers Plato and 
Aristippus,’ Plato sent it away with the words— 


a Cf. Hdt. iv. 176. 
> Cf. Diog. Laert. ii. 78, and i. 155 supra. The verses 
are from Eurip. Bacchae 836 and 317. 


463 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


οὐκ ἂν δυναίμην θῆλυν ἐνδῦναι στολήν 
ἄρρην πεφυκώς, 
€ \ 3 / / 7 
ὁ δὲ ᾿Αρίστιππος προσήκατο, φήσας 
καὶ γὰρ ἐν βακχεύμασιν 
S 5 ὦ / 2 / 
οὖσ᾽ ἢ ye σώφρων οὐ διαφθαρήσεται. 


“Ὁ \ 


οὕτω καὶ τῶν σοφῶν ᾧ μὲν οὐκ αἰσχρὸν ᾧ δὲ 
205 αἰσχρὸν ἐδόκει τοῦτο εἶναι. ἄθεσμον τέ ἐστι παρ 
ἡμῖν μητέρα 7 ἀδελφὴν ἰδίαν γαμεῖν" Πέρσαι δέ, 
καὶ μάλιστα αὐτῶν οἱ σοφίαν ἀσκεῖν δοκοῦντες, 
οὗ Μάγοι, γαμοῦσι τὰς μητέρας, καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι 
τὰς ἀδελφὰς ἄγονται πρὸς γάμον, καὶ ὡς ὁ 
ποιητής φησιν, ᾿ 
Ζεὺς “Ἥρην προσέειπε κασιγνήτην ἄλοχόν τε. 


ww 


ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ Κιτιεὺς Ζήνων φησὶ μὴ ἄτοπον εἶναι 
τὸ μόριον τῆς μητρὸς τῷ ἑαυτοῦ μορίῳ τρῖψαι, 
καθάπερ οὐδὲ ἄλλο τι μέρος τοῦ σώματος αὐτῆς 
τῇ χειρὶ τρῖψαι “φαῦλον ἂν εἴποι τις εἶναι. καὶ ὁ 

ρύσιππος δὲ ἐν τῇ πολιτείᾳ δογματίζει τόν τε 
πατέρα ἐκ τῆς θυγατρὸς παιδοποιεῖσθαι καὶ τὴν 
μητέρα ἐκ τοῦ παιδὸς καὶ τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἐκ τῆς 
ἀδελφῆς. Πλάτων δὲ καὶ καθολικώτερον κοινὰς 

206 εἶναι τὰς γυναῖκας δεῖν ἀπεφήνατο. TO τε at~ 
σχρουργεῖν ἐπάρατον ὃν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ὁ Ζήνων οὐκ 
ἀποδοκιμάζει" καὶ ἄλλους δὲ ὡς ἀγαθῷ τινὶ τούτῳ 
χρῆσθαι τῷ κακῷ πυνθανόμεθα. 

207 ᾿Αλλὰ καὶ τὸ ἀνθρωπείων γεύεσθαι σαρκῶν παρ᾽ 
ἡμῖν μὲν ἄθεσμον, παρ᾽ ὅλοις δὲ βαρβάροις ἔθνεσιν 
ἀδιάφορον ἐστίν. καὶ τί δεῖ τοὺς βαρβάρους λέγειν, 

@ Of. i, 152. > Homer, Jl. xviii. 356. 
© Cf. § 246, i. 160. 
4:64 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 204-207 


A man am I, and never could I don 
A woman’s garb ; 
2 


but Aristippus accepted it, saying— 


For e’en midst revel-routs 
She that is chaste will keep her purity. 


Thus, even in the case of these sages, while the one of 
them deemed this practice shameful, the other did 
not. And with us it is sinful to marry one’s mother 205 
or one’s own sister ; but the Persians, and especially 
those of them who are reputed to practise wisdom— 
namely, the Magi,—marry their mothers; and the 
Egyptians ὦ take their sisters in marriage, even as the 
poet says°— τ, 


Thus spake Zeus unto Hera, his wedded wife and his 
sister. 


Moreover, Zeno of Citium says that it is not amiss for 
a man to rub his mother’s private part with his own 
private part, just as no one would say it was bad for 
him to rub any other part of her body with his hand. 
Chrysippus,° too, in his book The State approves of a 
father getting children by his daughter, a mother by 
her son, and a brother by his sister. And Plato, in 
more general terms, has declared that wives ought 
to be held in common. Masturbation, too, which we 206 
count loathsome, is not disapproved by Zeno ; and we 
are informed that others, too, practise this evil as 
though it were a good thing. 

Moreover, the eating of human flesh is sinful with 207 
us, but indifferent amongst whole tribes of bar- 
barians.@ Yet why should one speak of “ barbarians ” 


a Of. Rep. v. 457. ¢ Cf. § 925 infra. 
VOL. I 2H 465 


208 


209 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ὅπου καὶ ὃ Τυδεὺς τὸν ἐγκέφαλον τοῦ: πολεμίου 
λέγεται φαγεῖν, καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς στοᾶς οὐκ ἄτοπον 
s / A / 4 3 , bd 3 
εἶναί φασι τὸ σάρκας τινὰ ἐσθίειν ἄλλων τε ἀν- 
θρώπων καὶ ἑαυτοῦ; τό τε ἀνθρωπείῳ μιαίνειν 
αἵματι βωμὸν θεοῦ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν τοῖς πολλοῖς 
ἄθεσμον, Λάκωνες δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ τῆς Ὃρ- 
θωσίας ᾿Αρτέμιδος. μαστίξζονται πικρῷς ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
πολλὴν αἵματος ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ τῆς θεοῦ γενέσθαι 
c/s 3 \ \ ~ ? 7 Eg / 
ῥύσιν. ἀλλὰ Kat τῷ Kpdvy θύουσιν ἄνθρωπόν 

,ὔ \ / “~ 9 7 \ 
τίνες, καθάπερ καὶ Σκύθαι τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι τοὺς 
ξένους" ἡμεῖς δὲ χραίνεσθαι τὰ t ἱερὰ δοκοῦμεν ἀν- 
θρώπου φόνῳ. τούς γε μὴν μοιχοὺς κολάζει παρ᾽ 
ἡμῖν vopos, mapa δέ τισιν ἀδιάφορόν ἐστι ταῖς 
τῶν ἑτέρων γυναιξὶ μίγνυσθαι" καὶ φιλοσόφων δέ 
τινές φασιν ἀδιάφορον εἶναι τὸ ἀλλοτρίᾳ γυναικὶ 
μίγνυσθαι. 


210 Τοὺς πατέρας τε ὑπὸ τῶν παίδων. ἐπιμελείας 


211 


ἀξιοῦσθαι κελεύει παρ᾽ ἡμῖν νόμος" οἱ Σικύθαι δὲ 
ὑπὲρ τὰ ἑξήκοντα ἔτη γενομένους αὐτοὺς ἀποσφάτ- 
τουσιν. καὶ τί θαυμαστόν, εἴγε 6 μὲν Kpdvos τῇ 
ἅρπῃ τὰ αἰδοῖα ἐξέτεμε τοῦ πατρός, 6 δὲ Ze vs 
τὸν ρόνον κατεταρτάρωσεν, us δὲ ᾿Αθηνᾶ μετὰ 
Ἥρας καὶ Ποσειδῶνος τὸν πατέρα δεσμεύειν ἐπ- 
εχείρησεν.; > ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ παῖδας ὁ Κρόνος 
ἀναιρεῖν ἔκρινεν, καὶ ὃ Σόλων ᾿Αθηναίοις τὸν περὶ 
τῶν ἀκρίτων νόμον ἔθετο, καθ᾽ ὃν φονεύειν ἑκάστῳ 
τὸν ἕαυτοῦ παῖδα ἐπέτρεψεν. παρ᾽ ἡμῖν δὲ τὸ 
τοὺς παῖδας φονεύειν ἀπαγορεύουσιν οἱ νόμοι. οἵ 
τε Ῥωμαίων νομοθέται τοὺς παῖδας ὑποχειρίους 





α Tydeus, father of Diomede; his “‘enemy” was Melan- 
ippus (Zl. xiv. 11+ f.). 


466 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 207-211 


when even Tydeus* is said to have devoured the 
brains of his enemy, and the Stoic School declare 
that it is not wrong for a man to eat either other 
men’s flesh or his own? And with most of us it is 
sinful to defile an altar of a god with human blood, 
but the Laconians lash themselves fiercely over the 
altar of Artemis Orthosia° in order that a great 
stream of blood may flow over the altar of the 
goddess. Moreover, some sacrifice a human victim 
to Cronos, just as the Scythians ὁ sacrifice strangers 
to Artemis ; whereas we deem that holy places are 


208 


defiled by the slaying of a man. Adulterers are, of 209 


course, punished by law with us, but amongst some 
peoples ὦ intercourse with other men’s wives is a thing 
indifferent ; and some philosophers,’ too, declare that 
intercourse with the wife of another is indifferent. 


With us, also, the law enjoins that the fathers 210 


should receive due care from their children ; but the 
Seythians cut their throats when they get to be 
over sixty years old. And what wonder, seeing that 
Cronos cut off his father’s genitals with a sickle, and 
Zeus plunged Cronos down to Tartarus, and Athena 
with the help of Hera and Poseidon attempted to 


bind her father with fetters?4 Moreover, Cronos 211 


decided to destroy his own children, and Solon gave 
the Athenians the law “ concerning things immune,” 
by which he allowed each man to slay his own child ; 
but with us the laws forbid the slaying of children. 
The Roman lawgivers also ordain that the children 


ὃ Boys were scourged at the altar of Artemis Orthia in 
Laconia. 
© Of. 1. 149. 
ἃ Cf, Hdt. iv. 180; Aristot. Pol. ii. 3. 
6 e.g. Diogenes the Cynic, οὐ Diog. Laert. vi. 72. 
* Cf. Hom. JI. xiv. 204, i. 399. 
467 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


καὶ δούλους τῶν πατέρων κελεύουσιν’ εἶναι, καὶ 
τῆς οὐσίας τῶν παίδων μὴ κυριεύειν τοὺς παῖδας 
δι \ 4 7 [χὰ "nv > f ξ ΄- 
ἀλλὰ τοὺς πατέρας, ἕως ἂν ἐλευθερίας οἱ παῖδες 
3 
τύχωσι KATA τοὺς ἀργυρωνήτους" παρ᾽ ἕτέροις δὲ 
212 ὡς τυραννικὸν τοῦτο ἐκβέβληται. νόμος τέ ἐστι 
Ἁ 3 / / ς / \ 
τοὺς ἀνδροφόνους κολάζεσθαι: of μονομάχαι δὲ 
φονεύοντες πολλάκις καὶ τιμῆς τυγχάνουσιν. ἀλλὰ 
καὶ τὸ τύπτειν ἐλευθέρους οἱ νόμοι κωλύουσιν" οἱ 
3 Ἁ A / 3 a 3 
ἀθληταὶ δὲ, τύπτοντες ἐλευθέρους ἄνδρας, πολ- 
λάκις καὶ ἀναιροῦντες, τιμῶν καὶ στεφάνων ἀξιοῦν - 
918 ται. νόμος τε παρ᾽ ἡμῖν κελεύει μιᾷ συνοικεῖν 
ἕκαστον, Θρᾳκῶν δὲ καὶ Γαιτούλων (Λιβύων δὲ 
914 ἔθνος τοῦτο) πολλαῖς ἕκαστος συνοικεῖ. τό τε 
a ta 
λῃστεύειν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν παράνομον Kal ἄδικόν 
ἐστι, παρὰ δὲ πολλοῖς τῶν βαρβάρων οὐκ ἄτοπον. 
\ \ « \ 3 \ “~ e / > Sf 
φασὶ δὲ ὅτι καὶ εὐκλεὲς τοῦτο ot Κίλικες ἐνόμιζον 
εἶναι, ὡς καὶ τοὺς ἐν λῃστείᾳ τελευτήσαντας τιμῆς 
ἀξίους εἶναι δοκεῖν. καὶ 6 Νέστωρ δὲ παρὰ τῷ 
ποιητῇ, μετὰ τὸ φιλοφρονήσασθαι τοὺς περὶ τὸν 
\ \ 
Τηλέμαχον, φησὶ πρὸς αὐτοὺς 


ἦ μαψιδίως ἀλάλησθε 


es a 
οἷά τε ληιστῆρες; 


ἢ > »” ey \ x , ’ Ν a 4 
καυτοι εἰ ἄτοπον ἣν TO Λῃστεύῦειν, οὐκ ἂν «ἣν. 
\ / \ 
οὕτως αὐτοὺς φιλοφρονησάμενος διὰ τὸ ὑποπτεύειν 
“-Ἤ } > 
μὴ ἄρα τοιοῦτοί τινες εἶεν. 
Ἂ 5 ᾿ \ , \ > ta .. » 
215 ᾿Αλλὰ καὶ κλέπτειν [μὲν] παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν ἄδικον 
? ¢ \ A / ἊΣ 
καὶ παράνομόν ἐστιν" οἱ δὲ καὶ κλεπτίστατον εἶναι 
4 e o~ wy “~ ᾽ὔ 
θεὸν λέγοντες τὸν “Ἑρμῆν οὐκ ἄδικον τοῦτο νομί- 
“~ “ \ av 7 
ζεσθαι ποιοῦσιν: πῶς yap av θεὸς εἴη κακός; 
A ¢ 
φασὶ δέ τινες ὅτι καὶ of Λάκωνες τοὺς κλέπτας 
1 «ἣν» addidi: «ὠνείδισε post φιλοφρ. cj. Mutsch 
468 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 211-215 


are subjects and slaves of their fathers, and that power 
over the children’s property belongs to the fathers 
and not the children, until the children have obtained 
their freedom like bought slaves ; but this custom is 
rejected by others as being despotic. Itis the law, too, 212 
that homicides should be punished ; but gladiators 
when they kill often receive actual commendation. 
Moreover, the laws prevent the striking of free men ; 
yet when athletes strike free men, and often even 
kill them, they are deemed worthy of rewards and 
crowns. With us, too, the law bids each man to 213 
have one wife, but amongst the Thracians and 
Gaetulians (a Libyan tribe)* each man has many 
wives. Piracy, toe, is with us illegal and criminal, 914 
but with many of the barbarians it is not disapproved. 
Indeed they say that the Cilicians used to regard it 
as a noble pursuit, so that they held those who died 
in the course of piracy to be worthy of honour. So 
too Nestor—in the poet’s account °>—after welcoming 
Telemachus and his comrades, addresses them thus— 


Say, are you roaming 
Aimlessly, like sea-rovers ? 


Yet, if piracy had been an improper thing, he would 
not have welcomed them in this friendly way, because 
of his suspicion that they might be people of that 
kind. 

Moreover, thieving is with us illegal and criminal ; 215 
yet those who declare that Hermes is a most thievish 
god cause this practice to be accounted not criminal— 
for how could a god be bad? And some say that the 
Laconians also punished those who thieved, not be- 


« Cf. Sallust, Bell. Jug. 21, 82. 


δ Homer, Od. iii. 73. For early Greek piracy ¢f. Thucyd. 
i, 5. 


469 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἐκόλαζον od διὰ τὸ κεκλοφέναι ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ πεφω- 
216 ρᾶσθαι. ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ δειλὸς καὶ ὁ ῥίψασπις ἀνὴρ 
κολάζεται παρὰ πολλοῖς νόμῳ" διὸ καὶ ἡ τὴν ἀσπί- 
δα τῷ παιδὶ ἐ ἐπὶ πόλεμον ἐξιόντι διδοῦσα Λάκαινα 
od” ἔφη, “τέκνον, ἢ ταύταν ἣ ἐπὶ ταύταν. 
᾿Αρχίλοχος δέ, ὥσπερ σεμνυνόμενος ἡμῖν ἐπὶ τῷ 
τὴν ἀσπίδα ῥίψας φυγεῖν, ἐν τοῖς Τοιήμασι περὶ 
ἑαυτοῦ φησὶν 


3 / A oh 3 lA Δ \ / 
ἀσπίδι μὲν Σιαΐων τις ἀγάλλεται, ἣν παρὰ θάμνῳ 
ἔντος ἀμώμητον κάλλιπον οὐκ ἐθέλων, 
3 \ 3 595 2 ? 7 
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἐξέφυγον θανάτου τέλος. 


217 αἱ δὲ ᾿Αμαζόνες καὶ ἐχώλευον τὰ ἄρρενα τῶν παρ᾽ 
αὐταῖς γεννωμένων ὑπὲρ τοῦ μηδὲν ἀνδρεῖον αὐτὰ 
ποιῆσαι δύνασθαι, περὶ πόλεμον δὲ ἔσχον αὐταί, 
τοῦ ἐναντίου παρ᾽ ἡμῖν καλῶς ἔχειν νενομισμένου. 
καὶ ἡ “μήτηρ δὲ τῶν θεῶν προσίεται τοὺς θηλυδρίας, 
οὐκ ἂν οὕτω κρίνασα ἡ θεός, εἴγε φύσει φαῦλον 

218 ἦν τὸ μὴ ἀνδρεῖον εἶναι. οὕτω καὶ τὰ περὶ τῶν 
δικαίων καὶ ἀδίκων καὶ τοῦ κατὰ τὴν ἀνδρίαν 
καλοῦ πολλὴν ἀνωμαλίαν ἔχει. 

Kai τὰ περὶ εὐσεβείας δὲ καὶ θεῶν πεπλήρωται 
πολλῆς διαφωνίας. θεοὺς γὰρ οἱ μὲν πολλοί φασιν 
εἶναι τινὲς δὲ οὐκ εἶναι, ὥσπερ οἵ περὶ Διαγόραν 
τὸν Μήλιον καὶ Θεόδωρον καὶ Κριτίαν τὸν ᾿Αθη- 
ναῖον. καὶ τῶν εἶναι θεοὺς ἀποφηναμένων οἱ μὲν 
τοὺς πατρίους νομίζουσι θεούς, οὗ δὲ τοὺς ἐν ταῖς 





@ A. of Paros, famous for his iambic poems, circa 680 8.6. 
Alcaeus, a later poet, also flung away his shield in battle ; 
and Η or. Od. ii. 7 is based on one or other of these incidents. 

ek Hdt. iv. 114. 
ybele, whose priests were eunuchs, cf. Catullus 63. 


470 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 215-218 


cause they had thieved, but because they had been 
found out. * Moreover, the coward and the man 216 
who throws away his shield are in many places 
punished by law; and this is why the Laconian 
mother, when giving a shield to her son as he set 
out for the war, said, “ Either with this, my child, or 
upon it.” Yet Archilochus,* as though vaunting to 

us of his flight after flinging away his shield, speaks 
thus of himself in his poems— 


Over my shield some Saian warrior gloats,— 
The shield I left, though loth, beside the bush— 
A flawless piece of armour; I myself 

Fled and escaped from death which endeth all. 


And the Amazon’ ὃ used to maim the males amongst 217 
their offspring so as to make them incapable of any 
manly action, while they themselves attended to 
warfare ; though with us the opposite practice is 
regarded as right. The Mother of the gods,° also, 
approves of effeminates, and the goddess would not 
have decided thus if unmanliness were naturally a 
bad thing. So it is that, in regard to justice and 218 
injustice and the excellence of manliness, there is a 
great variety of opinion. 

Around all matters of religion and theology also, 
there rages violent controversy. For while the 
majority declare that gods exist, some deny their 
existence, like the School of Diagoras of Melos, and 
Theodorus, and Critias the Athenian.@ And of those 
who maintain the existence of gods, some believe in 
the ancestral gods, others in such as are constructed 


¢ Cf. for this subject Adv. Phys. i. 13 ff., 50 ff. 

¢ Diagoras, atomist and poet, circa 420 3.c. ; Theodorus, 
a Cyrenaic, circa 310 8.c.; Critias, orator and poet, one of 
the “ Thirty Tyrants ” (404 8.c.) of Athens. 


471 


219 


220 


221 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


δογματικαῖς αἱρέσεσιν ἀναπλασσομένους,᾽ ὡς ᾿Αρι- 
στοτέλης “μὲν ἀσώματον εἶπεν εἶναι tov θεὸν καὶ 
πέρας τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, στωικοὶ δὲ πνεῦμα διῆκον καὶ 
Α ~ 3 o~ 3 7 \ 3 i 
διὰ τῶν εἰδεχθῶν, *Ezixovpos δὲ ἀνθρωπόμορφον, 
_ a a ‘ 
Ξενοφάνης δὲ σφαῖραν ἀπαθῆ. καὶ οἱ μὲν προ- 
νοεῖν τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς, οἵ δὲ μὴ προνοεῖν" τὸ γὰρ 
μακάριον καὶ ἄφθαρτον ὃ ᾿Επίκουρός" φησι μήτε 
αὐτὸ πράγματα ἔχειν μήτε ἑτέροις παρέχειν. ὅθεν 
καὶ τῶν κατὰ τὸν βίον ot μὲν ἕνα φασὶν εἶναι θεόν, 
οἱ δὲ πολλοὺς καὶ διαφόρους ταῖς μορφαῖς, ὡς 
καὶ εἷς τὰς τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ὑπολήψεις ἐκπίπτειν, 
κυνοπροσώπους καὶ ἱερακομόρφους καὶ βόας καὶ 
κροκοδείλους καὶ τί γὰρ οὐχὲ πομιζόντων τοὺς 
θεούς. 
Ψ \ \ \ ~ \ “" δ \ 
Οθεν καὶ τὰ περὶ θυσιῶν καὶ τῆς περὶ τοὺς 
4 3 ; 
θεοὺς θρησκείας ὅλως πολλὴν ἀνωμαλίαν ἔχει: ἃ 
γὰρ ἔν τισιν ἱεροῖς ὅσια, ταῦτα ἐν “ἑτέροις ἀνόσια. 
καίτοι εἰ φύσει τὸ ὅσιον καὶ τὸ ἀνόσιον ἦν, οὐκ ἂν 
τοῦτο ἐνομίσθη. οἷον γοῦν Σαράπιδι χοῖρον οὐκ 
“ \ \ 3 ἴω / 
av θύσειέ τις, Ἡρακλεῖ δὲ καὶ ᾿Ασκληπιῷ θύουσιν. 
πρόβατον “lowe θύειν ἄθεσμον, τῇ μητρὶ μέντοι 
εγομένῃ τῶν θεῶν καὶ θεοῖς ἄλλοις καλλιερεῦται. 
δες ; ς ͵ 1 7 " 
τῷ Ἰζρόνῳ <ot Ἱζαρχηδόνιοι»" θύουσιν ἄνθρωπον, 
ὃ τοῖς πλείστοις ἀσεβὲς εἶναι νομίζεται. αἴλουρον 
ἐν ᾿Αλεξανδρείᾳ. τῷ Ὥρῳ θύουσι, καὶ Θέτιδι 


σίλφην: ὃ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν οὐκ ἂν ποιήσειέ τις. ἵππον 


1 (οἱ Καρχηδόνιοι» addidi: «τινὲς 5é ante τῷ cj. Mutsch. 


-ποπαεσσπαο 


* This definition of God is not in our Aristotle, but ¢f. De 
caelo, i. 9, 279 a 16: ‘Weare wont to give the name of 
‘Heaven’ especially to the outermost and highest (part of 
the Universe), in which all the Divinity, we say, is situated.” 


472 





OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 218-221 


in the Ddgmatic systems—as Aristotle asserted 
that God is imcorporeal and “ the limit of heaven,” @ 
the Stoics that he is a breath which permeates even 
through things foul, Epicurus that he is anthropo- 
morphic,? Xenophanes that he is an impassive sphere. 
Some, too, hold that he cares for human affairs, others 219 
that he does not so care ; for Epicurus declares that 
“what is blessed andincorruptible neither feels trouble 
itself nor causes it to others.”” Hence ordinary people 
differ also, some saying that there is one god, others 
that there are many gods and of various shapes ; 
in fact, they even come to share the notions of the 
Egyptians ° who believe in gods that are dog-faced, or 
hawk-shaped, or gows or crocodiles or anything else. 
Hence, too, sacrificial usages, and the ritual of wor- 220 
ship in general, exhibit great diversity. For things 
which are in some cults accounted holy are in others 
accounted unholy. But this would not have been so 
if the holy and the unholy existed by nature. Thus, 
for example, no one would sacrifice a pig to Sarapis, 
but they sacrifice it to Heracles and Asclepius. To 
sacrifice a sheep to Isis is forbidden, but it is offered 
up in honour of the so-called Mother of the gods 
and of other deities. To Cronos? a human victim is 221 
sacrificed <at Carthage>, although this is regarded by 
most as an impious act. In Alexandria they offer a 
cat to Horus and a beetle to Thetis—a thing which 
no one here would do. To Poseidon they sacrifice a 


It is this outermost circumference—the abode of Fire, the 
finest and most divine of elements—-which is here termed 
** the limit’ (wépas). 

> Cf. Diog. Laert. vii. 138 f. (Stoics), x. 189 (Epicureans). 
For Xenophanes οἱ i. 225. 

¢ Cf. Hdt. ii. 41, Juvenal xv. 2 ff. 

4 Cf. § 208 supra. 


478 


223 


224 


225 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῷ Ποσειδῶνι καλλιεροῦσιν: ᾿Απόλλωνι δέ, ἐξ- 
αἱιρέτως τῷ Διδυμαίῳ, τὸ ζῶον ἀπέχθές. αἶγας 
᾿Αρτέμιδι θύειν εὐσεβές, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ᾿Ασκληπιῷ. 
καὶ ἄλλα δὲ τούτοις ὅμοια παμπληθῆ λέγειν ἔχων 
ἐῶ, τῆς συντομίας [παρα]στοχαζόμενος. εἰ μέντοι 
τι ἦν ὅσιον φύσει θῦμα καὶ ἀνόσιον, παρὰ πᾶσιν 
ἂν ὁμοίως ἐνομίζετο. ; 
Παραπλήσια δὲ τούτοις ἔστιν εὑρεῖν Kal τὰ ἐν 
τῇ κατὰ τὴν δίαυταν τῶν ἀνθρώπων θρησκείᾳ περὶ 
τοὺς θεούς. ᾿Ιουδαῖος. μὲν γὰρ ἢ ἱερεὺς Αἰγύπτιος 
θᾶττον ἂν ἀποθάνοι 7 χοίρειον φάγοι, Λίβυς δὲ 
προβατείου γεύσασθαι κρέως τῶν ἀθεσμοτάτων 
εἶναι δοκεῖ, Σύρων δέ τινες περῳτερᾶς, ἄλλοι δὲ 
ἱερείων. ἰχθῦς τε ἐν τισὶ μὲν ἱεροῖς θέμις ἐσθίειν, 
ἐν ἄλλοις δὲ ἀσεβές. Αἰγυπτίων δὲ τῶν coda 
εἶναι νενομισμένων οὗ μὲν κεφαλὴν ζώου φαγεῖν 
ἀνίερον εἶναι νομίζουσιν, οἱ δὲ ὠμοπλάτην, οἱ δὲ 
πόδα, οὗ δὲ ἄλλο τι. κρόμμυον δὲ οὐκ ἄν τις 
προσενέγκαιτο τῶν καθιερουμένων. τῷ κατὰ , Πηλού- 
σιον Kaciw Διί, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ἱερεὺς τῆς κατὰ 
Λιβύην ᾿Αφροδίτης σκορόδου γεύσαιτο ἄν. ἀπ- 
ἔχονται δὲ ἐ ἐν οἷς μὲν ἱεροῖς μίνθης, ἐ ἐν οἷς δὲ ἡδυ- 
ὅσμου, ἐν οἷς δὲ σελίνου. ἔνιοι δὲ θᾶττον ὁ ἂν τὰς 
κεφαλὰς φαγεῖν φασὶ τῶν πατέρων 7 κυάμους. 
ἀλλὰ παρ᾽ ἕτέροις ταῦτα ἀδιάφορα. κυνείων τε 
γεύσασθαι δοκοῦμεν ἡμεῖς ἀνίερον εἶναι, Θρᾳκῶν 
δὲ ἔνιοι κυνοφαγεῖν ἡ ἱστοροῦνται. ἴσως δὲ καὶ παρ᾽ 
Ἕλλησι τοῦτο ἣν σύνηθες" διόπερ καὶ Διοκλῆς ἀ ἀπὸ 
τῶν κατὰ τοὺς ᾿Ασκληπιάδας ὁρμώμενος τισὶ τῶν 





UF a 1.6. of Didymus, near GP Ἐς Ἶ 
t. li. 47, ὃ t. ii, 39. 
@ Cf. Juv. xv. 9. 6 Kast of the Nile Delta. 


474 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 221-225 


horse ; but to Apollo (especially the Didymaean δ 
Apollo) thatsanimal is an abomination. It is an act 
of piety to offer goats to Artemis, but not to Asclepius. 
And I might add a host of similar instances, but I 
forbear since my aim is to be brief. Yet surely, if a 
sacrifice had been holy by nature or unholy, it would 
have been deemed so by all men alike. 

Examples similar to these may also be found in 
the religious observances with regard to human diet. 
For a Jew or an Egyptian priest ὃ would sooner die 
than eat swine’s flesh ; by a Libyan it is regarded as 
a most impious thing to taste the meat of a sheep, 
by some of the Syrians to eat a dove, and by others 
to eat sacrificial,victims. And in certain cults it is 
lawful, but in others impious, to eat fish. And 
amongst the Egyptians some of those who are re- 
puted to be sages believe it is sinful to eat an animal’s 
head,¢ others the shoulder, others the foot, others 
some other part. And no one would bring an onion ὦ 
as an offering to Zeus Casius of Pelusium,’ just as 
no priest of the Libyan Aphrodite would taste garlic. 
And in some cults they abstain from mint, in others 
from catmint, in others from parsley. And some 
declare that they would sooner eat their fathers’ 
heads than beans.’ Yet, amongst others, these things 
are indifferent. Eating dog’s flesh, too, is thought 
by us to be sinful, but some of the Thracians are 
reported to be dog-eaters. Possibly this practice was 
customary also amongst the Greeks; and on this 
account Diocles, too, starting from the practices of 
the Asclepiadae,’ prescribes that hounds’ flesh should 

7 Cf. Emped. Frag. 141; probably a Pythagorean (or 
Orphic) “ taboo’; ef. Hdt. ii. 37. 

9 The earliest Greek medical guild ; Diocles was a famous 
physician of the fourth century B.c. 


ATS 


222 


223 


224 


225 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


/ ᾽ / , we \ 
πασχόντων σκυλάκεια δίδοσθαι κελεύει Kpea. τινὲς 
\ \ 3 7 / ¢ 37 a > / 
de καὶ ἀνθρώπων σάρκας, ws ἔφην, ἀδιαφόρως 
ἐσθίουσιν, ὅπερ aviepov παρ᾽ ἡμῖν εἶναι νενόμισται. 
226 καίτοι εἴγε Hv φύσει τὰ τῆς θρησκείας καὶ τῶν 
3 “- / 
ἀθέσμων, παρὰ πᾶσιν ἂν ὁμοίως ἐνομίζετο. 
Παραπλήσια δὲ ἔστι λέγειν καὶ περὶ τῆς εἰς 
τοὺς κατοιχομένους ὁσιότητος. οἱ μὲν γὰρ ὅλο- 
κλήρως περιστείλαντες τοὺς ἀποθανόντας γῇ καλύ- 
πτουσιν, ἀσεβὲς εἶναι νομίζοντες ἡλίῳ δεικνύειν 
> / 3 4 \ Ν᾿ 3} > ld 
αὐτούς: Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ τὰ ἔντερα ἐξελόντες ταρι- 
χεύουσιν αὐτοὺς καὶ σὺν ἑαυτοῖς ὑπὲρ γῆς ἔχουσιν. 
227 Αἰθιόπων δὲ ot ἰχθυοφάγοι εἰς τὰς λίμνας ἐμ- 
’, 9 ’ € 4 ~~ 2 ᾿ " ͵ 
βάλλουσιν αὐτούς, ὑπὸ τῶν ἰχθύων᾽ βρωθησομένους- 
δ ὁ 4 δὲ \ ? A 3 ᾽ ’ 3 ~ 
ρκανοὶ δὲ κυσὶν αὐτοὺς ἐκτίθενται βοράν, ᾿Ινδῶν 
ὃ \ 2) / ἐ8 λ ὃ / ὃ / > #/ 

é ἔνιοι γυψίν. Τρωγλοδύτας δέ φασιν ἐπί τινα 
γεώλοφον ἄγειν τὸν ἀποθανόντα, εἶτα δεσμεύσαντας 
3 “- Ἁ λὴ \ ‘ “ὃ AO LAA 
αὐτοῦ τὴν κεφαλὴν πρὸς τοὺς πόδας λίθοις βάλλειν 
μετὰ γέλωτος, εἶθ᾽ ὅταν χώσωσιν αὐτὸν τοῖς βαλ- 

228 λομένοις ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι. τινὲς δὲ βάρβαροι τοὺς 
μὲν ὑπὲρ ἑξήκοντα ἔτη γεγονότας θύσαντες ἐσθίου- 
σιν, τοὺς δὲ ἐν νεότητι ἀποθανόντας γῇ κρύπτουσιν. 
ἔνιοι δὲ καίουσι τοὺς τετελευτηκότας" ὧν οἱ μὲν 
3 7 ? ~ 4 > 7 [4 ξ A 
ἀναλαβόντες αὐτῶν τὰ ὀστέα κηδεύουσιν, ot δὲ 
ἀφροντίστως καταλείπουσιν ἐρριμμένα. Πέρσας δέ 
φασιν ἀνασκολοπίζειν τοὺς ἀποθανόντας καὶ νίτρῳ 
ταριχεύειν, εἶθ᾽ οὕτω τελαμῶσι συνειλεῖν. ἄλλοι 
δὲ ὅσον πένθος ἐπὶ τοῖς τελευτήσασιν ὑπομένουσιν 
ὁρῶμεν. 





α § 207 supra. 
476 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 225-228 


be given to certain patients. And some, as I have 
said,? even eat human flesh indifferently, a thing 
which with us is accounted sinful. Yet, if the rules 226 
of ritual and of unlawful foods had existed by nature, 
they would have been observed by all men alike. 

A similar account may be given of reverence 
towards the departed. Some wrap the dead up 
completely and then cover them with earth, thinking 
that it is impious to expose them to the sun; but 
the Egyptians take out their entrails and embalm 
them and keep them above ground with themselves. 
The fish-eating tribes of the Ethiopians cast them 227 
into the lakes, there to be devoured by the fish; the 
Hyrcanians ὁ expose them as a prey to dogs, and some 
of the Indians to vultures. And they say that some 
of the Troglodytes ὦ take the corpse to a hill, and then 
after tying its head to its feet cast stones upon it 
amidst laughter, and when they have made a heap 
of stones over it they leave it there. And some 228 
of the barbarians®¢ slay and eat those who are over 
sixty years old, but bury in the earth those who die 
young. Some burn the dead; and of these some 
recover and preserve their bones,’ while others show 
no care but leave them scattered about. And they 
say that the Persians? impale their dead and 
embalm them with nitre, after which they wrap 
them round in bandages. How much grief others 
endure for the dead we see ourselves. 


> For this subject cf. Diog. Laert. ix. 84; Cic. Tuse. i. 45; 
Sir T. Browne, Hydriotaphia, chap. i. 

¢ South of the Caspian Sea. 

4 2,6. “ cave-dwellers * of west coast of the Red Sea. 

6 Cf. § 210 supra. 

7 Cf. Tibull. iii. 2. 17 for the practice of ossilegium. 

σ Cf. Hat. i. 140. 


47 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


\ 
222 Καὶ τὸν θάνατον δὲ αὐτὸν οὗ μὲν δεινὸν Kat 
/ € ~ ¢ 
φευκτὸν εἶναι νομίζουσιν, ot δὲ od «τοιοῦτον. 6 


γοῦν Ἑϊὐρυπίδης φησὶν 


τίς δ᾽ oldev εἰ τὸ ζῆν μέν ἐστι κατθανεῖν, 
τὸ κατθανεῖν δὲ ζῆν κάτω νομίζεται; 


καὶ ὁ ᾽᾿ἘΠπίκουρος δέ φησιν “6 θάνατος οὐδὲν πρὸς 
¢ ~ \ Α \ 3 “A \ \ 3 
ἡμᾶς" TO yap διαλυθὲν ἀναισθητεῖ, τὸ δὲ ἀναισθη- 
τοῦν οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς. φασὶ δὲ καὶ ὡς εἴπερ 
συνεστήκαμεν ἐκ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος, 6 δὲ θάνατος 
διάλυσίς ἐστι ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος, ὅτε μὲν ἡμεῖς 
ἐσμέν, οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ θάνατος (οὐ γὰρ διαλυόμεθα), 
ὅτε δὲ ὁ θάνατος ἔστιν, οὐκ ἐσμὲν ἡμεῖς" τῷ γὰρ 
μηκέτι τὴν σύστασιν εἶναι τῆς ψυχῆς καὶ τοῦ 
280 σώματος οὐδὲ ἡμεῖς ἐσμέν. ὁ δὲ Ἡράκλειτός 
φησιν ὅ ὅτι καὶ τὸ ζῆν καὶ τὸ ἀποθανεῖν καὶ ἐν τῷ 
ζῆν ἡμᾶς ἐστὶ καὶ ἐν τῷ τεθνάναι: ὅτε μὲν γὰρ 
ἡμεῖς ζῶμεν, τὰς ψυχὰς ἡμῶν τεθνάναι καὶ ἐν 
ἡμῖν τεθάφθαι, ὅτε δὲ ἡμεῖς ἀποθνήσκομεν, τὰς 
ψυχὰς ἀναβιοῦν καὶ ζῆν. ἔνιοι δὲ καὶ βέλτιον 
εἶναι τὸ ἀποθανεῖν τοῦ ζῆν ἡμᾶς ὑπολαμβάνουσιν. 
6 γοῦν Ἐύὐριπίδης φησὶν 


ἐχρῆν γὰρ ἡμᾶς σύλλογον ποιουμένους 
τὸν φύντα θρηνεῖν, εἰς ὅσ᾽ ἔρχεται κακά, 
τὸν δ᾽ αὖ θανόντα καὶ κακῶν πεπαυμένον 
χαίροντας εὐφημοῦντας ἐκπέμπειν δόμων. 


231 ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς αὐτῆς ὑπολήψεως καὶ ταῦτα εἴρηται" 





* Kurip. Frag. 638 (Nauck). 
᾿ Epic. Ὁ. 61.6; 71. 6 (Usener); οὐ Lucret. iii. 830. 


478 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 229-231 


Some, too, believe death itself to be dreadful and 229 
horrible, others do not. Thus Euripides says @: 


Who knows if life be but the state of death, 
And death be counted life in realms below ? 


And Epicurus® declares: “ Death is nothing to us; 
for what is dissolved is senseless, and what is senseless 
is nothing to us.”’ They also declare that, inasmuch as 
we are compounded of soul and body, and death is a 
dissolution of soul and body, when we exist death 
does not exist (for we are not being dissolved), and 
when death exists we do not exist, for through the 
cessation of the compound of soul and body we too 
cease to exist. And Heracleitus ὁ states that both life 230 
and death exist Moth in our state of life and in our 
state of death; for when we live our souls are dead 
and buried within us, and when we die our souls 
revive and live. And some even suppose that dying 
is better for us than living. Thus Euripides says?: 


Rather should we assemble to bewail 

The babe new-born, such ills has he to face ; 
Whereas the dead, who has surcease from woe, 
With joy and gladness we should bear from home. 


These lines, too, spring from the same sentiment’: 231 


¢ Cf. Heracl. Frag. 67, 78(B 88 Diels). Part of the 
“Upward and Downward Way”’ of H. (see Introd. p. viii) 
is the cycle of generation by which every creature is simul- 
taneously both living and dying. The soul, which consists 
of “fire,” is continually passing into the other elements, 
and the other elements into it. But the second clause (“‘ for 
when we live” etc.) looks rather like a contamination of 
Heracleitus’s doctrine with the σῶμα----σῆμα (“ὁ body atomb”’) 
theory of Pythagoreanism. 

@ Frag. 449; οὗ. Cic. Tuse. i. 48, Lucr. v. 222 ff. 

6 Theognis 425 ff. ; cf. Séph. Oed. Col. 1227. 


479 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


2 Ἁ \ A ~ 3 / » 

ἀρχὴν μὲν μὴ φῦναι ἐπιχθονίοισιν ἄριστον, 
δ᾽ 3 ὃ “A > \ »ὦ 2 > λέ 

μηδ᾽ ἐσιδεῖν αὐγὰς ὀξέος ἠελίους 
4 > Φ δὴ / 9 ole ton 

φύντα δ᾽ ὅπως ὥκιστα πύλας ᾿Αἴδαο περῆσαι 
\ “A 4 ~ 3 ,ὔ 

καὶ κεῖσθαι πολλὴν γαῖαν ἐφεσσάμενον. 


καὶ τὰ περὶ Κλέοβιν δὲ καὶ Βίτωνα ἴσμεν, ἅ φησιν 
ὁ “Ἡρόδοτος ἐν τῷ περὶ τῆς ᾿Αργείας ἱερείας λόγῳ. 
232 ἱστοροῦνται δὲ καὶ Θρᾳκῶν ἔνιοι περικαθεσθέντες 
τὸν γεννηθέντα θρηνεῖν. οὐδὲ 6 θάνατος οὖν τῶν 
φύσει δεινῶν εἶναι νομίζοιτο ἄν, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ τὸ ζῆν 
τῶν φύσει καλῶν. οὐδὲ τῶν προειρημένων τί ἐστι 
φύσει τοῖον ἢ τοῖον, νομιστὰ δὲ πάντα καὶ πρός τι. 
388 Τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ τρόπον τῆς ἐπιχειρήσεως μετα- 
φέρειν ἔστι καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἕκαστον τῶν ἄλλων, ἃ μὴ 
ἐξεθέμεθα νῦν διὰ τὴν συντομίαν τοῦ λόγου. εἰ 
δὲ καὶ περί τινων μὴ ἔχομεν εἰπεῖν αὐτόθεν ἀνω- 
μαλίαν, λεκτέον ὅτι ἔν τισιν ἔθνεσιν ἀγνοουμένοις 
ἡμῖν ἐνδέχεται καὶ περὶ αὐτῶν εἶναι διαφωνίαν. 
284 ὡς οὖν εἰ μὴ ἐγιγνώσκομεν, εἰ τύχοι, τὸ περὶ τοῦ 
τὰς ἀδελφὰς γαμεῖν τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἔθος, οὐκ ἂν 
ὀρθῶς διεβεβαιούμεθα ὁμολογούμενον παρὰ πᾶσιν 
εἶναι τὸ μὴ δεῖν ἀδελφὰς γαμεῖν, οὕτως οὐδὲ περὶ 
τῶν πραγμάτων ἐκείνων ἐν οἷς οὐχ ὑποπίπτουσιν 
ἡμῖν ἀνωμαλίαι διαβεβαιοῦσθαι προσήκει μὴ εἶναι 
διαφωνίαν ἐν αὐτοῖς, ἐνδεχομένου, καθάπερ ἔφην, 
τοῦ παρά τισιν ἔθνεσι τῶν ἡμῖν μὴ γινωσκομένων 
τὴν περὶ αὐτῶν εἶναι διαφωνίαν. 





* Cf. Hdt. i. 31; Οἷς. Tuse. i. 47. Their mother Cydippe 
(the “ Argive priestess ’’ of Hera) prayed the goddess to grant 
her sons, C. and B., the best of boons for mortals: the same 
night both died in their sleep. 


480 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 231-234 


Not to have been begotten at all were the best thing for 
mortals, 
Nor to havé lookéd upon fiery rays of the sun : 
Or, if begotten, to hasten amain to the portals of Hades, 
And to lie unmoved robéd in masses of earth. 


We know, too, the facts about Cleobis and Biton 
which Herodotus? relates in his story of the Argive 
priestess. It is reported, also, that some of the 232 
Thracians sit round the new-born babe and chant 
dirges.° So, then, death should not be considered a 
thing naturally dreadful, just as life should not be 
considered a thing naturally good. Thus none of the 
things mentioned above is naturally of this character 
or of that, but all are matters of convention and 
relative. ᾿ 

The same method of treatment may be applied also 233 
to each of the other customs, which we have not now 
described owing to the summary character of our 
exposition. And even if, in regard to some of them, 
we are unable to declare their discrepancy offhand, 
we ought to observe that disagreement concerning 
them may possibly exist amongst certain nations that 
are unknown to us.° For just as, if we had been 234 
ignorant, say, of the custom amongst the Egyptians 
of marrying sisters,“ we should have asserted wrongly 
that it was universally agreed that men ought not to 
marry sisters,—even so, in regard to those practices 
wherein we notice no discrepancy, it is not proper for 
us to affirm that there is no disagreement about them, 
since, as I said, disagreement about them may possibly 
exist amongst some of the nations which are unknown 
to us. 


>’ Cf. Hdt. v. 4. ¢ CF, ii, 40. 
ὦ Cf. 8 205 supra. 


VOL. I Q1 481 


258 


236 


237 


238 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


‘O τοίνυν σκεπτικὸς τὴν τοσαύτην ᾿ἀνωμαλίαν 
τῶν πραγμάτων ὁρῶν ἐπέχει μὲν περὶ τοῦ φύσει 
τι ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακὸν ἢ ὅλως πρακτέον ἣ μὴ πρακτέον 
εἶναι, κἀν τούτῳ τῆς δογματικῆς ἀφιστάμενος προ- 
πετείας, ἕπεται δὲ ἀδοξάστως τῇ βιωτικῇ τηρήσει, 
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἐν μὲν τοῖς δοξαστοῖς ἀπαθὴς μένει, 
ἐν δὲ τοῖς κατηναγκασμένοις μετριοτίαθεῖ: ὡς μὲν 
γὰρ ἄνθρωπος αἰσθητιιςῶςϊ πάσχει, μὴ προσδοξά- 
ζων δὲ ὅτι τοῦτο ὃ πάσχει κακόν ἐστι φύσει, με- 
τριοπαθεῖ. τὸ γὰρ προσδοξάζειν τι τοιοῦτο χεῖρόν 
ἐστι καὶ αὐτοῦ τοῦ πάσχειν, ὡς ἐνίοτε τοὺς μὲν 
τεμνομένους ἢ ἄλλο τι τοιοῦτο πάσχοντας φέρειν, 
τοὺς δὲ παρεστῶτας διὰ τὴν πέρὶ τοῦ γινομένου 
δόξαν ὡς φαύλου λειποψυχεῖν. ὁ μέντοι γε ὑπο- 
θέμενος τὸ φύσει τι ἀγαθὸν ἣ κακὸν 7 ὅλως πρακ- 
τέον ἢ μὴ πρακτέον εἶναι ταράσσεται ποικίλως. 
καὶ γὰρ παρόντων αὐτῷ τούτων ἃ νομίζει φύσει 
κακὰ εἶναι ποινηλατεῖσθαι δοκεῖ, καὶ τῶν φαινο- 
μένων ἀγαθῶν αὐτῷ γινόμενος ἐγκρατὴς ὑπό τε 
τοῦ τύφου καὶ τοῦ περὶ τὴν ἀποβολὴν αὐτῶν φόβου, 
καὶ εὐλαβούμενος μὴ πάλιν ἐν τοῖς φύσει κακοῖς 
νομιζομένοις παρ᾽ αὐτῷ γένηται, ταραχαῖς οὐχὶ 
ταῖς τυχούσαις περιπίπτει" τοὺς γὰρ ἀναπόβλητα 
εἶναι. τὰ ἀγαθὰ λέγοντας ἐφέξομεν ἐκ τῆς ἀπο- 
ρίας τῆς κατὰ τὴν διαφωνίαν. ὅθεν ἐπιλογιζόμεθα 
ὅτι εἰ τὸ κακοῦ ποιητικὸν κακόν ἐστι καὶ φευκτόν, 
ἡ δὲ πεποίθησις τοῦ τάδε μὲν εἷναι φύσει ἀγαθὰ 


1 αἰσθητικῶς Heintz: αἰσθητικὸς mss., Bekk. 








0 ΟἹ 3. 18, 25 ff. 
482 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, ITI. 235-238 


Accordingly, the Sceptic, seeing so great a diversity 235 
of usages, suspends judgement as to the natural 
existence of anything good or bad or (in general) fit 
or unfit to be done, therein abstaining from the rash- 
ness of dogmatism ?; and he follows undogmatically 
the ordinary rules of life, and because of this he 
remains impassive in respect of matters of opinion, 
while in conditions that are necessitated his emotions 
are moderate; for though, as a human being, he 236 
suffers emotion through his senses, yet because he 
does not also opine that what he suffers is evil by 
nature, the emotion he suffers is moderate. For the 
added opinion that a thing is of such a kind is worse 
than the actual suffering itself, just as sometimes the 
patients themselves bear a surgical operation, while 
the bystanders swoon away because of their opinion 
that it is a horrible experience. But, in fact, he who 237 
assumes that there exists by nature something good 
or bad or, generally, fit or unfit to be done, is dis- 
quieted in various ways. For when he experiences 
what he regards as natural evils he deems himself to 
be pursued by Furies, and when he becomes possessed 
of what seems to him good things he falls into no 
ordinary state of disquiet both through arrogance and 
through fear of losing them, and through trying to 
guard against finding himself again amongst what he 
regards as natural evils ; for those who assert that goods 938 
are incapable of being lost® we shall put to silence 
by means of the doubts raised by their dissension. 
Hence we conclude that if what is productive of evil 
is evil and to be shunned, and the persuasion that 
these things are good, those evil, by nature produces 


δ So said the Cynics, and some Stoics ; other Stoics gave 
up the doctrine; ef. Diog. Laert. vi. 105, vii. 127. 


483 


239 


240 


24] 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τάδε δὲ κακὰ ταραχὰς ποιεῖ, κακόν ἐστι καὶ 
φευκτὸν τὸ ὑποτίθεσθαι καὶ πεποιθέναι φαῦλόν τι 
ἢ ἀγαθὸν ὡς πρὸς τὴν φύσιν εἶναι. 

Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ἀρκεῖ λελέχθαι 
περὶ ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν καὶ ἀδιαφόρων. 


KE’,—EI ἘΣΤῚ TEXNH ΠΈΡΙ BION 


Δῆλον δὲ ἐκ τῶν προειρημένων ὅτι οὐδὲ τέχνη 
τις ἂν εἴη περὶ τὸν βίον. εἰ γὰρ ἔστι τοιαύτη 
τέχνη, περὶ τὴν θεωρίαν τῶν τε ἀγαθῶν καὶ τῶν 
κακῶν καὶ τῶν ἀδιαφόρων ἔχει: διὸ τούτων ἀν- 
υπάρκτων ὄντων ἀνύπαρκτός, ἐστι καὶ ἡ περὶ τὸν 
βίον τέχνη. καὶ ἄλλως, ἐπεὶ μὴ ὁμοφώνως μίαν 
ἀπολείπουσι πάντες οἵ δογματικοὶ τέχνην περὶ τὸν 
βίον, ἀλλ᾽ ἄλλοι ἄλλην ὑποτίθενται, ὑποπίπτουσι 
τῇ διαφωνίᾳ καὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς διαφωνίας λόγῳ, ὃν 
ἠρώτησα ἐν τοῖς περὶ τἀγαθοῦ λελεγμένοις ἡμῖν. 
εἰ μέντοι καὶ μίαν εἶναι πάντες λέγοιεν καθ᾽ ὑπό- 
θεσιν τὴν περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνην, οἷον τὴν ἀοίδιμον 
φρόνησιν, ἥτις ὀνειροπολεῖται μὲν παρὰ στωικοῖς, 
μᾶλλον δὲ πληκτικωτέρα τῶν ἄλλων εἶναι δοκεῖ, 
καὶ οὕτως οὐδὲν ἧττον ἀτοπίαι παρακολουθήσουσιν. 
ἐπεὶ γὰρ φρόνησίς ἐστιν ἀρετή, τὴν δὲ ἀρετὴν 
μόνος εἶχεν ὁ σοφός, οἱ στωικοὶ μὴ ὄντες σοφοὶ 
οὐχ ἕξουσι τὴν περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνην. ὅλως τε, 
ἐπεὶ μὴ δύναται κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς ὑποστῆναι τέχνη, οὐδὲ 
περὶ τὸν βίον ἔ ἔσται τέχνη τις ὅσον ἐφ᾽ οἷς λέγουσιν. 

Οἷον γοῦν τέχνην εἶναί φασι σύστημα ἐκ κατα- 


α Cf. Adv. Eth. 167 ff. ; Οἷς. De jin. i. 18, v. 6 ff. 

> Cf. §§ 180, 238 supra. 

¢ For the sage as **indiscoverable”’ cf. ddv. Ph . i. 133, 
Introd. Ὁ. xxix. ‘“‘ Prudence”’ (φρόνησις), or “ practical 


48 4: 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 238-241 


disquiet, then the assumption and persuasion that 
anything is, in its real nature, either bad or good is 
evil and to be shunned. 

For the present, then, this account of things good, 
evil, and indifferent is sufficient. 


CHAPTER °“X XIIJ.—Dors THERE EXIST AN ART 
oF LivineG ? 


It is plain from what has been said above that there 239 
can be no art of living.* For if such an art exists, it 
has to do with the consideration of things good, evil, 
and indifferent, so that these being non-existent the 
art of living also.is non-existent. Further, since the 
Dogmatists do not all with one accord lay down one 
single art of living, but some propound one art, some 
another, they are guilty of discrepancy and open to 
the argument from discrepancy which I stated in our 
discussion of the Good.’ Yet, even if they were 240 
all to agree in assuming that the art of living is one 
—such as, for example, the celebrated “ prudence” 
whereof the Stoics dream, and which seems to be 
more convincing than all the rest,—even so equally 
absurd results will follow. For since “ prudence ”’ is a 
virtue, and the Sage alone was in possession of virtue, 
the Stoics, not being sages,° will not be in possession 
of the art of living. And in general, since, according 241 
to them, no art? can have real existence, an art of 
living cannot exist, so far as their statements go. 

Thus, for example, they declare that art is “ἃ com- 


wisdom,” is distinguished from ‘‘ wisdom” (σοφία). Note 
that in this argument ‘‘the art of living” is identified with 
“* prudence.” 
a Of. §§ 188 ff. ; ii. 53 ff 
4:85 


242 


248 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


λήψεων, κατάληψιν δὲ καταληπτικῇ ᾿ φαντασίᾳ 
συγκατάθεσιν. ἀνεύρετος δέ ἐστιν ἡ Καταληπτικὴ 
φαντασία" οὔτε γὰρ πᾶσα φαντασία καταληπτική 
ἐστιν, οὔτε ποία τίς ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῶν φαντασιῶν ἡ 
karadnrruch φαντασία ἐπιγνωσθῆναι δύναται, ἐπεὶ 
μήτε πάσῃ φαντασίᾳ δυνάμεθα κρίνειν ἁπλῶς τίς 
μέν ἐστι καταληπτικὴ τίς δὲ οὐ τοιαύτη, χρήζοντές 
τε καταληπτικῆς φαντασίας εἰς τὴν ἐπίγνωσιν τοῦ 
ποία τίς ἐστιν ἡ καταληπτικὴ φαντασία εἰς ἄπειρον 
ἐκβαλλόμεθα, εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν τῆς λαμβανομένης ὡς 
καταληπτικῆς φαντασίας καταληπτικὴν φαντασίαν 
ἄλλην αἰτούμενοι. ταῦτά τοι καὶ οἱ στωικοὶ ἐν τῇ 
τῆς ᾿καταληπτικῆς φαντασίας ἐ ἐννοίας ἀποδόσει οὐχ 
ὑγιῶς φέρονται: καταληπτικὴν μὲν γὰρ φαντασίαν 
λέγοντες τὴν ἀπὸ ὑπάρχοντος γινομένην, ὑπάρχον 
δὲ εἶναι λέγοντες 6 οἷόν τε κινεῖν καταληπτικὴν 
φαντασίαν, εἰς τὸν διάλληλον ἐμπίπτουσι τῆς 
ἀπορίας τρόπον. εἰ τοίνυν, ἵνα μὲν περὶ τὸν βίον 
ἢ τις τέχνη, δεῖ πρότερον εἶναι τέχνην, ἵνα δὲ 
ὑποστῇ τέχνη, κατάληψιν προὐὔφεστάναι, ἵνα δὲ 
ὑποστῇ κατάληψις, καταληπτικῇ φαντασίᾳ συγ- 
κατάθεσιν κατειλῆφθαι, ἀνεύρετος δέ ἐστιν ἡ κατα- 
ληπτικὴ φαντασία, ἀνεύρετός ἐστιν ἡ περὶ τὸν βίον 
τέχνη. 

"Ere κἀκεῖνο λέγεται. πᾶσα τέχνη ἐκ τῶν ἰδίως 
ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς ἀποδιδομένων ἔργων καταλαμβάνεσθαι 
δοκεῖ, οὐδὲν δέ ἐστιν ἴδιον ἔργον τῆς περὶ τὸν βίον 
τέχνης" ὃ > γὰρ ἂν ἔργον εἶναι ταύτης λέγῃ τις, τοῦτο 
κοινὸν εὑρίσκεται καὶ τῶν ἰδιωτῶν, οἷον τὸ τιμᾶν 
γονεῖς, τὸ παραθήκας ἀποδιδόναι, τἄλλα πάντα. 
οὐκ ἄρα ἔστι τις περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνη. οὔτε γὰρ 
ἀξὲ a ΟἿ. ii. 4, 53 ff., Introd. p. xxv. 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 241--248 


posite of apprehensions,” and apprehension is “ assent 
to an apprehensive impression.”* But the apprehen- 
sive impression is indiscoverable ; for every impression 
is not apprehensive, nor is it possible to decide which 
one of the impressions is the apprehensive impression, 
since we cannot simply decide by means of every 
impression which one is apprehensive and which 
not, while if We require an apprehensive impression in 
order to determine which is the apprehensive impres- 
sion we are wrecked on the ad injinetum fallacy, since 
we are asking for another apprehensive impression so 
as to determine the impression taken to be appre- 
hensive. And herein, too, the procedure of the Stoics, 242 
in presenting the notion of the apprehensive impres- 
sion, is logically unsound ; for in stating, on the one 
hand, that an apprehensive impression is that which 
is derived from a real object,? and, on the other hand, 
that a real object is that which is capable of giving 
rise to an apprehensive impression, they fall into the 
fallacy of circular reasoning. If, then, in order that 
an art of living may exist, there must first exist art, 
and in order that art may subsist apprehension must 
pre-exist, and in order that apprehension may subsist 
assent to an apprehensive impression must be appre- 
hended, but the apprehensive impression is indiscover- 
able,—then the art of living is indiscoverable. 
Another argument is this. Every art appears to 243 

be apprehended by means of its own special products, 
but there is no special product of the art of living ; 
for anything you might mention as its product—such 
as honouring parents, paying back deposits, and all 
the rest—is found to be common to ordinary folk 
as well. Therefore no art of living exists. For we 


» Cf. Adv. Log. ii. 88. 
487 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


~ , 
ἐκ τοῦ ἀπὸ φρονίμης διαθέσεως φαίνεσθαι λεγό- 
μενόν τι ὑπὸ τοῦ φρονίμου 7H ποιούμενον, ὡς φασί 
τινες, ἐπιγνωσόμεθα ὅτι τῆς φρονήσεως ἔργον 
bs) “ 9 \ 4 ἐ 7 / > 4 / 
344 ἐστίν. αὐτὴ yap ἡ φρονίμη διάθεσις ἀκατάληπτός 
ἐστι, μήτε ἐξ αὑτῆς ἁπλῶς καὶ αὐτόθεν φαινομένη 
μήτε ἐκ τῶν ἔργων αὐτῆς" κοινὰ γάρ ἐστι ταῦτα 
καὶ τῶν ἰδιωτῶν. τό τε λέγειν ὅτι τῷ διομαλισμῷ 
τῶν πράξεων καταλαμβάνομεν τὸν ἔχοντα τὴν περὶ 
τὸν βίον τέχνην, ὑπερφθεγγομένων ἐστὶ τὴν ἀν- 
θ ) ? \ > 4 SAA at iA θῆ 
ρώπων φύσιν καὶ εὐχομένων μᾶλλον ἢ τἀληθῆ 
λεγόντων" 


τοῖος “γὰρ νόος ἐστὶν ἐπιχθονίων ἀνθρώπων 
οἷον ἐπ᾽ ἦμαρ ἄγῃσι πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε. 


246 Λείπεται λέγειν ὅτι ἐξ ἐκείνων τῶν ἔργων κατα- 
λαμβάνεται ἡ περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνη ἅπερ ἀναγρά- 
φουσιν ἐν ταῖς βίβλοις" ὧν πολλῶν καὶ παραπλησίων 
> ὔ Ed 2\ 7 > ; / 
ἀλλήλοις ὄντων ὀλίγα ἐκθήσομαι παραδείγματος 
χάριν. οἷον γοῦν ὁ αἱρεσιάρχης αὐτῶν Ζήνων ἐν 
ταῖς διατριβαῖς φησὶ περὶ παίδων ἀγωγῆς ἄλλα τε 
¢ A / €¢ / δὲ any \ 
ὅμοια καὶ τάδε ““ διαμηρίζειν μηδὲν μᾶλλον μηδὲ 
ἧσσον παιδικὰ 7) μὴ παιδικά, μηδὲ θήλεα ἢ ἄρρενα: 

Ἄ \ ? “a » “a\ 4 “"Ἐ 9 \ 
οὐ yap [ἐστι] παιδικοῖς ἄλλα ἢ μὴ παιδικοῖς, οὐδὲ 
θηλείαις ἢ ἄρρεσιν, ἀλλὰ ταὐτὰ πρέπει τε καὶ πρέ- 

246 ποντα ἐστίν. περὶ δὲ τῆς εἰς τοὺς γονεῖς ὁσιό- 
τητος 6 αὐτὸς ἀνήρ φησιν εἰς τὰ περὶ τὴν ᾿Ιοκάστην 

A \ 390. ἡ μέ ? Εν x / \ 
Kat τὸν Οἰδίποδα ὅτι οὐκ ἦν δεινὸν τρίβειν τὴν 
μητέρα. “Ὧ καὶ εἰ μὲν ἀσθενοῦσαν ἕτερόν τι μέρος 
τοῦ σώματος τρίψας ταῖς χερσὶν ὠφέλει, οὐδὲν 

> / ? \ Ψ{Ψ , / + > 
αἰσχρόν" <i δὲ ἕτερα μέρη τρίψας εὔφραινεν, ὀδυνω- 


488 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 243-246 


shall not ascertain (as some assert) from the apparent 
derivation ofsome speech or operation of the prudent 
man from a state of prudence that it is a product of 
prudence. For the state of prudence itself is inappre- 244 
hensible, not being directly apparent either of itself or 
from its products, these being common to ordinary folk 
as well. And to say that we apprehend the possessor 
of the art of living by the unvarying quality of his 
actions * is the assertion of those who over-estimate 
human nature and are visionaries rather than truth- 
tellers : 

As is the day which upon them is brought by the sire 


immortal, 
So are the minds of mortal men. 


There remains the assertion that the art of living 245 
is apprehended by means of those effects which they 
describe in their books ; and these being numerous 
and much alike, I will extract a few of them by way 
of examples. Thus, for instance, Zeno, the Master of 
their sect, in his treatises, amongst many other state- 
ments regarding the rearing of children, says this: 

‘‘ Have carnal knowledge no less and no more of a 
favourite than of a non-favourite child, nor of a female 
than of a male; favourite or non-favourite, males or 
females, no different conduct, but the same, befits 
and is befitting to all alike.”” And as concerns piety 246 
towards parents, the same man states,° in reference 
to the story of Jocasta and Oedipus, that there was 
nothing dreadful in his rubbing his mother : ‘‘ If she 
had been ailing in one part of her body and he 
had done her good by rubbing it with his hands, it 
had not been shameful; was it, then, shameful for 


¢ i.e. always consistently good, impeccable. 
ὃ Homer, Od. xviii. 136-137. ¢ Cf. § 205. 


489 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


μένην παύσας, καὶ παῖδας ἐ ἐκ τῆς μητρὸς" γενναίους 
ἐποίησεν, αἰσχρόν; ᾿᾿ χούτοις δὲ ὁμογνωμονεῖ καὶ 
ὁ Χρύσιππος" ἐν γοῦν τῇ πολιτείᾳ φησὶ “᾿ δοκεῖ δέ 
μοι ταῦτα οὕτω διεξάγειν καθάπερ καὶ νῦν. οὐ 
κακῶς παρὰ πολλοῖς εἴθισται, ὥστε καὶ τὴν μη- 
τέρα ἐκ τοῦ υἱοῦ τεκνοποιεῖσθαι καὶ τὸν πατέρα 
ἐκ τῆς θυγατρὸς καὶ τὸν ὁμομήτριον ἐκ τῆς ὅμο- 
947 μητρίας.᾽ καὶ ἀνθρωποφαγεῖν ἐ ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῖς συν- 
τάγμασιν ἡμῖν ἐπεισάγει:" φησὶ γοῦν “ καὶ ἐὰν τῶν 
ὥώντων ἀποκοπῇ τι “μέρος πρὸς τροφὴν χρήσιμον, 
μήτε κατορύττειν αὐτὸ μήτε ἄλλως ῥίπτειν, ἄνα- 
λίσκειν δὲ αὐτό, ὅπως ἐκ τῶν ἡμετέρων ἕτερον 
948 μέρος γένηται.᾽᾽ ἐν δὲ τοῖς περὲ τοῦ καθήκοντος 
περὶ τῆς τῶν γονέων ταφῆς ῥητῶς φησὶν “ἅπο- 
γενομένων δὲ τῶν γονέων ταφαῖς χρηστέον ταῖς 
ἁπλουστάταις, ὡς ἂν τοῦ σώματος, κα άπερ 
ὀνύχων ἢ ὀδόντων ἢ τριχῶν, οὐδὲν ὄντος πρὸς 
ἡμᾶς, καὶ οὐδὲν ἐπιστροφῆς ἢ πολυωρίας προσ- 
δεομένων ἡ ἡμῶν τοιαύτης τινός. διὸ καὶ χρησίμων 
μὲν ὄντων τῶν κρεῶν τροφῇ χρήσονται αὐτοῖς, 
καθάπερ καὶ τῶν ἰδίων μερῶν, οἷον ποδὸς ἀπο- 
κοπέντος, ἐπέβαλλε χρῆσθαι αὐτῷ καὶ τοῖς παρα- 
πλησίοις" ἀχρείων δὲ ὄντων ἢ κατορύξαντες ἐά- 
σουσιν, ἢ κατακαύσαντες τὴν τέφραν ἀφήσουσιν, 7 
μακρότερον ῥίψαντες οὐδεμίαν αὐτῶν ἐπιστροφὴν 
ποιήσονται καθάπερ ὄνυχος 7 τριχῶν.᾽᾽ 
249 Τοιαῦτα μὲν πλεῖστα ὅσα λέγουσιν οἱ φιλόσοφοι. 
ἅπερ οὐκ ἂν τολμήσειαν διαπράττεσθαι, εἴγε μὴ 
παρὰ Κύκλωψιν ἢ Λαιστρυγόσι πολιτεύοιντο. εἰ 
δὲ τούτων μὲν ἀνενέργητοι παντάπασίν εἶσιν, ἅ 
δὲ πράττουσι, κοινὰ καὶ τῶν ἰδιωτῶν ἐστίν, οὐδὲν 


@ Cf, § 199. > Of. § 207. 
490 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 246-249 


him to stop her grief and give her joy by rubbing 
other parts,,and to beget noble children by his 
mother?” And with this opinion Chrysippus also 
agrees. - At least he says in his State: “I approve 
of carrying out those practices—which, quite rightly, 
are customary even nowadays amongst many peoples 
—according to which a mother has children by her 
son,* the father by his daughter, the brother by 


his full sister.’ And he proceeds, in the same 247 


treatises, to introduce amongst us cannibalism,? 
saying: “‘ And if from a living body a part be cut 
off that is good for food, we should not bury it nor 
otherwise get rid of it, but consume it, so that from 


our parts a new part may arise.” And in his book 248 


On Duty he says expressly, regarding the burial of 
parents: ‘‘ When our parents decease we should use 
the simplest forms of burial, as though the body—like 
the nails or teeth or hair—were nothing to us, and we 
need bestow no care or attention on a thing like it. 
Hence, also, men should make use of the flesh, when 
it is good, for food, Just as also when some particular 
part, such as the foot, is cut off, it would be proper that 
it and the like parts should be so used ; but when the 
flesh is not good, they should either bury it and leave 
it, or burn it up and let the ashes lie, or cast it far away 
and pay no more.regard to it than to nails or hair.” 
Of such a kind are most of the philosophers’ 
theories ; but they would not dare to put them into 
practice unless they lived under the laws of the 
Cyclopes or Laestrygones.° But if they are totally 
incapable of acting thus, and their actual conduct is 
common to ordinary folk as well, there is no action 


¢ For C. and L., as savages of ancient Sicily, cf. Hom. 
Od, i. 69, x. 81; Thuc. vi. 21. 


491 


249 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἴδιον ἔργον ἐστὶ τῶν ἔχειν ὑποπτευομένων τὴν 
περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνην. εἰ οὖν al μὲν τέχναι πάντως 
ὀφείλουσιν ἐκ τῶν ἰδίων ἔργων καταλαμβάνεσθαι, 

ON Ν 3 3 ξ wa “ \ \ f 
οὐδὲν δὲ ἴδιον ἔργον ὁρᾶται THs περὶ τὸν βίον 
λεγομένης τέχνης, οὐ καταλαμβάνεται αὕτη. διόπερ 

ΔΑ o \ 3. κι: 2 7 4 
οὐδὲ διαβεβαιοῦσθαι περὶ αὐτῆς δύναταί τις ὅτι 
ἔστιν ὑπαρκτή. : 


S’,—EI TINETAI EN ΑΝΘΡΩΠΟΙ͂Σ Η ΠΕΡῚ TON 
BION TEXNH 


250 Kat μὴν εἰ γίνεται ἐν ἀνθρώποις ἡ περὶ τὸν βίον 
τέχνη, ἦτοι φύσει ἐ ἐγγίνεται αὐτοῖς ἢ διὰ μαθήσεως 
καὶ διδασκαλίας. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν φύσει, ἤτοι καθὸ 
εἰσὶν ἄνθρωποι ἐ ἐγγίνοιτο ἂν αὐτοῖς ἡ περὶ τὸν βίον 
τέχνη, ἢ καθὸ οὐκ εἰσὶν ἄνθρωποι. καθὸ μὲν οὖν 
οὐκ εἰσὶν ἄνθρωποι, οὐδαμῶς" οὐδὲ γὰρ οὐκ εἰσὶν 
ἄνθρωποι. εἰ δὲ καθὸ εἰσὶν ἄνθρωποι, πᾶσιν 
ἀνθρώποις ὑπῆρξεν ὁ ἂν ἡ φρόνησις, ὡς πάντας εἶναι 

ρονίμους τε καὶ ἐναρέτους καὶ σοφούς. φαύλους 

251 δὲ τοὺς πλείστους λέγουσιν. οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ καθό 
εἰσιν ἄνθρωποι ὑπάρξειεν ἂν αὐτοῖς ἡ περὶ τὸν βίον 
τέχνη. οὐδὲ φύσει ἄρα. καὶ ἄλλως, ἐπειδὴ τὴν 
τέχνην σύστημα ἐκ καταλήψεων εἶναι βούλονται 
συγγεγυμνασμένων, διὰ πείρας τέ τινος καὶ μαθή- 
σεως ἐμφαίνουσι μᾶλλον ἀναλαμβάνεσθαι τάς τε 
ἄλλας τέχνας καὶ ταύτην περὶ ἧς ὁ λόγος. 


KZ',—EI ΔΙΔΑΚΤῊ ΕΣΤῚΝ H ΠΕΡῚ TON BION ΤΈΧΝΗ 


252 "“AAN οὐδὲ διδασκαλίᾳ καὶ «μαθήσει ἀναλαμβά- 
νεται. ἵνα γὰρ ὑπόστασιν ἔχῃ ταῦτα, δεῖ τρία 


402 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 249-252 


peculiar to those who are suspected of possessing the 
art of living.» So then, if the arts must certainly be 
apprehended by means of their peculiar effects, and 
no effect is observed that is peculiar to the so-called 
art of living, this art is not apprehended. Con- 
sequently, no one can positively affirm regarding it 
that it is really existent. 


Cuapter XX VI.—Dors tur Art or Livine 
ARISE IN ManxInp? 


Moreover, if the art of living comes into existence 250 
in men, it so comes either by nature or through learn- 
ing and teaching. But if it is by nature, then the 
art of living will arise in them either in so far as they 
are men, or in so far as they are not men. Certainly 
not in so far as they are not men; for it is not a fact 
that they are not men. But if it is in so far as they 
are men, then prudence * would have belonged to all 
men, so that all would have been prudent and virtuous 
and wise. But they describe most men as bad. 
Neither, then, in so far as they are men will the art of 251 
living belong to them. Therefore it does not accrue 
by nature. And again, since they insist that art is 
“a system of co-exercised apprehensions,’ they 
make it evident that the art under discussion, as well 
as all other arts, is acquired rather by some sort of 
effort and learning. 


CuaPrer XXVII.—Is toe Art or Livine 
CAPABLE OF BEING TAUGHT ? 


But neither is it acquired by teaching and learning. 252 
For in order that these should subsist, three things 


α For “ prudence,’’ or practical “ wisdom,” ¢f. § 240. 
> CF. §§ 188, 241, 261. 


493 


258 


254 


255 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


προωμολογῆσθαι, τὸ διδασκόμενον πρᾶγμα, τὸν 
ιδάσκοντα καὶ τὸν μανθάνοντα, τὸν" τρόπον τῆς 
μαθήσεως. οὐδὲν δὲ τούτων ὑφέστηκεν' οὐδὲ ἡ 
διδασκαλία ἄρα. 


KH’.—EI ἘΣΤῚ ΤΙ ΔΙΔΑΣΚΟΜΈΝΟΝ 


Οἷον γοῦν τὸ διδασκόμενον ἦτοι ἀληθές ἐστιν 
ἢ ψεῦδος" καὶ εἰ μὲν ψεῦδος, οὐκ ἂν διδάσκοιτο' 
3 


ἀνύπαρκτον γάρ φασιν εἶναι τὸ ψεῦδος, ἀνυπάρκτων 
δὲ οὐκ ἂν εἴη διδασκαλία. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ εἰ ἀληθὲς 
εἶναι λέγοιτο" ὅτι yap ἀνύπαρκτόν ἐστι τὸ ἀληθές, 
ὑπεμνήσαμεν ἐν τοῖς περὶ κριτηρίου. εἰ οὖν μήτε 
τὸ ψεῦδος μήτε τὸ ἀληθὲς διδάσκεται, παρὰ δὲ 
ταῦτα διδακτὸν οὐδέν ἐστιν (οὐ γὰρ δὴ τούτων 
ἀδιδάκτων ὄντων τοὺς ἀπόρους μόνους διδάσκειν 
ἐρεῖ τις), οὐδὲν διδάσκεται. τό τε διδασκόμενον 
πρᾶγμα ἤτοι φαινόμενόν ἐστιν ἢ ἄδηλον. ἀλλ᾽ 
εἰ μὲν φαινόμενόν ἐστιν, οὐκ ἔσται διδασκαλίας 
δεόμενον᾽ τὰ γὰρ φαινόμενα πᾶσιν ὁμοίως φαίνεται. 
εἰ δὲ ἄδηλον, ἐπεὶ τὰ ἄδηλα διὰ τὴν ἀνεπίκριτον 
περὶ αὐτῶν διαφωνίαν ἀκατάληπτά ἐστιν, ὡς 
πολλάκις ὑπεμνήσαμεν, οὐκ ἔσται διδακτόν- ὃ γὰρ 
μὴ καταλαμβάνει τις, πῶς ἂν τοῦτο διδάσκειν 7 
μανθάνειν δύναιτο; εἰ δὲ μήτε τὸ φαινόμενον 
μήτε τὸ ἄδηλον διδάσκεται, οὐδὲν διδάσκεται. 
"Ert τὸ διδασκόμενον ἦτοι σῶμά ἐστιν ἢ ἀ- 
σώματον, ἑκάτερον δὲ αὐτῶν ἦτοι φαινόμενον ἢ 





α Of, ii. 85 ff. 
δ “Dubious lessons”’: if the text is right, we must supply 
λόγους (sayings, ‘“lessons*’) with τοὺς ἀπόρους. It was laid 


494: 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 252-255 


must first be agreed upon—the matter which is being 
taught, the teacher and the learner, and the method 
of learning. But none of these subsists; neither, 
then, does teaching. 


Cuaptrrr XXVIIT.—Doss a Marrer or 
INSTRUCTION EXIST ? 


Thus, for instance, the matter of instruction is 253 
either true or false ; if false it would not be taught ; 
for they assert that falsehood is non-existent, and of 
non-existents there could be no teaching. Nor yet 
if it were said to.be true; for we have shown in our 
chapter “On the Criterion ἦα that truth is non- 
existent. If, then, neither the false nor the true 
is being taught, and besides these there is nothing 
capable of being taught (for no one, to be sure, will 
say that, though these are unteachable, he teaches 
only dubious lessons?), then nothing is taught. 
And the matter taught is either apparent or non- 254 
evident. But if it is apparent, it will not require 
teaching ; for things apparent appear to all alike. 
And if it is non-evident, then, since things non- 
evident are, as we have often shown, inapprehensible 
owing to the undecided controversy about them, it 
will be incapable of being taught; for how could 
anyone teach or learn what he does not apprehend ? 
But if neither the apparent is taught nor the non- 
evident, nothing is taught. 

Again, what is taught is either corporeal or in- 255 
corporeal, and each of these being either apparent or 


down (ef. Adv. Math. i. 29) that “ the dubious (ἄπορον) cannot 
be taught”’: it is intermediate between truth and falsehood. 


4.95. 


256 


257 


258 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἀδηλούμενον οὐ δύναται διδάσκεσθαι κατὰ τὸν 
μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἡμῖν εἰρημένον λόγον. οὐκ ἄρα 
διδάσκεταί τι. 

Πρὸς τούτοις ἤτοι τὸ ὃν διδάσκεται ἢ τὸ μὴ 
ὄν. τὸ μὲν οὖν μὴ ὃν οὐ διδάσκεται" εἰ γὰρ διδά- 
σκεται τὸ μὴ ὄν, ἐπεὶ τῶν ἀληθῶν δοκοῦσιν εἶναι 
αἱ διδασκαλίαι, ἀληθὲς ἔσται τὸ μὴ ὄν. ἀληθὲς 
δὲ ὃν καὶ ὑπάρξει: ἀληθὲς γὰρ εἶναί φασιν ὃ 
ὑπάρχει καὶ ἀντίκειταί τινι. ἄτοπον δέ ἐ ἐστι λέγειν 
ὑπάρχειν τὸ μὴ ὄν" οὐκ ἄρα διδάσκεται τὸ “μὴ ὄν. 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ ὄν. εἰ γὰρ διδάσκεται τὸ ὄν, ἤτοι 
καθὸ ὄν ἐστι διδάσκεται ἢ κατ᾽ ἄλλο τι. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ 
μὲν καθὸ ὄν ἐστι διδακτόν, τῶν ὄντων ἔσται, διὰ 
δὲ τοῦτο οὐδὲ διδακτόν" τὰς γὰρ διδασκαλίας ἐκ 
τινῶν ὁμολογουμένων καὶ ἀδιδάκτων γίνεσθαι προσ- 
ἥκει. οὐκ ἄρα τὸ ὃν καθὸ ὄν ἐστι διδακτόν ἐστιν. 
καὶ μὴν οὐδὲ κατ᾽ ἄλλο τι. τὸ γὰρ ὃν οὐκ ἔχει 
ἄλλο τί συμβεβηκὸς αὐτῷ ὃ μὴ ὅν ἐστιν, ὥστε εἰ 
τὸ ὃν καθὸ ὄν ἐστιν οὐ διδάσκεται, οὐδὲ κατ᾽ ἄλλο 
τι διδαχθήσεται" ἐκεῖνο γὰρ ὅ τι ποτέ ἐστι συμ- 
βεβηκὸς αὐτῷ, ὄν ἐστιν. καὶ ἄλλως, εἴτε φαινό- 
μενον εἴη τὸ ὃν ὃ > λέξουσι διδάσκεσθαι, εἴτε ἄδηλον, 
ταῖς εἰρημέναις ἀπορίαις ὑποπῖπτον ἀδίδακτον 
ἔσται. εἰ δὲ μήτε τὸ ὃν διδάσκεται μήτε τὸ μὴ 
ὄν, οὐδέν ἐστι τὸ διδασκόμενον. 





α For the Stoic doctrine of ‘‘the true”? and “truth” ¢/. 
ii. 80 ff. What “the true” is “ opposed to” is presumably 
‘the false.” 

> Cf. Aristot. Anal. Post. i. 1 


496 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 255-258 


non-evident is incapable of being taught, according 
to the argument we have just now stated. Nothing, 
therefore, is taught. 

Further, either the existent is taught or the non- 256 
existent. Now the non-existent is not taught; for 
if the non-existent is taught the non-existent will be 
true, since teaching is held to be of things true. And 
if it is true, it will also subsist ; for they declare that 
“a true thing is what subsists and is opposed to 
something.” * But it is absurd to say that the non- 
existent subsists; therefore the non-existent is not 
taught. Yet neither is the existent. For if the 257 
existent is taught, it is taught either in so far as it is 
existent or in so far as it is something else. But if it 
is to be taught in so far as it is existent, it will be one 
of the existing things, and therefore a thing incap- 
able of being taught ; for teaching ought to proceed 
from certain acknowledged facts which require no 
teaching. Therefore the existent, in so far as it is 
existent, is not capable of being taught. Nor, in fact, 258 
in so far as itis something else. For the existent has 
not anything else which is non-existent attached to it, 
so that if the existent in so far as it is existent is 
not taught, neither will it be taught in so far as it is 
something else ; for whatsoever thing is attached to 
it is existent. And further, whether the existent 
thing which, they will say, is taught be apparent or 
non-evident, as it is subject to the absurdities we have 
stated, it will be incapable of being taught. But if 
neither the existent nor the non-existent is taught, 
there is nothing that is taught. 


rhs) 
A 

aN 
© 
-ἃ 


VOL. I 


259 


260 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


KO’.—EI EZTIN O AIAASKON ΚΑῚ O MANOANON 


Σιυμπεριτρέπεται μὲν οὖν τούτῳ 6 τε διδάσκων 
καὶ ὁ μανθάνων, οὐδὲν δὲ ἧττον καὶ κατὰ ἰδίαν 
ἀποροῦνται. ἤτοι γὰρ 6 τεχνίτης τὸν τεχνίτην 
διδάσκει ἢ ὁ ἄτεχνος τὸν ἄτεχνον ἢ 6 ἄτεχνος τὸν 
τεχνίτην ἢ ὁ τεχνίτης τὸν ἄτεχνον... ὁ μὲν οὖν 
τεχνίτης τὸν τεχνίτην οὐ διδάσκει" οὐθέτερος γὰρ 
αὐτῶν, καθό ἐστι τεχνίτης, δεῖται μαθήσεως. ἀλλ᾽ 
οὐδὲ 6 ἄτεχνος τὸν ἄτεχνον, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ τυφλὸν 
ὁδηγεῖν δύναται τυφλός. οὐδὲ ἄτεχνος τὸν τεχνί- 
τὴν" γελοῖον γάρ. λείπεται λέγειν ὅτι 6 τεχνίτης 
τὸν ἄτεχνον: ὃ καὶ αὐτὸ τῶν ἀδυνάτων ἐστίν. 
ὅλως γὰρ ὑποστῆναι τεχνίτην ἀδύνατον εἶναι 

έγεται, ἐπεὶ μήτε αὐτοφυῶς τις καὶ ἅμα τῷ 


γενέσθαι τεχνίτης ὑφιστάμενος βλέπεται μήτε ἐξ 
: ΄ὔ 


26] 


ἀτέχνου γίνεταί Tis τεχνίτης. ἤτοι yap ἕν θεώρημα 
καὶ μία κατάληψις δύναται ποιῆσαι τὸν ἄτεχνον 
τεχνίτην ἢ οὐδαμῶς. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν κατάληψις μία 
τὸν ἄτεχνον τεχνίτην ἀπεργάζεται, πρῶτον μὲν 
ἐνέσται λέγειν ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι σύστημα ἐκ κατα- 
λήψεων ἡ τέχνη: 6 γὰρ μηδὲν ὅλως εἰδώς, εἰ ἕν 
θεώρημα διδαχθείη τέχνης, τεχνίτης ἂν οὕτω 
έγοιτο εἶναι. εἶτα καὶ ἐὰν λέγῃ τις ὡς 6 τινὰ 
θεωρήματα τέχνης ἀνειληφὼς καὶ προσδεόμενος 
ἑνὸς ἔτι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ὧν ἄτεχνος, ἂν τὸ ἕν ἐκεῖνο 
προσλάβῃ, τεχνίτης ἐξ ἀτέχνου ἀποτελεῖται ἐκ 





* For this saying ¢f. Matt. xv. 14; Hor. Epist. i. 17. 

° The argument here is that the non-expert cannot become 
an expert either (1) by a single lesson, §§ 261-262, or (2) by 
a course of lessons, which must follow each other singly, 
§ 263. “‘ Apprehension’? here means the grasp of a truth 
or principle of the art or craft which is being imparted, the 


498 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 259-261 


CHAPTER XXIX.—Do THE TEACHER AND THE 
LEARNER EXIST ἢ 


Now with the refutation of this is involved that of 259 
both the teacher and the learner ; though they are 
just as much open to doubt on their own account. 
For either the expert artist teaches the expert, or 
the non-expert the non-expert, or the non-expert the 
expert, or the expert the non-expert. Now the expert 
does not teach the expert ; for neither of them, qua 
expert, needs teaching. Nor does the non-expert 
teach the non-expert, any more than the blind can 
lead the blind. Nor the non-expert the expert, for 
it would be ridiculous. The only thing left is to say 260 
that the expert teaches the non-expert ; and this, 
too, is a thing impossible. For it is declared to be 
wholly impossible that an expert artist should exist, 
since neither do we see anyone existing spontaneously 
and from birth as an expert, nor does anyone turn 
into an expert from being a non-expert. For either 
one lesson and one apprehension can make an expert 
of the non-expert or they cannot do so at all.? 
But if one apprehension makes the non-expert an 261 
expert, it will be open to us to declare, firstly, that 
art is not a system of apprehensions®; for the man 
who knows nothing at all would be termed an expert 
if only he were taught a single lesson of art. And, 
secondly, should anyone assert that, as soon as a man 
who has acquired some principles of art and still 
needs one more, and because of this is non-expert, 
acquires also that one principle, he at once becomes 
an expert instead of a non-expert by means of one 


‘art’? itself being defined as a “system’”’ of such pieces 
of knowledge. σ Cf. § 251 supra. 
499 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


262 καταλήψεως μιᾶς, ἀποκληρωτικὸν λέξει. ἐπὶ γὰρ 
τῶν κατὰ μέρος οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο δεῖξαϊ τινα ἄτεχνον 
μὲν ἔτι, τεχνίτην. δὲ ἐσόμενον ἐὰν ἕν τι θεώρημα 
προσλάβῃ: οὐ γὰρ δήπου τὴν ἐξαρίθμησιν τῶν 

/ 
εωρημάτων ἑκάστης τέχνης ἐπίσταταΐ τις, ὥστε 
ἀπαριθμησάμενος. τὰ ἐγνωσμένα θεωρήματα, πόσα 
είπεται πρὸς τὸν πλήρη τῶν θεωρημάτων τῆς 
τέχνης ἀριθμὸν εἰπεῖν ἔχειν. οὐκοῦν ἑνὸς. θεωρή- 

263 ματος γνῶσις οὐ ποιεῖ τὸν ἄτεχνον τεχνίτην. εἰ 
δὲ τοῦτό ἐστιν ἀληθές, ἐπεὶ μὴ πάντα ἀθρόως τὰ 
θεωρήματα τῶν τεχνῶν ἀναλαμβάνει τις, ἀλλ᾽ 
εἴπερ ἄρα, καθ᾽ ἕν ἕκαστον, ἵνα τις καὶ τοῦτο καθ᾽ 
ὑπόθεσιν διδῷ, 6 κατὰ ἕν θεώρημα τῆς τέχνης 
ἀναλαμβάνειν. λεγόμενος οὐκ ἂν τεχνίτης γένοιτο" 
ὑπεμιμνήσκομεν γὰρ ὅτι οὐ δύναται θεωρήματος 
ἑνὸς γνῶσις τὸν ἄτεχνον ποιῆσαι τεχνίτην. οὐδὲ 
ἐξ ἀτέχνου τοίνυν γίνεταί τις τεχνίτης. ὥστε καὶ 
διὰ ταῦτα φαίνεται ἀνυπόστατος εἶναι 6 τεχνίτης. 
διὰ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ ὁ διδάσκων. 

264 "AAV οὐδὲ ὁ μανθάνειν λεγόμενος, ἄτεχνος ὦν, 
δύναται τὰ τῆς τέχνης θεωρήματα, ἧς ἐ ἐστὶν ἄτεχ- 
νος, μανθάνειν τε καὶ καταλαμβάνειν. ὡς γὰρ ὁ 
ἐκ γενετῆς πηρός, εἰς ὅσον ἐστὶ πηρός, οὐκ ἂν 
λάβοι χρωμάτων ἀντίληψιν, οὐδὲ ὁ ἐκ γενετῆς 
κωφὸς ὃ ὁμοίως φωνῆς, οὕτως οὐδὲ ὁ ἄτεχνος κατα- 
λάβοι ἂν τὰ τῆς τέχνης θεωρήματα ἣ ἧς ἐστὶν ἄτεχ- 
νος. καὶ γὰρ ἂν οὕτως ὁ αὐτὸς εἴη τεχνίτης τε 
καὶ ἄτεχνος τῶν αὐτῶν, ᾿ἄτεχνος μὲν ἐπεὶ οὕτως 
ὑπόκειται, τεχνίτης δὲ ἐπεὶ κατάληψιν ἔχει τῶν 





« (Οὐ. 19 supra. 
ὃ These comparisons are ascribed to Anacharsis, the 


500 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 262-264 


apprehension, he will be making a random assertion.* 262 
For in the case of individual men we could not point 
to one who, being still a non-expert, will become an 
expert by acquiring one additional principle ; for no 
one, to be sure, has such a command of the numera- 
tion of the principles of each art as to be able to say, 
by numbering off the known principles, how many 
are still needed to make up the full number of the 
principles of the art. So then the learning of one 
principle does not make the non-expert an expert. 
But if this is true, seeing that no one acquires all the 263 
principles of the arts at once, but each one singly, 
if at all—this point also being granted by way of 
assumption—the man who is said to acquire the prin- 
ciples of the art one by one will not be termed an 
expert ; for we recall the conclusion that the learning 
of one principle cannot make an expert of the non- 
expert. No one, then, becomes an expert from 
being a non-expert. Hence, on these grounds too, 
the expert artist appears to be non-existent. And 
therefore the teacher also. 

Neither can the so-called learner, if he is non- 264 
expert, learn and apprehend the principles of the art 
wherein he is non-expert. For just as the man who 
is blind from birth, in so far as he is blind, will not 
acquire perception of colours, nor, similarly, he who 
is deaf from birth, of sound,’ so too the non-expert 
will not apprehend the principles of the art wherein 
he is non-expert. For should he do so the same man 
would be both expert and non-expert in the same 
things—non-expert since he is such by hypothesis, 
and expert since he has apprehension of the prin- 


Scythian sage of Solon’s time (circa 590 3.c.); ef. Adv. Log. 
i. 55. 


501 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τῆς τέχνης θεωρημάτων. ὥστε οὐδὲ “ὃ τεχνίτης 

265 τὸν ἄτεχνον διδάσκει. εἰ δὲ μήτε Oo τεχνίτης τὸν 
τεχνίτην διδάσκει μήτε ὃ ἄτεχνος τὸν ἄτεχνον μήτε 
6 ἄτεχνος τὸν τεχνίτην μήτε ὁ τεχνίτης τὸν 
ἄτεχνον, παρὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐδὲν ἔστιν, οὔτε ὁ 
διδάσκων ἔστιν οὔτε ὁ διδασκόμενος. 


A’.—EI ἘΣΤῚ ΤΙΣ ΜΑΘΉΣΕΩΣ ΤΡΟΙΤΟΣ 


Μὴ ὄντος δὲ μήτε τοῦ μανθάνοντος μήτε τοῦ 
διδάσκοντος καὶ ὃ τρόπος τῆς διδασκαλίας παρ- 
266 ἔλκει: οὐδὲν δὲ ἧττον καὶ διὰ τούτων ἀπορεῖται. 
o 7) α 
ὃ γὰρ τρόπος τῆς διδασκαλίας ἤτοι ἐναργείᾳ 
γίνεται ἢ λόγῳ: οὔτε δὲ ἐναργείᾳ γίνεται οὔτε 
, 
λόγῳ, καθάπερ παραστήσομεν" οὐδὲ ὁ τρόπος ἄρα 
Fond 3 
τῆς μαθήσεώς ἐστιν εὔπορος. 
3 if \ ὧν ᾿] 7 / 3 X 
Evapyeia μὲν οὖν od γίνεται διδασκαλία, ἐπεὶ 
τῶν δεικνυμένων ἐστὶν ἡ ἐνάργεια. τὸ δὲ δεικνύ- 
μενον πᾶσίν ἐστι φαινόμενον: τὸ δὲ φαινόμενον, ἡ 
φαίνεται, πᾶσίν ἐστι ληπτόν" τὸ δὲ κοινῶς πᾶσι 
ληπτὸν ἀδίδακτον: οὐκ ἄρα τι ἐναργείᾳ διδακτόν 
ἐστιν. 
\ nN 
267 Kat μὴν οὐδὲ λόγῳ διδάσκεταί τι. οὗτος yap 
», f Ἅ δὲ [4 3 A \ 
ἤτοι σημαίνει TL ἢ οὐδὲν σημαίνει. ἀλλὰ μηδὲν 
\ f Oo. a 4 7 3 
μὲν σημαίνων οὐδὲ ἔσται τινὸς διδασκαλικός. εἰ 
’ y 
δὲ σημαίνει τι, ἤτοι φύσει onuaiver τι ἢ θέσει. 
A 
καὶ φύσει μὲν οὐ onuaives διὰ τὸ μὴ πάντας πάν- 
> [4 ͵ Ὁ [4 ’ 
τῶν ἀκούοντας συνιέναι, οἷον “Ἕλληνας βαρβάρων 


« Cf. i. 188, 178. > Of, ii. 914. 





502 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 264-267 


ciples of the art. Hence, neither does the expert 
teach the non-expert. But if neither the expert 265 
teaches the expert, nor the non-expert the non- 
expert, nor the non-expert the expert, nor the expert 
the non-expert, and these are all the alternatives 
possible, then neither the teacher exists nor the 
taught. 


CHAPTER XXX.——Dors THERE Exist ANY Metruop 
or LEARNING? 


And if neither the learner nor the teacher exists, 
the method of teaching also is abolished. And itis no 266 
less disputed on the following grounds. The method 
of teaching comes to exist either by ocular evidence 
or by speech?; but it does not come to exist either 
by ocular evidence or by speech, as we shall show ; 
therefore the method of learning also is not easy to 
discover. 

Now teaching does not come by ocular evidence, 
since ocular evidence consists in things exhibited. 
But what is exhibited is apparent to all; and the 
apparent, qua apparent, is perceptible by all; and 
what is perceptible by all in common is incapable of 
being taught ; therefore nothing is capable of being 
taught by ocular evidence. 

Nor, in fact, is anything taught by speech. For 267 
speech either signifies something or signifies nothing. 
But if it signifies nothing, neither will it be capable 
of teaching anything. And if it signifies some- 
thing, it does so either by nature or by conven- 
tion. But it is not significant by nature ® because 
all men do not understand all when they hear 
them, as is the case with Greeks hearing barbarians 


503 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


268 Kal βαρβάρους Ἑλλήνων. θέσει δὲ εἰ σημαίνει, 


δῆλον ὡς ot μὲν προκατειληφότες καθ: ὧν αἱ λέξεις 
εἰσὶ τεταγμέναι ἀντιλήψονται τούτων, οὐκ ἐξ av- 
τῶν διδασκόμενοι ἅπερ ἡγνόουν, ἀλλὰ ἀναμιμνη- 
σκόμενοι καὶ ἀνανεούμενοι ταῦτα ἅπερ ἤδεσαν, “Ob 
δὲ χρήζοντες τῆς τῶν ἀγνοουμένων μαθήσεως, 
καὶ μὴ εἰδότες Kal? ὧν εἰσὶν αἱ λέξεις τεταγ- 


269 μέναι, οὐδενὸς ἀντίληψιν ἕξουσιν. διόπερ, οὐδὲ ὁ 


τρόπος τῆς μαθήσεως ὑποστῆναι δύναιτο ἄν. καὶ 
γὰρ ὃ διδάσκων ᾿ κατάληψιν τῶν θεωρημάτων τῆς 
διδασκομένης τέχνης ἐμποιεῖν ὀφείλει τῷ μαν- 
ἄνοντι, ἵνα οὕτως ἐκεῖνος τὸ σύστημα τούτων 
καταλαβὼν τεχνίτης γένηται. οὐδὲν δέ ἐστι κατά- 
ληψις, ὡς ἐν τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν ὑπεμνήσαμεν- οὐκοῦν 
οὐδὲ ὃ τρόπος τῆς διδασκαλίας ὑφεστάναι δύναται. 
εἰ δὲ μήτε τὸ διδασκόμενον ἐ ἔστι μήτε ὁ διδάσκων 
καὶ ὃ μανθάνων μήτε 6 τρόπος τῆς μαθήσεως, 
οὔτε μάθησις ἔστιν οὔτε διδασκαλία. 


210 Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν κοινότερον ἐπικεχείρηται περὶ 


27] 


μαθήσεως. καὶ διδασκαλίας" ἔ ἔνεστι δὲ a ἀπορεῖν οὕτω 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς λεγομένης περὶ τὸν βίον εἶναι τέχνης. 
οἷον γοῦν τὸ μὲν διδασκόμενον πρᾶγμα, τουτέστι 
τὴν φρόνησιν, ἀνυπόστατον ἐδείξαμεν ἐν τοῖς ἐμ- 
προσθεν" ἀνυπόστατος δέ ἐστι καὶ ὃ διδάσκων καὶ 
ὁ μανθάνων. ἦτοι γὰρ ὃ φρόνιμος τὸν φρόνιμον 
διδάξει τὴν περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνην ἢ ὁ ἄφρων τὸν 
ἄφρονα ἢ ὁ ἄφρων τὸν φρόνιμον 1 ὁ φρόνιμος τὸν 
ἄφρονα: οὐδεὶς δὲ τούτων οὐδένα διδάσκει: οὐκ 
ἄρα διδάσκεται ἢ περὶ τὸν βίον εἶναι λεγομένη 
τέχνη. καὶ περὶ μὲν τῶν ἄλλων ἴσως περιττὸν 
καὶ λέγειν: εἰ δὲ 6 φρόνιμος τὸν ἄφρονα διδάσκει 
a ee 


2 Of, § 214. > OF. 88. 240 ff. 
504 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 268-271 


talk or “barbarians hearing Greeks. And if it 268 
is significant by convention, evidently those who 
have grasped beforehand the objects to which the 
several words are assigned will perceive those objects, 
not through being taught by the words things of 
which they were ignorant, but by recollecting and 
recovering things which they knew; whereas those 
who require to learn what they do not know, and 
who are ignorant of the objects to which the words 
are assigned, will have no perception of anything. 
Consequently, the method of learning also will be 269 
incapable of subsisting. For, in fact, the teacher 
ought to impart to the learner an apprehension of 
the principles of the art he is teaching, so that the 
latter by apprehending them as a system may thus 
become an expert artist. But, as we have shown 
above,* apprehension is nothing ; therefore also the 
method of teaching cannot subsist. But if neither 
the matter taught exists, nor the teacher and the 
learner, nor the method of learning, then neither 
learning exists nor teaching. 

Such, then, are the objections put forward regard- 270 
ing learning and teaching in general. And the same 
difficulties may also be alleged in the case of the 
so-called art of living. Thus, for instance, we have 
shown above ® that the matter taught, namely pru- 
dence, is non-existent ; and both the teacher and the 
learner are non-existent. For either the prudent 
man will teach the prudent the art of living, or the 
imprudent the imprudent, or the imprudent the 
prudent, or the prudent the imprudent; but none 
of these teaches any other; therefore the so-called 
art of living is not taught. Probably it is superfluous 271 
even to refer to the other cases ; but if the prudent 


505 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


τὴν φρόνησιν, ἡ δὲ φρόνησις ἐπιστήμη ἐστὶν ἀγα- 
Ov καὶ κακῶν καὶ οὐθετέρων, ὁ ἄφρῶν μὴ ἔχων 
τὴν φρόνησιν ἄγνοιαν ἔχει τῶν ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν 
καὶ οὐθετέρων, ἄγνοιαν δὲ τούτων ἔχων πάντως 
διδάσκοντος αὐτὸν τοῦ φρονίμου τὰ ἀγαθὰ καὶ 
κακὰ καὶ οὐθέτερα ἀκούσεται μόνον τῶν λεγο- 
μένων, οὐ γνώσεται δὲ ταῦτα. εἰ γὰρ ἀντιλαμ- 
dvoito αὐτῶν ἐν ἀφροσύνῃ καθεστώς, ἔσται καὶ 
ἡ ἀφροσύνη τῶν τε ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν καὶ οὐθ- 

272 ετέρων θεωρητική. οὐχὶ δέ γε τούτων κατὰ αὐτοὺς 
ἡ ἀφροσύνη θεωρητικὴ καθέστηκεν, ἐπεὶ ὁ ἄφρων 
ἔσται φρόνιμος. ὁ ἄρα ἄφρων οὐκ ἀντιλαμβά- 
νεται τῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ φρονίμου λεγομένων ἢ πραττο- 
μένων κατὰ τὸν τῆς φρονήσεως" λόγον. μὴ ἀντι- 
λαμβανόμενος δὲ οὐκ ἂν διδάσκοιτο ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, 
ἄλλως τε καὶ ἐπεὶ μήτε ἐναργείᾳ μήτε διὰ λόγου 
δύναται διδάσκεσθαι, καθὰ προειρήκαμεν. πλὴν 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μήτε διὰ μαθήσεως καὶ διδασκαλίας ἐγ- 
γίνεταί τινι ἡ περὶ τὸν βίον λεγομένη τέχνη μήτε 
φύσει, ἀνεύρετός ἐστιν ἡ παρὰ τοῖς φιλοσόφοις 
θρυλουμένη τέχνη περὶ τὸν βίον. 

213 Ei μέντοι καὶ δοίη τις ἐκ πολλοῦ τοῦ ,“περιόντος 
ἐγγίνεσθαί τινι τὴν ὀνειροπολουμένην τέχνην περὶ 
τὸν βίον, BA αβερὰ καὶ ταραχῆς αἰτία φανήσεται 
μᾶλλον τοῖς ἔχουσιν αὐτὴν ἢ ὠφέλιμος. 


AA’,—EI ὨΦΕΛΕΙ H ILEPI TON BION ΤΈΧΝΗ ΤῸΝ 
EXONTA ATTHN 


Αὐτίκα γοῦν, wa παραδείγματος ἕνεκεν ὀλίγα 
3 \ ~ u > “a a / \ A 
ἀπὸ πολλῶν εἴπωμεν, ὠφελεῖν ἂν δοκοίη τὸν σοφὸν 


1 τῆς φρονήσεως Mutsch.: τῆς μαθήσεως Bekk.: τήσσεως 
MSS.: τῆς ζητήσεως T, 


δ06 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 271-273 


man teaches prudence to the imprudent, and pru- 
dence is “‘ knowledge 5 of things good and evil and 
neither,’ the imprudent man, as he does not possess 
prudence, possesses ignorance of the things that are 
good and evil and neither; and since he possesses 
nothing but ignorance thereof, when the prudent 
man teaches him what things are good and evil and 
neither, he will merely hear what is said and will not 
get to know the things. For if he should grasp them 
while in a state of imprudence, then imprudence too 
will be capable of perceiving. what things are good 


and evil and neither. But, according to them, im- 272 


prudence is certainly not capable of perceiving these 
things, since, if it were, the imprudent man will be 
prudent. Therefore, according to the definition of 
prudence, the imprudent man does not grasp what 
is said or done by the prudent. And, as he fails to 
grasp, he will not be taught by him, especially since, 
as we have said above, he cannot be taught either 
by ocular evidence or by means of speech. But, in 
fine, if the so-called art of living is not imparted to 
anyone either by means of learning and teaching or 
by nature, then the art of living, so harped on by 
the philosophers, is indiscoverable. 

Yet even were one to grant, as an act of bounty, 
that this visionary art of living is imparted to some- 
one, it will show itself to be hurtful to its possessors, 
and. a cause of perturbation, rather than beneficial. 


Cuapter XXXI.—Dors tHe Art or Livine 
BENEFIT ITS PossEssor ἢ 
Thus, for instance—to take a few arguments out 
of many by way of example—the art of living might 
« Of. § 168. 
507 


274 


275 


276 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ἡ περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνη ἐγκράτειαν αὐτῷ ᾿παρεχο- 
μένη ἐν ταῖς πρὸς τὸ καλὸν , ὁρμαῖς Καὶ ἐν ταῖς 
ἀπὸ τοῦ κακοῦ ἀφορμαῖς. ὃ οὖν λεγόμενος κατ᾽ 
αὐτοὺς ἐγκρατὴς σοφὸς ἤτοι κατὰ τοῦτο «λέγεται 
ἐγκρατὴς καθόσον ἐν οὐδεμιᾷ γίνεται ὁρμῇ τῇ 
πρὸς τὸ κακὸν καὶ ἀφορμῇ τῇ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, 
ἢ καθόσον εἶχε μὲν φαύλ ας ὁρμὰς καὶ ἀφορμάς, 
περιεκράτει δὲ αὐτῶν τῷ λόγῳ. ἀλλὰ κατὰ μὲν 
τὸ μὴ γίνεσθαι ἐν φαύλαις κρίσεσιν οὐκ ἂν εἴη 
> 4 \ \ ς 
ἐγκρατής" οὐ γὰρ κρατήσει οὗ οὐκ ἔχει. καὶ ὡς 
οὐκ ἂν εἴποι τις τὸν εὐνοῦχον ἐγκρατῆ πρὸς ἀφρο- 
δίσια καὶ τὸν κακοστομαχοῦντα πρὸς ἐδεσμάτων 
ἀπόλαυσιν (οὐδ᾽ ὅλως γὰρ ἐπιζήτηεις αὐτοῖς γίνε- 
ται τῶν τοιούτων, ἵνα καὶ ἐγκρατῶς κατεξαναστῶσι 
τῆς ἐπιζητήσεωεὶ τῷ αὐτῷ τρόπῳ οὐδὲ τὸν σοφὸν 
ἐγκρατῆ ῥητέον διὰ τὸ μὴ φύεσθαι ἐν αὐτῷ πάθος 
οὗ ἔσται ἐγκρατής. εἰ δὲ κατὰ τοῦτο ἀξιώσουσιν 
αὐτὸν ὑπάρχειν ἐγκρατῆ καθόσον γίνεται μὲν ἐν 
φαύλαις κρίσεσιν περιγίνεται δὲ αὐτῶν τῷ λόγῳ, 
πρῶτον μὲν δώσουσιν ὅτι οὐδὲν ὠφέλησεν αὐτὸν ἡ 
φρόνησις, ἀκμὴν ἐν ταραχαῖς ὄντα καὶ βοηθείας 
δεόμενον, εἶτα καὶ κακοδαιμονέστερος. τῶν φαύλων 
λεγομένων εὑρίσκεται. εἰ μὲν γὰρ ὁρμᾷ ἐπί τι, 
πάντως ταράσσεται, εἰ δὲ περικρατεῖ τῷ λόγω 
συνέχει ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὸ κακόν, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο μᾶλλον 
ταράσσεται τοῦ φαύλου ἐκείνου μηκέτι τοῦτο 





α For the Stoic definition of this virtue cf. Adv. Phys. i. 153. 

It denotes κ᾿ self-mastery’? by which the rational self (or 
** Logos ’’) overcomes the irrational appetites and passions. 

Ch § 177 for the Stoic use of “ inclination ” and “ aver- 

sion’ as ethical terms. The Stoic ideal being complete 


508 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 273-276 


be thought, to benefit the wise man by furnishing 
him with temperance? in his impulses towards good 
and repulsions from evil. He, then, who is termed by 274 
them a temperate sage is called temperate either in 
virtue of his never feeling the impulse towards good 
or repulsion from evil,? or in virtue of his possessing 
slight impulses in either direction and overcoming 
them by reason. But in respect of his freedom from 275 
bad resolutions he will not be self-controlled ; for he 
will not control what he does not possess. And just 
as one would not call a eunuch temperate in sex~- 
indulgence, or a man with a poor stomach temperate 
in respect of the pleasures of the table (for they feel 
no attraction at all towards such things, so that they 
might rise superior to the attraction through temper- 
ance),—in the same way we ought not to term the 
sage temperate, because he possesses no natural 
feeling over which he may exercise control. And 276 
if they shall claim that he is temperate in virtue 
of his forming bad resolutions but overcoming them 
by reason, then, firstly, they will be admitting that 
prudence was of no benefit to him just when he was 
in a state of perturbation and needed assistance, and, 
secondly, he is found to be even more unfortunate 
than those they term bad.° For if he feels an impulse 
towards anything, he is certainly perturbed; while 
if he overcomes it by reason, he retains the evil, 
and because of this he is more perturbed than the 
bad man who no longer experiences this feeling ; 


absence of passion and emotion (“‘apathy’’), the less 
ἐῶ temperance” a man exercised the better he was. “The 
Sage,” being a purely rational self, needs no “ self-mastery.” 
Cf. Introd. Ὁ. xxviii. 

¢ The “ not-wise ”’ of the Stoics, cf. § 251. 


509 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


277 πάσχοντος" εἰ μὲν γὰρ ὁρμᾷ, ταράσσεται, εἰ δὲ 
τυγχάνει τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν, παύεται τῆς ταραχῆς. 
Οὐ τοίνυν ἐγκρατὴς γίνεται ὅσον ἐπὶ τῇ φρο- 
νήσει ὁ σοφός: ἢ εἴπερ γίνεται, πάντων ἀνθρώπων 
ἐστὶ κακοδαιμονέστατος, ὥστε οὐκ ὠφέλειαν ἀλλὰ 
ταραχὴν αὐτῷ μεγίστην ἡ περὶ τὸν βίον παρέσχε 
τέχνη. ὅτι δὲ ὁ νομίζων ἔχειν τὴν περὶ τὸν βίον 
τέχνην καὶ δι᾽ αὐτῆς ἐπεγνωκέναι τίνα τέ ἐστιν 
ἀγαθὰ ὡς πρὸς τὴν φύσιν καὶ τίνα φαῦλα, ταράσ- 
σεται σφόδρα. καὶ τῶν ἀγαθῶν αὐτῷ παρόντων 
καὶ τῶν κακῶν, ἐν τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν ὑπεμνήσαμεν. 
278 λεκτέον οὖν ὅτι εἰ μήτε 7 τῶν ἀγαθῶν τε καὶ 
κακῶν καὶ ἀδιαφόρων ὑπόστασις “ὁμολογεῖται, ἥ 
τε περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνη τάχα μὲν καὶ ἀνυπόστατός 
ἐστιν, εἰ δὲ καὶ ὑφεστάναι δοθείη καθ᾽ ὑπόθεσιν, 
οὐδεμίαν ὠφέλειαν τοῖς ἔχουσιν αὐτὴν παρέχει, 
τοὐναντίον δὲ ταραχὰς αὐτοῖς ἐμποιεῖ μεγίστας, 
μάτην ὠφρυῶσθαι δοκοῖεν ὁ ἂν οἱ δογματικοὶ κἀν τῷ 
λεγομένῳ ἠθικῷ μέρει τῆς καλουμένης φιλοσοφίας. 
279 Τοσαῦτα καὶ περὶ τοῦ ἠθικοῦ τόπου συμμέτρως 
ws ἐν ὑποτυπώσει διεξελθόντες, ἐνταῦθα περι- 
γράφομεν καὶ τὸ τρίτον σύνταγμα καὶ τὸ πᾶν τῶν 
υρρωνείων ὑποτυπώσεων σπούδασμα, ἐκεῖνο ἐπει- 
πόντες. 


AB’.—AIA ΤΊ Ο ΣΚΕΠΤΙΚΟΣ ENIOTE ΑΜΥΔΡΟΥ͂Σ 
ΤΑΙ͂Σ ΠΙΘΑΝΟΤΗΣΙΝ EPOTAN ἘΠΙΤΗΔΈΥΕΙ ΛΟΓΟΥ͂Σ 


28 Ὁ σκεπτικὸς διὰ τὸ φιλάνθρωπος εἶναι τὴν τῶν 
δογματικῶν οἴησίν τε καὶ προπέτειαν κατὰ δύναμιν 
ἰᾶσθαι λόγῳ βούλεται. του ἀπὸ οὖν οἱ τῶν σω- 

> Of, i. 20, 177 ; 711 256, 258. 
510 


OUTLINES OF ΡΥΒΒΗΟΝΙΘΜ, III. 277-280 


for the latter, though he is perturbed if he is feeling 277 
an impulse,’ yet ceases from his perturbation if he 
gains his desires. 

So, then, the sage does not become temperate in 
virtue of his prudence; or if he does become so, he 
is of all men the most miserable, so that the art of 
living has brought him no benefit but the uttermost 
perturbation. And we have shown above @ that the 
man who believes that he possesses the art of living, 
and that by means of it he discerns what things are 
naturally good and what bad, is extremely perturbed 
both when good things are his and when evil things. 
We must, then, declare that, if there is no agree- 278 
ment as to the existence of things good and bad and 
indifferent, and the art of living is possibly non- 
existent, or—if its existence is provisionally admitted 
—brings no benefit to its possessors but, on the 
contrary, causes them extreme perturbations, then 
the Dogmatists would seem to be vainly puffed up in 
respect of the so-called Ethical division of what they 
term “ philosophy.” 

Having now treated of the subject of Ethics also 279 
at sufficient length for an account in outline, we con- 
clude at this point our third book, and with it the 
complete treatise on ‘ Pyrrhonean Outlines,” adding 
only this final section : 


CHapter XXXII.—Wuyvy tur Scepric soMETIMES 
PURPOSELY PROPOUNDS ARGUMENTS WHICH ARE 
LACKING IN Power or Persuasion 


The Sceptic, being a lover of his kind, desires to 280 
cure by speech, as best he can, the self-conceit 
and rashness® of the Dogmatists. So, just as the 


511 


28] 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 


ματικῶν παθῶν ἰατροὶ διάφορα κατὰ μέγεθος 
ἔχουσι βοηθήματα, καὶ τοῖς μὲν σφοδρῶς πεπονθόσι 
τὰ σφοδρὰ τούτων προσάγουσι τοῖς δὲ κούφως τὰ 
κουφότερα, καὶ ὁ σκεπτικὸς οὕτως διαφόρους 
ἐρωτᾷ [καὶ κατὰ ἰσχὺν λόγους, καὶ τοῖς μὲν ἐμ- 
βριθέσι καὶ εὐτόνως ἀνασκευάζειν δυγαμένοις τὸ 
τῆς οἰήσεως τῶν δογματικῶν πάθος ἐπὶ τῶν 
σφόδρα τῇ προπετείᾳ κεκακωμένων χρῆται, τοῖς 
δὲ ,κουφοτέροις ἐπὶ τῶν ἐπιπόλαιον καὶ εὐίατον 
ἐχόντων τὸ τῆς οἰήσεως πάθος καὶ ὑπὸ κουφοτέρων 
πιθανοτήτων ἀνασκευάζεσθαι δυναμένων. διόπερ 
ὁτὲ μὲν ἐμβριθεῖς ταῖς πιθανότησιν ὁτὲ δὲ καὶ 
ἀμαυροτέρους φαινομένους οὐκ ὀκνεῖ λόγους συν- 
ερωτᾶν 6 ἀπὸ τῆς σκέψεως ὁρμώμενος, ἐπίτηδες, 
ὡς ἀρκοῦντας αὐτῷ πολλάκις πρὸς τὸ ἀνύειν τὸ 
προκείμενον. 


512 


OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM, III. 280-281 


physicians who cure bodily ailments have remedies 
which differ in strength, and apply the severe ones 
to those whose ailments are severe and the milder to 
those mildly affected,—so too the Sceptic propounds 
arguments which differ in strength, and employs those 281 
which are weighty and capable by their stringency of 
disposing of the Dogmatists’ ailment, self-conceit, in 
cases where’the mischief is due to a severe attack of 
rashness, while he employs the milder arguments in 
the case of those whose ailment of conceit is super- 
ficial and easy to cure, and whom it is possible to 
restore to health by milder methods of persuasion. 
Hence the adherent of Sceptic principles does not 
scruple to propound at one time arguments that are 
weighty in their’ persuasiveness, and at another time 
such as appear less impressive,—and he does so on 
purpose, as the latter are frequently sufficient to 
enable him to effect his object. 


VOL. I eo 513 


Printed in Great Britain dy R. & R. Ciark, Limirrp, Zdiburgh. 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY 


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED 


LATIN AUTHORS 

APULEIUS. THE GOLDEN ASS (METAMORPHO- 
SES). Trans. by W. Adlington (1566). Revised by 
S. Gaselee. (4th Impression.) 

AULUS GELLIUS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 3 Vols. 

AUSONIUS. Trans. by H. G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols. 

BEDE: HISTORICAL WORKS. Trans. by J. King. 


2 Vols. 

BOETHIUS: TRACTATES ann DE CONSOLATIONE 
PHILOSOPHIAE. Trans. by the Rev. H. F. Stewart 
and E. Κα. Rand. (2nd Impression.) 

CAESAR: CIVI£ WARS. Trans. by A. G. Peskett. 
(3rd Impression.) 

CAESAR: GALLIC WAR. Trans. by H. J. Edwards. 
(5th Impression.) 

CATULLUS. Trans. by F. W. Cornish; TIBULLUS. 
Trans. by J. P. Postgate; PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. 
Trans. by J. W. Mackail. (9th Impression.) 

CICERO: DE FINIBUS. Trans. by H. Rackham. (3rd 
Impression revised.) 

CICERO: DE NATURA DEORUM awn ACADEMICA. 
Trans. by H. Rackham. 

CICERO: DE OFFICHIS. Trans. by Walter Miller. (3rd 
Impression.) 

CICERO: DE REPUBLICA ayp DE LEGIBUS. Trans. 
by Clinton Keyes. 

CICERO: DE SENECTUTE, DE AMICITIA, DE 
DIVINATIONE, ‘Trans. by W. A. Falconer. (3rd Imp.) 

CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans. by E. Ὁ. 
Winstedt. 3 Vols. (Vols. I. 4th, 11, 3rd, II. 2nd Imp.) 

CICERO: LETTERS TO HIS FRIENDS. Trans. by 
W. Glynn Williams. 3 Vols. 

CICERO: PHILIPPICS. Trans. by W. C. A. Ker. 

CICERO: PRO ARCHIA POETA, POST REDITUM IN 
SENATU, POST REDITUM AD QUIRITES, DE 
DOMO SUA, DE HARUSPICUM RESPONSIS, PRO 
PLANCIO. Trans. by N. H. Watts. 

1 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


CICERO: PRO CAECINA, PRO LEGE ‘MANILIA, 
PRO CLUENTIO, PRO RABIRIO. Trans. by H. 
Grose Hodge.- 

CICERO: PRO MILONE, IN PISONEM, PRO 
SCAURO, PRO FONTEIO, PRO RABIRIO, PRO 
MARCELLO, PRO LIGARIO, PRO DEIOTARO. 
Trans. by N. H. Watts 

CICERO: "PRO QUINCTIO, PRO ROSCIO AMERINO, 
PRO ROSCIO ees CONTRA RULLUM. 
Trans. by J. H. Fre 

eee TUSCULAN DISPUTATIONS. Trans. by 

ing. 

CICERO: VERRINE ORATIONS. Trans. by L. H. G. 
Greenwood. 2 Vols.* Vol. I. 

CLAUDIAN. Trans. by M. Platnauer. 2 Vols. 

FLORUS. Trans. by E. S. Forster; CORNELIUS 
NEPOS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 

FRONTINUS: STRATAGEMS ann AQUEDUCTS. 
Trans. by C. E. Bennett. 

FRONTO» CORRESPONDENCE. Trans. by C. R. 
Haines. 2 Vols. 

HORACE: ODES anp EPODES. Trans. by C. E. 
Bennett. (9th Impression revised.) 

HORACE: SATIRES, EPISTLES, ARS POETICA. 
Trans. by H. R. Fairclough. (8rd Impression revised.) 
JUVENAL any PERSIUS. Trans. by G. G. Ramsay. 

πον Impression.) 
Avena, ἢ by B. O. Foster. 13 Vols. Vols. I.-V. 
* Vol. I. Qnd Impression revised.) 

LUCAN. Trans. by J. D. Duff. 

LUCRETIUS. Trans. by W. H. Ὁ. Rouse. (3rd Imp. rev.) 

MARTIAL. Trans. by W. C. A. Ker. 2 Vols. (3rd 
Impression revised.) 

MINUCIUS FELIX: οἱ TERTULLIAN. 

OVID: THE ART OF LOVE ann oruer porms. Trans. 
by J. H. Mozley. 

ΟΥ̓: FASTI. Trans. by Sir James G. Frazer. 

OVID: HEROIDES, AMORHES. Trans. by Grant Shower- 
man. (3rd Impression.) 

OVID: METAMORPHOSES. Trans. by Ῥ J. Miller. 
2 Vols. (Vols. I. 5th Impression, 11. 4th Impression.) 

OVID: TRISTIA awn EX PONTO. Trans. by A. 


Wheeler. 
ῷ 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


PETRONIUS. Trans. by M. Heselline: SENECA: 
APOCOLOGYNTOSIS. Trans. by W. H. Ὁ. Rouse. 
(5th Impression revised.) 

PLAUTUS. Trans. by Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. Vols. [.-IV. 
(Vol. I. 3rd, Vol. II. 2nd, Vol. III. 4th Impression.) 

PLINY: LETTERS. Melmoth’s trans. revised by ὟΝ. M. L. 
Hutchinson. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 4th, Vol. II. 3rd Imp.) 

PROPERTIUS. Trans. by H. E. Butler. (4th Impression.) 

QUINTILIAN. Trans. by H. E. Butler. 4 Vols. (Vol. 1. 
Φηᾷ Impression.) 

ST. AUGUSTINE: CONFESSIONS OF. Trans. by W. 
Watts (1631). 2 Vols. (4th Impression.) 

SAINT AUGUSTINE: SELECT,LETTERS. Trans. by 
J. H. Baxter. 

ee creas SELECT LETTERS. Trans. F. A. 

right. 

SALLUST. Trans, by J.C. Rolfe. (Qnd Impression revised.) 

SCRIPTORES HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE. Trans. by 
D. Magie. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Impression revised.) 

SENECA: EPISTULAE MORALES. Trans. by R. M. 
Gummere. 3 Vols. (Vols. I. and II. 2nd Impression, 
Vol. II. revised.) 

SENECA: MORAL ESSAYS. Trans. by J. W. Basore. 
3 Vols. Vols. I.-II. 

SENECA: TRAGEDIES. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 
2Vols. (2nd Impression revised.) 

STATIUS. Trans. by J. H. Mozley. 2 Vols. 

SUETONIUS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. (4¢h Im- 
pression revised.) 

TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Trans. by Sir Wm. Peterson ; 
and AGRICOLA ayn GERMANIA. ‘Trans. by Maurice 
Hutton. (4th Impression.) 

TACITUS: HISTORIES ann ANNALS. Trans. by 
C. H. Moore and J. Jackson. 3 Vols. Vols. I and II. 
TERENCE. Trans. by John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (5th Imp.) 
TERTULLIAN: APOLOGIA ayn DE SPECTACULIS. 
Trans. by T. R. Glover. MINUCIUS FELIX. Trans. 

by G. H. Rendall. 

VELLEIUS PATERCULUS ayn RES GESTAE DIVI 
AUGUSTI. Trans. by F. W. Shipley. 

VIRGIL. Trans. by H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 
11th Impression, Vol. IT. 8th Impression.) 

3 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


VITRUVIUS: DE ARCHITECTURA. Trans. by F. 
Granger. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 


GREEK AUTHORS 


ACHILLES TATIUS. Trans. by S. Gaselee. 

AENEAS TACTICUS, ASCLEPIODOTUS anv ONA- 
SANDER. Trans. by The Illinois Greek Glub. 

AESCHINES. Trans. by C. Ὁ. Adams. 

AESCHYLUS. Trans. by H. Weir Smyth. 2 Vols. 
(Vol. I. 3rd Impression, Vol. 11. 2nd Impression revised.) 

APOLLODORUS. Trans. by Sir James G. Frazer. 2 Vols. 

APOLLONIUS RHODIUS. Trans. by R. C. Seaton. 
(4th Impression.) 

THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Trans. by Kirsopp Lake. 
2 Vols. (Vol. I. 5th Impression, Vol. 11, 4th Impression.) 

APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Horace White. 
4 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd, Vols. II.-IV. 2nd Impression.) 

ARATUS: ef. CALLIMACHUS. 

ARISTOPHANES. Trans. by Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 
3 Vols. (Verse translation.) (3rd Impression.) 

ARISTOTLE: THE “ ART” OF RHETORIC. Trans. 
by J. H. Freese. 

ARISTOTLE: THE METAPHYSICS. Trans. by H. 
Tredennick. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 

ARISTOTLE : THE NICOMACHEAN ETHICS. Trans. 
by H. Rackham. 

ARISTOTLE: THE PHYSICS. Trans. by the Rev. P. 
Wicksteed and Τὶ, M. Cornford. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 

ARISTOTLE: POETICS: “LONGINUS ”: ON THE 
SUBLIME. Trans. by W. Hamilton Fyfe, ann DE- 
METRIUS: ON STYLE. Trans. by W. Rhys Roberts. 
(2nd Impression revised.) 

ARISTOTLE: THE POLITICS. Trans. by H. Rackham. 

ARRIAN: HISTORY OF ALEXANDER anp INDICA. 
Trans. by the Rev. E. Jliffe Robson. 2 Vols. 

ATHENAEUS: THE DEIPNOSOPHISTS, Trans. by 
C. B. Gulick. 7 Vols. Vols. I.-V. 

CALLIMACHUS ann LYCOPHRON. Trans. by A. W. 
Mair, ann ARATUS, trans. by G. R. Mair. 

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. Trans. by the Rev. 
G. W. Butterworth. 

4 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


COLLUTHUS : ef. OPPIAN. 

DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. Thornley’s translation revised 
by J. M. Edmonds: ἀχὸ PARTHENIUS. Trans. by 
S. Gaselee. (2nd Impression.) 

DEMOSTHENES: DE CORONA ann DE FALSA 

. LEGATIONE, Trans. by C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES: OLYNTHIACS, PHILIPPICS, LEP- 
TINES, ann MINORSPEECHES. Trans. byJ.H. Vince. 

DIO CASSIUS : ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by E. Cary. 
9 Vols. (Vol. 11. 2nd Impression.) 

PO Ὁ ΡΥ ΒΟ ΤΟΝ 4 Vols. Vol. I. Trans. by J. W. 

ohoon. . 
ΟΡ ΤῸ SICULUS. Trans. by C. H. Oldfather. 9 Vols. 


ol. I. 

DIOGENES LAERTIUS. Trans. by ΒΕ. Ὁ. Hicks. 2 Vols. 
(Vol. I. 2nd Impression.) 

EPICTETUS. Trans. by W. A. Oldfather. 2 Vols. 

EURIPIDES. Trans. by Α. 5. Way. 4 Vols. (Verse trans.) 
(Vols. I. and II. 5th, Vol. III. 3rd, Vol. IV. 4th Imp.) 

EUSEBIUS: ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. Trans. 
by Kirsopp Lake and E. L. Oulton. 2 Vols. 

GALEN: ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES. Trans. by 
A. J. Brock. (2nd Impression.) 

THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. Trans. by W. R. Paton. 
5 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd, Vol. 11. 2nd Impression.) 

THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, BION, 
MOSCHUS). Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. (5th Imp.) 
GREEK ELEGY AND IAMBUS wits tar ANACRE- 

ONTEA. Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. 2 Vols. 
HERODES, erc. Trans. by A. D. Knox: ef. THEO- 
PHRASTUS, CHARACTERS. 
HERODOTUS. Trans. by A. D. Godley. 4 Vols. (Vol. 
I. 3rd Impression, Vols. Il.-[V. 2nd Impression.) 
HESIOD ann THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans. by 
H. G. Evelyn White. (4th Impression.) 
HIPPOCRATES anp HERACLEITUS. Trans. by 
W. Ἡ. 9. Jones and E. T. Withington. 4 Vols. 
HOMER: ILIAD. Trans. by A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. 
(Vol. I. 3rd Impression, Vol. I. 2nd Impression.) 
HOMER: ODYSSEY. Trans. by A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. 
(Vols. I. 4th Impression, Vol. Il. 3rd Impression.) 
ISAEUS. Trans. by E. S. Forster. 
ISOCRATES. Trans. by G. Norlin. 3 Vols. Vols. 1. and II. 
ro] 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


J ea Trans. by H. St. J. Thackeray. 8 Vols. 
ols. I.-I'V. 

JULIAN. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 
Qnd Impression.) 

LUCIAN. Trans. by A. M. Harmon. 8 Vols. Vols. L-IV. 
(Vols. I. and II. 3rd Impression.) 

LYCOPHRON : ef. CALLIMACHUS. 

LYRA GRAECA. Trans.byJ..M.Edmonds. 3 Vols. (Vol. 
I. 2nd Edition revised and enlarged, Vol. 11. 9nd Imp. rev.) 

LYSIAS. Trans. by W. R. M. Lamb. 

MARCUS AURELIUS. Trans. by C. R. Haines. (3rd 
Impression revised.) 

MENANDER. Trans. by F. G. Allinson. (2nd Imp. rev.) 

OPPIAN, COLLUTHUS ayn TRYPHIODORUS. Trans. 


. by A. W. Mair. 

PAPYRI, SELECT. Trans. by A. S. Hunt and C. C. 
Edgar. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 

PARTHENIUS : ef. DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. Trans. 
by W. H. 5. Jones. 4 Vols. and Companion Vol. Vols. 
1.-11. (Vol. 1. 2nd Impression.) 

PHILO. ‘Trans. by F. H. Colson and the Rev. G. H. 
Whitaker. 10 Vols. Vols. I-IV. 

PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF 
TYANA. ‘Trans. by F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 
3rd Impression, Vol. 11. 2nd Impression.) 

PHILOSTRATUS snp EUNAPIUS: LIVES OF THE 
SOPHISTS. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. 

PHILOSTRATUS. IMAGINES; CALLISTRATUS. 
DESCRIPTIONS. Trans. by A. Fairbanks. 

PINDAR. ‘Trans. by Sir J. E. Sandys. (5th Imp. rev.) 

PLATO: CHARMIDES, ALCIBIADES I. awn IL, 
HIPPARCHUS, THE LOVERS, THEAGES, MINOS, 
EPINOMIS. Trans. by W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO: CRATYLUS, PARMENIDES, GREATER anp 
LESSER HIPPIAS. Trans. by H. N. Fowler. 

PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAEDO, 
PHAEDRUS. Trans. by H. N. Fowler. (6th Impression.) 

PLATO: LACHES, PROTAGORAS, MENO, EUTHY- 
DEMUS. ‘Trans. by W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO: LAWS. Trans. by the Rev. R. G. Bury. 2 Vols. 

PLATO: LYSIS, SYMPOSIUM, GORGIAS. Trans. by 
W.R.M. Lamb. (2nd Impression revised.) 

6 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


PLATO: REPUBLIC. Trans. by Paul Shorey. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 

PLATO: STATESMAN, PHILEBUS. ‘Trans. by H. N. 
Fowler; ION. Trans. by W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO: THEAETETUS, SOPHIST. Trans. by H. N. 
Fowler. (2nd Impression.) 

PLATO: TIMAEUS, CRITIAS, CLITOPHO, MENE- 

* XENUS, EPISTULAE. Trans. by the Rev. R. G. Bury. 

PLUTARCH: THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans. by B. 
Perrin. 11 Vols. (Vols. 1., 11., III. and VII. 2nd Imp.) 

PLUTARCH: MORALIA. Trans. by F. C. Babbitt. 
14 Vols. Vols. I.-III. 

POLYBIUS. Trans. by W. R. Paton. 6 Vols. 

PROCOPIUS ; HISTORY OF THE WARS. Trans. by 
H. B. Dewing. 7 Vols. Vols.eL.-V. (Vol. I. 2nd Imp.) 

QUINTUS SMYRNAEUS. Trans. by A. S. Way. (Verse.) 

ST. BASIL: THE LETTERS. Trans. by R. Deferrari. 
4 Vols. Vols. I.-III. 

ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND JOASAPH. 
Trans. by the Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. 

SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Trans. by the Rev. R. G. Bury. 
3 Vols. Vol. I. OUTLINES OF PYRRHONISM. 

SOPHOCLES. Trans. by F. Storr. 2 Vols. (Verse trans- 
lation.) (Vol. 1. 6th Impression, Vol. 11. 4th Impression.) 

STRABO: GEOGRAPHY. ‘Trans. by Horace L. Jones. 
8 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Impression.) 

THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS. Trans. by J. M. 
Edmonds ;, HERODES, CERCIDAS AND THE GREEK 
CHOLIAMBIC POETS. Trans. by A. D. Knox. 

THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS. Trans. 
by Sir Arthur Hort, Bart. 2 Vols. 

THUCYDIDES. Trans. by C. F. Smith. 4 Vols. (Vols. 
I-III. 2nd Impression revised.) 

TRYPHIODORUS : οὐ OPPIAN. 

XENOPHON : CYROPAEDIA. Trans. by Walter Miller. 
2 Vols. (2nd Impression.) 

XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, 
anp SYMPOSIUM. Trans. by C. L. Brownson and 
O. J. Todd. 3 Vols. (2nd Impression.) 

XENOPHON : MEMORABILIA ann OECONOMICUS. 
Trans. by E. C. Marchant. 

XENOPHON: SCRIPTA MINORA. Trans. by E. C. 
Marchant. 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 
VOLUMES IN PREPARATION 


GREEK AUTHORS 


ARISTOTLE: ATHENIAN CONSTITUTION. H. 
Rackham. 

ARISTOTLE: DE ANIMA etc. W. S. Hett. 

ARISTOTLE: ECONOMICS. W. G. Armstrong. 

ARISTOTLE: ON THE MOTION OF pa ΠΛΡΛΙε, ete. 
E. S. Forster and A. Peck. 

ARISTOTLE: ORGANON. H. P. Cooke. 

DEMOSTHENES: MEIDIAS, ANDROTION, ARISTO- 
CRATES, TIMOCRATES. 3, H. Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES : PRIVATE ORATIONS. G. M. 

alhoun. 

MINOR ATTIC ORATORS (ANTIPHON, ANDO- 
CIDES, DEMADES, DINARCHUS, HYPEREIDES),. 
K. Maidment. 

MYTHOGRAPHI GRAECI. D.H. Knappe 

GREEK MATHEMATICAL WORKS. J. Thomas. 

MYTHOGRAPHI GRAECI. Ὁ. H. Knappe. 


LATIN AUTHORS 


AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS. J.C. Rolfe. 
CELSUS. W. G. Spencer. 
CICERO: CATILINE ORATIONS. B. L. Ullman. 
CICERO: DE ORATORE, Ser BRUTUS. Charles 
Stuttaford and W. E. Sutt 
CICERO: PRO SESTIO, IN VATINIUM, PRO CAELIO, 
PRO PROV. CONS., PRO BALBO. J. H. Freese. 
ENNIUS, LUCILIUS, AND OTHER SPECIMENS OF 
OLD LATIN. E. H. Warmington. 
MINOR LATIN POETS. J. en mae 
PLINY: NATURAL HISTOR 
L. F. Newman. 
PRUDENTIUS. J.H. Baxter. 
SIDONIUS. E. V. Arnold and W. B. Anderson. 
SILIUS ITALICUS: PUNICA. J. D. Duff. 
VALERIUS FLACCUS. J. H. Mozley. 


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION 


. ὃ. Jones and 


ἜΜΕΝ ‘WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD 
New York . . G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
8
