The Heart of the Antarctic, Vol. II
Ernest Shackleton, 1909
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Shackleton's Nimrod narrative, Vol. II — completing the 1907-09 expedition account. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/heartofantarctic002shac). This 1909 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

-jfflltrivrtt  Jti


m


P^Ilpslwi


Y\\  r\<'TuTnci


^9


Boston  Library  Consortium  IVIember  Libraries


THE  HEART  OF
THE  ANTARCTIC


THE  NORTHERN  PARTY  AT  THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE
FROM   LEFT— DR.  MACK  AY,  PROFESSOR   DAVJD,
DOUGLAS  MAWSON


THE  HEART  OF  THE

ANTARCTIC

BEING  THE  STORY  OF  THE  BRITISH
ANTARCTIC    EXPEDITION    1907-1909

BY  E.  H.  SHACKLETON,  C.Y.O.

WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY  HUGH  ROBERT
MILL,  D.Sc.  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  FIRST  JOURNEY
TO    THE    SOUTH     MAGNETIC    POLE     BY    PROFESSOR

T.   W.    EDGEWORTH   DAVID,    F.  R.  S.


VOL.  ir


LONDON

WILLIAM    HEINEMANN

1909


/6r6'/^


hl^^'Z


G^


J.  B.  Lippincott  Company.


COJSTENTS

PAGE

CHAPTER  I

SOME  NOTES  ON  THE  SOUTHERN  JOURNEY  1

CHAPTER  II

SUMMER  AT  THE  WINTER  QUARTERS  22

CHAPTER  III

RETURN  OF  THE  NIMROD  40

CHAPTER  IV

THE  BLUEE  DEPOT  JOURNEY  52

CHAPTER  V

THE  WESTERN  JOURNEY  61

CHAPTER  VI

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  73

CHAPTER  VII

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)  92

CHAPTER  Vni

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)        111

CHAPTER  IX

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)         129

CHAPTER  X

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)         147
II  6  V


CONTENTS

PAGE

CHAPTER  XI

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)         166

CHAPTER  XII

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)         183

CHAPTER  XIII

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)        207

CHAPTER  XIV

ALL  ABOARD  :    THE  RETURN  TO  NEW  ZEALAND    223

APPENDIX  I

BIOLOGY.    NOTES  BY  JAMES  MURRAY,  BIOLOGIST

OF  THE  EXPEDITION  233

APPENDIX  II

GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  IN  ANTARCTICA  BY
THE  BRITISH  ANTARCTIC  EXPEDITION,  1907-1909.
BY  PROFESSOR  T.  W.  EDGEWORTH  DAVID,  B.A.,
F.R.S.,  AND  RAYMOND  E.  PRIESTLEY,  GEOLOGIST
TO  THE  EXPEDITION  268

NOTES  IN  REGARD  TO  MOUNT  EREBUS.  BY  PRO-
FESSOR T.  W.  EDGEWORTH  DAVID  AND  RAYMOND
PRIESTLEY  308

ADDITIONAL  NOTES  ON  ERUPTIONS.  BY  JAMES
MURRAY  310

APPENDIX  III

SCIENTIFIC  RESULTS  OF  THE  WESTERN  JOURNEY.
SECTION  I :  GEOLOGICAL  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL.
BY  RAYMOND  E.  PRIESTLEY,  GEOLOGIST  TO  THE
EXPEDITION  315

SECTION  II :  DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  STRANDED
MORAINES  AND  DRY  VALLEY,  WITH  SPECIAL
REFERENCE  TO  THE  RECENT  ELEVATION  OF  THE
LAND  BORDERING  McMURDO  SOUND  322

SECTION  III :  EFFECT  OF  THE  SUMMER  SUN  ON
DIFFERENT  VARIETIES  OF  ICE  AND  SNOW  331

vi


CONTENTS

PAGE

APPENDIX  IV

NOTES  ON  PHYSICS,  CHEMISTRY  AND  MIN-
ERALOGY :  ICE  AND  SNOW.  NOTES  BY  DOUGLAS
MAWSON,  B.Sc,  B.E.  334

ADDITIONAL  NOTES  BY  JAMES  MURRAY  339

MINERALOGY  AND  CHEMISTRY.  NOTES  BY
DOUGLAS  MAWSON,  B.Sc,  B.E.  344

METEOROLOGICAL  OPTICS.  NOTES  BY  DOUGLAS
MAWSON,  B.Sc,  B.E.  345

ADDITIONAL  NOTES  BY  JAMES  MURRAY  347

MAGNETIC  OBSERVATIONS.  THE  JMAGNETIC  POLE
AND  THE  AURORA.  NOTES  BY  DOUGLAS  MAWSON,
B.Sc,  B.E.  358

NOTES  ON  THE  AURORA  AUSTRALIS.  BY  JAMES
MURRAY  361

TIDES  AND  CURRENTS.     BY  JAMES  MURRAY  367

APPENDIX  V

METEOROLOGY.  A  SUMMARY  OF  RESULTS.  BY
PROFESSOR  T.  W.  EDGEWORTH  DAVID,  B.A.,  F.R.S.,
AND  LIEUTENANT  ADAMS,  R.N.R.,  METEOROLOGIST
TO  THE  EXPEDITION,  1907-1909  376

ADDITIONAL  NOTES  BY  JAMES  MURRAY  385

NOTE  ON  THERMOMETERS  FOR  POLAR  WORK.
BY  JAMES   MURRAY  389

CLOUD  FORMS.    BY  JAMES  MURRAY  390

APPENDIX  VI

REPORT  ON  THE  HEALTH  OF  THE  EXPEDITION.

BY  DR.  ERIC  MARSHALL,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  397

APPENDIX  VII

SOUTHERN  JOURNEY  DISTANCES  400

APPENDIX  VIII

CONSUMPTION  OF  STORES  AT  WINTER  QUARTERS    405

vii


CONTENTS

FAGS

APPENDIX  IX

THE  NIMROD'S  HOMEWARD  VOYAGE— IN  SEARCH

OF  DOUBTFUL  ISLANDS  407

APPENDIX  X

ESTIMATED   COST   OF  THE   BRITISH   ANTARCTIC
EXPEDITION  1907  UP  TO  AUGUST  1909  414

INDEX  415


irAii


LIST   OF   ILLUSTKATIONS

The  Nosthbrn  Party  at  the  Soitth  Magnbtic  Pole  Frontispiece

From  left :   Dr.  Maokay,  Professor  David,  Douglas  Mawsoa

COLOURED  PLATES

To  face
page

The  RBTrmNiNG  Sun  26

The  Depot  Party  Amoxqst  Crevasses  58

A  Blizzard  on  the  Barrier  82

A  Parselene  16i

The  Emperors'  Conclave  238

Return  of  the  Penguins  258

PLATES

The  Hut  in  Summer  Time  :  Coal  Bags  at  the  left  4
Another  View  of  the  Hut  in  Summer.    The  Meteorological  Station

can  be  seen  on  the  extreme  right  8

Bay  of  Whales,  or  Balloon  Bight  (Sketch  by  G.  Marston)  12

The  Motor-car  in  Soft  Snow,  after  the  Return  op  the  Ship  16

Penguins  listening  to  the  Gramophone  during  the  Summer  20

Glacier  South  op  Cape  Barne,  with  Motor  travelling  on  Sea  Ice  22

A  Seal  destined  por  ihe  Larder  24

Fetching  Snow  for  Cooking  Purposes  24
Transporting  a  Sledge  over  bare  Rocks  for  the  Summer  Journey

TO  the  Slopes  op  Mount  Erebus  26

Parasitic  Cone  on  the  Slopes  of  Mount  Erebus  26

Smoke  streaming  from  the  Crater  op  Mount  Erebus  30

ix


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS

To  face
page

Start  of  Western  Party  from  Cape  Royds  34

The  Motor  near  the  Winter  Quarters  38

A  Hafl  op  Fish  38

Serrated  Edge  of  Glacier  south  of  Cape  Barne,  Ross  Island  42
View  from  High  Hill  after  second  arrival  of  the  "  Nimrod."

The  Ship  in  loose  pack  44

Group  in  the  Hut  in  the  Summer  :  Joyce  at  the  Sewing  Machine  48

Bluff  Depot  Party  on  the  Barrier  50
A  Dog  Team  with  Loaded  Sledge  going  South  to  lay  a  Depot  for  the

Return  of  the  Southern  Party  62

Depot  Party  pitching  a  Tent  52

The  Bluff  Depot  54
Digging  to  ascertain  the  depth  of  snow  covering  a  depot  left  by

THE  Discovery  Expedition  56
A  TYPICAL  Crevasse  on  level  surface.    The  Snow  Bridge  fell  in  just

after  THE  Bluff  Depot  Party  had  passed  over  it  58
The  Winter  Quarters,  with  Mount  Erebus  in  the  background.     The

Dog-kennels  are  seen  on  the  left  60

Camp  on  December  17  on  the  Ferrar  Glacier  below  Sentinel  Rock  62

Rough  Ice  Surface  near  Windy  Gully  64
The  Western  Party  Camped  on  the  Ferrar  Glacier  on  Decebiber  18.

Heavy  hanging  Glaciers  on  the  Hills  64

Western  Party  in  Camp  on  December  20  66
Western  Party's  Camp  on  December  28  below  a  hanging  glacier  at

THE  Cathedral  Rocks  68
Looking  down  the  Eastern  Arm  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier  towards  Dry

Valley  from  Solitary  Rooks  70

Dry  Valley  70

Picking  up  the  Western  Party  74

The  Motor-car  in  the  Garage,  and  Maize-crusher  on  the  right  76
The  Start  of  a  Blizzard  from  the  South  ;  Drift  coming  round  Mount

Erebus  80

Marston  and  Murray  at  the  Door  of  the  Hut  84

Daisy's  Third  Litter  at  the  Winter  Quarters  84

The  Motor  hauling  Stores  for  a  Depot  88
X


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

To  face
page

MoEAiNic  Cone  with  raised  Beach   material.    Mount   Larsen   on

the  right.     "  backstairs  passage  "  is  behind  the  cone  92

One  of  the  Sledges  taken  by  the  Northern  Party  92

Taking  possession  as  Cape  Bebnacchi,  Victoria  Land  96

Dark  Enclosures  of  Hornblende  Rock  in  Gneiss,  Depot  Island  104

Seals  on  Coast  of  Victoria  Land  104

Adelie  Penguins  Visit  a  Camp  112

Seals  at  the  Ice-edge  IIG
Cliff  down  which  the  Sledges  were  lowered  on  the  North  Side

OF  THE  Nordenskjold  Ice  Baebieb  Tongue  122

A  Pause  by  the  Way  122

Skua  Gulls  at  the  Ice-edge  138

Depot  on  the  Drygalski  Barrier  160
"  Backstairs  Passage  "  on  the  Ascent  from  the  Sea  Ice  to  the

Plateau.    Mount  Larsen  on  the  left  160

The  Northern  Party  on  the  Plateau  180
Pool  of  Thaw  Water  formed  by  the  emergence  of  a  Sub-glacial

Stream  South-east  op  Mount  Larsen  180

Watching  for  Seals  at  the  Ice-edge  198

"  NiMROD  "   PICKING   UP   THE   NORTHERN   PaRTY   AT   THE   EDGE   OF   THE

Drygalski  Barrier  208

The  "  NiMROD  "  held  up  in  the  Ice  214

Captain  Evans  and  the  "  Nimrod  "  after  a  Blizzard  216

The  Deck  of  the  "  Nimrod  "  after  a  Blizzard  216

Party  setting  out  from  Ship  220

The  Crow's  Nest  of  the  "  Nimrod,"  as  seen  from  the  Deck  220

The  Ship  off  Pram  Point,  just  before  leaving  for  the  North  224
The  Motor- cab  being  taken  aboard  the  "  Nimrod  "  for  the  return

Journey  226

Ready  to  start  Home  226

New  Coast-line  West  of  Cape  North  (Sketched  by  G.  Marston)  228

Floating  Ice  off  Cape  Adare  228

Last  View  of  Cape  Adare  230
The  first  Landing  in  New  Zealand  on  the  betubn  of  the  Expedition.

A  Bay  in  Stewabt  Island  230

xi


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

Tofaoe
pa^e

Open  Wateb  at  Green  Lake  in  Summeb  Time  234

Claws  op  a  Watee-Bbar,  magnieied  about  600  Diameters  236
A  NEW  Species  of  Rotefeb  found  at  Cape  Royds.    Its  distinctive
peatubb  is  the  possession  of  wing-like  Pbotubebanoes  at  the

Sides  236
A   large  pbee-swimminq  Rotifer,  called  Hydatina.    It  is  very

PLENTIFUL  IN  THE  COAST  LaKES  EN  THE  SuMMEB  236

VrviPABOus  Rotefeb  fbom  the  Salt  Lakes.    The  oval  Bodies  seen  in

THE  Adult  Animal  are  the  Young  236
The  Gregarious  Rotifer,  which  forms  Blood-bed  Patches  in  the

Lakes  at  Cape  Royds  238
A  Single  Specemen  of  Gregarious  Rotifer.    The  Daek  Pobtion  is
THE  Stomach,  and  the  oval  fobm  of  an  Unbobn  Young  Rotefeb

can  be  seen  238

The  Commonest  Watee-Bear  en  the  Cape  Royds  District  238

Mubeay  holdeng  young  Penguins  240

Joyce  and  the  Dogs  en  the  Penguin  Rookery  240

Two  Emperor  Penguens  242

Adelie  Penguens  244

Emperors  Visit  the  Adelie  Rookery  ;  Ceremonial  Bowing  246

Emperors  Bowing  to  one  Another  246

Coy  248

Adelie  keeping  hee  Young  One  waem  248

An  Adelie  inspecting  a  Dog  248

Gboup  showing  a  Moulteng  Penguin  248

Building  the  Nest  248

An  Adelie  calling  for  a  Mate  after  commencing  the  Nest  248

Mother  Bibd  leaves  the  Nest  250

Stbangees  displaying  Interest  in  the  Lonely  Chicks  250

Young  Adelie  and  Pabents  250

An  Adelie  refusing  to  be  fbightened  252

Mubbay's   Advances  Resented  252

Adelie  tbyeng  to  Mothee  a  couple  op  well-geown  Stbangees  252

Empebors  Tobogganeng  254

A  View  of  the  Rookery  after  a  Blizzard  254

xii


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS

To  face
page

BrRDs  RisiNa  from  Snow  254

Emperors  on  the  March  256

Emperors  at  rest  256

Killer  Whales  Sounding  260

Seal  sucKLiNa  Young,  and  taking  no  notice  of  the  Motor-car  260

Joyce  lifting  a  Baby  Seal  260

Skua  Gulls  260

Seals  Emerging  from  the  Water  at  their  Blow-holes  262

Weddell  Seals  Quarrelling  262

A  Weddell  Seal  Asleep  262

Some  of  the  Dogs  264
Priestley  beside  an  erratic  Granite  Boulder  lying  on  Kenyte  at

Cape  Royds  272

Granite  erratic  at  Cape  Royds  272

Summer  effect  on  a  berg  :  Icicles  forming  280
The  Barrier  Edge  south  of  Hut  Point,  after  the  Sea  Ice  had

broken  away  280

Two  erratic  Boulders  of  Granite  on  the  Slopes  of  Erebus  282

The  Barrier  Edge  breaking  away  four  miles  south  of  Hut  Point  288

A  Weathered  Kenyte  Boulder  near  the  Winter  Quarters  292

Felspar  Crystals  from  Summit  of  Mount  Erebus  (natural  size)  294

Fossil  Wood  in  Sandstone,  from  a  Moraine  in  Latitude  85°  South  300
Blocks  of  Ice  hung  in  the  Wind  at  Winter  Quarters  in  order  to

ascertain  the  Rate  of  Evaporation  304

Erebus  in  Eruption,  June  14,  1908  308

Side  of  Ferrab  Glacier.  Figure  of  Man  in  lower  left  corner  318
Marine  Organisms  from  Raised   Beach  S.E.   of  Mount   Larsen,

Victoria  Land  (magnification  1|)  320
Stream  of  running  water  in  the  middle  op  the  Ferrab  Glacier  in

Midsummeb  332

loB  Crystals  on  Roof  of  the  Hut  Porch  334

Ice  Formations  336

Pressure  Ice  338

Crystals  on  Sea  Ice  338

Rectangular  Crystals  of  Ice  340

jj                                      Q  xiii


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS

Toface

page

Ice  Crystals  formed  on  a  line  340
Ice  Crystals     (The  Reproduction  of  the  Compass  on  the  upper  picture

is  of  natural  size)  342

Ice  Crystals  formed  on  the  line  of  a  Fish-trap  344
A  Photograph  of  the  Aurora  Australis.     The  Lights  in  the  Sky

indicate  the  Position  of  the  Streamers  356

The  TiDE-GAiTGE  368

Murray  and  Mawson  at  a  Hole  made  in  one  of  the  frozen  Lakes  368

Cloud  Spirals  above  Mount  Erebus  378

Cloud  Spirals  in  Upper  Currents  of  Air  near  Erebus  378

Dumb-bell  Cloud  above  Erebus  380
Panorama  illustrating  the  Northern  Party's  Journey  ^  i^  pocket  of
Panorama  of  Mountains  South  of  Mount  Markham            J       binding-case

ILLUSTRATIONS  IN  THE  TEXT

Section  showing  former  thickness  of  West  Branch  of  Great  Icb
Barrier  when  it  filled  McMurdo  Sound  at  maximum  of  Recent

Glaciation  278
Sections    showing    relative  heights  of  Mountains  and   of  the

Great  Snow  Plateaux  292

Fungus — Peat  and  Ice  Deposits  304

Eruption  of  June  14,  1908  312

Eruption  of  November  27,  1908  312

Great  Steam  Eruption,  September  8,  1908  313

Temperatures  of  Ice  of  Blue  Lake  342

Diagram  of  Prismatic  Arch,  March  13  349

Lunar  Halo,  Bright  Patches  and  Beam,  June  12  351

Inverted  Rings  Round  the  Sun,  February  7,  1909  352

Iridescent  Clouds,  August  22  353

Earth  Shadows,  April  12  354
Curved  Line  joining  Erebus  Summit  and  its  Shadow  on  the  Western

Mountains,  April  12  356

Earth  Shadows,  October  15  356

Earth  Shadows,  September  17  357

xiv


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS

To  fact
page

Part  oi"  Ctjbtaut  Display,  April  28  362

Curtain  Band  CmcLiNa  Erebits,  May  26  363

Arch  and  Curtain,  June  19  364

Great  Beam  of  Light,  May  23,  1908  365

Aurora  on  August  31  366

Diagram  showing  the  Principal  Parts  op  the  Tide-gauge  369

Tracing  of  Tide  Record  from  Third  Quarter  to  New  Moon  (New

on  28th)  370

Tracing  of  Tide  Record  from  July  20  to  27,  1908  371

Wind -driven  Ice  stopped  by  Current  from  North,  March  16  373

Eddy  gs  Pack  in  McMurdo  Sound,  January  1909  374

Variation  in  Direction  of  Current,  June  30  to  July  25  374
The  Curve  of  Atmospheric  Temperature  prom  Cape  Royds  to  Summit

of  Erebus  381
Diagram  showing  Daily  Means  op  Barometric    Pressure,   Wind

AND  Air  Temperature  384

Comparisons  of  Temperature,  387

Stratified  Cloud  on  Erebus,  October  13  391

Spiral  Cloud,  July  23  391

Spiral  Cloud,  September  25  392

Whale-backs,  September  16  393

Whale-back  Clouds,  September  16  394

Undulate  Strips  op  Cloud,  July  28  394

Interlacing  Clouds,  September  16  395

Saw-edged  Stratus  and  other  Clouds,  October  1,  1908  395

Tide-qauqh  413

MAPS

In  pocket  of  binding-case

General  Map  showing  the  Explorations  and  Surveys  op  the

Expedition
Route  and  Surveys  op  the  South  Magnetic  Polar  Party
Route  and  Surveys  of  the  Southern  Journey  Party,  1908-9

XV


NOTE

In  llie  p7iotograp7is  the  microscopic  animals
are  magnified  about  200  diameters


^


CHAPTER  I

SOME  NOTES  ON  THE  SOUTHERN  JOURNEY


WE  brought  back  with  us  from  the  journey  towards
the  Pole  vivid  memories   of  how  it  feels  to  be
intensely,  fiercely    hungry.      During   the    period   from

-VT _„T .  TK      loOQ     i-r^   TTf^Wnarv   9«4     1  QOQ     wft   had    but


a

f
t
e
r
s

i

t


g
e

[.

.s

n

e

>f

in  the  outer  boiler.     The  tea  was  always  put  in  a  strainer,
consisting  of  a  small  tin  in  which  we  had  punched  a

II  A  1


NOTE

In  Ihe  photograpJts  the  microscopic  animals'
are  magnified  about  200  diameters


Volume  II  ERRATA

Page  162,  line  10  from  bottom,  for  "  one  fortieth  "  read
"  one  fourteenth."
„     355,  line  4,/or  April  12,  1909,  read  April  12,  1908.

380,  line  12,  for  January  14,  1908,  read  June  14,
1908.

404,  The  addition  of  mileage  should  amount  to
1755  miles  20'.l  yards,  instead  of  1725  miles
300  yards.

411,  line  13,  for  "  direct  "  read  "  dead."

413,  under  cut,  for  "  water-gauge  "  read  "  current-
gauge."


CHAPTER  I

SOME  NOTES  ON  THE  SOUTHERN  JOURNEY

■Y^[TE  brought  back  with  us  from  the  journey  towards
'  »       the  Pole  vivid  memories   of  how  it  feels  to  be
intensely,  fiercely    hungry.      During   the    period   from
November  15,  1908,  to  February  23,  1909,  we  had  but
one  full  meal,  and  that  was  on  Christmas  Day.     Even
then  we  did  not  keep  the  sense  of   repletion  for  very
long  for  within  an  hour  or  two  it  seemed  to  us  that
we    were    as    hungry    as    ever.      Our  daily  allowance
of  food  would  have  been  a  small  one  for  a  city  worker
in  a  temperate  climate,  and  in   our  case   hunger   was
increased  by  the  fact  that  we  were  performing  vigorous
physical  labour  in  a  very  low  temperature.     We  looked
forward    to    each   meal   with    keen    anticipation,    but
when  the   food  was  in   our   hands   it   seemed   to  dis-
appear  without    making    us    any  the    less    ravenous.
The  evening  meal  at  the  end  of  ten  hours'   sledging
used    to    take     us    a    long     time    to    prepare.      The
sledges    had  to  be  unpacked  and   the  camp  pitched.
Then  the  cooker  was  filled  with  snow  and  the  primus
lamp  Ht,  often  no  easy  matter  with  our  cold,  frost-bitten
fingers.     The  materials   for  the  thin  hoosh  would  be
placed  in  the  boiling-pot,  with  the  addition,  perhaps,  of
some  pony  maize,  and  the  allowance  of  tea  was  placed
in  the  outer  boiler.     The  tea  was  always  put  in  a  strainer,
consisting  of  a  small  tin  in  which  we  had  punched  a

II  A  1


THE   HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

lot  of  holes,  and  it  was  removed  directly  the  water  had
come  to  the  boil.*  We  used  to  sit  round  the  cooker
waiting  for  our  food,  and  at  last  the  hoosh  would  be
ready  and  v/ouid  be  ladled  into  the  pannikins  by  the
cook  of  the  week.  The  scanty  allowance  of  biscuit
would  be  distributed  and  we  would  commence  the  meal.
In  a  couple  of  minutes  the  hot  food  would  be  gone,  and
we  would  gnaw  carefully  round  the  sides  of  our  biscuits,
making  them  last  as  long  as  possible.  Marshall  used
sometimes  to  stand  his  pannikin  of  hoosh  in  the  snow
for  a  little  while,  because  it  got  thick  r  as  it  cooled,
but  it  was  a  debatable  point  whether  this  paid.  One
seemed  to  be  getting  more  solid  food,  but  there  was  a
loss  of  warmth,  and  in  the  minus  temperatures  on
the  plateau  we  found  it  advisable  to  take  our  hoosh
very  hot.  We  would  make  the  biscuits  last  as  long  as
possible,  and  sometimes  we  tried  to  save  a  bit  to  eat
in  the  sleeping-bag  later  on,  but  it  was  hard  to  do  this.
If  one  of  us  dropped  a  crumb,  the  others  would  point
it  out,  and  the  owner  would  wet  his  finger  in  his  mouth
and  pick  up  the  morsel.  Not  the  smallest  fragment
was  allowed  to  escape.

We  used  to  "  turn  backs  "  in  order  to  ensure  equitable
division  of  the  food.  The  cook  would  pour  the  hoosh
into  the  pannikins  and  arrange  the  biscuits  in  four  heaps.
Perhaps  some  one  would  suggest  that  one  pannikin
had  rather  less  in  it  than  another,  and  if  this  view  was
endorsed  by  the  others  there  would  be  a  readjustment.
Then  when  we  were  all  satisfied  that  the  food  had  been
divided  as  fairly  as  possible,  one  man  woul  turn  his
back,  and  another,  pointing  at  one  pannikin  or  group
of  biscuits,  would  say,  "  Whose  ?  "^.  The  man  who  had
his  back  turned,  and  therefore  could  not  see  the  food,
would  give  a  name,  and  so  the  distribution  would
proceed,  each  of  us  always  feeling  sure  that  the  smallest
2


PONY    FLESH

share  had  fallen  to  our  lot.  At  lunch-time  there  would
be  chocolate  or  cheese  to  distribute  on  alternate  days,
and  we  much  preferred  the  chocolate  days  to  the  cheese
days.  The  chocolate  seemed  more  satisfying,  and  it
was  more  easily  divided.  The  cheese  broke  up  into
very  small  fragments  on  the  march,  and  the  allowance,
which  amounted  to  two  spoonfuls  per  man,  had  to  be
divided  up  as  nearly  as  possible  into  four  equal  heaps.
The  chocolate  could  be  easily  separated  into  sticks  of
equal  size.  It  can  be  imagined  that  the  cook  for  the
week  had  no  easy  task.  His  work  became  more  difficult
still  when  we  were  using  pony-meat,  for  the  meat  and
blood,  when  boiled  up,  made  a  delightful  broth,  while
the  fragments  of  meat  sunk  to  the  bottom  of  the  pot.
The  liquor  was  much  the  better  part  of  the  dish,  and
no  one  had  much  relish  for  the  little  dice  of  tough
and  stringy  meat,  so  the  cook  had  to  be  very  careful
indeed.  Poor  old  Chinaman  was  a  particularly  tough
and  stringy  horse.

We  found  that  the  meat  from  the  neck  and  rump  was
the  best,  the  most  stringy  portions  coming  from  the
ribs  and  legs.  We  took  all  the  meat  we  could,  tough
or  tender,  and  as  we  went  south  in  the  days  when
horse-meat  was  fairly  plentiful,  we  used  to  suck  frozen,
raw  fragments  as  we  marched  along.  Later  we  could
not  afford  to  use  the  meat  except  on  a  definite  allow-
ance. The  meat  to  be  used  during  the  day  was  generally
cut  up  when  we  took  a  spell  in  the  morning,  and  the
bag  containing  the  fragments  was  hung  on  the  back  of
the  sledge  in  order  that  the  meat  might  be  softened  by
the  sun.  It  cut  more  easily  when  frozen  than  when
partially  thawed,  but  our  knives  gradually  got  blunt,
and  on  the  glacier  we  secured  a  rock  on  which  to  sharpen
them.  During  the  journey  back,  when  every  ounce  of
weight  was  of  great  importance,  we  used  one  of  our

3


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

geological  specimens,  a  piece  of  sandstone,  as  a  knife-
sharpener.  The  meat  used  to  bulk  large  in  the  pot,
but  as  fresh  meat  contains  about  60  per  cent,  of  moisture,
it  used  to  shrink  considerably  in  the  process  of  cooking,
and  we  did  not  have  to  use  very  much  snow  in  the  pot.

We  used  the  meat  immediately  we  had  started  to
kill  the  ponies  in  order  to  save  the  other  food,  for  we
knew  that  the  meat  contained  a  very  large  percentage
of  water,  so  that  we  would  be  carrying  useless  weight
with  it.  The  pemmican  and  biscuits,  on  the  other
hand,  contained  very  little  moisture,  and  it  was  more
profitable  to  keep  them  for  the  march  further  south,
when  we  were  likely  to  want  to  reduce  the  loads  as  far
as  possible.  We  left  meat  at  each  depot,  to  provide
for  the  march  back  to  the  coast,  but  always  took  on  as
much  as  possible  of  the  prepared  foods.  The  reader
will  understand  that  the  loss  of  Socks,  which  represented
so  many  pounds  of  meat,  was  a  very  severe  blow  to  us,
for  we  had  after  that  to  use  sledging  stores  at  the  depots
to  make  up  for  the  lost  meat.  If  we  had  been  able
to  use  Socks  for  food,  I  have  no  doubt  that  we  would
have  been  able  to  get  further  south,  perhaps  even  to
the  Pole  itself,  though  in  that  case  we  could  hardly
have  got  back  in  time  to  catch  the  ship  before  she  was
forced  to  leave  by  the  approach  of  winter.

When  we  were  living  on  meat  our  desire  for  cereals
and  farinacious  foods  became  stronger ;  indeed  any
particular  sort  of  food  of  which  we  were  deprived  seemed
to  us  to  be  the  food  for  which  nature  craved.  When
we  were  short  of  sugar  we  would  dream  of  sweet-stuffs,
and  when  biscuits  were  in  short  supply  our  thoughts
were  concerned  with  crisp  loaves  and  all  the  other
good  things  displayed  in  the  windows  of  the  bakers'
shops.  During  the  last  weeks  of  the  journey  outwards,
and  the  long  march  back,  when  our  allowance  of  food


INTENSE    HUNGER

had  been  reduced  to  twenty  ounces  per  man  a  day,  we
really  thought  of  little  but  food.  The  glory  of  the  great
mountains  that  towered  high  on  either  side,  the  majesty
of  the  enormous  glacier  up  which  we  travelled  so  pain-
fully, did  not  appeal  to  our  emotions  to  any  great
extent.  Man  becomes  very  primitive  when  he  is  hungry
and  short  of  food,  and  we  learned  to  know  what  it  is
to  be  desperately  hungry.  I  used  to  wonder  sometimes
whether  the  people  who  suffer  from  hunger  in  the  big
cities  of  civilisation  felt  as  we  were  feeling,  and  I  arrived
at  the  conclusion  that  they  did  not,  for  no  barrier  of
law  and  order  would  have  been  allowed  to  stand  between
us  and  any  food  that  had  been  available.  The  man
who  starves  in  a  city  is  weakened,  hopeless,  spi  itless,
and  we  were  vigorous  and  keen.  Until  January  9  the
desire  for  food  was  made  the  more  intense  by  our
knowledge  of  the  fact  that  we  were  steadily  marching
away  from  the  stores  of  plenty.

We  could  not  joke  about  food,  in  the  way  that  is
possible  for  the  man  who  is  hungry  in  the  ordinary
sense.  We  thought  about  it  most  of  the  time,  and  on
the  way  back  we  used  to  talk  about  it,  but  always  in
the  most  serious  manner  possible.  We  used  to  plan
out  the  enormous  meals  that  we  proposed  to  have
when  we  got  back  to  the  ship  and,  later,  to  civilisation.
On  the  outward  march  we  did  not  experience  really
severe  hunger  until  we  got  on  the  great  glacier,  and
then  we  were  too  much  occupied  with  the  heavy  and
dangerous  climbing  over  the  rough  ice  and  crevasses
to  be  able  to  talk  much.  We  had  to  keep  some  distance
apart  in  case  one  man  fell  into  a  crevasse.  Then  on
the  plateau  our  faces  were  generally  coated  with  ice,
and  the  blizzard  wind  blowing  from  the  south  made
unnecessary  conversation  out  of  the  question.  Those
were  silent  days,  and  our  remarks  to  one  another  were

5


THE   HEART   OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

brief  and  infrequent.  It  was  on  the  march  back  that
we  talked  freely  of  food,  after  we  had  got  down  the
glacier  and  were  marching  over  the  barrier  surface.
The  wind  was  behind  us,  so  that  the  pulling  was  not
very  heavy,  and  a  there  were  no  crevasses  to  fear  we
were  able  to  keep  close  together.  We  would  get  up  at
5  A.M.  in  order  to  make  a  start  at  7  a.m.,  and  after  we
had  eaten  our  scanty  breakfast,  that  seemed  only  to
accentuate  hunger,  and  had  begun  the  day's  march,
we  could  take  turns  in  describing  the  things  we  would
eat  in  the  good  days  to  come.  We  were  each  going
to  give  a  dinner  to  the  others  in  turn,  and  there  was
to  be  an  anniversary  dinner  every  year,  at  which  we
would  be  able  to  eat  and  eat  and  eat.  No  French  chef
ever  devoted  more  thought  to  the  invention  of  new
dishes  than  we  did.

It  is  with  strange  feelings  that  I  look  back  over  our
notes,  and  see  the  wonderful  meals  that  we  were  going
to  have.  We  used  to  tell  each  other,  with  perfect
seriousness,  about  the  new  dishes  that  we  had  thought
of,  and  if  the  dish  met  with  general  approval  there
would  be  a  chorus  of,  "  Ah  !  That's  good."  Sometimes
there  would  be  an  argument  as  to  whether  a  suggested
dish  was  really  an  original  invention,  or  whether  it  did
not  too  nearly  resemble  something  that  we  had  already
tasted  in  happier  days.  The  "  Wild  roll  "  was  admitted
to  be  the  high-water  mark  of  gastronomic  luxury.
Wild  proposed  that  the  cook  should  take  a  supply  of
well-seasoned  minced  meat,  wrap  it  in  rashers  of  fat
bacon,  and  p  ace  around  the  whole  an  outer  covering
of  rich  pastry,  so  that  it  would  take  the  form  of  a  big
sausage-roll.  Then  this  roll  would  be  fried  with  plenty
of  fat.  My  best  dish,  which  I  must  admit  I  put  forward
with  a  good  deal  of  pride  as  we  marched  over  the  snow,
was  a  sardine  pasty,  made  by  placing  well-fried  sardines
6


THOUGHTS    OF    FOOD

inside  pastry.  At  least  ten  tins  of  sardines  were  to  be
emptied  en  to  a  bed  of  pastry,  and  the  whole  then  rolled
up  and  cooked,  preparatory  to  its  division  into  four
equal  portions.  I  remember  one  day  Marshall  came
forward  with  a  proposal  for  a  thick  roll  of  suet  pudding
with  plenty  of  jam  all  over  it,  and  there  arose  quite  a
heated  argument  as  to  whether  he  could  fairly  claim
this  dish  to  be  an  invention,  or  whether  it  was  not  the
jam  roll  already  known  to  the  housewives  of  civilisation.
There  was  one  point  on  which  we  were  all  agreed,  and
that  was  that  we  did  not  want  any  jellies  or  things  of
that  sort  at  our  future  meals.  The  idea  of  eating  such
elusive  stuff  as  jelly  had  no  appeal  to  us  at  all.

On  a  typical  day  during  this  backward  march  we
would  leave  camp  at  about  6.40  a.m.,  and  half  an  hour
later  would  have  recovered  our  frost-bitten  fingers,
while  the  moisture  on  our  clothes,  melted  in  the  sleeping-
bags,  would  have  begun  to  ablate,  after  having  first
frozen  hard.  We  would  be  beginning  to  march  with
some  degree  of  comfort,  and  one  of  us  Avould  remark,
"  Well,  boys,  what  are  we  going  to  have  for  breakfast
to-day  ?  "  We  had  just  finished  our  breakfast  as  a
matter  of  fact,  consisting  of  half  a  pannikin  of  semi-raw
horse-meat,  one  biscuit  and  a  half  and  a  pannikin  of
tea,  but  the  meal  had  not  taken  the  keenness  from  our
appetites.  We  used  to  try  to  persuade  ourselves  that
our  half-biscuit  was  not  quite  a  half,  and  sometimes
we  managed  to  get  a  little  bit  more  that  way.  The
question  v/ould  receive  our  most  serious  and  careful
consideration  at  once,  and  we  would  proceed  to  weave
from  our  hungry  imaginations  a  tale  of  a  day  spent  in
eating.  "  Now  we  are  on  board  ship,"  one  man  would
say.  "  We  wake  up  in  a  bunk,  and  the  first  thing  we
do  is  to  stretch  out  our  hands  to  the  side  of  the  bunk
and  get  some  chocolate,   some  Garibaldi  biscuits  and


THE    HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

some  apples.  We  eat  those  in  the  bunk,  and  then  we
get  up  for  breakfast.  Breakfast  will  be  at  eight  o'clock,
and  we  will  have  porridge,  fish,  bacon  and  eggs,  cold
ham,  plum  pudding,  sweets,  fresh  roll  and  butter,
marmalade  and  coffee.  At  eleven  o'clock  we  will  have
hot  cocoa,  open  jam  tarts,  fried  cods'  roe  and  slices  of
heavy  plum  cake.  That  will  be  all  until  lunch  at  one
o'clock.  For  lunch  we  will  have  Wild  roll,  shepherd's
pie,  fresh  soda-bread,  hot  milk,  treacle  pudding,  nuts,
raisins  and  cake.  After  that  we  will  turn  in  for  a  sleep,
and  we  will  be  called  at  3.45,  when  we  will  reach  out
again  from  the  bunks  and  have  dough-nuts  and  sweets.
We  will  get  up  then  and  have  big  cups  of  hot  tea  and
fresh  cake  and  chocolate  creams.  Dinner  will  be  at
six,  and  we  will  have  thick  soup,  roast  beef  and  York-
shire pudding,  cauliflower,  peas,  asparagus,  plum  pud-
ding, fruit,  apple-pie  with  thick  cream,  scones  and
butter,  port  wine,  nuts,  and  almonds  and  raisins.  Then
at  midnight  we  will  have  a  really  big  meal,  just  before
we  go  to  bed.  There  will  be  melon,  grilled  trout  and
butter-sauce,  roast  chicken  with  plenty  of  livers,  a
proper  salad  with  eggs  and  very  thick  dressing,  green
peas  and  new  potatoes,  a  saddle  of  mutton,  fried  suet
pudding,  peaches  a  la  Melba,  egg  curry,  plum  pudding
and  sauce,  Welsh  rarebit.  Queen's  pudding,  angels  on
horseback,  cream  cheese  and  celery,  fruit,  nuts,  port
wine,  milk  and  cocoa.  Then  we  will  go  to  bed  and
sleep  till  breakfast  time  We  will  have  chocolate  and
biscuits  under  our  pillows,  and  if  we  want  anything  to
eat  in  the  night  we  will  just  have  to  get  it."  Three  of
us  would  listen  to  this  programme  and  perhaps  suggest
amendments  and  improvements,  generally  in  the  direc-
tion of  additional  dishes,  and  then  another  one  of  us
would  take  up  the  running  and  sketch  another  glorious
day  of  feeding  and  sleeping.
8


CAUSE    OF    DYSENTERY

I  daresay  that  all  this  sounds  very  greedy  and
uncivilised  to  the  reader  who  has  never  been  on  the
verge  of  starvation,  but  as  I  have  said  before,  hunger
makes  a  man  primitive.  We  did  not  smile  at
ourselves  or  at  each  other  as  we  planned  wonderful
feats  of  over-eating.  We  were  perfectly  serious  about
the  matter,  and  we  noted  down  in  the  back  pages  of  our
diaries  details  of  the  meals  that  we  had  decided  to  have
as  soon  as  we  got  back  to  the  places  where  food  was
plentiful.  All  the  morning  we  would  allow  our  imagi-
nations to  run  riot  in  this  fashion.  Then  would  come
one  o'clock,  and  I  would  look  at  my  watch  and  say,
*'  Camp  !  "  We  would  drop  the  harness  from  our  tired
bodies  and  pitch  the  tent  on  the  smoothest  place  avail-
able, and  three  of  us  would  get  inside  to  wait  for  the
thin  and  scanty  meal,  while  the  other  man  filled  the
cooker  with  snow  and  fragments  of  frozen  meat.  An
hour  later  we  would  be  on  the  march  again,  once  more
thinking  and  talking  of  food,  and  this  would  go  on
until  the  camp  in  the  evening.  We  would  have  another
scanty  meal,  and  turn  into  the  sleeping-bags,  to  dream
wildly  of  food  that  somehow  we  could  never  manage
to  eat.

The  dysentery  from  which  we  suffered  during  the
latter  part  of  the  journey  back  to  the  coast  was  certainly
due  to  the  meat  from  the  pony  Grisi.  This  animal  was
shot  one  night  when  in  a  greatly  exhausted  condition,
and  I  believe  that  his  flesh  was  made  poisonous  by  the
presence  of  the  toxin  of  exhaustion,  as  is  the  case  with
animals  that  have  been  hunted.  Wild  was  the  first  to
suffer,  at  the  time  when  we  started  to  use  Grisi  meat
with  the  other  meat,  and  he  must  have  been  unfortunate
enough  to  get  the  greater  part  of  the  bad  meat  on  that
occasion.  The  other  meat  we  were  using  then  came
from  Chinaman,   and  seemed  to  be  quite  wholesome.

9


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

A  few  days  later  we  were  all  eating  Grisi  meat,  and  we
all  got  dysentery.  The  meat  could  not  have  become
affected  in  any  way  after  the  death  of  the  pony,  because
it  froze  hard  within  a  very  short  time.  The  manner
in  which  we  managed  to  keep  on  marching  when  suffer-
ing, and  the  speed  with  which  we  recovered  when  we
got  proper  food,  were  rather  remarkable,  and  the  reason,
no  doubt,  was  that  the  dysentery  was  simply  the  result
of  the  poison,  and  was  not  produced  by  organic  trouble
of  any  sort.  We  had  a  strong  wind  behind  us  day  after
day  during  this  period,  and  this  contributed  in  a  very
large  measure  to  our  safety,  for  in  the  weakened  con-
dition we  had  then  reached  we  could  not  have  made
long  marches  against  a  head-wind,  and  without  long
marches  we  would  have  starved  between  the  depots.
We  had  a  sail  on  the  sledge,  formed  of  the  floorcloth  of
a  tent,  and  often  the  sledge  would  overrun  us,  though
at  other  times  it  would  catch  in  a  drift  and  throw  us
heavily.

When  we  were  travelling  along  during  the  early
part  of  the  journey  over  the  level  Barrier  surface,  we
felt  the  heat  of  the  sun  severely,  though  as  a  matter  of
fact  the  temperature  was  generally  very  low,  sometimes
as  low  as  zero  Fahr.  though  the  season  was  the  height
of  summer.  It  was  quite  usual  to  feel  one  side  of  the
face  getting  frozen  while  the  other  side  was  being  sun-
burned. The  ponies  would  have  frozen  perspiration
on  their  coats  on  the  sheltered  side,  while  the  sun  would
keep  the  other  side  hot  and  dry,  and  as  the  day  wore
on  and  the  sun  moved  round  the  sky  the  frosted  area
on  the  animals  would  change  its  position  in  sympathy.
I  remember  that  on  December  4  we  were  marching
stripped  to  our  shirts,  and  we  got  very  much  sunburned,
though  at  noon  that  day  the  air  temperature  showed
ten  degrees  of  frost.  When  we  started  to  climb  the
10


FROST-BITE

glacier  and  marched  close  to  the  rocks,  we  felt  the  heat
much  more,  for  the  rocks  acted  as  radiators,  and  this
experience  weighed  with  me  in  deciding  to  leave  all  the
spare  clothing  and  equipment  at  the  Upper  Glacier
Depot,  about  seven  thousand  feet  up.  We  did  not
expect  to  have  to  climb  much  higher,  but,  as  the  reader
knows,  we  did  not  reach  the  plateau  until  we  had
climbed  over  ten  thousand  feet  above  sea-level,  and  so
we  felt  the  cold  extremely.  Our  wind-proof  Burberry
clothing  had  become  thin  by  this  time,  and  had  been
patched  in  many  places  in  consequence  of  having  been
torn  on  the  sharp  ice.  The  wind  got  in  through  a  tear
in  my  Burberry  trousers  one  day  and  I  was  frost-bitten
on  the  under  part  of  the  knee.  This  frost-bite  developed
into  an  open  wound,  into  which  the  wool  from  my
underclothing  worked,  and  I  had  finally  to  perform  a
rather  painful  operation  with  a  knife  before  the  wound
would  heal.  We  were  continually  being  frost-bitten
up  on  the  plateau,  and  when  our  boots  had  begun  to
give  out  and  we  were  practically  marching  on  the  senne-
grass  inside  the  finnesko,  our  heels  got  frost-bitten.  My
heels  burst  when  we  got  on  to  hard  stuff,  and  for  some
time  my  socks  were  caked  with  blood  at  the  end  of
every  day's  march.  Finally  Marshall  put  some  "  New-
skin  "  on  a  pad,  and  that  stuck  on  well  until  the  cracks
had  healed.  The  scars  are  likely  to  remain  with  me.
In  the  very  cold  days,  when  our  strength  had  begun  to
decrease,  we  found  great  difiiculty  in  hoisting  the  sail
on  our  sledge,  for  when  we  lifted  our  arms  above  our
heads  in  order  to  adjust  the  sail,  the  blood  ran  from  our
fingers  and  they  promptly  froze.  Ten  minutes  or  a
quarter  of  an  hour  sometimes  elapsed  before  we  could
get  the  sledge  properly  rigged.  Our  troubles  with  frost-
bite were  no  doubt  due  in  a  measure  to  the  lightness
of  our  clothing,   but  there   was   compensation  in  the

11


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

speed  with  which  we  were  able  to  travel.  I  have  no
doubt  at  all  that  men  engaged  in  polar  exploration
should  be  clothed  as  lightly  as  is  possible,  even  if  there
is  a  danger  of  frost-bite  when  they  halt  on  the  march.
The  surface  over  which  we  travelled  during  the
southern  journey  changed  continually.  During  the
first  few  days  we  found  a  layer  of  soft  snow  on  top  of
a  hard  crust,  with  more  soft  snow  underneath  that
again.  Our  weight  was  sufficient  to  break  through
the  soft  snow  on  top,  and  if  we  were  pulling  the  increased
pressure  would  cause  the  crust  to  break  also,  letting
us  through  into  the  second  layer  of  soft  snow.  This
surface  made  the  travelling  very  heavy.  Until  we
had  got  beyond  Minna  Bluff  we  often  passed  over  high,
sharp  sastrugi,  and  beyond  that  we  met  with  ridges
four  to  six  feet  high.  The  snow  generally  was  dry
and  powdery,  but  some  of  the  crystals  were  large,  and
showed  in  reflected  light  all  the  million  colours  of
diamonds.  After  we  had  passed  latitude  80°  South
the  snow  got  softer  day  by  day,  and  the  ponies  would
often  break  through  the  upper  crust  and  sink  in  right
up  to  their  bellies.  When  the  sun  was  hot  the  travelling
would  be  much  better,  for  the  surface  snow  got  near
the  melting-point  and  formed  a  slippery  layer  not  easily
broken.  Then  again  a  fall  in  the  temperature  would
produce  a  thin  crust,  through  which  one  broke  very
easily.  Between  latitude  80°  South  and  83°  South
there  were  hard  sastrugi  under  the  soft  snow,  and  the
hoofs  of  the  horses  suffered  in  consequence.  The
surface  near  the  land  was  broken  up  by  pressure  from
the  glaciers,  but  right  alongside  the  mountains  there
was  a  smooth  plain  of  glassy  ice,  caused  by  the  freezing
of  water  that  had  run  off  the  rocky  slopes  when  they
were  warm  under  the  rays  of  the  sun.  This  process
had  been  proceeding  on  the  snow  slopes  that  we  had
12


GLACIER    SURFACES

to  climb  in  order  to  reach  the  glacier.  Here  at  the
foot  of  the  glacier  there  were  pools  of  clear  water  round
the  rocks,  and  we  were  able  to  drink  as  much  as  we
wanted,  though  the  contact  of  the  cold  water  with  our
cracked  lips  was  painful.

The  glacier  itself  presented  every  variety  of  surface,
from  soft  snow  to  cracked  and  riven  blue  ice,  by-and-by
the  only  constant  feature  were  the  crevasses,  from  which
we  were  never  free.  Some  were  entirely  covered  with
a  crust  of  soft  snow,  and  we  discovered  them  only  when
one  of  us  broke  through,  and  hung  by  his  harness  from
the  sledge.  Others  occurred  in  mazes  of  rotten  ice,
and  were  even  more  difficult  to  negotiate  than  the
other  sort.  The  least  unpleasant  of  the  crevasses
were  those  that  were  wide  open  and  easily  seen,  with
firm  ice  on  either  side.  If  these  crevasses  were  not
too  wide,  we  would  pull  the  sledges  up  to  the  side,
then  jump  over,  and  pull  them  after  us.  This  was
more  difficult  than  it  sounds  from  the  fact  that  the
ice  gave  only  a  very  uncertain  footing,  but  we  always
had  the  harness  as  a  safeguard  in  case  of  a  fall.  If
the  crevasses  were  wide  we  had  to  make  a  detour.  The
sledges,  owing  to  their  length,  were  not  liable  to  slip
down  a  crevasse,  and  we  felt  fairly  safe  when  we  were
securely  attached  to  them  by  the  harness.  When  the
surface  was  so  bad  that  relay  work  became  necessary
we  used  to  miss  the  support  of  a  sledge  on  the  back
journeys.  We  would  advance  one  sledge  half  a  mile
or  a  mile,  put  up  a  bamboo  pole  to  mark  the  spot,  and
then  go  back  for  the  other.  We  were  roped  together
for  the  walk  back  to  the  second  sledge,  but  even  then
we  felt  a  great  deal  less  secure  than  when  harnessed
to  one  of  the  long,  heavy  sledges.  On  some  days  we
had  to  travel  up  steep  slopes  of  smooth  ice,  and  often
it  became  necessary  to  cut  steps  with    our    ice-axes.


THE    HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

and  haul  the  sledges  after  us  with  the  alpine  rope.
When  we  had  gone  up  about  sixty  feet,  the  length  of
the  rope,  we  would  haul  up  the  sledge  to  which  we  had
attached  the  lower  end,  and  jamb  it  so  that  it  could
not  slide  back.  Then  one  of  us  would  slide  down  in
order  to  fix  the  rope  to  the  other  sledge.

One  of  the  curious  features  of  the  glacier  was  a
yellow  line,  evidently  an  old  moraine,  extending  for
thirty  or  forty  miles.  The  rocks  of  the  moraine  had
gradually  sunk  in  out  of  sight,  the  radiation  of  the
sun's  heat  from  them  causing  the  ice  to  melt  and  let
them  through,  and  there  had  remained  enough  silt
and  dust  to  give  the  ice  a  dirty  yellow  appearance.
The  travelling  along  this  old  moraine  was  not  so  bad,
but  on  either  side  of  it  there  was  a  mass  of  pressure
ice,  caused  by  the  constriction  of  the  glacier  between
the  mountains  to  the  east  and  west.  Unfortunately
we  brought  back  no  photographs  of  this  portion  of  the
glacier.  The  number  of  plates  at  our  disposal  was
limited,  and  on  the  outward  march  we  decided  not  to
take  many  photographs  in  case  we  found  interesting
land  or  mountains  in  the  far  south  nearer  the  Pole.
We  thought  that  we  would  be  able  to  secure  as  many
photographs  of  the  glacier  as  we  wanted  on  the  way
back  if  we  had  the  plates  to  spare,  but  as  a  matter  of
fact  when  we  did  get  on  to  the  glacier  a  second  time
we  were  so  short  of  food  that  we  could  not  afford  the
time  to  unpack  the  camera,  which  had  to  be  stowed
away  carefully  on  the  sledge  in  order  to  avoid  damage
to  it.

Many  nights  on  the  glacier  there  was  no  snow  on
which  to  pitch  the  tents,  and  we  had  to  spend  perhaps
an  hour  smoothing  out  a  space  on  a  rippled,  sharp-
pointed  sea  of  ice.  The  provision  bags  and  sledges
had  to  be  packed  on  the  snow  cloths  roimd  the  tents,
14


DIFFICULT    TRAVELLING

and  it  was  indeed  fortunate  for  us  that  we  did  not  meet
with  any  bad  weather  while  we  were  marching  up  the
glacier.  Had  a  blizzard  come  on  while  we  were  asleep,
it  would  have  scattered  our  goods  far  and  wide,  and
we  would  have  been  faced  with  a  very  serious  position.
All  the  time  that  we  were  climbing  the  glacier  we  had
a  northerly  wind  behind  us,  although  the  direction
of  the  sastrugi  showed  clearly  that  the  prevailing  wind
was  from  the  south  ;  when  we  were  coming  back  later
in  the  season  the  wind  was  behind  us  all  the  time.
We  encountered  a  strong  wind  on  the  outward  journey
when  near  the  top  of  the  glacier,  and  as  the  ice  slopes
were  covered  with  snow  it  was  difficult  to  pull  the
sledges  up  them.  When  we  reached  the  same  slopes
on  the  way  back,  the  summer  sun  had  cleared  the  snow
from  them,  leaving  clear  ice,  and  we  simply  glissaded
down  all  but  the  steepest  slopes,  although  one  of  the
sledge  runners  was  very  badly  torn.  We  had  to  travel
carefully  on  the  steep  slopes,  for  if  we  had  let  the  sledge
get  out  of  hand  it  would  have  run  away  altogether,
and  would  probably  have  been  smashed  up  hundreds
of  feet  below.

The  Upper  Glacier  Depot  was  overhung  by  great
cliffs  of  rock,  shattered  by  the  frosts  and  storms  of
countless  centuries,  and  many  fragments  were  poised
in  such  a  fashion  that  scarcely  more  than  a  touch
seemed  needed  to  bring  them  hurtling  down.  All
around  us  on  the  ice  lay  rocks  that  had  recently  fallen
from  the  heights,  and  we  wondered  whether  some
boulder  would  come  down  upon  us  while  we  were  in
camp.  We  had  no  choice  of  a  camping-ground,  as  all
around  was  rough  ice.  The  cliffs  were  composed  largely
of  weathered  sandstone,  and  it  was  on  the  same  moun-
tains, higher  up  the  glacier,  that  the  coal  was  found,
at  a  point  where  the  slope  was  comparatively  gentle.

15


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

Looking  down  from  this  height,  we  could  see  the  glacier
stretching  away  to  the  point  of  junction  with  the
Barrier,  the  mountains  rising  to  east  and  west.  Many
of  the  mountains  to  the  west  of  the  glacier  were  more
or  less  dome-shaped,  but  there  were  some  sharp  conical
peaks  to  the  westward  of  the  particular  mountain  under
which  the  Upper  Glacier  Depot  had  been  placed.  There
were  three  distinct  peaks,  as  the  photographs  show,
and  the  plateau  ice  sweeping  down  made  a  long  moraine
on  the  west  side  of  the  glacier.  To  the  eastward  there
was  a  long  ridge  of  high  mountains,  fairly  uniform  in
shape  and  without  any  sharp  peaks,  but  with  ridges,
apparently  of  granite,  projecting  towards  the  west  and
so  constricting  the  glacier.  The  mountains  were  distant
about  twenty-five  miles,  but  well-defined  stratification
lines  could  plainly  be  seen.  Below  us,  as  we  looked
from  the  depot,  could  be  seen  the  cumulus  clouds  that
always  hung  above  "The  Cloudmaker."

When  we  looked  to  the  south  from  this  depot  we
saw  no  clouds  ;  there  was  nothing  but  hard  clear  sky.
The  sky  gave  no  indication  of  the  blizzard  winds  that
were  to  assail  us  when  we  reached  the  plateau,  and
after  we  had  gone  as  far  south  as  we  could  and  retraced
our  footsteps  to  the  depot,  we  looked  back  and  saw
the  same  clear  sky,  with  a  few  wisps  of  fleecy  cloud
in  it.  We  had  no  doubt  that  below  those  clouds  the
pitiless  gale  was  still  raging  across  the  great  frozen
plain,  and  that  the  wind  which  followed  us  during  our
march  back  to  the  coast  was  coming  from  the  vicinity
of  the  Pole.  As  we  advanced  from  the  Upper  Glacier
Depot  we  came  upon  great  ice  falls.  The  surface  looked
smooth  from  a  distance,  and  we  thought  that  we  were
actually  on  the  plateau,  but  as  we  advanced  we  saw
that  before  us  lay  enormous  ridges  rising  abruptly.
We  had  to  relay  our  gear  over  these  ridges,  and  often
16


RIDGES    AND    CREVASSES

at  the  tops  there  would  be  a  great  crevasse,  from  which
would  radiate  smaller  crevasses  fringed  with  crystals
and  showing  ghastly  depths  below.  We  would  creep
forward  to  see  what  lay  on  the  other  side,  and  perhaps
would  find  a  fall  of  fifty  feet,  with  a  grade  of  about
1  in  3.  Many  times  we  risked  our  sledge  on  very
severe  slopes,  allowing  it  to  ghssade  down,  but  other
times  the  danger  of  a  smash  was  too  great,  and  we  had
to  lower  the  sledge  slowly  and  carefully  with  the  rope.
The  ice  was  safe  enough  to  walk  upon  at  this  time
except  at  the  ridges,  where  the  crevasses  were  severe,
for  the  smaller  crevasses  in  the  hollows  and  slopes
could  be  passed  without  difficulty.

The  ice  falls  delayed  us  a  good  deal,  and  then  we
got  into  soft  snow,  over  which  the  sledge  dragged  heavily.
We  thought  that  we  wer  finally  on  the  plateau  level,
but  within  a  few  days  we  came  to  fresh  ridges  and
waves  of  pressure  ice.  The  ice  between  the  waves  was
very  rotten,  and  many  times  we  fell  through  when  we
put  our  weight  on  it.  We  fastened  the  alpine  rope  to
the  sledge  harness,  and  the  first  man  pulled  at  a  distance
of  about  eighteen  feet  from  the  sledge,  while  the  whole
party  was  so  scattered  that  no  two  men  could  fall
into  a  crevasse  together.  We  got  on  to  better  ground
by  steering  to  the  westward,  but  this  step  was  rather
dangerous,  for  by  taking  this  course  we  travelled
parallel  with  the  crevasses  and  were  not  able  to  meet
them  at  right  angles.  Many  times  we  nearly  lost  the
sledge  and  ourselves  when  the  ice  started  to  break  away
into  an  unseen  crevasse  running  parallel  with  our  course.
We  felt  very  grateful  to  Providence  that  the  weather
remained  clear,  for  we  could  not  have  moved  a  yard
over  this  rotten  ice  in  thick  weather  without  courting
disaster.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  good  weather
we  experienced  in  that  neighbourhood  was  normal.
n  B  17


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

We  generally  had  about  seven  miles  of  easy  going  after
we  had  passed  one  ridge  in  this  area,  and  then  another
ridge  would  rise  up  ahead  of  us,  and  we  v/ould  start
to  climb  again.  There  were  always  crevasses  at  the
top  of  the  ridges,  suggesting  that  the  ice  was  moving
over  land  at  no  great  depth.

We  passed  the  last  ridge  at  last,  and  reached  the
actual  plateau,  but  instead  of  hard  neve,  such  as  the
Discovery  expedition  had  encountered  in  the  journey
to  the  plateau  beyond  the  mountains  west  of  McMurdo
Sound,  we  found  soft  snow  and  hard  sastrugi.  All
the  sastrugi  pointed  to  the  south,  and  the  wind
blew  strongly  nearly  all  the  time  from  the  south  or
south-east,  with  an  occasional  change  to  the  south-
west. Sometimes  we  marched  on  hard  sastrugi,  and
at  other  times  we  had  soft  snow  under  our  feet,  but
could  feel  the  sastrugi  on  which  the  snow  was  lying.
I  formed  the  opinion  that  during  the  winter  on  the
plateau  the  wind  must  blow  with  terrible  violence  from
the  south,  and  that  the  hard  sastrugi  are  produced
then.  Still  further  south  we  kept  breaking  through
a  hard  crust  that  underlay  the  soft  surface  snow,  and
we  then  sank  in  about  eight  inches.  This  surface,
which  made  the  marching  heavy,  continued  to  the
point  at  which  we  planted  the  flag.  After  the  long
blizzard,  from  the  night  of  January  6  until  the  morning
of  January  9,  we  had  a  better  surface  over  which  to
make  our  final  march  southwards,  for  the  wind  had
swept  the  soft  snow  away  and  produced  a  fairly  hard
surface,  over  which,  unencumbered  with  a  sledge  as
we  were,  we  could  advance  easily.

We  found  the  surface  generally  to  be  improved  on
the  march  back.  The  blizzard  winds  had  removed
the  soft  surface  snow,  and  incidentally  uncovered  many
of  the  crevasses.  We  were  following  our  outward
18


PAINFUL    FALLS

tracks,  and  often  I  noticed  the  tracks  lead  us  to  the
edge  of  a  crevasse  which  had  been  covered  previously
and  over  which  we  had  passed  in  ignorance  of  our  danger
on  the  march  southwards.  When  we  got  to  the  head
of  the  glacier  we  tried  to  take  a  short  cut  to  the  point
where  we  had  left  the  Upper  Glacier  Depot,  but  we  got
enmeshed  in  a  maze  of  crevasses  and  pressure  ridges
to  the  eastward,  and  so  had  to  steer  in  a  westerly  direc-
tion again  in  order  to  get  clear.  The  dangers  that  we
did  know  were  preferable  to  those  that  we  did  not
know.  On  the  way  down  the  glacier  we  found  all  the
snow  stripped  away  by  the  wind  and  sun  for  nearly
one  hundred  miles,  and  we  travelled  over  slippery  blue
ice,  with  innumerable  cracks  and  sharp  edges.  We
had  many  painful  falls  during  this  paii:  of  the  journey.
Then  when  about  forty  miles  from  the  foot  of  the  glacier
we  got  into  deep  soft  snow  again,  over  which  rapid
progress  was  impossible.  -There  had  evidently  been
a  heavy  snowfall  in  this  area  while  we  were  further
south,  and  for  days,  while  our  food  was  running  short,
we  could  see  ahead  of  us  the  rocks  under  which  the
depot  had  been  placed.  We  toiled  with  painful  slowness
towards  the  rocks,  and  as  the  reader  has  already  learned,
we  were  without  any  food  at  all  for  the  last  thirty  hours
of  that  march.  We  found  the  Barrier  surface  to  be
very  soft  when  we  got  off  the  Glacier,  but  after  we
had  passed  Grisi  Depot  there  was  an  improvement.
The  surface  remained  fairly  good  until  we  reached  the
winter  quarters,  and  in  view  of  our  weakened  condition
it  was  fortunate  for  us  that  it  did  so.

In  reviewing  the  experience  gained  on  the  southern
journey,  I  do  not  think  that  I  could  suggest  any  improve-
ment in  equipment  for  any  future  expedition.  The
Barrier  surface  evidently  varies  in  a  remarkable  fashion,
and  its  condition  cannot  be  anticipated  with  any  degree

19


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

of  certainty.  The  traveller  must  be  prepared  for
either  a  hard  surface  or  a  very  soft  one,  and  he  may
get  both  surfaces  in  the  course  of  one  day's  march.
The  eleven-foot  sledge  is  thoroughly  suitable  for  the
work,  and  our  method  of  packing  the  stores  and  hauling
the  sledges  did  not  develop  any  weak  points.  We
would  have  been  glad  to  have  had  crampons  for  use
on  the  glacier  ;  what  would  be  better  still  would  be
heavy  alpine  boots  with  nails  all  round,  for  very  often
the  surface  would  give  little  grip  to  crampons,  which
would  only  touch  the  rough  ice  at  one  or  two  points.
The  temperature  is  too  cold  to  permit  of  the  explorer
wearing  ordinary  leather  boots,  and  some  boot  would
have  to  be  designed  capable  of  keeping  the  feet  warm
and  carrying  the  nails  all  round.  A  mast  consisting
of  a  bamboo  lashed  to  the  forward  oil-box  proved  as
efficient  as  could  be  required  for  use  in  connection  with
a  sail  on  the  sledges.  It  was  easily  rigged  and  had
no  elaborate  stays.  I  would  suggest  no  change  in  the
clothing,  for  the  light  woollen  underclothing,  with
thin  windproof  material  outside,  proved  most  satis-
factory in  every  way.  We  could  certainly  not  have
travelled  so  fast  had  we  been  wearing  the  regulation
pilot  cloth  garment  generally  used  in  polar  exploration.
Our  experience  made  it  obvious  that  a  party  which  hopes
to  reach  the  Pole  must  take  more  food  per  man  than
we  did,  but  how  the  additional  weight  is  to  be  provided
for  is  a  matter  for  individual  consideration.  I  would
not  take  cheese  again,  for  although  it  is  a  good  food,
we  did  not  find  it  as  palatable  as  chocolate,  which  is
practically  as  sustaining.  Our  other  foods  were  all
entirely  satisfactory.

Each  member  of  the  Southern  Party  had  his  own
particular  duties  to  perform.  Adams  had  charge  of
the  meteorology,  and  his  work  involved  the  taking  of
20


SOUTHERN   PARTY    DUTIES

temperatures  at  regular  intervals,  and  the  boiKng  of
the  hypsometer,  sometimes  several  times  in  a  day.
He  took  notes  during  the  day,  and  wrote  up  the  observa-
tions at  night  in  the  sleeping-bag.  Marshall  was  the
cosmographer  and  took  the  angles  and  bearings  of  all
the  new  land ;  he  also  took  the  meridian  altitudes
and  the  compass  variation  as  we  went  south.  When  a
meridian  altitude  was  taken,  I  generally  had  it  checked
by  each  member  of  the  party,  so  that  the  mean  could
be  taken.

Marshall's  work  was  about  the  most  uncomfortable
possible,  for  at  the  end  of  a  day's  march,  and  often  at
lunch-time,  he  would  have  to  stand  in  the  biting  wind
handling  the  screws  of  the  theodolite.  The  map  of
the  journey  was  prepared  by  Marshall,  who  also  took
most  of  the  photographs.  Wild  attended  to  the  repair
of  the  sledges  and  equipment,  and  also  assisted  me
in  the  geological  observations  and  the  collection  of
specimens.  It  was  he  who  found  the  coal  close  to  the
Upper  Glacier  Depot.  I  kept  the  courses  and  distances,
worked  out  observations  and  laid  down  our  directions.
We  all  kept  diaries.  I  had  two,  one  my  observation
book,  and  the  other  the  narrative  diary,  reproduced  in
the  first  volume.


11


CHAPTER  II

SUMMER  AT  THE  WINTER  QUARTERS

E  were  distant  about  thirty- two  miles  from  Hut
Point  when  I  decided  to  send  the  supporting-
party  back.  The  men  watched  us  move  off  across  the
white  plain  until  we  became  mere  dots  on  the  wide
expanse,  and  then  loaded  up  their  gear  and  started  north.
Joyce  was  left  in  charge  of  the  party,  and  he  decided  to
make  one  forced  march  to  Hut  Point.  They  had  to  cross
a  good  deal  of  crevassed  ice,  but  a  special  efiort  would
enable  them  to  make  their  next  camp  under  shelter.
They  got  under  way  at  7  a.m.  and  marched  till  noon,
making  good  progress  in  spite  of  the  surface.  In  the
afternoon  they  marched  from  two  till  five  o'clock,  and
then  a  final  march,  from  7  p.m.  till  1.80  a.m.,  took  them
to  the  old  Discovery  hut.  The  only  incident  of  the  day
had  been  the  succumbing  of  Brocklehurst's  feet  to
another  attack  of  frost-bite,  he  having  worn  ski-boots
when  the  other  men  had  put  on  finnesko.  The  damage
was  not  serious,  although  the  sufferer  himself  had  trouble
with  his  feet  for  some  time  after.  The  party  had
covered  thirty-two  miles  in  fourteen  hours  and  a  half,
very  good  marching  in  view  of  the  soft  and  broken
character  of  the  surface.

The  party  left  Hut  Point  on  the  morning  of
November  12,  and  had  a  hard  pull  to  Glacier  Tongue.
They  at  first  thought  of  camping  on  the  southern  side  of
22


WORK    AT    THE    HUT

the  Tongue,  but,  fortunately,  kept  on,  for  on  the  other  side
they  met  Day,  Murray  and  Roberts,  who  had  brought
out  stores  with  the  motor-car.  I  had  left  orders  that
about  1800  lb.  of  provisions  and  gear  should  be  taken
to  the  depot  there,  as  a  provision  for  the  sledging- parties,
in  case  they  should  be  cut  off  from  Cape  Royds  by  open
water  on  their  return.  Day  had  succeeded  in  running
the  car  right  up  to  the  Tongue,  about  twelve  miles
from  v^^inter  quarters.  After  a  good  meal  of  biscuits,
jam,  lobscouse,  tongue  and  cods'  roe,  the  two  parties
joined  in  getting  the  stores  up  to  the  depot.  Then
they  all  went  back  to  the  winter  quarters  on  the  car
and  the  light  sledges  it  had  in  tov/,  leaving  the
heavy  sledge  that  had  been  used  by  the  support-
ing-party to  be  brought  in  at  some  later  opportunity.
They  reached  the  hut  in  the  small  hours  of  the
morning,  and  after  another  meal  turned  in  for  a  good
sleep.

Routine  work  occupied  the  men  at  the  hut  for  some
time  after  the  return  of  the  supporting-party.  The
scientific  members  were  more  than  a  little  grieved  to
find  that  during  the  days  when  the  hut  had  been  un-
tenanted, for  Murray,  Day  and  Roberts  had  been  away
too  on  a  small  expedition,  some  of  the  dogs  had  managed
to  get  loose,  and  had  killed  thirty  or  forty  penguins.
We  had  from  the  first  tried  very  hard  to  avoid  any
accidents  of  this  sort,  for  we  did  not  v/ant  to  cause  any
unnecessary  destruction  of  animal  life.  The  penguins
were  now  laying,  and  the  men  found  that  the  eggs  were
very  good  to  eat.  The  egg  of  the  penguin  is  about  the
same  size  as  that  of  a  duck,  and  it  has  a  transparent,
jelly-like  white  and  a  small  yolk.  It  takes  about  eight
minutes'  boiling  to  cook  the  egg  nicely,  and  ten  minutes
if  it  is  required  set  hard  to  the  centre.  The  shell  is  the
most  beautiful  dark-green  inside,  while  the  outer  shell

23


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

is  chalky  and  white,  though  generally  stained  prettily
by  guano.  Murray  set  aside  a  certain  portion  of  the
rookery  for  the  supply  of  eggs  for  "  domestic  purposes,"
partly  in  order  to  ensure  freshness  and  partly  in  order
to  ascertain  how  many  eggs  the  penguins  would  lay.
The  other  portion  of  the  rookery  was  left  untouched  in
order  that  the  development  and  education  of  the  young
penguins  might  be  studied.

The  scientific  work  in  its  various  branches  was
carried  on  by  the  men  at  the  winter  quarters,  and  they
made  a  series  of  small  expeditions  to  points  of  interest
in  the  surrounding  country.  "  To-day  we  motored  to
Tent  Island  via  Inaccessible  Island,"  wrote  Priestley
on  November  14.  "  The  main  object  of  the  expedition
was  to  enable  Joyce  to  kill  and  skin  some  young  seals,
but  we  did  geological  work  as  well.  Day,  Joyce,
Murray  and  myself  were  the  party,  and  when  the  motor
was  pulled  up  opposite  Inaccessible  Island  three  of  us
strolled  over  to  look  at  its  western  slopes.  We  did
not  have  time  to  climb,  but  the  island  from  that  side
consists  entirely  of  a  flow  of  massive  basalt,  with
small  porphyritic  felspars,  which  show  out  best  in  the
weathered  specimens.  The  sheet  of  basalt  appeared
to  be  dipping  to  the  south.  Bay  endeavoured  to  join
us,  but  he  chose  a  bad  place,  and  got  so  deep  in  the
drift  that  his  axle  was  aground,  so  he  was  obliged  to
reverse  engines  and  back  out.  From  there  we  pro-
ceeded to  Tent  Island,  and  after  Joyce  had  picked  out
a  young  seal  and  started  operations,  Murray,  Day  and  I
climbed  up  a  water- worn  gully  on  the  island  and  had  a
cu  sory  look  at  the  rocks,  which  are  an  agglomerate
with  very  coarse  fragments  ;  capping  the  agglomerate
there  is  a  massive  flow  of  kenyte.  .  .  .  Day  photographed
the  lower  slopes  of  the  gully  while  Murray  and  I  climbed
the  rock- slopes  till  they  ended,  and  then  cut  steps  up
24.


A  Seal  destinkd  for  the  Lakoek


lA^


Fetching  Snow  foe  Cooking  Purposes


To  face  I'Kige  24


ON    TENT    ISLAND

a  snow  slope,  at  the  top  of  which  I  came  across  a  snow
cornice  and  nearly  got  into  trouble  getting  through  it.
On  reaching  the  top  we  walked  along  the  ridge,  and
photographed  a  splendid  weathered  kenyte  boulder,
hollowed  out  like  a  summer-house,  and  studded  with
felspars  as  an  old-fashioned  church  door  is  studded
with  nails.  After  taking  these  photographs  we  climbed
down  the  other  side  of  the  island,  and  walked  round
to  join  the  others.  The  rock-climbing  here,  on  any
slopes  at  all  steep,  is  very  difficult  because  of  the
weathered  fragments,  which,  owing  to  lack  of  powerful
natural  agents  of  transportation  and  to  the  fact  that
the  wind  carries  all  the  lightest  soil  away,  are  left  lying
just  at  their  angle  of  repose  ;  a  false  step  may  send
mountaineer  and  mountain  surface  hurtling  down  fifty
or  a  hundred  feet — ^no  agreeable  sensation,  as  I  know
from  frequent  experience.  The  sun  was  very  hot
to-day,  and  the  gully  was  occupied  by  a  little  stream
which  was  carrying  quite  a  quantity  of  light  soil  down
with  it."

Day  had  an  exciting  experience  with  the  car  during
this  journey.  He  encountered  a  big  crack  in  the  ice
near  Cape  Barne,  and  steering  at  right  angles  to  its
course,  put  on  speed  in  order  to  "  fly  "  it  in  the  usual
way.  When  only  a  few  yards  from  it  and  travelling
at  a  speed  of  about  fifteen  miles  an  hour,  he  found  that
the  crack  made  a  sudden  turn,  so  as  to  follow  the  line
he  was  taking,  and  an  instant  later  his  right-hand  front
wheel  dropped  in.  Any  weak  points  in  the  car  would
have  been  discovered  by  the  sudden  strain,  but  happily
nothing  broke,  and  the  crack  making  another  turn,  the
wheel  bounded  out  at  the  elbow,  and  the  car  was  on
sound  ice  again.

On  November  16  Priestley  made  an  interesting
trip  up  the  slopes  of  Erebus.     Beyond  the  lower  moraines

25


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

and  separated  from  them  by  a  snow-field  of  considerable
size,  he  found  a  series  of  kenyte  ridges  and  cones,
covered  by  very  little  debris.  The  ridges  continued  for
some  distance  to  the  edge  of  the  main  glacier,  where
they  terminated  in  several  well-marked  nunataks.  "  One
which  I  visited,  and  which  was  the  nearest  to  the  large
parasitic  cone,  was  eighty  feet  high,  of  massive  kenyte
of  brown  colour  and  close  texture,  jointed  into  very
large  cubical  joints  by  a  very  complete  series  of  master-
joints.  From  this  nunatak  I  obtained  nine  kinds  of
lichen,  including  four  or  five  new  species,  and  one  piece
of  moss.  One  of  the  lichens  was  so  much  larger  than
the  others  and  branched  so  much  that  it  might  well
be  called  a  forest-lichen,  and  Murray  considers  it  to  be
very  closely  allied  to  the  reindeer-moss,  or  ice-moss."

Joyce  was  engaged  at  this  time  in  making  zoological
collections,  and  with  the  aid  of  the  motor-car  he  was
able  to  cover  a  great  deal  of  ground.  The  motor-car,
driven  by  Day,  would  take  him  fifteen  or  sixteen  miles
over  the  sea-ice  to  some  suitable  locality,  generally
near  the  Cathedral  Rocks  on  the  north  side  of  Glacier
Tongue,  and  leave  him  there  to  kill  seals  and  penguins.
In  order  to  kill  young  seals,  some  specimens  of  which
were  required,  he  had  first  to  drive  the  mothers  away,
and  this  often  took  a  long  time,  as  the  female  seal
becomes  aggressive  when  interfered  with  in  this  manner.
The  w^ork  was  not  at  all  pleasant,  but  Joyce  killed  and
prepared  for  preservation  ilve  young  Weddell  seals  and
four  adult  specimens.  He  had  taken  lessons  in  taxi-
dermy before  leaving  England  in  order  to  be  ready  for
this  duty.  Joyce  and  Day  also  killed  and  skinned
twenty  Emperor  penguins,  twelve  Adelie  penguins  and
twelve  skua  gulls,  and  all  the  men  at  the  winter  quarters
assisted  in  collecting  eggs.

Murray  was  looking  after  the  scientific  work,  paying
26


THE  RETURNING  SUN


Teansi'ortinc  a  t<Li;i)i.:K  ()\i:j(   i;ahi.  Kocks  FOit  the  Summer  Journey  to  the  Slopes  of

Mount  Erebus


Wik.  1.'  "^


Parasitic  ('one  on  the  Slopes  of  Mount  Erebus


Tv  fact'  page  26


ANTARCTIC    COLOURING

special  attention  to  his  own  particular  domain,  that  of
biology,  and  Marston  was  devoting  as  much  time  as  he
could  to  sketching  and  painting.  He  had  taken  oils,
water-colours  and  pastels  to  the  south  with  him.  He
found  that  the  water-colours  could  not  be  used  in  the
open  at  all,  for  they  froze  at  once.  Oils  could  be  used
fairly  comfortably  in  the  summer,  though  it  was  always
chilly  work  to  sit  still  for  any  length  of  time  ;  during
the  spring  the  oils  froze  after  they  had  been  in  the
open  air  for  about  an  hour,  so  that  steady  work  was
not  possible.  The  pastels  could  always  be  used  for
making  "  colour  notes,"  and  they  were  also  used  for
some  of  the  colour-sketches  that  are  reproduced  in  this
book.  Mits  had  to  be  worn  for  all  outside  work,  and
this  made  sketching  difficult.

Marston  found,  as  other  artists  have  found,  that
Nature's  colour- schemes  in  the  Antarctic  are  remarkably
crude,  though  often  wondrously  beautiful.  Bright  blues
and  greens  are  seen  in  violent  contrast  with  brilliant
reds,  and  an  accurate  record  of  the  colours  displayed
in  a  sunset,  as  seen  over  broken  ice,  would  suggest  to
many  people  an  impressionistic  poster  of  the  kind  seen
in  the  London  streets.  Words  fail  one  in  an  attempt
to  describe  the  wildly  bizarre  effects  observed  on  days
when  the  sky  was  fiery  red  and  pale  green,  merging  into
a  deep  blue  overhead,  and  the  snow-fields  and  rocks
showed  violet,  green  and  white  under  the  light  of  the
moon.  Marston  used  to  delight  in  the  "  grey  days,"
when  there  was  no  direct  sunlight  and  the  snov/  all
around  showed  the  most  subtle  tones  of  grey ;  there
would  be  no  shadows  anywhere,  perhaps  light  drifts  of
snow  would  be  blowing  about,  and  the  whole  scene
became  like  a  frozen  fairyland.  The  snow-bergs  and
snow-fields  were  white  under  direct  light,  but  any
hollows  showed  a  vivid  blue,  deepening  almost  to  black

27


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

in  the  depths.  There  was  an  unlimited  amount  of
interesting  work  for  an  artist,  and  Marston  suffered  to
some  extent,  as  did  the  other  specialists  on  the  expe-
dition, from  the  fact  that  the  number  of  men  available
was  so  small  that  every  one,  in  addition  to  his  own  work,
had  to  take  a  share  in  the  routine  duties.

Joyce  devoted  what  spare  time  he  could  find  to  the
completion  of  the  volumes  of  the  "  Aurora  Australis."
Practice  had  made  him  more  skilful  in  the  handling  of
type,  and  he  was  able  to  make  a  good  deal  of  progress,
Day  assisting  with  the  preparation  of  the  Venesta
boards  in  which  the  volumes  were  to  be  bound.  Some
of  the  contributions  towards  the  literary  part  of  the
work  had  come  in  late,  so  that  there  was  plenty  of  work
left  to  do.  Marston  went  on  with  the  lithographing
for  the  illustrations.

Instructions  had  been  left  for  a  geological  recon-
naisance  to  be  made  towards  the  northern  slopes  of
Mount  Erebus,  to  examine,  if  possible,  some  parasitic
cones  and  the  oldest  main  crater  of  the  mountain.
Threatening  weather  prevented  the  carrying  out  of
this  plan  for  some  time,  yet  for  nearly  a  fortnight  after
the  return  of  the  southern  supporting-party  the  expected
blizzard  did  not  come,  while  the  weather  was  not  pro-
pitious for  the  journey.  At  length  no  further  delay
was  possible  if  the  trip  was  to  be  made,  as  Priestley,  the
geologist,  had  to  leave  for  the  western  mountains,  so
on  November  23  the  trip  was  begun,  though  with  mis-
givings as  to  the  long  overdue  blizzard.

The  party  consisted  of  Priestley,  Marston,  Joyce,
Murray  and  Brocklehurst,  and  they  took  seventy  pounds  of
food — a  week's  supply  on  the  ordinary  basis  of  thirty- trfo
ounces  per  day  for  each  man — ^but  carried  only  one  tent,
intended  to  hold  three  men,  their  idea  being  that  one  or
two  men  could  sleep  in  the  bags  outside  the  tent.  The
28


A    BLIZZARD    ON    EREBUS

weather  was  fine  when  they  left  the  hut,  but  in  the
afternoon  a  strong  southerly  wind  sprang  up,  and  they
had  to  march  through  low  drift.  They  camped  for  the
night  close  to  a  steep  nunatak  about  five  miles  from
the  hut  and  nearly  two  thousand  feet  above  sea-level.
There  was  difficulty  in  getting  a  good  snowy  camping-
ground,  and  we  had  to  put  up  the  tent  on  smooth  blue
glacier  ice,  having  a  thin  coating  of  snow,  and  sloping
gently  down  till  it  terminated  in  an  ice-cliff  overlooking
the  sea,  not  many  hundreds  of  yards  below.  After
dinner  Priestley,  Murray  and  Joyce  climbed  over  the
nunataks,  and  found  several  new  lichens,  but  the
specimens  collected  were  lost  in  the  blizzard  later  on.
Priestley  also  found  a  number  of  very  perfect  felspar
crystals  weathered  out  of  the  kenyte,  and  collected  a
couple  of  handfuls  of  the  best.  The  members  of  the
party  retired  to  their  sleeping-bags  at  eight  o'clock  on
Monday  night,  and  before  midnight  a  blizzard  swept
down  upon  them,  and  proved  to  be  an  exceptionally
severe  one,  with  dense  drift.  Priestley  had  volunteered
to  sleep  outside  that  night,  and  had  taken  his  sleeping-
bag  to  a  nook  in  the  rocks  some  distance  away.  When
the  other  men  heard  the  roaring  of  the  blizzard  they
looked  out,  and  were  reassured  to  find  that  he  had
come  down  while  there  was  time  and  had  lain  down
close  by  the  tent.  The  first  night  the  light  snow  round
the  tent  was  blown  away  leaving  one  side  open  to  the
wind,  but  the  occupants  were  able  to  find  a  few  bits  of
rock  close  by,  and  secured  it  with  those.

"  Inside  the  tent  for  the  next  three  days  we  were
warm  enough  in  our  sleeping-bags,"  wrote  Murray  in
his  report.  "  Though  we  could  not  cook  anything  we
ate  the  dry  biscuit  and  pemmican.  The  little  snow
under  the  floorcloth  was  squeezed  in  the  hand  till  it
became  ice,  and  we  sucked  this  for  drink.     We  were

29


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

anxious  about  Priestley,  and  occasionally  opened  the
door-flap  and  hailed  him,  when  he  always  replied  that
he  was  all  right.  Joyce  had  managed  to  pass  him  some
food  early  in  the  storm,  so  there  was  no  fear  of  starving,
but  as  we  learned  afterwards  he  could  get  nothing  to
drink  and  so  could  not  eat.  No  one  could  offer  to
change  places  with  him,  as  in  doing  so  the  sleeping-bag
would  have  filled  with  snow,  and  might  have  blown
away.  On  Wednesday  Marston  dressed  in  his  Burberries
and  crawled  down  to  Priestley,  who  reported  "  All  well,"
but  he  had  had  no  food  for  twenty-four  hours.  Marston
gave  him  some  biscuits  and  chocolate.  On  Thursday
morning  he  replied  to  the  hail,  but  he  was  getting  further
and  further  from  the  tent,  as  every  time  he  moved  he
slipped  a  little  bit  down  the  smooth  glacier.  At  mid-
day there  was  no  reply  to  our  hail,  and  we  thought  of
the  precipitous  ice-foot  and  imagined  things.  Joyce  and
I  dressed  and  went  out  to  seek  him.  The  drift  was  so
thick  that  nothing  whatever  could  be  seen,  and  when
the  head  was  lifted  to  try  and  look  the  whole  face  and
eyes  were  instantly  covered  by  a  sheet  of  ice.  We
crept  about  on  hands  and  knees  looking  for  the  lost
man.  The  only  chance  of  getting  back  to  the  tent  again
was  to  steer  by  the  wind,  down  the  wind  looking  for
Priestley,  up  the  wind  home  again.  At  one  side  the
sledge  lay,  forming  a  landmark,  and  Priestley  had  been
not  very  far  from  the  far-away  end.  Creeping  along
the  sledge  to  where  he  had  lain,  I  found  that  he  was
not  there.  Joyce  went  a  little  further  to  the  right  and
came  upon  him,  all  alive."

Priestley's  experiences  during  this  period  are  related
in  his  diary.  "  I  had  volunteered  to  sleep  in  the  bag
outside  the  tent,"  he  wrote,  "  and  by  the  time  I  was
ready  to  turn  in  the  drift  had  started  again  pretty
badly,  and  the  only  sheltered  spot  I  could  find  was  at
SO


.

PRIESTLEY'S    EXPERIENCE

the  top  of  the  hill,  so  I  told  Joyce  where  he  would  find
me  in  the  morning  and  camped  down,  first  luckily
taking  the  precaution  to  put  a  few  cubic  feet  of  kenyte
on  my  Burberry  trousers  and  jacket  outside  the  bag.
A  few  hours  later  I  woke  up  to  find  that  the  wind  had
increased  to  the  dimensions  of  a  blizzard,  and  that  the
drift  was  sweeping  in  a  steady  cloud  over  my  head.
I  realised  that  those  in  the  tent  would  have  trouble  in
reaching  me  in  the  morning,  so  I  got  out  of  the  bag  and
dressed,  getting  both  the  bag  and  my  clothes  full  of
snow  in  the  process.  Then,  after  some  trouble,  I  got
the  bag  down  the  steep  slope  of  the  nunatak  to  the
sledge,  where  I  wrapped  myself  up  in  the  tent-cloth  and
lay  athwart  the  wind.  In  about  two  hours  I  got  drifted
up  so  close  that  I  was  forced  to  get  my  shoulders  out
of  the  bag  and  lever  myself  out  of  the  drift,  and  I  then
tried  the  experiment  of  lying  head  to  wind  on  the
opening  of  the  sleeping-bag,  This  answered  very  well,
and  it  was  in  this  position  that  I  spent  the  next  seventy-
two  hours,  getting  shifted  down  a  yard  or  two  at  a  time
at  every  change  in  the  direction  of  the  wind,  and  being
gradually  pushed  along  the  wind-swept  surface  of  the
glacier  until  I  was  some  twenty  or  thirty  yards  from
the  tent,  and  in  some  danger  of  getting  swept,  as  the
wind  increased  in  violence,  either  on  to  some  rocks  a
quarter  of  a  mile  below  or  else  straight  down  the  glacier
and  over  a  hundred-foot  drop  into  Horseshoe  Bay.

"  Three  times  the  people  in  the  tent  managed  to
pass  me  over  some  biscuits  and  raw  pemmican,  and
Marston  got  my  chocolate  from  the  riicksack  and
brought  it  to  me.  My  chief  difficulty,  however,  was
want  of  water.  I  had  had  a  little  tea  before  I  turned
in,  but  from  that  time  for  nearly  eighty  hours  I  had
nothing  to  drink  but  some  fragments  of  ice  that  I  could
prise  up  with  the  point  of  a  small  safety-pin.    The

31


THE    HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

second  time  Joyce  came  down,  I  believe  about  the
beginning  of  the  third  day,  he  reported  that  the  lashings
at  the  top  of  the  tent-poles  had  given  way  and  that  a
rent  had  been  torn  in  the  material  by  the  comer  of  a
biscuit-tin.  He  added  that  it  was  impossible  to  keep
any  snow  on  the  skirt  of  the  tent,  and  that  as  the  snow-
cloth  was  kept  down  only  by  a  few  rocks,  the  occupants
of  the  tent  were  in  constant  expectation  of  seeing  the
tent  leave  them  altogether.  When  Joyce  left  me  on
this  occasion  the  drift  was  so  thick  that  he  could  see
nothing,  and  had  to  find  his  way  back  by  shouting
and  listening  for  the  return  shouts  of  his  tent-mates.
He  had  gone  only  a  quarter  of  the  distance  when  both
his  eyes  were  filled  with  drift  and  immediately  choked
with  ice,  and  when  he  reached  the  tent  his  face  was  a
mask  of  ice  and  both  feet  were  frost-bitten.  He  was
helped  inside  and  his  feet  brought  round  with  rubbing,
but  no  further  attempt  could  be  made  to  reach  me.
He  had  brought  me  some  biscuit  and  raw  pemmican.
Cooking  was  not  possible  in  the  tent  owing  to  the
impossibility  of  reaching  the  sledge  to  get  the  oil-filler.
It  may  sound  like  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  we  could
not  reach  the  sledge,  which  was  four  yards  or  less  from
the  tent,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  were  lying
on  the  slopes  of  a  clean-swept  glacier,  on  which  finnesko
could  get  no  hold.  The  snow  that  had  covered  the  ice
when  we  pitched  camp  had  all  disappeared  before  the
fury  of  the  blizzard.  Our  spiked  ski-boots  were  on
the  ice-axes  round  the  sledge,  where  they  had  been
hung  to  dry,  but  in  any  case  it  would  have  been  impos-
sible to  wear  them  in  a  blizzard  when  feet  were  getting
badly  frost-bitten  even  in  finnesko.  A  slip  on  the  ice
meant  very  serious  danger  of  destruction.

"  A  slight  decrease  in  the  wind  at  the  close  of  the
third  day  gave  me  hope  of  getting  up  to  the  tent,  and
32


AN    UNPLEASANT    SITUATION

I  prepared  to  move  by  putting  on  my  outdoor  clothing,
no  easy  task  in  a  sleeping-bag  ;  then,  rolling  over  on
my  side,  I  tried  to  get  out.  I  found  that  there  was
less  wind  and  less  drift,  and  that  I  was  able  for  the
first  time  to  see  where  I  was  with  regard  to  surrounding
objects.  I  was  unable,  however,  to  get  out  of  the  bag
without  being  blown  further  down  the  slippery  glacier,
and  I  could  see  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  crawl  up
the  slopes  with  the  cumbrous  bag.  If  I  lost  the  bag  I
might  as  well  have  let  myself  slide."

About  two  hours  after  this  Marston  ventured  forth
from  the  tent  in  one  of  the  remarkable  intervals  of
calm  occasionally  experienced  in  the  course  of  an
Antarctic  blizzard.  On  either  side  of  the  spot  on  which
the  camp  had  been  pitched  he  could  see  the  drift  flying
along  with  the  full  force  of  the  wind,  but  he  was  able
to  make  his  way  down  to  Priestley  before  the  blizzard
swept  down  on  them  again.  They  dragged  the  bag
up  the  glacier  by  kneeling  on  it  and  jerking  it  along,
and  both  got  into  the  tent.  "  Four  men  in  a  three-
men  tent  is  a  big  squeeze,"  continued  Priestley,  "  but
five  was  fearful,  and  it  was  some  time  before  I  managed
to  get  even  sitting  room.  The  first  thing  to  do  was  to
examine  and  attend  frost-bitten  feet,  and  the  examina-
tion showed  as  big  a  crop  as  could  be  expected,  for
Marston  and  I  each  had  both  feet  frost-bitten.  A  course
of  massage  brought  them  round,  and  I  got  into  Marston's
bag  while  he  made  tea.  .  .  .  After  tea  I  got  into  my
own  bag  and  lay  down  on  top  of  Murray  and  Marston,
and  by  dint  of  much  wriggling  we  managed  to  get  fairly
settled,  though  our  positions  were  so  cramped  that
sleep  was  impossible.

"  At  about  half-past  four  in  the  morning  we  cooked

some  pemmican  in  the  tent  and  had  a  proper  breakfast,

as  for  the  first  time  the  wind  had  really  begun  to  die

u  C  33


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

away.  Owing  to  the  cold,  the  long  period  of  semi-
starvation  in  our  cramped  quarters,  and  the  fact  that
oil  had  got  mixed  up  with  the  food,  we  were  unable  to
do  justice  either  to  the  hoosh  or  to  the  cocoa  which
followed  it,  and  were  still  fairly  empty  when  the  drift
ceased  and  we  turned  out  to  face  the  blizzard,  pack
the  sledge  and  start  for  home.  The  ascent  of  the
mountain  had,  of  course,  to  be  abandoned.  I  put  on
my  damp  finnesko  and  v/ent  out  to  help,  but  in  less
than  five  minutes,  though  the  temperature  was  plus
22°  Fahr.,  I  was  back  in  the  tent  with  the  front  portions
of  both  feet  frozen,  and  we  took  half  an  hour  to  bring
them  round  by  beating,  massaging  and  rubbing  with
snow.  This  latter  remedy,  Marston's  favourite,  is  a
very  drastic  one,  and  as  painful  as  any  I  know,  for  the
Antarctic  snow  is  invariably  in  small  sharp  crystals,
very  brittle  and  hard.  We  all  chafed  very  much  at
the  unavoidable  delay,  as  there  was  every  sign  of  a
renewal  of  the  blizzard  and  the  drift,  but  fortunately
we  got  under  way  before  any  drift  rose,  and  the  wind
was  rather  in  our  favour.  We  left  all  the  provisions
there,  and  unanimously  named  the  nunatak  '  Misery
Nunatak,'  and  we  were  about  as  glad  to  leave  the  place
as  a  soul  would  be  to  leave  purgatory.  We  also  left
a  tin  of  biscuits  and  some  oil  with  a  view  to  a  future
attempt  at  an  ascent,  to  be  made  by  Murray,  Day,
Marston  and  Joyce.

"  There  was  a  remarkable  contrast  between  the
wind-swept  surface  of  the  glacier  and  the  surface  over
v/hich  we  had  toilsomely  dragged  the  sledges  during
our  day's  journey  outward.  Instead  of  a  uniform
carpet,  six  inches  deep,  of  soft  snow,  varied  with  drifts
up  to  one's  knees,  we  found  patches  of  glacier  ice,
larger  stretches  of  n6ve,  and  hard  drifts  of  snow,  on
which  neither  our  weight  nor  the  weight  of  the  sledge
34


l(*»i»  ,  '^"'


r


EREBUS    IN    ERUPTION

made  the  slightest  impression  ;  these  drifts  were  deeply
undercut  on  the  south-east  side,  and  were  frequently
a  foot  to  eighteen  inches  in  height.  It  was  no  easy
matter  to  direct  the  sledge  across  the  strong  wind  then
blowing,  although  we  had  two  men  pulling  and  two
others  guiding  the  sledge,  and  we  ascended  about  half  a
mile  to  the  north  of  Horseshoe  Bay  in  what  was,  for  a
long  time,  totally  unfamiliar  country,  and  through
a  series  of  moraines  which  had  not  yet  been  explored.
I  was,  unfortunately,  of  no  use  in  the  pulling,  being
only  just  able  to  get  along  myself,  and  we  were  all
extremely  glad  to  get  the  sledge  to  the  Back  Door  Bay
end  of  Blue  Lake,  where  it  was  left  till  the  next  day.
We  reached  the  hut  and  started  on  a  course  of  feeding
and  recuperating,  having  been  five  days  out."

Mount  Erebus  was  noticed  to  be  in  eruption  when
the  party  was  marching  back  to  the  hut  on  November  27.
Huge  diverging  columns  of  steam  were  rising  from  the
crater,  and  behind  could  be  seen  curious  clouds  of
feathery  cirrus.  The  temperature  during  the  blizzard
had  not  fallen  below  12°  Fahr.  and  had  been  above
20°  Fahr.  during  most  of  the  time,  so  that  the  frost-bites
sustained  by  the  men  must  have  been  due  mainly  to
lowered  vitality,  caused  by  the  cramped  situation  and
the  lack  of  hot  food.

The  experience  had  been  rather  a  severe  one,  but
the  men  were  none  the  worse  for  it  after  a  day  or  two
at  the  winter  quarters,  and  they  commenced  at  once
to  make  preparations  for  the  western  journey.  I  had
left  instructions  that  on  December  1  Armytage,  Priestley
and  Brocklehurst  should  start  for  Butter  Point  with
600  lb.  of  stores  in  order  to  lay  a  depot  for  the  Northern
Party  which  might  be  expected  to  reach  that  point
on  its  journey  back  from  the  Magnetic  Pole.  Then
the  three  men  were  to  secure  what  stores  they  required

35


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

for  their  own  purposes,  and  proceed  up  the  Ferrar
Glacier  as  far  as  the  Depot  Nunatak  in  order  that
Priestley  might  search  for  fossils  in  the  sandstones  of
the  western  mountains.  They  were  to  get  back  to
Butter  Point  early  in  January  in  order  to  meet  Pro-
fessor David,  Mawson  and  Mackay,  and  if  a  junction
was  effected,  Mawson,  Priestley  and  Brocklehurst  were
to  carry  on  geological  work  in  Dry  Valley  and  the
surrounding  country,  while  Professor  David,  Armytage
and  Mackay  were  to  return  to  the  winter  quarters.
The  fact  that  the  Northern  Party  did  not  arrive  upset
this  arrangement  to  some  extent,  but  the  other  three
men  did  some  very  useful  work.  The  mountains  to  the
west  of  McMurdo  Sound  had  been  explored  by  Lieutenant
Armitage  and  Captain  Scott  during  the  Discovery
expedition,  Armitage  having  climbed  the  mountains
and  penetrated  west  to  an  altitude  of  9000  ft.  on
the  ice-cap,  while  Scott  had  reached  longitude  146°  33'
East  on  the  western  plateau.  Further  information
was  required,  however,  in  regard  to  the  geology  of
the  mountains.

Armytage,  Priestley  and  Brocklehurst  accordingly
left  the  winter  quarters  on  December  1,  taking  with
them  about  1200  lb.  of  gear  and  stores.  The  motor-car
carried  them  for  the  first  sixteen  miles,  although  the
sea-ice  was  by  this  time  in  a  very  bad  condition.  The
season  was  well  advanced,  the  sun  was  above  the  horizon
all  the  time,  and  there  were  cracks  and  pools  in  all
directions.  Day  and  Marston  took  the  car  out,  and
when  they  were  coming  back  after  leaving  the  Western
Party  the  car  got  stuck  firmly  in  a  crack  that  ran  across
the  course.  They  spent  two  hours  cutting  away
the  ice  sufficiently  to  get  the  car  out,  and  then  had  to
make  a  detour  of  five  miles  in  order  to  get  round
the  crack.     This  was  the  last  journey  of  the  car  in  the

m


JOURNEY    TO    BUTTER    POINT

Antarctic,  for  it  was  laid  up  when  it  got  back  to  the
hut.

The  Western  Party,  after  some  heavy  sledging,  camped
on  December  4  at  the  foot  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier.  Armytage
was,  at  this  time,  suffering  from  an  attack  of  snow-
blindness.  Priestley  found  moss  and  a  species  of
fungus  at  the  stranded  moraines  and  also  some  kenyte.
The  men  had  been  looking  forward  with  pleasurable
anticipation  to  securing  skuas'  eggs,  which  would  have
been  a  welcome  change  from  pemmican  and  biscuit,
but  the  birds  had  apparently  not  begun  to  lay  and  no
eggs  were  secured.  "  A  good  deal  of  water  denudation
and  transportation  is  taking  place  along  the  sea-cliffs  of
these  moraines,"  wrote  Priestley  in  his  diary.  "  Quite
a  thick  alluvial  deposit,  bearing  a  strong  resemblance
to  a  series  of  miniature  deltas,  is  to  be  seen  along  the
ice-foot  awaiting  the  breaking  up  of  the  ice  and  its
removal  to  the  sea.  The  dust  from  the  moraines  had
made  a  remarkable  surface  for  two  miles  this  side  of
them.  Some  winds  had  evidently  been  strong  enough
to  remove  a  considerable  quantity  of  the  gravel  with
the  snow,  and  the  drifts  which  had  contained  this  gravel
had  melted  away,  undercutting  the  edges  of  the  cleaner
snowdrifts,  and  thus  giving  a  surface  of  bare  ice  with
patchy  snowdrifts  undercut  on  all  sides."

The  party  reached  Butter  Point,  about  thirty-five
miles  as  the  crow  flies  from  the  winter  quarters,  on
December  5,  and  found  a  small  depot  left  there  by  the
Northern  Party  on  its  way  to  the  Magnetic  Pole.  Pro-
fessor David  and  his  companions  had  placed  some  final
letters  in  a  milk-tin.  The  stores  brought  for  the
purpose  were  placed  at  the  depot,  and  then  Army-
tage, Priestley  and  Brocklehurst  proceeded  back  to
the  winter  quarters,  arriving  there  on  December  7  at
11.30  P.M.     On  December  9  they  .started    for  Butter

37


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

Point  again,  taking  five  weeks'  provisions  for  three
men,  in  order  to  proceed  up  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  and  later
to  try  to  effect  a  junction  with  the  Northern  Party.

Only  five  men — Murray,  Joyce,  Day,  Marston  and
Roberts — were  now  at  the  winter  quarters.  The  heat
of  the  Antarctic  summer  being  at  its  height,  the  snow-
drifts were  melting  rapidly,  and  the  trickling  of  running
water  was  everywhere  to  be  heard.  A  large  drift
remained  on  the  hill  behind  the  hut,  leading  up  to
Mawson's  anemometer.  On  December  1  it  was  melting
in  several  little  trickles,  and  next  day  it  was  found  that
one  of  these  had  got  under  the  hut  and  made  a  pool
about  a  foot  in  depth  at  the  lower  end.  Many  valuable
things  were  stored  under  the  hut,  and  the  only  opening
was  occupied  by  the  pool  of  water.  A  hole  had  to  be
made  at  one  side  of  the  house,  where  the  ground  was
higher,  and  into  this  Joyce  crawled  and  spent  some
hours  -svriggling  about  in  a  space  hardly  more  than  one
foot  in  height,  rescuing  valuable  boxes  of  printing
material  and  printed  matter.

In  the  succeeding  days  the  men  at  the  hut  had  an
illustration  of  the  contrasts  which  the  Antarctic  climate
presents.  The  heat  of  the  sun  melted  the  snow,  and
indeed  made  the  weather  oppressively  warm,  yet  the
water  which  ran  below  the  house,  where  the  sunshine
could  not  penetrate  and  the  air  temperature  never  rose
above  32°  Fahr.,  froze  at  night  and  never  thawed  again,
so  that  the  water  each  day  added  a  layer  to  the  accu-
mulation beneath  the  hut,  till  it  reached  nearly  up  to
the  floor.

After  the  final  departure  of  the  Western  Party  on
December  9,  life  at  the  winter  quarters  was  uneventful
until  the  arrival  of  the  Nimrod.  The  members  of  the
expedition  remaining  at  Cape  Royds  v/ere  busy  collecting
skua  eggs,  preparing  skins,  carrying  on  the  routine
88


J>^>3-  ^^.^


--v«^;f.-i5af^^— _,


The  Motor  xNear  the  Winter  Quarters


A  Haul  of  Fish


Tofaeepage  38


SUMMER    AT    THE    HUT

scientific  observations,  and  watching  the  doings  of  the
Adelie  penguins.  Many  photographs  were  taken,  es-
pecially by  Day,  of  penguins  in  every  variety  of  attitude,
and  of  other  subjects  of  interest.  Experiments  were
made  in  photographing  microscopic  animals,  and  many
pictures  of  them  from  life  were  obtained.


CHAPTER  HI

RETURN  OF  THE  NIMROD

AFTER  leaving  us  on  February  22,  the  Nimrod  had
an  uneventful  voyage  back  to  New  Zealand.  Fair
winds  were  encountered  all  the  way,  and  the  ice  gave
no  difficulty,  the  coast  of  New  Zealand  being  sighted
twelve  days  after  the  departure  from  Cape  Royds.
During  the  winter  the  Nimrod  had  been  laid  up  in  Port
Lyttelton  waiting  till  the  time  arrived  to  bring  us  back
to  civilisation.  The  little  ship  had  been  docked  and
thoroughly  overhauled,  so  that  all  effects  of  the  severe
treatment  she  received  during  the  first  voyage  down
to  the  ice  had  been  removed,  and  she  was  once  more
ready  to  battle  with  the  floes.  Towards  the  end  of  the
year  stores  were  taken  on  board,  for  there  was  a  possi-
bility that  a  party  might  have  to  spend  a  second  winter
at  Cape  Royds,  if  the  men  comprising  one  of  the  sledging
expeditions  had  not  returned,  and,  of  course,  there
was  always  the  possibility  of  the  Nimrod  herself  being
caught  in  the  ice  and  frozen  in  for  the  winter.  Sufficient
stores  were  taken  on  board  to  provide  for  any  such
eventualities,  and  as  much  coal  as  could  be  stowed
away  was  also  carried.  Captain  P.  F.  Evans,  who
had  commanded  the  Koonya  at  the  time  she  towed
the  Nimrod  down  to  the  Antarctic  Circle,  was  ap-
pointed master  of  the  Nimrod  under  my  power  of
attorney.  Captain  England  having  resigned  on  account
40


NIMROD  GOES  SOUTH  AGAIN

of  ill-health  after  reaching  New  Zealand  earlier  in  the
year.

The  Nimrod  left  Ljrttelton  on  December  1,  1908,
and  encountered  fine  weather  for  the  voyage  south-
wards. On  the  evening  of  the  8rd,  the  wind  being
favourable,  the  propeller  was  disconnected,  and  the
vessel  proceeded  under  sail  alone  until  the  20th,  when
she  was  in  latitude  66°  30'  South,  longitude  178°  28'
West.  The  "  blink  "  of  ice  was  seen  ahead  and  the  ship
was  hove  to  until  steam  had  been  raised  and  the  pro-
peller connected.  Then  Captain  Evans  set  sail  again,
and  proceeded  towards  the  pack.  The  vessel  was  soon
in  brash  ice,  and  after  pushing  through  this  for  a  couple
of  hours  reached  the  pack,  and  made  her  way  slowly
through  the  lanes.  Numerous  seals  were  basking  on
the  floes,  regarding  the  ship  with  their  usual  air  of
mild  astonishment.  On  the  following  day  the  pack
was  more  congested,  and  the  progress  southward  was
slow,  so  much  so  that  the  crew  found  time  to  kill  and
skin  several  crabeater  seals.  Open  water  was  reached
again  that  evening,  and  at  noon  on  the  22nd  the  Nimrod
was  in  latitude  68°  20'  South,  longitude  175°  23'  East,
and  proceeding  under  sail  through  the  open  water  of
Ross  Sea.  The  belt  of  pack-ice  had  been  about  sixty
miles  wide.

On  December  26  the  Nimrod  reached  latitude  70°
42'  South,  longitude  173°  4'  West,  the  position,  in
which,  in  1843,  Sir  James  Ross  sighted  "  compact,
hummocky  ice,"  but  found  only  drift  ice,  with  plenty
of  open  water.  A  sounding  gave  no  bottom  with  1575
fathoms  of  wire,  so  that  the  theory  that  the  ice  seen
by  Ross  was  resting  on  land  was  completely  disproved.
At  noon  on  the  27th  the  Nimrod,  which  was  proceeding
in  a  south-east  direction,  was  brought  up  by  thick
floes  in  latitude  72°  8'  South,  longitude  173°  1'  West.

41


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

Progress  became  possible  again  later  in  the  day,  and
at  four  o'clock  on  the  following  morning  the  Nimrod  was
in  open  water,  with  the  blink  of  pack  to  the  eastward.
Captain  Evans  had  kept  east  with  the  hope  of  sighting
King  Edward  VII  Land,  but  the  pack  seemed  to  be
continuous  in  that  direction,  and  on  the  30th  he  there-
fore shaped  a  course  for  Cape  Bird,  and  on  January  1,
1909,  Mount  Erebus  was  sighted.  The  experience
of  Captain  Evans  on  this  voyage  confirms  my  own
impression  that,  under  normal  conditions,  the  pack
that  stretches  out  from  the  Barrier  to  the  eastward
of  the  Ross  Sea  is  not  penetrable,  and  that  the  Discovery
was  able  to  push  to  within  sight  of  King  Edward  VII
Land  in  1902  for  the  reason  that  the  ice  was  unusually
open  that  season.

The  progress  of  the  Nimrod  towards  the  winter
quarters  was  blocked  by  ice  off  Beaufort  Island,  and
after  manoeuvring  about  for  three  hours  Captain  Evans
made  the  vessel  fast  to  a  floe  with  ice  anchors.  The
next  morning  he  cast  off  from  the  floe,  and  with  the
help  of  the  current,  which  seems  to  set  constantly  to
the  west  between  Cape  Bird  and  Beaufort  Island,  and
by  taking  advantage  of  lanes  of  open  water,  gradually
proceeded  in  two  days  to  a  point  only  twenty-eight
miles  from  Cape  Royds.  Some  heavy  bumps  against
the  floes  tested  the  strength  of  the  vessel,  and  finally
what  appeared  to  be  fast  ice  was  encountered,  so  that
no  further  progress  towards  the  south  was  possible  for
the  time.  -

There  seemed  to  be  no  immediate  possibility  of  the
Nimrod  reaching  Cape  Royds,  and  Captain  Evans
therefore  decided  to  send  Mackintosh  with  three  men
to  convey  a  mail-bag  and  the  news  of  the  ship's  arrival
to  the  winter  quarters.  The  party  was  to  travel  over
the  sea  ice  with  a  sledge,  and  it  did  not  seem  that  there
42


ON    DRIFT    ICE

would  be  any  great  difficulties  to  be  encountered.  A
start  was  made  at  10.15  a.m.  on  January  8,  the  party
consisting  of  Mackintosh,  McGillan,  Riches  and  Paton,
with  one  sledge,  a  tent,  sleeping-bags,  cooking  equip-
ment and  a  supply  of  provisions.  The  distance  to  be
covered  was  about  twenty-five  miles.  In  the  afternoon
Mackintosh  sent  Riches  and  Paton  back  to  the  ship,
and  he  reduced  the  load  on  the  sledge  by  leaving  fifty
pounds  of  provisions  in  a  depot.  The  travelling  became
very  rough,  the  two  men  encountering  both  bad  ice  and
soft  snow.  They  camped  at  7.5  p.m.,  and  started  for
Cape  Royds  again  at  1.55  a.m.  on  the  following  day.
They  soon  got  on  to  a  better  surface,  and  made  good
progress  until  5.30  a.m.,  when  they  met  with  open  water,
with  pressure  ice  floating  past.  This  blocked  the  way.
They  walked  for  two  hours  in  a  v/esterly  direction  to
see  how  far  the  open  water  extended,  but  did  not  reach
the  end  of  it.  The  v/hole  of  the  ice  to  the  southward
seemed  to  be  moving,  and  the  stream  at  the  spot  at
which  they  were  then  standing  was  travelling  at  the
rate  of  about  three  miles  an  hour.  They  breakfasted
at  7.80  A.M.,  and  then  started  back  for  the  ship,  as
there  seemed  to  be  no  chance  of  reaching  Cape  Royds
in  consequence  of  the  open  water.

Presently  Mackintosh  found  that  there  was  open
water  ahead,  blocking  the  way  to  the  ship,  and  a  survey
of  the  position  from  a  hummock  revealed  the  unpleasant
fact  that  the  floe-ice  was  breaking  up  altogether,  and
that  they  were  in  most  serious  danger  of  drifting  out
into  the  sound.  Safety  lay  in  a  hurried  dash  for  the
shore  to  the  east,  and  they  proceeded  to  drag  their
sledge  across  rough  ice  and  deep  snow  with  all  possible
speed.  At  places  they  had  to  lift  the  sledge  bodily
over  the  ice-faces,  and  when,  after  an  hour's  very  heavy
work,  they  arrived  off  the  first  point  of  land,  they  found

43


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

an  open  lane  of  water  barring  their  way.  "  We  dragged
on  to  the  next  point,  which  appeared  to  be  safe,"  wrote
Mackintosh  in  his  diary.  "  The  floes  were  small  and
square  in  shape.  Every  two  hundred  yards  we  had
to  drag  our  sledge  to  the  edge  of  a  floe,  jump  over  a
lane  of  water,  and  then  with  a  big  effort  pull  the  sledge
after  us.  After  an  hour  of  this  kind  of  work  our  hands
were  cut  and  bleeding,  and  our  clothes,  which,  of  course,
froze  as  stiff  as  boards,  had  been  v/et  through  to  the
waist,  for  we  had  frequently  slipped  and  fallen  when
crossing  from  floe  to  floe.  At  2.30  p.m.  we  were  near
to  the  land,  and  came  to  a  piece  of  glacier  ice  that  formed
a  bridge.  The  floe  that  we  were  on  was  moving  rapidly,
so  we  had  to  make  a  great  effort  and  drag  our  sledge
over  a  six-foot  breach.  Our  luck  was  in,  and  we  pulled
our  sledge  a  little  way  up  the  face  of  the  fast  ice,  and
unpacked  it.  We  were  in  a  safe  position  again,  and
none  too  soon,  for  fifteen  minutes  later  there  was  open
water  where  we  had  gained  the  land."

Mackintosh  decided  to  go  into  camp  near  the  spot
where  they  had  landed,  as  a  journey  across  the  rocks
and  the  glaciers  of  the  coast  was  not  a  thing  to  be
undertaken  lightly,  and  would  probably  be  impossible
unless  the  mail-bag  was  left  behind.  McGillan,  more-
over, had  developed  snow-blindness,  and  both  men
were  very  tired.  I  will  quote  from  Mackintosh's  report
on  the  subsequent  experience  of  this  little  party.

"  Early  the  next  morning  T  found  McGillan  in  great
pain,"  wrote  Mackintosh.  "  His  eyes  were  closed  up
completely,  and  his  face  was  terribly  swollen.  The
only  remedy  I  could  apply  was  to  bathe  them,  and  this
seemed  to  give  him  some  relief.  From  an  elevated
position  I  had  a  good  look  round  for  the  ship,  and  could
not  see  a  trace  of  her.  As  the  day  wore  on  my  own  eyes
became  painful.  I  fervently  hoped  I  was  not  going
44


SNOW    BLINDNESS

to  be  as  bad  as  my  companion,  for  we  would  then  be
in  a  very  difficult  position.  The  morning  of  January  6
found  us  both  blind.  McGillan's  face  was  frightfully
swollen,  and  his  eyes  completely  and  tightly  shut,  so
that  he  did  not  know  that  I  was  attacked  too.  At
first  I  refrained  from  telling  him,  but  the  pain  was  very
severe,  and  I  had  to  tell  him.  By  the  painful  process
of  forcing  my  eyelids  apart  with  my  fingers  I  could  see
a  little,  but  I  was  not  able  to  do  this  for  long.  I  con-
tinued to  bathe  McGillan's  eyes,  and  then  suffered  six
hours'  agony,  ending  in  a  good  long  sleep,  from  which
I  awoke  refreshed  and  much  better.  I  was  able  to  see
without  effort.  McGillan  was  also  much  better,  and
our  relief,  after  the  anxiety  we  had  felt,  was  very  great.
By  midnight  we  had  improved  so  much  that  we  walked
to  the  penguin  rookery,  where  we  had  great  fun  with
the  birds  and  found  several  eggs."

The  men  stayed  in  camp  for  several  days,  seeing
no  sign  of  the  ship,  and  after  their  eyes  were  better
spent  a  good  deal  of  time  studying  the  neighbourhood
and  especially  the  bird-life.  They  cut  down  their  food
to  two  meals  a  day,  as  their  supply  of  food  was  not
large.  Finally,  Mackintosh  decided  that  he  would
leave  the  mail-bag  in  the  tent,  it  being  too  heavy  to
carry  for  any  distance,  and  march  in  to  Cape  Royds.
They  made  a  start  on  the  morning  of  January  11,  carry-
ing forty  pounds  each,  including  food  for  three  meals,  and
expected  to  be  able  to  reach  the  winter  quarters  within
twenty-four  hours.  The  first  portion  of  the  journey
lay  over  hills  of  basaltic  rock,  at  the  base  of  Mount
Bird,  and  they  thought  it  best  to  get  as  high  as  possible
in  order  to  avoid  the  valleys  and  glaciers.  They  went
up  about  five  thousand  feet,  and  had  fairly  easy  travel-
ling over  slopes  until  they  got  well  on  to  the  glaciers.
Then  their   troubles   commenced.     Tliey  were  wearing

45


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

ski-boots  without  spikes,  and  had  many  heavy  falls  on
the  slippery  ice.  "  We  were  walking  along,  each  picking
his  own  tracks,  and  were  about  fifty  yards  apart,
foolishly  not  roped,  when  I  happened  to  look  round
to  speak  to  my  companion,  and  found  that  he  had
disappeared,"  wrote  Mackintosh.  "  Suddenly  I  heard
my  name  called  faintly  from  the  bowels  of  the  glacier,
and  immediately  rushed  towards  the  place  from  which
the  sound  proceeded.  I  found  McGillan  in  a  yawning
chasm,  many  feet  beneath  me,  and  held  up  on  a
projection  of  ice.  I  took  off  my  straps  from  my  pack
and  to  them  tied  my  waist  lashing,  and  lowered  this
extemporised  rope  down  to  him.  It  just  reached  his
hand,  and  with  much  pulling  on  my  part  and  knee-
climbing  on  his,  he  got  safely  to  the  surface  of  the
glacier  again.  The  primus  stove  and  our  supply  of
food  had  gone  further  down  the  crevasse.  We  tried
to  hook  them  up,  and  in  doing  so  I  lost  my  straps  and
line  which  I  had  attached  to  a  ski-stick,  so  we  were
left  almost  without  equipment.  As  soon  as  McGillan
had  recovered  from  the  shock  he  had  received  we
started  off  again,  with  the  spare  strap  tying  the  two
of  us  together.  We  crossed  over  many  snow-bridges
that  covered  the  dangers  underneath,  but  soon  we  were
in  a  perfect  hot-bed  of  crevasses.  They  were  impassable
and  lay  right  across  our  path,  so  that  we  could  look
down  into  awful  depths.  We  turned  and  climbed
higher  in  order  to  get  a  clear  passage  round  the  top.  We
were  roped  together  and  I  was  in  the  lead,  with  McGillan
behind,  so  that  when  I  fell,  as  I  often  did,  up  to  my
waist  in  a  crevasse,  he  could  pull  me  out  again.  We
found  a  better  surface  higher  up,  but  when  we  began
to  descend  we  again  got  into  crevassed  regions.  At
first  the  crevasses  were  ice-covered  gaps,  but  later  we
came  to  huge  open  ones,  whose  yawning  depths  made
46


A   DANGEROUS    SITUATION

us  shudder.  It  was  not  possible  to  cross  them.  We
started  to  ascend  again,  and  soon  came  to  a  bridge  of
ice  across  a  huge  crevasse  about  twenty  feet  wide.  We
lashed  up  tighter,  and  I  went  off  in  the  lead,  straddle-
legged  across  the  narrow  bridge.  We  both  reached
the  other  side  in  safety,  but  one  slip,  or  the  breaking
of  the  bridge,  would  have  precipitated  us  into  those
black  depths  below."

The  two  men  found  their  way  blocked  by  crevasses
in  whichever  direction  they  turned,  and  at  last  reached
a  point  from  which  ascent  was  out  of  the  question,
while  below  lay  a  steep  slope  running  down  for  about
three  thousand  feet.  They  could  not  tell  what  lay  at
the  bottom  of  the  slope,  but  their  case  was  desperate,
and  they  decided  to  glissade  down.  Their  knives,
which  they  attempted  to  use  as  brakes,  were  torn  from
their  grasp,  but  they  managed  to  keep  their  heels  in
the  snow,  and  although  they  passed  crevasses,  none
lay  directly  in  their  path.  They  reached  the  bottom
in  safety  at  4  p.m.  on  the  11th.  They  were  very  hungry
and  had  practically  no  food,  but  they  could  get  forward
now,  and  at  6  p.m.  they  could  see  Cape  Royds  and  were
travelling  over  a  smooth  surface.  They  ate  a  few
biscuit  crumbs  and  half  a  tin  of  condensed  milk,  the
only  other  food  they  had  being  a  little  chocolate.  Soon
snow  commenced  to  fall,  and  the  weather  became  thick,
obscuring  their  view  of  the  Cape.  They  could  not  see
two  yards  ahead,  and  for  two  hours  they  stumbled
along  in  blinding  snow.  They  rested  for  a  few  minutes,
but  their  clothes  were  covered  with  ice,  icicles  hung
from  their  faces,  and  the  temperature  was  very  low.
In  a  temporary  clearing  of  the  blizzard  Mackintosh
thought  that  he  could  make  out  the  Cape  and  they
dashed  off,  but  at  lunch-time  on  the  12th  they  were
stiU  wandering  over  the  rocks  and  snow,  heavy  snow

47


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

cutting  off  all  view  of  the  surrounding  country.  Soon
after  this  the  snow  ceased  to  fall,  though  the  drift-snow,
borne  along  by  the  blizzard  wind,  still  made  the  weather
thick.  Several  times  they  thought  that  they  saw  Cape
Royds,  but  found  that  they  had  been  mistaken.  As
a  matter  of  fact  they  were  quite  close  to  the  winter
quarters  when,  at  about  7  p.m.,  they  were  found  by
Day.  They  were  in  a  state  of  complete  exhaus-
tion, and  were  just  managing  to  stagger  along  because
they  knew  that  to  stop  meant  death.  Within  a  few
minutes  they  were  in  the  hut,  where  warm  food,
dry  clothes  and  a  good  rest  soon  restored  them.  They
had  a  narrow  escape  from  death,  and  would  prob-
ably have  never  reached  the  hut  had  not  Day
happened  to  be  outside  watching  for  the  return  of
the  ship.

Mackintosh  and  McGillan  reached  the  hut  on  Janu-
ary 12,  but  in  the  meantime  the  Nimrod  had  arrived
at  Cape  Royds  and  had  gone  north  again  in  search  of  the
missing  men.  Murray  had  sailed  in  the  Nimrod,  and
as  events  turned  out,  he  was  not  able  to  get  back  to  the
hut  for  about  ten  days.  "  We  were  having  tea  on  the
afternoon  of  January  5,  and  Marston  happening  to  open
the  door,  there  was  the  Nimrod  already  moored  to  the
edge  of  the  fast  ice,  not  more  than  a  mile  away,"  wrote
Murray  in  a  report  on  the  summer  work.  "  W^e  ran
towards  the  ship,  over  the  rotten  sea  ice,  in  boots  or
slippers  as  chanced,  with  the  one  idea  that  is  uppermost
in  these  circumstances — to  get  '  letters  from  home.*
We  were  doomed  to  disappointment.  Before  we  had
finished  greeting  our  old  friends,  the  officers  asked  us,
'  Has  Mackintosh  arrived  ?  '  and  we  learned  to  our
horror  that  he  and  a  companion  had  left  the  ship  two
days  before  and  thirty  miles  north  of  Cape  Royds,  to
try  to  bring  the  letters  sooner  to  us  over  the  sea  ice,
48


NIMROD    IN    THE    ICE

over  the  bay  where  only  a  few  days  ago  we  saw  a  broad
sheet  of  open  water  to  the  horizon,  and  which  was  even
now  only  filled  with  loose  pack  !  So  we  got  no  home
letters,  and  had  good  reason  to  believe  that  our  friends
had  lost  their  lives  in  the  endeavour  to  bring  them.  We
knew  that  they  must  have  embarked  on  a  large  floe,
and  little  expected  to  see  them  again.  On  January  7
the  Nwirod  left  Cape  Royds  to  seek  for  the  lost  men,
on  the  chance  that  they  might  have  got  ashore  near
Cape  Bird.  Within  a  few  hours  she  was  caught  by  the
pack  which  was  drifting  rapidly  southward  along  the
shore  of  Ross  Island.  Driven  almost  on  shore  near
Horseshoe  Bay,  the  ship,  by  dint  of  hard  steaming,
got  a  little  way  off  the  land,  and  was  there  beset  by  the
ice  and  so  remained  from  the  7th  to  the  15th,  with
only  a  few  hours'  ineffectual  steaming  during  the  first
day  or  two.  At  length  she  was  rigidly  jammxcd  and
was  carried  helplessly  by  a  great  eddy  of  the  pack  away
towards  the  western  side  of  the  sound,  and  gradually
northward.

"  On  January  12  she  was  as  tight  as  though  frozen
in  for  the  winter.  In  tiie  afternoon  sudden  pressure
affected  all  the  ice  from  the  Nimrod  as  far  as  we  could
see.  Great  blocks  of  ice,  six  or  eight  feet  in  thickness,
were  tossed  and  piled  on  the  surface  of  the  floes.  These
pressure  heaps  were  formed  on  each  side  of  the  ship's
bow,  but  she  took  no  harm,  and  in  about  an  hour  the
pressure  ceased.  On  the  morning  of  January  15  there
was  not  the  slightest  sign  of  slacking  of  the  pack,  but
in  the  early  afternoon  Harbord,  from  the  crovv^'s-nest,
saw  lanes  of  water  at  no  great  distance  to  the  east.
Steam  was  got  up  and  in  a  few  hours  we  had  left  our
prison  and  got  into  a  broad  lane,  with  only  thin  ice
which  the  ship  could  charge,  and  the  open  water  was
in  sight.  Shortly  after  midnight  we  got  clear  of  the
II  D  49


THE   HEART   OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

ice.  When  released  we  were  not  very  far  from  the
Nordenskjold  Ice-Barrier.

"  The  deceptive  appearance  of  loose  pack  was  im-
pressed upon  us.  For  many  hours  there  was  blue
water  apparently  only  a  mile  or  two  ahead,  but  it  never
appeared  to  get  any  nearer  for  hours,  and  we  could
not  be  sure  it  v/as  really  near  till  we  were  within  a  few
hundred  yards  of  the  edge.  All  this  time  in  the  pack
we  were  in  doubt  as  to  the  fs.te  of  Mackintosh,  or  rather,
We  had  not  much  doubt  about  it,  for  we  had  given  him
up  for  lost,  but  we  were  helpless  to  do  anything.  On
the  afternoon  of  the  16th,  on  which  day  we  cleared  the
ice,  we  had  passed  Beaufort  Island  and  were  approaching
through  very  loose  pack  the  only  piece  of  shore  on
which  there  was  any  chance  of  finding  the  lost  men.
Near  the  end  of  this  stretch  of  beach,  where  it  is  suc-
ceeded by  hopeless  cliffs,  a  small  patch  of  greenish
colour  was  seen,  and  the  telescope  showed  the  details
of  a  deserted  camp,  a  tent  torn  to  ribbons  and  all  the
camp  gear  lying  around.  A  boat  was  sent  ashore  in
charge  of  Davis,  who  found  the  bag  of  letters,  and  a
note  from  Mackintosh  pinned  to  the  tent,  telling  of
his  risky  attempt  to  cross  the  mountains  nearly  a  week
before.  Knowing  the  frightfully  crevassed  character
of  the  valley  between  Mount  Bird  and  Mount  Erebus,
there  seemed  to  us  little  hope  that  they  would  get
through.  The  crevassed  slope  extends  right  to  the  top
of  Mount  Bird,  and  is  very  steep  towards  the  Erebus
Side.  When  Vv^e  reached  Cape  Royds  about  midnight,
only  two  men  came  out  to  meet  the  ship.  One  of  the
men  Vvas  Mackintosh's  comrade  in  all  his  adventures,
and  we  soon  learned  that  all  had  ended  v/eli."

In  the  meantime  the  Bluff  Depot  party  had  started
off  to  place  a  supply  of  provisions  off  Minna  Bluff  in
readiness  for  the  return  of  the  Southern  Party.  The
50


ANXIOUS    DAYS

crew  of  the  Nimrod  proceeded  to  take  on  board  the
geological  and  zoological  specimens  collected  by  the
expedition  and  stored  at  the  hut,  so  that  all  might  be
in  readiness  for  the  final  departure  when  the  parties
had  been  picked  up.  Then  followed  weeks  of  un-
certainty as  to  the  fate  of  the  men  who  were  away.


51


CHAPTER  IV

THE  BLUFF  DEPOT  JOURNEY

I  HAD  left  instructions  at  the  winter  quarters  that
a  party  should  proceed  to  Minna  Bluff  at  the
beginning  of  the  new  year,  and  place  at  a  point
opposite  the  Bluff  a  depot  of  stores  for  the  use  of  the
Southern  Party  on  its  return  journey.  Joyce  was  to
take  charge  of  this  work,  and  it  was  of  very  considerable
importance,  since  we  four  of  the  Southern  Party  would
be  depending  on  the  depot  to  supply  us  with  the  pro-
visions necessary  for  the  last  hundred  miles  or  so  of
the  journey  back  to  the  winter  quarters.  Joyce  was
accompanied  by  Mackintosh,  Day  and  Marston,  and
he  found  that  as  the  snow  surface  was  very  soft  it
would  be  necessary  to  make  two  journeys  to  the  Bluff,
one  with  ordinary  sledging  provisions,  and  the  other
with  special  luxuries  from  the  ship.  The  party  left
the  \7inter  quarters  at  Cape  Royds  on  January  15,  with
one  sledge  and  500  lb.  of  provisions,  drawn  by  eight
dogs.  Early  in  the  afternoon  they  encountered  soft
ice,  sticky  with  salt,  and  the  travelling  became  very
heavy.  They  kept  well  away  from  the  land,  but  Joyce,
Mackintosh  and  Marston  all  fell  through  at  different
times,  the  soft  surface  giving  away  under  them,  and
they  got  wet  up  to  their  waists.  Their  clothing  froze
stiff  at  once.  They  camped  for  the  night  at  Glacier
Tongue,  and  the  next  morning  found  the  weather  so
52


A  Dog  Team  with  Loaded  Sledge  going  South  to  lay  a  Depot  for  the  Return  of  the

Southern  Party


Depot  Party  pitching  a  Tent


To  face  page  52


A    DEPOT    PARTY

bad  that  they  were  unable  to  march.  There  was  a
strong  southerly  wind,  with  drift,  and  this  soon  turned
into  a  howling  blizzard.  A  calm  succeeded  at  mid-
night, and  on  the  morning  of  the  18th  they  got  undei
way  again.  The  dogs  had  been  buried  under  the  drift
by  the  blizzard,  only  their  noses  showing  at  the  surface,
and  it  was  necessary  to  dig  them  out  before  they  could
be  harnessed  up.  A  seven-foot  sledge  was  loaded  with
800  lb.  of  store  from  the  depot  at  the  Tongue,  and  the
four  men  took  on  the  two  sledges,  with  a  total  weight
of  800  lb.  They  had  a  heavy  day's  work,  over
soft  ice  and  snow-drift,  but  reached  the  old  Discovery
winter  quarters  at  Hut  Point  at  midnight.  The  dogs
pulled  very  well,  and  seemed  to  be  enjoying  their
work  after  the  long  spell  of  semi-idleness  at  Cape
Royds.

On  the  morning  of  the  19th  the  party  proceeded
on  to  the  Barrier.  The  surface  was  fairly  good,  and  the
dogs  ran  practically  all  the  time,  Joyce  finding  it  neces-
sary to  put  two  men  on  the  sledge  in  order  to  reduce  the
speed,  for  the  men  would  not  travel  at  the  pace  set  by
the  dogs.  The  weight  per  dog  was  well  over  100  lb.,
though  only  one  sledge  had  been  taken  on  from  Hut
Point.  The  temperature  was  low  during  the  days  that
followed,  and  the  men's  beards  were  constantly  coated
with  ice,  but  their  progress  was  rapid.  On  January  23,
when  they  were  travelling  over  a  deep  snow  surface
covering  sastrugi,  they  sighted  a  depot  about  three
miles  to  the  west  of  their  course.  This  was  the  depot
at  which  some  pony  fodder  had  been  left  in  the  spring.
Soon  after  this  the  party  came  upon  crevasses  running
at  right  angles  to  their  course,  and  the  travelling  became
difficult.  Joyce  had  the  members  of  the  party  roped
together,  as  the  crevasses  were  hidden  by  treacherous
snow  lids  and  were  therefore  dangerous.     The  crevasses


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

became  worse  in  the  following  two  days.  Some  of  the
pressm'e  ridges  were  over  thirty  feet  in  height,  running
in  an  east-south-east  and  west-north-west  direction,
with  enormous  crevasses  between  them,  and  they  all
had  the  experience  of  falling  through,  to  be  hauled  out
again  by  means  of  the  rope,  after  they  had  dropped
to  the  length  of  their  harness  with  a  heavy  jerk.  On
one  occasion  the  four  centre  dogs  fell  through  a  snow-
lid  into  a  crevasse,  and  were  got  out  with  great  difficulty.
Day  and  Joyce,  with  two  leaders,  were  on  one  side  of  the
crevasse,  and  Mackintosh  and  Marston,  with  the  two
rear  dogs,  were  on  the  other  side.  Day  and  Joyce  had
to  unharness  and  ease  the  dogs,  while  the  other  two  men
pulled  them  back  to  the  sledge.  The  dogs  meanwhile
were  hanging  over  the  abyss,  and  evidently  did  not  like
their  position.  Joyce  had  to  keep  altering  his  course
in  order  to  avoid  these  crevasses,  but  after  steering  in
a  south-west  direction  for  about  six  hours  he  reached
a  bett :r  surface.  The  crevasses  were  getting  smaller,
although  the  surface  of  neve  caused  many  falls.  An
attempt  to  steer  south,  straight  for  the  spot  at  which
the  depot  was  to  be  laid,  resulted  in  the  party  getting
into  the  badly  crevassed  area  again,  and  once  more
Joyce  had  to  steer  east-south-east.  Finally  they  got
clear  of  the  crevasses,  and  at  midnight  on  January  25,
reached  the  spot  at  which  it  had  been  decided  to  place
the  depot,  about  fourteen  miles  off  Minna  Bluff.

An  early  start  was  made  on  the  26th,  and  for  seven
hours  the  party  laboured  erecting  a  mound  of  snow
ten  feet  high.  On  top  of  the  mound  they  put  two
eleven-foot  bamboos,  lashed  together  and  carrying
three  black  flags.  The  total  height  of  the  depot  was
twenty-two  feet,  and  it  could  be  seen  at  a  distance  of
eight  miles.  The  bearing  of  this  depot  I  had  arranged
with  Joyce  during  the  spring  depot  journey,  before
54


The  Bldff  Depot


To  face  pctgv  64


A   DISCOVERY    DEPOT

my  departure  for  the  southern  journey.  It  was  on  a
line  drawn  through  a  sharp  peak  on  the  Bluff,  well-
known  to  Joyce,  and  the  top  of  Mount  Discovery,  with
a  cross  bearing  secured  by  getting  the  centre  peak  of
White  Island  in  line  with  a  peak  of  Mount  Erebus.

The  party  started  north  again  on  the  morning  of
the  27th,  a,nd  after  they  had  travelled  a  short  distance
Day  sighted  a  pole  projecting  from  the  snow,  some
distance  to  the  west  of  their  course.  Joyce  was  able
to  identify  this  as  the  depot  laid  out  for  the  Discovery^ s
Southern  Party  in  the  spring  of  1902.  There  was  a
bamboo  pole  about  eight  feet  high  projecting  from  the
snow,  with  a  tattered  flag  attached  to  it,  and  a  food
tin  on  top.  The  guys  to  which  the  pole  was  attached
were  completely  buried  under  the  snow.  The  men
dug  down  for  about  five  feet  with  the  idea  of  ascertain-
ing how  deeply  the  depot  had  been  covered  by  snow,
but  as  the  bottom  had  not  been  reached  and  time  was
limited,  they  put  fresh  flags  on  the  pole  and  proceeded
on  their  way,  intending  to  visit  the  depot  on  the  second
journey.  A  fresh  southerly  wind  was  blowing,  and
rapid  progress  was  made  to  the  north  towards  Cape
Crozier.  A  sail  was  hoisted  on  the  sledge,  and  this
assisted  the  dogs  so  much  that  three  men  were  able
to  sit  on  the  sledge,  while  a  pace  of  about  four  miles
an  hour  was  maintained.  Soon  the  area  of  crevasses,
caused  by  the  impinging  of  the  Barrier  ice  on  the  land
to  the  west,  was  reached  again,  and  for  thirty-seven
miles  the  party  twisted  and  turned  in  making  a  course
past  the  obstacles ;  Joyce  counted  the  crevasses  that
were  passed,  and  he  reported  that  he  had  seen  one
hundr  d  and  twenty-seven,  ranging  from  two  feet  to
thirty  feet  in  width.  The  larger  ones  were  open,  and
therefore  easily  detected,  but  the  smaller  ones  had  the
usual  snow-lids.     On  the  30th  the  men  were  held  up

55


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

by  another  blizzard,  which  completely  buried  the  dogs
and  sledge,  but  they  reached  Hut  Point  at  11  p.m.  on
January  31.

A  second  load  of  stores  was  secured  from  the  depot,
including  some  luxuries,  such  as  apples  and  fresh
mutton,  brought  by  a  party  from  the  ship,  and  on
February  2  the  party  started  south  again.  Joyce
decided  to  take  a  new  course  in  order  to  avoid  the
crevasses.  He  kept  a  course  towards  Cape  Crozier
for  two  days,  and  then  marched  south  on  the  5th  and
reached  the  depot  without  having  seen  any  crevasses
at  all.  I  think  that  the  crevasses  run  right  across  to
Cape  Crozier  from  the  district  around  White  Island,
but  they  are  evidently  more  snow  covered  along  the
outer  course.  When  the  party  was  close  to  the  depot
a  blizzard  came  up  from  the  south,  and  there  was  just
time  to  get  the  tents  up  before  the  drift  became  thick.
The  tents  were  completely  snowed  up  before  the  weather
cleared,  and  the  men  had  some  difficulty  in  getting  out
again.  The  dogs  were  covered,  but  they  seemed  to
be  quite  happy  in  their  "  nests  "  deep  in  the  drift.
When  dogs  and  sledge  had  been  dug  out  the  party  started
again,  and  at  2  a,m.  on  the  8th  they  reached  the  Bluff
depot  for  the  second  time.

"  We  expected  to  find  the  Soulliern  Party  camped
there,  and  to  surprise  them  with  the  luxuries  we  had
brought  out  for  them,"  wrote  Joyce  in  his  report,  "  but
they  were  not  there.  As  our  orders  were  to  return  on
the  10th  if  the  Southern  Party  did  not  turn  up,  we
began  to  feel  rather  uneasy.  It  came  on  to  blow  again
from  the  south,  and  presently  the  wind  turned  into  a
howling  blizzard,  and  did  not  ease  down  until  the  11th.
Durmg  every  lull  we  climbed  the  depot  and  looked
round  the  horizon  with  the  glasses,  expecting  every
minute  to  see  the  Southern  Party  loom  up  out  pf  the
58


Digging  to  ascertain  the  depth  of  snow  covering  a  depot  left  by  the  Discovery  Em'edition

To  face  pagi'  56


SOUTHERN  PARTY  OVERDUE

whiteness,  but  they  did  not  appear.  On  the  11th,
after  a  consultation,  we  decided  to  lay  depot  flags  in
towards  the  Bluff,  so  that  there  would  be  no  chance
of  the  other  party  missing  the  food  depot.  We  knew
that  they  would  be  run  out  of  provisions,  as  they  were
then  eleven  days  overdue,  and  the  position  caused  us
great  anxiety.  After  we  had  laid  the  flags,  three  miles
and  a  half  apart,  with  directions  where  to  find  the
depot,  we  decided  to  march  due  south  to  look  for  the
Southern  Party.  At  every  rest  we  would  get  on  the
sledge  with  the  glasses,  and  look  around,  thinking  that
each  snow  hummock  was  a  man  or  a  tent.  On  the
13th  Day  sighted  some  marks  in  the  snow  that  looked
unusual,  and  on  examination  we  found  them  to  be  the
hoof-prints  of  the  ponies,  evidently  made  on  the  outward
march  of  the  Southern  Party  three  months  before.
The  tracks  of  the  four  sledges  showed  distinctly.  We
followed  these  tracks  for  seven  hours,  and  then  we  lost
them.  We  camped  that  night  at  10  p.m.,  and  early
the  next  morning  proceeded  south  again,  thinking  all
the  time  that  we  would  see  something  appear  out  of
the  loneliness.  It  is  curious  what  things  one  can  see
in  circumstances  like  these,  especially  with  a  bad  light.
We  started  back  to  the  depot  with  all  sorts  of  fears
for  the  Southern  Party."

They  reached  the  depot  again  at  noon  on  the  16th,
and  Joyce  states  that  as  they  approached  the  mound
they  were  all  sure  that  they  could  see  a  tent  up  and
men  walking  about.  When  they  got  close,  however,
they  found  that  everything  was  just  as  they  had  left
it.  They  put  all  the  provisions  on  top  of  the  mound,
lashed  everything  securely,  and  examined  the  flags
to  the  eastward,  and  started  on  the  march  back  to  the
coast,  full  of  gloomy  thoughts  as  to  the  fate  of  the
Southern  Party,  which  was  now  eighteen  days  overdue.

57


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

They  proceeded  first  to  the  old  Discovery  depot
found  on  the  first  journey,  Joyce  wishing  to  take  some
measurements  in  order  to  ascertain  the  movement  of
the  Barrier  ice,  and  the  amount  of  the  snowfall.  The
depot  had  been  laid  six  years  previously  on  bearings
off  the  Bluff,  and  after  its  original  position  had  been
ascertained  as  exactly  as  possible,  the  distance  to  the
bamboo  pole  was  measured  off  by  Day  and  Marston
with  a  forty-foot  length  of  rope,  which  had  been
measured  off  with  a  tape-measure.  The  distance  was
found  to  be  9600  ft.,  and  the  direction  of  the  movement
was  about  east-north-east.  The  Barrier  ice  at  this
point  must  therefore  be  moving  forward  at  the  rate  of
about  1500  ft.  a  year.  The  party  then  worked  till
1  A.M.  digging  down  in  order  to  find  what  depth  of
snow  had  been  deposited  on  top  of  the  depot  during
the  six  years.  It  was  found  that  the  level  at  which
the  stays  of  the  depot  pole  had  been  made  fast  was
eight  feet  three  inches  down  in  hard  compressed  snow.
A  measured  quantity  of  this  snow  was  melted  in  order
to  ascertain  the  actual  amount  of  the  snowfall.  The
interesting  points  involved  in  these  investigations  will
be  dealt  with  in  the  reports  on  the  scientific  work  of
the  expedition.

The  party  started  north  again  on  the  following  day,
and  covered  a  distance  of  thirty- three  miles.  The  dogs
pulled  splendidly,  and  three  men  were  able  to  ride  on
the  sledge.  On  the  second  day  crevasses  were  en-
countered again,  and  several  times  men  fell  through
to  the  length  of  their  harness.  The  general  direction
of  the  crevasses  was  east-south-east  and  west-south-
west. The  party  had  a  narrow  escape  from  complete
disaster  at  this  stage.  "  We  were  going  at  a  good  trot
over  a  very  hard  surface,"  wrote  Joyce,  "  when  I  felt
my  foot  go  through.  I  called  out  *  Crack  ! '  and  rushed
58


THE  DEPOT  PARTY  AMONGST  CREVASSES


GOOD    WORK    BY    DOGS

the  dogs  over,  and  as  the  sledge  touched  the  other
side  of  the  hard  ridge,  the  whole  snow-bridge  over
which  we  had  passed  fell  in.  Marston,  who  was  running
astern  of  the  sledge,  felt  himself  falling  through  space,
but  the  pace  of  the  dogs  brought  him  over  the  crevasse,
at  the  length  of  his  harness.  We  found  ourselves  stand-
ing on  the  edge  of  a  yawning  gap  that  would  easily
have  swallowed  up  sledge,  dogs,  and  the  whole  party,
and  on  the  far  side  we  could  see  our  sledge  tracks  leading
right  up  to  the  edge.  It  seemed  almost  a  miracle  how
we  had  managed  to  escape.  Day  took  a  photograph,
and  we  altered  the  course  for  Cape  Crozier,  getting  out
of  the  crevasses  about  5  p.m.  Then  we  camped  for  the
night,  having  all  had  a  good  shaking  up."

A  long  march  the  next  day  over  a  good  surface
brought  the  party  to  Cape  Armitage  at  midnight.
Joyce  found  that  the  ice  in  the  sound  had  gone  out,
and  it  was  therefore  necessary  to  climb  through  the
gap  at  Observation  Hill.  A  blizzard  came  up,  and
with  great  difficulty  the  party  reached  the  old  Discovery
hut  at  Hut  Point  at  2  a.m.  The  distance  covered  during
the  day  had  been  forty-five  miles,  an  unusually  good
performance.  The  surface  had  been  good,  and  the
wind  favourable,  and  the  dogs  had  pulled  splendidly.
Joyce  speaks  very  highly  of  the  work  of  the  dogs  on
this  journey.  They  were  pulling  over  100  lb.  per  dog,
and  yet  ran  most  of  the  time.  They  suffered  a  good
deal  from  snow-blindness,  and  then  they  used  to  dig
a  hole  in  the  snow  and  bury  their  faces  right  in ;  this
method  of  treatment  seemed  to  ease  their  eyes  and
they  recovered  from  the  attacks  very  quickly.  "  One
day  I  released  Tripp,  because  he  had  a  chafed  leg,"
wrote  Joyce,  "  and  for  the  whole  day  he  ran  in  his  place
in  the  team,  as  if  he  had  been  harnessed  up.  He  slept
about  half  a  mile  from  camp  that  night,  and  when  I


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

tried  to  coax  him  over  in  the  morning  he  would  not
come,  but  as  soon  as  we  got  under  way  he  came  running
up  to  his  old  place.  I  fed  the  dogs  on  one  pound  of
biscuit  a  day  each,  and  this  seemed  to  satisfy  them ;
as  they  went  on  their  condition  improved.  The  dog
harness  was  generally  satisfactory,  but  could  have
been  improved  with  a  few  more  swivels,  in  order  to
avoid  tangling  when  the  dogs  jumped  over  their  traces.
I  think  that  all  dog  teams  should  be  taught  to  be  driven,
as  a  man  C9.nnot  keep  pace  with  dogs,  and  holding  them
back  in  order  that  a  man  may  go  ahead  causes  them
to  get  fagged  out.  If  they  were  let  go  at  their  best
pace,  one  could,  with  a  light  load,  say  80  lb.  per  dog,
get  forty  miles  a  day  out  of  them  over  a  good  surface."


60


CHAPTER  V

THE  WESTERN  JOURNEY

MEAN\^^HILE  the  Western  Party,  which  had  left
the  winter  quarters  for  the  second  time  on
December  9,  had  been  working  in  the  western  moun-
tains. The  three  men  (Armytage,  Priestley  and  Brockle-
hurst)  reached  the  stranded  moraines  on  December  13,
and  on  this  occasion  succeeded  in  securing  a  large
supply  of  skuas'  eggs.  The  anticipated  feast  was  not
enjoyed,  however,  for  only  about  a  dozen  of  the  eggs
were  "  good  enough  for  eating,"  to  quote  the  words  of
a  member  of  the  party.  The  other  eggs  were  throv/n
on  to  the  snow  near  the  tent,  and  the  result  was  an
invasion  of  skuas,  which  not  only  ate  the  eggs,  but  also
made  themselves  a  general  nuisance  by  pulling  about
the  sledge  harness  and  stores.  At  this  time  the  men
were  troubled  by  patches  of  thin  ice,  about  an  eighth
to  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  forming  a  lenticle,  the
top  of  the  middle  being  sometimes  as  much  as  five  or
six  inches  from  the  actual  surface.  When  these  patches
of  ice  were  trodden  on  they  broke  down,  and  not  in-
frequently disclosed  a  puddle  of  salt  water  an  inch  or
two  deep.  Priestley  thought  that  they  were  the  final
product  of  the  thawing  of  snowdrifts,  and  owed  their
character  to  the  fact  that  the  salt  water  worked  faster
from  below  than  did  the  sun  from  above.

On  December  15  the  party  started  to  ascend  the  Ferrar

61


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

Glacier,  Priestley  examining  the  rocks  carefully  on  the
way  with  a  view  to  securing  fossils  if  any  were  to  be
found.  The  surface  was  bad  for  the  most  part,  soft
snow  being  encountered  where  ice  had  been  expected.
On  December  19  they  were  held  up  by  a  blizzard,  and
then  they  got  on  to  very  slippery  crevassed  ice.  On
December  20  they  camped  near  the  Solitary  Rocks,
at  the  spot  at  which  Captain  Scott  had  camped  aftei
leaving  Dry  Valley.  The  idea  of  getting  to  Depot
Nunatak  had  to  be  abandoned,  for  a  heavy  snowfall
made  the  travelling  difficult,  and  the  time  at  the  dis-
posal of  the  expedition  was  short.  Priestley  worked
under  the  Bluff  between  Dry  Valley  and  the  east  fork
of  the  glacier  without  success,  and  then  they  moved
over  to  Obelisk  Mount.  "  I  have  examined  block  after
block  of  unfossiliferous-looking  sandstone  without  any
success,"  wrote  Priestley  in  his  diary  on  the  evening  of
the  21st.  "  The  only  thing  I  can  find  different  from
the  ordinary  quartz  grains  are  a  few  seams  of  conglo-
merate with  quartz  pebbles,  and  a  few  lenticles  of  a
soft  clayey  substance.  The  other  rock  I  have  collected
here  is  a  junction  between  granite  and  porphyry,  which
is  common.  The  sandstone  is  very  weathered,  dropping
to  pieces  in  many  cases  at  a  single  blow.  I  am  faced
with  the  necessity  of  examining  for  fossils  rocks  which
I  should  carefully  avoid  if  I  were  at  home  or  anywhere
else.  I  have  never  seen  a  sedimentary  rock  that  looked
more  unfossiliferous.  Many  of  the  boulders  are  coated
with  a  hard  crust  of  white,  opaque  salt  (probably  calcium
carbonate),  and  if  there  was  ever  any  lime  in  the  sand-
stone it  has  probably  been  dissolved  out  long  ago.
There  are  numerous  interesting  rocks  about  here,  but
I  am  debarred  from  collecting  much  by  the  difficulty
of  transport.  .  .  .  There  are  evidently  serious  defects
in  the  map  near  this  point.  The  whole  of  the  bluff
62


Camp  on  December  17  on  the  Feruar  Glacier  below  Sentinel  Rock

To  facv  page  62


IN   SEARCH    OF   FOSSILS

opposite  is  marked  as  Beacon  sandstone,  and  from  the
face  of  the  cliff  here  it  is  easily  seen,  for  at  least  SOOO
feet,  to  be  granite ;  the  very  grain  in  the  stones  can
be  seen.  This  granite  is  capped  by  the  beacon  sand-
stone on  the  tops  of  the  hills,  but  the  dolerite  seems
to  have  died  out,  with  the  exception  of  the  upper  flow.
This  formation  is  as  it  should  be,  taking  into  considera-
tion the  horizontal  structure  of  the  rocks,  and  it  was
the  fact  that  I  doubted  the  existence  of  Beacon  sand-
stone so  low  down  the  series  that  brought  me  here,  as
much  as  the  expectation  of  finding  fossils  if  the  mapping
should  be  correct."

At  this  time  thawing  was  proceeding  rapidly  on
the  glacier.  The  party  made  for  the  north  wail  of  the
glacier,  but  was  stopped  by  a  precipice  of  ice,  200  to
800  ft.  in  height,  with  a  stream  of  water  flowing  at
its  foot.  The  deeper  ripple-cracks  and  potholes  were
filled  with  water,  and  water  was  streaming  dov/n  the
convex  face  of  the  glacier  to  the  stream  which  was
roaring  beneath  the  ice-face.  The  scene  was  a  magni-
ficent one,  but  the  conditions  were  unpleasant  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  party.  The  ice  was  separated
from  the  rock  at  the  sides  of  the  glacier  by  a  thaw-
gully  about  fifty  feet  deep,  with  a  stream  of  water
fioYr'ing  at  the  bottom.  Then  came  the  lateral  moraine,
which  was  still  within  the  region  in  which  the  rock-heat
was  felt,  and  formed  a  depression  some  three  to  six  feet
below  the  main  surface  of  the  glacier,  commencing  as
an  abrupt  rise,  almost  perpendicular,  but  somewhat  con-
vex. After  this  came  the  ordinary  billowy  surface,  and
the  next  stones  met  with  formed  a  sub-medial  moraine
not  sufficiently  thick  to  effect  any  lowering  in  the  general
level  of  the  surface,  although  each  stone  was  surrounded
by  its  own  hollow,  filled  with  thaw  water.  Along  the
middle  meandered  a  small  stream,  a  few  feet  wide,  with

63


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

the  bottom  of  its  channel  filled  with  morainic  gravel
matter.  In  the  evening  freezing  commenced  in  the
potholes  that  were  sheltered  from  the  rays  of  the  sun.
Long  needles  of  ice  formed  from  the  small  grains  of
gravel,  and  crossed  and  recrossed  in  the  most  beautiful
pattern.  In  some  holes  hexagonal  plates  of  ice  were
being  formed  on  the  surface.

An  examination  of  the  Solitary  Rocks  proved  that
the  map  was  incorrect  at  this  point.  The  previous
expedition  had  thought  that  the  rocks  formed  an  island,
with  the  glacier  flowing  down  on  either  side,  but  a  close
examination  showed  that  the  rocks  were  in  reality  a
peninsula,  joined  to  the  main  north  wall  by  an  isthmus
of  granite  at  least  one  thousand  feet  high.  The  glacier
surged  round  the  peninsula  on  its  way  down  Dry  Valley,
and  just  below  the  isthmus  was  a  lake  of  some  size,  fed
by  streams  from  a  glacier  opposite.  These  streams
were  yellow  with  silt,  and  another  stream,  also  much
discoloured,  was  running  from  the  lake  down  to  Dry
Valley.  The  Solitary  Rocks  are  at  an  altitude  of
about  two  thousand  feet  above  sea-level.  Priestley
proceeded  with  geological  and  survey  work  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  east  fork,  and  made  an  extensive
examination  of  the  spots  known  as  Kurki  Kills,  Knob
Head  Mount  and  Windy  Gully.  On  December  24,
close  to  the  camp,  they  found  the  bleached  skeleton  of
a  crabeater  seal.  It  is  rather  curious  that  one  of  these
animals  should  proceed  so  far  up  the  glacier.  A  new
camp  was  pitched  at  the  foot  of  Knob  Head  Mountain,
just  below  the  second  gully  east  of  Windy  Gully,  and
here  Armytage  and  Priestley  climbed  up  the  slope
behind  to  an  altitude  of  4200  ft.,  finding  a  yellow  lichen
at  3100  ft.,  a  black  lichen  at  3800  ft.  and  a  green  lichen
or  moss  at  4200  ft.  The  altitude  of  the  camp  was
2470  ft.
64


KoutiH  Ice  Surface  near  Windy  Gully


The  Western  Party  Camped  on  the  Ferrar  Glacier  on  December  18.     Heavy

HANGING  Glaciers  on  the  Hills  ^- To  face  page  Gi.


CHRISTMAS    ON    A    GLACIER

Christmas  Day  was  spent  at  this  camp,  and,  as  was
the  case  with  the  other  sledging  expeditions  that  were
out  at  the  time,  a  special  feast  was  provided.  For
breakfast  they  had  hoosh,  sardines  in  tomato  sauce  and
raisins  ;  for  lunch  Garibaldi  biscuits  and  jelly  ;  and  for
dinner  potted  boneless  chicken  and  a  small  plum
pudding.  Armytage  picked  up  a  piece  of  sandstone
with  fernlike  markings,  but  Priestley  was  not  hopeful
of  finding  fossils  in  the  greatly  altered  sandstone.  The
day  was  spent  in  geological  work.  "  We  lose  the  sun
here  about  9.30  p.m.,"  noted  Priestley  in  his  diary,  "  and
it  is  curious  to  observe  the  sudden  change  from  bright
light  to  darkness  in  the  tent,  while  outside  the  thin
surface  of  ice  covering  the  thaw-water  round  the  rocks
immediately  contracts  with  reports  like  a  succession  of
pistol-shots,  and  sometimes  breaks  up  and  flies  about
in  all  directions,  making  a  noise  like  broken  glass.
This  is  the  effect  of  the  quick  cooling  of  the  ice  by  the
cold  plateau  wind  immediately  the  sun's  influence  is
withdrawn.  The  plum  pudding  was  '  top  hole.'  Must
remember  to  give  one  of  the  pot-holed  sandstones  to
Wild  for  the  New  Zealand  girl  who  gave  him  the  plum
pudding.'*

On  December  27  the  m.en  proceeded  down  the  glacier
again  in  order  to  see  v>^hether  the  Northern  Party  had
arrived  at  Butter  Point.  Priestley  studied  the  moraines
on  the  way  down,  and  made  an  extensive  collection  of
specimens,  and  on  January  1  they  arrived  at  the  depot.
They  had  constant  trouble  with  crevasses  and  '*  pot-
holes "  on  the  way  down  the  glacier,  but  met  with  no
serious  accident.  The  snow-bridges  many  times  let
them  through  up  to  their  knees  or  waists,  but  never
broke  away  entirely.  The  weather  vv^as  unpleasantly
warm  for  the  sort  of  work  they  were  undertaking,  since
the  snow  was  thawing,  and  they  were  constantly  vret.
II  E  65


THE   HEART   OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

They  found  no  sign  of  the  Northern  Party  at  Butter
Point,  and  after  waiting  there  until  the  6th  they  pro-
ceeded to  the  "  stranded  moraines,"  a  day's  trek  to  the
south,  in  order  that  geological  specimens  might  be
secured.  The  moraines,  which  were  found  by  the
Discovery  expedition,  and  are  relics  of  the  days  of  more
extensive  glaciation,  present  a  most  varied  collection
of  rocks,  representative  of  the  geological  conditions  to
be  found  in  the  mountains  to  the  west,  and  are  of  very
great  interest  on  that  account.  After  spending  two
days  at  this  spot,  the  party  went  back  to  Butter  Point
with  about  250  lb.  of  specimens,  and  camped  again  till
the  11th.  Still  there  was  no  sign  of  the  Northern  Party,
and  on  the  12th  they  went  north  to  Dry  Valley.  There
Priestley  found  a  raised  beach,  about  sixty  feet  abovd
sea-level,  and  Brocklehurst  climbed  the  mountain  known
as  the  Harbour  Heights.

Numerous  fragments  of  Pecten  Colbecki,  the  shell
at  present  common  at  Cape  Royds,  were  found  imbedded
in  the  sand  as  far  up  as  sixty  feet,  and  Priestley  thought
that  they  would  probably  be  found  higher  still.
¥/riting  of  the  moraines  at  this  point,  he  said  :  "  In
their  chief  characteristics  they  are  very  similar  to  the
stranded  moraines.  Large  patches  of  gravel  are  mixed
with  boulders  of  every  description  and  size,  a  chaos  of
sedimentary,  volcanic,  plutonic,  hypabyssal  and  meta-
morphic  rocks,  segmented  by  watercourses,  which  are
bordered  by  flats  of  gravel  and  spread  out  before  reach-
ing the  sea  over  large,  alluvial,  fan-shaped  mudflats.
They  differ  from  the  stranded  moraines  in  the  presence
of  numerous  specimens  of  now  existing  shells,  imbedded
in  the  gravel  and  sand  of  the  moraines,  but  found  in
most  cases  under  any  steep  declivity  in  a  stream's  bed
where  it  has  cut  back  through  a  gravel  terrace.  The
remarkable  part  of  the  preservation  of  these  shells  is
66


Western  Party  in  Camp  on  December  20


To  face  page  66


ADRIFT    ON    A    FLOE

their  extreme  fragility.  Of  Pecten  Colbecki  I  have
seen  thousands  of  specimens,  and  have  secured  many-
whole  single  valves.  Of  the  Anataena  so  common  at
Cape  Royds  I  came  across  several  patches.  At  the
head  of  one  of  the  alluvial  mudflats,  about  two  feet
above  the  present  level  of  the  sea- water,  I  secured  many
dried  bodies  of  a  small  amphipod  and  a  dried  fish  an
inch  long.  The  whole  of  the  moraines  so  far  as  I  have
been  are  covered  with  seal  bones,  and  I  have  seen  two
whole  dried  bodies,  with  the  skin  still  on.  One  was  a
crabeater.  Among  several  rock  specimens  secured
was  one  of  Beacon  sandstone  with  the  same  curious
markings  as  were  found  on  two  specimens  secured  by
Armytage  at  Knob  Head.  The  impression  in  the
original  stone  was  exactly  as  if  the  body  of  a  wasp-Uke
wingless  insect  several  inches  long  had  been  pressed
into  clay."

They  went  back  to  the  depot  on  the  14th,  and  in
accordance  with  the  orders  I  had  left,  pitched  camp  in
order  to  wait  for  the  Northern  Party  until  the  25th,
when  they  were  to  make  their  way  back  to  ^vinter
quarters,  or  signal  for  the  ship  by  means  of  the  helio-
graph. On  January  24-25  this  party  had  a  very
narrow  escape  from  disaster.  They  were  camped  on
the  sea-ice  at  the  foot  of  Butter  Point,  intending  to
move  off  on  the  return  journey  early  on  the  morning  of
the  25th.  Their  position  was  apparently  one  of  safety.
Armytage  had  examined  the  tide- crack  along  the  shore,
and  had  found  no  sign  of  more  than  ordinary  movement,
and  the  ice  in  the  neighbourhood  seemed  to  be  quite
fast.  At  7  A.M.  on  the  24th  Priestley  was  first  out  of
the  tent,  and  a  few  minutes  later  he  came  running  back
to  his  companions  to  tell  them  that  the  ice  they  were  on
had  broken  away  and  was  drifting  away  north  to  the
open  sea.     The  other  two  men  turned  out  promptly,


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

and  found  that  his  statement  was  only  too  true.  There
were  two  miles  of  open  water  between  the  floe  and  the
shore,  and  they  were  apparently  moving  steadily  out
to  sea.  "  When  we  found  that  the  ice  had  gone  out,"
wrote  Armytage  in  his  report  to  me,  "  we  struck  camp,
loaded  up  the  sledge,  and  started  away  with  the  object
of  seeing  whether  we  could  get  off  the  floe  to  the  north.
The  position  seemed  to  be  rather  serious,  for  we  could
not  hope  to  cross  any  stretch  of  open  water,  there  was
no  reasonable  expectation  of  assistance  from  the  ship,
and  most  of  our  food  was  at  Butter  Point.  We  had  not
gone  very  far  to  the  north  before  we  came  to  an  impas-
sible lane  of  open  water,  and  we  decided  to  return  to
our  original  position.  We  went  into  camp  and  had
breakfast  at  11  a.m.  Then  we  held  a  consultation  and
agreed  that  it  would  be  best  to  stop  where  we  then  were
for  a  time,  at  any  rate,  on  the  off-chance  of  the  ship
coming  along  one  of  the  lanes  to  pick  us  up  on  the
following  day,  or  of  the  current  changing  and  the  ice
once  more  touching  the  shore.  We  waited  till  three
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  but  there  did  not  seem  to  be
any  improvement  in  the  position.  The  killer-whales
were  spouting  in  the  channels,  and  occasionally  bumping
the  ice  under  us.  Then  we  marched  north  again,  but
met  with  open  water  in  every  direction,  and  after  we
had  marched  right  round  the  floe  we  got  into  camp  at
the  old  position  at  10  p.m.  We  had  a  small  meal  of
hoosh  and  biscuit.  We  had  only  four  days'  provisions
on  the  floe  with  us,  and  I  decided  that  we  would  have
to  go  on  short  rations.  We  were  encouraged  by  the
fact  that  we  had  apparently  ceased  to  move  north,  and
were  perhaps  getting  nearer  the  fast  ice  again.  We
got  into  our  sleeping-bags  in  order  to  keep  warm.  At
11.30  P.M.  Brocklehurst  turned  out  to  see  whether  the
position  had  changed,  and  reported  that  we  seemed  to
68


'^


WESTERN    PARTY    PICKED    UP

be  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  the  fast  ice,  and  still
moving  towards  the  land.  I  got  out  of  my  bag  and
put  on  my  finnesko,  and  at  midnight  saw  that  we  were
very  close  to  the  fast  ice,  probably  not  more  than  two
hundred  yards  away.  I  ran  back  as  fast  as  I  could,
deciding  that  there  was  a  prospect  of  an  attempt  to
get  ashore  proving  successful,  and  gave  the  other  two
men  a  shout.  They  struck  the  camp  and  loaded  up
within  a  very  few  minutes,  while  I  v/ent  back  to  the
edge  of  the  floe  at  the  spot  towards  which  chance  had
first  directed  my  steps.  Just  as  the  sledge  got  up  to
me,  I  felt  the  floe  bump  the  fast  ice.  Not  more  than
six  feet  of  the  edge  touched,  but  we  were  just  at  that
spot,  and  we  rushed  over  the  bridge  thus  formed.  We
had  only  just  got  over  when  the  floe  moved  away  again,
and  this  time  it  went  north  to  the  open  sea.  The  only
place  at  which  it  touched  the  fast  ice  was  that  to  which
I  had  gone  when  I  left  the  tent,  and  had  I  happened  to
go  to  any  other  spot  we  would  not  have  escaped.  We
made  our  way  to  Butter  Point,  and  at  about  three
o'clock  in  the  morning  camped  and  had  a  good  meal.
Then  we  turned  in  and  slept.  When  we  got  up  for
breakfast,  there  was  open  water  where  we  had  been
drifting  on  the  floe,  and  I  sighted  the  Nimrod  under
sail,  ten  or  twelve  miles  out.  We  laid  the  heliograph
on  to  the  vessel,  and  after  flashing  for  about  an  hour
got  a  reply.  The  Nimrod  came  alongside  the  fast  ice
at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  January  26,  and  we
went  on  board  with  our  equipment  and  specimens.  We
left  a  depot  of  provisions  and  oil  at  Butter  Point  in  case
the  Northern  Party  should  reach  that  point  after  our
departure."

On  January  22  and  23  a  fresh  wind  blew  from  the
south  and  commenced  to  break  up  the  ice-sheet  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Cape  Royds,  compelling  the  ship  to

09


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

refasten  further  to  the  southward.  From  this  point
Davis  took  a  sledge-party  to  Hut  Point  with  despatches
that  the  supporting-party  was  to  convey  to  me  at  the
Bluff  Depot.  On  the  25th  the  ice  had  broken  up  to
such  an  extent  that  Captain  Evans  thought  there  would
be  a  chance  of  getting  far  enough  across  McMurdo
Sound  to  search  the  western  coast-line  for  the  party
that  had  been  exploring  the  western  mountains,  and
also  for  the  Northern  Party,  which  might  by  that  time
have  returned  from  the  journey  to  the  Magnetic  Pole
and  reached  Butter  Point.  The  Nimrod  stood  out
into  the  sound,  and  from  a  distance  of  ten  or  twelve
miles  a  heliograph  was  seen  twinkling  near  Butter  Point,
The  ship  was  able  to  get  right  alongside  the  fast  ice,
and  picked  up  Armytage,  Priestley  and  Brocklehurst.

After  this  date  fine  weather  was  experienced  only  at
short  intervals,  the  season  being  advanced,  and  as  a
consequence  the  fast  ice  that  remained  in  the  sound
commenced  to  break  up  rapidly,  and  took  the  form  of
pack  trending  northwards.  When  blizzards  blew,  as
they  did  frequently,  the  Nimrod  moored  on  the  lee-side
of  a  stranded  iceberg  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cape
Barne,  with  the  object  of  preserving  her  position  without
the  consumption  of  more  coal  than  was  absolutely
necessary.  After  the  ice  had  broken  up  sufficiently,
shelter  was  found  under  Glacier  Tongue.

The  waiting  was  rather  unpleasant  for  the  remaining
members  of  the  shore-party  and  for  those  on  board  the
ship,  foj  the  time  was  approaching  when  it  wduld  be
necessary  to  leave  for  the  north  unless  the  Nimrod  was
to  be  frozen  in  for  the  winter,  and  two  of  the  parties
were  still  out.  I  had  left  instructions  that  if  the
Northern  Party  had  not  returned  by  February  1  a  search
was  to  be  made  along  the  western  coast  in  a  northerly
direction.  The  party  was  three  weeks  overdue,  and
70


Looking  down  the  Eastkkn  Akm  of  the  rERRAit  (;lai  ikk  iomahds  L)r\   \'alley  from

Solitary  Kocks


'  '4:e


I)i,"i    \  Ai,[,i;v


lb  face  2}('f/('  70


SEARCH  FOR  NORTHERN  PARTY

on  February  1,  therefore,  the  Nimrod  went  north,  and
Captain  Evans  proceeded  to  make  a  close  examination
of  the  coast.  The  ship  did  not  get  back  to  the  hut  until
February  11.  During  this  time  Murray  and  Priestley
found  work  of  scientific  interest.  Priestley  tramped
the  country,  and  now  that  the  snow  had  in  great  measure
disappeared,  was  enabled  to  see  various  interesting
geological  deposits  previously  covered  up.  Beds  of
sponge  spicules,  enclosing  various  other  fossils,  were
evidence  of  recent  elevation  of  the  sea  bottom.  A  thick
deposit  of  salts  was  found  on  a  mound  between  two
lakes,  and  some  curious  volcanic  formations  were  dis-
covered. The  smaller  ponds  were  entirely  melted,  and
gave  a  chance  to  find  some  forms  of  life  not  evident  in
winter.  The  penguins  continued  to  afford  Murray
material  for  study.

The  Ninirod's  search  for  the  Northern  Party  was
both  difficult  and  dangerous.  Captain  Evans  had  to
keep  close  to  the  coast,  in  order  to  guard  against  the
possibility  of  overlooking  a  signal,  which  might  consist
only  of  a  small  flag,  and  the  sea  was  obstructed  by
pack-ice.  He  was  to  go  north  as  far  as  a  sandy  beach
on  the  northern  side  of  the  Drygalski  Barrier,  and  he
performed  his  duty  most  thoroughly  in  the  face  of
what  he  afterwards  modestly  described  as  "  small  navi-
gational difficulties."  The  beach,  which  had  been
marked  on  the  chart,  was  found  to  have  no  existence  in
fact,  but  the  Nimrod  reached  the  neighbourhood  indi-
cated, and  then  proceeded  south  again,  still  searching
every  yard  of  the  coast.  On  the  4th  a  tent  was  sighted
on  the  edge  of  the  Barrier,  and  when  a  double  detonator
was  fired  the  three  men  who  had  been  to  the  Magnetic
Pole  came  tumbling  out  and  ran  down  towards  the
edge  of  the  ice.  Mawson  was  in  such  a  hurry  that  he
fall  down  a  crevasse,  and  did  not  get  out  again  until  a

71


THE    HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

party  from  the  ship  went  to  his  assistance.  "  They
were  the  happiest  men  I  have  ever  seen,"  said  Davis
in  describing  the  finding  of  the  party.  Their  sledge,
equipment  and  specimens  were  taken  on  the  Nimrod,
which  was  able  to  moor  right  alongside  the  fast  ice,
and  then  Captain  Evans  proceeded  back  to  the  winter
quarters.  In  the  chapters  that  follow  Professor  David
tells  the  story  of  the  Northern  Party's  journey.


72


CHAPTER  VI

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE

ON  September  19,  1908,  Lieutenant  Shackleton  gave
me  his  final  instructions  for  the  journey  of  the
Northern  Party  to  the  Magnetic  Pole.  These  he  read
over  to  me  in  the  presence  of  Mawson  and  Dr.  Mackay.
The  instructions  were  as  follows  :

"  British  Antarctic  Expedition,  1S07.

"  Cape  Royds,  September  19,  1008.

Instructions  for  Northern  Sledge-party  under
Command  of  Professor  E.  David.

"  Dear  Sir, — The  sledge-party  which  you  have  charge
of  consists  of  yourself,  Douglas  Mawson  and  Alistair
Mackay.

"  You  will  leave  winter  quarters  on  or  about  October  1,
1908.  The  main  objects  of  your  journey  are  to  be  as
follows  :

"  (1)  To  take  magnetic  observations  at  every  suitable
point  with  a  view  of  determining  the  dip  and  the  position
of  the  Magnetic  Pole.  If  time  permits,  and  your  equip-
ment and  supplies  are  sufficient,  you  will  try  and  reach
the  Magnetic  Pole.

"  (2)  To  make  a  general  geological  survey  of  the
coast  of  Victoria  Land.  In  connection  with  this  work
you  will  not  sacrifice  the  time  that  might  be  used  to

73


THE    HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

carry  out  the  work  noted  in  paragraph  (1).  It  is  un-
necessary for  me  to  describe  or  instruct  you  as  to  details
re  this  work,  as  you  know  so  much  better  than  I  do  what
is  requisite.

"  (3)  I  particularly  wish  you  to  be  able  to  work  at
the  geology  of  the  western  mountains,  and  for  Mawson
to  spend  at  least  one  fortnight  at  Dry  Valley  to  prospect
for  minerals  of  economic  value  on  your  return  from  the
north,  and  for  this  work  to  be  carried  out  satisfactorily
you  should  return  to  Dry  Valley  not  later  than  the
first  week  of  January.  I  do  not  wish  to  limit  you  to  an
exact  date  for  return  to  Dry  Valley  if  you  think  that
by  lengthening  your  stay  up  north  you  can  reach  the
Magnetic  Pole,  but  you  must  not  delay,  if  time  is  short,
on  your  way  south  again  to  do  geological  work.  I
consider  that  the  thorough  investigation  of  Dry  Valley
is  of  supreme  importance.

"  (4)  The  Nimrod  is  expected  in  the  Sound  about
January  15,  1909.  It  is  quite  possible  you  may  see  her
from  the  west.  If  so,  you  should  try  to  attract  at-
tention by  heliograph  to  winter  quarters.  You  should
choose  the  hours  noon  to  1  p.m.  to  flash  your  signal,  and
if  seen  at  winter  quarters  the  return  signal  will  be
flashed  to  you,  and  the  Nimrod  will  steam  across  as  far
as  possible  to  meet  you  and  wait  at  the  ice-edge.  If
the  ship  is  not  in,  and  if  she  is  and  your  signals  are  not
seen,  you  will  take  into  account  your  supply  of  pro-
visions and  proceed  either  to  Glacier  Tongue  or  Hut
Point  to  replenish  if  there  is  not  a  sufficient  amount  of
provision  at  Butter  Point  for  you.

"  (5)  Re  Butter  Point.  I  will  have  a  depot  of  at
least  fourteen  days'  food  and  oil  cached  there  for  you.
If  there  is  not  enough  in  that  supply  you  ought  to
return  as  mentioned  in  paragraph  (4).

"  (6)  I  shall  leave  instructions  for  the  master  of  the
74


0  '-^ ja^


PLAN    OF    JOURNEY

Nimrod  to  proceed  to  the  most  accessible  point  at  the
west  coast  and  there  ship  all  your  specimens.  But
before  doing  this,  he  must  ship  all  the  stores  that  are
lying  at  winter  quarters,  and  also  keep  in  touch  with  the
fast  ice  to  the  south  on  the  look-out  for  the  southern
sledge-party.  The  Southern  Party  will  not  be  expected
before  February  1,  so  if  the  ship  arrives  in  good  time
you  may  have  all  your  work  done  before  our  arrival
from  the  south.

"  (7)  If  by  February  1  after  the  arrival  of  the  Nimrod,
there  is  no  evidence  that  your  party  has  returned,  the
Nimrod  will  proceed  north  along  the  coast,  keeping  as
close  to  the  land  as  possible,  on  the  look-out  for  a  signal
from  you  flashed  by  heliograph.  The  vessel  will  proceed
very  slowly.  The  ship  will  not  go  north  of  Cape  Wash-
ington. This  is  a  safeguard  in  event  of  any  accident
occurring  to  your  party.

"  (8)  I  have  acquainted  both  Mawson  and  Mackay
with  the  main  facts  of  the  proposed  journey.  In  the
event  of  any  accident  happening  to  you,  Mawson  is  to
be  in  charge  of  the  party.

"  (9)  Trusting  that  you  will  have  a  successful  journey
and  a  safe  return.

"  I  am.,  yours  faithfully,

"  (Sgd.)  Ernest  H.  Shackleton,

V  Commander.
"  Professor  David,
"  Cape  Royds,
"  Antarctic.'*


"  Cape  Royds,
"  British  Antarctic  Expedition,  1G07.
**  Professor  David.

"  Dear  Sir, — If  you  reach  the  Magnetic  Pole,  you
will  hoist  the  Union  Jack  on  the  spot,  and  take  possession

75


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

of  it  on  beliali;  of  the   above  expedition  for  the  British
nation.

"  When  you  are  in  the  western  mountains,  please  do
the  same  at  one  place,  taking  possession  of  Victoria
Land  as  part  of  the  British  Empire.

"  If  economic  minerals  are  found,  take  possession  of
the  area  in  the  same  way  on  my  behalf  as  Commander
of  this  expedition.

"  Yours  faithfully,

"  (Sgd.)  Ernest  H.  Shackleton,

"  Commander.^*

We  had  a  farewell  dinner  that  night,  given  in  honour
of  the  Southern  Depot  Party,  who  were  about  to  start
to  lay  out  a  depot  one  hundred  miles  southerly  from
our  winter  quarters.

The  following  day,  September  20,  a  strong  south-
easterly blizzard  was  blowing.  In  the  afternoon  the  wind
somewhat  moderated,  and  there  was  less  drift.  Mackay
had  been  making  a  sail  for  our  journey  to  the  Magnetic
Pole,  and  we  now  tried  the  sail  on  two  sledges  lashed
together  on  the  ice  at  Backdoor  Bay.  We  used  the
tent  poles  of  one  of  the  sledging-tents  as  a  mast.  The
wind  w^as  blowing  very  strongly  and  carried  off  the  two
sledges  with  a  weight  on  them  of  300  lb.,  in  addition  to
the  weights  of  Mackay  and  myself,  who  were  sitting  on
the  sledges.     We  considered  this  a  successful  experiment.

The  weather  continued  bad  till  the  night  of  the  24th.

On  September  25  we  were  up  at  5.30  a.m.,  and  found
that  the  blizzard  had  subsided.  Priestley,  Day  and  I
started  in  the  motor-car,  dragging  behind  us  two
sledges  over  the  sea  ice.  One  sledge,  weighing  alto-
gether 606  lb.  with  its  load,  contained  five  of  our  fort-
nightly food-bags,  six  large  tins  of  biscuits,  and  60  lb.
of  oil.  The  other  sledge,  which  with  its  load  weighed
76


PRELIMINARY   WORK

about  250  lb.,  carried  personal  gear  which  we  might
have  to  use  on  the  depot  laying  trip  in  the  event  of
being  surprised  by  a  blizzard.  At  first  Day  travelled
on  his  first  gear  ;  he  then  found  that  the  engine  became
heated,  and  we  had  to  stop  for  it  to  cool  down.  He
discovered  while  we  were  waiting  that  one  of  the  cylinders
was  not  firing.  This  he  soon  fixed  up  all  right.  He
then  remounted  the  car  and  he  put  her  on  to  the
second  gear.  With  the  increased  power  given  by  the
repaired  cylinder  we  now  sped  over  the  floe-ice  at
fourteen  miles  an  hour,  much  to  the  admiration  of  the
seals  and  penguins.  When,  however,  we  had  travelled
about  ten  miles  from  winter  quarters,  and  were  some
five  miles  westerly  from  Tent  Island,  we  encountered
numerous  sastrugi  of  softish  snow,  the  car  continually
sticking  fast  in  the  ridges.  A  little  low  drift  was
flying  over  the  ice  surface,  brought  up  by  a  gentle
blizzard.  We  left  the  heavy  sledge  ten  miles  out,  and
then  with  only  the  light  sledge  to  draw  behind  us.  Day
found  that  he  was  able  to  travel  on  his  third  gear  at
eighteen  miles  an  hour.  At  this  speed  the  sledge,
whenever  it  took  one  of  the  snow  sastrugi  at  right  angles,
leapt  into  the  air  like  a  flying  fish  and  came  down  with
a  bump  on  the  surface  of  the  ice.  As  we  had  occasionally
to  make  sharp  turns  in  order  to  avoid  sastrugi  and
lumps  of  ice,  our  sledge  had  one  or  two  capsizes.  Mean-
while, the  blizzard  was  freshening,  and  we  tore  along
in  hopes  of  reaching  our  winter  quarters  before  it
became  very  violent.  We  had  just  reached  Flagstaff
Point,  and  were  taking  a  turn  in  towards  the  shore
opposite  the  Penguin  Rookery  when  the  blizzard  wind
caught  the  side  of  the  sledge  nearly  broadside  on,  and
capsized  it  heavily.  So  violent  was  the  shock  that  the
aluminium  cooking  apparatus  was  knocked  out  of
its  straps,  and  the  blizzard  wind  immediately  started

77


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

trundling  this  metal  cylinder  over  the  smooth  ice.  Day
stopped  his  car  as  soon  as  possible,  Priestley  and  I
jumped  off,  and  immediately  gave  chase  to  the  runaway
cooker.  Meanwhile,  the  cooker  had  fallen  to  pieces
so  to  speak;  the  tray  part  came  away  from  the  big
circular  cover ;  the  melter  and  the  supports  for  the
cooking-pot  and  for  the  main  outer  covering  also  came
adrift  as  well  as  the  cooking-pot  itself.  The  lid  of  the
last-mentioned  fell  off,  and  immediately  dumped  on  to
the  ice  the  three  pannikins  and  our  three  spoons.  These
articles  raced  one  another  over  the  smooth  ice-surface  in
the  direction  of  the  open  water  of  Ross  Sea.  The  spoons
were  easily  captured,  as  also  were  the  pannikins,  which,
being  conical  in  shape,  could  not  be  bowled  by  the  wind
in  a  straight  line,  but  described  arcs  of  circles.  Priestley
and  I  recovered  also  the  cooking-pot.  and  with  Brockle-
hurst's  help  (for  he  had  run  down  to  meet  us)  the
aluminium  supports,  but  the  large  snow  melter,  the
main  outer  casing,  and  the  tray  kept  revolving  in  front
of  us  at  a  speed  which  w^as  just  sufficient  to  outclass
our  own  most  desperate  efforts.  Finally,  when  we
were  nearly  upon  them,  they  took  a  joyous  leap  over
the  low  cliff  of  floe-ice  and  disappeared  one  after
another  most  exasperatingly  in  the  black  waters  of
the  Ross  Sea.

This  was  a  shrewd  loss,  as  aluminium  cookers  were,
of  course,  very  scarce.  Priestley  and  I  returned  dis-
consolate, and  very  much  winded  after  our  mile's  run  in
vain.

The  following  day  we  had  intended  laying  out  our
second  depot,  but  as  some  of  the  piston  rings  of  the
motor-car  needed  repair,  we  decided  to  postpone  the
departure  until  the  day  after.  That  afternoon,  after
the  repairs  had  been  completed,  Day  and  Armytage
'vvent  out  for  a  little  tobogganing  before  dinner.  Late  in
78


ACCIDENT    TO    DAY

the  evening  Armytage  returned  dragging  slowly  and
painfully  a  sledge  bearing  the  recumbent,  though  not
inanimate  form  of  Day.  We  crowded  round  to  inquire
what  was  the  matter,  and  found  that  just  when  Armytage
and  Day  were  urging  their  wild  career  down  a  steep
snow  slope  Day's  foot  had  struck  an  unyielding  block  of
kenyte  lava,  and  the  consequence  had  been  very  awk-
ward for  the  foot.  It  was  severely  staved,  so  that  he
was  quite  unable  to  walk  without  assistance.  As  no
one  but  Day  could  be  trusted  to  drive  the  motor-car,
this  accident  necessitated  a  further  postponement  of
the  laying  of  our  second  depot.

On  Septemxber  28  it  was  blowing.  On  the  29th
the  day  was  fairly  fine,  but  Day's  foot  was  not  well
enough  for  him  to  start  in  the  motor-car.

On  September  30  a  mild  blizzard  commenced  blow-
ing, and  on  October  1,  the  day  on  which  Lieutenant
Shackleton  had  intended  that  we  should  start,  it  was
still  raging  with  increased  force.  That  day  was  spent
chiefly  in  nailing  strips  of  tin,  painted  blue,  on  all
the  geological  specimen  boxes,  and  double-labelling
them.

On  October  2  the  weather  was  still  bad,  so  that  we
were  unable  to  start.  On  October  8,  the  weather  having
cleared,  Day,  Priestley,  Mackay  and  I  started  with  two
sledges  to  lay  our  second  depot.  All  went  well  for
about  eight  miles  out,  then  the  carburetter  played  up.
Possibly  there  was  some  dirt  in  the  nozzle.  Day  took
it  all  to  pieces  in  the  cold  wind,  and  spent  three-quarters
of  an  hour  in  fixing  it  up.  We  then  started  off  again
gaily  in  good  style.  We  crossed  a  large  crack  in  the
sea  ice  where  there  were  numbers  of  seals  and  Emperor
penguins.  On  the  other  side  of  this  crack  our  wheels
stuck  fast  in  snow  sastrugi.  All  hands  got  on  to  the
spokes  and  started  swinging  the   car  backwards   and

79


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

forwards  ;  when  we  got  a  good  swing  on,  Day  would
suddenly  snatch  on  the  power  and  over  we  would  go —
that  is,  over  one  of  the  sastrugi — only  to  find,  often,
that  we  had  just  floundered  into  another  one  ahead.
In  performing  one  of  these  evolutions  Priestley,  who,
as  usual,  was  working  like  a  Trojan,  got  his  hand  rather
badly  damaged  through  its  being  jammed  between  the
spokes  of  the  car  wheel  and  the  framework.  Almost
immediately  afterwards  one  of  my  fingers  was  nearly
broken,  through  the  same  cause,  the  flesh  being  torn  off
one  of  my  knuckles ;  and  then  Mackay  seriously
damaged  his  wrist  in  manipulating  what  Joyce  called
the  "  thumb-breaking  "  starter.  Still  we  went  flounder-
ing along  over  the  sastrugi  and  ice  cracks.  Day  every
now  and  then  getting  out  to  lighten  the  car  and  limping
alongside.  At  last  we  succeeded  in  reaching  a  spot
amongst  the  snov/  sastrugi  on  the  sea  ice,  fifteen  miles
distant  from  our  winter  quarters.  Here  we  dumped
the  load  intended  for  the  Northern  Party,  and  then
Day  had  a  hard  struggle  to  extricate  the  car  from  the
tangle  of  sastrugi  and  ice-cracks.  At  last,  after  two
capsizes  of  the  sledges,  we  got  back  into  camp  at
10  P.M.,  all  thoroughly  exhausted,  all  wounded  and
bandaged.  Brocklehurst  carried  Day  on  his  back  for
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  where  we  left  the  car  up
to  our  winter  quarters.  So  thoroughly  exhausted  were
we,  that  we  had  to  take  a  day's  rest  on  October  4,
before  making  our  final  start.

The  following  are  the  details  respectively  of  our
permanent  load  and  equipment  and  of  our  consumable
load  (food  and  oil)  when  we  did  eventually  start :


80


The  Start  of  a  Blizzard  from  the  South;  Drift  coming  round  Mount  Erebus

To  J  ace  page  80


NORTHERN    PARTY'S    EQUIPMENT


Northern  Party's  Permanent  Load


2  11-ft.  sledges
Tent,  poles  and  floorcloth
Shovel

Primus  and  cooker
Three-man  sleeping-bag

3  dozen  plates
J-plate  camera  and  caso
Legs  of  camera
Lloyd-Creak  dip  circle
Legs  for  dip  circle
Spirit  for  primus  stove

1  ready  bottle  for  spirit
Sail  and  yard
Venesta  board  for  table  ^
Centimetre  rule
Horn  protractor
Pencils
"Hints  to  Travellers"

and  Nautical  Almanac
3-in.  theodolite  and  case
Legs  of  theodolite
Field-glasses
3  ice-axes,  3  lb.  each
Rucksack  and  60  ft.  alpine  rope
Haversack,  hammer  and  chi?el
xAneroid  ^

2  prismatic  compasses/

2  pairs  of  sledge  thermometers  in  cases  ^

2  low-temperature  thermometers  J

1  hjrpsometer  in  case

Labels  and  small  bags  for  specimens

Repair  kit

Copper  wire

Cod-hne

Leather  for  repairs

1  pair  shooting-boots  for  depot  at  Butter  Point

1  pair  ski  boots  (Mawson)

1  pair  ski  boots  (David)


Weight.

Lb.

Oz

120

0

30

0

6

0

20

0

26

0

3

0

4

13

1

14

23

0

7

0

9

0

0

8

11

0

1     10


0

4

13

0
0
0


0     12


u


81


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC


3  pairs  ski  boots

9  pairs  finnesko,  2^  lb.  each

Charts  and  tin  case

Dram  case  of  paper

30  lb.  of  personal  gear|

6  lb.  of  bags  J

Prickers,  nipples,  and  washers  for  primus

3  hanks  sennegrass

3  bags  for  drjdng  sennegrass

Medical  bag

Depot  flags,  jack,  and  poles

Sledge  harness.

Sledge  ropes  and  toggles.

Small  set  of  tools.

Books  :

Field  note-books.

"  Magnetic  Memoir  of  Discovery  Expedition.'

Sketch-book.


Weii

ght.

Lb.

Oz.

12

0

20

4

1

0

1

0

36

0

0

8

4

8

0

8

5

0

4

0

NoETHERN  Party's  Consumable  Load


Plasmon  biscuit :  1  lb.  per  man  per  day  =  3  lb.  per  day.
93  days  x  3  =  279  lb.
Substitute  for  oatmeal,  1  lb.  3  oz.  for  3  men  per
week  X  13  =  14  lb.  10  oz.
Pemmican  :  7.5  oz.  per  man  per  day  x  3  x  93  =  2092

oz.
Emergency  rations  (checked  by  Marshall)  :    1^  oz.  per

man  per  day  x  3  x  93  =  418|  oz.
Sugar  (lumps)  :  3.8  oz.  per  man  per  day  x  3  x  93
Tea  (twice  a  day)  :  a  little  less  than  half  a  tin  per  week
Rowntree's  Sweet  Chocolate  :

8    oz.  per  man  per  week  =  normal  allowance.
4 J  „  do.  =  substitute  for  honey.

12|  oz.  do.

12J  X  3  X  13?-  =  487  oz.
Cocoa  :   14|  oz.  for  three  men  per  week  (once  a  day  for
dinner).     141  x  1.3  =  188  oz.

Out  of  this  plasmon  cocoa  available  for  6  weeks.
82


294

0

131

0

26

0

70

0

9

0

32      0
12      0


A  BLIZZARD  ON  THE  BARRIER


1


THE    START


Cheese  :  2  oz.  per  man  per  day,  3  days  per  week  =
18  oz.  per  week.     18  oz.  x  13|-  =  239y  oz.

Plasmon  and  dried  milk

Salt :  2  oz.  per  week  for  2  men  =  4  oz.  per  week  x  13
=  52  oz.

Paraffin  oil  in  10-lb.  tins


Weil

§ht.

Lb.

Oz.

15

0

17

7

3

4

100

0

709     11


October  4  was  a  Sunday,  and  after  the  morning
service  we  took  the  ponies  out  for  exercise.  In  the
evening  the  gramophone  discoursed  appropriate  music,
such  as  "  We  parted  on  the  Shore,"  "  I  and  my  true
love  will  never  meet  again  by  the  bonnie,  bonnie  banks
of  Loch  Lomond,"  concluding  with  the  universal
favourite,  "  Lead,  Kindly  Light."

Meanwhile,  Mackay  had  his  damaged  wrist  attended
to,  and  I  put  the  question  to  him  as  to  whether  or  not
he  was  prepared  to  undertake  the  long  journey  to  the
Magnetic  Pole  under  the  circumstances.  He  said  that
he  was  quite  ready,  provided  Maws  on  and  I  did  not
object  to  his  going  with  his  wrist  damaged  and  in  a
sling.  We  raised  no  objection,  and  so  the  matter  was
settled.  All  that  night  Mawson  and  I  were  occupied  in
writing  final  letters  and  packing  little  odds  and  ends.

The  following  morning,  October  5,  after  an  early
breakfast,  we  prepared  for  the  final  start.  It  was
quite  wonderful  what  a  lot  of  things  had  been  forgotten
until  this  last  moment.  The  sledges  were  dragged
down  from  our  hut  to  the  edge  of  the  sea  ice  at  the
Penguin  Rookery,  a  distance  of  a  little  over  a  quarter  of
a  mile.  Day  was  there  with  the  motor-car,  ready
for  the  start.  Every  now  and  then  some  one  of  the
pilgrims  would  remember  that  he  had  left  something
very  important  behind  at  the  hut,  and  would  go  running

83


THE    IIEAIIT    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

back  for  it.  These  odd  belongings  had  to  be  tied  with
bits  of  string  on  to  the  second  sledge  which  we  were
going  to  take  with  us  on  our  northern  journey,  con-
sequently, by  degrees,  this  sledge  became  hung  over
v^ith  boots,  crampons,  and  all  sorts  of  what  Day  called
"  gagdets."  Murray,  Brocklehurst  and  Armytage  came
down  on  the  ice  to  bid  us  a  final  farewell.  Brocklehurst
took  a  photo^.aph  of  us  just  before  we  started,
then  Day,  Priestley,  Roberts,  Mackay,  Mawson  and  I
got  aboard,  some  on  the  motor-car,  some  on  the  sledges.
Those  remaining  behind  gave  us  three  cheers.  Day  turned
on  the  power  and  away  we  v/ent.  A  light  wind  was
blowing  from  the  south-east  at  the  time  of  our  start,
bringing  a  little  snow  with  it  and  another  blizzard
seemed  impending.

After  travelling  a  little  over  two  miles,  just
beyond  Cape  Barne,  the  snow  had  become  so
thick  that  the  coast-line  was  almost  entirely  hidden
from  our  view.  Under  these  circumstances  I  did  not
think  it  prudent  to  take  the  motor-car  further,  so
Mackay,  Mawson  and  I  bid  adieu  to  our  good  friends.
Strapping  on  our  harness  we  toggled  on  to  the  sledge
rope,  and  with  a  one,  two,  three,  and  away,  pulled  off
into  the  thick  falling  snow,  which  in  a  few  minutes
blotted  out  all  view  of  the  motor-car  in  our  rear.  As
we  slowly  trudged  along  the  signs  of  an  approaching
blizzard  became  more  pronounced  and  we  bore  somewhat
to  our  left  so  as  to  have  Inaccessible  Island  as  a  lee  under
which  to  run  for  shelter,  but  after  a  time,  as  the  threat-
ened blizzard  did  not  come  up,  we  slewed  our  sledge
more  to  the  right,  av/ay  from  Inaccessible  Island,
heading  up  for  our  ten-mile  depot.  At  last,  towards
evening,  Mackay  sighted  the  black  flag  over  the  depot
about  a  mile  distant.

We  reached  the  depot  about  7  p.m.  and  got  up  our
84


i<iiiW!E«^^T^a(:    ";    -  -r    "K


.MAKSTON     AM)    .^IlKHAV     AT     Till;     DoOU    OF     lUi;     1  I  1    I'


Daisy's  Third  Litter  at  toe  Winter  Quarters


To  face-  prujc  84


RELAY   WORK

tent.  A  fairly  strong  wind  was  still  blowing  from  the
south-east,  raising  low  drift.  We  slept  that  night  on
the  floe-ice,  with  about  three  hundred  fathoms  of  water
under  our  pillow.

The  following  morning,  October  6,  we  started  our
relay  work.  We  dragged  the  Christmas  Tree  sledge  on
first,  as  we  were  specially  liable  to  lose  parcels  off  it,
for  a  distance  of  from  one-third  to  half  a  mile.  Then
we  returned  and  fetched  up  what  we  called  the  Plum
Duff  sledge,  chiefly  laden  with  our  provisions.  The
light  was  dull,  and  a  certain  amount  of  soft,  newly  fallen
snow  made  the  sledging  heavy.  The  weather  may  be
described  as  thick,  with  snow  falling  at  intervals.
During  the  afternoon  it  cleared  somewhat  and  the
western  mountains  came  into  view  at  about  2  p.m.
This  was  fortunate  for  us,  as  it  enabled  us  later  on  to
sight  the  flag  over  our  fifteen-mile  depot.  We  camped
that  night  amongst  screw  pack-ice  within  less  than  a  mile
of  this  depot.

The  following  day,  October  7,  was  beautifully  fine
and  calm.  We  started  about  9  a.m.  and  sledged  over
pressure  ice  ridges  and  snow  sastrugi,  reaching  our
fifteen-mile  depot  in  three-quarters  an  of  hour.  Here
we  camped  and  repacked  our  sledges.  We  took  the
wholemeal  plasmon  biscuits  out  of  two  of  the  biscuit
tins  and  packed  them  into  canvas  bags.  This  saved
us  a  weight  of  about  8  lb.

We  started  again  in  the  afternoon,  relaying  with  the
two  sledges.  The  sledging  again  was  heavy  on  account
of  the  fresh,  soft  snow,  and  small  sastrugi.  We  had  a
glorious  view  of  the  western  mountains,  crimsoned  in  the
light  of  the  setting  sun.  We  camped  that  night  close
to  a  seal  hole  which  belonged  to  a  fine  specimen  of
Weddell  seal.  We  were  somewhat  disturbed  that  night
by  the  snorting  and  whistling  of  the  seals  as  they  came

85


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

up  for  their  blows.  Evidently  this  seal  hole  was  a
syndicate  affair.  The  sounds  at  times  seemed  right
under  our  tent.

October  8  was  a  fine,  clear  day,  with  a  beautiful
sunset,  and  a  magnificent  mirage,  in  the  direction  of
Beaufort  Island.  To  the  north  of  us,  the  curious  hills,
called  by  Captain  Scott  the  "  Stranded  Moraines,"  were
now  beginning  to  show  out  very  plainly  in  the  direction
in  which  we  were  travelling.

On  the  morning  of  October  9  we  got  under  way  soon
after  eight  o'clock.  It  was  a  lovely,  calm  day  but  cold,
the  thermometer  registering  minus  30°  Fahr.  at  8  p.m.
The  surface  was  fairly  good  for  sledging,  but  in  places
we  came  on  patches  of  soft  snow,  and  a  small,  lumpy
structure  of  the  ice- surface,  resembling  a  newly  raked
garden  bed,  evidently  due  to  the  thawing  down  and
refreezing  of  "  ice  flowers."  This  made  travelling  very
heavy.  The  "  Stranded  Moraines  "  now  showed  up  very
clearly,  and  Butter  Point  itself  became  visible.

The  following  day,  Saturday,  October  10,  we  were
awakened  by  the  chatter  of  some  Emperor  penguins
who  had  marched  down  on  our  tent  during  the  night
to  investigate  us.  The  sounds  may  be  described  as
something  between  the  cackle  of  a  goose  and  the  chortle
of  a  kookaburra.  On  peeping  out  of  the  Burberry
spout  of  our  tent  I  saw  four  standing  by  the  sledges.
They  were  much  interested  at  the  sight  of  me,  and  the
conversation  between  them  became  lively.  They
evidently  took  us  for  penguins  of  an  inferior  type,
and  the  tent  for  our  nest.  They  watched,  and  took
careful  note  of  all  our  doings,  and  gave  us  a  good
send-off  when  we  started  about  8.30  a.m.

On  our  journey  that  morning  we  passed  close  by  a
large  bull  seal  of  the  Weddell  species.  A  little  further
on  we  noticed  a  curious  dark  object  on  the  ice  in  the
86


A    BLIZZARD

distance,  and  on  coming  up  to  it  found  that  it  was  a  dead
Weddell  seal  with  its  head,  neck,  and  shoulders  firmly
frozen  into  the  ice.  Evidently  it  had  stuck  fast  in  a
seal  hole  in  the  ice  in  trying  to  get  down  to  the  sea- water.

The  sky  was  overcast,  and  light  snow  began  to  fall
in  the  afternoon.  A  little  later  a  mild  blizzard  sprang
up  from  the  south-east ;  we  thought  this  a  favourable
opportunity  for  testing  the  sailing  qualities  of  our
sledges,  and  so  made  sail  on  the  Plum  Duff  sledge.
As  Mackay  put  it,  we  "  brought  her  to  try  with  main
course."  As  the  strength  of  the  blizzard  increased,  we
found  that  we  could  draw  both  sledges  simultaneously,
which  was,  of  course,  a  great  saving  in  labour.  We
were  tempted  to  carry  on  in  the  increasing  strength
of  the  blizzard  rather  longer  than  was  wise,  and  con-
sequently, when  at  last  we  decided  that  we  must  camp,
had  great  difficulty  in  getting  the  tent  up.  We  slipped
the  tent  over  the  poles  placed  close  to  the  ground  in  the
lee  of  a  sledge.  While  two  of  us  raised  the  poles,  the
third  shovelled  snow  on  to  the  skirt  of  the  tent,  which
we  pulled  out  little  by  little,  until  it  was  finally  spread
to  its  full  dimensions.  We  were  glad  to  turn  in  and
escape  from  the  biting  blast  and  drifting  snow.

The  following  day,  Sunday,  October  11,  a  violent
blizzard  was  still  blowing,  and  we  lay  in  our  sleeping-
bag  until  past  noon,  by  which  time  the  snow  had  drifted
high  upon  the  door  side  of  our  tent.  As  this  drift  was
pressing  heavily  on  our  feet  and  cramping  us,  I  got  up
and  dug  it  away.  The  cooker  and  primus  were  then
brought  in  and  we  all  got  up  and  had  some  hoosh  and
tea.  The  temperature,  as  usually  happens  in  a  blizzard,
had  now  risen  considerably,  being  8.5°  Fahr.  at  1.80  p.m.
The  copper  wire  on  our  sledges  was  polished  and
burnished  by  the  prolonged  blast  against  it  of  tiny
ice  crystals,  and  the  surface   of  the   sea  ice  was  also

87


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

brightly  polished  in  places.  As  it  was  still  blowing  we
remained  in  our  sleeping-bag  for  the  rest  of  that  day
as  well  as  the  succeeding  night.

When  we  rose  at  about  2  a.m.  on  Monday,  October  12,
the  blizzard  was  over.  We  found  very  heavy  snow-
drifts on  the  lee  side  of  our  sledges,  and  it  took  us  a
considerable  time  to  dig  these  away  and  get  the  hard
snow  raked  out  of  all  the  chinks  and  crannies  among
the  packages  on  the  sledges.  We  made  a  start  about
4  A.M.,  and  all  that  day  meandered  amongst  broken
pack-ice.  It  was  evident  that  the  south-east  blizzards
drive  large  belts  of  broken  floe-ice  in  this  direction
across  McMurdo  Sound  to  the  western  shore.  The
fractured  masses  of  sea  ice,  inclined  at  all  angles  to  the
horizontal,  are  frozen  in  later,  as  the  cold  of  winter
becomes  more  intense,  and  of  course,  constitute  a  very
difficult  surface  for  sledging.

In  order  to  make  up  for  the  time  we  had  lost  in  our
sleeping-bags  during  the  blizzard,  we  travelled  altogether
fourteen  hours,  and  succeeded  in  doing  about  six
statute  miles,  that  is,  eighteen  miles  of  relay  work,  and
all  felt  much  exhausted  when  we  turned  in  that  evening.
As  a  result  of  this  we  did  not  wake  until  after  8  a.m.
next  morning.

We  were  now  only  about  two  miles  from  Butter
Point.  We  got  under  way  at  10  a.m.,  and  a  few  hours
later  camped  at  the  foot  of  a  low  ice  cliff,  about  600  yards
south-south-east  of  Butter  Point.  Butter  Point  is
merely  an  angle  in  this  low  ice  cliff  near  the  junction  of
the  Ferrar  Glacier  valley  with  the  main  shore  of  Victoria
Land.  This  cliff  was  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  in
height,  and  formed  of  crevassed  glacier  ice.  It  was
covered  by  a  hard  snow  crust,  which  every  now  and
then  gave  way  and  let  one  down  for  a  foot  or  so.  This
glacier  ice  was  not  part  of  the  main  Ferrar  Glacier,  but
88


DEPOT    AT    BUTTER    POINT

appeared  to  be  simply  a  local  piedmont  glacier  stretch-
ing along  for  some  considerable  distance  between  the  base
of  the  coast  range  and  the  sea  ice,  past  the  "  Stranded
Moraines,"  until  still  further  south  it  became  confluent
with  that  Mr.  H.  G.  Ferrar  has  described  as  the  "  pin-
nacled ice."  It  was  evident  that  this  piedmont  ice
was  firmly  attached  to  the  land,  as  it  was  separated
from  the  sea  ice  by  a  well-marked  tide-crack.  With
the  help  of  our  ice  axes  we  crossed  over  this  crack  and
got  up  the  little  ice  cHff  on  to  the  glacier  ice,  and  selected
there  a  suits^ble  spot  for  our  depot.

According  to  arrangements  with  Lieutenant  Shackle-
ton  we  were  to  leave  a  depot  flag  at  Butter  Point  with
a  letter  giving  an  account  of  our  doings,  and  stating
approximately  by  what  date  we  hoped  to  return  there.
But  the  progress  of  our  journey  had  been  so  much
slower  than  we  had  originally  anticipated  that  we
decided  before  reaching  Butter  Point  that  it  would  be
imperatively  necessary,  in  order  to  make  the  Magnetic
Pole  in  the  time  available,  to  lighten  the  load  on  our
sledges  by  leaving  a  portion  of  our  equipment  and
food.

During  the  latter  part  of  this  day  Mawson  and
Mackay  were  busy  making  a  mast  and  boom  for  the
second  sledge,  it  being  our  intention  to  use  the  tent
floorcloth  as  a  sail.  Meanwhile  I  sorted  out  the  material
to  be  left  at  the  depot.

The  following  day,  Wednesday,  October  14,  we
spent  the  morning  in  resorting  the  loads  on  our  sledges.
We  depoted  two  tins  of  wholemeal  plasmon  biscuits,
each  weighing  about  27  lb.,  also  Mackay's  mountaineer-
ing nail  boots,  and  my  spare  head-gear  material  and  mits.
Altogether  we  lightened  the  load  by  about  70  lb.  We
sunk  the  two  full  tins  of  biscuits  and  a  tin  containing
boots,  &c.,  a  short  distance  in  the  glacier  ice  to  prevent

89


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

the  blizzards  blowing  them  away.  We  then  lashed
to  the  tins  a  short  bamboo  flag-pole,  carrying  one  of  our
black  depot  flags,  and  securely  fastened  to  its  base  one
of  our  empty  air-tight  milk  tins,  in  which  we  placed  our
letters.  In  these  letters  for  Lieutenant  Shackleton
and  R.  E.  Priestley,  respectively,  I  stated  that  in
consequence  of  our  late  start  from  Cape  Royds,  and
also  on  account  of  the  comparative  slowness  of  our
progress  thence  to  Butter  Point,  it  was  obvious  that
we  could  not  return  to  Butter  Point  until  January  12,
at  the  earliest,  instead  of  the  first  week  of  January,
as  was  originally  anticipated.  We  ascertained  months
later  that  this  little  depot  survived  the  blizzards,
and  that  Armytage,  Priestley  and  Brocklehurst  had
no  difficulty  in  finding  it,  and  that  they  read  our
letters.

Leaving  the  depot  about  9  a.m.  on  October  14,  we
started  sledging  across  New  Harbour  in  the  direction
of  Cape  Bernacchi.  In  the  afternoon  a  light  southerly
wind  sprang  up  bringing  a  little  snow  with  it,  the  fall
lasting  from  about  12.30  to  2.30  p.m.  We  steered  in
the  direction  of  what  appeared  to  us  to  be  an  uncharted
island.  On  arriving  at  it,  however,  we  discovered  that
it  was  a  true  iceberg,  formed  of  hard  blue  glacier  ice
with  a  conspicuous  black  band  near  its  summit  formed
of  fine  dark  gravel.  The  iceberg  was  about  a  quarter  of
a  mile  in  length,  and  thirty  to  forty  feet  high.  In  addi-
tion to  the  coarser  bands  of  gravel  there  was  a  great
quantity  of  dust,  and  fine  dust  bands,  near  the  surface
of  the  berg.  This  dust  absorbing  the  heat  of  the  sun
had  thawed  its  way  deep  down  into  the  berg,  thus  forming
numerous  dust  wells  and  dust  grooves.  There  were
several  large  cracks  in  the  sea  ice  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  this  iceberg,  and  having  taken  the  bearing
of  the  trend  of  these  by  a  compass  they  helped  us
90


A    MIRAGE

to  keep  direction  when  the  air  was  thick  with   falling
snow.

The  following  day,  October  15,  was  beautifully
fine  and  calm ;  the  sky  was  slightly  cloudy  with  long
belts  of  cirrus-stratus  and  alto-stratus.  Erebus,  now
over  fifty  miles  distant,  was  cloud  capped.  We  had  a
glorious  view  up  the  magnificent  valley  of  the  Ferrar
Glacier;  the  spurless  hills  on  either  side  of  the  valley,
strongly  faceted  in  a  direction  parallel  to  each  side
of  the  valley,  spoke  eloquently  of  intense  abrasive
glacial  action  in  the  immediate  geological  past.  The
hills  in  the  foreground,  formed  of  gneissic  granite,
were  of  a  rich  chocolate  brown  to  warm  sepia  hue,  fading
in  the  distance  to  exquisite  tints  of  reddish  purple  and
violet.  Towards  evening  we  had  a  wonderful  vision
of  several  large  icebergs  close  ahead  of  us  ;  it  seemed
as  though  they  were  only  a  mile  or  so  distant,  as  one
could  see  clearly  the  re-entering  angles  and  bright
reflected  sides  of  the  bergs  lit  up  in  the  rays  of  the
setting  sun.  Suddenly,  as  if  by  magic,  they  all  vanished.
They  had  been  momentarily  conjured  up  to  our  view
by  a  wonderful  mirage.  In  the  departing  rays  of  the
setting  sun  Mount  Erebus  and  Mount  Bird  glowed  with
a  glorious  golden  light.  This  was  one  of  the  most
beautiful  days  we  experienced  during  the  whole  of  our
journey.  The  cold  was  now  less  severe  than  it  had
been,  the  temperature  being  9.5°  Fahr.  at  8  p.m.


91


CHAPTER  VII

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)

^N  October  16  Ave  were  up  at  3.30  a.m.,  and  got
under  way  at  5.30.  A  cold  wind  was  blowing  from
the  south,  and  after  some  trouble  we  set  sail  on  both
sledges,  using  the  green  floorcloth  on  the  Christmas
Tree  sledge,  and  Mackay's  sail  on  the  Plum  Duff  sledge.
A  short  time  after  we  set  sail  it  fell  nearly  calm  ;  thick
clouds  gathered ;  a  light  wind  sprang  up  from  the
south-east,  veering  to  east-north-east,  then  back  again
to  south-east  in  the  afternoon.  Fine  snow  fell  for  about
three  hours,  forming  a  layer  nearly  a  quarter  of  an  inch
in  thickness.  Towards  evening  we  reached  one  of  the
bergs  that  had  been  miraged  up  the  night  before.  It
was  four  hundred  yards  long,  and  eighty  yards  wide,  and
was  a  true  iceberg  formed  of  glacier  ice  ;  Mackay,
Mawson  and  I  explored  this.  Like  the  previous  ice-
berg its  surface  was  pitted  with  numerous  deep  dust
wells.  It  was  wonderful  to  see  what  a  very  small
amount  of  dust  sufficed  to  dig  these  wells  to  a  depth
of  several  feet.  The  cliff  of  the  berg  which  faced
towards  the  north-west  was  deeply  grooved,  the  appear-
ance in  the  distance  reminding  one  of  a  number  of
large  parallel  stalactites.  Climbing  up  one  of  these
deep  grooves  I  found  numbers  of  small  angular  rock
pebbles,  up  to  one  and  a  half  inches  in  diameter,  adher-
ing to  the  bottom  of  the  groove,  and  it  seemed  as  though
92


Moraine  Cone  with  raised  Beach  material.    Mount  Laesen  on  the  right.    "Backstairs

Passage"  is  behind  the  Cone


One  of  the  Sledges  taken  bv  the  Northern  Partt  7\>/(icr  piii/e  92


PANCAKE    ICE

these  grooves,  like  the  dust  wells,  were  formed  by  the
warmth  of  these  small  fragments  of  rock  which,  as  the
process  of  thawing  of  the  ice  cliff  progressed,  gradually
settled  down  into  long  rows  or  strings  as  they  crept
gradually  downwards  under  the  influence  of  gravitation
to  the  level  of  the  sea  ice  below.  As  the  shore  was  high
and  rocky,  and  seemed  not  more  than  half  a  mile  dis-
tant, I  went  over  towards  it  after  our  evening  meal.
It  proved  to  be  somewhat  further  than  it  appeared.

On  the  way,  for  the  first  time,  I  met  with  a  structure
in  the  sea  ice  known  as  pancake  ice.  The  surface  of
the  ice  showed  a  rounded  polygonal  structure  something
like  the  tops  of  a  number  of  large  weathered  basaltic
columns.  The  edges  of  these  polygons  were  shghtly
raised,  but  sufficiently  rounded  off  by  thawing  or
ablation  to  afford  an  easy  surface  for  the  runners  of
our  sledge.  Later  on,  in  the  autumn  of  the  following
year,  we  noticed  this  pancake  ice  in  process  of  formation.
If,  as  was  often  the  case,  there  was  any  wind  when  the
sea  began  to  freeze  over,  the  water  at  first  commenced
to  look  soupy  ;  little  by  little  the  small  ice  particles
which  caused  this  appearance  aggregated  and  formed
myriads  of  small  structures  which  may  be  likened
to  small  open  jam  tarts.  These  would  then  coalesce
in  groups  at  their  edges  and  form  pancake  ice.  These
pancakes  were  from  one  foot  up  to  about  three  feet
in  diameter.  Later,  the  pancakes  vrould  cohere  and
so  a  continuous  hard  ice  crust  would  be  formed  over
the  sea  surface ;  later  freezing  simply  had  the  effect
of  strengthening  and  thickening  this  ice-sheet  from
below.  Close  in  shore  the  pancake  ice  was  traversed  by
deep  tidal  cracks.  After  climbing  over  these  I  reached
the  shore,  which  was  composed  of  a  well-marked  terrace
of  coarse  gravel  and  large  and  small  erratic  boulders.
The  smaller  rock  fragments  were  from  three  to  six  inches

93


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

in  diameter,  the  boulders  being  as  much  as  five  feet
in  diameter.  The  lower  terrace  was  about  twenty
yards  wide  and  as  many  feet  in  height  above  the  sea ;
then  followed  a  belt  of  coarsely  crystalline  white
marble  traversed  by  bands  of  grey  gneiss  and  blackish
rock.  Capping  this  belt  of  ancient  crystalline  rocks
was  a  terrace  of  angular  gravel,  from  eighty  to  one
hundred  feet  above  sea-level,  formed  of  small  rock
fragments  from  one  to  two  inches  in  diameter.  The
belts  of  coarse  marble,  gneiss,  &c.,  were  stained  green
and  reddish  to  ochreous  brown  in  places,  and  appeared
to  have  been  much  mineralised.  The  whole  area
seemed  to  promise  well  for  economic  minerals.  One
curious  boulder  specially  attracted  my  attention;  its
large  pinkish  crystals  were  peppered  over  with  small
black  crystals,  the  whole  being  enclosed  in  a  greenish
black  base.  A  specimen  of  this  boulder  which  we
brought  back  with  us  will  be  described  in  detail  in  the
geological  notes.

On  Saturday,  October  17,  Mawson,  Mackay  and  I
landed  at  Cape  Bernacchi,  a  little  over  a  mile  north
of  our  previous  camp.  Here  we  hoisted  the  Union
Jack  just  before  10  a.m.  and  took  possession  of  Victoria
Land  for  the  British  Empire.  Cape^  Bernacchi  is  a  low
rocky  promontory,  the  geology  of  which  is  extremely
interesting.  The  dominant  type  of  rock  is  a  pure  white
coarsely  crystalline  marble ;  this  has  been  broken  through
by  granite  rocks,  the  latter  in  places  containing  small
red  garnets.  The  marble  or  talc  schist  contains  graphite
disseminated  through  it  in  small  scales.  A  great  deal
of  tourmaline  and  epidote  are  developed  in  the  granite
at  its  point  of  contact  with  the  calcareous  schists.  It
appeared  that  the  granite  had  intruded  the  black
tourmaline  rocks.

After  taking  possession  we  resumed  our  sledging,
94,


A    BABY    SEAL

finding  the  surface  of  pancake  ice  very  good.  The  day-
being  calm  and  clear  and  free  from  either  falling  or
drifting  snow,  we  were  able,  for  the  first  time,  to  turn
our  sleeping-bag  inside  out  and  air  it  in  the  sun.  Pre-
vious to  this  the  reindeer  fur  inside  the  bag  had  become
much  encrusted  with  ice,  chiefly  the  result  of  the  freez-
ing of  our  breath.  Although  the  heat  of  the  sun  was
insufficient  to  actually  thaw  the  ice  it  evaporated  it
to  a  considerable  extent,  and  we  found  the  bag  that
night  much  more  comfortable  to  sleep  in  than  it  had
been  for  many  nights  previous.

The  following  day,  one  and  a  quarter  miles  north
of  our  preceding  camp,  we  reached  an  interesting  rocky
headland.  Here  we  found  a  mother  seal  with  a  newly
born  baby  seal,  the  latter  about  three  and  a  half  feet
in  length.  The  mother  seal  at  short  intervals  made
a  sound  like  "Wa-a-a."  After  a  close  inspection  the
mother  and  baby  were  left  undisturbed,  and  we
turned  our  attention  to  the  rocks.  These  were  most
interesting,  bearing  a  general  resemblance  to  those  at
Cape  Bernacchi.  Some  of  the  quartz  veins  traversing
this  point  Mawson  thought  very  favourable  for  gold.

When  we  left  this  point  the  wind  had  considerably
freshened.  We  had  previously  hoisted  sail  on  both
sledges,  and  the  wind  was  now  sufficiently  strong  to
admit  of  our  pulling  both  sledges  together.  The  total
distance  travelled  was  seven  statute  miles.  This  was
the  most  favourable  wind  we  experienced  during
the  whole  of  our  journey  to  and  from  the  Magnetic
Pole.

Shortly  after  leaving  Baby  Seal  Point  we  encoun-
tered heavy  belts  of  screw  pack-ice  with  high  sastrugi
between.  The  Christmas  Tree  sledge  capsized  badly
when  being  dragged  over  one  of  these  high  snow  ridges.
We  were  much  exhausted  when  we  camped  that  night

95


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

and  had  suffered  somewhat  from  the  cold  wind,  the
temperature  being  about  10°  Fahr.

That  night  I  experienced  a  rather  bad  attack  of
snow  blindness,  through  neglecting  to  wear  my  snow
goggles  regularly.  Finding  that  my  eyes  were  no
better  next  morning,  and  my  sight  being  dim  I  asked
Mawson  to  take  my  place  at  the  end  of  the  long  rope,
the  foremost  position  in  the  team.  Mawson  proved
himself  on  this  occasion  and  afterwards  so  remarkably
efficient  at  picking  out  the  best  track  for  our  sledges,
and  steering  a  good  course  that  by  my  request  he
occupied  this  position  throughout  the  rest  of  the  journey.

The  next  two  days  were  uneventful,  except  for  the
fact  that  we  occasionally  had  extremely  heavy  sledging
over  screw  pack-ice  and  high  and  long  sastrugi.  The
latter  were  from  two  to  three  feet  high,  bounded  fre-
quently by  almost  perpendicular  sides,  and  as  they
trended  from  west  to  east  and  our  course  was  from
south  to  north  they  proved  formidable  obstacles  to  our
progress,  and  capsizes  of  the  sledges  v/ere  frequent.

On  the  night  of  October  20,  we  camped  on  the
sea  ice  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  off  shore.  To
the  north-east  of  us  was  an  outward  curve  of  the  shore-
line, shown  as  a  promontory  on  the  existing  chart.
Early  the  next  morning  I  walked  over  to  the  shore
to  geologise,  and  found  the  rocky  headland  composed
of  curious  gneissic  granite  veined  with  quartz.  On
ascending  this  headland  I  noticed  to  my  surprise  that
what  had  been  previously  supposed  to  be  a  promontory
was  really  an  island  separated  by  a  narrow  strait  from
the  mainland.  It  was  clear  that  by  going  through
this  strait  we  would  save  several  miles.  Accordingly,
after  breakfast  we  sledged  into  the  strait.  The  western
side  of  the  strait  was  formed  of  glacier  ice  terminating
eastward  in  an  almost  precipitous  slope.  Here  and
96


INTERESTING    FOSSILS

there  masses  of  gneissic  granite  showed  from  beneath
the  ice.  The  eastern  side  of  the  strait  was  formed  of
terraced  moraine  gravels  with  large  erratics  embedded
in  the  gravel  of  the  top  terrace,  eighty  feet  above  sea-
level.

While  Mawson  determined  the  position  of  this
island  by  taking  a  round  of  angles  with  the  theodolite,
Mackay  and  I  crossed  the  strait  and  explored  the
island,  pacing  and  taking  levels.  The  rocks  of  which
the  erratics  and  boulder-bearing  gravels  were  formed
were  almost  without  exception  of  igneous  origin.  One
very  interesting  exception  was  a  block  of  weathered
clayey  limestone.  This  was  soft  and  yellowish  grey
externally,  but  hard  and  blue  on  the  freshly  fractured
surfaces  inside.  It  contained  traces  of  small  fossils
which  appeared  to  be  seeds  of  plants.  Specimens  of
these  were  taken  by  us  and  were  depoted  later  at  another
small  island,  which  we  called  Depot  Island.  It  is
much  to  be  regretted  that  we  were  unable  later  to
reach  this  depot  on  account  of  dense  belts  of  pack-ice,
and  so  these  very  interesting  specimens  were  lost.  Two
chips,  however,  of  this  rock  were  fortunately  preserved,
sufficient  for  chemical  analysis  and  microscopic  examina-
tion. There  could  be  little  doubt  that  this  clayey
limestone  has  been  derived  from  the  great  sedimentary
formation,  named  by  H.  T.  Ferrar,  the  Beacon  sand-
stone.

The  island  which  we  had  been  exploring  we  named
provisionally  Terrace  Island.  It  was  approximately
triangular  in  shape,  and  the  side  facing  the  strait,
down  which  we  travelled,  measured  one  mile  1200
yards  in  length.

The  following  day,  October  22,  we  sighted  the  first

skua  gull  we  had  seen  that  season.     Snow  fell  in  the

afternoon  between   2.30   and   5   p.m.,   forming  a  layer

II  G  9T


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

three-quarters  of  an  inch  deep.  The  temperature  rose
to  plus  6.5°  Fahr.  at  7  p.m.,  and  a  bhzzard  seemed
impending.

The  following  day,  October  23,  we  held  a  serious
council  as  to  the  future  of  our  journey  towards  the
Magnetic  Pole.  It  was  quite  obvious  that  at  our  present
rate  of  travelling,  about  four  statute  miles  daily  by  the
relay  method,  we  could  not  get  to  the  Pole  and  return
to  Butter  Point  early  in  January.  I  suggested  that  the
most  likely  means  of  getting  to  the  Pole  and  back  in
the  time  specified  by  Lieutenant  Shackleton  would
be  to  travel  on  half  rations,  depoting  the  remainder
of  our  provisions  at  an  early  opportunity.  They  both
agreed,  after  some  discussion,  to  try  this  expedient,
and  we  decided  to  think  the  matter  over  for  a  few  days
and  then  make  our  depot.

We  found,  as  the  result  of  the  fall  of  snow  on  the
preceding  day,  that  the  runners  of  our  sledge  clogged,
making  it  difficult  to  start  the  sledge  after  each  halt.
The  temperature  at  5  p.m.  was  now  as  high  as  plus
5°  Fahr.  There  were  numerous  seals,  mostly  mother
seals  with  young  ones,  on  the  ice  near  the  course  of
our  sledge,  as  many  as  seventeen  seals  being  sometimes
visible  simultaneously.

The  previous  day  we  had  observed  a  mother  seal
with  twin  baby  seals.  Mackay  took  up  one  of  these
in  his  arms  and  stroked  it  while  it  was  nuzzling  round.
It  somewhat  resembled  a  large  lizard.  The  mother
snorted  at  him  indignantly,  meanwhile,  but  made  no
attempt  to  attack  him.

We  encountered  some  large  cracks  in  the  sea  ice.
The  sea  water  between  the  opposite  walls  had  been  only
recently  frozen  over  so  that  the  ice  was  not  more  than
a  few  inches  in  thickness.  One  of  these  was  eighteen
feet  wide,  and  we  found  that  the  ice  bent  under  our
98


SEALS    AT    PLAY

weight  when  we  tested  it  primarily.  Mackay  called
it  "  The  Bridge  of  the  Beresina."  We  rushed  the
sledges  over  at  a  good  speed,  and  although  the  ice  bent
under  their  weight  it  fortunately  held.  At  about  3  p.m.
the  weather  grew  very  thick  and  it  began  to  snow ;  a
mild  blizzard  developing  later,  we  hoisted  sail  on  both
sledges.

The  next  day,  October  24,  we  found  it  very  warm
in  the  sleeping-bag,  the  sky  being  thickly  overcast
with  dense  stratus  cloud.  A  strong  water  sky  showed
up  to  the  east  of  us,  while  over  the  mountains  to  the
west  it  was  moderately  clear.  The  presence  of  this
water  sky,  indicating  open  sea,  warned  us  that  it  was
unsafe  to  stand  out  far  from  the  land.  We  reached  that
evening  a  long  rocky  point  of  gneissic  granite,  which  we
called  Gneiss  Point.  After  our  evening  hoosh  we  walked
across  to  the  point  and  collected  a  number  of  interesting
geological  specimens,  including  blocks  of  kenyte  lava.

The  following  day,  October  25,  proved  a  very  heavy
day  for  sledging,  as  we  had  to  drag  the  sledges  over  new
snow  from  three  to  four  inches  deep.  In  places  it  had
a  tough  top  crust  which  we  would  break  through  up  to
our  ankles.  We  met  also  several  obstacles  in  the
way  of  wide  cracks  in  the  sea  ice,  from  six  to  ten  feet  in
width,  and  several  miles  in  length.  The  sea  water
between  the  walls  of  the  cracks  had  only  recently  been
frozen  over,  so  that  the  ice  was  only  just  thick  enough
to  bear  the  sledges.  The  vicinity  of  these  great  ice-
cracks  were  perfect  baby  farms  for  young  seals.  It
was  a  pretty  sight  to  see  one  of  these  baby  seals  playing
with  its  mother,  whom  it  kept  gently  flicking  over  the
nose  with  its  small  flippers,  the  mother  every  now  and
then  gently  boxing  the  baby's  ear  with  one  of  her  large
flippers.  One  of  these  mothers  charged  down  on
Mackay,  who  was  making  an  inspection  of  her  baby

99


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

at  too  close  quarters  to  suit  her  fancy.  Another  mother
was  moaning  in  great  distress  over  her  baby,  which  had
just  died.  Evidently  the  mother  seal's  affection  for
her  young  is  very  strong.

In  pursuing  our  north-westerly  course  we  were  now
crossing  a  magnificent  bay,  which  trended  westwards
some  five  or  six  miles  away  from  the  course  we  were
steering.  On  either  side  of  this  bay  were  majestic
ranges  of  rocky  mountains  parted  from  one  another
at  the  head  of  the  bay  by  an  immense  glacier  with
steep  ice  falls.  On  examining  these  mountains  with  a  field-
glass  it  was  evident  that  in  their  lower  portions  they
were  formed  of  granites  and  gneiss,  producing  reddish
brown  soils.  At  the  higher  levels,  further  inland,  there
were  distinct  traces  of  rocks  showing  horizontal  strati-
fication. The  highest  rock  of  all  was  black  in  colour,
and  evidently  very  hard,  apparently  some  three
hundred  feet  in  thickness.  Below  this  was  some
softer  stratified  formation,  approximately  one  thou-
sand feet  in  thickness.  We  concluded  that  the  hard
top  layer  was  composed  of  igneous  rock,  possibly  a
lava,  while  the  horizontal  stratified  formation  be-
longed in  all  probability  to  the  Beacon  sandstone
formation.  Some  fine  nunataks  of  dark  rock  rose
from  the  south-east  side  of  the  great  glacier.  On
either  side  of  this  glacier  were  high  terraces  of  rock
reaching  back  for  several  miles  from  a  modern  valley
edge  to  the  foot  of  still  higher  ranges.  It  was  obvious
that  these  terraces  marked  the  position  of  the  floor  of
the  old  valley  at  a  time  when  the  glacier  ice  was  several
thousand  feet  higher  than  it  is  now,  and  some  ten
miles  wider  than  at  present.  The  glacier  trended
inland  in  a  general  south-westerly  direction.

We  longed  to  turn  our  sledges  shorewards  and
explore  these  inland  rocks,  but  this  would  have  involved
100


A    CHART    INACCURACY

a  delay  of  several  days— probably  a  week  at  least —
and  we  could  not  afford  the  time.  Mawson  took  a  series
of  horizontal  and  vertical  angles  with  the  theodolite  to
all  the  upper  peaks  in  these  ranges.  We  were  much
puzzled  to  determine  on  what  part  of  the  charted  coast
this  wide  bay  and  great  glacier  valley  was  situated.  We
speculated  as  to  whether  it  was  Granite  Harbour,  but
decided  that  it  could  not  be  in  view  of  the  distance
recorded  by  our  sledge  meter,  for,  according  to  this,  we
must  still  be  some  twenty  miles  south  of  Granite  Harbour
proper.  We  were  to  find  out  much  later  that  the  point
opposite  which  we  had  now  arrived  was  in  reality  Granite
Harbour,  and  that  its  position  was  not  shown  correctly
on  the  chart.  Of  course  in  pioneering  work  occasional
mistakes  such  as  these  are  inevitable.

The  following  day  the  sledge  still  proved  very
heavy  on  account  of  the  soft  snow — two  to  four  inches
deep — which  was  continually  clogging  the  runners  of
our  sledges.  It  was  also  difficult  to  steer  a  good  course
amongst  the  hummocky  pack-ice  on  account  of  the  day
being  dull  and  overcast.  There  was  much  low  stratus
cloud,  and  a  light  south-easterly  wind.

The  weather  of  October  27  was  beautifully  clear
and  sunshiny,  and  we  had  a  glorious  view  of  the
great  mountain  ranges  on  either  side  of  Granite  Harbour.
The  rich  colouring  of  warm  sepia  brown  and  terra  cotta
in  these  rocky  hills  was  quite  a  relief  to  the  eye.  Wind
springing  up  in  the  south-east  we  made  sail  on  both
sledges,  and  this  helped  us  a  good  deal  over  the  soft
snow  and  occasional  patches  of  sharp-edged  brash  ice.
Occasionally  the  runners  of  our  sledge  would  catch  on
one  of  these  sharp  fragments,  and  there  would  be  a
harsh  rasping  sound  as  a  shaving  was  peeled  off  the
runner.  We  feared  that  the  wind  would  develop  into  a
true  blizzard,  but  it  proved  to  be  only  what  Joyce  used

101


THE   HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

to  call  a  "  carpet  sweeper,"  driving  along  the  newly
fallen  snow  in  white  gossamer-like  films  over  the  sea  ice.

Towards  evening  we  fetched  up  against  some  high
ice-pressm'e  cracks  with  the  ice  ridged  up  six  to  eight
feet  high  in  huge  tumbled  blocks.  We  seemed  to  have
got  into  a  labyrinth  of  these  pressure  ridges  from  which
there  was  no  outlet.  At  last,  after  several  capsizes  of
the  sledges  and  some  chopping  through  the  ice  ridges
by  Mackay,  we  got  the  sledges  through,  and  camped
on  a  level  piece  of  ice.  We  were  much  helped  in  crossing
the  ridges  by  the  long  steep  sastrugi  of  hardened  snow.
In  places  these  ran  like  ramps  up  to  the  top  of  the
pressure  ridges,  and  were  just  wide  enough  and  strong
enough  to  bear  our  sledges.  Mawson  and  I  at  this
time  were  still  wearing  finnesko,  while  Mackay  had
taken  to  ski  boots.

The  following  day,  October  28,  the  sledging  was
again  very  heavy  over  sticky,  soft  snow  alternating
with  hard  sastrugi  and  patches  of  consolidated  brash
ice.  Shavings  of  wood  were  being  constantly  rasped
off  the  runners  of  our  sledges.  Mackay  lost  one  of  his
finnesko  off  the  sledge,  but  walked  back  a  couple  of
miles  in  the  evening  and  recovered  it.  Our  course
had  taken  us  past  a  number  of  snowbergs  ;  these  were
mostly  about  forty  feet  in  height  and  from  a  quarter  to
half  a  mile  in  length.  They  were  rigidly  embedded  in
the  sea  ice.  Occasionally  we  met  with  a  true  iceberg
of  blue  ice  amongst  the  snowbergs.

After  our  evening  hoosh,  Mawson  and  I  went  over
to  the  shore,  rather  more  than  half  a  mile  distant,  in
order  to  study  the  rocks.  These  we  found  were  com-
posed of  coarse  red  granite  ;  the  top  of  the  granite
was  much  smoothed  by  glacier  ice,  and  strewn  with
large  erratic  blocks.  In  places  the  granite  was  inter-
sected by  black  dykes  of  basic  rocks.  One  could  see
102


HEAVY    RELAY   WORK

that  the  glacier  ice,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  inland
from  this  rocky  shore,  had  only  recently  retreated  and
laid  bare  the  glaciated  rocky  surface.  We  found  a  little
moss  here  amongst  the  crevices  in  the  granite  rock.

October  29  was  beautifully  fine,  though  a  keen  and
fresh  wind,  rather  unpleasantly  cold,  was  blowing  from
off  the  high  mountain  plateau  to  our  west.  It  blew
from  a  direction  west  by  south  and  caused  a  little  low
drift  in  the  loose  snow  on  the  surface  of  the  sea  ice.
There  was  still  a  great  deal  of  deep,  soft  snow  alternating
with  hard  sastrugi  and  small  patches  of  consolidated
brash  ice,  so  that  the  sledging  was  very  heavy.

We  were  all  thoroughly  done  up  at  night  after  com-
pleting our  four  miles  of  relay  work.  That  evening  we
discussed  the  important  question  of  whether  it  would  be
possible  to  eke  out  our  food-supplies  with  seal  meat  so
as  to  avoid  putting  ourselves  on  half  rations,  and  we  all
agreed  that  this  should  be  done.  We  made  up  our  minds
that  at  the  first  convenient  spot  we  would  make  a
depot  of  any  articles  of  equipment,  geological  specimens,
&c.,  in  order  to  lighten  our  sledges,  and  would  at  the
same  time,  if  the  spot  was  suitable,  make  some  ex-
periments with  seal  meat.  The  chief  problem  in
connection  with  the  latter  was  how  to  cook  it  without
the  aid  of  paraffin  oil.  We  could  not  afford  more
paraffin  for  this  purpose,  as  we  estimated  that  even  with
the  utmost  care  the  supply  for  our  primus,  which  we
used  for  brewing  tea,  cocoa  and  hoosh,  would  become
exhausted  before  we  could  hope  to  reach  the  Magnetic
Pole,  unless  some  kind  of  substitute  for  paraffin  could
be  found.

The  following  day,  October  30,  was  full  of  interest
for  us,  as  well  as  hard  work.  In  the  early  morning,
between  2.30  a.m.  and  6.30  a.m.,  a  mild  blizzard  was
blowing.     We  got  under  way  a  little  later  and  camped

lOS


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

at  about  10.30  a.m.  for  lunch  alongside  a  very  inter-
esting rocky  point.  Mawson  got  a  good  set  of  theodolite
angles  from  the  top  of  this  point.  The  point  was  formed
of  coarse  porphyritic  grey  gneiss,  traversed  by  black
dykes  of  rock,  apparently  tinguaite,  and  another  variety
containing  an  abundance  of  sparkling  black  crystals  of
hornblende,  which  may  be  termed  provisionally  a  horn-
blende lamporphyre.

After  lunch  we  passed  close  by  a  mother  seal  and
her  baby.  The  mother  charged  us  and  we  had  to
skid  along  quick  and  lively  past  her  with  the  sledges.
That  day  was  the  first  occasion  that  we  tried  the
experiment  of  strengthening  the  brew  of  the  tea  by
using  the  old  tea-leaves  of  a  previous  meal  mixed  with
the  new  ones.  This  was  Mackay's  idea,  and  Mawson
and  I  at  the  time  did  not  appreciate  the  experiment.
Later  on,  however,  we  were  very  glad  to  adopt  it.

The  sledging  that  afternoon  was  about  the  heaviest
we  had  experienced  up  to  date.  The  weather  was  now
daily  becoming  warmer  and  the  saline  snow  on  the  sea
ice  became  sticky  in  consequence.  It  gripped  the
runners  of  the  sledges  like  glue,  and  we  were  only  able
v/ith  our  greatest  efforts  to  drag  the  sledges  over  this  at
a  snail's  pace.  We  were  all  thoroughly  exhausted  that
evening  when  we  camped  at  the  base  of  a  rocky  promon-
tory about  180  ft.  high.  This  cliff  was  formed  of  coarse
gneiss,  with  numerous  dark  streaks,  and  enclosures  of
huge  masses  of  greenish-grey  quartzite.

After  our  evening  hoosh  we  walked  over  to  a  very
interesting  small  island  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile
distant.  It  was  truly  a  most  wonderful  place  geologic-
ally, and  was  a  perfect  elysium  for  the  mineralogist.
The  island,  which  we  afterwards  called  Depot  Island,
was  accessible  on  the  shoreward  side,  but  rose  per-
pendicularly to  a  height  of  200  ft.  above  sea-level  on  the
104


Dark  Enclosures  of  Hornblende-Eock  in  Gneiss,  Depot  Island


Seals  on  Coast  of  Victoria  Land


TofaceiHir/e  10-1


MINERAL    DISCOVERIES

other  three  sides.  There  was  very  little  snow  or  ice
upon  it,  the  surface  being  almost  entirely  formed  of
gneissic  granite.  This  granite,  as  shown  in  the  photo-
graph, was  full  of  dark  enclosures  of  basic  rocks,  rich  in
black  mica  and  huge  crystals  of  hornblende.  It  was  in
these  enclosures  that  Mawson  discovered  a  translucent
brown  mineral,  which  he  believed  to  be  monazite,  but
which  has  since  proved  to  be  titanium  mineral.  Patches
of  a  crystalline,  milky- white  mineral  were  to  be  seen
amongst  the  large  platy  crystals  of  dark  green  horn-
blende. These  white  crystals  we  thought  might  be
scapolite.  We  returned  to  camp  and  slept  soundly
after  the  severe  work  of  the  day.

We  were  up  at  6  a.m.  next  morning,  and  after
breakfast  Mackay  and  Mawson  went  in  pursuit  of  some
seals  which  we  had  sighted  further  back  on  the  previous
day,  while  I  cUmbed  up  an  adjacent  granite  slope  with
the  field-glasses,  watching  for  a  signal  from  them,  if
they  were  successful  in  their  hunting,  to  bring  up  an
empty  sledge.  They  were,  however,  unsuccessful  in
their  quest,  and  after  some  time  returned  to  camp.

We  packed  up  and  made  for  the  island  at  9.80  a.m.
The  sledging  was  extremely  heavy,  and  we  fell  into  a
tide-crack  on  the  way,  but  the  sledge  was  got  over  safely.
Mackay  sighted  a  seal  about  six  hundred  yards  distant
from  the  site  of  our  new  camp  near  the  island,  and  just
then  we  noticed  that  another  seal  had  bobbed  up  in  the
tide-crack  close  to  our  old  camp.  Mackay  and  Mawson
at  once  started  off  in  the  direction  Vv^here  the  first  seal
had  been  sighted.  It  proved  to  be  a  bull  seal  in  very
good  condition,  and  they  killed  it  by  iaiocking  it  on  the
head  with  an  ice-axe.  Meanwhile,  I  unpacked  the  Duff
sledge  and  took  it  out  to  them.  Returning  to  the  site
of  our  canip  I  put  up  the  tent,  and  on  going  back  to
Mawson   and   Mackay    found   that   they    had    finished

105


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

fletching  the  seal.  We  loaded  up  the  empty  sledge  with
seal  blubber,  resembling  bars  of  soap  in  its  now  frozen
condition,  steak  and  liver,  and  returned  to  camp  for
lunch.

After  lunch  we  took  some  blubber  and  seal  meat
on  to  the  island,  intending  to  try  the  experiment  of
making  a  blubber  fire  in  order  to  cook  the  meat.
We  worked  our  way  a  short  distance  up  a  steep,  rocky
gulley,  and  there  built  a  fireplace  out  of  magnificent
specimens  of  hornblende  rock.  It  seemed  a  base  use
for  such  magnificent  mineralogical  specimens,  but
necessity  knows  no  laws.  We  had  brought  with  us  our
primus  lamp  in  order  to  start  the  fire.  We  put  blubber
on  our  iron  shovel,  warmed  this  imderneath  by  means
of  the  heat  of  the  primus  lamp  so  as  to  render  down  the
oil  from  it,  and  then  lit  the  oil.  The  experiment  was
not  altogether  successful.  Mawson  cooked  for  about
three  hours,  closely  and  anxiously  watched  by  Mackay
and  myself.  Occasionally  he  allowed  us  to  taste  small
snacks  of  the  partly  cooked  seal  meat,  which  were  pro-
nounced to  be  delicious.

While  the  experiment  was  at  its  most  critical
stage,  at  about  6  p.m.,  we  observed  sudden  swirls
of  snowdrift  high  up  on  the  western  mountains,
coming  rapidly  down  to  lower  levels.  For  a  few
minutes  we  did  not  think  seriously  of  the  phenome-
non, but  as  the  drift  came  nearer  we  saw  that  some-
thing serious  was  in  the  air.  Mackay  and  I  rushed  down
to  our  tent,  the  skirt  of  which  was  only  temporarily
secured  with  light  blocks  of  snow.  We  reached  it  just  as
it  was  struck  by  the  sudden  blizzard  which  had  descended
from  the  western  mountains.  There  was  no  time  to  dig
further  blocks  of  snow,  all  we  could  do  was  to  seize  the
heavy  food-bags  on  our  sledges,  weighing  sixty  pounds
each,  and  rush  them  on  to  the  skirt  of  the  tent.  The
106


RATIONS    REDUCED

blizzard  struck  our  kitchen  on  the  island  simultaneously
with  our  tent,  and  temporarily  Maws  on  lost  his  mits  and
most  of  the  tit-bits  of  seal  meat,  but  these  were  quickly
recovered,  and  he  came  rushing  down  to  join  us  in
securing  the  tent.  While  Mawson  in  frantic  haste
chopped  out  blocks  of  snow  and  dumped  them  on  to  the
skirt  of  the  tent,  Mackay,  no  less  frantically,  struggled
with  our  sleeping-bag,  which  had  been  turned  inside-
out  to  air,  and  which  by  this  time  was  covered  with
drift  snow.  He  quickly  had  it  turned  right  side  in
again,  and  dashed  it  inside  the  tent.  At  last  every-
thing was  secured,  and  we  found  ourselves  safe  and
sound  inside  the  tent.  The  primus  was  quickly  got
going,  and  soon  we  had  some  hot  cocoa  and  hot  seal
pottage,  together  with  some  small  pieces  of  charred  but
delicious  seal  blubber.  The  blizzard  continued  until
past  our  bedtime.  We  turned  in  with  a  determination
of  making  further  experiments  on  the  cooking  of  seal
meat  on  the  following  morning.

The  following  day,  November  1,  we  breakfasted
off  a  mixture  of  our  ordinary  hoosh  and  seal  meat.
After  some  discussion  we  decided  that  our  only  hope  of
reaching  the  Magnetic  Pole  lay  in  our  travelling  on
half  rations  from  our  present  camp  to  the  point  on
the  coast  at  the  Drygalski  Glacier,  where  we  might  for
the  first  time  hope  to  be  able  to  turn  inland  with  reason-
able prospect  of  reaching  the  Magnetic  Pole.  Mawson
was  emphatic  that  we  must  conserve  six  weeks  of  full
rations  for  our  inland  journey  to  and  from  the  Pole.
This  necessitated  our  going  on  half  rations  from  this
island  to  the  far  side  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier,  a  distance
of  about  one  hundred  statute  miles.  In  order  to  sup-
plement the  regular  half  rations  we  intended  to  take  seal
meat.

While   I   was   busy   in   calculating   the   times   and

107


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

distances  for  the  remainder  of  our  journey,  and  pro-
portioning the  food  rations  to  suit  our  new  programme,
Mawson  and  Mackay  conducted  further  experiments
on  the  cooking  of  seal  meat  with  blubber.  While  at
our  winter  quarters,  Mackay  had  made  some  ex-
periments on  the  use  of  blubber  as  a  fuel.  He  had  con-
structed a  blubber  lamp,  the  wick  of  which  kept  alight
for  several  hours  at  a  time,  feeding  itself  on  the  seal
oil.  He  had  tried  the  experiment  of  heating  up  water
over  this  blubber  lamp,  and  was  partly  successful  at
the  time  when  we  left  winter  quarters  for  our  present
sledging  journey.  But  his  experiments  at  the  time
were  not  taken  very  seriously,  and  the  blubber  lamp
was  left  behind,  a  fact  which  we  now  much  regretted.
An  effective  cooking-stove  was,  however,  evolved,  as
the  result  of  a  series  of  experiments  this  day,  out  of  one
of  our  large  empty  biscuit  tins.  The  lid  of  this  was
perforated  with  a  number  of  circular  holes  for  the
reception  of  wicks.  Its  edges  were  bent  down,  so  as
to  form  supports  to  keep  the  wick-holder  about  half  an
inch  above  the  bottom  of  the  biscuit  tin.  The  wick-
holder  was  put  in  place  ;  wicks  were  made  of  pieces  of
old  calico  food-bags  rolled  in  seal  blubber,  or  with  thin
slices  of  seal  blubber  enfolded  in  them,  the  calico  being
done  up  in  little  rolls  for  the  purpose  of  making  v/icks,
as  one  rolls  a  cigarette,  the  seal  blubber  taking  the
place  of  the  tobacco  in  this  case.  Lumps  of  blubber
were  laid  round  the  wick-holder.  Then,  after  some
difficulty,  the  wicks  were  lighted.  They  burned  feebly
at  first,  as  seal  blubber  has  a  good  deal  of  water  in
it.  After  some  minutes  of  fitful  spluttering,  the  wicks
got  fairly  alight,  and  as  soon  as  the  lower  part  of  the
biscuit  tin  was  raised  to  a  high  temperature,  the  big
lumps  of  blubber  at  the  side  commenced  to  have  the
water  boiled  out  of  them  and  the  oil  rendered  down.
lOS


COOKING    WITH    BLUBBER

This  oil  ran  under  the  wick-holder  and  supplied  the
wicks  at  their  base.  The  wicks,  now  fed  with  warm,
pure  seal  oil,  started  to  burn  brightly,  and  even  fiercely,
so  that  it  became  necessary  occasionally  to  damp  them
down  with  chips  of  fresh  blubber.  We  tried  the  ex-
periment of  using  lumps  of  salt  as  wicks,  and  found  this
fairly  successful.  We  also  tried  small  pieces  of  our
brown  rope  for  the  same  purpose,  using  the  separated
strands  of  these  cut  in  pieces  of  about  one  and  a  half
inches  long.  These  made  excellent  wicks,  but  we
could  not  spare  much  rope.  We  also  tried  the  lamp-
wick  that  we  had  brought  with  us  for  binding  on  our
finnesko,  but  in  this  case  also  rigid  economy  was  an
absolute  necessity.  We  decided  to  rely  for  wicks  chiefly
on  our  empty  food-bags,  and  thought  possibly  that  if
these  ran  out  we  might  have  recourse  to  moss.  But  the
empty  food-bags  supplied  suflficient  wick  for  our  need.

That  day,  by  means  of  galvanised  iron  wires,  we
slung  the  inner  pot  from  our  aluminium  cooker  over
the  lighted  wicks  of  our  bJubber  cooker,  thavvxd
down  snow  in  it,  added  chips  of  seal  meat  and  made
a  delicious  bouillon.  This  had  a  rich  red  colour  and
seemed  very  nutritious,  but  to  me  was  indigestible.
While  Mawson  was  still  engaged  on  further  cooking
experiments,  Mackay  and  I  ascended  to  the  highest
point  of  the  island,  selected  a  spot  for  a  cairn  to  mark
our  depot,  and  Mackay  commenced  building  the  cairn.
Meanwhile,  I  returned  to  camp  and  wrote  a  number  of
letters,  including  one  to  the  commander  of  the  Nimrod.
The  latter  was  accompanied  by  a  sketch  plan  taken
from  the  Admiralty  chart  to  show  the  proper  position
of  our  final  depot  before  we  were  to  turn  inland  "  on
the  low  sloping  shore  "  to  the  north-west  of  the  Dry-
galski  Glacier.  The  other  letters  were  to  Lieutenant
Shackleton  and  to  my  family.

109


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

The  letter  to  the  commander  of  the  Nimrod  con-
tained the  following  statement  of  our  plans  :

"  Camp,  Graitite  Harbouii.*
"  Dear  Sir, — ^I  beg  to  inform  you  that  we  intend
leaving  here  to-morrow  in  continuation  of  our  journey
towards  the  Magnetic  Pole.  We  have  to  work  our  two
sledges  by  relays,  which,  of  course,  means  slow  pro-
gress— only  about  four  miles  per  day.  At  this  rate  we
hope  to  reach  the  north  side  of  the  Drygalski  Ice  Barrier,
at  the  point  where  '  low  sloping  shore  '  is  marked  on  the
Admiralty  Chart  of  the  Antarctic  Sheet  III.  (please
see  sketch  on  opposite  page),  by  about  December  15.
We  propose  to  make  a  depot  there  marked  by  a  black
flag  similar  to  the  one  we  are  leaving  here  at  the  island
at  south  side  of  entrance  to  Granite  Harbour.  We
propose  to  travel  inland  from  the  '  low  sloping  shore,'
and  if  possible  reach  the  Magnetic  Pole  and  return  to
depot.  We  estimate  that  this  may  take  six  weeks,  so
that  we  may  not  return  to  the  coast  at  the  low  sloping
shore  depot  until  about  January  25.  We  propose  to
wait  there  until  the  Nimrod  calls  for  us  at  the  beginning
of  February."

The  letter  concluded  with  detailed  instructions  re-
garding the  course  to  be  pursued  in  searching  for  the
party.

*  At  this  time  we  were  under  the  impression  that  this  island  was
on  the  south  side  of  Granite  Harbour.  We  did  not  know  that  we  had
already  left  Granite  Harbour  about  twelve  miles  to  the  south  of  us.


110


CHAPTER  VIII

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)

The  old  dragon  under  ground

In  straiter  limits  bound,

Not  half  so  far  casts  his  usurped  sway,

And  wroth  to  see  his  kingdom  fail,

Swinges  the  scaly  horror  of  his  folded  tail.

Milton

IT  had,  of  course,  become  clear  to  us  before  this  letter
was  written,  in  view  of  our  experience  of  the  already
cracking  sea  ice  near  the  true  Granite  Harbour,  as  well
as  in  view  of  our  comparatively  slow  progress  by  relay,
that  our  retreat  back  to  camp  from  the  direction  of  the
Magnetic  Pole  would  in  all  probability  be  entirely  cut
off  through  the  breaking  up  of  the  sea  ice.  Under
these  circumstances  we  determined  to  take  the  risk  of
the  Nimrod  arriving  safely  on  her  return  voyage  at
Cape  Royds,  where  she  would  receive  the  instructions
to  search  for  us  along  the  western  coast,  and  also  the
risk  of  her  not  being  able  to  find  our  depot  and  our-
selves at  the  low  sloping  shore.  We  knew  that  there
was  a  certain  amount  of  danger  in  adopting  this  course,
but  we  felt  that  we  had  got  on  so  far  with  the  work
entrusted  to  us  by  our  Commander,  that  we  could  not
honourably  now  turn  back.  Under  these  circumstances
we  each  wrote  farewell  letters  to  those  who  were  nearest
and  dearest,  and  the  following  morning,  November  2,
we  were  up  at  4.30  a.m.     After  putting  all  the  letters

111


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTAHCTIC

into  one  of  our  empty  dried-milk  tins,  and  fitting  on
the  air-tight  lid,  I  wallved  with  it  to  the  island  and  climbed
up  to  the  cairn.  Here,  after  carefully  depoting  several
bags  of  geological  specimens  at  the  base  of  the  flagstaff,
I  lashed  the  little  post  office  by  means  of  cord  and  copper-
wire  securely  to  the  flagstaff,  and  then  carried  some  large
slabs  of  exfoliated  granite  to  the  cairn,  and  built  them
up  on  the  leeward  side  of  it  in  order  to  strengthen  it
against  the  southerly  blizzards.  A  keen  wind  was
blowing,  as  was  usual  in  the  early  morning,  off  the  high
plateau,  and  one's  hands  got  frequently  frost-bitten  in
the  work  of  securing  the  tin  to  the  flagstaff.  The
cairn  was  at  the  seaward  end  of  a  sheer  cliff  two  hundred
feet  high.

On  returning  to  camp  I  put  some  chopped  seal
meat  into  the  cooking-pot  on  our  blubber  stove,  which
Mawson  had  meanwhile  lighted,  and  about  three-
quarters  of  an  hour  later  we  partook  of  some  nourishing,
but  no  less  indigestible  seal  bouillon.  It  was  later
than  usual  when  we  started  our  sledges,  and  the  pull-
ing proved  extremely  heavy.  The  sun's  heat  was
thawing  the  snow  surface  and  making  it  extremely
sticky.  Our  progress  was  so  painfully  slow  that  we
decided,  after,  with  great  efforts,  doing  two  miles,  to
camp,  have  our  hoosh,  and  then  turn  in  for  six  hours,
having  meanwhile  started  the  blubber  lamp.  At  the
expiration  of  that  time  we  intended  to  get  out  of  our
sleeping-bag,  breakfast,  and  start  sledging  about  mid-
night. We  hoped  that  by  adopting  nocturnal  habits
of  travelling,  we  would  avoid  the  sticky  ice-surface  which
by  daytime  formed  such  an  obstacle  to  our  progress.

We  carried  out  this  programme  on  the  evening
of  November  2,  and  the  morning  of  November  3.
We  found  the  experiment  fairly  successful,  as  at  mid-
night and  for  a  few  hours  afterwards,  the  temperature
112


A   DRINK    DEBATED

remained  sufficiently  low  to  keep  the  surface  of  the
snow  on  the  sea  ice  moderately  crisp.

On  November  3  and  4  the  weather  was  fine,  and
we  made  fair  progress.  At  noon  Mawson  cleaned  out
the  refuse  from  our  blubber  lamp.  Amongst  this
were  a  few  dainty  bits  ;  Mackay  was  what  he  called
"  playing  the  skua,"  picking  these  over,  when  he
accidentally  transferred  to  his  mouth  and  swallowed
one  of  the  salt  "vvicks  which  we  had  been  using  in  the
blubber  lamp.  Mawson  and  I  were  unaware  of  this
episode  at  the  time.  Later  on,  towards  evening,  he
complained  much  of  thirst,  and  proffered  a  gentle
request,  when  the  snow  was  being  thawed  down  pre-
paratory to  making  hoosh,  that  he  might  be  allowed  to
drink  some  of  the  water  before  the  hoosh  was  put  into
it ;  at  the  same  time  he  gave  us  the  plausible  explanation
above  mentioned  as  the  cause  of  his  exceeding  thirst.
After  debating  the  matter  at  some  length,  it  was  de-
cided, in  view  of  the  special  circumstances  surrounding
the  case,  and  without  creating  a  precedent — which
otherwise  might  become  a  dangerous  one — that  he  might
be  allowed  on  this  occasion  to  take  a  drink.  Mackay,
however,  considered  that  this  water  gift  was  given
grudgingly,  and  of  necessity,  and  accordingly  he  sternly
refused  to  accept  it.  Just  then,  th€  whole  discussion
was  abruptly  terminated  through  the  pot  being  ac-
cidentally capsized  when  being  lifted  off  the  blubber
lamp,  and  the  whole  of  the  water  was  lost.

On  the  following  day,  November  5,  we  were  opposite
a  very  interesting  coastal  panorama,  which  we  thought
belonged  to  Granite  Harbour,  but  which  was  really
over  twenty  miles  to  the  north  of  it.  Magnificent
ranges  of  mountains,  steep  slopes  free  from  snow  and
ice,  stretched  far  to  the  north  and  far  to  the  south  of
us,  and  finished  away  inland,  towards  the  heads  of  long

U  H  118


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

glacier  cut  valleys,  in  a  vast  upland  snow  plateau.  The
rocks  which  were  exposed  to  view  in  the  lower  part  of
these  ranges  were  mostly  of  warm  sepia  brown  to  terra-
cotta tint,  and  were  evidently  built  up  of  a  continuation
of  the  gneissic  rocks  and  red  granites  which  we  had
previously  seen.  Above  these  crystalline  rocks  came  a
belt  of  greenish-grey  rock,  apparently  belonging  to  some
stratified  formation  and  possibly  many  hundreds  of
feet  in  thickness  ;  the  latter  was  capped  with  a  black
rock  that  seemed  to  be  either  a  basic  plateau  lava,  or
a  huge  sill.  In  the  direction  of  the  glacier  valleys,  the
plateau  was  broken  up  into  a  vast  number  of  conical
hills  of  various  shapes  and  heights,  all  showing  evidence  of
intense  glacial  action  in  the  past.  The  hills  were  here
separated  from  the  coast-line  by  a  continuous  belt  of
piedmont  glacier  ice.  This  last  terminated  where  it
joined  the  sea  ice  in  a  steep  slope,  or  low  cliff,  and  in
places  was  very  much  crevassed.  Mawson  at  our  noon
halts  for  lunch,  continued  taking  the  angles  of  all  these
ranges  and  valleys  with  our  theodolite.

The  temperature  was  now  rising,  being  as  high  as
22°  Fahr.  at  noon  on  November  5.  We  had  a  very  heavy
sledging  surface  that  day,  there  being  much  consolidated
brash  ice,  sastrugi,  pie-crust  snow,  and  numerous
cracks  in  the  sea  ice.  As  an  offset  to  these  troubles  we
had  that  night,  for  the  first  time,  the  use  of  our  new
frying-pan,  constructed  by  Mawson  out  of  one  of  our
empty  paraffin  tins.  This  tin  had  been  cut  in  half
down  the  middle  parallel  to  its  broad  surfaces,  and
loops  of  iron  wire  being  added,  it  was  possible  to  sus-
pend it  inside  the  empty  biscuit  tin  above  the  wicks  of
our  blubber  lamp.  We  found  that  in  this  frying-pan
we  could  rapidly  render  down  the  seal  blubber  into
oil,  and  as  soon  as  the  oil  boiled  we  dropped  into  the
pan  small  slices  of  seal  liver  or  seal  meat.  The  liver
114,


SEAL    BOUILLON

took  about  ten  minutes  to  cook  in  the  boiling  oil,  the
seal  meat  about  twenty  minutes.  These  facts  were
ascertained  by  the  empirical  method.  Mawson  dis-
covered by  the  same  method  that  the  nicely  browned
and  crisp  residue  from  the  seal  blubber,  after  the  oil
in  it  had  become  rendered  down,  was  good  eating,  and
had  a  fine  nutty  flavour.  We  also  found,  as  the  result
of  later  experiments,  that  dropping  a  little  seal's
blood  into  the  boiling  oil  produced  eventually  a  gravy
of  very  fine  flavour.  If  the  seal's  blood  was  poured
in  rapidly  into  the  boiling  oil,  it  made  a  kind  of  gravy
pancake,  which  we  also  considered  very  good  as  a
variety.

We  had  a  magnificent  view  this  day  of  fresh  ranges
of  mountains  to  the  north  of  Depot  Island.  At  the  foot
of  these  was  an  extensive  terrace  of  glacier  ice,  a  curious
type  of  piedmont  glacier.  Its  surface  was  strongly
convex  near  where  it  terminated  seawards  in  a  steep
slope  or  low  cliff.  In  places  this  ice  was  heavily
crevassed.  At  a  distance  of  several  miles  inland,  it
reached  the  spurs  of  an  immense  coastal  range,  while  in
the  wide  gaps  in  this  range  the  ice  trended  inland  as
far  as  the  eye  could  see  until  it  blended  in  the  far  dis-
tance with  the  skyline  high  up  on  the  great  inland
plateau.

A  little  before  9  p.m.  on  November  5  we  left  our
sleeping-bag,  and  found  snow  falling,  with  a  fresh  and
chilly  breeze  from  the  south.  The  blubber  lamp,  which
we  had  lighted  before  we  had  turned  in,  had  got  blown
out.  We  built  a  chubby  house  for  it  of  snow  blocks  to
keep  off  the  wind,  and  relighted  it,  and  then  turned
into  the  sleeping-bag  again  while  we  waited  for  the
snow  and  chips  of  seal  meat  in  our  cooking-pot  to
become  converted  into  a  hot  bouillon  ;  the  latter  was
ready  after  an  interval  of  about  one  hour  and  a  half.

115


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

Just  before  midnight  we  brought  the  cooker  ahght
into  the  tent  in  order  to  proteet  it  from  the  blizzard
which  was  now  blowing  and  bringing  much  falling  snow
with  it.  Mawson's  cooking  experiments  continued  to
be  highly  successful  and  entirely  satisfactory  to  the
party.

We  waited  for  the  falling  snow  to  clear  sufficiently
to  enable  us  to  see  a  short  distance  ahead,  and  then
started  again,  the  blizzard  still  blowing  with  a  little
low  drift.  After  doing  a  stage  of  pulling  on  both
sledges  to  keep  ourselves  warm  in  the  blizzard  we  set
sail — always  a  chilly  business — and  the  wind  was  a
distinct  assistance  to  us.  We  encountered  a  good  deal
of  brash  ice  that  day,  and  noticed  that  this  type  of  ice
surface  was  most  common  in  the  vicinity  of  icebergs,
which  just  here  were  very  numerous.  The  brash  ice
is  probably  formed  by  the  icebergs  surging  to  and  fro
in  heavy  weather  like  a  lot  of  gigantic  Yermaks,  and
crunching  up  the  sea  ice  in  their  vicinity.  The  latter,
of  course,  re-freezes,  producing  a  surface  covered  with
jagged  edges  and  points.

We  were  now  reduced  to  one  plasmon  biscuit  each
for  breakfast  and  one  for  the  evening  meal,  and  we  were
unanimous  in  the  opinion  that  we  had  never  before
fully  realised  how  very  nice  these  plasmon  biscuits
were.  We  became  exceedingly  careful  even  over  the
crumbs.  As  some  biscuits  were  thicker  than  others,  the
cook  for  the  week  would  select  three  biscuits,  place  them
on  the  outer  cover  of  our  aluminium  cooker,  and  get
one  of  his  mates  to  look  in  an  opposite  direction  while
the  messman  pointed  to  a  biscuit  and  said,  "  Whose  ?  "
The  mate  with  averted  face,  or  shut  eyes,  would  then
state  the  owner,  and  the  biscuit  was  ear-marked  for
him,  and  so  with  the  other  two  biscuits.  Grievous
was  the  disappointment  of  the  man  to  whose  lot  the
116


PRECIOUS    BISCUITS

thinnest  of  the  three  biscuits  had  fallen.  Originally,
on  this  sledge  journey,  when  biscuits  were  more
plentiful,  we  used  to  eat  them  regardless  of  the  loss  of
crumbs,  munching  them  boldly,  with  the  result  that
occasional  crumbs  fell  on  the  floorcloth.  Not  so  now.
Each  man  broke  his  biscuit  over  his  own  pannikin  of
hoosh,  so  that  any  crumbs  produced  in  the  process  of
fracture  fell  into  the  pannikin.  Then,  in  order  to  make
sure  that  there  were  no  loose  fragments  adhering  to
the  morsel  we  were  about  to  transfer  to  our  mouths,
we  tapped  the  broken  chip,  as  well  as  the  biscuit  from
which  it  had  been  broken,  on  the  sides  of  the  pannikin,
so  as  to  shake  into  it  any  loose  crumbs.  Then,  and
then  only,  was  it  safe  to  devour  the  precious  morsel.
Mackay,  who  adopted  this  practice  in  common  with  the
rest  of  us,  said  it  reminded  him  of  the  old  days  when
the  sailors  tapped  each  piece  of  broken  biscuit  before
eating  it  in  order  to  shake  out  the  weevils.

Mawson  and  I  now  wore  our  ski  boots  instead  of
finnesko,  the  weather  being  warmer,  and  the  ski  boot
giving  one  a  better  grip  on  the  snow  surface  of  the  sea
ice.  The  rough  leather  took  the  skin  off  my  right  heel,
but  Mackay  fixed  it  up  later  in  the  evening,  that  is,
my  heel,  with  some  "  Newskin."  As  we  found  the
sharp  iron  spikes  of  the  ski  boots  made  holes  in
our  waterproof  floorcloth  we  made  a  practice  of
always  changing  into  our  finnesko  before  entering  the
tent.

We  sledged  on  uneventfully  for  the  remainder  of
November  6,  and  during  the  7th,  and  on  November  8
it  came  on  to  blow  again  with  fresh-falling  snow.
The  blizzard  was  still  blowing  when  the  time  came  for
us  to  pitch  our  tent.  We  had  a  severe  struggle  to  get
the  tent  up  in  the  high  wind  and  thick  falling  snow.
At  last  the  work  was  accomplished,  and  we  were  all

117


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

able  to  turn  into  our  sleeping-bag,  pretty  tired,  at  about
12.30  P.M.

The  weather  was  still  bad  the  following  day,
November  9.  After  breakfast  off  seal's  liver,  and  digging
out  the  sledges  from  the  snow  drift,  we  started  in  the
blizzard,  the  snow  still  falling.  After  a  little  while  we
made  sail  on  both  sledges.  The  light  was  very  bad  on
a  ccount  of  the  thick  falling  snow,  and  we  were  constantly
falling  up  to  our  knees  in  the  cracks  in  the  sea  ice.  It
seemed  miraculous  that  in  spite  of  these  very  numerous
accidents  we  never  sprained  an  ankle.

That  day  we  saw  a  snow  petrel,  and  three  skua  gulls
visited  our  camp.  At  last  the  snow  stopped  falling
and  the  wind  fell  light,  and  we  were  much  cheered  by
a  fine,  though  distant  view  of  the  Nordenskjold  Ice
Barrier  to  the  north  of  us.  We  were  all  extremely
anxious  to  ascertain  what  sort  of  a  surface  for  sledging
we  should  meet  with  on  this  great  glacier.  According
to  the  Admiralty  chart,  prepared  from_  observations  by
the  Discovery  expedition,  this  glacier  was  between
twenty-four  and  thirty  miles  wide,  and  projected  over
twenty  miles  from  the  rocky  shore  into  the  sea.  We
hoped  that  we  might  be  able  to  cross  it  without  following
a  circuitous  route  along  its  seaward  margins.

We  started  off  on  November  10,  amongst  very
heavy  sastrugi  and  ridges  of  broken  pack-ice.  Cracks
in  the  sea  ice  were  extremely  numerous.  The  morning
was  somewhat  cloudy,  but  as  the  midnight  sun  got
higher  in  the  heavens,  the  clouds  dispersed  and  the
weather  became  comparatively  warm,  the  temperature
being  up  to  plus  3°  Fahr.  at  8  a.m.  That  day  when
we  pitched  camp  we  were  within  half  a  mile  of  the
southern  edge  of  the  Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier.

The  following  day,  November  11,  as  Mawson  wished
to  get  an  accurate  magnetic  determination  with  the
118


NORDENSKJOLD    ICE    BARRIER

Lloyd-Creak  dip  circle,  we  decided  to  camp,  Mackay
and  I  exploring  the  glacier  surface  to  select  a  suitable
track  for  our  sledges  while  Mawson  took  his  observa-
tions. After  breakfast  we  removed  everything  con-
taining iron  several  hundred  yards  away  from  the  tent,
leaving  Mawson  alone  inside  it  in  company  with  the
dip  circle.  We  found  that  the  ascent  from  the  sea  ice
to  the  Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier  was  a  comparatively
easy  one.  The  surface  was  formed  chiefly  of  hard
snow  glazed  in  places,  partly  through  thawing  and
re-freezing,  partly  through  the  polishing  of  this  wind-
ward surface  by  particles  of  fresh  snow  driven  over  it
by  the  blizzards.  Hummocky  masses,  apparently  of
the  nature  of  large  sastrugi,  projected  here  and  there  to
a  height  of  six  feet  above  the  general  level.  The  latter
were  something  like  elongated  white  ant's  nests.  In
places  the  snow  surface  showed  pie- crust  structure,  a
bad  surface  for  sledging.  On  the  whole  this  Barrier
was  fairly  free  from  crevasses,  although  Mackay  and
I  crossed  a  few  in  our  short  pioneering  excursion.

The  surface  ascended  gradually  to  a  little  over  one
hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea  ice,  passing  into
a  wide  undulating  plain  which  stretched  away  to  the
north  as  far  as  the  eye  could  see.

We  returned  to  Mawson  with  the  good  news  that
the  Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier  was  quite  practicable  for
sledging,  and  would  probably  afford  us  a  much  more
easy  surface  than  the  sea  ice  over  which  we  had  pre-
viously been  passing.  Mawson  informed  us,  as  the
result  of  his  observations  with  the  dip  circle,  that  the
Magnetic  Pole  was  probably  about  forty  miles  further
inland  than  the  theoretical  mean  position  calculated
for  it  from  the  magnetic  observations  of  the  Discovery
expedition  seven  years  ago.

Early  on  the  morning  of   November  12  we  packed

119


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

up,  and  started  to  cross  the  Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier.
We  noticed  here  that  there  were  two  well-marked  sets
of  sastrugi,  one  set,  nearly  due  north  and  south,  formed
by  the  strong  southerly  blizzards,  the  other  set,  crossing
nearly  at  right  angles,  coming  from  the  west  and  formed
by  the  cold  land  winds  blowing  off  the  high  plateau  at
night  on  to  the  sea.

We  were  surprised  to  observe  that  this  ice  barrier
was  almost  completely  isolated  from  the  shore  by  deep
inlets,  and  for  a  time  we  speculated  as  to  whether  after
all  it  might  not  be  a  gigantic  tabular  iceberg  run  aground.
In  view,  however,  of  what  we  observed  later  there  can
be  little  doubt  that  it  is  of  the  nature  of  a  large  pied-
mont glacier,  afloat  at  its  seaward  end  and  central
portions.  It  is  now  practically  inert,  having  no  for-
ward movement  from  the  land  towards  the  sea.  It  is
just  the  vanishing  remnant  of  what  at  one  time  was
no  doubt  a  large  active  glacier,  vigorously  pushed  out
seaward,  the  overflow  ice  from  the  vast  snow-fields  of
the  inland  plateau.  The  supply,  however,  of  ice  near
the  coast  has  dwindled  so  enormously  that  there  is  no
longer  sufficient  pressure  to  move  this  ice  barrier.

This  day,  November  12,  was  an  important  one  in
the  history  of  Mawson's  triangulation  of  the  coast,
for  he  was  able  in  the  morning  to  sight  simultaneously
Mount  Erebus  and  Mount  Melbourne,  as  well  as  Mount
Lister.  We  were  fortunate  in  having  a  very  bright
and  clear  day  on  this  occasion,  and  the  round  of  angles
obtained  by  Mawson  with  the  theodolite  were  in  every
way  satisfactory.

The  following  day,  November  13,  we  were  still  on  the
Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier.  The  temperature  in  the  early
morning,  about  8  a.m.,  was  minus  18°  Fahr.  Mawson
had  provided  an  excellent  dish  for  breakfast  consisting
of  crumbed  seal  meat  and  seal's  blood,  which  proved
120


AN   EASY    CROSSING

delicious.  We  got  under  way  about  2  a.m.  It  was
a  beautiful  sunshiny  day  with  a  gentle  cold  breeze  off
the  western  plateau.  When  we  had  sledged  for  about
one  thousand  yards  Mawson  suddenly  exclaimed  that
he  could  see  the  end  of  the  barrier  where  it  terminated
in  a  white  cliff  only  about  six  hundred  yards  ahead.
We  halted  the  sledge,  and  while  Mawson  took  some  more
theodolite  angles  Mackay  and  I  reconnoitred  ahead
but  could  find  no  way  down  the  cliff.  We  returned  to
the  sledge  and  all  pulled  on  for  another  quarter  of  a
mile.  Once  more  we  reconnoitred,  and  this  time  both
Mawson  and  I  found  some  steep  slopes  formed  by
drifted  snow  which  were  just  practicable  for  a  light
sledge  lowered  by  an  alpine  rope.  We  chose  what
seemed  to  be  the  best  of  these  ;  Mackay  tied  the  alpine
rope  around  his  body,  and  taking  his  ice-axe  descended
the  slope  cautiously,  Mawson  and  I  holding  on  to  the
rope  meanwhile.  The  snow  slope  proved  fairly  soft
giving  good  foothold,  and  he  was  soon  at  the  bottom
without  having  needed  any  support  from  the  alpine
rope.  He  then  returned  to  the  top  of  the  slope,  and
we  all  set  to  work  unpacking  the  sledges.  We  made
fast  one  of  the  sledges  to  the  alpine  rope,  and  after
loading  it  lightly  lowered  it  little  by  little  down  the  slope,
one  of  us  guiding  the  sledge  while  the  other  two  slacked
out  the  alpine  rope  above.  The  man  who  went  down
the  sledge  to  the  bottom  would  unload  it  there  on  the
sea  ice  and  then  climb  up  the  slope,  the  other  two  mean-
while pulling  up  the  empty  sledge.  This  manoeuvre  was
repeated  a  number  of  times  until  eventually  the  whole
of  our  food  and  equipment,  including  two  sledges,  were
safely  down  on  the  sea  ice  below.

We  were  all  much  elated  at  having  got  across  the
Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier  so  easily  and  so  quickly.
We  were  also  fortunate  in  securing  a  seal ;    Mackay

121


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

went  off  and  killed  this,  bringing  back  seal  steak,  liver
and  a  considerable  quantity  of  seal  blood.  From  the
last  Mackay  said  he  intended  to  manufacture  a  black
pudding.  Usually,  I  believe,  a  black  pudding  is  manu-
factured from  the  part  of  the  blood  which  does  not
contain  the  fibrin,  but  on  this  occasion  the  black  pudding
was  wholly  formed  of  fibrin,  so  that  it  may  be  described
as  a  negative  rather  than  a  positive  black  pudding.
This  fibrin  was  boiled  up  in  seal  oil,  and  though  rather
tasteless  was  at  all  events  nourishing,  and  was  certainly
filling.

While  Mackay  had  been  in  pursuit  of  the  seal  meat
Mawson  had  taken  a  meridian  altitude  while  I  kept
the  time  for  him.  After  our  hoosh  we  packed  the
sledges,  and  Mawson  took  a  photograph  showing
the  cliff  forming  the  northern  boundary  of  the
Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier.  This  cliff  was  about  forty
feet  in  height.  We  had  some  discussion  as  to  whether
or  not  there  was  a  true  tidal  crack  separating  the  sea
ice  from  this  ice  barrier.  Certainly,  on  the  south
side  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  presence  of  any  such
crack,  but  on  the  north  side  there  were  small  local
cracks  ;  yet  it  could  hardly  be  said  that  these  were  of
sufficient  importance  to  be  termed  true  tide-cracks.
In  one  of  these  cracks  most  beautiful  filagree  ice  crystals,
fully  one  inch  across,  lined  the  sides  of  the  walls  of  the
crack  in  the  sea  ice.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  I
think,  that  the  greater  part  of  this  Nordenskjold  Ice
Barrier  is  afloat.

The  sun  was  so  warm  this  day  that  I  was  tempted
before  turning  in  to  the  sleeping-bag  to  take  off  my
ski  boots  and  socks  and  give  my  feet  a  snow  bath,
which  was  very  refreshing.

The  following  day,  November  14,  we  were  naturally
anxious  to  be  sure  of  our  exact  position  on  the  chart,
122


Cliff  down  which  the  Sledges  were  Lowered  on  the  North  Side  of  the  Nordenskjold

Ice  Barrier  Tongue


A  Pause  by  the  Way


To  face  page  122  '


SKUA    GULLS

in  view  of  the  fact  that  we  had  come  to  the  end  of  the
ice  barrier  some  eighteen  miles  quicker  than  the  chart
led  us  to  anticipate  we  should.  Mawson  accordingly
worked  up  his  meridian  altitude,  and  I  plotted  out  the
angular  distances  he  had  found  respectively,  for  Mount
Erebus,  Mount  Lister  and  Mount  Melbourne.  As  the
result  of  the  application  of  our  calculations  to  the
chart  it  became  evident  that  we  had  actually  crossed
the  Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier  of  Captain  Scott's  survey,
and  were  now  opposite  what  on  his  chart  was  termed
Charcot  Bay.  This  was  good  news  and  cheered  us  up
very  much,  as  it  meant  that  we  were  nearly  twenty
miles  further  north  than  we  previously  thought  we
were.

The  day  was  calm  and  fine,  and  the  surface  of  the
sea  ice  was  covered  with  patches  of  soft  snow  with  nearly
bare  ice  between,  and  the  sledging  was  not  quite  as
heavy  as  usual.  In  the  evening  two  skua  gulls  went  for
our  seal  meat  during  the  interval  that  we  were  returning
for  the  second  sledge  after  pulling  on  the  first  sledge.
It  was  wonderful  how  quickly  these  gulls  made  their
appearance  from  distant  parts  of  the  horizon  as  soon
as  any  fresh  meat  was  available.  The  previous  day  one
of  them  had  actually  attempted  to  eat  the  seal  meat
out  of  our  frying-pan  when  the  meat  was  being  cooked
in  boiling  oil.  We  could  see  as  we  came  up  from  a
distance  that  the  heat  of  the  savoury  dish  puzzled  him
a  good  deal,  as  each  time  he  dipped  his  beak  into  our
hot  mince  he  jerked  it  out  again  very  suddenly  and
seemed  a  very  surprised  bird.

We  had  a  magnificent  view  of  the  rocky  coast-line,
which  is  here  most  impressive.  The  sea  ice  stretched
away  to  the  west  of  us  for  several  miles  up  to  a  low  cliff
and  slope  of  piedmont  glacier  ice,  with  occasional
black   masses   of   rock   showing   at   its   edge.     Several

123


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

miles  further  inland  the  piedmont  glacier  ice  terminated
abruptly  against  a  magnificent  range  of  mountains,
tabular  for  the  most  part  but  deeply  intersected.  In
the  wide  gaps  between  this  coast  range  were  vast  glaciers
fairly  heavily  crevassed,  descending  by  steep  slopes
from  an  inland  plateau  to  the  sea.

On  November  15,  there  was  a  fresh  wind  from  the
west-south-west.  The  weather  was  overcast,  and  a  few
flakes  of  snow  were  falling.  We  killed  two  young  seals
to  replenish  our  food-supply.  Mackay  took  over  the
blubber  cooking  apparatus  so  as  to  set  Mawson  free
for  his  theodolite  observations.  The  sky  was  dull  and
leaden  for  most  of  the  day,  with  occasional  glimpses  of
light  over  the  western  mountains.  On  the  whole  it
looked  as  if  a  blizzard  were  approaching.

We  were  still  doing  our  travelling  by  night  and
sleeping  during  the  afternoon.  When  we  arose  from
our  sleeping-bag  at  8  p.m.  on  the  night  of  November  15,
we  found  that  the  signs  of  the  blizzard  had  more  or
less  passed  away.  There  was  a  beautifully  perfect
"  Noah's  Ark  "  in  the  sky  ;  the  belts  of  cirrus-stratus
composing  the  ark  stretched  from  south-south-west  to
north-north-east,  converging  towards  the  horizon  in
each  of  these  directions.  Fleecy  sheets  of  frost  smoke
arose  from  over  the  open  water  on  Ross  Sea,  and  formed
dense  cumulus  clouds.  This,  of  course,  was  a  certain
indication  to  us  that  open  water  was  not  far  distant,
and  impressed  upon  us  the  necessity  of  making  every
possible  speed  if  we  hoped  to  reach  our  projected  point
of  departure  on  the  coast  for  the  Magnetic  Pole  before
the  sea  ice  entirely  broke  up.

This  had  been  a  truly  glorious  day,  bright  and
sunny,  and  as  this  was  the  end  of  a  food  week  and  the
messman  for  the  week  had  kept  a  little  food  up  his
sleeve,  so  to  speak,  we  fared  sumptuously.  The  cocoa
124


CAPE    IRIZAR

was  extra  strong,  milky  and  sweet.  Mackay's  opinion
^as  that  such  cocoa  much  reminded  him  of  better  days,
and  was  absolutely  uplifting.

The  following  day,  November  17,  after  a  very  heavy
sledging  over  loose  powdery  snow  six  inches  deep  we
reached  a  low  glacier  and  ice  cliff.  We  were  able  to
get  some  really  fresh  snow  from  this  barrier  or  glacier,
the  cliffs  of  which  were  from  thirty  to  forty  feet  high.
It  was  a  great  treat  to  get  fresh  water  at  last,  as  since
we  had  left  the  Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier  the  only  snow
available  for  cooking  purposes  had  been  brackish.

The  following  day  was  also  bright  and  sunny,  but
the  sledging  was  terribly  heavy.  The  sun  had  thawed
the  surface  of  the  saline  snow  and  our  sledge  runners
had  become  saturated  with  soft  water.  We  were  so
wearied  with  the  great  effort  necessary  to  keep  the
sledges  moving  that  at  the  end  of  each  halt  we  fell
sound  asleep  for  five  minutes  or  so  at  a  time  across  the
sledges.  On  such  occasions  one  of  the  party  would
wake  the  others  up,  and  we  would  continue  our  journey.
We  were  even  more  utterly  exhausted  than  usual  at  the
end  of  this  day.

By  this  time,  however,  we  were  in  sight  of  a  rocky
headland  which  we  took  to  be  Cape  Irizar,  and  we  knew
that  this  cape  was  not  very  far  to  the  south  of  the
Drygalski  Glacier.  Indeed,  already,  a  long  line  was
showing  on  the  horizon  which  could  be  no  other  than
the  eastward  extension  of  this  famous  and,  as  it  after-
wards proved,  formidable  glacier.

On  November  19,  we  had  another  heavy  day's
sledging,  ankle  deep  in  the  soft  snow  with  occasional
thin  patches  of  sludgy  saline  ice  from  which  ice  flowers
had  recently  disappeared  through  thawing.  We  only
did  two  miles  of  relay  work  this  day  and  yet  were
quite  exhausted  at  the  end  of  it.

125


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

The  following  day,  November  20,  being  short  of
meat  we  killed  a  seal  calf  and  cow,  and  so  replenished
our  larder.  At  the  end  of  the  day's  sledging  I  walked
over  about  two  miles  to  a  cliff  face,  about  six  miles
south  of  Cape  Irizar.  The  rocks  all  along  this  part
of  the  shore  were  formed  of  coarse  gneissic  granite,
of  which  I  was  able  to  collect  some  specimens.  The
cliff  was  about  one  hundred  feet  high  where  it  was
formed  of  the  gneiss,  and  above  this  rose  a  capping  of
from  seventy  to  eighty  feet  in  thickness  of  heavily
crevassed  blue  glacier  ice.  There  were  here  wide  tide-
cracks  between  the  sea  ice  and  the  foot  of  the  sea  cliff.
These  were  so  wide  that  it  was  difficult  to  cross  them.
The  whole  shore  line  was  literally  alive  with  seals  and
seal  calves ;  there  were  over  fifty  of  them  in  a  stretch
of  about  three  hundred  yards.  At  a  distance  of  two
miles  our  tent  was,  of  course,  quite  out  of  sight,  and
one  had  to  be  guided  back,  on  this  as  on  other
similar  occasions,  chiefly  by  one's  footprints.

The  following  day,  November  21,  the  sledging  was
painfully  heavy  over  thawing  saline  snow  surface,
and  sticky  sea  ice.  We  were  only  able  to  do  two  and
two-third  miles.

On  November  22,  on  rounding  the  point  of  the  low
ice  barrier,  thirty  to  forty  feet  high,  we  obtained  a
good  view  of  Cape  Irizar,  and  also  of  the  Drygalsld  Ice
Barrier.

On  November  23  we  found  that  a  mild  blizzard  was
blowing,  but  we  travelled  on  through  it  as  we  could
not  afford  to  lose  any  time.  The  blizzard  died  down
altogether  about  3  a.m.,  and  was  succeeded  by  a  gentle
westerly  wind  off  the  plateau.  That  evening,  after
our  tent  had  been  put  up  and  we  had  finished  the
day's  meal,  I  walked  over  a  mile  to  the  shore.  The
prevailing  rock  was  still  gneissic  granite  with  large
126


WANT    OF    SLEEP

whitish  veins  of  aplitic  granite.  A  little  bright  green
moss  was  growing  on  tiny  patches  of  sand  and  gravel,
and  in  some  of  the  cracks  in  the  granite.  The  top
of  the  cliff  was  capped  by  blue  glacier  ice.  With  the
help  of  steps  cut  by  my  ice-axe  I  climbed  some  distance
up  this  in  order  to  try  and  get  some  fresh  ice  for  cooking
purposes,  but  close  to  the  top  of  the  slope  I  accidentally
slipped  and  glissaded  most  unwillingly  some  distance
down  before  I  was  able  to  check  myself  by  means  of
the  chisel  edge  of  the  ice-axe.  My  hands  were  some-
what cut  and  bruised,  but  otherwise  no  damage  was
done.  The  whole  of  this  ice  was  slightly  bitter ;  no
doubt  sea  spray  in  heavy  weather  when  the  sea  was
open  during  summer  time,  had  dashed  over  the  head-
land, and  so  flavoured  the  ice  with  sea  salts.  At
last  I  obtained  some  fairly  fresh  ice  in  the  form  of
large  ice  stalactites  depending  from  an  overhanging  cliff
of  glacier  ice.  With  these  and  my  geological  specimens
I  trudged  back  to  the  camp.

On  November  24,  a  strong  keen  wind  was  blowing
off  the  plateau  from  the  west-south-west.  This  died
down  later  on  in  the  morning  at  about  2  a.m.  and  the
temperature  at  9  a.m.  rose  as  high  as  plus  20°  Fahr.
We  were  all  suffering  somewhat  from  want  of  sleep,
and  although  the  snow  surface  was  better  than  it  had
been  for  some  little  time  we  still  found  the  work  of
sledging  very  fatiguing.  A  three-man  sleeping-bag,
where  you  are  wedged  in  more  or  less  tightly  against
your  mates,  where  all  snore  and  shin  one  another  and
each  feels  on  waking  that  he  is  more  shinned  against
than  shinning,  is  not  conducive  to  real  rest ;  and  we
rued  the  day  that  we  chose  the  three-man  bag  in  prefer-
ence to  the  one-man  bags.  That  afternoon  and  evening
we  slept  a  little  longer  than  usual,  and  felt  much  re-
freshed on  the  early  morning  of  November  25.

127


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

It  was  interesting  to  watch  at  lunch  time  the  anxious
face  of  the  messman  for  the  week  as  he  sat  with  his  nose
close  to  the  outer  cover  of  the  aluminium  cooker  in
order  to  catch  the  first  whiff  of  the  delicious  aroma
which  told  th&t  the  tea  in  the  water  of  the  inner  cooking-
pot  had  been  just  brought  to  the  boil.  With  the  first
sniff  of  the  aroma  the  messman  would  immediately
unscrew  the  brass  valve  of  the  primus,  so  as  to  let  the
air  in  and  the  primus  lamp  down,  with  a  view  to  saving
paraffm  oil.


128


CHAPTER  IX

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)

ON  the  following  day,  November  26,  we  saw  on  look-
ing back  that  the  rocky  headland,  where  I  had
collected  the  specimens  of  granite  and  moss,  was  not
part  of  the  mainland  but  a  small  island.  This  day
was  rather  a  memorable  one  in  our  journey,  as  we
reached  a  large  rocky  promontory,  which  we  sup-
posed at  the  time  to  be  Cape  Irizar.  Subsequent
observations,  however,  proved  that  we  must  already
have  passed  Cape  Irizar,  which  was  in  all  probability
the  small  island  just  referred  to.

We  had  some  good  sledging  here  over  pancake  ice
nearly  free  from  snow  and  travelled  fast.  While
Mackay  secured  some  seal  meat  Mawson  and  I  ascended
the  rocky  promontory,  climbing  at  first  over  rock,
then  over  glacier  ice,  to  a  height  of  about  six  hundred
feet  above  the  sea.  The  rock  was  a  pretty  red  granite
traversed  by  large  dykes  of  black  rocks,  apparently  of
an  alkaline  character,  belonging  to  the  phonolites  or
tinguaites.

From  the  top  of  the  headland  to  the  north  we  had
a  magnificent  view  across  the  level  surface  of  sea  ice  far
below  us.  We  saw  that  at  a  few  miles  from  the  shore
an  enormous  iceberg,  frozen  into  the  floe  lay  right
across  the  path  which  we  had  intended  to  travel  in  our
northerly  course  on  the  morrow.  To  the  north-west
II  I  129


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

of  us  was  Geikie  Inlet  and  beyond  that  stretching  as
far  as  the  eye  could  follow  was  the  great  Drygalski
Glacier.  Beyond  the  Drygalski  Glacier  were  a  series
of  rocky  hills.  One  of  these  was  identified  as  probably
being  Mount  Neumayer.  Several  mountains  could  be
seen  further  to  the  north  of  this,  but  the  far  distance
was  obscured  from  view  by  cloud  and  mist  so  that  we
were  unable  to  make  out  the  outline  of  Mount  Nansen.
It  Y\^as  evident  that  the  Drygalski  Glacier  was  bounded
landwards  on  the  north  by  a  steep  cliff  of  dark,  highly
jointed  rock,  and  we  were  not  a  little  concerned  to  observe
with  our  field-glasses  that  the  surface  of  the  Drygalski
Glacier  was  wholly  different  to  that  of  the  Nordenskjold
Ice  Barrier.  It  was  clear  that  the  surface  of  the  Dry-
galski Glacier  was  formed  of  jagged  surfaces  of  ice  very
heavily  crevassed,  and  projecting  in  the  form  of  immense
seracs  separated  from  one  another  by  deep  undulations
oi  chasms.,  ;[t  at  once  suggested  to  my  mind  some
scaly  dragon-like  monster  and  recalled  the  lines  of  Milton
quoted  at  the  commencement  of  the  previous  chapter.
The  "  Sca,ly  horror  of  his  folded  tail  "  did  not  seem
enchanting  even  at  ,this  distance  of  ten  to  fifteen  miles.
We  could  see  that  much  of  this  glacier  was  absolutely
impossible  for  sledging,  but  it  appeared  that  further
eastward  the  inequalities  of  the  ice-surface  became  less
pronounced,  and  at  the  extreme  eastward  extension,
at  a  distance  of  some  twenty-five  to  thirty  miles  from
where  we  stood,  the  surface  appeared  fairly  smooth.
After  taking  these  observations  from  our  point  of
vantage  we  retraced  our  steps.  Mawson,  in  his  spiked
bki  boots,  got  down  the  sloping  ice-surface  with  com-
parative ease,  but  as  I  had  finnesko  on  I  found  it
necessary  to  cut  steps  with  my  ice-axe  all  the  way  down
the  glacier  ice.

It  was  obvious  from  what  we  had  seen  looking  out
X80


DRYGALSKI    GLACIER

to  sea  to  the  east  of  our  camp  that  there  were  large  bodies
of  open  water  trending  shorewards  in  the  form  of  long-
lanes  at  no  great  distance.  The  lanes  of  water  were
only  partly  frozen  over,  and  some  of  these  were  inter-
posed between  us  and  the  Drygalski  Glacier.  Clearly
not  a  moment  was  to  be  lost  if  we  were  to  reach  the
Drygalski  Glacier  before  the  sea  ice  broke  up.  A
single  strong  blizzard  would  now  have  converted  the
whole  of  the  sea  ice  between  us  and  the  Drygalski
Glacier  into  a  mass  of  drifting  pack.  We  obtained
from  this  rocky  promontory  a  fine  collection  of
geological  specimens,  and  here,  as  elsewhere,  got
abundant  evidence  of  former  much  greater  extension
of  the  inland  ice  sheet.

The  following  day,  November  27,  we  decided  to
run  our  sledges  to  the  east  of  the  large  berg  which  we
had  observed  on  the  previous  day,  and  this  course
apparently  would  enable  us  to  avoid  a  wide  and  ugly
looking  tide-crack  extending  northwards  from  the  rocky
point  at  our  previous  camp.  The  temperature  was  now
as  high  as  from  plus  26°  to  plus  28°  Fahr.  at  mid- day,
consequently,  the  saline  snow  and  ice  were  all  day  more
or  less  sticky  and  slushy.    We  camped  near  the  large  berg.

On  the  morning  of  November  28,  a  mother  seal
with  a  well-grown  baby  came  up  to  our  tent  and  sniffed
and  snorted  around  its  skirt.  It  seemed  about  to  enter
the  tent  when  I  hunted  it  off,  and  mother  and  baby,
meanwhile,  made  tracks,  in  every  sense  of  the  word,
for  the  open  water.  Then  we  packed  up  and  started
our  sledges,  and  pulled  them  over  a  treacherous  slushy
tide-crack,  and  then  headed  them  round  an  open  lead
of  water  in  the  sea  ice.  -*^  At  3  a.m.  we  had  lunch  near  the
east  end  of  the  big  berg.  Near  here  Mackay  and
Mawson  succeeded  in  catching  and  killing  an  Emperor
penguin,    and   took    the   breast   and   liver.     This   bird

131


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

was  caught  close  to  a  lane  of  open  water  in  the  sea  ice.
We  found  that  in  the  direction  of  the  berg  this  was
thinly  frozen  over,  and  for  some  time  it  seemed  as
though  our  progress  further  north  was  completely
blocked.  Eventually  we  found  a  place  where  the  ice
might  just  bear  our  sledges.  We  strengthened  this
spot  by  laying  down  on  it  slabs  of  sea  ice  and  shovelfuls
of  snow,  and  when  the  causeway  was  completed — not
without  Mackay  breaking  through  the  ice  in  one  place
and  very  nearly  getting  a  ducking — we  rushed  our
sledges  over  safely,  although  the  ice  was  so  thin  that
it  bent  under  their  weight.  We  were  thankful  to  get
them  both  safely  to  the  other  side.

We  now  found  ourselves  amongst  some  very  high
sastrugi  of  hard  tough  snow.  We  had  to  drag  the
sledges  over  a  great  number  of  these,  which  were  nearly
at  right  angles  to  our  course.  This  work  proved  ex-
tremely fatiguing.  The  sastrugi  were  from  five  to  six
feet  in  height.  As  we  were  having  dinner  at  the  end
of  our  day's  sledging  we  heard  a  loud  report  which
we  considered  to  be  due  to  the  opening  of  a  new  crack
in  the  sea  ice.  We  thought  it  was  possible  that  this
crack  was  caused  by  some  movement  of  the  great
active  Drygalski  Glacier,  now  only  about  four  miles
ahead  of  us  to  the  north.

We  got  out  of  our  sleeping-bag  soon  after  8  p.m.
on  the  evening  of  the  28th,  and  started  just  before  mid-
night. The  ice-surface  over  which  we  were  sledging
this  day  had  a  curious  appearance  resembling  rippling
stalagmites,  or  what  may  be  termed  ice  marble.  This
opacity  appeared  to  be  due  to  a  surface  enamel  of  partly
thawed  snow.  This  surface  kept  continually  cracking
as  we  passed  over  it  with  a  noise  like  that  of  a  whip
being  cracked.  It  was  evidently  in  a  state  of  tension,
being  contracted  by  the  cold  which  attained  its  maxi-
132


BITING    WINDS

mum  soon  after  midnight,  for,  although  of  course  we
had  for  many  weeks  past  been  having  the  midnight
sun  it  was  still  so  low  in  the  heavens  towards  midnight
that  there  was  an  appreciable  difference  in  the  tempera-
ture between  midnight  and  the  afternoon.  This  differ-
ence in  our  case  was  further  accentuated  by  the  cold
nocturnal  wind  from  the  high  plateau  to  our  west.
This  wind  was  of  the  nature  of  a  land  breeze  on  a  large
scale.

There  were  here  two  sets  of  sastrugi,  the  principal
set  parallel  to  the  plateau  wind  and  trending  here  from
nearly  north-west  to  south-east ;  the  other  set,  caused
by  the  blizzard  winds,  trended  from  south  to  north.
We  were  now  getting  very  short  of  biscuits,  and  as
a  consequence  were  seized  with  food  obsessions,  being
unable  to  talk  about  anything  but  cereal  foods,  chiefly
cakes  of  various  kinds  and  fruits.  Whenever  we  halted
for  a  short  rest  we  could  discuss  nothing  but  the  different
dishes  with  which  we  had  been  regaled  in  our  former
lifetime  at  various  famous  restaurants  and  hotels.

The  plateau  wind  blew  keenly  and  strongly  all  day
on  November  29.  As  we  advanced  further  to  the
north  the  ice-surface  became  more  and  more  undulatory,
rising  against  us  in  great  waves  like  waves  of  the  sea.
Evidently  these  waves  were  due  to  the  forward  move-
ment, and  consequent  pressure  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier.
We  had  a  fine  view  from  the  top  of  one  of  these  ridges
over  the  surface  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier,  to  the  edge
of  the  inland  plateau.  Far  inland,  perhaps  forty  or
fifty  miles  away,  we  could  see  the  great  neve  fields,
which  fed  the  Drygalski  Glacier,  descending  in  con-
spicuous ice  falls,  and  beyond  these  loomed  dim  moun-
tains. At  the  end  of  this  day  we  hardly  knew  whether
we  were  on  the  edge  of  the  sea  ice  or  on  the  thin  edge
of  the  Drygalski  Glacier.     Probably,  I  think,  we  were

133


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

on  very  old  sea  ice,  perhaps  representing  the  accumu-
lations of  several  successive  seasons.

It  fell  calm  at  about  9  p.m.,  but  just  before  midnight,
November  29-30,  the  plateau  wind  returned,  blowing
stronger  than  ever.  As  the  sun  during  the  afternoon
had  now  considerable  heating  power  we  tried  the  ex-
periment of  putting  snow  into  our  aluminium  cooking-
pot,  the  exterior  of  which  by  this  time  was  permanently
coated  with  greasy  lamp-black  from  the  blubber  lamp,
and  leaving  the  pot  exposed  in  the  evening  to  the  direct
rays  of  the  sun.  The  lamp-black,  of  course,  formed
an  excellent  absorbent  of  the  sun's  heat-rays.  On
getting  out  of  the  sleeping-bag  at  9  p.m.  on  November  29
I  found  that  about  half  the  snow  I  had  put  into  the
cooking-pot  had  been  thawed  down  by  the  sun's  heat.
This,  of  course,  saved  both  paraffin  and  blubber.  It
takes,  of  course,  as  much  energy  to  thaw  ice  or  snow  at  a
temperature  of  32°  Fahr.  to  form  a  given  volume  of  water
as  it  does  to  raise  that  water  from  32°  Fahr.  up  to  boiling-
point.  As  our  snow  and  ice  used  for  domestic  purposes
frequently  had  a  temperature  of  many  degrees  below
zero,  the  heat  energy  necessary  to  thaw  it  was  greater
than  that  required  to  raise  the  water  from  freezing-point
to  boiling-point.

As  we  advanced  with  our  sledge  on  the  early  morning
of  November  30,  the  ice  ridges  fronting  us  became
higher  and  steeper,  and  we  had  much  ado  straining
with  all  our  might  on  the  steep  ice  slopes  to  get  the
sledges  to  move,  and  they  skidded  a  good  deal  as  we
dragged  them  obliquely  up  the  slopes.  The  plateau
wind,  too,  had  freshened,  and  was  now  blowing  on  our
port  bow  at  from  fifteen  to  twenty  miles  an  hour,  bringing
with  it  a  good  deal  of  low  drift.  At  last,  about  10  a.m.,
the  plateau  wind  dropped  and  with  it  the  drift,  and  the
weather  became  warm  and  sunny.
134


ON    THE    GLACIEU

The  glacier  now  spread  before  us  as  a  great  billowy
sea  of  pale  green  ice,  with  here  and  there  high  embank-
ments of  marble-like  neve  resembling  railway  em-
bankments. Unfortunately  for  our  progress,  the  trend
of  the  latter  was  nearly  at  right  angles  to  our  course.
As  we  advanced  still  further  north  the  undulations
became  more  and  more  pronounced,  the  embankments
higher  and  steeper.  These  embankments  were  now
bounded  by  cliffs  from  forty  to  fifty  feet  in  height,
with  overhanging  cornices  of  tough  snow.  The  cliffs
faced  northwards.  The  deep  chasms  which  they  pro-
duced formed  a  very  serious  obstacle  to  our  advance,
and  we  had  to  make  some  long  detours  in  order  to  head
them  off.  On  studying  one  of  these  chasms  it  seemed
to  me  that  their  mode  of  origin  was  somewhat  as  follows  :
In  the  first  place  the  surface  of  the  ice  had  become
strongly  ridged  through  forward  movement  of  the
glacier,  with  perhaps  differential  frictional  resistance  ;
the  latter  causing  a  series  of  undulations,  the  top  of
each  ice  undulation  would  then  be  further  raised  by  an
accumulation  of  snow  partly  carried  by  the  west-north-
west plateau  wind,  partly  by  the  southerly  blizzard
wind.  These  two  force  components  produced  these
overhanging  cliffs  facing  the  north.  For  some  reason
the  snow  would  not  lie  at  the  bottoms  of  the  troughs
between  the  undulations.  Probably  they  v/ere  swept
bare  by  the  plateau  wind.  It  was  hardly  to  be  wondered
at  that  we  v/ere  unable  to  advance  our  sledges  more
than  about  one  mile  and  a  half  that  day.

The  next  day,  December  1,  the  hauling  of  our  sledges
became  much  more  laborious.  For  half  a  day  we
struggled  over  high  sastrugi,  hummocky  ice  ridges,
steep  undulations  of  bare  blue  ice  with  frequent  chasms
impassable  for  a  sledge,  unless  it  was  unloaded  and
lowered  by  alpine  rope.     After  struggling  on  for  a  little

135


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

over  half  a  mile  we  decided  to  camp,  and  while  Mawson
took  magnetic  observations  and  theodolite  angles,
Mackay  and  I  reconnoitred  ahead  for  between  two  and
three  miles  to  see  if  there  was  any  way  at  all  practicable
for  the  sledge  out  of  these  mazes  of  chasms,  vmdula-
tions  and  seracs.  Mackay  and  I  were  roped  together
for  this  exploratory  work,  and  fell  into  about  a  score  of
crevasses  before  we  returned  to  camp,  though  in  this
case  we  never  actually  fell  with  our  head  and  shoulders
below  the  lids  of  the  crevasses,  as  they  were  mostly
filled  at  the  surface  with  tough  snow.  We  had  left  a
black  signal  flag  on  top  of  a  conspicuous  ice  mound  as
a  guide  to  us  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  camp,  and
we  found  this  a  welcome  beacon  when  we  started  to
return,  as  it  was  by  no  means  an  easy  task  finding  one's
way  across  this  storm-tossed  ice  sea,  even  when  one  was
only  a  mile  or  two  from  the  camp.  On  our  return  we
found  that  Mawson  was  just  completing  his  observations.
He  found  that  the  dip  of  the  needle  here  was  2J°  off  the
vertical.  We  brought  the  tent  down  from  where  he  had
been  taking  magnetic  observations,  and  treading  warily,
because  of  crevasses,  set  it  up  again  close  to  our  sledge,
and  had  lunch.

We  noticed  in  the  case  of  the  snow  lids  over  crevasses
that  they  were  covered  by  a  very  pretty  moss-like
growth  of  pointed  ice  crystals.  This  growth  was
apparently  due  to  a  slow  upward  steaming  of  moist
air  from  the  spaces  between  the  walls  of  the  crevasses
below.  Possibly  during  the  day  the  air  beneath  the
snow  lids  may  become  slightly  warmed,  and  as  the
temperature  falls  at  night,  particularly  under  the
influence  of  the  plateau  wind,  a  slow  percolation  of  the
warm  air  through  the  snow  lid  may  take  place,  and  the
small  amount  of  moisture  in  it  is  deposited  on  the
surface  of  the  lid  on  coming  in  contact  with  the  colder
136


A    RETREAT    NECESSARY

air  outside.      This  process,  continued  from  day  to  day,
gradually  builds  up  these  moss-like  crystals.

That  afternoon  we  discussed  the  situation  at  some
length.  It  appeared  that  the  Drygalski  Glacier  must
be  at  least  twenty  miles  in  width.  If  we  were  to  cross
it  along  the  course  which  w^e  were  now  following  at  the
rate  of  half  a  mile  every  half  day  it  would  obviously
take  at  least  twenty  days  to  get  to  the  other  side,  and
this  estimate  did  not  allow  for  those  unforeseen  delays
which  experience  by  this  time  had  taught  us  were  sure
to  occur.  The  view  which  Mackay  and  I  had  obtained
of  the  glacier  ice  ahead  of  us  showed  that  our  difficulties,
for  a  considerable  distance,  would  materially  increase.
Under  these  circumstances  we  were  reluctantly  forced
to  the  conclusion  that  our  only  hope  of  ultimate  success
lay  in  retreat.  We  accordingly  determined  to  drag  the
sledges  back  off  the  glacier  on  to  the  sea  ice  by  the  way
along  which  we  had  come.

Early  on  the  morning  of  December  2  the  retreat
began.  Just  before  midnight  it  had  been  clear  and
sunny,  but  as  midnight  approached  a  thick  fog  sud-
denly came  up  and  obscured  everything.  Consequently
we  had  great  difficulty  in  picking  up  our  old  sledge
tracks  as  we  retreated  over  the  glacier  ice.  The  weather
was  still  very  thick  and  foggy  at  3  a.m.,  but  a  little  before
6  A.M.  the  fog  cleared  off  and  the  sun  shone  through.
We  had  now  reached  the  southern  edge  of  the
glacier,  and  were  back  on  the  old  undulating  sea  ice.
We  turned  our  sledges  eastwards  following  parallel
with  the  glacier  edge.  Immediately  on  our  left  rose
large  rounded  hummocky  masses  of  ice  belonging  to
the  Drygalski  Glacier,  and  from  fifty  to  sixty  feet  in
height.  The  sky,  meanwhile,  had  become  again  over-
cast with  dense  cumulus  which  drifted  across  rapidly
from  a  south-easterly  direction.

137


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

The  following  day  we  still  travelled  eastwards
parallel  to  the  southern  edge  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier.
The  sledging  was  chiefly  over  soft  snow,  ankle  deep,
with  occasional  high  snow  sastrugi,  and  here  and  there
a  patch  of  rippled  sea  ice.  There  could  be  no  doubt
about  it  being  sea  ice  this  time  because  in  one  place,  at
the  foot  of  one  of  these  steep  snow  ridges,  we  noticed  a
pool  of  water  only  thinly  frozen  over,  and  on  breaking
the  ice  I  tasted  the  water  and  found  it  was  very  salt.

Towards  the  end  of  this  day's  sledging  we  passed  a
long  inlet  trending  north-westerly.  This  inlet  was  floored
with  sea  ice,  and  made  a  long,  deep  indentation  in  the
glacier  ice.  After  our  hoosh,  and  before  turning  into
the  sleeping-bag,  Mawson  and  I  went  on  to  the  north  over
some  high  hummocky  ridges  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier
to  look  ahead.  Mawson,  after  a  while,  returned  to
camp,  while  I  turned  north-westwards  to  explore  the
inlet.  After  falling  into  a  few  crevasses  which  traversed
the  great  billowy  hummocks  of  blue  glacier  ice  in  all
directions,  I  got  down  into  the  inlet,  and  on  following  it
north-westwards,  found  that  it  gradually  passed  into
a  definite  glacial  river  channel,  and  became  quite  im-
practicable for  sledging.  It  was  quite  clear  from  the
steep  banks  of  this  channel,  cut  out  of  the  hard  snow
neve  and  glacier  ice,  that  during  the  few  weeks  of  thaw
in  this  part  of  the  Antarctic,  great  volumes  of  thaw
water  must  rush  down  off  the  higher  parts  of  the  glacier
towards  the  sea,  and  in  their  passage  they  tear  out  deep
canon-like  channels  in  the  glacier  ice  and  neve.  This
channel  trended  at  first  exactly  in  the  direction  in  which
we  wished  to  make,  but  it  was  obvious  that  it  was  an
impossible  route  for  the  sledges.

We  decided  on  December  4  that  we  had  better  go  on  an
extended  reconnoitring  expedition  before  we  again  risked
landing  our  sledge  in  a  labyrinth  of  pressure  ridges  and
138


REGION    OF    CREVASSES

crevasses.     After  hauling  our  sledges  for  a  little  less  than
a  mile,  and  meeting  with  steep  slopes  of  snow  dunes,  we
halted.      While  Mackay  sewed  one  of    the  tent-poles,
which  had  become  loosened,  back  into  its  place  in  the
canvas    crown  which    held  the  tops  of  the  tent-poles
together,    Mawson   and   I   climbed   on   to   some    hum-
mocks a  little  north  of  the  camp  to  see  which    route
would  be  best  to  follow  on  our  reconnoitring   journey.
After  lunch  we  all  three  started  with  our  ice-axes  and
the  alpine  rope.     We  travelled  up  a  broad    bottomed
snow  valley  for  about  two  miles  trending  in  the  direction
of  Mount  Larsen.      Then  for  a  little  over  a  mile  beyond
it  trended  more  to  the  right  in  the  direction  of  Mount
Nansen.      Here  we  got  into  difficult  country,  the  snow
surface    being    succeeded    by   steep-sided    hummocks,
rolls  and  ridges  of  blue  glacier  ice,  with  occasional  deep
chasms   and   very   numerous   crevasses.      We   fell   into
numbers  of  the  latter  up  to  our  thighs,  but  the  snow
lids  as  yet  were  just  strong  enough  to  stop  us  going
deeper.     Mawson   opened   up   one   of   these   snow    lids
with  his  ice-axe,  and  we  noticed  that  the  lid  was   from
one  to  one  and  a  half  feet  thick,  while  the  crevasse  was
thirty  feet  wide  and  of  vast  depth.      Much  of  the  ground
over  which   we  were  travelling  rang  hollow,   and  was
evidently  only  roofed  over  by  a  thin  layer  of    tough
snow.     Altogether  we  travelled  about  four  miles  to  the
north  of  our  camp  but  could  see  no  sign  from  there
of  any  sea  to  the  north  of    us.      Meanwhile,   Mackay
diverged  somewhat  to  the  west,  climbed  on  the  top  of  a
high  ice  pyramid,  but  was  unable  to  see  any  trace   of
the  sea  beyond.  ^   We  now  returned  at  a  smart   pace
back   to   camp,   arriving   about   9   a.m.     We   w^ere    all
pretty  tired,  and,  as  usual  before  entering  the  tent,  we
took  off  our  spiked  ski  boots  so  as  to  avoid  puncturing
the  waterproof  floorcloth,  and  put  on  finnesko.     Hoosh

189


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

was  prepared,  and  we  had  a  good  meal  of  it,  as  well  as
of  fried  seal  meat  with  blubber  and  seal  oil.

It  was  evident  now  that  even  if  we  were  to  succeed
in  crossing  the  Drygalski  Glacier,  the  passage  would
occupy  a  good  many  days,  even  under  the  most  favour-
able circumstances,  and  our  provisions  were  running
very  short.  After  we  finished  our  hoosh,  Mawson,  with
the  field-glasses,  sighted  a  seal  near  to  the  big  berg  to
the  south  of  us,  which  we  had  passed  some  five  days
previously.  We  decided  that  we  would  go  after  this
seal  the  next  day  ;  meanwhile,  the  seal  disappeared.
Fearing  that  a  blizzard  might  spring  up  on  the  following
day,  I  proposed  to  go  that  evening  out  to  the  berg  in
search  of  seals,  but  Mackay  kindly  volunteered  instead
and  started  off  with  his  ruck-sack  and  ice-axe  and  a
small  allowance  of  provisions,  consisting  of  some  cooked
seal  meat,  biscuits  and  chocolate.  He  had  a  long
journey  before  him.  While  he  was  gone  I  was  chiefly
occupied  in  dividing  up  our  rations  into  half-ration  lots.
At  5  P.M.  I  was  attracted  by  the  notes  of  a  penguin
behind  an  ice  mound  at  no  great  distance.  Rousing
Mawson,  we  both  went  in  pursuit  and  after  a  long  and
severe  chase,  captured  an  Adelie  penguin.

At  about  midnight,  December  4-5,  Mackay  re-
turned to  camp  after  his  fourteen  miles'  tramp  over  the
sea  ice.  He  brought  back  with  him  a  most  welcome
addition  to  our  larder  in  the  shape  of  over  thirty  pounds
of  seal  meat,  liver  and  seal  blubber.  He  reported  that
he  had  had  great  difficulty  in  crossing  the  large  ice-
crack  where  we  had  constructed  the  causeway  for  our
sledge  some  five  days  previously,  and  he  said  that  it
would  now  have  been  impossible  to  have  got  the  sledge
over  it.  Mackay  had  been  up  over  seventeen  hours,
and  had  been  sledging,  travelling  over  heavy  ice,  and
carrying  his  heavy  load  of  seal  meat  with  only  short
140


A    NEW    ROUTE

intervals  for  meals.  He  had  travelled  a  distance  of
about  twenty-four  miles,  and  of  course  under  the  cir-
cumstances was  much  exhausted  and  badly  in  need  of
a  long  rest.  By  securing  the  so  much  needed  additional
food-supply,  he  had  rendered  us  an  extremely  important
service.  It  now,  of  course,  became  necessary  to  give
him  the  needed  rest  on  the  following  day.  Accordingly,
the  earlier  part  of  December  5  we  spent  in  the  sleeping-
bag.

Soon  after  midnight,  December  5-6,  we  left  our  camp
on  the  south  side  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier,  and  struck
across  the  high  ridges  of  blue  ice  into  the  small  valley
in  the  glacier  which  we  had  prospected  two  days  pre-
viously. As  usual  a  keen  wind  was  blowing  off  the
plateau  at  this  time  of  the  morning,  but  the  tempera-
ture soon  rose  to  plus  23°  Fahr.  at  7.15  a.m.  The  sky
was  overcast  with  heavy  stratus  and  cumulus  clouds,
especially  in  the  direction  of  Cape  Washington.  We
passed  over  a  considerable  number  of  crevasses  without
any  serious  accident.  The  day's  sledging  was  heavy
on  account  of  the  strongly  undulating  surface  of  the
ice  and  the  quantity  of  soft  snow  in  the  ice  valley  on
the  surface  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier.

The  following  day,  December  7,  was  also  dull  and
lowering  with  very  dense  cumulus  clouds  over  Cape
V\^ashington  and  Mounts  Melbourne  and  Nansen.  We
inferred  that  this  dense  cumulus  was  due  to  the  presence
of  open  water  between  the  Drygalski  Glacier  and  Cape
Washington,  and  were  not  a  little  anxious  as  to  whether,
in  the  event  of  the  sea  ice  having  all  drifted  out  on  the
north  side  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier,  it  would  be  possible
for  us  to  travel  shorewards  on  the  surface  of  the  glacier
itself,  when  we  got  to  the  other  side.  We  encountered
many  precipitous  slopes  from  thirty  to  forty  feet  deep,
often  with  overhanging  cornices,  barring  our  northward

141


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

progress  like  those  already  met  with  in  the  part  of
the  glacier  from  which  we  had  retreated.  These
overhanging  cliffs,  however,  were  not  quite  as  serious
as  those  which  we  had  left  behind,  and  by  making  con-
siderable detours  we  managed  to  circumvent  them.  At
last  we  seemed  to  have  got  amongst  an  impassable
belt  of  high  crevassed  ice  ridges  with  precipitous
chasms  between.  After  a  good  deal  of  reconnoitring
ahead  a  clue  out  of  the  labyrinth  was  discovered
in  the  form  of  a  series  of  high  snow  ridges  which  led
backwards  and  forwards,  in  and  out,  amongst  the
high-pressure  ridges,  and  eventually  enabled  us  to  land
our  sledges  in  a  broad  crevassed  valley  on  the  glacier
surface.

After  the  hoosh  at  the  end  of  our  day's  sledging,
Mawson  and  I  walked  about  two  miles,  looking  out
for  a  track  for  the  next  morning.  The  outlook  was  by
no  means  encouraging,  as  the  surface  still  bristled  with
huge  ice  undulations  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.
It  y/as  just  as  though  a  stormy  sea  had  suddenly  been
frozen  solid,  with  the  troughs  between  its  large  waves
here  and  there  partly  filled  with  snow,  while  the  crests
of  the  waves  were  raised  by  hard  ridges  of  drift  snow,
terminating  in  overhanging  cliffs  facing  the  north.  It
was  obvious,  too,  that  the  glacier  ice  over  w^hich  we  would
have  to  travel,  v/as  still  very  heavily  crevassed.  As
we  returned,  a  mild  blizzard  sprang  up  from  the
south-south-west,  bringing  low  drift  with  it.  The
blizzard  cleared  off  in  about  an  hour  and  a  half,  and
the  sun  came  out  strong  and  hot,  and  rapidly  thawed
the  snow  on  our  tent  and  on  the  food-bags  stored  on
our  sledges.

The  following  day,  December  8,  we  dug  away
the  drift  snow  piled  by  the  blizzard  against  our
sledges,  and  were  pleased  to  find  that  the  day  was
142


OPEN    WATER    AGAIN

beautifully  fine  and  sunny  with  a  light  breeze  from
the  west-south-west.  The  sledging  was  very  heavy
up  and  down  steep  ice  slopes  with  much  soft  snow
between.

Mawson  had  a  slight  attack  of  snow  blindness  on
December  9.  The  day  v/as  so  warm  that  we  even
felt  it  oppressive,  the  temperature  at  midnight  being
as  high  as  plus  19°  Fahr.  The  glacier  ice  kept  cracking
from  time  to  time  with  sharp  reports.  Possibly  this
may  have  been  due  to  the  expansion  of  the  ice
under  the  influence  of  the  hot  sun.  At  one  spot  the
sledges  had  to  be  dragged  up  a  grade  of  1  in  3  over
smooth  blue  glacier  ice.  This  was  exceedingly  heavy
work.  At  last,  when  we  were  near  to  our  time  for
camping,  Mackay,  on  going  on  a  short  distance  ahead  to
reconnoitre  with  the  field-glasses,  sighted  open  water
on  the  northern  edge  of  the  Drygalski  Ice  Barrier,  about
three  to  four  miles  distant.  He  announced  his
discovery  with  shouts  of  OaXarTa,  OaXarra,  whlch  thrilled
us  now  as  of  old  they  thrilled  the  Ten  Thousand.  It
was  no  sparkling  waters  of  the  Euxine  that  had  met  his
gaze,  but  a  Black  Sea  nevertheless,  for  so  it  appeared
as  its  inky  waves  heaved  under  the  leaden  sky.  But
what  a  joy  to  have  reached  once  more  that  friendly
water  world  that  went  up  by  many  a  creek  and  river  to
our  homes.  It  was  now  clear  to  us  that  we  could  not
hope  for  sea  ice  over  vv^hich  to  sledge  westwards  to  the
shore,  where  we  proposed  to  make  our  final  depot  before
attempting  the  ascent  of  the  great  inland  plateau  in
order  to  reach  the  Magnetic  Pole.

During  the  day  we  were  cheered  by  a  visit  from
several  snow  petrels,  which  flew  around  our  camp,  as
well  as  from  three  skua  gulls.  Mawson  managed  to
snare  one  of  the  skuas  with  a  fishing-line,  but  it  got
away  when  he  was  hauling  in  the  line.     Our  sledging

143


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

that  day  was  not  quite  so  heavy  ;  the  ice  undulations  were
less  formidable,  and  the  belts  of  snow  between  became
wider  and  firmer.  Just  after  lunch  a  beautiful  Wilson's
petrel  flew  around  us.

December  10  saw  us  still  struggling  to  cross  the
Drygalski  Glacier.  We  could  see  that  we  were  now  on
a  pretty  high  ridge,  but  the  highest  part  of  the  glacier
now  lay  to  the  south  and  therefore  behind  us.  We
were  much  rejoiced  towards  the  end  of  the  day's
sledging  to  find  ourselves  at  last  off  the  true  glacier
type  of  surface,  and  on  to  what  may  be  described  as
an  undulating  barrier  type.  This  improvement  of
the  surface  to  our  west  enabled  us  to  do  what  we  had
been  longing  to  do  for  the  last  six  days,  turn  our  sledge
westwards.  At  first  we  had  to  incline  somewhat  to
the  north-west  in  order  to  skirt  round  some  high  ice
ridges.  Then,  after  making  some  northing,  we  were
able  to  go  nearly  due  west.  The  snow  surface  was  largely
of  the  pie-crust  type  ;  our  ski  boots  broke  through  it  at
every  step  and  we  sank  in  up  to  our  ankles.  At  inter-
vals we  still  crossed  low  ridges  of  solid  glacier  ice,
traversed  by  crevasses.  All  the  crevasses  were  more
or  less  roofed  over  with  tough  snow  lids.  These  lids
sometimes  were  slightly  in  relief,  or  sometimes  showed
slight  depressions  in  the  general  surface.  In  such
areas  the  snow  lids  rung  hollow  as  the  sledges  travelled
over  them.  We  found  the  snow  lids  always  most
treacherous  close  to  either  wall  of  the  crevasse,  and
we  frequently  fell  partially  through  at  such  spots,  but
had  no  very  bad  falls  in  this  part  of  the  glacier.

The  following  day,  December  11,  we  had  a  fine  view
of  "  Terra  Nova  "  Bay,  and  as  far  as  could  be  judged
the  edge  of  the  Drygalski  Ice  Barrier  on  the  north  was
now  scarcely  a  mile  distant.  We  were  much  surprised
at  the  general  appearance  of  the   outline  of  the  Ice


IN   A    CREVASSE

Barrier  coastal  ice  and  coast-line  ahead  of  us.     It  did
not  agree,  as  far  as  we  could  judge,  with  the  shape  of
this   region    as    shown   on   the   Admiralty   chart,    and
we  could  see  no  certain  indication  whatever   of   what
was  called,  on    the    chart,   "  the    low,   sloping   shore."
Accordingly  we  halted   a   little   earlier   than   usual   in
order   to    reconnoitre.      There  was    a    conspicuous  ice
mound  about   half  a  mile  to  the  north-west  of    this
camp.     Mackay  started  off  with  the  field-glasses  for  a
general  look  round  from  this  point  of  vantage.     Mawson
started  changing  his  plates  in  the  sleeping-bag,  while  I
prepared  to  go  out  with  my  sketch-book  and  get  an
outline  panoramic  view  of  the  grand  coast  ranges  now
in  sight.     Crevasses  of  late  had  been  so  few  and  far
between   that   I  thought  it  was   an  unnecessary  pre-
caution to  take  my  ice-axe  with  me,  but  I  had  scarcely
gone  more  than  six  yards  from  the  tent,  when  the  lid
of  a  crevasse  suddenly  collapsed  under  me  at  a  point
where  there  was  absolutely  no  outward  or  visible  sign
of  its  existence,  and  let  me  down  suddenly  nearly  up  to
my  shoulders.     I  only  saved  myself  from  going  right
down  by  throwing  my  arms  out  and  stapng  myself  on
the  snow  lid  on  either  side.     The  lid  was  so  rotten  that
I  dared  not  make  any  move  to  extricate  myself,  or  I
might   have   been   precipitated   into   the   abyss.     For-
tunately Mawson  was  close  at  hand,  and  on  my  calling
to  him,  he  came  out  of  our  sleeping-bag,  and  bringing
an  ice-axe,  chipped  a  hole  in  the  firm  ice  on  the  edge  of
the  crevasse  nearest  to  me.     He  then  inserted  the  chisel
edge  of  the  ice-axe  in  the  hole  and  holding  on  to  the  pick
point,  swung  the  handle  towards  me  :   grasping  this,   I
was  able  to  extricate  myself  and  climbed  out  on  to  the
solid  ice.

It  was  a  beautiful  day,  the  coast-line  showing  up

very  finely,  and  I  was  able  to  get  from  the  ice  mound

II  K  145


THE   HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

a  sketch  of  the  mountains.  Mawson  also  took  three
photographs,  making  a  panoramic  view  of  this  part  of
the  coast.  He  was  able,  also,  to  get  a  valuable  series  of
angles  with  the  theodolite,  which  showed  that  the  shape
of  the  coast-line  here  necessitated  serious  modification
of  the  existing  chart.


146


CHAPTER  X
PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)

Die  schonste  Jungfrau  sitzet
Dort  oben  wunderbar,
Ihr  goldnes  Greschmeide  blitzet,
Sie  Kammt  ihr  goldnes  Haar.

Sie  Kammt  es  mit  goldenem  Kamme,
Und  singt  ein  Lied  dabei ;
Das  hat  «in  wmidersame,
Gewaltige  melodei.

FAR  beyond  the  golden  mountains  to  the  north  and
west  lay  our  goal,  but  as  yet  we  knew  not  whether
wc  were  destined  to  fail  or  succeed.  Meanwhile  no  time
was  to  be  lost  in  hurrying  on  and  preparing  for  a  dash
on  to  the  plateau,  if  we  were  to  deserve  success.

The  following  day,  December  12,  we  sledged  on  for
half  a  mile  until  we  were  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  con-
spicuous ice  mound  previously  described.  We  con-
cluded that  as  this  ice  mound  commanded  such  a
general  view  of  the  surrounding  country,  it  must  itself
be  a  conspicuous  object  to  any  one  approaching  the
Drygalski  Glacier  by  sea  from  the  north ;  and  so  we
decided  that  as  there  was  still  no  trace  of  the  "  low,
sloping  shore  "  of  the  chart,  and  that  as  the  spot  at
which  we  had  now  arrived  was  very  near  to  the  area
so  named  on  the  chart,  we  would  make  our  depot  here.

147


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

We  intended  to  leave  at  this  depot  one  of  our  sledges
with  any  spare  equipment,  a  little  food,  and  all  our
geological  specimens,  and  proceed  thence  shore  wards
and  inland  with  one  sledge  only.  We  estimated  that
we  still  had  fully  220  miles  to  travel  from  this  depot  on
the  Drygalski  Glacier  to  the  Magnetic  Pole.  It  was,
therefore,  necessary  now  to  make  preparations  for  a
journey  there  and  back  of  at  least  440  miles.  We
thought  that  with  detours  the  journey  might  possibly
amount  to  500  miles.

We  could  see,  even  from  our  distance  of  from
twenty  to  thirty  miles  from  the  shore-line,  that  we
had  no  light  task  before  us  in  order  to  win  a  way  on
to  the  high  inland  plateau.  Before  we  knew  that
the  whole  of  the  sea  ice  had  gone  out  between  us
and  Mount  Melbourne,  we  had  contemplated  the  pos-
sibility of  travelling  further  northwards  along  the
coast  on  sea  ice,  down  to  a  spot  marked  on  the  chart  as
Gerlache  Inlet.  This  inlet  we  now  saw  was  situated
amongst  a  wilderness  of  high  sharp  jagged  mountain
peaks,  rising  to  heights  of  from  6000  to  8000  ft.  above
sea-level,  and  as  it  could  now  be  approached  only  from
the  land,  it  was  now  practically  inaccessible.  Nearer
to  us,  and  to  the  north-west  of  our  position  on  the
Drygalski  Ice  Barrier,  was  the  giant  form  of  Mount
Nansen,  one  of  the  grandest  and  most  imposing  of  all
the  mountains  seen  by  us  in  the  Antarctic.  Further  to
the  left  and  nearly  due  west  of  us  was  another  fine
dark  mountain  massif,  Mount  Larsen.  Between  Mount
Larsen  and  Mount  Nansen  was  a  vast  glacier  with  a
rugged  surface,  steep  ice  falls  and  large  crevasses.
About  midway  between  Mounts  Larsen  and  Nansen
was  a  huge  nunatak  of  black  rock,  rising  abruptly  from
the  ice  surface  at  a  point  several  miles  inland  from  the
shore-line.  Further  to  the  left  of  Mount  Larsen  was
148


SEALANDPENGUIN   MEAT

another  glacier  less  formidable  in  appearance  and
smaller  in  size  than  the  Mount  Nansen  Glacier.  This
terminated  near  the  coast  in  rather  a  steep  slope,  and
gradually  became  confluent  with  the  Drygalski  Glacier.
To  the  south  of  this  glacier,  which  may  be  termed  the
Mount  Larsen  Glacier,  was  another  great  mountain
massif  with  Mount  Bellingshausen  on  the  north  and
Mount  Neumayer  on  the  south.  The  foot-hills  of  Mount
Neumayer  terminated  in  steep  precipices  forming  the
northern  wall  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier.

Our  first  business  was  to  lay  in  a  stock  of  provisions
sufficient  to  last  us  for  our  500  miles  of  further  journeying.
Mackay  started  for  a  small  inlet  about  a  mile  and  a  half
distant  from  our  camp,  where  he  found  a  number  of
seals  and  Emperor  and  Adelie  penguins.  He  killed
some  seals  and  Emperor  penguins,  and  loaded  a  good
supply  of  seal  steak,  blubber,  liver  and  penguin  steak
and  liver  on  to  the  sledge.  In  the  course  of  his  hunting,
he  fell  through  an  ice  bridge,  at  a  tide-crack,  up  to  his
waist  in  the  water.  Mawson  and  I  went  out  to  meet  him
when  the  sledge  was  loaded,  and  helped  to  drag  it  back  to
camp.  We  found  it  very  hot  in  the  tent,  the  weather
being  fine  and  sunny.  It  was  delightful  to  be  able  at
last  to  rest  our  weary  limbs  after  the  many  weeks  of
painful  toil  over  the  sea  ice  and  the  Drygalski  Glacier.

We  started  cooking  our  meat  for  the  sledging  trip  on
the  following  day,  December  13,  our  intention  being  to
take  with  us  provisions  for  seven  weeks,  in  addition  to
equipment,  including  scientific  instruments,  &c.  We
estimated  that  the  total  weight  would  amount  to  about
670  lb.  We  were  doubtful,  in  our  then  stale  and
weakened  condition,  whether  we  should  be  able  to  pull
such  a  load  over  the  deep  loose  snow  ahead  of  us,  and
then  drag  it  up  the  steep  ice  slopes  of  the  great  glaciers
which  guarded  the  route  to  the  plateau.

149


THE    HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

The  sun  was  so  hot  that  it  started  melting  the
fat  out  of  our  pemmican  bags,  so  that  the  fat  actually
oozed  through  not  only  the  canvas  of  the  bags  them-
selves, but  also  through  the  thick  brown  canvas  of  the
large  fortnightly  food  bags,  which  formed  a  sort  of
tank  for  containing  the  pemmican  bags,  and  we  found
it  necessary  at  once  to  shade  the  food-bags  from  the  sun
by  piling  our  Burberry  garments  over  them.  Leather
straps,  tar  rope,  tins,  sledge  harness,  lamp-black  off  the
blubber  cooker,  warmed  by  the  rays  of  the  sun,  all
conamenced  to  sink  themselves  more  or  less  rapidly  into
the  neve.

We  unpacked  and  examined  both  sledges,  and
found  that  of  the  two,  the  runners  of  the  Duff  Sledge
were  the  less  damaged.  As  the  result  of  the  rough
treatment  to  which  it  had  recently  been  subjected,  one
of  the  iron  brackets  of  this  sledge  was  broken,  but  we
replaced  it  with  a  sound  one  from  the  discarded  Christmas
Tree  Sledge.

The  following  day,  December  14,  we  were  still  busy
preparing  for  the  great  trek  on  the  morrow.  Mackay
was  busy  cooking  Emperor  penguin  and  seal  meat  for
the  plateau  journey ;  Mawson  was  employed  in  trans-
ferring the  scientific  instument  boxes  and  the  Venesta
boxes  in  which  our  primus  lamp  and  other  light  gear
were  packed  from  the  Christmas  Tree  sledge  on  to  the
Duff  sledge.  He  also  scraped  the  runners  of  the  sledge
with  pieces  of  broken  glass  in  order  to  make  their
surfaces  as  smooth  as  possible.  I  was  busy  fixing  up
depot  flags,  writing  letters  to  the  Commander  of  the
Nimrod,  Lieutenant  Shackleton,  and  my  family,  and
fixing  up  a  milk  tin  to  serve  as  a  post  office  on  to  the
depot  flag-pole.  When  all  our  preparations  were
completed  we  drew  the  Christmas  Tree  sledge  with
some  of  GUI'  spare  clothing,  our  blubber  cooker,  a  biscuit
15i^


ANOTHER    BLIZZARD

tin  with  a  few  broken  biscuits,  and  all  our  geological
specimens  to  the  top  of  the  ice  mound,  about  a  quarter
of  a  mile  distant.  On  reaching  the  top  of  the  mound
we  cut  trenches  with  our  ice-axes  in  which  to  embed
the  runners  of  the  sledge,  fixed  the  runners  in  these
grooves,  piled  the  chipped  ice  on  top,  then  lashed  to
the  sledge,  very  carefully,  the  flag-pole  about  six  feet
high,  with  the  black  flag  displayed  on  the  top  of  it.
The  wind  blew  keenly  off  the  plateau  before  our  labours
were  completed.  We  all  felt  quite  sorry  and  downcast
at  parting  with  this  sledge,  which  by  this  time  seemed
to  us  like  a  bit  of  home.  We  then  returned  to  camp.
Just  previous  to  depoting  this  sledge,  Mackay  fixed
another  small  depot  flag  close  to  the  open  sea  a  few
yards  back  from  the  edge  of  the  ice  cliff.

Soon  after  we  had  turned  into  our  sleeping-bag,  a
gentle  blizzard  started  to  blow  from  west  by  south.
This  continued  all  night,  increasing  in  intensity  in  the
morning.  We  were  able  to  see  great  whale-backed
clouds,  very  much  like  those  with  which  we  had  been
familiar  over  Mount  Erebus,  forming  over  Mount
Nansen.  As  this  blizzard  wind  was  blowing  partly
against  us,  we  decided  that  we  would  wait  until  it  had
either  slackened  off,  or  decreased  in  force.

The  whole  of  the  next  day,  unfortunately,  the
bhzzard  continued.  The  sun  was  very  hot,  and  as  the
result  of  its  heat  we  were  to-day,  for  the  first  time,
subjected  to  a  new  trouble.  The  blizzard,  of  course,
drifted  snow  all  over  our  tent ;  and  a  strong  thaw  set
in  on  the  side  of  it  which  faced  the  sun.  The  wind,
flapping  the  canvas  of  the  tent  against  the  tent-poles,
brought  the  thaw  water  through  on  to  the  poles  facing
the  sun.  Inside  the  tent,  however,  the  temperature  was
just  below  freezing-point,  and  as  the  water  started  to
trickle  down  the  poles  it  froze.     With  the  flapping  of

151


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

the  tent  backwards  and  forwards  against  the  tent-
poles,  the  small  ridge  of  ice  on  the  upper  surface  of  each
tent-pole  became  drawn  out  into  sharp,  saw-like  teeth,
and  these  started  cutting  through  the  canvas.  All
through  this  day,  consequently,  we  had  to  be  con-
tinually getting  out  of  the  sleeping-bag  and  running  our
hands  down  the  tent-poles  so  as  to  rub  off  the  ice  teeth.

The  blizzard  continued  till  midnight  of  December
15—16,  when  its  force  markedly  decreased.  We  break-
fasted accordingly  just  after  midnight.  I  dug  out  the
sledge  from  the  snow  which  had  drifted  over  it,  and
Mackay  cached  some  seal  meat  in  an  adjoining  ice
mound.  At  last,  about  7  a.m.,  we  made  a  start,  and  were
delighted  to  find  that,  chiefly  as  the  result  of  the  three
days'  rest  in  camp,  we  were  able  to  pull  our  sledge —
weighing  about  670  lb. — with  comparative  ease.  The
snow,  though  soft,  had  become  crusted  over  the  sur-
face through  the  thaw  brought  on  by  the  blizzard,
followed  by  freezing  during  the  succeeding  cold  night.
The  sledging  was  certainly  heavy,  but  not  nearly  so
distressing  as  that  which  we  had  recently  experienced
in  crossing  the  Drygalski  Glacier.  The  "  tablecloth  was
being  laid  "  on  the  top  of  Mount  Nansen  in  the  form  of
a  remarkable  fiattish  thin  white  fleecy  cloud.  It
looked  as  though  a  high-level  blizzard  was  blowing
over  the  summit.  We  steered  towards  the  great  black
nunatak  midway  between  Mount  Nansen  and  Mount
Larsen,  as  Mawson  and  Mackay  both  considered  that
in  this  direction  lay  our  chief  hope  of  finding  a  prac-
tical route  to  the  high  plateau.

On  December  17  we  had  a  very  interesting  day.
The  sledging  was  rather  heavy,  being  chiefly  over  soft
snow  and  pie-crust  snow.  It  was  difficult  to  decide
sometimes  whether  we  were  on  fresh- water  ice  or  on  sea
ice.  Here  and  there  we  crossed  ice  ridges,  evidently
152


AN    ICE    BRIDGE

pressure  ridges  of  some  kind.  These  would  be  traversed
by  crevasses  which  showed  the  ice  in  such  places  to  be
at  least  thirty  to  forty  feet  in  thickness.  Close  to  our
final  camping-ground  for  the  day  was  a  long  shallow
valley  or  barranca  ;  it  was  from  one  hundred  and  twenty
to  one  hundred  and  thirty  yards  in  width.  The  near  side
was  steep,  though  not  too  steep  for  us  to  have  let  our
sledge  down ;  but  the  far  side  was  precipitous,  being
bounded  by  an  overhanging  cliff  from  twenty  to  thirty
feet  high.  The  floor  of  this  valley  was  deeply  and
heavily  crevassed.  This  sunken  valley,  therefore,
formed  a  serious  obstacle  to  our  advance.

While  Mackay  was  preparing  the  hoosh  Mawson
travelled  to  the  right,  and  I  to  the  left  along  this  valley
seeking  for  a  possible  crossing  place.  At  last  Mawson
found  a  narrow  spot  where  there  had  been  an  ice  bridge
over  the  valley,  but  this  had  become  cracked  through
at  the  centre.  It  was  nevertheless  strong  enough
to  bear  our  sledge.  Near  this  ice  bridge  Mawson
stated  that  he  noticed  muddy  material  containing
what  appeared  to  be  foraminifera,  squeezed  up  from
below.  The  day  had  been  calm  and  clear,  and  we
were  able  to  get  detailed  sketches  of  this  part  of  the
coast  range.

The  following  day  we  made  for  the  ice  bridge  with
our  sledge,  and  found  that  the  crack  crossing  it  had
opened  to  a  width  of  eighteen  inches  during  the
night.  The  far  side  had  become  too,  somewhat  higher
than  the  near  side.  We  had  little  difficulty  in  getting
the  sledge  over,  and  after  crossing  several  other  cracks
in  the  ice  and  n6ve  without  mishap  reached  once  more
a  fairly  level  surface.  A  light  plateau  wind  was  now
blowing  from  off  the  Mount  Nansen  glacier.  The  hard
snow  surface  was  furrowed  by  two  very  definite  sets  of
sastrugi,  one  set  coming  from  a  south-westerly  direction,

153


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

and  apparently  caused  by  blizzard  wind,  the  other
from  nearly  north-west.  The  latter  were  evidently
due  to  strong  rushes  of  cold  air  from  the  high  plateau
down  the  broad  valley  occupied  by  the  Mount  Nansen
glacier.  That  day  we  passed  over  a  series  of  pressure
ridges  with  their  steeper  sides  directed  towards  the
north-west.  At  the  bottom  of  these  steep  slopes  the
ice  was  often  crevassed,  and  sometimes  we  had  some
little  difficulty  in  crossing  them.  They  were  probably
due  to  pressure  from  the  Drygalski  Glacier.

At  lunch  time,  soon  after  midnight,  we  reached
some  very  interesting  glacial  moraines  in  the  form
of  large  to  small  blocks,  mostly  of  eruptive  rock,  em-
bedded in  the  ice.  It  was  probable,  from  their  general
distribution,  that  they  formed  part  of  an  old  moraine
of  Mount  Nansen,  though  now  about  fifteen  miles  in
advance  of  the  present  glacier  front.  A  conspicuous
rock  amongst  the  boulders  was  a  greenish-grey  to  greenish-
black  diorite,  very  rich  in  sphene.  The  brown  crystals
of  sphene  were  frequently  intercrystallised  with  the
felspars,  and  gave  the  rock  a  very  pretty  appearance.
Small  fragments  of  sandstone  and  clay  shale  were  also
represented  in  these  moraines.  The  larger  blocks  were
up  to  seven  feet  in  diameter,  and  formed  chiefly  of
reddish  porphyritic  granite.  We  collected  a  number  of
specimens  from  this  moraine.

Fine  rolls  of  cumulus  clouds  were  gathering  to  our
north-east.  The  day  was  calm  with  occasional  gleams
of  sunshine.  After  the  plateau  wind  had  died  down
about  2  P.M.  it  commenced  to  snow  a  little,  the  snow
coming  from  between  south-vrest  and  west-south-west.

At  midnight  on  December  19  we  started  sledging
in  the  falhng  snow,  guided  partly  by  the  direction  of
the  wind,  partly  by  that  of  the  pressure  ridges  and
crevasses,  occasionally  taking  compass  bearings.  Before
154


MAWSON   IN   A   CREVASSE

we  had  gone  far  we  reached  a  tide -crack  with  open
water  three  to  four  feet  wide.  There  was  also  a  width
of  about  eighteen  feet  of  recently  formed  thin  ice  at  this
tide-crack.  We  tasted  the  water  in  this  crack  and  found
that  it  was  distinctly  salt.  It  was  clear  then  that  at
this  part  of  our  journey  we  were  travelling  over  sea
ice.  About  half  a  mile  further  on  we  reached  another
open  tide-crack,  and  had  to  make  a  considerable  detour
in  order  to  get  over  it.  The  surface  of  the  ice  was  now
thawing,  and  we  trudged  through  a  good  deal  of  slushy
snow,  with  here  and  there  shallow  pools  of  water  as
blue  as  the  Blue  Grotto  of  Capri.  On  the  far  side  of
this  second  tide-crack,  and  beyond  the  blue  pools,  we
reached  a  large  pressure  ridge  forming  a  high  and  steep
scarped  slope  barring  our  progress.  Its  height  was
about  eighty  feet.  There  was  nothing  for  it,  if  we  were
to  go  forward,  but  to  drag  our  heavy  sledge  up  this
steep  slope.  It  was  extremely  exhausting  work,  and
we  were  forced  to  halt  a  few  times,  and  had  to  take  the
sledge  occasionally  somewhat  obliquely  up  the  slope
where  it  was  very  steep.  In  such  cases  the  sledge
frequently  skidded.  Our  troubles  were  increased  by
the  fact  that  this  ice  slope  was  traversed  by  numerous
crevasses,  which  became  longer  and  wider  the  further
we  advanced  in  this  direction.

At  last  we  got  to  the  slope,  only  to  see  in  the  dim
light  that  there  were  a  succession  of  similar  slopes  ahead
of  us,  becoming  continually  higher  and  steeper.  The  ice,
too,  became  a  perfect  network  of  cravasses,  some  of  which
were  partly  open,  but  most  of  them  covered  over  with
snow  lids.  Suddenly,  when  crossing  one  of  these  snow
lids,  just  as  he  was  about  to  reach  the  firm  ice  on  the  other
side,  there  was  a  slight  crash  and  Mawson  instantly  dis-
appeared from  sight.  Fortunately  the  toggle  at  the  end
of  his  sledge  rope  held,  and  he  was  left  swinging  in  the

155


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

empty  space  between  the  walls  of  the  crevasse,  being
suspended  by  his   harness  attached  to  the  sledge  rope.
Mackay  and  I  hung  on  to  the  rope  in  case  it  should
part  at  the  toggle,  where  it  was  somewhat  worn.     Mean-
while, Mawson  called  out  from  below  to  pass  him  down
the  alpine  rope.     Leaving  Mackay  to  keep  hold  of  the
toggle  end  of  Mawson's  harness  rope,  I  hurried  back  to
the  sledge,  which  was  about  ten  feet  behind,  and  just
as  I  was  trying  to  disengage  a  coil  of  rope  Mawson
called   out   that   he   felt   he   was   going.     I   ran   back
and  helped  Mackay  to  keep  a  strain  on  Mawson's  har-
ness rope.     Mawson  then  said  that  he  was  all  right.
Probably  at  the  time  he  felt  he  was  going  the  rope
had  suddenly  cut  back  through  the  Ud  of  the  crevasse
and  let  him  down  for  a  distance  of  about  a  couple  of
feet.     Altogether  he  was  about  eight  feet  down  below
the  level  of  the  snow  lid.     While  I  now  held  on  to
Mawson's   harness   rope   Mackay   hurried  back  to  the
sledge,   and   with   his   Swedish   knife,   cut  the   lashing
around  the  alpine  rope,  and  started  uncoiling  it,  making
a  bowline  at  the  end  in  which  Mawson  could  put  his
foot.     Meanwhile    Mawson    secured    some    ice    crystals
from  the  side  of  the  crevasse,  and  threw  them  up  for
examination.     The  alpine  rope  having  been  lowered,
Mawson  put  his  foot  into  the  bowline  and  got  Mackay
to  haul  his  leg  up  as  high  as  his  bent  knee  would  allow
it  to  go,  then,  calling  to   him   to   hold  tight  the  rope,
Mawson,  throwing   the   whole  weight   of   his   body  on
to  it,  raised  himself  about  eighteen  inches   by  means
of  his  arms  so  as  to  be  able  to  straighten  his  right  leg.
Meanwhile,  I  took  in  the  slack  of    his   harness   rope.
He  then  called  to  me  to   hold   tight  the  harness  rope,
as  he  was  going  to  rest  his  whole  weight  on  that,   so
as   to   take   the    strain  off   the    alpine   rope.     Mackay
then    was    able    to    pull    the    alpine    rope    up    about
156


DANGEROUS    TRAVELLING

eighteen  inches,  which  had  the  effect  of  bending  up
Mawson's  right  leg  as  before.  Mackay  then  held  fast
the  alpine  rope,  and  Mawson  again  straightened  him-
self up  on  it,  resting  his  whole  weight  on  that  rope.
Thus  little  by  little  he  was  hoisted  up  to  the  under
surface  of  the  snow  lid,  but  as  his  harness  rope  had  cut
back  a  narrow  groove  in  this  snow  lid  several  feet  from
where  the  snow  gave  way  under  him  Mawson  now  found
his  head  and  shoulders  pressing  against  the  under  side
of  the  snow  lid,  and  had  some  difficulty  in  breaking
through  this  in  order  to  get  his  head  out.  At  last
the  top  of  his  head  emerged,  a  sight  for  which  Mackay
and  I  were  truly  thankful,  and  presently  he  was  able
to  get  his  arms  up,  and  soon  his  body  followed,  and  he
got  safely  out  on  the  near  side  of  the  crevasse.  After
this  episode  we  were  extra  cautious  in  crossing  the
crevasses,  but  the  ice  was  simply  seamed  with  them.
Twice  when  our  sledge  was  being  dragged  up  ice-pres-
sure ridges  it  rolled  over  sideways  with  one  runner  in  a
crevasse,  and  once  the  whole  sledge  all  but  disappeared
into  a  crevasse,  the  snow  lid  of  which  had  partly  col-
lapsed under  its  weight.  Had  it  gone  down  completely
it  v>  ould  certainly  have  dragged  the  three  of  us  down
with  it,  as  it  weighed  nearly  one- third  of  a  ton.  It  was
clear  that  these  high-pressure  ridges  and  numerous
crevasses  were  caused  now,  not  by  the  Drygalski,  but
by  the  Nansen  Glacier.

It  was  no^Y  somewhat  foggy,  but  occasionally  the
fog  and  mist  lifted,  and  in  the  distance  one  caught
glimpses  of  magnificent  cliffs  of  reddish  brown  granite,
with  wisps  and  wreathes  of  white  mist  hanging  around  the
summits.  The  view  reminded  me  of  the  Grampians
in  Scotland  near  Ossian's  Cave  at  the  Pass  of  Glencoe.
Later  on  in  the  day  we  saw  in  the  dim  light  that  we  had
before  us  a  long  steep  descent  into  an  ice  valley,  which

157


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

appeared  to  be  heavily  crevassed  at  the  bottom.  As
we  were  uncertain  whether  we  could  get  across  it  at
this  spot  we  left  our  tent  and  sledge,  and  reconnoitred
ahead,  taking  with  us  the  alpine  rope  and  our  ice-axes.
We  found  a  way  of  crossing  this  valley,  but  could  see
that  the  ice-surface  ahead  of  us  was  apparently  worse
than  ever.  We  returned  to  our  tent  and  sledge,  and
put  up  the  tent,  and  chopped  lumps  of  ice  off  the  glacier
with  which  to  load  the  skirt,  as  no  snow  was  available
at  the  time.  It  was  just  commencing  to  snow,  and
wind  was  freshening  from  the  south-west.  We  were
now  in  a  perfect  labyrinth  of  crevasses  and  pressure
ridges.  Snow  continued  falling  heavily  accompanied
by  a  blizzard  wind  for  the  rest  of  that  day  and  the  whole
of  the  succeeding  night.  Inside  the  tent  we  experienced
some  discomfort  through  the  dripping  of  water  caused  by
the  thawing  snow.  As  usual  during  a  blizzard  the
temperature  rose,  and  although  the  sun's  heat  rays
were  partly  intercepted  by  the  falHng  snow  quite  suffi-
cient warmth  reached  the  side  of  the  tent  nearest  the
sun  to  produce  this  thaw.  Pools  of  water  lodged
on  the  foot  of  our  sleeping-bag,  but  we  were  able  to  keep
the  head  of  it  fairly  dry  by  fixing  up  our  Burberry
blouses  and  trousers  across  the  poles  on  the  inside  of
the  tent  so  as  to  make  a  temporary  waterproof  lining
just  above  our  heads.  We  were  all  thoroughly  ex-
hausted, and  slept  until  about  7  a.m.  the  following
day,  December  20.  By  that  time  the  snow  cleared  off.
About  six  inches  of  snow  had  fallen,  and  was  lying
deeply  drifted  in  places.  We  dug  away  the  drift
snow  from  around  the  sledges,  and  after  the  morning
hoosh  held  a  council  of  war.  The  question  was  whether
we  should  continue  pulling  on  in  the  direction  of  the
nunatak  rising  from  the  Mount  Nansen  Glacier,  or
whether  we  should  retreat  and  try  some  other  way  which
158


A   SECOND    RETREAT

might  lead  us  to  the  plateau.  Mackay  was  in  favour
of  hauling  ahead  over  the  Mount  Nansen  Glacier,  while
Mawson  and  I  favoured  retreat,  and  trjdng  a  passage
in  some  other  direction.

At  last  we  decided  to  retreat.  Our  fortunes  now,
so  far  as  the  possibility  of  reaching  the  Magnetic  Pole
were  concerned,  seemed  at  a  low  ebb.  It  was  already
December  20,  and  we  knew  that  we  had  to  be  back
at  our  depot  on  the  Drygalski  Glacier  not  later  than
February  1  or  2,  if  there  was  to  be  a  reasonable  chance
of  our  being  picked  up  by  the  Nimrod.  We  had  not
yet  climbed  more  than  100  ft.  or  so  above  sea-level,
and  even  this  little  altitude  was  due  to  our  having
climbed  ice-pressure  ridges,  which  from  time  to  time
dipped  down  again  to  sea-level.  We  knew  that  we
had  to  travel  at  least  480  to  500  miles  before  we  could
hope  to  get  to  the  Magnetic  Pole  and  back  to  our  depot,
and  there  remained  only  six  weeks  in  which  to  accom-
plish this  journey,  and  at  the  same  time  we  would  have
yet  to  pioneer  a  road  up  to  the  high  plateau.  Now  that
everything  was  buried  under  soft  snow  it  was  clear  that
sledging  would  be  far  slower  and  more  laborious  than
ever.  We  soon  proved  that  this  was  the  case,  for  after
starting  the  sledge  it  gathered  masses  of  soft  snow
around  it  and  under  it  as  it  went,  and  at  the  end  of
200  yards  we  had  to  halt  for  a  temporary  rest,  hoist  the
sledge  up  on  one  side  and  knock  away  the  masses  of
clogged  snow  from  underneath  it.  This  lai  to  be
repeated  every  few  hundred  yards,  and  after  we  had
gone  half  a  mile  we  decided  to  leave  the  sledge  and  go
ahead  with  ice-axes  and  alpine  rope  to  reconnoitre.

We  started  off  in  a  south-westerly  direction  with  the
intention  of  seeing  whether  the  Mount  Bellingshausen
Glacier  slope  would  be  more  practicable  for  our  sledges
than  the  Mount  Nansen  Glacier.     We  trudged  through

159


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

soft  thawing  snow  with  here  and  there  shallow  pools
of  water  on  the  surface  of  the  ice.  This,  of  course,
saturated  our  socks,  which  froze  as  the  temperature
fell  during  the  night.  After  proceeding  about  two
and  a  half  miles  we  observed  with  the  field-glasses
that  the  foot  of  the  Mount  Bellingshausen  Glacier
was  not  only  steep  but  broken  and  rugged.  We  decided
to  examine  what  appeared  to  be  a  narrow  stretch  of
snow  mantling  around  the  base  of  a  granite  mountain,
one  of  the  offshoots  from  the  Mount  Larsen  massif.
After  crossing  a  good  deal  of  pressure  ice  and  crevasses,
and  floundering  amongst  the  boulders  of  old  moraines
we  reached  some  shallow  lakes  of  thawed  snow  near
the  junction  between  the  sea  ice  and  the  foot  of  the
snow  slope  for  which  we  had  been  steering.  In  the
neighbourhood  of  the  moraines,  which  here  consisted
of  great  blocks  of  eruptive  rock  partly  or  wholly  im-
bedded in  ice,  the  blocks  became  so  warmed  up  by  the
sun's  heat  that  they  partially  thawed  the  ice  around,
and  in  some  cases  above  them  :  and  so  when  one  stepped,
near  one  of  these  blocks,  or  over  a  concealed  block,
the  ice  gave  way  with  a  crash  letting  one  down  a  depth
of  from  one  to  three  feet.  At  one  place,  before  reaching
the  shallow  lakes,  we  found  quite  a  strong  stream
of  water  flowing  just  under  the  surface  of  the  ice.  This
was  evidently  supplied  from  thaw  water  from  the  slopes
near  the  shore -line.

After  paddling,  unwillingly,  in  the  shallow  lakes
we  reached  the  foot  of  what  proved  now  to  be  not  a
snow  slope  but  a  small  branch  glacier.  This  was  covered
with  a  considerable  depth  of  soft  newly  drifted  snow,
and  we  found  the  ascent  in  consequence  very  tiring
as  we  sunk  at  each  step  in  the  soft  snow  over  our  knees.
At  last  we  attained  an  altitude  of  1200  ft.  above  sea-
level,  and  were  then  high  enough  to  see  that  the  upper
160


Depot  on  the  Drygalski  Barrier


•Backstairs  Passage"  on  the  Ascent  trom.  the  Sea  Ice  to  the  Plateau.

Mount  Larsen  on  the  Left  To  face  page  16


SEARCHING    FOR    A    PATH

part  of  this  branch  glacier  joined  the  Mount  Bellings-
hausen Glacier  at  about  800  ft.  higher  and  some  half
mile  further  on.  We  were  well  pleased  with  this  dis-
covery, but  as  the  glacier  front  ascended  about  1500
ft.  in  less  than  a  mile  we  did  not  look  forward  to  the
task  of  getting  our  heavy  sledge  up  this  steep  slope,
encumbered  as  it  was  with  soft  deep  thawing  snow.

On  our  return  to  the  shore-line  down  the  glacier
slope  we  discovered  that  it  was  slightly  crevassed
in  places,  though  not  heavily  so.  At  the  foot  of  the
glacier,  and  a  short  distance  towards  our  camp,  we
found  a  moraine  gravel.  This  was  intermixed  with  a
dark  marine  clay  containing  numerous  remains  of
serpulse,  pecten  shells,  bryozoa,  foraminifera,  &c.,  Mac-
kay  also  found  a  perfect  specimen  of  a  solitary  coral,
allied  to  Delto-cyathus,  and  also  a  Waldheimia.  All
these  specimens  were  carefully  preserved  and  brought
into  camp.  While  we  were  collecting  these  specimens
we  could  hear  the  roar  of  many  mountain  torrents
descending  the  steep  granite  slopes  of  the  great  moun-
tain mass  to  the  south  of  our  branch  glacier.  Occa-
sionally, too,  we  heard  the  boom  and  crash  of  an  aval-
anche descending  from  the  high  mountain  top.  Such
sounds  were  strange  to  our  ears,  accustomed  so  long
to  the  almost  perfect  solitude  and  silence  of  the  Antarctic,
hitherto  broken  only  by  the  bleating  of  baby  seals  and
the  call  of  the  penguins.

Mawson  discovered  in  another  part  of  the  moraine,
nearer  to  our  camp,  a  bright  green  mineral  forming
thin  crusts  on  a  very  pretty  quartz  and  felspar  porphyry.
These  we  decided  to  examine  more  carefully  on  the
morrow.  We  were  all  thoroughly  exhausted  after  the
day's  work,  and  Mackay  had  a  rather  bad  attack  of  snow
blindness.  For  some  time  after  we  got  into  the  sleep-
ing-bag, and  before  we  dozed  off,  we  could  still  hear
U  L  161


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

the  intermittent  roar  of  avalanches  like  the  booming  of
distant  artillery.

The  following  day,  December  22,  we  picked  our  way
with  our  sledge  cautiously  amongst  the  crevasses  and
over  the  pressure  mounds,  the  traversing  of  which
gave  us  some  trouble  in  places,  and  eventually  reached
a  fairly  good  track  along  the  ice  parallel  to  the  moraine
from  which  we  had  been  collecting  the  day  previous.
We  found  a  large  pool  of  thaw  water  on  the  surface
of  the  ice.  This  was  fed  by  a  sub-glacial  stream  coming
from  an  old  rock  moraine.  We  could  hear  this  stream
rolling  the  pebbles  along  in  its  channel.  At  another
point  the  moraine  showed  a  remarkable  cone,  which
at  first  sight  we  took  for  a  typical  esker,  but  a  nearer
examination  revealed  the  fact  that  the  whole  cone,  with
the  exception  of  the  exterior,  was  formed  of  solid  ice
with  only  an  outer  coating  of  sand,  mud  and  gravel
associated  with  abundant  marine  organisms  similar  to
those  collected  by  us  the  previous  day.  We  halted
when  we  arrived  opposite  the  green  mineral  observed
by  Mawson  the  previous  day.  We  collected  a  good
deal  of  this.  At  first  sight  we  thought  it  was  the
common  mineral  epidote,  but  its  hardness  and  the
fact  that  it  had  turned  yellow,  where  it  was  weathered,
made  this  hypothesis  untenable.  The  green  crusts
formed  by  it  were  about  one-fortieth  to  one-sixteenth
of  an  inch  in  thickness,  and  it  was  evidently  fairly
widely  distributed  in  that  locality,  as  numerous  large
joint  faces  of  the  quartz  and  felspar  porphjrry  were
completely  coated  with  it.  A  little  further  on  we
came  upon  an  enormous  silicious  sponge,  eighteen
inches  by  two  feet  in  diameter,  adhering  firmly  to
one  of  the  moraine  boulders.  We  secured  specimens
of  this.

Altogether  the  locality  was  most  fascinating,  an(

163


SOME    PROBLEMS

we  longed  to  have  been  able  to  spend  more  time  there.
Amongst  other  interesting  problems  was  the  question
as  to  how  the  material  of  the  sea  floor  came  to  be  up-
lifted here  to  a  height  of  twenty  to  thirty  feet  or  more
above  sea-level,  and  as  to  how  the  marine  sediments
came  to  be  resting  on  an  old  conical  surface  of  dense
ice.  We  tested  the  latter  to  see  whether  it  was  of  salt-
or  of  fresh-water  origin ;  it  was  not  distinctly  saline,
though  slightly  so — much  as  glacier  ice  would  be  if
it  were  sprayed  by  the  sea.  None  of  us  could  account
for  this  curious  phenomenon.  It  seemed  as  though
the  marine  muds  had  been  subjected  to  considerable
pressure,  as  numbers  of  the  fossils  in  it  were  triturated
and  shattered.  It  is  of  course  just  possible  that  in  the
forward  movement  of  the  Mount  Nansen  Glacier  it
may  have  pushed  up  some  of  the  sea  bottom  above  sea-
level,  and  still  there  remains  the  question  as  to  how
masses  of  ice  came  to  find  their  way  under  the  moraine
sediments.  It  is  possible  that  after  an  extensive  glacia-
tion  of  this  region  the  glacier  ice  from  inland  spread
over  the  spot  where  this  moraine  is  now  situated,  but
on  the  retreat  of  the  ice  inland,  while  still  a  small
thickness  of  ice  was  left  in  this  bay,  a  submergence
ensued,  and  dming  that  submergence  a  marine  mud
was  deposited  over  the  ice  together  with  the  larger
organisms  found  in  association  with  the  mud.  Then
there  was  an  advance  of  the  ice  once  more,  and  moraines
of  large  blocks  of  rock  were  laid  down  over  the  top
of  the  moraine  muds  and  the  relics  of  the  ancient  glacier
ice.  Then  once  more  the  ice  retreated  to  its  present
position  leaving  the  moraine  blocks  and  moraine  muds
of  the  old  ice  in  the  relative  situations  mentioned.

As  we  skirted  the  foot  of  the  small  branch  glacier
we  noticed  several  small  puffs  of  snow  near  the  top  angle
of  the  snow  slope  which  we  proposed  to  escalade.     Just

163


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

as  we  were  pulling  our  sledge  to  the  foot  of  this  slope  the
puff  of  wind  with  drift  snow  developed  suddenly  into  a
strong  blizzard.  We  pulled  in  against  this  with  great
difficulty  for  half  an  hour,  then  camped  at  the  foot  of
the  slope.  The  blizzard  with  its  heavy  drift  snow
and  the  occasional  gleams  of  warm  sunshine  cast  much
drift  over  our  tent  with  accompanying  thaw.  Con-
sequently inside  the  tent  water  dripped  heavily  all
over  our  clothing  and  sleeping-bag.  Fortunately  we
were  just  above  the  level  of  the  thaw  water  of  the
small  lakes,  but  we  could  hear  water  trickling  close
underneath  our  tent  amongst  the  granite  boulders  of
the  moraines  just  under  the  ice.

We  were  able  now  to  economise  fuel,  as  we  could
bale  the  water  out  of  these  rock  pools  and  streams  for
making  our  hoosh,  tea  and  cocoa.  All  that  night  the
blizzard  raged,  and  we  thought  any  moment  that  the
tent  would  be  ripped  up  from  top  to  bottom.  It  was
getting  very  thin  by  this  time  and  had  already  been
frequently  repaired  by  Mackay  and  Mawson.  On  this
occasion  several  new  rents  started  from  near  the  top  of
the  tent  and  spread  downwards.  Moreover,  the  canvas
cap  of  our  tent  was  broken  by  the  force  of  the  wind
and  the  pressure  of  the  drift  snow.

The  following  day,  about  7  a.m.,  I  got  up  and  dug
away  the  drift  snow  from  the  lee  side  of  the  tent,  which
was  cramping  our  feet  and  legs,  and  found  that  it  was
still  snowing  heavily  outside,  and  blowing  hard  as  well.
In  the  afternoon  the  blizzard  slacked  off  somewhat,
and  the  drift  nearly  ceased.  We  got  up  accordingly  and
had  a  meal.  We  halved  our  sledge  load,  repacked
the  sledge,  and  by  dint  of  great  exertions,  dragged  it
up  the  steep  snow  and  ice  slope  to  a  height  of  800  ft.
above  the  sea.  This  was  done  in  the  teeth  of  a  mild  but
freshening  blizzard.  The  blizzard  at  last  got  too  strong
164


A  PARSELENE


BETTER   PROGRESS

for  us,  so  that  we  left  the  load  at  the  altitude  mentioned
and  returned  back  to  our  tent  with  the  empty  sledge.

We  had  been  pleased  to  find  that  the  blizzard,
although  it  had  delayed  us  and  damaged  our  tent,  had
proved  a  blessing  in  disguise.  It  had  not  brought
with  it  much  fresh  snow,  but  had  blown  away  most  of
the  loose  snow  left  by  the  preceding  blizzard,  leaving
behind  it  now  a  fairly  hard  snow  surface  suitable  for
sledging.

Mackay's  eyes,  still  suffering  from  the  effects  of
snow-blindness,  were  treated  with  a  solution  of  thin
tabloids  (laminae)  of  sulphate  of  zinc  and  cocaine,  with
the  result  that  his  eyes  were  much  better  the  following
day,  December  25.  This  day  there  was  still  a  strong
breeze  coming  off  the  plateau,  and  sweeping  over  our
tent.  A  little  later  in  the  morning  the  weather  became
calm,  and  a  glorious  sunny  day  smiled  upon  us.  Mawson
and  Mackay  repaired  the  rents  in  the  tent,  while  I  saw
to  repacking  of  the  sledge  with  the  remaining  half  load,
and  collected  some  geological  specimens.

We  started  shortly  before  noon  and  commenced
dragging  up  the  second  part  of  our  load  to  the  accom-
paniment of  the  music  of  murmuring  streams.  During
our  interval  for  lunch,  Mawson  was  able  to  get  some
theodolite  angles.  We  had  the  great  satisfaction,  when
we  turned  in  at  10  p.m.  on  Christmas  Eve,  to  find  that
we  were  above  the  uncomfortable  zone  of  thaw,  and
everything  around  us  was  once  more  crisp  and  dry,
though  cold.  Our  spirits,  too,  mounted  with  the  altitude.
We  were  now  over  1200  ft.  above  sea-level.


165


CHAPTER  XI

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)

THE  following  day,  December  25,  was  Christmas  Day.
When  I  awoke,  I  noticed  a  pile  of  snow  on  top
of  the  sleeping-bag  close  to  my  head.  At  first,  before
I  was  fully  awake,  I  imagined  that  it  was  the  moisture
condensed  from  Mav/son's  breath.  Then  I  heard  the
gentle  patter  of  snow-flakes,  and,  on  turning  my  head
in  the  direction  in  which  the  rustling  proceeded,  saw
that  the  wind  had  undermined  the  skirt  of  our  tent,  and
was  blowing  the  snow  in  through  a  small  opening  it  had
made.  Accordingly,  I  slipped  out  and  snowed  up  the
skirt  again,  trampling  the  snow  down  firmly.  A  plateau
wind  was  now  blowing  with  almost  blizzard  force.

About  two  hours  later  we  got  up,  and  after  some
trouble  with  the  primus  lamp  on  account  of  the  wind,
had  our  breakfast,  but  as  the  wind  was  blowing  dead
against  us,  we  turned  into  the  sleeping-bag  for  a  short
time.  It  was  nearly  noon  before  the  wind  died  down,  and
we  started  off  with  our  sledge,  still  relaying  with  half
loads,  the  day  being  now  beautifully  clear  and  sunny.
At  the  1300  ft.  level  we  started  our  sledge  meter  again,
having  lifted  it  off  the  ice  while  we  were  going  up  the
steep  slope.  A  little  further  on  we  were  able  to  put
the  whole  of  our  load  again  on  to  the  sledge  and  so
dispense  with  further  relay  work.  Tiiis,  too,  was  a
great  blessing.
160


CLIMBING    THE    PLATEAU

When  we  arrived  at  our  spot  for  camping  that
night  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  finding  that  we  were
over  2000  ft.  above  sea-level,  and  that  we  had,  in
addition  to  the  climbing,  travelled  that  day  about  four
miles.  The  plateau  wind  had  almost  gone,  and  once
more  we  revelled  in  being  not  only  high,  but  dry.
Having  no  other  kind  of  Christmas  gift  to  offer,  Mawson
and  I  presented  Mackay  with  some  sennegrass  for  his
pipe,  his  tobacco  having  long  ago  given  out.  We  slept
soundly  that  Christmas  night.

On  December  26  we  observed  dense  dark  snow  clouds
to  the  north-east,  and  a  little  light  snow  commenced  to
fall,  but  fortunately  the  weather  cleared  towards  the
afternoon.  Mawson  lost  one  of  his  blue  sweaters  off  the
sledge,  but  he  and  Mackay  went  back  some  distance  and
recovered  it.  Towards  the  afternoon  we  found  it  neces-
sary to  cross  a  number  of  fairly  large  crevasses.  These
were  completely  snowed  over,  and  although  we  frequently
fell  through  up  to  our  knees,  we  had  no  serious  trouble
from  them  on  this  occasion.  Some  of  them  were  from
twenty  to  thirty  feet  in  width,  and  it  was  fortunate  for
us  that  the  snow  lids  were  strong  enough  to  carry
safely  the  sledge  and  ourselves.  Mackay  suggested,  for
greater  security,  fastening  the  alpine  rope  around
Mawson,  who  was  in  the  lead,  and  securing  the  other
end  of  it  to  the  sledge.  The  rope  was  left  just  slack
enough  to  admit  of  the  strain  of  hauling  being  taken
by  the  harness  rope,  hence  Mawson  had  two  strings
to  his  bow  in  case  of  being  suddenly  precipitated
into  a  crevasse.  This  was  a  good  system,  which
we  always  adopted  afterwards  in  crossing  heavily
crevassed  ice.

The  following  day,  December  27,  we  decided  to
make  a  small  depot  of  our  ski  boots  (as  by  this  time  it
appeared  we  were  getting  off  the  glacier  ice  on  to  hard


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

snow  and  neve  where  we  should  not  require  them)  and
also  of  all  our  geological  specimens,  and  about  one  day's
food-supply,  together  with  a  small  quantity  of  oil — a
supply  for  about  two  days  in  one  of  our  oil-cans.  The
following  is  a  list  of  the  provisions  :

Powdered  cheese  (enough  for  two  meals).

Tea  (for  four  meals).

Twenty-five  lumps  of  sugar.

Hoosh  for  one  meal.

Chocolate  (for  one  and  a  half  meals).

Twelve  biscuits.
We  also  left  an  empty  biscuit  tin  into  which  we
crammed  our  ski  boots,  and  our  three  ice-axes,  using
one  of  them  stuck  upright  as  a  staff  for  a  small  blue
flag  to  mark  the  depot.  Mawson  took  some  good
bearings  with  the  prismatic  compass,  and  we  then  pro-
ceeded on  our  way.  This  depot  we  called  the  Larsen
Depot,  as  it  was  close  to  one  of  the  southern  spurs  of
Mount  Larsen.

All  eyes  were  now  strained,  as  we  advanced  with
our  sledge,  to  see  whether  there  was  still  any  formidable
range  of  mountains  ahead  of  us  barring  our  path  to  the
plateau.  At  one  time  it  seemed  as  though  there  was
a  high  range  in  the  dim  distance,  but  a  careful  exam-
ination with  the  field-glasses  showed  that  this  ap-
pearance was  due  only  to  clouds.  Our  joy  and  thank-
fulness was  unbounded  when  we  at  last  realised  that
apparently  there  was  now  a  fairly  easy  ascent  of  hard
neve  and  snow  on  to  the  plateau.  That  day  we  sledged
a  little  over  ten  miles.  During  the  night  there  was  a
very  strong  radiant  in  the  sky  from  about  south-west
to  north-east,  with  a  movement  of  altro-stratus  cloud
from  north-west  to  south-east.  Therefore,  probably,
this  radiant  was  due  to  formation  of  great  rolls  of
cloud  curled  over  by  the  anti-trade  wind  as  it  pressed
16S


A    STEADY    ADVANCE

forward  in  a  south-easterly  direction.  The  rolls  of
clouds  were  distinctly  curved  convexly  towards  the
south-east.

The  following  day,  December  28,  we  travelled  on
north-westwards  in  thick  cloudy  weather,  at  first  quite
calm.  At  about  10  a.m.  a  breeze  set  in  from  the  sea,
spreading  westwards  over  the  top  of  Mount  Nansen  over
8000  ft.  above  sea-level.  Above  Nansen  it  met  the
upper  current  wind  and  was  obviously  deflected  by  it
in  a  south-easterly  direction.  Meanwhile,  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  coast  the  sky  was  very  dark  and  lowering,  and
probably  snow  was  falling  there.  Remarkable  pillars
of  cloud  formed  over  the  Mount  Larsen  group.  These
were  photographed  by  Mawson.  We  passed  over  occa-
sional patches  of  nearly  bare  glacier  ice,  alternating  with
stretches  of  hard  neve.  When  we  camped  that  evening
we  had  sledged  a  little  over  ten  miles,  and  a  keen,
cold  wind  was  blowing  gently  off  the  high  plateau  to
our  west.

The  following  day,  December  29,  was  clear,  calm,
and  cold.  At  noon  a  pretty  strong  wind  was  blowing
off  the  plateau.  The  surface  of  the  snow  was  fairly
strongly  ridged  with  sastrugi.  One  set  was  made  by
winds  coming  from  between  west-south-west  and  west
by  north,  the  other  by  winds  nearly  north-westerly,  or
between  west-30°-north  and  west-40°-north.  As  this
latter  bearing  was  not  far  off  the  direction  in  which  we
were  travelling,  we  were  able  from  time  to  time  to  follow
these  minor  sastrugi,  which  were  thus  of  considerable
help  to  us  in  bringing  over  the  sastrugi  more  oblique
to  the  direction  in  which  we  were  travelling.

The  following  day,  December  SO,  Moxmts  Larsen
and  Bellingshausen  were  disappearing  below  the  horizon,
and  several  mountains  were  showing  up  clearly  and
sharply  to  the  north  of  us,  the  principal  peaks  of  which

169


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

were  at  first  identified  by  us  as  Mount  New  Zealand
and  Mount  Queensland  of  Captain  Scott's  chart.  Later
Mawson  concluded  that  the  western  of  the  two  at  any
rate  was  new  and  unnamed.

There  was  still  a  strong  plateau  wind.  We  were
now  at  an  altitude  of  about  4500  ft.  Once  more,  as
in  winter  time,  our  breath  froze  into  lumps  of  ice,
cementing  our  Burberry  helmets  to  our  beards  and
moustaches.  In  putting  up  the  tent  for  lunch  in
the  strong  plateau  wind,  it  became  badly  torn  near
the  cap  piece.  This  wind  had  started  before  midnight
on  the  previous  night,  and  was  blowing  strongly  until
the  afternoon,  at  from  twelve  to  about  fifteen  miles  an
hour.  It  carried  along  with  it  a  little  low  drift.  The
plateau  wind  did  not  die  down  until  the  evening.  Our
distance  travelled  was  eleven  miles,  and  we  were  still
travelHng  on  an  up  grade,  being  now  nearly  5000  ft.
above  sea-level.

December  31  passed  off  without  any  special  event
other  than  that  after  Mackay  had  repaired  the  tent  in  the
morning,  it  became  torn  again  at  lunch-time  when  we
were  fitting  it  over  the  tent-poles.  Mawson  took  a  fresh
set  of  magnetic  observations.  We  camped  for  this
purpose  at  the  bottom  of  a  wide  undulation  in  the  neve
surface.  We  were  disappointed  at  his  announcement  that
he  made  out  that  the  Magnetic  Pole  was  further  inland
than  had  been  originally  estimated.  WTiat  ^vith  the
observations  with  the  Lloyd-Creak  dip  circle,  and  the  time
occupied  in  repairing  the  rents  in  the  tent,  we  ran  our-
selves somewhat  short  of  time  for  our  sledging  that
day,  and  did  not  camp  until  a  little  before  midnight.
We  were  still  dragging  the  sledge  on  an  up  grade ;  the
surface  was  softer  and  more  powdery  than  before,  and
the  sastrugi  heavier.  Also  since  the  previous  Tuesday
we  had  been  obliged  to  put  ourselves  on  somewhat
170


NEW    YEAR'S    DAY

shorter  rations  than  before,  as  we  had  to  take  one-
eighth  of  our  rations  out  in  order  to  form  an  emergency
food-supply  in  the  event  of  our  journey  to  and  from
the  Magnetic  Pole  proving  longer  than  we  originally
anticipated.

That  night,  about  a  mile  before  reaching  camp,  we
sighted  to  the  west  of  us,  much  to  our  surprise,  some
distinct  ice  falls.  This  showed  us  that  the  snow  desert
over  which  we  were  travelling  had  still  some  kind  of
creeping  movement  in  it.  A  skua  gull  came  to  visit
us  this  Nevf  Year's  Eve.  He  had  been  following  us  up
for  some  time  in  the  distance,  mistaldng  us,  perhaps,
for  seals  crawling  inland  to  die,  as  is  not  infrequently
the  habit  of  these  animals.  We  were  now  about  eighty
miles  inland  from  the  nearest  open  water.  Being
disappointed  of  his  high  hopes,  he  left  us  after
that  day  and  we  saw  him  again  no  more.  The  run  for
the  day  was  about  ten  miles.  We  felt  very  much
exhausted  when  we  turned  into  our  sleeping  -  bag  that
night.

January  1,  1909  (New  Year's  Day),  was  a  beautiful
calm  day  with  a  very  light  gentle  plateau  wind,  with
fairly  high  temperature.  The  sky  was  festooned  in  the
direction  of  Mount  Nansen  with  delicate  wispy  cirrus
clouds  converging  in  a  north-east  direction.  Later  on,
towards  the  evening,  it  was  evident  that  these  cirrus
clouds  were  strongly  bent  round  from  south-west
in  a  northerly  direction.  Possibly  this  bending  with
the  concave  side  to  the  west  -  north  -  west  was  due
to  the  pressure  at  a  high  level  of  the  anti-trade  wind
blowing  towards  the  east  -  south  -  east.  Mawson  took
observations  for  latitude  and  for  magnetic  deviation
at  noon.  He  made  our  latitude  at  noon  to  be  74°  18'.
That  night  Mawson  gave  us  a  grand  hoosh  and  a
rich  pot  of  cocoa  in  celebration  of  New  Year's  Day.

171


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

We  all  thoroughly  enjoyed  this  meal  after  our  exhausting
march.

On  January  2  we  noticed  that  the  sastrugi  were
gradually  swinging  round  into  a  direction  a  little  north
of  west.  The  snow  was  frequently  soft  in  large  patches,
which  made  sledging  very  heavy.  We  ascended
altogether  about  290  ft.,  but  we  crossed  a  large  number
of  broad  undulations,  the  troughs  of  which  were  from
thirty  to  forty  feet  below  their  crests.  These  un-
dulations considerably  increased  the  work  of  sledging,
and  the  loose  patches  of  snow  were  so  very  soft  and
powdery  that  the  runners  of  our  sledge  sunk  deeply
into  them,  so  that  it  was  only  with  our  utmost  efforts
that  we  were  able  that  day  to  finish  our  usual  ten  miles.
Again  we  were  much  exhausted  when  the  time  came
for  camping.  We  were  beginning  to  suffer,  too,  from
hunger,  and  would  have  liked  more  to  drink  if  we  could
have  afforded  it.  We  talked  of  what  we  would  have
drunk  if  we  had  had  the  chance.  Mackay  said  he  would
have  liked  to  drink  a  gallon  of  buttermilk  straight  off ;
Mawson  would  have  preferred  a  big  basin  of  cream ;
while  I  would  have  chosen  several  pots  of  the  best  coffee
with  plenty  of  hot  milk.

We  were  still  climbing  on  January  3,  having  as-
cended another  500  ft.  It  proved  the  heaviest  day's
sledging  since  we  reached  the  plateau.  The  snow
was  still  softer  than  on  the  previous  day,  and  the  sur-
face was  more  undulating  than  ever,  the  troughs  of  the
undulations  being  about  fifty  feet  below  the  crests.
The  sastrugi  themselves  were  from  two  to  three  feet  in
height.  The  crests  of  the  large  undulations  were
usually  formed  of  hard  snow,  the  strong  winds  having
blown  any  loose  material  off  them.  This  loose  material
had  accumulated  to  some  depth  in  the  troughs,  and
hence  made  the  wide  patches  of  soft  snow  which  made
172


OVER    6000    FEET    UP

our  sledge  drag  so  heavily  as  we  crossed  them.  By
dint  of  great  efforts  we  managed  to  finish  our  ten  miles
for  that  day.

The  next  day,  January  4,  we  were  pleased  to  find
that  there  was  less  up  grade  than  on  the  previous  day.
We  were  now  at  an  altitude  of  over  6000  ft.,  and  found
respiration  in  the  cold,  rarified  air  distinctly  trying.
It  was  not  that  we  suffered  definitely  from  mountain
sickness,  but  we  felt  weaker  than  usual  as  the  result,
no  doubt,  of  the  altitude  combined  with  the  cold.  To-
wards evening,  large  clouds  developed,  much  like
the  whaleback  clouds  which  we  had  often  observed
forming  over  Erebus  about  the  time  of  blizzards.
Great  rolls  of  cumulus  spread  rapidly  from  the  north-
west towards  the  south-east,  and  we  feared  that  a
blizzard  was  impending.  On  the  whole  the  sledging
was  a  little  easier  to-day  than  the  preceding  day,  and
again  we  managed  to  do  our  ten  miles.

On  the  morning  of  January  5  we  found  the  sky  thickly
overcast,  except  to  the  south  and  the  south-east  where
clear  strips  of  blue  were  showing.  We  thought  that
snow  was  coming.  The  weather  was  perfectly  calm,
comparatively  warm,  but  the  light  dull.  We  could
still  see  the  new  inland  mountain  and  Mount  New
Zealand  distinctly.  The  sun  was  so  oppressively  hot
when  it  peeped  out  from  behind  the  clouds  that  one
could  feel  it  burning  the  skin  on  one's  hands.

The  surface  was  more  marked  by  sastrugi  than  ever,
but  on  the  whole  firm.  We  sledged  ten  miles.  I  will
quote  from  my  diary  the  notes  regarding  some  succeeding
days.

January  6.  To-day  the  weather  was  gloriously  fine.
Bright,  warm  sunshine  with  a  crisp,  cold  air  in  the  early
morning  and  the  weather  almost  calm.  The  pulHng  was
rather  heavy  during  the  afternoon ;    possibly  the  hot

173


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

sun  may  have  somewhat  softened  the  surface  of  the
snow.  This  morning  I  left  off  my  crampons  and  put  on
a  new  pair  of  finnesko.  These  latter  proved  some-
what slippery,  and  in  falling  heavily  this  afternoon
over  one  of  the  sastrugi  I  slightly  strained  some  muscles
on  the  inner  side  of  my  left  leg,  just  below  the  knee.
This  gave  me  a  considerable  amount  of  pain  for  the
rest  of  the  journey.  Mackay  lost  all  his  stockings  and
socks  off  the  bamboo  pole  of  the  sledge,  but  was
fortunate  enough  to  recover  them  after  walking  back
over  a  mile  on  our  tracks.

January  7.  We  were  up  at  5  a.m.,  when  the  tempera-
ture was  minus  13°Fahr.  We  were  anxious  to  arrive  at
the  end  of  our  first  five  miles  in  good  time  for  Mawson
to  get  a  meridian  altitude,  and  take  theodolite  angles
to  the  new  mountain  and  Mount  New  Zealand,  which
were  now  almost  disappearing  from  view  below  the
horizon.  Mawson  made  our  latitude  to-day  73°  43'.
This  was  one  of  the  coldest  days  we  had  as  yet  ex-
perienced on  the  plateau,  the  wind  blowing  from  west
by  north.  We  all  felt  the  pulling  very  much  to-day,
possibly  because  it  was  still  slightly  uphill,  and  prob-
ably partly  on  account  of  mountain  lassitude.  The
distance  travelled  was  ten  miles.

Friday,  January  8.  To-day,  also,  was  bitterly  cold.
The  wind  blew  very  fresh  for  some  little  time  before
noon  from  a  direction  about  west  by  north,  raising
much  low  drift.  Our  hands  were  frost-bitten  several
times  when  packing  up  the  sledge.  The  cold  blizzard
continued  for  the  whole  day.  At  lunch  time  we  had
great  difficulty  in  getting  up  the  tent,  which  became
again  seriously  torn  in  the  process.  Our  beards  were
frozen  to  our  Burberry  helmets  and  Balaclavas,  and
we  had  to  tear  away  our  hair  by  the  roots  in  order
to  get  them  off.  We  continued  travelling  in  the
174


OPTICAL    EFFECTS

blizzard  after  lunch.  Mawson's  right  cheek  was  frost-
bitten, and  also  the  tip  of  my  nose.  The  wind  was
blowing  all  the  time  at  an  angle  of  about  45°  on  the
port  bow  of  our  sledge.  We  just  managed  to  do  our
ten  miles  and  were  very  thankful  when  the  time  came
for  camping.

The  following  day,  January  9,  a  very  cold  plateau
wind  w^as  still  blowing,  the  horizon  being  hazy  wdth
low  drift.  We  were  now  completely  out  of  sight  of
any  mountain  ranges,  and  were  toiling  up  and  down
amongst  the  huge  billows  of  a  snow  sea.  The  silence
and  solitude  were  most  impressive.  About  10.30  a.m.
a  well-marked  parphelion,  or  mock  sun,  due  to  floating
ice  crystals  in  the  air,  made  its  appearance.  It  had
the  form  of  a  wide  halo  with  two  mock  suns  at  either
extremity  of  the  equator  of  the  halo  parallel  to  the
horizon  and  passing  through  the  real  sun.  Mawson
was  able  to  make  his  magnetic  deviation  observation
with  more  comfort,  as  towards  noon  the  wind  slack-
ened and  the  day  became  gloriously  bright  and  clear.
In  the  afternoon  it  fell  calm.

We  were  feeling  the  pinch  of  hunger  somewhat,  and
as  usual  our  talk  under  these  circumstances  turned
chiefly  on  restaurants,  and  the  w^onderfully  elaborate
dinners  we  would  have  when  we  returned  to  civilisation.
Again  we  accomplished  our  ten  miles,  and  were  now  at
an  altitude  of  over  7000  ft.

January  10  was  also  a  lovely  day,  warm  and  clear ;
the  snow  surface  was  good  and  we  travelled  quickly.
There  was  a  strong  "  Noah's  Ark  "  structure  in  the
high-level  cirrus  clouds,  there  being  a  strong  radiant
point  respectively  in  the  north-west  and  south-east,
and  this  made  us  somewhat  apprehensive  that  we  were
in  for  another  blizzard.  These  cirrus  clouds  were  also
strongly  curved  with  the  concave  side  of  the  curve

175


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

facing  the  north-east.  We  thought  this  curve  was,  per-
haps, due  to  the  anti-trade  wind  bending  round  in  a
direction  following  that  of  the  curve  in  the  wisps  of
cirrus.

January  11.  We  were  up  about  7  a.m.,  the  tempera-
ture at  that  time  being  minus  12°  Fahr.  It  was  a
cold  day  to-day,  and  we  had  a  light  wind  nearly
southerly.  At  first  it  blew  from  between  south  and  south-
south-east  ;  this  gradually  freshened  at  lunch  time  and
veered  towards  the  west.  It  then  returned  again  more
towards  the  south-south-east.  Mawson  had  a  touch  of
snow-blindness  in  his  right  eye.  Both  he  and  Mackay
suffered  much  through  the  skin  of  their  hps  peeling  off,
leaving  the  raw  flesh  exposed.  Mawson,  particularly,
experienced  great  difficulty  every  morning  in  getting
his  mouth  opened,  as  his  Hps  were  firmly  glued  together
by  congealed  blood.

That  day  we  did  eleven  miles,  the  surface  being  fairly
firm,  and  there  being  no  appreciable  general  up  grade
now,  but  only  long-ridged  undulations,  with  sastrugi.  We
noticed  that  these  sastrugi  had  now  changed  direction,
and  instead  of  trending  from  nearly  west,  or  north
of  west,  eastwards,  now  came  more  from  the  south-
east directed  towards  the  north-west.  This  warned
us  that  we  might  anticipate  possibly  strong  head
winds  on  our  return  journey,  as  our  course  at
the  time  was  being  directed  almost  north-west,
following  from  time  to  time  the  exact  bearing  of  the
horizontal  magnetic  compass.  The  compass  was  now
very  sluggish,  in  fact  the  theodolite  compass  would
scarcely  work  at  all.  This  pleased  us  a  good  deal,
and  at  first  we  all  wished  more  power  to  it :  then
amended  the  sentiment  and  wished  less  power  to  it.
The  sky  was  clear,  and  Mawson  got  good  magnetic
meridian  observations  by  means  of  his  very  delicately
170


THE    MOVING    GOAL

balanced  horizontal  moving  needle  in  his  Brunton  transit
instrument.

January  12.  The  sky  to-day  was  overcast,  the
night  having  been  calm  and  cloudy.  A  few  snow-
flakes  and  fine  ice  crystals  were  falling.  The  sun  was
very  hot  and  it  somewhat  softened  the  snow  surface,
thereby  increasing  of  course  the  difficulty  of  sledging.
We  sledged  to-day  ten  and  three-quarter  miles.

That  evening,  after  hoosh,  Mawson,  on  carefully
analysing  the  results  set  forth  in  the  advance  copy
of  the  Discovery  Expedition  Magnetic  Report,  decided
that  although  the  matter  was  not  expressly  so  stated,
the  Magnetic  Pole,  instead  of  moving  easterly,  as  it  had
done  in  the  interval  between  Sabine's  observations  in
1841  and  the  time  of  the  Discovery  expedition  in  1902,
was  likely  now  to  be  travelling  somewhat  to  the  north-
west. The  results  of  dip  readings  taken  at  intervals
earlier  in  the  journey  also  agreed  with  this  decision.
It  would  be  necessary  therefore  to  travel  further  in
that  direction  than  we  had  anticipated  in  order  to
reach  our  goal.  This  was  extremely  disquieting  news,
for  all  of  us  as  we  had  come  almost  to  the  limit  of  our
provisions,  after  making  allowance  for  enough  to  take
us  back  on  short  rations  to  the  coast.  In  spite  of  the
anxiety  of  the  situation  extreme  weariness  after  sledg-
ing enabled  us  to  catch  some  sleep.

The  following  morning,  January  13,  we  were  up
about  6  A.M.  A  light  snow  was  falling,  and  fine  ice
crystals  made  the  sky  hazy.  There  was  a  light  wind
blowing  from  about  south-south-east.  About  8  a.m.
the  sun  peeped  through  with  promise  of  a  fine  day.
We  had  had  much  discussion  during  and  after  break-
fast as  to  our  future  movements.  The  change  in
the  position  of  the  Pole  necessitated  of  course  a
change  in  our  plans.  Mawson  carefully  reviewed  his
II  M  177


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

observations  as  to  the  position  of  the  Magnetic  Pole,
and  decided  that  in  order  to  reach  it  we  would  need  to
travel  for  another  four  days.  The  horizontally  moving
needle  had  now  almost  ceased  to  work.  We  decided
to  go  on  for  another  four  days  and  started  our
sledging.  It  was  a  cold  day  with  a  light  wind.  The
temperature  at  about  10.30  a.m.  being  minus  6°  Fahr.
At  noon  Mawson  took  a  magnetic  reading  with  the
Lloyd- Creak  dip  circle,  which  was  now  fifty  minutes
off  the  vertical,  that  is,  89°  10'.  At  noon  the  latitude
was  just  about  73°  South.  The  sastrugi  were  now
longer  and  higher  than  usual,  and  there  were  two
distinct  sets.  The  strongest  sastrugi  trended  from
south  to  north  ;  a  subordinate  set  from  south-east  to
north-west.     That  day  we  sledged  thirteen  miles.

January  14.  The  day  was  gloriously  clear  and
bright  with  a  warm  sun.  A  gentle  wind  was  blowing
from  about  south-south-east,  and  there  was  a  little
cumulus  cloud  far  ahead  of  us  over  the  horizon.  The
surface  of  the  snow  over  which  we  were  sledging  was
sparkling  with  large  reconstructed  ice  crystals,  about
half  an  inch  in  width  and  one-sixteenth  of  an  inch  in
thickness.  These  crystals  form  on  this  plateau  during
warm  days  when  the  sun's  heat  leads  to  a  gentle  up-
ward streaming  of  the  cold  air  with  a  small  amount
of  moisture  in  it  from  beneath.  Under  these  influences
combined  with  the  thawing  of  the  surface  snow,  these
large  and  beautiful  ice  crystals  form  rapidly  in  a  single
day.  We  observe  that  after  every  still  sunny  day  a
crop  of  these  crystals  develops  on  the  surface  of  the
neve,  and  remains  there  until  the  next  wind  blows
them  off.  They  form  a  layer  about  half  an  inch  in
thickness  over  the  top  of  the  n6v6.  In  the  bright  sun-
light the  neve,  covered  with  these  sheets  of  bright
reflecting  ice  crystals,  glittered  like  a  sea  of  diamonds.
178


AT    THE    MAGNETIC    POLE

The  heavy  runners  of  our  sledge  rustled  gently  as  they
crushed  the  crystals  by  the  thousand.  It  seemed  a
sacrilege.  The  sastrugi  were  large  and  high,  and  our
sledge  bumped  very  heavily  over  them  with  a  prodigious
ratthng  of  our  aluminium  cooking-gear.  It  was  clear
that  the  blizzard  winds  blow  over  this  part  of  the
plateau  at  times  with  great  violence.  Apparently
all  the  winds  in  this  quarter,  strong  enough  to  form
sastrugi,  blow  from  south  or  west  of  south  or  from  the
south-east.  Our  run  to-day  was  twelve  miles  one
hundred  and  fifty  yards.

January  15.  We  were  up  to-day  at  6  a.m.  and  found
a  cold  southerly  breeze  blowing,  the  temperature  being
minus  19°  Fahr.  at  6.80  a.m.  Mawson  got  a  good  latitude
determination  to-day,  72°  42^

At  about  twenty  minutes  before  true  noon  Mawson
took  magnetic  observations  with  the  dip  circle,  and
found  the  angle  now  only  fifteen  minutes  off  the  vertical
the  dip  being  89°  45'.  We  were  very  much  rejoiced
to  find  that  we  were  now  so  close  to  the  Magnetic
Pole.  The  observations  made  by  Bernacchi,  during  the
two  years  of  the  Discovery  expedition's  sojourn  at  their
winter  quarters  on  Ross  Island,  showed  that  the  ampli-
tude of  daily  swing  of  the  magnet  was  sometimes  con-
siderable. The  compass,  at  a  distance  from  the  Pole,
pointing  in  a  slightly  varying  direction  at  different
times  of  the  day,  indicates  that  the  polar  centre  executes
a  daily  round  of  wanderings  about  its  mean  position.
Mawson  considered  that  we  were  now  practically  at  the
Magnetic  Pole,  and  that  if  we  were  to  wait  for  twenty-
four  hours  taking  constant  observations  at  this  spot
the  Pole  would,  probably,  during  that  time,  come
vertically  beneath  us.  We  decided,  however,  to  go
on  to  the  spot  where  he  concluded  the  approximate
mean  position  of  the  Magnetic  Pole  would  lie.     That

179


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

evening  the  dip  was  89"  48'.  The  run  for  the  day  was
fourteen  miles.

From  the  rapid  rate  at  which  the  dip  had  been
increasing  recently,  as  well  as  from  a  comparison  of
Bernacchi's  magnetic  observations,  Mawson  estimated
that  we  were  now  about  thirteen  miles  distant  from
the  probable  mean  position  of  the  South  Magnetic
Pole.  He  stated  that  in  order  to  accurately  locate
the  mean  position  possibly  a  month  of  continuous
observation  would  be  needed,  but  that  the  position  he
indicated  was  now  as  close  as  we  could  locate  it.
We  decided  accordingly,  after  discussing  the  matter
fully  that  night,  to  make  a  forced  march  of  thirteen
miles  to  the  approximate  mean  position  of  the  Pole
on  the  following  day,  put  up  the  flag  there,  and  return
eleven  miles  back  on  our  tracks  the  same  day.  Our
method  of  procedure  on  this  journey  of  twenty-four
miles  is  described  in  the  journal  of  the  following  day.

Saturday^  January  16.  We  were  up  at  about  6  a.m.
and  after  breakfast  we  pulled  on  our  sledge  for  two
miles.  We  then  depoted  all  our  heavy  gear  and  equip-
ment with  the  exception  of  the  tent,  sleeping-bag,
primus  stove,  and  cooker,  and  a  small  quantity  of  food,
all  of  which  we  placed  on  the  sledge  together  with  the
legs  of  the  dip  circle  and  those  of  the  theodolite  to
serve  as  marks.  We  pulled  on  for  two  miles  and  fixed
up  the  legs  of  the  dip  circle  to  guide  us  back  on  our
track,  the  compass  moving  in  a  horizontal  plane  being
now  useless  for  keeping  us  on  our  course.  At  two
miles  further  we  fixed  up  the  legs  of  the  theodolite,
and  two  miles  further  put  up  our  tent,  and  had  a  light
lunch.  We  then  walked  five  miles  in  the  direction
of  the  Magnetic  Pole  so  as  to  place  us  in  the  mean
position  calculated  for  it  by  Mawson,  72°  25'  South
latitude,  155°  16'  East  longitude.  Mawson  placed  his
180


Pool  of  Thaw  Water  formed  by  the  emergence  of  a  Sub-Glacial  Stkeaji  South-east  of

Mount  Larsen  To  face  paga  180


THE    FLAG    HOISTED

camera  so  as  to  focus  the  whole  group,  and  arranged
a  trigger  which  could  be  released  by  means  of  a  string
held  in  our  hands  so  as  to  make  the  exposure  by  means
of  the  focal  plane  shutter.  Meanwhile,  Mackay  and  I
fixed  up  the  flag-pole.  We  then  bared  our  heads  and
hoisted  the  Union  Jack  at  3.30  p.m.  with  the  words
uttered  by  myself,  in  conformity  with  Lieutenant
Shackleton's  instructions,  "  I  hereby  take  possession
of  this  area  now  containing  the  Magnetic  Pole  for  the
British  Empire."  At  the  same  time  I  fired  the  trigger
of  the  camera  by  pulling  the  string.  Thus  the  group  were
photographed  in  the  manner  shown  on  the  plate.
The  blurred  line  connected  with  my  right  hand  repre-
sents the  part  of  the  string  in  focus  blown  from  side  to
side  by  the  wind.  Then  we  gave  three  cheers  for  his
Majesty  the  King.

There  was  a  pretty  sky  at  the  time  to  the  north
of  us  with  low  cumulus  clouds,  and  we  speculated  at
the  time  as  to  whether  it  was  possible  that  an  arm
of  the  sea,  such  as  would  produce  the  moisture  to  form
the  cumulus,  might  not  be  very  far  distant.  In  view
of  our  subsequent  discovery  of  a  deep  indent  in  the
coast-line  in  a  southerly  direction  beyond  Cape  North,
it  is  possible  that  the  sea  at  this  point  is  at  no  very  con-
siderable distance.

The  temperature  at  the  time  we  hoisted  the  flag
was  exactly  0°  Fahr.  It  was  an  intense  satisfaction
and  relief  to  all  of  us  to  feel  that  at  last  after  so  many
days  of  toil,  hardship  and  danger  we  had  been  able
to  carry  out  our  leader's  instructions,  and  to  fulfil
the  wish  of  Sir  James  Clarke  Ross  that  the  South
Magnetic  Pole  should  be  actually  reached,  as  he  had
already  in  1831  reached  the  North  Magnetic  Pole.
At  the  same  time  we  were  too  utterly  weary  to  be
capable   of   any   great   amount   of   exultation.     I   am

181


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

sure  the  feeling  that  was  uppermost  in  all  of  us  was  one
of  devout  and  heartfelt  thankfulness  to  the  kind  Provi-
dence which  had  so  far  guided  our  footsteps  in  safety
to  that  goal.  With  a  fervent  "  Thank  God  "  we  all  did
a  right-about  turn,  and  as  quick  a  march  as  tired
limbs  would  allow  back  in  the  direction  of  our  little
green  tent  in  the  wilderness  of  snow.

It  was  a  weary  tramp  back  over  the  hard  and  high
sastrugi  and  we  were  very  thankful  when  at  last  we  saw
a  small  dark  cone,  which  we  knew  was  our  tent,  rising
from  above  the  distant  snow  ridges.  On  reaching  the
tent  we  each  had  a  little  cocoa,  a  biscuit  and  a  small
lump  of  chocolate.  We  then  sledged  slowly  and  wearily
back,  picking  up  first  the  legs  of  the  theodolite,  then
those  of  the  dip  circle,  and  finally  reached  our  depot
a  little  before  10  p.m.

In  honour  of  the  event  we  treated  ourselves  that
night  to  a  hoosh,  which  though  modest  was  larger
in  volume  than  usual,  and  was  immensely  enjoyed.
Mawson  repacked  the  sledge  after  hoosh  time,  and
we  turned  into  the  sleeping-bag  faint  and  weary,  but
happy  with  the  great  load  of  apprehension  of  possible
failure,  that  had  been  hanging  over  us  for  so  many
weeks,  at  last  removed  from  our  minds.  We  all  slept
soundly  after  twenty-four  miles  of  travel.


182


CHAPTER  Xn

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONTINUED)

Coldly  thy  rosy  shadows  bathe  me,  cold
Are  all  thy  lights,  and  cold  my  wrinkled  feet.

Tennyson

X  CALLED  the  camp  a  little  before  10  a.m.  the  follow-
-*-  ing  morning.  We  now  discussed  the  situation  and
our  chances  of  catching  the  Nimrod,  if  she  came  in  search
of  us  along  the  coast  in  the  direction  of  our  depot  on  the
Drygalski  Glacier.  We  had  agreed,  before  we  decided  to
do  the  extra  four  days'  march  to  the  shifted  position
of  the  Magnetic  Pole,  that  on  our  return  journey  we
would  do  not  less  than  thirteen  miles  a  day.  At  the
Magnetic  Pole  we  were  fully  260  statute  miles  distant,
as  the  skua  flies,  from  our  depot  on  the  Drygalski  Glacier.
As  we  had  returned  eleven  of  these  miles  on  the  day
previous  we  still  had  249  miles  to  cover.  It  was  now
January  17,  and  the  Nimrod  was  due  to  start  to  search
for  us  on  February  1.  As  there  was  of  course  plenty  of
sunHght  day  and  night,  we  thought  it  quite  possible
that  she  might  be  up  to  the  Drygalski  Glacier  on  February
2 — possibly  on  the  morning  of  that  day.  We  accord-
ingly decided  to  try  and  make  back  to  our  Drygalski
depot  by  February  1.  This  gave  us  fifteen  days.  Con-
sequently we  would  have  to  average  sixteen  and  two-
third  miles  a  day  in  order  to  reach  the  coast  in  the  time
specified.     This  of  course  did  not  allow  of  any  delay

i88


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

on  account  of  blizzards,  and  we  had  seen  from  the
evidence  of  the  large  sastrugi  that  blizzards  of  great
violence  must  occasionally  blow  in  these  quarters,
and  from  the  direction  of  the  sastrugi  during  our  last
few  days'  march  it  was  clear  that  the  dominant  direc-
tion of  the  bhzzard  would  be  exactly  in  our  teeth.  The
prospect,  therefore,  of  reaching  our  depot  in  the  speci-
fied time  did  not  appear  bright.  Providentially  we
had  most  beautiful  and  glorious  weather  for  our  start
on  January  17.  It  remained  fine  for  the  whole  day,
and  we  were  greatly  favoured  by  a  light  wind  which  now
blew  from  between  north-west  and  west-north-west —
a  perfectly  fair  wind  for  our  journey.  In  fact  the
wind  changed  direction  with  us.  It  had  helped  us  by
blowing  from  the  south-east,  just  before  we  reached
the  Magnetic  Pole,  and  now  it  was  blowing  in  the  oppo-
site direction,  helping  us  home.  That  day,  in  spite  of  the
late  start,  we  sledged  sixteen  miles.

On  January  18  the  weather  again  was  fine,  and
we  had  a  hard  day's  sledging.  Unfortunately  Mawson's
left  leg  became  very  lame  and  pained  him  a  good
deal.  There  was  a  strong  radiant  in  the  clouds  towards
the  north-west,  and  we  were  a  little  apprehensive  of
the  wind  in  consequence.  Our  run  for  the  day  was
sixteen  miles  two  hundred  yards.  This  was  the  end  of
my  week's  cooking,  and  we  were  able  to  indulge  that
night  in  a  fairly  abundant  hoosh,  also  in  very  milky  and
sweet  cocoa,  and  Mackay  admitted  that  he  actually  felt
moderately  full  after  it  for  the  first  time  since  we  had
left  the  Drygalski  Depot.

The  following  day,  January  19,  we  boiled  the  hypso-
meter  at  our  camp,  and  found  the  level  to  be  about
7350  ft.  above  the  sea.  The  boiling-point  was  196.75°
Fahr.  There  was  a  cold  fresh  wind  blowing  from  the  south-
east, a  head  wind  for  us,  the  temperature  at  the  time
184


SUGAR    IN    THE    HOOSH

being  minus  11°  Fahr.  There  were  still  low  cumulus
clouds  to  the  north  of  us.  The  wind  freshened  in  the
afternoon  to  a  mild  blizzard,  and  we  found  pulling
against  it  very  severe  work.  That  morning  we  had  quite
an  unusual  diversion.  Mawson,  who  is  a  bold  culinary
experimenter,  being  messman  for  the  week,  tried  the
experiment  of  surreptitiously  introducing  a  lump  of  sugar
into  the  pemmican.  Mackay  detected  an  unusual  flavour
in  the  hoosh,  and  cross-questioned  Mawson  severely  on
the  subject.  Mawson  admitted  a  lump  of  sugar.
Mackay  was  thereupon  roused  to  a  high  pitch  of  indigna-
tion, and  stated  that  this  awful  state  of  affairs  was  the
result  of  going  out  sledging  with  "  two  foreigners."
This  mild  blizzard  partly  obliterated  our  old  sledge
tracks  by  piling  over  them  new  sastrugi  of  fine  hard
snow.  We  had  a  great  struggle  that  day  to  make  our
sixteen  miles,  but  fortunately  the  blizzard  slackened
off  towards  9  p.m.,  and  we  just  managed  it.

Owing  to  some  miscalculation,  for  which  I  was
responsible,  we  discovered  that  we  had  no  tea  for  this
week,  our  sixth  week  out,  unless  we  took  it  out  of  the
tea-bag  for  the  seventh  week.  Accordingly  we  halved
the  tea  in  the  seventh  week  bag,  and  determined  to
collect  our  old  tea-bags  at  each  of  our  old  camps  as  we
passed  them,  and  boil  these  bags  together  with  the
small  pittance  of  fresh  tea.  And  here  I  may  mention
the  tastes  of  the  party  in  the  matter  of  tea  somewhat
differed.  Mackay  Hked  his  tea  thoroughly  well  and
long  boiled,  whereas  Mawson  and  I  liked  it  made
by  just  bringing  the  water  to  the  boil;  as  soon  as
we  smelt  the  aroma  of  tea  coming  from  underneath
the  outer  lid  of  the  cooker  we  used  to  shut  off  the
primus  lamp  immediately  and  decant  the  tea  into  the
pannikins.  Mackay  had  always  objected  to  this  pro-
cedure when  we  were  sledging  along  the  sea  ice  where

185


THE    HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

water  boils  at  about  212°  Fahr. ;  now,  however,  he  had
a  strong  scientific  argument  in  his  favour  for  keeping
the  pot  boiling  for  a  few  minutes  after  the  tea  had
been  put  in.  He  pointed  out  that  at  our  present
altitude  water  boiled  at  just  over  196°  Fahr.,  a  tempera-
ture which  he  maintained  was  insufficient  to  extract
the  proper  juices  and  flavour  from  the  tea,  unless  the
boiling  was  very  much  prolonged.  Mawson,  however,
averred — on  chemical  and  physical  grounds — that  with
the  diminished  atmospheric  pressure  certain  virtuous
constituents  of  the  tea  could  be  extracted  at  a  lower
temperature.  The  discussion  was  highly  scientific  and
exhilarating,  though  not  very  finite.  It  was  agreed
as  a  compromise  to  allow  the  boiling  to  continue  for
three  or  four  minutes  after  the  water  had  come  to  the
boil  before  the  tea  was  poured  out.  As  in  our  progress
coastwards  we  were  continually  coming  upon  more  old
tea-bags  at  our  old  camps,  and  always  collected  these
and  did  not  throw  away  any  that  had  been  used  before
we  soon  had  quite  an  imposing  collection  of  muslin  bags
with  old  tea  leaves,  and  with  the  thorough  boiling  that
they  now  got  there  was  a  strong  flavour  of  muslin
superadded  to  that  of  old  tea.  Nevertheless  this  drink
was  nectar.

January  20.  We  were  still  able  to-day  to  follow
our  sledge  tracks,  which  was  a  great  blessing,  the
magnetic  needle  being  of  so  little  use  to  us.  We  had
the  wind  slightly  against  us  bringing  up  a  little  low
drift.  Again  we  made  our  sixteen-mile  run,  though
with  great  difficulty,  for  the  wind  had  been  blowing
freshly  all  day  on  our  starboard  bow.

In  view  of  the  good  progress  that  we  had  made,
and  after  carefully  calculating  out  the  provisions  left
over,  Mawson,  who  was  at  this  time  messman,  pro-
posed that  we  should  return  to  nearly  full  rations,
186


RAPID    MARCHING

as  we  were  becoming  much  exhausted  through  insuffi-
cient food.  This  proposal  was,  of  course,  hailed  with
delight.

On  January  21  there  was  a  light  wind  with  low
temperature,  clear  sky  and  hot  sun,  which  combined
to  consolidate  the  surface  over  which  we  were  sledging.
By  this  time  Mackay  and  Mawson's  raw  lips,  which  had
been  cracked  and  bleeding  for  about  a  fortnight  pre-
viously, were  now  much  better.  Mawson's  lame  leg
had  also  improved.  Again  we  did  our  sixteen-mile
run.

January  22.  We  were  up  soon  after  7  a.m.  It
was  a  clear  day  with  bright  sunshine.  The  wind  started
soon  after  5  a.m.,  constantly  freshening,  as  it  usually
did  in  this  part  of  the  plateau,  till  about  3  p.m.  Then
it  gradually  died  down  by  about  10  p.m.  The  tempera-
ture at  7.15  A.M.  was  minus  20°  Fahr.,  and  at  this  altitude
we  found  the  wind  at  this  temperature  very  trying.
To-day  we  had  to  sledge  over  a  great  deal  of  pie-crust
snow,  which  was  very  fatiguing.  Again  we  did  sixteen
miles.  We  had  since  the  day  before  yesterday  lost  our
old  sledge  tracks.  Mackay  earned  a  pound  of  tobacco,
to  be  given  him  when  we  returned  to  civilisation,  by
being  the  first  to  make  the  "  land  fall  " — new  mountain,
west  of  Mount  New  Zealand — which  showed  out  now
in  the  far  distance  very  faintly  a  Httle  to  the  left  of  our
course.  It  was  a  welcome  sight  to  all  of  us.  To-day
we  sledged  fifteen  miles.

January  23.  The  weather  was  bright  and  cold
with  a  light  southerly  wind.  This  day  was  very
fatiguing,  the  sledging  being  over  patches  of  soft  snow
and  pie-crust  snow.  At  the  same  time  we  were  con-
scious now  that  although  we  were  sledging  up  and
down  wide  undulations  we  were  on  the  whole  going
down  hill,  and  the  new  mountain  was  already  showing

187


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

up  as  an  impressive  massif.  The  air  was  cold  and
piercing.  Mawson's  right  leg  was  still  painful.  That
night  we  were  all  very  much  exhausted,  and  were
obliged  to  allow  ourselves  fully  eight  hours  sleep.  Our
run  was  sixteen  miles.

January  24.  To-day  we  had  more  heavy  sledging
over  a  lot  of  pie-crust  snow  and  soft  snow.  The  wind
was  blowing  somewhat  against  us  at  about  twelve  miles
an  hour,  the  temperature  being  minus  4°  Fahr.  in  the
afternoon.  A  low  drift  was  sweeping  in  waves  over  the
snow  desert ;  it  was  a  desolate  scene.  Later  in  the
day  we  were  cheered  by  the  sight  of  Mount  Baxter.

Towards  evening  we  had  some  discussion  as  to
whether  we  were  following  approximately  our  old  out-
going tracks.  Mackay  thought  we  were  nearer  to  the
new  mountain  than  before,  I  thought  we  were  further
to  the  south-west,  Mawson,  who  was  leading,  con-
tended that  we  were  pretty  well  on  our  old  course.  Just
then  I  discovered  that  we  were  actually  on  our  old
sledge  tracks,  which  showed  up  plainly  for  a  short
distance  between  the  newly  formed  sastrugi.  This
spoke  volumes  for  Mawson's  skill  as  a  navigator.  Dis-
tance sledged  sixteen  miles.

January  25.  It  was  blowing  a  mild  blizzard.  We
estimated  at  lunch  time  that  we  were  about  eighty  and
a  half  miles  distant  now  from  our  Mount  Larsen  Depot.
The  temperature  during  the  afternoon  was  minus  3°  Fahr.
We  all  felt,  as  usual,  much  fatigued  after  the  day's
sledging.  For  the  past  four  or  five  days  we  each  took  an
Easton  syrup  tabloid  for  the  last  stage  but  one  before
reaching  camp,  and  this  certainly  helped  to  keep  us
going.  This  evening  the  blizzard  died  down  about
8  P.M.,  and  Mount  Nansen  was  sighted  just  before  we
camped.

January  26.  We  lost  our  old  sledge  tracks  again
188


A    DIFFICULT    DESCENT

to-day.  The  weather  turned  cloudy  in  the  afternoon,
and  the  light  was  very  bad.  We  now  reached  a  surface
of  hard  marble-like  neve,  which  descended  by  short
steep  slopes.  We  did  not  at  first  realise  that  we  were
about  to  descend  what  we  had  termed  the  Ice  Falls  on
the  outward  journey.  Every  now  and  then  the  sledge
would  take  charge  and  rush  down  this  marble  stair-
case, bumping  very  heavily  over  the  steps.  Mawson
and  I  frequently  came  heavy  croppers.  Mawson  put
on  crampons  outside  his  finnesko  to  enable  him  to
get  a  grip  of  the  sUppery  surface,  but  my  crampons
were  frozen  so  hard  and  so  out  of  shape  that  I  was
unable  to  get  them  on,  so  I  followed  behind  and  steadied
the  sledge  as  it  continued  bumping  its  way  down  the
marble  steps.  At  last  we  reached  once  more  a  flattened
surface  and  camped.  Our  run  for  the  day  was  fourteen
and  a  half  miles.

January  27.  This  morning  we  all  felt  very  slack
after  the  night  spent  in  the  closely  covered  sleeping
bag,  the  sky  at  the  time  being  cloudy.  Under  these
circumstances,  as  we  now  had  come  down  from  our
highest  altitude  by  about  4000  ft.,  and  the  temperature
of  course,  had  somewhat  risen,  we  felt  stifled  and  de-
pressed. During  the  morning  fine  snow  fell  and  the
weather  was  quite  thick  to  the  south  and  east  of  us.
Mawson  steered  us  by  the  trend  of  the  sastrugi.  As
the  day  wore  on,  the  weather  cleared  up  and  we  had  a
good  view  of  the  new  mountain,  Mount  New  Zealand,
and  Mount  Baxter.  The  pulling  at  first  was  very  hard
work,  being  up-hill,  but  later  we  had  a  good  run  down
hill  to  the  spot  where  we  camped  for  lunch.  After  lunch
we  sledged  down  a  still  steeper  slope,  the  sledge  occasion-
ally taking  charge.  At  this  spot  Mackay  partially  fell
into  a  crevasse.  To-day  we  were  much  cheered  by  the
sight  at  last  of  Mount  Larsen.     By  the  time  we  reached

189


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

the  spot  where  we  camped  that  night  we  had  a  good  clear
view  of  Larsen.  The  distance  travelled  was  sixteen
ixdles.  We  were  now  only  about  forty  miles  from  our
Mount  Larsen  Depot.

January  28.  We  turned  out  of  the  sleeping-bag  to-
day at  about  6.30  a.m.  A  blizzard  was  blowing,  and
after  breakfast  we  had  much  difficulty  in  the  cold  wind
in  getting  up  the  mast  and  sail.  Mackay,  who  usually
did  the  greater  part  of  this  work,  got  his  hands  rather
badly  frost-bitten  before  our  preparations  were  com-
pleted. We  used  the  thick  green  canvas  floorcloth  as
a  sail ;  the  tent-poles  served  us  for  a  mast,  and  a  piece
of  bamboo  did  duty  as  a  yard.

The  wind  was  blowing  at,  perhaps,  about  twenty-
five  miles  an  hour,  and  as  soon  as  we  started  the  sledge,
it  began  to  travel  at  such  a  hot  pace  that  Mackay  and
Mawson,  with  their  long  legs,  were  kept  walking  at  the
top  of  their  speed,  while  I,  with  my  shorter  ones,  was
kept  on  a  jog  trot.  Occasionally,  in  an  extra  strong
puff  of  wind,  the  sledge  took  charge.  On  one  of  these
occasions  it  suddenly  charged  into  me  from  behind,
knocked  my  legs  from  under  me,  and  nearly  jugger-
nauted  me.  I  was  quickly  rescued  from  this  undignified
position  under  the  sledge  runners  by  Mawson  and
Mackay.  We  had  now  arrived  at  a  part  of  the  plateau
where  the  monotonous  level  or  gently  undulating  surface
gave  place  to  sharp  descents.  It  was  necessary  in  these
cases  for  one  of  us  to  untoggle  from  the  front  of  the
sledge  and  to  toggle  on  behind,  so  as  to  steer  and  steady
it.  About  noon,  when  we  were  in  full  career,  the  bow
of  the  sledge  struck  one  of  the  high  sastrugi  obliquely
and  the  sledge  was  capsized  heavily,  but  fortunately
nothing  was  broken.  After  righting  the  sledge,  we
cam.ped  for  lunch.

At  lunch,  with  a  faint  hope  of  softening  the  stern
190


THE    DEPOT    REACHED

heart  of  our  raessman  for  the  week — Mackay — and  in-
ducing him  to  give  us  an  extra  ration  of  food,  I  mi  Idly-
informed  him  that  it  was  my  birthday.  He  took  the
hint  and  we  all  fared  sumptuously  at  lunch  and  dinner
that  day.  The  day's  run  was  twenty  miles.  It  had
been  one  of  the  most  fatiguing  days  that  we  had  as  yet
experienced,  and  we  were  all  utterly  exhausted  when
we  turned  into  our  sleeping-bag  at  8.80  p.m.

January  29.  We  were  up  at  about  8  a.m.,  and  found
that  the  plateau  wind  was  still  blowing  at  a  speed  of
about  fifteen  miles  an  hour.  After  our  experience  of
the  preceding  day  we  decided  that  we  would  not  make
sail  on  the  sledge,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  found  that
pulling  the  sledge  in  the  ordinary  way  was  far  less
wearying  than  the  sailing  had  proved  the  preceding
day.  We  pulled  on  steadily  hour  after  hour,  and
Mounts  Nansen  and  Larsen  grew  every  moment  clearer
and  larger,  and  we  began  to  hope  that  we  might  be  able
to  reach  our  depot  at  Mount  Larsen  that  night.  After
Ave  had  sledged  about  ten  miles,  descending  at  a  gentle
grade  all  the  way,  we  found  that  there  was  a  slight
up  grade  in  the  snow  surface  towards  the  foot  of  Mount
Larsen,  but  it  was  not  steep  enough  to  cause  us  any
trouble.  But  later  in  the  day,  Mawson's  sprained  leg
caused  him  a  good  deal  of  pain,  and  we  had  almost  de-
cided to  camp  at  a  point  nearly  twenty  miles  from  our
preceding  camp,  when  Mackay 's  sharp  eyes  sighted,  at
a  distance  of  about  a  mile,  our  httle  blue  flag,  tied  to
the  ice-axe  at  our  depot.  We  soon  reached  the  depot,
fixed  up  the  tent,  had  a  good  hoosh,  and  turned  into  the
sleeping-bag  past  midnight.

We  were  up  at  9  a.m.  on  January  80.  The  day  was
sunny,  but  ominous  clouds  were  gathering  overhead  as
well  as  to  the  south.  After  breakfast  we  collected  the
material  at  our  depot,    chiefly  ski  boots,  ice-axes,  oil,

191


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

a  little  food,  and  geological  specimens,  and  loaded  these
on  to  our  sledge.  We  found  that,  owing  to  the  alternate
thawing  and  freezing  of  the  snow  at  our  depot,  our  ski
boots  were  almost  filled  with  solid  ice.  The  work  of
chipping  out  this  ice  proved  a  slow  and  tedious  job,  and
we  did  not  get  started  until  about  11  a.m.  Soon  after
we  got  going  we  found  ourselves  for  a  time  in  a  mesh-
work  of  crevasses.  These  were  from  a  foot  up  to  about
twenty  feet  in  width.  Nearly  all  of  them  were  roofed
over  with  a  hard  layer  of  snow.  The  only  visible  e^d-
dence  of  the  existence  of  a  crevasse  was  a  slight  de-
pression in  the  snow  surface  at  the  inner  edges  of  the
two  walls  bounding  the  crevasses,  the  whole  of  the  snow
roof  or  lid  being  slightly  counter-sunk  below  the  general
level  of  the  surrounding  snow  surface.

This,  however,  was  not  always  the  case,  and  crevasses
not  infrequently  existed  entirely  concealed  from  view
under  a  perfectly  smooth  hard  snow  surface.  On  ac-
count of  the  fact,  as  already  explained,  that  the  snow
lids  were  thinner  next  to  the  walls  of  the  crevasse,  and
thicker  towards  a  position  central  between  the  walls,
we  always  used  to  take  care,  if  we  could  see  the  little
depression  in  the  snow  surface — a  sure  indication  of  a
crevasse — not  to  put  our  foot  down  near  the  edge  of  the
depression,  but  to  alight  on  the  snow  lid  some  feet  away
from  the  crevasse  wall.

On  stepping  out  on  to  one  of  these  snow  lids  a  large
piece  suddenly  gave  way  under  me,  and  I  was  instantly
precipitated  into  the  chasm  below,  but  fortunately
caught  the  alpine  rope  under  my  arm  as  I  was  falling ;
this  broke  the  force  of  the  jerk  on  my  sledge  harness.
I  was  down  about  six  feet  below  the  snow  lid,  and  Mawson
and  Mackay  holding  on  to  the  harness  and  alpine  ropes
which  were  supporting  me,  I  was  able  to  climb  out
quickly,  and  we  resumed  our  journey.  Shortly  after
192


A    QUESTION    OF    ROUTE

this,  and  after  crossing  a  number  of  other  crevasses,  we
discovered  that  the  wheel  of  our  sledge  meter  had
disappeared.  Probably  it  had  got  into  one  of  the
crevasses,  and  gone  to  the  bottom.  As  we  were  now
so  close  to  the  end  of  our  journey,  the  loss  of  this,  which
earlier  in  our  travels  would  have  been  a  serious  disaster,
was  not  of  much  importance.  We  had  run  about
eight  miles  before  this  lunch,  previous  to  the  loss  of  our
sledge  meter  wheel.  At  lunch-time  Mawson  compounded
a  wonderful  new  hoosh  made  out  of  seal  liver,  pounded
up  with  a  geological  hammer,  and  mixed  with  crushed
biscuit.

We  had  some  discussion  as  to  whether  it  would  be
better  to  descend  on  to  the  sea  ice  by  the  old  track  up
which  we  had  come,  which  we  termed  Backstairs  Passage,
or  make  down  the  main  Larsen  Glacier  to  the  point
where  it  junctioned  with  the  Drygalski  Glacier.  Mackay
was  in  favour  of  the  former,  Mawson  and  I  of  the  latter.
Mackay  thought  the  devil  one  knew  was  better  than
the  devil  one  didn't  know,  while  Mawson  and  I  feared
that  during  the  thaw,  which  was  rapidly  breaking  up
the  sea  ice  at  the  time  when  we  were  ascending  the
plateau,  the  ice  might  have  gone  away  from  the  base
of  Backstairs  Passage  right  up  to  the  steep  granite
cliffs  of  the  coast.  Had  this  been  the  case,  and  had
we  descended  by  our  old  route,  we  should  have  had  to
retrace  our  steps  and  become  involved  in  a  very  arduous
uphill  piece  of  sledging  necessitating  an  ascent  of  at
least  1000  to  1500  ft.  in  a  distance  of  a  little  over  a
mile.  As  subsequent  events  proved,  Mackay  was  right
and  we  were  wrong.

We  held  on  down  the  main  glacier  with  the  imposing

cliffs  and  slopes  of  dark-red  granite  and  blackish  eruptive

rock  intermixed  with  it  close  on  our  left      Mawson's

leg  was  now  so  bad  that  it  was  only  with  considerable

II  N  198


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

pain  and  difficulty  that  he  could  proceed,  and  both
Mackay's  and  my  eyes  were  affected  a  good  deal  by  snow
blindness  and  were  painful.  We  found  as  we  advanced
that  at  about  six  miles  easterly  from  our  lunch  camp,
the  surface  of  the  Mount  Larsen  Glacier  descended  at
a  very  steep  angle.  Somewhat  ahead  to  the  right  it
was  clear  that,  where  it  junctioned  with  the  Drygalski
Glacier,  it  was  seamed  by  enormous  crevasses  and
traversed  by  strong  pressure  ridges.  We  held  on  with
our  sledge  on  a  course  which  took  us  close  to  the  north
side  of  the  glacier.  At  last  the  descent  became  so  steep
that  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  we  could
hold  the  sledge  back  and  prevent  its  charging  down
the  slope.  We  halted  here  and  Mackay  went  ahead  to
reconnoitre.  Presently  he  came  back  and  said  that
the  narrow  strip  of  snow  covering  the  glacier  ice,  near
its  contact  with  the  rocky  cliffs  on  oilr  left,  was  con-
tinuous right  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  slope,  and  he
thought  it  was  practicable,  if  we  made  rope  brakes  for
the  runners  on  our  sledge,  to  lower  it  down  this  steep
slope  in  safety.  He  fixed  on  some  brakes  of  brown
tarred  rope  by  just  twisting  the  rope  spirally  around
the  sledge  runners.  We  then  cautiously  started  the
sledge  down  the  steepest  bit  of  the  slope,  all  of  us  ready
to  let  go  in  case  the  sledge  took  charge.  The  rope
brake  worked  wonders,  and  it  was  even  necessary  to
put  a  slight  pull  on  the  sledge  in  places  in  order  to  get
it  down  the  steep  snow  surface.  We  had  left  the  great
crevasses  and  ice  falls  near  the  junction  of  the  Mount
Larsen  and  Drygalski  Glaciers  a  little  to  our  right.

We  now  found  ourselves  on  an  ice-surface  quite
unlike  anything  which  we  had  hitherto  experienced.
In  the  foreground  were  some  s^nall  frozen  lakes  close  to
the  foot  of  the  granite  hills  ;  on  the  far  side  of  the  lakes
were  beautiful  glacial  moraines.  All  around  the  lakes,
194


NEW    ICE    FORMATION

and  for  a  considerable  distance  up  the  ice  slopes  de-
scending towards  them,  the  surface  of  the  ice  was  formed
of  a  series  of  large  thin  anastomosing  curved  plates  of
ice.  These  were  pieced  together  in  such  a  way  as  to
form  a  pattern  on  a  large  scale  resembling  the  cups  of
some  of  the  recent  compound  corals,  or  the  ancient
extinct  form  known  to  geologists  as  Alveolites.  These
curved  ice  plates  or  tiles  sloped  at  an  angle  of  about
45°,  and  formed,  of  course,  an  immense  obstruction  to
sledging,  as  their  sharp  edges  caught  and  held  our
sledge  runners.  We  found,  too,  that  it  was  very  dis-
tressing travelling  over  this  extraordinary  surface,
which,  from  a  scenic  point  of  view,  was  exquisitely
beautiful.  As  we  stepped  forwards,  our  feet  usually
crashed  through  the  ice  tiles,  and  our  legs  were  im-
bedded in  the  formation  up  to  our  knees.  Frequently,
under  these  circumstances,  we  would  stumble  forwards,
and  had  some  difficulty  in  dragging  our  legs  out.  It
was  like  sledging  over  a  wilderness  of  glass  cucumber-
frames  set  up  at  an  angle  of  45°.  Another  moment  one
would  find  the  tiles  thick  enough  and  strong  enough  to
support  one,  but  their  surfaces  being  at  an  angle  of
45°  to  the  horizontal,  oiu*  feet  would  slip  down  them
sideways  and  we  ran  an  imminent  risk  of  spraining  our
ankles.  At  every  step  we  took  we  did  not  know  until
after  the  event  which  of  the  above  two  experiences
would  follow.

After  sledging  for  a  short  distance  over  surfaces  of
this  kind,  sloping  somewhat  steeply  to  the  small  lakes,
we  decided  to  camp  on  the  pale  green  ice  of  one  of
these  lakes.  Mawson  tested  this  ice  and  found  that
it  was  strong  enough  to  hold,  though  evidently  of  no
great  thickness.  We  sledged  along  this  lake  for  a
few  hundred  yards  to  its  north-east  end.  There  was
a  little  snow  here  which  would  do  for  loading  the  skirt

195


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

of  our  tent.  By  this  time  the  sky  was  thickly  over-
cast. We  fixed  up  the  tent,  chopping  little  holes  in  the
surface  of  the  smooth  ice,  in  which  to  socket  the  ends  of
the  tent-poles,  and  while  Mackay  cooked,  Mawson  and
I  snowed  the  skirt.  This  was  subsequent  to  a  little
reconnoitring  which  we  each  did.  It  was  2  a.m.  before
we  camped  on  the  lake  ice,  and  4  a.m.  before  we  turned
into  our  sleeping-bag.

Close  to  our  tent  was  the  most  beautiful  lateral
moraine  which  we  had  yet  discovered.  It  was  formed
of  blocks  of  bright  red  granite,  together  with  quartz
porphyries  with  much  rusty  stain  due  to  oxidation  of
iron  pyrites,  and  masses  of  dark  brown  rocks,  more
basic,  perhaps  of  an  intermediate  character  between
granite  and  diorite.  We  found  that  immediately  to  the
right  of  us,  in  an  easterly  direction — ^that  is,  directly
between  us  and  our  depot  on  the  Drygalski  Glacier —
were  great  pressure  ridges  of  ice,  and  a  vast  entangle-
ment of  crevasses.  In  fact,  in  that  direction  the
glacier  seemed  impassable.  The  only  possible  outlet
for  us  with  our  sledge  appeared  to  be  close  alongside
of  the  lateral  moraine  at  the  point  where  the  glacier  ice
joined  it.  Even  this  route  was  obviously  a  very  difficult
one,  and  we  decided  before  we  turned  in  that  on  the
morrow  we  should  have  to  unload  our  sledge  and  make
a  portage,  or  a  plurality  of  portages.  The  ice  on  the
small  lake  on  which  we  were  camped  was  only  between
two  and  three  inches  thick,  and  had  obviously  formed
quite  recently  after  the  thaw.  It  commenced  to  thaw
now  under  the  influence  of  the  warmth  of  our  sleeping-
bag,  as  we  lay  in  it,  and  we  found  shallow  pools  of  water
all  around  us  when  we  awoke  the  next  morning.

January  31.  We  were  up  about  11  a.m.,  having
slept  soundly  after  the  very  exhausting  work  of  our
previous  day's  sledging.  During  the  night  it  had  snowed
196


PRESSURE    RIDGES

heavily,  there  being  fully  from  three  to  four  inches  of
newly  fallen  snow  covering  everything  around  u^,  and
it  was  still  snowing  while  we  were  having  brct^bfast.
After  breakfast  the  snow  nearly  ceased,  and  v,e  took
half  the  load  off  our  sledge  and  started  with  the  re-
mainder to  try  and  work  a  passage  out  of  the  ice-pressure
ridges  of  the  combined  Drygalski  and  Larsen  Glaciers
on  to  the  smoother  sea  ice,  and  eventually  on  to  the
Drygalski  Ice  Barrier.  While  Mawson  and  Mackay
pulled,  I  steadied  the  sledge  on  the  lower  side  in  round-
ing the  steep  sidelings.  We  were  still  sledging  over  the
leafy  or  tile  ice,  which  mostly  crunched  underfoot  with
a  sharp  tinkUng  sound.  We  skirted  the  lateral  moraine
for  a  distance  of  over  half  a  mile,  following  a  depression
in  the  ice-surface  apparently  produced  by  a  stream,  the
outlet  of  the  waters  of  the  small  lakes.  At  one  spot
Mawson  crashed  right  through  into  the  water  beneath,
and  got  wet  up  to  his  thighs.  In  spite  of  my  efforts  to
keep  it  on  even  keel,  the  sledge  frequently  capsized  on
these  steep  sidelings.  At  last,  after  struggling  up  and
down  heavy  slopes,  and  over  low-lying  areas  of  rotten
ice,  which  every  here  and  there  let  us  through  into  the
water  beneath,  we  arrived  at  the  foot  of  an  immense
ice-pressure  ridge.  It  was  a  romantic-looking  spot,
though  at  the  time  we  did  not  exactly  appreciate  its
beauties.  To  our  left  was  a  huge  cliff  of  massive  granite
rising  up  steeply  to  heights  of  about  2000  ft.  The  com-
bined pressure  of  the  Drygalski  and  Mount  Larsen
Glaciers  had  forced  the  glacier  ice  up  into  great  ridges,
trending  somewhat  obliquely  to  the  coast  cliff.

We  went  back  to  the  tent  where  we  got  some  hot
tea,  of  which  Mawson,  particularly,  was  very  glad,  as
he  was  somewhat  cooled  down  as  the  result  of  his
wetting.  Then  we  packed  up  the  remainder  of  our
belongings  on  the  sledge  and  dragged  it  down,  to  where

197


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

we  had  dumped  the  half  load  on  the  near  side  of  the  pres-
sure ridge.  Mackay  reconnoitred  ahead,  and  found  that
the  large-pressure  ridge,  which  appeared  to  bar  our  pro-
gress towards  oiu-  depot,  gradually  came  nearer  and  nearer
in  to  the  granite  cliff,  until  it  pressed  hard  against  the
cliff  face.  Obviously,  then,  we  were  impounded  by
this  huge  pressure  ridge,  and  would  have  to  devise  some
means  of  getting  over  it.  Taking  our  ice-axes  we
smoothed  a  passage  across  part  of  the  ridge.  This
proved  a  very  tough  piece  of  work.  We  then  unloaded
the  sledge  and  passed  each  one  of  our  packages  over  by
hand.  Finally  we  dragged  the  sledge  up  and  hoisted
it  over  and  lowered  it  down  safely  on  the  other  side.
After  this  we  reloaded  the  sledge  and  dragged  it  for
some  considerable  distance  over  more  of  the  leafy  ice-
surface  alternating  with  flattish  depressions  of  rotten  ice
and  snow,  with  water  just  beneath.  We  were  now
troubled,  not  only  by  the  tile-ice  surface,  but  also  by
small  channels  with  steep  banks,  apparently  eroded
by  glacial  streams  which  had  been  flowing  as  the  result
of  the  thaw  while  we  were  on  the  Magnetic  Pole  plateau  i
We  were  also  worried  from  time  to  time  as  to  how  to
get  over  the  vast  number  of  intersecting  crevasses  which
lay  in  our  path.

Little  by  little  the  surface  improved  as  we  sledged
towards  our  depot.  The  platy  structure  on  the  ice
became  less  and  less  pronounced,  giving  place  to  a
surface  like  that  of  innumerable  frozen  wavelets  with
sharp  crests.  By  lunch-time  we  arrived  at  a  grand  old
glacial  moraine.  Amongst  its  boulders  was  a  hand-
some coarsely  crystalline  red  granite  of  which  Mackay
secured  a  good  specimen.  Numbers  of  boulders  pro-
jected a  few  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  ice,  but  most
of  them  were  wholly  encased  in  ice.  After  lunch,  the
sledging  surface,  though  still  heavy,  owing  to  the  newly
196


ICE    DONGAS

fallen  snow,  improved  a  little,  but  we  soon  found  out
progress  barred  by  what  may  be  termed  an  ice  donga,
apparently  an  old  channel  formed  by  a  river  of  thaw
water.  We  encountered  three  such  dongas  that  afternoon.
They  were  from  a  few  feet  up  to  fifty  or  a  hundred
feet  or  more  in  width,  and  from  ten  to  twenty  feet  deep,
and  bounded  by  precipitous  or  overhanging  sides.

After  a  considerable  amount  of  reconnoitring  by
Mackay  and  Mawson,  and  often  making  considerable
detours  with  our  sledge,  we  managed  to  cross  them.
Our  difficulties  were  increased  by  the  innumerable
crevasses  and  steep  ice  ridges.  Some  of  these  crevasses
were  open,  while  others  were  roofed  over  with  tough
snow.  We  fell  into  these  crevasses  from  time  to  time,
and  on  one  occasion,  Mackay  and  I  fell  into  the  same
crevasse  simultaneously,  he  up  to  his  shoulders  and  I
up  to  my  waist.  Fortunately  we  were  able,  by  throwing
out  our  arms,  to  prevent  ourselves  from  falling  right
through  the  snow  lid.  While  we  were  sledging  on
through  the  night  amongst  this  network  of  crevasses,
the  sky  became  heavily  overcast,  and  it  commenced  to
snow.  At  last  we  succeeded  in  getting  within  less  than
a  mile  of  the  moraine  containing  the  boulders  of  re-
markable sphene-diorite,  specimens  of  which  we  had
collected  at  that  spot  on  our  outward  journey.  Here
we  camped  and  turned  into  our  sleeping-bag  at  7  a.m.
on  February  1.

It  continued  snowing  heavily  during  the  day,  the  fall
being  about  six  inches  in  depth.  The  snow  on  the  side
of  the  tent  facing  the  sun  thawed  rapidly,  and  the  thaw
water  dripped  through  and  formed  pools  on  top  of
our  sleeping-bag.  Mawson's  sprained  leg  pained  him
a  great  deal.  We  estimated  that  we  were  now  only
about  sixteen  miles,  as  the  skua  flies,  from  our  depot  on
the  Drygalski  Glacier,  but  as  we  had  only  two  days'

199


I'HE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

food  left,  it  became  imperative  to  push  on  without
delay.  We  started  sledging  in  the  thick  driving  snow  on
the  evening  of  February  1.  The  surface  was  covered
with  a  layer  of  soft  snow,  nine  inches  in  thickness,  but
in  the  drifts  it  was,  of  course,  deeper.  The  work  of
sledging  under  these  circumstances  was  excessively
laborious  and  exhausting,  and  besides  it  was  impossible
to  keep  our  proper  course  while  the  blizzard  lasted.
Accordingly,  we  camped  at  8  p.m.,  and  after  our  evening
meal  we  rolled  into  our  sleeping-bag  and  slid  into  the
dreamless  sleep  that  comes  to  the  worn  and  weary
wanderer.

At  8  A,M.  on  February  2  we  were  rejoiced  to  find  the
sun  shining  in  a  clear  sky.  We  intended  making  a
desperate  attempt  this  day  to  reach  our  depot,  as  we
knew  that  the  Nimrod  would  be  due — perhaps  overdue
— ^by  the  night.  We  saw  as  we  looked  back  that  our
track  of  yesterday  was  about  as  straight  as  a  corkscrew.
Once  more  we  pulled  out  over  the  soft  snow,  and
although  refreshed  somewhat  by  our  good  sleep  we
found  the  work  extremely  trying  and  toilsome.  We
crossed  an  ice  donga,  and  about  four  miles  out
reached  the  edge  of  a  second  donga.  Here  we  decided
to  leave  everything  but  our  sledge,  tent,  sleeping-bag,
cooking-apparatus,  oil  and  food,  and  make  a  forced
march  right  on  to  the  Drygalski  Depot.  Accordingly
we  camped,  had  tea  and  two  biscuits  each,  and  fixed
up  our  depot,  including  the  Lloyd-Creak  dip  circle,
theodolite  and  legs,  geological  collections,  &c.,  and
marked  the  spot  with  a  little  blue  flag  tied  on  to  an
ice-axe.

We  now  found  the  sledge,  thus  lightened,  distinctly
easier  to  pull,  and  after  making  a  slight  detour,  crossed
the  donga  by  a  snow  bridge.  Soon  we  reached  another
donga,  and  successfully  crossed  it.  At  three  and  a  half
200


NEARING    THE    COAST

miles  further    at    8    p.m.    we    camped   again   and  had
a  little   cheese  and  biscuit.     After   this   short  halt  we
pulled     on     again,     steering     north-8°-east     magnetic.
Mawson   occasionally  swept  the  horizon  with   our  ex-
cellent   field-glasses   in    hopes    of    sighting    our    depot.
Suddenly   he   exclaimed   that   he   saw   the   depot   flag
distinctly  on  its  ice  mound,   apparently   about  seven
miles  distant,  but  it  was  well  round  on  the  starboard
bow  of  our  sledge  on  a  bearing  of  south-38°-west  mag-
netic.    Mackay  and  I  were  much  excited  at  Mawson 's
discovery.     Mackay  seized  the   field-glasses  as  soon  as
Mawson  put  them  down  and  directed  them  to  the  spot
indicated,  but  could  see  no  trace  of  the  flag  ;    then  I
looked  through  the  glasses  with  equally  negative  results.
Mawson    opined    that    we    must    both    be    snow-blind.
Then  he  looked  through  them  again,  and  at  once  ex-
claimed that  he  could  see  no  trace  of  the  flag  now.
The  horizon  seemed  to  be  walloping  up  and  down,  just
as  though  it  was  boiling,  evidently  the  result  of  a  mirage.
Mawson,  however,  was  so  confident  that  he  had  seen
the  flag  when  he  first  looked,  that  we  altered  course  to
south-38°-west    magnetic,    and    after  we  had  gone    a
little  over  a  mile,  and  reached  the  top  of  a  slight  emi-
nence in  the  ice-surface,  we  were  rejoiced  to  hear  the
announcement  that  he  could  now  see  the  depot  flag
distinctly.     We  kept  on  sledging  for  several  miles  further.
At  midnight,  when  the  temperature  had  fallen  to  zero,
I  felt  that  the  big  toe  of  my  right  foot  was  getting  frost-
bitten.    My  ski  boots  had  all  day  been  filled  with  the
soft  snow  and  the  warmth  of  my  foot  had  thawed  the
snow,  so  that  my  socks  were  wet  through  ;    and  now,
since  the  springing  up  of  the  wind  and  the  sudden  fall  in
temperature,  the  water  in  the  socks  had  turned  to  ice.
So  we  halted,  got  up  the  tent,  started  the  primus  and
prepared  for  a  midnight  meal,   wliiie,   with  Mawson's

201


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

assistance,  I  got  off  my  frozen  ski  boots  and  socks  and
restored  the  circulation  in  my  toe,  and  put  on  some
socks  less  icy  than  those  I  had  just  taken  off.

We  were  much  refreshed  by  our  supper,  and  then
started  off  again,  thinking  that  at  last  we  should  reach
our  depot,  or  at  all  events,  the  small  inlet  a  little  over
a  mile  distant  from  it,  but  "  the  best  laid  schemes  of
mice  and  men  gang  aft  agley."  There  was  an  ominous
white  streak  ahead  of  us  with  a  dark  streak  just  behind
it,  and  we  soon  saw  that  this  was  due  to  a  ravine  or
barranca  in  the  snow-  and  ice-surface  interposing  itself
between  ourselves  and  our  depot.  We  soon  reached  the
near  cliff  of  the  barranca.

The  barranca  was  about  two  hundred  yards  in
width,  and  from  thirty  to  forty  feet  deep.  It  was
bounded  by  a  vertical  cliff  or  very  steeply  inclined  slope
on  the  near  side,  the  north-west  side,  and  by  an  over-
hanging cliff  festooned  with  stalactites  on  the  south-
east side.  To  the  north-east  a  strip  of  dark  sea- water
was  visible  between  the  walls  of  the  barranca,  which
evidently  communicated  by  a  long  narrow  channel  with
the  ocean  outside,  some  three  miles  distant.  Inland,
the  barranca  extended  for  many  miles  as  far  as  the
eye  could  reach.  The  bottom  of  the  barranca  imme-
diately beneath  us  was  floored  with  sea  ice  covered
with  a  few  inches  of  snow.  This  ice  was  traversed
by  large  tide-cracks,  and  we  were  much  excited  to  see
that  there  were  a  number  of  seals  and  Emperor
penguins  dotted  over  the  ice  floor.  We  determined
to  try  and  cross  the  barranca.  We  looked  up  and
down  the  near  cliff  for  a  practicable  spot  where  we
could  let  down  our  sledge,  and  soon  found  a  suitable
slope,  a  little  to  the  north-east  of  us,  formed  by  a  steep
snow  drift.  We  sledged  on  to  this  spot,  and  making
fast  the  alpine  rope  to  the  bow  of  the  sledge,  lowered
202


FRESH    FOOD

it  cautiously,  stern  first,  to  the  bottom.  The  oil-cans
in  the  rear  of  the  sledge  were  rattled  up  somewhat
when  it  struck  bottom,  but  no  harm  was  done.  At
the  bottom  we  had  some  trouble  in  getting  the  sledge
over  the  gaping  tide-cracks,  some  ten  to  fifteen  feet
deep  and  three  to  five  feet  wide.

Arrived  at  the  middle  of  the  floor  of  the  barranca,
Mackay  killed  two  Emperor  penguins,  and  took  their
breasts  and  livers  to  replenish  our  exhausted  larder.
Meanwhile,  Mawson  crossed  to  the  far  side  of  the  floor
of  the  barranca  on  the  look-out  for  a  possible  spot
where  we  might  swarm  up.  I  joined  him  a  few  minutes
later,  and  as  I  was  feeling  much  exhausted  after  the
continuous  forced  marches  back  from  the  Magnetic
Pole,  asked  him  to  take  over  the  leadership  of  the  ex-
pedition. I  considered  that  under  the  circumstances
I  was  justified  in  taking  this  step.  We  had  accom-
plished the  work  assigned  to  us  by  our  leader,  having
reached  the  Magnetic  Pole.  We  were  within  two  or
three  miles  of  our  Drygalski  Depot,  and  although  the
only  food  left  there  was  two  days'  supply  of  broken
biscuits  with  a  little  cheese,  we  had  a  good  prospect  of
meat-supply,  as  the  barranca  abounded  in  seals  and
penguins,  so  that  for  the  present  we  had  no  reason  to
apprehend  the  danger  of  starvation.  On  the  other
hand,  as  regards  our  ultimate  personal  safety,  our
position  was  somewhat  critical.  We  were  not  even
certain  that  the  Nimrod  had  arrived  at  all  in  Ross  Sea
that  season,  though  we  thought  it,  of  course,  very
probable  that  she  had.  In  the  next  case,  on  the  as-
sumption that  she  had  arrived,  it  was  very  possible  that
in  view  of  the  great  difficulties  of  making  a  thorough
search  along  the  two  hundred  miles  of  coast,  at  any  part
of  which  we  might  have  been  camped — difficulties
arising  from  heavy  belts   of   pack-ice   and  icebergs,  as

203


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

well  as  from  the  deeply  indented  character  of  that  bold
and  rugged  coast — it  was  quite  possible  that  the  Nimrod
would  miss  sighting  our  depot  flags  altogether.  In
the  event  of  the  Nirnrod  not  appearing  within  a  few
days,  it  would  be  necessary  to  take  immediate  and
strenuous  action  with  a  view  either  to  wintering  at  the
spot,  or  with  a  view  to  an  attempt  to  sledge  back
around  the  great  mountain  massifs  and  over  the  many
steeply  crevassed  glaciers  for  over  two  hundred  miles  to
our  winter  quarters  at  Cape  Royds.  Even  now,  in
the  event  of  some  immediate  strenuous  action  being
necessary,  if  the  Nimrod  were  to  suddenly  appear  at  some
point  along  the  coast,  I  thought  it  would  be  best  for
Mawson,  who  was  less  physically  exhausted  than
myself,  to  be  in  charge.  He  had,  throughout  the  whole
journey,  shown  excellent  capacity  for  leadership,  fully
justifying  the  opinion  held  of  him  by  Lieutenant  Shackle-
ton  when  providing  in  my  instructions  that  in  the
event  of  anything  happening  to  myself  Mawson  was  to
assume  the  leadership.  When  I  spoke  to  him  on  the
subject,  he  at  first  demurred,  but  finally  said  that  he
would  act  for  a  time,  and  would  think  the  matter  over
at  his  leisure  before  definitely  deciding  to  become  per-
manently the  leader.  I  offered  to  give  him  authority
in  writing  as  leader,  but  this  he  declined  to  receive.

Meanwhile,  the  examination  of  the  cliff  face  on  the
south-east  side  of  the  barranca  showed  that  there  was  one
very  difficult  but  apparently  possible  means  of  ascent.
We  returned  to  where  we  had  left  Mackay,  and  then  we
three  dragged  the  sledge  around  to  the  edge  of  a  rather
formidable  tide-crack,  behind  which  lay  the  mound  of
snow  up  which  we  hoped  to  climb  ;  our  idea  being  to
unpack  our  sledge,  drag  it  to  the  top  of  this  steep
mound,  and  rearing  it  on  end  at  the  top  of  the  mound,
use  it  as  a  ladder  for  scaling  the  overhanging  cliff  above.
20^


SEVERE    CLIMBING

Mackay  managed  to  cross  the  tide-crack,  using  the
bamboo  poles  of  our  tent  as  a  bridge,  and  after  some
difficulty,  reached  the  top  of  the  snow  mound  under
the  overhanging  cliff.  Much  to  our  disappointment,
however,  he  discovered  that  the  mound  was  formed  of
very  soft  snow,  his  ice-axe  sinking  in  to  the  whole  depth
of  the  handle  directly  he  placed  it  on  top  of  the  mound.
It  was  obvious  that  as  our  sledge  would  sink  in  to  at
least  an  equal  depth,  the  top  of  it  would  then  be  too
short  to  enable  any  of  us  to  scale  the  overhanging  cliff
by  its  means.  We  were,  therefore,  reluctantly  com-
pelled to  drag  our  sledge  back  again  over  the  tide-cracks
to  the  north-west  side  of  the  barranca  down  which  we
had  previously  lowered  our  sledge.  We  then  discovered
that,  as  in  classical  times,  while  the  descent  to  Avernus
was  easy,  it  was  difficult  and  toilsome  to  retrace  one's
steps.  With  Mawson  ahead  with  the  ice-axe  and  towing
rope,  and  Mackay  and  I  on  either  side  of  the  sledge  in
the  rear,  we  managed  by  pulling  and  pushing  together
to  force  the  sledge  up  a  few  inches  at  a  time.  At  each
short  halt,  Mawson  would  stick  in  the  ice-axe,  take  a
turn  of  the  leading  rope  around  it,  and  support  the  sledge
in  this  way  for  a  brief  interval  while  we  all  got  our
breath.  At  last  the  forty  feet  of  steep  slope  was  suc-
cessfully negotiated,  and  we  found  ourselves  once  more
on  the  level  plain  at  the  top  of  the  barranca,  but  of
course,  on  the  wrong  side  in  reference  to  our  depot.
As  we  were  within  three  miles  of  the  open  sea  we  thought
it  would  be  safe  to  camp  here,  as  had  the  Nimrod
sighted  our  depot  flag  and  stood  in  to  the  coast,  we  could
easily  have  hurried  down  to  the  entrance  of  the  inlet
and  made  signals  to  her.

We  had  now  been  up  since  8  a.m.  on  the  previous
day,  and  were  very  thankful  to  be  able  to  enter  our
tent,  and  have  a  meal  off  a  stew  of  minced  penguin

205


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

liver.  We  then  turned  into  the  sleeping-bag  at  about
7  A.M.  Just  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  we  had
turned  in,  as  we  learnt  later,  the  Nimrod  must  have
passed,  bound  north  towards  Mount  Melbourne,  within
three  miles  of  the  ice  cliff  on  which  our  tent  was  now
situated.  Owing,  however,  to  a  light  wind  with  snow
drift,  she  was  unable  to  sight  either  our  depot  flag  or
tent.


206


CHAPTER  XIII

PROFESSOR  DAVID'S  NARRATIVE  (CONCLUDED)

FEBRUARY  3.  After  sleeping  in  the  bag  from  7  a.m.
until  11  A.M.  we  got  up  and  had  breakfast,  packed
our  sledge,  and  started  along  the  north  bank  of  the  snow
canon.  The  snow  and  ice  at  the  bottom  were  dotted
with  basking  seals  and  moulting  Emperor  penguins.
Fully  a  hundred  seals  could  be  counted  in  places  in  a
distance  of  as  many  yards  along  the  cafion.  At  about
one  mile  from  the  camp  we  reached  a  small  branch
canon,  which  we  had  to  head  off  by  turning  to  our
right.  We  now  proceeded  about  one  and  a  half
miles  further  along  the  edge  of  the  main  cafion,  and  in
our  then  tired  and  weak  state  were  much  dispirited  to
find  that  it  still  trended  inland  for  a  considerable  dis-
tance. We  now  halted  by  the  sledge  while  Mackay
went  ahead  to  try  and  find  a  crossing,  and  presently
Mawson  and  I  were  rejoiced  to  hear  him  shout  that
he  had  discovered  a  snow  bridge  across  the  cafion.
Presently  he  rejoined  us,  and  together  we  pulled  the
sledge  to  the  head  of  the  snow  bridge.  It  was  a
romantic  spot.  A  large  slice  of  the  snow  or  neve  cliff
had  fallen  obliquely  across  the  cafion,  and  its  surface
had  then  been  raised  and  partially  levelled  up  with  soft
drift  snow.  There  was  a  crevasse  at  both  the  near
and  far  ends  of  the  bridge,  and  the  middle  was  sunk
a  good  deal  below  the  abutments.     Stepping  over  the

207


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

crevasse  at  the  near  end  we  launched  the  sledge  with  a
run  down  to  the  centre  of  the  bridge,  then  struggled
up  the  steep  slope  facing  us,  Mackay  steadying  the  sledge
from  falling  off  the  narrow  causeway,  while  we  all  three
pulled  for  all  we  were  worth.  In  another  minute  or
two  we  were  safely  across  with  our  sledge,  thankful
that  we  had  now  surmounted  the  last  obstacle  that
intervened  between  us  and  our  depot.

While  heading  for  the  depot  we  sighted  an  Emperor
penguin  close  to  our  track.  Mackay  quickly  slew  him,
and  took  his  flesh  and  liver  for  our  cooking-pot.  Two
miles  further  on  we  camped.  Mawson  minced  the
Emperor's  flesh  and  liver,  and  after  adding  a  little
snow,  I  boiled  it  over  our  primus  so  as  to  make  one  and
a  half  pots  of  soupy  mincemeat  for  each  of  us.  This  was
the  most  satisfying  meal  we  had  had  for  many  a  long
day.  After  lunch  we  sledged  on  for  over  one  and  a  half
miles  further  towards  the  depot,  and  at  about  10.30  p.m.
reached  an  ice  mound  on  the  south  side  of  the  inlet
in  which  the  snow  canon  terminated  seawards.  This
camping  spot  was  a  little  over  a  mile  distant  from  our
depot.  We  were  now  all  thoroughly  exhausted  and
decided  to  camp.  The  spot  we  had  selected  seemed
specially  suitable,  as  from  the  adjacent  ice  mound  we
could  get  a  good  view  of  the  ocean  beyoud  the  Dry-
galski  Barrier.  While  Mawson  and  I  got  up  the  tent,
Mackay  went  to  kill  a  seal  at  the  shore  of  the  inlet.
He  soon  returned  with  plenty  of  seal  meat  and  liver.
He  said  that  he  had  found  two  young  seals,  and  had
killed  one  of  them;  that  they  had  both  behaved  in  a
most  unusual  manner,  scuttling  away  quickly  and
actively  at  his  approach,  instead  of  waiting  without
moving,  as  did  most  of  the  Weddell  seals,  of  which
we  had  hitherto  had  experience.  We  discovered  later
that  these  two  seals  belonged  to  the  comparatively
208


WAITING    FOR    THE    SHIP

rare  variety  known  as  Ross  seal.  After  a  delicious
meal  of  seal  blubber,  blood  and  oil,  with  fried  meal  and
liver,  cooked  by  Mawson,  Mawson  and  I  turned  into
the  sleeping-bag,  leaving  Mackay  to  take  the  first  of
our  four  hour  watches  on  the  look-out  for  the  Nimrod.
During  his  watch  he  walked  up  to  our  depot  and  dug
out  our  biscuit  tin,  which  had  served  us  as  a  blubber
lamp  and  cooker,  together  with  the  cut-down  paraffin
tin  which  we  had  used  as  a  frying-pan.  Both  these  he
carried  down  to  our  tent.  There  he  lit  the  blubber
lamp  just  outside  the  tent  and  cooked  some  penguin
meat,  regaling  himself  at  intervals,  during  his  four
hour's  watch,  with  dainty  morsels  from  the  savoury
dish.  When  he  called  me  up  at  4  a.m.  I  found  that
he  had  thoughtfully  put  into  the  frying-pan  a  junk  of
Emperor's  breast,  weighing  about  two  pounds,  for  me
to  toy  with  during  my  watch.  A  chilly  wind  was
blowing  off  the  plateau,  and  I  was  truly  thankful  for
an  occasional  nibble  at  the  hot  penguin  meat.  After
cooking  some  more  penguin  meat  I  called  up  Mawson
soon  after  8  a.m.  on  February  4,  and  immediately
afterwards  turned  into  the  bag,  and  at  once  dropped
off  sound  asleep.

Mawson  did  not  call  Mackay  and  myself  until  after
2  P.M.  We  at  once  rolled  up  the  sleeping-bag,  and
Mawson  cooked  a  generous  meal  of  seal  and  penguin
meat  and  blubber,  while  Mackay  made  a  thin  soupy
broth  on  the  primus.  Meanwhile,  I  went  on  to  the
ice  mound  with  the  field-glasses,  but  could  see  nothing
in  the  way  of  a  ship  to  seaward  and  returned  to  the
tent.  We  all  thoroughly  enjoyed  our  liberal  repast,  and
particularly  relished  the  seal's  blood,  gravy  and  seal  oil.

After  the  meal  we  discussed  our  future  plans.     We

decided  that  we  had  better  move  the  tent  that  afternoon

up  to  our  old  depot,  where  it  would  be  a  conspicuous

II  o  209


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

object  from  the  sea,  and  where,  too,  we  could  command
a  more  extensive  view  of  the  ocean.  We  also  talked
over  w^hat  we  had  best  do  in  the  event  of  the  Nimrod
not  turning  up,  and  decided  that  we  ought  to  attempt
to  sledge  overland  to  Hut  Point,  keeping  ourselves  alive
on  the  way,  as  best  we  might,  with  seal  meat.  It  must
be  admitted  that  the  prospect  of  tackling  two  hundred
miles  of  coast,  formed  largely  of  steep  rocky  foreshores,
alternating  with  heavily  crevassed  glacier  ice,  was  not
a  very  bright  one.  We  also  discussed  the  date  at  which
we  ought  to  start  trekking  southwards.  Mackay  thought
we  ought  to  commence  making  our  preparations  at  once,
and  that  unless  the  Nimrod  arrived  within  a  few  days
we  ought  to  start  down  the  coast  with  our  sledge,  tent,
sleeping-bag,  cooker  and  seal  meat,  leaving  a  note  at
the  depot  for  the  Nimrod,  in  case  she  should  arrive  later
asking  her  to  look  out  for  us  along  the  coast,  and  if  she
couldn't  sight  us,  to  lay  depots  of  food  and  oil  for  us
at  certain  specified  spots.  He  considered  that  by  this
method  we  could  make  sure  of  beginning  the  long
journey  in  a  sound  state  of  health,  and,  if  fortunate,
might  reach  Hut  Point  before  the  beginning  of  the
equinoctial  gales  in  March.  Mawson  and  I,  on  the
other  hand,  thought  that  we  ought  to  wait  on  at  our
present  camp  until  late  in  February.

From  whatever  point  of  view  we  looked  at  it,  our
present  lot  was  not  a  happy  one.  The  possibility  of  a
long  wait  in  the  gloomy  region  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier,
with  its  frequent  heavy  snows  at  this  season  of  the
year,  and  leaden  sky  vaulted  over  the  dark  sea,  was
not  pleasing  to  contemplate.  Still  less  cheerful  was
the  prospect  of  a  long,  tedious  and  dangerous  sledge
journey  towards  Hut  Point.  Even  the  diet  of  seal  and
penguin,  just  for  the  moment  so  nice,  largely  because
novel,  would  soon  savour  of  toujours  perdricc,
210


THE    NIMROD    ARRIVES

Dispirited  by  forebodings  of  much  toil  and  trouble,
we  were  just  preparing  to  set  our  weary  limbs  in  motion
to  pack  up  our  belongings  for  the  short  trek  up  to  the
depot,  when  Bang  !  went  something,  seemingly  close
to  the  door  of  our  tent ;  the  sound  thrilled  us  ;  in  another
instant  the  air  reverberated  with  a  big  boom  !  much
louder  than  the  first  sound.  Mawson  gave  tongue
first,  roaring  out,  "  A  gun  from  the  ship  !  "  and  dived
for  the  tent  door.  As  the  latter  was  narrow  and  funnel-
shaped  there  was  for  the  moment  some  congestion  of
traffic.  I  dashed  my  head  forwards  to  where  I  saw  a
small  opening,  only  in  time  to  receive  a  few  kicks  from
the  departing  Mawson.  Just  as  I  was  recovering  my
equilibrium,  Mackay  made  a  wild  charge,  rode  me
down  and  trampled  over  my  prostrate  body.  V^Hien
at  length  I  struggled  to  my  feet,  Mawson  had  got  a  lead
of  a  hundred  yards,  and  Mackay  of  about  fifty.  "  Bring
something  to  wave,"  shouted  Mawson,  and  I  rushed
back  to  the  tent  and  seized  Mackay's  ruck-sack.  As  I
ran  forward  this  time,  what  a  sight  met  my  gaze.  There
was  the  dear  old  Nimrod,  not  a  quarter  of  a  mile  away,
steaming  straight  towards  us  up  the  inlet,  her  bows  just
rounding  the  entrance.  At  the  sight  of  the  three  of  us
running  frantically  to  meet  the  ship,  hearty  ringing
cheers  burst  forth  from  all  on  board.  How  those
cheers  stirred  every  fibre  of  one's  being  !  It  would  be
hard,  indeed,  for  any  one,  not  situated  as  we  had  been,
to  realise  the  sudden  revulsion  of  our  feelings.  In  a
moment,  as  dramatic  as  it  was  heavenly,  we  seemed  to
have  passed  from  death  into  life.  My  first  feelings
were  of  intense  relief  and  joy  ;  then  of  fervent  gratitude
to  the  kind  Providence  which  had  so  mercifully  led  our
friends  to  our  deliverance.

A  sudden  shout  from  Mackay  called  me  back  to
earth,   "  Mawson's  fallen  into  a  deep  crevasse.     Look

211


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

out,  it's  just  in  front  of  you  !  "  I  then  saw  that  Mackay
was  kneeling  on  the  snow  near  the  edge  of  a  small
oblong  sapphire-blue  hole  in  the  neve.  "  Are  you  all
right,  Mawson  ?  "  he  sang  out,  and  from  the  depth,
came  up  the  welcome  word,  "  Yes."  Mackay  then  told
me  that  Mawson  was  about  twenty  feet  down  the
crevasse.  We  decided  to  try  and  pull  him  up  with
the  sledge  harness,  and  hurried  back  to  the  sledge,  un-
toggled  the  harness,  ran  back  with  it  to  the  crevasse,
and  let  one  end  down  to  Mawson.  We  found,  however,
that  our  combined  strength  was  insufficient  to  pull  him
up,  and  that  there  was  a  risk,  too,  of  the  snow  lid  at
the  surface  falling  in  on  Mawson,  if  weight  was  put  upon
it,  unless  it  was  strengthened  with  some  planking.
Accordingly,  we  gave  up  the  attempt  to  haul  Mawson
up,  and  while  I  remained  at  the  crevasse  holding  one
end  of  the  sledge  harness  Mackay  hurried  off  for  help  to
the  Nimrod,  which  was  now  berthing  alongside  of  the
south  wall  of  the  inlet,  about  two  hundred  yards  distant.
Mackay  shouted  to  those  on  board,  "  Mawson  has  fallen
down  a  crevasse,  and  we  got  to  the  Magnetic  Pole."
The  accident  had  taken  place  so  suddenly  that  those  on
board  had  not  realised  in  the  least  what  had  happened.
A  clear,  firm,  cheery  voice,  that  was  strange  to  me,  was
now  heard  issuing  prompt  orders  for  a  rescue  party.
Almost  in  less  time  than  it  takes  to  write  it,  officers  and
sailors  were  swarming  over  the  bows  of  the  Nimrod,
and  dropping  on  to  the  ice  barrier  beneath.  I  called
down  to  Mawson  that  help  was  at  hand.  He  said  that
he  was  quite  comfortable  at  present ;  that  there  was
sea  water  at  the  bottom  of  the  crevasse,  but  that  he  had
been  able  to  sustain  himself  a  couple  of  feet  above  it
on  the  small  ledge  that  had  arrested  his  fall.  Mean-
while, the  rescue  party,  headed  by  the  first  officer  of
the  Nimrod^  J.  K.  Davis,  had  arrived  on  the  scene.
212


GLAD    MOMENTS

The  crevasse  was  bridged  with  a  suitable  piece  of  sawn
timber,  and  Davis,  with  that  spirit  of  thoroughness
which  characterises  all  his  work,  promptly  had  himself
lowered  down  the  crevasse.  On  reaching  the  bottom  he
transferred  the  rope  by  which  he  had  been  lowered  to
Mawson,  and  with  a  long  pull  and  a  strong  pull  and  a  pull
altogether,  the  company  of  the  Nimrod  soon  had  Mawson
safe  on  top,  none  the  worse  for  the  accident  with  the
exception  that  his  back  was  slightly  bruised.  As  soon
as  the  rope  was  cast  free  from  Mawson,  it  was  let  down
again  for  Davis,  and  presently  he,  too,  was  safely  on
top.

And  now  we  had  a  moment  of  leisure  to  see  who
constituted  the  rescue  party.  There  were  the  dear  old
faces  so  well  known  on  our  voyage  together  the  previous
year,  and  interspersed  with  them  were  a  few  new
faces.  Here  were  our  old  comrades  Armytage  and
Brocklehurst,  Dr.  Michell,  Harbord  (the  officer  who —
as  we  learned  later — had  sighted  our  depot  flag),  our
good  stewards  Ansell  and  ElUs,  the  genial  boatswain
Cheetham,  Paton,  and  a  number  of  others.  What  a
joyous  grasping  of  hands  and  hearty  all-round  welcoming
followed.  Foremost  among  them  all  to  welcome  us
was  Captain  Evans,  who  had  commanded  the  s.s.
Koonya,  which  towed  the  Nimrod  from  Lyttleton  to
beyond  the  Antarctic  Circle,  and  it  goes  without  saying
that  the  fact  that  the  Nimrod  was  now  in  command  of
a  master  of  s\ich  experience,  so  well  and  favourably
known  in  the  shipping  world  of  New  Zealand  and
Australia,  gave  us  the  greatest  satisfaction.  He  hastened
to  assure  me  of  the  safety  and  good  health  of  my  wife
and  family.  While  willing  hands  packed  up  our  sledge,
tent  and  other  belongings,  Captain  Evans  walked  with
us  to  the  rope  ladder  hanging  over  the  bows  of  the
Nimi'od,

218


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

Quickly  as  all  this  had  taken  place,  Mackay  had
already  found  time  to  secure  a  pipe  and  some  tobacco
from  one  of  our  crew,  and  was  now  puffing  away  to  his
heart's  content.  We  were  soon  all  on  the  deck  of  the
Nimrod  once  more,  and  were  immediately  stood  up  in
a  row  to  be  photographed.  As  soon  as  the  cameras
had  worked  their  wicked  will  upon  us,  for  we  were  a
sorry  sight,  our  friends  hurried  us  off  for  afternoon
tea.  After  our  one  hundred  and  twenty-two  days  of
hard  toil  over  the  sea  ice  of  the  coast  and  the  great
snow  desert  of  the  hinterland,  the  little  ship  seemed
to  us  as  luxurious  as  an  ocean  liner.  To  find  oneself
seated  once  more  in  a  comfortable  chair,  and  to  be
served  with  new-made  bread,  fresh  butter,  cake  and
tea,  was  Elysium.

We  heard  of  the  narrow  escape  of  Armytage,  Priestley
and  Brocklehurst,  when  they  were  being  carried  out
to  sea,  with  only  two  days'  provisions,  on  a  small
ice-floe  surrounded  by  killer-whales ;  and  how,  just
after  the  momentary  grounding  of  the  floe,  they  were
all  just  able  to  leap  ashore  at  a  spot  where  they
were  picked  up  later  by  the  Nimrod.  We  also  heard
of  the  extraordinary  adventures  and  escape  of  Mac-
kintosh and  MacGillan  in  their  forced  march  overland,
without  tent  or  sleeping-bag,  from  Mount  Bird  to  Cape
Royds ;  of  the  departure  of  the  supporting-party  to
meet  the  Southern  Party;  and,  in  short,  of  all  the
doings  at  Cape  Royds  and  on  the  Nimrod  since  we  had
last  heard  any  news.  Pleasantly  the  buzz  of  our  friend's
voices  blended  itself  with  the  gentle  fizzing  of  steam  from
the  Nimrod' s  boiler,  and  surely  since  the  days  of  John
Gilpin  "  were  never  folk  so  glad  "  as  were  we  three.

Here  it  may  not  perhaps  be  out  of  place  to  quote
from  Captain  Evans'  private  log  in  reference  to  the
relief  of  our  Northern  Party  by  the  Nimrod.  After
214


I'HE    ■NiMROD"    held    LP    IN    THE    ICE.


To  face  page  214


THE    SHIP'S    WORK

hearing  from  the  Western  Party  under  Armytage  that
we  were  long  overdue  at  Butter  Point,  and  after  con-
sulting with  Murray  at  Cape  Royds,  he  decided  to
commence  to  search  for  us,  as  ordered  in  Lieutenant
Shackleton's  instructions,  on  February  1.  He  left
accordingly  at  that  date,  and  after  looking  for  us  in
vain  at  the  Butter  Point  depot,  and  at  Granite  Harbour
he  sailed  northwards  for  the  Drygalski  Ice  Barrier
Tongue,  and  when  about  three  miles  off  our  depot
island  had  sighted  our  little  flag  and  cairn,  but  was  not
certain  that  it  was  a  depot.  Nearer  approach  was  pre-
cluded at  the  time  by  the  pack-ice.

Captain  Evans'  private  log  reads  as  follows  :
''^  February  3,  1.30  a.m.  Cleared  belt  of  pack — •
proceeded  westward  along  Drygalski  Barrier  edge.
Moderate  to  strong  south-west  wind,  force  four  to  eight
with  snow  drift ;  7.30  a.m.  to  9.30  a.m.  off  Barrier.
(At  this  time  the  Nimrod  must  have  passed  within
about  three  miles  of  the  spot  where  we  were  at  our  last
camp  before  reaching  the  inlet,  and  had  it  not  been
for  a  little  falling  snow  our  flag  and  tent  would
probably  have  been  sighted  on  this  occasion);  10  a.m.
to  2.15  P.M.  :  coasted  along  the  beach  at  distances  of
from  one-fifth  of  a  mile  to  three-quarters  of  a  mile  in
water  from  ten  to  fifty  fathoms  ;  1  p.m.  wind  dropped
to  calm ;  2.15  p.m.  bearing  true  north-20°-east,  dis-
tant twenty-four  miles  Mount  Melbourne.  Came  to
top  of  bight  (Gerlache  Inlet)  full  of  pack;  sounded  in
sixty-four  fathoms ;  took  bearings  and  stood  eastward
to  search  Cape  Washington ;  3.30  p.m.  entered  the
pack-ice.

Midnight:  rounded  Cape  Washington  at  a  distance
of  one  and  a  half  cables  in  eleven  to  twenty  fathoms,
both  sides  of  the  cape  quite  inaccessible — awful-looki ag
ice    cliffs    northern    side — crevassed    ice    slopes    south

215


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

side.  Fresh  south-south-west  wind,  force  5-5.  .  .  .
No  sign  of  party  or  record  anywhere.

February  4,  1909,  10  a.m.  Pack-ice  stretching
east  and  west  to  northward — ^turned  back  to  try
coast  again  to  the  southward.  Fresh  southerly  wind,
force  6 — clear  and  fine,  barometer  28.86,  thermometer
17°.  .  .  .  Proceeding  again  along  Drygalski  Barrier;
3  P.M.  sighted  two  flags  on  Barrier  edge  and  a  little
back  of  it — small  inlet  developing.  (The  third  officer,
Mr.  A.  Harbord,  first  sighted  these  flags,  and  came
to  the  captain  and  said,  '  I  think,  sir,  I  see  a  flag,'
and  then  Armytage,  bringing  his  powerful  deer-stalking
telescope  to  bear  on  the  object,  said  to  the  captain,
'  It's  a  dead  sitter,  sir.'  T.W.E.D.)  3.40  p.m.  arrived
at  upper  end  of  inlet — picked  up  Professor  David,
Mawson  and  Mackay,  just  arrived  back  from  Magnetic
Pole ;  5  P.M.  killed  first  Ross  seal ;  2  p.m.  great
depression,  4  p.m.  great  elation.  ...  At  3.30  p.m.,
upon  sighting  the  top  of  the  Northern  Party's  tent,
we  fire  a  distress  double  detonator.  Upon  hearing
this  in  the  tent  we  learn  that  they  all  jumped  up,  and
upset  each  other,  and  everything,  including  the  tin
of  seal  blubber  and  blood  which  they  were  drinking,
and  which  Professor  David  pronouces  good  when  you
get  used  to  it,  and  rushed  out,  Mawson  first,  who  almost
immediately  went  down  a  crevasse,  from  which  Mr.
Davis  and  a  party  from  the  ship  soon  pulled  him  up.
A  great  meeting — a  tremendous  relief."

After  afternoon  tea  came  the  joy  of  reading  the  home
letters,  and  finding  that  the  news  was  good.  Later  we
all  three  had  a  novel  experience,  the  first  real  wash  for
over  four  months.  After  much  diligent  work  with
hot  water,  soap  and  towel  some  of  the  outer  casing  of
dirt  was  removed,  and  bits  of  our  real  selves  began
to  show  through  the  covering  of  seal  oil  and  soot.
216


Captain  Evans  and  the  "Ximrod"  after  a  Bltzzard


3

I

/I


X.


The  Deck  of  the  "Ximuod'  ai  ti;ii  a  Ulizzard


To/ace  ptii/e  216


LUXURY

Dinner  followed  at  6  p.m.  and  it  is  scarcely  necessary
to  add  that  with  our  raging  appetites,  and  all  the  new
types  of  dainty  food  around  us  we  over-ate  ourselves.
This  did  not  prevent  us  from  partaking  liberally  of
hot  cocoa  and  gingerbread  biscuits  before  turning
in  at  10  P.M.  None  but  those  whose  bed  for  months
has  been  on  snow  and  ice  can  realise  the  luxury  of  a
real  bunk,  blankets  and  pillow  in  a  snug  little  cabin.
A  few  minutes'  happy  reverie  preceded  sound  sleep.
At  last  our  toilsome  march  was  over,  the  work  that
had  been  given  us  to  do  was  done,  and  done  just  in  the
nick  of  time;  the  safety  of  those  nearest  and  dearest
to  us  was  assured,  and  we  could  now  lay  down  our  weary
limbs  to  rest.

Under  Providence  one  felt  one  owed  one's  life  to  the
patient  and  thorough  search,  sound  judgment  and  fine
seamanship  of  Captain  Evans,  and  the  devotion  to
duty  of  his  officers  and  crew  and  no  pen  can  describe
how  that  night  one's  heart  overflowed  with  thankful-
ness for  all  the  blessings  of  that  day.  One's  last  thought
in  the  twilight  that  comes  between  wakefulness  and
sleep  is  expressed  in  the  words  of  our  favourite  record
on  the  gramophone,  the  hymn  so  grandly  sung  by
Evan  Williams  :

"  So  long  Thy  power  hath  blest  me,  sure  it  still  will  lead
me  on."

If  one  may  be  permitted  to  take  a  brief  retrospect
of  our  journey  the  following  considerations  present
themselves  :  The  total  distance  travelled  from  Cape
Royds  to  the  Magnetic  Pole  and  back  to  our  depot
on  the  Drygalski  Glacier  was  about  1260  miles.  Of
this,  740  miles  was  relay  work,  and  we  dragged  a  weight
of,  at  first,  a  little  over  half  a  ton,  and  finally  some-
what under  half  a  ton  for  the  whole  of  this  distance.

217


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

For  the  remaining  520  miles  from  the  Drygalski  Depot
to  the  Magnetic  Pole  and  back  we  dragged  a  weight
at  first,  of  670  lb.,  but  this  finally  became  reduced  to
about  450  lb.,  owing  to  consumption  of  food  and  oil,
by  the  time  that  we  returned  to  our  depot.

We  were  absent  on  our  sledge  journey  for  one
hundred  and  twenty-two  days,  of  which  five  days  were
spent  in  our  tent  during  heavy  blizzards,  and  five  days
partly  in  experimenting  in  cooking  with  blubber  and
partly  in  preparing  supplies  of  seal  meat  for  the  journey
from  the  sea  ice  over  the  high  plateau,  and  three  days
in  addition  were  taken  up  in  reconnoitring,  taking
magnetic  observations,  &c.  We  therefore  covered  this
distance  of  1260  miles  in  109  travelling  days,  an  average
of  about  eleven  and  a  half  miles  a  day.

We  had  laid  two  depots  before  our  final  start,  but
as  these  were  distant  only  ten  miles  and  fifteen  miles
respectively,  from  our  winter  quarters  they  did  not
materially  help  us.  We  had  no  supporting-party,  and
with  the  exception  of  help  from  the  motor-car  in  lajnng
out  these  short  depots  we  pulled  the  sledges  for  the
whole  distance  without  assistance  except,  on  rare
occasions,  from  the  wind.

The  travelling  over  the  sea  ice  was  at  first  pretty
good,  but  from  Cape  Bernacchi  to  the  Nordenskjold
Ice  Barrier  we  were  much  hampered  by  screwed  pack-
ice  with  accompanjdng  high  and  hard  snow  ridges.
Towards  the  latter  part  of  October  and  during  Novem-
ber and  part  of  December  the  thawing  surface  of  saline
snow,  clogging  and  otherwise  impeding  our  runners,
made  the  work  of  sledging  extremely  laborious.  More-
over, on  the  sea  ice — especially  towards  the  last  part
of  our  journey  over  it — we  had  ever  present  the  risk
of  a  blizzard  breaking  the  ice  up  suddenly  all  around  us,
and  drifting  us  out  to  sea.  There  can  be  no  doubt,
218


REVIEW    OF    THE    JOURNEY

in  view  of  the  wide  lanes  of  open  water  in  the  sea  ice
on  the  south  side  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier,  when  we
reached  it  on  November  30,  that  we  got  to  glades  firma
only  in  the  nick  of  time.

Then  there  was  the  formidable  obstacle  of  the
Drygalski  Glacier,  with  its  wide  and  deep  chasms,  its
steep  ridges  and  crevasses,  the  passage  of  this  glacier
proving  so  difficult  that  although  only  a  little  over
twenty  miles  in  width  it  took  us  a  fortnight  to  get
across.  On  the  far  side  of  the  Drygalski  was  the  open
sea  forcing  us  to  travel  shorewards  over  the  glacier
surface.  Then  had  come  the  difficult  task  of  pioneering
a  way  up  to  the  high  plateau — the  attempt  to  force  a
passage  up  the  Mount  Nansen  Glacier — om*  narrow
escapes  from  having  our  sledge  engulphed  in  crevasses —
the  heavy  blizzard  with  deep  new  fallen  snow  and
then  our  retreat  from  that  region  of  high-pressure  ridges
and  crevasse  entanglements — our  abandonment  of  the
proposed  route  up  the  snout  of  the  Bellingshausen
Glacier,  and  finally  our  successful  ascent  up  the  small
tributary  glacier,  the  "  backstairs  passage,"  to  the  south
of  Mount  Larsen.

On  the  high  plateau  was  the  difficulty  of  respira-
tion, biting  winds  with  low  temperatures,  difficult
sledging — sometimes  against  blizzards — over  broad
undulations  and  high  sastrugi,  the  cracking  of  our  lips,
fingers  and  feet,  exhaustion  from  insufficient  rations,
disappointment  at  finding  that  the  Magnetic  Pole
had  shifted  further  inland  than  the  position  previously
assigned  to  it.  Then,  after  we  had  just  succeeded  by
dint  of  great  efforts  in  reaching  the  Pole  of  verticity,
came  the  necessity  for  forced  marches,  with  our  sledge,
of  from  sixteen  to  twenty  miles  a  day  in  order  to  reach
the  coast  with  any  reasonable  prospect  of  our  being
picked  up  by  the  Nimrod,

219


THE    HEART    OFT  HE    ANTARCTIC

Then  came  our  choice  of  the  difficult  route  down  the
snout  of  the  BelHngshausen  Glacier,  and  our  conse-
quent difficulties  in  surmounting  the  ice-pressure  ridges  ;
then  the  difficulty  of  sledging  over  the  "  tile-ice  "  sur-
face, the  opposing  ice  barrancas  formed  by  the  thaw
water  while  we  were  on  the  high  plateau  ;  the  final
heavy  snow  blizzard  ;  our  loss  of  direction  when  sledg-
ing in  bad  light  and  falling  snow,  and  finally  our  arrest
by  the  deep  barranca  of  what  afterwards  was  known  as
Relief  Inlet.

But  ours  were  not  the  only,  nor  the  greatest,  diffi-
culties connected  with  our  journey.  There  were  many
disappointments,  dangers  and  hardships  for  the  captain,
officers  and  crew  of  the  Nimrod  in  their  search  for  us
along  that  two  hundred  miles  of  desolate  and,  for  a  great
part,  inaccessible  coast-line.  How  often  black  spots
ashore,  proving  on  nearer  view  to  be  seals  or  penguins,
had  been  mistaken  for  depot  flags  ;  how  often  the  glint
of  sunlight  off  brightly  reflecting  facets  of  ice  had  been
thought  to  be  "  helios,"  only  the  disappointed  ones
can  tell ;  how  often,  too,  the  ship  was  all  but  aground,
at  other  times  all  but  beset  in  the  ice-pack  in  the  efforts
to  get  a  clearer  view  of  the  shore-line  in  order  to  dis-
cover our  depot !  This  is  a  tale  that  the  brave  men
who  risked  their  lives  to  save  ours  will  scorn  to  tell,
but  is  nevertheless  true.

As  the  result  of  our  journey  to  the  Magnetic  Pole
and  back,  Mawson  was  able  to  join  up  in  his  continuous
triangulation  survey,  Mount  Erebus  with  Mount  Mel-
bourne, and  to  show  with  approximate  accuracy  the
outline  of  the  coast-line,  and  the  position  and  height
of  several  new  mountains.  He  and  I  obtained  geological
collections,  sketches  and  notes — especially  on  glacial
geology — along  the  coast-line,  and  he  also  took  a  series
of  photographs  ;  while  Mackay  determined  our  altitudes
220


Party  setting  out  from  Ship


The  Crow's  Xest  of  the  "\imeod,"  as  seen  from  the  Deck         To  face  ixtge  220


PLANS    FOR    THE    FUTURE

on  the  plateau  by  means  of  the  hypsometer.  Mawson
also  made  magnetic  determinations,  and  I  was  able  to
gather  some  meteorological  information.  A  summary
of  this  work  is  given  in  the  Scientific  Appendix,  and
details  will  be  supplied  later  in  the  Scientific  Memoirs
of  the  expedition.

Unfortunately  the  time  available  during  our  journey
was  too  short  for  detailed  magnetic,  geological  or  mete-
orological observations.  Nevertheless,  we  trust  that  the
information  obtained  has  justified  the  journey.  At  all
events  we  have  pioneered  a  route  to  the  Magnetic  Pole,
and  we  hope  that  the  path  thus  found  will  prove  of  use
to  future  observers.

It  is  easy,  of  course,  to  be  wise  after  the  event,  but
there  is  no  doubt  that  had  we  known  that  there  was
going  to  be  an  abundance  of  seals  all  along  the  coast,
and  had  we  had  an  efficient  team  of  dogs  we  could  have
accomplished  our  journey  in  probably  half  the  time
that  it  actually  occupied.  Future  expeditions  to  the
South  Magnetic  Pole  would  probably  do  well  to  land
a  strong  and  well-equipped  party,  either  at  Relief  Inlet,
or  better,  as  near  to  Backstairs  Passage  as  the  ship
can  be  taken,  and  as  early  in  December  as  the  state  of
the  sea  ice  makes  navigation  possible.  A  party  of
three,  with  a  supporting-party  also  of  three,  with  good
dog  teams  and  plenty  of  fresh  seal  meat,  could  travel
together  for  about  seventy  miles  inland  ;  then  the  sup-
porting-party might  diverge  and  ascend  Mount  Nansen
from  its  inland  extremity.  The  other  party,  mean-
while, might  proceed  to  the  Magnetic  Pole  at  not  less
than  fifteen  miles  a  day.  This  should  admit  of  their
spending  from  a  week  to  a  fortnight  at  the  Pole,  and
they  should  then  be  able  to  return  to  the  coast  early  in
February.  Meanwhile,  there  would  be  plenty  of  scope
for  a  third  party  to  explore  the  foot-hills  of  Mount

221


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

Larsen  and  Mount  Nansen,  search  and  map  their  won-
derful moraines,  and  examine  the  deeply  indented  rocky
coast-line  from  Nansen  to  the  as  yet  untrod  volcano
Mount  Melbourne.


222


CHAPTER  XIV

ALL  ABOARD  :    THE  RETURN  TO  NEW  ZEALAND

rilHE  Nimrod,  with  the  members  of  the  Northern
-^  Party  aboard,  got  back  to  the  winter  quarters
on  February  11  and  landed  Mawson.  The  hut  party
at  this  period  consisted  of  Murray,  Priestley,  Mawson,
Day  and  Roberts.  No  news  had  been  heard  of  the
Southern  Party,  and  the  depot  party,  commanded  by
Joyce,  was  still  out.  The  ship  lay  under  Glacier  Tongue
most  of  the  time,  making  occasional  visits  to  Hut  Point
in  case  some  of  the  men  should  have  returned.  On
February  20  it  was  found  that  the  depot  party  had
reached  Hut  Point,  and  had  not  seen  the  Southern
Party.  The  temperature  was  becoming  lower,  and
the  blizzards  were  more  frequent.

The  instructions  left  by  me  had  provided  that  if
we  had  not  returned  by  February  25,  a  party  was  to
be  landed  at  Hut  Point,  with  a  team  of  dogs,  and  on
March  1  a  search-party  was  to  go  south.  On  Febru-
ary 21  Murray  and  Captain  Evans  began  to  make  prep-
arations for  the  landing  of  the  relief  party.  The  ship
proceeded  to  Cape  Royds  where  Mawson  was  picked
up.  In  accordance  with  my  expressed  wish  he  was
offered  the  command  of  the  relief  party,  and  accepted
it.  If  it  became  necessary  to  go  south  in  search  of  the
Southern  Party  the  men  landed  at  Hut  Point  would
have  to  spend  another  winter  in  the  south,  as  the  ship

223


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

could  not  wait  until  their  return.  It  was  therefore
a  serious  matter  for  those  who  stayed,  but  there  was
no  lack  of  volunteers.  These  arrangements  being  com-
pleted, most  of  the  members  of  the  expedition  then
on  board  went  ashore  at  Cape  Royds  to  get  the  last
of  their  property  packed  ready  for  departure.  The
ship  was  lying  under  Glacier  Tongue  when  I  arrived
at  Hut  Point  with  Wild  on  February  28,  and  after  I
had  been  landed  with  the  relief  party  in  order  to  bring
in  Adams  and  Marshall,  it  proceeded  to  Cape  Royds
in  order  to  take  on  board  the  remaining  members  of
the  shore-party  and  some  specimens  and  stores.

The  Nimrod  anchored  a  short  distance  from  the
shore,  and  two  boats  were  launched.  The  only  spot
convenient  for  embarkation  near  the  ship's  anchorage
was  at  a  low  ice  cliff  in  Backdoor  Bay.  Everything
had  to  be  lowered  by  ropes  over  the  cliff  into  the  boats.
Some  hours  were  spent  in  taking  on  board  the  last
of  the  collections,  the  private  property,  and  various
stores.

A  stiff  breeze  was  blowing,  making  work  with  the
boats  difficult,  but  by  6  a.m.  on  March  2  there  remained
to  be  taken  on  board  only  the  men  and  dogs.  The
operation  of  lowering  the  dogs  one  by  one  into  the  boats
was  necessarily  slow,  and  while  it  was  in  progress  the
wind  freshened  to  blizzard  force,  and  the  sea  began  to
run  dangerously.  The  waves  had  deeply  undercut
the  ice-cliff,  leaving  a  projecting  shelf.  One  boat,  in
charge  of  Davis,  succeeded  in  reaching  the  ship,  but
a  second  boat,  commanded  by  Harbord,  was  less  fortu-
nate. It  was  heavily  loaded  with  twelve  men  and  a
number  of  dogs,  and  before  it  had  proceeded  many
yards  from  the  shore  an  oar  broke.  The  Nimrod  was
forced  to  slip  her  moorings  and  steam  out  of  the  bay,
as  the  storm  had  become  so  severe  that  she  was  in  danger
224


p*^'


The  Ship  off  Pkam  Point,  just  before  leaving  for  the  Xorth  To  face  page  224


A    DISASTER    AVERTED

of  dragging  her  anchors  and  going  on  the  rocks.  An
attempt  to  float  a  buoy  to  the  boat  was  not  successful,
and  for  some  time  Harbord  and  the  men  with  him  were
in  danger.  They  could  not  get  out  of  the  bay  owing
to  the  force  of  the  sea,  and  the  projecting  shelf  of  ice
threatened  disaster  if  they  approached  the  shore.  The
flying  spray  had  encased  the  men  in  ice,  and  their  hands
were  numb  and  half-frozen.  At  the  end  of  an  hour
they  managed  to  make  fast  to  a  line  stretched  from
an  anchor  a  few  yards  from  the  cliff,  the  men  who  had
remained  on  shore  pulling  this  line  taut.  The  position
was  still  dangerous,  but  all  the  men  and  dogs  were
hauled  up  the  slippery  ice-face  into  safety  before  the
boat  sank.  Hot  drinks  were  soon  ready  in  the  hut,
and  the  men  dried  their  clothes  as  best  they  could
before  the  fire.  Nearly  all  the  bedding  had  been  sent
on  board,  and  the  temperature  was  low,  but  they  were
thankful  to  have  escaped  with  their  lives.

The  weather  was  bitter  on  the  following  morning
(March  3),  and  the  Nimrod,  which  had  been  sheltering
under  Glacier  Tongue,  came  back  to  Cape  Royds.  A
heavy  sea  was  still  running,  but  a  new  landing-place
was  selected  in  the  shelter  of  the  cape,  and  all  the  men
and  dogs  were  got  aboard.  The  ship  went  back  to
the  Glacier  Tongue  anchorage  to  wait  for  the  relief
party.

About  ten  o'clock  that  night  Mackintosh  was  walking
the  deck  engaged  in  conversation  with  some  other
members  of  the  expedition.  Suddenly  he  became
excited  and  said,  "  I  feel  that  Shackleton  has  arrived
at  Hut  Point."  He  was  very  anxious  that  the  ship
should  go  up  to  the  Point,  but  nobody  gave  much
attention  to  him.  Then  Dunlop  advised  him  to  go
up  to  the  crow's-nest  if  he  was  sure  about  it,  and  look
for  a  signal.  Mackintosh  went  aloft,  and  immediately
n  P  225


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

saw  our  flare  at  Hut  Point.  The  ship  at  once  left  for
Hut  Point,  reaching  it  at  midnight,  and  by  2  a.m.  on
March  4  the  entire  expedition  was  safe  on  board.

There  was  now  no  time  to  be  lost  if  we  were  to  attempt
to  complete  our  work.  The  season  was  far  advanced,
and  the  condition  of  the  ice  was  a  matter  for  anxiety,
but  I  was  most  anxious  to  undertake  exploration  with
the  ship  to  the  westward,  towards  Adelie  Land,  with
the  idea  of  mapping  the  coast-line  in  that  direction.
As  soon  as  all  the  members  of  the  expedition  were  on
board  the  Nimrod,  therefore,  I  gave  orders  to  steam
north,  and  in  a  very  short  time  we  were  under  way.
It  was  evident  that  the  sea  in  our  neighbourhood  would
be  frozen  over  before  many  hours  had  passed,  and
although  I  had  foreseen  the  possibility  of  having  to
spend  a  second  winter  in  the  Antarctic  when  making
my  arrangements,  we  were  all  very  much  disinclined
to  face  the  long  wait  if  it  could  be  avoided.  I  wished
first  to  round  Cape  Armitage  and  pick  up  the  geological
specimens  and  gear  that  had  been  left  at  Pram  Point,
but  there  was  heavy  ice  coming  out  from  the  south,
and  this  meant  imminent  risk  of  the  ship  being  caught
and  perhaps  "  nipped."  I  decided  to  go  into  shelter
under  Glacier  Tongue  in  the  little  inlet  on  the  north
side  for  a  few  hours,  in  the  hope  that  the  southern  wind,
that  was  bringing  out  the  ice,  would  cease  and  that  we
would  then  be  able  to  return  and  secure  the  specimens
and  gear.  This  was  about  two  o'clock  on  the  morning
of  March  4,  and  we  members  of  the  Southern  Party
turned  in  for  a  much-needed  rest.

At  eight  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  we  again
went  down  the  sound.  Young  ice  was  forming  over
the  sea,  which  was  now  calm,  the  wind  having  entirely
dropped,  and  it  was  evident  that  we  must  be  very  quick
if  we  were  to  escape  that  year.  We  brought  the  Nimrod
226


i


The  Motor  Car  being  taken  aboard  the  "  Nimrod  "  foe  the  Eeturn  Journey


Ready  to  start  Home


To  face  page  226


HOMEWARD    BOUND

right  alongside  the  pressure  ice  at  Pram  Point,  and  I
pointed  out  the  little  depot  on  the  hillside.  Mackintosh
at  once  went  off  with  a  party  of  men  to  bring  the  gear
and  specimens  down,  while  another  party  went  out  to
the  seal  rookery  to  see  if  they  could  find  a  peculiar  seal
that  we  had  noticed  on  our  way  to  the  hut  on  the
previous  night.  The  seal  was  either  a  new  species
or  the  female  of  the  Ross  seal.  It  was  a  small  animal,
about  four  feet  six  inches  long,  with  a  broad  white
band  from  its  throat  right  down  to  its  tail  on  the  under-
side. If  we  had  been  equipped  with  knives  on  the
previous  night  we  would  have  despatched  it,  but  we  had
no  knives  and  were,  moreover,  very  tired,  and  we
therefore  left  it.  The  search  for  the  seal  proved  fruitless,
and  as  the  sea  was  freezing  over  behind  us  I  ordered
all  the  men  on  board  directly  the  stuff  from  the  depot
had  been  got  on  to  the  deck,  and  the  Nimrod  once  more
steamed  north.  The  breeze  soon  began  to  freshen,
and  it  was  blowing  hard  from  the  south  when  we  passed
the  winter  quarters  at  Cape  Royds.  We  all  turned  out
to  give  three  cheers  and  to  take  a  last  look  at  the  place
where  we  had  spent  so  many  happy  days.  The  hut  was
not  exactly  a  palatial  residence,  and  during  our  period
of  residence  in  it  we  had  suffered  many  discomforts,
not  to  say  hardships,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  had  been
our  home  for  a  year  that  would  always  live  in  our
memories.  We  had  been  a  very  happy  little  party
within  its  walls,  and  often  when  we  were  far  away  from
even  its  measure  of  civilisation  it  had  been  the  Mecca
of  all  our  hopes  and  dreams.  We  watched  the  little
hut  fade  away  in  the  distance  with  feelings  almost
of  sadness,  and  there  were  few  men  aboard  who  did
not  cherish  a  hope  that  some  day  they  would  once
more  live  strenuous  days  under  the  shadow  of  mighty
Erebus.

227


THE   HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

I  left  at  the  winter  quarters  on  Cape  Royds  a  supply
of  stores  sufficient  to  last  fifteen  men  for  one  year.
The  vicissitudes  of  life  in  the  Antarctic  are  such  that
such  a  supply  might  prove  of  the  greatest  value  to
some  future  expedition.  The  hut  was  locked  up  and
the  key  hung  up  outside  where  it  would  be  easily  found,
and  we  readjusted  the  lashing  of  the  hut  so  that  it
might  be  able  to  withstand  the  attacks  of  the  blizzards
during  the  years  to  come.  Inside  the  hut  I  left  a  letter
stating  what  had  been  accomplished  by  the  expedition,
and  giving  some  other  information  that  might  be  useful
to  a  future  party  of  explorers.  The  stores  left  in  the
hut  included  oil,  flour,  jams,  dried  vegetables,  biscuits,
pemmican,  plasmon,  matches  and  various  tinned  meats,
as  well  as  tea,  cocoa,  and  necessary  articles  of  equipment.
If  any  party  has  to  make  use  of  our  hut  in  the  future,
it  will  find  there  everything  required  to  sustain  life.

The  wind  was  still  freshening  as  we  went  north
under  steam  and  sail  on  March  4,  and  it  was  fortunate
for  us  that  this  was  so,  for  the  ice  that  had  formed  on
the  sea  water  in  the  sound  was  thickening  rapidly,
assisted  by  the  old  pack,  of  which  a  large  amount  lay
across  our  course.  I  was  anxious  to  pick  up  a  depot
of  geological  specimens  on  Depot  Island,  left  there
by  the  Northern  Party,  and  with  this  end  in  view  the
Nimrod  was  taken  on  a  more  westerly  course  than  would
otherwise  have  been  the  case.  The  wind,  however,
was  freshening  to  a  gale,  and  we  were  passing  through
streams  of  ice,  which  seemed  to  thicken  as  we  neared
the  shore.  I  decided  that  it  would  be  too  risky  to
send  a  party  off  for  the  specimens,  as  there  was  no
proper  lee  to  this  small  island,  and  the  consequences
of  even  a  short  delay  might  be  serious.  I  therefore
gave  instructions  that  the  course  should  be  altered
to  due  north.  The  following  wind  helped  us,  and  on
228


To  /"..//"K-  i«iyf  SiS


NEW    COAST-LINE

the  morning  of  March  6  we  were  off  Cape  Adare.  I
wanted  to  push  between  the  Balleny  Islands  and  the
mainland,  and  make  an  attempt  to  follow  the  coast-
line from  Cape  North  westward,  so  as  to  link  it  up  with
Adelie  Land.  No  ship  had  ever  succeeded  in  penetrat-
ing to  the  westward  of  Cape  North,  heavy  pack  having
been  encountered  on  the  occasion  of  each  attempt.
The  Discovery  had  passed  through  the  Balleny  Islands
and  sailed  over  part  of  the  so-called  Wilkes  Land  of
the  maps,  but  the  question  of  the  existence  of  this  land
in  any  other  position  had  been  left  open.

We  steamed  along  the  pack-ice,  which  was  beginning
to  thicken,  and  although  we  did  not  manage  to  do  all
that  I  had  hoped,  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  pushing  our
little  vessel  along  that  coast  to  longitude  166°  14'  East,
latitude  69°  47'  South,  a  point  further  west  than  had  been
reached  by  any  previous  expedition.  On  the  morning  of
March  8  we  saw,  beyond  Cape  North,  a  new  coast-line
extending  first  to  the  southwards  and  then  to  the  west
for  a  distance  of  over  forty-five  miles.  We  took  angles
and  bearings,  and  Marston  sketched  the  main  outlines.
We  were  too  far  away  to  take  any  photographs  that
would  have  been  of  value,  but  the  sketches  show  very
clearly  the  type  of  the  land.  Professor  David  was  of
opinion  that  it  was  the  northern  edge  of  the  polar
plateau.  The  coast  seemed  to  consist  of  cliffs,  with  a
few  bays  in  the  distance.  We  would  all  have  been  glad
of  an  opportunity  to  explore  the  coast  thoroughly,  but
that  was  out  of  the  question  ;  the  ice  was  getting  thicker
all  the  time,  and  it  was  becoming  imperative  that  we
should  escape  to  clear  water  without  further  delay.
There  was  no  chance  of  getting  farther  west  at  that  point,
and  as  the  new  ice  was  forming  between  the  old  pack
of  the  previous  year  and  the  land,  we  were  in  serious
danger  of  being  frozen  in  for  the  winter  at  a  place  where

229


THE    HEART   OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

we  could  not  have  done  any  geological  work  of  import-
ance. We  therefore  moved  north  along  the  edge  of  the
pack,  making  as  much  westing  as  possible,  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  Balleny  Islands.  I  still  hoped  that  it  might
be  possible  to  skirt  them  and  find  Wilkes  Land.  It
was  awkward  work,  and  at  times  the  ship  could  hardly
move  at  all.

Finally,  about  midnight  on  March  9,  I  saw  that
we  must  go  north,  and  the  course  was  set  in  that  direc-
tion. We  were  almost  too  late,  for  the  ice  was  closing
in  and  before  long  we  were  held  up,  the  ship  being  unable
to  miove  at  all.  The  situation  looked  black,  but  we
discovered  a  lane  through  which  progress  could  be
made,  and  in  the  afternoon  of  the  10th  we  were  in  fairly
open  water,  passing  through  occasional  lines  of  pack.
Our  troubles  were  over,  for  we  had  a  good  voyage  up
to  New  Zealand,  and  on  March  22  dropped  anchor  at
the  mouth  of  Lord's  river,  on  the  south  side  of  Stewart
Island.  I  did  not  go  to  a  port  because  I  wished  to  get
the  news  of  the  expedition's  work  through  to  London
before  we  faced  the  energetic  newspaper  men.

That  was  a  wonderful  day  to  all  of  us.  For  over  a
year  we  had  seen  nothing  but  rocks,  ice,  snow  and  sea.
There  had  been  no  colour  and  no  softness  in  the  scenery
of  the  Antarctic ;  no  green  growth  had  gladdened  our
eyes,  no  musical  notes  of  birds  had  come  to  our  ears.
We  had  had  our  work,  but  we  had  been  cut  off  from
most  of  the  lesser  things  that  go  to  make  life  worth
while.  No  person  who  has  not  spent  a  period  of  his
life  in  those  "  stark  and  sullen  soHtudes  that  sentinel
the  Pole  "  will  understand  fully  what  trees  and  flowers,
sim-flecked  turf  and  running  streams  mean  to  the  soul
of  a  man.  We  landed  on  the  stretch  of  beach  that
separated  the  sea  from  the  luxuriant  growth  of  the
forest,  and  scampered  about  like  children  in  the  sheer
230


Last  View  of  Cape  Aoake


The  first  Landing  in  Xew  Zealand  on  the  return  of  the  Expedition.

A  Bay  in  Stewart  Island  To  face  jniffe  230


IN    NEW    ZEALANt)

joy  of  being  alive.  I  did  not  wish  to  despatch  my
cablegrams  from  Half  Moon  Bay  until  an  hour  previously
arranged,  and  in  the  meantime  we  revelled  in  the  warm
sand  on  the  beach,  bathed  in  the  sea  and  climbed
amongst  the  trees.  We  lit  a  fire  and  made  tea  on  the
beach,  and  while  we  were  having  our  meal  the  wekas,
the  remarkable  flightless  birds  found  only  in  New
Zealand,  came  out  from  the  bush  for  their  share  of  the
good  things.  These  quaint  birds,  with  their  long  bills,
brown  plumage  and  quick,  inquisitive  eyes,  have
no  fear  of  men,  and  their  friendliness  seemed  to  us
like  a  welcome  from  that  sunny  land  that  had  always
treated  us  with  such  open-hearted  kindliness.  The  clear,
musical  notes  of  other  birds  came  to  us  from  the  trees,
and  we  felt  that  we  needed  only  good  news  from  home
to  make  our  happiness  and  contentment  absolutely
complete.  One  of  the  scientific  men  found  a  cave
showing  signs  of  native  occupation  in  some  period  of
the  past,  and  was  fortunate  enough  to  discover  a  stone
adze  made  of  the  rare  pounamu,  or  greenstone.

Early  next  morning  we  hove  up  the  anchor,  and  at
10  A.M.  we  entered  Half  Moon  Bay.  I  went  ashore  to
despatch  my  cablegrams,  and  it  was  strange  to  see  new
faces  on  the  wharf  after  fifteen  months  during  which
we  had  met  no  one  outside  the  circle  of  our  own  little
party.  There  were  girls  on  the  wharf,  too,  and  every
one  was  glad  to  see  us  in  the  hearty  New  Zealand  way.
I  despatched  my  cablegrams  from  the  little  office,  and
then  went  on  board  again  and  ordered  the  course  to
be  set  for  Lyttelton,  the  port  from  which  we  had  sailed
on  the  first  day  of  the  previous  year.  We  arrived  there
on  March  25  late  in  the  afternoon.

The  people  of  New  Zealand  would  have  welcomed
us,  I  think,  whatever  had  been  the  result  of  our  efforts,
for   their   keen   interest   in   Antarctic   exploration   has

231


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

never  faltered  since  the  early  days  of  the  Discovery
expedition,  and  their  attitude  towards  us  was  always
that  of  warm  personal  friendship,  but  the  news  of  the
measure  of  success  we  had  achieved  had  been  published
in  London,  and  flashed  back  to  the  southern  countries,
and  we  were  met  out  in  the  harbour  and  on  the  wharves
by  cheering  crowds.  Enthusiastic  friends  boarded  the
Nimrod  almost  as  soon  as  she  entered  the  heads,  and
when  our  little  vessel  came  alongside  the  quay,  the
crowd  on  deck  became  so  great  that  movement  was
almost  impossible.  Then  I  was  handed  great  bundles
of  letters  and  cablegrams.  The  loved  ones  at  home
were  well,  the  vv^orld  was  pleased  with  our  work,  and  it
seemed  as  though  nothing  but  happiness  could  ever
enter  life  again.


288


APPENDIX  I

BIOLOGY
Notes  by  JAMES  MURRAY

BIOLOGIST   OF  THE   EXPEDITION

ON  the  calm  evening  of  our  departure  for  the  south,  while
the  New  Zealand  coast  was  still  in  view,  the  Nimrod
was  accompanied  by  a  number  of  southern  Black-back  or
Dominican  gulls,  with  their  beautiful  white-bordered  black
wings.  An  occasional  cormorant  flew  past.  Next  morning
these  shore  birds  had  left  us,  and  their  place  had  been  taken
by  the  albatrosses  and  petrels  which  were  to  keep  us  company
thenceforward  till  we  reached  the  Antarctic  Circle.

The  pretty  little  speckled  cape  pigeon  just  crossed  the
Circle,  and  left  us  next  day  ;  the  black-browed  albatross  was
seen  for  a  day  longer  ;  the  sooty  albatross  went  farthest  into
the  Antarctic,  and  was  last  seen  on  January  18.

Just  at  the  Antarctic  Cirde  we  were  met  by  those  peculiarly
Antarctic  birds,  the  snowy  and  Antarctic  petrels.  The  wide
zone  of  floating  ice,  a  hundred  miles  or  more  across,  would
have  been  gloomy  indeed  without  those  two  birds,  which
frequented  this  zone  in  large  flocks.  These  beautiful  petrels —
the  Antarctic  with  strongly  contrasting  brown  and  white,  the
Snowy  pure  white  except  for  the  black  bill  and  feet — reheved
by  their  bright  plumage  and  sprightly  flight  the  loneliness  of
this  region.  A  few  seals  and  penguins  on  the  lower  bergs  were
the  only  other  living  things  among  the  ice.

The  giant  petrel  and  the  little  Wilson's  petrel  were  the  only
birds  that  ranged  right  from  the  New  Zealand  coast  to  the
shores  of  Victoria  Land.

233


THE   HEART   OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

In  the  open  sea  to  the  south  of  the  belt  of  ice  even  the
Antarctic  and  snowy  petrels  for  the  most  part  left  us.

The  desolation  and  lifelessness  of  the  Antarctic  were  fully
realised  as  we  approached  the  great  Ice  Barrier.  There  was
no  living  thing  in  sight  as  we  steamed  eastward,  tracing  the
line  of  this  immense  glacier.  Towards  midnight  there  opened
suddenly  to  our  sight  a  scene  of  abounding  life.  The  cliff  of
the  Barrier  terminated,  and  a  wide  bay  opened  up,  extending
far  to  the  south,  and  partly  filled  by  fast  ice  of  one  season's
growth.  Away  to  the  eastward  the  cliff  recommenced.  This
bay,  which  we  afterwards  referred  to  by  the  appropriate  name
of  the  Bay  of  Whales,  was  teeming  with  all  the  familiar  kinds
of  Antarctic  life.  Hundreds  of  whales,  killers,  finners,  and
humpbacks,  were  rising  and  blowing  all  around.  On  the  ice
groups  of  Weddell  seals  were  basking  in  the  midnight  sunshine.
Emperor  penguins  were  standing  about  or  tobogganing  in
unconcerned  parties.  Skua  gulls  were  flying  heavily,  or  sitting
drowsily  on  the  ice.  Only  the  Adelie  penguin  (busy  nesting
elsewhere)  and  the  rarer  kinds  of  seal  were  absent.

It  could  hardly  be  supposed  that  this  was  a  chance  gathering
of  all  these  animals.  Passing  the  same  spot  on  the  return
journey  westward,  there  was  still  the  same  abundance  of  life.
There  was  probably  land  near  by.

Cape  Royds. — To  the  biologist,  no  more  uninviting  desert
is  imaginable  than  Cape  Royds  seemed  when  we  made  our  first
landing,  and  for  long  afterwards.  Here  is  absolute  desolation,
a  black  and  white  wilderness,  rugged  ridges  of  lava  alternating
with  snowdrifts  for  a  few  miles,  ending  to  the  north  and  south
in  crevassed  glaciers,  and  eastward  in  the  snow-field  stretching
up  to  the  rocky  crags  of  the  cone  of  Mount  Erebus.

On  the  very  edge  of  the  sea,  the  little  colony  of  Adelie
penguins  and  the  scattered  skua  gulls  relieved  the  monotony.
Beyond  was  no  living  creature,  no  blade  of  grass,  or  tiniest
patch  of  welcome  green.

Bleak  and  bare  though  it  was,  this  stretch  of  two  or  three
miles  of  broken  country,  where  rocky  peaks  and  ridges,  moraines
and  snow-drifts  diversified  the  surface,  was  the  field  of  opera-
tions for  the  biologist.  The  white  waste  of  glacier  and  snow-field
was  hopeless,  the  nearer  country  seemed  little  more  promising.
284


BIOLOGY

The  sea  was  there,  known  to  be  teeming  with  varied  life,
but  it  was  inaccessible  till  the  ice  should  bridge  it  over.

In  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  camp  were  many  little
sharp  peaks  of  kenyte,  and  short  valleys  filled  with  a  cindery
gravel  derived  from  the  decomposition  of  the  same  rock.
Moraines  covered  the  rock  in  places,  and  many  of  the  valleys
contained  frozen  ponds  or  lakes  of  various  sizes  up  to  half  a
mile  in  length.

The  first  walks  over  the  hills  did  little  to  encourage  the
biologist.  The  rugged  kenyte,  with  its  hard  projecting  felspar
crystals  tearing  the  boots,  supported  no  living  thing.  Little
could  we  suspect  that  far  beneath  the  thick  ice  of  the  lakes
was  plentiful  life,  dormant,  it  is  true,  but  only  waiting  to  be
thawed  out  to  spring  into  activity.

Gradually,  as  we  came  to  know  it,  it  began  to  appear  that
the  barrenness  was  not  so  absolute  as  we  at  first  supposed.
On  an  early  walk,  Mr.  Shackleton  brought  home  a  scrap  of  moss
and  lichen,  but  it  was  long  afterwards  that  the  melting  of  the
snow  in  the  next  summer  revealed  the  fact  that  on  some  of
the  moraines  the  growth  of  mosses  and  lichens  was,  compara-
tively speaking,  luxuriant.  A  httle  dried-up  pool,  some  two
yards  across,  close  by  the  penguin  rookery,  was  quite  covered
by  a  film  formed  of  bright  green  filamentous  algae.  Around  the
edges  of  some  of  the  smaller  lakes,  thick  wrinlded  sheets  of  a
plant  of  a  dingy  green  or  brown  colour  were  seen,  resembling
some  of  the  large  foliaceous  lichens  in  form.  Wild  brought
in  some  of  the  same  plant,  which  he  had  found  embedded  in
the  transparent  ice  of  a  lake  afterwards  known  as  Clear  Lake.
In  this  situation  it  was  of  a  beautiful  orange-red  colour.  Later
on,  this  plant  was  found  to  be  abundant  in  all  the  lakes,  and
in  many  of  them  it  formed  continuous  sheets  over  the  entire
bed.  Many  of  the  gravelly  valleys  showed  a  faint  green  tinge,
showing  where  water  had  run  in  the  summer-time.

Microscopic  Life

It  was  while  examining  a  bit  of  the  orange-coloured  weed
under  the  microscope  that  the  first  freshwater  animals  were
found.     Two  or  three  little  red  worm-like  creatures  were,  seen,

235


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

creeping  about  like  caterpillars,  now  and  again  coming
to  a  stop  and  putting  out  their  heads  to  feed,  when
they  showed  themselves  to  be  rotifers,  or  wheel-bearing
animalcules.

Having  thus  ascertained  that  there  were  microscopic  animals
on  this  plant,  a  large  quantity  of  it  was  gathered  and  washed
in  water  to  remove  the  adhering  organisms.  The  sediment
obtained  was  concentrated  by  straining,  and  a  drop  put  under
the  microscope.  Myriads  of  living  things  appeared,  animals
and  plants.  The  plant-life  consisted  of  various  spheres  and
threads  of  green  and  blue-green  algae,  some  of  the  latter  re-
sembling strings  of  beads.

The  animals  were  more  abundant,  and  in  greater  variety.
The  creeping  rotifers  were  most  plentiful,  and  there  were  several
kinds  of  them  besides  the  blood-red  one  first  noticed.  Some
were  of  curious  shapes.

Many  were  feeding,  the  two  rotating  wheels  sweeping
streams  of  minute  particles  towards  the  mouth.

Small  bear-like  creatures  were  scratching  among  the  debris
or  fiercely  "  pawing  the  air  "  with  great  curved,  dangerous-
looking  claws.     These  were  the  water-bears.

Miniature  snakes  (thread-worms)  were  twisting  in  and  out,
and  lashing  their  tails.  Some  of  the  simplest  of  animals  (pro-
tozoa), each  consisting  of  a  single  cell,  were  there,  the  active
infusoria  swimming  rapidly  by  means  of  their  cilia,  the  slower-
moving  rhizopods  putting  out  their  Uttle  soft  fingers  to  feed
or  creep  about.  Animals  higher  in  the  scale  were  not  wanting,
though  these  were  never  seen  alive.  Skins  of  some  mites  related
to  the  cheese  mite,  and  of  some  small  shrimps  (crustacea)  were
occasionally  found.

Among  all  these  animals  the  rotifers  and  water-bears  were
most  important  in  point  of  numbers,  and  they  lead  such  strange
lives  that  they  will  be  more  fully  described  in  later  paragraphs.
At  any  time  during  the  winter  an  unlimited  supply  of  these
animals  could  be  got  for  study  by  simply  melting  a  piece  of  ice
containing  some  weed.  In  summer,  the  ponds  and  smaller
lakes  were  completely  melted  for  weeks,  and  then  they  were
still  more  easily  got  by  washing  some  of  the  weed.  A  few
animals  not  found  in  winter  then  hatched  out  from  eggs  and
236


1.  Claws  of  a  Water-Beak,  magnified  about  500  Diameters.  2.  A  ne-vv  Species  of  Rotifer
FOUND  AT  Cape  Koyds.  Its  distinctive  feature  is  the  possession  of  wing-like  Protuberances
at  the  Sides.  3.  A  large,  free-swimming  Eotifer,  called  Hydatina.  It  is  very  plentiful  in
THE  Coast  Lakes  in  the  Summer.  4.  Viviparous  Rotifer  from  the  Salt  Lakes.  The  oval
»  Bodies  seen  in  the  Adult  Animal  are  the  Young  Tofacepaye2Z6


BIOLOGY

swam  about  in  the  water.  A  large  and  beautiful  rotifer  named
hydatina  appeared  in  Coast  Lake  only.

In  Coast  Lake  also  a  curious  thing  happened  in  summer.
The  stones  at  the  margin  became  covered  by  bright  red  patches,
as  though  they  had  been  sprinkled  with  blood.  These  patches
were  found  to  be  formed  of  rotifers,  of  the  same  kind  which
were  commonest  among  the  weed  in  winter.  The  red  stains
appear  to  rise  owing  to  their  rapid  multiplication,  and  to  their
fixing  themselves  side  by  side  as  close  as  they  can  pack.  The
photograph  shows  a  small  part  of  one  of  these  stains  transferred
by  a  brush  to  the  microscope  slide.

In  Coast  Lake  the  largest  of  these  patches  of  rotifers  would
not  be  more  than  an  inch  in  diameter,  but  Priestley  tells  us  that
in  a  lake  on  the  west  side  of  the  Sound  they  formed  patches
"  as  large  as  a  man's  head  "  and  of  appreciable  thickness.
Though  this  rotifer  usually  attaches  itself  by  the  foot  when
feeding,  many  of  them  let  go  their  hold  and  go  swimming  in
the  water,  so  that  when  water  from  any  of  these  lakes  is  taken
for  drinking  it  can  be  seen  that  there  is  a  fair  sprinkling  of  red
grains  in  it  which  must  be  swallowed  with  the  water.

In  summer,  too,  in  very  shallow  ponds  and  trickling  streams
an  alga  of  a  brownish  green  colour  grows  in  large  translucent
sheets.

Life  in  the  Ice

As  soon  as  animals  were  obtained  from  the  weed  enclosed
in  the  ice  in  the  manner  described  above,  it  was  obvious  that
mere  freezing  did  not  kill  them.  They  were  first  got  in  the
shallow  lakes,  where  the  weed  could  be  seen  through  the  trans-
parent ice  at  the  margins.  There  were  plenty  in  all  the  shallow
lakes.  A  shaft  was  sunk  through  fifteen  feet  of  ice  to  the  bottom
of  Blue  Lake.  There  was  a  film  of  yellow  weed  covering  the
gravel  of  which  the  bottom  was  composed,  and  on  this  weed
several  kinds  of  rotifers  were  found  alive.  This  fact  seemed
more  remarkable  later,  when  we  found  that  Blue  Lake  did  not
melt  during  the  two  summers  that  we  spent  at  Cape  Royds.
This  means  that  the  animals  must  be  capable  of  remaining
frozen  for  years,  possibly  for  many  years,  without  being  killed.
Though  enclosed  in  the  ice,  there  was  no  means  of  knowing  how

237


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

low  temperatures  they  could  endure,  for  the  ice  in  the  lakes
might  never  be  so  cold  as  the  air.

A  few  simple  experiments  were  carried  out  with  the  object
of  finding  what  degree  of  cold  they  could  survive.  Afterwards
the  experiments  were  extended  in  other  directions  ;  they  were
heated,  they  were  immersed  in  various  saline  mixtures  ;  in
short,  they  were  submitted  to  various  tests  such  as  they  might
be  exposed  to  in  nature.  It  must  be  admitted  that  we  did  not
ascertain  what  limits  of  temperature  they  could  endure.  We
only  know  that  they  live  at  a  certain  low  temperature  ;  the
Antarctic  was  not  cold  enough  to  show  us  any  temperature
at  which  they  die.

From  facts  previously  ascertained  we  may  predicate  approxi-
mately what  is  the  limit  at  the  other  end  of  the  scale.  Animal
protoplasm  is  known  to  coagulate  at  a  point  well  below  the
boiling-point  of  water.  As  the  Antarctic  was  not  cold  enough,
it  was  intended  to  use  the  resources  of  civilisation  in  order  to
get  greater  cold,  by  the  use  of  liquid  air.  Unfortunately,  the
animals  had  to  be  subjected  for  some  weeks  to  an  almost
tropical  temperature,  and  were  found  to  be  all  dead  when  they
reached  Sydney.*

Tenacity  of  Life

To  test  the  degree  of  cold  which  they  could  stand,  blocks  of
ice  were  cut  from  the  lakes  and  exposed  to  the  air  in  the  coldest
weather  of  the  whole  winter.  By  boring  into  the  centre  of  the
blocks  we  found  that  they  were  as  cold  as  the  air.  A  tempera-
ture of  minus  40°  Fahr.  did  not  kill  the  animals.

Then  they  were  alternately  frozen  and  thawed  weekly  for
a  long  period,  and  took  no  harm.  They  were  dried  and  frozen,
and  thawed  and  moistened,  and  still  they  lived.  At  last  they
were  dried,  and  the  bottle  containing  them  was  immersed  in
boUing  water,  which  was  allowed  to  cool  gradually  and  still  a
great  many  survived.  Again  they  were  put  into  sea-water,
and  into  the  brine  from  the  bottom  of  Green  Lake,  which  is  so
salt  that  it  only  freezes  at  about  zero  (Fahr.).     They  were  left

*  Since  this  was  \mtten,  examination  of  the  rotifers  in  London  (in
September  1909)  has  shown  that  they  are  still  living,

288


THE  EMPERORS'  CONCLAVE


The  Gregarious  Rotifer,  which  forms  Blood-red  Patches  in  the  Lakes  at  Cape  Kotds


A  Single  Specimen  of  Gregarious  Rotifer.
The  Dark  Portion  is  the  Stomach,  and  the

OVAL     FORM     of     an     UnBORN    YoUNG     ROTIFER

*  CAN    BE    SEEN


The  commonest  Water-Bear  in  the  Cape
RoYDS  District'

To  face  pctfje  238


BIOLOGY

in  these  salt  waters  for  a  month,  yet  as  soon  as  they  were  trans-
ferred to  fresh  water  they  began  to  crawl  about  as  though
nothing  had  happened.

Such  is  the  vitality  of  these  little  animals  that  they  can
endure  being  taken  from  ice  at  a  minus  temperature,  thawed,
dried  and  subjected  to  a  temperature  not  very  far  short  of
boiling-point,  all  within  a  few  hours  (a  range  of  more  than  200°
Fahr.).  It  is  not  the  eggs  merely  that  survive  all  these  changes,
but  the  grown  animals.  These  are  animals  comparatively  high
in  the  scale.  The  rotifers  are  worms,  and  the  water-bears
(which  stood  the  same  tests)  are  cousins  to  the  insects  and
spiders.  Some  very  lowly  plants  are  not  killed  by  being  put
in  boiling  water,  and  doubtless  many  very  simple  animals  can
live  through  cold  greater  than  we  found  in  the  Antarctic.  Men
can  endure  exposure  for  a  time  to  very  much  lower  temperatures,
and  to  dry  heat  far  above  the  temperature  of  boiling-water,
but  the  case  of  the  rotifer  is  very  different.  Its  little  body
actually  takes  those  different  temperatures,  man's  body  does
not.

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  these  animals,  which  can  endure
such  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  and  other  unfavourable  condi-
tions, readily  d  e  when  left  in  cold  water  at  a  moderate  tempera-
ture. The  water  may  get  a  few  degrees  warmer  than  they  are
accustomed  to,  and  may  be  insufficiently  aerated,  but  there  is
nothing  to  alarm  them  and  induce  them  to  make  use  of  their
remarkable  means  of  protection  (whatever  they  may  be).
Exposed  to  low  temperatures  or  to  salt  water,  they  contract
into  little  round  balls,  and  in  this  state  they  are  (somehow)
safe.  In  the  cold  water,  which  is  just  slightly  unfavom-able,
they  see  no  cause  for  alarm,  and  so,  as  Mr.  Shackleton  aptly
expressed  it  when  told  about  it,  "  they  go  out  without  their
Burberries,"  that  being  the  great  sin  against  prudence  on  the
part  of  a  polar  explorer.

The  rotifer  is  not  as  a  rule  a  long-lived  animal.  I  have
heard  of  a  patriarch  of  five  months,  which  then  came  to  an
untimely  end.  Generally  their  span  is  to  be  measured  by  days
or  weeks,  or  at  any  rate  is  limited  by  a  single  season.  The
majority  of  the  creeping  rotifers  can  protect  themselves  against
drying  up  by  coating  themselves  with  a  kind   of  varnish,  and

289


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

so  tliey  prolong  what  would  be  an  ephemeral  existence  through
a  period  of  years.  As  all  activity  is  suspended  it  may  be
questioned  whether  the  animal  gains  anything  by  this  marvel-
lous protect  ve  capacity,  but  at  least  the  chances  of  the  race
surviving  are  greatly  increased  by  it.  The  Antarctic  rotifers
in  like  manner  exist  in  a  state  of  suspended  animation  when
frozen  in  ice  for  a  long  period.  If  the  lakes  in  which  they  live
are  only  melted  at  long  intervals  and  for  short  periods,  it  may
be  that  some  very  ancient  rotifers  are  alive  beneath  the  ice,
possibly  scores  of  years  old.

Viviparous  Rotifeus

Most  otifers  lay  eggs,  but  a  good  many  kinds  bring  forth
the  young  alive  and  very  completely  developed.  At  Cape
Royds,  twelve  kinds  of  creeping  rotifers  were  found.  Eight
of  these  were  well-known  kinds  which  elsewhere  lay  eggs,  and
at  Cape  Royds  they  are  reproduced  in  the  same  way.

There  were,  however,  two  other  kinds  at  Cape  Royds,
unknown  anywhere  else,  and  these  are  greatly  more  abundant
than  any  of  the  others.  It  has  been  told  how  one  of  them  forms
blood-like  patches  in  the  lakes.  Now,  these  two  species  bring
forth  living  young,  yet  they  belong  to  groups  which  usually
lay  eggs.  One  of  them  belongs  to  a  genus  {Adineta),  no  other
known  member  of  which  is  viviparous  ;  the  other  {Philodina
gregofria)  belongs  to  a  section  of  the  genus  in  which  all  the
previously  known  species  are  oviparous.

It  is  obvious  that  this  mode  of  reproduction,  being  unusual
in  the  groups  to  which  they  belong,  must  have  been  developed
as  an  adaptation  to  the  peculiar  conditions,  and  their  extra-
ordinary abundance  shows  that  it  is  perfectly  successful.  Yet
this  is  contrary  to  our  preconception  of  what  will  be  favourable
under  severe  condit  ons.  It  is  usually  supposed  that  eggs  are
better  protected  against  evil  conditions  than  the  adult  animals,
and  that  production  of  winter  eggs  ensures  the  continuation
of  the  race  when  the  animals  perish,  and  it  appears  to  be  gene-
rally so  among  the  lower  invertebrata.  Yet  here,  in  one  of  the
severest  climates  in  the  world,  the  process  is  reversed.  Not
only  are  the  anipaals  viviparous,  but  parents  and  young  are
240


Murray  holding  yoikg  Penguins


To  face  page  2-4  0


mi


'^^i: .  ..^A.^


BIOLOGY

alike  indifferent  to  prolonged  interruption  of  their  activity
by  freezing,  and  when  thawing  occurs,  development  proceeds
from  where  it  left  off.  Since  the  viviparous  rotifers  are  the  most
successful  in  the  struggle  for  existence  at  Cape  Royds,  it  is
rather  curious  to  note  the  total  absence  of  animals  of  the  genus
Rotifer,  which  are  all  normally  viviparous.

Life  in  Salt  Lakes

Green  Lake  is  very  saline.  We  do  not  yet  know  how  much
saline  matter  the  water  contains  when  the  lake  is  entirely  melted
and  mixed  up  by  wind.  The  fluid  obtained  from  under  the  ice
in  winter  is  a  very  dense  and  strong-smelling  brine.  There  is
abundance  of  life  in  this  lake,  but  the  number  of  kinds  is  much
less  than  in  the  other  lakes  Only  two  out  of  the  twelve  species
of  rotifers  known  at  Cape  Royds  live  in  it.  One  of  these  {Calli-
dina  constricta)  is  not  very  plentiful ;  the  other  {Adineta  grandis)
is  extremely  so.  This  animal,  while  developing  the  power  of
enduring  cold,  has  at  the  same  time  become  accustomed  to
living  in  salt  water.  Though  they  were  not  killed  by  the  Green
Lake  brine,  which  is  so  much  Salter  than  the  sea-water,  none
of  these  rotifers  have  been  found  in  the  sea.

Water-bears  in  Ice

Water-bears  were  found  to  live  while  frozen  in  ice  just  as
well  as  the  rotifers  did.  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  only
abundant  species  at  Cape  Royds  is  an  Arctic  species  {Macro-
hiotiLS  arcticus)  which  was  only  previously  known  in  Spitzbergen
and  Franz  Josef  Land,  and  which  has  not  yet  been  detected
in  the  various  collections  made  on  the  other  side  of  the  Antarctic
by  Bruce's  and  Nordenskj old's  expeditions.

Distribution  of  Rotifers,  &c.

Most  of  the  rotifers  and  other  animals  were  found  generally

distributed  in  all  the  lakes  visited.     These  covered  a  very  limited

area,  the  most  distant  being  no  more  than  thirty  miles  apart.

The  nature  of  the  microscopic  fauna  of  other  parts  of  thf

n  Q  24.1


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

Antarctic  is  scarcely  known.  Some  of  the  Cape  Royds  lakes
are  richer  than  others,  and  the  saline  lakes  are  poorer,  but  the
general  distribut  on  o  most  of  the  animals  suggests  easy  dis-
persal from  one  to  another.  How  are  they  convej^ed  ?  Only
two  methods  suggest  themselves  to  one  acquainted  with  the
local  conditions.  The  skua  gulls,  which  are  so  fond  of  bathing,
may  transfer  a  few  adhering  to  their  feet  v/hen  they  go  from
one  lake  to  another.  No  other  bird  is  at  all  likely  to  assist  in
this  process.  The  other  method,  which  seems  likely  to  be  the
general  one,  is  by  wind.  The  weed  at  the  margins  of  the  lakes
gets  exposed  and  dried  by  the  evaporation  of  the  water,  or  more
common  y  by  the  ablation  of  the  ice  from  the  surface.  It  is
then  very  light  and  easily  blown  about  by  the  wind,  carrying
its  freight  of  dormant  rotifers,  &c.

The  experiments  detailed  above  show  that  in  the  course  of  this
dispersal  they  are  scarcely  exposed  to  danger  at  all.  The  hardest
frost  or  the  hottest  sun  cannot  harm  them,  and  should  they
even  fall  into  the  sea,  they  v/ill  not  be  killed  if  the  plant  which
forms  a  raft  for  them  eventually  reaches  the  shore,  when  they
may  be  again  dried  and  driven  by  the  wind  till  they  find  a
suitable  place  to  resume  living.  A  difficulty  suggests  itself
in  considering  this  theory  of  dispersal  by  wind.  The  prevalent
wind-storms  are  all  from  the  southward.  Northerly  winds  of
force  enough  to  move  the  dried  plants  are  almost  unknown.
Though  northerly  winds  prevail  for  a  somewhat  greater  number
of  hours  during  the  year  than  the  southerlies,  they  are  very
light  airs.  Dispersal  would  then  be  easy  in  one  direction  only,
and  might  be  very  slow,  and  dependent  on  the  agency  of  the
gulls  in  other  directions.

Life  Among  Moss

The  moss-dwellers  are  now  well  recognised  among  micro-
scopic animals.  There  are  rotifers  and  water-bears  among  the
mosses  at  Cape  Royds,  but  the  mosses  themselves  are  not  very
abundant,  and  the  creeping  rotifers  have  found  a  better  home
among  the  weed  in  the  lakes.

Among  the  mosses  the  animals  lead  even  a  harder  life  than
they  do  in  the  lakes.  In  the  lakes,  when  they  do  melt,  the
242


Two  P'iMPEROR  Penguins


BIOLOGY

rotifers  enjoy  a  period  of  some  weeks  when  they  can  move  and
feed  and  multiply.  Among  mosses  they  feel  at  once  the  lowest
temperatures  of  the  air.  They  are  frozen  during  the  greater
part  of  the  year.  They  are  frozen  even  in  summer  for  the
greater  part  of  every  day.  Only  for  a  few  hours  daily,  for  a
short  time  in  the  height  of  summer,  the  moss  is  thawed  by
the  sun's  rays.  One  wonders  when  the  beasts  get  any  time  to
grow.  Yet  they  are  there  in  abundance.  They  are  all  of
different  kinds  from  the  lake-dwellers.  None  of  the  rotifers
were  recognised,  but  some  of  the  water-bears  were.

Biological  Problems

By  what  means  do  the  rotifers  survive  freezing  ?  It  is  not,
as  with  higher  animals,  that  they  can  keep  warm  in  spite  of  the
cold.  They  are  too  small  for  that.  Their  very  blood,  as  the
watery  fluid  filling  the  body  cavity  may  be  called,  freezes  very
soon  after  the  surrounding  water.

Whence  is  the  microscopic  fauna  derived  ?  Are  the  rotifers
and  water-bears  survivors  from  the  remote  time  when  a  milder
climate  prevailed  in  Antarctica,  when  the  country  v/as  covered
with  a  vegetation  of  the  higher  plants  and  the  coal-beds  were
in  course  of  formation  ?  Or  are  they  colonists  from  the  tem-
perate regions,  which  have  migrated  across  the  stormy  Antarctic
Ocean  under  present-day  conditions  ?

Some  of  the  facts  favour  both  theories.  The  small  number
of  species,  and  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  them  are  widely
distributed  over  the  world,  point  to  recent  immigration.

Penguins

Though  so  much  has  been  written  about  them,  the  penguins
always  excite  fresh  interest  in  every  one  who  sees  them  for  the
first  time.  There  is  endless  interest  in  watching  them,  the
dignified  Emperor,  dignified  notwithstanding  his  clumsy  waddle,
going  along  with  his  wife  (or  wives)  by  his  side,  the  very  picture
of  a  successful,  self-satisfied  happy,  unsuspicious  countryman,
gravely  bowing  like  a  Chinaman  before  a  yelping  dog — the  little
undignified  matter-of-fact  Adelie,   minding  his   own  business

243


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

in  a  way  worthy  of  emulation.  They  are  perfectly  adapted
to  a  narrow  round  of  life,  and  when  compelled  to  face  matters
outside  of  their  experience  they  often  behave  with  apparent
stupidity,  but  sometimes  show  a  good  deal  of  intelligence.

Their  resemblance  to  human  beings  is  always  noticed.  This
is  partly  due  to  the  habit  of  walking  erect,  but  there  are  truly
a  great  many  human  traits  about  them.  They  are  the  civilised
nations  of  these  regions,  and  their  civilisation,  if  much  simpler
than  ours,  is  in  some  respects  higher  and  more  worthy  of  the
name.  But  there  is  a  good  deal  of  human  nature  in  them  too.
As  in  the  human  race,  their  gathering  in  colonies  does  not  show
any  true  social  instinct.  They  are  merely  gregarious  ;  each
penguin  is  in  the  rookery  for  his  own  ends,  there  is  no  thought
of  the  general  good.  You  might  exterminate  an  Adelie  rookery
with  the  exception  of  one  bird,  and  he  would  be  in  no  way
concerned  so  long  as  you  left  him  alone.

Some  little  suggestion  of  altruism  will  appear  in  dealing
with  the  nesting  habits  of  the  Adelie.  Thieving  is  known,
among  the  Adelies  at  least.  One  very  pleasing  trait  is  shown,
which  they  have  in  common  with  man.  Eating  is  not  with
them  the  prime  business  in  life,  as  it  is  with  the  common  fowl
and  most  animals.  Both  Emperors  and  Adelies,  when  the
serious  business  of  nesting  is  off  their  minds,  show  a  legitimate
curiosity.  Having  fed  and  got  into  good  condition  they  leave
the  sea  and  go  off  in  parties,  apparently  to  see  the  country,
and  travel  for  days  and  weeks.

The  Emperoe

We  saw  the  Emperor  only  as  a  summer  visitor.  Having
finished  nesting,  fed  up  and  become  glossy  and  beautiful,  they
came  up  out  of  the  sea  in  large  or  small  parties,  apparently
to  have  a  good  time  before  moulting.  While  the  Adelies  were
nesting  they  began  to  come  in  numbers  to  inspect  the  camp.
Passing  among  the  Adelies,  the  two  kinds  usually  paid  no  atten-
tion to  one  another,  but  sometimes  an  Adelie  would  think  an
Emperor  came  too  close  to  her  nest,  and  a  curious  unequal
quarrel  would  ensue,  the  little  impudence  pecking  and  scolding,
and  the  Emperor  scolding  back,  with  some  loss  of  dignity.
244


Adelie  Penguins


To  face  page  244


BIOLOGY

Though  more  than  able  to  hold  her  own  with  the  tongue,  the
Adelie  knew  the  value  of  discretion  whenever  the  Emperor
raised  his  flipper.

They  were  curious  about  any  unusual  object  and  would
come  a  long  way  to  see  a  motor-car  or  a  man.  When  out  on
these  excursions  the  leader  of  a  party  keeps  them  together  by
a  long  shrill  squawk.  Distant  parties  salute  in  this  way  and
continue  calling  till  they  get  pretty  close.  A  party  could  be
made  to  approach  by  imitating  this  call.  The  first  party  to
arrive  inspected  the  boat,  then  crossed  the  lake  to  the  camp.
Soon  they  discovered  the  dogs,  and  thereafter  all  other  interests
were  swallowed  up  in  the  interest  excited  by  them.  After  the
first  discovery  crowds  came  every  day  for  a  long  time,  and  from
the  manner  in  which  they  went  straight  to  the  kennels  one  was
tempted  to  beUeve  that  the  fame  of  them  had  been  noised
abroad.

Ceremonies  of  Meeting

Emperors  are  very  ceremonious  in  meeting  other  Emperors
or  men  or  dogs.  They  come  up  to  a  party  of  strangers  in  a
straggling  procession,  some  big  important  aldermanic  fellow
leading.  At  a  respectful  distance  from  the  man  or  dog  they
halt,  the  old  male  waddles  close  up  and  bows  gravely  till  his
beak  is  almost  touching  his  breast.  Keeping  his  head  bowed
he  makes  a  long  speech,  in  a  muttering  manner,  short  sounds
following  in  groups  of  four  or  five.  Having  finished  the  speech
the  head  is  still  kept  bowed  a  few  seconds  for  politeness  sake,
then  it  is  raised  and  he  describes  with  his  bill  as  large  a  circle
as  the  joints  of  his  neck  will  allow,  looking  in  your  face  at  last
to  see  if  you  have  understood.  If  you  have  not  comprehended,
as  is  usually  the  case,  he  tries  again.  He  is  very  patient  with
your  stupidity,  and  feels  sure  that  he  will  get  it  into  your  dull
brain  if  he  keeps  at  it  long  enough.  By  this  time  his  followers
are  getting  impatient.  They  are  sure  he  is  making  a  mess  of
it.  Another  male  will  waddle  forward  with  dignity,  elbow
the  first  aside  as  if  to  say,  "  I'll  show  you  how  it  ought  to
be  done,"  and  go  through  the  whole  business  again.  Their
most  solemn  ceremonies  were  used  towards  the  dogs,  and  three
old  fellows    have    been    seen    calmly  bowing    and    speaking

245


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

simultaneously  to  a  dog,  which  for  its  part  was  yelping  and
straining  at  its  chain  in  the  effort  to  get  at  them.

Left  to  themselves  the  Emperor  penguins  seem  perfectly
peaceable,  and  no  sign  of  quarrelling  was  ever  noticed.  When
a  party  of  them  was  driven  into  a  narrow  space  they  resented
the  jostling,  and  flippers  were  freely  used,  making  resounding
whacks,  which  apparently  are  not  felt  through  the  dense  feathery
fur.  The  flipper  strikes  with  equal  facility  forward  or  back-
ward.

They  seem  to  regard  men  as  penguins  like  themselves.
They  are  quite  unsuspicious  and  slow  to  take  alarm,  so  long
as  you  stay  still  or  move  very  slowly.  If  you  walk  too  fast
among  them,  or  if  you  touch  them,  they  get  frightened  and
run  away,  only  fighting  when  closely  pressed.  As  one  slowly
retreats,  fighting,  he  has  a  ludicrous  resemblance  to  a  small
boy  being  bullied  by  a  big  one,  his  flipper  towards  the  foe
elevated  in  defence,  and  making  quick  blows  at  the  bully.  It
is  well  to  keep  clear  of  that  flipper  when  he  strikes,  for  it  is  very
powerful,  and  might  break  an  arm.

Emperors  were  killed  by  the  dogs,  but  it  is  likely  that  the
animals  hunted  in  couples  to  do  this.  A  long  fight  was
witnessed  between  an  Emperor  and  the  dog  Ambrose,  the  largest
of  our  dogs  native  to  the  Antarctic.  The  penguin  was  quick
enough  in  movement  to  keep  always  facing  the  dog,  and  the
flipper  and  long  sharp  bill  were  efficient  weapons,  as  Ambrose
seemed  to  appreciate.  Only  the  bill  was  used,  and  it  appeared
to  be  due  to  short  sight  that  the  blow  always  fell  short.  Many
of  the  apparently  stupid  acts  of  both  kinds  of  penguins  are
doubtless  to  be  traced  to  their  very  defective  sight  in  air.

The  Emperor  can  hardly  be  said  to  migrate  since  he  remains
to  breed  during  the  winter  darkness,  and  spends  the  summer
among  the  ice  or  on  shore  in  the  same  region.  Yet  he  travels
a  good  deal,  and  the  meaning  of  some  of  his  journeyings  remains
a  mystery.  The  visits  of  touring-parties  to  the  camp  have
been  described.  At  the  same  season  (early  summer),  when  the
inator-car  was  making  frequent  journeys  southward  to  Glacier
Tongue  with  stores  for  depot-laying,  we  crossed  on  the  way
a  great  many  penguin  tracks.  Many  of  these  were  beaten
roads,  where  large  parties  had  passed,  some  walking,  some
2iG


'«k.#v


Emperors  Visit  the  Adelie  Eookeey  ;  Ceeemoniai.  Bowing


Emperors  Bowikg  to  one  another


To  face  page  246


BIOLOGY

tobogganing.  They  all  trended  roughly  to  the  south-east,  and
the  v/ing-marks  and  footmarks  showed  that  they  were  all  out-
ward bound  from  the  open  sea  towards  the  shores  of  Ross
Island.  Some  of  the  roads  were  twelve  miles  or  more  from  the
open  sea.     There  were  no  return  tracks.

We  expected  to  find  that  thc}^  had  gone  in  to  seek  sheltered
moulting-places,  but  on  a  motor  trip  to  the  Turk's  Head  we
skirted  a  long  stretch  of  the  coast  and  found  no  Emperors.

On  journeys  they  often  travel  many  miles  walking  erect,
when  they  get  along  at  a  very  slow  shuffle,  making  only  a  few
inches  at  each  step.  In  walking  thus  they  keep  their  balance
by  the  assistance  of  the  tail,  which  forms  a  tripod  v/ith  the  legs.
^Vhen  on  a  suitable  snow  surface  they  progress  rapidly  by
tobogganing,  a  very  graceful  motion,  when  they  make  sledges
of  their  breasts  and  propel  themselves  by  the  powerful  legs,
balancing  and  perhaps  improving  their  speed  by  means  of  the
wings.

Eight  of  them  visited  the  motor-car  one  day,  near  Tent
Island,  sledging  swiftly  towards  us.  Two  of  them  were  very
determined  fighters  and  refused  to  be  driven  awav.  One
obstinate  phlegmatic  old  fellow,  who  wasn't  going  to  be  hurried
by  anybody,  did  learn  to  hustle  as  the  car  bore  down  upon
him.

The  Adelie

The  Adelie  is  always  comical.  He  pops  out  of  the  water
with  startling  suddenness,  like  a  jack-in-the-box,  ahghts  on
his  feet,  gives  his  tail  a  shake,  and  toddles  off  about  his  business.
He  always  knows  where  he  wants  to  go,  and  what  he  wants  to
do,  and  isn't  easily  turned  aside  from  his  purpose.

In  the  water  the  Adelie  penguins  move  rapidly  and  circle
in  the  same  way  as  a  porpoise  or  dolphin,  for  which  they  are
easily  mistaken  at  a  little  distance.  On  level  ice  or  snow  they
can  run  pretty  fast,  getting  along  about  as  fast  as  a  man  at  a
smart  walk.  They  find  even  a  small  crack  a  serious  obstruction,
and  pause  and  measure  with  the  eye  one  of  a  few  inches  before
very  cautiously  hopping  it.  They  flop  down  and  toboggan
over  any  opening  more  than  a  few  inches  wide.  They  can
climb  hills  of  a  very  steep  angle,  but  on  uneven  ground  they  use

247


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

their  flippers  as  balancers.  They  toboggan  with  great  speed
on  snow  or  ice,  or  even  on  the  bare  rocks  when  scared,  but  in
that  case  their  flippers  are  soon  bleeding.  Very  rarely  they
swim  in  the  water  like  ducks.  They  lie  much  lower  in  the  water
than  the  duck.  The  neck  is  below  the  surface  and  the  head  is
just  showing.

The  Adelie  is  very  brave  in  the  breeding-season.  His  is
true  courage,  not  the  courage  of  ignorance,  for  after  he  has
learned  to  know  man,  and  fear  him,  he  remains  to  defend  the
nest  against  any  odds.  When  walking  among  the  nests  one  is
assailed  on  all  sides  by  powerful  bills.  Most  of  the  birds  sit
still  on  the  nests,  but  the  more  pugnacious  ones  run  at  you
from  a  distance  and  often  take  you  unawares.  We  wore  for
protection  long  felt  boots  reaching  well  above  the  knee.  Some
of  the  clever  ones  knew  that  they  were  wasting  their  efforts
on  the  felt  boots,  and  would  come  up  behind,  hop  up  and  seize
the  skin  above  the  boot,  and  hang  on  tight,  beating  with  their
wings.  One  of  these  little  furies,  hanging  to  your  flesh  and
flapping  his  strong  flippers  so  fast  that  you  can  hardly  see  them
move,  is  no  joke.  A  man  once  stumbled  and  fell  into  a  colony
of  Adelies,  and  before  he  could  recover  himself  and  scramble
out  they  were  upon  him,  and  he  bore  the  marks  of  their  fury
for  some  time.

Some  birds  became  greatly  interested  in  the  camp,  and
wanted  to  nest  there.  One  bird  (we  believe  it  was  alvv^ays  the
same  one)  couldn't  be  kept  away,  and  came  daily,  sometimes
bringing  some  friends.  As  he  passed  among  the  dogs,  which
were  barking  and  trying  to  get  at  him,  he  stood  and  defied  them
all,  and  when  we  turned  out  to  try  to  drive  him  away,  he  offered
to  take  us  all  on  too,  and  was  finally  saved  against  his  will,  and
carried  away  by  Brocklehurst,  a  wildly  struggling,  unconquer-
able being.

The  old  birds  enjoy  play,  while  the  young  ones  have  no
leisure  for  play,  being  engrossed  in  satisfying  the  enormous
appetites  they  have  when  growing.  Four  or  five  Adelies  were
playing  on  the  ice-floe.  One  acted  as  leader,  ad'^'^anced  to  the
edge  of  the  floe,  waited  for  the  others  to  line  up,  raised  his
flipper,  when  they  all  dived  in.  In  a  few  seconds  they  all
popped  out  again,  and  repeated  the  performance,  always
248


Coy


Adelie  keeping  her  young  One  warm


To  face  page  248


An  Adelie  inspecting  a  Dog


Group  showing  a  Moulting  Penguin


To  face 'page.  248


Building    the  Ne.st


An  Adelie  calling  for  a  Mate  after  Commencikg  the  Nest  To  face  puye  248


BIOLOGY

apparently  directed  by  the  one.  And  so  they  went  on  for  hours.
While  the  Nimrod  was  frozen  in  the  pack,  some  dozens  of  them
were  disporting  themselves  in  a  sea-pool  alongside.  They
swam  together  in  the  duck  fashion,  then  at  a  squawk  from  one
they  all  dived  and  came  up  at  the  other  side  of  the  pool.

Early  in  October  they  began  to  arrive  at  the  rookery,  singly
or  in  pairs.  The  first  to  come  were  males,  and  they  at  once
began  to  scrape  up  the  frozen  ground  to  make  hollows  for  their
nests,  and  to  collect  stones  for  the  walls  with  which  they  sur-
round them.  The  digging  is  hard  work  and  is  done  by  the  feet,
the  bird  lying  proL-e  and  kicking  out  backward.  As  soon  as
any  apology  for  a  nest  is  ready  the  males  begin  displaying,  as
shown  in  the  accompanying  photogi-aph.  He  points  his  bill
vertically  upwards,  flaps  his  wings  slowly,  inflates  his  chest,
and  makes  a  series  of  low  booming  sounds,  which  increase  in
loudness,  then  die  away  again,  the  throat  vibrating  strongly.
Then  he  slowly  subsides  into  the  usual  attitude.  We  supposed
this  to  be  a  part  of  his  courtship,  or  as  some  phrased  it  "  advertis-
ing for  a  wife,"  but  there  is  good  reason  to  suppose  that  the
pairing  is  done  before  the  birds  leave  the  sea.  Generally  the
male's  displaying  passes  entirely  disregarded.  He  continues
it  all  through  the  nesting-season,  till  the  chicks  are  nearly
fledged  and  the  moulting-time  is  near.  An  epidemic  of  display-
ing often  took  the  whole  rookery  at  once,  when  the  hens  were
mostly  away  disporting  themselves  in  the  sea.

When  the  rookery  is  pretty  well  filled,  and  the  nest-building
is  in  full  swing,  the  birds  have  a  busy  and  anxious  time.  To
get  enough  of  suitable  small  stones  is  a  matter  of  difficulty,
and  may  involve  long  journeys  for  each  single  stone.  The
temptation  is  too  strong  for  some  of  them,  and  they  become
habitual  thieves.  The  majority  remain  stupidly  honest.
Amusing  complications  result.  The  bearing  of  the  thief  clearly
shows  that  he  knows  he  is  doing  wrong.  He  has  a  conscience,
at  least  a  human  conscience,  i.e.,  the  fear  of  being  found  out.
Very  different  is  the  furtive  look  of  the  thief,  long  after  he  is
out  of  danger  of  pursuit,  from  the  expression  of  the  honest
penguin  coming  home  with  a  hard-earned  stone.

An  honest  one  was  bringing  stones  from  a  long  distance.
Each  stone  was  removed  by  a  thiel  as  soon  as  the  owner's  back

249


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

was  turned.  The  honest  one  looked  greatly  troubled  as  he
found  that  his  heap  didn't  grow,  but  he  seemed  incapable  of
suspecting  the  cause.

A  thief,  sitting  on  its  own  nest,  was  stealing  from  an  adjacent
nest,  whose  honest  owner  was  also  at  home,  but  looking  un-
suspectingly in  another  direction.  Casually  he  turned  his
head  and  caught  the  thief  in  the  act.  The  thief  dropped  the
stone  and  pretended  to  be  busy  picking  up  an  infinitesimal
crumb  from  the  neutral  ground.

The  stone-gathering  is  a  very  strong  part  of  the  nesting
instinct.  It  was  kept  up  while  sitting  on  the  eggs,  and  if  at
a  late  stage  they  lost  their  eggs  or  young,  they  reverted  to  the
heaping  of  stones,  which  they  did  in  a  half-hearted  way.  Un-
mated  birds  occupied  the  fringe  of  the  rookery,  and  amused
themselves  piling  and  stealing  till  the  chicks  began  to  hatch
out.

After  the  two  eggs  were  laid  the  males  appeared  to  do  most
of  the  work.  At  any  hour  the  males  predominated,  a  very
few  pairs  were  at  the  nests,  and  relieving  guard  was  rarely
noticed.  The  females  were  never  seen  in  the  majority.  Those
which  had  been  recently  down  to  feed  could  be  recognised  by
the  fresh  Crustacea  round  the  nests.  Judging  by  this  sign,  it
would  seem  that  some  birds  never  leave  the  nest  to  feed  during
the  whole  period  of  incubation.  Many  birds  lost  their  mates
through  the  occasional  breaking  loose  of  a  dog.  These  birds
couldn't  leave  the  nests.

Rearing  the  Chicks

The  rookery  is  most  interesting  after  the  chicks  arrive.
Many  curious  things  happen  as  they  grow.  The  young  chicks
are  silvery  or  slaty  grey,  with  darker  heads,  which  are  for  the
first  day  or  so  heavy  and  hang  down  helplessly.  As  soon  as
they  are  hatched  the  mothers  take  equal  share  in  tending  them,
whatever  they  may  have  been  doing  before  that.  For  some
weeks  the  nest  cannot  be  left  untended  or  the  chicks  would
perish  of  cold  or  fall  victims  to  the  skuas.  The  parents  keep
regular  watches,  going  dow^n  in  turn  to  feed,  and  relieving  guard
is  an  interesting  ceremony.  The  bird  just  arrived  from  the
250


Mother  IJikd  leaves  the  Nest


Strangers  Displatinci   Inteukst  in  the  Lonely  Chicks


'Jo /ai\-  jiaije  250


Young  Adfxie  and  Parents


To  f ((,:!'  pa gi'  250


BIOLOGY

sea  hurries  to  the  nest.  It  is  anxious  to  see  the  chick,  and  to
feed  it ;  the  other  is  unwilling  to  resign,  but  at  last  reluctantly
gets  off  the  nest,  evidently  very  stiff,  stretches  itself,  and  hangs
about  for  a  while  before  going  down  to  the  sea.

When  the  young  ones  can  hold  up  their  heads  the  feeding
begins.  At  first  the  parent  tries  to  induce  its  offspring  to  feed
by  tickling  its  bill  and  throat.  The  old  bird  opens  its  mouth
and  the  chick  puts  its  head  right  in  and  picks  the  food  out  of
the  throat.  The  bird  can  be  seen  bringing  it  up  into  the  throat
by  an  effort.  If  the  young  is  unwilling  to  feed  some  food  is
thrown  right  up  on  to  the  ground  and  a  little  of  it  picked  up
again  and  placed  on  the  chick's  bill.  After  learning  the  way
there  is  no  need  for  such  inducement,  and  the  parents  are  taxed
to  satisfy  the  clamouring  for  more.

For  some  weeks  after  the  young  are  hatched  life  in  the
rookery  goes  smoothly  along.  One  parent  is  always  on  the
nest  and  the  young  birds  do  not  wander.  Then  the  trouble
begins.  The  young  begin  to  move  about  and  if  anything
disturbs  the  colony  they  run  about  in  panic.  As  they  don't
know  nest  or  parent  they  cannot  return  home.  They  meet
the  case  by  adopting  parents,  and  run  under  any  bird  they  come
to.  The  old  birds  resent  this  and  a  chick  is  often  pecked  away
from  nest  after  nest  till  exhausted.  The  skuas  get  some  at  this
time,  but  it  is  surprising  how  few.  Most  of  the  chicks  take
some  old  one  unawares  and  get  in  the  nest.  She  may  have  a
chick  already,  or  chicks,  but  as  she  doesn't  know  which  is  her
own  she  cannot  drive  the  intruder  away.  A  sorely  puzzled
bird  may  be  seen  trying  to  cover  four  gigantic  chicks.  Some
of  the  less  precocious  youngsters  stay  at  home  long  enough  to
get  to  know  the  nest,  and  can  find  their  way  home  after  wander-
ing a  few  yards.     Such  homes  keep  together  a  little  longer.

The  time  comes  when  both  parents  must  be  absent  together
to  get  enough  food  for  the  growing  chicks.  Then  the  social
order  of  the  rookery  breaks  down  and  chaos  begins.  The  social
condition  which  is  evolved  out  of  the  chaos  is  one  of  the  most
remarkable  in  nature,  yet  it  serves  its  purpose  and  saves  the
race.  A  kind  of  communism  is  established,  but  the  old  birds
have  no  part  in  it.  They  cherish  the  fiction  that  they  have
aests  and  children,  and  when  they  come  up  from  the  sea  after

251


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

deeding  it  is  their  intention  to  find  the  nest  and  feed  their  own
young  only.  The  young  ones,  for  their  part,  estabUsh  a  com-
munity of  parents,  and  yet  it  isn't  exactly  that  either,  though
it  works  out  as  if  it  were.  It  is  each  bird  for  itself.  The  chick
assumes  the  fiist  old  one  that  comes  within  its  reach  to  be  its
parent.     Perhaps  it  really  thinks  so,  as  they  are  all  alike.

An  old  bird,  coming  up  full  of  shrimps,  is  met  by  clamorous
youngsters  before  it  has  time  to  begin  the  search  for  its  hypo-
thetical home.  They  order  it  to  stand  and  deliver.  It  objects
and  scolds,  and  runs  off.  It  may  be  by  the  irony  of  fate  that
it  is  its  own  young  which  accost  it,  but  it  can't  know  that.
The  chickens  are  both  imperative  and  wheedling.  Then  begins
one  of  those  parent  hunts  which  were  so  familiar  at  the  end  of  the
season.  The  end  is  never  in  doubt  from  the  first.  Every  now
and  again  the  old  one  stops  and  expostulates.  This  shows
weakness.  There  is  no  indecision  on  the  part  of  the  young  one.
It  never  seems  anxious  as  to  the  result,  but  in  the  most  matter-
of-fact  and  persistent  manner  hunts  the  old  one  down.  The
hunts  are  often  long  and  exhausting.  One  chase  was  witnessed
at  Pony  Lake  beside  the  camp.  Nine  times  they  circled  the
lake,  and  the  hunt  was  not  over  when  the  watcher  had  to  leave.
On  that  occasion  they  must  have  travelled  miles.  At  the  end
the  old  one  stops,  and  still  spluttering  and  protesting,  delivers
up.  One  would  think  that  in  these  circumstances  the  weaker
chicks  would  go  to  the  wall,  but  it  does  not  appear  to  be  so.
There  are  no  ill-nourished  young  ones  to  be  seen.  Perhaps
the  hunts  take  so  long  that  all  get  a  chance.

A  few  days  after  the  eggs  began  to  hatch  there  was  a  severe
blizzard,  which  lasted  several  days.  Snow  was  banked  up  round
most  of  the  birds.  A  snowdrift  crossed  the  densest  part  of  the
rookery,  partly  burying  many  birds.  In  the  deepest  part  nests
and  birds  were  covered  out  of  sight,  and  the  only  indication  of
the  whereabouts  of  a  bird  was  a  little  funnel  in  the  snow,  at  the
bottom  of  which  an  anxious  eye  could  be  seen.  Many  less
deeply  buried  birds  had  freed  one  wing  or  both,  which  became
stiff  with  cold,  as  they  could  not  be  got  back  again.  The  snow,
melting  by  the  heat  of  their  bodies,  and  refreezing,  made  walls
of  ice  round  the  birds.  Many  got  alarmed  and  left  the  nests,
when  the  snow  fell  in  and  buried  them.  In  the  warm  sunny
252


An  Auklie  Kefcsing  to  be  Frightened


-^^^  '^^^


JIlrray's  Advances  Kesented


To  face  page  252


AdKLIE     IKMM;    TU    illdHKR    A    COUPLE    OF    U  KLI.-G  KOM  -N     ^TKAMiEUS  'J'djdfe  jlllf/e  252


BIOLOGY

weather  that  followed  the  melting  snow  filled  many  nests  with
pools  of  water.  Some  birds  showed  ingenuity  in  dealing  with
these  floods.  They  moved  their  nests,  stone  by  stone  (always
keeping  a  hollow  for  the  eggs  or  chicks),  as  much  as  their  own
width  till  they  reached  dry  ground.  While  the  snowdrift
remained  some  birds  whose  nests  were  buried  scraped  hollows
in  the  snow  and  collected  a  few  stones.  On  a  moderate  estimate
about  half  the  young  perished  in  this  blizzard.

The  old  Adelies  do  not  mind  the  cold.  Their  thick  blubber
and  dense  fur  sufficiently  protect  them.  In  a  blizzard  they
will  lie  still  and  let  the  snow  cover  them.  Going  to  the  rookery
once  after  a  blizzard  I  could  see  no  penguins  ;  they  had  entirely
disappeared.  Suddenly  at  some  movement  or  noise  I  was
surrounded  by  them  ;   they  had  sprung  up  out  of  the  snow.

Domestic  Entanglements

While  the  Adelie  appears  to  be  entirely  moral  in  his  domestic
arrangements,  his  stupidity  (or  his  short-sightedness,  which
causes  him  to  seem  stupid)  gives  rise  to  many  domestic  complica-
tions. No  doubt  the  presence  of  our  camp  upset  the  social
economy,  and  probably  when  undisturbed  nothing  of  the  kind
would  occur.  He  has  little  sense  of  locality  and  one  little  heap
of  stones  is  very  like  another,  yet  pairs  seem  to  have  no  means
of  recognising  one  another  but  by  the  rendezvous  of  the  nest.
Husbands  and  wives,  parents  and  children,  do  not  know  one
another,  but  if  found  at  the  nest  are  accepted  as  bond  fide.

All  the  birds  go  to  their  nests  without  hesitation  when  they
come  from  the  sea  by  the  familiar  route,  but  if  taken  from  their
nests  to  some  other  part  of  the  rookery  some  find  their  way
back  without  difficulty,  others  are  quite  lost.  They  are  most
puzzled  when  moved  only  a  little  away  from  home,  and  they
will  fight  to  keep  another  bird's  nest  while  their  own  is  only  a
couple  of  feet  away.  A  bird  will  defend  an  egg  or  chick  in  the
nest,  but  if  it  is  removed  just  outside  it  will  peck  at  it  and
destroy  it.

Considering  these  facts  it  will  be  evident  that  if  the  rookery
be  disturbed  confusion  follows.  A  mere  walk  among  the  nests
caused   innumerable   entanglements.     One   bird   would   leave

253


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

the  nest  in  fright,  flop  down  a  yard  away  beside  a  nest  already
occupied,  or  on  a  nest  left  exposed  by  another  scared  bird.
Then  one-sided  fights  would  begin,  one  bird  attacking  another
under  the  impression  that  it  had  usurped  its  nest,  the  rightful
owner  troubling  little  about  the  vicious  pecking  he  was  receiv-
ing, sitting  calmly  in  conscious  rectitude.  A  fight  of  this  kind
has  been  watched  for  an  hour  at  a  time,  three  neighbouring
nests  having  been  disturbed.  One  bird  had  got  into  another's
nest,  a  second  was  trying  to  establish  a  claim  to  the  occupied
nest  of  a  third,  and  meanwhile  the  chicks  of  number  one  were
neglected  in  the  cold.  A  bird  which  had  no  family  came  and
covered  the  chicks,  but  looked  conscious  of  wrongdoing  and
kept  ready  to  bolt  on  a  second's  notice.  All  these  birds  but
the  last  wanted  their  own  nests  and  were  within  a  yard  of  them
without  knowing  it.

In  all  such  cases,  even  when  a  bird  got  established  on  the
wrong  nest,  there  was  always  an  adjustment  afterwards.  When
they  calmed  down  they  became  uneasy,  probably  observing
the  landmarks  more  critically,  and  would  even  leave  a  nest
with  chicks  for  their  own  empty  nest.  A  chick  removed  from
the  nest  and  put  alongside  was  not  recognised,  and  the  old  bird
never  seemed  to  connect  the  facts  of  the  empty  nest  and  the
chick  beside  it.  If  a  chick  were  taken  from  the  nest  under  the
old  bird's  very  eyes  and  held  in  front  of  it,  it  was  always  the
chick  that  was  viciously  attacked,  not  the  aggressor.

Some  experiments  were  tried  on  them  in  order  to  trace  the
workings  of  the  penguin  mind.  If  a  man  stood  between  a  bird
and  its  nest  so  as  to  prevent  it  from  getting  on  to  it,  the  bird
would  make  many  attempts  to  reach  home,  rushing  furiously
at  the  man.  After  a  time  it  would  appear  to  meditate,  and  then
walk  off  rather  disconsolately,  make  a  tour  of  the  colony  to
which  it  belonged,  and  approach  the  nest  from  another  side.
It  appeared  greatly  astonished  that  the  intruder  was  still  there.
This  curious  trait  was  often  seen.  It  is  like  the  ostrich  burying
its  head  in  the  sand  and  imagining  it  is  safe,  or  like  a  man
refusing  to  believe  his  own  eyes.  It  appears  to  think  that  if
it  takes  a  turn  round,  or  comes  to  its  nest  from  the  other  side,
the  horrible  vision  will  disappear.

A  bird  was  taken  from  a  nest  which  had  a  chick  in  it  and
254.


^''


A  View  of  the  Eookeky  after  a  Blizzard


%


Birds  Kistng  from  Snow


To  face  page  254


BIOLOGY

put  down  at  a  little  distance.  Meantime  tlie  chick  was  put
in  a  neighbour's  nest.  Presently  the  bird  came  running  up.
It  started  back  on  seeing  the  empty  nest,  not  in  alarm  or  fear,
but  exactly  as  if  thinking,  "  I've  come  to  the  v/rong  house  !  "
and  trotted  of!  to  a  distant  part  of  the  rookery.  Her  reasoning
seemed  to  be  this  :  "  There  vvas  a  chick  in  my  nest,  therefore
this  empty  nest  can't  be  mine."  She  couldn't  imagine  the  chick
leaving  the  nest,  and  so  never  searched  for  it.  It  was  only  a
yard  from  the  nest  all  the  time.  After  half  an  hour's  searching
in  vain  for  any  place  like  home  she  returned  to  the  nest,  and
accepted  the  restored  chick  as  a  matter  of  course.

A  lost  chick  was  never  sought  for.  There  would  be  no  use  ;
it  couldn't  be  recognised.  On  account  of  this  peculiarity  we
were  able  to  make  many  readjustments  of  the  family  arrange-
ments. When  the  blizzard  destroyed  so  many  chicks  we
distributed  the  young  from  nests  where  there  were  two  to  nests
where  there  were  none.  They  were  usually  adopted  eagerly
and  the  plan  was  quite  successful.

Wlien  both  birds  are  at  a  nest  that  is  disturbed,  or  when
the  mate  comes  up  from  feeding  to  relieve  guard,  there  is  an
interchange  of  civilities  in  the  form  of  a  loud  squawking  in
unison,  accompanied  by  a  curious  movement.  The  birds'
necks  are  crossed,  and  at  each  squawk  they  are  changed  from
side  to  side,  first  right  then  left.  The  harsh  complaining
clamour  which  they  make  was  for  long  mistaken  for  quarrelling.

A  bird  returning  from  the  sea  came  to  the  wrong  nest  and
tried  to  enter  into  conversation  with  the  occupant,  who  would
have  nothing  to  do  with  him.  She  knew  her  mate  had  just
gone  off  for  the  day,  and  wouldn't  be  such  a  fool  as  to  come  back
too  early,  so  she  sat  still,  indifferent  to  the  squawking  of  the
other.  A  look  of  distress  came  into  his  face  as  he  failed  to  get
any  response,  and  he  was  slow  to  realise  that  he  had  made  a
mistake.

A  small  colony  was  found  with  about  two  dozen  large  chicks,
unattended  by  any  old  birds.  They  were  driven  across  the
lake  to  a  larger  colony.  Half-way  over  a  few  old  birds  were
squatted,  enjoying  a  rest.  When  the  chicks  saw  them  they
ran  up  to  them  joyfully,  saying  :  "  Here's  pa  and  ma,  hooray  !  "
To  their  surprise  they  got  the  reverse  of  a  cordial  welcome,

255


THE    HEART     OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

being  driven  away  with  vicious  peckings.     They  were  driven
on  to  the  larger  colony  and  were  swallowed  up  in  it.

The  Adelies  are  not  demonstrative  of  their  affections.  It
is  difficult  to  discover  if  they  have  any  beyond  the  instinctive
affection  for  the  young.  The  pairing  appears  to  be  a  purely
business  matter,  and  the  mates  don't  even  show  any  power  to
recognise  one  another.  A  penguin  was  injured  by  the  dogs,
but  it  seemed  possible  that  it  might  recover,  so  we  did  not  at
once  put  it  out  of  pain.  In  a  couple  of  days  it  died.  Shortly
after  we  noticed  a  live  penguin  standing  by  it.  We  removed
the  dead  bird  to  a  distance,  and  after  a  while  found  the  other
standing  beside  it  as  before.  It  was  the  general  opinion  that
it  was  the  dead  bird's  mate  which  had  found  it  out.  Such  an
action  is  entirely  opposed  to  what  we  expect  after  a  long  study
of  their  habits.  There  are  always  plenty  of  dead  birds  about
a  rookery,  and  the  living  go  about  entirely  indifferent  to  them.
It  is  puzzling  in  any  point  of  view,  but  it  is  less  difficult  to  believe
that  the  bird  found  its  dead  mate  than  that  it  took  an  interest
in  a  dead  stranger.

Altruism

When  the  young  birds  are  well  grown,  if  there  is  an  alarm
they  flock  together,  and  any  old  birds  present  in  the  colony
form  a  wall  of  defence  between  the  young  and  the  enemy.  This
habit  has  given  rise  to  the  belief  that  they  are  somewhat  com-
munistic in  their  social  order,  and  that  the  defence  of  the  colony
is  a  concerted  action.  It  is  not  so.  Each  bird  is  defending  its
own  young  one  only,  and  will  often  fight  with  another  of  the
defending  birds,  or  peck  at  any  young  one  which  comes  in  its
way.

There  are  real  instances  of  altruism  or  kindness  to  strangers.
Our  passage  through  the  rookery  frightened  away  the  parent
of  a  very  young  chick.  A  bird  passing  at  the  distance  of  a
few  yards  noticed  it  and  came  over  to  it.  He  cocked  his  head
on  one  side  and  looked  at  it,  as  if  saying  :  "  Hullo  !  this  little
beggar's  deserted  ;  must  do  something  for  him."  He  tickled
its  bill,  as  the  parents  do  when  coaxing  the  very  young  chicks
to  feed,  but  it  was  too  much  frightened  to  feed.  After  coaxing
it  in  this  way  for  some  time  he  turned  away  and  put  some  food
256


Emperoks  on  the  March


Kmperors  at  rest


To  face  page  25  G


BIOLOGY

upon  the  ground,  and,  lifting  a  little  in  his  bill,  he  put  some  on
each  side  of  the  chick's  bill.  Just  then  the  rightful  parent
returned  and  the  helper  ran  off.  This  was  not  an  isolated  case,
but  was  observed  on  several  occasions.

One  incident  seemed  to  reveal  true  social  instinct.  From
a  small  colony  of  about  two  dozen  nests  all  the  eggs  but  one
were  taken  in  order  to  find  out  if  the  birds  would  lay  again.
As  it  turned  out  they  did  not.  The  birds  sat  on  their  empty
nests  for  some  time,  then  they  disappeared.  When  the  time
came  for  the  solitary  egg  to  hatch,  about  a  dozen  of  the  nests
were  reoccupied  and  the  birds  took  their  share  in  defending
the  one  chick.

Departure  of  the  Young

When  they  have  shed  most  of  their  down  the  young  birds
congregate  at  the  edge  of  the  sea.  They  cease  from  hunting
the  old  ones  for  food,  and  appear  to  be  waiting  for  something.
When  the  right  time  comes,  which  they  seem  to  know  perfectly,
they  dive  into  the  sea,  sometimes  in  small  parties,  sometimes
singly,  disappear  for  a  time,  and  may  be  seen  popping  up  far
out  to  sea.  They  dive  and  come  up  very  awkwardly,  but
swim  well.

It  is  marvellous  how  fully  instinct  makes  these  birds  in-
dependent. The  parents  do  not  take  them  to  the  water  and
teach  them  to  swim.  They  haven't  even  the  example  of  the
old  birds,  which  stay  behind  to  moult.  At  an  early  age  they
become  independent  of  their  own  parents,  and  earn  their  living
by  hunting  any  old  bird  they  find.  Though  they  have  spent
their  lives  on  land,  and  only  know  that  food  is  something
found  in  an  old  bird's  throat,  when  the  time  comes  they  leave
the  land  and  plunge  boldly  into  the  sea,  untaught,  to  get  their
living  by  straining  Crustacea  out  of  the  water  in  the  same  way
as  the  whale  does.

Some  of  our  party  reported  that  they  saw  penguins  teaching
the  young  to  swim,  but  if  this  ever  happens  it  is  not  general.
Time  and  again  the  young  have  been  watched  leaving  as  de-
scribed, entirely  on  their  own.  At  that  season  nearly  all  the
old  birds  are  in  the  moult  and  never  venture  into  the  water.

Like  the  Emperor,  the  Adelie  is  fond  of  travelling  when
n  R  257


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

family  cares  are  off  his  mind.  The  great  blizzard  which  wiped
out  half  the  rookery  left  hundreds  of  old  birds  free.  They  began
to  explore  the  adjacent  country  in  bands.  The  round  of  the
lakes  was  a  favourite  trip  and  broad  beaten  roads  marked  this
route.  Tracks  also  led  to  the  summits  of  some  of  the  hills,  though
the  short-sighted  Adelie  could  hardly  go  there  for  the  view.

There  was  no  general  trek  southwards,  such  as  the  Emperors
made,  yet  the  Southern  Party  found  tracks  of  two  at  a  distance
of  some  eighty  miles  from  the  sea.

Nebuchadnezzar  and  Nicodemus

These  names  dignified  two  penguin  chicks.  While  chaos
reigned  in  the  rookery  I  found  them  exhausted  and  covered
with  mire,  having  been  hunted  and  pecked  through  the  rookery.
They  were  taken  to  the  house,  put  in  a  large  cage  in  the  porch,
and  fed  by  hand  with  sardines  and  fish-cakes.  The  feeding
was  disagreeable.  They  didn't  like  the  food  and  shook  it  out
of  their  bills  in  disgust.  So  it  was  necessary  to  force  it  down
their  throats  till  it  was  beyond  their  reach.

In  a  few  days  they  became  quite  tame  and  recognised  those
who  fed  them.  Familiar  only  with  our  peculiar  method  of
feeding  them,  one  of  them  indicated  when  he  was  hungry  by
taking  my  finger  into  his  bill.  We  shortened  their  names  to
Nebby  and  Nicky,  and  they  answered  to  them,  but  they  answered
equally  readily  to  the  common  name  of  Bill.  The  sounds  of
the  rookery  reached  them  and  sometimes  greatly  excited  them,
and  they  made  desperate  efforts  to  get  through  the  netting
of  their  cage.  At  these  times  we  would  take  them  out  for  a
walk.  They  made  no  attempt  to  go  to  the  rookery,  and  were
rather  frightened.

Nebuchadnezzar  was  a  very  friendly  little  fellow,  and  would
follow  me  about  outside,  and  come  running  when  called.  The
feeding  was  unnatural,  and  for  this  reason,  doubtless,  in  a  few
weeks  they  died.

The  Ringed  Penguin

A  single  ringed  penguin  appeared  at  Cape  Royds  at  the  end
of  the  breeding-season,  just  as  the  Adelies  were  beginning  to
258


i


EETURN  OF  THE  PENGUINS


BIOLOGY

moult.  No  ringed  penguin  had  been  seen  in  this  part  of  the
Antarctic  before.  It  was  evidently  a  stray  one  which  had  come
ashore  to  moult.  It  is  about  the  same  size  as  the  Adelie,  but
is  more  agile.  It  was  at  the  season  when  the  young  Adelies
go  off  to  sea.  At  a  little  distance  the  ringed  penguin,  among
a  crowd  of  old  Adelies,  looked  somewhat  like  a  young  Adelie
with  the  white  throat.  I  picked  him  up  by  the  legs  to  investi-
gate. To  my  surprise  he  curled  round  and  bit  me  on  the  hand.
An  Adelie  could  not  do  so.  A  closer  examination  showed  what
he  was.

The  Skua  Gull

Some  hundreds  of  skuas  nested  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Cape  Royds.  At  Green  Lake  and  Coast  Lake  they  were  aggre-
gated in  what  were  known  as  skuaries.  Coast  Lake  was  the
most  populous  skuary.  Elsewhere  they  were  widely  scattered
over  the  lower  hills.  There  is  no  doubt  that  they  are  not  social
or  even  gregarious  birds,  and  that  they  congregate  at  such
places  as  Coast  Lake  out  of  their  fondness  for  freshwater
bathing.  They  do  not  love  their  kind,  nor  have  they  any
inducement  to.     Skua  will  prey  on  skua.

They  are  callous,  greedy,  vulturous  and  disgusting.  They
may  be  seen  sitting  in  a  circle  round  a  sick  or  wounded  penguin,
and  they  have  been  suspected  of  meditating  an  attack  on  the
eyes  of  a  sleeping  man.  When  the  young  penguins  are  hatching
they  squat  down  right  among  the  nests  waiting  for  a  chance  to
snatch  one.

When  they  have  eggs  or  young  they  swoop  down  on  an
intruder  in  a  menacing  manner,  which  is  rather  alarming
when  one  knows  how  sharp  and  strong  are  their  bills  and  claws.
They  rarely  strike,  however,  thinking  better  of  it  at  the  last
moment,  and  swerving  suddenly  upwards.  When  they  do
strike  it  is  probably  through  miscalculation.  Some  birds  were
known  which  did  habitually  strike  at  every  swoop.  These
blows  did  no  damage,  as  if  they  come  in  front  one  involuntarily
ducks,  and  from  any  other  direction  they  strike  the  cap  only.

They  were  very  bitter  against  dogs,  and  gave  no  attention
to  men  when  they  were  present.  Several  of  the  dogs  had  learned
to  eat  skua  eggs,  and  the  birds  no  doubt  knew  of  this.     They

259


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

have  a  harsh  cry,  and  the  shrill  chorus  that  went  up  when  we
had  failed  to  find  a  nest  sounded  very  much  like  laughter.
They  are  very  quarrelsome.  When  the  rookery  was  strewn
with  fresh  penguin  carcases,  victims  of  some  dogs  which  had
broken  loose,  the  skuas  would  fight  viciously  over  one,  when
there  were  plenty  for  all.

The  skua  has  no  true  courage  like  the  penguin.  On  one
occasion  we  snared  a  skua  and  dragged  it  by  a  string  into  the
midst  of  a  small  colony  of  penguins  in  order  to  see  how  these
ancient  enemies  would  behave  when  brought  together.  The
penguins  nearest  to  the  skua  pecked  at  it  without  leaving  their
nests.  It  bit  and  scratched  for  a  very  short  while,  and  then
gave  it  up  and  made  no  attempt  to  defend  itself,  though  it  was
not  hurt.  As  it  lay  motionless  some  one  called  out  that  the
poor  thing  was  killed,  and  we  began  to  feel  remorse  for  our
cruel  experiment,  but  when  thrown  up  into  the  air  the  skua
did  not  come  down  again.  The  bird's  one  virtue  is  cleanliness.
It  enjoys  its  bath.  Wherever  there  is  a  pool  of  fresh  water
the  skuas  may  be  seen  splashing  with  great  gusto,  and  they
will  bathe  in  a  sea-pool  on  occasion.

Whales

In  summer  whales  were  locally  abundant,  though  nowhere
else  in  such  numbers  as  we  saw  in  the  Bay  of  Whales  at  the
Great  Barrier.  As  long  as  there  was  open  water  small  schools
of  finners  and  larger  ones  of  killers  were  seen  daily  in  McMurdo
Sound.  Even  when  the  Sound  was  densely  filled  with  pack,
they  came  to  the  little  sea-pools.  For  a  long  time  in  winter
no  whales  were  reported.

The  finner,  with  its  little  fin  about  half-way  along  the  back,
and  its  long  pointed  head,  came  very  near,  and  often  grazed
the  ship.  One  came  vertically  up  close  by  the  ship's  side,  the
snout  ten  or  twelve  feet  out  of  the  water.  As  usual  in  such
emergencies  none  of  the  cameras  was  ready.

The  killers  were  often  in  family  parties,  or  a  few  families
together,  some  bulls  of  great  size,  with  magnificent  triangular
fin,  like  a  boat's  sail,  six  or  eight  feet  long,  the  cows  with  much
smaller,  often  curved  fin,  the  calves  following  close  by  their
260


.^wtSS**'*^'


■■"■■W'R'IS^i^Brisi*^


Killer  Whales  Solndinc;


I ,,inc,-  paije  260


Seal  suckling  Youxg,  and  taking  no  Xotice  of  the  3Iotor  Car


Joyce  lteting  a  Baby  Seal


Ti)  faci!  piiije  260


Skua  Gulls


To  fiu-c  pa/zc  2fi0


BIOLOGY

mothers'  tails  to  avoid  getting  lost.  Some  very  small  calves
were  seen  in  January.

The  humpback,  with  little  rounded  fin  set  far  back,  and  the
bottle-nose  were  rarely  seen.

The  killer  sometimes  rested  his  head  on  the  edge  of  a  floe
and  looked  about  with  his  wicked  little  eye  for  a  seal  or  penguin.
These  he  would  try  to  knock  off  by  rising  under  the  floe,  and
on  one  occasion  a  party  of  three  men,  who  spent  an  anxious
twenty-four  hours  adrift  on  a  floe,  related  that  the  killers  were
trying  this  experiment  with  them.

Seals

Of  the  four  Antarctic  seals  only  the  Weddell  was  common
at  Cape  Royds.  The  crab-eater  kept  to  the  pack  and  rarely
came  on  shore.  The  sea-leopard  and  the  Ross  seal  were  very
rare.

The  Weddell  seal,  or  false  sea-leopard,  is  a  large  and  heavy
animal.  The  skin  and  blubber  of  one  large  seal  made  a  full
sledge-load.  When  it  lies  peacefully  on  the  ice  it  is  a  shapeless
lump.  If  disturbed,  as  for  instance  by  putting  your  foot  on  it
or  throwing  a  dog  at  it,  it  shows  ludicrous  astonishment,  curves
both  ends  towards  the  intruder,  opens  its  mouth  astonishingly
wide,  gasps  and  bleats  with  fear,  its  eyes  starting  from  its  head.
It  is  slow  to  think  of  escaping,  though  its  blow-hole  may  be
close  by,  and  prefers  to  roll  over  sideways.

Sometimes  the  Weddells  pretend  to  be  very  fierce,  and  open
the  mouth  to  emit  a  kind  of  bellow,  but  they  have  no  belief
in  their  own  fierceness  and  are  usually  looping  away  before
the  roar  has  time  to  frighten  the  enemy.  In  autumn  as  many
as  one  hundred  Weddells  have  been  counted  together  on  the
ice  of  one  little  bay.  Even  in  winter  they  came  up  through
the  tide-cracks  occasionally,  though  sometimes  several  weeks
would  pass  without  any  being  seen.  They  used  the  holes  which
we  kept  open  for  dredging  as  blow-holes,  and  sometimes  they
reached  there  in  a  very  exhausted  condition,  as  evidenced  by
their  distressed  breathing.  At  these  seasons  there  might  be
no  other  breathing-space  for  a  long  distance.

The  nearest  rookery  of  Weddells  was  at  Inaccessible  Island,

261


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

about  eight  miles  from  the  camp.  When  the  first  young
were  born  early  in  November  we  ran  out  frequently  by
motor-car  to  watch  them.  They  were  in  no  way  alarmed  by
the  car.

The  newly  born  calves,  in  their  rough  grey  fur,  already  tried
the  intimidating  roar,  but  there  was  more  fear  than  fierceness
in  it.  They  can  snap  their  lower  jaws  against  the  upper  very
rapidly,  but  without  much  force.

Some  of  the  mothers  were  very  cowardly,  and  made  for  the
blow-holes,  leaving  the  young  to  their  fate.  Others  made  a
determined  stand  against  the  intruders  and  looked  so  much
like  business  that  we  didn't  care  to  venture  too  near,  and  a
few  carried  the  war  into  the  enemy's  country  and  ran  at  us
and  chased  us  off.  The  rough  coat  is  cast  and  the  smooth
spotted  skin  like  the  adult  appears  at  a  very  earlv  age.  In
the  middle  of  November  we  could  scarcely  find  any  that  hadn't
more  or  less  moulted.

The  crab-eater  can  move  much  faster  on  ice  or  land  than
the  Weddell.  When  not  frightened  it  progresses  in  the  same
way  as  the  Weddell,  arching  the  back  in  caterpillar  fashion  very
rapidly.  When  alarmed  and  excited  it  goes  along  for  a  short
time  in  another  manner,  sweeping  the  tail  end  from  side  to  side,
much  as  a  fish  swims,  and  actually  gets  forward  a  little  in  this
way.  A  crab-eater  is  able  to  hold  its  own  against  one  dog,
though  it  might  be  overcome  by  several.  A  fight  between  one
and  the  dog  Erebus  lasted  for  an  hour,  if  it  could  be  called  a
fight  where  they  never  came  to  close  quarters.  The  lighter
dog  circled  about,  snapping  at  the  seal's  neck  and  flippers.
The  crab-eater  always  turned  smartly  enough  to  be  ready  for
him  and  frequently  made  a  feint  of  moving  in  one  direction,
then  made  a  sudden  turn  and  snap,  drawing  his  head  close  down
to  his  shoulders  and  shooting  it  out  as  he  snapped,  just  as  the
sea-leopard  is  said  to  do.  It  was  much  more  fatiguing  for  the
heavy  seal  than  for  the  dog,  and  it  breathed  heavily,  making
a  continuous  sound  with  its  nostrils  like  snoring,  but  at  the  end
of  the  hour  it  was  still  able  to  take  care  of  itself.  It  became
very  angry  as  the  dog's  attack  continued,  whereas  the  Weddell,
after  any  amount  of  baiting,  only  seems  more  and  more
astonished.
262


Seals  Emerging  fkom  the  Water  at  tfieir  Blow-iioles  To  face  pa  c/i' 2  6  2


Weddell  Seals  Quarrelling


A  Weddell  Seal  asleep


To  face  page  262


BIOLOGY


The  Dogs


Our  dogs,  though  of  an  originally  Siberian  strain,  were
reared  in  the  mild  climate  of  New  Zealand,  being  the  descendants
of  dogs  left  there  some  generations  ago  by  a  returning  expedition.
They  were  small,  and  showed  evidence  of  crossing  with  ignoble
races.  Yet  they  showed  no  sign  of  degeneracy  in  their  ability
to  endure  the  unaccustomed  severe  climate,  and  on  the  short
journeys  for  which  they  were  used  they  did  splendid  work.

They  revelled  in  the  cold,  enjoyed  nothing  so  much  as  a  roll
and  a  fight  in  a  snowdrift,  and  wouldn't  use  the  kennels  provided
for  them,  preferring  to  curl  up  in  the  snow,  at  most  in  the  shelter
of  the  kennels,  or  to  lie  on  an5i:hing  dark,  such  as  a  coal-bag.
They  showed  some  characteristics  of  the  wild  northern  dog,
and  some  had  traces  of  their  wolf  ancestry.  Gwen  was  purely
wolfish  in  her  wildness  and  impatience  of  restraint,  and  her  son
Terror  was  like  her.  It  was  attempted  once  to  muzzle  Gwen,
after  some  penguin-hunting  exploit,  but  she  nearly  went  mad
in  her  efforts  to  get  rid  of  the  muzzle,  turning  and  twisting  so
rapidly  that  the  eye  couldn't  follow  her,  and  she  had  to  be  freed
from  it.

The  struggle  for  kingship  was  not  so  sanguinary  as  is  common
with  such  dogs.  Old  Scamp's  authority  was  never  seriously
disputed,  though  Trip  and  Wolf  occasionally  fought  him.
Scamp  was  not  the  heaviest  or  strongest  dog  but  he  downed
them  all  by  his  vehemence.  The  females  were  very  jealous,
and  were  apt  to  eat  one  another's  litters.  They  make  very
good  mothers.  A  litter  was  born  on  the  Nimrod  while  going
south.  After  we  landed  one  of  these  pups  was  killed  by  the  fall
of  a  house  during  a  blizzard.  The  body  was  flung  out  on  the
hill-side,  some  distance  away.  The  mother,  Possum,  discovered
It  and  nursed  it  for  a  whole  day.  Though  somewhat  fierce
and  quarrelsome  among  themselves,  the  dogs  were  very  friendly
to  man.  They  would  take  the  severest  beating  when  they  had
been  misbehaving,  and  be  friends  the  moment  it  was  over.

The  young  pups,  born  in  the  Antarctic,  were  very  self-
reliant  little  things.  When  very  young  they  used  to  issue
from  their  shelter,  run  out  in  the  snow  and  bark  in  defiance
of  everything.     They  got  their  drinking-water  for  a,  long  time

263


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

in  the  form  of  snow,  and  when  summer  came  and  water  was
given  to  them,  they  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  it  at  first.
They  soon  learned  to  appreciate  it,  and  to  consider  it  as  the
most  vakiable  of  all  things,  for  of  food  there  was  always  super-
abundance. In  late  summer,  when  the  snow  had  nearly  all
disappeared,  and  the  lake  by  the  house  was  frozen,  there  came
a  sort  of  water  famine.  We  had  no  time  to  break  the  ice  and
give  them  water  more  than  once  a  day.  They  got  pretty  thirsty
in  the  sun,  and  some  of  them  showed  a  good  deal  of  intelligence
in  asking  for  and  dealing  with  water.

One  day,  on  going  out  of  the  house,  I  heard  the  dog  Roland
barking  furiously.  Roland  was  tied  at  a  good  distance  from
the  house,  and  for  some  time  I  paid  no  attention  to  the  barking.
When  at  last  I  looked  in  the  right  direction,  Roland  picked  up
her  water-tin  and  waved  it  frantically  over  her  head.

An  old  dog.  Wolf,  was  so  convinced  of  the  value  of  water
that,  when  a  bowlful  was  given  to  him,  he  did  not  drink  it  all
at  once,  but  tried  to  keep  a  reserve  for  future  use.  He  tried
to  bury  it,  as  dogs  habitually  do  with  food.  He  carried  the
bowl  carefully  in  his  mouth,  placed  it  in  a  hollow,  and  covered
it  up  with  gravel.  Of  course  he  lost  the  water,  but  the  attempt
deserved  success.

In  their  hunting  they  showed  much  intelligence.  They
took  much  greater  liberties  v/ith  the  helpless  Weddell  seal  than
with  the  more  active  and  aggressive  crab-eater ;  and  as  for  the
sea-leopard,  they  seemed  to  know  enough  to  leave  him  alone
altogether.  They  hunted  in  couples  or  parties,  and  so  got  the
better  of  the  penguins.  The  penguins  appear  to  be  provided
with  efficient  defensive  weapons,  but  the  dogs  learned  where
to  seize  them  safely.  While  one  dog  kept  the  attention  of  a
penguin  in  front,  another  slipi^ed  round  behind  it  and  snapped
at  its  leg.  Some  bolder  dogs  attacked  the  penguin  in  front,
waiting  for  a  chance  to  bite  at  the  neck.  One  snap  finished
the  fight,  the  dogs  usually  leaving  the  disabled  bird  to  chase  a
fresh  one.

After  learning  that  penguin-hunting  was  a  punishable
offence  the  dogs  became  very  cunning.  They  slipped  away
on  their  hunting  expeditions,  without  attracting  attention,
and  the  first  intimation  we  had  of  it  was  the  distant  barking
264


f^^ffn  ^^'^  ■  ■'


Some  of  the  Dogs


To  face  paye  264


BIOLOGY

as  they  surrounded  some  poor  bird.  Though  they  could  have
but  httle  experience  of  the  effect  of  shooting  they  stood  in
wholesome  terror  of  a  gun.  Daisy  and  Gwen  especially  knew
that  a  gun  could  hurt  at  a  distance,  and  that  flight  was  useless,
so  they  slunk  home  when  a  shot  was  fired,  keeping  cover  as  far
as  possible,  and  hid  below  the  house.

Daisy  was  the  most  inveterate  hunter,  and  regularly  took
her  children  away  to  teach  them  to  become  self-supporting.
At  last  her  propensity  led  her,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt,  to
a  painful  death.  She  once  took  her  whole  family  out  hunting
on  the  pack-ice.  The  pack  was  blown  out  and  the  dogs  were
given  up  for  lost.  Some  days  later  they  all  came  back,  having
evidently  had  a  trying  experience,  their  faces  matted  with
blood  and  sea-salt.  Emboldened  perhaps  by  this  escape,
Daisy  again  went  hunting  on  the  pack,  taking  Roland  with
her,  and  again  the  pack  went  out  to  sea.  Roland  returned,
but  Daisy  never  did.

When  taken  for  a  walk  through  the  rookery,  the  dogs  bore
themselves  with  a  most  virtuous  air,  looking  with  indifference
at  the  penguins  as  if  they  had  no  idea  what  they  were  good  for.
When  detected  penguin-worrying,  old  Scamp  made  for  his
kennel,  and  sat  there  pretending  he  had  never  been  away,
looking  very  innocent,  overlooking  the  fact  that  he  was  dripping
with  blood.

Marine  Biology

Towards  mid-winter  the  ice  in  a  little  bay  bounding  Cape
Royds  on  the  south  was  strong  enough  to  permit  of  dredging
at  depths  of  from  six  to  twenty  fathoms.  The  bottom  here
was  a  fine  black  mud,  with  larger  and  small  pebbles  of  kenyte
in  it.  In  the  mud  were  embedded  large  shell-fish,  the  fragile
purple  Pecten,  the  siphon-bearing  Anatina,  and  others.  On
the  pebbles  were  growing  bush-like  sponges,  and  large  sea-
anemones  adhered  to  them.  One  or  two  reddish  brown  sea-
weeds were  plentiful  and  once  or  twice  we  brought  up  great
turnip-like  fixed  tunicates.  Ugly  and  greedy  big-headed  fishes
(Nototheia)  and  equally  greedy  carnivorous  whelks  of  a  large
size  {N eobuccinum)  crowded  to  any  bait  put  down.

Among  the   sponges   and   seaweeds   were   numerous   other

265


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

forms  of  life,  tube-dwelling  worms  with  beautiful  flower-like
heads  of  tentaeles  ;  delicate  shells,  almost  invisible  to  the  naked
eye,  many  larger  and  smaller  Crustacea,  though  none  of  any
considerable  size  ;  hairy  worms  like  the  sea-mouse  with  a  double
row  of  phosphorescent  lamps,  flashing  in  succession  from  head
to  tail.  When  captured  these  worms  have  a  spiteful  habit  of
breaking  themselves  up  into  small  pieces.

In  this  region  there  is  a  prevalence  of  yellow  and  orange-
red  colours.  The  commonest  sponges  are  yellow  ;  so  is  the  sea-
anemone.     Some  of  the  corals  are  very  bright  orange.

Most  of  the  Crustacea  and  many  worms,  star-fish,  &c.,  are
orange-red  or  yellow.  All  these  are  bottom  forms  of  life.  With
the  available  methods  of  collecting  very  little  was  got  in  the
open  water  of  the  sea,  away  from  the  bottom,  only  a  few  small
Crustacea,  some  diatirus,  and  occasionally  a  few  sea-butterflies
(Pteropods)  of  large  size  and  red  colour.

The  phosphorescence  remarked  in  some  of  the  bottom
worms  was  also  found  in  the  copepods  of  the  open  sea.  The
phosphorescence  is  displayed  by  cold-blooded  animals,  living
in  a  temperature  always  some  degrees  below  the  freezing-point
of  fresh  water,  and  it  is  shown  equally  throughout  the  winter.

Dredging  at  greater  depths  than  twenty  fathoms  was  rarely
possible,  owing  to  the  nearness  of  open  water  in  McMurdo  Sound,
always  within  a  mile  of  the  camp.  From  this  cause  we  did  no
deep  dredging  at  all,  only  on  one  or  two  occasions  at  nearly
one  hundred  fathoms.  From  the  mouth  of  the  bay  down  to  the
depth  of  one  hundred  fathoms  the  bottom  sloped  steeply.
Whether  from  this  cause  or  owing  to  the  strong  current  in  the
sound,  there  was  no  mud  in  this  zone  of  the  bottom.  In  the
shallower  parts  there  were  large  and  small  kenyte  pebbles,  but
at  fifty  fathoms  and  upwards  no  pebbles  were  got.  The  bottom
appears  to  be  carpeted  with  a  dense  growth  of  living  things,
as  if  the  dredge  merely  bit  and  was  immediately  drawn  up  it
was  usually  full  of  stuff.

In  this  deeper  region  the  animal  life  differed  greatly  from
that  in  the  muddy  bay,  though  many  kinds  were  found  through-
out both  places.  Here  we  first  got  the  long-legged  sea-spiders
[Pycnogonida),  glassy  sponges,  the  white  shells  of  Lima,  the
delicate  lace-corals,  &c.  The  sponges  were  especially  abundant
266


BIOLOGY

and  in  some  variety,  though  rarely  of  much  beauty.  One  glassy
sponge  resembled  an  egg,  with  bundles  of  long  glassy  spicules
projecting  at  regular  intervals  from  the  smooth  surface.

In  this  region  there  was  less  orange  and  yellow  colouring,
the  tendency  being  to  white.  Most  of  the  glass  sponges  and
many  of  the  horny  sponges  were  white  or  pale  cream-coloured,
and  the  Lima  shells  and  lace  corals  were  white.  There  were
still  some  yellow  sponges  and  most  of  the  sea-spiders  were
reddish.  At  this  depth  we  got  the  same  fish  as  in  the  bay.  A
fish-trap,  baited,  was  put  down  at  twenty-five  fathoms.  It
caught  some  dozens  of  pretty  large  big-heads  the  first  time  it
was  drawn,  and  almost  nothing  afterwards,  unless  left  for  a
considerable  time.  This  seems  to  indicate  that  they  are  pretty
plentiful,  but  that  they  grub  very  closely  among  the  sponges
and  don't  travel  fast  or  far,  so  that  the  first  haul  exhausts  the
region  immediately  around  the  trap.  When  the  trap  was  brought
up  great  red  worms  hung  like  ribbons,  one  yard,  or  even  two
yards,  below  the  trap.  These  could  contract  till  they  would
lie  on  the  palm  of  the  hand.


267


APPENDIX  II

GEOLOGICAL   OBSERVATIONS  IN  ANTARCTICA
BY  THE  BRITISH  ANTARCTIC  EXPEDITION

1907-1909

By  Professor  T.  W.  EDGEWORTH  DAVID,  B.A.,
F.R.S.,  AND  RAYMOND  E.  PRIESTLEY,  Geologist  to
THE  Expedition

Introductory

rilllE  conclusions  provisionally  adopted  in  these  notes  are
_i_  based  on  the  geological  collections  and  observations
obtained  by  the  Southern  Party,  the  Western  Party,  and  the
Northern  Party  of  our  expedition,  as  well  as  by  the  whole  party
when  in  winter  quarters  at  Cape  Royds.

The  only  determinable  fossil  as  yet  found  in  the  great
Beacon  sandstone  formation  of  Antarctica,  the  piece  of  coni-
ferous wood,  figured  in  these  notes,  was  obtained  from  the
collection  made  by  the  Southern  Party.

As  a  result  of  the  explorations,  chiefly  by  Nordenskjold,
Larsen,  Gunnar  Andersson,  Bruce,  Charcot  and  Ar^towski,
we  now  know  the  following  about  the  portion  of  Antarctica
south  of  America.

In  parts  of  Graham  Land  there  must  be  a  foundation  plat-
form of  gneiss  and  gneissic  granite,  as  boulders  of  these  rocks,
several  metres  in  diameter,  are  found  deposited  on  the  plateau
of  Seymour  Island,  to  the  east  of  Graham  Land,  as  recorded
by  Gunnar  Andersson.

In  1903  the  French  Antarctic  expedition,  under  the  com-
mand of  Dr.  Charcot,  landed  on  the  South  Shetland  Islands,
and  after  exploring  Palmer  Archipelago  and  Gerlache  Strait
268


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

wintered  at  Wandel  Island.  An  interesting  and  detailed
account  of  the  geological  specimens  collected  has  been  given
by  Dr.  E.  Gourdon.*  Amongst  the  rocks  described  are  horn-
blende granites,  quartz  diorites,  uralitic  gabbros,  trachy-
andesites  with  hornblende  and  mica,  dacites  and  andesites
with  associated  tuffs,  labradorite  rocks,  diabase  basalts,  micro-
granites  with  pyroxene  and  soda-hornblende.  He  also  describes
crystalline  schists,  quartzites  and  quartz  veins.

Dr.  Gourdon  concludes  that  these  rocks  are  part  of  the
eruptive  series  of  the  chain  of  the  Andes.  Nordenskjold  is
of  the  same  opinion  in  regard  to  the  eruptives  of  Graham  Land.

In  the  South  Orkneys  fossil  graptolites,  associated  with
radiolarian  jaspers,  were  discovered  by  Bruce's  expedition.
These  prove  the  existence  there  of  older  palaeozoic  rocks,  con-
sidered to  be  of  Ordovician  age.  As  far  as  we  can  learn  there
is  as  yet  no  evidence  of  the  presence,  in  that  region,  of  rocks
older  than  Ordovician,  unless  some  of  the  crystalline  rocks  of
south-western  Graham  Land,  such  as  those  of  Borchgrevink
Nunatak,  &c.,  antedate  that  period.

The  abundant  fossil  plants  discovered  by  Nordenskjold's
expedition  at  Hope  Bay,  at  the  north-eastern  end  of  Graham
Land,  show  that  in  that  region,  now  continuously  covered
with  ice  and  snow,  there  existed  in  Jurassic  times  a  rich  and
diversified  flora  embracing  ferns,  cycads  and  conifers.  Amongst
the  plants  found  at  Hope  Bay  the  genera  Sagenopteris,  Thinn-
feldia,  Cladophlebis,  Pterophyllum,  and  Otozamites  have  been
recorded  as  well  from  the  Trias-Jura  rocks  of  Eastern  Australia
and  India,  some  of  the  forms  being  found  also  in  South  Africa
and  in  the  Argentine  Republic.  The  distribution  is  shown  on
the  following  table  :


S.  Africa

India

Argentine

Australia

Sagenopleris  f    .

—

X

—

X

Thinnfeldia

X

X

X

X

Cladophlebis

X

X

—

X

Ptercphyllum

—

X

X

X

Otozamites

-  —

X

—

X

*  Expedition  antarctique  franyaise,  1903-05,  commandde  par  le  Dr.  Jean
Charcot.  Sciences  naturelles,  Documents  scientifiques,  G6ographie  physique,
Glaciologie,  Petrographie.  Par  E.  Gourdon,  Docteur-es-Sciences  de  I'Universit^
de  Paris.

t  This  list  has  been  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  W.  S.  Dun,  Palaeontologist,  Geol.
Sur.  N.S.  Wales,  and  of  Sydney  University.

269


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

So  far  no  trace  has  been  found  in  this  flora  of  any  representa-
tives of  the  Glossopteris  Jlora  of  Gondwana  Land,  such  as  the
Phyllotheca  discovered  by  Gunnar  Andersson  in  the  Falkland
Islands.  Evidently  in  Jurassic  time  a  mild  and  a  moist  climate
prevailed  in  Antarctica.

The  abundance  of  cretaceous  Ammonites  collected  by  the
Nordenskjold  expedition  at  Snow  Hill  Island,  to  the  east  of
Graham  Land,  points  to  a  continuance  of  mild  conditions  into
cretaceous  time.  The  fossil  Araucaria,  Beech,  &c.,  unearthed
by  the  Nordenskjold  expedition  at  Seymour  Island,  adjoining
Snow  Hill  Island  on  the  north-east,  prove  that  these  mild  con-
ditions were  further  prolonged  into  some  part  of  Tertiary  time.

In  marine  strata,  also  of  Tertiary  age,  and  considered  by
Wilckens*  to  belong  to  Upper  Oligocene  or  Lower  Miocene,
the  Nordenskjold  expedition  found  numerous  bird  bones  since
referred  to  five  new  genera  of  penguins,  f  besides  two  vertebrae
of  a  big  mammal,  referred  to  the  genus  Zeuglodon.  The  marine
fossils  associated  with  these  remains  enabled  Wilckens  to  come
to  the  above  decision  as  to  the  geological  age  of  the  formation.

At  Cockburn  Island,  to  the  north  of  Seymour  Island,  Gunnar
Andersson  describes  a  Pecten  conglomerate  160  metres  above
sea-level.  This  marine  formation  he  considers  to  be  probably
of  Pliocene  age,  and  the  equivalent  of  the  Parana  beds  of  the
north  of  the  Argentine  Republic  or  of  the  Cape  Fairweather
beds  of  Southern  Patagonia.

Nordenskjold's  expedition  proved  that  during  the  maximum
glaciation,  in  late  geological  time,  the  inland  ice  rose  300  metres
higher  than  it  does  at  present,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Borch-
grevink  Nunatak,  at  the  south-east  end  of  Graham  Land.
This  was  proved  by  the  maximum  height  of  erratic  boulders
found  on  the  slopes  of  the  nunatak,  above  the  present  level
of  the  surface  of  the  inland  ice- sheet.  Gunnar  Andersson
mentions  the  occurrence  of  raised  beaches  at  Cockburn  Island
and  also  at  Sidney  Herbert  Sound.

*  Die  Meeresablagerungen  der  Kreide-und  Tertiarablagerungen  in  Patago-
nien.     Neues  Jahr.  f.  Min.     Beilage,  Band  21,  1905.

t  These  are  stated  by  Gunnar  Andersson  to  be  Anthropornis  Nordenskjoldi,
Pachyteryx,  Espheniscus  Gunnari,  Delphinornis  Larsenii  and  Ichthyopteryx
gracilis.  Vide  Bulletin  of  the  Geological  Institution  of  the  University  of  Upsala,
vol.  vu.,  1904-5,  No.  13-14,  p.  45.

270


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

These  pieces  of  evidence  prove  an  emergence  of  the  land,
since  the  maximum  glaciation,  to  the  extent,  at  all  events,  of
a  few  metres,  possibly  as  much  as  forty  metres.

In  the  portion  of  the  Antarctic  visited  by  the  German
expedition,  1902,  under  the  leadership  of  Professor  E.  von
Drygalski,  the  following  information  has  been  obtained  :

In  latitude  66°  48'  South,  longitude  89°  30'  East,  there
rises  at  the  edge  of  the  inland  ice  a  ridge-shaped  remnant  of
a  volcanic  cone,  the  Gaussberg.  This  attains  a  height  of  366
metres  above  the  sea,  and  is  formed  of  leucite-basalt  tuff  and
leucite-basalt  rich  in  olivine,  lumps  up  to  the  size  of  one's  fist
being  found  in  the  lava.  The  top  and  slopes  of  the  Gaussberg,
as  recorded  by  Dr.  Philippi,  are  stre^vn  with  erratics.*  These
are  formed  of  whitish  garnet-bearing  gneiss,  a  darker  biotite-
gneiss,  mica-schist,  fragments  of  red  quartzite,  &c.  The
crystalline  rocks  are  considered  to  be  probably  of  Archaean
age.

In  the  Victoria  Land  region  of  the  Antarctic  the  researches
of  Ross,  Borchgrevink,  and  above  all  of  Captain  R.  F.  Scott
and  the  geologist  of  the  Discovery  expedition,  H.  T.  Ferrar,
prove  that  there  is  developed  in  that  region  an  ancient  complex
of  gneisses  and  gneissic  granites,  with  mica-schists,  calc-schists
and  quartzites,  and  that  these  rocks  are  capped  for  a  great
distance  by  a  formation  almost  horizontally  bedded,  called  by
Ferrar  the  "  Beacon  sandstone."  A  little  argillaceous  lime-
stone was  observed  by  him  associated  with  this  sandstone.
Ferrar  found  plant  remains  in  the  sandstone,  but  in  such  an
altered  condition  that  they  could  not  be  determined.  Ferrar
has  given  a  detailed  and  very  valuable  description  of  the  geology
of  Victoria  Land  and  Ross  Island  explored  by  him  on  this
expedition.  The  petrology  of  the  rocks  collected  has  been
worked  out  by  G.  T.  Prior,  f

Amongst  volcanic  rocks  are  comprised  hornblende-basalts,
olivine-basalts,    dolerites,    basalt    tuffs,    kenytes,    phonolitic

*  Veroffentlichungen  des  Instituts  fur  Meereskunde  und  des  Geographischen
Instituts  an  der  Universitat,  Berlin.  Heft  5,  Octr.  1903.  Deutsche  Siidpolar-
Expedition  auf  dem  SchiS  "  Gauss."

t  National  Antarctic  Expedition,  1901-1904,  Natural  History,  vol.  i.,
Geology.     British  Museum,  1902.

271


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

trachytes  and  phonolites.  Amongst  the  foundation  rocks  of
South  Victoria  Land,  Prior  records  crystalhne  Hmestones  with
chondrodite,  gneiss,  granites,  diorites,  camptonites,  kersantites
and  banakite.  Amongst  the  sedimentary  rocks  he  refers  to
sandstones,  somewhat  carbonaceous,  as  well  as  black  shaly
to  slaty  rocks.

The  volcanic  rocks,  as  pointed  out  by  Prior,  are  closely
allied  in  chemical  composition  and  mineral  constitution  to  the
volcanic  series  described  by  Dr.  P.  Marshall,  from  the  neighbour-
hood of  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.  It  may  be  noted  that  these
volcanic  rocks  are  developed  partly  along  the  coast-line  of
Victoria  Land,  partly  in  islands  arranged  in  lines  subparallel
to  this  coast-line.

It  is  worthy  of  comment  that  the  volcanic  zones  of  Victoria
Land  were  not  definitely  traced  by  Mr.  Shackleton  in  the  ranges
reached  by  him  in  his  farthest  south  journey  this  year.  No
trace  whatever  of  volcanic  rocks  was  noticed  by  him,  either
in  situ  or  in  the  moraines  of  the  vast  coast-range  which  bounds
the  Great  Ice  Barrier  on  its  south-west  side,  near  the  latitude
of  84°  to  86°  South.

Physical  Geography

These  observations  relate  wholly  to  the  region  between  the
meridians  of  170°  East  and  150°  West.  The  shore-line  in  this
region  of  the  Antarctic  continent  is  deeply  indented  by  the
Ross  Sea.  This  commences  just  south  of  the  parallel  of  70°
and  extends  to  the  parallel  of  78°  South.  Ross  Sea  is  bounded
at  its  east  side  by  dense  belts  of  pack-ice  and  low  snowbergs,
which  prevent  any  view  of  the  coast-line  being  obtained  except-
ing near  the  extreme  south-east  corner  of  Ross  Sea  ;  there,
Captain  Scott,  in  the  Discovery,  found  a  new  range  of  mountains
rising  from  a  land  afterwards  known  as  King  Edward  VII.
Land.  Southwards  Ross  Sea  is  bounded  by  the  cliff  of  the  Great
Ice  Barrier,  which  has  an  extent  of  about  470  miles  in  an  east
and  west  direction.  This  cliff  averages  about  150  ft.  in  height.
In  places  it  sinks  to  nearly  sea-level  in  low  gullies.  The  surface
beyond  this  Great  Barrier,  except  for  certain  broad  shallow  undu-
lations and  small  snow-ridges  (sastrugi)  is  practically  level.
Mr.  Shackleton,  on  his  southern  journey,  proved  that  it  extends
272


Peiestley  beside  an  erratic  Granite  Boulder,  lying  on  Kenyte  at  Cape  Royds


Toj'nrr  iiiiijr  -r,-!


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

southward  for  at  least  350  miles.  Westwards  the  Great  Barrier
cliff  terminates  in  high-pressure  ridges  against  Cape  Crozier,
the  easternmost  point  of  Ross  Island.

Ross  Island,  with  its  towering  volcanic  cones,  rises  like  some
vast  castle  at  the  end  of  this  huge  white  wall.  It  is  formed
of  four  large  volcanic  cones.  Mounts  Terror,  Terra  Nova,  Erebus
and  Bird.  The  three  first  volcanoes  appear  to  be  situated  on
an  east  and  west  line  of  fracture.  Another  fracture  line  probably
passes  in  a  southerly  direction  from  Mount  Bird  through  Mount
Erebus.  Thus  Erebus  may  be  said  to  be  at  the  junction  of
two  important  systems  of  earth  fracture.  Still  farther  south
several  smaller  craters  are  situated  on  what  may  be  termed
the  Erebus  Fracture  Zone,  including  that  of  Crater  Hill,  near
Hut  Point,  the  winter  quarters  of  the  Discovery  expedition.
Still  farther  south  are  the  volcanic  islands.  White  Island  and
Black  Island,  and  somewhat  to  the  south-south-west  Mount
Discovery  with  the  long  volcanic  promontory  trending  from  it
to  the  east-south-east,  known  as  Minna  Bluff.

In  the  gaps  between  these  islands  and  promontories  the  mass
of  the  Great  Barrier  moves  slowly  but  surely  seawards  towards
the  narrow  south-westerly  prolongation  of  Ross  Sea  known
as  McMurdo  Sound.  Pressure  ridges  of  ice  in  this  part  of  the
Great  Barrier,  as  well  a.s  actual  measurements  taken,  prove
that  this  part  of  the  Barrier  is  moving  seawards,  both  to  the
west  and  to  the  east  of  Ross  Island.

McMurdo  Sound  is  bounded  on  the  south  by  the  low  terminal
cliff  of  the  Great  Barrier  only  a  few  feet  in  height.  This  low
ice-cliff  extends  westwards  across  McMurdo  Sound,  for  a  distance
of  about  thirty  miles,  to  the  magnificent  coast  range  of  Victoria
Land.  Majestic  peaks  of  gneiss,  granite,  sandstone  and  lime-
stone capped  by  eruptive  rocks  rise  almost  sheer  from  the  coast
to  altitudes  of  from  8000  up  to  12,000  ft.  Throughout  its
entire  length  from  Cape  North  and  the  mountains  recently
discovered  by  our  expedition  farther  west,  down  to  the  parallel
of  86°  South,  a  distance  of  about  1100  miles,  the  ranges  form
a  slightly  elevated  border  to  an  inland  plateau.  The  con-
tinuity of  these  plateau  ranges  is  interrupted  at  intervals
by  wide  valley-like  depressions,  occupied  by  vast  glaciers.
These  glaciers  slope  steeply  to  the  sea,  or  to  the  surface  of  the
II  S  273


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

Great  Barrier,  and  are  heavily  crevassed.  Farther  inland
they  ascend  by  gentle  slopes,  interrupted  occasionally  by  ice-
falls,  to  the  neve  fields  of  the  plateau.

As  one  traces  the  coast-line  northwards,  from  opposite
Ross  Island  in  the  direction  in  which  the  Northern  Party
travelled  to  the  South  Magnetic  Pole,  one  encounters  some
very  remarkable  features  which  materially  modify  the  form  of
the  coast-line.  The  first  of  these  is  called  on  the  chart  of  the
Antarctic  Ocean,  prepared  from  observations  under  the  direc-
tion of  Captain  R.  F.  Scott,  the  Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier
Tongue.  It  is  about  six  miles  in  width,  and  projects  twenty
miles  or  more  seawards  from  the  coast-line.  There  is  reason
to  suppose  that  this  Barrier,  as  well  as  the  one  just  to  be  de-
scribed, is  floating  at  its  seaward  extremity.

North  of  the  Nordenskjold  Barrier  is  the  Drygalski  Barrier
or  Ice  Tongue.  This  is  a  huge  glacier  actively  moving  forwards
into  the  sea.  It  is  a  true  glacier  at  its  landward  end,  with
immense  seracs,  ridges  and  crevasses.  The  portion  which
projects  seawards  beyond  the  coast  is  about  twenty  miles  in
width,  and  thirty  miles  in  length.  Towards  its  seaward  end,
and  also  on  its  northern  side,  where  it  receives  the  bulk  of  the
snow  drifted  by  southerly  blizzards,  it  partakes  rather  of  a  flat-
topped  barrier  type  than  of  the  glacier  type  with  its  characteristic
rugged  surface.

Just  inland  to  the  north  of  the  Drygalski  Ice  Barrier  Tongue
is  a  fine  bay.  Terra  Nova  Bay,  inland  from  which,  near  its
northern  end,  rises  the  majestic  Mount  Nansen.  This  is  a  flat-
topped  mountain,  obviously  capped  by  sedimentary  rocks,  and
as  a  matter  of  fact  it  has  shed  lumps  of  limestone  and  sandstone
into  the  moraines  beneath  it.

Still  farther  north  the  beautifully  symmetrical  volcanic
cone  of  Mount  Melbourne  attains  a  height  of  8337  ft.  The
volcanic  rocks  with  which  it  is  associated  trend  sharply  to  the
south-west,  terminating  in  the  high  rugged  cliffs  of  Cape  Wash-
ington.

To  the  north-east  of  Mount  Melbourne  is  the  deep  indenta-
tion known  as  Wood  Bay,  and  thence  the  coast  bends  abruptly
to  the  east.  It  would  seem  indeed  as  though  Mount  Melbourne
is  probably  situated  on  some  east  and  west  line  of  earth  fractures,
274


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

like  Mounts  Terror  and  Terra  Nova.  The  coast-line  then  trends
nearly  north  again,  forming  the  west  boundary  of  Lady  Newnes
Bay.  Then  it  trends  once  more  east  to  Cape  Jones,  an  extinct
volcano.  Just  off  Cape  Jones  lies  the  large  volcanic  island,
Coulman  Island.  From  here  the  coast  again  trends  chiefly
northerly  to  Cape  Adare.  Volcanic  rocks  are  extensively
developed  at  this  cape,  but  the  ranges  inland  are  formed  of
older  rocks,  such  as  granite,  gneiss,  schist,  slate,  &c.,  apparently
still  capped  by  the  "  Beacon  sandstone  "  formation.  The
island  known  as  Possession  Island — also  volcanic — lies  to  the
south-south-east  of  Cape  Adare.  This  long  cape,  where  the
Southern  Cross  expedition,  under  Borcligrevink,  wintered,
forms  the  north-east  side  of  Robertson's  Bay.  From  this  bay
the  coast  trends  at  first  north-westwards  for  about  120  miles
to  Cape  North.  Near  here,  some  hills,  a  little  distance  back
from  the  coast,  give  one  a  strong  impression  of  their  being  of
volcanic  origin,  though  it  is  possible  that  they  are  merely  out-
lying sugar-loaf  hills,  relics  of  a  dissected  plateau.

It  was  clear  from  the  sight  which  we  obtained  of  the  part
of  the  coast  beyond  Cape  North  on  March  8,  1909,  that  the
hills  were  high,  having  an  altitude  of  from  6000  to  7000  ft.,
as  measured  by  sextant,  and  that  they  formed  the  abrupt
termination  seawards  of  a  deeply  denuded  high  plateau.  This
plateau  is  undoubtedly  a  northern  prolongation  of  the  one
travelled  over  by  the  Northern  Party  of  our  expedition  on  their
journey  to  the  South  Magnetic  Pole.  It  is  also  certainly
continuous  with  the  plateau  traversed  by  Captain  R.  F.  Scott
in  his  western  journey,  in  1903,  and  it  is  proved  now  that  it
is  part  of  the  same  plateau  to  which  Lieutenant  Shackleton
led  the  Southern  Party,  and  over  which  they  travelled  to  an
altitude  of  10,000  ft.  when  they  reached  their  farthest  point,
88°  23'  South.

Throughout  the  whole  of  this  magnificent  coastal  range  the
evidence  of  past  ice  action  is  extremely  clear.  Most  of  the
valleys  are  wide,  but  a  few,  like  the  Ferrar  Glacier  Valley,  are
narrow.  But  vhether  wide  or  narrow,  their  rocky  sides  show
most  impressively  the  abrasive  work  of  the  great  ice-plough,
indeed  the  rocky  slopes  bounding  these  glaciers  are  almost  as
even  as  the  banks  of  a  deep  railway  cutting.     One  is  at  once

275


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

struck  with  the  entire  absence  of  those  re-entering  spurs  and
angles  so  characteristic  of  river-worn  valleys.

A  curious  feature,  already  mentioned  by  Ferrar,  is  the
development  of  an  extensive  coastal  shelf,  for  at  any  rate  about
150  miles  northwards  of  the  latitude  of  Cape  Royds.  This  coastal
shelf  may  possibly  be  ascribed  to  step  faulting,  but  it  is  also
possible  that  it  may  be  due  to  an  overriding  of  the  foothills
of  the  coast  range,  and  a  ploughing  of  them  out  by  the  former
great  ice-sheet  of  the  Ice  Barrier,  at  a  time  when  its  surface  was
fully  1000  ft.  higher  than  it  is  at  present,  and  when  it  spread
northwards  into  the  Ross  Sea,  probably  at  least  100  to  200
miles  north  of  its  present  seaward  termination.

As  regards  the  reason  for  the  plateau  of  Victoria  Land
terminating  in  such  steep  mountain  slopes  eastwards,  it  is  of
course  possible,  as  Ferrar  suggests,  that  this  is  due  to  a  heavy
fault  or  series  of  faults  running  parallel  to  the  shore-line.  Cer-
tainly the  scenery,  particularly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount
Nansen,  and  between  that  and  Mount  Melbourne,  suggests  a
comparatively  recent  change  of  base,  down  to  which  the  base-
level  forces  have  recently  been  working.  In  fact,  these  glacier-
cut  valleys  appear  to  us  to  be  distinctly  young  in  their  origin.
The  soundings  in  Ross  Sea  off  this  coast  have  some  interest
as  bearing  on  this  question,  as  also  the  presence  of  raised  beaches
in  several  places  along  the  coast,  and  on  Ross  Island.  McMurdo
Sound,  from  Ross  Island  to  the  coast  of  Victoria  Land,  is  only
thirty  miles  wide,  and  yet  the  sea  is  nearly  500  fathoms  in  depth
within  a  few  miles  of  the  coast.  As  evidence  of  crust  move-
ments raised  beaches  may  be  quoted.  On  Ross  Island  they
were  traced  by  us  up  to  altitudes  of  160  ft.,  and  organisms
were  found  in  these  beaches  such  as  are  found  now  living  in
the  coastal  waters,  so  that  they  probably  indicate  an  uplift
since  the  deposition  of  these  organisms  of  a  good  deal  more  than
160  ft.  At  the  Ferrar  Glacier  on  the  mainland,  raised  beaches
extended  up  to  at  least  50  ft.  above  sea-level,  and  they  reached
apparently  to  an  altitude  of  20  to  30  ft.  on  the  coast  south-east
of  Mount  Larsen,  200  miles  farther  north.  It  is  possible  that
the  latter  may  be  due  to  upthrust  of  the  marine  sediments  by
glacier  ice.  These  changes  in  the  level  of  the  shore-line  have
taken  place  in  quite  recent  geological  time.  It  is,  of  course,
276


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

possible  that  such  changes  might  occur  without  being  due  to
geological  faulting.

The  sectional  drawing  shows  the  state  of  Ross  Sea,  and  of
McMurdo  Sound  during  the  maximum  recent  glaciation.  It
indicates  that  the  ice  attained  a  maximum  thickness  formerly
of  nearly  4000  ft.  in  parts  of  McMurdo  Sound  from  which  it
has  now  entirely  retreated.  Since  the  voyage  of  Ross,  in
1841,  the  front  of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier  has  retreated  south-
wards in  McMurdo  Sound  to  the  extent  of  about  thirty-five
miles,  as  determined  by  Captain  Scott.  Signs  of  waning  glacia-
tion are  conspicuous  all  the  way  from  Mount  Nansen  to  the
farthest  south  mountains  examined  by  the  Southern  Party
of  this  expedition  in  latitude  85°  15'  South.  For  example,
the  summit  of  Mount  Hope,  discovered  by  the  Southern  Party
in  latitude  83°  83'  South,  was  strewn  with  erratics,  at  an  altitude
of  fully  2000  ft.  above  the  general  level  of  the  adjacent  surface
of  the  glacier  ice.

GLACIOLOGY

The  glacial  phenomena  of  the  region  examined  by  us  are  due
to  the  action  either  (a)  of  water  substance  in  the  form  of
(1)  sea  ice,  and  ice-foot  or  shore  ice ;  (2)  glacier  ice ;  (3)  barrier
snow  and  ice-fields  ;  (4)  inland  ice  and  neve-fields  ;  (5)  ice-
bergs ;  (6)  pack-ice ;  (7)  thaw  water  forming  surface  lakes,
and  surface,  englacial  or  subglacial  streams  ;  or  (b)  to  the
action  of  wind  ;  or  (c)  to  that  of  seasonal  or  diurnal  changes
of  temperature.

(a)  Action  of  Water  Substancje

(1)  Sea  Ice. — We  made  a  series  of  observations,  by  cut-
ting holes  from  time  to  time  through  the  sea  ice,  to  ascertain
its  maximum  thickness  throughout  the  area,  and  also  its  methods
of  freezing.  The  maximum  thickness  measured  by  us  amounted
to  about  7  ft.,  in  the  case  of  ice  formed  in  a  sheltered  position
at  Back  Door  Bay  near  our  winter  quarters,  between  the  middle
of  March  and  middle  of  September  1908.  Ice  had  formed
over  the  same  area,  a  little  earlier  in  March,  to  the  depth  of

277


E.I65


M":^        M  U  R  D  O
ilCznp,  Rovri;;


X7~


^'JG'jn.is


'3«0fiiBO      ^^


0472  fms.


SOUND


»^


SEA


:::Tr}


3.77*30'


^^^Ericjland


GRANITE  HARBOUR    J


S.77'


showing  line  oF  Section

GEOGRAPHICAL         MILES
lO  5  O  10


EI65


3SOf.i.iO    N


M"-  Davidson

Depot' I.  r\

E.I63.  #


Chiefly

Kenyev

Lava


Q€A    L£VCL


LonjieeE.


Lon-jIWE.  Long.l63-*e


Section  showing  former  Thickness  of  West  Branch  op  Great  Ice  Barrier  when  it  filled
McJIuKDO  Sound  at  Maximum  of  Kecent  GlaciAtion


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

a  few  inches,  but  this  was  cracked  up,  and  drifted  away  by  the
blizzards.  This  thickness  of  7  ft.  of  ice  was  no  doubt  increased
between  the  middle  of  September  and  early  in  December.

Ferrar  states  that  the  maximum  thickness  of  sea  ice  which
formed  during  the  year  1903  at  Hut  Point,  McMurdo  Sound,
was  8  ft.  5 1  in.  We  observed  that  in  places  the  sea  ice  was
fractured,  through  pressure  of  wind  and  tidal  currents,  and  the
broken  slabs  were  forced  over  one  another  forming  pressure
ridges  from  10  to  20  ft.  in  height.

It  was  interesting  to  note  the  effect  on  the  sea  ice  of  a  sudden
fall  of  temperature.  The  contraction  following  on  such  a  fall
would  put  the  sea  ice,  especially  at  its  surface,  into  a  high  state
of  tension,  and  from  time  to  time  the  surface  would  crack  open
with  a  loud  report.  These  contraction  cracks  gaped  to  a  width
of  3  to  6  ft.,  and  the  sea  water  between  the  walls  of  the  crack,
of  course,  began  to  freeze  over.  Frequently  after  ice  had  formed
to  the  thickness  of  a  few  inches  a  rise  of  temperature  would
expand  the  ice.  This  expansion  would  tend  to  expend  itself
on  all  weak  spots,  especially  on  the  planks  of  thin  ice  formed
between  the  walls  of  the  contraction  cracks.  These  would  be
buckled  into  small  overfolds,  until  at  last  they  became  cracked
through  excess  of  thrusting,  and  overthrust  faults  resulted.
In  many  of  these  cracks  this  process  was  frequently  repeated.

Another  feature  worth  noting  in  the  sea  ice  is,  that  owing
to  the  great  difference  between  the  temperature  of  the  sea
water  below  the  ice  and  that  of  the  air  above  it,  as  soon  as  a
contraction  crack  opened,  the  sea  water  appeared  to  be  steam-
ing. A  wall  of  thick  vapour  would  rise  along  the  whole  length
of  each  crack.  To  this  the  term  of  frost-smoke  is  sometimes
applied.  The  water  vapour,  as  it  rose,  was  being  constantly
condensed  and  deposited  on  the  walls  of  the  narrow  cracks,
so  that  gradually  the  interspace  became  filled  with  ice,  and  not
infrequently  a  ridge  of  soft  ice  would  be  built  up  along  the  line
of  the  old  crack,  to  a  height  of  6  in.  or  so  above  the  general
level  of  the  surrounding  ice.  As  the  ice  was  often  traversed
by  a  perfect  network  of  these  cracks,  the  resulting  ridges  gave
the  ice-surface  the  appearance  of  Indian  paddy-fields,  with  their
dividing  "  bunds,"  or  mud  walls.

The  sea  ice  was  usually  separated  from  the  shore  ice,  or  ice-

279


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

foot,  by  one  or  more  well-marked  tide-cracks.  In  McMurdo
Sound,  near  omr  winter  quarters,  the  tidal  range  of  from  2  fb.
to  3  ft.  was  quite  sufficient  to  fracture  the  ice  in  contact  with
the  land.  The  seals  took  advantage  of  these  tide-cracks,  and
used  them  as  blow-holes.

The  chief  geological  work  done  by  the  sea  ice,  as  far  as  we
could  ascertain,  was  the  transport  seawards  of  wind-blown
rock  detritus  lodged  on  the  shore  ice  and  ice-foot,  in  the  manner
about  to  be  described.

Ice-foot  or  Shore  Ice. — On  first  arriving  on  the  shores
of  the  Antarctic  after  the  breaking  up  of  sea  ice,  towards  the
end  of  the  summer,  one  is  puzzled  to  account  for  the  low  cliff,
part  snow,  part  ice,  which  almost  everywhere  fringes  the  coast
and  so  makes  landing  from  a  boat  difficult.  This  fringe  is  seen
to  be  made  up  partly  of  ice  at  its  base,  resembling  somewhat
the  stalagmites  of  limestone  caves,  partly  of  layers  of  compressed
snow,  in  some  cases  alternating  with  bands  of  sand  and  gravel.
The  ice-foot  generally  rises  to  a  height  of  6  to  10  ft.  above  sea-
level.  It  is  usually  in  the  form  of  a  flat  narrow  terrace  from
20  to  100  ft.  wide,  sometimes  in  that  of  a  sheer  cliff,  occasionally
as  much  as  80  ft.  to  over  100  ft.  in  height,  the  summit  of  which
ascends  inland  in  a  more  or  less  steep  snow-slope.  At  its  base,
in  summer,  the  ice-foot  is  almost  invariably  undercut  by  the
sea,  and  from  the  overhanging  roof  thus  produced  there  depend
vast  numbers  of  beautiful  icicles.  These  icicles  have,  of  course,
been  formed  from  the  wash  of  the  waves,  and  the  sea  water
in  the  process  of  being  frozen  has  extruded  its  brine,  the  salinity
of  which  is  such  that  the  solution  cannot  freeze  at  a  temperature
above  zero  Fahr.  These  icicles  are  generally  moist,  and  the
moisture,  in  the  form  of  concentrated  brine,  works  downwards,
under  the  influence  of  gravity,  to  the  tips  of  the  icicles,  which
thus  become  sticky.  Hence  when  a  blizzard  springs  up  and
drives  snowflakes  against  them,  the  flakes  stick  on  chiefly
at  the  tips  and  gradually  build  out  those  foot-like  struc-
tures which  we  have  termed  foot-stalactites,  and  which  are
illustrated.

During  the  winter  of  1908  and  the  succeeding  spring  and
summer,  we  were  able  to  see  clearly  the  mode  of  growth  of  the
ice-foot.  After  the  sea  surface  had  been  frozen  over,  snow
280


'"'  ll'll


Summer  effect  on  a  Berg  ;  Icicles  forming


The  Barrier  Edge  south  of  Hut  Point,  after  the  Sea  Ice  had  broken  anvay

To  face  parjc.  280


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

carried  by  the  wind  from  the  land  or  from  the  surface  of  the
Great  Ice  Barrier  formed  drifts  of  greater  or  less  thickness  over
the  sea  ice  close  inshore.  These,  at  their  shoreward  end  where
the  cliffs  are  80  or  100  ft.  in  height,  may  form  drifts  of  equal
thickness  with  the  height  of  the  cliff.  These  drifts,  of  course,
thin  out  seawards.  They  are  stratified  and  contain  numerous
dark  bands  formed  of  chips  of  rock,  broken  crystals  of  felspar,
&c.  Wlien,  during  the  summer,  strong  blizzards  disrupt  the
sea  ice,  large  rafts  of  ice  are  dislodged  from  near  the  shore,  and
these  carry  away  on  their  surfaces  portions  of  the  old  snow-
drifts. As  the  work  of  destruction  proceeds,  even  the  thick
landward  portions  of  the  snow-drifts  are  cracked  off  in  large
slices,  and  float  seawards,  and  thus  in  summer-time  is  formed
that  almost  universal  low  cliff  known  as  the  ice-foot.  During
heavy  weather  when  the  sea  is  open  the  waves  wash  over  the
lower  portions  of  the  ice-foot,  with  the  result  that  it  is  being
constantly  bathed  in  salt  water,  which  freezes  in  successive
layers  on  its  surface.  Thus,  when  the  temperature  is  low,  the
old  masses  of  snow-drift,  of  which  the  upper  part  of  the  ice-
foot is  formed,  become  cased  over  with  ice  much  in  the  same
way  as  snowbergs  become  encased  as  the  result  of  their  being
splashed  by  sea  spray.

(2)  Glacier,  Ice  and  Neve. — The  glacier  ice  of  the  portion
of  the  Antarctic  area  examined  by  us  either  terminates  inland
in  glaciers,  some  of  which  are  hanging  glaciers,  and  some  pied-
mont glaciers,  or  ice-slabs,  or  it  comes  down  to  the  sea  where
it  is  broken  off  from  time  to  time  to  form  true  icebergs,  close
to  the  shore-line  ;  or — and  this  is  a  feature  emphasised  already
by  Mr.  H.  T.  Ferrar — the  ice  may  advance  for  a  considerable
distance  from  the  shore-line  into  the  sea,  in  some  cases  from
20  to  30  miles,  probably  far  more  in  the  case  of  the  Great  Ice
Barrier,  and  thus  discharge  icebergs  from  its  sides  as  well  as
its  snout.  Such  glaciers  were  described  by  Ferrar  as  piedmonts
afloat,  and  we  propose  to  retain  this  term  for  them.

Glaciers. — A  good  example  of  this  type  was  to  be  seen
a  little  over  two  miles  southerly  from  our  winter  quarters,  just
south  of  Cape  Barne.  The  glacier  there,  called  by  us  the  Cape
Barne  Glacier,  terminates  seawards  in  a  cliff  about  100  ft.  in
height,  and  some  three  miles  in  length.     It  has  its  source  in  the

281


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

neve- fields  of  the  western  slope  of  Mount  Erebus.  These  are
fed,  not  only  by  new  falling  snow,  but  also  by  large  quantities
of  drift  snow  swept  over  by  the  south-east  blizzards  on  to  this,
the  lee  side,  of  Erebus.  The  glacier  was  considerably  crevassed
at  its  seaward  extremity,  and  passed  up  gradually,  at  a  distance
of  some  four  or  five  miles  inland,  into  the  neve-field.  This
glacier  was  not  moving  actively,  as  we  never  observed  any  trace
of  buckling  or  crushing  of  the  sea  ice,  where  it  abutted  against
the  foot  of  the  glacier  cliff.  Had  there  been  any  appreciable
forward  movement  it  could  not  have  failed  to  ridge  up  or
crush  the  opposing  sheets  of  continuous  sea  ice.  At  the
same  time  the  crevassed  state  of  this  glacier  ice  proved  that
movement  was  still  in  progress.

A  glacier  of  a  Greenland  type,  also  on  a  large  scale,  is  the
Mount  Nansen  Glacier,  occupying  the  wide  depression  between
Mounts  Nansen  and  Larsen.  This  great  glacier  is  from  12  to
20  miles  in  width,  and  60  to  70  miles  in  length.  It  is  very
heavily  crevassed,  and  its  surface  is  extremely  irregular  towards
its  seaward  end.  Where  the  surface  falls  steeply,  it  has  raised
immense  pressure  ridges  in  the  sea  ice  along  the  shore,  and
bristles  with  hummocks  and  seracs.  So  difficult  was  this
surface  for  sledging  that  we  were  forced  to  abandon  it,  after
attempting  to  take  our  sledge  by  way  of  this  glacier  on  to  the
Magnetic  Pole  plateau.

On  striking  the  upper  end  of  this  glacier,  some  60  miles
inland,  we  found  that  there  was  still  a  little  ice  present  here
and  there  underneath  the  wide  neve- field.  This  neve- field
spread  out  into  a  wide  plain,  and  for  a  considerable  distance
before  reaching  the  Magnetic  Pole,  the  latter  being  over  220
miles  inland  at  right  angles  to  the  coast-line — our  horizon  on
all  sides  was  bounded  by  these  same  vast  neve-fields.  It  is
obvious  that  the  Mount  Nansen  Glacier  is  moving  steadily
seawards,  as  shown  by  the  great  pressure  ridges  which  it  has
raised  in  the  sea  ice  opposing  its  advance.  It  must,  therefore,
still  form  an  outlet  for  the  neve-formed  ice  of  the  inland  plateau.

The  interesting  question  here  suggests  itself.  Is  there  sufficient
snowfall  annually,  on  the  area  of  the  neve-fields  drained  by
this  glacier,  to  compensate  for  the  ice  which  is  lost  by  ablation,
or  by  being  discharged  as  icebergs  into  the  sea  ?  Until  more
28.2


m$:y  r^i


''■  1",


sKcsS'f'te.-E     Vriu^


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

data  are  available  no  accurate  quantitative  answer  can  be
given  to  this  question.  At  the  same  time  it  may  be  remarked
that  there  is  a  tolerably  heavy  snowfall  along  this  part  of  the
coast,  and  for  a  distance  of  at  least  50  miles  inland.  Portions
of  the  high  plateau  at  a  greater  distance  inland  from  the  shore
than  50  miles  at  present  probably  receive  only  a  very  small
snow-supply.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  surface  of  this
neve-field  far  inland  is  not  on  the  whole  being  reduced  in  level
through  the  snow  being  drifted  off  it  by  the  wind,  or  removed
by  the  slow  process  of  ablation.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  front  of  the  termination  of
the  Mount  Nansen  Glacier  there  is  an  immense  old  moraine
of  the  nature  apparently  of  a  medial  moraine.  We  could  trace
this  for  fully  23  miles  in  advance  of  the  present  glacier  snout.
It  follows  that  in  comparatively  recent  geological  time  the
Mount  Nansen  Glacier  has  retreated  by  at  least  the  amount
quoted  above.

Piedmont  Glaciers  on  Land. — A  curious  feature  observed
along  the  greater  part  of  the  coast-line  of  Victoria  Land,  from
near  Mount  Discovery  up  to  the  Drygalski  Ice  Barrier  Tongue,
is  the  development,  on  the  great  coastal  shelf,  at  an  altitude  of
about  1000  ft.  above  sea-level,  of  a  massive  covering  of  blue
glacier  ice.  This,  in  some  cases,  reaches  the  sea  and  breaks
off  to  form  bergs.  In  other  cases  the  sheets  do  not  reach  the
sea,  and,  therefore,  are  probably  on  the  wane.  For  the  latter
Ferrar  suggests  the  appropriate  name  of  ice- slabs.

Several  theories  might  be  advanced  to  account  for  them.
They  may  represent  actual  relics  of  the  old  Barrier  ice- sheet,
which  once  filled  McMurdo  Sound  and  Ross  Sea  for  probably
fully  100  miles  north  of  Ross  Island.  Another  view  is  that
they  may  be  local  developments  of  ice  resulting  from  a  coalescing
of  a  number  of  small  neve-fields  developed  in  the  cirques  among
the  foot-hills  of  the  plateau  ranges.  These  foot-hills  are  fre-
quently as  much  as  10  to  20  miles  back  from  the  edge  of  the
coast-line.

Piedmonth  Glaciers  Afloat. — Three  well-marked  ex-
amples of  this  type  of  glacier  came  under  our  notice.  The  first
was  Glacier  Tongue,  between  our  winter  quarters  and  the  old
winter  quarters  of  the  Discovery  at  Hut  Point.     Glacier  Tongue,

383


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

as  shown  on  the  Admiralty  Charts  and  the  Reports  of  the
Discovery  expedition,  is  an  elongated  mass  of  ice  stretching
from  the  shore-line  into  the  sea  for  a  distance  of  about  five  miles.
It  has  a  width  of  about  half  a  mile  near  its  seaward  end,  and
about  a  mile  where  it  rests  against  the  land.  Both  on  its  north
and  south  side  the  Tongue  is  deeply  indented  with  a  number
of  bays.  Its  height  above  sea-level  varies  from  about  40  ft.
up  to  nearly  100  ft.  While  the  Nimrod  was  lying  alongside  this
remarkable  piedmont  in  February  1908,  Captain  England  took
soundings  at  about  a  mile  east  of  its  seaward  end,  and  got  a
depth  of  157  fathoms.  As  the  maximum  height  of  the  glacier
above  sea-level  does  not  here  exceed  about  40  ft.,  and  the  sea
is  940  ft.  deep,  if  the  ice  were  aground  it  would  have  only  one-
twenty-third  of  its  volume  above  water,  which  of  course  is
physically  impossible.  We  must,  therefore,  conclude  that  this
part  of  Glacier  Tongue  is  afloat.  At  the  same  time  it  should
be  mentioned  that  alongside  of  this  glacier  there  are  traces
of  cracks,  which  some  observers  have  considered  to  be  tide-
cracks.  There  may  be  true  tide-cracks  near  the  shoreward
end  of  the  glacier,  but  we  were  not  satisfied  that  the  cracks
noticed  near  its  seaward  end  were  really  of  the  nature  of  tide-
cracks.  While  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  Southern  Party,
the  Nimrod  lay  in  a  snug  natural  dock,  formed  by  one  of  the
bays  on  the  north  side  of  this  glacier  tongue,  at  about  a  mile
from  its  seaward  end.  We  carefully  watched  for  any  evidence
of  rise  and  fall  of  the  tide  in  relation  to  the  shore-line  of  the
glacier,  but  were  unable  to  observe  any.  We  concluded
from  this  circumstance  that  the  glacier  must  be  rising  and
falling  in  unison  with  the  tide.  The  sounding-tube  of  our
Lucas  sounding-machine  brought  up  a  quantity  of  serpulce
and  sponge  spicules  from  the  sea  bottom  beneath  the  edge  of  the
glacier  where  our  ship  was  moored.

The  second  piedmont  afloat  is  the  Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier
Tongue.  This  Ice  Barrier  Tongue  is  about  20  miles  in  length,
and  5  to  6  miles  in  width.  Its  southern  edge  is  formed  of  ice
and  polished  neve.  Fierce  blizzards  have  swept  any  loose  snow
off  this  southern  edge  of  the  Barrier.  The  northern  edge  was
formed  largely  of  snow,  being  chiefly  of  the  nature  of  snow-
drift, from  40  to  50  ft.  in  thickness.  The  latter  tei-minates
284


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

in  a  vertical  cliff  with  overhanging  snow  cornices.  Obviously
this  cliff  was  the  combined  result  of  the  blizzard  winds  driving
snow  northwards  to  the  lee  side  of  this  piedmont  afloat,  and
to  the  breaking  away  in  summer-time  of  the  sea  ice  supporting
the  northernmost  portions  of  this  snow-drift.  Slices  are  thus
removed  from  time  to  time  from  the  northern  edges  of  the
drifts,  and  so  the  cliff  of  the  portion  left  behind  becomes  higher
in  proportion  as  the  thicker  ends  of  the  wedges  of  snow-drift
become  broken  away.  Certainly  no  true  tide-crack  was  visible
on  the  south  side  of  this  Barrier,  and  onlj^  a  small  crack  was  seen
on  its  north  side.  Strange  to  say,  this  big  mass  of  ice  and
consolidated  snow,  which  rises  at  its  centre  a  little  over  100  ft.
above  sea-level,  does  not  appear  to  communicate  directly  with
a  neve-field  at  its  inland  end.  Apparently,  then,  the  Nor-
denskjold  Ice  Barrier  is  not  now  being  directly  fed  from  the
inland  neve-fields.  It  appears  to  represent  an  old  piedmont
afloat,  which  is  in  the  act  of  dwindling  away  from  want  of
supplies  of  ice  from  the  interior.

Thirdly,  the  Drygalski  Ice  Barrier  Tongue  is  also  of  the
nature  of  a  piedmont  afloat.  It  is  probably  floating  for  at  least
three-quarters  of  the  distance  of  30  miles  to  which  it  projects
from  the  shore  into  the  sea.  The  surface  of  this  glacier,  where
it  leaves  the  shore-line,  is  extremely  rough  and  rugged,  being
traversed,  as  stated  in  the  narrative,  by  an  immense  number
of  chasms,  pressure  ridges  and  crevasses.  On  the  south  side,
where  the  ice  was  still  unbroken  when  we  reached  the  glacier
on  November  30, 1908,  the  old  sea  ice  was  forced  up  into  strong
pressure  ridges.  The  whole  appearance  suggested  to  us  that  this
glacier  is  moving  actively  from  inland  seawards.  We  could  see
with  our  field-glasses  that  at  a  distance  of  about  50  miles  inland
it  descended  by  steep  ice-falls  from  a  high  plateau  beyond.
At  the  point  where  we  crossed  it,  the  glacier  rose  to  an  altitude
at  its  centre  of  about  200  ft.  above  sea-level.  It  was  here
12  miles  in  width.  Farther  eastwards,  and  therefore  seawards,
the  glacier  ice  was  more  and  more  levelled  up  with  snow,  until
eventually  it  passed  into  a  true  barrier  type  with  a  comparatively
smooth  surface.

Captain  Evans,  after  he  brought  the  Nimrod  into  "  Relief
Inlet,"  where  he  picked  up  the  Northern  Party  just  returned

285


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

from  the  Magnetic  Pole,  sounded  alongside  of  the  Drygalski
Glacier  and  found  a  depth  of  G55  to  G68  fathoms,  at  a  distance
of  only  about  18  miles  from  the  rocky  shore-line.

As  the  Barrier  here  rises  to  a  height  not  exceeding  50  ft.
above  sea-level  it  must  surely  be  afloat.

During  the  few  weeks  of  thaw,  in  December  and  January,
torrents  of  water  must  rush  off  from  this  glacier  in  the  form
of  englacial  or  subglacial  streams.  These  in  some  cases  cut
deep  open  valleys  with  more  or  less  precipitous  sides  ;  in
other  cases  they  tunnel  channels  for  themselves  under  the
covering  of  hard  snow  and  ice,  and  the  roofs  of  these  tunnels
collapsing  through  want  of  support  produce  rugged  ravines,
very  difficult  to  cross  with  sledges.

This  Drygalski  Ice  Barrier,  on  its  northern  side,  contained
in  places  a  considerable  amount  of  moraine  material.  It  was
evident  that  at  the  time  when  the  glaciation  of  this  region
was  at  its  maximum  it  must  have  been  continuous  with  the
Mount  Nansen  glacier.  These  two  glaciers,  when  united,  doubt-
less formed  a  huge  piedmont  afloat.

(3)  Barrier  Snow-  and  Ice-fields. — The  structure  of  the
Nordenskjold  and  Drygalski  Barriers  throws  considerable  light
on  one  of  the  most  difficult  problems  of  the  Antarctic — the
origin  of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier.  To  ascertain  the  amount  of
annual  snowfall  on  this  Great  Barrier  is  of  very  great  importance,
but  we  found  this  a  hard  problem,  chiefly  on  account  of  the
difficulty  of  distinguishing  between  true  newly  fallen  snow
and  old  snow  which  has  been  drifted  along  by  blizzards.  We
tried,  during  our  observations  in  Antarctica,  to  eliminate  the
drift  snow  from  the  true  snowfall,  and  our  general  conclusion
now  is,  that  at  Cape  Royds  the  annual  snowfall  is  equal  to
about  9 1  in.  of  rain.  On  the  journey  of  the  southern  depot
party  under  Joyce,  when  laying  a  depot  for  the  relief  of  the
returning  Southern  Party  in  January  1909,  the  fortunate
discovery  was  made  of  Captain  Scott's  old  Depot  A.  The  sharp
eyes  of  Day  discerned,  at  a  distance  of  several  miles,  the
top  of  the  depot  bamboo  pole  with  just  a  wisp  of  the  old
black  flag  still  attached  to  it.  Knowing  the  importance,  from
a  scientific  point  of  view,  of  estimating  the  extent  and  direction
of  movement  of  this  depot,  in  the  six  years,  four  months
286


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

and  a  half  that  had  elapsed  since  Captain  Scott  left  it
there,  the  party  visited  it,  and  Mackintosh  took  a  series
of  angles  and  measurements,  which  enabled  him  to  deter-
mine that  the  depot  had  moved  bodily  to  the  east-north-
east at  the  rate  of  a  little  over  500  yards  a  year  for  the  past
six  years  and  six  months.  The  party  also  dug  down  through
the  hard  snow  to  a  depth  of  8  ft.  2  in.,  when  they  came  upon
the  original  snow-surface  on  which  the  depot  was  formed.  Thejr
were  thus  able  to  show  that,  during  the  above  period,  October  1,
1902,  to  February  15,  1909,  on  the  average  about  13  in.  per  year
of  hard  snow  had  accumulated  In  order  to  determine  the
density  of  this  snow  they  melted  down  a  considerable  quantity
of  it,  and  measured  the  volume  of  the  thaw-water  resulting.
This  showed  that  the  annual  accumulation  of  snow  on  this
part  of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier  is  equal  to  about  7|  in.  of  rain.

This  depot  is  in  the  latitude  of  :RIinna  BlufT,  about  78°  40'
South.  Farther  north,  as,  for  example,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Mount  Nansen,  the  snowfall  appeared  to  be  considerably
heavier,  and  it  seemed  to  be  heavier  still  nearer  to  the  Antarctic
Circle.  As  7|  in.  of  rain  is  equal  to  7|  ft.  of  snow  it  is  obvious
that  the  accumulation  of  snow,  even  as  far  south  as  between
latitude  78°  and  79°,  is  not  inconsiderable,  but  on  account  of
its  great  density  this  compressed  snow,  near  Minna  Bluff,
formed  a  layer  annually  1S|  in.  thick,  instead  of  7|  ft.  thick.

For  the  sake  of  simplicity  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  rate
of  accumulation  over  the  Great  Barrier  generally  is  about  1  ft.
annually.  Now  it  has  been  proved  that  the  Great  Barrier
extends  inland  for  fully  300  miles  in  places.  From  the  observa-
tions at  Minna  Bluff  and  the  rate  of  movement  of  Captain
Scott's  Depot  A,  as  measured  by  Captain  Scott  and  again  by
Joyce,  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  Great  Barrier  there  is  travel-
ling seawards  at  the  rate  of  about  one-third  of  a  mile  per  year.
From  this  it  may  be  argued  that  a  snowfall  on  any  part  of  the
Barrier  300  miles  inland  would  take  900  years  to  reach  the  edge
of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier,  where  bergs  are  discharged  into  the
sea.  At  this  rate,  if  1  ft.  of  snow  is  added  to  the  Barrier  every
year,  a  layer  of  snow,  formed  800  miles  inland  900  years  ago,
if  it  reaches  the  Great  Barrier  cliffs  at  the  present  day,  will  be
covered  by  a  thickness  of  900  ft.   of  snow.     Obviously  this

287


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

theory  gives  a  vast  thickness  of  snow  to  form  the  seaward  end
of  the  Great  Barrier.  Theoretically  then,  as  the  result  of  the
calculations  from  the  observations  of  the  southern  depot
party,  it  might  be  argued  that  a  consider  ible  thickness  of  the
bersr  material  derived  from  the  Great  Ice  Barrier  was  formed
of  consolidated  snow  and  neve  rather  than  of  true  glacier  ice.
Practical  proof  of  this  was  afforded  us  by  another  series  of
observations.  At  the  end  of  the  breaking  up  of  the  sea  ice  in
the  summer  of  1907-8,  three  bergs  drifted  into  McMurdo  Sound,
and  grounded  between  our  winter  quarters  and  Cape  Barne.
During  the  following  winter  the  sea  was  frozen  over  around  these
bergs,  and  we  were  able  to  go  over  to  them  and  study  them.
Fortunately  they  were  much  tunnelled  by  sea- worn  caves.
This  enabled  us  to  see  their  internal  structure.  We  found  that
all  around  the  edge,  particularly  along  the  line  of  the  wave-
worn  groove  which  surrounds  all  bergs,  a  good  deal  of  ice  was
developed.  This  ice  resulted  evidently  from  the  freezing  of
sea  water  as  the  waves  washed  and  dashed  against  the  foot  of
the  berg  cliff.  In  heavy  weather  a  large  quantity  of  spray
would  be  flung  high  up  against  the  cliff  faces  of  the  berg,  and
the  spray  freezing  would  encrust  the  exterior  of  the  berg  with
ice.  There  was  no  evidence,  however,  of  the  existence  of  any
solid  ice  inside  the  berg,  this  portion  of  it  being  formed  purely
of  compressed  snow.

From  this  fact  we  were  led  to  speculate  as  to  whether  the
whole  of  the  berg  might  not  be  formed  of  hard  snow,  its  sub-
merged portion  saturated,  but  only  superficially,  with  sea
water.  That  this  was  actually  the  case  was  proved  later  by
Captain  F.  P.  Evans.  He  saw  in  these  bergs  an  excellent  shelter
for  his  ship  from  the  blizzards,  and  moored  the  Nimrod  to  one
of  the  larger  bergs.  While  here  he  took  soundings  around  the
most  t5rpical  of  these  tabular  bergs,  and  found  that  whereas  its
cliff  face  rose  to  a  height  of  80  ft.  above  sea-level,  the  berg  was
aground  in  only  thirteen  fathoms  of  water  ;  that  is,  the  berg  was
submerged  to  a  depth  of  78  ft.,  so  that  practically  half  of  it
was  out  of  the  water  and  half  immersed.  This  direct  observa-
tion is  obviously  of  great  importance  as  bearing  on  the  mode
of  origin  and  structure  of  the  so-called  icebergs  of  the  Antarctic.
There  can,  we  think,  now  be  little  doubt  that  a  great  proportion,
288


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

in  some  cases  the  whole,  of  the  material  of  typical  Antarctic
bergs  is  formed  of  consolidated  snow  rather  than  ice.  These
observations  may  now  be  considered  in  their  bearing  on  the
origin  of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier.  Captain  Scott  has  shown  that
the  Great  Ice  Barrier  for  the  greater  part  of  its  length,  prob-
ably for  400  miles  at  least  along  its  edge,  is  afloat.  Wherever  we
got  near  to  the  cliff  face  of  the  Barrier,  and  we  were  at  times
very  close  to  it,  we  were  unable  to  see  anything  of  the  nature
of  true  glacier  ice,  even  in  cases  where  the  clilf  rose  to  a  height
of  over  150  ft.  above  sea-level.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was
every  appearance  of  the  Barrier  being  formed  of  numbers  of
superimposed  layers  of  snow.  On  the  line  of  argument  previously
given  it  is  not  improbable  that  a  thickness  of  900  ft.  of  snow,
or  thereabouts,  may  accumulate  on  a  large  proportion  of  the
Barrier  near  its  terminal  cliff,  so  that  obviously  a  great  part
of  the  thickness  of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier  is  probably  due  to  this
compressed  snow.

The  question  still  remains  as  to  what  becomes  of  the  glacier
ice  which  undoubtedly  does  feed  the  Barrier  at  many  spots
along  its  western  and  southern  boundaries.  For  example,
the  great  glacier,  50  miles  wide,  up  which  the  Southern  Party
travelled  from  the  spot  where  they  were  compelled  to  diverge
from  the  Barrier,  latitude  83°  South,  must  be  discharging  vast
quantities  of  ice  into  the  Barrier.  This  same  glacier  had  raised
pressure  ridges  on  the  Barrier  surface  for  20  miles  out  from  its
junction  with  the  Barrier.  It  is  clear,  too,  from  the  fact  estab-
lished both  by  the  Discovery  expedition  and  our  own,  that  the
Great  Ice  Barrier  is  moving  seawards.  The  propelling  force
can  be  no  other  than  that  of  glacier  ice.  This  glacier  ice
descending  from  the  inland  plateau  must  also  move  sea-
wards, but  as  it  gets  nearer  to  the  Great  Barrier  ice- cliff
it  becomes  weighted  down  with  a  vast  thickness  of  super-
incumbent snow,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  under  these
conditions  a  great  deal  of  it  may  be  thawed  off  from  below  by
the  sea  water.

The  question  here  suggests  itself.  Does  the  water  circulating
beneath  the  Great  Ice  Barrier  ever  have  a  temperature  high
enough  to  thaw  freshwater  ice  ?  It  does,  of  course,  thaw  the
sea  ice  quite  rapidly.


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

(4)  Inland  Ice  and  Neve-fields. — Reference  has  already
been  made  to  this  type  of  ice  under  the  head  of  "  Glaciers,"
in  the  description  of  the  Mount  Nanscn  Glacier.  The  great
glacier  discovered  by  the  Southern  Party  between  83°  33'
South  and  85°  South,  over  100  miles  in  length  and  50  miles
in  width,  descended  about  6000  ft.  in  that  distance  from  a  vast
inland  snow  plateau.  This  plateau  is  identical  with  that
traversed  by  Captain  Scott's  party  of  the  Discovery  expedition
on  their  western  journey  in  1903.  It  is  identical  also  with
the  plateau  travelled  by  the  Northern  Party  of  our  expedition
in  their  journey  inland  to  the  South  Magnetic  Pole,  as  well
as  with  the  new  land  discovered  by  our  expedition  to  the  west
of  Cape  North.  This  vast  plateau,  extending,  it  is  practically
certain,  for  over  1200  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  over  200
miles  from  east  to  west,  7000  ft.  high  at  its  northern  end,  and
at  least  10,000  ft.  at  its  southern,  is  formed  superficially  of
neve.  Doubtless  beneath  the  neve  is  glacier  ice.  The  neve
is  possibly  of  no  very  great  thickness,  for  the  horizontally
bedded  or  gently  inclined  plateau  rocks  of  the  Beacon  sandstone
formation  rise  to  heights  of  8000  to  10,000  ft.  above  sea-level
along  the  eastern  border  of  the  plateau.

This  structure  of  the  plateau  is  illustrated  on  the  diagram
(p.  292).

(5)  Icebergs  have  already  been  described  under  the  heading
"  Barrier  Snow-  and  Ice-fields."

(6)  Pack  ice  has  also  been  referred  to  under  the  heading
"  Sea  Ice."  It  may  be  noted  that  in  the  Ross  Sea  the  bulk
of  the  pack  ice,  formed  chiefly  of  fractured  masses  of  sea  ice,
partly  of  small  snowbergs  and  icebergs,  impelled  by  the  south-
easterly winds,  drifts  past  Cape  Adare  to  the  part  of  the  Antarctic
Ocean  which  lies  between  Cape  North  and  the  Balleny  Islands.
This  region  appears  to  be  permanently  beset  with  very  old
pack  ice  and  icebergs.  As  most  of  the  blocks  of  sea  ice  have
been  twisted  and  piled  on  one  another,  this  pack  may  be
described  as  "  screwed  pack."

(7)  Thaw-water  forming  Surface  Lakes,  and  Surface,
Englacial  or  Subglacial  Streams. — Some  of  the  streams
formed  by  thaw-water  have  already  been  described  under  the
head  of  "  Glaciers,"  in  the  ease  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier.  In  the
290


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

latitude  of  this  glacier  in  75°  South,  the  thaw  set  in  about
December  10  and  lasted  to  about  the  third  week  in  January.

Lakes  and  Lap:e  Ice. — We  found  it  difficult  during  the  short
period  of  our  stay  in  the  Antarctic  to  ascertain  to  what  thickness
this  ice  formed  during  a  single  season.  The  difficulty  arose
from  the  fact  that  in  the  summer  of  1908-1909  the  freshwater
ice  of  these  lakes  did  not  entirely  thaw.

Some  of  the  lakes  were  slightly  saline,  and  some  of  these,
such  as  Green  Lake  and  Coast  Lake,  thawed  completely  during
the  summer,  and  during  the  winter  the  ice  froze  over  them
from  top  to  bottom  until,  in  the  case  of  Green  Lake,  in  August
1908,  only  a  very  little  saline  water,  a  few  inches  in  depth,
remained  unfrozen  below  a  thickness  of  5  ft.  of  ice.  At  the
same  time  of  year  the  water  of  "  Coast  Lake,"  also  somewhat
saline,  was  frozen  solid,  the  lake  being  a  little  under  5  ft.  deep.

In  the  case  of  the  freshv\^ater  lake,  known  as  Clear  Lake,
it  was  noticed  that  during  the  summer  the  ice  thawed  chiefly
on  the  south  side  of  the  lake,  where  it  was  in  contact  with  the
black  rock,  and  where  that  rock  was  specially  warmed  by  the
sun's  rays.  The  sun  being  highest  when  it  is  due  north,  has  its
greatest  heating  effect  on  southern  slopes.  The  ice  towards
the  middle  and  north  side  of  the  lake  did  not  wholly  thaw.  The
same  remark  is  true  of  the  ice  of  the  Blue  Lake  near  our  winter
quarters.

In  the  case  of  the  Blue  Lake  we  found,  as  the  result  of  the
shafts  sunk,  that  in  the  south-west  division  of  this  lake  the
ice  was  at  least  15  ft.  in  thickness,  while  in  the  north-western
division  Brocklehurst  sunk  a  shaft  to  21  ft.,  but  in  his  case
a  little  water  was  found  beneath  the  ice,  whereas  in  the  first
case  the  ice  was  solid  down  to  the  bed-rock.  We  are  of  opinion
that  this  Blue  Lake  ice  had  not  been  thawed  for  probably  at
least  three  seasons.

As  many  of  these  small  lakes  were  encircled  by  steep  banks
of  hard  rock,  the  ice,  expanding  as  it  formed,  was  forced  to
curve  itself  upwards  in  order  to  make  room  for  itself,  as  it  could
not  burst  the  sides  of  the  rock  basin.  Thus  its  surface  was
frequently  convex  upwards.  In  this  process  of  upward  bulging
of  the  ice  towards  the  lake's  centre,  each  successive  fresh  layer
of  ice  as  it  froze  beneath  the  older  and  overlying  layers  would

291


^

X

^

n

CJ

2

u

(-

cr»

f)

s:

O-

x:

^

3

o

z

!s

CO

03

t?

£

^

ir

h

CD

tn

o

CO


o

CO

to


2     €


bJ

to


lb
3


2»  ga-


m


.   I  .J     IVil.iJ.    I,i  I


c


'Jr.


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

buckle  them  and  bend  them.  The  latter  would  at  last  crack
open,  and  so  in  the  final  stage  of  freezing  of  a  small  shallow
lake,  by  the  time  that  the  whole  of  the  water  had  frozen  from
top  to  bottom  the  basin  would  be  occupied  by  a  biconvex
cracked  lens  of  ice,  the  cracks  being  widest  at  the  top  and  taper-
ing away  to  nothing  below.

A  curious  feature  which  we  observed  in  the  lake  ice  was
the  presence  of  what  we  termed  "  snow  tabloids."  We  found
that  in  some  cases  these  were  merely  empty  bubble-like  spaces
in  the  ice  filled  with  air.  In  other  cases,  however,  where  the
bubbles  were  larger,  3  to  6  in.  in  width,  they  were  occupied  by
snow.  In  some  cases  patches  of  thin  rippled  snow  were  inter-
stratified  in  this  lake  ice.

Most  of  this  freshwater  lake  ice  exhibited  at  its  surface  a
very  beautiful  structure,  which  we  termed  coralloidal  structure.

The  mode  of  origin  of  this  curious  structure  will  be  discussed
in  the  Scientific  Memoirs  of  this  Expedition.

(b)  Action  of  Wind  in  Relation  to  Antarctic
Glacial  Phenomena

An  explanation  has  already  been  given  of  how  vast  quantities
of  finely  divided  rock  material,  chiefly  in  the  form  of  sand,  are
constantly  being  blown  on  to  the  sea  ice  by  the  wind.  For
some  distance  seawards  from  the  shore  such  wind-blown  material
must  form  an  appreciable  amount  of  the  sediments  now  form-
ing on  the  sea  floor.  Ferrar  has  already  commented  on  the
great  importance  of  the  wind  in  these  regions  as  a  destructive
agent.

By  accelerating  evaporation  of  snow  and  ice,  and  by  its
mechanical  erosive  force  on  the  surfaces  of  snow-fields,  the
blizzards  are  important  contributors  to  the  present  deglaciation
of  Antarctica.  The  amount  of  snow  annually  blown  out  to
sea  must  be  very  great,  inasmuch  as  during  blizzards,  often  of
several  days'  duration,  the  air  is  frequently  so  thick  with  fine
particles  of  snow  that  one  cannot  see  more  than  a  few  yards
in  front  of  one.  We  observed  that  sledge-tracks  and  foot-
prints on  the  snows  of  the  coastal  areas,  or  of  the  inland  plateau,
were  nearly  always,  after  the  expiry  of  a  few  weeks,  left  in  relief.

293


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

This  suggests  that,  at  present,  in  many  parts  of  Antarctica
the  general  surface  of  the  snov/  and  ice  is  being  continually
lowered  by  ablation  and  wind  drift.

(c)  Changes  of  Temperatuhe

During  spring  and  autumn  when  sunrise  and  sunset  replace
the  perpetual  sunlight  of  summer,  and  the  perpetual  darkness
of  winter,  the  range  of  temperature  between  noon  and  mid-
night is  most  marked.  On  March  10,  1908,  r^^hen  at  an  altitude
of  about  9000  ft.,  on  Mount  Erebus,  and  with  the  thermometer
at  about  10°  Fahr.,  we  observed  that  snow  in  contact  with
black  lumps  of  kenyte  lava  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays  thawed
rapidly,  so  that  we  were  able  to  get  water  to  drink  by  laying  a
lump  of  snow  in  saucer-shaped  hollows  on  the  surface  of  this
lava.  At  night  these  same  rocks  became  very  cold.  There
was  no  question  here  of  the  survival  of  any  original  volcanic
heat  in  the  lava,  as  there  was  no  thaw  whatever  of  the  snow
where  it  touched  the  lava  in  spots  shaded  from  the  sun's  heat.
This  absorption  of  heat  by  black  rocks  partly  explains  the
survival  of  lichens  high  up  on  the  slopes  of  Erebus.  It  also
has  the  effect  of  prolonging  a  superficial  local  thaw  from  summer
far  into  spring,  on  the  one  hand,  and  autumn  on  the  other.
Such  a  great  diurnal  range  of  temperature,  combined  with  the
effects  of  summer  thaw  followed  by  the  severe  frosts  of  winter,
exerts  a  powerful  disrupting  force  upon  the  rocks,  and  accounts
for  the  extensive  rubble  banks  and  sheets  and  patches  of  loose
and  broken  felspar  crystals,  which  are  spread  over  such  a  large
area  of  country  near  Mount  Erebus,  &c.  At  our  winter  quarters
at  Cape  Royds  we  at  first  mistook  these  for  beds  of  volcanic
tuff.

Volcanic  Rocks

Ross  Island. — xis  the  chief  varieties  of  volcanic  rocks  met
with  in  Ross  Island  have  already  been  described  by  Messrs.
Ferrar  and  Prior,  a  brief  description  of  these  will  suffice.

At  Ross  Island  we  particularly  studied  the  relations  to  one
another  of  the  three  principal  types  of  rock  there  developed,
viz.,  kenyte,  trachyte  and  basalt.  We  are  now  in  a  position
294)


'i;


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

to  say  that,  on  the  whole,  the  trachytes  appear  to  have  been
the  oldest  rocks,  the  kenytes  to  be  of  intermediate  age,
and  the  basalts  the  newest.  The  evidence  for  this  is  as
follows  :

On  the  western  slopes  of  Mount  Erebus,  above  our  winter
quarters,  specimens  were  not  infrequently  found  of  what  at
first  sight  appeared  to  be  fragments  of  sandstone  enclosed  in
kenyte  lava.  A  closer  inspection  of  these  showed  that  they
were  in  reality  varieties  of  trachyte.  Similar  specimens  were
met  with  in  the  kenytes  near  Cape  Barne.  It  would  seem
from  this  that  the  oldest  lavas  in  this  area  were  trachytes,  and
that  later  kenyte  eruptions  followed,  which  partly  destroyed
the  trachytes,  and  thus  the  disrupted  trachyte  fragments
subsequently  became  embedded  in  the  kenj^te  lava.  In  the
next  place  we  found  that  at  Cape  Barne  the  kenyte  had  been
very  powerfully  intruded  by  the  basalt.  Large  fragments  of
kenyte  were  frequently  found  entangled  in  the  basalt  of  the
comparatively  recent  volcanic  cone  at  Cape  Barne,  and  on  a
line  trending  inland  in  a  south-easterly  direction.  In  the  case
also  of  the  long  spur  which  extends  from  Mount  Erebus  to  the
old  winter  quarters  of  the  Discovery  expedition  at  Hut  Point,
it  is  clear  that  the  latest  volcanic  products  of  that  locality  are
scoriaceous  basalts.  These  basalts  are  obviously  newer  than
the  trachytes  of  Observation  Hill ;  they  are  even  newer  than
the  olivine-basaits  of  Sulphur  Hill  in  the  same  area.  In  our
ascent  of  Erebus  we  found  that  not  only  were  there  old  kenyte
lavas  developed  on  its  flanks,  but  that  at  intervals  on  the  way
up  the  rock  was  still  kenyte,  becoming  of  newer  and  newer  age
until  the  modern  active  crater  was  reached.  This  crater  was
partly  filled  with  molten  lava  from  June  to  September  1908.
It  is  evident  from  this  that  some  of  the  kenyte  is  amongst  the
newest  of  all  the  volcanic  products  of  Ross  Island.  The
following  table  shows  the  probable  chronological  relations  of
these  lavas  in  descending  order  :

Kenyte  of  modern  crater.  Scoriaceous  basalt.

Olivine  basalt.
Pre-basaitic  kenyte.

Trachyte.

295


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

East  Coast  of  Victoria  Land. — The  succession,  therefore,
on  the  whole  has  been  from  trachyte  through  kenyte  to  ohvine-
basalt.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  whole  of  the  trachyte
eruptions,  the  pre-basaltic  kenyte,  and  the  olivine  basalts  ante-
date the  epoch  of  greatest  recent  glaciation.

The  occurrence  of  large  blocks  of  kenyte  at  Gneiss  Point,  a
few  miles  to  the  east-south-east  of  Granite  Harbour,  suggests
the  possibility  that  some  of  the  dark  sheets  of  rock  near  the
highest  portions  of  the  plateau  may  perhaps  be  formed  in  part
of  kenyte.  At  the  same  time  it  is  possible  that  these  kenyte
boulders  of  Gneiss  Point  have  been  drifted  northwards  from
Ross  Island  amongst  the  moraine  material  of  the  western  branch
of  the  former  gigantic  Great  Ice  Barrier,  when  it  occupied  the
whole  of  McMurdo  Sound.  Dykes  of  dark  rocks,  resembling
tinguaites,  were  not  uncommon  from  Granite  Harbour  north-
wards to  near  Geikie  Inlet,  south  of  the  Drygalski  Glacier.
We  also  observed  dyke  rocks  full  of  small  black  bright  prismatic
crystals  of  hornblende.  These  appear  to  be  of  the  nature  of
hornblende  lamprophyres.  Small  pieces  of  scoriaceous  volcanic
rocks  were  found  by  us  as  far  north  as  Cape  Irizar.  These
fragments  may  have  come  from  the  mountains  of  the  western
plateau.

Foundation  Rocks

The  oldest  rocks  seen  by  us  in  the  Antarctic  belong  to  the
series  already  described  by  Ferrar  and  Prior,  and  consist  of
banded  gneiss,  gneissic-granite,  grano-diorite  and  diorite  rich
in  sphene.  In  some  spots,  as  at  Cape  Bernacchi,  masses  of
very  coarse  white  crystalline  marble  are  interspersed  in  the
gneiss.

These  foundation  rocks  have  their  planes  of  foliation  sharply
folded  in  places,  as  is  the  case  at  Depot  Island,  the  axis  of
folding  there  being  approximately  parallel  to  the  trend  of  the
coast-line.  Near  the  same  spot  huge  enclosures  can  be  seen
in  the  gneissic-granite.  These  are  partly  greenish  grey  quartzites
in  masses  ten  to  twenty  feet  in  diameter,  partly  large  lumps
of  blackish  green  coarsely  crystalline  hornblende  rock,  with
much  sphene  and  a  white  mineral,  apparently  either  saus-
suritised  felspar,  or  scapolite.  In  other  places,  as  at  Cape
296


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

Bernacchi,  black  tourmaline  schists  with  epidote  were  frequently-
interspersed  through  the  gneiss,  and  the  gneiss  was  also  tra-
versed by  veins  of  white  aplite,  with  small  crystals  of  garnet.
The  coarsely  crystalline  belts  of  marble  in  the  gneiss  at  Cape
Bernacchi  contained  abundant  graphite  in  the  form  of  small
flakes.  It  appears  to  us  that  the  marble  and  the  quartzite
represent  an  old  sedimentary  formation,  and  the  large  enclosures
of  hornblende-and-sphene  rock  an  old  amphibolite  or  gabbro,
both  the  former  and  the  latter  types  of  rock  disrupted  by  the
intrusive  gneissic  granites.

Ferrar  was  of  opinion  that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  hill
marked  (d)  on  his  map  showing  the  valley  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier,
the  grey  granite  of  these  hills  is  older  than  the  dolerite  which
rests  upon  its  even  upper  surface,  but  that  the  pink  granite  of
(d)  is  intrusive  and  later  than  the  dolerite.*  This  is  an  important
observation.  We  did  not  see  this  spot,  but  in  other  areas,  as
near  Granite  Harbour,  the  dolerite  appeared  to  be  newer  than
the  granites.

Older  (?)  Paleozoic  Sedimentary  Rocks

Apart  from  the  large  enclosures  of  quartzites,  &c.,  in  gneissic
granite,  already  referred  to,  the  next  oldest  sedimentary  rocks
appear  to  be  greenish  grey  slates  brought  back  by  the  Southern
Party  from  the  surface  of  the  great  glacier  up  which  they  were
travelling  between  Mount  Hope  and  "  The  Cloudmaker,"  in  ap-
proximately latitude  84°  South.  These  fragments,  as  Lieutenant
Shackleton  informs  us,  were  blown  on  to  the  surface  of  the  ice
from  what  appeared  to  be  mountains  of  slate  farther  west.
The  approximate  relative  position  of  these  slate  hills  and  of  the
granite  hill  of  Mount  Hope,  and  the  nunatak  of  coal-bearing
Beacon  sandstone  further  south  is  shown  in  the  photographs.

At  Cape  Royds  we  found  occasionally,  but  sparingly,  erratics
of  radiolarian  chert.  The  radiolaria  appear  to  be  of  older
palaeozoic  type,  but  we  were  unable  to  discover  any  rock  like
it  in  situ.  Obviously  at  Cape  Royds  the  erratics  have  travelled
from  some  spot  to  the  south  and  west.  It  is  possible  that
these  black  and  grey  cherts  belong  to  the  limestone  series

*  Nat.  Ant.  Exped.,  Nat.  Hist.,  vol.  i.,  Geology,  p.  S8,     Brit.  Museum.

297


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

discovered  by  the  Southern  Party  in  85°  15'  South.  This
limestone  varies  in  colour  from  pink  to  dark  grey.  The  pink
limestone  is  banded  with  some  dull  green  earthy  mineral ;  it
contains  numerous  obscure  casts  resembling  those  of  radiolaria.
The  dark  bluish  grey  portion  of  this  limestone  does  not  show
any  trace  of  organisms.  Apparently  it  has  been  too  much
metamorphosed  to  retain  the  outlines  of  any  of  its  original
fossils.  It  is  traversed  in  all  directions  by  veins  of  white  calcite.
The  limestones  appear  to  be  almost  horizontally  bedded,  and
are  several  hundreds  of  feet  in  thickness.  The  Southern  Party
were  unable  to  determine  the  relation  of  this  massive  limestone
to  the  adjacent  Beacon  sandstone,  as  unfortunately  there  was
a  break  in  the  continuity  of  the  section  which  prevented  the
junction  of  these  two  formations  being  seen.  This  limestone,
7000  ft.  above  sea-level,  is  higher  geographically  than  the  Beacon
sandstone  formation,  but  as  the  latter  dips  away  from  it  towards
the  north-east,  the  limestone  may  be  stratigraphically  below
the  Beacon  sandstone.  The  Southern  Party  discovered  large
blocks  of  limestone  breccia  in  the  moraines  near  "  The  Cloud-
maker."  The  fragments  in  the  morainic  breccias  near  this
mountain  are  formed  of  limestones,  not  unlike  those  of  the
great  nunatak,  but  whether  these  breccias  belong  to  the  basal
beds  of  the  Beacon  sandstone  formation,  or  to  the  base  of  the
massive  limestones,  or  to  crush  breccia  zones  in  the  massive
limestones  is  not  as  yet  apparent.  It  is  even  possible  that
they  may  be  stratigraphically  above  the  Beacon  sandstone,
but  this  is  improbable.  Fragments  of  old  limestones  were
observed  by  us  in  the  ancient  moraines  of  the  Mount  Nansen
Glacier.  These  were  associated  with  pieces  of  sandstone  and
fragments  of  grey  clay  shale  with  obscure  impressions  of  fossil
roots.  This  limestone  appears  to  have  been  derived  from  the
Beacon  sandstone  formation.  It  is  very  much  altered  through
recrystallisation,  and  we  have  been  unable  to  recognise  in  it
any  fossils.

It  may  be  mentioned  that  when  journeying  to  the  South
Magnetic  Pole  at  a  spot  about  twenty  miles  south-east  of  Granite
Harbour  we  found  on  a  small  island.  Terrace  Island,  a  large
fragment  of  argillaceous  limestone.  This  had  evidently  been
derived  from  the  Beacon  sandstone  formation  in  the  adjacent
298


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

hills.  When  broken  open  it  was  found  to  contain  small  oval
bodies,  pointed  at  one  end,  and  about  one-third  of  an  inch
in  length,  resembling  seeds  of  fossil  plants,  possibly  coniferous
seeds.

This  specimen  was  subsequently  left  at  "  Depot  Island,"
and  has  not  since  been  recovered.

The  Beacon  sandstone  formation  has  now  been  proved  to
extend  from  at  least  as  far  as  Mount  Nansen  in  the  north  to
latitude  85°  South,  where  it  was  explored  in  situ  by  the  Southern
Party,  a  distance  of  fully  seven  hundred  miles.  As  described
by  Ferrar,  its  thickness  in  the  Ferrar  Glacier  Valley  amounts
to  fully  two  thousand  feet,  and  even  then  the  base  of  the
formation  was  not  seen.

The  following  is  a  generalised  section  of  the  Beacon  sand-
stone formation  in  85°  South,  in  descending  order,  from  informa-
tion supplied  by  Mr.  Shackleton  and  F.  Wild  of  the  Southern
Party  :

500  ft.   sandstone.

300  ft.  sandstone  with  bands  of  shale,  and  about  seven
seams  of  coal,  or  seams  formed  of  black  shale  alternating  with
laminae  of  bright  coal.  In  this  belt  the  following  seams  were
seen  in  situ :

1  ft.  to  Ij  ft.  coal  seam.

Strata.
7  ft.  coal  seam  with  bands  of  grey  shale.

Strata.
5  ft.  coal  seam  apparently  formed  of  clean  coal.

Strata.
3  ft.  (about)  coal  seam.

Strata.
3  ft.  (about)  coal  seam.

Strata.
3  ft.  (about)  coal  seam.

Strata.
3  ft.  (about)  coal  seam.

Seven-hundred-foot  sandstones  with  numerous  water-worn
quartz  pebbles  in  the  lower  beds      These  pebbles  are  from  one

to  two  inches  in  diameter.     Total  1500  ft.

291^


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

In  the  medial  moraine,  below  the  great  nunatak  in  85°  South,
the  Southern  Party  obtained,  amongst  several  specimens  of  sand-
stone with  much  mother-of-coal,  or  mineral  charcoal,  one
specimen  of  special  interest.  It  was  a  fragment  of  fine-grained
hard  sandstone,  evidently  derived  from  the  Beacon  sandstone
formation  higher  up,  showing  a  black  band  one-quarter  of
an  inch  thick  running  through  it.  Micro-slides  of  this  ex-
amined at  the  University  prove  that  it  is  a  coniferous  wood.
The  following  description  of  it  has  been  written  by  Mr.  E.  J.
Goddard,  B.Sc,  Macleay  Research  Fellow  of  the  Linnsean
Society,  New  South  Wales  :

"Specimens  from  Medial  Moraine,  December  11,  1908

(No.  101)

*'  Longitudinal  sections  of  the  included  dark  masses  give
a  homogeneous  banded  appearance  of  a  distinctly  organic
nature.  The  banded  appearance  is  due  to  the  vascular  nature
of  the  organic  elements  composing  the  mass.  The  whole
structure  recalls  to  one's  mind  the  appearance  given  by  longi-
tudinal sections  of  the  xylem  portion  of  the  vascular  area  of
a  gymnosperm,  such  as  Pinus.  Only  the  xylem  area  is  repre-
sented in  the  specimen,  no  traces  of  medullary,  cortical,  or
phloem  tissue  being  visible.  Medullary  rays  are  present  as
shown  in  the  micro-photograph.

"The  xylem  itself  is  composed  of  a  homogeneous  mass  of
vessels,  tracheidal  in  nature,  no  differentiation  as  regards  the
vascular  elements  being  present.  In  places  one  may  readily
make  out  in  longitudinal  sections  dark  opaque  bands  of  much
greater  size  individually  than  the  tracheides.  These  in  all
probability  represent  resin  passages  belonging  to  the  xylem.
It  would  seem,  further,  that  these  masses  might  be  considered
as  being  nothing  more  than  an  aggregation  of  material  similar
in  nature  to  that  of  the  walls,  and  due  to  changes  under  the
process  of  petrifaction.  This,  however,  is  opposed  by  the  fact
that  they  occur  even  in  these  small  sections  fairly  commonly,
and  at  the  same  time  are  all  of  exactly  the  same  size  as  regards
width.  At  all  events  they  represent  some  definite  structure,
and  in  all  probability  resin  passages.
800


Fossil  Wood  in  Sandstone,  from  a  Moraine  in  Latitude


85°  South


To  face  page  300


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

"  The  walls  of  the  tracheides  themselves  seen  under  the  high
power  of  the  microscope  appear  to  be  pitted,  but  the  preserva-
tion is  by  no  means  good  enough  to  warrant  any  remarks  on
this  beyond  that  in  the  common  wall  of  adjacent  tracheides
occur  clear  spaces  of  the  same  relative  importance  as  the  bordered
pits  of  such  a  gymnosperm  as  Pinus.  These  clear  spaces  occur
regularly  along  the  length  of  the  tracheides,  and  stand  out
strongly  against  the  dark  colour  of  the  walls  in  their  preserved
condition.

"  The  nature  of  the  xylem  itself  leads  to  the  conclusion
that  it  is  a  portion  of  a  gymnospermous  plant,  resembling
strongly  in  nature  the  same  portion  of  a  coniferous  plant."

If  the  conclusion  as  to  the  coniferous  character  of  the  wood
is  correct,  and  there  seems  little  reason  to  doubt  its  correctness,
the  lower  limit  of  the  age  of  the  Beacon  sandstone  is  perhaps
lower  carboniferous  or  Upper  Devonian,  unless  conifers  in  the
Antarctic  had  a  deeper  range  in  geological  time  than  elsewhere.

The  plate  shows  the  general  appearance  under  the
microscope  of  this  fossil  wood.  The  medullary  rays  are  fairly
distinct.

This  is  the  first  determinable  fossil  plant  that  has  been
obtained  from  the  Victoria  Land  portion  of  the  Antarctic.

Although  a  date  not  older  than  carboniferous  or  Devonian
is  suggested  by  the  presence  of  this  coniferous  wood,  it  is  of
course  possible  that  the  Beacon  sandstone  is  of  higher  geological
antiquity,  and  if  the  radiolarian  rocks,  already  referred  to,
are  conformable  with  the  Beacon  sandstone,  it  may  even  go
far  down  into  the  older  palaeozoic.

The  degree  of  induration  of  these  unfolded  plateau  sand-
stones and  the  general  absence  of  fossils  from  the  limestones
is  suggestive  of  a  high  geological  antiquity.

Raised  Beaches

Raised  beaches  were  observed  at  two  distinct  localities  on
the  western  slopes  of  Ross  Island,  also  near  the  mouth  of  the
Ferrar  Glacier,  as  well  as  to  the  south-east  of  Mount  Larsen.

The    first    locality    on    Ross    Island    was    discovered    by

801


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

Armytage ;  the  second  locality  by  one  of  us ;  the  raised
beaches  near  the  Ferrar  Glacier  also  by  one  of  us  ;  while
the  Mount  Larsen  raised  beaches  were  observed  by  the
Northern  Party  on  their  journey  to  the  South  Magnetic  Pole.
These  four  localities  may  be  referred  to  as  :

(1)  Back  Door  Bay  deposit.

(2)  Cape  Barne  deposit.

(3)  Ferrar  Glacier  deposit.

(4)  Mount  Larsen  deposit.

Deposit  (1)  lies  at  a  height  of  160  ft.  above  sea-level.  It
was  found  at  the  bottom  of  a  shallow  flat-bottomed  gulley
sloping  down  eastwards  into  a  small  arm  of  McMurdo
Sound,  called  by  us  Back  Door  Bay.  The  area  of  the
deposit  was  only  a  few  square  yards.  It  consisted  of  a  brownish
earthy  material  with  abundant  remains  of  crushed  tubes  of
serpulfe.  Diatoms  were  fairly  abundant  in  it.  We  were  at
first  in  some  doubt  as  to  whether  this  serpula  deposit  was  a
genuine  raised  beach,  or  merely  a  mass  of  sandy  material  from
the  sea  floor  pushed  up  by  the  ploughing  action  of  the  old
McMurdo  Sound  ice-sheet.  There  has,  of  course,  been  a  similar
question  raised  in  regard  to  the  so-called  raised  beaches
of  Moel  Tryfaen  in  North  Wales.  The  subsequent  discovery
by  one  of  us  of  an  extensive  raised  beach  at  an  altitude
of  about  180  ft.  near  Cape  Barne  (deposit  2)  is  confirmatory
ev  dence  as  o  the  genuine  raised  beach  character  of  the  first-
mentioned  deposit.  At  this  Cape  Barne  deposit  the  material
is  largely  formed  of  spicules  of  siliceous  sponges  and  molluscan
shells,  as  well  as  the  remains  of  serpulae.  The  nature  of  the
organisms  there  present  is  such  as  to  render  it  probable  that
the  deposit  was  formed  in  water  of  some  depth.  It  may
therefore  indicate  an  elevation  of  this  part  of  the  coast  near
Cape  Barne,  not  merely  of  180  ft.,  but  perhaps  of  double  that
amount.

Deposit  (3)  near  the  entrance  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier  Valley.
These  deposits  chiefly  consist  of  brownish  sands  with  very
numerous  shells  of  a  large  species  of  peetens.  They  were
discovered  by  one  of  us,  and  traced  to  altitudes  of  from
50  to  60  ft.  Farther  north  at  Cape  Bernacchi  there  are  strongly
302


GEOLOGICAL   OBSERVATIONS

marked  terraces  suggestive  of  raised  beaches,  which  were
observed  by  the  Northern  Party  to  extend  up  to  altitudes  of
100  ft.  At  Terrace  Island,  about  twenty  miles  to  the  north
of  Cape  Bernacchi,  we  observed  well-marked  terraces,  ranging
up  to  about  80  to  85  ft.  above  sea-level.  These  had  every
appearance  of  having  been  laid  down  by  the  action  of  the  sea,
though  no  sea-shells  were  found  amongst  the  sands  and  coarse
gravels  constituting  this  deposit.

Deposit  (4)  south-east  of  Mount  Larsen.  A  very  curious
type  of  what  may  be  termed  a  raised  beach  or  possibly  an
upthrust  area  was  observed  by  us  on  our  journey  from  the  sea
ice  near  the  Drygalski  Glacier  to  the  foot  of  the  small  branch
glacier  at  what  we  called  Backstairs  Passage.  This  moraine
deposit  consisted  of  greenish  grey  muds  underlying  coarse
moraines  of  granite  blocks  and  quartz  and  felspar  porphyry.
Beneath  the  grey  muds  was  ice  ;  the  ice  was  just  very  slightly
saline  in  places.  These  muds  contained  remains  of  serpulae
in  great  quantity,  an  enormous  number  of  shells  of  that  well-
known  arctic  type  amongst  the  foraminifera,  Biloculina,
numerous  representatives  of  horny  polyzoa,  siliceous  sponges,
and  a  perfect  form  of  solitary  coral  allied  to  a  perfect  shell  of
Ij^otlij^'ina,  &c.,  dentalium,  chiton,  &c.

The  height  of  this  deposit  above  sea-level  could  not  be
definitely  ascertained  by  us.  It  was  at  least  20  ft.,  possibly
as  much  as  30  ft.,  above  the  sea.

The  evidence  generally  of  these  raised  beaches  is  very
interesting,  as  showing  the  probability  that  when  the  ice,  in
recent  geological  time,  had  its  maximum  extension  in  this
region,  there  was  probably  a  subsidence,  possibly  due  to  the
load  on  this  part  of  the  eaith's  crust,  of  such  a  vast  extra
thickness  of  ice,  and  that  after  the  subsidence,  which  probably
lagged  behind  the  epoch  of  maximum  glaciation,  there  has
been  a  gradual  re-emergence  to  the  amount  of  150  to  200  ft
The  brachiopod  and  polyzoon  in  the  raised  marine  mud  from
the  Larsen  area  have  kindly  been  identified  for  us  by  Mr.  C.
Hedley  and  Mr.  E.  F.  Hallman  respectively,  of  the  Australian
Museum.


803


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC


Peat  Deposits

Amongst  formations  of  recent  origin  may  be  mentioned  peat.
A  deposit  of  peat  was  discovered  by  one  of  us  formed  on  the
bottom  of  the  lake  called  Coast  Lake.


Layers    of    ice    sepa-
rated from  one  another      *r*<»A»*/.*
by  layers  of  bubbles.  r<Ji^iGUS|


Ice  divided  into  eleven
laminae  by  sheets  of
bubbles.


Ice     strongly    fibrous
and  prismatic  with  nunie-  \

rous  vertical  bubble-
htiles.  The  bottom  ice
for  6  in.  in  depth  is
yellow.


Peaty  fungus  and  ice
mixed.


Altematincf  laminje  of
fungus-peat  and  ice  pa?;^-
ing  downwards  into  4  in.
of  g'rittj'^  peat.


Pebbles  of  kenyte
lava  and  _  fungus  ce-
mented by  ice.


This  peat  is  formed  from  the  remains  of  a  large  fungoid
plant,  which  grows  in  profusion  in  the  w^ater  of  these  coastal
lakes  when  the  ice  thaws  in  midsummer.


A   deposit    of    mirabilite   was    discovered    by   one   of    us


304


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

at  the  spot  shown  on  the  map  near  Cape  Barne,  after
the  summer  thaw  had  set  in.  The  white  colour  of  the
salt  during  winter  rendered  it  indistinguishable  from  the
surrounding  snow,  but  after  the  thaw  the  difference  of  course
was  noticeable  between  this  white  salt  and  the  edges  of  the
dark  volcanic  rock.

Apparently  this  mirabilite  forms  one  of  the  products  of
evaporation  of  an  old  lake.  Numbers  of  these  dried  lake  basins
were  noticed  by  us  amongst  the  glacial  moraines  on  these
western  slopes  of  Erebus  near  Cape  Barne  and  our  winter
quarters.

In  regard  to  the  important  theoretical  question  as  to
whether  the  west  coast  of  Victoria  Land  is  of  an  Atlantic
or  of  a  Pacific  type,  the  following  considerations  present
themselves :

As  pointed  out  by  H.  T.  Ferrar,  the  massive  Beacon  sand-
stone formation  terminates  in  steep,  and  in  places  precipitous,
slopes  along  the  whole  line  of  coast  from  beyond  Cape  North
southerly  to  Mount  Discovery.  From  there  to  where  Mr.
Shackleton  and  his  Southern  Party,  after  ascending  the  granite
and  slate  mountains  of  this  coastal  range  in  latitude  83°  33',
longitude  170°  East,  reached  85°  South  at  an  altitude  of
6000  ft.,  sedimentary  rocks  were  found  to  cap  the  ranges.
They  were  disposed  in  gently  dipping  or  nearly  hori-
zontal strata,  and  extended  south-easterly  to  at  least  86°
South.

At  the  Great  Nunatak  in  latitude  85°  South,  longitude  165°
East,  the  sandstone  beds  containing  the  seven  seams  of  coal
dip  in  a  north-easterly  direction  at  an  angle  of  about  6°  to  8°.
There  was  no  evidence  there,  nor  as  far  northwards  as  our
explorations  extended,  that  is,  to  Mount  Nansen,  of  any  folding
in  the  Beacon  sandstone  formation.

At  Depot  Island,  to  the  north  of  Granite  Harbour,  the
ancient  gneiss  platform  is  there  folded  parallel  with  the  coast-
line, but  this  structure  appeared  to  be  the  exception  rather
than  the  rule.

The  Beacon  sandstone,  for  reasons  already  given,  is  perhaps

as  old  as  palaeozoic,  possibly  older  palaeozoic.     So,  if  the  above

conclusions  are  correct,  there  has  been  no  appreciable  folding

II  u  305


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

in  the  part  of  Victoria  Land  examined  by  us  since  palaeozoic
time.

The  coast-line  is,  therefore,  in  our  opinion,  of  the  Atlantic
rather  than  of  the  Pacific  type,  and  probably  owes  its  trend
and  position  to  a  powerful  fault  or  zone  of  faults,  with  a  down-
throw to  the  east.  The  volcanoes  Mount  Melbourne,  Mount
Erebus,  Mount  Discovery,  &c.,  are  probably  on  this  fracture,
or  zone  of  fractures.  If  this  view  as  to  the  Atlantic  type  of
this  part  of  the  coast  is  correct,  what  has  become  of  the
great  Andean  folds  developed  on  the  west  side  of  Graham
Land  ?

Possibly,  as  Wilckens  has  suggested,  west  of  Alexander  I.
Land  the  cordillera  is  submerged  through  faulting.*

In  this  case  the  Ross  Sea  subsidence  area  (if  such  it  be)
would  have  approximately  the  same  relation  to  the  Andean
trend-lines  in  the  Antarctic  that  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the
Antillean  and  West  Indian  fracture  zones  bear  to  the  trend-
lines  of  the  tropical  Andes.  It  must,  nevertheless,  be  admitted
that  the  Great  South  Polar  Shield  of  ancient  and  practically
incompressible  crystalline  rock,  intensely  folded  in  the  past,
would  be  incapable  of  being  further  folded  now,  and  if  the
Andean  zone  of  disturbance  traversed  this  shield  it  would  be
likely  to  traverse  it  as  a  zone  of  fractures  with  local  lava
effusions,  rather  than  as  a  fold  range  of  the  Pacific  type.
This  important  matter  will  be  discussed  by  us  in  detail  in  the
Geological  Memoir  of  this  Expedition.

Summary. — The  following  inferences  are  tentatively  sug-
gested in  regard  to  the  geology  of  Antarctica :

(1)  The  majority  of  the  tabular  bergs  of  this  region  are
largely,  in  some  cases  wholly,  snowbergs,  not  icebergs.

(2)  True  icebergs  are  also  found.

(3)  Glaciers  in  the  Antarctic  push  out  in  some  cases  thirty
miles  from  the  coast,  and  must  be  afloat,  as  argued  by  Ferrar,
for  the  greater  part  of  this  length.

(4)  The  Great  Ice  Barrier  is  formed  of  true  glacier  ice  at
its  sides  and  inland  extremity,  but  the  centre  and  seaward
portion  is  formed,  in  its  upper  part,  chiefly  of  snow.  We  agree
with  Captain  Scott's  conclusions  that  the  Great  Barrier,  except

*  Centralblatt  fiir  Min„  Geol.  und  Pal.,  1906,  No.  6,  p.  179.
306


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

at  its  edges  and  perhaps  at  some  distance  inland,  must  be  afloat.
At  its  eastern  side  it  has  been  moving  seawards  at  the  average
rate  of  about  five  hundred  yards  a  year  for  the  past  seven  years.

(5)  Throughout  the  whole  of  the  region  of  Antarctica
examined  by  us,  for  16°  of  latitude,  there  is  evidence  of  a  recent
great  diminution  in  the  glaciation.  In  McMurdo  Sound  this
arm  of  the  sea  now  free  from  land  ice  was  formerly  filled  by
a  branch  of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier,  whose  surface  rose  fully
1000  ft.  above  sea-level,  and  the  Barrier  ice  in  this  sound,  in
areas  from  which  the  ice  has  retreated,  was  formerly  about
4000  ft.  in  thicknesSo

(6)  The  snowfall  at  Cape  Royds  from  February  1908  to
February  1909  was  equal  to  about  9|  in.  of  rain.

(7)  The  neve-fields  of  Antarctica  are  probably  of  no  great
thickness.

(8)  The  southern  and  western  sides  of  the  sector  of  Ant-
arctica south  of  Australia  is  a  plateau  from  7000  to  10,000  ft.
high,  which  may  possibly  extend  across  the  South  Pole  to
Coat's  Land  and  Graham  Land.

(9)  Ross  Sea  is  probably  a  great  subsidence  area.

(10)  The  Beacon  sandstone  formation  which  extends  for
at  least  1100  miles  from  north  to  south  in  Antarctica  contains
coniferous  wood  associated  with  coal-seams.  It  is  probably
of  palaeozoic  age.

(11)  Limestones,  pisolitic  in  places,  in  85°  15'  South,  and
7000  ft.  above  sea-level,  contain  obscure  casts  of  radiolaria,

Radiolaria,  in  a  fair  state  of  preservation,  occur  in  black
cherts  amongst  the  erratics  at  Cape  Royds.  They  appear  to
belong  to  the  same  formation  as  the  limestone.  These  radio-
laria appear  to  be  of  older  palaeozoic  age.

(12)  The  succession  of  lavas  at  Erebus  appears  to  have  been
first  trachytes,  then  kenytes,  then  olivine  basalts.  Erebus  is,
however,  still  erupting  kenyte.

(13)  Peat  deposits,  formed  of  fungus,  are  now  forming  on
the  bottoms  of  some  of  the  Antarctic  glacial  lakes  near  77*"  and
78°  South.

(14)  Raised  beaches  of  recent  origin  extend  at  Ross  Island
to  a  height  of  at  least  160  ft.  above  sea-leveL

fl07


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC


NOTES  IN  REGARD  TO  MOUNT  EREBUS

By  Professor  T.  W.  EDGEWORTH  DAVID  and
RAYMOND  PRIESTLEY

Volcanic  Eruptions

We  observed  that  the  eruptions  of  Erebus,  like  those  of
StromboH,  were  most  frequent  during  a  low  barometer.  The
following  is  a  description  of  the  chief  eruption  of  Erebus
witnessed  by  us  on  June  14,  1908  :

This  morning,  about  8.45  a.m.,  as  the  small  blizzard  of  the
preceding  night  was  subsiding  we  noticed  that  Erebus  was  more
than  usually  active  ;  the  steam  cloud  over  its  summit  was
broader  and  taller  than  usual ;  and  there  were  frequent  out-
bursts of  steam.

At  11.30  AM.  it  was  noticed  that  an  eruption  of  altogether
unprecedented  vigour,  as  far  as  our  experience  of  Erebus  went,
was  in  progress.  Immense  masses  of  steam  rushed  upwards
to  at  least  2000  it.  above  the  summit  in  about  half  a  minute,
and  spread  out  to  form  a  vast  mushro  m-shaped  cloud.  This
rapidly  became  asymmetrical ;  while  the  main  steam  column
was  bent  over  to  the  left  (northerly)  by  the  return  air-current
from  the  Pole,  the  higher  ascending  portion,  at  about  2500  to
3000  ft.  was  carried  by  the  upper  current  in  a  southerly,  or  more
probably  south-easterly  direction.  At  about  2,30  p.m.  there
was  a  specially  grand  outburst  of  steam.  It  rushed  upwards
nearly  vertically,  just  a  trifle  bent  to  the  north,  and  dashed
its  head  with  great  violence  through  the  mushroom-shaped
cloud  or  canopy,  emerged  on  the  other  side,  and  must  have
ascended  there  from  1000  to  2000  ft.  higher  ;  in  all  about
5000  ft.  above  the  summit  of  the  mountain.

At  3.15  P.M.  a  bright  glov/  was  seen  on  Erebus  by  Messrs.
Priestley,  Murray  and  Mackay.  It  illuminated  the  whole
steam  column  to  the  base  of  the  mushroom.  We  observed  that
the  top  of  this  column  then  spread  out  gradually,  first  into  a
club -headed  lump,  then  into  a  mushroom-like  form.

At  3.25  P.M.  a  remarkably  bright  glow  suddenly  lit  up  all


go  o

r>   S    O

O  Q  o
f3  5^   Si


OOOOOOOOOOOOoOoOOOOOO

oooooooooooooooopcdoo
qoooOoooOooooooqoooo
o"  oT  00  K  uJ  in  «f  m  w  —  o"  <n  CO  K  CO"  «5  "t  pj  fJ  ~


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

the  lower  part  of  the  steam  column  above  the  crater.  This  was
seen  by  Shackleton,  Priestley  and  Day.

By  3.45  P.M.  the  steam  cloud  had  spread  out  much  more
and  had  besides  risen  higher,  and  the  first-formed  portions  of
the  cloud  trailed  away  in  long  streamers  to  the  south  with  one
extensive  branch  going  first  north  by  east,  then  north-westerly.

At  3.50  P.M.  there  was  another  bright  glow.  As  regards
the  uprushes  of  steam  the  interval  may  not  have  been  constant,
but  it  seemed  to  be  about  four  to  five  minutes.

Towards  6  p.m.  the  bend  over  of  the  steam  column  to  the
north-north-west  or  north-west  was  more  strongly  m.arked,
and  the  asymmetry  of  the  steam  cloud  was  due  to  a  preponderat-
ing amount  of  steam  gathering  to  the  north-west  side  of  Erebus.
By  this  time  the  older  part  of  the  steam  cloud  had  formed  a
species  of  thin  cirrus  cloud,  about  20,000  ft.  to  30,000  ft.  above
sea-level.

At  6.40  p.m.  Shackleton  observed  a  very  bright  glow  on  the
steam  cloud.

By  8  p.m.  the  eruption  appeared  to  be  subsiding,  and  the
steam  cloud  meanwhile  stretched  across  the  sky,  now  in  a  direc-
tion from  east-south-east  to  west-north-west  (the  surface  wind
was  at  the  time  about  north-north-east),  and  appeared  to  be
passing  almost  over  Sandy  Beach  and  Horseshoe  Bay.  It  was
now  delicately  draped  in  the  form  of  sinuous  thin  folds  like  a
thin  muslin  skirt.  Evidently  the  wind  direction  had  changed
at  the  summit  level  to  about  east-south-east  to  west-north-
west.

That  night  there  was  a  full  moon.  The  sky  a  lovely  deep
blue  near  the  zenith,  paler  towards  the  horizon.  When  the
moon  came  over  the  great  steam  cloud  of  Erebus  (22J°  of  arc)
the  scene  was  sublime.  Its  light  was  brightly  reflected  from  the
small  glaciers  at  the  south-west  foot  of  the  cone  of  Erebus  ;
all  the  rest  of  the  west  and  north-west  slope  was  in  deep  shadow.
In  middle  distance  below  the  base  of  the  cone  soft  white  mist
swathed  the  mountain.  Near  Back  Door  Bay  and  Cape  Royds
brightly  moonlit  patches  of  snow  showed  up  the  black  and  dark
brown  patches  of  rock  ;  our  hut  and  stable  in  the  middle  of  the
foreground  with  the  dazzling  white  surface  of  our  little  lake
with  its  winding  bays  and  coves.


THE   HEART    OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

On  June  17,  at  8  p.m.,  we  noticed  remarkable  white  cloud-
like dense  white  cumulus  to  north-north-east  over  the  ridge
at  the  back  of  our  hut  and  towards  Horseshoe  Bay.

At  11  P.M.  (about)  Mawson  came  running  down  from  Anemo-
meter Ridge  to  say  that  an  eruption  had  broken  out  from  a  new
quarter.  We  rushed  out  and  witnessed  a  distinct  eruption
amongst  the  huge  masses  of  steam  hanging  in  the  air  to  the
north-north-east.  The  new  mass  of  steam,  of  great  volume,
rolled  up  rapidly,  starting  at  perhaps  2000  ft.  above  sea-level,
to  probably  at  least  5000  ft.  above  the  sea.  A  photograph
was  taken  of  it,  and  afterwards  more  distinct  steam  eruptions
were  witnessed.

The  eruption  appeared  to  have  its  origin  on  the  southerly
and  south-south-west  slope  of  Mount  Bird,  at  perhaps  about
2000  ft.  above  the  sea-level.  The  steam  cloud  appeared  to
ascend  to  a  height  of  about  5000  ft.  above  sea-level  in  an  in-
credibly short  space  of  time.  These  fumaroles  or  intermittent
geysers  must  be  among  the  most  powerful  known.  They  appear
to  be  developed  near  the  meridional  earth  crack  which  extends
from  Mount  Bird  southerly  through  Mount  Erebus.

A  description  of  the  craters  of  Erebus  has  already  been
given  in  the  narrative  of  this  work,  and  the  fact  is  emphasised
that  the  interior  of  the  old  crater  is  largely  filled  with  layers
of  large  felspar  crystals  and  pumice,  alternating  with  beds  of
snow.  Five  of  these  felspar  crystals  are  figured  on  the  accom-
panying plate.


ADDITIONAL  NOTES  ON  ERUPTIONS

By  JAMES  MURRAY

We  were  not  so  fortunate  as  to  witness  an  eruption  of  any
great  moment.  The  activity  of  Mount  Erebus  showed  in  the
form  of  increased  volume  of  the  steam  cloud  or  "  smoke  cloud  '*
ejected  from  the  crater,  and  in  a  red  glow  or  flare  at  the  crater,
often  visible  at  night.  There  were  also  steam  eruptions  from
fumaroles  more  or  less  distant,  sometimes  many  miles  distant
from  the  active  crater.
310


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

The  Smoke  Cloud. — We  referred  to  the  cloud  of  steam
which  issued  from  the  crater  as  the  "  smoke  cloud,"  to  leave
no  chance  of  confounding  it  with  the  great  laminated  cloud
which  commonly  hung  over  the  mountain.  The  variations  in
the  volume  of  the  smoke  cloud  were  associated  with  high  and
low  barometer.  Occasionally,  for  a  few  days,  no  smoke  was
visible,  and  this  was  usually  at  times  of  high  pressure.  Even
then  we  could  not  be  sure  that  there  was  no  smoke  issuing,
as  there  is  a  gap  in  the  crater  not  visible  from  our  camp.  Great
activity  in  the  ejection  of  steam  occurred  with  the  glass  as
high  as  29.5  (very  high  for  this  region),  and  as  low  as  28.3  (pretty
nearly  our  minimum).

A  large  volume  of  cloud  was  often  thrown  up  with  great
force,  to  a  height  of  several  thousand  feet,  sometimes  as  much
as  5000  or  6000  ft.,  where  it  spread  out  and  formed  a  "  mush-
room." Commonly  in  these  eruptions  two  columns  could  be
distinguished  issing  from  the  crater,  one  white  (steam),  the
other  brown.  When  the  two  columns  were  soon  caught  by
the  wind,  the  white  one  went  higher,  and  the  dark  one  remained
lower.  Several  times  there  were  three  columns  in  the  crater,
and  on  April  11  there  were  two  in  the  crater,  and  one  outside,
well  to  the  right.  This  last  might  be  of  steam  which  had  rolled
out  through  the  gap.

One  of  the  largest  eruptions  happened  on  June  14,  when  the
steam  was  repeatedly  blown  up  to  a  great  height,  and  getting
into  a  still  region  at  several  thousand  feet  above  the  crater,
spread  out  on  both  sides  into  a  great  mushroom  cap.  At  one
period,  while  we  were  looking  at  it,  a  more  forcible  eruption
took  place,  and  the  ascending  column  penetrated  the  mushroom
and  formed  a  cone  above  it,  as  shown  in  the  figure.

A  beautiful  eruption  occurred  on  November  27,  while  a
party  was  breaking  camp  at  a  height  of  about  1600  ft.  on  the
mountain.  Many  diverging  columns  of  steam  shot  up  simulta-
neously, forming  a  design  like  Prince  of  Wales's  feathers.  It
was  accompanied  by  varied  and  curious  cloud  forms.  An
attempt  to  depict  it  is  made  in  the  second  illustration.

From  May  till  September,  when  it  was  sufficiently  dark
to  allow  it  to  be  seen,  a  red  glow  was  common  at  the  mouth
of  the  crater.     Usually  it  only  lighted  up  at  long  intervals

311


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC


Eruption  of  June  14,  1908


Ehuption  of  November  27, 1908


312


GEOLOGICAL    OBSERVATIONS

(ten  minutes  or  more),  and  appeared  to  be  simply  an  illumina-
tion from  some  heated  matter  hidden  within  the  crater.  Some-
times it  flared  up  frequently,  flashing  out  every  few  seconds,
with  brighter  glows  at  longer  intervals.

On  several  occasions  (as  on  June  14  and  25),  when  the
voluminous  smoke  cloud  showed  unusual  activity, there  appeared
to  be  red-hot  or  incandescent  matter  thrown  out  to  a  consider-


Great  Steam  Eruption,  September  8, 1908


able  height  (1000  to  2000  ft.  perhaps),  and  the  glow  lighted  up
the  lower  side  of  the  mushroom  cap.  Nothing  was  ever  seen
to  fall  outside  the  edge  of  the  crater.

Dr.  Mackay  pointed  out  some  fumaroles  on  the  old  crater,
which  were  visible  from  the  camp  at  Cape  Royds.  They  would
not  have  been  detected  had  they  not  been  seen  by  the  party
which  ascended  the  mountain.  Occasionally  little  jets  of  steam
could  be  seen  issuing  from  these,  and  on  May  21  quite  a  large
cloud  of  steam  came  from  one  of  them.

The  greatest  steam  eruptions  did  not  come  from  Mount
Erebus,  but  from  a  point  low  down  between  it  and  Mount

313


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

Bird.  In  this  direction  steam  clouds  were  seen  rising  in  April,
but  in  June  Mawson  twice  reported  considerable  eruptions.
On  June  17  many  jets  of  steam  were  seen,  extending  over  a
considerable  area.

On  September  8  a  single  jet  of  steam  shot  up  to  an  immense
height,  apparently  to  about  twice  the  height  of  Mount  Erebus.
A  strong  gale  was  blowing  at  the  time,  and  the  steam  was
carried  away  in  a  few  seconds,  so  that  there  was  no  time  to  take
an  angle.  In  spite  of  the  gale  the  steam  shot  up  with  such
velocity  that  the  column  appeared  quite  vertical.  The  figure
shows  it  too  near  Erebus,  for  the  sake  of  comparison.


314


APPENDIX  III

SCIENTIFIC  RESULTS   OF  THE  WESTERN
JOURNEY

SECTION  I

GEOLOGICAL  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL

By  RAYMOND  E.  PRIESTLEY

GEOLOGIST  TO  THE  EXPEDITION

THE  stratigraphy  of  that  portion  of  the  western  mountains
which  forms  the  chff s  on  either  side  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier
has  been  well  described  by  Mr.  Ferrar  in  his  account  of  the
geological  work  carried  out  by  the  National  Antarctic  Expedi-
tion, 1901-3.  In  its  broad  outlines  the  sequence  of  rocks  may  be
sketched  as  follows  :  (1)  at  the  base  lies  a  thick  series  of  gneisses
and  schists  ;  (2)  a  mass  of  granite  with  intrusive  sills  of  dolerite
lies  unconformably  on  the  schistose  series  ;  (3)  this  again  is
capped  unconformably  by  the  series  of  sedimentary  rocks
and  interbedded  volcanics  to  which  Mr.  Ferrar  has  given  the
name  of  the  Beacon  sandstone.

In  the  foothills  on  either  side  of  the  lower  slopes  of  the
glacier  a  series  of  schists  and  gneisses,  with  occasional  beds
of  limestone,  is  exposed,  and  the  most  striking  feature  of  this
series  is  the  great  variation  in  texture  and  mineral  compo-
sition of  these  metamorphic  rocks.  Farther  up  the  valley
of  the  glacier  these  are  capped  by  great  masses  of  granite  and
porphyry,  which  are  traversed  by  one  sill  of  dolerite  and  capped
by  another.

315


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

The  intrusive  nature  of  these  dolerites  is  abundantly  proved
by  the  fact  that  in  places  thin  veins  arising  from  the  two  sills  can
be  seen  cutting  across  the  granite  both  above  and  below,  and
even  in  one  or  two  cases  enclosing  large  masses  of  that  rock,
which  thus  appear  to  have  been  caught  up  in  the  dolerite.

On  the  north  side  of  the  bluff  which  forms  the  western
and  upper  extremity  of  the  Kukri  Hills  and  separates  the  east
fork  of  the  glacier  from  the  Dry  Valley,  this  structure  is  very
conspicuous  and  the  lower  sill  of  dolerite  appears  to  divide,
one  branch  running  upward  and  joining  the  upper  sill,  whilst
the  other  and  main  branch  runs  downward  at  a  slight  angle
for  a  short  distance,  is  lost  for  fifty  yards  behind  a  large  talus
heap,  and  reappears  at  a  lower  level,  where  it  becomes  first
horizontal  and  then  can  be  traced  as  far  as  the  horizon  as  a
broad  black  band  with  a  very  slight  upward  trend  for  the  last
mile  or  two.  From  the  upper  dolerite  sill  small  veins  extend
downward  into  the  granite  below,  and  in  the  bluff  at  the
upper  end  of  the  Kukri  Hills  a  branch  runs  from  the  lower
to  the  upper  sill.

The  main  object  of  our  journey  up  the  Ferrar  Glacier  was
to  examine  the  Beacon  sandstone  at  any  accessible  exposures
with  a  view  to  the  discovery  of  any  traces  of  former  organic
life,  and  with  this  object  I  carefully  examined  at  every  halting-
place  the  sandstone  blocks  in  the  moraines  amongst  which  we
frequently  encamped,  but  without  success.  Had  there  been
originally  any  organic  remains  the  probabilities  are  great  that
they  would  have  been  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  obliterated  by
the  intense  amount  of  weathering  that  the  rocks  had  under-
gone. The  more  resistant  of  the  blocks  were  coated,  in  many
cases,  with  a  hard  crust  of  carbonate  of  lime  derived  from  the
original  cementing  material,  and  in  places  as  much  as  an  eighth
of  an  inch  in  thickness,  and  those  which  were  originally  held
together  by  a  soluble  cement  were  so  friable  that  I  was  able
to  take  blocks  as  big  as  my  head  and  break  them  up  in  my
fingers  with  as  much  ease  as  I  could  a  similar-sized  block  of
friable  marl  from  the  English  trias  ;  whilst  in  many  cases
large  masses,  when  struck  fairly  hard  with  the  haft  of  my
geological  hammer,  crumbled  to  a  powder  of  individual  quartz
grains.  Each  stone,  owing  to  its  greater  capacity  for  absorbing
310


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

heat  than  that  of  the  ice  around  it,  had  melted  a  hollow  round
it  of  a  size  dependent  on  its  own,  and  in  cases  where  the  hollows
had  not  been  tapped  by  some  of  the  many  interlacing  cracks
with  which  the  face  of  the  glacier  was  seamed,  they  were  full
of  thaw-water  covered  only  when  in  shadow  by  a  thin  sheet  of
ice,  and  the  saline  taste  of  this  water,  which  we  frequently  were
compelled  to  use  for  cooking  purposes,  was  an  eloquent  tribute
to  the  amount  of  matter  filched  from  the  boulders.

Having  examined  the  medial  and  lateral  moraines  up  as
far  as  the  Cathedral  Rocks,  and  now  approaching  a  region  where,
judging  from  the  map,  there  seemed  some  likelihood  of  reaching
accessible  exposures  of  large  masses  of  the  Beacon  sandstone,
I  asked  Armytage  to  make  for  the  passage  between  the  Solitary
Rocks  and  the  north  side  of  the  glacier,  and  to  make  a  detour
on  the  way  in  order  to  examine  the  foot  of  the  Obelisk  Range
if  possible.

In  pursuance  of  this  plan  we  left  the  Cathedral  Rocks  on
December  20  and  made  for  the  north  side  of  the  glacier,  examin-
ing morainic  matter  on  the  way,  and  after  successfully  negotiat-
ing a  series  of  ice-falls  by  keeping  well  to  the  north,  we  camped
practically  on  the  site  of  Scott's  first  camp  after  leaving  the
Dry  Valley,  nam.ely,  at  the  north-western  end  of  the  bluff
which  forms  the  upper  end  of  the  Kukri  Hills.  We  had  a
good  view  of  the  Solitary  Rocks  from  here  and  of  the  islands
beyond  them,  and,  in  view  of  subsequent  discoveries  on  closer
inspection,  I  may  here  say  that  from  our  camp  of  this  night
I  would  myself  have  declared  both  that  the  Solitary  Rocks
were  an  island,  that  there  were  two  islands  off  the  south-eastern
end  of  them,  and  that  in  all  probability  they  were  of  Beacon
sandstone,  all  three  of  which  suppositions  were  made  by  the
Discovery  sledge-parties,  and  all  three  of  which  eventually
turned  out  to  be  incorrect.

On  the  other  hand,  even  from  here  the  lowest  three  or  four
thousand  feet  of  the  Obelisk  Range,  marked  on  the  map  as
Beacon  sandstone,  looked  much  more  like  the  granite  bluff
under  which  we  were  camped,  and  I  was  more  than  ever  anxious
to  examine  it  as  closely  as  possible.

It  was  at  this  date  that  Armytage  informed  me  that  he  was
afraid  his  orders  would  not  allow  us  to  reach  the  Depot  Nunatak,

317


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

as  he  was  due  to  meet  the  Northern  Party  at  Butter  Point  on
January  3,  and  as  that  removed  my  chance  of  getting  fossils
from  the  carbonaceous  bands  which  occur  in  the  sandstone
of  the  nunatak,  I  determined  to  give  fuller  attention  to  that
lobe  of  the  glacier  we  were  now  entering  and  to  examine  the
Obelisk  Range,  if  possible,  and  the  Solitary  Rocks,  together
with  the  islands  off  them.

We  therefore  broke  camp  on  the  21st  and  reached  the  north
wall  of  the  glacier  late  in  the  afternoon,  but  found  ourselves
cut  off  from  the  cliff  exposure  as  the  ice  terminated  in  a  sheer
precipice  between  two  and  three  hundred  feet  high  and  with
a  considerable  and  swift  river  running  at  the  bottom.  It  was,
however,  possible  from  where  we  were  to  see  the  grain  of  the
coarser  varieties  of  the  rock,  and  I  had  no  hesitation  whatever,
even  then,  in  naming  it  in  my  diary  as  a  similar  granite,  with
intrusions  of  a  dark  green  porphyry,  to  that  seen  in  the  Kukri
Hills.

On  continuing  round  the  lobe  of  the  glacier,  the  next  big
fact  which  forced  itself  on  my  recognition  was  that  the  Solitary
Rocks  were  not  islands,  but  were  connected  with  the  north  wall
of  the  glacier  by  a  ridge  of  the  same  granite  over  a  thousand
feet  high.

We  were  obliged,  at  the  time  that  this  first  became  clear  to
us,  to  move  farther  towards  the  centre  of  the  ice,  as  the  edges
of  the  glacier  had  been  swept  clear  of  snow,  and  Armytage  did
not  care  to  camp  on  the  bare  ice  with  a  strong  wind  blowing
straight  towards  the  ice-cliff.  After  the  camp  had  been  pitched,
Armytage  volunteered  to  go  with  me,  and  we  walked  down  to
the  edge  of  the  cliff  opposite  the  north  wall  of  the  glacier  and
followed  this  cliff  round  until  we  were  opposite  the  Solitary
Rocks,  thus  clearly  demonstrating  that  there  is  no  passage  for
the  glacier  ice  to  the  north  of  these  rocks,  but  that  they  are
the  butt  end  of  a  peninsula  banking  up  the  ice  above  and  forcing
it  round  to  the  southern  side,  where  it  descends  as  a  series  of  ice-
falls.  At  the  foot  of  the  cliff,  in  the  corner  made  by  the  isthmus
and  the  main  mass  of  the  Obelisk  Range,  there  lies  a  lake  of
considerable  size  which  was  fed  by  a  stream  from  under  the
Solitary  Rocks  and  by  many  torrents  from  the  gullies  in  the
mountains.  This  lake  gives  rise  to  the  main  drainage  river,
818


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

which  follows  the  north  wall  of  the  glacier.  I  subsequently
saw  this  river  at  its  mouth,  and  found  that  in  reaching  the
sea  it  splits  into  a  number  of  sluggish  distributaries  which  have
deposited  a  considerable  delta  of  fine  detritus  at  the  eastern
extremity  of  the  Dry  Valley.  The  amount  of  river  denudation,
although  accomplished  in  a  very  small  portion  of  the  year,
must  be  of  no  mean  geological  result,  since  all  the  many  streams
I  saw  during  this  thaw  were  choked  with  fine  sediment,  and  the
lake  was  of  a  yellow  colour  owing  to  the  amount  of  fine  material
held  in  suspension  in  its  waters.

At  two  points  I  was  able,  during  the  next  day,  to  gain  access
to  the  Solitary  Rocks.  These  consist  of  alternate  bands  of
black  and  yellow  rock  v/hich  are  identified  on  Ferrar's  map
as  dolerite  and  Beacon  sandstone  ;  but  on  December  22  I
climbed  down  the  ice-cliff,  crossed  the  frozen  stream  separating
me  from  the  exposure,  climbed  up  the  talus  scree  and  collected
from  the  lower  yellow  band  of  the  Northern  Solitary  and
found  the  rock  to  be  a  granite  similar  to  that  of  the  Kukri
Hills.

There  were  numerous  specimens  of  the  dark  porphyry  in  the
scree,  but  I  saw  none  in  situ.  I  also  picked  up  several  pieces
of  a  dark  fine-grained  basaltic  rock  in  the  moraines,  a  fact  which
points  to  the  occurrence  of  basalts  among  the  volcanic  rocks
of  the  upper  regions  of  the  glacier.  The  large  height  at  which
these  last  ice-worn  specimens  were  found  indicates  to  some
extent  what  shrinking  there  has  been  in  the  amount  of  ice  over-
flowing through  this  great  glacier.  It  was  at  this  exposure
that  I  observed  many  great  blocks  that  had  evidently  fallen
from  the  upper  yellow  band,  and  as  these  proved  to  be  a  granite
differing  from  that  of  the  lower  band  only  in  being  of  somewhat
finer  and  more  compact  texture,  I  decided  to  ask  Armytage
to  allow  me  to  prolong  my  stay  on  this  side  of  the  glacier  for
a  few  hours  longer  in  order  to  coUect  if  possible  from  this  upper
band  itself.  In  this  attempt  I  was  partially  thwarted  as  I
was  unable  to  find  any  accessible  place  where  the  scree  reached
right  to  the  upper  band,  but  fortunately  I  was  able  at  one  other
place  to  collect  from  some  blocks  of  the  rock  which  had  fallen
on  the  top  of  a  scree  sufficiently  high  to  cover  up  the  lower
granite  completely  and  also  half  the  dolerite  band  above  it.

819


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

I  have  not  the  sUghtest  hesitation,  therefore,  in  mapping  both
the  Hght  bands  of  the  Sohtary  Rocks  as  granite.

Specimens  were  also  collected  from  the  lower  dolerite  band,
but  the  upper  one  proved  inaccessible.

After  leaving  these  rocks  we  decided  to  make  a  day's  march
round  by  the  islands  mapped  at  their  south-eastern  extremity,
and  from  there  to  the  bluff  end  of  the  Kukri  Hills  before  proceed-
ing to  the  south  side  of  the  glacier  to  look  for  fossils  in  the  Beacon
sandstone  of  the  Knob  Head  Mountain  and  the  Terra-cotta
Range.  At  the  point  where  the  island  (for  the  two  islands
indicated  on  the  Discovery  map  proved  to  be  one)  was  struck
it  proved  inaccessible,  but  was  sufficiently  close  for  a  fairly
accurate  description  to  be  noted  down  and  a  rough  plan  and
sketch  were  also  taken.  At  the  north-western  end  the  sill  of
dolerite  still  remained  as  a  sheet  of  considerable  thickness
capping  the  granite,  and  cutting  across  the  granite  were  two
pipes  of  dolerite  several  feet  thick  which  persisted  until  they
were  lost  beneath  the  ice.  The  middle  of  the  island  is  much
lower  than  either  end,  and  this  causes  the  island,  when  viewed
from  some  distance,  to  have  the  appearance  of  two  smaller
ones.  The  south-eastern  end  of  the  island  is  a  low  granite  hill
with  one  shoulder  capped  by  a  thin  portion  of  the  dolerite  sill,
the  majority  of  which  has  been  removed  by  denudation.  A
specimen  picked  up  proved  the  dolerite  to  be  a  much  finer-
grained  variety  than  that  of  the  Solitary  Rocks.  The  plan
will  be  published  in  the  geological  volume  of  the  results  of  the
expedition,  together  with  other  sections  illustrating  different
details.

Subsequently  we  moved  across  to  Knob  Head  Mountain,
and  the  rest  of  the  time  before  it  was  necessary  for  the  party
to  return  was  occupied  by  an  exhaustive  examination  of  the
rocks  of  that  mountain  and  the  Terra-cotta  Mountains,  which,
though  they  yielded  no  fossils,  produced  many  fine  specimens
of  different  varieties  of  the  Beacon  sandstones,  and  of  junctions
between  the  sandstone  and  the  dolerite.  Specimens  of  many
other  types  of  rocks  were  obtained  from  the  moraines  at  the
foot  of  the  cliffs.

The  cliffs  at  this  spot  are  seamed  with  gullies,  which  must
be  almost  always  swept  by  the  strong  winds  which  blew  practi-
320


Solitary  Coral  secu  from  above


a        O


li;.io3  .f.ix;jTios


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

cally  continuously  during  the  three  or  four  days  we  stayed
there.  A  geological  result  of  this  overflow  of  cold  air  from  the
inland  plateau  is  that  several  beautiful  instances  of  mechanical
weathering  through  the  agency  of  the  sand-blast  are  to  be  seen.
The  most  marked  instance  of  this  type  of  weathering  was  to
be  seen  in  the  occurrence  of  numerous  cups  of  sandstone  beauti-
fully polished  and  concentrically  striated  on  the  outside  and
hollowed  out  more  or  less  perfectly  inside,  ranging  in  size  from
that  of  a  large  cocoa-nut  to  that  of  an  ordinary  glass  marble.
We  were  for  some  time  puzzled  to  account  for  the  origin  of  these
pot-holes,  as  we  named  them,  but  the  mystery  was  cleared  up
when  a  block  of  weathered  sandstone  was  found  which  proved
to  be  full  of  round  patches,  anything  up  to  half  a  foot  in  diameter,
which  were  of  a  different  colour  and  consistency  from  the  rest
of  the  rock.  Several  of  these  round  nodules  had  weathered
out  and  were  lying  at  different  distances  from  the  parent  rock,
and  when  one  or  two  of  them  were  collected  and  broken  across
the  middle  with  a  hammer  they  were  seen  to  consist  of  a  very
hard  and  indurated  outer  shell  from  an  eighth  to  half  an  inch
thick,  enclosing  a  dark  green  ferruginous-looking  sandstone
of  larger  grain  and  with  less  cohesion  between  the  grains.  The
mode  of  origin  of  these  structures  was  now  clear,  for  they  were
to  be  seen  in  all  stages  of  formation,  from  the  nodule  which  was
left  intact  and  only  polished  on  the  outside,  through  the  various
intermediate  stages,  to  the  perfect  cup  where  the  inside  had
been  completely  cleaned  out  and  only  the  polished  outer  shell
was  left,  containing  many  of  the  quartz  grains  which  had  been
used  by  the  wind  as  a  file  to  get  rid  of  the  less  resistant  portion
of  the  stone.  Even  a  further  stage  was  to  be  seen,  for  in  time
the  outer  shell  itself  began  to  wear  away  and  the  cup  became
sufficiently  light  to  be  moved  by  the  wind  and  many  had  been
lifted  up  and  smashed  to  pieces.

One  other  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  plateau  wind  as
a  denuding  agent  was  well  shown  at  a  height  of  6000  ft.  on  the
Terra-cotta  Mountains,  where  the  talus  became  sufficiently  thin
for  the  Beacon  sandstone  to  be  seen  in  situ.  One  of  the  beds
of  sandstone  was  a  fine-grained  white  rock,  and  this  stood  out
in  ledges  eighteen  or  twenty  inches  wide,  and  the  underside
of  these  ledges  had  been  weathered  into  a  series  of  thin,  roughly

n  X  821


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

hexagonal  columns  from  one  to  nine  inches  long,  and  from  a
quarter  to  half  an  inch  thick.

Where  these  columns  hung  close  together  their  original
structure  seemed,  as  before  mentioned,  to  be  hexagonal,  and
it  appears  probable  that  the  weathering  has  been  assisted  in
producing  this  particular  type  by  some  secondary  structure
due  to  alteration  and  secondary  crystallisation  in  the  rock
itself.  When  the  columns  hung  further  apart,  owing  to  the  gaps
made  by  the  entire  removal  of  some,  they  had  lost  all  definite
shape  and  resembled  nothing  so  much  as  stone  icicles.  Several
specimens  of  both  types  of  weathered  sandstone  were  collected,
but  those  of  the  latter  type  were  extremely  difficult  to  preserve
during  a  sledge  journey  over  rough  ice,  and  one  or  two  also
were  damaged  in  the  transition  from  the  Butter  Point  Depot
to  the  ship.

On  the  way  down  the  glacier  any  specimens  were  collected
which  had  peculiar  markings  on  them,  and  these  and  the  other
specimens  secured  will  be  carefully  examined  when  the  detailed
petrological  work  is  done,  but  it  is  very  improbable  that  any
of  them  will  reveal  the  presence  of  any  organic  remains  suffi-
ciently unaltered  to  be  identifiable.

At  the  entrance  of  the  east  fork  of  the  glacier  and  on  the
north  side  we  passed  and  examined  moraines  which  were  essen-
tially different  from  the  ordinary  moraines  met  with  higher  up,
and  there  seems  no  doubt  that  the  sea  has  played  a  considerable
part  in  the  heaping  up  of  this  material  at  the  mouth  of  the
glacier.  It  is  proposed  to  deal  more  fully  with  this  subject
in  that  section  of  the  chapter  having  reference  to  the  recent
elevation  of  land.


SECTION  II

Descriptions  of  the  Stranded  Moraines  and  Dry  Valley,
WITH  Special  Reference  to  the  Recent  Elevation
OF  the  Land  Bordering  McMurdo  Sound

We  first  visited  the  moraines  on  December  4,  when  I  collected
a  few  specimens  of  rock  and  some  moss  and  fungus  for  Murray,
but  was  not  able  to  take  much  extra  weight  as  we  were  already
322


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

pulling  215  lb.  per  man.  Subsequent  visits  were  made  on
December  13  and  January  5,  and  it  is  from  notes  taken  on  these
three  visits  that  I  have  compiled  the  description  which  follows.

The  moraines  are  several  miles  long  and  of  considerable
breadth,  while  many  of  their  numerous  small  hills  reach  a  height
of  between  a  hundred  and  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  They
consist  of  a  heterogeneous  collection  of  dihris  of  numerous
varieties  of  rocks,  and  the  material  ranges  in  size  from  blocks
containing  many  cubic  feet  of  rock  to  the  finest  dust.  They  are
separated  from  the  piedmont  glacier  which  here  fringes  the  moun-
tains by  a  stream-channel  cut  out  almost  to  sea-level,  and  the
water  which  has  accomplished  this  erosion  is  evidently  the  result
of  the  summer  thaw,  the  stream  being  fed  during  that  season
both  from  the  glacier  and  from  the  snowdrifts  on  the  western
side  of  the  moraines.  This  stream  is  undercutting  the  ice,
and  from  the  exposures  of  morainic  material  on  its  western
bank  it  appears  probable  that  the  mantle  of  debris  continues
right  up  to  the  flanks  of  the  foothills  to  the  west.

The  dihris  being  mostly  of  a  dark  colour  the  amount  of  thaw
in  summer  is  considerable,  and  the  whole  district  is  seamed
with  stream-channels  which,  during  the  few  sunny  days  in  the
height  of  summer,  are  filled  with  running  water.  Every  basin-
like hollow  between  the  ridges  and  peaks  is  filled  with  a  lake
corresponding  in  size  to  that  of  the  hollow.  In  spite  of  the
loose  nature  of  the  debris  the  lake  basins  are  enabled  to  hold
water  because  at  all  periods  of  the  year  the  ground  at  a  depth
of  a  few  feet  is  frozen  hard.  Even  in  summer  the  whole  mass
of  the  dSbris,  except  an  outer  mantle,  is  firmly  cemented,  in
consequence  of  the  freezing  at  a  slight  depth  of  the  percolating
water  supplied  by  the  melting  snowdrifts.

Proof  of  this  is  seen  where  the  streams  have  cut  fairly  deep
channels  in  the  moraines.  In  the  walls  of  these  channels
lenticles  of  opaque  ice  fairly  free  from  gravel  and  varying  from
an  inch  or  two  to  a  couple  of  feet  in  thickness  are  to  be  seen
in  many  places,  while  in  other  places,  if  a  few  feet  of  the  outer
mantle  of  the  stream-cliff  are  removed,  the  gravel  behind  is
found  to  be  firmly  cemented.

Most  of  the  streams  run  northwards,  and  at  the  northern
end  of  the  moraines  quite  a  thick  alluvial  deposit,  having  a

323


THE    HEART    OF    THE   ANTARCTIC

strong  resemblance  to  a  series  of  miniature  deltas,  is  to  be  seen
along  the  ice-foot,  awaiting  subsequent  removal  to  the  sea.
The  amount  of  material  removed  from  the  moraines  in  this  way
must  be  very  considerable.  Another  agency  which  must  be
fast  reducing  the  size  of  the  moraines  is  the  direct  heat  of  the
summer  sun  on  the  cliffs  at  the  northern  end.  Frequently
while  we  were  camped  near  the  moraines  small  avalanches  of
gravel  and  mud  fell  on  to  the  ice-foot,  and  many  tons  of  material
brought  down  in  this  manner  must  be  carried  away  when  the
ice-foot  breaks  up  in  the  late  summer  months.  The  wind  also
plays  an  important  part  in  the  transport  of  finer  material ;
the  snow  for  several  miles  to  the  north  of  the  moraines  being
full  of  grit,  which  is  so  abundant  that,  as  I  have  observed  in
my  diary,  it  accelerates  considerably  the  melting  of  the  drift-
snow  and  surface  of  the  ice.

There  is  a  much  greater  proportion  of  pebbles  and  large
boulders  in  the  upper  layers  of  the  morainic  material  than  in
the  lower,  as  seen  in  section  in  the  northern  cliff  exposures.
This  phenomenon,  I  think,  is  partially  explained  by  the  fact
that  the  finer  material  would  gradually  be  carried  down  by  the
thaw-water  and  used  to  increase  the  compactness  of  the  lower
layers  at  the  expense  of  the  upper  ones  ;  but  in  addition  I  am
inclined  to  believe  that  when  the  glacier  which  borders  the
moraines  was  actually  providing  an  outlet  for  the  ice  accumulat-
ing on  the  mountains  above  it,  it  brought  down  its  quota  of
morainic  material  from  local  sources,  which  local  material
would  reach  the  moraines  rather  in  the  condition  of  large
fragments  than  as  the  finely  divided  debris  which  is  essentially
the  result  of  the  prolonged  trituration  for  which  a  long  journey
is  necessary.  This  latter  explanation  finds  support  in  the
abundance  of  local  erratics  on  that  portion  of  the  moraines
nearest  the  shore,  erratics  which  are  identical  with  the  different
great  formations  which  crop  out  in  the  sides  of  the  glacier
valleys  furrowing  the  western  mountains.  As  for  the  material
which  makes  up  the  main  mass  of  the  moraines,  a  great
proportion  of  it  must  have  come  across  the  Sound,  because,
while  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  other  great  outburst
of  kenytic  material  besides  that  of  Mount  Erebus,  large
quantities  of  kenyte  and  kenytic  fragmental  rocks  were
324


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

picked  up  by  my  companions  and  myself  during  our  short  stay
here.

With  regard  to  the  distribution  of  the  local  erratics,  I  will
quote  a  note  from  my  diary  of  January  6,  1909,  when  I  observed
that :  "  The  southernmost  portion  of  the  moraines  is  almost
entirely  composed  of  angular  basaltic  and  kenytic  debris  on  the
seaward  side,  the  local  boulders  becoming  more  common  as  the
landward  side  is  approached,  though  at  the  northern  end  of
the  moraines  these  boulders  become  very  numerous  even  on
the  extreme  seaward  side."

An  important  characteristic  in  addition  to  those  already
noted  is  the  very  isolated  occurrence  of  some  of  the  erratics.

Some  small  conical  heaps  consisting  entirely  of  fragments
of  one  kind  of  rock  were  undoubtedly,  from  the  angular  nature
of  the  fragments,  the  final  results  of  the  frost  weathering  of
very  large  original  blocks.  Not  so  in  all  cases,  however.  In
the  case  of  one  basalt  tuff  particularly  I  noticed  that  it  was
found  entirely  covering  two  or  three  small  hills  at  the  south-
eastern corner  of  the  moraines,  and  I  found  it  nowhere  else.
The  pieces  were  all  rounded  or  subangular  and  they  were  too
scattered  to  have  been  the  result  of  the  weathering  of  a  few
large  boulders.

I  have  noticed  in  my  diary  a  similar  occurrence  of  olivine
basalt  on  one  of  the  mounds  fringing  the  Terraced  Lake  at
Cape  Barne,  within  two  miles  of  winter  quarters.

One  fact  points  to  recent  elevation  of  these  moraines.  At
the  north-eastern  end  of  the  moraines  a  number  of  flat-topped
hills  and  ridges  were  of  the  same  height  and  all  capped  by
several  inches  of  a  brownish  deposit  which  proved,  on  examina-
tion, to  be  a  fungus  similar  to  those  found  in  the  lakes  at  winter
quarters.  The  whole  district  seems,  therefore,  to  have  been
at  quite  a  recent  date  a  lake  bed.  The  lake  has  been  elevated
and  drained,  and  its  bed  has  been  dissected  by  streams,  whilst
the  higher  land  which  formerly  existed  to  the  east  and  con-
stituted the  boundary  of  the  lake  has  been  worn  down  and
removed  during  the  recent  elevation  of  the  moraines  by  a
combination  of  the  successive  summer  thaws  and  marine
erosion.

I  have  given  a  fairly  full  description  of  these  moraines

825


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

because  their  characteristics  are  interesting,  and  they  are  a
duplicate  of  those  we  afterwards  examined  in  the  north-eastern
fork  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  to  which  Captain  Scott  gave  the
name  of  Dry  Valley.  In  describing  the  latter  I  wish  to  pay
particular  attention  to  the  raised  beach  there.

Specimens  of  moss,  fungus  and  alga  were  secured,  as  also
numerous  specimens  of  a  peculiar  rotifer  living  in  the  lakes,
but  a  striking  feature  of  the  life  of  the  moraines  was  the  absence
of  any  type  of  lichen.

The  Dry  Valley  of  New  Harbour

It  was  originally  intended  that  a  sledge-party  of  three
should  make  an  exhaustive  examination  of  the  area  which
was  originally  occupied  by  the  north-eastern  arm  of  the  Ferrar
Glacier,  but  from  which  the  ice  has  at  present  retreated,  and
which  is  now  covered  by  a  thick  deposit  of  morainic  debris.
The  plans  were,  however,  decidedly  modified  through  the
Northern  Party  failing  to  return  to  Butter  Point,  and  our
operations  being  much  restricted  by  our  orders,  we  were  un-
fortunately unable  to  spend  more  than  two  days  in  the  Valley.
On  January  12  we  left  Butter  Point  for  New  Harbour,  and
reached  our  objective  at  6  p.m.  the  same  day.

The  13th  and  14th  were  spent  examining  the  moraines,
and  on  the  15th  we  returned  to  our  permanent  camping-place
at  the  Point,  and  resumed  our  wait  for  the  Northern  Party.

We  had  hardly  been  on  shore  half  an  hour  when  Armytage
picked  up  some  fragments  of  Pecten  Colbecki,  the  shell  of  a
mollusc  which  is  still  found  living  on  the  sea-floor  at  Back
Door  Bay.  Encouraged  by  this  find  we  devoted  all  our  energies
towards  making  similar  discoveries  at  different  points  along
the  foreshore,  and  were  successful  beyond  my  wildest  hopes.
Not  only  were  numerous  fragments  and  many  whole  valves
of  the  Pecten  obtained  at  all  elevations  up  to  fifty  feet  above
sea-level,  but  in  several  spots  fragments  of  the  shell  of  an
Anatina,  a  mollusc  which  still  flourishes  abundantly  in  the
sea  on  the  other  side,  were  very  numerous,  and  in  one  place,
by  digging  down  several  inches  into  the  sand  with  the  lid  of
a  cocoa-tin,  I  secured  two  double-valve  shells  of  another  species
326


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

of  bivalve  which  I  have  seen  commonly  in  our  biologist's
dredge.

From  the  abundance  of  the  shells  I  have  no  doubt  at  all
that  this  was  a  genuine  raised  beach,  and  the  recent  nature
of  the  shells  points  to  the  probability  of  the  rise  of  the  land
being  still  in  progress.  A  few  shells  might  have  been  cast  up
by  the  waves  of  a  storm  during  the  short  time  that  the  bay  is
free  from  ice  or  ice-foot,  but  the  vast  number  of  the  organic
remains  precludes  the  possibility  of  their  having  all  been  cast
up  by  this  means,  while  a  still  stronger  point  is  the  nature  and
wholeness  of  the  shells  :  both  the  Pecten  and  the  Anatina
possess  shells  of  extreme  fragility,  and  we  cannot  suppose  that
they  could  be  hurled  about  by  waves  capable  of  throwing  them
hundreds  of  yards  up  the  gravel  banks  without  being  smashed
to  atoms.  Yet  hundreds  of  valves  of  the  Pecten  especially
were  practically  intact,  ears  and  all,  and  the  only  way  to  account
for  their  presence  so  far  out  of  their  native  element  is  on  the
supposition  of  a  gradual  rising  of  the  land  such  as,  from  evidence
recently  brought  to  light,  appears  to  be  taking  place  along  large
stretches  of  the  western  coast  of  the  Sound.

There  were  large  mud-flats  bordering  the  ice-foot  in  this
valley,  and  these  reached  their  greatest  extent  where  they  were
augmented  by  the  deltaic  material  of  the  many  streams  draining
the  valley,  and  on  them,  a  few  feet  above  the  present  sea-level,
I  secured  numerous  specimens  of  amphipods  and  sea-spiders,
and  one  small  fish,  all  in  a  much  desiccated  condition.  It  is
not  necessary  to  postulate  a  recent  rise  in  the  level  of  the  land
to  account  for  these  specimens,  since,  in  the  short  period  when
the  sea  is  released  from  the  control  of  its  icy  winter  covering,
a  strong  wind  blowing  directly  into  the  bay  would  inevitably
cause  a  rise  in  the  level  of  the  water  sufficient  to  assure
the  submergence  of  those  portions  of  the  mud-flats  immedi-
ately adjacent  to  the  ice-foot.  Upon  the  recession  of  the  sea,
numerous  animals  would  be  left  stranded  in  any  slight  depres-
sion in  the  recently  covered  flats,  and  evaporation  and  ablation
would  remove  the  sea  water  during  the  late  summer  and  autumn,
leaving  the  desiccated  remains  of  the  animals  and  giving  rise
to  an  efiiorescence  of  salt  on  the  surface  of  the  mud.  Indeed
this  sequence  of  events  might  very  well  have  been  caused  by

327


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

the  very  blizzard  which  raged  from  February  20  to  the  22nd,
1908,  when  the  Nimrod  was  driven  north.

The  remaining  features  of  the  Dry  Valley  moraines  are  very
much  a  repetition  of  those  of  the  stranded  moraines,  but  on  a
much  larger  scale.  I  was  unfortunately  only  able  in  the  limited
time  at  my  disposal  to  cursorily  examine  a  few  square  miles
of  the  moraines,  and  in  my  longest  excursion  only  penetrated
three  or  four  miles  inland.  This  particular  walk,  however,
resulted  in  one  interesting  observation,  for  I  reached  a  height
of  between  five  hundred  and  six  hundred  feet,  and  found  that
the  abundance  of  what  might  be  called  erratics  foreign  to  the
valley,  namely,  kenyte  and  basalt  and  fragmental  rocks  apper-
taining to  these  two  types,  had  in  no  wise  diminished  in  quantity,
their  proportion  to  those  rocks  which  obviously  might  have
been  derived  from  the  sides  of  the  valley  or  from  the  higher
reaches  of  the  glacier  remaining  much  the  same  as  at  sea-
level.

Only  two  of  the  many  stream-channels  which  furrow  the
district  immediately  round  the  camp  are  now  active,  the  rest
being  at  the  best  only  occupied  by  a  series  of  stagnant  pools,
while  numerous  depressions  of  smaller  extent,  with  a  heavy
efflorescence  of  salt  coating  the  gravel,  mark  the  site  of  former
pools.

The  most  northerly  and  most  flourishing  stream  in  the  Dry
Valley  has  cut  a  channel  fifty  feet  deep  through  the  stratified
gravel,  the  sides  of  which  slope  steeply  at  angles  between  45°
and  75°.  The  water  here  was  unfit  to  drink,  owing  to  the  amount
of  fine  sediment  held  in  suspension.  As  the  stream  became
sluggish  when  breaking  up  into  numerous  branches  and  meander-
ing across  the  alluvial  stretches  of  land  at  its  mouth,  this  fine
sediment  could  quite  easily  be  observed  settling  down  in  suffi-
cient quantity  to  add  appreciably  to  the  delta  even  in  the  course
of  a  few  days.

During  our  stay  at  this  camp  I  collected  numerous  specimens
of  the  more  interesting  erratics  and  bags  of  the  finer  material
of  the  deposits,  and  Brocklehurst  secured  specimens  from  New
Harbour  Heights,  including  two  pieces  of  fairly  pure  calcite
from  one  of  the  limestones  interbedded  with  the  Archaean
schists.
328


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

Biological  Field  Notes

Specimens  of  moss,  fungus  and  lichen  were  obtained  for
Murray.  One  of  these  specimens  is  worth  individual  notice,
namely,  a  fungus-like  substance  growing  as  a  thick  layer  on
the  black  mud  of  the  tide-flats  just  above  the  present  level
of  the  water  and  well  inside  the  region  which  must  be  covered
either  at  an  ordinary  high  tide  or  during  any  unusual  rise  of  the
water.

The  peculiar  point  about  the  plant  which  first  struck  me
was  the  formation  of  a  series  of  cones,  as  much  as  six  inches
high,  and  formed  by  the  gas  from  the  organic  mud  underneath
collecting  as  large  bubbles  under  the  impervious  skin  of  fungus.

We  saw  altogether  three  whole  specimens  of  Crab-eater
seals  and  a  like  number  of  Weddells  dead  on  the  hills  hereabouts,
and  the  moraines  are  covered  with  scattered  remains.  One
of  the  Crab-eater  carcases  was  lying  at  a  steep  angle  on  one  of
the  banks  bordering  the  northern  stream  I  have  mentioned
earlier  in  my  notes,  and  at  a  height  above  sea-level  of  consider-
ably over  two  hundred  feet,  but  this  does  not  compare  with  the
heights  at  which  we  found  similar  skeletons  in  the  Ferrar  Glacier
Valley,  no  fewer  than  three  being  found  there  between  the  two-
thousand-  and  three-thousand-foot  levels.

Moraines  in  the  East  Fork  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier

The  last  ten  miles  of  the  east  valley  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier
below  the  first  ice-falls  is  occupied  by  a  peculiar  variety  of  ice
which,  at  its  highest  point,  is  not  forty  feet  above  sea-level,
and  is  apparently  composed  largely  of  a  frozen  slush  formed
by  the  inundation  of  the  winter  snow-drifts  by  the  summer
thaw-water.  With  this  are  intermingled  patches  of  macro-
crystalline ice  exactly  comparable  with  the  ice  so  common
on  the  lakes  at  Cape  Royds,  especially  Blue  Lake,  and  evidently
caused  by  the  freezing  of  pure  thaw-water.  I  propose  to  give
the  detailed  evidence  regarding  the  nature  of  this  stretch  of
ice  when  the  scientific  results  of  the  expedition  are  published
in  full.  At  present  I  will  only  mention  certain  deposits,  a
portion  of  which  is  visible  as  a  series  of  small  hills  protruding

329


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

above  the  ice-surface,  which  hills,  from  their  occurrence  in  a
fairly  straight  line,  appear  to  be  the  more  prominent  peaks  of
a  partially  submerged  ridge.  These  deposits  I  examined  care-
fully on  December  31,  1908,  on  our  return  from  the  glacier,
and  was  able  to  secure  numerous  specimens  which  rendered
it  certain  that  they  are  exactly  comparable  with  the  Stranded
Moraines  and  also  with  those  afterwards  examined  in  the  Dry
Valley.  Concerning  these  deposits  I  have  down  in  my  diary
the  following  notes  :  "  Large  quantities  of  the  debris  are  com-
posed of  the  local  granites  and  schists,  but  in  the  space  of  half
an  hour  I  have  picked  up  specimens  of  two  or  three  varieties
of  tuff  (consolidated  volcanic  ash),  basalt,  kenyte  and  an
olivine  and  augite  kenyte  which  occurs  sparsely  at  Cape  Royds,
and  which  I  have  so  named  because  it  contains  large  porphyritic
crystals  of  augite  and  olivine  besides  the  more  common  anor-
thoclase  felspar ,  and  also  various  porphyries  which  I  have  not
seen  or  heard  of  in  the  valley  itself."

Thus  in  the  case  of  all  three  of  these  moraines,  the  Stranded
Moraines,  those  of  the  Dry  Valley,  and  those  of  the  East  Fork
of  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  the  conclusion  is  irresistible  that  a  con-
siderable portion  of  the  material  composing  them  has  either  been
brought  many  miles  up  the  coast  or  has  been  carried  right  across
the  Sound.  The  three  agencies  which  alone  could  be  responsible
for  this  transport  to  any  large  extent  are  :  (1)  Shore-drift.
(2)  A  considerably  greater  extent  of  the  ice-sheet  and  all  its
affluents,  such  as  glaciers,  barriers,  &c.  Of  such  an  extension
there  are  abundant  evidences,  of  which  I  may  here  mention  the
finding  of  granitic  and  schistose  erratics  at  a  height  of  1100  ft.
on  the  slopes  of  Erebus  by  Professor  David,  Armytage  and
myself  in  the  autumn  of  last  year.  (3)  The  third  agency,  and
one  which  I  have  myself  observed  in  operation,  is  the  transport-
ing power  of  icebergs  and  pieces  broken  off  the  ice-foot.  At
Cape  Royds  I  have  frequently  seen,  especially  around  Flagstaff
Point,  large  boulders  of  kenyte  being  carried  out  on  pieces
of  the  ice-foot,  and  I  have  seen  several  icebergs  which  were
full  of  a  fairly  fine  sediment.  While  the  ice  is  at  its  present
extent,  however,  this  last  agency  can  only  be  a  minor  one.


330


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

SECTION  III

Effect  of  the  Summer  Sun  on  Different  Varieties
OF  Ice  and  Snow

The  melting  of  large  stretches  of  normally  pure  snow  is  carried
out  by  the  increase  of  some  grains  to  the  detriment  of  others,
and  this,  in  cases  where  the  air  temperature  is  low  and  the  upper
crust  is  cooled  by  a  cold  breeze,  results  in  the  formation  of
crusts  of  snow  delicately  equipoised  over  considerable  areas,
for  the  vapour  from  the  lower  snow  crystals  is  cooled  and
condensed  on  those  of  the  upper  layer,  and  in  time  the  crystals
of  the  latter  become  firmly  joined  together.  Underneath  this
layer  the  ablating  process  still  continues,  leaving  as  a  final
product  a  powder  of  much  larger  granules  of  snow  than  the
particles  of  the  original  drift,  whilst  the  upper  crust  is  only
immediately  supported  from  beneath  in  places  few  and  far
between.  Quite  commonly,  when  the  leader  of  the  sledge-
party  stepped  on  the  edge  of  one  of  these  areas,  the  whole  crust
would  shatter  and  fall  to  the  ground  with  a  soft  sibilant  sound.

It  is  this  process  which  causes  the  lessening  in  the  amount
of  true  drift  in  the  summer  blizzards.  In  those  winds  during
this  season  which  were  free  from  snow  the  only  drift  was  a  low
one,  seldom  reaching  above  our  thighs,  and  I  should  decidedly
attribute  this  to  the  fact  that  the  granules  of  ice  produced  by
the  summer  ablation  are  sufficiently  large  and  heavy  to  prevent
an  ordinary  wind  from  carrying  them  very  far  or  high.

When  this  process  is  going  on  in  the  drifts  above  the  sea
ice  it  is  somewhat  modified,  because  the  sea  ice  melts  at  a
temperature  between  28°  and  29°  Fahr.,  causing  actual  thawing
of  the  drift  to  take  place  from  below  and  the  ice  crust  over  the
top  of  the  drifts  to  become  much  thicker.  The  thickness  in
cases  of  deep  drifts  attains  as  much  as  a  quarter  of  an  inch.
When  this  crust  breaks  beneath  the  foot,  an  unwary  explorer
is  liable  to  be  let  down  six  or  nine  inches  into  a  pool  of  salt
water  several  inches  deep,  and  this  rendered  sledging  over  the
sea  ice  in  the  late  summer  particularly  objectionable.

On  December  21  the  temperature  of  the  air  in  the  Ferrar
Glacier  Valley  reached  40°  Fahr.,  and  in  the  few  hours  during

331


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

which  the  air  remained  calm  two  inches  of  snow  which  had
fallen  the  previous  night  had  either  been  entirely  removed
as  thaw-water  or  converted  into  a  thin  coating  of  rough  ice,
opaque  through  the  inclusion  of  air,  which  formed  a  distinct
help  to  us  in  our  subsequent  marches,  as  it  very  much  reduced
the  slipperiness  of  the  ablation  ripples.

The  principal  characteristics  of  this  big  thaw  on  an  Antarctic
glacier  are  interesting,  and  some  of  them  may  be  mentioned
here.  Every  stone  in  the  glacial  moraines  is  surrounded  by
a  large  hollow,  scooped  out  by  the  heat  radiation  from  the
boulder,  and  these  hollows  are  all,  more  or  less,  full  of  thaw-
water,  which  is  also  overflowing  through  every  deep  ablation
ripple  and  crack.  A  number  of  the  small  rivulets  from  these
sources  join  up  at  a  little  distance  from  their  source  to  form  a
stream,  and  innumerable  streams  are  flowing  down  over  the
convex  face  of  the  glacier  to  join  the  river  which  can  be  heard
roaring  at  the  foot  of  the  cliff  which  ends  the  ice-face.  In
searching  for  a  camp  on  the  night  of  the  21st  we  passed  across
large  areas  of  the  glacier  face  which  were  slightly  depressed
below  the  general  level,  and  at  the  bottoms  of  these  depressions
we  were  compelled  to  wade  through  stretches  of  water,  three
or  four  inches  deep,  for  hundreds  of  yards.  Other  characteristics
of  the  thaw  are  described  in  one  of  the  extracts  taken  from  my
diary  and  drafted  into  the  general  report  of  the  journey  in  a
previous  part  of  the  book.

One  other  effect  of  the  sun's  heat  on  snow  under  peculiar
conditions,  which  I  should  like  to  mention  here,  is  the  case  I
noticed  of  the  snow  surrounding  many  boulders  in  the  lowest
reaches  of  the  glacier  below  the  first  ice -falls.  Much  of  the
larger  morainic  debris  was  here  surrounded  by  a  coating  of  pure
ice  under  the  snow  of  the  drift,  and  between  each  boulder  and
the  drift  snow  was  to  be  seen  a  transitional  granular  stage  like
that  already  mentioned,  but  much  more  exaggerated,  many
of  the  grains  nearest  the  boulder  being  a  quarter  of  an  inch
or  more  in  diameter.

Finally,  in  closing  this  short  report  of  the  scientific  results
of  the  western  journey,  I  should  like  to  pay  a  tribute  to  the
generous  help  I  received  from  my  companions,  who  thought
nothing  of  climbing  screes  many  hundreds  and  even  thousands
332


WESTERN    MOUNTAINS

of  feet  in  height  at  the  end  of  a  long  day's  march  in  order  to
assist  me  in  obtaining  a  representative  geological  collection,
so  that  many  of  the  most  valuable  specimens  secured  were
collected  by  them.  To  Armytage  especially,  the  leader  of  the
party,  my  thanks  are  due  for  the  unfailing  consideration  he
showed  for  the  scientific  work  of  the  party  and  for  the  way
he  accompanied  me  on  every  excursion  I  made  after  specimens
of  any  description.  For  reading  the  manuscript  of  this  article
and  suggesting  many  alterations  in  the  text  I  am  much  indebted
to  Mr.  T.  F.  Sibly,  D.Sc,  F.G.S.


883


APPENDIX  TV

NOTES  ON  PHYSICS,  CHEMISTRY
AND  MINERALOGY

ICE  AND  SNOW
Notes  by  DOUGLAS  MAWSON,  B.Sc,  B.E.

THE  most  interesting  results  were  obtained  in  a  study  of  ice
in  all  its  forms,  the  temperature  conditions  in  such  a  climate
producing  phenomena  hardly  to  be  realised  by  the  student  of
more  temperate  regions.  At  temperatures  even  far  below
freezing-point,  snow  is  able  to  compact  itself  and  become  quite
hard  by  a  slow  process  of  vaporisation  and  recrystallisation.
The  tendency  is  for  the  smaller  snow  particles  to  disappear
and  the  larger  to  be  added  to  at  their  expense,  and  when  other
conditions  are  suitable  well-formed  crystals  are  built  up  in  this
way.  Thus  well-developed  hexagonal  barrel-shaped  crystals
of  ice  were  found  developed  on  a  seal's  liver,  which  had  been
buried  during  the  winter.

Variations  in  atmospheric  temperatures  were  always  accom-
panied by  phenomena  such  as  this  ;  for  example,  at  times  of
falling  temperature,  no  matter  through  what  limits,  a  develop-
ment of  spicular  ice  formed  over  all  exposed  objects.  This
accompanied  a  fall  of  even,  say,  from  50°  Fahr.  to  60°  Fahr.
below  freezing-point.  Serious  interference  with  spectroscopic
work  was  thus  introduced  on  account  of  the  camera  lens  be-
coming thickly  coated  with  ice.  A  similar  phenomenon  was
continually  produced  in  a  small  laboratory  built  as  an  adjunct
to  the  hut.  This  opened  indirectly  by  the  outer  passage  to  the
334.


PHYSICS

interior  of  the  hut.  Moist  air  from  the  living-quarters,  kept
at  a  mean  temperature  just  above  freezing-point,  circulated
through  the  cracks  around  the  door  and  entered  the  laboratory,
which  for  the  most  of  the  time  maintained  a  mean  temperature
of  40°  Fahr.  to  50°  Fahr.  below  freezing-point ;  there  the  water
vapour  crystallised  out,  coating  the  walls  and  passages  with  a
thick  formation  of  ice-blades.  The  result  was  exquisitely
beautiful,  but  most  undesirable,  finally  making  it  necessary
to  abandon  the  room  for  everything  but  ice-work.

In  the  same  way  ice-formations  appeared  on  the  colder
portions  of  the  interior  of  the  hut.  In  crevasses  beautifully
formed  crystals  up  to  four  inches  in  length  were  found  developed
on  the  walls  from  circulating  vapour.  Along  cracks  in  the  sea
ice  during  winter  such  formations  were  abundantly  produced.
In  such  situations  the  sea  water  actually  "  smokes,"  an  effect
due  to  the  freezing  out  of  abundant  water  vapour  present  in
the  warmer  air  ascending  from  it.  This  condensation  produces
beautiful  fern-like  crystal  formations,  not  only  on  the  sides  of
the  cracks  but  also  on  the  frozen  sea  surface  itself  ;  these  ice-
flowers  are  best  developed  when  the  surface  waters  freeze  most
rapidly.

During  the  formation  of  the  surface  ice  some  of  the  sea  salts
are  squeezed  upward  through  capillary  cracks  to  the  surface
and  there  in  the  form  of  concentrated  brine  eventually  freeze
as  cryo-hydrates  and  form  nuclei  for  additions  from  atmospheric-
water  vapour.  The  net  result  is  the  production  of  little  rosette-
shaped  aggregates  of  radiating  crystal  blades,  which  were  met
with  up  to  two  inches  in  height.

As  a  rule,  however,  the  moisture  is  precipitated  from  the
atmosphere  in  the  form  of  snow.  Rain  is  quite  unknown  in
South  Victoria  Land.  Many  varieties  of  snow  were  observed.
When  precipitation  occurred  near  freezing-point  the  snow  fell
as  large  six- rayed  feathery  flakes.  It  appeared  that  even  at  the
same  temperature,  if  the  chilling  of  the  vapour-laden  air
was  more  rapid,  the  snow  fell  as  tiny  felted  spheres,  one-tenth
of  an  inch  and  more  in  diameter.  This  we  referred  to  as  sago,
or  tapioca  snow,  according  to  the  coarseness  of  the  grain.
Snow,  falling  in  colder  conditions,  appears  as  tiny  compact
six-rayed  crystals.     At  times  when  low  temperatures  prevailed,

335


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

the  air  was  filled  with  tiny  crystals  of  ice  about  one-hundredth
of  an  inch  in  diameter  descending  from  a  cloudless  sky.

Recently  fallen  snow  is  quite  soft,  but  soon  compacts  itself.
This  may  take  place  in  summer-time  within  a  few  hours  should
a  cold  period  succeed  a  warmer  one.  A  pie- crust-like  surface
is  produced  in  this  way  where  a  superficial  hardening  of  the
soft  snow  has  preceded,  though  not  sufficiently  strong  to  support,
a  heavily  laden  sledge.  Very  soon,  however,  the  snow  becomes
more  firmly  bound  together,  and  the  usual  smooth-sledging
type  of  winter  snow-ice  surface  is  produced.  What  is  known  as
barrier  ice  in  the  Antarctic  is  an  immensely  thick  formation  of
this  compacted  snow  horizontally  stratified.  This  is  what  one  sees
in  the  face  of  the  Ross  Barrier  and  numerous  other  small  barriers
along  the  coast.  Its  characteristic  horizontal  surface,  vertical
fractures,  and  dazzling  whiteness  distinguish  it  from  other
varieties  of  ice  even  at  a  great  distance.  Nearer  at  hand,  the
stratification  lines,  appearing  every  few  inches  apart,  are  readily
noticeable.  Such  barrier  ice  is  really  a  snow-field  afloat  and
may  be  expected  in  tongue-like  forms  jutting  out  into  the  sea
at  the  debouchure  of  glaciers,  or  forming  the  cliffs  along  the
sea-fronts  of  piedmont  glacier-slopes.  The  granules  increase
in  size  and  are  more  intimately  interlocked  in  the  lower  portions
of  such  formations.  The  tabular  icebergs  typical  of  the  Ant-
arctic which  have  originated  by  breaking  off  from  the  barriers
are,  owing  to  the  nature  of  their  formation,  less  dense  and  far
more  buoyant  than  the  transparent  glacier-icebergs  of  the
Arctic.  The  plateau  ice,  existing  under  conditions  of  great
cold,  sparse  snowfall,  and  continuous  strong  winds,  is  pre-
dominantly hard.  At  a  short  distance  below  the  surface  it  is
still  finely  granular,  but  very  compact.  This  is  seen  where
the  blizzards  have  abraded  the  superficial  softer  formation
and  exposed  the  deeper  ice  in  channelled  sastrugi ;  it  then
resembles  polished  Carrara  marble.  The  more  typical  glacier-
ice  consists  of  interlocking  crystals  an  inch  or  more  in  diameter.

In  the  vicinity  of  Cape  Royds  there  are  a  number  of  small
lakes  occupying  rocky  basins.  The  smaller  of  these  thaw  out
each  year  during  summer,  others  are  only  partly  thawed,  or
not  at  all.  In  these,  refrigeration  during  the  autumn  proceeds
under  tranquil  conditions.  As  a  result  the  ice  appears  prismatic
336


..'..fiS^^


SF       ^


tHj^S*^'^-


wMm^


Ice  Formations


To  face  page  336


PHYSICS

with  the  longer  axes  of  the  prisms  parallel  and  vertical.  Winter
snow,  falling  on  this  surface,  slowly  consolidates,  building  at
the  same  time  similarly  oriented  additions  to  the  surface  ends
of  the  lake  ice-prisms.  Should  several  years  succeed  without
thawing,  a  most  interesting  structure  is  produced,  the  nature
of  which  is  made  evident  by  the  subsequent  removal  by  blizzards
of  the  unconsolidated  snow.  It  then  presents  a  smooth,  polished
surface  exhibiting  a  mosaic  appearance,  produced  by  clear  ice-
prisms  separated  by  lines  of  white  ice  containing  air-cavities.

As  refrigeration  goes  on  in  the  lakes,  the  saline  contents  are
gradually  concentrated  in  the  residual  liquid  and  a  continuously
increasing  cold  is  required  to  freeze  each  succeeding  separation.
Ultimately  a  meshwork  of  ice  and  cryo-hydrate  crystals  is
formed  at  the  bottom  of  the  lakes.  As  some  of  the  lakes  are
very  saline,  this  cryo-hydrate  often  bulks  large.  Some  of  it
freezes  at  as  low  a  temperature  as  50°  Fahr.  below  freezing-point.

In  the  case  of  sea  ice  the  first  stages  differ  somewhat  from
those  of  lake  ice.  On  account  of  the  wave  movements,  the
regular  growth  of  vertical  prisms  is  seldom  possible  in  the
initial  stages.  Instead,  delicate  glancing  scale-like  crystals  of
ice  form  on  the  surface  and  are  seen  floating  about,  even  at
the  depth  of  several  feet.  The  single  scales  are  but  an  inch
or  less  in  diameter,  but  they  soon  unite  to  form  freely  floating
rosettes.  Eventually,  as  these  become  more  abundant,  a
complete  felt-work  is  produced.  In  this  stage  the  ice,  only
one  to  three  inches  in  thickness,  is  partially  transparent  and
appears  dark,  as  the  colour  of  the  sea  shows  through  it.  This
ice  is  peculiarly  flexible.  Unless  a  heavy  swell  intervenes  the
ice  is  now  sufficiently  strong  to  hold  together  and  to  aid  in
maintaining  the  sea  in  a  tranquil  state.  If,  however,  the  swell
increases,  the  ice  is  broken  into  pieces  of  a  foot  or  more  in
diameter,  depending  on  its  thickness  at  the  time.  These
fragments,  jostling  each  other  continuously,  become  rounded
and  develop  a  turned-up  rim.  This  is  called  pancake  ice.
Eventually,  with  the  advent  of  calmer  conditions,  the  pancake
ice  may  be  firmly  frozen  together.  Crystallis  tion  now  proceeds
by  additions  from  below.  Thus,  vertical  prismatic  ice  similar
to  that  found  in  the  lakes  is  produced.  These  prisms  may  be
half  an  inch  in  diameter  and  many  inches  in  length.  A  few
u  y  337


THE   HEART   OF   THE   ANTARCTIC

hours  of  still,  cold  weather  goes  far  to  freeze  over  the  sea.  If,
however,  the  air  temperature  rises,  the  active  formation  of  ice
is  suspended,  to  be  resumed  when  the  temperature  again  falls.
By  a  succession  of  such  variations  in  temiDerature  a  horizontal
banded  appearance  is  produced  in  the  sea  ice  ;  each  band
representing  a  separate  period  of  refrigeration.  The  lake  ice
often  showed  a  banded  appearance  resembling  this,  and  the
greater  or  lesser  abundance  of  air-bubbles  set  free  from  the
frozen  water  and  included  in  the  ice  is  due  to  a  similar  cause.
The  banding  in  the  sea  ice  is  due  to  an  alternation  of  more  and
less  opaque  layers  of  ice,  of  half  an  inch  to  several  inches  in
thickness.  The  sea  salt  mechanically  separates  from  the  ice
as  the  latter  forms  and  is  partially  forced  out  into  the  sea  water
below,  and  partially  included  in  white  vertical  tracts  between
the  ice-prisms.  When  the  unfrozen  sea  surface  is  agitated  by
winds  at  very  low  temperatures,  the  spray  is  apt  to  freeze  as
it  scuds  through  the  air  and  it  falls  back  as  ice.  In  this  way
the  whole  surface  of  the  sea  may  assume  a  pea-soup-like  con-
sistency. Strong  winds,  producing  a  swell,  may  break  up  the
solid  sea  ice  and  drive  it  along  as  a  field  of  separate  floating
masses.  This  is  termed  pack-ice,  and  may  eventually  become
frozen  together  as  an  irregular  surface  field  of  ice.  In  cases
of  this  kind  huge  icebergs  are  not  infrequently  found  frozen
in  amongst  the  smaller  ice.  Where  the  wind  drives  floe  ice
before  it,  pressure  ridges  may  be  formed  by  the  mounting  of
some  of  the  ice  upon  that  in  front ;  fragments  may  be  piled  up
to  many  feet  in  height,  an  operation  usually  accompanied  by
a  great  crunching  and  grinding  noise.

During  the  autumn,  sea  spray,  dashing  on  the  coast,  remains
behind  as  ice.  Thus  a  huge  ice-foot  develops  along  the  coast.
Grottoes  are  not  uncommon  in  this  ice-foot,  resembling  lime-
stone caves  of  remarkable  beauty,  filled  with  stalactites  (up
to  several  feet  in  length),  and  stalagmites  of  ice.  These  owe
their  origin  largely  to  the  fact  that  the  more  saline  residual
water  dripping  from  the  roof  is  further  chilled  by  exposure,
and  thus  continual  additions  are  made  to  the  formations  from
which  the  drip  has  taken  place.  The  water  is  highly  saline,
and  stalagmites  are  produced  only  at  very  low  temperatures,
when  they  may  consist  entirely  of  cryo-hydrate.
838


Pressure-ice


Crystals  on  Sea  Ice


To  face  page  338


PHYSICS


Additional  Notes  by  JAMES  MURRAY

Sea  Ice. — Wlien  a  crack  opened  out  to  a  yard  or  more  in
width  it  was  very  quickly  filled  with  new  ice.  The  prisms
composing  this  grew  out  horizontally  from  the  older  ice  at  each
side.  They  were  straight  and  at  right  angles  to  the  edges  of
the  crack,  except  where  that  was  abruptly  bent  or  curved,
when  the  adjustment  to  the  influence  of  the  two  sides  of  the
angle  produced  oblique  or  even  curved  prisms.  Good  photo-
graphs of  this  horizontal  prismatic  ice  were  obtained.

Polygonal  plates  of  thin  ice  accumulated  round  the  dredging
line  when  left  undisturbed  in  the  sea  for  some  time,  as  previously
noticed  by  Hodgson.  At  Cape  Royds  this  only  occurred  late
in  the  season,  and  seemed  to  be  much  less  in  amount  than  at
Hut  Point,  probably  on  account  of  the  higher  temperatures
which  we  experienced.

Prismatic  Ice. — It  has  been  explained  (by  Mawson)  how
the  vertical  prismatic  structure  of  the  irregular  surfaces  of
hardened  snow  found  on  the  lakes  has  originated  in  the  building
up  of  additions  to  the  prisms  of  lake  ice.  Further  light  on  the
formation  of  prismatic  ice  was  afforded  by  observations  in
summer  when  he  was  absent.

The  freshwater  ice  found  under  tranquil  conditions  was
clear  and  transparent,  and  the  prismatic  structure  was  not
evident.  In  colder  weather  it  became  revealed  as  a  very  fine
hexagonal  reticulation.  On  the  surface  of  hardened  snow-drifts
prismatic  structure  was  developed  while  the  lower  layers  of  the
drift  remained  as  snow,  and  therefore  independently  of  the
lake  ice-prisms  as  a  foundation.

The  most  interesting  formation  of  prismatic  structure  was
observed  at  Clear  Lake.  On  November  3,  1908,  a  large  heap
of  chips  of  ice  was  thrown  out  from  a  shaft.  The  chips  were  of
hard  clear  ice,  and  of  all  sizes  up  to  several  inches  in  diameter.
On  February  24,  1909,  it  was  found  that  prismatic  structure
had  developed  in  the  heap,  making  it  quite  like  the  general
surface  of  the  lake,  which  we  supposed  to  have  been  derived  from
snow.  The  prisms  were  most  distinct  at  the  surface,  while
within  the  mass  traces  of  the  original  chips  were  still  visible.

339


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

The  mosaic  design  showing  on  the  surface  of  prismatic  ice
was  not  uniform,  nor  yet  was  it  irregular.  It  built  up  patterns,
the  prisms  arranging  themselves  round  centres,  as  is  well  shown
in  Professor  David's  photographs.  As  the  lake  surfaces  were
more  and  more  smoothed  by  ablation  the  mosaic  changed  in
character.  The  prismatic  structure  became  less  distinct,  and
at  some  depth  gave  place  to  rows  of  bubbles  arranged  in  curvi-
linear designs,  the  relation  of  which  to  the  original  hexagonal
mosaic  was  not  apparent.

About  midwinter  a  curious  optical  effect  was  noticed  at
Blue  Lake.  The  surface  of  the  lake  was  almost  entirely  pris-
matic, but  had  been  much  smoothed  by  ablation,  and  was
marked  by  ripples  like  those  of  the  sand  of  the  sea  shore,  but
much  larger.  On  walking  across  the  lake  the  moonlight  was
constantly  glancing  apparently  from  very  large  plane  crystalline
surfaces,  several  inches  in  diameter,  inclined  at  a  low  angle
to  the  horizontal.  On  touching  these  spots  it  was  evident  that
there  were  no  large  crystals  on  the  surface,  but  only  the  smooth
rounded  ripples.  The  internal  structure  of  vertical  prisms
made  it  unlikely  that  these  broad  crystalline  surfaces  would
exist  within  the  ice.

In  the  heat  of  summer  the  prismatic  layer  on  the  surface  of
Blue  Lake  became  greatly  eroded,  large  holes  as  much  as  two
feet  in  depth  being  formed.  Parts  of  the  lake  were  unsafe  to
walk  on,  the  loosened  prisms  crumbling  away  under  foot.


Large  Crystals  in  Crevasses

Similar  crystals  to  those  referred  to  elsewhere  by  Mawson,
several  inches  in  diameter,  were  found  in  the  shafts  sunk  in  the
lakes.  These  were  thin  triangular  plates,  growing  from  the
wall,  to  which  they  were  attached,  sometimes  by  a  side,  some-
times by  an  angle.  They  were  regularly  striated  in  lines  parallel
to  one  side.  Some  were  twinned,  two  series  of  striae  meeting
in  the  centre  of  a  symmetrical  plate.  Designs  were  built  up
by  the  growth  of  new  crystals  from  the  free  edges  of  others,
or  even  from  angles.
340


Rectangular  Crystals  on  Ice


Ice  Crystals  formed  on  a  line


To  face  pagv.  3J10


PHYSICS

Ice-flowers  occurred  on  freshwater  ice  at  Clear  Lake  and
Blue  Lake.  They  were  on  the  ice  rapidly  and  tranquilly  formed
in  the  trenches  sunk  for  the  observation  of  temperature.  They
were  much  smaller  than  those  on  the  sea  ice,  being  only  half
an  inch  or  less  in  diameter.

In  the  height  of  summer  the  combined  action  of  the  sun
and  air  on  compacted  snow-drifts  caused  deep  erosion  of  the
snow.  A  kind  of  stratification  resulted  which  appeared  to
have  no  relation  to  any  original  stratification  of  the  snow.
Thin  flat  layers  of  ice  v/ere  formed,  separated  by  cavities.
These  dipped  at  a  gentle  angle  to  the  south,  that  is  to  say,
their  edges  were  directed  towards  the  sun  at  the  time  of  day
when  it  is  highest.  These  ice-plates  were  so  fragile  that  they
collapsed  in  multitudes  as  we  walked  over  the  drifts,  and  a
slight  breeze  whirled  quantities  of  them  along,  often  rolling
on  their  edges.


Temperatures  of  Lake  Ice

During  the  winter  a  series  of  shafts  was  cut  through  the
ice  of  most  of  the  lakes,  in  order  to  observe  the  temperature
at  different  depths.  The  first  trenches  at  Clear  Lake  were  the
work  of  the  whole  scientific  staff.  After  that  the  entire  work
devolved  upon  Priestley  till  the  end  of  the  winter.  Then
Brocklehurst  cut  one  in  Blue  Lake  which  proved  the  deepest
of  all,  reaching  water  at  21  ft.

A  single  series  of  observations  at  each  shaft  was  of  but  little
value,  especially  as  the  admission  of  air  to  the  exposed  surfaces
caused  very  rapid  changes.  One  shaft  at  Blue  Lake,  in  which
we  had  come  on  solid  bottom  at  a  depth  of  15  ft.,  was  kept
open  for  five  months,  from  July  to  December.  Here  periodic
readings  were  taken,  in  order  to  watch  the  rate  at  which  the
temperature  at  different  depths  changed  in  correspondence
with  the  air  temperatures.  After  some  experience  the  shaft
was  covered  with  sacking  to  prevent  it  filling  up  with  snow.
This  would  also  reduce  the  circulation  of  air.

On  the  first  day,  when  the  shaft  was  sunk  to  a  depth  of  5  ft.,
there  was  a  difference  of  23°  between  the  surface  (minus  21*0°  F.)

34X


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

and  the  bottom  (plus  2*0''  F.).  When  the  bottom  at  15  ft.
was  reached  a  week  later  the  whole  range  from  top  to  bottom
was  26°  (top,  minus  6*0°  ;    bottom,  plus  20*0°).

On  account  of  the  high  temperatures  at  the  bottom  we
found  these  shafts  very  comfortable  places  to  work  in,  and  could
lie  down  to  partake  of  lunch,  on  a  luxurious  couch  made  of  ice


1       1         1

!

^r     ^

a«-                   -fc«-                              ^J-            -i^i--

M,                                W,'                                                «"                      J>9

">  *~      ^

kl                  \b                            vJ            3I

'>"               %                     "T

^r             ^                    ^t        ^i"

,f

.r

3/0

J5-

-'Y'.zS

^   -

^^%'a-

5^^   -

"y^g^r

-,                                          1

^  S

^  r>u.

"isgp^

A«i'.4, .          TT?i-    „

r  vrfi^^^^^  ^^

-it®   ,          ^^       ^

_c»e^j^    gfflrA^

%^                "i^^^

£i'"*T       "*              ^i?^W       i^^

\               --444.

^sJ*=T^                ^^'$^^      fir

'^                           Sf**'rt!^2^''    (4f

'r<*    '  :i.          ^4Jj''i^'r

_J^  _j^^ss -^  ^  gj»' ^  ^ y  ^  '   ^p^

f^y           «rf*rf^       i'      s^^

*'*^Ja,t          W^''           ■^-

rM^^f**         ^sS          aT     ^^

^                                     C  »^  _aaiijB5  aS    ^

A  9  J.  a.  ;;ai2S^T          S     f  S^       ^P^

'  ^        ""  *^*r4siJ^"^  ■               ~^^  ^

i^j^isfei-    ^&  3,Mie  =  *'^pr^

°T^  S  ^^S3

/«        /               >^'*

_              ^^^

/\  -^           j^^n

r'             .I'^^r

-^     ■«5^?^F

'              ^^^

s

/         rf^^r

^£                   7                       1^5            J

^^^

.^II  !S^-_i_3-ii*|l^

^2

flO        V        ^!e^s^™

^        -^        —»-

7

L     /

4-:^'

iZ

Temperatuees  of  Ice  of  Blue  Lake


chips,  in  perfect  comfort,   when  the  air  was  down  between
minus  30*0°  and  minus  40"0°.

Series  of  temperatures  were  taken  at  every  2  ft.  in  depth
daily  for  about  a  fortnight.  Afterwards  a  series  was  taken
once  a  month,  as  we  had  not  time  to  read  them  oftener.

In  the  diagram  are  shown  the  curves  of  temperature  for  six
months,  at  one  reading  per  month,  compared  with  the  curve
of  mean  air  temperature  for  the  four  weeks  preceding  each
reading  of  the  temperatures  of  the  lake  ice,
343


^*''^


i  S'-J.


^*-i


Ice  Crystals  To  face  page  312

(The  Keproductiou  of  tlie  Compass  on  the  upper  picture  is  of  natural  size)


PHYSICS

The  scale  of  temperature  on  the  left  side  reads  up  and  down,
from  plus  28-0°  Fahr.  to  minus  20-0°  Fahr.  The  time  reads  from
left  to  right,  in  months,  July  to  December.  The  lowest  curve,
drawn  thicker,  is  the  mean  air  temperature.  The  dotted  line
is  the  surface  temperature.  The  other  four  lines,  reading  from
below  upward,  are  the  temperatures  at  4  ft.,  8  ft.,  12  ft.,  and
15  ft.  (bottom).  The  thin  zigzag  line  is  the  weekly  mean
of  the  air  temperatures.  The  air  curve  is  always  much  lower.
The  others  maintain  their  relative  positions  pretty  steadily,
except  the  surface  curve,  which  fluctuates,  and  becomes  highest
of  all  in  December.

These  curves  show  some  points  of  interest.  The  similarity
and  uniformity  of  all  except  the  surface  curve  are  remarkable.
We  cannot  build  much  theory  on  such  curves,  as  the  curves  of
ioe  temperature  represent  single  observations  in  each  month,
while  the  air  curve  is  a  real  mean  deduced  from  twenty-eight
daily  means.  Still  the  similar  course  traced  by  each  curve
cannot  be  entirely  chance.  If  there  were  no  direct  relation
between  the  air  curve  and  the  others  we  would  expect  greater
differences  at  different  depths.

The  monthly  mean  is  selected  as  giving  the  nearest  estimate
as  to  the  rate  at  which  the  temperatures  within  the  ice  follow
the  air  temperatures.  The  daily  means  of  air  temperature
would  not  be  expected  to  correspond  at  all  with  the  slower
changes  within  the  ice,  but  the  curve  was  drawn  and  fluctuated
extremely.  Then  the  mean  for  a  week  before  each  observation
was  taken,  also  the  weekly  means  for  the  entire  period,  and
they  showed  no  obvious  relation  to  the  ice  temperatures.  Even
with  the  means  for  a  fortnight  before  each  monthly  series  the
correspondence  is  far  from  close.

When  the  curve  of  the  monthly  means  is  drawn  beside  the
others  it  is  at  once  evident  that  it  takes  a  place  in  the  series,
but  that  its  range  is  much  greater.  All  the  curves  converge
steadily  after  August,  and  approximate  very  closely  in  November
and  December,


P4§


THE  HEARTOF  THE  ANTARCTIC

MINERALOGY  AND  CHEMISTRY

Notes  by  DOUGLAS  MAWSON,  B.Sc,  B.E.

A  LARGE  variety  of  minerals,  chiefly  rock-forming  types,  were
met  with  by  the  expedition.  The  minerals  included  felspar,
pyroxenes,  amphiboles,  micas,  garnet,  &c.  Among  the  most
notable  features  was  the  occurrence  of  idiomorphic  felspar
crystals  a  couple  of  inches  in  length,  found  abundantly  scattered
about  the  old  crater  of  Erebus.  These  had  apparently  been  ex-
pelled by  the  explosive  force  of  steam  from  the  molten  lava  in
which  they  occurred.

Epidote,  actinolite,  tourmaline,  and  calcite  in  the  form  of
marble  were  abundantly  developed  in  the  vicinity  of  Cape
Bernacchi.  In  the  marble,  cubes  of  graphite  and  iron  pyrites,
together  with  some  tetrahedra  of  copper  pyrites,  were  observed.
In  a  moraine  in  this  vicinity  also  a  boulder  of  reef  quartz  contain-
ing iron  pyrites  was  observed.  Natrolite  was  found  in  seams
in  boulders  of  basic  lava  in  a  moraine  near  Mount  Larsen.
Titanium  minerals  appeared  to  be  abundant  in  the  eruptive
rocks  and  schists  met  with  between  Granite  Harbour  and  Mount
Larsen.

An  important  occurrence  of  mirabilite  near  Cape  Barne
was  noted  by  Priestley.  This  he  found  in  rough  masses  several
pounds  in  weight  piled  up  at  the  northern  end  of  one  of  the
lakes.  It  is  at  a  situation  some  height  above  the  present  lake
level,  but  no  doubt  owes  its  origin  to  salts  originally  contained
in  the  lake  water.  Gypsum  was  found  by  Joyce  in  fissures
amongst  the  kenyte  at  the  Penguin  Rookery,  Cape  Royds.
Mixtures  of  magnesium  and  sodium  sulphates,  apparently
originally  derived  from  the  sea,  are  to  be  found  under  most
of  the  loose  stones  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cape  Royds.  Sea
spray  and  blown  saline  snow  have  no  doubt  carried  these  salts
to  their  present  resting-place.


^H


Ice  Crystals  formed  on  the  line  of  a  flsii  trap  To  face  page  344


OPTICS

METEOROLOGICAL  OPTICS
Notes  by  DOUGLAS  MAWSON,  B.Sc,  B.E.

Mirage

Wonderful  exhibitions  of  mirage  were  of  daily  occurrence,
especially  in  the  early  morning  hours.  In  summer-time,  travel-
ling over  the  sea  ice  on  the  Magnetic  Pole  journey,  it  was  usually
impossible  to  make  theodolite  observations  between  the  hours  of
1  A.M.  and  6  a.m.  on  account  of  the  extreme  distortion  of  distant
objects  due  to  mirage  effects.  This  was  attributable  to  the  fact
that,  at  about  this  hour,  a  large  body  of  cold  dense  air  descends
from  the  great  plateau  of  South  Victoria  Land,  flowing  down
the  glacier  valleys  and  mingling  with  the  warmer  air  over  the
sea  ice.  For  the  same  reason  the  western  mountains  observed
from  Cape  Royds  always  loomed  larger  in  the  early  morning.
Distant  capes  viewed  over  the  open  water  often  appeared  to
be  hung  up  in  the  sky.

The  type  of  illusion  known  as  fata  Morgana  was  of  very
frequent  occurrence  in  the  case  of  distant  floating  ice-rafts  ;
the  warmer  stratum  of  the  air  in  proximity  to  the  s  a  causing
the  slight  irregularities  on  the  ice  surface  to  appear  as  lofty
pinnacles.

Rings  and  Crosses  Round  the  Sun  and  Moon

These  phenomena,  proceeding  from  the  refraction  of  the
light  of  the  sun  and  moon,  were  numerous  and  varied.  Both
large  and  small  rings  were  observed.  Usually  only  those
portions  of  the  ring  appeared  which  neighboured  on  the
horizontal  line  through  the  sun  or  moon,  normal  to  the  line
of  sight.  Parhelia  and  parselene  of  this  kind  were  of
common  occurrence.

In  summer-time  on  the  plateau  we  observed  the  most  com-
plicated and  gorgeous  phenomena  of  this  kind.  These  were
always  best  seen  through  coloured  glasses.

During  the  winter  a  fine  example  of  a  parselene  appeared

645


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

between  us  and  Mount  Erebus.  The  image  must  have  been
formed  within  a  mile  or  two  of  us.

In  winter  when  the  atmosphere  was  cold,  clear  and  still,
similar  rings  could  be  artificially  formed  near  the  face  by  breath-
ing towards  the  moon.  The  moistiure  in  the  breath  freezes
instantly  on  leaving  the  body,  and  the  optical  effect  is  produced
in  the  cloud  of  tiny  floating  ice-particles.

Rings,  coloured  like  the  rainbow,  closely  investing  the  moon,
were  of  frequent  occurrence  during  the  winter  night.  On  one
occasion  a  magnificent  exhibition  of  this  kind  appeared  as  a
series  of  three  coloured  rings  ;  that  nearest  the  moon  showed
the  colours  of  the  first  order  in  Newton's  scale  ;  the  second  and
third  rings  showed  the  second  and  third  orders  respectively.
The  effect  was  similar  to  that  seen  when  viewing  a  uniaxial
crystal  in  convergent  polarised  light  along  the  principal  axis.


Other  Colour  Effects

At  certain  periods  of  the  year  certain  clouds  are  seen  very
brightly  coloured.  This  colouring  is  strong,  and  all  the  colours
of  Newton's  scale  are  seen  as  in  the  rainbow.  This  succession
of  colours  increases  in  a  direction  away  from  the  sun.  The
orders  of  colour  increase  successively  with  a  corresponding
reduction  in  distinctiveness,  until  too  faint  for  observation.
An  isolated  patch  of  cloud  illuminated  in  this  way  resembles
a  fragment  of  a  mineral  like  olivine  viewed  through  an  analyser
under  polarised  light.  This  phenomenon  was  strongly  shown
only  for  the  few  days  preceding  the  departure  and  the  arrival
of  the  sun  respectively  before  and  after  the  winter  night.

Especially  at  the  intermediate  seasons  of  the  year  the  advent
and  departure  of  the  sun  each  day  was  accompanied  by  pris-
matic sunset  and  sunrise  effects.  Mount  Erebus  was  often
bathed  in  a  delicate  pink  light.

Purple  lights  are  apt  to  be  produced  on  snow  surfaces  when
obliquely  lighted.

Cavities  in  snow  formations  appear  of  a  wonderful  azure
blue  colour.     Those  in  iccj  od  the  9ther  hand,  appear  bluish
green,  or  greenish^
346


OPTICS

Earth  Shadows

The  earth  shadows,  or  dark  shadow-bands  crossing  the  sky,
seen  when  the  sun  is  very  low  on  the  horizon,  were  observed
in  a  variety  of  forms.  Some  of  these  certainly  bore  a  relation
to  the  relative  positions  of  Mount  Erebus  and  the  sun.  When
on  top  of  Mount  Erebus  we  remarked  the  great  conical  shadow
it  threw  at  sunrise  over  McMurdo  Sound  and  even  as  far  as  the
western  mountains.  It  was  noted  later  on  that  a  relationship
existed  between  some  of  the  earth  shadows  seen  in  the  sky
from  Cape  Royds  and  this  conical  shadow  of  Erebus.

Other  forms  of  the  shadows  are  not  so  easily  explained.
On  one  occasion  when  the  sun  was  low  on  the  northern  horizon
near  noon,  just  after  its  return,  we  observed  the  sky  overhead
crossed  by  six  parallel  earth-shadow  beams,  directed  from  the
sun  and  supplying  a  Noah's  ark  appearance.


Additional  Notes  by  JAMES  MURRAY

The  sun,  prime  source  of  all  the  optical  phenomena  referred
to,  was  seen  for  the  last  time  before  the  long  winter  night  on
April  27,  1908.  One-third  of  its  disc  was  above  the  horizon  at
noon.  It  was  again  seen  for  the  first  time  on  August  17,  1908.
The  entire  disc  was  above  the  horizon,  and  the  bottom  edge
one-quarter  of  the  diameter  from  the  horizon,  so  that  it  could
probably  have  been  seen  a  day  or  so  earlier  if  the  weather  had
been  clear.  The  long  night  was  therefore  of  111  days  (or  less).
It  is  supposed  that  the  night  at  latitude  77°  30',  considered
astronomically,  should  be  several  daj^^s  longer,  and  that  the  sun
was  seen  later  and  earlier  on  account  of  refraction.

The  limits  of  the  long  day  could  not  be  so  readily  determined
(by  observation)  as  the  sun  v/ent  behind  the  mountains.  The
first  year  we  had  only  a  small  part  of  the  long  day,  and  we
supposed  that  the  sun  began  to  set  on  February  22,  the  day  the
Nimrod  left  us.  The  second  year  we  experienced  the  entire
long  day,  from  about  October  17  to  about  February  22.

There  was  perpetual  daylight  on  each  side  of  the  long  day
for  several  weeks,  and  similarly  tl^e  Jong  night  was  tempered

347


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

by  very  good  twilight  during  the  day  for  some  weeks  at  the
beginning  and  end.

Some  of  the  most  striking  optical  phenomena,  as  the  earth
shadows,  iridescent  clouds,  &c.,  were  only  exhibited  during
the  short  periods  when  the  sun  rose  and  set  each  day.  Others,
like  the  prismatic  sunrises  and  sunsets,  continued  long  into  the
night.

In  addition  to  the  optical  effects  familiar  in  polar  regions,
such  as  mock  suns  and  moons,  haloes  and  crosses,  there  were
observed  a  number  of  optical  phenomena  which  are  not  so  well
known.

Several  of  these  (the  prismatic  sunsets  and  sunrises,  the
curved  earth  shadows,  and  the  arched  ice-blink  of  the  Barrier)
are  characterised  by  their  arched  form,  their  upper  boundary
being  an  arc  of  a  great  circle.

Prismatic  Sunrises  and  Sunsets

The  phenomenon  to  which  we  gave  this  name  consisted  in
a  high  arch,  coloured  in  bands  like  the  solar  spectrum,  which
appeared  in  the  sky  opposite  to  the  sun,  before  sunrise  and  after
sunset.  It  was  of  daily  occurrence  in  clear  weather,  during
the  whole  of  the  two  periods  when  the  sun  was  rising  and  setting.
Even  during  the  long  night  it  was  common  at  noon  for  nearly
a  month  after  the  sun  had  set,  and  it  recommenced  a  month
before  the  sun  reappeared.

It  began  instantly  when  the  sun  set  and  got  higher  as  the
sun  sank  farther  below  the  horizon,  at  least  it  appeared  so,
perhaps  through  the  arch  becoming  more  distinct  as  the  darkness
deepened.  Some  low  arches  which  were  measured  were  25°
and  30°  above  the  horizon,  and  it  was  estimated  that  at  its
highest  the  arch  reached  to  45°.  Round  the  horizon  it  extended
for  about  90°  or  more.

The  accompanying  figure  gives  an  idea  of  its  size  and  of  the
breadth  of  the  bands  of  colour.

Though  the  rainbow  colours  are  unmistakable,  the  bands
are  very  delicate,  and  their  limits,  as  well  as  the  boundary  of
the  whole  arch,  are  very  obscure,  though  the  latter  is  clearly
a  circular  arc.  The  number  of  colours  which  can  be  distin-
848


OPTICS

guished  by  the  eye  varies  with  the  distinctness  of  the  display,
and  with  the  height  of  the  arch.  In  a  low  arch  usually  only
two  bands  were  visible,  a  lower  one  of  slaty  blue  (greenish  quite
close  to  the  horizon),  and  a  higher  one  of  purple.  When  the
arch  was  high,  other  colours  could  be  distinguished.  The
order  of  their  arrangement  is  here  given  as  they  appeared,  without
bias  as  to  the  correct  order  in  a  solar  spectrum.  On  March  13,
1908,  the  colours  noted  were  (reckoning  from  the  horizon  up-


DiAGSAM  OF  Prismatic  Arch,  March  13

wards)  pale  blue,  violet,  orange,  yellow,  fading  at  the  outer
edge  with  pale  greenish  blue.  On  April  7,  at  7  a.m.,  the  colours
distinguished  were  slaty  blue,  purple,  pink,  red,  orange,  yellow,
greenish  blue.  No  doubt  these  colours  were  affected  by  atmo-
spheric conditions,  and  by  the  colour  of  clouds  in  the  back-
ground, for  the  arch  could  often  be  seen  against  clouds.

Apparently  the  colours  were  not  concentric  bands,  but  those
near  the  horizon  formed  arcs  of  larger  circles  than  the  upper
ones.  If  not  so  the  blue  and  purple  bands  would  be  very  small,
but  they  have  really  the  greatest  horizontal  extension.  Some-
times the  reds  and  yellows  did  not  appear  to  form  arched  bands

349


THE   HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

like  the  lower  colours,  but  were  limited  to  an  elliptical  area,
as  indicated  by  dotted  lines  in  the  diagram.

On  October  2  the  blue  zone  rose  to  15°  above  the  horizon,
and  the  purple  zone  to  25°.

In  all  cases  the  whole  arch,  from  the  summit  to  the  horizon,
was  filled  with  bands  of  colour,  thereby  differing  from  rainbows
and  haloes.

Simultaneously  with  the  appearance  of  a  prismatic  arch
opposite  to  the  sun,  there  were  frequently  to  be  seen,  over  the
sun's  position,  brilliant  sunset  colours,  which  also  formed  an
arch  in  which  the  colours  were  in  inverse  order  to  those  of  the
prismatic  arch,  ranging  from  orange  at  the  horizon,  through
yellow  and  green  to  blue.  The  bands  were  less  distinct  than
in  the  prismatic  arch,  but  the  colours  were  much  brighter.  The
prismatic  arch  often  occurred  without  this  complementary
display  being  visible.

Though  not  confined  to  the  Antarctic  region  this  phenomenon
appears  to  be  exceptionally  distinct  and  frequent  there.

Ice-blink

The  ice-blink  of  the  Great  Barrier,  viewed  from  some
little  distance,  was  always  in  the  form  of  a  low  arch.  On
January  27  and  28,  1908,  we  coasted  the  Barrier  all  day  long,
but  out  of  sight  of  it.  All  the  time  the  arched  ice-blink  accom-
panied us,  unvarying  except  in  height  as  we  receded  or  ap-
proached, and  apparently  always  bounded  by  a  true  circular
arc.  When  close  in  to  the  Barrier  the  white  glare  seemed  to
penetrate  to  a  very  limited  distance  through  the  air,  which  was
unaffected  at  a  higher  level.

Mock  Suns  and  Moons,  &c.

No  illustrations  are  available  of  the  more  complicated
displays  of  this  kind  observed  on  the  western  plateau.  There
are  some  sketches  of  the  simpler  occurrences  witnessed  at  Cape
Royds.  Most  commonly  there  were  simply  two  bright  patches
equidistant  on  each  side  of  the  sun  or  moon.  These  were  not
round  mock  suns  and  moons,  as  frequently  reported  in  the
350


OPTICS

arctic  regions,  but  were  bits  of  a  ring  concentric  with  the  sun
or  moon.  Less  frequently  a  similar  patch  was  visible  right  over
the  sun  or  moon.  Generally  the  ring  connecting  these  patches
could  not  be  seen,  but  occasionally  it  was  visible,  and  on  June  12
there  was  a  complete  ring  round  the  moon,  accompanied  by  the
three  bright  patches,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  ring  was  between
the  observers  and  Mount  Erebus.     All  these  parts,  which  are


Lunar  Halo,  Bright  Patches  and  Beam,  June  12


associated  alike  with  sun  and  moon,  are  shown  in  the  figure.
There  is  an  additional  vertical  beam  shown.

After  the  lateral  sun-dogs  the  commonest  phenomenon  M^as
this  vertical  beam  of  light,  which  rose  from  the  sun  or  moon,
and  passed  beyond  the  ring,  if  one  were  present.  In  the  case
of  the  sun  the  beam  of  light  was  yellow,  that  from  the  moon  was
often  decidedly  red.  It  could  not  readily  be  seen  when  the
whole  disc  was  in  sight,  but  often  the  yellow  beam  was  seen
rising  from  behind  a  hill,  the  sun  itself  being  entirely  hidden.
It  could  never  be  traced  below  the  sun  or  moon,  and  we  have
no  notes  of  a  horizontal  beam  of  the  same  kind.

351


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

A  complete  halo  round  the  sun  or  moon  was  usually  of
uniform  brightness,  without  brighter  spots  or  straight  beams.

On  February  7,  1909,  there  were  seen  portions  of  three
rings,  convex  towards  the  sun.  The  one  over  the  sun  was  nearly
in  the  zenith,  and  more  than  an  eighth  part  of  the  circle  was
visible.     The  lateral  ones  were  quite  short,  and  like  the  ordinary


O


Inverted  Kings  Round  the  Sun,  Febkuaky  7,  1909


sun-dogs,  but  the  centres  of  the  circles  away  from  the  sun.
This  display  is  here  figured.

The  iridescent  colours  of  these  sun-dogs  were  not  disposed
in  broad  bands  as  in  the  rainbow,  but  in  a  succession  of  minute
coloured  streaks,  each  repeating  all  the  colours,  and  concentric
with  the  whole  ring.

Rainbow

On  December  22  the  only  rainbow  was  seen,  that  is  to  say,
there  was  a  bow  in  the  sky  opposite  to  the  sun,  and  rather  less
than  a  semicircle.  It  was  visible  from  10.80  p.m.  to  near  mid-
night, and  was  therefore  a23proximately  in  the  north.  It  was
like  a  moon  rainbow  in  the  faintness  of  the  colours.  It  looked
352


OPTICS

simply  like  a  lighter  streak  amid  the  slight  haze  which  prevailed.
Some  of  those  who  saw  it  could  distinguish  a  faint  red  band  on
the  outer  side  of  the  bow,  others  could  only  distinguish  a  pale
yellow  and  a  paler  green  towards  the  outside.  There  was  a
deep  band  on  the  inside,  of  pale  bluish  or  purple.  It  appeared
quite  near,  coming  down  in  front  of  hills  which  were  less  than
a  quarter  of  a  mile  away.     The  essential  dilference  between


Ibidescemt  CiiOUDB,  August  22

such  a  bow  as  this  and  the  prismatic  arch  seen  at  sunrise
and  sunset  is  that  it  is  a  band  of  narrow  limits,  while  the
spectrum  of  the  other  extends  from  the  top  of  the  arch  down
to  the  horizon.


Iridescent  Clouds

The  sketch  is  intended  to  show  the  bands  of  colour  (vivid
purple,  orange,  green,  &c.)  on  the  margins  of  the  cloud,  and  the
central  patch.  Each  cloud  has  a  broad  central  tract  of  deep
clear  blue,  which  looks  exactly  like  a  bit  of  ordinary  blue  sky,
seen  through  a  gap  in  the  cloud.  A  great  bank  of  grey  stratus
II  z  353


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

passing  behind  the  v/isps  of  illuminated  cloud,  proved  that  there
was  no  blue  sky  present.

The  colours  of  the  iridescent  clouds  were  brighter  than  in
any  of  the  other  phenomena  of  the  same  class,  such  as  the
prismatic  sunrises  and  sunsets.  They  were  brighter  than  any
rainbow  and  only  to  be  compared  with  the  spectrum  of  sun-
light shown  by  a  glass  prism.


Earth  Shadows,  April  12


Eauth  Shadows

The  name  Is  that  used  by  Captain  Scott,  though  perhaps
their  appearance  may  be  better  suggested  if  they  were  called
aerial  shadows.  These  shadows  appear  to  be  generally  from
mountain  peaks,  but  their  source  is  often  hidden.  They  most
commonly  take  the  form  of  straight  bands  projected  from  the
mountain  into  the  clear  atmosphere  (their  visibility  in  which
may  be  associated  with  the  presence  of  invisible  particles  of
ice).  These  bands  are  in  the  beginning  sufficiently  darker
than  the  sky  to  be  called  shadows,  but  they  fade  out  upwards
354i


OPTICS

till  there  remains  merely  a  fine  line  which  cannot  be  called
either  lighter  or  darker  than  the  sky.

The  figure  shows  one  of  the  first  of  these  shadows  noticed
on  the  western  mountains,  April  12,  1909.  Two  bands  rose
up  at  different  angles.  As  the  sun  went  round  the  band  on
the  left  became  more  nearly  horizontal,  the  other  went  steeper,
keeping  the  same  relation  to  one  another.  The  line  on  the  left
could  be  traced  without  interruption  to  the  summit  of  Erebus
as  shown  in  the  next  figure,  that  on  the  right  died  out  altogether.


Curved  Line  Joining  Erebus  Summit  and  its  shadow  on  the
Western  Mountains,  April  12


The  line  on  the  left  was  curved,  but  the  fact  was  not  remarked
upon  at  the  time.


Shadows  from  Mount  Erebus

The  most  remarkable  "  shadows  "  were  those  from  Erebus.
As  early  as  April  12,  1908,  we  noticed  that  the  two  shadows
rising  from  Mount  Lister  joined  the  ordinary  shadow  of  Erebus
cast  upon  the  foothills  of  Lister.  There  was  at  that  time
no  suggestion  made  as  to  the  nature  of  these  shadows,  and
it  was  not  till  later  detected  that  some  of  them  were  not
straight.

On  September  2  the  curious  curved  "  shadow  "  was  first
noticed,  and  was  afterwards  observed  frequently.

To  illustrate  this  remarkable  "  shadow  "  it  is  necessary  to
make  a  diagram  in  which  perspective  is  everywhere  violated.

355


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

When  looking  at  the  shadow  on  Mount  Lister,  Erebus  was  almost
behind  us,  and  the  whole  curve  could  only  be  seen  by  turning
the  head.

In  the  picture  both  mountains  are  shown,  Erebus  on  the
left,  Lister  on  the  right.  The  shadow  of  Erebus  falls  upon
Lister,  and  the  curved  line  joins  them,  broadening  out  near


I&ABTH  BUADOITB,  OCTOBER  16

each  end.     In  the  foreground  is  outlined  Flagstaff  Point,  Cape
Royds,  near  which  the  observer  stood.

While  the  broad  ends  of  these  curved  "  shadows  "  are  appre-
ciably darker  than  the  sky,  the  central  portion  is  different.  It
is  an  exceedingly  fine  line,  neither  lighter  nor  darker  than  the
sky  above  and  below,  yet  perfectly  well  defined.  In  some
instances  the  darker  ends  have  a  bright  line  outside,  and  a  blue
zone  inside,  which  broadens  at  the  ends.  Usually  the  observer
was  in  the  shadow  of  Erebus  when  these  effects  were  seen,  but
similar  shadows  could  be  detected  from  the  outside,  as  on
September  29,  when  a  curved  shadow  crossed  the  Ferrar  Glacier,
low  down,  the  sun  being  in  the  south-east.  On  the  same  day
the  curved  shadow  from  Erebus  was  measured,  30°  above  the
856


A  Photograph  of  the  Aurora  Austrams.     The  Lights  in  the  Sky  indicate  the  Position

OF  the  Streamers  To  face  page  356


OPTICS

horizon  (to  the  north).     On  this  occasion  it  did  not  reach  to  the
mountains,  but  ended  on  the  sea  ice.

The  Figures  on  pp.  354  and  355  show  shadows  from  Erebus.
That  on  p.  356  shows  three  peaks  of  the  western  mountains,
with  shadows  projected  from  them.,  the  sun  being  behind
them.


Earth  Shadow^s,  September  17

Almost  as  puzzUng  as  the  curved  "  shadows  "  are  those
instances  when  several  of  the  shadows  diverge  from  one  point
as  shown  in  the  figure  above.  On  this  occasion  the  sun  was
behind  the  observer.


357


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

MAGNETIC  OBSERVATIONS

THE  MAGNETIC  POLE  AND  THE  AURORA

Notes  by  DOUGLAS  MAWSON,  B.Sc,  B.E.

There  are  two  *  localities  where  the  lines  of  magnetic
force  stand  perpendicular  to  the  earth's  surface.  One  of
these  is  situated  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere  to  the  north-
west of  Hudson  Bay  and  is  called  the  North  Magnetic  Pole  ;
the  other,  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere,  in  the  northern  part  of
South  Victoria  Land,  is  known  as  the  South  Magnetic  Pole.

The  lines  of  magnetic  force  are  imaginary  lines  passing
through  any  place  in  the  direction  along  which  a  freely  sus-
pended magnet  will  align  itself.  In  the  vicinity  of  the  magnetic
poles  such  a  magnet  stands  vertically  and  at  intermediate
positions  assumes  an  angle  intermediate  between  a  vertical
and  a  horizontal  position.  The  south-seeking  end  of  the  magnet
dips  downwards  and  is  attracted  towards  the  South  Magnetic
Pole  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere,  whilst  in  the  Northern
Hemisphere  it  is  the  north-seeking  end  of  the  magnet  which
dips.

Magnets  mounted  as  compasses  are  balanced  on  a  vertical
pivot  and  consequently  they  are  free  to  swing  in  a  horizontal
circle  only.  They  are  controlled  by  the  horizontal  components
of  the  earth's  magnetic  force  at  the  spot  where  any  observation
is  made  and  consequently,  if  used  at  the  magnetic  poles,  where
the  whole  of  the  magnetic  force  is  vertical,  they  are  unaffected
and  useless.  The  dip  circle  is  the  instrument  used  for  measuring
the  vertical  component  of  magnetic  force,  and  consequently
it  is  a  very  important  instrument  in  the  polar  regions.  It
consists  of  a  magnetised  needle  swinging  on  a  horizontal  axis,
and  the  readings  are  taken  in  degrees  from  the  vertical.

The  magnetic  poles,  or  ends  of  the  magnetic  axis  of  the
earth,  do  not  bear  any  necessary  relation  to  the  geographical

*  Observations  of  dip  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere  indicate  the  existence  ef
two  magnetic  poles  of  unequal  strength.  The  stronger  of  these  is  regarded  as
the  North  Magnetic  Pole,  the  other  is  situated  in  Siberia  and  is  generally  referred
to  as  the  Asiatic  focus.

858


MAGNETISM

poles,  which  are  the  extremities  of  the  rotation  axis  of  the
earth.  They  are  not  diametral,  but  are  unsymmetrically
placed.  In  this  connection  one  authority  says  :  "In  natural
magnets  the  points  at  which  attraction  takes  place,  otherwise
called  poles,  are  generally  unsymmetrically  placed  and  depend
entirely  on  the  internal  structure  of  the  magnet  as  well  as  on
the  irregularities  of  its  surface."

The  magnetic  poles  are  not  fixed  spots  but  are  constantly
travelling  onward,  executing  an  unknown  paith  and  apparently
completing  a  cycle  in  a  period  of  many  hundreds  of  years.
Besides  this  onward  movement  of  a  few  miles  per  year,  there
is  a  lesser  daily  oscillation.  The  North  Magnetic  Pole  was
reached  in  1831  by  Sir  James  Clark  Ross,  who  afterwards
visited  the  Antarctic  in  the  hope  of  securing  the  double  event,
but  he  was  successful  only  in  locating  the  South  Magnetic  Pole
by  observations  made  on  his  ship  at  a  distance.  In  the  interval
between  1841,  when  these  observations  were  made,  and  1902,
when  the  Discovery  expedition  again  located  the  South  Magnetic
Pole,  it  had  moved  about  two  hundred  geographical  miles  to
the  eastward.

Observations  of  magnetic  declination  and  dip  were  taken
at  intervals  along  the  route  to  the  South  Magnetic  Pole.  Those
taken  on  the  coast,  when  compared  with  values  determined  by
the  Discovery  expedition,  indicate  that  the  magnetic  pole  has,
in  the  interval,  moved  in  a  northerly  and  westerly  direction.
This  fact  was  further  ascertained  by  actually  sledging  inland
from  the  Drygalski  Barrier,  following  as  nearly  as  possible  the
magnetic  meridian,  until  dip  readings  showed  approximate
verticality.  Here  the  flag  was  hoisted.  The  determination  of
the  exact  centre  of  the  magnetic  polar  area  could  not  be  made
on  the  spot,  as  it  would  involve  a  large  number  of  readings
taken  at  positions  surrounding  the  Pole.  The  execution  of
such  observations  under  conditions  of  such  low  temperature
and  prevalent  high  winds  is  a  matter  of  very  great  difficulty,
and  when  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  many  days  would  be  necessary
for  the  operations,  the  impossibility  of  such  a  course  for  sledging-
parties  such  as  ours  is  obvious.


359


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC


The  Aueora  Australis

The  aurora  was  first  observed  during  the  evening  of  March  26,
1908.  Earlier  in  the  season  the  daylight  overpowered  the  light
of  the  aurora,  and  therefore  observations  were  not  possible.
After  October  4,  1908,  likewise,  observations  were  not  possible
on  account  of  the  continuous  daylight.  Nevertheless,  the
aurora  was  probably  in  the  heavens  during  the  summer-time,
as  observations  made  by  the  ship's  party  in  lower  latitudes
showed.  As  the  Nimrod  travelled  north  into  regions  where
dark  nights  prevailed,  auroral  displays  were  observed  both  in
the  latter  part  of  February  1908  and  early  in  March  1909.
Between  the  dates  of  March  26  and  October  4  scarcely  twenty-
four  hours  passed  without  some  display.  At  times  the  auroral
lights  were  present  in  the  heavens  for  many  days  together,
though  of  course  at  full  moon  the  brilliancy  of  the  light  obscured
the  more  delicate  auroral  effects.  Certain  hours  of  the  day
were  attended  by  greater  displays  than  others.  About  half-
past  seven  in  the  evening  a  brilliant  display  was  to  be  expected
and  this  continued  with  little  reduction  in  intensity  throughout
the  evening  hours.  The  effect  increased  in  brilliancy  at  about
four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  died  away  towards  7  a.m.
At  one  period  of  the  year  we  experienced  bright  aurorae  fre-
quently about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  Very  little
colour  was  observed  in  connection  with  these  aurorae  other
than  the  usual  yellowish  green  tints,  but  at  some  times  the
luminosity  showed  yellower  than  at  others.  In  some  of  the  most
brilliant  displays  the  curtains  were  bordered  below  by  a  narrow
zone  of  deep  crimson  colour.  The  displays  were  usually  in
the  form  of  arches,  which  showed  minor  convolutions  and
appeared  as  beautifully  draped  curtains.  These  were  sharply
defined  below  but  merged  insensibly  into  the  heavens  above ;
their  depth  appears  to  have  been  many  thousands  of  feet.
Besides  the  curtain  aurorae,  diffused  nebulous  lights  were
frequently  observed,  often  in  connection  with  clouds.  On
still  cold  evenings  a  faintly  luminous  mist  enveloped  Ross
Island,  and  this  seemed  to  have  some  connection  with  the
nebulous  aurorae.  In  fact,  very  early  in  the  winter  a  nebulous
860


MAGNETISM

type  of  aurora  was  seen  on  one  occasion  to  descend  between
us  and  the  slopes  of  Erebus,  apparently  only  about  five  or  six
thousand  feet  in  height  above  us.

When  at  their  greatest  brilliancy  the  displays  were  powerful
enough  to  throw  shadows  but  were  yet  insufficiently  strong  to
allow  of  their  being  photographed.  We  obtained  impressions
on  photographic  plates  after  about  ten  minutes'  exposure,  but
as  the  curtains  had  altered  their  shape  during  the  interval,
the  result  was  of  little  value.  With  regard  to  the  curtain
aurorse,  when  once  outlined  in  the  sky  they  experienced
spasmodic  kindling,  the  waves  of  light  travelling  usually  in
one  definite  direction.  This  has  the  effect  of  producing  to  the
eye  the  appearance  of  ripples  of  luminescence  traversing  the
curtain  at  a  very  rapid  rate.  The  curtains,  as  a  whole,  slowly
drift  in  a  determined  direction,  generally  towards  the  magnetic
pole.  The  displays,  however,  were  very  seldom  observed  in
that  part  of  the  heavens  situated  towards  the  magnetic  pole ;
they  usually  appeared  in  the  north,  through  east  to  south.
The  arches  sometimes  travelled  towards  us  from  the  south-east.
Observations  of  electric  potential  showed  nothing  remarkable
during  displays  of  the  aurora.

I  am  informed  by  the  Chief  of  the  Telegraph  Department
of  South  Australia  that  during  September  12,  1908,  the  tele-
graph lines,  both  north  and  south,  and  east  and  west,  across
Australia,  were  much  affected  by  earth  currents.  At  the  same
time  we  experienced  considerable  auroral  displays.  Since
then,  on  May  14  and  15,  1909,  the  same  authority  reports
further  disturbed  earth  currents,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note
that  brilliant  auroral  displays  were  observed  in  the  Southern
Indian  Ocean  by  a  passing  steamer.


NOTES  ON  THE  AURORA  AUSTRALIS

By  JAMES  MURRAY

The  different  forms  exhibited  by  the  aurora  could  be  much
better  understood  from  a  few  pictures  than  from  much  de-
scription.    To  depict   the  delicate   and   evanescent   beams  of

361


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

auroral  light  by  harsh  black  lines  is  very  unsatisfactory,  but
as  some  illustration  is  desirable,  these  sketches  attempt  to
give  the  general  forms.  Marston's  coloured  picture  gives  a
good  idea  of  a  curtain  aurora.

Curtain  Aurora. — At  Cape  Royds  this  was  by  far  the
commonest  type  of  aurora.  It  consists  of  broad  ribbon-like
bands  made  up  of  transverse  parallel  fibres.     It  hangs  in  folds


Part  of  Curtain  Dispi-at,  April  28


like  those  assumed  by  heavy  drapery,  and  looks  very  like  fehe
fringe  of  separate  threads  bordering  a  curtain.  The  folds  and
convolutions  of  these  curtains  are  sometimes  very  complicated,
as  shown  in  the  figure.

The  picture  shows  part  of  a  magnificent  display  of  curtain
aurora,  which  was  seen  on  April  28,  1908.  The  whole  sky  was
covered  by  a  series  of  curtains,  from  horizon  to  zenith,  with
very  little  blank  space.  The  curtains  were  much  folded  and
convoluted.  Similar  displays  occurred  on  May  24,  and  on
several  other  occasions.

Sometimes  a  single  curtain  formed  a  complete  band,  more
or  less  folded,  which  usually  encircled  the  summit  of  Mount
862


MAGNETISM

Erebus  at  some  distance.  Such  a  band  is  shown  in  the  figure
of  the  aurora  of  May  26.

Similar  complete  rings  occurred  which  did  not  go  behind
the  mountain.

Curtains  sometimes  had  the  beams  separated,  or  little
groups  of  beams  separated  from  one  another.  These  were
spoken   of   as   disjointed   curtains.     Some   curtains   were   not


Curtain  Band  Circling  Erebus,  May  2G


folded  at  all,  but  stretched  across  the  sky  as  simple  bands,
which  were  sometimes  called  arches.  An  entirely  different
kind  of  arch  could,  however,  be  distinguished.

Arch  Aurora. — ^This  consists  of  a  series  of  bright  patches,
arranged  on  a  large  arc  or  circle,  and  of  long  tapering  beams
going  upwards  from  each  patch.  Examined  closely  there  is
a  sharp  distinction  between  the  narrow  tapering  beam  and
the  brighter  expanded  portion.  The  arch  in  its  typical  form
is  much  less  common  than  the  curtain.  The  rays  are  often
seen  coming  from  beyond  the  horizon,  or  from  behind  hills,
while  the  basal  arc  is  hidden.  Similar  beams  often  rise  far
apart,   but  still  apparently  radiating  from  a  centre.     Others

363


THE   HEART


OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

These  form  a


are  unconnected,  and  incline  at  various  angles,
transition  to  the  searchlight  type.

The  figure  shows  a  typical  arch,  with  a  bright  curtain
beneath  it,  witnessed  on  June  19,  1908.

Searchlight  Aurora. — Long  bright  expanding  beams
suggest  a  resemblance  to  searchlights,  not  only  by  their  form,
but  by  the  rapidity  of  their  movements.  They  swing  about
in  the  same  manner   and  shoot  out  suddenly  from  the  horizon


Aech  and  Curtain,  June  19


or  from  a  patch  of  nebulous  aurora,  and  as  suddenly  disappear.
They  often  accompany  other  forms  of  aurora.  Some  search-
light beams  are  shown  in  the  figure  of  the  very  peculiar  aurora
of  May  23,  1908.

Nebulous  Aurora. — A  nebulous  auroral  haze  is  constantly
associated  with  clouds,  occurring  on  the  upper  surface  and
showing  at  the  edges.  Sometimes  the  nebulous  light  accom-
panied haze  so  thin  that  it  would  not  be  seen  without  the
illumination,  and  in  such  cases  it  might  be  seen  drifting  along
with  the  wind.

Other  Aurora. — All  the  definite  types  of  aurora  readily
B64i


MAGNETISM

change  into  other  types.  Curtains  lose  their  form  and  become
nebulous  ;  the  hazy  border  of  a  cloud  gives  out  beams  like
an  arch  or  searchlights  ;  any  type  will  suddenly  concentrate
into  a  single  beam  or  into  a  shapeless  patch.  Some  aurorae
occurred  which  could  not  be  classed  with  any  of  the  types
recognised,  but  they  were  not  common  enough  to  get  special
names.     Two  of  the  most  striking  auroras  are  figured.

On  May  23  at  11  a.m.  a  great  broad  beam  of  light  appeared


Great  Beam  of  Light,  May  23,  1£


from  behind  a  stratus  cloud  in  the  west  from  Cape  Royds,  and
grew  upwards  till  it  reached  the  zenith.  It  was  at  first  accom-
panied by  some  searchlight  beams  (shown  inclined  to  the  right)
which  soon  disappeared.  The  broad  beam  illuminated  some
strips  of  cirrus  in  its  path,  which  were  scarcely  visible  to  right
and  left  of  it.

It  swung  slowly  down  to  the  left,  the  lower  end  keeping
in  the  same  apparent  position,  till  it  made  an  angle  of  forty-five
degrees  with  the  horizon,  when  it  faded.  The  whole  display
lasted  twenty  minutes.  The  dotted  line  in  the  figure  shows
the  last  position  of  the  beam.     It  differed  from  the  ordinary

365


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

searchlights  in  the  great  breadth  and  parallel  sides  of  the  beam
as  well  as  in  its  steady  motion.

This  was  one  of  the  few  aurorae  somewhat  in  the  direction
of  the  Magnetic  Pole,  but  it  did  not  appear  to  be  very  distant,
to  judge  from  its  illumination  of  cirrus  clouds  at  a  great
heigh  b.

On  August  31  was  seen  the  aurora  figured  below.  Almost
in  the  zenith  there  was  a  large  tract  of  sigmoid  shape.     From


AuKOHA  ON  August  31


near  this  there  diverged  very  long  faint  streamers  over  the
whole  quarter  of  the  sky  from  east  to  north.  Though  pretty
close  together  the  streamers  were  not  joined  as  in  a  curtain,
and  were  of  unequal  lengths.  On  several  other  occasions
similar  displays,  converging  on  bright  tracts  in  the  zenith,  were
seen,  which  approached  the  corona  type  of  aurora,  as  figured
by  Peters.

Movements  of  Aurora. — Is  there  any  general  direction  in
which  auroras  move,  or  in  which  the  shimmer  or  kindling  passes
along  the  curtains,  &c.  ?     Some  notes  bearing  on  the  question
are  available.
366


TIDES    AND    CURRENTS

Those  aurorse  associated  with  clouds  must  travel  simply
with  the  wind.  Auroras  not  connected  with  clouds  may  have
their  motions  determined  by  other  causes.

May  24. — An  even  arch  appeared,  trending  from  north-west
to  south-east,  about  80°  above  the  south-west  horizon.  The
arch  travelled  towards  the  north-east  till  it  reached  the  zenith,
and  passed  20°  beyond  it.  One  end  now  rested  on  Mount
Erebus,  when  the  motion  ceased  and  the  arch  faded.  The
motion  was  slow  and  intermittent.

JuTie  4,  8.30  P.M. — An  auroral  glow  appeared  in  the  west.
A  curtain  grew  east  from  it  to  Erebus.  A  vivid  green  shimmer
passed  slowly  along  from  west  to  east,  and  faded  just  over
Erebus.

Earlier  on  the  same  day  Professor  David  reported  an  arch
trending  from  north  to  south,  and  a  shimmer  passing  along  it
from  north  to  south.

June  80. — ^A  disjointed  curtain  over  the  summit  of  Erebus
travelled  southward,  and  at  length  concentrated  in  one  reddish
beam.

August  26,  6.15  P.M. — A  typical  curtain  low  down  over
Erebus,  its  ends  bearing  north-east  and  south-east.  Waves  of
brighter  light  passed  along  it  from  north  to  south.


TIDES  AND  CURRENTS

By  JAMES  MURRAY

The  coast-line,  always  encumbered  by  the  ice-foot,  would
render  littoral  tide  observations  in  Antarctica  difficult  or  im-
possible. Fortunately  the  fast  ice,  filling  all  confined  waters
during  the  winter  and  spring  months,  gives  a  unique  oppor-
tunity for  such  observations,  impossible  in  open  waters.  The
ice-surface  affords  a  platform  on  which  to  erect  any  tide-observ-
ing instrument,  which,  while  rising  and  falling  freely  with  the
tides  or  other  dishevelling  agencies,  is  undisturbed  by  any
lateral  movements.  By  the  combined  efforts  of  most  of  the
scientific  staff,  and  the  skilful  hands  of  our  engineer,  Day,  a

»67


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

form  of  tide-recording  instrument  was  devised  and  made.  It
was  set  up  on  the  ice  of  Back  Door  Bay,  about  one  hundred
yards  from  shore,  by  Dr.  Mackay  and  Professor  David.

The  recording  part  of  the  instrument  was  a  modified  baro-
graph. A  box  weighted  with  stones  was  put  down  through  a
hole  in  the  ice  as  an  anchor.  The  wire  from  this  anchor  was
taken  over  a  pulley  hung  from  a  tripod  of  bamboo  poles.  It
was  then  attached  to  one  end  of  a  long  lever  of  bamboo,  which
was  weighted  to  keep  the  wire  taut.  By  the  arrangement  of  the
lever  the  record  of  the  tide  movement  was  reduced  to  one-
twentieth  and  thus  brought  within  the  limits  of  the  barograph
drum.  The  parts  above  the  ice  are  shown  in  the  photograph.
The  wire  in  passing  through  the  ice  is  enclosed  in  a  tube  which
is  kept  filled  with  oil,  as  used  for  the  same  purpose  on  the
Discovery  expedition.  The  instrument  worked  well,  and  a
continuous  record  was  got  for  about  three  months,  interrupted
only  for  half  an  hour  weekly,  when  the  papers  were  changed.
At  the  end  of  that  time  the  wire  broke  from  the  box  at  the
bottom  of  the  sea,  and  the  tripod  was  blown  down  during  a
severe  blizzard.  The  ice  was  then  so  thick  that  it  was  found
impossible  to  cut  a  hole  to  put  down  another  anchor.

The  tide  record  obtained  on  the  barograph  drum  was  a
simple  undulating  curve  with  one  maximum  per  day,  attaining
the  greatest  amplitude  at  full  and  new  moon,  and  diminishing
almost  to  nothing  at  the  quarters,  when  shorter  waves  of  less
amplitude  could  be  seen.

When  the  record  was  analysed  it  was  resolved  into  two
undulations,  the  larger  one  having  the  period  equal  to  the
lunar  day,  the  smaller  one  having  a  period  of  half  a  day.  As
one  maximum  per  day  of  the  lesser  tide  coincides  with  the
maximum  of  the  greater  tide,  its  effect  on  the  original  record
is  to  increase  the  apparent  amplitude  in  that  phase,  while  the
other  maximum  of  the  lesser  tide  causes  a  flattening  in  the
opposite  phase  of  the  greater  one.

This  figure  shows  the  results  of  an  analysis  of  the  same
portion  of  tide-record  shown  in  the  previous  figure.  The  upper
curve  is  the  larger  tide,  and  shows  how  it  diminishes  at  the
first  and  third  quarters  (end  of  line  to  the  left)  and  increases
at  new  and  full  (to  right).  The  lower  curve  is  the  smaller  tide,
868


The  Tide  Gauge


MUKUAY    AND    MAMSON    AT    A    HOLE    MADE    IN    ONE    OF    THE    FROZEN    LAKES


To  fact  pay  v  368


TIDES    AND    CURRENTS

and  it  is  almost  uniform  through  all  phases  of  the  moon,  though
it  is  not  always  so  uniform  as  in  the  portion  figured.

Seiches. — The  tide  record  shows  what  is  known  as  a
"  festooning,"  due  to  lesser  undulations.  These  are  seen
chiefly  during  blizzards,  but  they  are  known  to  occur  also  in
calms.    The  small  scale  on  which  the  record  is  made  prevents


DiAGKAM   SHOWING   THE   PRINCIPAL   PAKTS    OF   THE    TiDE-GAUGE

W  =  the  weights,  the  larger  one  as  anchor,  lying  on  the  sea  bottom,  the  smaller  one  (the  object
of  which  is  to  keep  the  line  taut  at  all  times)  on  the  free  end  of  the  line,  below  the  lever  ;
L  =  the  long  bamboo  lever  lor  reducing  the  scale;  T  =  two  legs  of  the  bamboo  tripod,  support-
ing the  pulley  overwhich  the  wire  passes ;  D  =  the  drum  on  which  the  record  is  made.  The
recording  part  of  the  apparatus  is  more  complicated  than  the  diagram  indicates.  It  will  be
described  in  detail  in  the  scientific  publications.


any  analysis  of  these  undulations,  but  they  were  more  clearly
seen  on  the  first  tide-measuring  instrument  which  we  used.
Before  the  recording  tide-gauge  was  devised.  Dr.  Mackay  built
an  instrument  for  measuring  the  tides.  In  this  there  was
simply  a  weight  sliding  on  an  inclined  plane  which  was  marked
as  a  scale.  A  pencil  working  in  a  straight  line  gave  the  amount
of  the  tides^  but  to  get  the  time  of  the  different  phases  it  had  to
n  ^  2  a  369


a-


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

be  observed  at  regular  intervals.  It  was  noticed  that  over  and
above  the  steady  rise  and  fall  of  the  tide,  the  weight  was  con-
stantly rising  and  falling  at  intervals  of  one  or  a  few  minutes,
and  sometimes  to  the  extent  of  four  inches  or  more.

It  would  have  been  possible  to  plot  a  detailed  curve  of  these
oscillations  by  observing  at  intervals  of  half  or  quarter  minutes,
but  the  cold  was  too  great  to  permit  uncovering  the  hands  to
record  the  observations.  These  oscillations  are  considered  to
be  of  the  nature  of  seiche  waves.  Seiche  was  the  name  given
to  certain  free  oscillations  of  enclosed  bodies  of  water,  first
observed  in  Swiss  lakes  by  Professor  Forel.  Whatever  the
origin  of  the  inequalities  of  level  which  must  precede  the  oscilla-
tion, that  continues  as  a  seiche,  diminishing  till  a  state  of  rest
is  again  reached.

The  period  of  the  seiche  {i.e.,  the  time  between  the  recur-
rences of  the  same  phase  of  the  oscillation)  has  a  definite  relation
to  the  dimensions  of  the  body  of  water.  Seiches  are  best  observed
in  enclosed  basins  of  water,  where  they  are  not  interfered  with
by  tides,  but  oscillations  of  the  same  nature  are  of  frequent
occurrence  in  deep  bays  on  the  sea  coast.  These  may  be  set
up  by  the  ordinary  lunar  tides,  but  the  recurring  tidal  waves
may  often  obscure  them.  The  seiches  at  Cape  Royds  might
originate  in  this  way.  The  Ross  Sea  is  a  deep  bay  of  large  size
in  which  secondary  oscillations  might  be  expected,  and  McMurdo
Sound  is  a  similar  bay  of  small  dimensions.  The  seiches
observed,  with  periods  of  only  a  few  minutes  and  small  ampli-
tude, might  be  supposed  to  be  readily  set  up  by  winds.


Currents  in  McMurdo  Sound

There  were  many  indications  of  a  permanent  current  setting
south  past  Cape  Bird  towards  Cape  Royds.  About  half  a  mile
north  of  Cape  Royds,  at  Black  Sand  Beach,  it  was  by  some
influence  deflected  and  left  the  land,  passing  away  southward
for  some  miles.  The  readings  of  the  current  indicator  set  up
near  Cape  Royds  seem  to  show  that  the  deflecting  influence  is
another  current  coming  from  the  southward.

The  first  indication  of  the  southward-setting  current  was
372


TIDES    AND    CURRENTS

a  pretty  one.  On  March  16,  when  the  Sound  was  entirely
open  and  no  large  ice  was  in  sight,  a  strong  southerly  wind  was
blowing.  This  brought  a  quantity  of  fine  broken  ice  with  it
which  drifted  along  the  shore  from  Cape  Royds  northward,
forming  a  zone  about  one  hundred  yards  wide.  In  the  figure
the  dark  shading  shows  the  band  of  ice  fragments,  the  small


WiND-DEivEN  Ice  stopped  by  Current  from  North,  March  16


arrows  the  direction  of  the  wind,  and  the  long  arrow  the
currents  from  the  north  which  stopped  the  drift  of  the  ice.

At  Black  Sand  Beach  the  band  of  ice  left  the  shore  and
swung  round  and  went  away  across  the  Sound  in  a  direction
south  of  west.  The  north  edge  of  the  ice-band  was  as  clean
as  if  it  had  stopped  against  a  solid,  while  the  spindrift  flying
northward  showed  that  there  was  no  change  in  the  wind.  The
line  followed  by  this  band  of  ice  fragments  became  approximately
the  limit  of  the  fast  ice  later  on.

After  the  permanent  ice  formed  in  the  Sound,  its  edge  extend-
ing in  a  line  south-west  from  Black  Sand  Beach,  every  gale
cleared  the  ice  out  from  the  sea  north  of  this  line.     When  calm


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC


Eddy  of  Pack  in  McMukdo  Sound,  January  1909


Variation  in  Direction  of  Current,  June  30  to  July  25,  indicated
BY  the  Arrow


374


TIDES    AND    CURRENTS

weather  returned,  pack-ice  and  bergs  floated  down  the  east
side  of  the  Sound,  till  they  struck  the  fast  ice,  when  they  began
to  roll  along  its  edge  away  south-westward.

The  drift  of  the  Nimrod  from  January  7  to  16,  1909,  when
held  in  the  pack,  extended  our  knowledge  of  this  current,  and
proved  a  vast  eddy  from  Cape  Bird  round  by  Cape  Royds  and
Granite  Harbour,  to  the  Nordenskjold  Barrier

The  arrows  indicate  roughly  the  drift  of  the  ice.  The  cross
(-}-)  marks  the  spot  where  the  Nimrod  was  caught  in  the  pack,
and  the  other  cross  (  x  )  about  where  she  was  released.  The
line  below  the  arrows  is  the  edge  of  the  fast  ice.

Current  Indicator. — This  was  devised  by  Shackleton,  and
set  up  on  the  ice  a  short  distance  off  Cape  Royds.  It  was  put
in  charge  of  Brocklehurst,  who  visited  it  several  times  a  day
when  practicable,  from  June  SO  to  August  18,  when  it  was
finally  out  of  action.  Only  the  earlier  readings  are  taken  into
account,  as  it  is  suspected  that  latterly  the  vane  beneath  the
ice  became  encumbered  by  the  growth  of  the  ice,  and  the  read-
ings are  therefore  not  so  trustworthy.

These  readings  bring  out  two  things  :  first,  a  current  nearly
at  right  angles  to  that  coming  from  Cape  Bird  ;  secondly,  an
absence  of  any  indication  of  tidal  influence.  From  June  30  to
July  25,  the  current  was  steadily  between  north  and  west,  and
most  frequently  north-west.  The  arrows  show  the  amount
of  variation  in  the  direction.


375


APPENDIX    V

METEOROLOGY

A  SUMMARY  OF  RESULTS

By  professor  T.  W.  EDGEWORTH  DAVID,  B.A.,
F.R.S.,  AND  LIEUTENANT  ADAMS,  R.N.R.,  Meteo-
rologist TO  THE  Expedition,   1907-1909

SYSTEMATIC  meteorological  observations  were  kept  on  the
voyage  of  the  Nimrod,  commencing  on  January  1,  1908,
from  Port  Lyttelton  down  to  winter  quarters  at  Cape  Royds.
These  observations  were  taken  hourly.  On  the  return  voyage
from  Ross  Island  to  Port  Lyttelton  observations  were  taken
during  every  watch.  On  the  return  voyage  of  the  Nimrod  from
Lyttelton  to  Ross  Island,  on  her  cruises  in  the  Antarctic,  and
the  return  voyage  to  Lyttelton,  meteorological  observations
were  taken  at  intervals  of  four  hours.

At  winter  quarters.  Cape  Royds,  systematic  observations
were  taken  by  one  of  us  (Lieutenant  Adams),  during  the  day,
from  March  to  October  1908,  observations  at  night  being  taken
by  whoever  happened  at  the  time  to  be  night  watchman.
These  observations  were  two  hourly.  From  October  1908
till  February  1909,  the  biologist,  J.  Murray,  who  had  previous
experience  of  meteorological  work,  was  in  charge  of  the  meteoro-
logical observations  and  records.

Attempts  were  made  to  ascertain  the  amount  of  annual
snowfall  in  the  Antarctic  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ross  Island.
This  task  was,  of  course,  beset  with  the  same  difficulty  which
the  meteorologists  of  all  other  Antarctic  expeditions  experienced,
376


METEOROLOGY

viz.,  that  of  distinguishing  between  fresh  falling  snow  and  old
snow  drifted  through  the  air  by  blizzards.  We  did  our  best
to  make  this  discrimination,  but  the  results  can  only  be  set
down  as  empirical  and  provisional.  Our  general  conclusion
is  that  at  Cape  Royds  the  snowfall  from  February  1908  to
February  1909  was  equal  to  about  9|  in.  of  rain.

Mackintosh,  when  on  the  Southern  Supporting-party's  ex-
pedition, in  charge  of  Joyce,  in  January  1909,  found,  as  the
result  of  excavations  made  at  the  old  Depot  A  of  the  Discovery
expedition  near  Minna  Bluff,  that  the  snowfall  there  for
the  past  six  years  had  been  equal  to  an  annual  rainfall  of

During  the  whole  time  of  our  residence  in  the  Antarctic,
from  February  1908  till  the  beginning  of  March  1909,  no  rain
whatever  fell.  The  snow  usually  came  with  a  blizzard.  These
blizzards  blew  from  a  general  southerly  direction ;  at  Cape
Royds  they  were  mostly  from  the  south-east.  It  is  clear  that
the  snow  brought  by  the  blizzards  is  in  part  drift  snow,  in  part
new  falling  snow.  On  several  occasions  we  noticed  that,
whereas  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  blizzard  the  snow  was  largely
redistributed  old  snow  in  the  form  of  drift,  towards  the  end  of
a  blizzard  fresh  new  falling  snow  would  be  deposited.  As
at  the  time  of  the  blizzard  the  wind  was  travelling  very  rapidly
from  the  south  at  the  rate  of  perhaps  sixty  to  seventy  miles
an  hour,  we  argued  that  this  new  falling  snow  was  probably
produced  by  moisture  carried  by  the  upper  currents.  The
temperature  of  the  atmosphere  invariably  increased  consider-
ably from  the  beginning  of  a  blizzard  towards  its  end.  This
rise  was  very  marked,  for  whereas  the  initial  temperature  at
the  beginning  of  a  blizzard  would  be  perhaps  minus  30°  Fahr.,
at  the  end  of  a  blizzard,  after  a  lapse  of  possibly  twenty-four
to  thirty  hour  ,  the  temperature  would  have  risen  to  plus  12°
or  plus  15°  Fahr.

This  rise  in  temperature  may  have  been  due  to  causes  of
which  the  more  important  are  :  First,  the  usual  fohn  effect,
the  temperature  of  the  air  being  raised  through  compression
as  the  air  descends  from  higher  levels  to  lower.  This  compres-
sion effect  ought  theoretically  to  make  itself  strongly  felt  at
the  atmospheric  South  Polar  vortex.     Secondly,  the  latent  heat

377


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

set  free  when  aqueous  vapour  in  the  atmosphere  is  passing  into
the  form  of  snow,  which,  of  course,  tends  to  raise  the  atmospheric
temperature.  It  might  also  be  suggested  that  as  the  atmo-
spheric circulation  during  a  blizzard  is  immensely  accelerated,
probably  the  upper  winds  under  these  conditions  may  transfer
relatively  warm  air  from  tropical  regions  polewards.  If  this  be
so,  it  is  quite  possible  that  some  of  the  snow  which  falls  towards
the  close  of  a  blizzard  was  formed  out  of  the  moisture  generated
in  warmer  climates.

The  Southern  Party  specially  studied  the  question  of  whether
much  snow  fell  far  south,  and  the  Northern  Party,  who  went
to  the  South  Magnetic  Pole,  also  paid  special  attention  to  this
point  of  whether  the  snowfall  increased  in  proportion  as  one
receded  from  the  South  Pole.  As  the  result  of  the  observations
of  the  Southern  Party  it  was  clear  that  within  ninety-seven
geographical  miles  of  the  South  Pole  there  were  still  very  strong
south-south-east  winds,  bringing  with  them  a  quantity  of  snow.
During  the  time  the  Southern  Party  were  on  the  plateau  no
falls  of  fresh  snow  were  observed ;  but  there  was  nothing
to  suggest  that  the  annual  snowfall  was  less  than  at  winter
quarters.

Temperature. — The  lowest  temperature  we  experienced
was  minus  57°  Fahr.,  near  White  Island  on  the  Great  Ice  Barrier,
on  August  14,  1908.  We  may  refer  to  Mr.  Murray's  notes  for
a  comparison  of  the  temperatures  observed  by  us  and  by  other
Antarctic  expeditions.

Winds. — These  may  be  divided  into  surface  winds  and  high-
level  winds.

As  regards  surface  winds,  we  found  in  Ross  Sea  that  these
were  controlled  to  a  great  extent  by  the  presence  or  absence
of  ice  over  Ross  Sea.  Once  McMurdo  Sound  and  the  Ross
Sea  to  the  north  of  it  became  firmly  frozen  over,  we  found  that
we  enjoyed  calmer  weather  conditions  than  we  did  when  the
sea  was  open.  Evidently  the  presence  of  a  large  surface  of
comparatively  warm  water  at  plus  28°  Fahr.  acts  as  a  disturb-
ing factor  in  the  local  atmospheric  circulation.  The  surface
winds  at  our  winter  quarters  were  either  gentle  northerly  winds,
whose  speed  seldom  exceeded  twelve  miles  an  hour,  or  gentle
winds  from  the  south-south-east  or  south-east.  If  these  latter
878


Cloud  Spirals  above  Mount  Erebus


Cloud  Spirals  in  Upper  Currents  of  Air  near  Erebus  To  face  page  378


METEOROLOGY

winds  become  strongly  developed  they  pass  over  into  a  definite
blizzard.  One  of  the  rarest  winds  at  Cape  Royds  was  a  north-
westerly.

On  the  southern  journey  it  was  noted  that  south-south-
east winds  predominated  on  the  surface  of  the  Great  Barrier.
These  sometimes  swung  round  to  between  south-south-west
and  west-south-west.  The  Southern  Party  experienced  a
violent  south-south-east  blizzard  at  a  point  just  beyond  latitude
88°  South.  At  the  farthest  point  south  attained  by  them,
latitude  88°  23',  the  sastrugi  were  large  and  high,  and  trended
from  south-south-east  to  north-north-west.  There  was  much
soft  snow  on  this  part  of  the  plateau  at  an  altitude  of  over
10,000  ft.

On  the  journey  of  the  Norlnern  Party  to  the  South  Magnetic
Pole  it  was  found  that  the  chief  winds  on  the  coast,  as  well  as
on  the  high  plateau,  are  from  south-south-west  to  west,  with
occasional  blizzard  winds  from  the  south- south-east  and  south-
east. Both  the  Northern  and  Southern  Party  kept  specially
careful  records  of  the  direction  of  the  dominant  sastrugi.  Maps
of  these  will  be  published  in  the  Meteorological  Memoir.  It  is
certain  that  a  good  deal  of  the  westerly  wind  experienced  by
the  Northern  Party  in  their  journey  along  the  sea  ice  near  the
coast  was  practically  a  land  breeze.  It  used  to  spring  up  soon
after  midnight,  and  keep  on  blowing  pretty  freshly  until  about
10  A.M.  on  the  following  day.  It  was  observed  that  occasionally
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount  Nansen  a  breeze  would  spring
up  from  the  north-east  ofi  Ross  Sea,  carrying  dense  cumulus
clouds  inland.

High-level  Atmospheric  Currents. — On  January  14,
1908,  Messrs.  Leo  Cotton,  Douglas  Mawson  and  T.  W.  Edge-
worth  David  were  able  to  get  some  observations  of  the  direction
and  rate  of  movement  and  height  of  the  upper  w'nd  ciirrent,
in  latitude  69°  53'  South,  longitude  179°  47'  West.  We  esti-
mated that  the  mean  height  of  the  mackerel  sky  which  seemed
to  be  formed  at  the  base  of  the  anti-trade  wind  was  on  this
occasion  between  13,000  and  14,000  ft.,  and  we  determined
that  the  rate  of  movement  of  the  mackerel  clouds  was  about
twenty  miles  per  hour  in  a  south-easterly  direction.  This  does
not  mean  necessarily,  of  course,  that  the  upper  wind  was  not

379


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

moving  at  a  still  more  rapid  rate,  but  the  figure  may  be  looked
upon  as  the  minimum  sp  ed  for  that  current.

At  Mount  Erebus  our  winter  quarters  were  s'tuated  in  an
exc  ptionally  favoured  position  for  observing  the  upper  currents
of  the  atmosphere.  Not  only  had  we  the  great  cone  of  Erebus
to  serve  as  a  graduated  scale  against  which  we  could  read  off
the  heights  of  the  various  air  currents  as  portrayed  by  the  move-
ments of  the  clouds  belonging  to  them,  but  we  also  had  the
magnificent  steam  column  in  the  mountain  itself,  which  by  its
swaying  from  side  to  side  indicated  exactly  the  direction  of
movement  of  the  higher  atmosphere.  *  Moreover,  during  violent
eruptions  like  that  of  January  14,  1908,  the  steam  column
rose  to  an  altitude  of  over  20,000  ft.  above  sea-level.  Under
these  circumstances  it  penetrated  far  above  the  level  of  a  current
of  air  from  the  pole  northwards,  so  that  its  summit  came  well
within  the  sweep  of  the  higher  wind  blowing  in  a  southerly
direction,  the  result  being  that  the  steam  cloud  in  this  region
was  dragged  over  powerfully  towards  the  south-east.  On  such
occasions  one  usually  saw  evidence  of  two  high-level  currents,
the  one  coming  from  a  northerly  direction,  its  under  limit  being
about  15,000  ft.  above  sea-level ;  and  the  other,  or  middle
current,  from  a  southerly  quarter,  usually  blowing  towards  the
east-north-east,  having  its  upper  limit  at  15,000  ft.  normally,
while  its  lower  limit  was  between  6000  and  7000  ft.  above  sea-
level.  While  these  two  currents  were  blowing  strongly  there
would  frequently  be  a  surface  current  blowing  gently  from  the
north.  This  would  bring  up  very  dense  masses  of  cumulus
cloud  from  off  Ross  Sea.  The  cumulus  would  drift  up  to  the
6000  or  7000  ft.  level  on  the  north-west  slopes  of  Erebus,  and
then  the  tops  of  the  cumulus  would  be  cut  off  by  the  lower
edge  of  the  northward-flowing  middle  current.  Wisps  of  fleecy
cloud  would  be  swept  along  to  the  east-north-east,  torn  from
the  tops  of  these  cumulus  clouds  by  the  middle  current.  The
whole  appearance  is  illustrated  in  the  accompanying  diagram.

It  is  of  especial  interest  to  note  the  effects  of  blizzards  on
the  direction  of  movement  of  the  high-level  currents,  as  well
as  on  their  altitude.  As  the  result  of  our  ascent  of  Erebus  we
ascertained  that  the  whole  of  the  snowfall  lying  within  the  rim
of  the  second  great  crater,  at  an  altitude  of  from  11,500  to
880


Dumb-bell  Cloud  above  Erebus


To  face  page  380


METEOROLOGY

over  12,000  ft.,  is  strongly  ridged  with  sastrugi,  which  trend
from  about  west-south-west  to  east-north-east  in  the  direction
of  the  prevalent  middle-air  current.  The  sharp  points  of  these
sastrugi  are  directed  towards  the  west- south-west,  the  quarter
from  which  of  course  the  prevalent  wind  blows.

Our  actual  experience  of  a  heavy  blizzard,  at  a  level  of  over
5000  ft.  on  Erebus,  as  well  as  our  subsequent  observations  of
the  height  to  which  the  blizzard  wind  extended,  showed  that
during  blizzards  the  whole  atmosphere  from  sea-level  up  to  at


HEIGHT


ABOVE      SEA


LEVEL


•0300^


The  Curve  of  Atmospheric  Temperature  from  Cape  Eoyds  to  Summit  of  Erebus


least  11,000  ft.  moves,  near  Cape  Royds,  from  south-east  to
north-west,  and  the  speed  of  movement  is  from  forty  up  to  over
sixty  miles  an  hour.  The  day  that  we  reached  the  summit  of
Erebus,  March  10,  1908,  we  found  ourselves  at  the  level  of  over
13,000  ft.  within  the  lower  limit  of  the  upper  wind.  Subsequent
observations  by  us  of  the  point  in  the  steam  cloud  over  Erebus,
where  the  bend  took  place  at  the  junction  of  the  lower  limit
of  this  current,  with  the  top  limit  of  the  middle  current,  showed
that  after  and  during  the  blizzard  the  middle-air  current,
normally  blowing  from  the  west-south-west,  is  temporarily
abolished,  being  absorbed  by  the  immense  outrushing  air  stream
of  the  south-east  blizzard.  We  noticed  that  usually  in  winter-
time, especially  when  a  blizzard  was  impending,  strong  cloud
radiants  were  developed  towards  the  north-west.  These  radiants
were  produced  by  the  apparent  convergence,  due  to  perspective,

38X


THE    HEART    OF   THE    ANTARCTIC

of  long  belts  of  cirro-stratus  clouds  ;  they  could  be  observed
swinging  round  for  several  hours  from  north-west  to  true  north,
and  even  east  of  north.  When  this  was  the  case  a  blizzard
was  certain  to  be  impending.  Unfortunately  during  a  blizzard
the  air  was  generally  so  thick  with  snow  that  we  were  unable
to  see  the  top  of  Erebus.  At  the  end  of  a  blizzard  the  air
current  over  Erebus  became  suddenly  reversed,  the  steam
cloud  swinging  round  from  the  south  to  the  north.  After  a
time,  following  on  the  conclusion  of  a  blizzard,  a  high-level
current  was  seen  to  be  floating  the  cirrus  clouds  from  the  south-
east towards  the  north-west,  and  the  steam  of  Erebus  would
stream  out  towards  the  north-west.  We  could  not  account
for  this  high-level  south-easterly  current.  It  looked  like  a
reversal  of  the  usual  upper  wind,  and  it  appears  to  be  a  fact
new  to  meteorological  science.

As  regards  the  sequence  of  events  during  a  blizzard,  they
would  seem  to  be  as  follows  :  First,  there  would  be  gentle
northerly  winds  at  Cape  Royds  for  perhaps  one  or  two  days  ;
temperatures  would  be  low,  and  it  would  appear  as  though  the
air  flowing  south  was  coming  to  supply  the  void  which  otherwise
would  be  caused  by  the  contraction  of  the  atmosphere  near  the
pole.  Then  would  follow  two  or  three  days  of  absolute  calm,
the  temperature  meanwhile  continually  falling.  We  may
suggest  hypothetically  this  meant  that  a  great  mass  of  air
near  the  pole  was  constantly  becoming  heavier  and  denser  as
the  result  of  the  increasing  cold.  Sooner  or  later,  perhaps
a  week  after  the  northerly  wind  ceased  to  blow,  this  heavy
mass  of  cold  air  would  seem  to  force  a  passage  for  itself
equatorwards.  It  would  commence  rushing  out  as  a  south-
easterly blizzard,  and  as  soon  as  this  rapid  current  was
started,  and  even  before  it  had  got  to  the  latitude  of  Cape
Royds,  77°  82'  South,  an  acceleration  of  the  upper  current
above  it  had  already  set  in.  This  led  to  the  curving  of  the  upper
current  into  a  direction  more  or  less  parallel  to  meridians  as
it  rushed  in  to  take  the  place  of  the  cold  wind  escaping  from
the  neighbourhood  of  the  pole.  The  increased  speed  of  circu-
lation of  the  upper  current  increased  the  normal  fohn  effect
at  the  pole,  and  this,  with  the  more  rapid  transfer  of  warm
air  from  the  north  to  the  south  by  the  mediura  of  the  upp^j

ns2


METEOROLOGY

current,  together  with  the  latent  heat  from  the  snow  formed,
combined  to  raise  the  polar  atmospheric  temperature,  and  so
temporarily  to  make  that  region  a  region  of  relatively  low
pressure  instead  of  relatively  high,  that  is,  relatively  as  compared
with  the  normal  atmospheric  pressure  there.  As  soon,  however,
as  this  warming  of  the  polar  air  had  become  general,  conditions
for  a  blizzard  wind  ceased,  and  a  period  of  calm  supervened.
At  the  moment  of  the  cessation  of  the  wind,  conceivably,  a
species  of  hydraulic  ram  effect  made  itself  felt  in  the  suddenly
checked  anti-trade  wind  current  above,  which  led  to  the  stop-
page of  that  great  air  stream  temporarily,  and  its  resurging
back  equatorwards,  thus  producing  a  curious,  high-level  current
frequently  seen  by  us  after  a  blizzard  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Erebus.

To  return  from  this  theoretical  digression  to  observed  facts,
an  occasional  precursor  of  the  cessation  of  a  blizzard  was  the
veering  of  the  wind  from  south-east  through  east-south-east
to  east.

That  these  blizzard  winds  occasionally  blow  right  across  the
Antarctic  Circle  and  reach  the  shores  of  Australasia  is  indicated
by  the  experience  of  the  Nimrod.  When  she  left  Cape  Royds
on  February  23,  1908,  she  left  us  in  a  light  south-easterly  wind,
the  survival  of  a  previous  blizzard,  and  the  following  four  days
it  was  still  blowing  a  blizzard.  Then,  after  a  partial  cessation
of  the  wind  for  two  days  more,  the  blizzard  freshened  again  on
March  1,  continuing  to  blow  on  March  2.  The  Nimrod  expe-
rienced these  south-easterly  winds  all  the  way  back  from  Cape
Royds  to  Port  Lyttelton  in  New  Zealand,  arriving  at  the
latter  port  within  twelve  and  a  half  days  after  she  left  Cape
Royds.

It  is,  of  course,  premature  as  yet  to  generalise  on  the  result
of  these  observations.  It  is  hoped  that  when  the  Meteoro-
logical Memoir  is  completed  that  the  observations,  especially
on  the  movements  of  the  higher  atmosphere,  will  contribute
to  our  knowledge  of  meteorological  conditions  and  the  laws
-^hich  control  them  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere.


383


!i-^      -      ;a_ ::"^r""x:':"~'*'"

^           '-J         —%-

1                   g(«3^                  ~y"           >'

1            ^                       J^                                                  ^                             L

—tlit                !^                           J         >••••"**£

_i_  _9L       j     l          V            ^v

{       [              ^1                     jL~                  S

J         "?             r        ^

J                  r                         a               3

J             I                    5            3

1                      J'                                     ^                       'l

1  -•       i                     f;           't-

^        Hh-I               i        .  _.l,

1                ^            J            x

J                  it            ^            ^       -

-e^                        ^               S

^%           ^        ^^^    ^x

^^  ^       -.?            ~^^-           ^s^

^i  ^       ^                     L     ^       J

^               rx                            r       ^         ^.

"^Sk,                         ^                                                 3                                   ^

^                                           ^                        ^

■^        C                      ^           -J—

J                      1           J.

p^      jB                            X             -f

5                        3           3

5                     /            s_

^                                         /f_                    /

^  »=L%                         -| »-  -^  .^         I

\                        p~                                       ^^

I  ^  "1  ■"^'"         "  ^    :"■""  i:

5           ^                 1             ^r

2         -.^               w  "i             ^

i_- ,^       3            ^^i^  -    ^^

^  J  ^      ^            ^'^         /'■  ■

J  3:    t               £"BE"-"i       t

g                               ^K                                             ^^                                     »fc.                  '

,  '            1                                     ^^                                                ^                                     '^^            j

^        "1                                    ^°~                                                  f

T                            -J                                                        J             '      '"             JL            1

1                            if                                    .                          1                                      |_

J      ^              /                                                                  f                                       \

J    ^^    £        "^                2                  J

1                           S                                                   r^                                  /

"T                     ,                                      Y                      i^

„vi„„ il_«^„_=__„„_i-._I-    £

„^„„_^^__«».„_=.-_„_l-._--^_

<S8!i«>                                               re>                                                                    i^      r      .              .       S     .          -     .     .             .

-^"^    <          He            _H:^.»*-i:"  ^^

-S   2'       -   fc               i,    _^-,   S

:s  :      ^^            SI

*.  1                 ^                                 jj;*^*'     -'^■"'  "  "li

*•                                           ,i^                                                                    J^of'*^

*.                    ^-                                       '*'^-                    ^

•^         '^^                                          1                      J

'        1       '_«■£.          ^^

b,                            -2                         £

~t             ■  ^  '■■^''             \

:„^is.>=.^„s^^._._^;  _  _      J-    I

"i"    ■       ■  ^         £

s„  -^_<_^  i-       . .^1       j'   ^  ^

_    .              ^a.      5£w      s»^                           _                           _^

" 'fe    '^     ^^    '     "^l^  H  '^^'  'M  "9"^

^-fv   "^t"    ^jr             '         "^^      "^

-^   _     """"""  "T_""  "■    "       ■■;■            ^i,  '  "

■"                                  'fel^5E:t|igAji^^J3|^     "isise^  ^  a»  ^^  ^1*=^  ^  **  "^r"^

_                      '^„      feik_                                     _         ''     .mj:^__

^                           ^  ^                          ^  *"

*"                          '  ~       ^"                          ^                          ^^

^fe                           "C                          ^^  '■

^M                         5a.                         l^

^ll-««i„    ''^      ".»,.^.*,    "^^'"'      ■'■" j2jI"' '  "'

ETEOROLOGY


Additional  Notes  by  JAMES  MURRAY

In  regard  to  the  relation  of  barometric  pressure  and  temperature
to  wind-storms,  the  accompanying  diagram  shows  the  curves
traced  by  the  daily  means  of  barometric  pressure,  wind,  and  air
temperature.  The  curves  are  drawn  to  such  scales  as  will  make
them  readily  comparable.

The  upprmost  curve  is  that  of  the  daily  means  of  the  baro-
metric readings,  the  middle  curve  is  the  wind,  and  the  lowest
one  is  the  temperature.  The  dates  are  marked  at  the  top,  and
each  vertical  line  represents  an  interval  of  one  day.  The  period
selected  includes  the  whole  of  May  and  June  1908.  The  scales
are  marked  vertically  at  the  left-hand  side,  the  barometer  in
inches  and  tenths,  the  wind  in  miles  per  hour  (from  zero  up  to
40),  the  temperature  in  degrees  Fahrenheit  (from  plus  20°  to
minus  20°).

The  midwinter  period  is  selected  because  at  that  time
two  features  characteristic  of  the  Antarctic  climate  are  best
developed.  The  first  is  the  absence  of  constant  and  definite
correspondence  between  barometric  movement  and  wind  ;  the
second  is  the  constant  relation  of  temperature  and  wind.

It  is  not  meant  that  wind-storms  never  accompany  or  follow
great  changes  of  pressure,  but  that  the  relation  often  fails,
and  is  not  constant  and  reliable.  Severe  wind-storms  may  occur
when  the  barometer  is  steady  or  shows  only  gentle  movements,
as  in  the  first  few  days  of  May  1908.  On  the  other  hand,  and
more  commonly,  very  great  rises  and  falls  of  the  barometer  may
occur  in  comparatively  calm  weather,  as  between  June  1  and
12,  in  which  period  there  were  only  a  few  hours  of  moderately
fresh  breeze  on  the  4th.  June  19  to  22  is  a  more  striking
example,  when  a  very  rapid  rise  of  barometer  occurred,  with-
out any  decided  wind-storm.  But  the  wind-storms  between
May  5  and  15  accompanied  considerable  fluctuations  of  the
barometer.

The  relation  of  wind   and  temperature  is   shown  in  the

remarkable  parallelism  of  the  two  curves.      A  wind-storm  is

almost  invariably  followed  by  a  rise  of  temperature,  as  indicated

by  the  dotted  lines.     The  only  exception  in  the  period  illustrated

II  2  b  385


THE    HEART   OF  THE    ANTARCTIC

is  the  moderate  storm  of  May  20  to  21,  when  there  was  no
appreciable  rise  of  temperature.

Cold  blizzards  have  been  noted.  The  worst  of  all  was  that
of  July  25  to  27,  when  the  daily  means  ranged  from  minus  22*0°
to  minus  29*0°,  and  as  low  as  minus  35*0°  was  recorded.

The  rise  of  temperature  during  a  blizzard  amounted  to  as
much  as  32°  on  July  9,  and  even  greater  rises  have  been  noted.

The  intimate  relation  between  wind  and  temperature
continues  throughout  the  cold  weather,  but  almost  disappears
in  the  summer  months.  The  relation  of  wind  to  barometric
pressure  (possibly  on  account  of  the  proximity  of  open  sea)
is  also  much  more  regular  in  the  summer.


Antarctic  Temperatures

The  accompanying  diagram  was  drawn  while  in  the  south,
in  order  to  make  a  comparison  of  the  temperatures  experienced
by  all  the  Antarctic  expeditions  (of  which  records,  giving
monthly  means  for  a  period  of  one  year  or  more,  were  available).
The  results  of  plotting  the  temperature  curves  were  so  curious
and  interesting  that  the  diagram  is  here  reproduced.

The  months  read  from  left  to  right,  and  the  temperatures,
in  degrees  Fahrenheit,  from  above  downwards.

The  two  uppermost  curves  are  Dr.  Bruce's  records  {Scotia
expedition)  dot  and  dash  —  .  —  =  his  first  year  (1903),  dots
.    .    .    .   =  his  second  year  (1904).

The  thin  plain  line  =  Borchgrevink's  record  (1899).
(This  curve  is  taken  from  Mr.  Armitage's  book.)

The  short  dashes =  the  Discovery  records  for  the  first

year  (1902),  the  long  dashes =  the  second  year  (1903).

The  thick  plain  line  gives  the  curve  for  our  expedition,
which  only  covers  ten  months  of  the  year  1908.

Dr.  Bruce's  temperatures  were  recorded  much  farther
north  than  any  of  the  others  and  outside  the  Antarctic  Circle.
They  are  much  higher  throughout  except  in  the  summer  months,
at  which  season  all  the  records  approximate  pretty  closely.
The  remarkable  feature  in  these  two  series  is  the  alternating
of  higher  and  lower  temperatures  in  the  two  years,  so  that  the
two  curves  when  plotted  together  make  a  regular  chain.
386


Jan.


Feb.


March


April


May


JttNK


"JuijY


Aug.


-  Sept.


Oct.


Nov.


-Dec.


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

Borchgrevink's  curve  is  much  higher  than  those  of  the
Discovery,  except  in  July  and  September,  which  were  equalled
in  the  second  year  of  the  Discovery.

The  Discovery  curves  for  the  two  years  show  a  peculiarity
similar  to  those  of  the  Scotia.  The  second  year  was  colder
throughout,  till  October,  after  which  it  was  warmer.  The  two
curves  diverge  in  April,  meet  in  May  and  June,  diverge  in  July,
meet  in  August,  diverge  in  September,  meet  and  cross  in  October.
Though  there  is  only  one  crossing  the  chain  is  almost  as  distinct
as  in  the  Scotia  records.

Our  curve  for  1908  is  first  noticeable  for  the  striking
parallelism  from  March  till  August  with  the  Discovery  second
year  It  lies  between  the  two  Discovery  curves  in  March  and
April,  rises  greatly  in  May  and  equals  Borchgrevink's.  In
June  it  is  well  above  Borchgrevink's,  making  the  least  cold
June  known  in  Victoria  Land.  From  August  to  November
it  is  again  the  warmest  season  known  in  this  region.

In  all  the  records  for  Victoria  Land  the  trough  form  of  the
curves  is  very  noticeable.  The  summer,  as  measured  by  tem-
perature, is  very  short :  the  approximate  maximum  is  main-
tained only  for  two  months  (December  and  January),  and  the
curve  faUs  away  steeply  and  steadily  on  each  side.  The  tempera-
ture falls  rapidly  till  the  approximate  winter  mean  is  reached,
after  which  it  fluctuates  about  this  mean  for  from  four  to  six
months,  before  the  next  summer's  rise  sets  in.

The  winter  mean  was  reached  approximately  as  early  as
April  in  the  second  year  of  the  Discovery  (1903),  and  in  1908.
In  the  Discovery  first  year  (1902)  it  was  reached  in  May,  and  in
1899  (Borchgrevink)  as  late  as  June.  The  rise  began  in  all
cases  in  September,  except  in  the  second  year  of  the  Discovery
(1903),  when  it  was  a  month  later.

In  Dr.  Bruce's  records  the  summer  is  longer,  lasting  for
five  or  six  months,  and  the  winter  is  much  less  marked,  as  far
as  temperature  goes  The  difference  between  the  highest
monthly  mean  for  summer  and  the  lowest  for  winter  is  only
about  26°  (Fahr.).     In  1908  the  difference  was  47°.

An  important  characteristic  of  Antarctica  is  the  cold  summers,
with  the  monthly  mean  rarely  above  freezing-point.  The
diagram  brings  out  the  dose  approximation  (within  10°)  of  all
888


METEOROLOGY

the  means  recorded  for  December  and  January,  from  regions
so  far  apart  in  latitude  as  the  wintering  stations  of  the  Discovery
and  the  Scotia.


NOTE  ON  THERMOMETERS  FOR  POLAR

WORK

By  JAMES  MURRAY

For  work  in  regions  where  temperatures  below  the  freezing-
point  of  mercury  are  to  be  expected  it  is  customary  to  trust
entirely  to  spirit  thermometers.  We  had  reason  to  regret
doing  so.  Whatever  may  be  their  behaviour  in  temperate
climates,  in  polar  regions  the  error  of  the  spirit  thermometers
is  apt  to  fluctuate  in  a  puzzling  and  irritating  manner,  espec  ally
in  thermometers  which  have  to  be  carried  about  from  place  to
place.

For  example,  severa  thermometers  were  tested  in  the  sea
in  winter,  when  the  temperature  was  just  a  small  fraction
above  the  freez  ng-point  of  sea  water.  They  showed  errors
varying  frcm  one  or  two  to  many  degrees.  When  tested
immediately  afterwards  in  water  from  melting  freshwater  ice,
they  read  quite  correctly,  that  is  to  say,  they  showed  errors
no  greater  than  those  indicated  on  the  Kew  certificates.

To  make  corrections  in  the  readings  only  for  the  certified
error  would  be  most  misleading.  To  attempt  to  restore  the
thermometers  by  getting  the  displaced  spirit  back  into  the
column  before  beginning  a  series  of  observations  was  of  no
avail,  as  the  thermometers  might  go  wrong  at  any  moment.

The  only  means  of  giving  the  readings  of  spirit  thermometers
any  credibility  at  all  was  to  test  them  constantly  in  comparison
with  a  mercury  thermometer,  which  was  itself  tested  occasionally
in  melting  freshwater  ice.  Fortunately  we  had  half  a  dozen
mercury  thermometers,  taken  for  other  than  meteorological
purposes.  Unfortunately  they  were  only  graduated  down
to  zero  (Fahr.).  Had  the  scale  gone  down  to  near  the  freezing-
point  of  mercury,  they  might  have  served  for  all  our  observa-
tions. Whenever  a  series  of  temperatures  (as  in  a  shaft  sunk
through  the  ice)  came  partly  below  and  partly  above  zero  (Fahr.),

389


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

the  whole  series  was  taken  with  a  spirit  thermometer,  but  every
one  above  zero  was  repeated  with  a  mercury  thermometer,
and  the  whole  series  corrected  in  correspondence  with  its  read-
ings. This  practice  at  least  minimised  the  chance  of  change
in  the  error  of  the  spirit  thermometer  by  allowing  the  least
possible  time  for  it.

In  the  meteorological  screen  a  mercury  thermometer  was
hung  beside  the  spirit  one  used  for  the  dry-bulb  readings.  No
variation  was  ever  detected  in  this  one,  which  was  undisturbed.
The  maximum  and  minimum  frequently  went  wrong,  and  had
to  be  corrected  by  observing  the  position  at  which  they  rested
when  shaken  down.

Greely  remarks  on  the  unreliability  of  spirit  thermometers.
It  is  desirable  for  polar  expeditions  to  be  provided  with  mercury
thermometers  graduated  down  as  low  as  possible.  We  have
no  reason  to  believe  that  our  thermometers  were  not  of  excellent
quality.     The  defect  is  inherent  and  largely  due  to  climate


CLOUD  FORMS

By  JAMES  MURRAY

Without  treating  them  from  the  meteorological  standpoint,
some  notes  and  fetches  of  the  more  striking  forms  of  cloud
associated  with  Mount  Erebus  may  be  of  interest.

This  great  isolated  cone,  standing  between  the  open  sea
and  the  boundless  frozen  plain,  had  an  immense  effect  on  the
moisture-laden  currents  of  air,  and  gave  rise  to  remarkable
forms  of  clouds  which  we  saw  nowhere  else.

The  Laminated  Cloud. — Most  characteristic  of  all  the
clouds  of  Erebus  was  the  great  bank  of  laminated  cloud,  resting
on  one  flank  or  other  of  the  mountain,  and  reaching  to  the  summit
and  above  it,  often  to  the  height  of  many  thousands  of  feet.
The  familiar  shape  of  this  cloud  was  given  when  two  gentle
currents  of  air  going  in  opposite  directions  met  at  some  height
above  the  crater.  The  lower  current  carried  the  cloud  a  little
bit  one  way,  then  it  was  carried  back  in  the  opposite  direction
by  the  upp^r  current,  as  shown  in  the  illustration.
390


METEOROLOGY


Stratified  Cloud  on  Ekebus,  October  13


Spiral  Cloud,  July  23


391


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

The  disposition  of  the  c'ouds  shown  in  this  sketch  is  unusual,
as  there  is  a  thin  stratified  band  (not  the  smoke  cloud)  trailing
ojff  to  the  south,  while  the  great  bank  hangs  on  the  north.
Generally  this  great  cloud  rests  on  the  north  slope,  but  occa-
siona  ly  the  position  is  reversed.

Spiral  Cloud. — A  modification  of  the  great  cloud-bank,
produced  by  the  meeting  of  very  gentle  currents,  resulted  in  the
rolling  up  of  the  cloud  into  a  spiral  form.

On  July  23  a  spiral  was  formed  from  a  bank  on  the  south


Spiral  Cloud,  September  25


side  of  the  mountain,  as  figured  on  p.  391.  The  upper  current
on  this  occasion  was  from  the  south.  A  similar  spiral  cloud
is  figured,  right  over  the  mountain,  in  the  picture  of  saw-edged
stratus,  October  1.

The  most  remarkable  spiral  cloud  observed  was  that  of
September  25,  1908.  The  bank  of  cloud  lay  on  the  north
flank.  The  upper  current  was  from  the  south,  as  on  July  23.
Its  ac'ion  was  o  regular  that  the  spiral  could  be  traced  for
more  than  a  complete  turn.

Whale-back  Clouds. — The  most  striking  of  all  the  cloud
392


METEOROLOGY

forms  on  Erebus  were  those  to  which  we  gave  the  name  of
whale-backs.  They  were  small  patches  of  cloud,  isolated  or
two  or  three  together,  one  over  another,  with  very  evenly
rounded  upper  surfaces,  the  lower  surfaces  more  indefinite,
often  rounded  too.  A  very  good  development  of  them  occurred
on  September  16,  1908.  The  largest  stratified  group  of  them
formed  an  object  like  a  comet,  the  others  were  isolated.  This
display  went  through  many  changes,  slowly  and  gradually.
Two  stages  are  figured.      The  first  figure  shows  the  clouds  at  an


Whale-backs,  September  16


early  stage,  in  which  they  appear  imbricated  in  a  characteristic
manner,  observed  on  many  other  occasions.  They  were  then
stratified,  showing  generally  three  layers  in  each  group.

At  a  later  stage,  shown  in  the  next  figure,  the  whale-backs
were  isolated,  except  the  one  large  comet-like  mass.

While  usually  evenly  rounded,  the  curves  were  frequently
reversed  at  the  ends,  as  shown  in  the  lower  group  in  the  first
figure.

Whale-backs  were  usually  seen  after  a  blizzard,  occasionally
before  one.     During  the  blizzard  the  mountain  was  generally

393


THE   HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC


Whale-back  Cloods,  September  16

hidden,  so  that  we  could  not  tell  if  they  were  formed  during
the  storm.


aaciiva,,,«paaa»»n«rT^lg^MH|Bf'-»i»Tcaaiji»p«««!«r^

Undulate  Strips  of  Cloud,  July  28


394


METEOROLOGY


Interlacing  Clouds,  September  16

Undulate    Clouds. — Narrow    lines    of    cloud    vv^ere    often
arranged  in  regular  or  irregular  undulations.     The  first  figure


Saw-edged  Stratus  and  other  Clouds,  October  1,  1908


895


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

shows  fairly  regular  undulations,  over  the  summit  of  Erebus,
on  July  28,  1908.  The  second  figure  shows  a  modification  of
this  form,  in  which  the  wisps  of  cloud  are  intricate  y  nterlaced.
This  occurred  on  the  south  side  of  Erebus,  on  September  16,
at  the  same  time  as  well-developed  whale-backs  on  the  north
side.

Sometimes,  especially  after  storms,  a  great  variety  of  clouds
were  piled  up  over  and  around  Erebus,  including  whale-backs,
cumulus,  undulate  clouds,  with  perhaps  a  spiral  cloud  over
all.

One  such  accumulation  is  figured  in  which  there  were
cumulus  just  below  the  summit,  two  banks  of  stratus  at  different
levels,  the  upper  one  with  deeply  serrated  edge,  and  a  spiral
cloud.  Over  all  was  a  Noah's  ark  of  cirro-stratus,  not  figured,
and  beyond  the  influence  of  Erebus.  Saw-edged  stratus  was
seen  on  one  or  two  other  occasions  but  was  not  common.


396


APPENDIX   Yl

REPORT  ON  THE  HEALTH  OF  THE
EXPEDITION

By  Dr.  ERIC  MARSHALL,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.

THE  fact  that  there  was  no  case  of  scurvy  during  the  period  of
the  expedition's  residence  in  the  Antarctic  may  be  attributed
to  the  fact  that  the  utmost  care  had  been  taken  in  provisioning
the  expedition  with  foods  of  the  best  quaUty  obtainable,  in  that
variety  which  is  essential  under  polar  conditions.  Bottled  and
preserved  fruits  were  used  liberally  during  the  long  winter,  and
when  the  spring  approached  and  the  preparations  for  the  spring
and  summer  sledging  involved  an  increasing  amount  of  physical
work,  the  allowance  of  fresh  meat  (penguin,  seal  and  mutton)
was  increased.  When  the  spring  depot  party  started  south
on  September  22,  1908,  all  the  members  of  the  expedition  had
been  on  a  liberal  allowance  of  fresh  meat  for  a  month.  During
the  whole  winter  all  the  men  took  daily  exercise  in  the  open  air,
this  routine  being  interrupted  only  by  the  most  severe  blizzards.
There  was  no  case  of  sickness.

We  found,  in  the  matter  of  clothing,  that  heavy  pilot-cloth
garments  and  furs  were  not  essential  provided  that  wind-proof
suits  were  worn,  and  that  the  body  temperature  was  maintained
by  a  full  diet.  On  the  southern  journey,  when  the  rations
had  been  reduced  to  the  minimum,  and  our  clothing  was  worn
and  torn,  so  that  it  no  longer  kept  out  the  biting  wind,  our
temperatures  were  subnormal.  At  the  end  of  a  long  day's
march  and  in  the  face  of  a  blizzard  wind,  when  our  altitude
was  about  ten  thousand  feet,  our  temperatures  were  on  several

397


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

occasions  reduced  to  94°  Falir.,  rising  to  97°  or  98°  after  we  had
eaten  a  hot  though  scanty  meal.  Frost-bites  were  more  frequent
at  these  times,  and  it  was  more  difficult  to  restore  the  part
attacked.

It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  members  of  the  expedition
did  not  suffer  from  colds  during  their  stay  in  the  Antarctic
save  in  August  1908,  when  a  bale  of  new  clothing  was  opened
in  the  hut,  and  all  the  men  were  at  once  seized  with  acute  nasal
catarrh.  The  symptoms  were  quickly  dispelled  when  we
took  exercise  in  the  open,  and  those  who  remained  in  the  hut
recovered  after  two  or  three  days.

On  the  return  of  the  expedition  to  New  Zealand  the  Nimrod
laid  up  for  one  day  at  the  mouth  of  Lords  river,  Stewart's  Island,
and  a  number  of  the  staff  went  ashore  to  bathe  and  fish,  &c.
All  who  went  ashore  suffered  considerably  from  the  inflammation
caused  by  bites  from  sand-flies,  yet  it  was  only  those  members
who,  on  arrival  at  Lyttelton  and  Christchurch,  New  Zealand,
were  not  immediately  seized  with  colds.

The  expedition  was  not  entirely  free  from  accidents,  for
on  arrival  at  the  ice  in  January  1909,  A.  L.  A.  Mackintosh  was
struck  in  the  right  eye  by  a  hook  while  unloading  cargo.
The  accident  necessitated  the  immediate  removal  of  the  eye.
His  recovery  was  extremely  satisfactory,  so  that  on  the  fourth
day  he  was  able  to  get  about.  This,  however,  prevented  him
from  remaining  with  the  shore  staff,  as  it  was  deemed  necessary
that  he  should  return  to  Australia.

During  the  ascent  of  Mount  Erebus,  Brocklehurst,  while
wearing  ski-hoots,  was  frost-bitten  in  both  feet,  eight  toes
being  affected.  Under  treatment  seven  recovered,  but  the
great  toe  of  the  left  foot  showed  no  signs  of  improvement,  and
ultimately,  dry  gangrene  having  set  in,  I  amputated  the  last
joint  a  month  after  the  accident.  Recovery  was  slow  owing
to  the  limited  amount  of  healthy  tissue  for  the  posterior  anterior
flap.  The  ultimate  result  was  satisfactory.  B.  Day,  while
tobogganing,  fractured  the  base  of  the  third  metatarsal  of
his  right  foot.  These  accidents,  together  with  a  few  septic
fingers,  were  all  that  arose  in  the  surgical  line.

Weights  and  measurements  were  taken  regularly,  but
although  slightly  on  the  increase  during  the  winter,  did  not
398


MEDICAL    REPORT

vary  much  from  month  to  month,  although  one  member  has
now  well-marked  linear  albicantes  on  both  upper  arms  as  a
memento  of  the  adiposea  of  the  south.

During  one  time  or  another  all  the  members  of  the  Southern
Party  suffered  more  or  less  severely  from  dysentery.  Some
of  the  pony-meat  was  not  wholesome,  and  as  the  supply  of  oil
was  small,  it  was  either  eaten  raw  or  warmed  to  about  100°
Fahr.,  with  the  result  that  we  were  unable  to  digest  it.  An  acute
enteritis  resulted  and  prostrated  us  from  time  to  time.  At  this
time  we  were  almost  entirely  dependent  on  the  pony-meat,
the  starch  food  available  being  of  the  scantiest.

A  considerable  quantity  of  Easton  Syrup  tabloids  was
used  on  the  plateau  and  were  found  of  assistance.  Only  on
two  or  three  occasions  did  any  one  suffer  from  snow-blindness,
and  on  each  occasion  the  snow-goggles  provided  had  not  been
worn.

The  deep  amber  glasses  were  a  sufficient  protection,  as
they  cut  out  all  the  actinic  rays,  and  had  a  very  pleasing  tone.
A  combined  flash  red  and  worked  green  glass,  giving  an  orange-
brown  tone,  was  also  provided.  The  glasses  themselves  entirely
eliminate  the  violet  and  ultra-violet  rays  and  were  an  absolute
protection  against  snow-blindness,  but  a  more  complete
system  of  ventilation  in  the  vulcanised  fibre  cylinders  was
required.


a99


APPENDIX  VII


SOUTHERN  JOURNEY  DISTANCES

THE  following  table  gives  detailed  information  regarding
the  distances  travelled  day  by  day  on  the  southern  journey.
The  geographical  miles  given  in  the  first  column  cover  the
period  from  November  15,  when  the  party  left  Depot  A,  until
January  9,  when  the  farthest  south  point  was  reached.  The
distances  have  been  taken  from  the  chart  after  all  corrections
have  been  made,  and  represent  a  direct  line  from  camp  to
camp.

In  the  second  column  will  be  found  the  noon  latitudes,
calculated  from  observations  taken  as  opportunity  offered.  The
observations  have  been  checked  by  the  officers  of  the  Royal
Geographical  Society  in  London.

The  last  column  shows  the  distances  travelled  day  by  day
according  to  sledge-meter,  and  these  figures  of  course  take  into
account  all  deviations  and  dStours,  so  often  rendered  necessary
by  the  condition  of  the  surface.  That  the  sledge-meter  was
reliable  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  on  the  homeward  journey
we  were  able  to  calculate  our  positions  without  taking  latitude
observations.  We  took  only  one  observation  during  the  journey
back  to  the  coast  (January  31,  noon  position  82°  58'  South),
and  on  that  occasion  the  theodolite  confirmed  the  record  of  the
sledge-meter.

Observations  for  variation  were  taken  whenever  we  took
a  latitude  observation,  and  the  results  will  be  found  recorded
on  the  chart.

The  latitude  observations  noted  in  this  table  were  taken
with  a  three-inch  theodolite,  which  was  carefully  adjusted
400


SOUTHERN    JOURNEY

before  the  start  for  the  southern  journey.  An  observation
taken  on  the  return  journey,  in  February,  when  the  position
was  known  from  bearings,  showed  that  the  instrument  was
correct.  The  observations  were  only  taken  with  the  theodolite
"  face  left,"  but  as  the  instrument  was  in  good  adjustment
this  was  sufficient.

On  the  outward  journey  the  last  latitude  observation  was
taken  in  latitude  87°  22'  South.  The  remainder  of  the  distance
marched  towards  the  south  was  calculated  by  sledge-meter
and  dead  reckoning.  The  accuracy  of  the  sledge-meters  used
was  proved  by  the  fact  that  on  the  return  journey  we  were  able
to  pick  up  the  depots  without  taking  observations.  The  "  slip  "
was  ascertained  by  careful  tests  before  the  start  of  the  journey.

The  chronometer  watches  taken  were  rated  before  leaving
and  on  the  return,  and  the  error  was  only  eight  seconds.  All
bearings,  angles  and  azimuths  were  taken  with  the  theodohte.
Variation  was  ascertained  by  means  of  a  compass  attached  to
the  theodohte,  and  the  steering  compasses  were  checked  accord-
ingly. At  noon  each  day  the  prismatic  compasses  were  placed  in
the  true  meridian,  and  checked  against  the  theodolite  compass
and  the  steering  compasses.


Date.

Geographical
miles.

Noon
latitudes.

Statute
miles.

Yards.

Relay.

1908

October  29

—

—

14

880

—

„      30  (Hut  Point)

—

—

9

880

—

„      31  (back  to  Royds)  .

—

—

23

—

—

November    1  (to  Hut  Point)

—

—

23

—

—

„           2  (blizzard)

—

—

no  march

—

3      .         .         .

—

—

12

300

—

4      .          .          .

—

—

16

500

—

5      .         .         .

—

—

9

1200

—

„           6  (blizzard)

—

—

no  march

—

—

7     .         .         .

—

—

1

—

—

„           8  (blizzard)

—

—

no  march

—

—

9     .         .         .

—

—

14

600

—

„          10     .         .         .

—

—

15

1560

—

„         11      .         .         .

—

—

15

—

—

„          12      .         .         .

—

—

16

1650

—

II


2c


401


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC


Geograpliiciil

Noon

Statute

Date.

miles.

latitudes

miles.

Yards.

IJelay.

1908

November  13      .          .

—

—

15

1550

—

14      .

—

• —

15

100

—

„         15      .         .         .

7-39
(from  noon)

79°  36'  S.

12

1500

—

16      .

14-91

—

17

200

—

17      .

13-3

—

16

200

—

18      .

13

—

15

500

—

19     .

13-7

—

15

200

—

20      .

13-6

—

15

800

—

21      .

13-3

—

15

500

—

22      .

16

—

15

250

—

23      .

14

—

17

1650

24      .

15-4

—

17

680

25     .

14-6

—

17

1600

—

26     .

13-2

82°  12'  S.

16

1700

—

27      .

15-5

—

16

1200

—

28     .

13-6

82°  39'  S.

15

1500

—

29     .

11-7

—

14

900

—

„         30     .

11

—

12

150

—

December    1     .

10-5

—

12

200

—

2      .         .         .

10-3

—

11

1450

—

„           3  (Mount  Hope)

—

20

—

—

4      .          .          .

10-5

83°  33'  S.

10

—

—

5      .          .          .

3-1

—

5

—

4

6      .         .         .

4-1

—

4

—

3

7     .         .         .

9-1

—

10

570

—

8      .         .         .

7-7

—

12

150

—

9     .         .         .

9-8

84°  2'  S.

11

1450

2

10     .

9-8

—

11

860

—

11      .

7-2

—

8

900

—

12      .

3-1

—

3

500

6     1000

13     .

45

—

5

—

6

14     .

8

—

7

880

2

15     .

11-5

—

13

200

—

16     .

12

84°  53'  S.

13

1650

—

17      .

91

—

12

250

1

18      .

3

—

6

600

12

19      .

7-4

—

10

—

1      880

20      .

10

85°19'S.

11

950

1

21      .

7

—

6

—

3

22      .

7

—

4

—

6

23      .

6-2

13

"

402


SOUTHERN    JOURNEY


Date.

Geo^aphlcal
miles.

Noon
latitudes.

Statute
miles.

Yards.

Relay.

1908

December  24     .

9-2

—

11

250

—

25

9-2

—

10

650

—

26

11-4

—

14

480

—

27

12

—

14

930

—

28

11-7

—

14

450

—

„         29

101

—

12

600

—

30

3-7

—

4

100

—

31

8-5

11

—

—

1909

January    1        .         .         .

9-7

86°  59'  S.

11

900

—

2

9-1

—

10

460

—

3

12-6

87°  22'  S.

11

1680

—

4

12-2

—

14

660

—

5

13-4

—

15

480

—

6

13-2

(88°  7'

15

313

—

camp)

7  (bli

azard)

—

no  march

—

—

„         8  (bl,

zzard)

—



no  march

—

—

9

.

16-5

88°23'S.

f  1^

704  from

—

camp

(farthest

18

704  back

—

south)

I     *

40  to

camp

—

„       10       .

—

—

21

308

—

11

—

—

19

1580

—

12

—

—

14

100

—

13

—

—

15

1660

—

14

—

—

20

1600

—

15

—

—

20

—

—

16

—

—

18

800

—

„       17

—

—

22

850

—

18

—

—

26

900

—

19

—

—

29

—

—

„       20

—

—

15

800

—

»       21

—

—

17

—

—

»       22

—

—

15

900

—

„       23

—

—

14

100

—

»       24

—

—

16

—

—

„       25

—

—

26

—

—

„       26
„       27

—

1}

16

{I

—

408

THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC


Date.

Geographical
miles.

Noon
latitudes.

Statute
miles.

Yards.

Eelay.

1909

January    28       .         .         .

—

—

14

890

—

„        29  (blizzard)

—

—

2

—

—

„       30       .

—

—

13

—

—

„       31       .

—

82°  58

13

850

—

February    1        .         .         .

—

—

13

1400

—

„         2       .         .         .

—

—

13

900

—

„         3       .         .         .

—

—

5

900

—

„          4  (dysentery)

—

—

no  march

—

—

„          5        .          .          .

—

—

8

—

—

„          6        .          .          .

—

—

10

—

—

„         7       .        .         .

—

—

12

880

—

»         8       .         .         .

—

—

12

—

—

„         9       .         .         .

—

—

14

900

—

„        10       .

—

—

20

300

—

„        11        .

—

—

16

1320

—

»        12       .         .         .

—

—

14

450

—

„       13       .

—

—

12

—

—

„        14       .

—

—

11

1400

—

„        15       .

—

—

12

440

—

„       16

—

—

13

—

—

„        17       .

—

—

19

200

—

„        18       .

—

—

15

400

—

„        19       .

—

—

14

440

—

„       20       .         .         .

—

—

14

—

—

„       21        .         .         .

—

—

20

—

—

„       22       .

—

—

20

800

—

„       23       .

—

—

14

500

—

„       24       .         .         .

—

—

15

—

—

„        25  (blizzard)

—

—

no  march

—

—

„       26  (left  A.  and  M.)

—

—

24

—

—

»       27       .         .         .

„       28       .

I

—  1

—  /

39

{  =



March      1       «         .         .
2

—

~\

63

—

—

„                 £l              .                 .                 .

»         3       .         .         .

30  out

-^

33  back

„         4       .         .         .

■'

N.

The  total  distance  marched,  from  October  29  to  March  4,
as  recorded  on  the  sledge -meters,  was  1755  miles  209  yards
statute,  this  including  relay  work  and  back  marches.


404


APPENDIX  yill

CONSUMPTION  OF  STORES  AT  WINTER  QUARTERS


Fifteen  Men

Week  ending  July  27.  1908

lb.

Mutton

80

Seal-meat

15

Penguins  (six  Adelies)

12

Bacon  (one  side)

30

Tinned  fish

5

Tinned  meat

8

Tinned  soups

36

Tinned  and  dried  vegetables

19

Sugar

20

Syrup

6

Honey

5

Jam

15

Chocolate

4

Crystallised  fruits

5

Dried  fruits

2

Tinned  and  bottled  fruit

40

Dried  milk

56

Coffee

1

Tea

6

Oatmeal  and  Quaker  Oats

6

Eggs  (fresh  and  dried)

6

Butter

20

Suet  (tinned)

6

405


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

lb.
Cocoa  2

Rice  4

Biscuits  10

Flour  56

Currants  and  raisins  8

433

Such  articles  as  salt  and  pepper  were  issued  as  required,
and  on  special  occasions  there  were  extra  dishes,  such  as  tinned
roast  reindeer,  roast  black-cock,  marrow  pudding,  lobscouse
and  fish-cakes.

The  amount  of  food  consumed  per  man  per  day  in  this  week
was  about  4'12  lb.


406


APPEJSDIX  IX

THE  NIMROD'S  HOMEWARD  VOYAGE— IN
SEARCH  OF  DOUBTFUL  ISLANDS

THE  homeward  voyage  of  the  Nimrod,  after  the  members  of
the  shore-party  had  been  landed  at  Port  Lyttelton,  was
made  interesting  by  a  search  for  some  charted  islands,  the  exist-
ence of  which  was  doubtful.  J.  K.  Davis,  who  had  been  first
officer,  was  in  command  at  this  time,  and  he  had  under  him  the
members  of  the  ship's  staff,  all  the  members  of  the  shore-party
proceeding  from  New  Zealand  by  the  ordinary  passenger  routes.
The  Nimrod  went  first  to  Sydney,  where  the  naval  authorities
very  generously  assisted  in  effecting  certain  necessary  repairs.
The  appended  report  by  Captain  Davis  deals  with  the  voyage
from  that  point.

"Monte  Video,

"July  8,  1909.

"  Leaving  Sydney  on  May  8,  I  steered  south  on  the  151st
meridian  against  moderate  southerly  winds.  On  May  12,
when  the  position  was  latitude  43°  South,  longitude  151°  East,
the  wind  came  away  fresh  from  the  south-east,  and  as  I  did  not
consider  that  I  was  far  enough  to  windward  of  Macquarie  Island
to  allow  me  to  stand  east  in  that  latitude,  I  stood  west  and
decided  to  carry  out  your  instructions  regarding  the  Royal
Company  Island  if  the  wind  continued  south-easterly.  This
was  a  fortunate  decision,  for  the  wind  continued  from  the  south
and  east  for  four  days,  so  that  on  May  17  I  was  only  ninety-
seven  miles  from  the  position  of  the  islands  as  given  on  the
chart.  At  noon,  after  ascertaining  our  position,  I  took  a  sound-
ing in  2430  fathoms.     The  bottom  specimen  was  lost  through

407


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

the  wire  parting  while  heaving  in.  On  May  18,  at  2  p.m.,  in
fine  clear  weather,  we  sailed  over  the  position  assigned  to  the
Royal  Company  Island,  with  nothing  in  sight.  I  stood  east
till  4  P.M.,  and  then  south,  but  saw  nothing  to  indicate  the
existence  of  land  in  the  vicinity.

"  On  May  24,  when  190  miles  ofT  Macquarie  Island,  we
encountered  a  heavy  north-west  gale,  which  the  vessel  weathered
with  very  little  damage,  though  deeply  loaded.  This  was
followed  on  the  25th  by  a  heavy  gale  from  the  south-west,  but
at  11.45  P.M.  of  this  day  we  sighted  the  island  and  managed  to
get  to  leeward  of  it  till  daylight,  when  the  wind  and  sea  were
less  violent.  My  instructions  were  to  visit  Macquarie  Island
for  the  purpose  of  making  zoological  and  geological  collections
to  connect  those  already  obtained  in  the  Antarctic  with  the  life
and  rocks  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  and  also  of  observing
whether  any  Antarctic  birds  or  penguins  migrated  there  in  the
winter  months,  as  they  (the  penguins  particularly)  leave  the
Far  South  when  the  sea  freezes  over  in  April,  and  do  not  return
until  the  following  summer  ;  where  they  migrate  to  has  so  far
not  been  discovered.  We  sighted  the  island  on  the  night  of
May  26,  and  stood  off  till  daylight,  when  we  were  soon  able  to
make  out  its  distinctive  features.  Approaching  from  the  east-
ward one  is  at  once  struck  by  the  rugged  boldness  of  the  coast-
line, which  rises  sheer  out  of  the  water  to  a  height  of  nearly
1500  ft.  in  places.  At  the  south-east  extremity  there  is  a  reef
of  dangerous  ragged  rocks  on  which  the  sea  breaks  heavily,  and
as  we  got  nearer  we  were  able  to  see  that  the  mountain  slopes
were  green,  and  to  trace  the  course  of  several  waterfalls.  A
wide  bay  or  rather  curve  in  the  coast-line  forms  the  southern
anchorage,  called  Lusitania  Road ;  close  inshore  is  a  line  of
rocks,  and  it  is  through  a  break  in  these  rocks  that  the  landing-
place  is  reached.

"  At  10  A.M.  we  anchored  in  eight  fathoms  about  a  quarter
of  a  mile  from  the  shore.  From  the  ship  we  could  see  two  huts
situated  on  the  lower  ground  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  A  large
rookery  of  penguins  and  some  sea-elephants  appeared  the  only
life  visible.  A  boat  was  soon  lowered  and  sent  ashore  in  charge
of  the  chief  officer  ;  the  party  succeeded  in  landing  through  the
heavy  surf  and  the  boat  was  hauled  up  into  a  bed  of  kelp.  The
408


NIMROD'S    VOYAGE

men  scattered  to  collect  specimens,  &c.  They  found  the  slopes
of  the  hills  covered  with  a  long  coarse  grass.  There  are  no  trees
or  even  shrubs  on  the  island.  A  small  river  running  down  a
valley  formed  by  the  hills  made  the  low  ground  swampy.  Of  the
two  huts,  the  larger  was  evidently  a  boiler-house  for  rendering
down  the  blubber  of  the  sea-elephants,  and  the  smaller  was  the
one  in  which  the  sealers  lived  while  engaged  in  this  work  during
the  season.  Both  wore  a  very  neglected  and  forlorn  appearance.
The  sea-elephant,  which  is  like  a  big  seal  and  in  some  cases  over
thirty  feet  long,  is  an  awkward  clumsy  animal  and  apparently
spends  most  of  its  time  asleep  in  the  long  grass  near  the  water.
It  has  large  teeth  which  somewhat  resemble  tusks,  but  although
it  appears  very  fierce  is  not  dangerous.  The  penguins,  of  which
there  were  a  great  number,  were  of  the  King  genus,  and  they
keep  up  a  continuous  squeaking.  The  young  birds  were  just
fledged  and  were  nearly  ready  to  take  to  the  water.

"  We  remained  at  anchor  here  for  the  night  and  at  day-
break, which  was  not  till  eight  o'clock,  we  steamed  along  the
coast  northwards.  There  was  a  fresh  north-west  wind,  and  it
came  down  the  hill-sides  in  violent  gusts,  called  by  the  whalers
*  willy waws,'  raising  a  sheet  of  foam  on  the  water.  About  six
miles  up  the  coast  there  is  a  break  in  the  hills  at  a  place  called
Green  Gorge,  which  is  a  wide  valley  running  across  the  island.
Farther  on  we  could  make  out  Nugget  Point,  from  which  extends
a  reef  of  rocks  for  some  distance  seaward.  As  we  drew  nearer
to  this  point  we  could  make  out  two  huts  on  the  shore  and  also
the  wreck  of  a  vessel  high  and  dry  on  the  beach.  Suddenly,
to  our  surprise,  a  column  of  smoke  rose  from  the  smaller  of  the
two  huts.  As  we  had  heard  nothing  of  any  one  living  on  the
island  this  was  extraordinary.  Presently  with  the  glass  we
could  make  out  the  figure  of  a  man,  standing  at  the  door  of  the
smaller  of  the  two  huts,  watching  our  approach.  We  came  to
an  anchor,  and  the  boat  was  lowered  and  headed  for  the  shore.
The  man,  who  had  been  watching  us  from  the  hut,  now  walked
down  to  the  beach  accompanied  by  two  little  dogs.  There  was
a  heavy  surf,  but  our  Crusoe-like  friend,  after  pointing  out  the
best  landing-place,  walked  into  the  water  and  assisted  in  beach-
ing the  boat.  Every  one  at  once  wanted  to  know  what  he  was
doing  there,  was  he  alone,  how  long  had  he  been  there,  &c.,  and

40d


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

the  following  information  was  gathered  in  less  time  than  it  takes
to  write.  Mr.  W.  McKibbon  had  arrived  at  the  island  last
March  in  a  small  vessel  called  the  Jessie  Nicoll,  belonging  to  a
company  that  has  the  lease  of  the  island  for  the  purposes  of
obtaining  sea-elephant  and  penguin  oil.  This  vessel  brings
down  a  number  of  men  to  work  on  the  island  during  the  short
season  trying  down  blubber  on  shore,  &c.  When  the  previous
season  was  over  and  the  ship  filled  with  barrels  of  oil,  instead
of  returning  with  the  other  men,  our  friend  had  elected  to  remain
behind  on  the  island  for  the  winter  by  himself,  and  to  collect
oil  for  the  next  season.

"  The  next  day  I  went  ashore  myself ;  we  were  met  by  our
friend  of  the  day  before,  who  escorted  me  to  his  little  hut,  which
was  very  warm  and  comfortable  and  scrupulously  clean.  It
consisted  of  two  rooms,  both  of  which  had  fires  ;  one  of  them
was  used  as  a  workroom  and  store,  the  other  as  a  sleeping-
place.  I  learnt,  as  I  sat  in  front  of  a  comfortable  little  fire,
that  McKibbon  was  a  native  of  Carrick-on-Shannon,  and  had
been  in  the  navy  for  twenty  years  ;  he  was  a  typical  sailor,
clean-shaven,  and  despite  his  fifty  years  of  active  life  was  as
keen  and  alert  as  a  boy.  '  I  never  had  an  illness  in  my  life,'
he  said  when  I  asked  him  what  would  happen  to  him  if  he  fell
ill.  He  was  nearly  as  surprised  to  see  us  as  we  were  to  see  him.
'  I  thought  at  first  it  was  the  New  Zealand  Government  light-
house tender ;  then  when  you  came  closer  I  saw  you  were  a
wooden  vessel  and  put  you  down  as  a  surveying  ship.'  When
he  heard  that  we  had  just  returned  from  the  Antarctic  he  told
us  that  he  had  been  in  the  Arctic  in  the  paddle  frigate  Valorus,
which  vessel  took  up  stores  for  the  expedition  under  Nares  and
Markham.

"  We  spent  four  days  at  Macquarie  Island,  and  obtained  a
good  collection  of  specimens.  We  left  the  island  on  May  30,
and  as  soon  as  we  got  from  under  its  lee  encountered  a  fresh
westerly  gale  with  high  seas.  Running  before  this  we  passed
over  the  charted  position  of  Emerald  Island  at  8  p.m.  on  the  31st.
It  was  a  clear  night,  three  days  from  full  moon,  and  if  there  had
been  even  low  land  in  the  vicinity  we  should  have  seen  it.  I
decided  to  stand  on,  as  it  was  blowing  hard,  and  a  high  westerly
sea  made  soundings  impracticable.  On  June  9  we  arrived  in
410


NIMROD'S    VOYAGE

the  vicinity  of  the  position  assigned  to  the  Nimrod  Islands,
and  at  1.15  a.m.,  in  fine  clear  weather,  passed  over  this  spot
with  nothing  in  sight.  The  weather  here  again  was  much
against  us,  a  very  high  sea,  with  fresh  westerly  wind  and  squally,
and  the  barometer  at  28*20.  After  steaming  east  sixteen
miles  from  the  position,  it  being  now  dark,  I  hove  to  and
attempted  to  sound.  This  operation,  being  performed  in  a  kind
of  blizzard  by  lamplight,  with  the  ship  rolling  heavily  all  the
time,  was  not  a  great  success.  We  slacked  out  1140  fathoms
but  obtained  no  bottom,  so  hove  in  again  as  the  wind  was  coming
away  in  fierce  squalls  from  the  south-west.  I  found  that  we  were
setting  fast  to  leeward,  so  decided  to  continue  our  voyage.

"  At  noon  on  June  17  we  were  up  by  dead  reckoning  to
the  position  of  Dougherty  Island,  as  given  by  Captain  Dougherty,
but  as  the  weather  was  overcast  could  not  be  sure  of  our  position.
Captain  Keates  places  the  island  in  the  same  latitude  thirty-
four  miles  farther  east.  I  therefore  continued  eastward  on  the
parallel  over  this  position  (by  dead  reckoning).  As  it  was
now  dark  and  the  weather  moderate,  I  stood  back  again  to  the
westward,  hoping  to  get  sights  at  daylight  and  did  so.  Good
star  observations  were  confirmed  at  noon,  when  the  island,
according  to  Captain  Dougherty's  position,  should  have  borne
west  distance  four  miles.  No  land  was  in  sight  from  the  mast-
head in  clear  weather.  I  stood  east  again,  and  at  4  p.m.,  when
darkness  was  just  setting  in,  the  island,  according  to  Captain
Keates'  position,  should  have  borne  east  four  miles ;  nothing
in  sight.  At  4.30  we  passed  over  this  position  and  continued
eastward  along  the  parallel  of  59°  21'  South,  but  saw  no  indica-
tion of  land.  It  is  just  here  that  we  met  with  ice  during  our
passage,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think  Dougherty  Island  has
melted.  The  darkness  was  sixteen  hours  out  of  the  twenty-
four  ;  it  was,  in  fact,  to  quote  from  the  '  Directory,'  one
long  starless  desolate  night,  a  perpetual  gloom  which  the
sun  seems  never  to  penetrate,  and  the  conditions  made  a
search  of  this  kind  more  or  less  doubtful.  Although  I
will  not  say  these  islands  do  not  exist,  I  can  with  con-
fidence say  they  do  not  exist  in  the  locality  laid  down  or
anywhere  near  it.  When  in  latitude  59°  31'  South,  longi-
tude 107°  West,  we  encountered  north-easterly  winds,  which

411


THE    HEART    OF    THE    ANTARCTIC

drove  us  into  61 1°  South,  where  we  met  moderately  warm
weather  and  continual  rain.  As  the  sun  had  only  an  altitude
of  5°  at  noon  there  was  almost  constant  darkness.  At  10.45
P.M.  on  June  27  we  sighted  the  Diego  Ramirez  Island  right  ahead
at  a  distance  of  fourteen  miles.  We  made  an  extremely  good
landfall,  and  this  satisfied  me  that  our  chronometers,  despite
the  changes  of  temperature  to  which  they  had  been  subjected,
were  reliable.  It  was  a  cloudy  moonlight  night,  and  the  fact
that  we  saw  these  islands,  or  rather  rocks,  for  the  highest  point
is  only  587  ft.  above  sea-level,  so  far  off  convinces  me  that  if
the  other  islands  had  existed  anywhere  near  the  localities  laid
down  for  them  we  could  not  have  failed  to  see  them."

The  Nimrod  touched  at  Monte  Video  and  arrived  at  Fal-
mouth on  August  26.  Four  days  later  she  was  berthed  in  the
Thames,  thus  completing  the  most  adventurous  cruise  of  her
eventful  career.  She  had  been  awsij  from  the  Thames  for  nearly
twenty-five  months.


412


CtTRBENT-GATIGE


2540

4  8

490

6  7

1821

6  11

5161

3  3

APPENDIX  X

ESTIMATED  COST  OF  THE  BRITISH  ANTARCTIC
EXPEDITION  1907  UP  TO  AUGUST  1909

£      s.    d.       £    a.     d.
Purchase  price  of  ^imroi  5000    0    0

Cost  of  improvements,  alterations,  and  repairs  in  dry

dock,  London  2550    0    0

Cost   of   improvements,   alterations,   additions   and

repairs  at  Lyttelton,  New  Zealand  740  19     9

Cost  of  repairs  at  Lyttelton,  New  Zealand,  after  her

return  from  the  Antarctic  on  her  first  voyage  when

she  was  damaged  during  heavy  weather  957    3    3

9248    3    0

Equipment  for  ship,  engine,  carpenters,  deck  and

galley  stores,  &c.
Relief  equipment  ship
Food-supplies,  ship

Wages  :  captain's,  oflBcers',  and  crew  of  ship
Coal  account  for  ship  at  London,  Torquay,  St. Vincent,

Cape  Town,  Lyttelton,  New  Zealand  (three  supplies)

and  Monte  Video  1520    8    8

General  expenses  of  ship,  including  labour,  pilotage,

shipbrokers'  charges,  &c.
Insurance  on  ship,  &c.

Equipment  shore-party  for  sixteen  men  for  two  years
Relief  equipment  shore -party

Food-supplies  shore-party,  sixteen  men  for  two  years
Relief  food -supplies  for  whole  expedition,  forty  men

for  one  year
Salaries  shore -party
Cost  of  fifteen  Manchurian  ponies,  including  purchase

price,  freight  from  China  to  New  Zealand,  harness,

two  years'  forage,  &c.
Cost  of  nine  Esquimau  dogs  and  food
Interest  account  at  bank  on  guarantees,  &c.,  and

bank  charges
Passage  of  shore -party  and  manager  of  expedition  to

New  Zealand  and  back
TraveUing  expenses
General  expenses  :   manager's  salary,  office  rent,  tele-
grams,    postages,     typewriting     correspondence,

exhibition  of  equipment,  wages  district  messenger-
boy,  telephone  rent,  &c.  &c.  1484  19    7
Cost  of  cablegrams  between  London  and  Australia,

and  New  Zealand  before  the  expedition  sailed  and

on  its  return  264  14    7


1365  15
863  12

4296  18

328  16

2005  14

1

0

4

11

7

1807  10
6065  10

7
4

1517  17
126  0

8
0

2021  11

5

1016  15
443  4

10
9

£44,380  14    9


414


INDEX


Acetylene  gas,  20, 142

Adams,  27,  28,  30,  143,  171,  180,  215,

249,  292,  371 ;  ii.  20
Adare,  Cape,  ii.  229
Adelie  Land,  ii.  226,  229
Adineta,  ii,  240

grandis,  ii.  241
Admiralty,  24

Albatross,  48,  52,  60  ;  ii.  233
Alg£e,  209;  ii.  235
Anatina,  ii.  265
Ansell,  65
Armitage,  Cape,  231,  368  ;  ii.  59

Lieutenant,  ii.  36
Armytage,  28,  30,  145,  213,  227,  256  ;

ii.  61
Aurora  Australis,  203,  221  ;  ii.  360-67
"  Aurora  Australis  "   (book),  217-18  ;

ii.28
Australia,  3,  35

Back  Door  Bay,  109, 119,  126, 163
Backstairs  Passage,  ii.  193
Balleny  Islands,  ii.  229,  230
Balloon  Bight  {see  Barrier  Inlet)
Barne,  Cape,  94,  95, 133,  235  ;  ii.  70

Inlet,  284
Barrier,  Great  Ice,  2,  41,  68,  70,  71,
230, 231, 287  ;  ii.  42,  276

movement,  75,  234,  276  ;    ii.  55,
278, 286
Barrier  Inlet,  68,  73-76,  80

Origin,  ii.  286-89
Beacon  sandstone,  ii.  63,  67,  97,  100,

268,  299,  305,  316
Beardmore  Glacier,  308,  323  ;  ii.  13


Beaufort  Island,  83  ;  ii.  42
Bellingshausen,  Mount,  ii.  149, 159, 169,

220
Bernacchi,  Cape,  ii.  92,  94, 218
"  Billy,"  36

Biological  laboratory,  145
Biology,  219,  222  ;  ii.  233-67
Bird,  Cape,  83, 125, 135  ;  ii.  42

Mount,  104 ;  ii.  45,  310
Bjorn,  16

Black-back  (Dominican)  gull,  ii.  233
Black  Island,  85
Blubber,  211
Blue  Lake,  134,  163
BluS  Depot,  256,  362,  364,  365;    ii.

50,  52-60,  223
Borchgrevink,  72,  75  ;  ii.  271
Brocklehurst,  28,   30,    129,    145,    171,

180,  184,  195,  223,  233,  256,  262  ;

ii.  22,  28,  61
Brown  Island,  85
Buckley,  28,  41,  59,  61,  364
Burberry  material,  21,  157,  341
Butter  Point,  ii.  35,  37,  74,  86,  88

Callidina  constricta,  ii.  241

Cameras,  26

Cape  pigeon,  61  ;  ii.  233

Castle  Rock,  84, 135,  229,  263,  369

"  Castle,"  the,  335

"  Cavalry  Club,"  46,  55,  57

Charcot  Bay,  ii.  122

Cheatham,  29,  116

Cheese,  250-51,  341

Chemistry,  ii.  344

"  Chinaman,"  36, 110, 164,  285,  290

415


INDEX


Chinaman  Depot  (Depot  B),  290,  359

Chocolate,  250-51,  341

Cinematograph,  26

Clear  Lake,  134

CliflE  Point,  117

Clothing,  21

"  Cloudmaker,"  the,  309,  314,  319,  326  ;

ii.  16
Coal,  127-28,211

(Southern  journey),  327  ;  ii.  299
Coast  Lake,  134
Colbeck,  Cape,  79
Compressed  fodder,  37,  256
Cooker,  20,  28,  154
Cooking  range,  20, 126, 149
Cost  of  expedition,  ii.  414
Cotton,  L.,  28

Crabeater  seal,  66  ;  ii.  261, 262
Crater  Hill,  230,  371
Crozier,  Cape,  83  ;  ii.  55, 66
Crustacea,  ii.  236,  266
Currents,  ii.  367-75

Dark  Room,  141

David,   28,  31,  41,  45,  142,  147,  179,

202,  215,  227,  245,  247  ;  ii.  37,  268
Davis,  29, 116, 125  ;  ii.  70,  212  224, 407
Day,  28,  31,  87,  144,  233,  262;   ii.  25,

36,52
Delbridge  Islands,  84
Depot  A,  240-44, 282,  362
Nunatak,  ii.  36,  62
Island,  ii.  97,  104,  116,  228
Derrick  Point,  108,  112,  130
Diatoms,  221

Discovery  expedition,   1,    27,  46,  81,
85,  89,  94,  151,  160,  173,  227,
229,  261,  307 ;    ii.   36,  66,  66,
118,  177, 179
Depot,  ii.  65,  286
Mount,  86, 280,  361 ;  ii.  55
"  Doctor,"  36, 61
Dogs,  21,  24,  37,  40,  100,  140,  165-69,

238, 242, 245  ;  ii.  53,  69,  263-65
Dougherty  Island,  ii.  411
DrygalsM  Barrier,  257;    ii.  107,  130,
133,   137,   140,   141,   143,   148,
154,  197,  219,  274,  286

416


Drygalski  Depot,  ii.  147,  200, 201, 209
Dry  Valley,  ii.  36,  62,  74
Dunlop,29, 116

Dysentery,    355,   357,    368,   367;     ii
9,399

Earth  shadows,  223 ;  ii.  347,  354r-57

Emerald  Island,  410

England,  Captain,  29,  39,  87,  112,  114,

117, 120, 127  ;  ii.  40
Equipment,  6,  26,  99
Erebus,  Mount,  82,  83,  132,  134,  136,

170-201,  222,  280,  362  ;    ii.  28,  35,

55,  308-14
Evans,  Captain,  38,  49,  366  ;  ii.  40,  71,

213

Pblspae  crystals,  185, 196, 199 ;  ii.  29
Perrar  Glacier,  ii.  36,  37,  62,  88
Finnesko,  14, 167,  252,  253,  344
PlagstafE  Point,  95,  108,  112,  121,  127,

133
Fossils,  ii.  62,  66
Fossil  wood  (southern  journey),  320 ;

ii.  268,  300
Front  Door  Bay,  108, 117, 121, 127, 129
Frost-bite,  184,  333,  341,  344,  347 ;  ii.

11,  35
Fumaroles,  183,  185
Fungi,  209,  224 ;  ii.  329
Furs,  13-15

Geikib  Inlet,  ii.  130
Geographical  Journal,  3

Society,  24
Geological  summary,  ii.  306-307
Gteology,  general,  ii.  268-314

Western  mountains,  ii.  315-33
Grerlache  Inlet,  ii.  148
Glacier  Tongue,  114, 127, 174,  228,  234,

256, 262, 369  ;  ii.  70, 283
Glaciology,  ii.  27^94, 331-33
Gneiss  Point,  ii.  99
Goggles,  26,  253,  268,  278
Granite  Harbour,  257;    ii.   101,  110,

111
Green  Park,  132, 162
Lake,  134


INDEX


"Grisi,"  36,  101,  138,  164,  262,  363,

363  ;  ii.  10
Grisi  Depot  (Depot  C),  299,  357 ;    ii.

19

Handcock,  55

Harbord,   29,  116,  119,  123,  125 ;    ii.

49,  224
Head-gear,  157

Health  of  expedition,  ii.  397-99
Hope,  Mount,  307-309
Horseshoe  Bay,  133  ;  ii.  19
Hut,  19-20,  96,  97,  107,  137,  141-50 ;

ii.  38,  227,  228
Point,  84,  89,  93,  98, 113,  134, 170,

227,  237,  256,  263,  371  ;   ii.  22,

59,  227
Hydatina,  ii.  237

Ice-birds,  61

Ice-flowers,  220

Ice-forms,  ii.  334-41

Ice-temperatures  (in  lakes),  ii.  341-43

Inaccessible  Island,  92,  94,  234  ;  ii.  24

Infusoria,  ii.  236

Instruments,  24-26

Irizar,  Cape,  ii.  125, 126, 129

ifAEGER  clothing,  21,  157
Joyce,  27,  28,  31,  147,  215,  256,  281,
363,  365  ;  ii.  22,  28,  52

Kenyte,  199  ;  ii.  25,  29,  37

King    Edward  VII  Land,  74,  75,  76,

79,  81  ;  ii.  42,  272
Killer- whales,  88,  221  ;  ii.  68,  234
Kinsey,  J.  J.,  38
Knob  Head,  Mount,  64
Koonya,  38,  43,  49,  51,  62
Kukri  Hills,  64  ;  ii.  322,  324

Larsen  Depot,  ii.  168, 188, 191

Mount,  ii.  139, 148, 169, 189
Lichen,  209  ;  ii.  26,  64,  235
Longstaff,  Mount,  294,  298,  305
Lower  Glacier  Depot,  314,  354
Lyttelton,  Port,  34,  35,  38,  39  ;  ii.  40,

41,  231
TI  2


"  Mac,"  36

Mackay,  28,  31,  36,  89,  146,  171,  182,

245,  246,  370  ;    ii.  73
Mackintosh,  29,  32,  89,  116,  367  ;   ii,

42, 52, 225
Macquarie  Island,  ii.  408-10
Macrohiohis  arcticus,  241
Magnetic   Pole,  4,  246,  369;    ii.   73,
119,   136,   170,   177,   179-181,   221,
358,  359
Magnetism,  ii.  358-67
Marine  biology,  208,  220
Maize,   37,  240,  243,   256,  270,   302,

333,  338
Markham,  Mount,  294
Marshall,  28,    32,    89,    143,  171,  180,

215,  249,  367,  368;    ii.  21
Mars,  25,  28,  32,  144,  243  ;   ii.  27,  28,

36
Maujee  ration,  37,  256,  270,  302,  336
Mawson,  28,  32,   142,   147,  171,  216,
245,  370 ;    ii.  71,  73,  155,  203,  334
McGillan,  370;    ii.  43
McMurdo  Sound,  81,  84,  85,  121,  125,

133,  202;    ii.   88,  273
Michell,  29,  45,  89
Microscopic  life,  ii.  235-43
Minna  Bluff,  243,  281  ;   ii.  12,  50
Mineralogy,  ii.  344
Mirabilite,  ii.  305
Mirage,  ii.  345
Mits,  15,  158,  252,  253
Meteorological   station,    140,   203-208
Meteorology,  ii.  376-96
Montague,  55
Moss,  209  ;  ii.  235

Motor-car,   21,    23,    87,    90,    99,    169,
233,  238-240,  246,  249,  265 ;  ii.  23,
25,  36,  76
Mount  A.  Markham,  297
Murray,  28,   33,    147,  203,  208,   209,
216,  256 ;    ii.  28,  48,  233


Nansen,  Mount,  ii.  139,  148,  154, 171,

188,  221,  274
Neobuccinum,  ii.  265
New  coast- line,  ii.  229,  276

D  41T


INDEX


New  Harbour,  ii.  90

New  Zealand,  2,  3,   11,  34,  35,  38;

ii.  230
Nimrod,  16-17,  36,  37,  87,  117,  121,
127,  257,  367,  369,  370  ;   ii.  38,
40,  48,  69,  110,  200,  210,  223,
232,  407
Islands,  ii.  411
Mount,  ii.  170, 174
Nordenskjold  Ice  Barrier,  ii.  50,  118,

120,  218,  274,  284
North,  Cape,  ii.  181,  229
Northern  party,  245,  246,  257  ;  ii.  35,

37,  66,  69,  71,  73-222
Nototheia,  ii.  265

Obelisk,  Mount,  ii.  62
Observation  Hill,  84,  234,  368  ;   ii.  59
Optics,  Meteorological,  ii.  345-57
"  Oyster  Alley,"  37,  40,  47,  52,  121

Passelenb,  ii.  345
Paton,  ii.  43
Peat,  ii.  304

Pecten  Colbecki,  ii.  66,  265
Pemmican,  9,  159

Penguins,  Adelie,  68,  88,  95,  118,  220,
278,  280 ;   ii.  23,  39,  234,  247-58
Emperor,  74  ;  ii.  234, 244-47
Ringed,  ii.  258
Petrel,  Antarctic,  68  ;    ii.  233
Giant,  ii.  233
Snowy,  ii.  233
Wilson's,  ii.  233
Petroleum,  154,  227,  232
Philodina  gregaria,  ii.  240
Physics,  ii.  334-43
Plasmon  biscuit,  159
Plateau,  Antarctic,  ii.  290-92
Plateau  depot,  343,  349
Ponies,  21,  22,  36,  37,  40,  46,  50,  99,

101,  161-65,  237,  249,  287,  290
Pony  Lake,  132

meat,  292,  303
"  Possum,"  58,  126,  165
Pram  Point,  369

Piiestley,  28,  33,  146,  202, 216, 233, 256
262  ;  ii.  24,  25,  28,  37,  61,  208,  315

418


Protozoa,  ii.  236
Provisions,  6-12
Pteropods,  ii.  266
Pycnogonida,  ii.  266

Quail  Island,  23,  36

"  Quan,"  36,  163,  261,  262,  265,  285,

301,  303
Queen  Alexandra's  Flag,  35,  253,  261,

266,  335,  348

Raised  beaches,  ii.  276,  301-303

Reid,  6,  35,  39

Rhizopods,  ii.  236

Riches,  ii.  43

Roberts,  28,  33,  55,  146

Ross  Island,  92,  135,  221 ;  ii.  49,  273

Sea,  63,  64,  68  ;   ii.  41,  272

Seal,  ii.  209,  227,  261

Sir  James,  80, 173, 174  ;  ii.  41, 181
Royal  Company  Island,  ii.  407

Society,  24
Royds,  Cape,  85,  95,  133,  135,  202;

ii.  42
Rotifers,  219  ;  ii.  236-43

"  Sandy,"  36

Sandy  Beach,  133,  162

Sastrugi,  177

Scott,  Captain,  97,  296,  307,  334,  366;

ii.  36,  62,  122
Sea  leopards,  223  ;    ii.  261

spiders,  ii.  266

weed,  224
Sennegrass,  15
Shackleton,  30

Inlet,  294,  296
Ski,  15

boots,  14
Skua  gulls,  91,  95,  220  ;  ii.  61,  259-60
"  Socks,"  36,  164,  261,  265,  301,  310,

315
Sledges,  12,  13,  151-54,  255
Sledging  foods,  158-60
Sleeping-bags,   14,    156,  227,  241
Snow   blindness,   273,   278,  280,   299,
301,  306,  313,  314;    ii.  37,  44,
90,  143,  161


INDEX


Snow  Cape,  297
Solitary  Rocks,  ii.   62,   64
Southern  party,  226,  248,  257,  260-71,
ii.  1-21,  50,  56,  223
Journey  distances,  ii.  401-404
equipment,  250-66
Staff,  27-33
Stamps,  36,  61
Stewart   Island,   ii.    230
Stranded  moraines,  ii.  66,  86,  322

Temperatures,  sub-normal,  336,  340,

343  ;   ii.  397
Tent  Island,  228
Tents,  20,  155
Tide-crack,  102
Tides,  ii.  367-375
Titanium,  ii.  105
Terra  Nova  Bay,  ii.  144
Terrace  Island,  ii.  97
Terror,  Mount,  83
Tubman,  36
Turk's  Head,  228


Upper  Glacier  Depot,  326.   352;    ii.
11,  19

Victoria  Land,  2  ;   ii.  73,  76,  94,  301
Volcanic  Rocks,  ii.  294

Washington,  Cape,  ii.  75,  141

Water-bears,  ii.  236-43

Weddell  Seals,  66,  92,  220  ;  ii.  26,  85,

86,  95,  98,  234,  261-62
Western  party,  256  ;    ii.  35,  37,  61-9

Bight,  70,  82
Whales,  70;    ii.  234,  26G

Bay  of,  74,  75,  78,  79;  ii.  234
White  Island,  85,  242,  267,  368  ;  ii.  55
Wild,  27,  28,  33,  147,  216,  233,  249  j

ii.   21
Wilkes  Land,  ii.  229,  230
V/ilson,  Cape,  297

Dr.  97,  366
Windy  Gully,  ii.  64

"Zulu,"  36,  69,  89


Printed  by  Ballantyne  fir"  Co.  Limited
Tavistock  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London


'•^¥^.


■-<■*,»««* -''Ui""  I  ifm<mmmmmmmBmme«mn


\o


?


J


Date  Doe

JOT'''^^

*a.^

si

%'i,itrW

"^

-unhH

^._

i  ''a^^H

^.i;.,^.,   ^-

L.  B.   CAT.  MO    1)37

WELLESLEY  COLLEGE  LIBRARY


3  5002  03193  1400


G  850  1907  . A32  2

Shackleton,  Ernest  Henry,
1874-1922.

The  heart  of  the  Antarctic


♦  •*.


