The  Right  Hon..*


.    Cooper,


Frontispiece


SECOND    CHARACTERS

OR

THE   LANGUAGE   OF    FORMS


BY    THE    RIGHT    HONOURABLE
ANTHONY,  EARL  OF  SHAFTESBURY

AUTHOR    OF    CHARACTERISTICS
EDITED   BY

BENJAMIN  RAND,  PH.D.

HARVARD  UNIVERSITY


Cambridge  :

at   the   University   Press
1914


Cambridge:


PRINTED   BY  JOHN    CLAY,    M.A.
AT   THE    UNIVERSITY    PRESS


TO

THE   RIGHT   HONOURABLE
ANTHONY,    EARL   OF    SHAFTESBURY


CONTENTS

PAGE

INTRODUCTION •  xi

TITLE !

PREFACE        3

IDEA  OF  THE  WORK 4

PREFATORY  ANTICIPATORY  THOUGHTS 12

I.  A  LETTER  CONCERNING  DESIGN       ...        .       .  17

II.  A  NOTION  OF  THE  HISTORICAL  DRAUGHT  OF  HERCULES  .  29

III.  THE  PICTURE  OF  CEBES 63

IV.  PLASTICS 89

1.  Characters,  ist,  2d,  3d 90

2.  Characters,  Personages 94

3.  Rise,    Progress,    Declension    and    Revival   of    Second

Characters 103

4.  Instinct,  Natural  Ideas 105

5.  Taste,  Relish,  Eye,  Judgment,  Criticism       .         .         .  108

6.  Discouragements  in  Art.         .         .         .         .         .         .  116

7.  Encouragements,  Motives 121

8.  Praises,  Recommendations  of  the  Art   ....  122

9.  Ancient  Masters  and  Works 124

10.     Modern  Masters  and  Works.         .....  127

n.     Painters: — Character,  Education,  Qualification     .        .  131

12.  Subjects  of  Painting 133

13.  Sorts  of  Painters  and  Painting 134


x  CONTENTS

14.  The  Five  Parts  in  Painting 140

ist  Part,  viz.  Invention,  Story,  Imagery          .         .  141

2nd    Part,    viz.    Proportion,    Drawing,    Symmetry

particular 144

3rd  Part,  viz.  Colouring 146

4th  Part,  viz.  Sentiment,  Movement,  Passion,  Soul  .  151

5th   Part,   viz.    System,    Composition,    Collocation,

Position,  Symmetry  general 152

15.  Maxims  of  the  Art 153

16.  Of  the  Machine,  Machinery,  or  Deity  Work        .         .  160

17.  Of  the  Scene,  Camps,  Perspective,  Ornament      .         .  162

1 8.  Of  Shortenings  or  Fore-shortening        .         .         .         .  164

19.  Of  Truth,  viz.  Plastic 164

20.  Of  Freedom  or  the  Free  Manner 165

21.  Of  the  Decorum 167

22.  Common  Citations  and  Remarks 170

23.  Moral  and  Theological  Citations  and  Maxims     .         .  173

DICTIONARY  OF  ART  TERMS 179

INDEX  OF  EASE  181


"  I  "HE  Third  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  is  best  known  to
J_  the  world  as  the  author  of  the  '  Characteristics.'
Another  work  by  him  was  discovered  by  the  present
editor  in  the  Record  Office  in  London,  and  printed  in
1900,  with  the  title  of  '  Philosophical  Regimen.'  At
that  time  a  manuscript  volume  was  also  found  among
the  Shaftesbury  Papers,  containing  the  plan  and
fourth  treatise  of  a  work  intended  as  a  complement
to  the  '  Characteristics,'  which  was  entitled  '  Second
Characters.'  This  volume  was  mostly  written  in  1712.
It  appears  that  owing  to  declining  health  Shaftesbury
had  been  compelled  to  leave  England  and  spend  the
last  year  and  a  half  of  his  life  in  Italy.  On  the  3rd  of
July,  1711,  he  sailed  from  Dover,  and  proceeding
slowly  through  Paris,  Turin,  and  Rome,  arrived
November  i5th,  1711,  in  Naples.  In  this  city  he
resided,  seeking  in  vain  through  the  aid  of  a  mild
climate  to  recover  his  gradually  failing  strength,  until
his  death,  February  I5th,  1713.  In  spite  of  his
contest  with  disease,  and  brief  as  was  the  period  that
remained  to  him  of  allotted  life,  his  last  months  spent
in  Naples  were  nevertheless  replete  with  large  literary
activity.  Not  only  did  he  then  complete  for  the  press
a  second  edition  of  the  '  Characteristics  '  but  he  like
wise  carried  forward  the  preparation  for  intended
publication  of  an  entirely  new  work.

The  book  was  to  consist  of  four  treatises.  These
were:  I  'A  Letter  concerning  Design';  II  'A
Notion  of  the  Historical  Draught  or  Tablature  of
The  Judgment  of  Hercules  '  ;  III  'An  Appendix  con
cerning  the  Emblem  of  Cebes '  ;  and  IV  '  Plastics

R.  a


xii  INTRODUCTION

or  the  Original  Progress  and  Power  of  Designatory
Art.'  The  '  Letter  concerning  Design  '  was  printed
for  the  first  time  in  1732,  in  the  fifth  edition  of  the
'Characteristics.'  The  'Judgment  of  Hercules'  was
first  printed  in  French,  in  the  Journal  des  S^avans  for
November,  1712,  a  fact  which  has  heretofore  strangely
escaped  the  attention  of  bibliographers.  An  "original
translation "  of  this  treatise  appeared  in  English,
separately,  in  1713,  and  was  also  included  in  the
second  edition  of  the  '  Characteristics  'in  1714.  The
'  Appendix  concerning  the  Emblem  of  Cebes,'  so  far
as  known,  remained  to  be  written,  and  the  '  Tablet '
itself  instead  is  here  printed  in  a  new  translation.
'  Plastics,'  regarded  by  the  author  as  the  chief
treatise  of  the  four,  has  never  previously  been  pub
lished.  The  definite  grouping  of  these  various
treatises  in  the  form  of  a  single  work,  as  intended
when  written,  is  also  here  first  made  known.  Just  two
centuries  have  elapsed  since  Shaftesbury  was  forced
to  lay  down  his  pen,  until  the  present  editing,  for  the
first  time,  of  his  aesthetic  work  with  the  title  of  '  Second
Characters,'  so  far  as  it  is  completed.

Concerning  the  origin  and  progress  of  '  Second
Characters '  considerable  information  may  be  gathered
from  the  correspondence  of  Shaftesbury  while  in
Naples.  To  Thomas  Micklethwayt,  his  young  friend
who  carried  the  second  edition  of  the  '  Characteristics  '
through  the  press  after  his  death,  he  says  in  a  post
script  to  a  letter  of  February  2nd,  I7I21  :  "I  must  add
a  word  to  tell  you  that  if  I  live  and  am  able  to  proceed
in  my  virtuoso  studies  it  will  follow  of  necessity  (as
you  may  easily  conceive)  that  1  shall  embrace  more
objects  in  my  view  than  simply  what  I  first  began
upon,  and  was  the  cause  of  my  search.  Is  it  possible
think  you  for  me  to  enlarge  my  conversation,  engage
in  speculative  reading  and  antiquities  of  this  kind  and
not  find  in  any  way  many  curiosities  of  which  without

1  An  unpublished  letter  among  the  Shaftesbury  Papers.


INTRODUCTION  xiii

any  more  trouble  and  with  the  same  expense  of  pains
and  money  I  may  make  some  improvement?"  Here
was  the  inception  of  a  new  project  in  art,  born  of  his
surroundings,  and  made  in  addition  to  the  prepar
ation  of  the  second  edition  of  the  '  Characteristics '
with  its  newly  planned  emblems.  "  My  own  designs,"
he  writes,  February  i6th,  1712,  to  his  intimate  friend,
Sir  John  Cropley,  "  you  know  run  all  on  moral
emblems  and  what  relates  to  ancient  Roman  and
Greek  history,  philosophy  and  virtue.  Of  this  the
modern  painters  have  but  little  taste.  If  anything  be
stirred,  or  any  studies  turned  this  way,  it  must  be  I
that  must  set  the  wheel  a  going  and  help  to  raise  the

spirit My  charges  turn  wholly,  as  you  see,  towards

the  raising  of  art  and  the  improvement  of  virtue  in  the
living,  and  in  posterity  to  come1."  Like  Plato,  Shaftes-
bury  realized  that  you  must  surround  the  citizens  with
an  atmosphere  of  grace  and  beauty  if  you  desire  to
instil  noble  and  true  ideas  in  the  mind.  And  animated
by  the  inspired  purpose  of  reviving  and  elevating  art,
particularly  in  England,  his  remaining  strength  was
steadfastly  applied  to  the  production  of  '  Second
Characters.'

To  Micklethwayt  in  a  letter  of  February  23rd,
1712,  Shaftesbury  writes:  "I  have  a  noble  virtuoso
scheme  before  me,  and  design,  if  I  get  life  this  summer,
to  apply  even  this  great  work  (the  history  piece
bespoke,  and  now  actually  working)  to  the  credit  and
reputation  of  Philol....!  know  that  by  what  1  have  said
I  must  have  highly  raised  your  curiosity,  which  till
next  post  I  am  unable  to  satisfy,  and  then  you  shall
have  it  all  before  you  by  the  copy  of  the  little  treatise
(which  Mr  Crell  is  now  actually  transcribing  from  the
foul)  written,  or  rather  dictated,  on  this  subject  of  the
great  piece  of  history  in  hand,  and  which  will  come
within  the  compass  of  a  sheet  of  paper.  But  it  being

1  The  Life,  Unpublished  Letters,  and  Philosophical  Regimen  of  the
Third  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  edited  by  Benjamin  Rand,  London,  1900,
p.  468-9.


xiv  INTRODUCTION

written  in  French  for  the  painters  use,  you  cannot  have
it  in  its  right  condition  until  it  be  thought  over  anew
and  translated  anew  into  its  natural  English.  It  will
be  in  Mr  Coste's  power  to  make  this  piece  truly
original,  as  it  now  is,  by  touching  it  up  (as  the  painters'
phrase  is)  and  converting  it  wholly  into  pure  language
with  his  masterly  hand  and  genius.  And  in  this
condition  I  would  willingly  consent  he  should  carry  it,
or  send  it  over  to  his  friend  to  be  inserted  in  the  very
next  Bib.  Chois.  of  his  friend's  friend  Mons.  Le  Clerc1."
The  historical  piece,  to  which  reference  is  here  made,
was  the  Choice  of  Hercules,  as  related  by  Prodicus
and  recorded  by  Xenophon  in  the  second  book  of  the
Memorabilia,  of  which  Shaftesbury  had  undertaken  to
have  a  painting  made  by  Paulo  de  Matthaeis.  In
order  that  the  painter  might  have  full  information  in
regard  to  the  purpose  of  the  fable  and  the  desired
character  of  the  work,  the  "  little  treatise  "  above  men
tioned  was  written  and  was  composed  in  French  as  he
says  "  from  what  passed  in  conversation  with  my
painters,  and  some  other  virtuosos  with  whom  I  can
converse  only  in  that  language."  On  the  first  appear
ance  of  the  '  Judgment  of  Hercules '  in  French,  in  the
Journal  des  Sfavans,  Nov.,  1712,  he  judged  an  early
translation  and  publication  of  it  in  English  to  be
necessary,  as  he  was  doubtless  mindful  of  his  previous
experience  in  the  surreptitious  issue  of  the  '  Inquiry
concerning  Virtue.'  "  With  extreme  satisfaction,"  he
writes  to  Pierre  Coste,  November  22nd,  1712,  "I  have
just  now  received  the  three  exemplars  of  the  little
dissertation  in  which  your  admirable  judgment  and
care  has  made  me  not  a  little  proud,  so  that  I  am  in  a
manner  resolved  to  naturalize  it  myself  and  give  it  to
the  public  Englished  at  first  hand,  rather  than  suffer  it
to  go  to  Grub  Street  by  help  of  those  Anglo-Gallish
translators,  who  generally  understand  neither  the  one
language  nor  the  other2."  The  English  publication  of

1  Ibid.  p.  472-3.  -'  Ibid.  p.  523.


INTRODUCTION  xv

this  treatise  was  also  deemed  urgent  by  his  friends.
"  I  join  with  you,"  he  writes  to  Micklethwayt,
December  2oth,  1712,  "in  opinion  for  instantly  print
ing  the  '  Judgment  of  Hercules '  as  I  wrote  to  you  and
Sir  John  just  before  I  fell  ill,  and  having  presently
made  my  plan  you  will  receive  it  from  Mr  Crell
transcribed  by  the  next  post  that  Mr  D — y  may
instantly  proceed1."  And  in  a  final  letter  of  January
loth,  1713,  to  Micklethwayt  he  concludes  :  "I  hope  I
may  soon  by  the  posts  receive  from  you  the  return  of
the  models  of  the  title-pages,  and  perhaps  the  first
sheet  of  the  'Judgment  of  Hercules'  if  you  have
resolution  enough  to  print  at  least  the  '  Notion  '  by
itself,  to  which  singly  (as  I  wrote  you)  the  advertise
ment  I  first  sent  (in  mine  of  December  27)  may  serve
as  a  preface  leaving  out  only  the  last  words,  viz.  '  in
the  letter  which  is  here  prefixed'."  These  letters  reveal
very  clearly  the  reason  and  circumstances  which  led  to
the  separate  publication  of  the  '  Judgment  of  Hercules  '
in  1712,  in  anticipation  of  the  completed  work  of
'  Second  Characters.'  There  is,  moreover,  no  evidence
of  any  intention  on  the  part  of  Shaftesbury  ever  to
print  this  treatise  as  part  of  the  'Characteristics,'  and
it,  with  the  '  Letter  of  Design,'  has  been  very  properly
omitted  by  Mr  J.  M.  Robertson  in  his  excellent  edition
of  that  classic  work.

To  Lord  Somers  all  the  treatises  which  comprise
the  '  Characteristics '  had  been  dedicated  by  Shaftes
bury.  It  was  only  natural  therefore  in  the  gradual
development  of  his  new  literary  project  that  '  The
Notion '  should  be  accompanied  by  a  letter  to  his
esteemed  patron.  The  first  reference  to  this  dedicatory
epistle  is  to  be  found  in  a  letter  of  March  29th,  1712,
to  Sir  John  Cropley.  "  You  have  here,"  he  says,
"  enclosed  my  letter  [of  Design]  long  promised,  and  (as
you  see)  long  since  written  to  our  old  Lord  [Somers].
The  little  treatise  [or  '  Judgment  of  Hercules ']  which

1  Ibid.  p.  528.
R.  b


xvi  INTRODUCTION

accompanies  it  (and  which  I  hope  you  will  deliver  or
convey  carefully  and  handsomely  sealed  up  with  it)
I  have  also  enclosed  this  post  to  my  cousin  Mick1."
On  the  1 2th  of  April,  he  writes  to  Micklethwayt :
"  And  earnestly  I  long  (as  you  may  well  believe)  to
hear  of  the  delivery,  reception,  and  success  of  my
epistle  [of  Design]  and  treatise  [of  Hercules]  thereto
belonging."  Shaftesbury's  first  intention  when  he
thought  of  making  an  English  translation  of  the
'Judgment  of  Hercules'  was  to  include  in  its  publi
cation  the  '  Letter  of  Design.'  "Now  pray  tell  me,"
he  writes,  November  22nd,  1712,  to  Sir  John  Cropley,
"  which  I  had  better  resolve  to  do  ?  Whether  leave
it  ['Judgment  of  Hercules  ']  to  the  Grub  Street  trans
lators  and  retailers  to  rend  in  their  own  game,  or
whether  produce  the  original  translation  (if  I  may  call
it)  by  itself  alone  without  that  which  I  count  the  life
and  spirit  of  it  I  mean  the  recommendatory  letter  [of
Design]  to  my  friend-lord,  whose  property  this  is,  and
to  whom  it  is  my  chief  delight  to  join  myself,  in  these
as  in  former  thoughts  and  contemplations  of  my  retired
and  leisured  hours.  For  my  own  part  should  the  Lord
approve  the  thing  I  am  resolute  to  send  both  '  Letter  '
and  '  Notion  '  without  more  ado  to  Darby  (suppressing
names  only),  to  be  printed  in  the  very  manner  and
character  as  the  '  Letter  of  Enthusiasm  'V  Among  his
last  instructions  concerning  the  publication  contained
in  an  unpublished  manuscript  he  quotes  from  a  letter
to  Mr  M — t  of  the  3rd  of  January,  1713  :  "  If  you
friends,  who  are  judges  of  the  affair,  cannot  resolve  to
print  the  '  Letter'  itself  together  with  the  '  Notion,  I
hope  at  least  you  may  hold  the  resolution  of  printing
the  '  Notion  '  to  save  the  abuse  of  a  Grub  Street
translation."  His  friends  Micklethwayt  and  Cropley
brought  out  the  'Judgment  of  Hercules'  in  1712,  as
we  have  seen,  but  they  did  not  print  the  '  Letter  of
Design.'  Doubtless  the  inclusion  of  the  'Notion'  in

1  Ibid.  p.  781-2.  2  Ibid.  p.  526-7.


INTRODUCTION  xvii

the  second,  third,  and  fourth  editions  of  the  '  Charac
teristics  '  aroused  the  desire  to  have  all  the  treatises  of
the  author  then  known  to  exist,  in  this  work,  and  led
to  the  printing  in  its  fifth  edition  of  the  '  Letter  of
Design '  in  the  incongruous  position  of  a  closing
treatise.  But  in  the  phrase  in  the  present  volume,
"Observe  also  if  the  '  Letter'  and  '  Notion'  be  first
printed  and  afterward  the  whole  together  under  the
answerable  general  title  of  '  Second  Characters '
Shaftesbury  looks  forward  to  the  publication  of  this
completed  work.  For  the  first  time  therefore  the
'  Letter  of  Design  '  now  appears,  as  intended,  at  the
beginning  as  a  real  epistle  of  dedication  to  his  friend,
Lord  Somers.

Already  in  February  of  1712  the  thoughts  of
Shaftesbury  had  turned  towards  'The  Tablet  of  Cebes  '
as  capable  of  somewhat  similar  artistic  and  literary
treatment  to  that  he  had  in  hand  upon  the  '  Judgment
of  Hercules.'  He  expresses  the  desire  at  that  time
that  Mr  Coste  be  instructed  "to  bring  with  him  from
Holland  the  best  edition  or  two  (with  notes)  of  Cebes'
Table,  with  the  ordinary  ugly  prints  (such  as  there  are)
of  this  beautiful  socratic  piece,  which  I  shall  have
time  to  study  at  leisure  and  fit  for  a  companion  to  this
other  socratic,  but  more  simple,  and  (in  painting)  more
exact,  natural,  and  just  piece  of  Prodicus  now  carrying
on,  and  upon  which  I  have  composed  my  little  treatise
in  French1."  An  engraving  had  been  made  of  the
painting  of  Hercules  illustrating  the  tale  of  Prodicus
and  there  was  a  first  vague  notion  that  one  of  Cebes
might  accompany  it  for  insertion  in  the  '  Characteristics  '
(vol.  n,  p.  250)  in  connection  with  the  reference  to  Cebes
and  Prodicus.  Later,  however,  the  idea  of  its  proper
place  as  part  of  a  new  treatise  developed.  "  And  now
Cebes,"  he  writes  in  April  to  Sir  John  Cropley,  "may
follow  in  due  time,  if  my  life  goes  beyond  this  summer,
and  that  I  live  to  see  the  beginning  of  another."  And

1  Ibid.  p.  474.

b*


xviii  INTRODUCTION

again  to  Pierre  Coste,  who  had  not  yet  visited  Naples,
he  says  in  a  letter  of  July  25th  :  "  Pray  if  you  light  on
any  good  edition,  private  or  particular  remarks,  notes  or
thoughts  on  Cebes'  Table,  pick  them  up  and  bring  them
improved  to  me  by  your  reflections1."  Shaftesbury
did  not  live  to  see  another  summer  and  probably
never  wrote  the  '  Appendix  concerning  the  Emblem  of
Cebes.'  Among  his  manuscripts  in  the  Record  Office,
however,  there  is  an  English  translation  of  Cebes'
'  Tablet '  with  notes,  that  has  never  been  published.
The  translator  writes  in  easy  flowing  English,  unim
peded  by  the  Greek  forms  of  the  original  text.  The
accuracy  with  which  every  thought  of  the  Greek  author
is  reproduced  indicates  too  that  the  translator  like
Shaftesbury  was  a  master  of  the  classics.  But  the
translation  is  not  in  Shaftesbury's  handwriting  and  if
it  were  by  him  must  have  been  dictated.  The  Notes
to  the  translation  might  possibly  also  be  by  him,  as  the
language  and  thought  bear  such  a  close  resemblance
to  the  contents  of  a  letter  written  to  Pierre  Coste2.
It  is  this  translation  of  the  'Tablet  of  Cebes'  with
notes  which  appears  in  the  present  work  in  lieu  of  the
unwritten  '  Appendix  '  to  it.

The  fourth  treatise,  that  on  '  Plastics,'  is  styled
by  Shaftesbury  the  "  great  one  "  of  '  Second  Char
acters.'  It  is  to  be  found  in  a  manuscript  volume  of
'The  Shaftesbury  Papers'  (V.  15)  in  the  London
Record  Office.  At  the  beginning  of  this  volume  there
is  also  outlined  the  plan  and  directions  for  the  union
of  the  four  treatises  here  mentioned  as  composing
'  Second  Characters.'  The  date  of  the  proposed
scheme  of  the  entire  work  is  April  25th,  1712,  which
would  probably  precede  a  direct  accumulation  of  data
for  the  chief  treatise.  Writing  to  Pierre  Coste  at
Amsterdam,  July  25th,  1712,  concerning  the  French
copy  of  the  'Judgment  of  Hercules'  he  gives  a  reason
for  its  publication  that  bears  directly  upon  the  larger

1  Ibid.  p.  525.


INTRODUCTION  xix

project.  "  If  the  piece,"  he  says,  "  were  found
valuable  I  could  freely  commit  it  to  you,  and  the
author  being  for  the  present  unknown  (no  matter  what
happened  afterwards)  I  should  be  content  to  see  it
abroad  in  any  journal.  That  of  Monsieur  Le  Clerc's
would  be  too  high  honour  for  it  perhaps.  The  reason
why  I  wish  this  is  because  I  should,  from  the  effect  of
this  when  it  was  read  by  people  of  fashion,  be  able  to
judge  whether  or  no  it  would  be  worth  while  to  turn
my  thoughts  (as  I  am  tempted)  towards  the  further
study  of  design  and  plastic  art,  both  after  the  ancient
and  modern  foundations,  being  able  (as  I  myself)  to
instil  by  this  means  some  further  thoughts  of  virtue
and  honesty,  and  the  love  of  liberty  and  mankind,  after
a  way  wholly  new  and  unthought  of1."  His  friends
were  always  anxious  lest  these  constant  labours  should
destroy  any  chance  he  had  of  recovery,  and  for  this
reason  he  constantly  sought  to  minimize  the  extent  and
importance  of  his  work.  "  As  I  once  told  my  cousin
Mick,"  he  writes,  October  nth,  1712,  to  Sir  John
Cropley,  "  very  emphatically,  'tis  easier  to  write
Characters  than  Char-acks.  My  trifles  of  virtuosoship
are  all  I  should  entertain  you  with,  and  if  this  prove
not  entertaining  or  profiting  (I  should  hope)  some  little
moral  along  with  them.  The  mighty  treatises  [Cebes
and  Plastics]  which  you  seem  to  think  me  intent
upon  (according  to  report  from  cousin  Mick)  are
barely  two  such  poor  tracts  as  the  '  Letter '  and
'  Notion/  already  sent  through  your  heads  to  our  old
Lord.  Nor  have  I  yet  set  pen  to  paper,  or  dictated
one  word  on  either  of  these  intended  pieces,  only
noted  a  few  memorandums,  that  if  I  should  live  over
the  winter  I  might  employ  myself  a  little  during  the
following  summer2."  Doubtless  the  author  would  not
have  included  in  the  publication  of  the  book  the
early  "  memorandums  "  which  are  printed  in  this  text
under  the  'Title'  and  'Idea  of  the  Work'  and
'  Prefatory  Anticipatory  Thoughts  to  each  piece

1  Ibid.?.  503.  2  Ibid.  p.  518.


xx  INTRODUCTION

severally.'  They  throw,  however,  so  much  light  upon
the  relation  of  the  '  Characteristics '  to  the  '  Second
Characters,'  and  give  the  reader  such  intimacy  with
the  author  in  his  study,  that  it  is  believed  their  insertion
will  much  enhance  the  interest  and  value  of  the  present
work.

With  unflagging  zeal  Shaftesbury  henceforward
applied  himself  to  the  completion  of  his  literary  task.
To  Sir  John  Cropley  he  writes  in  an  unpublished
letter,  dated  November  8th,  1712  :  "I  have  promised
to  treat  him  [i.e.  Micklethwayt]  less  like  a  disciple,  and
hope  that  as  a  friend  he  will  not  find  the  same  un
easiness  in  corresponding  with  me,  especially  on  the
subjects  of  virtuosoship  and  the  new  ornaments  of  my
first  offspring  (as  I  have  called  it)  which  I  had  never  set
about  with  such  application  of  labour,  and  time  so  scarce
with  me  at  this  time  of  day,  but  for  his  importunity
and  earnest  exhortation  ever  since  I  left  England.
These  indeed  are  now  become  my  only  remaining
study.  Tho  perhaps  out  of  these  amusements  I  may
raise  something  which  may  help  still  to  recommend  my
former  offspring ;  this  being  all  I  meant  by  the  four
treatises  with  which  you  were  so  alarmed  by  my  cousin
Mick,  as  taking  them  to  be  really  four  new  philo
sophical  pieces  in  the  same  strain  with  Philol.  But
for  such  study  as  that  would  imply  I  have  (God
knows),  but  very  insufficient  health  and  strength.
Some  memoirs  and  transactions  of  affairs,  which  I  once
acted  in,  and  characters  I  well  know,  might  possibly
employ  my  pen  at  thoughtful  hours  in  the  public.
And  these  might  be  of  weight  when  I  am  dead,  tho  at
present  you  tell  me  men  laugh  at  characters  and
secrets,  and  despise  what  we  poor  writers  may  compose.
Be  it  so."  One  has  only  to  read  the  passages  in  his
letters  with  reference  to  his  now  rapidly  failing  health
to  discover  what  bravery  was  involved  in  these  final
efforts.  "  The  more  painful  my  hours  grow,"  he  writes
near  the  close  to  Micklethwayt,  January  3rd,  1713,
"and  the  fewer  I  have  to  expect  in  life,  the  faster  you


INTRODUCTION  xxi

see  I  ply  you  (and  shall  continue  to  do  so)  with  what
alone  can  give  me  amusement,  and  at  the  same  time
advance  the  principal  good  I  shall  leave  behind  me,
my  brain  offspring,  so  likely  to  make  its  way,  espoused
and  honoured  as  it  now  is  by  such  judgments  and
friends  appearing  in  its  behalf1."  Soon  after,  he  was
compelled  to  lay  down  his  pen.  His  noble  spirit
passed  away  February  i5th,  1713.  Two  centuries
from  the  period  of  its  composition  his  treatise  on
'  Plastics '  is  here  given  to  the  world  precisely  as  it
was  left2.  The  queries  in  the  text  and  the  footnotes'
will  indicate  the  various  changes  or  additions  that
would  have  been  made  in  the  final  writing  of  it  for  the
press.  These  will  be  found  to  relate  chiefly  to  appro
priate  illustrations  or  the  enlargement  of  certain  topics.
For  the  most  part  they  concern  the  form  rather  than
the  content.  It  is  therefore  safe  to  say  that  the
essential  thoughts  of  '  Plastics '  are  contained  in  the
present  publication,  for  the  first  time,  of  this  fourth
treatise  of  '  Second  Characters.'

From  the  foregoing  sketch  of  the  production  of
the  several  treatises  which  compose  '  Second  Charac
ters  '  we  turn  to  outline  briefly  their  content.  As
already  remarked  the  '  Letter  of  Design  '  addressed  to
Lord  Somers  now  assumes  its  proper  place  at  the
beginning  of  the  volume  instead  of  following  as  here
tofore  the  'Judgment  of  Hercules.'  Of  these  two
treatises  Thomas  Fowler  in  his  '  Shaftesbury  and
Hutcheson  '  regards  the  '  Letter '  as  perhaps  the  more
interesting.  It  contains  an  account  from  Shaftesbury's
own  hand  of  the  growth  and  purpose  of  his  virtuoso
work  in  Italy.  Its  inception  was  due,  it  is  said,  to  a
conversation  with  his  noble  patron,  and  its  final  aim  is
described  as  the  revival  of  art,  particularly  in  England.
The  most  striking  feature  of  it  is  an  abiding  faith  in
liberty  and  in  the  artistic  judgment  of  the  people  as  the

1  Ibid.  p.  529.

2  The  necessary  modernisation  of  the  text  and  bracketed  editorial
matter  must  be  excepted.


xxii  INTRODUCTION

true  foundation  of  any  revival  in  liberal  arts.  Persistent
efforts,  he  argues,  must  therefore  be  made,  with  the
growing  freedom,  to  secure  the  best  models,  to  seek
correct  standards,  and  to  found  academies  of  instruction,
in  order  to  create  a  cultivated  taste  in  the  general
public.

In  the  '  Notion  of  the  Historical  Draught  or
Tablature  of  the  Judgment  of  Hercules,'  Shaftesbury
delineates  for  the  benefit  of  his  painter  the  scene  in
which  Hercules  according  to  Prodicus  made  a  choice
between  the  two  goddesses  virtue  and  vice.  'He
formulates  in  it  the  rules  both  of  consistency  and  of
the  unity  of  time  for  the  correct  representation  of  such
an  event  in  a  painting.  The  position,  pose,  and  habit
of  the  principal  figures,  which  would  best  maintain  the
truth  alike  of  appearance  and  of  history  in  the  scene,
are  fully  described.  Harmony  in  the  ornamentation
is  emphasized.  In  conclusion,  a  comparison  is  made
between  the  task  of  the  painter  and  of  the  poet.  It
was  this  treatise,  doubtless  in  its  French  original  of
1712  as  well  as  in  the  German  translation1  of  1759,
that  had  such  an  important  influence  upon  aesthetics
on  the  continent  of  Europe.  According  to  Professor
Howard  not  only  does  Shaftesbury  present  here  the
fullest  treatment  of  the  '  fruitful  moment,'  before
Lessing,  but  he  was  the  first  among  all  the  writers  of
art  to  consider  "the  pictorial  value  of  the  various
moments  in  the  course  of  which  an  action  takes  place2."
He  anticipated  in  it  also,  it  is  said,  both  Diderot  and
Lessing,  in  important  rules  given  by  them  for  the
guidance  of  the  painter,  as  likewise  in  the  description
of  the  same  subject  by  literary  and  pictorial  art.

In  the  allegory  of  the  '  Tablet  of  Cebes,'  with  deceit
at  the  gateway  leading  men  astray  by  a  draught  of
ignorance  and  error,  with  fortune,  blind,  distracted,

1  In    the    Bibliothek   der   Schonen    Wissenschaften   und   der  freien
Kiinste.

2  Laokoon :    Lessing,   Herder,    Goethe.      Selections   edited    with   an
Introduction  by  William  Guild  Howard,  N.  Y.,  1910,  p.  Ixxvii.


INTRODUCTION  xxiii

and  deaf,  upon  a  round  stone,  her  gifts  being  neither
certain  nor  stable,  with  true  learning,  upon  a  firm
square  stone  as  affording  alone  a  solid  foundation
against  error,  and  with  the  way  to  true  knowledge
rough,  rocky,  and  difficult,  in  contrast  to  the  opposite
path  of  false  knowledge,  alike  easy  and  smooth,  there
are  presented  materials  which  would  have  afforded
Shaftesbury  opportunities  for  literary  and  artistic
creation  that  might  have  rivalled  those  he  found  in  the
apologue  of  '  Hercules  at  the  Cross-roads.'  "  For
here,"  writes  Diogenes  Laertius,  upon  whose  testimony
the  authorship  by  Cebes  chiefly  depends,  "  thou  hast  a
fair  prospect  and  view  of  the  life  of  man  even  from  the
cradle  to  the  grave.  In  these  few  sheets  thou  mayest
plainly  perceive  with  what  joys  and  trophies  a  religious
man  is  crowned  ;  and  on  the  contrary  with  what  scorn
and  derision,  infamy  and  punishment,  a  foolish  and
wicked  man  is  most  deservedly  treated."  The  principal
doctrines  set  forth  in  the  '  Tablet '  are  strictly  socratic.
They  embrace  the  identity  of  virtue  and  knowledge,
the  insufficiency  of  sense  knowledge  or  opinion,  and
the  advocacy  of  rigorous  definition.  If  Shaftesbury
had  lived  to  write  '  An  Appendix  concerning  the
Emblem  of  Cebes,'  it  undoubtedly  would  have  had  an
exposition  of  these  socratic  doctrines  as  he  expressly
mentions  "after  the  like  moral  parts  have  been  ex
plained,"  and  most  probably  would  also  have  included
similar  additional  rules  and  observations  upon  art  to
those  set  forth  in  the  '  Notion.'  "  Dwell  upon  the
things  that  have  been  told  you  until  they  are  habitual  "
is  an  instruction  in  art  which  in  more  than  one  instance
is  quoted  from  the  '  Cebes'  Tablet '  in  the  concluding
treatise  of  this  book.  'A^exew  /ecu  aircrew  (to  bear  and
to  forbear),  based  upon  the  familiar  words  of  Epictetus,
was  the  maxim  chosen  by  him  for  the  proposed  treatise
and  is  here  used  with  the  discovered  translation  of  the
'Emblem.'  So  constantly  is  the  'Tablet  of  Cebes'
before  his  mind,  and  so  interwoven  is  it  with  the  com
position  of  the  entire  work,  that  this  unpublished


xxiv  INTRODUCTION

translation  of  it  accompanied  by  notes  among  the
'  Shaftesbury  Papers '  is  here  inserted,  we  hope  justly,
in  lieu  of  the  unwritten  '  Appendix '  as  the  third  treatise
of  '  Second  Characters.'

'  Plastics  or  the  Original  Progress  and  Power  of
Designatory  Art '  is  the  full  title  of  the  fourth  and
concluding  treatise  of  this  book.  "  Remember  still,"
writes  Shaftesbury,  "  this  the  idea  of  the  work,  viz.
quasi,  the  vehicle  of  other  problems,  i.e.  the  precepts,
demonstrations  etc.  of  real  ethics.  But  this  hid,  not  to
be  said  except  darkly  or  pleasantly  with  raillery  upon
self,  or  some  such  indirect  way  as  in  '  Miscellany  '."
That  Shaftesbury's  theory  of  ethics  may  be  readily
transformed  into  a  theory  of  aesthetics  has  been
clearly  pointed  out  by  Prof.  Fowler  in  his  work  on
'  Shaftesbury  and  Hutcheson.'  In  the  '  Characteristics  '
there  is  presented  thefGreek  conception  that  harmony
and  proportion  are  the  ultimate  foundations  alike  of
beauty  and  of  morality.  Man  is  gifted  with  the  innate
power  to  recognise  the  beautiful  alike  in  works  of  art
and  in  moral  actions.  Such  a  sense  applied  to  external
objects  is  the  sense  of  beauty,  and  applied  to  conduct
or  disposition  is  the  moral  sense?)  Beauty  is  never  in
the  matter,  but  solely  in  the  art  or  design.  Art  is  that
which  beautifies  "  so  that  the  beautifying  not  the
beautified  is  the  really  beautiful."  In  the  early  sections
of  '  Plastics '  a  transition  is  made  from  aesthetic
theory  to  applied  art.  The  counterpart  of  '  First
Characters '  is  to  be  found  in  '  Second  Characters.'
The  former  is  speculative,  the  latter  practical.  The
'  Second  Characters '  correspond  as  it  were  to  the
underparts  of  a  drama.  And  through  these  underparts
it  is  hoped  to  support  those  higher.  Nevertheless,  it
is  added,  no  one  may  presume  to  criticise  the  '  Second
Characters '  who  is  not  already  master  in  the  First.
'  Second  Characters '  as  here  described  are  also  moral.
In  proof  thereof  numerous  quotations  from  classic
literature  are  made.  Horace's  De  Arte  Poetica  is
most  frequently  cited.  Painting  too  must  be  regarded


INTRODUCTION  xxv

as  an  imitative  art  It  presents  a  picture  and  not
reality.  Truth  in  it  is  not  so  much  a  copy  of  reality  as
of  appearance.  Its  poetic  qualities  are  best  found  in
an  historic  painting  such  as  the  '  Judgment  of  Hercules,'
where  the  passions  and  character  of  men  are  repre
sented.  In  every  designatory  work  of  art  there  is
something  which  answers  to  history  in  a  truly  poetic
work.  This  is  its  character  :  "The  characteristic  still,
the  truth,  the  historic  is  all  in  all.  The  thing  imitated,
the  thing  specified,  is  the  whole  delight,  the  secret
charm  of  the  spectacle."  All  art  thus  deals  with  the
typical,  or  in  other  words  the  ideal.

There  is  next  in  '  Plastics '  a  defence  of  the  part  /
played  by  instinct  and  natural  sagacity  as  the  source  !
of  the  idea  of  the  beautiful.  The  corruptions  of  taste  '
are  pointed  out.  In  art  as  in  real  life  a  correct  taste
must  be  cultivated.  The  absence  of  a  classic  environ
ment  and  the  substitution  of  the  artificial  for  the
natural  are  among  the  discouragements  of  modern  art.
Art  ideals  must  to-day  be  sought  chiefly  in  nature,
and  in  good  models  found  in  ancient  remains.  Among
present  encouragements  to  art,  however,  is  the  possible
training  of  the  public  eye  owing  to  the  invention  of
prints,  etching,  etc.  A  peculiar  interest  attaches  to
the  author's  criticisms  upon  ancient  and  modern
painters  owing  to  the  time  and  place  in  which  this
work  was  written.  The  toil,  study,  and  meditation
necessary  in  the  production  of  a  great  work  of  art  are
emphasized  in  his  remarks  upon  the  education  of  the
painter.  The  various  kinds  and  subjects  of  painting
are  also  discussed  at  considerable  length.  Under
the  heading  of  the  '  Revival  of  Second  Characters '
Shaftesbury  again  strikes  the  keynote  of  the  entire
treatise.  He  says  that  "politeness  always  holds  pro
portion  with  laws  and  liberty,  so  that  where  the  one  is
with  a  tolerable  progress  in  the  first  species  (viz.  ist
Characters),  the  other  (viz.  2nd  Characters)  will  soon
prevail,  and  where  it  ceases  and  tyranny  prevails,  art
and  2nd  Characters  accordingly  sink."  Invention,


xxvi  INTRODUCTION

symmetry,  colouring,  expression,  and  composition,
which  are  the  five  parts  of  painting  as  observed  by  the
ancients  and  followed  in  the  more  modern  works  of
Junius  and  Freart,  are  in  turn  discussed.  The  nature
and  value  of  perspective  in  art  form  the  underlying
theme  of  several  important  sections.  Plastic  truth  and
decorum  are  deemed  as  with  Plato  the  culminating
excellence  of  artistic  production.  The  entire  treatise
of  '  Plastics  '  confirms  the  statement  which  has  been
based  upon  the  '  Judgment  of  Hercules,'  that  there  can
be  applied  to  Shaftesbury  what  Lessing  says  of
Raphael,  "  that  he  would  have  been  the  greatest
artistic  genius  even  though  unfortunately  he  had  been
born  without  hands."

A  true  virtuoso  was  Shaftesbury.  In  the  '  Char
acteristics  '  he  himself  delights  to  draw  a  parallel
between  the  philosophers  and  the  virtuosi.  "  To
philosophize,"  he  says,  "  in  a  just  signification  is  but  to
carry  good  breeding  a  step  higher.  For  the  accom
paniment  of  breeding  is  to  learn  whatever  is  decent
in  company,  or  beautiful  in  arts ;  and  the  sum  of
philosophy.  In  this  latter  general  denomination  we
include  the  real  fine  gentleman,  the  lovers  of  art  and
ingenuity,  such  as  have  seen  the  world,  and  informed
themselves  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  several
nations  of  Europe,  searched  into  their  antiquities  and
records,  considered  their  police  laws,  and  constitutions,
observed  the  strength  and  ornaments  of  their  cities,
their  principal  arts,  studies  and  ornaments,  their
architecture,  sculpture,  painting,  music,  and  their  taste
in  poetry,  learning,  language  and  conversation."
What  is  here  described  as  the  "  sum  of  philosophy  "  in
the  artistic  realm  found  an  actual  fulfilment  in  the
closing  drama  of  Shaftesbury's  life  when  he  was  engaged
in  writing  the  'Second  Characters.'  But  the  highest
examples  of  art  belonged  as  he  believed  to  the  classical
period.  The  ancients  best  provided  the  consummate
models  in  art,  suitable  for  any  age.  That  is  one
secret  of  his  adverse  criticism  of  the  "  Gothic  "  and  the


INTRODUCTION  xxvii

modern.  The  literature  of  the  classical  authors  had
entered  too  most  deeply  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  his
life.  His  was  no  mere  imitation,  however,  of  Greek
and  Roman  thought,  for  he  was  thoroughly  original
both  in  thinking  and  writing.  Not  since  the  days  of
Plato  has  there  been  such  an  eloquent  expression  as
that  in  the  '  Characteristics1,'  of  the  true,  the  beautiful,
and  the  good.  "  What  is  beautiful  is  harmonious  and
proportionable  ;  what  is  harmonious  and  proportionable
is  true  ;  and  what  is  at  once  both  beautiful  and  true  is
of  consequence  agreeable  and  good."  Philosophy  and
aesthetics  nevertheless  meant  more  to  him  than  mere
theoretical  systems.  They  must  be  carried  over  into
the  life  of  the  community.  The  knowledge  and
practice  of  art  must  penetrate  every  province  of  public
activity.  "Where  then  is  beauty  or  harmony  to  be
found  ?  How  is  this  symmetry  to  be  discovered  and
applied  ?  Is  it  any  other  art  than  that  of  philosophy,
or  the  study  of  universal  numbers  and  proportions,
which  can  exhibit  this  in  life2  ? "  Through  '  Second
Characters  '  he  would  emphasize  the  necessity  that  the
subtle  influence  of  beauty  and  art  must  pervade  the
state  if  its  citizens  would  possess  right  ideas  and
exhibit  noble  conduct.  The  artistic  should  also  per
meate  the  whole  nature  of  the  individual.  Only  in
this  way  can  human  achievement  be  glorified.  Beauty
is  in  the  creator  and  not  in  the  created.  And  beautiful
products  of  art  best  serve  to  inspire  the  state  of  mind
which  the  original  artist  experienced  in  creating  them.
Shaftesbury  himself  indeed  was  a  great  artist,  for  his
whole  being^was  permeated  by  the  artistic  tempera
ment.  He  embodied  the  classical  ideals  in  his  own
person.  In  outward  appearance  the  painting  of
Closterman  is  a  true  portrait  of  him.  He  is  the  !
greatest  Greek  of  modern  times.  It  is  no  wonder  j
that  he  appealed  to  the  best  spirits  of  the  eighteenth  /
century.  Herder  speaks  of  him  as  the  "  virtuoso  of

\     !  Vol.  in,  p.  182.  *  ibid,  in,  p.  184.


xxviii  INTRODUCTION

humanity."  Montesquieu  says  that  "the  four  great
poets  are  Plato,  Malebranche,  Shaftesbury,  Mon
taigne."  Lessing  also  was  a  student  of  his  works
to  which  he  had  been  guided  by  the  philosopher
Mendelssohn.  Leibnitz  too  recognised  in  his  doctrines
the  similarity  to  those  he  promulgated1,  and  was
charmed  by  the  eloquence  of  his  utterance.  In  future
generations  wherever  there  is  refinement  and  true
culture  the  influence  of  this  modern  classical  philo
sopher  must  likewise  be  felt.  He  embodied  his
philosophy  in  a  life.  This  philosophy  finds  expression
in  the  personal  meditations  of  the  '  Philosophical
Regimen,'  in  the  moral  and  aesthetic  doctrines  of  the
'  Characteristics,'  and  in  the  support  given  to  this  chief
work  by  an  application  of  its  theoretical  principles  to
the  realm  of  art  in  '  Second  Characters.'

The  name  of  Shaftesbury  has  been  honoured  in  the
past  by  the  genius  and  the  services  of  three  distin
guished  members  of  this  noble  family.  The  first  Earl
was  a  great  statesman,  the  third  Earl  an  eminent
philosopher,  and  the  seventh  a  broad-minded  philan
thropist.  It  is  a  pleasure  therefore  to  dedicate  this
work  by  permission  to  the  present  Earl,  who  also
"has  proven  true  to  his  own  and  his  family  motto,

LOVE,    SERVE."

1  Their  relation  is  best  set  forth  in  Armand  Bacharach's  Shaftesbury's
Optimismus  und  sein  Verhaltnis  zum  Leibnizschen,  Thann,  1912.


BENJAMIN    RAND

HARVARD  UNIVERSITY
December,  1913


SECOND   CHARACTERS

OR

THE   LANGUAGE   OF   FORMS

IN
FOUR   TREATISES

viz.

I.  LETTER  CONCERNING  DESIGN

II.  A  NOTION  OF  THE  HISTORICAL

DRAUGHT   OF   HERCULES

III.  AN  APPENDIX  CONCERNING  THE

EMBLEM  OF  CEBES

IV.  PLASTICS,

OR  THE  ORIGINAL  PROGRESS  AND
POWER  OF  DESIGNATORY  ART


NAPLES,  April  28,  1712

d  MOTTOS  AND  DIVISIONS

ks
of  The  old  round  device  with

u  Tlavra  VTroXrjtyis

ME  REBUS1
N  (with  the  Parcae  as  in  marg.)
sequentem  ducunt  nolentem  trahuni

*ij    3

JT>  —

.2  '5  >

a'c  ^

^o

D   aJ

<u  .-
-So£

.S(*H
|4

'1

cn

'*

S    "S  y     s~

V                  £          vjk

G         o   ^      .81
*-•        *S    4>

S         j.  J3         §

S  *••       <"
oj      "9           rt
X      /<  4)       o

S    (-1           ^

-^              *^>         4>
*

A)  ^*  t*

IH  —     O

4)    C  W5
*-.    c    O  'c

lll|

w  u  §  <5
rt  o  °"  m

.£  w  g  S.

-»-

c

u

rt

'  ^

:->

*7

*"y                                         ^        O            hlf)

_s

'35

<U

T3

u

D

hi

n

-C
M

9

cS

4)           VH

in    05    O

OJ    UT3
U     '     4J
4)  -C    <L)
^2U    C

-s-S'z

C^

ITLES

v5

w

Q

O
g

F  PRODICl

CEBES

O

Jl         ^

"B'S    §

H  °£    u

in   •*   sS-8

1  s  ill  ,

o    o    .b  2^      5?

O        f—  i         <U    <"    41            o

'a,

a,

'g    <U^<

H

S

0

iv.

**•  ^  t<  U

^     5*c^  «    8

1

S

rt

U1

isSfl

D  •—   •{-!  CJ

:i|-

0
g

z,

)NCER

03

W
_)

t)

HH

o

S

W

u|  0^^

r_    jj    4;  ^  pi  ^
C/2'^.!2  ^  <J

J  Q  ^       'C   rt   c/5   (/3      C

"T     Q     "3  '*j'     E~*    "*

H

-g

«s5|

3         -rt  "S

z
D

^-/
U

u
P4

h_)

PQ

fx  aS   2

2     fc     bl4|   I

2

"3  "rt    G    3

«

&

W

S

"S  In        J5

O             "3  2j  >lc  »H    u

S

c

n  g  /s  <d
J5  <C  R

OS    3    43    <U

W
H

S

W

rt       QJ
"S"      W

o/      y  o  2  v2    «

w   g    s-s5^!f

W

0

S  C/}  •£

H

W

a!

£        >         ^  O    o   g

-*—  •

.  «

W

Z,

U-f                 ^**                                           4—1       {J          ^

S

0

r^

o     *>

2

H

^      H

-1

GENERAL  TITLE

SECOND  CHARACTERS
OR
THE  LANGUAGE  OF  FORMS

IN

FOUR  TREATISES
viz.

I.  A  LETTER  CONCERNING
DESIGN

II.  A  NOTION  OF  THE
HISTORICAL  DRAUGHT
OF  HERCULES

II.  APPENDIX  CONCERNING
THE  EMBLEM  OF  CEBES

,  PLASTICS  OR  THE  ORIGINA
PROGRESS  AND  POWER
OF  DESIGNATORY  ART

/1-gS.s    \
|9|HJ  \

Vilfx

R.


VJ     W

^  rt

w

*"O  rt

u  c

s.s

<c  §

'§•3

•2  -

g

S  s

=2    a

c  5

j^    D

%c  ^

_

1     (/)

rt  £

Ml

^  2

it)  ME  RE]
employment

rt  >-

•fl«S

.h  rt

o    •-

£?

.«•§
B

*^    0)

N-S
'>     ^,

'  Oi

</)    (/)

-      •—

"  }i
<U    "

b  o  |—  '  (fi

o,  _,  y

•-  s*s*i

Is-iB

>   tn         O

0    g    g  ^

2«  g  s

<-»-i   CB  is  "S

^ifl

||^.s

^flG
O     -   "

r,  especially

Ss

ai

a

•sc:

2>b
.S  rt

tn     S-,
O)

62

1    2

rt

*j    O   *-"
2'uK   </T

tn   rt
w     ^

""^      t/1

™     CO

13  tn
w  .

w

'^

rt

•si

O--

•Cns
'3  c
&o

£•5
8^

^U

^"fl

0   rt

•>,  8

el

5P

15  T3

6  S

«-<  >>

fe  <*

O   e

5.B

rf

&  v

8^

£w

c

T3    "1

in   ^

&CA)

'5

C  0-

"-  "

r-  .,_,

7  o

C  .Ji

O    o

4J    i)

•->

C

tn   41

S-d

3-gj

>  "

C

C    <U

"S  •£

•rt  CO

-3

..rfi

ecause  of  the  design
:treat,  banishment,  an

E'C

2s

en

al

4!  e

h  o
6J>w«j3

5j=  </>

rt  *;  fi
a^  2

£c^i
$|

'J6

J2

•a^O
C      .

rt  -Q

•c  w
8-g

as

s  «

.2  o

J3.fi

^

0)

a  j=
.2  ~
rt  rt

gT3

CC     <y

"Q,>

=  !

ff§  c  «  SSX     ^C

gS-^^pi")      ^°

25  Sll^'St!

a||ol^Ul^S

B  *  8   P  s  .d  *r  •S'o

•S_^S-  west's  «

•cf-sl^r*l«

s=Sge-:502-s<«c
•g|8,8j,gag3-2

<S'U3H|S  g»o|

in

V

1
y=

4)

j:

"o
u

JJ

r^

|

CO

X
in"    •   M

Pa.C

">   —  rt  j*

||  |l

O-  n    i-  «f

»  w


«^

t:  S,     S  I«  s  3  «  L-  "^      S  *>«d


.2   h  S

-^qo


c  _,  5-3  B  g  g.B  -  g  o  g  -  o  g  2  £^^

llfe^illPflSSll^J

^  s.||  ;j  g,sg»^.s  o  |6.a|  g-a-3


1§
1-

p    (U


§:


K

tn  ~


-v  c


•*

-.2'5owg  rt^  2  "


--'  --

S  g  2  ^.^S


O


'^^^•5-^1^
i>  K  g     -,  M  o

<"  -^    b    *i    u   OT     •

•  j  a  2  ^  e  c  "O

i|8:||l

H>81S^?!


-^


»-       »*      S     4-1      <O       —

S2  g  8  o  >-S  c

<C  ^    OJ'C  J«


•*  tl  G

vc  >-  5-c  -3

^   R  CO  rt   m
H  ^4       _ J


_c  "S  -g  '£


tn  Ji    t)   >>>*.  -O

rt  -S  u  ^  O  c

^fiSst

I^Sjii,

S  E2  §'5>SB

S'^Bi!

<*-    rt  C  -5    W

O    ,u    be  oj  •-  J3    ^

4;    1-.    CT    -    """


'§»^g'5


^^<u
^  «»  C


PREFACE

OF  the  accidental  origin  and  general  growth  of
the  following  tracts,  as  well  as  of  their  corre
sponding  with  the  general  title  which  is  given  them,  the
reader  will  soon  be  resolved  and  best  informed  as  he
proceeds.  If  our  author,  who  treated  formerly  of
CHARACTERS  in  a  higher  sense,  should  by  this  latter
manner  appear  to  have  lost  somewhat  of  the  rank  he
had  amidst  the  order  of  writers,  this  will  be  of  small
concern  to  him.  It  is  sufficient  honour  if  by  these
SECOND  CHARACTERS,  or  under-parts,  he  can  be  able
in  the  least  degree  to  support  those  higher,  which  he
once  sustained  in  behalf  of  the  chief  concerns  and
interests  of  mankind.  The  subjects  which  he  here
treats  are  presumed  (he  knows)  to  relate  no  further
than  to  the  ordinary  pleasures  and  diversions  of  the
fashionable  world.  But  however  they  may  have  been
rated  ;  if  our  author  should  by  good  fortune  have  been
able  to  render  them  more  speculative,  or  in  reality
more  suitable  to  a  taste  and  judgment  than  they  have
hitherto  passed  in  the  world,  he  may  have  reason
perhaps  to  be  satisfied  with  his  attempt.  He  may
count  it  his  happiness  that  whilst  even  he  afforded


4  SECOND   CHARACTERS

himself  these  entertainments  for  his  own  sake  he  could
even  in  retirement  find  means  to  share  them  still  with
others,  and  serve  the  polite  world  and  better  sort  in
those  pleasures  and  diversions  which  they  are  some
times  at  a  loss  how  to  defend  against  the  formal
censors  of  the  age.

"  That  the  writings  to  which  the  author  refers  are
perfect,  or  (as  they  ought  to  be)  correct...  is  what  he
no  way  pretends.  But  that  he  has  endeavoured  to
make  them  such  by  elaborate  care  and  study  he  readily
professes  ;  far  contrary  to  that  humour  so  generally
affected  of  writing  negligently  and  in  such  a  manner
as  might  easily  admit  of  alteration  and  improvement
by  the  same  hand.  And  this  profession  ('tis  plain)
gives  him  (a  modern)  the  same  right  as  ancient1  poets
and  prose  authors  had  of  saying  the  very  same  things
over  when  occasion  offered  in  the  selfsame  words2."


IDEA   OF    THE    WORK

[A.  PREFACES.]  Again  before  the  great  Treatise
remember  a  like  small  preface,  or  preliminary  lines  of
introduction,  To  my  Lord  *** :  that  excuse  may  be
renewed,  the  ridicule  again  anticipated  ;  the  moralist
or  grave  author  vindicated  and  reader  prepossessed  ;
and  that  the  address  afterwards  may  be  more  general,
not  always  particular  to  that  Lord  :  the  piece  being
too  large  and  too  formal  for  a  letter.  Accordingly
begin  thus  (from  the  first  words  of  the  Letter  of
Design) :  "  You  may  remember  my  Lord,  I  began
this  research  by  calling  painting  a  vulgar  science.
Now  you  see  it  is  come  so  far  and  I  have  so  deeply
engaged  that  I  am  about  to  show  this  to  be  far  from  a
vulgar  or  low  science."

1  Such  as  Homer  and  Xenophon.

2  Now  remember  this,  viz.  Resolved  that  it  would  be  better  (after  this
early  apology  in  the  Preface)  on  no  account  (except  by  necessary  illus
tration)   to  refer  by   figures   or   numbers   to  the   passages  of  Char-ks
rehearsed.     Italic  characters  or  guillemets  will  be  sufficient  distinction.


IDEA   OF   THE   WORK  5

Upon  mature  thought,  (from  consideration  of  the
necessary  repetition  of  the  ego1  in  cases  of  master's
hands,  and  what  seen  and  observed  in  Italy,  as  also
of  the  easy  pleasant  narrative  manner),  resolved  to
address  wholly,  or  at  least  principally,  and  in  a  con
tinued  strain  at  the  head  of  each  great  division,  to  the
friend-Lord,  My  Lord  *  *  as  Letter  of  Enthusiasm
and  that  of  Design  (the  leading  treatise  of  this  work).
And  thus  every  new  part  or  chapter  will  have  a  kind
of  preface,  or  renewal  of  the  address  and  epistolary2
style  (My  Lord,  etc.).  And  therefore  the  Treatise
itself  should  be  entitled  epistolary  as  giving  warning  of
this  mixed  manner,  viz.  half-general  address,  but
(begging  the  public's  pardon)  more  than  one  half  to
the  friend,  the  Lord,  etc.  Accordingly  it  will  be  a
new  and  not  odd  or  unseemly  way  to  begin  each  great
division  as  Book  or  Part  (but  rather  Part,  indeed,  since
Books  would  be  too  formal  to  divide  into  and  contrary
to  the  epistolary  idea),  to  begin  I  say  each  Part  with
the  title,  My  Lord,  set  (as  at  the  beginning  of  the
Letter  of  Enthusiasm  and  every  other  Letter)  a  little
way  below  the  contents.  And  for  the  subdivisions,
and  mere  chapters  or  sections,  these  may  begin  not
directly  with  the  title  but  taking  it  in,  (as  the  newer
and  more  fashionable  way  is,  in  familiar  letters),  in
directly  and  curiously,  in  the  first  sentence  or  period
after  a  word  or  two,  (as  "Would  one  imagine3  My
Lord  "  etc.).  And  thus  the  division  and  subdivision
will  be  agreeable,  distinguished,  and  in  the  composition
of  the  writing  and  style.  I  shall  myself  be  thus  forced
to  observe  a  right  rule,  viz.  :  "  To  begin  each  Part
with  a  deeper  breath,  distinguishably  from  the  sub
altern  sallies  or  excursions  in  the  mere  sections  into
which  the  main  parts  are  divided."

(i)  Of  this  explanation  of  Second  Characters  and
reasons  at  large  see  below,  p.  94,  in  Characters,  etc.

1  Infra,  p.  8.  2  Supra,  p.  I.

3  Or,  "  It  may  be  objected  my  Lord,"  etc.     See  such  an  objection  as
this  :  fit  for  the  beginning  of  a  pretty  early  subdivision,  infra,  p.  15.


6  SECOND   CHARACTERS

(2)  Also  apology1  for  self-citation2,  and  references
so  frequent  to  Notion,  Letter,  and  to  Characteristics.
Light  and  instruction  being  aimed  at,  and  the  shortest
way  the  best.     This  best  too  for  inculcating  the  great
maxims  as  from  certain  postulates,  axioms,  etc.

(3)  Motto  or  device  of  last  treatise  o  TL  KaXbv
cf>L\ov  dei      Euripides'  Bacch.  88 1.

(4)  Advertisement  at  the  beginning  of  all,  wishing
the  reader  (if  he  would  read  in  earnest)  to  observe  the
reference  marks  :  as  Tr.  (for  treatise),  c  (for  chapter),
or  p  (for  paragraphs).     The  capital  figures  after  Tr. ;
small  ones  after  c  and   p,   and  for  the   notes  of  the
chapters  or  paragraphs  the  Greek  characters  a,  y8,  y,  §.
In  this  advertisement  also  warning  of  words,  phrases
(see   Dictionary3),  and  references  to  the  indexes  and
explanations  at  the  end  of  the  work.

(5)  Running  titles,  viz.  :  The  Letter  concerning
Design,  The  Hercules  of  Prodicus,  Emblem4  of  Cebes.
And  for  the  title  of  the  fourth  and  last  work  (viz.  the
great  one)  Plastic  Art5.

Let  it  be  perhaps  after  the  idea  of  nodes  atticae,
evening  conversations,  hours,  virtuoso-amusement,
plastic-entertainments.  Deliciae  elegantiae  artis.

(6)  The  print  (when  all  the  four  together)  to  be
the  same,  but  letters  set  a  little  closer  than  in  Char-cks,
for  room  (much  wanting)  as  well  as  beauty,   if  they
will  be  exact  in   setting.     The  text  margin   to   have
only  hands  and  notes  and  references.      But  the  margin
of  the  notes  to  have  note  upon  note  :  as  Monsr  Bayle.

[B.  STYLE.]  Remember  still,  this  the  idea  of  the
work,  viz.  :  Quasi.  The  vehicle  of  other  problems,
i.e.  the  precepts,  demonstrations,  etc.  of  real  ethics.
But  this  hid  :  not  to  be  said  except  darkly  or  pleasantly
with  raillery  upon  self ;  or  some  such  indirect  way  as
in  Miscellany.

Of  this  deviation,  transfer,  transition,  or  tralation

1  Supra,  p.  4.  2  jnfra,  p.  12.

3  Infra,  p.  179.  *  Viz.  Appendix.     Supra,  p.  xviii.

5  Supra,  p.  xviii.


IDEA   OF    THE   WORK  7

in  favour  of  the  TO  /ca\6>  of  the  chief  species  see
example  below  p.  142  near  the  end:  "Accordingly
the  proficient "  etc.'

Continuance  of  manner  and  style  of  Miscellanys,
anticipation  raillery1  etc.

And  since  dialogue-manner  (whether  diverse  or
recitative)  too  ponderous  and  vast ;  endeavour  though
in  the  letter-style  and  particular  private  address,  (as
O  Theophilus !  My  Lord  or  Reader !),  to  introduce
scenes  and  machines  of  this  sort  in  many  a  chapter
and  everywhere  in  general,  as  much  as  possible  in  way
of  apostrophe  and  prosopope.

[C.  INDEXES.]  (i)  After  finis  an  index  with  this
previous  N.B.  viz.  "That  the  words  marked  with  an
asterisk  are  such  as  have  a  further  explanation  in  the
volumes  entitled  Charact-cks,  and  may  be  sought  in
the  index  belonging  to  those  volumes."

(2)  After  this  and  the  index  make  a  column  with
this  title  :  "  Places  of  the  volumes  entitled  '  Character
istics  '  explained  or  defended  in  this  volume  or  '  Second
Characters.' "

(3)  After  this  again  in  small  print  and  in  coarse,
according  to  the  pages  of  the  book,  page  after  page,
comprise  all  the  translations  of  Greek,  Latin,  French,
Italian,  with  prefatory  excuse  in  a  word  or  two:  "as
serving  either  for  such  artists  in  a  modern  way  as  are
not  scholars  in  the  ancient,  or  for  such  scholars  in  the
learned  and  ancient  way  as  are  not  acquainted  with
the  foreign  modern  tongues,  viz.  Italian  or  French."

(4)  To   have  several   indicatory    small    pointing
hands  (besides  asterisks,  daggers,  etc.)  wrought  and
cast  by  a  good  workman  :  that  both  for  right  and  left
margin  there  may  be  enough  to  serve  for  the  maxims
of  the  art,  which  alone  are  to  be  thus  marked,  as  must
be  explained  to  the  reader  in  the  advertisement  already
mentioned2.

(5)  Also  a  kind  of  prefatory  dictionary3  of  terms
of  art,  or  new  coined  (with  apology),  after  the  manner

1  Infra,  p.  140.  2  Supra,  (4)  p.  6.  3  Infra,  p.  179.


8  SECOND   CHARACTERS

of  Monsieur  Freart  de  Chambray1,  but  in  the  reverse
of  his  insolent  way.

(6)  An  index  of  the  names  of  authors  cited,  and
their  edition,  year,  etc.,  e.g.  Junius  (Diet,  de  pictura
veterum,  etc.),  that  in  the  body  of  the  treatise,  and
even  in  the  mere  notes,  or  margin  of  the  notes,
(according  to  Mr  Bayle  re-iterare  citations),  there  may
be  no  need  of  more  than  the  word  Junius.

[D.  NOTES.]  (i)  Observe  in  the  notes  under
the  text  to  speak  always  (without  once  failing)  in  the
style  of  we,  us,  and  our,  for  /,  me,  and  mine.  Also  the
author  and  the  authors,  keeping  the  /  and  me  for  the
text :  which  the  epistolary  address  may  excuse.

Yet  even  here  remember  to  use  it  as  little  as
possible  :  and  to  substitute  in  its  room,  the  fashionable
one,  from  the  French  on,  viz.  on  solitude,  on  voudroit,
on  est  bien  aise.  The  free  use  of  the  ego  or  /  will  be
best  near  the  beginning  of  each  head  or  division,  part,
or  chapter,  where  the  epistolary  address  is  renewed
and  fresh  in  the  ear.

Observe  also  that  if  the  Letter  and  Notion  be  first
printed  (as  the  case  was  with  Char-cks),  and  afterwards
the  whole  together  under  the  answerable  general  title
of  Second  Characters  ;  in  this  case,  for  better  pro
portion's  sake  and  uniformity  of  the  print,  many  more
notes  may  be  taken  into  the  Letter,  Notion,  and
Emblem,  and  such  thrown  off  from  the  last  treatise,
(Plasticks)  as  may  best  ease  that  full  page,  which  will
be  still  the  more  eased  in  double  and  triple  proportion
by  referring  from  thence  hither.

(2)  A  rule,  viz.  :  Nothing  in  the  text  but  what
shall  be  of  easy,  smooth,  and  polite  reading,  without
seeming  difficulty,  or  hard  study  ;  so  that  the  better
and  gentler  rank  of  painters  and  artists,  the  ladies,
beaux,  courtly  gentlemen,  and  more  refined  sort  of
country  and  town  wits,  and  notable  talkers  may  com
prehend,  or  be  persuaded  that  they  comprehend,  what

1  [Cf.  Roland  Freart,  Sieur  de  Cambray's  An  idea  of  the  Perfection  of
Painting.     Translated  by  J.  Evelyn.     Lond.  1668.     Adv.]


IDEA   OF   THE    WORK  9

is  there  written  in  the  text.  All  besides,  (viz.  the
Greek,  Latin,  Italian,  and  French  terms  of  art,
criticisms,  and  more  learned  remarks,  or  clearings,  on
history,  nature,  philosophy,  and  the  places  of  Char-cks),
to  be  reserved  for  notes,  of  which  the  easiest  may  be
distinguished  from  the  rest  (as  Mr  Coste  has  done  the
hardest  in  his  translated  Hiero)  by  a  particular  kind  of
character  or  form.  The  notes  which  are  to  have  the
hands  (as  in  paragraph  .(4)  just  above)  being  to  pass  as
among  the  harder  sort,  fit  only  for  the  critic,  the  real
virtuoso,  or  philosopher.

(3)  In  the  fourth  and  great  piece  (viz.  after  Letter
of  Design,  The  Hercules  of  Prodicus,  and  The
Appendix,  or  Emblem  of  Cebes)  remember  somewhere
in  the  beginning  of  some  chapter  near  the  beginning
of  the  treatise  to  prepare  and  give  notice  of  the
frequent  references  to  the  Notion,  etc.  :  that  being
practical,  this  speculative  ;  that  proof  and  fact,  this
descant  and  remark.  So  reference  and  recourse
thither  by  citation,  as  to  axioms  or  postulates,  demon
strations,  etc.

[E.  HEADS.]  (i)  Not  too  frequent  in  the  divi
sion  of  heads,  e.g.  The  five  parts  in  general  and  the
five  particular  to  be  in  one  chapter,  together  with
anticipation-article  and  ridicule  of  usual  parallels  run
between  the  two  arts1.  All  this  chapter  in  one  head.

(2)  To  twist,  as  it  were,  and  interweave  morality
with  plasticks,  that  supreme  beauty  with  this  subaltern  ;
those  high  and  severe  maxims  with  these  curious  and
severe  in  their  kind.

Thus  the  Notion  and  Prodicus  piece,  in  the  same
original  view  as  recited  by  Socrates  and  recorded  by
Xenophon  (no  ill-grounded  design  or  abuse,  but  the
stratagem  and  original)  by  the  absolute  opposition  of
pleasure  to  virtue,  and  the  secret  anti- Epicurean  view
running  through  the  whole.

NOTE.  This  may  be  said  introductorily  in  the
beginning  of  some  chapter  and  confessed  pleasantly

1  Infra,  p.  140.


io  SECOND   CHARACTERS

and  with  raillery.  Though  with  this  artifice,  that  in
this  very  chapter  where  warning  is  given  there  should
be  less  doctrine,  depth  of  morals,  or  learning  dis
covered,  only  a  small  show  or  pattern  of  it  ;  which  the
reader  with  little  study  may  discover  and  applaud
himself  for  it,  believing  the  rest  easy.  So  that  it  is  in
the  next  following  chapters  that  the  maxims,  or  deep
precepts,  theorems,  etc.  may  be  couched,  and  so  de
livered,  that  what  surpasses  the  ignorant  reader  may
pass  him  by,  without  reproaching  him  his  defect,  or
frightening  him  with  the  supposed  profoundness  of  the
sense  or  reading.

Hence  maxims1  and  citations2  to  be  employed
according  to  the  heads.

(3)  In  this  view  examine  and  recollect  sometimes
in  seriousness  the  'Acr/af/xara3,  old  and  new,  with  the
chapters  of  the  divine  man,  particularly  what  is  said
in  the  old  about  the  reXos,  end,  and  in  the  new  on
the  TO  KaXov.  Also  Sensus  Communis4.  Effect  of
poetic  (and  so  plastic)  art,  viz.  and  "in  vocal  measures
of  syllables  and  sounds,  to  express  the  harmony  and
numbers  of  an  inward  kind5."  And  follows  next  page,
viz.  :  "that  what  we  most  admired  even  in  the  turn
of  outward  features,  was  but  a  mysterious  expression
of  something  inward6"  etc.  Also  a  little  below  again
of  the  same  Treatise  :  "  For  all  beauty  is  truth7."  The
TO  evcrvvoTTTov*,  with  all  that  follows  in  that  remarkable
virtuoso-place  of  maxims,  which  must  be  in  part  or
whole  copied  and  commented  at  large  in  Second
Characters,  showing  the  dependency  of  the  first  on
second,  i.e.  of  '  Characteristics '  on  this  new  Treatise,
and  vice  versa.

[F.  CITATIONS.]  (i)  Citations  of  moderns.  This
work  quatenus  poetical  (as  plastical,  pictorial),  may

1  Infra,  p.  153.  2  Infra,  p.  170.

3  [Cf.  Shaftesbury's  Life,  Letters,  and  Philosophical  Regimen,  edited
by  Benjamin  Rand,  Lond.  1900,  pp.  1-272.]

4  Cf.  Shaftesbury's  Characteristics,  Lond.  1790,  I.

5  Ibid.  p.  137.  e  /£,•£  p    I38-
7  Ibid.  p.  142.                                   s  Ibid.  p.  143.


IDEA   OF   THE   WORK  u

take  in,  especially  in  the  notes,  many  of  our  best
English  poets  in  citations,  the  moderns  who  are  friends
for  liberty,  as  Rowe,  Congreve  (though  the  latter  too
immoral  in  his  comedy),  and  Dryden  (with  the  same
rebuke)  for  equity,  and  on  account  of  his  assisted
translation  (by  my  old  friend  Moyle,  whom  he  names
in  his  preface)  of  Virgil's  two  philosophical,  theistical,
hypothesis-passages  :  viz.  his  bees  in  the  '  Georgics,'
Esse  apibus  partem  divinae  mentis^,  etc.  ;  and  his
Sixth  '  Aeneid,'  Spiritus  intus  alit*,  etc.  To  which  if
as  well  done  by  that  translator  add  (for  equity's  sake
also  on  the  atheist's  side)  the  song  of  Silenus3.

N.B.  Search  Mr  Rowe's  'Tamerlane'  for  any
good  moral  lines. ..Also  Philips'4  'Cyder,'  the  praises
of  honesty,  etc.,  whom  we  would  name  with  praise,  but
for  his  sottish  life,  gross  flattery  to  his  patrons,  and
consequent  slavish  principles.  Also  Lord  Landsdown
(when  Mr  Granville)  not  naming :  his  ecstasy  on
honesty  in  one  of  Jacob  Tonson's  '  Miscellany  Poems.'
"  And  what  there  ?  Take  a  place  at  court."  Betray
country.  Be  a  Frenchman,  anything.  This  last
abated.  No  personal  invective.  Also  a  rule  in  this
place  :  Not  cite  a  prose  author.  Else  why  not  preface
to  Aur  of  Denmark  and  other  friends.

(2)  On  all  occasions  of  citations  of  classic  authors
(the  poets  especially)  make  it  a  rule  to  consult  the  old
editions  and  best  commentators  to  make  sure  of  the
right  text,  orthography  and  interpretation.  As  also

1  Georgics,  IV.  220.  2  Aeneid,  vi.  726.

3  The  sixth  pastoral  in  Dryden's  translation  of  Virgil.

4  The  new  Mr  Philips,  author  of  the  pretty  lines  in  the  letter  of  the
Frost  from  Copenhagen,  and  since  author  of  a  tragedy  Andromache
(which  remember  to  look  over  together  with  Racine's  and  the  ancients).
Also   author  of  pastorals,    whence  called  "The  Happy  Swain."      The
Tragedy  of  Andromache  is  entitled  "The  Distress!  Mother."     And  who
seemed  taken  with  Char-cks  in  letter  from  Sir  N  to  my  W-  of  21  March
1712.

[John  Philips  (1679-1709)  mentioned  in  the  text  wrote  the  '  Cyder'  in

imitation  of  Virgil's  Georgics  ;  and  Ambrose  Philips  (i675?-i749)  called

The  new'  in  the  note  wrote  the  'Epistle  to  the  Earl  of  Dorset,'  dated

Copenhagen,   9  March,  1709,  as   also  'Pastorals'  and  'The  Distress!

Mother.']


12  SECOND   CHARACTERS

to  discover  (what  may  sometimes  prove  very  happy)
the  parallel  places  of  other  authors.

(3)  Liberty  of  self-citation1.  The  use  of  the  ego
banished  in  all  but  the  epistolary  kind  (viz.  in  the
Inquiry  and  in  Hercules  and  Cebes).  "  For  who
am  I  ?2"  i.e.  forsooth,  referring  to  the  author's  name,
title,  (reverend,  honourable,)  and  picture  in  the  front,
and  title-page,  with  the  testimonial,  enconiums,  verses,
prefacing  self-adornments,  and  dressing.  And  even
the  we,  us,  ours,  never  used  but  in  a  sense3  as  it  were,
taking  in  the  reader,  cooperating  with  the  writer,  and
discovering,  investigating,  as  a  party  himself4.

PREFATORY  ANTICIPATORY  THOUGHTS,

BELONGING    TO    EACH    PIECE    SEVERALLY

(i)  In  some  of  the  early  divisions  raise  the
objection  of  luxury  and  expense  encouraged  in  the
great  and  consequently  too  in  the  little  according  to
Esop's  and  Horace's  Fables  so  unto  themselves.
But  first  a  compromise,  a  compounding,  a  less  for  a
greater  and  worse.  A  taking  off  from  play,  equipage,
riot  and  feast,  nay  even  from  building ;  and  in  the
next  place  when  the  extravagance  is  committed,  and
the  res,  the  patrimony  hurt,  (of  which  speak  seriously
as  the  way  to  knavery,  court  dependence,  etc.  in  the
gentlemen),  all  may  be  retrieved,  and  upon  a  new  turn
of  business  with  a  good  air  disposed  of,  and  with  good
advantage  and  increase  of  the  principal,  if  such  rules

1  So  in  particular  and  principally  in  respect  of  the  new  volume  of
Second  Characters.      See   Char-cks,  Vol.  I,  viz.    in    Soliloquy,    p.    333.
Apology  for  present  recourse  to  the  rules  of  artists,  painters,  statuaries,
the  best  masters,  etc.

2  This  mentioned  for  the  sake  of  other  future  authors,  who  may  write
on  other  kinds,  and  greater  compositions  (poem  and  discourse),  improving
still  our  language,  and  raising  our  ear,  taste,  correctness,  etc.

3  Otherwise    the   repeated   use   of  we   makes   the   selfishness  more
ridiculously,  as  may  be  easily  observed  in  Dr  Davenant,  and  exalts  the
author  to  the  style  and  language  of  royalty.

4  This  may,  in  one  of  the  after-appendices,  advertisements,  indexes,
mentioned  above,  p.  7,  be  inserted  as  a  remark  on  style,  together  with
the  other  laws  of  correctness  imposed  by  the  author  on  himself.


13

as  these  are  followed  and  not  fancy.  For  this  is
worthy  observation  that  though  we  scarce  see  a  man
whose  fancy  agrees  with  another  in  the  many  hands
and  paintings ;  yet  in  general  when  the  Cabal  is  over,
for  this  must  be  excepted  (as  in  Poussin's  case  in
France  and  Domenichino  at  Naples),  the  public  always
judges  right,  and  the  pieces  esteemed  or  disesteemed
after  a  time  and  a  course  of  some  years  are  always
exactly  esteemed  according  to  their  proportion  of
worth  by  these  rules  and  studies,  so  that  the  gentleman
who  follows  lies  and  caprice  may  undo  himself.  But
he  who  either  fixes  his  taste  or  brief  according  to  the
universal  judgment  and  public  taste  and  confession  of
painters  in  works  of  the  deceased  will  never  be  abused
or  come  off  a  sufferer  when  he  parts  with  his  effects.

In  one  of  the  exordiums  or  preface-addresses  to
my  Lord  ***  of  the  earliest  chapters  must  be  repre
sented  by  way  of  apology  at  being  led  hither  insensibly
by  his  Lordship's  desire1,  the  time,  (the  times),  place,
conversation,  circumstance  of  health,  and  the  amuse
ments  of  Hercules,  Cebes,  etc.  in  paint  (and  thence
Letter,  Notion)  ;  that  having  formerly  and  at  first
applied  only  as  others  by  mere  taste  not  judgment  or
speculation,  resolved  (being  invited  to  the  exercise)  to
dissect  the/£  ne  sais  quoi,  etc.

(2)  "  He  and  he  only,"  (upon  the  tone  of  the
Moralists  near  the  end),  the  undique  tutus  [everywhere
secure]  and  recalcitrator  ;  "  He  only  can  ridicule,"  and
without  ridicule  greater  on  himself  (as  in  Essay  on
Raillery,  etc.)  can  despise  and  rally  virtuosos,  who  is
himself  the  great  virtuoso,  sage,  philosopher,  self-
measurer,  self-examiner,  critic,  student  and  pursuer  of
beauty,  architect  (as  in  The  Moralists),  plastic,  in
amorato,  etc.  (as  in  Moralists,  not  so  near  the  end,
viz.  Enthusiasm  vindicated)  of  the  highest  order  and
in  the  first  species  and  primary  characters.  None
presume  to  laugh  at  Second  Characters,  being  not

1  Infra,  p.  23.


i4  SECOND   CHARACTERS

masters  in  first.  This  in  answer  to  the  pretended
moralist,  philosopher,  grave  censurer,  and  affected
ignorant  despiser  of  these  studies.

(3)  He  who  studies  and  breaks  through  the  shell
must  see  some  way  into  the  kernel.     Other  rules  of
physiognomy  false  ;    but   motion  of  the  passions  and
the  traces  which  they  make  and  leave,  this  true.     And
hence  the  solution  of  the  truth  whatever  there  is  in
physiognomy,  except  merely  imbecility,   idiotism,  de
formed  organs  and  consequent  obstructions,   etc.

(4)  Remember  somewhere   early   in  the   explan
atory  parts   to   apologise    for   using  painter's  vulgar
terms,  though  coarsely  and  improperly  :    but  to  this
Horace's  usus.

(5)  And  that  as  to  painters,  though  not  so  abso
lutely  the  chief  artists,  not    raised    above    statuarys,
(were  there  any  truly  worthy  of  that  name  in  this  age,
or  since  the  ancients),  yet  their  name  always  for  short
ness  and  clearness  made  use  of  for  all  plastic  artists
and  their  art,  for  all  plastic  art  and  architecture  itself,
as  far  as  architecture  relates  to  drawing  and  design  on
which  indeed  it  fundamentally  relies.

(6)  Also   at   the   very  entrance    apology  to    my
Lord  **  *  for  the  poetic  style,  alluding  to  what  said  to
him  in  the  correspondent  first  Letter  of  Enthusiasm  at
the  beginning.

(7)  Also,  early,  or  at  least   in  some  of  the  first
heads,  declarations  and  raillery  against  affected  French
and  Italian  terms  ;  as  far  as  possible  without  affectation
on  the  other  side  against  what  is  established  and  has
already  gained1.

(8)  Also  a  kind  of  playing  on  the  word  Second
Characters,  as  second  parts  in  drama,  secondary  under-
parts.       The   author   reduced    to    this,    excluded    the
higher  :   content  in  lower,  always  something  towards,
etc.,  Ka\6v,  $l\ov,  etc.     This  according  to  the  tone  of
the  Letter  of  Design2.

1  Dictionary,  infra,  p.  179  2  Infra,  p.  18.


PREFATORY   THOUGHTS  15

Premise  and  distinguish  between  the  worthy  to  be
criticised,  and  the  unworthy  to  be  named.  Of  the
former  sort,  (among  authors),  Fontenel1,  (among
painters),  Rubens,  Le  Brun,  scarce  a  French  painter
besides,  not  reckoning  Poussin2,  a  naturalized  Roman,
really  naturalized,  after  having  been  bred  up  there  and
being  invited  back  to  France  and  caballed  against  fled
to  Rome  with  detestation  of  his  country,  which  made
him  and  Salvator  Rosa  (as  I  have  been  assured  by
the  old  virtuosos  and  painters  there)  so  good  friends  :
the  latter  being  a  malcontent  Neapolitan  dissatisfied
with  his  countrymen  as  his  satires  show.  Both  these
by  the  way  were  honest  moral  men,  the  latter  over-
soured  and  mortal  enemy  of  the  priests,  who  had
nothing  to  take  advantage  of  against  him  besides  the
supposed  familiarity  he  had  with  his  woman-servant,
on  which  account  he  married  her.

Also  Pietro  da  Cortona,  Jordano3,  Spaniolet4
hardly  :  a  villain  and  like  his  work,  ill  usage  of  poor
Domenichino.

Remember  as  a  principal  and  pretty  early  apology
this  viz.  :  objection  against  a  great  man's  or  a  philo
sopher's  waiting  upon  such  slight  subjects  as  statues,
pictures,  etc.  "  For  no  such  precedent  of  old."
Answer :  "  though  Plutarch,  etc.,  not  directly  ;  or
though  Pliny  and  Pausanias,  etc.,  who  have  not  written
direct,  were  to  pass  as  nothing ;  let  this  be  con
sidered  that  the  great  artists  (like  the  great  generals  :
Xenophon,  Caesar,)  could  write  and  did  so  for  them
selves*."  But  now  on  the  contrary,  illiterate,  vulgar,

1  Infra,  p.  159.

2  Such  is  the  excellent  Nicolo  Poussin  in  both  parts  of  history  and
perspective,   and   such   in   the   latter   is  his   Italian  brother-in-law  and
disciple  Caspar,  who  borrowed  of  him  his  surname,  that  they  are  harder
to  be  censured  in  their  best  works  than  even  a  Raphael,  a  Titian,  or  a
Carache.     And  had  the  times  or  his  own  nation  given  encouragement  to
Nicolo  to  pursue  the  great,  full,  and  true  manner  (not  the  little  and  false
for  cabinets,  and  to  please  the  delicate)  he  had  been  perhaps  the  greatest
of  moderns  by  far.

3  Infra,  p.  132.  4  Infra,  p.  133.

6  And  so  needed  not  that  other  philosophers  and  wits  should  take  the
province.


16  SECOND   CHARACTERS

scarce  sober,  and  in  their  wits.  No  liberal  education,
philosophy,  or  learning.  Mere  mechanics.  If  hit
right,  by  example,  by  rote  :  no  reason  to  give  for  it.
Hear  their  common  talk  !  "  Give  me  nature,  "  says
one  ;  "  nothing  like  nature."  Then  porters  and  whores
called  to  sit,  or  wives  (as  Rubens')  painted  over  and
over,  dully  and  insipidly.  Here  the  Academy-genius,
and  mere  Academicists  as  now  called  according  to
modern  institution.  At  this  the  ablest  and  noblest
genius  of  a  painter  laughs  or  spurns,  and  justly.  But
what  says  he  for  himself?  "  Nature  is  out."  "  Nature
must  be  mended."  "  Nature  is  poor,  imperfect,  short."
And  what  says  the  pedant  author  (Freart1),  and  the
other  writer  Bosse,  etc.  Forsooth  :  "  We  must  not
design  in  perspective  as  we  see  things,  but  as  we  ought
to  see  them."  This  is  a  weak  aim  at  good  sense,  but
by  them  made  mere  nonsense.

Memorandum.  To  premise,  as  an  observation  on
the  usefulness  of  the  treatise  (modestly  insinuated)  the
knowledge  of  men  and  manners  even  in  the  vulgar
characters  and  lives  of  the  plastics  or  artists,  modern
as  well  as  ancient,  chiefly  modern,  so  well  remem
bered  and  told  in  stories,  fresh  and  attested  without
interest  or  design  to  vary,  add,  or  impose.  And  in
this  respect  observe  "how  the  works  and  characters
of  the  masters  correspond  to  their  own  proper  and
personal  characters,  legible  from  their  artificial  second
characters,  i.e.  their  works."

1  Concerning  Monr  Freart  de  Chambray,  see  also  and  note  there  what
he  says  of  Raphael,  in  his  'Massacre  of  the  Innocents,'  infra,  p.  132
and  p.  167.


TREATISE    I
A

LETTER

CONCERNING   THE

ART,    OR    SCIENCE

OF

DESIGN

To    MY    LORD    *  *  *  *

Ante  omnia  Mus<e.


Virg.   Georg.  Lib.  ii.


Printed  first  in  the  Year  M.DCC.XXXII.


R.


T


A

LETTER  1

CONCERNING

DESIGN  j

MY  LORD,
HIS  letter  comes  to  your  Lordship,  accompanied


with  a  small  writing  intitled  A  Notion:  for  such

alone  can  that  piece  deservedly  be  called,  which  aspires
no  higher  than  to  the  forming  of  a  project,  and  that  too
in  so  vulgar  a  science  as  painting.  But  whatever  the
subject  'be,  if  it  can  prove  any  way  entertaining  to  you,
it  will  sufficiently  answer  my  design.  And  if  possibly
it  may  have  that  good  success,  I  should  have  no  ordinary
opinion  of  my  project;  since  I  know  how  hard  it  would
be  to  give  your  Lordship  a  real  entertainment  of  any
thing  which  was  not  in  some  respect  worthy  and  useful.
On  this  account  I  must,  by  way  of  prevention,
inform  your  Lordship,  that  after  I  had  conceived  my
Notion  such  as  you  see  it  upon  paper,  I  was  not  con
tented  with  this,  but  fell  directly  to  work;  and  by  the
hand  of  a  master-painter  brought  it  into  practice,  and
formed  a  real  design.  This  was  not  enough.  I  resolved
afterwards  to  see  what  effect  it  would  have,  when  taken
out  of  mere  black-and-white,  into  colours:  and  thus  a
sketch  was  afterwards  drawn.  This  pleased  so  well,
that  being  encouraged  by  the  virtuosi,  who  are  so
eminent  in  this  part  of  the  world,  I  resolved  at  last  to
engage  my  painter  in  the  great  work.  Immediately  a
cloth  was  bespoke  of  a  suitable  dimension,  and  the
figures  taken  as  big  or  bigger  than  the  common  life;


LETTER   CONCERNING   DESIGN       19

the  subject  being  of  the  heroic  kind,  and  requiring
rather  such  figures  as  should  appear  above  ordinary
human  stature.

Thus  my  Notion,  as  light  as  it  may  prove  in  the
treatise,  is  become  very  substantial  in  the  workmanship.
The  piece  is  still  in  hand;  and  like  to  continue  so  for
some  time.  Otherwise  the  first  draught  or  design
should  have  accompanied  the  treatise;  as  the  treatise
does  this  letter/  But  the  design  having  grown  thus
into  a  sketch,  and  the  sketch  afterwards  into  a  picture;
I  thought  it  fit  your  Lordship  should  either  see  the
several  pieces  together,  or  be  troubled  only  with  that
which  was  the  best ;  as  undoubtedly  the  great  one  must
prove,  if  the  master  I  employ  sinks  not  very  much
below  himself,  in  this  performance.

Far  surely  should  I  be,  my  Lord,  from  conceiving
any  vanity  or  pride  in  amusements  of  such  an  inferior
kind  as  these;  especially  were  they  such  as  they  may
naturally  at  first  sight  appear.  I  pretend  not  here  to
apologize  either  for  them,  or  for  myself.  Your  Lordship
however  knows,  I  have  naturally  ambition  enough  to
make  me  desirous  of  employing  myself  in  business  of
a  higher  order:  since  it  has  been  my  fortune  in  public
affairs  to  act  often  in  concert  with  you,  and  in  the  same
views,  on  the  interest  of  Europe  and  mankind.  There
was  a  time,  and  that  a  very  early  one  of  my  life,  when
I  was  not  wanting  to  my  country,  in  this  respect.  But
after  some  years  of  hearty  labour  and  pains  in  this  kind
of  workmanship,  an  unhappy  breach  in  my  health  drove
me  not  only  from  the  seat  of  business,  but  forced  me
to  seek  these  foreign  climates;  where,  as  mild  as  the
winters  generally  are,  I  have  with  much  ado  lived  out
this  latter  one;  and  am  now,  as  your  Lordship  finds,
employing  myself  in  such  easy  studies  as  are  most
suitable  to  my  state  of  health,  and  to  the  genius  of  the
country  where  I  am  confined.

This  in  the  meantime  I  can,  with  some  assurance
say  to  your  Lordship  in  a  kind  of  spirit  of  prophecy,
from  what  I  have  observed  of  the  rising  genius  of  our

2 —  2


20  SECOND   CHARACTERS

nation,  That  if  we  live  to  see  a  peace  any  way  answer
able  to  that  generous  spirit  with  which  this  war  was
begun,  and  carried  on,  for  our  own  liberty  and  that  of
Europe;  the  figure  we  are  like  to  make  abroad,  and
the  increase  of  knowledge,  industry  and  sense  at  home,
will  render  united  Britain  the  principal  seat  of  arts;
and  by  her  politeness  and  advantages  in  this  kind,  will
shew  evidently,  how  much  she  owes  to  those  counsels,
which  taught  her  to  exert  herself  so  resolutely  on  behalf
of  the  common  cause,  and  that  of  her  own  liberty,  and
happy  constitution,  necessarily  included.

I  can  myself  remember  the  time,  when,  in  respect
of  music,  our  reigning  taste  was  in  many  degrees  inferior
to  the  French.  The  long  reign  of  luxury  and  pleasure
under  King  Charles  the  Second,  and  the  foreign  helps
and  studied  advantages  given  to  music  in  a  following
reign,  could  not  raise  our  genius  the  least  in  this  respect.
But  when  the  spirit  of  the  nation  was  grown  more  free,
though  engaged  at  that  time  in  the  fiercest  war,  and  with
the  most  doubtful  success,  we  no  sooner  began  to  turn
ourselves  towards  music,  and  enquire  what  Italy  in
particular  produced,  than  in  an  instant  we  outstripped
our  neighbours  the  French,  entered  into  a  genius  far
beyond  theirs,  and  raised  ourselves  an  ear,  and  judgment,
not  inferior  to  the  best  now  in  the  world.

In  the  same- manner,  as  to  painting.  Though  we
have  as  yet  nothing  of  our  own  native  growth  in  this
kind  worthy  of  being  mentioned;  yet  since  the  public
has  of  late  begun  to  express  a  relish  for  engravings,
drawings,  copyings,  and  for  the  original  paintings  of
the  chief  Italian  schools  (so  contrary  to  the  modern
French),  I  doubt  not  that,  in  very  few  years  we  shall
make  an  equal  progress  in  this  other  science.  And
when  our  humour  turns  us  to  cultivate  these  designing
arts,  our  genius,  I  am  persuaded,  will  naturally  carry
us  over  the  slighter  amusements,  and  lead  us  to  that
higher,  more  serious,  and  noble  part  of  imitation,  which
relates  to  history,  human  nature,  and  the  chief  degree
or  order  of  beauty;  I  mean  that  of  the  rational  life,


LETTER   CONCERNING    DESIGN       21

distinct  from  the  merely  vegetable  and  sensible,  as  in
animals,  or  plants;  according  to  those  several  degrees
or  orders  of  painting,  which  your  Lordship  will  find
suggested  in  this  extemporary  Notion  I  have  sent  you.

As  for  architecture,  it  is  no  wonder  if  so  many
noble  designs  of  this  kind  have  miscarried  amongst  us;
since  the  genius  of  our  nation  has  hitherto  been  so  little
turned  this  way,  that  through  several  reigns  we  have
patiently  seen  the  noblest  public  buildings  perish  (if
I  may  say  so)  under  the  hand  of  one  single  court-
architect;  who,  if  he  had  been  able  to  profit  by  experi
ence,  would  long  since,  at  our  expense,  have  proved
the  greatest  master  in  the  world.  But  I  question
whether  our  patience  is  like  to  hold  much  longer.
The  devastation  so  long  committed  in  this  kind,  has
made  us  begin  to  grow  rude  and  clamorous  at  the
hearing  of  a  new  palace  spoilt,  or  a  new  design  com
mitted  to  some  rash  or  impotent  pretender.

It  is  the  good  fate  of  our  nation  in  this  particular,
that  there  remain  yet  two  of  the  noblest  subjects  for
architecture;  our  Prince's  Palace  and  our  House  of
Parliament.  For  I  cannot  but  fancy  that  when
Whitehall  is  thought  of,  the  neighbouring  Lords  and
Commons  will  at  the  same  time  be  placed  in  better
chambers  and  apartments,  than  at  present;  were  it
only  for  majesty's  sake,  and  as  a  magnificence  becoming
the  person  of  the  Prince,  who  here  appears  in  full
solemnity.  Nor  do  I  fear  that  when  these  new  subjects
are  attempted,  we  should  miscarry  as  grossly  as  we  have
done  in  others  before.  Our  State,  in  this  respect,  may
prove  perhaps  more  fortunate  than  our  Church,  in  having
waited  till  a  national  taste  was  formed,  before  these
edifices  were  undertaken.  But  the  zeal  of  the  nation
could  not,  it  seems,  admit  so  long  a  delay  in  their
ecclesiastical  structures,  particularly  their  metropolitan.
And  since  a  zeal  of  this  sort  has  been  newly  kindled
amongst  us,  it  is  like  we  shall  see  from  afar  the  many
spires  arising  in  our  great  city,  with  such  hasty  and
sudden  growth,  as  may  be  the  occasion  perhaps  that


22  SECOND   CHARACTERS

our  immediate  relish  shall   be   hereafter  censured,  as
retaining  much  of  what  artists  call  the  Gothic  kind.

Hardly,  indeed,  as  the  public  now  stands,  should
we  bear  to  see  a  Whitehall  treated  like  a  Hampton
Court,  or  even  a  new  cathedral  like  St  Paul's.  Almost
every  one  now  becomes  concerned,  and  interests  himself
in  such  public  structures.  Even  those  pieces  too  are
brought  under  the  common  censure,  which,  though
raised  by  private  men,  are  of  such  a  grandeur  and
magnificence,  as  to  become  national  ornaments.  The
ordinary  man  may  build  his  cottage,  or  the  plain
gentleman  his  country  house  according  as  he  fancies:
but  when  a  great  man  builds,  he  will  find  little  quarter
from  the  public,  if  instead  of  a  beautiful  pile,  he  raises,
at  a  vast  expense,  such  a  false  and  counterfeit  piece  of
magnificence,  as  can  be  justly  arraigned  for  its  deformity
by  so  many  knowing  men  in  art,  and  by  the  whole
people,  who,  in  such  a  conjuncture  readily  follow  their
opinion.

In  reality  the  people  are  no  small  parties  in  this
cause.  Nothing  moves  successfully  without  them.
There  can  be  no  public,  but  where  they  are  included.
And  without  a  public  voice,  knowingly  guided  and
directed,  there  is  nothing  which  can  raise  a  true
ambition  in  the  artist;  nothing  which  can  exalt  the
genius  of  the  workman,  or  make  him  emulous  of  after
fame,  and  of  the  approbation  of  his  country,  and  of
posterity.  For  with  these  he  naturally,  as  a  freeman,
must  take  part:  in  these  he  has  a  passionate  concern,
and  interest,  raised  in  him  by  the  same  genius  of  liberty,
the  same  laws  and  government,  by  which  his  property
and  the  rewards  of  his  pains  and  industry,  are  secured
to  him,  and  to  his  generation  after  him.

Everything  co-operates,  in  such  a  State,  towards
the  improvement  of  art  and  science.  And  for  the
designing  arts  in  particular,  such  as  architecture,
painting,  and  statuary,  they  are  in  a  manner  linked
together.  The  taste  of  one  kind  brings  necessarily
that  of  the  others  along  with  it.  When  the  free  spirit


LETTER   CONCERNING   DESIGN       23

of  a  nation  turns  itself  this  way,  judgments  are  formed;
critics  arise;  the  public  eye  and  ear  improve;  a  right
taste  prevails,  and  in  a  manner  forces  its  way.  Nothing
is  so  improving,  nothing  so  natural,  so  congenial  to  the
liberal  arts,  as  that  reigning  liberty  and  high  spirit  of
a  people,  which  from  the  habit  of  judging  in  the  highest
matters  for  themselves,  makes  them  freely  judge  of
other  subjects,  and  enter  thoroughly  into  the  characters
as  well  of  men  and  manners,  as  of  the  products  or
works  of  men,  in  art  and  science.  So  much,  my  Lord,
do  we  owe  to  the  excellence  of  our  national  constitution,
and  legal  monarchy;  happily  fitted  for  us,  and  which
alone  could  hold  together  so  mighty  a  people;  all  sharers
(though  at  so  far  a  distance  from  each  other)  in  the
government  of  themselves;  and  meeting  under  one
head  in  one  vast  metropolis;  whose  enormous  growth,
however  censurable  in  other  respects,  is  actually  a  cause
that  workmanship  and  arts  of  so  many  kinds  arise  to
such  perfection.

What  encouragement  our  higher  powers  may  think
fit  to  give  these  growing  arts,  I  will  not  pretend  to
guess.  This  I  know,  that  it  is  so  much  for  their
advantage  and  interest  to  make  themselves  the  chief
parties  in  the  cause,  that  I  wish  no  court  or  ministry,
besides  a  truly  virtuous  and  wise  one,  may  ever  concern
themselves  in  the  affair.  For  should  they  do  so,  they
would  in  reality  do  more  harm  than  good;  since  it  is
not  the  nature  of  a  court  (such  as  courts  generally  are)
to  improve,  but  rather  corrupt  a  taste.  And  what  is
in  the  beginning  set  wrong  by  their  example,  is  hardly
ever  afterwards  recoverable  in  the  genius  of  a  nation.

Content  therefore  I  am,  my  Lord,  that  Britain
stands  in  this  respect  as  she  now  does.  Nor  can  one,
methinks,  with  just  reason  regret  her  having  hitherto
made  no  greater  advancement  in  these  affairs  of  art.
As  her  constitution  has  grown,  and  been  established,
she  has  in  proportion  fitted  herself  for  other  improve
ments.  There  has  been  no  anticipation  in  the  case.
And  in  this  surely  she  must  be  esteemed  wise,  as  well


24  SECOND   CHARACTERS

as  happy;  that  ere  she  attempted  to  raise  herself  any
other  taste  or  relish,  she  secured  herself  a  right  one  in
government.  She  has  now  the  advantage  of  beginning
in  other  matters  on  a  new  foot.  She  has  her  models
yet  to  seek,  her  scale  and  standard  to  form,  with  de
liberation  and  good  choice.  Able  enough  she  is  at
present  to  shift  for  herself;  however  abandoned  or
helpless  she  has  been  left  by  those  whom  it  became  to
assist  her.  Hardly,  indeed,  could  she  procure  a  single
academy  for  the  training  of  her  youth  in  exercises.  As
good  soldiers  as  we  are,  and  as  good  horses  as  our
climate  affords,  our  Princes,  rather  than  expend  their
treasure  this  way,  have  suffered  our  youth  to  pass  into
a  foreign  nation,  to  learn  to  ride.  As  for  other
academies,  such  as  those  for  painting,  sculpture,  or
architecture,  we  have  not  so  much  as  heard  of  the
proposal;  whilst  the  Prince  of  our  rival  nation  raises
academies,  breeds  youth,  and  sends  rewards  and
pensions  into  foreign  countries,  to  advance  the  interest
and  credit  of  his  own.  Now  if,  notwithstanding  the
industry  and  pains  of  this  foreign  court,  and  the  supine
unconcernedness  of  our  own,  the  national  taste  however
rises,  and  already  shews  itself  in  many  respects  beyond
that  of  our  so  highly  assisted  neighbours ;  what  greater
proof  can  there  be  of  the  superiority  of  genius  in  one
of  these  nations  above  the  other?

It  is  but  this  moment  that  I  chance  to  read  in  an
article  of  one  of  the  gazettes  from  Paris,  that  it  is
resolved  at  court  to  establish  a  new  academy  for
political  affairs.  "In  it  the  present  chief  minister  is
to  preside;  having  under  him  six  academists,  douez
des  talens  n&cessaires. — No  person  to  be  received
under  the  age  of  twenty-five.  A  thousand  livres
pension  for  each  scholar. — Able  masters  to  be  ap
pointed  for  teaching  them  the  necessary  sciences,
and  instructing  them  in  the  Treaties  of  Peace  and
Alliances,  which  have  been  formerly  made. — The
members  to  assemble  three  times  a  week. — Cest  de  ce
Seminaire  (says  the  writer)  quon  tirera  les  secretaires


LETTER   CONCERNING    DESIGN       25

d1  Ambassade ;  qui  par  degrez  pourront  monter  h  de
plus  hauts  emplois"

I  must  confess,  my  Lord,  as  great  an  admirer  as
I  am  of  these  regular  institutions,  I  cannot  but  look
upon  an  academy  for  ministers  as  a  very  extraordinary
establishment;  especially  in  such  a  monarchy  as  France,
and  at  such  a  conjuncture  as  the  present.  It  looks  as
if  the  ministers  of  that  court  had  discovered  lately  some
new  methods  of  negotiation,  such  as  their  predecessors
Richelieu  and  Mazarine  never  thought  of;  or  that,  on
the  contrary,  they  have  found  themselves  so  declined,
and  at  such  a  loss  in  the  management  of  this  present
treaty,  as  to  be  forced  to  take  their  lesson  from  some
of  those  ministers  with  whom  they  treat:  a  reproach,
of  which,  no  doubt,  they  must  be  highly  sensible.

But  it  is  not  my  design  here,  to  entertain  your
Lordship  with  any  reflections  upon  politics,  or  the
methods  which  the  French  may  take  to  raise  them
selves  new  ministers,  or  new  generals;  who  may  prove
a  better  match  for  us  than  hitherto,  whilst  we  held  our
old.  I  will  only  say  to  your  Lordship  on  this  subject
of  academies;  that  indeed  I  have  less  concern  for  the
deficiency  of  such  a  one  as  this,  than  of  any  other  which
could  be  thought  of,  for  England;  and  that  as  for  a
seminary  of  statesmen,  I  doubt  not  but,  without  this
extraordinary  help,  we  shall  be  able,  out  of  our  old
stock,  and  the  common  course  of  business,  constantly
to  furnish  a  sufficient  number  of  well  qualified  persons
to  serve  upon  occasion,  either  at  home,  or  in  our  foreign
treaties;  as  often  as  such  persons  accordingly  qualified
shall  duly,  honestly,  and  bona  fide  be  required  to  serve.

I  return  therefore  to  my  virtuoso  science;  which
being  my  chief  amusement  in  this  place  and  circum
stance,  your  Lordship  has  by  it  a  fresh  instance  that
I  can  never  employ  my  thoughts  with  satisfaction  on
any  subject,  without  making  you  a  party.  For  even
this  very  notion  had  its  rise  chiefly  from  the  conversa
tion  of  a  certain  day,  which  I  had  the  happiness  to  pass
a  few  years  since  in  the  country  with  your  Lordship.


26  SECOND   CHARACTERS

It  was  there  you  shewed  me  some  engravings,  which
had  been  sent  you  from  Italy.  One  in  particular  I  well
remember;  of  which  the  subject  was  the  very  same
with  that  of  my  written  Notion  enclosed.  But  by  what
hand  it  was  done,  or  after  what  master,  or  how  executed,
I  have  quite  forgot.  It  was  the  summer  season,  when
you  had  recess  from  business.  And  I  have  accordingly
calculated  this  epistle  and  project  for  the  same  recess
and  leisure.  For  by  the  time  this  can  reach  England,
the  spring  will  be  far  advanced,  and  the  national  affairs
in  a  manner  over,  with  those  who  are  not  in  the
immediate  administration.

Were  that  indeed  your  Lordship's  lot,  at  present;
I  know  not  whether  in  regard  to  my  country  I  should
dare  throw  such  amusements  as  these  in  your  way.
Yet  even  in  this  case,  I  would  venture  to  say  however,
in  defence  of  my  project,  and  of  the  cause  of  painting;
that  could  my  young  hero  come  to  your  Lordship  as
well  represented  as  he  might  have  been,  either  by  the
hand  of  a  Marat1  or  a  Jordano  (the  masters  who  were
in  being,  and  in  repute,  when  I  first  travelled  here  in
Italy),  the  picture  itself,  whatever  the  treatise  proved,
would  have  been  worth  notice,  and  might  have  become
a  present  worthy  of  our  court  •  and  Prince's  palace ;
especially  were  it  so  blessed  as  to  lodge  within  it  a
royal  issue  of  her  Majesty's.  Such  a  piece  of  furniture
might  well  fit  the  gallery,  or  hall  of  exercises,  where
our  young  Princes  should  learn  their  usual  lessons.
And  to  see  virtue  in  this  garb  and  action,  might  perhaps
be  no  slight  memorandum  hereafter  to  a  royal  youth,
who  should  one  day  come  to  undergo  this  trial  himself;
on  which  his  own  happiness,  as  well  as  the  fate  of
Europe  and  of  the  world,  would  in  so  great  a  measure
depend.

This,  my  Lord,  is  making  (as  you  see)  the  most
I  can  of  my  project,  and  setting  off  my  amusements

1  Carlo  Marat  was  yet  alive  at  the  time  when  this  letter  was  written ;
but  had  long  been  superannuated,  and  incapable  of  any  considerable
performance.


LETTER   CONCERNING    DESIGN       27

with  the  best  colour  I  am  able;  that  I  may  be  the
more  excusable  in  communicating  them  to  your
Lordship,  and  expressing  thus,  with  what  zeal  I  am,

My  Lord,

Your  Lordship's

most  faithful  humble  Servant,
SHAFTESBURY.

NAPLES,  March  6.

N.  S.  1712.


TREATISE    II

A  NOTION  of  the  Historical
Draught  or  'Tablature

OF   THE

JUDGMENT   of  HERCULES

According  to  PRODICUS,  Lib.  II.  Xen.  de  Mem.  Soc.


-Potiores


HERCULIS  asrumnas  credat,  saevosque  labores,
Et  Venere,  et  coenis,  et  pluma  SARDANAPALI.

Juv.  Sat.   10.


Printed  first  in  English  in  the  Year  M.DCC.XIII.


7>aul


J'culps.-


A    NOTION


OF   THE


HISTORICAL   DRAUGHT


OF


HERCULES1


INTRODUCTION

(i)  BEFORE  we  enter  on  the  examination  of  our
historical  sketch,  it  may  be  proper  to  remark,  that  by
the  word  Tablature  (for  which  we  have  yet  no  name
in  English,  besides  the  general  one  of  picture)  we

1  [In  order  that  the  reader  may  better  understand  this  discussion  it  is
necessary  to  have  before  the  mind  the  principal  circumstances  of  the
choice  of  Hercules  as  uttered  by  the  Sophist  Prodicus  and  related  by
Xenophon  in  the  Memorabilia,  II.  i.  21.  "  Prodicus  the  sophist,  also,  in  his


THE    HERCULES   OF    PRODICUS       31

denote,  according-  to  the  original  word  Tabula,  a  work
not  only  distinct  from  a  mere  portraiture,  but  from  all
those  wilder  sorts  of  painting  which  are  in  a  manner

narrative  concerning  Hercules,  which  he  indeed  declaims  to  most  people
as  a  specimen  of  his  ability,  expresses  a  similar  notion  respecting  virtue,
speaking,  as  far  as  I  remember,  to  the  following  effect :  For  he  says  that
Hercules,  when  he  was  advancing  from  boyhood  to  manhood,  a  period  at
which  the  young,  becoming  their  own  masters,  begin  to  give  intimations
whether  they  will  enter  on  life  by  the  path  of  virtue  or  that  of  vice,  went
forth  into  a  solitary  place,  and  sat  down,  perplexed  as  to  which  of  these
two  paths  he  should  pursue  ;  22.  and  that  two  female  figures,  of  lofty
stature,  seemed  to  advance  toward  him,  the  one  of  an  engaging  and
graceful  mien,  gifted  by  nature  with  elegance  of  form,  modesty  of  look,
and  sobriety  of  demeanour,  and  clad  in  a  white  robe ;  the  other  fed  to
plumpness  and  softness,  but  assisted  by  art  both  in  her  complexion,  so  as
to  seem  fairer  and  rosier  than  she  really  was,  and  in  her  gesture,  so  as  to
seem  taller  than  her  natural  height ;  she  had  her  eyes  wide  open,  and  a
robe  through  which  her  beauty  would  readily  show  itself;  she  frequently
contemplated  her  figure,  and  looked  about  to  see  if  any  one  else  was
observing  her ;  and  she  frequently  glanced  back  at  her  own  shadow.
23.  As  they  approached  near  to  Hercules,  she,  whom  I  first  described,
came  forward  at  the  same  pace,  but  the  other,  eager  to  get  before  her,
ran  up  to  Hercules,  and  exclaimed,  "  I  see  that  you  are  hesitating,
Hercules,  by  what  path  you  shall  enter  upon  life  ;  if  then  you  make  a
friend  of  me,  I  will  conduct  you  by  the  most  delightful  and  easy  road,
you  shall  taste  of  every  species  of  pleasure,  and  lead  a  life  free  from  every
sort  of  trouble..."

26.  Hercules,  on  hearing  this  address,  said,  "And  what,  O  woman,  is
your  name?"     "My  friends,"  she  replied,  "call  me  Happiness,  but  those
who  hate  me,  give  me,  to  my  disparagement,  the  name  of  Vice."

27.  In  the  meantime  the  other  female  approached,  and  said,  "  I  also
am  come  to  address  you,  Hercules,  because  I  know  your  parents,  and
have  observed  your  disposition  in  the  training  of  your  childhood,  from
which  I  entertain  hopes,  that  if  you  direct  your  steps  along  the  path  that
leads  to  my  dwelling,  you  will  become  an  excellent  performer  of  whatever
is  honourable  and  noble,  and  that  I  shall  appear  more  honourable  and
attractive  through  your  illustrious  deeds.     1  will  not  deceive  you,  how
ever,  with  promises  of  pleasure,  but  will  set  before  you  things  as  they
really  are,  and  as  the  gods  have  appointed  them ;   28.    for  of  what  is
valuable  and  excellent  the  gods  grant  nothing  to  mankind  without  labour
and  care ;  and  if  you  wish  the  gods,  therefore,  to  be  propitious  to  you,
you  must  worship  the  gods  ;  if  you  seek  to  be  loved  by  your  friends,  you
must  serve  your  friends ;  if  you  desire  to  be  honoured  by  any  city,  you
must  benefit  that  city ;  if  you  long  to  be  admired  by  all  Greece  for  your
merit,  you  must  endeavour  to  be  of  advantage  to  all  Greece ;  if  you  are
anxious  that  the  earth  should  yield  you  abundance  of  fruit,  you  must
cultivate  the  earth;   if  you  think  that  you  should  enrich  yourself  from
herds  of  cattle,  you  must  bestow  care  upon  herds  of  cattle ;  if  you  are
eager  to  increase  your  means  by  war,  and  to  secure  freedom  to  your
friends  and  subdue  your  enemies,  you  must  learn  the  arts  of  war,  and
learn  them  from  such  as  understand  them,  and  practice  how  to  use  them
with  advantage ;  if  you  wish  to  be  vigorous  in  body,  you  must  accustom
your  body  to  obey  your  mind,  and  exercise  it  with  toil  and  exertion."

Here  Vice,  interrupting  her  speech,  said,  (as  Prodicus  relates,)  "  Do


32  SECOND   CHARACTERS

absolute,  and  independent;  such  as  the  paintings  in
fresco  upon  the  walls,  the  ceilings,  the  staircases,  the
cupola's,  and  other  remarkable  places  either  of  churches
or  palaces.

(2)  Accordingly  we  are  to  understand,  that  it  is
not  merely  the  shape  or  dimension  of  a  cloth,  or  board,
which  denominates  the  piece  or  tablature;  since  a  work
of  this  kind  may  be  composed  of  any  coloured  substance,
as  it  may  of  any  form ;  whether  square,  oval  or  round.
But  it  is  then  that  in  painting  we  may  give  to  any
particular  work  the  name  of  Tablature,  when  the  work
is  in  reality  "a  single  piece,  comprehended  in  one  view,
and  formed  according  to  one  single  intelligence,  mean
ing,  or  design;  which  constitutes  a  real  whole,  by  a
mutual  and  necessary  relation  of  its  parts,  the  same  as
of  the  members  in  a  natural  body."  So  that  one  may
say  of  a  picture  composed  of  any  number  of  figures
differently  ranged,  and  without  any  regard  to  this
correspondency  or  union  described,  that  it  is  no  more
a  real  piece  or  tablature  than  a  picture  would  be  a
man's  picture,  or  proper  portraiture,  which  represented

you  see  Hercules,  by  how  difficult  and  tedious  a  road  this  woman  conducts
you  to  gratification,  while  I  shall  lead  you  by  an  easy  and  short  path  to
perfect  happiness?"

"Wretched  being,"  rejoined  Virtue,  "of  what  good  are  you  in  posses
sion?  Or  what  real  pleasure  do  you  experience,  when  you  are  unwilling
to  do  anything  for  the  attainment  of  it?". ..32.  But  I  am  the  companion
of  the  gods ;  I  associate  with  virtuous  men ;  no  honourable  deed,  divine
or  human,  is  done  without  me ;  I  am  honoured  most  of  all  by  the  deities,
and  by  those  among  men  to  whom  it  belongs  to  honour  me,  being  a
welcome  co-operator  with  artisans,  a  faithful  household  guardian  to
masters,  a  benevolent  assistant  to  servants,  a  benign  promoter  of  the
labours  of  peace,  a  constant  auxiliary  to  the  efforts  of  war,  an  excellent
sharer  in  friendship.  33.  My  friends  have  a  sweet  and  untroubled
enjoyment  of  meat  and  drink,  for  they  refrain  from  them  till  they  feel  an
appetite.  They  have  also  sweeter  sleep  than  the  idle ;  and  are  neither
annoyed  if  they  lose  a  portion  of  it,  nor  neglect  to  do  their  duties  for  the
sake  of  it.  The  young  are  pleased  with  praise3  frcm  the  old  ;  the  old  are
delighted  with  honours  from  the  young.  They  remember  their  former
acts  with  pleasure,  and  rejoice  to  perform  their  present  occupations  with
success ;  being  through  my  influence,  dear  to  the  gods,  beloved  by  their
friends,  and  honoured  by  their  country.  And  when  the  destined  end  of
life  comes,  they  do  not  lie  in  oblivion  and  dishonour,  but,  celebrated  with
songs  and  praise,  flourish  for  ever  in  the  memory  of  mankind.  By  such
a  course  of  conduct,  O  Hercules,  son  of  noble  parents,  you  may  secure
the  most  exalted  happiness."  Bohn's  ed.]


THE    HERCULES    OF    PRODICUS      33

on  the  same  cloth,  in  different  places,  the  legs,  arms,
nose,  and  eyes  of  such  a  person,  without  adjusting
them  according  to  the  true  proportion,  air,  and  character
which  belonged  to  him.

(3)  This  regulation  has  place  even  in  the  inferior
degrees  of  painting;  since  the  mere  flower-painter  is,
we  see,  obliged  to  study  the  form  of  festoons  and  to
make  use  of  a  peculiar  order,  or  architecture  of  vases,
jars,  cannisters,  pedestals,  and  other  inventions,  which
serve   as   machines,  to   frame   a  certain  proportionate
assemblage,  or  united  mass,  according  to  the  rules  of
perspective;  and  with  regard  as  well  to  the  different
shapes  and    sizes   of  his    several    flowers,   as   to   the
harmony  of  colours    resulting    from    the   whole:    this
being  the  only  thing  capable   of  rendering   his  work
worthy  the  name  of  a  composition  or  real  piece.

(4)  So  much  the  more,  therefore,  is  this  regulation
applicable  to  history-painting,  where  not  only  men,  but
manners,  and  human  passions  are  represented.     Here
the  unity  of  design  must  with  more  particular  exactness
be  preserved,  according  to  the  just  rules  of  poetic  art;
that  in  the  representation  of  any  event,  or  remarkable
fact,  the  probability,  or  seeming  truth  (which  is  the
real  truth  of  art)  may  with  the  highest  advantage  be
supported  and  advanced :  as  we  shall  better  understand
in  the  argument  which  follows  on  the  historical  tablature
of  the  Judgment  of  Hercules;  who  being  young,  and
retired  to  a  solitary  place  in  order  to  deliberate  on  the
choice  he  was  to  make  of  the  different  ways  of  life,  was
accosted  (as  our  historian  relates)  by  the  two  goddesses,
Virtue  and  Pleasure.      It  is  on  the  issue  of  the  contro
versy  between  these  two,  that  the  character  of  Hercules
depends.     So  that  we  may  naturally  give  to  this  piece
and  history,  as  well  the  title  of  The  Education,  as  the
Choice  or  Judgment  of  Hercules.


R.


CHAPTER  I

OF  THE  GENERAL  CONSTITUTION  OR  ORDINANCE
OF  THE  TABLATURE

(1)  THIS  fable  or  history  may  be  variously  repre
sented,  according  to  the  order  of  time:

Either  in  the  instant  when  the  two  goddesses
(Virtue  and  Pleasure)  accost  Hercules;

Or  when  they  are  entered  on  their  dispute ;

Or  when  their  dispute  is  already  far  advanced,  and
Virtue  seems  to  gain  her  cause.

(2)  According  to  the  first  notion,  Hercules  must
of  necessity  seem  surprized  on  the  first  appearance  of
such  miraculous  forms.      He  admires,  he  contemplates;
but  is  not  yet  engaged  or  interested.     According  to
the   second   notion,  he   is   interested,  divided,   and   in
doubt.     According  to  the   third,   he   is  wrought,  agi
tated,  and   torn   by  contrary  passions.     It  is  the  last
effort  of  the  virtuous  one,  striving  for  possession  over
him.      He  agonizes,  and  with  all  his  strength  of  reason
endeavours  to  overcome  himself :

Et  premitur  ratione  animus,  vincique  laborat.

(3)  Of  these  different  periods  of  time,  the  latter
has  been  chosen;  as  being  the  only  one  of  the  three,
which  can  well  serve  to  express  the  grand  event,  or
consequent  resolution  of  Hercules,  and  the  choice  he
actually  made  of  a  life  full  of  toil  and  hardship,  under
the  conduct  of  Virtue,  for  the  deliverance  of  mankind
from  tyranny  and  oppression.     And   it   is   to  such  a
piece,   or   tablature,   as    represents    this    issue    of  the


THE    HERCULES    OF    PRODICUS       35

balance,  in   our  pondering  hero,   that  we    may  justly
give  the  title  of  the  Decision  or  Judgment  of  Hercules.

(4)  The    same    history   may  be    represented    yet
according  to  a  fourth  date  or  period:  as  at  the  time
when   Hercules  is  entirely  won  by  Virtue.      But  then
the  signs  of  this  resolute  determination  reigning  abso
lutely  in  the  attitude,  and  air  of  our  young  hero;  there
would  be  no  room  left  to  represent  his  agony,  or  inward
conflict,  which  indeed  makes  the  principal  action  here;
as  it  would  do  in  a  poem,  were  this  subject  to  be  treated
by  a  good  poet.     Nor  would  there  be  any  more  room
left  in  this  case,  either  for  the  persuasive  rhetoric  of
Virtue  (who  must  have  already  ended  her  discourse)
or  for  the  insinuating  address  of  Pleasure,  who  having
lost  her  cause,  must  necessarily  appear  displeased,  or
out  of  humour:    a  circumstance  which  would  no  way
suit  her  character.

(5)  In  the  original  story  or  fable  of  this  adventure
of  our   young  Hercules,   it  is  particularly  noted,  that
Pleasure,  advancing  hastily  before  Virtue,  began  her
plea,  and  was  heard  with  prevention ;  as  being  first  in
turn.     And  as  this  fable  is  wholly  philosophical  and
moral,  this  circumstance  in  particular  is  to  be  considered
as  essential.

(6)  In  this  third  period  therefore  of  our  history
(dividing   it,   as   we   have   done,   into   four   successive
dates  or  points  of  time)   Hercules  being  auditor,  and
attentive,  speaks  not.     Pleasure  has  spoken.     Virtue
is  still  speaking.     She  is  about  the  middle,  or  towards
the  end  of  her  discourse ;  in  the  place  where,  according
to  just  rhetoric,  the  highest  tone  of  voice  and  strongest
action  are  employed.

(7)  It  is  evident,   that  every  master  in  painting,
when  he  has  made  choice  of  the  determinate  date  or
point  of  time,  according  to  which  he  would  represent
his  history,  is  afterwards  debarred  the  taking  advantage
from  any  other  action  than  what  is  immediately  present,
and  belonging  to  that  single  instant  he  describes.     For
if  he  passes  the  present  only  for  a  moment,  he  may  as

3—2


36  SECOND    CHARACTERS

well  pass  it  for  many  years.  And  by  this  reckoning
he  may  with  as  good  right  repeat  the  same  figure
several  times  over,  and  in  one  and  the  same  picture
represent  Hercules  in  his  cradle,  struggling  with  the
serpents;  and  the  same  Hercules  of  full  age,  fighting
with  the  Hydra,  with  Anteus,  and  with  Cerberus:
which  would  prove  a  mere  confused  heap,  or  knot  of
pieces,  and  not  a  single  entire  piece,  or  tablature,  of  the
historical  kind.

(8)  It    may    however    be    allowable,    on     some
occasions,    to    make    use    of    certain    enigmatical    or
emblematical  devices,  to  represent  a  future  time:    as
when    Hercules,   yet   a  mere   boy,  is   seen   holding  a
small  club,  or  wearing  the  skin  of  a  young  lion.      For
so  we  often  find  him  in  the  best  antiques.     And  though
history  had  never  related  of  Hercules,  that  being  yet
very  young,  he  killed  a  lion  with  his  own  hand;  this
representation  of  him  would  nevertheless  be  entirely
conformable  to  poetic  truth;   which  not  only  admits,
but  necessarily  presupposes  prophecy  or  prognostica
tion,  with  regard  to  the  actions,  and  lives  of  heroes
and  great   men.      Besides   that  as   to  our  subject,   in
particular,  the  natural  genius  of  Hercules,  even  in  his
tenderest  youth,  might  alone  answer  for  his  handling
such  arms  as  these,  and  bearing,  as  it  were  in  play,
these  early  tokens  of  the  future  hero.

(9)  To  preserve  therefore  a  just  conformity  with
historical  truth,  and  with  the  unity  of  time  and  action,
there  remains  no  other  way  by  which  we  can  possibly
give  a  hint  of  any  thing  future,  or  call  to  mind  any  thing
past,  than  by  setting  in  view  such  passages  or  events
as  have  actually  subsisted,  or  according  to  nature  might
well  subsist,  or  happen  together  in  one  and  the  same
instant.     And  this  is  what  we  may  properly  call  the
rule  of  consistency.

(10)  How  is   it   therefore   possible,  says  one,  to
express  a  change  of  passion  in  any  subject,  since  this
change  is  made  by  succession;  and  that  in  this  case
the  passion  which  is  understood  as  present,  will  require


THE    HERCULES   OF    PRODICUS       37

a  disposition  of  body  and  features  wholly  different
from  the  passion  which  is  over,  and  past?  To  this
we  answer,  That  notwithstanding  the  ascendency  or
reign  of  the  principal  and  immediate  passion,  the  artist
has  power  to  leave  still  in  his  subject  the  tracts  or
footsteps  of  its  predecessor:  so  as  to  let  us  behold  not
only  a  rising  passion  together  with  a  declining  one;
but,  what  is  more,  a  strong  and  determinate  passion,
with  its  contrary  already  discharged  and  banished.
As  for  instance,  when  the  plain  tracts  of  tears  new
fallen,  with  other  fresh  tokens  of  mourning  and
dejection,  remain  still  in  a  person  newly  transported
with  joy  at  the  sight  of  a  relation  or  friend,  who  the
moment  before  had  been  lamented  as  one  deceased  or
lost.

(n)  Again,  by  the  same  means  which  are  em
ployed  to  call  to  mind  the  past,  we  may  anticipate  the
future:  as  would  be  seen  in  the  case  of  an  able  painter,
who  should  undertake  to  paint  this  history  of  Hercules
according  to  the  third  date  or  period  of  time  proposed
for  our  historical  tablature.  For  in  this  momentary
turn  of  action,  Hercules  remaining  still  in  a  situation
expressive  of  suspense  and  doubt,  would  discover
nevertheless  that  the  strength  of  this  inward  conflict
was  over,  and  that  victory  began  now  to  declare  herself
in  favour  of  virtue.  This  transition,  which  seems  at
first  so  mysterious  a  performance,  will  be  easily  com
prehended,  if  one  considers,  that  the  body,  which  moves
much  slower  than  the  mind,  is  easily  outstripped  by
this  latter;  and  that  the  mind  on  a  sudden  turning  itself
some  new  way,  the  nearer  situated  and  more  sprightly
parts  of  the  body  (such  as  the  eyes,  and  muscles  about
the  mouth  and  forehead)  taking  the  alarm,  and  moving
in  an  instant,  may  leave  the  heavier  and  more  distant
parts  to  adjust  themselves,  and  change  their  attitude
some  moments  after.

(12)  This  different  operation  may  be  distinguished
by  the  names  of  anticipation  and  repeal.

(13)  If  by  any  other   method    an   artist   should


S8  SECOND   CHARACTERS

pretend  to  introduce  into  this  piece  any  portion  of
time,  future  or  past,  he  must  either  sin  directly  against
the  law  of  truth  and  credibility,  in  representing  things
contrary  and  incompatible;  or  against  that  law  of  unity
and  simplicity  of  design,  which  constitutes  the  very
being  of  his  work.  This  particularly  shews  itself  in
a  picture,  when  one  is  necessarily  left  in  doubt,  and
unable  to  determine  readily,  which  of  the  distinct
successive  parts  of  the  history  or  action  is  that  very
one  represented  in  the  design.  For  even  here  the
case  is  the  same  as  in  the  other  circumstances  of
poetry  and  painting:  "That  what  is  principal  or  chief,
should  immediately  shew  itself,  without  leaving  the
mind  in  any  uncertainty."

(14)  According  to  this  rule  of  the  unity  of  time,
if  one  should  ask  an  artist,  who  had  painted  this
history  of  the  Judgment  of  Hercules,  "  Which  of  these
four  periods  or  dates  of  time  above  proposed  he  in
tended  in  his  picture  to  represent1?"  and  it  should
happen  that  he  could  not  readily  answer,  It  was  this,
or  that:  it  would  appear  plainly  he  had  never  formed
a  real  notion  of  his  workmanship,  or  of  the  history
he  intended  to  represent.  So  that  when  he  had
executed  even  to  a  miracle  all  those  other  beauties
requisite  in  a  piece,  and  had  failed  in  this  single  one,
he  would  from  hence  alone  be  proved  to  be  in  truth
no  history-painter,  or  artist  in  the  kind,  who  under
stood  not  so  much  as  how  to  form  the  real  design  of
a  historical  piece.

1  If  the  same  question  concerning  the  instantaneous  action,  or  present
moment  of  time,  were  applied  to  many  famous  historical  paintings  much
admired  in  the  world,  they  would  be  found  very  defective :  as  we  may
learn  by  the  instance  of  that  single  subject  of  Acteon,  one  of  the  commonest
in  painting.  Hardly  is  there  anywhere  seen  a  design  of  this  poetical
history,  without  a  ridiculous  anticipation  of  the  metamorphosis.  The
horns  of  Acteon,  which  are  the  effect  of  a  charm,  should  naturally  wait  the
execution  of  that  act  in  which  the  charm  consists.  Till  the  goddess
therefore  has  thrown  her  cast,  the  hero's  person  suffers  not  any  change.
Even  while  the  water  flies,  his  forehead  is  still  found.  But  in  the  usual
design  we  see  it  otherwise.  The  horns  are  already  sprouted,  if  not  full
grown :  and  the  goddess  is  seen  watering  the  sprouts.


CHAPTER    II

OF    THE    FIRST    OR    PRINCIPAL    FIGURE

(1)  To  apply  therefore  what  has  been  said  above
to  our  immediate  design  or  tablature  in  hand;  we  may
observe,  in   the   first   place,   with   regard  to  Hercules
(the  first  or  principal  figure  of  our  piece)  that  being-
placed  in  the  middle,  between  the  two  goddesses,  he
should  by  a  skilful  master  be  so  drawn,  as  even  setting
aside  the  air  and  features  of  the  face,  it  should  appear
by  the  very  turn  or  position  of  the  body  alone,  that
this  young  hero  had  not  wholly  quitted  the  balancing
or  pondering  part.     For  in   the   manner  of  his  turn
towards  the  worthier  of  these  goddesses,  he  should  by
no  means  appear  so  averse  or  separate  from  the  other,
as  not  to  surfer  it  to  be  conceived  of  him,  that  he  had
ever  any  inclination  for  her,  or  had  ever  hearkened  to
her  voice.     On  the  contrary,  there  ought  to  be  some
hopes  yet  remaining  for  this  latter  goddess  Pleasure,
and  some  regret  apparent  in  Hercules.     Otherwise  we
should  pass  immediately  from  the  third  to  the  fourth
period;  or  at  least  confound  one  with  the  other.

(2)  Hercules,  in  this  agony  described,  may  appear
either  sitting,  or  standing:  though  it  be  more  according
to  probability  for  him  to  appear  standing,  in  regard  to
the  presence  of  the  two  goddesses,  and  by  reason  the
case  is  far  from  being  the  same  here  as  in  the  Judgment
of   Paris,  where  the  interested  goddesses  plead  their
cause  before  their  judge.     Here  the  interest  of  Hercules
himself  is  at  stake.      It  is  his  own  cause  which  is  trying.
He  is  in  this  respect  not  so  much  the  judge,  as  he  is
in  reality  the  party  judged.


40  SECOND   CHARACTERS

(3)  The    superior    and    commanding   passion    of
Hercules  may  be  expressed  either  by  a  strong  admira
tion,  or  by  an  admiration  which  holds  chiefly  of  love.

— Ingenti  perculsus  amore.

(4)  If  the  latter  be  used,  then  the  reluctant  passion,
which  is  not  yet  wholly  overcome,  may  shew  itself  in
pity  and  tenderness,  moved  in  our  hero  by  the  thought
of  those  pleasures  and  companions  of  his  youth,  which
he  is  going  for  ever  to  abandon.     And  in  this  sense
Hercules  may  look  either  on  the  one  or  the  other  of
the  goddesses,  with  this  difference;  that  if  he  looks  on
Pleasure,  it  should  be  faintly,  and  as  turning  his  eyes
back   with   pity;    having  still   his  action   and  gesture
turned    the   other   way   towards    Virtue.      If,    on    the
contrary,  he  looks  on  Virtue ;  it  ought  to  be  earnestly,
and  with  extreme  attention,  having  some  part  of  the
action  of  his  body  inclining  still  towards  Pleasure,  and
discovering  by  certain   features   of  concern  and  pity,
intermixed  with  the  commanding  or  conquering  passion,
that  the  decision   he  is  about  to  make  in  favour  of
Virtue,  cost  him  not  a  little.

(5)  If  it  be  thought   fit   rather  to   make   use  of
admiration,  merely  to  express  the  commanding  passion
of  Hercules:  then  the  reluctant  one  may  discover  itself
in  a  kind   of  horror,  at  the  thought  of  the  toil  and
labour,  to  be  sustained  in  the  rough  rocky  way  apparent
on  the  side  of  Virtue.

(6)  Again,  Hercules  may  be  represented  as  looking
neither  towards  Virtue  nor  Pleasure,  but  as  turning  his
eyes  either  towards  the  mountainous  rocky  way  pointed
out  to  him  by  Virtue,  or  towards  the  flowery  way  of  the
vale  and  meadows,  recommended  to  him  by  Pleasure.
And  to  these  different  attitudes  for  the  expression  of
the  turn  or  balance  of  judgment  in  our  pensive  hero.

(7)  Whatever  may  be  the  manner  chosen  for  the
designing  of  this  figure  of  Hercules,  according  to  that
part  of  the  history  in  which  we  have  taken  him;  it  is
certain  he  should  be  so  drawn,  as  neither  by  the  opening


THE    HERCULES   OF    PRODICUS      41

of  his  mouth,  or  by  any  other  sign,  to  leave  it  in  the
least  dubious  whether  he  is  speaking  or  silent.  For  it
is  absolutely  requisite  that  silence  should  be  distinctly
characterised  in  Hercules,  not  only  as  the  natural  effect
of  his  strict  attention,  and  the  little  leisure  he  has  from
what  passes  at  this  time  within  his  breast;  but  in  order
withal  to  give  that  appearance  of  majesty  and  superiority
becoming  the  person  and  character  of  pleading  Virtue ;
who  by  her  eloquence  and  other  charms  has  ere  this
made  herself  mistress  of  the  heart  of  our  enamoured
hero:

— Pendetque  iterum  narrantis  ab  ore1.

This  image  of  the  sublime  in  the  discourse  and  manner
of  Virtue,  would  be  utterly  lost,  if  in  the  instant  that
she  employed  the  greatest  force  of  action,  she  should
appear  to  be  interrupted  by  the  ill-timed  speech,  reply,
or  utterance  of  her  auditor.  Such  a  design  or  repre
sentation  as  this,  would  prove  contrary  to  order,  contrary
to  the  history,  and  to  the  decorum,  or  decency  of
manners.  Nor  can  one  well  avoid  taking  notice  here
of  that  general  absurdity  committed  by  many  of  the
esteemed  great  masters  in  painting;  who  in  one  and
the  same  company,  or  assembly  of  persons  jointly
employed,  and  united  according  to  the  history,  in  one
single  or  common  action,  represent  to  us  not  only  two
or  three,  but  several,  and  sometimes  all  speaking  at
once  :  which  must  naturally  have  the  same  effect  on
the  eye,  as  such  a  conversation  would  have  upon  the
ear  were  we  in  reality  to  hear  it.

1  Virg.  Aen.  Lib.  4,  ver.  79.


CHAPTER    III

OF    THE    SECOND    FIGURE

(1)  AFTER  what  has  been  said  on  the  subject  of
Hercules,  it  appears  plainly  what  the  attitude  must  be
of  our  second  figure,  Virtue;  who,  as  we  have  taken
her  in   this  particular  period  of  our  history,  must  of
necessity  be  speaking  with  all  the  force  of  action,  such
as  would  appear  in  an  excellent  orator,  when  at  the
height,  and  in  the  most  affecting  part  of  his  discourse.

(2)  She  ought  therefore  to   be   drawn  standing;
since   it  is   contrary  to  all   probable   appearance,  and
even  to  nature  itself,  that  in  the  very  heat  and  highest
transport  of  speech,  the  speaker  should  be  seen  sitting,
or  in  any  posture  which  might  express  repose.

(3)  She  may  be  habited  either  as  an  Amazon,  with
the  helmet,  lance,  and  in  the  robe  or  vest  of  Pallas;  or
as  any  other  of  the  virtues,  goddesses,  or  heroines,  with
the  plain   original   crown,  without  rays,  according  to
genuine  antiquity.     Our  history  makes  no  mention  of
a  helmet,  or  any  other  armour  of  Virtue.     It  gives  us
only  to  understand  that  she  was  dressed  neither  negli
gently,  nor  with  much  study  or  ornament.      If  we  follow
this  latter  method,  we  need  give  her  only  in  her  hand
the  imperial  or  magisterial  sword1;  which  is  her  true
characteristic  mark,  and  would  sufficiently  distinguish
her,  without  the  helmet,  lance,  or  other  military  habit.
And   in   this   manner  the   opposition   between  herself
and  her  rival  would  be  still  more  beautiful  and  regular.

—"But  this  beauty,"  says  one,  "would  be  discoverable
only  by  the  learned." — Perhaps  so.     But  then  again

1  Parazonium.


THE    HERCULES    OF    PRODICUS      43

there  would  be  no  loss  for  others:  since  no  one  would
find  this  piece  the  less  intelligible  on  the  account  of
this  regulation.  On  the  contrary,  one  who  chanced
to  know  little  of  antiquity  in  general,  or  of  this  history
in  particular,  would  be  still  further  to  seek,  if  upon
seeing  an  armed  woman  in  the  piece,  he  should
represent  to  himself  either  a  Pallas,  a  Bellona,  or  any
other  warlike  form,  or  deity  of  the  female  kind.

(4)  As  for  the  shape,  countenance,  or  person  of
Virtue;  that  which  is  usually  given  to  Pallas  may  fitly
serve  as  a  model  for  this  dame;  as  on  the  other  side,
that  which  is  given  to  Venus  may  serve  in  the  same
manner  for  her  rival.     The  historian  whom  we  follow,
represents  Virtue  to  us  as  a  lady  of  a  goodly  form,  tall
and  majestic.     And  by  what  he  relates  of  her,  he  gives
us   sufficiently  to    understand,    that    though    she    was
neither  lean,   nor  of  a  tanned  complexion,  she   must
have  discovered  however,  by  the  substance  and  colour
of  her  flesh,  that  she  was  sufficiently  accustomed  to
exercise.      Pleasure,  on   the  other  hand,   by  an  exact
opposition,    is   represented   in    better   case,    and   of  a
softness  of  complexion ;    which   speaks   her  manners,
and  gives  her  a  middle  character  between  the  person
of  a  Venus,  and  that  of  a  Bacchinal  nymph.

(5)  As    for   the    position,  or  attitude  of  Virtue;
though  in  a  historical  piece,  such  as  ours  is  designed,
it  would  on  no  account  be  proper  to  have  immediate
recourse  to  the  way  of  emblem ;    one  might,  on  this
occasion,  endeavour  nevertheless  by  some  artifice,  to
give  our  figure,  as  much  as  possible,  the  resemblance
of  the  same  goddess,  as  she  is  seen  on  medals,  and
other  ancient  emblematic  pieces   of  like   nature.      In
this  view,  she  should  be  so  designed,  as  to  stand  firm
with  her  full  poise  upon  one  foot,  having  the  other  a
little  advanced,  and  raised  on  a  broken  piece  of  ground
or  rock,  instead  of  the  helmet  or  little  globe  on  which
we  see  her  usually  setting  her  foot,  as  triumphant,  in
those  pieces  of  the  emblematic    kind.     A   particular
advantage  of  this  attitude,  so  judiciously  assigned  to


44  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Virtue  by  ancient  masters,  is,  that  it  expresses  as  well
her  aspiring  effort,  or  ascent  towards  the  Stars  and
Heaven,  as  her  victory  and  superiority  over  fortune
and  the  world.  For  so  the  poets  have  of  old  described
her.

—  Negata  tentat  iter  via1.
Virtutisque  viam  deserit  arduae".

And  in  our  piece  particularly,  where  the  arduous  and
rocky  way  of  Virtue  requires  to  be  emphatically  repre
sented;  the  ascending  posture  of  this  figure,  with  one
foot  advanced,  in  a  sort  of  climbing  action,  over  the
rough  and  thorny  ground,  must  of  necessity,  if  well
executed,  create  a  due  effect,  and  add  to  the  sublime
of  this  ancient  poetic  work3.

(6)  As  for  the  hands  or  arms,  which  in  real  oratory,
and  during  the  strength  of  elocution,  must  of  necessity
be  active;  it  is  plain  in  respect  of  our  goddess,  that  the
arm  in  particular  which  she  has  free  to  herself,  and  is
neither  encumbered  with  lance  or  sword,  should  be
employed  another  way,  and  come  in,  to  second  the
discourse,  and  accompany  it,  with  a  just  emphasis  and
action.  Accordingly,  Virtue  would  then  be  seen  with
this  hand,  turned  either  upwards  to  the  rocky  way
marked  out  by  her  with  approbation  ;  or  to  the  sky,
or  stars,  in  the  same  sublime  sense;  or  downwards  to
the  flowery  way  and  vale,  as  in  a  detesting  manner,
and  with  abhorrence  of  what  passes  there;  or  last  of
all  (in  a  disdainful  sense,  and  with  the  same  appearance
of  detestation)  against  Pleasure  herself.  Each  manner
would  have  its  peculiar  advantage.  And  the  best  profit

1  Horat.  Lib.  3,  Od.  2.  a  Idem  ibid.  Od.  24.

3  As  ancient  as  the  poet  Hesiod,  which  appears  by  the  following
verses,  cited  by  our  historian,  as  the  foundation,  or  first  draught  of  this
Herculean  tablature.


rf)i>  p.ft>  yap  KaKorrjra  (cat  tXaSdv  fcrnv  f\ftrdai
pT)i8ia>s.     Xet'i;  fjLtv  68bst  /x<iXa  8'  (yyvdi  vaifij
rrjs  8'  aper?)r  tSpaira   6fO\  irpoirdpoiOfv  f&i
adavarot  '    fj.au  pos  8t   (cat  opdios  olp.os  fir'
Kat  rprjvvs  TO  irp&Tov  '    eV^i/   8'  (Is  aKpov
8    fJTrtiTa  TreXft,  ^aXeTDj  irep  fov<ra.


THE    HERCULES    OF    PRODICUS      45

should  be  made  of  this  arm  and  hand  at  liberty  to
express  either  the  disapprobation  or  the  applause
proposed.  It  might  prove,  however,  a  considerable
advantage  to  our  figure  of  Virtue,  if  holding  the  lance,
or  imperial  sword,  slightly,  with  one  of  her  hands
stretched  downwards,  she  could,  by  that  very  hand
and  action,  be  made  to  express  the  latter  meaning;
opening  for  that  purpose  some  of  the  lower  fingers  of
this  hand,  in  a  refusing  or  repelling  manner;  whilst
with  the  other  arm  and  hand  at  liberty,  she  should
express  as  well  the  former  meaning,  and  point  out  to
Hercules  the  way  which  leads  to  honour,  and  the  just
glory  of  heroic  actions.

(7)  From  all  these  circumstances  of  history,  and
action,  accompanying  this  important  figure,  the  difficulty
of  the  design  will  sufficiently  appear,  to  those  who
carry  their  judgment  beyond  the  mere  form,  and  are
able  to  consider  the  character  of  the  passion  to  which
it  is  subjected.  For  where  a  real  character  is  marked,
and  the  inward  form  peculiarly  described,  it  is  necessary
the  outward  should  give  place.  Whoever  should
expect  to  see  our  figure  of  Virtue,  in  the  exact  mein
of  a  fine  talker,  curious  in  her  choice  of  action,  and
forming  it  according  to  the  usual  decorum,  and  regular
movement  of  one  of  the  fair  ladies  of  our  age,  would
certainly  be  far  wide  of  the  thought  and  genius  of  this
piece.  Such  studied  action  and  artificial  gesture  may
be  allowed  to  the  actors  and  actresses  of  the  stage.
But  the  good  painter  must  come  a  little  nearer  to
truth,  and  take  care  that  his  action  be  not  theatrical,
or  at  second  hand ;  but  original,  and  drawn  from  nature
herself.  Now  although  in  the  ordinary  tenour  of  dis
course,  the  action  of  the  party  might  be  allowed  to
appear  so  far  governed  and  composed  by  art,  as  to
retain  that  regular  contrast  and  nice  balance  of  move
ment  which  painters  are  apt  to  admire  as  the  chief
grace  of  figures;  yet  in  this  particular  case,  where  the
natural  eagerness  of  debate,  supported  by  a  thorough
antipathy  and  animosity,  is  joined  to  a  sort  of


46  SECOND   CHARACTERS

enthusiastic  agitation  incident  to  our  prophetic  dame,
there  can  be  little  of  that  fashionable  mien,  or  genteel
air  admitted.  The  painter  who,  in  such  a  piece  as  we
describe,  is  bound  to  preserve  the  heroic  style,  will
doubtless  beware  of  representing  his  heroine  as  a  mere
scold.  Yet  this  is  certain,  that  it  were  better  for  him
to  expose  himself  to  the  meanness  of  such  a  fancy,
and  paint  his  lady  in  a  high  rant,  according  to  the
common  weakness  of  the  sex,  than  to  engage  in  the
embellishment  of  the  mere  form;  and  forgetting  the
character  of  severity  and  reprimand  belonging  to  the
illustrious  rival,  present  her  to  us  a  fair  specious
personage,  free  of  emotion,  and  without  the  least  bent
or  movement  which  should  express  the  real  pathetic  of
the  kind.


CHAPTER    IV

OF    THE    THIRD    FIGURE

(1)  CONCERNING  Pleasure  there  needs  little  to  be
said,  after  what  has  been  already  remarked  in  relation
to  the  two  preceding  figures.     The  truth  of  appearance,
that  of  history,  and  even  the  decorum  itself  (according
to  what  has  been  explained  above)  require  evidently,
that  in  this  period  or  instant  described,  Pleasure  should
be   found   silent.     She  can   have    no   other   language
allowed  her  than   that   merely  of  the   eyes.     And   it
would  be  a  happy  management  for  her  in  the  design,
if  in  turning  her  eyes  to  meet  those  of  Hercules,  she
should  find  his  head  and  face  already  turned  so  much
on  the  contrary  side,  as  to  shew  it  impossible  for  her
as  yet  to  discover  the  growing  passion  of  this  hero  in
favour  of  her  rival.      By  this  means  she  might  still  with
good  right  retain  her  fond  airs  of  dalliance  and  court
ship  ;  as  having  yet  discovered  no  reason  she  has  to  be
dissatisfied.

(2)  She  may  be  drawn  either  standing,  leaning,
sitting,  or  lying;  without  a  crown,  or  crowned  either
with  roses,  or  with  myrtle;  according  to  the  painter's
fancy.     And  since  in  this  third  figure  the  painter  has
so  great  a  liberty  left  him,  he  may  make  good  advantage
of  it  for  the  other  two,  to  which  this  latter  may  be
subjected,  as  the  last  in  order,  and  of  least  consequence.

(3)  That  which   makes   the  greatest  difficulty  in
the  disposition   or  ordinance  of  this  figure  Pleasure,
is,  that  notwithstanding  the  supine  air  and  character  of
ease  and  indolence,  which  should  be  given   her,  she
must  retain  still  so  much  life  and  action,  as  is  sufficient


48  SECOND    CHARACTERS

to  express  her  persuasive  effort,  and  manner  of  indica
tion  towards  her  proper  paths;  those  of  the  flowery
kind,  and  vale  below,  whither  she  would  willingly  guide
our  hero's  steps.  Now  should  this  effort  be  over-
strongly  expressed;  not  only  the  supine  character  and
air  of  indolence  would  be  lost  in  this  figure  of  Pleasure ;
but,  what  is  worse,  the  figure  would  seem  to  speak,  or
at  least  appear  so,  as  to  create  a  double  meaning,  or
equivocal  sense  in  painting;  which  would  destroy  what
we  have  established  as  fundamental,  concerning  the
absolute  reign  of  silence  throughout  the  rest  of  the
piece,  in  favour  of  Virtue,  the  sole  speaking  party  at
this  instant,  or  third  period  of  our  history.

(4)  According  to  a  computation,   which    in    this
way  of  reasoning  might  be  made,  of  the  whole  motion
or  action  to  be  given  to  our  figure  of  Pleasure ;  she
should  scarce  have  one-fifth  reserved   for  that  which
we  may  properly  call  active  in  her,  and  have  already
termed  her  persuasive  or  indicative  effort.     All  besides
should  be  employed  to  express  (if  one  may  say  so)  her
inaction,  her  supineness,  effeminacy,  and  indulgent  ease.
The  head  and  body  might  entirely  favour  this  latter
passion.     One  hand  might  be  absolutely  resigned  to  it;
serving  only  to  support,  with  much  ado,  the  lolling  lazy
body.     And  if  the  other  hand  be  required  to  express
some  kind  of  gesture  or  action  toward  the   road  of
pleasures    recommended    by    this    dame;    the   gesture
ought  however  to  be  slight  and  negligent,  in  the  manner
of  one  who  has  given  over  speaking,  and  appears  weary
and  spent.

(5)  For  the  shape,  the  person,   the  complexion,
and  what  else  may  be  further  remarked  as  to  the  air
and  manner  of  Pleasure;  all  this  is  naturally  compre
hended   in  the  opposition,  as  above    stated,  between
herself  and  Virtue.


CHAPTER   V

OF    THE    ORNAMENTS    OF    THE    PIECE  ;     AND    CHIEFLY
OF    THE    DRAPERY,    AND    PERSPECTIVE

(i)  IT  is  sufficiently  known,  how  great  a  liberty
painters  are  used  to  take,  in  the  colouring  of  their
habits,  and  of  other  draperies  belonging  to  their
historical  pieces.  If  they  are  to  paint  a  Roman  people,
they  represent  them  in  different  dresses;  though  it  be
certain  the  common  people  among  them  were  habited
very  near  alike,  and  much  after  the  same  colour.  In
like  manner,  the  Egyptians,  Jews,  and  other  ancient
nations,  as  we  may  well  suppose,  bore  in  this  particular
their  respective  likeness  or  resemblance  one  to  another,
as  at  present  the  Spaniards,  Italians,  and  several  other
people  of  Europe.  But  such  a  resemblance  as  this
would,  in  the  way  of  painting,  produce  a  very  untoward
effect;  as  may  easily  be  conceived.  For  this  reason
the  painter  makes  no  scruple  to  introduce  philosophers,
and  even  apostles,  in  various  colours,  after  a  very
extraordinary  manner.  It  is  here  that  the  historical
truth  must  of  necessity  indeed  give  way  to  that  which
we  call  poetical,  as  being  governed  not  so  much  by
reality,  as  by  probability,  or  plausible  appearance.  So
that  a  painter,  who  uses  his  privilege  or  prerogative  in
this  respect,  ought  however  to  do  it  cautiously,  and
with  discretion.  And  when  occasion  requires  that  he
should  present  us  his  philosophers  or  apostles  thus
variously  coloured,  he  must  take  care  at  least  so  to
mortify  his  colours,  that  these  plain  poor  men  may  not
appear,  in  his  piece,  adorned  like  so  many  lords  or
princes  of  the  modern  garb.


K.


50  SECOND    CHARACTERS

(2)  If,    on    the    other   hand,    the    painter    should
happen  to  take  for  his  subject  some  solemn  entry  or
triumph,  where,  according  to  the  truth  of  fact,  all  manner
of  magnificence  had  without  doubt  been  actually  dis
played,  and  all   sorts   of  bright  and   dazzling  colours
heaped    together    and    advanced,    in    emulation,    one
against  another;  he  ought  on  this  occasion,  in  breach
of  the    historical   truth,   or    truth    of  fact,    to    do   his
utmost  to  diminish   and   reduce  the   excessive  gaiety
and  splendour  of  those  objects,  which  would  otherwise
raise  such  a  confusion,  oppugnancy,  and  riot  of  colours,
as  would   to  any  judicious  eye  appear  absolutely  in
tolerable.

(3)  It  becomes  therefore  an  able  painter  in  this,
as  well  as  in  the  other  parts  of  his  workmanship,  to
have  regard  principally,  and  above  all,  to  the  agree
ment  or  correspondency  of  things.     And  to  that  end
it  is  necessary  he  should  form  in  his  mind  a  certain
note  or  character  of  unity,  which  being  happily  taken,
would,  out  of  the  many  colours  of  his  piece,  produce
(if  one  may  say  so)  a  particular  distinct  species  of  an
original  kind:  like  those  compositions  in  music,  where
among  the  different  airs  (such  as  sonatas,  entries,  or
sarabands)  there  are  different  and  distinct  species  ;  of
which  we  may  say  in  particular,  as  to  each,   "that  it
has   its  own   proper  character  or  genius,  peculiar  to
itself."

(4)  Thus  the  harmony  of  painting  requires,  "that
in  whatever  key  the  painter  begins  his  piece,  he  should
be  sure  to  finish  it  in  the  same."

(5)  This  regulation  turns  on  the  principal  figure,
or  on  the  two  or  three  which  are  eminent,  in  a  tablature
composed  of  many.     For  if  the  painter  happens  to  give
a  certain  height  or  richness  of  colouring  to  his  principal
figure ;  the  rest  must  in  proportion  necessarily  partake
this  genius.      But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  painter  should
have  chanced  to  give  a  softer  air,  with  more  gentleness
and  simplicity  of  colouring,  to  his  principal  figure;  the
rest  must  bear  a  character  proportionable,  and  appear


THE    HERCULES   OF    PRODICUS       51

in  an  extraordinary  simplicity;  that  one  and  the  same
spirit  may,  without  contest,  reign  through  the  whole  of
his  design.

(6)  Our  historical  draught  of  Hercules  will  afford
us  a  very  clear  example  in  the  case.      For  considering
that  the  hero  is  to  appear  on  this  occasion  retired  and
gloomy;  being  withal  in  a  manner  naked,  and  without
any  other  covering  than  a  lion's  skin,  which  is  itself
of  a  yellow  and  dusky  colour;  it  would  be  really  im
practicable   for  a  painter   to   represent    this   principal
figure  in  any  extraordinary  brightness  or  lustre.     From
whence   it   follows,  that   in   the   other   inferior  figures
or  subordinate    parts   of  the  work,  the   painter  must
necessarily  make   use   of  such    still    quiet   colours,  as
may  give  to  the  whole  piece  a  character  of  solemnity
and  simplicity,  agreeable  with  itself.      Now  should  our
painter  honestly  go  about  to  follow  his  historian,  accord
ing  to  the  literal  sense  of  the  history,  which  represents
Virtue  to  us  in  a  resplendent  robe  of  the  purest  and
most  glossy  white,    it   is    evident  he   must  after  this
manner  destroy  his  piece.     The  good  painter  in  this,
as  in  all  other  occasions  of  like  nature,  must  do  as  the
good  poet;    who  undertaking  to  treat  some   common
and  known  subject,  refuses  however  to  follow  strictly,
like  a  mere  copyist  or  translator,  any  preceding  poet
or  historian;  but  so  orders  it,  that  his  work  in  itself
becomes  really  new  and  original.

Publica  materies  privati  juris  erit,  si

Nee  circa  vilem  patulumque  moraberis  orbem;

Nee  verbum  verbo  curabis  redder e  fidus

Interpres^.

(7)  As  for  what  relates  to  the  perspective  or  scene
of  our  historical  piece,  it  ought  so  to  present  itself,  as
to  make  us  instantly  conceive  that  it  is  in  the  country,
and  in  a  place  of  retirement,  near  some  wood  or  forest,
that    this    whole    action    passes.       For    it    would    be

1  Horat.  de  Art.  Poet.  11.  131-4.

4—2


52  SECOND   CHARACTERS

impertinent  to  bring  architecture  or  buildings  of  what
ever  kind  in  view,  as  tokens  of  company,  diversion,
or  affairs,  in  a  place  purposely  chosen  to  denote
solitude,  thoughtfulness,  and  premeditated  retreat.
Besides,  that  according  to  the  poets  (our  guides  and
masters  in  this  art)  neither  the  goddesses,  nor  other
divine  forms  of  whatever  kind,  cared  ever  to  present
themselves  to  human  sight,  elsewhere  than  in  these
deep  recesses.  And  it  is  worth  observing  here,  how
particularly  our  philosophical  historian  affects  to  speak,
by  way  of  prevention,  of  the  solitary  place  where
Hercules  was  retired,  and  of  his  thoughtfulness  pre
ceding  this  apparition :  which  from  these  circumstances
may  be  construed  henceforward  as  a  mere  dream ;  but
as  such,  a  truly  rational,  and  divine  one.

(8)  As  to  the  fortress,  temple,  or  palace,  of  Virtue,
situated   on  a  mountain,  after  the  emblematical  way,
as  we  see  represented  in  some  pieces  formed  upon  this
subject;  there  is  nothing  of  this  kind  expressed  by  our
historian.     And  should  this  or  any  thing  of  a  like  nature
present  itself  in  our  design,  it  would  fill  the  mind  with
foreign  fancies,  and  mysterious  views,  no  way  agree
able  to  the  taste  and  genius  of  this  piece.      Nor  is  there
any  thing,  at  the   same  time,  on    Pleasure's   side,   to
answer,  by  way  of  opposition,  to  this  palace  of  Virtue;
which,  if  expressed,  would  on  this  account  destroy  the
just  simplicity  and  correspondency  of  our  work.

(9)  Another  reason  against  the  perspective  part,
the  architecture,  or  other  studied   ornaments    of  the
landscape  kind,  in  this  particular  piece  of  ours,  is,  that
in  reality  there  being  no  occasion  for  these  appearances,
they  would  prove  a  mere  incumbrance  to  the  eye,  and
would  of  necessity  disturb  the  sight,  by  diverting  it
from    that  which    is   principal,    the    history  and    fact.
Whatsoever  appears  in   a  historical  design,  which  is
not  essential   to   the  action,  serves  only  to  confound
the  representation,  and  perplex  the  mind:  more  par
ticularly,  if  these  episodic  parts  are  so  lively  wrought,
as  to  vie  with  the  principal  subject,  and  contend  for


THE    HERCULES   OF    PRODICUS       53

precedency  with  the  figures  and  human  life.  A  just
design,  or  tablature,  should,  at  first  view,  discover,
what  nature  it  is  designed  to  imitate;  what  life,  whether
of  the  higher  or  lower  kind,  it  aims  chiefly  to  represent.
The  piece  must  by  no  means  be  equivocal  or  dubious;
but  must  with  ease  distinguish  itself,  either  as  historical
and  moral,  or  as  perspective  and  merely  natural.  If
it  be  the  latter  of  these  beauties,  which  we  desire  to
see  delineated  according  to  its  perfection,  then  the
former  must  give  place.  The  higher  life  must  be
allayed,  and  in  a  manner  discountenanced  and  obscured;
whilst  the  lower  displays  itself,  and  is  exhibited  as
principal.  Even  that  which  according  to  a  term  of
art  we  commonly  call  still-life,  and  is  in  reality  of  the
last  and  lowest  degree  of  painting,  must  have  its
superiority  and  just  preference  in  a  tablature  of  its
own  species.  It  is  the  same  in  animal  pieces,  where
beasts  or  fowl  are  represented.  I  n  landscape,  inanimates
are  principal:  it  is  the  earth,  the  water,  the  stones  and
rocks  which  live.  All  other  life  becomes  subordinate.
Humanity,  sense,  manners,  must  in  this  place  yield,  and
become  inferior.  It  would  be  a  fault  even  to  aim  at  the
expression  of  any  real  beauty  in  this  kind,  or  go  about
to  animate  or  heighten  in  any  considerable  degree  the
accompanying  figures  of  men,  or  deities  which  are  acci
dentally  introduced,  as  appendices,  or  ornaments,  in
such  a  piece.  But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  human  species
be  that  which  first  presents  itself  in  a  picture ;  if  it  be
the  intelligent  life,  which  is  set  to  view;  it  is  the  other
species,  the  other  life,  which  must  then  surrender  and
become  subservient.  The  merely  natural  must  pay
homage  to  the  historical  or  moral.  Every  beauty,
every  grace  must  be  sacrificed  to  the  real  beauty  of
this  first  and  highest  order.  For  nothing  can  be  more
deformed  than  a  confusion  of  many  beauties:  and  the
confusion  becomes  inevitable,  where  the  subjection  is
not  complete.

(10)     By  the  word  moral  are  understood,  in  this
place,  all  sorts  of  judicious  representations  of  the  human


54  SECOND    CHARACTERS

passions;  as  we  see  even  in  battle  pieces;  excepting
those  of  distant  figures,  and  the  diminutive  kind;  which
may  rather  be  considered  as  a  sort  of  landscape.  In  all
other  martial  pieces,  we  see  expressed  in  lively  action,
the  several  degrees  of  valour,  magnanimity,  cowardice,
terror,  anger,  according  to  the  several  characters  of
nations,  and  particular  men.  It  is  here  that  we  may
see  heroes  and  chiefs  (such  as  the  Alexanders  or
Constantines)  appear,  even  in  the  hottest  of  the  action,
with  a  tranquillity  and  sedateness  of  mind  peculiar  to
themselves :  which  is,  indeed,  in  a  direct  and  proper
sense,  profoundly  moral.

(n)  But  as  the  moral  part  is  differently  treated
in  a  poem,  from  what  it  is  in  history,  or  in  a  philo
sophical  work;  so  must  it,  of  right,  in  painting  be  far
differently  treated,  from  what  it  naturally  is,  either  in
the  history,  or  poem.  For  want  of  a  right  under
standing  of  this  maxim,  it  often  happens  that  by
endeavouring  to  render  a  piece  highly  moral  and
learned,  it  becomes  thoroughly  ridiculous  and  im
pertinent.

(12)  For  the  ordinary  works  of  sculpture,  such  as
the  low-relieves,  and  ornaments  of  columns  and  edifices,
great  allowance  is  made.  The  very  rules  of  perspective
are  here  wholly  reversed,  as  necessity  requires,  and  are
accommodated  to  the  circumstance  and  genius  of  the
place  or  building,  according  to  a  certain  oeconomy  or
order  of  a  particular  and  distinct  kind;  as  will  easily
be  observed  by  those  who  have  thoroughly  studied  the
Trajan  and  Antoninus  pillars,  and  other  relieve-works
of  the  ancients.  In  the  same  manner,  as  to  pieces  of
engraved  work,  medals,  or  whatever  shews  itself  in
one  substance  (as  brass  or  stone),  or  only  by  shade
and  light  (as  in  ordinary  drawings,  or  stamps),  much
also  is  allowed,  and  many  things  admitted,  of  the
fantastic,  miraculous,  or  hyperbolical  kind.  It  is  here
that  we  have  free  scope,  withal,  for  whatever  is  learned,
emblematical,  or  enigmatic.  But  for  the  completely
imitative  and  illusive  art  of  painting,  whose  character


THE    HERCULES   OF    PRODICUS       55

it  is  to  employ  in  her  works  the  united  force  of  different
colours;  and,  who  surpassing  by  so  many  degrees,  and
in  so  many  privileges,  all  other  human  fiction,  or
imitative  art,  aspires  in  a  directer  manner  towards
deceit,  and  a  command  over  our  very  sense;  she  must  of
necessity  abandon  whatever  is  over-learned,  humorous,
or  witty;  to  maintain  herself  in  what  is  natural,  credible,
and  winning  of  our  assent:  that  she  may  thus  acquit
herself  of  what  is  her  chief  province,  the  specious
appearance  of  the  object  she  represents.  Otherwise
we  shall  naturally  bring  against  her  the  just  criticism
of  Horace,  on  the  scenical  representation  so  nearly
allied  to  her:

Quodcunque  ostendis  mihi  sic,  incredulus  odi.

(13)  We  are  therefore  to  consider  this  as  a  sure
maxim  or  observation  in  painting,  "that  a  historical
and  moral  piece  must  of  necessity  lose  much  of  its
natural  simplicity  and  grace,  if  any  thing  of  the  emble
matical  or  enigmatic  kind  be  visibly  and  directly  inter
mixed."  As  if,  for  instance,  the  circle  of  the  Zodiac1,
with  its  twelve  signs,  were  introduced.  Now  this  being
an  appearance  which  carries  not  any  matter  of  similitude
or  colourable  resemblance  to  any  thing  extant  in  real
nature;  it  cannot  possibly  pretend  to  win  the  sense,  or
gain  belief,  by  the  help  of  any  poetical  enthusiasm,
religious  history,  or  faith.  For  by  means  of  these,
indeed,  we  are  easily  induced  to  contemplate  as  realities
those  divine  personages  and  miraculous  forms,  which
the  leading  painters,  ancient  and  modern,  have  speciously
designed,  according  to  the  particular  doctrine  or  theo
logy  of  their  several  religious  and  national  beliefs.  But
for  our  tablature  in  particular,  it  carries  nothing  with
it  of  the  mere  emblematical  or  enigmatic  kind:  since
for  what  relates  to  the  double  way  of  the  vale  and

1  This  is  what  Raphael  himself  has  done,  in  his  famous  design  of  The
Judgment  of  Paris.  But  this  piece  having  never  been  painted,  but
designed  only  for  Marc  Antonio's  engraving,  it  comes  not  within  our
censure ;  as  appears  by  what  is  said  in  the  paragraph  just  preceding.


56  SECOND   CHARACTERS

mountain,  this  may  naturally  and  with  colourable
appearance  be  represented  at  the  mountain's  foot.
But  if  on  the  summit  or  highest  point  of  it,  we  should
place  the  fortress,  or  palace  of  virtue,  rising  above  the
clouds,  this  would  immediately  give  the  enigmatical
mysterious  air  to  our  picture,  and  of  necessity  destroy
its  persuasive  simplicity,  and  natural  appearance.

(14)  In  short,  we  are  to  carry  this  remembrance
still  along  with  us,  "that  the  fewer  the  objects  are,
besides  those  which  are  absolutely  necessary  in  a  piece,
the  easier  it  is  for  the  eye,  by  one  simple  act  and  in
one  view,  to  comprehend  the  sum  or  whole."  The
multiplication  of  subjects,  though  subaltern,  renders
the  subordination  more  difficult  to  execute  in  the
ordinance  or  composition  of  a  work.  And  if  the
subordination  be  not  perfect,  the  order  (which  makes
the  beauty)  remains  imperfect.  Now  the  subordination
can  never  be  perfect,  except  "when  the  ordinance
is  such,  that  the  eye  not  only  runs  over  with  ease  the
several  parts  of  the  design  (reducing  still  its  view  each
moment  on  the  principal  subject  on  which  all  turns),
but  when  the  same  eye,  without  the  least  detainment
in  any  of  the  particular  parts,  and  resting,  as  it  were,
immovable  in  the  middle,  or  centre  of  the  tablature,
may  see  at  once,  in  an  agreeable  and  perfect  corre
spondency,  all  which  is  there  exhibited  to  the  sight1."

1  This  is  what  the  Grecian  masters  so  happily  expressed,  by  the  single
word  (va-iivoirTov.     See  'Characteristics'  vol.  I.  pp.  143,  etc.


CHAPTER   VI

OF    THE    CASUAL    OR    INDEPENDENT    ORNAMENTS

(1)  THERE  remains  for  us  now  to  consider  only
of  the  separate  ornaments,  independent  both  of  figures
and  perspective ;  such  as  the  machine-work1  or  divinities
in    the    sky,   the   winds,   cupids,   birds,  animals,  dogs,
or  other  loose  pieces  which  are  introduced  without  any
absolute  necessity,  and  in  a  way  of  humour.      But  as
these  belong  chiefly  to  the  ordinary  life,  and   to  the
comic    or    mixed    kind;    our   tablature,    which   on   the
contrary  is  wholly  epic,  heroic,  and  in  the  tragic  style,
would  not  so  easily  admit  of  anything  in  this  light  way.

(2)  We   may  besides  consider,  that  whereas  the
mind  is  naturally  led  to  fancy  mystery  in  a  work  of
such  a  genius  or  style  of  painting  as  ours,  and  to  con
found  with  each  other  the  two  distinct  kinds   of  the
emblematic  and  merely  historical  or  poetic ;  we  should
take   care   not  to  afford  it  this  occasion  of  error  and
deviation,  by  introducing  into  a  piece  of  so  uniform
a  design,  such  appendices,  or  supplementary  parts,  as,
under  pretext  of  giving  light  to  the  history,  or  character
izing  the  figures,  should  serve  only  to  distract  or  dissi
pate  the  sight,  and  confound  the  judgment  of  the  more
intelligent  spectators.

(3)  "Will  it  then,  says  one,  be  possible  to  make
out  the  story  of  these  two  dames  in  company  with
Hercules,  without  otherwise  distinguishing  them  than
as  above  described  ? "  —We  answer,  it  is  possible;  and

1  This  is  understood  of  the  machine-work,  when  it  is  merely  orna
mental,  and  not  essential  in  the  piece ;  by  making  part  of  the  history,  or
fable  itself.


58  SECOND    CHARACTERS

not  that  only,  but  certain  and  infallible,  in  the  case  of
one  who  has  the  least  genius,  or  has  ever  heard  in
general  concerning  Hercules,  without  so  much  as
having  ever  heard  this  history  in  particular.  But  if
notwithstanding  this,  we  would  needs  add  some  exterior
marks,  more  declaratory  and  determinative  of  these
two  personages,  Virtue  and  Pleasure;  it  may  be  per
formed,  however,  without  any  necessary  recourse  to
what  is  absolutely  of  the  emblem-kind.  The  manner
of  this  may  be  explained  as  follows.

(4)  The  energy  or  natural  force  of  Virtue,  according
to  the   moral   philosophy  of  highest  note  among  the
ancients,   was   expressed   in   the   double  effect  of  for
bearance1  and  endurance,  or  what  we  may  otherwise
call  refrainment  and  support.     For  the  former,  the  bit
or  bridle,  placed  somewhere  on  the  side  of  Virtue,  may
serve   as  emblem   sufficient;    and  for  the  second,  the
helmet  may  serve  in  the  same  manner;  especially  since
they  are  each  of  them  appurtenances  essential  to  heroes
(who,  in  the  quality  of  warriors,  were  also  subduers  or
managers  of  horses2)  and  that  at  the  same  time  these
are  really  portable    instruments,   such   as   the   martial
dame;    who  represents  virtue,  may  be  well  supposed
to  have  brought  along  with  her.

(5)  On   the  side  of  Pleasure,   certain  vases,  and
other  pieces  of  embossed  plate,  wrought  in  the  figures
of  satyrs,  fauns,  and  bacchanals,  may  serve  to  express
the  debauches  of  the  table-kind.     And  certain  draperies
thrown  carelessly  on  the  ground,  and  hung  upon  a  neigh
bouring  tree,  forming  a  kind  of  bower  and  couch  for
this  luxurious  dame,  may  serve  sufficiently  to  suggest
the  thought  of  other  indulgences,  and  to  support  the
image  of  the  effeminate,  indolent,  and  amorous  passions.
Besides  that  for  this  latter  kind,  we  may  rest  satisfied,
it  is  what  the  painter  will  hardly  fail  of  representing


a,  'E-yKpareia  :  they  were  described  as  sisters  in  the  emblem
atic  moral  philosophy  of  the  ancients.  Whence  that  known  precept,
'exov  teal  'Antxov,  Sustine  et  Abstine.

2  Castor,  Pollux;  all  the  heroes  of  Homer;  Alexander  the  Great,  etc.


THE    HERCULES    OF    PRODICUS       59

to  the  full.  The  fear  is,  lest  he  should  overdo  this
part,  and  express  the  affection  too  much  to  the  life.
The  appearance  will,  no  doubt,  be  strongly  wrought  in
all  the  features  and  proportions  of  this  third  figure;
which  is  of  a  relish  far  more  popular,  and  vulgarly
engaging,  than  that  other  opposed  to  it,  in  our  historical
design.


CONCLUSION

(1)  WE  may  conclude  this  argument  with  a  general
reflection,  which  seems  to  arise  naturally  from  what  has
been  said  on  this  subject  in  particular:   "that  in  a  real
history-painter,  the  same  knowledge,  the  same  study,
and  views,  are  required,  as  in  a  real  poet."      Never  can
the  poet  (whilst  he  justly  holds  that  name)  become  a
relator,  or  historian  at  large.      He  is  allowed  only  to
describe  a  single  action;   not  the  actions  of  a  single
man,  or  people.     The  painter  is  a  historian  at  the  same
rate,  but  still  more  narrowly  confined,  as  in  fact  appears ;
since  it  would  certainly  prove  a  more  ridiculous  attempt
to  comprehend  two  or  three  distinct  actions  or  parts  of
history  in  one  picture,  than  to  comprehend  ten  times
the  number  in  one  and  the  same  poem.

(2)  It  is  well  known,  that  to  each  species  of  poetry,
there  are  natural  proportions  and  limits  assigned.     And
it  would  be  a  gross  absurdity  indeed  to  imagine,  that
in   a  poem   there   was   nothing   which    we    could    call
measure  or  number,  except  merely  in  the  verse.     An
elegy,  and  an  epigram  have  each  of  them  their  measure,
and  proportion,   as  well   as  a  tragedy,  or  epic  poem.
In   the  same    manner,    as    to    painting,   sculpture,    or
statuary,    there    are   particular   measures    which    form
what  we  call  a  piece:   as   for  instance,  in   mere  por
traiture,  a  head,  or  bust:    the  former  of  which  must
retain  always  the  whole,  or  at  least  a  certain  part  of
the   neck;    as   the   latter  the  shoulders,  and  a  certain
part  of  the  breast.     If  any  thing  be  added  or  retrenched,


60  SECOND   CHARACTERS

the  piece  is  destroyed.  It  is  then  a  mangled  trunk,
or  dismembered  body,  which  presents  itself  to  our
imagination;  and  this  too  not  through  use  merely,  or
on  the  account  of  custom,  but  of  necessity,  and  by  the
nature  of  the  appearance:  since  there  are  such  and
such  parts  of  the  human  body,  which  are  naturally
matched,  and  must  appear  in  company:  the  section,
if  unskilfully  made,  being  in  reality  horrid,  and  repre
senting  rather  an  amputation  in  surgery,  than  a  seemly
division  or  separation  to  art.  And  thus  it  is,  that  in
general,  through  all  the  plastic  arts,  or  works  of  imita
tion,  "whatsoever  is  drawn  from  nature,  with  the
intention  of  raising  in  us  the  imagination  of  natural
species  or  object,  according  to  real  beauty  and  truth,
should  be  comprised  in  certain  complete  portions,  or
districts,  which  represent  the  correspondency  or  union
of  each  part  of  nature  with  entire  nature  herself."  And
it  is  this  natural  apprehension,  or  anticipating  sense  of
unity,  which  makes  us  give  even  to  the  works  of  our
inferior  artisans,  the  name  of  pieces  by  way  of  excellence,
and  as  denoting  the  justness  and  truth  of  work.

(3)  In  order  therefore  to  succeed  rightly  in  the
formation  of  any  thing  truly  beautiful  in  this  higher
order  of  design;  it  were  to  be  wished  that  the  artist,
who  had  understanding  enough  to  comprehend  what
a  real  piece  or  tablature  imported,  and  who,  in  order
to  this,  had  acquired  the  knowledge  of  a  whole  and
parts,  would  afterwards  apply  himself  to  the  study  of
moral  and  poetic  truth :  that  by  this  means  the  thoughts,
sentiments,  or  manners,  which  hold  the  first  rank  in
his  historical  work,  might  appear  suitable  to  the  higher
and  nobler  species  of  humanity  in  which  he  practised,
to  the  genius  of  the  age  which  he  described,  and  to  the
principal  or  main  action  which  he  chose  to  represent.
He  would  then  naturally  learn  to  reject  those  false
ornaments  of  affected  graces,  exaggerated  passions,
hyperbolical  and  prodigious  forms ;  which  equally  with
the  mere  capricious  and  grotesque,  destroy  the  just
simplicity  and  unity,  essential  in  a  piece.  And  for  his


THE    HERCULES   OF    PRODICUS      61

colouring;  he  would  then  soon  find  how  much  it  became
him  to  be  reserved,  severe,  and  chaste,  in  this  particular
of  this  art;  where  luxury  and  libertinism  are,  by  the
power  of  fashion  and  the  modern  taste,  become  so
universally  established.

(4)  It  is  evident  however  from  reason  itself,  as
well  as  from  history1  and  experience,  that  nothing  is
more  fatal,  either  to  painting,  architecture,  or  the
other  arts,  than  this  false  relish,  which  is  governed
rather  by  what  immediately  strikes  the  sense,  than  by
what  consequentially  and  by  reflection  pleases  the  mind,
and  satisfies  the  thought  and  reason.  So  that  whilst
we  look  on  painting  with  the  same  eye,  as  we  view
commonly  the  rich  stuffs,  and  coloured  silks  worn  by
our  ladies,  and  admired  in  dress,  equipage,  or  furni
ture;  we  must  of  necessity  be  effeminate  in  our  taste,
and  utterly  set  wrong  as  to  all  judgment  and  knowMJpe
in  the  kind.  For  of  this  imitative  art  we  may  justly
say;  "that  though  it  borrows  help  indeed  from  colours,
and  uses  them,  as  means,  to  execute  its  designs;  it  has
nothing,  however,  more  wide  of  its  real  aim,  or  more
remote  from  its  intention,  than  to  make  a  shew  of
colours,  or  from  their  mixture,  to  raise  a  separate2  and
flattering  pleasure  to  the  sense."

1  See  Vitruvius  and  Pliny.

2  The  pleasure  is  plainly  foreign  and  separate,  as  having  no  concern
or  share  in  the  proper  delight  or  entertainment  which  naturally  arises
from  the  subject,  and  workmanship  itself.     For  the  subject,  in  respect  of
pleasure,  as  well  as  science,  is  absolutely  completed,  when  the  design  is
executed,  and  the  proposed  imitation  once  accomplished.     And  thus  it
always   is   the  best,  when   the  colours   are   most   subdued,  and  made
subservient.


TREATISE  III

THE  PICTURE  OF  CEBES

DISCIPLE    OF

SOCRATES

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GREEK

AND  ACCOMPANIED  WITH  NOTES


/ecu


Printed  in  lieu  of  the  unwritten   '  Appendix  concerning
the  Emblem  of  Cebes  '


THE  PICTURE  OF  CEBES

DISCIPLE   OF

SOCRATES'

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GREEK2

WE  were  walking  in  the  temple  of  Saturn,  where
we  took  a  view  of  a  great  many  other  presents  that
were  there.  But  there  was  placed  before  the  temple
a  picture,  in  which  there  were  certain  drawings  that
were  foreign  and  strange,  and  it  contained  certain
particular  fictions,  that  we  were  not  able  to  guess  what
they  were,  nor  whence  they  were  taken.  For  the
thing  described  seemed  to  us  two  neither  a  city  nor  a
camp,  but  an  enclosure  that  contained  within  it  other
enclosures,  one  greater,  and  one  less.  There  was  a
gate  in  the  first  enclosure,  and  at  the  gate  there  seemed
to  stand  a  great  crowd  of  people,  and  within  the
enclosure  there  appeared  a  multitude  of  women.  At
the  entrance  of  the  first  gate  and  enclosure  there  stood
an  old  man,  who  by  his  manner  expressed  his  giving
certain  directions  to  the  crowd*  that  was  entering3.
When  we  had  been  long  in  doubt  amongst  ourselves,
about  the  meaning  and  explication  of  these  fictions,  an
elderly  man  accosting  us  said  :

It  is  no  wonder  at  all  strangers,  that  you  are  at  a
loss  about  this  picture ;  for  there  are  not  many  of  the

1  [Cf.  Prefatory  Introduction,  supra,  p.  xviii.]

2  From  K.ffir)Tos  IItVa£.

3  It  is  the  entrance  into  the  moral  life,  and  not  the  natural  that  is  here
described.     Of  consequence  the  crowd  here  are  of  years  to  begin  their
rational  faculties  and  to  have  a  sense  of  their  own  in  moral  concerns.


PICTURE    OF    CEDES  65

country  that  understand  what  the  fiction  imparts.  For
it  is  not  a  present  made  by  any  citizen,  but  a  long  time
ago,  there  came  hither  a  certain  stranger,  a  man  of
great  prudence  and  wisdom,  one  who  both  in  his
words  and  action  pursued  that  method  of  life,  that  was
followed  by  Pythagoras  and  Parmenides1,  and  this
man  erected  this  temple  and  dedicated  this  picture  to
Saturn.

Did  you  know  this  man  then,  said  I,  and  have  you
seen  him  ?

Yes,  said  he,  and  long  admired  him,  for  when  I
was  a  young  man  I  have  heard  him  discourse  upon
many  noble  subjects,  and  have  often  heard  him  explain
the  meaning  of  this  fiction.

Pray  then,  said  I,  unless  you  have  some  urgent
business  on  your  hands  relate  it  to  us  for  we  are  mighty
desirous  to  hear  what  this  fiction  means.

Strangers  said  he,  I  do  not  at  all  grudge  you  that
satisfaction,   but  this  you  must  understand,    that    the
relation  carries  something  of  danger  with  it.
And  what  is  that  ?  said  I.

Why,  said  he,  that  if  you  give  attention  and  under
stand  the  things  that  are  told  you,  you  will  become
wise  and  happy  ;  but  if  you  do  not  you  will  become
fools  and  unhappy,  vicious  and  ignorant,  and  will  pass
your  days  wretchedly.  For  this  relation  is  like  the
riddle  that  the  sphinx  used  to  propose  to  men.  If  a
man  understood  it  he  came  off  with  safety,  but  if  he
understood  it  not  he  was  destroyed  by  the  sphinx.  It
is  the  same  with  this  relation,  for  folly  is  a  sphinx  in
men.  She  makes  dark  representations  to  man  of  what
is  good,  and  of  what  is  ill,  and  of  what  is  neither  good
nor  ill  in  life.  And  if  a  man  do  not  attain  to  the
knowledge  of  these  things  he  perishes  under  her  hands,
and  not  all  at  once,  as  he  who  dies  devoured  by  the
sphinx,  but  he  wastes  away  and  perishes  little  by  little
during  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  like  those  that  are

1  See  Note  (2)  infra,  p.  87.
R.  5


66  SECOND   CHARACTERS

delivered  over  to  torture.  But  if  a  man  attain  to  this
knowledge  then  folly  on  the  other  hand  perishes,  the
man  is  saved,  and  he  becomes  blessed  and  happy  in
the  whole  course  of  his  life.  Do  you  therefore  give
attention,  and  do  not  lend  an  idle  ear.

0  Hercules,  if  this  be  the  case  what  a  vast  desire
have  you  inspired  us  with.

Indeed,  said  he,  this  is  the  case.

Haste  then  and  give  us  the  relation  as  being  men
that  will  give  attention,  and  that  not  slightly,  since  the
consequences  both  ways  are  of  great  importance.
Taking  a  wand  therefore  into  his  hand,  and  holding  it
up  to  the  picture,

You  see,  said  he,  this  enclosure.

We  see  it.

This  in  the  first  place  you  must  know  that  this  is
called  life,  and  that  mighty  crowd  that  stands  at  the
gate,  these  are  they  that  are  upon  their  entrance  into
life.  The  old  man  that  stands  above  holding  a  paper
in  one  hand,  and  seems  to  be  showing  something  with
the  other,  is  called  the  divine  genius.  He  directs  those
that  are  going  in,  what  they  ought  to  do  when  they
are  entered  into  life,  and  shows  them  the  way  they
ought  to  take,  if  they  would  obtain  safety  in  life.

And  what  is  the  way  therefore,  said  I,  that  he
leads  them  to  take,  or  how  are  they  to  proceed  ?

You  see  near  the  gate,  said  he,  a  seat  that  stands  at
that  place  where  the  crowd  enters  ;  and  upon  it  sits  a
woman  whose  form  is  artfully  composed,  and  her  ap
pearance  engaging,  holding  a  kind  of  cup  in  her  hand.

1  see  her,  said  I,  but  who  is  she  ?

She  is  called  deceit,  said  he,  and  leads  all  men
astray.

And  what  is  it  that  she  does  ?

She  gives  a  draught  of  her  own  power  and  nature
to  those  that  are  entering  into  life.

And  what  is  this  draught  ?

Error,  said  he,  and  ignorance.

What  follows  upon  this  ?


PICTURE    OF    CEBES  67

When  they  have  taken  this  draught,  they  enter  into
life.

Do  all  drink  of  error,  or  do  they  not  ?

All  drink  of  it,  said  he,  but  some  more  and  some
less. — Now  don't  you  see  besides  within  the  gate  a
multitude  of  courtesans  of  all  kinds  of  shapes  and
figures  ?

I  do.

These  are  called  opinions,  desires,  and  pleasures,
and  when  the  crowd  enters  these  run  to  them,  and
severally  engage  themselves  to  every  one,  and  lead
them  away.

And  whither  do  they  lead  them  ?

Some  to  safety,  and  others  to  destruction,  by  means
of  deceit.

0  unfortunate  man,  how  sad  a  draught  is  this  that
you  speak  of!

And  yet  they  all  give  assurance  that  they  will
conduct  them  to  what  is  blest  and  to  a  life  that  is
happy  and  advantageous.  Some  by  means  of  ignorance
and  error  that  they  drank  from  the  cup  of  deceit,  do  not
find  the  true  way  in  life,  but  wander  about  at  random
as  you  see.  And  you  see  how  they  that  first  entered
rove  about  wherever  these  courtesans  direct  them.

1  see  it,  said  I,  but  what  is  that  woman  that  seems
to  be  a  blind  distracted  creature,  and  stands  upon  a
round  stone  ?

She  is  called  fortune,  said  he,  and  she  is  not  only
blind  but  distracted  and  deaf.

And  what  is  her  business  ?

Why  she  rambles  about  everywhere,  said  he,  some
she  robs  of  what  they  possess  and  gives  it  to  others,
then  she  immediately  takes  from  these  very  persons
the  things  that  she  gave  them,  and  gives  them  to
others  again,  immediately  and  as  chance  directs,  so
that  her  ensign  very  well  explains  her  nature.

What  is  the  ensign,  said  I  ?

Her  standing  upon  a  round  stone.

And  what  does  this  import  ?


68  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Why  that  her  gifts  are  neither  secure  nor  stable.
For  the  losses  and  disappointments  are  very  great  and
very  severe,  when  anyone  reposes  any  trust  in  her.

And  that  mighty  crowd  that  stands  about  her,  what
would  they  have  and  what  are  they  called  ?

These  are  called  the  inconsiderate,  and  all  beg  for
the  things  that  she  throws  about.

And  how  comes  it  to  pass  then  that  they  do  not  all
carry  countenances  alike,  but  that  some  seem  to  rejoice,
and  others  are  in  dejection  and  have  their  arms
extended  ?

Those  of  them  that  seem  to  rejoice  and  laugh  are
such  as  have  received  something  at  the  hands  of
fortune,  and  these  call  her  good  fortune,  they  that  seem
to  be  in  tears  and  have  their  arms  extended,  are  those
from  whom  she  has  taken  the  things  she  had  before
given  them,  and  these  on  the  other  hand  call  her  ill
fortune.

But  what  are  the  things  she  gives  them  that  the
receivers  are  so  rejoiced  at,  and  they  that  part  with
them  lament  for  with  tears  ?

These,  said  he,  are  such  things  as  by  the  multitude
are  accounted  good.

But  what  are  they  ?

They  are  smiles,  honour,  noble  birth,  children,
tyrannies,  kingships,  and  other  things  like  these.

And  how  comes  it  to  pass  then  that  these  things
are  not  good  ?

Concerning  these  matters,  said  he,  we  will  discourse
at  another  time.  But  now  let  us  mind  the  explication
of  the  fiction.

Be  it  so.

You  see  therefore,  when  you  have  passed  this  gate,
another  enclosure  that  stands  higher,  and  certain
women  that  stand  without  the  enclosure,  and  are
adorned  as  courtesans  used  to  be.

Yes,  I  do.

These  are  called  intemperance,  prodigality,  insa-
tiableness,  and  flattery.


PICTURE    OF   CEBES  69

And  why  do  they  stand  there  ?

They  keep  a  watch  upon  those  that  have  received
anything  from  fortune.

And  what  then  ?

They  run  to  them  and  engage  themselves  with
them,  and  flatter  them,  and  tell  them  that  they  shall
enjoy  a  life  of  pleasure,  without  trouble,  and  without
misfortune.  If  anyone  therefore  happens  to  be  per
suaded  by  them  into  luxury,  then  as  far  as  certain
bounds  go,  his  commerce  with  her  appears  agreeable
and  pleasant,  while  she  tickles  the  man,  but  afterwards
it  continues  so  no  longer  ;  for  when  he  recovers  his
senses  he  perceives  that  it  is  not  he  that  has  fed,  but
that  he  has  been  fed  upon  and  abused  by  her.  And
when  she  has  wasted  all  that  he  has  received  from
fortune,  he  is  forced  to  be  a  slave  to  these  women,  to
suffer  everything,  to  act  a  vile  indecent  part,  and  for
their  sake  to  do  everything  that  is  pernicious ;  such  as
to  defraud,  to  plunder  places  that  are  sacred,  to  swear
falsely,  to  betray,  to  rob,  and  all  things  that  are  of  the
like  kind.  Then  when  everything  fails  them,  they  are
delivered  over  to  torture.

And  what  is  she  ?

A  little  behind  these  women  you  see,  said  he,  a
kind  of  little  door  and  a  place  that's  narrow  and  dark  ?

I  do.

And  certain  vile  filthy  women  clothed  in  rags  seem
to  be  there  assembled  ?

It  is  so.

Of  these  therefore,  said  he,  she  that  holds  a  scourge
is  called  torture ;  she  that  holds  her  head  between  her
knees  is  called  grief ;  she  that  is  tearing  her  hair
vexation.

But  he  that  stands  by  these  women  is  of  ugly
aspect,  lank  in  shape  and  naked,  and  she  that  is  also
like  him,  lank  and  ugly,  who  are  they  ?

He,  said  he,  is  called  anguish,  and  she  his  sister
despair.  To  these  therefore  is  the  man  delivered ;
with  these  he  passes  his  days  in  torment ;  then  again


70  SECOND   CHARACTERS

he  is  thrown  into  another  apartment  to  misery  ;  and
thus  he  passes  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  all  kind  of
misery,  unless  by  fortune's  means  repentance  meet
with  him.

Then  what  happens,  if  repentance  meets  with  him  ?

She  takes  him  out  of  these  evils  and  gives  him
another  opinion,  and  another  desire  that  conducts  him
towards  true  learning,  but  likewise  towards  her,  who
is  called  false  learning.

And  what  happens  upon  this  ?

If  he  admits,  said  he,  of  that  opinion  that  conducts
him  towards  true  learning,  he  is  by  her  purified  and
saved  and  becomes  blessed  and  happy  in  the  whole
course  of  his  life.  If  he  does  not  admit  of  her,  he  is
again  led  astray  by  false  opinion.

0  Hercules  how  great  is  this  other  danger !     But
what  is  false  learning  ?  said  I.

Do  not  you  see  that  other  enclosure  ?

1  do,  said  I.

And  without  the  enclosure  does  not  there  stand  a
woman,  who  appears  extremely  clean  and  decent  ?

There  does.

This  woman  the  generality  of  man  and  the  incon
siderate  call  learning,  yet  she  is  not  so  but  she  is  the
false  learning,  said  he,  and  they  who  at  last  obtain
safety  when  they  have  a  mind  to  proceed  to  true
learning  first  touch  here.

Is  there  not  another  way  therefore  that  leads  to
true  learning  ?

There  is,  said  he.

But  those  men  who  walk  to  and  fro,  within  the
enclosure,  who  are  they  ?

These  are  the  lovers  of  false  learning,  but  are
deceived  and  think  that  they  are  conversing  with  true
learning.

And  what  are  these  called  ?

These  are  some  of  their  poets,  said  he,  some  skilled
in  rhetoric,  some  in  the  art  of  discoursing,  some  in
music,  some  in  arithmetic,  some  in  geometry,  some  in


PICTURE    OF    CEBES  71

astronomy,  some  are  patrons  of  pleasure,  some  Peri
patetics1,  some  critics,  and  people  of  the  like  kind.

But  those  women  that  seem  to  be  running  about,
and  that  resemble  those  others  among  whom  you  said
that  intemperance  and  her  attendants  were,  who  are
they?

These  are  the  very  same  persons,  said  he.

And  have  they  therefore  entrance  here  ?

Yes  indeed  they  have  but  it  is  but  sparingly,  and
not  as  within  the  first  enclosure.

And  have  opinions  too  access  hither  ?

They  have,  said  he,  for  the  draught  these  men  took
from  the  cup  of  deceit,  ignorance,  too,  and  together
with  her,  even  folly,  remains  still  with  them.  Nor  does
opinion  quit  them,  nor  the  rest  of  the  vicious  train,  till
renouncing  false  learning  they  enter  into  the  true  way,
and  take  a  draught  that  has  the  power  of  cleansing
them  from  the  taint  of  the  former,  till  they  throw  off
all  the  vices  they  retain,  till  they  throw  off  opinion,
ignorance,  and  every  other  vice  ;  and  thus  they  will  be
saved.  But  while  they  continue  with  false  learning
they  will  never  be  set  free  ;  nor  will  they  get  rid  of
any  vice  by  means  of  these  sciences.

Which  is  the  way  then  that  leads  to  true  learning  ?

Do  you  see  that  place  above  where  nobody  inhabits,
but  that  seems  deserted  ?

I  see  it.

You  see  then  a  certain  little  gate,  and  a  way  that
leads  to  that  gate  that  is  not  much  crowded  and  where
very  few  are  passing,  it  appears  to  be  very  rough  and
rocky,  and  passable  with  great  difficulty.

I  do,  said  I.

Then  there  appears  to  be  a  high  hill,  whose  ascent
is  extremely  narrow  with  deep  precipices  on  both  sides
of  it.

I  see  it.

This  therefore,  said  he,  is  the  way  that  leads  to
true  learning.

1  See  Note  (3),  infra,  p.  87.


72  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Truly  'tis  trouble  even  to  look  at.

Then  don't  you  see  above,  round  the  hill,  a  rock
that  is  of  great  extent,  high  and  a  precipice  all  round  ?

I  see  it,  said  I.

You  see  then  two  women  standing  upon  this  rock,
who  are  in  good  plight,  robust  and  healthy,  and  hold
out  their  hands  with  great  earnestness.

I  see  them,  but  what  are  they  called  ?  said  I.

The  one  is  called  abstinence,  and  the  other  patience,
and  they  are  sisters.

And  why  do  they  hold  out  their  hands  with  such
earnestness  ?

They  exhort  those  that  approach  the  place,  said  he,
to  take  courage  and  not  to  sink  under  their  difficulties,
telling  them  they  ought  to  bear  up  yet  a  little  while,
and  that  then  they  will  get  into  a  very  fair  and
beautiful  way.

And  when  they  get  up  to  the  rock  how  do  they
mount  it  ?  For  I  see  no  way  that  leads  up  to  it.

These  women  descend  from  the  rocks  toward
them,  and  draw  them  up  to  themselves.  Then  they
bid  them  rest  themselves,  and  after  a  little  time  they
give  them  strength  and  courage,  they  promise  to  place
them  with  true  learning,  and  they  show  them  the  way,
how  fair  it  is,  how  smooth,  how  easily  passable,  and
how  clean  and  free  from  all  defects,  as  you  see.

Indeed  it  appears  so.

And  then  do  you  see  above  that  grove  a  certain
place  that  appears  to  be  very  beautiful,  is  like  a
meadow,  and  has  a  great  deal  of  light  upon  it  ?

I  do.

And  do  you  observe  in  the  middle  of  that  meadow
another  enclosure,  and  another  gate  ?

It  is  so.      But  what  is  this  place  called  ?

The  habitation  of  the  happy,  said  he,  for  here
dwell  all  the  virtues  and  happiness  herself.

I  allow,  said  I,  that  it  is  indeed  a  very  beautiful
place.

You  see  then,  said  he,  that  by  the  gate  there  is


PICTURE    OF    CEBES  73

a  beautiful  woman,  her  countenance  sedate,  having
already  attained  to  the  middle  and  most  judicious  part
of  her  age,  in  a  plain  dress,  and  without  any  affected
ornaments,  and  she  stands  not  upon  a  round  stone,
but  upon  a  square  one,  that  rests  upon  the  ground
with  great  firmness,  and  that  with  her  there  are  two
others  that  seem  to  be  her  daughters.

It  appears  so.

Of  these  she  that  is  in  the  middle  is  called  learning  ;
one  is  called  truth,  and  the  other  persuasion.

And  why  does  she  stand  upon  a  square  stone  ?

It  is  her  ensign,  said  he,  and  imports  that  the  way
to  her  is  firm  and  secure  to  those  that  receive  them.

And  what  are  the  things  she  gives  ?

Courage  and  intrepidity,  said  he.

And  what  are  these  ?

They  consist  in  knowing  how  never  to  suffer
anything  severe  or  ill  in  life.

O  Hercules,  said  I,  what  noble  gifts!  But  for
what  reason  does  she  stand  so  without  the  enclosure  ?

That  she  may  attend  the  cure  of  those  that  come
up  to  her,  and  give  them  a  draught  of  her  own  cleansing
nature.  When  they  are  cleansed,  she  introduces  them
to  the  virtues.

How  is  this,  said  I,  for  I  do  not  understand  it  ?

But,  said  he,  you  will  understand,  that  if  a  man
happens  to  be  extremely  sick,  and  applying  himself  to
a  physician,  shall  discharge  all  the  causes  of  his
distemper  by  purging  medicines,  the  physician  then
presents  him  to  recovery  and  health.  But  that  if  he
do  not  submit  to  the  things  the  physician  ordered  him,
he  is  then  justly  rejected  and  perishes  under  his
distemper.

This  I  understand,  said  I.

In  the  same  manner  therefore,  when  anyone  comes
to  learning,  she  takes  care  of  his  cure  and  gives  him  a
draught  of  her  own  nature  and  power,  that  she  may
first  cleanse  away  and  discharge  all  the  ills  he  came
with.


74  SECOND   CHARACTERS

And  what  are  these  ?

Ignorance  and  error  that  he  drank  from  the  cup  of
deceit ;  arrogance,  desire,  intemperance,  wrath,  love  of
money,  and  all  those  things  that  he  was  filled  with  in
the  first  enclosure.

When  he  is  cleansed  therefore,  whither  does  she
send  him  ?

She  sends  him  in,  said  he,  to  knowledge,  and  to
the  other  virtues.

And  what  are  these  ?

Do  not  you  see,  said  he,  without  the  gate,  a  set  of
women,  how  handsome  they  appear  to  be,  and  how
decent  in  plain  habits,  no  way  effeminate  and  nice  ?
And  besides  how  artless  they  are,  and  without  any  of
these  affected  ornaments  that  the  others  have  ?

I  see  them,  said  I.      But  what  are  they  called  ?

The  first  of  them,  said  he,  is  called  knowledge  ;  and
the  others  are  her  sisters,  fortitude,  justice,  integrity,
modesty,  decency,  freedom,  abstinence  and  gentleness.

0  the  beautiful  personages!  said  I,  how  great  are
the  hopes  we  have  ?

Yes,  said  he,  if  you  understand  the  things  that  you
hear,  and  make  them  habitual  to  you.

We  will  use  our  utmost  care  in  it,  said  I.

Then,  said  he,  you  will  be  saved.

But  then  when  these  women  have  received  him,
whither  do  they  conduct  him  ?

To  their  mother,  said  he.

Who  is  she  ?

Happiness,  said  he.

And  what  is  she  ?

You  see  a  road  that  leads  to  that  building  that
stands  aloft,  and  is  the  summit  of  all  the  enclosure  ?

1  see  it.

And  at  the  porch  there  sits  a  sedate  comely  woman,
upon  a  lofty  seat,  in  a  liberal  but  plain  and  unaffected
dress,  and  crowned  with  a  flourishing  crown,  in  a  very
beautiful  manner.

So  it  appears  to  be.


PICTURE    OF   CEBES  75

This  therefore  is  happiness,  said  he.

When  therefore  anyone  gets  thither,  what  does
he  do  ?

Happiness  crowns  him  with  her  own  nature  and
power,  and  so  do  all  the  other  virtues,  as  those  are
crowned  who  have  gained  a  victory  in  the  greatest
conflicts.

And  what  are  these  conflicts  he  has  conquered  in  ?
said  I.

In  the  greatest,  said  he,  and  he  has  subdued  wild
beasts  of  the  greatest  size  ;  and  such  as  before  de
voured,  tortured  and  enslaved  him.  All  these  he  has
conquered  and  thrown  from  him,  and  he  is  become
master  of  himself,  so  as  that  they  are  now  slaves  to
him  as  he  was  before  to  them.

And  what  are  these  beasts  you  speak  of  ?  for  I  am
very  desirous  to  be  informed  of  it.

In  the  first  place,  said  he,  ignorance  and  error,  and
do  you  not  take  these  to  be  beasts  ?

Yes,  said  I,  and  very  mischievous  ones.

Then  grief,  anguish,  love  of  money,  intemperance,
and  the  rest  of  the  vicious  train,  all  these  he  has
subdued,  and  is  no  longer  subdued  by  them  as  before.

O  the  noble  acts,  said  I,  and  the  noble  victory !
But  pray  tell  me  this  too,  what  is  the  power  of  that
crown,  that  you  said  he  was  crowned  with  ?

A  power,  young  man,  that  makes  him  happy.  For
he  that  is  crowned  with  this  power  becomes  blessed
and  happy,  and  places  his  hopes  of  happiness  no  longer
in  other  things  but  himself.

O  how  noble  a  conquest  is  that  you  speak  of!
But  when  he  is  crowned,  what  does  he  do  or  whither
does  he  go  ?

The  virtues  take  him  and  conduct  him  to  that  place,
from  whence  he  came  before ;  and  show  him  the
people  that  pass  their  time  there,  how  ill  and  how
wretched  they  live,  how  they  make  shipwreck  in  life,
wander  and  are  led  about  in  subjection,  as  if  subdued
by  enemies,  some  by  intemperance,  some  by  arrogance,


76  SECOND   CHARACTERS

some  by  love  of  money,  some  by  vanity,  and  others  by
other  vices.  And  of  these  evils,  that  they  are  hampered
with,  they  are  not  able  to  extricate  themselves,  so  as
to  be  saved  and  to  reach  this  place,  but  they  pass  their
days  in  hurry  and  disorder ;  and  this  they  undergo
because  they  are  not  able  to  find  their  way  to  this
place,  for  they  have  forgot  the  commands  of  the
divinity.

I  think  you  say  very  right,  but  then  this  again,  I
am  at  a  loss  about,  why  the  virtues  should  show  him
the  place  from  whence  he  came  before.

He  was  not  exactly  apprized,  nor  did  he  under
stand,  said  he,  any  of  the  things  that  passed  there  ;
but  was  at  a  loss,  and  by  reason  of  ignorance  and
error,  that  he  had  sucked  in,  he  took  things  that  were
not  good  to  be  good,  and  things  that  were  not  ill  to
be  ill ;  by  which  means  he  lived  wretchedly  as  others
do  who  inhabit  there.  But  now  having  attained  to
the  knowledge  of  things  profitable  and  advantageous,
he  lives  handsomely  and  views  how  wretchedly  those
others  fare.

When  therefore  he  has  viewed  all  these  things,
what  does  he  do  and  whither  does  he  go  ?

Wherever  he  pleases,  said  he,  for  he  has  security
everywhere,  as  much  as  if  he  were  possessed  of  the
Corycian  cavern1.  And  wherever  he  comes  he  will
take  every  step  in  life  handsomely  and  well,  and  with
all  manner  of  security.  For  all  men  will  receive  him
joyfully,  as  patients  do  their  physician.

And  is  he  not  at  all  afraid  of  suffering  at  the  hands
of  those  women  that  you  called  beasts  ?

Not  at  all,  for  he  is  not  to  be  disordered,  either  by
vexation  or  grief,  or  intemperance,  or  love  of  money,
or  fear  of  poverty,  or  by  any  other  ill ;  for  he  is  master

1  In  the  ascent  of  the  mountain  Parnassus,  from  Delphi,  there  is  a
cavern  called  Corycian  from  a  nymph  Corygia.  It  is  said  tc  have  been
sacred  to  the  nymphs  and  to  Pan.  The  ascent  to  it  from  Delphi  is  passable
for  a  mule  or  horse ;  but  from  the  cavern  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain
the  ascent  is  difficult  even  for  a  man.


PICTURE    OF    CEBES  77

of  them  all,  and  is  above  all  these  things  that  afflicted
him  before,  like  those  that  deal  in  vipers.  For  these
animals  that  do  all  others  mischief,  even  to  death,  give
them  no  pain  because  they  have  an  antidote ;  so  nothing
affects  this  man  because  he  has  an  antidote.

I  think  you  say  right,  but  tell  me  this  further ;  who
are  those  that  seem  to  be  coming  from  thence  down
the  hill,  some  of  them  crowned  and  giving  signs  of
satisfaction,  some  without  crowns  in  an  abject  con
dition,  who  seem  to  have  their  legs  and  their  heads
bruised,  and  are  held  by  a  certain  woman  ?

They  that  are  crowned  are  such  as  have  safely
attained  to  learning,  and  are  in  joy  upon  their  having
gained  her.  They  that  are  without  crowns  are  such
as  have  been  rejected  by  learning,  and  are  returning
back  in  a  vile  and  wretched  condition  ;  and  such  as
losing  all  courage,  after  having  mounted  as  far  as
patience,  do  again  turn  back  and  rave  about  without
pursuing  any  certain  way.

But  those  women  that  attend  them,  who  are  they  ?

Grief,  said  he,  and  vexations,  despair,  ignominy
and  ignorance.

All  manner  of  evils  you  then  say  attend  them.

All  manner  of  evils,  said  he,  do  indeed  attend
them,  and  when  they  come  into  the  first  enclosure  to
luxury  and  intemperance,  they  do  not  blame  them
selves,  but  they  presently  fall  to  defame  learning.
And  they  tell  how  calamitous,  wretched,  and  unhappy,
they  are  who  direct  their  course  thither,  who  quitting
that  method  of  life,  which  they  themselves  pursue,  pass
their  days  in  misery,  and  do  not  enjoy  the  good
and  valuable  things  that  they  themselves  are  possessed
of.

What  are  the  things  that  they  call  good  ?

Dissolution  and  intemperance,  as  one  may  in  short
express  it.  For  to  be  cramming  themselves  like  beasts
they  take  to  be  the  enjoyment  of  the  greatest  good
in  the  world.

But  those    other    women,   that   are    coming    from


78  SECOND   CHARACTERS

thence,  who  are  cheerful  and  laughing,  what  are  they
called  ?

Opinions,  said  he,  who  having  conducted  to  learn
ing,  those,  that  are  introduced  to  the  virtues,  turn  back
again  in  order  to  fetch  more.  And  they  relate  how
happy  those  already  are,  that  they  before  conducted.

And  have  these  then,  said  I,  entrance  to  the  virtues  ?

No,  said  he,  for  it  is  not  allowed  that  opinions
should  have  entrance  to  knowledge.  But  opinions
deliver  men  to  learning,  and  when  learning  has  re
ceived  them,  they  then  turn  back  again,  and  freight
anew  with  other  effects.

These  things  I  think  you  have  related  very  well ;
but  you  have  not  yet  discovered  to  us  what  it  is  that
diyinity  directs  those  to  do  that  are  entering  into  life.

He  bids  them  to  courage,  said  he.  And  do  you
therefore  take  courage  for  I  will  relate  all  to  you  and
not  omit  anything.

You  speak  very  kindly  and  handsomely,  said  I.

Therefore  holding  out  his  hand  again,  you  see,
said  he,  that  woman,  that  seems  to  be  blind,  and  to
stand  upon  a  round  stone,  and  that  I  lately  told  you
was  called  fortune.

We  see  her.

He  bids  them  put  no  trust  in  her,  and  not  to  believe
that  they  have  firm  and  secure  possession  of  anything
whatever,  that  any  of  them  receive  from  her,  not  to
account  it  their  own ;  for  nothing  hinders  her  from
taking  those  things  away  and  giving  them  to  others.
For  this  she  is  frequently  accustomed  to  do ;  and  for
this  reason,  he  bids  them  not  to  subject  themselves  to
her  for  the  presents  that  she  makes  them,  and  neither
to  rejoice  when  she  gives,  nor  to  be  dejected  when
she  takes  away  ;  and  neither  to  reproach  her  nor  com
mend  her.  For  she  does  nothing  with  reason,  but
at  random,  and  as  things  fall  out,  as  I  told  you  before.
For  this  reason  therefore  the  divinity  orders,  that
men  should  wonder  at  nothing  that  she  does,  and
they  should  not  resemble  corrupt  bankers,  for  these


PICTURE    OF   CEDES  79

people  when  they  receive  money  from  men,  are  de
lighted  and  reckon  it  their  own,  but  when  they  are
called  upon  to  return  it  they  take  offence,  and  think
that  they  suffer  great  hardship,  not  remembering  that
they  received  these  deposits  to  this  very  end,  that  the
person  depositing  them  may  take  them  away  again
without  any  hinderance.  The  divinity  therefore  orders
that  men  should  be  just  so  disposed  with  respect  to
the  presents  of  fortune,  and  should  remember  that  she
is  of  such  a  nature,  as  to  take  away  the  things  she
has  given,  and  again  immediately  to  bestow  abundance
more,  then  presently  to  take  away  the  things  she  so
gives,  and  not  only  those,  but  what  men  were  pos
sessed  of  before.  He  orders  therefore  that  they
should  receive  the  things  that  she  gives,  and  with
them  go  their  way  quietly  to  obtain  a  stable  and
secure  gift.

And  what  is  this  ?  said  I.

The   gift  that  they  will  receive  from  learning,  if
they  safely  attain  to  her.

And  what  is  that  ?

The  true  knowledge,  said  he,  of  things  profitable,
and  this  is  a  secure  gift,  stable  and  unchangeable.
Therefore  he  orders  men  to  fly  quickly  to  her,  and
when  they  are  come  to  these  women  that  I  said
were  called  intemperance  and  luxury,  he  bids  them
quickly  depart  thence  and  to  trust  to  none  of  those
neither  in  anything  till  they  come  to  false  learning,
and  here  he  bids  them  pass  sometimes,  take  what
they  think  fit  from  her,  as  provision  upon  their  journey,
and  then  quickly  to  pass  on  to  true  learning.  These
are  the  things  that  the  divinity  enjoins.  Whoever
therefore  acts  contrary  to  these  in  anything,  or  gives
but  slight  attention  to  them,  is  a  wretch  and  perishes
wretchedly.  And  now  strangers,  the  fiction  that  is
contained  in  the  picture  is  such  as  I  have  related.
But  if  you  would  make  any  further  inquiry  concerning
any  of  the  particulars,  I  grudge  you  not  the  satis
faction  of  knowing  for  I  will  tell  it  you.


8o  SECOND   CHARACTERS

What  you  say,  said  I,  is  very  kind  and  handsome.
What  is  it  then  that  the  divinity  bids  them  take  from
false  learning  ?

The  things  that  seem  to  be  of  use.

And  what  are  these  ?

Letters,  said  he,  and  some  part  of  other  sciences,
that  like  a  kind  of  bridle  as  Plato  says1,  have  a  power
to  hinder  young  men  from  being  drawn  away  to  other
things.

And  is  it  necessary  for  anyone  that  is  to  attain  to
the  true  learning  to  take  these  things  or  not  ?

There  is  no  necessity  for  it,  said  he.  They  are
of  use,  indeed,  but  they  contribute  nothing  of  them
selves  to  the  constituting  men  better.

Do  you  say  that  these  things  are  of  no  use  to  the
making  men  better  ?

Men  may  become  better  without  them,  yet  they
are  not  without  their  uses2.  For  as  we  sometimes
understand  what  is  said  by  an  interpreter,  yet  it  is  not
a  useless  thing  for  us  to  gain  a  more  exact  knowledge,
though  we  made  shift  to  understand  something  of  it
before.  So  that  nothing  hinders  but  that  we  may  be
very  well  without  these  sciences.

And  have  these  men  of  science  no  advantage
above  the  rest  of  men  with  respect  to  their  being
better  ?

How  can  they  have  any  such  advantage  when  they
appear  to  be  deceived  both  with  respect  to  things  that
are  good  and  things  that  are  ill,  and  are  still  hampered
by  vices  of  all  kinds  ?  For  there  is  no  inconsistency
for  a  man  to  have  skill  in  letters  and  to  be  master  of
all  the  sciences,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  to  be  a
drunkard,  to  be  intemperate,  to  love  money,  to  be
unjust,  treacherous  and  to  conclude  to  be  a  fool.

Indeed  there  are  many  such  to  be  seen.

Wherefore,  how  can  these  men,  said  he,  have  the

1  The  Laws,  Bk.  vn,  808.

2  There  seems  to  be  some  defect  that  has  occasioned  the  sense  to  be
not  perfectly  clear.


PICTURE    OF   CEDES  81

advantage  with  respect  to  their  being  better  than  others
upon  the  account  of  these  sciences  ?

From  this  discourse  it  does  not  appear  by  any
means  that  they  can.  But  what  is  the  reason,  said  I,
that  they  pass  their  time  within  the  second  enclosure
as  if  they  were  neighbours  to  true  learning  ?

What  advantage  is  this  to  them,  said  he,  when  it  is
frequently  to  be  seen,  that  there  are  those  who  come
out  of  the  first  enclosure,  from  intemperance  and  the
rest  of  the  vicious  train,  even  up  to  the  third  enclosure,
to  true  learning,  and  yet  quit  these  men  of  science  ?
So  that  still  how  have  these  men  the  advantage  ?
They  are  then  less  industrious,  or  have  a  sort  of
science  that  makes  them  worse  than  others.

How  so  ?  said  I.

Because  being  within  the  second  enclosure,  if  there
be  nothing  else  in  the  case,  they  fancy  that  they  know
things,  that  they  really  do  not  know  ;  and  while  they
are  possessed  with  this  opinion  they  must  of  necessity
be  less  industrious  with  respect  to  any  inclination  to
attain  true  learning.  But  then  do  not  you  see  another
thing,  that  opinions  from  out  of  the  first  enclosure
have  entrance  to  them  here  likewise  ?  So  that  these
men  are  not  at  all  better  than  the  others,  unless  re
pentance  meet  with  them,  and  they  become  convinced
that  they  are  not  possessed  of  learning  but  of  the  false
learning  that  leads  them  astray,^  and  that  while  they
are  in  this  disposition  they  can  never  be  saved.  Do
you  therefore  strangers,  said  he,  act  in  this  manner.
Dwell  upon  the  things  that  have  been  told  you,  till
you  have  made  them  habitual.  You  must  frequently
consider  them  and  not  give  them  over,  and  must
reckon  all  other  things  but  slight  and  occasional.  If
you  do  otherwise  you  will  reap  no  benefit  by  the  things
you  hear.

We  will  do  it.  But  then  relate  to  us  how  it  comes
to  pass,  that  those  things  are  not  good,  that  men
receive  from  fortune,  such  as  life,  health,  riches  and
honour,  children,  conquests,  and  things  of  the  like


R.


82  SECOND   CHARACTERS

kind,  and  on  the  other  hand  how  the  contraries  to
these  come  not  to  be  ill.  For  the  assertion  seems  to
us  to  be  very  strange  and  incredible.

Well  then,  said  he,  do  you  do  your  endeavour,  in
reply  to  me,  to  tell  me  how  matters  appear  in  such
things  as  I  shall  ask  you.

I  will  do  it,  said  I.

If  anyone  then  live  wretched  and  ill,  is  life  a  good
to  him  ?

I  think  it  is  said  but  an  ill.

How  comes  living  then  to  be  a  good  since  to  him
it  is  an  ill.

Because,  to  those  that  live  wretchedly  and  ill,  life
I  think  is  an  ill,  but  to  those  that  live  handsomely  and
well,  I  think  it  is  a  good.

You  say  then  that  life  is  both  good  and  ill.

I  do.

Do  not  talk  absurdly,  for  it  is  impossible  that  the
same  thing  should  be  both  good  and  ill.  For  by  this
means  it  would  be  both  advantageous  and  hurtful  at
the  same  time.

Of  a  truth  this  is  absurd.  But  how  comes  it  to
pass  that,  if  living  ill  be  an  ill,  to  him  that  it  may
happen  to,  that  life  itself  should  be  an  ill  ?

For  to  live  and  live  ill,  said  he,  is  not  the  same
thing.  Does  it  not  appear  so  to  you  ?

Truly  it  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  the  same
thing.

Therefore  to  live  is  not  an  ill ;  since  if  it  were  an
ill,  it  would  be  an  ill  to  those  that  live  well,  because
they  have  life  which  is  an  ill.

I  think  you  say  true.

Therefore  since  living  belongs  both  to  those  that
live  ill,  and  to  those  that  live  well,  to  live  is  neither
good  nor  ill.  So1  cutting  and  burning  in  the  case  of
distempered  people,  are  not  both  noxious  and  salutary.
Thus  do  matters  stand  with  respect  to  life.  Consider

1  Here  as  well  as  in  other  pieces  in  the  course  for  this  reasoning
there  seem  to  be  defects  that  have  lost  us  the  full  strength  of  it.


PICTURE    OF   CEDES  83

then  this.  Would  you  choose  to  live  wretchedly  and
ill,  or  to  die  handsomely  and  bravely  ?

I  would  choose  to  die  handsomely.

Then  neither  is  death  an  ill,  since  it  is  frequently
more  eligible  than  life.

These  things  are  as  you  say.

The  reason  is  the  same  with  respect  to  health  and
sickness,  for  health  frequently  may  not  be  of  advantage,
but  the  contrary  when  circumstances  so  fall  out.

You  say  true.

Well  then,  let  us  examine  in  the  same  manner
concerning  riches,  may  we  not  take  it  for  granted  as
a  thing  frequently  to  be  seen,  that  riches  are  in  a
man's  possession  and  yet  that  the  man  passes  his
days  in  wretchedness  and  misery  ?

Yes  indeed  one  may  see  many  such.

Riches  then  do  not  give  any  help  to  these  men
towards  living  handsomely  and  well.

It  does  not  appear  that  they  do,  for  they  are  vile
unworthy  men.

Therefore  it  is  not  riches  that  makes  men  deserving,
but  learning.

Probably  it  is  so  from  this  reasoning.

Then  how  can  riches  be  a  good  if  they  do  not  help
those  that  have  them  to  be  better  men  ?

It  appears  to  be  as  you  say.

So  neither  is  it  of  advantage  or  profit  for  some
people  to  be  rich,  when  they  know  not  how  to  make
use  of  riches.

So  I  think.

Therefore  how  can  one  judge  that  to  be  a  good,
that  is  often  of  no  profit  or  advantage  to  have.  ?

One  cannot  do  it  by  any  means.

Therefore  if  a  man  know  how  to  make  a  skilful
and  handsome  use  of  riches,  he  will  live  well,  if  not
he  will  live  ill.

I  think  you  say  very  true  in  this.

And  on  the  whole  to  pay  a  veneration  to  those
things  as  being  good,  or  to  hold  them  in  disgrace,  as

6—2


84  SECOND   CHARACTERS

being  ill,  this  is  the  thing  that  disorders  men  and  does
them  mischief,  while  they  put  a  mighty  value  on  these
things,  and  think  to  obtain  happiness  by  means  of
them  alone.  They  of  consequence  put  all  in  practice
in  order  to  obtain  them,  even  things  that  appear  to  be
most  impious.  And  all  this  they  suffer  by  ignorance
of  good.


NOTES1    ON    THE    PICTURE    OF    CEBES

(i)  Diogenes  Laertius  in  his  preface  ascribes  the
rise  of  philosophy  to  the  Greeks,  but  he  mentions  several
others  to  give  it  to  the  barbarians.  This  difference
seems  to  be  a  matter  that  can  never  be  composed.
For  where  a  rich  and  regular  language  was  once
formed,  and  the  complete  use  of  letters  attained  to,  in
that  place  the  foundation  of  all  science  laid ;  but
language  and  letters  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  be  per
fected  but  in  a  course  of  many  ages.  And  letters  can
record  nothing  till  they  are  perfected.

The  birth,  the  infancy,  and  growth  of  letters  there
fore  can  never  be  known.  But  this  much  may  be  said
in  this  matter,  that  it  is  letters,  arts  sciences,  philosophy,
that  must  establish  the  distinction  between  Greek  and
Barbarian.  And  a  time  there  was  before  letters  had
their  birth.  Before  that  time  then,  all  the  several
herds  of  men  were  equally  barbarian,  and  if  this  infant
production  arose  amongst  the  Greeks  it  still  arose  in  a
notion  that  was  barbarian.  And  perhaps  many  nations
may  have  nursed  up  this  infant  to  a  certain  degree,
but  by  means  of  distemper  in  government  and  by
tyranny  they  have  dropped  it,  and  still  kept  in  bar
barism.  It  does  not  seem  impossible,  but  that  Egypt
may  have  been  the  birthplace  of  Greek  letters.  From
Egypt  these  people  may  have  united  themselves  in
Crete  and  in  the  isles  of  the  Aegean  sea,  and  may
have  settled  colonies  upon  the  continent  in  many

1  [Cf.  Prefatory  Introduction,  supra^  p.  xviii.]


PICTURE    OF   CEBES  85

places,  and  upon  disorders  in  their  mother-country  and
upon  the  erecting  some  mighty  tyranny  there  these
colonies  may  have  preserved  independency,  liberty
and  letters.  The  Greeks  in  their  several,  free  and
independent  states  certainly  nursed  up  learning-  to  a
prodigious  perfection,  and  to  the  Greeks  is  the  present
world  indebted  for  what  they  have  of  it.

The  turn  that  was  given  to  learning  amongst  the
Gymnosophists,  Druides,  Chaldaeans  and  Mages,  that
were  the  wise  men  of  the  Indians,  Gauls,  Assyrians,
and  Persians,  and  the  turn  given  to  it  by  the  Egyptians,
as  Laertius  and  others  have  described  it,  seem  to  imply
that  it  was  wrapped  up  in  a  mystery  amongst  them,
kept  within  a  few  hands  and  communicated  in  ways
not  very  intelligible,  the  professors  of  it  more  highly
interested  in  the  state  and  used  their  learning  to  serve
political  ends  and  to  manage  the  multitude  to  their
own  purposes.  And  these  are  rather  arguments  of
their  imposture  that  was  pretty  apparent  than  of  their
learning  that  they  in  a  great  measure  concealed.  The
antiquity  of  the  Mages  is  reported  to  have  been  very
great.  Zoroaster,  the  first  of  them,  is  by  some  placed
six  thousand  years  before  the  taking  of  Troy,  which
exceeds  the  time  that  we  set  for  the  creation  of  the
world.  And  Ephesus  or  Vulcan  the  son  of  Nile,  to
whom  the  Egyptians  ascribe  the  original  of  learning,
is  reported  by  them  to  have  lived  forty-eight  thousand
eight  hundred  and  sixty  years  before  the  time  of
Alexander  the  Great.  Laertius  mentions  Musaeus,
the  son  of  Eumolpus,  of  the  Athenian  race;  and
Linus,  the  son  of  Hermes,  or  Mercury,  and  of  the
Muse  Ouranie,  a  Theban,  as  men  from  whom  learning
is  derived,  but  he  is  not  particular  as  to  the  age  they
lived  in.

The  birth  of  the  word  Philosophy  may  perhaps
be  justly  enough  limited  to  the  age  of  Thales  and
Pythagoras.  For  what  before  was  called  sophia  or
wisdom  Pythagoras  termed  philosophy  or  love  of
wisdom  ;  and  its  followers,  instead  of  wise  men  and


86  SECOND   CHARACTERS

sophists  that  they  were  called  before,  he  named  philo
sophers  or  lovers  of  wisdom,  declaring  that  no  man
was  wise,  but  that  God  only  was  so.  But  then  one
must  have  a  very  wrong  notion  of  learning  to  think
that  it  did  not  require  a  vast  extent  of  time  to  arrive
at  the  great  perfection  it  had  attained  in  that  age  and
long  before.

Can  one  believe  that  the  poems  of  Homer  were
the  product  of  letters  in  their  infancy  ?  Or  can  one
imagine  that  the  Spartan  institution  of  Lycurgus  was
the  product  of  an  age  when  the  first  rudiments  of
letters  and  science  were  just  appearing  ?  Yet  some
place  the  birth  of  Homer  an  hundred  and  twelve  years
after  the  taking  of  Troy,  and  this  is  reckoned  about
four  hundred  and  thirty  years  before  the  birth  of
Thales.  Others  make  Homer  contemporaneous  with
Lycurgus,  who  gave  laws  to  Sparta  about  two  hundred
and  fifty-eight  years  after  the  taking  of  Troy,  which
is  about  two  hundred  and  eighty-six  years  before  the
birth  of  Thales.  And  Thales'  birth  preceded  that  of
Socrates  by  about  170  years,  and  that  of  our  Saviour
Christ  by  about  637  years.

Laertius  makes  mention  of  schools  of  philosophy.
One  he  calls  the  Ionic  from  Thales  who  was  an  Ionian,
the  other  he  calls  Italic  from  Pythagoras,  who  passed
most  of  his  time  in  Italy.  He  divides  philosophy  into
three  parts  :  the  natural  from  enquiring  into  the  nature
of  the  world,  and  things  in  it ;  the  moral  from  the
study  of  life  and  manners  and  of  things  that  relate  to
ourselves  ;  the  dialectic  from  the  study  of  the  art  of
reasoning.  And  Socrates  introduces  the  moral.  And
this  may  be  truly  said  of  Socrates,  if  no  more  be
understood  by  it,  than  that  he  censured  the  vain
philosophy  of  the  naturalists,  and  endeavoured  to  turn
men  more  to  the  study  and  knowledge  of  themselves.
But  that  Socrates  was  the  first  father  of  the  moral
science  seems  to  be  an  idle  imagination.  Diogenes
Laertius  then  ranks  the  philosophers  under  several
names,  and  mentions  ten  sorts  of  moral  philosophy.


PICTURE    OF   CEDES  87

But  notwithstanding  that  variety  one  may  divide  the
moral  philosophy  into  three  sorts  ;  one  that  establishes
a  Providence  disposing  all  things  in  the  most  beautiful
order,  and  giving  to  man  a  capacity  to  attend  to  its
laws  and  to  follow  them  ;  another  that  attributes  the
disposition  of  things  to  atoms  and  chance  and  that
makes  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  its  end ;  and  the  third
that  takes  part  neither  way,  but  judges  things  not  to
be  at  all  comprehensible,  and  therefore  suspends  opinion
entirely.  Socrates  and  the  branch  derived  from  Chry-
sippus  were  of  the  first  sort,  Aristippus  and  Epicurus
of  the  second,  and  Pyrrho  of  the  third.  Other  sects
seem  necessarily  to  fall  within  compass  of  these  three,
and  to  consist  of  various  mixtures  of  them.  The
picture  writ  by  Cebes  and  the  manual  of  Epictetus
are  two  little  pieces  that  apparently  belong  to  the
divine  system  of  philosophy,  and  Cebes  was  one  of
those  who  knew  and  conversed  with  Socrates.

(2)  Parmenides  was  of  the  school  of  Pythagoras.
The  succession   in  this  school  was  thus   Pherecydes,
Pythagoras,  his  son  Telauges,   Xenophanes,  Parmen
ides,  Zeno  the  Eleatic,  Leucippus,  Democritus,  who  is
said    to    have    been    one    year   older    than     Socrates,
Nausiphanes,  and   Naucydes ;  and  from  the  two  last,
Epicurus,  Diog.  Laertius,  Proceus,  Segment.

(3)  The  mention  of  the  Peripatetics  here  and  of
Plato  afterward  is  used   as  an  argument  that  Cebes
who  conversed  with  Socrates  was  never  the  author  of
this  piece.     But  supposing  that  the  name  of  Peripatetic
was  not  applied  to  any  sort  of  men  before  Aristotle,
yet  Cebes  may  very  well  have  lived  beyond  the  time
that  this  name  was  given  to  Aristotle  and  his  followers.
For  Aristotle  was  thirty-five  years  of  age  when  Plato
died,  and  Cebes  may  have  lived  yet  longer  than  Plato,
though  Plato  is  reckoned  to  have  been  but  28  years
of  age  when  Socrates  died,  and  lived  80  years.


TREATISE    IV

PLASTICS

OR

THE    ORIGINAL    PROGRESS

AND

POWER    OF    DESIGNATORY    ART


o  n  KoXov  <f>i\ov  diet.

Eurip.  Bacch.  88 1.


Written  in  Italy  in  the  year  M.DCC.XII  ;    and  edited
in  the  year  M.DCCCC.XII.


PLASTICS


AN    EPISTOLARY    EXCURSION

IN

THE    ORIGINAL    PROGRESS

AND

POWER    OF    DESIGNATORY    ART

I.       CHARACTERS1,     ISt,     2d,     3d.

Distinction  of  characters,  viz.  first;  second;  third:
viz.  middle  or  mixed.

(1)  FIRST.     Notes.     Marks  of  sounds,   syllables,
words,  speech,  and    of  sentiments,   senses,    meanings
by  that  medium,   viz.   of  sounds  and   speech.     Thus
ciphers,  shorthand,   Cicero's  invention.

(2)  SECOND.     Signs.     Signa.     Sigilla.     Imitation
of  real  forms  and  natural   beings,  plastically  (convex
or  concave),  or  lineally  and  graphically  by  lines  and
colours,  from  the   superficies   and   extremities  of  the
bodies,  according  to  optics.

(3)  A  THIRD  and  middle  sort,  emblematic.     As
when  the  latter  signa  are  used  as   mediums   (speech
being    passed    over)    to    convey    sentiments,    senses,
meanings,  etc.  (but  not  sentences,  diction,  etc.)     For
when    the    figure    of  an   animal    stands    as    a    mark,

1  In  the  notes  below  for  memory  sake  and  order  (all  being  smooth
and  polite  above)  place  this  table  :


PLASTIC   ART  91


Ill     lp     S     PS    Jf

111  i£l  i  Ifln

S-St     sTS-a     E     „-"•"     •=


<D    r-,  **H  r  i    O                                   ^    7;    TO

ill  -i*  §  §rs

^      ,__  _,          »*       t^^                            ^                •          .J           _H           *^*

«W0  §  =  '"         S^^rt-a

u«      |S5:  ^^.Sel^JfS*-!


OH  4j'J5


£3         ^    3    u          rt        fc    -•§    00^'        w    rtj

OCL-^-CU       rt^^^^^S^^0
K  3   <"   o3  <u  S  -d   S.       u  ^   -   «  -2  t3   S

2      ffSS-SS   '  gw««  gH.-Srf:  a  B.g


•5  3     ^  C     So     VH     &,.S     ,„"   C    S."   2     O  '       .S  ~     3

•H.5     SB     J  5^3  «  3  *^  E'^      5  12 'a

S  o§.^-a3(^u^^(ipuu^3§>,

•w  ?i  «j  O  C  o .  worrt   boOL-r:   O  O  n  *>


c  u.         ^o  oT  oo^-^;  H  o  o
boM  =  yo3-r;  o  ^Tb  °  •«  S  «  2  u  o  -a

/-i    03    ^  ji         u         ^D         Ur^^o3yo  ^^
.S.      inremOS(DOo^i  y    tX-r-    o!    ^    C


..  -    —

"P      *S  >•  SJ  &U  ^^vacdH-a^03

!!5tv'rt'-3m?        *HI/)QJO—   ")r-~

--       £  ^«  b.2


vH  „


1  2*.S  S  |T3"|gS  S  |  cfl  fl-f-llls

|      .     t3  s^^.a  rt^-gT:  «.§•«  bl2-5^  §<«  £

•^     i*gll 8 1 S  «r.§  J-w  hi^S « s.S "


*  I  make  no  scruple  to  place  the  emblematic  and  enigmatic  kind
(which  is  a  middle  sort,  holding  something  of  each)  as  the  third  or  last
n  order,  even  in  respect  of  time,  history,  and  progress  of  the  arts.
Since  hardly  will  anyone  imagine  by  reason  and  experience  of  all  other
nations,  barbarians  and  Gothic  as  well  as  Greek,  but  that  letters  next
follow  upon  speech,  and  the  copy  of  forms  afterward  as  a  work  of  leisure.
This  second  way  of  description  or  characters  may  indeed  whilst  yet  rude


92  SECOND   CHARACTERS

arbitrarily  and  without  relation  to  his  form,  nature,
passion,  history,  then  is  this  no  more  than  an  ordinary
first  character  (as  a,  /3,  y).  But  if  natural  history,
passion,  habit,  form,  be  taken  in,  then  ought  this  to
be  fine  and  beautiful  and  just :  else  it  is  lame  and
imperfect  in  its  kind.

Of  this  latter  sort,  the  true,  therefore,  is  emble
matic  and  graceful  without  mixture;  the.  false  enigmatic
merely,  mixt  and  barbarous  :  as  the  Egyptian  hiero
glyphics1.  Nor  can  the  mixture  of  middle  characters
with  first,  as  in  the  Egyptian  way  of  obelisks,  be  any
other  than  monstrous  upon  examination,  as  it  appears
prima  facie  to  the  slightest  examiner  or  novice  :  how
ever  this  hieroglyphic  may  have  been  extolled  by
travelling  philosophers  and  admirers  of  the  wonders
of  Egypt.

That  our  particular  science  therefore,  of  design  or
signature  may  emerge  from  this  chaos  of  barbarity,  we
distinguish  first  characters  from  barbarous  forms  con
joined  with  those  first  (as  in  Egyptian  hieroglyphics2),
leaving  only  the  beautiful  anaglyphies  (relief-works

in  use — in  1000 — have  been  employed  to  the  use  of  First  characters  and
barbarously  mixed  with  those  (as  by  the  Egytians).  But  scarcely  without
design  of  mystery,  a  priesthood,  and  (as  is  notorious  in  that  case)  magic,
etc.  And  even  by  the  hieroglyphics  [of  the  Egyptians]  it  appears  in
their  mixture  with  other  notes  and  characters  (which  are  of  no  imitation,
after  life,  or  natural  shapes,  but  purely  characters  of  the  first  kind  as
Arabic,  Chinese,  etc.)  that  the  way  of  first  characters  was  known  to  them,
and  that  the  other  so  much  boasted  way  was  but  an  abridgment  or
concealment  of  these :  an  art  superinduced,  and  afterwards  regulated,
prescribed,  and  maintained  ceremoniously,  rationally,  orthodoxly,  and
specifically,  as  said  below  p.  125  latter  part.

1  Of  which  the  cause  see  below,  p.  125.

2  After  the  middle  or  third  sort  of  characters  and  hieroglyphics  thus
fully  discussed  (with  account  in  passing  of  Egyptian  priesthood,  mystery,
as  here  and  p.  125),  subjoin  Oxford  Almanac  as  among  examples,  "which
for  ugliness  of  figures  etc.,  might  pass  as  truly  mystic,  priestly  and  hiero
glyphic  ;  but  otherwise  emblematic,  or  at  least  so  aimed,  and  the  third
or  middle  order  intended."     Appellation,  viz.  "  Those  famous  academical
anaglyphies,  of  annual  edition — emblematic  nostradamus's  of  the  age
of  Christian  church  renowned  for  prophecies  in  church  and  state.

So  many  pretty  cubs  of  mice  and  moles  handed  about,  penny-books,
together  with  almanac  and  prayer-books;  cried  in  the  street  by  the  fat
man  with  strutting  body  and  big  voice.

Orthodox  forms  (as  the  Egyptians  above),  so  these  Oxford,  awkward
figures.  So  the  originals,  viz.  doctors,  college  men,  etc."  Raillery.


PLASTIC   ART


93


and  inwrought  of  the  polite  ancients)  as  a  true  species
of  art  and  workmanship :  in  the  emblematic  way.  But
this  also  being  slightly  touched  and  explained,  we  pass
over  to  the  unmixed,  the  simple  and  pure,  viz.  "design,
plastic  art ;  second,  poetry,  imagery,  iconography,
typography  (improperly  applied  to  printing  characters),
by  type,  prototype  and  ectype ;  and  the  just  imitation
of  nature  according  to  natural  history  and  the  ideas
or  species  of  the  several  forms,  animal  or  vegetative,
to  some  end  and  with  some  intent."  E.g.  In  a  single
figure  of  a  human  body:  "A  man.  Why?  What
man?"  Answer:  "A  strong  man."  Therefore  here
something  learnt. — "A  beautiful  well-made  man."
Again  something  learnt. — "An  ugly,  cruel,  dangerous
man."  Therefore  caution,  discernment1  taught ;  the
mind  profited,  advanced ;  and  fancy,  judgment  im
proved  ;  knowledge  of  the  species,  of  our  own  species,
of  ourselves,  the  best  and  chief  knowledge,  a  step
hither.  So  all  imitation  of  natural  things  according
to  the  great  master  in  his  Poetics.

Nothing  being  more  pleasant  to  human  nature
from  the  beginning  as  this  learning,  viz.  This  is  this2 :
distinguishing  into  species  and  classes  (the  way  to
record,  remember,  lay  up,  draw  consequences),  and
helping  society,  and  communion  of  thought  and
sense ;  information  mutual,  delightful.  Mimicry  of
the  better  sort.  All  men  mimic,  else  no  speech,  no
manners.  And  hence  the  Egyptians  made  a  monkey


1  Physiognomy  and  penetration  into  tempers,  manners,  designs  (the
dark  cabinet),  as  far  as  natural  and  true  is  learnt  also  by  this  art  from
the  ideas  of  the  great  masters.     See  below,  p.  100.

2  Hie  ille  est.    6  avrov,  Demosthenes.    Digito  monstrari  et  dicier  hie  est.
Pers.  Sat.  I,  28.     Who  is  the  ille  ?    Some  pre-science,  else  nothing  learnt. :
Thus  in  the  imitative  poetic  part  of  painting  and  plastic  art,  reference
(in  the  higher  sense)  to  the  innate  idea  of  forms  as  explained  above,
viz....;   and  (in  the  lower  sense)  to  the  early  learnt  species  or  general
classes,  the  natural  sort,  into  which  nature  has  actually  and  necessarily
cast,  as  into  moulds,  the  severally  organised  creatures  and  their  genera
tions  successive.     As,    "This  is  a  horse!"    How  like!    "This  a  dog,  a
water-dog,  a  land-spaniel,  a  hound ! "  etc.     So  a  child  delighted  (accord
ing  to  Aristotle's  Poetics,  IV.).     Something  learnt.


94  SECOND    CHARACTERS

the  hieroglyphic  of  learning,  and  modern  painters  use
it  for  universities1.


2.     CHARACTERS,   PERSONAGES.
Second  Characters  (viz.  with  regard  to  the  title2)

morn/  Personal

mUl  CM,  personages-
See  the  chief  verse  and  hinge  of  Horace's  poetic
art  (vers.  86)  Descriptas  servare  vices,  operumque
colores,  i.e.  xaPaKT^Pa^  et  mores  m  dramatico  ["To
observe  the  distinctions  described  and  the  complexion  of
works,"  i.e.  characters  and  the  customs  in  the  dramatic].
I.e.  Actionum  affectuum  humanorum  in  scenis  ubi  res
agitur  (ut  Hor.  de  arte  poet.  vers.  179)  in  satyra
refertur  tantum  quare.  [Of  the  affects  of  human
actions  on  the  stage  where  the  affair  is  acted  out

only  so  much  is  related  in  satire  as ]      Sic  Isocrates

ad  Demonicum,  -^apaKTrjpa  rots  epyots  e7n/3aAA.eiz'  [to
stamp  characters  upon  deeds].  Et  Demosth.  eV  Se
rats  OjU-iXiats  6  TTJ?  i//v^9  ^apaKTrjp  ySXeVerat  [but  in
intercourse  the  character  of  the  soul  is  seen].  Sic
rursus  infra  de  comedia  Hor.  De  arte  poet.  v.  156
Aetatis  cujusque  etc.  Mobilibusque  decor  naturis  [of
every  age  etc.  and  to  changing  tempers  a  proper
decorum].  Vide  Hor.  Sat.  lib.  i.  vers.  12  Defendente
vicem  modo  rhetoris,  atque  poetae  ["  maintaining  the
character  now  of  the  orator,  and  now  of  the  poet "].
Et  infra,  De  arte  poet.  vers.  193,  Officiumque  virile
defendat  [and  perform  the  duty  manfully].  Partes
defendere  idem  quod  hie  servare  vices  [to  perform

1  See  "Iconologia"  di  Cesare  Ripa  upon  the  word  accademia:    "II
cinocefalo  ovvero  babbuino  lo  faciamo   assistente   dell'   accademia  per
essere  egli  stato  tenuto  dagli  egitu  ieroglifico  de  le  lettere,  e  pero  lo  con-
secrauano  a  mercurio  repartato,  inventore  et  autore  di  tutte  le  lettere  si
come  riferisce."  Pierio  Valeriano,  'Hieroglyphica,'  Venet.  1604  lib.  VI,  p.  38.

All  this  premised  that  the  following  chapters,  phrases,  terms,  etc.  may
be  easy,  viz.  Second  characters.  Signature.  Designation.  Inwroughts.
Typography  etc.,  the  fixed  and  settled  terms  or  expressions  for  notions
as  just  above.  So  much  therefore  as  to  this,  now  proceed.

2  Supra,  p.  i.


PLASTIC   ART  95

the  parts  as  likewise  to  preserve  here  the  changes].
Sic  Hor.  Epist.  i.  lib.  2,  vers.  171,  Partes  tutetur
[supports  the  character].

Quisquis  erit  vitae,  scribam,  color.

Horace.  Sat.  I.  lib.  n.  v.  60.

[Whatever  be  the  colour  of  my  life,  I  will  write.]
Again  Horace,  de  arte poetica,  vers.  101-113

Ut  ridentibus  arrident,  ita  flentibus  adsunt
Human!  vultus...

male  si  mandata  loqueris,

Aut  dormitabo,  aut  ridebo.     Tristia  maestum
Vultum  verba  decent...

Format  enim  natura  prius   non   intus  ad  omnem
Fortunarum  habitum:...
Si  dicentis  erunt  fortunis  absona  dicta,
Romani  tollent  equites  peditesque  cachinnum.

["As  the  human  countenance  smiles  on  those  that

smile,  so  does  it  sympathize  with  those  that  weep

.;£  If  you  pronounce  the  parts  assigned  you  ill,  I  shall
either  fall  asleep  or  laugh.

Pathetic  accents  suit  a  melancholy  countenance  —

For  nature  forms  us  first  to  every  modification  of
fortune...

If  the  words  be  discordant  to  the  station  of  the
speaker,  the  Roman  knights  and  plebeians  will  raise  an
immoderate  laugh."  Smart.]

The  same  ridicule  as  when  even  a  Guido  makes
his  Andromeda  dance  (Lord  Devon's  picture)  though
chained  and  in  sight  of  the  monster.

The  truth  of  the  affections :

Aetatis  cujusque  notandi  sunt  tibi  mores,
Mobilibusque  decor  naturis  dandus  et  annis.

HOR.  de  arte  poet.  v.  156.

["The  manners  of  every  age  must  be  marked  by
you,  and  a  proper  decorum  assigned  to  men's  varying
dispositions  and  years."]


96  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Imberbis  juvenis  v.  161  ["the  beardless  youth"].

Semper  in  adjunctis,  aevoque  morabimur  aptis.

v.  178.

["We  must  dwell  always  upon  those  qualities  which
are  joined  and  adapted  to  each  person's  age."]

Thus  also  the  painter's  science  and  wisdom,  know
ledge  of  men  and  things,  moral  characters,  etc.

...ille  profecto

Reddere  personae  scit  convenientia  cuique,
Respicere  exemplar1  vitae  morumque  jubebo
Doctum  imitatorem,  et  veras  hinc  ducere  voces.

...morataque  recte
Fabula...  v.  315 — 319.

["He  certainly  knows  how  to  give  suitable  attributes
to  every  character.  I  should  direct  the  learned  imitator
to  have  a  regard  to  the  mode  of  nature  and  manners,
and  thence  draw  his  expressions  to  the  life... A  play
where  the  manners  are  well  marked."]

Ficta  voluptatis  causa  sint  proxima  veris,
Nee  quodcunque  volet,  poscat  sibi  fabula  credi.

v-  338-9-

["  Let  whatever  is  imagined  for  the  sake  of  enter
tainment,  have  as  much  likeness  to  truth  as  possible ;  but
whatever  it  chooses,  let  not  your  play  demand  belief."]
Which  is  the  same  as  the  incredulous  ode2  (v.  188)
cited  already  in  the  Notion.

Hence  metamorphoses  dangerous  subjects,  though
so  common  with  moderns.

Quere.  Whether  any  subject,  and  how  managed
by  the  ancients.  Just  painters.  Answer...3

1  Good  in  Socraticis  chartis  habet  (ut  supra,  v.  310)  ubi  person  et
characteres,  moras  nimiarum  quia  dialog!  erant.       Vide  Aristot.  Poet.,
cap.  i  (2co<cpariKoy  Xo-yot),  Athenaeum,  lib.  1 1.

2  Refer  hence  to  Charac-cks,  vol.  ill,  p.  181.     Note  Vitruvius.

3  Note.       Remember    in    this    place    dialogue     writing,    imitative,
political,  dramatic,  active.     Drawing  and  design  as  in  Moralists,  II,  187  :
"  To  lay  colours,"  etc.  and  moral  painting  (all  true  painting  being  moral)
in  the  following  page,  viz.  188.

Also  what  is  said  at  length  of  dialogue 'drawing  and  design  etc.  in
Miscellany  etc.     See  Index  there  and  particularly  vol.  I,  pp.  201,  202.


PLASTIC   ART  97

...Sibi  convenientia  finge.     v.  119.

["Frame  new  characters  which  with  themselves  shall
well  accord."]

The  Characters  which  in  poetry  are  included  in  the
5th  and  last  part  (according  to  Horace's  concealed
division  in  his  Ars  Poet.}  answer,  in  painting  to  the
symmetry  and  proportion  of  the  figures.  Because
suppose  a  hand  or  head  given,  the  rest  of  the  figure
must  answer  this  species.  For  there  are  such  and
such:  and  these  the  painter  must  investigate  from
observation  and  instinct.  A  Moor  in  the  East  and
a  West- Indian,  not  only  different  in  colours,  hair,
feature,  but  whole  proportion.  And  even  among
Europeans :  a  Swede,  Dane,  Briton,  how  different
even  from  Flemish,  and  High-German,  much  more
from  Spaniard,  Gascon,  or  South  Frenchman.  The
Huns,  (Gothic  invaders  from  the  East  and  North-East
parts  of  Europe)  how  described1,  resembling  the
present  Tartars,  short-necked,  squat,  square,  and  some
thing  peculiar  about  the  head  and  nose.

Thus  particular  symmetry  (viz.  the  figures  and
forms)  are  in  the  Characters  ;  since  these  in  poetry
are  included  in  the  moral  part,  or  manners.  For
manners  are  here  properly  exhibited  by  characters
only,  their  opposition,  contrast,  foil,  operation  :  whence
the  purgation  spoken  of  by  Aristotle  and  explained
in  Char-cks2.

The  clidactive  or  preceptive  way  being  un-artificial,
un-masterly,  and  un-poetic :  not  Homerical,  though
Virgilian.  This  the  province  of  the  philosopher,  the
rhetorician,  the  historian  :  not  the  bard,  the  vates,  the
enthusiast.  Thus  Sophocles  more  poetical  than  even
Euripides,  though  the  latter  refined  beyond  him  and
excelled  in  style  and  other  parts  ;  particularly  in  sen
tences  in  which  this  moral  irregularity  and  encroach
ment  on  the  philosophers  or  rhetoricians  part  so  much
the  better  afforded  him  scope.

1  Quere.    Where  find  it  ?

2  Vol.  ill,  p.  262.    Notes,  line  17.


K.


98  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Corollarily.  That  particular  division  of  the  five
in  painting  called  symmetry  (viz.  of  the  figures  with
respect  to  themselves)  is  separate  and  abstract  from
the  moral  part  and  manners;  which  in  poetry  includes
characters  and  mental  forms.  On  the  other  hand,  the
moral  part  in  painting  lies  but  little  in  the  forms  (for
Socrates,  a  Silenus  whom  he  resembled,  a  triton,  the
centaur  Chiron,  or  any  other  less  specious  form  cor
poreal  may  be  principally  moral),  but  is  expressed  in
the  air,  feature,  attitude,  action,  motion ;  and  is  there
fore  wholly  lodged  in  that  part  of  painting  called  the
movements,  where  action,  passion,  the  affections  are
shown.  Thus  Characters  which  in  painting  are  mere
forms  are  not  moral,  though  in  poetry  always  moral
and  belonging  to  ethics  in  that  division1.

Again.  "  What  is  it  we  see  ?  A  boy — therefore,
sweet,  pretty,  innocent:  But  a  cupid.  A  new  case.  A
boy  and  beautiful  boy,  the  most  that  is  possible;  but
not  innocent,  not  harmless,  not  wholly  sweet,  gentle,
loving:  but  mischievous,  treacherous,  mocking,  subtle.
An  urchin,  half  civil,  demon,  cruel,  spiteful,  proud,  dis
dainful,  tyrannical,  capricious,  imperious2."  Here  a  new
story,  a  new  lesson,  an  instruction3,  something  learnt.
For  wretched  would  be  that  painter,  who  being  to  paint
a  cupid,  or  several  cupids,  should  lose  this  essential
moral  part.  No  history,  no  true  form,  no  cupid4,  if
this  be  lost:  if  this  visibly  appear  not  and  the  manners,
character  preserved  according  to  the  poetic  idea  and
hypothesis.  This  is  plastic  truth.  And  this  in  As-
canius  (when  truly  Ascanius)  very  different  from  a
cupid,  when  the  habit  and  form  of  Ascanius,  but

1  At  this  place  under  the  black  line  begins  the  division  of  this  head
(occasioned  by  the  equivocal  word  Characters) :  viz.  into  Characters  ist,
2d,  3d  (as  hitherto  above  ever  since,  p.  90)  and  into  characters  of  life,
manners  etc.,  which  begins  at  this  paragraph  occasionally  drawn  from
what  preceded.

2  Compare  place  with  Char-cks,  vol.  Ill,  p.  319.

3  So  again  below,  p.  101.

4  Memd.      Here  in  Sign  Porchinaro's  collection  at  Naples,  his  two
cupids,  the  one  of  Jacint  Prandi,  the  other  Sign  Parli  ;    the  first  good
style,  but  character  lost ;  the  latter  French  style  and  air,  but  character  kept.
The  former,  however,  preferred  (is  bought  because  of  the  practise  etc.).


PLASTIC   ART


99


carrying  his  own  true  manner  and  character ;  which  it
would  be  curious  in  an  able  painter  to  preserve  in  this
history,  if  it  were  to  be  represented  by  a  great  hand.
Quite  otherwise  as  to  cupid  when  he  is  out  of  his
natural  character  and  form,  as  in  the  story  of  Psyche,
where  not  only  his  size  is  manly  and  form  different,
but  history  and  manner  altered,  character  changed  :
a  party  and  concerned  himself;  a  sufferer  under  his
other  self ;  a  patient,  an  actor ;  not  a  god  or  demon,
or  genius,  in  the  machine  part  and  superior  roll  of  a
deity  invested  in  his  proper  powers  and  habits,  arts,
practices,  etc.  See  Raphael  (so  judicious  !)  on  this
subject,  in  the  Vatican1.

Explanation,  viz.  the  5th  part  in  painting  called
"symmetry  is  abstract  from  the  moral  part,  which  lies
chiefly  in  the  air,  feature  &c.  and  in  the  movements2,
where  action,  passion,  and  the  affections."  Add  "in
some  measure  also  in  the  custom3,  habit,  dress,  helping
the  air  and  describing  the  manners."

And  here  insert  "the  different  describers  (poets
and  painters)  of  the  better  and  worse  humanity,  ac
cording  to  Aristotle's  Poetics... where  such  and  such

a  one  (viz )  described  them  better;  such  and  such

a  one  (viz )  worse."

And  here  dividing  and  distinguishing  between  the
heroic  and  lower,  or  3rd  comic  (to  which  the  ryparo-
graphers4  answer)  a  word  or  two  of  these  latter  in  as
far  only  as  they  are  characteristical,  therefore  pleasing
by  a  je  ne  sais  quoi,  which  is  easily  explained.  As
among  other5  instances  remember  the  modern  common

1  If  not  there,  on  the  walls.  2  Viz.  of  4th  part.

3  Viz.  of  ist  part.  4  Infra,  p.   136.

5  La  Bruyere  (after  Theophraste)  the  chief.  And  here  remember  not
only  to  cite  and  comment  on  a  few  principal  characters,  but  (in  the  notes
still)  transcribe  his  whole  passage  of  ancient  and  modern  manners  in  his
preface.  And  remember  his  French  court  at  mass,  their  backs  to  the
God  they  worship  (their  altar  and  god-wafer),  and  faces  to  the  tribunal,
i.e.  the  king.  Long  perukes,  etc.

See  also  what  may  be  inserted  here  in  the  text  itself  (without  scruple
of  self-citation,  as  resolved  above,  p.  4)  concerning  Characteristics
from  vol.  I,  p.  201  etc.,  viz.  "Such  or  such  a  face,  etc.  Every  face  must
be  a  certain  man's."

7—2


ioo  SECOND   CHARACTERS

author,  our  guest  Monr  St  Evremond,  one  of  his
best  things  (slighting  the  rest)  is  his  exact  copy

after  the  life  of  the  old  French  Marshall  de and

the  Jesuit.  So  an  Italian,  or  Spaniard,  an  odd  figure
wrapt  in  a  ragged  cloak,  but  with  formal  mien,
the  shrug,  or  strut.  So  a  country  peasant,  or  boor,
a  Jew.  One  of  Salvator  Rosa's  cut-throat  figures,
shaberoons,  ragamuffins,  moss-troopers,  knights  of  the
post,  jilts,  drabs,  eavesdroppers,  gamesters,  sharks,
players,  musicians,  mountebanks,  quack  doctors,
sharpers,  ambubaiarum  collegia.

All  these  the  more  pleasing  as  more  secret,
mysterious,  difficult  and  withal  instructive  in  manners,
and  of  real  use  in  life,  and  towards  the  knowledge  of
mankind  and  the  world.  And  upon  this  found  this
maxim  or  rule,  viz.  :  "  That  in  all  such  satirical  charac
teristics,  as  the  finer  and  better  subjects  of  imitation,
are  the  more  concealed  and  not  the  obvious,  staring,
notorious  faults  in  manners.  So  the  finer  and  more
delicate  imitation  is  the  more  tender,  and  by  nicest
slightest  touches  in  poetry  as  in  painting,  and  not  by
exaggeration,  amplification,  straining,  tightening,  over
charging."  (Caricature,  burlesque  in  one  kind,  bom
bast  and  gigantic  in  the  other.)  On  which  very  thing
depends  the  difference  between  Horace  and  Juvenal.
Sordidus  et  luscus  qui  possit  dicere  lusce.  [Sordid  and
half  blind  the  man  who  can  speak  blindly.]  So  a
sordid  painter  first  chooses  a  mean  blemish  and  not  a
true  one  in  manners  :  and  then  withal  exaggerates.
A  blind  fiddler  instead  of  Tigellinus,  a  king's  chapel... :
debaucher  of  youth,  rake,  dissolute  and  gamester,  etc.

Remember  also  our  Shakespeare's  Jack  Falstaff;
a  character.  And  here  indeed  the  form  itself  helps
the  manners.  But  overdone  and  spoilt  both  by  poet
and  players.  The  painter  (a  Salvator  Rosa  and
tolerable  good  satirist  in  poetry)  would  not  hyperbole1


1  Not  in  his  little  perspective  figures,  though  in  heroic  often  guilty,  and
even  in  perspective  for  horror's  sake.


PLASTIC   ART  101

so ;  but  moderate  the  hyperbole1  and  strike  the
imagination  far  better.

Remember  also  Voiture's  delight  in  his  letters  from
Spain  of  the  scenes  of  Don  Quixote  where  he  was
travelling.  Strange  impression  of  character.

Something  therefore  there  is  in  every  design,  or
designatory  work  of  imitation,  and  copy  after  nature
(be  it  even  in  animals,  fruit,  or  flower-pieces),  which
answers  to  the  history  in  a  truly  epic  or  poetic  work.
This  is  in  truth  and  strictness  historical,  moral,  char
acteristic.  The  note  or  character  of  nature,  the  form,
natural  habit,  constitution,  reason  of  the  thing,  its
energy,  operation,  place,  use  or  effect  in  nature  :  if  ill
and  mischievous  to  us,  that  we  may  record  and  avoid  ;
if  salutary,  record  and  improve.  This  is  the  moral,
the  intelligence  of  the  fable.  "  Such  a  one  he  is  !  You
see  him  in  his  true  colours  !  This  is  the  man  !  Such
he  is — Sic,  Crito  est  hie !  As  in  the  Roman  comic
poet2,  so  in  the  animal,  beast  or  fowl.  This  is  the
creature  !  Such  he  is  !  Be  it  a  lion.  See  how  like  !
Such  is  his  easy  march,  his  unconcernedness,  his  want
of  fear,  his  consciousness  of  mastery,  superiority,  and
his  contempt  of  other  creatures.  Such  his  slowness
and  largeness,  though  ready  for  activity  and  agility,
when  roused  by  any  assault  or  called  by  hunger  to  his
prey. — Is  it  a  bull3  ?  See  the  same  grum  indifference,

1  Of  the  hyperbole  see  below,  p.  154.

2  Andrea,  Act  v,  Sc.  4,  supra,  p.  93.

3  Thus  the  animal,  but  chiefly  the  cattle-painter,  not  so  easily  the
bird-man.     The  horse  belonging  to  humanity  and  history,  to  be  studied
by  the  great  master,  so  noble  a  creature  he  is  and  so  near  human  nature
in  the  expression  of  passion,  etc.,  so  fitted  to  man.     Thus  I  say,  the
animal   painters   of  the  comic  order   (as  cock   and   dung-hill)   become
historian,  poetic.

A  whole,  (i)  Unity  of  spirit  in  the  kind,  harmony  of  the  sexes,
economy,  the  young,  the  old,  the  bell-wether,  the  master,  reverend,  long-
bearded,  longsbard  goat,  the  ram.

The  seraglio,  grand-seignior,  and  concubines  of  the  place.  (2)  Unity
of  the  group  or  groups,  a  principal  figure,  etc.,  with  all  the  other  rules.

On  the  contrary,  an  unable  artist  or  one  guided  by  the  bespeaker
(these  being  a  poor  mean  race),  and  turned  out  of  his  way  (which  though
unable  to  give  the  reason,  he  would  and  often  does  naturally  and  by  taste
alone  pursue)  when  the  group  is  finished  the  animal  nature,  action,


102  SECOND   CHARACTERS

sullen  security  and  ease,  trust  to  his  strength,  the
jealousy  of  his  eye  over  his  females  on  the  approach
of  anything  injurious  to  them,  or  any  rivalship  from
his  own  kind. —  Is  it  a  bird  ?  A  tame  one  merely,  and
of  the  household  kind  ?  A  cock  ?  See  his  walk,  his
demarche,  his  carriage  amongst  his  ladies  ;  his  gene
rosity,  even  to  the  starving  himself  and  neglect  of  his
own  sustenance  ! "

The  courage  of  all  these  creatures,  their  ready
exposing  of  their  lives  in  the  defence  of  their  kind !
The  tractableness  and  tameness  of  these !  The  un-
subduable,  indomitable  fierceness,  and  love  of  liberty
in  the  others !  The  tenderness  and  innocence  of
some !  the  savageness  and  cruelty  of  others ! — The
characteristic  still,  the  truth,  the  historic  is  all  in  all,

and  the  TO  <$>V<TIKOV,  the  TO The  thing  imitated,  the

thing  specified  (reduced  to  its  true  form  and  species)
is  all  in  all,  the  whole  delight,  pleasure  of  the  work,
the  secret  charm  of  the  spectacle.  This  accomplished
and  all  is  done.  Instruction,  moral  description,  truth.

The  meaning,  the  intelligence,  humour,  thought.
A  sense.  A  thought.  Even  in  portraiture1,  as  a
statue  of  a  senator  (nature  concurring,  and  the  person
being  in  shape  and  feature  adapted).  This  is  a  sense,
a  thought.  Even  an  indifferent  person,  etc.  So  a
promising  youth,  hero,  prince,  etc.  Quantum  instar
ipso  est  /2  [Whatever  the  form  exactly  is.]

humour  shown  in  its  simplicity  and  agreeable  truth.  He  unhappily
introduces  a  man  (humanity  spoiling  all),  or  else  an  inferior  or  foreign
nature,  or  some  way  incoherent,  as  a  peacock  with  the  cock  and  hens,
and  something  like  this  in  a  beautiful  group  of  cattle  by  the  heat  under  a
shade  by  a  pool's  side,  and  casting  the  spectator  into  an  agreeable
revery  t.

t  Remember  in  this  place  to  improve  this  description  of  the  summer
heat  and  cattle  attempted,  as  in  a  forest  or  wild  common,  to  a  shade  of
trees  and  water,  the  flies  fled  from,  and  cattle  for  coolness  in  the  water,
tails  playing.  Nothing  of  this  view  (if  broken  by  foreign  figures)  capable
of  bestowing  that  sweet  revery.

1  Portraiture,  infra,  p.  134.  2  Virgil's  Aeneid,  VI,  865.


PLASTIC   ART  103

3.     RISE,   PROGRESS,  DECLENSION  AND  REVIVAL  OF
SECOND  CHARACTERS1.

Politeness  in  figures  helped  still  to  polish  grace.
So  music.  But  Plato  and  other  philosophers  and  sages
look  wistfully  towards  the  Egyptian  laws  (as  lovers  of
rarities  for  such  the  Athenians,  such  the  Greeks  in
general,  and  so  humoured  even  by  a  Xenophon)
admiring  mystery,  hiding  secrets  from  the  vulgar.
This,  as  being  frighted  by  the  popular  spirit,  felt  so
severely  in  the  person  of  their  master  Socrates.
Besides  Plato's  and  Pythagoras'  affectation  of  legis-
latourship  and  pulse  beating  towards  that  noble
ambition,  to  which  the  first  a  sacrifice  and  the  second
often  tempted,  and  in  state  affairs  under  Dion  brought
in  considerable  danger.  Hence  his  emulation  with
Homer,  envious  and  somewhat  detracting  way,  too
truly  objected  by  Dionysius  Halicarnassus.

True  indeed  that  by  this  ungenerous  and  hierar
chical  polity  the  state  of  longer  duration2.  For  of
what  duration  Egypt  ?  But  then  what  a  state !  What
barbarity  !  Superstition  !  And  when  enervated  once  :
how  perpetual  a  slavery,  from  Mede  and  Persian,  to
Marmaluke  and  Turk.

Insinuation  from  hence,  as  to  the  last  and  present
grand  hierarchy  of  Romish  Church.  Whether  not

1  Quere  from  Herodotus,  Diodorus  Siculus... :  Marsham,  etc.,  about
the  records  of  the  Egyptians:  how  far  back.     Hierarcho-political  reason,
as  below,  p.  125  for  retaining  the  first  ancient  and  hieroglyphic  forms  and
statues  of  the  gods,  etc.

2  Proof  of  this  from  the  hierarchical  policy  and  hope  always  to  engage
sovereign  and  bring  over  and  reconcile  even  the  conqueror  partly  by
superstition  (sin  and  pleasure),  partly  by  policy   as   assistant   to   him.
Hence  easy  betrayer  of  their  national  form,  prince  and  people.     Trust  to
spiritual  weapons  for  their  own  preservation  at  least  (come  what  will  of
nobles,  prince  or  people),  as  when  Attila  was  met  and  Alexander  by  the
Jewish  priests  (see  Arrianus).     Hence  the  oracles  (though  a  Grecian  and
much  limited  priesthood)  after  they  had  stood  steady  all  along,  yet  when
things  desperate  and  almost  all  Greece  conquered,  (Athens  not  resisting
but  driven  to  sea),  began  to  faint  and  preach  submission.    This  Herodotus
saw  and  honestly  noted.     Though  for  this  and  other  freedoms,  i.e.  poetic
liberty  as  complaining  of  the  gods,  lashed  by  honest  Plutarch,  himself  a
priest.


io4  SECOND   CHARACTERS

better  to  have  followed  the  Egyptian  in  this  (as  in
many  other  things)  and  keep  the  orthodox  forms
horrid,  savage,  and  consequently  inspiring  superstition,
as  in  reality  their  first  were  from  the  Gothic  times  or
last  feces  of  the  Empire  and  of  Arts,  when  images,
etc.,  were  introduced.

And  though  Protestants  take  the  contrary  weapon
(and  very  justly  from  the  present  period),  yet  for  the
larger  and  more  extensive  period  of  time.  Quere.
Whether  this  may  not  weaken  and  supplant,  as  it
polishes  and  refines,  emollit  mores.  Nothing  more
true  in  nature  can  be  said.  So  chiefly  a  fine  picture
or  statue  frontispiece,  a  fine  piece  of  music,  effeminacy
indeed,  an  evil  consequent  :  but  not  necessarily  so,  if
the  magistrate  provides,  without  totally  banishing  (as
Lycurgus  some  sorts  of  music  and  most  arts,  because
of  his  local  and  specific  commonwealth),  or  prohibiting
as  Plato  in  the  case  of  Homer.

Therefore  as  beauteous  forms  polish  (taking
politeness  with  its  consequences),  so  ugly  barbarise1.
None  impossible ;  or  if  practicable,  still  equally
barbarous.

Moses  (non  obstante  2d  commandment)  raised  a
serpent,  and  after  him  the  arch  and  sanctus  sanctorum,
their  cherubs,  etc.,  the  brazen  tree,  its  buds,  etc.

Prohibition  therefore  such  as  Egyptian,  Jewish,
(or  suppose  Scythian  or  Persian),  and  absolute  ab
horrence  of  figure  or  temple,  a  savage  and  barbarising
enthusiasm.

Apology  and  protestation  against  entering  into  the
decision  of  the  Egyptian  and  Chinese  pretensions  to
antiquity  (so  far  beyond  Moses')  in  their  records2,
though  recite  the  authorities.  But  this  assert :  that
neither  Jew,  Egyptian,  nor  Chinese  polite.

This  a  judgment  of  politeness.  If  polite  :  show
me  a  picture,  a  statue,  coin,  proportion,  nature.  But
arabesque!  Japan!  Indian!  Savage.  Monstrous.

1  Infra,  p.  123.  2  Supra,  p.  103.


PLASTIC   ART  105

Even  in  their  portraiture,  pleasure-pieces,  wanton
pieces.  Also  gods  monstrous,  frightful  according  to
Egyptian1  and  Syrian  models  ;  or  Turkish  mosques,
no  architecture,  or  statuary,  or  figures  :  or  as  bad  as
none.

Frightful,  horrid,  cruel  ideas  entertained,  advanced
by  such  divine  forms  ;  soft,  gentle,  humane  ideas,  by
truly  human  forms,  and  divinity  represented  after  the
best,  sweetest,  and  perfectest  idea  of  humanity  to  the
vulgar.  But  without  application  to  divinities,  and
simply  viewed  and  contemplated  in  cities,  groves,
high- ways,  places,  gardens,  forums,  etc.,  emollit  mores,

"  Bad  figures  :  bad  minds."  "  Crooked  designs  :
crooked  fancies."  "  No  designs :  no  thought."  So
Turks,  etc.  "  No  imitation  :  no  poetry."  No  arts  of
this  kind  :  no  letters,  or  at  least  in  a  poor  degree.  So
politeness  always  holds  proportion  with  laws  and
liberty.  So  that  where  the  one  is  with  a  tolerable
progress  in  the  first  species  (viz.  ist  Characters),  the
other  (viz.  2d  Characters)  will  soon  prevail.  And
where  it  ceases  and  tyranny  (such  as  the  Eastern
monarchies,  ancient  and  modern)  prevails,  art  and
2d  Characters  accordingly  sink.  See  Japan  !  Mogul !
China  !  Turk  and  Tartar  !  Show  me  amongst  their
infinite  delicacy  of  other  work  a  single  2d  Character,
diform,  even  but  a  single  figure  a  perspective,  a  statue,
coin,  palace,  architecture — that  is  not  worse  than
Gothic.  Show  but  so  much  as  a  vase  !  till  in  China
taught  by  us  and  the  Dutch.

4.     INSTINCT,   NATURAL  IDEAS,  ETC.

Those  philosophers  (modern)  the  poorest  and  most
shifting,  for  the  sake  of  a  system,  hypothesis,  who,
surpassing  all  ancient  conceits  and  extravagances  of
the  kind,  deny  ideas,  sense,  perception,  (i.e.  life)  to
animals.  But  those  yet  poorer  and  more  shifting,  who
impugn  natural  ideas  and  ridicule  instinct  and  innate

1  Infra,  p.  125.


io6  SECOND   CHARACTERS

ideas,  because  perhaps  abused,  misapplied,  carried  too
far  by  some  modern  preceding  writers,  or  by  Plato.

The  same  philosophers  would  confound  the  very
notion  of  species,  specific  ideas  (sad  virtuosos!)1.  But
had  not  the  creatrix  or  sovereign  plastic  nature  set  the
boundaries,  the  caprice  (i.e.  wantonness  and  bestiality)
of  corrupt  man  would  long  since  have  gone  beyond
any  of  the  worst  painters,  grotesque  pvirapoypd^oi,  etc.
as  well  beyond  any  of  the  poets  in  composing  new
complicated  forms  of  satires,  etc.,  with  which  the  breed
would  have  run  out  and  been  lost.  But  now  even  in
the  inward,  several  species  (within  the  genus)  as  in
dogs  and  fowls,  which  breed  with  one  another,  a  natural
propensity  for  like  joining  with  like  ;  so  that  the  breed
when  mixed  and  blended,  in  time  and  after  several
consequent  generations  displays  and  opens  itself,  and
the  orders  return  to  their  first  natural  secretions,  purity
and  simplicity  of  form2.

An  ingenious  author  and  notable  metaphysician3
about  twenty  years  ago  took  such  an  advantage  from
the  affected  fulsome  and  common  use  of  instinct  and
innate  ideas,  that  being  extremely  well  received  and
heard  on  account  of  his  excellent  genius  and  capacity
in  other  writings,  these  words  grew  so  out  of  fashion
that  a  man  of  sense  durst  hardly  use  them  on  the  most
proper  and  most  obvious  occasion.  And  it  was  safer
for  a  gentleman  who  was  a  lover  of  sports  to  say
seriously  upon  the  subject  of  his  chase,  that  his  dog,
jowler,  or  tomboy  reasoned  or  meditated,  than  that  he
had  natural  sagacity  or  instinct.  We  were  allowed,
indeed,  to  say  that  the  poor  turner's  pot  had  sense  and
feeling  above  the  iron-jack  which  supplied  his  room,

1  See  MCC.

2  Memorandum.     Room  here  for  demonstration  of  the  young  swallow.
First  flight  precipitated,  viz.  from  a  rock  over  the  sea,  or  an  eminence
over  a  paved  court,  or  place  fatal  to  fall.     Yet  the  equilibrium  instantly
found  and  the  art  known,  not  learnt.     Strength  only  failing  when  sup
ported  by  the  old  ones,  not  art  wanting.     To  the  birds'  nest,  as  well  or
better,    more   exact   the  first  than  afterwards  as  in   Charac-ks,  vol.  II,
pp.  307,  411,  412,  etc.

3  The  same  as  above.


PLASTIC   ART  107

(for  Cartesianism  was  not  admitted  in  its  strict  sense).
But  it  was  dangerous  to  talk  of  breeds,  either  of  dogs,
or  hogs,  or  horses,  lest  we  should  betray  our  ignorance
in  imagining  according  to  the  vulgar  error,  that
passions,  affections,  instincts,  inclinations,  impressions,
impulses,  ideas,  imaginations  (ready  for  the  object
when  prescribed,  and  even  raising  or  calling  up  a  feigned
and  false  object  when  the  season  or  ripeness  came)
should  possibly  be  delivered  down  in  descent  and
extract  to  particular  species.  Nay  even  the  species
themselves  were  called  in  question,  and  more  than
called  in  question,  flatly  denied.

As  thus  poor  Horace  and  other  poets,  even  in  their
epicurean  and  least  theological  fits,  were  very  credulous
and  superstitious  and  foolish,  when  they  said  for
instance  :

Est  in  juvencis...patrum  virtus1.

[The  merit  of  the  sire  survives  in  the  offspring.]

The  rictus  and  gapings  of  noxious  creatures,  bears,
lions,  wolves,  crocodiles,  dragons,  even  small  serpents
and  insects  (as  vipers)  imprinted,  previous  mould  or
sockets  to  speak  by  analogy  (as  no  other  way  in  cases
of  sensation,  intelligence,  perception,  egoity,  not  con
fined  to  place  or  determined  by  it).

So  on  the  other  hand  who  can  doubt  the  contraries,
viz.  beauteous  faces  (especially  in  the  same  kind)  to
be  equally  imprinted  by  innate  characters,  moulds,
preparatory  sockets  for  reception  and  recognition
of  such  joyous  forms,  as  in  the  passion  between  the
sexes.

Who  would  charge  human  nature  with  this  dullness
and  so  readily  clear  and  acquit  the  bestial  ?  unless
perhaps  the  senseless  modern  philosophy  and  fool
hypothesis  of  insensibility  be  brought  in  play  for
cavil's  sake.

What  more  certain  than  that  the  poorest  ignoramus
of  our  species,  being  kept  from  seeing  anything  but

1  Horace's  Carmina,  Lib.  iv,  Ode  IV,  1.  30.


io8  SECOND   CHARACTERS

old  males,  and  clothed  bodies  (as  in  monkish  cloister,
or  barbarous  hermitage)  would  in  a  clear  light,  when
brought  to  see  nudities,  distinguish  between  the  true
and  natural,  and  the  unnatural  deformed  kind.

Thus  the  species  of  horses  and  other  animals,  the
kind  being  once  seen  and  nature  helped  (changes  not
seen  in  perfection,  but  far  off),  the  idea  of  beauty  and
perfection  is  raised,  and  when  reduced  to  this  idea  of
instinct  by  the  able  artist,  recognised  presently  by  the
good  eye  of  every  spectator.

If  a  female  of  our  own  species  (to  pass  by  the  love
of  babies  and  that  shrewd  propensity)  should  after  a
great  belly  got  she  scarce  knew  how,  not  find  herself
inclined  to  pick  straws,  or  make  a  nest :  no  wonder,
because  of  the  second  string  to  the  bow,  reason,
discourse,  community,  the  reserve1.  Nor  is  it  a
wonder  any  more,  that  coming  to  lose  the  same  great
belly,  and  the  season  at  hand  for  suckling,  etc.,  that
she  has  not  the  conatus  or  effort,  that  she  calls  not  for
the  babies  newly  left  off,  nor  does  what  is  answerable
to  the  hen,  bustling  about,  swelling  her  wings,  stretching
her  legs,  picking  and  scraping  like  a  thing  mad  and  in
fury.

5.     TASTE,  RELISH,  EYE,  JUDGMENT,  CRITICISM.

1.  Pedantry  in  painting,  as  in  scholarship,  mere'
scholar,  mere  painter  ;  colleges  of  scholars,  academies
of  painters.

Seldom  a  thorough,  practising,  labouring  scholar,
not  a  pedant.  Seldom  an  orator,  a  poet;  but  seldomer,
hardly  ever  a  painter.  Yet  sometimes  a  Homer  (if
we  may  judge  by  a  guess),  sometimes  a  Horace,  a
Xenophon,  a  Demosthenes,  a  Socrates,  an  Apelles,  a
Raphael.

2.  First  corruption  of  taste,  from  bad  sculptures,
prints,  etc.,  arid  drawing  without  masters.      For  so  in
all   other  exercises,  as  fencing,   dancing,   etc.     Better

1  As  in  '  Moralists,'  p.  307.


PLASTIC   ART  109

never  have  learnt.  Ask  all  masters.  Appeal  to  all
able.  For  habits  not  to  be  broken.  Besides  conceit
gains,  and  stiffness  ;  or  surfeit  contracted,  and  aversion
to  the  study  and  science.  Ungrateful  because  unsuc
cessful.  Hence  pedantry  in  petty  virtuosos.  Gentry
lose  their  taste  and  exchange  for  a  worse  than  mere
painters.

Second  corruption.  Haste,  hurry.  Therefore  arts
contemplatory  require  otium ;  thrive  only  (as  letters
and  philosophy)  where  much  of  this  recess  from  public.
Yet  a  public  and  activity,  i.e.  action  carrying  on,
debates,  freedom,  liberty,  etc.  Soliloquy1  necessary
here  as  in  philosophy'2.

1  See  '  Soliloquy '  in  '  Characteristics.'

,    2  Second  Corruption.     See  Junius'  de  pictura  veterum,  Lib.  I.  c.  5,
p.  34.     In  pursuance  of  soliloquy  referred  to1.

"Nihil  est  curiosius  otiosis."  Plinius  Jun.  Epist.  32,  Lib.  IX.
"  Frequentia  et  obambulatio  hominum  conturbat  et  infirmat  imaginum
notas  :  solitudo  conservat  integras  simulacrorum  figuras."  Cornificius,
Rhet.  ad  Herenn.  Lib.  ill,  xix.  Ouamobrem  etiam  recte  Plinius,  agens
de  ea  tranquillitate  animi  et  securitate  otii  quae  debetur  harum
artium  consideration!.  Magni  officiorum  negotiorumque  acervi  inquit
abducunt  omnes  a  contemplatione  talium  ;  quoniam  otiosorum  et  in  magno
loci  silentio  apta  admiratio  talis  est.  In  promptu  est  ratio:  phantasiam
enim,  cujus  in  diligenti  artis  inspectione  praecipuae  partes  sunt,  vacuus
animus  et  sola  tacentiaque  loca  mirifice  excitant  atque  alunt.  Quumque
perfectum,  accuratumque  picturarum  admiratorem  veras  omnium  rerum
species  animo  concipere,  conceptasque  ad  examinanda  pulcherrimae  artis
experimenta  advocare  oporteat,  manifestum  etiam  est  neutrum  horum
sine  virtute  imaginativa  effici  posse  ;  ac  ne  ipsam  quidem  imaginum
conformationem2,  .quotidianis  negotiis  et  discurrentium  tumultu  inter-
pellatam,  bene  procedere.  Videas  itaque  cultores  artis  minime  vanos,  si
forte  aliquando  liberiores  et  magis  vacuos  ab  interventoribus  dies  nacti
sunt,  nunquam  non  per  otium  adsuefacere  animos  absolutissimis  qui-
busque  rerum  imaginibus  colligendis  atque  in  animum  congerendis.
Atque  hoc  est  illud  quod  ait  Apollonius  apud  Philostratum,  Lib.  n,
cap.  XXII.  Tovs  6pa>vTas  TO.  TTJS  ypcHpiKTJs  (pya,  fjufJiTjTiKris  ftdcrdai  ov  yap  uv
tirtuvfotll  Tts  TQV  yfypa/Jifjievov  Imrov  r/  ravpov,  p.r]  TO  £<aov  evdvfJLrjdfis,  at
fluavrai.  Eos,  qui  pictoriae  artis  opera  inspiciunt,  indigere  imaginativa
facultate.  Nemo  enim  recte  laudaverit  pictum  equum,  nisi  qui  animal
illud  animo  concipiat,  cujas  similitudinem  pictura  exprimit ;  vide  locum.
Inspice  quoque  Platonem  Lib.  II,  de  Legibus.  Quamvis  autem  ratio
haec,  quam  attulimus,  solitudinem  satis  commendet  artificum  opera  di-
judicaturis  ;  praesto  tamen  est  et  alia  non  minus  praegnans,  quae
idem  suadeat.  Quemadmodum  enim  medicis  non  apparentia  modo

1  Nat.  Hist.  Lib.  xxxvi,  cap.  v.

1  Compare  this  contemplative  habit  with  the  truly  contemplative  and  mental  to  which  this
leads,  and  of  which  it  borrows  when  refined  and  improved  in  right  virtuosoship,  etc.  Compare  I
say  with  Maximus  Tyrius  (as  in  little  black  paper  book,  p.  8).


no  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Third  corruption.  Vice,  corruption  itself,  prosti
tution.  Worse  sort  of  pvTrdpoypd^oi,  viz.  obscene  acts,
very  deformity.  Hence  in  a  second  degree  not  quite
so  lewd,  effeminacy  (as  expressed  in  the  last  paragraph
of  the  Notion),  the  licked  manner,  lechd  in  French  ;
the  enamelled,  the  very  paint  (as  Flemish  phrase),  just
as  if  it  were  painted.

Fourth  corruption  (or  rather  prevention,  depri
vation).  Want  of  nudity,  statuary,  distortion  of  bodies1,
etc.

Painter's  taste  like  dancing  masters2  in  carriage.
All  towards  the  affectation.  Quite  contrary  to  the
ancient.  All  modern.  No  ancient  (not  of  the  worst
workmen)  guilty  of  this,  because  of  the  many  models
extant,  which  though  ill  copied,  yet  no  new  designed
after  the  affected  way  (the  sweer  as  they  call  it).
Raphael  never  guilty  of  this  ;  nor  Poussin,  though  a
Frenchman.

Quere.     About  Raphael's    admired   figure    of  the

vitia  notanda  sunt,  verum  etiam  invenienda  qua  latent ;  saepe  ipsis,  qui
sanandi  sunt,  ea  occulentibus  :  ita  ad  inspiciendas  picturas  admissus,
plura,  quam  prima  facie  ostendi  videntur,  rimabitur  ;  cujus  rei  in  soli-
tudine  certius  judicium  ;  quod  in  turba  spectantibus  frequenter  aut
suus  cuique  favor,  aut  ille  laudantium  clamor  extorquet.  Pudet  enim
dissentire,  et  velut  tacita  quadam  verecundia  inhibemur  plus  nobis
credere  ;  cum  interim  et  vitiosa  pluribus  placeant,  et  ab  adulantibus
laudentur  etiam  quae  non  placent ;  cum  denique  optime  pictis  gratiam
pravia  judicia  non  referant.

Quotquot  igitur  huic  curae  sedulo  incumbere  in  animum  inducunt,  de
industria  quandoque  sumunt  certas  quasdam  imagines,  quas  quam
numerosissime  versent,  velut  eadem  cera  aliae  atque  aliae  formae  duci
solent.  Plastae  certe  atque  ii  qui  coloribus  utuntur,  ex  ipsis  rebus
capessunt  notiones  quibus  lineamenta,  lucem,  umbram,  eminentias,  re-
cessus  imitentur.  In  singulis  corporibus  praestantissimas  quasque  verae
pulchritudinis  notas  observant,  easque  in  unum  aliquod  opus  conferunt  ;
ut  non  tarn  didicisse  a  natura,  quam  cum  ea  certasse,  aut  potius  illi  legem
dedisse  videantur.  Quis  enim  putet  ullam  unquam  talem  fuisse  foeminae
cujusquam  pulchritudinem,  in  qua  nihil  desideraret  non  vulgaris  judex?
Nam  tametsi  in  ipsis  naturae  normis  atque  dimensionibus  universa
perfectio  est  ;  tamen  utriusque  parentis  mistio,  tempus,  coeluin,  locus,
improvisus  aliquis  casus,  et  vaga  quaevis  cogitatio  natural!  formae  non
nihil  possunt  detrahere  similitudinum  quidem  in  mente  reputatio  est,
inquit  Plinius  Nat.  Hist.  Lib.  VH,  cap.  12.  et  in  qua  credantur  multa
fortuita  pollere  ;  visus,  auditus,  memoria,  haustaeque  imagines  sub  ipso
conceptu,  etc.

1  See  below,  p.  117.  2  Infra,  p.  128.


PLASTIC   ART  in

sitting  woman  (Justice)  and  the  ostrige  ?  Esteemed
the  finest  (by  painters),  to  me  seems  the  most  modern
and  ergo...

Criticism.  How  necessary  here  ;  as  in  other  arts
according  to  Char-cks.

Horace's  reason  :

Ut  pictura  poesis  erit ;  quae,  si...

—volet  haec  sub  luce  videri,
Judicis  argutum  quae  non  formidat  acumen.
Haec  placuit  semel :    haec  decies  repetita  placebit1.

["As  with  a  painting  so  with  a  poem;  one... another
will  prefer  to  brave  the  open  light,  dreading  not  the
critics  keenest  skill  :  this  pleases  once  ;  this  viewed  ten
times  will  please."]

If  this  were  true  in  nature  (as  I  would  not  give
credit,  because  of  founding  no  argument  on  hypo
thetical,  or  dubious  foundation,  but  on  fact  and  truth)
here  would  be  a  high  commendation  indeed  of  ideas,
imagery,  and  the  force  of  the  ^a^racruxi,  fleeting  forms2,
etc.  Not  only  our  painters  but  our  women  should
imagery,  etc.  (treat  this  in  raillery)  for  fear  of  the  breed.

Caution  against  prejudice,  prevention,  prepos
session  from  artificial  and  half-taste,  gathered  from
painters  or  empirical  and  practical  science  (the  worst
imaginable)  in  gentlemen.

As  thus  :

A  parallel,  since  such  are  fashionable,  between
painting  and  eloquence,  rhetoric,  etc.  (as  often  between
that  and  poetry).  "  O  pulchrum  prosopopeiam  "  (as  in
Petronius)  so  here.  "  O  the  fine  fore-shortening !  "

Thus  in  pulpit  rhetoric  and  priest-oratory,  at  a
country  church  especially,  or  in  a  college  among  the
bearded  boys  and  pedants.  "  O  the  excellent  turn,
application  of  the  Greek  sentence !  O  the  division !
quotation  !  "  So  in  French  (Moliere's  comedy)  "si  bien
que  je  n'entendais  goutte."

1  Hor.  de  Arte  Poet.  11.  361—5.

2  As  below,  p.  143.


ii2  SECOND    CHARACTERS

Reasons  why  a  gentleman's  taste  if  practical  and
empirical1  necessarily  false  :

First  Reason.  Becomes  interested,  makes  him
self  a  party,  espouses  a  manner,  style,  mannerist  in
lowest  degree  and  below  the  painter  by  trade  and
profession.  Also  judge  and  party  in  the  cause  unfair.
So  Nero's2  voice  and  acting  (remember  Agrippinus,
etc.)  in  the  divine  man,  and  so  again  the  governour  of
the  Grecian  province  and  the  people  differing  about
the  actor  or  advice.

Dilemma.  Either  has  an  idea  or  not.  If  an  idea  :
a  hand  to  come  up  to  it  or  not.  If  a  hand  obedient
and  answering,  then  a  painter  omnibus  numeris ;  if  a
hand  inferiour  unanswering,  then  being  not  obliged  to
pursue  as  a  professor,  or  for  maintenance,  but  wholly
voluntary  and  for  pleasure  only,  must  lose  his  end,  and
hate  his  products.  For  if  loves  and  pleasure  come  by
degrees,  through  self  love,  conceit,  or  flattery  ;  then
here  comes  the  corruption,  here  the  taste  inevitably
miscarries,  grows  awry,  warps,  turns  crooked,  perverse.
Carry  this  reasoning  into  music3.

Second  Reason.  Extravagant  fondness  for  one
master,  one  particular  hand,  one  piece  (a  hundred  to
one,  if  a  good  one).  Besides  that,  no  one  master  yet
of  the  moderns  after  Raphael  has  deserved  anything
like  this  ;  and  even  as  to  Raphael  see  reasons...

So  Nero's  Greek  statue.     See  Pliny.

Third  Reason.  That  if  our  gentleman  besides  his
superiour  knowledge,  learning,  education  and  converse,
has  not  withal  a  particular  genius,  idea,  and  hand
superiour  to  the  trading  artists  and  of  a  degree  dis
tinguishable  from  the  common  road  and  style  of
painting  :  he  must  naturally  by  his  study  and  practice
be  brought  upon  a  level  and  familiarized  with  the  set
of  painters  of  his  time  ;  and  as  he  is  subject  to  their
flattery  and  emulous  of  their  praise  be  brought  into

1  Exception  for  gentlemen  quite  painters  as  Fabius  Pictor.

2  So  also  the  good  emperor  Adrian,  his  great  weakness  and  blemish  ;
only  cause  and  subject  of  tyranny  in  him.

3  And  see  below,  p.  176.


PLASTIC   ART  113

society  and  sympathy  with  this  race,  so  as  to  be  in  a
manner  one  of  tkem,  and  of  their  club  and  fraternity  ;
a  circumstance  which  will  prove  as  little  advantageous
to  his  fame  and  reputation  as  to  his  manners,  his
interest,  family  and  estate1.

The  case  being  the  same  with  this  company  as  with
that  of  players,  musicians,  songsters,  minstrels,  dancers,
and  the  rest  of  those  trades  and  their  conspiring  crew  :
all  holding  together2.

Nothing  even  of  natural  beings  worthy  of  wonder
or  admiration,  but  as  they  show  nature's  real  and
highest  art,  best  hand,  supreme  touches,  nature's
magnificence,  symmetry,  proportions,  highest  orders,
supreme  order  (beyond  doric  or  ionic,  beyond  corin-
thian).  For  what  are  all  these  but  imitations  ?  Or  as
in  united  and  conspiring  forms,  of  actual  unity  and
concurrence  in  one,  means  to  an  end,  harmony
agreement.

Ergo  a  tree  or  even  a  leaf,  beautiful  not  as  a  green,
not  as  regularly  shaped  ;  for  then  a  mere  turf  or  cut
bush  would  equal  and  surpass  an  old  oak,  or  cedar,  or
pine.  But  a  rough  bit  of  rock  more  beautiful  in  reality
than  a  pearl  or  diamond.  No  bribe  to  make  those
relished  by  almost  all,  and  lastingly  relished.  The
other  but  for  a  moment,  as  a  rarity,  or  as  set  off  itself
or  helping  to  set  off  other  forms  in  dress,  equipage,  etc.,
of  the  lowest  human  caprice  and  misconception  of
beauty.  Thus  grottos,  caves,  etc.,  the  finest  imitations
of  finest  gardening.  For  this  is  truth  ;  the  rest  false,

Thus  even  in  nature,  the  rainbow  a  mere  jewel,
an  accidental  species,  refraction,  etc.  No  real  unit:
no  being,  form,  design,  end,  concurrence.  Ergo,  a
nothing,  a  non-entity  in  virtuosoship.  A  mere  miracle
or  prodigy  (without  moral  or  doctrine} ;  a  nothing,  a
juggle.  The  passion  of  those  who  run  after  monsters
in  fairies  and  the  ^av/xaTorrotot.  Prestidigitators.

1  Memd.     Exception  for  Fabius  Pictor,  etc.,  as  above,  p.  112,  and  the
whole  man  as  below,  p.  176.     Definition  of  a  pedant  and  how  formed  in
painting,  etc.,  as  in  other  science.     Adrian  Emperour  as  above,  p.  112.

2  As  said  below,  p.  176.     'Ambubaiarum  collegia.'


R.


ii4  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Therefore  the  same  here  as  in  life  and  true  wisdom
in  order  to  avoid  deceit  and  imposture.

The  great  business  in  this  (as  in  our  lives,  or  in  the
whole  of  life)  is  "to  correct  our  taste1."  For  whither
will  not  taste*  lead  us  ?  aircrew,  arrest,  suspend,  defer,
delay, proceed  gradually,  wait,  expect,  improve...  Else
we  are  run  away  with.  The  man  upon  the  runaway
horse  in  Lucian's  cynic  (if  so  good  a  piece  as  that  be
Lucian's),  "Whither  away!  Whither  this  pleases,"
viz.  his  horse,  pointing  to  it.  Therefore  stop  it  in  its
full  career,  cross  it,  turn  it ;  and  sometimes  when  lazy
even  give  it  the  spur  ;  just  as  in  horsemanship,  as  in
breaking  the  colt.

Animum  rege  :    qui  nisi  paret,
Imperat :    hunc  frenis,   hunc  tu  compesce  catena3.

["  Check  your  temper,  which  if  not  ruled,  will
sternly  rule.  Hold  it  hard  in  with  bit  and  rein."]

From  hence  it  follows :  "  That  pleasure  (in  order
to  reap  true  pleasure)  not  to  be  indulged."  Ask,
inquire  of  self.  "  What  sort  of  pleasure  have  I  ?
What  would  I  have  ?  Quaere,  if  the  true  ?  if  truth  ?
to  what  end  ?  What  do  I  contemplate  ?  What
inspect  ?  What  to  understand,  reap,  learn4  ?  "

Is  it  to  see  flesh  painted  as  flesh  ? — No.  This
artificial,  empirical,  the  artisan,  and  even  least  part  of
the  artisan  ! — Is  it  drapery  ? — No.  This  of  the  same
kind. — Is  it  fore-shortnings,  academy  postures,  etc.  ? —
No.  This  still  empirical. — Is  it  fine  forms  in  a  vicious
sense  ?  This  false  and  more  so  than  ever  the  ryparo-
graphics.  Since  this  deforms  the  beautiful  nature ;
whereas  the  cacatorio,  a  boor,  or  soldier,  under  a
hedge  or  on  a  dunghill,  more  nauseating. — Exciting
appetite,  a  horrid  reason.  Who  dares  give  this  for  a
reason  ?  If  so  :  paint  sauces  and  dishes  for  the  table,
smoking  pastys,  etc.  A  thought  never  as  yet  pursued
(I  think)  any  more  than  curtsying  ladies,  or  bowing

1  Infra,  p.  144.  2  TO  8oK(iv.

3  Horat.  Epistola,  Lib.  I,  Ep.  2,  11.  62,  63.  4  Supra,  p.  92.


PLASTIC   ART  115

beaus,  except  in  the  French  court.  Pictures  of  the
pretty  princes  and  princesses,  and  court-airs  as  hung
in  toy  shops.

Observe  the  difference  of  a  right  and  liberal  eye
from  a  mechanic,  false :  the  same  in  painting  and
figures,  etc.,  as  in  real  life  and  persons.  "  What
Person,  what  form,  character,  species  of  a  man,  do  we
see  ?  Who  was  he  whom  we  saw  in  such  a  company,
in  such  an  action,  circumstance,  reading,  writing,
talking,  hearkening,  musing,  exercising  ? "

A  tailor  who  is  asked  :  he  answers  (according  to
his  eye).  "  A  gentleman  in  such  a  coloured  stuff,  of
such  a  cut."

If  it  be  a  dancing  master:  he  answers  (according
to  his  eye).  "  A  gentleman  with  such  a  gait  or  tread,
his  leg  turned  so  or  so."

If  it  be  a  fop  :  he  answers  (according  to  his  eye)
still,  and  as  uniting  the  two  latter  tastes.  "  A  gentle
man  so  or  so  dressed,  coming  into  a  room  with  such  or
such  an  air,  etc.,  such  coloured  lips,  such  teeth."

But  if  a  man  of  sense,  with  an  eagle's  eye  :  he
answers  from  his  memory  and  recollection  (for  so  he
gathers,  collects,  imprints,  and  such  is  his  imagery,
history,  invention).  "  A  gentleman  of  such  a  be
haviour,  speech,  action,  such  an  address,  such  manners,
aspect,  and  seeming  note  or  character  of  sense  and
understanding,  temper,  mind,  soul,  and  inward  com
plexion."

The  artificial,  witty,  far-fetched,  refined,  hyper
critical  taste  (what  is  apt  to  be  commended  as
ingenuous  and  merely  speculative)  is  the  worst  in  the
world,  being  half-way,  and  like  half-thinkers  (in
Char-cks,  in,  302).  The  same  in  fencing,  riding,
dancing.  The  natural  best,  till  well  and  truly  formed
(see  again  Char-cks,  i,  190,  at  the  end),  and  the
original  first  rude  taste' corrected  by  rule,  and  reduced
to  a  yet  more  simple  and  natural  measure.  Otherwise
an  innocent  child's  eye  (of  good  parts  and  not  spoilt
already  by  pictures  of  the  common  sort)  always  found


n6  SECOND    CHARACTERS

the  best,  as  I  have  found  experimentally,  in  such  a  one
not  of  the  higher  gentry  but  liberal,  and  out  of  the
way  of  prints,  and  such  costly  playthings  of  imagery,
etc.  The  same  experienced  as  to  likeness  in  por
traiture.

Ergo.  Better  mere  nature  than  half-way,  illa-
borate,  artful,  merely  critical  judgment ;  as  it  were  in
wantonness,  gayete  de  coeur,  with  indifference,  super
ciliousness,  neglect,  scoff,  as  may  be  seen  even  in  the
manners,  and  in  the  way  itself  of  censuring  by  these
false-censurers,  pseudo  critiques,  answerable  to  the
French  pretieuses,  etc.

Better  be  the  mere  je  ne  sais  quoi  of  the  French.
Though  this  not  in  our  language  :  nor  I  hope  ever
will.  But  for  us  (I  hope)  something  better  reserved.

Docti  rationem  artis  intelligunt,  indocti  voluptatem1.

["  The  learned  understand  the  art  of  composition,  the
unlearned  enjoy  pleasure  from  it."]

6.     DISCOURAGEMENTS  IN  ART.

Compare  moderns  with  ancients.  Consider  the
latter,  their  care  and  culture  of  bodies  themselves  by
exercises,  the  Greek  discipline.  Wrestling,  even  of
the  wrestlers  in  state  (remember  Pericles  in  Plutarch).
So  a  Scipio,  when  first  Rome  took  the  polite  way.  See
the  passage  of  Livy  when  the  commissioners  from  the
Senate  were  sent  as  inquisitors  into  his  athletic  and
other  Greek  manners.

Consider  after  the  bodies  and  forms  themselves,
the  opportunity  of  viewing  these  forms  of  the  finer
sort  (not  porters  or  beggars)  in  nudity,  and  in  easy,
familiar,  as  well  as  strenuous  exercising  action.  For
as  in  a  hot  country,  so  in  quotidian  baths.  In  private
families,  wives,  children.  Whereas  now  none  but
painters  (as  Albani)  used  to  such  views,  and  these

1  Quintilian's  Institutiones  Qratoriae,  Lib.  IX,  cap.  4,  1.  116,  cited  by
Junius  in  de  pictura  veterum,  p.  38.


PLASTIC   ART  117

constrained  and  awkward  as  being  lucrative  only,
necessitous,  mercenary,  and  a  reproach  and  shame  in
the  passive  parties.

Also  distortions  by  dress,  unnatural  bandages,
ligatures :  as  cravats,  garterings,  women's  bodice
and  contraction  of  waist,  pressure  of  hips,  swellings
and  unnatural  disfigurations  of  necks,  breasts,  paps.
Borings  and  lugging  down  of  ears  by  jewels,  (well  that
it  is  not  nostrils  as  with  the  other  barbarians),  perukes,
cravats.

Also  props  or  stilts  under  the  heel  or  hind  part
of  the  foot,  relaxing  the  hinder  tendon  and  muscles ;
and  extending,  stretching  unnaturally  those  of  the
fore  part  and  instep,  setting  us  young  a  tiptoe.  So
women's  figures  of  feet  and  legs  wholly  destroyed  in
China  by  small  shoes,  till  they  are  unable  to  stand.
Our  case  even  among  the  lower  sort  very  near  the
same  ;  a  degree  or  two  only  removed  from  the  same
barbarism.

Hence  no  modern  figure  (of  the  noble  kind)  now
extant  in  the  world,  which  can  be  seen  standing  natur
ally  on  the  ground.

Idea  therefore  must  be  taken  from  nature  and
drawn ;  instinct  and  what  is  innate ;  or  from  the
ancient  trunks  and  broken  remains.

What  little  help  from  Academy  in  this  respect,  viz.  of
nudity's,  i.e.  naked  porters,  or  privately  from  diseased
courtesans.  Whereas  those  who  know  nature  under
stand  well  what  difference  debauch  soon  makes  in  the
youngest  female,  and  how  deflowering  is  soon  de
flowering  in  this  sense  also :  the  fas  instantly  vanishing.

Statuary1  the  mother  art  to  painting.  In  the  first
place  on  account  of  religion  and  civil  government  (as
these  stood  among  the  ancients),  the  families,  heroes,
patricians,  patriots,  etc.  as  well  as  penates.  ("He
deserves  his  statue  in  gold ! "  Modern  expressions
which  show  the  nature  of  the  thing.)  And  in  the  next
place  on  account  of  the  profound  learning,  muscles,

1  Infra^  p.  127.


n8  SECOND   CHARACTERS

anatomy,  physique,  symmetry,  (a  statue  viewed  all
round),  simplicity,  purity.

Remember  also  what  pity:  Raphael  forced  to  paint
walls1;  cartoons  for  tapestry  ;  an  underwork  man  for
false  work  ;  altar  pieces  as  the  priests  commanded  ;
popes  enjoined  (witness  the  transfiguration -piece2,
called  the  first  picture  of  the  world)  saints  with  lights
about  their  heads  :  sometimes  gold  and  silver !  rare
works  in  art3 !

False*  criticism  another  discouragement  in  art.  Up
start  affected  critics:  Why  this?  Why  that  ?  General
topics  which  they  think  mighty  ingenious  as  :  lights
whence  ?  How  here  and  yet  there  ? — Answer:  Flying
clouds,  a  thunder  storm  covering  one  spot;  sun  shining
the  stronger  and  brighter  on  another.  A  reflection
from  the  rocks  unseen.  Other  objects  out  of  the
picture  in  the  very  place  of  the  spectator,  whence  new
various  mixed  tints5  of  which  nothing  appears, — but
the  effect  in  the  picture  itself.

Also  that  other  pert  question  of  these  sprightly
critics,  viz.  "  How  does  that  garment  hang  on  ? "
Answer:  "It  does  not  hang  at  all.  'Tis  dropping.
You  catch  sight  only  in  an  instant."  So  in  running

1  Infra,  p.  148.

2  This  transfiguration-piece  of  Raphael  would  have  made  an  excellent
marble  or  piece  of  relief-work  (and  such  Raphael  always  carried  in  head:
those  of  the  ancients  in  default  of  pictures  having  been  his  great  school
and  lesson).     But  as  it  is,  in  the  illusive  art  'tis  so  far  from  that  sweet
persuasiveness  and  illusion  (sweet  as  it  is  in  other  respects)  that  it  not
only  breaks  all  rule  of  perspective,  but   everything   of  general    order,
position  or  collocation.     The  mountain  a  mole-hill,  at  most  a  mounte
bank's  stage.     Those  figures  below  which  should  be  seen  by  the  upper
parts  (supposing  the  point  of  sight  to  be  above  the  flat  of  the  mountain
as  it  must  be  for  the  sake  of  the  lying  figures  there)  are  not  at  all  in  the
air.     Every  figure  a  point  of  light  by  itself  may  be  cut  out  of  the  cloth,
or  stuck  on  any  other  cloth,  anywhere  as  well  as  where  they  are.     No
one  principal,  no  subjection,  subordination,  unity  or  integrity :  no  piece :
no  whole.     All  disposition  and  order  sacrificed  in  this  transfiguration-
work,  as  all  colouring  in  the  cartoons.

3  Quere.    Whether  no  instance  of  this  in  Raphael's  ?    Where  or  what
other  master's  besides.     Answer....

4  Of  true  criticism  (of  which  an  art  must  be  found)  see  '  Soliloquy,'
vol.  I,  p.  240.     "  For  to  all  music  there  must  be  an  ear  proportionable.
There  must  be  an  art  of  hearing  found."     So  of  seeing,  etc.

5  Infra,  p.  147.


PLASTIC   ART  119

figures,  in  a  horse  full  speed,  in  the  gladiator  Farnese.
Whoever  saw  either  of  these  subjects  precisely  and
distinctly  in  any  such  attitude  ?  So  a  man  falling  from
a  precipice.  An  angel,  mercury  flying.  Michael
Angelo's  natural  attraction  of  his  resurrection  figures
upwards  (ill  represented  in  the  print,  a  poor  one).  All
these  instantaneous.  All  is  invention  (the  first  part  of
painting),  creation,  divining,  a  sort  of  prophesying
and  inspiration,  the  poetical  ecstatic  and  rapture.
Things  that  were  never  seen  ;  no  nor  that  ever  were  :
yet  feigned.  Painter  as  poet,  a  second  maker1.

But  without  all  this  apology  and  defence.  The
poem  and  fiction  is  answer  sufficient :  the  hyperbole,
the  invention,  essential  ;  the  probable,  plausible ;  the
poetic,  truth.  What  else  would  be  every  line  in  epic
exaggerated  continally  beyond  all  possibility  if  narrowly
searched.  And  see  most  particularly  (what  is  of  in
finite  curiosity  and  of  usefulest  speculation  to  us  in
the  research  of  painting)  the  Homerical  and  Virgilian
description  of  the  shields,  where  the  figures  at  last
insensibly  begin  to  stir  and  move  and  do  what  is
absurd  and  impossible  to  imagine.  Yet  this  is  right.

Sad  to  consider  that  the  occasional  rise  of  painting,
being  chiefly  from  the  popish  priesthood,  the  improve
ment  and  culture  of  it  (excepting  the  vicious  part  for
the  cabinets  of  the  grandees  etc.)  has  turned  wholly
on  the  nourishment  and  support  of  superstition  (chiefly
too  in  ugly  forms),  and  exaltation  of  that  vile  shrivelling
passion  of  beggarly  modern  devotion  (as  in  Miscel
lanys,  pp.  126-8,  and  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  pp.  35-36).
Witness  the  best  picture  in  the  world,  Domenichino's
St  Jerome.

Remember  here  (as  prefatory)  to  anticipate  the
nauseating,  the  puking,  the  delicate,  tender-stomached,
squeamish  reader  (pseudo  or  counter  critic),  deltca-
tulus.  "Why  all  this?"  And  "can't  one  taste  or
relish  a  picture  without  this  ado  ?"  (So  in  Miscellany,
the  prosopopy,  pp.  166,  278.)  Thus  kicking,  spurning

1  See  Char-cks,  vol.  I,  p.  207.


120  SECOND   CHARACTERS

at  the  speculation,  investigating,  discussion  of  the  je
ne  sais  quoy.

Euge  tuum  et  belle  :  nam  belle  hoc  excute  totum,
Quid  non  intus  habet  ?*

["Your  'well  done!'  and  your  'O  fine!'  for  examine
this  whole  '  Opine.1     What  has  it  not  within  ?  "]
So  the  "I  like,"  "you  like,"  who  can  forbear?    who
does  forbear?    Therefore.     Have  patience.     Wait  the
tale.     Let  me  unfold  etc.

Chief  support  of  painting  what? — X1! — Wretched
model2.  Barbarian.  No  form,  no  grace  of  shoulders,
breast3,  no  demarche,  air,  majesty,  grandeur,  a  lean
uncomely  proportion  and  species,  a  mere  Jew  or
Hebrew  (originally  an  ugly  scabby  people)  both  shape
and  physique,  with  half  beard  peaked,  not  one  or  the
other.  Lank  clinging  hair,  snivelling  face,  hypocritical
canting  countenance  and  at  best  melancholy,  mad
and  enthusiastical  in  the  common  and  lower  way,  not
so  well  as  even  the  bacchanals  and  bacchantes4.

But  of  this  more  when  we  come  to  speak  of
Decorum5.  And  there  add  (in  notes):  The  painters,
without  any  manner  of  necessity  or  prescription  that
I  know  of,  represent  the  husband  of  the  blessed  virgin
as  a  broken,  blind,  doating  old  man,  at  the  very  birth
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour ;  though  highly  probable

1  Persius,  Satires,  I.

2  Memd.     Here  the  general  subject,  viz.  God  the  Father  a  broken,
wrapt  up,  nursed,  old ;   consumptive  look,  haggard,  with  carcass,  a  dead
Christ  held  forth  in  winding  sheet,  a  pigeon  in  bosom,  and  a  lubberly,
hober-de-hoy  or  two  of  an  angel  (hermaphroditical  forms,  half-man,  half-
woman,  in  petticoats  and  broad  flopping  wings)  with  a  dozen  or  score
of  peepers,  raw,  callow  heads  (like  gaping  birds  out  of  a  nest)  stuck  in
unnaturally  between  a  pair  of  wings  without  a  body,  and  called  cherubs.

From  hence  (as  taking  ground  from  a  high  station),  thunder  and  rant
(but  comical  still  and  in  good  humour)  against  common  prayer-book-
cult,  glass  window  etc.,  tapestry  figures  of  high  church  and  chapel.

Better  the  perfect  in  the  kind  ;  and  statuary  introduced.  Altar  a  true
altar,  and  image  etc.  as  becoming.  And  justify  this  by  Queen  Elizabeth's

rant  cited  by  an  ingenious  author  and  learned  gentleman  (M'C ).  Is

priestcraft  in  perfection.  (Cite  the  cited  authority  but  not  M'C.,  nor  his
pamphlet  by  name.)

3  Here  cite  the  poets,  finest  works  of  Apollo,  Jove.

4  Of  which  see  below,  p.  126.  5  Infra,  p.  167.


PLASTIC   ART  121

(and  better  to  be  supported)  that  according  to  the
Jewish  practice,  highly  commendable  in  suitable
marriages  and  regard,  veneration,  that  the  parties  were
of  equal  or  suitable  age.  And  now  thirty  and  odd
years  after,  the  same  Joseph  is  seen  going  out  without
kindred  in  search  of  Christ.

7.     ENCOURAGEMENTS,  MOTIVES.

1.  Invention    of     prints,     etchings     (which     are
original)  answerable  to  printing  in  the  commonwealth
of  letters.      Hence  eye  of  the  public  framed  ;  though
injured  by  the  false  (French  and  Flemish)  taste,  and
ill   cuts  in  books  of  learning :    always   ill   because  of
cheapness  of  the  impression.

2.  As  to  the  benefit  to  mankind  and  the  youth  :
not  only  emollit  mores1,  but  forms.      Diverts  the  noble
(and    idle)    from    extravagant    expense    of    time    and
estate  :    gaming :    riot :     excess :    lazy   habit   and    its
consequences2.

3.  IloXXa/as    e#av/*acra...   and    upon  that  tone  to
remark,  observe,  "  How  great  an  ambition  in  nobility,
gentry,  wits,  etc.,  to  be  knowing  in  master's  hands."
Comparisons    drawn    from    painting,    poets,     orators,
divines.      Lives  of  painters,   even   modern   and  mere
wretches  such  as  they  are,   much  canvassed,  emphati
cally  related,  in  the  best  companys,  among  ladies,  etc.3

Also  this  concerning  excursions,  deviations,  di
verting  tales,  episodes,  miscellany,  occasional  reflections
(partly  as  Lucullus  said,  for  my  own  sake).  I  have
always  thought  strange  that  authors  should  be  found
(and  readers  to  support  them)  who  could  purpose,
write,  and  couch  their  fragments  and  spare  thoughts,
as  if  pity  the  world  should  lose  the  least4.

1  [Ovid,  Epistola  ex  Ponto,  Lib.  II,  Epist.  9,  1.  48.]

2  As  below,  p.  174.

3  This  in  the  preface  and  introductory  part,  with  much  thrown  off  into
notes  below  it.     See  also  about  the  master  painters'  lives  and  occasional
relation  of  their  personal  and  hand  characters,  resembling  and  instructive
as  well  as  entertaining.     See  I  say  above,  p.  15.

*  See  '  Soliloquy,'  p.  164,  and  '  Miscellanys,'  pp.  145 — 6.


122  SECOND    CHARACTERS

With  respect  to  self,  (apologizing  for  it).  Thus
reconciliation  of  plastics,  etc.,  viz.  That  being  sick
and  under  pains,  watches,  insomnias,  etc.,  as  also
disturbing  business  or  affairs  overmuch  for  one  in  a
low  habit,  etc.  The  custom  of  viewing  the  forms  and
raising  these  pleasing  spectres,  not  only  good  as
chasers,  drivers  away  of  other  species  and  haunting
forms  of  faces,  grimaces,  etc.,  in  weak  stomachs,  in
digestions,  head  aches ;  but  in  reality  helping  the
passions,  calming,  allaying,  introducing  new.  But  this
conditionally,  that  the  just  virtuoso-rules  be  practised,
and  none  of  the  frightful  or  ghastly  spectacles  (as
Apollo,  executioner  of  martyrs,  in  the  very  flaying  act),
any  more  than  the  lascivious  be  admitted.  For  each
of  these  are  false  and  never  ryparography.


8.     PRAISES,   RECOMMENDATIONS  OF  THE  ART.

Had  I  been  born  a  Christian  Catholic  where
Christianity  and  imagery  was  natural  cult,  etc.,  I
should  say  to  myself,  or  as  I  now  am,  shall  say  to  such
a  one,  in  favour  of  poor  art  and  artists,  recognized
however  by  heaven  and  divine  law  {jure  divino]  :
"Sir!  Can  you  worship  thus?  Would  doggerel
serve  you  for  hymns  ?  bagpipe  or  jews'  harp  for  music
and  hallelujahs  ?  Can  you  see  Christ  twice  crucified  ?
Him  broken  and  distorted  of  whom  it  was  said  a  bone
of  him,  etc.  ?  Him  disfigured  of  whom  it  is  written...  ?
Him  decrepit,  gouty,  old,  etc.,  who  never  had  a
blemish,  wound,  or  disease  ;  and  who  was  so  young  a
man  still  when  he  suffered  ?  Him  who  was  purposely
by  the  wicked  placed  between  two  thiefs  in  disgrace,
made  resembling  to  such  countenances,  and  of  the
same  looks,  mien,  form  and  passion  as  either  rascal  ?  "

Dilemma  about  the  use  of  pictures  by  Christians.
Either  none  or  good.  Church  of  England,  (High
Church)  and  Lutheran  miserable.  And  in  this  sense
odi  imitatores  as  in  '  Characteristics.'


PLASTIC   ART  123

And  here  again  in  favour  of  painters:  To  insist1
that  beautiful  forms  beautify ;  polite,  polish.  On  the
contrary,  gothic  gothicize,  barbarous  barbarize.

In  respect  of  economy  and  as  delivering  from
other  luxuries  and  expences  when  rightly  taken.  First
because  of  its  own  nature  ;  TO  KaXov ;  expensiveness
and  richness  being  the  very  ruin  of  the  art  according
to  Pliny  in  the  '  Characteristics.'

Also  for  reasons  hinted  just  below2.  And  here  a
place  for  moralizing.  "  Everyone  covets  in  proportion
to  the  appetite  of  expence  :  not  florid  and  generous  as
is  vulgarly  conceived,  but  modest  and  generous.  Love
of  giving,  largition,  communication,  joined  with  hatred
of  waste  and  needless  expence. — Frugal  ergo  liberal-
Saving  ergo  bountiful."  A  good  father,  excellent  man
I  knew,  taught  his  lad  to  fling  away  farthings  in  view
of  generosity.  This  directly  the  contrary  road  and  I
fear  would  sooner  teach  him  avarice,  increasing  his
wants  by  negligence,  and  his  appetites  not  decreasing.
On  the  contrary  his  ill  appetites  and  affections  rising
stronger  by  the  contempt  of  other  peoples  wants  and
the  noble  pleasure  of  relieving  them  by  what  he  neglects
and  spurns.  Hence  heart  hardened.

The  Roman  vir  frugi.  The  first  Cato.  Above
all  the  Englishman,  because  of  a  court  and  place-pre
ferment,  prostitution,  etc.

But  in  a  way  it  may  be  objected  :  "  That  this
makes  against  our  subject,  viz.  Pictures."  If  it  does
so,  so  let  it.  Let  it  take  its  chance.  God's  name.
But  let  us  see  first.  Examine  the  true  taste,  etc.

In  some  of  the  early  divisions3  (whether  the  begin
ning  or  middle  of  part  or  chapter)  raise  the  objection
of  luxury  and  expence  encouraged  in  the  great,  and
consequently  too  in  the  little  according  to  Esop's  and
Horace's  Frogs  so  unto  themselves.  But  first  a  com
promise,  a  compounding,  a  less  for  a  greater  and
worse  ;  a  taking  off  from  play,  equipage,  riot  and  feast.

1  Supra,  p.  104.  2  Infra,  p.  123.

3  Supra,  p.  123.


i24  SECOND    CHARACTERS

Nay  even  from  building  ;  and  in  the  next  place  when
the  extravagance  is  committed  and  the  res,  the  patri
mony  hurt  (of  which  speak  seriously  as  the  way  to
knavery,  etc.,  in  the  gentleman).  All  may  be  retrieved
and  upon  a  new  turn  of  business  with  a  good  air  dis
posed  of,  and  with  good  advantage  and  increase  of  the
principal,  if  such  rules  as  these  arefollowed  and  notfancy.

For  this  is  worthy  observation  that  though  we
scarce  see  a  man  whose  fancy  agrees  with  another  in
the  many  hands  and  paintings,  yet  in  general  when
the  cabal1  is  over,  for  this  must  be  excepted  (as  in
Poussin's  case  in  France  and  Domenichino's  in  Naples),
the  public  always  judges  right,  and  the  pieces  esteemed
or  disesteemed  after  a  time  and  a  course  of  some  years
are  always  exactly  esteemed  according  to  their  pro
portion  of  worth  by  these  rules  and  studies.  So  that
the  gentleman  who  follows  his  caprice  may  undo
himself.  But  he  who  either  fixes  his  taste,  or  buys
according  to  the  universal  judgment  and  public  taste
and  confession  of  painters  in  works  of  the  deceased,
will  never  be  abused  or  come  off  a  sufferer  when  he
parts  with  his  effects.

Also  secret  apology  (in  passing  and  not  with  set
design)  for  purchasing  of  pictures  :  because  of  necessity
of  purchasing  as  a  virtuoso  for  commerce  and  acquaint
ance  in  Italy.  This  to  be  thrown  in  in  raillery  and
humour  upon  my  Lord  ...  etc.,  and  addressing  to  him
as  the  cause  of  drawing  me  in.  And  there  being  a
necessity  withal  of  speaking  of  self  (another  kind  of
self-citation)  because  of  these  purchases2.

9.     ANCIENT  MASTERS  AND  WORKS,  IN  STATUES,
HEADS,   RELIEFS,  INTAGLIOS.

Beginning  of  ancient  reform,  improvement  and
perfection  of  iconics,  plastics,  and  graphical  imitation,

1  In  notes  refer  to  Fre"art  and  Bosse  about  this  Cabal  against  Poussin.
Supra,  p.  15;  infra,  p.  128.

2  See  above,  p.  98.


PLASTIC    ART  125

about  the  same  time  with  the  poetical  (after  the  great
model  Homer)  in  the  two  branches  of  dramatic,  viz.
tragedy  and  comedy.

Euripides  before  and  Menander  just  after  Apelles
and  Protegenes ;  or  near  upon  their  contemporaries.
The  art  of  colours  being  not  in  its  perfection  (or  beyond
four)  till  then.

Therefore  statuary1  first  in  order  of  time  (history
and  nature:  as  said  of  other  arts  in  Char-cks).  Then
painting.  For  design  indeed  the  foundation  :  colours
an  after  ornament  (and  to  be  regarded  by  tyros),
though  drawing  perfect  of  necessity  when  statuary
perfect.  Therefore  Leukis  not  yet  an  Apelles.  And
had  Raphael  ever  had  an  equal  since  him  in  idea  and
grace,  he  had  been  surpassed  and  not  the  first  and
only  great  in  painting,  because  of  some  improvement
perhaps  in  colouring  after,  tho — .

Egyptians  though  so  much  earlier  and  so  vastly
ancient ;  yet  barbarous.  Why  ?  A  law  in  this  case.
Orthodox  designing,  hieroglyphics2,  sacred-monstrous,
reformation  of  these  first  forms,  sacrilegious,  heretical.
National  church-painting.  Figures  of  the  gods  still
monstrous  (though  somewhat  Greek)  whilst  in  Asia
or  Africa:  as  Jupiter,  Hammon,  Diana  of  Ephesus,
Anubis,  Canopus —

The  animals  once  ill  designed  as  at  first  when
given  by  Isis,  or  other  sovereigns  to  be  kept  alive
and  mourned  for  when  happening  to  die  (being  in
memory  of  mangled  husband  whose  true  body  was
still  concealed3).

These  animal  forms,  I  say,  being  never  after  to  be
innovated.

The  religion  of  the  Egyptians  being  thus  made
specific*,  both  internally  within  themselves  and  with

1  Supra,  p.  117.  2  Supra,  p.  92.

3  Sec  Herodotus,  Diodorus  Siculus.

4  So  the  Jewish  religion  specific.     Christian  not  till  after  Christ  and
settled  by  successional  authority.      E.g.  had  a  proselyte  to  the  Jewish
temple  and  religion  been  at  Jerusalem,  or  in  Judea  at  the  preaching  of
Christ  and  been  converted,  afterwards  carried  away  and  lost  in  a  foreign


126  SECOND   CHARACTERS

still  greater  division  and  abhorrence  from  externs.
Not  thus  the  Greek,  Roman,  and  other  heathen
worthies.  For  here  an  emperour,  or  philosopher,  or
historian  (as  Herodotus)  travelling,  could  be  initiated
severally  in  each  worship.

Note  that  all  the  true  antique  figures,  and  especially
the  single  female1  heads  or  busts  of  bacchanals,  have  a
deep,  eager,  severe  ecstatic  or  enthusiastic  air.  No
thing  like  disorder  from  wine  :  nothing  drowsy,  frolic
some,  wanton,  or  so  much  as  gay  or  smiling ;  but  on
the  contrary  stern  and  rigid,  the  passion  of  the  plain,
prophetic,  oraculous  kind,  fanatic  and  lymphatic  (as
in  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  etc.).  Whence  the  guess2  of
Heinsius,  (though  so  rash  an  obtruder)  wonderfully
engaging  and  persuasive,  entering  into  the  spirit  of
the  Ode  of  Horace  there  cited3  and  into  the  rest  of
antiquity  as  by  these  figures  and  heads  of  bacchanals,
is  so  confirmed  and  illustrated.  Also  the  place  in
Livy,  ibid.  (viz.  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  p.  47)  and
Miscellanys,  pp.  39,  40,  66,  67  and  notes.  Full  of
the  Holy  Ghost. — Full  of  grace  (as  the  Molinists  and
Quietists,  mystics,  quakers,  new  prophets).  Same
passion  by  modern  painters  in  some  of  their  saints4.

Against  Academy  life-painting  (as  inferiour  to  study

land  like  China  or  Japan:  in  this  case  he  would  not  have  been  a  specific,
unless  he  had  an  apostolic  revelation  or  mission,  but  at  liberty  to  have
relinquished  the  Jews  even  though  he  found  a  synagogue,  circumcision,
and  sabattizing  in  that  very  new  country  to  which  he  was  carried.  Thus
also  during  the  controversy  between  Paul  and  Peter,  the  Christian
religion  less  specific  :  whilst  one  conformed  the  other  absolutely  dis
sented  from  the  Jewish  rites  with  anger  and  reflection  on  the  occasional-
conformist  Peter.  And  thus  also  the  Protestant  sects  more  or  less
specific,  as  they  allow  latitude  and  communion  with  others :  not  ab
solutely  damning,  condemning.  But  the  Church  of  Rome  absolutely
specific,  as  exclusive,  peremptory,  negatively  and  affirmatively.

This  by  way  of  explanation  only  of  the  phrase  specific.  So  to  return
again  to  our  specific  forms,  the  barbarous  sculpture  and  hieroglyphic
notes  of  the  Aegyptian  priests.

1  See    Leonardo   Agostini's  Le  Gemme  Anttche,   partie   ie,  Fig.  27,
pp.  28  and  so  to  34  inclusive.

2  Viz.  Lymphatur  for  Lactatur.     For  no  joy  in  the  case.     "  I  have
seen  God.     1  shall  die."     See  Scripture.

3  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  p.  51.

4  As  for  instance  see  in  modern  masters,  infra,  p.  127.


PLASTIC   ART


127


of  ancient  forms  and  culture  of  ideas).  Let  but  any
one  read  Plutarch  and  Xenophon  on  the  Spartan
discipline,  diet,  and  care  of  breed,  conception,  birth
and  nurture  of  bodies,  and  then  wonder,  if  he  can,  why
ancient  life  beyond  modern  (porters),  and  Spartans
beyond  even  the  rest  of  the  Greeks  in  number  of
victories  at  the  Olympics  ;  or  that  Leonidas  and  his
six  hundred  at  Thermopylae,  etc.

(1)  Ancient  masters  how  much  honoured  and  in
repute  from  Xeuxis  and  Apelles,   Fabius  Pictor,  etc.
to  Diognetus,   Marcus's  master —

(2)  Philosophy  itself  out  of  the  school  of  design
and  plastic  art.    Sophroniscus's  son  of  whose  own  hand
the  graces,  etc.

(3)  In  the  question,  whether  the  statuary  or  painter
—the  noblest.     Remember,  that  besides  Socrates,  of
Sophroniscus,  etc.  and  his  graces.     Nothing  mechanical
and  even  much  less  than  painting,  though  seemingly
the  contrary.      For  note  the  story  of  Raphael  contend
ing  with  Michael  Angelo,  and  making  (by  command
and  precept  to  an  ordinary  stone-carver)  one  of  the
perfectest,    if  not  the   perfectest,   of   modern    statues.
Also  the  ancient  statuarys  wrought  more  immediately
for  the  temples,  the  lares,  the  gods,  heroes,  patriots,
ancestors,   magistrates,   etc.     The    painters    more    for
pleasure  and  beauteous  contemplation.

(4)  Here  statuary  the  mother  art  of  painting1.

10.     MODERN  MASTERS  AND  WORKS,  IN  PAINTING,
ETCHING,   ETC.

What  our  English  life-writer  says  of  the  enthusiasm
of  Domenichino.

Enthusiasm  represented  by  modern  masters,  when
of  the  prophetic  ecstatic  kind — as  by  ancient  masters2
— in  the  persons  of  St  Paul,  the  prophet  Jeremiah,
Saul.

1     Supra,  p.  117.  2  Supra,  p.  126.


128  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Monsieur  du  Fresnoy  \  who  wrote  the  Ars  Graphica,
was  himself  a  painter,  according  to  our  English  trans
lator2.  Quere.  What  for  a  performer  ? — This  highly
material  because  of  his  being  an  author.

Quere  also  (for  the  same  reason)  about  Leonardo
da  Vinci3,  so  extolled  by  the  French  author  Freart,
who  was  refuted  on  this  point ;  it  having  been  shown
that  this  piece  (which  he  brags  of  having  translated)
was  not  of  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  nor  of  any  worth ;  as  the
excellent  Poussin  testifies  in  his  letter,  if  it  be  genuine
and  undoubted  as  published  by  Monsieur  Bosse  in
his  Peintre\

Censure  of  Annibale  Carracci9.  His  noted  piece
frequently  engraved,  etched  by  Carlo  Marat  with  great
exactness  (viz.  Christ  and  Samaritan  Woman).  Action
all  theatrical6.  Imitation  of  an  imitation  ;  at  second
hand ;  not  immediate,  not  original,  from  nature.  Art
by  custom  becomes  a  new  model.

So  the  tragic,  or  the  stage.  Each  nation  (as  French
and  English,  vice  versa]  finds  this  better  in  their  con
trary  than  in  themselves.  Monr  Baron.  Our  Mrs  Barry.
So  the  dancing-master7  if  strictly  followed  :  a  fictitious,

1  Infra,  p.  140.

2  Anonymous  publisher  who  praises  him.    [Cf.  C.  du  Fresnoy's  The
Art  of  Painting,  translated  by  M.  Dryden.     Lond.  1750.]

3  A    Florentine    great    mathematician,    anatomist,    and    older    than
Raphael.     Rival  of,  in  art,  and  restorer  of  modern  painting,  according
to  our  English  author  (in  Dryden's  Fresnoy,  p.  278).

4  P-  56.

6  Memd.  Speak  of  his  gallery  with  just  applause,  that  being  after
his  contemplation  of  the  ancient  forms  and  study  of  Raphael,  for  which
I  have  heard  him  censured  by  the  best  modern  heads  of  eminent  painters
and  virtuosi :  "  Forsooth !  as  varying  from  his  finer  early  manner  and
delicacy  of  his  great  predecessor,  leader,  and  countryman  Correggio,
from  whence  his  Lombard  school."

6  Theatrical,  etc.  (see  "  Notion  of  Hercules,"  chap,  in,  7),  or,  which  is
the  same  as  theatrical  action,  pulpit-action,  as  in  foreign  catholic-country.
(This  may  be  safely  pushed  to  ridicule,  our  own  priests  accompanying
the  laugh;  though  against  their  real  interest  and  art  at  the  bottom.)
And  from  hence  I  have  known  a  real  able,  but  devout  painter  fall  in
raptures  on  the  pathetic  action  of  the  Christ,  the  touch  of  the  single
finger  on  the  breast  (the  other  fingers  in  apt  position  about),  when  by
this  he  really  and  truly  showed  and  even  demonstrated  to  me,  the  affec
tation  I  suspected,  and  which  I  was  always  willing  in  honour  of  Carracci
to  pass  by  uncriticised.  7  Supra,  p.  no.


PLASTIC   ART  129

false  and  affected  gesture  and  mien  :  not  the  natural
bow,  tread  or  entrance  into  a  room.

The  painter  more  than  the  poet  should  beware  of
this  (though  even  in  tragedy  Horace  says:  Et  tragicus
plerumque  dolet  sermone  pectestri1}  ["  So  tragical  gener
ally,  in  their  pain  take  to  the  language  of  prose"]
by  reason  that...

Modern  masters  no  learning.  No  converse  till
after  raised  and  known  by  their  pencil,  and  then  too
late.  Illiberal.  Dis-ingenuous.  Sharks,  rakes.  What
ideas,  when  thus  vulgar!  Not  even  so  high  as  what
we  call  good  breeding  and  manners  in  a  common
sense.  What  sense  of  poetic  manners,  characters,
personages,  moral  truth  !  What  kind  of  judges !  Yet
these  give  the  clue  and  lead  the  great,  who  are  cheated
as  well  as  misled  by  these  mechanic  knaves.

History  of  revival  of  painting.  How  far  owing  to
Roman  hierarchy2  (see  Char-cks,  vol.  in,  p.  90).
But  liberty  withal,  viz.  the  hierarchy  itself  (archon  for
life,  ephori,  generals  of  orders,  Jesuits  etc.),  and  also
civil  liberty,  the  free  states  of  Italy  as  Venice,  Genoa,
and  then  Florence  also  and  other  places.  Besides
that,  meeting  and  as  it  were  co-habiting  as  private
men,  but  grandees,  in  one  city  (as  in  Rome,  or  at  a
carnival  in  Venice).  This  reduces  things  to  a  parity
with  a  free  state  and  independency  which  sets  painters
and  artists  free,  erects  a  public,  a  nation,  Italy  (see
Machiavelli's  passion  for  Italy  as  the  Greek  ^>l\e\\t]va),
excites  emulation  etc.,  creates  a  taste,  judgment.

1  De  Arte  Poetica,  1.  95.

-  Memd.  Under  this  head  of  the  hierarchy  remark  in  notes,  viz.
"  That  we  in  particular  (viz.  Anglo-saxons)  and  church  (quatenus  Chris
tian,  independent  of  the  magistracy  and  act  of  parliament)  are  but  a
colony  of  the  papal  hierarchy  from  Pope  Gregory  and  his  missionary
monk,"  etc.  (as  in  Characteristics,  vol.  in,  p.  239,  and  N.B.).  That  notwith
standing  the  Pope's  great  enmity  to  letters  (true  letters :  though  himself
so  rhetorical)  yet  what  care  of  music  and  magnificence !  See  in  his  life,
in  Platina  and  Monsieur  Bayle.  Glad  would  he  have  been  after  extir
pation  of  ancient  heathen  beauties  (a  reproach  as  he  thought)  to  have
revived  art,  statuary,  idols,  etc.,  upon  the  finest  model  and  taste,  provided
it  had  been  new  and  like  the  attempted  new  Christian  poem  (page  240
of  the  same  third  volume  of  the  Char-cks)  on  the  foundation  of  Christ,
etc.


K.


130  SECOND    CHARACTERS

Story  of  Domenichino  (here  in  Naples,  ergo]  from
Signer  Paulo,  after  I  had  been  to  see  the  chapel  of
the  town-saint  (St  Janr),  called  the  treasury  in  the
archiepiscopal  great  church.  Whereupon  a  consul
tation  held  by  the convoked.  Poor  Domenichino

was  rated  by  the  head  :  they  wisely  supposing  that  he
would  make  no  bodies  without  heads,  and  therefore
concluding  that  a  head  must  carry  a  body  at  ten  crowns1
per  head.  So  the  poor  painter  stuck  the  vaults  with
heads  (cherubim  and  seraphim)  as  an  orange  with
cloves  to  get  his  bread  :  the  hard  even  at  this  rate.
The  work  therefore  unfinished,  unstudied,  and  much
of  it  unworthy  of  him.  The  pretty  peepers  still  very
amiable  and  executable  even  by  their  gentility  and
prettiness.  But  sometimes  even  a  bishop  and  principal
figure  peeps,  which  is  very  unsuitable  ;  and  sometimes
such  a  figure  stretched  out  too  far  in  length,  a  mere
whole  profile  because  easier  studied  and  as  it  were
taking  breath,  or  making  way  for  thicker  heads  to
appear  the  more  excusably  in  clusters  elsewhere.

How  judge  of  such  things  without  knowledge  of
these  facts  and  lives  of  the  painters  themselves.

Poussin  wonderful,  when  considered  according  to
paragraph  (3)  of  the  Notion  ;  and  chiefly  when  con
sidered  also  as  a  Frenchman\  and  working  in  little2.

Apply  to  Poussin's  character  what  stands  in  Char-
cks3,  viz.  fidelity  to  art.  This  plainly  the  cause  of
his  discontent  in  France  and  being  set  and  over
powered  by  the  cabal.  This  the  reason  why  he  after
wards4  naturalized  himself  a  Roman  :  resolved  not  to
betray  his  art  or  renounce  his  manner.  Drawing  in
little  (of  which  the  very  kind  is  in  strictness  without
truth']  was  the  utmost  he  would  do.  But  his  other
work  of  figures  tolerably  sizeable.

1  Ducats,  viz.  five  to  our  pound.

2  Hint  withal  his  learning  and  education   as  in  English  lives  (Du
Fresnoy's  Art  of  Painting,  tr.  p.  359),  with  reproach  on  other  painters  as
illiterate.

3  Vol.  I,  p.  261.

4  See  if  this  be  sure.


PLASTIC   ART  131

Reason  for  this  little  manner,  viz.  cabinet-furniture,
pieces-de-cabinet  for  ladies  and  the  court.  Ladies  hate
the  great  manner;  love  baby-sizes,  toys,  miniature.
Besides  this  the  churches  and  palaces  (that  are  spacious)
were  filled  ere  this  by  the  multitude  of  tolerable  good
pieces,  since  the  Carracci's  school.  And  therefore
according  to  our  love  of  novelty  and  the  humour  of
the  age  he  found  this  to  be  the  most  enabling  him  to
get  a  living  by  a  moderate  price  (such  as  he  set  upon
his  pieces  with  great  integrity),  the  roof,  staircase,
cupola,  and  fresco-painting  (the  chief  in  vogue)  being
abhorrent  from  his  chaste,  severe,  just  and  accurate
genius,  which  therefore  kept  itself  to  tablature  and
home-study,  wisdom,  nature,  philosophy,  history,
criticism,  learning.

ii.     PAINTERS: — CHARACTER,   EDUCATION,

QUALIFICATION1.

The  face  painter,  limner  (as  Cooper,  Sir  Godfrey
Kneller,  Riley  etc.),  no  study  of  their  works  after  the
knack  and  colouring  got.  No  workmanship,  no  labour,
no  not  so  much  as  thought,  but  when  the  party  is
sitting  and  sees.  The  patron  lord  or  lady  sees  and
is  witness  to  all  the  industry,  pains,  or  study,  there
is  in  the  business  :  nothing  when  their  back  is  turned.

But  when  a  subject  is  given  to  a  real  painter,  a
heroic  great  subject:  Good  heavens!  What  toil!  What
study !  What  meditation  requisite !  The  five  parts
resolved,  accommodated,  determined,  ist.  Invention
raised.  2d.  Forms  passed  in  review,  proportion
chosen  suitably.  3d.  Colouring  and  tints  in  the  same
manner  suitable:  if  tragical,  tragic,  and  so  in  general
and  particular  each  figure  with  harmony  considered.
4th.  The  passions,  moral,  thought,  sentiment,  manners.
—What  a  study.  And  5th,  the  collocation,  general
symmetry,  disposition,  as  a  general  making  his  dis
position  and  order  of  battle  when  about  to  engage.

1  See  Junius'  passages  on  this  head.

9—2


i32  SECOND    CHARACTERS

What  restless  nights !    What  brown  studies,  reveries,
ecstatic  veins,   rabiosa  silentia  etc.!

Here  remember  what  said  of  Michael  Angelo.
Domenichino... when  surprised,  overheard,  or  spied
through  a  key-hole  or  chink,  in  agitation,  trembling,
rolling  on  the  ground,  on  all  fours,  prancing,  caprioling
(like  a  horse  or  quadruped  monster  when  such  a  one
was  to  be  imagined,  designed),  gaping,  staring,  mur
muring,  roaring.  So  my  painter  (Closterman)  going
into  his  picture  when  in  the  dark  and  standing  long
before  it.

How  great  a  shame  for  such  an  artist  as  a  "painter
(an  epic,  heroic-one)  to  know  less  of  mathematics,
measuring,  statics,  common  principles,  or  rules  of
mechanic  art,  than  the  most  ordinary  mechanic,  the
house  carpenter,  common  surveyor,  head  bricklayer,
or  inferiour  architect !  For  the  statuary,  his  very
measuring  tools  and  plumets  will  set  him  in  the  way! "

Michael  Angelo1  to  be  justified  against  the  French
and  other  bigot  attacks.  Pietro  Belloris  denial  of
Vasaris  and  the  received  account  of  his  having  taught
Raphael ;  and  particularly  against  the  French  author,
Freart  de  Chambray2.  Whose  as  impertinent  censure  of
Raphael  (his  pretended  favourite  and  abominably  wrong
commended,  as  if  it  were  praising  Both3  upon  his
Judgment  of  Paris)  in  his  Massacre  of  the  Innocents4.

Jordano.  Rabble  painter,  not  only  as  painting
rabble  best  (witness  his  rout  of  Holofernes'  camp  in
the  treasury  roof  of  the  Carthusians  at  Naples,  and
his  great  door  piece  at  the  entrance  of  the  church  of
St  Girolimi,  ibid!}\  but  as  disguising  himself  best  in

1  Confer  with  Sensus  Communis,  p.   144  note.     And  below,  p.   154.
Monr  Freart  (according  to  his  dogmatical  character)  reasons  only  on  a
wretched  print:    having  never  seen  the  original;   or  if  he  had,  having
no  eye  in  painting;  only  a  good  thought  and  maxim  from  affection  to
the  ancients,  and  Raphael  their  student.

2  Freart  de  Chambray,  An  idea  of  the  perfection  of  painting,  translated
by  J.  Evelyn.     Lond.  1668,  pp.  14,  64,  70.

3  [The  text  refers  probably  to  Jan   Both's  painting  in  the  National
Gallery  (no.  209)  in  which  the  figures  are  by  Poelenburgh.]

4  See  his  pages  47,  48  and  supra,  p.  16.


PLASTIC   ART  133

a  multitude,  in  a  confusion,  heap,  variety  of  tints,  and
mad  figures,  especially  the  imperfect  ones  at  a  distance
do  wonders.  See  what  is  applied  of  the  chorus
singers1  (like  the  French).  Can't  sing  alone,  or  with
a  il  corbo,  or  few  strings  accompanying.

Spaniolet2:  Bust  painter,  half  figures,  and  of  old
ugly  figures,  fierce  style  (from  M.  Ang.  de  Caravaggio),
no  drawing,  the  antipode  of  grace  (witness  his  rival
picture  to  Domenichino,  in  the  treasury  of  the  great
church),  horrid,  monstrous,  is  said  to  be  well  from
waist  upward,  an  executioner,  from  whence  below.
And  indeed  all  his  whole3  figures,  like  himself  barbarous
and  horrid.

12.     SUBJECTS  OF  PAINTING.

Through  indulgence  to  the  fashionable  taste  (viz.
gallantry  and  amours,  as  in  tragedy  and  poem,  so  in
epic  tablature)  give  for  a  subject  and  pattern  of  the
ultima  linea  in  this  kind:  'The  History  of  Bacchus
and  Ariadne.'

Firstly.  Both  sexes  in  perfect  beauty;  as  heroic
then  machine  :  (Juno,  whom  as  Pronuba  I  would  prefer
to  Venus,  cupids  being  allowed  in  a  distinct  group  in
the  air  or  otherwise,  so  as  not  to  intermix  with  Juno,
or  her  car,  or  attendance).  And  in  the  next  place  as
to  the  camps  or  perspective,  both  land  and  sea
(Ariadne  having  been  left  on  an  island)  with  the
beauties  of  both  as  far  as  the  principal  life  will  allow,
and  thus  grove,  rock,  port  and  shipping,  a  descent
and  train.  A  kind  of  oration,  solemn  march,  or
triumph.  The  hero  and  chief  in  agriculture  and
benefaction  to  mankind,  a  conqueror  with  benignity,
in  opposition  to  a  ravager,  a  mars,  a  nimrod.  Thirdly.
The  form  perfect.  Age,  youth,  strength,  no  decay,
no  rawness,  much  less  fat,  or  bloating  (as  illiterate
artists  of  the  moderns  represent),  but  rather  over-slim

1  Infra,  p.  176.  2  [Spagnoletto]  supra,  p.  15.

3  Supra,  p.  15.


i34  SECOND   CHARACTERS

and  effeminate,  like  the  Eastern  princes,  whence  he
came  conqueror  with  the  softness  of  their  manners ;
not  those  of  the  Northern  Thrace,  who  abused  his
gift  and  were  thence  noted  for  quarrels — Pugnare,
Thracum  est1.  Fourthly.  Ariadne's  form,  the  same
with  chastity  waiting  him  in  the  marriage  bower  (as
in  Xenophon  who  chose  this  subject  for  his  Sym
posium);  yet  being  widow  not  virgin  may  be  allowed
better  to  wait  him  with  secret  but  modest  joy,  inter-
mixt  with  sorrow  because  of  her  abandoned  state.
Sixthly.  The  comic  part  (as  in  Homer  himself)  viz.
satires,  fawns,  etc.  in  the  train  and  dance  after  Bacchus.

13.    SORTS  OF  PAINTERS  AND  PAINTING:  PORTRAITURE,
RYPAROGRAPHY,  GROTESQUE,  BATTLE  PAINTING,  ETC.

Portraiture.  Face  painting  being  almost  the  whole
of  portraiture  (as  profiles  and  mere  busts  in  medals
and  the  like).  The  artist  may  be  and  almost  ever  is
ignorant  of  anatomy,  proportions,  and  the  five  parts,
excepting  a  small  matter  of  the  outline  (enough  for
copying,  since  a  copy  after  a  face  or  a  figure  taken  in
a  cloth  is  much  the  same)  together  with  some  part  or
degree  of  the  third  part,  viz.  colouring.  And  with
this  he  may  set  up  for  a  painter  and  great  in  his  way,
with  drapery's,  etc. ;  if  perhaps,  he  hires  not  another
as  is  usual  to  do  this,  or  anything  that  happens  if
beyond  a  mere  common  figure  singly  or  a  single  head.
Thus  good  face  painters  and  medalists,  etc.  without
further  study.  For  if  perhaps  a  genius,  capable  ;  it
must  be  checked  and  spoilt :  witness  Van  Dyck2,  Sir

1  Horace,  Ode  xxvii,  1.  2.

2  A  portrait  painter  (as  Van  Dyck)  attempts  a  family  piece,  puts
figures  together  in  an  action,  lays  a  scene,  unites,  makes  a  disposition,
etc.     But  this  is  launching  out  of  his  depth.     Better  a  history  painter
if  strongly  invited   should   descend   to   this  work  for  some  great  and
understanding  patron   or    Prince — for  if  not  understanding    cannot   be
satisfied  with  the  work  on  account  of  subordination,  and  2d,  3d  and  4th
figures  disobliged— than  that  the  accustomed  face-painter  should  offer
to  ascend  so  high  as  this,  in  which  he  will  prove  an  Icarus.      For  so
Van  Dyck :  fantastic,  apish,  antic  in  his  action,  and  wretched  and  false
in  his  composition,  collocation,  etc.


PLASTIC   ART  135

P.  Lilly.  And  thus  our  Cooper,  Peter  Oliver,  and
others  in  miniature,  were  perfect  in  face  painting,
ignorant  in  design  and  art,  mere  mechanics.  This
not  so  much  as  a  liberal  art  nor  to  be  so  esteemed ;
as  requiring  no  liberal  knowledge,  genius,  education,
converse,  manners,  moral-science,  mathematics,  optics,
but  merely  practical  and  vulgar.  Therefore  not  deserv
ing  honour,  gentility,  knighthood  conferred1.

Even  an  indifferent  person'-,  who  neither  in  mien
nor  habit  carries  any  similitude  to  any  known  species,
rank,  or  class  (as  neither  senator,  or  judge,  soldier,
scholar,  or  philosopher,  saint,  monk3,  or  priest,  good
fellow,  rake,  squander,  wild  youth,  enamorata,  courtier,
cook4,  country-squire,  etc.),  yet  being  known  parti
cularly,  and  very  remarkable,  citable,  much  talked  of,
much  praised,  much  ridiculed,  or  bantered  by  his  club,
cabal,  set  of  friends,  or  known  in  such  and  such  walks,
such  coffee-house,  in  the  side-box,  at  St  James  or
Hyde  Park,  Mr  Such-a-one,  Mr  What-do-you-call-him,
Mr  Thing-urn.  This  personage,  this  very  phiz  (as
they  say)  is  for  the  time  that  he  is  known  and  re
membered,  and  whilst  the  human  lasts  a  pleasing
imitation,  and  makes  the  artist  by  chance  and  un
knowingly  "a  poet-painter  for  the  time  being."  Even
this  a  character3,  and  the  work  characteristicaLm^\x\\^.\.^.
("How  like!  Just  he  for  all  the  world!")  But  the
humour  over  once,  the  jest  spent;  and  where  is  the
sense,  the  thought  ?  The  piece  sinks  again  into  its
nothing.  Its  no  character.  It  dies  and  becomes

1  Glance  at  Sir  Kneller.     Am  not  reflecting  on   King  W" :    yet  see
again,  infra,  note  3.  2  Supra,  p.  102.

3  Monk  :    Remember  Van  Dyck's  friar,  which  old  Lord  Bradford  had
of  Closterman.     An  imitation  of  an  imitation  (of  a  hypocrite,  not  really
mortified,  but  how  refined !  how  artful  and  near  nature  in  the  original,
viz.  the  actor,  the  priest  himself!).     A  fiction  after  a  fiction,  yet  even
thus  characteristical,  a  character:    with  his  death   head   and    seeming
mortified  face.     Not  so  on  the  stage.     See  Dryden's  Spanish  friar  and
Sir  G.  Kneller  after  Lee.     Even  this  characteristical,  and  though  reiterate
still  pleasing.

4  A  cook.     And  so  down  through  all  the  order  of  ryparography,  as
below,  p.  136.  6  See  above  in  Characters,  p.  99.

6  Sic  oculos,  sic  ille  manus,  sic  ora  ferebat.     Aeneid,  lib.  3.


136  SECOND   CHARACTERS

thoughtless,  void  of  meaning;  and  all  the  art  in  the  world
is  thrown  away.  'Tis  an  abuse  of  real  art  which  should
(aye  and  will)  be  reserved  for  better  purpose.  For  if
the  painter  deigns  to  hold  to  this  work,  his  art  and
genius  will  not  deign  to  attend  him  thus  employed.
He  may  excel  in  this,  but  (as  Van  Dyck)  sacrifice  his
ability  in  all  else.

This  remark  as  to  the  epic  artist  when  he  becomes
face  painter,  or  worker  in  portraiture,  viz.  "  That
besides  the  subjecting  of  his  genius,  narrowing  of  his
thought,  contraction  of  his  idea,  deadening  of  his  fancy,
constraining  of  his  hand,  disaccustomed  him  in  the
freedom  of  his  pencil,  tying  him  down  to  copying,  trans
lating,  servilely  submitting  to  the  lords  and  ladies,  etc.,
his  originals.  Besides  all  that,  I  say  he  looks  his  time
and  fame.  These  works  buried :  those  immortal ;
these  scarce  one  in  twenty  worth  purchasing  by  a
stranger:  those  the  same  to  all  people  and  all  nations.
And  as  he  proceeds,  he  improves.  He  gains  not  only
in  his  experience,  but  by  the  spreading  of  his  works
abroad,  which  spread  his  name,  bring  custom  to  him
while  living,  honours  both  while  living  and  (what  is
the  generous  artist's  great  spur  as  it  is  the  hero's)  after
life,  both  in  his  own  country  and  foreign  nations."

Ryparography.  Ryparography  though  by  itself
naught,  yet  to  be  understood  and  used  by  the  heroic
masters  to  mix  (but  much  modified)  with  his  heroic
as  the  foil.  So  often  Raphael  himself;  a  cook,  a
pharisee,  a  thyrsites,  amidst  the  other  homerical  forms.

The  prince  of  critics  and  great  judge  of  arts  dis
tinguishes  painters  into  the  heroic,  who  paint  them
better  than  the  common  life,  better  than  they  are
by  nature;  the  ridiculous,  lower  comic,  who  paint  them
worse  than  the  common  life,  worse  than  they  naturally
are ;  and  a  middle  sort,  who  paint  them  true  and  just
as  they  are.  But  then  this  truth  in  heroic  is  falsehood,
and  a  blur  against  the  truth  of  art  and  the  hypothesis
itself;  whether  it  be  Scripture  and  history  which  is
posed  or  laid  down,  or  whether  heathen  gods  or


PLASTIC   ART  137

heroes,  or  even  great  men,  Roman  and  Grecian  chiefs,
consecrated  as  it  were  by  age,  time,  and  history.

In  the  middle  kind,  when  according  to  truth,  may
be  comprehended  fairs,  camps,  public  places  in  modern
cities,  hunting  matches,  and  parties  of  pleasure,  of
gentlemen  and  ladies,  (where  the  figures,  not  the
perspective  pay  sage  or  animals  are  principal)...

In  the  last  detestable  and  odious  kind,  excels  the
Flemish . . .  Brouwer,  pvirapoypafyoi.

Grotesque.  All  grotesque  painting  not  ryparo-
graphy;  though  most  may  be  such.  Witness  Raphael's
monsters  and  grotesque  after  the  ancients,  in  Signr
Bartoli's  book  of  prints,  etc.

Remember  also  to  acknowledge  the  excellence  and
attainment  of  perfection  in  the  vulgar  life  and  abject1
base  life  by  modern  masters.  But  not  so  as  to  the
heroic,  epic,  lyric  (not  even  Raphael  entirely ;  for  how
clogged!  how  diverted!  how  prostituted!).  Only  the
doggerel,  farce,  burlesque.  Parody :  first  comedy  :
satire:  mimes.  But  not  tragedy:  latter  not  comedy,
not  after  an  iliad  like  the  verses  given  to  -  —  on
which  he  formed  his  Olympic  Jove.

Battle  Painting.  Battle  painting  though  modern
and  little;  yet  next  joined  to  humanity  (proportionately
little)  because  of  the  horse  noble  animal,  and  next  to
man.  Of  the  horse  treat  elsewhere,  remembering  the
noble  cast  of  the  eye  and  head  ;  the  sublime  air ;  the
triton  horses ;  the  hero  horses,  half  or  quarter  deities
such  as  Achilles'  Xanthus  and  his  speech  (a  noble
subject  for  painting!),  on  which  mention  Homer  and
the  Pere  Bossu's  excuse  by  Balaam's  ass.  The  en
thusiasm  and  inspiration  expressible  in  the  heathen
subject  and  poet,  not  in  the  sacred  one,  not  to  be
attempted  (I  fear)  with  any  success.  This  historically
true  :  poetically  false.  In  the  other  (with  the  religious
heathen,  who  could  join  both)  what  effect2!

1  By  masters  Flemish,  not  worthy  of  being  mentioned.     The  boor-
painters.

2  See  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  pp.  4,  5,  6,  7.


138  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Battle  painting  if  in  little  figures  (unfinished  and
therefore  true  as  said  just  before)  is  to  be  esteemed
but  as  a  species  of  perspective,  (according  to  what  is
said  in  Notion,  chap,  v,  par.  10).  The  same  as  to
buildings  and  architecture,  if  the  perspective  painter's
genius  leads  to  architecture.  But  if  the  architecture
be  so  far  principal  and  eminent  as  to  drown,  or  as
it  were  devour  the  field,  and  stand  single  by  itself
without  a  town,  people  and  natural  appurtenances  of  a
town-prospect ;  or  without  a  country,  ruins,  rocks,  wood
and  natural  appurtenances  of  a  rural  or  country  pro
spect:  in  this  case  the  species  of  painting  is  empty,
foolish,  false,  and  below  still  life.  For  this  at  least  is
true  and  taking  in  vases,  and  other  proportionable
and  artful  pieces;  and  contains  as  well  the  rules  of
mathematics,  or  mathematical  mechanics,  and  elegant
workmanship.

Ship  Painting.  Ship  painting  (whether  storms  or
calms),  in  which  the  Dutch,  as  they  well  may,  excel,
is  also  no  more  than  a  species  of  perspective  ;  the
rest  being  the  mere  knowledge  of  a  hulk  and  ropes
(no  extraordinary  science,  not  above  the  ship-wrights) ;
but  if  joined  with  rock,  sky,  sea-port,  etc. :  then  right
and  a  true  though  inferiour  species  of  perspective.

Miniature  or  Limning.  "Miniature  (viz.  the  dimi
nutive  kind)  if  finished  is  false ;  if  unfinished  and  true
serves  only  as  machine  work,  appendix,  or  ornament
to  perspective."

Exception  in  this  place  for  small  portraiture  of
heads  only  (for  bodies  would  be  mere  puppets  and
ridiculous  as  everyone  presently  sees),  which  con
venience  and  use  renders  agreeable  and  friendship
amiable.  So  enamel  and  water  colours  (viz.  in  minia
ture  still.  For  even  roof-work  and  fresco  is  water-
coloured  and  so  Raphael's  cartoons  though  bigger
than  life).  But  enamel  especially  being  generally
little  and  in  its  nature  glossy  is  still  more  false ;  though
the  ancients  who  had  not  our  way  in  oil  had  another
(as  they  had  many  now  lost)  of  burning,  which  way


PLASTIC   ART  i39

for  the  largest  as  well  as  least  manner,  and  what  was
highly  esteemed,  as  by  Pliny's  remark  of  the  master's
inscriptions  of  their  names  eVe'/caoz/.

Exception  also  in  general  for  miniature  or  the
diminutive  kind  in  statuary1,  sculpture,  etc.,  and  for
all  works  in  the  plastic  kind,  or  of  one  substance,  or
even  on  a  superiour  plane  with  lines  as  lapidary  or
medal-imitations,  or  draughts  in  two  colours,  claro-
oscuro,  etc.  on  account  of  reason  given  in  Notion2.

Besides  that  there  is  no  perspective  field,  or  ac
companying  nature  (sky,  ground,  distances,  appendices,
etc.).  And  for  high  or  low  relief,  the  medal-learning
and  antiquary  science  of  anaglyphies  (so  necessary  in
society  and  for  the  use  of  mankind),  as  also  the  mere
use  and  currency  of  coinage  and  money  (another
necessity)  familiarizes  and  executes  this  diminutive
manner  in  other  kinds,  which  are  not  fully,  supremely
and  strictly  imitative  painting.

Remember  the  reverse  of  the  common  phrase
(speaking  of  meadows  and  perspective).  "  'Tis  as  if  it
were  painted." — Ridiculous  !• — Therefore  this  is  just
what  should  not  be  painted.  And  therefore  when  a
real  good  picture  is  to  be  commended  say  of  it :  "  This
is  like  perfect  nature  and  not  like  paint."  For  when
nature  herself  paints  (as  sometimes  in  wantonness  and
as  it  were  luxuriantly)  she  ought  not  to  be  imitated :
not  the  picture,  but  herself  only  (her  pure  self]  copied.

Concerning  mixture  of  works,  master  with  master
(as  "perspective  by  such  a  one,  figures  by  such  a  one
or  such  a  one  ")  wholly  false.  So  in  my  Claude  de
Lorrain,  figures  by  Jordano,  the  latter  giants  and  out
of  size,  though  moderately  in  harmony  as  to  colouring.
Remember  Montague  House,  which  I  was  never
willing  to  go  to  see  after  rebuilt  and  painted,  because
the  better  the  masters  the  more  violent  the  conflict

1  And  thus  of  old  certain  considerable  statuary  commended  in  the
little  way  as....     See  Pliny.

But  of  painters  above  that  I  remember... Search  for  these  in  Pausanias,
Pliny,  Philostratus.

2  Chap,  v,  p.  12.


1 40  SECOND    CHARACTERS

and  dissonance  harsher.  For  though  a  man  may
submit  to  himself  in  this  regard  (though  even  the
judicious  Poussin — that  equally  great  master  in  both
kinds — sometimes  failed  in  this  and  could  not  be
enough  below  himself  in  perspective  pieces),  yet  never
to  another.  But  Caspar  his  brother-in-law  (by  him
taught)  and  being  able  only  in  the  perspective  part,
was  through  necessity  perhaps  (though  with  judgment
joined)  a  perfect  model  of  truth  of  this  kind1.

14.     THE  FIVE  PARTS  IN  PAINTING.
General  Considerations.

Monsieur  Du  Fresnoy's  Ars  Grapkica*:  whether
worthy  of  notice  ?

1.  If  worthy  note  that  the  five  parts  of  painting
are  wrongly  reduced  to  three,  by  the  marginal  notes
added,  contrary  to   the  sense  of  the  author ;    who  is
not  distinct  in  the  five  parts,  has  however  reckoned
four  at  least,  and  would  have  made  no  such  enumera
tion  as  three  according  to  the  text.

2.  In  the  first  place,  in  the  article  of  satire,  or  way
of  anticipation  by  raillery,  censure,  etc.  (as  necessary
according  to  miscellaneous  style  to  turn  off  ridicule,
excite  the  nauseating  palate  by  piquancy  and  feed  the
fashionable  spleen).      Remember  to  note   the    wrong
impertinent  blundering  application  of  the  plastic  rules.

Scarce  at  any  time  in  any  of  our  modern  poets  or
authors  one  single  metaphor,  allusion,  allegory,  simile
grounded  on  the  art  and  formed  on  the  painter's
business,  but  what  makes  the  painter  blush,  the  artist
lose  himself,  not  cognizable  in  the  description  or  com
parison.  Something  silly,  preposterous  and  betraying
ignorance.

1  Expose  in  this  place  the  civil  war,  riot,  hub-bub,  sedition,  tumult,
uproar  of  pieces,  parts,  colours,  etc.  in  mixed  works.  Cupola  of  the
Treasury  at  Naples,  the  Jesuits,  ibid.  And  refer  reciprocally  to  Notion,
chap,  v,  par.  2  and  9.

*  [Cf.  C.  A.  Du  Fresnoy's  The  Art  of  Painting,  translated  by  Mr
Dryden,  Lond.  1750.]


PLASTIC   ART  i4I

3.  Also  comparisons  and  parallel  ran  between
painting  and  poetry  because  of  the  pictoribus  atque
poetis1  [painters  and  poets]  etc.  and  the  ut  pictura
poesis*  [poems  are  as  paintings]  almost  ever  absurd  and
at  best  constrained,  lame,  or  defective.

One  says... .Another  says....

As  to  habits,  dresses  and  all  which  painters  com
prehend  in  the  common  phrase  of  drapery  should  it
be  asked:  "In  which  of  the  five  parts  do  we  place
this  ?  "  Tis  answered:  "  In  the  first  and  third."  For
not  only  invention,  but  history  and  learning  lie  in  the
first  part.  And  for  whatever  in  art  goes  further  than
the  outline,  must  in  respect  of  the  draperies,  be  wholly
in  the  third  part  (viz.  light  and  shadow  and  colouring).
There  being  properly  no  symmetry  or  regular  men
suration  of  mere  foldings  so  as  to  require  anything  of
the  second  part ;  and  much  less  life  or  passion,  so  as
to  have  to  do  at  all  in  the  fourth.  And  as  for  the
fifth,  the  general  collocation,  it  is  either  included  or
carried  along  with  the  figures  and  bodies  which  it
adorns,  or  it  comes  in  like  architecture,  or  trees,  as
making  part  of  the  masses  or  balancing  parts  in  the
perspective  ;  and  as  such,  it  belongs  indirectly  and
not  immediately  to  part  second.

ist  Part  in  Painting:   Invention.    Story.     Imagery.

This  being  the  first  of  the  (five)  parts  in  painting  ;
though  in  poetry  'tis  the  Swecris,  collocation,  whole,
unity,  as  the  French  author  (Monr  Freart  de  Cham-
bray)  has  made  it  also  in  painting  :  but  not  with  parity
of  reason.  Since  the  manner  of  signature,  designation,
or  image  making  is  common  to  the  poet  with  the  rest
of  mankind,  especially  the  literate,  viz.  by  words,
written  characters  of  speech,  grammar,  etc.

But  the  painter's  or  plastic's  manner,  means,  or
medium  peculiar  to  himself  and  art ;  not  common  to
him  with  others.  A  man  complete  in  wit,  science,

1  Horace's  De  Arte  Poetica,  1.  9.  2  Ibid.  1.  361.


142  SECOND   CHARACTERS

letters,  politeness  and  even  in  the  very  judgment1  of
design  :  yet  no  designer,  no  hand,  nor  idea  in  order
to  a  hand.

Therefore  in  this  first  part  is  involved  the  materia
plastica.  Without  this  and  the  forming  or  active  part
(according  to  the  high  philosophical  division  into  the
amwS^s  KCU  V\LKOV  [causal  and  material]),  no  work,  no
business,  no  advancement  or  foundation.

1.  The  good  painter  (quatenus  painter)  begins  by
working  first  within.      Here  the  imagery!     Here  the
plastic   work !     First  makes  forms,  fashions,  corrects,
amplifies,  contracts,  unites,  modifies,  assimilates,  adapts,
conforms,  polishes,  refines  etc.,  forms  his  ideas  :  then
his  hand  :    his  strokes.

2.  Thus   Raphael,  dying  young  (37).      His  idea
before  his  hand.     All  other  masters  their  hand  before
their  idea.      He    still    working   to   his   death.       Hand
(viz.  colouring)  scarce  come  to  him  ;  as  painters  observe
in  his  best  piece  of  this  kind,  viz.  his  Transfiguration,
called  foe.  first  picture  of  the  world  (this  Raphael  would
have  judged  otherwise  :    being  mixed,  a  double  piece,
not  a  whole).

3.  Accordingly  a  proficient  in  this  kind  (and  such
a  one  when  found  and  happening  to  read  this  young
would  thank   me)   will   apply  to   his   idea,   and  study
invention,   for  which   a  real  secret  (non  obstante,  re
hearsal,   Mr  Bays)  viz.   passing  the  forms  in   review
(as    soldiers    mustering),    then    checking,    redressing,
imprinting,   stirring,    exciting ;    then   criticizing ;    then
corroborating2.

4.  And   thus    the   proficient    in   another  science,
the  true  c^tXo/caXog  [lover  of  the  beautiful],  forms  his
ideas,  till  a  habit  (as  in  Cebes'  Table3,  so  reiterately
enjoined).

The  young  painter  thus  becomes  original4,  "whilst  he

1  Almost  not  quite  so.     For  judgment  will  necessarily  impart  some
degree  of  polishing  or  working  on  the  forms,  species,  etc.
-  See  Instinct,  p.  105.  3  Supra,  pp.  74,  81.

4  See  Characteristics,  vol.  ill,  p.  262,  note,  line  20.


PLASTIC   ART  I43

draws  from  various  models,"  etc.  Whereas  by  copying
merely  (though  this  good  in  some  degree  and  at  first)
he  advances  little  and  can  create  nothing  of  his  own.

But  again  the  secret  (as  just  above)  of  invention
is  (when  young)  to  view  good  models,  etchings  (the
nearest  originals,  and  really  original  when  by  the
masters  themselves),  drawings,  cartoons,  if  not  able  to
come  at  pictures  and  statues.

And  from  hence  fleeting  forms  between  sleeping
and  waking,  working  on  his  ambition  as  well  as  fancy.
So  Themistocles  haunted  and  made  to  walk  at  nights
by  the  apparitions  of  the  trophies  of  Miltiades  (an-
swerably  to  the  statues1  said  to  walk  in  those  days,
when  many  of  a  family  in  the  house,  many  in  all
public  places.  See  Lucian).

From  these  fleeting  forms  (call  them  the  effluvia
of  Epicurus,  or  the  ideas  of  Plato)  the  prophet  collects
still,  joins,  disjoins,  compares,  adds,  subtracts,  modifies,
tempers,  allays  for  fear  of  wildness.  Appeal  to  ordinary
fancy  of  faces  upon  walls  in  obscure  places  where
casual  lines  are  drawn  at  random  and  chiefly  in  fever,
sickness,  or  indigestion,  grimaces  and  ugly  forms ;
sometimes  fair  and  beautiful,  sometimes  bestial,  mon
strous.  These  drive  away,  beat  down ;  those  mark,
note,  remember,  raise,  repass.  So  Raphael.  So  Guido.
See  their  letters.  The  first  of  his  Galatea  or  Venus
in  Pietro  Bellori  concerning  his  works.  The  second
in... where  he  says:  "that  for  the  devil  (the  idea  of
ugliness)  he  purposely  keeps  it  out  of  his  mind  till
necessary  to  paint."  Thus  Raphael,  a  Raphael;  and
Guido,  Guido.

i .  The  reverse  of  this,  and  the  ruin  of  young  artists
as  well  as  virtuosos,  judges,  good  eyes  and  taste,  is
the  contrary  habit  of  not  selecting,  not  gathering ;
suffering  the  ideas  to  present  themselves  and  lead  on
and  engage  and  enamour  as  they  will  or  can'2.  No

1  See  what  is  said  bemoaningly  of  the  want  of  statues,  supra,  p.  108.

2  See  Characteristics,  vol.  I,  p.  312,  viz.  imperiousness  of  the  -visa,
(avTdcraiai    etc.


i44  SECOND   CHARACTERS

order :  no  control :  no  regulation  of  the  forms :  no
check,  restraint  or  exception ;  but  all  permitted,  the
appearances — I  fancy  ergo  I  choose. — I  am  pleased,
therefore,  I  will  be  pleased. — But  this  is  impossible  :
not  durable,  as  in  the  chosen,  select,  and  truly  judicious
and  natural  forms.  These  durable,  eternal,  more  and
more  enchanting  and  instructive,  improving,  exalting.
The  other  nauseating,  soon  quelling,  satiating:  then
art  and  science  condemned,  slighted.  What  wonder  ?
2.  'Tis  not  the/<?  ne  sais  quoi  to  which  idiots  and
the  ignorant  of  the  art  would  reduce  everything.  'Tis
not  the  So/cet,  the  I  like  and  you  like.  But  why  do  I
like  ?  And  if  not  with  reason  and  truth  I  will  refuse
to  like,  dislike  my  fancy,  condemn  the  form,  search  it,
discover  its  deformity  and  reject  it1.

2d  Part"  in  Painting:    Proportion,   Drawing,
Symmetry  particular.

No  intention  to  declare  which  and  which  are  the
proportions;  how  many  heads  lengths,  whether... or...
to  a  body.  (This  the  Academy,  the  painter's  school,
common,  practical.)  But  which  and  which  species,
many  sorts,  even  of  the  heroic  genus,  still  different
species,— as  Mars  more  gladiatorian,  gregarian,  legion
ary  form :  thick  truss,  waist  not  so  noble  round,  equally
turned,  as  a  Hercules  of  middle  age,  much  less  in  beauty
of  form  like  an  Apollo,  Bacchus  (the  true  Bacchus),
or  a  Mercury.  Witness  the  best  medals  as  well  as
statues  and  ancient  relief  works.

This  founded  in  nature.      For  as  Hercules  (young)

1  [A  paragraph  follows  here  in  the   text   numbered   3,   beginning  :
"And  thus  the  proficient,"  etc.  which  is  the  same  as  4,  supra,  p.  142  ;  and
another  numbered  4,  beginning  :  "  First  corruption  of  taste,"  etc.  which
is  the  same  as  2  supra,  p.  108.]

2  Note  that  according  to  this  division  into  five  parts,  this  second  part
must  be  subdivided  into  two :  of  which  figures  (in  respect  of  themselves)
must  make  one,  and  perspective  another.

— No!  Not  so! — For  now  I  see  at  least  (according  to  Frdart's  report
from  Junius)  that  perspective  (or  optic)  must  be  referred  to  the  last  part,
viz.  collocation.


PLASTIC   ART  145

the  finest  form  to  succeed  in  all  the  five  exercises  and
carry  (as  he  is  said  to  have  done)  the  prizes  of  the...,
so  the  form  of  Mars  most  proper  for  war,  foot  or
horse.  J\.sfoot  because  of  the  length  of  the  fork,  slow
marching  but  gaining  ground,  not  for  running.  And
as  horse,  because  of  short  waist  sitting  best,  and  long
legs,  a  help  especially  when  the  horse  clasped  with  the
calf  or  shin,  as  when  they  used  no  stirrups  to  draw
and  lengthen  out  their  legs,  to  an  inconvenience,  if
the  horse  anything  low.

Add  to  this :  the  thick  chestedness  for  great  breath
and  long  endurance  of  fatigue.  The  length  also  of
arms  (accompanying  the  long  legs)  a  principal  matter
in  fence  by  the  reach,  and  in  the  cast  of  the  lance  as
well  thrust.  Also  height  and  tallness  generally  at
tending  this  make  more  than  the  longer  waisted  equal
and  proportionable.  Seldom  the  well-made  and  exact
bodies  seen  very  tall  but  middle-sized.

These  the  reasons  for  the  stated  forms  of  the
ancients  as  they  appear  in  the  antiques,  and  which
the  practising  painters  of  the  Roman  schools  (present
at  Rome  and  studying  the  antique)  learn  by  rote  and
do  wonderfully,  they  know  not  why  themselves.  And
this  is  the  great  subject  in  which  Protogenes  excelled
Apelles  by  his  own  confession.  This  the  subject  on
which  the  learned  artist  Euphranor  wrote  his  treatise
concerning  symmetry,  and  the  different  proportions
belonging  to  the  different  and  subdivided  under  species
of  the  genus  MAN1.

Add  to  this  :  "  That  as  the  view  of  the  antique,
the  study  of  the  basso-relievo,  statues,  etc.  (with  coins
and  other  assistance)  can  only  be  expected  to  qualify
for  the  right  conception  of  forms  in  the  heroic  kind  ;
so  this  school  alone  of  Rome  (whence  Raphael,  Jul.
Romano  and  Poussin)  has  as  yet  ever  qualified  for  the
unmixed,  pure  and  simple  grace,  void  of  affectation*.

1  See  Char-cks,  I,  144.

2  Concerning  which  see  in  the  other  head  below  on  the  4th  part  of
painting,  i.e.  Sentiment,  etc.

R.  10


146  SECOND   CHARACTERS

3rd  Part  in  Painting  :    viz.   Colouring.

Simplicity  the  main  in  this,  as  in  all.  But  the  way
to  it  more  strange  and  paradoxical1.

The  several  colours  being  assembled,  and  each
absolute  simple  and  unmixed  in  themselves,  make  in
the  joint  views  the  least  simple  and  most  complex,
staring  effect  that  is  possible.  Thus  patchwork  of
pure  white,  red,  green,  blue,  yellow,  etc.,  the  more
pure,  the  more  ugly ;  the  more  simple,  the  more
tawdry — a  rainbow,  a  foolscoat  flower,  or  a  real
harlequin  foolscoat,  a  parrot,  peacock,  jay,  pictaeque
volucres  (as  Virgil  calls  them).  Nature's  painting!
But  nature  not  to  be  painted  where  she  herself  paints.
Not  a  picture  of  a  picture.

This  the  simplicity  which  delights  children2.  Gaudy,
striking.  "  Itself  a  spectacle  not  a  medium  by  which
other  spectacles,  views  are  created,  raised,  exhibited."
Colours  the  instruments,  not  the  subject-matter.
Means:  not  end.  Imitation,  lesson,  instruction,  peda
gogy  of  the  eye  :  to  make  it  learned,  erudite,  polite,
acute,  judicious  in  its  choice  and  discernment  of
objects ;  in  its  fruition  of  beauty,  its  taste  of  good,  by
which  its  pleasure  consistent  and  lasting,  and  by  which
by  easy  transition  the  mind  learns  its  art  and  fruition  :
the  moral  pictures  known  and  proportion  discovered.

Thus  in  respect  of  painting  and  the  art  of  imitation
by  colours,  the  least  simple,  sincere  and  genuine,  etc.
in  the  cloth  or  seam  of  the  tablature  are  those  which
are  the  most  simple,  pure  and  absolute  in  themselves.
These  the  true  art  of  painting  abhors.

Nor  would  a  Raphael,  a  Jul.  Romano,  a  Titian
(the  chief  in  this),  endure  such  a  glare,  notwithstanding
the  Pietro  da  Cortona  and  other  corrupters,  with  all
the  French,  Poussin  excepted.  A  mere  white,  a  mere

1  Infra,  p.  149.

2  Such  the  bubbles  of  soap-suds  blown  up  by  children  and  ravishing,
first  for  their  regular  tigure  (as  the  globe,  the  cube,  the  cylinder,  etc.,  in
Moralists),  and  next  for  their  colouring,  the  various  and  rich.


PLASTIC   ART  147

scarlet,  a  mere  blue1,  (the  worst  of  all  and  most  abused
because  of  the  lapis  lazuli,  and  Pliny's  reason  of  the
rich  fancy  of  the  great,  and  ruin  of  painting)  all  these
so  many  monarchies  or  monarchs,  independent,  abso
lute.  Now  nothing  should  be  so  as  to  colouring  in
the  piece.  The  ambient  air  and  earth  (being  chief  of
the  field  or  camps)  govern  chiefly,  and  then  the  greater
bodies.  To  the  air  or  sky  belong  the  clouds,  and  all
the  tints  which  the  painter  thinks  fit  to  raise  out  of
them,  as  he  may  to  best  advantage,  whatever  he
pleases,  in  great  variety.  To  the  other  part,  viz.  the
earth,  belong  the  rocks,  ruins,  pieces  of  architecture,
trees,  rivers,  pools,  broken  grounds  of  all  sorts,  out  of
which  also  the  painter  may,  for  the  interest  and
economy  of  his  figures,  raise  what  variety  of  tints  he
can  find  occasion  or  thought  to  use.

Next  to  these  two  fundamental  repositories,  come
the  great  and  near  figures  themselves  with  the  great
draperies,  whether  on  or  off  of  the  bodies.  All  these2
as  they  receive  so  they  communicate  to  each  other.
The  sky  chiefly  to  these  ;  but  these  again  something
to  those,  and  much  to  one  another.  For  every  con
siderable  mass  which  carries  light,  every  illuminated
and  coloured  body  in  a  picture,  is  a  chameleon  and
borrows  something.  Everything3  gives  and  takes  and
from  this  multiplicity  of  tints  is  formed  that  chief  and
amiable  simplicity,  the  very  perfection  of  colouring.

1  An  azure  blue  for  this  reason  also  one  of  the  worst  of  colours,  as  it
robs  heaven,  kills  the  sky,  puts  the  very  celestial  bodies  out  of  counten
ance,  hills,  sea,  waters,  etc.,  and  which  if  any  might  tend  to  simplicity
and  absoluteness ;  but  yet  how  false  see  in  Caspar  and  the  best  perspective
painters.

The  ultra  marine  or  lapis  lazuli,  good  (they  say)  to  hold  the  colour
ing.  Excellent.  Therefore  use,  but  mix,  allay,  change,  break  and
modify  it.

2  Supra,  p.  1 1 8.

3  For  this  reason  a  mass  of  blue  draperies  red,  rose,  yellow,  etc.,  not
sufferable  ;    because  it  must  communicate  too  much  and  can  take   or
receive  but  little  or  nothing.     For  how  go  about  to  break  such  a  bright
original  and  wrongly-simple  mass  ?     Above  all,  blue  the  worst.


148  SECOND   CHARACTERS

Manage1  des  Couleurs.     Contrapposizione2  della  Tinta.

i.  Melting  of  colours,  symphony,  harmony.  Age
helping  a  picture,  why  but  for  this  reason  ?  Ridiculous  !
When  we  can  have  that  effect  instantly  and  without
loss  (for  age  loses  and  in  the  shades  or  sinkings,
expression  vanishes).  But  we  see  with  a  false  and
artificial  eye  what  is  new,  and  expect  the  new  genius,
the  mere  paint,  and  wont  believe  ourselves  that  when
colours  are  finest,  work  is  worst.  As  if  old  music
(were  this  possible)  could  pass  when  heard  simple,  but
new  music  the  contrary.  Or  as  if  music  was  to  be  set
at  a  distance  and  half  of  it  drowned,  lost  and  unheard,
that  the  other  half  might  be  the  more  music  and  more
harmonious.  Ridiculous !  As  if  music  near  at  hand
and  all  in  hearing  (and  so  picture  all  in  sight)  could
not  be  so  governed  and  modulated  as  to  hear  all  that
should  be  heard.  Thus  the  glare  and  gloss  of  new
painting  once  off,  i.e.  when  but  once  thoroughly  dry  :
nothing  else  can  add,  if  painted  according  to  plastic
truth.  But  that,  the  modern  painter,  though  a
Raphael,  (a  Poussin  chiefly),  fears  to  do.  So  he  must
wait  for  time  hereafter  and  be  really  better  seen  then
(when  perished  in  part  even  in  his  picture),  than  in
his  own  time  and  in  the  perfection  of  his  work.  For
if  perchance  he  ventures  to  paint  perfect  and  right  at
first,  antiquity  alone  (the  name  of  it)  must  give  it
protection.  Its  own  merit  cannot,  and  the  painter
must  be  condemned  for  doing  well,  because  he  is
modern  :  because  the  modern  taste  is  false ;  and
affectation  of  antiquity  alone  sets  us  right  in  ancient
pieces.

I  remember  in  the  working  of  a  sketch  once  by  a

1  Hence  may  be  used  poetically,  and  in  the  style  of  this  treatise,  the
expressions  of  the  ambition  of  colours,  their  aspiring,  assuming,  their
encroachment   on    the   art,   their  domineering,   their    insolence,    pride,
avarice  (because  of  gold  and  silver,  jewels,  etc.,  intermixt  and  what  Pliny
says,  Char-cks,  I,  p.  340),  as  well  as  that  riot  and  luxury,  luxuriant.

2  Hence  in  opposition,  maquerellage,  libertinage,  prostitution,  as  it
were  fornication,  whoredom  of  colours,  unlawful  procreation,  engendering,
copulating,  spurious  race,  bastardy,  illegitimacy.


PLASTIC   ART  149

good  master  in  history  to  have  seen  all  run  har
moniously,  and  colours  embrace,  love,  etc.,  when  on
a  sudden  a  fine  cherry-colour  clapt  in  made  the  same
painful  harsh  effect,  as  a  trumpet  putting  in  on  a
sudden,  with  a  soft  mellow  voice  and  a  theorbo  lute  in
a  chamber.

2.  Remember  here  the  story  of  the  deaf  man's
likening  scarlet  to  a  trumpet.

3.  Strange   paradox1 !    but    leading   maxim,    viz.
"  that  in  tablature  and  painting,  colours  are  in  them
selves  nothing,  nor  have  nothing  to  do."     For    first
all  the  perfect  and  true  rejected  as  wholly  false  in  the
workmanship.      The    rest    dirtied,    deadened,    mixed,
confounded,   and  as  it   were  annihilated.     The  slave
of  all.

Remember  censure2  of  cartoons :  viz.  Raphael's
druggery3  for  hangings.  This  a  fatal  stumbling  block
of  taste  for  English-men,  being  our  great  model,  if  no
caution  and  premonition.  All  gaudiness,  all  false.
The  very  pattern  of  falsehood.  Curious  to  see  how
all  turned  together  (bad  music  !)  by  so  good  a  master,
so  prostitute  to  cardinals,  popes,  etc.

Maxim4.  That:  "By  as  much  as  they  attract  to
themselves,  by  so  much  they  detract  and  derogate
from  the  design,  and  render  the  execution  of  the  piece
defective  and  impotent."  For  if  glaring  colours  in  the
standing  frame  or  close  about  the  picture  disturb  the
view,  and  weaken  the  strength  of  our  imagination  on
which  the  painter  practises  and  to  which  he  chiefly
applies,  what  effect  must  these  colours  have  when
introduced  into  the  piece  itself?  And  how  is  that
attention  likely  to  be  commanded  which  is  necessary
for  that  pleasing  illusion  or  deceit  which  makes  the
sole  use  and  beauty  of  the  spectacle  ?  'Tis  evident
that  in  the  pieces  of  claro-obscuro,  but  especially  where

1  Supra,  p.  148.  2  Supra,  p.  118.

3  [Possibly  the  nature  of  drugget.]

4  On  the  subject  of  florid  colours  taken  from  maxim  at  the  end  of  the
Treatise  II,  viz.  The  Notion.


150  SECOND   CHARACTERS

a  single  colour  is  added,  if  the  design  and  history  be
well  performed,  the  illusion  becomes  so  strong,  and
the  eye  of  the  able  spectator  so  fixed,  and  by  a  sort  of
enchantment  in  a  manner  riveted  to  the  subject :  that
the  mind  in  its  first  transports  requires  not  anything
further ;  nor  does  the  fancy  while  this  fervour  lasts
suggest  the  least  defect,  or  suffer  the  least  uneasiness
for  want  of  what  is  still  behind.  How  must  it  prove,
therefore,  when  the  whole  force  of  colours,  under  a
just  management  and  due  restraint  are  added  to  the
piece  ?  And  how  real  an  enchantment  must  be  then
produced  when  all  the  resemblances  of  nature  in  her
proper  aspects  are  assembled  and  united  harmoniously
and  in  consort  to  complete  the  summary  and  the
supreme  work  of  art  ?

The  Modern   Four  Colours.

The  modern  four  colours,  viz.  i .  Terra  rossa.  Ocre
rouge.  2.  Terra  galla.  Ocre  jaune.  3.  Oltra-marino.
Azuro.  Lapis  lazuli.  4.  Terra  verde,  de  verona  ferrigno,
iron-coloured.  The  light  and  dark,  viz.  i.  Biacca  y
ceruse.  Blanc  de  plomb.  Ceruse.  2.  Terra  nigra.
The  last  has  also  a  dun  colour  akin  to  it  to  be  called
Terra  d'ombra.  The  green,  however,  seems  not  an
original,  or  principal  colour,  since  it  can  be  made  by
mixture  of  black  and  yellow  with  a  little  white.  A  few
hints  only  of  this  kind  to  be  proved  by  others.  This
a  foundation  or  ansa  [handle]  only.  Our  consideration
and  work  different.

It  must  be  remarked  upon  the  whole,  after  the
small  explanation  (not  too  precise  or  mechanical)  of
the  four  colours  that :  this  was  meant  by  the  four  colours
of  Apelles,  etc.,  in  Pliny.  Not  merely  by  four  without
the  mixture  and  result.

Remember  also  here  the  reigning  tint1  or  regent
colour,  master  species.  The  real  complexion  from
the  chief  in  the  complex,  the  predominant  in  the

1  Tint  4.


PLASTIC    ART  151

assemblage  and  mixture.  This  to  be  explained  by  the
easy  practice  of  a  curtain  of  any  one  colour  drawn  before
the  single  window  or  entrance  of  light  into  a  room.
Be  there  what  colours  it  will,  it  instantly  reduces  them
all  and  forms  one  of  those  species  of  drawings  reckoned
amongst  the  claro  obscuros — amongst  which  is  an  old
way  of  a  particular  colour  as  yellow  or  dun  added  to
the  black  and  white,  which  makes  three  colours,
though  in  strictness  but  one  colour,  the  other  black
and  white,  being  shade  and  light  only,  not  colouring  :
not  a  piece  said  to  be  in  colours  on  this  account,  nor
indeed  on  the  addition  of  this  one  real  colour,  though
green,  blue  or  red.  This  being  still  in  the  singular
not  plural.  But  when  a  real  second  colour  is  super-
added,  a  progeny  arises  as  from  male  and  female,  and
the  parents  beget  abundantly.  Good  reason  therefore
to  stop  at  four.  For  see  how  multiplied  a  generation !
Though  kindred  and  so  affectionately,  kindly,  consan-
guineously  allied  and  united.  Therefore  live  the
ancients.

4th   Part  in   Painting:    viz.   Sentiment,   Movement,
Passion,  Soul.

The  divine  part  and  only  Raphael's.  Something
which  is  above  the  modern  turn  and  only  antique
species  of  grace.  Above  the  dancing-master,  above
the  actor  and  the  stage.  Above  the  other  masters  of
exercise.  And  this  even  the  ordinary  painters  and
statuarys  see ;  and  therefore,  no  toe  twisted  out,  na
chin  held  up.  No  stalk1,  or  tread,  or  bridling,  like
the  tragic,  or  theatrical  action.  Yet  the  sneer
retained  ;  the  twist ;  the  affected  contrast.  :<  Here
and  here.  This  way  and  this  way."  So  the  French
modern  school,  in  reverse  of  Poussin  their  renegade  ;
or  rather  they  his  rebels,  since  he  had  a  right  to.  be
their  prince.

1  No  seat,  a  horse-buck,  according  to   modern   discipline   and   ac
coutrements,  stirrups,  etc.,  with  raised  chin,  tossing  head,  etc.


152  SECOND   CHARACTERS

This  an  eternal  distinction  between  ancient  and
modern.  The  first  ever  without  affectation.  The
latter  (except  Raphael,  Poussin,  and  in  statuary
Michael  Angelo)  all  give  into  it  more  or  less.  And
the  cavalier  Bernini1  in  this  respect  an  apostate  in
statuary,  as  Pietro  da  Cortona  in  painting,  both  for
this  and  for  colours2.

Definition  of  affectation,  viz.  "An  expressed
consciousness  of  grace  which  spoils  grace  and  its
simplicity.  An  attention  to  self,  to  the  action,  move
ment,  or  attitude  itself."  This  unpardonable  even  in
a  Venus,  and  never  allowed  even  there  by  the
ancients.

Many  ill  works  remaining  of  ancients  (for  must
not  they  have  had  their  underlings  and  botches  as
well  as  we  ?).  But  never  a  show  or  token  of  this
affectation  in  coin,  basso  relievo,  statue,  etc.

5th   Part  in  Painting :    viz.   System,   Composition*,
Collocation,   Position,  Symmetry  general.

Hyperbole4,  i.  In  this  part  treat  of  the  magis
trates  (together  with  the  hyperbole),  e.g.  I  n  portraitures,
even  in  half-lengths  and  heads,  often  a  window  open
and  a  distant  perspective  of  small  and  lessened  objects,
no  way,  not  by  any  medium  or  middle  size  united  to
the  great.  This  a  plain  breach  of  symmetry,  and  an
errour  in  the  magnitudes.

1  Memd.     Bernini  wicked.     Therefore  sit  the  harder  on  him  as  on
Spaniolet,  Carvagio,  etc.,  throwing  in  a  word  in  behalf  of  M.  Angelo  and
Salvator  Rosa.     This  elsewhere  not  here.

2  See  Colouring.

3  Beware  of  word  composition  here,  since  it  may  be  applied  equi
vocally  to  Invention,  part  ist.

4  On  the  subject  of  the  hyperbole  (which   I   believe  will  require  a
distinct  head)  remember  principally  the  noble  ancient  statue  of  Laocoon.
True  example  !     But  so  unknown  to   modern  judges,   that   it   is    even
condemned  by  critics,  as  if  the  master,  great  as  he  was,  had  been  such  a
blunderer  as  to  mistake  his  sizes,  and  give  the  form  of  twenty  or  twenty
one  years  old  to  a  pair  of  children,  not  half  grown.     N.B.    This  is  the
very  statue  (of  which  I  have  the  old  print),  a  good  subject  for  Mr  Frei.
Gribelin,  or  other  engraver  in  little  ;  to  fit  the  octavo  size  and  stand  in
the  page  under  this  chapter,  among  the  ornaments  of  Second  Characters.


PLASTIC   ART  153

The  same  rule  holds  as  well  in  the  masses  or
groups  as  between  the  particular  pieces  or  figures.

2.  By  the  very  use  of  the  hyperbole  (which  is  a
voluntary  and  premeditated  errour  from  the  rules  of
perspective)  those  very  rules  are  shown  to  be  most
necessary  for  the  painter  to  understand.  The  devi
ation  in  loco  requiring  the  nicest  knowledge  and
reason.  As  for  instance  when  it  is  and  how  a  distant
figure  on  a  ground  near  the  horizon  (the  air  appearing
under  its  legs),  or  receiving  a  strong  light  on  any
extremity  or  particular  part,  comes  to  be  excessive  and
large  beyond  its  proportion,  as  in  N.  Poussin's  figure
and  perspective  piece  of  the  Samaritan  Woman,  where
a  pointing  finger  is  longer  than  the  whole  head  or  face.

How  agreeable  this  part !  (essential  and  constituent
of  piece  and  tablature)  even  when  found  in  ryparo-
graphy,  animals,  a  dunghill  (cock  and  hens),  a  flower,
or  fruit  piece  (according  to  what  delivered  in  Notion
at  paragraph  3  of  the  introduction)  if  perchance  the
poor  master  has  a  genius  of  this  kind  ;  and  has  order
in  his  head,  to  him  indeed  the  je  ne  sais  quoi  yet
perceived  and  executed.  //  ne  salt  comment :  ravishes
and  delight  others.  Us  ne  savent  pour  quoi.

15.     MAXIMS  OF  THE  ART1.

1.  A  tablature  must  have  but  one  point  of  sight.

2.  It  must   be   seen   only  from   one  position,   or
point  of  sight,  and  be  so  wrought  that  if  nearer  or
further  viewed,  it  appears  imperfect.      For  if  as  well
nearer  or  further,  here  or  there :  then  as  well  no-where.
The  touches  or  pencil  (as  well  as  the  dimensions   in
fresco-work   and  uneven    superficies)    must    trim    the
balance  and  drive  you  back,  or  bring  you  forward,  as
your  eye  (you  will  find)  requires.

3.  All  very  little  painting  (viz.  less  than  natural

1  Memd.  The  only  [section]  which  is  to  be  marked  with  hands  (as
determined  above,  p.  7).  Bring  first  as  many  as  possible  into  the  first
Treatises,  and  mark  them  still  repeatedly  with  the  hands  afterwards,  both
there  and  here.


i54  SECOND   CHARACTERS

lessening  at  convenient  distance  computed  within  and
without  the  tabula  or  cloth)  is  false  ;  and  only  suffer-
able  in  portraiture  of  faces,  not  whole  or  half-figures  ;
which  would  be  still  so  much  the  more  preposterous  as
being  more,  and  the  littleness  amplified  and  more
apparent  and  resulting  pigmy,  baby-forms.  But  in
this  respect  (if  history  and  real  humanity)  false :
because  no  life  so  lessened  can  appear  so  distinct,  or
features  be  seen  and  counted.  Therefore  bemoan  the
excellent  Poussin  employing  the  greatest  truth  of
pencil  and  judgment  in  a  kind  or  species  that  is  in
itself  false,  but  for  cabinets — and  so  he  got  his  liveli
hood  best — :  modesty  and  the  great  masters  all  before
him  discouraging  him  from  the  noble  size  and  that
above  life,  of  which  otherwise  so  capable.  Witness
his. ..in  St  Peter's.  But  his  pieces  of  two  or  three  feet,
not  of  the  kind  here  censured.  These  excellent.
His  Plague  and  other  pieces  in  the  French  king's
closet  of  the  unhappy  little  kind,  and  relish  of  closet
virtuosos  and  the  court.

Hyperbole.

In  the  heroic  style  (as  either  epic  or  tragic)  the
hyperbole1  has  place  and  must  reign  :  else  no  heroes,
no  amplification.  And  therefore  buskin  (cothurnus)
high  raised,  bigger  than  life,  voice  and  tone  suitable,
and  action  (which  makes  the  strut  and  bellow  endured
even  to  extravagance  in  the  actor).  But  in  the
common,  practical,  and  merely  natural  style,  the
hyperbole  runs  to  farce  immediately  and  the  buskins
are  stilts  ;  the  tones  whining  or  bellowing  in  reality.
The  descriptions,  motions,  etc.  are  Horace's  '  Dwarf
of  Augustus  in  Arms.'  The  genuine  comic  becomes
farce  ;  the  middle  comedy  and  Menander,  Aristo-
phanic.

Even  the   great    Michael    Angelo2,    his    muscling

1  Supra,  p.  100.

2  Confer  with  Sensus  Communis,  p.  144  notes.


PLASTIC   ART  155

action  and  movements  gigantic.  Other  painters  too
timorous  and  strict ;  sweet  and  natural ;  but  unfit  for
any  noble  sally  of  genius,  as  Domenichino  the  judicious,
correct,  and  Poussin.  And  among  the  yet  more
modern,  Carlo  Marat,  fittest  for  beauty  and  soft  action  ;
not  fierce,  terrible.  So  wrong  was  a  certain  Cardinal's
judgment,  who  having  two  contrary  pieces  to  bespeak,
a  tragic  ugly  one,  and  a  pleasant  beautiful  one,  gave
the  former  to  Salvator  Rosa  and  the  latter  to  Marat.
Whence  this  absurdity  :  "  The  devils  or  furies  of  the
latter  were  angel's  forms  ;  the  angels  of  the  former
furies."

Of  the  happy  medium  and  just  hyperbole,  see
perpetual  instance  in  divine  Raphael.  And  here  cite1
and  reprove  sharply  the  sharp  French  censurer  and
railer  Freart2  particularly  p.  47  being  the  exact
description  and  very  picture  of  the  false  taste.  Nothing
being  so  just  and  beautiful  on  this  very  account  as
Raphael's  in  this  Massacre  of  the  Innocents  (of  which
I  have  seen  the  original  drawing).

Again  as  to  the  hyperbole  even  in  perspective—
Salvator  Rosa3 :  "  He  had  chosen  a  cloth  of  a  vast
height  in  proportion  to  its  breadth.  It  was  full... by...
This  was  with  design  to  compose  his  perspective  of
huge  parts  (according  to  the  right  and  noble  taste),
taking  in  for  the  purpose  as  much  height  as  was
possible  for  his  near  rocks  and  trees  which  would
require  it ;  and  choosing  to  lose  the  shapeliness  of  his
piece  both  as  to  frame  and  portion  of  space  without,
and  as  to  the  whole  or  body  within,  rather  than  not
approach  his  great  objects  of  this  kind  ;  which  could
not  therefore  be  seen  to  their  tops  if  so  mighty  a
height  had  not  been  gained.

"  Accordingly  when  this  was  done  he  introduced  his

1  In  the  notes.

2  Fre"art's  An  Idea  of  the  Perfection  of  Painting.     Preface  at  the  end
of  p.  14.     Bigot,  revenge  against  M.  Angelo.

3  A  small  history  of  this  Salvator  Rosa  which  though  no  where  written
or  told  and  though  past  long  before  my  time  (for  he  died  ere  I  was  born).
I  shall  relate  as  if  had  been  present.


156  SECOND   CHARACTERS

rock  in  the  most  stupendous  manner.  This  being
designed  and  drawn  to  his  fancy ;  he  proceeds  to
adorn  his  piece  (according  to  his  natural  ambition)
with  those  wild  savage  figures  of  banditti,  wandering
gypsies,  strollers,  vagabonds,  etc.,  at  which  he  was  so
excellent ;  and  being  pushed  on  still  by  that  vanity  to
make  these  also  in  great  perfection  and  to  advantage,
he  designed  and  painted  them  on  a  forward  ground,  in
a  full  size  or  rather  larger  than  naturally  the  perspective
would  allow  at  so  near  a  distance.  He  had  no  sooner
done  this  than  he  perceived  what  injury  he  had  done
at  the  same  time  to  his  first  design  and  that  after
doing  all  in  his  power  to  magnify  his  rock  and  raise
the  majesty  and  grandeur  of  that  form  and  principal
part,  he  had  pulled  it  back  again,  thrown  it  off  to  a
distance,  or  what  was  worse,  kept  it  in  the  same  place
but  rendered  it  diminutive,  which  in  that  peculiar  form
and  shape  of  horrour  and  dismay  would  prove  a  sort
of  burlesque  and  absolutely  ridiculous  (like  a  little
elephant,  a  little  camel,  etc.).  This  was  the  faulty
reiterate  hyperbole,  which  destroys  itself  put  all  out
of  tune  and  order,  and  renders  the  whole  fantastical
and  a  mere  vision,  a  sick  dream,  not  a  clear  view,  an
inviting,  instructive,  exalting  fiction  or  poem.

"  But  what  does  Salvator  upon  this.  In  an  instant,
ere  the  paint  was  well  laid,  he  strikes  all  out  with
a  dash  or  two  of  his  pencil,  destroys  his  giants  niched
in  his  hollow  cave,  and  draws  a  rock  over  his  vast
abode,  as  Dryden  translates  in  his  Proteus  of  Virgil's
Eclogues.  But  that  his  piece  might  not  want  its
ornamental  human  figures  he  immediately  upon  a  yet
nearer  ground  places  just  such  another  figure  or  two
at  least  three  sizes  less,  by  which  his  hyperbole  once
again  came  right,  the  grandeur  of  parts  in  perspective
restored,  and  his  rock  majestic,  terribly  impending,
vast,  enormous ;  as  it  should  be,  and  as  he  first
designed  it."

The  picture  (with  another  of  the  same  kind,  its
fellow)  was  purchased  at  a  high  price  by  the  truly


PLASTIC   ART  157

great  and  worthy  Prince  and  Governour,  the  Viceroy
of  Naples ;  after  whose  death,  his  pictures  coming  to
sale,  the  piece  mentioned,  together  with  its  fellow,  came
into  the  hands  of  the  author.  And  the  piece  mentioned
being  set  in  a  counter  light  sufficiently  discovers  the
passage  related.

Great  maxim  of  colouring1,  viz.  "  For  the  hyperbole
something  must  be  sacrificed."  Therefore,  see  what  ?
The  hyperbole  must  be  one,  only  one,  unique,  simple.

Upon  the  same  subject  of  hyperbole  apply  Horace's2
Qui  nil  molitur  inepte  ["who  begins  with  no  foolish
effort "].  So  the  divine  Raphael  in  this  respect  far
beyond  Michael  Angelo,  whose  figures  labour  and  toil
though  without  reason,  showing  great  learning  in
design,  anatomy,  etc.,  but  without  cause.  But  par
ticularly  among  the  more  modern  Pietro  da  Cortona,
who  often  molitur  inepte,  overdoes  in  this  sense,  as  in
his  colouring  and  ornaments,  overrich,  magnificent,  false.

Ellipsis3.

1 .  From  the  following  two  maxims,  viz.    ( i )  " Frus-
tra  fit  per  plura"  etc.,  confirmed  in  practice  by  nature
in  anatomy  ;    and  (2)  "  whatever  in  poetic  or  plastic
imitation,  or  rhetoric,  is  left  to  guess  and  results  strong
and  striking  though  not  expressed  "  (as  by  the  figure
ellipsis) — from  these  two  maxims,  I  say,  this  deduction :
That  the  outline  when  skipped,  or  lost  (as  in  an  arm
running  over  any  part  of  the  body,  and  marked  only
here  and  there),  and  yet  has  its  effect  at  due  distance,
shows  the  power  of  art,  and  has  its  suitable  effect  even
on  the  unconscious  spectator.

2.  Remember  the  ellipsis  (or  omission,  retrench
ment,  reform,  reduction)  of  the  traces  and  harness  in
the  divinity  and  triumphal  chariots,  and  even  racing
chariots,  ploughs,  etc.,  in  medal  and  antique  relief- work
entails,    etc.  :    yet  this   however   to   be  moderated    in

1  See  above,  p.  149.

2  Horace's  De  Arte  Poetica,  1.  140.

3  Outline  see  Free-manner,  infra,  p.  165.


158  SECOND   CHARACTERS

painting  and  colours,  because  of  the  maxim  in  Notion
(chap,  v,  par.  12).

3.  In  the  comparison  between  poetry  and  painting
(ist  and   2d   Characters)  this   difference:    That  what
may  decently  be  described  in  one  not  seen  the  least
in  the  other  ;  so  in  a  plague  painted1,  mascerated  bodies
and  cadaverous  looks  indicative  of  the  sores,   but  no
plain  sore,  no  running  boil,  or  plague-sore,   no  ulcer,
cancer,  or  the  like.     From  hence  argument  a  fortiori:
How  indecent  is  obscenity  ?     When  painting  in  other
impurities   is  so  nice  and  cannot  show  what  may  be
said  in  the  broadest,  harshest  terms.

4.  Again  of  the  ellipsis  and  outline.     The  sense
as  well  as  the  wit  and  fancy  loves  to  guess,  when  easy ;
hates  to  be  overhelped,  tutored.      In  leaping,  running,
to  take  a  leap,  aiming  at  a  thrust  in  fencing,  a  recurring
to  the  rule  puzzles.     The  fruit  of  the  doctrine  to  be
from  nature  and  instinct,  no  lesson  applied  or  thought
of  at  the  time.      Besides  that  in  views  whether  real  or
imitative,  that  which  is  gathered  from  a  few  charac
teristics,    or    notes,    principal    aspects,    touches,    lines,
features,   is  more   powerfully  gathered2,    more  simply
formed  in  the  conception,  idea,  more  distinct  and  firmly
lodged   in   the  memory,   and  sealed  to    the    sense  or
understanding,  than  what  is  multifariously  drawn  from
a  confusion  of  concurrent  indicatives,  which   destroy
the  effect  of  each  other.     So  in  rhetoric  and  a  cause
pleaded,  the  one  reason  or  the  two  or  three  principal
grounds  well  urged  ;  the  rest  slighted.      Else  the  fine
speech  and  the  enforced  argument  overturns  the  cause  ;
shows  the  fine  grammarian  and  logician,  but  destroys
the  orator.      Not  so  Demosthenes,  who  having  struck
his  blow,  etc.     So  the  tragedians,  epics,  enemies  of  the
detail  as  all  great  arts.     And  so  the  great  masters  in
their  style  of  painting,  hate  minuteness3.

1  Supra,  p.  141.

2  lecta  potenter.     Horace's  De  Arte  Poetica,  1.  40,  and  what  ensues
by  way  of  facility  in  the  artist's  free  pencil.      Verbaque  provisam  rem  non
inirita  sequentur,  1.  311.

3  See  Characteristics,  I,  144.


PLASTIC    ART  159

The  power  of  the  figure  and  its  supreme  utmost
politeness  well  known  to  those  who  have  studied
the  ancient  critics  and  orators  as  well  as  poets,  with
what  has  been  remarked  on  the  style  of  Isocrates,
Demosthenes1,  etc.  Even  in  comedy  a  Menander,  a
Terence.  Ego  ne  illam,  quae  ilium,  quae  me,  quae  non  ?
So  even  a  La  Fontaine  in  his  first  fable2,  etc.,  par  le
moindre  petit  morceau.,  which  shows  that  author  (who
prostituted  his  muse  and  lost  his  real  beauty  and
simplicity  in  his  long,  multiform,  complex,  unshapely
tales,  where  the  ill  salt  and  lewdness  chiefly  attracts
(carmina  Lucilii3))  to  have  imbibed  the  ancient  wit  and
to  have  known  more  of  true  dialogue  than  Fontenel,
whose  dialogues  of  the  dead  are  only  tricked  with
patch  work,  commonplace  book  writing  without  body4,
grace  or  characters.  And  a  single  fable  of  La  Fontaine
will,  both  with  the  lady  page  and  the  philosopher,  be
read  (sincerely  speaking)  more  repeatedly  again  and
again  at  all  hours  and  times,  than  the  finest  of  his
ancient  masqueraders  whom  he  defames  and  defaces,
and  are  indeed  real  marks  and  speeches.  No  one  of
the  real  good  judges  of  the  French  but  would  avow
they  had  rather  be  author  of  one  such  little  fable  as
this  of  the  ant  and  the  grasshopper  (where  characters
and  manners  are  touched,  and  the  very  spirit  and
humour  of  the  housewifely  dame  and  frugal  man  of
business  and  the  prodigal  squire  are  exactly  touched)

1  Remember   to   search  Longinus  for  this,  also  Dionysius  Halicar-
nassus,  and  what  Aristotle  says  above  all ;  and  let  this  be  a  full  and  large
note  of  citations.

2  So  the  omission  of  the  two  indicatives  of  the  dialogue  in  the  last
line,  as  in  all  his  dialogue  manner  :  a  thing  of  the  nicest  judgment  and
art,  to  know  when  and  how  to  omit  ;  of  which  Horace  the  great  pattern
after  his  masters  in  Greece.

3  [This  word  is  obscure  in  the  text.]

*  See  Char-cks  (upon  the  manner  of  dialogue  writing),  Vol.  I,  p.  196.
And  what  is  said  of  the  same  false  manner  of  dialogue  writing  used  by
certain  divines  and  other  false  imitators  of  Plato  and  the  ancients.  These
dialogues  of  Monsieur  Fontenel  being  indeed  only  bad  imitations  of  a
bad  false  imitator  Lucian,  good  only  in  style  and  humour  of  the  lower  of
the  abusive  ist  comedy  and  his  master  mimic  Aristophanes  :  the  great
paroder  and  only  model  of  what  we  call  burlesque,  and  was  quitted  in
the  middle  ages  of  politeness,  viz.  from  Aristophanes  to  this  Lucian.


160  SECOND   CHARACTERS

than  of  either  of  the  volumes  of  that  other  author's
uncharacterized  characters,  and  dialogues  of  phantoms
with  borrowed  names  and  without  a  tale  or  story,
a  moral  design,  draught,  or  any  proportion,  body  or
shape  belonging  to  them.  This  author  is  worthy,
however,  of  criticism,  being  one  who  was  able  to  write
well,  as  his  dialogue  of  the  Pluralite  des  Mondes  may
serve  to  show,  where  there  is  some  kind  of  imitation
(with  allowance  for  modern  air  of  gallantry) :  the
chief  and  common  scope,  mark,  or  butt  of  dialogue
and  poetry,  and  all  fictitious  work  according  to
Atheneus  in  Char-cks,  i,  254,  and  so  196,  Homer,  etc.

1 6.     OF  THE  MACHINE,  MACHINERY,  OR  DEITY
WORK.

Deus  intersit.  Always  necessary  in  the  high  heroic
(as  in  the  epic).  No  piece  sublime  without  the  action
being  in  this  respect  of  full  dignity.  Dignus  Vindicis
Nodus.  No  tablature  complete  in  the  heroic  kind
without.

Ergo  common  history  (though  of  heroes  such  as
Alexander,  Caesar,  Mark  Antony,  etc.)  not  of  the
higher  epic  order  in  painting ;  because  no  machine
introducible,  and  much  less  modern  history  (except  in
the  emblematic  and  oblique  way,  which  is  of  the
irregular  kind)  since  a  King  William,  a  Louis,  can
much  less  appear  in  the  field,  or  council,  with  a  train  of
deities,  or  with  Mars,  Minerva,  Apollo,  Mercury,  etc.

But  when  the  Christian  machine  enters  (as  in  the
case  of  a  Constantine),  then  the  painter  again  rises
and  heroism  complete,  the  miraculous  and  sublime
restored  with  credibility,  through  faith,  tradition,  sacred
history,  religion,  as  in  heathenism,  and  the  ancient
machine.

Ergo  fable  more  the  subject  of  historical  painting
than  mere  history.  Same  reasons  as  in  poetry.  See
Char-cks,  Aristotle  and  places  depending.

This  is  besides  the  advantages  of  the  machine,  the


PLASTIC   ART  161

glory's,  clouds,  and  miraculous  lights  as  Apollo  in
particular  :  the  rays  about  his  head  as  the  sun  ;  and
something  of  this  kind  in  proportion  also  to  other
deitys  and  demigods.

But  why  ancient  machine  still  superiour  to  modern,
see  example  in  such  a  case  as  the  weakness  of  human
nature,  or  the  virile  virtue  in  opposition  to  the  female
charms  or  those  of  love.  Take  a  Hercules  (according
to  the  common  fiction)  and  an  Omphale.  Here  the
hero  spins,  lies  in  the  lap,  etc.  Cupids  above  and
below  triumph,  insult,  illude.  Venus  laughs.  Even
fawns  and  satyrs  may  come  in  to  make  sport  and  add
to  the  victory  since  the  same  fiction  makes  Hercules
withal  subject  to  the  pleasure  of  wine  and  of  the  table.
Now  change  the  scene  and  take  a  Samson.  What
machine  ?  Not  angels  surely.  And  for  demons  much
less.  How  would  this  appear  ?  Ergo  moderns  hit
the  sublime  best  in  the  more  ghastly  and  (otherwise)
ungraceful  in-venuste  subject  of  executioners  and
martyrs,  or  hideous  dying  pieces,  beggary,  prayer,  etc.
As  Domenichino  instance  the  second  esteemed  picture
in  the  world  (according  to  Poussin,  etc.),  viz.  St  Jerome
taking  the  host.  A  sacred  mystery,  seen  with  the  eyes
of  faith  and  confirmed  by  the  very  machine  above.
All  noble  !  and  exalting  low  part.

Nothing    worse    than    the    unskilful    mixture    and

o

confusion  of  the  machine  work  with  the  historical  and
human  figures.  A  delicate  and  just  perceptible  dis
tinction  and  separation  necessary.  Not  so  as  to  make
two  pieces,  or  two  styles,  or  two  sorts  of  light  (though
somewhat  of  this  latter  kind  not  amiss  if  well  united
by  intermediates).

Examine  Raphael's  Transfiguration  piece  by  this
maxim,  and  observe  how  the  false  double  piece  (viz.
the  part  above)  serves  however  as  the  machine  part
with  an  infinite  advantage.

Remember  Rubens'  Mercury  with  the  two  cardinals
and  queen,  as  an  instance  of  the  monstrous  mixture  of
machine  and  history...  Luxembourg  gallery,  Paris.


R.


162  SECOND   CHARACTERS

17.     OF  THE  SCENE,  CAMPS,   PERSPECTIVE,

ORNAMENT.

(i)  Of  landscape  painting  or  perspective  con
sidered  by  itself.

Ego  laudo  ruris  amoeni
Rivos  et  musco  circumlita  saxa,   nemusque1.

["  I  praise  the  streams,  the  moss-covered  rocks  and
the  groves  of  the  delightful  country."]

Also  that  of  Juvenal  after  encomiums  of  the  country
in  his  own  way.  Satire  3  in  the  beginning  and  the

Ego  vel  Prockytam  praepono  Suburae.
In  vallem  Egeriae  descendimus,  et  speluncas
Dissimiles  veris.     Quanto  praestantius  esset
Numen  aquae,  viridi  si  margine  clauderet  undas
Herba,  nee  ingenuum  violarent  marmora  tophum  ?

["  /  prefer  even  Prochyta  to  the  Sziburra.  We
descended  into  the  valley  of  the  Egeria  and  the
grottoes  so  altered  from  what  nature  made  them.
How  much  more  should  we  feel  the  influence  of  the
presiding  genius  of  the  spring,  if  turf  enclosed  the
waters  with  its  margin  of  green,  and  no  marble
profaned  the  native  stone."]

And  that  of  the  other  severe  poet  (for  even  the
severest  allow  and  even  exalt  this  relish  as  the  truly
natural.  So  we  see  in  this  of  Juvenal  in  order  from
that  foot  or  foundation  to  reproach  and  shame  vice,
and  at  being  in  itself  divine  and  moral*  according  to
the  spirit  of  the  Lucilius's,  the  Horace's,  etc.),  viz.
Persius,  Sat.  6.

Hybernatque  meum  mare3,  qua  latus  ingens
Dant  scopuli  et  multa  litus.se  valle  receptat.

1  Hor.  Epist.  Lib.  I,  x.  6.

2  Characteristics,  I,  141.

3  So  Horace's  description  of  his  villa  :

Continui  montes,  nisi  dissocientur  opaca

Valle;...

and         Paulum  silvae  super  his.
and         Ubi  ingens  pinus  albaque  populus

Umbram  hospitalem,  etc.  et  obliquo  laborat  lympha.


PLASTIC   ART  163

[And  my  sea  is  wintry,  where  the  rocks  present  a
large  side,  and  the  shore  recedes  into  a  deep  valley.]
Hie  ego  securus  vulgi,  etc.

["  Here  am  I,  careless  of  the  vulgar."]

These  are  the  images  with  which  a  mind  must  be
rilled  ;  these  the  beauties  of  which  it  must  be  apprised
and  with  which  it  must  be  enamoured  and  possessed,
previously  to  this  taste  in  painting.  For  so  in  poetry.
What  would  pastorals  (for  instance)  prove  to  one  who
had  no  relish  of  the  real  pay  sage  ?  the  rus,  animals,  and
rural  objects.

Remember  the  several  orders  (as  of  old  with
Mr  Clostr  in  Richmond  Park  and  St  Giles's  woods)  into
which  it  is  endeavoured  to  reduce  the  natural  views  :
the  last  and  most  sacred,  like  the  Alpine  kind,  where
the  vast  wood  and  caverns  with  the  hollows  and  deep
valleys  worn  by  the  cataracts  in  the  very  rock  itself,
pines,  firs,  and  trunks  of  other  aged  trees1.  This
attempted  by  Salvator  Rosa,  but  without  the  just
speculation.  Witness  the  stickiness  of  his  noble  trees
(which  he  otherwise  finely  described),  and  his  mangling
them  like  artificial  trunks  and  amputations  made  by
man  and  with  instruments — contrary  to  the  idea  of
those  sacred  recesses,  where  solitude  and  deep  retreat,
and  the  absence  of  gainful,  lucratible  and  busy  mortals,
make  the  sublime,  pathetic  and  enchanting,  raises  the
sweet  melancholy,  the  revery,  meditation.  "  Where
no  hand  but  that  of  time.  No  steel,  no  scythe,  but
that  of  Saturn's."  Secret2  suggestion  of  the  world's
ruin  and  decay;  its  birth  and  first  formation3,  "where
neither  art  nor  the  conceit  or  caprice  of  man  has  spoiled
their  genuine  order4."

1  See  Rhapsody,  p.  389,  etc.

2  Against  the  atheists  of  the  world  (this  globe's  eternity).

3  Cf.  Rhapsody,  pp.  389—390  and  393,  line  22.

4  Write  this  fluently,  though  a  repetition  of  what  writ  before  in  Rhapsody
to  which  no  occasion  to  refer  here  purposely.     For  why  not  cite  one's
own  when  suitable,  as  Xenophon  (his  battle  of  Mantinea  in  his  Agesilaus
and  his  History),  after  Homer  and  the  poets.     So  Lucretius,  Virgil.     If
moderns  imitate  not,  'tis  because  not  so  elaborate,  just.    On  '  Self-citation,'
supra,  p.  4.

II 2


1 64  SECOND    CHARACTERS

1 8.     OF  SHORTENINGS  OR  FORE-SHORTENING.

All  the  shortenings  of  figures,  or  other  constituent
parts  of  the  tablature  our  painters  have  customarily
called  by  the  name  of  fore-shortenings  because  indeed
all  shortenings  of  a  particular  single  figure  (standing
by  itself  and  being  substantial  not  adjective,  but  con
taining  the  point  of  sight  within  itself)  are  indeed
fore-shortenings,  that  is,  shortenings,  foresight.  But
the  point  of  sight  being  taken  out  of  the  figure  and
removed  to  some  other  (which  changes  the  whole
economy  of  the  tablature),  the  shortenings  whatever
they  are  become  quite  different ;  though  the  attitude  of
that  figure  be  exactly  the  same.  The  whole  drawing
is  then  changed,  be  the  figure  transplanted  but  a  half
body's  breadth  either  to  the  one  side  or  other,  or
removed  but  a  faces'  length  either  higher  or  lower  in
respect  of  the  horizon,  which  must  be  the  first  thing
fixed  even  by  the  most  stupid  and  paltry  draughtsman
before  he  can  draw  so  much  as  a  man  at  table,  a  dish
on  it,  a  dog  under  it.  For  if  the  point  of  sight  be  just
above  the  table  so  that  the  dish  be  seen  into,  if  the
servant  raises  the  dish  it  must  be  seen  by  the  bottom
and  no  possibility  of  seeing  into  it ;  unless  the  point  of
sight  again  be  raised  higher  and  the  horizon  supposed
above  the  raised  dish;  and  then  the  bottom  dishes  are
not  only  deeper  seen  into,  but  the  guests'  heads  are  seen
like  the  dishes  before,  and  their  crowns  or  upper  parts
discovered,  chins  and  throats  so  much  lost  in  proportion.
The  same  side-ways,  right  and  left,  whence  may  rise
the  phrase,  high-shortening;  low-shortening;  side-
shortening.

19.     OF  TRUTH  (viz.   PLASTIC).

Remember  what  argued  with  Mr  Trench  about  my
design  of  the  good  and  evil  conscience  (two  boys)  for
flourish  plate  of  Treatise  III  of  Characteristics.  The
harpies  and  evil  dreams  in  volatile  shapes,  being  first


PLASTIC   ART  165

proposed  to  be  made  bigger  than  the  life  in  respect  of
the  boys,  that  their  action  and  accompaniments  might
be  seen  the  plainer.  But  this  was  found  nought  and
false.  Afterwards  having  reduced  them  to  as  big  as
life,  but  having  chosen  rather  the  eagle  and  vulture-
proportion  as  the  largest:  this  still  was  found  false.
For  at  this  rate,  the  haggard  forms  instead  of  buffeting
and  frightening  the  children  might  be  supposed  brg
enough  to  fly  away  with  them  as  their  prey.  The  next
size  therefore  was  chosen,  viz.  that  of  the  raven,  the
kite,  etc.

This  merely  in  grotesque  work  and  the  emblematic ;
where  all  is  false  and  everything  so  wildly  and  ex
travagantly  fictitious,  with  such  variety  of  proteus-
forms  and  different  species  conjoined;  yet  not  pre
posterously,  absurdly,  or  without  intelligence,  specula
tion  and  a  truth !

-Non  ut  placidis  coeant  immitia1.

["Not  to  join  what's  fierce  with  what  is  mild."]
How  great  a  testimony  to  truth  and  support  of  that
early  maxim  in   Characteristics,   i,  p.  4,   "That   truth
is  the  most  powerful  thing  in  the  world."     So  again,
pp.    142,   146  of  Sensus  Communis.

And  here  by  the  way  take  notice  in  relation  to
Horace's  verse  just  cited,  that  the  harpy  form  is  no
objection  to  him.  Since  if  the  fair  lady  was  joined
to  the  vulture  beneath,  this  was  the  more  moral  and
instructive,  like  the  other  forms  of  the  siren-kind,  to
show  the  speciousness  of  vice,  and  that  in  such
characters  the  best  countenance  and  face  of  sweetness
and  beauty  may  hide  the  greatest  cruelty  underneath,
and  be  joined  to  the  most  savage  disposition.

20.     OF  FREEDOM  OR  THE  FREE  MANNER.

i.  Remember  Mgr  Heer  Van  der  Werff  (the  exact
contrary)  his  Abraham,  Sarah,  and  Hagar  introduced.

1  Hor.  De  Arte  Poet.  1.  12.


1 66  SECOND   CHARACTERS

All  false,  bound  up,  glued,  clung,  candied,  baked. ...And
withal  minute,  contracted,  diminished,  miniatured,
particularized,  detailed,  little  parts  expressed,  nails,
hair,  etc.  (as  ridiculed  by  Horace  in  the  Emilian  Faber.
See  Char-cks).  No  sacrifice  of  under  parts,  no  sub
jection  of  tints,  beating  down  the  ambitious  colours1.
No  introducing  of  the  mortifying  kind  (amortir  in
French),  no  abatement,  degradation;  consequently,
no  elevation,  exaltation,  or  sublime.  No  hyperbole,

majesty,   etc.    No.2 And   lastly   no    ellipsis   or    right

direction  in  the  outline3.

Compare  the  ellipsis  in  the  outline  of  painting  to
the  superficies  of  large  or  colossus  statuary  work,  or
relief  work  set  at  a  distance.  For  here  the  roughness
helps.  Remarkable  lineaments  and  no  more.  Not
the  Emilian  Faber.  Not  the  hairs.  But  by  this  rule:
"That  whatever  is  hid  by  the  due  distance,  whether
in  painting  or  statuary,  is  not  only  superfluous,  but
injurious  and  detracting."

Remember  the  Ephesian  colossus4  (of  which
Salvator  Rosa  speaks  in  his  satire  on  painting),  which
being  admired  before  erected,  was  afterwards  found  to
lose  much  instead  of  gaining  as  was  believed.

Also  Pliny's  story  of  Nero's  passion  for  a  statue,
which  he  first  gilded  (by  which  he  gave  dazzling  lights
and  odd  reflections  to  the  before  quiet,  passive,  and
sober  work);  then  ungilt  by  scraping  off,  whence
besides  a  small  diminution  of  each  part  of  the  superficies
(and  not  in  proportion  neither)  he  made  all  smooth,
and  could  not  possibly  without  new  impression  and
subtraction  restore  to  its  original  roughness  and
masculine  touch  and  complexion.

2.  Freedom !  Free-manner !  What  ?  As  how  ?
Why  not  explain  ?  This  said  by  everyone.  But  let
us  hear  what  account  ?  Few  except  the  painter  can
give  any.  And  the  painter  mute  in  this  respect  viz.
that  he  has  neither  language  nor  pen  by  which  to

1  See  in  Colours,  supra,  p.  148.  2  Supra,  p.  155.

3  Supra,  p.  159.  4  Quere  where  to  find  this  story?


PLASTIC   ART  167

explain  himself  clearly  to  those  who  are  not  of  the
mystery  and  trade.  (Not  so  the  ancient  painters,  who
wrote  and  philosophized  on  their  art.)  Thus  certain
philosophers  coiffed  in  their  artificial  terms  of  ideas,
complex,  reflex,  etc.,  are  angry  when  they  cannot
explain  their  mind  to  one  without  the  pale1.

3.  Concerning  freedom  see  a  moral  explanation:
The  samedoctrine  and  explanation  of  liberty  and  freedom
in  true  moral  philosophy  as  in  painting,  viz.  "That  the
truly  austere,  severe,  and  self-severe,  regular,  restrain-
tive,  character  and  regimen  corresponds  (not  fights  or
thwarts)  with  the  free,  the  easy,  the  secure,  the  bold.
TO  0apcra\eov  [the  undaunted],"  etc.   "Not  libertinism
for  liberty."     No  libertinage,  dissoluteness,  but  the  only
e\€vBepia  [freedom].     Sibiqui  imperiosus*  [who  controls
himself].

4.  Memorandum.      In  life  of  Titian,  what  he  said
upon   his  loose,  wild  strokes  over  the  hair  ana  com-
plection  of  a  portraiture  nicely  painted,  viz.  that  he  did
it  por  coprire  la  fatica,  to  cover  the  fatigue,  or  bury
the  pains.


21.     OF  THE  DECORUM.

This  the  place  for  censure  of  the  censurer  of
Raphael  Monsieur  Freart3.  But  then  by  way  of
excuse  for  him  (he  being  a  stout  defender  of  the
ancients)  observe:  "That  this  is  in  common  with  all
other  popish  virtuosi  accustomed  to  cruel  and  indecent
spectacles... Painting,  wholly  opposite  to  the  decorum,
viz.  crucifixion,  martyrdoms,  wheels,  gibbets,  torments,
to  be  ranked  indeed  in  ryparography.

A  painter  therefore  must  imitate  the  dramatic  and
scenical,  not  the  epic  and  merely  recitative  poet.

1  See  the  parallel  place  in  the  divine  man.

2  Cf.  Horace,  Sat.  II.  vii.  83.     So  Char-ks  (Miscellany,  p.  311  and
other  passages).

3  As  above,  p.  132.


168  SECOND    CHARACTERS

See    Homer's    (Iliad  xvm,    569)    description    of
Achilles  shield  :


(l)     Totcru'   S'   ez'  /tecrcrotcrt   TTCUS

Hos  vero  inter  medios  puer  etiam  cithara  sonora
'ifjiepoev   /ci$api£e,  \Lvov  S'  VTTO   KaXbv  aetSei'
Suaviter  citharicabat  chorda  autem  belle  resonabat
AeTrraXeij   (jxovy    rot   Se  prjcrcrovTes  a^aprfj
Tenella  voce  hie  hiero  pulsantes  terram  simul
MoXTTT?   T'   Ivyi^a)  re  TTOCTI   <TKa.ipovTe<;  eirovro.
Cantuque   sibiloque    pedibus   tripudiantes   seque-
bantur.

["  And  in  the  midst  of  them  a  boy  made  pleasant
music  on  a  clear  toned  viol,  and  sang  thereto  a  sweet
Linos-song  with  delicate  voice  ;  while  the  rest  with
feet  falling  together  kept  time  with  music  and  song."]

And  so  again  Virgil's  description  of  Aeneas'  shield.
The  wolf  nurse:  1  11am  tereti  cervice  reflexa  mulcere
alternos1.  ["She  with  sleek  neck  bent  back  stroked
them  by  turns."]

Nee  non  Tarquinium  ejectum   Porsenna  jubebat

Accipere  —

Aeneadae  in  ferrum  pro  libertate  ruebant2.

["Therewithal  Porsenna  commanded  to  admit  the
exiled  Tarquin.

The  Aeneadae  rushed  on  the  sword  of  liberty."]

Here  we  have  tyranny  and  liberty  painted  but
without  marks  or  signature,  and  so  huzzas  and  the
noise  of  multitudes.  Laetitia  ludisque  viae  plausuque
fremebant3.  ["The  streets  were  loud  with  gladness  and
games  and  cheering."]  And  even  variety  of  language,
victae  longo  ordine  gentes,  quam  variae  linguis,  habitu
tarn  vestis  et  armis4.  ["The  conquered  tribes  move  in
long  line,  diverse,  as  in  tongue,  so  in  fashion,  in  dress,
and  in  armour."]

These  two  works  are  real  spectacles,  not  recitals  of

1  Virgil's  Aeneid,  vm.  633.  2  Ibid.  646.

3  Ibid.  717.  4  Ibid.  723.


PLASTIC   ART  169

spectacles,  where  the  mind  takes  in  greedily  what  the
eye  cannot  (i)  investigate,  or  (2)  endure.

Thus  Medea,  whether  in  the  scene  or  the  chaste
correct  tablature,  must  not  actually  stab  her  children
(coram  populo1);  but  the  combat  of  the  passion  must
be  seen  and  represented  according  to  supreme  art,  not
the  butchery  and  mere  event  and  fact.

Thus  ever  in  battles  (heroic  and  of  good  masters),
rarely  a  spear  sticking  in  a  body,  and  then  too  not  in
a  principal  or  near  figure.  Never  a  head  divided  like
that  by  Turnus  in  the  Aeneid?.

(2)  Atque  illi  partibus  aequis

Hue  caput  atque  illuc  humero  ex  utroque  pependit.

["In  equal  halves
The  sundered  head  from  either  shoulder  swung."]

And  just  before

Et  mediam  ferro  gemina  inter  tempora  frontem
Dividit,  impubesque  immani  vulnere  malas3.

["Clove   temples,  brows  and   beardless  cheeks  clean

through  with  loudly  ringing  blow."]
And  below  again

Cum  galea  longe  jacuit  caput4.

["With  one  swift  blow  lopped  off  the  head."]

No  arms,  limbs,  etc.  chopped  off  and  lying  by  as
by  this  Monsieur  Freart  prescribed  in  this  his  censure5.
Such  are  the  pictures  which  the  (reciting  epic)  poet
draws.  But  of  which  the  first  sort,  marked  (i),  are
un-executable;  the  second  indecent  and  against  the
decorum  in  painting,  and  unimitable  on  the  stage.
And  for  the  former  sort  see  again  what  a  design  Virgil
makes  for  a  shield  in  the  same  place  (lib.  VIIL).  But
which  neither  basso  relievo,  claro  oscuro,  nor  colours
can  execute.  "Fleets  with  their  officers  aboard  them

1  Horace,  De  Arte  Poetica,  1.  185.          2  Virgil,  Aeneid,  Lib.  IX.  754.

3  Ibid.  1.  750.  4  Ibid.  1.  7?i-

5  Fre"art's  An  idea  of  the  Perfection  of  Painting,  tr.  Lond.  1668,  p.  48.


i;o  SECOND   CHARACTERS

appearing  distinct;  nations  and  the  gods  drawn  to
battle ;  generals  and  particulars ;  aggregate  and  separate  ;
near  and  distant;  little  and  great."

Inveigh  here  (but  with  modesty  and  socratic  irony)
against  High  Church  arrd  Popish  toleration  and  inqui
sition  of  that  horrid  representation  (viz.  crucifixion)
and  other  saints  adored  in  those  agonies  and  made
altar-pieces,  church-ornament  and  for  rock  closets.
Not  our  part  here  to  censure  (like  true  protestant1  and
zealous)  the  idolatrous  part.  On  the  contrary  should
we  speak  our  thought  we  might  incur  some  displeasure
perhaps  for  diminishing  the  force  of  that  terrible  word
idolatry  (which  we  might  confine  perhaps  to  the  material
virtue,  the  relic  worship  only,  indulging  all  else  for
vulgar's  sake  who  will  always  frame  the  idol  and  might
better  have  one  painted  beautiful  to  hand).  But  as  to
humanity  and  manners,  sure  I  am,  that  this  is  all  ill,
injurious,  and  imbruing  young  minds  in  merely  cold
blood,  massacre,  etc.  And  here  take  occasion  to  re
commend  the  genius  of  our  nation  against  keeping
anything  in  pain  and  putting  out  of  pain,  though
otherwise  so  greedy  of  fighting  spectacles,  but  not
cold-blood.  Above  all  praise  our  laws  for  rack  abo
lished:  no  wheel.  "Spectacle  corrupts  more  than  the
example  mends  or  terrifies."

22.     COMMON  CITATIONS  AND  REMARKS.

In  praise  and  as  mere  just  character  of  the  Greeks:
Note  the  two  passages  of  Cicero  and  of  Livy,  the  first
such  a  partial  zealot,  the  second  such  a  high  admirer
and  lover  of  his  nation.  The  first  ad  Fratreni1-,  when
governing  in  Greece:  cum  vero  ei  generi  hominum
praesimus,  non  modo  in  quo  ipsa  sit,  sed  etiam  a  quo
ad  alios  pervenisse  putetur  humanitas.  ["But  when
we  rule  over  a  race  of  men  in  which  civilization  not
only  exists,  but  from  which  it  is  believed  to  have  spread
to  others."]

1  Supra,  p.  119.  2  Cicero,  ad  Fratrem,  Lib.  I.  Epis.  I.  9.


PLASTIC   ART  171

The  other  of  Livy,  viz.  Lib.  39.  viii.  Nulla  cum
arte  earum,  quas  multas  ad  animorum  corporumque
cultum  nobis  eruditissima  omnium  gens  invexit.  ["  Not
with  one  of  the  many  trades  which  his  nation,  of  all
others  the  most  skilful  in  embellishing  the  mind  and
body,  has  introduced  amongst  us."]

Against  libidinous1  representation  in  plastic  art.
This  reflection  (in  a  protopope  of  a  master):  "If  I
have  a  servant,  a  dependant,  a  poor  relation,  or  any
friendly  person  much  beneath  me  and  at  my  command,
unashamed  even  though  lewd  and  licentious  in  my  life
to  use  such  a  one  and  employ  him  in  such  a  base
service !  And  shall  I  use  my  art'\  my  science,  thus
and  prostitute  my  head  and  pencil  ?  Shall  I  scruple
out  of  my  respect  and  regard  to  dignity  of  person  to
give  a  bawd's,  a  pimp's,  a  pandar's  part  to  one  for
whom  I  have  but  the  least  common  esteem  ?  And  shall
I  use  that  divinity,  muse,  and  personage,  which  is
beauty  and  decorum  itself  in  such  a  vile  manner  and
to  such  vilifying  purposes  ? "

See  also  the  good  reasons  of  the  pragmatical  author
Monsieur  Freart  de  Chambray3  of  the  loss  and  distinc
tion  of  good  painters  from  bigots  (as  Rubens  graces
by  Madam  de  Guise  or  Monpensier:  Quere  which?).
Though  Rubens'  graces  not  so  great  a  loss.  Well
that  they  were  not  a  Raphael's:  the  only  painter  fit.
For  even  Titian  not  fit.  No  heroic,  antique,  learning,
poetry,  enthusiasm.  A  Guido  fitter:  had  he  under
stood  much  beyond  le  air  de  t£te.

Aemilium  circa  ludum  faber  imus  et  ungues

Infelix...quia  ponere  totum

Nesciet4.

["You  will  come  across  in  the  Aemilian  school
a  worker  in  bronze  of  the  lowest  rank... unhappy...
because  he  has  no  idea  of  representing  a  whole."]

This  applicable  to  the  architect,  as  well  as  statuary,

1  Supra,  p.  114.  2  Infra,  p.  175.

3  pp.  15,  1 6.  4  Horace,  De  Arte  Poetica,  11.  32,  34.


172  SECOND   CHARACTERS

and  painter.  You  may  know  him  (viz.  the  pseudo-
architect)  by  his  extolling  an  inlaid  floor  :  mighty  nice,
draught  (with  collections  of  such)  of  the  rails  of  a  new
modern  altar,  or  the  mosaic  work  and  incrustation  of...
He  is  a  mighty  admirer  of  Pietro  da  Cortona,  Carlo
Maratti,  above  a  Raphael,  or  a  Carracci.  He  even
abhors,  etc.  Such  a  one  having  spent  three  or  four
years  at  Rome,  and  got  the  mimical  action  and  tones
of  the  Italian  with  the  idiom  and  phrase,  comes  home,
and  the  first  thing  you  hear  of  him1

Penatibus  et  magnis  Dis2.

["The  gods  of  household  and  state."]
From  hence  take  occasion  to  speak  of  the  lares,
little  statues,  portable  concealable  movables.  Every
one's  first  religion,  his  family's,  his  private  and  peculiar
one;  then  "the  publics3,"  which  a  man  and  partaker
and  intelligent  in  such  affairs,  the  community,  and
common  religion,  i.e.  the  religion  in  common  proavis
and  focis.  A  perfect  toleration4  for  private  worship
and  public.  No  priest  called:  but  master  of  the  family,
his  own;  as  in  the  main  and  in  the  higher  degree  the
magistrate  himself  for  the  public,  the  mere  priests  being
but  servants5,  one  to  a  temple,  a  sort  of  sexton,  little
better;  and  the  augurs  but  a  sort  of  pedlars  in  the
trade,  not  arrived  to  be  such  merchants  and  traders  at
large  as  afterwards  for  whole  kingdoms,  continents;
as  now  the  Jesuits  (after  gleaning  up  the  remains  of
other  orders  in  the  catholic  Europe,  where  the  whole
tribe  of  orders,  etc.  have  in  some  kingdoms  and  states
swallowed  two-thirds,  and  have  gone  so  far  as  not  to

1  Continue  this  picture  remembering  Mr  Talm-n.

2  Virgil,  Aeneid,  Lib.  3,  1.  10.

3  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  p.  17.

4  Not  so  at  present  (Turk  and  Christian)  in  Europe  or  Asia Hard  to

find  in  any  region  a  human  society  which  has  human  laws  (Inquiry,  p.  97).
This  self-citation  tempered  as  many  others  by  an  as  I  said  to  that  Ld  P
elsewhere  particularly  when  it  refers  to  '  Letter  of  Enthusiasm.'     For  as
to  the  Inquiry,  indeed,  and  other  Tracts  it  cannot  be  so  well  said  your
Lord  P....

5  Miscellany,  p.  43.


PLASTIC   ART  173

leave  slaves  now  remaining,  or  a  gentry  and  laity  enough
to  cover  and  guard  them,  or  keep  up  the  countenance
of  a  temporal  and  civil  government)  are  gone  to  Asia,
China,  America,  joining  real  trade  and  commerce  with
their  spiritual,  and  bidding  for  the  magi-empire,  by  a
previous  universal  monarch,  their  assured  slave.


23.     MORAL  AND  THEOLOGICAL  CITATIONS
AND  MAXIMS.


1.  The  two  passages  of  the  'ATro/x^^ovevVctra1  of
Xenophon,  Dialogue  of  Socrates  with  the  painter  and
statuary.     Also  with  the  armourer,  ibid.

2.  "  Inquiry,"  pp.   104,  105,  on  the  TO  /caXoV.     A
principal   and  fundamental   citation  for  plastic  beauty
and  contemplation.

3.  Maxim,    viz.    Ruinous  in   religious  and   moral
sense  to  wonder  or  admire  wrong.      Hence  superstition.
So  barbarity  (that  of  tyrants)  from  delight  in  blood,
pain,   torture.     First   a   horrour:    then    by   degrees    a
delight.     At   last   horrour   removed,   delight    remains,
etc.   eTrt^atpe/ca/cta2.

4.  Thus    in   painting,  wonderment,  astonishment
at  bold  and  great   things  apt  to  beget  the   taste  of
savage  and  monstrous  in  design  and  colouring.     And
the    same  wonderment   and    rapture    at    the    sight   of
pretty  and  genteel  things  apt  to  beget  the  little  taste
or  relish  of  toys,  baby  relish,  womanish  as  Camilla's  in
Virgil's  Aeneid,   Lib.   XL   775:

Turn  croceam  chlamydemque  sinusque  crepantes
Carbaseos  fulvo  in  nodum  collegerat  auro,
Pictus  acu  tunicas  et  barbara  tegmina  crurum.

["Red  gold  knotted  up  his  yellow  scarf  with  its
rustling  lawny  folds;  his  tunics  and  barbarian  leggings
were  wrought  in  needlework."]

1  Xenophon's  Memorabilia,  Book  ill.  ch.  x.

2  This  maxim  may  be  placed  under  the  head  of  Taste,  supra,  p.  108.


174  SECOND    CHARACTERS

which  was  what  Virgil  here  called  womanish  in
Camilla's  taste,  and  which  he  makes  to  be  her  loss
and  ruin,  and  of  the  whole  cause  and  army  entrusted
with  her.  Noble  and  just  heroic  fable  of  the  same
sense  and  moral  as  that  of  Esop's  kind  of  the  Bride
and  Mouse.  "Nothing  even  of  natural  beings  worthy
of  wonder  or  admiration  but  as,  etc."

Est  aliquid  quo  tendis  et  in  quod  dirigis  arcum  ?
...atque  ex  tempore  vivis1  ?

["Is  there  anything  whither  you  tend  ?  and  to  what
do  you  direct  your  bow?... and  do  you  live  from  the
Time  ?"]

Extemporary  life  miserable.  Better  the  settled
miser  or  covetous  passion  (when  attended  with  thought
of  name,  family,  etc.),  than  the  full,  easy,  contented,
but  uncertain  floating.  Non  prescripta  ad  munia
surgit  (as  the  accumulator).  But  "what  shall  I  do
next?"  Oscitantia:  visiting  fashionable  gentlemen  of
the  town,  set  up  with  a  pair  of  horses  and  a  chariot.
"Whither  shall  we  go?"  "How  pass  our  time,  till
such  or  such  an  hour,  the  opera  play,  etc.?"  In  the
interim  caught  by  a  thousand  passions,  hooks,  snares:
always  sure  to  catch  those  who  are  not  engaged.  But
the  accumulator  (though  the  worst  employed)  more
secure.  The  collector  of  a  cabinet  and  intent  virtuoso,
still  more  secure  as  nearer  order,  virtue,  beauty.  If
taken  with  a  belle;  for  once  or  so  only;  not  ever,  not
a  rake.

The  unity  and  equality  of  life,  made  by  unity  of
object.  Therefore  the  artist  (if  in  liberal  art)  one  of
the  happiest  men,  whilst  truly  ^iXoTrovos  and  true
to  his  art.  Capable  of  doing  the  greatest  good  (as  the
intention  of  this  treatise  is  to  show).  And  therefore
worthy  even  of  a  liberal  and  noble  born  youth:  if  an
extraordinary  genius,  with  particular  reasons  against
the  public  and  family  engagements  (i.e.  economy  the

1  Persius,  Sat.  ill.  1.  60.


PLASTIC   ART  175

chief  part  or  duty  of  such  person).  And  so  Fabius
Pictor  in  Pliny,  with  many  other  Grecians,  if  examined1.

What  Virgil2  said  of  stealing  verses  from  Homer:
Facilis  esse  Herculi  clavum  quam  Homero  versum
surripere:  so  a  figure  from  a  great  master's  piece  in
great  design,  viz.  history  and  composition,  where  the
fifth  part  (the  collocation,  just  position  and  optics  are
observed)  by  reason  of  want  of  application.  For  how
apply  to  any  thing  besides  ?  How  adapt  but  as  there
adapted ;  if  the  design  be  just,  real,  one,  a  whole  ?

Also  the  reason  given  by  the  French  author,  viz.
Monsieur  Freart  de  Chambray3:  "Si  bien  qu'il  est
absolument  impossible  apres  avoir  derobe"  quelque
partie  du  travail  dans  une  nouvelle  composition,  sous
1'aide  de  la  perspective ! "  Now  if  perspective  be  called
to  assistance  and  the  figure  new  designed,  it  is  in  great
measure  original  and  a  new  figure,  at  least  much  more
so  than  anything  taken  from  a  statue.  Since  the  figure
borrowed  from  painting  must  first  be  reduced,  as  it
were,  to  statuary  and  life  by  the  borrowing  painter  or
copyist;  and  thence  from  that  idea  new  wrought  and
so  transferred  into  his  new  composition,  which  is  almost
equivalent  to  an  original  design  or  drawing.

1.  The  most  lovely  thing  in  the  world  is  love  of
one's  duty,  part.     So  of  one's  art4  (quatenus)  painter
merely;  and  more  quatenus  ingenious,  virtuous  painter
in  humanity,  etc.  i.e.  in  reality  quatenus  poet,  historian,
philosopher.

2.  The  word  ^xe/crec?  [attitudes]  by  the  deepest
moralists  borrowed  from  statuary,  anatomy,  designing,
and  applied   as   the   most  significant   term    of  art    in
morals.

3.  The  quid  verum  atque  decens5  of  Horace  little

1  "Ergo  examine."     Also  see  what  modern  in  Vasari,  etc.

2  See  in  his  life  by  Tib.  Claud.  Donat.

3  Not  quoting  him  as  not  worthy  because  of  his  detraction,  insolence,
conceit,  etc.  and  what  he  so  ignorantly  says  against  Raphael's  Massacre,
p.  457  and  over  censoriously  and  bitterly  against  Michael  Angelo,  p.  14.

4  Supra,  pp.  171  and  174.

6  Horace,  Epist.  Lib.  I.  i.  n.


176  SECOND    CHARACTERS

understood  (like  the  blundering  Bishop  Fowler  in  his
answer  to  the  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  p.  4,  soil.  Great
Discovery,  etc.).

4.  The  vita  colour  (quisquu  eritvitae^  of  Horace;
as  also  his  operumque  colores'2,  to  be  alluded  to,  com
mented    and    morally   explained    (with    sublime    and
pathetic  as  may  be)  in  the  chapter3  of  colouring;  the
melting,  uniting,  counterposition,  marriage,  symphoniz-
ing,    spreading,    diffusing,    communicating,    conspiring
of  tints.

5.  Memd.      The  malus  musicus  delitascens  in  choro.
Where  is  this?     In  Arrian  ?  or...  ?     Subjoin  this  as  a
reinforcement   to   what    is    noted    (Char-cks,    vol.    in,
p.  263).     And  apply  this  or  rather  introduce  it  where
mention  is  made  of  Jordano4.

6.  Also    that    passage    (a    principal    citation)    in
Moralists,  p.  211:   "Knowing  as  you  are... well  knowing
in  all  the  degrees  and  orders  of  beauty... of  the  par
ticular  forms,  etc."

Learning  music  practically  (as  to  play  on  an
instrument,  or  sing,  or  anything  of  this  kind  beyond
mere  rudiments  and  for  better  speculation,  theory,  and
ear,  is  the  same  in  a  gentleman  or  liberal  youth,  as
learning  to  paint.  'Tis  mechanical.  'Tis  either  poor
and  base,  if  indifferent  and  slightly  studied  (and  as  the
French  say  sillily  cavalierement),  or,  if  thoroughly  and
to  perfection,  requires  the  whole  man5.

But  remember  what  as  to  statuary  is  feigned  by
the  poetical  author  of  Telemachus  and  Philocles,  when
compelled  for  a  livelihood.  One  of  the  finest  parts  in
his  book.

Among  other  citations  remember  Marcus  on  the
rictus  of  wild  beasts,  etc.  (and  here  innate  ideas).

Also  Socrates  on  painting  in  the  Memorabilia,
instructing  about  the  passions.  Mark  that  painting

1  Horace,  Satires,  Lib.  II.  Sat.  I.  1.  60.          2  De  Arte  Poetica,  1.  86.

3  Supra,  p.  148.

4  Supra,  p.  132.     N.B.     This  ought  to  have  been  placed  in  common
citations  as  being  not  properly  moral  in  the  use  and  sense.

5  See  what  is  said  on  this  subject  above,  p.  112  and  p.  115.


PLASTIC   ART  177

though  high  at  that  time  as  to  symmetry,  form,  etc.,
yet  not  as  yet  attained  this  part  of  the  affections,  the
pathetic,  moral,  etc.

"To  look  around,  inspect,  survey,  dive  into  beauty,
be  present  with  nature  in  her  sweetest  aspects.  See
her  causes  and  dependancies,  her  drawing,  design,
her  prosperity  (TTO.V  /xot  crvvapfjLoa-r),  etc.),  her  flourishing,
a  beauteous  perspective,  the  woods,  the  rivers,  animals,
birds  (the  rising  singing  lark),  and  thus  joyously  with
the  rest  celebrate  nature's  festival,  her  birthday,
marriage,  progeny,  and  give  joy  to  the  incessant
creator."

Self-cite  the  passage  in  Soliloquy1:  "The  Thalia's,
Polyhymnia's,  etc.,  willingly  join  their  parts  and  being
alike  interested  in  the  cause  of  numbers  are  with  regret
in  favour  of  disorder — made  syrens-pandar."  So  the
generous  painter — beware  of  fact,  because  of  Titian's,
Carache's  and  others  prostitution.  But  keep  to  what
should  be,  and  to  the  example  of  the  best  ancients,  the
majesty  and  gravity  also  of  a  Roscius,  an  Aesopus  in
acting.  See  Cicero,  what  he  says  of  one  of  them
keeping  to  the  grave  and  slow  pronunciation:  though
not  so  popular  and  effeminate.  See  above2  what  is
said  on  obscenity  in  painters.

Self-cite  also  on  good  occasion  the  theological
passages  referring  to  art  in  Inquiry3:  "the  elegant
passion,  or  love  of  beauty  running  too  high,  etc."
Ecstasy  and  rapture  in  the  common  subjects  of  art,
etc.  enthusiasm.

The  rules  of  perspective  lie  hid  (under  the  je  ne
sais  quoi]  like  the  rules  of  morals,  right  and  wrong,
equity  and  inequity,  etc.

The  philosopher  and  virtuoso  alone  capable  to
prove,  demonstrate.  But  the  idiot,  the  vulgar  man
can  feel,  recognise.  The  eye  has  sense  of  its  own,  a
practice  method  peculiar  and  distinct  from  common
reason  or  argumentation.  Thus  the  equilibrium  found

1  p.  317.  2  p-  171-

3  Latter  end  of  first  book,  viz.  p.  75-


K.


12


1 78  SECOND   CHARACTERS

so  instantly  in  some  creatures  (as  that  of  the  wing  in
a  swallow  and  the  legs  in  a  partridge  and  other  poultry
kinds),  as  well  as  all  their  other  instincts,  which  our
kind  made  by  nature  to  rely  on  reason  (virtuoso-like
and  according  to  that  rule  of  frustra  Jit  per  plura]
possesses  in  a  less  degree.  But  the  anti-virtuosi  again
says — Who  is  he  ? — Who  but  the  same  one  and  the
same  man  from  him  who  said  he  knew  not  what  the
KaXov  [beautiful]  was  et  /AT)  eiraiveTov  ?  [unless  it  be
praised  ?]  Hence  Hobbes,  Locke,  etc.  still  the  same
man,  same  genus  at  the  bottom. — "  Beauty  is  nothing."
—"Virtue  is  nothing." — So  "perspective  nothing.—
Music  nothing." — But  these  are  the  greatest  realities
of  things,  especially  the  beauty  and  order  of  affections.
These  philosophers  together  with  the  anti-virtuosi
may  be  called  by  one  common  name,  viz.  barbar


DICTIONARY1   OF   ART   TERMS


In  case  of  the  word  ordonance  (necessary  to  be  used  as  before  in
Letter  and  Notion)  remember  to  put  sometimes  the  word  economy.

In  case  of  the  word  group  or  groups  (in  the  same  manner)  the  word
mass.  "The  groups,  masses."

And  in  case  of  plastic,  the  word  graphic  (as  in  Sensus  Communis,
p.  146),  especially  when  with  a  glance  to  gravery-geo-graph,  Ars  graph.

Also  these  words  (some  made,  others  already  of  arf)

Feigned,  devotional


p


Ryparography  )
RyparographersJ
Accompaniments.
Colourists,  viz.  of  the  Venetian

School  for  the  best.
Mannerists.

Epic2- painting  and  painter.
Contraposition  of  tints.
The  plastic3.
Picturesque4,  grotesque.
Arabesque.
Contrast.
Tint  for  teinte.
Machinery.
Vegetable,  still
Sensible,  quick
Real

Natural,  animal
Heroic,  epic
Tragic,  poetic
Masculine
Romantic,  fantastic


Life.


Ecstatic,  seraphic,  mystic      ,  .,

Grotesque,  barbarous

Savage,  monstrous

Fruitage.

Drapery.

Groups  or  masses.

Ordonance.

Foreshortening.

High-low-side-short.

Killing,  killed.

Deadened,  mortified.

Tablature.

Relief  works.

Inwroughts.

Outline.

Signature.

Designation.

Figurative  (as  in  the  title).

Freedom  and  free  manner.

Style.

Design.


(i)  What  to  join  with  the  word  epique  (for  tragic)  instead  of  comic
and  satire  ?  The  word  not  yet  found.  But  remember  the  word  ethic  in
case  of  moral  and  manners.  Thus  "  ethic  and  moral,"  "  ethic  and  heroic,"
"epic  and  ethic,"  "ethic  artist,  painter,"  "ethic  and  poetic."

1  Supra,  p.  7.

a  P.  Belloris'  Raphael,  p.  38.

3  The  generous  plastic,  the  noble  plastic  (the  artist).     The  epic  master,  heroic
painter,  etc.     The  maker,  TTOHJT^S,  creator,  etc.  as  in  Miscellanys.

4  But  whereas  the  terminations  in  esque  (as  burlesque,  romanesque,  etc.)  are  all
buffooning,  remember  never  to  use  the  word  pictoresque  by  way  of  honour  (as  all
common  painters  in  their  art,  so  Raphaelesque  or  Salvatoresque).     But  rarely  this,
and  use  instead  of  it  painterlike,  plastical,  graphical,  poetical.


i8o  SECOND   CHARACTERS

The  epic-painter  can  be  said  with  dignity.  But  what  for  a  Paul
Veronese,  an  ordinary  scripture  painter,  painter  of  Christ's,  Apostles,
virgins,  etc.  ?  Martyrdoms  indeed  are  tragic  in  form  and  epic  because
usually  intermixt  with  heathen  grandeur,  pomps,  and  magistrate,  with
the  sublime  of  Christian  machine  and  seraphim  in  the  air,  etc.

(2)  Venture  the  word  and  call  the  tablature  sometimes  the  poem  after
P.  Belloris'  example  (p.  36,  1.  8)  of  his  pictures  of  Raphael  in  the  Vatican.

(3)  The  epithetic  decorous  (under  the  head  Decorum)  and  the  decorouse
instead  of  ihepulchrum.     TO  KO\OV  as  in  sounds,  the  sonorous.

(4)  The  -virtual  for  the  virtuous ;  which  last  cannot  be  used  for  the
energetic  in  the  good  sense.    But  virtual  may  be  introduced  with  practical.
Also   applied   to   make   things — painting,   etc.     For   so   already   in  our
language  the  virtue  of  a  medium,  etc.     Hence  the  virtualize  to  come  in
case  (and  with  diversion)  of  virtuoso.

(5)  In  the  same  manner  the  numerous  (sense   of  number).      The
decorous,  the  numerous  (use  them  together).    The  true.    The  veri/m  atque
decens  of  Horace,  supra  p.  175.


INDEX   OF    EASE


Adrian,  112,  113

Aesop,  12,  123,   174

Affectation,  151

Almanac,  Oxford,  92

Ambubiarum  Collegia,  100,   113

Andromeda,  95

Apelles,  125

Apology,  4

Arabesque,   104

Aristotle,  99,  160

Arrian,  103,  176

Atheneus,  160

Bacchus,  133
Battle  painting,   137
Bernini,  152
Bosse,  1 6
Bossu,  137

Caravaggio,  133
Carracci,  128,  172
Cebes,  picture  of,  9,  64-87
Cicero,  177
Constantine,   160
Contrast,  151
Correggio,  128
Criticism,  118
Cupids,  98,  1 13,  161

Decorum,   166-170
Demosthenes,  93,  108,  159
Dialogue,  96

Diogenes  Laertius,  84,  85,  86
Dionysius  Halicarnassus,  103
Domenichino,  119,  124,  127,  132,

161

Don  Quixote,  101
Dryden,  135,   140

Ego,  58

Egyptians,  92,  125
Ellipsis,  157-160
Enthusiasm,   126,   127
Epicurus,  87
Evremond,  100


Fabius  Pictor,  113,   175

FalstafF,  100

Fre"art,  128,  132,  141,  155,  167,  169,

171
Fresnoy,  128,  140

Groups,  179
Guido,  95,  143,  171

Hercules,  Judgment  of,  37-61,  161

Herodotus,  103

Homer,  4,  88,  104,  137,   168,   175

Horace,  137

Hyperbole,  152,  154-157

Idolatry,   170
I  socrates,   159

Jesuits,  172

Jordano,  132,  139,  176

Juvenal,  100,  162

Kneller,  Sir  Godfrey,  131,  135

La  Bruyere,  99

La  Fontaine,   159

Laocoon,  152

Lares,  172

Leonardo  da  Vinci,  128

Livy,  170,  171

Locke,  178

Lucian,  114

Marat,  155
Maxims,  153,  173
Medea,  169
Metamorphoses,  96
Mimicry,  93
Miniature,  135,  138
Moliere,  1 1 1
Music,  112,   176

Nature,  177
Nero,  1 66
Notes,  8,  90


182


SECOND    CHARACTERS


Outline,  158

Painters,  37,  119,  131-133

Parmenides,  87

Pathologia,  2

Pedantry,  108

Penates,  117,  172

Peripatetics,  71

Persius,  120,   162,  174

Perspective,   177

Physiognomy,  14,  105

Pietro  da  Cortona,  15,  146,  152,  172

Plato,  80,  87,  103,   104

Pliny,  61,  150,  166

Plutarch,  103

Poetry,  141,   158

Poets,  159

Portraiture,  134,  136

Poussin,  13,  130,  140,  145,  154

Prevention,  no

Priests,  119,  172

Pythagoras,  65,  85,  87,   103

Raphael,    99,    108,    no,    118,    125,

127,  132,  138,  149,  155
Romano,  145,  146
Rubens,  161,   171


Salvator  Rosa,    15,    100,    152,    155,

163

Saturn,  64,  65
Shakespeare,  100
Shield,  Achilles',  168
Socrates,  87,  98,   108,  173,  176
Sophocles,  97
Spagnoletto,  133
Statuary,  125
Symmetry,  99,  144
SXHTttf,    175

Terence,   159

Thales,  85,  86

Titian,  167,  171

Trumpet,  149

Truth,  plastic,  98,  164 — 165

Van  Dyck,  134,  135,  136
Vitruvius,  61,  96

(j)i\(\\rjva,    129
(f)i\6irovoS)    174

Xenophon,  41,  103,  134,  163,  173
Zoroaster,  85


CAMBRIDGE  :    PRINTED  BY  JOHN  CLAY,  M.A.   AT  THE  UNIVERSITY
