CHARACTERISTICS OF MEN, MANNERS, OPINIONS, TIMES, ETC. — VOL. I
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/characteristicso01shafiala): edited with introduction and notes by John M. Robertson (London: Grant Richards, 1900), vol. I.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SHAFTESBURY'S
CHARACTERISTICS


CHARACTERISTICS


OF


Men,  Manners,  Opinions,
Times,  etc.

By  the  Right  Honourable
ANTHONY  EARL  OF  SHAFTESBURY


EDITED,  WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES,  BY

JOHN M. ROBERTSON


IN  TWO  VOLUMES
VOL.  I


London
GRANT RICHARDS

1900


LIBKARY
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFO
SAINTA  BARBARA


EDITOR'S PREFACE

This  edition  of  Shaftesbury's  Chai' act  eristics  repro-
duces all  the  essays  he  himself  so  entitled,  with  strict
adherence  to  his  text,  as  corrected  by  him  for  a
reissue.  Of  that  corrected  copy  I  have  collated  a
large  part  with  the  reprints,  and  I  find  that  his
alterations  were  scrupulously  given  effect  to,  down
to  the  smallest  particulars.  A  few  of  the  footnote
references  to  corroborative  passages  in  the  book
itself  have  here,  as  a  matter  of  convenience,  been
altered  back  to  their  first  form,  specifying  titles  and
sections  of  the  essays  rather  than  pages  of  the  book  ;
but  no  liberty  has  at  any  point  been  taken  with  the
text  beyond  the  modernising  of  the  spelling  and
disregard  of  the  old  italics  and  capitals.

This  external  change  has  been  made  with  some
reluctance,  but  with  a  conviction  that  it  is  really  a
service  to  the  author.  The  profuse  use  of  italics
and  capitals  in  English  books  of  Shaftesbury's  day,
though  in  exact  reprints  it  lends  a  certain  agreeable
local colour  to such books as the  Spectator^  and


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

though  it  might  lend  an  analogous  element  to  an
exact  reprint  of  Shakspere,  is  a  positive  hindrance
to  the  fluent  reading  of  an  argumentative  treatise.
Those  who  have  read  the  Characteristics  in  an  old
edition  will  find  the  modernised  text  distinctly
easier  to  follow.  As  with  variations  of  type,  so
with  spelling.  One  hesitates  to  put  "  them  "  for  the
modish  "  'em  "  commonly  used,  even  by  some  theo-
logical writers,  about  1700  ;  but  the  usage  is  become
so  quaint  in  its  virtual  foppery,  like  the  spelling
"  aukard,"  as  to  be  disconcerting  to  the  reader's
thought.  It  may  interest  moderns,  however,  to
know  that  Shaftesbury  wrote  "  specter,"  "  center,"
and  "  theater,"  thus  giving  to  these  "  Americanisms  "
the  classic  Enghsh  paternity  established  for  so  many
others.

In  the  interest  of  a  large  part  of  the  reading
public  it  has  been  thought  advisable  to  append  foot-
note translations  of  the  Latin  and  Greek  extracts
in  the  original.  Some  of  them,  doubtless,  hardly
needed  translating  ;  but  others  would  have  given
trouble  to  all  but  readers  who  had  not  let  their
classics  rust  ;  and  the  usage  has  been  made  uniform.
In  this  matter  the  editor  has  been  relieved  by  a  much
better  scholar.  Elucidatory  notes,  which  at  some
points  in  the  text  had  become  necessary,  and  at
others  may  not  be  supererogatory,  have  been  invari-

vi


EDITOR'S PREFACE

ably  put  in  brackets,  a  course  recommended  by  the
fact  that  in  Mr.  Hatch's  unfinished  edition  of  1869
some  of  Shaftesbury's  own  notes  have  been  marked
«Ed."

Save  for  that  edition,  unfortunately  stopped  by
its  editor's  death  when  only  one  of  three  volumes
had  been  printed,  the  present  is  beUeved  to  be  the
first  reprint  of  the  Characteristics  for  over  a
century.  It  is  hoped  that  it  does  not  unworthily
reproduce  a  set  of  treatises  which  once  had  almost
classic  status  throughout  Europe,  and  in  our  own
day  have  been  made  the  subject  of  two  elaborate
German  monographs.


vu


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

In  his  Pensees  Diverses,  Montesquieu  has  a  surprising  phrase,
giving  an  obsolete  view  of  more  than  one  reputation.  "The
four  great  poets,""  it  inns,  are  "  Plato,  Malebranche,  Shaftesbury,
Montaigne."  Probably  the  idea  came  from  Shaftesbury  him-
self, who  often  discusses  poetry  as  identical  with  good  moral
teaching.  The  author  of  the  Spirit  of  Laws,  on  his  part,  was
not  exactly  a  connoisseur  of  poetry,  for  he  is  further  committed
to  the  view  that  "  Pope  alone  has  felt  the  greatness  of  Homer  " ;
and  in  any  case  his  praise  of  a  thinker  as  a  poet  does  not
necessarily  imply  approval  of  his  teaching,  since  he  affirms  in
another  page  that  Malebranche  has  fallen  into  a  thousand
sophisms  through  missing  the  principle  of  relativity.  Since,
however,  he  makes  no  such  charge  against  Shaftesbury,  he  must
be  supposed  in  his  regard  to  have  intended  high  praise ;  and
as  a  matter  of  fact  his  eulogy  of  the  author  of  the  Cliaracter-
ist'ics  would  be  echoed,  with  whatever  differences  of  phrase,  by
multitudes  of  instructed  men  in  France,  Germany,  and  England,
at  the  time  he  wrote.  As  late  as  1794  we  have  Herder  praising
our  author  as  a  "virtuoso  of  humanity,"  who  had  "signally
influenced  the  best  heads  of  the  eighteenth  century."  ^  Such  a
reputation  seems  worth  looking  into.

1  Cited  by  G.  von  Gizycki,  Die  Philosophie  Shaftesbury's,  1876.

ix


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


Anthony  Ashley  Cooper,  third  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  was
bom  in  London  on  February  J26,  1671  (New  Style).  Connected
by  direct  descent  with  the  famous  "  Achitophel ""  of  Dryden,  who
was  his  grandfather,  he  is  associated  in  literary  history  no  less
closely  with  John  Locke,  who  had  been  chai'ged  by  the  first
earl  to  find  a  wife  for  his  invalid  son,  and  who  acted  thereafter
as  supervisor  of  the  training  of  the  seven  children  born  of  the
marriage.  Under  Locke's  eye  and  method,  Anthony,  the  first-
bom,  was  taught  Greek  and  Latin,  on  the  plan  of  conversation,
by  an  accomplished  woman,  Elizabeth  Birch,  daughter  of  a
schoolmaster.  He  had  thus  the  rare  fortune  to  be  able  to
read  both  languages  with  ease  at  the  age  of  eleven.  Yet  it
was  thought  fit  to  send  him  to  the  Winchester  public  school
at  that  age,  presumably  by  way  of  toughening  him  for  practical
life.  Professor  Fowler,  his  most  thorough  biographer,  has
seen  a  letter  in  which,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  he  gives  a
startling  account  of  the  ways  of  the  school ;  and  the  biographer's
conclusion  is  that  "  the  English  public-school  education  of  those
days  probably  left  fewer  traces  of  culture,  and  inspired  boys
less  with  the  love  of  letters,  than  it  does  even  in  our  own."
Shaftesbury,  however,  had  been  well  grounded  under  Locke;
and  three  years  (1686-89)  spent  in  foreign  travel  added  a
perfect  mastery  of  French  to  his  skill  in  the  classics,  and  gave
him  a  love  of  the  arts  which  solaced  him  till  his  death.
On  his  retiuTi  to  England  he  gave  nearly  five  years  to  quiet
study.

It  was  not,  however,  to  letters  but  to  politics  that  he  gave
himself  when  he  felt  he  had  intellectually  come  of  age.  In
1695  he  entered  Parliament  as  member  for  Poole ;  and  in  that

X


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

year  he — he  and  not  the  Earl  of  Halifax,  of  whom  the  story  is
sometimes  told — made  the  often-cited  stroke  of  advocacy  for
the  Bill  which  provided  that  men  indicted  on  charges  of  treason
should  be  allowed  the  use  of  counsel.  Finding  himself  at  a
loss  for  words,  he  had  yet  presence  of  mind  enough  to  say :  "  If
I,  sir,  who  rise  only  to  speak  my  opinion  on  the  Bill  now
depending,  am  so  confounded  that  I  am  unable  to  express  the
least  of  what  I  proposed  to  say ;  what  must  the  condition  of
the  man  be  who  is  pleading  for  his  life  without  any  assistance,
and  under  apprehensions  of  being  deprived  of  it  ?  "  i  The  Bill
passed  ;  but  Shaftesbury  did  not  often  so  conciliate  the  House.
It  was  then  in  one  of  its  most  factious  periods;  and  Shaftesbury's
hereditary  Whiggism  and  personal  independence  were  not  to
the  taste  of  either  side.  In  any  case,  his  health  soon  worsened
to  a  degree  that  forced  him  to  give  up  his  seat  after  the
dissolution  of  1698.  His  malady  was  Locke's — asthma,  to
which  London  smoke  then,  as  later,  was  peculiarly  deadly ;
and  to  relieve  it  he  spent  a  year  in  Holland,  returning  to
England  at  the  end  of  1699,  when,  on  his  father's  death,  he
succeeded  to  the  title.  Macaulay,  in  his  specific  manner,
asserts  that  after  leaving  the  Commons  Shaftesbury  "gave
himself  up  to  mere  intellectual  luxury,"  As  a  matter  of  fact
he  exerted  himself  so  greatly  on  the  Whig  side  in  the  two
elections  of  1701  as  to  receive  the  special  thanks  of  the  king,
with  repeated  offers  of  high  office;  and  though  he  declined
these,  it  was  only  the  complete  change  of  men  and  measures
at  the  accession  of  Anne  that  drove  him  back  into  private

^  Macaulay  (ch.  xxi.)  gives  a  much  more  elaborate  version  of  the
appeal.  If  it  had  been  worded  as  he  gives  it,  it  would  justify  his  suspicion
that  the  whole  episode  was  premeditated.  But  his  version  is  plainly  a
composition  of  a  later  date.  Tliat  in  the  text  is  the  report  authorised  by
Shaftesbury's  son.

xi


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

life.  Even  thereafter,  his  letters  show  him  constantly  and
deeply  interested  in  current  politics,  though  he  became  ere  long
a  confirmed  invalid.^

It  was  in  this  state  of  health  that  he  at  length  addressed
himself  to  deliberate  authorship,  and  to  no  less  deliberate
marriage.  Those  of  his  letters  unwarrantably  published  by
Toland  show  him  desirous  of  marrying,  in  1708,  the  daughter
of  a  certain  rich  "  old  lord,"  who  (the  father,  that  is,)  would  not
take  a  favourable  view  of  him  or  his  suit,  though  he  was
willing  to  forego  a  dowry.  One  plan  failing,  he  formed
another,  and  in  1709  married  Miss  Jane  Ewer,  a  distant  family
connection,  with  very  little  fortune.  Ten  years  earlier  he
seems  to  have  put  aside  the  suggestion  of  Locke,  that  he  should
propose  to  a  certain  young  lady  with  a  fortune  of  cif  20,000.
In  private  life  he  cared  above  all  things  for  quiet  happiness,
and  he  seems  to  have  found  it,  as  he  humorously  testifies  to
his  friend  Molesworth  that  after  marriage  he  finds  himself  "  as
happy  a  man  now  as  ever."

In  1708  had  been  published  his  anonymous  Letter  Concern-
ing' Enthitsiasm,  which  had  the  distinction  of  speedily  eliciting
three  angry  replies,  each  bulkier  than  his  pamphlet — one  being
twice  its  size.  His  only  previous  venture  had  been  an  edition
in  1698  of  some  sermons  of  the  Cambridge  Latitudinarian,
Dr.  Whichcote,  to  which  he  put  a  laudatory  preface.  In  1699
Toland  had  published  without  his  permission  his  remarkably
precocious  Inquiry  Concerning  Virtue  or  Merits  in  some  respects
his  most  weighty  performance ;  but  not  till  he  had  put  his
ethical  doctrine  afresh,  with  a  lighter  and  more  unsystematic

^  In  June  1703  he  writes  of  *^my  health,  which  I  have  mightily
impaired  by  my  fatigues  in  the  public  affairs  these  last  three  years "
{Original  Letters  of  Locke,  Sidney,  and  Shaftesbury,  ed.  by  T,  Forster,
1830,  p.  198).

xii


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

touch,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Freedom  of  Wit  and  Humour  and
his  Moralists.,  both  published  in  1709,  and  produced  his  Advice
to  an  Author  (1710),  did  he  proceed  to  publish  the  revised
version  of  his  early  treatise  with  the  others.

It  was  in  1711  that  he  put  forth  his  collected  essays  as
CharacteristicTcs  of  Men,  Manners,  Opinions,  Times,  including
among  them  the  Inquiry,  and  adding,  as  third  volume,
Miscellaneous  Reflections  on  the  preceding  Treatises,  and  other
Critical  Subjects.  It  may  be  surmised  that  the  Moralists,  the
Wit  and  Humour,  and  the  Advice  to  an  Author,  or  some  of
them,  had  been  begun  before  1708 ;  and  that  his  industry  from
that  year  onwards  was  motived  partly  by  his  success,  partly  by
his  consciousness  of  rapidly  failing  strength,  and  the  need  to
husband  time.  Only  two  more  years  were  left  him.  In  July
1711  he  set  out  for  the  warmer  clime  of  Italy;  and  there,  at
Naples,  he  died  early  in  1713,  barely  forty-two  years  old.^  His
last  literary  labours  were  the  careful  revision  of  his  Character-
istics and  the  writing  of  two  essays  in  aesthetics,  a  Letter  on
Design,  and  a  Notion  of  the  Historical  Draught  or  Tahlature  of
the  Judgment  of  Hercules ;  with  some  note-making  for  a  general
essay  on  the  arts.

II

Of  this  short  literary  career  the  success  was  rapid  and
far-reaching.  It  was  hardly  an  exaggeration  in  1733  to  say,
as  did  the  preface  to  the  pocket-edition  of  that  year,  that  "  all

^  Various  errors  are  current  as  to  the  above  dates.  I  have  been  else-
where misled  by  a  standard  authority  which  gives  1711  as  the  year  of
Shaftesbury's  death ;  the  editions  of  1733  and  1737  (and  presumably
others)  describe  the  Miscellaneous  Reflections  as  having  been  first  printed
in  1714 ;  Mr.  Hatch's  edition  represents  the  whole  collection  as  first
appearing  in  1713 ;  and  Dr.  Gideon  Spicker  in  his  work  on  Shaftesbury
dates  it  1709.

xiii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  best  judges  are  agreed  that  we  never  had  any  work  in  the
English  language  so  beautiful,  so  delightful,  and  so  instructive
as  these  Characterkticks.''''  On  the  title-page  of  a  clerical  Cure
of  Deism f  published  in  1736,  Shaftesbury  and  Tindal  figure  as
"  the  two  Oracles  of  Deism " ;  and  this  was  perhaps  the  high-
water  period  of  the  Deistic  agitation.  Nor  was  it  only  a  popular
acceptance  that  was  thus  indicated :  the  praise  of  Leibnitz  had
reached  the  Earl  before  his  death ;  Hutcheson,  the  most  con-
siderable philosopher  between  Berkeley  and  Hume,  was  his
professed  champion,  and  declared  that  his  writings  "  will  be
esteemed  while  any  reflection  remains  among  men"";^  while
Mandeville,  Berkeley,  and  Butler  testified  to  his  importance  in
criticising  him.  Abroad,  his  status  was  equally  high.  The
Essay  mi  tlie  Freedom  of  Wit  and  Humour^  issued  in  1709,  was
translated  into  French  before  1713 ;  a  German  translation  of
the  essays  was  begun  in  1738 ;  Diderot,  then  in  his  first  Deistic
stage,  issued  his  adaptation  of  the  Inquiry  Concerning  Virtue
and  Merit  in  1745 ;  Montesquieu  panegyrised  him  as  we  have
seen ;  a  complete  French  translation  of  his  works  and  Letters
appeared  at  Geneva  in  1769 ;  and  a  complete  German  transla-
tion of  the  Characteristics  in  1776-79.  By  that  time,  Shaftes-
bury's form  of  optimism  had  even  carried  the  day  in  Germany
over  that  of  Leibnitz,^  who  had  admitted  its  measure  of  congruity
with  his  own ;  and  there  are  clear  traces  of  his  influence  in
both  the  ethics  and  the  aesthetics  of  Kant.^  As  regarded  his
general  vogue,  the  facts  that  his  philosophy  was  the  basis  of

*  Preface  to  the  later  editions  oi  An  Inquiry  into  the  Original  of  our
Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue. 'ITie  passage  is  not  in  the  first  edition  (1725).

2  Cp.  Lange,  History  of  Materialism,  Eng.  tr.  ii.  146,  147.

^  Zart,  Einfluss  der  englischen  Philosophen  seit  Bacon  auf  die  deutsclie
Philosophic  des  18ten  Jahrhunderts,  1881,  S.  219,  231.  Kant,  of  course,
never  committed  himself  to  optimism.

xiv


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

Bolingbroke's,  and  therefore  of  Pope's  Essay  on  Maiij  and  that
at  least  eleven  English  editions  of  his  book  (the  last  appearing
at  Basel)  had  been  produced  by  the  year  1790,  may  be  taken
to  signify  that  he  held  a  classic  standing  before  the  beginning
of  the  reaction  against  the  French  Revolution,  in  which  so
many  popularities  were  undone.  The  publication  of  Brown's
Essays  on  the  Characteristics  in  1751  was  a  proof  that  forty
years  after  publication  they  were  reckoned  dangerously  in-
fluential ;  and  the  prompt  production  of  three  replies  to  Brown
testified  to  the  rightness  of  his  estimate  of  Shaftesbury's  vogue.

The  decay  of  this  reputation  in  the  present  century  has
been  ascribed  by  one  critic  alternately  to  the  unattractiveness
of  Shaftesbury's  style  and  to  the  inconclusiveness  of  his  think-
ing ;  as  if  profundity  conferred  popularity,  or  charm  of  style
philosophic  influence.  Certainly  the  fashion  of  style  has
changed  since  Shaftesbury's  passed  as  specially  delightful.  Its
main  defect  is  that  which  differences  it  so  entirely  from
Montaigne's,  its  constant  preoccupation  with  the  labour  of
being  at  ease.  Lamb  has  done  it  a  certain  injustice  in  calling
it  "  genteel " ;  for  though  Shaftesbury  seeks  to  "  regulate  his
style  or  language  by  the  standard  of  good  company,  and  people
of  the  better  sort,"  ^  he  is  really  concerned  less  to  be  superior
than  to  seem  natural ;  and  when  he  is  fairly  judged  he  must  be
admitted  to  have  substantially  reached  his  aim.  Yet,  withal,  his
very  conception  of  the  natural  had  a  certain  gentility ;  so  that,
though  his  prose  is  really  not  inferior  to  Addison's,  with  which
it  is  so  often  contrasted  by  way  of  condemnation,  it  is  inferior
in  both  energy  and  ease  to  Dryden's,  which  lay  to  his  hand  as
a  model.  Addison  is  indeed  more  transparent,  but  only  because
he  is  so  much  shallower. Something  depends  on  the  depth  of

^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  i.  §  1.
XV


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

what  a  man  has  to  say.  What  deprives  Shaftesbury  of  litheness
and  large-limbed  vigour  as  a  writer  is  his  derivative  ideal  of
propriety,  which  perhaps  con*elates  with  his  invalidism ;  though
on  the  other  hand  it  goes  by  the  ruling  standards  of  his  age.
A  generation  before,  Dryden's  own  gift,  no  less  than  the  heritage
of  spacious  and  imaginative  prose  which  still  remained  to
compensate  Englishmen  for  the  loss  of  great  dramatic  verse,
had  availed  to  reveal  to  him,  after  Rapin  and  Rymer  had  done
their  worst,  the  supremacy  of  Shakspere  and  the  doom  of  the
classic  French  tragedy,  as  well  as  to  preserve  stride  and  stature
in  his  own  prose.  But  the  dme  damnee  of  James  II.,  the
Romanist  pervert,  and  the  venomous  assailant  of  the  first
Shaftesbury,  was  nearly  the  last  man  to  whom  the  accomplished
and  scholarly  third  Earl,  Whig  of  the  Whigs,  was  likely  to
look  for  either  example  or  instruction.^  In  these  matters
Locke  could  not  guide  his  pupil,  and  he  formed  his  taste  on
the  French  critics  of  the  periwig  period,  reading  the  classics
partly  through  their  spectacles.

Thus  we  find  him  praising  the  Elizabethans  and  Milton  at
most  for  their  choice  of  blank  verse  and  their  ethical  quality,
finding  Shakspere  devoid  of  grace,  finish,  polish,  and  ornament,
but  a  good  moral  teacher  so  far  as  Hamlet  went ;  and  Milton  as
an  artist  no  better — this  after  poor  John  Dennis  had  shot  his
bolt  on  the  right  side,  and  just  before  Addison  took  up  Milton's
cause  in  the  Spectator.  Shaftesbury,  again,  had  enough  of  the
fine  gentleman  in  liim  to  make  him  concerned  to  tell  his  readers  ^
that  he  allowed  the  printer  to  sell  as  many  copies  of  the  book
as  he  could  for  his  own  profit,  the  author  taking  no  money;

*  See  the  long  note  in  the  Miscellaneous  Reflections,  Misc.  v.  ch.  iL,
where  Dryden  is  not  unskilfully  pilloried  for  some  of  his  petulances.
^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii  §  2.

xvi


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

and  that  his  Letter  Concerning  Enthusicmn  was  really  a  private
letter,  which  got  into  print  by  accident.^  The  punctilio  about
money  survived  in  the  peerage  till  Byron's  day,  so  that  we  must
not  charge  it  specially  to  Shaftesbury ;  but  the  whole  attitude
smacks  more  of  Beau  Brummel  than  of  Montaigne.  And  with
all  his  lordship's  severity  on  his  professional  fellow-authors  for
"aiming  at  a  false  sublime,  with  crowded  simile  and  mixed
metaphor  (the  hobby-horse  and  rattle  of  the  Muses),''  he  could
proceed  in  the  next  breath  after  that  very  protest  to  speak  of
the  Elizabethans  as  having  "happily  broken  the  ice  for  those
who  are  to  follow  them ;  and  who,  treading  in  their  footsteps,
may  at  leisure  polish  our  language,  lead  our  ear  to  finer
pleasure,  and  find  out  the  true  rhythmus  and  harmonious
numbers  which  alone  can  satisfy  a  just  judgment  and  Muse-like
apprehension "  2 — one  of  the  most  comprehensive  mixtures  of
metaphor  on  record,  and  a  tolerable  specimen  of  crowded  simile,
if  not  of  the  false  sublime.

Some  of  his  canons  of  style,  further,  were  pettily  pedantic,
and  pedantically  held.  In  his  own  carefully  corrected  copy  of
the  Characteristics,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  he  notes  that  a
friend  has  suggested  the  substitution  of  a  "though"  for  a
"  notwithstanding  "  at  a  place  where  such  a  change  would  create
a  succession  of  ten  monosyllables,  "  an  offence,"  he  declares,
"  which  I  am  resolved  never  to  commit."  In  another  page,
finding  he  has  actually  committed  it,  he  deliberately  creates  a
tautology  by  way  of  cure,  and  the  clause  "  for  any  one  to  take
the  chair  who  is  not  called  to  it"  is  made  to  run  "neither
called  nor  invited."  ^  For  once  he  seems  to  have  been  bowins
to  Dryden,  who  in  the  Essay  on  Dramatic  Poesy  derides  a

^  Misc.  i.  chs.  ii,  iii.  ;  Misc.  iv.  ch.  i.
*  Advice  to  an  Author,  infra,  p.  142.  ^  Infra,  p.  63.

xvii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

poetaster  of  his  day  as  "  creeping  along  with  ten  Httle  words
in every  line." Dryden's  judgment seems to have become
canonical,  since  Pope  in  the  Essay  on  Criticism  repeats  it : —
And  ten  low  words  oft  creep  in  one  dull  line.

But  that  Dryden  had  no  notion  of  forbidding  every  succession
of  ten  monosyllables  either  in  prose  or  in  verse  is  clear  from
his  own  practice  in  the  same  Essay ;  for  not  only  does  he  at
times  put  ten  successive  monosyllables  in  his  prose,  but  he
renders  thus  a  bad  line  of  Ovid  : —

Now  all  was  sea,  nor  had  that  sea  a  shore ;

and,  as  everybody  will  remember,  he  begins  his  translation  of
the  Aeiieid  with  the  ten  monosyllables —

Arms  and  the  man  I  sing^  who,  forced  by  fate.

What  he  was  condemning  was  the  eking  out  of  a  verse  with
weak  redundant  particles,  as  "  for,"  "  to,"  "  unto,"  to  the  entire
loss  of  sonority  and  strength ;  and  Pope  had  in  view  the  same
kind  of  thing.  Categorically  obeyed,  the  veto  accepted  by
Shaftesbury  would  have  quashed  Shakspere's

We  are  such  stuff
As  dreams  are  made  on,  and  our  little  life
Is  rounded  with  a  sleep ;

and  Tennyson's

Break,  break,  break,

On  thy  cold  gray  stones,  O  Sea !
and

When  the  dumb  hour,  clothed  in  black.
Brings  the  dreams  about  my  bed.

It  is  not  thus  that  the  great  masters  of  speech  are  ruled ;  ^
and  Shaftesbury's  acceptance  of  such  an  arbitrary  bondage  in

*  In  Bacon's  essay  Of  Gardens  (par.  6)  there  is  a  sequence  of  twenty-
four  monosyllables.

xviii


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

style,  while  standing  for  "  free  thought "  in  all  things,  must  be
granted  to  take  him  out  of  the  magistral  rank.  At  times,  as
in  the  Miscellanemts  Reflections,  he  is  even  dilettantist  enough
in  his  manner  and  matter  to  justify  Professor  Fowler's  complaint
that  his  tone  becomes  "  falsetto,"

All  this  however  proves  only  that  Shaftesbury  is  not  a  great
or  an  impeccable  artist :  it  does  not  amount  to  destroying  his
credit  as  a  good  writer.  Before  he  was  classed  as  a  Deist,
nobody  seems  to  have  denied  that  he  wrote  very  well  indeed.
On  the  first  appearance  of  the  Letter  Concerning  Enthimasm
it  was  credited  to  Swift  by  all  his  friends;  and  Swift  himself,
believing  it  to  be  by  his  accomplished  friend  Hunter,  pronounced
it  "very  well  writ."  ^  This  praise  it  certainly  deserves.  Though
Shaftesbury  can  at  times  sink  below  Addison — who,  however,  was
capable  of  chronic  bad  grammar  as  well  as  of  much  slipshod —
he  is  normally  above  him  in  point  of  sheer  vivacity  and  intension,
to  say  nothing  of  his  intellectual  impact  on  a  reader's  sense.
Even  as  critics  the  two  men  are  pretty  much  on  a  par,  since
Addison's  admiration  of  Milton  was  mainly  based  on  religious
sentiment,  and  was  freely  extended  to  the  impossible  Blackmore.
And  though  Shaftesbury's  elegant  manipulation  of  his  rapier
often  makes  us  wish  for  the  clean  cut  and  thrust  of  Hobbes's
mightier  blade,  yet  he  can  at  times  write,  and  that  in  criticism
of  Hobbes,2  with  a  swift  sureness  and  spontaneous  power  that
the  other  could  not  excel,  and  that  Addison  could  not  approach.

1  Forster's  Ufe  of  Swift,  p.  220.

2  See  the  Essay  on  the  Freedom  of  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iii.  §  1^  end.
As  regards  the  criticism  there  passed  upon  Hobbes,  it  should  be  remarked
that  he  himself  anticipates  it  in  the  admission  (Leviathan,  part  i.  ch.  xiv. )  that
religious  fear  "  hath  place  in  the  nature  of  man  before  civil  society  "  ;  and
again  (part  ii.  ch.  xxx.)  in  the  insistence  that  men  must  know  before  law
the  obligation  to  keep  faith.  But  Hobbes  never  properly  colligated  his
principles,  and  he  is  substantially  open  to  Shaftesbury's  attack. Temple

VOL.  I  xix  b


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

It  was  not  literary  imperfection,  then,  that  lost  the  Character-
istics their  one-time  credit.  Rather  their  veiy  literary  art  may
have  counted  somewhat  to  that  effect,  since  the  students  to
whom  finally  Shaftesbury's  audience  was  restricted  would  be  apt
to  be  impatient  with  his  gentlemanlike  discursiveness  and  want
of  visible  method,  in  contrast  with  the  businesslike  progression
of  Locke.  Nor  can  it  well  have  been  the  logical  insufficiency  of
his  philosophy  that  lost  him  his  status  as  a  serious  classic  in  the
sense  in  which  Locke  may  be  said  to  have  kept  his ;  for  Locke
is  at  least  as  pervious  to  criticism.  The  explanation,  however,
though  different  from  those  above  considered,  is  perhaps  fully
as  simple.  In  any  case  it  is  properly  to  be  reached  by  way  of
a  view  of  his  doctrine.

Ill

The  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm^  with  which  Shaftesbury
began  his  few  years  of  diligent  authorship,  gives  clear  clues  to
all  the  essentials  of  his  thought,  though  it  is  properly  a  political
pamphlet  aiming  at  influencing  immediate  action.  As  we  have
seen,  he  was  a  highly-principled  Whig,  and  as  such  he  disliked
at  once  the  fanaticism  of  "enthusiasm"  and  the  fanaticism
which  would  forcibly  suppress  it.  In  the  case  of  the  "  French
prophets,""  both  forces  were  at  work ;  and  though  he  did  not
anticipate  any  serious  convulsion  from  their  clash,  he  saw  in
their  emergence  an  excellent  opportunity  for  inculcating  a
counsel  of  perfection — a  counsel  which,  as  it  happened,  he  must
first  have  given  to  himself  before  passing  it  on. For  as  urbane

had  already  put  the  two  sides  of  the  case  shrewdly  enough  in  the  phrase  :
"  Nor  do  I  know,  if  men  are  like  sheep,  why  they  need  any  government,
or,  if  they  are  like  wolves,  how  they  can  suffer  it "  {Essay  upon  the  Original
and  Nature  of  Government,  1672  ;  M'^orks,  ed.  1814,  i.  9, 10).

XX


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

as  he  is — to  use  one  of  his  favourite  idioms — in  his  plea  for
good-humour  in  all  matters  of  religious  discussion,  it  happens
that  he  came  to  that  view  by  way  of  self- discipline,  having
become  aware  in  himself  of  "those  defects  of  passion,  those
meannesses  and  imperfections  which  we  acknowledge  such  in
ourselves,  which  as  good  men  we  endeavour  to  be  superior  to,
and  which  we  find  we  every  day  conquer  as  we  grow  better."
Serenity  was  the  prescription  of  his  early  Iixquiry  Concerning
Virtue ;  but  he  had  not  always  fulfilled  his  ideal.  In  the  first
of  his  Letters  to  a  Student,  under  date  February  24,  1706-7,
he  is  anything  but  good-humoured  about  the  "  enthusiasts '^
who,  then  as  always,  decried  the  "  cold  dead  reasoning ""  which
put  them  at  a  disadvantage ;  and  on  that  score  he  warmly
champions  Locke,  whom  on  other  grounds  he  was  later  to
criticise  with  some  asperity.  It  was  later  in  the  same  year
that  he  ^vrote  his  plea  for  ridicule  as  the  proper  regimen  for
"enthusiasm,''"'  having  in  the  interim  doubtless  found  it  the
more  comfortable  frame  of  mind.  As  his  Letter  to  Somers
avows,  we  are  all  capable  of  some  sort  of  "  enthusiasm "" ;  and
as  he  elsewhere  urges,  the  only  safeguard  against  miscarriage
is  vigilant  self-judgment.  The  very  self- consciousness  of  the
Letter  might  alone  suggest  the  manner  of  its  inception.  It
does  not  employ  banter,  but  prescribes  it :  a  man  spontaneously
given  that  way  would  have  made  the  fun  he  recommended.

And  that  Shaftesbury  went  through  a  process  of  self-
discipline  in  serenity  as  a  part  of  his  progress  to  (or  in)  a
philosophy  of  optimism,  may  be  gathered  from  one  of  his  letters
to  his  friend  Moles  worth,  dated  November  4,  1708  : —

You  may  think  me  melancholy  if  you  will.  I  own  there  was
a  time  in  public  affairs  when  I  really  was;  for,  saving  yourself,  and
perhaps  one  or  two  more  (I  speak  the  most)  I  had  none  that  acted

xxi


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

with  me  against  the  injustice  and  corruption  of  both  parties :  each
of  them  enflamed  against  me,  particularly  one,  because  of  my  birth
and  principles ;  the  other,  because  of  my  pretended  apostasy,  which
was  only  adhering  to  those  principles  on  which  their  party  was
founded.  .  .  .  But  the  days  are  long  past  since  you  and  I  were
treated  as  Jacobites.

Yet  even  in  the  very  year  in  which  he  published  his  Letter
on  Enthusiasm  and  his  Essay  on  Wit  and  Humour  we  find  him
writing  to  his  student  protege  with  extraordinary  heat  against
Lucian  as  "a  wretch  who  was  truly  the  most  profane  and
impious  ■"  ;  ^  a  deliverance  so  surprising  as  to  make  us  feel  afresh
that  the  critic's  leaning  to  humorous  methods  was  a  rather
artificially  cultivated  mood  with  him.

Having  declared,  however,  for  ridicule  as  the  proper  pro-
tection for  the  State  and  the  spirit  against  fanaticism,  he  must
needs  argue,  as  a  consistent  optimist,  that  there  was  nothing  to
be  feared  from  the  resort  to  such  an  instrument.  It  could
check  folly,  but  it  could  not  hurt  truth.  Thus  his  humane
prescription  led  him  subtly  into  a  position  not  tenable  without
paralogism ;  and  he  duly  paralogised,  albeit  pleasantly,  even
making  Aristotle  say,  what  Aristotle  never  said,  that  ridicule  is
the  test  of  truth.  No  right-thinking  person,  Shaftesbury  goes
on,  can  endure  ridicule  of  the  truth.  But  the  right-thinking
person,  who  thus  admittedly  apprehends  the  truth  without  the
help  of  ridicule,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  case ;  since  the
business  in  hand  is  to  enlighten  the  wrong -thinking,  the  en-
thusiast who  takes  error  for  truth.  And  as  this  person  errs
about  what  is  tixith,  he  can  obviously  err  about  the  rightness
of  ridicule  ;  so  that  for  him  it  is  no  test ;  while  the  other  man,
in  the  terms  of  the  case,  does  not  need  this  test  in  particular.

1  Letter  of  January  28,  1708-9.

xxii


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

Forty  years  later,  "  Estimate "'''  Brown  took  much  time  and
space  to  put  some  such  refutation  of  the  false  formula  into
which  Shaftesbury  unwittingly  expanded  his  very  sensible
counsel  to  the  politicians  of  his  day.  In  the  criticism,  the
practical  good  wrought  by  Shaftesbury^s  challenge  receives  small
recognition.  The  trouble  was  that  by  Brown's  time  the  test
of  ridicule  had  come  to  be  rather  freely  applied  in  directions
where  others  than  enthusiasts  were  disturbed  by  it.  Voltaire
was  now  in  session.  Brown  was  probably  wrong  in  arguing
that  the  ridicule  of  Aristophanes  contributed  to  the  death  of
Socrates — a  question  still  discussed — but  he  was  of  course  safe
in  saying  that  any  doctrine  whatever  may  be  ridiculed  by  a
qualified  opponent,  and  that  the  worse  may  so  be  made  to
appear  the  better  reason,  Shaftesbury  had  indeed  implied  as
much  in  the  somewhat  odd  passage  in  which,  while  professing
orthodoxy,  he  argued  concerning  the  hostility  of  the  Jews  to
Jesus  that  "  had  they  but  taken  the  fancy  to  act  such  puppet-
shows  in  his  contempt  as  at  this  hour  the  Papists  are  acting  in
his  honour,"  they  "  might  possibly  have  done  our  religion  more
harm  than  by  all  their  other  ways  of  severity.**  Paul,  he  pro-
ceeded to  say,  had  fared  ill  at  urbane  and  critical  Athens.
Believing  Christians  might  be  excused  for  inferring  that  a  man
who  wrote  thus,  and  who  had  previously  urged  that  no  right-
thinking  person  could  enjoy  "ridicule  wrong  placed,""  was  not
a  believer.

As  to  this  there  has  been  some  forensic  dispute,  though  his
express  compliments  to  Christianity  as  a  "  witty  and  good-
natured  religion "  have  not  as  a  rule  given  satisfaction  to  the
serious.  Of  his  way  of  life  it  is  told  by  his  son  that  "  whenever
his  health  permitted,  he  was  constant  in  attending  the  services
of  the  Church  of  England,  and  received  the  Holy  Communion

xxiii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

regularly  three  or  four  times  a  year";  and  in  a  letter  to  his
brother  he  blessed  Providence  for  a  church  "  where  zeal  was  not
frenzy  and  enthusiasm  ;  .  .  .  religious  discoveries  not  cant  and
unintelligible  nonsense ;  but  where  a  good  and  virtuous  life  .  .  .
joined  with  a  religious  performance  of  all  sacred  duties  and  a
conformity  with  the  established  rites,  was  enough  to  answer
the  highest  character  of  religion."  As  Dr.  Fowler  says,  "  the
language  is  not  very  fervid "" ;  and  one  is  moved  to  pronounce
his  lordship  pious  in  a  Pickwickian  sense,^  the  more  so  when  we
have  his  own  avowal  as  to  the  calculated  way  in  which,  after  a
youth  of  some  outspokenness,  he  decided  to  alter  his  outward
demeanour,  without  professing  to  have  altered  his  opinions.
In  a  letter  to  his  brother  under  date  January  19,  1701-2,
printed  by  Mr.  Hatch  (App.  II.),  Shaftesbury  gives  a  striking
account  of  a  visit  he  had  received  from  a  set  of  charlatan
"enthusiasts,"  whom  he  specifies  as  "my  old  acquaintance
Chrysogenes  and  Chrysogeneia  his  accomplished  spouse,"  and  a
woman  in  Quaker's  dress  who  accompanied  them.  Telling  how
he  did  his  best  to  receive  their  vaticinations  with  respectful
religious  comment,  he  mentions  that  he  asked  his  friend  "  if  he
thought  this  discourse  any  way  strange  in  me,  or  if  he  judged
of  me  now  at  this  time  by  my  character  of  early  days  and  in
the  heat  of  youth,^  when  he  first  knew  me,  though  even  then  he
knew  very  well  the  awful  impression  I  had  of  a  Deity.  And
here  I  appealed  to  him  concerning  my  much  altered  character

^  Compare  the  cautiously  ironical  passage  in  the  Miscellaneous  Befleo
tions,  Misc.  v.  ch.  iii. ,  with  what  follows.

2  Shaftesbury  probably  had  leanings  to  Deism  early  instilled  into  him
by  his  grandfather,  of  whom  is  first  told,  by  Toland,  the  familiar  story  of
the  statesman's  saying  that  all  wise  men  are  of  one  religion,  the  nature  of
which  wise  men  never  tell.  Toland  (Clidophorus,  ch.  xiii.)  says  he  had
the  story  from  "a  near  relation  to  the  old  Lord  Shaftesbury."

xxiv


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

of  late  years,  my  greater  deference  to  all  things  sacred,  or
that  carried  but  the  shadow  of  religion."  It  may  be  doubted
whether  such  a  declaration,  could  it  have  been  read  by  Berkeley,
would  have  induced  him  to  withhold  from  its  presumed  applica-
tion to  Shaftesbury  ^  his  remark  that  "  an  infidel  who  sets  up  for
the  nicest  honour  shall,  without  the  least  grain  of  faith  or '
religion,  take  any  test,  join  in  any  act  of  worship,  kneel,  pray,
receive  the  Sacrament,  to  serve  an  interest."  ^  And  yet,  apart
from  the  gratuitous  implication  of  the  last  clause,  Shaftesbury
would  in  that  case  only  be  doing  what  Berkeley  constantly  and
passionately  called  upon  unbelievers  to  do.  Again  and  again
he  urges  on  them  the  "usefulness"  of  Christianity,  and  the
recklessness  of  any  course  which  takes  away  existing  moral
motives  and  menaces.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that
Shaftesbury  in  his  conformities  acted  on  some  principle  of
giving  a  good  example  to  "  the  vulgar " ;  and  yet  Berkeley  is
only  the  more  exasperated.

Between  the  two  men  there  is  perhaps  little  to  choose  on
the  point  of  principle,  since  Berkeley  implicitly  justifies  the
subordination  of  truth  to  supposed  public  utility ;  ^  and  on  the
point  of  temper  and  bearing  the  advantage  is  almost  wholly
with  Shaftesbury,  who  does  seem  to  have  attained  a  due  philo-
sophic tranquillity,  where  Berkeley  grows  more  and  more  em-
bittered during  some  thirty  years  of  strife  with  the  new  ideas.
What  he  thought  of  the  philosophy  of  his  friend  Pope's  Essay
on  Man,  which is in large part pure Shaftesbury,*  filtered

*  Professor  Fowler  is  satisfied  that  all  the  insinuations  at  the  outset  of
the  third  Dialogue  of  The  Minute  Philosopher  were  directed  against  Shaftes-
bury. This  is  probable,  but  not  certain  on  the  face  of  the  composition.

2  Minute  Philosopher,  Dial.  iii.  §  2.
^  Cp.  Dial.  iii.  end,  and  Dial.  iv.  §  4.

*  This  was  noted  by  Voltaire  (Lettres  sur  les  Anglais,  xxii. ) ;  but  even

XXV


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

through  BoHngbroke,  is  not  recorded.^  The  first  two  epistles
of  the  Essay  appeared  in  1732,  the  very  year  of  the  issue  of  the
Minute  Philosopher;  and  they  brought  upon  Pope  charges  of
pantheism  and  immorahty.  His  rehabihtation  at  the  hands  of
Warburton  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  chances  of  opinion-
making.  Warburton,  we  are  assured,  on  first  reading  the  Essay
declared  that  it  taught  rank  atheism. ^  When  the  French
academician  Crousaz  said  the  same  thing,  Warburton  took
Pope's  side,  declared  that  he  spoke  "  truth  uniformly  through-
out," and  went  about  to  prove  as  much  in  an  elaborate  com-

in  Professor  Ward's  excellent  edition  of  Pope  the  inspiration  of  the  Essay
is  credited  solely  to  Bolingbroke  and  Leibnitz,  though  Pope  denied  having
ever  read  anything  by  Leibnitz,  and  Bolingbroke  dismissed  him  with
contempt,  as  chimerical  and  unintelligible  {Letter  to  Mr.  Pope,  in  volume
with  Letter  to  Wyndham,  1753,  p.  470).  Specific  parallels  between  Shaftes-
bury and  Pope  are  traced  by  Warton,  Essay  on  Pope,  4th  ed. ,  ii.  G4-66,  93-95,
97-98.  But  there  are  many  others  :  compare,  for  instance,  the  thesis,
"  true  self-love  and  social  are  the  same,"  with  the  Inquiry  Concerning
Virtue,  bk.  i.  part  ii.  §  2  ;  bk.  ii.  part  ii.  §  i. ;  the  passage  "Shall  gravitation
cease.''"  with  Shaftesbury's  "  The  central  Powers  .  .  .  must  not  be  con-
trolled to  .  .  .  rescue  from  the  precipice  a  puny  animal "  {Moralists,  part
i.  §  3)  ;  and  the  passage —

Opinion  gilds  with  varying  rays

Those  painted  clouds  that  beautify  our  days,

with  the  engraving  on  the  title-page  of  the  later  editions  of  the  Character-
istics, and  its  legend,  iravra  w^Xtj^is — a  thesis  often  returned  to  in  the
text.  So  general,  indeed,  is  the  parallel,  that  we  must  suppose  Boling-
broke's  silence  on  the  subject  to  be  due  to  the  sharp  political  opposition
between  him  and  Shaftesbury  in  the  war  period,  and  to  Shaftesbury's
unanswerable  indictment  of  his  career  in  the  Characteristics  (see  the  Mis-
cellaneous Reflections,  Misc.  iii.  ch.  ii,,  and  editor's  note).

1  Warton  (ii.  123,  124,  296)  has  an  odd  story,  derived  from  Spence,  to
the  effect  that  Berkeley  persuaded  Pope  to  omit  from  the  Essay  an  address
to  Jestis  Christ,  on  the  score  that  "  the  Christian  dispensation  did  not
come  within  the  compass  of  his  plan  " — the  very  circumstance,  it  might
have  been  supposed,  which  to  Berkeley  would  be  most  objectionable.

2  Mr.  Stephen's  Pope,  p,  178 ;  Warton,  ii.  125,  citing  Bishop  Law.

xxvi


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

mentary.  Later,  Pope  told  this  precious  champion  that  "to
his  knowledge  the  Characteristics  had  done  more  harm  to
revealed  religion  in  England  than  all  the  works  of  infidelity
put  together "" ;  ^  and  Warburton  passed  on  to  Brown  the
mission  of  confuting  Shaftesbury.  Finally,  Pope,  in  reply  to
the  complaint  of  the  younger  Racine  that  his  Essay  was  Spino-
zistic  and  irreligious,  wrote  repudiating  alike  Spinoza  and
Leibnitz,  and  claiming  to  be  on  the  side  of  Pascal  and  Fenelon.^
Yet,  even  after  Warburton  demonstrated  to  him  his  orthodoxy,
he  had  written  his  "  Universal  Prayer,*"  which  passed  current
as  "  The  Deist's  Prayer  " ;  and  it  had  contained  at  first  a  stanza
asking  whether  any  act  could  "  offend  great  Nature's  God  which
Nature's  self  inspires  ?  "  Compared  with  the  prudent  poet,  the
most  untruthful  man  of  his  age,  and  the  accommodating  if
blusterous  bishop,  the  author  of  the  Characteristics,  whom  they
utilised  and  impeached,  comes  out  fairly  well  for  posterity,  as  a
man  and  as  a  propagandist.

His  course,  however,  involved  distinct  penalties.  By  putting
forth  an  ethical  philosophy  which  plainly  impugned  the  reigning
creed,  and  embroidering  it  with  sarcasms  against  the  priests
thereof,  he  put  himself  in  the  position  of  owing  his  literary
vogue  to  the  vogue  of  heresy,  and  of  losing  it  when  that  went
out  of  fashion.  To  speak  of  him  as  unwarrantably  indirect  in
his  way  of  impugning  the  argument  from  miracles,^  is  to  make
unduly  small  account  of  the  risks  which  in  1711  still  attended
any  direct  attack  on  the  popular  religion.  Under  the  Blas-
phemy Law  of  1697,  the  author  of  such  an  attack  could  be

^  Chalmei-s'  Biog.  Diet.,  art.  on  Brown,  cited  by  Professor  Fowler.

2  Warton,  ii.  121.  TTie  letter  is  dated  1742.  Pascal,  it  may  be  noted,
is  copied  in  the  lines  of  the  Essay  describing  man  as  the  "glory,  jest,  and
riddle  of  the  world "  ;  but  he  would  certainly  have  repudiated  it  as  a
whole.  ^  So  Professor  Fowler,  Shq/iesbury,  p.  121.

xxvii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

imprisoned;  and  in  1713  Anthony  Collins  actually  found  it
expedient  to  fly  to  Holland  during  the  storm  aroused  by  his
Discourse  of  Freethiriking.  Shaftesbury  was  quite  direct  enough
to  be  instantly  ranked  with  the  unbelievers.  He  had  indeed
declared  for  a  Church  Establishment,  on  Harrington's  ground
that  "  'tis  necessary  a  people  should  have  a  public  leading  in
religion."  ^  But  Hobbes  before  him  had  failed  to  win  by  such
a  view  any  forgiveness  for  direct  hostility  to  the  intellectual
claims  of  Churchmen ;  and  Bolingbroke  in  the  next  generation
was  disowned  by  the  Church  he  had  politically  championed,
when,  after  his  death,  the  views  they  knew  him  to  hold  on
religion  were  by  his  directions  put  in  print.  It  was  a  matter  of
ecclesiastical  police.  And  as  Shaftesbury  and  Bolingbroke
among  the  older  writers  mainly  represented  the  deistic  position
at  the  date  of  the  French  Revolution  for  English  people  of
heterodox  culture,  they  passed  together  from  fashionable  popu-
larity to  disgrace  as  soon  as  the  upper  classes  realised  that
rationalism  of  every  sort  had  begun  to  mean  democracy.
Shaftesbury  in  particular  was  notable  as  a  rather  pronounced
Whig,  though  he  did  speak  of  monarchy  with  much  complais-
ance. The  Characteristics  accordingly  have  not  been  reprinted
in  full  from  that  day  to  this.  The  explanation  is,  broadly
speaking,  that  when  "free"  views  were  again  able  to  force  a
hearing,  they  were  put  by  new  writers  in  a  current  idiom,  and
in  terms  of  the  ideas  accumulated  during  a  hundred  years  of
research.  Relatively  to  modem  philosophy,  Shaftesbury  is  but
a  pioneer.  But  after  two  German  monographs  such  as  those  of
Spicker  ^  and  Gizycki  ^  have  been  devoted  to  showing  his  im-

^  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm,  §  2.

*  Die  Philosophie  des  Grafen  Shaftesbury,  1872.

^  Die  Philosophie  Shaftesbury's,  1876.

xxviii


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

portance  in  the  line  of  progress  of  moral  philosophy ;  and  after
two  such  culture-historians  as  Hettner  and  J.  H.  Fichte  have
pronounced  him  a  most  important  writer,  whom  our  century
does  ill  to  neglect ;  even  if  we  smile  at  Dr.  Spicker"'s  unsmiling
reminder  ^  that  it  needed  the  Germans  to  teach  us  to  appreciate
Shakspere,  it  may  be  assumed  that  a  knowledge  of  an  English
author  of  such  repute  will  be  generally  admitted  to  be  a  part  of
a  liberal  English  culture.


IV

We  come  now  to  a  study  of  Shaftesbury's  philosophy  with-
out any  preoccupying  concern  as  to  why  it  first  succeeded  and
then  failed.  As  exhibiting  a  way  of  thought  which  prevailed
widely  in  Europe  throughout  the  eighteenth  century,  and
affected  even  the  orthodox  theology  which  repelled  it,  the  ethic
and  Welt-Anschauung  of  the  following  essays  deserves  undis-
tracted  attention.  Put  with  much  graceful  reiteration  through-
out the  Characteristics,  it  may  be  briefly  stated  thus  : —

1.  Not  only  is  the  world  providentially  ruled  by  a  Mind ;
but  that  rule  is  as  absolutely  beneficent  as  in  the  nature  of
things  it  can  be.  Nothing  in  the  universe  is  "  ill,"  relatively
to  the  whole,  and  everything  is  as  it  must  be.^

2.  The  ruling  Mind  may  be  alternately  conceived  as  the
Soul  of  the  universe  and  as  a  personality  external  to  the
universe.^ Disbelief  in  such  a  Mind  need  not  necessarily  do

1  ^Vork  cited,  S.  53.

2  Inquiry  Concerning  Virtue,  bk.  i.  part  i,  §  2  ;  part  ii.  §  1 ;  part  iii.
§  3 ;  Moralists,  part  i.  §§  2,  3 ;  part  ii.  §  4 ;  part  iii.  §  2  ;  Letter  on
Enthusiasm,  §§  4,  5.

^  Cp.  Moralists,  part  iii.  §  1  ;  Inquiry  Concerning  Virtue,  bk.  i.  part  iii.
§3.

xxix


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

harm,  but  does  no  active  good ;  right  belief  can  do  much  good,
and  wrong  belief  much  harni,^

3.  The  ruling  Mind  being  absolutely  beneficent,  Benevolence
is  the  proper  frame  of  mind  in  Man,  who  is  so  constituted  as
to  find  happiness  in  all  his  benevolent  affections  and  in  all
beneficent  action,  and  misery  in  the  contrary.^  Delight  in  evil
does  exist,  but  is  "  unnatural.""  ^

4.  This  being  so,  all  cajolery  and  terrorism  in  religion  are
vicious  and  fallacious.  God  is  to  be  loved  without  hope  of
reward  or  fear  of  punishment.*  Immortality  is  likely  enough ;
but  future  happiness  is  not  to  be  held  out  as  a  bribe  to  right
action  when  right  action  is  in  itself  happiness ;  and  future
punishment  is  for  the  same  reasons  not  to  be  held  out  as  a
menace,  especially  seeing  that  such  considerations  weaken  the
appeal  of  the  natural  moral  interests,  and  that  there  is  no
virtue  in  doing  right  from  fear.  Yet  the  strong  hope  of  future
reward  and  strong  fear  of  future  punishment  may  lead  men
into  habits  out  of  which  true  virtue  may  grow ;  though  a  weak
belief  in  a  future  state  is  again  entirely  injurious.^

5.  While  virtue  is  thus  in  every  way  natural  to  Man,  there

is  an  art  or  refinement  in  that  as  in  other  expressions  of  natural

preference. Perfect  virtue,  then,  is  perfected  taste  in  morals.

"  All  Beauty  is  Truth "" ; "  Beauty  and  Good  are  one  and  the

same."" Misconduct,  accordingly,  is  bad  taste  in  morals;  and

it  is  not  surprising  that  ill-educated  people  err  in  ethics  as  in

^  Inquiry,  bk.  i.  part  iii.

2  Inquiry,  bk.  i.  part  ii.  §  2  ;  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  1  ;  Essay  on  Wit  and
Humour,  part  iii.  §  1.

^  Inquiry,  bk.  ii.  part  ii.  §  3.

*  Inquiry,  bk. i. part iii. §  3 ; Moralists, part  ii. §  3. Letter  on
Enthusiasm,  §  5.

*  Inquiry,  bk.  i.  part  iii.  §  3 ;  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  3 ;  Bissay  on'  Wit  and
Humour,  part  ii.  §§  3^  4.

XXX


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

aesthetics.  To  be  good-humoured  and  truly  cultivated  is  to
be  right  in  religion  and  in  conduct,  and  consequently  happy.
To  be  malevolent  or  maleficent,  in  the  same  way,  is  to  be
miserable.^

Merely  to  state  these  articles  of  philosophic  faith  in  context,
of  course,  is  to  show  their  inconsistency.  But  we  shall  best
appreciate  their  influence  by  remembering  that  they  share  that
defect  with  all  philosophies  which  have  ever  been  popular,  and
by  reflecting  that  the  defect  followed  inevitably  on  their  purpose
as  a  reform  of  religious  theory  from  within.  If  we  ask  why
Shaftesbury  in  effect  affirmed  that  "whatever  is,  is  right,"
that  the  universe  is  beneficently  controlled,  and  that  man  is
naturally  virtuous,  while  avowing  that  most  things  need
rectifying,  that  the  ruling  Mind  is  normally  misconceived  by
its  creatures,  and  that  bad  taste  in  morals  abounds,  the  first
answer  must  be  that  Shaftesbury  set  out  with  some  philosophic
conclusions  entailed  on  him  by  previous  thought.

His  critics  and  commentators  in  general  have  rather  oddly
overlooked  the  fact  that  his  philosophy,  as  regards  its  bases,
is  drawn  more  or  less  directly  from  Spinoza.  It  is  customary
to  point  to  The  Moralists  as  the  enunciation  of  his  optimism
that  presumably  influenced  the  Theodicee  of  Leibnitz,  which
appeared  a  year  later ;  but  the  main  positions  of  The  Moralists
are  laid  down  in  the  Inquiry  Concerning  Virtue^  and  the  whole
argument  of  that  essay  is  contained  in  the  version  published
by  Toland  in  1699,^  the  later  alterations  being  in  the  main

^  WU  and  Humour,  part  iii.  §  4  ;  part  iv.  §§  1,  2  ;  Advice  to  an  Author,
part  iv.  §  3 ;  Moralists,  part  iii.  §  2.

2  Archbishop  King's  Latin  essay  on  the  Origin  of  Evil,  to  which  Zart
thinks  Leibnitz  owed  more  than  to  Shaftesbury  (^Einfluss  der  englischen
Philosophen  seit  Bacon  auf  die  deutsche  Philosophic  des  18ten  Jahrh,,  1881^
S.  15,  16),  appeared  in  1702.

xxxi


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

mere  improvements  in  style.  Now,  that  Shaftesbury  should  at
the  age  of  eighteen  have  produced  from  his  own  meditations  a
finished  and  formal  philosophical  treatise,  of  which  the  theses
were  capable  of  influencing  European  thought  for  a  century,
would  be  an  extravagant  assumption.  It  is  morally  certain
that  his  main  ideas  were  given  him ;  and  as  a  matter  of  fact
they  are  nearly  all  explicit  or  implicit  in  Spinoza,  whose
teaching  Shaftesbury  was  sure  to  hear  of  in  his  sojourn  in
Holland  in  1698,  if  he  had  not  studied  it  before.  That  there
can  be  nothing  essentially  evil  in  the  universe  as  a  whole;
that  sin  and  evil  ai'e  "  not  positive  " ;  that  men  cannot  properly
be  said  to  sin  against  God ;  that  blessedness  is  not  the  reward
of  virtue  but  the  state  of  virtue ;  that  acts  done  from  fear
of  punishment  are  not  virtuous ;  that  benevolence  involves
happiness;  that  things  which  are  evil  relatively  to  us  are  to
be  borne  with  tranquillity,  since  nothing  in  the  universe  can  be
otherwise  than  it  is ;  that  angry  passions  constitute  a  state  of
misery — all  these  doctrines  are  to  be  found  in  Spinoza's  Ethics
or  in  his  correspondence.^  Some  of  them  are  also  to  be  found,
in  less  explicit  form,  in  the  De  Legibus  Naturae  of  Cumberland
(1672),  who  like  Shaftesbury  oppugned  Hobbes;  some  (with
other  favourite  ideas  of  Shaftesbury's  such  as  that  of  the  beauty
of  virtue)  in  the  ethic  of  the  ancients  —  Platonic,  Stoic,
Epicurean ;  some  in  Charron  and  Locke.  With  some  of  these
debts  Shaftesbury  was  reproached  by  clerical  assailants ;  but
not  one  of  them,  I  think,  noted  that  he  echoes  the  Book  of
Proverbs  (xi.  17),  and  none  of  them  seems  to  have  known  his

^  Cp.  the  Ethics,  part  i.  Prop,  xvii.,  CoroU.  and  Schol.  ;  Prop,  xxxiii.
and  Scholia ;  Prop,  xxxvi.  and  Appendix ;  part  ii.  Prop.  xlix.  Schol.  ;
part  V.  Prop.  xlii.  Letters  to  Blyenbergh,  Jan.  and  Feb.  1665  (Ep.  32,
34,  36,  ed.  Gfrorer),

xxxii


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

relation  to  Spinoza,  his  chief  forerunner.^  It  seems  regrettable
that  he  himself  should  never  have  avowed  his  chief  sources ;
but  as  regards  Cumberland  he  may  have  been  unaware  of  his
coincidences ;  and  as  regards  Spinoza  he  probably  had  cause
to  apprehend  being  specially  attacked  as  atheistic  if  he
professed  any  agreement  with  the  great  Jew,  since  his  Inquiry
seems  to  have  been  actually  so  stigmatised.^

The  ethical  ideas  thus  variously  traceable  Shaftesbury  puts
formally  but  simply  and  lucidly  in  the  Inquiry;  and  in  the
Moralists  he  develops  them  with  that  urbane  strategy  of
exposition  which  he  regarded  as  best  ensuring  attention  and
comprehension  on  the  part  of  those  whom  he  wished  to  reach.
And  the  central  inconsistency  as  well  as  the  practical  insuffi-
ciency of  the  scheme  as  a  whole  inheres  in  the  great  structure  of
Spinoza  as  well  as  in  the  lighter  framework  set  up  by  Shaftesbury
and  the  flimsy  erection  of  Pope,  Needless  to  add,  Spinoza  in
his  beginnings  proceeds  on  Descartes ;  and  Descartes  in  the  very
act  of  claiming  to  begin  a  philosophy  without  presuppositions
had  presupposed  the  idea  of  God.  Thus  the  whole  series  of
effbrts  to  deal  philosophically  with  the  problem  of  evil  were
but  revisions  of  the  immemorial  theological  effort,  with  the
problem  still  conceived  as  theology  had  put  it,^  and  as  it  was
envisaged  ages  ago  in  the  drama  of  Job  and  his  cold  comforters.

^  Some  sug'gestions  Shaftesbury  may  also  have  had  from  the  Enchiridion
Ethicum  of  Henry  More,  which  he  highly  praises  in  one  of  his  Letters  to  a
Student  (December  30,  1709)  ;  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  Hobbes  himself,
as  against  the  passages  {e.g.  Leviathan,  part  i.  ch.  vi.)  in  which  he  seems
to  make  moral  distinctions  arbitrary,  expressly  states  their  natural'~basis  vaf^
social  utility  (part  i.  ch.  xv.  near  end).

2  See  The  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  3.

2  The  direct  passage  of  the  problem  from  theological  hands  to  those
of  Spinoza  can  be  readily  seen  from  the  Disputatio  de  Malo  of  Robert
Baronius,  §  5  of  part  i.  of  his  Metaphysica  Generalis,  described  on  its  title-

xxxiii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

For  us  to-day,  the  criticism  of  all  alike  is  that  the  attempt
to  prove  the  essential  rightness  of  an  infinite  universe  as  such
is  not  so  much  fallacious  as  meaningless.  As  some  of  our
discerning  ancestors  must  have  gathered  from  the  battles  of
Irish  bishops  soon  after  Shaftesbury's  day,^  every  expedition
to  reconcile  "  divine  goodness  "  with  earthly  evil  ends  in  trouble,
for  it  has  to  be  finally  admitted  that  infinite  goodness  cannot
be  as  human  goodness ;  that  is  to  say,  that  infinite  goodness
has  no  meaning  for  men.  Thus  every  optimistic  philosophy
ends  in  verbally  explaining  to  an  uncomprehended  infinitude,
in  terms  of  finite  thought,  the  necessity  of  its  infinite  perfection
from  its  own  point  of  view :  a  laudably  disinterested  under-
taking, but  one  which  men  might  profitably  forego  in  the
pursuit  of  their  own  concerns.

Theory  apart,  the  undertaking  has  this  special  bane,  that
inasmuch  as  any  doctrine,  to  be  held  at  all  intelligently,  must
needs  be  construed  with  a  meaning  rather  than  as  meaningless,
the  optimistic  view  of  evil  is  always  tending  to  paralyse  ethics.
Normally,  no  doubt,  the  theorem  that  evil  is  non-ens^  that
whatever  is  is  right,  that  wrong  is  so  only  relatively  to  the  finite,
is  held  as  a  philosophic  verbalism,  out  of  touch  with  conduct.

page  as  ad  usum  theologiae  accommodata  (Leyden,  1657).  The  proposition
as  to  the  nonentity  of  evil  was  also  taken  over  by  Spinoza  from  Descartes  :
see  the  Principia  philos.  Cartes.,  Pars  i.  Prop.  xv.  and  Schol.,  and  the
Cogitata  Metaphysica,  Pars  i.  c.  vi.  Dr.  Martineau,  indeed  {Spinoza,  p.  50),
finds  that  in  this  one  case  of  the  doctrine  that  evil  is  non-ens  Spinoza  may
have  been  indebted  to  rabbinical  philosophy — in  particular  to  Maimonides.
But  for  that  matter  the  thesis  is  at  least  as  old  as  Gregory  of  Nyssa,
who  anticipated  St.  Augustine  in  using  it  against  the  Manicheans  ;  and  it
reappears  clearly  in  the  Pseudo-Dionysius ;  and  again,  long  afterwards,
in  Giordano  Bruno. (Ueberweg,  Eng.  tr.  i.  330,  343,  351  ;  ii.  27.)

^  See  Mr.  Leslie  Stephen's  account  of  the  feud  of  Bishops  Browne  and
Berkeley,  English  Thought  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  i.  114-118.  Arch-
bishops King  and  Synge  were  implicated.

xxxiv


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

In  the  hands  of  Pope  the  insincerity  of  it  becomes  preposterous.
Spinoza  and  Shaftesbury,  like  their  predecessors,  affirm  in  one
breath  the  universal  harmony  of  things,  and  in  the  next
denounce  the  discords.  In  our  own  day,  Mr.  Browning  has
with  unique  vivacity  repeated  their  procedure,  reminding  us
in  one  set  of  poems,  in  the  ancient  fashion,  that  we  who  see
only  a  minute  fraction  of  the  scheme  of  things  have  no  right
to  an  opinion ;  and  in  others  darkly  explaining  how  Deity
"  unmakes  but  to  remake "  its  moral  misfits.  "  It's  better
being  good  than  bad,"  sings  the  poet,  face  to  face  with  evil ;
going  on  to  inform  us  that  his  "  own  hope  is,  a  sun  will  pierce
the  thickest  cloud  earth  ever  stretched,"  and  that  what  God
blessed  once  cannot  prove  accurst.  On  that  airy  footing,
perhaps,  little  harm  is  done  to  anything  but  the  logical  sense.
But  whether  or  not  Mr.  Browning  ever  made  of  his  optimism
a  deafening  medium  between  his  sensibilities  and

the  fierce  confederate  storm
Of  sorrow,  barricadoed  evermore
Within  the  walls  of  cities,

there  is  always  an  even  chance  that  the  less  sensitive  will  so
employ  the  theorem.

In  the  case  of  Shaftesbury  as  in  that  of  Pope,  it  is  plain,
the  optimist  and  the  moralist  are  always  tending  to  neutralise
each  other.  If  partial  ill  be  universal  good,  how  shall  the  man
who  thinks  so  be  zealous  to  alter  any  ill  save,  by  reflex  action,
the  pinching  of  his  own  shoe  ?  If  he  be  really  concerned  to
mend  human  things,  to  what  end  does  he  insist  that  it  is  only
from  the  ignorant  human  point  of  view  that  they  need  mending,
and  that  a  Benevolent  First  Cause  has  done  all  things  well  ?
For  the  mere  comfort  of  resignation  under  ills  that  cannot  be
altered,  such  a  moral  price  seems  excessive,  to  say  nothing  of  the
VOL.  I  XXXV  C


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

philosophical  vertigo  involved.  Haunted  by  the  old  dilemma,
and  hemmed  in  by  the  adversary,  Mr.  Gladstone  in  our  own
day  took  the  prudent  course  of  avowing  that  evil  in  general  is
a  mystery,  though  like  his  teachers  he  could  always  salve  any
particular  evil  by  the  argument  from  finite  ignorance.  Two
hundred  years  ago,  in  the  first  enchantment  of  naturalistic
exploration,  away  from  the  theological  close,  the  pioneering
theists  did  not  feel  the  need  for  reserves,  else  Shaftesbury  and
Pope  had  not  had  such  an  easy  time  of  it  in  criticism.

We  can  but  note,  then,  that  Shaftesbury  saddled  his  ethic
with  optimism  on  the  pressure  of  his  theistic  presuppositions,
and  that  he  did  his  work  winningly  enough  to  satisfy  the  liberal
majority  for  two  or  three  generations.  If  he  repelled  Christians
where  Locke  sought  to  conciliate  them,  on  the  other  hand  he
seemed  to  Deists  to  give  a  new  footing  to  theistic  ethics  by
rejecting  Locke's  polemic  against  innate  ideas  as  irrelevant,^
inasmuch  as  moral  ideas  are  none  the  less  inevitably  developed.
It  was  his  form  of  optimism,  as  we  saw,  that  carried  the  day  in
the  land  of  Leibnitz  ;  he  inspired  the  Deism  of  France,  through
Diderot  and  Voltaire ;  and  it  may  well  have  been  by  lineal
literary  descent  from  him  that  Browning  drew  his  creed ;  for
we  find  it  accepted,  apparently  from  the  Characteristics,  by
Priestley ,2  who  passed  it  on  to  the  Unitarian  Cogan  and  to
W.  J.  Fox,  from  whose  preaching  in  South  Place  Chapel
Browning  would  seem  to  have  partly  derived  it.^

At  the  same  time,  the  ethic  of  the  Characteristics ,  considered
apart  from  its  theistic  frame,  was  no  less  widely  influential.
The  appearance  of  the  book,  says  our  historian  of  ethics,  "  marks

1  See  the  Letters  to  a  Student,  under  date  June  3, 1709.

*  Essay  on  the  First  Principles  of  Government,  2nd  ed.  1771,  pp.  257-261.

'  Cp.  Dr.  Conway's  Centenary  of  the  South  Place  Society,  1894,  pp.  80,  89.

xxxvi


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

a  tuniing-point  in  the  history  of  English  ethical  thought. ""
"  Shaftesbury  is  the  first  moralist  who  distinctly  takes  psycho-
logical experience  as  the  basis  of  ethics.  His  suggestions  were  de-
veloped by  Hutcheson  into  one  of  the  most  elaborate  systems  of
moral  philosophy  which  we  possess ;  and  through  Hutcheson,  if
not  directly,  they  indirectly  influenced  Hume's  speculations.  .  .  .
Moreover,  the  substance  of  Shaftesbury's  main  arguments  was
adopted  by  Butler.""  ^  In  this  aspect,  again,  our  author  com-
pels our  critical  attention.


The  gist  of  Shaftesbury's  doctrine  of  morals,  later  system -
atised  by  Hutcheson,  lies  in  his  claim  that  is  self-evident  "  that
in  the  very  nature  of  things  there  must  of  necessity  be  the
foundation  of  a  wrong  and  a  right  taste,  relish,  or  choice,  as
well  in  respect  of  inward  characters  and  features  as  of  outward
person,  behaviour,  and  action."  ^  Its  immediate  controversial
bearing  lay  in  its  relation  to  the  ethics  of  Hobbes  and  Locke,
of  whom  the  former,  though  he  did  incidentally  note  clearly
enough  that  moral  law  is  an  expression  of  a  surmised  social
utility,  was  led  by  his  reaction  against  rebellious  fanaticism  to
place  all  moral  authority  in  a  political  head ;  while  the  latter,
rejecting  political  absolutism,  placed  the  source  of  morals  in  the
will  or  command  of  Deity.  To  force  moral  philosophy  from
these  bases  to  that  of  human  nature  and  rationally  conceived
utility  was  no  small  service ;  and  this  Shaftesbury  virtually
accomplished. The  previous  effort  of  Cumberland,  who  was  in

^  Sidgwick,  Outlines  of  the  History  of  Ethics,  3rd.  ed.  p.  190.
2  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  3  ;  infra,  pp.  216,  217.

xxxvii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  main  not  only  utilitarian  but  psychologically  materialistic,^
but  who  still  made  Deity  a  concurrent  factor  in  morals,  seems
to  have  come  to  nothing,  apparently  for  lack  of  adhesiveness  of
statement.  His  book,  whether  in  the  original  Latin  or  in  the
English  abridgment  or  complete  translation,  seems  never  to  have
been  widely  circulated ;  whereas  Shaftesbury  became  instantly
popular;  and  ever  since  his  day,  through  the  succession  of
Hutcheson,  Butler,  Hume,  Smith,  Bentham,  Mill,  and  Spencer,
the  rationalistic  view  has  held  its  ground  in  English  thought.
Even  Brown's  clerical  criticism  of  the  Characteristics  expressly
aimed  at  putting  a  thorough  in  place  of  an  imperfect
utilitarianism.

Imperfections  apart,  Shaftesbury's  teaching  broadly  pro-
moted rational  morals,  not  only  against  the  political  and
theological  forms  of  dogmatism,  but  against  the  anarchism
which  they  had  generated.  Locke's  dogma  that  rightness  and
wrongness  depend  on  God's  will,  left  small  theistic  standing-
ground  against  his  own  demonstration  that  all  moral  ideas  are
acquired,  and  vary  accordingly.  As  Hutcheson  remarked,
"  Nothing  is  more  ordinary  among  those  who  after  Mr.  Locke
have  shaken  off  the  groundless  opinions  about  innate  ideas,  than
to  allege  that  all  our  relish  for  beauty  and  order  is  either  from
advantage,  or  custom,  or  education  ; "  ^  and  the  argument  as
to  morals  was  on  all  fours.  Mandeville  made  it  classic;  but
Shaftesbury's  remarks^  show  that  it  was  popular  before
Mandeville  published  the  prose  commentary  on  his  Fable  of

^  See  the  account  of  his  doctrine  by  Whewell,  Lectures  on  Moral
Philosophy,  ed.  1862,  pp.  75-83.

2  Inquiry  into  the  Original  of  our  Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue,  1st.  ed.
pp.  73,  74.

'  Inquiry,  bk.  ii.  part  ii.  §  1  ;  Wit  and  Humour,  part  ii.  §  2  ;  part  iii
§  3 ;  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  3.

xxxviii


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

the  Bees.  Against  that  Nihilistic  line  of  attack  Shaftesbury's
defence  would  have  been  distinctly  stronger  if,  instead  of
affirming  the  infinite  rightness  of  things  and  loosely  attaching
to  that  concept  the  further  formula  that  the  infinite  order  is
absolute  beauty,  to  which  it  is  our  business  to  approximate,
he  had  squarely  put  it  that  the  relations  involved  in  ethics
are  subjectively  variable,  like  those  involved  in  aesthetics.
Moral  opinions  clearly  enough  root  in  the  nature  of  things;
they  therefore  vary  with  all  variations  and  developments  in
human  relations.  As  Brown  irreligiously  put  it,  right  or
beautiful  actions  "  have  not  any  absolute  and  independent  but
a  relative  and  reflected  beauty.*"  ^  And  as  Shaftesbury  himself
admitted  the  greater  need  for  self-study  and  criticism  in
morals  than  in  aesthetics,  he  should  in  just  sequence  have  pro-
ceeded to  teach  that  the  right  adjustment  of  human  relations  all
round  is  a  matter  of  endless  and  anxious  calculation.  This
much  he  might  have  recognised  even  without  the  light  of  that
concept  of  evolution  which  prepares  us  to  find  in  men  an
endless  diversity  of  adaptation  to  social  conditions,  from  the
best  to  the  worst.  As  it  was,  he  gave  a  standing-ground
against  moral  anarchism ;  but  his  optimism  put  his  adherents
very  much  at  their  ease  in  Zion,  and  left  not  a  little  logical
room  for  the  play  of  the  dogmatisms  which  avowedly  recognised
the  difficulties  he  ignored.  Life  was  too  plainly  a  less  simple
matter  than  he  made  it  out.

Two  criticisms  typify  the  resistance  against  which  Shaftes-
bury failed  to  provide.  Mandeville  in  his  grimly  humorous
way  pointed  to  the  enormous  force  of  egoism  in  human  affairs,
and  in  effect  decided  for  the  theoretic  solution  of  Hobbes.
Brown,  while  sharply  repugning  Mandeville,  whose  humour  he
^  Essays  on  the  '  Characteristics,'  1751,  p.  136.

xxxix


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

appreciated  as  little  as  he  did  Shaftesbury's,  dwelt  equally  with
him  on  the  stress  of  evil,  and  theologically  insisted  on  the
necessity  of  a  hope  of  reward  and  fear  of  future  punishment  as  a
restraint  on  human  action,  declaring  such  a  belief  to  be  "  the
essence  of  religion."  ^  Such  theological  utilitarianism,  dignified
by  Butler  and  confused  by  Paley,  became  the  ruling  English
orthodoxy.  The  upshot  was  that  while  Shaftesbury  was  in
favour  with  leisured  and  irresponsible  men  of  rational  culture,
the  semi-pessimism  of  the  cynic  and  of  the  theologian  held  its
ground  with  the  majority, — all  the  more  easily  because  Shaftes-
bury himself  allowed  that  "  the  mere  vulgar  of  mankind  often
stand  in  need  of  such  a  rectifying  object  as  the  gallows  before
their  eyes."^  Between  Mandevillism  and  the  Church,  despite
the  revulsion  of  many,  there  grew  up  a  curious  sympathy.  It
is  indeed  a  mistake  to  take  seriously,  as  does  Professor  Fowler,
the  closing  sentence  of  Mandeville*'s  book,  in  which,  with  a
sardonic  humour  all  his  own,  he  speaks  of  Shaftesbury  as
designing  "to  establish  heathen  virtue  on  the  ruins  of
Christianity."  There  was  certainly  small  serious  concerri  for
Christianity  in  the  author  of  the  Fable  of  the  Bees.  None  the
less  there  arose,  as  Henry  Crabb  Robinson  wrote  to  Schlosser,
a  "sneaking  kindness"  towards  Mandeville  on  the  part  of
Churchmen,^  who  felt  that  if  he  did  not  believe  in  them  he  at
least  damaged  their  adversary,  the  optimistic  pantheist.* The

*  Essays,  p.  210.

*  Essay  on  the  Freedom  of  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iii.  §  A,  end.

^  Schlosser,  History  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  Eng.  tr.  ii.  .51,  note.

*  Mandeville  observed  that  no  two  systems  could  be  more  opposed  than
his  and  Shaftesbury's.  Yet  there  is  a  point  of  concurrence,  at  which
Shaftesbury's  is  left  undeveloped.  In  general  he  argued  for  the  pleasur-
ableness  of  virtue,  where  Mandeville  founded  on  the  old  Christian  doctrine
that  there  is  no  virtue  without  self-sacrifice.  In  the  Inquiry,  however,
Shaftesbury  expressly  admits  that  there  is  more  virtue  in  governing  a  bad

xl


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

due  subjection  of  "  the  vulgar,"  however,  was  sufficiently  agreed
upon  all  round,  down  till  the  last  decade  of  the  century,  to
make  it  possible  for  Shaftesburyan  deists  and  pantheists  to
maintain  themselves  as  good  friends  of  the  reigning  order ;  and
when  that  was  suddenly  and  vehemently  assailed  they  seem
promptly  to  have  joined  the  party  of  authority  and  repression.


VI

When  all  is  said,  however,  Shaftesbury  is  found  to  leave  to
our  own  age  the  legacy  of  a  rarely  tolerant  judgment,  a  deeply
rational  bias,  and  many  a  shrewd  hint  towards  the  understand-
ing of  that  social  evolution  which  his  formula  of  optimism  as  a
whole  unduly  glosed.  He  deserves,  among  other  things,  to
rank  as  one  of  the  very  first  of  our  sociologists ;  since  ideas
which  afterwards  seem  fresh  in  Hume  and  Ferguson  are  to  be
found  clearly  enough  set  forth  in  his  pages.  Not  only  does  he
confute  with  masterly  force  the  Hobbesian  fallacy  that  a
political  compact  first  gives  validity  to  moral  obligations,^  but  he
expresses  in  a  singularly  modern  way  the  continuity  and  ubiquity
of  the  associative  principle  in  man,  from  the  primordial  herd
onwards  to  societies  within  society.^  While  humorists  and  para-
doxers  of  Mandeville"'s  school  were  obscuring  the  truth  by  their
exaggerations,  witty  or  otherwise,  he  puts  his  finger  accurately
on  the  economic  principle  in  religious  evolution.^  And  though
Mandeville  on  the  whole  did  more  for  the  analysis  of  con-
disposition  than  in  following  a  good  one  {Inquiry,  bk.  i.  part  ii.  §  4).
"  There  seems,"  he  confesses,  "  to  be  some  kind  of  difficulty  in  the  case."

^  See  the  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iii.  §  1  ;  infra,  pp.  73,  74.

2  Id.  part  iii.  §  2.

^  Miscellaneous  Reflections,  Misc.  ii.  chs.  i.  ii.

xli


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

temporary  social  problems,  he  rendered  no  better  social  service
than  did  Shaftesbury  in  the  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm,  of
which  the  paralogism  did  no  harm,  seeing  that  men  always  did
and  always  will  ridicule  what  they  do  not  believe;  while  the
practical  plea  for  a  literary  and  humorous  instead  of  a  physical
and  malignant  inquisition  into  popular  heresy  was  more
persuasive  and  more  practically  effective  than  any  other  of  that
age,  not  even  excepting  Locke's.  At  a  time  when  we  are
imprisoning  the  "  Peculiar  People "  for  doing  without  doctors
for  their  children,  it  is  still  well  worth  reading.  And  at  a  time
when  "  empire ""  is  becoming  once  more  a  popular  ideal  in  an
advanced  civilisation,  it  is  no  less  worth  while  to  read  the
arguments  in  the  Characteristics^  as  to  the  affinity  of  the  arts
and  sciences  for  the  life  of  free  states,  and  as  to  the  diseases
incident  to  overgrown  ones.

Not  that  Shaftesbury  was  a  sworn  friend  of  peace.  His
faith  in  the  rule  of  infinite  goodness,  and  in  the  dependence  of
human  happiness  on  the  play  of  the  benevolent  affections,  left
him  a  very  warm  partisan  of  the  war  against  Louis  XIV. ;  and
his  last  days  seem  to  have  been  darkened  by  disappointment  at
the  stop  put  to  hostilities  by  the  new  Ministry.  That  "the
fatal  villainy  of  the  priest  Sacheveril,  and  the  fall  of  the  old
Ministry  and  Whigs,"  should  reduce  a  devout  theistic  optimist
to  serious  dejection,^  and  that  he  should  die  full  of  a  sense  of
"  shame "  over  such  a  national  "  calamity ""  as  the  granting  of
an  easy  peace  to  a  half-ruined  enemy,  are  notable  psychological
facts.  The  onlooking  mind  craves  a  closer  adjustment  of
philosophy  to  life,  and  grows  more  than  ever  doubtful  of  the

^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  ii.  §§1,2; Wit  and  Humour,  part  ii.  §  2.
2  Letter  to  Furly, July 19, 1712, in  T. Forster's  vol. of  Original
Letters  of  Locke,  Sidney,  and  Shafiesbury,  1830,  p.  270.

xlii


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

value  of  optimistic  theories  of  things.  It  is  only  fair,  however,
to  remember  that  it  was  a  dying  man  who  thus  desponded  with
his  optimistic  essays  under  his  pillow ;  and  for  the  rest,  that
throughout  his  life  Shaftesbury  had  very  well  fulfilled  his
principle  that  happiness  lies  in  the  exercise  of  the  benevolent
affections.  The  student  Michael  Ainsworth,  son  of  his  butler,
to  whom  he  addressed  the  lettei-s  collected  and  published  in
1716,  was  one  of  many  beneficiaries  of  his.  Among  the  others
was  the  deist  Toland,  to  whom  he  accorded  a  pension  somewhat
against  his  own  bias,  Toland's  vivacious  temperament  being
lacking  in  some  of  the  merits  he  most  appreciated.

It  is  this  spirit  of  practical  benevolence,  finally,  that  best
countervails  the  aesthetic  shortcomings  of  Shaftesbury's  aesthetic
essays,  the  Notion  of  the  Historical  Draught  or  Tablature  of  the
Judgment  of  Hercules^  and  the  Letter  Concerning  Design.  It  is
with  regret  that  I  dissent  from  Professor  Fowler's  verdict  that
these  papers,  which  were  incongruously  included  in  the  later
editions  of  the  Characteristics,  show  him  to  have  had  a  good
taste  in  the  arts.  They  rather  show  him,  I  think,  to  have  had  no
breadth  of  taste  in  architecture,  since  he  despised  St.  Paul's  as
"  Gothic,"  and  to  have  held  the  typically  Anglican  view  that
painting  is  properly  not  a  source  of  delight  to  the  sense,  but  a
vehicle  of  moral  instruction.  His  aesthetic,  as  we  have  seen,
was  like  his  ethic  Platonist  and  a  priori ;  and  when  Baumgarten
in  the  next  generation  began  to  lay  the  bases  of  a  truly  in-
ductive aesthetic,  he  had  to  negate  the  principle  on  which
Shaftesbury  most  insisted.  Shaftesbury  was  in  fact  false  to  his
own  rules  of  expertise,  for  if  he  had  consulted  the  trained  tastes,
those  of  the  artists,  not  even  in  England  would  he  have  found
them  in  accord  with  his.  In  the  closing  paragraph  of  the
Notion  he  expressly  insists  that  painting  "has  nothing  more

xliii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

wide  of  its  real  aim,  or  more  remote  from  its  intention,  than
to  make  a  show  of  colours,  or  from  their  mixture  to  raise  a
separate  and  flattering  pleasure  to  the  sense";  and  though  in
a  footnote  he  adds  a  possibly  sounder  plea  that  "  it  is  always
the  best  when  the  colours  are  most  subdued,"  it  is  evident  that
he  did  not  value  a  picture  as  a  composition  in  colour,  but  as  a
fingerpost  to  right  conduct.  From  that  hopeless  standpoint
one  turns  with  satisfaction  to  his  appeal,  in  the  Letter  Concerning
Design^  for  an  inclusion  of  the  whole  people  in  the  artistic
culture  that  he  hoped  England  would  thenceforth  develop.
"  In  reality  the  people  are  no  small  parties  in  this  cause.
Nothing  moves  successfully  without  them.  There  can  be  no
PUBLIC  but  where  they  are  included."  There  spoke  the  man
with  a  gift  for  morals,  the  "  virtuoso  of  humanity,"  who  advised
authors  to  "add  the  wisdom  of  the  heart  to  the  task  and
exercise  of  the  brain,  in  order  to  bring  proportion  and  beauty
into  their  works."  ^

And  though  the  delicate  copperplates  of  curious  design
which  adorn  the  old  octavo  editions  published  after  the  author's
death  cannot  be  said  to  observe  even  his  own  relatively  judicious
stipulation  that  multiplicity  of  detail  should  never  be  allowed
to  perplex  the  eye  in  any  design,  yet  their  careful  scrupulosity
of  symbolism  and  of  execution  has  a  certain  coeval  congruity
with  the  text,  while  reminding  us  that  that  in  turn  carried  in  it
so  much  more  of  new  life.  In  an  age  of  mostly  restrictive  and
pedestrian  artistic  ideals,  and  of  thinking  that  was  apt  to  be
splenetic  when  it  was  not  commonplace,  Shaftesbiuy  rises,
despite  his  aesthetic  chains,  to  intellectual  levels  of  serenity  and
sincerity  where,  though  aliens  and  predecessors  may  transcend
him,  no  English  contemporary  stands  by  his  side — not  the
^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  ii.  §  3  ;  infra,  p.  180.

xliv


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

exasperated  Swift,  nor  the  otherwise  embittered  Berkeley,  who
stand  on  cloudier  heights;  and  not  the  esteemed  Addison,
whose  ideas  are  to-day  so  entirely  negligible.  Given  fair  play,
the  Characteristics  can  still  hold  their  own  with  most  of  the
books  with  which  they  competed  in  their  generation.

JOHN  M.  ROBERTSON.


xlv


CONTENTS


PREFACE


FASS
1


TREATISE I
A  Letter  concerning  Enthusiasm  to  My  Lord  *****


Section I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII


5

9
17
24
28
31
37


TREATISE II
Sensus  Communis  ;  An  Essay  on  the  Freedom  of  Wit  and  Humour


Part

I. — Section I . . .

. 43

„ II .

. 44

„ III .

46

„ IV .

. 48

„ V .

. 61

„ VI .

. 64

xlvii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


Part II, — Section


Part  III. — Section


Part  IV. — Section


PAOE

I 67

II

63

III

65

I

69

II

74

III

77

IV

81

I

86

II

89

III

94

TREATISE III
Soliloquy  or  Advice  to  an  Author


Part I.

—Section

>3

>)

III

Part II.

—Section

}}

)}

III

Part  III.

— Section

»

III

103
112
124

137
150

170

182
197
212


TREATISE IV

An  Inquiry  concerning  Virtue  or  Merit

BOOK  I


Part I. — Section I
II


xlviii


237
239


CONTENTS


PADS

Part II. — Section

I

. 243

})

II

. 247

}}

III

. 251

}>

IV

. 265

Part  HI. — Section

I

. 258

»

II

. 261

)}

III

BOOK  II

. 265

Part I. — Section

I

. 280

»

11

. 282

}}

III

. 285

Part II. — Section

I

. 293

)}

II

. 317

))

III

. 330

CONCLUSION

. 336

xlix


PREFACE

If  the  Author  of  these  united  Tracts  had  been  any  friend
to  prefaces,  he  would  probably  have  made  his  entrance  after
that  manner,  in  one  or  other  of  the  five  treatises  formerly
published  apart.  But  as  to  all  prefatory  or  dedicatory
discourse,  he  has  told  us  his  mind  sufficiently  in  that  treatise
which  he  calls  "  Soliloquy."  Being  satisfied,  however,  that  there
are  many  persons  who  esteem  these  introductory  pieces  as  very
essential  in  the  constitution  of  a  work,  he  has  thought  fit,  in
behalf  of  his  honest  printer,  to  substitute  these  lines  under  the
title  of  a  Preface ;  and  to  declare  "  That  (according  to  his  best
judgment  and  authority)  these  presents  ought  to  pass,  and  be
received,  construed,  and  taken,  as  satisfactory  in  full,  for  all
preliminary  composition,  dedication,  direct  or  indirect  applica-
tion for  favour  to  the  public,  or  to  any  private  patron  or  party
whatsoever :  nothing  to  the  contrary  appearing  to  him  from
the  side  of  truth  or  reason.""  Witness  his  hand,  this  fifth  day
of  December,  1710.

A.  A.  C.  A.  N.  A.  M.  C.
M.  D.  C.  L.  X.  X.  1.1

^  [These  initials  presumably  signify  as  follows  : — "  Anthony  Ashley
Cooper,  Armiger,  Natus  Anno  Aetatis  Christi  (or  Aerae  Christianae)  1671 "
— that  being  the  year  of  his  birth.  ]


VOL.  I  B


TREATISE I

A LETTER
CONCERNING ENTHUSIASM

TO

MY  LORD  *****


Ridentem  dicere  verum
Quid  vetat?  Hor.  Sat.  i.


Printed  first  in  the  year  MDCCVIII.
[*  The  name  '^Sommers"  is  added  in  the  sixth  edition^  1737.]


A  LETTER  CONCERNING  ENTHUSIASM  ^

Sept.  1707.
My  Lord,
Now  you  are  returned  to  .  .  .,  and  before  the  season  comes
which  must  engage  you  in  the  weightier  matters  of  state,  if  you
care  to  be  entertained  a  while  with  a  sort  of  idle  thoughts,  such
as  pretend  only  to  amusement,  and  have  no  relation  to  business
or  affairs,  you  may  cast  your  eye  slightly  on  what  you  have
before  you ;  and  if  there  be  anything  inviting,  you  may  read
it  over  at  your  leisure.

It  has  been  an  established  custom  for  poets,  at  the  entrance
of  their  work,  to  address  themselves  to  some  muse :  and  this
practice  of  the  ancients  has  gained  so  much  repute  that  even
in  our  days  we  find  it  almost  constantly  imitated.  I  cannot
but  fancy,  however,  that  this  imitation,  which  passes  so  cuiTently
with  other  judgments,  must  at  some  time  or  other  have  stuck
a  little  with  your  lordship,  who  is  used  to  examine  things  by  a

^  [The  words  "  enthusiasm  "  and  "  enthusiast "  normally  carried  in  the
seventeenth  and  eif^hteenth  centuries  the  significance  of  "fanaticism"  and
"  fanatic/'  especially  of  the  emotionally  demonstrative  kind.  Churchmen
and  Deists  alike  disparaged  all  such  manifestations.  Compare  Locke,
Essay,  bk.  iv.  ch.  xix.  §  7.  Shaftesbury  accepts  the  normal  sense  of  the
terms,  but  endeavours  in  this  Letter  and  elsewhere  to  widen  and  elevate
their  application.  Compare  the  end  of  the  present  Letter  with  the  Moralists,
part  iii.  §  2,  and  the  Miscellaneous  Reflections,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.  Dr.
Henry  More  had  previously  urged  such  a  modification  ;  but  Shaftesbury
appears  to  have  given  the  first  effective  lead  to  the  modem  and  com-
mendatory use  of  the  terms.]

5


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

better  standard  than  that  of  fashion  or  the  common  taste.
You  must  certainly  have  observed  our  poets  under  a  remarkable
constraint,  when  obliged  to  assume  this  character:  and  you
have  wondered,  perhaps,  why  that  air  of  enthusiasm,  which  sits
so  gracefully  with  an  ancient,  should  be  so  spiritless  and
awkward  in  a  modem.  But  as  to  this  doubt,  your  lordship
would  have  soon  resolved  yourself;  and  it  could  only  serve  to
bring  across  you  a  reflection  you  have  often  made  on  many
occasions  besides,  that  truth  is  the  most  powerful  thing  in  the
world,  since  even  fiction  itself  must  be  governed  by  it,  and  can
only  please  by  its  resemblance.  The  appearance  of  reality  is
necessary  to  make  any  passion  agreeably  represented ;  and  to
be  able  to  move  others  we  must  first  be  moved  ourselves,  or  at
least  seem  to  be  so,  upon  some  probable  grounds.  Now  what
possibility  is  there  that  a  modern,  who  is  known  never  to  have
worshipped  Apollo,  or  owned  any  such  deity  as  the  muses,
should  persuade  us  to  enter  into  his  pretended  devotion  and
move  us  by  his  feigned  zeal  in  a  religion  out  of  date  ?  But  as
for  the  ancients,  'tis  known  they  derived  both  their  religion  and
polity  from  the  muses'  art.  How  natural  therefore  must  it
have  appeared  in  any,  but  especially  a  poet  of  those  times,  to
address  himself  in  raptures  of  devotion  to  those  acknowledged
patronesses  of  wit  and  science  ?  Here  the  poet  might  with
probability  feign  an  ecstasy,  though  he  really  felt  none :  and
supposing  it  to  have  been  mere  affectation,  it  would  look  how-
ever like  something  natural,  and  could  not  fail  of  pleasing.

But  perhaps,  my  lord,  there  was  a  further  mystery  in  the
case.  Men,  your  lordship  knows,  are  wonderfully  happy  in  a
faculty  of  deceiving  themselves,  whenever  they  set  heartily  about
it :  and  a  very  small  foundation  of  any  passion  will  serve  us,
not  only  to  act  it  well,  but  even  to  work  ourselves  into  it
beyond  our  own  reach.  Thus,  by  a  little  affectation  in  love-
matters,  and  with  the  help  of  a  romance  or  novel,  a  boy  of
fifteen,  or  a  grave  man  of  fifty,  may  be  sure  to  gi'ow  a  very
natural  coxcomb,  and  feel  the  belle  passion  in  good  earnest. A

6


ENTHUSIASM

man  of  tolerable  good-nature,  who  happens  to  be  a  little  piqued,
may,  by  improving  his  resentment,  become  a  very  fury  for
revenge.  Even  a  good  Christian,  who  would  needs  be  over-good,
and  thinks  he  can  never  believe  enough,  may,  by  a  small  inclina-
tion well  improved,  extend  his  faith  so  largely  as  to  comprehend
in  it  not  only  all  scriptural  and  traditional  miracles,  but  a  solid
system  of  old  wives'  stories.  Were  it  needful,  I  could  put  your
lordship  in  mind  of  an  eminent,  learned,  and  truly  Christian
prelate  you  once  knew,^  who  could  have  given  you  a  full  account
of  his  belief  in  fairies.  And  this,  methinks,  may  serve  to  make
appear  how  far  an  ancient  poefs  faith  might  possibly  have  been
raised  together  with  his  imagination.

But  we  Christians,  who  have  such  ample  faith  ourselves,  will
allow  nothing  to  poor  heathens.  They  must  be  infidels  in
every  sense.  We  will  not  allow  them  to  believe  so  much  as
their  own  religion ;  which,  we  cry,  is  too  absurd  to  have  been
credited  by  any  besides  the  mere  vulgar.  But  if  a  reverend
Christian  prelate  may  be  so  great  a  volunteer  in  faith,  as  beyond
the  ordinary  prescription  of  the  catholic  church  to  believe  in
fairies,  why  may  not  a  heathen  poet,  in  the  ordinary  way  of
his  religion,  be  allowed  to  believe  in  muses .''  For  these,  your
lordship  knows,  were  so  many  divine  pei-sons  in  the  heathen
creed,  and  were  essential  in  their  system  of  theology.  The
goddesses  had  their  temples  and  worship,  the  same  as  the  other
deities :  and  to  disbelieve  the  Holy  Nine,  or  their  Apollo,  was
the  same  as  to  deny  Jove  himself,  and  must  have  been  esteemed
equally  profane  and  atheistical  by  the  generality  of  sober  men.
Now  what  a  mighty  advantage  must  it  have  been  to  an  ancient
poet  to  be  thus  orthodox,  and  by  the  help  of  his  education,  and
a  good-will  into  the  bargain,  to  work  himself  up  to  the  belief
of  a  divine  presence  and  heavenly  inspiration  ?  It  was  never
surely  the  business  of  poets  in  those  days  to  call  revelation  in

^  Dr.  Edward  Fowler,  Bishop  of  Gloucester.  [Note  to  ed.  of  1733.
One  of  the  replies  to  the  Letter  deals  excitedly  with  this  passage,  and  is
plausihlv  ascribed  to  Bishop  Fowler.]

7


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

question,  when  it  evidently  made  so  well  for  their  art.  On  the
contrary,  they  could  not  fail  to  animate  their  faith  as  much  as
possible;  when  by  a  single  act  of  it,  well  enforced,  they  could
raise  themselves  into  such  angelical  company.

How  much  the  imagination  of  such  a  presence  must  exalt
a  genius  we  may  observe  merely  from  the  influence  which  an
ordinary  presence  has  over  men.  Our  modem  wits  are  more
or  less  raised  by  the  opinion  they  have  of  their  company,  and
the  idea  they  form  to  themselves  of  the  persons  to  whom  they
make  their  addresses.  A  common  actor  of  the  stage  will  inform
us  how  much  a  full  audience  of  the  better  sort  exalts  him  above
the  common  pitch.  And  you,  my  lord,  who  are  the  noblest
actor,  and  of  the  noblest  part  assigned  to  any  mortal  on  this
earthly  stage,  when  you  are  acting  for  liberty  and  mankind ;  ^
does  not  the  public  presence,  that  of  your  friends,  and  the  well-
wishers  to  your  cause,  add  something  to  your  thought  and
genius  ?  Or  is  that  sublime  of  reason,  and  that  power  of
eloquence,  which  you  discover  in  public,  no  more  than  what
you  are  equally  master  of  in  private,  and  can  command  at
any  time,  alone,  or  with  indifferent  company,  or  in  any  easy
or  cool  hour?  This  indeed  were  more  godlike;  but  ordinary
humanity,  I  think,  reaches  not  so  high.

For  my  own  part,  my  lord,  I  have  really  so  much  need  of
some  considerable  presence  or  company  to  raise  my  thoughts  on
any  occasion,  that  when  alone  I  must  endeavour  by  strength
of  fancy  to  supply  this  want ;  and  in  default  of  a  muse,  must
inquire  out  some  great  man  of  a  more  than  ordinary  genius,
whose  imagined  presence  may  inspire  me  with  more  than  what

1  [The  high  eulogy  here  passed  on  Somers  was  not  overstrained,  accord-
ing to  the  literary  standards  of  the  time.  Addison  dedicated  to  him  the
Spectator  in  nearly  as  high  a  strain  ;  and  Swift's  humorous  dedication  of
the  Tale  of  a  Tub  goes  as  far  ;  though  on  changing  parties  Swift  changed
his  tone.  The  detailed  estimate  in  Macaulay's  twentieth  chapter  sub-
stantially bears  out  all  these  panegyrics  on  the  great  Whig  statesman.
In  religion  he  seems  to  have  been  nearly  if  not  quite  as  advanced  as
Shaftesbury,  for  whom  he  had  a  great  regard.]

8


ENTHUSIASM

I  feel  at  ordinary  hours.  And  thus,  my  lord,  have  I  chosen  to
address  myself  to  your  lordship ;  though  without  subscribing
my  name :  allowing  you  as  a  stranger  the  full  liberty  of  reading
no  more  than  what  you  may  have  a  fancy  for ;  but  reserving  to
myself  the  privilege  of  imagining  you  read  all,  with  particular
notice,  as  a  friend,  and  one  whom  I  may  justifiably  treat  with
the  intimacy  and  freedom  which  follows.

Section  II

If  the  knowing  well  how  to  expose  any  infirmity  or  vice  were  a
sufficient  security  for  the  virtue  which  is  contrary,  how  excellent
an  age  might  we  be  presumed  to  live  in !  Never  was  there  in
our  nation  a  time  known  when  folly  and  extravagance  of  every
kind  were  more  sharply  inspected,  or  more  wittily  ridiculed.
And  one  might  hope,  at  least  from  this  good  symptom,  that
our  age  was  in  no  declining  state ;  since  whatever  our  distempers
are,  we  stand  so  well  affected  to  our  remedies.  To  bear  the
being  told  of  faults  is  in  private  persons  the  best  token  of
amendment.  'Tis  seldom  that  a  public  is  thus  disposed.  For
where  jealousy  of  state,  or  the  ill  lives  of  the  great  people,  or
any  other  cause,  is  powerful  enough  to  restrain  the  freedom  of
censure  in  any  part,  it  in  effect  destroys  the  benefit  of  it  in  the
whole.  /There  can  be  no  impartial  and  free  censure  of  manners
where  any  peculiar  custom  or  national  opinion  is  set  apart,  and
not  only  exempted  from  criticism,  but  even  flattered  with  the
highest  art.  'Tis  only  in  a  free  nation,  such  as  ours,  that
imposture  has  no  privilege ;  and  that  neither  the  credit  of  a
court,  the  power  of  a  nobility,  nor  the  awfulness  of  a  Church
can  give  her  protection,  or  hinder  her  from  being  arraigned  in
every  shape  and  appearance.  'Tis  true,  this  liberty  may  seem
to  run  too  far.  We  may  perhaps  be  said  to  make  ill  use  of  it.
So  every  one  will  say,  when  he  himself  is  touched,  and  his
opinion  freely  examined.  But  who  shall  be  judge  of  what
may  be  freely  examined  and  what  may  not.'* Where  liberty

9


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

may  be  used  and  where  it  may  not  ?  What  remedy  shall  we
prescribe  to  this  in  general  ?  Can  there  be  a  better  than  from
that  liberty  itself  which  is  complained  of  ?  If  men  are  vicious,
petulant,  or  abusive,  the  magistrate  may  correct  them  :  but  if
they  reason  ill,  "'tis  reason  still  must  teach  them  to  do  better.
Justness  of  thought  and  style,  refinement  in  manners,  good
breeding,  and  politeness  of  every  kind  can  come  only  from  the
trial  and  experience  of  what  is  best.  Let  but  the  search  go
freely  on,  and  the  right  measure  of  everything  will  soon  be
found.  Whatever  humour  has  got  the  start,  if  it  be  unnatural,
it  cannot  hold ;  and  the  ridicule,  if  ill-placed  at  first,  will
certainly  fall  at  last  where  it  deserves.

I  have  often  wondered  to  see  men  of  sense  so  mightily
alarmed  at  the  approach  of  anything  like  ridicule  on  certain
subjects ;  as  if  they  mistrusted  their  own  judgment.  For  what
ridicule  can  lie  against  reason  ?  or  how  can  any  one  of  the  least
justness  of  thought  endure  a  ridicule  wrong  placed  ?  Nothing
is  more  ridiculous  than  this  itself.  The  vulgar,  indeed,  may
swallow  any  sordid  jest,  any  mere  drollery  or  buffoonery ;  but
it  must  be  a  finer  and  truer  wit  which  takes  with  the  men  of
sense  and  breeding.  How  comes  it  to  pass,  then,  that  we
appear  such  cowards  in  reasoning,  and  are  so  afraid  to  stand
the  test  of  ridicule .''  O !  say  we,  the  subjects  are  too  grave.
Perhaps  so :  but  let  us  see  first  whether  they  are  really  grave
or  no :  for  in  the  manner  we  may  conceive  them  they  may,
peradventure,  be  very  gi"ave  and  weighty  in  our  imagination,
but  very  ridiculous  and  impertinent  in  their  own  nature.
Gravity  is  of  the  very  essence  of  imposture.  It  does  not  only
make  us  mistake  other  things,  but  is  apt  perpetually  almost  to
mistake  itself.  For  even  in  common  behaviour,  how  hard  is  it
for  the  grave  character  to  keep  long  out  of  the  limits  of  the
formal  one  ?  AVe  can  never  be  too  grave,  if  we  can  be  assured
we  are  really  what  we  suppose.  And  we  can  never  too  much
honour  or  revere  anything  for  gi'ave,  if  we  are  assured  the
thing  is  grave,  as  we  apprehend  it. The  main  point  is  to  know

10


ENTHUSIASM

always  true  gravity  from  the  false  :  and  this  can  only  be  by
carrying  the  rule  constantly  with  us,  and  freely  applying  it  not
only  to  the  things  about  us,  but  to  oiu-selves ;  for  if  unhappily
we  lose  the  measure  in  ourselves,  we  shall  soon  lose  it  in  every-
thing besides.  Now  what  rule  or  measure  is  there  in  the  world,
except  in  the  considering  of  the  real  temper  of  things,  to  find
which  are  truly  serious  and  which  ridiculous?  And  how  can
this  be  done,  unless  by  applying  the  ridicule,  to  see  whether  it
will  bear  ?  But  if  we  fear  to  apply  this  rule  in  anything,  what
security  can  we  have  against  the  imposture  of  formality  in  all
things  ?  We  have  allowed  ourselves  to  be  formalists  in  one
point ;  and  the  same  formality  may  rule  us  as  it  pleases  in
all  other.

Tis  not  in  every  disposition  that  we  are  capacitated  to  judge
of  things.  We  must  beforehand  judge  of  our  own  temper,  and
accordingly  of  other  things  which  fall  under  our  judgment.
But  we  must  never  more  pretend  to  judge  of  things,  or  of  our
own  temper  in  judging  them,  when  we  have  given  up  our
preliminary  right  of  judgment,  and  under  a  presumption  of
gravity  have  allowed  ourselves  to  be  most  ridiculous  and  to
admire  profoundly  the  most  ridiculous  things  in  nature,  at  least
for  aught  we  know.  For  having  resolved  never  to  try,  we  can
never  be  sure.

Ridiculum  aeri
Fortius  et  melius  magnas  plerumque  secat  res.^

This,  my  lord,  I  may  safely  aver,  is  so  true  in  itself,  and  so
well  known  for  truth  by  the  cunning  formalists  of  the  age,  that
they  can  better  bear  to  have  their  impostures  railed  at,  with  all
the  bitterness  and  vehemence  imaginable,  than  to  have  them
touched  ever  so  gently  in  this  other  way.  They  know  very  well,
that  as  modes  and  fashions,  so  opinions,  though  ever  so  ridi-
culous, are  kept  up  by  solemnity  ;  and  that  those  formal  notions,

1  ["A  jest  often  decides  weighty  matters  better  and  more  forcibly  than
can  asperity." — Hor.  Sat.  i.  x.  14,  15.]

11


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

which  grew  up  probably  in  an  ill  mood  and  have  been  conceived
in  sober  sadness,  are  never  to  be  removed  but  in  a  sober  kind  of
cheerfulness,  and  by  a  more  easy  and  pleasant  way  of  thought.
There  is  a  melancholy  which  accompanies  all  enthusiasm.  Be  it
love  or  religion  (for  there  are  enthusiasms  in  both)  nothing  can
put  a  stop  to  the  growing  mischief  of  either,  till  the  melancholy
be  removed  and  the  mind  at  liberty  to  hear  what  can  be  said
against  the  ridiculousness  of  an  extreme  in  either  way.

It  was  heretofore  the  wisdom  of  some  wise  nations  to  let
people  be  fools  as  much  as  they  pleased,  and  never  to  punish
seriously  what  deserved  only  to  be  laughed  at,  and  was,  after
all,  best  cured  by  that  innocent  remedy.  There  are  certain
humours  in  mankind  which  of  necessity  must  have  vent.  The
human  mind  and  body  are  both  of  them  naturally  subject  to
commotions :  and  as  there  are  strange  ferments  in  the  blood,
which  in  many  bodies  occasion  an  extraordinary  discharge ;  so
in  reason,  too,  there  are  heterogeneous  particles  which  must  be
thrown  off  by  fermentation.  Should  physicians  endeavour
absolutely  to  allay  those  ferments  of  the  body,  and  strike  in
the  humours  which  discover  themselves  in  such  eruptions,  they
might,  instead  of  making  a  cure,  bid  fair  perhaps  to  raise  a
plague,  and  turn  a  spring-ague  or  an  autumn-surfeit  into  an
epidemical  malignant  fever.  They  are  certainly  as  ill  physicians
in  the  body-politic  who  would  needs  be  tampering  with  these
mental  eruptions;  and  under  the  specious  pretence  of  healing
this  itch  of  superstition,  and  saving  souls  from  the  contagion  of
enthusiasm,  should  set  all  nature  in  an  uproar,  and  turn  a  few
innocent  carbuncles  into  an  inflammation  and  mortal  gangrene.

We  read  ^  in  history  that  Pan,  when  he  accompanied
Bacchus  in  an  expedition  to  the  Indies,  found  means  to  strike  a
terror  through  a  host  of  enemies  by  the  help  of  a  small  company,
whose  clamours  he  managed  to  good  advantage  among  the
echoing  rocks  and  caverns  of  a  woody  vale.  The  hoarse  bellow-
ing of  the  caves,  joined  to  the  hideous  aspect  of  such  dark  and
*  Polyaeni  Strateg.  i.  2.

12


ENTHUSIASM

desert  places,  raised  such  a  horror  in  the  enemy,  that  in  this
state  their  imagination  helped  them  to  hear  voices,  and  doubtless
to  see  forms  too,  which  were  more  than  human :  whilst  the
uncertainty  of  what  they  feared  made  their  fear  yet  greater,  and
spread  it  faster  by  implicit  looks  than  any  narration  could
convey  it.  And  this  was  what  in  after- times  men  called  a  panic.
The  story  indeed  gives  a  good  hint  of  the  nature  of  this  passion,
which  can  hardly  be  without  some  mixture  of  enthusiasm  and
horrors  of  a  superstitious  kind.

One  may  with  good  reason  call  every  passion  panic  which  is
raised  in  a  multitude  and  conveyed  by  aspect  or,  as  it  were,  by
contact  of  sympathy.  Thus  popular  fury  may  be  called  panic
when  the  rage  of  the  people,  as  we  have  sometimes  known,  has
put  them  beyond  themselves ;  especially  where  religion  has  had
to  do.  And  in  this  state  their  very  looks  are  infectious.  The
fury  flies  from  face  to  face  ;  and  the  disease  is  no  sooner  seen  than
caught.  They  who  in  a  better  situation  of  mind  have  beheld  a
multitude  under  the  power  of  this  passion,  have  owned  that  they
saw  in  the  countenances  of  men  something  more  ghastly  and
terrible  than  at  other  times  is  expressed  on  the  most  passionate
occasion.  Such  force  has  society  in  ill  as  well  as  in  good
passions  :  and  so  much  stronger  any  affection  is  for  being  social
and  communicative.

Thus,  my  lord,  there  are  many  panics  in  mankind  besides
merely  that  of  fear.  And  thus  is  religion  also  panic ;  when
enthusiasm  of  any  kind  gets  up,  as  oft,  on  melancholy  occasions,
it  will.  For  vapours  naturally  rise  ;  and  in  bad  times  especially,
when  the  spirits  of  men  are  low,  as  either  in  public  calamities,
or  during  the  unwholesomeness  of  air  or  diet,  or  when  con-
vulsions happen  in  nature,  storms,  earthquakes,  or  other  amazing
prodigies  :  at  this  season  the  panic  must  needs  run  high,  and  the
magistrate  of  necessity  give  way  to  it.  For  to  apply  a  serious
remedy,  and  bring  the  sword,  or  fasces,  as  a  cure,  must  make
the  case  more  melancholy,  and  increase  the  very  cause  of  the
distemper. To  forbid  men's  natural  fears,  and  to  endeavour

12


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  overpowering  them  by  other  feai*s,  must  needs  be  a  most
unnatural  method.  The  magistrate,  if  he  be  any  artist,  should
have  a  gentler  hand ;  and  instead  of  caustics,  incisions,  and
amputations,  should  be  using  the  softest  balms ;  and  with  a
kind  sympathy  entering  into  the  concern  of  the  people ;  and
taking,  as  it  were,  their  passion  upon  him  should,  when  he  has
soothed  and  satisfied  it,  endeavour,  by  cheerful  ways,  to  divert
and  heal  it.

This  was  ancient  policy :  and  hence  (as  a  notable  author  ^  of
our  nation  expresses  it)  'tis  necessary  a  people  should  have  a
public  leading  in  religion.  For  to  deny  the  magistrate  a  worship,
or  take  away  a  national  church,  is  as  mere  enthusiasm  as  the
notion  which  sets  up  persecution.  For  why  should  there  not
be  public  walks  as  well  as  private  gardens .''  Why  not  public
libraries  as  well  as  private  education  and  home-tutors  ?  But
to  prescribe  bounds  to  fancy  and  speculation,  to  regulate  men''s
apprehensions  and  religious  beliefs  or  fears,  to  suppress  by
violence  the  natural  passion  of  enthusiasm,  or  to  endeavour  to
ascertain  it,  or  reduce  it  to  one  species,  or  bring  it  under  any
one  modification,  is  in  truth  no  better  sense,  nor  deserves  a
better  character,  than  what  the  comedian  declares  of  the  like
project  in  the  affair  of  love —

Nihilo  plus  agas
Quam  si  des  operam  ut  cum  ratione  insanias.^

Not  only  the  visionaries  and  enthusiasts  of  all  kinds  were
tolerated,  your  lordship  knows,  by  the  ancients ;  but,  on  the
other  side,  philosophy  had  as  free  a  course,  and  was  permitted
as  a  balance  against  superstition.  And  whilst  some  sects,  such
as  the  Pythagorean  and  latter  Platonic,  joined  in  with  the
superstition  and  enthusiasm  of  the  times;  the  Epicurean,  the
Academic,  and  others,  were  allowed  to  use  all  the  force  of  wit

*  Harrington.

2  ["  You  will  manage  it  no  better  than  if  you  undertook  to  be  rationally
insane." — Terence,  Eunuchus,  Act  i.  Sc.  1.]

14


ENTHUSIASM

and  raillery  against  it.  And  thus  matters  were  happily
balanced ;  reason  had  fair  play ;  learning  and  science  flourished.
Wonderful  was  the  harmony  and  temper  which  arose  from  all
these  contrarieties.  Thus  superstition  and  enthusiasm  were  mildly
treated,  and  being  let  alone  they  never  raged  to  that  degree  as
to  occasion  bloodshed,  wars,  persecutions,  and  devastation  in  the
world.  But  a  new  sort  of  policy,  which  extends  itself  to  another
world  and  considers  the  future  lives  and  happiness  of  men  rather
than  the  present,  has  made  us  leap  the  bounds  of  natural
humanity ;  and  out  of  a  supernatural  charity  has  taught  us  '
the  way  of  plaguing  one  another  most  devoutly.  It  has  raised
an  antipathy  which  no  temporal  interest  could  ever  do ;  and
entailed  upon  us  a  mutual  hatred  to  all  eternity.  And  now
uniformity  in  opinion  (a  hopeful  project !)  is  looked  on  as  the
only  expedient  against  this  evil.  The  saving  of  souls  is  now  the
heroic  passion  of  exalted  spirits ;  and  is  become  in  a  manner
the  chief  care  of  the  magistrate,  and  the  very  end  of  government
itself.

K  magistracy  should  vouchsafe  to  interpose  thus  much  in
other  sciences,  I  am  afraid  we  should  have  as  bad  logic,  as  bad
mathematics,  and  in  every  kind  as  bad  philosophy,  as  we  often
have  divinity,  in  countries  where  a  precise  orthodoxy  is  settled
by  law.  'Tis  a  hard  matter  for  a  government  to  settle  wit.  If
it  does  but  keep  us  sober  and  honest,  'tis  likely  we  shall  have  as
much  ability  in  our  spiritual  as  in  our  temporal  affaii-s :  and  if
we  can  but  be  trusted,  we  shall  have  wit  enough  to  save  our-
selves, when  no  prejudice  lies  in  the  way.  But  if  honesty  and
wit  be  insufficient  for  this  saving  work,  'tis  in  vain  for  the
magistrate  to  meddle  with  it :  since  if  he  be  ever  so  virtuous  or
wise,  he  may  be  as  soon  mistaken  as  another  man.  I  am  sure
the  only  way  to  save  men's  sense,  or  preserve  wit  at  all  in  the
world,  is  to  give  liberty  to  wit.  Now  wit  can  never  have  its
liberty  where  the  freedom  of  raillery  is  taken  away  :  for  against
serious  extravagances  and  splenetic  humours  there  is  no  other
remedy  than  this.

15


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

We  have  indeed  full  power  over  all  other  modifications  of
spleen.  We  may  ti-eat  other  enthusiasms  as  we  please.  We
may  ridicule  love,  or  gallantry,  or  knight-errantry  to  the
utmost ;  and  we  find  that  in  these  latter  days  of  wit,  the
humoui"  of  this  kind,  which  was  once  so  prevalent,  is  pretty
well  declined.  The  crusades,  the  rescuing  of  holy  lands,  and
such  devout  gallantries,  ai'e  in  less  request  than  formerly :  but
if  something  of  this  militant  religion,  something  of  this  soul-
rescuing  spirit  and  saint-errantry  prevails  still,  we  need  not
wonder,  when  we  consider  in  how  solemn  a  manner  we  treat
this  distemper,  and  how  preposterously  we  go  about  to  cure
enthusiasm.

I  can  hardly  forbear  fancying  that  if  we  had  a  sort  of
inquisition,  or  formal  court  of  judicature,  with  grave  officers
and  judges,  erected  to  restrain  poetical  licence,  and  in  general
to  suppress  that  fancy  and  humour  of  versification ;  but  in
particular  that  most  extravagant  passion  of  love,  as  it  is  set  out
by  poets,  in  its  heathenish  dress  of  Venuses  and  Cupids :  if  the
poets,  as  ringleaders  and  teachers  of  this  heresy,  were,  under
grievous  penalties,  forbid  to  enchant  the  people  by  their  vein
of  rhyming ;  and  if  the  people,  on  the  other  side,  were,  under
proportionable  penalties,  forbid  to  hearken  to  any  such  charm,
or  lend  their  attention  to  any  love  tale,  so  much  as  in  a  play,
a  novel,  or  a  ballad — we  might  perhaps  see  a  new  Arcadia  arising
out  of  this  heavy  persecution :  old  people  and  young  would  be
seized  with  a  versifying  spirit :  we  should  have  field -conventicles
of  lovers  and  poets :  forests  would  be  filled  with  romantic
shepherds  and  shepherdesses :  and  rocks  resound  with  echoes
of  hymns  and  praises  offered  to  the  powers  of  love.  We  might
indeed  have  a  fair  chance,  by  this  management,  to  bring  back
the  whole  train  of  heathen  gods,  and  set  our  cold  northern  island
burning  with  as  many  altars  to  Venus  and  Apollo,  as  were
formerly  in  Cyprus,  Delos,  or  any  of  those  warmer  Grecian
climates.


16


ENTHUSIASM


Section  III


But,  my  lord,  you  may  perhaps  wonder,  that  having  been  drawn
into  such  a  serious  subject  as  religion,  I  should  forget  myself  so
far  as  to  give  way  to  raillery  and  humour.  I  must  own,  my
lord,  'tis  not  merely  through  chance  that  this  has  happened.
To  say  truth,  I  hardly  care  so  much  as  to  think  on  this  subject,
much  less  to  write  on  it,  without  endeavouring  to  put  myself  in
as  good  humour  as  is  possible.  People  indeed,  who  can  endure
no  middle  temper,  but  are  all  air  and  humour,  know  little  of
the  doubts  and  scruples  of  religion,  and  are  safe  from  any
immediate  influence  of  devout  melancholy  or  enthusiasm,  which
requires  more  deliberation  and  thoughtful  practice  to  fix  itself
in  a  temper,  and  grow  habitual.  But  be  the  habit  what  it
will ;  to  be  delivered  of  it  at  so  sad  a  cost  as  inconsiderateness,
or  madness,  is  what  I  would  never  wish  to  be  my  lot.  I  had
rather  stand  all  adventures  with  religion,  than  endeavom*  to  get
rid  of  the  thoughts  of  it  by  diversion.  All  I  contend  for,  is
to  think  of  it  in  a  right  humour ;  and  that  this  goes  more  than
half-way  towards  thinking  rightly  of  it,  is  what  I  shall  en-
deavour to  demonstrate.

Good-humour  is  not  only  the  best  security  against  enthusiasm,
but  the  best  foundation  of  piety  and  true  religion  ;  for  if  right
thoughts  and  worthy  apprehensions  of  the  Supreme  Being  are
fundamental  to  all  true  worship  and  adoration,  'tis  more  than
probable  that  we  shall  never  miscarry  in  this  respect,  except
through  ill-humour  only.  Nothing  beside  ill-humour,  either
natural  or  forced,  can  bring  a  man  to  think  seriously  that  the
world  is  governed  by  any  devilish  or  malicious  power.  I  very
much  question  whether  anything  besides  ill-humour  can  be  the
cause  of  atheism.  For  there  are  so  many  arguments  to  persuade
a  man  in  humour  that,  in  the  main,  all  things  are  kindly  and
well  disposed,  that  one  would  think  it  impossible  for  him  to  be
so  far  out  of  conceit  with  affairs  as  to  imagine  they  all  ran  at
VOL.  I  17  C


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

adventures ;  and  that  the  world,  as  venerable  and  wise  a  face
as  it  carried,  had  neither  sense  nor  meaning  in  it.  This  how-
ever I  am  persuaded  of,  that  nothing  beside  ill-humour  can  give
us  dreadful  or  ill  thoughts  of  a  Supreme  Manager.  Nothing
can  persuade  us  of  sullenness  or  sourness  in  such  a  being,  beside
the  actual  sore  feeling  of  somewhat  of  this  kind  within  ourselves;
and  if  we  are  afraid  of  bringing  good-humour  into  religion,  or
thinking  with  freedom  and  pleasantness  on  such  a  subject  as
God,  "'tis  because  we  conceive  the  subject  so  like  ourselves,  and
can  hardly  have  a  notion  of  majesty  and  greatness  without
stateliness  and  moroseness  accompanying  it.

This,  however,  is  the  just  reverse  of  that  character  which
we  own  to  be  most  divinely  good  when  we  see  it,  as  we  some-
times do,  in  men  of  highest  power  among  us.  If  they  pass  for
truly  good,  we  dare  treat  them  freely,  and  are  sure  they  will
not  be  displeased  with  this  liberty.  They  are  doubly  gainers
by  this  goodness  of  theirs.  For  the  more  they  are  searched
into,  and  familiarly  examined,  the  more  their  worth  appears ;
and  the  discoverer,  charmed  with  his  success,  esteems  and  loves
more  than  ever,  when  he  has  proved  this  additional  bounty  in
his  superior,  and  reflects  on  that  candour  and  generosity  he  has
experienced.  Your  lordship  knows  more  perhaps  of  this
mystery  than  any  one.  How  else  should  you  have  been  so
beloved  in  power,  and  out  of  power  so  adhered  to,  and  still
more  beloved  ?

Thank  heaven  !  there  are  even  in  our  own  age  some  such
examples.  In  former  ages  there  have  been  many  such.  We
have  known  mighty  princes,  and  even  emperors  of  the  world,
who  could  bear  unconcernedly,  not  only  the  free  censure  of
their  actions,  but  the  most  spiteful  reproaches  and  calumnies,
even  to  their  faces.  Some  perhaps  may  wish  there  had  never
been  such  examples  found  in  heathens;  but  more  especially,
that  the  occasion  had  never  been  given  by  Christians.  'Twas
more  the  misfortune  indeed  of  mankind  in  general,  than  of
Chiistians in particular, that some of the earlier Roman

18


ENTHUSIASM

emperors  were  such  monsters  of  tyranny,  and  began  a  persecu-
tion, not  on  religious  men  merely,  but  on  all  who  were  suspected
of  worth  or  virtue.  What  could  have  been  a  higher  honour  or
advantage  to  Christianity  than  to  be  persecuted  by  a  Nero  ?
But  better  princes,  who  came  after,  were  persuaded  to  remit
these  severe  courses.  'Tis  true,  the  magistrate  might  possibly
have  been  surprised  with  the  newness  of  a  notion,  which  he
might  pretend,  perhaps,  did  not  only  destroy  the  sacredness  of
his  power,  but  treated  him  and  all  men  as  profane,  impious,
and  damned,  who  entered  not  into  certain  particular  modes  of
worship ;  of  which  there  had  been  formerly  so  many  thousand
instituted,  all  of  them  compatible  and  sociable  till  that  time.
However,  such  was  the  wisdom  of  some  succeeding  ministries,
that  the  edge  of  persecution  was  much  abated  ;  and  even  that
prince  ^  who  was  esteemed  the  greatest  enemy  of  the  Christian
sect,  and  who  himself  had  been  educated  in  it,  was  a  great
restrainer  of  persecution,  and  would  allow  of  nothing  further
than  a  resumption  of  church  lands  and  public  schools,  without
any  attempt  on  the  goods  or  persons,  even  of  those  who  branded
the  State  religion  and  made  a  merit  of  affronting  the  public
worship.

'Tis  well  we  have  the  authority  of  a  sacred  author  in  our
religion  to  assure  us  that  the  spirit  of  love  and  humanity  is
above  that  of  martyrs.^  Otherwise,  one  might  be  a  little
scandalised,  perhaps,  at  the  history  of  many  of  our  primitive
confessors  and  martyrs,  even  according  to  our  own  accounts.
There  is  hardly  now  in  the  world  so  good  a  Christian  (if  this  be
indeed  the  mark  of  a  good  one)  who,  if  he  happened  to  live  at
Constantinople,  or  elsewhere  under  the  protection  of  the  Turks,
would  think  it  fitting  or  decent  to  give  any  disturbance  to  their
mosque -worship.  And  as  good  Protestants,  my  lord,  as  you
and  I  are,  we  should  consider  him  as  little  better  than  a  rank

^  [Julian. The  subject  is  recurred  to  in  the  Miscellaneous  Reflections,
Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.  note.]
2  1  Cor.  xiii.  3.

19


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

enthusiast,  who,  out  of  hatred  to  the  Romish  idolatry,  should,
in  time  of  high  mass  (where  mass  perhaps  was  by  law  established),
interrupt  the  priest  with  clamours,  or  fall  foul  on  his  images
and  relics.

There  are  some,  it  seems,  of  our  good  brethren,  the  French
Protestants,  lately  come  among  us,^  who  are  mightily  taken
with  this  primitive  way.  They  have  set  afoot  the  spirit  of
martyrdom  to  a  wonder  in  their  own  country ;  and  they  long
to  be  trying  it  here,  if  we  will  give  them  leave,  and  afford  them
the  occasion  :  that  is  to  say,  if  we  will  only  do  them  the  favour
to  hang  or  imprison  them ;  if  we  will  only  be  so  obliging  as  to
break  their  bones  for  them,  after  their  country  fashion,  blow  up
their  zeal,  and  stir  afresh  the  coals  of  persecution.  But  no  such
grace  can  they  hitherto  obtain  of  us.  So  hard-hearted  we  are,
that  notwithstanding  their  own  mob  are  willing  to  bestow  kind
blows  upon  them,  and  fairly  stone  them  now  and  then  in  the
open  street;  though  the  priests  of  their  own  nation  would
gladly  give  them  their  desired  discipline,  and  are  earnest  to
light  their  probationary  fires  for  them ;  we  Englishmen,  who

^  [These  were  refugees  from  the  Cevennes,  where  had  occurred  the
war  of  the  Camisards,  as  a  sequel  to  the  Revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes.
Frightful  cruelties,  recalling  the  Languedoc  massacres  of  four  centuries
before,  awoke  in  the  persecuted  people  a  spirit  of  mystic  frenzy,  and
hundreds  declared  themselves  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  prophesy.
It  was  some  of  these  "  prophets "  who  reproduced  in  London  the  ecstatic
phenomena  of  their  warfare  in  the  Cevennes.  In  1707  the  refugees
petitioned  the  English  court  for  succour  for  their  destitute ;  and  £1000
a  month  were  allowed  them.  In  the  same  year  (July)  a  number  of  the
prophets  were  tried  for  publishing  books  containing  predictions  of  trouble
for  England,  and  were  ultimately  sentenced  (November)  to  be  fined  20
marks,  with  the  alternative  of  imprisonment,  and  to  be  pilloried  at
Charing  Cross  and  Cornhill,  Shaftesbury's  Letter,  which  in  the  collected
edition  is  dated  Sept.  1707,  remains  without  reference  to  the  sentence  in
question.  A  number  of  contemporary  pamphlets  deal  with  the  proceed-
ings of  the  "  French  prophets  "  ;  and  fairly  full  details  as  to  the  literature
of  the  subject  will  be  found  in  Appendix  I.  to  the  unfinished  edition  of
the  Characteristics  by  the  Rev.  W.  M.  Hatch,  1870.]

20


ENTHUSIASM

are  masters  in  our  own  country,  will  not  suffer  the  enthusiasts
to  be  thus  used.  Nor  can  we  be  supposed  to  act  thus  in  envy
to  their  phoenix  sect,  which  it  seems  has  risen  out  of  the  flames,
and  would  willingly  grow  to  be  a  new  church  by  the  same
manner  of  propagation  as  the  old  one,  whose  seed  was  truly  said
to  be  from  the  blood  of  the  martyi"s.

But  how  barbarous  still,  and  more  than  heathenishly  cruel,
are  we  tolerating  Englishmen !  For,  not  contented  to  deny
these  prophesying  enthusiasts  the  honour  of  a  persecution,  we
have  delivered  them  over  to  the  cruellest  contempt  in  the  world.
I  am  told,  for  certain,  that  they  are  at  this  very  time^  the
subject  of  a  choice  droll  or  puppet-show  at  Bart'lemy  Fair.^
There,  doubtless,  their  strange  voices  and  involuntary  agitations
are  admirably  well  acted,  by  the  motion  of  wires  and  inspiration
of  pipes.  For  the  bodies  of  the  prophets,  in  their  state  of
prophecy,  being  not  in  their  own  power,  but  (as  they  say  them-
selves) mere  passive  organs,  actuated  by  an  exterior  force,  have
nothing  natural,  or  resembling  real  life,  in  any  of  their  sounds
or  motions ;  so  that  how  awkwardly  soever  a  puppet-show  may
imitate  other  actions,  it  must  needs  represent  this  passion  to
the  life.  And  whilst  Barflemy  Fair  is  in  possession  of  this
privilege,  I  dare  stand  security  to  our  National  Church  that  no
sect  of  enthusiasts,  no  new  venders  of  prophecy  or  miracles,

1  Viz.  Anno  1707.

2  [i.e.  St.  Bartholomew's  Fair,  then  at  the  height  of  its  popularity  and
disrepute.  In  1708  was  made  the  first  of  a  series  of  attempts  to  confine  it
within  its  original  bounds  of  three  days,  which  it  had  so  far  exceeded  as
to  last  a  full  fortnight.  No  reference  is  made  in  Professor  Henry  Morley's
Memoirs  of  Bartholomew  Fair  to  the  particular  "  droll "  mentioned  by
Shaftesbury ;  but  such  a  performance  was  sure  to  be  popular,  being  a
return  to  a  favourite  species  of  ridicule,  dating  from  Ben  Jonson's  day.
It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  puppet-show  was  not  conducted  in  the  spirit  of
Shaftesbury's  essay ;  but  the  "prophecies"  seem  rapidly  to  have  degenerated
into  money-getting  imposture.  See,  in  Mr.  Hatch's  edition,  p.  33,
extracts  from  a  satirical  handbill  on  the  pilloried  prophets,  preserved  in
the  Bodleian,  also  his  Appendix,  pp.  380,  381.]

21


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

shall  ever  get  the  start,  or  put  her  to  the  trouble  of  trying  her
strength  with  them,  in  any  case.

Happy  it  was  for  us,  that  when  popery  had  got  possession,
Smithfield  was  used  in  a  more  tragical  way.  Many  of  our  fii'st
reformers,  'tis  feared,  were  little  better  than  enthusiasts;  and
God  knows  whether  a  warmth  of  this  kind  did  not  considerably
help  us  in  throwing  off  that  spiritual  tyranny.  So  that  had
not  the  priests,  as  is  usual,  preferi'ed  the  love  of  blood  to  all
other  passions,  they  might  in  a  menier  way,  perhaps,  have
evaded  the  greatest  force  of  our  reforming  spirit.  I  never  heard
that  the  ancient  heathens  were  so  well  advised  in  their  ill
purpose  of  suppressing  the  Christian  religion  in  its  first  rise,  as
to  make  use,  at  any  time,  of  this  Barflemy  Fair  method.  But
this  I  am  persuaded  of,  that  had  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  been
any  way  surmountable,  they  would  have  bid  much  fairer  for  the
silencing  it,  if  they  had  chosen  to  bring  our  primitive  founders
upon  the  stage  in  a  pleasanter  way  than  that  of  bear-skins  and
pitch-barrels.

The  Jews  were  naturally  a  very  cloudy  ^  people,  and  would
endure  little  raillery  in  anything,  much  less  in  what  belonged
to  any  religious  doctrines  or  opinions.  Religion  was  looked
upon  with  a  sullen  eye ;  and  hanging  was  the  only  remedy  they
could  prescribe  for  anything  which  looked  like  setting  up  a  new
revelation.  The  sovereign  argument  was  Crucify,  Crucify.^
But  with  all  their  malice  and  inveteracy  to  our  Saviour,  and  his
apostles  after  him,  had  they  but  taken  the  fancy  to  act  such
puppet-shows  in  his  contempt,  as  at  this  hour  the  papists  are
acting  in  his  honour,  I  am  apt  to  think  they  might  possibly
have  done  our  religion  more  harm  than  by  all  their  other  ways
of  severity.

'  [i.e.  gloomy.]

2  Our  author  having  been  censured  for  this  and  some  following  passages
concerning  the  Jews,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  notes  and  citations  in
the  Miscellaneous  Reflections,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.  [See  also,  hereinafter,  the
Advice  to  an  Author,  paii;  iii.  §  1.]

22


ENTHUSIASM

I  believe  our  great  and  learned  Apostle  found  less  advantage  ^
from  the  easy  treatment  of  his  Athenian  antagonists,  than  from
the  surly  and  curst  spirit  of  the  most  persecuting  Jewish  cities.
He  made  less  improvement  of  the  candour  and  civility  of  his
Roman  judges,  than  of  the  zeal  of  the  synagogue  and  vehemence
of  his  national  priests.  Though  when  I  consider  this  apostle  as
appearing  either  before  the  witty  Athenians,  or  before  a  Roman
court  of  judicature,  in  the  presence  of  their  great  men  and  ladies,
and  see  how  handsomely  he  accommodates  himself  to  the  appre-
hensions and  temper  of  those  politer  people,  I  do  not  find  that
he  declines  the  way  of  wit  or  good-humour ;  but,  without
suspicion  of  his  cause,  is  willing  generously  to  commit  it  to  this
proof,  and  try  it  against  the  sharpness  of  any  ridicule  which
might  be  offered.

But  though  the  Jews  wqre  never  pleased  to  tiy  their  wit  or
malice  this  way  against  our  Saviour  or  his  apostles,  the  irre-
ligious part  of  the  heathens  had  tried  it  long  before  against  the
best  doctrines  and  best  characters  of  men  which  had  ever  arisen
amongst  them.  Nor  did  this  prove  in  the  end  any  injury,  but,
on  the  contrary,  the  highest  advantage  to  those  very  characters
and  doctrines,  which,  having  stood  the  proof,  were  found  so  solid
and  just.  The  divinest  man  who  had  ever  appeared  in  the
heathen  world  was  in  the  height  of  witty  times,  and  by  the
wittiest  of  all  poets,  most  abominably  ridiculed,  in  a  whole
comedy  writ  and  acted  on  purpose.  But  so  far  was  this  from
sinking  his  reputation,  or  suppressing  his  philosophy,  that  they
each  increased  the  more  for  it ;  and  he  apparently  grew  to  be
more  the  envy  of  other  teachere.  He  was  not  only  contented  to
be  ridiculed ;  but,  that  he  might  help  the  poet  as  much  as
possible,  he  presented  himself  openly  in  the  theatre;  that  his

^  What  advantage  he  made  of  his  sufferings,  and  how  pathetically  his
bonds  and  stripes  were  set  to  view,  and  often  pleaded  by  him,  to  raise  his
character,  and  advance  the  interest  of  Christianity,  any  one  who  reads  his
Epistles,  and  is  well  acquainted  with  his  manner  and  style,  may  easily
observe.

2a


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

real  figure  (which  was  no  advantageous  one)  might  be  compared
with  that  which  the  witty  poet  had  brought  as  his  representative
on  the  stage.  Such  was  his  good-humour !  Nor  could  there  be
in  the  world  a  greater  testimony  of  the  invincible  goodness  of
the  man,  or  a  greater  demonstration,  that  there  was  no  imposture
either  in  his  character  or  opinions.  For  that  imposture  should
dare  sustain  the  encounter  of  a  grave  enemy  is  no  wonder.  A
solemn  attack,  she  knows,  is  not  of  such  danger  to  her.  There
is  nothing  she  abhors  or  dreads  like  pleasantness  and  good-
humour.

Section IV

In  short,  my  lord,  the  melancholy  way  of  treating  religion  is
that  which,  according  to  my  apprehension,  renders  it  so  tragical,
and  is  the  occasion  of  its  acting  in  reality  such  dismal  tragedies
in  the  world.  And  my  notion  is,  that  provided  we  treat  religion
with  good  manners,  we  can  never  use  too  much  good-humour,
or  examine  it  with  too  much  freedom  and  familiarity.  For,  if
it  be  genuine  and  sincere,  it  will  not  only  stand  the  proof,  but
thrive  and  gain  advantage  from  hence;  if  it  be  spurious,  or
mixed  with  any  imposture,  it  will  be  detected  and  exposed.

The  melancholy  way  in  which  we  have  been  taught  religion,
makes  us  unapt  to  think  of  it  in  good-humour.  Tis  in  adversity
chiefly,  or  in  ill  health,  under  affliction,  or  disturbance  of  mind,
or  discomposure  of  temper,  that  we  have  recourse  to  it.  Though
in  reality  we  are  never  so  unfit  to  think  of  it  as  at  such  a  heavy
and  dark  hour.  We  can  never  be  fit  to  contemplate  anything
above  us,  when  we  are  in  no  condition  to  look  into  ourselves,
and  calmly  examine  the  temper  of  our  own  mind  and  passions.
For  then  it  is  we  see  wrath,  and  fury,  and  revenge,  and  terrors
in  the  Deity ;  when  we  are  full  of  disturbances  and  fears  within,
and  have,  by  sufferance  and  anxiety,  lost  so  much  of  the  natural
calm  and  easiness  of  our  temper.

We  must  not  only  be  in  ordinary  good-humour,  but  in  the

24


ENTHUSIASM

best  of  humours,  and  in  the  sweetest,  kindest  disposition  of  our
lives,  to  understand  well  what  true  goodness  is,  and  what  those
attributes  imply  which  we  ascribe  with  such  applause  and
honour  to  the  Deity.  We  shall  then  be  able  to  see  best
whether  those  forms  of  justice,  those  degrees  of  punishment,
that  temper  of  resentment,  and  those  measures  of  offence  and
indignation,  which  we  vulgarly  suppose  in  God,  are  suitable  to
those  original  ideas  of  goodness,  which  the  same  Divine  Being,
or  Nature  under  him,  has  implanted  in  us,  and  which  we  must
necessarily  presuppose,  in  order  to  give  him  praise  or  honour  in
any  kind.  This,  my  lord,  is  the  best  security  against  all  super-
stition :  to  remember  that  there  is  nothing  in  God  but  what  is
godlike ;  and  that  he  is  either  not  at  all,  or  truly  and  perfectly
good.  But  when  we  are  afraid  to  use  our  reason  freely,  even  on
that  very  question,  "  whether  he  really  be,  or  not, "  we  then
actually  presume  him  bad,  and  flatly  contradict  that  pretended
character  of  goodness  and  greatness;  whilst  we  discover  this
mistrust  of  his  temper,  and  fear  his  anger  and  resentment,  in
the  case  of  this  freedom  of  inquiry.

We  have  a  notable  instance  of  this  freedom  in  one  of  our
sacred  authors.  As  patient  as  Job  is  said  to  be,  it  cannot  be  j
denied  that  he  makes  bold  enough  with  God,  and  takes  his  "^
providence  roundly  to  task.  His  friends,  indeed,  plead  hard
with  him,  and  use  all  arguments,  right  or  wrong,  to  patch  up
objections,  and  set  the  affairs  of  providence  upon  an  equal  foot.
They  make  a  merit  of  saying  all  the  good  they  can  of  God,  at
the  very  stretch  of  their  reason,  and  sometimes  quite  beyond  it.
But  this,  in  Job's  opinion,  is  flattering  God,  accepting  of  God's
person,  and  even  mocking  him.^  And  no  wonder.  For,  what
merit  can  there  be  in  believing  God,  or  his  providence,  upon
frivolous  and  weak  grounds .''  What  virtue  in  assuming  an
opinion  contrary  to  the  appearance  of  things,  and  resolving  to
hear  nothing  which  may  be  said  against  it .''  Excellent  character
of  the  God  of  truth!  that  he  should  be  offended  at  us  for

1  ch.  xiii.  7-10.
V  25


^


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

having  refused  to  put  the  lie  upon  our  understandings,  as  much
as  in  us  lay,  and  be  satisfied  with  us  for  having  believed  at  a
venture,  and  against  our  reason,  what  might  have  been  the
greatest  falsehood  in  the  world,  for  anything  we  could  bring  as
a  proof  or  evidence  to  the  contrary  !

It  is  impossible  that  any  besides  an  ill-natured  man  can  wish
against  the  being  of  a  God;  for  this  is  wishing  against  the
public,  and  even  against  one's  private  good  too,  if  rightly
understood.  But  if  a  man  has  not  any  such  ill-will  to  stifle
his  belief,  he  must  have  surely  an  unhappy  opinion  of  God,  and
believe  him  not  so  good  by  far  as  he  knows  himself  to  be,  if  he
imagines  that  an  impartial  use  of  his  reason,  in  any  matter  of
speculation  whatsoever,  can  make  him  run  any  risk  hereafter;
and  that  a  mean  denial  of  his  reason,  and  an  affectation  of  belief
in  any  point  too  hard  for  his  understanding,  can  entitle  him
to  any  favour  in  another  world.  This  is  being  sycophants  in
religion,  mere  parasites  of  devotion.  "'TIS  using  God  as  the
crafty  beggars  use  those  they  address  to,  when  they  are  ignorant
of  their  quality.  The  novices  amongst  them  may  innocently
come  out,  perhaps,  with  a  "  good  sir,""  or  a  "  good  foi-sooth "" ;

,\)i  .  but  with  the  old  stagers,  no  matter  whom  they  meet  in  a  coach,
y  .  'tis  always  "  good  your  honour  ! "  or  "  good  your  lordship  ! "  or
^^  "  your  ladyship  ! "" For  if  there  should  be  really  a  lord  in  the

r  case,  we  should  be  undone  (say  they)  for  want  of  giving  the

title ;  but  if  the  party  should  be  no  lord,  there  would  be  no
offence ;  it  would  not  be  ill  taken.

And  thus  it  is  in  religion.  We  are  highly  concerned  how
to  beg  right ;  and  think  all  depends  upon  hitting  the  title,  and
making  a  good  guess.  'Tis  the  most  beggarly  refuge  imaginable,
which  is  so  mightily  cried  up,  and  stands  as  a  great  maxim  with
many  able  men,  "that  they  should  strive  to  have  faith,  and
believe  to  the  utmost ;  because  if,  after  all,  there  be  nothing  in
the  matter,  there  will  be  no  harm  in  being  thus  deceived ;  but
if  there  be  anything,  it  will  be  fatal  for  them  not  to  have
believed  to  the  full."" But  they  are  so  far  mistaken  that,  whilst

26


ENTHUSIASM

they  have  this  thought,  'tis  certain  they  can  never  beheve  either
to  their  satisfaction  and  happiness  in  this  world,  or  with  any
advantage  of  recommendation  to  another.  For  besides  that  our
reason,  which  knows  the  cheat,  will  never  rest  thoroughly
satisfied  on  such  a  bottom,  but  turn  us  often  adrift,  and  toss
us  in  a  sea  of  doubt  and  perplexity,  we  cannot  but  actually
grow  worse  in  our  religion,  and  entertain  a  worse  opinion  still
of  a  Supreme  Deity,  whilst  our  belief  is  founded  on  so  injurious
a  thought  of  him.

To  love  the  public,  to  study  universal  good,  and  to  promote
the  interest  of  the  whole  world,  as  far  as  lies  within  our  power,
is  surely  the  height  of  goodness,  and  makes  that  temper  which
we  call  divine.  In  this  temper,  my  lord  (for  surely  you  should
know  it  well),  'tis  natural  for  us  to  wish  that  others  should
partake  with  us,  by  being  convinced  of  the  sincerity  of  our
exemple.  'Tis  natural  for  us  to  wish  our  merit  should  be  known  ;
particularly  if  it  be  our  fortune  to  have  served  a  nation  as  a
good  Minister ;  or  as  some  prince,  or  father  of  a  country,  to  have
rendered  happy  a  considerable  part  of  mankind  under  our  care.
But  if  it  happened  that  of  this  number  there  should  be  some  so
ignorantly  bred,  and  of  so  remote  a  province,  as  to  have  lain  out
of  the  hearing  of  our  name  and  actions ;  or  hearing  of  them
should  be  so  puzzled  with  odd  and  contrary  stories  told  up  and
down  concerning  us,  that  they  knew  not  what  to  think,  whether
there  were  really  in  the  world  any  such  person  as  ourself ;  should
we  not,  in  good  truth,  be  ridiculous  to  take  offence  at  this?
And  should  we  not  pass  for  extravagantly  morose  and  ill-
humoured  if,  instead  of  treating  the  matter  in  raillery,  we  should
think  in  earnest  of  revenging  ourselves  on  the  offending  parties,
who,  out  of  their  rustic  ignorance,  ill-judgment,  or  incredulity,
had  detracted  from  our  renown  ?  \ '

How  shall  we  say  then  ?  Does  it  really  deserve  praise  to  be
thus  concerned  about  it .''  Is  the  doing  good  for  glory's  sake  so
divine  a  thing .?  or  is  it  not  diviner  to  do  good  even  where  it
may  be  thought  inglorious,  even  to  the  ungrateful,  and  to  those

27


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

who  are  wholly  insensible  of  the  good  they  receive?  How
comes  it  then,  that  what  is  so  divine  in  us,  should  lose  its
character  in  the  Divine  Being?  And  that  according  as  the
Deity  is  represented  to  us,  he  should  more  resemble  the  weak,
womanish,  and  impotent  part  of  our  nature,  than  the  generous,
manly,  and  divine  ?

Section  V

One  would  think,  my  lord,  it  were  in  reality  no  hard  thing  to
know  our  own  weaknesses  at  first  sight,  and  distinguish  the
features  of  human  frailty  with  which  we  are  so  well  acquainted.
One  would  think  it  were  easy  to  understand  that  provocation
and  offence,  anger,  revenge,  jealousy  in  point  of  honour  or
power,  love  of  fame,  glory,  and  the  like,  belong  only  to  limited
beings,  and  are  necessarily  excluded  a  being  which  is  perfect
and  universal.  But  if  we  have  never  settled  with  ourselves  any
notion  of  what  is  morally  excellent ;  or  if  we  cannot  trust  to  that
reason  which  tells  us  that  nothing  beside  what  is  so,  can  have
place  in  the  Deity ;  we  can  neither  trust  to  anything  which
others  relate  of  him,  or  which  he  himself  reveals  to  us.  We
must  be  satisfied  beforehand  that  he  is  good,  and  cannot  deceive
us.  Without  this,  there  can  be  no  real  religious  faith  or  con-
fidence. Now,  if  there  be  really  something  previous  to  revelation,
some  antecedent  demonstration  of  reason,  to  assure  us  that  God  is,
and  withal  that  he  is  so  good  as  not  to  deceive  us ;  the  same
reason,  if  we  will  trust  to  it,  will  demonstrate  to  us  that  God  is  so
good  as  to  exceed  the  very  best  of  us  in  goodness.  And  after  this
manner  we  can  have  no  dread  or  suspicion  to  render  us  uneasy ;
for  it  is  malice  only,  and  not  goodness,  which  can  make  us  afraid.
There  is  an  odd  way  of  reasoning,  but  in  certain  distempers
of  mind  very  sovereign  to  those  who  can  apply  it ;  and  it  is  this  :
"  There  can  be  no  malice  but  where  interests  are  opposed.  A
universal  being  can  have  no  interest  opposite  ;  and  therefore  can
have  no  malice.""  If  there  be  a  general  mind,  it  can  have  no
particular  interest ;  but  the  general  good,  or  good  of  the  whole,

28


ENTHUSIASM

and  its  own  private  good,  must  of  necessity  be  one  and  the
same.  It  can  intend  nothing  besides,  nor  aim  at  any-
thing beyond,  nor  be  provoked  to  anything  contrary.  So  that
we  have  only  to  consider  whether  there  be  really  such  a  thing
as  a  mind  which  has  relation  to  the  whole,  or  not.  For  if  un-
happily there  be  no  mind,  we  may  comfort  ourselves,  however,
that  Nature  has  no  malice ;  if  there  be  really  a  mind,  we  may
rest  satisfied  that  it  is  the  best-natured  one  in  the  world.  The
last  case,  one  would  imagine,  should  be  the  most  comfortable ;
and  the  notion  of  a  common  parent  less  frightful  than  that  of
forlorn  Nature  and  a  fatherless  world.  Though,  as  religion  stands
amongst  us,  there  are  many  good  people  who  would  have  less
fear  in  being  thus  exposed,  and  would  be  easier,  perhaps,  in
their  minds,  if  they  were  assured  they  had  only  mere  Chance  to
trust  to.  For  nobody  trembles  to  think  there  should  be  no
God ;  but  rather  that  there  should  be  one.  This  however
would  be  otherwise,  if  Deity  were  thought  as  kindly  of  as
Humanity  ;  and  we  could  be  persuaded  to  believe,  that  if  there
really  was  a  God,  the  highest  goodness  must  of  necessity  belong
to  him,  without  any  of  those  defects  of  passion,^  those  mean-
nesses and  imperfections  which  we  acknowledge  such  in  ourselves,
which  as  good  men  we  endeavour  all  we  can  to  be  superior  to,
and  which  we  find  we  every  day  conquer  as  we  grow  better.

Methinks,  my  lord,  it  would  be  well  for  us  if,  before  we
ascended  into  the  higher  regions  of  divinity,  we  would  vouchsafe
to  descend  a  little  into  ourselves,  and  bestow  some  poor
thoughts  upon  plain  honest  morals.  When  we  had  once  looked
into  ourselves,  and  distinguished  well  the  nature  of  our  own
affections,  we  should  probably  be  fitter  judges  of  the  divineness

*  For  my  own  part,  says  honest  Plutarch,  I  had  rather  men  should  say
of  me,  "  That  there  neither  is  nor  ever  was  such  a  one  as  Plutarch  ;  than
they  should  say,  There  was  a  Plutarch,  an  unsteady,  changeable,  easily
provokable,  and  revengeful  man,  &vdpoyiros  a^i^aio^,  eyytterd/SoXos,  evxep^^
irpbs  dpy^v,  fuKpdXinros"  etc.  Plutarch,  de  Superstitione.  [Compare  Misc.  ii.
ch.  iiL]

29


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

of  a  character,  and  discern  better  what  affections  were  suitable
or  unsuitable  to  a  perfect  being.  We  might  then  understand
how  to  love  and  praise,  when  we  had  acquired  some  consistent
notion  of  what  was  laudable  or  lovely.  Otherwise  we  might
chance  to  do  God  little  honour,  when  we  intended  him  the
most.  For  'tis  hard  to  imagine  what  honour  can  arise  to  the
Deity  from  the  praises  of  creatures  who  are  unable  to  discern
what  is  praiseworthy  or  excellent  in  their  own  kind.

If  a  musician  were  cried  up  to  the  skies  by  a  cei'tain  set  of
people  who  had  no  ear  in  music,  he  would  surely  be  put  to
the  blush,  and  could  hardly,  with  a  good  countenance,  accept
the  benevolence  of  his  auditors,  till  they  had  acquired  a  more
competent  apprehension  of  him,  and  could  by  their  own  senses
find  out  something  really  good  in  his  performance.  Till  this
were  brought  about,  there  would  be  little  glory  in  the  case,
and  the  musician,  though  ever  so  vain,  would  have  little  reason
to  be  contented.

They  who  affect  praise  the  most,  had  rather  not  be  taken
notice  of  than  be  impertinently  applauded.  I  know  not  how
it  comes  about  that  he  who  is  ever  said  to  do  good  the  most
disinterestedly  should  be  thought  desirous  of  being  praised  so
lavishly,  and  be  supposed  to  set  so  high  a  rate  upon  so  cheap
and  low  a  thing  as  ignorant  commendation  and  forced  applause.

'Tis  not  the  same  with  goodness  as  with  other  qualities,
which  we  may  understand  very  well  and  yet  not  possess.  We
may  have  an  excellent  ear  in  music,  without  being  able  to
perform  in  any  kind.  We  may  judge  well  of  poetry,  without
being  poets  or  possessing  the  least  of  a  poetic  vein ;  but  we
can  have  no  tolerable  notion  of  goodness,  without  being  tolerably
good.  So  that  if  the  praise  of  a  divine  being  be  so  great  a
part  of  his  worship,  we  should,  methinks,  learn  goodness,  were
it  for  nothing  else  than  that  we  might  learn,  in  some  tolerable
manner,  how  to  praise.  For  the  praise  of  goodness  from  an
vmsound  hollow  heart  must  certainly  make  the  greatest  disso-
nance in  the  world.

80


ENTHUSIASM

Section  VI

Other  reasons,  my  lord,  there  are,  why  this  plain  home-spun
philosophy,  of  looking  into  ourselves,  may  do  us  wondrous
service,  in  rectifying  our  errors  in  religion.  For  there  is  a
sort  of  enthusiasm  of  second  hand.  And  when  men  find  no
original  commotions  in  themselves,  no  prepossessing  panic
which  bewitches  them,  they  are  apt  still,  by  the  testimony  of
others,  to  be  imposed  on,  and  led  credulously  into  the  belief
of  many  false  miracles.  And  this  habit  may  make  them
variable,  and  of  a  very  inconstant  faith,  easy  to  be  carried
away  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,  and  addicted  to  every  up-
start sect  or  superstition.  But  the  knowledge  of  our  passions
in  their  very  seeds,  the  measuring  well  the  growth  and  progress
of  enthusiasm,  and  the  judging  rightly  of  its  natural  force,
and  what  command  it  has  over  our  very  senses,  may  teach  us
to  oppose  more  successfully  those  delusions  which  come  armed
with  the  specious  pretext  of  moral  certainty  and  matter  of
fact.

The  new  prophesying  sect  I  made  mention  of  above,
pretend,  it  seems,  among  many  other  miracles,  to  have  had  a
most  signal  one,  acted  premeditately,  and  with  warning,  before
many  hundreds  of  people,  who  actually  give  testimony  to  the
truth  of  it.  But  I  would  only  ask,  whether  there  were  present,
among  those  hundreds,  any  one  person,  who  having  never  been
of  their  sect,  or  addicted  to  their  way,  will  give  the  same
testimony  with  them  ?  I  must  not  be  contented  to  ask,
whether  such  a  one  had  been  wholly  free  of  that  particular
enthusiasm  ?  but,  whether,  before  that  time,  he  was  esteemed
of  so  sound  a  judgment,  and  clear  a  head,  as  to  be  wholly  free
of  melancholy,  and  in  all  likelihood  incapable  of  all  enthusiasm
besides  ?  For  otherwise,  the  panic  may  have  been  caught ;
the  evidence  of  the  senses  lost,  as  in  a  dream ;  and  the  imagina-
tion so  inflamed,  as  in  a  moment  to  have  burnt  up  every
particle of  judgment  and  reason. The combustible  matters

31


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

lie  prepared  within,  and  ready  to  take  fire  at  a  spark ;  but
chiefly  in  a  multitude  seized  with  the  same  spirit.^  No  wonder
if  the  blaze  rises  so  of  a  sudden ;  when  innumerable  eyes  glow
with  the  passion,  and  heaving  breasts  are  labouring  with
inspiration ;  when  not  the  aspect  only,  but  the  very  breath
and  exhalations  of  men  are  infectious,  and  the  inspiring  disease
imparts  itself  by  insensible  transpiration.  I  am  not  a  divine
good  enough  to  resolve  what  spirit  that  was  which  proved  so
catching  among  the  ancient  prophets,  that  even  the  profane
Saul  was  taken  by  it.  But  I  learn  from  Holy  Scripture,  that
there  was  the  evil  as  well  as  the  good  spirit  of  prophecy.^  And
I  find  by  present  experience,  as  well  as  by  all  histories,  sacred
and  profane,  that  the  operation  of  this  spirit  is  everywhere
the  same  as  to  the  bodily  organs.

A  gentleman  who  has  writ  lately  in  defence  of  revived
prophecy,  and  has  since  fallen  himself  into  the  prophetic
ecstasies,  tells  us  "That  the  ancient  prophets  had  the  spirit
of  God  upon  them  under  ecstasy,  with  divers  strange  gestures
of  body  denominating  them  madmen  (or  enthusiasts),  as  appears
evidently  (says  he)  in  the  instances  of  Balaam,  Saul,  David,
Ezekiel,  Daniel,  etc."  And  he  proceeds  to  justify  this  by  the
practice  of  the  apostolic  times,  and  by  the  regulation  which
the  Apostle  himself  applies  to  these  seemingly  irregular  gifts,^
so  frequent  and  ordinary  (as  our  author  pretends)  in  the  primi-
tive church,  on  the  first  rise  and  spreading  of  Christianity.  But
I  leave  it  to  him  to  make  the  resemblance  as  well  as  he  can
between  his  own  and  the  apostolic  way.  I  only  know  that  the
symptoms  he  describes,  and  which  himself  (poor  gentleman  ! )
labours  under,  are  as  heathenish  as  he  can  possibly  pretend
them  to  be  Christian.  And  when  I  saw  him  lately  under  an
agitation  (as  they  call  it)  uttering  prophecy  in  a  pompous
Latin  style,  of  which,  out  of  his  ecstasy,  it  seems,  he  is  wholly

*  See  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.  [hereinafter].

*  See  1 Kings  xxii.  20,  etc.  ; 2  Chron.  xviii. 19,  etc.  ; and  [liere-
inafter]  Migc.  ii.  ch.  iiu  ^  1  Cor.  xiv.

82


ENTHUSIASM

incapable,  it  brought  into  my  mind  the  Latin  poet's  descrip-
tion of  the  Sibyl,  whose  agonies  were  so  perfectly  like  these —

Subito  non  vultus,  non  color  unus,
Non  comptae  mansere  comae,  sed  pectus  anhelum,
Et  rabie  fera  corda  tument ;  majorque  videri
Nee  mortale  sonans :  afflata  est  numine  quando
Jam  propiore  dei.  .  .  .  ^

And  again  presently  after  : —

Immanis  in  antro
Bacchatur  vates,  magnum  si  pectore  possit
Excussisse  deum  ;  tanto  magis  ille  fatigat
Os  rabidum,  fera  corda  doinans,Jingitquepre7ne7ido.^

Which  is  the  very  style  of  our  experienced  author.  "  For  the
inspired  (says  he)  undergo  a  probation,  wherein  the  spirit,  by
frequent  agitations,  forms  the  organs,  ordinarily  for  a  month
or  two  before  utterance.""

The  Roman  historian,  speaking  of  a  most  horrible  enthusiasm
which  broke  out  in  Rome  long  before  his  days,  describes  this
spirit  of  prophecy :  Viros,  velut  mente  capta,  cum  jactatione
fanatica  corporis  vaticinari.^  The  detestable  things  which  are
further  related  of  these  enthusiasts,  I  would  not  willingly  tran-
scribe ;  but  the  Senate's  mild  decree  in  so  execrable  a  case,  I
cannot  omit  copying ;  being  satisfied,  that  though  your  lordship
has  read  it  before  now,  you  can  read  it  again  and  again  with
admiration :  In  reliquum  deinde  (says  Livy)  S.  C.  cautum  est,
etc. Si  quis  tale  sacrum  solenne  et  necessarium  duceret,  nee

^  ["  Immediately  her  face  changes^  her  colour  flies,  her  hair  falls  in
disorder,  her  breast  heaves  and  her  heart  swells  with  mad  passion ;
greater  her  stature  seems,  and  her  voice  not  mortal,  for  she  is  breathed
upon  by  the  god  now  imminent." — Virgil,  Aeneid,  vi.  47-51.]

2  ["  The  prophetess  rages  monstrously  in  the  cave,  seeking  to  cast  from
her  breast  the  mighty  God  ;  so  much  the  more  he  compels  the  rabid
mouth,  ruling  the  wild  heart,  and  moulds  her  by  his  force." — Jb.  77-80.]

*  ["  Men  vaticinate  as  if  out  of  their  minds,  with  fanatical  convulsions
of  the  body." — Livy,  xxxix.  13.]

VOL.  I  88  D


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

sine  religione  et  piaculo  se  id  omittei'e  posse ;  apud  praetorem
urbanum  profiteretur :  praetor  senatum  consuleret.  Si  ei  per-
missum  esset,  cum  in  senatu  centum  non  minus  essent,  ita  id
sacrum  faceret;  dum  ne  plus  quinque  sacrificio  interessent,
neu  qua  pecunia  communis,  neu  quis  magister  sacrorum  aut
sacerdos  esset.  ^

So  necessary  it  is  to  give  way  to  this  distemper  of  enthusiasm,
that  even  that  philosopher  who  bent  the  whole  force  of  his
philosophy  against  superstition,  appears  to  have  left  room  for
visionary  fancy,  and  to  have  indirectly  tolerated  enthusiasm.
For  it  is  hard  to  imagine,  that  one  who  had  so  little  religious
faith  as  Epicurus,  should  have  so  vulgar  a  credulity  as  to
believe  those  accounts  of  armies  and  castles  in  the  air,  and  such
visionary  phenomena.  Yet  he  allows  them ;  and  then  thinks
to  solve  them  by  his  effluvia,  and  aerial  looking-glasses,  and
I  know  not  what  other  stuff;  which  his  Latin  poet,  however,
sets  off  beautifully,  as  he  does  all —

Rerum  simulacra  vagari
Multa  modis  multis  in  cunctas  undique  parteis
Tenuia,  quae  facile  inter  se  junguntur  in  auris,
Obvia  cum  veniunt,  ut  aranea  bracteaque  auri.

*****

Centauros  itaque  et  Scyllarum  membra  videmus
Cerbereasque  canum  facies  simulacraque  eorum
Quorum  morte  obita  tellus  amplectitur  ossa :
Omne  genus  quoniam  passim  simulacra  feruntur,


^  ["As  to  the  future,  the  Senate  enacted  that  if  any  one  should  believe
that  such  a  cult  was  religiously  necessary  to  him,  and  that  he  could  not
without  irreligion  and  impiety  forego  it,  he  should  inform  the  praetor  of
the  city,  who  should  consult  the  Senate.  If,  with  not  less  than  a  hundred
present,  the  Senate  should  give  permission,  the  rites  might  be  performed  ;
but  there  should  not  be  more  than  five  assisting  at  the  sacrifice,  nor  should
there  be  any  common  fund,  nor  any  master  of  the  rites,  nor  any  priest."
— Livy,  xzxix.  18.]

84


ENTHUSIASM

Partim  sponte  sua  quae  fiunt  acre  in  ipso,
Partim  quae  variis  ab  rebus  cumque  recedunt.^

Twas  a  sign  this  philosopher  believed  there  was  a  good
stock  of  visionary  spirit  originally  in  human  nature.  He  was
so  satisfied  that  men  were  inclined  to  see  visions,  that  rather
than  they  should  go  without,  he  chose  to  make  them  to  their
hand.  Notwithstanding  he  denied  the  principles  of  religion  to
be  natural,^  he  was  forced  tacitly  to  allow  there  was  a  wondrous
disposition  in  mankind  towards  supernatural  objects ;  and  that
if  these  ideas  were  vain,  they  were  yet  in  a  manner  innate,  or
such  as  men  were  really  born  to,  and  could  hardly  by  any  means
avoid.  From  which  concession,  a  divine,  methinks,  might  raise
a  good  argument  against  him,  for  the  truth  as  well  as  the
usefulness  of  religion.  But  so  it  is :  whether  the  matter  of
apparition  be  true  or  false,  the  symptoms  are  the  same,  and  the
passion  of  equal  force  in  the  person  who  is  vision-struck.  The
lymphatici  of  the  Latins  were  the  nympJiolepti  of  the  Greeks.
They  were  persons  said  to  have  seen  some  species  of  divinity,  as
either  some  rural  deity,  or  nymph,  which  threw  them  into  such
transports  as  overcame  their  reason.  The  ecstasies  expressed
themselves  outwardly  in  quakings,  tremblings,  tossings  of  the
head  and  limbs,  agitations,  and  (as  Livy  calls  them)  fanatical
throws  or  convulsions,  extemporary  prayer,  prophecy,  singing,
and  the  like.  All  nations  have  their  lymphatics  of  some  kind
or  another ;  and  all  churches,  heathen  as  well  as  Christian,  have
had  their  complaints  against  fanaticism.

One  would  think  the  ancients  imagined  this  disease  had

1  ["Many  simulacra  of  things,  thin,  manifold  in  number  and  form,
wander  about  in  all  manner  of  ways,  which  when  in  the  air  they  meet,
easily  conjoin,  like  cobwebs  or  gold-leaf.  .  .  .  Tlius  we  see  Centaurs  and
limbs  of  Scylla,  and  shapes  of  dogs  like  Cerberus,  and  the  phantasms  of
those  passed  away  whose  bones  the  earth  enfolds ;  since  everywhere  float
simulacra  of  every  kind,  partly  those  spontaneously  shaped  by  the  air
within  itself,  partly  those  thrown  off  by  various  things." — Lucretius,  iv.
724-737.]

2  Infra,  Treatise  u.  part  iii.  §  3.

85


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

some  relation  to  that  which  they  called  hydrophoby.  Whether
the  ancient  lymphatics  had  any  way  like  that  of  biting,  to
communicate  the  rage  of  their  distemper,  I  cannot  so  positively
determine.  But  certain  fanatics  there  have  been  since  the  time
of  the  ancients,  who  have  had  a  most  prosperous  faculty  of
communicating  the  appetite  of  the  teeth.  For  since  first  the
snappish  spirit  got  up  in  religion,  all  sects  have  been  at  it,  as
the  saying  is,  tooth  and  nail ;  and  are  never  better  pleased  than
in  worrying  one  another  without  mercy.

So  far  indeed  the  innocent  kind  of  fanaticism  extends  itself,
that  when  the  party  is  struck  by  the  apparition,  there  follows
always  an  itch  of  imparting  it,  and  kindling  the  same  fire  in
other  breasts.  For  thus  poets  are  fanatics  too.  And  thus
Horace  either  is  or  feigns  himself  lymphatic,  and  shows  what  an
effect  the  vision  of  the  nymphs  and  Bacchus  had  on  him —

Bacchum  ^  in  remotis  carmina  rupibus
Vidi  docentem,  credite  posteri,

Nymphasque  discentes.  .  .  .
Evoe  !  recenti  mens  trepidat  metu,
Plenoque  Bacchi  pectore  turbidum

Lymphatur^  ....

as  Heinsius  reads.

No  poet  (as  I  ventured  to  say  at  first  to  your  lordship)  can
do  anything  great  in  his  own  way  without  the  imagination  or
supposition  of  a  divine  presence,  which  may  raise  him  to  some
degree  of  this passion we are speaking of. Even  the  cold

^  \^'  Bacchus  have  I  seen  in  far-off  stony  places  teaching  his  songs  (after-
comers,  believe  me  !)  and  the  nymphs  conning  them.  .  .  .  Evoe  !  my
heart  trembles  with  the  still-felt  fear,  and  wildly  maddens  {lymphatur)  in  a
breast  filled  with  Bacchus." — Horace,  Odes,  n.  xix.  The  accepted  reading
is  laetatur,  "exults."]

*  So  again.  Sat.  i.  v.  97,  Gnatia  lymphis  iratis  exstructa,  where  Horace
wittily  treats  the  people  of  Gnatia  as  lymphatics  and  enthusiasts,  for
believing  a  miracle  of  their  priests  :  Credat  Judaeus  Apella,  Hor.  ibid.  See
Heinsius  and  Torrentius ;  and  the  quotation  in  the  following  notes,  iirb
tQv  3f  iz/x^wy,  etc.

86


ENTHUSIASM

Lucretius  makes  use  of  inspiration,  when  he  writes  against  it,
and  is  forced  to  raise  an  apparition  of  Nature,  in  a  divine  form,
to  animate  and  conduct  him  in  his  very  work  of  degrading
Nature,  and  despoiUng  her  of  all  her  seeming  wisdom  and
divinity —

Alma  Venus,  caeli  subter  labentia  signa

Quae  mare  navigerum,  quae  terras  frugiferenteis

Concelebras.  .  .  .

Quae  quoniam  rerum  naturam  sola  gubemas

Nee  sine  te  quidquam  dias  in  luminis  eras

Exoritur  neque  fit  laetum  neque  amabile  quidquam :

Te  sociam  studeo  scribundis  versibus  esse

Quos  ego  de  rerum  natura  pangere  conor

Memmiadae  nostro.^


Section VII

The  only  thing,  my  lord,  I  would  infer  from  all  this  is,  that
enthusiasm  is  wonderfully  powerful  and  extensive ;  that  it  is  a
matter  of  nice  judgment,  and  the  hardest  thing  in  the  world
to  know  fully  and  distinctly ;  since  even  atheism  ^  is  not  exempt
from  it.  For,  as  some  have  well  remarked,  there  have  been
enthusiastical  atheists.  Nor  can  divine  inspiration,  by  its  out-
ward marks,  be  easily  distinguished  from  it.  For  inspiration
is  a  real  feeling  of  the  Divine  Presence,  and  enthusiasm  a  false
one.  But  the  passion  they  raise  is  much  alike.  For  when  the
mind  is  taken  up  in  vision,  and  fixes  its  view  either  on  any  real
object,  or  mere  spectre  of  divinity ;  when  it  sees,  or  thinks  it

1  ["  Nutrient  Venus,  who  under  the  gliding  signs  of  heaven  fillest  with
life  the  ship-bearing  sea  and  the  fruitful  lands.  .  .  .  Since  thou  alone
rulest  the  nature  of  things,  nor  without  thee  ariseth  aught  to  the  holy
frontiers  of  light,  nor  groweth  anything  joyous  or  meet  for  love,  thee
would  I  have  for  helper  in  framing  the  song  I  seek  to  build  for  this  our
son  of  the  Memmian  line." — Lucretius,  i.  2-4,  22-26.]

2  See  [hereinafter]  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.  in  the  beginning.

87


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

sees,  anything  prodigious,  and  more  than  human ;  its  horror,
deHght,  confusion,  fear,  admiration,  or  whatever  passion  belongs
to  it,  or  is  uppermost  on  this  occasion,  will  have  something  vast,
immanef  and  (as  painters  say)  beyond  life.  And  this  is  what
gave  occasion  to  the  name  of  fanaticism,  as  it  was  used  by  the
ancients  in  its  original  sense,  for  an  apparition  transporting  the
mind.

Something  there  will  be  of  extravagance  and  fury,  when  the
ideas  or  images  received  are  too  big  for  the  narrow  human
vessel  to  contain.  So  that  inspiration  may  be  justly  called
divine  enthusiasm ;  for  the  word  itself  signifies  divine  presence,
and  was  made  use  of  by  the  philosopher  whom  the  earliest
Christian  Fathers  called  divine,  to  express  whatever  was  sublime
in  human  passions.^  This  was  the  spirit  he  allotted  to  heroes,
statesmen,  poets,  orators,  musicians,  and  even  philosophers  them-

^  &p'  oitffd  Sti  U7r6  Twv  'SvfiipQv  ix  vpopolas  aa<f>ui  ivdovffidffco  ,  .  .  roaavra  fi^v  trot
Kal  in  irXelu  #x"  fuivlai  yiyvofiiprii  diri  deCiv  \4yeiv  KoXi  fpya,  etc. — Phaedr.
Kai  Toiis  iroXiTiKoiii  ovx  i'lKiara  Toirwv  (fxufxev  hv  6elovs  re  erj/ot  Kcd  ivdovaiij^eiv. —
Meno.  iyvwv  oZv  hv  Kal  irepl  tCjv  iron}T(t)v  iv  6\Ly<{)  tovto,  6ti  oii  ao<t>lq.  irmdiev,  dXXA
(t)(icei  TLvl  Kal  ivdovarid^ovTei,  wawep  ol  Oeo/jLivTeis  Kal  xF')<^f^V^°^- — Apol.  In
particular  as  to  philosophers,  Plutarch  tells  us,  'twas  the  complaint  of
some  of  the  sour  old  Romans,  when  learning  first  came  to  them  from
Greece,  that  their  youth  grew  enthusiastic  with  philosophy.  For  speaking
of  one  of  the  philosophers  of  the  Athenian  Embassy,  he  says,  fpura  dnvdv
ifi^ipXriKe  rdis  vioii  v<f>  oD  rCi)v  &Wu)v  ijSovwv  Kal  diarpi^iip  iKireffdvrei  ivdovaiQai
vepl  <t>i\o(To^lav. — Plut.  Cato  Major.

[Plato,  Phaednis,  241  e,  seems  here  misquoted.  Tlie  accepted  text
means :  "I  suppose  you  know  that  I  shall  be  quite  possessed  (ipOovcnda-u)  by
the  nymphs,  to  whom  you  have  designedly  exposed  me."

Plato,  Menon,  99  n  :  ''  And,  among  them,  we  should  say  that  the  poli-
ticians were  specially  rapt  and  inspired  "  (ivOov^id^eif).

Plato,  Apol.  22  B  (slightly  misquoted).  The  right  version  would
give  :  **  So  I  observed  also  about  poets  in  a  short  time  that  they  did  not
compose  out  of  wisdom,  but  from  an  instinct  and  an  inspiration  (ivBovaid^ovres)
like  seers  and  prophets."

Plutarch,  Cato  Major,  22  :  "  He  put  a  spell  upon  young  men,  under
which  they  give  up  other  pleasures  and  amusements,  and  are  possessed  by
philosophy  "  (^iydovffi&ffi).']

88


ENTHUSIASM

selves.  Nor  can  we,  of  our  own  accord,  forbear  ascribing  to  a
noble  enthusiasm  1  whatever  is  greatly  performed  by  any  of  these.
So  that  almost  all  of  us  know  something  of  this  principle.  But
to  know  it  as  we  should  do,  and  discern  it  in  its  several  kinds,
both  in  ourselves  and  others ;  this  is  the  great  work,  and  by
this  means  alone  we  can  hope  to  avoid  delusion.  For  to  judge
the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God,  we  must  antecedently
judge  our  own  spirit,  whether  it  be  of  reason  and  sound  sense ;
whether  it  be  fit  to  judge  at  all,  by  being  sedate,  cool,  and  im-
partial, free  of  every  biassing  passion,  every  giddy  vapour,  or
melancholy  fume.^  This  is  the  first  knowledge  and  previous
judgment :  "  To  understand  ourselves,  and  know  what  spirit  we
are  of."  Afterwards  we  may  judge  the  spirit  in  others,  consider
what  their  personal  merit  is,  and  prove  the  validity  of  their
testimony  by  the  solidity  of  their  brain.  By  this  means  we
may  prepare  ourselves  with  some  antidote  against  enthusiasm.
And  this  is  what  I  have  dared  affirm  is  best  performed  by
keeping  to  good-humour.  For  otherwise  the  remedy  itself  may
turn  to  the  disease.

And  now,  my  lord,  having,  after  all,  in  some  measure  justified
enthusiasm,  and  owned  the  word,  if  I  appear  extravagant  in
addressing  to  you  after  the  manner  I  have  done,  you  must  allow
me  to  plead  an  impulse.  You  must  suppose  me  (as  with  truth
you  may)  most  passionately  yours ;  and  with  that  kindness  which
is  natural  to  you  on  other  occasions,  you  must  tolerate  your
enthusiastic  friend,  who,  excepting  only  in  the  case  of  this  over-
fonvard  zeal,  must  ever  appear,  with  the  highest  respect,  my
lord.  Your  Lordship's,  etc.

^  Of  this  passion,  in  the  nobler  and  higher  sense,  see  more  [hereinafter]
in  the  Inquiry  Concerning  Virtue,  bk.  i.  part  iii.  §  3,  end  ;  Moralists,  part
iii,  §  2 ;  Miscellaneous  Reflections,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.

*  [Compare  the  more  extended  argument  of  Locke,  Essay,  bk.  iv.  ch.
xix.,  which  is  here  condensed.]


39


TREATISE II

SEN8US  COMMUNIS;  (

AN  ESSAY  ON  THE  FEEEDOM

OF

WIT  AND  HUMOUK

IN  A  LETTER  TO A FRIEND


hac  urget  lupus^  hac  canis.  .  ,  .

HoR.  Sat.  II.  ii.


Printed  first  in  the  year  MDCCIX.


F.vU-«>««^  ^  f\^^tA^


AN  ESSAY  ON  THE  FREEDOM  OF  WIT
AND  HUMOUR

PART  I
Section I

I  HAVE  been  considering,  my  friend,  what  your  fancy  was,
to  express  such  a  surprise  as  you  did  the  other  day,  when  I
happened  to  speak  to  you  in  commendation  of  raillery.  Was
it  possible  you  should  suppose  me  so  grave  a  man  as  to  dislike
all  conversation  of  this  kind  ?  or  were  you  afraid  I  should  not
stand  the  trial,  if  you  put  me  to  it,  by  making  the  experiment
in  my  own  case  ?

I  must  confess  you  had  reason  enough  for  your  caution  if
you  could  imagine  me  at  the  bottom  so  true  a  zealot  as  not  to
bear  the  least  raillery  on  my  own  opinions.  'Tis  the  case,  I
know,  with  many.  Whatever  they  think  grave  or  solemn,  they
suppose  must  never  be  treated  out  of  a  grave  and  solemn  way ;
though  what  another  thinks  so,  they  can  be  contented  to  treat
otherwise ;  and  are  forward  to  try  the  edge  of  ridicule  against
any  opinions  besides  their  own.

The  question  is,  whether  this  be  fair  or  no.?  and,  whether
it  be  not  just  and  reasonable  to  make  as  free  with  our  own
opinions  as  with  those  of  other  people  ?  For  to  be  sparing  in
this  case  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  piece  of  selfishness.  We  may
be  charged  perhaps  with  wilful  ignorance  and  blind  idolatry  for
having  taken  opinions  upon  trust,  and  consecrated  in  ourselves
certain  idol-notions,  which  we  will  never  suffer  to  be  unveiled

43


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

or  seen  in  open  light.  They  may  perhaps  be  monsters,  and  not
divinities,  or  sacred  truths,  which  are  kept  thus  choicely  in  some
dark  corner  of  our  minds.  The  spectres  may  impose  on  us,
whilst  we  refuse  to  turn  them  every  way,  and  view  their  shapes
and  complexions  in  every  light.  For  that  which  can  be  shown
only  in  a  certain  light  is  questionable.  Truth,  'tis  supposed,
may  bear  all  lights ;  and  one  of  those  principal  lights,  or  natural
mediums,  by  which  things  are  to  be  viewed,  in  order  to  a
thorough  recognition,  is  ridicule  itself,  or  that  manner  of  proof
by  which  we  discern  whatever  is  liable  to  just  raillery  in  any
subject.  So  much,  at  least,  is  allowed  by  all  who  at  any  time
appeal  to  this  criterion.  The  gravest  gentlemen,  even  in  the
gravest  subjects,  are  supposed  to  acknowledge  this,  and  can
have  no  right,  'tis  thought,  to  deny  others  the  freedom  of
this  appeal ;  whilst  they  are  free  to  censure  like  other  men,
and  in  their  gravest  arguments  make  no  scruple  to  ask.  Is  it
not  ridiculous .''

Of  this  affair,  therefore,  I  design  you  should  know  fully
what  my  sentiments  are.  And  by  this  means  you  will  be  able
to  judge  of  me,  whether  I  was  sincere  the  other  day  in  the
defence  of  raillery,  and  can  continue  still  to  plead  for  those
ingenious  friends  of  ours,  who  are  often  censured  for  their
humoiu"  of  this  kind,  and  for  the  freedom  they  take  in  such  an
airy  way  of  conversation  and  ^vriting.

Section II

In  good  earnest,  when  dne  considers  what  use  is  sometimes
made  of  this  species  of  wit,  and  to  what  an  excess  it  has  risen  of
late  in  some  characters  of  the  age,  one  may  be  startled  a  little,
and  in  doubt  what  to  think  of  the  practice,  or  whither  this
rallying  humour  will  at  length  carry  us.  It  has  passed  from
the  men  of  pleasure  to  the  men  of  business.  Politicians  have
been  infected  with  it ;  and  the  grave  affairs  of  State  have  been
treated  with  an  air  of  irony  and  banter. The  ablest  negotiators

44


FREEDOM OF AVIT AND HUMOUR

have  been  known  the  notablest  buffoons ;  the  most  celebrated
authors,  the  greatest  mastei*s  of  burlesque.

There  is  indeed  a  kind  of  defensive  raillery  (if  I  may  so  call
it)  which  I  am  willing  enough  to  allow  in  affairs  of  whatever
kind ;  when  the  spirit  of  curiosity  would  force  a  discovery  of
more  truth  than  can  conveniently  be  told.  For  we  can  never  7
do  more  injury  to  truth  than  by  discovering  too  much  of  it  I
on  some  occasions.  ""Tis  the  same  with  understandings  as  with
eyes :  to  such  a  cei-tain  size  and  make  just  so  much  light  is
necessary,  and  no  more.  Whatever  is  beyond,  brings  darkness
and  confusion.

'Tis  real  humanity  and  kindness  to  hide  strong  truths  from
tender  eyes.  And  to  do  this  by  a  pleasant  amusement  is  easier
and  civiller  than  by  a  harsh  denial  or  remarkable  reserve.  But
to  go  about  industriously  to  confound  men,  in  a  mysterious
manner,  and  to  make  advantage  or  draw  pleasure  from  that
perplexity  they  are  thrown  into  by  such  unceii:ain  talk,  is  as
unhandsome  in  a  way  of  raillery  as  when  done  with  the  gi*eatest
seriousness,  or  in  the  most  solemn  way  of  deceit.  It  may  be
necessary,  as  well  now  as  heretofore,  for  wise  men  to  speak  in
parables,  and  with  a  double  meaning,  that  the  enemy  may  be
amused,  and  they  only  who  have  eai's  to  hear  may  hear.  But
^tis  certainly  a  mean,  impotent,  and  dull  sort  of  wit  which
amuses  all  alike,  and  leaves  the  most  sensible  man,  and  even  a
friend,  equally  in  doubt,  and  at  a  loss  to  understand  what  one's
real  mind  is,  upon  any  subject.

This  is  that  gross  sort  of  raillery  which  is  so  offensive  in
good  company.  And  indeed  there  is  as  much  difference  between
one  sort  and  another  as  between  fair-dealing  and  hypocrisy,  or
between  the  genteelest  wit  and  the  most  scurrilous  buffoonery.
But  by  freedom  of  conversation  this  illiberal  kind  of  wit  will
lose  its  credit.  For  wit  is  its  own  remedy.  Liberty  and
commerce  bring  it  to  its  true  standard.  The  only  danger
is,  the  laying  an  embargo.  The  same  thing  happens  here,
as  in  the  case  of  trade. Impositions  and  restrictions  reduce

45


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

it  to  a  low  ebb.  Nothing  is  so  advantageous  to  it  as  a  free
port^

We  have  seen  in  our  own  time  the  decline  and  ruin  of  a
false  sort  of  wit,  which  so  much  delighted  our  ancestors,  that
their  poems  and  plays,  as  well  as  sermons,  were  full  of  it.  All
humour  had  something  of  the  quibble.  The  veiy  language  of
the  Court  was  punning.  But  'tis  now  banished  the  town,  and
all  good  company :  there  are  only  some  few  footsteps  of  it  in
the  country ;  and  it  seems  at  last  confined  to  the  nurseries  of
youth,  as  the  chief  entertainment  of  pedants  and  their  pupils.
And  thus  in  other  re§pects  wit  will  mend  upon  our  hands,  and
humour  will  refine  itself,  if  we  take  care  not  to  tamper  with  it,
and  bring  it  under  constraint,  by  severe  usage  and  rigorous
prescriptions.  All  politeness  is  owing  to  liberty.  We  polish
one  another,  and  rub  off  our  corners  and  rough  sides  by  a  sort
of  amicable  collision.  To  restrain  this,  is  inevitably  to  bring
a  rust  upon  men's  understandings.  Tis  a  destroying  of  civility,
good  breeding,  and  even  charity  itself,  under  pretence  of  main-
taining it.

Section  III

To  describe  true  raillery  would  be  as  hard  a  matter,  and  perhaps
as  little  to  the  purpose,  as  to  define  good  breeding.  None  can
understand  the  speculation,  beside  those  who  have  the  practice.
Yet  every  one  thinks  himself  well-bred ;  and  the  formallest
pedant  imagines  he  can  rally  with  a  good  grace  and  humour.
I  have  known  some  of  those  grave  gentlemen  undertake  to  correct
an  author  for  defending  the  use  of  raillery,  who  at  the  same

^  [This  is  one  of  a  number  of  passages  in  the  literature  of  two  or  more
centuries  ago  showing  a  belief  in  Free  Trade  before  it  became  a  legislative
principle.  Shaftesbury  had  doubtless  profited  by  the  teaching  of  Dudley
Northj  who  in  his  economics  was  closely  followed  by  Locke.  Two  genera-
tions earlier,  Pepys  (under  date  1664,  Feb,  29)  cites  Sir  Philip  Warwick
as  ingeniously  expounding  the  "  paradox  "  that  it  does  not  impoverish  the
nation  to  export  legs  than  it  imports.]

46


FREEDOM OF WIT AND HUMOUR

time  have  upon  every  turn  made  use  of  that  weapon,  though
they  were  naturally  so  very  awkward  at  it.  And  this  I  believe
may  be  observed  in  the  case  of  many  zealots,  who  have  taken
upon  them  to  answer  our  modern  free-writers.  The  tragical
gentlemen,  with  the  grim  aspect  and  mien  of  true  inquisitors,
have  but  an  ill  grace  when  they  vouchsafe  to  quit  their  austerity,
and  be  jocose  and  pleasant  with  an  adversary,  whom  they  would
choose  to  treat  in  a  very  different  manner.  For  to  do  them
justice,  had  they  their  wills,  I  doubt  not  but  their  conduct  and
mien  would  be  pretty  much  of  a  piece.  They  would  in  all
probability  soon  quit  their  farce,  and  make  a  thorough  tragedy.
But  at  present  there  is  nothing  so  ridiculous  as  this  Janus-face
of  writei-s,  who  with  one  countenance  force  a  smile,  and  with
another  show  nothing  beside  rage  and  fury.  Having  entered  the
lists,  and  agreed  to  the  fair  laws  of  combat  by  wit  and  argument,
they  have  no  sooner  proved  their  weapon,  than  you  hear  them
crying  aloud  for  help,  and  delivering  over  to  the  secular  arm.

There  cannot  be  a  more  preposterous  sight  than  an  execu-
!  tioner  and  a  merry -Andrew  acting  their  part  upon  the  same
stage.  Yet  I  am  persuaded  any  one  will  find  this  to  be  the  real
picture  of  certain  modem  zealots  in  their  controversial  writings.
They  are  no  more  masters  of  gravity  than  they  are  of  good-
humour.  The  first  always  runs  into  harsh  severity,  and  the
latter  into  an  awkward  buffoonery.  And  thus  between  anger
and  pleasure,  zeal  and  drollery,  their  writing  has  much  such  a
gi'ace  as  the  play  of  humoi"some  children,  who,  at  the  same
instant,  are  both  peevish  and  wanton,  and  can  laugh  and  cry
almost  in  one  and  the  same  breath.

How  agreeable  such  writings  are  like  to  prove,  and  of  what
effect  towards  the  winning  over  or  convincing  those  who  are
supposed  to  be  in  error,  I  need  not  go  about  to  explain.  Nor
can  I  wonder,  on  this  account,  to  hear  those  public  lamentations
of  zealots,  that  whilst  the  books  of  their  adversaries  are  so
current,  their  answei-s  to  them  can  hardly  make  their  way  into
the  world,  or  be  taken  the  least  notice  of. Pedantry  and

47


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


I


bigotry  are  mill-stones  able  to  sink  the  best  book  which  carries
the  least  part  of  their  dead  weight.  The  temper  of  the  peda-
gogue suits  not  with  the  age.  And  the  world,  however  it  may
be  taught,  will  not  be  tutored.  If  a  philosopher  speaks,  men
hear  him  willingly  while  he  keeps  to  his  philosophy.  So  is  a
Christian  heard  while  he  keeps  to  his  professed  charity  and
meekness.  In  a  gentleman  we  allow  of  pleasantry  and  raillery
as  being  managed  always  with  good  breeding,  and  never  gross  or
clownish.  But  if  a  mere  scholastic,  intrenching  upon  all  these
characters,  and  writing  as  it  were  by  starts  and  rebounds  from
one  of  these  to  another,  appears  upon  the  whole  as  little  able
to  keep  the  temper  of  Christianity  as  to  use  the  reason  of  a
philosopher  or  the  raillery  of  a  man  of  breeding,  what  wonder
is  it,  if  the  monstrous  product  of  such  a  jumbled  brain  be
ridiculous  to  the  world  ?

If  you  think,  my  friend,  that  by  this  description  I  have  done
wrong  to  these  zealot-writers  in  religious  controversy,  read  only
a  few  pages  in  any  one  of  them  (even  where  the  contest  is  not
abroad,  but  within  their  own  pale)  and  then  pronounce.

Section  IV

But  now  that  I  have  said  thus  much  conceiTiing  authors  and
writings,  you  shall  hear  my  thoughts,  as  you  have  desired,  upon
the  subject  of  conversation,  and  particularly  a  late  one  of  a  free
kind,  which  you  remember  I  was  present  at,  with  some  friends
of  yours,  whom  you  fancied  I  should  in  great  gravity  have
condemned.

'Twas,  I  must  own,  a  very  diverting  one,  and  perhaps  not
the  less  so  for  ending  as  abruptly  as  it  did,  and  in  such  a  sort  of
confusion  as  almost  brought  to  nothing  whatever  had  been
advanced  in  the  discourse  before.  Some  particulars  of  this
conversation  may  not  perhaps  be  so  proper  to  commit  to
paper.  'Tis  enough  that  I  put  you  in  mind  of  the  conversation
in  general. A  great  many  fine  schemes,  'tis  true,  were  destroyed ;

48


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

many  grave  reasonings  overturned ;  but  this  being  done  without
offence  to  the  parties  concerned,  and  with  improvement  to  the
good-humour  of  the  company,  it  set  the  appetite  the  keener  to
such  conversations.  And  I  am  persuaded,  that  had  Reason  herself
been  to  judge  of  her  own  interest,  she  would  have  thought  she
received  more  advantage  in  the  main  from  that  easy  and  familiar
way,  than  from  the  usual  stiff  adherence  to  a  particular  opinion.

But  perhaps  you  may  still  be  in  the  same  humour  of  not
believing  me  in  earnest.  You  may  continue  to  tell  me  I  affect
to  be  paradoxical  in  commending  a  convei'sation  as  advantageous
to  reason,  which  ended  in  such  a  total  uncertainty  of  what  reason
had  seemingly  so  well  established.

To  this  I  answer,  that  according  to  the  notion  I  have  of
reason,  neither  the  written  treatises  of  the  learned,  nor  the  set
discourses  of  the  eloquent,  are  able  of  themselves  to  teach  the
use  of  it.  'Tis  the  habit  alone  of  reasoning  which  can  make  a
reasoner.  And  men  can  never  be  better  invited  to  the  habit
than  when  they  find  pleasure  in  it.  A  freedom  of  raillery,
a  liberty  in  decent  language  to  question  everything,  and
an  allowance  of  unravelling  or  refuting  any  argument,  with-
out offence  to  the  arguer,  are  the  only  terms  which  can
render  such  speculative  conversations  any  way  agreeable.  For,
to  say  truth,  they  have  been  rendered  burdensome  to  mankind
by  the  strictness  of  the  laws  prescribed  to  them,  and  by  the
prevailing  pedantry  and  bigotry  of  those  who  reign  in  them,
and  assume  to  themselves  to  be  dictators  in  these  provinces.

Semper  ego  auditor  tantum .?  ^  is  as  natural  a  case  of  com-
plaint in  divinity,  in  morals,  and  in  philosophy,  as  it  was  of  old
the  satirist's  in  poetry. Vicissitude  is  a  mighty  law  of  discourse,
and  mightily  longed  for  by  mankind. In  matter  of  reason,  more  i
is  done  in  a  minute  or  two,  by  way  of  question  and  reply,  than  |
by  a  continued  discourse  of  whole  hours. Orations  are  fit  only
to  move the  passions ; and  the  power  of  declamation is to
terrify,  exalt,  ravish,  or  delight,  rather  than  satisfy  or  instruct.
^  ["Must  I  always  be  a  listener  only.''" — Juvenal,  Sat.  i.  1.]
VOL.  I  49  E


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

A  free  conference  is  a  close  fight.  The  other  way,  in  comparison
to  it,  is  merely  a  brandishing  or  beating  the  air.  To  be
obstructed  therefore  and  manacled  in  conferences,  and  to  be
confined  to  hear  orations  on  certain  subjects,  must  needs  give  us
a  distaste,  and  render  the  subjects  so  managed  as  disagreeable
as  the  managers.  Men  had  rather  reason  upon  trifles,  so  they
may  reason  freely,  and  without  the  imposition  of  authority,  than
on  the  useful  lest  and  best  subjects  in  the  world,  where  they
are  held  under  a  restraint  and  fear.

Nor  is  it  a  wonder  that  men  are  generally  such  faint
reasoners,  and  care  so  little  to  argue  strictly  on  any  trivial
subject  in  company,  when  they  dare  so  little  exert  their  reason
in  greater  matters,  and  are  forced  to  argue  lamely  where  they
have  need  of  the  greatest  activity  and  strength.  The  same
thing  therefore  happens  here  as  in  strong  and  healthy  bodies
which  are  debarred  their  natural  exercise  and  confined  in  a
narrow  space.  They  are  forced  to  use  odd  gestures  and
contortions.  They  have  a  sort  of  action,  and  move  still,
though  with  the  worst  grace  imaginable.  For  the  animal
spirits  in  such  sound  and  active  limbs  cannot  lie  dead  or
without  employment.  And  thus  the  natural  free  spirits  of
ingenious  men,  if  imprisoned  and  controlled,  will  find  out
other  ways  of  motion  to  relieve  themselves  in  their  constraint ;
and  whether  it  be  in  burlesque,  mimicry,  or  buffoonery,  they
will  be  glad  at  any  rate  to  vent  themselves,  and  be  revenged  on
their  constrainers.

If  men  are  forbid  to  speak  their  minds  seriously  on  certain
subjects,  they  will  do  it  ironically.  If  they  are  forbid  to  speak
at  all  upon  such  subjects,  or  if  they  find  it  really  dangerous
to  do  so,  they  will  then  redouble  their  disguise,  involve  them-
selves in  mysteriousness,  and  talk  so  as  hardly  to  be  understood,
or  at  least  not  plainly  interpreted,  by  those  who  are  disposed
to  do  them  a  mischief  And  thus  raillery  is  brought  more  in
fashion,  and  runs  into  an  extreme.  'Tis  the  persecuting  spirit
has  raised  the  bantering  one ;  and  want  of  liberty  may  account

50


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

for  want  of  a  true  politeness,  and  for  the  corruption  or  wrong
use  of  pleasantry  and  humour.

If  in  this  respect  we  strain  the  just  measure  of  what  we
call  urbanity,  and  are  apt  sometimes  to  take  a  buffooning
rustic  air,  we  may  thank  the  ridiculous  solemnity  and  sour
humour  of  our  pedagogues ;  or  rather,  they  may  thank  them-
selves, if  they  in  particular  meet  with  the  heaviest  of  this  kind
of  treatment.  For  it  will  naturally  fall  heaviest  where  the
constraint  has  been  the  severest.  The  greater  the  weight  is,
the  bitterer  will  be  the  satire.  The  higher  the  slavery,  the
more  exquisite  the  buffoonery.

That  this  is  really  so,  may  appear  by  looking  on  those
countries  where  the  spiritual  tyranny  is  highest.  For  the
greatest  of  buffoons  are  the  Italians ;  and  in  their  writings,
in  their  freer  sort  of  conversations,  on  their  theatres,  and  in
their  streets,  buffoonery  and  burlesque  are  in  the  highest
vogue.  'Tis  the  only  manner  in  which  the  poor  cramped
wretches  can  discharge  a  free  thought.  We  must  yield  to  them
the  superiority  in  this  sort  of  wit.  For  what  wonder  is  it  if
we,  who  have  more  of  liberty,  have  less  dexterity  in  that
egregious  way  of  raillery  and  ridicule .?

Section V

'Tis  for  this  reason,  I  verily  believe,  that  the  ancients  discover
so  little  of  this  spirit,  and  that  there  is  hardly  such  a  thing
found  as  mere  burlesque  in  any  authors  of  the  politer  ages.
The  manner  indeed  in  which  they  treated  the  very  gravest
subjects  was  somewhat  different  from  that  of  our  days.  Their
treatises  were  generally  in  a  free  and  familiar  style.  They
chose  to  give  us  the  representation  of  real  discourse  and
converse,  by  treating  their  subjects  in  the  way  of  dialogue  ^
and  free  debate.  The  scene  was  commonly  laid  at  table,  or
in  the  public  walks  or  meeting-places ;  and  the  usual  wit  and

*  See  the  following  treatise,  viz.  Soliloquy,  part  i.  §  3.

51


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

humour  of  their  real  discourses  appeared  in  those  of  their  own
composing.  And  this  was  fair.  For  without  wit  and  humour,
reason  can  hardly  have  its  proof  or  be  distinguished.  The
magisterial  voice  and  high  strain  of  the  pedagogue  commands
reverence  and  awe.  'Tis  of  admirable  use  to  keep  under-
standings at  a  distance  and  out  of  reach.  The  other  manner,
on  the  contrary,  gives  the  fairest  hold,  and  suffers  an  antagonist
to  use  his  full  strength  hand  to  hand  upon  even  ground.

'Tis  not  to  be  imagined  what  advantage  the  reader  has
when  he  can  thus  cope  with  his  author,  who  is  willing  to  come
on  a  fair  stage  with  him,  and  exchange  the  tragic  buskin  for
an  easier  and  more  natural  gait  and  habit.  Grimace  and  tone
are  mighty  helps  to  imposture.  And  many  a  formal  piece  of
sophistry  holds  proof  under  a  severe  brow,  which  would  not
pass  under  an  easy  one.  'Twas  the  saying  of  an  ancient  sage,^
"  that  humour  was  the  only  test  of  gravity ;  and  gravity  of
humour.  For  a  subject  which  would  not  bear  raillery  was
suspicious ;  and  a  jest  which  would  not  bear  a  serious  examina-
tion was  certainly  false  wit."

But  some  gentlemen  there  are  so  full  of  the  spirit  of
bigotry  and  false  zeal,  that  when  they  hear  principles  ex-
amined, sciences  and  arts  inquired  into,  and  matters  of
importance  treated  with  this  frankness  of  humour,  they  imagine
presently  that  all  professions  must  fall  to  the  ground,  all
establishments  come  to  ruin,  and  nothing  orderly  or  decent
be  left  standing  in  the  world.  They  fear,  or  pretend  to  fear,
that  religion  itself  will  be  endangered  by  this  free  way,  and  are
therefore  as  much  alarmed  at  this  liberty  in  private  conversation,

^  Gorgias  Leontinus  apud  Arist.  Rhetor,  iii.  18,  ttiv  (xiv  ffirovdrjv  dia-
4>6elpnv  yiKwTi  rbv  di  7AwTa  <rirovSy,  which  the  translator  renders,  seria  risu,
risum  seriis  discutere.  [As  is  complained  by  Brown  in  his  Essays  on  the
Characteristics  (i.  §  9),  Shaftesbury  here  perverts  the  passage  he  cites.
The  saying  of  Gorgias,  endorsed  by  Aristotle,  was  simply  that  in
argument  one  should  meet  serious  pleading  with  humour,  and  humour
with  serious  pleading.  The  second  sentence  put  by  Shaftesbury  in
quotation  marks  is  his  own  addendum.]

52


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

and  under  pinident  management,  as  if  it  were  grossly  used  in
public  company,  or  before  the  solemnest  assembly.  But  the
case,  as  I  apprehend  it,  is  far  different.  For  you  are  to
remember,  my  friend,  that  I  am  writing  to  you  in  defence
only  of  the  liberty  of  the  club,  and  of  that  sort  of  freedom
which  is  taken  amongst  gentlemen  and  friends  who  know  one
another  perfectly  well.  And  that  'tis  natural  for  me  to  defend
liberty  with  this  restriction,  you  may  infer  from  the  very  notion
I  have  of  liberty  itself.

'Tis  sui'ely  a  violation  of  the  freedom  of  public  assemblies
for  any  one  to  take  the  chair  who  is  neither  called  nor  invited
to  it.  To  start  questions,  or  manage  debates,  which  offend
the  public  ear,  is  to  be  wanting  in  that  respect  which  is  due
to  common  society.  Such  subjects  should  either  not  be  treated
at  all  in  public,  or  in  such  a  manner  as  to  occasion  no  scandal
or  disturbance.  The  public  is  not,  on  any  account,  to  be
laughed  at  to  its  face ;  or  so  reprehended  for  its  follies  as  to
make  it  think  itself  contemned.  And  what  is  contrary  to  good
breeding  is  in  this  respect  as  contrary  to  liberty.  It  belongs  )
to  men  of  slavish  principles  to  affect  a  superiority  over  the
vulgar,  and  to  despise  the  multitude.  The  lovers  of  mankind  •
respect  and  honour  conventions  and  societies  of  men.  And  in
mixed  company,  and  places  where  men  are  met  promiscuously
on  account  of  diversion  or  affairs,  'tis  an  imposition  and  hard-
ship to  force  them  to  hear  what  they  dislike,  and  to  treat  of
matters  in  a  dialect  which  many  who  are  present  have  perhaps
been  never  used  to.  'Tis  a  breach  of  the  harmony  of  public
conversation  to  take  things  in  such  a  key  as  is  above  the
common  reach,  puts  others  to  silence,  and  robs  them  of  their
privilege  of  turn.  But  as  to  private  society,  and  what  passes
in  select  companies,  where  friends  meet  knowingly,  and  with
that  very  design  of  exercising  their  wit,  and  looking  freely  into
all  subjects,  I  see  no  pretence  for  any  one  to  be  offended  at
the  way  of  raillery  and  humour,  which  is  the  very  life  of  such
conversations; the  only thing  which makes  good company,

53


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  frees  it  from  the  formality  of  business,  and  the  tutorage
and  dogmaticalness  of  the  schools.


Section  VI

To  return  therefore  to  our  argument.  If  the  best  of  our  modem
conversations  are  apt  to  run  chiefly  upon  trifles ;  if  rational
discourses  (especially  those  of  a  deeper  speculation)  have  lost
their  credit,  and  are  in  disgrace  because  of  their  formality ;
there  is  reason  for  more  allowance  in  the  way  of  humour  and
gaiety.  An  eaisier  method  of  treating  these  subjects  will  make
them  more  agreeable  and  familiar.  To  dispute  about  them,
will  be  the  same  as  about  other  matters.  They  need  not  spoil
good  company,  or  take  from  the  ease  or  pleasure  of  a  polite
conversation.  And  the  oftener  these  conversations  are  renewed,
the  better  will  be  their  effect.  We  shall  grow  better  reasoners,
by  reasoning  pleasantly,  and  at  our  ease ;  taking  up  or  laying
down  these  subjects  as  we  fancy.  So  that,  upon  the  whole,  I
must  own  to  you,  I  cannot  be  scandalised  at  the  raillery  you
took  notice  of,  nor  at  the  effect  it  had  upon  our  company.
The  humour  was  agreeable,  and  the  pleasant  confusion  which
the  conversation  ended  in,  is  at  this  time  as  pleasant  to  me
upon  reflection,  when  I  consider  that  instead  of  being  dis-
couraged from  resuming  the  debate,  we  were  so  much  the
readier  to  meet  again  at  any  time,  and  dispute  upon  the  same
subjects,  even  with  more  ease  and  satisfaction  than  before.

We  had  been  a  long  while  entertained,  you  know,  upon  the
subject  of  morality  and  religion.  And  amidst  the  different
opinions  started  and  maintained  by  several  of  the  parties,  with
great  life  and  ingenuity,  one  or  other  would  every  now  and
then  take  the  liberty  to  appeal  to  common  sense.  Every  one
allowed  the  appeal,  and  was  willing  to  stand  the  trial.  No  one
but  was  assured  common  sense  would  justify  him.  But  when
issue  was  joined,  and  the  cause  examined  at  the  bar,  there  could
be  no  judgment  given. The parties  however  were  not  less

54


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

forward  in  renewing  their  appeal  on  the  very  next  occasion
which  presented.  No  one  would  offer  to  call  the  authority  of
the  court  in  question,  till  a  gentleman,  whose  good  under-
standing was  never  yet  brought  in  doubt,  desired  the  company,
very  gravely,  that  they  would  tell  him  what  common  sense
was.

"  If  by  the  word  sense  we  were  to  understand  opinion  and
judgment,  and  by  the  word  common  the  generality  or  any
considerable  part  of  mankind,  "'twould  be  hard,  he  said,  to
discover  where  the  subject  of  common  sense  could  lie.  For  that
which  was  according  to  the  sense  of  one  part  of  mankind,  was
against  the  sense  of  another.  And  if  the  majority  were  to
determine  common  sense,  it  would  change  as  often  as  men
changed.  That  which  was  according  to  common  sense  to-day,
would  be  the  contrary  to-morrow,  or  soon  after.''

But  notwithstanding  the  different  judgments  of  mankind  in
most  subjects,  there  were  some  however  in  which  'twas  supposed
they  all  agreed,  and  had  the  same  thoughts  in  common. — The
question  was  asked  still.  Where  ?  "  For  whatever  was  of  any
moment,  'twas  supposed,  might  be  reduced  under  the  head  of
religion,  policy,  or  morals.

"  Of  the  differences  in  religion  there  was  no  occasion  to
speak ;  the  case  was  so  fully  known  to  all,  and  so  feelingly
understood  by  Christians,  in  particular,  among  themselves.
They  had  made  sound  experiment  upon  one  another;  each
party  in  their  turn.  No  endeavours  had  been  wanting  on  the
side  of  any  particular  sect.  Whichever  chanced  to  have  the
power,  failed  not  of  putting  all  means  in  execution,  to  make
their  private  sense  the  public  one.  But  all  in  vain.  Common
sense  was  as  hard  still  to  determine  as  catholic  or  orthodox.
What  with  one  was  inconceivable  mystery,  to  another  was  of
easy  comprehension.  What  to  one  was  absurdity,  to  another
was  demonstration.

"  As  for  policy ;  what  sense  or  whose  could  be  called
common,  was  equally  a  question. If  plain  British  or  Dutch

55


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

sense  were  right,  Turkish  and  French  sense  must  certainly  be
very  wrong.  And  as  mere  nonsense  as  passive  obedience
seemed,  we  found  it  to  be  the  common  sense  of  a  great  party
amongst  ourselves,  a  greater  party  in  Europe,  and  perhaps  the
greatest  part  of  all  the  world  besides.

"  As  for  morals ;  the  difference,  if  possible,  was  still  wider.
For  without  considering  the  opinions  and  customs  of  the  many
barbarous  and  illiterate  nations,  we  saw  that  even  the  few  who
had  attained  to  riper  letters,  and  to  philosophy,  could  never  as
yet  agree  on  one  and  the  same  system,  or  acknowledge  the  same
moral  principles.  And  some  even  of  our  most  admired  modem
philosophers  had  fairly  told  us,  that  virtue  and  vice  had,  after
all,  no  other  law  or  measure  than  mere  fashion  and  vogue."

It  might  have  appeared  perhaps  unfair  in  our  friends  had
they  treated  only  the  graver  subjects  in  this  manner,  and
suffered  the  lighter  to  escape.  For  in  the  gayer  part  of  life,
our  follies  are  as  solemn  as  in  the  most  serious.  The  fault  is,
we  carry  the  laugh  but  half-way.  The  false  earnest  is  ridiculed,
but  the  false  jest  passes  secure,  and  becomes  as  errant  deceit  as
the  other.  Our  diversions,  our  plays,  our  amusements  become
solemn.  We  dream  of  happiness  and  possessions,  and  enjoy-
ments in  which  we  have  no  understanding,  no  certainty;  and
yet  we  pursue  these  as  the  best  known  and  most  certain  things
in  the  world.  There  is  nothing  so  foolish  and  deluding  as  a
partial  scepticism.^  For  whilst  the  doubt  is  cast  only  on  one
side,  the  certainty  grows  so  much  stronger  on  the  other.
Whilst  only  one  face  of  folly  appears  ridiculous,  the  other
grows  more  solemn  and  deceiving.

But  'twas  not  thus  with  our  friends.  They  seemed  better
critics,  and  more  ingenious  and  fair  in  their  way  of  questioning
received  opinions,  and  exposing  the  ridicule  of  things.  And  if
you  will  allow  me  to  carry  on  their  humour,  I  will  venture  to
make  the  experiment  throughout ;  and  try  what  certain  know-
ledge or  assurance  of  things  may  be  recovered,  in  that  very  way,
'  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  1.

56


FREEDOM OF  WIT AND HUMOUR

by  which  all  certainty,  you  thought,  was  lost,  and  an  endless
scepticism  introduced.


PART  II

Section I

If  a  native  of  Ethiopia  were  on  a  sudden  transported  into
Europe,  and  placed  either  at  Paris  or  Venice  at  a  time  of
carnival,  when  the  general  face  of  mankind  was  disguised,  and
almost  every  creature  wore  a  mask,  'tis  probable  he  would  for
some  time  be  at  a  stand,  before  he  discovered  the  cheat;  not
imagining  that  a  whole  people  could  be  so  fantastical  as  upon
agreement,  at  an  appointed  time,  to  transform  themselves  by
a  variety  of  habits,  and  make  it  a  solemn  practice  to  impose
on  one  another,  by  this  universal  confusion  of  characters  and
persons.  Though  he  might  at  first  perhaps  have  looked  on
this  with  a  serious  eye,  it  would  be  hardly  possible  for  him  to
hold  his  countenance  when  he  had  perceived  what  was  carrying
on.  The  Europeans,  on  their  side,  might  laugh  perhaps  at  this
simplicity.  But  our  Ethiopian  would  certainly  laugh  with
better  reason.  'Tis  easy  to  see  which  of  the  two  would  be
ridiculous.  For  he  who  laughs  and  is  himself  ridiculous,  bears
a  double  share  of  ridicule.  However,  should  it  so  happen  that
in  the  transport  of  ridicule,  our  Ethiopian,  having  his  head  still
running  upon  masks,  and  knowing  nothing  of  the  fair  complexion
and  common  dress  of  the  Europeans,  should  upon  the  sight  of  a
natural  face  and  habit,  laugh  just  as  heartily  as  before,  would
not  he  in  his  turn  become  ridiculous,  by  carrying  the  jest  too
far ;  when  by  a  silly  presumption  he  took  nature  for  mere  art,
and  mistook  perhaps  a  man  of  sobriety  and  sense  for  one  of
those  ridiculous  mummers  ?

There  was  a  time  when  men  were  accountable  only  for  their
actions  and  behaviour. Their  opinions  were  left  to  themselves.

57


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

They  had  liberty  to  differ  in  these  as  in  their  faces.  Every
one  took  the  air  and  look  which  was  natural  to  him.  But  in
process  of  time  it  was  thought  decent  to  mend  men's  counte-
nances, and  render  their  intellectual  complexions  uniform  and
of  a  sort.  Thus  the  magistrate  became  a  dresser,  and  in  his
turn  was  dressed  too,  as  he  deserved,  when  he  had  given  up  his
power  to  a  new  order  of  tire-men.  But  though  in  this  extra-
ordinary conjuncture  'twas  agreed  that  there  was  only  one  certain
and  true  dress,  one  single  peculiar  air,  to  which  it  was  necessary
all  people  should  conform,  yet  the  misery  was,  that  neither  the
magistrate  nor  the  tire-men  themselves  could  resolve  which  of
the  various  modes  was  the  exact  true  one.  Imagine,  now,  what
the  effect  of  this  must  needs  be  ;  when  men  became  persecuted
thus  on  every  side  about  their  air  and  feature,  and  were  put  to
their  shifts  how  to  adjust  and  compose  their  mien,  according  to
the  right  mode ;  when  a  thousand  models,  a  thousand  patterns
of  dress  were  current,  and  altered  every  now  and  then,  upon
occasion,  according  to  fashion  and  the  humour  of  the  times.
Judge  whether  men's  countenances  were  not  like  to  grow  con-
strained, and  the  natural  visage  of  mankind,  by  this  habit,
distorted,  convulsed,  and  rendered  hardly  knowable.

But  as  unnatural  or  artificial  as  the  general  face  of  things
may  have  been  rendered  by  this  unhappy  care  of  dress,  and
over -tenderness  for  the  safety  of  complexions,  we  must  not
therefore  imagine  that  all  faces  are  alike  besmeared  or  plastered.
All  is  not  fucus  or  mere  varnish.  Nor  is  the  face  of  Truth  less
fair  and  beautiful,  for  all  the  counterfeit  vizards  which  have
been  put  upon  her.  We  must  remember  the  Carnival,  and  what
the  occasion  has  been  of  this  wild  concourse  and  medley ;  who
were  the  institutors  of  it ;  and  to  what  purpose  men  were  thus
set  awork  and  amused.  We  may  laugh  sufficiently  at  the
original  cheat ;  and,  if  pity  will  suffer  us,  may  make  ourselves
diversion  enough  with  the  folly  and  madness  of  those  who
are  thus  caught  and  practised  on  by  these  impostures;  but
we  must  remember  withal  our  Ethiopian,  and  beware  lest  by

58


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

taking  plain  Nature  for  a  vizard,  we  become  more  ridiculous
than  the  people  whom  we  ridicule.  Now  if  a  jest  or  ridicule
thus  strained  be  capable  of  leading  the  judgment  so  far  astray,
"'tis  probable  that  an  excess  of  fear  or  horror  may  work  the  same
effect.

Had  it  been  your  fortune,  my  friend,  to  have  lived  in  Asia
at  the  time  when  the  Magi  ^  by  an  egregious  imposture  got
possession  of  the  empire,  no  doubt  you  would  have  had  a  de-
testation of  the  act ;  and  perhaps  the  very  persons  of  the  men
might  have  grown  so  odious  to  you  that  after  all  the  cheats
and  abuses  they  had  committed,  you  might  have  seen  them
dispatched  with  as  relentless  an  eye  as  our  later  European
ancestors  saw  the  destruction  of  a  like  politic  body  of  conjurers,
the  Knights  Templars,  who  were  almost  become  an  over-match
for  the  civil  sovereign.  Your  indignation  perhaps  might  have
can'ied  you  to  propose  the  razing  all  monuments  and  memorials
of  these  magicians.  You  might  have  resolved  not  to  leave  so
much  as  their  houses  standing.  But  if  it  had  happened  that
these  magicians,  in  the  time  of  their  dominion,  had  made  any
collection  of  books,  or  compiled  any  themselves,  in  which  they
had  treated  of  philosophy,  or  morals,  or  any  other  science,  or
part  of  learning,  would  you  have  carried  your  resentment  so  far
as  to  have  extirpated  these  also,  and  condemned  every  opinion
or  doctrine  they  had  espoused,  for  no  other  reason  than  merely
because  they  had  espoused  it.^*  Hardly  a  Scythian,  a  Tartar,
or  a  Goth,  would  act  or  reason  so  absurdly.  Much  less  would
you,  my  friend,  have  carried  on  this  magophony,  or  priest-
massacre,  with  such  a  barbarous  zeal.  For,  in  good  earnest,  to
destroy  a  philosophy  in  hatred  to  a  man,  implies  as  errant  a
Tartar-notion  as  to  destroy  or  murder  a  man  in  order  to
plunder  him  of  his  wit,  and  get  the  inheritance  of  his  under-
standing.

I  must  confess  indeed  that  had  all  the  institutions,  statutes,
and  regulations  of  this  ancient  hierarchy  resembled  the  funda-

^  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.

59


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

mental  one  of  the  Order  itself,^  they  might  with  a  great  deal
of  justice  have  been  suppressed ;  for  one  cannot,  without  some
abhorrence,  read  that  law  of  theirs  : —

Nam  magus  ex  matre  et  gnato  gignatur  oportet.^

But  the  conjurers  (as  we"'ll  rather  suppose)  having  considered
that  they  ought  in  their  principle  to  appear  as  fair  as  possible
to  the  world,  the  better  to  conceal  their  practice,  found  it  highly
for  their  interest  to  espouse  some  excellent  moral  rules,  and
establish  the  very  best  maxims  of  this  kind.  They  thought  it
for  their  advantage  perhaps,  on  their  first  setting  out,  to  re-
commend the  greatest  purity  of  religion,  the  greatest  integrity
of  life  and  manners.  They  may  perhaps,  too,  in  general,  have
preached  up  charity  and  good-will.  They  may  have  set  to  view
the  fairest  face  of  human  nature ;  and  together  with  their  bye-
laws  and  political  institutions  have  interwove  the  honestest
morals  and  best  doctrine  in  the  world.

How  therefore  should  we  have  behaved  ourselves  in  this
affair.'*  How  should  we  have  carried  ourselves  towards  this
order  of  men,  at  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  their  cheat,  and
ruin  of  their  empire  .'*  Should  we  have  fallen  to  work  instantly
with  their  systems,  struck  at  their  opinions  and  doctrines  without
distinction,  and  erected  a  contrary  philosophy  in  their  teeth  ?
Should  we  have  flown  at  every  religious  and  moral  principle,
denied  every  natural  and  social  affection,  and  rendered  men  as
much  wolves  ^  as  was  possible  to  one  another,  whilst  we  described
them  such ;  and  endeavoured  to  make  them  see  themselves  by
far  more  monstrous  and  corrupt  than  with  the  worst  intentions
it  was  ever  possible  for  the  worst  of  them  to  become  .'* — ^This,

^  Uipffai  Si  Kal  fiAXiffra  airGiv  61  ffo<t>iav  icKeiv  SoKOvurei,  ol  Mdyoi,  yafiovci  tAj
firjrepas. — Sext.  Empir.  Pyrrh.  iii.  24.

["  The  Persians,  and  especially  their  Wise  Men,  the  Magi,  marry  their
mothers."]

2  ["  For  a  Magus  must  be  bom  of  a  mother  and  her  son." — Catullus,
87  (90).]

^  Infra,  part  iii.  §  3,  and  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  5,  at  the  end.

60


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

you'll  say,  doubtless  would  have  been  a  very  preposterous  part,
and  could  never  have  been  acted  by  other  than  mean  spirits,
such  as  had  been  held  in  awe  and  over-frighted  by  the  Magi.^

And  yet  an  able  and  witty  philosopher^  of  our  nation  was,
we  know,  of  late  years,  so  possessed  with  a  horror  of  this  kind,
that  both  with  respect  to  politics  and  morals  he  directly  acted
in  this  spirit  of  massacre.  The  fright  he  took  upon  the  sight
of  the  then  governing  powers  who  unjustly  assumed  the  authority
of  the  people,  gave  him  such  an  abhoiTence  of  all  popular
government,  and  of  the  very  notion  of  liberty  itself,  that  to
extinguish  it  for  ever,  he  recommends  the  very  extinguishing  of
Letters,  and  exhorts  princes  not  to  spare  so  much  as  an  ancient
Roman  or  Greek  historian.  ...  Is  not  this  in  truth  somewhat
Gothic?  And  has  not  our  philosopher,  in  appearance,  something
of  the  savage,  that  he  should  use  philosophy  and  learning  as
the  Scythians  are  said  to  have  used  Anacharsis  and  others,  for
having  visited  the  wise  of  Greece,  and  learnt  the  manners  of  a
polite  people  ?

His  quarrel  with  religion  was  the  same  as  with  liberty.
The  same  times  gave  him  the  same  terror  in  this  other  kind.
He  had  nothing  before  his  eyes  beside  the  ravage  of  enthusiasm,
and  the  artifice  of  those  who  raised  and  conducted  that  spirit.
And  the  good  sociable  man,  as  savage  and  unsociable  as  he
would  make  himself  and  all  mankind  appear  by  his  philosophy,
exposed  himself  during  his  life,  and  took  the  utmost  pains  that
after  his  death  we  might  be  delivered  from  the  occasion  of  these

1  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.  in  the  notes.

2  Mr.  Hobbes,  who  thus  expresses  himself:  "By  reading  of  these
Greek  and  Latin  authors^  men  from  their  childhood  have  gotten  a  habit
(under  a  false  show  of  liberty)  of  favouring  tumults,  and  of  licentious
controlling  the  actions  of  their  sovereigns." — Leviathan,  part  ii.  ch.  xxi.
p.  111.  By  this  reasoning  of  Mr,  Hobbes  it  should  follow  that  there  can
never  be  any  tumults  or  deposing  of  sovereigns  at  Constantinople  or  in
Mogol.  See  again,  pp.  171  and  377,  and  what  he  intimates  to  his  prince
(p.  193)  concerning  this  extirpation  of  ancient  literature,  in  favour  of  his
Leviathan  thesis  and  new  philosophy.

61


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

terrors.  He  did  his  utmost  to  show  us  "  that  both  in  religion
and  morals  we  were  imposed  on  by  our  governors ;  that  there
was  nothing  which  by  nature  inclined  us  either  way ;  nothing
which  naturally  drew  us  to  the  love  of  what  was  without  or
beyond  ourselves.""  ^  Though  the  love  of  such  great  truths  and
sovereign  maxims,  as  he  imagined  these  to  be,  made  him  the
most  laborious  of  all  men  in  composing  systems  of  this  kind  for
our  use ;  and  forced  him,  notwithstanding  his  natural  fear,  to
run  continually  the  highest  risk  of  being  a  martyr  for  our
deliverance.

Give  me  leave  therefore,  my  friend,  on  this  occasion,  to
prevent  your  seriousness,  and  assure  you  that  there  is  no  such
mighty  danger  as  we  are  apt  to  imagine  from  these  fierce  pro-
secutore  of  superstition,  who  are  so  jealous  of  every  religious
or  moral  principle.  Whatever  savages  they  may  appear  in
philosophy,  they  are  in  their  common  capacity  as  civil  persons
as  one  can  wish.  Their  free  communicating  of  their  principles
may  witness  for  them.  'Tis  the  height  of  sociableness  to  be
thus  friendly  and  communicative.

If  the  principles,  indeed,  were  concealed  from  us,  and  made
a  mystery,  they  might  become  considerable.  Things  are  often
made  so  by  being  kept  as  secrets  of  a  sect  or  party  ;  and  nothing
helps  this  more  than  the  antipathy  and  shyness  of  a  contrary
party.  If  we  fall  presently  into  hoiTors  and  consternation  upon
the  hearing  maxims  which  are  thought  poisonous,  we  are  in  no
disposition  to  use  that  familiar  and  easy  part  of  reason  which
is  the  best  antidote.  The  only  poison  to  reason  is  passion.
For  false  reasoning  is  soon  redressed  where  passion  is  removed.
But  if  the  very  hearing  certain  propositions  of  philosophy  be
sufficient  to  move  our  passion,  'tis  plain  the  poison  has  already
gained  on  us,  and  we  are  effectually  prevented  in  the  use  of  our
reasoning  faculty.

Were  it  not  for  the  prejudices  of  this  kind,  what  should
hinder  us  from  diverting  ourselves  with  the  fancy  of  one  of
^  Inquiry  Concerning  Virtue,  bk,  ii.  part  i.  §  1,  at  the  end.

62


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

these  modem  reformers  we  have  been  speaking  of?  What
should  we  say  to  one  of  these  anti-zealots,  who,  in  the  zeal  of
such  a  cool  philosophy,  should  assure  us  faithfully  "that  we
were  the  most  mistaken  men  in  the  world  to  imagine  there  was
any  such  thing  as  natural  faith  or  justice?  For  that  it  was
only  force  and  power  which  constituted  right.  That  there  was
no  such  thing  in  reality  as  virtue ;  no  principle  of  order  in
things  above  or  below ;  no  secret  charm  or  force  of  nature  by
which  every  one  was  made  to  operate  willingly  or  unwillingly
towards  public  good,  and  punished  and  tormented  if  he  did
otherwise.""  ...  Is  not  this  the  very  charm  itself?  Is  not  the
gentleman  at  this  instant  under  the  power  of  it  ?  .  .  .  "  Sir !
the  philosophy  you  have  condescended  to  reveal  to  us  is  most
extraordinary.  We  are  beholden  to  you  for  yo\ir  instruction.
But,  pray,  whence  is  this  zeal  in  our  behalf?  What  are  we  to
you  ?  Are  you  our  father  ?  Or  if  you  were,  why  this  concern
for  us?  Is  there  then  such  a  thing  as  natural  affection?  If
not,  why  all  this  pains,  why  all  this  danger  on  our  account?
Why  not  keep  this  secret  to  yourself?  Of  what  advantage  is
it  to  you  to  deliver  us  from  the  cheat?  The  more  are  taken
in  it  the  better.  'Tis  directly  against  your  interest  to  undeceive
us  and  let  us  know  that  only  private  interest  governs  you,  and
that  nothing  nobler,  or  of  a  larger  kind,  should  govern  us  whom
you  converse  with.  Leave  us  to  ourselves,  and  to  that  notable
art  by  which  we  are  happily  tamed,  and  rendered  thus  mild  and
sheepish.  Tis  not  fit  we  should  know  that  by  nature  we  are  all
wolves.  Is  it  possible  that  one  who  has  really  discovered  him-
self such,  should  take  pains  to  communicate  such  a  discovery  ?  "

Section  II

In  reality,  my  friend,  a  severe  brow  may  well  be  spared  on  this
occasion,  when  we  are  put  thus  upon  the  defence  of  common
honesty  by  such  fair  honest  gentlemen,  who  are  in  practice  so
different  from  what  they  would  appear  in  speculation. Knaves

68


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

I  know  there  are  in  notion  and  principle,  as  well  as  in  practice,
who  think  all  honesty  as  well  as  religion  a  mere  cheat,  and  by
a  very  consistent  reasoning  have  resolved  deliberately  to  do
whatever  by  power  or  art  they  are  able  for  their  private
advantage ;  but  such  as  these  never  open  themselves  in  friend-
ship to  others.  They  have  no  such  passion  for  truth,  or  love  for
mankind.  They  have  no  quarrel  with  religion  or  morals ;  but
know  what  use  to  make  of  both  upon  occasion.  If  they  ever
discover  their  principles,  'tis  only  at  unawares.  They  are  sure
to  preach  honesty  and  go  to  church.

On  the  other  side,  the  gentlemen  for  whom  I  am  apologising
cannot  however  be  called  hypocrites.  They  speak  as  ill  of
themselves  as  they  possibly  can.  If  they  have  hard  thoughts  of
human  nature,  'tis  a  proof  still  of  their  humanity  that  they
give  such  warning  to  the  world.  If  they  represent  men  by
nature  treacherous  and  wild,  'tis  out  of  care  for  mankind,  lest
by  being  too  tame  and  trusting,  they  should  easily  be  caught.

Impostor's  naturally  speak  the  best  of  human  nature,  that
they  may  the  easier  abuse  it.  These  gentlemen,  on  the  contrary,
speak  the  worst;  and  had  rather  they  themselves  should  be
censured  with  the  rest,  than  that  a  few  should  by  impostui*e
prevail  over  the  many.  For  'tis  opinion  of  goodness  which
creates  easiness  of  trust,  and  by  trust  we  are  betrayed  to  power ;
our  very  reason  being  thus  captivated  by  those  in  whom  we
come  insensibly  to  have  an  implicit  faith.  But  supposing  one
another  to  be  by  nature  such  very  savages,  we  shall  take  care  to
come  less  in  one  another's  power ;  and  apprehending  power  to  be
insatiably  coveted  by  all,  we  shall  the  better  fence  against  the
evil ;  not  by  giving  all  into  one  hand  (as  the  champion  of  this
cause  would  have  us),  but,  on  the  contrary,  by  a  right  division
and  balance  of  power,  and  by  the  restraint  of  good  laws  and
limitations,  which  may  secure  the  public  liberty.

Should  you  therefore  ask  me,  whether  I  really  thought  these
gentlemen  were  fully  persuaded  of  the  principles  they  so  often
advance  in  company  ?  I  should  tell  you,  that  though  I  would

64


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

not  absolutely  arraign  the  gentlemen's  sincerity,  yet  there  was
something  of  mystery  in  the  case,  more  than  was  imagined.  The
reason,  perhaps,  why  men  of  wit  delight  so  much  to  espouse  these
paradoxical  systems,  is  not  in  truth  that  they  are  so  fully  satisfied
with  them,  but  in  a  view  the  better  to  oppose  some  other  systems,
which  by  their  fair  appearance  have  helped,  they  think,  to  bring
mankind  under  subjection.  They  imagine  that  by  this  general
scepticism,  which  they  would  introduce,  they  shall  better  deal
with  the  dogmatical  spirit  which  prevails  in  some  particular
subjects.  And  when  they  have  accustomed  men  to  bear  con-
tradiction in  the  main,  and  hear  the  nature  of  things  disputed
at  large,  it  may  be  safer  (they  conclude)  to  argue  separately
upon  certain  nice  points  in  which  they  are  not  altogether  so  well
satisfied.  So  that  from  hence,  perhaps,  you  may  still  better
apprehend  why,  in  conversation,  the  spirit  of  raillery  prevails  so
much,  and  notions  are  taken  up  for  no  reason  besides  their  being
odd  and  out  of  the  way.

Section  III

But  let  who  will  condemn  the  humour  thus  described,  for  my
part  I  am  in  no  such  apprehension  from  this  sceptical  kind  of
wit.  Men  indeed  may,  in  a  serious  way,  be  so  wrought  on  and
confounded,  by  different  modes  of  opinion,  different  systems  and
schemes  imposed  by  authority  that  they  may  wholly  lose  all
notion  or  comprehension  of  truth.  I  can  easily  apprehend  what
effect  awe  has  over  men's  understandings.  I  can  very  well
suppose  men  may  be  frighted  out  of  their  wits,  but  I  have  no
apprehension  they  should  be  laughed  out  of  them.  I  can  hardly
imagine  that  in  a  pleasant  way  they  should  ever  be  talked  out
of  their  love  for  society,  or  reasoned  out  of  humanity  and
common  sense.  A  mannerly  wit  can  hurt  no  cause  or  interest
for  which  I  am  in  the  least  concerned;  and  philosophical  specula-
tions, politely  managed,  can  never  surely  render  mankind  more
unsociable  or  uncivilised.  This  is  not  the  quarter  from  whence
VOI-.  I  65  F


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

I  can  possibly  expect  an  inroad  of  savageness  and  barbarity.
And  by  the  best  of  my  observation  I  have  learnt  that  virtue  is
never  such  a  sufferer,  by  being  contested,  as  by  being  betrayed.
My  fear  is  not  so  much  from  its  witty  antagonists,  who  give  it
exercise,  and  put  it  on  its  defence,  as  from  its  tender  nurses,
who  are  apt  to  overlay  it,  and  kill  it  with  excess  of  care  and
cherishing.

I  have  known  a  building,  which  by  the  officiousness  of  the
workmen  has  been  so  shored  and  screwed  up  on  the  side  where
they  pretended  it  had  a  leaning,  that  it  has  at  last  been  turned
the  contrary  way  and  overthrown.  There  has  something,
perhaps,  of  this  kind  happened  in  morals.  Men  have  not  been
contented  to  show  the  natural  advantages  of  honesty  and  virtue.
They  have  rather  lessened  these,  the  better,  as  they  thought,
to  advance  another  foundation.  They  have  made  virtue  so
mercenary  a  thing,  and  have  talked  so  much  of  its  rewards,  that
one  can  hardly  tell  what  there  is  in  it,  after  all,  which  can  be
worth  rewarding.  For  to  be  bribed  only  or  terrified  into  an
honest  practice,  bespeaks  little  of  real  honesty  or  worth.  We
may  make,  'tis  true,  whatever  bargain  we  think  fit ;  and  may
bestow  in  favour  what  ovei'plus  we  please ;  but  there  can  be  no
excellence  or  wisdom  in  voluntarily  rewarding  what  is  neither
estimable  nor  deserving.  And  if  virtue  be  not  really  estimable
in  itself,  I  can  see  nothing  estimable  in  following  it  for  the  sake
of  a  bargain.

If  the  love  of  doing  good  be  not,  of  itself,  a  good  and  right
inclination,  I  know  not  how  there  can  possibly  be  such  a  thing
as  goodness  or  virtue.  If  the  inclination  be  right,  'tis  a  pervert-
ing of  it,  to  apply  it  solely  to  the  reward,  and  make  us  conceive
such  wonders  of  the  grace  and  favour  which  is  to  attend  virtue,
when  there  is  so  little  shown  of  the  intrinsic  worth  or  value  of
the  thing  itself.

I  could  be  almost  tempted  to  think  that  the  true  reason
why  some  of  the  most  heroic  virtues  have  so  little  notice  taken
of  them  in  our  holy  religion,  is  because  there  would  have  been

66


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

no  room  left  for  disinterestedness  had  they  been  entitled  to  a
share  of  that  infinite  reward  which  Providence  has  by  revelation
assigned  to  other  duties.  Private  friendship,^  and  zeal  for  the
public  and  our  country,  are  virtues  purely  voluntary  in  a
Christian.  They  are  no  essential  parts  of  his  charity.  He  is
not  so  tied  to  the  affairs  of  this  life,  nor  is  he  obliged  to  enter
into  such  engagements  with  this  lower  world,  as  are  of  no  help
to  him  in  acquiring  a  better.  His  conversation  is  in  heaven.
Nor  has  he  occasion  for  such  supernumerary  cares,  or  embarrass-
ments here  on  earth,  as  may  obstruct  his  way  thither,  or  retard
him  in  the  careful  task  of  working  out  his  own  salvation.  If
nevertheless  any  portion  of  reward  be  reserved  hereafter  for  the
generous  part  of  a  patriot,  or  that  of  a  thorough  friend,  this  is

^  By  private  friendship  no  fair  reader  can  here  suppose  is  meant  that
common  benevolence  and  charity  which  every  Christian  is  obliged  to  show
towards  all  men,  and  in  particular  towards  his  fellow-Christians,  his  neigh-
bour, brother,  and  kindred,  of  whatever  degree  ;  but  that  peculiar  relation
which  is  formed  by  a  consent  and  harmony  of  minds,  by  mutual  esteem,
and  reciprocal  tenderness  and  affection  ;  and  which  we  emphatically  call  a
friendship.  Such  was  that  between  the  two  Jewish  heroes  after  mentioned,
whose  love  and  tenderness  was  surpassing  that  of  women  (2  Sam.  i.).
Such  were  those  friendships  described  so  frequently  by  poets,  between
Pylades  and  Orestes,  'ITieseus  and  Pirithous,  with  many  others.  Such
were  those  between  philosophers,  heroes,  and  the  greatest  of  men  ;  between
Socrates  and  Antisthenes,  Plato  and  Dion,  Epaminondas  and  Pelopidas,
Scipio  and  Laelius,  Cato  and  Brutus,  Thrasea  and  Helvidius.  And  such
there  may  have  lately  been,  and  are  still  perhaps  in  our  own  age,  though
envy  suffers  not  the  few  examples  of  this  kind  to  be  remarked  in  public.
The  author's  meaning  is  indeed  so  plain  of  itself,  that  it  needs  no  explanatory
apology  to  satisfy  an  impartial  reader.  As  for  others  who  object  the
singularity  of  the  assertion,  as  differing  (they  suppose)  from  what  our
reverend  doctors  in  religion  commonly  maintain,  they  may  read  what  the
learned  and  pious  Bishop  Taylor  says  in  his  Treatise  of  Friendship.  "  You
inquire,"  says  he,  "  how  far  a  dear  and  a  perfect  friendship  is  authorised  by
the  principles  of  Christianity  }  To  this  I  answer,  that  the  word  friendship
in  the  sense  we  commonly  mean  by  it,  is  not  so  much  as  named  in  the
New  Testament,  and  our  religion  takes  no  notice  of  it.  You  think  it
strange  ;  but  read  on,  before  you  spend  so  much  as  the  beginning  of  a
passion  or  a  wonder  upon  it. There  is  mention  of  friendship  of  the  world ;

67


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

.^11  behind  the  curtain,  and  happily  concealed  from  us;  that
we  may  be  the  more  deserving  of  it  when  it  comes.

It  appears  indeed  under  the  Jewish  dispensation  that  each
of  these  virtues  hatf  their  illustrious  examples,  and  were  in  some
manner  recommended  to  us  as  honourable,  and  worthy  our
imitation.  Even  Saul  himself,  as  ill  a  prince  as  he  is  represented,
appears  both  living  and  dying  to  have  been  respected  and
praised  for  the  love  he  bore  his  native  country.  And  the  love
which  was  so  remarkable  between  his  son  and  his  successor,  gives
us  a  noble  view  of  a  disinterested  friendship,  at  least  on  one  side.
But  the  heroic  virtue  of  these  persons  had  only  the  common
reward  of  praise  attributed  to  it,  and  could  not  claim  a  future
recompense  under  a  religion  which  taught  no  future  state,  nor
exhibited  any  rewards  or  punishments,  besides  such  as  were
temporal,  and  had  respect  to  the  written  law.

and  it  is  said  to  be  enmity  with  God  ;  but  the  word  is  nowhere  else  named,
or  to  any  other  purpose,  in  all  the  New  Testament.  It  speaks  of  friends
often  ;  but  by  friends  are  meant  our  acquaintance,  or  our  kindred,  the
relatives  of  our  family,  or  our  fortune,  or  our  sect,  etc. — And  I  think  I
have  reason  to  be  confident,  that  the  word  friend  (speaking  of  human
intercourse)  is  no  other  ways  used  in  the  Gospels,  or  Epistles,  or  Acts  of
the  Apostles. "  And  afterwards, "  Christian  charity,"  says  he,  "  is  friendship
to  all  the  world ;  and  when  friendships  were  the  noblest  things  in
the  world,  charity  was  little,  like  the  sun  drawn  in  at  a  chink,  or  his
beams  drawn  into  the  centre  of  a  burning-glass.  But  Christian  charity  is
friendship  expanded  like  the  face  of  the  sun,  when  it  mounts  above  the
eastern  hills."  In  reality  the  good  Bishop  draws  all  his  notions  as  well  as
examples  of  private  friendship  from  the  heathen  world,  or  from  the  times
preceding  Christianity.  And  after  citing  a  Greek  author,  he  immediately
adds  :  "  Of  such  immortal,  abstracted,  pure  friendships,  indeed,  there  is
no  great  plenty ;  but  they  who  are  the  same  to  their  friend  avbirpoOev,  when
he  is  in  another  country,  or  in  another  world,  are  fit  to  preserve  the  sacred
fire  for  eternal  sacrifices,  and  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  those  exemplary
friendships  of  the  best  men,  which  have  filled  the  world  with  history  and
wonder  ;  for  in  no  other  sense  but  this  can  it  be  true  that  friendships  are
pure  loves,  regarding  to  do  good  more  than  to  receive  it.  He  that  is  a
friend  after  death,  hopes  not  for  a  recompense  from  his  friend,  and  makes
no  bargain  either  for  fame  or  love ;  but  is  rewarded  with  the  conscience
and  satisfaction  of  doing  bravely."

68


FREEDOM OF WIT AND HUMOUR

And  thus  the  Jews  as  well  as  heathens  were  left  to  their
philosophy,  to  be  instructed  in  the  sublime  part  of  virtue,  and
induced  by  reason  to  that  which  was  never  enjoined  them
by  command.  No  premium  or  penalty  being  enforced  in  these
cases,  the  disinterested  part  subsisted,  the  virtue  was  a  free
choice,  and  the  magnanimity  of  the  act  was  left  entire.  He
who  would  be  generous  had  the  means.  He  who  would  frankly
serve  his  friend,  or  country,  at  the  expense  even  of  his  life,^
might  do  it  on  fair  terms.  Dulce  et  decorum  est  ^  was  his  sole
reason.  ""Twas  inviting  and  becoming.  Twas  good  and  honest.
And  that  this  is  still  a  good  reason,  and  according  to  common
sense,  I  will  endeavour  to  satisfy  you.  For  I  should  think  my-
self very  ridiculous  to  be  angry  with  any  one  for  thinking  me
dishonest,  if  I  could  give  no  account  of  my  honesty,  nor  show
upon  what  principle  I  differed  from  a  knave.^


PART  III

Section I

The  Roman  satirist  may  be  thought  more  than  ordinarily
satirical,  when  speaking  of  the  nobility  and  court ;  he  is  so  far
from  allowing  them  to  be  the  standard  of  politeness  and  good
sense,  that  he  makes  them  in  a  manner  the  reverse —

Rams  enim  ferme  sensus  communis  in  ilia
Fortuna.  .  .  .*

^  "  Perad venture,"  says  the  holy  Apostle,  "  for  a  good  man  some  would
even  dare  to  die,"  rdxa  tIs  kclI  roXf^q.,  etc.,  Rom.  v.  7.  This  the  Apostle
judiciously  supposes  to  belong  to  human  nature  ;  though  he  is  so  far  from
founding  any  precept  on  it,  that  he  ushers  his  private  opinion  with  a  very
dubious  peradventure.

2  Hor.  Od.  iii.  2.

'  Infra,  part  iv.  §  1. Advice  to  an  Author,  part  i.  §  2.

*  Juv.  viii.  7.3.  [Shaftesbury  here  takes  it  to  mean  "  rare  is  common
sense  in  men  of  that  rank."]

69


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Some  of  the  most  ingenious  commentators,^  however,  interpret
this  very  differently  from  what  is  generally  apprehended.  They
make  this  common  sense  of  the  poet,  by  a  Greek  derivation,
to  signify  sense  of  public  weal,  and  of  the  common  interest ;
love  of  the  community  or  society,  natural  affection,  humanity,
obligingness,  or  that  sort  of  civility  which  rises  from  a  just  sense
of  the  common  rights  of  mankind,  and  the  natural  equality
there  is  among  those  of  the  same  species.

And  indeed  if  we  consider  the  thing  nicely,  it  must  seem
somewhat  hard  in  the  poet  to  have  denied  wit  or  ability  to  a
court  such  as  that  of  Rome,  even  under  a  Tiberius  or  a  Nero.
But  for  humanity  or  sense  of  public  good,  and  the  common
interest  of  mankind,  'twas  no  such  deep  satire  to  question
whether  this  was  properly  the  spirit  of  a  court.  Twas  difficult
to  apprehend  what  community  subsisted  among  courtiers,  or

^  Viz.  the  two  Casaubons,  Is,  and  Mer.,  Salmasius,  and  our  English
Gataker  :  see  the  first  in  Capitolinus^  Vit.  M.  Ant.  sub  fiuem  ;  the  second
in  his  Comment  on  M.  Ant  i.  §§  13,  IG ;  Gataker  on  the  same  place,
and  Salmasius  in  the  same  Life  of  Capitolinus,  at  the  end  of  his  annotations.
The  Greek  word  is  KoivovoTjiMavvq,  which  Salmasius  interprets,  "moderatam,
usitatam  et  ordinariam  hominis  mentem  quae  in  commune  quodammodo
consulit,  nee  omnia  ad  commodum  suum  refert,  respectumque  etiam  habet
eorum  cum  quibus  versatur,  modeste,  modiceque  de  se  sentieus.  At  contra
infiati  et  superbi  omnes  se  sibi  tantum  suisque  commodis  natos  arbitrantur,
et  prae  se  caeteros  contemnunt  et  negligunt ;  et  hi  sunt  qui  sensum  com-
munem  non  habere  recte  dici  possunt.  Nam  ita  nensum  communem  ac-
cipit  Juvenalis  Sat.  viii.,  Rarus  enim  ferme  sensus  communis,  etc.  fpCKavdpu-
irlav  et  xPV<^'^^W-  Galenus  vocat,  quam  Marcus  de  se  loquens  Koivovoijfio-
<jvvi\v  ;  et  alibi,  ubi  de  eadem  re  loquitur,  iMerpiSrijTa  Kai  evyvu/j.oain'ijv,  qua
gratiam  illi  fecerit  Marcus  simul  eundi  ad  Germanicum  helium  ac  sequendi
se."  In  the  same  manner  Isaac  Casaubon  :  Herodianus,  says  he,  calls  this
the  t6  ixirpiov  KoX  Mfierpov.  "  Subjicit  vero  Antoninus  quasi  banc  vocem
interpretans,  xal  rb  i<p€tadai  toU  iplXon  ftrire  avvSeiirveiv  airrif  vdvTW!,  /MT^e  <rvva-
vo5r]fjitiv  firdvayKei."  This,  I  am  persuaded,  is  the  sensus  communis  of
Horace  (1  Sat.  iii.)  which  has  been  unobserved,  as  far  as  I  can  learn,
by  any  of  his  commentators  ;  it  being  remarkable  withal,  that  in  this  early
Satire  of  Horace,  before  his  latter  days,  and  when  his  philosophy  as  yet
inclined  to  the  less  rigid  assertors  of  virtue,  he  puts  this  expression  (as  may

70


FREEDOM OF WIT AND HUMOUR

what  public  between  an  absolute  prince  and  his  slave-subjects.
And  for  real  society,  there  could  be  none  between  such  as  had
no  other  sense  than  that  of  private  good.

Our  poet  therefore  seems  not  so  immoderate  in  his  censure,
if  we  consider  it  is  the  heart,  rather  than  the  head,  he  takes  to
task,  when,  reflecting  on  a  court  education,  he  thinks  it  unapt
to  raise  any  affection  towards  a  country,  and  looks  upon  young
princes  and  lords  as  the  young  masters  of  the  world  ;  who  being
indulged  in  all  their  passions,  and  trained  up  in  all  manner  of
licentiousness,  have  that  thorough  contempt  and  disregard  of

be  seen  by  the  whole  Satire  taken  together)  into  the  mouth  of  a  Crispinus,
or  some  ridiculous  mimic  of  that  severe  philosophy,  to  which  the  coinage  of
the  word  Koivovori/xoa-^vij  properly  belonged.  For  so  the  poet  again  (Sat.  iv.
77)  uses  the  word  sensus,  speaking  of  those  who  without  sense  of
manners,  or  common  society,  without  the  least  respect  or  deference  to
others,  press  rudely  upon  their  friends,  and  upon  all  company  in  general,
without  regard  to  time  or  place,  or  anything  besides  their  selfish  and
brutish  humour  : —

Haud  illud  quaerentes  num  sine  sensu.
Tempore  num  faciant  alieno.

avaiffdrp-Qi,  as  old  Lambin  interprets  it,  though  without  any  other  explana-
tion, referring  only  to  the  sensus  communis  of  Horace  in  that  other  Satire.
Thus  Seneca  {Epist.  105),  Odium  autem  ex  offensa  sic  vitabis,  neminem  laces-
sendo  gratuito :  a  quo  te  seiuus  communis  tuebitur.  And  Cicero  accordingly,
Justitiae  partes  sunt,  non  violare  homines:  verecundiae,  non  offendere.
— i.  De  Off.  It  may  be  objected  possibly  by  some,  particularly  versed  in-
the  philosophy  above-mentioned,  that  the  Koivbs  vovs,  to  which  the  koivo-
vo-qiioffWT}  seems  to  have  relation,  is  of  a  different  meaning.  But  they  will
consider  withal  how  small  the  distinction  was  in  that  philosophy  between
the  vTr6\Tifis  and  the  vulgar  aUffOrja-i^ ;  how  generally  passion  was  by  those
philosophers  brought  under  the  head  of  opinion.  And  when  they  consider,
besides  this,  the  very  formation  of  the  word  Koivovo-nnocrijvi)  upon  the  model
of  the  other  femalised  virtues,  the  eiryvufioavvr),  a-(j}<(>pocnjv7],  SiKo-Loavvrj,  etc. ,
they  will  no  longer  hesitate  on  this  interpretation. — The  reader  may  per-
haps by  this  note  see  better  why  the  Latin  title  of  sensus  communis  has
been  given  to  this  second  treatise.  He  may  observe,  withal,  how  the  same
poet  Juvenal  uses  the  word  sensus  in  Sat.  xv.,  Haec  nostri  pars  optima
sensus.

71


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

mankind,  which  mankind  in  a  manner  deserves,  where  arbitrary
power  is  permitted  and  a  tyranny  adored —

Haec  satis  ad  juvenem,  quem  nobis  fama  superbum
Tradit  et  inflatum,  plenumque  Nerone  propinquo.^

A  public  spirit  can  come  only  from  a  social  feeling  or  sense
of  partnership  with  human  kind.  Now  there  are  none  so  far
from  being  partners  in  this  sense,  or  sharei's  in  this  common
affection,  as  they  who  scarcely  know  an  equal,  nor  consider
themselves  as  subject  to  any  law  of  fellowship  or  community.
And  thus  morality  and  good  government  go  together.  There
is  no  real  love  of  virtue,  without  the  knowledge  of  public  good.
And  where  absolute  power  is,  there  is  no  public.

They  who  live  under  a  tyranny,  and  have  learnt  to  admire
its  power  as  sacred  and  divine,  are  debauched  as  much  in  their
religion  as  in  their  morals.  Public  good,  according  to  their
apprehension,  is  as  little  the  measure  or  rule  of  government  in
the  universe  as  in  the  State.  They  have  scarce  a  notion  of
what  is  good  or  just,  other  than  as  mere  will  and  power  have
determined.  Omnipotence,  they  think,  would  hardly  be  itself,
were  it  not  at  liberty  to  dispense  with  the  laws  of  equity,^  and
change  at  pleasure  the  standard  of  moral  rectitude.

But  notwithstanding  the  prejudices  and  corruptions  of  this
kind,  'tis  plain  there  is  something  still  of  a  public  principle,
even  where  it  is  most  perverted  and  depressed.  The  worst  of
magistracies,  the  mere  despotic  kind,  can  show  sufficient  instances
of  zeal  and  affection  towards  it.  Where  no  other  government
is  known,  it  seldom  fails  of  having  that  allegiance  and  duty  paid
it  which  is  owing  to  a  better  form.  The  Eastern  countries,  and
many  barbarous  nations,  have  been  and  still  are  examples  of
this  kind.  The  personal  love  they  bear  their  prince,  however
severe  towards  them,  may  show  how  natural  an  affection  there

'  ["  So  much  for  the  young  man  whom  fame  gives  out  as  proud  and
puffed-up,  and  full  of  his  relationship  to  Nero." — Juvenal,  viii.  71,  72.]
2  Infra,  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  1.

72


FREEDOM OF WIT AND HUMOUR

is  towards  government  and  order  among  mankind.  If  men
have  really  no  public  parent,  no  magistrate  in  common  to
cherish  and  protect  them,  they  will  still  imagine  they  have  such
a  one ;  and,  like  new-bom  creatures  who  have  never  seen  their
dam,  will  fancy  one  for  themselves,  and  apply  (as  by  Nature
prompted)  to  some  like  form,  for  favour  and  protection.  In
the  room  of  a  true  foster-father  and  chief,  they  will  take  after
a  false  one ;  and  in  the  room  of  a  legal  government  and  just
prince,  obey  even  a  tyrant,  and  endure  a  whole  lineage  and
succession  of  such.

As  for  us  Britons,  thank  Heaven,  we  have  a  better  sense  of
government  delivered  to  us  from  our  ancestors.  We  have  the
notion  of  a  public,  and  a  constitution ;  how  a  legislative  and
how  an  executive  is  modelled.  We  understand  weight  and
measure  in  this  kind,  and  can  reason  justly  on  the  balance  of
power  and  property.  The  maxims  we  draw  from  hence,  are  as
evident  as  those  in  mathematics.  Our  increasing  knowledge
shows  us  every  day,  more  and  more,  what  common  sense  is  in
politics  ;  and  this  must  of  necessity  lead  us  to  understand  a  like
sense  in  morals,  which  is  the  foundation.

'Tis  ridiculous  to  say  there  is  any  obligation  on  man  to  act
sociably  or  honestly  in  a  formed  government,  and  not  in  that
which  is  commonly  called  the  state  of  nature.^  For,  to  speak
in  the  fashionable  language  of  our  modern  philosophy  :  "  Society
being  founded  on  a  compact,  the  surrender  made  of  every  man's
private  unlimited  right,  into  the  hands  of  the  majority,  or  such
as  the  majority  should  appoint,  was  of  free  choice,  and  by  a
promise."  Now  the  promise  itself  was  made  in  the  state  of
nature ;  and  that  which  could  make  a  promise  obligatory  in  the
state  of  nature,  must  make  all  other  acts  of  humanity  as  much
our  real  duty  and  natural  part.  Thus  faith,  justice,  honesty,
and  virtue,  must  have  been  as  early  as  the  state  of  nature,  or
they  could  never  have  been  at  all.  The  civil  union,  or  con-
federacy, could  never  make  right  or  wrong,  if  they  subsisted  not
1  Moralints,  part  ii.  §  4,  latter  end.

78


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

before.  He  who  was  free  to  any  villainy  before  his  contract,
will  and  ought  to  make  as  free  with  his  contract  when  he
thinks  fit.  The  natural  knave  has  the  same  reason  to  be  a  civil
one,  and  may  dispense  with  his  politic  capacity  as  oft  as  he
sees  occasion.  ""Tis  only  his  word  stands  in  his  way.  ...  A  man  is
obliged  to  keep  his  word.  Why  ?  Because  he  has  given  his
word  to  keep  it.  .  .  .  Is  not  this  a  notable  account  of  the  original
of  moral  justice,  and  the  rise  of  civil  government  and  allegiance  !

Section  II

-,  But  to  pass  by  these  cavils  of  a  philosophy  which  speaks  so
^1,  much  of  nature  with  so  little  meaning,  we  may  with  justice
U  surely  place  it  as  a  principle,  "  That  if  anything  be  natural,  in
W  any  creature,  or  any  kind,  "'tis  that  which  is  preservative  of  the
kind  itself,  and  conducing  to  its  welfare  and  support."  If  in
original  and  pure  nature  it  be  wrong  to  break  a  promise,  or  be
treacherous,  'tis  as  truly  wrong  to  be  in  any  respect  inhuman,
or  any  way  wanting  in  our  natural  part  towards  human  kind.
If  eating  and  drinking  be  natural,  herding  is  so  too.  If  any
appetite  or  sense  be  natural,  the  sense  of  fellowship  is  the  same.
If  there  be  anything  of  nature  in  that  affection  which  is  between
the  sexes,  the  affection  is  certainly  as  natural  towards  the  con-
sequent offspring ;  and  so  again  between  the  offspring  themselves,
as  kindred  and  companions,  bred  under  the  same  discipline  and
economy.  And  thus  a  clan  or  tribe  is  gradually  formed ;  a
public  is  recognised ;  and  besides  the  pleasure  found  in  social
entertainment,  language,  and  discourse,  there  is  so  apparent  a
necessity  for  continuing  this  good  correspondency  and  union,
that  to  have  no  sense  or  feeling  of  this  kind,  no  love  of  country,
community,  or  anything  in  common,  would  be  the  same  as  to
be  insensible  even  of  the  plainest  means  of  self-preservation,  and
most  necessary  condition  of  self-enjoyment.

How  the  wit  of  man  should  so  puzzle  this  cause  as  to  make
civil  government  and  society  appear  a  kind  of  invention  and

74


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

creature  of  art,  I  know  not. For  my  own  part,  methinks,  this 1
herding  principle,  and  associating  incHnation,  is  seen  so  natural
and  strong  in  most  men,  that  one  might  readily  affirm  "'twas
even  from  the  violence  of  this  passion  that  so  much  disorder
arose  in  the  general  society  of  mankind.

Univei*sal  good,  or  the  interest  of  the  world  in  general,  is  a  j
kind  of  remote  philosophical  object.  That  greater  community
falls  not  easily  under  the  eye.  Nor  is  a  national  interest,  or  that
of  a  whole  people,  or  body  politic,  so  readily  apprehended.  In
less  parties,  men  may  be  intimately  conversant  and  acquainted
with  one  another.  They  can  there  better  taste  society,  and
enjoy  the  common  good  and  interest  of  a  more  contracted  public.
They  view  the  whole  compass  and  extent  of  their  community,
and  see  and  know  particularly  whom  they  serve,  and  to  what
end  they  associate  and  conspire.  All  men  have  naturally  their
share  of  this  combining  principle  ;  and  they  who  are  of  the
sprightliest  and  most  active  faculties  have  so  large  a  share  of  it,
that  unless  it  be  happily  directed  by  right  reason,  it  can  never
find  exercise  for  itself  in  so  remote  a  sphere  as  that  of  the  body
politic  at  large.  For  here  perhaps  the  thousandth  part  of  those
whose  interests  are  concerned  are  scarce  so  much  as  known  by
sight.  No  visible  band  is  formed,  no  strict  alliance ;  but  the
conjunction  is  made  with  different  persons,  orders,  and  ranks  of
men  ;  not  sensibly,  but  in  idea,  according  to  that  general  view  or
notion  of  a  state  or  commonwealth.

Thus  the  social  aim  is  disturbed  for  want  of  certain  scope.
The  close  sympathy  and  conspiring  virtue  is  apt  to  lose  itself,
for  want  of  direction,  in  so  wide  a  field.  Nor  is  the  passion
anywhere  so  strongly  felt  or  vigorously  exerted  as  in  actual
conspiracy  or  war ;  in  which  the  highest  geniuses  are  often  known
the  forwardest  to  employ  themselves.  For  the  most  generous
spirits  are  the  most  combining.  They  delight  most  to  move  in
concert,  and  feel  (if  I  may  so  say)  in  the  strongest  manner  the
force  of  the  confederating  charm.

Tis  strange  to  imagine  that  war,  which  of  all  things  appears

75


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  most  savage,  should  be  the  passion  of  the  most  heroic  spirits.
But  "'tis  in  war  that  the  knot  of  fellowship  is  closest  drawn.  'Tis
in  war  that  mutual  succour  fs  most  given,  mutual  danger  run,
and  common  affection  most  exerted  and  employed.  For  heroism
and  philanthropy  are  almost  one  and  the  same.  Yet  by  a  small
misguidance  of  the  affection,  a  lover  of  mankind  becomes  a
ravager ;  a  hero  and  deliverer  becomes  an  oppressor  and  destroyer.

Hence  other  divisions  amongst  men.  Hence,  in  the  way  of
peace  and  civil  government,  that  love  of  party  and  subdivision
by  cabal.  For  sedition  is  a  kind  of  cantonising  already  begun
within  the  State.  To  cantonise  ^  is  natural ;  when  the  society
grows  vast  and  bulky ;  and  powerful  States  have  found  other
advantages  in  sending  colonies  abroad  than  merely  that  of
having  elbow-room  at  home,  or  extending  their  dominion  into
distant  countries.  Vast  empires  are  in  many  respects  unnatural ;
but  particularly  in  this,  that  be  they  ever  so  well  constituted,
the  affairs  of  many  must,  in  such  governments,  turn  upon  a  very
few,  and  the  relation  be  less  sensible,  and  in  a  manner  lost,
between  the  magistrate  and  people,  in  a  body  so  unwieldy  in  its
limbs,  and  whose  members  lie  so  remote  from  one  another  and
distant  from  the  head.

'Tis  in  such  bodies  as  these  that  strong  factions  are  aptest  to
engender.  The  associating  spirits,  for  want  of  exercise,  form
new  movements,  and  seek  a  narrower  sphere  of  activity,  when
they  want  action  in  a  greater.  Thus  we  have  wheels  within
wheels.  And  in  some  national  constitutions  (notwithstanding
the  absurdity  in  politics)  we  have  one  empire  within  another.
Nothing  is  so  delightful  as  to  incorporate.  Distinctions  of  many
kinds  are  invented.  Religious  societies  are  formed.  Orders  are
erected,  and  their  interests  espoused  and  served  with  the  utmost
zeal  and  passion. Founders  and  patrons  of  this  sort  are  never

'  [This  use  of  the  term,  and  a  general  application  of  the  substantive,
were  common  in  the  seventeenth  century.  E.g.  Locke  :  "  They  canton
out  to  themselves  a  little  Goshen  in  the  intellectual  world." — Conduct  of
the  Understanding.^

76


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

wanting.  Wonders  are  performed,  in  this  wrong  social  spirit,
by  those  members  of  separate  societies.  And  the  associating
genius  of  man  is  never  better  proved  than  in  those  very  societies,
which  are  formed  in  opposition  to  the  general  one  of  mankind,
and  to  the  real  interest  of  the  State.

In  short,  the  very  spirit  of  faction,  for  the  greatest  part,
seems  to  be  no  other  than  the  abuse  or  irregularity  of  that  social
love  and  common  affection  which  is  natural  to  mankind.
For  the  opposite  of  sociableness  is  selfishness.  And  of  all
characters,  the  thorough  selfish  one  is  the  least  forward  in  taking
party.  The  men  of  this  sort  are,  in  this  respect,  tioie  men  of
moderation.  They  are  secure  of  their  temper,  and  possess  them-
selves too  well  to  be  in  danger  of  entering  warmly  into  any  cause,
or  engaging  deeply  with  any  side  or  faction.


^ Section  III

You  have  heard  it,  my  friend,  as  a  common  saying,  that  interest
governs  the  world.  But,  I  believe,  whoever  looks  narrowly  into
the  affairs  of  it  will  find  that  passion,  humour,  caprice,  zeal,
faction,  and  a  thousand  other  springs,  which  are  counter  to  self-
interest,  have  as  considerable  a  part  in  the  movements  of  this
machine.  There  are  more  wheels  and  counterpoises  in  this
engine  than  are  easily  imagined.  Tis  of  too  complex  a  kind
to  fall  under  one  simple  view,  or  be  explained  thus  briefly  in  a
word  or  two.  The  studiers  of  this  mechanism  must  have  a  very
partial  eye  to  overlook  all  other  motions  besides  those  of  the
lowest  and  narrowest  compass.  'Tis  hard  that  in  the  plan  or
description  of  this  clock-work  no  wheel  or  balance  should  be
allowed  on  the  side  of  %e  better  and  more  enlarged  affections  ;
that  nothing  should  be  understood  to  be  done  in  kindness  or
generosity,  nothing  in  pure  good-nature  or  friendship,  or  through
any  social  or  natural  afl'ection  of  any  kind ;  when,  perhaps,  the
mainsprings  of  this  machine  will  be  found  to  be  either  these

77


SHAPTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

very  natural  affections  themselves,  or  a  compound  kind  derived
from  them,  and  retaining  more  than  one  half  of  their  nature.

But  here,  my  friend,  you  must  not  expect  that  I  should
draw  you  up  a  formal  scheme  of  the  passions,^  or  pretend  to
show  you  their  genealogy  and  relation :  how  they  are  inter-
woven with  one  another,  or  interfere  with  our  happiness  and
interest.  'Twould  be  out  of  the  genius  and  compass  of
such  a  letter  as  this,  to  frame  a  just  plan  or  model  by  which
you  might,  with  an  accurate  view,  observe  what  proportion
the  friendly  and  natural  affections  seem  to  bear  in  this  order
of  architecture.

Modem  projectors,  I  know,  would  willingly  rid  their  hands
of  these  natural  materials,  and  would  fain  build  after  a  more
uniform  way.  They  would  new-frame  the  human  heart,  and
have  a  mighty  fancy  to  reduce  all  its  motions,  balances,  and
weights,  to  that  one  principle  and  foundation  of  a  cool  and
deliberate  selfishness.  Men,  it  seems,  are  unwilling  to  think
they  can  be  so  outwitted  and  imposed  on  by  Nature,  as  to  be
made  to  serve  her  purposes  rather  than  their  own.  They  are
ashamed  to  be  drawn  thus  out  of  themselves,  and  forced  from
what  they  esteem  their  true  interest.

There  has  been  in  all  times  a  sort  of  narrow  -  minded
philosophers,  who  have  thought  to  set  this  difference  to  rights
by  conquering  Nature  in  themselves.  A  primitive  father  and
founder  among  these,  saw  well  this  power  of  Nature,^  and
understood  it  so  far,  that  he  earnestly  exhorted  his  followers
neither  to  beget  children  nor  serve  their  country.  There  was
no  dealing  with  Nature,  it  seems,  while  these  alluring  objects
stood  in  the  way.  Relations,  friends,  countrymen,  laws,
politic  constitutions,  the  beauty  of  order  and  government,  and
the  interest  of  society  and  mankind,  were  objects  which,  he
well  saw,  would  naturally  raise  a  stronger  affection  than  any
which was  grounded  upon  the  narrow  bottom  of  mere  self.

^  See  the  fourth  Treatise,  viz.  Inquiry  Concerning  Virtue.
2  Treatise  i.  6 ;  Treatise  iv.  ii.  1  ;  and  Treatise  vi.  ii.  1.

78


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

His  advice,  therefore,  not  to  marry,  nor  engage  at  all  in  the
public,  was  wise,  and  suitable  to  his  design.  There  was  no
way  to  be  truly  a  disciple  of  this  philosophy,  but  to  leave
family,  friends,  country,  and  society,  to  cleave  to  it.  .  .  .  And,
in  good  earnest,  who  would  not,  if  it  were  happiness  to  do
so .'' — The  philosopher,  however,  was  kind  in  telling  us  his
thought. 'Twas  a  token  of  his  fatherly  love  of  mankind —

Tu  pater,  et  reruni  inventor ! Tu  patria  nobis
Suppeditas  praecepta !  ^

But  the  revivers  of  this  philosophy  in  latter  days  appear
to  be  of  a  lower  genius.  They  seem  to  have  understood  less
of  this  force  of  Nature,  and  thought  to  alter  the  thing  by
shifting  a  name.  They  would  so  explain  all  the  social  passions
and  natural  affections  as  to  denominate  them  of  the  selfish
kind.  Thus  civility,  hospitality,  humanity  towards  strangers
or  people  in  distress,  is  only  a  more  deliberate  selfishness.
An  honest  heart  is  only  a  more  cunning  one ;  and  honesty  and
good-nature,  a  more  deliberate  or  better-regulated  self-love.
The  love  of  kindred,  children  and  posterity,  is  purely  love  of
self  and  of  one's  own  immediate  blood ;  as  if,  by  this  reckoning,
all  mankind  were  not  included :  all  being  of  one  blood,  and
joined  by  inter-marriages  and  alliances,  as  they  have  been
transplanted  in  colonies  and  mixed  one  with  another.  And
thus  love  of  one's  country  and  love  of  mankind  must  also  be
self-love.  Magnanimity  and  courage,  no  doubt,  are  modifica-
tions of  this  universal  self-love !  For  courage,^  says  our
modem  philosopher,  is  constant  anger ;  and  all  men,  says  a
witty  poet,^  would  be  cowards  if  they  durst.

That the poet and the philosopher both  were  cowards,

1  [''  Thou,  Father,  art  (es  is  the  revised  reading)  discoverer  of  things ;
thou  givest  us  fatherly  precepts." — Lucretius,  iii.  9.]

2  Sudden  courage  (says  Mr.  Hobbes,  Lev.  vi.)  is  anger.  Therefore
courage  considered  as  constant,  and  belonging  to  a  character,  must,  in
his  account,  be  defined  constant  anger,  or  anger  constantly  returning.

'  Lord  Rochester,  Satire  against  Man.

79


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

may  be  yielded  perhaps  without  dispute.  They  may  have
spoken  the  best  of  their  knowledge.  But  for  true  courage,  it
has  so  little  to  do  with  anger,  that  there  lies  always  the
strongest  suspicion  against  it  where  this  passion  is  highest.
The  true  courage  is  the  cool  and  calm.  The  bravest  of  men
have  the  least  of  a  brutal  bullying  insolence ;  and  in  the  very
time  of  danger  are  found  the  most  serene,  pleasant,  and  free.
Rage,  we  know,  can  make  a  coward  forget  himself  and  fight.
But  what  is  done  in  fury  or  anger  can  never  be  placed  to  the
account  of  courage.  Were  it  otherwise,  womankind  might
claim  to  be  the  stoutest  sex ;  for  their  hatred  and  anger  have
ever  been  allowed  the  strongest  and  most  lasting.

Other  authors  there  have  been  of  a  yet  inferior  kind :  a
sort  of  distributors  and  petty  retailers  of  this  wit,^  who  have
run  changes,  and  divisions  without  end,  upon  this  article  of
self-love.  You  have  the  very  same  thought  spun  out  a  hundred
ways,  and  drawn  into  mottoes  and  devices  to  set  forth  this
riddle,  that  "  act  as  disinterestedly  or  generously  as  you  please,
self  still  is  at  the  bottom,  and  nothing  else."  Now  if  these
gentlemen  who  delight  so  much  in  the  play  of  words,  but  are
cautious  how  they  grapple  closely  with  definitions,  would  tell
us  only  what  self-interest  was,^  and  determine  happiness  and
good,  there  would  be  an  end  of  this  enigmatical  wit.  For  in
this  we  should  all  agree,  that  happiness  was  to  be  pursued,
and  in  fact  was  always  sought  after;  but  whether  found  in
following  Nature,  and  giving  way  to  common  affection,  or  in
suppressing  it,  and  turning  every  passion  towards  private
advantage,  a  narrow  self-end,  or  the  preservation  of  mere  life,

^  The  French  translator  supposes  with  good  reason  that  our  author,
in  this  passage,  had  an  eye  to  those  sentences  or  maxims  which  pass
under  the  name  of  the  Duke  de  la  Rochefoucault.  He  has  added,  withal,
the  censure  of  this  kind  of  wit,  and  of  these  maxims  in  particular,  by  some
authors  of  the  same  nation.  The  passages  are  too  long  to  insert  here,
though  they  are  otherwise  very  just  and  entertaining.  That  which  he
has  cited  of  old  Montaigne  is  from  the  first  chapter  of  his  second  Essay.

2  Inquiry,  bk.  i.  part  ii.  §  2 ;  bk.  ii.  part  i.  §§  1,  3,  part  ii.  §  2.

80


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

this  would  be  the  matter  in  debate  between  us.  The  question
would  not  be,  "  who  loved  himself,  or  who  not,''  but  "  who
loved  and  served  himself  the  rightest,  and  after  the  truest
manner."

Tis  the  height  of  wisdom,  no  doubt,  to  be  rightly  selfish.
And  to  value  life,  as  far  as  life  is  good,  belongs  as  much  to
courage  as  to  discretion ;  but  a  wretched  life  is  no  wise  man's
wish.  To  be  without  honesty  is,  in  effect,  to  be  without
natural  affection  or  sociableness  of  any  kind.  And  a  life  with-
out natural  affection,  friendship,  or  sociableness  would  be  found
a  wretched  one  were  it  to  be  tried.  'Tis  as  these  feelings  and
affections  are  intrinsically  valuable  and  worthy  that  self-interest
is  to  be  rated  and  esteemed.  A  man  is  by  nothing  so  much
himself  as  by  his  temper  and  the  character  of  his  passions  and
affections.  If  he  loses  what  is  manly  and  worthy  in  these,  he
is  as  much  lost  to  himself  as  when  he  loses  his  memory  and
vmderstanding.  The  least  step  into  villainy  or  baseness  changes
the  character  and  value  of  a  life.  He  who  would  preserve
life  at  any  rate  must  abuse  himself  more  than  any  one  can  abuse
him.  And  if  life  be  not  a  dear  thing  indeed,  he  who  has
refused  to  live  a  villain  and  has  prefened  death  to  a  base  action
has  been  a  gainer  by  the  bargain.

Section IV

'TIS  well  for  you,  my  friend,  that  in  your  education  you  have
had  little  to  do  with  the  philosophy^  or  philosophers  of  our
days.  A  good  poet  and  an  honest  historian  may  afford
learning  enough  for  a  gentleman ;  and  such  a  one,  whilst  he
reads  these  authors  as  his  divei-sion,  will  have  a  truer  relish  of
their  sense,  and  understand  them  better  than  a  pedant  with
all his labours and the assistance of  his volumes of  com-

^  Our  author,  it  seems,  writes  at  present  as  to  a  young'  gentleman
chiefly  of  a  court  breeding.  See,  however,  his  further  sentiments  more
particularly  in  Treatise  in.  (viz.  Soliloquy)  infra,  part  iii.  §  3,  etc. ,  in  the
notes.

VOL.  I  81  G


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

mentators.  I  am  sensible  that  of  old  "'twas  the  custom  to  send
the  youth  of  highest  quality  to  philosophers  to  be  formed.
'Twas  in  their  schools,  in  their  company,  and  by  their  precepts
and  example  that  the  illustrious  pupils  were  inured  to  hard-
ship and  exercised  in  the  severest  courses  of  temperance  and
self-denial.  By  such  an  early  discipline  they  were  fitted  for
the  command  of  others;  to  maintain  their  country's  honour
in  war,  rule  wisely  in  the  State,  and  fight  against  luxury  and
corruption  in  times  of  prosperity  and  peace.  If  any  of  these
arts  are  comprehended  in  university  learning,  'tis  well.  But  as
some  universities  in  the  world  are  now  modelled,  they  seem  not
so  very  effectual  to  these  purposes,  nor  so  fortunate  in  pre-
paring for  a  right  practice  of  the  world,  or  a  just  knowledge
of  men  and  things.  Had  you  been  thorough -paced  in  the
ethics  or  politics  of  the  schools,  I  should  never  have  thought
of  writing  a  word  to  you  upon  common  sense  or  the  love  of
mankind.  I  should  not  have  cited  the  poet's  dulce  et  decorum ;
nor,  if  I  had  made  a  character  for  you,  as  he  for  his  noble
friend,  should  I  have  crowned  it  with  his

Non  ille  pro  carls  amicis
Aut  patria  timidus  perire.^

Our  philosophy  nowadays  runs  after  the  manner  of  that
able  sophister  who  said,  "  Skin  for  skin :  all  that  a  man  hath
will  he  give  for  his  life.''^  Tis  orthodox  divinity,  as  well  as
sound  philosophy,  with  some  men  to  rate  life  by  the  number
and  exquisiteness  of  the  pleasing  sensations.  These  they
constantly  set  in  opposition  to  dry  virtue  and  honesty ;  and
upon  this  foot  they  think  it  proper  to  call  all  men  fools  who
would  hazard  a  life  or  part  with  any  of  these  pleasing  sensations
except  on  the  condition  of  being  repaid  in  the  same  coin  and
with  good  interest  into  the  bargain. Thus,  it  seems,  we  are

'  ^  [''  He  fears  not  to  die  for  his  dear  friends  and  fatherland." — Horace^
Odes,  IV.  ix.  51,  62.]  2  j^j,  y  4

82


FREEDOM OF  WIT AND HUMOUR

to  learn  virtue  by  usury,  and  enhance  the  value  of  life,  and  of
the  pleasures  of  sense,  in  order  to  be  wise  and  to  live  well.

But  you,  my  friend,  are  stubborn  in  this  point ;  and  instead
of  being  brought  to  think  mournfully  of  death,  or  to  repine  at
the  loss  of  what  you  may  sometimes  hazard  by  your  honesty,
you  can  laugh  at  such  maxims  as  these,  and  divert  yourself
with  the  improved  selfishness  and  philosophical  cowardice  of
these  fashionable  moralists.  You  will  not  be  taught  to  value
life  at  their  rate,  or  degrade  honesty  as  they  do,  who  make  it
only  a  name.  You  are  persuaded  there  is  something  more  in
the  thing  than  fashion  or  applause ;  that  worth  and  merit
are  substantial,  and  no  way  variable  by  fancy  or  will ;  and
that  honour  is  as  much  itself  when  acting  by  itself  and  unseen,
as  when  seen  and  applauded  by  all  the  world.

Should  one  who  had  the  countenance  of  a  gentleman  ask
me  "Why  I  would  avoid  being  nasty,  when  nobody  was
present .''  *"  In  the  first  place  I  should  be  fully  satisfied  that
he  himself  was  a  very  nasty  gentleman  who  could  ask  this
question,  and  that  it  would  be  a  hard  matter  for  me  to  make
him  ever  conceive  what  true  cleanliness  was.  However,  I
might,  notwithstanding  this,  be  contented  to  give  him  a  slight
answer,  and  say  "'twas  because  I  had  a  nose.''  Should  he
trouble  me  further  and  ask  again,  "  what  if  I  had  a  cold  ?
or  what  if  naturally  I  had  no  such  nice  smell  ? "  I  might
answer  perhaps,  "  that  I  cared  as  little  to  see  myself  nasty  as
that  others  should  see  me  in  that  condition."  But  what  if  it
were  in  the  dark  ?  Why  even  then,  though  I  had  neither  nose
nor  eyes,  my  sense  of  the  matter  would  still  be  the  same :  my
nature  would  rise  at  the  thought  of  what  was  sordid;  or  if  it
~3i3not,  I  should  have  a  wretched  nature  indeed,  and  hate
myself  for  a  beast.  Honour  myself  I  never  could  whilst  I  had
no  better  a  sense  of  what  in  reality  I  owed  myself,  and  what
became  me  as  a  human  creature.

Much  in  the  same  manner  have  I  heard  it  asked,  Why
should  a  man  be  honest  in  the  dark  .'* What  a  man  must  be

83


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

to  ask  this  question  I  will  not  say.  But  for  those  who  have  no
better  a  reason  for  being  honest  than  the  fear  of  a  gibbet  or
a  jail,  I  should  not,  I  confess,  much  covet  their  company  or
acquaintance.  And  if  any  guardian  of  mine  who  had  kept
his  trust,  and  given  me  back  my  estate  when  I  came  of  age,  had
been  discovered  to  have  acted  thus  through  fear  only  of  what
might  happen  to  him,  I  should,  for  my  own  part,  undoubtedly
continue  civil  and  respectful  to  him ;  but  for  my  opinion  of  his
worth,  it  would  be  such  as  the  Pythian  God  had  of  his  votary,
who  devoutly  feai*ed  him,  and  therefore  restored  to  a  friend
what  had  been  deposited  in  his  hands —

Reddidit  ergo  metu,  non  moribus ;  et  tamen  omnem
Vocem  adyti  dignam  temple,  veramque  probavit,
Extinctus  tota  pariter  cum  prole  domoque.^

I  know  very  well  that  many  services  to  the  public  are  done
merely  for  the  sake  of  a  gratuity ;  and  that  informers  in  par-
ticular are  to  be  taken  care  of  and  sometimes  made  pensioners
of  State.  But  I  must  beg  pardon  for  the  particular  thoughts  I
may  have  of  these  gentlemen"'s  merit ;  and  shall  never  bestow
my  esteem  on  any  other  than  the  voluntary  discoverers  of
villainy  and  hearty  prosecutors  of  their  country's  interest.  And
in  this  respect,  I  know  nothing  greater  or  nobler  than  the
undertaking  and  managing  some  important  accusation,  by  which
some  high  criminal  of  State,  or  some  formed  body  of  con-
spirators against  the  public,  may  be  arraigned  and  brought
to  punishment  through  the  honest  zeal  and  public  affection  of
a  private  man.

I  know,  too,  that  the  mere  vulgar  of  mankind  often  stand  in
need  of  such  a  rectifying  object  as  the  gallows  before  their  eyes.
Yet  I  have  no  belief  that  any  man  of  a  liberal  education,  or
common  honesty,  ever  needed  to  have  recourse  to  this  idea  in

*  ["  So  he  paid  it  back,  from  fear,  not  from  principle.  Yet  still  he
proved  the  oracle  true  and  fit  to  be  God's  voice,  for  he  and  his  house
perished  root  and  branch." — Juv.  xiii.  204-206.]

84


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

his  mind,  the  better  to  restrain  him  from  playing  the  knave.
And  if  a  saint  had  no  other  virtue  than  what  was  raised  in  him
by  the  same  objects  of  reward  and  punishment,  in  a  more  distant
state,  I  know  not  whose  love  or  esteem  he  might  gain  besides,
but  for  my  own  paii;  I  should  never  think  him  worthy  of  mine.

"  Nee  furtum  feci  nee  fugi/'  si  mihi  dicat

Servus  :  "habes  pretium,  loris  non  ureris,"  aio.

"  Non  hominem  occidi." "  Non  pasces  in  cruce  corvos."

**  Sum  bonus  et  frugi." Renuit  negitatque  Sabellus.^


PART  IV

/ Section  I

By  this  time,  my  friend,  you  may  possibly,  I  hope,  be  satisfied
that  as  I  am  in  earnest  in  defending  raillery,  so  I  can  be
sober  too  in  the  use  of  it.  'Tis  in  reality  a  serious  study  to
learn  to  temper  and  regulate  that  humour  which  nature  has
given  us  as  a  more  lenitive  remedy  against  vice,  and  a  kind  of
specific  against  superstition  and  melancholy  delusion.  There  is
a  great  difference  between  seeking  how  to  raise  a  laugh  from
everything,  and  seeking  in  everything  what  justly  may  be
laughed  at.  For  nothing  is  ridiculous  except  what  is  deformed  ;
nor  is  anything  proof  against  raillery  except  what  is  handsome
and  just.  And  therefore  'tis  the  hardest  thing  in  the  world  to
deny  fair  honesty  the  use  of  this  weapon,  which  can  never  bear
an  edge  against  herself,  and  bears  against  everything  contrary.

If  the  very  Italian  buffoons  were  to  give  us  the  rule  in  these
cases,  we  should  learn  by  them  that  in  their  lowest  and  most

^  ["  If  my  slave  tells  me,  '  I  have  not  stolen,  nor  run  away,'  I  answer,
'  You  have  your  reward,  you  are  not  flogged. '  '  I  have  not  killed  a  man  ! '
'The  crows  do  not  devour  you  on  the  cross.'  '  I  am  good  and  honest  !'
My  Sabine  bailiff  shakes  his  head  and  denies  it." — Horace,  Epist.  i.  xvi.
46-49.]

85


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

scurrilous  way  of  wit,  there  was  nothing  so  successfully  to  be
played  upon  as  the  passions  of  cowardice  and  avarice.  One  may
defy  the  world  to  turn  real  bravery  or  generosity  into  ridicule.
A  glutton  or  mere  sensualist  is  as  ridiculous  as  the  other  two
characters.  Nor  can  an  unaffected  temperance  be  made  the
subject  of  contempt  to  any  besides  the  grossest  and  most  con-
temptible of  mankind.  Now  these  three  ingredients  make  up
a  virtuous  character,  as  the  contrary  three  a  vicious  one.  How
therefore  can  we  possibly  make  a  jest  of  honesty  ?  To  laugh
both  ways  is  nonsensical.  And  if  the  ridicule  lie  against
sottishness,  avarice,  and  cowardice,  you  see  the  consequence.
A  man  must  be  soundly  ridiculous  who,  with  all  the  wit  imagin-
able, would  go  about  to  ridicule  wisdom,  or  laugh  at  honesty,  or
good  manners.

A  man  of  thorough  good  breeding,^  whatever  else  he  be,  is
incapable  of  doing  a  rude  or  brutal  action.  He  never  deliberates
in  this  case,  or  considers  of  the  matter  by  prudential  rules  of  self-
interest  and  advantage.  He  acts  from  his  nature,  in  a  manner
necessarily,  and  without  reflection ;  and  if  he  did  not,  it  were
impossible  for  him  to  answer  his  character,  or  be  found  that
truly  well-bred  man  on  every  occasion.  'Tis  the  same  with
the  honest  man.  He  cannot  deliberate  in  the  case  of  a  plain
villainy.  A  "  plum ""  is  no  temptation  to  him.  He  likes  and
loves  himself  too  well  to  change  hearts  with  one  of  those  coiTupt
miscreants,  who  amongst  them  gave  that  name  to  a  round  sum
of  money  gained  by  rapine  and  plunder  of  the  commonwealth.
He  who  would  enjoy  a  freedom  of  mind,  and  be  truly  possessor
of  himself,  must  be  above  the  thought  of  stooping  to  what  is
villainous  or  base.  He,  on  the  other  side,  who  has  a  heart  to
stoop,  must  necessarily  quit  the  thought  of  manliness,  resolution,
friendship,  merit,  and  a  character  with  himself  and  othei's.  But
to  affect  these  enjoyments  and  advantages,  together  with  the
privileges  of  a  licentious  principle ;  to  pretend  to  enjoy  society
and  a  free  mind  in  company  with  a  knavish  heart,  is  as  ridiculous
^  Miscellaneous  Reflections,  Misc.  iii.  ch.  i.

86


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

as  the  way  of  children,  who  eat  their  cake  and  afterwards  cry  for
it.  When  men  begin  to  deliberate  about  dishonesty,  and  finding
it  go  less  against  their  stomach,  ask  slily,  "Why  they  should
stick  at  a  good  piece  of  knavery  for  a  good  sum  ?  "  they  should
be  told,  as  children,  that  they  cannot  eat  their  cake  and  have  it.
When  men  indeed  are  become  accomplished  knaves  they  are
past  crying  for  their  cake.  They  know  themselves,  and  are
known  by  mankind.  'Tis  not  these  who  are  so  much  envied  or
admired.  The  moderate  kind  are  the  more  taking  with  us.
Yet  had  we  sense  we  should  consider  'tis  in  reality  the  thorough
profligate  knave,  the  very  complete  unnatural  villain  alone,  who
can  any  way  bid  for  happiness  with  the  honest  man.  True
interest  is  wholly  on  one  side  or  the  other.  All  between  is
inconsistency,^  irresolution,  remorse,  vexation,  and  an  ague  fit :
from  hot  to  cold ;  from  one  passion  to  another  quite  contrary ;
a  perpetual  discord  of  life ;  and  an  alternate  disquiet  and  self-
dislike.  The  only  rest  or  repose  must  be  through  one  deter-
mined, considerate  resolution,  which  when  once  taken  must  be
courageously  kept;  and  the  passions  and  afiections  brought
under  obedience  to  it ;  the  temper  steeled  and  hardened  to  the
mind;  the  disposition  to  the  judgment.  Both  must  agree,  else
all  must  be  disturbance  and  confusion.  So  that  to  think  with
one"'s  self  in  good  earnest,  "  why  may  not  one  do  this  little
villainy,  or  commit  this  one  treachery,  and  but  for  once,"  is
the  most  ridiculous  imagination  in  the  world,  and  contrary  to
common  sense.  For  a  common  honest  man,  whilst  left  to  him-
self, and  undisturbed  by  philosophy  and  subtle  reasonings  about

^  Our  author's  French  translator  cites,  on  this  occasion,  very  aptly
those  verses  of  Horace,  Sat.  ii.  vii.  18-20  : —

Quanto  constantior  idem
In  vitiis,  tanto  levius  miser  ac  prior  ille
Qui  jam  contento,  jam  laxo  fune  laborat.

["  At  any  rate  he  was  so  much  the  more  consistent  in  vice,  and  so  far
less  miserable  than  that  other,  who  pulls  now  on  a  loose  and  now  on  a
tight  cord."]

87


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

his  interest,  gives  no  other  answer  to  the  thought  of  villainy
than  that  he  cannot  possibly  find  in  his  heart  to  set  about  it,  or
conquer  the  natural  aversion  he  has  to  it.  And  this  is  natural
and  just.

The  truth  is,  as  notions  stand  now  in  the  world  with  respect
to  morals,  honesty  is  like  to  gain  little  by  philosophy,  or  deep
speculations  of  any  kind.  In  the  main,  'tis  best  to  stick  to
common  sense  and  go  no  farther.  Men's  first  thoughts  in  this
matter  are  generally  better  than  their  second :  their  natural
notions  better  than  those  refined  by  study  or  consultation  with
casuists.  According  to  common  speech,  as  well  as  common
sense,  honesty  is  the  best  policy ;  but  according  to  refined  sense,
the  only  well-advised  persons,  as  to  this  world,  are  errant  knaves ;
and  they  alone  are  thought  to  serve  themselves  who  serve  their
passions,  and  indulge  their  loosest  appetites  and  desires.  Such,
it  seems,  are  the  wise,  and  such  the  wisdom  of  this  world  !

An  ordinary  man  talking  of  a  vile  action,  in  a  way  of
common  sense,  says  naturally  and  heartily,  "he  would  not  be
guilty  of  such  a  thing  for  the  whole  world."  But  speculative
men  find  great  modifications  in  the  case ;  many  ways  of  evasion  ;
many  remedies;  many  alleviations.  A  good  gift  rightly  applied;
a  right  method  of  suing  out  a  pardon ;  good  alms-houses,  and
charitable  foundations  erected  for  inght  worshippers,  and  a  good
zeal  shown  for  the  right  belief,  may  sufficiently  atone  for  one
wrong  practice,  especially  when  it  is  such  as  raises  a  man  to  a
considerable  power  (as  they  say)  of  doing  good,  and  serving  the
true  cause.

Many  a  good  estate,  many  a  high  station  has  been  gained
upon  such  a  bottom  as  this.  Some  crowns  too  may  have  been
purchased  on  these  terms  ;  and  some  great  emperoi"s  (if  I  mistake
not)  there  have  been  of  old,  who  were  much  assisted  by  these
or  the  like  principles ;  and  in  return  were  not  ungrateful  to  the
cause  and  party  which  had  assisted  them.  The  forgei*s  of  such
morals  have  been  amply  endowed,  and  the  world  has  paid
roundly  for  its  philosophy,  since  the  original  plain  principles  of

88


» 1^  W  I  '  »vy.^  w


FREEDOM OF  WIT  AND HUMOUR

humanity,  and  the  simple  honest  precepts  of  peace  and  mutual  \
love,  have,  by  a  sort  of  spiritual  chemists,  been  so  sublimated
as  to  become  the  highest  corrosives,  and  passing  through  their ,
limbecks,  have  yielded  the  strongest  spirit  of  mutual  hatred  and f
malignant  persecution.  i

/ Section II

But  our  humours,  my  friend,  incline  us  not  to  melancholy
reflections.  Let  the  solemn  reprovers  of  vice  proceed  in  the
manner  most  suitable  to  their  genius  and  character.  I  am
ready  to  congratulate  with  them  on  the  success  of  their  labours,
in  that  authoritative  way  which  is  allowed  them.  I  know  not,
in  the  meanwhile,  why  others  may  not  be  allowed  to  ridicule
folly,  and  recommend  wisdom  and  virtue  (if  possibly  they  can)
in  a  way  of  pleasantry  and  mirth.  I  know  not  why  poets,  or
such  as  write  chiefly  for  the  entertainment  of  themselves  and
others,  may  not  be  allowed  this  privilege.  And  if  it  be  the
complaint  of  our  standing  reformers  that  they  are  not  heard
so  well  by  the  gentlemen  of  fashion ;  if  they  exclaim  against
those  airy  wits  who  fly  to  ridicule  as  a  protection,  and  make
successful  sallies  from  that  quarter ;  why  should  it  be  denied  one,
who  is  only  a  volunteer  in  this  cause,  to  engage  the  adversary
on  his  own  terms,  and  expose  himself  willingly  to  such  attacks,
on  the  single  condition  of  being  allowed  fair  play  in  the  same
kind  ?

By  gentlemen  of  fashion,  I  understand  those  to  whom  a
natural  good  genius,  op  the  force  of  good  education,  has  given
a  sense  of  what  is  naturally  graceful  and  becoming.  Some  by
mere  nature,  others  by  art  and  practice,  are  masters  of  an  ear
in  music,  an  eye  in  painting,  a  fancy  in  the  ordinary  things  of
ornament  and  gi'ace,  a  judgment  in  proportions  of  all  kinds,
and  a  general  good  taste  in  most  of  those  subjects  which  make
the  amusement  and  delight  of  the  ingenious  people  of  the  world.
Let  such  gentlemen  as  these  be  as  extravagant  as  they  please,

89


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

or  as  irregular  in  their  morals,  they  must  at  the  same  time
discover  their  inconsistency,  live  at  variance  with  themselves,
and  in  contradiction  to  that  principle  on  which  they  ground
their  highest  pleasure  and  entertainment.

Of  all  other  beauties  which  virtuosos  pursue,  poets  celebrate,
musicians  sing,  and  architects  or  artists,  of  whatever  kind,
describe  or  form,  the  most  delightful,  the  most  engaging  and
pathetic,  is  that  which  is  drawn  from  real  life,  and  from  the
passions.  Nothing  affects  the  heart  like  that  which  is  purely
from  itself,  and  of  its  own  nature ;  such  as  the  beauty  of
sentiments,  the  grace  of  actions,  the  turn  of  characters,  and
the  proportions  and  features  of  a  human  mind.  This  lesson  of
philosophy,  even  a  romance,  a  poem,  or  a  play  may  teach  us ;
whilst  the  fabulous  author  leads  us  with  such  pleasure  through
the  labyrinth  of  the  affections,  and  interests  us,  whether  we  will
or  no,  in  the  passions  of  his  heroes  and  heroines  : —

Angit,
Irritat,  mulcet,  falsis  terroribus  iraplet,
Ut  magus.^

Let  poets,  or  the  men  of  harmony,  deny,  if  they  can,  this
force  of  Nature,  or  withstand  this  moral  magic.  They,  for  their
parts,  carry  a  double  portion  of  this  charm  about  them.  For
in  the  first  place,  the  very  passion  which  inspires  them  is  itself
the  love  of  numbers,  decency  and  proportion ;  and  this  too,
not  in  a  narrow  sense,  or  after  a  selfish  way  (for  who  of  them
composes  for  himself?),  but  in  a  friendly  social  view,  for  the
pleasure  and  good  of  others,  even  down  to  posterity  and  future
ages.  And  in  the  next  place,  'tis  evident  in  these  performers
that  their  chief  theme  and  subject,  that  which  raises  their
genius  the  most,  and  by  which  they  so  effectually  move  others,
is  purely  manners  and  the  moral  part.  For  this  is  the  effect,
and  this  the  beauty  of  their  art ;  "  in  vocal  measures  of  syllables

*  ["  Like  a  Mage,  he  tortures,  enrages,  soothes,  fills  us  with  false
terrors."— Hor.  Epist.  ii.  i.  211-213.]

90


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

and  sounds  to  express  the  harmony  and  numbers  of  an  inward
kind,  and  represent  the  beauties  of  a  human  soul  by  proper  foils
and  contrarieties,  which  serve  as  graces  in  this  limning,  and
render  this  music  of  the  passions  more  powerful  and  enchanting."
The  admirers  of  beauty  in  the  fair  sex  would  laugh,  perhaps,
to  hear  of  a  moral  part  in  their  amours.  Yet  what  a  stir  is
made  about  a  heart !  A\Tiat  curious  search  of  sentiments  and
tender  thoughts  !  What  praises  of  a  humour,  a  sense,  a  je  ne  sgai
quoi  of  wit,  and  all  those  graces  of  a  mind  which  these  virtuoso-
lovers  delight  to  celebrate  !  Let  them  settle  this  matter  among
themselves,  and  regulate,  as  they  think  fit,  the  proportions
which  these  different  beauties  hold  one  to  another.  They  must
allow  still,  there  is  a  beauty  of  the  mind,  and  such  as  is  essential
in  the  case.  Why  else  is  the  very  air  of  foolishness  enough  to
cloy  a  lover  at  first  sight .''  Why  does  an  idiot-look  and  manner
destroy  the  effect  of  all  those  outward  charms,  and  rob  the
fair  one  of  her  power,  though  regularly  armed  in  all  the  exact-
ness of  features  and  complexion  ?  We  may  imagine  what  we
please  of  a  substantial  solid  part  of  beauty;  but  were  the  subject
to  be  well  criticised  we  should  find,  perhaps,  that  what  we  most
admired,  even  in  the  turn  of  outward  features,  was  only  a
mysterious  expression,  and  a  kind  of  shadow  of  something
inward  in  the  temper;  and  that  when  we  were  struck  with  a
majestic  air,  a  sprightly  look,  an  Amazon  bold  gi-ace,  or  a
contrary  soft  and  gentle  one,  ^twas  chiefly  the  fancy  of  these
characters  or  qualities  which  wrought  on  us :  our  imagination
being  busied  in  forming  beauteous  shapes  and  images  of  this
rational  kind,  which  entertained  the  mind  and  held  it  in  ad-
miration, whilst  other  passions  of  a  lower  species  were  employed
another  way.  The  preliminary  addresses,  the  declarations,  the
explanations,  confidences,  clearings,  the  dependence  on  something
mutual,  something  felt  by  way  of  return,  the  spes  animi  credula
mutui — all  these  become  necessary  ingredients  in  the  affair  of
love,  and  are  authentically  established  by  the  men  of  elegance
and  art  in  this  way  of  passion.

91


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Nor  can  the  men  of  cooler  passions  and  more  deliberate
pursuits  withstand  the  force  of  beauty  in  other  subjects.  Every
one  is  a  virtuoso  of  a  higher  or  lower  degree.  Every  one  pursues
a  Grace  and  courts  a  Venus  of  one  kind  or  another.  The  venus-
tuirif  the  honestuTriy  the  decorum  of  things  will  force  its  way.
They  who  refuse  to  give  it  scope  in  the  nobler  subjects  of  a
rational  and  moral  kind  will  find  its  prevalency  elsewhere  in
an  inferior  order  of  things.  They  who  overlook  the  main
springs  of  action,  and  despise  the  thought  of  numbers  and  pro-
portion in  a  life  at  large,  will,  in  the  mean  particulars  of  it,  be
no  less  taken  up  and  engaged,  as  either  in  the  study  of  common
arts,  or  in  the  care  and  culture  of  mere  mechanic  beauties.
The  models  of  houses,  buildings,  and  their  accompanying  orna-
ments ;  the  plans  of  gardens,  and  their  compartments ;  the
ordering  of  walks,  plantations,  avenues ;  and  a  thousand  other
symmetries,  will  succeed  in  the  room  of  that  happier  and  higher
symmetry  and  order  of  a  mind.  The  species^  of  fair,  noble,
handsome,  will  discover  itself  on  a  thousand  occasions,  and  in
a  thousand  subjects.  The  spectre  still  will  haunt  us  in  some
shape  or  other ;  and  when  driven  from  our  cool  thoughts,  and
frighted  from  the  closet,  will  meet  us  even  at  court,  and  fill  our
heads  with  dreams  of  grandeur,  titles,  honours,  and  a  false
magnificence  and  beauty,  to  which  we  are  ready  to  sacrifice  our
highest  pleasure  and  ease,  and  for  the  sake  of  which  we  become
the  merest  drudges  and  most  abject  slaves.

The  men  of  pleasure,  who  seem  the  greatest  contemners  of
this  philosophical  beauty,  are  forced  often  to  confess  her  charms.
They  can  as  heartily  as  others  commend  honesty;  and  are  as
much  struck  with  the  beauty  of  a  generous  part.  They  admire
the  thing  itself,  though  not  the  means.  And,  if  possible,  they
would  so  order  it,  as  to  make  probity  and  luxury  agree.  But
the  rules  of  harmony  will  not  permit  it.  The  dissonances  are
too  strong.  However,  the  attempts  of  this  kind  are  not  un-
pleasant to  observe.  For  though  some  of  the  voluptuous  are
^  Misc.  iii.  ch.  ii.

92


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

found  sordid  pleaders  for  baseness  and  coiTuption  of  every  sort,
yet  others,  more  generous,  endeavour  to  keep  measures  with
honesty ;  and  understanding  pleasure  better,  are  for  bringing  it
under  some  rule.  They  condemn  this  manner ;  they  praise  the
other.  "  So  far  was  right ;  but  further,  wrong.  Such  a  case
was  allowable ;  but  such  a  one  not  to  be  admitted."  They
introduce  a  justice  and  an  order  in  their  pleasures.  They  would
bring  reason  to  be  of  their  party,  account  in  some  manner  for
their  lives,  and  form  themselves  to  some  kind  of  consonancy
and  agi'eement.  Or  should  they  find  this  impracticable  on
certain  terms,  they  would  choose  to  sacrifice  their  other  pleasures
to  those  which  arise  from  a  generous  behaviour,  a  regularity  of
conduct,  and  a  consistency  of  life  and  manners  : —

Et  verae  numerosque  modosque  ediscere  vitae.^

Other  occasions  will  put  us  upon  this  thought ;  but  chiefly
a  strong  view  of  merit,  in  a  generous  character,  opposed  to  some
detestably  vile  one.  Hence  it  is  that  among  poets,  the  satirists
seldom  fail  in  doing  justice  to  virtue.  Nor  are  any  of  the
nobler  poets  false  to  this  cause.  Even  modern  wits,  whose  turn
is  all  towards  gallantry  and  pleasure,  when  bare-faced  villainy
stands  in  their  way,  and  brings  the  contrary  species  in  view,
can  sing  in  passionate  strains  the  praises  of  plain  honesty.

AVhen  we  are  highly  friends  with  the  world,  successful  with
the  fair,  and  prosperous  in  the  possession  of  other  beauties,  we
may  perchance,  as  is  usual,  despise  this  sober  mistress.  But
when  we  see,  in  the  issue,  what  riot  and  excess  naturally  produce
in  the  world ;  when  we  find  that  by  luxury's  means,  and  for  the
service  of  vile  interests,  knaves  are  advanced  above  us,  and  the
vilest  of  men  preferred  before  the  honestest ;  we  then  behold
virtue  in  a  new  light,  and  by  the  assistance  of  such  a  foil,  can
discern  the  beauty  of  honesty,  and  the  reality  of  those  charms
which  before  we  understood  not  to  be  either  natural  or  powerful.

^  ["To  learn  the  measures  and  rules  of  the  true  life." — Hor.  Epist.  u.
ii.  144.]

93


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


^ Section III

And  thus,  after  all,  the  most  natural  beauty  in  the  world  is
honesty  and  moral  truth.  For  all  beauty  is  truth.  TiTie
features  make  the  beauty  of  a  face ;  and  true  proportions  the
beauty  of  architecture ;  as  true  measures  that  of  harmony  and
music.  In  poetry,  which  is  all  fable,  truth  still  is  the  perfection.
And  whoever  is  scholar  enough  to  read  the  ancient  philosopher,
or  his  modem  copyists,^  upon  the  nature  of  a  dramatic  and  epic
poem,  will  easily  understand  this  account  of  truth.  ^

A  painter,  if  he  has  any  genius,  understands  the  truth  and
I  unity  of  design ;  and  knows  he  is  even  then  unnatural  when  he
follows  Nature  too  close,  and  strictly  copies  Life.  For  his  art
allows  him  not  to  bring  all  nature  into  his  piece,  but  a  part
only.  However,  his  piece,  if  it  be  beautiful,  and  carries  truth,
must  be  a  whole,  by  itself,  complete,  independent,  and  withal  as
great  and  comprehensive  as  he  can  make  it.  So  that  particulars,
on  this  occasion,  must  yield  to  the  general  design,  and  all  things
be  subservient  to  that  which  is  principal ;  in  order  to  form  a
certain  easiness of  sight,  a simple,  clear,  and united view,^

1  The  French  translator^  no  doubt,  has  justly  hit  our  author's  thought,

by  naming  in  his  margin  the  excellent  Bossu  Du  poeme  epique ;  who  in

that  admirable  comment  and  explanation  of  Aristotle,  has  perhaps  not

I  only  shown  himself  the  greatest  of  the  French  critics,  but  presented  the

' world  with  a  view  of  ancient  literature  and  just  writing  beyond  any  other

modern  of  whatever  nation.

^  Misc.  iii.  ch.  ii.  and  v.  cli.  i.

'  The  t6  eiiaivovTov,  as  the  great  Master  of  arts  calls  it  in  his  Poetics,
ch.  xxiii.  but  particularly  ch.  vii.,  where  he  shows  "that  the  rb  KoKbv,
the  beautiful,  or  the  sublime,  in  these  above-mentioned  arts,  is  from  the
expression  of  greatness  with  order  :  that  is  to  say,  exhibiting  the  principal
or  main  of  what  is  designed,  in  the  very  largest  proportions  in  which  it  is
capable  of  being  viewed.  For  when  it  is  gigantic,  'tis  in  a  manner  out  of
sight,  and  can  be  no  way  comprehended  in  that  simple  and  united  view.
As,  on  the  contrary,  when  a  piece  is  of  the  miniature  kind  ;  when  it  runs
into  the  detail  and  nice  delineation  of  every  little  particular ;  'tis  as  it

94


FREEDOM  OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

which  would  be  broken  and  disturbed  by  the  expression  of  any
thing  peculiar  or  distinct.

Now  the  variety  of  Nature  is  such,  as  to  distinguish  every-
thing she  forms,  by  a  peculiar  original  character,  which,  if
strictly  observed,  will  make  the  subject  appear  unlike  to  any-

were  invisible,  for  the  same  reason  ;  because  the  summary  beauty,  the
whole  itself,  cannot  be  comprehended  in  that  one  united  view  ;  which  is
broken  and  lost  by  the  necessary  attraction  of  the  eye  to  every  small  and
subordinate  part.  In  a  poetic  system,  the  same  regard  must  be  had  to  the
memory  as  in  painting  to  the  eye.  The  dramatic  kind  is  confined  within
the  convenient  and  proper  time  of  a  spectacle.  The  epic  is  left  more  at
large.  Each  work,  however,  must  aim  at  vastness,  and  be  as  great,  and
of  as  long  duration  as  possible  ;  but  so  as  to  be  comprehended  (as  to  the
main  of  it)  by  one  easy  glance  or  retrospect  of  memory.  And  this  the
philosopher  calls,  accordingly,  the  rh  eJu/jLvrj/juivevTov."  I  cannot  better
translate  the  passage  than  as  I  have  done  in  these  explanatory  lines.  For
besides  what  relates  to  mere  art,  the  philosophical  sense  of  the  original  is
so  majestic,  and  the  whole  treatise  so  masterly,  that  when  I  find  even  the
Latin  interpreters  come  so  short,  I  should  be  vain  to  attempt  anything  iu
our  language.  I  would  only  add  a  small  remark  of  my  own,  which  may
perhaps  be  noticed  by  the  studiers  of  statuary  and  painting  :  that  the
greatest  of  the  ancient  as  well  as  modem  artists,  were  ever  inclined  to
follow  this  rule  of  the  philosopher  ;  and  when  they  erred  in  their  designs,
or  draughts,  it  was  on  the  side  of  greatness,  by  running  into  the  unsizable
and  gigantic,  rather  than  into  the  minute  and  delicate.  Of  this,  Mich.
Angelo,  the  great  beginner  and  founder  among  the  moderns,  and  Zeuxis
the  same  among  the  ancients,  may  serve  as  instances.  See  Pliny,  xxxv.
9,  concerning  Zeuxis,  and  the  notes  of  Father  Hardouin  in  his  edition
in  tisum  Delphini,  p.  200,  on  the  words,  deprehenditur  tamen  Zeuxis,  etc.
And  again  Pliny  himself  upon  Euphranor,  in  the  same  book,  ch.  11,  p.  226,
docilis  ac  laboriosus  ante  omnes,  et  in  quocumque  genere  excellens,  ac
sibi  aequalis.  Hie  primus  videtur  expressisse  dignitates  heroum,  et
usurpasse  symmetriam.  Sed  fuit  universitate  corporum  exilior,  capitibus
articulisque  grandior.  Volumina  quoque  composuit  de  symmetria  et
coloribus,  etc.  \_"  A  good  learner  and  painstaking,  uniformly  excellent  in
every  branch.  He  is  thought  to  have  first  done  justice  to  the  majesty  of
heroes  and  first  mastered  proportion,  but  his  bodies  were  over-slender,  his
heads  and  limbs  over-large.  He  wrote  too  on  proportion  and  colouring."
Pliny,  H.  N.  xxxv.  128.]  Vide  infra,  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  3,  in
the  notes.

95


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

thing  extant  in  the  world  besides.  But  this  effect  the  good
poet  and  painter  seek  industriously  to  prevent.  They  hate
minuteness,  and  are  afraid  of  singularity ;  which  would  make
their  images,  or  characters,  appear  capricious  and  fantastical.
The  mere  face-painter,  indeed,  has  little  in  common  with  the
poet;  but,  like  the  mere  historian,  copies  what  he  sees,  and
minutely  traces  every  feature  and  odd  mark.  Tis  otherwise
with  the  men  of  invention  and  design.  'Tis  from  the  many
objects  of  nature,  and  not  from  a  particular  one,  that  those
geniuses  form  the  idea  of  their  work.  Thus  the  best  artists  are
said  to  have  been  indefatigable  in  studying  the  best  statues  :  as
esteeming  them  a  better  rule  than  the  perfectest  human  bodies
could  afford.  And  thus  some  considerable  wits^  have  recom-
mended the  best  poems  as  preferable  to  the  best  of  histories ;
and  better  teaching  the  truth  of  characters  and  nature  of
mankind.

Nor  can  this  criticism  be  thought  high-strained.  Though
few  confine  themselves  to  these  rules,  few  are  insensible  of  them.
Whatever  quarter  we  may  give  to  our  vicious  poets,  or  other
composers  of  irregular  and  short-lived  works,  we  know  very
well  that  the  standing  pieces  of  good  artists  must  be  formed
after  a  more  uniform  way.  Every  just  work  of  theirs  comes
under  those  natural  rules  of  proportion  and  truth.  The
creature  of  their  brain  must  be  like  one  of  Nature's  formation.
It  must  have  a  body  and  parts  proportionable ;  or  the  very
vulgar  will  not  fail  to  criticise  the  work  when  it  has  neither
head  nor  tail.  For  so  common  sense  (according  to  just
philosophy)  judges  of  those  works  which  want  the  justness  of
a  whole,  and  show  their  author,  however  curious  and  exact  in
particulars,  to  be  in  the  main  a  very  bungler —

^  Thus  the  great  Master  himself  in  his  Poetics  above  cited^  viii. ,  Sib  Kal
^iXoffOifxirfpov  Kal  airovdai&repov  irolr}<ris  Icropias  iariV  i)  /liv  yd,p  irolrjais  fiSXKoy
tA  KaOoXov,  7]  5'  laropla  t4  KaO'  iKaffrov  Xeyei.  ["  Poetry  is  both  a  more
philosophic  and  a  more  real  thing  than  history  ;  for  poetry  tells  rather  the
universal,  history  the  particular." — Arist  Poet.  xcvL]

96


FREEDOM OF  WIT AND HUMOUR

Infelix  operis  summa,  quia  ponere  totum
Nesciet.i

Such  is  poetical  and  such  (if  I  may  so  call  it)  graphical
or  plastic  truth.  Narrative  or  historical  truth  must  needs  be
highly  estimable ;  especially  when  we  consider  how  mankind,
who  are  become  so  deeply  interested  in  the  subject,  have
suffered  by  the  want  of  clearness  in  it.  'Tis  itself  a  part  of
moral  truth.  To  be  a  judge  in  one,  requires  a  judgment  in
the  other.  The  morals,  the  character,  and  genius  of  an  author
must  be  thoroughly  considered ;  and  the  historian  or  relator  of
things  important  to  mankind  must,  whoever  he  be,  approve
himself  many  ways  to  us,  both  in  respect  of  his  judgment,
candour,  and  disinterestedness,  ere  we  are  bound  to  take
anything  on  his  authority.  And  as  for  critical  truth,^  or  the
judgment  and  determination  of  what  commentators,  translators,
paraphrasts,  grammarians  and  others  have,  on  this  occasion,
delivered  to  us ;  in  the  midst  of  such  variety  of  style,  such
diff"erent  readings,  such  interpolations  and  corruptions  in  the
originals ;  such  mistakes  of  copyists,  transcribers,  editors,  and  a
hundred  such  accidents  to  which  ancient  books  are  subject ;  it
becomes,  upon  the  whole,  a  matter  of  nice  speculation,  con-
sidering withal  that  the  reader,  though  an  able  linguist,  must
be  supported  by  so  many  other  helps  from  chronology,  natural
philosophy,  geography,  and  other  sciences.

And  thus  many  previous  truths  are  to  be  examined  and
understood  in  order  to  judge  rightly  of  historical  truth,  and  of
the  past  actions  and  circumstances  of  mankind,  as  delivered  to
us  by  ancient  authors  of  different  nations,  ages,  times,  and
different  in  their  characters  and  interests.  Some  moral  and
philosophical  truths  there  are  withal  so  evident  in  themselves,
that  'twould  be  easier  to  imagine  half  mankind  to  have  run  mad,
and  joined  precisely  in  one  and  the  same  species  of  folly,  than
to  admit  anything  as  truth  which  should  be  advanced  against
such  natural  knowledge,  fundamental  reason,  and  common  sense.
^  Hor.  De  Arte  Poet.  34.  2  ;^i^f.^  y^  qY^  ^

VOL.  I  97  U


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

This  I  have  mentioned,  the  rather  because  some  modern
zealots  appear  to  have  no  better  knowledge  of  truth,  nor  better
manner  of  judging  it,  than  by  counting  noses.  By  this  rule,
if  they  can  poll  an  indifferent  number  out  of  a  mob ;  if  they
can  produce  a  set  of  Lancashire  noddles,  remote  provincial
headpieces,  or  visionary  assemblers,  to  attest  a  story  of  a  witch
upon  a  broomstick,  and  a  flight  in  the  air,  they  triumph  in  the
solid  proof  of  their  new  prodigy,  and  cry,  magna  est  Veritas
et  praevalebit !

Religion,  no  doubt,  is  much  indebted  to  these  men  of
prodigy,  who,  in  such  a  discerning  age,  would  set  her  on  the
foot  of  popular  tradition,  and  venture  her  on  the  same  bottom
with  parish  tales,  and  gossiping  stories  of  imps,  goblins,  and
demoniacal  pranks,  invented  to  fright  children,  or  make
practice  for  common  exorcists  and  "  cunning  men '' !  For  by
that  name,  you  know,  country  people  are  used  to  call  those
dealers  in  mystery  who  are  thought  to  conjure  in  an  honest
way,  and  foil  the  devil  at  his  own  weapon.

And  now,  my  friend,  I  can  perceive  'tis  time  to  put  an  end
to  these  reflections,  lest  by  endeavouring  to  expound  things
any  further,  I  should  be  drawn  from  my  way  of  humour  to
harangue  profoundly  on  these  subjects.  But  should  you  find
I  had  moralised  in  any  tolerable  manner,  according  to  common
sense,  and  without  canting,  I  could  be  satisfied  with  my  jier-
formance,  such  as  it  is,  without  fearing  what  disturbance  I
might  possibly  give  to  some  formal  censors  of  the  age,  whose
discourses  and  writings  are  of  another  strain.  I  have  taken
the  liberty,  you  see,  to  laugh  upon  some  occasions;  and  if  I
have  either  laughed  wrong,  or  been  impertinently  serious,  I  can
be  content  to  be  laughed  at  in  my  turn.  If  contrariwise  I  am
railed  at,  I  can  laugh  still,  as  before,  and  with  fresh  advantage
to  my  cause.  For  though,  in  reality,  there  could  be  nothing
less  a  laughing  matter  than  the  provoked  rage,  ill-will,  and
fury  of  certain  zealous  gentlemen,  were  they  armed  as  lately
they  have  been  known ;  yet  as  the  magistrate  has  since  taken

98


FREEDOM OF WIT  AND HUMOUR

care  to  pare  their  talons,  there  is  nothing  very  terrible  in  their
encounter.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  something  comical  in  the
case.  It  brings  to  one''s  mind  the  fancy  of  those  grotesque
figures  and  dragon-faces,  which  are  seen  often  in  the  frontis-
piece and  on  the  corner-stones  of  old  buildings.  They  seem
placed  there  as  the  defenders  and  supporters  of  the  edifice ;  but
with  all  their  grimace,  are  as  harmless  to  people  without,  as
they  are  useless  to  the  building  within.  Great  efforts  of  anger
to  little  purpose,  serve  for  pleasantry  and  farce.  Exceeding
fierceness,  with  perfect  inability  and  impotence,  make  the
highest  ridicule. — I  am,  dear  friend,  affectionately  yours,  etc.


99


TREATISE III

SOLILOQUY


OR


ADVICE  TO  AN  AUTHOR

Nee  TE  quaesiveris  extra.  I 'y^

Pers.  Sat.  i.  il

Printed  first  in  the  year  MDCCX.


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

PART  I

Section I

I  HAVE  often  thought  how  ill-natured  a  maxim  it  was,  which
on  many  occasions  I  have  heard  from  people  of  good  under-
standing, "  that,  as  to  what  related  to  private  conduct,  no  one
was  ever  the  better  for  advice."  But  upon  farther  examination
I  have  resolved  with  myself  that  the  maxim  might  be  admitted
without  any  violent  prejudice  to  mankind.  For  in  the  manner
advice  was  generally  given,  there  was  no  reason,  I  thought,  to
wonder  it  should  be  so  ill  received.  Something  there  was  which
strangely  inverted  the  case,  and  made  the  giver  to  be  the  only
gainer.  For  by  what  I  could  observe  in  many  occurrences  of
our  lives,  that  which  we  called  giving  advice  was,  properly,
taking  an  occasion  to  show  our  own  wisdom  at  another's  expense.
On  the  other  side,  to  be  instructed,  or  to  receive  advice  on  the
terms  usually  prescribed  to  us,  was  little  better  than  tamely  to
afford  another  the  occasion  of  raising  himself  a  character  from
our  defects.

In  reality,  however  able  or  willing  a  man  may  be  to  advise,
'tis  no  easy  matter  to  make  advice  a  free  gift.  For  to  make  a
gift  free  indeed,  there  must  be  nothing  in  it  which  takes  from
another  to  add  to  oui-self.  In  all  other  respects,  to  give  and
to  dispense  is  generosity  and  good-will ;  but  to  bestow  wisdom,
is  to  gain  a  mastery  which  cannot  so  easily  be  allowed  us. Men

103


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

willingly  learn  whatever  else  is  taught  them.  They  can  bear  a
master  in  mathematics,  in  music,  or  in  any  other  science,  but
not  in  understanding  and  good  sense.

Tis  the  hardest  thing  imaginabio  for  an  author  not  to  appear
assuming  in  this  respect.  For  all  authors  at  large  are,  in  a
manner,  professed  masters  of  understanding  to  the  age.  And  for
this  reason,  in  early  days,  poets  were  looked  upon  as  authentic
sages,  for  dictating  rules  of  life,  and  teaching  manners  and  good
sense.  How  they  may  have  lost  their  pretension,  I  cannot  say.
Tis  their  peculiar  happiness  and  advantage  not  to  be  obliged
to  lay  their  claim  openly.  And  if  whilst  they  profess  only  to
please,  they  secretly  advise  and  give  instruction,  they  may  now
perhaps,  as  well  as  formerly,  be  esteemed  with  justice  the  best
and  most  honourable  among  authors.

Meanwhile,  "  if  dictating  and  prescribing  be  of  so  dangerous
a  nature  in  other  authors,  what  must  his  case  be  who  dictates
to  authors  themselves  ?  "

To  this  I  answer  :  that  my  pretension  is  not  so  much  to  give
advice,  as  to  consider  of  the  way  and  manner  of  advising.  My
science,  if  it  be  any,  is  no  better  than  that  of  a  language-master,
or  a  logician.  For  I  have  taken  it  strongly  into  my  head,  that
there  is  a  certain  knack  or  legerdemain  in  argument,  by  which
we  may  safely  proceed  to  the  dangerous  part  of  advising,  and
make  sure  of  the  good  fortune  to  have  our  advice  accepted  if  it
be  anything  worth.

My  proposal  is  to  consider  of  this  affair  as  a  case  of  surgery.
'Tis  practice,  we  all  allow,  which  makes  a  hand.  "  But  who,  on
this  occasion,  will  be  practised  on  "?  Who  will  willingly  be  the
first  to  try  our  hand,  and  afford  us  the  requisite  experience  ? "
Here  lies  the  difficulty.  For  supposing  we  had  hospitals  for
this  sort  of  surgery,  and  there  were  always  in  readiness  certain
meek  patients  who  would  bear  any  incisions,  and  be  probed  or
tented  at  our  pleasure,  the  advantage  no  doubt  would  be  con-
siderable in  this  way  of  practice.  Some  insight  must  needs  be
obtained. In  time  a  hand  too  might  be  acquired ;  but  in  all

104


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

likelihood  a  very  rough  one,  which  would  by  no  means  serve
the  purpose  of  this  latter  surgery.  For  here,  a  tenderness  of
hand  is  principally  requisite.  No  surgeon  will  be  called  who
has  not  feeling  and  compassion.  And  where  to  find  a  subject
in  which  the  operator  is  likely  to  preserve  the  highest  tenderness,
and  yet  act  with  the  greatest  resolution  and  boldness,  is  certainly
a  matter  of  no  slight  consideration.

I  am  sensible  there  is  in  all  considerable  projects,  at  first
appearance,  a  certain  air  of  chimerical  fancy  and  conceit,  which
is  apt  to  render  the  projectors  somewhat  liable  to  ridicule.  I
would  therefore  prepare  my  reader  against  this  prejudice,  by
assuring  him  that  in  the  operation  proposed  there  is  nothing
which  can  justly  excite  his  laughter;  or  if  there  be,  the  laugh
perhaps  may  turn  against  him  by  his  own  consent  and  with
his  own  concurrence,  which  is  a  specimen  of  that  very  art  or
science  we  are  about  to  illustrate.

Accordingly,  if  it  be  objected  against  the  above-mentioned
practice  and  art  of  surgery,  "  that  we  can  nowhere  find  such  a
meek  patient,  with  whom  we  can  in  reality  make  bold,  and  for
whom  nevertheless  we  are  sure  to  presei-ve  the  greatest  tenderness
and  regard,"  I  assert  the  contrary ;  and  say,  for  instance,  that
we  have  each  of  us  ourselves  to  practise  on.  "  Mere  quibble  ! "
you  will  say ;  "  for  who  can  thus  multiply  himself  into  two  persons
and  be  his  own  subject  ?  Who  can  properly  laugh  at  himself,
or  find  in  his  heart  to  be  either  merry  or  severe  on  such  an
occasion  .'* ""  Go  to  the  poets,  and  they  will  present  you  with
many  instances.  Nothing  is  more  common  with  them,  than
this  sort  of  soliloquy.  A  person  of  profound  parts,  or  perhaps
of  ordinary  capacity,  happens  on  some  occasion  to  commit  a
fault.  He  is  concerned  for  it.  He  comes  alone  upon  the  stage  ;
looks  about  him  to  see  if  anybody  be  near ;  then  takes  himself
to  task,  without  sparing  himself  in  the  least.  You  would
wonder  to  hear  how  close  he  pushes  matters,  and  how  thoroughly
he  caiTies  on  the  business  of  self-dissection.  By  virtue  of  this
soliloquy  he  becomes  two  distinct  persons. He  is  pupil  and

105


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

preceptor.  He  teaches,  and  he  learns.  And  in  good  earnest,
had  I  nothing  else  to  plead  in  behalf  of  the  morals  of  our
modern  dramatic  poets,  I  should  defend  them  still  against  their
accusers  for  the  sake  of  this  very  practice,  which  they  have  taken
care  to  keep  up  in  its  full  force.  For  whether  the  practice  be
natural  or  no,  in  respect  of  common  custom  and  usage,  I  take
upon  me  to  assert,  that  it  is  an  honest  and  laudable  practice;
and  that  if  already  it  be  not  natural  to  us,  we  ought  however  to
make  it  so,  by  study  and  application.

"  Are  we  to  go  therefore  to  the  stage  for  edification  ?  Must
we  leam  our  catechism  from  the  poets  ?  And,  like  the  players,
speak  aloud  what  we  debate  at  any  time  with  ourselves  alone .'' ''"'
Not  absolutely  so,  perhaps.  Though  where  the  harm  would  be,
of  spending  some  discourse,  and  bestowing  a  little  breath  and
clear  voice  purely  upon  ourselves,  I  cannot  see.  We  might
peradventure  be  less  noisy  and  more  profitable  in  company,  if
at  convenient  times  we  discharged  some  of  our  articulate  sound,
and  spoke  to  ourselves  viva  voce  when  alone.  For  company  is
an  extreme  provocative  to  fancy,  and,  like  a  hot  bed  in  garden-
ing, is  apt  to  make  our  imaginations  sprout  too  fast.  But  by
this  anticipating  remedy  of  soliloquy,  we  may  effectually  provide
against  the  inconvenience.

We  have  an  account  in  history  of  a  certain  nation  who
seem  to  have  been  extremely  apprehensive  of  the  effects  of  this
frothiness  or  ventosity  in  speech,  and  were  accordingly  resolved
to  provide  thoroughly  against  the  evil.  They  carried  this
remedy  of  ours  so  far,  that  it  was  not  only  their  custom,  but
their  religion  and  law,  to  speak,  laugh,  use  action,  gesticulate,
and  do  all  in  the  same  manner  when  by  themselves  as  when
they  were  in  company.  If  you  had  stolen  upon  them  unawares
at  any  time  when  they  had  been  alone,  you  might  have  found
them  in  high  dispute,  arguing  with  themselves,  reproving,
counselling,  haranguing  themselves,  and  in  the  most  florid
manner  accosting  their  own  persons.  In  all  likelihood  they  had
been once a people remarkably fluent in expression, much

106


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

pestered  mth  orators  and  preachers,  and  mightily  subject  to
that  disease  which  has  been  since  called  the  leprosy  of  eloquence,
till  some  sage  legislator  arose  amongst  them,  who,  when  he  could
not  oppose  the  torrent  of  words  and  stop  the  flux  of  speech  by
any  immediate  application,  found  means  to  give  a  vent  to  the
loquacious  humour,  and  broke  the  force  of  the  distemper  by
eluding  it.

Our  present  manners,  I  must  own,  are  not  so  well  calculated
for  this  method  of  soliloquy  as  to  suffer  it  to  become  a  national
practice.  'Tis  but  a  small  portion  of  this  regimen  which  I
would  willingly  borrow  and  apply  to  private  use,  especially  in
the  case  of  authors.  I  am  sensible  how  fatal  it  might  prove  to
many  honourable  persons,  should  they  acquire  such  a  habit  as
this,  or  off*er  to  practise  such  an  art  within  reach  of  any  mortal
ear.  For  'tis  well  known  we  are  not  many  of  us  like  that
Roman  who  wished  for  windows  to  his  breast,  that  all  might  be
as  conspicuous  there  as  in  his  house,  which  for  that  very  reason
he  had  built  as  open  as  was  possible.  I  would  therefore  advise
our  probationer  upon  his  first  exercise  to  retire  into  some  thick
wood,  or  rather  take  the  point  of  some  high  hill,  where,  besides
the  advantage  of  looking  about  him  for  security,  he  would  find
the  air  perhaps  more  rarefied  and  suitable  to  the  perspiration
required,  especially  in  the  case  of  a  poetical  genius —

Scriptorum  chorus  omnis  amat  nemus  et  fugit  urbes.^

'Tis  remarkable  in  all  great  wits,  that  they  have  owned  this
practice  of  ours,  and  generally  described  themselves  as  a  people
liable  to  sufficient  ridicule  for  their  great  loquacity  by  them-
selves, and  their  profound  taciturnity  in  company.  Not  only
the  poet  and  philosopher,  but  the  orator  himself  was  wont  to
have  recourse  to  our  method.  And  the  prince  of  this  latter
tribe  may  be  proved  to  have  been  a  gi'eat  frequenter  of  the
woods  and  river-banks,  where  he  consumed  abundance  of  his

^  [*'The  whole  band  of  authors  loves  a  wood  and  shuns  a  city." — Hor.
Epist.  II.  ii.  77.]

107


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

breath,  suffered  his  fancy  to  evaporate,  and  reduced  the  vehe-
mence both  of  his  spirit  and  voice.  If  other  authors  find
nothing  which  invites  them  to  these  recesses,  'tis  because  their
genius  is  not  of  force  enough ;  or  though  it  be,  their  character,
they  may  imagine,  will  hardly  bear  them  out.  For  to  be
surprised  in  the  odd  actions,  gestures,  or  tones,  which  are  proper
to  such  ascetics,  I  must  own  would  be  an  ill  adventure  for  a
man  of  the  world.  But  with  poets  and  philosophers  'tis  a
known  case : —

Aut  insanit  homo,  aut  versus  facit.^

Composing  and  raving  must  necessarily,  we  see,  bear  a
resemblance.  And  for  those  composers  who  deal  in  systems  and
airy  speculations,  they  have  vulgarly  passed  for  a  sort  of  prose
poets. Their  secret  practice  and  habit  has  been  as  frequently"

Murmura  cum  secum  et  rabiosa  silentia  rodunt.^

Both  these  sorts  are  happily  indulged  in  this  method  of  evacua-
tion. ITiey  are  thought  to  act  naturally  and  in  their  proper
way  when  they  assume  these  odd  mannei*s.  But  of  other
authors  'tis  expected  they  should  be  better  bred.  They  are
obliged  to  preserve  a  more  conversible  habit,  which  is  no  small
misfortune  to  them.  For  if  their  meditation  and  reverie  be
obstructed  by  the  fear  of  a  nonconforming  mien  in  conversation,
they  may  happen  to  be  so  much  the  worse  authors  for  being
finer  gentlemen.  Their  fervency  of  imagination  may  possibly
be  as  strong  as  either  the  philosopher's  or  the  poet's.  But  being
denied  an  equal  benefit  of  discharge,  and  withheld  from  the
wholesome  manner  of  relief  in  private,  'tis  no  wonder  if  they
appear  with  so  much  froth  and  scum  in  public.

'Tis  observable  that  the  writers  of  memoirs  and  essays  are
chiefly  subject  to  this  frothy  distemper.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted
that  this  is  the  true  reason  why  these  gentlemen  entertain  the

1  ["The  man  is  either  raving  or  composing." — Hor.  Sat.  ii.  vii.  118.]

2  Pars.  Sat.  iii.

108


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

world  so  lavishly  with  what  relates  to  themselves.  For  having
had  no  opportunity  of  privately  conversing  with  themselves,  or
exercising  their  own  genius  so  as  to  make  acquaintance  with  it
or  prove  its  strength,  they  immediately  fall  to  work  in  a  wrong
place,  and  exhibit  on  the  stage  of  the  world  that  practice  which
they  should  have  kept  to  themselves,  if  they  designed  that
either  they  or  the  world  should  be  the  better  for  their  moralities.
Who  indeed  can  endure  to  hear  an  empiric  talk  of  his  own
constitution,  how  he  governs  and  manages  it,  Avhat  diet  agrees
best  with  it,  and  what  his  practice  is  with  himself?  The
proverb,  no  doubt,  is  very  just.  Physician  cure  thyself.  Yet
methinks  one  should  have  but  an  ill  time  to  be  present  at  these
bodily  operations.  Nor  is  the  reader  in  truth  any  better
entertained  when  he  is  obliged  to  assist  at  the  experimental
discussions  of  his  practising  author,  who  all  the  while  is  in
reality  doing  no  better  than  taking  his  physic  in  public.

For  this  reason  I  hold  it  very  indecent  for  any  one  to  publish
his  meditations,  occasional  reflections,  solitary  thoughts,  or  other
such  exercises  as  come  under  the  notion  of  this  self-discoursing
practice.  And  the  modestest  title  I  can  conceive  for  such
works  would  be  that  of  a  certain  author  who  called  them  his
crudities.  'Tis  the  unhappiness  of  those  wits  who  conceive
suddenly,  but  without  being  able  to  go  out  their  full  time,  that
after  many  miscarriages  and  abortions,  they  can  bring  nothing
well-shapen  or  perfect  into  the  world.  They  are  not,  however,
the  less  fond  of  their  offspring,  which  in  a  manner  they  beget
in  public.  For  so  public-spirited  they  are,  that  they  can  never
afford  themselves  the  least  time  to  think  in  private  for  their
own  particular  benefit  and  use.  For  this  reason,  though  they
are  often  retired,  they  are  never  by  themselves.  The  world  is
ever  of  the  party.  They  have  their  author-character  in  view,
and  are  always  considering  how  this  or  that  thought  would
serve  to  complete  some  set  of  contemplations,  or  furnish  out  the
commonplace  book  from  whence  these  treasui'ed  riches  are  to
flow  in  plenty  on  the  necessitous  world.

109


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

But  if  our  candidates  for  authorship  happen  to  be  of  the
sanctified  kind,  'tis  not  to  be  imagined  how  much  farther  still
their  charity  is  apt  to  extend.  So  exceeding  great  is  their
indulgence  and  tenderness  for  mankind,  that  they  are  unwilling
the  least  sample  of  their  devout  exercise  should  be  lost.  Though
there  are  already  so  many  formularies  and  rituals  appointed  for
this  species  of  soliloquy,  they  can  allow  nothing  to  lie  concealed
which  passes  in  this  religious  commerce  and  way  of  dialogue
between  them  and  their  soul.

These  may  be  termed  a  sort  of  pseudo-ascetics,  who  can  have
no  real  converse  either  with  themselves,  or  with  heaven,  whilst
they  look  thus  asquint  upon  the  world,  and  carry  titles  and
editions  along  with  them  in  their  meditations.  And  although
the  books  of  this  sort,  by  a  common  idiom,  are  called  good
books,  the  authors,  for  certain,  are  a  sorry  race ;  for  religious
crudities  are  undoubtedly  the  worst  of  any.  A  saint-author  of
all  men  least  values  politeness.^  He  scorns  to  confine  that  spirit
in  which  he  writes  to  rules  of  criticism  and  profane  learning.
Nor  is  he  inclined  in  any  respect  to  play  the  critic  on  himself,
or  regulate  his  style  or  language  by  the  standard  of  good
company,  and  people  of  the  better  sort.  He  is  above  the
consideration  of  that  which  in  a  narrow  sense  we  call  manners.
Nor  is  he  apt  to  examine  any  other  faults  than  those  which  he
calls  sins ;  though  a  sinner  against  good-breeding  and  the  laws
of  decency  will  no  more  be  esteemed  a  good  author,  than  will
a  sinner  against  grammar,  good  argument,  or  good  sense.  And
if  moderation  and  temper  are  not  of  the  party  with  a  writer,
let  his  cause  be  ever  so  good,  I  doubt  whether  he  will  be  able  to
recommend  it  with  great  advantage  to  the  world.

On  this  accoimt,  I  would  principally  recommend  our  exercise
of  self-convei-se  to  all  such  persons  as  are  addicted  to  write  after
the  manner  of  holy  advisers,  especially  if  they  lie  under  an
indispensable  necessity  of  being  talkers  or  haranguers  in  the
same  kind.  For  to  discharge  frequently  and  vehemently  in
'  Mine.  V.  cb.  i.  ill  the  iiotes.

110


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

public,  is  a  great  hindrance  to  the  way  of  private  exercise,
which  consists  chiefly  in  control.  But  where,  instead  of  control,
debate,  or  argument,  the  chief  exercise  of  the  wit  consists  in
uncontrollable  harangues  and  reasonings,  which  must  neither
be  questioned  nor  contradicted,  there  is  gi-eat  danger  lest  the
party,  through  this  habit,  should  suffer  much  by  crudities,
indigestions,  choler,  bile,  and  particularly  by  a  certain  tumour
or  flatulency,  which  renders  him  of  all  men  the  least  able  to
apply  the  wholesome  regimen  of  self-practice.  Tis  no  wonder
if  such  quaint  practitioners  grow  to  an  enormous  size  of
absurdity,  whilst  they  continue  in  the  reverse  of  that  practice
by  which  alone  we  coiTect  the  redundancy  of  humours,  and
chasten  the  exuberance  of  conceit  and  fancy.

A  remarkable  instance  of  the  want  of  this  sovereign  remedy
may  be  drawn  from  our  common  great  talkers,  who  engross  the
greatest  part  of  the  conversations  of  the  world,  and  are  the
forwardest  to  speak  in  public  assemblies.  Many  of  these  have
a  sprightly  genius,  attended  with  a  mighty  heat  and  ebullition
of  fancy.  But  'tis  a  certain  observation  in  our  science,  that
they  who  are  great  talkers  in  company  have  never  been  any
talkers  by  themselves,  nor  used  to  these  private  discussions  of
our  home  regimen.  For  which  reason  their  froth  abounds.
Nor  can  they  discharge  anything  without  some  mixture  of  it.
But  when  they  carry  their  attempts  beyond  ordinary  discourse,
and  would  rise  to  the  capacity  of  authors,  the  case  grows  worse
with  them.  Their  page  can  carry  none  of  the  advantages  of
their  person.  They  can  no  way  bring  into  paper  those  airs  they
give  themselves  in  discourse.  The  turns  of  voice  and  action,
with  which  they  help  out  many  a  lame  thought  and  incoherent
sentence,  must  here  be  laid  aside,  and  the  speech  taken  to
pieces,  compared  together,  and  examined  from  head  to  foot.
So  that  unless  the  party  has  been  used  to  play  the  critic
thoroughly  upon  himself,  he  will  hardly  be  found  proof  against
the  criticisms  of  others.  His  thoughts  can  never  appear  very
connect,  unless  they  have  been  used  to  sound  correction  by  them-

111


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

selves,  and  been  well  formed  and  disciplined  before  they  are
brought  into  the  field.  'Tis  the  hardest  thing  in  the  world  to
be  a  good  thinker  without  being  a  strong  self-examiner  and
thorough-paced  dialogist  in  this  solitary  way.

Section II

But  to  bring  our  case  a  little  closer  still  to  morals.  I  might
perhaps  very  justifiably  take  occasion  here  to  enter  into  a
spacious  field  of  learning,  to  show  the  antiquity  of  that  opinion  :
"  That  we  have  each  of  us  a  daemon,  genius,  angel,  or  guardian-
spirit,  to  whom  we  were  strictly  joined  and  committed  from
our  earliest  dawn  of  reason,  or  moment  of  our  birth.""  This
opinion,  were  it  literally  true,  might  be  highly  serviceable,  no
doubt,  towards  the  establishment  of  our  system  and  doctrine.
For  it  would  infallibly  be  proved  a  kind  of  sacrilege  or  impiety
to  slight  the  company  of  so  divine  a  guest,  and  in  a  manner
banish  him  our  breast,  by  refusing  to  enter  with  him  into  those
secret  conferences  by  which  alone  he  could  be  enabled  to  become
our  adviser  and  guide.  But  I  should  esteem  it  unfair  to  proceed
upon  such  an  hypothesis  as  this,  when  the  very  utmost  the  wise
ancients  ever  meant  by  this  daemon  companion  I  conceive  to
have  been  no  more  than  enigmatically  to  declare,  "  that  we  had
each  of  us  a  patient  in  ourself ;  that  we  were  properly  our  own
subjects  of  practice ;  and  that  we  then  became  due  practitioners,
when  by  virtue  of  an  intimate  recess  we  could  discover  a  certain
duplicity  of  soul,  and  divide  ourselves  into  two  parties.""  One
of  these,  as  they  supposed,  would  immediately  approve  himself
a  venerable  sage ;  and  with  an  air  of  authority  erect  himself  our
counsellor  and  governor,  whilst  the  other  party,  who  had  nothing
in  him  besides  what  was  base  and  servile,  would  be  contented
to  follow  and  obey.

According  therefore  as  this  recess  was  deep  and  intimate,
and  the  dual  number  practically  formed  in  us,  we  were  supposed
to  advance  in  morals  and  true  wisdom. This,  they  thought,

112


ADVICE TO  AN  AUTHOR

was  the  only  way  of  composing  matters  in  our  breast,  and
establishing  that  subordinacy  which  alone  could  make  us  agree
with  ourselves  and  be  of  a  piece  within.  They  esteemed  this
a  more  religious  work  than  any  prayers,  or  other  duty  in  the
temple.  And  this  they  advised  us  to  carry  thither,  as  the  best
offering  which  could  be  made —

Gimpositum  jus,  fasque  animi,  sanctosque  recessus
Mentis.  .  .  .  ^

This was, among the ancients, that celebrated Delphic  \
inscription,  Recognise  yourself; which  was  as  much  as  to  say,
divide  yourself,  or  be  two. For  if  the  division  were  rightly
made,  all within would of  course,  they  thought, be  rightly
understood  and  prudently  managed. Such  confidence  they  had
in this  home-dialect  of  soliloquy. For  it  was  accounted  the
peculiar  of  philosophers  and  wise  men,  to  be  able  to  hold  them-
selves in  talk. And  it  was  their  boast  on  this  account,  "  that
they  were  never  less  alone  than  when  by  themselves.'" A  knave,  |
they  thought,  could  never  be  by  himself. Not  that  his  conscience  •
was  always  sure  of  giving  him  disturbance ;  but  he  had  not,
they  supposed,  so  much  interest  with  himself  as  to  exert  this
generous  faculty,  and raise himself  a  companion,  who  being
fairly admitted into partnership, would quickly mend his
partner,  and  set  his  affairs  on  a  right  foot.

One  would  think  there  was  nothing  easier  for  us  than  to
know  our  own  minds,  and  understand  what  our  main  scope
was ;  what  we  plainly  drove  at,  and  what  we  proposed  to  our-
selves, as  our  end,  in  every  occurrence  of  our  lives.  But  our
thoughts  have  generally  such  an  obscure  implicit  language,  that
'tis  the  hardest  thing  in  the  world  to  make  them  speak  out
distinctly.  For  this  reason,  the  right  method  is  to  give  them
voice  and  accent.  And  this,  in  our  default,  is  what  the
moralists  or  philosophers  endeavour  to  do  to  our  hand,  when,

*  [ "  Duty  to  God  and  man  well  blended  in  the  mind,  purity  in  the
shrine  of  the  heart." — Persius,  Sat.  ii.  73  :  Conington's  translation.]
VOL.  1  113  1


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

as  is  usual,  they  hold  us  out  a  kind  of  vocal  looking-glass,  draw
sound  out  of  our  breast,  and  instruct  us  to  personate  ourselves
in  the  plainest  manner.

Ilia  sibi  introrsum,  et  sub  lingua  immurmurat ;  o  si
EbuUit  patrui  praeclarum  funus !  ^

A  certain  air  of  pleasantry  and  humour,  which  prevails
nowadays  in  the  fashionable  world,  gives  a  son  the  assurance
to  tell  a  father  he  has  lived  too  long ;  and  a  husband  the
privilege  of  talking  of  his  second  wife  before  his  first.  But  let
the  airy  gentleman,  who  makes  thus  bold  with  others,  retire
awhile  out  of  company,  and  he  scarce  dares  tell  himself  his
wishes.  Much  less  can  he  endure  to  carry  on  his  thought,  as
he  necessarily  must,  if  he  enters  once  thoroughly  into  himself,
and  proceeds  by  interrogatories  to  form  the  home  acquaintance
and  familiarity  required.  For  thus,  after  some  struggle,  we
may  suppose  him  to  accost  himself:  "Tell  me  now,  my  honest
heart !  am  I  really  honest,  and  of  some  worth  ?  or  do  I  only
make  a  fair  show,  and  am  intrinsically  no  better  than  a  rascal  ?
As  good  a  friend,  a  countryman,  or  a  relation,  as  I  appear
outwardly  to  the  world,  or  as  I  would  willingly  perhaps  think
myself  to  be,  should  I  not  in  reality  be  glad  they  were  hanged,
any  of  them,  or  broke  their  necks,  who  happened  to  stand
between  me  and  the  least  portion  of  an  estate  ?  Why  not  ?
since  'tis  my  interest.  Should  I  not  be  glad  therefore  to  help
this  matter  forwards,  and  promote  my  interest,  if  it  lay  fairly
in  my  power  ?  No  doubt ;  provided  I  were  sure  not  to  be
punished  for  it.  And  what  reason  has  the  greatest  rogue  in
nature  for  not  doing  thus.?  The  same  reason,  and  no  other.
Am  I  not  then,  at  the  bottom,  the  same  as  he  ?  The  same :
an  arrant  villain,  though  perhaps  more  a  coward,  and  not  so
perfect  in  my  kind. If  interest  therefore  points  me  out  this

1  [This  passaf^e  is  from  Persius,  Sat.  ii,  10,  but  the  reading  which  Shaftes-
bury followed  is  not  now  generally  accepted.  It  might  mean  that  the
prayer  which  a  man  utters  within  and  secretly,  when  he  has  prayed  aloud
for  sound  mind  and  credit,  is  for  the  speedy  death  of  a  rich  uncle.  ]

114


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

road,  whither  would  humanity  and  compassion  lead  me  ?
Quite  contrary.  Why  therefore  do  I  cherish  such  weaknesses  ?
^Vhy  do  I  sympathise  with  others  ?  Why  please  myself  in  the
conceit  of  worth  and  honour  ?  a  character,  a  memory,  an  issue,
or  a  name  ?  AVhat  else  are  these  but  scruples  in  my  way  ?
Wherefore  do  I  thus  belie  my  own  interest,  and  by  keeping
myself  half-knave,  approve  myself  a  thorough  fool  ?  "

This  is  a  language  we  can  by  no  means  endure  to  hold  with
ourselves,  whatever  raillery  we  may  use  with  others.  We  may
defend  villainy,  or  cry  up  folly,  before  the  world ;  but  to  appear
fools,  madmen,  or  varlets  to  ourselves,  and  prove  it  to  our
own  faces  that  we  are  really  such,  is  insupportable.  For  so
true  a  reverence  has  every  one  for  himself  when  he  comes  clearly
to  appear  before  his  close  companion,  that  he  had  rather  profess
the  vilest  things  of  himself  in  open  company  than  hear  his
character  privately  from  his  own  mouth.  So  that  we  may
readily  from  hence  conclude  that  the  chief  interest  of  ambition,
avarice,  corruption,  and  every  sly  insinuating  vice  is  to  prevent
this  interview  and  familiarity  of  discourse  which  is  consequent
upon  close  retirement  and  inward  recess.  'Tis  the  gi'and  artifice
of  villainy  and  lewdness,  as  well  as  of  superstition  and  bigotry,  to
put  us  upon  terms  of  greater  distance  and  formality  with  our-
selves, and  evade  our  proving  method  of  soliloquy.  And  for
this  reason,  how  specious  soever  may  be  the  instruction  and
doctrine  of  formalists,  their  very  manner  itself  is  a  sufficient
blind  or  remora  in  the  way  of  honesty  and  good  sense.

I  am  sensible  that  should  my  reader  be  peradventure  a
lover,  after  the  more  profound  and  solemn  way  of  love,  he
would  be  apt  to  conclude  that  he  was  no  stranger  to  our
proposed  method  of  practice  ;  being  conscious  to  himself  of
having  often  made  vigorous  excursions  into  those  solitary
regions  above-mentioned,  where  soliloquy  is  upheld  with  most
advantage.  He  may  chance  to  remember  how  he  has  many
times  addressed  the  woods  and  rocks  in  audible  articulate  sounds,
and  seemingly  expostulated  with  himself  in  such  a  manner  as

115


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

if  he  had  really  formed  the  requisite  distinction,  and  had  the
power  to  entertain  himself  in  due  form.  But  it  is  very  apparent,
that  though  all  were  true  we  have  here  supposed,  it  can  no  way
reach  the  case  before  us.  For  a  passionate  lover,  whatever
solitude  he  may  affect,  can  never  be  truly  by  himself.  His  case
is  like  the  author'^s  who  has  begun  his  courtship  to  the  public,
and  is  embarked  in  an  intrigue  which  sufficiently  amuses  and
takes  him  out  of  himself.  Whatever  he  meditates  alone,  is
interrupted  still  by  the  imagined  presence  of  the  mistress  he
pursues.  Not  a  thought,  not  an  expression,  not  a  sigh,  which
is  purely  for  himself.  All  is  appropriated,  and  p\\  devoutly
tendered  to  the  object  of  his  passion.  Insomuch  that  there  is
nothing  ever  so  trivial  or  accidental  of  this  kind,  which  he  is
not  desirous  should  be  witnessed  by  the  party  whose  grace  and
favour  he  solicits.

■"Tis  the  same  reason  which  keeps  the  imaginary  saint,  or
mystic,  from  being  capable  of  this  entertainment.  Instead  of
looking  narrowly  into  his  own  nature  and  mind,  that  he  may
be  no  longer  a  mystery  to  himself,  he  is  taken  up  with  the  con-
templation of  other  mysterious  natures,  which  he  can  never
explain  or  comprehend.  He  has  the  spectres  of  his  zeal  before
his  eyes,  and  is  as  familiar  with  his  modes,  essences,  personages,
and  exhibitions  of  deity,  as  the  conjuror  with  his  different
forms,  species,  and  orders  of  genii  or  daemons.  So  that  we
make  no  doubt  to  assert  that  not  so  much  as  a  recluse  reli-
gionist, a  votary,  or  hermit,  was  ever  truly  by  himself.  And
thus  since  neither  lover,  author,  mystic,  nor  conjuror  (who  are
the  only  claimants)  can  truly  or  justly  be  entitled  to  a  share  in
this  self-entei-tainment,  it  remains  that  the  only  person  entitled
is  the  man  of  sense,  the  sage,  or  philosopher.  However,  since
of  all  other  characters  we  are  generally  the  most  inclined  to
favour  that  of  a  lover,  it  may  not,  we  hope,  be  impertinent,  on
this  occasion,  to  recite  the  story  of  an  amour.

A  virtuous  young  prince  of  a  heroic  soul,  capable  of  love
and  friendship,  made  war  upon  a  tyrant,  who  was  in  every

116


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

respect  his  revei-se.  'Tvvas  the  happiness  of  our  prince  to  be  as
great  a  conqueror  by  his  clemency  and  bounty  as  by  his  arms
and  military  virtue.  Already  he  had  won  over  to  his  party
several  potentates  and  princes,  who  before  had  been  subject  to
the  tyrant.  Among  those  who  adhered  still  to  the  enemy,
there  was  a  prince  who,  having  all  the  advantage  of  person  and
merit,  had  lately  been  made  happy  in  the  possession  and  mutual
love  of  the  most  beautiful  princess  in  the  world.  It  happened
that  the  occasions  of  the  war  called  the  new-married  prince
to  a  distance  from  his  beloved  princess.  He  left  her  secure,
as  he  thought,  in  a  strong  castle,  far  within  the  country ;  but
in  his  absence  the  place  was  taken  by  sui-prise,  and  the  princess
brought  a  captive  to  the  quarters  of  our  heroic  prince.

There  was  in  the  camp  a  young  nobleman,  favourite  of  the
prince;  one  who  had  been  educated  with  him,  and  was  still
treated  by  him  with  perfect  familiarity.  Him  he  immediately
sent  for,  and  with  strict  injunctions  committed  the  captive
princess  to  his  charge ;  resolving  she  should  be  treated  with
that  respect  which  was  due  to  her  high  rank  and  merit.  'Twas
the  same  young  lord  who  had  discovered  her  disguised  among
the  prisoners,  and  learnt  her  story ;  the  particulars  of  which  he
now  related  to  the  prince.  He  spoke  in  ecstasy  on  this  occasion  ;
telling  the  prince  how  beautiful  she  appeared,  even  in  the  midst
of  soiTow ;  and  though  disguised  under  the  meanest  habit,  yet
how  distinguishable,  by  her  air  and  manner,  from  every  other
beauty  of  her  sex.  But  what  appeared  strange  to  our  young
nobleman  was  that  the  prince,  during  this  whole  relation,
discovered  not  the  least  intention  of  seeing  the  lady,  or  satisfying
that  curiosity  which  seemed  so  natural  on  such  an  occasion.
He  pressed  him  ;  but  without  success.  "  Not  see  her,  sir  ! "  said
he,  wondering,  "  when  she  is  so  handsome,  beyond  what  you  have
ever  seen  ! ""

"  For  that  very  reason,*"  replied  the  prince,  "  I  would  the
rather  decline  the  interview.  For  should  I,  upon  the  bare
report  of  her  beauty,  be  so  charmed  as  to  make  the  first  visit

117


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

at  this  urgent  time  of  business,  I  may  upon  sight,  with  better
reason,  be  induced  perhaps  to  visit  her  when  I  am  more  at
leisure ;  and  so  again  and  again,  till  at  last  I  may  have  no
leisure  left  for  my  affairs.""

"  Would  you,  sir,  persuade  me  then,"  said  the  young  noble-
man, smiling,  "  that  a  fair  face  can  have  such  power  as  to  force
the  will  itself,  and  constrain  a  man  in  any  respect  to  act  contrary
to  what  he  thinks  becoming  him  ?  Are  we  to  hearken  to  the
poets  in  what  they  tell  us  of  that  incendiary  love,  and  his
iri'esistible  flames  ?  A  real  flame,  we  see,  burns  all  alike.  But
that  imaginary  one  of  beauty  hurts  only  those  who  are  consent-
ing. It  affects  no  otherwise  than  as  we  ourselves  are  pleased  to
allow  it.  In  many  cases  we  absolutely  command  it :  as  where
relation  and  consanguinity  are  in  the  nearest  degree.  Authority
and  law,  we  see,  can  master  it.  But  'twould  be  vain  as  well  as
unjust  for  any  law  to  intermeddle  or  prescribe,  were  not  the
case  voluntary  and  our  will  entirely  free.""

"How  comes  it  then,''  replied  the  prince,  "that  if  we  are
thus  masters  of  our  choice,  and  free  at  first  to  admire  and  love
where  we  approve,  we  cannot  afterwards  as  well  cease  to  love
whenever  we  see  cause .''  This  latter  liberty  you  will  hardly
defend.  For  I  doubt  not  you  have  heard  of  many  who,  though
they  were  used  to  set  the  highest  value  upon  liberty  before  they
loved,  yet  afterwards  were  necessitated  to  sei've  in  the  most
abject  manner,  finding  themselves  constrained  and  bound  by  a
stronger  chain  than  any  of  iron  or  adamant."

"  Such  wretches,"  replied  the  youth,  "  I  have  often  heard
complain ;  who,  if  you  will  believe  them,  are  wretched  indeed,
without  means  or  power  to  help  themselves.  You  may  hear
them  in  the  same  manner  complain  grievously  of  life  itself.
But  though  there  are  doors  enough  to  go  out  of  life,  they  find
it  convenient  to  keep  still  where  they  are.  They  are  the  very
same  pretenders,  who  through  this  plea  of  irresistible  necessity
make  bold  with  what  is  another's,  and  attempt  unlawful  beds.
But  the  law,  I  perceive,  makes  bold  with  them  in  its  turn,

118


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

as  with  other  invaders  of  property.  Neither  is  it  your  custom,
sir,  to  pardon  such  offences.  So  that  beauty  itself,  you  must
allow,  is  innocent  and  harmless,  and  can  compel  no  one  to  do
anything  amiss.  The  debauched  compel  themselves,  and  unjustly
charge  their  guilt  on  love.  They  who  are  honest  and  just,  can
admire  and  love  whatever  is  beautiful,  without  offering  at  any-
thing beyond  what  is  allowed.  How  then  is  it  possible,  sir,  that
one  of  your  virtue  should  be  in  pain  on  any  such  account,  or  fear
such  a  temptation  ?  You  see,  sir,  I  am  sound  and  whole,  after
having  beheld  the  princess.  I  have  conversed  with  her ;  I  have
admired  her  in  the  highest  degree ;  yet  am  myself  still,  and
in  my  duty;  and  shall  be  ever  in  the  same  manner  at  your
command."

"  'Tis  well,"  replied  the  prince ;  "  keep  yourself  so.  Be  ever
the  same  man ;  and  look  to  your  charge  carefully,  as  becomes
you.  For  it  may  so  happen  in  the  present  posture  of  the  war
that  this  fair  captive  may  stand  us  in  good  stead."

With  this  the  young  nobleman  departed  to  execute  his
commission ;  and  immediately  took  such  care  of  the  captive
princess  and  her  household,  that  she  seemed  as  perfectly  obeyed,
and  had  everything  which  belonged  to  her  in  as  great  splendour
now,  as  in  her  principality,  and  in  the  height  of  fortune.  He
found  her  in  every  respect  deserving,  and  saw  in  her  a  generosity
of  soul  which  was  beyond  her  other  charms.  His  study  to  oblige
her,  and  soften  her  distress,  made  her  in  return  desirous  to
express  a  gratitude,  which  he  easily  perceived.  She  showed  on
every  occasion  a  real  concern  for  his  interest ;  and  when  he
happened  to  fall  ill,  she  took  such  tender  care  of  him  herself,
and  by  her  servants,  that  he  seemed  to  owe  his  recovery  to  her
friendship.

From  these  beginnings,  insensibly,  and  by  natural  degi-ees
(as  may  easily  be  conceived)  the  youth  fell  desperately  in  love.
At  first  he  offered  not  to  make  the  least  mention  of  his  passion
to  the  princess ;  for  he  scarce  dared  tell  it  to  himself  But
afterwards  he  grew  bolder. She  received  his  declaration  with

119


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

an  unaffected  trouble  and  concern,  spoke  to  him  as  a  friend,  to
dissuade  him  as  much  as  possible  from  such  an  extravagant
attempt.  But  when  he  talked  to  her  of  force,  she  immediately
sent  away  one  of  her  faithful  domestics  to  the  prince  to  implore
his  protection.  The  prince  received  the  message  with  the
appearance  of  more  than  ordinary  concern ;  sent  instantly  for
one  of  his  first  Ministers ;  and  bid  him  go  with  that  domestic  to
the  young  nobleman,  and  let  him  understand  "that  force  was
not  to  be  offered  to  such  a  lady ;  persuasion  he  might  use,  if  he
thought  fit.''

The  Minister,  who  was  no  friend  to  the  young  nobleman,
failed  not  to  aggravate  the  message,  inveighed  publicly  against
him  on  this  occasion,  and  to  his  face  reproached  him  as  a  traitor
and  dishonourer  of  his  prince  and  nation,  with  all  else  which
could  be  said  against  him,  as  guilty  of  the  highest  sacrilege,
perfidiousness,  and  breach  of  trust.  So  that  in  reality  the
youth  looked  upon  his  case  as  desperate,  fell  into  the  deepest
melancholy,  and  prepared  himself  for  that  fate  which  he  thought
he  well  deserved.

In  this  condition  the  prince  sent  to  speak  with  him  alone ;
and  when  he  saw  him  in  the  utmost  confusion,  "  I  find,''  said  he,
"  my  fi'iend,  I  am  now  become  dreadful  to  you  indeed ;  since  you
can  neither  see  me  without  shame,  nor  imagine  me  to  be  without
resentment.  But  away  with  all  those  thoughts  from  this  time
forwards.  I  know  how  much  you  have  suffered  on  this  occasion.
I  know  the  power  of  love,  and  am  no  otherwise  safe  myself,  than
by  keeping  out  of  the  way  of  beauty..  'Twas  I  who  was  in  fault ;
'twas  1  who  unhappily  matched  you  with  that  unequal  adversary,
and  gave  you  that  impracticable  task  and  hard  adventure,  which
no  one  yet  was  ever  strong  enough  to  accomplish."

"  In  this,  sir,"  replied  the  youth,  "  as  in  all  else,  you  express
that  goodness  which  is  so  natural  to  you.  You  have  com-
passion, and  can  allow  for  human  frailty;  but  the  rest  of
mankind  will  never  cease  to  upbraid  me.  Nor  shall  I  ever  be
forgiven,  were  I  able  ever  to  forgive  myself. I  am  reproached

120


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

by  my  nearest  friends.  I  must  be  odious  to  all  mankind
wherever  I  am  known.  The  least  punishment  I  can  think
due  to  me,  is  banishment  for  ever  from  your  presence.''

"Think  not  of  such  a  thing  for  ever,"  said  the  prince,
"  but  trust  me ;  if  you  retire  only  for  a  while,  I  shall  so  order
it,  that  you  shall  soon  return  again  with  the  applause  even  of
those  who  are  now  your  enemies,  when  they  find  what  a
considerable  service  you  shall  have  rendered  both  to  them
and  me."

Such  a  hint  was  sufficient  to  revive  the  spirits  of  our
despairing  youth.  He  was  transported  to  think  that  his
misfortunes  could  be  turned  any  way  to  the  advantage  of  his
prince :  he  entered  with  joy  into  the  scheme  the  prince  had
laid  for  him,  and  appeared  eager  to  depart  and  execute  what
was  appointed  him.  "  Can  you,  then,"  said  the  prince,
"  resolve  to  quit  the  charming  princess .? "

"  Oh  sir  ! "  replied  the  youth,  "  well  am  I  now  satisfied  that
I  have  in  reality  within  me  two  distinct  separate  souls.  This
lesson  of  philosophy  I  have  learnt  from  that  villainous  sophister
Love.  For  'tis  impossible  to  believe  that,  having  one  and  the
same  soul,  it  should  be  actually  both  good  and  bad,  passionate
for  virtue  and  vice,  desirous  of  contraries.  No.  There  must  of
necessity  be  two :  and  when  the  good  prevails,  'tis  then  we
act  handsomely ;  when  the  ill,  then  basely  and  villainously.
Such  was  my  case.  For  lately  the  ill  soul  was  wholly  master.
But  now  the  good  prevails  by  your  assistance,  and  I  am
plainly  a  new  creature,  with  quite  another  apprehension,  another
reason,  another  will."

Thus  it  may  appear  how  far  a  lover  by  his  own  natural
strength  may  reach  the  chief  principle  of  philosophy,  and
understand  our  doctrine  of  two  persons  in  one  individual
self.  Not  that  our  courtier,  we  suppose,  was  able  of  himself
to  form  this  distinction  justly  and  according  to  art.  For
could  he  have  effected  this,  he  would  have  been  able  to  cure
himself  without the  assistance  of  his prince. However,  he

121


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

was  wise  enough  to  see  in  the  issue  that  his  independency  and
freedom  were  mere  glosses,  and  resolution  a  nose  of  wax.
For  let  Will  be  ever  so  free,  Humour  and  Fancy,  we  see,
govern  it.  And  these,  as  free  as  we  suppose  them,  are  often
changed  we  know  not  how,  without  asking  our  consent,  or
giving  us  any  account.  If  opinion  be  that  which  governs  and
makes  the  change,  'tis  itself  as  liable  to  be  governed  and  varied
in  its  turn.  And  by  what  I  can  observe  of  the  world,  fancy
and  opinion  stand  pretty  much  upon  the  same  bottom.  So
that  if  there  be  no  certain  inspector  or  auditor  established
within  us  to  take  account  of  these  opinions  and  fancies  in
due  form,  and  minutely  to  animadvert  upon  their  several
growths  and  habits,  we  are  as  little  like  to  continue  a  day  in
the  same  will  as  a  tree,  during  a  summer,  in  the  same  shape,
without  the  gardener's  assistance,  and  the  vigorous  application
of  the  shears  and  pruning-knife.

As  cruel  a  court  as  the  Inquisition  appears,  there  must,  it
seems,  be  full  as  formidable  a  one  erected  in  ourselves,  if  we
would  pretend  to  that  uniformity  of  opinion  which  is  necessary
to  hold  us  to  one  will,  and  preserve  us  in  the  same  mind  from
one  day  to  another.  Philosophy,  at  this  rate,  will  be  thought
perhaps  little  better  than  persecution ;  and  a  supreme  judge
in  matters  of  inclination  and  appetite  must  needs  go  exceedingly
against  the  heart.  Every  pretty  fancy  is  disturbed  by  it ;
every  pleasure  interrupted  by  it.  The  course  of  good-humour
will  hardly  allow  it,  and  the  pleasantry  of  wit  almost  absolutely
rejects  it.  It  appears,  besides,  like  a  kind  of  pedantry  to  be
thus  magisterial  with  ourselves,  thus  strict  over  our  imagina-
tions, and  with  all  the  airs  of  a  real  pedagogue  to  be  solicitously
taken  up  in  the  sour  care  and  tutorage  of  so  many  boyish
fancies,  unlucky  appetites  and  desires,  which  are  perpetually
playing  truant  and  need  correction.

We  hope,  however,  that  by  our  method  of  practice  and
the  help  of  the  grand  arcanum  which  we  have  professed  to
reveal,  this  regimen  or  discipline  of  the  fancies  may  not  in

122


ADVICE TO  AN AUTHOR

the  end  prove  so  severe  or  moi'tifying  as  is  imagined.  We
hope  also  that  our  patient  (for  such  we  naturally  suppose
our  reader)  will  consider  duly  with  himself  that  what  he
endures  in  this  operation  is  for  no  inconsiderable  end,  since
'tis  to  gain  him  a  Will,  and  ensure  him  a  certain  resolution,
by  which  he  shall  know  where  to  find  himself;  be  sure  of  his
own  meaning  and  design ;  and  as  to  all  his  desires,  opinions,  and
inclinations,  be  warranted  one  and  the  same  person  to-day  as
yesterday,  and  to-morrow  as  to-day.

This,  perhaps,  will  be  thought  a  miracle  by  one  who  well
considers  the  nature  of  mankind,  and  the  growth,  variation,
and  inflection  of  Appetite  and  Humour.  For  Appetite,  which
is  elder  brother  to  Reason,  being  the  lad  of  stronger  growth,
is  sure,  on  every  contest,  to  take  the  advantage  of  drawing  all
to  his  own  side.  And  Will,  so  highly  boasted,  is  at  best
merely  a  top  or  football  between  these  youngsters,  who  prove
very  unfortunately  matched ;  till  the  youngest,  instead  of  now
and  then  a  kick  or  lash  bestowed  to  little  purpose,  forsakes
the  ball  or  top  itself,  and  begins  to  lay  about  his  elder  brother.
'Tis  then  that  the  scene  changes.  For  the  elder,  like  an  aiTant
coward,  upon  this  treatment,  presently  gi'ovvs  civil,  and  affords
the  younger  as  fair  play  afterwards  as  he  can  desire.

And  here  it  is  that  our  sovereign  remedy  and  gymnastic
method  of  soliloquy  takes  its  rise ;  when  by  a  certain  powerful
figure  of  inward  rhetoric  the  mind  apostrophises  its  own
fancies,  raises  them  in  their  proper  shapes  and  personages,
and  addresses  them  familiarly,  without  the  least  ceremony  or
respect.  By  this  means  it  will  soon  happen  that  two  formed
parties  will  erect  themselves  within.  For  the  imaginations
or  fancies  being  thus  roundly  treated  are  forced  to  declare
themselves  and  take  party.  Those  on  the  side  of  the  elder
brother  Appetite  are  strangely  subtle  and  insinuating.  They
have  always  the  faculty  to  speak  by  nods  and  winks.  By  this
practice  they  conceal  half  their  meaning,  and,  like  modern
politicians,  pass  for  deeply  wise,  and  adorn  themselves  with

123


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  finest  pretexts  and  most  specious  glosses  imaginable ;  till,
being  confronted  with  their  fellows  of  a  plainer  language  and
expression,  they  are  forced  to  quit  their  mysterious  manner,  and
discover  themselves  mere  sophisters  and  impostors  who  have
not  the  least  to  do  with  the  party  of  reason  and  good  sense.

Accordingly  we  might  now  proceed  to  exhibit  distinctly,
and  in  due  method,  the  form  and  manner  of  this  probation  or
exercise  as  it  regards  all  men  in  general.  But  the  case  of
authors  in  particular  being,  as  we  apprehend,  the  most  urgent,
we  shall  apply  our  rule  in  the  first  place  to  these  gentlemen,
whom  it  so  highly  imports  to  know  themselves,  and  undei'stand
the  natural  strength  and  powers  as  well  as  the  weaknesses  of  a
human  mind.  For  without  this  understanding,  the  historian's
judgment  will  be  very  defective ;  the  politician's  views  very
narrow  and  chimerical ;  and  the  poet's  brain,  however  stocked
with  fiction,  will  be  but  poorly  furnished,  as  in  the  sequel  we
shall  make  appear.  He  who  deals  in  characters  must  of
necessity  know  his  own,  or  he  will  know  nothing.  And  he
who  would  give  the  world  a  profitable  entertainment  of  this
sort,  should  be  sure  to  profit,  first,  by  himself.  For  in  this
sense.  Wisdom  as  well  as  Charity  may  be  honestly  said  to  begin
at  home.  There  is  no  way  of  estimating  manners,  or  apprising
the  different  humours,  fancies,  passions,  and  apprehensions  of
others,  without  first  taking  an  inventory  of  the  same  kind  of
goods  within  ourselves,  and  surveying  our  domestic  fund.  A
little  of  this  home  practice  will  sei-ve  to  make  great  discoveries —
Tecum  habita  et  noris  quam  sit  tibi  curta  suppellex.i

Section III

Whoever  has  been  an  observer  of  action  and  grace  in  human
bodies  must  of  necessity  have  discovered  the  great  difference  in
this  respect  between  such  persons  as  have  been  taught  by  nature

'  ["  Live  at  home  and  learn  how  slenderly  furnished  your  apartments
are." — Persius,  Sat.  iv.  62  :  Conington's  translation.]

124


ADVICE  TO AN  AUTHOR

only,  and  such  as  by  reflection  and  the  assistance  of  art  have
learnt  to  form  those  motions  which  on  experience  are  found  the
easiest  and  most  natural.  Of  the  former  kind  are  either  those
good  rustics  who  have  been  bred  remote  from  the  formed
societies  of  men,  or  those  plain  artisans  and  people  of  lower
rank  who,  living  in  cities  and  places  of  resort,  have  been
necessitated  however  to  follow  mean  employments,  and  wanted
the  opportunity  and  means  to  form  themselves  after  the  better
models.  There  are  some  persons  indeed  so  happily  formed  by
Nature  herself,  that  with  the  greatest  simplicity  or  rudeness  of  c4\
education  they  have  still  something  of  a  natural  grace  and  \y
comeliness  in  their  action ;  and  there  are  others  of  a  better
education  who,  by  a  wrong  aim  and  injudicious  affectation  of  ,
grace,  are  of  all  people  the  farthest  removed  from  it.  'Tis
undeniable,  however,  that  the  perfection  of  grace  and  comeliness
in  action  and  behaviour  can  be  found  only  among  the  people
of  a  liberal  education.  And  even  among  the  graceful  of  this
kind,  those  still  are  found  the  gracefullest  who  early  in  their
youth  have  learnt  their  exercises,  and  formed  their  motions
under  the  best  masters.

Now  such  as  these  masters  and  their  lessons  are  to  a  fine
gentleman,  such  are  philosophers  and  philosophy  to  an  author.
The  case  is  the  same  in  the  fashionable  and  in  the  literate
world.  In  the  former  of  these  it  is  remarked  that  by  the  help
of  good  company,  and  the  force  of  example  merely,  a  decent
carriage  is  acquired,  with  such  apt  motions  and  such  a  freedom
of  limbs  as  on  all  ordinary  occasions  may  enable  the  party  to
demean  himself  like  a  gentleman.  But  when,  upon  further
occasion,  trial  is  made  in  an  extraordinary  way — when  exercises
of  the  genteeler  kind  are  to  be  performed  in  public — "'twill  easily
appear  who  of  the  pretenders  have  been  formed  by  rudiments,
and  had  masters  in  private,  and  who,  on  the  other  side,  have
contented  themselves  with  bare  imitation,  and  learnt  their  part
casually  and  by  rote.  The  parallel  is  easily  made  on  the  side
of  writei-s. They  have  at  least  as  much  need  of  learning  the

125


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

several  motions,  counterpoises  and  balances  of  the  mind  and
passions,  as  the  other  students  those  of  the  body  and  limbs —

Scribendi  recte  sapere  est  et  principium  et  fons  ;
Rem  tibi  Socraticae  poterunt  ostendere  chartae.^

The  gallant,  no  doubt,  may  pen  a  letter  to  his  mistress,  as
the  courtier  may  a  compliment  to  the  Minister,  or  the  Minister
to  the  favourite  above  him,  without  going  such  vast  depths  into
learning  or  philosophy. But  for  these  privileged  gentlemen,

'  Hor.  de  Arte  Poet.  See  even  the  dissolute  Petronius's  judgment  of  a
writer : —

Artis  severae  si  quis  amat  efFectus,
Mentemque  magnis  applicat ;  prius  more
Frugalitatis  lege  polleat  exacta  ;
Nee  curet  alto  regiam  trucem  vultu.

*  *  *  *  *

neve  plausor  in  scaena
Sedeat  redemptus,  histrioniae  addictus.
*****

Mox  et  Socratico  plenus  grege,  mutet  habenas
Liber^  et  ingentis  quatiat  Demosthenis  arma.
*****

His  animum  succinge  bonis,  sic  flumine  large
Plenus,  Pierio  defundes  pectore  verba.
1  [(i)  '^  Sound  knowledge  is  the  first  requisite  for  writing  well;  the  books

of  Socrates'  school  will  yield  you  the  matter." — Hor.  Ars  Poet.  309,  310.]
[(ii)  Petron.  c.  v. The  readings  followed  by  Shaftesbury  are  not  very

good. The  general  sense  is  given  thus  by  Wilson  (translation  of  the

Satyricon  of  Petronius  Arbiter,  1708  :  reprinted  for  private  circulation,

1899):  —

By  liberal  arts  would  you  acquire  renown.
And  rise  to  power  by  honours  of  the  gown .''
Strict  in  your  life,  of  conversation  chaste.
Far  from  the  court  with  just  precaution  haste.

The  haughty  great  but  very  rare  attend,

*****

And  fly  the  luscious  accents  of  the  stage,

♦  *  *  *  *

Next  let  philosophy  employ  your  thought.

And  maxims  learn  the  wise  Athenian  taught,  etc.]

126


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

though  they  set  fashions  and  prescribe  rules  in  other  cases,  they
are  no  controllers  in  the  commonwealth  of  Letters.  Nor  are  they
presumed  to  write  to  the  age,  or  for  remote  posterity.  Their
works  are  not  of  a  nature  to  entitle  them  to  hold  the  rank  of
authors,  or  be  styled  writers  by  way  of  excellence  in  the  kind.
Should  their  ambition  lead  them  into  such  a  field,  they  would
be  obliged  to  come  otherwise  equipped.  They  who  enter  the
public  lists  must  come  duly  trained  and  exercised,  like  well-
appointed  cavaliers  expert  in  arms,  and  well  instructed  in  the
use  of  their  weapon  and  management  of  their  steed.  For  to
be  well  accoutred  and  well  mounted  is  not  sufficient.  The
horse  alone  can  never  make  the  horseman,  nor  limbs  the
wrestler  or  the  dancer.  No  more  can  a  genius  alone  make  a
poet,  or  good  parts  a  writer  in  any  considerable  kind.  The
skill  and  grace  of  writing  is  founded,  as  our  wise  poet  tells  us,
in  knowledge  and  good  sense ;  and  not  barely  in  that  knowledge
which  is  to  be  learnt  from  common  authors,  or  the  general
conversation  of  the  world ;  but  from  those  particular  rules  of
art  which  philosophy  alone  exhibits.

The  philosophical  writings  to  which  our  poet  in  his  Art  of
Poetry  refers,  were  in  themselves  a  kind  of  poetry,  like  the
mimes,^  or  personated  pieces  of  early  times,  before  philosophy
was  in  vogue,  and  when  as  yet  dramatical  imitation  was  scarce
formed ;  or  at  least,  in  many  parts,  not  brought  to  due  per-
fection. They  were  pieces  which,  besides  their  force  of  style
and  hidden  numbers,  canned  a  sort  of  action  and  imitation,  the
same  as  the  epic  and  dramatic  kinds.  They  were  either  real
dialogues,  or  recitals  of  such  personated  discourses ;  where  the
persons  themselves  had  their  characters  preserved  throughout,
their  manners,  humours,  and  distinct  turns  of  temper  and
understanding  maintained,  according  to  the  most  exact  poetical
truth.  'Twas  not  enough  that  these  pieces  treated  funda-
mentally of  morals,  and  in  consequence  pointed  out  real
characters  and  manners :  they  exhibited  them  alive,  and  set  the
^  Infra,  part  ii.  §  2,  in  the  notes.

127


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

countenances  and  complexions  of  men  plainly  in  view.  And  by
this  means  they  not  only  taught  us  to  know  others,  but,  what
was  principal  and  of  highest  virtue  in  them,  they  taught  us  to
know  ourselves.

The  philosophical  hero  of  these  poems,  whose  name  they
carried  both  in  their  body  and  front,  and  whose  genius  and
manner  they  were  made  to  represent,  was  in  himself  a  perfect
character ;  yet  in  some  respects  so  veiled  and  in  a  cloud,  that
to  the  unattentive  surveyor  he  seemed  often  to  be  very  different
from  what  he  really  was ;  and  this  chiefly  by  reason  of  a  certain
exquisite  and  refined  raillery  which  belonged  to  his  manner,  and
by  virtue  of  which  he  could  treat  the  highest  subjects  and  those
of  the  commonest  capacity  both  together,  and  render  them
explanatory  of  each  other.  So  that  in  this  genius  of  writing
there  appeared  both  the  heroic  and  the  simple,  the  tragic  and
the  comic  vein.  However,  it  was  so  ordered  that,  notwithstand-
ing the  oddness  or  mysteriousness  of  the  principal  character,  the
under -parts  or  second  characters  showed  human  nature  more
distinctly  and  to  the  life.  We  might  here,  therefore,  as  in  a
looking-glass,  discover  ourselves,  and  see  our  minutest  features
nicely  delineated,  and  suited  to  our  own  apprehension  and
cognizance.  No  one  who  was  ever  so  little  a  while  an  inspector,
could  fail  of  becoming  acquainted  with  his  own  heart.  And,
what  was  of  singular  note  in  these  magical  glasses,  it  would
happen  that,  by  constant  and  long  inspection,  the  parties
accustomed  to  the  practice  would  acquire  a  peculiar  speculative
habit,  so  as  virtually  to  carry  about  with  them  a  sort  of  pocket-
mirror,  always  ready  and  in  use.  In  this,  there  were  two  faces
which  would  naturally  present  themselves  to  our  view :  one  of
them,  like  the  commanding  genius,  the  leader  and  chief  above-
mentioned  ;  the  other  like  that  rude,  undisciplined,  and  head-
strong creature  whom  we  ourselves  in  our  natural  capacity  most
exactly  resembled.  Whatever  we  were  employed  in,  whatever
we  set  about,  if  once  we  had  acquired  the  habit  of  this  mirror
we should, by virtue of the double reflection, distinguish

128


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

ourselves  into  two  different  parties.  And  in  this  dramatic
method,  the  work  of  self-inspection  would  proceed  with
admirable  success.

'Tis  no  wonder  that  the  primitive  poets  were  esteemed  such
sages  in  their  times,  since  it  appears  they  were  such  well-
practised  dialogists,  and  accustomed  to  this  improving  method,
before  ever  philosophy  had  adopted  it.  Their  mimes  or  char-
acterised discourses  were  as  much  relished  as  their  most  regular
poems ;  and  were  the  occasion  perhaps  that  so  many  of  these
latter  were  formed  in  such  perfection.  For  poetry  itself  was
defined  an  imitation  chiefly  of  men  and  manners ;  and  was  that
in  an  exalted  and  noble  degree  which  in  a  low  one  we  call
mimicry.  'Tis  in  this  that  the  great  mimographer,^  the  father
and  prince  of  poets,  excels  so  highly ;  his  characters  being
wrought  to  a  likeness  beyond  what  any  succeeding  masters  were
ever  able  to  describe.  Nor  are  his  works,  which  are  so  full  of
action,  any  other  than  an  artful  series  or  chain  of  dialogues,
which  turn  upon  one  remarkable  catastrophe  or  event.  He
describes  no  qualities  or  virtues  ;  censures  no  manners ;  makes
no  encomiums,  nor  gives  characters  himself ;  but  brings  his  actors
still  in  view.  'Tis  they  who  show  themselves.  'Tis  they  who
speak  in  such  a  manner  as  distinguishes  them  in  all  things  from
all  others,  and  makes  them  ever  like  themselves.  Their  different
compositions  and  allays  so  justly  made,  and  equally  carried  on
through  every  particle  of  the  action,  give  more  instruction  than
all  the  comments  or  glosses  in  the  world. The  poet,  instead  of

^  "O/XTipos  Si  iWa  T€  TToXXi  d^ios  iiraiveiffdai,  Kal  5rj  kuI  6ri  fi,6vos  rwu  ironjTuv
ovK  ayvod  6  5ei  iroieiv  avrbv.  airrbv  yap  Set  rbv  toithttiv  iXaxiffra  \4yeiv  •  oii  yap
i<TTi  Kark  raCra  /Miixtp-qi'  oi  /J-iv  odu  aXXot  avrol  jj^v  di'  SXov  iyuvl^ovrai,  fu/Movprai
Si  6\lya  Kal  dXiyoLKH.

If'  Homer,  excellent  in  many  other  respects,  is  specially  so  because  he
is  the  only  poet  who  knows  what  part  to  take  himself.  For  the  poet  in
his  own  person  should  speak  as  little  as  may  be,  for  it  is  not  his  speaking
which  makes  him  an  imitator.  Now,  other  poets  are  on  the  stage  them-
selves all  the  time,  but  their  imitations  are  short  and  tew." — Arist.
Poet,  xxiv.]

VOL.  I  129  K


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

giving  himself  those  dictating  and  masterly  airs  of  wisdom,
makes  hardly  any  figure  at  all,  and  is  scarce  discoverable  in  his
poem.  This  is  being  truly  a  master.  He  paints  so  as  to  need
no  inscription  over  his  figures  to  tell  us  what  they  are  or  what
he  intends  by  them.  A  few  words  let  fall  on  any  slight  occasion,
from  any  of  the  parties  he  introduces,  are  sufficient  to  denote
their  mannei"s  and  distinct  character.  From  a  finger  or  a  toe
he  can  represent  to  our  thoughts  the  frame  and  fashion  of  a
whole  body.  He  wants  no  other  help  of  art  to  personate  his
heroes  and  make  them  living.  There  was  no  more  left  for
tragedy  to  do  after  him  than  to  erect  a  stage  and  draw  his
dialogues  and  characters  into  scenes ;  turning,  in  the  same
manner,  upon  one  principal  action  or  event,  with  that  regard
to  place  and  time  which  was  suitable  to  a  real  spectacle.  Even
comedy  itself  Avas  adjudged  to  this  great  master;^  it  being
derived  from  those  parodies  or  mock-humours  of  which  he  had
given  the  specimen  -  in  a  concealed  sort  of  raillery  intermixed
with  the  sublime.  ...  A  dangerous  stroke  of  art !  and  which
required  a  masterly  hand,  like  that  of  the  philosophical  hero
whose  character  was  represented  in  the  dialogue  writings
above  mentioned.

From  hence  possibly  we  may  form  a  notion  of  that  re-
semblance which  on  so  many  occasions  was  heretofore  remarked
between  the  prince  of  poets  and  the  divine  philosopher  who
was  said  to  rival  him,  and  who,  together  with  his  contemporaries
of  the  same  school,  writ  wholly  in  that  manner  of  dialogue
above  described.  From  hence  too  we  may  comprehend  perhaps
why  the  study  of  dialogue  was  heretofore  thought  so  advan-
tageous to  writers,  and  why  this  manner  of  writing  was  judged
so  difficult,  which  at  first  sight,  it  must  be  owned,  appeal's  the
easiest  of  any.

I  have  formerly  wondered  indeed  why  a  manner,  which  was
familiarly  used  in  treatises  upon  most  subjects  with  so  much

1  Infra,  part  ii.  §  2,  in  the  notes.

2  Not  only  in  his  Margites,  but  even  in  his  Iliad  and  Odyssei/,

130


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

success  among  the  ancients,  should  be  so  insipid  and  of  little
esteem  with  us  modems.  But  I  afterwards  perceived  that,
besides  the  difficulty  of  the  manner  itself,  and  that  mirror
faculty  which  we  have  observed  it  to  cany  in  respect  of
ourselves,  it  proves  also  of  necessity  a  kind  of  mirror  or
looking-glass  to  the  age.  If  so,  it  should  of  consequence
(you  will  say)  be  the  more  agreeable  and  entertaining.

True,  if  the  real  view  of  ourselves  be  not  perhaps  displeasing
to  us.  But  why  more  displeasing  to  us  than  to  the  ancients  ?
Because  perhaps  they  could  with  just  reason  bear  to  see  their
natural  countenances  represented.  And  why  not  we  the  same .''
What  should  discourage  us  ?  For  are  we  not  as  handsome,  at
least  in  our  own  eyes  ?  Perhaps  not,  as  we  shall  see  when  we
have  considered  a  little  further  what  the  force  is  of  this  miiTor-
writing,  and  how  it  differs  from  that  more  complacent  modish
way  in  which  an  author,  instead  of  presenting  us  with  other
natural  characters,  sets  off  his  own  with  the  utmost  art,  and
purchases  his  reader's  favour  by  all  imaginable  compliances  and
condescensions.

An  author  who  writes  in  his  own  person  has  the  advantage
of  being  who  or  what  he  pleases.  He  is  no  certain  man,  nor
has  any  certain  or  genuine  character;  but  suits  himself  on
every  occasion  to  the  fancy  of  his  reader,  whom,  as  the  fashion
is  nowadays,  he  constantly  caresses  and  cajoles.  All  turns
upon  their  two  persons.  And  as  in  an  amour  or  commerce  of
love-letters,  so  here  the  author  has  the  privilege  of  talking
eternally  of  himself,  dressing  and  sprucing  himself  up,  whilst
he  is  making  diligent  court,  and  working  upon  the  humour  of
the  party  to  whom  he  addresses.  This  is  the  coquetry  of  a
modem  author,  whose  epistles  dedicatory,  prefaces,  and  addresses
to  the  reader  are  so  many  affected  graces,  designed  to  draw
the  attention  from  the  subject  towards  himself,  and  make  it
be  generally  observed,  not  so  much  what  he  says,  as  what  he
appears,  or  is,  and  what  figure  he  already  makes,  or  hopes  to
make,  in  the  fashionable  world.

181


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

These  are  the  airs  which  a  neighbouring  nation  give  them-
selves, more  particularly  in  what  they  call  their  memoirs.
Their  very  essays  on  politics,  their  philosophical  and  critical
works,  their  comments  upon  ancient  and  modern  authors,  all
their  treatises  are  memoirs.  The  whole  writing  of  this  age  is
become  indeed  a  sort  of  memoir-writing.  Though  in  the  real
memoirs  of  the  ancients,  even  when  they  writ  at  any  time
concerning  themselves,  there  was  neither  the  /  nor  thou
throughout  the  whole  work.  So  that  all  this  pretty  amour
and  intercourse  of  caresses  between  the  author  and  reader  was
thus  entirely  taken  away.

Much  more  is  this  the  case  in  dialogue.  For  here  the
author  is  annihilated,  and  the  reader,  being  no  way  applied
to,  stands  for  nobody.  The  self-interesting  parties  both  vanish
at  once.  The  scene  presents  itself  as  by  chance  and  un-
designed. You  are  not  only  left  to  judge  coolly  and  with
indifference  of  the  sense  delivered,  but  of  the  character,  genius,
elocution,  and  manner  of  the  persons  who  deliver  it.  These
two  are  mere  strangers,  in  whose  favour  you  are  no  way
engaged.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  the  persons  introduced  speak
pertinent  and  good  sense  at  every  turn.  It  must  be  seen
from  what  bottom  they  speak ;  from  what  principle,  what
stock  or  fund  of  knowledge  they  draw  ;  and  what  kind  or  species
of  understanding  they  possess.  For  the  understanding  here
must  have  its  mark,  its  characteristic  note,  by  which  it  may
be  distinguished.  It  must  be  such  and  such  an  understanding ;
as  when  we  say,  for  instance,  such  or  such  a  face ;  since  Nature
has  characterised  tempers  and  minds  as  peculiarly  as  faces.
And  for  an  artist  who  draws  naturally,  'tis  not  enough  to  show
us  merely  faces  which  may  be  called  men's  :  every  face  must  be  a
certain  man's.

Now  as  a  painter  who  draws  battles  or  other  actions  of
Christians,  Turks,  Indians,  or  any  distinct  and  peculiar  people,
must  of  necessity  draw  the  several  figures  of  his  piece  in  their
proper  and  real  proportions,  gestures,  habits,  arras,  or  at  least

132


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

with  as  fair  resemblance  as  possible,  so  in  the  same  manner  that
writer,  whoever  he  be,  among  us  modems,  who  shall  venture  to
bring  his  fellow-modems  into  dialogue,  must  introduce  them  in
their  proper  manners,  genius,  behaviour  and  humour.  And  this
is  the  mirror  or  looking-glass  above  described.

For  instance,  a  dialogue,  we  will  suppose,  is  framed  after  the
manner  of  our  ancient  authors.  In  it  a  poor  philosopher,  of  a
mean  figure,  accosts  one  of  the  powerfiillest,  wittiest,  handsomest,
and  richest  noblemen  of  the  time  as  he  is  walking  leisurely
towards  the  temple.  "  You  are  going  then,""  says  he  (calling
him  by  his  plain  name)  "  to  pay  your  devotions  yonder  at  the
temple.'*  I  am  so.  But  with  an  air  methinks,  as  if  some  thought
perplexed  you.

"  What  is  there  in  the  case  which  should  perplex  one .''  The
thought  perhaps  of  your  petitions,  and  the  consideration  what
vows  you  had  best  offer  to  the  Deity.  Is  that  so  difficult  ?
Can  any  one  be  so  foolish  as  to  ask  of  Heaven  what  is  not  for  his
good  ? Not  if  he  understands  what  his  good  is.

"  Who  can  mistake  it,  if  he  has  common  sense,  and  knows  the
difference  between  prosperity  and  adversity .''  T'is  prosperity
therefore  you  would  pray  for  ?

"  Undoubtedly.  For  instance,  that  absolute  sovereign,  who
commands  all  things  by  virtue  of  his  immense  treasures,  and
governs  by  his  sole  will  and  pleasure,  him  you  think  prosperous
and  his  state  happy."

Whilst  I  am  copying  this  (for  'tis  no  more  indeed  than  a
borrowed  sketch  from  one  of  those  originals  before  mentioned)
I  see  a  thousand  ridicules  arising  from  the  manner,  the  circum-
stances and  action  itself,  compared  with  modem  breeding  and
civility. — Let  us  therefore  mend  the  matter  if  possible,  and
introduce  the  same  philosopher,  addressing  himself  in  a  more
obsequious  manner,  to  his  Grace,  his  Excellency,  or  his  Honour,
without  failing  in  the  least  tittle  of  the  ceremonial.  Or  let  us
put  the  case  more  favourably  still  for  our  man  of  letters.  Let
us  suppose  him  to  be  incognito,  without  the  least  appearance  of

133


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

a  character,  which  in  our  age  is  so  little  recommending.  Let  his
garb  and  action  be  of  the  more  modish  sort,  in  order  to  introduce
him  better  and  gain  him  audience.  And  with  these  advantages
and  precautions,  imagine  still  in  what  manner  he  must  accost
this  pageant  of  state,  if  at  any  time  he  finds  him  at  leisure,
walking  in  the  fields  alone,  and  without  his  equipage.  Consider
how  many  bows  and  simpering  faces !  how  many  preludes,
excuses,  compliments ! — Now  put  compliments,  put  ceremony
into  a  dialogue,  and  see  what  will  be  the  effect !

This  is  the  plain  dilemma  against  that  ancient  manner  of
writing  which  we  can  neither  well  imitate  nor  translate,
whatever  pleasure  or  profit  we  may  find  in  reading  those
originals.  For  what  shall  we  do  in  such  a  circumstance  ?
What  if  the  fancy  takes  us,  and  we  resolve  to  try  the  experiment
in  modem  subjects  .'*  See  the  consequence ! — If  we  avoid
ceremony  we  are  unnatural ;  if  we  use  it,  and  appear  as  we
naturally  are,  as  we  salute,  and  meet,  and  treat  one  another,  we
hate  the  sight.  .  .  .  What's  this  but  hating  our  own  faces  .-^
Is  it  the  painter's  fault  ?  Should  he  paint  falsely  or  affectedly  ;
mix  modern  with  ancient,  join  shapes  preposterously,  and  betray
his  art  ?  If  not,  Avhat  medium  is  there  ?  What  remains  for
him  but  to  throw  away  the  pencil  ?  .  .  .  No  more  designing
after  the  life ;  no  more  mirror- writing  or  personal  representation
of  any  kind  whatever.

Thus  dialogue  is  at  an  end.  The  ancients  could  see  their
own  faces,  but  we  cannot.  And  why  this  ?  Why,  but  because
we  have  less  beauty ;  for  so  our  looking-glass  can  inform  us.
.  .  .  Ugly  instrument !  And  for  this  reason  to  be  hated.  .  .  .
Our  commerce  and  manner  of  conversation,  which  we  think  the
politest  imaginable,  is  such,  it  seems,  as  we  ourselves  cannot
endure  to  see  represented  to  the  life.  'Tis  here,  as  in  our  real
portraitures,  particularly  those  at  full  length,  where  the  poor
pencil-man  is  put  to  a  thousand  shifts,  whilst  he  strives  to  dress
us  in  afffected  habits,  such  as  we  never  wore ;  because  should  he
paint  us  in  those  we  really  wear,  they  would  of  necessity  make

134


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

the  piece  to  be  so  much  more  ridiculous  as  it  was  more  natural
and  resembling.

Thus  much  for  antiquity  and  those  rules  of  art,  those
philosophical  sea-cards,  by  which  the  adventurous  geniuses  of  the
times  were  wont  to  steer  their  coui-ses  and  govern  their  im-
petuous muse.  These  were  the  chartae  of  our  Roman  master-
poet,  and  these  the  pieces  of  art,  the  mirrors,  the  exemplars  he
bids  us  place  before  our  eyes —

Vos  exemplaria  Graeca
Noctuma  versate  manu,  versate  diuma.^

And  thus  poetry  and  the  writer's  art,  as  in  many  respects  it
resembles  the  statuary's  and  the  painter's,  so  in  this  more
particularly,  that  it  has  its  original  draughts  and  models  for
study  and  practice ;  not  for  ostentation,  to  be  shown  abroad  or
copied  for  public  view.  These  are  the  ancient  busts,  the  trunks
of  statues,  the  pieces  of  anatomy,  the  masterly  rough  drawings
which  are  kept  within,  as  the  secret  learning,  the  mystery,  and
fundamental  knowledge  of  the  art.  There  is  this  essential
difference  however  between  the  artists  of  each  kind :  that  they
who  design  merely  after  bodies,  and  form  the  graces  of  this  sort,
can  never,  with  all  their  accuracy  or  correctness  of  design,  be
able  to  reform  themselves,  or  grow  a  jot  more  shapely  in  their
persons.  But  for  those  artists  who  copy  from  another  life,  who
study  the  graces  and  perfections  of  minds,  and  are  real  masters
of  those  rules  which  constitute  this  latter  science,  'tis  impossible
they  should  fail  of  being  themselves  improved,  and  amended  in
their  better  part.

1  must  confess  there  is  hardly  anywhere  to  be  found  a  more
insipid  race  of  mortals  than  those  whom  we  modems  are  con-
tented to  call  poets,  for  having  attained  the  chiming  faculty  of
a  language,  with  an  injudicious  random  use  of  wit  and  fancy.
But  for  the  man  who  truly  and  in  a  just  sense  deserves  the

^  ["  Thumb  your  Greek  patterns  by  night  and  by  day. " — Hor.  de  Arte
Poet.  268.]

135


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

name  of  poet,  and  who  as  a  real  master,  or  architect  in  the  kind,
can  describe  both  men  and  manners,  and  give  to  an  action  its
just  body  and  proportions,  he  will  be  found,  if  I  mistake
not,  a  very  different  creature.  Such  a  poet  is  indeed  a  second
yf^  Maker ;  a  just  Prometheus  under  Jove.  Like  that  sovereign
artist  or  universal  plastic  nature,  he  forms  a  whole,  coherent  and
proportioned  in  itself,  with  due  subjection  and  subordinacy  of
constituent  parts.  He  notes  the  boundaries  of  the  passions,
and  knows  their  exact  tones  and  measures ;  by  which  he  justly
represents  them,  marks  the  sublime  of  sentiments  and  action,
and  distinguishes  the  beautiful  from  the  deformed,  the  amiable
from  the  odious.  The  moral  artist  who  can  thus  imitate  the
Creator,  and  is  thus  knowing  in  the  inward  form  and  structure
of  his  fellow-creature,  will  hardly,  I  presume,  be  found  un-
knowing in  himself,  or  at  a  loss  in  those  numbei*s  which  make  the
[harmony  of  a  mind.  For  knavery  is  mere  dissonance  and  dispro-
portion. And  though  villains  may  have  strong  tones  and  natural
capacities  of  action,  'tis  impossible  that  true  judgment  and  in-
genuity should  reside  where  harmony  and  honesty  have  no  being.^
But  having  entered  thus  seriously  into  the  concerns  of
authors,  and  shown  their  chief  foundation  and  strength,  their
preparatory  discipline  and  qualifying  method  of  self-examination,
'tis  fit,  ere  we  disclose  this  mystery  any  farther,  we  should
consider the advantages or disadvantages our authors may

*  The  maxim  will  hardly  be  disproved  by  fact  or  history,  either  in
respect  of  philosophers  themselves  or  others  who  were  the  great  geniuses
or  masters  in  the  liberal  arts.  The  characters  of  the  two  best  Roman
poets  are  well  known.  Those  of  the  ancient  tragedians  no  less.  And
the  great  epic  master,  though  of  an  obscurer  and  remoter  age,  was  ever
presumed  to  be  far  enough  from  a  vile  or  knavish  character.  The  Roman
as  well  as  the  Grecian  orator  was  true  to  his  country,  and  died  in  like
manner  a  martyr  for  its  liberty.  And  those  historians  who  are  of  highest
value  were  either  in  a  private  life  approved  good  men,  or  noted  such  by
their  actions  in  the  public.  As  for  poets  in  particular  (says  the  learned
and  wise  Strabo),  "  Can  we  possibly  imagine  that  the  genius,  power,  and
excellence  of  a  real  poet  consists  in  aught  else  than  the  just  imitation  of

136


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

possibly  meet  with  from  abroad,  and  how  far  their  genius  may
be  depressed  or  raised  by  any  external  causes  arising  from  the
humour  or  judgment  of  the  world.

Whatever  it  be  which  influences  in  this  respect  must  proceed
either  from  the  grandees  and  men  in  power,  the  critics  and  men
of  art,  or  the  people  themselves,  the  common  audience,  and
mere  vulgar.  We  shall  begin  therefore  with  the  gi-andees  and
pretended  masters  of  the  world,  taking  the  liberty,  in  favour  of
authors,  to  bestow  some  advice  also  on  these  high  persons,  if
possibly  they  are  disposed  to  receive  it  in  such  a  familiar  way
as  this.


PART  II

Section  I

As  usual  as  it  is  with  mankind  to  act  absolutely  by  will  and
pleasure,  without  regard  to  counsel  or  the  rigid  method  of  rule
and  precept,  it  must  be  acknowledged  nevertheless  that  the
good  and  laudable  custom  of  asking  advice  is  still  upheld  and
kept  in  fashion  as  a  matter  of  fair  repute  and  honourable
appearance ;  insomuch  that  even  monarchs,  and  absolute  princes

life  in  formed  discourse  and  numbers?  But  how  should  he  be  that  just
imitator  of  life  whilst  he  himself  knows  not  its  measures,  nor  how  to  guide
himself  by  judgment  and  understanding.''  For  we  have  not  surely  the
same  notion  of  the  poet's  excellence  as  of  the  ordinary  craftsman's,  the
subject  of  whose  art  is  senseless  stone  or  timber,  without  life,  dignity,  or
beauty  ;  whilst  the  poet's  art  turning  principally  on  men  and  manners,  he
has  his  virtue  and  excellence  as  poet  naturally  annexed  to  human  ex-
cellence, and  to  the  worth  and  dignity  of  man.  Insomuch  that  'tis
impossible  he  should  be  a  great  and  worthy  poet  who  is  not  first  a  worthy
and  good  man."  ov  ykp  ovtu  (fiaixkv  Tr)v  tCjv  ttoitjtQv  aptr^v  ws  ■^  reicrovwv  •^
XaXxewv,  etc.,  i]  Si  ttoit/toO  avvi^evKTai  t^  tov  avdpunrov  koL  ovx  ol6v  re  ayaObv
yeviada.1  woiriTriv,  /jltj  irpbrepov  yevijOevra  dvSpa  dya66v. — l.  i.  See  below,  part  ii.
§  3,  at  the  end,  and  part  iii.  §  3,  in  the  notes,  and  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.  ii.

137


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

themselves,  disdain  not,  we  see,  to  make  profession  of  the
practice.

*ris,  I  presume,  on  this  account  that  the  royal  persons  are
pleased  on  public  occasions  to  make  use  of  the  noted  style  of  xoe
and  lis.  Not  that  they  are  supposed  to  have  any  converse  with
themselves,  as  being  endowed  with  the  privilege  of  becoming
plural  and  enlarging  their  capacity  in  the  manner  above  de-
scribed. Single  and  absolute  persons  in  government,  I  am  sensible,
can  hardly  be  considered  as  any  other  than  single  and  absolute
in  morals.  They  have  no  inmate-controller  to  cavil  with  them
or  dispute  their  pleasure.  Nor  have  they,  from  any  practice
abroad,  been  able  at  any  time  to  learn  the  way  of  being  free
and  familiar  with  themselves  at  home.  Inclination  and  will  in
such  as  these  admit  as  little  restraint  or  check  in  private
meditation  as  in  public  company.  The  world,  which  serves  as
a  tutor  to  persons  of  an  inferior  rank,  is  submissive  to  these
royal  pupils,  who  from  their  earliest  days  are  used  to  see  even
their  instructors  bend  before  them,  and  to  hear  evei-ything
applauded  which  they  themselves  perform.

For  fear  therefore  lest  their  humour  merely,  or  the  caprice
of  some  favourite,  should  be  presumed  to  influence  them  when
they  come  to  years  of  princely  discretion  and  are  advanced  to
the  helm  of  government,  it  has  been  esteemed  a  necessary
decency  to  summon  certain  advisers  by  profession  to  assist  as
attendants  to  the  single  pei-son,  and  be  joined  with  him  in  his
written  edicts,  proclamations,  letters-patent,  and  other  instru-
ments of  regal  power.  For  this  use  privy-counselloi's  have  been
erected,  who,  being  persons  of  considerable  figure  and  wise
aspect,  cannot  be  supposed  to  stand  as  statues  or  mere  ciphers
in  the  government,  and  leave  the  royal  acts  erroneously  and
falsely  described  to  us  in  the  plural  number,  when  at  the
bottom  a  single  will  or  fancy  was  the  sole  spring  and  motive.

Foreign  princes  indeed  have  most  of  them  that  unhappy
prerogative  of  acting  unadvisedly  and  wilfully  in  their  national
affairs. But  'tis  known  to  be  far  otherwise  with  the  legal  and

138


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

just  princes  of  our  Island.  They  are  surrounded  with  the  best
of  counsellors,  the  laws.  They  administer  civil  affairs  by  legal
officers  who  have  the  direction  of  their  public  will  and  conscience ;
and  they  annually  receive  advice  and  aid  in  the  most  effectual
manner  from  their  good  people.  To  this  wise  genius  of  our
Constitution  we  may  be  justly  said  to  owe  our  wisest  and  best
princes,  whose  high  birth  or  royal  education  could  not  alone  be
supposed  to  have  given  them  that  happy  turn,  since  by  experi-
ence we  find  that  those  very  princes,  from  whose  conduct  the
world  abroad  as  well  as  we  at  home  have  reaped  the  greatest
advantages,  were  such  as  had  the  most  controverted  titles,  and
in  their  youth  had  stood  in  the  remoter  prospects  of  regal
power,  and  lived  the  nearest  to  a  private  life.

Other  princes  we  have  had,  who,  though  difficult  perhaps  in
receiving  counsel,  have  been  eminent  in  the  practice  of  applying
it  to  others.  They  have  listed  themselves  advisers  in  form,
and  by  publishing  their  admonitory  works  have  added  to  the
number  of  those  whom  in  this  treatise  we  have  presumed  to
criticise.  But  our  criticism  being  withal  an  apology  for  authors
and  a  defence  of  the  literate  tribe,  it  cannot  be  thought  amiss
in  us  to  join  the  royal  with  the  plebeian  penmen  in  this
common  cause.

'Twould  be  a  hard  case  indeed  should  the  princes  of  our
nation  refuse  to  countenance  the  industrious  race  of  authors,
since  their  royal  ancestors  and  predecessors  have  had  such
honour  derived  to  them  from  this  profession.  'Tis  to  this  they
owe  that  bright  jewel  of  their  crown,  purchased  by  a  warlike
prince,  who  having  assumed  the  author,  and  essayed  his  strength
in  the  polemic  writings  of  the  school -divines,  thought  it  an
honour  on  this  account  to  retain  the  title  of  Defendee  of  the
Faith.

Another  prince,  of  a  more  pacific  nature  and  fluent  thought,
submitting  arms  and  martial  discipline  to  the  gown,  and  con-
fiding in  his  princely  science  and  profound  learning,  made  his
style  and  speech  the  nerve  and  sinew  of  his  government. He

139


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

gave  us  his  works  full  of  wise  exhortation  and  advice  to  his
royal  son,  as  well  as  of  instruction  to  his  good  people,  who
could  not  without  admiration  observe  their  author -sovereign
thus  studious  and  contemplative  in  their  behalf.  'Twas  then
one  might  have  seen  our  nation  growing  young  and  docile,  with
that  simplicity  of  heart  which  qualified  them  to  profit  like  a
scholar- people  under  their  royal  preceptor.  For  with  abundant
eloquence  he  graciously  gave  lessons  to  his  parliament,  tutored
his  ministers,  and  edified  the  greatest  churchmen  and  divines
themselves,  by  whose  suffrage  he  obtained  the  highest  appella-
tions which  could  be  merited  by  the  acutest  wit  and  truest
understanding.  From  hence  the  British  nations  were  taught  to
own  in  common  a  Solomon  for  their  joint  sovereign,  the  founder
of  their  late  completed  union.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted  that  the
pious  treatise  of  self-discourse  ascribed  to  the  succeeding  monarch
contributed  in  a  great  measure  to  his  glorious  and  never-fading
titles  of  Saint  and  Martyr.

However  it  be,  I  would  not  willingly  take  upon  me  to
recommend  this  author-character  to  our  future  princes.  *Vhat-
ever  crowns  or  laurels  their  renowned  predecessors  may  have
gathered  in  this  field  of  honour,  I  should  think  that  for  the
future  the  speculative  province  might  more  properly  be  com-
mitted to  private  heads.  'Twould  be  a  sufficient  encouragement
to  the  learned  world,  and  a  sure  earnest  of  the  increase  and
flourishing  of  Letters  in  our  nation,  if  its  sovereigns  would  be
contented  to  be  the  patrons  of  wit,  and  vouchsafe  to  look
graciously  on  the  ingenious  pupils  of  art.  Or  were  it  the
custom  of  their  prime  ministers  to  have  any  such  regard,  it
would  of  itself  be  sufficient  to  change  the  face  of  affairs.  A
small  degree  of  favour  would  ensure  the  fortunes  of  a  distressed
and  ruinous  tribe,  whose  forlorn  condition  has  helped  to  draw
disgrace  upon  arts  and  sciences,  and  kept  them  far  off  from  that
politeness  and  beauty  in  which  they  would  soon  appear  if  the
aspiring  genius  of  our  nation  were  forwarded  by  the  least  care
or  culture.

140


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

There  should  not,  one  would  think,  be  any  need  of  courtship
or  persuasion  to  engage  our  grandees  in  the  patronage  of  Arts
and  Letters,  For  in  our  nation,  upon  the  foot  things  stand,
and  as  they  are  likely  to  continue,  'tis  not  difficult  to  foresee
that  improvements  will  be  made  in  every  art  and  science.  The
Muses  will  have  their  turn,  and  with  or  without  their
Maecenases  will  grow  in  credit  and  esteem  as  they  arrive  to
greater  perfection  and  excel  in  every  kind.  There  will  arise
such  spirits  as  would  have  credited  their  court  patrons  had
they  found  any  so  wise  as  to  have  sought  them  out  betimes,
and  contributed  to  their  rising  greatness.

'Tis  scarce  a  quarter  of  an  age  since  such  a  happy  balance
of  power  was  settled  between  our  prince  and  people  as  has
firmly  secured  our  hitherto  precarious  liberties,  and  removed
from  us  the  fear  of  civil  commotions,  wars  and  violence,  either
on  account  of  religion  and  worship,  the  property  of  the  subject,
or  the  contending  titles  of  the  Crown.  But  as  the  greatest
advantages  of  this  world  are  not  to  be  bought  at  easy  prices,
we  are  still  at  this  moment  expending  both  our  blood  and
treasure  to  secure  to  ourselves  this  inestimable  purchase  of  our
free  government  and  national  constitution.  And  as  happy  as
we  are  in  this  establishment  at  home,  we  are  still  held  in  a
perpetual  alarm  by  the  aspect  of  affairs  abroad,  and  by  the
terror  of  that  Power  which,  ere  mankind  had  well  recovered
the  misery  of  those  barbarous  ages  consequent  to  the  Roman
yoke,  has  again  threatened  the  world  with  a  universal  monarchy
and  a  new  abyss  of  ignorance  and  superstition.

The  British  Muses,  in  this  din  of  arms,  may  well  lie  abject
and  obscure,  especially  being  as  yet  in  their  mere  infant  state.
They  have  hitherto  scarce  amved  to  anything  of  shapeliness  or
person.  They  lisp  as  in  their  cradles ;  and  their  stammering
tongues,  which  nothing  besides  their  youth  and  rawness  can
excuse,  have  hitherto  spoken  in  wretched  pun  and  quibble.
Our  dramatic  Shakspere,  our  Fletcher,  Jonson,  and  our  fepic
Milton  preserve  this  style. And  even  a  latter  race,  scarce  free

141


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

of  this  infirmity,  and  aiming  at  a  false  sublime,  with  crowded
simile  and  mixed  metaphor  (the  hobby-horse  and  rattle  of  the
Muses),  entertain  our  raw  fancy  and  unpractised  ear,  which  has
not  as  yet  had  leisure  to  form  itself  and  become  truly  musical. ^

But  those  reverend  bards,  rude  as  they  were,  according  to
their  time  and  age,  have  provided  us  however  Avith  the  richest
ore.  To  their  eternal  honour  they  have  withal  been  the  first
of  Europeans  who,  since  the  Gothic  model  of  poetry,  attempted
to  throw  off  the  horrid  discord  of  jingling  rhyme.^  They  have
asserted  ancient  poetic  liberty,  and  have  happily  broken  the  ice
for  those  who  are  to  follow  them,  and  who,  treading  in  their
footsteps,  may  at  leisure  polish  our  language,  lead  our  ear  to
finer  pleasure,  and  find  out  the  true  rhythmus  and  harmonious
numbers,  which  alone  can  satisfy  a  just  judgment  and  muse-
like apprehension.

Tis  evident  our  natural  genius  shines  above  that  airy
neighbouring  nation,  of  whom,  however,  it  must  be  confessed
that  with  truer  pains  and  industry  they  have  sought  politeness,
and  studied  to  give  the  Muses  their  due  body  and  proportion,
as  well  as  the  natural  ornaments  of  correctness,  chastity,  and
grace  of  style.  From  the  plain  model  of  the  ancients  they
have  raised  a  noble  satirist.^  In  the  epic  kind  their  attempts
have  been  less  successful.  In  the  dramatic  they  have  been  so
happy  as  to  raise  their  stage  to  as  great  perfection  as  the
genius  of  their  nation  will  permit.* But  the  high  spirit  of

*  See  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.  towards  the  end,  and  in  the  notes.

2  [Dryden,  who  gave  so  much  higher  praise  to  Shakspere,  had
declined  with  Rymer  to  praise  Milton  for  his  preference  of  blank  verse
to  rhyme.  But  Shaftesbury's  less  unlucky  position  seems  to  have  been
reached  rather  by  way  of  classicist  prejudice  than  of  superiority  in  taste.
See  his  estimate  of  Shakspere's  style  in  §  iii.  hereinafter.  Addison's
defence  of  Milton  in  the  Spectator  began  (Jan.  1712)  within  a  year  of  the
issue  of  the  Characteristics.^  ^  Boileau.

*  [Dryden  is  at  this  point  the  luckier  critic.  Compare  his  preface  to
All  for  Love.  Shaftesbury's  further  explanation,  however,  is  suggestive,
apart  from  his  unhappy  definition  of  the  genius  of  tragedy.]

142


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

tragedy  can  ill  subsist  where  the  spirit  of  liberty  is  wanting.
The  genius  of  this  poetry  consists  in  the  lively  representation
of  the  disorders  and  misery  of  the  great ;  to  the  end  that  the
people  and  those  of  a  lower  condition  may  be  taught  the  better
to  content  themselves  with  privacy,  enjoy  their  safer  state,  and
prize  the  equality  and  justice  of  their  guardian  laws.  If  this  be
found  agreeable  to  the  just  tragic  model,  which  the  ancients
have  delivered  to  us,  'twill  easily  be  conceived  how  little  such
a  model  is  proportioned  to  the  capacity  or  taste  of  those  who
in  a  long  series  of  degrees,  from  the  lowest  peasant  to  the  high
slave  of  royal  blood,  are  taught  to  idolise  the  next  in  power
above  them,  and  think  nothing  so  adorable  as  that  imlimited
greatness  and  tyrannic  power,  which  is  raised  at  their  own
expense  and  exercised  over  themselves.

Tis  easy,  on  the  other  hand,  to  apprehend  the  advantages
of  our  Britain  in  this  particular,  and  what  effect  its  established
liberty  will  produce  in  everything  which  relates  to  art,  when
peace  returns  to  us  on  these  happy  conditions.  'Twas  the  fate
of  Rome  to  have  scarce  an  intermediate  age,  or  single  period  of
time,  between  the  rise  of  arts  and  fall  of  liberty.  No  sooner
had  that  nation  begun  to  lose  the  roughness  and  barbarity  of
their  manners,  and  learn  of  Greece  to  form  their  heroes,  their
orators  and  poets  on  a  right  model,  than  by  their  unjust
attempt  upon  the  liberty  of  the  world  they  justly  lost  their
own.  With  their  liberty  they  lost  not  only  their  force  of
eloquence,  but  even  their  style  and  language  itself.  The  poets
who  afterwards  arose  among  them  were  mere  unnatural  and
forced  plants.  Their  two  most  accomplished,  who  came  last,
and  closed  the  scene,  were  plainly  such  as  had  seen  the  days  of
liberty,  and  felt  the  sad  effects  of  its  departure.  Nor  had  these
been  ever  brought  in  play,  otherwise  than  through  the  friend-
ship of  the  famed  Maecenas,  who  turned  a  prince^  naturally
cruel  and  barbarous  to  the  love  and  courtship  of  the  Muses.
These  tutoresses  formed  in  their  royal  pupil  a  new  nature.
^  Injra,  §  iii.  iu  the  uotes.

143


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

They  taught  him  how  to  charm  mankind.  They  were  more
to  him  than  his  arms  or  military  virtue,  and,  more  than  Fortune
herself,  assisted  him  in  his  greatness,  and  made  his  usurped
dominion  so  enchanting  to  the  world,  that  it  could  see  without
regret  its  chains  of  bondage  firmly  riveted.  The  corrupting
sweets  of  such  a  poisonous  government  were  not  indeed  long-
lived.  The  bitter  soon  succeeded ;  and  in  the  issue  the
world  was  forced  to  bear  with  patience  those  natural  and
genuine  tyrants  who  succeeded  to  this  specious  machine  of
arbitrary  and  universal  power.

And  now  that  I  am  fallen  imawares  into  such  profound
reflections  on  the  periods  of  government,  and  the  flourishing
and  decay  of  Liberty  and  Letters,  I  cannot  be  contented  to
consider  merely  of  the  enchantment  which  wrought  so  powerfully
upon  mankind  when  first  this  universal  monarchy  was  estab-
lished. I  must  wonder  still  more  when  I  consider  how  after
the  extinction  of  this  Caesarean  and  Claudian  family,  and  a
short  interval  of  princes  raised  and  destroyed  with  much
disorder  and  public  ruin,  the  Romans  should  regain  their
perishing  dominion,  and  retrieve  their  sinking  state,  by  an
after-race  of  wise  and  able  princes  successively  adopted,  and
taken  from  a  private  state  to  rule  the  empire  of  the  world.
They  were  men  who  not  only  possessed  the  military  virtues
and  supported  that  sort  of  discipline  in  the  highest  degree ;
but  as  they  sought  the  interest  of  the  world,  they  did  what  was
in  their  power  to  restore  liberty,  and  raise  again  the  perishing
arts  and  decayed  virtue  of  mankind.  But  the  season  was  now
past !  The  fatal  form  of  government  was  become  too  natm'al ;
and  the  world,  which  had  bent  under  it,  and  was  become  slavish
and  dependent,  had  neither  power  nor  will  to  help  itself.  The
only  deliverance  it  could  expect  was  from  the  merciless  hands  of
the  barbarians,  and  a  total  dissolution  of  that  enormous  empire
and  despotic  power,  which  the  best  hands  could  not  preserve
from  being  destructive  to  human  nature.  For  even  barbarity
and  Gothicism  were  already  entered  into  arts  ere  the  savages

144


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

had  made  any  impression  on  the  empire.  All  the  advantage
which  a  fortuitous  and  almost  miraculous  succession  of  good
princes  could  procure  their  highly  favoured  arts  and  sciences,
was  no  more  than  to  preserve  during  their  own  time  those
perishing  remains,^  which  had  for  awhile  with  difficulty
subsisted  after  the  decline  of  Liberty.  Not  a  statue,  not  a
medal,  not  a  tolerable  piece  of  architecture  could  show  itself
afterwards.  Philosophy,  wit  and  learning,  in  which  some  of
those  good  princes  had  themselves  been  so  renowned,  fell  with
them ;  and  ignorance  and  darkness  overspread  the  world,  and
fitted  it  for  the  chaos  and  iniin  which  ensued.

We  are  now  in  an  age  when  Liberty  is  once  again  in  its
ascendant.  And  we  are  ourselves  the  happy  nation  who  not
only  enjoy  it  at  home,  but  by  our  greatness  and  power  give
life  and  vigour  to  it  abroad ;  and  are  the  head  and  chief  of
the  European  League,^  founded  on  this  common  cause.  Nor
can  it,  I  presume,  be  justly  feared  that  we  should  lose  this
noble  ardour,  or  faint  under  the  glorious  toil,  though,  like
ancient  Greece,  we  should  for  succeeding  ages  be  contending
with  a  foreign  power,  and  endeavouring  to  reduce  the  ex-
orbitancy of  a  Grand  Monarch.  Tis  with  us  at  present  as
with  the  Roman  people  in  those  early  days,^  when  they  wanted
only  repose  from  arms  to  apply  themselves  to  the  improvement
of  arts  and  studies.  We  should  in  this  case  need  no  ambitious
monarch  to  be  allured,  by  hope  of  fame  or  secret  views  of
power,  to  give  pensions  abroad  as  well  as  at  home,  and  purchase
flattery  from  every  profession  and  science. AVe  should  find  a

^  Infra,  §  2,  and  part  iii.  §  3,  in  the  notes.
2  [Against  Louis  XIV.]

^  Serus  enim  Graecis  admovit  acumina  chartis  ;
Et  post  Punica  bella  quietus,  quaerere  coepit.
Quid  Sophocles  et  Thespis  et  Aeschylus  utile  ferrent.
["  Not  till  late  did  the  Roman  apply  his  shrewdness  to  the  books  of
Greece  ;  and  it  was  when  resting  after  the  Punic  Wars  that  he  began  to
inquire  what  useful  thing  Sophocles  and  Thespis  and  Aeschylus  oflFered."
— Hor.  Up.  u.  i.  161-163.]

VOL.  I  145  L


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

better  fund  within  ourselves,  and  might,  without  such  assist-
ance, be  able  to  excel  by  our  own  virtue  and  emulation.

Well  it  would  be,  indeed,  and  much  to  the  honour  of  our
nobles  and  princes,  would  they  freely  help  in  this  affair,  and
by  a  judicious  application  of  their  bounty  facilitate  this  happy
birth,  of  which  I  have  ventured  to  speak  in  a  prophetic  style.
Twould  be  of  no  small  advantage  to  them  during  their  life,
and  would,  more  than  all  their  other  labours,  procure  them  an
immortal  memory.  For  they  must  remember  that  their  fame  is
in  the  hands  of  penmen ;  and  that  the  greatest  actions  lose
their  force  and  perish  in  the  custody  of  unable  and  mean
writers.

Let  a  nation  remain  ever  so  rude  or  barbarous,  it  must
have  its  poets,  rhapsoders,  historiographers,  antiquaries  of
some  kind  or  other,  whose  business  it  will  be  to  recount  its
remarkable  transactions,  and  record  the  achievements  of  its
civil  and  military  heroes.  And  though  the  military  kind  may
happen  to  be  the  farthest  removed  from  any  acquaintance  with
Letters  or  the  Muses,  they  are  yet,  in  reality,  the  most
interested  in  the  cause  and  party  of  these  remembrancers.
The  greatest  share  of  fame  and  admiration  falls  naturally  on
the  armed  worthies.  The  great  in  council  are  second  in  the
Muses'  favour.  But  if  worthy  poetic  geniuses  are  not  found,
nor  able  penmen  raised,  to  rehearse  the  lives  and  celebrate
the  high  actions  of  great  men,  they  must  be  traduced  by  such
recorders  as  chance  presents.  We  have  few  modem  heroes  who,
like  Xenophon  or  Caesar,  can  write  their  own  Commentaries.
And  the  raw  memoir- writings  and  unformed  pieces  of  modem
statesmen,  full  of  their  interested  and  private  views,  will  in
another  age  be  of  little  service  to  support  their  memory  or
name,  since  already  the  world  begins  to  sicken  with  the  kind.
'Tis  the  learned,  the  able  and  disinterested  historian,  who
takes  place  at  last.  And  when  the  signal  poet  or  herald  of
fame  is  once  heard,  the  inferior  trumpets  sink  in  silence  and
oblivion,

146


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

But  supposing  it  were  possible  for  the  hero  or  statesman
to  be  absolutely  unconcerned  for  his  memory,  or  what  came
after  him,  yet  for  the  present  merely,  and  during  his  own
time,  it  must  be  of  importance  to  him  to  stand  fair  with  the
men  of  letters  and  ingenuity,  and  to  have  the  character  and
repute  of  being  favourable  to  their  art.  Be  the  illustrious
person  ever  so  high  or  awful  in  his  station,  he  must  have
descriptions  made  of  him  in  verse  and  prose,  under  feigned  or
real  appellations.  If  he  be  omitted  in  sounding  ode  or  lofty
epic,  he  must  be  sung  at  least  in  doggerel  and  plain  ballad.
The  people  will  needs  have  his  effigies,  though  they  see  his
person  ever  so  rarely ;  and  if  he  refuses  to  sit  to  the  good
painter,  there  are  others  who,  to  oblige  the  public,  will  take
the  design  in  hand.  We  shall  take  up  with  what  presents,
and  rather  than  be  without  the  illustrious  physiognomy  of
our  great  man,  shall  be  contented  to  see  him  portraitured  by
the  artist  who  serves  to  illustrate  prodigies  in  fairs  and  adorn
heroic  sign-posts.  The  ill  paint  of  this  kind  cannot,  it  is  true,
disgrace  his  excellency,  whose  privilege  it  is,  in  common  with
the  royal  issue,  to  be  raised  to  this  degree  of  honour,  and  to
invite  the  passenger  or  traveller  by  his  signal  representative.
'Tis  supposed  in  this  case  that  there  are  better  pictures  current
of  the  hero,  and  that  such  as  these  are  no  true  or  favourable
representations.  But  in  another  sort  of  limning  there  is  great
danger  lest  the  hand  should  disgrace  the  subject.  Vile
encomiums  and  wretched  panegyrics  are  the  worst  of  satires ;
and  when  sordid  and  low  geniuses  make  their  court  successfully
in  one  way,  the  generous  and  able  are  aptest  to  revenge  it
in  another.

All  things  considered  as  to  the  interest  of  our  potentates
and  grandees,  they  appear  to  have  only  this  choice  left  them :
either  wholly,  if  possible,  to  suppress  Letters,  or  give  a  helping
hand  towards  their  support.  Wherever  the  author-practice
and  liberty  of  the  pen  has  in  the  least  prevailed,  the  governors
of  the  State  must  be  either  considerable  gainers  or  sufferers  bv

147


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

its  means.  So  that  "'twould  become  them  either  by  a  right
Turkish  policy  to  strike  directly  at  the  profession,  and  over-
throw the  very  art  and  mystery  itself,  or  with  alacrity  to  support
and  encourage  it  in  the  right  manner,  by  a  generous  and
impartial  regard  to  merit.  To  act  narrowly,  or  by  halves ;  or
with  indifference  and  coolness ;  or  fantastically,  and  by  humour
merely,  will  scarce  be  found  to  turn  to  their  account.  They
must  do  justice,  that  justice  may  be  done  them  in  return.
'Twill  be  in  vain  for  our  Alexanders  to  give  orders  that  none
besides  a  Lysippus  should  make  their  statue,  nor  any  besides
an  Apelles  should  draw  their  picture.  Insolent  intruders  will
do  themselves  the  honour  to  practise  on  the  features  of  these
heroes.  And  a  vile  Chaerilus  after  all  shall,  with  their  own
consent  perhaps,  supply  the  room  of  a  deserving  and  noble
artist.

In  a  government  where  the  people  are  sharers  in  power,  but
no  distributers  or  dispensers  of  rewards,  they  expect  it  of  their
princes  and  great  men  that  they  should  supply  the  generous
part,  and  bestow  honour  and  advantages  on  those  from  whom
the  nation  itself  may  receive  honour  and  advantage.  'Tis
expected  that  they  who  are  high  and  eminent  in  the  State
should  not  only  provide  for  its  necessary  safety  and  subsistence,
but  omit  nothing  which  may  contribute  to  its  dignity  and
honour.  The  Arts  and  Sciences  must  not  be  left  patronless.
The  public  itself  will  join  with  the  good  wits  and  judges  in
the  resentment  of  such  a  neglect.  'Tis  no  small  advantage,
even  in  an  absolute  government,  for  a  ministry  to  have  wit  on
their  side,  and  engage  the  men  of  merit  in  this  kind  to  be  their
well-wishers  and  friends.  And  in  those  states  where  ambitious
leaders  often  contend  for  the  supreme  authority,  'tis  a  consider-
able advantage  to  the  ill  cause  of  such  pretenders  when  they
can  obtain  a  name  and  interest  with  the  men  of  letters.  The
good  emperor  Trajan,  though  himself  no  mighty  scholar,  had
his  due  as  well  as  an  Augustus,  and  was  as  highly  celebrated
for  his  munificence  and  just  encouragement  of  every  art  and

148


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

virtue.  And  Caesar,  who  could  write  so  well  himself,  and  main-
tained his  cause  by  wit  as  well  as  arms,  knew  experimentally
what  it  was  to  have  even  a  Catullus  his  enemy ;  and  though
lashed  so  often  in  his  lampoons,  continued  to  forgive  and  court
him.  The  traitor  knew  the  importance  of  this  mildness.  May
none  who  have  the  same  designs,  understand  so  well  the  advan-
tages of  such  a  conduct !  I  would  have  required  only  this  one
defect  in  Caesar"'s  generosity  to  have  been  secure  of  his  never
rising  to  greatness,  or  enslaving  his  native  country.  Let  him
have  shown  a  ruggedness  and  austerity  towards  free  geniuses,  or
a  neglect  or  contempt  towards  men  of  wit ;  let  him  have  trusted
to  his  arms,  and  declared  against  Arts  and  I»etters ;  and  he  would
have  proved  a  second  Marius,  or  a  Catiline  of  meaner  fame  and
character.

""Tis,  1  know,  the  imagination  of  some  who  are  called  great
men  that  in  regard  of  their  high  stations  they  may  be  esteemed
to  pay  a  sufficient  tribute  to  Letters,  and  discharge  themselves
as  to  their  own  part  in  particular ;  if  they  choose  indifferently
any  subject  for  their  bounty,  and  are  pleased  to  confer  their
favour  either  on  some  one  pretender  to  art,  or  promiscuously  to
such  of  the  tribe  of  writers  whose  chief  ability  has  lain  in
making  their  court  well,  and  obtaining  to  be  introduced  to  their
acquaintance.  This  they  think  sufficient  to  instal  them  patrons
of  wit,  and  masters  of  the  literate  order.  But  this  method  will
of  any  other  the  least  serve  their  interest  or  design.  The  ill
placing  of  rewards  is  a  double  injury  to  merit;  and  in  every
cause  or  interest  passes  for  worse  than  mere  indifference  or
neutrality.  There  can  be  no  excuse  for  making  an  ill  choice.
Merit  in  every  kind  is  easily  discovered  when  sought.  The
public  itself  fails  not  to  give  sufficient  indication,  and  points
out  those  geniuses  who  want  only  countenance  and  encouragement
to  become  considerable.  An  ingenious  man  never  starves  un-
known  ;  and  great  men  must  wink  hard  or  'twould  be  impossible
for  them  to  miss  such  advantageous  opportunities  of  showing
their  generosity  and  acquiring  the  universal  esteem,  acknow-

149


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

ledgments,  and  good  wishes  of  the  ingenious  and  learned  part
of  mankind.

Section II

What  judgment  therefore  we  are  to  form  concerning  the
influence  of  our  grandees  in  matters  of  Art  and  Letters,  will
easily  be  gathered  from  the  reflections  already  made.  It  may
appear  from  the  very  freedom  we  have  taken  in  censuring  these
men  of  power,  what  little  reason  authors  have  to  plead  them  as
their  excuse  for  any  failure  in  the  improvement  of  their  art  and
talent.  For  in  a  free  country  such  as  ours  there  is  not  any
order  or  rank  of  men  more  free  than  that  of  writers ;  who  if
they  have  real  ability  and  merit,  can  fully  right  themselves
when  injured,  and  are  ready  fuiTiished  with  means  sufficient  to
make  themselves  considered  by  the  men  in  highest  power.

Nor  should  I  suspect  the  genius  of  our  writers,  or  charge
them  with  meanness  and  insufficiency  on  the  account  of  this
low-spiritedness  which  they  discover,  were  it  not  for  another
sort  of  fear  by  which  they  more  plainly  betray  themselves,  and
seem  conscious  of  their  own  defect.  The  critics,  it  seems,  arc
formidable  to  them.  The  critics  are  the  dreadful  spectres,  the
giants,  the  enchanters,  who  traverse  and  disturb  them  in  their
works.  These  are  the  persecutors,  for  whose  sake  they  are
ready  to  hide  their  heads ;  begging  rescue  and  protection  of  all
good  people ;  and  flying  in  particular  to  the  great,  by  whose
favour  they  hope  to  be  defended  from  this  merciless  examining
race.  "For  what  can  be  more  cruel  than  to  be  forced  to
submit  to  the  rigorous  laws  of  wit,  and  write  under  such  severe
judges  as  are  deaf  to  all  courtship,  and  can  be  wrought  upon  by
no  insinuation  or  flattery  to  pass  by  faults  and  pardon  any
transgi'ession  of  art  ? ""

To  judge  indeed  of  the  circumstances  of  a  modem  author
by  the  pattern  of  his  prefaces,^  dedications,  and  introductions,

^  Infra,  part  iii.  §  3 ;  and  Misc.  v.  ch.  ii.  the  former  part,  in  the
notes.

150


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

one  would  think  that  at  the  moment  when  a  piece  of  his  was  in
hand,  some  conjuration  was  forming  against  him,  some  diabolical
powers  drawing  together  to  blast  his  work  and  cross  his  generous
design.  He  therefore  rouses  his  indignation,  hardens  his  fore-
head, and  with  many  furious  defiances  and  "  Avaunt-Satans ! ""
enters  on  his  business ;  not  with  the  least  regard  to  what  may
justly  be  objected  to  him  in  a  way  of  criticism,  but  with  an
absolute  contempt  of  the  manner  and  art  itself

Odi  profanum  vulgus  et  arceo  ^  was  in  its  time,  no  doubt,  a
generous  defiance.  The  "  Avaunt ! "  was  natural  and  proper  in
its  place,  especially  where  religion  and  virtue  were  the  poet's
theme.  But  with  our  modems  the  case  is  generally  the  very
reverse.  And  accordingly  the  defiance  or  "  avaunt "  should  run
much  after  this  manner :  "  As  for  you  vulgar  souls,  mere  natm'als,
who  know  no  art,  were  never  admitted  into  the  temple  of  wisdom,
nor  ever  visited  the  sanctuaries  of  wit  or  learning,  gather  your-
selves together  from  all  parts,  and  hearken  to  the  song  or  tale  I
am  about  to  utter.  But  for  you  men  of  science  and  understanding,
who  have  ears  and  judgment,  and  can  weigh  sense,  scan  syllables,
and  measure  sounds ;  you  who  by  a  certain  art  distinguish  false
thought  from  true,  correctness  from  rudeness,  and  bombast  and
chaos  from  order  and  the  sublime  ;  away  hence  !  or  stand  aloof !
whilst  I  practise  upon  the  easiness  of  those  mean  capacities  and
apprehensions,  who  make  the  most  numerous  audience,  and  are
the  only  competent  judges  of  my  labours.""

Tis  strange  to  see  how  differently  the  vanity  of  mankind
runs  in  different  times  and  seasons.  'Tis  at  present  the  boast
of  almost  every  enterpriser  in  the  Muses'  art,  "That  by  his
genius  alone,  and  a  natural  rapidity  of  style  and  thought,  he
is  able  to  carry  all  before  him  ;  that  he  plays  with  his  business,
does  things  in  passing,  at  a  venture,  and  in  the  quickest  period
of  time."  In  the  days  of  Attic  elegance,  as  works  were  then  truly
of  another  form  and  turn,  so  workmen  were  of  another  humour,
and  had  their  vanity  of  a  quite  contrary  kind. They  became

^  ["Avaunt,  ye  uninitiated  crowd." — Hor.  Odes,  i.  iii.  1.]  | r

151


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

rather  affected  in  endeavouring  to  discover  the  pains  they  had
taken  to  be  correct.  They  were  glad  to  insinuate  how  labori-
ously and  with  what  expense  of  time  they  had  brought  the
smallest  work  of  theirs  (as  perhaps  a  single  ode  or  satire,  an
oration  or  panegyric)  to  its  perfection.  When  they  had  so
polished  their  piece,  and  rendered  it  so  natural  and  easy,  that
it  seemed  only  a  lucky  flight,  a  hit  of  thought,  or  flowing  vein
of  humour,  they  were  then  chiefly  concerned  lest  it  should  in
reality  pass  for  such,  and  their  artifice  remain  undiscovered.
They  were  willing  it  should  be  known  how  serious  their  play
was,  and  how  elaborate  their  freedom  and  facility ;  that  they
might  say  as  the  agreeable  and  polite  poet,  glancing  on  himself,

Ludentis  speciem  dabit  et  torquebitur.  .  .  .  ^
And,

Ut  sibi  quivis
Speret  idem,  sudet  multum,  frustraque  laboret
Ausus  idem,  tantum  series  juncturaque  poUet.^

Such  accuracy  of  workmanship  requires  a  critic's  eye.  Tis
lost  upon  a  vulgar  judgment.  Nothing  grieves  a  real  artist
more  than  that  indifference  of  the  public  which  suffers  work  to
pass  uncriticised.  Nothing,  on  the  other  side,  rejoices  him  more
than  the  nice  view  and  inspection  of  the  accurate  examiner  and
judge  of  work.  'Tis  the  mean  genius,  the  slovenly  performer,
who  knowing  nothing  of  true  workmanship,  endeavours  by  the
best  outward  gloss  and  dazzling  show  to  turn  the  eye  from  a
direct  and  steady  survey  of  his  piece.

What  is  there  which  an  expert  musician  more  earnestly
desires  than  to  perform  his  part  in  the  presence  of  those  who
are  knowing  in  his  art .''  'Tis  to  the  ear  alone  he  applies  him-
self;  the  critical,  the  nice  ear. Let  his  hearers  be  of  what

^  [''He  will  seem  in  sport,  yet  really  be  toiling." — Hor.  Epist.  ii.  ii.
124.]

2  ["  So  that  any  man  may  hope  the  same  success,  toil  greatly,  and
work  in  vain  at  the  same  task, — so  great  is  the  might  of  the  sequence  and
connection  in  writing." — Hor.  De  Arte  Poet.  240-242.]

152


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

character  they  please :  be  they  naturally  austere,  morose,  or
rigid ;  no  matter,  so  they  are  critics ;  able  to  censure,  remark
and  sound  every  accord  and  symphony.  What  is  there  mortifies
the  good  painter  more  than  when  amidst  his  admiring  spectators
there  is  not  one  present  who  has  been  used  to  compare  the
hands  of  different  masters,  or  has  an  eye  to  distinguish  the
advantages  or  defects  of  every  style  ?  Through  all  the  inferior
orders  of  mechanics,  the  rule  is  found  to  hold  the  same.  In
every  science,  every  art,  the  real  masters  or  proficients  rejoice
in  nothing  more  than  in  the  thorough  search  and  examination
of  their  performances,  by  all  the  rules  of  art  and  nicest  criticism.
Why  therefore  (in  the  Muses'  name  ! )  is  it  not  the  same  with
our  pretenders  to  the  writing  art,  our  poets,  and  prose  authors
in  every  kind  ?  Why  in  this  profession  are  we  found  such
critic-haters,  and  indulged  in  this  unlearned  aversion,  unless
it  be  taken  for  granted  that  as  wit  and  learning  stand  at
present  in  our  nation,  we  are  still  upon  the  foot  of  empirics
and  mountebanks  ?

From  these  considerations  I  take  upon  me  absolutely  to
condemn  the  fashionable  and  prevailing  custom  of  inveighing
against  critics  as  the  common  enemies,  the  pests  and  incendi-
aries of  the  commonwealth  of  Wit  and  Letters.  I  assert,  on  the
contrary,  that  they  are  the  props  and  pillars  of  this  building ;
and  that  without  the  encouragement  and  propagation  of  such
a  race,  we  should  remain  as  Gothic  architects  as  ever.

In  the  weaker  and  more  imperfect  societies  of  mankind,^  such
as  those  composed  of  federate  tribes,  or  mixed  colonies,  scarce
settled  in  their  new  seats,  it  might  pass  for  sufficient  good-
fortune  if  the  people  proved  only  so  far  masters  of  language
as  to  be  able  to  understand  one  another,  in  order  to  confer
about  their  wants,  and  provide  for  their  common  necessities.
Their  exposed  and  indigent  state  could  not  be  presumed  to
afford  them  either  that  full  leisure  or  easy  disposition  which  was
requisite  to  raise  them  to  any  curiosity  of  speculation.  They
^  As  to  this,  and  what  remains  of  the  section,  see  Misc.  iii.  ch.  i.

153


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

who  were  neither  safe  from  violence,  nor  secure  of  plenty,  were
unlikely  to  engage  in  unnecessary  arts.  Nor  could  it  be  ex-
pected they  should  turn  their  attention  towards  the  numbers  of
their  language,  and  the  harmonious  sounds  which  they  accidentally
emitted.  But  when,  in  process  of  time,  the  affairs  of  the  society
were  settled  on  an  easy  and  secure  foundation ;  when  debates
and  discourses  on  these  subjects  of  common  interest  and  public
good  were  grown  familiar ;  and  the  speeches  of  prime  men  and
leaders  were  considered  and  compared  together,  there  would
naturally  be  observed  not  only  a  more  agreeable  measure  of
sound,  but  a  happier  and  more  easy  rangement  of  thoughts,  in
one  speaker  than  in  another.

It  may  be  easily  perceived  from  hence  that  the  goddess
Persuasion  must  have  been  in  a  manner  the  mother  of  poetry,
rhetoric,  music,  and  the  other  kindred  arts.  For  'tis  apparent
that  where  chief  men  and  leaders  had  the  strongest  interest  to
persuade,  they  used  the  highest  endeavours  to  please.  So  that
in  such  a  state  or  polity  as  has  been  described,  not  only  the
best  order  of  thought  and  turn  of  fancy,  but  the  most  soft  and
inviting  numbers,  must  have  been  employed  to  charm  the  public
ear,  and  to  incline  the  heart  by  the  agreeableness  of  expression.

Almost  all  the  ancient  masters  of  this  sort  were  said  to  have
been  musicians.  And  tradition,  which  soon  grew  fabulous,
could  not  better  represent  the  first  founders  or  establishers  of
these  larger  societies  than  as  real  songsters,  who,  by  the  power
of  their  voice  and  lyre,  could  charm  the  wildest  beasts,  and  draw
the  rude  forests  and  rocks  into  the  form  of  fairest  cities.  Nor
can  it  be  doubted  that  the  same  artists,  who  so  industriously
applied  themselves  to  study  the  numbers  of  speech,  must  have
made  proportionable  improvements  in  the  study  of  mere  sounds
and  natural  harmony,  which  of  itself  must  have  considerably
contributed  towards  the  softening  the  rude  mannei-s  and  harsh
temper  of  their  new  people.

If  therefore  it  so  happened  in  these  free  communities,  made
by consent  and voluntary association,  that  after  awhile  the

154


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

power  of  one  or  of  a  few  grew  prevalent  over  the  rest ;  if  force
took  place,  and  the  affairs  of  the  society  were  administered
without  their  concurrence  by  the  influence  of  awe  and  terror ;
it  followed  that  these  pathetic  sciences  and  arts  of  speech  were
little  cultivated  since  they  were  of  little  use.  But  where
persuasion  was  the  chief  means  of  guiding  the  society ;  where
the  people  were  to  be  convinced  before  they  acted ;  there
elocution  became  considerable,  there  orators  and  bards  were
heard,  and  the  chief  geniuses  and  sages  of  the  nation  betook
themselves  to  the  study  of  those  arts  by  which  the  people  were
rendered  more  treatable  in  a  way  of  reason  and  understanding,
and  more  subject  to  be  led  by  men  of  science  and  erudition.
The  more  these  artists  courted  the  public,  the  more  they  in-
structed it.  In  such  constitutions  as  these  'twas  the  interest
of  the  wise  and  able  that  the  community  should  be  judges  of
ability  and  wisdom.  The  high  esteem  of  ingenuity  was  what
advanced  the  ingenious  to  the  gi'eatest  honours.  And  they
who  rose  by  science  and  politeness  in  the  higher  arts  could  not
fail  to  promote  that  taste  and  relish  to  which  they  owed  their
personal  distinction  and  pre-eminence.

Hence  it  is  that  those  arts  have  been  delivered  to  us  in  such
perfection  by  free  nations,  who  from  the  nature  of  their
government,  as  from  a  proper  soil,  produced  the  generous  plants ;
whilst  the  mightiest  bodies  and  vastest  empires,  governed  by
force  and  a  despotic  poAver,  could,  after  ages  of  peace  and  leisure,
produce  no  other  than  what  was  deformed  and  barbarous  of  the
kind.

When  the  persuasive  arts  were  grown  thus  into  repute,  and
the  power  of  moving  the  affections  become  the  study  and
emulation  of  the  forward  wits  and  aspiring  geniuses  of  the
times,  it  would  necessarily  happen  that  many  geniuses  of  equal
size  and  strength,  though  less  covetous  of  public  applause,  of
power,  or  of  influence  over  mankind,  would  content  themselves
with  the  contemplation  merely  of  these  enchanting  arts.  These
they  would  the  better  enjoy  the  more  they  refined  their  taste

155


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  cultivated  their  ear.  For  to  all  music  there  must  be  an
ear  proportionable.  There  must  be  an  art  of  hearing  found
ere  the  performing  arts  can  have  their  due  effect,  or  anything
exquisite  in  the  kind  be  felt  or  comprehended.  The  just  per-
formers therefore  in  each  art  would  naturally  be  the  most
desirous  of  improving  and  refining  the  public  ear,  which  they
could  no  way  so  well  effect  as  by  the  help  of  those  latter  geniuses,
who  were  in  a  manner  their  interpreters  to  the  people,  and
who  by  their  example  taught  the  public  to  discover  what  was
just  and  excellent  in  each  perfonnance.

Hence  was  the  origin  of  critics,  who,  as  arts  and  sciences
advanced,  would  necessarily  come  withal  into  repute,  and  being
heard  with  satisfaction  in  their  turn,  were  at  length  tempted  to
become  authors  and  appear  in  public.  These  were  honoured
with  the  name  of  Sophists :  a  character  which  in  early  times  was
highly  respected.  Nor  did  the  gravest  philosophers,  who  were
censors  of  manners  and  critics  of  a  higher  degree,  disdain  to
exert  their  criticism  in  the  inferior  arts,  especially  in  those
relating  to  speech  and  the  power  of  argument  and  persuasion.

When  such  a  race  as  this  was  once  risen,  'twas  no  longer
possible  to  impose  on  mankind  by  what  was  specious  and  pre-
tending. The  public  would  be  paid  in  no  false  wit  or  jingling
eloquence.  Where  the  learned  critics  were  so  well  received,  and
philosophers  themselves  disdained  not  to  be  of  the  number,
there  could  not  fail  to  arise  critics  of  an  inferior  order  who
would  subdivide  the  several  provinces  of  this  empire.  Etymo-
logists, philologists,  grammarians,  rhetoricians,  and  others  of
considerable  note  and  eminent  in  their  degree,  would  everywhere
appear,  and  vindicate  the  truth  and  justice  of  their  art  by
revealing  the  hidden  beauties  which  lay  in  the  works  of  just
performers,  and  by  exposing  the  weak  sides,  false  ornaments,
and  affected  graces  of  mere  pretenders.  Nothing  of  what  we
call  sophistry  in  argument  or  bombast  in  style,  nothing  of  the
effeminate  kind  or  of  the  false  tender,  the  pointed  witticism,
the  disjointed  thought,  the  crowded  simile,  or  the  mixed  meta-

156


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

phor,  could  pass  even  on  the  common  ear ;  whilst  the  notaiies,
the  expositors  and  prompters  above  mentioned,  were  everywhere
at  hand  and  ready  to  explode  the  unnatural  manner.

'Tis  easy  to  imagine  that,  amidst  the  several  styles  and
manners  of  discourse  or  writing,  the  easiest  attained  and  earliest
practised  was  the  miraculous,  the  pompous,  or  what  we  generally
call  the  sublime.  Astonishment  is  of  all  other  passions  the
easiest  raised  in  raw  and  unexperienced  mankind.  Children  in
their  earliest  infancy  are  entertained  in  this  manner ;  and  the
known  way  of  pleasing  such  as  these  is  to  make  them  wonder,
and  lead  the  way  for  them  in  this  passion  by  a  feigned  surprise
at  the  miraculous  objects  we  set  before  them.  The  best  music
of  barbarians  is  hideous  and  astonishing  sounds.  And  the  fine
sights  of  Indians  are  enormous  figures,  various  odd  and  glaring
colours,  and  whatever  of  that  sort  is  amazingly  beheld  with  a
kind  of  horror  and  consternation.

In  poetry  and  studied  prose  the  astonishing  part,  or  what
commonly  passes  for  sublime,  is  formed  by  the  variety  of  figures,
the  multiplicity  of  metaphors,^  and  by  quitting  as  much  as

^  X^|ewj  5^  dperrj  <Ta<p^  Kal  /ht;  TaireiVT]v  etvai'  ffatpeaT&Tri  fjLkv  oCv  iariv  ij  iK  tCov
Kvplwv  dvofidrup,  dXXd  raveivq.  .  .  .  aefivr]  5^  Kal  i^aWdrrovcra  rb  iSiuTiKbv,  i)  rois
^eviKois  KexpVM^'^-  ^«'"c6«'  5^  \4yw,  yXuTrav,  Kal  H€Ta<t>opb.v ,  koI  iviKraatv,  Kal  vav
t6  irapd  rb  Kijpiov.  dXX'  iv  ris  dfj.a  diravra  TotaOra  iroi-fjar],  ij  atviy/JU  iarai,  rj
^ap^apifffibs.  dv  fxev  odv  iK  fj.eTa<popC>v,  alviypta,  edv  di  (k  yXwrrup,  /Sa/J/Sopt-
afibs.  [''The  excellence  of  diction  is  to  be  clear  without  being  mean.
Clearest  is  the  diction  which  is  made  up  of  usual  words,  but  it  is  mean.  .  .  .
That  is  majestic  and  free  from  commonplace  which  uses  strange  words.
By  strange  I  mean  out-of-the-way  words,  or  metaphorical,  or  extended  in
usage ;  in  fact  all  which  are  unusual.  But  if  a  man  compose  in  such  words
only,  his  composition  will  be  either  a  riddle  or  gibberish  :  if  he  compose
in  metaphors,  a  riddle ;  if  in  out-of-the-way  words,  gibberish  too. " — Arist.
Poet,  xxii.]  This  the  same  master-critic  explains  further  in  his  Rhetorics,
III.  i.,  where  he  refers  to  these  passages  of  his  Poetics.  iirel  8'  ol
ironp'al  Xiyomes  einfidr]  5td  Ti)v  Xi^iv  iddKovv  voplaacrdai  rrivSe  Trjv  db^av,  Sid  tovto
irotijrtKTj  irpdrrt)  iyivero  \i^ti,  .  .  .  Kal  vvv  in  ol  iroWol  tCiv  diraiSeinuv  roiis  toiov-
Touj  otovrai  SiaX^yeffdai  KdWiffra.  tovto  S'  oiiK  iffTiv.  .  .  .  oii8i  ydp  ol  rdj  Tpayifi-
dlai  -TTOioOcTes  in  xp^vrat  rbv  avrbv  rpbirov  dXX'  Cxxirep  Kal  iK  tQv  rerpanirpuv  els  rd
lafipeTov  fieri^riffav  did  rb  T<p  Xbycp  tovto  tup  fiirpup  ofjLOibTaTOV  elvai  twp  AXKuv,

157


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

possible  the  natural  and  easy  way  of  expression  for  that  which
is  most  unlike  to  humanity  or  ordinary  use.  This  the  prince  of
critics  assures  us  to  have  been  the  manner  of  the  earliest  poets,
before  the  age  of  Homer,  or  till  such  time  as  this  father-poet
came  into  repute,  who  deposed  that  spurious  race  and  gave  rise
to  a  legitimate  and  genuine  kind.  He  retained  only  what  was
decent  of  the  figurative  or  metaphoric  style,  introduced  the
natural  and  simple,  and  turned  his  thoughts  towards  the  real
beauty  of  composition,  the  unity  of  design,  the  truth  of  char-
acters, and  the  just  imitation  of  Nature  in  each  particular.

The  manner  of  this  father-poet  was  afterwards  variously
imitated,  and  divided  into  several  shares ;  especially  when  it
came  to  be  copied  in  dramatic.  Tragedy  came  first,  and  took
what  was  most  solemn  and  sublime.  In  this  part  the  poets
succeeded  sooner  than  in  Comedy  or  the  facetious  kind ;  as  was
natural  indeed  to  suppose,  since  this  was  in  reality  the  easiest
manner  of  the  two,  and  capable  of  being  brought  the  soonest  to
perfection. For  so  the  same  prince  of  critics  ^  sufficiently  informs

oOtw  Kal  Twv  dvofidruv  dtpelKaffiP,  Saa  irapk  r7]v  didXeKrSv  iffriv.  .  .  .  Kal  fri  vvv  ol
tA  e^dfierpa  TrotoOfres  d(}>i)Ka<n,  Si6  yeKoiov  fiifieiadai  toittouj  ol  avrol  ovk  ?ti  xP^"^*"'^
iKelptfi  Tip  rpdirij).  ["  But  as  the  poets,  while  uttering  simple  things,  were
thought  to  have  acquired  a  reputation  through  their  style,  the  first
(rhetorical)  style  was  poetic  in  character  .  .  .  ;  and  even  now  most  un-
educated men  think  that  speakers  of  that  sort  speak  best.  But  this  is  not
so.  .  .  .  For  not  even  writers  of  tragedy  use  it  any  longer  in  the  same
way,  but,  just  as  they  changed  from  tetrameter  to  iambic  metre  because
the  latter  is  the  metre  most  like  prose,  so  too  they  have  abandoned  such
terms  as  are  alien  to  the  style  of  conversation  .  .  .  and  even  the  writers
of  hexameters  have  abandoned  them.  So  it  is  absurd  to  copy  men  who
themselves  no  longer  follow  this  fashion."]  That  among  the  early  re-
formers of  this  bombastic  manner  he  places  Homer  as  the  chief,  we  may
see  easily  in  his  Poetics.  As  particularly  in  that  passage,  ?rt  rds  Siavolas  kcU
TTi]v  \i^iv  Hx^if  KaXQs,  oh  dvacnv  "OfM-rjpos  K^xPV'o-h  Kal  vpCoroi  Kal  iKavQi.  .  .  .
Tpbi  di  ToiiTOii  X^^et  Kal  diavolq.  irdpras  virep^i^XriKf.  ["  Further,  the  thoughts
and  the  diction  must  be  well  chosen.  In  all  these  points  Homer  set,
and  well  set,  the  example.  .  .  .  Moreover  be  exceeds  all  in  diction  and
thought." — Arist.  Poet,  xxiv,]

•  yevofiivrjs  oSy  iw'  dpxv^  auroffxeStao-TiK^j,  Kal  airr)  Kal  ■^  KU/xtfdla, etc. — De

158


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

us.  And  'tis  highly  worth  remarking,  what  this  mighty  genius
and  judge  of  art  declares  concerning  Tragedy :  that  whatever
idea  might  be  formed  of  the  utmost  perfection  of  this  kind  of
poem,  it  could  in  practice  rise  no  higher  than  it  had  been
already  can-ied  in  his  time ;  ^  "  having  at  length,"  says  he,
"  attained  its  ends,  and  being  apparently  consummate  in  itself,"
But  for  Comedy,  it  seems,  "'twas  still  in  hand. It  had  been

Poet.  iv.  When  he  has  compared  both  this  and  Tragedy  together,  he  re-
capitulates in  his  next  chapter,  al  fji^v  oHv  ttjs  rpayipdias  fiera^affeis,  /cat  di  uv
iyivovTO,  oil  \e\ifi0a<Tiv.  i]  5i  KUfj-ifdia  dicL  rb  fii)  airovSA^eaOai  i^  o.pxv^  eXaOev.  Kal
yap  xop^"  KOfupSiov  6\pi  irore  6  Apxuv  edwKev,  etc. ,  see  Misc.  iii.  ch.  i.  in  the
notes.  [(i.)  "Both  Tragedy  and  Comedy  were  at  first  improvisations
merely." — Arist.  Poet.  iv.  (ii.)  "  The  changes  which  passed  over  Tragedy,
and  the  authors  of  them,  are  known  ;  but  Comedy,  because  it  was  not  at
first  taken  seriously,  passed  unnoticed.  For  only  late  did  the  Archon
grant  a  comic  chorus,"  etc. — Arist.  Poet,  v.]

^  Kal  ttoXXAj  /«Ta/3oX4y  fiera^aXovtra  i)  rpayipdla  iiraiffaro,  iirel  e<rxe  ttjv  airrTJs
(piiffiv,  iv.  So  true  a  prophet  as  well  as  critic  was  this  great  man.  For  by
the  event  it  appeared  that  Tragedy  being  raised  to  its  height  by  Sophocles
and  Euripides,  and  no  room  left  for  further  excellence  or  emulation,  there
were  no  more  tragic  poets  besides  these  endured  after  the  author's  time.
Whilst  Comedy  went  on  improving  still  to  the  second  and  third  degree.
Tragedy  finished  its  course  under  Euripides  ;  whom  though  our  great
author  criticises  with  the  utmost  severity  in  his  Poetics,  yet  he  plainly
enough  confesses  to  have  carried  the  style  of  Tragedy  to  its  full  height  and
dignity.  For  as  to  the  reformation  which  that  poet  made  in  the  use  of  the
sublime  and  figurative  speech  in  general,  see  what  our  discerning  author
says  in  his  Rhetorics;  where  he  strives  to  show  the  impertinence  and
nauseousness  of  the  florid  speakers,  and  such  as  understood  not  the  use  of
the  simple  and  natural  manner.  "  The  just  masters  and  right  managers
of  the  poetic  or  high  style  should  learn,"  says  he,  "  how  to  conceal  the
manner  as  much  as  possible."  Sib  Sd  Xavddveiv  Troioupxas,  Kal  /j.ri  SoKeTv  X^Yeti*
irevXaa/jLivus,  dXXd  iretpvKbTUs,  toOto  yhp  inOavbv,  eKeivo  8k  rovvavrlov,  wj  yb.p  irpbi
iwi^ovKeiovTa  Sia^iWovrai,  KaOdirep  wpbs  roiis  olvovs  rovi  fiefuyn^vovi,  Kal  otov  ij
QeoSdipov  (pwvTj  Triirovde  irpbs  ttji'  tuv  &Wuv  viroKpirGiv '  t)  fiiv  ykp  tov  \iyovTo%  ioiKtv
elvai,  al  5'  aWbrpiat..  /cX^TrreToi  5'  ev,  idv  rit  ^k  ttjs  elwdvlas  SiaXeKTov  iKX^yuv  cvv-
Tidrj'  6  wep  EvpiviSt]s  iroiet.  Kal  vveSei^e  irpGxroi.  ["  So  we  must  do  it  unobserved
and  have  the  appearance  of  speaking  not  in  an  afl^ected,  but  in  a  natural
way  ;  for  the  one  carries  conviction,  the  other  the  reverse.  For  (with  the
latter)  men  are  on  their  g^ard,  suspecting  deceit,  as  they  would  be  against

159


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

already  in  some  manner  reduced ;  but,  as  he  plainly  insinuates,
it  lay  yet  unfinished,  notwithstanding  the  witty  labours  of  an
Aristophanes,  and  the  other  comic  poets  of  the  first  manner,
who  had  flourished  a  whole  age  before  this  critic.  As  perfect
as  were  those  wits  in  style  and  language,  and  as  fertile  in  all
the  varieties  and  turns  of  humour,  yet  the  truth  of  characters^
the  beauty  of  order,  and  the  simple  imitation  of  Nature  were  in
a  manner  wholly  unknown  to  them,  or  through  petulancy  or
debauch  of  humour  were,  it  seems,  neglected  and  set  aside.  A
Menander  had  not  as  yet  appeared ;  who  arose  soon  after,  to
accomplish  the  prophecy  of  our  grand  master  of  art  and  con-
summate philologist.

Comedy^  had  at  this  time  done  little  more  than  what  the
ancient  parodies  ^  had  done  before  it.  'Twas  of  admirable  use
to  explode  the  false  sublime  of  early  poets,  and  such  as  in  its
own  age  were  on  every  occasion  ready  to  relapse  into  that  vicious
manner.  The  good  tragedians  themselves  could  hardly  escape
its  lashes. The  pompous  orators  were  its  never-failing  subjects.

adulterated  wines.  Your  style  should  be  like  the  voice  of  Theodorus  as
compared  with  that  of  other  actors ;  for  his  seemed  the  very  voice  of  the
character,  theirs  foreign  to  it.  The  trick  is  successfully  performed  if  a
man  make  up  his  diction  by  choosing  from  ordinary  conversation.  Euri-
pides does  this,  and  first  gave  the  suggestion." — Arist.  Rhet.  iii.  ii.  4,  5.]

1  wawep  Si  Kal  ret  ffirovSaia  fidXiaTa  ttoii/ttjs  "0/jirjpos  ^u  {fibvos  yap  o&x.  ^'  ^5,
dXV  6ti  Kal  fUfjLT^aeis  Spa/zanxAj  iirolijaev)  oiiro)  Kal  rd  ttjs  Ku/xtfiSlas  (XxrifJ-aTa  irpCrroi
iiiridei^ev.  ["  And,  just  as  Homer  is  especially  a  poet  in  the  serious  vein
(for  he  composed  his  imitations  not  only  well,  but  also  in  dramatic  form),
so  too  he  first  sketched  the  outline  of  Comedy." — Arist.  Poet,  iv.]  No
wonder  if,  in  this  descent.  Comedy  came  late.  See  below,  p.  166,  in  the
notes,  and  above,  p.  130.

2  The  parodies  were  very  ancient,  but  they  were  in  reality  no  other
than  mere  burlesque  or  farce.  Comedy,  which  borrowed  something  from
those  thumours,  as  well  as  from  the  Phallica  below  mentioned,  was  not,
however,  raised  to  any  form  or  shape  of  art  (as  said  above)  till  about  the
time  of  Aristophanes,  who  was  the  first  model,  and  a  beginner  of  the  kind  ;
at  the  same  time  that  Tragedy  had  undergone  all  its  changes,  and  was
already  come  to  its  last  perfection,  as  the  grand  critic  has  shown  us,  and
as  our  other  authorities  plainly  evince.

160


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

Everything  which  might  be  imposing,  by  a  false  gravity  or
solemnity,  was  forced  to  endure  the  trial  of  this  touchstone.
Mannei-s  and  characters,  as  well  as  speech  and  writings,  were
discussed  with  the  greatest  freedom.  Nothing  could  be  better
fitted  than  this  genius  of  wit  to  unmask  the  face  of  things,  and
remove  those  larvae  naturally  formed  from  the  tragic  manner
and  pompous  style  which  had  preceded.

Et  docuit  magnumque  loqui,  nitique  cothumo.
Suceessit  vetus  his  comoedia.i

'Twas  not  by  chance  that  this  succession  happened  in  Greece
after  the  manner  described,  but  rather  through  necessity,  and
from  the  reason  and  nature  of  things.  ^  For  in  healthy  bodies
Nature  dictates  remedies  of  her  own,  and  provides  for  the  cure
of  what  has  happened  amiss  in  the  growth  and  progress  of  a

^  ["  (Aeschylus)  taught  how  to  use  high-flown  language  and  to  strut  in
the  buskin.  After  them  (Aeschylus  and  Thespis)  came  the  Old  Comedy."
— Hor.  A.  P.  280,  281.]  The  immediate  preceding  verses  of  Horace,  after
his  having  spoken  of  the  first  tragedy  under  Thespis,  are  : —

Post  hunc  personae  pallaeque  repertor  honestae
Aeschylus,  et  modicis  instravit  pulpita  tignis
Et  docuit,  etc.

["  After  him  (Thespis)  Aeschylus,  inventor  of  the  mask  and  the  becoming
robe,  laid  his  stage  upon  beams  of  moderate  height,"  etc. — Hor.  A.  P.  278,
279.]  Before  the  time  of  Thespis,  Tragedy  indeed  was  said  to  be,  as  Horace
calls  it  here  (in  a  concise  way),  ignotum  genus.  It  lay  in  a  kind  of  chaos  in-
termixed with  other  kinds,  and  hardly  distinguishable  by  its  gravity  and
pomp  from  the  humours  which  gave  rise  afterwards  to  Comedy.  But  in  a
strict  historical  sense,  as  we  find  Plato  speaking  in  his  Minos,  Tragedy  was
of  ancienter  date,  and  even  of  the  very  ancientest  with  the  Athenians.
His  words  are,  •^  Si  rpayipSia  iari  iraXaibv  iv6a.Se,  oix  wj  oiovrat  iird  QeawiSos
&p^afjJvr)  ov5'  d7r6  ^pvvixov.  dXV  el  deXeii  ivvoijaai,  irdvv  waXaibp  airrb  evp^aets  bv
rrjirSe  t^s  7r6Xews  eiifyrjfjLa.  ["^  But  Tragedy  is  quite  old  here  and  did  not,  as
people  think,  begin  with  Thespis  or  Phrynichus.  But  if  you  choose  to
consider,  you  will  find  it  a  very  old  invention  of  this  city." — Plato  (.''),  Minos,
820  E.]

2  Of  this  subject  see  more  in  Misc.  iii.  ch.  i.

VOL.  I  161  M


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

constitution.  The  affairs  of  this  free  people  being  in  the
increase,  and  their  ability  and  judgment  every  day  improving
as  Letters  and  Arts  advanced,  they  would  of  course  find  in
themselves  a  strength  of  nature,  which  by  the  help  of  good
ferments  and  a  wholesome  opposition  of  humours  would  correct
in  one  way  whatever  was  excessive  or  peccant  (as  physicians  say)
in  another.  Thus  the  florid  and  over-sanguine  humour  of  the
high  style  was  allayed  by  something  of  a  contrary  nature.  The
comic  genius  was  applied  as  a  kind  of  caustic  to  those  exuber-
ances and  funguses  of  the  swoln  dialect  and  magnificent  manner
of  speech.  But  after  awhile  even  this  remedy  itself  was  found
to  turn  into  a  disease,  as  medicines,  we  know,  grow  corrosive
when  the  fouler  matters  on  which  they  wrought  are  sufficiently
purged  and  the  obstructions  removed.

In  vitium  libertas  excidit,  et  vim
Dignara  lege  regi.^

'Tis  a  great  error  to  suppose,  as  some  have  done,  that  the
restraining  this  licentious  manner  of  wit  by  law  was  a  violation
of  the  liberty  of  the  Athenian  state,  or  an  effect  merely  of  the
power  of  foreigners,  whom  it  little  concerned  after  what  manner
those  citizens  treated  one  another  in  their  comedies,  or  what
sort  of  wit  or  humour  they  made  choice  of  for  their  ordinary
diversions.  If  upon  a  change  of  government,  as  during  the
usurpation  of  the  Thirty,  or  when  that  nation  was  humbled  at
any  time  either  by  a  Philip,  an  Alexander,  or  an  Antipater,
they  had  been  forced  against  their  wills  to  enact  such  laws  as
these,  "'tis  certain  they  would  have  soon  repealed  them  when
those  terrors  were  removed  (as  they  soon  were)  and  the  people

^  It  follows —

Lex  est  accepta^  chorusque
Turpiter  obticuit,  sublato  jure  nocendi.

[''Freedom  slipped  into  License  and  a  violence  which  called  for  legal
restraint.  The  law  was  submitted  to,  and  the  chorus  fell  scandalously
silent,  because  it  might  not  sting." — Hor.  A.  P.  282-284.]

162


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

restored  to  their  former  liberties.  For  notwithstanding  what
this  nation  suffered  outwardly,  by  several  shocks  received  from
foreign  states,  notwithstanding  the  dominion  and  power  they
lost  abroad,  they  preserved  the  same  government  at  home.  And
how  passionately  interested  they  were  in  what  concerned  their
diversions  and  public  spectacles ;  how  jealous  and  full  of  emula-
tion in  what  related  to  their  poetry,  wit,  music,  and  other  arts,
in  which  they  excelled  all  other  nations ;  is  well  known  to
persons  who  have  any  comprehension  of  ancient  manners,  or
been  the  least  conversant  in  history.

Nothing  therefore  could  have  been  the  cause  of  these  public
decrees,  and  of  this  gradual  reform  in  the  commonwealth  of
wit,  beside  the  real  reform  of  taste  and  humour  in  the  common-
wealth or  government  itself.  Instead  of  any  abridgment,  'twas
in  reality  an  increase  of  liberty,  an  enlargement  of  the  security
of  property,  and  an  advancement  of  private  ease  and  personal
safety,  to  provide  against  what  was  injurious  to  the  good  name
and  reputation  of  every  citizen.  As  this  intelligence  in  life  and
mannei-s  grew  greater  in  that  experienced  people,  so  the  relish
of  wit  and  humour  would  naturally  in  proportion  be  more  refined.
Thus  Greece  in  general  grew  more  and  more  polite,  and  as  it
advanced  in  this  respect,  was  more  averse  to  the  obscene  buffoon-
ing manner.  The  Athenians  still  went  before  the  rest,  and  led
the  way  in  elegance  of  every  kind.  For  even  their  first  comedy
was  a  refinement  upon  some  iiTegular  attempts  which  had  been
made  in  that  dramatic  way.  And  the  grand  critic^  shows  us
that  in  his  own  time  the  Phallica,  or  scurrilous  and  obscene  farce,
prevailed  still,  and  had  the  countenance  of  the  magistrate  in
some  cities  of  Greece  who  were  behind  the  rest  in  this  reform  of
taste  and  manners.

1  Kal  ij  fji^v  airb  tQv  i^apx()vri>>v  fbv  SiBipafi^ov,  ij  8i  &w6  twv  tA  <paWiKd  A  #rt
Kal  vvv  iv  fl-oWats  tQ)v  TrbXeiov  dia/ifvei  vofii^ofieva,  Kard.  fUKphv  TjO^ifidTj,  etc.
["  Tragedy  began  with  the  leaders  of  the  dithyrambic  songs  ;  Comedy  with
the  leaders  of  the  Phallic  songs  which  are  still  customary  in  many  cities. "
— Arist.  Poet,  iv.]

163


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

But  what  is  yet  a  more  undeniable  evidence  of  this  natural
and  gradual  refinement  of  styles  and  manners  among  the
ancients,  particularly  in  what  concerned  their  stage,  is,  that
this  very  case  of  prohibition  and  restraint  happened  among  the
Romans  themselves,  where  no  effects  of  foreign  power  or  of  a
home  tyranny  can  be  pretended.  Their  Fescennine  and  Atellan
way  of  wit  was  in  early  days  prohibited,  and  laws  made  against
it  for  the  public's  sake  and  in  regard  to  the  welfare  of  the
community ;  such  licentiousness  having  been  found  in  reality
contrary  to  the  just  liberty  of  the  people.

Doluere  cruento
Dente  lacessiti ;  fuit  intactis  quoque  cura
Conditione  super  communi. Quin  etiam  lex
Poenaque  lata  male  quae  nollet  carmine  quemquam
Describi.^

In  defence  of  what  I  have  here  advanced,  I  could,  besides
the  authority  of  grave  historians  and  chronologists,^  produce

1  ["  Men  were  vexed  when  bitten  by  its  bloody  teeth  ;  the  unbitten  too
were  anxious  for  the  common  weal ;  and  even  a  law  and  penalty  were
enacted  against  libelling  any  one  in  verse." — Hor.  Ep.  ii.  i.  150-154.]

2  To  confirm  what  is  said  of  this  natural  succession  of  wit  and  style,
according  to  the  several  authorities  above  cited  in  the  immediate  preceding
notes,  see  Strabo.  ws  5'  elireiv,  6  irefdj  X67oy,  6  ye  KareffKevafffiivos,  fjUfiri/Ma  toO  iroii)-
TiKov  iffTi.  irpiiriffra  yip  i}  iroirjrt.Ki]  KaraaKevi)  irafnfKOev  eli  t6  fxiffov  koL  eiSoKlfi-ria-ev '
elra  iKelvT}v  fjufioi/iepoi,  Xijcayrfs  rb  fiirpov,  rSXXa  di  (pvXd^avres  tA  ironp-iKO,,  avviypa-
^j/av  ol  wepl  Kddfiov,  Kal  ^epeKid-qv,  Kal  'EKaratoi' '  clra  ol  Vcrrepov,  d<paipovvTes  del  ri
tG>v  TOioiruv,  d%  t6  vvv  elSoj  Ka.TijrYa.yov,  wj  hv  dvb  Otpovs  ti.v6s,  KaOdnep  &v  ris  Kal
T^v  KUfJUfidlav  (pair)  Xa^eTv  tt]v  auffracriv  dirb  riji  rpayifidias  Kal  tov  Kar'  airijv  ii^povs
Kara^i^affOeiffav  eli  rb  XoyoeiSis  vvvl  Ka\oij/j.evov.  ["  In  fact,  prose  speech  when
carefully  wrought  is  an  imitation  of  poetic.  For  in  the  first  instance
poetic  style  came  forward  and  gained  a  name,  and  then  Cadmus,  Phere-
cydes,  or  Hecataeus  wrote  in  imitation  thereof,  giving  up  the  metre,  but
keeping  other  poetic  features.  Later  writers  afterwards,  dropping  these
point  by  point,  brought  the  style  down  as  if  from  a  height  to  the  present
form,  just  as  we  might  say  that  Comedy  sprang  from  Tragedy  by  being
brought  down  from  Tragedy  and  its  elevation  to  what  is  now  called  prosaic."
—Strabo,  i.  p.  18.]

164


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

the  testimony  of  one  of  the  wisest  and  most  serious  of  ancient
authors,  whose  single  authority  would  be  acknowledged  to  have
equal  force  with  that  of  many  concurring  writers.  He  shows
us  that  this  first-formed  comedy  and  scheme  of  ludicrous  wit
was  introduced  upon  the  neck  of  the  Sublime}  The  familiar
airy  muse  was  privileged  as  a  sort  of  counter-pedagogue  against
the  pomp  and  formality  of  the  more  solemn  writers.  And
what  is  highly  remarkable,  our  author  shows  us  that  in  philo-
sophy itself  there  happened,  almost  at  the  very  same  time,  a
like  succession  of  wit  and  humour ;  when  in  opposition  to  the
sublime  philosopher,  and  afterwards  to  his  grave  disciple  and
successor  in  the  Academy,^  there  arose  a  comic  philosophy  in  the
person  of  another  master  and  other  disciples,  who  personally,
as  well  as  in  their  writings,  were  set  in  direct  opposition  to  the

1  irpCrrov  al  rpayifiSiai  irap-fixSw^^  vTrofivTjdTiKal  tQv  (xvfi^aivhvTUJv,  Koi  Sri  ravra
ovTu  vi(pvKe  yiveffOai,  Kal  Sri  oh  eirl  rijs  aKriviji  \l/vxay<i)yeiffde,  toOtois  /xt)  S-x^^ffOe
iirl  TTJs  fiel^ovos  (Tkijj'tji.  .  •  .  fierci  S^  tijv  rpayifidlav  i}  dpxai-a  KUfj-CfjSla  iraprixOVj
irai5ayuyiKTjv  irapp-qaiav  ^x^^'^^i  'f^i  t^s  dTv<f)las  oiiK  dxpfrjarw^  5i'  axiTrji  t'^j  evdvppr]-
lAOffvvTjs  virofii/ivi/icrKovffa '  trpbs  ol6v  rt  Kai  Aioy^v-qs  rairrl  irapeXdfi^ave.  fierk  raOra  t'is
71  /ji^ffTi  KUfivSLa,  Kal  \otir6v  i]  via,  etc.  ["  First,  tragedies  were  brought  out
to  remind  you  of  what  happens,  and  to  remind  you  that  events  naturally
happen  thus,  and  that  when  a  thing  has  amused  you  on  the  stage,  you
must  not  be  shocked  at  it  on  the  larger  stage.  .  .  .  And  after  Tragedy  the
Old  Comedy  was  brought  out,  using  the  freedom  of  a  teacher,  and  usefully
warning  us  by  its  plain  speech  against  pride.  (For  some  such  purpose
used  Diogenes  to  borrow  these  points. )  After  this,  observe  what  was  the
Middle  Comedy  and  the  New,"  etc. — Marcus  Aurelius,  xi.  6.]

oxjTus  Set  Trap'  8\ov  rbv  §iov  iroieiv,  Kai  Sirov  Xiav  d^iSiriffTa  ra  irpdyfMTa  (pavrd-
l^erai,  diroyvpivodv  airrd,  koL  tt)v  eirriXeiav  ainCjv  Kadopdv,  Kal  r7}v  iaropiav,  e<p'  -g
aefjwvveTai.,  irepiaipeiv,  deivbs  yap  6  tiJ^os  irapa\oyi(TTT^s'  Kal  Sre  doKeis  /J-dKurra  vepl
TO.  ffirovdaia  KaraylueaOai,  Tore  /jAXiara  Karayorp-eijei.  Spa  yovv  6  K/mIttjj.  tI  irepl
a&rov  rod  ^voKpdrovs  "Kiyei.  ["  In  this  way  we  must  act  all  through  life,
and  where  things  seem  most  worthy  of  trust  we  must  strip  them  and  see
their  poorness,  and  get  rid  of  the  claptrap  of  which  they  are  so  proud.
For  pride  is  a  great  deceiver,  and  when  you  think  you  are  most  occupied
with  serious  things,  then  it  takes  you  in  most.  See  at  all  events  what
Crates  says  even  of  Xenocrates." — Mar.  Aur.  vi,  13.]

^  See  the  citations  immediately  preceding.

165


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

former ;  not  as  differing  in  opinions  or  maxims,^  but  in  their
style  and  manner;  in  the  turn  of  humour  and  method  of
instruction.

'Tis  pleasant  enough  to  consider  how  exact  the  resemblance
was  between  the  lineage  of  Philosophy  and  that  of  Poetry  as
derived  from  their  two  chief  founders  or  patriarchs,  in  whose
loins  the  several  races  lay  as  it  were  enclosed.  For  as  the
grand  poetic  sire  ^  was,  by  the  consent  of  all  antiquity,  allowed
to  have  furnished  subject  both  to  the  tragic,  the  comic,  and
every  other  kind  of  genuine  poetry,  so  the  philosophical
patriarch  in  the  same  manner,  containing  ^^^thin  himself  the
several  geniuses  of  Philosophy,  gave  rise  to  all  those  several
manners  in  which  that  science  was  delivered.

His  disciple  of  noble  birth  and  lofty  genius,  who  aspired  to
poetry  and  rhetoric,^  took  the  Sublime  part,  and  shone  above
his  other  condisciples.  He  of  mean  birth  and  poorest  circum-
stances, whose  constitution  as  well  as  condition  inclined  him

^  Tunica  distantia.  ["The  difference  being  one  of  dress  only." — Juv.
xiii.  122.]

2  See  above,  p.  160,  in  the  notes.  According  to  this  Homerical  lineage
of  Poetry,  Comedy  would  naturally  prove  the  Drama  of  latest  birth.  For
though  Aristotle  in  the  same  place  cites  Homer's  Margites  as  analogous  to
Comedy,  yet  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey,  in  which  the  heroic  style  prevails,
having  been  ever  highest  in  esteem,  were  likeliest  to  be  first  wrought  and
cultivated.

^  His  Dialogues  were  real  poems  (as  has  been  shown  above,  p.  127,  etc.)
This  may  easily  be  collected  from  the  Poetics  of  the  grand  master.  We
may  add  what  is  cited  by  Athenaeus  from  another  treatise  of  that  author,
6  Toi)i  dXXofy  ajraf ajrXcDs  KaKoXoyTjcas,  iv  fj^v  t-q  HoKinlq.  "O/xripov  iK^dWuv  Kal  t^v
fjLi/j.rp-iKriv  irol'qcn.v,  airbs  S^  [II\6.tuv]  rods  5to\670iis  ix.i/jL7]TiKu>i  ypi\(/a%,  &u  t^s  Idiai
0(55'  airris  euper-^s  iffTiv.  irpb  ybip  airroO  tov$'  edpe  rb  elSos  tQv  Xbyuv  6  Tiyi'oj  'AXe|a-
/levbs,  wj  Ni/cias  6  NtKaei)j  laropei  Kal  ^utLwv.  'ApttrTorAT/j  5^  iv  rifi  irepl  UoirjrQv
oCtwj  ypi<pei'  "  ovkovv  ovdi  imxArpovi  Toiis  KaXovfiivov^  2,(i)<ppovoi  MifMOVs  fii}  <f>ufi€f>
elxat  \6yovs  Kal  /u/i-qceii,  fj  tovs  ' AXe^a/j-evdv  tov  Tiijtov  roiit  wpurrovs  ypatpivras  rwf
'SiWKpariKQv  SiaXbyuv  ;  "  dvrt/cpuj  (pdaKwy  6  iroikvixadi<TTaTO%  'ApKrrorATjs  irpb  IlXd-
ruvos  diaX&yovs  yeypa<f>ivaL  rbv  'AKe^afievdv.  ["  (Plato)  the  man  who  vilified
others  in  general,  who  while  in  his  Republic  he  rejected  Homer  and  imita-
tive poetry,  himself  wrote  dialogues  in  imitative  style. Yet  he  did  not

166


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

most  to  the  way  we  call  satiric,  took  the  reproving  part,  which
in  his  better-humoured  and  more  agreeable  successor  turned
into  the  comic  kind,  and  went  upon  the  model  of  that  ancient
comedy  which  was  then  prevalent.^  But  another  noble  disciple,
whose  genius  was  towards  action,  and  who  proved  afterwards
the  greatest  hero  of  his  time,  took  the  genteeler  part  and  softer
manner.  He  joined  what  was  deepest  and  most  solid  in  philo-
sophy with  what  was  easiest  and  most  refined  in  breeding,  and
in  the  character  and  manner  of  a  gentleman.  Nothing  could
be  remoter  than  his  genius  was  from  the  scholastic,  the
rhetorical,  or  mere  poetic  kind.  He  was  as  distant  on  one
hand  from  the  sonorous,  high,  and  pompous  strain,  as  on  the
other  hand  from  the  ludicrous,  mimical,  or  satiric.

This  was  that  natural  and  simple  genius  of  antiquity,^
comprehended  by  so  few  and  so  little  relished  by  the  vulgar.
This  was  that  philosophical  Menander  of  earlier  time,  whose
works  one  may  wonder  to  see  preserved  from  the  same  fate,
since  in  the  darker  ages  through  which  they  passed  they  might
probably  be  alike  neglected,  on  the  account  of  their  like  sim-
plicity of  style  and  composition.

There  is,  besides  the  several  manners  of  writing  above
described,  another  of  considerable  authority  and  weight,  which
had  its  rise  chiefly  from  the  critical  art  itself,  and  from  the
more  accurate  inspection  into  the  works  of  preceding  masters.
The  grand  critic  of  whom  we  have  already  spoken  was  a  chief
and  leader  in  this  order  of  penmen.  For  though  the  Sophists
of  elder  time  had  treated  many  subjects  methodically  and  in
form,  yet  this  writer  was  the  first  who  gained  repute  in  the

invent  that  style.  For  Alexamenos  of  Teos  thought  of  it  before  him,  as
Nicias  of  Nicaea  and  Sotion  say.  Aristotle  too  writes  thus  in  his  book  on
Poets :  '  Therefore  we  must  not  say  that  the  so-called  mimes  of  Sophron  are
metrical  dialogues  or  imitations,  or  the  dialogues  of  Alexamenos  of  Teos,
which  were  the  earliest  written  of  the  Socratic  dialogues.'" — Athenaeus,
505.]

1  According  to  the  two  citations,  p.  165.

2  Xenophon. See  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.

167


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

methodic  kind.  As  the  talent  of  this  great  man  was  more
towards  polite  learning  and  the  arts  than  towards  the  deep  and
solid  parts  of  philosophy,  it  happened  that  in  his  school  there
was  more  care  taken  of  other  sciences  than  of  ethics,  dialect,  or
logic,  which  provinces  were  chiefly  cultivated  by  the  successors
of  the  Academy  and  Porch.

It  has  been  observed  of  this  methodic  or  scholastic  manner
that  it  naturally  befitted  an  author  who,  though  endowed  with
a  comprehensive  and  strong  genius,  was  not  in  himself  of  a
refined  temper,  blessed  by  the  Graces,  or  favoured  by  any  Muse ;
one  who  was  not  of  a  fruitful  imagination,  but  rather  dry  and
rigid,  yet  withal  acute  and  piercing,  accurate  and  distinct.  For
the  chief  nerve  and  sinew  of  this  style  consists  in  the  clear  division
and  partition  of  the  subjects.  Though  there  is  nothing  exalting
in  the  manner,  'tis  naturally  powerful  and  commanding,  and,
more  than  any  other,  subdues  the  mind  and  strengthens  its
determinations.  'Tis  from  this  genius  that  firm  conclusions
and  steady  maxims  are  best  formed,  which  if  solidly  built,  and
on  sure  ground,  are  the  shortest  and  best  guides  towards  wisdom
and  ability  in  every  kind ;  but  if  defective  or  unsound  in  the
least  part,  must  of  necessity  lead  us  to  the  grossest  absurdities
and  stiffest  pedantry  and  conceit.

Now  though  every  other  style  and  genuine  manner  of  com-
position has  its  order  and  method  as  well  as  this  Avhich,  in  a
peculiar  sense,  we  call  the  methodic,  yet  it  is  this  manner  alone
which  professes  method,  dissects  itself  in  parts,  and  makes  its
own  anatomy.  The  sublime  can  no  way  condescend  thus,  or
bear  to  be  suspended  in  its  impetuous  course.  The  comic  or
derisory  manner  is  farther  still  from  making  show  of  method.
Tis  then,  if  ever,  that  it  presumes  to  give  itself  this  wise  air,
when  its  design  is  to  expose  the  thing  itself,  and  ridicule  the
formality  and  sophistry  so  often  sheltered  beneath  it.  The
simple  manner,  which  being  the  strictest  imitation  of  Nature
should  of  right  be  the  completest  in  the  distribution  of  its
parts  and  symmetry  of  its  whole,  is  yet  so  far  from  making

168


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

any  ostentation  of  method,  that  it  conceals  the  artifice  as  much
as  possible,  endeavouring  only  to  express  the  effect  of  art
under  the  appearance  of  the  greatest  ease  and  negligence.
And  even  when  it  assumes  the  censuring  or  reproving  part,  it
does  it  in  the  most  concealed  and  gentle  way.

The  authors  indeed  of  our  age  are  as  little  capable  of
receiving  as  of  giving  advice  in  such  a  way  as  this ;  so  little  is
the  general  palate  formed  as  yet  to  a  taste  of  real  simplicity.
As  for  the  Sublime,  though  it  be  often  the  subject  of  criticism,
it  can  never  be  the  manner  or  afford  the  means.  The  way  of
form  and  method,  the  didactive  or  perceptive  manner,  as  it  has
been  usually  practised  amongst  us,  and  as  our  ears  have  been
long  accustomed,  has  so  little  force  towards  the  winning  our
attention,  that  it  is  apter  to  tire  us  than  the  metre  of  an  old
ballad.  We  no  sooner  hear  the  theme  propounded,  the  subject
divided  and  subdivided  (with  first  of  the  first  and  so  forth,  as
order  requires),  than  instantly  we  begin  a  strife  with  Nature,
who  otherwise  might  surprise  us  in  the  soft  fetters  of  sleep,  to
the  great  disgrace  of  the  orator  and  scandal  of  the  audience.
The  only  manner  left  in  which  criticism  can  have  its  just  force
amongst  us  is  the  ancient  comic ;  of  which  kind  were  the  first
Roman  miscellanies  or  satiric  pieces ;  a  sort  of  original  writing
of  their  own,  refined  afterwards  by  the  best  genius  and  politest
poet  of  that  nation,  who,  notwithstanding,  owns  the  manner
to  have  been  taken  from  the  Greek  comedy  above  mentioned.
And  if  our  home  wits  would  refine  upon  this  pattern,  they
might  perhaps  meet  with  considerable  success.

In  effect  we  may  observe  that  in  our  own  nation  the  most
successful  criticism  or  method  of  refutation  is  that  which
borders  most  on  the  manner  of  the  earliest  Greek  comedy.
The  highly-rated  burlesque  poem,^  written  on  the  subject  of
our  religious  controversies  in  the  last  age,  is  a  sufficient  token
of  this  kind. And  that  justly  admired  piece  of  comic  wit^

1  Hudibras.

2  The  Rehearsal. See  Misc.  v.  ch.  ii.  in  the  notes.

169


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

given  us  some  time  after  by  an  author  of  the  highest  quality,
has  furnished  our  best  wits  in  all  their  controversies,  even  in
religion  and  politics,  as  well  as  in  the  affairs  of  wit  and  learn-
ing, with  the  most  effectual  and  entertaining  method  of
exposing  folly,  pedantry,  false  reason  and  ill  writing.  And
without  some  such  tolerated  manner  of  criticism  as  this,  how
grossly  we  might  have  been  imposed  on,  and  should  continue
to  be  for  the  future,  by  many  pieces  of  dogmatical  rhetoric
and  pedantic  wit,  may  easily  be  apprehended  by  those  who
know  anything  of  the  state  of  Letters  in  our  nation,  or  are  in
the  least  fitted  to  judge  of  the  manner  of  the  common  poets  or
formal  authors  of  the  times.

In  what  form  or  manner  soever  criticism  may  appear  amongst
us,  or  critics  choose  to  exert  their  talent,  it  can  become  none
besides  the  grossly  superstitious  or  ignorant  to  be  alarmed  at
this  spirit.  For  if  it  be  ill-managed,  and  with  little  wit,  it  will
be  destroyed  by  something  wittier  in  the  kind.  If  it  be  witty
itself,  it  must  of  necessity  advance  wit.

And  thus  from  the  consideration  of  ancient  as  well  as
modem  time,  it  appears  that  the  cause  and  interest  of  critics
is  the  same  with  that  of  wit,  learning,  and  good  sense.

Section III

Thus  we  have  surveyed  the  state  of  authors  as  they  are  influ-
enced from  without,  either  by  the  frowns  or  favour  of  the
great,  or  by  the  applause  or  censure  of  the  critics.  It  remains
only  to  consider  how  the  people,  or  world  in  general,  stand
affected  towards  our  modern  penmen,  and  what  occasion  these
adventurers  may  have  of  complaint  or  boast  from  their  en-
counter with  the  public.

There  is  nothing  more  certain  than  that  a  real  genius  and
thorough  artist  in  whatever  kind  can  never,  without  the  greatest
unwillingness  and  shame,  be  induced  to  act  below  his  character,
and  for  mere  interest  be  prevailed  with  to  prostitute  his  art  or

170


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

science  by  performing  contrary  to  its  known  rules.  Whoever
has  heard  anything  of  the  lives  of  famous  statuaries,  architects,
or  painters,  will  call  to  mind  many  instances  of  this  nature.
Or  whoever  has  made  any  acquaintance  with  the  better  sort  of
mechanics,  such  as  are  real  lovers  of  their  art  and  masters  in  it,
must  have  observed  their  natural  fidelity  in  this  respect.  Be
they  ever  so  idle,  dissolute,  or  debauched,  how  regardless  soever
of  other  rules,  they  abhor  any  transgression  in  their  art,  and
would  choose  to  lose  customers  and  starve  rather  than  by  a
base  compliance  with  the  world  to  act  contrary  to  what  they
call  the  justness  and  truth  of  work.

"  Sir,"  says  a  poor  fellow  of  this  kind  to  his  rich  customer,
**  you  are  mistaken  in  coming  to  me  for  such  a  piece  of  work-
manship. Let  who  will  make  it  for  you  as  you  fancy,  I  know
it  to  be  wrong.  Whatever  I  have  made  hitherto  has  been  true
work.  And  neither  for  your  sake  or  any  body''s  else  shall  I  put
my  hand  to  any  other."

This  is  virtue !  real  virtue  and  love  of  truth ;  independent
of  opinion  and  above  the  world.  This  disposition  transferred
to  the  whole  of  life,  perfects  a  character  and  makes  that  probity
and  worth  which  the  learned  are  often  at  such  a  loss  to  explain.
For  is  there  not  a  workmanship  and  a  truth  in  actions  ?  Or  is
the  workmanship  of  this  kind  less  becoming,  or  less  worthy  our
notice,  that  we  should  not  in  this  case  be  as  surly  at  least  as
the  honest  artisan,  who  has  no  other  philosophy  than  what
nature  and  his  trade  have  taught  him  ?

When  one  considers  this  zeal  and  honesty  of  inferior  artists,
one  would  wonder  to  see  those  who  pretend  to  skill  and  science
in  a  higher  kind  have  so  little  regard  to  truth  and  the  perfection  ,-

of  their  art. One  would  expect  it  of  our  writers  that  if  they r  ^
had  real  ability  they  should  draw  the  world  to  them,  and  not  /
meanly  suit  themselves  to  the  world  in  its  weak  state. We  •
may  justly  indeed  make  allowances  for  the  simplicity  of  those
early  geniuses  of  our  nation  who  after  so  many  barbarous  ages,
when  Letters  lay  yet  in  their  ruins,  made  bold  excursions  into  a

171


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

vacant  field  to  seize  the  posts  of  honour  and  attain  the  stations
which  were  yet  unpossessed  by  the  wits  of  their  own  country.
But  since  the  age  is  now  so  far  advanced,  learning  established,
the  rules  of  writing  stated,  and  the  truth  of  art  so  well  appre-
hended and  everywhere  confessed  and  owned,  'tis  strange  to  see
our  writers  as  unshapen  still  and  monstrous  in  their  works  as
heretofore.  There  can  be  nothing  more  ridiculous  than  to  hear
our  poets  in  their  prefaces  talk  of  Art  and  Structure,  whilst  in
their  pieces  they  perform  as  ill  as  ever,  and  with  as  little
regard  to  those  professed  rules  of  art  as  the  honest  bards  their
predecessors,  who  had  never  heard  of  any  such  rules,  or  at  least
had  never  owned  their  justice  or  validity.

Had  the  early  poets  of  Greece  thus  complimented  their
nation  by  complying  with  its  first  relish  and  appetite,  they
had  not  done  their  countrymen  such  service  nor  themselves
such  honour  as  we  find  they  did  by  conforming  to  truth  and
nature.  The  generous  spirits  who  first  essayed  the  way  had
not  always  the  world  on  their  side,  but  soon  drew  after  them
the  best  judgments,  and  soon  afterwards  the  world  itself.  They
forced  their  way  into  it,  and  by  weight  of  merit  turned  its  judg-
ment on  their  side.  They  formed  their  audience,  polished  the
age,  refined  the  public  ear  and  framed  it  right,  that  in  return
they  might  be  rightly  and  lastingly  applauded.  Nor  were  they
disappointed  in  their  hope.  The  applause  soon  came  and  was
lasting,  for  it  was  sound.  They  have  justice  done  them  at  this
day.  They  have  survived  their  nation  and  live,  though  in  a
dead  language.  The  more  the  age  is  enlightened,  the  more
they  shine.  Their  fame  must  necessarily  last  as  long  as  Letters,
and  posterity  will  ever  own  their  merit.

Our  modem  authors,  on  the  contrary,  are  turned  and
modelled  (as  themselves  confess)  by  the  public  relish  and
current  humour  of  the  times.  They  regulate  themselves  by
the  irregular  fancy  of  the  world,  and  frankly  own  they  are
preposterous  and  absurd,  in  order  to  accommodate  themselves  to
the  genius  of  the  age. In  our  days  the  audience  makes  the

172


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

poet,  and  the  bookseller  the  author,  with  what  profit  to  the
public,  or  what  prospect  of  lasting  fame  and  honour  to  the
writer,  let  any  one  who  has  judgment  imagine.

But  though  our  writers  charge  their  faults  thus  freely  on
the  public,  it  will,  I  doubt,  appear  from  many  instances  that
this  practice  is  mere  imposture,  since  those  absurdities,  which
they  are  the  aptest  to  commit,  are  far  from  being  delightful  or
entertaining.  We  are  glad  to  take  up  with  what  our  language
can  afford  us,  and  by  a  sort  of  emulation  with  other  nations
are  forced  to  cry  up  such  writers  of  our  own  as  may  best  serve
us  for  comparison.  But  when  we  are  out  of  this  spirit  it  must
be  owned  we  are  not  apt  to  discover  any  great  fondness  or
admiration  of  our  authors.  Nor  have  we  any  whom  by  mutual
consent  we  make  to  be  our  standard.  We  go  to  plays  or  to
other  shows,  and  frequent  the  theatre  as  the  booth.  We  read
epics  and  dramatics  as  we  do  satires  and  lampoons ;  for  we
must  of  necessity  know  what  wit  as  well  as  what  scandal  is
stirring.  Read  we  must ;  let  writers  be  ever  so  indifferent.
And  this  perhaps  may  be  some  occasion  of  the  laziness  and
negligence  of  our  authors,  who  observing  this  need  which  our
curiosity  brings  on  us,  and  making  an  exact  calculation  in  the
way  of  trade,  to  know  justly  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the
public  demand,  feed  us  thus  from  hand  to  mouth ;  resolving
not  to  over-stock  the  market,  or  be  at  the  pains  of  more  correct-
ness or  wit  than  is  absolutely  necessary  to  cany  on  the  traffic.

Our  satire  therefore  is  scurrilous,  buffooning,  and  without
morals  or  instruction,  which  is  the  majesty  and  life  of  this  kind
of  writing.  Our  encomium  or  panegyric  is  as  fulsome  and
displeasing  by  its  prostitute  and  abandoned  manner  of  praise.
The  worthy  persons  who  are  the  subjects  of  it  may  well  be
esteemed  sufferers  by  the  manner.  And  the  public,  whether  it
will  or  no,  is  forced  to  make  untoward  reflections  when  led  to
it  by  such  satirising  panegyrists.  For  in  reality  the  nerve  and
sinew  of  modem  panegyric  lies  in  a  dull  kind  of  satire,  which
the  author,  it  is  true,  intends  should  turn  to  the  advantage  of

173


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

his  subject,  but  which,  if  I  mistake  not,  will  appear  to  have  a
very  contrary  effect.

The  usual  method  which  our  authors  take  when  they  would
commend  either  a  brother-author,  a  wit,  a  hero,  a  philosopher,
or  a  statesman,  is  to  look  abroad  to  find  within  the  narrow
compass  of  their  learning  some  eminent  names  of  persons  who
answered  to  these  characters  in  a  former  time.  These  they  are
sure  to  lash,  as  they  imagine,  with  some  sharp  stroke  of  satire.
And  when  they  have  stripped  these  reverend  personages  of  all
their  share  of  merit,  they  think  to  clothe  their  hero  with  the
spoils.  Such  is  the  sterility  of  these  encomiasts !  They  know
not  how  to  praise  but  by  detraction.  If  a  fair  one  is  to  be
celebrated,  Helen  must  in  comparison  be  deformed,  Venus  her-
self degraded.  That  a  modern  may  be  honoured,  some  ancient
must  be  sacrificed.  If  a  poet  is  to  be  extolled,  down  with  a
Homer  or  a  Pindar.  If  an  orator  or  philosopher,  down  with
Demosthenes,  Tully,  Plato.  If  a  general  of  our  army,  down
with  any  hero  whatever  of  time  past.  "  The  Romans  knew  no
discipline  ! The  Grecians  never  learnt  the  art  of  war  ! "

Were  there  an  art  of  writing  to  be  formed  upon  the  modem
practice,  this  method  we  have  described  might  perhaps  be  styled
the  Rule  of  Dispatch,  or  the  Herculean  law,  by  which  encomiasts,
with  no  other  weapon  than  their  single  club,  may  silence  all
other  fame,  and  place  their  hero  in  the  vacant  throne  of  honour.
I  would  willingly  however  advise  these  celebrators  to  be  a  little
more  moderate  in  the  use  of  this  club-method.  Not  that  I
pretend  to  ask  quarter  for  the  ancients ;  but  for  the  sake  merely
of  those  moderns  whom  our  panegyrists  undertake  to  praise,  I
would  wish  them  to  be  a  little  cautious  of  comparing  characters.
There  is  no  need  to  call  up  a  Publicola  or  a  Scipio,  an  Aristides
or  a  Cato,  to  serve  as  foils.  These  were  patriots  and  good
generals  in  their  time,  and  did  their  country  honest  service.
No  offence  to  any  who  at  present  do  the  same.  The  Fabriciuses,
the  Aemiliuses,  the  Cincinnatuses  (poor  men  !)  may  be  suffered  to
rest  quietly ;  or  if  their  ghosts  should  by  this  unlucky  kind  of

174


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

enchantment  be  raised  in  mockery  and  contempt,  they  may
perhaps  prove  troublesome  in  earnest,  and  cast  such  reflections
on  our  panegyrists  and  their  modern  patrons  as  may  be  no-way
for  the  advantage  of  either.  The  well-deserving  ancients  will
have  always  a  strong  party  among  the  wise  and  learned  of  every
age ;  and  the  memory  of  foreign  worthies,  as  well  as  those  of
our  own  nation,  will  with  gratitude  be  cherished  by  the  nobler
spirits  of  mankind.  The  interest  of  the  dead  is  not  so  disre-
garded but  that  in  case  of  violence  offered  them  through
partiality  to  the  living,  there  are  hands  ready  prepared  to  make
sufficient  reprisals.

'Twas  in  times  when  flattery  grew  much  in  fashion  that  the
title  of  panegyric  was  appropriated  to  such  pieces  as  contained
only  a  profuse  and  unlimited  praise  of  some  single  person.  The
ancient  panegyrics  were  no  other  than  merely  such  writings  as
authors  of  every  kind  recited  at  the  solemn  assemblies  of  the
people.  They  were  the  exercises  of  the  wits  and  men  of  letters,
who  as  well  as  the  men  of  bodily  dexterity  bore  their  part  at
the  Olympic  and  other  national  and  panegyric  games.

The  British  nation,  though  they  have  nothing  of  this  kind
ordained  or  established  by  their  laws,  are  yet  by  nature  wonder-
fully inclined  to  the  same  panegyric  exercises.  At  their  fairs,
and  during  the  time  of  public  festivals,  they  perform  their  rude
Olympics  and  show  an  activity  and  address  beyond  any  other
modem  people  whatever.  Their  trials  of  skill,  it  is  true,  are
wholly  of  the  body,  not  of  the  brain.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered
at,  if  being  left  to  themselves,  and  no  way  assisted  by  the  laws
or  magistrate,  their  bodily  exercises  retain  something  of  the
barbarian  character,  or  at  least  show  their  manners^  to  hold

^  Whoever  has  a  thorough  taste  of  the  wit  and  manner  of  Horace,  if  he
only  compares  his  Epistle  to  Augustus  (ii.)  with  the  secret  character  of
that  prince  from  Suetonius  and  other  authors,  will  easily  find  what  judg-
ment that  poet  made  of  the  Roman  taste,  even  in  the  person  of  his  sovereign
and  admired  Roman  prince,  whose  natural  love  of  amphitheatrical  spectacles
and  other  entertainments  (little  accommodated  to  the  interest  of  the  Muses)
is  there  sufficiently  insinuated. The  prince  indeed  was  (as  'tis  said  above,

175


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

more  of  Rome  than  Greece.^  The  gladiatorian  and  other
sanguinary  sports  which  we  allow  our  people,  discover  sufficiently
our  national  taste.  And  the  baitings  and  slaughter  of  so  many
sorts  of  creatures,  tame  as  well  as  wild,  for  diversion  merely,
may  witness  the  extraordinary  inclination  we  have  for  amphi-
theatrical  spectacles.

I  know  not  whether  it  be  from  this  killing  disposition
remarked  in  us  that  our  satirists  prove  such  very  slaughter-men,
and  even  our  panegyric  authors  or  encomiasts  delight  so  much
in  the  dispatching  method  above  described  ;  but  sure  I  am  that
our  dramatic  poets  ^  stand  violently  affected  this  way,  and  delight
to  make  havoc  and  destruction  of  every  kind.

Tis  alleged  indeed  by  our  stage-poets,  in  excuse  for  vile
ribaldry  and  other  gross  irregularities,  both  in  the  fable  and
language  of  their  pieces,  that  their  success,  which  depends
chiefly  on  the  ladies,  is  never  so  fortunate  as  when  this  havoc
is  made  on  virtue  and  good  sense,  and  their  pieces  are  exhibited

p.  143)  obliged  in  the  highest  degree  to  his  poetical  and  witty  friends  for
guiding  his  taste  and  forming  his  manners^  as  they  really  did,  with  good
effect,  and  great  advantage  to  his  interest.  Witness  what  even  that  flat-
tering court  historian,  Dion,  relates  of  the  frank  treatment  which  that
prince  received  from  his  friend  Maecenas,  who  was  forced  to  draw  him
from  his  bloody  tribunal  and  murderous  delight  with  the  reproach  of
Surge  vero  tandem,  Carnifex  !  But  Horace,  according  to  his  character
and  circumstances,  was  obliged  to  take  a  finer  and  more  concealed  manner
both  with  the  prince  and  favourite.

Omne  vafer  vitium  ridenti  Flaccus  amico
Tangit,  et  admissus  circum  praecordia  ludit.

["  Roguish  Horace  makes  his  friend  laugh,  yet  probes  every  fault,  and,
never  refused  admission, plays  about  his  inmost  feelings." — Pers.  i.  116,117.]
See  Misc.  v,  ch.  i,  in  the  notes.

^  We  may  add  to  this  note  what  Tacitus  or  Quintilian  remarks  on  the
subject  of  the  Roman  taste  :  Jam  vero  propria  et  peculiaria  hujus  urbis  vitia
poene  in  utero  matris  concipi  mihi  videntur,  histrionalis  favor,  et  gladiato-
rum  equorumque  studia  ;  quibus  occupatus  et  obsessus  animus  quantulum
loci  bonis  artibus  relinquit .'' — Dial,  de  Oratoribus,  xxix.

*  See  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.  towards  the  end.

176


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

publicly  in  this  monstrous  form.  I  know  not  how  they  can
answer  it  to  the  fair  sex  to  speak  (as  they  pretend)  experi-
mentally, and  with  such  nice  distinction  of  their  audience.  How
far  this  excuse  may  serve  them  in  relation  to  common  amours
and  love  adventures  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  pronounce ;
but  I  must  own,  I  have  often  wondered  to  see  our  fighting  plays
become  so  much  the  entertainment  of  that  tender  sex.^

They  who  have  no  help  from  learning  to  observe  the  wider
periods  or  revolutions  of  human  kind,  the  alterations  which
happen  in  manners,  and  the  flux  and  reflux  of  politeness,  wit,
and  art,  are  apt  at  every  turn  to  make  the  present  age  their
standard,  and  imagine  nothing  barbarous  or  savage  but  what  is
contrary  to  the  manners  of  their  own  time.  The  same  pretended
judges,  had  they  flourished  in  our  Britain  at  the  time  when
Caesar  made  his  first  descent,  would  have  condemned  as  a
whimsical  critic  the  man  who  should  have  made  bold  to  censure
our  deficiency  of  clothing,  and  laugh  at  the  blue  cheeks  and
party-coloured  skins  which  were  then  in  fashion  with  our
ancestors.  Such  must  of  necessity  be  the  judgment  of  those
who  are  only  critics  by  fashion.  But  to  a  just  Naturalist  or
Humanist,  who  knows  the  creature  Man  and  judges  of  his  growth
and  improvement  in  society,  it  appears  evidently  that  we  British
men  were  as  barbarous  and  uncivilised  in  respect  of  the  Romans
under  a  Caesar,  as  the  Romans  themselves  were  in  respect  of  the
Grecians  when  they  invaded  that  nation  under  a  Mummius.

The  noble  wits  of  a  court  education,  who  can  go  no  farther
back  into  antiquity  than  their  pedigree  will  carry  them,  are
able  however  to  call  to  mind  the  different  state  of  manners  in
some  few  reigns  past,  when  Chivalry  was  in  such  repute.  The
ladies  were  then  spectators  not  only  of  feigned  combats  and
martial  exercises,  but  of  real  duels  and  bloody  feats  of  arms.
They  sat  as  umpires  and  judges  of  the  doughty  frays.  These
were  the  saint-protectrices  to  whom  the  champions  chiefly  paid
their  vows,  and  to  whom  they  recommended  themselves  by  these
^  See  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.  towards  the  end.
VOL.  I  177  N


:^  SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

gallant  quarrels  and  elegant  decisions  of  right  and  justice.  Nor
is  this  spirit  so  entirely  lost  amongst  us  but  that  even  at  this  hour
the  fair  sex  inspire  us  still  with  the  fancy  of  like  gallantries.
They  are  the  chief  subject  of  many  such  civil  turmoils,  and
remain  still  the  secret  influencing  constellation  by  which  we
are  engaged  to  give  and  ask  that  satisfaction  which  is  peculiar
to  the  fine  gentlemen  of  the  age.  For  thus  a  certain  gallant  of
our  court  expressed  the  case  very  naturally,  when  being  asked
by  his  friends,  why  one  of  his  established  character  for  courage
and  good  sense  would  answer  the  challenge  of  a  coxcomb,  he
confessed,  "That  for  his  own  sex,  he  could  safely  trust  their
judgment ;  but  how  should  he  appear  at  night  before  the  maids
of  honour  ?  "

Such  is  the  different  genius  of  nations,  and  of  the  same
nation  in  different  times  and  seasons.  For  so  among  the
ancients  some  have  been  known  tender  of  the  sex^  to  such  a

^  Contra  ea,  pleraque  nostris  moribus  sunt  decora,  quae  apud  illos
turpia  putantur.  Quern  enim  Romanorum  pudet  uxorem  ducere  in  con-
vivium  ?  Aut  cujus  materfamilias  non  primum  locum  tenet  aedium,  atque
in  celebritate  versatur  ?  quod  multo  fit  aliter  in  Graecia.  Nam  neque  in
convivium  adhibetur,  nisi  propinquorum,  neque  sedet,  nisi  in  interiore
parte  aedium,  quae  gynaeconitis  appellatur  :  quo  nemo  accedit,  nisi  pro-
pinqua  cognatione  conjunctus,  [^'Whereas  many  things  are  respectable
according  to  our  customs  which  the  Greeks  think  disreputable.  For  what
Roman  is  ashamed  to  take  his  wife  to  a  dinner-party .''  or  who  is  there
whose  wife  does  not  occupy  the  first  place  in  the  house  and  go  into  society?
Things  are  very  different  in  Greece.  For  a  lady  does  not  appear  at  a
dinner-party  except  at  a  dinner  of  relations,  nor  does  she  sit  anywhere  but
in  the  back  of  the  house,  in  what  is  called  the  gynaeconitis,  to  which  none
but  relations  have  admission." — Corn.  Nepos,  Praef  ]  See  also  MWan,  i.  10,
and  the  law  in  Pausanias,  v.  G,  and  the  story  of  ^lian  better  related  as  to
the  circumstances.  Hinc  de  saxo  foeminas  dejicere  Eleorum  lex  jubet,  quae
ad  Olympicos  ludos  penetrasse  deprehensae  fuerint,  vel  quae  omnino
Alphaeum  transmiserint,  quibus  est  eis  interdictum  diebus  :  Non  tamen
deprehensam  esse  ullam  perhibent  praeter  unam  Callipatiram,  quam  alii
Pherenicen  nominant.  Haec  viro  mortuo  cum  virili  oruatu  exercitationum
se  magistrum  simulans,  Pisidorum  filium  in  certamen  deduxit ;  jamque
eo  vincente  sepimentum  in  quo  magistros  seclusos  habent,  transiluit  veste

178


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

degree  as  not  to  suffer  them  to  expose  their  modesty  by  the
view  of  masculine  games,  or  theatrical  representations  of  any
kind  whatever.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  have  introduced  them
into  their  amphitheatres,  and  made  them  sharers  in  the  cruellest
spectacles.

But  let  our  authors  or  poets  complain  ever  so  much  of  the
genius  of  our  people,  "'tis  evident  we  are  not  altogether  so
barbarous  or  Gothic  as  they  pretend.  We  are  naturally  no  ill
soil,  and  have  musical  parts  which  might  be  cultivated  with
great  advantage  if  these  gentlemen  would  use  the  art  of  masters
in  their  composition.  They  have  power  to  work  upon  our
better  inclinations,  and  may  know  by  certain  tokens  that  their
audience  is  disposed  to  receive  nobler  subjects,  and  taste  a
better  manner,  than  that  which,  through  indulgence  to  them-
selves more  than  to  the  world,  they  are  generally  pleased  to
make  their  choice.

Besides  some  laudable  attempts  which  have  been  made
with  tolerable  success  of  late  years  towards  a  just  manner  of
writing,  both  in  the  heroic  and  familiar  style,  we  have  older
proofs  of  a  right  disposition  in  our  people  towards  the  moral
and  instructive  way. Our  old  dramatic  poet  ^  may  witness  for

amissa.  Inde  foeminam  agnitam  omni  crimine  liberarunt.  Datum  hoc  ex
judicum  aequitate,  patris^  fratrum,  et  filii  gloriae  ;  qui  omnes  ex  Olympicis
ludis  victores  abieraut.  Ex  eo  lege  saiicitum,  ut  nudati  adessent  ludis  ipsi
etiam  magistri.  ["  Therefore  the  Elean  law  bids  hurl  from  a  rock  women
who  are  caught  at  the  Olympic  Games,  or  who  have  even  crossed  the  river
Alphaeus  on  the  forbidden  days.  Yet  they  say  no  one  was  ever  caught
except  a  certain  Callipatira  or  Pherenice.  She,  after  the  death  of  her
husband,  took  her  son  Pisidorus  to  the  games,  dressed  as  a  man  and  pre-
tending to  be  his  trainer  ;  and  when  he  won,  she  jumped  the  rope  which
shuts  off  trainers  and  dropped  her  cloak.  Then  when  she  was  seen  to  be
a  woman,  she  was  acquitted  by  the  indulgence  of  the  stewards  in  honour
of  her  father,  her  brothers,  and  her  son,  all  of  whom  had  won  prizes  at  the
Olympic  Games.  But  after  that  a  law  was  passed  that  trainers  too  must
attend  the  games  uncloaked." — Shaftesbury  has  chosen  to  quote  Pausanias
in  a  Latin  version.]
^  Sliakspere.

179


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

our  good  ear  and  manly  relish.  Notwithstanding  his  natural
rudeness,  his  unpolished  style,  and  antiquated  phrase  and  wit,
his  want  of  method  and  coherence,  and  his  deficiency  in  almost
all  the  graces  and  ornaments  of  this  kind  of  writings,  yet  by
the  justness  of  his  moral,  the  aptness  of  many  of  his  descrip-
tions, and  the  plain  and  natural  turn  of  several  of  his  characters,
he  pleases  his  audience,  and  often  gains  their  ear  without  a
single  bribe  from  Luxury  or  Vice.  That  piece  ^  of  his  which
appears  to  have  most  affected  English  hearts,  and  has  perhaps
been  oftenest  acted  of  any  which  have  come  upon  our  stage,  is
almost  one  continued  moral :  a  series  of  deep  reflections  drawn
from  one  mouth,  upon  the  subject  of  one  single  accident  and
calamity,  naturally  fitted  to  move  honor  and  compassion.  It
may  be  properly  said  of  this  play,  if  I  mistake  not,  that  it  has
only  one  character  or  principal  part.  It  contains  no  adoration
or  flattery  of  the  sex ;  no  ranting  at  the  gods ;  no  blustering
heroism ;  nor  anything  of  that  curious  mixture  of  the  fierce
and  tender  which  makes  the  hinge  of  modern  tragedy,  and
nicely  varies  it  between  the  points  of  Love  and  Honour.

Upon  the  whole,  since  in  the  two  great  poetic  stations,  the
epic  and  dramatic,  we  may  observe  the  moral  genius  so  naturally
prevalent ;  since  our  most  approved  heroic  poem  ^  has  neither
the  softness  of  language  nor  the  fashionable  turn  of  wit,  but
merely  solid  thought,  strong  reasoning,  noble  passion,  and  a
continued  thread  of  moral  doctrine,  piety,  and  virtue  to
recommend  it ;  we  may  justly  infer  that  it  is  not  so  much  the
public  ear  as  the  ill  hand  and  vicious  manner  of  our  poets
which  needs  redress.

And  thus  at  last  we  are  returned  to  our  old  article  of
advice :  that  main  preliminary  of  self-study  and  inward  con-
verse which  we  have  found  so  much  wanting  in  the  authors  of
our  time.  They  should  add  the  wisdom  of  the  heart  to  the
task  and  exercise  of  the  brain,  in  order  to  bring  proportion  and
beauty  into  their  works. That  their  composition  and  vein  of

^  The  ti'agedy  of  Hamlet.  -  Miltou's  Furadisn  Lout.

180


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

writing  may  be  natural  and  free,  they  should  settle  matters  in
the  first  place  with  themselves.  And  having  gained  a  mastery
here,  they  may  easily,  with  the  help  of  their  genius  and  a  right
use  of  art,  command  their  audience  and  establish  a  good  taste.

'Tis  on  themselves  that  all  depends.  We  have  considered
their  other  subjects  of  excuse.  We  have  acquitted  the  great
men,  their  presumptive  patrons,  whom  we  have  left  to  their
own  discretion.  We  have  proved  the  critics  not  only  an  in-
offensive but  a  highly  useful  race.  And  for  the  audience,  we
have  found  it  not  so  bad  as  might  perhaps  at  first  be  appre-
hended.

It  remains  that  we  pass  sentence  on  our  authors  after
having  precluded  them  their  last  refuge.  Nor  do  we  condemn
them  on  their  want  of  wit  or  fancy,  but  of  judgment  and  correct-
ness, which  can  only  be  attained  by  thorough  diligence,  study,
and  impartial  censure  of  themselves.  'Tis  manners  which  is
wanting:.^  'Tis  a  due  sentiment  of  morals  which  alone  can  make
us  knowing  in  order  and  proportion,  and  give  us  the  just  tone
and  measure  of  human  passion.

So  much  the  poet  must  necessarily  bon'ow  of  the  philosopher
as  to  be  master  of  the  common  topics  of  morality.  He  must
at  least  be  speciously  honest,  and  in  all  appearance  a  friend  to
Virtue  throughout  his  poem.  The  good  and  wise  will  abate
him  nothing  in  this  kind ;  and  the  people,  though  coiTupt,
are  in  the  main  best  satisfied  with  this  conduct.

'  Speciosa  locis,  morataque  recta
Fabula,  nullius  veneris,  sine  pondere  et  arte,
Valdius  oblectat  populum,  meliusque  moratur,
Quam  versus  inopes  rerum,  nugaeque  canorae.^


^  Supra,  p.  1.36,  and  infra,  part  iii.  §  3,  in  the  notes;  and  Misc.  v.  chs.i.  ii.

2  ["  Sometimes  a  play  if  it  is  embellished  with  sentiments  and  well-
drawn  as  to  its  characters,  though  it  has  no  grace,  no  weight  of  language,
no  art,  delights  the  people  more  and  keeps  their  attention  better  than
verses  with  little  in  them  and  well-rounded  trifles." — Hor.  A.  P.  319-322.]

181


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


PART  III

Section  I

'Tis  esteemed  the  highest  comph'ment  which  can  be  paid  a  writer,
on  the  occasion  of  some  new  work  he  has  made  public,  to  tell
him  "that  he  has  undoubtedly  surpassed  himself.'*'  And
indeed  when  one  observes  how  well  this  compliment  is  received,
one  would  imagine  it  to  contain  some  wonderful  hyperbole  of
praise.  For  according  to  the  strain  of  modern  politeness,  'tis
not  an  ordinary  violation  of  truth  which  can  afford  a  tribute
sufficient  to  answer  any  common  degree  of  merit.  Now  'tis  well
known  that  the  gentlemen  whose  merit  lies  towards  authorship
are  unwilling  to  make  the  least  abatement  on  the  foot  of  this
ceremonial.  One  would  wonder  therefore  to  find  them  so  en-
tirely satisfied  with  a  form  of  praise  which  in  plain  sense
amounts  to  no  more  than  a  bare  affirmative  "  that  they  have
in  some  manner  differed  from  themselves,  and  are  become  some-
what worse  or  better  than  their  common  rate."  For  if  the  vilest
writer  grows  viler  than  ordinary,  or  exceeds  his  natural  pitch
on  either  side,  he  is  justly  said  to  exceed  or  go  beyond  himself.

"We  find  in  the  same  manner  that  there  is  no  expression
more  generally  used  in  a  way  of  compliment  to  great  men  and
princes  than  that  plain  one  which  is  so  often  verified,  and  may
be  safely  pronounced  for  truth  on  most  occasions :  "  That  they
have  acted  like  themselves,  and  suitably  to  their  own  genius  and
character."  The  compliment,  it  must  be  owned,  sounds  well.
No  one  suspects  it.  For  what  person  is  there  who  in  his
imagination  joins  not  something  worthy  and  deserving  with  his
true  and  native  self,  as  oft  as  he  is  referred  to  it,  and  made  to
consider  who  he  is  ?  Such  is  the  natural  affection  of  all  man-
kind towards  moral  beauty  and  perfection  that  they  never  fail
in  making  this  presumption  in  behalf  of  themselves :  "  That  by

182


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

nature  they  have  something  estimable  and  worthy  in  respect  of
others  of  their  kind ;  and  that  their  genuine,  true,  and  natural
self  is,  as  it  ought  to  be,  of  real  value  in  society,  and  justly
honourable  for  the  sake  of  its  merit  and  good  qualities."  They
conclude  therefore  they  have  the  height  of  praise  allotted  them
when  they  are  assured  by  any  one  that  they  have  done  nothing
below  themselves,  or  that  in  some  particular  action  they  have
exceeded  the  ordinary  tenor  of  their  character.

Thus  is  every  one  convinced  of  the  reality  of  a  better  self,
and  of  the  cult  or  homage  which  is  due  to  it.  The  misfortune
is,  we  are  seldom  taught  to  comprehend  this  self  by  placing  it
in  a  distinct  view  from  its  representative  or  counterfeit.  In  our
holy  religion,  which  for  the  greatest  part  is  adapted  to  the  very
meanest  capacities,  'tis  not  to  be  expected  that  a  speculation  of
this  kind  should  be  openly  advanced.  'Tis  enough  that  we  have
hints  given  us  of  a  nobler  self  than  that  which  is  commonly
supposed  the  basis  and  foundation  of  our  actions.  Self-interest
is  there  taken  as  it  is  vulgarly  conceived.  Though  on  the
other  side  there  are,  in  the  most  sacred  characters,^  examples
given  us  of  the  highest  contempt  of  all  such  interested  views,  of
a  willingness  to  suffer  without  recompense  for  the  sake  of  others,
and  of  a  desire  to  part  even  with  life  and  being  itself  on  account
of  what  is  generous  and  worthv.  But  in  the  same  manner  as
the  celestial  phsenomena  are  in  the  sacred  volumes  generally
treated  according  to  common  imagination  and  the  then  current
system  of  Astronomy  and  Natural  Science,  so  the  moral  appear-
ances are  in  many  places  preserved  without  alteration,  according
to  vulgar  prejudice  and  the  general  conception  of  interest  and
self-good.  Our  real  and  genuine  self  is  sometimes  supposed
that  ambitious  one  which  is  fond  of  power  and  glory,  sometimes
that  childish  one  which  is  taken  with  vain  show,  and  is  to  be
invited  to  obedience  by  promise  of  finer  habitations,  precious
stones  and  metals,  shining  garments,  crowns,  and  other  such

*  Exod.  xxxii.  31,  32,  etc.,  and  Rom.  ix.  1,  2,  S,  etc.

183


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

dazzling  beauties,  by  which  another  earth  or  material  city  is
represented.

It  must  be  owned  that  even  at  that  time  when  a  greater
and  purer  Light  disclosed  itself  in  the  chosen  nation,  their
natural  gloominess  appeared  still,^  by  the  great  difficulty  they
had  to  know  themselves,  or  learn  their  real  interest,  after  such
long  tutorage  and  instruction  from  above.  The  simplicity  of
that  people  must  certainly  have  been  very  great,  when  the  best
doctrine  could  not  go  down  without  a  treat,  and  the  best
disciples  had  their  heads  so  running  upon  their  loaves,  that  they
were  apt  to  construe  every  divine  saying  in  a  belly-sense,^  and
thought  nothing  more  self-constituent  than  that  inferior  re-
ceptacle. Their  taste  in  morals  could  not  fail  of  being  suitable
to  this  extraordinary  estimation  of  themselves.  No  wonder  if
the  better  and  nobler  self  was  left  as  a  mystery  to  a  people  who
of  all  human  kind  were  the  most  grossly  selfish,  crooked,  and
perverse.  So  that  it  must  necessarily  be  confessed  in  honour
of  their  divine  legislators,  patriots,  and  instructors,  that  they
exceeded  all  others  in  goodness  and  generosity,  since  they  could
so  truly  love  their  nation  and  brethren  such  as  they  were,  and
could  have  so  generous  and  disinterested  regards  for  those  who
were  in  themselves  so  sordidly  interested  and  undeserving.

But  whatever  may  be  the  proper  effect  or  operation  of
religion,  'tis  the  known  province  of  philosophy  to  teach  us  our-
selves, keep  us  the  self- same  persons,  and  so  regulate  our
governing  fancies,  passions,  and  humours,  as  to  make  us
comprehensible  to  ourselves,  and  knowable  by  other  features
than  those  of  a  bare  countenance.  For  'tis  not  certainly  by
virtue  of  our  face  merely  that  we  are  ourselves.  'Tis  not  we
who  change  when  our  complexion  or  shape  changes.  But  there
is  that,  which  being  wholly  metamorphosed  and  converted,  we
are  thereby  in  reality  transformed  and  lost.

Should  an  intimate  friend  of  ours,  who  had  endured  many
sicknesses  and  run  many  ill  adventures  while  he  travelled
^  Supra,  p.  22,  and  Misc.  ii.  chs.  i.  iii.  ^  Matt.  xvi.  6,  7,  8,  etc.

184


ADVICE  TO AN  AUTHOR

through  the  remotest  parts  of  the  East,  and  hottest  countries
of  the  South,  return  to  us  so  altered  in  his  whole  outward
figure,  that  till  we  had  for  a  time  conversed  with  him  we  could
not  know  him  again  to  be  the  same  person,  the  matter  would
not  seem  so  \ery  strange,  nor  would  our  concern  on  this  account
be  very  great.  But  should  a  like  face  and  figure  of  a  friend
return  to  us  with  thoughts  and  humours  of  a  strange  and
foreign  turn,  with  passions,  affections,  and  opinions  wholly
different  from  anything  we  had  formerly  known,  we  should
say  in  earnest,  and  with  the  greatest  amazement  and  concera,
that  this  was  another  creature,  and  not  the  friend  whom  we
once  knew  familiarly.  Nor  should  we  in  reality  attempt  any
renewal  of  acquaintance  or  correspondence  with  such  a  person,
though  perhaps  he  might  preserve  in  his  memory  the  faint
marks  or  tokens  of  former  transactions  which  had  passed
between  us.

When  a  revolution  of  this  kind,  though  not  so  total,  happens
at  any  time  in  a  character;  when  the  passion  or  humour
of  a  known  person  changes  remarkably  from  what  it  once  was ;
'tis  to  philosophy  we  then  appeal.  'Tis  either  the  want  or
weakness  of  this  principle  which  is  charged  on  the  delinquent.
And  on  this  bottom  it  is  that  we  often  challenge  ourselves
when  we  find  such  variation  in  our  manners,  and  observe
that  it  is  not  always  the  same  self  nor  the  same  interest  we  have
in  view,  but  often  a  direct  contrary  one,  which  we  serve  still
with  the  same  passion  and  ardour.  When  from  a  noted
liberality  we  change  perhaps  to  as  remarkable  a  parsimony;
when  from  indolence  and  love  of  rest  we  plunge  into  business,
or  from  a  busy  and  severe  character,  abhorrent  from  the  tender
converse  of  the  fair  sex,  we  turn  on  a  sudden  to  a  contrary
passion,  and  become  amorous  or  uxorious ;  we  acknowledge
the  weakness,  and  charging  our  defect  on  the  general  want  of
philosophy  we  say  (sighing)  "that,  indeed,  we  none  of  us
truly  know  ourselves."  And  thus  we  recognise  the  authority
and  proper  object  of  philosophy ;  so  far  at  least,  that  though

185


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

we  pretend  not  to  be  complete  philosophers,  we  confess  "  that
as  we  have  more  or  less  of  this  intelligence  or  comprehension  of
ourselves  we  are  accordingly  more  or  less  truly  men,  and  either
more  or  less  to  be  depended  on  in  friendship,  society,  and  the
commerce  of  life."

The  fruits  of  this  science  are  indeed  the  fairest  imaginable,
and  upon  due  trial  are  found  to  be  as  well  relished  and  of  as
good  favour  with  mankind.  But  when  invited  to  the  specula-
tion, we  turn  our  eyes  on  that  which  we  suppose  the  tree,  'tis
no  wonder  if  we  slight  the  gardenership  and  think  the  manner
of  culture  a  very  contemptible  mystery.  "Grapes,"  'tis  said,
"  are  not  gathered  from  thorns,  nor  figs  from  thistles."  Now
if  in  the  literate  world  there  be  any  choking  weed,  anything
purely  thorn  or  thistle,  'tis  in  all  likelihood  that  very  kind  of
plant  which  stands  for  philosophy  in  some  famous  schools.^
There  can  be  nothing  more  ridiculous  than  to  expect  that
manners  or  understanding  should  sprout  from  such  a  stock.
It  pretends  indeed  some  relation  to  manners  as  being  definitive
of  the  natures,  essences,  and  properties  of  spirits,  and  some
relation  to  reason  as  describing  the  shapes  and  forms  of  certain
instruments  employed  in  the  reasoning  art.  But  had  the
craftiest  of  men,  for  many  ages  together,  been  employed  in
finding  out  a  method  to  confound  reason  and  degrade  the
understanding  of  mankind,  they  could  not,  perhaps,  have  suc-
ceeded better  than  by  the  establishment  of  such  a  mock-science.

I  knew  once  a  notable  enthusiast^  of  the  itinerant  kind,
who  being  upon  a  high  spiritual  adventure  in  a  country
where  prophetic  missions  are  treated  as  no  jest,  was,  as  he
told me, committed a close prisoner, and kept for several

*  Infra,  part  iii.  §  3,  and  Misc.  iii.  ch.  ii.

2  [Leibnitz  appears  to  be  right  in  supposing  this  to  refer  to  the  younger
Van  Helmont  (1618-1G99),  who  was  thrown  into  the  prison  of  the  Inquisi-
tion at  Rome  in  1662,  He  published  his  Alphabeti  vere  naturalis  hehraici
hrevissima  delineatio  at  Sulzbach  in  1667.  For  some  time  he  sojourned  in
England,  where  he  composed  for  the  Countess  of  Conway  his  Two  Hundred

186


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

months  where  he  saw  no  manner  of  light.  In  this  banishment
from  letters  and  discourse  the  man  very  wittily  invented  an
amusement  much  to  his  pui-pose,  and  highly  preservative  both
of  health  and  humour.  It  may  be  thought,  perhaps,  that  of
all  seasons  or  circumstances  here  was  one  the  most  suitable  to
our  oft-mentioned  practice  of  soliloquy ;  especially  since  the
prisoner  was  one  of  those  whom  in  this  age  we  usually  call
philosophers,  a  successor  of  Paracelsus,  and  a  master  in  the
occult  sciences.  But  as  to  moral  science  or  anything  relating
to  self-converse,  he  was  a  mere  novice.  To  work  therefore  he
went  after  a  different  method.  He  tuned  his  natural  pipes,  not
after  the  manner  of  a  musician,  to  practise  what  was  melodious
and  agreeable  in  sounds,  but  to  fashion  and  form  all  sorts  of
articulate  voices  the  most  distinctly  that  was  possible.  This
he  performed  by  strenuously  exalting  his  voice,  and  essaying  it
in  all  the  several  dispositions  and  configurations  of  his  throat
and  mouth.  And  thus  bellowing,  roaring,  snarling,  and  other-
wise variously  exerting  his  organs  of  sound,  he  endeavoured
to  discover  what  letters  of  the  alphabet  could  best  design
each  species,  or  what  new  letters  were  to  be  invented  to  mark
the  undiscovered  modifications.  He  found,  for  instance,  the
letter  a  to  be  a  most  genuine  character,  an  original  and  pure
vowel,  and  justly  placed  as  principal  in  the  front  of  the
alphabetic  order.  For  having  duly  extended  his  under  jaw
to  its  utmost  distance  from  the  upper,  and  by  a  proper
insertion  of  his  fingers  provided  against  the  contraction  of
either  corner  of  his  mouth,  he  experimentally  discovered  it
impossible  for  human  tongue  under  these  circumstances  to
emit  any  other  modification  of  sound  than  that  which  was
described  by  this  primitive  character. The  vowel  o  was  formed

Problems  concerning  the  Revolutions  of  the  Soul ;  but  Shaftesbury  doubtless
made  his  acquaintance  in  Holland,  where  he  latterly  resided.  Leibnitz,
who  esteemed  him  and  wrote  his  epitaph,  denies  that  he  was  a  mere  novice
in  moral  science,  and  highly  praises  his  moral  character,  remarking  that
his  works  show  his  least  admirable  side.]

187


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

by  an  orbicular  disposition  of  the  mouth,  as  was  aptly  delineated
in  the  character  itself.  The  vowel  u  by  a  parallel  protrusion  of
the  lips.  The  other  vowels  and  consonants  by  other  various
collisions  of  the  mouth,  and  operations  of  the  active  tongue
upon  the  passive  gum  or  palate.  The  result  of  this  profound
speculation  and  long  exercise  of  our  prisoner  was  a  philosophical
treatise,  which  he  composed  when  he  was  set  at  liberty.  He
esteemed  himself  the  only  master  of  voice  and  language  on  the
account  of  this  his  radical  science  and  fundamental  knowledge
of  sounds.  But  whoever  had  taken  him  to  improve  their
voice,  or  teach  them  an  agreeable  or  just  manner  of  accent
or  delivery,  would,  I  believe,  have  found  themselves  considerably
deluded.

'Tis  not  that  I  would  condemn  as  useless  this  speculative
science  of  articulation.  It  has  its  place  no  doubt  among  the
other  sciences,  and  may  serve  to  grammar  as  grammar  serves  to
rhetoric  and  to  other  arts  of  speech  and  writing.  The  solidity
of  mathematics  and  its  advantage  to  mankind  is  proved  by
many  effects  in  those  beneficial  arts  and  sciences  which  depend
on  it,  though  astrologers,  horoscopers,  and  other  such  are  pleased
to  honour  themselves  with  the  title  of  mathematicians.  As  for
metaphysics,^  and  that  which  in  the  schools  is  taught  for  logic
or  for  ethics,  I  shall  willingly  allow  it  to  pass  for  philosophy
when  by  any  real  effects  it  is  proved  capable  to  refine  our  spirits,
improve  our  understandings,  or  mend  our  manners.  But  if  the
defining  material  and  immaterial  substances,  and  distinguishing
their  properties  and  modes,  is  recommended  to  us  as  the  right
manner  of  proceeding  in  the  discovery  of  our  own  natures,  I
shall  be  apt  to  suspect  such  a  study  as  the  more  delusive  and
infatuating  on  account  of  its  magnificent  pretension.

The  study  of  triangles  and  circles  interferes  not  with  the
study  of  minds  ;  nor  does  the  student  in  the  meanwhile  suppose
himself  advancing  in  wisdom  or  the  knowledge  of  himself  or

^  [Shaftesbury  uses  the  term  in  its  old  application  to  a  body  of  scholastic
definitions,  not  to  philosophy  commonly  so  called.]

188


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

mankind.  All  he  desires  is  to  keep  his  head  sound  as  it  was
before.  And  well,  he  thinks  indeed,  he  has  come  off  if  by  good
fortune  there  be  no  crack  made  in  it.  As  for  other  ability  or
improvement  in  the  knowledge  of  human  nature  or  the  world,
he  refers  himself  to  other  studies  and  practice.  Such  is
the  mathematician"'s  modesty  and  good  sense.  But  for  the
philosopher  who  pretends  to  be  wholly  taken  up  in  considering
his  higher  faculties,  and  examining  the  powers  and  principles
of  his  understanding,  if  in  reality  his  philosophy  be  foreign  to
the  matter  professed,  if  it  goes  beside  the  mark  and  reaches
nothing  we  can  truly  call  our  interest  or  concern,  it  must  be
somewhat  worse  than  mere  ignorance  or  idiotism.  The  most
ingenious  way  of  becoming  foolish  is  by  a  system.  And  the
surest  method  to  prevent  good  sense  is  to  set  up  something  in
the  room  of  it.  The  liker  anything  is  to  wisdom,  if  it  be  not
plainly  the  thing  itself,  the  more  directly  it  becomes  its
opposite.

One  would  expect  it  of  these  physiologists  and  searchers  of
modes  and  substances  that  being  so  exalted  in  their  understand-
ings and  enriched  with  science  above  other  men,  they  should  be
as  much  above  them  in  their  passions  and  sentiments.  The
consciousness  of  being  admitted  into  the  secret  recesses  of  nature
and  the  inward  resources  of  a  human  heart  should,  one  would
think,  create  in  these  gentlemen  a  sort  of  magnanimity  which
might  distinguish  them  from  the  ordinary  race  of  mortals.  But
if  their  pretended  knowledge  of  the  machine  of  this  world,  and
of  their  own  frame,  is  able  to  produce  nothing  beneficial  either
to  the  one  or  to  the  other,  I  know  not  to  what  purpose  such  a
philosophy  can  serve,  except  only  to  shut  the  door  against  better
knowledge,  and  introduce  impertinence  and  conceit  with  the  best
countenance  of  authority.

'Tis  hardly  possible  for  a  student,  but  more  especially  an
author,  who  has  dealt  in  ideas  and  treated  formally  of  the
passions  in  a  way  of  Natural  Philosophy,  not  to  imagine  him-
self more  wise  on  this  account  and  more  knowing  in  his  own

189


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

character  and  the  genius  of  mankind.  But  that  he  is  mistaken
in  his  calculation,  experience  generally  convinces  us,  none  being
found  more  impotent  in  themselves,  of  less  command  over
their  passions,  less  free  from  superstition  and  vain  fears,  or  less
safe  from  common  imposture  and  delusion,  than  the  noted  head-
pieces of  this  stamp.  Nor  is  this  a  wonder.  The  speculation
in  a  manner  bespeaks  the  practice.  There  needs  no  formal
deduction  to  make  this  evident.  A  small  help  from  our
familiar  method  of  soliloquy  may  serve  turn,  and  we  may
perhaps  decide  this  matter  in  a  more  diverting  way  by  con-
fronting this  super-speculative  philosophy  with  a  more  practical
sort,  which  relates  chiefly  to  our  acquaintance,  friendship,  and
good  correspondence  with  ourselves.

On  this  account  it  may  not  be  to  my  reader's  disadvantage
if,  forgetting  him  for  awhile,  I  apply  chiefly  to  myself,  and  as
occasion  oft'ers  assume  that  self-conversant  practice  which  I  have
pretended  to  disclose.  'Tis  hoped  therefore  he  will  not  esteem
it  as  ill-breeding  if  I  lose  the  usual  regard  to  his  presence.
And  should  I  fall  insensibly  into  one  of  the  paroxysms  described,
and  as  in  a  sort  of  frenzy  enter  into  high  expostulation  with  my-
self, he  will  not  sm'ely  be  offended  with  the  free  language  or  even
with  the  reproaches  he  hears  from  a  person  who  only  makes
bold  with  whom  he  may.

If  a  passenger  should  turn  by  chance  into  a  watchmaker's
shop,  and  thinking  to  inform  himself  concerning  watches,  should
inquire  of  what  metal,  or  what  matter,  each  part  was  composed  ;
what  gave  the  colours,  or  what  made  the  sounds ;  without
examining  what  the  real  use  was  of  such  an  instiiiment,  or  by
what  movements  its  end  was  best  attained,  and  its  perfection
acquired ;  'tis  plain  that  such  an  examiner  as  this  would  come
short  of  any  understanding  in  the  real  nature  of  the  instrument.
Should  a  philosopher,  after  the  same  manner,  employing  himself
in  the  study  of  human  nature,  discover  only  what  effects  each
passion  wrought  upon  the  body ;  what  change  of  aspect  or
feature they  produced; and in  what  different  manner  they

190


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

affected  the  limbs  and  muscles,  this  might  possibly  qualify  him
to  give  advice  to  an  anatomist  or  a  limner,  but  not  to  mankind
or  to  himself;  since  according  to  this  survey  he  considered  not
the  real  operation  or  energy  of  his  subject,  nor  contemplated
the  man,  as  real  man,  and  as  a  human  agent,  but  as  a  watch  or
common  machine.

"  The  passion  of  Fear,"  as  a  modem  philosopher  ^  informs  me,
"  determines  the  spirits  to  the  muscles  of  the  knees,  which  are
instantly  ready  to  perform  their  motion,  by  taking  up  the  legs
with  incomparable  celerity  in  order  to  remove  the  body  out  of
harm's  way."'''  Excellent  mechanism  !  But  whether  the  knocking
together  of  the  knees  be  any  more  the  cowardly  symptom  of
flight,  than  the  chattering  of  the  teeth  is  the  stout  symptom  of
resistance,  I  shall  not  take  upon  me  to  determine.  In  this
whole  subject  of  inquiry  I  shall  find  nothing  of  the  least  self-
concernment.  And  I  may  depend  upon  it,  that  by  the  most
refined  speculation  of  this  kind  I  shall  neither  learn  to  diminish
my  fears  or  raise  my  courage.  This,  however,  I  may  be  assured
of,  that  'tis  the  nature  of  fear,  as  well  as  of  other  passions,  to
have  its  increase  and  decrease,  as  it  is  fed  by  opinion  and  in-
fluenced by  custom  and  practice.

These  passions,  according  as  they  have  the  ascendency  in
me,  and  differ  in  proportion  with  one  another,  affect  my
chai-acter,  and  make  me  different  with  respect  to  myself  and
others.  I  must,  therefore,  of  necessity  find  redress  and  improve-
ment in  this  case,  by  reflecting  justly  on  the  manner  of  my  own
motion,  as  guided  by  affections  which  depend  so  much  on
apprehension  and  conceit.  By  examining  the  various  turns,
inflections,  declensions,  and  inward  revolutions  of  the  passions,
I  must  undoubtedly  come  the  better  to  understand  a  human
breast,  and  judge  the  better  both  of  others  and  myself.  'Tis
impossible  to  make  the  least  advancement  in  such  a  study  with-
out acquiring  some  advantage  from  the  regulation  and  govern-
ment of  those  passions  on  which  the  conduct  of  a  life  depends.
^  Monsieur  des  Cartes,  in  his  Treatise  of  the  Passions.
191


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

For  instance,  if  superstition  be  the  sort  of  fear  which  most
oppresses,  'tis  not  very  material  to  inquire,  on  this  occasion,  to
what  parts  or  districts  the  blood  or  spirits  are  immediately
detached,  or  where  they  are  made  to  rendezvous.  For  this  no
more  imports  me  to  understand,  than  it  depends  on  me  to
regulate  or  change.  But  Avhen  the  grounds  of  this  superstitious
fear  are  considered  to  be  from  opinion,  and  the  subjects  of  it
come  to  be  thoroughly  searched  and  examined,  the  passion
itself  must  necessarily  diminish,  as  I  discover  more  and  more
the  imposture  which  belongs  to  it.

In  the  same  manner,  if  vanity  be  from  opinion,  and  I  con-
sider how  vanity  is  conceived,  from  what  imaginary  advantages
and  inconsiderable  grounds ;  if  I  view  it  in  its  excessive  height,
as  well  as  in  its  contrary  depression ;  'tis  impossible  I  should
not  in  some  measure  be  relieved  of  this  distemper.

Laudis  amore  tumes  ?  Sunt  certa  piacula.  .  .  .
Sunt  verba  et  voces  quibus  hunc  lenire  dolorem
Possis,  et  magnam  morbi  deponere  partem.^

The  same  must  happen  in  respect  of  anger,  ambition,  love,
desire,  and  the  other  passions  from  whence  I  frame  the  different
notion  I  have  of  interest.  For  as  these  passions  veer,  my
interest  veers,  my  steerage  varies ;  and  I  make  alternately,  now
this,  now  that,  to  be  my  course  and  harbour.  The  man  in
anger  has  a  different  happiness  from  the  man  in  love.  And
the  man  lately  become  covetous  has  a  different  notion  of  satis-
faction from  what  he  had  before,  when  he  was  liberal.  Even
the  man  in  humour  has  another  thought  of  interest  and  ad-
vantage than  the  man  out  of  humour,  or  in  the  least  disturbed.
The  examination,  therefore,  of  my  humours,  and  the  inquiry^

^  I"  Are  you  swollen  up  with  the  love  of  praise .''  There  are  sure
remedies.  .  .  .  There  are  spells  and  charms  by  which  you  may  ease  this
pain  and  throw  off  a  great  part  of  your  complaint." — Shaftesbury  quotes
these  lines  from  Horace,  Ep.  i.  i.  34-36,  in  the  wrong  order.]

2  See  Inquiry,  viz.  Treatise  iv.  of  these  volumes.

192


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

after  my  passions,  must  necessarily  draw  along  with  it  the  search
and  scrutiny  of  my  opinions,  and  the  sincere  consideration  of
my  scope  and  end.  And  thus  the  study  of  human  affection
cannot  fail  of  leading  me  towards  the  knowledge  of  human
nature  and  of  myself.

This  is  the  philosophy  which  by  Nature  has  the  pre-eminence
above  all  other  science  or  knowledge.  Nor  can  this  surely  be  of
the  sort  called  vain  or  deceitful,^  since  it  is  the  only  means  by
which  I  can  discover  vanity  and  deceit.  This  is  not  of  that
kind  which  depends  on  genealogies  or  traditions,^  and  ministers
questions  and  vain  jangling.^  It  has  not  its  name,  as  other
philosophies,  from  the  mere  subtlety  and  nicety  of  the  specula-
tion, but  by  way  of  excellence,  from  its  being  superior  to  all
other  speculations,  from  its  presiding  over  all  other  sciences  and
occupations,  teaching  the  measure  of  each,  and  assigning  the
just  value  of  everything  in  life.  By  this  science  religion  itself
is  judged,  spirits  are  searched,  prophecies  proved,  miracles
distinguished :  the  sole  measure  and  standard  being  taken  from
moral  rectitude,  and  from  the  discernment  of  what  is  sound  and
just  in  the  affections.  For  if  the  tree  is  known  only  by  its
fruits,*  my  first  endeavour  must  be  to  distinguish  the  true  taste
of  fruits,  refine  my  palate,  and  establish  a  just  relish  in  the  kind.
So  that  to  bid  me  judge  authority  by  morals,  whilst  the  rule
of  morals  is  supposed  dependent  on  mere  authority  and  will,^
is  the  same  in  reality  as  to  bid  me  see  with  my  eyes  shut,
measure  without  a  standard,  and  count  without  arithmetic.

And  thus  Philosophy,  which  judges  both  of  herself  and
of  everything  besides,  discovers  her  own  province  and  chief
command,  teaches  me  to  distinguish  between  her  person  and
her  likeness,  and  shows  me  her  immediate  and  real  self,  by  that
sole  privilege  of  teaching  me  to  know  myself  and  what  belongs

1  Col.  ii.  8.  2  Tit.  iii.  9.  ^  j  xim.  I  4,6;  vi.  20.

*  Luke  vi.  43,  44 ;  Matt.  vii.  16. See  Treatise  v.  part  ii.  §  5.
^  Supra,  p.  72. [The  allusion  is  presumably  to  Locke. See  his  Essay,
bk.  i.  ch.  iii.  §  6.]

VOL.  I  193  o


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

to  me.  She  gives  to  every  inferior  science  its  just  rank ;  leaves
some  to  measure  sounds,  others  to  scan  syllables,  others  to
weigh  vacuums,  and  define  spaces  and  extensions ;  but  reserves
to  herself  her  due  authority  and  majesty,  keeps  her  state  and
ancient  title  of  vitae  dux,  virtutis  indagatrix,^  and  the  rest
of  those  just  appellations  which  of  old  belonged  to  her  when
she  merited  to  be  apostrophised,  as  she  was,  by  the  orator :
"Tu  inventrix  legum,  tu  magistra  morum  et  disciplinae.  .  .  .
Est  autem  unus  dies  bene  et  ex  praeceptis  tuis  actus,  peccanti
iramortalitati  anteponendus."  ^  Excellent  mistress  !  but  easy
to  be  mistaken  !  whilst  so  many  handmaids  wear  as  illustrious
apparel,  and  some  are  made  to  outshine  her  far  in  dress  and
ornament.

In  reality,  how  specious  a  study,  how  solemn  an  amuse-
ment is  raised  from  what  we  call  philosophical  speculations,
the  formation  of  ideas,  their  compositions,  comparisons,  agree-
ment, and  disagreement !  What  can  have  a  better  appear-
ance, or  bid  fairer  for  genuine  and  true  philosophy  ?  Come
on  then.  Let  me  philosophise  in  this  manner,  if  this  be
indeed  the  way  I  am  to  grow  wise.  Let  me  examine  my  ideas
of  space  and  substance ;  let  me  look  well  into  matter  and  its
modes ;  if  this  be  looking  into  myself,  if  this  be  to  improve  my
understanding  and  enlarge  my  mind.  For  of  this  I  may  soon  be
satisfied.  Let  me  observe  therefore,  with  diligence,  what  passes
here ;  what  connection  and  consistency,  what  agreement  or
disagreement  I  find  within ;  "  whether,  according  to  my  present
ideas,  that  which  I  approve  this  hour,  I  am  like  to  approve  as
well  the  next ;  and  in  case  it  be  otherwise  with  me,  how  or
after  what  manner  I  shall  relieve  myself;  how  ascertain  my
ideas,  and  keep  my  opinion,  liking,  and  esteem  of  things  the
same." If  this  remains  unsolved,  if  I  am  still  the  same  mystery

^  ["Guide  of  life,  investigator  of  virtue."]

2  ["  Thou  didst  find  out  laws,  thou  wast  the  teacher  of  character  and
method.  .  .  .  One  day  spent  well  and  under  thy  rules  is  better  than  an
eternity  of  error." — Cic.  Tilsc.  Disp.  v.  5.]

194


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

to  myself  as  ever,  to  what  purpose  is  all  this  reasoning  and
acuteness  ?  wherefore  do  I  admire  my  philosopher,  or  study  to
become  such  a  one  myself?

To-day  things  have  succeeded  well  with  me,  consequently
my  ideas  are  raised.  "  'Tis  a  fine  world  !  All  is  glorious  !
Everything  delightful  and  entertaining  !  Mankind,  conversation,
company,  society ;  what  can  be  more  desirable  ?  "  To-morrow
comes  disappointment,  crosses,  disgrace.  And  what  follows.?
"  O  miserable  mankind  !  Wretched  state !  Who  would  live
out  of  solitude .''  Who  would  write  or  act  for  such  a  world .? ""
Philosopher  !  where  are  thy  ideas  ?  Where  is  truth,  certainty,
evidence,  so  much  talked  of?  'Tis  here  surely  they  are  to  be
maintained  if  anywhere.  'Tis  here  I  am  to  preserve  some  just
distinctions  and  adequate  ideas,  which  if  I  cannot  do  a  jot  the
more  by  what  such  a  philosophy  can  teach  me,  the  philosophy
is  in  this  respect  imposing  and  delusive.  For  whatever  its  other
virtues  are,  it  relates  not  to  me  myself,  it  concerns  not  the  man,
nor  any  other  wise  affects  the  mind  than  by  the  conceit  of
knowledge  and  the  false  assurance  raised  from  a  supposed
improvement.

Again,  what  are  my  ideas  of  the  world,  of  pleasure,  riches,
fame,  life  ?  What  judgment  am  I  to  make  of  mankind  and
human  affairs.?  What  sentiments  am  I  to  frame.?  What
opinions  ?  What  maxims  ?  If  none  at  all,  why  do  I  concern
myself  in  speculations  about  my  ideas  ?  What  is  it  to  me,  for
instance,  to  know  what  kind  of  idea  I  can  form  of  space  ?
"  Divide  a  solid  body  of  whatever  dimension,"  says  a  renowned
modem  philosopher,  "  and  'twill  be  impossible  for  the  parts  to
move  within  the  bounds  of  its  superficies,  if  there  be  not  left
in  it  a  void  space,  as  big  as  the  least  part  into  which  the
said  body  is  divided."  ^

Thus  the  atomist,  or  Epicurean,  pleading  for  a  vacuum.
The  plenitudinarian,  on  the  other  side,  brings  his  fluid  in  play,

^  These  are  the  words  of  the  particular  author  cited. [The  citation  is
from  Locke,  Essay,  bk.  ii.  eh.  xiii.  §  23,  but  it  is  not  verbatim.  1

195


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  joins  the  idea  of  body  and  extension.  Of  this,  says  one,
I  have  clear  ideas.  Of  this,  says  the  other,  I  can  be  certain.
And  what  say  I  if  in  the  whole  matter  there  be  no  certainty
at  all  ?  For  mathematicians  are  divided,  and  mechanics
proceed  as  well  on  one  hypothesis  as  on  the  other.  My  mind,
I  am  satisfied,  will  proceed  either  way  alike,  for  it  is  concerned
on  neither  side.  ...  "  Philosopher,  let  me  hear  concerning
what  is  of  some  moment  to  me.  Let  me  hear  concerning  life
what  the  right  notion  is,  and  what  I  am  to  stand  to  upon
occasion  ;  that  I  may  not  when  life  seems  retiring,  or  has  run
itself  out  to  the  very  dregs,  cry  Vanity ;  condemn  the  world
and  at  the  same  time  complain  that  life  is  short  and  passing."
For  why  so  short  indeed  if  not  found  sweet  .-^  Why  do  I
complain  both  ways  ?  Is  vanity,  mere  vanity,  a  happiness  ?
Or  can  misery  pass  away  too  soon  ?

This  is  of  moment  to  me  to  examine.  This  is  worth  my
while.  If,  on  the  other  side,  I  cannot  find  the  agreement  or
disagreement  of  my  ideas  in  this  place,  if  I  can  come  to  nothing
certain  here,  what  is  all  the  rest  to  me  ?  What  signifies  it
how  I  come  by  my  ideas,  or  how  compound  them ;  which  are
simple,  and  which  complex  ?  If  I  have  a  right  idea  of  life,  now
when  perhaps  I  think  slightly  of  it,  and  resolve  with  myself
"  that  it  may  easily  be  laid  down  on  any  honourable  occasion
of  service  to  my  friends  or  country ,''"'  teach  me  how  I  may
preserve  this  idea,  or  at  least  how  I  may  get  safely  rid  of  it ;
that  it  may  trouble  me  no  more  nor  lead  me  into  ill  adventures.
Teach  me  how  I  came  by  such  an  opinion  of  worth  and  virtue ;
what  it  is  which  at  one  time  raises  it  so  high,  and  at  another
time  reduces  it  to  nothing ;  how  these  disturbances  and  fluctua-
tions happen,  "By  what  innovation,  what  composition,  what
intervention  of  other  ideas."  If  this  be  the  subject  of  the
philosophical  art,  I  readily  apply  to  it  and  embrace  the  study.
If  there  be  nothing  of  this  in  the  case,  I  have  no  occasion  for
this  sort  of  learning,  and  am  no  more  desirous  of  knowing  how
I  form  or  compound  those  ideas  which  are  marked  by  words,

196


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

than  I  am  of  knowing  how,  and  by  what  motions  of  my  tongue
or  palate,  I  form  those  articulate  sounds,  which  I  can  full  as  well
pronounce  without  any  such  science  or  speculation.

Section  II

But  here  it  may  be  convenient  for  me  to  quit  myself  awhile
in  favour  of  my  reader,  lest  if  he  prove  one  of  the  uncourteous
sort,  he  should  raise  a  considerable  objection  in  this  place.  He
may  ask  perhaps  "  why  a  writer  for  self-entertainment  should
not  keep  his  writings  to  himself,  without  appearing  in  public
or  before  the  world.""

In  answer  to  this  I  shall  only  say  that  for  appearing  in
public  or  before  the  world,  I  do  not  readily  conceive  what  our
worthy  objector  may  understand  by  it.  1  can  call  to  mind,
indeed,  among  my  acquaintance,  certain  merchant-adventurers
in  the  letter-trade,  who  in  correspondence  with  their  factor-
bookseller  are  entered  into  a  notable  commerce  with  the  world.
They  have  directly,  and  in  due  form  of  preface  and  epistle
dedicatory,  solicited  the  public,  and  made  interest  with  friends
for  favour  and  protection  on  this  account.  They  have  ventured,
perhaps,  to  join  some  great  man''s  reputation  with  their  own  ;
having  obtained  his  permission  to  address  a  work  to  him  on
presumption  of  its  passing  for  something  considerable  in  the
eyes  of  mankind.  One  may  easily  imagine  that  such  patronised
and  avowed  authors  as  these  would  be  shrewdly  disappointed  if
the  public  took  no  notice  of  their  labours.  But  for  my  own
part,  'tis  of  no  concern  to  me  what  regard  the  public  bestows  on
my  amusements,  or  after  what  manner  it  comes  acquainted
with  what  I  write  for  my  private  entertainment,  or  by  way  of
advice  to  such  of  my  acquaintance  as  are  thus  desperately
embarked.

'Tis  requisite  that  my  friends  who  peruse  these  advices
should  read  them  in  better  characters  than  those  of  my  own
hand-writing ;  and  by  good  luck  I  have  a  very  fair  hand  offered,

197


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

which  may  save  me  the  trouble  of  re-copying,  and  can  readily
furnish  me  with  as  many  handsome  copies  as  I  would  desire  for
my  own  and  friends'"  service.  I  have  not  indeed  forbid  my
amanuensis  the  making  as  many  as  he  pleases  for  his  own
benefit.  What  I  write  is  not  worth  being  made  a  mystery.
And  if  it  be  worth  any  one's  purchasing,  much  good  may  it  do
the  purchaser.  'Tis  a  traffic  I  have  no  share  in,  though  I
accidentally  furnish  the  subject-matter.

And  thus  am  I  nowise  more  an  author  for  being  in  print.
I  am  conscious  of  no  additional  virtue  or  dangerous  quality
from  having  lain  at  any  time  under  the  weight  of  that  alpha-
betic engine  called  the  Press.  I  know  no  conjuration  in  it,
either  with  respect  to  Church  or  State.  Nor  can  I  imagine  why
the  machine  should  appear  so  formidable  to  scholars  and
renowned  clerks,  whose  very  mystery  and  foundation  depends
on  the  letter-manufacture.  To  allow  benefit  of  clergy  and  to
restrain  the  press  seems  to  me  to  have  something  of  cross-
purpose  in  it.  I  can  hardly  think  that  the  quality  of  what  is
written  can  be  altered  by  the  manner  of  writing,  or  that  there
can  be  any  harm  in  a  quick  way  of  copying  fair  and  keeping
copies  alike.  Why  a  man  may  not  be  permitted  to  write  with
iron  as  well  as  quill,  I  cannot  conceive  ;  or  how  a  writer  changes
his  capacity  by  this  new  dress,  any  more  than  by  the  wear  of
wove-stockings,  after  having  worn  no  other  manufacture  than
the  knit.

So  much  for  my  reader,  if  perchance  I  have  any  besides  the
friend  or  two  above  mentioned.  For  being  engaged  in  morals,
and  induced  to  treat  so  rigorous  a  subject  as  that  of  self-
examination,  I  naturally  call  to  mind  the  extreme  delicacy  and
tenderness  of  modern  appetites  in  respect  of  the  philosophy  of
this  kind.  What  distaste  possibly  may  have  arisen  from  some
medicinal  doses  of  a  like  nature  administered  to  raw  stomachs
at  a  very  early  age,  I  will  not  pretend  to  examine.  But  what-
ever manner  in  philosophy  happens  to  bear  the  least  resemblance
to  that  of  Catechism,  cannot,  I  am  persuaded,  of  itself  prove

198


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

very  inviting.  Such  a  smart  way  of  questioning  ourselves  in  our
youth  has  made  our  manhood  more  averse  to  the  expostulatory
discipline.  And  though  the  metaphysical  points  of  our  belief  are
by  this  method,  with  admirable  care  and  caution,  instilled  into
tender  minds,  yet  the  manner  of  this  anticipating  philosophy
may  make  the  after-work  of  reason,  and  the  inward  exercise  of
the  mind  at  a  riper  age,  proceed  the  more  heavily  and  with
greater  reluctance.

It  must  needs  be  a  hard  case  with  us,  after  having  passed  so
learned  a  childhood,  and  been  instructed  in  our  own  and  other
higher  natures,  essences,  incorporeal  substances,  personalities,
and  the  like,  to  condescend  at  riper  years  to  ruminate  and  con
over  this  lesson  a  second  time,  ""Tis  hard  after  having,  by  so
many  pertinent  interrogatories  and  decisive  sentences,  declared
who  and  what  we  are,  to  come  leisurely,  in  another  view,  to
inquire  concerning  our  real  self  and  end,  the  judgment  we  are
to  make  of  interest,  and  the  opinion  we  should  have  of  advan-
tage and  good,  which  is  what  must  necessarily  determine  us  in
our  conduct  and  prove  the  leading  principle  of  our  lives.

Can  we  bear  looking  anew  into  these  mysteries  ?  Can  we
endure  a  new  schooling  after  having  once  learnt  our  lesson
from  the  world  ?  Hardly,  I  presume.  For  by  the  lesson  of
this  latter  school,  and  according  to  the  sense  I  acquire  in  con-
verse with  prime  men,  should  I  at  any  time  ask  myself  what
governed  me  .'*  I  should  answer  readily.  My  interest.  "  But
what  is  interest  ?  and  how  governed  .'*  By  opinion  and  fancy.
Is  everything  therefore  my  interest  which  I  fancy  such  ?  or  may
my  fancy  possibly  be  wrong  ?  It  may.  If  my  fancy  of  interest
therefore  be  wrong,  can  my  pursuit  or  aim  be  right .''  Hardly
so.  Can  I  then  be  supposed  to  hit,  when  I  know  not,  in
reality,  so  much  as  how  to  aim  ? ""

My  chief  interest  it  seems,  therefore,  must  be  to  get  an  aim,
and  know  certainly  where  my  happiness  and  advantage  lies.
"  Where  else  can  it  lie  than  in  my  pleasure,  since  my  advan-
tage and  good  must  ever  be  pleasing,  and  what  is  pleasing  can

199


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

never  be  other  than  my  advantage  and  good  ?  Excellent !
Let  fancy  therefore  govern,  and  interest  be  what  we  please.
For  if  that  which  pleases  us  be  our  good^  because  it  pleases
us,  anything  may  be  our  interest  or  good.  Nothing  can  come
amiss.  That  which  we  fondly  make  our  happiness  at  one  time,
we  may  as  readily  unmake  at  another.  No  one  can  learn  what
real  good  is.  Nor  can  any  one  upon  this  foot  be  said  to  under-
stand his  interest.''

Here,  we  see,  are  strange  embroils  !  .  .  .  But  let  us  try  to
deal  more  candidly  with  ourselves,  and  frankly  own  that
pleasure  is  no  rule  of  good,^  since  when  we  follow  pleasure
merely,  we  are  disgusted,  and  change  from  one  sort  to  another ;
condemning  that  at  one  time  which  at  another  we  earnestly
approve,  and  never  judging  equally  of  happiness  whilst  we  follow
passion  and  mere  humour.

A  lover,  for  instance,  when  struck  with  the  idea  or  fancy
of  his  enjoyment,  promises  himself  the  highest  felicity  if  he
succeeds  in  his  new  amour.  .  .  .  He  succeeds  in  it,  finds  not
the  felicity  he  expected,  but  promises  himself  the  same  again
in  some  other.  .  .  .  The  same  thing  happens ;  he  is  disappointed
as  before,  but  still  has  faith.  .  .  .  Wearied  with  this  game,  he
quits  the  chace,  renounces  the  way  of  courtship  and  intrigue,
and  detests  the  ceremony  and  difficulty  of  the  pleasure.  ...  A
new  species  of  amours  invites  him.  Here  too  he  meets  the  same
inquietude  and  inconstancy.  .  .  .  Scorning  to  grow  sottish  and
plunge  in  the  lowest  sink  of  vice,  he  shakes  off  his  intemperance,
despises  gluttony  and  riot,  and  hearkens  to  Ambition.  He  grows
a  man  of  business  and  seeks  authority  and  fame.  .  .  .
Quo  teneam  vultus  mutantem  Protea  node  ?  ^

Lest  this  therefore  should  be  my  own  case,  let  me  see  whether
) I  can  control  my  fancy  and  fix  it,  if  possible,  on  something

^  Moralists,  part  ii,  §  1  ;  Misc.  iv.  ch.  L

2  Infra,  p.  218.
I 3  ^t(  ^itji  what  chain  can  I  bind  the  ever-changing  figure  of  Proteus  ?  "
I — Hor.  Ep.  I.  i.  90.]

200


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

which  may  hold  good.  .  .  .  ^Tien  I  exercise  my  reason  in  moral
subjects,  M-hen  I  employ  my  affection  in  friendly  and  social
actions,  I  find  I  can  sincerely  t^njoy  myself.  If  there  be  a
pleasure  therefore  of  this  kind,  why  not  indulge  it  ?  Or  what
harm  would  there  be,  supposing  it  should  grow  greater  by
indulgence  .'*  If  I  am  lazy  and  indulge  myself  in  the  languid
pleasure,  I  know  the  harm  and  can  foresee  the  drone.  If  I  am
luxurious,  I  know  the  harm  of  this  also,  and  have  the  plain
prospect  of  the  sot.  If  avarice  be  my  pleasure,  the  end  I  know
is  being  a  miser.  But  if  honesty  be  my  delight,  I  know  no
other  consequence  from  indulging  such  a  passion  than  that  of
growing  better  natured,  and  enjoying  more  and  more  the
pleasures  of  society.  On  the  other  hand,  if  this  honest  pleasure
be  lost  by  knavish  indulgence  and  immorality,  there  can  hardly
be  a  satisfaction  left  of  any  kind,  since  good-nature  and  social
affection  are  so  essential  even  to  the  pleasures  of  a  debauch.^

If  therefore  the  only  pleasure  I  can  freely  and  without
reserve  indulge,  be  that  of  the  honest  and  moral  kind ;  if  the
rational  and  social  enjoyment  be  so  constant  in  itself  and  so
essential  to  happiness  ;  why  should  I  not  bring  my  other  pleasures
to  coiTespond  and  be  friends  with  it,  rather  than  raise  myself
other  pleasures  which  are  destructive  of  this  foundation,  and
have  no  manner  of  correspondency  with  one  another  ?

Upon  this  bottom  let  me  try  how  I  can  bear  the  assault  of
Fancy,  and  maintain  myself  in  my  moral  fortress  against  the
attacks  which  are  raised  on  the  side  of  corrupt  interest  and  a
wrong  self.  When  the  idea  of  pleasure  strikes  I  ask  myself,
"  Before  I  was  thus  struck  by  the  idea,  was  anything  amiss  with
me  ?  No.  Therefore  remove  the  idea  and  I  am  well.  But
having  this  idea  such  as  I  now  have,  I  cannot  want  the  thing
without  regi-et.  See  therefore  which  is  best :  either  to  suffer
under  this  want  till  the  idea  be  removed ;  or  by  satisfying  the
want,  confirm  not  only  this  idea  but  all  of  the  same  stamp ! "'"'

In  reality  has  not  every  fancy  a  like  privilege  of  passing,  if
^  Inquiry,  bk.  ii,  part  ii.  §  1,  2.

201


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

any  single  one  be  admitted  upon  its  own  authority  ?  And  what
must  be  the  issue  of  such  an  economy  if  the  whole  fantastic
crew  be  introduced,  and  the  door  refused  to  none  ?  What  else
is  it  than  this  management  which  leads  to  the  most  dissolute
and  profligate  of  characters?  What  is  it,  on  the  contrary,
which  raises  us  to  any  degree  of  worth  or  steadiness,  besides  a
direct  contraiy  practice  and  conduct  ?  Can  there  be  strength
of  mind,  can  there  be  command  over  oneself,  if  the  ideas  of
pleasure,  the  suggestions  of  fancy,  and  the  strong  pleadings  of
appetite  and  desire  are  not  often  withstood,  and  the  imagina-
tions soundly  reprimanded  and  brought  under  subjection  ?

Thus  it  appears  that  the  method  of  examining  our  ideas  is
no  pedantic  practice.  Nor  is  there  anything  ungallant  in  the
manner  of  thus  questioning  the  lady  fancies,  which  present
themselves  as  charmingly  dressed  as  possible  to  solicit  their
cause  and  obtain  a  judgment  by  favour  of  that  worse  part  and
corrupt  self  to  whom  they  make  their  application.

It  may  be  justly  said  of  these,  that  they  are  very  powerful
solicitresses.  They  never  seem  to  importune  us,  though  they
are  ever  in  our  eye,  and  meet  us  whichever  way  we  turn.  They
understand  better  how  to  manage  their  appearance  than  by
always  throwing  up  their  veil  and  showing  their  faces  openly  in
a  broad  light,  to  run  the  danger  of  cloying  our  sight,  or  exposing
their  features  to  a  strict  examination.  So  far  are  they  from  such
forwardness,  that  they  often  stand  as  at  a  distance,  suffering  us
to  make  the  first  advance,  and  contenting  themselves  with
discovering  a  side-face,  or  bestowing  now  and  then  a  glance  in
a  mysterious  manner,  as  if  they  endeavoured  to  conceal  their
persons.

One  of  the  most  dangerous  of  these  enchantresses  appears  in
a  sort  of  dismal  weed,  with  the  most  mournful  countenance
imaginable ;  often  casting  up  her  eyes,  and  wringing  her  hands,
so  that  "'tis  impossible  not  to  be  moved  by  her,  till  her  meaning
be  considered  and  her  imposture  fully  known.  The  airs  she
borrows  are  from  the  tragic  muse  Melpomene. Nor  is  she  in

202


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

her  own  person  any  way  amiable  or  attractive.  Far  from  it.
Her  art  is  to  render  herself  as  forbidding  as  possible,  that  her
sisters  may  by  her  means  be  the  more  alluring.  And  if  by  her
tragic  aspect  and  melancholy  looks  she  can  persuade  us  that
Death  (whom  she  represents)  is  such  a  hideous  form,  she  con-
quers in  behalf  of  the  whole  fantastic  tribe  of  wanton,  gay,  and
fond  desires.  Effeminacy  and  cowardice  instantly  prevail.  The
poorest  means  of  life  grow  in  repute  when  the  ends  and  just
conditions  of  it  are  so  little  known,  and  the  dread  of  parting
with  it  raised  to  so  high  a  degree.  The  more  eagerly  we  grasp
at  Life,  the  more  impotent  we  are  in  the  enjoyment  of  it.  By
this  avidity  its  very  lees  and  dregs  are  swallowed.  The  ideas  of
sordid  pleasure  are  advanced.  Worth,  manhood,  generosity,
and  all  the  nobler  opinions  and  sentiments  of  honest,  good,  and
virtuous  pleasure  disappear  and  fly  before  this  Queen  of  Terrors.
'Tis  a  mighty  delight  which  a  sort  of  counter-philosophers
take  in  seconding  this  phantom,  and  playing  her  upon  our
undei*standings  whenever  they  would  take  occasion  to  confound
them.  The  vicious  poets  employ  this  spectre  too  on  their  side,
though  after  a  different  manner.  By  the  help  of  this  tragic
actress  they  gain  a  fairer  audience  for  the  luxurious  fancies,
and  give  their  Eratos  and  other  playsome  Muses  a  fuller  scope
in  the  support  of  riot  and  debauch.  The  gloomy  prospect  of  \
death  becomes  the  incentive  to  pleasures  of  the  lowest  order.  ;
Ashes  and  shade,  the  tomb  and  cypress,  are  made  to  serve  as
foils  to  luxury.  The  abhorrence  of  an  insensible  state  makes
mere  vitality  and  animal  sensation  highly  cherished.  /

Indulge  genio  ;  carparaus  dulcia  ;  nostrum  est
Quod  vivis ;  cinis,  et  manes,  et  fabula  fies.^

""Tis  no  wonder  if  Luxury  profits  by  the  deformity  of  this  spectre-
opinion.  She  supports  her  interest  by  this  childish  bug-bear ;
and,  like  a  mother  by  her  infant,  is  hugged  so  much  the  closer

^  ["  Give  your  genius  play  ;  let  us  take  our  pleasures  ;  your  life  (alone)
is  ours  ;  you  will  (soon)  be  but  dust,  a  ghost,  a  name." — Pers.  v.  151, 152.]

203


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

by  her  votary  as  the  fear  presses  him  and  grows  importunate.
She  invites  him  to  live  fast,  according  to  her  best  measure  of
life.  And  well  she  may.  Who  would  not  willingly  make  life
pass  away  as  quickly  as  was  possible,  when  the  nobler  pleasures
of  it  were  already  lost  or  corrupted  by  a  wretched  fear  of  death.?
The  intense  selfishness  and  meanness  which  accompanies  this
fear,  must  reduce  us  to  a  low  ebb  of  enjoyment,  and  in  a
manner  bring  to  nothing  that  main  sum  of  satisfactory  sensa-
tion by  which  we  vulgarly  rate  the  happiness  of  our  private
condition  and  fortune.

But  see !  A  lovely  form  advances  to  our  assistance,  intro-
duced by  the  prime  Muse,  the  beauteous  Calliope  !  She  shows
us  what  real  beauty  is,  and  what  those  numbers  are  which  make
life  perfect  and  bestow  the  chief  enjoyment.  She  sets  virtue
before  our  eyes,  and  teaches  us  how  to  rate  life  from  the  experi-
ence of  the  most  heroic  spirits.  She  brings  her  sisters  Clio  and
Urania  to  support  her.  From  the  former  she  borrows  whatever
is  memorable  in  history  and  ancient  time  to  confront  the  tragic
spectre,  and  show  the  fixed  contempt  which  the  happiest  and
freest  nations,  as  well  as  single  heroes  and  private  men  worthy
of  any  note,  have  ever  expressed  for  that  impostress.  From  the
latter  she  borrows  what  is  sublimest  in  philosophy  to  explain
the  laws  of  nature,  the  order  of  the  universe,  and  represent  to
us  the  justice  of  accompanying  this  amiable  administration.
She  shows  us  that  by  this  just  compliance  we  are  made  happiest;
and  that  the  measure  of  a  happy  life  is  not  from  the  fewer  or
more  suns  we  behold,  the  fewer  or  more  breaths  we  draw,  or
meals  we  repeat,  but  from  the  having  once  lived  well,  acted  our
part  handsomely,  and  made  oui*  exit  cheerfully,  and  as  became
us.

Thus  we  retain  on  virtue's  side  the  noblest  party  of  the
Muses.  Whatever  is  august  among  those  sisters,  appears  readily
in  our  behalf.  Nor  are  the  more  jocund  ladies  wanting  in  their
assistance  when  they  act  in  the  perfection  of  their  art,  and
inspire  some  better  geniuses  in  this  kind  of  poetry. Such  were

204


ADVICE  TO AN  AUTHOR

the  nobler  lyrics,  and  those  of  the  latter  and  more  refined
comedy  of  the  ancients.  The  Thalias,  the  Polyhymnias,  the
Terpsy chores,  the  Euterpes  willingly  join  their  parts,  and
being  alike  interested  in  the  cause  of  numbers,  are  with  regret
employed  another  way,  in  favour  of  disorder.  Instead  of  being
made  sirens  to  serve  the  purposes  of  vice,  they  would  with  more
delight  accompany  their  elder  sistei-s,  and  add  their  graces  and
attractive  charms  to  what  is  most  harmonious,  muse-like,  and
divine  in  human  life.  There  is  this  difference  only  between
these  and  the  more  heroic  dames :  that  they  can  more  easily  be
perverted  and  take  the  vicious  form.  For  what  person  of  any
genius  or  masterly  command  in  the  poetic  art  could  think  of
bringing  the  epic  or  tragic  muse  to  act  the  pander,  or  be  sub-
servient to  effeminacy  and  cowardice  ?  Tis  not  against  death,
hazards,  or  toils,  that  tragedy  and  the  heroic  fable  are  pointed.
'TIS  not  mere  life  which  is  here  exalted,  or  has  its  price  enhanced.
On  the  contrary,  its  calamities  are  exposed ;  the  disorders  of  the
passions  set  to  view;  fortitude  recommended;  honour  advanced;
the  contempt  of  death  placed  as  the  peculiar  note  of  every
generous  and  happy  soul ;  and  the  tenacious  love  of  life  as  the
truest  character  of  an  abject  wretch.

Usque  adeone  mori  miserum  est  ?  ^

"Tis  not  to  be  imagined  how  easily  we  deal  with  the  deluding
apparitions  and  false  ideas  of  happiness  and  good,  when  this
frightful  spectre  of  misery  and  ill  is  after  this  manner  well  laid,
and  by  honest  magic  conjured  down,  so  as  not  to  give  the  least
assistance  to  the  other  tempting  forms.  This  is  that  occult
science,  or  sort  of  counter-necromancy,  which  instead  of  ghastli-
ness  and  horror,  inspires  only  what  is  gentle  and  humane,  and
dispels  the  imposing  phantoms  of  every  kind.  He  may  pass
undoubtedly  for  no  mean  conjurer  who  can  deal  with  spirits  of
this  sort.  .  .  .  But  hold  !  .  .  . Let  us  try  the  experiment  in

*  ["  Is  it  so  hard  to  die  ?  " — Virg.  Aeneid,  xu.  646.]

205


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

due  form,  and  draw  the  magic  circle.  Let  us  observe  how  the
inferior  imps  appear  when  the  head  gobhn  is  securely  laid.  .  .  .

See !  The  enchantress  Indolence  presents  herself  in  all  the
pomp  of  ease  and  lazy  luxury.  She  promises  the  sweetest  life,
and  invites  us  to  her  pillow ;  enjoins  us  to  expose  ourselves  to
no  adventurous  attempt,  and  forbids  us  any  engagement  which
may  bring  us  into  action.  "  Where,  then,  are  the  pleasures
which  Ambition  promises  and  Love  affords  ?  How  is  the  gay
world  enjoyed  ?  Or  are  those  to  be  esteemed  no  pleasures  which
are  lost  by  dulness  and  inaction  ?  But  indolence  is  the  highest
pleasure.  To  live,  and  not  to  feel !  To  feel  no  trouble.  What
good  then  ?  Life  itself.  And  is  this  properly  to  live  ?  Is
sleeping,  life  ?  Is  this  what  I  should  study  to  prolong  ?  .  .  .""
Here  the  fantastic  tribe  itself  seems  scandalised.  A  civil  war
begins.  The  major  part  of  the  capricious  dames  range  them-
selves on  Reason's  side,  and  declare  against  the  languid  siren.
Ambition  blushes  at  the  offered  sweet.  Conceit  and  Vanity  take
superior  airs.  Even  Luxury  herself,  in  her  polite  and  elegant
humour,  reproves  the  apostate  sister,  and  marks  her  as  an  alien
to  true  pleasure.  ..."  Away,  thou  drowsy  phantom !  Haunt
me  no  more.  For  I  have  learned  from  better  than  thy  sister-
hood that  life  and  happiness  consist  in  action  and  employment.''

But  here  a  busy  form  solicits  us :  active,  industrious,  watch-
ful, and  despising  pains  and  labour.  She  wears  the  serious
countenance  of  virtue,  but  with  features  of  anxiety  and  disquiet.
What  is  it  she  mutters  ?  What  looks  she  on  with  such  admira-
tion and  astonishment  ?  Bags !  coffers  !  heaps  of  shining  metal !
"  What !  for  the  service  of  Luxury  ?  for  her  these  preparations  ?
Art  thou  then  her  friend,  grave  fancy  !  is  it  for  her  thou  toilest  ?
No,  but  for  provision  against  want.  But,  luxury  apart,  tell  me
now,  hast  thou  not  already  a  competence  ?  'Tis  good  to  be
secure  against  the  fear  of  starving.  Is  there  then  no  death
beside  this  ?  No  other  passage  out  of  life  ?  Are  other  doors
secured  if  this  be  barred  ?  Say,  Avarice,  thou  emptiest  of
phantoms,  is  it  not  vile  cowardice  thou  servest  ? What  further

206


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

have  I  then  to  do  with  thee,  thou  doubly  vile  dependent,  when
once  I  have  dismissed  thy  patroness  and  despised  her  threats  ? ""

Thus  I  contend  with  fancy  and  opinion,^  and  search  the
mint  and  foundery  of  imagination.  For  here  the  appetites  and
desires  are  fabricated  ;  hence  they  derive  their  privilege  and
currency.  If  I  can  stop  the  mischief  here  and  prevent  false
coinage,  I  am  safe.  "  Idea !  wait  awhile  till  I  have  examined
thee,  whence  thou  art  and  to  whom  thou  retainest.  Art  thou
of  Ambition's  train .''  or  dost  thou  promise  only  pleasure .''
Say,  what  am  I  to  sacrifice  for  thy  sake  ?  What  honour  ?
What  truth .''  What  manhood  .''  What  bribe  is  it  thou  bringest
along  with  thee  ?  Describe  the  flattering  object,  but  without
flattery ;  plain  as  the  thing  is,  without  addition,  without  sparing
or  reserve.  Is  it  wealth  ?  is  it  a  report  ?  a  title  ?  or  a  female  ?
Come  not  in  a  troop,  ye  fancies  !  bring  not  your  objects  crowd-
ing to  confound  the  sight,  but  let  me  examine  your  worth  and
weight  distinctly.  Think  not  to  raise  accumulative  happiness.
For  if  separately  you  contribute  nothing,  in  conjunction  you
can  only  amuse."

Whilst  I  am  thus  penning  a  soliloquy  in  form,  I  cannot
forbear  reflecting  on  my  work.  And  when  I  view  the  manner
of  it  with  a  familiar  eye,  I  am  readier,  I  find,  to  make  myself
diversion  on  this  occasion  than  to  suppose  I  am  in  good  earnest
about  a  work  of  consequence.  "  What !  am  I  to  be  thus
fantastical  ?  Must  I  busy  myself  with  phantoms  ?  fight  with
apparitions  and  chimeras .?  For  certain,  or  the  chimeras  will
be  beforehand  with  me,  and  busy  themselves  so  as  to  get  the
better  of  my  understanding.  What !  talk  to  myself  like  some
madman,  in  different  persons,  and  under  different  characters !
Undoubtedly,  or  'twill  be  soon  seen  who  is  a  real  madman,  and
changes  character  in  earnest  without  knowing  how  to  help  it.''

This  indeed  is  but  too  certain :  that  as  long  as  we  enjoy
a  mind,  as  long  as  we  have  appetites  and  sense,  the  fancies  of
all  kinds  will  be  hard  at  work ;  and  whether  we  are  in  company
*  Misc.  iv.  ch.  i.  middle  part.

207


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

or  alone  they  must  range  still  and  be  active.  They  must  have
their  field.  The  question  is,  whether  they  shall  have  it  wholly
to  themselves,  or  whether  they  shall  acknowledge  some  con-
troller or  manager.  If  none,  'tis  this,  I  fear,  which  leads  to
madness.  "'TIS  this,  and  nothing  else,  which  can  be  called
madness  or  loss  of  reason.  For  if  Fancy  be  left  judge  of
anything,  she  must  be  judge  of  all.  Everything  is  right,  if
anything  be  so,  because  I  fancy  it.  "  The  house  turns  round.
The  prospect  turns.  No,  but  my  head  turns  indeed :  I  have  a
giddiness ;  that  is  all.  Fancy  would  persuade  me  thus  and
thus,  but  I  know  better.""  'Tis  by  means  therefore  of  a  con-
troller and  correcter  of  fancy  that  I  am  saved  from  being  mad.
Otherwise,  'tis  the  house  turns  when  I  am  giddy.  'Tis  things
which  change  (for  so  I  must  suppose)  when  my  passion  merely
or  temper  changes.  "  But  I  was  out  of  order.  I  dreamt.
Who  tells  me  this  ?  Who  besides  the  correctrice  by  whose
means  I  am  in  my  wits,  and  without  whom  I  am  no  longer
myself.""

Every  man  indeed  who  is  not  absolutely  beside  himself,
must  of  necessity  hold  his  fancies  under  some  kind  of  discipline
and  management.  The  stricter  this  discipline  is,  the  more  the
man  is  rational  and  in  his  wits.  The  looser  it  is,  the  more
fantastical  he  must  be,  and  the  nearer  to  the  madman's  state.
This  is  a  business  which  can  never  stand  still.  I  must  always
be  winner  or  loser  at  the  game.  Either  I  work  upon  my  fancies,
or  they  on  me.  If  I  give  quarter,  they  will  not.  There  can  be
no  truce,  no  suspension  of  arms  between  us.  The  one  or  the
other  must  be  superior  and  have  the  command.  For  if  the
fancies  are  left  to  themselves,  the  government  must  of  course  be
theirs.  And  then,  what  difference  between  such  a  state  and
madness  ?

The  question  therefore  is  the  same  here  as  in  a  family  or
household  when  'tis  asked,  "  Who  rules  ?  or  who  is  master  ?  "

Learn  by  the  voices.  Observe  who  speaks  aloud  in  a
commanding  tone ;  who  talks,  who  questions,  or  who  is  talked

208


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

with,  and  who  questioned.  For  if  the  servants  take  the  former
part,  they  are  the  masters,  and  the  government  of  the  house
will  be  found  such  as  naturally  may  be  expected  in  these  cir-
cumstances.

How  stands  it  therefore  in  my  own  economy,  my  principal
province  and  command  ?  How  stand  my  fancies  ?  How  deal
they  with  me .''  Or  do  I  take  upon  me  rather  to  deal  with
them  ?  Do  I  talk,  question,  arraign  ?  Or  am  I  talked  with,
arraigned,  and  contented  to  hear  without  giving  a  reply  ?  If
I  vote  with  Fancy,  resign  my  opinion  to  her  command,^  and
judge  of  happiness  and  misery  as  she  judges,  how  am  I
myself  ?

He  who  in  a  plain  imagines  precipices  at  his  feet,  impending
rocks  over  his  head  ;  fears  bursting  clouds  in  a  clear  sky ;  cries
fire !  deluge !  earthquake,  or  thunder !  when  all  is  quiet,  does
he  not  rave  ?  But  one  whose  eyes  seemingly  strike  fire  by  a
blow,  one  whose  head  is  giddy  from  the  motion  of  a  ship  after
having  been  newly  set  ashore,  or  one  who  from  a  distemper  in
his  ear  hears  thundering  noises,  can  readily  redress  these  several
apprehensions,  and  is  by  this  means  saved  from  madness.

A  distemper  in  my  eye  may  make  me  see  the  strangest
kind  of  figures.  And  when  cataracts  and  other  impurities  are
gathering  in  that  organ,  flies,  insects,  and  other  various  forms
seem  playing  in  the  air  before  me.  But  let  my  senses  err  ever
so  widely,  I  am  not  on  this  account  beside  myself;  nor  am  I
out  of  my  own  possession  whilst  there  is  a  person  left  within
who  has  power  to  dispute  the  appearances  and  redress  the
imagination.

I  am  accosted  by  ideas  and  striking  apprehensions,  but  I
take  nothing  on  their  report,  I  hear  their  story  and  return
them  answer  as  they  deserve.  Fancy  and  I  are  not  all  one.
The  disagreement  makes  me  my  own.  When,  on  the  contrary,
I  have  no  debate  with  her,  no  controversy,  but  take  for  happi-
ness and  misery,  for  good  and  ill,  whatever  she  presents  as  such,
^  Mi)5C.  iv.  ch.  i.  middle  pai*!.

VOL.  I  209  P


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

I must then  join  voices  with her  and cry precipice ! fire !
Cerberus !  Elysium !  .  .  .

Sandy  deserts,  flowery  fields,
Seas  of  milk,  and  sliips  of  amber !

A  Grecian  prince,  who  had  the  same  madness  as  Alexander,
and  was  deeply  struck  with  the  fancy  of  conquering  worlds,  was
ingeniously  shown  the  method  of  expostulating  with  his  lady
governess,  when  by  a  discreet  friend,  and  at  an  easy  horn*,  he
was  asked  little  by  little  concerning  his  design,  and  the  final
purpose  and  promised  good  which  the  flattering  dame  proposed
to  him.  The  story  is  sufficiently  noted.  All  the  artifice
employed  against  the  prince  was  a  well-managed  interrogatory
of  what  next  ?  Lady  Fancy  was  not  aware  of  the  design  upon
her ;  but  let  herself  be  wormed  out  by  degrees.  At  first  she
said  the  princess  design  was  only  upon  a  tract  of  land,  which
stood  out  like  a  promontory  before  him  and  seemed  to  eclipse
his  glory.  A  fair  rich  island,  which  was  close  by,  presented
itself  next,  and  as  it  were  naturally  invited  conquest.  The
opposite  coast  came  next  in  view.  Then  the  continent  on  each
side  the  larger  sea.  And  then  (what  was  easiest  of  all,  and
would  follow  of  course)  the  dominion  both  of  sea  and  land.
"And  what  next  .'* ''  replied  the  friend.  "What  shall  we  do  when
we  are  become  thus  happy  and  have  obtained  our  highest  wish  ?
Why  then  we  will  sit  down  peaceably,  and  be  good  company
over  a  bottle.  Alas,  sir,  what  hinders  us  from  doing  the  same
where  we  now  are  ?  Will  our  humour  or  our  wine  grow  better  ?
Shall  we  be  more  secure  or  at  heart's  ease  ?  What  you  may
possibly  lose  by  these  attempts  is  easy  to  conceive.  But  which
way  you  will  be  a  gainer,  your  own  fancy,  you  see,  cannot
so  much  as  suggest."  Fancy  in  the  meanwhile  earned  her
point ;  for  she  was  absolute  over  the  monarch,  and  had  been
too  little  talked  to  by  herself  to  bear  being  reproved  in
company.  The  prince  grew  sullen,  turned  the  discourse,
abhorred the profanation offered to his sovereign -empress,

210


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

delivered  up  his  thoughts  to  her  again  with  deep  devotion,
and  fell  to  conquering  with  all  his  might.  The  sound  of  victory
rung  in  his  ears.  Laurels  and  crowns  played  before  his  eyes.  .  .  .
What  was  this  beside  giddiness  and  dream  ?  Appearances
uncorrected  ? "  Worlds  dancing  ? Phantoms  playing  ?

Seas  of  milk,  and  ships  of  amber !  "

'Tis  easy  to  bring  the  hero's  case  home  to  ourselves,  and  see,
in  the  ordinary  circumstances  of  life,  how  love,  ambition,  and  the
gayer  tribe  of  fancies,  as  well  as  the  gloomy  and  dark  spectres
of  another  sort,  prevail  over  our  mind.  'Tis  easy  to  observe
how  they  work  on  us  when  we  refuse  to  be  beforehand  with
them,  and  bestow  repeated  lessons  on  the  encroaching  sorceresses.
On  this  it  is  that  our  offered  advice  and  method  of  soliloquy
depends.  And  whether  this  be  of  any  use  towards  making  us
either  wiser  or  happier,  I  am  confident  it  must  help  to  make
us  wittier  and  politer.  It  must,  beyond  any  other  science,
teach  us  the  turns  of  humour  and  passion,  the  variety
of  manners,  the  justness  of  characters,  and  truth  of  things,
which  when  we  rightly  understand  we  may  naturally  describe.
And  on  this  depends  chiefly  the  skill  and  art  of  a  good  writer.
So  that  if  to  write  well  be  a  just  pretence  to  merit,  'tis  plain
that  writers  who  are  apt  to  set  no  small  value  on  their  art
must  confess  there  is  something  valuable  in  this  self-examining
practice  and  method  of  inward  colloquy.

As  for  the  writer  of  these  papers  (as  modern  authors
are  pleased  modestly  to  style  themselves)  he  is  contented,  for
his  part,  to  take  up  with  this  practice,  barely  for  his  own
proper  benefit,  without  regard  to  the  high  function  or  capacity
of  author.  It  may  be  allowed  him  in  this  particular  to  imitate
the  best  genius  and  most  gentleman-like  of  Roman  poets.
And  though  by  an  excess  of  dulness  it  should  be  his  misfortune
to  learn  nothing  of  this  poet's  wit,  he  is  persuaded  he  may
iearn  something  of  his  honesty  and  good-humour,

211


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Neque  enim,  cum  lectulus,  aut  me
Porticus  excepit,  desum  mihi :  "  Rectius  hoc  est :
Hoc  faciens,  vivam  melius :  sic  dulcis  amicis
Occurram."  .  .  . Haec  ego  mecum
Compressis  agito  labris.^

Section III

We  are  now  arrived  to  that  part  of  our  performance  where  it
becomes  us  to  cast  our  eye  back  on  what  has  ah'eady  passed.
The  observers  of  Method  generally  make  this  the  place  of
recapitulation.  Other  artists  have  substituted  the  practice  of
apology  or  extenuation.  For  the  anticipating  manner  of
prefatory  discourse  is  too  well  known  to  work  any  surprising
effect  in  the  author's  behalf,  preface  being  become  only  another
word  to  signify  excuse.  Besides  that  the  author  is  generally
the  most  straitened  in  that  preliminary  part  which  on  other
accounts  is  too  apt  to  grow  voluminous.  He  therefore  takes
the  advantage  of  his  corollary  or  winding-up,  and  ends  pathetic-

^  And  again  : —

Quocirca  mecum  loquor  haec,  tacitusque  recorder  :
Si  tibi  nulla  sitim  fiuiret  copia  lymphae,
Narrares  medicis  :  quod  quanto  plura  parasti,
Tanto  plura  cupis,  nuUiue  faterier  audes .''
♦  *♦««*♦

Non  68  avarus  :  abi, quid .''  caetera  jam  simul  isto
Cum  vitio  fugere .'' caret  tibi  pectus  inani
Ambitione  ? Caret  mortis  formidiue  et  ira .''
[(i)  "  For  I  do  not  fail  when  my  study-couch  or  a  colonnade  has  received
me. '  This  is  more  right ;  if  I  do  thus,  I  shall  live  better  ;  so  my  friends
will  be  glad  to  meet  me.'  .  .  .  These  are  my  silent  reflections  with  myself."
— Hor.  Sat.  i.  iv.  133-138.]

[(ii)  "  And  so  I  speak  as  follows  to  myself  and  try  to  remember  in
silence:—'  If  no  abundance  of  water  ended  your  thirst,  you  would  tell  the
doctors  ;  seeing  that  the  more  money  you  have,  the  more  you  want,  dare  you
tell  no  one  ?  .  .  .  You  are  not  avaricious.  Very  good.  But  have  other
faults  gone  too?  Is  your  heart  free  from  unsatisfying  ambition.^  from
the  fear  of  death  .^  from  auger  .^ '"—Hor.  Ep.  u.  ii.  145-148,  205-207.]

212


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

ally  by  endeavouring  in  the  softest  manner  to  reconcile  his
reader  to  those  faults  which  he  chooses  rather  to  excuse  than
to  amend.

General  practice  has  made  this  a  necessary  part  of  elegance,
hardly  to  be  passed  over  by  any  writer.  Tis  the  chief  stratagem
by  which  he  engages  in  personal  conference  with  his  reader,
and  can  talk  immoderately  of  himself  with  all  the  seeming
modesty  of  one  who  is  the  furthest  from  any  selfish  views  or
conceited  thoughts  of  his  own  merit.  There  appears  such  a
peculiar  grace  and  ingenuity  in  the  method  of  confessing
laziness,  precipitancy,  carelessness,  or  whatever  other  vices
have  been  the  occasion  of  the  author's  deficiency,  that  it  would
seem  a  pity  had  the  work  itself  been  brought  to  such  perfection
as  to  have  left  no  room  for  the  penitent  party  to  enlarge  on
his  own  demerits.  For  from  the  multiplicity  of  these  he  finds
subject  to  ingratiate  himself  with  his  reader,  who  doubtless
is  not  a  little  raised  by  this  submission  of  a  confessing  author,
and  is  ready,  on  these  terms,  to  give  him  absolution  and  receive
him  into  his  good  grace  and  favour.

In  the  galante  world,  indeed,  we  easily  find  how  far  a
humility  of  this  kind  prevails.  They  who  hope  to  rise  by
merit  are  likeliest  to  be  disappointed  in  their  pretensions.
The  confessing  lover,  who  ascribes  all  to  the  bounty  of  the  fair
one,  meets  his  reward  the  sooner  for  having  studied  less  how
to  deserve  it.  For  merit  is  generally  thought  presumptuous,
and  supposed  to  carry  with  it  a  certain  assurance  and  ease
with  which  a  mistress  is  not  so  well  contented.  The  claim  of
well-deserving  seems  to  derogate  from  the  pure  grace  and
favour  of  the  benefactrice,  who  then  appears  to  herself  most
sovereign  in  power,  and  likeliest  to  be  obeyed  without  reserve,
when  she  bestows  her  bounty  where  there  is  least  title  or
pretension.

Thus  a  certain  adoration  of  the  sex  which  passes  in  our  age
without  the  least  charge  of  profaneness  or  idolatry,  may,
according  to  vulgar  imagination,  serve  to  justify  these  galant

218


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

votaries  in  the  imitation  of  the  real  religious  and  devout.
The  method  of  self-abasement^  may  perhaps  be  thought  the
properest  to  make  approaches  to  the  sacred  shrines;  and  the
entire  resignation  of  merit,  in  each  case,  may  be  esteemed  the
only  ground  of  well-deserving.  But  what  we  allow  to  Heaven
or  to  the  fair  should  not,  methinks,  be  made  a  precedent  in
favour  of  the  world.  Whatever  deference  is  due  to  that  body
of  men  whom  we  call  readers,  we  may  be  supposed  to  treat
them  with  sufficient  honour  if  with  thorough  diligence  and
]5ains  we  endeavour  to  render  our  works  perfect,  and  leave  them
to  judge  of  the  performance  as  they  are  able.

However  difficult  or  desperate  it  may  appear  in  any  artist
to  endeavour  to  bring  perfection  into  his  work,  if  he  has  not
at  least  the  idea  of  perfection  to  give  him  aim  he  will  be  found
very  defective  and  mean  in  his  performance.  Though  his
intention  be  to  please  the  world,  he  must  nevertheless  be,  in  a
manner,  above  it,  and  fix  his  eye  upon  that  consummate  grace,
that  beauty  of  Nature,  and  that  perfection  of  numbers  which
the  rest  of  mankind,  feeling  only  by  the  effisct  whilst  ignorant
of  the  cause,  term  theje  ne  s(^ay  quoy^  the  unintelligible  or  the
I  know  not  what,  and  suppose  to  be  a  kind  of  charm  or  enchant-
ment of  which  the  artist  himself  can  give  no  account.

But  here  I  find  I  am  tempted  to  do  what  I  have  myself
condemned.  Hardly  can  I  forbear  making  some  apology  for  my
frequent  recourse  to  the  rules  of  common  artists,  to  the  masters
of  exercise,  to  the  academies  of  painters,  statuaries,  and  to  the
rest  of  the  virtuoso  tribe.  But  in  this  I  am  so  fully  satisfied  I
have  reason  on  my  side,  that  let  custom  be  ever  so  strong  against
me,  I  had  rather  repair  to  these  inferior  schools  to  search  for
Truth  and  Nature  than  to  some  other  places  where  higher  arts
and  sciences  are  professed.

I  am  persuaded  that  to  be  a  virtuoso  (so  far  as  befits  a
gentleman)  is  a  higher  step  towards  the  becoming  a  man  of
virtue  and  good  sense  than  the  being  what  in  this  age  we  call

1  Supra,  p.  28.

214


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

a  scholar.^  For  even  rude  Nature  itself,  in  its  primitive  sim-
plicity, is  a  better  guide  to  judgment  than  improved  sophistry
and  pedantic  learning.  The  "  faciunt,  nae,  intellegendo,  ut
nihil  intellegant ""  will  be  ever  applied  by  men  of  discernment  and
free  thought  to  such  logic,  such  principles,  such  forms  and  rudi-
ments of  knowledge  as  are  established  in  certain  schools  of
literature  and  science.  The  case  is  sufficiently  understood  even
by  those  who  are  unwilling  to  confess  the  truth  of  it.  Effects
betray  their  causes.  And  the  known  turn  and  figure  of  those
understandings,  which  sprout  from  nurseries  of  this  kind,  give  a
plain  idea  of  what  is  judged  on  this  occasion.  Tis  no  wonder
if  after  so  wrong  a  gi-ound  of  education  there  appears  to  be  such
need  of  redress  and  amendment  from  that  excellent  school  which
we  call  the  world.  The  mere  amusements  of  gentlemen  are
found  more  improving  than  the  profound  researches  of  pedants;

^  It  seems  indeed  somewhat  improbable  that  according  to  modern  erudi-
tion, and  as  science  is  now  distributed^  our  ingenious  and  noble  youths
should  obtain  the  full  advantage  of  a  just  and  liberal  education  by  uniting  the
scholar-part  with  that  of  the  real  gentleman  and  man  of  breeding.  Acad-
emies for  exercises,  so  useful  to  the  public,  and  essential  in  the  formation
of  a  genteel  and  liberal  character,  are  unfortunately  neglected.  Letters
are  indeed  banished,  I  know  not  where,  in  distant  cloisters  and  unpractised
cells,  as  our  poet  has  it,  confined  to  the  commerce  and  mean  fellowship  of
bearded  boys.  The  sprightly  arts  and  sciences  are  severed  from  philosophy,
which  consequently  must  grow  dronish,  insipid,  pedantic,  useless,  and
directly  opposite  to  the  real  knowledge  and  practice  of  the  world  and
mankind.  Our  youth  accordingly  seem  to  have  their  only  chance  between
two  widely  different  roads  :  either  that  of  pedantry  and  school-learning,
which  lies  amidst  the  dregs  and  most  corrupt  part  of  ancient  literature,
or  that  of  the  fashionable  illiterate  world,  which  aims  merely  at  the
character  of  the  fine  gentleman,  and  takes  up  with  the  foppery  of  modern
languages  and  foreign  wit.  The  frightful  aspect  of  the  former  of  these
roads  makes  the  journey  appear  desperate  and  impracticable.  Hence  that
aversion  so  generally  conceived  against  a  learned  character,  wrong  turned,
and  hideously  set  out  under  such  difficulties,  and  in  such  seeming  labyrinths
and  mysterious  forms.  As  if  a  Homer  or  a  Xenophon  imperfectly  learnt,
in  raw  years,  might  not  afterwards,  in  a  riper  age,  be  studied  as  well  in  a
capital  city  and  amidst  the  world  as  at  a  college  or  country-town  ! Or  as

215


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  in  the  management  of  our  youth  we  are  forced  to  have
recourse  to  the  former,  as  an  antidote  against  the  genius  pecuHar
to  the  latter.  If  the  formalists  of  this  sort  were  erected  into
patentees  with  a  sole  commission  of  authorship,  we  should  un-
doubtedly see  such  writing  in  our  days  as  would  either  wholly
wean  us  from  all  books  in  general,  or  at  least  from  all  such  as
were  the  product  of  our  own  nation  under  such  a  subordinate
and  conforming  government.

However  this  may  prove,  there  can  be  no  kind  of  writing
which  relates  to  men  and  manners  where  it  is  not  necessary  for
the  author  to  understand  poetical  and  moral  truth,^  the  beauty
of  sentiments,  the  sublime  of  characters,  and  carry  in  his  eye  the
model  or  exemplar  of  that  natural  grace  which  gives  to  every
action  its  attractive  charm.  If  he  has  naturally  no  eye  or  ear
for  these  interior  numbers,  'tis  not  likely  he  should  be  able  to
judge  better  of  that  exterior  proportion  and  symmetry  of  com-
position which  constitutes  a  legitimate  piece.

Could  we  once  convince  ourselves  of  what  is  in  itself  so
evident,^  "That  in  the  very  nature  of  things  there  must  of
necessity  be  the  foundation  of  a  right  and  wrong  taste,  as  well
in respect  of  inward  characters and  features  as of  outward

it  a  Plutarch,  a  TuUy,  or  a  Horace,  could  not  accompany  a  young  man  in
his  travels,  at  a  court,  or  (if  occasion  were)  even  in  a  camp  !  The  case  is
not  without  precedent.  Leisure  is  found  sufficient  for  other  reading  of
numerous  modern  translations  and  worse  originals,  of  Italian  or  French
authors,  who  are  read  merely  for  amusement.  The  French  indeed  may
hoast  of  some  legitimate  authors  of  a  just  relish,  correct,  arid  without  any
mixture  of  the  affected  or  spurious  kinds  :  the  false  tender,  or  the  false
sublime ;  the  conceited  jingle  or  the  ridiculous  point.  They  are  such
geniuses  as  have  been  formed  upon  the  natural  model  of  the  ancients,  and
willingly  own  their  debt  to  those  great  masters.  But  for  the  rest,  who
draw  from  another  fountain,  as  the  Italian  authors  in  particular,  they  may
be  reckoned  no  better  than  the  corrupters  of  true  learning  and  erudition,
ani  can  indeed  be  relished  by  those  alone  whose  education  has  unfortu-
nately denied  them  the  familiarity  of  the  noble  ancients,  and  the  practice
of  a  better  and  more  natural  taste.  See  above,  p.  186,  etc. ,  and  Moralists,
part  i.  §  1.  ^  Supra,  p.  136.  ^  Misc.  iii.  ch.  ii.

216


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

person,  behaviour,  and  action,"  we  should  be  far  more  ashamed
of  ignorance  and  wrong  judgment  in  the  former  than  in  the
latter  of  these  subjects.  Even  in  the  Arts,  which  are  mere
imitations  of  that  outward  grace  and  beauty,  we  not  only  confess
a  taste,  but  make  it  a  part  of  refined  breeding  to  discover  amidst
the  many  false  manners  and  ill  styles  the  true  and  natural  one,
which  represents  the  real  beauty  and  Venus  of  the  kind.^  'Tis
the  like  moral  grace  and  Venus  which,  discovering  itself  in  the
turns  of  character  and  the  variety  of  human  affection,  is  copied
by  the  writing  artist.  If  he  knows  not  this  Venus,  these  graces,
nor  was  ever  sti'uck  with  the  beauty,  the  decorum  of  this  inward
kind,  he  can  neither  paint  advantageously  after  the  life  nor  in
a  feigned  subject  where  he  has  full  scope.  For  never  can  he,
on  these  terms,  represent  merit  and  virtue,  or  mark  deformity
and  blemish.^  Never  can  he  with  justice  and  true  proportion
assign  the  boundaries  of  either  part,  or  separate  the  distant
characters.  The  schemes  must  be  defective  and  the  draughts
confused  where  the  standard  is  weakly  established  and  the
measure  out  of  use.  Such  a  designer,  who  has  so  little  feeling
of  these  proportions,  so  little  consciousness  of  this  excellence  or
these  perfections,  will  never  be  found  able  to  describe  a  perfect
character ;  or,  what  is  more  according  to  art,^  "  express  the
effect  and  force  of  this  perfection  from  the  result  of  various  and
mixed  charactei*s  of  life.""

And  thus  the  sense  of  inward  numbers,  the  knowledge  and
practice  of  the  social  virtues,  and  the  familiarity  and  favour  of
the  moral  graces,  are  essential  to  the  character  of  a  deserving
artist  and  just  favourite  of  the  Muses.  Thus  are  the  Arts  and
Virtues  mutually  friends ;  and  thus  the  science  of  virtuosi  and
that  of  virtue  itself  become,  in  a  manner,  one  and  the  same.

One  who  aspires  to  the  character  of  a  man  of  breeding  and
politeness  is  careful  to  form  his  judgment  of  arts  and  sciences
upon  right  models  of  perfection. If  he  travels  to  Rome,  he

1  Supra,  p.  92,  etc.  ;  and  Misc.  iii,  ch.  ii.  in  the  notes.
2  Supra,  p.  136.  ^  See  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.  in  the  notes.

217


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

inquires  which  are  the  truest  pieces  of  architecture,  the  best
remains  of  statues,  the  best  paintings  of  a  Raphael  or  a  Caraccio.
However  antiquated,  rough,  or  dismal  they  may  appear  to  him
at  first  sight,  he  resolves  to  view  them  over  and  over,  till  he  has
brought  himself  to  relish  them,  and  finds  their  hidden  graces  and
perfections.  He  takes  particular  care  to  turn  his  eye  from
evervthing  which  is  gaudy,  luscious,  and  of  a  false  taste.  Nor  is
he  less  careful  to  turn  his  ear  from  every  sort  of  music  besides
that  which  is  of  the  best  manner  and  truest  harmony.

""Twere  to  be  wished  we  had  the  same  regard  to  a  right  taste
in  life  and  manners.  What  mortal  being,  once  convinced  of  a
difference  in  inward  character,  and  of  a  preference  due  to  one
kind  above  another,  would  not  be  concerned  to  make  his  own
the  best  ?  If  civility  and  humanity  be  a  taste ;  if  brutality,
insolence,  riot,  be  in  the  same  manner  a  taste,  who,  if  he  could
reflect,  would  not  choose  to  form  himself  on  the  amiable  and
agreeable  rather  than  the  odious  and  perverse  model  ?  Who
would  not  endeavour  to  force  Nature  as  well  in  this  respect  as
in  what  relates  to  a  taste  or  judgment  in  other  arts  and  sciences  ?
For  in  each  place  the  force  on  Nature  is  used  only  for  its  redress.
If  a  natural  good  taste  be  not  already  formed  in  us,  why  should
not  we  endeavour  to  form  it,  and  cultivate  it  till  it  become
natural  ?  .  .  .

"  I  like  !  I  fancy  !  I  admire  !  How  ?  By  accident,  or  as  I
please  ?  No.  But  I  learn  to  fancy,  to  admire,  to  please,  as
the  subjects  themselves  are  deserving,  and  can  bear  me  out.
Otherwise,  I  like  at  this  hour  but  dislike  the  next.  I  shall  be
weary  of  my  pursuit,  and,  upon  experience,  find  little  pleasure
in  the  main,^  if  my  choice  and  judgment  in  it  be  from  no  other
rule  than  that  single  one,  because  I  please.  Grotesque  and
monstrous  figures  often  please.  Cruel  spectacles  and  barbarities
are  also  found  to  please,  and,  in  some  tempers,  to  please  beyond
all  other  subjects.  But  is  this  pleasure  right?  And  shall  I
follow  it  if  it  presents  ?  not  strive  with  it,  or  endeavour  to
'  Supra,  p.  200,  and  Mornli.stn,  part  ii.  §  1.

218


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

prevent  its  growth  or  prevalency  in  my  temper?  .  .  .  How
stands  the  case  in  a  more  soft  and  flattering  kind  of  pleasure  ?
.  .  .  Effeminacy  pleases  me.  The  Indian  figures,  the  Japan
work,  the  enamel  strikes  my  eye.  ITie  luscious  colours  and
glossy  paint  gain  upon  my  fancy.  A  French  or  Flemish  style
is  highly  liked  by  me  at  first  sight,  and  I  pursue  my  liking.
But  what  ensues  ?  .  .  .  Do  I  not  for  ever  forfeit  my  good  relish  ?
How  is  it  possible  I  should  thus  come  to  taste  the  beauties  of
an  Italian  master,  or  of  a  hand  happily  formed  on  nature  and
the  ancients  ?  Tis  not  by  wantonness  and  humour  that  I  shall
attain  my  end  and  arrive  at  the  enjoyment  I  propose.  The  art
itself  is  severe,^  the  rules  rigid.  And  if  I  expect  the  knowledge
should  come  to  me  by  accident,  or  in  play,  I  shall  be  grossly

^  Thus  Pliny  speaking  with  a  masterly  judgment  of  the  dignity  of  the
then  declining  art  of  painting  (''de  dignitate  artis  morientis")  shows  it  to
be  not  only  severe  in  respect  of  the  discipline,  style,  design,  but  of  the
characters  and  lives  of  the  noble  masters  ;  not  only  in  the  effect,  but  even  in
the  very  materials  of  the  art,  the  colours,  ornaments,  and  particular  circum-
stances belonging  to  the  profession.  Euphranoris  discipulus  Antidotus  .  .  .
diligentior  quam  numerosior,  et  in  coloribus  severus.  .  .  .  Niciae  comparatur,
et  aliquanto  praefertur  Athenion  Maronites,  Glaucionis  Corinthii  discipulus,
et  austerior  colore,  et  in  austeritate  jucundior,  ut  in  ipsa  pictura  eruditio
eluceat.  .  .  .  Quod  nisi  injuventaobiisset,  nemo  eicompararetur.  .  .  .  Pausiae
filius  et  discipulus  Aristolaus  e  severissimis  pictoribus  fuit.  .  .  .  Fuit  et
nuper  gravis  ac  severus  pictor  Amulius.  .  .  .  Paucis  diei  horis  pingebat,
id  quodque  cum  gravitate,  quod  semper  togatus,  quamquam  in  machinis.
\^'  Antidotus,  a  pupil  of  Euphranor,  was  more  painstaking  than  prolific,  and
was  austere  in  his  colouring.  .  .  .  Athenion  of  Maronea  is  compared  with
Nicias,  but  greatly  preferred  to  him.  He  was  a  pupil  of  Glaucion  the
Corinthian,  rather  gloomy  in  colouring,  yet  pleasant  in  his  gloom,  so  that
his  cultivation  comes  out  in  his  very  painting.  .  .  .  Had  he  not  died
young,  no  one  could  be  compared  with  him.  .  .  .  Aristolaus,  son  and
pupil  of  Pausias,  was  one  of  the  most  austere  of  painters.  .  .  .  Lately  too
we  had  Amulius,  a  severe  and  serious  painter.  .  .  .  He  used  only  to  paint
a  few  hours  a  day,  but  that  very  seriously,  for  he  always  wore  full  dress,
even  on  his  scaffolding." — Pliny,  H.  N.  xxxv.  (cc.  37,  40)  119-137.]  One  of
the  mortal  symptoms  upon  which  Pliny  pronounces  the  sure  death  of  this
noble  art,  not  long  survivor  to  him,  was  what  belonged  in  common  to  all
the  other  perishing  arts  after  the  Fall  of  Liberty  :  I  mean  the  luxury  of

219


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

deluded,  and  prove  myself,  at  best,  a  mock-virtuoso  or  mere
pedant  of  the  kind.""

Here  therefore  we  have  once  again  exhibited  our  moral
science  in  the  same  method  and  manner  of  soliloquy  as  above.
To  this  correction  of  humour  and  formation  of  a  taste  our
reading,  if  it  be  of  the  right  sort,  must  principally  contribute.
Whatever  company  we  keep,  or  however  polite  and  agreeable
their  characters  may  be  with  whom  we  converse  or  con*espond,
if  the  authors  we  read  are  of  another  kind,  we  shall  find  our
palate  strangely  turned  their  way.  We  are  the  unhappier  in
this  respect  for  being  scholai"s  if  our  studies  be  ill  chosen. Nor

the  Roman  Court,  and  the  change  of  taste  and  manners  naturally  conse-
quent to  such  a  change  of  government  and  dominion.  This  excellent,
learned,  and  polite  critic  represents  to  us  the  false  taste  springing  from
the  Court  itself,  and  from  that  opulence,  splendour,  and  affectation  of
magnificence  and  expense  proper  to  the  place.  Thus  in  the  statuary  and
architecture  then  in  vogue  nothing  could  be  admired  beside  what  was
costly  in  the  mere  matter  or  substance  of  the  work.  Precious  rock,  rich
metal,  glittering  stones,  and  other  luscious  ware,  poisonous  to  art,  came
every  day  more  into  request,  and  were  imposed  as  necessary  materials  on
the  best  masters.  'Twas  in  favour  of  these  Court  beauties  and  gaudy  ap-
pearances that  all  good  drawing,  just  design,  and  truth  of  work  l)egan  to
be  despised.  Care  was  taken  to  procure  from  distant  parts  the  most
gorgeous  splendid  colours,  of  the  most  costly  growth  or  composition  ;  not
such  as  had  been  used  by  Apelles  and  the  great  masters,  who  are  justly
severe,  loyal  and  faithful  to  their  art.  This  newer  colouring  our  critic
calls  the  florid  kind.  ITie  materials  were  too  rich  to  be  furnished  by  the
painter,  but  were  bespoke  or  furnished  at  the  cost  of  the  person  who  em-
ployed him  ("  quos  dominus  pingemi  praestat ").  Tlie  other  he  calls  the
austere  kind.  And  thus,  says  he,  "Rerum,  non  animi  pretiis  excubatur:
The  cost,  and  not  the  life  and  art  is  studied."  He  shows,  on  the  contrary,
what  care  Apelles  took  to  subdue  the  florid  colours  by  a  darkening
varnish  :  "  Et  eadem  res,"  says  he,  "  nimis  floridis  coloribus  austeritatem
occulte  daret."  And  he  says  just  before,  of  some  of  the  finest  pieces  of
Apelles,  "that  they  were  wrought  in  four  colours  only."  So  great  and
venerable  was  simplicity  held  among  the  ancients,  and  so  certain  was  the
ruin  of  all  true  elegance  in  life  or  art  where  this  mistress  was  once  quitted
or  contemned  ! — See  Pliny,  xxxv.  See  also  above,  p.  95,  in  the  notes ;
and  p.  145.

220


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

can  I,  for  this  reason,  think  it  proper  to  call  a  man  well-read
who  reads  many  authors,  since  he  must  of  necessity  have  more
ill  models  than  good,  and  be  more  stuffed  with  bombast,  ill
fancy,  and  wry  thought  than  filled  with  solid  sense  and  just
imagination.

But  notwithstanding  this  hazard  of  our  taste  from  a  multi-
plicity of  reading,  we  are  not,  it  seems,  the  least  scrupulous  in
our  choice  of  subject.  We  read  whatever  comes  next  us.  What
was  first  put  into  our  hand  when  we  were  young,  serves  us
afterwards  for  serious  study  and  wise  research  when  we  are
old.  We  are  many  of  us,  indeed,  so  grave  as  to  continue  this
exercise  of  youth  through  our  remaining  life.  The  exercis-
ing authors  of  this  kind  have  been  above  described  ^  in  the
beginning  of  this  treatise.  The  manner  of  exercise  is  called
meditation,  and  is  of  a  sort  so  solemn  and  profound,  that  we
dare  not  so  much  as  thoroughly  examine  the  subject  on  which
we  are  bid  to  meditate.  This  is  a  sort  of  task-reading,  in  which
a  taste  is  not  permitted.  How  little  soever  we  take  of  this
diet,  'tis  sufficient  to  give  full  exercise  to  our  gi*ave  humour,
and  allay  the  appetite  towards  further  research  and  solid  con-
templation. The  rest  is  holiday,  diversion,  play,  and  fancy.
We  reject  all  rule,  as  thinking  it  an  injury  to  our  diversions
to  have  regard  to  tinith  or  nature,  without  which,  however,
nothing  can  be  truly  agreeable  or  entertaining,  much  less
instructive  or  improving.  Through  a  certain  sui-feit  -  taken  in
a  wrong  kind  of  serious  reading,  we  apply  ourselves,  with  full
content,  to  the  most  ridiculous.  The  more  remote  our  pattern
is  from  anything  moral  or  profitable,  the  more  freedom  and
satisfaction  we  find  in  it.  We  care  not  how  Gothic  or  barbarous
our  models  are,  what  ill-designed  or  monstrous  figures  we  view,
or  what  false  proportions  we  trace  or  see  described  in  history,
romance,  or  fiction.  And  thus  our  eye  and  ear  is  lost.  Our  j
relish  or  taste  must  of  necessity  grow  barbarous,  whilst  bar-
barian customs,  savage  manners,  Indian  wars,  and  wonders  of
1  Pp.  109,  110,  etc.  2  Supra,  pp.  50,  51

221


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  terra  incognita,  employ  our  leisure  hours  and  are  the  chief
materials  to  furnish  out  a  library.

These  are  in  our  present  days  what  books  of  chivalry  were
in  those  of  our  forefathers,  I  know  not  what  faith  our  valiant
ancestors  may  have  had  in  the  stories  of  their  giants,  their
dragons,  and  St.  Georges.  But  for  our  faith  indeed,  as  well  as
our  taste  in  this  other  way  of  reading,  I  must  confess  I  cannot
consider  it  without  astonishment.

It  must  certainly  be  something  else  than  incredulity  which

fashions  the  taste  and  judgment  of  many  gentlemen  whom  we

hear  censured  as  atheists,  for  attempting  to  philosophise  after

a  newer  manner  than  any  known  of  late. For  my  own  part,

I  have  ever  thought  this  sort  of  men  to  be  in  general  more

credulous,  though  after  another  manner,  than  the  mere  vulgar.

Besides  what  I  have  observed  in  conversation  with  the  men  of

this  character,  I  can  produce  many  anathematised  authors  who,

if  they  want  a  true  Israelitish  faith,  can  make  amends  by  a

Chinese or  Indian  one. If  they  are  short  in  Syria  or  the

Palestine,  they  have  their  full  measure  in  America  or  Japan,

I  Histories  of  Incas  or  Iroquois,  written  by  friars  and  mission-

\  aries,  pirates  and  renegades,  sea-captains  and  trusty  travellers,

I  pass  for  authentic  records  and  are  canonical  with  the  virtuosi

/  of  this sort. Though Christian miracles may not so well

j satisfy  them,  they dwell with the highest contentment  on

1 the  prodigies  of  Moorish  and  Pagan  countries. They  have  far

more  pleasure  in  hearing  the  monstrous  accounts  of  monstrous

men  and  manners  than  the  politest  and  best  narrations  of  the

affairs,  the governments, and lives of  the wisest and most

polished  people,

'Tis  the  same  taste  which  makes  us  prefer  a  Turkish  history
to  a  Grecian  or  a  Roman,  an  Ariosto  to  a  Virgil,  and  a  romance
or  novel  to  an  Iliad,  We  have  no  regard  to  the  character  or
genius  of  our  author,  nor  are  so  far  curious  as  to  observe  how
able  he  is  in  the  judgment  of  facts,  or  how  ingenious  in  the
texture  of  his  lies. For  facts  unably  related,  though  with  the

222


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

greatest  sincerity  and  good  faith,  may  prove  the  worst  sort  of
deceit ;  ^  and  mere  lies,  judiciously  composed,  can  teach  us  the
truth  of  things  beyond  any  other  manner.^  But  to  amuse  our-
selves with  such  authors  as  neither  know  how  to  lie  nor  tell
truth,  discovers  a  taste  which,  methinks,  one  should  not  be  apt
to  envy.  Yet  so  enchanted  we  are  with  the  travelling  memoii's
of  any  casual  adventurer,  that  be  his  character  or  genius  what
it  will,  we  have  no  sooner  turned  over  a  page  or  two,  than  we
begin  to  interest  ourselves  highly  in  his  affairs.  No  sooner  has
he  taken  shipping  at  the  mouth  of  the  Thames,  or  sent  his
baggage  before  him  to  Gravesend  or  Buoy  in  the  Nore,  than
straight  our  attention  is  earnestly  taken  up.  If  in  order  to  his
more  distant  travels,  he  takes  some  part  of  Europe  in  his  way,
we  can  with  patience  hear  of  inns  and  ordinaries,  passage-boats
and  ferries,  foul  and  fair  weather,  with  all  the  particulars  of  the
author's  diet,  habit  of  body,  his  personal  dangers  and  mischances
on  land  and  sea.  And  thus,  full  of  desire  and  hope,  we  eic-
company  him  till  he  enters  on  his  great  scene  of  action,  and
begins  by  the  description  of  some  enormous  fish  or  beast.  From
monstrous  brutes  he  proceeds  to  yet  more  monstrous  men.  For
in  this  race  of  authors  he  is  ever  completest  and  of  the  first
rank  who  is  able  to  speak  of  things  the  most  unnatural  and
monstrous.^

This  humour  our  old  tragic  poet  *  seems  to  have  discovered.

1  ['ITiis  criticism,  which  is  followed  up  later,  is  held  to  have  been  aimed
at  Locke,  whose  acceptance  of  travellers'  tales  as  to  the  religion  of  savages
{Essay,  bk.  i.  ch.  iii.  §  9;  ch.  iv.  §  8)  Shaftesbury  derides  in  one  of  his  Letters
to  a  Student,  June  3, 1709.]

2  The  greatest  of  critics  says  of  the  greatest  poet,  when  he  extols  him
the  highest,  "  that  above  all  others  he  understood  how  to  lie  :  5e5t5axe  5^
fid\i(TTa''Ofirjpos,  Kal  roin  aWovs  il/evdij  X^ety  us  dei." — Arist.  De  Poet,  xxiv. —
See  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.  iu  the  notes.

^  [As  this  essay  antedates  by  eight  years  the  writing  of  Robinson  Crusoe,
it  is  not  unlikely  to  have  influenced  Defoe  towards  the  artistic  restraint
which  marks  his  story  in  comparison  with  the  class  of  narratives  here
described,  which  would  seem  to  have  suggested  it.]  *  Shakspere.

223


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

He  hit  our  taste  in  giving  us  a  Moorish  hero,  full-fraught  with
prodigy,  a  wondrous  story -teller !  But  for  the  attentive  part,
the  poet  chose  to  give  it  to  womankind.  What  passionate
reader  of  travels,  or  student  in  the  prodigious  sciences,  can
refuse  to  pity  that  fair  lady,  who  fell  in  love  with  the  miraculous
Moor?  especially  considering  with  what  suitable  grace  such  a
lover  could  relate  the  most  monstrous  adventures,  and  satisfy
the  wondering  appetite  with  the  most  wondrous  tales:  Wherein,
says  the  hero-traveller.

Of  antres  vast  and  deserts  idle.

It  was  my  hint  to  speak  .  .  . ;

And  of  the  Cannibals  that  each  other  eat.

The  Anthropophagi  and  men  whose  heads

Do  grow  beneath  their  shoulders. This  to  hear

Would  Desdemona  seriously  incline.

Seriously,  'twas  a  woeful  tale !  unfit,  one  would  think,  to
win  a  tender  fair  one.  It  is  true,  the  poet  sufficiently  condemns
her  fancy,  and  makes  her  (poor  lady  !)  pay  dearly  for  it  in  the
end.  But  why,  amongst  his  Greek  names,  he  should  have  chosen
one  which  denoted  the  lady  superstitious,  I  cannot  imagine :
unless,  as  poets  are  sometimes  prophets  too,  he  should  figuratively,
under  this  dark  type,  have  represented  to  us  that  about  a
hundred  years  after  his  time,  the  fair  sex  of  this  island  should,
by  other  monstrous  tales,  be  so  seduced  as  to  turn  their  favour
chiefly  on  the  persons  of  the  tale-tellers,  and  change  their
natural  inclination  for  fair,  candid,  and  courteous  knights,  into
a  passion  for  a  mysterious  race  of  black  enchanters,  such  as  of
old  were  said  to  creep  into  houses,  and  lead  captive  silly  women.

1'is  certain  there  is  a  very  great  affinity  between  the  passion
of  superstition  and  that  of  tales.  The  love  of  strange  nar-
rations, and  the  ardent  appetite  towards  unnatural  objects,  has
a  near  alliance  with  the  like  appetite  towards  the  supernatural
kind,  such  as  are  called  prodigious  and  of  dire  omen. For  so

224


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

the  mind  forebodes  on  every  such  unusual  sight  or  hearing.
Fate,  destiny,  or  the  anger  of  Heaven  seems  denoted,  and  as  it
were  delineated,  by  the  monstrous  birth,  the  horrid  fact,  or  dire
event.  For  this  reason  the  very  persons  of  such  relators  or
tale-tellers,  with  a  small  help  of  dismal  habit,  suitable  counte-
nance and  tone,  become  sacred  and  tremendous  in  the  eyes  of
mortals  who  are  thus  addicted  from  their  youth.  The  tender
virgins,  losing  their  natural  softness,  assume  this  tragic  passion,
of  which  they  are  highly  susceptible,  especially  when  a  suitable
kind  of  eloquence  and  action  attends  the  character  of  the
narrator.  A  thousand  Desdemonas  are  then  ready  to  present
themselves,  and  would  frankly  resign  fathers,  relations,  country-
men, and  country  itself,  to  follow  the  fortunes  of  a  hero  of  the
black  tribe.

But  whatever  monstrous  zeal  or  superstitious  passion  the
poet  might  foretell,  either  in  the  gentlemen,  ladies,  or  common
people  of  an  after  age,  'tis  certain  that  as  to  books  the  same
Moorish  fancy,  in  its  plain  and  literal  sense,  prevails  strongly
at  this  present  time.  Monsters  and  monster-lands  were  never
more  in  request ;  and  we  may  often  see  a  philosopher,  or  a  wit,  ;
run  a  tale-gathering  in  those  idle  deserts  as  familiarly  as  the
silliest  woman  or  merest  boy.

One  would  imagine that our philosophical writers,^ who

^  Considering  what  has  been  so  often  said  on  this  subject  of  philosophy,
learning,  and  the  sister  arts,  after  that  ancient  model  which  has  since  been
so  much  corrupted,  it  may  not  be  amiss  perhaps  to  hear  the  confession  of
one  of  the  greatest  and  most  learned  of  moderns  upon  this  head  :  "  Scilicet
asseusuri  isti  sunt  veteribus  sapientibus,  poeticam  rijs  aefwoTdrijs  <fH\offo<f>las
elvai  avvvaov,  severissimae  philosophiae  contubernalem  esse ;  quos  videmus
omni  cura  morum  posthabita,  quae  vera  philosophia  est,  in  nescio  quibus
argumentatiunculis,  in  nugis  sophisticis,  in  puerilibus  argutiolis,  Xw^ots
denique  pij/xart'ois  rrji  diaXeicriKijs,  quod  sua  jam  aetate  Euphrades,  Themistius
conquerebatur,  summam  sapientiam  ponere  !  Scilicet  facundiae  Persii
virile  robur,  aut  recondita  ilia  eruditio  eos  capiet,  quibus  pristinam  bar-
bariem  mordicus  retinere,  et  in  antiquitatis  totius  ignoratione  versari,
potius  videtur  esse  ac  melius,  quam  possessionem  literarum,  olim  simili
socordia  extiuctarum,  memoria  vero  patrum  maguo  Dei  immortalis  beueficio

VOL.  I  225  Q


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

pretend  to  treat  of  morals,  should  far  out-do  mere  poets  in
recommending  virtue,  and  representing  what  was  fair  and
amiable  in  human  actions.  One  would  imagine  that  if  they
turned  their  eye  towards  remote  countries  (of  which  they  affect
so  much  to  speak)  they  should  search  for  that  simplicity  of
manners  and  innocence  of  behaviour  which  has  been  often
known  among  mere  savages,  ere  they  were  corrupted  by  our

in  lucem  revocatarum  ex  alta  hominum  oblivione,  sibi  viudicare,  et  pro  sua
quemque  virili  posteris  asserere ! .  .  .  Scribit  vero  Arrianus,  sapientissimum
senem  ilium  Epictetum,  impietatis  in  Deum  eos  iusimulasse,  qui  ill  philo-
sophiae  studiis  rriv  dirayyeXTiKriv  Uvafuv,  sive  sermonis  curam  taiiquam  rem
levem  aspernarentur  :  quoniam  quidem,  aiebat  vir  diviiius^  dcre|3oCj  i^riv
avOpibirov  rks  irapa  toO  6eov  xfip'Tas  aTifid^eLv.  En  Germaiium  pliilosophum  !
En  vocem  auream  !  Nee  minus  memorabile  Synesii  philosophi  praestan-
tissimi  vaticinium  tristi  eventu  confirmatum,  quod  multo  ante  ab  ipso  est
editum,  cum  rationem  studiorum  similiter  perverti  ab  aequalibus  suis
cerneret.  Disputans  enim  contra  eos  qui  ad  sanctissimae  theologiae  studia
infantiam  et  sophisticen  pro  solida  eruditione  aiFerrent,  fatidicam  banc  quasi
sortem  edidit.  kLvSwos,  inquit,  ««  &^v(X(t6v  tlvo,  <p\vapias  ifiireffdvras  to&tovs
Siaipdaprivai..  Periculum  est  ne  ejusmodi  homines  in  abyssum  quamdam  in-
eptiarum  delapsi  penitus  corrumpautur.  Utiiiam  defuisset  huic  oraculo
fides.  Sed  profecto,  depravationi  illi,  et  hujus  scientiarum  reginae,  et
omnium  aliarum^  quae  postea  accidit,  occasionem  quidem  Gothorum  et
Alanorum  invasioues  praebuerunt :  at  causa  illius  propior  ac  vera  est^  ratio
studiorum  perversa^  et  in  liberalibus  discipliiiis  prava  iiistitutio,  ac  lingu-
arum  simul  et  universae  literaturae  melioris  ignoratio.  .  .  .  Atqui  non  in
eum  certe  finem  viri  magni  et  praecepta  et  exempla  virtutum  memoriae
commendata  ad  posteros  transmiserunt,  ut  ad  inanem  aurium  oblectationem,
vel  jactationem  vanam  inutilis  eruditionis,  ea  cognosceremus  ;  verum  ut  suis
nos  lucubrationibus  excitareut  ad  effodienda  et  in  actum  producenda  recti
honestique  semina  ;  quae  cum  a  natura  accepissemus,  vitiis  tamen  circum-
fusa,  et  tantum  non  obruta,  sic  in  nostris  animis,  nisi  cultura  melior
accedat,  latent,  quasi  in  altum  quendam  scrobem  penitus  defossa.  Hue
spectant  tot  ilia  volumiua  quae  de  morali  disciplina  philosophi  confecerunt.
Tendit  eodem  et  Graeeorum  Latinorumque  poetarum  pleraque  manus  ;  sed
itineribus  diversis.  Quot  sunt  enim  poetarum  genera  (sunt  autem  quam-
plurima)  tot  fere  diverticula  et  viarum  ambages  eo  ducentium." — Is.
Casaub.  in  Praefatione  Commentarii  ad  Pers.  See  above,  pp.  124, 126,  etc.,
and  135,  136,  186,  and  193,  194,  and  216,  etc.,  and  217,  etc.  And  Misc.
ii.  clis.  i.  ii.,  and  v.  ch.  i.  in  the  notes.

226


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

commerce,  and,  by  sad  example,  instructed  in  all  kinds  of
treachery  and  inhumanity.  'Twould  be  of  advantage  to  us
to  hear  the  causes  of  this  strange  coiTuption  in  oui'selves,  and
be  made  to  consider  of  our  deviation  from  nature,  and  from
that  just  purity  of  manners  which  might  be  expected,  especially
from  a  people  so  assisted  and  enlightened  by  religion.  For
who  would  not  naturally  expect  more  justice,  fidelity,  temper-
ance, and  honesty  from  Christians  than  from  Mahometans  or
mere  pagans  ?  But  so  far  are  our  modern  moralists  from
condemning  any  unnatural  vices  or  corrupt  manners,  whether
in  our  own  or  foreign  climates,  that  they  would  have  vice  itself
appear  as  natural  as  virtue,  and  from  the  worst  examples  would
represent  to  us  "  that  all  actions  are  naturally  indifferent ;  that
they  have  no  note  or  character  of  good  or  ill  in  themselves ;
but  are  distinguished  by  mere  fashion,  law,  or  arbitrary  decree.""
Wonderful  philosophy !  raised  from  the  dregs  of  an  illiterate
mean  kind,  which  was  ever  despised  among  the  great  ancients
and  rejected  by  all  men  of  action  or  sound  erudition ;  but  in
these  ages  imperfectly  copied  from  the  original,  and,  with
much  disadvantage,  imitated  and  assumed  in  common  both  by
devout  and  indevout  attempters  in  the  moral  kind.

Should  a  writer  upon  music,  addressing  himself  to  the
students  and  lovers  of  the  art,  declare  to  them  "  that  the
measui'e  or  rule  of  harmony  was  caprice  or  will,  humour  or
fashion,"  'tis  not  very  likely  he  should  be  heard  with  great
attention  or  treated  with  real  gravity.  For  harmony  is
harmony  by  nature,  let  men  judge  ever  so  ridiculously  of  music.
So  is  symmetry  and  proportion  founded  still  in  nature,  let
men's  fancy  prove  ever  so  barbarous,  or  their  fashions  ever  so
Gothic  in  their  architecture,  sculpture,  or  whatever  other  design-
ing art.  'Tis  the  same  case  where  life  and  manners  are  con-
cerned. Virtue  has  the  same  fixed  standard.  The  same
numbers,  harmony,  and  proportion  will  have  place  in  morals,
and  are  discoverable  in  the  characters  and  affections  of  man-
kind;  in  which  are  laid  the  just  foundations  of  an  art  and

227


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

science  superior  to  every  other  of  human  practice  and  com-
prehension.

This,  I  suppose  therefore,  is  highly  necessary  that  a  writer
should  comprehend.  For  things  are  stubborn  and  will  not  be
as  we  fancy  them,  or  as  the  fashion  varies,  but  as  they  stand
in  nature.  Now  whether  the  writer  be  poet,  philosopher,  or  of
whatever  kind,  he  is  in  truth  no  other  than  a  copyist  after
nature.  His  style  may  be  differently  suited  to  the  different
times  he  lives  in,  or  to  the  different  humour  of  his  age  or
nation ;  his  manner,  his  dress,  his  colouring  may  vary ;  but  if
his  drawing  be  uncorrect  or  his  design  contrary  to  nature,  his
piece  will  be  found  ridiculous  when  it  comes  thoroughly  to  be
examined.  For  Nature  will  not  be  mocked.  The  prepossession
against  her  can  never  be  very  lasting.  Her  decrees  and  instincts
are  powerful  and  her  sentiments  inbred.  She  has  a  strong
party  abroad,  and  as  strong  a  one  within  ourselves ;  and  when
any  slight  is  put  upon  her,  she  can  soon  turn  the  reproach
and  make  large  reprisals  on  the  taste  and  judgment  of  her
antagonists.

Whatever  philosopher,  critic,  or  author  is  convinced  of  this
prerogative  of  nature,  will  easily  be  persuaded  to  apply  himself
to  the  great  work  of  reforming  his  taste,  which  he  will  have
reason  to  suspect,  if  he  be  not  such  a  one  as  has  deliberately
endeavoured  to  frame  it  by  the  just  standard  of  nature.
Whether  this  be  his  case,  he  will  easily  discover  by  appealing
to  his  memory ;  for  custom  and  fashion  are  powerful  seducers ;
and  he  must  of  necessity  have  fought  hard  against  these  to
have  attained  that  justness  of  taste  which  is  required  in  one
who  pretends  to  follow  nature.  But  if  no  such  conflict  can  be
called  to  mind,  'tis  a  certain  token  that  the  party  has  his  taste
very  little  different  from  the  vulgar.  And  on  this  account  he
should  instantly  betake  himself  to  the  wholesome  practice
recommended  in  this  treatise.  He  should  set  afoot  the  power-
fullest  faculties  of  his  mind,  and  assemble  the  best  forces  of  his
wit  and  judgment,  in  order  to  make  a  formal  descent  on  the

228


ADVICE TO AN  AUTHOR

territories  of  the  heart ;  resolving  to  decline  no  combat,  nor
hearken  to  any  terms,  till  he  had  pierced  into  its  inmost
provinces  and  reached  the  seat  of  empire.  No  treaties  should
amuse  him  ;  no  advantages  lead  him  aside.  All  other  specula-
tions should  be  suspended,  all  other  mysteries  resigned,  till  this
necessary  campaign  was  made  and  these  inward  conflicts  learnt ;
by  which  he  would  be  able  to  gain  at  least  some  tolerable  in-
sight into  himself  and  knowledge  of  his  own  natural  principles.

It  may  here  perhaps  be  thought  that  notwithstanding  the
particular  advice  we  have  given  in  relation  to  the  forming  of
a  taste  in  natural  characters  and  mannei"s,  we  are  still  defective
in  our  performance  whilst  we  are  silent  on  supernatural  cases,
and  bring  not  into  our  consideration  the  manners  and  characters
delivered  us  in  Holy  Writ.  But  this  objection  will  soon
vanish  when  we  consider  that  there  can  be  no  rules  given  by
human  wit  to  that  which  was  never  humanly  conceived,  but
divinely  dictated  and  inspired.

For  this  reason  'twould  be  in  vain  for  any  poet  or  ingenious
author  to  form  his  characters  after  the  models  of  our  sacred
penmen.^  And  whatever  certain  critics  may  have  advanced
concerning  the  structure  of  a  heroic  poem  of  this  kind,  I  will
be  bold  to  prophesy  that  the  success  will  never  be  answerable
to  expectation.

It  must  be  owned  that  in  our  sacred  history  we  have  both
leaders,  conquerors,  founders  of  nations,  deliverers,  and  patriots
who,  even  in  a  human  sense,  are  noway  behind  the  chief  of
those  so  much  celebrated  by  the  ancients.  There  is  nothing
in  the  story  of  Aeneas  which  is  not  equalled  or  exceeded  by  a
Joshua  or  a  Moses.  But  as  illustrious  as  are  the  acts  of  these
sacred  chiefs,  'twould  be  hard  to  copy  them  in  just  heroic.
'T would  be  hard  to  give  to  many  of  them  that  grateful  air
which  is  necessary  to  render  them  naturally  pleasing  to  man-
kind, according  to  the  idea  men  are  universally  found  to  have
of  heroism  and  generosity.

*  Misc.  V.  ch.  i.  in  the  notes.

229


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Notwithstanding  the  pious  endeavours  which,  as  devout
Christians,  we  may  have  used  in  order  to  separate  ourselves  from
the  interests  of  mere  heathens  and  infidels,  notwithstanding
the  true  pains  we  may  have  taken  to  arm  our  hearts  in  behalf
of  a  chosen  people  against  their  neighbouring  nations  of  a
false  religion  and  worship,  there  will  be  still  found  such  a
partiality  remaining  in  us  towards  creatures  of  the  same  make
and  figure  with  ourselves,  as  will  hinder  us  from  viewing  with
satisfaction  the  punishments  inflicted  by  human  hands  on  such
aliens  and  idolators.

In  mere  poetry,  and  the  pieces  of  wit  and  literature,  there
is  a  liberty  of  thought  and  easiness  of  humour  indulged  to  us
in  which,  perhaps,  we  are  not  so  well  able  to  contemplate
the  divine  judgments,  and  see  clearly  into  the  justice  of  those
ways  which  are  declared  to  be  so  far  from  our  ways  and  above
our  highest  thoughts  or  understandings.  In  such  a  situation
of  mind  we  can  hardly  endure  to  see  heathen  treated  as  heathen,
and  the  faithful  made  the  executioners  of  the  divine  wrath.
There  is  a  certain  perverse  humanity  in  us  which  inwardly
resists  the  divine  commission,  though  ever  so  plainly  revealed.
The  wit  of  the  best  poet  is  not  sufficient  to  reconcile  us
to  the  campaign  of  a  Joshua,  or  the  retreat  of  a  Moses  by
the  assistance  of  an  Egyptian  loan.  Nor  will  it  be  possible,
by  the  Muses'  art,  to  make  that  royal  hero  appear  amiable  in
human  eyes  who  found  such  favour  in  the  eye  of  Heaven.  Such
are  mere  human  hearts  that  they  can  hardly  find  the  least
sympathy  with  that  only  one  which  had  the  character  of  being
after  the  pattern  of  the  Almighty*'s.

'Tis  apparent,  therefore,  that  the  manners,  actions,  and
characters  of  sacred  writ  are  in  no  wise  the  proper  subject  of
other  authors  than  divines  themselves.  They  are  matters  incom-
prehensible in  philosophy  ;  they  are  above  the  pitch  of  the  mere
human  historian,  the  politician,  or  the  moralist,  and  are  too
sacred  to  be  submitted  to  the  poet"'s  fancy  when  inspired  by  no
other  spirit  than  that  of  his  profane  mistresses  the  Muses.

230


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

I  should  be  unwilling  to  examine  rigorously  the  performance
of  our  great  poet,^  who  sung  so  piously  the  Fall  of  Man.  The
War  in  Heaven  and  the  catastrophe  of  that  original  pair  from
whom  the  generations  of  mankind  were  propagated  are  matters
so  abstrusely  revealed,  and  with  such  a  resemblance  of  mythology,
that  they  can  more  easily  bear  what  figurative  construction
or  fantastic  turn  the  poet  may  think  fit  to  give  them.  But
should  he  venture  farther  into  the  lives  and  characters  of  the
patriarchs,  the  holy  matrons,  heroes  and  heroines  of  the  chosen
seed ;  should  he  employ  the  sacred  machine,  the  exhibitions
and  interventions  of  divinity  according  to  Holy  Writ  to  sup-
port the  action  of  his  piece ;  he  would  soon  find  the  weakness
of  his  pretended  orthodox  Muse,  and  prove  how  little  those
divine  patterns  were  capable  of  human  imitation,  or  of  being
raised  to  any  other  majesty,  or  sublime,  than  that  in  which
they  originally  appear.

The  theology  or  theogony  of  the  heathens  could  admit  of
such  different  turns  and  figurative  expressions  as  suited  the
fancy  and  judgment  of  each  philosopher  or  poet.  But  the
purity  of  our  faith  will  admit  of  no  such  variation.  The
Christian  theology,  the  birth,  procedure,  generation,  and
pereonal  distinction  of  the  Divinity,  are  mysteries  only  to  be
determined  by  the  initiated  or  ordained,  to  whom  the  State
has  assigned  the  guardianship  and  promulgation  of  the  divine
oracles.  It  becomes  not  those  who  are  uninspired  from  heaven
and  uncommissioned  from  earth,  to  search  with  curiosity  into
the  original  of  those  holy  rites  and  records  by  law  established.
Should  we  make  such  an  attempt,  we  should  in  probability
find  the  less  satisfaction  the  further  we  presumed  to  carry  our
speculations.  Having  dared  once  to  quit  the  authority  and
direction  of  the  law,  we  should  easily  be  subject  to  heterodoxy
and  error  when  we  had  no  better  warrant  left  us  for  the
authority  of  our  sacred  symbols  than  the  integrity,  candour,
and  disinterestedness  of  their  compilers  and  registers. How

1  Milton.
231


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

great  that  candour  and  disinterestedness  may  have  been,  we
have  no  other  histories  to  inform  us  than  those  of  their  own
licensing  or  composing.  But  busy  persons,  who  officiously
search  into  these  records,  are  ready  even  from  hence  to  draw
proofs  very  disadvantageous  to  the  fame  and  character  of  this
succession  of  men.  And  persons  moderately  read  in  these
histories  are  apt  to  judge  no  otherwise  of  the  temper  of
ancient  councils  than  by  that  of  later  synods  and  modern
convocations.

When  we  add  to  this  the  melancholy  consideration  of  what
disturbances  have  been  raised  from  the  disputes  of  this  kind ;
what  effusion  of  blood,  what  devastations  of  provinces,  what
shock  and  ruin  of  empires  have  been  occasioned  by  contro-
versies founded  on  the  nicest  distinction  of  an  article  relat-
ing to  these  mysteries,  "'twill  be  judged  vain  in  any  poet  or
polite  author  to  think  of  rendering  himself  agreeable  or
entertaining  whilst  he  makes  such  subjects  as  these  to  be  his
theme.

But  though  the  explanation  of  such  deep  mysteries  and
religious  duties  be  allotted  as  the  peculiar  province  of  the  sacred
order,  'tis  presumed,  nevertheless,  that  it  may  be  lawful  for
other  authors  to  retain  their  ancient  privilege  of  instructing
mankind  in  a  way  of  pleasure  and  entertainment.  Poets  may
be  allowed  their  fictions  and  philosophers  their  systems.  ""Twould
go  hard  with  mankind  should  the  patentees  for  religion  be
commissioned  for  all  instruction  and  advice  relating  to  manners
or  conversation.  The  stage  may  be  allowed  to  instruct  as  well
as  the  pulpit.  The  way  of  wit  and  humour  may  be  serviceable
as  well  as  that  of  gravity  and  seriousness ;  and  the  way  of  plain
reason  as  well  as  that  of  exalted  revelation.  The  main  matter
is  to  keep  these  provinces  distinct  and  settle  their  just  boundaries.
And  on  this  account  it  is  that  we  have  endeavoured  to  represent
to  modem  authors  the  necessity  of  making  this  separation  justly
and  in  due  form.

Twould  be  somewhat  hard,  methinks,  if  Religion,  as  by  law

232


ADVICE TO AN AUTHOR

established,^  were  not  allowed  the  same  privilege  as  Heraldry.
'Tis  agreed  on  all  hands  that  particular  persons  may  design  or
paint,  in  their  private  capacity,  after  what  manner  they  think
fit ;  but  they  must  blazon  only  as  the  public  directs.  Their
lion  or  bear  must  be  figured  as  the  science  appoints,  and  their
supporters  and  crest  must  be  such  as  their  wise  and  gallant
ancestors  have  procured  for  them.  No  matter  whether  the
shapes  of  these  animals  hold  just  proportion  with  Nature.  No
matter  though  different  or  contrary  forms  are  joined  in  one.
That  which  is  denied  to  painters  or  poets  is  permitted  to
heralds.  Naturalists  may,  in  their  separate  and  distinct
capacity,  inquire  as  they  think  fit  into  the  real  existence  and
natural  truth  of  things ;  but  they  must  by  no  means  dispute
the  authorised  forms.  Mermaids  and  griffins  were  the  wonder
of  our  forefathers,  and,  as  such,  delivered  down  to  us  by  the
authentic  traditions  and  delineations  above  mentioned.  We
ought  not  so  much  as  to  criticise  the  features  or  dimensions  of
a  Saracen"'s  face,  brought  by  our  conquering  ancestors  from  the
holy  wars ;  nor  pretend  to  call  in  question  the  figure  or  size  of
a  dragon,  on  which  the  history  of  our  national  champion  and
the  establishment  of  a  high  order  and  dignity  of  the  realm
depends.

But  as  worshipful  as  are  the  persons  of  the  illustrious  heralds,
Clarencieux,  Garter,  and  the  rest  of  those  eminent  sustainers  of
British  honour  and  antiquity,  'tis  to  be  hoped  that  in  a  more
civilised  age,  such  as  at  present  we  have  the  good  fortune  to  live
in,  they  will  not  attempt  to  strain  their  privileges  to  the  same
height  as  formerly.  Having  been  reduced  by  law  or  settled
practice  from  the  power  they  once  enjoyed,  they  will  not,  'tis
presumed,  in  defiance  of  the  magistrate  and  civil  power,  erect
anew  their  stages  and  lists,  introduce  the  manner  of  civil
combat,  set  us  to  tilt  and  tournament,  and  raise  again  those
defiances  and  moral  frays  of  which  their  Order  were  once  the
chief  managers  and  promoters.

*  Misc.  i.  ch.  ii. ; v.  ch.  i.
233


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

To  conclude :  the  only  method  which  can  justly  qualify  us
for  this  high  privilege  of  giving  advice,  is  in  the  first  place  to
receive  it  ourselves  with  due  submission  where  the  public  has
vouchsafed  to  give  it  us  by  authority.  And  if  in  our  private
capacity  we  can  have  resolution  enough  to  criticise  ourselves,
and  call  in  question  our  high  imaginations,  florid  desires,  and
specious  sentiments,  according  to  the  manner  of  soliloquy  above
prescribed,  we  shall,  by  the  natural  course  of  things,  as  we
grow  wiser,  prove  less  conceited,  and  introduce  into  our  char-
acter that  modesty,  condescension,  and  just  humanity  which  is
essential  to  the  success  of  all  friendly  counsel  and  admonition.
And  honest  home -philosophy  must  teach  us  the  wholesome
practice  within  ourselves.  Polite  reading,  and  converse  with
mankind  of  the  better  sort,  will  qualify  us  for  what  remains.


234


TREATISE IV

AN  INQUIRY  CONCERNING
VIRTUE OR MERIT

Formerly  Printed  from  an  Imperfect  Copy :  Now
Corrected,  and  Published  entire.


Amoto  quaeramus  seria  ludo.

Hor.  Sat.  1.


Printed  first  in  the  Year  MDCXCIX.


AN  INQUIRY  CONCERNING  VIRTUE
OR  MERIT

BOOK  I

PART  I

Section I

Religion  and  Virtue  appear  in  many  respects  so  nearly  related,
that  they  are  generally  presumed  inseparable  companions.  And
so  willing  we  are  to  believe  well  of  their  union,  that  we  hardly
allow  it  just  to  speak  or  even  think  of  them  apart.  It  may
however  be  questioned  whether  the  practice  of  the  world  in
this  respect  be  answerable  to  our  speculation.  ""Tis  certain  that
we  sometimes  meet  with  instances  which  seem  to  make  against
this  general  supposition.  We  have  known  people  who,  having
the  appearance  of  great  zeal  in  religion,  have  yet  wanted  even
the  common  affections  of  humanity,  and  shown  themselves
extremely  degenerate  and  corrupt.  Others  again,  who  have
paid  little  regard  to  religion,  and  been  considered  as  mere
atheists,  have  yet  been  observed  to  practise  the  rales  of
morality,  and  act  in  many  cases  with  such  good  meaning  and
affection  towards  mankind  as  might  seem  to  force  an  acknow-
ledgment of  their  being  virtuous.  And  in  general,  we  find
mere  moral  principles  of  such  weight,  that  in  our  dealings  with
men  we  are  seldom  satisfied  by  the  fullest  assurance  given  us
of  their  zeal  in  religion,  till  we  hear  something  further  of  their

237


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

character.  If  we  are  told  a  man  is  religious,  we  still  ask,
"  AVhat  are  his  morals  ? "  But  if  we  hear  at  first  that  he  has
honest  moral  principles,  and  is  a  man  of  natural  justice  and
good  temper,  we  seldom  think  of  the  other  question,  "  Whether
he  be  religious  and  devout  ? ""

This  has  given  occasion  to  inquire  "  what  honesty  or  virtue
is,  considered  by  itself,  and  in  what  manner  it  is  influenced  by
religion  ;  how  far  religion  necessarily  implies  virtue  ;  and  whether
it  be  a  true  saying  that  it  is  impossible  for  an  atheist  to  be
virtuous,  or  share  any  real  degree  of  honesty  or  merit."

And  here  it  cannot  justly  be  wondered  at  if  the  method  of
explaining  things  should  appear  somewhat  unusual,  since  the
subject-matter  has  been  so  little  examined,  and  is  of  so  nice  and
dangerous  speculation.  For  so  much  is  the  religious  part  of
mankind  alarmed  by  the  freedom  of  some  late  pens,^  and  so
great  a  jealousy  is  raised  everywhere  on  this  account,  that  what-
ever an  author  may  suggest  in  favour  of  religion,  he  will  gain
little  credit  in  the  cause  if  he  allows  the  least  advantage  to  any
other  principle.  On  the  other  side,  the  men  of  wit  and  raillery,
whose  pleasantest  entertainment  is  in  the  exposing  the  weak
sides  of  religion,  are  so  desperately  afraid  of  being  drawn  into
any  serious  thoughts  of  it,  that  they  look  upon  a  man  as  guilty
of  foul  play  who  assumes  the  air  of  a  free  writer,  and  at  the
same  time  preserves  any  regard  for  the  principles  of  Natural
Religion.  They  are  apt  to  give  as  little  quarter  as  they  receive,
and  are  resolved  to  think  as  ill  of  the  morals  of  their  antagonists
as  their  antagonists  can  possibly  think  of  theirs. Neither  of

*  [The  reference  is  probably  to  the  Oracles  of  Reason  of  Charles  Blount
(posthumously  collected  iu  1(395),  and  John  Tolaud's  Christianity  not  Mys-
terious, published  in  1690.  These  were  the  first  openly  deistic  treatises
after  those  of  Lord  Herbert  of  Cherbury  and  Hobbes  ;  but  the  anonymous
Unitarian  treatise  of  William  Freeke  was  burnt  by  the  hangman  in  1G93 ;
and  the  more  moderate  work  of  the  Rev.  Arthur  Bury,  The  Naked  Gospel
(1090),  had  been  similarly  treated.  The  Account  of  the  Growth  of  Deism  in
England  (1696),  and  Leslie's  Short  and  Easy  Method  with  the  Deists  (1697),
show  how  far  matters  had  gone.  ]

238


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

them,  it  seems,  will  allow  the  least  advantage  to  the  other.
Tis  as  hard  to  persuade  one  sort  that  there  is  any  virtue  in
religion,  as  the  other  that  there  is  any  virtue  out  of  the  verge
of  their  particular  community.  So  that,  between  both,  an
author  must  pass  his  time  ill  who  dares  plead  for  religion  and
moral  virtue  without  lessening  the  force  of  either,  but  allowing
to  each  its  proper  province  and  due  rank,  would  hinder  their
being  made  enemies  by  detraction.

However  it  be,  if  we  would  pretend  to  give  the  least  new
light,  or  explain  anything  effectually  within  the  intended
compass  of  this  inquiry,  'tis  necessary  to  take  things  pretty
deep,  and  endeavour  by  some  short  scheme  to  represent  the
original  of  each  opinion,  whether  natural  or  unnatural,  relating
to  the  Deity.  And  if  we  can  happily  get  clear  of  this  thorny
part  of  our  pfiilosophy,  the  rest,  'tis  hoped,  may  prove  more
plain  and  easy.

Section  II

In  the  whole  of  things  (or  in  the  universe)  either  all  is  according
to  a  good  order  and  the  most  agreeable  to  a  general  interest,
or  there  is  that  which  is  otherwise,  and  might  possibly  have
been  better  constituted,  more  wisely  contrived,  and  with  more
advantage  to  the  general  interest  of  beings,  or  of  the  whole.

If  everything  which  exists  be  according  to  a  good  order,
and  for  the  best,  then  of  necessity  there  is  no  such  thing  as  real
ill  in  the  universe,  nothing  ill  with  respect  to  the  whole.

Whatsoever  then  is  so  as  that  it  could  not  really  have  been
better,  or  any  way  better  ordered,  is  perfectly  good ;  what-
soever in  the  order  of  the  world  can  be  called  ill,  must  imply
a  possibility  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  to  have  been  better
contrived  or  ordered.  For  if  it  could  not,  it  is  perfect,  and  as
it  should  be.

Whatsoever  is  really  ill,  therefore,  must  be  caused  or
produced either  by design  (that  is  to  say, with knowledge

239


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  intelligence)  or,  in  defect  of  this,  by  hazard  and  mere
chance.

If  there  be  anything  ill  in  the  universe  from  design,  then
that  which  disposes  all  things  is  no  one  good  designing  prin-
ciple. For  either  the  one  designing  principle  is  itself  corrupt,
or  there  is  some  other  in  being  which  operates  contrarily  and
is  ill.

If  there  be  any  ill  in  the  universe  from  mere  chance,  then  a
designing  principle  or  mind,  whether  good  or  bad,  cannot  be
the  cause  of  all  things.  And  consequently  if  there  be  supposed
a  designing  principle,  who  is  the  cause  only  of  good,  but  cannot
prevent  the  ill  which  happens  from  chance,  or  from  a  contrary
ill  design,  then  there  can  be  supposed  in  reality  no  such  thing
as  a  superior  good  design  or  mind,  other  than  what  is  impotent
and  defective ;  for  not  to  correct  or  totally  exclude  that  ill  of
chance  or  of  a  contrary  ill  design,  must  proceed  either  from
impotency  or  ill-will.^

Whatsoever  is  superior  in  any  degree  over  the  world,  or
rules  in  Nature  with  discernment  and  a  mind,  is  what,  by
universal  agreement,  men  call  God.  If  there  ai'e  several  such
superior  minds,  they  are  so  many  Gods ;  but  if  that  single  or
those  several  superiors  are  not  in  their  nature  necessarily  good,
they  rather  take  the  name  of  Daemon.

To  believe  therefore  that  everything  is  governed,  ordered,
or  regulated  for  the  best,  by  a  designing  principle  or  mind,
necessarily  good  and  permanent,  is  to  be  a  perfect  Theist.

To  believe  nothing  of  a  designing  principle  or  mind,  nor
any  cause,  measure,  or  rule  of  things,  but  chance,  so  that  in
Nature  neither  the  interest  of  the  whole  nor  of  any  particulars
can  be  said  to  be  in  the  least  designed,  pursued,  or  aimed  at,  is
to  be  a  perfect  Atheist.

To  believe  no  one  supreme  designing  principle  or  mind,  but

^  [Compare  Spinoza,  Ethics,  part  i.  Prop,  xxxiii.  Schol.  2  and  App.  ;
part  iv.  Praef.  and  Prop.  Ixiv.  ;  also  Principia  philos.  Cartesianae,  App.
part  i.  ch.  vi.  ;  and  Spinozsi's  first  letter  to  Bleyenberg,  Jan.  1G64.]

240


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

rather  two,  three,  or  more  (though  in  their  nature  good),  is  to
be  a  Polytheist.

To  believe  the  governing  mind,  or  minds,  not  absolutely
and  necessarily  good,  nor  confined  to  what  is  best,  but  capable
of  acting  according  to  mere  will  or  fancy,  is  to  be  a  Daemonist.

There  are  few  who  think  always  consistently,  or  according  to
one  certain  hypothesis,  upon  any  subject  so  abstruse  and  intricate
as  the  cause  of  all  things,  and  the  economy  or  government  of
the  universe.  For  "'tis  evident  in  the  case  of  the  most  devout
people,  even  by  their  own  confession,  that  there  are  times  when
their  faith  hardly  can  support  them  in  the  belief  of  a  supreme
Wisdom,  and  that  they  are  often  tempted  to  judge  disadvantage-
ously  of  a  providence  and  just  administration  in  the  whole.

That  alone,  therefore,  is  to  be  called  a  man"'s  opinion,  which
is  of  any  other  the  most  habitual  to  him  and  occurs  upon  most
occasions.  So  that  'tis  hard  to  pronounce  certainly  of  any  man
that  he  is  an  atheist,  because  unless  his  whole  thoughts  are  at
all  seasons  and  on  all  occasions  steadily  bent  against  all  sup-
position or  imagination  of  design  in  things,  he  is  no  perfect
Atheist.  In  the  same  manner,  if  a  man's  thoughts  are  not  at  all
times  steady  and  resolute  against  all  imagination  of  chance,
fortune,  or  ill  design  in  things,  he  is  no  perfect  Theist.  But  if
any  one  believes  more  of  chance  and  confusion  than  of  design,  he
is  to  be  esteemed  more  an  Atheist  than  a  Theist,  from  that  which
most  predominates  or  has  the  ascendant.  And  in  case  he
believes  more  of  the  prevalency  of  an  ill  designing  principle
than  of  a  good  one,  he  is  rather  a  Daemonist,  and  may  be  justly
so  called  from  the  side  to  which  the  balance  of  his  judgment
most  inclines.

All  these  sorts  both  of  Daemonism,  Polytheism,  Atheism,
and  Theism  may  be  mixed.  ^ Religion  excludes  only  perfect

*  As  thus  : —

1.  Theism  with  Daemonism;  2.  Daemonism  with  Polytheism;  3.  Theism
with  Atheism  ;  4.  Daemonism  with  Atheism  ;  5.  Polytheism  with  Atheism  ;
6.  Theism  (as  it  stands  in  opposition  to  Daemonism,  and  denotes  goodness

VOL.  I  241  R


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

atheism.  Perfect  daemonists  undoubtedly  there  are  in  religion ;
because  we  know  whole  nations  who  worship  a  devil  or  fiend,
to  whom  they  sacrifice  and  offer  prayers  and  supplications,  in
reality  on  no  other  account  than  because  they  fear  him.  And
we  know  very  well  that,  in  some  religions,  there  are  those  who
expressly  give  no  other  idea  of  God  than  of  a  being  arbitrary,
violent,  causing  ill  and  ordaining  to  misery ;  which  in  effect  is
the  same  as  to  substitute  a  daemon  or  devil  in  his  room.

Now  since  there  are  these  several  opinions  concerning  a
superior  Power,  and  since  there  may  be  found  perhaps  some
persons  who  have  no  formed  opinion  at  all  upon  this  subject ;
either  through  scepticism,  negligence  of  thought,  or  confusion
of  judgment ;  the  consideration  is,  how  any  of  these  opinions,
or  this  want  of  any  certain  opinion,  may  possibly  consist  with
virtue  and  merit,  or  be  compatible  with  an  honest  or  moral
character.

in  the  superior  Deity)  with  Polytheism  ;  7.  The  same  Theism  or  Polytheism
with  Daemonism  ;  8.  Or  with  Daemonism  and  Atheism.

1.  As  when  the  one  chief  mind  or  sovereign  being  is  (in  the  believer's
sense)  divided  between  a  good  and  an  ill  nature,  by  being  the  cause  of  ill
as  well  as  good,  or  otherwise  when  two  distinct  and  contrary  principles
subsist ;  one  the  author  of  all  good,  the  other  of  all  ill.

2.  As  when  there  is  not  one  but  several  corrupt  minds  who  govern ;
which  opinion  may  be  called  Polydaemonism.

3.  As  when  chance  is  not  excluded,  but  God  and  chance  divide.

4.  As  when  an  evil  daemon  and  chance  divide.

5.  As  when  many  minds  and  chance  divide.

6.  As  when  there  are  more  principal  minds  than  one,  but  agreeing  in
good,  with  one  and  the  same  will  and  reason.

7.  As  when  the  same  system  of  Deity  or  corresponding  Deity  subsists,
together  with  a  contrary  principle,  or  with  several  contrary  principles  or
governing  minds.

8.  As  when  the  last  case  is,  together  with  chance.


242


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT


PART  II

Section I

When  we  reflect  on  any  ordinary  frame  or  constitution  either
of  Art  or  Nature,  and  consider  how  hard  it  is  to  give  the  least
account  of  a  particular  part  without  a  competent  knowledge  of
the  whole,  we  need  not  wonder  to  find  ourselves  at  a  loss  in
many  things  relating  to  the  constitution  and  frame  of  Nature
herself.  For  to  what  end  in  Nature  many  things,  even
whole  species  of  creatures,  refer,  or  to  what  purpose  they  serve,
will  be  hard  for  any  one  justly  to  determine ;  but  to  what  end
the  many  proportions  and  various  shapes  of  parts  in  many
creatures  actually  serve,  we  are  able,  by  the  help  of  study  and
observation,  to  demonstrate  with  great  exactness.

We  know  that  every  creature  has  a  private  good  and  interest
of  his  own,  which  Nature  has  compelled  him  to  seek,  by  all  the
advantages  afforded  him  within  the  compass  of  his  make.^  We
know  that  there  is  in  reality  a  right  and  a  wrong  state  of  every
creature,  and  that  his  right  one  is  by  nature  forwarded  and  by
himself  affectionately  sought.  There  being  therefore  in  every
creature  a  certain  interest  or  good,  there  must  be  also  a  certain
end  to  which  everything  in  his  constitution  must  naturally  refer.
To  this  end  if  anything,  either  in  his  appetites,  passions,  or
affections,  be  not  conducing  but  the  contrary,  we  must  of
necessity  own  it  ill  to  him.  And  in  this  manner  he  is  ill  with
respect  to  himself,  as  he  certainly  is  with  respect  to  others  of
his  kind,  when  any  such  appetites  or  passions  make  him  anyway
injurious  to  them.  Now,  if  by  the  natural  constitution  of  any
rational  creature,  the  same  irregularities  of  appetite  which  make
him  ill  to  others,  make  him  ill  also  to  himself,  and  if  the
same  regularity  of  affections  which  causes  him  to  be  good  in  one

*  [On  the  ensuing  argument  compare  Spinoza,  Ethics,  part  iv.  Props.
xix,-xxxv.]

243


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

sense,  causes  him  to  be  good  also  in  the  other,  then  is  that
goodness  by  which  he  is  thus  useful  to  others  a  real  good  and
advantage  to  himself.  And  thus  virtue  and  interest  may  be
found  at  last  to  agree.

Of  this  we  shall  consider  particularly  in  the  latter  part  of
our  inquiry.  Our  first  design  is  to  see  if  we  can  clearly  determine
what  that  quality  is  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  goodness  or
virtue.

Should  a  historian  or  traveller  describe  to  us  a  certain
creature  of  a  more  solitary  disposition  than  ever  was  yet  heard
of;  one  who  had  neither  mate  nor  fellow  of  any  kind,  nothing
of  his  own  likeness,  towards  which  he  stood  well-affected  or
inclined,  nor  anything  without  or  beyond  himself  for  which  he
had  the  least  passion  or  concern ;  we  might  be  apt  to  say
perhaps,  without  much  hesitation,  "  that  this  was  doubtless  a
very  melancholy  creature,  and  that  in  this  unsociable  and  sullen
state  he  was  like  to  have  a  very  disconsolate  kind  of  life.""  But
if,  we  were  assured  that,  notwithstanding  all  appearances,  the
creature  enjoyed  himself  extremely,  had  a  great  relish  of  life,
and  was  in  nothing  wanting  to  his  own  good,  we  might  ac-
knowledge, perhaps,  "that  the  creature  was  no  monster,  nor
absurdly  constituted  as  to  himself."  But  we  should  hardly,  after
all,  be  ijiduced  to  say  of  him  "  that  he  was  a  good  creature."

However,  should  jt  be  urged  against  us  "  that  such  as  he
was,  the  creature  was  still  perfect  in  himself,  and  therefore  to
be  esteemed  good  ;  for  what  had  he  to  do  with  others  ? " — in
this  sense,  indeed,  we  might  be  forced  to  acknowledge  "that
he  was  a  good  creature;  if  he  could  be  understood  to  be
absolute  and  complete  in  himself,  without  any  real  relation
to  anything  in  the  universe  besides."  For  should  there  be
anywhere  in  nature  a  system  of  which  this  living  creature
was  to  be  considered  as  a  part,  then  could  he  nowise  be
allowed  good ;  whilst  he  plainly  appeared  to  be  such  a  part  as
made  rather  to  the  harm  than  good  of  that  system  or  whole  in
which  he  was  included.

244


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR  MERIT

If  therefore  in  the  structure  of  this  or  any  other  animal,
there  be  anything  which  points  beyond  himself,  and  by  which
he  is  plainly  discovered  to  have  relation  to  some  other  being
or  nature  besides  his  own,  then  will  this  animal  undoubtedly  be
esteemed  a  part  of  some  other  system.  For  instance,  if  an
animal  has  the  proportions  of  a  male,  it  shows  he  has  relation
to  a  female.  And  the  respective  proportions  both  of  the  male
and  female  will  be  allowed,  doubtless,  to  have  a  joint  relation
to  another  existence  and  order  of  things  beyond  themselves.
So  that  the  creatm^es  are  both  of  them  to  be  considered  as
jarts  of  another  system,  which  is  that  of  a  particular  race
or  species  of  living  creatures,  who  have  some  one  common
nature,  or  are  provided  for  by  some  one  order  or  constitution
of  things  subsisting  together,  and  co-operating  towards  their
conservation  and  support.

In  the  same  manner,  if  a  whole  species  of  animals  contribute
to  the  existence  or  well-being  of  some  other,  then  is  that
whole  species,  in  general,  a  part  only  of  some  other  system.

For  instance,  to  the  existence  of  the  spider  that  of  the  fly
is  absolutely  necessary.  The  heedless  flight,  weak  frame,  and
tender  body  of  this  latter  insect,  fits  and  determines  him  as
much  a  prey  as  the  rough  make,  watchfulness,  and  cunning  of
the  former  fits  him  for  rapine  and  the  ensnaring  part.  The
web  and  wing  are  suited  to  each  other.  And  in  the  structure
of  each  of  these  animals  there  is  as  apparent  and  perfect  a
relation  to  the  other  as  in  our  own  bodies  there  is  a  relation
of  limbs  and  organs ;  or  as  in  the  branches  or  leaves  of  a  tree
we  see  a  relation  of  each  to  the  other,  and  all,  in  common,  to
one  root  and  trunk.

In  the  same  manner  are  flies  also  necessary  to  the  existence
of  other  creatures,  both  fowls  and  fish.  And  thus  are  other
species  or  kinds  subservient  to  one  another,  as  being  parts  of
a  certain  system,  and  included  in  one  and  the  same  order
of  beings.

So  that  there  is  a  system  of  all  animals :  an  animal-order

245


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

or  economy,  according  to  which  the  animal  affairs  are  regulated
and  disposed.

Now,  if  the  whole  system  of  animals,  together  with  that  of
vegetables,  and  all  other  things  in  this  inferior  world,  be
properly  comprehended  in  one  system  of  a  globe  or  earth,  and
if,  again,  this  globe  or  earth  itself  appears  to  have  a  real
dependence  on  something  still  beyond,  as,  for  example,  either
on  its  sun,  the  galaxy,  or  its  fellow-planets,  then  is  it  in  reality
a  part  only  of  some  other  system.  And  if  it  be  allowed  that
there  Ts^in  like  manner  a  system  of  all  things,  and  a  universal
nature,  there  can  be  no  particular  being  or  system  which  is  not
either  good  or  ill  in  that  general  one  of  the  universe ;  for  if  it
be  insignificant  and  of  no  use,  it  is  a  fault  or  imperfection,  and
consequently  ill  in  the  general  system.

Therefore  if  any  being  be  wholly  and  really  ill,  it  must
be  ill  with  respect  to  the  universal  system ;  and  then  the  system
of  the  universe  is  ill  or  imperfect.  But  if  the  ill  of  one  private
system  be  the  good  of  others ;  if  it  makes  still  to  the  good  of
the  general  system  (as  when  one  creature  lives  by  the  destruc-
tion of  another ;  one  thing  is  generated  from  the  corruption  of
another;  or  one  planetary  system  or  vortex  may  swallow  up
another),  then  is  the  ill  of  that  private  system  no  real  ill  in
itself,  any  more  than  the  pain  of  breeding  teeth  is  ill  in  a
system  or  body  which  is  so  constituted  that,  without  this
occasion  of  pain,  it  would  suffer  worse  by  being  defective.

So  that  we  cannot  say  of  any  being  that  it  is  wholly  and
absolutely  ill,  unless  we  can  positively  show  and  ascertain  that
what  we  call  ill  is  nowhere  good  besides,  in  any  other  system,
or  with  respect  to  any  other  order  or  economy  whatsoever.

But  were  there  in  the  world  any  entire  species  of  animals
destructive  to  every  other,  it  may  be  justly  called  an  ill  species,
as  being  ill  in  the  animal  system.  And  if  in  any  species  of
animals  (as  in  men,  for  example)  one  man  is  of  a  nature
pernicious  to  the  rest,  he  is  in  this  respect  justly  styled  an
ill  man.

246


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR MERIT

We  do  not,  however,  say  of  any  one  that  he  is  an  ill  man
because  he  has  the  plague-spots  upon  him,  or  because  he  has
convulsive  fits  which  make  him  strike  and  wound  such  as
approach  him.  Nor  do  we  say  on  the  other  side  that  he  is  a
good  man  when,  having  his  hands  tied  up,  he  is  hindered  from
doing  the  mischief  he  designs ;  or  (which  is  in  a  manner  the
same)  when  he  abstains  from  executing  his  ill  purpose  through
a  fear  of  some  impending  punishment,  or  through  the  allurement
of  some  exterior  reward.

So  that  in  a  sensible  creature  that  which  is  not  done
through  any  affection  at  all  makes  neither  good  nor  ill  in  the
nature  of  that  creature,  who  then  only  is  supposed  good  when
the  good  or  ill  of  the  system  to  which  he  has  relation  is  the
immediate  object  of  some  passion  or  affection  moving  him.

Since  it  is  therefore  by  affection  merely  that  a  creature  is
esteemed  good  or  ill,  natural  or  unnatural,  our  business  will  be
to  examine  which  are  the  good  and  natural,  and  which  the  ill
and  unnatural  affections.

Section II

In  the  first  place,  then,  it  may  be  observed  that  if  there  be  an
affection  towards  any  subject  considered  as  private  good,  which
is  not  really  such,^  but  imaginary,  this  affection,  as  being
supei-fluous,  and  detracting  from  the  force  of  other  requisite
and  good  affections,  is  in  itself  vicious  and  ill,  even  in  respect  of
the  private  interest  or  happiness  of  the  creature.

If  there  can  possibly  be  supposed  in  a  creature  such  an
affection  towards  self-good  as  is  actually,  in  its  natiu-al  degree,
conducing  to  his  private  interest,  and  at  the  same  time  in-
consistent with  the  public  good,  this  may  indeed  be  called  still
a  vicious  affection  ;  and  on  this  supposition  a  creature  ^  cannot
really  be  good  and  natural  in  respect  of  his  society  or  public,
without  being  ill  and  unnatural  towards  himself. But  if  the

^  Infra,  bk.  ii.  part  i.  §  1  ;  part  ii.  §  3.

247


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

affection  be  then  only  injurious  to  the  society  when  it  is
immoderate,  and  not  so  when  it  is  moderate,  duly  tempered,
and  allayed,  then  is  the  immoderate  degree  of  the  affection
truly  vicious,  but  not  the  moderate.  And  thus  if  there  be
found  in  any  creature  a  more  than  ordinary  self-concernment
or  regard  to  private  good,  which  is  inconsistent  with  the
interest  of  the  species  or  public,  this  must  in  every  respect
be  esteemed  an  ill  and  vicious  affection.  And  this  is  what  we
commonly  call  selfishness,^  and  disapprove  so  much  in  whatever
creature  we  happen  to  discover  it.

On  the  other  side,  if  the  affection  towards  private  or  self-
good,  however  selfish  it  may  be  esteemed,  is  in  reality  not  only
consistent  with  public  good,  but  in  some  measure  contributing
to  it ;  if  it  be  such,  perhaps,  as  for  the  good  of  the  species  in
general  every  individual  ought  to  share ;  'tis  so  far  from  being
ill  or  blamable  in  any  sense,  that  it  must  be  acknowledged
absolutely  necessary  to  constitute  a  creature  good.  For  if  the
want  of  such  an  affection  as  that  towards  self-preservation  be
injurious  to  the  species,  a  creature  is  ill  and  unnatural  as  well
through  this  defect  as  through  the  want  of  any  other  natural
affection.  And  this  no  one  would  doubt  to  pronounce,  if  he
saw  a  man  who  minded  not  any  precipices  which  lay  in  his  way,
nor  made  any  distinction  of  food,  diet,  clothing,  or  whatever  else
related  to  his  health  and  being.  The  same  would  be  averred
of  one  who  had  a  disposition  which  rendered  him  averse  to  anv
commerce  with  womankind,  and  of  consequence  unfitted  him
through  illness  of  temper  (and  not  merely  through  a  defect  of
constitution)  for  the  propagation  of  his  species  or  kind.

Thus  the  affection  towards  self-good  may  be  a  good  affection
or  an  ill  one.  For  if  this  private  affection  be  too  strong  (as
when  the  excessive  love  of  life  unfits  a  creature  for  any  generous
act)  then  is  it  undoubtedly  vicious,  and  if  vicious,  the  creature
who  is  moved  by  it  is  viciously  moved,  and  can  never  be  other-
wise than  vicious  in  some  degree  when  moved  by  that  affection.
^  Esmy  on  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iii.  §  3.

248


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR MERIT

Therefore  if  through  such  an  earnest  and  passionate  love  of  hfe
a  creature  be  accidentally  induced  to  do  good  (as  he  might  be
upon  the  same  terms  induced  to  do  ill)  he  is  no  more  a  good
creature  for  this  good  he  executes  than  a  man  is  the  more  an
honest  or  good  man  either  for  pleading  a  just  cause,  or  fighting
in  a  good  one,  for  the  sake  merely  of  his  fee  or  stipend.

Whatsoever  therefore  is  done  which  happens  to  be  advan-
tageous to  the  species  through  an  affection  merely  towards
self-good,  does  not  imply  any  more  goodness  in  the  creature
than  as  the  affection  itself  is  good.  Let  him,  in  any  particular,
act  ever  so  well,  if  at  the  bottom  it  be  that  selfish  affection
alone  which  moves  him,  he  is  in  himself  still  vicious.  Nor  can
any  creature  be  considered  otherwise  when  the  passion  towards
self-good,  though  ever  so  moderate,  is  his  real  motive  in  the
doing  that  to  which  a  natural  affection  for  his  kind  ought  by
right  to  have  inclined  him.

And  indeed  whatever  exterior  helps  or  succours  an  ill-disposed
creature  may  find  to  push  him  on  towards  the  performance  of
any  one  good  action,  there  can  no  goodness  arise  in  him  till  his
temper  be  so  far  changed  that  in  the  issue  he  comes  in  earnest
to  be  led  by  some  immediate  affection,  directly  and  not  acci-
dentally, to  good  and  against  ill.

For  instance,  if  one  of  those  creatures  supposed  to  be  by
nature  tame,  gentle,  and  favourable  to  mankind,  be,  contrary
to  his  natural  constitution,  fierce  and  savage,  we  instantly
remark  the  breach  of  temper,  and  own  the  creature  to  be
ufinatural  and  corrupt.  If  at  any  time  afterwards  the  same
creature,  by  good  fortune  or  right  management,  comes  to  lose
his  fierceness,  and  is  made  tame,  gentle,  and  treatable  like  other
creatru-es  of  his  kind,  'tis  acknowledged  that  the  creature  thus
restored  becomes  good  and  natural.  Suppose  now  that  the
creature  has  indeed  a  tame  and  gentle  carriage,  but  that  it
proceeds  only  from  the  fear  of  his  keeper,  which  if  set  aside,
his  predominant  passion  instantly  breaks  out ;  then  is  his
gentleness  not  his  real  temper,  but  his  true  and  genuine  nature

249


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

or  natural  temper  remaining  just  as  it  was  :  the  creature  is  still
as  ill  as  ever.

Nothing  therefore  being  properly  either  goodness  or  illness
in  a  creature,  except  what  is  from  natural  temper,  "  A  good
creature  is  such  a  one  as  by  the  natural  temper  or  bent  of  his
affections  is  carried  primarily  and  immediately,  and  not  second-
arily and  accidentally,  to  good  and  against  ill ;  *"  and  an  ill
creature  is  just  the  contrary,  viz.  "One  who  is  wanting  in
right  affections  of  force  enough  to  carry  him  directly  towards
good,  and  bear  him  out  against  ill ;  or  who  is  earned  by  other
affections  directly  to  ill  and  against  good.'"*

When  in  general  all  the  affections  or  passions  are  suited  to
the  public  good,  or  good  of  the  species,  as  above  mentioned,
then  is  the  natural  temper  entirely  good.  If,  on  the  contrary,
any  requisite  passion  be  wanting,  or  if  there  be  any  one  super-
numerary or  weak,  or  anywise  disserviceable  or  contrary  to
that  main  end,  then  is  the  natural  temper,  and  consequently
the  creature  himself,  in  some  measure  corrupt  and  ill.

There  is  no  need  of  mentioning  either  envy,  malice,
frowardness  or  other  such  hateful  passions,  to  show  in  what
manner  they  are  ill,  and  constitute  an  ill  creature.  But  it  may
be  necessary  perhaps  to  remark,  that  even  as  to  kindness  and
love  of  the  most  natural  sort  (such  as  that  of  any  creature  for
its  offspring)  if  it  be  immoderate  and  beyond  a  certain  degree
it  is  undoubtedly  vicious,^  For  thus  over-great  tenderness
destroys  the  effect  of  love,  and  excessive  pity  renders  us
incapable  of  giving  succour.  Hence  the  excess  of  motherly
love  is  owned  to  be  a  vicious  fondness;  over-great  pity, effeminacy
and  weakness;  over-great  concern  for  self-preservation,  meanness
and  cowardice ;  too  little,  rashness  ;  and  none  at  all,  or  that
which  is  contrary  (viz.  a  passion  leading  to  self-destruction),  a
mad  and  desperate  depravity.

^  [Cp.  Spinoza,  Ethics,  part  iv.  Props,  xxxix.-xliv.]

250


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR  MERIT

Section III

But  to  proceed  from  what  is  esteemed  mere  goodness,  and  lies
within  the  reach  and  capacity  of  all  sensible  creatures,  to  that
which  is  called  virtue  or  merit,  and  is  allowed  to  man  only.  j

In  a  creature  capable  of  forming  general  notions  of  things,
not  only  the  outward  beings  which  offer  themselves  to  the  sense
are  the  objects  of  the  affection,  but  the  very  actions  themselves,
and  the  affections  of  pity,  kindness,  gratitude,  and  their  con-
traries, being  brought  into  the  mind  by  reflection,  become
objects.  So  that,  by  means  of  this  reflected  sense,  there  arises
another  kind  of  affection  towards  those  very  affections  themselves,
which  have  been  already  felt,  and  are  now  become  the  subject
of  a  new  liking  or  dislike.

The  case  is  the  same  in  the  mental  or  moral  subjects  as  in
the  ordinary  bodies  or  common  subjects  of  sense.  The  shapes,
motions,  colours,  and  proportions  of  these  latter  being  presented
to  our  eye,  there  necessarily  results  a  beauty  or  deformity,^
according  to  the  different  measure,  arrangement,  and  disposition
of  their  several  parts.  So  in  behaviour  and  actions,  when
presented  to  our  understanding,  there  must  be  found,  of
necessity,  an  apparent  difference,  according  to  the  regularity
or  irregularity  of  the  subjects.

The  mind,  which  is  spectator  or  auditor  of  other  minds,
cannot  be  without  its  eye  and  ear,  so  as  to  discern  proportion,
distinguish  sound,  and  scan  each  sentiment  or  thought  which
comes  before  it.  It  can  let  nothing  escape  its  censure.  It  feels
the  soft  and  harsh,  the  agreeable  and  disagreeable  in  the  affec-
tions ;  and  finds  a  foul  and  fair,  a  harmonious  and  a  dissonant,
as  really  and  truly  here  as  in  any  musical  numbers  or  in  the
outward  forms  or  representations  of  sensible  things.  Nor  can
it  withhold  its  admiration  and  ecstasy,  its  aversion  and  scorn,
any  more  in  what  relates  to  one  than  to  the  other  of  these
subjects.  So  that  to  deny  the  common  and  natural  sense  of
^  The  Moralists,  part  iii.  §  2.

251


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

a  sublime  and  beautiful  in  things,  will  appear  an  affectation
merely,  to  any  one  who  considers  duly  of  this  affair.^

Now  as  in  the  sensible  kind  of  objects  the  species  or  images
of  bodies,  colours,  and  sounds  are  perpetually  moving  before
our  eyes,  and  acting  on  our  senses  even  when  we  sleep ;  so  in
the  moral  and  intellectual  kind,  the  forms  and  images  of  things
are  no  less  active  and  incumbent  on  the  mind,  at  all  seasons,
and  even  when  the  real  objects  themselves  are  absent.

In  these  vagrant  characters  or  pictures  of  manners,  which
the  mind  of  necessity  figures  to  itself  and  carries  still  about
with  it,  the  heart  cannot  possibly  remain  neutral ;  but  con-
stantly takes  part  one  way  or  other.  However  false  or  coiTupt
it  be  within  itself,  it  finds  the  difference,  as  to  beauty  and
comeliness,  between  one  heart  and  another,  one  turn  of  affection,
one  behaviour,  one  sentiment  and  another;  and  accordingly,
in  all  disinterested  cases,  must  approve  in  some  measure  of  what
is  natural  and  honest,  and  disapprove  what  is  dishonest  and
corrupt.

Thus  the  several  motions,  inclinations,  passions,  dispositions,
and  consequent  carriage  and  behaviour  of  creatures  in  the
various  parts  of  life,  being  in  several  views  or  perspectives
represented  to  the  mind,  which  readily  discerns  the  good  and  ill
towards  the  species  or  public,  there  arises  a  new  trial  or  exercise
of  the  heart,  which  must  either  rightly  and  soundly  affect  what
is  just  and  right,  and  disaffect  what  is  contrary,  or  corruptly
affect  what  is  ill  and  disaffect  what  is  worthy  and  good.

And  in  this  case  alone  it  is  we  call  any  creature  worthy  or
virtuous,  when  it  can  have  the  notion  of  a  public  interest,  and
can  attain  the  speculation  or  science  of  what  is  morally  good
or  ill,  admirable  or  blamable,  right  or  wrong.  For  though  we
may  vulgarly  call  an  ill  horse  vicious,  yet  we  never  say  of  a
good  one,  nor  of  any  mere  beast,  idiot,  or  changeling,  though
ever  so  good-natured,  that  he  is  worthy  or  virtuous.

*  Essay  on  Wit  and  Humour,  part  ii.  §  2  (end) ; Miscellaneous  Reflec-
tions, Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.

252


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR  MERIT

So  that  if  a  creature  be  generous,  kind,  constant,  compas-
sionate, yet  if  he  cannot  reflect  on  what  he  himself  does,  or
sees  others  do,  so  as  to  take  notice  of  what  is  worthy  or  honest,
and  make  that  notice  or  conception  of  worth  and  honesty  to  be
an  object  of  his  affection,  he  has  not  the  character  of  being
virtuous ;  for  thus,  and  no  otherwise,  he  is  capable  of  having  a
sense  of  right  or  wrong,  a  sentiment  or  judgment  of  what  is
done  through  just,  equal,  and  good  affection,  or  the  contrary.

Whatsoever  is  done  through  any  unequal  affection  is  in-
iquitous, wicked,  and  wrong.  If  the  affection  be  equal,  sound,
and  good,  and  the  subject  of  the  affection  such  as  may  with
advantage  to  society  be  ever  in  the  same  manner  prosecuted
or  affected,  this  must  necessarily  constitute  what  we  call  equity
and  right  in  any  action.  For  wrong  is  not  such  action  as  is
barely  the  cause  of  harm  (since  at  this  rate  a  dutiful  son  aiming
at  an  enemy,  but  by  mistake  or  ill  chance  happening  to  kill  his
father,  would  do  a  wrong),  but  when  anything  is  done  through
insufficient  or  unequal  affection  (as  when  a  son  shows  no  concern
for  the  safety  of  a  father ;  or,  where  there  is  need  of  succour,
prefers  an  indifferent  person  to  him)  this  is  of  the  nature  of
wrong.

Neither  can  any  weakness  or  imperfection  in  the  senses  be
the  occasion  of  iniquity  or  wrong ;  if  the  object  of  the  mind
itself  be  not  at  any  time  absurdly  framed,  nor  any  way  improper,
but  suitable,  just,  and  worthy  of  the  opinion  and  affection
applied  to  it.  For  if  we  will  suppose  a  man  who,  being  sound
and  entire  both  in  his  reason  and  affection,  has  nevertheless  so
depraved  a  constitution  or  frame  of  body  that  the  natm-al
objects  are,  through  his  organs  of  sense,  as  through  ill  glasses,
falsely  conveyed  and  misrepresented,  'twill  be  soon  observed,  in
such  a  person's  case,  that  since  his  failm-e  is  not  in  his  principal
or  leading  part,  he  cannot  in  himself  be  esteemed  iniquitous  or
unjust.

'Tis  otherwise  in  what  relates  to  opinion,  belief,  or  specula-
tion. For  as  the  extravagance  of  judgment  or  belief  is  such

253


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

that  in  some  countries  even  monkeys,  cats,  crocodiles,  and
other  vile  or  destructive  animals  have  been  esteemed  holy,  and
worshipped  even  as  deities ;  should  it  appear  to  any  one  of  the
religion  or  belief  of  those  countries  that  to  save  such  a  creature
as  a  cat,  preferably  to  a  parent,  was  right,  and  that  other  men
who  had  not  the  same  religious  opinion  were  to  be  treated  as
enemies  till  converted ;  this  would  be  certainly  wrong  and
wicked  in  the  believer;  and  every  action,  grounded  on  this
belief,  would  be  an  iniquitous,  wicked,  and  vicious  action.

And  thus  whatsoever  causes  a  misconception  or  misappre-
hension of  the  worth  or  value  of  any  object,  so  as  to  diminish
a  due,  or  raise  any  undue,  irregular  or  unsocial  affection,  must
necessarily  be  the  occasion  of  wrong.  Thus  he  who  affects  or
loves  a  man  for  the  sake  of  something  which  is  reputed  honour-
able, but  which  is  in  reality  vicious,  is  himself  vicious  and  ill.
The  beginnings  of  this  corruption  may  be  noted  in  many
occurrences ;  as  when  an  ambitious  man,  by  the  fame  of  his
high  attempts,  a  conqueror  or  a  pirate  by  his  boasted  enter-
prises, raises  in  another  person  an  esteem  and  admiration  of
that  immoral  and  inhuman  character  which  deserves  abhorrence,
'tis  then  that  the  hearer  becomes  corrupt,  when  he  secretly
approves  the  ill  he  hears.  But  on  the  other  side,  the  man  who
loves  and  esteems  another,  as  believing  him  to  have  that  virtue
which  he  has  not,  but  only  counterfeits,  is  not  on  this  account
either  vicious  or  corrupt.

A  mistake  therefore,  in  fact,  being  no  cause  or  sign  of  ill
affection,  can  be  no  cause  of  vice.  But  a  mistake  of  right
being  the  cause  of  unequal  affection,  must  of  necessity  be  the
cause  of  vicious  action  in  every  intelligent  or  rational  being.

But  as  there  are  many  occasions  where  the  matter  of  right
may  even  to  the  most  discerning  part  of  mankind  appear
difficult,  and  of  doubtful  decision,  'tis  not  a  slight  mistake  of
this  kind  which  can  destroy  the  character  of  a  virtuous  or
worthy  man.  But  when,  either  through  superstition  or  ill
custom,  there  come  to  be  very  gross  mistakes  in  the  assignment

254


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

or  application  of  the  affection ;  when  the  mistakes  are  either  in
their  nature  so  gross,  or  so  compHcated  and  frequent,  that  a
creature  cannot  well  live  in  a  natural  state,  nor  with  due
affections,  compatible  with  human  society  and  civil  life ;  then
is  the  character  of  virtue  forfeited.

And  thus  we  find  how  far  worth  and  virtue  depend  on  a
knowledge  of  right  and  wrong,  and  on  a  use  of  reason,  sufficient
to  secure  a  right  application  of  the  affections ;  that  nothing
horrid  or  unnatural,  nothing  unexemplary,  nothing  destructive
of  that  natural  affection  by  which  the  species  or  society  is  upheld,
may  on  any  account,  or  through  any  principle  or  notion  of
honour  or  religion,  be  at  any  time  affected  or  prosecuted  as  a
good  and  proper  object  of  esteem.  For  such  a  principle  as  this
must  be  wholly  vicious ;  and  whatsoever  is  acted  upon  it  can  be
no  other  than  vice  and  immorality.  And  thus  if  there  be  any-
thing which  teaches  men  either  treachery,  ingratitude,  or  cruelty,
by  divine  warrant  or  under  colour  and  pretence  of  any  present
or  future  good  to  mankind  ;  if  there  be  anything  which  teaches
men  to  persecute  their  friends  through  love,^  or  to  torment
captives  of  war  in  sport,  or  to  offer  human  sacrifice,  or  to
torment,  macerate,  or  mangle  themselves  in  a  religious  zeal  before
their  God,  or  to  commit  any  sort  of  barbarity  or  brutality  as
amiable  or  becoming ;  be  it  custom  which  gives  applause,  or
religion  which  gives  a  sanction ;  this  is  not,  nor  ever  can  be,
virtue  of  any  kind,  or  in  any  sense,  but  must  remain  still  horrid
depravity,  notwithstanding  any  fashion,  law,  custom  or  religion
which  may  be  ill  and  vicious  itself,  but  can  never  alter  the  eternal
measures  and  immutable  independent  nature  of  worth  and
virtue.

Section IV

Upon  the  whole.  As  to  those  creatures  who  are  only  capable
of  being  moved  by  sensible  objects,  they  are  accordingly  good

^  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm,  §  2  ;  Misc.  ii.  ch.  iii.

255


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

or  vicious  as  the  sensible  affections  stand  with  them.  'Tis
otherwise  in  creatures  capable  of  framing  rational  objects  of
moral  good.  For  in  one  of  this  kind,  should  the  sensible
affections  stand  ever  so  much  amiss,  yet  if  they  prevail  not,
because  of  those  other  rational  affections  spoken  of,  'tis  evident
the  temper  still  holds  good  in  the  main,  and  the  person  is  with
justice  esteemed  virtuous  by  all  men.

More  than  this.  If  by  temper  any  one  is  passionate,  angry,
fearful,  amorous,  yet  resists  these  passions,  and  notwithstanding
the  force  of  their  impression  adheres  to  virtue,  we  say  commonly
in  this  case  that  the  virtue  is  the  greater;  and  we  say  well.
Though  if  that  which  restrains  the  person  and  holds  him  to  a
virtuous-like  behaviour  be  no  affection  towards  goodness  or
virtue  itself,  but  towards  private  good  merely,  he  is  not  in
reality  the  more  virtuous,  as  has  been  shown  before.  But  this
still  is  evident,  that  if  voluntarily  and  without  foreign  constraint
an  angry  temper  bears,  or  an  amorous  one  refrains,  so  that
neither  any  cruel  nor  immodest  action  can  be  forced  from  such
a  person,  though  ever  so  strongly  tempted  by  his  constitution,
we  applaud  his  virtue  above  what  we  should  naturally  do  if  he
were  free  of  this  temptation  and  these  propensities.  At  the
same  time,  there  is  nobody  will  say  that  a  propensity  to  vice
can  be  an  ingredient  in  virtue,  or  any  way  necessary  to  complete
a  virtuous  character.

There  seems  therefore  to  be  some  kind  of  difficulty  in  the
case,  but  it  amounts  only  to  this.  If  there  be  any  part  of  the
temper  in  which  ill  passions  or  affections  are  seated,  whilst  in
another  part  the  affections  towards  moral  good  are  such  as
absolutely  to  master  those  attempts  of  their  antagonists,  this  is
the  greatest  proof  imaginable  that  a  strong  principle  of  virtue
lies  at  the  bottom  and  has  possessed  itself  of  the  natural  temper.
Whereas  if  there  be  no  ill  passions  stirring,  a  person  may  be
indeed  more  cheaply  virtuous,  that  is  to  say,  he  may  conform
himself  to  the  known  rules  of  virtue  without  sharing  so  much
of  a  virtuous  principle  as  another. Yet  if  that  other  person,

256


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

who  has  the  principle  of  virtue  so  strongly  implanted,  comes  at
last  to  lose  those  contrary  impediments  supposed  in  him,  he
certainly  loses  nothing  in  virtue;  but  on  the  contrary,  losing
only  what  is  vicious  in  his  temper,  is  left  more  entire  to  virtue,
and  possesses  it  in  a  higher  degree.

Thus  is  virtue  shared  in  different  degrees  by  rational
creatures,  such  at  least  as  are  called  rational,  but  who  come
short  of  that  sound  and  well-established  reason  which  alone  can
constitute  a  just  affection,  a  uniform  and  steady  will  and
resolution.  And  thus  vice  and  virtue  are  found  variously  mixed,
and  alternately  prevalent  in  the  several  characters  of  mankind.
For  it  seems  evident  from  our  inquiry,  that  how  ill  soever  the
temper  or  passions  may  stand  with  respect  either  to  the  sensible
or  the  moral  objects ;  however  passionate,  furious,  lustful  or  cruel
any  creature  may  become ;  however  vicious  the  mind  be,  or
whatever  ill  rules  or  principles  it  goes  by ;  yet  if  there  be  any
flexibleness  or  favourable  inclination  towards  the  least  moral
object,  the  least  appearance  of  moral  good  (as  if  there  be  any
such  thing  as  kindness,  gratitude,  bounty,  or  compassion),  there
is  still  something  of  virtue  left,  and  the  creature  is  not  wholly
vicious  and  unnatural.

Thus  a  ruffian  who  out  of  a  sense  of  fidelity  and  honour  of
any  kind  refuses  to  discover  his  associates,  and  rather  than
betray  them  is  content  to  endure  torments  and  death,  has
certainly  some  principle  of  virtue,  however  he  may  misapply  it.
'Twas  the  same  case  with  that  malefactor  who,  rather  than  do
the  office  of  executioner  to  his  companions,  chose  to  keep  them
company  in  their  execution.

In  short,  as  it  seems  hard  to  pronounce  of  any  man  "  that
he  is  absolutely  an  atheist,''  so  it  appears  altogether  as  hard
to  pronounce  of  any  man  "that  he  is  absolutely  corrupt  or
vicious,"  there  being  few,  even  of  the  horridest  villains,  who
have  not  something  of  virtue  in  this  imperfect  sense.  Nothing
is  more  just  than  a  known  saying,  "  That  it  is  as  hard  to  find  a
man  wholly  ill  as  wholly  good,''  because  wherever  there  is  any
VOL.  I  257  S


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

good  affection  left,  there  is  certainly  some  goodness  or  virtue
still  in  being.

And  having  considered  thus  of  virtue,  what  it  is  in  itself,
we  may  now  consider  how  it  stands  with  respect  to  the  opinions
concerning  a  Deity,  as  above  mentioned.


PART III

Section I

The  nature  of  virtue  consisting  (as  has  been  explained)  in  a
certain  just  disposition  or  proportionable  affection  of  a  rational
creature  towards  the  moral  objects  of  right  and  wrong,  nothing
can  possibly  in  such  a  creature  exclude  a  principle  of  virtue,  or
render  it  ineffectual,  except  what

1.  Either  takes  away  the  natural  and  just  sense  of  right  and
wrong ;

2.  Or  creates  a  wrong  sense  of  it ;

3.  Or  causes  the  right  sense  to  be  opposed  by  contrary
affections.

On  the  other  side,  nothing  can  assist  or  advance  the
principle  of  virtue  except  what  either  in  some  manner  nourishes
and  promotes  a  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  or  preserves  it  genuine
and  uncorrupt,  or  causes  it  when  such  to  be  obeyed,  by  subduing
and  subjecting  the  other  affections  to  it.

We  are  to  consider,  therefore,  how  any  of  the  above-
mentioned  opinions  on  the  subject  of  a  Deity  may  influence
in  these  cases,  or  produce  either  of  these  three  effects.

1.  As  to  the  first  case,  the  taking  away  the  natural  sense
of  right  and  wrong.

It  will  not  surely  be  understood  that  by  this  is  meant  the
taking  away  the  notion  of  what  is  good  or  ill  in  the  species
or  society.  For  of  the  reality  of  such  a  good  and  ill,  no
rational  creature  can  possibly  be  insensible. Every  one  discerns

258


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

and  owns  a  public  interest,  and  is  conscious  of  what  affects  his
fellowship  or  community.  When  we  say,  therefore,  of  a
creature  "that  he  has  wholly  lost  the  sense  of  right  and
wrong,"  we  suppose  that  being  able  to  discern  the  good  and  ill
of  his  species,  he  has  at  the  same  time  no  concern  for  either,
nor  any  sense  of  excellency  or  baseness  in  any  moral  action
relating  to  one  or  the  other.  So  that  except  merely  with
respect  to  a  private  and  narrowly  confined  self -good,  'tis
supposed  there  is  in  such  a  creature  no  liking  or  dislike  of
manners ;  no  admiration  or  love  of  anything  as  morally  good,
nor  hatred  of  anything  as  morally  ill,  be  it  ever  so  unnatural
or  deformed.

There  is  in  reality  no  rational  creature  whatsoever  who
knows  not  that  when  he  voluntarily  offends  or  does  harm
to  any  one,  he  cannot  fail  to  create  an  apprehension  and  fear
of  like  harm,  and  consequently  a  resentment  and  animosity
in  every  creature  who  observes  him.  So  that  the  offender
must  needs  be  conscious  of  being  liable  to  such  treatment
from  every  one  as  if  he  had  in  some  degree  offended  all.

Thus  offence  and  injury  are  always  known  as  punishable
by  every  one ;  and  equal  behaviour  (which  is  therefore  called
merit)  as  rewardable  and  well-deserving  from  every  one.  Of
this  even  the  wickedest  creature  living  must  have  a  sense.  So
that  if  there  be  any  further  meaning  in  this  sense  of  right  and
wrong ;  if  in  reality  there  be  any  sense  of  this  kind  which  an
absolute  wicked  creature  has  not ;  it  must  consist  in  a  real  anti-
pathy or  aversion  to  injustice  or  wrong,  and  in  a  real  affection
or  love  towards  equity  and  right  for  its  own  sake,  and  on  the
account  of  its  own  natural  beauty  and  worth.

'TIS  impossible  to  suppose  a  mere  sensible  creature  originally
so  ill-constituted  and  unnatural  as  that,  from  the  moment  he
comes  to  be  tried  by  sensible  objects,  he  should  have  no  one
good  passion  towards  his  kind,  no  foundation  either  of  pity,
love,  kindness,  or  social  affection.  'Tis  full  as  impossible  to
conceive  that  a  rational  creature  coming  first  to  be  tried  by

259


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

rational  objects,  and  receiving  into  his  mind  the  images  or
representations  of  justice,  generosity,  gratitude,  or  other  virtue,
should  have  no  liking  of  these  or  dislike  of  their  contraries,
but  be  found  absolutely  indifferent  towards  whatsoever  is
presented  to  him  of  this  sort.  A  soul,  indeed,  may  as  well  be
without  sense  as  without  admiration  in  the  things  of  which
it  has  any  knowledge.  Coming  therefore  to  a  capacity  of
seeing  and  admiring  in  this  new  way,  it  must  needs  find  a
beauty  and  a  deformity  as  well  in  actions,  minds,  and  tempers,
as  in  figures,  sounds,  or  colours.  If  there  be  no  real  amiableness
or  deformity  in  moral  acts,  there  is  at  least  an  imaginary  one
of  full  force.  Though  perhaps  the  thing  itself  should  not  be
allowed  in  Nature,  the  imagination  or  fancy  of  it  must  be
allowed  to  be  from  Nature  alone.  Nor  can  anything  besides
art  and  strong  endeavour,  with  long  practice  and  meditation,
overcome  such  a  natural  prevention  or  prepossession  of  the
mind  in  favour  of  this  moral  distinction.^

Sense  of  right  and  wrong  therefore  being  as  natural  to  us
as  natural  affection  itself,  and  being  a  first  principle  in  our
constitution  and  make,  there  is  no  speculative  opinion,  per-
suasion, or  belief,  which  is  capable  immediately  or  directly
to  exclude  or  destroy  it.  That  which  is  of  original  and  pure
nature,  nothing  beside  contrary  habit  and  custom  (a  second
nature)  is  able  to  displace.  And  this  affection  being  an  original
one  of  earliest  rise  in  the  soul  or  affectionate  part,  nothing
beside  contrary  afl'ection,  by  frequent  check  and  control,  can
operate  upon  it,  so  as  either  to  diminish  it  in  part  or  destroy
it  in  the  whole.

Tis  evident  in  what  relates  to  the  frame  and  order  of  our
bodies,  that  no  particular  odd  mien  or  gesture,  which  is  either
natural  to  us  and  consequent  to  our  make,  or  accidental  and
by  habit  acquired,  can  possibly  be  overcome  by  our  immediate
disapprobation,  or  the  contrary  bent  of  our  will  ever  so
strongly  set  against  it.  Such  a  change  cannot  be  effected
^  The  Moralists,  part  iii.  §  2.

260


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

without  extraordinary  means,  and  the  intervention  of  art  and
method,  a  strict  attention,  and  repeated  check.  And  even
thus.  Nature  we  find  is  hardly  mastered,  but  lies  sullen,  and
ready  to  revolt  on  the  first  occasion.  Much  more  is  this  the
mind's  case  in  respect  of  that  natural  affection  and  anticipating
fancy  which  makes  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong.  'Tis  impos-
sible that  this  can  instantly,  or  without  much  force  and
violence,  be  effaced,  or  struck  out  of  the  natural  temper,  even
by  means  of  the  most  extravagant  belief  or  opinion  in  the
world.

Neither  Theism  therefore,  nor  Atheism,  nor  Daemonism,
nor  any  religious  or  irreligious  belief  of  any  kind  being  able
to  operate  immediately  or  directly  in  this  case,  but  indirectly,
by  the  intervention  of  opposite  or  of  favourable  affections
casually  excited  by  any  such  belief,  we  may  consider  of  this
effect  in  our  last  case,  where  we  come  to  examine  the  agreement
.or  disagreement  of  other  affections  with  this  natural  and  moral
one  which  relates  to  right  and  wrong.

Section II

2.  As  to  the  second  case,  viz.  the  wrong  sense  or  false  imagina-
tion of  right  and  wrong.

This  can  proceed  only  from  the  force  of  custom  and  educa-
tion in  opposition  to  Nature,  as  may  be  noted  in  those  countries
where,  according  to  custom  or  politic  institution,  certain  actions
naturally  foul  and  odious  are  repeatedly  viewed  with  applause,
and  honour  ascribed  to  them.  For  thus  'tis  possible  that  a
man,  forcing  himself,  may  eat  the  flesh  of  his  enemies,  not  only
against  his  stomach,  but  against  his  nature,  and  think  it
nevertheless  both  right  and  honourable,  as  supposing  it  to  be
of  considerable  service  to  his  community,  and  capable  of
advancing  the  name  and  spreading  the  terror  of  his  nation.

But  to  speak  of  the  opinions  relating  to  a  Deity,  and  what
effect  they  may  have  in  this  place. As  to  atheism,  it  does  not

261


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

seem  that  it  can  directly  have  any  effect  at  all  towards  the
setting  up  a  false  species  of  right  or  wrong.  For  notwith-
standing a  man  may, through  custom,  or  by  licentiousness  of
practice,  favoured  by  atheism,  come  in  time  to  lose  much  of
^  his  natural  moral  sense,^ yet  it  does  not  seem  that  atheism

should  of  itsefr  be  the  cause  of  any  estimation  or  valuing  of
anything  as  fair,  noble,  and  deserving,  which  was  the  contrary.
It  can  never,  for  instance,  make  it  be  thought  that  the  being
able  to  eat  man"'s  flesh,  or  commit  bestiality,  is  good  and
excellent  in  itself.  But  this  is  certain,  that  by  means  of
corrupt  religion  or  superstition,  many  things  the  most  horridly
unnatural  and  inhuman  come  to  be  received  as  excellent,  good,
and  laudable  in  themselves.

Nor  is  this  a  wonder.  For  wherever  anything,  in  its  nature
odious  and  abominable,  is  by  religion  advanced,  as  the  supposed
will  or  pleasure  of  a  supreme  Deity,  if  in  the  eye  of  the  believer
it  appears  not  indeed  in  any  respect  the  less  ill  or  odious  on
this  account,  then  must  the  Deity  of  necessity  bear  the  blame,
and  be  considered  as  a  being  naturally  ill  and  odious,  how-
ever courted  and  solicited  through  mistrust  and  fear.  But
this  is  what  religion,  in  the  main,  forbids  us  to  imagine.  It
everywhere  prescribes  esteem  and  honour  in  company  with
worship  and  adoration.  Whensoever  therefore  it  teaches  the
love  and  admiration  of  a  Deity  who  has  any  apparent  character
of  ill,  it  teaches  at  the  same  time  a  love  and  admiration  of  that
ill,  and  causes  that  to  be  taken  for  good  and  amiable  which  is
in  itself  horrid  and  detestable.

For  instance,  if  Jupiter  be  he  who  is  adored  and  reverenced,
and  if  his  history  represents  him  amorously  inclined,  and  per-
mitting his  desires  of  this  kind  to  wander  in  the  loosest  manner,
'tis  certain  that  his  worshippers,  believing  this  history  to  be
literally  and  strictly  true,  must  of  course  be  taught  a  greater

11  [This  expression  appears  to  have  been  first  introduced  into  ethics
by  Shaftesbury.  It  occurs  several  times  above  in  the  marginal  headings
of  the  Inquiry.]

262


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR  MERIT

love  of  amorous  and  wanton  acts.  If  there  be  a  religion  which
teaches  the  adoration  and  love  of  a  God  whose  character  it  is  to
be  captious  and  of  high  resentment,  subject  to  wrath  and  anger,
furious,  revengeful,  and  revenging  himself,  when  offended,  on
others  than  those  who  gave  the  offence ;  and  if  there  be  added
to  the  character  of  this  God  a  fraudulent  disposition,  encouraging
deceit  and  treachery  amongst  men,  favourable  to  a  few,  though
for  slight  causes,  and  cruel  to  the  rest,  'tis  evident  that  such  a
religion  as  this  being  strongly  enforced  must  of  necessity  raise
even  an  approbation  and  respect  towards  the  vices  of  this  kind,
and  breed  a  suitable  disposition,  a  capricious,  partial,  revengeful,
and  deceitful  temper.  For  even  irregularities  and  enormities  of
a  heinous  kind  must  in  many  cases  appear  illustrious  to  one
who  considers  them  in  a  being  admired  and  contemplated  with
the  highest  honour  and  veneration.

This  indeed  must  be  allowed,  that  if  in  the  cult  or  worship
of  such  a  Deity  there  be  nothing  beyond  common  form,  nothing
beside  what  proceeds  from  mere  example,  custom,  constraint,  or
fear ;  if  there  be,  at  the  bottom,  no  real  heartiness,  no  esteem
or  love  implied,  the  worshipper  perhaps  may  not  be  much  misled
as  to  his  notion  of  right  and  wrong.  If  in  following  the  precepts
of  his  supposed  God,  or  doing  what  he  esteems  necessary  towards
the  satisfying  of  such  his  Deity,  he  is  compelled  only  by  fear,
and,  contrary  to  his  inclination,  performs  an  act  which  he
secretly  detests  as  barbarous  and  unnatural,  then  has  he  an
apprehension  or  sense  still  of  right  and  wrong,  and,  according
to  what  has  been  already  observed,  is  sensible  of  ill  in  the  char-
acter of  his  God,  however  cautious  he  may  be  of  pronouncing
anything  on  this  subject,  or  so  thinking  of  it  as  to  frame  any
formal  or  direct  opinion  in  the  case.  But  if  by  insensible
degrees,  as  he  proceeds  in  his  religious  faith  and  devout  exercise,
he  comes  to  be  more  and  more  reconciled  to  the  malignity,
arbitrariness,  partiality,  or  revengefulness  of  his  believed  Deity,
his  reconciliation  with  these  qualities  themselves  will  soon  grow
in  proportion,  and  the  most  cruel,  unjust,  and  barbarous  acts

263


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

will,  by  the  power  of  this  example,  be  often  considered  by
him  not  only  as  just  and  lawful,  but  as  divine  and  worthy  of
imitation.

For  whoever  thinks  there  is  a  God,  and  pretends  formally  to
believe  that  he  is  just  and  good,  must  suppose  that  there  is
independently  such  a  thing  as  justice  and  injustice,  truth  and
falsehood,  right  and  wrong,  according  to  which  he  pronounces
that  God  is  just,  righteous,  and  true.  If  the  mere  will,  decree,
or  law  of  God  be  said  absolutely  to  constitute  right  and  wrong,
then  are  these  latter  words  of  no  significancy  at  all.^  For  thus,
if  each  part  of  a  contradiction  were  affirmed  for  truth  by  the
Supreme  Power,  they  would  consequently  become  true.  Thus
if  one  person  were  decreed  to  suffer  for  another's  fault,  the
sentence  would  be  just  and  equitable.  And  thus,  in  the  same
manner,  if  arbitrarily  and  without  reason  some  beings  were
destined  to  endure  perpetual  ill,  and  others  as  constantly  to
enjoy  good,  this  also  would  pass  under  the  same  denomination.
But  to  say  of  anything  that  it  is  just  or  unjust  on  such  a
foundation  as  this,  is  to  say  nothing,  or  to  speak  without  a
meaning.

And  thus  it  appears  that  where  a  real  devotion  and  hearty
worship  is  paid  to  a  Supreme  Being,  who  in  his  history  or  char-
acter is  represented  otherwise  than  as  really  and  ti'uly  just  and
good,  there  must  ensue  a  loss  of  rectitude,  a  disturbance  of
thought,  and  a  corruption  of  temper  and  manners  in  the
believer.  His  honesty  will  of  necessity  be  supplanted  by  his
zeal,  whilst  he  is  thus  unnaturally  influenced,  and  rendered
thus  immorally  devout

To  this  we  need  only  add,  that  as  the  ill  character  of  a
God  does  injury  to  the  affections  of  men,  and  disturbs  and
impairs  the  natural  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  so,  on  tlie  other
hand,  nothing  can  more  highly  contiibute  to  the  fixing  of  right
apprehensions,  and  a  sound  judgment  or  sense  of  right  and

*  [The  reference  is  probably  to  Locke,  Essay,  bk.  i.  ch.  iii.  §  6.  Cp.
Spinoza,  Ethics,  part  i.  Prop.  xvii.  Scholium.]

264


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR MERIT

wrong,  than  to  believe  a  God  who  is  ever  and  on  all  accomits
represented  such  as  to  be  actually  a  true  model  and  example  of
the  most  exact  justice  and  highest  goodness  and  worth.  Such
a  \-iew  of  divine  providence  and  bounty  extended  to  all,  and
expressed  in  a  constant  good  affection  towards  the  whole,  must
of  necessity  engage  us,  within  our  compass  and  sphere,  to  act
by  a  like  principle  and  affection.  And  having  once  the  good
of  our  species  or  public  in  view,  as  our  end  or  aim,  'tis  impossible
we  should  be  misguided  by  any  means  to  a  false  apprehension
or  sense  of  right  or  wrong.

As  to  this  second  case  therefore,  religion  (according  as  the
kind  may  prove)  is  capable  of  doing  great  good  or  harm,  and
atheism  nothing  positive  in  either  way.  For  however  it  may
be  indirectly  an  occasion  of  men's  losing  a  good  and  sufficient
sense  of  right  and  wrong,  it  will  not,  as  atheism  merely,  be  the
occasion  of  setting  up  a  false  species  of  it,  which  only  false
religion  or  fantastical  opinion,  derived  commonly  from  supersti-
tion and  creduhty,  is  able  to  effect.

Section  HI

Now  as  to  the  last  case,  the  opposition  made  by  other  affections
to  the  natural  sense  of  right  and  wrong.

Tis  evident  that  a  creature  having  this  sort  of  sense  or  good
affection  in  any  degiee  must  necessarily  act  according  to  it,  if
it  happens  not  to  be  opposed,  either  by  some  settled  sedate
affection  towards  a  conceived  private  good,  or  by  some  sudden,
strong,  and  forcible  passion,  as  of  lust  or  anger,  which  may  not
only  subdue  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  but  the  very  sense  of
private  good  itself,  and  over-rule  even  the  most  familiar  and
received  opinion  of  what  is  conducing  to  self-interest.

But  it  is  not  our  business  in  this  place  to  examine  the
several  means  or  methods  by  which  this  corruption  is  intro-
duced or  increased.  We  are  to  consider  only  how  the  opinions
concerning  a  Deity  can  influence  one  way  or  another.

265


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

That  it  is  possible  for  a  creature  capable  of  using  reflection
to  have  a  liking  or  dislike  of  moral  actions,  and  consequently
a  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  before  such  time  as  he  may  have
any  settled  notion  of  a  God,  is  what  will  hardly  be  questioned ;
it  being  a  thing  not  expected,  or  any  way  possible,  that  a
creature  such  as  man,  arising  from  his  childhood  slowly  and
gradually  to  several  degrees  of  reason  and  reflection,  should
at  the  very  first  be  taken  up  with  those  speculations  or  more
refined  sort  of  reflections,  about  the  subject  of  God's  existence.

Let  us  suppose  a  creature  who,  wanting  reason  and  being
unable  to  reflect,  has  notwithstanding  many  good  qualities
and  affections,  as  love  to  his  kind,  courage,  gratitude,  or  pity.
'Tis  certain  that  if  you  give  to  this  creature  a  reflecting  faculty,
it  will  at  the  same  instant  approve  of  gratitude,  kindness,  and
pity ;  be  taken  with  any  show  or  representation  of  the  social
passion,  and  think  nothing  more  amiable  than  this,  or  more
odious  than  the  contrary.  And  this  is  to  be  capable  of  virtue,
and  to  have  a  sense  of  right  and  wrong.

Before  the  time,  therefore,  that  a  creature  can  have  any
plain  or  positive  notion  one  way  or  other  concerning  the
subject  of  a  God,  he  may  be  supposed  to  have  an  apprehension
or  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  and  be  possessed  of  virtue  and  vice
in  different  degrees,  as  we  know  by  experience  of  those  who,
having  lived  in  such  places  and  in  such  a  manner  as  never  to
have  entered  into  any  serious  thoughts  of  religion,  are  neverthe-
less very  different  among  themselves,  as  to  their  characters  of
honesty  and  worth  :  some  being  naturally  modest,  kind,  friendly,
and  consequently  lovers  of  kind  and  friendly  actions ;  others
proud,  harsh,  cruel,  and  consequently  inclined  to  admire  rather
the  acts  of  violence  and  mere  power.

Now  as  to  the  belief  of  a  Deity,  and  how  men  are  influenced
by  it,  we  may  consider,  in  the  first  place,  on  what  account  men
yield  obedience,  and  act  in  conformity  to  such  a  supreme  Being.
It  must  be  either  in  the  way  of  his  power,  as  presupposing  some
disadvantage  or  benefit  to  accrue  from  him  ;  or  in  the  way  of

266


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

his  excellency  and  worth,  as  thinking  it  the  perfection  of  nature
to  imitate  and  resemble  him.

If  (as  in  the  first  case)  there  be  a  belief  or  conception  of  a
Deity  who  is  considered  only  as  powerful  over  his  creature,  and
enforcing  obedience  to  his  absolute  will  by  particular  rewards
and  punishments ;  and  if  on  this  account,  through  hope  merely
of  reward,  or  fear  of  punishment,  the  creature  be  incited  to  do
the  good  he  hates,  or  restrained  from  doing  the  ill  to  which  he
is  not  otherwise  in  the  least  degree  averse,  there  is  in  this  case
(as  has  been  already  shown)  no  virtue  or  goodness  whatsoever.
The  creature,  notwithstanding  his  good  conduct,  is  intrinsically
of  as  little  worth  as  if  he  acted  in  his  natural  way,  when  under
no  dread  or  terror  of  any  sort.  There  is  no  more  of  rectitude,
piety,  or  sanctity  in  a  creature  thus  reformed,  than  there  is
meekness  or  gentleness  in  a  tiger  strongly  chained,  or  innocence
and  sobriety  in  a  monkey  under  the  discipline  of  the  whip.
For  however  orderly  and  well  those  animals,  or  man  himself
upon  like  terms,  may  be  induced  to  act,  whilst  the  will  is  neither
gained  nor  the  inclination  wrought  upon,  but  awe  alone  prevails
and  forces  obedience,  the  obedience  is  servile,  and  all  which  is
done  through  it  merely  servile.  The  greater  degree  of  such  a
submission  or  obedience  is  only  the  greater  servility,  whatever
may  be  the  object.  For  whether  such  a  creature  has  a  good
master  or  an  ill  one,  he  is  neither  more  nor  less  servile  in  his
own  nature.  Be  the  master  or  superior  ever  so  perfect  or
excellent,  yet  the  greater  submission  caused  in  this  case,  through
this  sole  principle  or  motive,  is  only  the  lower  and  more  abject
servitude,  and  implies  the  greater  wretchedness  and  meanness
in  the  creature,  who  has  those  passions  of  self-love  so  pre-
dominant, and  is  in  his  temper  so  vicious  and  defective  as  has
been  explained.

As  to  the  second  case.  If  there  be  a  belief  or  conception  of
a  Deity  who  is  considered  as  worthy  and  good,  and  admired
and  reverenced  as  such,  being  understood  to  have,  besides  mere
power  and  knowledge,  the  highest  excellence  of  nature,  such  as

267


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

renders  him  justly  amiable  to  all ;  and  if  in  the  manner  this
Sovereign  and  mighty  Being  is  represented,  or  as  he  is  historic-
ally described,  there  appears  in  him  a  high  and  eminent  regard
to  what  is  good  and  excellent,  a  concern  for  the  good  of  all,
and  an  affection  of  benevolence  and  love  towards  the  whole,
such  an  example  must  undoubtedly  serve  (as  above  explained)
to  raise  and  increase  the  affection  towards  virtue,  and  help  to
submit  and  subdue  all  other  affections  to  that  alone.

Nor  is  this  good  effected  by  example  merely.  For  where
the  theistical  belief  is  entire  and  perfect,  there  must  be  a  steady
opinion  of  the  superintendency  of  a  supreme  Being,  a  witness
and  spectator  of  human  life,  and  conscious  of  whatsoever  is  felt
or  acted  in  the  universe;  so  that  in  the  perfectest  recess  or
deepest  solitude  there  must  be  One  still  presumed  remaining
with  us,  whose  presence  singly  must  be  of  more  moment  than
that  of  the  most  august  assembly  on  earth.  In  such  a  presence,
'tis  evident  that  as  the  shame  of  guilty  actions  must  be  the
greatest  of  any,  so  must  the  honour  be  of  well-doing,  even
under  the  unjust  censure  of  a  world.  And  in  this  case  'tis  very
apparent  how  conducing  a  perfect  theism  must  be  to  virtue,
and  how  great  deficiency  there  is  in  atheism.

What  the  fear  of  future  punishment  and  hope  of  future
reward,  added  to  this  belief,  may  further  contribute  towards
virtue,  we  come  now  to  consider  more  particularly.  So  much
in  the  meanwhile  may  be  gathered  from  what  has  been  said
above,  that  neither  this  fear  nor  hope  can  possibly  be  of  the
kind  called  good  affections,  such  as  are  acknowledged  the
springs  and  sources  of  all  actions  truly  good.  Nor  can  this
fear  or  hope,  as  above  intimated,  consist  in  reality  with  virtue
or  goodness,  if  it  either  stands  as  essential  to  any  moral
performance,  or  as  a  considerable  motive  to  any  act,  of  which
some  better  affection  ought  alone  to  have  been  a  sufficient  cause.

It  may  be  considered  withal,  that  in  this  religious  sort  of
discipline,  the  principle  of  self-love,  which  is  naturally  so  pre-
vailing in  us,  being  no  way  moderated  or  restrained,  but  rather

268


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

improved  and  made  stronger  every  day  by  the  exercise  of  the
passions  in  a  subject  of  more  extended  self-interest,  there  may
be  reason  to  apprehend  lest  the  temper  of  this  kind  should
extend  itself  in  general  through  all  the  parts  of  life.  For  if
the  habit  be  such  as  to  occasion,  in  every  particular,  a  stricter
attention  to  self  good  and  private  interest,  it  must  insensibly
diminish  the  affections  towards  public  good  or  the  interest  of
society,  and  introduce  a  certain  narrowness  of  spirit,  which  (as
some  pretend)  is  peculiarly  observable  in  the  devout  persons
and  zealots  of  almost  every  religious  persuasion.

This,  too,  must  be  confessed :  that  if  it  be  true  piety  to
love  God  for  his  own  sake,  the  over-solicitous  regard  to  private
good  expected  from  him  must  of  necessity  prove  a  diminution
of  piety.  For  whilst  God  is  beloved  only  as  the  cause  of  private
good,  he  is  no  otherwise  beloved  than  as  any  other  instrument
or  means  of  pleasure  by  any  vicious  creature.  Now  the  more
there  is  of  this  violent  affection  towards  private  good,  the  less
room  is  there  for  the  other  sort  towards  goodness  itself,  or  any
good  and  deserving  object,  worthy  of  love  and  admiration  for
its  own  sake,  such  as  God  is  universally  acknowledged,  or  at
least  by  the  generality  of  civilised  or  refined  worshippers.^

Tis  in  this  respect  that  the  strong  desire  and  love  of  life
may  also  prove  an  obstacle  to  piety,  as  well  as  to  virtue
and  public  love.  For  the  stronger  this  affection  is  in  any  one,
the  less  will  he  be  able  to  have  true  resignation,  or  submission
to  the  rule  and  order  of  the  Deity.  And  if  that  which  he  calls
resignation  depends  only  on  the  expectation  of  infinite  retribu-
tion or  reward,  he  discovers  no  more  worth  or  virtue  here
than  in  any  other  bargain  of  interest.  The  meaning  of  his
resignation  being  only  this,  "  That  he  resigns  his  present  life
and  pleasures  conditionally,  for  that  which  he  himself  confesses
to  be  beyond  an  equivalent :  eternal  living  in  a  state  of  highest
pleasure  and  enjoyment.''

^  [Cp.  Spinoza,  Ethics,  part  ii.  (end) ;  part  iv.  Prop.  Ixiii ;  part  v.
Props,  xvii.-xix.]

269


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

But  notwithstanding  the  injury  which  the  principle  of
virtue  may  possibly  suffer  by  the  increase  of  the  selfish  passion
in  the  way  we  have  been  mentioning,  'tis  certain,  on  the  other
side,  that  the  principle  of  fear  of  future  punishment,  and  hope
of  future  reward,  how  mercenary  or  servile  soever  it  may  be
accounted,  is  yet  in  many  circumstances  a  great  advantage,
security,  and  support  to  virtue.

It  has  been  already  considered,  that  notwithstanding  there
may  be  implanted  in  the  heart  a  real  sense  of  right  and  wrong,
a  real  good  affection  towards  the  species  or  society,  yet  by
the  violence  of  rage,  lust,  or  any  other  counter- working  passion,
this  good  affection  may  frequently  be  controlled  and  overcome.
Where  therefore  there  is  nothing  in  the  mind  capable  to  render
such  ill  passions  the  objects  of  its  avei*sion,  and  cause  them
earnestly  to  be  opposed,  'tis  apparent  how  much  a  good
temper  in  time  must  suffer,  and  a  character  by  degrees  change
for  the  worse.  But  if  religion,  interposing,  creates  a  belief
that  the  ill  passions  of  this  kind,  no  less  than  their  consequent
actions,  are  the  objects  of  a  Deity's  animadversion,  'tis  certain
that  such  a  belief  must  prove  a  seasonable  remedy  against
vice,  and  be  in  a  particular  manner  advantageous  to  virtue.
For  a  belief  of  this  kind  must  be  supposed  to  tend  considerably
towards  the  calming  of  the  mind,  and  disposing  or  fitting  the
person  to  a  better  recollection  of  himself,  and  to  a  stricter
observance  of  that  good  and  virtuous  principle  which  needs
only  his  attention  to  engage  him  wholly  in  its  party  and
interest.

And  as  this  belief  of  a  future  reward  and  punishment  is
capable  of  supporting  those  who  through  ill  practice  are  like
to  apostatise  from  virtue,  so  when  by  ill  opinion  and  wrong
thought  the  mind  itself  is  bent  against  the  honest  course,
and  debauched  even  to  an  esteem  and  deliberate  preference  of
a  vicious  one,  the  belief  of  the  kind  mentioned  may  prove  on
this  occasion  the  only  relief  and  safety.

A  person,  for  instance,  who has  much of  goodness and

270


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

natural  rectitude  in  his  temper,  but  withal  so  much  softness  or
effeminacy  as  unfits  him  to  bear  poverty,  crosses,  or  adversity,
if  by  ill  fortune  he  meets  with  many  trials  of  this  kind,  it  must
certainly  give  a  sourness  and  distaste  to  his  temper,  and-  make
him  exceedingly  averse  to  that  which  he  may  falsely  presume
the  occasion  of  such  calamity  or  ill.  Now  if  his  own  thoughts,
or  the  corrupt  insinuations  of  other  men,  present  it  often  to
his  mind  "that  his  honesty  is  the  occasion  of  this  calamity,
and  that  if  he  were  delivered  from  this  restraint  of  virtue  and
honesty,  he  might  be  much  happier,'"'  'tis  very  obvious  that
his  esteem  of  these  good  qualities  must  in  proportion  diminish
every  day  as  the  temper  grows  uneasy  and  quarrels  with  itself.
But  if  he  opposes  to  this  thought  the  consideration  "  that
honesty  carries  with  it,  if  not  a  present,  at  least  a  future
advantage,  such  as  to  compensate  that  loss  of  private  good
which  he  regrets,"  then  may  this  injury  to  his  good  temper
and  honest  principle  be  prevented,  and  his  love  or  affection
towards  honesty  and  virtue  remain  as  it  was  before.

In  the  same  manner,  M'here  instead  of  regard  or  love  there
is  rather  an  aversion  to  what  is  good  and  virtuous  (as,  for
instance,  where  lenity  and  forgiveness  are  despised,  and  revenge
highly  thought  of  and  beloved),  if  there  be  this  consideration
added,  "That  lenity  is,  by  its  rewards,  made  the  cause  of  a
greater  self- good  and  enjoyment  than  what  is  found  in
revenge,"  that  very  affection  of  lenity  and  mildness  may
come  to  be  industiiously  nourished,  and  the  contrary  passion
depressed.  And  thus  temperance,  modesty,  candour,  benignity,
and  other  good  affections,  however  despised  at  first,  may  come
at  last  to  be  valued  for  their  own  sakes,  the  contrary  species
rejected,  and  the  good  and  proper  object  beloved  and  prose-
cuted, when  the  reward  or  punishment  is  not  so  much  as
thought  of.

Thus  in  a  civil  state  or  public  we  see  that  a  virtuous
administration,  and  an  equal  and  just  distribution  of  rewards
and punishments, is of the highest service, not only by

271


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

restraining  the  vicious,  and  forcing  them  to  act  usefully  to
society,  but  by  making  virtue  to  be  apparently  the  interest
of  every  one,  so  as  to  remove  all  prejudices  against  it,  create
a  fair  reception  for  it,  and  lead  men  into  that  path  which
afterwards  they  cannot  easily  quit.  For  thus  a  people  raised
from  barbarity  or  despotic  rule,  civilised  by  laws,  and  made
virtuous  by  the  long  course  of  a  lawful  and  just  administration,
if  they  chance  to  fall  suddenly  under  any  misgovernment  of
unjust  and  arbitrary  power,  they  will  on  this  account  be  the
rather  animated  to  exert  a  stronger  virtue  in  opposition  to
such  violence  and  corruption.  And  even  where,  by  long  and
continued  arts  of  a  prevailing  tyranny,  such  a  people  are  at
last  totally  oppressed,  the  scattered  seeds  of  virtue  will  for  a
long  time  remain  alive,  even  to  a  second  generation,  ere  the
utmost  force  of  misapplied  rewards  and  punishments  can
bring  them  to  the  abject  and  compliant  state  of  long-accustomed
slaves.

But  though  a  right  distribution  of  justice  in  a  government
be  so  essential  a  cause  of  virtue,  we  must  observe  in  this  case
that  it  is  example  which  chiefly  influences  mankind,  and  forms
the  character  and  disposition  of  a  people.  For  a  virtuous
administration  is  in  a  manner  necessarily  accompanied  with
virtue  in  the  magistrate.  Otherwise  it  could  be  of  little  effect,
and  of  no  long  duration.  But  where  it  is  sincere  and  well
established,  there  virtue  and  the  laws  must  necessarily  be
respected  and  beloved.  So  that,  as  to  punishments  and  rewards,
their  efiicacy  is  not  so  much  from  the  fear  or  expectation  which
they  raise,  as  from  a  natural  esteem  of  virtue  and  detestation
of  villainy,  which  is  awakened  and  excited  by  these  public  ex-
pressions of  the  approbation  and  hatred  of  mankind  in  each
case.  For  in  the  public  executions  of  the  greatest  villains
we  see  generally  that  the  infamy  and  odiousness  of  their  crime,
and  the  shame  of  it  before  mankind,  contribute  more  to  their
misery  than  all  besides ;  and  that  it  is  not  the  immediate  pain
of  death  itself  which raises so much horror either in the

272


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

sufferers  or  spectators,  as  that  ignominious  kind  of  death
which  is  inflicted  for  public  crimes  and  violations  of  justice
and  humanity.

And  as  the  case  of  reward  and  punishment  stands  thus  in
the  public,  so,  in  the  same  manner,  as  to  private  families.  For
slaves  and  mercenary  servants,  restrained  and  made  orderly  by
punishment  and  the  severity  of  their  master,  are  not  on  this
account  made  good  or  honest.  Yet  the  same  master  of  the
family  using  proper  rewards  and  gentle  punishments  towards  his
children,  teaches  them  goodness,  and  by  this  help  instructs  them
in  a  virtue  which  afterwards  they  practise  upon  other  grounds,
and  without  thinking  of  a  penalty  or  bribe.  And  this  is  what
we  call  a  liberal  education  and  a  liberal  service ;  the  contrary
service  and  obedience,  whether  towards  God  or  man,  being
illiberal  and  unworthy  of  any  honour  or  commendation.

In  the  case  of  religion,  however,  it  must  be  considered  that
if  by  the  hope  of  reward  be  understood  the  love  and  desire  of
virtuous  enjoyment,  or  of  the  very  practice  and  exercise  of  virtue
in  another  life,  the  expectation  or  hope  of  this  kind  is  so  far
from  being  derogatory  to  virtue,  that  it  is  an  evidence  of  our
loving  it  the  more  sincerely  and  for  its  own  sake.  Nor  can  this
principle  be  justly  called  selfish ;  for  if  the  love  of  virtue  be  not
mere  self-interest,  the  love  and  desire  of  life  for  virtue's  sake
cannot  be  esteemed  so.  But  if  the  desire  of  life  be  only  through
the  violence  of  that  natural  aversion  to  death,  if  it  be  through
the  love  of  something  else  than  virtuous  affection,  or  through
the  unwillingness  of  parting  with  something  else  than  what  is
purely  of  this  kind,  then  is  it  no  longer  any  sign  or  token  of
real  virtue.

Thus  a  person  loving  life  for  life's  sake,  and  virtue  not  at  all,
may  by  the  promise  or  hope  of  life,  and  fear  of  death  or  other
evil,  be  induced  to  practise  virtue,  and  even  endeavour  to  be
truly  virtuous  by  a  love  of  what  he  practises.  Yet  neither  is
this  very  endeavour  to  be  esteemed  a  virtue.  For  though  he
may  intend  to  be  virtuous,  he  is  not  become  so  for  having  only
VOL.  I  273  T


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

intended  or  aimed  at  it  through  love  of  the  reward.  But  as
soon  as  he  is  come  to  have  any  affection  towards  what  is  morally
good,  and  can  like  or  affect  such  good  for  its  own  sake,  as  good
and  amiable  in  itself,  then  is  he  in  some  degree  good  and
virtuous,  and  not  till  then.

Such  are  the  advantages  or  disadvantages  which  accrue  to
virtue  from  reflection  upon  private  good  or  interest.  For
though  the  habit  of  selfishness  and  the  multiplicity  of  interested
views  are  of  little  improvement  to  real  merit  or  virtue,  yet
there  is  a  necessity  for  the  preservation  of  virtue,  that  it  should
be  thought  to  have  no  quarrel  with  true  interest  and  self-
enjoyment.

Whoever,  therefore,  by  any  strong  persuasion  or  settled
judgment,  thinks  in  the  main  that  virtue  causes  happiness  and
vice  misery,  carries  with  him  that  security  and  assistance  to
virtue  which  is  required.  Or  though  he  has  no  such  thought,
nor  can  believe  virtue  his  real  interest,  either  with  respect  to
his  own  nature  and  constitution,  or  the  circumstances  of  human
life,  yet  if  he  believes  any  supreme  powers  concerned  in  the
present  affairs  of  mankind,  immediately  intei-posing  in  behalf
of  the  honest  and  virtuous  against  the  impious  and  unjust,  this
will  serve  to  preserve  in  him,  however,  that  just  esteem  of  virtue
which  might  otherwise  considerably  diminish.  Or  should  he
still  believe  little  of  the  immediate  interposition  of  Providence
in  the  affairs  of  this  present  life,  yet  if  he  believes  a  God
dispensing  rewards  and  punishments  to  vice  and  virtue  in  a
future,  he  carries  with  him  still  the  same  advantage  and
security,  whilst  his  belief  is  steady  and  nowise  wavering  or
doubtful.  For  it  must  be  observed,  that  an  expectation  and
dependency  so  miraculous  and  great  as  this,  must  naturally
take  off  from  other  inferior  dependencies  and  encouragements.
Where  infinite  rewards  are  thus  enforced,  and  the  imagination
strongly  turned  towards  them,  the  other  common  and  natural
motives  to  goodness  are  apt  to  be  neglected  and  lose  much  by
disuse. Other  interests  are  hardly  so  much  as  computed,  whilst

274


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR MERIT

the  mind  is  thus  transported  in  the  pursuit  of  a  high  advantage,
and  self-interest  so  narrowly  confined  within  ourselves.  On
this  account,  all  other  affections  towards  friends,  relations,
or  mankind  are  often  slightly  regarded,  as  being  worldly  and  of
little  moment  in  respect  of  the  interest  of  our  soul.  And  so
little  thought  is  there  of  any  immediate  satisfaction  arising  from
such  good  offices  of  life,  that  it  is  customary  with  many  devout
people  zealously  to  decry  all  temporal  advantages  of  goodness,
all  natural  benefits  of  virtue,  and  magnifying  the  contrary
happiness  of  a  vicious  state,  to  declare  "  that  except  only  for
the  sake  of  future  reward  and  fear  of  future  punishment,  they
would  divest  themselves  of  all  goodness  at  once,  and  freely  allow
themselves  to  be  most  immoral  and  profligate."  From  whence
it  appears  that  in  some  respects  there  can  be  nothing  more
fatal  to  virtue  than  the  weak  and  uncertain  belief  of  a  futvu-e
reward  and  punishment.^  For  the  stress  being  laid  wholly  here,
if  this  foundation  come  to  fail,  there  is  no  further  prop  or
security  to  men''s  morals.  And  thus  virtue  is  supplanted  and
betrayed.

Now  as  to  atheism ;  though  it  be  plainly  deficient  and
without  remedy,  in  the  case  of  ill  judgment  on  the  happiness  of
virtue,  yet  it  is  not,  indeed,  of  necessity  the  cause  of  any  such
ill  judgment.  For  without  an  absolute  assent  to  any  hypothesis
of  theism,  the  advantages  of  virtue  may  possibly  be  seen  and
owned,  and  a  high  opinion  of  it  established  in  the  mind.
However,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  natural  tendency  of
atheism  is  very  different.

'Tis  in  a  manner  impossible  to  have  any  great  opinion  of  the
happiness  of  virtue  without  conceiving  high  thoughts  of  the  satis-
faction resulting  from  the  generous  admiration  and  love  of  it ;
and  nothing  beside  the  experience  of  such  a  love  is  likely  to
make  this  satisfaction  credited.  The  chief  ground  and  support
therefore  of  this  opinion  of  happiness  in  virtue  must  arise  from
the  powerful  feeling  of  this  generous  moral  affection,  and  the
1  Eissay  on  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iL  §  3.

275


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

knowledge  of  its  power  and  strength.  But  this  is  certain,  that
it  can  be  no  great  strengthening  to  the  moral  affection,  no
gi'eat  support  to  the  pure  love  of  goodness  and  virtue,  to  suppose
there  is  neither  goodness  nor  beauty  in  the  Whole  itself;  nor
any  example  or  jirecedent  of  good  affection  in  any  superior
Being.  Such  a  belief  must  tend  rather  to  the  weaning  the
affections  from  anything  amiable  or  self-worthy,  and  to  the
suppressing  the  very  habit  and  familiar  custom  of  admiring
natural  beauties,  or  whatever  in  the  order  of  things  is  according
to  just  design,  harmony,  and  proportion.  For  how  little  dis-
posed must  a  person  be  to  love  or  admire  anything  as  orderly
in  the  universe  who  thinks  the  universe  itself  a  pattern  of
disorder  ?  How  unapt  to  reverence  or  respect  any  particular
subordinate  beauty  of  a  part,  when  even  the  Whole  itself  is
thought  to  want  perfection,  and  to  be  only  a  vast  and  infinite
deformity  ?

Nothing  indeed  can  be  more  melancholy  than  the  thought
of  living  in  a  distracted  universe,  from  whence  many  ills  may  be
suspected,  and  where  there  is  nothing  good  or  lovely  which
presents  itself,  nothing  which  can  satisfy  in  contemplation,  or
raise  any  passion  besides  that  of  contempt,  hatred,  or  dislike.
Such  an  opinion  as  this  may  by  degrees  embitter  the  temper,
and  not  only  make  the  love  of  virtue  to  be  less  felt,  but  help  to
impair  and  ruin  the  very  principle  of  virtue,  viz.  natural  and
kind  affection.

Upon  the  whole,  whoever  has  a  firm  belief  of  a  God  whom
he  does  not  merely  call  good,  but  of  whom  in  reality  he  believes
nothing  beside  real  good,  nothing  beside  what  is  truly  suitable
to  the  exactest  character  of  benignity  and  goodness ;  such  a
person  believing  rewards  or  retributions  in  another  life,  must
believe  them  annexed  to  real  goodness  and  merit,  real  villainy
and  baseness,  and  not  to  any  accidental  qualities  or  circum-
stances, in  which  respect  they  cannot  properly  be  styled  rewards
or  punishments,  but  capricious  distributions  of  happiness  or
unhappiness  to  creatures. These  are  the  only  terms  on  which

276


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

the  belief  of  a  world  to  come  can  happily  influence  the  believer.
And  on  these  terms,  and  by  virtue  of  this  belief,  man  perhaps
may  retain  his  virtue  and  integrity,  even  under  the  hardest
thoughts  of  human  nature,  when  either  by  any  ill  circumstance
or  untoward  doctrine  he  is  brought  to  that  unfortunate  opinion
of  Virtue's  being  naturally  an  enemy  to  happiness  in  life.

This,  however,  is  an  opinion  which  cannot  be  supposed
consistent  with  sound  theism.  For  whatever  be  decided  as  to
a  future  life,  or  the  rewards  and  punishments  of  hereafter,  he
who,  as  a  sound  theist,  believes  a  reigning  mind  sovereign  in
Nature,  and  ruling  all  things  with  the  highest  perfection  of
goodness,  as  well  as  of  Avisdom  and  power,  must  necessarily
believe  virtue  to  be  naturally  good  and  advantageous.^  For
what  could  more  strongly  imply  an  unjust  ordinance,  a  blot
and  imperfection  in  the  general  constitution  of  things,  than  to
suppose  virtue  the  natural  ill,  and  vice  the  natural  good  of  any
creature  ?

And  now,  last  of  all,  there  remains  for  us  to  consider  a  yet
further  advantage  to  virtue,  in  the  theistical  belief  above  the
atheistical.  The  proposition  may  at  first  sight  appear  over-
refined,  and  of  a  sort  which  is  esteemed  too  nicely  philosophical.
But  after  what  has  been  already  examined,  the  subject  perhaps
may  be  more  easily  explained.

There  is  no  creature,  according  to  what  has  been  already
proved,  who  must  not  of  necessity  be  ill  in  some  degree,  by
having  any  affection  or  aversion  in  a  stronger  degree  than  is
suitable  to  his  own  private  good,  or  that  of  the  system  to  which
he  is  joined.  For  in  either  case  the  affection  is  ill  and  vicious.
Now  if  a  rational  creature  has  that  degree  of  aversion  which  is
requisite  to  arm  him  against  any  particular  misfortune,  and
alarm  him  against  the  approach  of  any  calamity,  this  is  regular
and  well.  Hut  if  after  the  misfortune  is  happened,  his  aversion
continues  still,  and  his  passion  rather  grows  upon  him,  whilst
he  rages  at  the  accident  and  exclaims  against  his  private  fortune
^  [Cp.  Spinoza,  Ethics,  part  v.  Prop.  xli.  and  Scholium.]

277


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

or  lot,  this  will  be  acknowledged  both  vicious  in  present  and  for
the  future,  as  it  affects  the  temper,  and  disturbs  that  easy  course
of  the  affections  on  which  virtue  and  goodness  so  much  depend.
On  the  other  side,  the  patient  enduring  of  the  calamity,  and
the  bearing  up  of  the  mind  under  it,  must  be  acknowledged
immediately  virtuous  and  preservative  of  virtue.  Now,  accord-
ing to  the  hypothesis  of  those  who  exclude  a  general  mind,  it
must  be  confessed  there  can  nothing  happen  in  the  course  of
things  to  deserve  either  our  admiration  and  love  or  our  anger
and  abhorrence.  However,  as  there  can  be  no  satisfaction  at
the  best  in  thinking  upon  what  atoms  and  chance  produce,  so
upon  disastrous  occasions,  and  under  the  circumstances  of  a
calamitous  and  hard  fortune,  'tis  scarce  possible  to  prevent  a
natural  kind  of  abhorrence  and  spleen,  which  will  be  entertained
and  kept  alive  by  the  imagination  of  so  perverse  an  order  of
things.  But  in  another  hypothesis  (that  of  perfect  theism)  it
is  understood  "  that  whatever  the  order  of  the  world  produces,
is  in  the  main  both  just  and  good.""  Therefore  in  the  course  of
things  in  this  world,  whatever  hardship  of  events  may  seem  to
force  from  any  rational  creature  a  hard  censure  of  his  private
condition  or  lot,  he  may  by  reflection  nevertheless  come  to  have
patience,  and  to  acquiesce  in  it.  Nor  is  this  all.  He  may  go
further  still  in  this  reconciliation,  and  from  the  same  principle
may  make  the  lot  itself  an  object  of  his  good  affection,  whilst
he  strives  to  maintain  this  generous  fealty,  and  stands  so  well
disposed  towards  the  laws  and  government  of  his  higher
country.

Such  an  affection  must  needs  create  the  highest  constancy
in  any  state  of  sufferance,  and  make  us  in  the  best  manner
support  whatever  hardships  are  to  be  endured  for  virtue's  sake.
And  as  this  affection  must  of  necessity  cause  a  greater  acquies-
cence and  complacency  with  respect  to  ill  accidents,  ill  men,  and
injuries,  so  of  course  it  cannot  fail  of  producing  still  a  greater
equality,  gentleness,  and  benignity  in  the  temper.  Consequently
the  affection  must  be  a  truly  good  one,  and  a  creature  the  more

278


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

truly  good  and  virtuous  by  possessing  it.  For  whatsoever  is
the  occasion  or  means  of  more  affectionately  uniting  a  rational
creature  to  his  part  in  society,  and  causes  him  to  prosecute  the
public  good  or  interest  of  his  species  with  more  zeal  and
affection  than  ordinary,  is  undoubtedly  the  cause  of  more  than
ordinary  virtue  in  such  a  person.

This  too  is  certain,  that  the  admiration  and  love  of  order,
harmony,  and  proportion,  in  whatever  kind,  is  naturally  improv-
ing to  the  temper,  advantageous  to  social  affection,  and  highly
assistant  to  virtue,  which  is  itself  no  other  than  the  love  of
order  and  beauty  in  society.  In  the  meanest  subjects  of  the
world,  the  appearance  of  order  gains  upon  the  mind  and  draws
the  affection  towards  it.  But  if  the  order  of  the  world  itself
appears  just  and  beautiful,  the  admiration  and  esteem  of  order
must  run  higher,  and  the  elegant  passion  or  love  of  beauty,
which  is  so  advantageous  to  virtue,  must  be  the  more  improved
by  its  exercise  in  so  ample  and  magnificent  a  subject.  For  'tis
impossible  that  such  a  divine  order  should  be  contemplated
without  ecstasy  and  rapture,  since  in  the  common  subjects  of
science  and  the  liberal  arts,  whatever  is  according  to  just
harmony  and  proportion  is  so  transporting  to  those  who  have
any  knowledge  or  practice  in  the  kind.

Now  if  the  subject  and  ground  of  this  divine  passion  be  not
really  just  or  adequate  (the  hypothesis  of  theism  being  supposed
false)  the  passion  still  in  itself  is  so  far  natural  and  good,  as  it
proves  an  advantage  to  virtue  and  goodness,  according  to  what
has  been  above  demonstrated.  But  if,  on  the  other  side,
the  subject  of  this  passion  be  really  adequate  and  just  (the
hypothesis  of  theism  being  real,  and  not  imaginary),  then  is
the  passion  also  just,  and  becomes  absolutely  due  and  requisite
in  every  rational  creature.

Hence  we  may  determine  justly  the  relation  which  Virtue
has  to  Piety,  the  first  being  not  complete  but  in  the  latter,
since  where  the  latter  is  wanting,  there  can  neither  be  the  same

279


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

benignity,  firmness,  or  constancy,  the  same  good  composure  of
the  affections  or  uniformity  of  mind.

And  thus  the  perfection  and  height  of  virtue  must  be  owing
to  the  belief  of  a  God.^


BOOK  II

PART I

Section  I

We  have  considered  what  virtue  is  and  to  whom  the  character
belongs.  It  remains  to  inquire,  what  obligation  there  is  to
virtue,  or  what  reason  to  embrace  it.

We  have  found  that,  to  deserve  the  name  of  good  or
virtuous,  a  creature  must  have  all  his  inclinations  and  affections,
his  dispositions  of  mind  and  temper,  suitable,  and  agreeing  with
the  good  of  his  kind,  or  of  that  system  in  which  he  is  included,
and  of  which  he  constitutes  a  part.  To  stand  thus  well  affected,
and  to  have  one's  affections  right  and  entire,  not  only  in  respect
of  oneself  but  of  society  and  the  public,  this  is  rectitude,
integrity,  or  virtue.  And  to  be  wanting  in  any  of  these,  or  to
have  their  contraries,  is  depravity,  corruption,  and  vice.

It  has  been  already  shown,  that  in  the  passions  and  affec-
tions of  particular  creatures  there  is  a  constant  relation  to  the
interest  of  a  species  or  common  nature.  This  has  been  demon-
strated in  the  case  of  natural  affection,  parental  kindness,  zeal
for  posterity,  concern  for  the  propagation  and  nurture  of  the
young,  love  of  fellowship  and  company,  compassion,  mutual
succour,  and  the  rest  of  this  kind.  Nor  will  any  one  deny  that
this  affection  of  a  creature  towards  the  good  of  the  species  or
common  nature  is  as  proper  and  natural  to  him  as  it  is  to  any

^  [Cp.  Spinoza,  Ethics,  part  iv.  Prop,  xxviii.]

280


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

organ,  part,  or  member  of  an  animal  body,  or  mere  vegetable,
to  work  in  its  known  course  and  regular  way  of  growth.  'Tis
not  more  natural  for  the  stomach  to  digest,  the  lungs  to
breathe,  the  glands  to  separate  juices,  or  other  entrails  to
perform  their  several  offices,  however  they  may  by  particular
impediments  be  sometimes  disordered  or  obstructed  in  their
operations.

There  being  allowed  therefore  in  a  creature  such  affections
as  these  towards  the  common  nature  or  system  of  the  kind,
together  with  those  other  which  regard  the  private  nature  or
self-system,  it  will  appear  that  in  following  the  first  of  these
affections,  the  creature  must  on  many  occasions  contradict  and
go  against  the  latter.  How  else  should  the  species  be  preserved  ?
Or  what  would  signify  that  implanted  natural  affection,  by
which  a  creature  through  so  many  difficulties  and  hazards
preserves  its  offspring  and  supports  its  kind  ?

It  may  therefore  be  imagined,  perhaps,  that  there  is  a  plain
and  absolute  opposition  between  these  two  habits  or  affections.
It  may  be  presumed  that  the  pursuing  the  common  interest  or
public  good  through  the  affections  of  one  kind,  must  be  a
hindrance  to  the  attainment  of  private  good  through  the
affections  of  another.  For  it  being  taken  for  granted  that
hazards  and  hardships  of  whatever  sort  are  naturally  the  ill  of
the  private  state,  and  it  being  certainly  the  nature  of  those
public  affections  to  lead  often  to  the  greatest  hardships  and
hazards  of  every  kind,  'tis  presently  inferred  "  that  'tis  the
creature's  interest  to  be  without  any  public  affection  whatsoever."

This  we  know  for  certain,  that  all  social  love,  friendship,
gratitude,  or  whatever  else  is  of  this  generous  kind,  does  by  its
nature  take  place  of  the  self-interesting  passions,  draws  us  out
of  ourselves,  and  makes  us  disregardful  of  our  own  convenience
and  safety.  So  that  according  to  a  known  way  of  reasoning
on  self-interest,^  that  which  is  of  a  social  kind  in  us  should  of

1  [i.e.  that  of  Hobbes.  See  the  Essay  on  Wit  and  Humour,  part  ii.  §  1,
and  part  iii.  §  3.]

281


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

right  be  abolished.  Thus  kindness  of  every  sort,  indulgence,
tenderness,  compassion,  and,  in  short,  all  natural  affection,  should
be  industriously  suppressed,  and  as  mere  folly  and  weakness  of
nature  be  resisted  and  overcome ;  that  by  this  means  there
might  be  nothing  remaining  in  us  which  was  contrary  to  a
direct  self-end ;  nothing  which  might  stand  in  opposition  to  a
steady  and  deliberate  pursuit  of  the  most  narrowly  confined
self-interest.

According  to  this  extraordinary  hypothesis,  it  must  be
taken  for  granted  "  that  in  the  system  of  a  kind  or  species,
the  interest  of  the  private  nature  is  directly  opposite  to  that  of
the  common  one,  the  interest  of  particulars  directly  opposite  to
that  of  the  public  in  general.""  A  strange  constitution !  in
which  it  must  be  confessed  there  is  much  disorder  and  unto-
wardness,  unlike  to  what  we  observe  elsewhere  in  Nature.  As
if  in  any  vegetable  or  animal  body  the  part  or  member  could
be  supposed  in  a  good  and  prosperous  state  as  to  itself,  when
under  a  contrary  disposition  and  in  an  unnatural  growth  or
habit  as  to  its  whole.

Now  that  this  is  in  reality  quite  otherwise,  we  shall  endeavour
to  demonstrate,  so  as  to  make  appear  "  that  what  men  repre-
sent as  an  ill  order  and  constitution  in  the  universe,  by  making
moral  rectitude  appear  the  ill,  and  depravity  the  good  or
advantage  of  a  creature,  is  in  Nature  just  the  contrary.  That
to  be  well  affected  towards  the  public  interest  and  one's  own
is  not  only  consistent  but  inseparable ;  and  that  moral  rectitude
or  virtue  must  accordingly  be  the  advantage,  and  vice  the
injury  and  disadvantage  of  every  creature."

Section  II

There  are  few  perhaps  who,  when  they  consider  a  creature
void  of  natural  affection  and  wholly  destitute  of  a  communica-
tive or  social  principle,  will  suppose  him  at  the  same  time
either  tolerably  happy  in  himself,  or  as  he  stands  abroad,  with

282


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

respect  to  his  fellow-creatures  or  kind.  'Tis  generally  thought
that  such  a  creature  as  this  feels  slender  joy  in  life,  and  finds
little  satisfaction  in  the  mere  sensual  pleasures  which  remain
with  him,  after  the  loss  of  social  enjoyment  and  whatever  can
be  called  humanity  or  good  nature.  We  know  that  to  such  a
creature  as  this  'tis  not  only  incident  to  be  morose,  rancorous,
and  malignant ;  but  that  of  necessity  a  mind  or  temper  thus
destitute  of  mildness  and  benignity  must  turn  to  that  which
is  contrary,  and  be  wrought  by  passions  of  a  different  kind.
Such  a  heart  as  this  must  be  a  continual  seat  of  perverse
inclinations  and  bitter  aversions,  raised  from  a  constant  ill-
humour,  sourness,  and  disquiet.  The  consciousness  of  such  a
nature,  so  obnoxious  to  mankind,  and  to  all  beings  which
approach  it,  must  overcloud  the  mind  with  dark  suspicion  and
jealousy,  alarm  it  with  fears  and  horror,  and  raise  in  it  a  con-
tinual disturbance,  even  in  the  most  seeming  fair  and  secure  state
of  fortune,  and  in  the  highest  degree  of  outward  prosperity.

This,  as  to  the  complete  immoral  state,  is  what,  of  their
own  accord,  men  readily  remark.  Where  there  is  this  absolute
degeneracy,  this  total  apostasy  from  all  candour,  equity,  trust,
sociableness,  or  friendship,  there  are  few  who  do  not  see  and
acknowledge  the  misery  which  is  consequent.  Seldom  is  the
case  misconstrued  when  at  worst.  The  misfortune  is,  we  look
not  on  this  depravity,  nor  consider  how  it  stands,  in  less
degrees.  The  calamity,  we  think,  does  not  of  necessity  hold
proportion  with  the  injustice  or  iniquity.  As  if  to  be  absolutely
immoral  and  inhuman  were  indeed  the  greatest  misfortune  and
misery ;  but  that  to  be  so  in  a  little  degree  should  be  no
misery  nor  harm  at  all.  Which  to  allow,  is  just  as  reasonable
as  to  own  that  'tis  the  greatest  ill  of  a  body  to  be  in  the
utmost  manner  distorted  and  maimed ;  but  that  to  lose  the
use  only  of  one  limb,  or  to  be  impaired  in  some  one  single
organ  or  member,  is  no  inconvenience  or  ill  worthy  the  least
notice.

The parts and proportions of the mind, their  mutual

283


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

relation  and  dependency,  the  connection  and  frame  of  those
passions  which  constitute  the  soul  or  temper,  may  easily  be
understood  by  any  one  who  thinks  it  worth  his  while  to  study
this  inward  anatomy.  'TIS  certain  that  the  order  or  symmetry
of  this  inward  part  is  in  itself  no  less  real  and  exact  than
that  of  the  body.  However,  'tis  apparent  that  few  of  us
endeavour  to  become  anatomists  of  this  sort.  Nor  is  any  one
ashamed  of  the  deepest  ignorance  in  such  a  subject.  For
though  the  greatest  misery  and  ill  is  generally  owned  to  be
from  disposition  and  temper ;  though  'tis  allowed  that  temper
may  often  change,  and  that  it  actually  varies  on  many  occasions,
much  to  our  disadvantage ;  yet  how  this  matter  is  brought
about  we  inquire  not.  We  never  trouble  ourselves  to  consider
thoroughly  by  what  means  or  methods  our  inward  constitution
comes  at  any  time  to  be  impaired  or  injured.  The  solutio
continuiy  which  bodily  surgeons  talk  of,  is  never  applied  in
this  case  by  surgeons  of  another  sort.  The  notion  of  a  whole
and  parts  is  not  apprehended  in  this  science.  We  know  not
what  the  effect  is  of  straining  any  affection,  indulging  any
wrong  passion,  or  relaxing  any  proper  and  natural  habit  or
good  inclination.  Nor  can  we  conceive  how  a  particular  action
should  have  such  a  sudden  influence  on  the  whole  mind  as  to
make  the  person  an  immediate  sufferer.  We  suppose  rather
that  a  man  may  violate  his  faith,  commit  any  wickedness
unfamiliar  to  him  before,  engage  in  any  vice  or  villainy,  without
the  least  prejudice  to  himself,  or  any  misery  naturally  following
from  the  ill  action.

'Tis  thus  we  hear  it  often  said,  "  Such  a  person  has  done
ill  indeed ;  but  what  is  he  the  worse  for  it .'' "  Yet,  speaking
of  any  nature  thoroughly  savage,  curst,  and  inveterate,  we  say
truly,  "  Such  a  one  is  a  plague  and  torment  to  himself."  And
we  allow  "  that  through  certain  humours  or  passions,  and
from  temper  merely,  a  man  may  be  completely  miserable,  let
his  outward  circumstances  be  ever  so  fortunate."  These
different  judgments  sufficiently  demonstrate  that  we  are  not

284


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR  MERIT

accustomed  to  think  with  much  coherency  on  these  moral
subjects ;  and  that  our  notions  in  this  respect  are  not  a  little
confused  and  contradictory.

Now  if  the  fabric  of  the  mind  or  temper  appeared  such  to
us  as  it  really  is ;  if  we  saw  it  impossible  to  remove  hence
any  one  good  or  orderly  affection,  or  introduce  any  ill  or
disorderly  one,  without  drawing  on,  in  some  degree,  that
dissolute  state,  which  at  its  height  is  confessed  to  be  so
miserable;  'twould  then  undoubtedly  be  owned  that  since  no
ill,  immoral,  or  unjust  action  could  be  committed  without  either
a  new  inroad  and  breach  on  the  temper  and  passions,  or  a
farther  advancing  of  that  execution  already  begun,  whoever
did  ill,  or  acted  in  prejudice  of  his  integrity,  good-nature,
or  worth,  would  of  necessity  act  with  greater  cruelty  towards
himself  than  he  who  scrupled  not  to  swallow  what  was  poisonous,
or  who  with  his  own  hands  should  voluntarily  mangle  or  wound
his  outward  form  or  constitution,  natural  limbs  or  body.

Section III

It  has  been  shown  before,  that  no  animal  can  be  said  properly
to  act  otherwise  than  through  affections  or  passions,  such  as
are  proper  to  an  animal.  For  in  convulsive  fits,  where  a
creature  strikes  either  himself  or  others,  'tis  a  simple  mechanism,
an  engine,  or  piece  of  clockwork,  which  acts,  and  not  the
animal.

AVhatsoever  therefore  is  done  or  acted  by  any  animal  as
such,  is  done  only  through  some  affection  or  passion,  as  of  fear,
love,  or  hatred  moving  him.

And  as  it  is  impossible  that  a  weaker  affection  should  over-
come a  stronger,  so  it  is  impossible  but  that  where  the  affections
or  passions  are  strongest  in  the  main,  and  form  in  general  the
most  considerable  party,  either  by  their  force  or  number,
thither  the  animal  must  incline :  and  according  to  this  balance
he  must  be  governed  and  led  to  action.

285


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

The  affections  or  passions  which  must  influence  and  govern
the  animal  are  either —

1.  The  natural  affections,  which  lead  to  the  good  of  the
public.

2.  Or  the  self  affections,  which  lead  only  to  the  good  of
the  private.

3.  Or  such  as  are  neither  of  these,  nor  tending  either  to
any  good  of  the  public  or  private,  but  contrary-wise ;  and  which
may  therefore  be  justly  styled  unnatural  affections.

So  that  according  as  these  affections  stand,  a  creature  must
be  virtuous  or  vicious,  good  or  ill.

The  latter  sort  of  these  affections,  'tis  evident,  are  wholly
vicious.  The  two  former  may  be  vicious  or  virtuous  according
to  their  degree.

It  may  seem  strange,  perhaps,  to  speak  of  natural  affections
as  too  strong,  or  of  self  affections  as  too  weak.  But  to  clear
this  difficulty  we  must  call  to  mind  what  has  been  already
explained,  "That  natural  affection  may,  in  particular  cases,
be  excessive,  and  in  an  unnatural  degree."  As  when  pity  is
so  overcoming  as  to  destroy  its  own  end,  and  prevent  the
succour  and  relief  required ;  or  as  when  love  to  the  offspring
proves  such  a  fondness  as  destroys  the  parent,  and  consequently
the  off*spring  itself.  And  notwithstanding  it  may  seem  harsh  to
call  that  unnatural  and  vicious  which  is  only  an  extreme  of  some
natural  and  kind  affection,  yet  "'tis  most  certain  that  wherever
any  single  good  affection  of  this  sort  is  over-great,  it  must  be
injurious  to  the  rest,  and  detract  in  some  measure  from  their
force  and  natural  operation.  For  a  creature  possessed  with  such
an  immoderate  degree  of  passion,  must  of  necessity  allow  too
much  to  that  one,  and  too  little  to  othei"s  of  the  same  character,
and  equally  natural  and  useful  as  to  their  end.  And  this  must
necessarily  be  the  occasion  of  partiality  and  injustice  whilst
only  one  duty  or  natural  part  is  earnestly  followed,  and  other
parts  or  duties  neglected,  which  should  accompany  it,  and
perhaps  take  place  and  be  preferred.

286


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

This  may  well  be  allowed  true  in  all  other  respects,  since
even  religion  itself,  considered  as  a  passion,  not  of  the  selfish
but  nobler  kind,  may  in  some  characters  be  strained  beyond
its  natural  proportion,  and  be  said  also  to  be  in  too  high  a
degree.  For  as  the  end  of  religion  is  to  render  us  more  perfect
and  accomplished  in  all  moral  duties  and  performances ;  if  by
the  height  of  devout  ecstasy  and  contemplation  we  are  rather
disabled  in  this  respect,  and  rendered  more  unapt  to  the  real
duties  and  offices  of  civil  life,  it  may  be  said  that  religion
indeed  is  then  too  strong  in  us.  For  how,  possibly,  can  we
call  this  superstition,  whilst  the  object  of  the  devotion  is
acknowledged  just  and  the  faith  orthodox?  'Tis  only  the
excess  of  zeal  which  in  this  case  is  so  transporting  as  to
render  the  devout  person  more  remiss  in  secular  affairs,  and
less  concerned  for  the  inferior  and  temporal  interests  of
mankind.

Now  as  in  particular  cases  public  affection,  on  the  one  hand,
may  be  too  high,  so  private  affection  may,  on  the  other  hand,
be  too  weak.  For  if  a  creature  be  self-neglectful  and  insensible
of  danger,  or  if  he  want  such  a  degree  of  passion  in  any  kind
as  is  useful  to  preserve,  sustain,  or  defend  himself,  this  must
certainly  be  esteemed  vicious  in  regard  of  the  design  and  end  of
Nature.  She  herself  discovers  this  in  her  known  method  and
stated  rule  of  operation.  'Tis  certain  that  her  provisionary
care  and  concern  for  the  whole  animal  must  at  least  be  equal
to  her  concern  for  a  single  part  or  member.  Now  to  the  several
parts  she  has  given,  we  see  proper  aff*ections,  suitable  to  their
interest  and  security,  so  that  even  without  our  consciousness
they  act  in  their  own  defence,  and  for  their  own  benefit  and
preservation.  Thus  an  eye,  in  its  natural  state,  fails  not  to
shut  together  of  its  own  accord,  unknowingly  to  us,  by  a
peculiar  caution  and  timidity,  which  if  it  wanted,  however  we
might  intend  the  preservation  of  our  eye,  we  should  not  in
effect  be  able  to  preserve  it,  by  any  observation  or  forecast  of
our  own. To  be  wanting  therefore  in  those  principal  affections

287


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

which  respect  the  good  of  the  whole  constitution,  must  be  a  vice
and  imperfection  as  great  surely  in  the  principal  part  (the  soul
or  temper)  as  it  is  in  any  of  those  inferior  and  subordinate  parts
to  want  the  self-preserving  affections  which  are  proper  to  them.

And  thus  the  affections  towards  private  good  become
necessary  and  essential  to  goodness.  For  though  no  creature
can  be  called  good  or  virtuous  merely  for  possessing  these
affections,  yet  since  it  is  impossible  that  the  public  good  or
good  of  the  system  can  be  preserved  without  them,  it  follows
that  a  creatiu"e  really  wanting  in  them  is  in  reality  wanting  in
some  degree  to  goodness  and  natural  rectitude,  and  may  thus
be  esteemed  vicious  and  defective.

'Tis  thus  we  say  of  a  creature,  in  a  kind  way  of  reproof,  that
he  is  too  good,  when  his  affection  towards  others  is  so  warm  and
zealous  as  to  carry  him  even  beyond  his  part;  or  when  he
really  acts  beyond  it,  not  through  too  warm  a  passion  of  that
sort,  but  through  an  over-cool  one  of  another,  or  through  want
of  some  self-passion  to  restrain  him  within  due  bounds.

It  may  be  objected  here,  that  the  having  the  natural
affections  too  strong  (where  the  self  affections  are  overmuch  so),
or  the  having  the  self  affections  defective  or  weak  (where  the
natural  affections  are  also  weak),  may  prove  upon  occasion
the  only  cause  of  a  creature''s  acting  honestly  and  in  moral
proportion.  For,  thus,  one  who  is  to  a  fault  regardless  of  his
life,  may  with  the  smallest  degree  of  natural  affection  do  all
which  can  be  expected  from  the  highest  pitch  of  social  love  or
zealous  friendship.  And  thus,  on  the  other  hand,  a  creature
excessively  timorous  may,  by  as  exceeding  a  degree  of  natural
affection,  perform  whatever  the  perfectest  coiu-age  is  able  to
inspire.

To  this  it  is  answered,  that  whenever  we  arraign  any  passion
as  too  strong,  or  complain  of  any  as  too  weak,  we  must  speak
with  respect  to  a  certain  constitution  or  economy  of  a  particular
creature  or  species.  For  if  a  passion,  leading  to  any  right  end,
be  only  so  much  the  more  serviceable  and  effectual  for  being

288


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

strong,  if  we  may  be  assured  that  the  strength  of  it  will  not  be
the  occasion  of  any  disturbance  within,  nor  of  any  dispropor-
tion between  itself  and  other  affections,  then  consequently  the
passion,  however  strong,  cannot  be  condemned  as  vicious.  But
if  to  have  all  the  passions  in  equal  proportion  with  it,  be  what
the  constitution  of  the  creature  cannot  bear,  so  that  only  some
passions  are  raised  to  this  height,  whilst  others  are  not,  nor  can
possibly  be  wrought  up  to  the  same  proportion,  then  may  those
strong  passions,  though  of  the  better  kind,  be  called  excessive.
For  being  in  unequal  proportion  to  the  others,  and  causing  an
ill  balance  in  the  affection  at  large,  they  must  of  course  be  the
occasion  of  inequality  in  the  conduct,  and  incline  the  party  to
a  wrong  moral  practice.

But  to  show  more  particularly  what  is  meant  by  the
economy  of  the  passions,  from  instances  in  the  species  or  kinds
below  us.^  As  for  the  creatures  who  have  no  manner  of  power
or  means  given  them  by  Nature  for  their  defence  against
violence,  nor  anything  by  which  they  can  make  themselves
formidable  to  such  as  injure  or  offend  them,  'tis  necessary  they
should  have  an  extraordinary  degree  of  fear,  but  little  or  no
animosity,  such  as  might  cause  them  to  make  resistance,  or
incline  them  to  delay  their  flight.  For  in  this  their  safety  lies,
and  to  this  passion  of  fear  is  serviceable,  by  keeping  the  senses
on  the  watch,  and  holding  the  spirits  in  readiness  to  give
the  start.

And  thus  timorousness,  and  an  habitual  strong  passion  of
fear,  may  be  according  to  the  economy  of  a  particular  creature,
both  with  respect  to  himself  and  to  the  rest  of  his  species.
On  the  other  hand,  courage  may  be  contrary  to  his  economy,
and  therefore  vicious.  Even  in  one  and  the  same  species,  this
is  by  Nature  differently  ordered,  with  respect  to  different  sexes,
ages,  and  growths.  The  tamer  creatures  of  the  grazing  kind,
who  live  in  herds,  are  different  from  the  wilder,  who  herd  not,
but  live  in  pairs  only,  apart  from  company,  as  is  natural  and

^  Infra,  bk.  ii.  part  ii.  §  1 ;  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  4 ;  Misc.  iv.  ch.  ii.

VOL.  I  289  u  '


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

suitable  to  their  rapacious  life.  Yet  is  there  found,  even
among  the  former  inoffensive  kind,  a  courage  proportionable
to  their  make  and  strength.  At  a  time  of  danger,  when  the
whole  herd  flies,  the  bull  alone  makes  head  against  the  lion,  or
other  whatever  invading  beast  of  prey,  and  shows  himself
conscious  of  his  make.  Even  the  female  of  this  kind  is  armed,
we  see,  by  Nature,  in  some  degree,  to  resist  violence,  so  as  not
to  fly  a  common  danger.  As  for  a  hind  or  doe,  or  any  other
inoffensive  and  mere  defenceless  creature,  'tis  no  way  unnatural
or  vicious  in  them,  when  the  enemy  approaches,  to  desert  their
offspring,  and  fly  for  safety.  But  for  creatures  who  are  able  to
make  resistance,  and  are  by  Nature  armed  offensively,  be  they
of  the  poorest  insect  kind,  such  as  bees  or  wasps,  'tis  natural  to
them  to  be  roused  with  fury,  and  at  the  hazard  of  their  lives
oppose  any  enemy  or  invader  of  their  species.  For  by  this
known  passion  in  the  creature,  the  species  itself  is  secured,  when
by  experience  'tis  found  that  the  creature,  though  unable  to
repel  the  injury,  yet  voluntarily  exposes  his  life  for  the  punish-
ment of  the  invader,  and  suffers  not  his  kind  to  be  injured  with
impunity.  And  of  all  other  creatures,  man  is  in  this  sense  the
most  formidable,  since  if  he  thinks  it  just  and  exemplary,  he
may,  possibly  in  his  own  or  in  his  country's  cause,  revenge  an
injury  on  any  one  living,  and  by  throwing  away  his  own  life
(if  he  be  resolute  to  that  degree)  is  almost  certain  master  of
another's,  however  strongly  guarded.  Examples  of  this  nature
have  often  served  to  restrain  those  in  power  from  using  it  to
the  utmost  extent,  and  urging  their  inferiors  to  extremity.

Upon  the  whole,  it  may  be  said  properly  to  be  the  same
with  the  affections  or  passions  in  an  animal  constitution  as
with  the  cords  or  strings  of  a  musical  instrument.  If  these,
though  in  ever  so  just  proportion  one  to  another,  are  strained
beyond  a  cei*tain  degree,  'tis  more  than  the  instrument  will
bear :  the  lute  or  lyre  is  abused,  and  its  effect  lost.  On  the
other  hand,  if  while  some  of  the  strings  are  duly  strained,
others  are  not  wound  up  to  their  due  proportion,  then  is  the

290


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

instrument  still  in  disorder,  and  its  part  ill  performed.  The
several  species  of  creatures  are  like  different  sorts  of  instru-
ments ;  and  even  in  the  same  species  of  creatures  (as  in  the
same  sort  of  instrument)  one  is  not  entirely  like  the  other,  nor
will  the  same  strings  fit  each.  The  same  degree  of  strength
which  winds  up  one,  and  fits  the  several  strings  to  a  just
harmony  and  consort,  may  in  another  burst  both  the  strings
and  instrument  itself.  Thus  men  who  have  the  liveliest  sense,
and  are  the  easiest  affected  with  pain  or  pleasure,  have  need  of
the  strongest  influence  or  force  of  other  affections,  such  as
tenderness,  love,  sociableness,  compassion,  in  order  to  preserve
a  right  balance  within,  and  to  maintain  them  in  their  duty,  and
in  the  just  performance  of  their  part,  whilst  others,  who  are  of
a  cooler  blood,  or  lower  key,  need  not  the  same  allay  or  counter-
part, nor  are  made  by  Nature  to  feel  those  tender  and  endearing
affections  in  so  exquisite  a  degree.

It  might  be  agreeable,  one  would  think,  to  inquire  thus  into
the  different  tunings  of  the  passions,  the  various  mixtures  and
allays  by  which  men  become  so  different  from  one  another.
For  as  the  highest  improvements  of  temper  are  made  in  human
kind,  so  the  greatest  corruptions  and  degeneracies  are  dis-
coverable in  this  race.  In  the  other  species  of  creatures  around
us,  there  is  found  generally  an  exact  proportionableness,  con-
stancy, and  regularity  in  all  their  passions  and  affections ;  no
failure  in  the  care  of  the  offspring  or  of  the  society  to  which
they  are  united  ;  no  prostitution  of  themselves ;  no  intemperance
or  excess  in  any  kind.  The  smaller  creatures,  who  live  as  it
were  in  cities  (as  bees  and  ants),  continue  the  same  train  and
harmony  of  life,  nor  are  they  ever  false  to  those  affections
which  move  them  to  operate  towards  their  public  good.  Even
those  creatures  of  prey  who  live  the  farthest  out  of  society,
maintain,  we  see,  such  a  conduct  towards  one  another  as  is
exactly  suitable  to  the  good  of  their  own  species.  Whilst  man,
notwithstanding  the  assistance  of  religion  and  the  direction  of
laws,  is  often  found  to  live  in  less  conformity  with  Nature,  and

291


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

by  means  of  religion  itself  is  often  rendered  the  more  barbarous
and  inhuman.  Marks  are  set  on  men ;  distinctions  formed ;
opinions  decreed  under  the  severest  penalties ;  antipathies
instilled,  and  aversions  raised  in  men  against  the  generality  of
their  own  species.  So  that  'tis  hard  to  find  in  any  region  a
human  society  which  has  human  laws.  No  wonder  if  in  such
societies  "'tis  so  hard  to  find  a  man  who  lives  naturally  and
as  a  man.

But  having  shown  what  is  meant  by  a  passion's  being  in  too
high  or  in  too  low  a  degree ;  and  that  "  to  have  any  natural
affection  too  high,  or  any  self  affection  too  low,"  though  it  be
often  approved  as  virtue,  is  yet,  strictly  speaking,  a  vice  and
imperfection ;  we  come  now  to  the  plainer  and  more  essential
part  of  vice,  and  which  alone  deserves  to  be  considered  as  such ;
that  is  to  say —

1.  "  When  either  the  public  affections  are  weak  or  de-
ficient.

2.  "  Or  the  private  and  self  affections  too  strong.

3.  "  Or  that  such  affections  arise  as  are  neither  of  these,  nor
in  any  degree  tending  to  the  support  either  of  the  public  or
private  system.""

Otherwise  than  thus,  it  is  impossible  any  creature  can  be
such  as  we  call  ill  or  vicious.  So  that  if  once  we  prove  that  it
is  really  not  the  creature"'s  interest  to  be  thus  viciously  affected,
but  contrariwise,  we  shall  then  have  proved  "that  it  is  his
interest  to  be  wholly  good  and  virtuous,"  since  in  a  wholesome
and  sound  state  of  his  affections,  such  as  we  have  described,  he
cannot  possibly  be  other  than  sound,  good,  and  virtuous  in  his
action  and  behaviour.

Our  business,  therefore,  will  be  to  prove —

1.  "  That  to  have  the  natural,  kindly,  or  generous  affections
strong  and  powerful  towards  the  good  of  the  public,  is  to  have
the  chief  means  and  power  of  self-enjoyment";  and  "that  to
want  them,  is  certain  misery  and  ill.""

2.  "  That  to  have  the  private  or  self  affections  too  strong,

292


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR  MERIT

or  beyond  their  degree  of  subordinacy  to  the  kindly  and  natural,
is  also  miserable."

3.  And  "that  to  have  the  unnatural  affections  (viz.  such
as  are  neither  founded  on  the  interest  of  the  kind  or  public,  nor
of  the  private  person  or  creature  himself)  is  to  be  miserable  in
the  highest  degree."


PART  II

Section I

To  begin  therefore  with  this  proof,  "  That  to  have  the  natural
affections  (such  as  are  founded  in  love,  complacency,  good-will,
and  in  a  sympathy  with  the  kind  or  species)  is  to  have  the  chief
means  and  power  of  self-enjoyment ;  and  that  to  want  them  is
certain  misery  and  ill."

We  may  inquire  first  what  those  are  which  we  call  pleasures
or  satisfactions,  from  whence  happiness  is  generally  computed.
They  are  (according  to  the  common  distinction)  satisfactions
and  pleasures  either  of  the  body  or  of  the  mind.

That  the  latter  of  these  satisfactions  are  the  greatest,  is
allowed  by  most  people,  and  may  be  proved  by  this  :  that  when-
ever the  mind,  having  conceived  a  high  opinion  of  the  worth  of  any
action  or  behaviour,  has  received  the  strongest  impression  of  this
sort,  and  is  wrought  up  to  the  highest  pitch  or  degree  of  passion
towards  the  subject,  at  such  time  it  sets  itself  above  all  bodily
pain  as  well  as  pleasure,  and  can  be  no  way  diverted  from  its
purpose  by  flattery  or  terror  of  any  kind.  Thus  we  see  Indians,
barbarians,  malefactors,  and  even  the  most  execrable  villains,  for
the  sake  of  a  particular  gang  or  society,  or  through  some
cherished  notion  or  principle  of  honour  or  gallantry,  revenge
or  gratitude,  embrace  any  manner  of  hardship,  and  defy
torments  and  death.  Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  a  person
being  placed  in  all  the  happy  circumstances  of  outward  enjoy-
ment, surrounded  with  everything  which  can  allure  or  charm

293


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  sense,  and  being  then  actually  in  the  very  moment  of  such
a  pleasing  indulgence,  yet  no  sooner  is  there  anything  amiss
within,  no  sooner  has  he  conceived  any  internal  ail  or  disorder,
anything  inwardly  vexatious  or  distempered,  than  instantly  his
enjoyment  ceases,  the  pleasure  of  sense  is  at  an  end,  and  every
means  of  that  sort  becomes  ineffectual,  and  is  rejected  as  uneasy
and  subject  to  give  distaste.

The  pleasures  of  the  mind  being  allowed,  therefore,  superior
to  those  of  the  body,  it  follows  "  that  whatever  can  create  in
any  intelligent  being  a  constant  flowing  series  or  train  of  mental
enjoyments,  or  pleasures  of  the  mind,  is  more  considerable  to  his
happiness  than  that  which  can  create  to  him  a  like  constant
course  or  train  of  sensual  enjoyments  or  pleasures  of  the  body."

Now  the  mental  enjoyments  are  either  actually  the  very
natural  affections  themselves  in  their  immediate  operation,  or
they  wholly  in  a  manner  proceed  from  them,  and  are  no  other
than  their  effects.

If  so,  it  follows  that,  the  natural  affections  duly  established
in  a  rational  creature  being  the  only  means  which  can  procure
him  a  constant  series  or  succession  of  the  mental  enjoyments,
they  are  the  only  means  which  can  procure  him  a  certain  and
solid  happiness.

Now,  in  the  first  place,  to  explain  "how  much  the  natural
affections  are  in  themselves  the  highest  pleasures  and  enjoy-
ments," there  should  methinks  be  little  need  of  proving  this
to  any  one  of  human  kind  who  has  ever  known  the  condition
of  the  mind  under  a  lively  affection  of  love,  gratitude,  bounty,
generosity,  pity,  succour,  or  whatever  else  is  of  a  social  or
friendly  sort.  He  who  has  ever  so  little  knowledge  of  human
nature  is  sensible  what  pleasure  the  mind  perceives  when  it  is
touched  in  this  generous  way.  The  difference  we  find  between
solitude  and  company,  between  a  common  company  and  that
of  friends ;  the  reference  of  almost  all  our  pleasures  to  mutual
converse,  and  the  dependence  they  have  on  society  either  present
or  imagined ;  all  these  are  sufficient  proofs  in  our  behalf.

294


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

How  much  the  social  pleasures  are  superior  to  any  other
may  be  known  by  visible  tokens  and  effects.  The  very  outward
features,  the  marks  and  signs  which  attend  this  sort  of  joy,  are
expressive  of  a  more  intense,  clear,  and  undisturbed  pleasure
than  those  which  attend  the  satisfaction  of  thirst,  hunger,  and
other  ardent  appetites.  But  more  particularly  still  may  this
superiority  be  known  from  the  actual  prevalence  and  ascendency
of  this  sort  of  affection  over  all  besides.  Wherever  it  presents
itself  with  any  advantage,  it  silences  and  appeases  every  other
motion  of  pleasure.  No  joy,  merely  of  sense,  can  be  a  match
for  it.  Whoever  is  judge  of  both  the  pleasures  will  ever  give
the  preference  to  the  former.  But  to  be  able  to  judge  of  both,
'tis  necessary  to  have  a  sense  of  each.  The  honest  man  indeed
can  judge  of  sensual  pleasure,  and  knows  its  utmost  force.  For
neither  is  his  taste  or  sense  the  duller;  but,  on  the  contrary,
the  more  intense  and  clear  on  the  account  of  his  temperance
and  a  moderate  use  of  appetite.  But  the  immoral  and  pro-
fligate man  can  by  no  means  be  allowed  a  good  judge  of  social
pleasure,  to  which  he  is  so  mere  a  stranger  by  his  nature.

Nor  is  it  any  objection  here,  that  in  many  natures  the  good
affection,  though  really  present,  is  found  to  be  of  insufficient
force.  For  where  it  is  not  in  its  natural  degree,  'tis  the  same
indeed  as  if  it  were  not,  or  had  never  been.  The  less  there  is
of  this  good  affection  in  any  untoward  creature,  the  greater  the
wonder  is  that  it  should  at  any  time  prevail ;  as  in  the  very
worst  of  creatures  it  sometimes  will.  And  if  it  prevails  but
for  once  in  any  single  instance,  it  shows  evidently  that  if
the  affection  were  thoroughly  experienced  or  known,  it  would
prevail  in  all.

Thus  the  charm  of  kind  affection  is  superior  to  all  other
pleasure,  since  it  has  the  power  of  drawing  from  every  other
appetite  or  inclination.  And  thus  in  the  case  of  love  to  the
offspring  and  a  thousand  other  instances,  the  charm  is  found  to
operate  so  strongly  on  the  temper  as,  in  the  midst  of  other
temptations,  to  render  it susceptible  of  this passion alone;

295


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

which  remains  as the master-pleasure  and  conqueror  of  the
rest.

There  is  no  one  who,  by  the  least  progress  in  science  or
learning,  has  come  to  know  barely  the  principles  of  mathematics,
but  has  found,  that  in  the  exercise  of  his  mind  on  the  discoveries
he  there  makes,  though  merely  of  speculative  truths,  he  receives
a  pleasure  and  delight  superior  to  that  of  sense.  When  we
have  thoroughly  searched  into  the  nature  of  this  contemplative
delight,  we  shall  find  it  of  a  kind  which  relates  not  in  the  least
to  any  private  interest  of  the  creature,  nor  has  for  its  object
any  self-good  or  advantage  of  the  private  system.  The  admira-
tion, joy,  or  love  turns  wholly  upon  what  is  exterior  and  foreign
to  ourselves.  And  though  the  reflected  joy  or  pleasure  which
arises  from  the  notice  of  this  pleasure  once  perceived,  may  be
interpreted  a  self-passion  or  interested  regard,  yet  the  original
satisfaction  can  be  no  other  than  what  results  from  the  love  of
truth,  proportion,  order  and  symmetry  in  the  things  without.
If  this  be  the  case,  the  passion  ought  in  reality  to  be  ranked
with  natural  affection.  For  having  no  object  within  the
compass  of  the  private  system,  it  must  either  be  esteemed
superfluous  and  unnatural  (as  having  no  tendency  towards  the
advantage  or  good  of  anything  in  Nature)  or  it  must  be  judged
to  be  what  it  truly  is,^  "A  natural  joy  in  the  contemplation  of
those  numbers,  that  harmony,  proportion,  and  concord  which
supports  the  universal  nature,  and  is  essential  in  the  constitution
and  form  of  every  particular  species  or  order  of  beings.""

But  this  speculative  pleasure,  however  considerable  and
valuable  it  may  be,  or  however  superior  to  any  motion  of  mere
sense,  must  yet  be  far  surpassed  by  virtuous 'motion,  and  the
exercise  of  benignity  and  goodness,  where,  together  with  the
most  delightful  affection  of  the  soul,  there  is  joined  a  pleasing
assent  and  approbation  of  the  mind  to  what  is  acted  in  this
good  disposition  and  honest  bent.  For  where  is  there  on  earth
a  fairer  matter  of  speculation,  a  goodlier  view  or  contemplation,

^  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.

296


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

than  that  of  a  beautiful,  proportioned,  and  becoming  action  ?
Or  what  is  there  relating  to  us,  of  which  the  consciousness  and
memory  is  more  solidly  and  lastingly  entertaining  ?

We  may  observe  that  in  the  passion  of  love  between  the
sexes,  where,  together  with  the  affection  of  a  vulgar  sort,  there
is  a  mixture  of  the  kind  and  friendly,  the  sense  or  feeling  of
this  latter  is  in  reality  superior  to  the  former;  since  often
through  this  affection,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  person  beloved,
the  greatest  hardships  in  the  world  have  been  submitted  to,
and  even  death  itself  voluntarily  embraced  without  any  expected
compensation.  For  where  should  the  ground  of  such  an  expect-
ation lie  ?  Not  here  in  this  world,  surely ;  for  death  puts  an
end  to  all.  Nor  yet  hereafter,  in  any  other ;  for  who  has  ever
thought  of  providing  a  heaven  or  future  recompense  for  the
suffering  virtue  of  lovers  ?

We  may  observe  withal,  in  favour  of  the  natural  affections,
that  it  is  not  only  when  joy  and  sprightliness  are  mixed  with
them  that  they  carry  a  real  enjoyment  above  that  of  the
sensual  kind.  The  very  disturbances  which  belong  to  natural
affection,  though  they  may  be  thought  wholly  contrary  to
pleasure,  yield  still  a  contentment  and  satisfaction  greater  than
the  pleasures  of  indulged  sense.  And  where  a  series  or  con-
tinued succession  of  the  tender  and  kind  affections  can  be
carried  on,  even  through  fears,  horrors,  sorrows,  giiefs,  the
emotion  of  the  soul  is  still  agreeable.  We  continue  pleased
even  with  this  melancholy  aspect  or  sense  of  virtue.  Her
beauty  supports  itself  under  a  cloud  and  in  the  midst  of
suiTounding  calamities.  For  thus  when  by  mere  illusion,  as
in  a  tragedy,  the  passions  of  this  kind  are  skilfully  excited  in
us,  we  prefer  the  entertainment  to  any  other  of  equal  duration.
We  find  by  ourselves  that  the  moving  our  passions  in  this
mournful  way,  the  engaging  them  in  behalf  of  merit  and  worth,
and  the  exerting  whatever  we  have  of  social  affection  and
human  sympathy,  is  of  the  highest  delight,  and  affords  a
greater  enjoyment  in  the  way  of  thought  and  sentiment  than

297


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEKISTICS

anything  besides  can  do  in  a  way  of  sense  and  common  appetite.
And  after  this  manner  it  appears  "how  much  the  mental
enjoyments  are  actually  the  very  natural  affections  them-
selves.'"

Now,  in  the  next  place,  to  explain  "how  they  proceed
from  them,  as  their  natural  effects,"  we  may  consider  first,
that  the  effects  of  love  or  kind  affection,  in  a  way  of  mental
pleasure,  are  "an  enjoyment  of  good  by  communication.
A  receiving  it,  as  it  were,  by  reflection,  or  by  way  of  partici-
pation in  the  good  of  others ""';  and  "  a  pleasing  consciousness
of  the  actual  love,  merited  esteem,  or  approbation  of  others."

How  considerable  a  part  of  happiness  arises  from  the
former  of  these  effects  will  be  easily  apprehended  by  one  who
is  not  exceedingly  ill-natured.  It  will  be  considered  how  many
the  pleasures  are  of  sharing  contentment  and  delight  with
others  ;  of  receiving  it  in  fellowship  and  company  ;  and  gather-
ing it,  in  a  manner,  from  the  pleased  and  happy  states  of  those
around  us,  from  accounts  and  relations  of  such  happinesses,
from  the  very  countenances,  gestures,  voices  and  sounds,  even
of  creatures  foreign  to  our  kind,  whose  signs  of  joy  and
]  contentment  we  can  anyway  discern.  So  insinuating  are  these
f  pleasures  of  sympathy,  and  so  widely  diffused  through  our
whole  lives,  that  there  is  hardly  such  a  thing  as  satisfaction
or  contentment  of  which  they  make  not  an  essential  part.

As  for  that  other  effect  of  social  love,  viz,  the  consciousness
of  merited  kindness  or  esteem,  "'tis  not  difficult  to  perceive  how
much  this  avails  in  mental  pleasure,  and  constitutes  the  chief
enjoyment  and  happiness  of  those  who  are,  in  the  naiTowest
sense,  voluptuous.  How  natural  is  it  for  the  most  selfish
among  us  to  be  continually  drawing  some  sort  of  satisfaction
from  a  character,  and  pleasing  ourselves  in  the  fancy  of
deserved  admiration  and  esteem  ?  For  though  it  be  mere
fancy,  we  endeavour  still  to  believe  it  truth,  and  flatter  our-
selves all  we  can  with  the  thought  of  merit  of  some  kind,  and
the  persuasion  of  our  deserving  well  from  some  few  at least

298


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

with  whom  we  happen  to  have  a  more  intimate  and  familiar
commerce.

What  tyrant  is  there,  what  robber,  or  open  violator  of  the
laws  of  society,  who  has  not  a  companion,  or  some  particular
set,  either  of  his  own  kindred,  or  such  as  he  calls  friends,  with
whom  he  gladly  shares  his  good,  in  whose  welfare  he  delights,
and  whose  joy  and  satisfaction  he  makes  his  own  ?  What
person  in  the  world  is  there  who  receives  not  some  impressions
from  the  flattery  or  kindness  of  such  as  are  familiar  with  him  ?
'Tis  to  this  soothing  hope  and  expectation  of  friendship  that
almost  all  our  actions  have  some  reference.  'Tis  this  which
goes  through  our  whole  lives,  and  mixes  itself  even  with  most
of  our  vices.  Of  this,  vanity,  ambition,  and  luxury  have  a
share,  and  many  other  disorders  of  our  life  partake.  Even
the  unchastest  love  borrows  largely  from  this  source.  So  that
were  pleasure  to  be  computed  in  the  same  way  as  other  things
commonly  are,  it  might  properly  be  said,  that  out  of  these
two  branches  (viz.  community  or  participation  in  the  pleasures
of  others,  and  belief  of  meriting  well  from  others)  would  arise
more  than  nine- tenths  of  whatever  is  enjoyed  in  life.  And
thus  in  the  main  sum  of  happiness  there  is  scarce  a  single
article  but  what  derives  itself  from  social  love,  and  depends
immediately  on  the  natural  and  kind  affections.

Now  such  as  causes  are,  such  must  be  their  effects.  And
therefore  as  natural  affection  or  social  love  is  perfect  or
imperfect,  so  must  be  the  content  and  happiness  depending
on  it.

But  lest  any  should  imagine  with  themselves  that  an  inferior
degree  of  natural  affection,  or  an  imperfect  partial  regard  of
this  sort,  can  supply  the  place  of  an  entire,  sincere,  and  truly
moral  one ;  lest  a  small  tincture  of  social  inclination  should
be  thought  sufficient  to  answer  the  end  of  pleasure  in  society,
and  give  us  that  enjoyment  of  participation  and  community
which  is  so  essential  to  our  happiness ;  we  may  consider  first,
that  partial  affection,  or  social  love  in  part, without  regard

299


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

to  a  complete  society  or  whole,  is  in  itself  an  inconsistency,
and  implies  an  absolute  contradiction.  Whatever  affection  we
have  towards  anything  besides  ourselves,  if  it  be  not  of  the
natural  sort  towards  the  system  or  kind,  it  must  be  of  all
other  affections  the  most  dissociable,  and  destructive  of  the
enjoyments  of  society.  If  it  be  really  of  the  natural  sort,  and
applied  only  to  some  one  part  of  society,  or  of  a  species,  but
not  to  the  species  or  society  itself,  there  can  be  no  more
account  given  of  it  than  of  the  most  odd,  capricious,  or
humorsome  passion  which  may  ai'ise.  The  person,  therefore,
who  is  conscious  of  this  affection  can  be  conscious  of  no  merit
or  worth  on  the  account  of  it.  Nor  can  the  persons  on  whom
this  capricious  affection  has  chanced  to  fall,  be  in  any  manner
secure  of  its  continuance  of  force.  As  it  has  no  foundation
or  establishment  in  reason,  so  it  must  be  easily  removable,
and  subject  to  alteration  without  reason.  Now  the  variableness
of  such  sort  of  passion,  which  depends  solely  on  capriciousness
and  humour,  and  undergoes  the  frequent  successions  of  alternate
hatred  and  love,  aversion  and  inclination,  must  of  necessity
create  continual  disturbance  and  disgust,  give  an  allay  to  what
is  immediately  enjoyed  in  the  way  of  friendship  and  society,
and  in  the  end  extinguish,  in  a  manner,  the  very  inclination
towards  friendship  and  human  con)merce.  Whereas,  on  the
other  hand,  entire  affection  (from  whence  integrity  has  its
name)  as  it  is  answerable  to  itself,  proportionable,  and  rational,
so  it  is  irrefragable,  solid,  and  durable.  And  as  in  the  case
of  partiality,  or  vicious  friendship,  which  has  no  rule  or  order,
every  reflection  of  the  mind  necessarily  makes  to  its  disad-
vantage and  lessens  the  enjoyment,  so  in  the  case  of  integrity,
the  consciousness  of  just  behaviour  towards  mankind  in  general,
casts  a  good  reflection  on  each  friendly  affection  in  particular,
and  raises  the  enjoyment  of  friendship  still  the  higher,  in  the
way  of  community  or  participation  above  mentioned.

And  in  the  next  place,  as  partial  affection  is  fitted  only  to
a  short  and  slender  enjoyment  of  those  pleasures  of  sympathy

300


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

or  participation  with  others,  so  neither  is  it  able  to  derive
any  considerable  enjoyment  from  that  other  principal  branch
of  human  happiness,  viz.  consciousness  of  the  actual  or  merited
esteem  of  others.  From  whence  should  this  esteem  arise .''
The  merit,  surely,  must  in  itself  be  mean,  whilst  the  affection
is  so  precarious  and  uncertain.  What  trust  can  there  be  to
a  mere  casual  inclination  or  capricious  liking.?  Who  can
depend  on  such  a  friendship  as  is  founded  on  no  moral  rule,
but  fantastically  assigned  to  some  single  person,  or  small  part
of  mankind,  exclusive  of  society  and  the  whole  ?

It  may  be  considered,  withal,  as  a  thing  impossible,  that
they  who  esteem  or  love  by  any  other  rule  than  that  of  virtue,
should  place  their  affection  on  such  subjects  as  they  can  long
esteem  or  love.  'Twill  be  hard  for  them,  in  the  number  of
their  so  beloved  friends,  to  find  any  in  whom  they  can  heartily
rejoice,  or  whose  reciprocal  love  or  esteem  they  can  sincerely
prize  and  enjoy.  Nor  can  those  pleasures  be  sound  or  lasting
which  are  gathered  from  a  self-flattery  and  false  persuasion
of  the  esteem  and  love  of  others  who  are  incapable  of  any
sound  esteem  or  love.  It  appears  therefore  how  much  the
men  of  narrow  or  partial  affection  must  be  losers  in  this  sense,
and  of  necessity  fall  short  in  this  second  principal  part  of
mental  enjoyment.

Meanwhile  entire  affection  has  all  the  opposite  advantages.
It  is  equal,  constant,  accountable  to  itself,  ever  satisfactory  and
pleasing.  It  gains  applause  and  love  from  the  best,  and  in  all
disinterested  cases  from  the  very  worst  of  men.  We  may  say  of
it  with  justice,  that  it  carries  with  it  a  consciousness  of  merited
love  and  approbation  from  all  society,  from  all  intelligent
creatures,  and  from  whatever  is  original  to  all  other  intelligence.
And  if  there  be  in  Nature  any  such  original,  we  may  add  that
the  satisfaction  which  attends  entire  affection  is  full  and  noble
in  proportion  to  its  final  object,  which  contains  all  perfection,
according  to  the  sense  of  theism  above  noted.  For  this,  as  has
been  shown,  is  the  result  of  virtue. And  to  have  this  entire

801


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

affection  or  integrity  of  mind  is  to  live  according  to  Nature,
and  the  dictates  and  rules  of  supreme  wisdom.  This  is  morality,
justice,  piety,  and  natural  religion.^

But  lest  this  argument  should  appear  perhaps  too  schol-
astically  stated,  and  in  terms  and  phrases  which  are  not  of
familiar  use,  we  may  try  whether  possibly  we  can  set  it  yet  in  a
plainer  light.

Let  any  one,  then,  consider  well  those  pleasures  which  he
receives  either  in  private  retirement,  contemplation,  study  and
converse  with  himself,  or  in  mirth,  jollity,  and  entertainment
with  others,  and  he  will  find  that  they  are  wholly  founded  in
an  easy  temper,  free  of  harshness,  bitterness,  or  distaste ;  and  in
a  mind  or  reason  well  composed,  quiet,  easy  within  itself,  and
such  as  can  freely  bear  its  own  inspection  and  review.  Now
such  a  mind  and  such  a  temper,  which  fit  and  qualify  for  the
enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  mentioned,  must  of  necessity  be
owing  to  the  natural  and  good  affections.

As  to  what  relates  to  temper,  it  may  be  considered  thus.
ITiere  is  no  state  of  outward  prosperity  or  flowing  fortune
where  inclination  and  desire  are  always  satisfied,  fancy  and
humour  pleased.  There  are  almost  hourly  some  impediments
or  crosses  to  the  appetite  ;  some  accidents  or  other  from  without,
or  something  from  within,  to  check  the  licentious  course  of  the
indulged  affections.  They  are  not  always  to  be  satisfied  by
mere  indulgence.  And  when  a  life  is  guided  by  fancy  only,
there  is  sufficient  ground  of  contrariety  and  disturbance.  The
very  ordinary  lassitudes,  uneasinesses,  and  defects  of  disposition
in  the  soundest  body ;  the  interrupted  course  of  the  humours  or
spirits  in  the  healthiest  people ;  and  the  accidental  disorders
common  to  every  constitution,  are  sufficient,  we  know,  on  many
occasions  to  breed  uneasiness  and  distaste.  And  this  in  time
must  grow  into  a  habit,  where  there  is  nothing  to  oppose  its
progress  and  hinder  its  prevailing  on  the  temper.  Now  the  only
soimd  opposite  to  ill-humour  is  natural  and  kind  affection.
^  [Cp.  Spinoza^  Ethics,  part  iv.  Prop,  xxxv.]

302


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

For  we  may  observe,  that  when  the  mind  upon  reflection
resolves  at  any  time  to  suppress  this  disturbance  already  risen
in  the  temper,  and  sets  about  this  reforming  work  with  hearti-
ness and  in  good  earnest,  it  can  no  otherwise  accomplish  the
undertaking  than  by  introducing  into  the  affectionate  part  some
gentle  feeling  of  the  social  and  friendly  kind,  some  enlivening
motion  of  kindness,  fellowship,  complacency,  or  love,  to  allay
and  convert  that  contrary  motion  of  impatience  and  discontent.^
If  it  be  said,  perhaps,  that  in  the  case  before  us,  religious
affection  or  devotion  is  a  sufficient  and  proper  remedy,  we
answer,  that  'tis  according  as  the  kind  may  happily  prove.
For  if  it  be  of  the  pleasant  and  cheerful  sort,  'tis  of  the  very
kind  of  natural  affection  itself ;  if  it  be  of  the  dismal  or  fearful
sort ;  ^  if  it  brings  along  with  it  any  affection  opposite  to  man-
hood, generosity,  courage,  or  free  thought,  there  will  be  nothing
gained  by  this  application,  and  the  remedy  will,  in  the  issue,
be  undoubtedly  found  worse  than  the  disease.  The  severest
reflections  on  our  duty,  and  the  consideration  merely  of  what  is
by  authority  and  under  penalties  enjoined,  will  not  by  any
means  serve  to  calm  us  on  this  occasion.  The  more  dismal  our
thoughts  are  on  such  a  subject,  the  woi-se  our  temper  will  be,
and  the  readier  to  discover  itself  in  harshness  and  austerity.
If  perhaps  by  compulsion,  or  through  any  necessity  or  fear
incumbent,  a  different  carriage  be  at  any  time  affected,  or
different  maxims  owned,  the  practice  at  the  bottom  will  be
still  the  same.  If  the  countenance  be  composed,  the  heart,
however,  will  not  be  changed.  The  ill  passion  may  for  the
time  be  withheld  from  breaking  into  action,  but  will  not  be
subdued,  or  in  the  least  debilitated  against  the  next  occasion.
So  that  in  such  a  breast  as  this,  whatever  devotion  there  may  be,
'tis  likely  there  will  in  time  be  little  of  an  easy  spirit  or  good
temper  remaining,  and  consequently  few  and  slender  enjoyments
of  a  mental  kind.

^  [Cp.  Spinoza,  Ethics,  part  iv.  Prop,  vii.]
2  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm,  §  4 ;  Misc.  ii.  ch.  iii.

303


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

If  it  be  objected,  on  the  other  hand,  that  though  in  melan-
choly circumstances  ill-humour  may  prevail,  yet  in  a  course  of
outward  prosperity,  and  in  the  height  of  fortune,  there  can
nothing  probably  occur  which  should  thus  sour  the  temper  and
give  it  such  disrelish  as  is  suggested,  we  may  consider,  that  the
most  humoured  and  indulged  state  is  apt  to  receive  the  most
disturbance  from  every  disappointment  or  smallest  ail.  And  if
provocations  are  easiest  raised,  and  the  passions  of  anger,  offence,
and  enmity  are  found  the  highest  in  the  most  indulged  state  of
will  and  humour,  there  is  still  the  greater  need  of  a  supply
from  social  affection,  to  preserve  the  temper  from  running  into
savageness  and  inhumanity.  And  this  the  case  of  tyrants
and  most  unlimited  potentates  may  sufficiently  verify  and
demonstrate.

Now  as  to  the  other  part  of  our  consideration,  which  relates
to  a  mind  or  reason  well  composed  and  easy  within  itself,  upon
what  account  this  happiness  may  be  thought  owing  to  natural
affection,  we  may  possibly  resolve  ourselves  after  this  manner.
It  will  be  acknowledged  that  a  creature  such  as  man,  who  from
several  degrees  of  reflection  has  risen  to  that  capacity  which  we
call  reason  and  understanding,  must  in  the  very  use  of  this  his
reasoning  faculty  be  forced  to  receive  reflections  back  into
his  mind  of  what  passes  in  itself,  as  well  as  in  the  affections  or
will ;  in  short,  of  whatsoever  relates  to  his  character,  conduct,
or  behaviour  amidst  his  fellow-creatures  and  in  society.  Or
should  he  be  of  himself  unapt,  there  are  others  ready  to  remind
him,  and  refresh  his  memory  in  this  way  of  criticism.  We
have  all  of  us  remembrancers  enow  to  help  us  in  this  work.
Nor  are  the  greatest  favourites  of  Fortune  exempted  from  this
task  of  self- inspection.  Even  flattery  itself,  by  making  the
view  agreeable,  renders  us  more  attentive  this  way,  and  en-
snares us  in  the  habit.  The  vainer  any  person  is,  the  more  he
has  his  eye  inwardly  fixed  upon  himself,  and  is  after  a  certain
manner  employed  in  this  home  survey.  And  when  a  true
regard  to  ourselves  cannot  oblige  us  to  this  inspection,  a  false

304


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

regard  to  others  and  a  fondness  for  reputation  raises  a  watchful
jealousy,  and  furnishes  us  sufficiently  with  acts  of  reflection  on
our  own  character  and  conduct.

In  whatever  manner  we  consider  of  this,  we  shall  find  still,
that  every  reasoning  or  reflecting  creature  is  by  his  nature
forced  to  endure  the  review  of  his  own  mind  and  actions,  and  to
have  representations  of  himself  and  his  inward  affairs  constantly
passing  before  him,  obvious  to  him,  and  revolving  in  his  mind.
Now  as  nothing  can  be  more  grievous  than  this  is  to  one  who
has  thrown  off  natural  affection,  so  nothing  can  be  more  delight-
ful to  one  who  has  preserved  it  with  sincerity.

There  are  two  things  which  to  a  rational  creature  must  be
horridly  offensive  and  grievous,  viz.  "  To  have  the  reflection  in
his  mind  of  any  unjust  action  or  behaviour  which  he  knows  to
be  naturally  odious  and  ill-deserving ;  or  of  any  foolish  action
or  behaviour  which  he  knows  to  be  prejudicial  to  his  own
interest  or  happiness.""

The  former  of  these  is  alone  properly  called  Conscience,
whether  in  a  moral  or  religious  sense.  For  to  have  a^e  and
terror  of  the  Deity  does  not,  of  itself,  imply  conscience.  No
one  is  esteemed  the  more  conscientious  for  the  fear  of  evil
spirits,  conjurations,  enchantments,  or  whatever  may  proceed
from  any  unjust,  capricious,  or  devilish  nature.  Now  to  fear
God  any  otherwise  than  as  in  consequence  of  some  justly
blamable  and  imputable  act,  is  to  fear  a  devilish  nature,  not
a  divine  one.  Nor  does  the  fear  of  hell  or  a  thousand  terrors
of  the  Deity  imply  conscience,  unless  where  there  is  an  appre-
hension of  what  is  wrong,  odious,  morally  deformed,  and
ill -deserving.  And  where  this  is  the  case,  there  conscience
must  have  effect,  and  punishment  of  necessity  be  apprehended,
even  though  it  be  not  expressly  threatened.

And  thus  religious  conscience  supposes moral  or  natural

conscience. And  though  the  former  be  understood  to  carry

with  it  the  fear  of  divine  punishment,  it  has  its  force  however

from  the  apprehended  moral  deformity  and  odiousness  of  any

VOL.  I  305  X


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

act  with  respect  purely  to  the  Divine  Presence,  and  the  natural
veneration  due  to  such  a  supposed  being.  For  in  such  a  presence
the  shame  of  villainy  or  vice  must  have  its  force,  independently
on  that  further  apprehension  of  the  magisterial  capacity  of  such
a  being,  and  his  dispensation  of  particular  rewards  or  punish-
ments in  a  future  state.

It  has  been  already  said,  that  no  creature  can  maliciously
and  intentionally  do  ill  without  being  sensible  at  the  same
time  that  he  deserves  ill.  And  in  this  respect,  every  sensible
creature  may  be  said  to  have  conscience.  For  with  all  mankind,
and  all  intelligent  creatures,  this  must  ever  hold,  "  That  what
they  know  they  deserve  from  every  one,  that  they  necessarily
must  fear  and  expect  from  all.''  And  thus  suspicious  and  ill
apprehensions  must  arise,  with  terror  both  of  men  and  of  the
Deity.  But  besides  this,  there  must  in  every  rational  creature
be  yet  farther  conscience,  viz.  from  sense  of  deformity  in  what
is  thus  ill  -  deserving  and  unnatural,  and  from  a  consequent
shame  or  regret  of  incumng  what  is  odious  and  moves
aversion.

There  scarcely  is,  or  can  be,  any  creature  whom  conscious-
ness of  villainy,  as  such  merely,  does  not  at  all  offend ;  nor  any-
thing opprobrious  or  heinously  imputable  move  or  affect.  If
there  be  such  a  one,  'tis  evident  he  must  be  absolutely  indifferent
towards  moral  good  or  ill.  If  this  indeed  be  his  case,  'twill  be
allowed  he  can  be  no  way  capable  of  natural  affection ;  if  not
of  that,  then  neither  of  any  social  pleasure  or  mental  enjoyment
as  shown  above,  but  on  the  contrary,  he  must  be  subject  to  all
manner  of  horrid,  unnatural,  and  ill  affection.  So  that  to  want
conscience,  or  natural  sense  of  the  odiousness  of  crime  and
injustice,  is  to  be  most  of  all  miserable  in  life ;  but  where
conscience  or  sense  of  this  sort  remains,  there,  consequently,
whatever  is  committed  against  it  must  of  necessity,  by  means
of  reflection,  as  we  have  shown,  be  continually  shameful,  grievous,
and  offensive.

A  man  who  in  a  passion  happens  to  kill  his  companion,

306


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

relents  immediately  on  the  sight  of  what  he  has  done.  His
revenge  is  changed  into  pity,  and  his  hatred  turned  against
himself.  And  this  merely  by  the  power  of  the  object.  On  this
account  he  suffers  agonies  :*  the  subject  of  this  continually  occurs
to  him,  and  of  this  he  has  a  constant  ill  remembrance  and
displeasing  consciousness.  If  on  the  other  side  we  suppose  him
not  to  relent  or  suffer  any  real  concern  or  shame,  then,  either
he  has  no  sense  of  the  deformity  of  the  crime  and  injustice,  no
natural  affection,  and  consequently  no  happiness  or  peace
within ;  or  if  he  has  any  sense  of  moral  worth  or  goodness,  it
must  be  of  a  perplexed  and  contradictory  kind.  He  must
pursue  an  inconsistent  notion,  idolise  some  false  species  of
virtue,  and  affect  as  noble,  gallant,  or  worthy  that  which  is
irrational  and  absurd.  And  how  tormenting  this  must  be  to
him,  is  easy  to  conceive.  For  never  can  such  a  phantom  as
this  be  reduced  to  any  certain  form.  Never  can  this  Proteus
of  honour  be  held  steady  to  one  shape.  The  pursuit  of  it  can
only  be  vexatious  and  distracting.  There  is  nothing  beside
real  virtue  (as  has  been  shown)  which  can  possibly  hold  any
proportion  to  esteem,  approbation,  or  good  conscience.  And
he  who,  being  led  by  false  religion  or  prevailing  custom,  has
learnt  to  esteem  or  admire  anything  as  virtue  which  is  not
really  such,  must  either  through  the  inconsistency  of  such  an
esteem,  and  the  perpetual  immoralities  occasioned  by  it,  come  at
last  to  lose  all  conscience,  and  so  be  miserable  in  the  worst  way ;
or,  if  he  retains  any  conscience  at  all,  it  must  be  of  a  kind  never
satisfactory,  or  able  to  bestow  content.  For  "'tis  impossible
that  a  cruel  enthusiast  or  bigot,  a  persecutor,  a  murderer,  a
bravo,  a  pirate,  or  any  villain  of  less  degree,  who  is  false  to  the
society  of  mankind  in  general,  and  contradicts  natural  affection,
should  have  any  fixed  principle  at  all,  any  real  standard  or
measure  by  which  he  can  regulate  his  esteem,  or  any  solid
reason  by  which  to  form  his  approbation  of  any  one  moral  act.
And  thus  the  more  he  sets  up  honour  or  advances  zeal,  the
worse  he  renders  his  natui'e,  and  the  more  detestable  his  char-

807


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

acter.  The  more  he  engages  in  the  love  or  admiration  of  any
action  or  practice  as  great  and  glorious,  which  is  in  itself
morally  ill  and  vicious,  the  more  contradiction  and  self-dis-
approbation he  must  incur.  For  there  being  nothing  more
certain  than  this,  "  That  no  natural  affection  can  be  contradicted,
nor  any  unnatural  one  advanced,  without  a  prejudice  in  some
degree  to  all  natural  affection  in  general,""  it  must  follow,  "  That
inward  deformity  growing  greater  by  the  encouragement  of
unnatural  affection,  there  must  be  so  much  the  more  subject  for
dissatisfactory  reflection,  the  more  any  false  principle  of  honour,
any  false  religion  or  superstition  prevails."

So  that  whatever  notions  of  this  kind  are  cherished,  or
whatever  character  affected,  which  is  contrary  to  moral  equity
and  leads  to  inhumanity,  through  a  false  conscience,  or  wrong
sense  of  honour,  serves  only  to  bring  a  man  the  more  under  the
lash  of  real  and  just  conscience,  shame,  and  self-reproach.  Nor
can  any  one  who,  by  any  pretended  authority,  commits  one
single  immorality,  be  able  to  satisfy  himself  with  any  reason
why  he  should  not  at  another  time  be  carried  further  into  all
manner  of  villainy,  such  perhaps  as  he  even  abhors  to  think  of.
And  this  is  a  reproach  which  a  mind  must  of  necessity  make  to
itself  upon  the  least  violation  of  natural  conscience,  in  doing
what  is  morally  deformed  and  ill-deserving,  though  warranted
by  any  example  or  precedent  amongst  men,  or  by  any  supposed
injunction  or  command  of  higher  powers.

Now,  as  for  that  other  part  of  conscience,  viz.  the  remem-
brance of  what  was  at  any  time  unreasonably  and  foolishly
done  in  prejudice  of  one"'s  real  interest  or  happiness ;  this
dissatisfactory  reflection  must  follow  still  and  have  effect,
wheresoever  there  is  a  sense  of  moral  deformity  contracted  by
crime  and  injustice.  For  even  where  there  is  no  sense  of  moral
deformity  as  such  merely,  there  must  be  still  a  sense  of  the
ill  merit  of  it  with  respect  to  God  and  man.  Or  though  there
were  a  possibility  of  excluding  for  ever  all  thoughts  or  suspicions
of  any  superior  powers,  yet  considering  that  this  insensibility

308


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

towards  moral  good  or  ill  implies  a  total  defect  in  natural
affection,  and  that  this  defect  can  by  no  dissimulation  be
concealed,  "'tis  evident  that  a  man  of  this  unhappy  character
must  suffer  a  very  sensible  loss  in  the  friendship,  trust,  and
confidence  of  other  men,  and  consequently  must  suffer  in  his
interest  and  outward  happiness.  Nor  can  the  sense  of  this
disadvantage  fail  to  occur  to  him,  when  he  sees,  with  regret
and  envy,  the  better  and  more  grateful  terms  of  friendship  and
esteem  on  which  better  people  live  with  the  rest  of  mankind.
Even  therefore  where  natural  affection  is  wanting,  'tis  certain
still,  that  by  immorality,  necessarily  happening  through  want
of  such  affection,  there  must  be  disturbance  from  conscience  of
this  sort,  viz.  from  sense  of  what  is  committed  imprudently
and  contrary  to  real  interest  and  advantage.

From  all  this  we  may  easily  conclude  how  much  our  happi-
ness depends  on  natural  and  good  affection.  For  if  the  chief
happiness  be  from  the  mental  pleasures,  and  the  chief  mental
pleasures  are  such  as  we  have  described,  and  are  founded  in
natural  affection,  it  follows  "  that  to  have  the  natural  affections
is  to  have  the  chief  means  and  power  of  self-enjoyment,  the
highest  possession  and  happiness  of  life."

Now  as  to  the  pleasures  of  the  body  and  the  satisfactions
belonging  to  mere  sense,  'tis  evident  they  cannot  possibly  have
their  effect  or  afford  any  valuable  enjoyment  otherwise  than  by
the  means  of  social  and  natural  affection.

To  live  well  has  no  other  meaning  with  some  people  than
to  eat  and  drink  well.  And  methinks  'tis  an  unwary  concession
we  make  in  favour  of  these  pretended  good  livers  when  we
join  with  them  in  honouring  their  way  of  life  with  the  title  of
living  fast.  As  if  they  lived  the  fastest  who  took  the  greatest
pains  to  enjoy  least  of  life ;  for  if  our  account  of  happiness  be
right,  the  greatest  enjoyments  in  life  are  such  as  these  men
pass  over  in  their  haste,  and  have  scarce  ever  allowed  themselves
the  liberty  of  tasting.

But  as  considerable  a  part  of  voluptuousness  as  is  founded

309


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

in  the  palate,  and  as  notable  as  the  science  is  which  depends
on  it,  one  may  justly  presume  that  the  ostentation  of  elegance,
and  a  certain  emulation  and  study  how  to  excel  in  this
sumptuous  art  of  living,  goes  very  far  in  the  raising  such  a
high  idea  of  it  as  is  observed  among  the  men  of  pleasure.
For  were  the  circumstances  of  a  table  and  company,  equipages,
services,  and  the  rest  of  the  management  withdrawn,  there
would  be  hardly  left  any  pleasure  worth  acceptance,  even  in
the  opinion  of  the  most  debauched  themselves.

The  very  notion  of  a  debauch  (which  is  a  sally  into  whatever
can  be  imagined  of  pleasure  and  voluptuousness)  carries  with  it
a  plain  reference  to  society  or  fellowship.  It  may  be  called  a
surfeit  or  excess  of  eating  and  drinking,  but  hardly  a  debauch
of  that  kind,  when  the  excess  is  committed  separately,  out
of  all  society  or  fellowship.  And  one  who  abuses  himself  in
this  way  is  often  called  a  sot,  but  never  a  debauchee.  The
courtezans,  and  even  the  commonest  of  women,  who  live  by
prostitution,  know  very  well  how  necessary  it  is  that  every  one
whom  they  entertain  with  their  beauty  should  believe  there
are  satisfactions  reciprocal,  and  that  pleasures  are  no  less  given
than  received.  And  were  this  imagination  to  be  wholly  taken
away,  there  would  be  hardly  any  of  the  grosser  sort  of  mankind
who  would  not  perceive  their  remaining  pleasure  to  be  of
slender  estimation.

Who  is  there  can  well  or  long  enjoy  anything,  when  alone,
and  abstracted  perfectly,  even  in  his  very  mind  and  thought*
from  everything  belonging  to  society  ?  Who  would  not,  on
such  terms  as  these,  be  presently  cloyed  by  any  sensual  indul-
gence ?  Who  would  not  soon  gi'ow  uneasy  with  his  pleasure,
however  exquisite,  till  he  had  found  means  to  impart  it,  and
make  it  truly  pleasant  to  him,  by  communicating  and  sharing
it  at  least  with  some  one  single  person  ?  Let  men  imagine
what  they  please,  let  them  suppose  themselves  ever  so  selfish,
or  desire  ever  so  much  to  follow  the  dictates  of  that  narrow
principle  by  which  they  would  bring  Nature  under  restraint,

310


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  JNIERIT

Nature  will  break  out ;  and  in  agonies,  disquiets,  and  a  dis-
tempered state,  demonstrate  evidently  the  ill  consequence  of
such  violence,  the  absurdity  of  such  a  device,  and  the  punish-
ment which  belongs  to  such  a  monstrous  and  horrid  endeavour.

Thus,  therefore,  not  only  the  pleasures  of  the  mind,  but
even  those  of  the  body,  depend  on  natural  affection ;  insomuch
that  where  this  is  wanting,  they  not  only  lose  their  force,  but
are  in  a  manner  converted  into  uneasiness  and  disgust.  The
sensations  which  should  naturally  afford  contentment  and
delight  produce  rather  discontent  and  sourness,  and  breed
a  wearisomeness  and  restlessness  in  the  disposition.  This
we  may  perceive  by  the  perpetual  inconstancy  and  love  of
change  so  remarkable  in  those  who  have  nothing  communi-
cative or  friendly  in  their  pleasures.  Good  fellowship,  in  its
abused  sense,  seems  indeed  to  have  something  more  constant
and  determining.  The  company  supports  the  humour.  'Tis
the  same  in  love.  A  certain  tenderness  and  generosity  of
affection  supports  the  passion,  which  otherwise  would  instantly
be  changed.  The  perfectest  beauty  cannot,  of  itself,  retain  or
fix  it.  And  that  love  which  has  no  other  foundation,  but
relies  on  this  exterior  kind,  is  soon  turned  into  aversion.  Satiety,
perpetual  disgust,  and  feverishness  of  desire  attend  those  who
passionately  study  pleasure.  They  best  enjoy  it  who  study  to
regulate  their  passions.  And  by  this  they  will  come  to  know
how  absolute  an  incapacity  there  is  in  anything  sensual  to
please  or  give  contentment,  where  it  depends  not  on  something
friendly  or  social,  something  conjoined,  and  in  affinity  with
kind  or  natural  affection.

But  ere  we  conclude  this  article  of  social  or  natural  affection
we  may  take  a  general  view  of  it,  and  bring  it  once  for  all  into
the  scale,  to  prove  what  kind  of  balance  it  helps  to  make
within,^  and  what  the  consequence  may  be  of  its  deficiency  or
light  weight.

There  is  no  one  of  ever  so  little  understanding  in  what
1  Supra,  p.  289.

311


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

belongs  to  a  human  constitution  who  knows  not  that  without
action,  motion,  and  employment  the  body  languishes  and  is
oppressed ;  its  nourishment  turns  to  disease ;  the  spirits,  un-
employed abroad,  help  to  consume  the  parts  within ;  and
Nature,  as  it  were,  preys  upon  herself.  In  the  same  manner,
the  sensible  and  living  part,  the  soul  or  mind,  wanting  its  proper
and  natural  exercise,  is  burdened  and  diseased.  Its  thoughts
and  passions  being  unnaturally  withheld  from  their  due  objects,
turn  against  itself,  and  create  the  highest  impatience  and  ill-
humour.

In  brutes  and  other  creatures  who  have  not  the  use  of
reason  and  reflection  ^  (at  least  not  after  the  manner  of  mankind)
'tis  so  ordered  in  Nature  that  by  their  daily  search  after  food,
and  their  application  either  towards  the  business  of  their
livelihood  or  the  affairs  of  their  species  or  kind,  almost  their
whole  time  is  taken  up,  and  they  fail  not  to  find  full  employ-
ment for  their  passion  according  to  that  degree  of  agitation
to  which  they  are  fitted,  and  which  their  constitution  requires.
If  any  one  of  these  creatures  be  taken  out  of  his  natural  labori-
ous state  and  placed  amidst  such  a  plenty  as  can  profusely
administer  to  all  his  appetites  and  wants,  it  may  be  observed
that  as  his  circumstances  grow  thus  luxuriant,  his  temper  and
passions  have  the  same  growth.  When  he  comes  at  any  time
to  have  the  accommodations  of  life  at  a  cheaper  and  easier  rate
than  was  at  first  intended  him  by  Nature,  he  is  made  to  pay
dear  for  them  in  another  way,  by  losing  his  natural  good
disposition  and  the  orderliness  of  his  kind  or  species.

This  needs  not  to  be  demonstrated  by  particular  instances.
Whoever  has  the  least  knowledge  of  Natural  History,  or  has
been  an  observer  of  the  several  breeds  of  creatures,  and  their
ways  of  life  and  propagation,  will  easily  understand  this
difference  of  orderliness  between  the  wild  and  the  tame  of  the
same  species.  The  latter  acquire  new  habits,  and  deviate  from
their  original  nature.  They  lose  even  the  common  instinct
*  Supra,  p.  289 ;  and  Moralists,  part  vi.  §  4 ;  and  Misc.  iv.  ch.  ii.

312


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

and  ordinary  ingenuity  of  their  kind,  nor  can  they  ever  regain
it  whilst  they  continue  in  this  pampered  state ;  but  being
turned  to  shift  abroad,  they  resume  the  natural  affection  and
sagacity  of  their  species.  They  learn  to  unite  in  stricter
fellowship,  and  grow  more  concerned  for  their  offspring.  They
provide  against  the  seasons,  and  make  the  most  of  every
advantage  given  by  Nature  for  the  support  and  maintenance
of  their  particular  species  against  such  as  are  foreign  and
hostile.  And  thus  as  they  grow  busy  and  employed,  they
grow  regular  and  good.  Their  petulancy  and  vice  forsakes
them  with  their  idleness  and  ease.

It  happens  with  mankind  that  whilst  some  are  by  necessity
confined  to  labour,  others  are  provided  with  abundance  of  all
things  by  the  pains  and  labour  of  inferiors.  Now,  if  among
the  superior  and  easy  sort  there  be  not  something  of  fit  and
proper  employment  raised  in  the  room  of  what  is  wanting  in
common  labour  and  toil ;  if  instead  of  an  application  to  any
sort  of  work,  such  as  has  a  good  and  honest  end  in  society
(as  letters,  sciences,  arts,  husbandry,  public  affairs,  economy,
or  the  like),  there  be  a  thorough  neglect  of  all  duty  or  employ-
ment ;  a  settled  idleness,  supineness,  and  inactivity ;  this  of
necessity  must  occasion  a  most  relaxed  and  dissolute  state :  it
must  produce  a  total  disorder  of  the  passions,  and  break  out  in
the  strangest  irregularities  imaginable.

We  see  the  enormous  growth  of  luxury  in  capital  cities,
such  as  have  been  long  the  seat  of  empire.  We  see  what
improvements  are  made  in  vice  of  every  kind  where  numbers
of  men  are  maintained  in  lazy  opulence  and  wanton  plenty.
'Tis  otherwise  with  those  who  are  taken  up  in  honest  and  due
employment,  and  have  been  well  inured  to  it  from  their  youth.
This  we  may  observe  in  the  hardy  remote  provincials,  the
inhabitants  of  smaller  towns,  and  the  industrious  sort  of
common  people,  where  'tis  rare  to  meet  with  any  instances
of  those  irregularities  which  are  known  in  courts  and  palaces,
and  in  the  rich  foundations  of  easy  and  pampered  priests.

313


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Now  if  what  we  have  advanced  concerning  an  inward
constitution  be  real  and  just ;  if  it  be  true  that  Nature  works
by  a  just  order  and  regulation  as  well  in  the  passions  and
affections  as  in  the  limbs  and  organs  which  she  forms ;  if  it
appears  withal  that  she  has  so  constituted  this  inward  part
that  nothing  is  so  essential  to  it  as  exercise,  and  no  exercise
so  essential  as  that  of  social  or  natural  affection ;  it  follows
that  where  this  is  removed  or  weakened,  the  inward  part  must
necessarily  suffer  and  be  impaired.  Let  indolence,  indifference,
or  insensibility  be  studied  as  an  art,  or  cultivated  with  the
utmost  care,  the  passions  thus  restrained  will  force  their  prison,
and  in  one  way  or  other  procure  their  liberty  and  find  full  em-
ployment. They  will  be  sure  to  create  to  themselves  unusual
and  unnatural  exercise  where  they  are  cut  off  from  such  as  is
natural  and  good.  And  thus  in  the  room  of  orderly  and  natural
affection,  new  and  unnatural  must  be  raised,  and  all  inwai'd  order
and  economy  destroyed.

One  must  have  a  very  imperfect  idea  of  the  order  of  Nature
in  the  formation  and  structure  of  animals  to  imagine  that  so
gi'eat  a  principle,  so  fundamental  a  part  as  that  of  natural
affection,  should  possibly  be  lost  or  impaired,  without  any
inward  ruin  or  subversion  of  the  temper  and  frame  of  mind.

Whoever  is  the  least  versed  in  this  moral  kind  of  archi-
tecture, will  find  the  inward  fabric  so  adjusted,  and  the  whole
so  nicely  built,  that  the  barely  extending  of  a  single  passion
a  little  too  far,  or  the  continuance  of  it  too  long,  is  able  to
bring  irrecoverable  ruin  and  misery.  He  will  find  this  ex-
perienced in  the  ordinary  case  of  frenzy  and  distraction,
when  the  mind,  dwelling  too  long  upon  one  subject  (whether
prosperous  or  calamitous)  sinks  under  the  weight  of  it,  and
proves  what  the  necessity  is  of  a  due  balance  and  counterpoise
in  the  affections.  He  will  find  that  in  every  different  creature
and  distinct  sex  there  is  a  different  and  distinct  order,  set,  or
suit  of  passions,  proportionable  to  the  different  order  of  life,  the
different functions  and  capacities  assigned  to  each. As the

314


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

operations  and  effects  are  different,  so  are  the  springs  and
causes  in  each  system.  The  inside  work  is  fitted  to  the  out-
ward action  and  performance.  So  that  where  habits  or  affections
are  dislodged,  misplaced,  or  changed,  where  those  belonging
to  one  species  are  intermixed  with  those  belonging  to  another,
there  must  of  necessity  be  confusion  and  disturbance  within.

All  this  we  may  observe  easily  by  comparing  the  more
perfect  with  the  imperfect  natures,  such  as  are  imperfect  from
their  birth,  by  having  suffered  violence  within  in  their  earliest
form  and  inmost  matrix.  We  know  how  it  is  with  monsters,
such  as  are  compounded  of  different  kinds  or  different  sexes.
Nor  are  they  less  monsters  who  are  misshapen  or  distorted  in
an  inward  part.  The  ordinary  animals  appear  unnatural  and
monstrous  when  they  lose  their  proper  instincts,  forsake  their
kind,  neglect  their  ofll'spring,  and  pervert  those  functions  or
capacities  bestowed  by  Nature.  How  A^Tetched  must  it  be,
therefore,  for  man,  of  all  other  creatures,  to  lose  that  sense  and
feeling  which  is  proper  to  him  as  a  man,  and  suitable  to  his
character  and  genius  ?  How  unfortunate  must  it  be  for  a
creature  whose  dependence  on  society  is  greater  than  any
others,  to  lose  that  natural  affection  by  which  he  is  prompted
to  the  good  and  interest  of  his  species  and  community  ?  Such
indeed  is  man''s  natural  share  of  this  affection,  that  he,  of  all
other  creatures,  is  plainly  the  least  able  to  bear  solitude.  Nor
is  anything  more  apparent  than  that  there  is  naturally  in
every  man  such  a  degree  of  social  affection  as  inclines  him  to
seek  the  familiarity  and  friendship  of  his  fellows.  'Tis  here
that  he  lets  loose  a  passion,  and  gives  reins  to  a  desire  which
can  hardly  by  any  struggle  or  inward  violence  be  withheld ;
or  if  it  be,  is  sure  to  create  a  sadness,  dejection,  and  melancholy
in  the  mind.  For  whoever  is  unsociable,  and  voluntarily  shuns
society  or  commerce  with  the  world,  must  of  necessity  be
morose  and  ill-natured.  He,  on  the  other  side,  who  is  with-
held by  force  or  accident,  finds  in  his  temper  the  ill  effects  of
this  restraint. The  inclination,  when  suppressed,  breeds  dis-

315


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

content,  and  on  the  contrary  affords  a  healing  and  enlivening
joy  when  acting  at  its  liberty  and  with  full  scope ;  as  we  may
see  particularly  when  after  a  time  of  solitude  and  long  absence
the  heart  is  opened,  the  mind  disburdened,  and  the  secrets  of
the  breast  unfolded  to  a  bosom  friend.

This  we  see  yet  more  remarkably  instanced  in  persons  of  the
most  elevated  stations,  even  in  princes,  monarchs,  and  those  who
seem  by  their  condition  to  be  above  ordinary  human  commerce,
and  who  affect  a  sort  of  distant  strangeness  from  the  rest  of
mankind.  But  their  carriage  is  not  the  same  towards  all  men.
The  wiser  and  better  sort,  it  is  true,  are  often  held  at  a  distance,
as  unfit  for  their  intimacy  or  secret  trust.  But  to  compensate
this  there  are  others  substituted  in  their  room,  who  though  they
have  the  least  merit,  and  are  peihaps  the  most  vile  and  con-
temptible of  men,  are  sufficient,  however,  to  serve  the  purpose
of  an  imaginary  friendship,  and  can  become  favourites  in  form.
These  are  the  subjects  of  humanity  in  the  great.  For  these  we
see  them  often  in  concern  and  pain  ;  in  these  they  easily  confide  ;
to  these  they  can  with  pleasure  communicate  their  power  and
greatness,  be  open,  free,  generous,  confiding,  bountiful,  as
rejoicing  in  the  action  itself;  having  no  intention  or  aim
beyond  it ;  and  their  interest,  in  respect  of  policy,  often  standing
a  quite  contrary  way.  But  where  neither  the  love  of  mankind
nor  the  passion  for  favourites  prevails,  the  tyrannical  temper
fails  not  to  show  itself  in  its  proper  colours  and  to  the  life,
with  all  the  bitterness,  cruelty,  and  mistrust  which  belong  to
that  solitary  and  gloomy  state  of  uncommunicative  and  un-
friendly greatness.  Nor  needs  there  any  particular  proof  from
history  or  present  time  to  second  this  remark.

Thus  it  may  appear  how  much  natural  affection  is  pre-
dominant :  how  it  is  inwardly  joined  to  us,  and  implanted  in
our  natures ;  how  interwoven  with  our  other  passions,  and  how
essential  to  that  regular  motion  and  course  of  our  affections  on
which  our  happiness  and  self-enjoyment  so  immediately  depend.

And  thus  we  have  demonstrated  that  as,  on  one  side,  to

316


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

have  the  natural  and  good  affections  is  to  have  the  chief  means
and  power  of  self-enjoyment ;  so,  on  the  other  side,  to  want
them  is  certain  misery  and  ill.

Section II

We  are  now  to  prove,  that  by  having  the  self-passions  too
intense  or  strong,  a  creature  becomes  miserable.

In  order  to  this  we  must,  according  to  method,  enumerate
those  home-affections  which  relate  to  the  private  interest  or
separate  economy  of  the  creature,  such  as  love  of  life ;  resentment
of  injury;  pleasure,  or  appetite  towards  nourishment  and  the
means  of  generation ;  interest,  or  desire  of  those  conveniences
by  which  we  are  well  provided  for  and  maintained ;  emulation,
or  love  of  praise  and  honour;  indolence,  or  love  of  ease  and
rest.  These  are  the  affections  which  relate  to  the  private
system,  and  constitute  whatever  we  call  interestedness  or
self-love.

Now  these  affections,  if  they  are  moderate  and  within
certain  bounds,  are  neither  injurious  to  social  life  nor  a
hindrance  to  virtue;  but  being  in  an  extreme  degree,  they
become  cowardice,  revengefulness,  luxury,  avarice,  vanity  and
ambition,  sloth ;  and  as  such  are  owned  vicious  and  ill  with
respect  to  human  society.  How  they  are  ill  also  with  respect  to
the  private  person,  and  are  to  his  own  disadvantage  as  well  as
that  of  the  public,  we  may  consider  as  we  severally  examine  them.

If  there  were  any  of  these  self-passions  which  for  the  good
and  happiness  of  the  creature  might  be  opposed  to  natural
affection,  and  allowed  to  over-balance  it,  the  desire  and  love  of
life  would  have  the  best  pretence.  But  it  will  be  found  perhaps
that  there  is  no  passion  which,  by  having  much  allowed  to  it,  is
the  occasion  of  more  disorder  and  misery.

There  is  nothing  more  certain  or  more  imiversally  agreed
than  this,  "  That  life  may  sometimes  be  even  a  misfortune  and
misery."  To  enforce  the  continuance  of  it  in  creatures  reduced
to such  extremity is esteemed the  greatest cruelty. And

317


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

though  religion  forbids  that  any  one  should  be  his  own
reliever,  yet  if  by  some  fortunate  accident,  death  offers  of  itself,
it  is  embraced  as  highly  welcome.  And  on  this  account  the
nearest  friends  and  relations  often  rejoice  at  the  release  of  one
entirely  beloved,  even  though  he  himself  may  have  been  so  weak
as  earnestly  to  decline  death,  and  endeavour  the  utmost  pro-
longment  of  his  own  uneligible  state.

Since  life,  therefore,  may  frequently  prove  a  misfortune  and
misery,  and  since  it  naturally  becomes  so  by  being  only
prolonged  to  the  infirmities  of  old  age ;  since  there  is  nothing,
withal,  more  common  than  to  see  life  over- valued,  and  purchased
at  such  a  cost  as  it  can  never  justly  be  thought  worth;  it
follows  evidently  that  the  passion  itself  (viz.  the  love  of  life,
and  abhorrence  or  dread  of  death)  if  beyond  a  certain  degree,
and  over-balancing  in  the  temper  of  any  creature,  must  lead  him
directly  against  his  own  interest;  make  him,  upon  occasion,
become  the  greatest  enemy  to  himself,  and  necessitate  him  to
act  as  such.

But  though  it  were  allowed  the  interest  and  good  of  a
creature,  by  all  coui^ses  and  means  whatsoever,  in  any  circum-
stances or  at  any  rate,  to  preserve  life,  yet  would  it  be  against
his  interest  still  to  have  this  passion  in  a  high  degree.  For  it
would  by  this  means  prove  ineffectual,  and  no  way  conducing
to  its  end.  Various  instances  need  not  be  given.  For  what  is
there  better  known,  than  that  at  all  times  an  excessive  fear
betrays  to  danger  instead  of  saving  from  it  ?  "'Tis  impossible
for  any  one  to  act  sensibly  and  with  presence  of  mind,  even
in  his  own  preservation  and  defence,  when  he  is  strongly
pressed  by  such  a  passion.  On  all  extraordinary  emergencies
"'tis  courage  and  resolution  saves,  whilst  cowardice  robs  us  of  the
means  of  safety,  and  not  only  deprives  us  of  our  defensive
faculties,  but  even  runs  us  to  the  brink  of  ruin,  and  makes  us
meet  that  evil  which  of  itself  would  never  have  invaded  us.

But  were  the  consequences  of  this  passion  less  injurious  than
we  have  represented,  it  must  be  allowed  still  that  in  itself  it  can

818


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

be  no  other  than  miserable,  if  it  be  misery  to  feel  cowardice,
and  be  haunted  by  those  spectres  and  hoiTors  which  are  proper
to  the  character  of  one  who  has  a  thorough  dread  of  death.
For  'tis  not  only  when  dangers  happen,  and  hazards  are  incurred,
that  this  sort  of  fear  oppresses  and  distracts.  If  it  in  the  least
prevails,  it  gives  no  quarter  so  much  as  at  the  safest,  stillest
hour  of  retreat  and  quiet.  Every  object  suggests  thought
enough  to  employ  it.  It  operates  when  it  is  least  observed  by
others,  and  enters  at  all  times  into  the  pleasantest  parts  of  life,
so  as  to  corrupt  and  poison  all  enjoyment  and  content.  One
may  safely  aver  that  by  reason  of  this  passion  alone  many  a
life,  if  inwardly  and  closely  viewed,  would  be  found  to  be
thoroughly  miserable,  though  attended  with  all  other  circum-
stances which  in  appearance  render  it  happy.  But  when  we
add  to  this  the  meannesses  and  base  condescensions  occasioned
by  such  a  passionate  concern  for  living,  when  we  consider  how
by  means  of  it  we  are  driven  to  actions  we  can  never  view
without  dislike,  and  forced  by  degrees  from  our  natural  conduct
into  still  greater  crookednesses  and  perplexity,  there  is  no  one
surely  so  disingenuous  as  not  to  allow  that  life  in  this  case
becomes  a  sorry  purchase,  and  is  passed  with  little  freedom  or
satisfaction.  For  how  can  this  be  otherwise,  whilst  everything
which  is  generous  and  worthy,  even  the  chief  relish,  happiness,
and  good  of  life,  is  for  life's  sake  abandoned  and  renounced  ?

And  thus  it  seems  evident  "  that  to  have  this  affection  of
desire  and  love  of  life  too  intense,  or  beyond  a  moderate  degi-ee.
is  against  the  interest  of  a  creature,  and  contrary  to  his  happi-
ness and  good."

There  is  another  passion  very  different  from  that  of  fear
and  which  in  a  certain  degree  is  equally  preservative  to  us,  and
conducing  to  our  safety.  As  that  is  serviceable  in  prompting
us  to  shun  danger,  so  is  this  in  fortifying  us  against  it,  and
enabling  us  to  repel  injury  and  resist  violence  when  offered.
Tis  true  that  according  to  strict  virtue,  and  a  just  regulation
of  the  affections  in  a  wise  and  vu'tuous  man,  such  efforts  towards

319


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

action  amount  not  to  what  is  justly  styled  passion  or  commotion.
A  man  of  courage  may  be  cautious  without  real  fear;  and  a
man  of  temper  may  resist  or  punish  without  anger;  but  in
ordinary  characters  there  must  necessarily  be  some  mixture  of
the  real  passions  themselves,  which,  however,  in  the  main,  are
able  to  allay  and  temper  one  another.  And  thus  anger  in  a
manner  becomes  necessary.  Tis  by  this  passion  that  one
creature  offering  violence  to  another  is  deterred  from  the
execution,  whilst  he  observes  how  the  attempt  affects  his  fellow,
and  knows  by  the  very  signs  which  accompany  this  rising
motion,  that  if  the  injury  be  carried  further  it  will  not  pass
easily  or  with  impunity.  ""Tis  this  passion  withal  which,  after
violence  and  hostility  executed,  rouses  a  creature  in  opposition,
and  assists  him  in  returning  like  hostility  and  harm  on  the
invader.  For  thus,  as  rage  and  despair  increase,  a  creature
grows  still  more  terrible,  and  being  urged  to  the  greatest
extremity,  finds  a  degree  of  strength  and  boldness  unexperi-
enced till  then,  and  which  had  never  risen  except  through  the
height  of  provocation.  As  to  this  affection  therefore,  not-
withstanding its  immediate  aim  be  indeed  the  ill  or  punishment
of  another,  yet  it  is  plainly  of  the  sort  of  those  which  tend  to
the  advantage  and  interest  of  the  self-system,  the  animal
himself,  and  is  withal  in  other  respects  contributing  to  the
good  and  interest  of  the  species.  But  there  is  hardly  need  we
should  explain  how  mischievous  and  self-destructive  anger  is,
if  it  be  what  we  commonly  understand  by  that  word :  if  it  be
such  a  passion  as  is  rash  and  violent  in  the  instant  of  provocation,
or  such  as  imprints  itself  deeply,  and  causes  a  settled  revenge
and  an  eager  vindicative  pursuit.  No  wonder  indeed  that  so
much  is  done  in  mere  revenge,  and  under  the  weight  of  a  deep
resentment,  when  the  relief  and  satisfaction  found  in  that
mdulgence  is  no  other  than  the  assuaging  of  the  most  torturous
pain,  and  the  alleviating  the  most  weighty  and  pressing  sensation
of  misery.  The  pain  of  this  sort  being  for  awhile  removed  or
alleviated  by the  accomplishment  of  the  desire  in  the  ill  of

320


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR MERIT

another,  leaves  indeed  behind  it  the  perception  of  a  delicious
ease,  and  an  over-flowing  of  soft  and  pleasing  sensation.  Yet
is  this,  in  truth,  no  better  than  the  rack  itself.  For  whoever
has  experienced  racking  pains,  can  tell  in  what  manner  a  sudden
cessation  or  respite  is  used  to  affect  him.  From  hence  are  those
untoward  delights  of  perverseness,  frowardness,  and  an  en-
venomed malignant  disposition  acting  at  its  liberty.  For
this  is  only  a  perpetual  assuaging  of  anger  perpetually  renewed.
In  other  characters,  the  passion  arises  not  so  suddenly  or  on
slight  causes,  but  being  once  moved,  is  not  so  easily  quieted.
The  dormant  fury.  Revenge,  being  raised  once,  and  wrought  up
to  her  highest  pitch,  rests  not  till  she  attains  her  end  ;  and,
that  attained,  is  easy  and  reposes,  making  our  succeeding  relief
and  ease  so  much  the  more  enjoyed  as  our  preceding  anguish
and  incumbent  pain  was  of  long  duration  and  bitter  sense.
Certainly  if  among  lovers,  and  in  the  language  of  gallantry,  the
success  of  ardent  love  is  called  the  assuaging  of  a  pain,  this
other  success  may  be  far  more  justly  termed  so.  However  soft
or  flattering  the  former  pain  may  be  esteemed,  this  latter  surely
can  be  no  pleasing  one ;  nor  can  it  be  possibly  esteemed  other
than  sound  and  thorough  wretchedness,  a  grating  and  disgustful
feeling,  \vithout  the  least  mixture  of  anything  soft,  gentle,
or  agreeable.

'Tis  not  very  necessary  to  mention  the  ill  effects  of  this
passion  in  respect  of  our  minds  or  bodies,  our  private  condition,
or  circumstances  of  life.  By  these  particulars  we  may  grow  too
tedious.  These  are  of  the  moral  sort  of  subjects,  joined  com-
monly with  religion,  and  treated  so  rhetorically  and  with  such
enforced  repetition  in  public  as  to  be  apt  to  raise  the  satiety  of
mankind.  What  has  been  said  may  be  enough  perhaps  to
make  this  evident,  "  That  to  be  subject  to  such  a  passion  as  we
have  been  mentioning,  is  in  reality  to  be  very  unhappy  ■" ;  and
"  that  the  habit  itself  is  a  disease  of  the  worst  sort,  from  which
misery  is  inseparable."

Now  as  to  luxury,  and  what  the  world  calls  pleasure :  were

VOL.  I  321  Y


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

it  true  (as  has  been  proved  the  contrary)  that  the  most  con-
siderable enjoyments  were  those  merely  of  the  sense ;  and  were
it  true,  withal,  that  those  enjoyments  of  the  sense  lay  in  certain
outward  things  capable  of  yielding  always  a  due  and  certain
portion  of  pleasure,  according  to  their  degree  and  quality,  it
would  then  follow  that  the  certain  way  to  obtain  happiness
would  be  to  procure  largely  of  these  subjects  to  which  happi-
ness and  pleasure  were  thus  infallibly  annexed.  But  however
fashionably  we  may  apply  the  notion  of  good  living,  'twill
hardly  be  found  that  our  inward  faculties  are  able  to  keep  pace
with  these  outward  supplies  of  a  luxuriant  fortune.  And  if  the
natural  disposition  and  aptness  from  within  be  not  concurring,
'twill  be  in  vain  that  these  subjects  are  thus  multiplied  from
abroad,  and  acquired  with  ever  so  great  facility.

It  may  be  observed  in  those  who  by  excess  have  gained  a
constant  nauseating  and  distaste,  that  they  have  nevertheless
as  constant  a  craving  or  eagerness  of  stomach.  But  the
appetite  of  this  kind  is  false  and  unnatural,  as  is  that  of  thirst
arising  from  a  fever,  or  contracted  by  habitual  debauch.  Now
the  satisfactions  of  the  natural  appetite,  in  a  plain  way,  are
infinitely  beyond  those  indulgences  of  the  most  refined  and
elegant  luxury.  This  is  often  perceived  by  the  luxurious
themselves.  It  has  been  experienced  in  people  bred  after  the
sumptuous  way,  and  used  never  to  wait,  but  to  prevent
appetite,  that  when  by  any  new  turn  of  life  they  came  to  fall
into  a  more  natural  course,  or  for  awhile,  as  on  a  journey,  or
a  day  of  sport,  came  accidentally  to  experience  the  sweet  of  a
plain  diet,  recommended  by  due  abstinence  and  exercise,  they
have  with  freedom  owned  that  it  was  then  they  received  the
highest  satisfaction  and  delight  which  a  table  could  possibly
afford.

On  the  other  side,  it  has  been  as  often  remarked  in  persons
accustomed  to  an  active  life  and  healthful  exercise,  that  having
once  thoroughly  experienced  this  plainer  and  more  natural  diet,
they  have  upon  a  following  change  of  life  regretted  their  loss,

322


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

and  undervalued  the  pleasures  received  from  all  the  delicacies
of  luxury  in  comparison  with  those  remembered  satisfactions
of  a  preceding  state.  'Tis  plain  that  by  urging  Nature,  forcing
the  appetite,  and  inciting  sense,  the  keenness  of  the  natural
sensations  is  lost.  And  though  through  vice  or  ill  habit  the
same  subjects  of  appetite  may  every  day  be  sought  with
less  satisfaction ;  though  the  impatience  of  abstaining  be
greater,  the  pleasure  of  indulgence  is  really  less;  the  palls  or
nauseatings  which  continually  intervene  are  of  the  worst  and
most  hateful  kind  of  sensation.  Hardly  is  there  anything
tasted  which  is  wholly  free  from  this  ill  relish  of  a  surfeited
sense  and  ruined  appetite.  So  that  instead  of  a  constant  and
flowing  delight  afforded  in  such  a  state  of  life,  the  very  state
itself  is  in  reality  a  sickness  and  infirmity,  a  corruption  of
pleasure,  and  destructive  of  every  natural  and  agreeable  sensa-
tion. So  far  is  it  from  being  true  "that  in  this  licentious
course  we  enjoy  life  best,  or  are  likely  to  make  the  most  of  it."

As  to  the  consequences  of  such  an  indulgence :  how  fatal  to
the  body,  by  diseases  of  many  kinds,  and  to  the  mind,  by
sottishness  and  stupidity ;  this  needs  not  any  explanation.

The  consequences  as  to  interest  ai-e  plain  enough.  Such  a
state  of  impotent  and  unrestrained  desire,  as  it  increases  our
wants,  so  it  must  subject  us  to  a  greater  dependence  on  others.
Our  private  circumstances,  however  plentiful  or  easy  they  may
be,  can  less  easily  content  us.  Ways  and  means  must  be
invented  to  procure  what  may  administer  to  such  an  imperious
luxury  as  forces  us  to  sacrifice  honour  to  fortune,  and  runs  us
out  into  all  irregularity  and  extravagance  of  conduct.  The
injuries  we  do  ourselves,  by  excess  and  unforbearance,  are  then
surely  apparent,  when  through  an  impotence  of  this  sort,  and
an  impossibility  of  restraint,  we  do  what  we  ourselves  declare  to
be  destructive  to  us.  But  these  are  matters  obvious  of  them-
selves. And  from  less  than  what  has  been  said  'tis  easy  to
conclude  "  that  luxury,  riot,  and  debauch  are  contrary  to
real  interest,  and  to  the  true  enjoyment  of  life.''

VOL.  I  323  Y  2


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

There  is  another  luxury  superior  to  the  kind  we  have  been
mentioning,  and  which  in  strictness  can  scarce  be  called  a  self-
passion,  since  the  sole  end  of  it  is  the  advantage  and  promotion
of  the  species.  But  whereas  all  other  social  affections  are
joined  only  with  a  mental  pleasure,  and  founded  in  mere  kind-
ness and  love,  this  has  more  added  to  it  and  is  joined  with  a
pleasure  of  sense.  Such  concern  and  care  has  Nature  shown  for
the  support  and  maintenance  of  the  several  species,  that  by  a
certain  indigence^  and  kind  of  necessity  of  their  natures  they
are  made  to  regard  the  propagation  of  their  kind.  Now
whether  it  be  the  interest  or  good  of  the  animal  to  feel  this
indigence  beyond  a  natural  and  ordinary  degree,  is  what  we
may  consider.

Having  already  said  so  much  concerning  natural  and  un-
natural appetite,  there  needs  less  to  be  said  on  this  occasion.
If  it  be  allowed  that  to  all  other  pleasures  there  is  a  measure
of  appetite  belonging,  which  cannot  possibly  be  exceeded  with-
out prejudice  to  the  creature,  even  in  his  very  capacity  of
enjoying  pleasure,  it  will  hardly  be  thought  that  there  is
no  certain  limit  or  just  boundary  of  this  other  appetite  of  the
amorous  kind.  There  are  other  sorts  of  ardent  sensations
accidentally  experienced,  which  we  find  pleasant  and  acceptable
whilst  they  are  held  within  a  certain  degree ;  but  which,  as
they  increase,  grow  oppressive  and  intolerable.  Laughter  pro-
voked by  titillation  grows  an  excessive  pain,  though  it  retains
still  the  same  features  of  delight  and  pleasure.  And  though  in
the  case  of  that  particular  kind  of  itch  which  belongs  to  a
distemper  named  from  that  effect,  there  are  some  who,  far  from
disliking  the  sensation,  find  it  highly  acceptable  and  delightful,
yet  it  will  hardly  be  reputed  such  among  the  more  refined  sort,
even  of  those  who  make  pleasure  their  chief  study  and  highest
good.

Now  if  there  be  in  every  sensation  of  mere  pleasure  a  certain
pitch  or  degree  of  ardour,  which  by  being  further  advanced

*  [In  the  common  Latin  sense,  indigentia  est  libido  inexplebilis. — Cicero.]

324


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR MERIT

comes  the  nearer  to  mere  rage  and  fury ;  if  there  be  indeed
a  necessity  of  stopping  somewhere,  and  determining  on  some
boundary  for  the  passion ;  where  can  we  fix  our  standard,  or
how  regulate  ourselves  but  with  regard  to  Nature,  beyond  which
there  is  no  measure  or  rule  of  things  ?  Now  Nature  may  be
known  from  what  we  see  of  the  natural  state  of  creatures,  and
of  man  himself,  when  unprejudiced  by  vicious  education.

Where  happily  any  one  is  bred  to  a  natural  life,  inured  to
honest  industry  and  sobriety,  and  unaccustomed  to  anything
immoderate  or  intemperate,  he  is  found  to  have  his  appetites
and  inclinations  of  this  sort  at  command.  Nor  are  they  on
this  account  less  able  to  afford  him  the  pleasure  or  enjoyment
of  each  kind.  On  the  contrary,  as  they  are  more  sound,  healthy,
and  uninjured  by  excess  and  abuse,  they  must  afford  him  pro-
portionate satisfaction.  So  that  were  both  these  sensations  to
be  experimentally  compared ;  that  of  a  virtuous  course  which
belonged  to  one  who  lived  a  natural  and  regular  life,  and  that
of  a  vicious  course  which  belonged  to  one  who  was  relaxed  and
dissolute ;  there  is  no  question  but  judgment  would  be  given
in  favour  of  the  former,  without  regard  to  consequences,  and
only  with  respect  to  the  very  pleasure  of  sense  itself.

As  to  the  consequences  of  this  vice,  with  respect  to  the
health  and  vigour  of  the  body,  there  is  no  need  to  mention
anything.  The  injury  it  does  the  mind,  though  less  noticed,  is
yet  greater.  The  hindrance  of  all  improvement,  the  wretched
waste  of  time,  the  effeminacy,  sloth,  supineness,  the  disorder
and  looseness  of  a  thousand  passions  through  such  a  relaxation
and  enervating  of  the  mind,  are  all  of  them  effects  sufficiently
apparent  when  reflected  on.

What  the  disadvantages  are  of  this  intemperance,  in  respect
of  interest,  society,  and  the  world ;  and  what  the  advantages
are  of  a  contrary  sobriety  and  self-command,  would  be  to  little
purpose  to  mention.  "Tis  well  known  there  can  be  no  slavery
greater  than  what  is  consequent  to  the  dominion  and  rule  of
such  a  passion. Of  all  other,  it  is  the  least  manageable  by

325


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

favour  or  concession,  and  assumes  the  most  from  privilege  and
indulgence.  What  it  costs  us  in  the  modesty  and  ingenuity
of  our  natures,  and  in  the  faith  and  honesty  of  our  characters,
is  as  easily  apprehended  by  any  one  who  will  reflect.  And  it
will  from  hence  appear  "  that  there  is  no  passion  which  in  its
extravagance  and  excess  more  necessarily  occasions  disorder  and
unhappiness.""

Now  as  to  that  passion  which  is  esteemed  peculiarly  interest-
ing, as  having  for  its  aim  the  possession  of  wealth,  and  what  we
call  a  settlement  or  fortune  in  the  world  :  if  the  regard  towards
this  kind  be  moderate  and  in  a  reasonable  degi'ee ;  if  it  occasions
no  passionate  pursuit,  nor  raises  any  ardent  desire  or  appetite ;
there  is  nothing  in  this  case  which  is  not  compatible  with
virtue,  and  even  suitable  and  beneficial  to  society.  The  public
as  well  as  private  system  is  advanced  by  the  industry  which
this  affection  excites.  But  if  it  grows  at  length  into  a  real
passion,  the  injury  and  mischief  it  does  the  public  is  not  greater
than  that  which  it  creates  to  the  person  himself.  Such  a  one
is  in  reality  a  self-oppressor,  and  lies  heavier  on  himself  than
he  can  ever  do  on  mankind.

How  far  a  coveting  or  avaricious  temper  is  miserable,  needs
not  surely  be  explained.  Who  knows  not  how  small  a  portion
of  worldly  matters  is  sufficient  for  a  man's  single  use  and  con-
venience ;  and  how  much  his  occasions  and  wants  might  be
contracted  and  reduced  if  a  just  frugality  were  studied,  and
temperance  and  a  natural  life  came  once  to  be  pursued  with
half  that  application,  industry,  and  art  which  is  bestowed  on
sumptuousness  and  luxury  ?  Now  if  temperance  be  in  reality
so  advantageous,  and  the  practice  as  well  as  the  consequences  of
it  so  pleasing  and  happy,"  as  has  been  before  expressed,  there  is
little  need,  on  the  other  side,  to  mention  anything  of  the
miseries  attending  those  covetous  and  eager  desires  after  things
which  have  no  bounds  or  rule ;  as  being  out  of  Nature,  beyond
which  there  can  be  no  limits  to  desire.  For  where  shall  we
once  stop  when  we  are  beyond  this  boundary  ? How  shall  we

326


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR  MERIT

fix  or  ascertain  a  thing  wholly  unnatural  and  unreasonable  ?
Or  what  method,  what  regulation,  shall  we  set  to  mere  imagina-
tion, or  the  exorbitancy  of  fancy,  in  adding  expense  to  expense,
or  possession  to  possession.

Hence  that  known  restlessness  of  covetous  and  eager  minds
in  whatever  state  or  degree  of  fortune  they  are  placed ;  there
being  no  thorough  or  real  satisfaction,  but  a  kind  of  insatiable-
ness  belonging  to  this  condition.  For  "'tis  impossible  there
should  be  any  real  enjoyment  except  in  consequence  of  natural
and  just  appetite.  Nor  do  we  readily  call  that  an  enjoyment
of  wealth  or  of  honour  when  through  covetousness  or  ambition
the  desire  is  still  forward,  and  can  never  rest  satisfied  with  its
gains.  But  against  this  vice  of  covetousness  there  is  enough
said  continually  in  the  world ;  and  in  our  common  way  of  speak-
ing "a  covetous  and  a  miserable  temper  has,  in  reality,  one
and  the  same  signification.''

Nor  is  there  less  said  abroad  as  to  the  ills  of  that  other
aspiring  temper,  which  exceeds  an  honest  emulation  or  love  of
praise,  and  passes  the  bounds  even  of  vanity  and  conceit.  Such
is  that  passion  which  breaks  into  an  enormous  pride  and
ambition.  Now  if  we  consider  once  the  ease,  happiness,  and
seciuity  which  attend  a  modest  disposition  and  quiet  mind,
such  as  is  of  easy  self-command,  fitted  to  every  station  in
society,  and  able  to  suit  itself  with  any  reasonable  circumstances
whatever,  'twill  on  the  first  view  present  us  with  the  most
agreeable  and  winning  character.  Nor  will  it  be  found  necessary
after  this  to  call  to  mind  the  excellence  and  good  of  moderation,
or  the  mischief  and  self-injury  of  immoderate  desires,  and  con-
ceited fond  imagination  of  personal  advantage,  in  such  things
as  titles,  honours,  precedencies,  fame,  glory,  or  vulgar  astonish-
ment, admiration,  and  applause.

This  too  is  obvious,  that  as  the  desires  of  this  kind  are
raised  and  become  impetuous,  and  out  of  our  command,  so  the
aversions  and  fears  of  the  contrary  part  grow  proportionably
strong  and violent, and the temper  accordingly suspicious,

327


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

jealous,  captious,  subject  to  apprehensions  from  all  events,
and  incapable  of  bearing  the  least  repulse  or  ordinary  dis-
appointment. And  hence  it  may  be  concluded  "  that  all  rest
and  security  as  to  what  is  future,  and  all  peace,  contentedness,
and  ease  as  to  what  is  present,  is  forfeited  by  the  aspiring
passions  of  this  emulous  kind ;  and  by  having  the  appetites
towards  glory  and  outward  appearance  thus  transporting  and
beyond  command."

There  is  a  certain  temper  placed  often  in  opposition  to
those  eager  and  aspiring  aims  of  which  we  have  been  speaking.
Not  that  it  really  excludes  either  the  passion  of  covetousness
or  ambition,  but  because  it  hinders  their  effects,  and  keeps
them  from  breaking  into  open  action.  Tis  this  passion  which
by  soothing  the  mind  and  softening  it  into  an  excessive  love
of  rest  and  indolence,  renders  high  attempts  impracticable,
and  represents  as  insuperable  the  difficulties  of  a  painful  and
laborious  course  towards  wealth  and  honours.  Now  though
an  inclination  to  ease,  and  a  love  of  moderate  recess  and  rest
from  action,  be  as  natural  and  useful  to  us  as  the  inclination
we  have  towards  sleep,  yet  an  excessive  love  of  rest,  and  a
contracted  aversion  to  action  and  employment,  must  be  a
disease  in  the  mind  equal  to  that  of  a  lethargy  in  the  body.

How  necessary  action  and  exercise  are  to  the  body  may  be
judged  by  the  difference  we  find  between  those  constitutions
which  are  accustomed,  and  those  which  are  wholly  strangers
to  it ;  and  by  the  different  health  and  complexion  which  labour
and  due  exercise  create,  in  comparison  with  that  habit  of  body
we  see  consequent  to  an  indulged  state  of  indolence  and  rest.
Nor  is  the  lazy  habit  ruinous  to  the  body  only.  The  languish-
ing disease  corrupts  all  the  enjoyments  of  a  vigorous  and  healthy
sense,  and  carries  its  infection  into  the  mind,  where  it  spreads
a  worse  contagion.  For  however  the  body  may  for  awhile  hold
out,  'tis  impossible  that  the  mind,  in  which  the  distemper  is
seated,  can  escape  without  an  immediate  affliction  and  dis-
order. The habit begets a tediousness and anxiety,  which

828


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

influences  the  whole  temper,  and  converts  the  unnatural  rest
into  an  unhappy  sort  of  activity,  ill-humour,  and  spleen,  of
which  there  has  been  enough  said  above,  where  we  considered
the  want  of  a  due  balance  in  the  affections.

Tis  certain  that  as  in  the  body,  when  no  labour  or  natural
exercise  is  used,  the  spirits  which  want  their  due  employment
turn  against  the  constitution,  and  find  work  for  themselves  in
a  destructive  way ;  so  in  a  soul  or  mind  unexercised,  and  which
languishes  for  want  of  proper  action  and  employment,  the
thoughts  and  affections  being  obstructed  in  their  due  coui"se,
and  deprived  of  their  natural  energy,  raise  disquiet,  and  foment
a  rancorous  eagerness  and  tormenting  irritation.  The  temper
from  hence  becomes  more  impotent  in  passion,  more  incapable
of  real  moderation,  and,  like  prepared  fuel,  readily  takes  fire  by
the  least  spark.

As  to  interest,  how  far  it  is  here  concerned  :  how  wretched
that  state  is  in  which  by  this  habit  a  man  is  placed  towards
all  the  circumstances  and  affairs  of  life  when  at  any  time  he  is
called  to  action ;  how  subjected  he  must  be  to  all  incon-
veniencies,  wanting  to  himself,  and  deprived  of  the  assistance
of  others ;  whilst  being  unfit  for  all  offices  and  duties  of
society  he  yet  of  any  other  person  most  needs  the  help  of  it,
as  being  least  able  to  assist  or  support  himself;  all  this  is
obvious.  And  thus  'tis  evident  "that  to  have  this  over-
biassing  inclination  towards  rest,  this  slothful,  soft,  or  effeminate
temper,  averse  to  labour  and  employment,  is  to  have  an  un-
avoidable mischief  and  attendant  plague."

Thus  have  we  considered  the  self-passions,  and  what  the
consequence  is  of  their  rising  beyond  a  moderate  degree.
These  affections,  as  self-interesting  as  they  are,  can  often,  we
see,  become  contrary  to  our  real  interest.  They  betray  us
into  most  misfortunes  and  into  the  greatest  of  unhappinesses,
that  of  a  profligate  and  abject  character.  As  they  grow
imperious  and  high,  they  are  the  occasion  that  a  creature  in
proportion  becomes  mean  and  low. They  are  original  to  that

329


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

which  we  call  selfishness,  and  give  rise  to  that  sordid  disposition
of  which  we  have  already  spoken.  It  appears  there  can  be
nothing  so  miserable  in  itself,  or  so  wretched  in  its  consequence,
as  to  be  thus  impotent  in  temper,  thus  mastered  by  passion,
and  by  means  of  it  brought  under  the  most  servile  subjection
to  the  world.

'Tis  evident,  withal,  that  as  this  selfishness  increases  in  us,
so  must  a  certain  subtlety  and  feignedness  of  carriage  which
naturally  accompanies  it.  And  thus  the  candour  and  ingenuity
of  our  natures,  the  ease  and  freedom  of  our  minds,  must  be
forfeited;  all  trust  and  confidence  in  a  manner  lost,  and  sus-
picions, jealousies,  and  envies  multiplied.  A  separate  end  and
interest  must  be  every  day  more  strongly  formed  in  us ;
generous  views  and  motives  laid  aside ;  and  the  more  we  are
thus  sensibly  disjoined  every  day  from  society  and  our  fellows,
the  worse  opinion  we  shall  have  of  those  uniting  passions
which  bind  us  in  strict  alliance  and  amity  with  others.  Upon
these  terms  we  must  of  course  endeavour  to  silence  and  suppress
our  natural  and  good  affections,  since  they  are  such  as  would
carry  us  to  the  good  of  society  against  what  we  fondly
conceive  to  be  our  private  good  and  interest,  as  has  been
shown.

Now  if  these  selfish  passions,  besides  what  other  ill  they  are
the  occasion  of,  are  withal  the  certain  means  of  losing  us  our
natural  affections ;  then  (by  what  has  been  proved  before)  ^tis
evident  "  that  they  must  be  the  certain  means  of  losing  us  the
chief  enjoyment  of  life,  and  raising  in  us  those  horrid  and
unnatural  passions,  and  that  savageness  of  temper,  which  makes
the  greatest  of  miseries  and  the  most  wretched  state  of  life,""
as  remains  for  us  to  explain.

Section III

The  passions,  therefore,  which  in  the  last  place  we  are  to
examine,  are  those  which  lead  neither  to  a  public  nor  a  private

330


CONCERNING VIRTUE OR MERIT

good,  and  are  neither  of  any  advantage  to  the  species  in  general
nor  the  creature  in  particular.  These,  in  opposition  to  the  social
and  natural,  we  call  the  unnatural  affections.

Of  this  kind  is  that  unnatural  and  inhuman  delight  in  behold-
ing torments,  and  in  viewing  distress,  calamity,  blood,  massacre
and  destruction,  with  a  peculiar  joy  and  pleasure.  This  has
been  the  reigning  passion  of  many  tyrants  and  barbarous
nations,  and  belongs  in  some  degree  to  such  tempers  as  have
thrown  off"  that  courteousness  of  behaviour  which  retains  in  us
a  just  reverence  of  mankind,  and  prevents  the  growth  of
hai-shness  and  brutality.  This  passion  enters  not  where  civility
or  affable  manners  have  the  least  place.  Such  is  the  nature  of
what  we  call  good  breeding,  that  in  the  midst  of  many  other
corruptions  it  admits  not  of  inhumanity  or  savage  pleasure.
To  see  the  sufferance  of  an  enemy  with  cruel  delight  may
proceed  from  the  height  of  anger,  revenge,  fear,  and  other
extended  self-passions ;  but  to  delight  in  the  torture  and  pain
of  other  creatures  indifferently,  natives  or  foreigners,  of  our  own
or  of  another  species,  kindred  or  no  kindred,  known  or  unknown  ;
to  feed  as  it  were  on  death,  and  be  entertained  with  dying
agonies ;  this  has  nothing  in  it  accountable  in  the  way  of  self-
interest  or  private  good  above  mentioned,  but  is  wholly  and
absolutely  unnatural,  as  it  is  horrid  and  miserable.

There  is  another  affection  nearly  related  to  this,  which  is  a
gay  and  frolicsome  delight  in  what  is  injurious  to  others ;  a  sort
of  wanton  mischievousness,  and  pleasure  in  what  is  destructive ;
a  passion  which,  instead  of  being  restrained,  is  usually  encouraged
in  children ;  ^  so  that  'tis  indeed  no  wonder  if  the  effects  of  it
are  very  unfortunately  felt  in  the  world.  For  'twill  be  hard,
perhaps,  for  any  one  to  give  a  reason  why  that  temper  which
was  used  to  delight  in  disorder  and  ravage  when  in  a  nursery,

'  [This  is  one  of  the  testimonies  which  prove  a  distinct  change  for  the
better  to  have  taken  place  in  the  ordinary  parental  attitude  towards
the  characters  of  children.  Compare  Montaigne,  Essai«,  i.  xxii.  as  to
the  usages  of  his  day  :  "  It  is  a  pastime  for  mothers  to  see  a  child  wring

331


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

should  not  afterwards  find  delight  in  other  disturbances,  and  be
the  occasion  of  equal  mischief  in  families,  amongst  friends,  and
in  the  public  itself.  But  of  this  passion  there  is  not  any
foundation  in  Nature,  as  has  been  explained.

Malice,  malignity  or  ill-will,  such  as  is  grounded  on  no  self-
consideration,  and  where  there  is  no  subject  of  anger  or  jealousy,
nor  anything  to  provoke  or  cause  such  a  desire  of  doing  ill  to
another,  this  also  is  of  that  kind  of  passion.

Envy  too,  when  it  is  such  as  arises  from  the  prosperity  or
happiness  of  another  creature  no  ways  interfering  with  ours,  is
of  the  same  kind  of  passion.

There  is  also  among  these  a  sort  of  hatred  of  mankind  and
society,  a  passion  which  has  been  known  perfectly  reigning  in
some  men,  and  has  had  a  peculiar  name  given  to  it.  A  large
share  of  this  belongs  to  those  who  have  long  indulged  themselves
in  a  habitual  moroseness,  or  who  by  force  of  ill-nature  and  ill-
breeding  have  contracted  such  a  reverse  of  affability  and  civil
manners  that  to  see  or  meet  a  stranger  is  offensive.  The  very
aspect  of  mankind  is  a  disturbance  to  them,  and  they  are  sure
always  to  hate  at  first  sight.  The  distemper  of  this  kind  is
sometimes  found  to  be  in  a  manner  national,  but  peculiar  to  the
more  savage  nations,  and  a  plain  characteristic  of  uncivilised
manners  and  barbarity.  This  is  the  immediate  opposite  to
that  noble  affection  which  in  ancient  language  was  termed
hospitality,^  viz.  extensive  love  of  mankind  and  relief  of
strangers.

We  may  add  likewise  to  the  number  of  the  unnatural
passions  all  those  which  are  raised  from  superstition  (as  before
mentioned)  and  from  the  customs  of  barbarous  countries ;  all

the  neck  of  a  chicken,  and  struggle  to  hurt  a  dog  or  cat ;  and  a  father  can
be  found  fool  enough  to  take  it  as  good  promise  of  a  martial  spirit  when  he
sees  his  son  beating  a  peasant  or  a  lacquey  who  does  not  resist ;  and  as
proof  of  cleverness  when  he  sees  him  overreach  a  companion  by  some
malicious  disloyalty  or  treachery  "  (Ed.  Firmin-Didot,  1882,  vol.  i.  p.  88).
Montaigne  and  Shaftesbury  agree  in  their  comment.]
^  Misc.  iii.  ch.  i.  in  the  notes.

332


,  CONCERNING VIRTUE OR  MERIT

which  are  too  horrid  and  odious  in  themselves  to  need  any
proof  of  their  being  miserable.

There  might  be  other  passions  named,  such  as  unnatural
lusts,  in  foreign  kinds  or  species,  with  other  perversions  of  the
amorous  desire  within  our  own.  But  as  to  these  depravities  of
appetite  we  need  add  nothing  here,  after  what  has  been  already
said  on  the  subject  of  the  more  natural  passion.

Such  as  these  are  the  only  affections  or  passions  we  can
strictly  call  unnatural,  ill,  and  of  no  tendency  so  much  as  to
any  separate  or  private  good.  Others  indeed  there  are  which
have  this  tendency,  but  are  so  exorbitant  and  out  of  measure,
so  beyond  the  common  bent  of  any  ordinary  self-passion,  and  so
utterly  contrary  and  abhorrent  to  all  social  and  natural  affection,
that  they  are  generally  called,  and  may  be  justly  esteemed,
imnatural  and  monstrous.

Among  these  may  be  reckoned  such  an  enormous  pride  or
ambition,  such  an  arrogance  and  tyranny,  as  would  willingly
leave  nothing  eminent,  nothing  free,  nothing  prosperous  in  the
world ;  such  an  anger  as  would  sacrifice  everything  to  itself;
such  a  revenge  as  is  never  to  be  extinguished,  nor  ever  satisfied
without  the  greatest  cruelties ;  such  an  inveteracy  and  rancour
as  seeks,  as  it  were,  occasion  to  exert  itself,  and  lays  hold  of  the
least  subject,  so  as  often  to  make  the  weight  of  its  malevolence
fall  even  upon  such  as  are  mere  objects  of  pity  and  compassion.

Treachery  and  ingratitude  are  in  strictness  mere  negative
vices,  and  in  themselves  no  real  passions,  having  neither
aversion  nor  inclination  belonging  to  them,  but  are  derived
from  the  defect,  unsoundness,  or  corruption  of  the  affections  in
general.  But  when  these  vices  become  remarkable  in  a
character,  and  arise  in  a  manner  from  inclination  and  choice ;
when  they  are  so  forward  and  active  as  to  appear  of  their  own
accord,  without  any  pressing  occasion ;  ^tis  apparent  they
borrow  something  of  the  mere  unnatural  passions,  and  are
derived  from  malice,  envy,  and  inveteracy,  as  explained  above.

It  may  be  objected  here  that  these  passions,  unnatural  as

333


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

they  are,  cany  still  a  sort  of  pleasure  with  them,  and  that
however  barbarous  a  pleasure  it  be,  yet  still  it  is  a  pleasure  and
satisfaction  which  is  found  in  pride,  or  tyranny,  revenge,  malice,
or  cruelty  exerted.  Now  if  it  be  possible  in  Nature  that  any
one  can  feel  a  barbarous  or  malicious  joy  otherwise  than  in
consequence  of  mere  anguish  and  torment,  then  may  we  perhaps
allow  this  kind  of  satisfaction  to  be  called  pleasure  or  delight.
But  the  case  is  evidently  contrary.  To  love,  and  to  be  kind ;
to  have  social  or  natural  affection,  complacency,  and  good-will,
is  to  feel  immediate  satisfaction  and  genuine  content.  ^Tis  in
itself  original  joy,  depending  on  no  preceding  pain  or  un-
easiness, and  producing  nothing  beside  satisfaction  merely.  On
the  other  side,  animosity,  hatred,  and  bitterness,  is  original
misery  and  torment,  producing  no  other  pleasure  or  satisfaction
than  as  the  unnatural  desire  is  for  the  instant  satisfied  by  some-
thing which  appeases  it..  How  strong  soever  this  pleasure
therefore  may  appear,  it  only  the  more  implies  the  misery  of
that  state  which  produces  it.  For  as  the  cniellest  bodily  pains
do  by  intervals  of  assuagement  produce  (as  has  been  shown)  the
highest  bodily  pleasure,  so  the  fiercest  and  most  raging  torments
of  the  mind  do,  by  certain  moments  of  relief,  afford  the
greatest  of  mental  enjoyments  to  those  who  know  little  of  the
truer  kind.

The  men  of  gentlest  dispositions  and  best  of  tempers  have
at  some  time  or  other  been  sufficiently  acquainted  with  those
disturbances  which,  at  ill  hours,  even  small  occasions  are'  apt  to
raise.  Prom  these  slender  experiences  of  harshness  and  ill-
humour  they  fully  know  and  will  confess  the  ill  moments  which
are  passed  when  the  temper  is  ever  so  little  galled  or  fretted.
How  must  it  fare,  therefore,  with  those  who  hardly  know  any
better  hours  in  life,  and  who,  for  the  greatest  part  of  it,  are
agitated  by  a  thorough  active  spleen,  a  close  and  settled
malignity  and  rancour  .''  How  lively  must  be  the  sense  of  every
thwarting  and  controlling  accident  .'*  How  great  must  be  the
shocks  of  disappointment,  the  stings  of  affront,  and  the  agonies

334


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

of  a  working  antipathy,  against  the  multiplied  objects  of
offence  ?  Nor  can  it  be  wondered  at  if,  to  pei-sons  thus
agitated  and  oppressed,  it  seems  a  high  delight  to  appease  and
allay  for  the  while  those  furious  and  rough  motions,  by  an
indulgence  of  their  passion  in  mischief  and  revenge.

Now  as  to  the  consequences  of  this  unnatural  state  in
respect  of  interest  and  the  common  circumstances  of  life ;  upon
what  terms  a  person  who  has  in  this  manner  lost  all  which  we
call  Nature  can  be  supposed  to  stand  in  respect  of  the  society
of  mankind ;  how  he  feels  himself  in  it ;  what  sense  he  has  of
his  own  disposition  towards  others,  and  of  the  mutual  dis-
position of  others  towards  himself ;  this  is  easily  conceived.

What  enjoyment  or  rest  is  there  for  one  who  is  not  conscious
of  the  merited  affection  or  love,  but,  on  the  contrary,  of  the
ill-will  and  hatred  of  every  human  soul  ?  AVhat  ground  must
this  afford  for  hoiTor  and  despair  ?  What  foundation  of  fear,
and  continual  apprehension  from  mankind  and  from  superior
powers.''  How  thorough  and  deep  must  be  that  melancholy
which,  being  once  moved,  has  nothing  soft  or  pleasing  from  the
side  of  friendship  to  allay  or  divert  it  ?  Wherever  such  a
creature  turns  himself,  whichever  way  he  cast  his  eye,  everything
around  must  appear  ghastly  and  horrid ;  everything  hostile  and,
as  it  were,  bent  against  a  private  and  single  being,  who  is  thus
divided  from  everything,  and  at  defiance  and  war  with  the  rest
of  Nature.

'Tis  thus,  at  last,  that  a  mind  becomes  a  wilderness,  where
All  is  laid  waste,  everything  fair  and  goodly  removed,  and
nothing  extant  beside  what  is  savage  and  deformed.  Now  if
banishment  from  one's  country,  removal  to  a  foreign  place,  or
anything  which  looks  like  solitude  or  desertion,  be  so  heavy  to
endiu^,  what  must  it  be  to  feel  this  inward  banishment,  this
real  estrangement  from  human  commerce,  and  to  be  after  this
manner  in  a  desert,  and  in  the  horridest  of  solitudes  even  when
in  the  midst  of  society.? What  must  it  be  to hve  in this

335


SHAFTESBURY'S  CHARACTERISTICS

disagreement  with  everything,  this  irreconcilableness  and  oppo-
sition to  the  order  and  government  of  the  universe  ?

Hence  it  appears  that  the  greatest  of  miseries  accompanies
that  state  which  is  consequent  to  the  loss  of  natural  affection ;
and  that  to  have  those  horrid,  monstrous,  and  unnatural
affections  is  to  be  miserable  in  the  highest  degree.


CONCLUSION

Thus  have  we  endeavoured  to  prove  what  was  proposed  in  the
beginning.  And  since  in  the  common  and  known  sense  of  vice
and  illness,  no  one  can  be  vicious  or  ill  except  either —

1.  By  the  deficiency  or  weakness  of  natural  affections ;

Or,  2.  By  the  violence  of  the  selfish  ;

Or,  3.  By  such  as  are  plainly  unnatural ;

It  must  follow  that,  if  each  of  these  are  pernicious  and
destructive  to  the  creature,  insomuch  that  his  completest  state
of  misery  is  made  from  hence,  to  be  wicked  or  vicious  is  to
be  miserable  and  unhappy.

And  since  every  vicious  action  must  in  proportion,  more  or
less,  help  towards  this  mischief  and  self-ill,  it  must  follow  that
every  vicious  action  must  be  self-injurious  and  ill.

On  the  other  side,  the  happiness  and  good  of  virtue  has
been  proved  from  the  contrary  effect  of  other  affections,  such
as  are  according  to  Nature  and  the  economy  of  the  species  or
kind.  We  have  cast  up  all  those  particulars  from  whence  (as
by  way  of  addition  and  subtraction)  the  main  sum  or  general
account  of  happiness  is  either  augmented  or  diminished.  And
if  there  be  no  article  exceptionable  in  this  scheme  of  moral
arithmetic,  the  subject  treated  may  be  said  to  have  an  evidence
as  great  as  that  which  is  found  in  numbers  or  mathematics.
For  let  us  carry  scepticism  ever  so  far,  let  us  doubt,  if  we  can,
of  everything  about  us,  we  cannot  doubt  of  what  passes  within
ourselves. Our  passions  and  affections  are  known  to  us. They

336


CONCERNING  VIRTUE OR  MERIT

are  certain,  whatever  the  objects  may  be  on  which  they  are
employed.  Nor  is  it  of  any  concern  to  our  argument  how
these  exterior  objects  stand  :  whether  they  are  realities  or  mere
illusions ;  whether  we  wake  or  dream.  For  ill  dreams  will  be
equally  disturbing ;  and  a  good  dream  (if  life  be  nothing  else)
will  be  easily  and  happily  passed.  In  this  dream  of  life,  there-
fore, our  demonstrations  have  the  same  force ;  our  balance  and
economy  hold  good,  and  our  obligation  to  virtue  is  in  every
respect  the  same.

Upon  the  whole  there  is  not,  I  presume,  the  least  degree  of
certainty  wanting  in  what  has  been  said  concerning  the  prefer-
ableness  of  the  mental  pleasures  to  the  sensual ;  and  even  of  the
sensual,  accompanied  with  good  affection,  and  under  a  temperate
and  right  use,  to  those  which  are  no  ways  restrained,  nor
supported  by  anything  social  or  affectionate.

Nor  is  there  less  evidence  in  what  has  been  said  of  the
united  structure  and  fabric  of  the  mind,  and  of  those  passions
which  constitute  the  temper  or  soul,  and  on  which  its  happiness
or  misery  so  immediately  depend.  It  has  been  shown  that  in
this  constitution  the  impairing  of  any  one  part  must  instantly
tend  to  the  disorder  and  ruin  of  other  parts,  and  of  the  whole
itself,  through  the  necessary  connection  and  balance  of  the
affections ;  that  those  very  passions  through  which  men  are
vicious  are  of  themselves  a  torment  and  disease ;  and  that
whatsoever  is  done  which  is  knowingly  ill  must  be  of  ill
consciousness ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  act  is  ill  must  impair
and  corrupt  social  enjoyment,  and  destroy  both  the  capacity  of
kind  affection  and  the  consciousness  of  meriting  any  such.  So
that  neither  can  we  participate  thus  in  joy  or  happiness  with
others,  nor  receive  satisfaction  from  the  mutual  kindness  or
imagined  love  of  others,  on  which,  however,  the  greatest  of  all
our  pleasures  are  founded.

If  this  be  the  case  of  moral  delinquency,  and  if  the  state
which  is  consequent  to  this  defection  from  Nature  be  of  all
other  the  most  horrid,  oppressive,  and  miserable,  'twill  appear

337


SHAFtESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

"  that  to  yield  or  consent  to  anything  ill  or  immoral  is  a
breach  of  interest,  and  leads  to  the  greatest  ills  " ;  and  "  that  on
the  other  side,  everything  which  is  an  improvement  of  virtue,
or  an  establishment  of  right  affection  and  integi'ity,  is  an
advancement  of  interest,  and  leads  to  the  greatest  and  most
solid  happiness  and  enjoyment.*"

Thus  the  wisdom  of  what  rules,  and  is  first  and  chief  in
Nature,  has  made  it  to  be  according  to  the  private  interest  and
good  of  every  one  to  work  towards  the  general  good,  which  if
a  creature  ceases  to  promote,  he  is  actually  so  far  wanting  to
himself,  and  ceases  to  promote  his  own  happiness  and  welfare.
He  is  on  this  account  directly  his  own  enemy,  nor  can  he
any  otherwise  be  good  or  useful  to  himself  than  as  he  continues
good  to  society,  and  to  that  whole  of  which  he  is  himself  a
part.  So  that  virtue,  which  of  all  excellences  and  beauties  is
the  chief  and  most  amiable;  that  which  is  the  prop  and
ornament  of  human  affairs ;  which  upholds  communities,  main-
tains union,  friendship,  and  correspondence  amongst  men ;  that
by  which  countries,  as  well  as  private  families,  flourish  and  are
happy,  and  for  want  of  which  everything  comely,  conspicuous,
great,  and  worthy,  must  perish  and  go  to  ruin  ;  that  single
quality,  thus  beneficial  to  all  society,  and  to  mankind  in  general,
is  found  equally  a  happiness  and  good  to  each  creature  in  par-
ticular, and  is  that  by  which  alone  man  can  be  happy,  and
without  which  he  must  be  miserable.

And  thus  virtue  is  the  good,  and  vice  the  ill  of  every  one.


END OF VOL. I


Ptinttdby  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh.
