CHARACTERISTICS OF MEN, MANNERS, OPINIONS, TIMES, ETC. — VOL. II
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/characteristicso02shaf): edited with introduction and notes by John M. Robertson (London: Grant Richards, 1900), vol. II.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SHAFTESBURY'S
CHARACTERISTICS


CHARACTERISTICS


OF


Men, Manners, Opinions,
Times,  etc.

By  the  Right  Honourable
ANTHONY  EARL  OF  SHAFTESBURY


EDITED,  WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES,  BY

JOHN M. ROBERTSON


IN 71V0 rOLUMES

VOL. II


London
GRANT RICHARDS

1900


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2008  with  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/characteristicso02shaf


CONTENTS


LMJVERSJ I 'i OJ (VIJFOf
SAMA  UAKiiAia


TREATISE V

The  Moralists,  A Piiii,osoi'iiir\i. Il^AI'son^■


I'aut

I.

— .Section

I

}}

11

})

III

Part

II.

— Section

I

}}

11

))

III

j>

IV

>y

V

Part

III.

— Section

I

93

11
III

3
10

20

20
40
47
GO
84

95
124
145


TREATISE VI

Miscellaneous  Reflections  on  the Preceding  Treatises,  etc.

MISCELLANY  I
CHAPTER I

Of  the  nature,  rise,  and  estal)lishnient  of  Miscellanies — Tlie  subject

of  these  which  follow — Intention  of  the  writer .  .  . 157


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


CHAPTER II

PAflK

Of  controversial  writings:  answers:  replies — I'oleiiiio  divinity,  or
tlie  writing  Church  militant — i'liilosophers,  and  l)ear  ^'arden —
Authors  paired  aiul  matched — The  matchmakers — Foi.thall — A
dialogue  between  our  author  and  his  bookseller  .  ,  . IGl


CHAPTER III

Of  the  letter  concerning  Enthusiasm — Foreign  critics — Of  letters  in
general,  ;nid  of  the  epistolary  style — Addresses  to  great  men —
Authors  and  horsemanship — The  modern  amble — Further  ex-
planation of  tJie  miscellaneous  manner .... 16G


MISCELLANY  II


CHAPTER I

Review  of  Entliusiasm — Its  defence,  praise — Use  in  business  as  well
as  pleasure — Operation  by  fear.  Love — Modifications  of  en-
thusiasm ;  magnanimity  ;  heroic  virtue  ;  lionour  ;  public  zeal  ;
religion;  superstition;  persecution;  martyrdom — Energy  of  the
ecstatic  devotion  in  the  tender  sex  Account  of  ancient  priest-
hood—  Religious  war — Reference  to  a  succeeding  chapter  . ]7'3


CHAPTER II

Judgment  of  divines  and  grave  authors  concerning  Enthusiasm —
Reflections  upon  scepticism — A  sceptic  Christian — Judgment
of  the  inspired  concerning  their  own  inspirations — Knov\  ledge
and  belief — History  of  religion  resumed — Zeal  offensive  and
defensive — A  Church  in  danger — Persecution— Policy  of  tJie
Church  of  Ronu' ....... 1!W

vi


CONTENTS


CHyM'TKK HI

PAGE

Of  tlie  force  of  liuniour  in  it'liifidii  — Supimrt  of  our  autlior's  iirj^u-
nieiit  ill  his  essay  »»n  the  fret'doni  of  wit  and  raillery— Zeal  dis-
cussed. Spiritual  sur:;eoiis  ;  e.\e(;utioiiers  ;  carvers  —  ()ri;^iiial
of  human  sacrifice — Exiiilaration  of  relijfion — Various  aspects
from  outward  causes  .  .  . 2\o


MISCELLANY  III


CHAPTER I

Kurtlier  remarks  on  the  author  of  the  treatises — Ilis  order  and  design
— His  remarks  on  tlie  succession  of  wit,  and  proijress  of  letters,
and  philosophy  —  Of  words,  relations,  affections  —  Countrymen
and  country — Old  England — Patriots  of  the  soil — \'irtuosi  and
philosophers— A  taste ...... 'IVtl


CHAPTER II

Explanation  of  a  taste  continued — Ridiculers  of  it — Their  wit  and
sinceritx' — .A])p]ication  of  the  taste  to  affairs  of  (io\ernnient  and
politics  —  Imaginary  characters  in  the  State— A'oung  nohility
and  gentry — Pursuit  of  heauty — Preparation  for  philosophy  liofj


MISCELLAXY  IV


CHAPTER 1

Coiuiection  and  union  of  the  suhject-treatises — Philosophy  in  form-
Metaphysics^  Egoity— Identity — Moral  footing — Proof  and  dis-
cipline of  the  fancies — Settlement  of  opinion — Anatomv  of  the
mind — A  fahle ....... 'I't'-i

vii


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


CHAPTER II

PAGE

Passage  from  terra  hicognitu  to  tlie  visible  world — Mistress-ship  (»f
nature — Animal  confederacy^  degrees,  subordination — Master
animal  man — Privilege  of  his  birth — Serious  countenance  of  the
author ........ 286


MISCELLANY V

CHAPTER I

Ceremonial  adjusted  between  author  and  reader — Affectation  of  pre-
cedency in  the  former — Various  claims  to  inspiration — Bards,
])ropliets.  Sibylline  Scripture — "Written  oracles,  in  verse  and
j)rose — Common  interest  of  ancient  letters  and  Christianity —
State  of  wit,  elegance,  and  correctness — Poetic  truth — Prepara-
tion for  criticism  on  our  author  in  his  concluding  treatise  . 29G

CHAPTER II

Generation  and  succession  of  our  national  and  modern  wit^Manners
of  the  proprietors — Corporation  and  joint  stock — Statute  against
criticism — A  coffee-house  committee— Mr.  Bays — Other  Bays'
in  divinity — Censure  of  our  author's  dialogue  piece,  and  of  tlie
manner  of  dialogue  writing  used  by  reverend  wits  .  . 324

CHAPTER III

Of  extent  or  latitude  of  thought — Free-thinkers — Tlieir  cause  and
character — Dishonesty,  a  half-thought — Short-thinking,  cause  of
vice  and  l)igotry — Agreementof  slavery  and  superstition — Liberty,
civil,  moral,  spiritual  -Free-thinking  divines — Representatives
incognito — Ambassadors  from  the  moon — Effectual  determination
of  Christian  controversy  and  religious  belief .  .  . .'341


Vlll


TREATISE V

THE MORALISTS,

A  Philosophical  Rhapsody

BEING

A  Recital  of  certain  Conversations  on  Natural
and  JNIoral  Subjects


Inter  silvas  Academi  quaerere  verum.

Hor.  £p.  II.  ii.


Published  in  the  year  MDCCIX.


vol. II


THE MORALISTS,
A PHILOSOPHICAL RHAPSODY

PART  I

Skctiox  I

P/i'doclcs  to  Pakiiiuii

What  mortal,  it'  lie  had  never  chanced  to  hear  your  character,
Palemon,  could  imagine  that  a  genius  fitted  for  the  greatest
affairs,  and  formed  amidst  courts  and  camps,  should  have  so
violent  a  turn  towards  philosophy  and  the  schools  r  Who  is
there  could  possibly  believe  that  one  of  yoin*  rank  and  credit
in  the  fashionable  world  should  be  so  thoroughly  conversant
in  the  learned  one,  and  deeply  interested  in  the  affairs  of  a
people  so  disagreeable  to  the  generality  of  mankind  and  humoui'
of  the  age  ?

I  believe,  truly,  you  are  the  only  well-bred  man  who  would
have  taken  the  fancy  to  talk  philosophy  in  such  a  circle  of  good
company  as  we  had  round  us  yesterday,  when  we  were  in  your
coach  together,  in  the  Park.  How  you  could  reconcile  the
objects  there  to  such  subjects  as  these  was  unaccountable.  I
could  only  conclude,  that  either  you  had  an  extravagant  passion
for  philosophy,  to  {|uit  so  many  charms  for  it,  or  that  some  of
those  tender  charms  had  an  extravagant  effect,  which  sent  you
to  philoso}:)hy  for  relief.

In  either  case  I  pitied  you ;  thinking  it  a  milder  fate  to
be,  as  I  truly  was  for  my  own  part,  a  more  indifferent  lover.

3


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

'Twas  better,  I  told  you,  to  admire  beauty  and  wisdom  a  little
more  moderately.  ""Twas  better,  I  maintained,  to  engage  so
cautiously  as  to  be  sure  of  coming  off  with  a  whole  heart,  and
a  fancy  as  strong  as  ever  towards  all  the  pretty  entertainments
and  diversions  of  the  world.  For  these,  methought,  were  things
one  would  not  willingly  part  with  for  a  fine  romantic  passion
of  one  of  those  gentlemen  whom  they  called  virtuosi.

The  name  I  took  to  belong  in  common  to  your  lover  and
philosopher;  no  matter  what  the  object  was,  whether  poetry,
music,  philosophy,  or  the  fair.  All  who  were  enamoured  any-
way were  in  the  same  condition.  You  might  perceive  it,  I
told  you,  by  their  looks,  their  admiration,  their  profound
thoughtfulness,  their  waking  ever  and  anon  as  out  of  a  dream,
their  talking  still  of  one  thing,  and  scarce  minding  what  they
said  on  any  other  subject — sad  indications  !

But  all  this  warning  served  not  to  deter  you.  For  you,
Palemon,  are  one  of  the  adventurous,  whom  danger  rather
animates  than  discourages.  And  now  nothing  less  will  satisfy
you  than  to  have  our  philosophical  adventures  recorded.  All
must  be  laid  before  you  and  summed  in  one  complete  account ;
to  remain,  it  seems,  as  a  monument  of  that  unseasonable  con-
versation so  opposite  to  the  reigning  genius  of  gallantry  and
pleasure.

I  must  own,  indeed,  'tis  become  fashionable  in  our  nation
to  talk  politics  in  every  company,  and  mix  the  discourses  of
State  affairs  with  those  of  pleasure  and  entertainment.  How-
ever, 'tis  certain  we  apjirove  of  no  such  freedom  in  philosophy.
Nor  do  we  look  upon  politics  to  be  of  her  province,  or  in  the
least  related  to  her.  So  much  have  we  moderns  degraded  her,
and  stripped  her  of  her  chief  rights.

You  must  allow  me,  Palemon,  thus  to  bemoan  philosophy,
since  you  have  forced  me  to  engage  with  her  at  a  time  when
her  credit  runs  so  low.  She  is  no  longer  active  in  the  world,
nor  can  hardly,  with  any  advantage,  be  brought  upon  the
public  stage. We  have  immured  her,  poor  lady,  in  colleges


THE MORALISTS

and  cells,  and  have  set  her  servilely  to  sut-h  works  as  those  in
the  mines.  Empirics  and  })edantic  sophists  are  her  chief  pupils.
The  school -syl loo-ism  and  the  elixir  are  the  choicest  of  her
products.  So  far  is  she  from  producinf^  statesmen,  as  of  old,
that  hardly  any  man  of  note  in  the  public  cares  to  own  the
least  obligation  to  her.  If  some  few  maintain  their  ac-
quaintance, and  come  now  and  then  to  her  recesses,  "'tis  as  the
disciple  of  cjuality  came  to  his  lord  and  master,  "secretlv,  and
by  night."

But  as  low  as  philosophy  is  reduced,  if  morals  be  allowed
belonging  to  her,  politics  must  undeniably  be  hers.  For  to
understand  the  manners  and  constitutions  of  men  in  common,
'tis  necessary  to  study  man  in  particular,  and  know  the  creature
as  he  is  in  himself,  before  we  consider  him  in  company,  as  he
is  interested  in  the  State,  or  joined  to  any  city  or  community.
Nothing  is  more  familiar  than  to  reason  concerning  man  in  liis
confederate  state  and  national  relation,  as  he  stands  ensatjed
to  this  or  that  society,  by  birth  or  naturalisation ;  yet  to
consider  him  as  a  citizen  or  commoner  of  the  world,  to  trace
his  pedigree  a  step  higher,  and  view  his  end  and  constituti(m
in  Nature  itself,  must  pass,  it  seems,  for  some  intricate  or
over-refined  speculation.

It  may  be  properly  alleged  perhaps,  as  a  reason  for  this
general  shyness  in  moral  inquiries,  that  the  people  to  whom  it
has  principally  belonged  to  handle  these  subjects  have  done  it
in  such  a  manner  as  to  put  the  better  sort  out  of  countenance
with  the  undertaking.  The  appropriating  this  concern  to
mere  scholastics  has  brought  their  fashion  and  air  into  the
very  subject.  There  are  formal  set-places  where,  we]  reckon,
there  is  eno\io;h  said  and  taught  on  the  head  of  these  graver
subjects.  We  can  give  no  cjuarter  to  anything  like  it  in  good
company.  The  least  mention  of  such  matters  gives  us  a
disgust,  and  puts  us  out  of  humour.  If  learning  comes  across
us,  we  count  it  pedantry;  if  morality,  "'tis  preaching.

One  must  own  this,  however,  as  a  real  disadvantage  of  our

5


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

modern  conversations,  that  by  such  a  scrupiilons  nicety  they
Jose  those  masculine  helps  of  learning  and  sound  reason.  Even
the  fair  sex,  in  whose  favour  we  pretend  to  make  this  con-
descension, may  with  reason  despise  us  for  it,  and  laugh  at  us
for  aiming  at  their  peculiar  softness.  'Tis  no  compliment  to
them  to  affect  their  manners  and  be  effeminate.  Our  sense,
language,  and  style,  as  well  as  our  voice  and  person,  should
have  something  of  that  male-feature  and  natural  roughness
by  which  our  sex  is  distinguished.  And  whatever  politeness
we  may  pretend  to,  'tis  more  a  disfigurement  than  any  real
refinement  of  discourse  to  render  it  thus  delicate.

No  work  of  wit  can  be  esteemed  perfect  without  that
strength  and  boldness  of  hand  which  gives  it  body  and  pro-
portions. A  good  piece,  the  painters  say,  must  have  good
muscling  as  well  as  colouring  and  drapery.  And  surely  no
writing  or  discourse  of  any  great  moment  can  seem  other  than
enervated  when  neither  strong  reason,  nor  antiquity,  nor
the  records  of  things,  nor  the  natural  history  of  man,  nor
anything  which  can  be  called  knowledge,  dares  accompany  it,
except  perhaps  in  some  ridiculous  habit,  which  may  give  it  an
air  of  play  and  dalliance.

This  brings  to  my  mind  a  reason  I  have  often  sought  for,
why  we  moderns  who  abound  so  much  in  treatises  and  essays
are  so  sparing  in  the  way  of  dialogue,^  which  heretofore  was
found  the  politest  and  best  way  of  managing  even  the  graver
subjects.  The  truth  is,  'twould  be  an  abominable  falsehood
and  belying  of  the  age  to  put  so  much  good  sense  together
in  any  one  conversation  as  might  make  it  hold  out  steadily
and  with  plain  coherence  for  an  hour's  time,  till  any  one  subject
had  been  rationally  examined.'^

To  lay  colours,  to  draw,  or  describe,  against  the  a]:)pearance
of  nature  and  truth,  is  a  liberty  neither  permitted  the  painter

^  Advice  to  an  Autlior,  part  i.  §  8  ;  Misc.  v.  ch.  ii.

^  [Compare  Swift's  Polite  Conversutioit,  and  Hints  towards  an  Essay  on
Conversation.]

6


THE MOKALTSTS

nor  the  ^ut.  Much  less  can  the  philosoplier  have  such  a
privilege,  especially  in  his  own  case.  If  he  ivpresents  his
philosophy  as  niaking  any  figure  in  conversation,  it"  he  triunij}h.s
in  the  debate,  and  gives  his  own  wisdom  the  advantage  over
that  of  the  world,  he  may  be  liable  to  sound  raillery,  and
possibly  be  made  a  fable  of.

'Tis  said  of  the  lion,  that  being  in  civil  conference  with
the  man,  he  wisely  refused  to  yield  the  superiority  of  strength
to  him,  when  instead  of  fact  the  man  ])roduceil  onlv  certain
figures  and  representations  of  human  victories  over  the  lion-
kind.  These  master-pieces  of  art  the  beast  discovered  to  be
wholly  of  human  forgery ;  and  from  these  he  had  good  right
to  appeal.  Indeed  had  he  ever  in  his  life  been  witness  to  any
such  combats  as  the  man  represented  to  him  in  the  way  of  art,
possibly  the  example  might  have  moved  him.  But  old  statues
of  a  Hercules,  a  Theseus,  or  other  beast-subduers,  could  have
little  power  over  him,  whilst  he  neither  saw  nor  felt  any  such
living  antagonist  capable  to  dispute  the  field  with  him.

AVe  need  not  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  sort  of  moral
])ainting,  by  way  of  dialogue,  is  so  much  out  of  fashion,  and
that  we  see  no  more  of  these  philosophical  portraitures  nowa-
days. For  where  are  the  originals  ?  Or  what  though  vou,
Palemon,  or  I,  by  chance,  have  lighted  on  such  a  one,  and
pleased  ourselves  with  the  life  ?  Can  you  imagine  it  should
make  a  good  ])icture  ?

You  know,  too,  that  in  this  academic  philosophy  I  am  to
present  you  with,  there  is  a  certain  way  of  questioning  and
doubting,  which  no  way  suits  the  genius  of  our  age.  Men  love
to  take  ]mrty  instantly.  They  cannot  bear  being  ke])t  in
suspense.  The  examination  torments  them.  They  want  to
be  rid  of  it  upon  the  easiest  terms.  'Tis  as  if  men  fancied
themselves  drowning  whenever  they  dare  trust  to  the  current
of  reason.  They  seem  hurrying  away  they  know  not  whither,
and  are  ready  to  catch  at  the  first  twig.  There  they  choose
afterwards to hang, though ever  so insecurely, rather than

7


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

trust  their  strength  to  bear  them  above  water.  He  who  has
got  hold  of  an  hypothesis,  how  slight  soever,  is  satisfied.  He
can  presently  answer  every  objection,  and,  with  a  few  terms
of  art,  give  an  account  of  everything  without  trouble.

'Tis  no  wonder  if  in  this  age  the  philosophy  of  the
alchemists  prevails  so  much,^  since  it  promises  such  wonders,
and  requires  more  the  labour  of  hands  than  brains.  We  have
a  strange  fancy  to  be  creators,  a  violent  desire  at  least  to  know
the  knack  or  secret  by  which  Nature  does  all.  The  rest  of
our  philosophers  only  aim  at  that  in  speculation  which  our
alchemists  aspire  to  in  practice.  For  with  some  of  these  it
has  been  actually  under  deliberation  how  to  make  Man,  by
other  mediums  than  Nature  has  hitherto  provided.  Every
sect  has  a  recipe.  When  you  know  it,  you  are  master  of
Nature :  you  solve  all  her  phenomena,-  you  see  all  her  designs,
and  can  account  for  all  her  operations.  If  need  were  you
might  perchance,  too,  be  of  her  laboratory  and  work  for  her.
At  least  one  would  imagine  the  partizans  of  each  modern
sect  had  this  conceit.  They  are  all  Archimedeses  in  their
way,  and  can  make  a  world  upon  easier  terms  than  he  offered
to  move  one.

In  short,  there  are  good  reasons  for  our  being  thus  super-
ficial, and  consequently  thus  dogmatical  in  philosophy.  We
are  too  lazy  and  effeminate,  and  withal  a  little  too  cowardly,
to  dare  doubt. The  decisive  way  best  becomes  our  manners.

^  [Boyle  himself,  who  was  at  his  strongest  in  chemistry,  left  to  his
executors  at  his  death,  in  1691,  a  quantity  of  red  earth  "  with  directions
for  endeavouring-  to  turn  it  into  gold."  Locke,  however,  seems  to  have
been  persuaded  by  Newton  to  give  up  the  experiment  as  useless.  See
Fox  Bourne's  Life  of  Locke,  ii.  223-225.  The  correspondence  of  Spinoza
{Epp.  xlv.  and  Ixvi.  B.,1G67  and  1675)  mentions  similar  instances  of  credulity
among  his  friends.  It  appears  that  his  correspondent  Schaller,  a  qualified
physician,  believed  he  had  "  made  gold  "  by  a  certain  process.  Spinoza,
like  Newton,  was  finally  quite  incredulous.  Doubtless  the  prevalent  opinion
a  generation  later  was  still  on  the  side  of  fallacy.]

2  See  Misc.  iii.  ch.  i.

8


THE MORATJSTS

It  suits  as  well  willi  our  vices  as  with  our  sujjerslition.  W'liicli-
ever  we  are  foiul  of  is  secured  by  it.  If  in  favour  of  relitrioii
we  have  espoused  an  livpothesis  on  which  oiu"  faitli,  we  think,
depends,  we  are  superstitiously  careful  not  to  be  loosened  in  it.
If,  by  means  of  our  ill  morals,  we  are  broken  with  reli<;ion,  'tis
the  same  case  still :  we  are  as  nnuh  afraid  of  doubting.  We
must  be  sure  to  say,  "  It  cannot  be,"  and  "  'tis  demonstrable.
For  otherwise  who  knows  .^ And  not  to  know  is  to  yield  !"

Thus"  we  will  needs  know  evervthing-,  and  be  at  the  ])ains
of  examining-  nothing.  Of  all  philoso])hy,  theref(n-e,  liow
absolutely  the  most  disagreeable  nuist  that  appear  which  goes
upon  no  established  livpothesis,  nor  presents  us  with  any  flatter-
ing scheme,  talks  only  of  probabilities,  suspense  of  judgment,
inquiry,  search,  and  caution  not  to  be  imposed  on  or  deceived  .''
This  is  that  academic  disci})line  in  which  formerly  the  youth
were  trained;^  when  not  only  horsemanship  and  military  arts
had  their  public  ])laccs  of  exercise,  but  philosophy  too  had
its  wrestlers  in  repute.  Reason  and  Wit  had  tlieir  academy,
and  underwent  this  trial,  not  in  a  formal  way,  apart  from  the
world,  but  openly,  among  the  better  sort,  and  as  an  exercise
of  the  o-enteeler  kind.  This  the  greatest  men  were  not  ashamed
to  practise  in  the  intervals  of  public  affairs,  in  the  highest
stations  and  employments,  and  at  the  latest  hour  of  their  lives.
Hence  that  way  of  dialogue,  and  patience  of  debate  and  reason-
ino-,  of  which  we  have  scarce  a  resemblance  left  in  any  of  our
conversations  at  this  season  of  the  world.

Consider  then,  Palemon,  what  our  picture  is  like  to  pro\e,
and  how  it  will  a])pear,  especially  in  the  light  you  have  un-
luckily chosen  to  set  it.  For  who  would  thus  have  confronted
philosophy  with  the  gaiety,  wit,  and  humovn"  of  the  age  ?  If
this,  however,  can  be  for  your  credit  I  am  content.  The
project  is  your  own.  'Tis  you  who  have  matched  philosophy
thus  unequally.  Therefore  leaving  you  to  answer  for  the
success,  I  begin  this  inauspicious  work,  which  my  ill  stars  and
'  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  S,  and  notes.

9


SHAFTESBURY'S CHATIACTERTSTICS

you  have  assigned  me,  and  in  which  I  hardly  dare  ask  succour
of  the  Muses,  as  ])oetical  as  I  am  obliged  to  show  myself  in
this  enterprise.

Sectiox II

"  O  WRETCHED  statc  of  mankind  !  Hapless  Nature,  thus  to  have
erred  in  thy  chief  workmanship !  Whence  s})rang  this  fatal
weakness  ?  What  chance  or  destiny  shall  we  accuse  ?  Or
shall  we  mind  the  poets  when  they  sing  thy  tragedy,  Pro-
metheus !  who  with  thy  stolen  celestial  fire,  mixed  with  vile
clay,  didst  mock  heaven"'s  countenance,  and  in  abusive  likeness
of  the  immortals  madest  the  compound  man  :  that  wretched
mortal,  ill  to  himself,  and  cause  of  ill  to  all."

What  say  you,  Palemon,  to  this  rant,  now  upon  second
thoughts  ?  Or  have  you  forgot  'twas  just  in  such  a  romantic
strain  that  you  broke  out  against  human  kind,  upon  a  day  when
everything  looked  pleasing,  and  the  kind  itself,  I  thought,  never
appeared  fairer  or  made  a  better  show.

But  'twas  not  the  whole  creation  you  thus  quarrelled  with,
nor  were  you  so  out  of  conceit  with  all  beauty.  The  verdure
of  the  field,  the  distant  prospects,  the  gilded  horizon  and  purple
sky,  formed  by  a  setting  sun,  had  charms  in  abundance,  and
were  able  to  make  impression  on  you.  Here,  Palemon,  you
allowed  me  to  admire  as  much  as  I  pleased,  when,  at  the  same
instant,  you  would  not  bear  my  talking  to  you  of  those  nearer
beauties  of  our  own  kind,  which  I  thought  more  natural  for  men
at  our  age  to  admire.  Your  severity  however  could  not  silence
me  upon  this  subject.  I  continued  to  plead  the  cause  of  the
fair,  and  advance  their  charms  above  all  those  other  beauties  of
Nature.  And  when  you  took  advantage  from  this  opposition
to  show  how  little  there  was  of  Nature  and  how  much  of  Art  in
what  I  admired,  I  made  the  best  apology  I  could,  and  fighting  for
beauty,  kept  the  field  as  long  as  there  was  one  fair  one  present.

Considering  how  your  genius  stood  inclined to jjoetry, I

10


THE ArORATJSTS

woiulert'cl  most  to  find  you  on  a  sudden  <>;i"o\vn  so  out  of  conceit
witli  our  iiiodcni  [)()C'ts  und  guihintc  writers,  whom  1  (juoted  to
you  Jis  better  authorities  than  any  ancient  in  behalf  of"  the
fair  sex  and  their  prerogative,  liut  this  you  treated  slightly.
You  acknowledged  it  to  be  true  indeed,  what  had  been  observed
by  some  late  wits,  "  that  gallantry  was  of  a  modern  growth."
And  well  it  might  be  so,  you  thought,  Avithout  dishonour  to  the
ancients,  who  understood  Truth  and  Nature  too  well  to  admit
so  ritliculous  an  invention.

'Twas  in  vain,  therefore,  that  I  held  u])  this  shield  in  my
defence.  I  did  my  cause  no  service,  when  in  behalf  of  the
fair  I  pleaded  all  the  fine  things  which  are  usually  said  in
this  romantic;  way  to  their  advantage.  You  attacked  the  very
fortress  of  gallantry,  ridiculed  the  point  of  honour,  with  all
those  nice  sentiments  and  ceremonials  belonging  to  it.  You
damned  even  our  favourite  novels :  those  dear,  sweet,  natural
pieces,  writ  most  of  them  by  the  fair  sex  themselves.  In  short,
this  whole  order  and  scheme  of  wit  you  condemned  absolutely
as  felse,  monstrous,  and  Gothic  ;  quite  out  of  the  way  of  Nature,
and  sprung  from  the  mere  dregs  of  chivalry  or  knight-errantry  :
a  thing  which  in  itself  you  preferred,  as  of  a  better  taste  than
that  which  reigns  at  present  in  its  stead.  For  at  a  time  when
this  mystery  of  gallantry  carried  along  with  it  the  notion  of
doughty  knighthood,  when  the  fair  were  made  witnesses  and,  in
a  manner,  parties  to  feats  of  arms,  entered  into  all  the  ])oints  of
war  and  combat,  and  were  won  by  dint  of  lance  and  manly
prowess,  'tw^as  not  altogether  absurd,  you  thought,  on  such  a
foundation  as  this,  to  pay  them  homage  and  adoration,  make
them  the  standard  of  wit  and  manners,  and  bring  mankind
under  their  laws.  But  in  a  country  where  no  she-saints  were
worshipped  by  any  authority  from  religion,  "'twas  as  impertinent
and  senseless  as  it  was  profane  to  deify  the  sex,  raise  them  to
a  capacity  above  what  Nature  had  allow^ed,  and  treat  them  w  ith  a
respect  whicli  in  the  natural  way  of  lo\e  they  themselves  were
the  aptest  to  complain  of.

11


SHAFTESBURY'S CHAKACTERISTICS

Indeed  as  for  the  moral  part,  'twas  wonderful,  you  said,  to
observe  the  licentiousness  which  this  foppish,  courtly  humour
had  established  in  the  world.  AVhat  such  a  flattering  way  of
address  to  all  the  sex  in  common  could  mean  you  knew  not,
unless  it  were  to  render  them  wholly  common  indeed,  and
make  each  fair  one  apprehend  that  the  public  had  a  right  to
her,  and  that  beauty  Avas  too  communicative  and  divine  a  thing
to  be  made  a  property  and  confined  to  one  at  once.

Meanwhile  our  company  began  to  leave  us.  The  heaii-monde^
whom  you  had  been  thus  severely  censuring,  drew  off  apace,  for
it  grew  late.  I  took  notice  that  the  approaching  objects  of  the
night  were  the  more  agreeable  to  you  for  the  solitude  they
introduced,  and  that  the  moon  and  planets  which  began  now  to
appear  were  in  reality  the  only  proper  company  for  a  man  in
your  humour.  For  now  you  began  to  talk  with  much  satis-
faction of  natural  things,  and  of  all  orders  of  beauties,  man
only  excepted.  Never  did  I  hear  a  finer  description  than  you
made  of  the  order  of  the  heavenly  luminaries,  the  circles  of  the
planets,  and  their  attendant  satellites.  And  you  who  would
allow  nothing  to  those  fair  earthly  luminaries  in  the  circles
which  just  now  we  moved  in ;  you,  Palemon,  who  seemed  to
overlook  the  pride  of  that  theatre,  began  now  to  look  out
with  ravishment  on  this  other,  and  triumph  in  the  new
philosophical  scene  of  worlds  vniknown.  Here,  when  you  had
pretty  well  spent  the  first  fire  of  your  imagination,  I  would
have  got  you  to  reason  more  calmly  with  me  u])on  that  other
]jart  of  the  creation,  your  own  kind,  to  which,  I  told  you,  you
discovered  so  much  aversion  as  would  make  one  believe  you  a
complete  Timon  or  man-hater,

"  Can  you  then,  O  Philocles,"  said  you  in  a  high  strain,  and
with  a  moving  air  of  passion — "  can  you  believe  me  of  that
character  ?  or  can  you  think  it  of  me  in  earnest,  that  ])eing
man,  and  conscious  of  my  nature,  I  should  have  yet  so  little  of
humanity  as  not  to  feel  the  affections  of  a  man  ?  or  feeling
what  is  natural towards my kind, that I should hold  their

12


THE MORALISTS

interest  light,  and  be  indificrently  afl'ectcd  \vitli  what  affects  or
seriously  concerns  them  ?  Am  I  so  ill  a  lover  of  my  country  ?
or  is  it  that  you  find  mc  indeed  so  ill  a  friend  ?  For  what  are
all  relations  else  ?  What  are  the  ties  of  })rivate  friendship  if
that  to  mankind  be  not  obligino-  ?  Can  there  be  yet  a  bond  in
Nature  if  that  be  none?  O  Philocles  !  believe  me  when  I  say  I
feel  it  one,  and  fully  pro\e  its  power  within  me.  Think  not
that  I  would  willingly  break  my  chain ;  nor  count  me  so  ■
degenerate  or  muiatural  as  whilst  I  hold  this  form  and  wear  a  '
human  heart  I  should  throw  off'  love,  compassion,  kindness,
and  not  befriend  mankind.  But  oh  !  what  treacheries  !  what
disorders !  and  how  corrupt  is  all  !  .  .  .  Did  you  not  observe
even  now,  when  all  this  space  was  filled  with  goodly  rows  of
company,  how  peaceful  all  appeared.  .  .  .  What  charms  there
are  in  public  companies  !  What  harmony  in  courts  and  courtly
places  !  How  pleased  is  every  face  !  how  courteous  and  humane
the  general  carriage  and  behaviour  !  .  .  .  What  creature  capable
of  reflection,  if  he  thus  saw  us  mankind,  and  saw  no  more,
would  not  believe  our  earth  a  very  heaven  ?  What  foreigner
(the  inhabitant,  suppose,  of  some  near  planet)  when  he  had
travelled  hither,  and  surveyed  this  outward  face  of  things,
would  think  of  what  lay  hid  beneath  the  mask  ?  But  let
him  stay  awhile.  Allow  him  leisure,  till  he  has  gained  a
nearer  view,  and  following  our  dissolved  assemblies  to  their
particular  recesses,  he  has  the  power  of  seeing  them  in  this  new
aspect.  .  .  .  Here  he  may  behold  those  great  men  of  the
Ministry,  who  not  an  hour  ago  in  public  appeared  such  friends,
now  plotting  craftily  each  others  ruin,  with  the  ruin  of  the  State
itself,  a  sacrifice  to  their  ambition.  Here  he  may  see  too  those
of  a  softer  kind,  who  knowing  not  ambition,  follow  only  love.
Yet,  Philocles,  who  would  think  it  .^ "  .  . .

At  these  words,  you  may  remember,  I  discovered  the
lightness  of  my  temper  and  laughed  aloud,  which  I  could
hardly  hope  you  would  have  pardoned  had  I  not  freely  told
you  the  true  reason. 'Twas  not  for  want  of  being  affected  with

13


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

what  you  spoke.  I  only  imagined  a  more  particular  cause  had
provoked  you,  when  having  passed  over  the  ambitious,  you  were
coming  full-charged  against  the  people  of  a  softer  passion.  At
first  I  looked  on  you  as  deeply  in  the  spleen,  but  now  I  concluded
you  in  love,  and  so  unhappily  engaged  as  to  have  reason  to
complain  of  infidelity.  "  This,"  thought  I,  "  has  moved  Palemon
thus.  Hence  the  sad  world  !  Here  was  that  corruption,  and
those  disorders  he  lamented  !  "

After  I  had  begged  pardon  for  my  rude  mirth,  which  had
the  good  fortune  however  to  make  some  change  in  your  humour,
we  fell  naturally  into  cool  reasoning  about  the  nature  and
cause  of  ill  in  general :  "  through  what  contingency,  what
chance,  by  what  fatal  necessity,  what  will,  or  what  permission
it  came  upon  the  world,  or  being  come  once,  should  still  subsist."
This  inquiry, '^  which  with  slight  reasoners  is  easily  got  over,
stuck  hard,  I  found,  with  one  of  your  close  judgment  and
penetration.  And  this  insensibly  led  us  into  a  nice  criticism
of  Nature,  whom  you  sharply  arraigned  for  many  absurdities  you
thought  her  guilty  of,  in  relation  to  mankind,  and  his  peculiar
state.

Fain  would  I  have  persuaded  you  to  think  with  more
equality  of  Nature,  and  to  proportion  her  defects  a  little  better.
My  notion  was,  that  the  grievance  lay  not  altogether  in  one
part,  as  you  placed  it,  but  that  everything  had  its  share  of
inconvenience  :  pleasure  and  pain,  beauty  and  deformity,  good
and  ill,  seemed  to  me  everywhere  interwoven ;  and  one  with
another  made,  I  thought,  a  pretty  mixture,  agreeable  enough
in  the  main.  'Twas  the  same,  I  fancied,  as  in  some  of  those
rich  stuff's  where  the  flowers  and  ground  were  oddly  put  together
with  such  irregular  work  and  contrary  colours  as  looked  ill  in
the  pattern,  but  mighty  natural  and  well  in  the  piece.

But  you  Avere  still  upon  extremes.  Nothing  would  serve  to
excuse  the  faults  or  blemishes  of  this  part  of  the  creation,
mankind,  even  though  all  besides  were  fair,  without  a  blemish.
^  Treatise  iv. See  the  beginning.

14


THE MORALISTS

The  very  storms  and  tempests  head  their  beauty  in  your  account,
those  alone  excepted  which  arose  in  human  breasts.  'Twas  only
for  this  turbulent  race  of  mortals  you  offered  to  accuse  Nature.
And  I  now  foimd  why  you  had  been  so  transjiorted  with  the
story  of  Prometheus.  Vou  wanted  such  an  oj)erator  as  this  for
mankind,  and  you  were  tempted  to  wish  the  story  could  have
been  confirmed  in  modern  divinity  ;  that  clearinnr  the  supreme
powers  of  any  concern  or  hand  in  the  ill  workmanship,  you
mio-ht  have  the  liberty  of  inveighing  against  it  without
profaneness.

This  however,  I  told  you,  was  but  a  slight  evasion  of  the
religious  poets  among  the  ancients.  'Twas  easy  to  answer  every
objection  by  a  Prometheus:  as,  "Why  had  mankind  originally
so  much  folly  and  perverseness  ?  why  so  much  })ride,  such
ambition,  and  strange  appetites  ?  why  so  many  plagues  and
curses  entailed  on  him  and  his  posterity  ? ""  Prometheus  was
the  cause.  The  plastic  artist,  with  his  unlucky  hand,  solved
all.  "  'Twas  his  contrivance,"  they  said,  "  and  he  was  to  answer
for  it."  They  reckoned  it  a  fair  game  if  they  could  gain  a
single  remove  and  j)ut  the  evil  cause  farther  off.  If  the  peoj)le
asked  a  question,  they  told  them  a  tale,  and  sent  them  away
satisfied.  None  besides  a  few^  philosophers  would  be  such
busybodies,  they  thought,  as  to  look  beyond,  or  ask  a  second
question.

And  in  reality,  continued  I,  "'tis  not  to  be  imagined  how
serviceable  a  tale  is  to  amuse  others  besides  mere  children,  and
how  much  easier  the  generality  of  men  are  paid  in  this  paper-
coin  than  in  sterling  reason.  We  ought  not  to  laugh  so  readily
at  the  Indian  philosophers,  who,  to  satisfy  their  })eople  how
this  huge  frame  of  the  world  is  supported,  tell  them  'tis  by  an
elephant.  And  the  elephant  how .?  .  .  .  A  shrewd  question  !  but
which  by  no  means  should  be  answered.  'Tis  here  only  that
our  Indian  philosophers  are  to  blame.  They  should  be  con-
tented with  the  elephant,  and  go  no  farther.  But  they  have
a  tortoise  in  reserve,  whose  back,  they  think,  is  broad  enough.

15


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

So  the  tortoise  must  bear  the  new  load ;  and  thus  the  matter
stands  worse  than  before.

The  heathen  story  of  Prometheus  was,  I  told  you,  much  the
same  with  this  Indian  one,  only  the  heathen  mythologists  were
so  wise  as  not  to  go  beyond  the  first  remove.  A  single  Pro-
metheus was  enough  to  take  the  weight  from  Jove.  They
fairly  made  Jove  a  stander-by.  He  resolved,  it  seems,  to  be
neuter,  and  see  what  would  come  of  this  notable  experiment ;
how  the  dangerous  man -moulder  would  proceed,  and  what
would  be  the  event  of  his  tampering.  .  .  .  Excellent  account  to
satisfy  the  heathen  vulgar !  But  how,  think  you,  would  a
philosopher  digest  this.^*  "For  the  Gods,""  he  would  say  presently,
"  either  could  have  hindered  Prometheus's  creation  or  they  could
not.  If  they  could,  they  were  answerable  for  the  consequences  ;
if  they  could  not,  they  were  no  longer  Gods,  being  thus  limited
and  controlled.  And  whether  Prometheus  were  a  name  for
chance,  destiny,  a  plastic  nature,  or  an  evil  daemon,  whatever
was  designed  by  it,  'twas  still  the  same  breach  of  omnipotence."

That  such  a  hazardous  affair  as  this  of  creation  should  have
been  undertaken  by  those  who  had  not  perfect  foresight  as  well
as  command,  you  owned  was  neither  wise  nor  just.  But  you
stood  to  foresight.  You  allowed  the  consequences  to  have  been
understood  by  the  creating  powers  when  they  undertook  their
work,  and  you  denied  that  it  would  have  been  better  for  them
to  have  omitted  it,  though  they  knew  what  would  be  the  event.
"  'Twas  better  still  that  the  project  should  be  executed,  what-
ever might  become  of  mankind,  or  how  hard  soever  such  a
creation  was  like  to  fall  on  the  generality  of  this  miserable  race.
For  'twas  impossible,  you  thought,  that  Heaven  should  have
acted  otherwise  than  for  the  best.  So  that  even  from  this
misery  and  ill  of  man  there  was  undoubtedly  some  good  arising,
something  which  over-balanced  all,  and  made  full  amends.""

This  was  a  confession  I  wondered  indeed  how  I  came  to
draw  from  you ;  and  soon  afterwards  I  found  you  somewhat
uneasy  under  it. For  here  I  took  up  your  own  part  against

16


THE MOUATJSTS

vou,  ami  setting  all  those  villanies  and  eonuptioiis  of  liunian
kind  in  the  same  light  you  had  done  just  before,  I  put  it  uj)on
vou  to  tell  where  possibly  could  be  the  advantage  or  good
arising  hence,  or  what  excellence  or  beautv  could  redomul  from
those  tragical  ])ictures  you  yourself  had  tlraun  so  well  after  the
life,  \\niether  it  must  not  be  a  very  strong  philosophical  faith
which  should  persuade  one  that  those  dismal  |)nits  you  set  to
view  were  only  the  necessary  shades  of  a  fine  piec-e,  to  be
reckoned  among  the  beauties  of  the  creation,  or  whether
possibly  you  might  look  uj)on  tliat  maxini  as  very  fit  for
heaven,  which  I  was  sure  you  did  not  approve  at  all  in  man-
kind, "  to  do  ill  that  good  might  follow."

This,  I  said,  made  me  think  of  the  manner  of  our  modern
Prometheuses,  the  mountebanks,  who  performed  such  wonders
of  many  kinds  here  on  our  earthly  stages.  They  could  create
diseases  and  make  mischief  in  order  to  heal  and  to  restore.
But  should  we  assign  such  a  practice  as  this  to  Heaven  't  Should
we  dare  to  make  such  empirics  of  tlie  Gods,  and  such  a  patient
of  poor  Nature  .^  "  Was  this  a  reason  for  Nature's  sickliness?
Or  how  else  came  she  (poor  innocent !)  to  fall  sick,  or  run
astray?  Had  she  been  originally  healthy,  or  created  sound  at
first,  she  had  still  continued  so.  'Twas  no  credit  to  the  Gods  to
leave  her  destitute,  or  with  a  flaw  which  would  cost  dear  the
mending,  and  make  them  sufferers  for  their  own  work."'

I  was  going  to  bring  Homer  to  witness  for  the  many  troubles
of  Jove,  the  death  of  Sarpedon,  and  the  frequent  crosses  Heaven
met  with  from  the  fatal  sisters.  But  this  discourse,  I  saw,
displeased  you.  I  had  by  this  time  plainly  discovered  my  in-
clination to  Scepticism.  And  here  not  only  religion  was
objected  to  me,  but  I  w^as  reproached  too  on  the  account  of  that
gallantry  which  I  had  some  time  before  defended.  Both  were
joined  together  in  the  charge  you  made  against  me  when  vou
saw  I  adhered  to  nothing,  but  was  now  as  ready  to  declaim
against  the  fair  as  I  had  been  before  to  plead  their  cause,  and
defend  the  moral  of  lovers.  This,  you  said,  was  my  constant
VOL.  II  17  c


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

way  in  all  debates  :  I  was  as  well  pleased  with  the  reason  on  one
side  as  on  the  other  ;  I  never  troubled  myself  about  the  success
of  the  argument,  but  laughed  still,  whatever  way  it  went,  and
even  when  I  convinced  others,  never  seemed  as  if  I  was  con-
vinced myself.

I  owned  to  you,  Palemon,  there  was  truth  enough  in  your
charge.  For  above  all  things  I  loved  ease,  and  of  all  philosophers
those  who  reasoned  most  at  their  ease,  and  were  never  angry  or
disturbed,  as  those  called  Sceptics,  you  owned,  never  were,  1
looked  upon  this  kind  of  philosophy  as  the  prettiest,  agreeablest,
roving  exercise  of  the  mind  possible  to  be  imagined.  The  other
kind,  I  thought,  was  painful  and  laborious :  "  to  keep  always
in  the  limits  of  one  path,  to  drive  always  at  a  point,  and  hold
precisely  to  what  men  at  a  venture  called  the  Truth ;  a  point,
in  all  appearance,  very  unfixed  and  hard  to  ascertain."  Besides,
my  way  hurt  nobody.  I  was  always  the  first  to  comply  on  any
occasion,  and  for  matters  of  religion  was  farther  from  profane-
ness  and  erroneous  doctrine  than  any  one.  I  could  never  have
the  sufficiency  to  shock  my  spiritual  and  learned  superiors.  I
was  the  farthest  from  leaning  to  my  own  understanding,  nor
was  I  one  who  exalted  reason  above  faith,  or  insisted  much  upon
what  the  dogmatical  men  call  demonstration,  and  dare  oppose
to  the  sacred  mysteries  of  religion.  And  to  show  you,  continued
I,  how  impossible  it  is  for  the  men  of  our  sort  ever  to  err  from
the  catholic  and  established  faith,  pray  consider,  that  whereas
others  pretend  to  see  with  their  own  eyes  what  is  properest  and
best  for  them  in  religion,  we,  for  our  parts,  pretend  not  to  see
with  any  other  than  those  of  our  spiritual  guides.  Neither  do
we  presume  to  judge  those  guides  ourselves,  but  submit  to  them
as  they  are  appointed  us  by  our  just  superiors.  In  short,  you  who
are  rationalists,  and  walk  by  reason  in  everything,  pretend  to
know  all  things,  whilst  you  believe  little  or  nothing.  We,  for
our  parts,  know  nothing  and  believe  all.

Here  I  ended,  and  in  return  you  only  asked  me  coldly
"  whether  with  that  fine  scepticism of  mine  I  made  no  more

18


THE ISIOKALISTS

distinction  between  sincerity  and  insincerity  in  actions,  than  I
did  between  truth  and  falsehood,  right  and  wrong,  in  arguments?"

I  durst  not  ask  what  vour  (juestion  drove  at.  I  was  afraid
I  saw  it  too  plainly,  and  that  by  this  loose  way  of  talking,  which
I  had  learnt  in  some  fashionable  conversations  of  the  world,  I
had  given  you  occasion  to  sus])ect  me  of  the  worst  sort  of
scepticism,  such  as  s})ared  nothing,  but  overthrew  all  principles,
moral  and  divine.

Forgive  me,  said  I,  good  Palenion  ;  vou  arc  offended,  I  see,
and  not  without  cause.  But  what  if  I  should  endeavour  to
compensate  my  sceptical  misbehaviour  by  using  a  known  sceptic
privilege,  and  asserting  streiuiously  the  cause  I  have  hitherto
opposed  ?  Do  not  imagine  that  I  dare  aspire  so  high  as  to
defend  revealed  religion,  or  the  holy  mysteries  of  the  Christian
faith.  I  am  unworthy  of  such  a  task,  and  should  profane  the
subject.  "Tis  of  mere  ])hiloso])hy  I  speak  ;  and  my  ffincy  is  only
to  try  what  I  can  muster  up  thence,  to  make  head  against  the
chief  arguments  of  atheism,  and  re-estabhsh  what  I  have  offered
to  loosen  in  the  system  of  theism.

Your  project,  said  you,  bids  fair  to  reconcile  me  to  vour
character,  wliich  I  was  beginning  to  mistrust.  For  as  averse  as
I  am  to  the  cause  of  theism,  or  name  of  Deist,  when  taken  in  a
sense  exclusive  of  revelation,  I  consider  still  that  in  strictness
the  root  of  all  is  theism,  and  that  to  be  a  settled  Christian,  it  is
necessary  to  be  first  of  all  a  good  theist ;  for  theism  can  only
be  opj^osed  to  polytheism  or  atheism.^  Nor  have  I  patience  to
hear  the  name  of  Deist  (the  highest  of  all  names)  decried,  and
set  in  opposition  to  Christianity.  "  As  if  our  religion  was  a
kind  of  magic,  which  depended  not  on  the  belief  of  a  single
supreme  Being.  Or  as  if  the  firm  and  rational  belief  of  such  a
Being  on  philosophical  grounds  was  an  improper  qualification
for  •  believing  anything  further.'"'  Excellent  presumption  for
those  who  naturally  incline  to  the  disbelief  of  revelation,  or  who
through  vanity  affect  a  freedom  of  this  kind  !  .  .  .
^  "To  pol}'theism  (daemonism)  or  atheism."  Inquiry,  p;ut  i.  Itk.  i.  §  2.

19


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

But  let  me  hear,  continued  you,  whether  in  <>'ood  earnest
and  thorough  sincerity  you  intend  to  advance  anytliing  in
favour  of  that  opinion  which  is  fundamental  to  all  religion,  or
whether  you  design  only  to  divert  yourself  with  the  subject  as
you  have  done  hitherto  ?  "  ^Vhatever  your  thoughts  are,
Philocles,  I  am  resolved  to  force  them  from  you.  You  can  no
longer  plead  the  unsuitableness  of  the  time  or  ])lace  to  such
grave  subjects.  The  gaudy  scene  is  over  with  the  day.  Our
company  have  long  since  cjuitted  the  field;  and  the  solemn
majesty  of  such  a  night  as  this,  may  justly  suit  with  the  pro-
foundest  meditation  or  most  serious  discourse."

Thus,  Palemon,  you  continued  to  urge  me,  till  by  necessity
I  was  drawn  into  the  following  vein  of  philosophical  enthusiasm.

Section  III

You  shall  find  then,  said  I  (taking  a  grave  air),  that  it  is  possible
for  me  to  be  serious,  and  that  'tis  probable  I  am  growing  so  for
good  and  all.  Your  over-seriousness  awhile  since,  at  such  an
unseasonable  time,  may  have  driven  me  perhaps  into  a  contrary
extreme  by  opposition  to  your  melancholy  humour.  But  I
have  now  a  better  idea  of  that  melancholy  you  discovered,  and
notwithstanding  the  humorous  turn  you  were  pleased  to  give  it,
I  am  persuaded  it  has  a  different  foundation  from  any  of  those
fantastical  causes  I  then  assigned  to  it.  "  Love,  doubtless,  is  at
the  bottom ;  but  a  nobler  love  than  such  as  common  beauties
inspire."

Here,  in  my  turn,  I  began  to  raise  my  voice,  and  imitate  the
solemn  way  you  had  been  teaching  me.  "  Knowing  as  you  are,"
continued  I,  "  well-knowing  and  experienced  in  all  the  degrees
and  orders  of  beauty,  in  all  the  mysterious  charms  of  the
particular  forms,  you  rise  to  what  is  more  general,  and  with  a
larger  heart,  and  mind  more  comprehensive,  you  generously
seek  that  which  is  highest  in  the  kind.  Not  captivated  by  the
lineaments  of  a  fair  face,  or  the  well-drawn  proportions  of  a

20


THE MORALISTS

human  bodv,  you view  the  life  itself,  and  t'lnbracc  rather  the
mind  which  adds  the  lustre,  and  renders  chieHy  amiable.

"  Nor  is  the  enjoyment  of  such  a  sin<;Ie  beauty  sufficient  to
satisfy  such  an  asj)irino-  sonl.  It  seeks  how  to  combine  more
beauties,  and  by  what  coalition  of  these  to  form  a  beautiful
society.  It  views  connnunities,  friendship.s,  relations,  duties,
and  considers  bv  what  harmony  of  particular  minds  the  general
harmony  is  composed,  and  connnonweal  established.

"  Nor  satisfied  even  with  public  good  in  one  comniunity  of
men,  it  frames  itself  a  nobler  object,  and  with  enlarged  affection
seeks  the  good  of  mankind.  It  dwells  with  pleasure  amidst  that
reason  and  those  orders  on  which  this  fair  correspondence  and
goodly  interest  is  established.  Laws,  constitutions,  civil  and
religious  rites ;  whatever  civilises  or  polishes  rude  mankind  ;  the
sciences  and  arts,  philosophy,  morals,  virtue ;  the  flourishing
state  of  human  affairs,  and  the  perfection  of  human  nature  ;
these  are  its  delightfid  prospects,  and  this  the  charm  of  beauty
which  attracts  it.

"Still  ardent  in  this  pursuit  (such  is  its  love  of  order  and
perfection)  it  rests  not  here,  nor  satisfies  itself  with  the  beauty
of  a  part,  but,  extending  further  its  communicative  bounty,
seeks  the  good  of  all,  and  affects  the  interest  and  ])rosperity  of
the  whole.  True  to  its  native  world  and  higher  country,  'tis
here  it  seeks  order  and  perfection  ;  wishing  the  best,  and  hoping
still  to  find  a  just  and  wise  administration.

"  And  since  all  hope  of  this  were  vain  and  idle  if  no
universal  mind  presided ;  since  without  such  a  supreme  intelli-
gence and  providential  care  the  distracted  universe  must  be
condennied  to  suffer  infinite  calamities ;  'tis  here  the  generous
mind  labours  to  discover  that  healing  cause  by  which  the
interest  of  the  whole  is  securely  established,  the  beauty  of
things  and  the  universal  order  ha]ipily  sustained.

"This,  Palemon,  is  the  labour  of  your  soul,  and  this  its
melancholy  when,  unsuccessfully  pursuing  the  supreme  beauty,
it meets with darkening clouds which intercept its sight.

21


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

jNIonsters  arise,  not  those  from  Lybian  deserts,  but  from  the
heart  of  man  more  fertile,  and  with  their  horrid  aspect  cast
an  unseemly  reflection  upon  Nature.  She,  helpless  (as  she  is
thought),  and  working  thus  absurdly,  is  contemned,  the  govern-
ment of  the  world  arraigned,  and  Deity  made  void.

"  Much  is  alleged  in  answer  to  show  why  Nature  errs,  and
how  she  came  thus  impotent  and  erring  from  an  unerring  hand.
But  I  deny  she  errs ;  and  Avhen  she  seems  most  ignorant  or
perverse  in  her  productions,  I  assert  her  even  then  as  wise  and
provident  as  in  her  goodliest  works.  For  'tis  not  then  that
men  complain  of  the  world's  order,  or  abhor  the  face  of  things,
when  they  see  various  interests  mixed  and  interfering ;  natures
subordinate  of  different  kinds,  opposed  one  to  another,  and  in
their  different  operations  submitted  the  higher  to  the  lower.
'Tis  on  the  contrary  from  this  order  of  inferior  and  superior
things  that  we  admire  the  world's  beauty,^  founded  thus  on
contrarieties,  whilst  from  such  various  and  disagreeing  principles
a  universal  concord  is  established.

"  Thus  in  the  several  orders  of  terrestrial  forms  a  resigna-
tion is  required,  a  sacrifice  and  mutual  yielding  of  natures  one
to  another.  The  vegetables  by  their  death  sustain  the  animals,
and  animal  bodies  dissolved  enrich  the  earth,  and  raise  again
the  vegetable  world.  The  numerous  insects  are  reduced  by  the
superior  kinds  of  birds  and  beasts,  and  these  again  are  checked
by  man,  who  in  his  turn  submits  to  other  natures,  and  resigns
his  form  a  sacrifice  in  common  to  the  rest  of  things.  And  if  in
natures  so  little  exalted  or  pre-eminent  above  each  other,  the
sacrifice  of  interests  can  appear  so  just,  how  nuich  more  reason-
ably may  all  inferior  natures  be  subjected  to  the  superior  nature
of  the  world  !  that  world,  Palemon,  which  even  now  transported
you  when  the  sun's  fainting  light  gave  way  to  these  bright  con-
stellations, and  left  you  this  wide  system  to  contemplate.

"  Here  are  those  laws  which  ought  not  nor  can  submit  to

^  See  Misc.  v.  cli.  i.  what  is  cited  in  the  notes  from  the  ancient  author
on  The  World.

22


THE MORAIJSTS

anything  below.  Tlic  central  powers,  which  hold  the  lasting
orbs  in  their  just  poise  and  movement,  must  not  be  controlled
to  save  a  fleeting  form,  and  rescue  from  the  precij^ice  a  puny
animal,  whose  brittle  frame,  however  protected,  must  of  itself
so  soon  dissolve.  The  ambient  air,  the  inward  vapours,  the
impending  meteors,  or  whatever  else  is  nutrimental  or  pre-
servative of  this  earth,  must  operate  in  a  natural  course,  and
other  constitutions  must  submit  to  the  good  habit  and  con-
stitution of  the  all-sustaining  globe.

"  Let  us  not  therefore  wonder  if  by  earthquakes,  storms,
pestilential  blasts,  nether  or  upper  fires,  or  floods,  the  animal
kinds  are  oft  afflicted,  and  whole  species  perhaps  involved  at
once  in  common  ruin ;  but  much  less  let  us  account  it  strange
if  either  by  outward  shock,  or  some  interior  wound  from  hostile
matter,  particular  animals  are  deformed  even  in  their  first
conception,  when  the  disease  invades  the  seats  of  generation,
and  seminal  parts  are  injured  and  obstructed  in  their  accurate
labours.  'Tis  then  alone  that  monstrous  shapes  are  seen :
Nature  still  working  as  before,  and  not  perversely  or  erroneously,
not  faintly,  or  with  feeble  endeavours ;  but  overpowered  by  a
superior  rival,  and  by  another  nature's  justly  conquering  force.

"  Nor  need  we  wonder  if  the  interior  form,  the  soul  and
temper,  partakes  of  this  occasional  deformity,  and  sympathises
often  with  its  close  partner,  ^^'ho  is  there  can  ^vonder  either
at  the  sicknesses  of  sense,  or  the  depravity  of  minds  enclosed  in
such  frail  bodies,  and  dependent  on  such  pervertible  organs .''

"  Here  then  is  that  solution  you  require,  and  hence  those
seeming  blemishes  cast  upon  Nature.  Nor  is  there  aught  in
this  beside  what  is  natural  and  good.  Tis  good  which  is
]H-edominant ;  and  every  corruptible  and  mortal  nature  by  its
mortality  and  corruption  yields  only  to  some  better,  and  all  in
common  to  that  best  and  highest  nature  which  is  incorruptible
and  immortal."'

"  I  scarce  had  ended  these  words  ere  you  broke  out  in
admiration,  asking  what  had  befallen me that of  a sudden

23


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

I  had  thus  changed  my  character,  and  entered  into  thoughts
which  must  certainly,  you  supposed,  have  some  foundation  in
me,  since  I  could  express  them  with  such  seeming  affection  as
I  had  done.

O,  said  I,  Palemon  !  that  it  had  been  my  fortune  to  have
met  you  the  other  day,  just  at  my  return  out  of  the  country
from  a  friend  whose  conversation  had  in  one  day  or  two  made
such  an  impression  on  me  that  I  should  have  suited  you  to  a
miracle.  You  would  have  thought  indeed  that  I  had  been
cured  of  my  scepticism  and  levity,  so  as  never  to  have  rallied
more  at  that  wild  rate  on  any  subject,  much  less  on  these
which  are  so  serious.

Truly,  said  you,  I  could  wish  I  had  met  you  rather  at  that
time,  or  that  those  good  and  serious  impressions  of  your  friend
had  without  interruption  lasted  with  you  till  this  moment.

Whatever  they  were,  I  told  you,  Palemon,  I  had  not  so  lost
them  neither  as  not  easily,  you  saw,  .to  revive  them  on  occasion,
were  I  not  afraid.  Afraid  !  said  you.  For  whose  sake,  good
Philocles,  I  entreat  you  ?  for  mine  or  your  own  ?  For  both,
replied  I.  For  though  I  was  like  to  be  perfectly  cured  of  my
scepticism,  'twas  by  what  I  thought  worse,  downright  enthusiasm.
You  never  knew  a  more  agreeable  enthusiast !

Were  he  my  friend,  said  you,  I  should  hardly  treat  him  in
so  free  a  manner;  nor  should  I,  perhaps,  judge  that  to  be
enthusiasm  which  you  so  freely  term  so.  I  have  a  strong
suspicion  that  you  injure  him.  Nor  can  I  be  satisfied  till  I
hear  further  of  that  serious  conversation  for  which  you  tax  him
as  enthusiastic.

I  must  confess,  said  I,  he  had  nothing  of  that  savage  air
of  the  vulgar  enthusiastic  kind.  All  was  serene,  soft,  and
harmonious.  The  maimer  of  it  was  more  after  the  pleasing
transports  of  those  ancient  poets  you  are  often  charmed  with,
than  after  the  fierce  unsociable  way  of  modern  zealots,  those
starched,  gruff  gentlemen,  who  guard  religion  as  bullies  do  a
mistress,  and  give  us the  while  a  very  indifferent  opinion  of

24


THE MOIJAMSTS

their  lady's  merit  aiul  tlieir  own  wit,  by  luloiin^-  what  they
neither  allow  to  be  inspected  by  others  nor  care  themselves  to
examine  in  a  fair  li<;ht.  liut  here,  I  will  answer  for  it,  there  was
nothing-  of  disguise  or  [)aint.  .Ml  was  fair,  oj)en,  and  genuine
as  Nature  herself.  'Twas  Nature  he  was  in  love  with ;  "twas
Nature  he  sung.  And  if  any  one  might  be  said  to  have  a
natural  mistress  my  friend  certainly  might,  whose  heart  was
thus  engaged.  ]iut  Io\e,  I  found,  was  everywhere  the  same.
And  though  the  object  here  was  very  fine,  and  the  passion  it
created  \  ery  noble,  yet  liberty,  I  thought,  was  finer  than  all ;
and  I  who  never  cared  to  cngao-e  in  other  love  of  the  least
continuance,  was  tlie  more  afraid,  I  told  you,  of  this  whidi  had
such  a  power  with  my  ])oor  friend  as  to  make  him  a})pear  the
perfectest  enthusiast  in  the  world,  ill-humour  only  excepted.
For  this  was  singular  in  him,  "That  though  he  had  all  of  the
enthusiast,  he  hatl  nothing  of  the  bigot.  He  heard  everything
with  mildness  and  delight,  and  bore  with  me  when  I  treated  all
his  thoughts  as  visionary,  and  when,  sceptic-like,  I  unravelled
all  his  systems."

Here  was  that  character  and  description  which  so  liighlv
pleased  von  that  you  would  liardlv  suffer  me  to  come  to  a  con-
clusion. 'Twas  impossible,  I  found,  to  'give  you  satisfaction
without  reciting  the  main  of  what  passed  in  those  two  days
between  my  friend  and  me  in  our  country  retirement.  Again
and  again  I  bid  vou  beware:  "  you ;  knew  not  the  danger  of
this  philosophical  passion,  nor  considered  what  vou  nn'ght
])ossibly  draw  uyion  yourself,  and  make  me  the  author  of.  I
was  far  enough  engaged  already,  and  you  were  pushing  me
further,  at  your  ow  n  hazard.'"

All  I  could  say  made  not  the  least  impression  on  vou.  Hut
rather  than  proceed  any  further  this  niglit,  I  engaged,  for  vour
sake,  to  turn  writei-,  and  draw  up  the  memoirs  of  those  two
philosophical  days,  beginning  with  what  had  ])assed  this  last
day  between  ourselves,  as  I  have  accordingly  done,  you  see,  by
way  of  introduction  to  my  story.

25


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

By  this  time,  being  got  late  to  town,  some  hours  after  the
latest  of  our  company,  you  set  me  down  at  my  own  lodging,
and  thus  we  bade  good-night.


PART II

Section I

Philodes  to  Palemon

AiTEK  such  a  day  as  yesterday  I  might  well  have  thought  it
hard,  when  I  awaked  the  next  morning,  to  find  myself  under
positive  engagements  of  proceeding  in  the  same  philosophical
way  without  intermission,  and  upon  harder  terms  than  ever.
For  "'twas  no  longer  the  agreeable  part  of  a  companion  which  I
had  now  to  bear.  Your  conversation,  Palemon,  which  had
hitherto  supported  me,  was  at  an  end.  I  was  now  alone,
confined  to  my  closet,  obliged  to  meditate  by  myself,  and
reduced  to  the  hard  circumstances  of  an  author  and  historian
in  the  most  difficult  subject.

But  here,  methought,  propitious  Heaven  in  some  manner
assisted  me.  For  if  dreams  were,  as  Homer  teaches,  sent  from
the  throne  of  Jove,  I  might  conclude  I  had  a  favourable  one  of
the  true  sort  towards  the  morning  light,  which,  as  I  recollected
myself,  gave  me  a  clear  and  perfect  idea  of  what  I  desired  so
earnestly  to  bring  back  to  my  memory.

I  found  myself  transported  to  a  distant  country,  which
presented  a  pompous  rural  scene.  It  was  a  mountain  not  far
from  the  sea,  its  brow  adorned  with  ancient  wood,  and  at  its
foot  a  river  and  well-inhabited  ])lain,  beyond  which  the  sea
appearing,  closed  the  prospect.

No  sooner  had  I  considered  the  place  than  I  discerned  it  to
be  the  very  same  where  I  had  talked  with  Theocles  the  second
day  I  was  with  him  in  the  country. I  looked  about  to  see  if

26


THE AIOHAI.ISTS

I  could  tiiul  my  liicucl,  and  calling  Tlicoclcs  I  1  awaked.  But
so  powerful  was  the  impression  of  my  dream,  and  so  perfect  the
idea  raised  in  mc  of  the  person,  words,  and  manner  of  my  friend,
that  I  could  now  fancy  myself  philosophically  inspired,  as  that
Roman  sage  ^  by  his  Egeria,  and  invited  on  this  occasion  to
try  my  historical  nnise.  For  justly  might  I  hope  for  such
assistance  in  behalf  of  Theocles,  who  so  loved  the  jNIuses,  and
was  I  thought  no  less  beloved  by  them.

To  return  therefore  to  that  ori<;inal  rural  scene  and  that
heroic  genius,  the  companion  and  guide  of  my  first  thoughts  in
these  profounder  subjects;  1  found  him  the  first  morning  with
his  beloved  ^Nlantuan  ^Nluse,  roving  in  the  fields,  where,  as  I
had  been  informed  at  his  house,  he  was  gone  out,  after  his  usual
way,  to  read.  The  moment  he  saw  me  his  book  vanished,  and
he  came  with  friendly  haste  to  meet  me.  After  we  had
embraced,  1  discovered  my  curiosity  to  know  what  he  was
reading,  and  asked  "  if  it  were  of  a  secret  kind,  to  which  I  could
not  be  admitted."  On  this  he  showed  me  his  poet,  and  looking
pleasantly.  Now  tell  me  truly,  said  he,  Philocles,  did  you  not
expect  some  more  mysterious  book  than  this  ?  I  owned  I  did,
considering  his  character,  which  I  took  to  be  of  so  contemplative
a  kind.  And  do  you  think,  said  he,  that  without  being  con-
templative, one  can  truly  relish  these  diviner  poets  ?  Indeed,
said  I,  I  never  thought  there  was  any  need  of  gro wing-
contemplative,  or  retiring  from  the  world,  to  read  Virgil  or
Horace.

You  have  named  two,  said  he,  who  can  hardly  be  thought  so
very  like,  though  they  were  friends  and  equally  good  poets.
Yet  joining  them  as  you  are  pleased  to  do,  I  would  willingly
learn  from  you  whether  in  your  opinion  there  be  any  dis-
position so  fitted  for  reading  them  as  that  in  which  they  writ
themselves.  In  this,  I  am  sure,  they  both  joined  heartily :  to
love  retirement ;  when  for  the  sake  of  such  a  life  and  habit  as
you  call  contemplative,  they  were  willing  to  sacrifice  the  highest

'  Niima.

27


SHAFTESBURY'S CHAIIACTEIIISTICS

advantages,  pleasures,  and  favour  of  a  court.  But  I  will  venture
to  say  more  in  favour  of  retirement :  "  that  not  only  the  best
authors  but  the  best  company  require  this  seasoning."  Society
itself  cannot  be  rightly  enjoyed  without  some  abstinence  and
separate  thought.  All  grows  insipid,  dull,  and  tiresome  without
the  help  of  some  intervals  of  retirement.  Say,  Philocles,  whether
you  yourself  have  not  often  found  it  so?  Do  you  think
those  lovers  understand  the  interests  of  their  loves  who  by
their  good-will  would  never  be  parted  for  a  moment  ?  or  would
they  be  discreet  friends,  think  you,  who  would  choose  to  live
toirether  on  such  terms  ?  What  relish  then  must  the  world
have  (that  common  world  of  mixed  and  undistinguished
company)  without  a  little  solitude ;  without  stepping  now  and
then  aside,  out  of  the  road  and  beaten  track  of  life,  that
tedious  circle  of  noise  and  show,  which  forces  wearied  mankind
to  seek  relief  from  every  poor  diversion  ?

By  your  rule,  said  I,  Theocles,  there  should  be  no  such
thing  as  happiness  or  good  in  life,  since  every  enjoyment  wears
out  so  soon  ;  and  growing  painful,  is  diverted  by  some  other
thing,  and  that  again  by  some  other,  and  so  on.  I  am  sure,  if
solitude  serves  as  a  remedy  or  diversion  to  anything  in  the  world,
there  is  nothing  which  may  not  serve  as  diversion  to  solitude,
which  wants  it  more  than  anything  besides.  And  thus  there
can  be  no  good  which  is  regular  or  constant.  Happiness  is  a
thing  out  of  the  way,  and  only  to  be  found  in  wandering.

0  Philocles,  replied  he,  I  rejoice  to  find  you  in  the  pursuit
of  happiness  and  good,  however  you  may  wander.  Nay,  though
you  doubt  whether  there  be  that  thing,  yet  if  you  reason,  'tis
sufficient ;  there  is  hope  still.  But  see  how  you  have  unawares
engaged  yourself!  For  if  you  have  destroyed  all  good,  because
in  all  you  can  think  of  there  is  nothing  will  constantly  hold  so ;
then  you  have  set  it  as  a  maxim  (and  very  justly  in  my  opinion)
"  that  nothing  can  be  good  but  what  is  constant."

1  own,  said  I,  that  all  I  know  of  worldly  satisfaction  is
inconstant. The  things  which  give  it  are  never  at  a  stay,  and

28


THE >rOKATJSTS

the  ot)0(l  itself,  w  liak'vci'  it  \n\  (Icpciuls  no  less  on  liiiniour  than
on  fortune.  I'oi-  iliat  wln'cli  Chance  may  often  spai-e,  'i'inie  will
not.  Ai;e,  chan<;e  of  temper,  other  lh()n<>ht.s,  a  different  j)assion,
new  en<>aoen»ents,  a  new  turn  of  life,  or  conversation, — the  least
of  these  are  fatal,  and  alone  sufficient  to  destroy  enjoynient.
Though  the  object  be  tiie  same,  tlie  relish  changes  and  the
short-lived  good  expires.  IJiit  I  slioukl  wonder  nnich  if  vou
could  tell  me  anytliing  in  life  which  was  not  of  as  change-
able a  nature,  and  sul)ject  to  the  same  connnon  fate  of  satictv
and  disgust.

I  find  then,  replied  he,  that  the  current  notion  of  good  is
not  sufficient  to  satisfy  you.  You  can  afford  to  scepticise
where  no  one  else  will  so  mucli  as  hesitate ;  for  almost  everv
one  philosophises  dogmatically  on  this  head.  All  are  positive
in  tliis,  "  that  our  real  good  is  pleasure.""

If  they  would  inform  us  "  which,"  said  I,  "  or  what  sort,"  and
ascertain  once  the  very  species  and  distinct  kind,  such  as  must
constantly  remain  tlie  same,  and  e([ually  eligible  at  all  times,  I
should  then  perliajis  be  better  satisfied.  But  when  will  and
pleasure  are  synonymous ;  when  everything  which  pleases  us  is
called  pleasure,^  and  we  never  choose  or  prefer  but  as  we  please ;
'tis  trifling  to  say  "  Pleasure  is  our  good."  P'or  this  has  as
Httle  meaning  as  to  say,  "  We  choose  what  we  think  eligible  " ;
and  "  We  are  })leased  with  what  delights  or  pleases  us."  The
question  is  "  whether  we  are  rightly  pleased,  and  choose  as  we
should  do  ?  "  For  as  highly  pleased  as  children  are  with  baubles,  )
or  with  whatever  affects  their  tender  senses,  we  cannot  in  our
hearts  sincerely  admire  tlieir  enjoyment,  or  imagine  them
possessors  of  any  extraordinary  good.  Yet  are  their  senses,  we
know,  as  keen  and  susceptible  of  pleasure  as  our  own.  The
same  reflection  is  of  force  as  to  mere  animals,  who  in  respect  of
the  liveliness  and  delicacy  of  sensation  have  many  of  them  the
advantage  of  us.  And  as  for  some  low  and  sordid  pleasures  of
human  kind,  should  they  be  ever  so  lastingly  enjoyed,  and  in
^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  ii.  ;  Misc.  ix.  eh.  i.

29


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  highest credit with  their  enjoyers,  I  should never  afford
them  the  name  of  happiness  or  good.

Would  you  then  appeal,  said  he,  from  the  immediate  feeling
and  experience  of  one  who  is  pleased  and  satisfied  with  what
he  enjoys  ?

Most  certainly  I  should  appeal,  said  I  (continuing  the  same
zeal  which  Theocles  had  stirred  in  me,  against  those  dogmatisers
on  pleasure). P'or  is  there  that  sordid  creature  on  earth  who
does  not  prize  his  own  enjoyment  ? Does  not  the  forwardest,
the  most  rancorous  distempered  creature  do  as  much  ? Is  not
malice  and  cruelty  of  the  highest  relish  with  some  natures  ? Is
not  a  hoggish life  the height  of  some  men's wishes  ? You
would  not  ask  me  surely  to  enumerate  the  several species  of
sensations  which  men  of  certain  tastes  have  adopted,  and  owned
for  their  chief  pleasure  and  delight. For  with  some  men  even
diseases  have  been  thought  valuable  and  worth  the  cherishing,
merely for  the pleasure  found  in  allaying  the  ardour  of  an
irritating  sensation. And  to  these  absurd  epicures  those  other
are  near  akin  who  by  studied  provocatives  raise  unnatural  thirst
and  appetite,  and,  to  make  way for  fresh repletion, prepare
emetics,  as  the  last  dessert,  the  sooner  to  renew  the  feast. 'Tis
said,  I  know,  proverbially,  "  that  tastes  are  different,  and  must
not  be  disputed." And I  remember  some  such  motto  as  this
placed  once  on  a  device,  which  was  found  suitable  to  the  notion.
A  fly  was  represented  feeding  on  a  certain  lump. The  food,
however vile, was natural to the animal. There w^as no
absurdity  in  the  case. But  should  you  show  me  a  brutish  or  a
barbarous  man thus taken up, and solaced in  his  pleasure ;
should  you  show  me  a  sot  in  his  solitary  debauch,  or  a  tyrant
in  the  exercise  of  his  cruelty,  with  this  motto  over  him,  to  forbid
my  appeal ;  I  should  hardly  be  brought  to  think  the  better  of
his  enjoyment ;  nor  can  I  possibly  suppose  that  a  mere  sordid
wretch,  with  a  base,  abject  soul,  and  the  best  fortune  in  the
world,  was  ever  capable  of  any  real  enjoyment.

By  this  zeal,  replied  Theocles,  which  you  have  shown  in  the

30


THE MORALISTS

refuting  a  wioiig  hypothesis,  one  would  iiiiagiiie  you  had  in
reality  some  notion  of  a  right,  and  began  to  think  that  there
might  possibly  be  such  a  thing  at  last  as  good.

That  there  is  something  nearer  to  good,  and  more  like  it
than  another,  I  am  free,  said  I,  to  own.  But  what  real  good  is
I  am  still  to  seek,  and  must  therefore  wait  till  vou  can  better
inform  me.  This  I  only  know,  "that  either  all  pleasure  is
good,  or  only  some."  If  all,  then  every  kind  of  sensuality  must
be  precious  and  desirable.  If  some  oidy,  then  we  are  to  seek
what  kind,  and  discover,  if  we  can,  what  it  is  which  distinguishes
between  one  pleasure  and  another,  and  makes  one  indifferent,
soiTy,  mean  ;  another  valuable  and  worthy.  And  by  this  stamp,
this  character,  if  there  be  any  such,  we  must  define  good,  and
not  by  pleasure  itself,  which  may  be  very  great  and  yet  very
contemptible.  Nor  can  any  one  truly  judge  the  value  of  any
immediate  sensation  otherwise  than  by  judging  first  of  the
situation  of  his  own  mind.  For  that  which  we  esteem  a
happiness  in  one  situation  of  mind  is  otherwise  thought  of  in
another.  AMiich  situation  therefore  is  the  justest  nmst  be
considered  :  "  how  to  gain  that  point  of  sight  whence  probably
we  may  best  discern ;  and  how  to  ])lace  ourselves  in  that
unbiassed  state  in  which  we  are  fittest  to  pronounce.''

O  Philocles,  replied  he,  if  this  be  unfeigned ly  your  sentiment,
if  it  be  possible  vou  should  have  the  fortitude  to  withhold  your
assent  in  this  affair,^  and  go  in  search  of  what  the  meanest  of
mankind  think  they  already  know  so  certainly,  'tis  from  a
nobler  turn  of  thought  than  what  you  have  observed  in  any  of
the  modern  sceptics  you  have  conversed  with.  For  if  I  mistake
not,  there  are  hardly  anywhere  at  this  day  a  sort  of  people
more  peremptory,  or  who  deliberate  less  on  the  choice  of  good.
They  who  |)retend  to  such  a  scrutiny  of  other  evidences  are  the
readiest  to  take  the  evidence  of  the  greatest  deceivers  in  the
world,  their  own  ])assions.  Having  gained,  as  they  think,  a
liberty  from  some  seeming  constraints  of  religion,  they  suppose
^  Essay  on  Wit  and  Humour,  part  i.  §  0.

31


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

they  employ  this  liberty  to  perfection  by  following  the  first
motion  of  their  will,  and  assenting  to  the  first  dictate  or  report
of  any  prepossessing  fancy ,^  any  foremost  opinion  or  conceit  of
good.  So  that  their  privilege  is  only  that  of  being  perpetually
amused,  and  their  liberty  that  of  being  imposed  on  in  their
most  important  choice.  I  think  one  may  say  with  assurance
"  that  the  greatest  of  fools  is  he  who  imposes  on  himself,  and  in
his  greatest  concern  thinks  certainly  he  knows  that  which  he
has  least  studied,  and  of  which  he  is  most  profoundly  ignorant.
He  who  is  ignorant  but  knows  his  ignorance,  is  far  wiser.  And
to  do  justice  to  these  fashionable  men  of  wit,  they  are  not
all  of  them,  indeed,  so  insensible  as  not  to  perceive  something
of  their  own  blindness  and  absurdity.  For  often  when  they
seriously  reflect  on  their  past  pursuits  and  engagements  they
freely  own  "  that  for  what  remains  of  life  they  know  not
whether  they  shall  be  of  a  piece  with  themselves,  or  whether
their  fancy,  humour,  or  passion  will  not  hereafter  lead  them
to  a  quite  different  choice  in  pleasure,  and  to  a  disapprobation
of  all  they  ever  enjoyed  before."  ....  Comfortable  reflection  !
To  bring  the  satisfactions  of  the  mind,  continued  he,  and
the  enjoyments  of  reason  and  judgment  under  the  denomination
of  Pleasure,  is  only  a  collusion,  and  a  plain  receding  from  the
common  notion  of  the  word.  They  deal  not  fairly  with  us
who  in  their  philosophical  hour  admit  that  for  pleasure  which
at  an  ordinary  time,  and  in  the  common  practice  of  life,  is  so
little  taken  for  such.  The  mathematician  who  labours  at  his
problem,  the  bookish  man  who  toils,  the  artist  who  endures
voluntarily  the  greatest  hardships  and  fatigues, — none  of  these
are  said  "  to  follow  pleasure.''  Nor  will  the  men  of  pleasure  by
any  means  admit  them  to  be  of  their  number.  The  satisfactions
which  are  purely  mental,  and  depend  only  on  the  motion  of  a
thought,  must  in  all  likelihood  be  too  refined  for  the  appre-
hensions of  our  modern  epicures,  who  are  so  taken  up  with
pleasure  of  a  more  substantial  kind.  They  who  are  full  of  the
*  Advice  to  cm  Author,  part  iii.  §  2.

32


THE MORALISTS

idea  of  such  a  sensible  solid  good  can  have  but  a  slender  fancy
for  the  mere  spiritual  and  intellectual  sort.  But  'tis  this  latter
they  set  up  and  magnify  upon  occasion,  to  save  the  ignominy
which  may  redound  to  them  from  the  former.  This  done,  the
latter  may  take  its  chance  :  its  use  is  presently  at  an  end.  For
'tis  observable  that  when  the  men  of  this  sort  have  recom-
mended the  enjoyments  of  the  mind  under  the  title  of  pleasure,
when  they  have  thus  dignified  the  word,  and  included  in  it
whatever  is  mentally  good  or  excellent,  they  can  afterwards
suffer  it  contentedly  to  slide  down  again  into  its  own  genuine
and  vulgar  sense,  whence  they  raised  it  only  to  serve  a  turn.
When  pleasure  is  called  in  tjuestion  and  attacked,  then  reason
and  virtue  are  called  in  to  her  aid,  and  made  principal  parts  of
her  constitution.  A  complicated  form  appears,  and  comprehends
straight  all  which  is  generous,  honest,  and  beautiful  in  human
life.  But  when  the  attack  is  over,  and  the  objection  once
solved,  the  spectre  vanishes ;  pleasure  returns  again  to  her
former  shape ;  she  may  even  be  pleasure  still,  and  have  as  little
concern  with  dry,  sober  reason  as  in  the  nature  of  the  thing
and  according  to  common  understanding  she  really  has.  For
if  this  rational  sort  of  enjoyment  be  admitted  into  the  notion
of  good,  how  is  it  possible  to  admit  withal  that  kind  of  sensation
which  in  effect  is  rather  opposite  to  this  enjoyment.^  'Tis
certain  that  in  respect  of  the  mind  and  its  enjoyments,  the
eagerness  and  irritation  of  mere  pleasure  is  as  disturbing  as  the
importunity  and  vexation  of  pain.  If  either  throws  the  mind
off  its  bias,  and  deprives  it  of  the  satisfaction  it  takes  in  its
natural  exercise  and  employment,  the  mind  in  this  case  must  be
sufferer  as  well  by  one  as  by  the  other.  If  neither  does  this,
there  is  no  harm  on  either  side. .  .  .

Bv  the  way,  said  I,  interrupting  him,  as  sincere  as  I  am  in
questioning  "  whether  pleasure  be  really  good,"  I  am  not  such
a  sceptic  as  to  doubt  "  whether  pain  be  really  ill."

Whatever  is  grievous,  replied  he,  can  be  no  other  than  ill.
But  that  what  is  grievous  to  one,  is  not  so  much  as  troublesome
VOL. II  33  D


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

to  another,  let  sportsmen,  soldiers,  and  others  of  the  hardy
kinds  be  witness.  Nay,  that  what  is  pain  to  one  is  pleasure  to
another,  and  so  alternately,  we  very  well  know,  since  men  vary
in  their  apprehension  of  these  sensations,  and  on  many  occasions
confound  one  with  the  other.  Has  not  even  Nature  herself  in
some  respects,  as  it  were,  blended  them  together,  and  (as  a  wise
man  said  once)  "joined  the  extremity  of  one  so  nicely  to  the
other,  that  it  absolutely  runs  into  it  and  is  indistinguishable"  ?

In  fine  then,  said  I,  if  ])leasure  and  pain  be  thus  convertible
and  mixed ;  if,  according  to  your  account,  "  that  which  is  now
pleasure,  by  being  strained  a  little  too  far,  runs  into  pain,  and
pain,  when  carried  far,  creates  again  the  highest  pleasure,  by
mere  cessation  and  a  kind  of  natural  succession  ;  if  some  pleasures
to  some  are  pains,  and  some  pains  to  others  are  pleasures '" ;  all
this,  if  I  mistake  not,  makes  still  for  my  opinion,  and  shows
that  there  is  nothing  you  can  assign  which  can  really  stand  as
good.  For  if  pleasure  be  not  good,  nothing  is.  And  if  pain
be  ill  (as  I  must  necessarily  take  for  granted)  we  have  a  shrewd
chance  on  the  ill  side  indeed,  but  none  at  all  on  the  better.  So
that  we  may  fairly  doubt  "  whether  life  itself  be  not  mere
misery,"  since  gainers  by  it  we  can  never  be ;  losers  we  may
sufficiently,  and  are  like  to  be  every  hour  of  our  lives.  Ac-
cordingly, what  our  English  poetess  says  of  good  should  be
just  and  proper,  "'Tis  good  not  to  be  born."  .  .  .  And  thus  for
anything  of  good  which  can  be  expected  in  life,  we  may  e'en
"  beg  pardon  of  Nature,  and  return  her  present  on  her  hands
without  waiting  for  her  call."  For  what  should  hinder  us  ?  or
what  are  we  the  better  for  living  ?

The  query,  said  he,  is  pertinent.  But  why  such  dispatch  if
the  case  be  doubtful  ?  This,  surely,  my  good  Philocles  !  is  a
plain  transgression  of  your  sceptical  bounds.  We  must  be
sufficiently  dogmatical  to  come  to  this  determination.  'Tis  a
deciding  as  well  concerning  death  as  life,  "  what  possibly  may
be  hereafter,  and  what  not."  Now  to  be  assured  that  we  can
never  be  concerned  in  anything  hereafter,  we  must  understand

34


I


I

1


THE MORALISTS

perfectly  what  it  is  whidi  concerns  or  engages  us  in  anything
j)resent.  We  must  truly  know  ourselves,  and  in  what  this  self
of  ours  consists.  AVe  nuist  determine  against  pre-existence,  and
give  a  better  reason  for  our  having  never  been  concerned  in
aught  before  our  birth  than  merely  "  because  we  remember
not,  nor  are  conscious."'  For  in  many  things  we  liave  been
concerned  to  piu*pose,  of  \\hich  we  have  now  no  memory  or
consciousness  remaining.  And  thus  we  may  happen  to  be  again
and  again  to  jierpetuity,  for  any  reason  we  can  show  to  the
contrary.  All  is  revohition  in  us.  Wc  are  no  more  the  self-
same matter  or  system  of  matter  from  one  day  to  another.
What  succession  there  may  be  hereafter  we  know  not,  since
even  now  we  live  by  succession,  and  only  perish  and  are
renewed.  'Tis  in  vain  we  flatter  ourselves  with  the  assurance
of  our  interests  ending  with  a  certain  shape  or  form.  What
interested  us  at  first  in  it  we  know  not,  any  more  than  how  we
have  since  held  on,  and  continue  still  concerned  in  such  an
assemblage  of  fleeting  particles.  AVhere  besides  or  in  what
else  we  may  have  to  do,  perchance,  in  time  to  come,  we  know  as
little,  nor  can  tell  how  chance  or  providence  hereafter  may
dispose  of  us.  And  if  providence  be  in  the  case,  we  have  still
more  reason  to  consider  how  we  undertake  to  be  our  own  dis-
posers. It  must  needs  become  a  sceptic  above  all  men  to
hesitate  in  matters  of  exchange.  And  though  he  acknowledges
no  present  good  or  enjoyment  in  life,  he  must  be  sure,  however,
of  bettering  his  condition  before  he  attempts  to  alter  it.  But
as  yet,  Philocles,  even  this  point  remains  undetermined  between
us :  "  whether  in  this  present  life  there  be  not  such  a  thing  as

real  oood."

o

Be  you  therefore,  said  I,  my  instructor,  sagacious  Theocles !
and  inform  me  "  what  that  good  is,  or  where,  w  hich  can  afford
contentment  and  satisfaction  always  alike,  without  variation  or
diminution."  For  though  on  some  occasions  and  in  some
subjects  the  mind  may  possibly  be  so  bent,  and  the  passion  so
wrought  up,  that  for  the  time  no  bodily  sufferance  or  pain  can

35


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

alter  it,  yet  this  is  what  can  seldom  happen,  and  is  unlikely  to
last  long,  since  without  any  pain  or  inconvenience,  the  passion
in  a  little  time  does  its  own  work,  the  mind  relaxes  with  its
bent,  and  the  temper  wearied  with  repetition  finds  no  more
enjoyment,  but  runs  to  something  new.

Hear  then  !  said  Theocles.  For  though  I  pretend  not  to
tell  you  at  once  the  nature  of  this  which  I  call  good,  yet  I  am
content  to  show  you  something  of  it  in  yourself,  which  you  will
acknowledge  to  be  naturally  more  fixed  and  constant  than  any-
thing you  have  hitherto  thought  on.  Tell  me,  my  friend,  if
ever  you  were  weary  of  doing  good  to  those  you  loved  ?  Say
when  you  ever  found  it  unpleasing  to  serve  a  friend .''  or
whether  when  you  first  proved  this  generous  pleasure  you  did
not  feel  it  less  than  at  this  present,  after  so  long  experience  ?
Believe  me,  Philocles,  this  pleasure  is  more  debauching  than
any  other.  Never  did  any  soul  do  good,  but  it  came  readier
to  do  the  same  again  with  more  enjoyment.  Never  was  love,
or  gratitude,  or  bounty  practised  but  with  increasing  joy,  which
made  the  practiser  still  more  in  love  with  the  fair  act.  Answer
me,  Philocles,  you  who  are  such  a  judge  of  beauty,  and  have  so
good  a  taste  of  pleasure,  is  there  anything  you  admire  so  fair
as  friendship  ?  or  anything  so  charming  as  a  generous  action  ?
What  would  it  be,  therefore,  if  all  life  were  in  reality  but  one
continued  friendship,  and  could  be  made  one  such  entire  act  .'*
Here  surely  would  be  that  fixed  and  constant  good  you  sought.
Or  would  you  look  for  anything  beyond  ?

Perhaps  not,  said  I.  But  I  can  never,  surely,  go  beyond
this  to  seek  for  a  chimera,  if  this  good  of  yours  be  not
thoroughly  chimerical.  For  though  a  poet  may  possibly  work
up  such  a  single  action,  so  as  to  hold  a  play  out,  I  can  conceive
but  very  faintly  how  this  high  strain  of  friendship  can  be  so
managed  as  to  fill  a  life.  Nor  can  I  imagine  where  the  object
lies  of  such  a  sublime,  heroic  passion.

Can  any  friendship,  said  he,  be  so  heroic  as  that  towards
mankind .'' Do  you  think  the  love  of  friends  in  general  and

36


THE MORALISTS

of  one's  country  to  be  notliiii*;"?  or  tluit  particular  friendship
can  well  subsist  without  such  an  enlarged  affection  and  sense
of  obligation  to  society  ?  Say,  if  possible,  you  are  a  friend,
but  hate  vour  country.  Say,  you  are  true  to  the  interest  of  a
companion,  but  false  to  that  of  society.  Can  you  believe  your-
self.? or  will  you  lay  the  name  aside,  and  refuse  to  be  called  the
friend,  since  you  renounce  the  man  ?

That  there  is  something,  said  I,  due  to  mankind,  is  what  I
think  will  not  be  disputed  by  one  who  claims  the  name  of
friend.  Hardly  indeed  could  I  allow  the  name  of  man  to  one
who  never  could  call  or  be  called  friend.  But  he  who  .justly
proves  himself  a  friend  is  man  enough,  nor  is  he  wanting  to
society.  A  single  friendship  may  accpiit  him.  He  has  deserved
a  friend,  and  is  man's  friend,  though  not  in  strictness,  or  accord-
ing to  your  high  moral  sense,  the  friend  of  mankind.  For  to
say  truth,  as  to  this  sort  of  friendship  it  may  by  wiser  heads
be  esteemed  perhaps  more  than  ordinarily  manly,  and  even
heroic,  as  you  assert  it ;  but  for  my  part  I  see  so  very  little
worth  in  mankind,  and  have  so  indifferent  an  opinion  of  the
public,  that  I  can  propose  little  satisfaction  to  myself  in  loving
either.

Do  you,  then,  take  bounty  and  gratitude  to  be  among  the
acts  of  friendship  and  good-nature  ?  Undoubtedly,  for  they
are  the  chief.  Suppose  then  that  the  obliged  person  discovers
in  the  obliger  several  failings ;  does  this  exclude  the  gratitude
of  the  former  ?  Not  in  the  least.  Or  does  it  make  the  exercise
of  gratitude  less  pleasing  ?  I  think  rather  the  contrary.  For
when  deprived  of  other  means  of  making  a  return,  I  might
rejoice  still  in  that  sure  way  of  showing  my  gratitude  to  mv
benefactor  by  bearing  his  failings  as  a  friend.  And  as  to
bounty  :  tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  is  it  to  tliose  only  who  are
deserving  that  we  should  do  good  ?  Is  it  only  to  a  good
neighbour  or  relation,  a  good  fother,  child,  or  brother.?  Or
does  Nature,  reason,  and  humanitv  better  teach  us  to  do  good
still  to  a  father  because  a  father,  and  to  a  child  because  a  child,

37


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  so  to  every  relation  in  human  life  ?  I  think,  said  I,  this
last  is  rightest.

O  Philocles,  replied  he,  consider  then  what  it  was  you  said
when  you  objected  against  the  love  of  mankind  because  of
human  frailty,  and  seemed  to  scorn  the  public  because  of  its
misfortunes.  See  if  this  sentiment  be  consistent  with  that
humanity  which  elsewhere  you  own  and  practise.  For  where
can  srenerosity  exist  if  not  here  ?  AVhere  can  we  ever  exert
friendship,  if  not  in  this  chief  subject  ?  To  what  should  we
be  true  or  grateful  in  the  world  if  not  to  mankind  and  that
society  to  which  we  are  so  deeply  indebted  ?  What  are  the
faults  or  blemishes  which  can  excuse  such  an  omission,  or  in  a
srateful  mind  can  ever  lessen  the  satisfaction  of  makino;  a
grateful,  kind  return  ?  Can  you  then  out  of  good-breeding
merely,  and  from  a  temper  natural  to  you,  rejoice  to  show
civility,  courteousness,  obligingness,  seek  objects  of  compassion,
and  be  pleased  Avith  every  occurrence  where  you  have  power  to
do  some  service  even  to  people  unknown  ?  Can  you  delight  in
such  adventures  abroad  in  foreign  countries,  or  in  the  case  of
strangers  here  at  home ;  to  help,  assist,  relieve  all  Avho  require
it,  in  the  most  hospitable,  kind,  and  friendly  manner  ?  And
can  your  country  or,  what  is  more,  your  kind,  require  less  kind-
ness from  you,  or  deserve  less  to  be  considered,  than  even  one
of  these  chance  creatures  ?  O  Philocles  !  how  little  do  you
know  the  extent  and  power  of  good-nature,  and  to  what  an
heroic  pitch  a  soul  may  rise  which  knows  the  thorough  force
of  it,  and  distributing  it  rightly,  frames  in  itself  an  equal,  just,
and  universal  friendship  !

Just  as  he  had  ended  these  words,  a  servant  came  to  us  in
the  field  to  give  notice  of  some  company  who  were  come  to
dine  with  us,  and  waited  our  coming  in.  So  we  walked  home-
wards. I  told  Theocles,  going  along,  that  I  feared  I  should
never  make  a  good  friend  or  lover  after  his  way.  As  for  a
plain  natural  love  of  one  single  person  in  either  sex,  I  could
compass  it,  I  thought,  well  enough ;  but  this  complex,  universal

38


THE MOKATJSTS

sort  was  beyond  my  reach.  I  could  love  the  individual,  hut
not  the  species.  This  was  too  mysterious,  too  metaphysical  an
object  for  me.  In  short,  I  could  love  nothing  of  which  I  had
not  some  sensible,  material  image.

How  !  replied  Theocles,  can  you  never  love  except  in  this
manner  ?  when  yet  I  know  that  you  admired  and  loved  a  friend
long  ere  you  knew  his  ]:)erson.  Or  was  Palemon's  character  of
no  force  when  it  engaged  you  in  that  long  correspondence
which  jn'ecedcd  vour  late  ])ersonal  acquaintance  ?  The  fact,
said  I,  I  must  of  necessity  own  to  vou.  And  now,  methinks,
I  understand  vour  mystery,  and  perceive  how  I  must  prepare
for  it ;  for  in  the  same  manner  as  when  I  first  began  to  love
Palemon,  I  was  forced  to  form  a  kind  of  material  object,  and
had  always  such  a  certain  image  of  him  ready  drawn  in  my
mind  whenever  I  thouoht  of  him  ;  so  I  must  endeavour  to  order
it  in  the  case  before  us,  if  possibly  by  your  help  I  can  raise  any
such  image  or  spectre  as  may  represent  this  odd  being  you
would  have  me  love.

Methinks,  said  he,  you  might  have  the  same  indulgence  for
Nature  or  Mankind  as  for  the  people  of  old  Rome,  whom,
notwithstanding  their  blemishes,  I  have  known  you  in  love
with  many  ways,  particularly  under  the  representation  of  a
beautiful  youth  called  the  Genius  of  the  People.  For  I  re-
member that,  viewing  once  some  pieces  of  antiquity  where  the
people  were  thus  represented,  you  allowed  them  to  be  no
disagreeable  object.

Indeed,  replied  I,  were  it  possible  for  me  to  stamp  upon  my
mind  such  a  figure  as  you  speak  of,  whether  it  stood  for  Mankind
or  Nature,  it  might  probably  have  its  effect,  and  I  might  become
perhaps  a  lover  after  your  wav ;  but  more  especially  if  you
could  so  order  it  as  to  make  things  reciprocal  between  us,  and
bring  me  to  fancy  of  this  genius  that  it  could  be  "  sensible  of
my  love,  and  capable  of  a  return."  For  without  this  I  should
make  but  an  ill  lover,  though  of  the  perfectest  beauty  in  the
world.

39


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

'Tis  enough,  said  Theocles,  I  accept  the  terms,  and  if  you
promise  to  love,  I  will  endeavour  to  show  you  that  beauty
which  I  count  the  perfectest,  and  most  deserving  of  love,  and
which  will  not  fail  of  a  return.  .  .  .  To-morrow,  when  the
eastern  sun  (as  poets  describe)  with  his  first  beams  adorns  the
front  of  yonder  hill,  there,  if  you  are  content  to  wander  with
me  in  the  woods  you  see,  we  will  pursue  those  loves  of  ours  by
favour  of  the  sylvan  nymphs ;  and  invoking  first  the  genius  of
the  place,  we  will  try  to  obtain  at  least  some  faint  and  distant
view  of  the  sovereign  genius  and  first  beauty.  This  if  you  can
come  once  to  contemplate,  I  will  answer  for  it  that  all  those
forbidding  features  and  deformities,  whether  of  Nature  or
Mankind,  will  vanish  in  an  instant,  and  leave  you  that  love  I
could  wish.  But  now,  enough  !  .  .  .  Let  us  to  our  company,
and  change  this  conversation  for  some  other  more  suitable  to
our  friends  and  table.


Sectiox II

You  see  here,  Palemon,  what  a  foundation  is  laid  for  the  en-
thusiasms I  told  you  of,  and  which,  in  my  opinion  (I  told  you
too),  were  the  more  dangerous,  because  so  very  odd  and  out  of
the  way.  But  curiosity  had  seized  you,  I  perceived,  as  it  had
done  me  before.  For  after  this  first  conversation  I  must  own
I  longed  for  nothing  so  much  as  the  next  dav,  and  the  appointed
morning  walk  in  the  woods.

We  had  only  a  friend  or  two  at  dinner  with  us,  and  for  a
good  while  we  discoursed  of  news  and  indifferent  things,  till  1,
who  had  my  head  still  running  upon  those  other  subjects,  gladly
laid  hold  of  something  dropt  by  chance  concerning  friendship,
and  said  that  for  my  own  part,  truly,  though  I  once  thought  I
had  known  friendship,  and  really  counted  myself  a  good  friend
during  my  whole  life,  yet  I  was  now  persuaded  to  believe
myself  no  better  than  a  learner,  since  Theocles  had  almost  con-
vinced me  "  that  to  be  a  friend  to  any  one  in  particular,  'twas

40


THE MORALISTS

necessary  to  be  first  a  friend  to  mankind.'"  But  how  to  qualify
myself  for  such  a  friendship  was,  niethought,  no  little  difliculty.

Indeed,  said  Theocles,  you  have  criven  us  a  very  indifferent
character  of  yourself  in  saying  so.  If  you  had  spoken  thus  of
the  friendship  of  any  threat  man  at  court,  or  perhajjs  of  a  court
itself,  and  had  complained  "how  hard  it  was  for  you  to  succeed,
or  make  interest  with  such  as  ooverned  there,"  we  should  have
concluded  in  your  behalf  that  there  were  such  terms  to  be  com-
plied with  as  were  unworthy  of  you.  But  "to  deserve  well
of  the  public,'"  and  "to  be  justly  styled  the  friend  of  mankind,"'"'
requires  no  more  than  to  be  good  and  virtuous ;  terms  which
for  one''s  own  sake  one  would  naturally  covet.

How  comes  it  then,  said  I,  that  even  these  good  terms
themselves  are  so  ill  accepted,  and  hardly  ever  taken  (if  I  may
so  express  it)  except  on  further  terms  ?  For  virtue  by  itself  is
thought  but  an  ill  bargain;  and  I  know  few,  even  of  the  religious
and  devout,  who  take  up  with  it  any  otherwise  than  as  children
do  with  physic ;  where  the  rod  and  sweetmeat  are  the  potent
motives.

They  are  children  indeed,  replied  Theocles,  and  should  be
treated  so,  who  need  any  force  or  persuasion  to  do  what  conduces
to  their  health  and  good.  But  where,  I  beseech  you,  are  those
forbidding  circumstances  which  should  make  virtue  go  down  so
hardly  ?  Is  it  not  among  other  things  that  you  think  yourself
by  this  means  precluded  the  fine  tables  and  costly  eating  of  our
modern  epicures,  and  that  perhaps  you  fear  the  being  reduced
to  eat  always  as  ill  as  now,  upon  a  plain  dish  or  two  and  no
more  ?

This,  I  protested,  was  injuriously  supposed  of  me.  For  I
wished  never  to  eat  otherwise  than  I  now  did  at  his  table,  which,
by  the  way,  had  more  resemblance,  I  thought,  of  Epicurus's,
than  those  which  nowadays  preposterously  passed  under  his
name.  For  if  his  opinion  might  be  taken,  the  highest  pleasures
in  the  world  were  owing  to  temperance  and  moderate  use.

If  then  the  merest  studier  of  pleasure,  answered  Theocles,

41


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

even  Epicurus  himself,  made  that  favourable  report  of  temper-
ance, so  different  from  his  modern  disciples ;  if  he  could  boldly
say  "  that  with  such  fare  as  a  mean  garden  afforded,  he  could
vie  even  with  the  gods  for  happiness  " ;  how  shall  we  say  of  this
part  of  virtue  that  it  needs  be  taken  upon  terms  ?  If  the  im-
mediate practice  of  temperance  be  thus  harmless,  are  its  conse-
quences injurious  ?  Does  it  take  from  the  vigour  of  the  mind,
consume  the  body,  and  render  both  the  one  and  the  other  less
apt  to  their  proper  exercises,  "  the  enjoyments  of  reason  or  sense,
or  the  employments  and  offices  of  civil  life "  ?  Or  is  it  that  a
man^s  circumstances  are  the  worse  for  it,  as  he  stands  towards
his  friends  or  mankind  ?  Is  a  gentleman  in  this  sense  to  be
pitied  "  as  one  burdensome  to  himself  and  others ;  one  whom
all  men  will  naturally  shun  as  an  ill  friend  and  a  corrupter  of
society  and  good  manners"?  .  .  .  Shall  we  consider  our  gentleman
in  a  public  trust,  and  see  whether  he  is  like  to  succeed  best  with
this  restraining  quality,  or  whether  he  may  be  more  relied  on,
and  thought  more  incorrupt,  if  his  appetites  are  high,  and  his
relish  strong  towards  that  which  we  call  pleasure  ?  Shall  we
consider  him  as  a  soldier  in  a  campaign  or  siege,  and  advise
with  ourselves  how  we  might  be  best  defended,  if  we  had  occa-
sion for  such  a  one's  service  ?  "  Which  officer  would  make  the
best  for  the  soldiers,  which  soldier  for  the  officers,  or  which  army
for  their  country  ? "  .  .  .  What  think  you  of  our  gentleman
for  a  fellow-traveller  ?  Would  he,  as  a  temperate  man,  be  an
ill  choice  ?  Would  it  indeed  be  more  eligible  and  delightful
"  to  have  a  companion  who,  in  any  shift  or  necessity,  would
prove  the  most  ravenous,  and  eager  to  provide  in  the  first  place
for  himself,  and  his  own  exquisite  sensations "  ?  .  .  .  I  know
not  what  to  say  where  beauty  is  concerned.  Perhaps  the
amorous  galants  and  exquisite  refiners  on  this  sort  of  pleasure
may  have  so  refined  their  minds  and  tempers  that,  notwith-
standing their  accustomed  indulgence,  they  can  upon  occasion
renounce  their  enjoyment  rather  than  violate  honour,  faith,  or
justice. .  .  . And thus  at  last  there  will be little  virtue  or

42


TFIK >rOKATJSTS

worth  ascribed  to  this  patient,  sober  character.  "The  dull,
temperate  man  is  no  fitter  to  be  trusted  than  the  elegant,
luxurious  one.  Innocence,  youth,  and  fortune  may  be  as  well
committed  to  the  care  of  this  latter  gentleman.  He  would
prove  as  good  an  executor,  as  good  a  trustee,  as  good  a  guardian,
as  he  would  a  friend.  The  family  which  entrusted  him  would
be  secure,  and  no  dishonour  in  any  likelihood  would  ha])j)en
from  the  honest  man  of  pleasure."

The  seriousness  with  which  Theocles  spoke  this,  made  it  the
more  pleasant,  and  set  our  other  company  upon  saying  a  great
many  good  things  on  the  same  subject  in  commendation  of  a
temperate  life.  So  that  our  dinner  by  this  time  being  ended,
and  the  wine,  according  to  custom,  placed  before  us,  I  found
still  we  were  in  no  likelihood  of  proceeding  to  a  debauch.
Every  one  drank  only  as  he  fancied,  in  no  order  or  proportion,
and  with  no  regard  to  circular  healths  or  pledges.  A  manner
which  the  sociable  men  of  another  scheme  of  morals  \\ould  have
censured  no  doubt  as  a  heinous  irregularity  and  corruption  of
good  fellowshi]).

I  own,  said  I,  I  am  far  from  thinking  temperance  so  dis-
agreeable a  character.  As  for  this  part  of  virtue,  I  think  there
is  no  need  of  taking  it  on  any  other  terms  to  recommend  it
than  the  mere  advantage  of  being  saved  from  intemperance,  and
from  the  desire  of  things  unnecessary.

How,  said  Theocles,  are  you  thus  far  advanced  ?  And  can
you  carry  this  temperance  so  far  as  to  estates  and  honours  by
opposing  it  to  avarice  and  ambition .''  Nay,  then  truly  you
may  be  said  to  have  fairly  embarked  yourself  in  this  cause.
You  have  passed  the  channel,  and  arc  more  than  half-seas
over.  There  remains  no  further  scru])le  in  the  case  of  virtue
unless  you  will  declare  yourself  a  coward,  or  conclude  it  a
happiness  to  be  }x)rn  one.  For  if  you  can  be  temperate  withal
towards  life,  and  think  it  not  so  great  a  business  whether  it  be
of  fewer  or  more  years  ;  but,  satisfied  with  what  you  have  lived,
can  rise  a  thankful  guest  from  a  full,  liberal  entertainment,  is

43


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

not  this  the  sum  of  all  ?  the  finishing  stroke  and  very  ac-
complishment of  virtue  ?  In  this  temper  of  mind  what  is
there  can  hinder  us  from  forming  for  ourselves  as  heroic  a
character  as  we  please  ?  What  is  there  either  good,  generous,
or  great,  which  does  not  naturally  flow  from  such  a  modest
temperance  ?  Let  us  once  gain  this  simple,  plain-looked  virtue,
and  see  whether  the  more  shining  virtues  will  not  follow.  See
what  that  country  of  the  mind  will  produce,  when  by  the
wholesome  laws  of  this  legislatress  it  has  obtained  its  liberty !
You,  Philocles,  who  are  such  an  admirer  of  civil  liberty,  and
can  represent  it  to  yourself  with  a  thousand  several  graces  and
advantages ;  can  you  imagine  no  grace  or  beauty  in  that
original,  native  liberty  which  sets  us  free  from  so  many  inborn
tyrannies,  gives  us  the  privilege  of  ourselves,  and  makes  _us
our  own  and  independent  ?  A  sort  of  property  which,  me-
thinks,  is  as  material  to  us  to  the  full  as  that  which  secures  us
our  lands  or  revenues.

I  should  think,  said  he  (carrying  on  his  humour),  that  one
might  draw  the  picture  of  this  moral  dame  to  as  much
advantage  as  that  of  her  political  sister,  whom  you  admire,  as
described  to  us  "  in  her  Amazon-dress,  with  a  free,  manly  air
becoming  her ;  her  guards  the  laws,  with  their  written  tables,
like  bucklers,  surrounding  her;  riches,  traffic,  and  plenty,  with
the  cornucopia,  serving  as  her  attendants ;  and  in  her  train  the
arts  and  sciences,  like  children,  playing."  .  .  .  The  rest  of  the  piece
is  easy  to  imagine:  "her  triumph  over  tyranny,  and  lawless
rule  of  lust  and  passion."  .  .  .  But  what  a  triumph  would  her
sister"'s  be !  what  monsters  of  savage  passions  would  there
appear  subdued  !  "  There  fierce  ambition,  lust,  uproar,  mis-
rule, with  all  the  fiends  which  rage  in  human  breasts,  would
be  securely  chained.  And  when  fortune  herself,  the  queen  of
flatteries,  with  that  prince  of  terrors,  death,  were  at  the  chariot-
wheels  as  captives,  how  natural  would  it  be  to  see  fortitude,
magnanimity,  justice,  honour,  and  all  that  generous  band
attend  as  the  companions  of  our  inmate  Lady  Liberty  ! She,

44


THE MORALISTS

like  some  new-born  ooddoss,  would  oracc  her  mother's  chariot,
and  own  her  birth  from  humble  temperance,  that  nursing
mother  of  the  virtues,  who  like  the  parent  of  the  gods  (old
reverend  Cybele)  would  pro})erly  ap])ear  drawn  by  reined  lions,
patient  of  the  bit,  and  on  her  head  a  turret-like  attire,  the
image  of  defensive  power  aiid  strength  of  mind."

Kv  this  ])icture  Theock™!  found,  had  given  entertainment
to  the  company,  who,  from  this  rough  draught  of  his,  fell  to
designing  upon  the  same  subject  after  the  ancient  manner,  till
Prodicus  and  Cebes  and  all  the  ancients  were  exhausted.

Gentlemen,  said  I,  the  descriptions  you  have  been  making
are,  no  doubt,  the  finest  in  the  world ;  but  after  all,  when  you
have  made  virtue  as  glorious  and  triumphant  as  you  please,  1
will  bring  you  an  authentic  ])ictiu'e  of  another  kind,  where  we
shall  see  this  trium})h  in  reverse :  "  Virtue  herself  a  captive  in
her  turn  ;  and  by  a  proud  concpieror  triumphed  over,  degraded,
spoiled  of  all  her  honours,  and  defaced,  so  as  to  retain  hardly
one  single  feature  of  real  beauty."

I  offered  to  go  on  further,  but  could  not,  being  so  violently
decried  by  my  two  fellow-guests,  who  protested  they  would
never  be  brought  to  own  so  detestable  a  picture ;  and  one  of
them  (a  formal  sort  of  gentleman,  somewhat  advanced  in  years)
looking  earnestly  upon  me,  said,  in  an  angry  tone,  "  that  he
had  hitherto,  indeed,  conceived  some  hopes  of  me,  notwith-
standing he  observed  my  freedom  of  thought,  and  heard  me
quoted  for  such  a  passionate  lover  of  liberty ;  but  he  was  sorry
to  find  that  my  principle  of  liberty  extended  in  fine  to  a  liberty
from  all  principles "  (so  he  expressed  himself),  "  and  none,"  he
thought,  "  beside  a  libertine  in  principle  would  approve  of  such
a  picture  of  virtue  as  only  an  atheist  could  have  the  impudence
to  make."

Theocles  the  while  sat  silent,  though  he  saw  I  minded  not
my  antagonists,  but  kept  my  eye  fixed  steadily  on  himself,
expecting  to  hear  what  he  would  say.  At  last,  fetching  a  deep
sigh,  O  Philocles,  said  he,  how  well  you  are  master  of  that

45


SHAFTESBURY'S CHAHACTETMSTICS

cause  yon  have  taken  on  you  to  defend  !  How  well  you  know
the  way  to  gain  advantage  to  the  ^^'Ol^st  of  causes  from  the
imprudent  management  of  those  who  defend  the  best !  I  dare
not,  for  my  own  share,  affirm  to  you,  as  my  worthy  friends
have  done,  "  that  'tis  the  atheist  alone  can  lay  this  load  on
Virtue,  and  picture  her  thus  disgracefully."  No.  There  are
other  over-officious  and  less  suspected  hands,  which  do  her
perhaps  more  injury,  though  with  a  better  colour.

That  virtue  should,  with  any  show  of  reason,  be  made  a
victim  (continued  he,  turning  himself  to  his  guests)  must  have
appeared  strange  to  you,  no  doubt,  to  hear  asserted  with  such
assurance  as  has  been  done  by  Philocles.  You  could  conceive
no  tolerable  ground  for  such  a  spectacle.  In  this  reversed
triumph  you  expected  perhaps  to  see  some  foreign  conqueror
exalted  ;  as  either  vice  itself,  or  pleasure,  wit,  spurious  philo-
sophy, or  some  false  image  of  truth  or  Nature.  Little  were
you  aware  that  the  cruel  enemy  opposed  to  virtue  should  be
religion  itself !  But  you  will  call  to  mind  that  even  innocently,
and  without  any  treacherous  design,  virtue  is  often  treated  so
by  those  who  would  magnify  to  the  utmost  the  corruption  of
man's  heart ;  and  in  exposing,  as  they  pretend,  the  falsehood
of  human  virtue,  think  to  extol  religion.  How  many  religious
authors,  how  many  sacred  orators,  turn  all  their  edge  this  way,
and  strike  at  moral  virtue  as  a  kind  of  step-dame,  or  rival  to
religion !  "  Morality  must  not  be  named ;  Nature  has  no
pretence ;  reason  is  an  enemy ;  common  justice,  folly ;  and
virtue,  misery.  Who  would  not  be  vicious  had  he  his  choice  ?
Who  would  forbear  but  because  he  must .''  Or  who  would
value  virtue  but  for  hereafter  ?  "  ^

Truly,  said  the  old  gentleman  (interru]:)ting  him),  if  this  be
the  triumph  of  religion,  'tis  such  as  her  greatest  enemy,  I
believe,  would  scarce  deny  her;  and  I  must  still  be  of  opinion
(with  Philocles's  leave)  that  it  is  no  great  sign  of  tenderness  for
religion  to  be  so  zealous  in  honouring  her  at  the  cost  of  virtue.
^  Misc.  V.  ch.  iii.

46


THE MOUALISTS

Perhaps  so,  said  I.  Vet  that  there  are  inany  such  zealots
in  the  world  you  will  acknowledge.  And  that  there  is  a  certain
harmony  between  this  zeal  and  what  you  call  atheism,  Theocles,
you  hear,  has  allowed.  Hut  let  us  hear  him  out,  if  perhaps  lie
will  be  so  free  as  to  discover  to  us  what  he  thinks  of  the
generality  of  our  religious  writers,  and  their  method  of  en-
counterino-  their  connnon  enemy,  the  atheist.  This  is  a  subject
which  })ossibly  may  need  a  better  clearino;.  I'or  'tis  notorious'
that  the  chief  opposers  of  atheism  write  upon  contrary  prin-
ciples to  one  another,  so  as  in  a  manner  to  confute  themselves.
Some  of  them  hold  zealously  for  \irtue,  and  are  realists  in  the
point.  Others,  one  may  say,  are  only  nominal  moralists,  by
makin<);  virtue  nothing  in  itself,  a  creature  of  will  onlv,  or  a
mere  name  of  fashion.  'Tis  the  same  in  natural  })hiloso})hy  :
some  take  one  hypothesis  and  some  another.  I  should  be  glad
to  discover  once  the  true  foundation,  and  distinguish  those  who
effectually  refute  their  other  antagonists  as  well  as  the  atheists,
and  rightly  assert  the  joint  cause  of  virtue  and  religion.

Here,  Palemon,  I  had  my  wish.  For  bv  den;rees  I  eny-aaed
Theocles  to  chscover  himself  fully  upon  these  subjects,  which
served  as  a  prelude  to  those  we  were  to  engage  in  the  next
morning,  for  the  approach  of  which  I  so  impatientlv  longed.
If  his  speculations  proved  of  a  rational  kind,  this  previous
discourse,  I  knew,  would  help  me  to  comprehend  them ;  if  only
pleasing  fancies,  this  would  hel})  me,  however,  to  please  myself
the  better  with  them.

Here  then  began  his  criticism  of  authors,  which  grew  bv
degrees  into  a  continued  discourse.  So  that  had  this  been  at  a
university,  Theocles  might  very  well  have  })assed  for  some  grave
divinity  professor,  or  teacher  of  ethics,  reading  an  afternoon
lecture  to  his  pupils.

Section  IH

It  would  be  undoubtedly,  said  he,  a  happy  cause  which  could
have  the  benefit  of  such  managers  as  should  never  give  their

47


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

adversaries  any  handle  of  advantage  against  it.  I  could  wish
that  in  the  cause  of  rehgion  we  had  reason  to  boast  as  much.
-But  since  'tis  not  impossible  to  write  ill  even  in  the  best  of
causes,  I  am  inclined  to  think  this  great  one  of  religion  may
have  run  at  least  an  equal  hazard  with  any  other,  since  they
who  write  in  defence  of  it  are  apt  generally  to  use  so  much  the
less  caution  as  they  are  more  exempt  from  the  fear  of  censure
or  criticism  in  their  own  person.  Their  adversary  is  well  secured
and  silenced  to  their  hand.  They  may  safely  provoke  him  to  a
field  where  he  cannot  appear  openly,  or  as  a  professed  antagonist.
His  weapons  are  private,  and  can  often  reach  the  cause  without
offence  to  its  maintainers,  whilst  no  direct  attack  robs  them  of
their  imaginary  victory.  They  conquer  for  themselves,  and
expect  to  be  approved  still  for  their  zeal,  however  the  cause
itself  may  have  suffered  in  their  hands.

Perhaps  then,  said  I  (interrupting  him),  it  may  be  true
enough  what  was  said  once  by  a  person  who  seemed  zealous  for
religion,  "that  none  writ  well  against  the  atheists  beside  the
clerk  who  drew  the  warrant  for  their  execution,"

If  this  were  the  true  writing,  replied  he,  there  would  be  an
end  of  all  dispute  or  reasoning  in  the  case.  For  where  force  is
necessary,  reason  has  nothing  to  do.  But  on  the  other  hand,
if  reason  be  needful,  force  in  the  meanwhile  must  be  laid  aside ;
for  there  is  no  enforcement  of  reason  but  by  reason.  And
therefore  if  atheists  are  to  be  reasoned  with  at  all,  they  are  to
be  reasoned  with  like  other  men,  since  there  is  no  other  way  in
Nature  to  convince  them.

This  I  own,  said  I,  seems  rational  and  just,  but  I  am  afraid
that  most  of  the  devout  people  will  be  found  ready  to  abandon
the  patient  for  the  more  concise  method.  And  though  force
without  reason  may  be  thought  somewhat  hard,  yet  your  other
way  of  reason  without  force,  I  am  apt  to  think,  would  meet
with  fewer  admirers.

But  perhaps,  replied  Theocles,  'tis  a  mere  sound  which
troubles  us. The  word  or  name  of  atheist  may  possibly  occa-

48


THE MORALISTS

sion  some  disturbance,  by  bein«^  made  to  describe  two  characters
so  very  different  as  his  who  absolutely  denies  and  his  who  only
doubts.  Now  he  who  doubts  may  possibly  lament  his  own
unhappiness  and  wish  to  be  convinced.  He  who  denies  is
daringly  presumptuous,  and  sets  up  an  opinion  against  the
interest  of  mankind  and  being  of  society.  'Tis  easily  seen  that
one  of  these  persons  may  bear  a  due  respect  to  the  magistrate
and  laws,  though  not  the  other,  who  being  obnoxious  to  them
is  therefore  punishable.  But  how  the  former  is  punishable  by
man  will  be  hard  to  say,  unless  the  magistrate  had  dominion
over  minds,  as  well  as  over  actions  and  behaviour,  and  had
power  to  exercise  an  inquisition  within  the  inmost  bosoms  and
secret  thoughts  of  men.

I  apprehend  you,  said  I.  And  by  your  account,  as  tliere
are  two  sorts  of  people  who  are  called  atheists,  so  there  are  two
ways  of  writing  against  them,  which  may  be  fitly  used  apart,
but  not  so  well  jointly.  You  would  set  aside  mere  menaces
and  separate  the  philosopher's  work  from  the  magistrate's,
taking  it  for  granted  that  the  more  discreet  and  sober  part  of
unbelievers,  who  come  not  under  the  dispatching  pen  of  the
magistrate,  can  be  affected  only  by  the  more  deliberate  and
gentle  one  of  philosophy.  Now  the  language  of  the  magistrate,
I  must  confess,  has  little  in  common  with  that  of  philosophy.
Nothing  can  be  more  unbecoming  the  niagisterial  authority
than  a  philosophical  style,  and  nothing  can  be  more  unphilo-
sophical  than  a  magisterial  one.  A  mixture  of  these  must  needs
spoil  both.  And  therefore,  in  the  cause  before  us,  "  if  any  one
besides  the  magistrate  can  be  said  to  write  well,  'tis  he  (accord-
ing to  your  account)  who  writes  as  becomes  philosophv,  with
freedom  of  debate,  and  ftiirness  towards  his  adversary."

Allow  it,  replied  he.  For  what  can  be  more  equitable .''
Nothing.  But  will  the  world  be  of  the  same  opinion  ?  And
may  this  method  of  writing  be  justly  practised  in  it?  Un-
doubtedly it  may.  And  for  a  proof  we  have  many  instances  in
antiquity  to  produce. The  freedom  taken  in  this  philosophical

VOL.  II  49  E


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

way  was  never  esteemed  injurious  to  religion  or  prejudicial  to
the  vulgar,  since  we  find  it  to  have  been  a  practice  both  in
Avriting  and  converse  among  the  great  men  of  a  virtuous  and
religious  people ;  and  that  even  those  magistrates  who  officiated
at  the  altars,  and  were  the  guardians  of  the  public  worship,
were  sharers  in  these  free  debates.

Forgive  me,  Theocles,  said  I,  if  I  presume  to  say  that  still
this  reaches  not  the  case  before  us.  We  are  to  consider  Christian
times  such  as  are  now  present.  You  know  the  common  fate  of
those  who  dare  to  appear  fair  authors.  What  was  that  pious
and  learned  man's  case  who  wrote  The  Intellectual  System  of  the
Universe  ?  ^  I  confess  it  was  pleasant  enough  to  consider  that
though  the  whole  world  were  no  less  satisfied  with  his  capacity
and  learning  than  with  his  sincerity  in  the  cause  of  Deity,  yet
was  he  accused  of  giving  the  upper  hand  to  the  atheists  for
having  only  stated  their  reasons  and  those  of  their  adversaries
fairly  together.  And  among  other  writings  of  this  kind  you
may  remember  how  a  certain  fair  Inquiry"  (as  you  called  it)
was  received  and  what  offence  was  taken  at  it.

I  am  sorry,  said  Theocles,  it  proved  so.  But  now  indeed
you  have  found  a  way  which  may,  perhaps,  force  me  to  discourse
at  large  with  you  on  this  head,  by  entering  the  lists  in  defence
of  a  friend  unjustly  censured  for  this  philosophical  libertv.

I  confessed  to  Theocles  and  the  company  that  this  had  really
been  my  aim,  and  that  for  this  reason  alone  I  made  myself
the  accuser  of  this  author,  "  whom  I  here  actually  charged,  as  I
did  all  those  other  moderate  calm  writers,  with  no  less  than
profaneness,  for  reasoning  so  unconcernedly  and  patiently,  with-
out the  least  show  of  zeal  or  passion,  upon  the  subject  of  a
Deity  and  a  future  state.'"

And  I,  on  the  other  side,  replied  Theocles,  am  rather  for
this  patient  way  of  reasoning,  and  will  endeavour  to  clear  my
friend  of  this  imputation,  if  you  can  have  patience  enough  to
hear  me  out  in  an  affair -of  such  a  compass.

^  [Cudwortli.]  ^  [I.e.  Shaftesbury's  early  essay^  printed  above.]

50


THE MORALISTS

We  all  answered  for  ourselves,  and  he  befjjan  thus  : —
Of  the  many  writers  engaged  in  the  defence  of  religion,  it
seems  to  me  that  the  greatest  part  are  employed  either  in
supporting  the  truth  of  the  Christian  I'aith  in  general,  or  in
refuting  such  particular  doctrines  as  are  esteemed  innovations
in  the  Christian  Church.  There  are  not,  'tis  thought,  manv
persons  in  the  world  who  are  loose  in  the  very  grounds  and
principles  of  all  religion ;  and  to  such  as  these  we  find,  indeed,
there  are  not  many  writers  who  ])ur])osely  apply  themselves.
They  may  think  it  a  mean  labour,  and  scarce  becoming  them,
to  argue  sedately  with  such  as  are  almost  universally  treated
with  detestation  and  horror.  But  as  we  are  required  by  our
religion  to  have  charity  for  all  men,  so  we  cannot  surely  avoid
having  a  real  concern  for  those  whom  we  apprehend  to  be  under
the  worst  of  errors,  and  whom  we  find  by  experience  to  be  with
the  greatest  difficulty  reclaimed.  Neither  ought  they  perhaps
in  prudence  to  be  treated  with  so  little  regard  whose  number,
however  small,  is  thought  to  be  rather  increasing,  and  this,  too,
among  the  people  of  no  despicable  rank.  So  that  it  may  well
deserve  some  consideration  "•  whether  in  our  age  and  country
the  same  remedies  may  serve  which  have  hitherto  been  tried,
or  whether  some  other  may  not  be  preferred,  as  being  suitable
to  times  of  less  strictness  in  matters  of  religion  and  places  less
subject  to  authority.'"'

This  might  be  enough  to  jnit  an  author  upon  thinking  of
such  a  way  of  reasoning  with  these  deluded  persons,  as  in  his
opinion  might  be  more  effectual  for  their  benefit,  than  the
repeated  exclamations  and  invectives  with  which  most  of  the
arguments  used  against  them  are  conmionly  accompanied.  Nor
was  it  so  absurd  to  imagine  that  a  quite  different  method  might
be  attempted,  by  which  a  writer  might  offer  reason  to  these
men  with  so  much  more  favour  and  advantage,  as  he  appeared
unprepossessed  and  willing  to  examine  everything  with  the
greatest  unconcern  and  indifference.  For  to  such  persons  as
these  "tis  to  be feared  'twill always  appear  "that what  was

51


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

never  questioned,  was  never  proved  ;  and  that  whatever  subject
had  not,  at  some  time  or  other,  been  examined  with  perfect
indifference,  was  never  rightly  examined  nor  could  rightly  be
believed."  And  in  a  treatise  of  this  kind,  offered  as  an  Essay
or  Inquiry  only,  they  would  be  far  from  finding  that  impartiality
and  indifference  which  is  requisite,  if,  instead  of  a  readiness  to
comply  with  whatever  consequences  such  an  examination  as
this  and  the  course  of  reasoning  brought  forth,  the  author
should  show  a  previous  inclination  to  the  consequences  only  on
one  side,  and  an  abhorrence  of  any  conclusion  on  the  other.

Others,  therefore,  in  different  circumstances,  may  perhaps
have  found  it  necessary,  and  becoming  their  character,  to  show
all  manner  of  detestation  both  of  the  persons  and  principles  of
these  men.  Our  author,  on  the  contrary,  whose  character
exceeds  not  that  of  a  layman,  endeavours  to  show  civility  and
favour  by  keeping  the  fairest  measures  he  possibly  can  with  the
men  of  this  sort,  allowing  them  all  he  is  able,  and  arguing  with
a  perfect  indifference,  even  on  the  subject  of  a  Deity.  He
offers  to  conclude  nothing  positive  himself,  but  leaves  it  to
others  to  draw  conclusions  from  his  principles ;  having  this  one
chief  aim  and  intention :  "  how,  in  the  first  place,  to  reconcile
these  persons  to  the  principles  of  virtue ;  that  by  this  means
a  way  might  be  laid  open  to  religion,  by  removing  those  greatest,
if  not  only  obstacles  to  it,  which  arise  from  the  vices  and
passions  of  men."

'Tis  upon  this  account  he  endeavours  chiefly  to  establish
virtue  on  principles  by  which  he  is  able  to  argue  with  those
who  are  not  as  yet  induced  to  own  a  God  or  future  state.  If
he  cannot  do  thus  much,  he  reckons  he  does  nothing.  For  how
can  supreme  goodness  be  intelligible  to  those  who  know  not
what  goodness  itself  is  ?  Or  how  can  virtue  be  understood  to
deserve  reward,  when  as  yet  its  merit  and  excellence  is  unknown  ?
We  begin  surely  at  the  wrong  end  when  we  would  prove  merit
by  favour,  and  order  by  a  Deity.  This  our  friend  seeks  to
redress. For  being,  in  respect  of  virtue,  what  you  lately  called

52


THE MORALISTS

a  realist,  lie  endeavours  to  show  "  that  it  is  really  something
in  itself,  and  in  the  nature  of  things ;  not  arbitrary  or  factitious
(if  I  may  so  speak)  ;  not  constituted  from  without,  or  dependent
on  custom,  fancy,  or  will;  not  even  on  the  supreme  will  itself,
which  can  no  way  govern  it ;  but  being  necessarily  good,  is
governed  by  it  and  ever  uniform  with  it."  And  notwithstand-
ing he  has  thus  made  virtue  his  chief  subject,  and  in  some
measure  independent  on  religion,  yet  I  fancy  he  may  possibly
appear  at  last  as  high  a  divine  as  he  is  a  moralist.

I  would  not  willingly  advance  it  as  a  rule  "  that  those  who
make  only  a  name  of  virtue  make  no  more  of  Deity,  and  cannot
without  affectation  defend  the  i)rinciples  of  religion"  ;  but  this  I
will  venture  to  assert,  "  that  whoever  sincerely  defends  ^•irtue,
and  is  a  realist  in  morality,  must  of  necessity,  in  a  manner,  by
the  same  scheme  of  reasoning,  prove  as  very  a  realist  in  divinity.'

All  affectation,  but  chiefly  in  philosophy,  I  must  own,  I
think  unpardonable.  And  you,  Philocles,  who  can  give  no
quarter  to  ill  reasoning,  nor  endure  any  unsound  or  inconsistent
hypothesis;  you  will  be  so  ingenuous,  I  dare  say,  as  to  reject
our  modern  Deism,  and  challenge  those  who  assume  a  name  to
which  their  philosophy  can  never  in  the  least  entitle  them.

Connnend  me  to  honest  Epicurus,  Avho  raises  his  deities
aloft  in  the  imaginary  spaces,  and  setting  them  apart  out  of
the  universe  and  nature  of  things,  makes  nothing  of  them
beyond  a  word.  This  is  ingenuous  and  plain  dealing ;  for  this
every  one  who  philosoj)hises  may  easily  understand.

The  same  ingenuity  belongs  to  those  philosophers  whom  you,
Philocles,  seem  inclined  to  favour.  When  a  sceptic  questions
"  whether  a  real  theology  can  be  raised  out  of  philosophv  alone,
without  the  help  of  revelation,"  he  does  no  more  than  pav  a
handsome  compliment  to  authority  and  the  received  religion.
He  can  inqiose  on  no  one  who  reasons  deeph' ;  since  whoever
does  so,  will  easily  conceive  that  at  this  rate  theology  must
have  no  foundation  at  all.  For  revelation  itself,  we  know,  is
founded  on  the  acknowledgment  of  a  divine  existence ;  and  'tis

53


SHAFTESBURY'S CHAUACTERISTICS

the  province  of  philosophy  alone  to  prove  what  revelation  only
supposes.

I  look  on  it  therefore  as  a  most  unfair  way  for  those  who
would  be  builders,  and  undertake  this  proving  part,  to  lay  such
a  foundation  as  is  insufficient  to  bear  the  structure.  Supplant-
ing and  undermining  may  in  other  cases  be  fair  war,  but  in
philosophical  disputes  'tis  not  allowable  to  work  underground,
or  as  in  sieges  by  the  sap.  Nothing  can  be  more  unbecoming
than  to  talk  magisterially  and  in  venerable  terms  of  "  a  supreme
Nature,  an  infinite  Being,  and  a  Deity,"  when  all  the  while  a
pi'ovidence  is  never  meant,  nor  anything  like  order  or  the
government  of  a  mind  admitted.  For  when  these  are  understood,
and  real  divinity  acknowledged,  the  notion  is  not  dry  and
barren,  but  such  consequences  are  necessarily  drawn  from  it  as
must  set  us  in  action,  and  find  employment  for  our  strongest
affections.  All  the  duties  of  religion  evidently  follow  hence,
and  no  exception  remains  against  any  of  those  great  maxims
which  revelation  has  established.

Now  whether  our  friend  be  unfeignedly  and  sincerely  of
this  latter  sort  of  real  theologists,  you  will  learn  best  from  the
consequences  of  his  hypothesis.  You  will  observe  whether,
instead  of  ending  in  mere  speculation,  it  leads  to  practice ;  and
you  will  then  surely  be  satisfied  when  you  see  such  a  structure
raised,  as  with  the  generality  of  the  world  must  pass  at  least  for
high  religion,  and  with  some,  in  all  likelihood,  for  no  less  than
enthusiasm.

For  I  appeal  to  you,  Philocles,  whether  there  be  anything  in
divinity  which  you  think  has  more  the  air  of  enthusiasm  than
that  notion  of  divine  love  such  as  separates  from  everything
worldly,  sensual,  or  meanly  interested  ?  A  love  which  is  simple,
pure,  and  unmixed,  which  has  no  other  object  than  merely  the
excellency  of  that  being  itself,  nor  admits  of  any  other  thought
of  happiness  than  in  its  single  fruition.  Now  I  dare  presume
you  will  take  it  as  a  substantial  proof  of  my  friend's  being  far
enough  from  irreligion  if  it  be  shown  that  he  has  espoused  this

54


THE MORALISTS

notion,  anil  thinks  of  making  out  this  high  point  of  divinity,
from  arguments  familiar  even  to  those  who  oppose  rehgion.

According  therefore  to  his  hypothesis  he  would  in  the
first  place,  by  way  of  prevention,  declare  to  you  that  though
the  disinterested  love  of  God  were  the  most  excellent  principle,
yet  he  knew  very  well  that  by  the  indiscreet  zeal  of  some
devout,  well-meaning  people  it  had  been  stretched  too  far,
perhaps  even  to  extravagance  and  enthusiasm,  as  formerly
among  the  mystics  of  the  ancient  church,  whom  these  of  latter
days  have  followed.  On  the  other  hand,  that  there  were  those
who  in  opposition  to  this  devout  mystic  way,  and  as  professed
enemies  to  what  they  call  enthusiasm,  had  so  far  exploded
everything  of  this  ecstatic  kind  as  in  a  manner  to  have  given
up  devotion,  and  in  reality  had  left  so  little  of  zeal,  affection,
or  warmth,  in  what  they  call  their  rational  religion,  as  to  make
them  much  suspected  of  their  sincerity  in  any.  For  though  it
be  natural  enough  (he  would  tell  you)  for  a  mere  political
writer  to  ground  his  great  argument  for  religion  on  the  necessity
of  such  a  belief  as  that  of  a  future  reward  and  punishment,  yet,
if  you  will  take  his  opinion,  'tis  a  very  ill  token  of  sincerity  in
religion,  and  in  the  Christian  religion  more  especiallv,  to  reduce
it  to  such  a  philosophy  as  will  allow  no  room  to  that  other
principle  of  love ;  but  treats  all  of  that  kind  as  enthusiasm
for  so  much  as  aiming  at  what  is  called  disinterestedness,  or
teaching  the  love  of  God  or  virtue  for  God  or  virtue's  sake.

Here,  then,  we  have  two  sorts  of  people  (according  to  my
friend's  account),  who  in  these  opposite  extremes  expose  religion
to  the  insults  of  its  adversaries.  For  as  on  one  hand  'twill  be
found  difficult  to  defend  the  notion  of  that  high-raised  love
espoused  with  so  much  warmth  by  those  devout  mystics,  so  on
the  other  hand  'twill  be  found  as  hard  a  task,  upon  the
principles  of  these  cooler  men,  to  guard  religion  from  the
imputation  of  mercenariness  and  a  slavish  spirit.  For  how
shall  one  deny  that  to  serve  God  by  compulsion,  or  for  interest
merely,  is  servile  and  mercenary  't Is  it  not  evident  that  the

bo


SHAFTESBURYS CHARACTERISTICS

only  true  and  liberal  service  paid  either  to  that  supreme  Being,
or  to  any  other  superior,  is  that  "  which  proceeds  from  an
esteem  or  love  of  the  person  served,  a  sense  of  duty  or  gratitude,
and  a  love  of  the  dutiful  and  grateful  part,  as  good  and  amiable
in  itself"?  And  where  is  the  injury  to  religion  from  such  a
concession  as  this  ?  Or  what  detraction  is  it  from  the  belief  of
an  after  reward  or  punishment  to  own  "  that  the  service  caused
by  it  is  not  equal  to  that  which  is  voluntary  and  with  inclina-
tion, but  is  rather  disingenuous  and  of  the  slavish  kind "  ?  Is
it  not  still  for  the  good  of  mankind  and  of  the  world  that
obedience  to  the  rule  of  right  should  some  way  or  other  be
paid,  if  not  in  the  better  way,  yet  at  least  in  this  imperfect  one  ?
And  is  it  not  to  be  shown  "  that  although  this  service  of  fear  be
allowed  ever  so  low  or  base,  yet  religion  still  being  a  discipline
and  progress  of  the  soul  towards  perfection,  the  motive  of  reward
and  punishment  is  primary  and  of  the  highest  moment  with  us,
till,  being  capable  of  more  sublime  instruction,  we  are  led  from
this  servile  state  to  the  generous  service  of  affection  and  love  "  ?

To  this  it  is  that  in  our  friend's  opinion  we  ought  all  of  us
to  aspire,  so  as  to  endeavour  "that  the  excellence  of  the  object,
not  the  reward  or  pvmishment,  should  be  our  motive ;  but  that
where,  through  the  corruption  of  our  nature,  the  former  of  these
motives  is  found  insufficient  to  excite  to  virtue,  there  the  latter
should  be  brought  in  aid,  and  on  no  account  be  undervalued  or
neglected."

Now  this  being  once  established,  how  can  religion  be  any
longer  subject  to  the  imputation  of  mercenariness  ?  But  thus
we  know  religion  is  often  charged.  "  Godliness,""  say  they,  "  is
great  gain ;  nor  is  God  devoutly  served  for  naught.'"'  ...  Is
this  therefore  a  reproach .''  Is  it  confessed  there  may  be  a  better
service,  a  more  generous  love  ?  Enough,  there  needs  no
more.  On  this  foundation  our  friend  presumes  it  easy  to  defend
religion,  and  even  that  devoutest  part,  which  is  esteemed  so
great  a  paradox  of  faith.  For  if  there  be  in  Nature  such  a
service  as  that  of  affection  and  love,  there  remains  then  only  to

5Q


THE MORALISTS

consider  of  the  object  whether  there  be  really  that  sujireme  One
we  suppose;  for  if  there  be  (hvine  excellence  in  things,  if  there
be  in  Nature  a  supreme  mind  or  Deity,  we  have  then  an  object
consummate  and  comprehensive  of  all  which  is  good  or  excellent.
And  this  object,  of  all  others,  nnist  of  necessity  be  the  most
amiable,  the  most  engaging,  and  of  highest  satisfaction  and
enjoyment.  Now  that  there  is  such  a  principal  object  as  this  in
the  world,  the  world  alone  (if  I  may  say  so)  by  its  wise  and
perfect  order  must  evince.  This  order,  if  indeed  perfect,  excludes
all  real  ill.  And  that  it  really  does  so,  is  what  our  author  so
earnestly  maintiiins,  by  solving  the  best  he  can  those  untoward
phenomena  and  ill  signs,  taken  from  the  course  of  Providence,
in  the  seemingly  unequal  lot  of  virtue  in  this  world.

'Tis  true,  though  the  apjiearances  hold  ever  so  strongly
against  virtue,  and  in  favour  of  vice,  the  objection  which  arises
hence  against  a  Deity  may  be  easily  removed,  and  all  set  right
again  on  the  supposal  of  a  future  state.  This  to  a  Christian,  or
one  already  convinced  of  so  great  a  point,  is  sufficient  to  clear
every  dark  cloud  of  Providence.  For  he  needs  not  be  over  and
above  solicitous  as  to  the  fate  of  virtue  in  this  world  who  is
secure  of  hereafter.  But  the  case  is  otherwise  as  to  the  people
we  are  here  to  encounter.  They  are  at  a  loss  for  Providence,
and  seek  to  find  it  in  the  world.  The  aggravation  of  the
appearing  disorders  in  worldly  affairs,  and  the  blackest
representation  of  society  and  human  nature,  will  hardly  help
them  to  this  view.  'Twill  be  difficult  for  them  to  read
Providence  in  such  characters.  From  so  uncomely  a  face  of
things  below,  they  will  presume  to  think  unfavourably  of  all
above.  By  the  effects  they  see,  they  will  be  inclined  to  judge
the  cause,  and  by  the  fate  of  virtue  to  determine  of  a  providence.
But  being  once  convinced  of  order  and  a  providence  as  to  things
present,  they  may  soon,  perhaps,  be  satisfied  even  of  a  future
state.  For  if  virtue  be  to  itself  no  small  reward,  and  vice  in  a
great  measure  its  own  punishment,  we  have  a  solid  ground  to
go  upon. The  plain  foundations  of  a  distributive  justice  and

57


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

due  order  in  this  world  may  lead  us  to  conceive  a  further
building.  We  apprehend  a  larger  scheme,  and  easily  resolve
ourselves  why  things  were  not  completed  in  this  state,  but
their  accomplishment  reserved  rather  to  some  further  period.
For  had  the  good  and  virtuous  of  mankind  been  wholly
prosperous  in  this  life  ;  had  goodness  never  met  with  opposition,
nor  merit  ever  lain  under  a  cloud  ;  where  had  been  the  trial,
victory,  or  crown  of  virtue  .'*  Where  had  the  virtues  had  their
theatre,  or  whence  their  names .''  Where  had  been  temperance
or  self-denial?  Where  patience,  meekness,  magnanimity?
Whence  have  these  their  being  ?  What  merit  except  from
hardship  ?  What  virtue  without  a  conflict,  and  the  encounter
of  such  enemies  as  arise  both  within  and  from  abroad  ?

But  as  many  as  are  the  difficulties  which  Virtue  has  to
encounter  in  this  world,  her  force  is  yet  superior.  Exposed  as
she  is  here,  she  is  not  however  abandoned  or  left  miserable.
She  has  enough  to  raise  her  above  pity,  though  not  above  our
wishes,  and  as  happy  as  we  see  her  here,  we  have  room  for
further  hopes  in  her  behalf.  Her  present  portion  is  sufficient
to  show  Providence  already  engaged  on  her  side.  And  since
there  is  such  provision  for  her  here,  such  happiness  and  such
advantages  even  in  this  life,  how  probable  must  it  appear  that
this  providential  care  is  extended  yet  further  to  a  succeeding
life,  and  perfected  hereafter  ?

This  is  what,  in  our  friend's  opinion,  may  be  said  in  behalf
of  a  future  state  to  those  who  question  revelation.  'Tis  this
must  render  revelation  probable,  and  secure  that  first  step  to  it,
the  belief  of  a  Deity  and  Providence.  A  providence  must  be
proved  from  what  we  see  of  order  in  things  present.  We  must
contend  for  order ;  and  in  this  part  chiefly,  where  virtue  is  con-
cerned, all  must  not  be  referred  to  a  hereafter.  For  a  disordered
state,  in  which  all  present  care  of  things  is  given  up,  vice  uncon-
trolled, and  virtue  neglected,  represents  a  very  chaos,  and  reduces
us  to  the  beloved  atoms,  chance,  and  confusion  of  the  atheists.

What  therefore  can  be  worse  done  in  the  cause  of  a  Deity

58


THE ^MORALISTS

than  to  niatijnify  disorder,  and  exaggerate  (as  some  zealous
people  do)  the  misfortunes  of  virtue,  so  far  as  to  render  it  an
unhappy  choice  with  respect  to  this  world  ?  They  err  widely
who  propose  to  turn  men  to  the  thoughts  of  a  better  world  by
makinir  them  think  so  ill  of  this.  For  to  declaim  in  this
manner  against  virtue  to  those  of  a  looser  faith,  will  make  them
the  less  believe  a  ])eity,  but  not  the  more  a  future  state.  Nor
can  it  be  thought  sincerely  that  any  man,  by  having  the  most
elevated  opinion  of  virtue,  and  of  the  happiness  it  creates,  was
ever  the  less  inclined  to  the  belief  of  a  future  state.  On  the
contrary,  it  will  ever  be  found  that  as  they  who  are  favourers
of  vice  are  always  the  least  willing  to  hear  of  a  future  existence,
so  they  who  are  in  love  with  virtue  are  the  readiest  to  embrace
that  opinion  which  renders  it  so  illustrious,  and  makes  its  cause
trium})hant.

Thus  it  was  that  among  the  ancients  the  great  motive
which  inclined  so  many  of  the  wisest  to  the  belief  of  this
doctrine,  unrevealed  to  them,  was  purely  the  love  of  virtue  in
the  persons  of  those  great  men,  the  founders  and  preservers
of  societies,  the  legislators,  patriots,  deliverers,  heroes,  whose
virtues  they  were  desirous  should  live  and  be  immortalised.
Nor  is  there  at  this  day  anything  capable  of  making  this  belief
more  enn-affin";  amony;  the  <;ood  and  virtuous  than  the  love  of
friendship,  which  creates  in  them  a  desire  not  to  be  wholly
separated  by  death,  but  that  they  may  enjoy  the  same  blessed
society  hereafter.  How  is  it  possible,  then,  that  an  author
should,  for  exalting  virtue  merely,  be  deemed  an  enemy  to  a
future  state  ?  How  can  our  friend  be  judged  false  to  religion
for  defending  a  principle  on  which  the  very  notion  of  God  and
goodness  depends  ?  For  this  he  says  only,  and  this  is  the  sum
of  all,  "  that  by  building  a  future  state  on  the  ruins  of  virtue,
religion  in  general  and  the  cause  of  a  Deity  is  betrayed,  and
by  making  rewards  and  punishments  the  principal  motives  to
duty,  the  Christian  religion  in  particular  is  overthrown,  and  its
greatest  principle,  that  of  love,  rejected  and  exposed."

59


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Upon  the  whole  then  we  may  justly  as  well  as  charitably
conclude  that  it  is  truly  our  author's  design,  in  applying  him-
self with  so  much  fairness  to  the  men  of  looser  principles,  to
lead  them  into  such  an  apprehension  of  the  constitution  of
mankind  and  of  human  affairs  as  might  form  in  them  a  notion
of  order  in  things,  and  draw  hence  an  acknowledgment  of  that
wisdom,  goodness,  and  beauty,  which  is  supreme ;  that  being
thus  far  become  proselytes,  they  might  be  prepared  for  that
divine  love  which  our  religion  would  teach  them,  when  once
they  should  embrace  its  precepts,  and  form  themselves  to  its
sacred  character.

Thus,  continued  he,  I  have  made  my  friend's  apology,  Avhich
may  have  shown  him  to  you  perhaps  a  good  moralist,  and,  I
hope,  no  enemy  to  religion.  But  if  you  find  still  that  the
divine  has  not  appeared  so  much  in  his  character  as  I  promised,
I  can  never  think  of  satisfying  you  in  any  ordinary  way  of  con-
versation. Should  I  offer  to  go  farther,  I  might  be  engaged
deeply  in  spiritual  affairs,  and  be  forced  to  make  some  new
model  of  a  sermon  upon  his  system  of  divinity.  However,  I
am  in  hopes,  now  that  in  good  earnest  matters  are  come  well-
nigh  to  preaching,  you  will  acquit  me  for  what  I  have  already
performed.

Section IV

Just  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  speaking  came  in  some  visitants,
who  took  us  up  the  remaining  part  of  the  afternoon  in  other
discourses.  But  these  being  over,  and  our  strangers  gone  (all
except  the  old  gentleman  and  his  friend,  who  had  dined  with  us),
we  began  anew  with  Theocles,  by  laying  claim  to  his  sermon,
and  entreating  him  again  and  again  to  let  us  hear  him  at  large
in  his  theological  way.

This,  he  complained,  was  persecuting  him  ;  as  you  have  seen
company,  said  he,  often  persecute  a  re})uted  singer,  not  out  of
any  fancy  for  the  music,  but  to  satisfy  a  malicious  sort  of
curiosity,  which  ends  commonly  in  censure  and  dislike.

60


THE xMORALISTS

However  it  might  be,  we  tokl  liini  we  were  resolved  to
persist.  And  I  assured  our  companions  that  if  they  would
second  me  heartily  in  the  manner  I  intended  to  press  him,  we
should  easily  get  the  better.

In  revenge  then,  said  he,  I  will  comply  on  this  condition,
that  since  I  am  to  sustain  the  part  of  the  divine  and  preacher,
it  shall  be  at  Philocles's  cost,  "who  shall  bear  the  part  of  the
infidel,  and  stand  for  the  person  pieached  to.

Truly,  said  the  old  gentleman,  the  part  you  have  proposed
for  him  is  so  natural  and  suitable  that  I  doubt  not  he  will  be
able  to  act  it  without  the  least  pain.  I  could  wish  rather
that  you  had  spared  yourself  the  trouble  of  putting  him  thus  in
mind  of  his  proper  character.  He  would  have  been  apt  enough
of  his  own  accord  to  interrupt  your  discourse  by  his  })erpetual
cavils.  Therefore  since  we  have  now  had  entertainment  enough
by  way  of  dialogue,  I  desire  the  law  of  sermon  may  be  strictly
observed,  and  "  that  there  be  no  answering  to  whatever  is
argued  or  advanced."

I  consented  to  all  the  terms,  and  told  Theocles  I  would
stand  his  mark  willingly ;  and  besides,  if  I  really  were  that
infidel  he  was  to  suppose  me,  I  should  count  it  no  unhappiness,
since  I  was  sure  of  being  so  thoroughly  convinced  by  him  if  he
would  vouchsafe  to  undertake  me.

Theocles  then  proposed  we  should  walk  out,  the  evening
being  fine,  and  the  free  air  suiting  better  (as  he  thought)  with
such  discourses  than  a  chamber.

Accordingly  we  took  our  evening  walk  in  the  fields,  from
whence  the  laborious  hinds  were  now  retiring.  We  fell
naturally  into  the  praises  of  a  country  life,  and  discoursed
awhile  of  husbandry  and  the  nature  of  the  soil.  Our  friends
began  to  admire  some  of  the  plants  which  grew  here  to  great
perfection.  And  it  being  my  fortune  (as  having  accjuired  a
little  insight  into  the  nature  of  simples)  to  say  something  they
mightily  approved  upon  this  subject,  Theocles  immediately
turning about to me, "  O my ingenious friend ! " said he,

61


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

"  whose  reason  in  other  respects  must  be  allowed  so  clear  and
happy,  how  is  it  possible  that  with  such  insight,  and  accurate
judgment  in  the  ^particulars  of  natural  beings  and  operations,
you  should  no  better  judge  of  the  structure  of  things  in  general,
and  of  the  order  and  frame  of  Nature  ?  Who  better  than
yourself  can  show  the  structure  of  each  plant  and  animal
body,  declare  the  office  of  every  part  and  organ,  and  tell  the
uses,  ends,  and  advantages  to  which  they  serve  ?  How  there-
fore should  you  prove  so  ill  a  naturalist  in  this  Avhole,  and
understand  so  little  the  anatomy  of  the  world  and  Nature,  as
not  to  discern  the  same  relation  of  parts,  the  same  consistency
and  uniformity  in  the  universe  !

"  Some  men  perhaps  there  are  of  so  confused  a  thought,  and
so  irregularly  formed  within  themselves,  that  'tis  no  more  than
natural  for  them  to  find  fault,  and  imagine  a  thousand  in-
consistencies and  defects  in  this  wider  constitution.  'Twas
not,  we  may  presume,  the  absolute  aim  or  interest  of  the
universal  nature  to  render  every  private  one  infallible  and
without  defect.  'Twas  not  its  intention  to  leave  us  without
some  pattern  of  imperfection,  such  as  we  perceive  in  minds
like  these,  perplexed  with  froward  thought.  But  you,  my
friend,  are  master  of  a  nobler  mind.  You  are  conscious  of
better  order  within,  and  can  see  workmanship  and  exactness  in
yourself  and  other  innumerable  parts  of  the  creation,  can  you
answer  it  to  yourself,  allowing  thus  much  not  to  allow  all  ?
Can  you  induce  yourself  ever  to  believe  or  think  that  where
there  are  parts  so  variously  united,  and  conspiring  fitly  within
themselves,  the  whole  itself  should  have  neither  union  nor
coherence ;  and  where  inferior  and  private  natures  are  often
found  so  perfect,  the  universal  one  should  want  perfection,  and
be  esteemed  like  whatsoever  can  be  thought  of,  most  monstrous,
rude,  and  imperfect  ?

"  Strange !  that  there  should  be  in  Nature  the  idea  of  an
order  and  perfection  which  Nature  herself  wants  !  That  beings
which  arise  from Nature  should  be  so  perfect  as  to  discover

62


THE IMORALISTS

imperfection  in  her  constitution,  and  be  wise  cnouoh  to  correct
that  wisdom  by  which  they  were  made !

"  Nothing  surely  is  more  strongly  imprinted  on  our  minds,
or  more  closely  interwoven  with  our  souls,  than  the  idea  or
sense  of  order  and  proportion.  Hence  all  the  force  of  numbers,
and  those  powerful  arts  founded  on  their  management  and
use.  What  a  difference  there  is  between  harmony  and  discord  !
cadency  and  convulsion  !  AVhat  a  difference  between  composed
and  orderly  motion,  and  that  which  is  ungovemed  and  acci-
dental !  between  the  regular  and  uniform  pile  of  some  noble
architect,  and  a  heap  of  sand  or  stones  !  between  an  organised
body,  and  a  mist  or  cloud  driven  by  the  wind  !

"  Now  as  this  difference  is  immediately  perceived  by  a  plain
internal  sensation,  so  there  is  withal  in  reason  this  account  of
it,  that  whatever  things  have  order,  the  same  have  unity  of
design,  and  concur  in  one ;  are  parts  constituent  of  one  whole
or  are,  in  themselves,  entire  systems.  Such  is  a  tree,  with  all
its  branches ;  an  animal,  with  all  its  members ;  an  edifice,  with
all  its  exterior  and  interior  ornaments.  What  else  is  even  a
tune  or  symphony,  or  any  excellent  piece  of  music,  than  a
certain  system  of  proportioned  sounds  ?

Now  in  this  which  we  call  the  universe,  whatever  the  per-
fection may  be  of  any  particular  systems,  or  whatever  single
parts  may  have  proportion,  unity,  or  form  within  themselves,
yet  if  they  are  not  imited  all  in  general,  in  one  system,^  but

' Vid.  Locke  :  Of  Human  Understaudiujx,  bk.  iv.  ch.  vi.  §  11.

Ac  milii  quidem  veteres  illi  majus  quiddam  auimo  complex!  plus
multo  etiam  vidisse  videntur,  ([uam  quantum  nostrorum  ingeniorum  acies
intueri  potest  :  qui  omnia  haec,  quae  supra  et  subter,  unum  esse  et  una
vi  atque  una  consensione  naturae  constricta  esse  dixerunt.  Nulhim  est
enim  genus  rerum  quod  aut  avulsum  a  caeteris  per  seipsum  constare  aut
quo  caetera^  si  careant,  vim  suam  atque  aeternitatem  conservare  possint.

["  Indeed,  those  old  authors  seem  to  me  to  have  had  greater  power  of
imagination,  or  even  of  vision,  than  is  given  to  the  penetration  of  our
minds,  when  they  declared  that  everything  above  and  below  us  is  one  and
bound  together  by  one  force  and  one  harmony  of  Nature. For  there  is  no

03


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

are,  in  respect  of  one  another,  as  the  driven  sands,  or  clouds,
or  breaking  waves,  then  there  being  no  coherence  in  the  whole,
there  can  be  inferred  no  order,  no  proportion,  and  consequently
no  project  or  design.  But  if  none  cf  these  parts  are  independent,
but  all  apparently  united,  then  is  the  whole  a  system  complete,
according  to  one  simple,  consistent,  and  uiniform  design.

"  Here  then  is  our  main  subject  insisted  on,  that  neither
man  nor  any  other  animal,  though  ever  so  complete  a  system
of  parts  as  to  all  within,  can  be  allowed  in  the  same  manner
complete  as  to  all  without,  but  must  be  considered  as  having
a  further  relation  abroad  to  the  system  of  his  kind.  So  even
this  system  of  his  kind  to  the  animal  system,  this  to  the  world
(our  earth),  and  this  again  to  the  bigger  world  and  to  the
universe.

"  All  thinjTs  in  this  world  are  united.  For  as  the  branch
is  united  with  the  tree,  so  is  the  tree  as  inmiediately  with  the
earth,  air,  and  water  which  feed  it.  As  much  as  the  fertile
mould  is  fitted  to  the  tree,  as  much  as  the  strong  and  upright
trunk  of  the  oak  or  elm  is  fitted  to  the  twining  branches  of

kind  of  tiling  which  can  stand  alone  if  torn  from  the  rest^  or  which,  if
withdrawn  from  the  rest,  would  suffer  them  to  keep  their  functions  and
duration." — Cicero,  De  Oratore,  iii.  §  20.]

Omne  hoc  quod  vides,  quo  divina  atque  humana  conclusa  sunt,  unum
est ;  membra  sumus  corporis  magni.

["  All  that  you  see,  of  which  God  and  man  form  parts,  is  one  ;  we  are
the  limbs  of  one  great  body." — Seneca,  Ep.  95,  52.]

Societas  nostra  lapidum  fornication!  simillima  est  :  quae  casura,  nisi
invicem  obstarent,  hoc  ipso  sustinetur.

["  Our  fellowship  is  most  like  to  the  stones  of  an  arch,  llie  arch
would  fall  if  it  were  not  held  up  by  the  stones  blocking  each  other." —
Seneca,  Eiy.  95,  53.]

Estne  dei  sedes,  nisi  terra,  et  pontus,  et  aether,

Et  coelum,  et  virtus  .'' Superos  quid  quaerimus  ultra  ?

Jupiter  est  quodcunque  vides,  quocunque  moveris.

[''  What  house  is  there  for  the  god  save  earth  and  sea  and  air  and  sky
and  virtue  ?  Why  do  we  look  for  the  gods  outside  ourselves .''  All  that
you  see,  all  that  you  feel,  is  Jupiter." — Lucan,  ix.  578-580.]

64


THE AroUAUSTS

the  vine  or  ivy  ;  so  much  are  tlie  very  leaves,  tlie  seeds,  ami
fruits  of  these  trees  fitted  to  the  various  animals :  these  a^ain
to  one  another  and to  the  elements  where  they  live,  and  to
which  they  are,  as  appendices,  in  a  manner  fitted  and  joined,
as  either  by  wings  for  the  air,  fins  for  the  water,  feet  for  the
earth,  and by other  corres})()ndent inward parts of  a more
curious  frame  and  texture. Thus  in  contemplating  all  on  earth,
we  must  of  necessity  view  all  in  one,  as  holding  to  one  common
stock. Thus  too  in  the  system  of  the  bigger  world. See  there
the mutual dependency of  things  ! the relation of  one to
another ;  of  the  sun  to  this  inhabited  earth,  and  of  the  earth
and  other  planets  to  the  sun  !  the  order,  union,  and  coherence
of  the whole  ! and  know, my ingenious friend,  that  by this
survey  you  will  be  obliged  to  own the universal system  and
coherent  scheme  of  things  to  be  established  on  abundant  proof,
capable  of  convincing  any  fair  and  just contemplator  of  the
works  of  Nature. For  scarce  woukl  any  one,  till  he  had  well
surveyed this universal  scene,  believe  a  union thus  evidently
tlemonstrable, by such numerous and powerful instances of
mutual  correspondency  and  relation,  from  the  minutest  ranks
and  orders  of  beings  to  the  remotest  spheres.

"  Now  in  this  mighty  union,  if  there  be  such  relations  of
parts  one  to  another  as  are  not  easily  discovered,  if  on  this
account  the  end  and  use  of  things  does  not  everywhere  appear,
there  is  no  wonder,  since  "'tis  no  more  indeed  than  what  nmst
hapj)en  of  necessity  ;  nor  could  supreme  wisdom  have  otherwise
ordered  it.  For  in  an  infinity  of  things  thus  relative,  a  mind
which  sees  not  infinitely  can  see  nothing  fully ;  and  since  each
particular  has  relation  to  all  in  general,  it  can  know  no  perfect
or  true  relation  of  any  thing  in  a  world  not  perfectly  and  fully
known.

"The  same may be considered in any dissected animal,

plant,  or  flower ;  where  he  who  is  no  anatomist,  nor  versed  in

natural  history,  sees  that  the  many  parts  have  a  relation  to  the

whole,  for  thus  much  even  a  slight  view  affords ;  but  he  who

VOL.  II  G5  F


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

like  you,  my  friend,  is  curious  in  the  works  of  Nature,  and  has
been  let  into  a  knowledge  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  world,
he  alone  can  readily  declare  the  just  relation  of  all  these  parts
to  one  another,  and  the  several  uses  to  which  they  serve.

"  But  if  you  would  willingly  enter  further  into  this  thought,
and  consider  how  much  we  ought  not  only  to  be  satisfied  with
this  our  view  of  things,  but  even  to  admire  its  clearness,  imagine
only  some  person  entirely  a  stranger  to  navigation,  and
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  sea  or  waters ;  how  great  his
astonishment  would  be,  when  finding  himself  on  board  some
vessel,  anchoring  at  sea,  remote  from  all  land  prospect,  whilst  it
was  yet  a  calm,  he  viewed  the  ponderous  machine  firm  and
motionless  in  the  midst  of  the  smooth  ocean,  and  considered  its
foundations  beneath,  together  with  its  cordage,  masts,  and
sails  above.  How  easily  would  he  see  the  whole  one  regular
structure,  all  things  depending  on  one  another ;  the  uses  of  the
rooms  below,  the  lodgments,  and  conveniences  of  men  and
stores  ?  But  being  ignorant  of  the  intent  or  design  of  all
above,  would  he  pronounce  the  masts  and  cordage  to  be  useless
and  cumbersome,  and  for  this  reason  condemn  the  frame  and
despise  the  architect  ?  O  my  friend  !  let  us  not  thus  betray
our  icrnorance  ;  but  consider  where  we  are,  and  in  what  a
universe.  Think  of  the  many  parts  of  the  vast  machine  in
which  we  have  so  little  insight,  and  of  which  it  is  impossible  we
should  know  the  ends  and  uses,  when  instead  of  seeing  to  the
highest  pendants,  we  see  only  some  lower  deck,  and  are  in  this
dark  case  of  flesh,  confined  even  to  the  hold  and  meanest  station
of  the  vessel.

"  Now  having;  recoo-nised  this  uniform  consistent  fabric,  and
owned  the  universal  system,  we  must  of  consequence  ac-
knowledge a  universal  mind,  which  no  ingenious  man  can  be
tempted  to  disown,  except  through  the  imagination  of  disorder
in  the  universe,  its  seat.  For  can  it  be  supposed  of  any  one  in
the  world,  that  being  in  some  desert  far  from  men,  and  hearing
there  a  perfect  symphony  of  music,  or  seeing  an  exact  pile  of

66


THE MORALISTS

regular  arcliitecture  arisinor  o-radually  from  the  earth  in  all  its
orders  and  proportions,  ho  should  be  persuaded  that  at  the
bottom  there  was  no  design  accompanying  this,  no  secret  spring
of  thought,  no  active  mind  ?  Would  he,  because  he  saw  no
hand,  deny  the  handiwork,  and  suppose  that  each  of  these
complete  and  ])erfect  systems  were  framed,  and  thus  united  in
just  synnnetry  and  conspiring  order,  either  by  the  accidental
blowing  of  the  winds  or  rolling  of  the  sands  ?

"  What  is  it  then  should  so  disturb  ovu-  views  of  Nature,  as
to  destroy  that  unity  of  design  and  order  of  a  mind,  wliich
otherwise  would  be  so  apj)arent  ?  All  we  can  see  either  of  the
heavens  or  earth  demonstrates  order  and  perfection  ;  so  as  to
afford  the  noblest  subjects  of  contemplation  to  minds,  like
yours,  enriched  with  sciences  and  learning.  All  is  delightful,
amiable,  rejoicing,  except  with  relation  to  man  only,  and  his
circumstances,  which  seem  unequal.  Here  the  calamity  and  ill
arises,  and  hence  the  ruin  of  this  goodly  frame.  All  perishes
on  this  account ;  and  the  whole  order  of  the  universe,  elsewhere
so  firm,  entire,  and  immovable,  is  here  overthrown  and  lost  by
this  one  view,  in  which  we  refer  all  things  to  ourselves,  submit-
ting the  interest  of  the  whole  to  the  good  and  interest  of  so
small  a  part.

"  But  how  is  it  you  complain  of  the  unequal  state  of  man,
and  of  the  few  advantages  allowed  him  above  the  beasts  ?
What  can  a  creature  claim,  so  little  differing  from  them,  or
whose  merit  appears  so  little  above  them,  except  in  wisdom  and
virtue,  to  which  so  few  conform  ?  ]Man  may  be  virtuous,  and
by  being  so,  is  happy.  His  merit  is  reward ;  by  virtue  he
deserves,  and  in  virtue  only  can  meet  his  happiness  deserved.
But  if  even  virtue  itself  be  unprovided  for,  and  vice,  more
j)rosperous,  be  the  better  choice ;  if  this  (as  you  suppose)  be  in
the  nature  of  things,  then  is  all  order  in  reality  inverted,  and
supreme  wisdom  lost ;  imperfection  and  irregularity  being,  after
this  manner,  undoubtedly  too  apparent  in  the  moral  world.

"  Have vou then,  ere  you  |)ronounced this sentence,  con-

07


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

sidered  of  the  state  of  virtue  and  vice  with  respect  to  this  life
merely,  so  as  to  say,  with  assurance,  when,  and  how  far,  in  what
particulars,  and  how  circumstantiated,  the  one  or  the  other  is
oood  or  ill  ?  You  who  are  skilled  in  other  fabrics  and  com-
positions,  both  of  art  and  nature,  have  you  considered  of  the
fabric  of  the  mind,  the  constitution  of  the  soul,  the  connection
and  frame  of  all  its  passions  and  affections  ;  to  know  accordingly
the  order  and  symmetry  of  the  part,  and  how  it  either  improves
or  suffers ;  what  its  force  is  when  naturally  preserved  in  its
sound  state,  and  what  becomes  of  it  when  corrupted  and
abused  ?  Till  this,  my  friend,  be  well  examined  and  understood,
how  shall  we  judge  either  of  the  force  of  virtue  or  power  of
vice  ?  Or  in  what  manner  either  of  these  may  work  to  our
happiness  or  undoing  ?

"  Here,  therefore,  is  that  inquiry  we  should  first  make.  But
who  is  there  can  afford  to  make  it  as  he  ought  ?  If  happily  we
are  born  of  a  good  nature  ;  if  a  liberal  education  has  formed  in
us  a  generous  temper  and  disposition,  well-regulated  appetites,
and  w^orthy  inclinations,  'tis  well  for  us ;  and  so  indeed  we
esteem  it.  But  who  is  there  endeavours  to  ffive  these  to
himself,  or  to  advance  his  portion  of  happiness  in  this  kind  ?
Who  thinks  of  improving,  or  so  much  as  of  preserving  his
share  in  a  world  where  it  must  of  necessity  run  so  great  a
hazard,  and  where  we  know  an  honest  nature  is  so  easily
corrupted  .^  All  other  things  relating  to  us  are  preser\ed  with
care,  and  have  some  art  or  economy  belonging  to  them ;  this
which  is  nearest  related  to  us  and  on  which  our  happiness
depends,  is  alone  committed  to  chance,  and  temper  is  the  only
thing  ungoverned,  whilst  it  governs  all  the  rest.

"  Thus  we  inquire  concerning  what  is  good  and  suitable  to
our  appetites  ;  but  what  appetites  are  good  and  suitable  to  us
is  no  part  of  our  examination.  We  inquire  what  is  according
to  interest,  policy,  fashion,  vogue ;  but  it  seems  wholly  strange
and  out  of  the  way  to  inquire  what  is  according  to  Nature.
The  balance  of  Europe,  of  trade,  of  power,  is  strictly  sought

68


THE MORALISTS

after;  while  few  have  heard  of  the  balance  of  their  passions,  or
thought  of  holding  these  scales  even.  Few  are  accjuainted  with
this  province,  or  knowing  in  these  affairs.  But  were  we  more
so  (as  this  in(iuiry  would  make  us)  we  should  then  see  beauty
and  decorum  here,  as  well  as  elsewhere  in  Nature;  and  the  order
of  the  moral  woild  would  equal  that  of  the  natural,  liy  this
the  beauty  of  virtue  would  appear,  and  hence  (as  has  been  shown)
the  supreme  and  sovereign  beauty,  the  original  of  all  which  is
good  or  amiable.

"  IJut  lest  I  should  appear  at  last  too  like  an  enthusiast,  I
choose  to  express  my  sense,  and  conclude  this  philosophical
sermon  in  the  words  of  one  of  those  ancient  ])hilologists,  whom
you  are  used  to  esteem.  For  divinity  itself,  says  he,  is  surely
beauteous,  and  of  all  beauties  the  brightest ;  though  not  a
beauteous  body,  but  that  from  whence  the  beauty  of  bodies  is
derived  ;  not  a  beauteous  plain,  but  that  from  whence  the  ])lain
looks  beautiful.  The  river's  beauty,  the  sea's,  the  heaven's,  and
heavenly  constellations  all  flow  from  hence  as  from  a  source
eternal  and  incorruptible.  As  beings  partake  of  this,  they  are
fair,  and  flourishing,  and  happy ;  as  they  are  lost  to  this,  they
are  deformed,  perished,  and  lost."

AVhcn  Theocles  had  thus  spoken  he  was  formally  compli-
mented by  our  two  companions.  I  was  going  to  add  something
in  the  same  way,  but  he  presently  stop])ed  me  by  saying  he
should  be  scandalised,  if  instead  of  connnending  him,  I  did  not,
according  to  my  character,  choose  rather  to  criticise  some  part
or  other  of  his  long  discourse.

If  it  must  be  so  then,  replied  I,  in  the  first  ])lace  give  me
leave  to  wondei'  that,  instead  of  the  many  arguments  connnonly
brought  for  proof  of  a  deity,  you  make  use  only  of  one  single
one  to  build  on.  I  expected  to  have  heard  from  you,  in
customary  form,  of  a  first  cause,  a  first  being,  and  a  beginning
of  motion.  How  clear  the  idea  was  of  an  immaterial  substance,
and  how  plainly  it  appeared,  that  at  some  time  or  other  matter
must  have  been  created. But  as  to  all  this  you  are  silent. As

69


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

for  what  is  said  of  "  A  material  unthinking  substance  being
never  able  to  have  produced  an  immaterial  thinking  one,"  I
readily  grant  it,  but  on  the  condition  that  this  great  maxim
of  nothing  being  ever  made  from  notliing  may  hold  as  well  on
my  side  as  my  adversary's.  And  then,  I  suppose,  that  whilst
the  world  endures,  he  will  be  at  a  loss  how  to  assign  a  beginning
to  matter,  or  how  to  suggest  a  possibility  of  annihilating  it.
The  spiritual  men  may,  as  long  as  they  please,  represent  to  us
in  the  most  eloquent  manner,  "  That  matter  considered  in  a
thousand  different  shapes,  joined  and  disjoined,  varied  and
modified  to  eternity,  can  never,  of  itself,  afford  one  single
thought,  never  occasion  or  give  rise  to  anything  like  sense  or
knowledge."  Their  argument  will  hold  good  against  a  Demo-
critus,  an  Epicurus,  or  any  of  the  elder  or  latter  atomists.  But
it  will  be  turned  on  them  by  an  examining  Academist,  and
when  the  two  substances  are  fairly  set  asunder,  and  considered
apart  as  different  kinds,  'twill  be  as  strong  sense,  and  as  good
argument,  to  say  as  well  of  the  immaterial  kind  :  "  That  do
with  it  as  you  please,  modify  it  a  thousand  ways,  purify  it,
exalt  it,  sublime  it,  torture  it  ever  so  nmch  or  rack  it,  as  they
say,  with  thinking,  you  will  never  be  able  to  produce  or  force
the  contrary  substance  out  of  it."  The  poor  dregs  of  sorry
matter  can  no  more  be  made  out  of  the  simple  pure  substance
of  immaterial  thought,  than  the  high  spirits  of  thought  or
reason  can  be  extracted  from  the  gross  substance  of  heavy
matter.  So  let  the  dogmatists  make  of  this  arfijument  what
they  can.

But  for  your  jiart,  continued  I,  as  you  have  stated  the
(question,  'tis  not  about  what  was  first  or  foremost,  but  what  is
instant  and  now  in  being.  "  For  if  deity  be  now  really  extant,
if  by  any  good  token  it  appears  that  there  is  at  this  present  a
universal  mind,  "'twill  easily  be  yielded  there  ever  was  one."  .  .  .
This  is  your  argument.  .  .  .  You  go  (if  I  may  say  so)  upon
fact,  and  would  prove  that  things  actually  are  in  such  a  state
and  condition,  which  if  they  really  were,  there  would  indeed  be

70


THE MORALISTS

no  dispute  left.  Your  union  is  your  main  supj)ort.  Yet  how
is  it  you  prove  this  ?  What  demonstration  have  you  given  ?
What  have  you  so  much  as  offered  at,  beyond  bare  probabihty  ?
So  far  are  you  from  demonstrating  anything,  that  if  this  uniting
scheme  be  the  chief  argument  for  deity  (as  you  tacitly  allow)
you  seem  rather  to  have  demonstrated,  "  that  the  case  itself  is
incapable  of  demonstration."  lor,  "  how,  say  you,  can  a  narrow
mind  see  all  things.'"'  .  .  .  And  yet  if  in  reality  it  sees  not  all,
it  had  as  good  see  nothing.  The  demonstrable  part  is  still  as
far  behind.  For  grant  that  this  all,  which  lies  within  our  view
or  knowledge,  is  orderly  and  united,  as  you  supjiose  ;  this  mighty
all  is  a  mere  point  still,  a  very  nothing  compared  to  what
remains.  ""'Tis  only  a  separate  by-world  (we'll  say)  of  which
perhaps  there  are,  in  the  wide  waste,  millions  besides,  as  horrid
and  deformed  as  this  of  ours  is  regular  and  proportioned.  In
length  of  time,  amidst  the  infinite  hurry  and  shock  of  beings,
this  single  odd  world,  by  accident,  might  have  been  struck  out,
and  cast  into  some  form  (as  among  infinite  chances  what  is
there  which  may  not  happen  ?).  But  for  the  rest  of  matter,  'tis
of  a  different  hue.  Old  Father  Chaos  (as  the  poets  call  him)  in
these  wild  spaces  reigns  absolute,  and  uj^holds  his  realms  of
darkness.  He  presses  hard  upon  our  frontier,  and  one  day,
belike,  shall  by  a  furious  inroad  recover  his  lost  right,  conquer  his
rebel  state,  and  reunite  us  to  primitive  discord  and  confusion."

This,  said  I,  Theocles  !  (concluding  my  discourse)  is  all  I
dare  offer  in  opposition  to  your  philosophy.  I  imagined,  indeed,
you  might  have  given  me  more  scope  ;  but  you  have  retrenched
yourself  in  narrower  bounds.  So  that,  to  tell  you  truth,  I  look
upon  your  theology  to  be  hardly  so  fair  or  open  as  that  of  our
divines  in  general.  They  are  strict,  it  is  true,  as  to  names,  but
allow  a  greater  latitude  in  things.  Hardly  indeed  can  they
bear  a  home-charge,  a  downright  questioning  of  deity  ;  but  in
return  they  give  always  fair  play  against  Nature,  and  allow  her
to  be  challenged  for  her  failings.  She  may  freely  err,  and  we  as
freely  censure. Deity,  thev  think,  is  not  accountable  for  her.

71


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Only  she  for  herself.  But  you  are  straiter,  and  more  precise  in
this  point.  You  have  unnecessarily  brought  Nature  into  the
controversy,  and  taken  upon  you  to  defend  her  honour  so  highly
that  I  know  not  whether  it  may  be  safe  for  me  to  question  her.

Let  not  this  trouble  you,  replied  Theocles,  but  be  free  to
censure  Nature,  Avhatever  may  be  the  consequence.  'Tis  only  my
hyjiothesis  can  suffer.  If  I  defend  it  ill,  my  friends  need  not  be
scandalised.  They  are  fortified,  no  doubt,  with  stronger  argu-
ments for  a  deity,  and  can  well  employ  those  metaphysical
weapons,  of  whose  edge  you  seem  so  little  apprehensive.  I  leave
them  to  dispute  this  ground  with  you,  whenever  they  think  fit.
For  my  own  arguments,  if  they  can  be  supposed  to  make  any
part  of  this  defence,  they  may  be  looked  upon  only  as  distant
lines,  or  outworks,  which  may  easily  perhaps  be  won,  but  with-
out any  danger  to  the  body  of  the  place.

Notwithstanding,  then,  said  I,  that  you  are  willing  1  should
attack  Nature  in  form,  I  choose  to  spare  her  in  all  other  subjects,
except  man  only.  How  comes  it,  I  entreat  you,  that  in  this
noblest  of  creatures,  and  worthiest  her  care,  she  should  appear
so  very  weak  and  impotent ;  whilst  in  mere  brutes,  and  the
irrational  species,  she  acts  with  so  much  strength,  and  exerts
such  hardy  vigour  ?  Why  is  she  spent  so  soon  in  feeble  man,
who  is  found  more  subject  to  diseases,  and  of  fewer  years  than
many  of  the  wild  creatures  ?  They  range  secure,  and  proof
against  all  the  injuries  of  seasons  and  weather,  Avant  no  helj)
from  art,  but  live  in  careless  ease,  discharged  of  labour,  and  freed
from  the  cumbersome  bago-age  of  a  necessitous  human  life.  In
infancy  more  helj^ful,  vigorous  in  age,  with  senses  (piicker,  and
more  natural  sagacity,  they  pursue  their  interests,  joys,  recrea-
tions, and  cheaply  purchase  both  their  food  and  maintenance,
clothed  and  armed  by  Nature  herself,  who  ]irovides  them  both  a
couch  and  mansion.  So  has  Nature  ordered  for  the  rest  of
creatures.  Such  is  their  hardiness,  robustness,  vigour.  AVhy
not  the  same  for  man  ?  .  .  .

And  do  you  stop  thus  short,  said  Theocles,  in  your  expostu-

72


THE MORALISTS

latiun  ?  Methinks  'twere  as  easy  to  proceed,  now  you  are  in  the
way ;  and  instead  of  laying  claim  to  some  few  advantages  of
other  creatures,  you  might  as  well  stand  for  all,  and  con)plain
"  that  man,  for  his  part,  should  be  anything  less  than  a  con-
summation of  all  advantages  and  privileges  which  Nature  can
afford."  Ask  not  merely,  why  man  is  naked,  why  unhoofcd,
why  slower-footed  than  the  beasts  ?  Ask  "  why  he  has  not
wings  also  for  the  air,  fins  for  the  Avater,  and  so  on — that  he
might  take  possession  of  each  element,  and  reign  in  all  P'^

Not  so,  said  I,  neither.  This  would  be  to  rate  him  higli
indeed  !  As  if  he  were,  by  nature,  lord  of  all,  which  is  more
than  I  could  willino-ly  allow.

'Tis  enough,  rej)Iied  he,  that  this  is  yielded.  For  if  we  allow
once  a  subordination  in  his  case ;  if  Nature  herself  be  not  for
man,  but  man  for  Nature ;  then  must  man,  by  his  good  leave,
submit  to  the  elements  of  Nature,  and  not  the  elements  to  him.
Few  of  these  are  at  all  fitted  to  him,  and  none  perfectly.  If  he
be  left  in  air,  he  falls  headlong,  for  wings  were  not  assigned  him.
In  water  he  soon  sinks.  In  fire  he  consumes.  Within  earth
he  suffocates.  . . .

As  for  what  dominion  he  may  naturally  have  in  other
elements,  said  I,  my  concern  truly  is  not  very  great  in  his  be-
half, since  by  art  he  can  even  exceed  the  advantages  Nature  has
given  to  other  creatures.  But  for  the  air,  methinks  it  had  been
wonderfully  oblitrinii'  in  Nature  to  have  allowed  him  winfrs.

And  what  would  he  have  gained  by  it,  replied  Theocles  ?
For  consider  what  an  alteration  of  form  must  have  ensued.
Observe  in  one  of  those  winged  creatvu-es  whether  the  whole
structure  be  not  made  subservient  to  this  purpose,  and  all  other
advantages  sacrificed  to  this  single  operation.  The  anatomy  of
the  creature  shows  it,  in  a  manner,  to  be  all  wing,  its  chief  bulk
being  composed  of  two  exorbitant  nuiscles,  which  exhaust  the
strength  of  all  the  other,  and  engross  (if  I  may  say  so)  the  whole
economy  of  the  frame.  'Tis  thus  the  aerial  racers  are  able  to
perform  so  raj)id  and  strong  a  motion,  beyond  comparison  with

73


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

any  other  kind,  and  far  exceeding  their  Httle  share  of  strength
elsewhere ;  these  parts  of  theirs  being  made  in  such  superior
proportion,  as  in  a  manner  to  starve  their  companions.  And  in
man's  architecture,  of  so  different  an  order,  were  the  flying
engines  to  be  affixed,  must  not  the  other  members  suffer,  and
the  multiphed  parts  starve  one  another  ?  What  think  you  of
the  brain  in  this  partition  ?  Is  it  not  Hke  to  prove  a  starvehng?
Or  would  you  have  it  be  maintained  at  the  same  high  rate,  and
draw  the  chief  nourishment  to  itself,  from  all  the  rest  ?  .  .  .

I  understand  you,  said  I,  Theocles  (interrupting  him) :  the
brain  certainly  is  a  great  starver  Avhere  it  abounds,  and  the
thinking  people  of  the  world,  the  philosophers  and  virtuosi
especially,  must  be  contented,  I  find,  with  a  moderate  share  of
bodily  advantages  for  the  sake  of  what  they  call  parts  and
capacity  in  another  sense.  The  parts,  it  seems,  of  one  kind
agree  ill  in  their  economy  with  the  parts  of  the  other.  But  to
make  this  even  on  both  sides,  let  us  turn  the  tables,  and  the
case,  I  suppose,  will  stand  the  same  with  the  Milos  of  the  age,
the  men  of  bodily  prowess  and  dexterity.  For  not  to  mention
a  vulgar  sort,  such  as  wrestlers,  vaulters,  racers,  hunters ;  what
shall  we  say  of  our  fine-bred  gentlemen,  our  riders,  fencers,
dancers,  tennis-players,  and  such  like .''  'Tis  the  body  surely  is
the  starver  here ;  and  if  the  brain  were  such  a  terrible  devourer
in  the  other  way,  the  body  and  bodily  parts  seem  to  have  their
reprisals  in  this  rank  of  men.

If  then,  said  he,  the  case  stands  thus  between  man  and  man,
how  must  it  stand  between  man  and  a  quite  different  creature  ?
If  the  balance  be  so  nice  that  the  least  thing  breaks  it,  even  in
creatures  of  the  same  frame  and  order,  of  what  fatal  effect
must  it  be  to  change  the  order  itself,  and  make  some  essential
alteration  in  the  frame  ?  Consider  therefore  how  it  is  we
censure  Nature  in  these  and  such-like  cases.  "  Why,"  says  one,
"  was  I  not  made  by  Nature  strong  as  a  horse  ?  Why  not  hardy
and  robust  as  this  brute-creature  ?  or  nimble  and  active  as  that
other?". .  .  And  vet  when  uncommon  strength,  agility,  and

74


THE MORAIJSTS

feats  of  body  are  subjoined,  even  in  our  own  species,  see  \<hat
befalls !  So  that  for  a  person  thus  in  love  with  an  athletic
Milonean  constitution,  it  were  better,  methinks,  and  more
modest  in  him,  to  change  the  expostulation  and  ask,  "  AVhy  was
I  not  made  in  <^ood  earnest  a  very  brute  ? '"'  For  that  w  ould
be  more  suitable.

I  am  apt,  indeed,  said  I,  to  think  that  the  excellence  of  man
lies  somewhat  different  from  that  of  a  brute ;  and  that  such
amongst  us  as  are  more  truly  men  should  naturally  aspire  to
manly  qualities,  and  leave  the  brute  his  own.  But  Nature,  I
see,  has  done  well  to  mortify  us  in  this  particular  by  furnishinf^
us  with  such  slight  stuff,  and  in  such  a  tender  frame,  as  is
indeed  wonderfully  connnodious  to  supjiort  that  man-excellence
of  thought  and  reason,  but  wretchedly  scanty  and  ineffectual
for  other  purposes.  As  if  it  were  her  very  design  "  to  hinder
us  from  aspiring  ridiculously  to  what  was  misbecoming  our
character."

I  see,  said  Theocles,  you  are  not  one  of  those  timorous
arguers  who  tremble  at  every  objection  raised  against  their
opinion  or  belief,  and  are  so  intent  in  upholding  their  own  side
of  the  argument  that  they  are  unable  to  make  the  least  con-
cession on  the  other.  Your  wit  allows  you  to  divert  yourself
with  whatever  occurs  in  the  debate :  and  you  can  pleasantly  im-
prove even  w  hat  your  antagonist  brings  as  a  support  to  his  own
hypothesis.  This,  indeed,  is  a  fairer  soit  of  practice  than  what
is  connnon  nowadays.  But  'tis  no  more  than  suitable  to  your
character.  And  were  I  not  afraid  of  speaking  Avith  an  air  of
compliment  in  the  midst  of  a''  philosophical  debate,  I  should
tell  you,  perhaps,  what  I  thought  of  the  becoming  manner  of
your  scepticism  in  oj)position  to  a  kind  of  bigot-sceptics,  who
forfeit  their  right  to  the  philosopliic  character,  and  retain
hardly  so  much  as  that  of  the  gentleman  or  good  companion.
.  .  .  But  to  our  argument. .  . .

Such  then,  continued  he,  is  the  admirable  distribution  of
Nature,  her  adapting  and  adjusting  not  onlv  the  stuff  or  matter

'75'


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

to  the  shape  and  form,  and  even  the  shape  itself  and  form  to
the  circumstance,  place,  element,  or  region ;  but  also  the  affec-
tions, appetites,  sensations,  mutually  to  each  other,  as  well  as
to  the  matter,  form,  action,  and  all  besides :  "  All  managed
for  the  best,  with  jierfect  frugality  and  just  reserve ;  profuse
to  none,  but  bountiful  to  all ;  never  employing  in  one  thing
more  than  enough,  but  with  exact  economy  retrenching  the
superfluous,  and  adding  force  to  what  is  principal  in  every
thing."  And  is  not  thought  and  reason  principal  in  man  ?
AVould  he  have  no  reserve  for  these  ?  no  saving  for  this  part
of  his  engine  ?  Or  would  he  have  the  same  stuff  or  matter,  the
same  instruments  or  organs  serve  alike  for  different  purposes,
and  an  ounce  be  ecjuivalent  to  a  ])ound  ?  ...  It  cannot  be.
What  wonders,  then,  can  he  expect  from  a  few  ounces  of  blood
in  such  a  narrow  vessel,  fitted  for  so  small  a  district  of  Nature  ?
Will  he  not  rather  think  highly  of  that  Nature  which  has  thus
managed  his  portion  for  him  to  best  advantage,  with  this  happy
reserve  (happy  indeed  for  him,  if  he  knows  and  uses  it !)  by
which  he  has  so  much  a  better  use  of  organs  than  any  other
creature  ?  by  which  he  holds  his  reason,  is  a  man,  and  not
a  beast  ?

But  beasts,^  said  I,  have  instincts  which  man  has  not.

True,  said  he,  they  have  indeed  perceptions,  sensations,  and
pre-sensations  -  (if  I  may  use  the  expression)  which  man,  for  his
part,  has  not  in  any  jiroportionable  degree.  Their  females,
newly  pregnant,  and  before  they  have  bore  young,  have  a  clear
prospect  or  pre-sensation  of  their  state  which  is  to  follow ;
know  what  to  provide,  and  how,  in  what  manner,  and  at  what
time.  How  many  things  do  they  preponderate  ?  ^  How  many
at  once  comprehend  ?  The  seasons  of  the  year,  the  country,
climate,  place,  as])ect,  situation,  the  basis  of  their  building,  the
materials,  architecture;  the  diet  and  treatment  of  their  offs]n-ing,
in  short,  the  whole  economy  of  their  nursery ;  and  all  this  as

1  Jiif/niri/,  l)k.  ii.  i);irt  i.  §  o  ;  part  ii.  §  1  ;  aiul  Mi.sc.  iv.  cli.  ii.
-  liij'rti,  part  iii.  §  2.  '•'  [f.r.  ])i-e-]>onder,  pre-coiisider.]

7(>


THE MOIJAIJSTS

perfectly  at  first,  {iiul  when  inexperieiicecl,  as  at  any  timi'  of
their  life  afterwards.  And  "  why  not  this,  say  yon,  in  hniiian
kind?"  Nay,  rather,  on  the  contrary,  I  ask  "why  this?  where
was  the  occasion  or  use?  where  the  necessity?  why  tliis  sagacity
for  men  ?  Have  they  not  what  is  better,  in  anotlier  kind  ?
have  they  not  reason  and  discourse?  does  not  this  instruct
them?  what  need  tlien  of  the  otlier  ?  where  would  !)(•  the
prutient  manaoement  at  this  rate  ?  where  the  reserve  ? "

The  young  of  most  other  kinds,  continued  he,  are  instantly
helpful  to  themselves,  sensible,  vi<;orous,  know  to  shun  dan<;-er
and  seek  their  good.  A  Junnan  infant  is  of  all  the  most  help-
less, weak,  infirm.  Aud  wherefore  sliould  it  not  have  been
thus  ordered  ?  Where  is  the  loss  in  such  a  species  ?  Or  what
is  man  the  worse  for  this  defect,  amitlst  such  large  supplies  ?
Does  not  this  defect  engage  him  the  more  strongly  to  society,
and  force  him  to  own  that  he  is  ])urposely,  and  not  by  accident,
matle  rational  and  sociable  ;  and  can  no  otherwise  increase  or
subsist  than  in  that  social  intercourse  and  connnunity  which  is
his  natural  state  ?  Is  not  both  conjugal  affection  and  natural
affection  to  parents,  duty  to  magistrates,  love  of  a  connnon  city,
community,  or  country,  with  the  other  duties  and  social  parts
of  life,  deduced  from  hence  and  foinuled  in  these  very  wants  ?
What  can  be  happier  than  such  a  deficiency  as  is  the  occasion
of  so  nuich  good  ?  What  better  than  a  want  so  abundantly
made  up,  and  answered  by  so  many  enjoyments?  Now  if  there
are  still  to  be  found  among  mankind,  such  as  even  in  the  midst
of  these  wants  seem  not  ashamed  to  affect  a  right  of  inde-
pendency, and  deny  themselves  to  be  by  nature  sociable  ;  where
would  their  shame  have  been  had  Nature  otherwise  su])j)lied
these  wants  ?  What  duty  or  obligation  had  been  ever  thought
of?  What  respect  or  reverence  of  ])arents,  magistrates,  their
country,  or  their  kind  ?  AVould  not  their  full  and  self-sufficient
state  more  strongly  have  determined  them  to  throw  off'  Nature,
and  deny  the  ends  and  author  of  their  creation  ?

Whilst Theocles  argued thus  concerning  Nature,  the old

77


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

gentleman,  my  adversary,  expressed  great  satisfaction  in  hearing
me,  as  he  thought,  refuted,  and  my  opinions  exposed.  For  he
would  needs  believe  these  to  be  strongly  my  opinions,  which  I
had  only  started  as  objections  in  the  discourse.  He  endeavoured
to  reinforce  the  argument  by  many  particulars  from  the  connnon
topics  of  the  schoolmen  and  civilians.  He  added,  withal,  "  That
it  was  better  for  me  to  declare  my  sentiments  openly,  for  he
was  sure  I  had  strongly  imbibed  that  principle,  that  the  state
of  Nature  was  a  state  of  war.""  ^

That  it  was  no  state  of  government  or  public  rule,  replied
I,  you  yourself  allow.  I  do  so.  Was  it  then  a  state  of  fellow-
ship or  society  ?  "  No ;  for  when  men  entered  first  into  society
they  passed  from  the  state  of  nature  into  that  new  one  which
is  founded  upon  compact,"  And  was  that  former  state  a
tolerable  one  ?  Had  it  been  absolutely  intolerable,  there  had
never  been  any  such.  Nor  could  we  properly  call  that  a  state,
which  could  not  stand  or  endure  for  the  least  time.  If  man,
therefore,  could  endure  to  live  without  society,  and  if  it  be  true
that  he  actually  lived  so  when  in  the  state  of  nature,  how  can
it  be  said  "  that  he  is  by  nature  sociable  "  ?

The  old  gentleman  seemed  a  little  disturbed  at  my  question,
but  having  recovered  himself,  he  said  in  answer,  "That  man
indeed,  from  his  own  natural  inclination,  might  not,  perhaps,
have  been  moved  to  associate,  but  rather  from  some  particular
circumstances."

His  nature  then,  said  I,  was  not  so  very  good,  it  seems,  since
having  no  natural  affection  or  friendly  inclination  belonging  to
him,  he  was  forced  into  a  social  state  against  his  will ;  and  this
not  from  any  necessity  in  respect  of  outward  things  (for  you
have  allowed  him  a  tolerable  subsistence),  but  in  probability
from  such  inconveniences  as  arose  chiefly  from  himself  and  his
own  malignant  temper  and  principles.  And  indeed  'twas  no
wonder  if  creatures  who  were  naturally  thus  unsociable,  should
be  as  naturally  mischievous  and  troublesome.  If  according  to
^ Wit  and  Humour,  part  iii.  §  1.

78


THE MORALISTS

their  nature  they  could  live  out  of  society  with  so  little  affec-
tion for  one  another's  company,  'tis  not  likely  that  upon  occasion
they  would  spare  one  another's  j)ersons.  If  they  were  so  sullen
as  not  to  meet  for  love,  'tis  more  than  probahle  they  would
fight  for  interest.  And  thus  from  your  own  reasoning  it  appears
"that  the  state  of  nature  must  in  all  likelihood  have  been
little  different  from  a  state  of  war."

He  was  going  to  answer  me  with  some  sharpness,  as  by  his
looks  appeared,  when  Theocles,  interposing,  desired  that  as  he
had  occasioned  this  dispute  he  might  be  allowed  to  try  if  he
could  end  it  by  setting  the  question  in  a  fairer  light.  You
see,  said  he  to  the  old  gentleman,  what  artifice  Philocles  made
use  of,  when  he  engaged  you  to  allow  that  the  state  of  nature
and  that  of  society  were  perfectly  distinct.  But  let  us  question
him  now  in  his  turn,  and  see  w^hether  he  can  demonstrate  to  us,
"That  there  can  be  naturally  any  human  state  which  is  not
social."

What  is  it  then,  said  the  old  gentleman,  which  we  call  the
state  of  nature  't

Not  that  imperfect  rude  condition  of  mankind,  said  Theocles,
which  some  imagine ;  but  which,  if  it  ever  were  in  nature,  could
never  have  been  of  the  least  continuance,  or  any  way  tolerable,
or  sufficient  for  the  support  of  human  race.  Such  a  condition
cannot  indeed  so  properly  be  called  a  state.  For  what  if,
speaking  of  an  infant  just  coming  into  the  world,  and  in  the
moment  of  the  birth,  I  should  fancy  to  call  this  a  state,  would
it  be  proper  .'*

Hardly  so,  I  confess.

Just  such  a  state,  therefore,  was  that  which  we  suppose  of
man  ere  yet  he  entered  into  society,  and  became  in  truth  a
human  creature.  'Twas  the  rough  draught  of  man,  the  essay
or  first  effort  of  Nature,  a  species  in  the  birth,  a  kind  as  yet
unformed ;  not  in  its  natural  state,  but  under  violence,  and  still
restless,  till  it  attained  its  natural  perfection.

And  thus,  said  Theocles  (addressing  still  more  particularly

79


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

to  the  old  gentleman),  the  case  must  necessarily  stand,  even  on
the  supposal  "  that  there  was  ever  such  a  condition  or  state  of
men,  when  as  yet  they  were  unassociated,  unacquainted,  and
consequently  without  any  language  or  form  of  art."  But
"  that  it  was  their  natural  state  to  live  thus  separately,""  can
never  Avithout  absurdity  be  allowed.  For  sooner  may  you  divest
the  creature  of  any  other  feeling  or  affection  than  that  towards
society  and  his  likeness.  Allowing  you,  however,  the  power  of
divesting  him  at  pleasure,  allowing  you  to  reduce  even  whole
jjarts  and  members  of  his  present  frame,  would  you  transform
him  thus  and  call  him  still  a  man?  Yet  better  might  you  do
this  indeed  than  you  could  strip  him  of  his  natural  affections,
separate  him  from  all  his  kind,  and  enclosing  him  like  some
solitary  insect  in  a  shell,  declare  him  still  a  man.  So  might
you  call  the  human  egg  or  embryo  the  man.  The  bug  \\'hich
breeds  the  butterfly  is  more  properly  a  fly,  though  without
wings,  than  this  imaginary  creature  is  a  man.  For  though
his  outward  shape  were  human,  his  passions,  appetites,  and
organs  must  be  wholly  different.  His  whole  inward  make  must
be  reversed,  to  fit  him  for  such  a  recluse  economy  and  separate
subsistence.

To  explain  this  a  little  further,  continued  he,  let  us  examine
this  pretended  state  of  nature ;  how  and  on  what  foundation  it
must  stand,  "  For  either  man  must  have  been  from  eternity  or
not.  If  from  eternity,  there  could  be  no  primitive  or  original
state,  no  state  of  nature  other  than  we  see  at  present  before
our  eyes.  If  not  from  eternity,  he  arose  either  all  at  once  (and
consequently  he  was  at  the  very  first  as  he  is  now)  or  by  degrees,
through  several  stages  and  conditions,  to  that  in  which  he  is  at
length  settled,  and  has  continued  for  so  many  generations,"

For  instance,  let  us  suppose  he  sprang,  as  the  old  poets
feigned,  from  a  big-bellied  oak,  and  then  belike  he  might  re-
semble more  a  mandrake  than  a  man.  Let  us  suppose  him  at
first  with  little  more  of  life  than  is  discovered  in  that  plant
which  they  call  the  sensitive. But  when  the  mother-oak  had

80


THE MOllA LISTS

been  .sonic  time  dcliverccl,  and  the  false  birth  by  some  odd
accitlent  or  deviee  was  wrought  into  form,  the  members  were
then  fully  displayed,  and  the  organs  of  sense  began  to  unfold
themselves.  "Here  sprang  an  ear;  there  peeped  an  eye.
Perhaps  a  tail  too  came  in  company.  For  what  superHuities
Nature  may  ha\e  l)een  charged  with  at  first  is  difficult  to
determine.  They  dropped  off,  it  seems,  in  time;  and  ha}ij)ily
have  left  things  at  last  in  a  good  posture,  and  (to  a  wonder  ! )
just  as  they  should  be.''

This  surely  is  the  lowest  view  of  the  ori";inal  affairs  of
human  kind.  For  if  a  providence,  and  not  chance,  gave  man
his  being,  our  argument  for  his  social  nature  must  surely  be  the
stronger.  But  admitting  his  rise  to  be  as  we  have  described,
and  as  a  certain  sort  of  j^hilosophers  would  needs  have  it,  Nature
has  then  had  no  intention  at  all,  no  meaning;  or  desiy-n  in  this
whole  matter.  So  how  anything  can  be  called  natural  in  the
case,  how  any  state  can  be  called  a  state  of  Nature,  or  according
to  Nature,  one  more  than  another,  I  know  not.

Let  us  go  on,  however,  and  on  their  hyj:)othesis  consider
which  state  we  may  best  call  Nature's  own.  "  She  has  by
accident,  through  many  changes  and  chances,  raised  a  creature
which,  springing  at  first  from  rude  seeds  of  matter,  proceeded
till  it  became  what  now  it  is,  and  arrived  where  for  many
generations  it  has  been  at  a  stay."  In  this  long  procession  (for
I  allow  it  any  length  whatever)  I  ask,  "  Where  was  it  that
this  state  of  Nature  could  begin .'' "  The  creature  must  have
endured  many  changes ;  and  each  change,  whilst  he  was  thus
growing  up,  was  as  natural  one  as  another.  So  that  either  there
must  be  reckoned  a  hundred  different  states  of  Nature,  or  if  one,
it  can  be  only  that  in  which  Nature  was  perfect,  and  her  grow  th
complete.  Here  where  she  rested  and  attained  her  end,  here
nmst  be  her  state,  or  nowhere.

Could  she  then  rest,  think  you,  in  that  desolate  state  before
society .'' Could  she  maintain  antl  propagate  the  species,  such
as  it  now  is,  without  fellowship  or  community  .'* Show  it  us
VOL.  II  81  G


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

in  fact  anywhere,  amongst  any  of  our  own  kind.  For  as  for
creatures  which  may  much  resemble  us  in  outward  form,  if  they
differ  yet  in  the  least  part  of  their  constitution,  if  their  inwards
are  of  a  different  texture,  if  their  skin  and  pores  are  otherwise
formed  or  hardened ;  if  they  have  other  excrescences  of  body,
another  temper,  other  natural  inseparable  habits  or  affections,
they  are  not  truly  of  our  kind.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  their
constitution  be  as  ours,  their  natural  parts  or  inward  faculties
as  strong,  and  their  bodily  frame  as  weak  as  ours  ;  if  they  have
memory,  and  senses,  and  affections,  and  a  use  of  organs  as  ours :
'tis  evident  they  can  no  more  by  their  goodwill  abstain  from
society  than  they  can  possibly  preserve  themselves  without  it.

And  here,  my  friends,  we  ought  to  remember  what  we  dis-
coursed a  while  since,  and  was  advanced  by  Philocles  himself,
concerning  the  weakness  of  human  bodies  ^  and  the  necessitous
state  of  man  in  respect  of  all  other  creatures ;  "  his  long  and
helpless  infancy,  his  feeble  and  defenceless  make,  by  which  he  is
more  fitted  to  be  a  prey  himself  than  live  by  prey  on  others.'*'
Yet  'tis  impossible  for  him  to  subsist  like  any  of  those  grazing
kinds.  He  must  have  better  provision  and  choicer  food  than
the  raw  herbage  ;  a  better  couch  and  covering  than  the  bare
earth  or  open  sky.  How  many  conveniences  of  other  kinds
does  he  stand  in  need  of.-^  What  union  and  strict  society  is
required  between  the  sexes  to  preserve  and  nurse  their  growing
offspring  ?  This  kind  of  society  will  not,  surely,  be  denied  to
man,  which  to  every  beast  of  prey  is  known  proper  and  natural.
And  can  we  allow  this  social  part  to  man,  and  go  no  further  ?
Is  it  possible  he  should  pair,  and  live  in  love  and  fellowship
with  his  partner  and  offspring,  and  remain  still  wholly  wild  and
speechless,  and  without  those  arts  of  storing,  building,  and  other
economy,  as  natural  to  him,  surely,  as  to  the  beaver,  or  to  the
ant  or  bee  ?  Where,  therefore,  should  he  break  oft'  from  this
society  if  once  begun  ?  For  that  it  began  thus,  as  early  as
generation,  and  grew  into  a  household  and  economy,  is  plain.

1  P.  72.
82


THE MORALISTS

Must  not  this  have  orown  soon  into  a  tribe  ?  antl  this  tril)e  into
a  nation  ?  Or  thou<i;h  it  remained  a  tribe  only,  was  not  this
still  a  society  for  mutual  defence  and  common  interest?  In
short,  if  <i!;cneration  be  natural,  if  natural  affection  and  the  care
and  luu'ture  of  the  offspring  be  natural,  things  standing  as  they
do  with  man,  and  the  creature  being  of  that  form  and  constitu-
tion he  now  is,  it  follows  "  that  society  must  be  also  natural  to
him,"  and  "that  out  of  society  and  community  he  never  did,
nor  ever  can,  subsist.""

To  conclude,  said  he  (addressing  still  to  the  two  companions),
I  will  venture  to  add  a  word  in  behalf  of  Philocles  :  that  since
the  learned  have  such  a  fancy  for  this  notion,  and  love  to  talk
of  this  imaginary  state  of  Nature,  I  think  'tis  even  charity  to
speak  as  ill  of  it  as  we  possibly  can.  Let  it  be  a  state  of  war,
rapine,  and  injustice.  Since  'tis  unsocial,  let  it  even  be  as
uncomfortable  and  as  frightful  as  "'tis  possible.  To  speak  well
of  it  is  to  render  it  inviting  and  tempt  men  to  turn  hermits.
Let  it,  at  least,  be  looked  on  as  many  degrees  worse  than  the
worst  government  in  being.  The  greater  dread  we  have  of
anarchy,  the  better  countrymen  we  shall  prove,  and  value  more
the  laws  and  constitution  under  which  we  live,  and  by  which  we
are  protected  from  the  outrageous  violences  of  such  an  unnatural
state.  In  this  I  agree  heartily  with  those  transformers  of  human
nature  who,  considering  it  abstractedly  and  apart  from  govern-
ment or  society,  represent  it  under  monstrous  visages  of  dragons,
leviathans,  and  I  know  not  what  devouring  creatures.  They
would  have  done  well,  however,  to  have  expressed  themselves
more  properly  in  their  great  maxim.  For  to  say  in  disjiarage-
ment  of  man  "  that  he  is  to  man  a  wolf '"  appears  somewhat
absurd,  when  one  considei's  that  wolves  are  to  wolves  very  kind
and  loving  creatures.  The  sexes  strictly  join  in  the  care  and
imrture  of  the  young,  and  this  union  is  continued  still  between
them.  They  howl  to  one  another  to  bring  company,  whether
to  hunt,  or  invade  their  prey,  or  assemble  on  the  discovery  of
a  good  carcase. Even the  swinish kinds  want  not  connnon

83


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

affection,  and  run  in  herds  to  the  assistance  of  their  distressed
fellows.  The  meaning,  therefore,  of  this  famous  sentence  (if  it
has  any  meaning  at  all)  must  be,  "  That  man  is  naturally  to
man  as  a  wolf  is  to  a  tamer  creature " ;  as,  for  instance,  to  a
sheep.  But  this  will  be  as  little  to  the  ])urpose  as  to  tell  us
that  "  there  are  different  species  or  characters  of  men ;  that  all
have  not  this  wolfish  nature,^  but  that  one  half  at  least  are
naturally  innocent  and  mild."  And  thus  the  sentence  comes  to
nothing.  For  without  belying  nature  and  contradicting  what
is  evident  from  natural  history,  fact,  and  the  plain  course  of
things,  'tis  impossible  to  assent  to  this  ill-natured  proposition
when  we  have  even  done  our  best  to  make  tolerable  sense  of  it.
.  .  .  But  such  is  mankind !  And  even  here  human  nature
shows  itself,  such  as  it  is,  not  perfect  or  absolutely  successful,
though  rightly  tending  and  moved  by  proper  and  just  principles.
'Tis  here,  therefore,  in  philosophy  as  in  the  common  conversa-
tions of  the  world.  As  fond  as  men  are  of  company,  and  as
little  able  to  enjoy  any  happiness  out  of  it,  they  are  yet  strangely
addicted  to  the  way  of  satire.  And  in  the  same  manner  as  a
malicious  censure,  craftily  worded  and  pronounced  with  assurance,
is  apt  to  pass  with  mankind  for  shrewd  wit,  so  a  virulent  maxim
in  bold  expressions,  though  without  any  justness  of  thought,
is  readily  received  for  true  philosophy.


Sectiox V

In  these  discourses  the  evening  ended,  and,  night  advancing,  we
returned  home  from  our  walk.  At  supper,  and  afterwards  for
the  rest  of  that  night,  Theocles  said  little.  The  discourse  was
now  managed  chiefly  by  the  two  companions,  who  turned  it
upon  a  new  sort  of  philosophy,  such  as  you  will  excuse  me,  good
Palemon,  if  I  pass  over  with  more  haste.

There  was  much  said,  and  with  great  learning,  on  the  nature  of

1 IVit  and  Humour,  psirt  ii.  §  1  ;  part  iii.  §  3.

84


TIIK M()1{ALISTS

spirits  and  appai'itions,  of  wliit-h  tlic  most  astonishiii<r  accounts
were  the  most  ravisliino-  with  our  friends,  wlio  endeavoured  to
exceed  one  another  in  this  achniiahle  way,  and  performed  to
a  miracle  in  raisin<>;  one  another's  amazement.  Nothinji;  was  so
charmiiiii'  witli  them  as  that  whidi  was  disafjreeintr  and  odd  ;
nothing  so  soothino-  as  that  wiiich  movctl  horror.  In  short,
whatever  was  rational,  plain,  and  easy  bore  no  rehsh ;  and
nothing  came  amiss  A\hic]i  was  cross  to  nature,  out  of  sort  and
order,  and  in  no  proportion  or  harmonv  with  the  rest  of  things.
Monstrous  births,  prochgies,  encliantments,  elementary  ^  wars  and
convulsions  were  our  chief  entertaiinnent.  One  would  have
thought  that  in  a  kind  of  rivalship  between  Providence  and
Nature,  the  latter  lady  was  made  to  appear  as  homely  as  possible,
that  her  deformities  miglit  rcconnnend  and  set  off  the  beauties
of  the  former.  For  to  do  our  friends  justice,  I  mnst  own  I
thouglit  their  intention  to  bo  sincerely  religions.  IJut  this  was
not  a  face  of  religion  I  was  like  to  be  enamoured  with.  It  was
not  from  lience  I  feared  being  made  enthusiastic  or  superstitious.
If  ever  I  became  so,  I  found  it  would  rather  be  after  Theocles's
manner.  The  monujnents  and  churchyanls  were  not  such
powerful  scenes  with  me  as  the  mountains,  the  plains,  the
solemn  woods  and  groves,  of  whose  inliabitants  I  chose  nnich
rather  to  hear  than  of  the  other.  And  I  was  readier  to  fancy
truth  in  those  poetical  fictions  which  Theocles  made  use  of
than  in  any  of  his  friend's  ghastly  stories,  so  ])ompously  set  off,
after  the  usual  way,  in  a  lofty  tone  of  authority  and  with  an
assuming  air  of  truth.

You  may  imagine,  Palemon,  that  my  scepticism,-  with  which
you  so  often  reproach  me,  could  not  well  forsake  me  here ;  nor
could  it  fail  to  give  disturbance  to  our  companions,  especially  to
the  grave  gentleman  who  had  clashed  with  me  some  time  before.
He  bore  with  me  awhile,  till  having  lost  all  patience,  "One  nuist
certainly,"'"'  said  he,  "  be  master  of  no  small  share  of  assurance  to
hold  out  against  the  common  opinioji  of  the  world  and  deny
'  [I.e.  elemental.]  -  Misc.  ii.  eh.  ii.  ;  v.  cli.  i.  iii.

85


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

things  which  are  known  by  the  report  of  the  most  considerable
part  of  mankind."

This,  said  I,  is  far  from  being  my  case.  You  have  never  yet
heard  me  deny  anything,  though  I  have  questioned  many.  If  I
suspend  my  judgment,  'tis  because  I  have  less  sufficiency  than
others.  There  are  people,  I  know,  who  have  so  great  a  regard
to  every  fancy  of  their  own,  that  they  can  believe  their  very
dreams.  But  I,  who  could  never  pay  any  such  deference  to  my
sleeping  fancies,  am  apt  sometimes  to  question  even  my  waking
thoughts  and  examine  "whether  these  are  not  dreams  too,"
since  men  have  a  faculty  of  dreaming  sometimes  with  their  eyes
open.  You  will  own  'tis  no  small  pleasure  with  mankind  to
make  their  dreams  pass  for  realities,  and  that  the  love  of  truth
is,  in  earnest,  not  half  so  prevalent  as  this  passion  for  noveltv
and  surprise,  joined  with  a  desire  of  making  impression  and
being  admired.  However,  I  am  so  charitable  still  as  to  think
there  is  more  of  innocent  delusion  than  voluntary  imposture  in
the  world,  and  that  they  who  have  most  imposed  on  mankind
have  been  happy  in  a  certain  faculty  of  imposing  first  upon
themselves,  by  which  they  have  a  kind  of  salvo  for  their  con-
sciences, and  are  so  much  the  more  successful,  as  Ihey  can  act
their  part  more  naturally  and  to  the  life.  Nor  is  it  to  be
esteemed  a  riddle  that  men's  dreams  shoidd  sometimes  have  the
good  fortune  of  passing  with  them  for  truth,  when  we  con-
sider that  in  some  cases  that  which  was  never  so  nuich  as
dreamt  of,  or  related  as  truth,  comes  afterwards  to  be  believed
by  one  who  has  often  told  it.

So  that  the  greatest  impostor  in  the  world,  replied  he,  at
this  rate  may  be  allowed  sincere.

As  to  the  main  of  his  imposture,  said  I,  perhaps  he  may,
notwithstanding  some  pious  frauds  made  use  of  between  whiles
in  behalf  of  a  belief  thought  good  and  wholesome.  And  so  very
natural  do  I  take  this  to  be,  that  in  all  religions  except  the
true  I  look  upon  the  greatest  zeal  to  be  accompanied  with  the
strongest  inclination  to  deceive. For  the  design  and  end  being

8G


THE MORAT.ISTS

the  truth,  'tis  not  custoniai-y  to  hesitate  or  be  scrupulous  about
the  flioice  of  means.  Whether  this  be  true  or  no,  I  appeal  to
the  experience  of  the  last  age,  in  which  'twill  not  be  difficult  to
find  very  remarkable  exam])les,  where  imposture  and  zeal,
bigotry  and  hvi>tx'n^v,  have  lived  together  in  one  and  the  same
character.

Let  this  be  as  it  will,  replied  he,  I  am  sorry,  upon  the  whole,
to  find  you  of  such  an  incredulous  temper.

'Tis  just,  said  I,  that  you  should  pity  me  as  a  sufferer  for
losing  that  pleasure  which  I  see  others  enjoy.  For  what  stronger
pleasure  is  there  with  mankind,  or  what  do  they  earlier  learn
or  longer  retain,  than  the  love  of  hearing  and  relating  things
stranore  and  incredible  ?  How  \\onderful  a  thing  is  the  love  of
wondering  and  of  raising  wonder !  'Tis  the  delight  of  children
to  hear  tales  they  shiver  at,  and  the  vice  of  old  age  to  abound
in  strange  stories  of  times  past.  We  come  into  the  world
wondering  at  everything,  and  when  our  wonder  about  common
things  is  over,  we  seek  something  new  to  wonder  at.  Our  last
scene  is  to  tell  wonders  of  our  own  to  all  who  will  believe  them.
And  amidst  all  this,  'tis  well  if  truth  comes  off  but  moderately
tainted.

"Tis  well,  replied  he,  if  with  this  moderate  faith  of  yours
you  can  believe  any  miracles  whatever.

No  matter,  said  I,  how  incredulous  I  am  of  modern  miracles,
if  I  have  a  right  faith  in  those  of  former  times  by  paying  the
deference  due  to  sacred  writ.  'Tis  here  I  am  so  much  warned
against  credulity,  and  enjoined  never  to  believe  even  the  greatest
miracles  which  may  be  wrought,  in  opposition  to  what  has  been
already  taught  me.  A)id  this  injunction  I  am  so  well  fitted  to
comply  with,  that  I  can  safely  engage  to  keep  still  in  the  same
faith  and  promise  never  to  believe  amiss.

liut  is  this  a  promise  which  can  well  be  made  ?

If  not,  and  that  my  belief  indeed  does  not  absolutely  depend
upon  mvself,  how  am  I  accountable  for  it.^  I  may  be  justly
putiished  for  actions  in  which  my  will  is  free,  but  with  what

87"


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

justice  can  I  be  challenged  for  my  belief,  if  in  this  I  am  not  at
my  liberty  ?  If  credulity  and  incredulity  are  defects  only  in  the
judgment ;  and  the  best-meaning  person  in  the  world  may  err
on  either  side,  whilst  a  much  worse  man,  by  having  better  parts,
may  judge  far  better  of  the  evidence  of  things;  how  can  you
punish  him  who  errs,  unless  you  would  punish  weakness  and
say  'tis  just  for  men  to  suffer  for  their  ludiappiness,  and  not
their  fault  ?

I  am  apt  to  think,  said  he,  that  very  few  of  those  who  are
punished  for  their  incredulity  can  be  said  to  be  sufferers  for
their  weakness.

Taking  it  for  granted  then,  replied  I,  that  simplicity  and
weakness  is  more  the  character  of  the  credulous  than  of  the  un-
believing, yet  I  see  not  but  that  even  this  way  still  we  are  as
liable  to  suffer  by  our  weakness  as  in  the  contrary  case  by  an
over-refined  wit.  For  if  we  cannot  command  our  own  belief,
how  are  we  secure  against  those  false  prophets  and  their  delud-
ing miracles  of  which  we  have  such  warning  given  us  ?  How
are  we  safe  from  heresy  and  false  religion  't  Credulity  being
that  which  delivers  us  up  to  all  impostures  of  this  sort,  and
which  actually  at  this  day  hold  the  Pagan  and  Mahometan  world
in  error  and  blind  superstition.  Either,  therefore,  there  is  no
punishment  due  to  wrong  belief,  because  we  cannot  believe  as
we  will  ourselves,  or  if  we  can,  why  should  we  not  promise  never
to  believe  amiss  ?  Now  in  respect  of  miracles  to  come,  the  surest
way  never  to  believe  amiss  is  never  to  believe  at  all.  For  being
satisfied  of  the  truth  of  our  religion  by  past  miracles,  so  as  to
need  no  other  to  confirm  us,  the  belief  of  new  may  often  do  us
harm,  but  can  never  do  us  good.  Therefore  as  the  truest  mark
of  a  believing  Christian  is  to  seek  after  no  sign  or  miracle  to
come,  so  the  safest  station  in  Christianity  is  his  who  can  be
moved  by  nothing  of  this  kind,  and  is  thus  miracle-proof.  For
if  the  miracle  be  on  the  side  of  his  faith,  'tis  superfluous,  and  he
needs  it  not ;  if  against  his  faith,  let  it  be  as  great  as  possible,
he  will  never  regard  it  in  the  least,  or  believe  it  any  other  than

88


THE MORALISTS

imposture,  tlionoh  coniiiiir  from  an  angel.  So  that  uitli  all  that
incredulity  for  which  you  re])roach  me  so  severely,  I  take  myself
to  be  still  the  better  and  more  orthodox  Christian.  At  least  I
am  more  sure  of  continuing  so  than  you,  who  with  your  credulity
may  be  im})osed  u])on  by  such  as  are  far  short  of  angels.  For
having  this  jMeparatory  disposition,  'tis  odds  you  may  come  in
time  to  believe  miracles  in  any  of  the  diff'ei-ent  sects  who,  we
know,  all  pretend  to  them.  I  am  persuaded,  therefore,  that  the
best  maxim  to  go  by  is  that  connnon  one,  "  That  miracles  are
ceased."'"'  And  I  am  ready  to  defend  this  opinion  of  mine
to  be  the  most  probable  in  itself,  as  well  as  most  suitable  to
Christianity.

This  question,  uj)on  further  debate,  ha])pened  to  divide  our
two  companions.  For  the  elderly  gentleman,  mv  antagonist,
maintained  "  that  the  giving  up  of  miracles  for  the  time
present  would  be  of  great  advantage  to  the  atheists.""  The
younger  gentleman,  his  companion,  questioned  "  whether  the
allowing  them  might  not  be  of  as  great  advantage  to  the
enthusiasts  and  sectaries  against  the  national  church ;  this  of
the  two  being  the  greatest  danger,  he  thought,  both  to  religion
and  the  state."  He  was  resolved,  therefore,  for  the  future  to
be  as  cautious  in  examining  these  modern  miracles  as  he  had
before  been  eager  in  seeking  them.  He  told  us  very  ])leasantly
what  an  adventurer  he  had  been  of  that  kind,  and  on  how
many  parties  he  had  been  engaged,  with  a  sort  of  people  who
were  always  on  the  hot  scent  of  some  new  prodigy  or  apparition,
some  upstart  revelation  or  pro})hecy.  This,  he  thought,  was
true  fanaticism  errant.  He  had  enough  of  this  visionary  chase,
and  would  ramble  no  more  in  blind  corners  of  the  world,  as  he
had  been  formerly  accustomed,  in  ghostly  companv  of  spirit-
hunters,  witch -finders,  and  layers -out  for  hellish  stories  and
diabolical  transactions.  There  was  no  need,  he  thought,  of
such  intelligences  from  hell  to  prove  the  power  of  heaven  and
being  of  a  God.  And  now  at  last  he  began  to  see  the  ridicule
of  laying  such a  stress  on these  matters,  as if  a  providence

89


SHAFTESBURY'S CHATIACTEKTSTICS

depentlecl  on  them  and  religion  were  at  stake  when  any  of  these
wild  feats  were  questioned.  He  was  sensible  there  were  many
good  Christians  who  made  themselves  strong  partisans  in  this
cause,  though  he  could  not  avoid  wondering  at  it,  now^  he
began  to  consider  and  look  back.

The  heathens,  he  said,  who  wanted  Scripture,  might  have
recourse  to  miracles ;  and  Providence  perhaps  had  allowed  them
their  oracles  and  prodigies  as  an  imperfect  kind  of  revelation.
The  Jews  too,  for  their  hard  heart  and  harder  understanding,
had  this  allowance,  when  stubbornly  they  asked  for  signs  and
wonders.  But  Christians,  for  their  parts,  had  a  far  better  and
truer  revelation  ;  they  had  their  plainer  oracles,  a  more  rational
law  and  clearer  Scripture,  carrying  its  own  force,  and  withal  so
well  attested  as  to  admit  of  no  dispute.  And  were  I,  continued
he,  to  assign  the  exact  time  when  miracles  probably  might  first
have  ceased,  I  should  be  tempted  to  fancy  it  was  when  sacred
writ  took  place  and  was  completed.

This  is  fancy  indeed,  replied  the  grave  gentleman,  and  a
very  dangerous  one  to  that  Scriptiu'e  you  pretend  is  of  itself  so
well  attested.  The  attestation  of  men  dead  and  gone,  in  behalf
of  miracles  past  and  at  an  end,  can  never  surely  be  of  equal
force  with  miracles  present ;  and  of  these,  I  maintain,  there  are
never  wanting  a  number  sufficient  in  the  world  to  warrant  a
divine  existence.  If  there  were  no  miracles  nowadays,  the
world  would  be  apt  to  think  there  never  were  any.  The
present  nnist  answer  for  the  credibility  of  the  past.  This  is
"  God  witnessing  for  himself,"  not  "  men  for  God."  For  who
shall  witness  for  men,  if  in  the  case  of  religion  they  have  no
testimony  from  heaven  in  their  behalf.^

What  it  is  may  make  the  report  of  men  credible,  said  the
younger  gentleman,  is  another  question.  But  for  mere  miracles,
it  seems  to  me,  they  cannot  be  properly  said  "  to  witness  either
for  God  or  men."  For  who  shall  witness  for  the  miracles  them-
selves ?  And  what  though  they  are  ever  so  certain.?  What
security  have  w^e  that  they  are  not  acted  by  demons  ? What

90


THE MOllALISTS

proof  that  thev  are  not  wrought  by  niaoic  p  In  short,  ''  what
trust' is  there  to  anythino-  above  or  below,  if  the  sions  are  only
of  pow  er  and  not  of  goodness  ? "

And  are  you  so  far  improved  then,  rcjilied  the  severe
companion,  under  your  new  sceptical  master  (pointing  to  me)
that  you  can  thus  readily  discard  all  miracles  as  useless  ?  . . .

The  voung  gentleman,  I  saw,  was  somewhat  daunted  with
this  rouiih  usaoe  of  his  friend,  who  was  ooing  on  still  with  his
invective.  Nay  then,  said  I,  interposing,  'tis  I  who  am  to
answer  for  this  voung  gentleman,  whom  you  make  to  be  my
disciple.  And  since  his  modesty,  I  see,  will  not  allow  him  to
pursue  what  he  has  so  handsomely  begun,  I  will  endeavour  it
myself,  if  he  will  give  mc  leave.

The  young  gentleman  assented,  and  I  went  on  representing
his  fair  intention  of  establishing  in  the  first  place  a  rational  and
just  foundation  for  our  faith,  so  as  to  vindicate  it  from  the
reproach  of  having  no  immediate  miracles  to  support  it.  He
would  have  done  this,  I  said,  undoubtedly  by  showing  how-
good  proof  we  had  already  for  our  sacred  oracles  from  the
testimony  of  the  dead,  whose  characters  and  lives  might  answer
for  them  as  to  the  truth  of  what  they  reported  to  us  from  God.
This,  however,  was  by  no  means  "  witnessing  for  God,"  as  the
zealous  gentleman  had  hastily  expressed  himself,  for  this  was
above  the  reach  either  of  men  or  miracles.  Nor  could  God
witness  for  himself,  or  assert  his  being  any  other  way  to  men,
than  "  by  revealing  himself  to  their  reason,  appealing  to  their
judgment,  and  submitting  his  w'ays  to  their  censure  and  cool
deliberation."  The  contemplation  of  the  universe,  its  laws  and
government,  was,  I  averred,  the  only  means  which  could  establish
the  sound  belief  of  a  Deity.  For  what  though  innumerable
miracles  from  every  part  assailed  the  sense  and  gave  the
trembling  soul  no  respite  ?  What  though  the  sky  shouki
suddenlv  open  and  all  kinds  of  prodigies  appear,  voices  be
heard  or  characters  read  ?  What  would  this  evince  more  than
"  that there were certain powers  could do all this "  ? But

91


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

"  what  powers,  whether  one  or  more,  whether  superior  or
subaltern,  mortal  or  immortal,  wise  or  foolish,  just  or  unjust,
good  or  bad "" ;  this  would  still  remain  a  mystery,  as  would  the
true  intention,  the  infallibility  or  certainty  of  whatever  those
powers  asserted.  Their  word  could  not  be  taken  in  their  own
case.  They  might  silence  men  indeed,  but  not  convince  them  ;
since  "  power  can  never  serve  as  proof  for  goodness,^  and  good-
ness is  the  only  pledge  of  truth."  Bv  goodness  alone  trust  is
created.  By  goodness  superior  powers  may  win  belief.  They
must  allow  their  works  to  be  examined,  their  actions  criticised ;
and  thus,  thus  only,  they  may  be  confided  in ;  "  When  by
repeated  marks  their  benevolence  is  proved,  and  their  character
of  sincerity  and  truth  established."  To  whom  therefore  the  laws
of  this  universe  and  its  government  appear  just  and  uniform,
to  him  they  speak  the  government  of  one  Just  One ;  to  him
they  reveal  and  witness  a  God  ;  and  laying  in  him  the  founda-
tion of  this  first  faith,  they  fit  him  for  a  subse{|uent  one.^  He
can  then  hearken  to  historical  revelation,  and  is  then  fitted  (and
not  till  then)  for  the  reception  of  any  message  or  miraculous
notice  from  above,  where  he  knows  beforehand  all  is  just  and
true.  But  this  no  powxr  of  miracles,  nor  any  power  besides
his  reason,  can  make  him  know^  or  apprehend.

But  now,  continued  I,  since  I  have  been  thus  long  the
defendant  only,  I  am  resolved  to  take  up  offensive  arms  and  be
aggressor  in  my  turn,  provided  Theocles  be  not  angry  with  me
for  borrowing  ground  from  his  hypothesis.

Whatever  you  borrow  of  his,  replied  my  antagonist,  you  are
pretty  sure  of  spoiling  it ;  and  as  it  passes  through  your  hands
you  had  best  beware  lest  you  seem  rather  to  reflect  on  him
than  me.

Ill  venture  it,  said  I,  whilst  I  maintain  that  most  of  those
maxims  you  build  upon  are  fit  only  to  betray  your  own  cause.
For  whilst  you  are  labouring  to  unhinge  Nature,  whilst  you  are

^ Wit  and  Humour,  part  ii.  §  2  ;  Misc.  v.  ch.  iii.
2  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  J  ;  and  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  3.

92


THE MOllAI.lSTS

searcliing  heaven  and  earth  for  prodigie.s,  and  studying-  liow  to
niiracuhse  everything,  you  bring  confusion  on  the  world,  you
break  its  uniformity  and  destroy  that  achuirable  simplicity  of
order  from  whence  the  one  infinite  and  })erfect  principle  is
known.  Perpetual  strifes,  convulsions,  violences,  breach  of  laws,
variation  and  unsteadiness  of  order,  show  either  no  control,  or
several  uncontrolled  and  unsubordinate  ])owers  in  Nature.  \\'e
have  before  our  eyes  either  the  chaos  and  atoms  of  the  atheists,
or  the  magic  and  demons  of  the  polytheists.  Vet  is  this
tumultuous  system  of  the  universe  asserted  with  the  highest
zeal  by  some  who  would  maintain  a  Deity.  This  is  that  face  of
things,  and  these  the  features  by  which  they  represent  divinity.
Hither  the  eyes  of  our  more  inquisitive  and  ingenuous  youth
are  turned  with  care,  lest  they  see  anything  otherwise  than  in
this  perplexed  and  amazing  view.  As  if  atheism  were  the  most
natural  inference  which  could  be  drawn  from  a  regular  and
orderly  state  of  things  !  But  after  all  this  mangling  and  dis-
figurement of  Nature,  if  it  happens  (as  oft  it  does)  that  the
amazed  disciple,  coming  to  himself  and  searching  leisurely  into
Nature's  ways,  finds  more  of  order,  uniformity,  and  constancy
in  things  than  he  suspected,  he  is,  of  course,  driven  into
atheism ;  and  this  merely  by  the  impressions  he  received  from
that  preposterous  system  which  taught  him  to  seek  for  Deity
in  confusion,  and  to  discover  Providence  in  an  irregular  dis-
jointed world.

And  when  you,  replied  he,  with  your  newly-espoused  system,
have  brought  all  things  to  be  as  uniform,  plain,  regular,  and
simple  as  you  could  wish,  I  suppose  you  will  send  your  disciple
to  seek  for  Deity  in  mechanism ;  that  is  to  say,  in  some
exquisite  system  of  self-governed  matter.  For  what  else  is  it
you  naturalists  make  of  the  world  than  a  mere  machine .''

Nothing  else,  replied  I,  if  to  the  machine  you  allow  a  mind.
For  in  this  case  'tis  not  a  self-governed  but  a  God-governed
machine.

And  what  are  the  tokens,  said  he,  which  should  convince

03


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

us  ?  What  signs  should  this  dumb  machine  give  of  its  being
thus  governed  ?

The  present,  rephed  I,  are  sufficient.  It  cannot  possibly
give  stronger  signs  of  life  and  steady  thought.  Compare  our
own  machines  with  this  great  one,  and  see  whether  by  their
order,  management,  and  motions  they  betoken  either  so  perfect
a  life  or  so  consummate  an  intelligence.  The  one  is  regular,
steady,  permanent ;  the  other  are  irregular,  variable,  inconstant.
In  one  there  are  the  marks  of  wisdom  and  determination ;  in
the  other  of  whimsy  and  conceit :  in  one  there  appears  judg-
ment ;  in  the  other,  fancy  only :  in  one,  will ;  in  the  other,
caprice  :  in  one,  truth,  certainty,  knowledge  ;  in  the  other,  error,
folly,  and  madness.  But  to  be  convinced  there  is  something
above  which  thinks  and  acts,  we  want,  it  seems,  the  latter  of
these  signs,  as  supposing  there  can  be  no  thought  or  intelligence
beside  what  is  like  our  own.  We  sicken  and  grow  weary  with
the  orderly  and  regular  course  of  things.  Periods,  and  stated
laws,  and  revolutions,  just  and  proportionable,  work  not  upon
us,  nor  win  our  admiration.  We  must  have  riddles,  prodigies,
matter  for  surprise  and  horror !  By  harmony,  order,  and
concord  we  are  made  atheists ;  by  irregularity  and  discord  we
are  convinced  of  Deity  !  "  The  world  is  mere  accident  if  it
proceeds  in  course,  but  an  effect  of  wisdom  if  it  runs  mad  ! ""

Thus  I  took  upon  me  the  part  of  a  sound  theist  whilst  I
endeavoured  to  refute  my  antagonist  and  show  that  his
principles  favoured  atheism.  The  zealous  gentleman  took  high
offence,  and  we  continued  debating  warmly  till  late  at  night.
But  Theocles  was  moderator,  and  we  retired  at  last  to  our
repose,  all  calm  and  friendly.  However,  I  was  not  a  little
rejoiced  to  hear  that  our  companions  Avere  to  go  away  early  the
next  morning  and  leave  Theocles  to  me  alone.

For  now,  Palemon,  that  morning  was  approaching  for  which
I  so  much  longed.  What  your  longing  may  prove  I  may  have
reason  to  fear.  You  have  had  enough,  one  would  think,  to
turn the edge of your curiosity in this kind. Can it be

94"


THE MORALISTS

iniagiiicd  that  after  the  recital  of  two  such  days  ah-eudy  \nisi
you  can  with  patience  hear  of  another  yet  to  come,  more
|)hilosoj)lii(al  than  either?  .  .  .  liut  you  have  made  me  promise;
and  now,  whatever  it  cost,  take  it  you  nuist,  as  follows.


PART III

Sectiox I

PhUodcs  to  Paloiinii

Ir  was  vet  deep  nijj^ht  (as  I  imagined)  when  I  waked  with  the
noise  of  ])eopIe  up  in  the  house.  I  called  to  know  the  matter,
and  was  told  that  Theocles  had  a  little  hefore  })artcd  with  his
friends,  after  which  he  went  out  to  take  his  morning  walk,
but  would  return,  they  thought,  pretty  soon  :  for  so  he  had
left  word,  and  that  nobody  in  the  meantime  should  disturb
my  rest.

This  was  disturbance  sufficient  when  I  heard  it.  I  })rescntly
got  up,  and  finding  it  light  enough  to  see  the  hill,  which  was
at  a  little  distance  from  the  house,  I  soon  got  thither,  and  at
the  foot  of  it  ovei-took  Theocles,  to  whom  I  complained  of  his
unkindness.  For  I  was  not  certainly  (I  told  him)  so  effeminate
and  weak  a  friend  as  to  deserve  that  he  should  treat  me  like
a  woman ;  nor  had  I  shown  such  an  aversion  to  his  maimers  or
conversation  as  to  be  thought  fitter  for  the  dull  luxury  of  a
soft  bed  and  ease  than  for  business,  recreation,  or  study  with
an  early  friend.  He  had  no  other  way,  therefore,  of  making  me
amends  than  by  allowing  me  henceforward  to  be  a  party  with
him  in  his  serious  thoughts,  as  he  saw  I  was  resolved  to  })e  in
his  hours  and  exercises  of  tliis  sort.

Vou  have  forgot  then,  said  Theocles,  the  assignation  you  had

9.5


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

yesterday  with  the  silvan  nymphs  at  this  place  and  hour  ?  No,
truly,  said  I,  for,  as  you  see,  I  am  come  punctually  to  the  place
appointed.  But  I  never  expected  you  should  have  come  hither
without  me.  Nay  then,  said  Theocles,  there  is  hope  you  may
in  time  become  a  lover  with  me,  for  you  already  begin  to  show
jealousy.  How  little  did  I  think  these  nymphs  could  raise  that
passion  in  you  'i  Truly,  said  I,  for  the  nymphs  you  mention,
I  know  little  of  them  as  yet.  My  jealousy  and  love  regard  you
only.  I  was  afraid  you  had  a  mind  to  escape  me ;  but  now
that  I  am  again  in  possession  of  you,  I  want  no  nymph  to  make
me  happy  here,  unless  it  were  perhaps  to  join  forces  against
you,  in  the  manner  your  beloved  poet  makes  the  nymph  .^Egle
join  with  his  two  youths  in  forcing  the  god  Silenus  to  sing  to
them.

I  dare  trust  your  gallantry,  replied  Theocles,  that  if  you
had  such  fair  company  as  you  speak  of,  you  would  otherwise
bestow  your  time  than  in  an  adventure  of  philosophy.  But  do
you  expect  I  should  imitate  the  poefs  God  you  mentioned,  and
sing  "  the  rise  of  things  from  atoms,  the  birth  of  order  from
confusion,  and  the  origin  of  union,  harmony,  and  concord
from  the  sole  powers  of  chaos  and  blind  chance " .?  The  song
indeed  was  fitted  to  the  God.  For  what  could  better  suit  his
jolly  character  than  such  a  drunken  creation,  which  he  loved
often  to  celebrate  by  acting  it  to  the  life  ?  But  even  this  song
was  too  harmonious  for  ithe  night's  debauch.  Well  has  our
poet  made  it  of  the  morning  when  the  God  was  fresh ;  for
hardly  should  we  be  brought  ever  to  believe  that  such  har-
monious numbers  could  arise  from  a  mere  chaos  of  the  mind.
But  we  must  hear  our  poet  speaking  in  the  mouth  of  some
soberer  demi-god  or  hero.  He  then  presents  us  with  a  different
principle  of  things,  and  in  a  more  proper  order  of  precedency
gives  thought  the  upper  hand.  He  makes  mind  originally  to
have  governed  body,  not  body  mind ;  for  this  had  been  a  chaos
everlasting,  and  must  have  kept  all  things  in  a  chaos-state  to
this  day,  and  for  ever,  had  it  ever  been. But


THE INIOllALISTS

The  active  mind,  infused  throufijh  all  the  space,
Unites  and  mingles  with  the  mighty  mass ;
Hence  men  and  beasts.^

Here,  Philocles,  we  shall  find  our  sovereign  genius,  if  we
can  charm  the  genius  of  the  place  (more  chaste  and  sober  than
your  Silenus)  to  inspire  us  with  a  truer  song  of  Nature,  teach  us
some  celestial  hymn,  and  make  us  feel  divinity  present  in  these
solemn  places  of  retreat.

Haste  then,  I  conjure  you,  said  I,  good  Theocles,  and  stop
not  one  moment  for  any  ceremony  or  rite.  For  well  I  see,
methinks,  that  without  any  such  preparation  some  divinity
has  approached  us  and  already  moves  in  you.  AVe  are  come  to
the  sacred  groves  of  the  Hamadryads,  which  formerly  were  said
to  render  oracles.  "We  are  on  the  most  beautiful  part  of  the
hill,  and  the  sun,  now  ready  to  rise,  draws  off  the  curtain  of
night  and  shows  us  the  open  scene  of  Nature  in  the  plains
below.  Begin  :  for  now  I  know  you  are  full  of  those  divine
thoughts  which  meet  you  ever  in  this  solitude.  Give  them  but
voice  and  accents ;  you  may  be  still  as  much  alone  as  you  are
used,  and  take  no  more  notice  of  me  than  if  I  were  absent.

Just  as  I  had  said  this,  he  turned  away  his  eyes  from  me,
musing  awhile  by  himself;  and  soon  afterwards,  stretching  out
his  hand,  as  pointing  to  the  objects  round  him,  he  began  : —

"  Ye  fields  and  woods,  my  refuge  from  the  toilsome
world  of  business,  receive  me  in  your  quiet  sanctuaries,  and
favour  my  retreat  and  thoughtful  solitude.  Ye  verdant  plains,
how  gladly  I  salute  ye  !  Hail  all  ye  blissful  mansions  !  known
seats !  delightful  prospects !  majestic  beauties  of  this  earth,
and  all  ye  rural  powers  and  graces !  Blessed  be  ye  chaste
abodes  of  happiest  mortals,  who  here  in  peaceful  innocence
enjoy  a  life  unenvied,  though  divine  ;  whilst  with  its  blessed
tranquillity  it  affords  a  happy  leisure  and  retreat  for  man,  who,
made for  contemplation, and to search his own and other

1  [^'irgil,  Aeneid,  vi.  726-728.]
VOL.  II  97  H


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

natures,  may  here  best  meditate  the  cause  of  things,  and,  placed
amidst  the  various  scenes  of  Nature,  may  nearer  view  her
works.

"  O  glorious  nature  !  supremelv  fair  and  sovereignly  good  !
all-lovino;  and  all-lovelv,  all-divine !  whose  looks  are  so  be-
coming  and  of  such  infinite  grace  ;  whose  study  brings  such
wisdom,  and  whose  contemplation  such  delight ;  whose  every
single  work  affords  an  ampler  scene,  and  is  a  nobler  spectacle
than  all  which  ever  art  presented  !  O  mighty  Nature  !  wise
substitute  of  Providence  !  impowered  creatress  !  Or  thou
impowering  Deity,  supreme  creator  !  Thee  I  invoke  and  thee
alone  adore.  To  thee  this  solitude,  this  place,  these  rural
meditations  are  sacred  ;  whilst  thus  inspired  with  harmony  of
thought,  though  unconfined  by  words,  and  in  loose  numbers,  I
sing  of  Nature"'s  order  in  created  beings,  and  celebrate  the
beauties  which  resolve  in  thee,  the  source  and  principle  of  all
beauty  and  perfection.

"  Thy  being  is  boundless,  unsearchable,  impenetrable.  In
thy  immensity  all  thought  is  lost,  fancy  gives  over  its  flight,
and  wearied  imagination  spends  itself  in  vain,  finding  no  coast
nor  limit  of  this  ocean,  nor,  in  the  widest  tract  through  which
it  soars,  one  point  yet  nearer  the  circumference  than  the  first
centre  whence  it  parted.  Thus  having  oft  essayed,  thus  sallied
forth  into  the  wide  expanse,  when  I  return  again  within  myself,
struck  with  the  sense  of  this  so  narrow  being  and  of  the  fulness
of  that  immense  one,  I  dare  no  more  behold  the  amazing
depths  nor  sound  the  abyss  of  Deity.

"  Yet  since  by  thee,  O  sovereign  mind,  I  have  been  formed
such  as  I  am,  intelligent  and  rational,  since  the  peculiar
dignity  of  my  nature  is  to  know  and  contemplate  thee,  permit
that  with  due  freedom  I  exert  those  faculties  with  which  thou
hast  adorned  me.  Bear  with  my  venturous  and  bold  approach.
And  since  nor  vain  curiosity,  nor  fond  conceit,  nor  love  of  aught
save  thee  alone  inspires  me  with  such  thoughts  as  these,  be
thou my assistant and guide me in this pursuit, whilst I

98


THE MORALISTS

venture  thus  to  tread  the  labyrinth  of  wide  Nature  and
endeavour  to  trace  thee  in  thy  works."

Here  he  stopped  short,  and  starting  as  out  of  a  dream  :
now,  Philocles,  said  he,  inform  me,  how  have  I  ap])eared  to  you
in  my  fit?  Seemed  it  a  sensible  kind  of  madness,  like  those
transports  which  are  permitted  to  our  poets  ?  or  \\  as  it  down-
right raving  ?

I  onlv  wish,  said  I,  that  you  had  been  a  little  stronger  in
your  transport,  to  have  proceeded  as  you  began,  without  ever
minding  me.  For  I  was  bei^innino;  to  see  wonders  in  that
Nature  you  taught  me,  and  was  coming  to  know  the  hand  of
your  divine  Artificer.  But  if  you  stop  here  I  shall  lose  the
enjoyment  of  the  pleasing  vision.  ^Vnd  already  I  begin  to  find
a  thousand  difficulties  in  fancying  such  a  universal  genius  as
you  describe.

Why,  said  he,  is  there  any  difficulty  in  fancying  the  universe
to  be  one  entire  thing  .''  Can  one  otherwise  think  of  it,  by  what
is  visible,  than  that  all  hangs  together  as  of  a  piece  ?  Grant
it ;  and  what  follows  ?  Only  this,  that  if  it  may  indeed  be  said
of  the  world  "  that  it  is  simply  one,"  there  should  be  something
belonging  to  it  which  makes  it  one.  As  how  ?  No  otherwise
than  as  you  may  observe  in  everything.  For  to  instance  in
what  we  see  before  us ;  I  know  you  look  upon  the  trees  of  this
vast  wood  to  be  different  from  one  another ;  and  this  tall
oak,  the  noblest  of  the  company,  as  it  is  by  itself  a  different
thing  from  all  its  fellows  of  the  wood,  so  with  its  own  wood  of
numerous  spreading  branches  (which  seem  so  many  different
trees)  'tis  still,  I  suppose,  one  and  the  self-same  tree.  Now
should  you,  as  a  mere  caviller,  and  not  as  a  fair  sceptic,  tell  me
that  if  a  figure  of  wax,  or  any  other  matter,  were  cast  in  the
exact  shape  and  colours  of  this  tree,  and  tempered,  if  possible,
to  the  same  kind  of  substance,  it  might  therefore  possibly  be  a
real  tree  of  the  same  kind  or  species,  I  would  have  done  with
you,  and  reason  no  longer.  But  if  you  questioned  me  fairly,
and  desired  I  should  satisfy  you  what  I  thought  it  was  which

99


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEIIISTICS

made  this  oneness  or  sameness  in  the  tree  or  any  other  plant,
or  by  what  it  differed  from  the  waxen  figure,  or  from  any  such
figure  accidentally  made,  either  in  the  clouds,  or  on  the  sand
by  the  sea  shore,  I  should  tell  you  that  neither  the  wax,  nor
sand,  nor  cloud  thus  pieced  together  by  our  hand  or  fancy  had
any  real  relation  within  themselves,  or  had  any  nature  by  which
they  corresponded  any  more  in  that  near  situation  of  parts
than  if  scattered  ever  so  far  asunder.  But  this  I  should  affirm,
"  that  wherever  there  was  such  a  sympathising  of  parts  as  we
saw  here  in  our  real  tree,  wherever  there  was  such  a  plain
concurrence  in  one  common  end,  and  to  the  support,  nourish-
ment, and  propagation  of  so  fair  a  form,  we  could  not  be
mistaken  in  saying  there  was  a  peculiar  nature  belonging  to
this  form,  and  common  to  it  with  others  of  the  same  kind."
By  virtue  of  this,  our  tree  is  a  real  tree,  lives,  flourishes,  and  is
still  one  and  the  same  even  when  by  vegetation  and  change  of
substance  not  one  particle  in  it  remains  the  same.

At  this  rate  indeed,  said  I,  you  have  found  a  way  to  make
very  adorable  places  of  these  sylvan  habitations.  For  besides
the  living  genius  of  each  place,  the  woods  too,  which  by  your
account  are  animated,  have  their  Hamadryads,  no  doubt,  and
the  springs  and  rivulets  their  nymphs  in  store  belonging  to
them,  and  these  too,  by  what  I  can  apprehend,  of  immaterial
and  immortal  substances.

We  injure  them  then,  replied  Theocles,  to  say  "they  belong
to  these  trees,"  and  not  rather  "these  trees  to  them."  But
as  for  their  immortality,  let  them  look  to  it  themselves.  I  only
know  that  both  theirs  and  all  other  natures  must  for  their
duration  depend  alone  on  that  Nature  on  which  the  world
depends  ;  and  that  every  genius  else  must  be  subordinate  to
that  one  Good  Genius,  whom  I  would  willingly  persuade  you  to
think  belonging  to  this  world,  according  to  our  present  way  of
speaking.

Leaving,  therefore,  these  trees,  continued  he,  to  personate
themselves  the best they  can,  let  us  examine  this thing  of

100


THE MORALISTS

personality  between  you  and  nie,  and  consider  how  you,
Philocles,  are  you,  and  I  am  niyself.  For  that  there  is  a
sympathy  of  parts  in  these  figures  of  ours  other  than  in  those
of  marble  formed  by  a  Phidias  or  Praxiteles,  sense,  I  believe,
will  teach  us.  And  yet  that  our  own  marble  or  stuff  (whatever
it  be,  of  which  we  are  composed)  wears  out  in  seven,  or  at  the
longest  in  twice  seven  years,  the  meanest  anatomist  can  tell  us.
Now  where,  I  beseech  you,  will  that  same  one  be  found  at  last,
supposing  it  to  lie  in  the  stuff  itself,  or  any  part  of  it  ?  For
when  that  is  wholly  spent,  and  not  one  particle  of  it  left,  we
are  ourselves  still  as  much  as  before.

What  you  philosophers  are,  replied  I,  may  be  hard  perhaps
to  determine,  but  for  the  rest  of  mankind,  I  dare  affirm,  that
few  are  so  long  themselves  as  half  seven  years.  'Tis  good
fortune  if  a  man  be  one  and  the  same  only  for  a  day  or  two.
A  year  makes  more  revolutions  than  can  be  numbered.

True,  said  he  ;  but  though  this  may  happen  to  a  man,  and
chiefly  to  one  whose  contrary  vices  set  him  at  odds  so  often  with
himself,  yet  when  he  comes  to  suffer  or  be  punished  for  those
vices,  he  finds  himself,  if  I  mistake  not,  still  one  and  the  same.
And  you,  Philocles,  who,  though  you  disown  philosophy,  are
yet  so  true  a  proselyte  to  Pyrrhonism,  should  you  at  last,  feeling
the  power  of  the  Genius  I  preach,  be  wrought  upon  to  own  the
divine  hypothesis,  and  from  this  new  turn  of  thought  admit  a
total  change  in  all  your  principles  and  opinions,  yet  would  you
be  still  the  self-same  Philocles,  though  better  yet,  if  you  will
take  my  judgment,  than  the  present  one,  as  much  as  I  love  and
value  him.  You  see,  therefore,  there  is  a  strange  simplicity  in
this  you  and  me,  that  in  reality  they  should  be  still  one  and  the
same,  when  neither  one  atom  of  body,  one  passion,  nor  one
thought  remains  the  same.  And  for  that  poor  endeavour  of
making  out  this  sameness  or  identity  of  being,  from'some  self-
same matter  or  particle  of  matter,  supposed  to  remain  with  us
when  all  besides  is  changed,  this  is  by  so  much  the  more  con-
temptible, as  that  matter  itself  is  not  really  capable  of  such

101


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

simplicity.  For  I  dare  answer,  you  will  allow  this  you  and  me
to  be  each  of  us  simply  and  individually  one,  better  than  you
can  allow  the  same  to  anything  of  mere  matter,  unless,  cjuitting
your  inclination  for  scepticism,  you  fall  so  in  love  with  the  notion
of  an  atom  as  to  find  ^it  full  as  intelligible  and  certain  to  you
as  that  you  are  yourself.

But  whatever,  continued  Theocles,  be  supposed  of  uncom-
pounded  matter  (a  thing  at  best  pretty  difficult  to  conceive),
yet  being  compounded  and  put  together  in  a  certain  number
of  such  parts  as  unite  and  conspire  in  these  frames  of  ours,  and
others  like  them,  if  it  can  present  us  with  so  many  innumerable
instances  of  particular  forms,  who  share  this  simple  principle,
by  which  they  are  really  One^  live,  act,  and  have  a  nature  or
genius  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  provident  for  their  own
welfare,  how  shall  we  at  the  same  time  overlook  this  in  the
whole,  and  deny  the  great  and  general  Oke  of  the  world  ?
How  can  we  be  so  unnatural  as  to  disown  divine  Nature,  our
common  parent,  and  refuse  to  recognise  the  universal  and
sovereign  Genius  ?

Sovereigns,  said  I,  require  no  notice  to  be  taken  of  them
when  they  pass  incognito,  nor  any  homage  where  they  appear
not  in  due  form.  We  may  even  have  reason  to  presume  they
should  be  displeased  with  us  for  being  too  officious  in  en-
deavouring to  discover  them  when  they  keep  themselves  either
wholly  invisible  or  in  very  dark  disguise.  As  for  the  notice
we  take  of  these  invisible  powers  in  the  common  way  of  our
religion,  we  have  our  visible  sovereigns  to  answer  for  us.  Our
lawful  superiors  teach  us  what  we  are  to  own  and  to  perform
in  worship.  And  we  are  dutiful  in  complying  with  them  and
following  their  example.  But  in  a  jjhilosophical  way  I  find  no
warrant  for  our  being  such  earnest  recognisers  of  a  controverted
title.  However  it  be,  you  must  allow  one  at  least  to  understand
the  controversy  and  know  the  nature  of  these  powers  described.
May  one  not  inquire  "what  substances  they  are  of.^  whether
material  or  immaterial  .^ ""

102


THE MORALISTS

May  one  not  on  the  other  hand,  rcphcd  Theocles,  incjuirc
as  well  "  what  substance,  or  w  hich  of  these  two  substances,  you
count  your  real  and  pro])er  self."  Or  would  you  rather  be  no
substance,  but  choose  to  call  yourself  a  mode  or  accident  ?

Truly,  said  I,  as  accidental  as  my  life  may  be,  or  as  random
that  humour  is  which  governs  it,  I  know  nothino;,  after  all,  so
real  and  substantial  as  myself.  Therefore  if  there  be  that
thing  you  call  a  substance,  I  take  for  granted  I  am  one.  But
for  anything  further  relating  to  this  question,  you  know  my
sceptic  principles  ;  I  determine  neither  way.

Allow  me  then,  replied  he,  good  Philocles,  the  same
privilege  of  scepticism  in  this  respect,  since  it  concerns  not  the
affair  before  us,  which  way  we  determine,  or  whether  we  come
to  any  determination  at  all  in  this  point.  For  be  the  difficulty
ever  so  great,  it  stands  the  same,  you  may  perceive,  against
your  own  being  as  against  that  which  I  am  pretending  to
convince  you  of.  You  may  raise  what  objections  you  please  on
either  hand,  and  your  dilemma  may  be  of  notable  force  against
the  manner  of  such  a  su})reme  ]3eing\s  existence.  But  after  you
have  done  all,  you  will  bring  the  same  dilemma  home  to  you,
and  be  at  a  loss  still  about  yourself  when  you  have  argued  ever
so  long  upon  these  metaphysical  points  of  mode  and  substance,
and  have  philosophically  concluded  from  the  difficulties  of  each
hypothesis  "  that  there  cannot  be  in  Nature  such  a  universal
One  as  this "" ;  you  must  conclude  from  the  same  reasons  "  that
there  cannot  be  any  such  particular  one  as  yourself,""  But  that
there  is  actually  such  a  one  as  this  latter,  your  own  mind,  'tis
hoped,  may  satisfy  you.  And  of  this  mind  'tis  enough  to  say
"  that  it  is  something  which  acts  upon  a  body,  and  has  some-
thing passive  under  it  and  subject  to  it ;  that  it  has  not  only
body  or  mere  matter  for  its  subject,  but  in  some  respect  even
itself  too,  and  what  proceeds  from  it ;  that  it  superintends  and
manages  its  own  imaginations,  ap})earances,  fancies,  correcting,
working,  and  modelling  these  as  it  finds  good,  and  adorning
anti  accomplishing  the  best  it  can  this  composite  order  of  body

103


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  understanding.'"'  Such  a  mind  and  governing  part  I  know
there  is  somewhere  in  the  world.  Let  Pyrrho,  by  the  help  of
such  another,  contradict  me  if  he  pleases.  AVe  have  our  several
understandings  and  thoughts,  however  we  came  by  them.  Each
understands  and  thinks  the  best  he  can  for  his  own  purpose  ;
he  for  himself,  I  for  another  self  And  who,  I  beseech  you,  for
the  whole  ?  .  .  .  No  one  ?  Nothing  at  all  ?  .  .  .  The  world,
perhaps,  you  suppose  to  be  mere  body,  a  mass  of  modified
matter.  The  bodies  of  men  are  part  therefore  of  this  body.
The  imaginations,  sensations,  apprehensions  of  men  are  included
in  this  body  and  inherent  in  it,  produced  out  of  it  and  resumed
again  into  it,  though  the  body,  it  seems,  never  dreams  of  it !
The  world  itself  is  never  the  wiser  for  all  the  wit  and  wisdom  it
breeds  !  It  has  no  apprehension  at  all  of  what  is  doing ;  no
thought  kept  to  itself,  for  its  own  proper  use  or  purpose ;  not
a  single  imagination  or  reflection  by  which  to  discover  or  be
conscious  of  the  manifold  imaginations  and  inventions  which  it
sets  afoot  and  deals  abroad  with  such  an  open  hand  !  The
goodly  bulk,  so  prolific,  kind,  and  yielding  for  every  one  else,  has
nothing  left  at  last  for  its  own  share,  having  unhappily  lavished
all  away  !  .  .  .  By  what  chance .''  I  would  fain  understand.
"  How  ?  or  by  what  necessity  ?  .  .  .  AVho  gives  the  law  ?  .  .  .
Who  orders  and  distributes  thus  ? "  Nature,  say  you.  And
what  is  Nature  ?  Is  it  sense  ?  Is  it  a  person  ?  Has  she  reason
or  understanding  ?  No.  Who  then  understands  for  her,  or  is
interested  or  concerned  in  her  behalf?  No  one;  not  a  soul.
But  every  one  for  himself.

Come  on  then.  Let  us  hear  further.  Is  not  this  Nature  still
a  self  ?  Or  tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  how  are  you  one  ?  By  what
token.''  Or  by  virtue  of  what.^  "By  a  principle  which  joins
certain  parts,  and  which  thinks  and  acts  consonantly  for  the  use
and  purpose  of  those  parts."  Say,  therefore,  what  is  your  whole
system  a  part  of  P  Or  is  it,  indeed,  no  part,  but  a  whole,  by
itself,  absolute,  independent,  and  unrelated  to  anything  besides  ?
If  it  be  indeed  a  part,  and  really  related,  to  what  else,  I  beseech

104


THE MORALISTS

you,  than  to  tlic  \\  hole  of  Nature  ?  Is  there  then  such  a  uniting
principle  in  Nature  ?  If  so,  how  are  you  then  a  self,  and  Nature
not  so  ?  How  have  you  something  to  understand  and  act  for
you,  and  Nature,  who  gave  this  understanding,  nothing  at  all
to  understand  for  her,  advise  her,  or  help  her  out  (]ioor  being !)
on  any  occasion,  whatever  necessity  she  may  be  in  ?  Has  the
world  such  ill-fortune  in  the  main  ?  Are  there  so  many  par-
ticular understanding  active  princi])les  everywhere  ?  And  is
there  nothing  at  last  which  thinks,  acts,  or  understands  for  all  ?
Nothing  which  administers  or  looks  after  all  ?

No  (says  one  of  a  modern  hypothesis),  for  the  world  was  from
eternity  as  you  see  it,  and  is  no  more  than  barely  what  you
see  :  "  Matter  modified  ;  a  lump  in  motion,  with  here  and  there
a  thought  or  scattered  portion  of  dissoluble  intelligence."  .  .  .
No  (says  one  of  an  ancienter  hy])othesis),  for  the  world  was  once
without  any  intelligence  or  thought  at  all :  "  jMere  matter,
chaos,  and  a  play  of  atoms,  till  thought,  by  chance,  came  into
play,  and  made  up  a  harmony  which  was  never  designed  or
thought  of."  .  .  .  Admirable  conceit !  Believe  it  who  can.
For  my  own  share  (thank  Providence),  I  have  a  mind  in  my
possession  which  serves,  such  as  it  is,  to  keep  my  body  and  its
affections,  my  passions,  appetites,  imaginations,  fancies,  and  the
rest  in  tolerable  harmony  and  order.  But  the  order  of  the
universe,  I  am  persuaded  still,  is  much  the  better  of  tlie  two.
Let  Epicurus,  if  he  please,  think  his  the  better,  and,  believing
no  genius  or  wisdom  above  his  own,  inform  us  by  what  chance
'twas  dealt  him,  and  how  atoms  came  to  be  so  wise.

In  fine,  continued  Theocles  (raising  his  voice  and  action),
being  thus,  even  by  scepticism  itself,  convinced  the  more  still
of  my  own  being  and  of  this  self  of  mine  "  that  'tis  a  real  self
drawn  out  and  copied  from  another  principal  and  original  self
(the  Great  One  of  the  world),"  I  endeavour  to  be  really  one
with  it,  and  conformable  to  it  as  far  as  I  am  able.  I  consider
that,  as  there  is  one  general  mass,  one  body  of  the  whole,  so  to
this  body  there  is  an  order,  to  this  order  a  mind ;  that  to  this

105


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

general  mind  each  particular  one  must  have  relation,  as  being
of  like  substance  (as  much  as  we  can  understand  of  substance),
alike  active  upon  body,  original  to  motion  and  order;  alike
simple,  uncompounded,  individual ;  of  like  energy,  effect,  and
operation  ;  and  more  like  still,  if  it  co-operates  with  it  to
general  good,  and  strives  to  will  according  to  the  best  of  wills.
So  that  it  cannot  surely  but  seem  natural  "  that  the  particular
mind  should  seek  its  happiness  in  conformity  with  the  general
one,  and  endeavour  to  resemble  it  in  its  highest  simplicity  and
excellence."

Therefore,  now,  said  I,  good  Theocles,  be  once  again  the
enthusiast,  and  let  me  hear  anew  that  divine  song  with  which
I  was  lately  charmed.  I  am  already  got  over  my  qualm,  and
begin  better  than  ever  to  fancy  such  a  nature  as  you  speak  of;
insomuch  that  I  find  mvself  mightily  in  its  interest,  and  con-
cerned that  all  should  go  happily  and  well  with  it.  Though
at  the  rate  it  often  runs,  I  can  scarce  help  being  in  some  pain
on  its  account.

Fear  not,  my  friend,  replied  he.  For  know  that  every
particular  nature  certainly  and  constantly  produces  what  is  good
to  itself,  unless  something  foreign  disturbs  or  hinders  it,  either
by  overpowering  and  corrupting  it  within,  or  by  violence  from
without.  Thus  Nature  in  the  patient  struggles  to  the  last  and
strives  to  throw  off  the  distemper.  Thus  even  in  these  plants
we  see  round  us,  every  particular  nature  thrives  and  attains  its
perfection,  if  nothing  from  \\ithout  obstructs  it  nor  anything
foreign  has  already  impaired  or  wounded  it ;  and  even  in  this
case  it  does  its  utmost  still  to  redeem  itself  What  are  all
weaknesses,  distortions,  sicknesses,  imperfect  births,  and  the
seeming  contradictions  and  perversities  of  nature  other  than  of
this  sort .''  And  how  ignorant  must  one  be  of  all  natural  causes
and  operations  to  think  that  any  of  these  disorders  happen  by
a  miscarriage  of  the  particular  nature,  and  not  by  the  force  of
some  foreign  nature  which  overpowers  it.  If,  therefore,  every
particular  nature be thus  constantly  and unerringly  true  to

106


THE INIORALISrS

itself,  and  certain  to  protluce  only  what  is  <rood  for  itself  and
conducing  to  its  own  right  state,  shall  not  the  general  one,  the
nature  of  the  whole,  do  full  as  much?  shall  that  alone  niiscan-y
or  fail  ?  Or  is  there  anything  foreign  which  should  at  any  time
do  violence  upon  it  or  force  it  out  of  its  natural  way  ?  If  not,
then  all  it  produces  is  to  its  own  advantage  and  good,  the  good
of  all  in  general ;  and  what  is  for  the  good  of  all  in  general  is
just  and  good.

'Tis  so,  said  I,  I  confess.

Then  you  ought  to  rest  satisfied,  replied  he  ;  and  not  only
so,  but  be  pleased  and  rejoice  at  what  happens,  knowing  whence
it  comes,  and  to  what  ])erfection  it  contributes.

Bless  me,  said  I,  Theoclcs,  into  what  a  superstition  are  you
like  to  lead  me  !  I  thought  it  heretofore  the  mark  of  a  super-
stitious mind  to  search  for  Providence  in  the  connnon  accidents
of  life,  and  ascribe  to  the  Divine  Tower  those  connnon  disasters
and  calamities  which  nature  has  entailed  on  mankind.  But
now  I  find  I  must  place  all  in  general  to  one  account,  and
viewing  things  through  a  kind  of  magical  glass,  I  am  to  see  the
worst  of  ills  transformed  to  good,  and  admire  equally  whatever
comes  from  one  and  the  same  perfect  Hand.  But  no  matter,
I  can  surmount  all.  Go  on,  Theocles,  and  let  me  advise  you
in  my  own  behalf,  that  since  you  have  rekindled  me,  you  do  not
by  delaving  give  me  time  to  cool  again.

I  would  have  you  know,  replied  he,  I  scorn  to  take  the
advantage  of  a  warm  fit  and  be  beholden  to  temper  or  imagina-
tion for  o-ainino-  me  vour  assent.  Therefore  ere  I  go  yet  a
step  farther,  I  am  resolved  to  enter  again  into  cool  reason  with
you  and  ask  if  you  admit  for  proof  what  I  advanced  yesterday
upon  that  head,  "  of  a  universal  union,  coherence,  or  sympathis-
ing: of  things  "  ?

By  force  of  probability,  said  I,  you  overcame  me.  Bemg
convinced  of  a  consent  and  correspondence  in  all  we  saw  of
thiniTs,  I  considered  it  as  unreasonable  not  to  allow  the  same
throughout.

107


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Unreasonable  indeed  !  replied  he.  For  in  the  infinite  residue,
were  there  no  principle  of  union,  it  would  seem  next  to  im-
possible that  things  within  our  sphere  should  be  consistent
and  keep  their  order.  "  For  what  was  infinite  would  be  pre-
dominant.*"

It  seems  so.

Tell  me  then,  said  he,  after  this  union  owned,  how  you
can  refuse  to  allow  the  name  of  demonstration  to  the  remain-
ing arguments,  which  establish  the  government  of  a  perfect
mind.

Your  solutions,  said  I,  of  the  ill  appearances  are  not  perfect
enough  to  pass  for  demonstration.  And  whatever  seems  vicious
or  imperfect  in  the  creation  puts  a  stop  to  further  conclusions
till  the  thing  be  solved.

Did  you  not  then,  said  he,  agree  with  me  when  I  averred
that  the  appearances  must  of  necessity  stand  as  they  are,  and
things  seem  altogether  as  imperfect  even  on  the  concession  of
a  perfect  supreme  mind  existent  ?

I  did  so.

And  is  not  the  same  reason  good  still  ?  viz.  "  that  in  an
infinity  of  things,  mutually  relative,  a  mind  which  sees  not
infinitely  can  see  nothing  fully,  and  must  therefore  frequently
see  that  as  imperfect  which  in  itself  is  really  perfect."

The  reason  is  still  good.

Are  the  appearances,  then,  any  objection  to  our  hypothesis  ?

None,  whilst  they  remain  appearances  only.

Can  you  then  prove  them  to  be  any  more .''  For  if  you  can-
not, you  prove  nothing.  And  that  it  lies  on  you  to  prove
you  plainly  see,  since  the  appearances  do  not  only  agree  with
the  hypothesis,  but  are  a  necessary  consequence  from  it.  To
bid  me  prove,  therefore,  in  this  case  is  in  a  manner  the  same
as  to  bid  me  be  infinite.  For  nothing  beside  what  is  infinite
can  see  infinite  connections.

The  presumption,  I  must  confess,  said  I,  by  this  reckoning
is  wholly  on  your  side. Yet  still  this  is  only  presumption.

108


THE MORALISTS

Take  demonstration  then,  said  he,  if  you  can  encUn-c  I  should
reason  thus  abstractedly  and  drily.  The  appearances  of  ill,  you
say,  are  not  necessarily  that  ill  they  represent  to  us.

I  own  it.

Therefore  what  they  represent  may  possibly  be  good.

It  may.

And  therefore  there  may  possibly  be  no  real  ill  in  things,
but  all  may  be  perfectly  concurrent  to  one  interest,  the  interest
of  that  universal  One.

It  may  be  so.

Why,  then,  if  it  may  be  so  (be  not  surprised),  "it  follows
that  it  must  be  so,"  on  the  account  of  that  great  unit  and
simple  self-principle  which  you  have  granted  in  the  whole.  For
whatever  is  possible  in  the  whole,  the  nature  or  mind  of  the
whole  will  put  in  execution  for  the  whole's  good  ;  and  if  it  be
possible  to  exclude  ill,  it  will  exclude  it.  Therefore,  since  not-
withstanding the  appearances,  'tis  possible  that  ill  may  actu-
ally be  excluded,  count  upon  it  "  that  actually  it  is  excluded."
For  nothing  merely  passive  can  oppose  this  universally  active
principle.  If  anything  active  oppose  it,  'tis  another  principle.
I  allow  it.

'Tis  impossible.  For  were  there  in  nature  two  or  more
principles,  either  they  must  agree  or  not.  If  they  agree  not,
all  must  be  confusion  till  one  be  predominant.  If  they  agree,
there  nnist  be  some  natural  reason  for  their  agreement,  and  this
natural  reason  cannot  be  from  chance,  but  from  some  particular
design,  contrivance,  or  thought,  which  brings  us  up  again  to
OxE  principle,  and  makes  the  other  two  to  be  subordinate.  And
thus  when  we  have  compared  each  of  the  three  opinions,  viz.
"  That  there  is  no  designing  active  principle  ;  that  there  is  more
than  one " ;  or  "  that  finally  there  is  but  Oxk,"  we  shall  per-
ceive that  the  only  consistent  opinion  is  the  last.  And  since
one  or  other  of  these  opinions  nmst  of  necessity  be  true,  what
can  we  determine  other  than  that  the  last  is,  and  nuist  be  so,
demonstrably  ?  if  it  be  demonstration,  "  that  in  three  opinions,

109


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

one  of  which  must  necessarily  be  true,  two  being  plainly  absurd,
the  third  must  be  the  truth."

Enough,  said  I,  Theocles.  My  doubts  are  vanished.  Malice
and  chance  (vain  phantoms  !)  have  yielded  to  that  all-prevalent
wisdom  which  you  have  established.  You  are  conqueror  in  the
cool  way  of  reason,  and  may  with  honour  now  grow  warm  again
in  your  poetic  vein.  Return  therefore,  I  entreat  you,  once  more
to  that  perfection  of  being,  and  address  yourself  to  it  as  before
on  our  approaches  to  these  sylvan  scenes  where  first  it  seemed
to  inspire  you.  I  shall  now  no  longer  be  in  danger  of  imagining
either  magic  or  superstition  in  the  case,  since  you  invoke  no
other  power  than  that  single  Oxe  which  seems  so  natural.

Thus  I  continue  then,  said  Theocles,  addressing  myself  as  you
would  have  me,  to  that  guardian  deity  and  inspirer  whom  we
are  to  imagine  present  here,  but  not  here  only.  For,  "  O  mighty
Genius  !  sole  animating  and  inspiring  power !  author  and  sub-
ject of  these  thoughts  !  thy  influence  is  universal,  and  in  all
things  thou  art  inmost.  From  thee  depend  their  secret  springs
of  action.  Thou  movest  them  with  an  irresistible  unwearied
force,  by  sacred  and  inviolable  laws,  framed  for  the  good  of  each
particular  being,  as  best  may  suit  with  the  perfection,  life,  and
vigour  of  the  whole.  The  vital  principle  is  widely  shared  and
infinitely  varied,  dispersed  throughout,  nowhere  extinct.  All
lives,  and  by  succession  still  revives.  The  temporary  beings  quit
their  borrowed  forms  and  yield  their  elementary  substance  to
new-comers.  Called  in  their  several  turns  to  life,  they  view  the
light,  and  viewing  pass,  that  others  too  may  be  spectators  of
the  goodly  scene,  and  greater  numbers  still  enjoy  the  privilege
of  Nature.  Munificent  and  great,  she  imparts  herself  to  most
and  makes  the  subjects  of  her  bounty  infinite.  Nought  stays
her  hastening;  hand.  No  time  nor  substance  is  lost  or  unim-
proved.  New  forms  arise,  and  when  the  old  dissolve,  the  matter
whence  they  were  composed  is  not  left  useless,  but  wrought  with
equal  management  and  art,  even  in  corruption.  Nature's  seeming
waste  and  vile  abhorrence. The  abject  state  appears  merely  as

110


THE MORATJSTS

the  way  or  passage  to  some  better.  But  coukl  we  nearly  view
it,  and  with  indifference,  remote  from  the  antipathy  of  sense,
we  then  perhaps  should  hi<ijhest  raise  our  admiration,  convinced
that  even  the  way  itself  was  ecjual  to  the  end.  Nor  can  we
judge  less  favourably  of  that  consunnnate  art  exhibited  through
all  the  works  of  Nature,  since  our  weak  eyes,  helped  by  mechanic
art,  discover  in  these  works  a  hidden  scene  of  wonders,  worlds
within  worlds  of  infinite  minuteness,  though  as  to  art  still  equal
to  the  greatest,  and  pregnant  with  more  wonders  than  the  most
discerning  sense,  joined  with  the  greatest  art  or  the  acutest
reason,  can  penetrate  or  unfold.

"  But  "'tis  in  vain  for  us  to  search  the  bulky  mass  of  matter,
seeking  to  know  its  nature ;  how  great  the  whole  itself,  or  even
how  small  its  parts.

"  If,  knowing  only  some  of  the  rules  of  motion,  we  seek  to
trace  it  further,  'tis  in  vain  we  follow  it  into  the  bodies  it  has
reached.  Our  tardy  aj:)prehensions  fail  us,  and  can  reach  nothing
beyond  the  body  itself,  through  which  it  is  diffused.  Wonderful
being  (if  we  may  call  it  so),  which  bodies  never  receive  except
from  others  which  lose  it,  nor  ever  lose,  unless  by  imparting  it
to  others.  Even  without  change  of  place  it  has  its  force,  and
bodies  big  with  motion  labour  to  move,  yet  stir  not,  whilst  they
express  an  energy  beyond  our  comprehension.

"  In  vain,  too,  we  pursue  that  phantom  time,  too  small,  and
yet  too  mighty  for  our  grasp,  when,  shrinking  to  a  narrow  point,
it  escapes  our  hold,  or  mocks  our  scanty  thought  by  swelling  to
eternity,  an  object  unproportioned  to  our  capacity,  as  is  thy
being,  O  thou  ancient  cause  !  older  than  time,  yet  young  wdth
fresh  eternity.

"  In  vain  we  try  to  fsithom  the  abyss  of  space,  the  seat  of  thy
extensive  being,  of  which  no  place  is  empty,  no  void  which  is
not  full.

"  In  vain  we  labour  to  understand  that  principle  of  sense  and
thought,  which  seeming  in  us  to  depend  so  much  on  motion,  yet
differs  so  much  from  it  and  from  matter  itself  as  not  to  suffer

111


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

us  to  conceive  how  thought  can  more  result  from  this  than  this
arise  from  thought.  But  thought  we  own  pre-eminent,  and
confess  the  realest  of  beings,  the  only  existence  of  which  we  are
made  sure  by  being  conscious.  All  else  may  be  only  dream  and
shadow.  All  which  even  sense  suggests  may  be  deceitful.  The
sense  itself  remains  still ;  reason  subsists,  and  thought  maintains
its  eldership  of  being.  Thus  are  we  in  a  manner  conscious  of
that  original  and  eternally  existent  thought  whence  we  derive
our  own.  And  thus  the  assurance  we  have  of  the  existence  of
beings  above  our  sense  and  of  thee  (the  great  exemplar  of  thy
works)  comes  from  thee,  the  all  true  and  perfect,  who  hast  thus
communicated  thyself  more  immediately  to  us,  so  as  in  some
manner  to  inhabit  within  our  souls,  thou  who  art  orio-inal
soul,  diffusive,  vital  in  all,  inspiriting  the  whole.

"  All  Nature's  wonders  serve  to  excite  and  perfect  this  idea
of  their  author.  'Tis  here  he  suffers  us  to  see,  and  even  con-
verse with  him  in  a  manner  suitable  to  our  frailty.  How
glorious  is  it  to  contemplate  him  in  this  noblest  of  his  works
apparent  to  us,  the  system  of  the  bigger  world  ! "

Here  I  must  own,  'twas  no  small  comfort  to  me  to  find  that,
as  our  meditation  turned,  we  were  likely  to  get  clear  of  an  en-
tangling abstruse  philosophy.  I  was  in  hopes  Theocles,  as  he
proceeded,  might  stick  closer  to  Nature,  since  he  was  now  come
upon  the  borders  of  our  world.  And  here  I  would  willingly
have  welcomed  him,  had  I  thought  it  safe  at  present  to  venture
the  least  interruption.

"  Besides  the  neighbouring  planets  (continued  he,  in  his
rapturous  strain)  what  multitudes  of  fixed  stars  did  we  see
sparkle  not  an  hour  ago  in  the  clear  night,  which  yet  had  hardly
yielded  to  the  day  .'*  How  many  others  are  discovered  by  the
help  of  art  ?  Yet  how  many  remain  still  beyond  the  reach  of
our  discovery  !  Crowded  as  they  seem,  their  distance  from  each
other  is  as  unmeasurable  by  art  as  is  the  distance  between  them
and  us.  Whence  we  are  naturally  taught  the  immensity  of  that
being  who,  through  these  immense  spaces,  has  disposed  such  an

112


I


THE MORALISTS

infinity  of  bodies,  belonging  each  (as  we  may  well  presume)  to
systems  as  comj)lete  as  our  own  world,  since  even  the  smallest
spark  of  this  bright  galaxy  may  vie  with  this  our  sun,  which
shining  now  full  out,  gives  us  new  life,  exalts  our  spirits,  and
makes  us  feel  divinity  more  present.

"  Prodigious  orb  !  bright  source  of  vitid  heat,  and  spring
of  day  !  .  .  .  Soft  flame,  yet  how  intense,  how  active  !  how
diffusive,  and  how  vast  a  substance ;  yet  how  collected  thus
within  itself,  and  in  a  glowing  mass  confined  to  the  centre  of
this  planetary  world  I  .  .  .  Mighty  being !  brightest  image  and
representative  of  the  Almighty  !  supreme  of  the  corporeal  world  !
unj)erishing  in  grace,  and  of  undecaying  youth  !  fair,  beautiful,
and  hardly  mortal  creature  !  By  what  secret  ways  dost  thou
receive  the  supplies  which  maintain  thee  still  in  such  unwearied
vigour  and  unexhausted  glory  ;  notwithstanding  those  externally
emitted  streams  and  that  continual  expense  of  vital  treasures
which  enlighten  and  invigorate  the  surrounding  worlds  ?  . .  .

"Around  him  all  the  planets,  with  this  our  earth,  single,
or  with  attendants,  continually  move,  seeking  to  receive  the
blessing  of  his  light  and  lively  warmth !  Towards  him  they
seem  to  tend,  with  prone  descent,  as  to  their  centre,  but  happily
controlled  still  by  another  impulse,  they  kee})  their  heavenly
order;  and  in  just  numbers  and  exactest  measure,  go  the
eternal  rounds.

But,  O  thou  who  art  the  author  and  modifier  of  these
various  motions  !  O  sovereign  and  sole  mover,  by  whose  high  art
the  rolling  spheres  are  governed,  and  these  stupendous  bodies  of
our  world  hold  their  unrelenting  courses !  O  wise  economist,
and  powerful  chief,  whom  all  the  elements  and  powers  of  Nature
serve !  how  hast  thou  animated  these  moving  worlds  ?  what
spirit  or  soul  infused  ?  what  bias  fixed  ?  or  how  encompassed
them  in  liquid  ether,  driving  them  as  with  the  breath  of  living
winds,  thy  active  and  unwearied  ministers  in  this  intricate  and
mighty  work  ?

"Thus  powerfully  are  the  systems  held  entire,  and  kept
VOL.  II  113  I


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

from  fatal  interfering.  Thus  is  our  ponderous  globe  directed
in  its  annual  course,  daily  revolving  on  its  own  centre,  whilst
the  obsequious  moon  with  double  labour,  monthly  surrounding
this  our  bigger  orb,  attends  the  motion  of  her  sister  planet,
and  pays  in  common  her  circular  homage  to  the  sun.

"  Yet  is  this  mansion-globe,  this  man-container,  of  a  much
narrower  compass  even  than  other  its  fellow-wanderers  of  our
system.  How  narrow  then  must  it  appear  compared  with  the
capacious  system  of  its  own  sun  ?  And  how  narrow,  or  as
nothing,  in  respect  of  those  innumerable  systems  of  other
suns  ?  Yet  how  immense  a  body  it  seems  compared  with  ours
of  human  form,  a  borrowed  remnant  of  its  variable  and  oft-
converted  surface  ?  though  animated  with  a  sublime  celestial
spirit  by  which  we  have,  relation  and  tendency  to  Thee  our
Heavenly  Sire,  centre  of  souls,  to  whom  these  spirits  of  ours  by
nature  tend,  as  earthly  bodies  to  their  proper  centre.  O  did
they  tend  as  unerringly  and  constantly  !  .  .  .  But  thou  alone
composest  the  disorders  of  the  corporeal  world,  and  from  the
restless  and  fighting  elements  raisest  that  peaceful  concord  and
conspiring  beauty  of  the  ever-flourishing  creation.  Even  so
canst  thou  convert  these  jarring  motions  of  intelligent  beings,
and  in  due  time  and  manner  cause  them  to  find  their  rest ;
making  them  contribute  to  the  good  and  perfection  of  the
universe,  thy  all-good  and  perfect  work.*"

Here  again  he  broke  off,  looking  on  me  as  if  he  expected  I
should  speak,  which  when  he  found  plainly  I  would  not,  but
continued  still  in  a  posture  of  musing  thought :  Why,  Philocles  !
said  he,  with  an  air  of  wonder ;  what  can  this  mean,  that  you
should  suffer  me  thus  to  run  on  without  the  least  interruption  ?
Have  you  at  once  given  over  your  scrupulous  philosophy,  to  let
me  range  thus  at  pleasure  through  these  aerial  spaces  and
imaginary  regions  Avhere  my  capricious  fancy  or  easy  faith  has
led  me  ?  I  would  have  you  to  consider  better,  and  know,  my
Philocles,  that  I  had  never  trusted  myself  with  you  in  this  vein  of
enthusiasm,  had  I  not  relied  on  you  to  govern  it  a  little  better.

114


THE INIORATJSTS

I  find,  then,  .said  I  (rousing  myself  from  my  musing  posture),
you  exjject  I  should  serve  you  in  the  same  capacity  as  that
musician,  whom  an  ancient  orator  made  use  of  at  his  elbow,  to
strike  such  moving  notes  as  raised  him  when  he  was  perceived
to  sink ;  and  calmed  him  again  when  his  impetuous  spirit  was
transported  in  too  high  a  strain.

You  imagine  right,  replied  Theocles;  and  therefore  I  am
resolved  not  to  go  on  till  you  have  promised  to  pull  me  by  the
sleeve  when  I  grow  extravagant.  Be  it  so,  said  I ;  you  have
my  promise,  liut  how  if  instead  of  rising  in  my  transports
I  should  grow  flat  and  tiresome  ;  what  lyre  or  instniment  would
you  emjiloy  to  raise  me  f

The  danger,  I  told  him,  could  hardly  be  supposed  to  lie
on  this  hand.  His  vein  was  a  plentiful  one,  and  his  enthusiasm
in  no  likelihood  of  failing  him.  His  subject,  too,  as  well  as  his
numbers,  would  bear  him  out.  And  with  the  advantage  of
the  rural  scene  around  us,  his  numbered  prose,  I  thought,
supplied  the  room  of  the  best  pastoral  song.  For  in  the
manner  I  was  .now  wrought  up,  'twas  as  agreeable  to  me  to
hear  him,  in  this  kind  of  passion,  invoke  his  stars  and  elements,
as  to  hear  one  of  those  amorous  shepherds  complaining  to  his
Hock,  and  making  the  woods  and  rocks  resound  the  name  of
her  whom  he  adored.  .  .  .  Begin  therefore,  continued  I,  still
pressing  him,  begin  anew,  and  lead  me  boldly  through  your
elements.  Wherever  there  is  danger,  be  it  on  either  hand,  I
promise  to  give  you  warning  when  I  perceive  it.

Let  us  begin,  then,  said  he,  with  this  our  element  of  earth,
which  yonder  we  see  cultivated  with  such  care  by  the  early
swains  now  working  in  the  plain  below — "  Unhappy  restless
men,  who  first  disdained  these  peaceful  labours,  gentle  rural
tasks,  performed  with  such  delight !  "\Miat  pride  or  what
ambition  bred  this  scorn  ?  Hence  all  those  fatal  evils  of  your
race,  enormous  luxury,  despising  homely  fare,  ranges  through
seas  and  lands,  rifles  the  globe ;  and  men,  ingenious  to  their
misery,  work  out  for  themselves  the  means  of  heavier  labour,

115


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

anxious  cares,  and  sorrow.  Not  satisfied  to  turn  and  manure
for  their  use  the  wholesome  and  beneficial  mould  of  this  their
earth,  they  dig  yet  deeper,  and  seeking  out  imaginary  wealth,
they  search  its  very  entrails.

"  Here,  led  by  curiosity,  we  find  minerals  of  different  natures
which,  by  their  simplicity,  discover  no  less  of  the  divine  art
than  the  most  compounded  of  nature's  works.  Some  are  found
capable  of  surprising  changes ;  others  as  durable,  and  hard  to
be  destroyed  or  changed  by  fire,  or  utmost  art.  So  various  are
the  subjects  of  our  contemplation,  that  even  the  study  of  these
inglorious  parts  of  nature  in  the  nether  world  is  able  itself
alone  to  yield  large  matter  and  employment  for  the  busiest
spirits  of  men,  who  in  the  labour  of  these  experiments  can
willingly  consume  their  lives.  But  the  noisome  poisonous
steams  which  the  earth  breathes  from  these  dark  caverns
where  she  conceals  her  treasures,  suffer  not  prying  mortals  to
live  long  in  this  search.

"  How  comfortable  is  it  to  those  who  come  out  hence  alive
to  breathe  a  purer  air !  to  see  the  rejoicing  light  of  day !  and
tread  the  fertile  ground  !  How  gladly  they  contemplate  the
surface  of  the  earth,  their  habitation,  heated  and  enlivened  by
the  sun,  and  tempered  by  the  fresh  air  of  fanning  breezes !
These  exercise  the  resty  plants,  and  scour  the  unactive  globe.
And  when  the  sun  draws  hence  thick  clouded  steams  and
vapours,  'tis  only  to  digest  and  exalt  the  unwholesome  particles,
and  commit  them  to  the  sprightly  air,  which,  soon  imparting
its  quick  and  vital  spirit,  renders  them  again  with  improvement
to  the  earth  in  gentle  breathings,  or  in  rich  dews  and  fruitful
showers.  The  same  air,  moving  about  the  mighty  mass,  enters
its  pores,  impregnating  the  whole.  And  both  the  sun  and  air,
conspiring  to  animate  this  mother-earth,  that  though  ever
breeding  her  vigour  is  as  great,  her  beauty  as  fresh,  and  her
looks  as  charming  as  if  she  newly  came  out  of  the  forming
hands  of  her  creator.

"How  beautiful  is  the  water  among  the  inferior  earthly

116


THE MORALISTS

works  !  Heavy,  liciuid,  and  transparent,  without  the  springing
vigour  and  expansive  force  of  air,  but  not  without  activity.
Stubborn  and  unyiekHng  when  compressed,  but  ])lacidlv  avoiding
force,  and  bending  every  way  with  ready  fluency  !  Insinuating,
it  dissolves  the  lumpish  earth,  frees  the  entangled  bodies,
procures  their  intercourse,  and  sunnnons  to  the  field  the  keen
terrestrial  particles,  whose  hap[)y  strifes,  soon  ending  in  strict
union,  produce  the  various  forms  which  we  behold.  How  vast
are  the  abysses  of  the  sea,  where  this  soft  element  is  stored ;
and  whence  the  sun  and  winds  extracting,  raise  it  into  clouds !
These,  soon  converted  into  rain,  water  the  thirsty  ground,  and
supply  afresh  the  springs  and  rivers,  the  comfort  of  the  neigh-
bouring plains,  and  sweet  refreshment  of  all  animals.

"  But  whither  shall  we  trace  the  sources  of  the  light  ?  or
in  what  ocean  comprehend  the  luminous  matter  so  wide  diffused
through  the  innnense  spaces  which  it  fills  ?  What  seats  shall
we  assign  to  that  fierce  element  of  fire,  too  active  to  be  confined
within  the  compass  of  the  sun,  and  not  excluded  even  the
bowels  of  the  heavy  earth  ?  The  air  itself  submits  to  it,  and
serves  as  its  inferior  instrument.  Even  this  our  sun,  with  all
those  numerous  suns,  the  glittering  host  of  Heaven,  seem  to
receive  from  hence  the  vast  supplies  which  keep  them  ever  in
their  splendid  state.  The  invisible  ethereal  substance,  penetrat-
ing both  liquid  and  solid  bodies,  is  diffused  throughout  the
universe.  It  cherishes  the  cold  dull  massy  globe,  and  warms  it
to  its  centre.  It  forms  the  minerals :  gives  life  and  growth  to
vegetables ;  kindles  a  soft,  invisible,  and  vital  flame  in  the
breasts  of  living  creatures  ;  frames,  animates,  and  nurses  all  the
various  forms ;  sparing,  as  well  as  employing  for  their  use,  those
sulphurous  and  combustible  matters  of  which  they  are  composed.
Benign  and  gentle  amidst  all,  it  still  maintains  this  happy
peace  and  concord,  according  to  its  stated  and  peculiar  laws.
But  these  once  broken,  the  acquitted  being  takes  its  course
unruled.  It  runs  impetuous  through  the  fatal  breach,  and
breaking  into  visible  and  fierce  flames,  passes  triumphant  over

117


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  yielding  forms,  converting  all  into  itself,  and  dissolving  now
those  systems  which  itself  before  had  formed. 'Tis  thus ""....
Here  Theocles  stopped  on  a  sudden,  when  (as  he  imagined)
I  was  putting  my  hand  out  to  lay  hold  on  his  sleeve.

0  Philocles,  said  he,  'tis  well  remembered.  I  was  growing
too  warm,  I  find  ;  as  well  I  might  indeed,  in  this  hot  element.
And  here  perhaps  I  might  have  talked  yet  more  mysteriously,
had  you  been  one  who  could  think  otherwise  than  in  the
common  way  of  the  soft  flames  of  love.  You  might,  perhaps,
have  heard  wonders  in  this  kind  :  "  how  all  things  had  their
being  hence,  and  how  their  noblest  end  was  to  be  here  wrapt  up,
consumed  and  lost."  But  in  these  high  flights  I  might  possibly
have  gone  near  to  burn  my  wings.

Indeed,  said  I,  you  might  well  expect  the  fate  of  Icarus  for
your  high-soaring.  But  this,  indeed,  was  not  what  I  feared.
For  you  were  got  above  danger ;  and,  with  that  devouring
element  on  your  side,  had  mastered  not  only  the  sun  himself,
but  every  thing  which  stood  in  your  way.  I  was  afraid  it
might,  in  the  issue,  run  to  what  they  tell  us  of  a  universal
conflagration ;  in  which  I  knew  not  how  it  might  go,  possibly,
with  our  Genius.

1  am  glad,  said  he,  Philocles,  to  find  this  grown  such  a
concern  with  you.  But  you  may  rest  secure  here,  if  the  case
you  meant  were  that  periodical  conflagration  talked  of  by  some
philosophers.  For  there  the  Genius  would  of  necessity  be  all
in  all ;  and  in  those  intervals  of  creation,  when  no  form  nor
species  existed  anywhere  out  of  the  divine  mind,  all  then  was
Deity ;  all  was  that  Oxi:,  collected  thus  within  itself,  and
subsisting  (as  they  imagined)  rather  in  a  more  simple  and
perfect  manner,  than  Avhen  multiplied  in  more  ways ;  and
becoming  productive,  it  unfolded  itself  in  the  various  map  of
Nature  and  this  fair  visible  world.

But  for  my  part,  said  I  (interrupting  him),  who  can  much
better  see  divinity  unfolded  than  in  that  involved  and  solitary
state  before  creation,  I  could  wish  you  would  go  a  little  further

118


THE MORALISTS

with  nie  in  the  map  of  Nature,  especially  if,  descending  from
your  lofty  flights,  you  would  he  content  to  ])itch  upon  this
hunihle  spot  of  earth,  where  I  could  better  accompany  you,
wherever  you  led  me.

But  you,  replied  he,  who  would  confine  me  to  this  heavy
earth,  must  yet  allow  me  the  same  wings  of  fancy.  How  else
shall  I  fly  with  you  through  different  climates,  from  pole  to
pole,  and  from  the  frigid  to  the  torrid  zone  ?

Oh,  said  I,  for  this  purpose  I  will  allow  you  the  Pegasus  of
the  poets,  or  that  winged  Griffin  which  an  Italian  poet  of  the
moderns  gave  to  one  of  his  heroes ;  yet  on  this  condition,  that
you  take  no  such  extravagant  flight,  as  his  was,  to  the  moon ;
but  keep  closely  to  this  orb  of  earth.

Since  you  will  have  it  so,  replied  Theocles,  let  us  try  first
on  the  darkest  and  most  imperfect  parts  of  our  map,  and  see
how  you  can  endure  the  prospect.  "  How  oblique  and  faintly
looks  the  sun  on  yonder  climates,  far  removed  from  him  !  How
tedious  are  the  winters  there  !  How  deep  the  horrors  of  the
night,  and  how  uncomfortable  even  the  light  of  day  !  The
freezing  winds  employ  their  fiercest  breath,  yet  are  not  spent
with  blowing.  The  sea,  which  elsewhere  is  scarce  confined
within  its  limits,  lies  here  immured  in  walls  of  crystal.  The
snow  covers  the  hills,  and  almost  fills  the  lowest  valleys.  How
wide  and  deep  it  lies,  incumbent  over  the  plains,  hiding  the
sluggish  rivers,  the  shrubs  and  trees,  the  dens  of  beasts  and
mansions  of  distressed  and  feeble  men  !  .  .  .  See !  where  they
lie  confined,  hardly  secure  against  the  raging  cold  or  the  attacks
of  the  wild  beasts,  now  masters  of  the  wasted  field,  and  forced
by  hunger  out  of  the  naked  woods.  .  .  .  Yet  not  disheartened
(such  is  the  force  of  human  breasts)  but  thus  provided  for  by
art  and  prudence,  the  kind  compensating  gifts  of  heaven,  men
and  their  herds  may  wait  for  a  release.  For  at  length  the  sun,
approaching,  melts  the  snow,  sets  longing  men  at  liberty,  and
affords  them  means  and  time  to  make  provision  against  the
next  return of  cold. It  breaks  the  icy  fetters  of  the  main,

119


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

where  vast  sea-monsters  pierce  through  floating  islands,  with
arms  which  can  withstand  the  crystal  rock ;  whilst  others,  who
of  themselves  seem  great  as  islands,  are  by  their  bulk  alone
armed  against  all  but  man,  whose  superiority  over  creatures  of
such  stupendous  size  and  force  should  make  him  mindful  of  his
privilege  of  reason,  and  force  him  humbly  to  adore  the  great
composer  of  these  wondrous  frames,  and  author  of  his  own
superior  wisdom.

"  But  leaving  these  dull  climates,  so  little  favoured  by  the
sun,  for  those  happier  regions,  on  which  he  looks  more  kindly,
making  perpetual  summer ;  how  great  an  alteration  do  we  find  ?
His  purer  light  confounds  weak-sighted  mortals,  pierced  by  his
scorching  beams.  Scarce  can  they  tread  the  glowing  ground.
The  air  they  breathe  cannot  enough  abate  the  fire  which  burns
within  their  panting  breasts.  Their  bodies  melt;  overcome
and  fainting  they  seek  the  shade,  and  wait  the  cool  refreshments
of  the  night.  Yet  oft  the  bounteous  creator  bestows  other
refreshments.  He  casts  a  veil  of  clouds  before  them  and  raises
gentle  gales ;  favoured  by  which  the  men  and  beasts  pursue
their  labours,  and  plants  refreshed  by  dews  and  showers  can
gladly  bear  the  warmest  sunbeams.

"  And  here  the  varying  scene  opens  to  new  wonders.  We
see  a  country  rich  with  gems,  but  richer  with  the  fragrant
spices  it  affords.  How  gravely  move  the  largest  of  land  creatures
on  the  banks  of  this  fair  river  !  How  ponderous  are  their  arms,
and  vast  their  strength,  with  courage  and  a  sense  superior  to
the  other  beasts !  Yet  are  they  tamed  (we  see)  by  mankind,
and  brought  even  to  fight  their  own  battles,  rather  as  allies
and  confederates  than  as  slaves.  .  .  .  But  let  us  turn  our  eyes
towards  these  smaller  and  more  curious  objects,  the  numerous
and  devouring  insects  on  the  trees  in  these  wide  plains.  How
shining,  strong,  and  lasting  are  the  subtle  threads  spun  from
their  artful  mouths.  Who,  beside  the  all- wise,  has  taught  them
to  compose  the  beautiful  soft  shells,  in  which  recluse  and  buried,
yet  still  alive,  they  undergo  such  a  surprising  change,  when  not

120


THE MORALISTS

destroyed  by  men,  who  clothe  and  adorn  themselves  with  the
labours  and  lives  of  these  weak  creatures,  and  are  proud  of
wearing  such  inglorious  spoils  ?  How  sumptuously  apparelled,
gay,  and  splendid  are  all  the  various  insects  which  feed  on  the
other  plants  of  this  warm  region  !  How  beautiful  the  plants
themselves  in  all  their  various  growths,  from  the  trinm])hant
palm  down  to  the  humble  moss  !

"  Now  may  we  see  that  happy  country  where  precious  gums
and  balsams  flow  from  trees,  and  Nature  yields  her  most
delicious  fruits.  How  tame  and  tractable,  how  ]mtient  of
labour  and  of  thrift  are  those  large  creatures,  who,  lifting  up
their  lofty  heads,  go  led  and  loaden  through  these  drv  and
barren  places  !  Their  shape  and  temper  show  them  framed  by
Nature  to  submit  to  man,  and  fitted  for  his  service,  who  from
hence  oug-ht  to  be  more  sensible  of  his  wants  and  of  the  divine
bounty  thus  supplying  them.

"  But  see,  not  far  from  us,  that  fertilest  of  lands,  watered
and  fed  by  a  friendly  generous  stream,  which,  ere  it  enters  the
sea,  divides  itself  into  many  branches,  to  dispense  more  ecjually
the  rich  and  nitrous  manure  it  bestows  so  kindly  and  in  due
time  on  the  adjacent  plains.  .  ,  .  Fair  image  of  that  fruitful
and  exuberant  nature,  who  with  a  flood  of  bounty  blesses  all
things,  and,  parent-like,  out  of  her  many  breasts  sends  the
nutritious  draught  in  various  streams  to  her  rejoicing  offspring  !
.  .  .  Innumerable  are  the  dubious  forms  and  unknown  species
which  drink  the  slimy  current ;  whether  they  are  such  as,  leaving
the  scorched  deserts,  satiate  here  their  ardent  thirst,  and  pro-
miscuously engendering,  beget  a  monstrous  race ;  or  whether
(as  it  is  said)  by  the  sun's  genial  heat,  active  on  the  fermenting
ooze,  new  forms  are  generated  and  issue  from  the  river's  fertile
bed.  .  .  .  See  there  the  noted  tyrant  of  the  flood  and  terror
of  its  borders,  when  suddenly  displaying  his  horrid  form,  the
amphibious  ravager  invades  the  land,  quitting  his  waterv  den,
and  from  the  deep  emerging  with  hideous  rush  sweeps  over  the
trembling  plain. The  natives from  afar  behold  with  wonder

121


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  enormous  bulk,  sprung  from  so  small  an  egg.  With  horror
they  relate  the  monster's  nature,  cruel  and  deceitful ;  how  he
with  dire  hypocrisy  and  false  tears  beguiles  the  simple-hearted  ;
and  inspiring  tenderness  and  kind  compassion,  kills  with  pious
fraud.  •  .  .  Sad  emblem  of  that  spiritual  plague,  dire  super-
stition !  native  of  this  soil,  where  first  religion  ^  grew  unsociable,
and  among  different  worshippers  bred  mutual  hatred  and
abhorrence  of  each  other"'s  temples.  The  infection  spreads ;
and  nations  now  profane  one  to  another  war  fiercelier,  and  in
religion's  cause  forget  humanity  :  whilst  savage  zeal,  with  meek
and  pious  semblance,  works  dreadful  massacre ;  and  for  heaven's
sake  (horrid  pretence  !)  makes  desolate  the  earth.  .  .  .

"  Here  let  us  leave  these  monsters  (glad  if  we  could  here
confine  them  !)  and  detesting  the  dire  prolific  soil,  fly  to  the
vast  deserts  of  these  parts.  All  ghastly  and  hideous  as  they
appear,  they  want  not  their  peculiar  beauties.  The  wildness
pleases.  We  seem  to  live  alone  with  Nature.  We  view  her  in
her  inmost  recesses,  and  contemplate  her  Avith  more  delight  in
these  original  wilds  than  in  the  artificial  labyrinths  and  feigned
wildernesses  of  the  palace.  The  objects  of  the  place,  the  scaly
serpents,  the  savage  beasts,  and  poisonous  insects,  how  terrible
soever,  or  how  contrary  to  human  nature,  are  beauteous  in
themselves,  and  fit  to  raise  our  thoughts  in  admiration  of  that
divine  wisdom,  so  far  superior  to  our  short  views.  Unable  to
declare  the  use  or  service  of  all  things  in  this  universe,  we  are
yet  assured  of  the  perfection  of  all,  and  of  the  justice  of  that
economy  to  which  all  things  are  subservient,  and  in  respect  of
which  things  seemingly  deformed  are  amiable,  disorder  becomes
regular,  corruption  wholesome,  and  poisons  (such  as  these  we
have  seen)  prove  healing  and  beneficial.

"  But  behold  ! through  a  vast  tract  of  sky  before  us,  the

mighty  Atlas  rears  his  lofty  head  covered  with  snow  above  the

clouds. Beneath  the  mountain's  foot  the  rocky  country  rises

into  hills,  a  proper  basis  of  the  ponderous  mass  above,  where

*  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.

122


THE MORALISTS

huge  enibodied  rocks  lie  piled  on  one  another,  and  seem  to  prop
the  high  arch  of  heaven.  .  .  .  See  !  with  what  trembling  steps
poor  mankind  tread  the  narrow  brink  of  the  deep  precipices,
from  whence  with  gidtly  horror  they  look  down,  mistrusting
even  the  ground  which  bears  them,  whilst  they  hear  the  hollow
sound  of  torrents  underneath,  and  see  the  ruin  of  the  impending
rock,  with  falling  trees  which  hang  with  their  roots  upwards
and  seem  to  draw  more  ruin  after  them.  Here  thoughtless
men,  seized  with  the  newness  of  such  objects,  become  thoughtful,
and  willingly  contemplate  the  incessant  changes  of  this  earth's
surface.  They  see,  as  in  one  instant,  the  revolutions  of  past  ages,
the  fleeting  forms  of  things,  and  the  decay  even  of  this  our
globe,  whose  youth  and  first  formation  they  consider,  whilst  the
apparent  spoil  and  irreparable  breaches  of  the  wasted  mountain
show  them  the  world  itself  only  as  a  noble  ruin,  and  make  them
think  of  its  ap})roaching  ])eriod.  .  .  .  But  here,  mid-way  the
mountain,  a  spacious  border  of  thick  wood  harbours  our  wearied
travellers,  who  now  are  come  among  the  ever  green  and  lofty
pines,  the  firs,  and  noble  cedars,  whose  towering  heads  seem
endless  in  the  sky,  the  rest  of  the  trees  appearing  only  as  shrubs
beside  them.  And  here  a  different  hoiTor  seizes  our  sheltered
travellers  when  they  see  the  day  diminished  by  the  deej)  shades
of  the  vast  wood,  which,  closing  thick  above,  spreads  darkness
and  eternal  nig^ht  below.  The  faint  and  gloomv  light  looks
horrid  as  the  shade  itself;  and  the  profound  stillness  of  these
places  imposes  silence  upon  men,  struck  with  the  hoarse  echoings
of  every  sound  within  the  spacious  caverns  of  the  wood.  Here
space  astonishes ;  silence  itself  seems  pregnant,  whilst  an  un-
known force  works  on  the  mind,  and  dubious  objects  move  the
wakeful  sense.  Mysterious  voices  are  either  heard  or  fancied,
and  various  forms  of  deity  seem  to  present  themselves  and
appear  more  manifest  in  these  sacred  silvan  scenes,  such  as  of
old  gave  rise  to  temples,  and  favoured  the  religion  of  the  ancient
world.  Even  we  ourselves,  who  in  plain  characters  may  read
divinity  from  so  many  bright  parts  of  earth,  choose  rather  these

123


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

obscurer  places  to  spell  out  that  mysterious  being,  a\  hich  to  our
weak  eyes  appears  at  best  under  a  veil  of  cloud.  .  ,  ."

Here  he  paused  a  while  and  began  to  cast  about  his  eyes,
which  before  seemed  fixed.  He  looked  more  calmly,  with  an
open  countenance  and  free  air,  by  which,  and  other  tokens,  I
could  easily  find  we  were  come  to  an  end  of  our  descriptions,
and  that  whether  I  would  or  no,  Theocles  was  now  resolved  to
take  his  leave  of  the  sublime,  the  morning  being  spent  and  the
forenoon  by  this  time  well  advanced.

Sf.ction II

Methinks,  said  he,  Philocles  (changing  to  a  familiar  voice),  we
had  better  leave  these  unsociable  places  whither  our  fancy  has
transported  us,  and  return  to  ourselves  here  again  in  our  more
conversable  woods  and  temperate  climates.  Here  no  fierce
heats  nor  colds  annoy  us,  no  precipices  nor  cataracts  amaze  us.
Nor  need  we  here  be  afraid  of  our  own  voices  whilst  we  hear
the  notes  of  such  a  cheerful  choir,  and  find  the  echoes  rather
agreeable  and  inviting  us  to  talk.

I  confess,  said  I,  those  foreign  nymphs  (if  there  were  any
belono-ino:  to  those  miraculous  woods)  were  much  too  awful
beauties  to  please  me.  I  found  our  familiar  home -nymphs  a
great  deal  more  to  my  humour.  Yet  for  all  this,  I  cannot  help
being  concerned  for  your  breaking  off  just  when  we  were  got
half  the  world  over,  and  wanted  only  to  take  America  in  our
way  home.  Indeed,  as  for  Europe,  I  could  excuse  your  making
any  great  tour  there,  because  of  the  little  variety  it  would  afford
us.  Besides  that,  it  would  be  hard  to  see  it  in  any  view  without
meeting  still  that  politic  face  of  affairs  which  would  too  much
disturb  us  in  our  philosophical  flights.  But  for  the  western
tract,  I  cannot  imagine  why  you  should  neglect  such  noble
subjects  as  are  there,  unless  perhaps  the  gold  and  silver,  to
which  I  find  you  such  a  bitter  enemy,  frighted  you  from  a
mother-soil  so  full  of  it. If  these  countries  had  been  as  bare

124


THE MOKATJSTS

of  those  metals  as  old  Sparta,  we  ini<;ht  have  heard  more
perhaps  of  the  Perus  and  Mexicos  than  of  all  Asia  and  Africa.
We  might  have  had  creatures,  plants,  woods,  mountains,  rivers,
beyond  any  of  those  we  have  passed.  How  sorry  am  I  to  lose
the  noble  .Vmazon  ! How  sorry

Here,  as  I  would  have  proceeded,  I  saw  so  significant  a  smile
on  Theocles's  face  that  it  stopped  me,  out  of  curiosity,  to  ask
him  his  thought.

Nothing,  said  he ;  nothing  but  this  very  subject  itself.  Go
on  —  I  see  you'll  finish  it  for  me.  The  spirit  of  this  sort  of
prophecy  has  seized  you.  And  Philocles,  the  cold  indifferent
Philocles,  is  become  a  pursuer  of  the  same  mysterious  beauty.

T'is  true,  said  I,  Theocles,  I  own  it.  Your  genius,  the
genius  of  the  place,  and  the  Great  Genius  have  at  last  prevailed.
I  shall  no  longer  resist  the  passion  growing  in  me  for  things  of
a  natural  kind,  where  neither  art  nor  the  conceit  or  caprice  of
man  has  spoiled  their  genuine  order  by  breaking  in  upon  that
primitive  state.  Even  the  rude  rocks,  the  mossy  caverns,  the
irregular  unwrought  grottos  and  broken  falls  of  waters,  with  all
the  horrid  graces  of  the  wilderness  itself,  as  representing  Nature
more,  will  be  the  more  engaging,  and  appear  with  a  magnificence
beyond  the  formal  mockery  of  princely  gardens.  .  .  .  But  tell  me,
I  entreat  you,  how  comes  it  that,  excepting  a  few  j^hilosophers
of  your  sort,  the  only  people  who  are  enamoured  in  this  way,
and  seek  the  woods,  the  rivers,  or  seashores,  are  your  poor
vulgar  lovers  ?

Say  not  this,  replied  he,  of  lovers  only.  For  is  it  not  the
same  with  poets,  and  all  those  other  students  in  nature  and  the
arts  w  hich  copy  after  her  "t  In  short,  is  not  this  the  real  case
of  all  who  are  lovers  either  of  the  Muses  or  the  Graces  t

However,  said  I,  all  those  who  are  deep  in  this  romantic
way  are  looked  upon,  you  know,  as  a  people  either  ])lainly  out
of  their  wits, or  overrun with melancholy and enthusiasm.^

1  See  Letter  of  Enthummm,  towards  the  eud.  See  also  above.  Inquiry,
bk.  i.  part  iii.  §  3  ;  aud  M'dic.  ii.  ch.  1.

125


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

We  always  endeavour  to  recall  them  from  these  solitary  places.
And  I  must  own  that  often  when  I  have  found  ray  fancy  run
this  way,  I  have  checked  myself,  not  knowing  what  it  was
possessed  me,  when  I  was  passionately  struck  with  objects  of
this  kind.

No  wonder,  replied  he,  if  we  are  at  a  loss  when  we  pursue
the  shadow  for  the  substance.  For  if  we  may  trust  to  what
our  reasoning  has  taught  us,  whatever  in  Nature  is  beautiful  or
charming  is  only  the  faint  shadow  of  that  first  beauty.  So
that  every  real  love  depending  on  the  mind,  and  being  only  the
contemplation  of  beauty  either  as  it  really  is  in  itself  or  as  it
appears  imperfectly  in  the  objects  which  strike  the  sense,  how
can  the  rational  mind  rest  here,  or  be  satisfied  with  the  absurd
enjoyment  which  reaches  the  sense  alone  ?

From  this  time  forward  then,  said  I,  I  shall  no  more  have
reason  to  fear  those  beauties  which  strike  a  sort  of  melancholy,
like  the  places  we  have  named,  or  like  these  solemn  groves.  No
more  shall  I  avoid  the  moving  accents  of  soft  music,  or  fly  from
the  enchanting  features  of  the  fairest  human  face.

If  you  are  already,  replied  he,  such  a  proficient  in  this  new
love  that  you  are  sure  never  to  admire  the  representative
beauty  except  for  the  sake  of  the  original,  nor  aim  at  other
enjoyment  than  of  the  rational  kind,  you  may  then  be  confident.
I  am  so,  and  presume  accordingly  to  answer  for  myself  How-
ever, I  should  not  be  ill  satisfied  if  you  explained  yourself  a
little  better  as  to  this  mistake  of  mine  you  seem  to  fear.
Would  it  be  any  help  to  tell  you,  "  That  the  absurdity  lay  in
seeking  the  enjoyment  elsewhere  than  in  the  subject  loved".''
The  matter,  I  must  confess,  is  still  mysterious.  Imagine  then,
good  Philocles,  if  being  taken  with  the  beauty  of  the  ocean,
which  you  see  yonder  at  a  distance,  it  should  come  into  your
head  to  seek  how  to  command  it,  and,  like  some  mighty  admiral,
ride  master  of  the  sea,  would  not  the  fancy  be  a  little  absurd  ?

Absurd  enough,  in  conscience.  The  next  thing  I  should
do,  'tis  likely,  upon  this  frenzy,  would  be  to  hire  some  bark

126


THE MORALISTS

and  go  in  nuptial  ceremony,  Venetian-like,  to  wed  the  gulf,
which  I  might  call  perhaps  as  proj)erlv  niy  own.

Let  who  will  call  it  theirs,  replied  Theocles,  you  will  own
the  enjoyment  of  this  kind  to  be  very  different  from  that  which
should  naturally  follow  from  the  contemplation  of  the  ocean''s
beauty.  The  bridegroom-Doge,  who  in  liis  stately  Bucentaur
floats  on  the  bosom  of  his  Thetis,  has  less  possession  than  the
poor  she])herd,  who  from  a  hanging  rock  or  ])oint  of  some  high
promontory,  stretched  at  his  ease,  forgets  his  feeding  flocks,
while  he  atlmires  her  beauty.  But  to  come  nearer  home,  and
make  the  cjuestion  still  more  familiar.  Suppose  (my  I'hilocles)
that,  viewing  such  a  tract  of  country  as  this  delicious  vale  we
see  beneath  us,  you  should,  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  prospect,
recpiire  the  property  or  possession  of  the  land.

The  covetous  fancy,  replied  I,  would  be  as  absurd  altogether
as  that  other  ambitious  one.

0  Philocles !  said  he,  may  I  bring  this  yet  a  little  nearer,
and  will  you  follow  me  once  more 't  Suppose  that,  being
charmed  as  you  seem  to  be  with  the  beauty  of  those  trees
under  whose  shade  we  rest,  you  should  long  for  nothing  so
much  as  to  taste  some  delicious  fruit  of  theirs ;  and  having
obtained  of  Nature  some  certain  relish  by  which  these  acorns  or
berries  of  the  wood  became  as  palatable  as  the  figs  or  peaches
of  the  garden,  you  should  afterwards,  as  oft  as  you  revisited
these  groves,  seek  hence  the  enjoyment  of  them  by  satiating
yourself  in  these  new  delights.

The  fancy  of  this  kind,  replied  I,  would  be  sordidly  luxurious,
and  as  absurd,  in  my  opinion,  as  either  of  the  former.

Can  you  not  then,  on  this  occasion,  said  he,  call  to  mind
some  other  forms  of  a  fair  kind  among  us,  where  the  admiration
of  beauty  is  apt  to  lead  to  as  irregular  a  consequence  "i

1  feared,  said  I,  indeed,  where  this  would  end,  and  was
apprehensive  you  would  force  me  at  last  to  think  of  certain
powerful  forms  in  human  kind  which  draw  after  them  a  set  of
eager desires, wishes, and hoj)cs ; no way suitable, I must

127


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

confess,  to  your  rational  and  refined  contemplation  of  beauty.
The  proportions  of  this  living  architecture,  as  wonderful  as
they  are,  inspire  nothing  of  a  studious  or  contemplative  kind.
The  more  they  are  viewed,  the  further  they  are  from  satisfying
by  mere  view.  Let  that  which  satisfies  be  ever  so  disproportion-
able  an  effect,  or  ever  so  foreign  to  its  cause,  censure  it  as  you
please,  you  must  allow,  however,  that  it  is  natural.  So  that
you,  Theocles,  for  aught  I  see,  are  become  the  accuser  of
Nature  by  condemning  a  natural  enjoyment.

Far  be  it  from  us  both,  said  he,  to  condemn  a  joy  which  is
from  Nature.  But  when  we  spoke  of  the  enjoyment  of  these
woods  and  jn'ospects,  we  understood  by  it  a  far  different  kind
ii'om  that  of  the  inferior  creatures,  who,  rifling  in  these  places,
find  here  their  choicest  food.  Yet  we  too  live  by  tasteful  food,
and  feel  those  other  joys  of  sense  in  common  with  them.  But
"'twas  not  here  (my  Philocles)  that  we  had  agreed  to  place  our
good,  nor  consequently  our  enjoyment.  We  who  were  rational,
and  had  minds,  methought,  should  place  it  rather  in  those
minds  which  were  indeed  abused,  and  cheated  of  their  real
good,  when  drawn  to  seek  absurdly  the  enjoyment  of  it  in  the
objects  of  sense,  and  not  in  those  objects  they  might  properly
call  their  own,  in  which  kind,  as  I  remember,  we  comprehended
all  which  was  truly  fair,  generous,  or  good.

So  that  beauty,  said  I,  and  good  with  you,  Theocles,  I
perceive,  are  still  ^  one  and  the  same.

'Tis  so,  said  he.  And  thus  are  we  returned  again  to  the
subject  of  our  yesterday's  morning  conversation.  Whether  I
have  made  good  my  promise  to  you  in  showing  '^  the  true  good,
I  know  not.  But  so,  doubtless,  I  should  have  done  with  good
success  had  I  been  able  in  my  poetic  ecstasies,  or  by  any  other
efforts,  to  have  led  you  into  some  deep  view  of  Nature  and  the
sovereign  genius.  We  then  had  proved  the  force  of  divine
beauty,  and  formed  in  ourselves  an  object  capable  and  worthy
of  real  enjoyment.

^  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  1.  ^  lb.

128


THE ISIOIIALISTS

O  Theocles!  said  I,  well  do  I  remember  now  the  terms  in
which  you  en<z;af;ed  me  that  morning  when  yo^i  bespoke  my
love  of  this  mysterious  beauty.  You  have  indeed  made  good
your  part  of  the  condition,  and  may  now^  claim  me  for  a
proselyte.  If  there  be  any  seeming  extravagance  in  the  case  I
must  comfort  myself  the  best  I  can,  and  consider  that  all  sound
love  and  admiration  is  enthusiasm  :  ^  "  The  transi)orts  of  poets,
the  sublime  of  orators,  the  rapture  of  musicians,  the  high
strains  of  the  virtuosi — all  mere  enthusiasm  !  Even  learning
itself,  the  love  of  arts  and  curiosities,  the  spirit  of  travellers
and  adventurers,  gallantry,  war,  heroism — all,  all  enthusiasm!""
'Tis  enough;  I  am  content  to  be  this  new  enthusiast  in  a  way
unknown  to  me  before.

And  I,  replietl  Theocles,  am  content  you  should  call  this
love  of  ours  enthusiasm,  allowing  it  the  ])rivilege  of  its  fellow-
])assions.  For  is  there  a  f;ur  and  ])lausible  enthusiasm,  a
reasonable  ecstasy  and  transport  allowed  to  other  sulijccts,  such
as  architecture,  painting,  nuisic ;  and  shall  it  be  exploded  here  ?
Arc  there  senses  by  which  all  those  other  graces  and  perfections
are  perceived,  antl  none  by  which  this  higher  jierfection  and
grace  is  comprehended  't  Is  it  so  })reposterous  to  bring  that
enthusiasm  hither,  and  transfer  it  from  those  secondary  and
scanty  objects  to  this  original  and  comprehensive  one  .^  Observe
how  the  case  stands  in  all  those  other  subjects  of  art  or  science.
What  difficulty  to  be  in  any  degree  knowing  !  How  long  ere  a
true  taste  is  gained  !  How  many  things  shocking,  how  many
offensive  at  first,  which  afterwards  are  known  and  acknowledged
the  highest  beauties !  For  'tis  not  instantly  we  acquire  the
sense  by  which  these  beauties  are  discoverable.  Labour  and
pains  are  recpiired,  and  time  to  cultivate  a  natural  genius  ever
so  apt  or  forward.  But  who  is  there  once  thinks  of  cultivating
this  soil,  or  of  improving  any  sense  or  faculty  which  Nature
may  have  given  of  this  kind  ?  And  is  it  a  wonder  we  should
be  dull  then,  as  we  are,  confounded  and  at  a  loss  in  these
^  Letter  of  Eidhnsiitum ,  ttuvarrls  the  end.

vol..  II  129  K


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

affairs,  blind  as  to  this  higher  scene,  these  nobler  representa-
tions ?  Which  way  should  we  come  to  understand  better  ?
which  way  be  knowing  in  these  beauties  ?  Is  study,  science,
or  learning  necessary  to  understand  all  beauties  else  ?  And
for  the  sovereign  beauty,  is  there  no  skill  or  science  required  ?
In  painting  there  are  shades  and  masterly  strokes  which  the
vulgar  understand  not,  but  find  fault  with ;  in  architecture
there  is  the  rustic ;  in  music  the  chromatic  kind,  and  skilful
mixture  of  dissonancies  :  and  is  there  nothing  which  answers  to
this  in  the  whole  ?

I  must  confess,  said  I,  I  have  hitherto  been  one  of  those
vulgar  who  could  never  relish  the  shades,  the  rustic,  or  the
dissonancies  you  talk  of.  I  have  never  dreamt  of  such  master-
pieces in  Nature.  'Twas  my  way  to  censure  freely  on  the  first
view.  But  I  perceive  I  am  now  obliged  to  go  far  in  the  pursuit
of  beauty,  which  lies  very  absconded  and  deep ;  and  if  so,  I  am
well  assured  that  my  enjoyments  hitherto  have  been  very  shallow.
1  have  dwelt,  it  seems,  all  this  while  u])on  the  surface,  and
enjoyed  only  a  kind  of  slight  superficial  beauties,  having
never  gone  in  search  of  beauty  itself,  but  of  what  I  fancied
such.  Like  the  rest  of  the  unthinking  world,  I  took  for  granted
that  what  I  liked  was  beautiful,  and  what  I  rejoiced  in  was  my
good.  I  never  scrupled  loving  what  I  fancied,  and  aiming  only
at  the  enjoyment  of  what  I  loved ;  I  never  troubled  myself  with
examining  what  the  subjects  were,  nor  ever  hesitated  about
their  choice.

Begin  then,  said  he,  and  choose.  See  what  the  subjects  are,
and  which  you  would  prefer,  which  honour  with  your  admiration,
love,  and  esteem.  For  by  these  again  you  will  be  honoured  in
your  turn.  Such,  Philocles,  as  is  the  worth  of  these  companions,
such  will  your  worth  be  found.  As  there  is  emptiness  or  fulness
here,  so  will  there  be  in  your  enjoyment.  See  therefore  where
fulness  is,  and  where  emptiness.  Sec  in  what  subject  resides  the
chief  excellence,  where  beauty  reigns,  where  'tis  entire,  perfect,
absolute ;  where  broken,  imperfect,  short. View  these  terrestrial

130


THE MORALISTS

beauties  and  whatever  has  the  appearanee  of  excellence  and  is
able  to  attract.  See  that  which  either  really  is,  or  stands  as  in
the  room  of  fair,  beautiful,  and  o-ood.  "  A  mass  of  metal,  a  tract
of  land,  a  number  of  slaves,  a  pile  of  stones,  a  human  body  of
certain  lineaments  and  proportions."  Is  this  the  highest  of  the
kind  ?  Is  beauty  founded  then  in  body  only,  and  not  in  action,
life,  or  operation  ?  .  .  .

Hold  !  hold  !  said  I,  good  Theocles,  you  take  this  in  too
high  a  key  above  my  reach.  If  you  would  have  me  accompany
you,  pray  lower  this  strain  a  little,  and  talk  in  a  more  familiar
way.

Thus  then,  said  he  (smiling),  whatever  ])assion  you  may  have
for  other  beauties,  I  know,  good  I'hilocles,  you  are  no  such
admirer  of  wealth  in  any  kind  as  to  allow  much  beauty  to  it,
especially  in  a  rude  heap  or  mass.  But  in  medals,  coins,  embossed
work,  statues,  and  well-fabricated  pieces,  of  whatever  sort,  you
can  discover  beauty  and  admire  the  kind.  True,  said  I,  but  not
for  the  metaPs  sake.  'Tis  not  then  the  metal  or  matter  which
is  beautiful  with  you  't  No.  But  the  art.^  Certainly.  The  art
then  is  the  beauty.^  Bight.  And  the  art  is  that  which
beautifies 't  The  same.  So  that  the  beautifying,  not  the
beautified,  is  the  really  beautiful?  It  seems  so.  For  that
which  is  beautified,  is  beautiful  only  by  the  accession  of  some-
thing beautifying,  and  by  the  recess  or  withdrawing  of  the  same,
it  ceases  to  be  beautiful  .^  Be  it.  In  respect  of  bodies  therefore,
beauty  comes  and  goes .''  So  we  see.  Nor  is  the  body  itself  any
cause  either  of  its  coming  or  staying  ?  None.  So  that  there  is
no  principle  of  beauty  in  body  ?  None  at  all.  Yoy  body  can  no
way  be  the  cause  of  beauty  to  itself?  No  way.  Nor  govern  nor
regulate  itself?  Nor  yet  this.  Nor  mean  nor  intend  itself?
Nor  this  neither.  Must  not  that,  therefore,  which  means  and
intends  for  it,  regulates  and  orders  it,  be  the  ])rinci}ile  of
beauty  to  it  ?  Of  necessity.  And  what  must  that  be  ?  ]\Iind,
I  suppose,  for  what  can  it  be  else .''

Here  then,  said  he,  is  all  I  would  have  explained  to  you

131


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

before.  "  That  the  beautiful,  the  fair,  the  comely,  were  never
in  the  matter,  but  in  the  art  and  design ;  never  in  body  itself,
but  in  the  form  or  forming  power."  Does  not  the  beautiful
form  confess  this,  and  speak  the  beauty  of  the  design  whenever
it  strikes  you  ?  What  is  it  but  the  design  which  strikes  ?
What  is  it  you  admire  but  mind,  or  the  effect  of  mind .''  Tis
mind  alone  which  forms.  All  which  is  void  of  mind  is  horrid,
and  matter  formless  is  deformity  itself.

Of  all  forms  then,  said  I,  those  (according  to  your  scheme)
are  the  most  amiable,  and  in  the  first  order  of  beauty,  which
have  a  power  of  making  other  forms  themselves.  From  whence
methinks  they  may  be  styled  the  forming  forms.  So  far  I  can
easily  concur  with  you,  and  gladly  give  the  advantage  to  the
human  form,  above  those  other  beauties  of  man's  formation.
The  palaces,  equipages  and  estates  shall  never  in  my  account  be
brought  in  competition  with  the  original  living  forms  of  flesh
and  blood.  And  for  the  other,  the  dead  forms  of  Nature,  the
metals  and  stones,  however  precious  and  dazzling,  I  am  resolved
to  resist  their  splendour,  and  make  abject  things  of  them,  even
in  their  highest  pride,  when  they  pretend  to  set  oft'  human
beauty,  and  are  officiously  brought  in  aid  of  the  fair.

Do  you  not  see  then,  replied  Theocles,  that  you  have  estab-
lished three  degrees  or  orders  of  beauty  ?  As  how  ?  Why  first,
the  dead  forms,  as  you  properly  have  called  them,  which  bear  a
fashion,  and  are  formed,  whether  by  man  or  Nature,  but  have  no
forming  power,  no  action,  or  intelligence.  Right.  Next,  and
as  the  second  kind,  the  forms  which  form,  that  is,  which  have
intelligence,  action,  and  operation.  Right  still.  Here  therefore
is  double  beauty.  For  here  is  both  the  form  (the  effect  of
mind)  and  mind  itself.  The  first  kind  low  and  despicable  in  re-
spect of  this  other,  from  whence  the  dead  form  receives  its  lustre
and  force  of  beauty.  For  what  is  a  mere  body,  though  a  human
one,  and  ever  so  exactly  fashioned,  if  inward  form  be  wanting,
and  the  mind  be  monstrous  or  imperfect,  as  in  an  idiot  or  savage.^
This  too  I  can  apprehend,  said  I,  but  where  is  the  third  order .''

132


THE MORALISTS

Have  patience,  replied  he,  and  see  first  whether  you  have
discovered  tlie  wliole  f'oice  of  this  second  beauty.  How  else
should  you  understand  the  force  of  love,  or  have  the  power  of
enjoyment?  Tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  when  first  you  named
these  the  forminir  forms,  did  vou  think  of  no  other  productions
of  theirs  besides  the  dead  kinds,  such  as  the  palaces,  the  coins,
the  brazen  or  the  marble  fifrures  of  men  ?  Or  did  vou  think  of
somethinfT  nearer  life  ?

I  could  easily,  said  I,  have  added,  that  these  forms  of  ours
had  a  virtue  of  producinf^  other  livin"^  forms  like  themselves.
IJut  this  virtue  of  theirs,  I  thou<^ht,  was  from  another  form  above
them,  and  could  not  properly  be  called  their  virtue  or  art,  if  in
reality  there  was  a  superior  art  or  somethin<T^  artist-like,  which
guided  their  hand,  and  made  tools  of  them  in  this  specious  work.

Happily  thought,  said  he;  you  have  j^revented  a  censure
whicli  I  hardly  imagined  you  could  esca})e.  And  here  vou  have
unawares  discovered  that  third  order  of  beauty,  which  forms  not
only  such  as  we  call  mere  forms  but  even  the  forms  which  form.
For  we  ourselves  are  notable  architects  in  matter,  and  can  show
lifeless  bodies  brought  into  form,  and  fashioned  by  our  own
hands,  but  that  which  fashions  even  minds  themselves,  contains
in  itself  all  the  beauties  fashioned  by  those  minds,  and  is  conse-
(|uently  the  jn-inciple,  source,  and  fountain  of  all  beauty.

It  seems  so.

Therefore  whatever  beauty  appears  in  our  second  order  of
forms,  or  whatever  is  derived  or  jiroduced  from  thence,  all  this
is  eminently,  principally,  and  originally  in  this  last  order  of
supreme  and  sovereign  beauty.

True.

Thus  architecture,  music,  and  all  which  is  of  human  inven-
tion, resolves  itself  into  this  last  order.

Right,  said  I ;  and  thus  all  the  enthusiasms  of  other  kinds
resolve  themselves  into  ours.  The  fashionable  kinds  borrow
from  us,  and  are  nothing  without  us.  We  have  undoubtedly
the  honour  of  beino;  originals.

133


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEHISTICS

Now  therefore  say  again,  replied  Theocles :  whether  are
those  fabrics  of  architecture,  sculpture,  and  the  rest  of  that  sort
the  greatest  beauties  which  man  forms,  or  are  there  greater  and
better  ?  None  which  I  know,  replied  I.  Think,  think  again,
said  he ;  and  setting  aside  those  productions  which  just  now
you  excepted  against,  as  masterpieces  of  another  hand  ;  think
what  there  are  which  more  immediately  proceed  from  us,  and
may  more  truly  be  termed  our  issue.  I  am  barren,  said  I,  for
this  time  ;  you  must  be  plainer  yet,  in  helping  me  to  conceive.
How  can  I  help  you  ?  replied  he.  Would  you  have  me  be
conscious  for  you,  of  that  which  is  immediately  your  own,  and
is  solely  in  and  from  yourself?  You  mean  my  sentiments,  said
I.  Certainly,  replied  he,  and  together  with  your  sentiments,
your  resolutions,  principles,  determinations,  actions  ;  whatsoever
is  handsome  and  noble  in  the  kind  ;  whatever  flows  from  your
good  understanding,  sense,  knowledge,  and  will ;  whatever  is
engendered  in  your  heart  (good  Philocles  ! )  or  derives  itself
from  your  parent-mind,  which,  luilike  to  other  parents,  is  never
spent  or  exhausted,  but  gains  strength  and  vigour  by  producing.
So  you,  my  friend,  have  proved  it,  by  many  a  work,  not  suffer-
ing that  fertile  part  to  remain  idle  and  unactive.  Hence  those
good  parts,  which  from  a  natural  genius  you  have  raised  by  due
improvement.  And  here,  as  I  cannot  but  admire  the  pregnant
genius  and  parent-beauty,  so  am  I  satisfied  of  the  offspring,  that
it  is  and  will  be  ever  beautiful.

I  took  the  compliment,  and  wished  (I  told  him)  the  case
were  really  as  he  imagined,  that  I  might  justly  merit  his  esteem
and  love.  My  study  therefore  should  be  to  grow  beautiful,  in
his  way  of  beauty,  and  from  this  time  forward  I  would  do  all
I  could  to  propagate  that  lovely  race  of  mental  children,
happily  sprung  from  such  a  high  enjoyment  and  from  a  union
with  what  was  fairest  and  best.  But  "'tis  you,  Theocles,  con-
tinued I,  must  help  my  labouring  mind,  and  be  as  it  were  the
midwife  to  those  conceptions ;  which  else,  I  fear,  will  prove
abortive.

134


THE MORALISTS

Voii  do  well,  iej)Ii{'tl  lie,  to  tr'wc  me  the  midwife's  part  only;
for  the  miiul  eonceivirif^  of  itself,  can  only  lie,  as  you  say,
assisteil  in  the  birth.  Its  pregnancy  is  from  its  natm-e.  Nor
couUl  it  ever  have  been  thus  impregnated  by  any  other  mind
than  that  which  formed  it  at  the  beginning;  and  which,  as  we
have  alreadv  proved,  is  original  to  all  mental  as  well  as  other
beauty.

Do  you  maintain  then,  said  I,  that  these  mental  children,
tlio  notions  and  ])rinciples  of  fair,  just,  antl  honest,  with  the  rest
of  these  ideas,  are  innate  ?

Anatomists,  said  he,  tell  us  that  the  eggs,  Avhich  are  prin-
ciples in  bodv,  are  innate,  being  formed  already  in  the  foetus
before  the  birth.  lint  when  it  is,  whetlier  before,  or  at,  or
after  the  birth,  or  at  what  time  after,  that  either  these  or  other
principles,  organs  of  sensation,  or  sensations  themselves,  are
first  formed  in  us,  is  a  matter,  doutbless,  of  curious  speculation,
but  of  no  great  importance.  The  question  is,  whether  the
principles  spoken  of  are  from  art  or  Xatiu'e  ?  If  from  Nature
purely,  'tis  no  matter  for  the  time ;  nor  would  I  contend  with
you  though  you  should  deny  life  itself  to  be  innate,  as  imagin-
ing it  followed  rather  than  preceded  the  moment  of  birth.
But  this  I  am  certain  of,  that  life  and  the  sensations  which
accompany  life,  come  when  they  will,  are  from  mere  Nature,  and
nothino;  else.  Therefore  if  vou  dislike  the  word  innate,  let  us
change  it,  if  you  will,  for  instinct,  and  call  instinct  that  which
Nature  teaches,  exclusive  of  art,  culture,  or  discipline.

Content,  said  I.

Leaving  then,  replied  he,  those  admirable  speculations  to
the  virtuosi,  the  anatomists,  and  school  divines,  we  may  safely
aver,  with  all  their  consents,  that  the  several  organs,  particularly
those  of  generation,  are  formed  by  Natiu'c.  AVhethcr  is  there
also  from  Nature,  think  you,  any  instinct  for  the  after  use  of
them  ?  or  whether  must  learning  and  experience  imprint  this
use  ?  "Tis  imprinted,  said  I,  enough  in  conscience.  The  im-
pression or  instinct  is  so  strong  in the  case,  that  "twould be

135


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

absurdity  not  to  think  it  natural,  as  well  in  our  own  species  as
in  other  creatures,  amongst  whom  (as  you  have  already  taught
me)  not  only  the  mere  engendering  of  the  young,  but  the
various  and  almost  infinite  means  and  methods  of  providing  for
them,  are  all  foreknown.  For  thus  much  we  may  indeed  discern
in  the  preparatory  labours  and  arts  of  these  wild  creatures,
which  demonstrate  their  anticipating  fancies,  pre-conceptions,  or
pre-sensations,  if  I  may  use  a  word  you  taught  me  yesterday.^

1  allow  your  expression,  said  Theocles,  and  will  endeavour
to  show  you  that  the  same  pre-conceptions,  of  a  higher  degree,
have  place  in  human  kind.  Do  so,  said  I,  I  entreat  you ;  for
so  far  am  I  from  finding  in  myself  these  pre-conceptions  of  fair
and  beautiful,  in  your  sense,  that  methinks,  till  now  of  late,  I
have  hardly  known  of  anything  like  them  in  Nature.  How
then,  said  he,  would  you  have  known  that  outward  fair  and
beautiful  of  human  kind,  if  such  an  object  (a  fair  fleshly  one)
in  all  its  beauty  had  for  the  first  time  appeared  to  you,  by
yourself,  this  'morning,  in  these  groves  ?  Or  do  you  think
perhaps  you  should  have  been  unmoved,  and  have  found  no
difference  between  this  form  and  any  other,  if  first  you  had  not
been  instructed  ?

I  have  hardly  any  right,  replied  I,  to  plead  this  last  opinion,
after  what  I  have  owned  just  before.

Well  then,  said  he,  that  I  may  appear  to  take  no  advantage
against  you,  I  quit  the  dazzling  form  which  carries  such  a  force
of  complicated  beauties,  and  am  contented  to  consider  separately
each  of  those  simple  beauties,  which  taken  all  together  create
this  wonderful  effect.  For  you  will  allow,  without  doubt,  that
in  respect  of  bodies,  whatever  is  commonly  said  of  the  unex-
pressible,  the  unintelligible,  the  I-know-not-what  of  beauty,
there  can  lie  no  mystery  here,  but  what  plainly  belongs  either
to  figure,  colour,  motion  or  sound.  Omitting  therefore  the
three  latter,  and  their  dependent  charms,  let  us  view  the  charm
in  Avhat  is  simplest  of  all,  mere  figure. Nor  need  we  go  so  high

P.  70.
1136


THE MORALISTS

as  sculpture,  architecture,  or  the  designs  of  those  who  from  this
study  of  beauty  have  raised  such  dehf^htful  arts.  Tis  onougli
if  we  consider  the  simplest  of  figures,  as  either  a  round  hall,  a
cube,  or  dye.  Why  is  even  an  infant  pleased  with  the  first  view
of  these  proportions  P  ^^'hy  is  the  sphere  or  globe,  the  cylinder
and  obelisk  ])referred  ;  and  the  irregular  figures,  in  respect  of
these,  rejected  and  desjjised  'l

I  am  ready,  replied  I,  to  own  there  is  in  certain  figures  a
natural  beaut  v,^  which  the  eve  finds  as  soon  as  the  object  is
presented  to  it.

Is  there  then,  said  he,  a  natural  beau  I  v  of  figures.^  and  is
there  not  as  natural  a  one  of  actions  ?  No  sooner  the  eye  ojiens
upon  figures,  the  ear  to  sounds,  than  straiglit  the  beautiful
results  and  grace  and  harmony  are  known  and  acknowledgetl.
No  sooner  are  actions  viewed,  no  sooner  tlie  human  affections
and  passions  discerned  (and  they  are  most  of  them  as  soon
discerned  as  felt)  than  straight  an  inward  eye  distinguishes,  and
sees  the  fair  and  shapely,  the  amiable  and  admirable,  ajjart
from  the  deformed,  the  foul,  the  odious,  or  the  despicable.
How  is  it  possible  therefore  not  to  own  "  that  as  these  dis-
tinctions have  their  foundation  in  Nature,  the  discernment  itself
is  natural,  and  from  Nature  alone  "  ?

If  this,  I  told  him,  were  as  he  represented  it,  there  could
never,  I  thought,  be  any  disagreement  among  men  concerning
actions  and  behaviour,  as  which  was  base,  which  worthy ;  which
handsome,  and  which  deformed.  But  now  we  found  perjietual
variance  among  mankind,  whose  differences  were  chiefly  foimded
on  this  disagreement  in  opinion  ;  "  The  one  affirming,  the  other
denying  that  this,  or  that,  was  fit  or  decent."

Even  by  this,  then,  replied  he,  it  appears  there  is  fitness
and  decency  in  actions ;  since  the  fit  and  decent  is  in  this
controversy  ever  pre-supposed.  And  whilst  men  are  at  odds
about  the  subjects,  the  thing  itself  is  universally  agreed.  For
neither  is  there  agreement  in  judgments  about  other  beauties.
Inquiry,  bk.  i.  part  ii.  §  3.

137


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

'Tis  controverted  "  which  is  the  finest  pile,  the  lovehest  shape
or  fjxce":  but  without  controversy  'tis  allowed  "there  is  a
beauty  of  each  kind."  This  no  one  goes  about  to  teach  :  nor  is
it  learnt  by  any,  but  confessed  by  all.  All  own  the  standard,
rule,  and  measure :  but  in  applying  it  to  things  disorder  arises,
ignorance  prevails,  interest  and  passion  breed  disturbance.  Nor
can  it  otherwise  happen  in  the  affairs  of  life,  whilst  that  which
interests  and  engages  men  as  good,  is  thought  different  from
that  which  they  admire  and  praise  as  honest.  But  with  us,
rhilocles,  'tis  better  settled,  since  for  our  parts  we  have  already
decreed  "  that  beauty  and  good  are  still  the  same."

I  remember,  said  I,  what  you  forced  me  to  acknowledge
more  than  once  before.  And  now,  good  Theocles,  that  I  am
become  so  willing  a  disciple,  I  want  not  so  much  to  be  con-
vinced, methinks,  as  to  be  confirmed  and  strengthened.  And  I
hope  this  last  work  may  prove  your  easiest  task.

Not  unless  you  help  in  it  yourself,  replied  Theocles,  for  this
is  necessary  as  well  as  becoming.  It  had  been  indeed  shameful
for  you  to  have  yielded  without  making  good  resistance.  To
help  oneself  to  be  convinced  is  to  prevent  reason,  and  bespeak
error  and  delusion.  But  upon  fair  conviction  to  give  our  heart
up  to  the  evident  side,  and  reinforce  the  impression,  this  is  to
help  reason  heartily.  And  thus  we  may  be  said  honestly  to
persuade  ourselves.  Show  me  then  how  I  may  best  persuade
myself.

Have  courage,  said  he,  Philocles  (raising  his  voice),  be  not
offended  that  I  say,  have  courage  !  'Tis  cowardice  alone  betrays
us.  For  whence  can  false  shame  be,  except  from  cowardice  ?
To  be  ashamed  of  what  one  is  sure  can  never  be  shameful,  must
needs  be  from  the  want  of  resolution.  We  seek  the  right  and
wrono;  in  things ;  we  examine  what  is  honourable,  w^hat  shame-
ful ;  and  having  at  last  determined,  we  dare  not  stand  to  our
own  judgment,  and  are  ashamed  to  own  there  is  really  a
shameful  and  an  honourable.  "  Hear  me "  (says  one  who
pretends  to  value  Philocles,  and  be  valued  by  him),  "  there  can

138


THE MORALISTS

be  no  sucli  thin<;  as  real  valiiablcness  or  worth  ;  nothiiii;  in
itself  estimable  or  amiable,  odious  or  shameful.  All  is  ojjinion.
'Tis  oj)iiiioii  which  makes  beauty,  and  unmakes  it.  'I'he
"graceful  or  uni^raceful  in  things,  the  decorum  and  its  contrary,
the  amiable  and  unamiable,  vice,  virtue,  honour,  shame,  all  this
is  founded  in  opinion  only.  Opinion  is  the  law  and  measure.
Nor  has  ojMuion  any  rule  besides  mere  chance,  which  varies  it,
as  custom  varies ;  and  makes  now  this,  now  that,  to  be  thought
worthy,  according  to  the  reign  of  fashion  and  the  ascendant
power  of  education."  What  shall  we  say  to  such  a  oner'  I  low-
represent  to  him  his  absurdity  and  extravagance.^  Will  he
desist  the  sooner.'^  Or  shall  we  ask,  what  shame,  of  one  who
acknowledges  no  shameful  ?  Yet  he  derides,  and  cries,
ridiculous  !  By  what  right  ?  what  title  .^  For  thus,  if  I  were
Philocles,  would  I  ilefend  myself :  "  x\m  I  ridiculous.?  As  how  ?
\Miat  is  ridiculous.?  Everything.?  or  nothing.?""  Ridiculous
indeed  !  liut  something,  then,  something  there  is  ridiculous ;
and  the  notion,  it  seems,  is  right,  "of  a  shameful  and  ridiculous
in  things.""

How  then  shall  we  ap]ily  the  notion  .?  For  this  being  wrong
applied,  cannot  itself  but  be  ridiculous.  Or  will  he  who  cries
shame  refuse  to  acknowledge  any  in  his  turn .?  Does  he  not
blush,  nor  seem  discountenanced  on  any  occasion .?  If  he  does,
the  case  is  very  distinct  from  that  of  mere  grief  or  fear.  The
disorder  he  feels  is  from  a  sense  of  what  is  shameful  and  odious
in  itself,  not  of  what  is  hurtful  or  dangerous  in  its  consequences.
For  the  o-reatest  dano;er  in  the  world  can  never  breed  shame ;
nor  can  the  opinion  of  all  the  world  compel  us  to  it,  where  our
own  opinion  is  not  a  party.  Wa  may  be  afraid  of  appearing
impudent,  and  may  therefore  feign  a  modesty,  liut  we  can
never  really  blush  for  anything  beside  what  we  think  truly
shameful,  and  what  we  should  still  blush  for  were  we  ever  so
secure  as  to  our  interest,  and  out  of  the  reach  of  all  incon-
venience which  could  hapjicn  to  us  from  the  thing  we  were
ashamed  of.

139


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Thus,  continued  he,  should  I  be  able  by  anticipation  to
defend  myself,  and  looking  narrowly  into  menu's  lives,  and  that
which  influenced  them  on  all  occasions,  I  should  have  testimony
enough  to  make  me  say  within  myself,  "  Let  who  will  be  my
adversary  in  this  opinion,  I  shall  find  him  some  way  or  other
prepossessed  with  that  of  which  he  would  endeavour  to  dis-
possess me."  Has  he  gratitude  or  resentment,  pride  or  shame  ?
\Vhichever  way  it  be,  he  acknowledges  a  sense  of  just  and
unjust,  worthy  and  mean.  If  he  be  grateful  or  expects
gratitude,  I  ask  "  why  ?  and  on  what  account  ? "  If  he  be
angry,  if  he  indulges  revenge,  I  ask  "  how  ?  and  in  what  case  ?
Revenged  of  what  ?  of  a  stone,  or  madman  ? ""  Who  is  so  mad  ?
"  But  for  what  ?  For  a  chance  hurt .''  an  accident  against
thought  or  intention.^"  Who  is  so  unjust .^  Therefore  there
is  just  and  "unjust;  and  belonging  to  it  a  natural  presumption
or  anticipation  on  which  the  resentment  or  anger  is  founded.
For  what  else  should  make  the  wickedest  of  mankind  often
prefer  the  interest  of  their  revenge  to  all  other  interests,  and
even  to  life  itself,  except  only  a  sense  of  wrong  natural  to  all
men,  and  a  desire  to  prosecute  that  wrong  at  any  rate  ?  Not
for  their  own  sakes,  since  they  sacrifice  their  very  being  to  it,
but  out  of  hatred  to  the' imagined  wrong  and  from  a  certain
love  of  justice,  which  even  in  unjust  men  is  by  this  example
shown  to  be  beyond  the  love  of  life  itself.

Thus  as  to  pride,  I  ask,  "  why  proud  ?  why  conceited  ?  and
of  what  ?  Does  any  one  who  has  pride  think  meanly  or  indif-
ferently of  himself?"  No;  but  honourably.  And  how  this,
if  there  be  no  real  honour  or  dignity  pre-supposed  ?  For  self-
valuation  supposes  self- worth ;  and  in  a  person  conscious  of
real  worth,  is  either  no  pride,  or  a  just  and  noble  one.  In  the
same  manner  self-contempt  supposes  a  self-meanness  or  de-
fectiveness; and  may  be  either  a  just  modesty  or  unjust
humility.  But  this  is  certain,  that  whoever  is  proud  must  be
proud  of  something.  And  we  know  that  men  of  thorough
pride  will be  proud  even  in  the  meanest  circumstances,  and

140


THE MORATJSTS

when  there  is  no  visible  subject  for  them  to  be  jiroud  of.  But
tliey  descry  a  merit  in  themselves  which  others  cannot :  and  "'tis
this  merit  they  admire.  No  matter  whether  it  be  really  in
tliem,  as  they  imagine,  it  is  a  worth  still,  an  honour  or  merit
which  they  admire,  and  would  do,  wherever  they  saw  it,  in  any
subject  besides.  For  then  it  is,  then  only,  that  they  are
humbled,  "  when  they  see  in  a  more  eminent  degree  in  others
what  they  respect  and  admire  so  nuich  in  themselves."  And
thus  as  long  as  I  iind  men  either  angry  or  revengeful,  proud  or
ashamed,  I  am  safe.  For  they  conceive  an  honourable  and  dis-
honourable, a  foul  and  fair,  as  well  as  I.  No  matter  where  they
place  it,  or  how  they  are  mistaken  in  it,  this  hinders  not  my  being
satisfied  "  that  the  thing  is,  and  is  universally  acknowledged  ;
that  it  is  of  nature's  impression,  naturally  conceived,  and
by  no  art  or  counter-nature  to  be  eradicated  or  destroyed.''"'

And  now,  what  say  you,  Philocles  (continued  he),  to  this
defence  I  have  been  making  for  you  ?  'Tis  grounded,  as  you
see,  on  the  supposition  of  your  being  deeply  engaged  in  this
philosophical  cause.  But  perhaps  you  have  yet  many  difficulties
to  get  over,  ere  you  can  so  far  take  part  with  beauty  as  to
make  this  to  be  your  good.

I  have  no  difficulty  so  great,  said  I,  as  not  to  be  easily
removed.  ]Vly  inclinations  lead  me  strongly  this  way,  for  I  am
ready  enough  to  yield  there  is  no  real  good  beside  the  enjoy-
ment of  beauty.  And  I  am  as  ready,  replied  Theocles,  to  yield
there  is  no  real  enjoyment  of  beauty  beside  what  is  good.
Excellent !  but  upon  reflection  I  fear  I  am  little  beholden  to
you  for  your  concession.  As  how  ?  Because  should  I  offer  to
contend  for  any  enjoyment  of  beauty  out  of  your  mental  way,
vou  would,  I  doubt,  call  such  enjoyment  of  mine  absurd,  as  you
did  once  before.  Undoubtedly  I  should.  For  what  is  it  should
enjoy  or  be  capable  of  enjoyment,  except  mind.''  or  shall  we
say,  body  enjoys  ?  By  the  help  of  sense,  perhaps,  not  otherwise.
Is  beauty,  then,  the  object  of  sense  .''  Say  how  ?  Which  way  ?
For  otherwise  the  help  of  sense  is  nothing  in  the  case;  and  if

141


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

body  be  of  itself  incapable,  and  sense  no  help  to  it  to  apprehend
or  enjoy  beauty,  there  remains  only  the  mind  which  is  capable
either  to  apprehend  or  to  enjoy.

True,  said  I,  but  show  me,  then,  "  Why  beauty  may  not  be
the  object  of  the  sense  ?  "  Show  me  first,  I  entreat  you,  "  Why,
where,  or  in  what  you  fancy  it  may  be  so  ?  "  Is  it  not  beauty
which  first  excites  the  sense,  and  feeds  it  afterwards  in  the
passion  Ave  call  love  ?  Say  in  the  same  manner,  "  That  it  is
beauty  first  excites  the  sense,  and  feeds  it  afterwards  in  the
passion  we  call  hunger.'"  .  .  .  You  will  not  say  it.  The
thought,  I  perceive,  displeases  you.  As  great  as  the  pleasure
is  of  good  eating,  you  disdain  to  apply  the  notion  of  beauty
to  the  good  dishes  which  create  it.  You  would  hardly  have
applauded  the  preposterous  fancy  of  some  luxurious  Romans
of  old,  who  could  relish  a  fricassee  the  better  for  hearing  it  was
composed  of  birds  which  wore  a  beautiful  feather  or  had  sung
deliciously.  Instead  of  being  incited  by  such  a  historical
account  of  meats,  you  would  be  apt,  I  believe,  to  have  less
appetite  the  more  you  searched  their  origin,  and  descended
into  the  kitchen  science,  to  learn  the  several  forms  and  changes
they  had  undergone  ere  they  were  served  at  this  elegant
voluptuous  table.  But  though  the  kitchen  forms  be  ever  so
disgraceful,  you  will  allow  that  the  materials  of  the  kitchen,
such,  for  instance,  as  the  garden  furnishes,  are  really  fair  and
beautiful  in  their  kind.  Nor  will  you  deny  beauty  to  the  wild
field,  or  to  these  flowers  which  grow  around  us  on  this  verdant
couch.  And  yet,  as  lovely  as  are  these  forms  of  Nature,  the
shining  grass  or  silvered  moss,  the  flowery  thyme,  wild  rose  or
honeysuckle ;  'tis  not  their  beauty  allures  the  neighbouring
herds,  delights  the  bro wising  fawn  or  kid,  and  spreads  the  joy
we  see  amidst  the  feeding  flocks ;  'tis  not  the  form  rejoices,
but  that  which  is  beneath  the  form ;  'tis  savouriness  attracts,
hunger  impels,  and  thirst  better  allayed  by  the  clear  brook
than  the  thick  puddle,  makes  the  fair  nymph  to  be  preferred,
whose  form  is  otherwise  slighted. For  never  can  the  form  be

142


THE MORALISTS

of  real  force  where  it  is  unconteinplated,  un|ucl<;efl  of,  un-
examined, and  stands  only  as  the  accidental  note  or  token  of
what  appeases  provoked  sense,  and  satisfies  the  brutish  })art.
Are  you  persuaded  of  this,  good  Philocles?  or,  rather  than  not
give  brutes  the  advantage  of  enjoyment,  will  you  allow  them
also  a  mind  and  rational  part  i

Not  so,  I  told  him.

If  brutes,  therefore,  said  lie,  be  incapable  of  knowing  and
enjoying  beauty,  as  being  brutes,  and  having  sense  only  (the
brutish  part)  for  their  own  share,  it  follows  "  that  neither  can
man  by  the  same  sense  or  brutish  part  conceive  or  enjoy  beauty;
but  all  the  beauty  and  good  he  enjoys  is  in  a  nobler  way,  and
by  the  help  of  what  is  noblest,  his  mind  and  reason."  Here
lies  his  dignity  and  highest  interest,  here  his  capacity  toward
good  and  happiness.  His  ability  or  incompetency,  his  power
of  enjoyment  or  his  impotence,  is  founded  in  this  alone.  As
this  is  sound,  fair,  noble,  worthy,  so  are  its  subjects,  acts  and
employments.  For  as  the  riotous  mind,  captive  to  sense,  can
never  enter  in  competition,  or  contend  for  beauty  with  the
virtuous  mind  of  reason's  culture  ;  so  neither  can  the  objects
which  allure  the  former  compare  with  those  which  attract  and
charm  the  latter.  And  when  each  gratifies  itself  in  the  enjoy-
ment and  possession  of  its  object,  how  evidently  fairer  are  the
acts  which  join  the  latter  pair,  and  give  a  soul  the  enjoyment
of  what  is  generous  and  good  .^  This  at  least,  Philocles,  vou
will  surely  allow,  that  when  you  place  a  joy  elsewhere  than  in
the  mind,  the  enjoyment  itself  will  be  no  beautiful  subject,  nor
of  any  graceful  or  agreeable  appearance.  But  when  you  think
how  friendship  is  enjoyed,  how  honour,  gratitude,  candour,
benignity,  and  all  internal  beauty ;  how  all  the  social  j^leasures,
society  itself,  and  all  which  constitutes  the  worth  and  happiness
of  mankind ;  you  will  here  surely  allow  beauty  in  the  act,  and
think  it  worthy  to  be  viewed  and  passed  in  review  often  by
the  glad  mind,  happily  conscious  of  the  generous  part,  and  of
its  own  advancement  and  growth  in  beauty.

143


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Thus,  Pliilocles  (continued  he,  after  a  short  pause),  thus
have  I  presumed  to  treat  of  beauty  before  so  great  a  judge,  and
such  a  skilful  admirer  as  yourself.  For,  taking  rise  from  Nature''s
beauty,  which  transported  me,  I  gladly  ventured  further  in  the
chase,  and  have  accompanied  you  in  search  of  beauty,  as  it
relates  to  us,  and  makes  our  highest  good  in  its  sincere  and
natural  enjoyment.  And  if  we  have  not  idly  spent  our  hours,
nor  ranged  in  vain  through  these  deserted  regions,  it  should
appear  from  our  strict  search  that  there  is  nothing  so  divine
as  beauty,  which  belonging  not  to  body,  nor  having  any  prin-
ciple or  existence  except  in  mind  and  reason,  is  alone  discovered
and  acquired  by  this  diviner  part,  when  it  inspects  itself,  the  only
object  worthy  of  itself.  For  whatever  is  void  of  mind,  is  void
and  darkness  to  the  mind's  eye.  This  languishes  and  grows
dim  whenever  detained  on  foreign  subjects,  but  thrives  and
attains  its  natural  vigour  when  employed  in  contemplation  of
what  is  like  itself.  'Tis  thus  the  improving  mind,  shghtly
surveying  other  objects,  and  passing  over  bodies  and  the  common
forms  (where  only  a  shadow  of  beauty  rests),  ambitiously  presses
onward  to  its  source,  and  views  the  original  of  form  and  order
in  that  which  is  intelligent.  And  thus,  O  Philocles,  may  we
improve  and  become  artists  in  the  kind ;  learning  "  to  know
ourselves,  and  what  that  is,  which  by  improving,  we  may  be
sure  to  advance  our  worth  and  real  self-interest."  For  neither
is  this  knowledge  acquired  by  contemplation  of  bodies,  or  the
outward  forms,  the  view  of  pageantries,  the  study  of  estates
and  honours ;  nor  is  he  to  be  esteemed  that  self-improving
artist  who  makes  a  fortune  out  of  these,  but  he  (he  only)  is  the
wise  and  able  man,  who  with  a  slight  regard  to  these  things,
applies  himself  to  cultivate  another  soil,  builds  in  a  different
matter  from  that  of  stone  or  marble  ;  and  having  righter  models
in  his  eye,  becomes  in  truth  the  architect  of  his  own  life  and
fortune,  by  laying  within  himself  the  lasting  and  sure  founda-
tions of  order,  peace,  and  concord.  .  .  .  But  now  'tis  time  to
think  of  returning  home. The  morning  is  far  spent. Come  !

144


THE INIORALISTS

let  us  away  and  leave  these  uncommon  subjects,  till  we  retire
again  to  these  remote  and  unfrequented  places.

At  these  words  Theocles,  mending  his  pace,  and  going  down
the  liill,  left  me  at  a  good  distance,  till  he  heard  me  calling
earnestly  after  him.  Having  joined  him  once  again,  I  begged
he  would  stay  a  little  longer,  or  if  ho  were  resolved  so  soon  to
leave  both  the  woods  and  that  philosophy  which  he  confined  to
them,  that  he  would  let  me,  however,  part  with  them  more
gradually,  and  leave  the  best  impression  on  me  he  could  against
my  next  return.  For  as  much  convinced  as  I  was,  and  as  great
a  convert  to  his  doctrine,  my  danger  still,  I  owned  to  him,  was
very  great,  and  I  foresaw  that  when  the  charm  of  these  places
and  his  company  was  ceased,  I  should  be  apt  to  relapse  and
weakly  yield  to  that  too  powerful  charm,  the  world.  Tell  me,
continued  I,  how  is  it  possible  to  hold  out  against  it  and  with-
stand the  general  opinion  of  mankind,  who  have  so  different  a
notion  of  that  which  we  call  good  ?  Say  truth  now,  Theocles,
can  anything  be  more  odd  or  dissonant  from  the  common  voice
of  the  world  than  what  we  have  determined  in  this  matter?

Whom  shall  we  follow,  then  ?  replied  he.  AVhose  judgment
or  opinion  shall  we  take  concerning  wliat  is  good,  wliat  contrary  ?
If  all  or  any  part  of  mankind  are  consonant  with  themselves,
and  can  agree  in  this,  I  am  content  to  leave  philosophy  and
follow  them.  If  otherwise,  why  should  we  not  adhere  to  what
we  have  chosen  ?  .  .  .  Let  us,  then,  in  another  view  consider
how  this  matter  stands.

Section* III

We  then  walked  gently  homewards  (it  being  almost  noon),  and
he  continued  his  discourse.

One  man,  said  he,  affects  the  hero,  esteems  it  the  highest
advantage  of  life  to  have  seen  war  and  been  in  action  in  the
field. Another  laughs  at  this  humour,  counts  it  all  extrava-
gance and  folly,  prizes  his  own  wit  and  prudence,  and  would
VOL.  II  145  L


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

take  it  for  a  disgrace  to  be  thought  adventurous.  One  person
is  assiduous  and  indefatigable  in  advancing  himself  to  the
character  of  a  man  of  business.  Another,  on  the  contrary,
thinks  this  impertinent ;  values  not  fame  or  a  character  in  the
world,  and  by  his  goodwill  would  always  be  in  a  debauch,  and
never  live  out  of  the  stews  or  taverns,  where  he  enjoys,  as  he
thinks,  his  highest  good.  One  values  wealth  as  a  means  onlv
to  indulge  his  palate  and  to  eat  finely.  Another  loathes  this,
and  affects  popularity  and  a  name.  One  admires  music  and
paintings,  cabinet  curiosities  and  in-door  ornaments.  Another
admires  gardens,  architecture,  and  the  pomp  of  buildings.
Another,  who  has  no  gusto  of  either  sort,  believes  all  those
they  call  virtuosi  to  be  half-distracted.  One  looks  upon  all
expense  to  be  madness,  and  thinks  only  wealth  itself  to  be  good.
One  games ;  another  dresses  and  studies  an  equipage ;  another
is  full  of  heraldry,  points  of  honour,  a  family,  and  a  blood.
One  recommends  gallantry  and  intrigue ;  another,  ordinary
good-fellowship ;  another,  buffoonery,  satire,  and  the  common
wit  ;  another,  sports  and  the  country  ;  another,  a  court  ;
another,  travelling  and  the  sight  of  foreign  parts ;  another,
poetry  and  the  fashionable  learning.  .  .  .  All  these  go  different
ways.  All  censure  one  another,  and  are  despicable  in  one
another's  eyes.  By  fits  too  they  are  as  despicable  in  their  own,
and  as  often  out  of  conceit  with  themselves  as  their  humour
changes  and  their  passion  turns  from  one  thing  to  another.  .  .  .
What  is  it,  then,  I  should  be  concerned  for  ?  Whose  censure
do  I  fear,  or  by  whom,  after  all,  shall  I  be  guided  ?

If  I  ask,  "  Are  riches  good  when  only  heaped  up  and  un-
employed ?  "  one  answers,  "  They  are."  The  rest  deny.  "  How
is  it,  then,  they  are  to  be  employed  in  order  to  be  good  ? ""
All  disagree.  All  tell  me  different  things.  "  Since,  therefore,
riches  are  not  of  themselves  good  (as  most  of  you  declare),  and
since  there  is  no  agreement  among;  you  which  way  they  become
good,  why  may  not  I  hokl  it  for  my  opinion  that  they  are  neither
good  in  themselves  nor  directly  any  cause  or  means  of  good  ?  "

146


THE IMOKALISTS

If  thert'  be  those  wlio  wholly  despise  fame,  and  if  ai)i()i)<>-
those  who  covet  it  he  who  desires  it  for  one  thing  despises  it
for  another,  he  who  seeks  it  witli  some  men  despises  it  with
others,  why  may  not  I  say  "that  neither  do  I  know  how  any
fame  can  be  called  a  good  "  ?

If  of  those  who  covet  })leasiire,  they  who  admire  it  in  one
kind  are  superior  to  it  in  another,  why  may  not  I  say  "that
neither  do  I  know  which  of  these  pleasures,  or  how  pleasure
itself,  can  be  called  good  "'  ?

If  among  those  who  covet  life  ever  so  earnestly,  that  life
which  to  one  is  eligible  and  amiable  is  to  another  despicable
and  vile,  why  may  not  I  say  "  that  neither  do  I  know  how
life  itself  can  of  itself  be  thouoht  a  good  "  ?

In  the  meantime  this  I  know  certainly,  "  that  the  neces-
sary conse(|uence  of  esteeming  these  things  highly  is  to  be
a  slave,  and  consequently  miserable."  But  })erhaps,  Philocles,
you  are  not  yet  enough  acquainted  with  this  odd  kind  of
reasoning  ?

More,  said  I,  than  I  believe  you  can  easily  imagine.  I
perceived  the  goodly  lady,  your  celebrated  beauty,  was  about  to
appear  anew,  and  I  easily  knew  again  that  fair  face  of  liberty
which  I  had  seen  but  once  in  the  picture  ^  you  drew  yesterday
of  that  moral  dame.  I  can  assure  you  I  think  of  her  as  highly
as  possible,  and  find  that  without  her  help  to  raise  one  above
these  seemingly  essential  goods,  and  make  one  more  easy  and
indifferent  towards  life  and  towards  a  fortune,  "'twill  be  the
hardest  thing  in  the  world  to  enjoy  either.  Solicitude,  cares,
and  anxiety  will  be  multiplied  ;  and  in  this  unhappy  dependency
'tis  necessary  to  make  court  and  be  not  a  little  servile.  To
flatter  the  great,  to  bear  insults,  to  stoop  and  fawn  and  abjectly
resign  one's  sense  and  manhood — all  this  must  courageously  be
endured,  and  carried  off  with  as  free  an  air  and  good  counte-
nance as  possible  by  one  who  studies  greatness  of  this  sort,  who
knows  the  general  way  of  courts,  and  how  to  fix  unsteady
1  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  2  ;  and  Misc.  iv.  cli.  i.  ;  v.  cli.  iii.

147


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

fortune.  I  need  not  mention  the  envyings,  the  mistrusts,  and
jealousies

No,  truly,  said  he  (interrupting  me),  neither  need  you.
But  finding  you  so  sensible,  as  I  do,  of  this  unhappy  state,  and
of  its  inward  sores  (whatever  may  be  its  outward  looks),  how
is  it  possible  but  you  must  find  the  hapjiiness  of  that  other
contrary  state  ?  Can  you  not  call  to  mind  what  we  resolved
concerning  Nature  ?  Can  anything  be  more  desirable  than  to
follow  her?  Or  is  it  not  by  this  freedom  from  our  passions
and  low  interests  that  we  are  reconciled  to  the  goodly  order  of
the  universe,  that  we  harmonise  with  Nature,  and  live  in  friend-
ship both  with  God  and  man  ?

Let  us  compare,  continued  he,  the  advantages  of  each  state,
and  set  their  goods  one  against  another.  On  one  side,  those
which  we  found  were  uncertainly  so,  and  depended  both  on
fortune,  age,  circumstances,  and  humour ;  on  the  other  side,
those  which,  being  certain  themselves,  are  founded  on  the
contempt  of  those  others  so  uncertain.  Is  manly  libertv,
generosity,  magnanimity,  not  a  good  ?  May  we  not  esteem  as
happiness  that  self-enjoyment  which  arises  from  a  consistency
of  life  and  manners,  a  harmony  of  affections,  a  freedom  from
the  reproach  of  shame  or  guilt,  and  a  consciousness  of  worth
and  merit  with  all  mankind,  our  society,  country,  and  friends —
all  which  is  founded  in  virtue  only  ?  A  mind  subordinate  to
reason,  a  temper  humanised  and  fitted  to  all  natural  affections,
an  exercise  of  friendship  uninterrupted,  a  thorough  candour,
benignity,  and  good  nature,  with  constant  security,  tranquillity,
equanimity  (if  I  may  use  such  philosophical  terms),  are  not
these  ever  and  at  all  seasons  good  ?  Is  it  of  these  one  can  at
any  time  nauseate  and  grow  weary  ?  Are  there  any  particular
ages,  seasons,  places,  circumstances,  which  must  accompany
these  to  make  them  agreeable  ?  Are  these  variable  and  incon-
stant ?  Do  these,  by  being  ardently  beloved  or  sought,  occasion
any  disturbance  or  misery  ?  Can  these  be  at  any  time  over-
valued, or,  to  say  more  yet,  can  these  be  ever  taken  from  us,  or

148


THE MORALISTS

can  we  ever  he  hindered  in  the  enjoyment  of  them  unless  l)y
ourselves  ?  How  can  we  better  praise  the  goodness  of  Providence
than  in  this,  "That  it  has  jilaced  our  happiness  and  good  in
things  we  can  bestow  upon  ourselves"  ?

If  this  be  so,  said  I,  I  see  no  reason  we  have  to  accuse
Providence  on  any  account,  liut  men,  I  fear,  will  hardly  be
brought  to  this  good  temper  while  their  fancy  is  so  strong
as  it  naturally  is  towards  those  other  movable  goods.  And,
in  short,  if  we  may  depend  on  what  is  said  connnonly,  "All
good  is  merely  as  w^e  fancy  it.  'Tis  conceit  whicli  makes  it.
All  is  opinion  and  fancy  only.""

AVherefore,  then,  said  he,  do  we  act  at  any  time .''  Why
choose,  or  why  prefer  one  thing  to  another  t  You  w  ill  tell  me,
I  suppose,  'tis  because  we  fancy  it,  or  fancy  good  in  it.  Are  we
therefore  to  follow  every  present  fancy,  opinion,  or  imagination
of  good .''  If  so,  then  we  must  follow  that  at  one  time  which
we  decline  at  another,  approve  at  one  time  what  we  disapprove
at  another,  and  be  at  ])erpetual  variance  with  ourselves.  But
if  we  are  not  to  follow  all  fancy  or  opinion  alike,  if  it  be  allowed
"that  of  fancies,  some  are  true,  some  false,"  then  we  are  to
examine  every  fancy  ;  and  there  is  some  rule  or  other  by  which
to  judge  and  determine.  'Twas  the  fancy  of  one  man  to  set
fire  to  a  beautiful  temple,  in  order  to  obtain  immortal  memory
or  fame.  ""Twas  the  fancy  of  another  man  to  conquer  the  world
for  the  same  reason,  or  what  was  very  like  it.  If  this  were  really
the  man''s  good,  whv  do  we  wonder  at  him  ?  If  the  fancy  were
wrong,  say  plainly  in  what  it  Avas  so,  or  why  the  subject  was
not  good  to  him  as  he  fancied .''  Either,  therefore,  "  that  is
every  man's  good  which  he  fancies,  and  because  he  fancies  it  and
is  not  content  without  it,"  or  otherwise,  "  there  is  that  in  which
the  nature  of  man  is  satisfied,  and  which  alone  must  be  his
good."  If  that  in  which  the  nature  of  man  is  satisfied  and  can
rest  contented  be  alone  his  good,  then  he  is  a  fool  who  follows
that  with  earnestness  as  his  good  which  a  man  can  be  without,
and  yet  be  satisfied  and  contented. In  the  same  manner  is  he

149


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

a  fool  who  flies  that  earnestly  as  his  ill  which  a  man  may
endure  and  yet  be  easy  and  contented.  Now  a  man  may
possibly  not  have  burnt  a  temple  (as  Erostratus)  and  yet  may
be  contented.  Or  though  he  may  not  have  conquered  the  world
(as  Alexander)  yet  he  may  be  easy  and  contented,  as  he  may
still  without  any  of  those  advantages  of  power,  riches,  or
renown,  if  his  fancy  hinders  not.  In  short,  we  shall  find  "  that
without  any  one  of  those  which  are  commonly  called  goods,  a
man  may  be  contented."  As,  on  the  contrary,  "  he  may  possess
them  all,  and  still  be  discontented  and  not  a  jot  the  happier.""
If  so,  it  '  follows  "  that  happiness  is  from  within,  not  from
without.""  A  good  fancy  is  the  main.  And  thus  you  see  I
agree  with  you  "  that  opinion  is  all  in  all."  ^  But  what  is  this,
Philocles,  which  has  seized  you  ?  You  seem  of  a  sudden  grown
deeply  thoughtful.

To  tell  you  truth,  said  I,  I  was  considering  what  would
become  of  me  if  after  all  I  should,  by  your  means,  turn  philo-
sopher. The  change,  truly,  would  be  somewhat  extraordinary,
replied  Theocles.  But  be  not  concerned.  The  danger  is  not
so  great.  And  experience  shows  us  every  day  that  for  talking
or  writing  philosophy,  people  are  not  at  all  the  nearer  being
philosophers.

But,  said  I,  the  very  name  is  a  kind  of  reproach.  The  word
idiot  stood  formerly  as  the  opposite  to  philosopher,  but  now-
adays it  means  nothing  more  commonly  than  the  philosopher
himself.

Yet,  in  effect,  replied  he,  what  else  is  it  we  all  do  in  general
than  philosophise  ?  If  philosophy  be,  as  we  take  it,  the  study
of  happiness,  must  not  every  one,  in  some  manner  or  other,  either
skilfully  or  unskilfully  philosophise  ?  Is  not  every  deliberation
concerning  our  main  interest,  every  correction  of  our  taste,
every  choice  and  preference  in  life  to  be  reckoned  of  this  kind  ?
For  "if  happiness  be  not  allowed  to  be  from  self  and  from
within,  then  either  is  it  from  outward  things  alone,  or  from  self
^  Advice  to  a7i  Author,  part  iii.  §  2  ;  Midc.  iv.  ch.  i.

150


THE MORALISTS

and  outward  things  together."  If  from  outward  things  alone,
show  it  us  in  fact  "  that  all  men  are  happy  in  proportion  to
these,  and  that  no  one  who  possesses  them  is  ever  miserable  by
his  own  fault."  But  this,  it  seems,  hardly  any  one  will  pretend
to  evince.  All  own  the  contrary.  Therefore  "if  happiness  be
partly  from  self,  partly  froni  outward  things,  then  each  must
be  considered,  and  a  certain  value  set  on  the  concerns  of  an
inward  kind,  and  which  depend  on  self  alone."  If  so,  and  that
I  consider  "how,  and  in  what  these  are  to  be  preferred;  when
and  on  what  occasion  they  are  in  season  or  out  of  season  ;  when
properly  to  take  place,  when  to  yield,"  what's  this  after  all  but
to  philosophise  ''!  Yet  even  this,  still,  is  enough  to  put  one  out
of  the  ordinary  way  of  thinking,  and  give  one  an  unhappy  turn
for  business  and  the  world.  Right !  For  this  also  is  to  be
considered  and  well  weighed.  And  therefore  this  still  is  philo-
sophy, "  to  inquire  where,  and  in  what  respect  one  may  be  most
a  loser ;  which  are  the  greatest  gains,  the  most  profitable
exchanges,"  since  everything  in  this  world  goes  by  exchange.
Nothing  is  had  for  nothing.  Favour  requires  courtship  ;  interest
is  made  by  solicitation ;  honours  are  acquired  with  hazard ;
riches  with  pains ;  learning  and  accomplishments  by  study  and
application.  Security,  rest,  indolence  are  to  be  had  at  other
prices.  They  may  be  thought,  perhaps,  to  come  easy.  For
"  what  hardship  is  there  'i  AVhere  is  the  harm  ?  'Tis  only  to
abate  of  fame  and  fortune.  'Tis  only  to  waive  the  point  of
honour  and  share  somewhat  less  of  interest.  If  this  be  easy,
all  is  well.  Some  patience,  you  see,  is  necessary  in  the  case.
Privacy  must  be  endured ;  even  obscurity  and  contempt.  Such
are  the  conditions.  And  thus  everything  has  its  condition.
Power  and  preferments  are  to  be  had  at  one  rate,  pleasures  at
another,  liberty  and  honesty  at  another.  A  good  mind  must
be  paid  for  as  other  things.

But  we  had  best  beware  lest,  perhaps,  we  pay  too  dear  for
it.  Let  us  be  assured  we  have  a  good  bargain.  Come  on  then.
.  .  .  Let  us  account.  ..."  AMiat  is  a  mind worth  '<! AVhat

151


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

allowance  may  one  handsomely  make  for  it  ?  or  Avhat  may  one
well  afford  it  for  ? "  .  .  .  If  I  part  with  it,  or  abate  of  it,  "'tis
not  for  nothing.  Some  value  I  must  needs  set  upon  my  liberty,
some  upon  my  inward  character.  Something  there  is  in  what
we  call  worth,  something  in  sincerity  and  a  sound  heart.
Orderly  affections,  generous  thoughts,  and  a  commanding
reason  are  fair  possessions,  not  slightly  to  be  given  up.  I  am
to  consider  first  "  what  may  be  their  equivalent  ?  Whether  I
shall  find  my  account  in  letting  these  inward  concerns  run  as
they  please,  or  whether  I  shall  not  be  better  secured  against
fortune  by  adjusting  matters  at  home,  rather  than  by  making
interest  abroad,  and  acquiring  first  one  great  friend,  then
another,  to  add  still  more  and  more  to  my  estate  or  quality  ? "
For  where  am  I  to  take  up  ?  Begin  and  set  the  bounds.  Let
me  hear  positively  "  how  far  I  am  to  go,  and  why  no  further  ? ""
What  is  a  moderate  fortune,  a  competency,  and  those  other
degrees  commonly  talked  of  ?  Where  is  my  anger  to  stop  ?  or
how  high  may  I  suffer  it  to  rise  ?  How  far  may  I  engage  in
love .''  How  far  give  way  to  ambition  ?  How  far  to  other
appetites  ?  Or  am  I  to  let  all  loose  ?  Are  the  passions  to  take
their  swing,  and  no  application  to  be  given  to  them,  but  all  to
the  outward  things  they  aim  at  ?  Or  if  any  application  be
requisite,  say  plainly  "how  much  to  one,  and  how  much  to
the  other  ?  "  How  far  are  the  appetites  to  be  minded,  and  how
far  outward  things  ?  Give  us  the  measure  and  rule.  See
whether  this  be  not  to  philosophise  ?  and  whether  willingly  or
unwillingly,  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  directly  or  indirectly,
every  one  does  not  as  much  ?  "  Where,  then,  is  the  difference  ?
Which  manner  is  the  best  ?  "  Here  lies  the  question.  This  is
what  I  would  have  you  weigh  and  examine.  "  But  the  ex-
amination (say  you)  is  troublesome,  and  I  had  better  be  without
it."  Who  tells  you  thus  ?  Your  reason,  you  say,  whose  force,
of  necessity,  you  must  yield  to.""  Tell  me,  therefore,  have  you
fitly  cultivated  that  reason  of  yours,  polished  it,  bestowed  the
necessary  pains  on  it,  and  exercised  it  on  this  subject.'* Oris

152


THE MORALISTS

it  like  to  (letcrniine  full  as  well  when  unexercised  as  when
thoroughly  exercised  or  ever  so  ex])ert  ?  Consider,  pray,  in
mathematics  whose  is  the  better  reason  of  the  two,  and  fitter
to  be  relied  on  ?  The  practiser's,  or  his  who  is  unpractised  ?
Whose  in  the  way  of  war,  of  policy,  or  civil  affairs  ?  Whose  in
merchandise,  law,  physic  ?  And  in  morality  and  life,  I  ask
still,  whose?  ^lay  he  not,  perhaps,  be  allowed  the  best  judge
of  living  who  studies  life  and  endeavours  to  form  it  bv  some
rule?  Or  is  he  indeed  to  be  esteemed  most  knowing  in  the
matter  who  slightly  examines  it,  and  who  accidentally  and
unknowingly  philosophises  ?

Thus,  Philocles,  said  he,  concluding  his  discovu'se,  thus  is
philosoj)hy  established.  For  every  one,  of  necessitv,  must  reason
concerning  his  own  happiness  "  what  his  good  is  and  what  his
ill."  The  question  is  only  "who  reasons  best?"  For  even  he
who  rejects  this  reasoning  or  deliberating  part  does  it  from  a
certain  reason,  and  from  a  persuasion  "  that  this  is  best."

By  this  time  we  found  ourselves  insensibly  got  home.  Our
philosophy  ended,  and  we  returned  to  the  common  affairs  of
life.


153


I


TUEATISK VI


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

On  the  preceding  Treatises,  etc.


Scilicet  uiii  atMiuus  Mrtuti  atcjue  ejus  amicis.

Hor.  Sot.  I.  ii.


Printed  first  in  tlie  year  MDCCXI.


'  [In  many  of  the  later  editions  tins  date  is  wronj^ly  given  as  1714.
The  Miscellaneous  Reflections  actually  appeared  in  1711,  making  the  third
volume  of  the  Characteristics.']


MISCELLANY I


CHAPTER I

Of  the  nature,  rise,  and  estahlisliment  of  Miscellanies — 'Hie  su]»ject  of
these  which  follow — Intention  of  tlie  writer.

Peace  be  with  the  soul  of  that  charitable  and  courteous  author
who,  for  the  coiumon  benefit  of  his  fellow-authors,  introiluced
the  ingenious  way  of  miscellaneous  writin<^  !  It  must  be  owned
that  since  this  happy  method  was  established,  the  harvest
of  wit  has  been  more  plentiful,  and  the  labourers  more  in
number  than  heretofore.  'Tis  well  known  to  the  able  practi-
tioners in  the  writing  art  "  that  as  easy  as  it  is  to  conceive
wit,  "'tis  the  hardest  thing  imaginable  to  be  delivered  of  it,
upon  certain  terms."  Nothing  could  be  more  severe  or  rigid
than  the  conditions  formerly  prescribed  to  writers,  when
criticism  took  place,  and  regularity  and  order  were  thought
essential  in  a  treatise.  The  notion  of  a  genuine  work,  a
legitimate  and  just  piece,  has  certainly  been  the  occasion  of
great  timiditv  and  backwardness  among  the  adventurers  in  wit ;
and  the  imposition  of  such  strict  laws  and  rules  of  composition
has  sat  heavy  on  the  free  spirits  and  forward  geniuses  of  mankind.
""Twas  a  yoke,  it  seems,  which  our  forefathers  bore,  but  \\hich,
for  our  parts,  we  have  generously  thrown  off.  In  effect,  the
invidious  distinctions  of  bastardy  and  legitimacy  being  at  length
removed,  the  natural  and  lawful  issue  of  the  brain  comes  with

157


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

like  advantage  into  the  world,  and  wit  (mere  wit)  is  well
received  without  examination  of  the  kind  or  censure  of  tlifi
form.

This  the  miscellaneous  manner  of  writing,  it  must  be  owned,
has  happily  effected.  It  has  rendered  almost  every  soil  pro-
ductive. It  has  disclosed  those  various  seeds  of  wit  which  lay
suppressed  in  many  a  bosom,  and  has  reared  numberless  con-
ceits and  curious  fancies  which  the  natural  rudeness  and
asperity  of  their  native  soil  would  have  withheld,  or  at  least  not
have  permitted  to  rise  above  the  ground.  From  every  field,
from  every  hedge  or  hillock,  we  now  gather  as  delicious  fruits
and  fragrant  flowers  as  of  old  from  the  richest  and  best
cultivated  gardens.  Miserable  were  those  ancient  planters  who,
understanding  not  how  to  conform  themselves  to  the  rude  taste
of  unpolished  mankind,  made  it  so  difficult  a  task  to  serve  the
world  with  intellectual  entertainments,  and  furnish  out  the
repasts  of  literature  and  science.

There  was  certainly  a  time  when  the  name  of  author  stood
for  something  considerable  in  the  world.  To  succeed  happily  in
such  a  labour  as  that  of  writing  a  treatise  or  a  poem  was  taken
as  a  sure  mark  of  understanding  and  good  sense.  The  task
was  painful,  but,  it  seems,  'twas  honourable.  How  the  case
happened  in  process  of  time  to  be  so  much  reversed  is  hard  to
say.  The  primitive  authors  perhaps  being  few  in  number  and
highly  respected  for  their  art,  fell  under  the  weight  of  envy.
Being  sensible  of  their  misfortune  in  this  respect,  and  being
excited,  as  'tis  probable,  by  the  example  of  some  popular  genius,
they  quitted  their  regular  schemes  and  accurate  forms  of  work-
manship in  favour  of  those  wits  who  could  not  possibly  be  received
as  authors  upon  such  difficult  terms.  'Twas  necessary,  it  seems,
that  the  bottom  of  wit  should  be  enlarged.  'Twas  advisable
that  more  hands  should  be  taken  into  the  work,  and  nothing
could  better  serve  this  popular  purpose  than  the  way  of
miscellany  or  common  essay,  in  which  the  most  confused  head,
if  fraught  with  a  little  invention  and  provided  with  common-

158


MISCELT.ANEOUS REFLECTIONS

place  book  learning,  might  exert  itself  to  as  much  advantage  as
the  most  orderly  and  well -settled  judgment.

To  explain  the  better  how  this  revolution  in  letters  has  been
effected,  it  mav  not  perhaps  be  indecent  should  wc  offer  to
conij)are  our  writing  artists  to  the  manufacturers  in  stuff'  or
silk.  For  among  these  "'tis  esteemed  a  principal  ])iece  of  skill
to  frame  a  pattern  or  plan  of  workmanship  in  which  the
several  colours  are  agreebly  disposed,  with  such  }n-oj)ortionable
adjustment  of  the  various  figures  and  devices  as  mav,  in  the
whole,  create  a  kind  of  harmony  to  the  eye.  According  to  this
method  each  piece  must  be  in  reality  an  original.  For  to
copy  what  has  gone  before  can  be  of  no  use.  The  fraud  would
easily  be  perceived.  On  the  other  side,  to  work  originally,  and
in  a  manner  create  each  time  anew,  must  be  a  matter  of  ]:)ress-
ing  weight,  and  fitted  to  the  strength  and  caj)acitv  of  none
besides  the  choicest  workmen.

A  manner  therefore  is  invented  to  confound  this  simplicity
and  conformity  of  design ;  patchwork  is  substituted  ;  cuttings
and  shreds  of  learning,  with  various  fragments  and  points  of  wit,
are  drawn  together  and  tacked  in  any  fantastic  form.  If  they
chance  to  cast  a  lustre  and  spread  a  sort  of  sprightly  glare,  the
miscellany  is  approved  and  the  complex  form  and  texture  of
the  work  admired.  The  eye,  which  before  was  to  be  won  by
regularity,  and  had  kept  true  to  measure  and  strict  proportion,
is  by  this  means  pleasingly  drawn  aside  to  commit  a  kind  of
debauch  and  amuse  itself  in  oaudv  colours  and  disfio-ured
shapes  of  things.  Custom  in  the  meanwhile  has  not  only
tolerated  this  licentiousness,  but  rendered  it  even  commend-
able, and  brought  it  into  the  highest  repute.  The  wild  and
whimsical,  under  the  name  of  the  odd  and  pretty,  succeed  in  the
room  of  the  graceful  and  the  beautiful.  Justness  and  accuracy
of  thought  are  set  aside  as  too  constraining  and  of  too  painful
an  aspect  to  be  endured  in  the  agreeable  and  more  easy  com-
merce of  gallantry  and  modern  wit.

Now  since  it  has  been  thought  convenient  in  these  latter

159


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

ages  to  distinguish  the  provinces  of  wit  and  wisdom  and  set
apart  the  agreeable  from  the  useful,  'tis  evident  there  could  be
nothing  devised  more  suitable  to  the  distinct  and  separate
interest  of  the  former  of  these  provinces  than  this  complex
manner  of  performance  which  we  call  miscellany.  For  whatever
is  capricious  and  odd  is  sure  to  create  diversion  to  those  who
look  no  further.  And  where  there  is  nothing  like  nature,  there
is  no  room  for  the  troublesome  part  of  thought  or  contempla-
tion. 'Tis  the  perfection  of  certain  grotesque  painters  to  keep
as  far  from  nature  as  possible.  To  find  a  likeness  in  their
works  is  to  find  the  greatest  fault  imaginable.  A  natural  con-
nection is  a  slur.  A  coherence,  a  design,  a  meaning  is  against
their  purpose,  and  destroys  the  very  spirit  and  genius  of  their
workmanship.

I  remember  formerly  when  I  was  a  spectator  in  the  French
theatre  I  found  it  the  custom  at  the  end  of  every  grave  and
solemn  tragedy  to  introduce  a  comic  farce  or  miscellany  which
they  called  the  little  piece.  We  have  indeed  a  method  still  more
extraordinary  upon  our  own  stage,  for  we  think  it  agreeable
and  just  to  mix  the  little  piece  or  farce  with  the  main  plot  or
fable  through  every  act.  This  perhaps  may  be  the  rather
chosen,  because  our  tragedy  is  so  much  deeper  and  bloodier
than  that  of  the  French,  and  therefore  needs  more  immediate
refreshment  from  the  elegant  way  of  drollery  and  burlesque
wit,  which,  being  thus  closely  interwoven  with  its  opposite,
makes  that  most  accomplished  kind  of  theatrical  miscellany,
called  by  our  poets  a  tragi-comedy.

I  could  go  further  perhaps,  and  demonstrate  from  the
writings  of  many  of  our  grave  divines,  the  speeches  of  our
senators,  and  other  principal  models  of  our  national  erudition
"  that  the  miscellaneous  manner  is  at  present  in  the  highest
esteem."  But  since  my  chief  intention  in  the  following  sheets
is  to  descant  cursorily  upon  some  late  pieces  of  a  British
author,  I  will  presume  that  what  I  have  said  already  on  this
head  is  sufficient,  and  that  it  will  not  be  judged  improper  or

160


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

absurd  in  me,  as  I  proceed,  to  take  advantage  of  this  miscel-
laneous taste  which  now  evidently  prevails.  According  to  this
method,  whilst  I  serve  as  critic  or  interpreter  to  this  new  writer,
I  may  the  better  correct  his  flegm,  and  give  him  more  of  the
fashionable  air  and  manner  of  the  world,  esj)ecially  in  what
relates  to  the  subject  and  manner  of  his  two  la.st  pieces,  which  are
contained  in  his  second  volume.  For  these  being  of  the  more
regular  and  formal  kind  may  easily  be  oppressive  to  the  airy
reader,  and  may  therefore  with  the  same  assurance  as  tragedy
claim  the  necessary  relief  of  the  little  piece  or  farce  above
mentioned.

Nor  ought  the  title  of  a  miscellaneous  writer  to  be  denied
me  on  the  account  that  I  have  grounded  my  miscellanies  upon
a  certain  set  of  treatises  already  published.  Grounds  and
foundations  are  of  no  moment  in  a  kind  of  work  which,  accord-
ing to  modern  establishment,  has  properly  neither  top  nor
bottom,  beginning  nor  end.  Besides  that,  I  shall  no  way  confine
myself  to  the  precise  contents  of  these  treatises,  but,  like  my
fellow-miscellanarians,  shall  take  occasion  to  vary  often  from
my  proposed  subject,  and  make  what  deA'iations  or  excursions  I
shall  think  fit,  as  I  proceed  in  my  random  essays.


CHAPTER II

Of  controversial  writings  :  answers  :  replies — Polemic  divinity,  or  the
writing  Churcli  militant — Philosophers,  and  bear  garden — Authors
paired  and  matched  —  The  matchmakers  —  Football  —  A  dialogue
between  our  author  and  his  bookseller.

Among  the  many  improvements  daily  made  in  the  art  of  writing,
there  is  none  perhaps  which  can  be  said  to  have  attained  a
greater  height  than  that  of  controversy  or  the  method  of  answer
and  refutation,  'Tis  true  indeed,  that  anciently  the  wits  of
men  were  for  the  most  part  taken  up  in  other  employment.
VOL.  II  IGl  M


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

If  authors  writ  ill  they  were  despised,  if  well  they  were  by  some
party  or  other  espoused.  For  parties  there  would  necessarily
be,  and  sects  of  every  kind  in  learning  and  philosophy.  Every
one  sided  with  whom  he  liked,  and  having  the  liberty  of  hearing
each  side  speak  for  itself,  stood  in  no  need  of  express  warning
pieces  against  pretended  sophistry  or  dangerous  reasoning.
Particular  answers  to  single  treatises  were  thought  to  be  of
little  use.  And  it  was  esteemed  no  compliment  to  a  reader  to
help  him  so  carefully  in  the  judgment  of  every  piece  which
came  abroad.  Whatever  sects  there  were  in  those  days,  the
zeal  of  party-causes  ran  not  so  high  as  to  give  the  reader  a
taste  of  those  personal  reproaches  which  might  pass  in  a  debate
between  the  different  party-men.

Thus  matters  stood  of  old,  when  as  yet  the  method  of
writing  controversy  was  not  raised  into  an  art,  nor  the  feuds  of
contending  authors  become  the  chief  amusement  of  the  learned
world.  But  we  have  at  present  so  high  a  relish  of  this  kind,
that  the  writings  of  the  learned  are  never  truly  gustful  till  they
are  come  to  what  we  may  properly  enough  call  their  due  ripe-
ness, and  have  begot  a  fray.  When  the  answer  and  reply  is
once  formed  our  curiosity  is  excited ;  we  begin  then,  for  the
first  time,  to  whet  our  attention  and  apply  our  ear.

For  example,  let  a  zealous  divine  and  flaming  champion  of
our  faith,  when  inclined  to  show  himself  in  print,  make  choice
of  some  tremendous  mystery  of  religion,  opposed  heretofore  by
some  damnable  heresiarch,  whom  having  vehemently  refuted,  he
turns  himself  towards  the  orthodox  opinion,  and  supports  the
true  belief,  with  the  highest  eloquence  and  profoundest  erudi-
tion ;  he  shall,  notwithstanding  this,  remain  perhaps  in  deep
obscurity,  to  the  great  affliction  of  his  bookseller  and  the  regret
of  all  who  bear  a  just  veneration  for  Church  history  and  the
ancient  purity  of  the  Christian  faith.  But  let  it  so  happen  that
in  this  prosecution  of  his  deceased  adversary  our  doctor  raises
up  some  living  antagonist,  who,  on  the  same  foot  of  orthodoxy
with  himself,  pretends  to  arraign  his  expositions,  and  refute  the

162


J


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

refuter  upon  every  article  he  has  advanced ;  from  this  moment
the  writing  gathers  life,  the  public  listens,  the  bookseller  takes
heart,  and  when  issue  is  well  joined,  the  repartees  grown  smart,
and  the  contention  vigorous  between  the  learned  parties,  a  ring
is  made  and  readers  gather  in  abundance.  Every  one  takes
party,  and  encourages  his  own  side.  "This  shall  be  my
champion  !  This  man  for  my  money  !  WqW  hit,  on  our  side  !
Affain,  a  good  stroke  !  There  he  was  even  with  him  !  Have
at  him  the  next  bout  ! "  Excellent  sport !  And  when  the
combatants  are  for  a  while  drawn  off  and  each  retired  with
his  own  companions,  what  praises  and  congi'atulations  !  what
applauses  of  the  supposed  victor !  .\nd  how  honourably  is  he
saluted  by  his  favourers,  and  conn)limented  even  to  the  dis-
turbance of  his  modesty  !  "  Nay,  but  gentlemen  !  Good
gentlemen  !  do  you  really  think  thus  ?  Are  you  sincere  with
me  ?  Have  I  treated  my  adversary  as  he  deserves  ?  Never  was
man  so  mauled.  Why,  you  have  killed  him  downright.  O
sirs  !  you  flatter  me.  He  can  never  rise  more.  Think  ye  so
indeed  ?  Or  if  he  should,  'twould  be  a  pleasure  to  see  how  you
would  handle  him."

These  are  the  triumphs.  This  is  what  sets  sharp  ;  this  gives
the  author  his  edge  and  excites  the  reader's  attention,  when  the
trumpets  are  thus  sounded  to  the  crowd,  and  a  kind  of  amphi-
theatrical  entertainment  exhibited  to  the  multitude  by  these
gladiatoricin  penmen.

The  author  of  the  preceding  treatises  being  by  profession  a
nice  inspector  into  the  ridicule  of  things,  must  in  all  probability
have  raised  to  himself  some  such  views  as  those  which  hindered
him  from  engaging  in  the  way  of  controversy.  For  when,  by
accident,  the  first  of  these  treatises^  (a  private  letter,  and  in
the  writer's  esteem  little  worthy  of  the  public's  notice)  came  to
be  read  abroad  in  copies,  and  afterwards  in  print,  the  smartest
answers  which  came  out  against  it  could  not,  it  seems,  move
our  author  to  form  any  reply.  All  he  was  heard  to  say  in
^  Viz.  the  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm.

163


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

return  was,  "  that  he  thought  whoever  had  taken  upon  him  to
pubhsh  a  book  in  answer  to  that  casual  piece,  had  certainly
made  either  a  very  high  compliment  to  the  author,  or  a  very  ill
one  to  the  public.'"'

It  must  be  owned  that  when  a  writer  of  any  kind  is  so
considerable  as  to  deserve  the  labour  and  pains  of  some  shrewd
heads  to  refute  him  in  public,  he  may,  in  the  quality  of  an
author,  be  justly  congratulated  on  that  occasion.  'Tis  supposed
necessarily  that  he  must  have  written  with  some  kind  of  ability
or  wit.  But  if  his  original  performance  be  in  truth  no  better
than  ordinary,  his  answerer's  task  must  certainly  be  very  mean.
He  must  be  very  indifferently  employed  who  would  take  upon
him  to  answer  nonsense  in  form,  ridicule  what  is  of  itself  a  jest,
and  put  it  upon  the  world  to  read  a  second  book  for  the  sake
of  the  impertinencies  of  a  former.

Taking  it,  however,  for  granted  "  that  a  sorry  treatise  may
be  the  foundation  of  a  considerable  answer,"  a  reply  still  must
certainly  be  ridiculous  whichever  way  we  take  it.  For  either
the  author,  in  his  original  piece,  has  been  truly  refuted  or  not.
If  refuted,  why  does  he  defend  ?  If  not  refuted,  why  trouble
himself?  What  has  the  public  to  do  with  his  private  quarrels
or  his  adversary's  impertinence  ?  Or  supposing  the  world,  out
of  curiosity,  may  delight  to  see  a  pedant  exposed  by  a  man  of
better  wit,  and  a  controversy  thus  unequally  carried  on  between
two  such  opposite  parties,  how  long  is  this  diversion  likely  to
hold  good .''  And  what  will  become  of  these  polemic  writings
a  few  years  hence  ?  What  is  already  become  of  those  mighty
controversies  with  which  some  of  the  most  eminent  authors
amused  the  world  within  the  memory  of  the  youngest  scholar  ?
An  original  work  or  two  may  perhaps  remain ;  but  for  the
subsequent  defences,  the  answers,  rejoinders,  and  replications,
they  have  been  long  since  paying  their  attendance  to  the  pastry-
cooks. Mankind  perhaps  were  heated  at  that  time  when  first
those  matters  were  debated ;  but  they  are  now  cool  again.
They laughed ;  they carried  on  the  humour ; they  blew  the

164


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

coals ;  they  teased,  and  set  on  maliciously,  and  to  create  them-
selves diversion.  But  the  jest  is  now  over.  No  one  so  much
as  incjuires  where  the  wit  was,  or  wliere  possibly  the  stinfij
should  lie  of  those  notable  reflections  and  satirical  hints  which
were  once  found  so  pungent,  and  gave  the  readers  such  high
delight.  Notable  philosoj)hers  and  divines,  who  can  be  con-
tented to  make  sport,  and  write  in  learned  Billinsgate  to  divert
the  coffee-house,  and  entertain  the  assemblies  at  booksellers"'
shops  or  the  more  airy  stalls  of  inferior  book  retailers  !

It  must  be  allowed  that  in  this  respect  controversial  writing
is  not  so  whollv  unprofitable,  and  that  for  book-merchants,  of
whatever  kind  or  degree,  they  undoubtedly  receive  no  small
advantage  from  a  right  improvement  of  a  learned  scufHe.
Nothing  revives  them  more,  or  makes  a  quicker  trade,  than  a
pair  of  substantial  divines  or  grave  philosophers,  well  matched
and  soundly  backed,  till  by  long  worrying  one  another  they
are  grown  out  of  breath  and  have  almost  lost  their  force  of
biting.  "  So  have  I  known  a  crafty  glazier,  in  time  of  frost,
procure  a  footfall  to  draw  into  the  street  the  emulous  chiefs  of
the  robust  youth.  The  tumid  liladder  bounds  at  every  kick,
bursts  the  withstanding  casements,  the  chassies,^  lanterns,  and
all  the  brittle  vitreous  ware.  The  noise  of  blows  and  outcries
fills  the  whole  neighbourhood,  and  ruins  of  glass  cover  the
stonv  pavements,  till  the  bloated  battering  engine,  subdued  by
force  of  foot  and  fist,  and  yielding  up  its  breath  at  many  a
fatal  crannv,  becomes  lank  and  harmless,  sinks  in  its  flight,  and
can  no  longer  uphold  the  spirit  of  the  contending  parties."

This  our  author  supposes  to  have  been  the  occasion  of  his
being  so  often  and  zealously  complimented  by  his  amanuensis
(for  so  he  calls  his  bookseller  or  printer-)  on  the  fame  of  his
first  piece.  The  obliging  craftsman  has  at  times  presented  him
with  many  a  handsome  book,  set  off  with  titles  of  remarks,
reflections,  and  the  like,  which,  as  he  assured  him,  were  answers
to  his  small  treatise. "  Here,  sir,  says  he,  you  have  a  consider-

^  [I.e.  window-frames. Fr.  chassie.]  -  Vol.  i.  p.  198.

165


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

able  hand  has  undertaken  you  ! — This,  sir,  is  a  reverend ;  this
a  right  reverend ;  this  a  noted  author.  Will  you  not  reply,
sir  ?  O'  my  word,  sir,  the  world  is  in  expectation.  Pity  they
should  be  disappointed  !  A  dozen  sheets,  sir,  would  be
sufficient !  You  might  dispatch  it  presently.  Think  you  so  ?
I  have  my  paper  ready — and  a  good  letter.  Take  my  word
for  it.  You  shall  see,  sir !  Enough.  But  hark  ye  (Mr.
A-a-a-a),  my  worthy  engineer  and  manager  of  the  war  of
letters,  ere  you  prepare  your  artillery  or  engage  me  in  acts  of
hostility,  let  me  hear,  I  entreat  you,  whether  or  no  my  adversary
be  taken  notice  of.  Wait  for  his  second  edition,  and  if  by
next  year,  or  a  year  or  two  after,  it  be  known  in  good  company
that  there  is  such  a  book  in  being,  I  shall  then  perhaps  think
it  time  to  consider  of  a  reply."'"'


CHAPTER  III

Of  the  letter  concerning  Enthusiasm  —  Foreign  critics — Of  letters  in
general^  and  of  the  epistolary  style  —  Addresses  to  great  men —
Authors  and  horsemanship — The  modern  amble  —  Further  explana-
tion of  the  miscellaneous  manner.

As  resolute  as  our  author  may  have  shown  himself  in  refusing
to  take  notice  of  the  smart  writings  published  against  him  by
certain  zealots  of  his  own  country,  he  could  not,  it  seems,  but
out  of  curiosity  observe  what  the  foreign  and  more  impartial
critics  might  object  to  his  small  treatise,  which  he  was  surprised
to  hear  had  been  translated  into  foreign  languages  soon  after  it
had  been  published  here  at  home.  The  first  censure  of  this
kind  which  came  to  our  author's  sight  was  that  of  the  Paris
Journal  des  Savans}  Considering  how  little  favourable  the
author  of  the  letter  had  shown  himself  towards  the  Romish
Church  and  policy  of  France,  it  must  be  owned  those  journalists

1  Du  25  mars  1709.

166


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

have  treated  him  with  sufficient  candour,  though  they  failed
not  to  take  what  advantages  tliey  well  could  against  the  writing,
and  particularly  arraigned  it  for  the  want  of  order  and  method.^

The  Protestant  writers,  such  as  live  in  a  free  country,  and
can  deliver  their  sentiments  without  constraint,  have  certainly  ^
done  our  author  more  honour  than  he  ever  presumed  to  think
he  could  deserve.  His  translator,  indeed,  who  had  done  him
the  previous  honour  of  introducing  him  to  the  acquaintance  of
the  foreign  world,  represents  particularly,  by  the  turn  given  to
the  latter  end  of  the  letter,  that  the  writer  of  it  was,  as  to  his
condition  and  rank,  little  better  than  an  inferior  dependent  on
the  noble  Lord  to  whom  he  had  addressed  himself.  And  in
reality  the  original  has  so  much  of  that  air  that  I  wonder  not,
if  what  the  author  left  ambiguous,  the  translator  has  determined
to  the  side  of  clientship  and  dependency.

But  whatever  may  have  been  the  circumstance  or  character
of  our  author  himself,  that  of  his  great  friend  ought  in  justice
to  have  been  considered  by  those  former  critics  above  mentioned.
So  much,  at  least,  should  have  been  taken  notice  of,  that  there
was  a  real  great  man  characterised  and  suitable  measures  of
address  and  style  preserved.  But  they  who  would  neither
observe  this  nor  apprehend  the  letter  itself  to  be  real,  w^ere
insufficient  critics,  and  uncjualified  to  judge  of  the  turn  or
humour  of  a  piece  which  they  had  never  considered  in  a  proper
light.

'Tis  become  indeed  so  connnon  a  practice  among  authors  to
feign  a  correspondency,  and  give  the  title  of  a  private  letter  to
a  piece  addressed  solely  to  the  public,  that  it  would  not  be
strange  to  see  other  journalists  and  critics,  as  well  as  the  gentle-
men of  Paris,  pass  over  such  particularities,  as  things  of  form.

^  "  Ses  pensees  iie  sembleut  occuper  dans  sou  ouvrage  que  la  place  que
le  hazard  leur  a  doiiuee." Ih.  p.  181.

2  (1)  Bihliothcque  C'hoisie,  anne'e  1709,  tome  xix.  p.  427.  (2)  Ilisfoire
des  Ouvrnges  des  Savans,  mois  d'octobre,  iiovembre,  et  decembre  1708,
p.  514. (.3)  Xouvelles  de  la  Republique  des  Lettren,  mois  de  mars  1710.

167


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

This  prejudice,  however,  could  not  misguide  a  chief  critic  of  the
Protestant  side,  when  mentioning  this  letter  concerning  En-
thusiasm,^ he  speaks  of  it  as  a  real  letter  (such  as  in  truth  it
was),  not  a  precise  and  formal  treatise  designed  for  public  view.^
It  will  be  owned  surely,  by  those  who  have  learnt  to  judge
of  elegancy  and  wit  by  the  help  merely  of  modern  languages,
that  we  could  have  little  relish  of  the  best  letters  of  a  Balsac
or  Voiture,  were  we  wholly  ignorant  of  the  characters  of  the
principal  persons  to  whom  those  letters  were  actually  written.
But  much  less  could  we  find  pleasure  in  this  reading,  should  w^e
take  it  into  our  heads  that  both  the  personages  and  corre-
spondency itself  were  merely  fictitious.  Let  the  best  of  Tully's
Epistles  be  read  in  such  a  narrow  view  as  this,  and  they  will
certainly  prove  very  insipid.  If  a  real  Brutus,  a  real  Atticus
be  not  supposed,  there  will  be  no  real  Cicero.  The  elegant
writer  will  disappear,  as  will  the  vast  labour  and  art  with  which
this  eloquent  Roman  writ  those  letters  to  his  illustrious  friends.
There  was  no  kind  of  composition  in  which  this  great  author
prided  or  pleased  himself  more  than  in  this,  where  he  en-
deavoured to  throw  off  the  mien  of  the  philosopher  and  orator,
whilst  in  effect  he  employed  both  his  rhetoric  and  philosophy
with  the  greatest  force.  They  who  can  read  an  epistle  or  satire
of  Horace  in  somewhat  better  than  a  mere  scholastic  relish,  will
comprehend  that  the  concealment  of  order  and  method  in  this
manner  of  writing  makes  the  chief  beauty  of  the  work.  They
will  own  that  unless  a  reader  be  in  some  measure  apprised  of
the  characters  of  an  Augustus,  a  Maecenas,  a  Florus,  or  a
Trebatius,  there  will  be  little  relish  in  those  satires  or  epistles

^  "  Ceux  qui  Tout  lue  ont  pu  voir  en  general,  que  I'auteur  ne  s'y  est
pas  propose  un  certain  plan  pour  traiter  sa  matiere  methodiquement ;
parceque  c'est  une  lettre,  et  non  un  traite."  Bibliotheque  Choisie,  tome
xix.  p.  328.

2  If  in  this  joint  edition,  with  other  works,  the  letter  be  made  to  pass
under  that  general  name  of  treatise,  'tis  the  bookseller  must  account  for
it.  For  the  author's  part,  he  considers  it  as  no  other  than  what  it  origin-
ally was.

168


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

addressed  in  particular  to  the  courtiers,  ministers,  and  great
men  of  the  times.  Even  the  satiric  or  miscellaneous  manner  of
the  polite  ancients,  required  as  much  order  as  the  most  regular
pieces.  But  the  art  was  to  destroy  every  such  token  or  appear-
ance, give  an  extemporary  air  to  what  was  writ,  and  make  the
effect  of  art  be  felt  without  discovering  the  artifice.  There
needs  no  further  explanation  on  this  head.  Our  author  himself
has  said  enough  in  his  Advice  to  an  Author,^  particularly  where
he  treats  of  the  simple  style,  in  contradistinction  to  the  learned,
the  formal,  or  methodic.

'Tis  a  different  case  indeed  when  the  title  of  Epistle  is  im-
properly given  to  such  works  as  were  never  writ  in  any  other
view  than  that  of  being  made  public,  or  to  serve  as  exercises  or
specimens  of  the  wit  of  their  composer.  Such  were  those  infinite
numbers  of  Greek  and  Latin  Epistles,  writ  by  the  ancient
sophists,  grammarians,  or  rhetoricians,  where  we  find  the  real
character  of  the  Epistle,  the  genuine  style  and  manners  of  the
corresponding  parties  sometimes  imitated,  but  at  other  times
not  so  much  as  aimed  at,  nor  any  measures  of  historical  truth
preserved.  Such  perhaps  we  may  esteem  even  the  letters  of  a
Seneca  -  to  his  friend  Lucilius. Or  supposing  that  philosophical

1  Vol.  i.  pp.  107-1 G9.

2  'Tis  not  the  person,  cliaracterj  or  geuius^  but  tlie  style  and  maimer  of
this  great  man  which  we  presume  to  censure.  We  acknowledge  his  noble
sentiments  and  worthy  actions.  We  own  the  patriot  and  good  minister  ;
but  we  reject  the  writer.  He  was  the  first  of  any  note  or  worth  who  gave
credit  to  that  false  style  and  manner  here  spoken  of.  He  might  on  this
account  be  called  in  reality  the  corrupter  of  Roman  eloquence.  This
indeed  could  not  but  naturally,  and  of  itself,  become  relax  and  dissolute,
after  such  a  relaxation  and  dissolution  of  manners,  consequent  to  the  change
of  Government,  and  to  the  horrid  luxury  and  effeminacy  of  the  Roman  court
even  before  the  time  of  a  Claudius  or  a  Nero.  There  was  no  more  pos-
sibility of  making  a  stand  for  language  than  for  liberty.  As  the  world
now  stood,  the  highest  glory  which  could  be  attained  by  mortal  man  was
to  be  mitigator  or  moderator  of  that  universal  tyranny  already  established.
To  this  I  must  add  that  in  every  city,  principality,  or  smaller  nation,
where  single  will  prevails,  and  court-power,  instead  of  laws  or  constitutions,

169


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

courtier  had  really  such  a  correspondency,  and,  at  several  times,
had  sent  so  many  fair  Epistles,  honestly  signed  and  sealed,  to
his  country  friend  at  a  distance ;  it  appears,  however,  by  the
Epistles  themselves,  in  their  proper  order  (if  they  may  be  said
to  have  any),  that  after  a  few  attempts  at  the  beginning,  the
author  by  degrees  loses  sight  of  his  correspondent,  and  takes
the  world  in  general  for  his  reader  or  disciple.  He  falls  into
the  random  way  of  miscellaneous  writing,  says  everywhere  great

guides  the  State,  'tis  of  the  highest  difficulty  for  the  best  minister  to  pro-
cure a  just  or  even  a  tolerable  administration.  Where  such  a  minister  is
found,  who  can  but  moderately  influence  the  petty  tyranny,  he  deserves
considerable  applause  and  honour.  But  in  the  case  we  have  mentioned,
where  a  universal  monarchy  was  actually  established^  and  the  interest  of  a
whole  world  concerned,  he  surely  must  have  been  esteemed  a  guardian-
angel  who,  as  a  Prime  Minister,  could  for  several  years  turn  the  very
worst  of  courts,  and  worst  conditioned  of  all  princes,  to  the  fatherly  care
and  just  government  of  mankind.  Such  a  minister  was  Seneca  under  an
Agrippina  and  a  Nero.  And  such  he  was  acknowledged  by  the  ancient
and  never-sparing  satirists,  who  could  not  forbear  to  celebrate  withal  his
generosity  and  friendship  in  a  private  life  : —

Nemo  petit  modicis  quae  mittebantur  amicis
A  Seneca ;  quae  Piso  bonus,  quae  Cotta  solebat
Largiri  :  namque  et  titulis,  et  fascibus  olim
Major  habebatur  donandi  gloria.

["  No  one  asks  for  what  used  to  be  sent  to  his  clients  by  Seneca,  or
what  good-natured  Piso  or  Cotta  used  to  give  ;  for  the  glory  of  liberality
was  once  reckoned  greater  than  inscriptions  recording  your  high  office." —
Juvenal,  v.  108-111.]

Quis  tam
Perditus,  ut  dubitet  Senecam  praeferre  Neroni  ?

["Who  is  so  abandoned  as  to  hesitate  to  set  Seneca  above  Nero.''" —
Juvenal,  viii.  212.]

This  remark  is  what  I  have  been  tempted  to  make  by  the  way  on  the
character  of  this  Roman  author,  more  mistaken  (if  I  am  not  very  much  so
myself)  tlian  any  other  so  generally  studied.  As  for  the  philosophic
character  or  function  imputed  to  him,  'twas  foreign,  and  no  way  proper  or
peculiar  to  one  who  never  assumed  so  much  as  that  of  sophist  or  pensionary
teacher  of  philosophy. He  was  far  wide  of  any  such  order  or  profession.

170


IMISCELLANEOUS llEl  LECTIONS

aiul  noblu  things,  in  and  out  of  the  way,  accidentally  as  words
led  him  (for  with  these  he  j)lays  perpetually),  with  infinite  wit,
but  with  little  or  no  cohei-ence,  without  a  shape  or  body  to  his
work,  without  a  real  beginning,'  a  middle,  or  an  end.  Of  a
hundred  and  twenty-four  Epistles,  you  may,  if  you  please,  make
five  hundred,  or  half  a  score.  A  great  one,  for  instance,  you
may  divide  into  five  or  six.  A  little  one  you  may  tack  to
another,  and  that  to  another,  and  so  on.  The  unity  of  the
writing  will  be  the  same ;  the  life  and  spirit  full  as  well  pre-
served. 'Tis  no*^,  only  whole  letters  or  pages  you  may  change
and  manage  thus  at  pleasure;  every  period,  every  sentence
almost,  is  independent,  and  may  be  taken  asunder,  transposed,
postponed,  anticipated,  or  set  in  any  new  order,  as  you  fancy.

This  is  the  manner  of  writing  so  much  admired  and  imitated
in  our  a^e,  that  we  have  scarce  the  idea  of  anv  other  model.
"W^e  know  little,  indeed,  of  the  difference  between  one  model  or
character  of  writing  and  another.  All  runs  to  the  same  tune,
and  beats  exactlv  one  and  the  same  measure.  Nothing,  one
would  think,  could  be  more  tedious  than  this  uniform  pace.
The  common  amble  or  canterbury  is  not,  I  am  persuaded,  more
tiresome  to  a  good  rider  than  this  see-saw  of  essay  writers  is  to
an  able  reader.  The  just  composer  of  a  legitimate  piece  is  like
an  able  traveller,  who  exactly  measures  his  joui'ney,  considers

lliere  is  sjreat  difference  between  ;i  courtier  who  takes  a  fancy  for  philo-
sophy and  a  philosopher  who  should  take  a  fancy  for  a  court.  Now  Seneca
was  born  a  courtier,  being  son  of  a  court  rhetor  ;  himself  bred  in  the  same
manner,  and  taken  into  favour  for  his  wit  and  genius,  his  admired  style
and  eloejuence,  not  for  his  learning  in  the  books  of  philosophy  and  the
ancients.  For  this  indeed  was  not  very  profound  in  him.  In  short,  he
was  a  man  of  wonderful  wit,  fluency  of  tliought  and  language,  an  able
minister,  and  honest  courtier.  iVnd  what  has  l)een  delivered  down  to  his
prejudice,  is  by  the  common  enemy  of  all  the  free  and  generous  Romans,
that  apish  shallow  historian  and  court  flatterer,  Uion  Cassius,  of  a  low  age,
when  barbarism  (as  may  be  easily  seen  in  his  own  work)  came  on  apace,
and  the  very  traces  and  features  of  virtue,  science,  and  knowledge  were
wearing  out  of  the  world.

1  Infra,  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.,  in  the  notes;  and  Wit  and  Ilumonr,  part.  iv.  §  3.

171


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

his  ground,  premeditates  his  stages  and  intervals  of  relaxation
and  intention  to  the  very  conclusion  of  his  undertaking,  that
he  happily  arrives  where  he  first  proposed  when  he  set  out.
He  is  not  presently  upon  the  spur,  or  in  his  full  career,  but
walks  his  steed  leisurely  out  of  his  stable,  settles  himself  in  his
stirrups,  and,  when  fair  road  and  season  offer,  puts  on  perhaps
to  a  round  trot,  thence  into  a  gallop,  and  after  a  while  takes
up.  As  down  or  meadow  or  shady  lane  present  themselves,
he  accordingly  suits  his  pace,  favours  his  palfrey ;  and  is  sure
not  to  bring  him  puffing,  and  in  a  heat,  into  his  last  inn.  But
the  post-way  is  become  highly  fashionable  with  modern  authors.
The  very  same  stroke  sets  you  out  and  brings  you  in.  Nothing
stays  or  interrupts.  Hill  or  valley,  rough  or  smooth,  thick  or
thin ;  no  difference,  no  variation.  When  an  author  sits  down
to  Avrite  he  knows  no  other  business  he  has  than  to  be  witty,
and  take  care  that  his  periods  be  well  turned,  or,  as  they
commonly  say,  run  smooth.  In  this  manner  he  doubts  not  to
gain  the  character  of  bright.  When  he  has  Avrit  as  many  pages
as  he  likes,  or  as  his  run  of  fancy  would  permit,  he  then  perhaps
considers  what  name  he  had  best  give  to  his  new  writing;
whether  he  should  call  it  letter,  essay,  miscellany,  or  aught
else.  The  bookseller  perhaps  is  to  determine  this  at  last,  when
all  besides  the  preface,  epistle  dedicatory,  and  title-page  is
dispatched.

. . . Incertus  scamnum  faceretne  Priapum.
. .  .  Deus  inde  ego !  i

^  ["  Hesitating  whether  he  should  make  a  bench  or  a  Priapus. ... So
I  am  a  God  !" Horace,  Sat.  i  viii.  2,  .3.]


172


MISCELLANY II


CHAPTER I

Review  of  Enthusiasm — Its  defence,  praise — L'se  in  business  as  well  as
pleasure — Operation  by  fear.  Love — Modifications  of  enthusiasm  ;
magnanimity  ;  heroic  virtue  ;  honour  ;  public  zeal  ;  religion
superstition  ;  persecution  ;  martyrdom  —  Energy  of  the  ecstatic
devotion  in  the  tender  sex  —  Account  of  ancient  priesthood —
Religious  war — Reference  to  a  succeeding  chapter.

Whether,  in  fact,  there  be  any  real  enchantment,  any  influence
of  stars,  any  power  of  demons  or  of  foreign  natures  over  our
own  minds,  is  thought  questionable  by  many.  Some  there  are
who  assert  the  negative,  and  endeavour  to  solve  the  appearances
of  this  kind  by  the  natural  operation  of  our  passions  and  the
common  course  of  outward  things.  For  mv  own  part,  I  cannot
but  at  this  present  apprehend  a  kind  of  enchantment  or  magic
in  that  which  we  call  enthusiasm;  since  I  find  that,  having
touched  slightly  on  this  subject,  I  cannot  so  easily  part  with  it
at  pleasure.

After  having  made  some  cursory  reflections  on  our  author's
letter,^  I  thought  I  might  have  sufficiently  acquitted  myself  on
this  head,  till  passing  to  his  next  treatise  I  found  myself  still
further  engaged.  I  perceived  plainly  that  I  had  as  yet  scarce
entered  into  our  author's  humour,  or  felt  anythino-  of  that
passion  which,  as  he  informs  us,  is  so  easily  communicable
and  naturally  engaging. But  what  I  had  passed  over  in  my

^  Viz.  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm,  above.

173


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

first  reflections  I  found  naturally  rising  in  me  upon  second
thoughts.  So  that  by  experience  I  proved  it  true  what  our
author  says,  "That  we  all  of  us  know  something  of  this
principle."  And  now  that  I  find  I  have  in  reality  so  much  of  it
imparted  to  me,  I  may  with  better  reason  be  pardoned  if,  after
our  author's  example,  I  am  led  to  write  on  such  subjects  as  these
with  caution,  at  different  reprises ;  and  not  singly,  in  one  breath.

I  have  heard  indeed  that  the  very  reading  of  treatises  and
accounts  of  melancholy  has  been  apt  to  generate  that  passion
in  the  over-diligent  and  attentive  reader.  And  this,  perhaps,
may  have  been  the  reason  why  our  author  himself  (as  he  seems
to  intimate  towards  the  conclusion  of  his  first  letter)  cared  not
in  reality  to  grapple  closely  with  his  subject,  or  give  us  at  once
the  precise  definition  of  enthusiasm.  This,  however,  we  may,
with  our  author,  presume  to  infer  from  the  coolest  of  all  studies,
even  from  criticism  itself  (of  which  we  have  been  lately  treating),
"  that  there  is  a  power  in  numbers,  harmony,  proportion,  and
beauty  of  every  kind,  which  naturally  captivates  the  heart,  and
raises  the  imagination  to  an  opinion  or  conceit  of  something
majestic  and  divine."

Whatever  this  subject  may  be  in  itself,  we  cannot  help
being  transported  with  the  thought  of  it.  It  inspires  us  with
something  more  than  ordinary,  and  raises  us  above  ourselves.
Without  this  imagination  or  conceit  the  world  would  be  but  a
dull  circumstance,  and  life  a  sorry  pastime.  Scarce  could  we  be
said  to  live.  The  animal  functions  might  in  their  course  be
carried  on ;  but  nothing  further  sought  for  or  regarded.  The
gallant  sentiments,  the  elegant  fancies,  the  belles  passions  which
have,  all  of  them,  this  beauty  in  view,  would  be  set  aside,  and
leave  us  probably  no  other  employment  than  that  of  satisfying
our  coarsest  appetites  at  the  cheapest  rate,  in  order  to  the  attain-
ment of  a  supine  state  of  indolence  and  inactivity.

Slender  would  be  the  enjoyments  of  the  lover,  the  ambitious
man,  the  warrior,  or  the  virtuoso  (as  our  author  has  elsewhere  ^
^  Moralists,  part  iii.  §  2.

174


MISCELT.ANEOUS UEFI.ECTIONS

intimated),  if  in  the  beauties  whith  they  admire  and  ])a.ssi()n-
ately  pursue  there  were  no  reference  or  re<ijard  to  any  hi<;lier
majesty  or  grandeur  than  what  simply  results  from  the  j)articular
objects  of  their  pursuit.  I  know  not,  in  reality,  what  we  should
do  to  find  a  seasoning  to  most  of  our  pleasures  in  life,  were  it
not  for  the  taste  or  relish  which  is  owing  to  this  particular
passion,  and  the  conceit  or  imagination  which  suj)p()i'ts  it.
Without  this,  we  could  not  so  much  as  admire  a  poem  or  a
picture ;  a  garden  or  a  palace ;  a  charming  shape  or  a  fair  face.
Love  itself  would  appear  the  lowest  thing  in  Nature  when  thus
anticipated,  and  treated  according  to  the  anti -enthusiastic
poet's  method : —

Et  jacere  humorem  collectum  in  corpora  quaeque.^

How  heroism  or  magnanimity  must  stand  in  this  hypothesis
is  easy  to  imagine.  The  IMuses  themselves  nuist  make  a  very
indifferent  figure  in  this  philosophical  draught.  Even  the
prince  of  poets  -  would  prove  a  most  insipid]  writer  if  he  were
thus  reduced.  Nor  could  there,  according  to  this  scheme,  be
yet  a  place  of  honour  left  even  for  our  Latin  poet,^  the  great
disciple  of  this  un-polite  philosophy,  who  dares  with  so  little
equity  employ  the  ]\Iuses'  art  in  favour  of  such  a  system.  But
in  spite  of  his  philosophy  he  everywhere  gives  way  to  admira-
tion and  rapturous  views  of  Nature.  He  is  transported  with
the  several  beauties  of  the  world,  even  whilst  he  arraigns  the
order  of  it,  and  destroys  the  principle  of  beauty  from  whence  in
ancient  languages  the  world  *  itself  was  named.

^  Lucretius,  iv.  10G5.

^  ov8h  fiipoi  '0/j.ripu  ddeov,  oudi  dwdarov  6.iropov,  ov5k  dpxv^  ^PVI^O",  a'XXa  travTa
fjLeffTO.  deluv  ofo/j.a.Tojv  Kal  ddwv  'Koyiov,  Kal  deias  Tex"^^-  [''No  part  in  Homer  is
devoid  of  Gods,  or  bare  of  princes,  or  destitute  of  magistrates  ;  but  all  is
full  of  names  and  speeches  and  art  of  Gods." — Maximus  Tyrius,  Dissert.  10.1

3  Viz.  Lucretius,  as  above,  Treatise  i.  §  G,  end.

*  Kbffjxo's,  mundus.  From  whence  that  expostulation,  iv  aol  fxiv  ns  K6<r/j.oi
iKplaracdai  Suvarai,  iv  U  toj  -rravTi  aKoafjila  ;  ["  Or  can  a  certain  order  subsist

175


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

This  is  what  our  author  advances :  when  in  behalf  of
enthusiasm  he  quotes  its  formal  enemies,  and  shows  that  they
are  as  capable  of  it  as  its  greatest  confessors  and  assertors.
So  far  is  he  from  degrading  enthusiasm  or  disclaiming  it  in
himself,  that  he  looks  on  this  passion,  simply  considered,  as  the
most  natural,  and  its  object  as  the  justest  in  the  Avorld.  Even
virtue  itself  he  takes  to  be  no  other  than  a  noble  enthusiasm
justly  directed  and  regulated  by  that  high  standard  which  he
supposes  in  the  nature  of  things.

He  seems  to  assert  ^  "  that  there  are  certain  moral  species
or  appearances  so  striking  and  of  such  force  over  our  natures,
that  when  they  present  themselves  they  bear  down  all  contrary
opinion  or  conceit,  all  opposite  passion,  sensation,  or  mere
bodily  affection."  Of  this  kind  he  makes  virtue  itself  to  be
the  chief,  since  of  all  views  or  contemplations  this,  in  his
account,  is  the  most  naturally  and  strongly  affecting.  The
exalted  part  of  love  is  only  borrowed  hence.  That  of  pure
friendship  is  its  immediate  self.  He  who  yields  his  life  a
sacrifice  to  his  prince  or  country ;  the  lover  who  for  his
paramour  performs  as  much ;  the  heroic,  the  amorous,  the
religious  martyrs,  who  draw  their  views,  whether  visionary  or
real,  from  this  pattern  and  exemplar  of  divinity ;  all  these,
according  to  our  author's  sentiment,  are  alike  actuated  by  this
passion,  and  prove  themselves  in  effect  so  many  different
enthusiasts.

Nor  is  thorough  honesty,  in  his  hypothesis,  any  other  than
zeal  or  passion  moving  strongly  upon  the  species  or  view  of  the
decorum  and  sublime  of  actions. Others  may  pursue  -  different

within  thee,  and  none  in  the  universe.''" — Marcus  Aurelius,  iv.  27.]  And
that  other  alhision  to  the  same  word,  kSit/j.oi'  5'  irv/xws  to  aufXTrav,  dX\'  ovk
aKoixfiiav  dvo/ndaais  &v.  ["  We  might  with  correct  etymology  call  the  uni-
verse an  order,  but  not  a  disorder." — Aristotle,  Trepi  Koafjiov,  c.  G.]  Below,
Misc.  V.  eh.  i.  in  the  notes.

1  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iv.  §  2  ;  Inquiry,  bk.  ii.  part  ii.  §  1.

2  Moralists,  part  iii.  §  3.

17C


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

forms  and  fix  their  eye  on  dificrent  species  (as  all  men  do  on
one  or  other).  The  real  honest  man,  however  plain  or  simple
he  appears,  has  that  highest  species,  honesty  itself,^  in  view ;
and  instead  of  outward  forms  or  symmetries,  is  struck  with  that
of  inward  character,  the  harmony  and  numbers  of  the  heart  and
beauty  of  the  affections,  which  form  the  manners  and  conduct
of  a  truly  social  life.

'Tis  indeed  ])eculiar  to  the  genius  of  that  cool  philosophy
above  described,-  that  as  it  denies  the  order  or  harmony  of
things  in  general,  so  by  a  just  consequence  and  truth  of  reason-
ing it  rejects  the  habit  of  admiring  or  being  charmed  with
whatever  is  called  beautiful  in  particular.  According  to  the
regimen  prescribed  by  this  philosophy,  it  must  be  acknowledged
that  the  evils  of  love,  ambition,  vanity,  luxury,  with  other
distvu'bances  derived  from  the  florid,  high,  and  elegant  ideas
of  things,  must  in  appearance  be  set  in  a  fair  way  of  being
radically  cured.

It  need  not  be  thought  surprising  that  religion  itself  should
in  the  account  of  these  philosophers  be  reckoned  among  those
vices  and  disturbances  which  it  concei-ns  us  after  this  manner
to  extirpate.  If  the  idea  of  majesty  and  beauty  in  other
inferior  subjects  be  in  reality  distracting,  it  must  chiefly  prove
so  in  that  principal  subject,  the  basis  and  foundation  of  this
conceit.  Now  if  the  subject  itself  be  not  in  nature,  neither  the
idea  nor  the  passion  grounded  on  it  can  be  properly  esteemed
natural ;  and  thus  all  admiration  ceases,  and  enthusiasm  is  at
an  end.  But  if  there  be  naturally  such  a  passion,  'tis  evident
that  religion  itself  is  of  the  kind,  and  must  be  therefore  natural
to  man.

We  can  admire  nothing  profoundly  without  a  certain
religious  veneration.  And  because  this  borders  so  much  on
fear,  and  raises  a  certain  tremor  or  horror  of  like  appearance,
'tis  easy  to  give  that  turn  to  the  affection,  and  represent  all

^  The  honestum,  pulcliruni,  rb  koKov,  irpiirou. Infra,  Misc.  iii.  ch.  ii.

-  Supra,  p.  175 ;  Treatise  i.  §  G  ;  and  Treatise  11.  part  iii,  §  o.
VOL.  II  177  N


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

enthusiasm  and  religious  ecstasy  as  the  product  or  mere  effect
of  fear :

Primus  in  orbe  deos  fecit  timor.

But  the  original  passion,  as  appears  plainly,  is  of  another  kind,
and  in  effect  is  so  confessed  by  those  who  are  the  greatest
opposers  of  religion,  and  who,  as  our  author  observes,  have
shown  themselves  sufficiently  convinced,  "  that  although  these
ideas  of  divinity  and  beauty  were  vain,  they  were  yet  in  a
manner  innate,  or  such  as  men  were  really  born  to  and  could
hardly  by  any  means  avoid."  ^

Now  as  all  affections  have  their  excess,  and  require  judgment
and  discretion  to  moderate  and  govern  them,  so  this  high  and
noble  affection,  which  raises  man  to  action  and  is  his  guide  in
business  as  well  as  pleasure,  requires  a  steady  rein  and  strict
hand  over  it.  All  moralists,  worthy  of  any  name,  have  recog-
nised the  passion,  though  among  these  the  wisest  have  prescribed
restraint,  pressed  moderation,  and  to  all  tyros  in  philosophy
forbid  the  forward  use  of  admiration,  rapture,  or  ecstasy,  even
in  the  subjects  they  esteemed  the  highest  and  most  divine.
They  knew  very  well  that  the  first  motion,  appetite,  and  ardour
of  the  youth  in  general  towards  philosophy  and  knowledge
depended  chiefly  on  this  turn  of  temper :  -  yet  were  they  well
apprised,  withal,  that  in  the  progress  of  this  study,  as  well
as  in  the  affairs  of  life,  the  florid  ideas  and  exalted  fancies  of
this  kind  became  the  fuel  of  many  incendiary  passions;  and
that,  in  religious  concerns  particularly,  the  habit  of  admiration
and  contemplative  delight  would,  by  over-indulgence,  too  easily
mount  into  high  fanaticism  or  degenerate  into  abject  superstition.

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  according  to  our  author,  enthusi-

^  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  6.

2  So  the  Stagirite  :  5td  yap  rb  Oav/xdi^eiv  oi  duOpunroi  Kal  vOv  Kal  rb  vpwTOV
%p^a,vTo  <pLKo(To<t>Hv.  ["  For  it  was  through  wonder  that  men  first  began,  and
do  still  begin,  to  philosophise." — Ai-ist.  Metaph.  i.  ii.  082  b.]  See  below.
Misc.  iv.  ch.  i.,  in  the  notes.

178


MISCELI.ANEOUS liEl  LECTIONS

asm  is  ill  itself  a  very  natural  honest  })assion,  and  has  properly
nothing  for  its  object  but  what  is  good  and  honest.^ 'Tis  apt
indeed,  he  confesses,  to  run  astray. And  by  modern  exam])le
we  know,  perhaps  yet  better  than  by  any  ancient,  that  in  religion
the  enthusiasm  which  works  by  love  is  subject  to  many  strange
irregularities,  and  that  which  works  by  fear  to  many  monstrous
and  horrible  superstitions. iVIystics  and  fanatics  are  known  to
abound  as  well in  our  reformed  as  in  the  Romish  churches.
The  pretended  floods  of  grace  poured  into  the  bosoms  of  the
quietists,  pietists,  and those who favour  the ecstatic way  of
devotion,  raise  such  transports  as  by  their  own  proselytes  are
confessed  to  have  something  strangely  agreeable,  and  in  common
with  what  ordinary  lovers  are  used  to  feel. And  it  has  been
remarked  by  many  that  the  female  saints  have  been  the  greatest
improvers  of  this  soft  part  of  religion. What  truth  there  may
be  in  the  related  operations  of  this  })retended  grace  and  amorous
zeal,  or  in  the  accounts  of  what  has  usually  passed  between  the
saints  of  each  sex,  in  these  devout  ecstasies,  I  shall  leave  the
reader  to examine, supposing he will find credible  accounts
sufficient  to  convince  him  of  the  dangerous  progress  of  enthusi-
asm in  this  amorous  lineage.

There  are  many  branches  indeed  more  vulgar,  as  that  of  fear,
melancholy,  consternation,  suspicion,  despair.  And  when  the
passion  turns  more  towards  the  astonishing  and  frightful  than
the  amiable  and  delightful  side,  it  creates  rather  what  we  call
superstition  than  enthusiasm.  I  must  confess,  withal,  that  what
we  commonly  style  zeal  in  matters  of  religion,  is  seldom  without
a  mixture  of  both  these  extravagancies.  The  ecstatic  motions
of  love  and  admiration  are  seldom  unaccompanied  with  the
horrors  and  consternations  of  a  lower  sort  of  devotion.  These
paroxysms  of  zeal  are  in  reality  as  the  hot  and  cold  fits  of  an
ague,  and  depend  on  the  different  and  occasional  views  or  aspects
of  the  divinity,  according  as  the  Avorshipper  is  guided  from
without,  or  affected  from  within,  by  his  particular  constitution. -
1  TO  KaXbu  Kal  a.-jad6v.  -  Infra,  J/wc.  ii.  ch.  iii.,  end.

179


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Seldom  are  those  aspects  so  determinate  and  fixed  as  to  excite
constantly  one  and  the  same  spirit  of  devotion.  In  religions,
therefore,  which  hold  most  of  love,  there  is  generally  room  left
for  terrors  of  the  deepest  kind.  Nor  is  there  any  religion  so
diabolical  as,  in  its  representation  of  divinity,  to  leave  no  room
for  admiration  and  esteem.  Whatever  personage  or  spectre  of
divinity  is  worshipped,  a  certain  esteem  and  love  is  generally
affected  by  his  worshippers.  Or  if,  in  the  devotion  paid  him,
there  be  in  truth  no  real  or  absolute  esteem,  there  is  however
a  certain  astonishing  delight  or  ravishment  excited.

This  passion  is  experienced  in  common  by  every  worshipjjer
of  the  zealot  kind.  The  motion,  when  unguided  and  left  wholly
to  itself,  is  in  its  nature  turbulent  and  incentive.  It  disjoints
the  natural  frame  and  relaxes  the  ordinary  tone  or  tenor  of  the
mind.  In  this  disposition  the  reins  are  let  loose  to  all  passion
which  arises ;  and  the  mind,  as  far  as  it  is  able  to  act  or  think
in  such  a  state,  approves  the  riot,  and  justifies  the  wild  effects  by
the  supposed  sacredness  of  the  cause.  Every  dream  and  frenzy
is  made  inspiration,  every  affection,  zeal.  And  in  this  persuasion
the  zealots,  no  longer  self-governed,  but  set  adrift  to  the  Avide
sea  of  passion,  can  in  one  and  the  same  spirit  of  devotion  exert
the  opposite  passions  of  love  and  hatred,  unite  affectionately  and
abhor  furiously,  curse,  bless,  sing,  mourn,  exult,  tremble,  caress,
assassinate,  inflict  and  suffer  martyrdom,^  with  a  thousand  other
the  most  vehement  efforts  of  variable  and  contrary  affections.

The  common  heathen  religion,  especially  in  its  latter  age,
when  adorned  with  the  most  beautiful temples  and  rendered

1  A  passage  of  history  comes  to  my  mind,  as  it  is  cited  by  an  eminent
divine  of  our  own  Churchy  with  regard  to  tliat  spirit  of  mai-tyrdom  which
furnishes,  it  seems,  such  solid  matter  for  the  opinion  and  faith  of  many
zealots.  The  story,  in  the  words  of  our  divine,  and  with  his  own  reflec-
tions on  it,  is  as  follows  :  "  Two  Franciscans  offered  themselves  to  the  fire
to  prove  Savonarola  to  he  a  heretic  ;  but  a  certain  Jacobine  offered  him-
self to  the  fire  to  prove  that  Savonarola  had  true  revelations,  and  was  no
heretic.  In  the  meantime  Savonarola  preached,  but  made  no  such  con-
fident offer,  nor  durst  he  venture  at  that  new  kind  of  fii-e-ordeal. And

180


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

more  illustrious  by  the  niuuificencc  of  the  Roman  senate  and
succecdino-  emperors,  ran  wholly  into  pomp,  and  was  supported
chiefly  bv  that  sort  of  enthusiasm  which  is  raised  from  the
external  objects  of  orandeur,  majesty,  and  what  we  call  au«;ust.^
On  the  other  side,  the  Egyptian  or  Syrian  religions,  which  lay
more  in  mystery  and  concealed  rites,  having  less  dejiendence  on
the  magistrate  and  less  of  that  decorum  of  art,  politeness,  and
magnificence,  ran  into  a  more  pusillanimous,  frivolous,  and  mean
kind  of  superstition  :  "  The  observation  of  days,'.the  forbearance
of  meats,  and  the  contention  about  traditions,  seniority  of  laws,
and  ])riority  of  godships." -

Sunimus  utrinque
Inde  furor  vulgo,  quod  nuniina  viciiioruui
Odit  uterque  locus,  quum  solos  crcdat  habendos
Esse  deos,  quos  ipse  colit.^

History,  withal,  informs  us  of  a  certain  estabhshment  in
Egypt  which  was  very  extraordinary,  and  must  needs  have  had
a  very  uncommon  effect,  no  way  advantageous  to  that  nation
in  particular,  or  to  the  general  society  of  mankind.  We  know
very  well  that  nothing  is  more  injurious  to  the  police  or
municipal  constitution  of  any  city  or  colony  than  the  forcing  of
a  particular  trade.  Nothing  more  dangerous  than  the  over-
peopling  any  manufacture,  or  multiplying  the  traders  or  dealers,
of  whatever  vocation,  beyond  their  natural  proportion  and  the
public  demand. Now  it  happened  of  old,  in  this  motherland  of

put  case,  all  four  had  passed  through  the  fire  aud  died  iu  tlie  flames,  what
would  that  have  proved.^  Had  he  beeu  a  heretic,  or  no  heretic,  the  more
or  the  less,  for  the  confidence  of  these  zealous  idiots  ?  If  we  mark  it,  a  great
many  arguments  whereon  many  sects  rely  are  no  better  probation  than
this  comes  to." — Bishop  Taylor  in  his  dedicatory  discourse,  before  his
Liberty  of  Prophesying. See  Letter  of  Enthuxiasui ,  §  8.

^  Infra,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.  ^  See  MoralistN,  pt.  iii.  §  1.

^  ["  Hence  a  raging  madness  is  abroad  on  both  sides,  l)ecause  each
place  hates  its  neighbours'  deities,  since  it  believes  that  only  its  own  objects
of  worsliip  are  Gods." — Juv.  xv.  ;3.5-8.]

181


SHAFTESBURYS CHARACTERISTICS

superstition,  that  the  sons  of  certain  artists  were  by  law  obHged
always  to  follow  the  same  calling  with  their  fathers.^  Thus  the
son  of  a  priest  was  alwavs  a  prie.st  bv  birth,  as  was  the  whole
lineage  after  him,  without  inteii-uption.  Nor  was  it  a  custom
with  this  nation,  as  with  others,  to  have  onlv  one  single  priest
or  priestess  to  a  temple  :  but  as  the  number  of  Gods  and  temples
was  infinite,  so  was  that  of  the  priests.-  The  religious  foundations
were  without  restriction,  and  to  one  single  worship  or  temple  as
many  of  the  holy  order  might  be  retainers  as  could  raise  a
maintenance  from  the  office.

^^^latever  happened  to  other  races  or  professions,  that  of  the
priest,  in  all  likelihood,  must  by  this  regulation  have  propagated

^  i(TTi  oe  AlyvTTTioiJV  eirra  yevea'  Kal  rovrojv  ol  ixev,  Ipees,  oi  8i,  fidxifJ'-O''
KeKkearaL. — oi'5e  TovroLcriv  e^eari  rexvrjv  eiracrKijcrai  ov5efu.T}v,  dWi  to.  is  TdXe/Mov
iiraffKiovcn  fiovva,  irah  irapa  irarphs  iKoeKoiievos.  ["'The  Eg^'ptians  are  dmded
into  seven  classes — one  of  priests,  one  of  warriors,  etc.  .  .  .  Tlie  warriors
may  not  practise  any  craft,  but  only  that  of  war,  which  they  inherit  by
birth."— Herodot.  ii.'  164,  166.]

iparai  Se  ovk  eh  eKdarov  tQv  dedv,  dWa.  TroWot  .  .  eirEav  Se  tis  dTroOavr),  toi'tov  6
irais  dfTiKariffTaTaL.  [''Xot  one  priest,  but  a  whole  colleare  of  priests,  is
consecrated  to  each  srod,  .  .  .  and  when  one  priest  dies  his  son  is  con-
secrated in  his  place." — Ibid.  u.  37.]

-  TTJs  5e  x^P°-^  dwdtrqs  els  rpia  fiiprj  diTjpri/ueyTjs,  etc.  Cum  tota  regio  in  tres
partes  divisa  sit,  primam  sibi  portionem  vendicat  ordo  sacerdotum,  magna
apud  indigenas  auctoritate  pollens,  turn  ob  pietatem  in  deos,  tum  quod
multam  ex  eruditione  scientiam  ejusmodi  homines  afferunt.  Ex  reditibus
autem  suis  cuucta  per  Aegyptum  sacrificia  procurant,  ministros  alunt ;  et
propriis  commoditatibus  ancillantur,  rah  i5iais  xpe'ats  xopviova-iv.  Xon  enim
(Aegyptii)  existimant  fas  esse  deorum  honores  mutari,  sed  semper  ab  eisdem
eodem  ritu  peragi  ;  neque  eos  necessariorum  copia  destitui  qui  in  com-
mune omnibus  consulunt.  In  universum  namque  de  maximis  rebus  con-
sulentes,  indesinenter  regi  praesto  sunt,  in  nounuUis  tanquam  participes
imperii,  in  aliis  reges,  duces  et  magistri  (cri-vepyoi,  eL<jir)-rrrai,  di5dcxica\oi)
existentes.  Ex  astrologia  quoque  et  sacrorum  inspectione  futura  prae-
dicunt,  atque  e  sacrorum  librorum  scriptis  res  gestas  cum  utilitate  con-
junctas  praelegiint.  Xon  enim,  ut  apud  Graecos,  unus  tantummodo  vir
aut  foemina  una  sacerdotio  fungitur ;  sed  complures  sacrificia  et  honores
deum  obeuntes  liberis  suis  eandem  vitae  rationem  quasi  per  manus  tradunt.
Hi  autem  cunctis  oneribus  sunt  immunes,  et  primos  post  regem  honoris

182


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

the  most  of  any.  'Tis  a  tempting  circumstance  to  have  so  easy
a  mastery  over  the  world,  to  subdue  by  wit  instead  of  force,  to
practise  on  the  passions  and  triumph  over  the  judgment  of
mankind,  to  influence  private  families  and  public  councils,
conquer  conquerors,  control  the  magistrate  himself,  and  govern
without  the  envv  which  attends  all  other  government  or
superioritv.  No  wonder  if  such  a  profession  was  apt  to  multiply,
esj^ecially  when  we  consider  the  easy  living  and  security  of  the
professoi-s,  their  exemption  from  all  labour  and  hazard,  the
supposed  sacredness  of  their  character,  and  their  free  possession
of  wealth,  grandeur,  estates,  and  women.

There  was  no  need  to  invest  such  a  body  as  this  with  rich
lands  and  ample  territories,  as  it  happened  in  Egypt.  The
generation  or  tribe  being  once  set  apart  as  sacred,  would  without
further  encoui'agement  be  able,  no  doubt,  in  process  of  time  to
establish  themselves  a  plentiful  and  growing  fund  or  religious
land-bank.  'Twas  a  sufficient  donative  to  have  had  only  that
single  privilege  from  the  law,i  "that  they  might  retain  what

et  potestatis  gradus  obtineut.  ["  The  whole  country  being  divided  into
three  parts,  the  order  of  priests  claims  the  first  part  It  enjoys  great
authority  among  the  people,  both  for  its  piety  toward  the  Gods  and  for  its
profound  learning.  Out  of  their  revenues  the  priests  find  all  the  sacrifices
for  Egj-pt,  pay  their  servants,  and  meet  their  ovrn  expenses.  For  the
Egyptians  do  not  think  it  lawful  to  change  the  rites  of  the  Gods,  but  hold
that  they  must  be  carried  on  unchanged  by  the  same  class  of  persons,  and  that
those  who  %ratch  for  all  must  not  lack  bread.  For  the  priests,  perpetually
watching  for  the  general  good,  are  ever  by  the  king's  side  ;  and  in  some
matters  they  share  his  power,  in  some  they  act  as  fellow-workers,  advisers,
teachers.  They  also  foretell  the  future  from  astronomy  and  from  the
examination  of  victims,  and  from  their  sacred  books  they  give  useful
teaching  in  history.  For  it  is  not  as  with  the  Greeks,  among  whom  one
man  or  one  woman  holds  a  priesthood,  but  several  Egyptian  priests  attend
to  sacrifices  and  ritual,  and  they  pass  on  the  same  way  of  life  by  inheritance
to  their  children.  They  are  exempted  from  all  taxes,  and  they  enjoy  the
first  rank  and  dignity  after  the  king." — Diad.  Sic.  i.  73.  Shaftesbury
chooses  to  cite  this  Greek  author  in  a  Latin  version.]
*  Infra,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.

183


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

they  could  get,  and  that  it  might  be  lawful  for  their  order  to
receive  such  estates  by  voluntary  contribution,  as  could  never
afterwards  be  converted  to  other  uses."

Now  if,  besides  the  method  of  propagation  by  descent,  other
methods  of  increase  were  allowed  in  this  order  of  men,  if
volunteers  were  also  admitted  at  pleasure,  without  any  stint  or
confinement  to  a  certain  number,  'tis  not  difficult  to  imagine
how  enormous  the  growth  would  be  of  such  a  science  or  pro-
fession, thus  recognised  by  the  magistrate,  thus  invested  with
lands  and  power,  and  thus  entitled  to  whatever  extent  of
riches  or  possessions  could  be  acquired  by  practice  and  influence
over  the  superstitious  part  of  mankind.

There  were,  besides,  in  Egypt  some  natural  causes  of  super-
stition, beyond  those  which  were  common  to  other  regions.
This  nation  might  well  abound  in  prodigies,  when  even  their
country  and  soil  itself  was  a  kind  of  prodigy  in  nature.  Their
solitary  idle  life  whilst  shut  up  in  their  houses  by  the  regular
inundations  of  the  Nile ;  the  unwholesome  vapours  arising  from
the  new  mud  and  slimy  relicts  of  their  river  exposed  to  the
hot  suns ;  their  various  meteors  and  phenomena,  with  the  long
vacancy  they  had  to  observe  and  comment  on  them ;  the
necessity,  withal,  which,  on  the  account  of  their  navigation
and  the  measure  of  their  yearly  drowned  lands,  compelled  them
to  promote  the  studies  of  astronomy  and  other  sciences,  of
which  their  priesthood  could  make  good  advantages — all  these
may  be  reckoned  perhaps  as  additional  causes  of  the  immense
growth  of  superstition,  and  the  enormous  increase  of  the  priest-
hood in  this  fertile  land.

'Twill,  however,  as  I  conceive,  be  found  unquestionably  true,
according  to  political  arithmetic,  in  every  nation  whatsoever,
"  that  the  quantity  of  superstition  (if  I  may  so  speak)  will  in
proportion  nearly  answer  the  number  of  priests,  diviners,
soothsayers,  prophets,  or  such  who  gain  their  livelihood  or
receive  advantages  by  officiating  in  religious  affairs."  For  if
these  dealers  are  numerous,  they  will force  a  trade. And  as

184


MISCETJ>ANEOUS REFLECTIONS

the  liberal  hand  of  the  ina<j;i.stmte  can  easily  raise  swarms  of
this  kind  where  they  are  already  but  in  a  moderate  proportion,
so  where  through  any  other  cause  the  number  of  these,  increas-
ing still  by  degrees,  is  suffered  to  grow  beyond  a  certain
measure,  they  will  soon  raise  such  a  ferment  in  men's  minds  as
will  at  least  compel  the  magistrate,  however  sensible  of  the
grievance,  to  be  cautious  in  proceeding  to  a  reform.

We  may  observe  in  other  necessary  professions,  raised  on
the  infirmities  and  defects  of  mankind  (as,  for  instance,  in  law
and  physic),  "  that  with  the  least  help  from  the  bounty  or
beneficence  of  the  magistrate,  the  number  of  the  professors  and
the  subject-matter  of  the  profession  is  found  over  and  above
increasing."  New  difficulties  are  started,  new  subjects  of  con-
tention ;  deeds  and  instruments  of  law  grow  more  numerous  and
prolix,  hypotheses,  methods,  regimens,  more  various,  and  the
materia  medica  more  extensive  and  abundant.  AVhat,  in
process  of  time,  must  therefore  natui'ally  have  happened  in  the
case  of  religion  among  the  Egyptians  may  easily  be  gathered.

Nor  is  it  strange  that  we  should  find  the  property  ^  and
power  of  the  Egyptian  priesthood  in  ancient  days  arrived  to
such  a  height  as  in  a  manner  to  have  swallowed  up  the  state
and  monarchy.  A  worse  accident  befel  the  Persian  crown,  of
which  the  hierarchy  having  got  absolute  possession,  had  once
a  fair  chance  for  universal  empire.  Now  that  the  Persian  or
Babylonian  hierarchy  was  much  after  the  model  of  the  Egyptian,
though  different  perhaps  in  rites  and  ceremonies,  we  may  well

1  AVliicli  was  one-third.  ^ov\oiJ^vr]v  8^  ttjv  'Ictlv,  etc.  Sed  cum  Isis
lucro  etiani  sacerdotes  invitare  vellet  ad  cultus  istos  (nempe  Osiridis,
mariti  fato  functi)  tertiam  eis  terrae  partem  ds  irpocbSovs,  ad  deorum
miiiisteria  et  sacra  munia,  fruendam  donavit.  ["  But  as  Isis  wished  to
encourage  the  priests  hy  train  also  to  the  worship  of  lier  dead  husband
Osiris,  slie  irranted  tliem  one-tliird  of  the  country,  to  employ  its  revenues
for  divine  duties  and  sacrifices." — Diod.  Sic.  i.  21.]  A  remarkable  effect
of  female  superstition  !  See  also  the  passage  of  the  same  historian,  cited
above,  p.  182,  in  the  notes.

185


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

judge,  not  only  from  the  history  of  the  Magi,^  but  from  what
is  recorded  of  ancient  colonies  sent  long  before  by  the  Egyptians
into  Chaldea^  and  the  adjacent  countries.  And  whether  the
Ethiopian  model  was  from  that  of  Egypt,  or  the  Egyptian
from  that  of  Ethiopia  (for  each  nation  had  its  pretence  ^),  we
know  by  remarkable  effects*  that  the  Ethiopian  empire  was
once  in  the  same  condition,  the  state  having  been  wholly
swallowed  in  the  exorbitant  power  of  their  landed  hierarchy.
So  true  it  is,  "  That  dominion  must  naturally  follow  property."
Nor  is  it  possible,  as  I  conceive,  for  any  state  or  monarchy  to
withstand  the  encroachments  of  a  growing  hierarchy,  founded
on  the  model  of  these  Egyptian  and  Asiatic  priesthoods.  No
superstition  will  ever  be  wanting  among  the  ignorant  and
vulgar  whilst  the  able  and  crafty  have  a  power  to  gain  inherit-
ances and  possessions  by working on this human weakness.

^  See  Treatise  ii.  part  ii.  §  1.  Herodotus  gives  us  the  history  at
length  in  his  third  book.

2  Diod.  Sic.  i.  28,  81.

3  Herodot.  ii.  30,  104 ;  and  Diod.  Sic.  iii.  3.

■*  Kara  rriv  Mepdrju  oi  jrepl  ras  rdv  6e(Jov  depaireia^  re  /cat  rt/xas  oiaTpijSovTes
lepeh,  etc.  Qui  in  Meroe  (urhe,  et  insula  primaria  Aethiopum)  deorum
cultus  et  honores  administrant  sacerdotes  (ordo  autem  hie  maxima  pollet
auctoritate),  (juandocumque  ipsis  in  mentem  venerit,  misso  ad  regem
nuntio,  vita  se  ilium  ahdicare  jubent.  Oraculis  enim  deorum  hoc  edici  :
nee  fas  esse  ab  ullo  mortalium,  quod  dii  immortales  jusserint,  contemni.
["  The  priests  who  look  after  the  ritual  and  worsliip  of  the  Gods  at  Meriie
(and  very  great  is  the  authority  of  this  order)  send  word  to  the  king,
whenever  they  think  fit,  that  he  must  die ;  for  so  (they  say)  the  oracles
of  the  Gods  enjoin,  and  what  Gods  command  no  mortal  must  disobey." —
Diod.  Sic.  iii.  G.]  So  much  for  their  kings  ;  for  as  to  subjects,  the  manner
was  related  a  little  before.  Unus  ex  lictoribus  ad  reum  mittitur,  signum
mortis  praeferens  :  quo  ille  viso  domum  abiens  sibi  mortem  consciscit.
I"  One  of  their  attendants  is  sent  to  the  accused,  bearing  a  sign  of  death  ;
whereupon  the  accused  goes  home  and  kills  himself" — Diod.  Sic.  iii.  .5.]
This  the  people  of  our  days  would  call  passive  obedience  and  priestcraft,
with  a  witness.  But  our  historian  proceeds  :  Et  per  superiores  quidem
aetates,  non  armis  aut  vi  coacti,  sed  merae  superstitionis  vtt  'avrrjs  ttjs
deiaidaifjioi'las  fascino  mente  c.apti  reges,  sacerdotibus morem gesserunt :

186


INIISCELT.ANEOUS REFLECTIONS

This  is  a  fund  wliich,  by  these  allowances,  will  prove  inexhaust-
ible. New  modes  of  worship,  new  miracles,  new  heroes,  saints,
divinities  (which  serve  as  new  occasions  for  sacred  donatives),  will
be  easily  supplied  on  the  part  of  the  religious  orders,  whilst  the
civil  magistrate  authorises  the  accumulative  donation,  and  neither
restrains  the  number  or  jiossessions  of  the  sacred  body.

AVe  find,  withal,  that  in  the  early  days  of  this  ancient
priestly  nation  of  whom  we  have  been  speaking,  'twas  thought
expedient  also,  for  the  increase  of  devotion,  to  enlarge  their
system  of  deity,  and  either  by  mystical  genealogy,  consecration,
or  canonisation,  to  nudtiply  their  revealed  objects  of  worship
and  raise  new  personages  of  divinity  in  their  religion.  They
proceeded,  it  seems,  in  process  of  time,  to  increase  the  number
of  their  Gods,^  so  far  that  at  last  they  became  in  a  manner
numberless.  What  odd  shapes,  species,  and  forms  of  deity
were  in  latter  times  exhibited  is  well  known.  Scarce  an  animal
or  plant  but  was  adopted  into  some  share  of  divinity.

O  sanctas  gentes,  quibiis  haec  nascuntur  in  hortis

Numina  !  -

donee  Ergamenes,  Aethiopum  rex  (Ptolemaeo  secundo  rerum  potiente),
Graecorum  disciplin.ie  et  pliilosophiae  particeps,  maiidata  ilia  primus
adspernari  ausus  fuit.  Nam  liic  aiiimo,  qui  reg^em  deceret,  sumto,  cum
militum  manu  in  locum  inaccessum,  ul)i  aureum  fuit  templum  Aethiopum,
profectus  :  omnes  illos  sacriticos  jug-ulavit,  et  abolito  more  pristino,  sacra
pro  arbitrio  suo  instauravit.  ["  In  former  generations  the  kings,  not
forced  by  arms,  but  simply  bewitched  by  superstition,  obeyed  the  priests.
But  Ergamenes,  king  of  the  Ethiopians  in  the  time  of  Ptolemy  II.,  who
was  initiated  into  Greek  philosophy,  was  the  first  to  despise  their  orders.
With  kingly  courage  he  marched  his  soldiers  upon  the  inaccessible  spot
where  stood  the  golden  temple  of  the  Ethiopians,  cut  down  all  the  priests,
abolished  the  old  usage,  and  rearranged  the  ritual  to  his  own  liking." —
Diod.  Sic.  iii.  G.]

^  (iy  di  avTol  \4yovcn,  ^red  iari  eTrraKtffxiXta  Kal  /xvpia  t j  "A/xacrtv  ^atrtXeiVaira,
eVet  re  iK  tQv  dKrCo  6eQv  ot  SvwdcKa  deoi  eyivovro.  \_"  Bv  the  Effvptians'  own
story  it  is  17,000  years  from  the  time  when  the  eight  Gods  grew  into
twelve  down  to  the  reign  of  Amasis." — Herodot.  ii.  43.]

-  ["O  pious  nation,  for  whom  Gods  like  these  grow  in  the  garden  !"
— Juv.  XV.  10.]

187


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

No  wonder  if  by  a  nation  so  abounding  in  religious  orders,
spiritual  conquests  were  sought  in  foreign  countries,  colonies
led  abroad,^  and  missionaries  detached  on  expeditions  in  this
prosperous  service.  'Twas  thus  a  zealot  people,  influenced  of
old  by  their  very  region  and  climate,  and  who  through  a  long
tract  of  time,  under  a  peculiar  policy,  had  been  raised  both  by
art  and  nature  to  an  innnense  growth  in  religious  science  and
mystery,  came  by  degrees  to  spread  their  variety  of  rites  and
ceremonies,  their  distinguishing  marks  of  separate  worships
and  secret  communities,  through  the  distant  world,  but  chiefly
through  their  neighbouring  and  dependent  countries.

We  understand  from  history  that  even  when  the  Egyptian
state  was  least  powerful  in  arms,  it  was  still  respected  for  its
religion  and  mysteries.  It  drew  strangers  from  all  parts  to
behold  its  wonders.  And  the  fertility  of  its  soil  forced  the
adjacent  people,  and  wandering  nations  who  lived  dispersed  in
single  tribes,  to  visit  them,  court  their  alliance,  and  solicit  a
trade  and  commerce  with  them,  on  whatsoever  terms.  The
strangers,  no  doubt,  might  well  receive  religious  rites  and
doctrines  from  those  to  whom  they  owed  their  maintenance  and
bread.

Before  the  time  that  Israel  was  constrained  to  go  down  to
Egypt  and  sue  for  maintenance  to  these  powerful  dynasties  or

1  ot  5^  ovv  AiyvTrTioL,  etc.  Aegyptii  plurimas  colonias  ex  Aegypto  in
orbem  terrarum  disseminatas  fuisse  dicunt.  In  Babylonem  colonos
deduxit  Belus,  qui  Neptuni  et  Libyae  filius  liabetur :  et  posita  ad
Euphratem  sede,  instituit  sacerdotes  ad  morem  Aegyptiorum  exemptos
impensis  et  oneribus  publicis,  quos  Babylouii  vocant  Chaldaeos,  qui,
exemplo  sacerdotum  et  physicorum,  astrologorumque  in  Aegypto,  ob-
servant Stellas.  ["  The  Egyptians  say  that  very  many  colonies  were
scattered  over  the  world  from  Egypt.  Belus,  who  is  reputed  son  of
Poseidon  and  Libya,  led  colonists  to  Babylon.  After  planting  his  town
on  the  Euphrates,  he  instituted  priests  after  the  Egyptian  fashion,
exempt  from  taxes  and  public  burdens  ;  these,  whom  the  Babylonians  call
Chaldeans,  like  the  priests  and  the  men  of  science  and  the  astronomers  in
Egypt,  watch  the  stars." — Diod.  Sic.  i.  28,  also  81.]

188


MISCELLANEOl  S REFLECTIONS

lowland  states,  the  holy  ])atriaich  Abraham  himself  had  been
necessitated  to  this  compliance  on  the  same  account.^  He
applied  in  the  same  manner  to  the  12gy])tian  court.  He  was  at
first  well  received  and  handsomely  presented,  but  afterwards
ill-used  and  out  of  favour  with  the  jirince,  yet  suffered  to  dej)art
the  kingdom  and  retire  with  his  effects,  without  any  attempt
of  recalling  him  again  by  force,  as  it  happened  in  the  case  of
his  posterity.  'Tis  certain  that  if  this  holy  patriarch,  who  first
instituted  the  sacred  rite  of  circumcision  within  his  own  family
or  tribe,  had  no  regard  to  any  policy  or  religion  of  the  Egyptians,
yet  he  had  formerly  been  a  guest  and  inhabitant  in  Egypt
(where  historians  mention  this  to  have  been  a  national  rite-),
long  ere  he  had  received  any  divine  notice  or  revelation  con-
cerning this  affair.^  Nor  was  it  in  religion  merely  that  this
reverend  guest  was  said  to  have  derived  knowledge  and  learning
from  the  Egyptians.  'Twas  from  this  parent-country  of  occult
sciences  that  he  was  presumed,  together  with  other  wisdom,  to
have  learnt  that  of  judicial  astrology,*  as  his  successors  did
afterwards  other  prophetical  and  miraculous  arts,  proper  to  the
Magi  or  priesthood  of  this  land.

One  cannot  indeed  but  observe,  in  after  times,  the  strange

^  Geu.  xii.  10^  etc.

2  Abramus,  quando  Aegyptum  ingressus  est,  noudum  circumcisus  erat,
neque  per  auiios  amplius  viginti  post  reditum.  .  .  .  Illius  postei'i  circumcisi
suutj  et  ante  introitum,  et  dum  in  Aegypto  commorati  sunt  :  post  exitum
vero  non  sunt  circumcisi  J  (jiiamdiu  vixit  Moses.  ''Fecit  itaque  Josue  cultros
lapideosj  et  circumcidit  lilios  Israel  in  colle  praeputiorum.  Factum  Deus
ratum  habuit,  dixitque,  Hodie  d<f>elXov  t6v  dveidia/xbv  Aiyvirrov  d<f>'  vfiuv,  abstuli
opprobrium  Aegj^ti  a  vobis."  Josue,  v.  3.  Tam  Aegyptiis  quam  Judaeis
opprobrio  erant  incircumcisi.  Apud  Aegyptios  circumcidendi  ritus  vetus-
tissimus  fuit,  et  aw'  dpxrj^  ab  ipso  initio  institutus.  Illi  nullorum  aliorum
hominum  institutis  uti  volunt.  Herodot.  ii.  91.  rd  aido'ia  y  dXXot  fiiv  iwat  ilis
iyivovTO,  ttXtjc  ocrot  dirb  tovtwv  efiadov  Alyvirrioi  5e  TrepiTd/xvouTai..  ["The
Egyptians  practise  circumcision,  but  no  other  people  do  so  except  those
who  have  learned  it  from  the  Egyptians." — Herodot.  ii.  3(5.] — Marshami
Chronicus  Canon,  p.  72.  ^  Gen.  xvii.

*  Julius  Firmicus,  apud  Marshamum,  pp.  452,  453.

189


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

adherence  and  servile  dependency  of  the  whole  Hebrew  race  on
the  Egyptian  nation.  It  appears  that  though  they  were  of  old
abused  in  the  person  of  their  grand  patriarch ;  though  after-
wards held  in  bondage,  and  treated,  as  the  most  abject  slaves ;
though  twice  expelled,  or  necessitated  to  save  themselves  by
flight  out  of  this  oppressive  region,  yet  in  the  very  instant  of
their  last  retreat,  whilst  they  were  yet  on  their  march,  conducted
by  visible  Divinity,  supplied  and  fed  from  heaven,  and  supported
by  continual  miracles,  they  notwithstanding  inclined  so  strongly
to  the  manners,  the  religion,  rites,  diet,  customs,  laws  and  con-
stitutions of  their  tyrannical  masters,  that  it  was  with  the
utmost  difficulty  they  could  be  withheld  from  returning  again
into  the  same  subjection.^ Nor  could  their  great  captains  and

*  It  can  scarce  be  said  in  reality,  from  what  appears  in  Holy  ^Frit,  that
their  retreat  was  voluntary. And  for  the  historians  of  other  nations,  they
have  presumed  to  assert  that  this  people  was  actually  expelled  Egypt  on
account  of  their  lei)rosy,  to  which  the  Jewish  laws  appear  to  have  so  great
a  reference. Thus Tacitus  : Plurimi auctores consentiunt^ orta per
Aegyptum  tabe,  quae  corpora  foedaret,  regem  Occhorim,  adito  Hammonis
oraculoj  remedium  peteutem,  purgari  regnum,  et  id  genus  hominum  ut
invisum  deis,  alias in terras  avehere  jussum. Sic  conquisitum coUec-
tumque  vulgus,  .  .  . Mosen  unum  monuisse^  etc. ["  Several authors
agree  that  when  a  disfiguring  disease  spread  among  the  Egyptians,  king
Bocchoris  consulted  the  oracle  of  Hammon,  and  was  bidden  to  purge  the
kingdom  and  remove  from  it  that  class  of  men  (the  sick)  as  offensive  to
the  Gods. So  when  the  mob  was  hunted  up  and  got  together  .  .  . Moses
alone  advised,"  etc. — Tacitus,  Hist.  v. y.] Aegyptii,  (juum scabiem  et
vitiliginem  paterentur,  response  moniti  eum  (Mosen)  cum  aegris,  ne  pestis
ad  plures  serperet,  terminis  Aegypti  pellunt. Dux  igitur  exulum  factus,
sacra  Aegyptiorum  furtoabstulit :  quae  repetentes  armis  Aegyptii,  domum
redire  tempestatibus  compulsi  sunt. ["  When  the  Egyptians  were  suffer-
ing from  leprosy  they  were  warned  by  an  oracle  to  expel  Moses  and  the
sick  from  Egypt,  lest  the  disease  should  spread  further. Becoming  there-
fore leader  of  the  exiles,  Moses  stole  the  sacred  objects  of  the  Egyptians ;
and  when  the  Egyptians  tried  to  recapture  these,  they  were  driven  home
by  storms." — Justin,  xxxvi.  2.] And  in  Marsham  we  find  this  remarkable
citation  from  Manetho  :  Amenophin  regem  affectasse  OeQv  yeviaOat  dearrjv,
ibffirep  ^fip  eh  tCov  irpb  avTou ^e^aaiXevKdrwu, deorum esse comtemplatorem,

190


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

legislators  prevent  their  relapsing  perpetually  into  the  same
woi*ship  to  which  they  had  been  so  long  accustomed.^

How  far  the  divine  Providence  might  have  indulged  the
stubborn  habit  and  stupid  humour  of  this  people,  by  giving
them  laws  (as  the  Prophet  says'^)  which  he  himself  approved
not,  I  have  no  intention  to  examine. This  only  I  pretend  to

sicut  Oruni  (jueiul.im  rofi:um  prioruni.  Cui  responsum  est,  6Vt  Swrjo-erat
deout  iSeTw,  quod  posset  videre  decs,  si  regioiiem  a  leprosis  et  immuiidis
hominibus  purf^aret.  ["  That  king  Amenopliis  desired  to  see  the  Gods,
like  Orus,  an  earlier  king,  and  received  tlie  answer  from  an  oracle  that  he
might  see  the  Gods  if  he  cleared  the  country  of  filthy  lepers." — Chronicus
Canon,  p.  52.]

^  See  what  is  cited  above  (p.  1!5!),  in  the  notes  from  Marsliam)  of  the
Jews  returning  to  circumcision  under  Joshua,  after  a  generation's  inter-
mission ;  this  being  approved  by  God,  for  the  reason  given,  "That  it  was
taking  from  them  the  reproach  of  the  Egyptians,  or  what  rendered  them
odious  and  impious  in  the  eyes  of  that  people."  Compare  with  this  the
passage  concerning  Moses  himself,  Exod.  iv.  18,  25,  2G  (togetlier  with
Acts  vii.  30,  3-1),  where  in  regard  to  the  Egyptians,  to  whom  he  was  now
returning  when  fourscore  years  of  age,  he  appears  to  have  circumcised  his
children,  and  taken  otf  this  national  reproach  ;  Zipporah,  his  wife,  never-
theless, reproaching  him  with  the  bloodiness  of  the  deed,  to  which  she
appears  to  have  been  a  party  only  through  necessity,  and  in  fear  rather  of
her  husband  than  of  God.

^  Ezek.  XX.  25  ;  Acts  xv.  10.  Of  these  Egyptian  institutions  received
amongst  the  Jews,  see  our  Spencer.  Cum  morum  quorundam  antiquorum
toleratio  vi  magna  polleret,  ad  Hebraeorum  animos  Dei  legi  et  cultui  con-
ciliandos,  et  a  reformatione  Mosaica  invidiam  omnem  amoliretur  ;  maxinie
conveniebat,  ut  Deus  ritus  alitjuos  anti([uitus  usitatos  in  sacrorum  suorum
numerum  assumeret,  et  lex  a  Mose  data  speciem  aliijuam  cultus  olim  re-
cepti  ferret.  .  .  .  Ita  nempe  nati  factiijue  erant  Israelitae,  ex  Aegypto
recens  egressi,  quod  Deo  pene  necesse  esset  (humanitus  loqui  fas  sit)
rituum  aliquorum  veterum  usum  iis  indulgere,  et  illius  iustituta  ad  eorum
morem  et  modulum  accommodare.  Nam  populus  erat  a  teneris  Aegypti
moribus  assuetus,  et  in  iis  multorum  annorum  usu  confirmatus.  .  .  .
Hebraei,  non  tantum  Aegypti  moribus  assueti,  sed  etiam  refractarii  fuerunt.
.  .  .  Quemadmodum  cuj usque  regionis  et  terrae  populo  sua  sunt  ingeuia,
mores(iue  proprii,  ita  luitura  gentem  Hebraeorum,  praeter  caeteros  orl)is
iucolas,  ingenio  moroso,  difficili,  et  ad  infamiam  usque  pertinaci,  linxit.
.  .  . Cum  itaquc  veteres  Hebraei  moribus  assent  asperis  et  efferatis  adeo,

191


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

infer  from  what  has  been  advanced,  "  that  the  manners,  opinions,
rites,  and  customs  of  the  Egyptians  had,  in  the  earhest  times
and  from  generation  to  generation,  strongly  influenced  the
Hebrew  people  (their  guests  and  subjects),  and  had  undoubtedly
gained  a  powerful  ascendency  over  their  natures."

How  extravagant  soever  the  multitude  of  the  Egyptian
superstitions  may  appear,  'tis  certain  that  their  doctrine  and
wisdom  were  in  high  repute,  since  it  is  taken  notice  of  in  Holy
Scripture  as  no  small  advantage  even  to  Moses  himself,  "  that
he  had  imbibed  the  wisdom  of  this  nation,"  ^  which,  as  is  well
known,  lay  chiefly  among  their  priests  and  Magi.

Before  the  time  that  the  great  Hebrew  legislator  received
his  education  among  these  sages,  a  Hebrew  slave,^  who came

populi  conditio  postulavit,  ut  Deos  ritus  aliquos  usu  veteri  lirmatos  lis  con-
cederet,  et  vo/juktiv  Xarpeiav  TTJ  eavTwv  dadevda  av/J.^aivovaav  (uti  loquitur
Theodoretus)  cultum  legalem  eorum  infii-mitati  accommodatum  iustituerit.
.  .  .  Hebraei  superstitiosa  geus  erant,  et  omui  pene  literatura  destituti.
Quam  alte  gentium  superstitionibus  immergebantur^  e  legibus  intelligere
licet,  quae  populo  tanquam  remedia  superstitionis  imponebantur.  Con-
tumax  autem  bellua  superstitio,  si  praesertim  ab  igiiorautiae  tenebris
novam  ferociam  et  contumaciam  liauserit.  Facile  vero  credi  potest,
Isi'aelitas,  uuper  e  servorum  domo  liberatos,  artium  humaniorum  rudes
fuisse,  et  vix  quicquam  supra  lateres  atque  allium  Aegypti  sapuisse.
Quando  itaque  Deo  jam  negotium  esset,  cum  populo  tam  barbaro,  et
superstitioni  tam  impense  dedito  ;  pene  uecesse  fuit,  ut  aliquid  eorum
inlirmitati  daret,  eosque  dolo  quodam  (uon  argumentis)  ad  seipsum  alli-
ceret.  Nullum  animal  superstitioso,  rudi  praecipue,  morosius  est,  aut
majori  arte  tractandum. — Spencerus,  l)e  Leg.  Ilebr.  pp.  G27,  628,  629.

1  (1)  Kal  iwai.oevd-q  Mwct'^s  Trdcrr}  aoepla  AlyvTVTiwv'  ijv  5e  dvvaros  ev  XoyOLS
Kot  ev  ^pyoLs. Act.  Apost.  vii.  22.

(2)  Exod.  vii.  11,  22.

(3)  Ibid.  viii.  7.

(4)  Justin,  xxxvi.  2.

•^  Gen.  xxxix. ,  etc. Minimus  aetate  inter  fratres  Joseph  fuit,  cujus

excellens  ingenium  veriti  fratres  clam  interceptum  peregrinis  mercatoribus

vendiderunt. A  quibus  deportatus  in  Aegyptum,  cum  magicas  ibi  artes

solerti  ingenio  percepisset,  brevi  ipsi  regi  percarus  fuit. ["Joseph  was

he  youngest  of  the  brothers,  and  they,  fearing  his  cleverness,  kidnapped

192


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

a  youth  into  the  Egyptian  Court,  had  already  grown  so  powerful
in  this  kind  of  wisdom,  as  to  outdo  the  chief  diviners,  prognos-
ticators  and  interpreters  of  Egypt.  He  raised  himself  to  be
chief  minister  to  a  prince,  who,  following  his  advice,  obtained
in  a  manner  the  whole  property,  and  consequently  the  absolute
dominion  of  that  land.  But  to  what  height  of  power  the
established  priesthood  was  arrived  even  at  that  time,  may  be
conjectured  hence :  "  that  the  crown  (to  speak  in  a  modern
style)  offered  not  to  meddle  with  the  church  lands'";  and  that
in  this  great  revolution  nothing  was  attempted,  so  much  as  by
way  of  purchase  or  exchange,^  in  prejudice  of  this  landed  clergy,
the  prime  minister  himself  having  joined  his  interest  with  theirs,
and  entered  by  marriage  into  their  alliance.^  And  in  this  he
was  followed  by  the  great  founder  of  the  Hebrew  state.  For
he  also  matched  himself  \\ith  the  priesthood  of  some  of  the
neighbouring  nations  ^  and  traders  *  into  Egypt,  long  ere  his
establishment  of  the  Hebrew  religion  and  commonwealth.  Nor
had  he  perfected  his  model  till  he  consulted  the  foreign  priest,
his  father-in-law,^  to  whose  advice  he  paid  such  remarkable
deference.

But  to  resume  the  subject  of  our  speculation  concerning  the
wide  diffusion  of  the  priestly  science  or  function,  it  appears
from  what  has  been  said,  that  notwithstanding  the  Egyptian
priesthood  was  by  ancient  establishment  hereditary,  the  skill
of  divining,  soothsaying,  and  magic  was  communicated  to  others
besides  their  national  sacred  body ;  and  that  the  wisdom  of  the
magicians,  their  power  of  miracles,  their  interpretation  of  dreams
and  visions,  and  their  art  of  administering  in  divine  affairs,
were  entrusted  even  to  foreigners  who  resided  amongst  them,
him  and  sold  him  to  foreign  merchants.  These  men  carried  him  to  Egypt,
where  he  (juickly  learned  magic  and  rose  to  high  favour  even  with  the
king." — Justin,  xxxvi.  2.]

1  Gen.  xlvii.  22,  26.  2  Qeu.  xli.  4-5.

^  Exod.  iii.  1,  and  xviii.  1,  etc.

*  Such  were  the  Midianites,  Gen.  xxxvii.  28,  36.

^  Exod.  xviii.  17-24.

VOL.  II  193  o


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

It  appears  withal,  from  these  considerations,  how  apt  the
rehgious  profession  was  to  spread  itself  widely  in  this  region
of  the  world,  and  what  efforts  would  naturally  be  made  by
the  more  necessitous  of  these  unlimited  professors  towards
a  fortune  or  maintenance,  for  themselves  and  their  suc-
cessors.

Common  arithmetic  will,  in  this  case,  demonstrate  to  us
"  that  as  the  proportion  of  so  many  laymen  to  each  priest  grew
every  day  less  and  less,  so  the  wants  and  necessities  of  each  priest
must  grow  more  and  more."  The  magistrate  too,  who,  according
to  this  Egyptian  regulation,  had  resigned  his  title  or  share  of
right  in  sacred  things,  could  no  longer  govern  as  he  pleased  in
these  affairs,  or  check  the  growing  number  of  these  professors.
The  sjiiritual  generations  were  left  to  prey  on  others,  and  (like
fish  of  prey)  even  on  themselves,  when  destitute  of  other  capture
and  confined  within  too  narrow  limits.  What  method  therefore,
was  there  left  to  heighten  the  zeal  of  worshippers  and  augment
their  liberality,  but  "  to  foment  their  emulation,  prefer  worship
to  worship,  faith  to  faith,  and  turn  the  spirit  of  enthusiasm  to
the  side  of  sacred  horror,  religious  antipathy,  and  mutual  discord
between  worshippers  "'*'  ?

Thus  provinces  and  nations  were  divided  by  the  most
contrary  rites  and  customs  which  could  be  devised  in  order  to
create  the  strongest  aversion  possible  between  creatures  of  a  like
species.  For  when  all  other  animosities  are  allayed,  and  anger
of  the  fiercest  kind  appeased,  the  religious  hatred,  we  find,
continues  still,  as  it  began,  Avithout  provocation  or  voluntary
offence.  The  presumed  misbeliever  and  blasphemer,  as  one
rejected  and  abhorred  of  God,  is,  through  a  pious  imitation,
abhorred  by  the  adverse  worshipper  whose  enmity  must  naturally
increase  as  his  religious  zeal  increases.

From  hence  the  opposition  rose  of  temple  against  tem]:)le,
proselyte  against  proselyte.  The  most  zealous  worship  of  one
God  was  best  expressed  (as  they  conceived)  by  the  open  defiance
of  another. Surnames  and  titles  of  divinity  passed  as  watch-

194


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

words. He  who  had  not  tlie  symbol  nor  could  give  tlie  word
received  the  knock.

Down  with  him! Kill  liim  I Merit  heaven  tliereby  ;

as  our  poet  has  it  in  his  American  tragedy.^

Nor  (Hd  ])hilosoj)hy,"-  when  introduced  into  i-ehgion,  ex-
tinguish but  rather  inHame  this  zeal,  as  we  may  show  perhaps
in  our  following  chapter  more  particularly,  if  we  return  again,
as  is  likely,  to  this  subject.  For  this,  we  perceive,  is  of  a  kind
apt  enough  to  grow  upon  our  hands.  Wa  shall  here  therefore
observe  only  what  is  obvious  to  every  student  in  sacred  anti-
(juities,  that  from  the  contentious  learning  and  sophistry  of  the
ancient  schools  (when  true  science,  philosophy,  and  arts  were
already  deep  in  their  decline-^)  religious  problems  of  a  like
contentious  form  sprang  uj),  and  certain  doctrinal  tests  were
framed  by  which  religious  parties  were  engaged  and  listed  against
one  another,  with  more  animosity  than  in  any  other  cause  or
quarrel  had  been  ever  known.  Thus  religious  massacres  bejran
and  were  carried  on ;  temples  were  demolished,  holy  utensils
destroyed,  the  sacred  pomp  trodden  under-foot,  insulted,  and
the  insulters  in  their  turn  exposed  to  the  same  treatment  in
their  persons  as  well  as  in  their  worship.  Thus  madness  and
confusion  were  brought  upon  the  world,  like  that  chaos  which
the  poet  miraculously  describes  in  the  mouth  of  his  mad  hero,
when  even  in  celestial  places  disorder  and  blindness  reigned ;
"  No  dawn  of  light  "—

"  No  glimpse  or  starry  spark,
But  Gods  met  Gods,  and  justled  in  the  dark."  ^

^  Dryden,  Indian  Emperor,  Act  v.  Sc.  2.
^  IiiJ'ra,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.

3  Treatise  in.  part  ii.  §  1  ; and  part iii. §  8 in  the  notes. Infra,
Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.

*  Oedipus  of  Drydeu  and  Lee.

195


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


CHAPTER II

Judgment  of  divines  and  grave  authors  concerning  enthusiasm — Reflec-
tions upon  scepticism — A  sceptic  Christian — Judgment  of  the  inspired
concerning  their  own  inspirations — Knowledge  and  Itelief — History
of  religion  resumed — ^Zeal  offensive  and  defensive — A  Church  in
danger — Pei'secution — Policy  of  the  Church  of  Rome.

What  I  had  to  remark  of  my  own  concerning  enthusiasm  I
have  thus  di.s))atched ;  what  others  have  remarked  on  the  same
subject  I  may,  as  an  apologist  to  another  author,  be  allowed  to
cite,  especially  if  I  take  notice  only  of  what  has  been  dropped
very  naturally  by  some  of  our  most  approved  authors  and
ablest  divines.

It  has  been  thought  an  odd  kind  of  temerity  in  our  author
to  assert,^  "that  even  atheism  itself  was  not  wholly  exempt
from  enthusiasm,  that  there  have  been  in  reality  enthusiastical
atheists,  and  that  even  the  spirit  of  martyrdom  could,  upon
occasion,  exert  itself  as  well  in  this  cause  as  in  any  other."
Now,  besides  what  has  been  intimated  in  the  preceding  chapter,
and  what  in  fact  may  be  demonstrated  from  the  examples  of
Vaninus  and  other  martyrs  of  a  like  principle,  we  may  hear  an
excellent  and  learned  divine,"  of  highest  authority  at  home  and
fame  abroad,  who  after  having  described  an  enthusiastical  atheist
and  one  atheistically  inspired,  says  of  this  very  sort  of  men
"  that  they  are  fanatics  too,  however  that  word  seem  to  have  a
more  peculiar  respect  to  something  of  a  deity  ;  all  atheists  being
that  blind  Goddess  Nature''s  fanatics.""

And  again,  "  All  atheists,"  says  he,  "  are  possessed  with  a
certain  kind  of  madness  that  may  be  called  pneumatophobia,^

1  Viz.  in  his  Letter  concerning  Enthusiasm.
~  Dr.  Cudworth's  Intellectual  System,  p.  134.

•^  The  good  doctor  makes  use  here  of  a  stroke  of  raillery  against  the
over-frighted  anti-superstitious  gentlemen,  with  whom  our  author  reasons

19G


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

that  makes  tliein  have  an  iirational  hut  desperate  abhon-ence
from  spirits  or  incoi-poreal  substances ;  they  being  acted  also,
at  the  same  time,  with  an  hvlomania,  whereby  thev  madiv  dote
upon  matter,  and  devoutly  worship  it  as  the  only  numen.'"

AVhat  the  power  of  ecstasy  is,  whether  through  melancholy,
wine,  love,  or  other  natural  causes,  another  learned  divine  ^  of
our  church,  in  a  discourse  upon  enthusiasm,  sets  forth,  bringing
an  example  from  Aristotle  "  of  a  Svracusean  poet  who  never
versified  so  well  as  when  he  was  in  his  distracted  fits."  But  as
to  poets  in  general,  compared  with  the  religious  enthusiasts,  he
says,  there  is  this  difference,  "  that  a  poet  is  an  enthusiast  in
jest,  and  an  enthusiast  is  a  ])oet  in  good  earnest.'"'

"'Tis  a  strong  temptation,  says  the  doctor,'-  with  a  melan-
cholist,  when  he  feels  a  storm  of  devotion  and  zeal  come  upon
him  like  a  mighty  wind,  his  heart  being  full  of  affection,  his

at  larjje  in  liis  second  Treatise  (part  ii.  §  1).  'Tis  indeed  the  nature  of
fear,  as  of  all  otlier  passions,  wlien  excessive,  to  defeat  its  own  end  and
prevent  us  in  tlie  execution  of  what  we  naturally  propose  to  ourselves  as
our  advantage.  Superstition  itself  is  but  a  certain  kind  of  fear,  which
])ossessing  us  strongly  with  the  apprehended  wrath  or  displeasure  of
divine  powers,  hinders  us  from  judging  what  those  powers  are  in  them-
selves, or  what  conduct  of  ours  may,  with  best  reason,  be  thought  suitable
to  such  highly  rational  and  superior  natures.  Now  if  from  the  experience
of  many  gross  delusions  of  a  superstitious  kind  the  course  of  this  fear
begins  to  turn,  'tis  natural  for  it  to  run  with  e(]ual  violence  a  contrary
way.  The  extreme  passion  for  religious  objects  passes  into  an  aversion.
And  a  certain  horror  and  dread  of  imposture  causes  as  great  a  disturbance
as  even  imposture  itself  had  done  before.  In  such  a  situation  as  this,
the  mind  may  easily  be  bliiuled,  as  well  in  one  respect  as  in  the  other.
'Tis  plain  both  these  disorders  carry  something  with  them  which  discovers
us  to  be  in  some  manner  beside  our  reason,  and  out  of  the  right  use  of
judgment  and  understanding.  For  how  can  we  be  said  to  intrust  or  use
our  reason  if  in  any  case  we  fear  to  be  convinced  .''  How  are  we  masters
of  ourselves  when  we  have  acquired  the  habit  of  bringing  horror,  aversion,
favour,  fondness,  or  any  other  temper  than  that  of  mere  indifference  and
impartiality  into  the  judgment  of  opinions  and  search  of  truth  ?

1  Dr.  More,  §§  11,  19,  20,  and  so  on.

^  §1G.

197


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

head  pregnant  with  clear  and  sensible  representations,  and  his
mouth  flowing  and  streaming  with  fit  and  powerful  expressions,
such  as  would  astonish  an  ordinary  auditory';^  'tis,  I  say,  a
shrewd  temptation  to  him  to  think  it  the  very  spirit  of  God
that  then  moves  su})ernaturally  in  him,  whenas  all  that  excess
of  zeal  and  affection  and  fluency  of  words  is  most  palpably  to
be  resolved  into  the  power  of  melancholy,  which  is  a  kind  of
natural  inebriation."

The  learned  doctor,  with  much  pains  afterwards,  and  by
help  of  the  peripatetic  philosophy,  explains  this  enthusiastic
inebriation,  and  shows  in  particular-  "how  the  vapours  and
fumes  of  melancholy  partake  of  the  nature  of  wine."

One  might  conjecture  from  hence  that  the  malicious  opposers
of  early  Christianity  were  not  unversed  in  this  philosophy,  when
they  sophistically  objected  against  the  apparent  force  of  the
divine  spirit  speaking  in  divers  languages,  and  attributed  it  "  to
the  power  of  new  wine."  ^

But  our  devout  and  zealous  doctor  seems  to  go  yet  further.
For  besides  what  he  says  of  the  enthusiastic  power"*  of  fancy
in  atheists,  he  calls  melancholy'^  a  pertinacious  and  religious
complexion,  and  asserts  "that  there  is  not  any  true  spiritual
grace  from  God,  but  this  mere  natural  constitution,  according
to  the  several  tempers  and  workings  of  it,  will  not  only  resemble,
but  sometimes  seem  to  outstriji."  And  after  speaking  of
prophetical  enthusiasm,*^  and  establishing  (as  our  author ''  does)
a  legitimate  and  a  bastard  sort,  he  asserts  and  justifies  the
devotional  enthuiasm  ^  (as  he  calls  it)  of  holy  and  sincere  souls,
and  ascribes  this  also  to  melancholy.

^  It  appears  from  hence  that  in  the  notion  \\  liich  this  learned  divine
pves  us  of  enthusiasm,  he  comprehends  the  social  or  popular  genius  of
the  passion  ;  agreeahly  with  what  our  author  in  his  Letter  concernir^g
Enthusiasm  has  said  of  the  influence  and  power  of  the  assembly  and
auditory  itself,  and  of  tlie  communicative  force  and  rapid  progress  of  this
ecstatic  fervour,  once  kindled  and  set  in  action.

^  §§  20,  22,  23,  20.  ^  Acts  ii.  18.  *  §  1.  ^  §  1.5.

6  §§  30  and  5'.  ^  Treatise  i.  §  G.  ^  §  C3.

198


MTSCETJwXNROUS REFLECTIONS

He  allows  "  tli;it  the  soul  may  sink  so  far  into  phantasms
as  not  to  recover  the  use  of  her  free  faculties,  and  that  this
enormous  stren<^th  of  imagination  does  not  only  beget  the  belief
of  mad  internal  a|)])rehensions,  but  is  able  to  assure  us  of  the
presence  of  external  objects  which  are  not."  He  adds,  "that
what  custom  and  education  do  by  degrees,  distempered  fancy
may  do  in  a  shorter  time."  And  speaking  of  ecstasy  ^  and  the
power  of  melancholy  in  ecstatic  fancies,  he  says  "  that  what  the
imagination  then  ])uts  forth,  of  herself,  is  as  clear  as  broad  day,
and  the  perception  of  the  soul  at  least  as  strong  and  vigorous
as  at  any  time  in  beholding  things  awake. ''

From  whence  the  doctor  infers  "  that  the  strength  of  per-
ception is  no  sure  ground  of  truth."

Had  any  other  than  a  reverend  father  of  our  diurch  ex-
pressed himself  in  this  manner,  he  must  have  been  contented
perhaps  to  bear  a  sufficient  charge  of  scepticism.

'Twas  a  good  fortinie  in  mv  I^ord  liacon's  case  that  he
should  have  escaped  being  called  an  atheist  or  a  sceptic,'-  when,
speaking  in  a  solemn  manner  of  the  religious  passion,  the  ground
of  superstition  or  enthusiasm  (wliich  he  also  terms  a  panic  ^),  he
derives  it  from  an  imperfection  in  the  creation,  make,  or  natural

1  §28.

-  [As  a  matter  uf  fact  lie  did  nut  escape  it.  See  the  preface  (Author  to
Reader)  to  Francis  Osborn's  Miscellany  of  Sundry  P^ssays,  etc.,  in  his  >\'^orks,
7th.  ed.,  1073.]

^  Natura  rerum  omnibus  viventibus  indidit  metum  et  formidinem,
vitae  atque  esseutiae  suae  conservatricem,  ac  mala  ingruentia  vitantem  et
depellentem.  Verumtamen  eadem  natura  niddum  tenere  nescia  est,  sed
timoribus  salutaribus  semi)er  vanos  et  inanes  admiscet  :  adeo  ut  omnia
(si  intus  conspici  darentur)  panicis  terroribus  plenissima  sint,  praesertim
humana  ;  et  maxime  omnium  apud  vul^''um,  <iui  superstitione  (([uae  vera
nihil  aliud  quam  panicus  terror  est)  in  immensum  laborat  et  aijitatur  ;
praecipue  temporibus  duris  et  trepidis  et  adversis. — Franciscus  Bacon  de
Augment.  Scient.,  lib.  ii.  c.  LS.

The  author  of  the  letter,  I  dare  say,  would  have  expected  no  quarter
from  his  critics,  had  he  expressed  himself  as  tliis  celebrated  author  liere
quoted,  who  by  his  Xatura  Rerum  can  mean  nothing  less  than  the  univer'^al

199


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

constitution  of  man.  How  far  the  author  of  the  letter  ^  differs
from  this  author  in  his  opinion  both  of  the  end  and  foundation
of  this  passion,  may  appear  from  what  has  been  said  above.
And,  in  general,  from  what  we  read  in  the  other  succeeding
treatises  of  our  author  we  may  venture  to  say  of  him  with
assurance,  "  that  he  is  as  little  a  sceptic  (according  to  the  vulgar
sense  of  that  word)  as  he  is  Epicurean  or  atheist."  This  may  be
proved  sufficiently  from  his  philosophy  ;  and  for  anything  higher,
'tis  what  he  nowhere  presumes  to  treat,  having  forborne  in  par-
ticular to  mention  any  holy  mysteries  of  our  religion,  or  sacred
article  of  our  belief.

As  for  what  relates  to  revelation  in  general,^  if  I  mistake
not  our  author's  meaning,  he  professes  to  believe,  as  far  as  is
possible  for  any  one  who  himself  had  never  experienced  any
divine  communication,  whether  by  dream,  vision,  apparition,  or
other  supernatural  operation ;  nor  was  ever  present  as  eye-
witness of  any  sign,  prodigy,  or  miracle  whatsoever.  Many  of
these,^  he  observes,  are  at  this  day  pretendedly  exhibited  in
the  world  with  an  endeavour  of  giving  them  the  perfect  air  and
exact  resemblance  of  those  recorded  in  Holy  Writ.  He  speaks
indeed  with  contempt  of  the  mockery  of  modern  miracles  and  in-
spiration. And  as  to  all  pretences  to  things  of  this  kind  in  our
present  age,  he  seems  inclined  to  look  upon  them  as  no  better
than  mere  imposture  or  delusion.  But  for  what  is  recorded  of
ages  heretofore,  he  seems  to  resign  his  judgment,  with  entire
condescension,  to  his  superiors.  He  pretends  not  to  frame  any
certain  or  positive  opinion  of  his  own,  notwithstanding  his  best
searches  into  antiquity  and  the  nature  of  religious  record  and
traditions ; but  on all occasions  submits most  willingly,  and

dispensing  Nature,  erring  blindly  in  the  very  first  design^  contrivance,  or
original  frame  of  things,  according  to  the  opinion  of  Epicurus  himself,
whom  this  author  immediately  after  cites  with  praise.

1  Viz.  the  Letter  concerning  Enthusiasm,  above.

-  Infra,  Misc.  v.  .3.

^  Letter  concerning  Enthusiasm,  §  H  ;  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  5.

200


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

with  lull  conliilciKf  ancl  trust,  to  the  opinions'  by  law  cstiib-
lislictl.  Ancl  if  this  be  not  sufficient  to  free  liini  from  the
reproach  of  scepticism,  lie  nuist,  for  auglit  I  see,  be  content  to
undergo  it.

To  say  tnitli,  I  have  often  wondered  to  find  such  a  disturb-
ance raised  about  the  simple  name  of  scej)tic.-  'Tis  certain
that,  in  its  original  and  plain  signification,  the  word  imports  no
more  than  barely  "that  state  or  frame  of  mind  in  which  every
one  remains  on  every  subject  of  which  he  is  not  certain."  He
who  is  certain,  or  presumes  to  say  he  knows  is  in  that  particular,
whether  he  be  mistaken  or  in  the  right,  a  dogmatist,  lietween
these  two  states  or  situations  of  mind  there  can  be  no  medium.
For  he  who  says  "  that  he  believes  for  certain,  or  is  assured  of
what  he  believes,""  either  speaks  ridiculously  or  says  in  effect
"  that  he  believes  strongly,  but  is  not  sure."  So  that  whoever  is
not  conscious  of  revelation,  nor  has  certain  knowledge  of  any
miracle  or  sign,  can  be  no  more  than  sceptic  in  the  case ;  and
the  best  Christian  in  the  world,  who  being  destitute  of  the
means  of  certainty  depends  only  on  history  and  tradition  for
his  belief  in  these  particulars,  is  at  best  but  a  sceptic  Christian.
He  has  no  more  than  a  nicely  critical  ^  historical  faith,  subject
to  various  speculations,  and  a  thousand  different  criticisms  of
languages  and  literature.

This  he  will  naturally  find  to  be  the  case  if  he  attempts  to
search  into  originals  in  order  to  be  his  own  judge,  and  proceed
on  the  bottom  of  his  own  discernment  and  understanding.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  ho  is  no  critic,  nor  competently  learned  in
these  originals,  'tis  plain  he  can  have  no  original  judgment  of
his  own,  but  must  rely  still  on  the  opinion  of  those  who  have
opportunity  to  examine  such  matters,  and  whom  he  takes  to
be  the  unbiassed  and  disinterested  judges  of  these  religious
narratives. His  faith  is  not  in  ancient  facU  or  persons,  nor  in

'  Advice  to  an  Author,  towards  tlie  end  ;  Mine.  ii.  :3  ;  v.  1,  :].

2  Moralists,  part  i.  §  2  ;  Misc.  v.  3.

^ Wit  and  Hinnonr,  part  iv.  §  3  ;  Misc.  v.  3.

201


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERTSTICS

the  ancient  writ,  or  primitive  recorders ;  nor  in  the  successive
collators  or  conservators  of  these  records  (for  of  these  he  is  un-
able to  take  cognisance).  IJut  his  confidence  and  trust  must
be  in  those  modern  men,  or  societies  of  men,  to  whom  the
public  or  he  himself  ascribes  the  judgment  of  these  records,
and  commits  the  determination  of  sacred  writ  and  genuine
story.

Let  the  person  seem  ever  so  positive  or  dogmatical  in  these
high  points  of  learning,  he  is  yet  in  reality  no  dogmatist,  nor
can  any  way  free  himself  from  a  certain  kind  of  scepticism.
He  must  know  himself  still  capable  of  doubting ;  or  if,  for  fear
of  it,  he  strives  to  banish  every  opposite  thought,  and  resolves
not  so  much  as  to  deliberate  on  the  case,  this  still  will  not
acquit  him.  So  far  are  we  from  being  able  to  be  sure  when  we
have  a  mind ;  that  indeed  we  can  never  be  thoroughly  sure,  but
then  only  when  we  can't  help  it,  and  find  of  necessity  we  must
be  so,  whether  we  will  or  not.  Even  the  highest  implicit  faith
is  in  reality  no  more  than  a  kind  of  passive  scepticism  ;  "  a
resolution  to  examine,  recollect,  consider,  or  hear  as  little  as
possible  to  the  prejudice  of  that  belief,  which  having  once
espoused  we  are  ever  afterwards  afraid  to  lose."

If  I  might  be  allowed  to  imitate  our  author,  in  daring  to
touch  now  and  then  upon  the  characters  of  our  divine  worthies,
I  should,  upon  this  subject  of  belief,  observe  how  fair  and
generous  the  great  Christian  convert  and  learned  apostle  has
shown  himself  in  his  sacred  writings.  Notwithstanding  he  had
himself  an  original  testimony  and  revelation  from  heaven  on
which  he  grounded  his  conversion ;  notwithstanding  he  had  in
his  own  person  the  experience  of  outward  miracles  and  inward
communications;  he  condescended  still,  on  many  occasions,  to
speak  sceptically,  and  with  some  hesitation  and  reserve,  as  to  the
certainty  of  these  divine  exhibitions.  In ,  his  account  of  some
transactions  of  this  kind,  himself  being  the  witness,  and  speak-
ing (as  we  may  presume)  of  his own  person  and  proper  vision,^

1  2  Cor.  xii.  2,  3.

202


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

he  says  only  tliat  ''■  lie  knew  ;i  man,  ulK'ther  in  the  IxxK  oi'  out
of  it,  lie  cannot  tell.  IJut  siicli  ;i  one  c-aui;lil  up  lo  the  lliird
heaven  he  knew  formerly,  he  says,  al)ove  fourteen  years  before
his  then  writini;;/''  And  when  in  ajiother  capacity  the  same
inspired  writer,  ^i^ivini;-  precej)ts  to  his  discij)les,  distinguishes
wliat  ^  he  writes  by  divine  connnission  from  what  he  delivers  as
his  own  judgment  and  ])rivate  opinion,  he  condescends  neveithe-
less  to  speak  as  one  no  way  positive,  or  master  of  any  absolute
criterion  in  the  case.  And  in  several  subsecpient  -  passages  he
expresses  himself  as  under  some  kind  of  doubt  how  to  jutlge
or  determine  certainly,  "  whether  he  writes  by  inspiration  or
otherwise.  He  only  "  thinks  he  has  the  spirit."  He  "  is  not  sure,"
nor  would  have  us  to  depend  on  him  as  positive  or  certain  in  a
matter  of  so  nice  discernment.

The  holy  founders  and  inspired  authors  of  our  religion
required  not,  it  seems,  so  strict  an  assent,  or  such  implicit  faith
in  behalf  of  their  original  writings  and  revelations,  as  later  un-
inspired doctors,  without  the  help  of  divine  testimony  or  any
miracle  on  their  side,  have  recpiired  in  behalf  of  their  own
comments  and  interpretations.  The  earliest  and  \\orst  of
heretics,  'tis  said,  were  those  called  Gnostics,  who  took  their
name  from  an  audacious  pretence  to  certain  knowledge  and
comprehension  of  the  greatest  mysteries  of  faith.  If  the  most
dangerous  state  of  opinion  was  this  dogmatical  and  presump-
tuous sort,  the  safest,  in  all  likelihood,  must  be  the  sceptical  and
modest.

There  is  nothing  more  evident  than  that  our  holy  religion,
in  its  original  constitution,  was  set  so  far  apart  from  all
philosophy  or  refined  speculation,  that  it  seemetl  in  a  manner
diametrically  op])Osed  to  it.  A  man  might  have  been  not  only
a  .sceptic  in  all  the  controverted  j)oints  of  the  academies  or
schools  of  learning,  but  even  a  perfect  stranger  to  all  of  this
kind  ;  and  yet  complete  in  his  religion,  faith,  and  worship.

Among the polite heathens of the ancient world, these
1  1  Cor.  vii.  10,  12.  -  1  Cor.  vii.  40.

203


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

different  provinces  of  religion  and  philosophy  were  upheld,  we
know,  Avithout  the  least  interfering  with  each  other.  If  in  some
barharous  nations  the  philosopher  and  priest  were  joined  in  one,
'tis  observable  that  the  mysteries,  whatever  they  were,  which
sprang  from  this  extraordinary  conjunction  were  kept  secret
and  undivulged.  'Twas  satisfaction  enough  to  the  priest-
philosopher,  if  the  initiated  pai'ty  preserved  his  respect  and
veneration  for  the  tradition  and  worship  of  the  temple,  by  com-
plying in  every  respect  with  the  requisite  performances  and  rites
of  worship.  No  account  was  afterwards  taken  of  the  philosophic
faith  of  the  proselyte  or  worshipper.  His  opinions  were  left  to
himself,  and  he  might  philosophise  according  to  what  foreign
school  or  sect  he  fancied.  Even  amongst  the  Jews  themselves,
the  Sadducee  (a  materialist  and  denier  of  the  souPs  immortality)
was  as  well  admitted  as  the  Pharisee ;  who  from  the  schools  of
Pythagoras,  Plato,  or  other  latter  philosophers  of  Greece,  had
learnt  to  reason  upon  immaterial  substances,  and  the  natural
immortality  of  souls.

'Tis  no  astonishing  reflection  to  observe  how  fast  the  world
declined  in  wit  and  sense,^  in  manhood,  reason,  science,  and  in
every  art  when  once  the  Roman  Empire  had  prevailed  and
spread  an  universal  tyranny  and  oppression  over  mankind.
Even  the  Romans  themselves,  after  the  early  sweets  of  one
peaceful  and  long  reign,  began  to  groan  under  that  yoke  of
which  they  had  been  themselves  the  imposers.  How  much
more  must  other  nations  and  mighty  cities  at  a  far  distance
have  abhorred  this  tyranny,  and  detected  their  common  servitude
under  a  people  who  were  themselves  no  better  than  mere  slaves  ?

It  may  be  looked  upon,  no  doubt,  as  providential,  that  at
this  time,  and  in  these  circumstances  of  the  world,  there  should
arise  so  high  an  expectation  of  a  divine  deliverer ;  and  that
from  the  eastern  parts  and  confines  of  Judea,  the  opinion
should  spread  itself  of  such  a  deliverer  to  come,  with  strength
from  heaven  sufficient  to  break  that  Empire,  which  no  earthly
^  Advice,  part  ii.  §  1,  and  in  the  preceding  chapter,  at  the  end.

204


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

power  remaining  could  he  thought  sufficient  to  encounter.
Nothing  could  have  better  disposed  the  generality  of  mankind
to  receive  the  evangelical  advice  whilst  they  mistook  the  news,
as  many  of  the  first  Christians  plainly  ditl,  and  understood  the
promises  of  a  Messias  in  this  temporal  sense,  with  respect  to
his  second  coming  and  sudden  reign  here  upon  earth.

Superstition,^  in  the  meanwhile,  could  not  hut  naturally
prevail,  as  misery  and  ignorance  increased.  The  lloman
emperors,  as  they  grew  more  barbarous,  grew  so  much  the  more
superstitious.  The  lands  and  revenues  as  well  as  the  numbers
of  the  heathen  priests  grew  daily.  And  when  the  season  came,
that  by  means  of  a  convert-emperor  the  heathen-  church-
lands,  with  an  increase  of  power,  became  transferred  to  the
Christian clergy, 'twas no wonder if by such riches and

' Wit  (Did  lliunour,  part  iv.  §  1,  and  below,  p.  21o.

-  How  rich  and  vast  these  were,  especially  in  the  latter  times  of  that
Empire,  may  be  judged  frcmi  what  belonjred  to  the  single  order  of  the
vestals,  and  what  we  read  of  the  revenues  belonging  to  the  temples  of  the
sun  (as  in  the  time  of  the  monster  Heliogabalus)  and  of  other  donations
by  other  emperors.  But  \\\\nt  may  give  us  yet  a  greater  idea  of  these
riches,  is,  that  iu  the  latter  heathen  times,  which  grew  more  and  more
superstitious,  the  restraining  laws  (or  statutes  of  Mortmain)  by  which
men  had  formerly  been  withheld  from  giving  away  estates  by  will  or
otherwise  to  religious  uses  were  repealed  ;  and  the  heathen  church  left  in
this  manner  as  a  bottomless  gulf  and  devouring  receptacle  of  land  and
treasure.  Senatus-consulto,  et  constitutionibus  principum,  haeredes
instituere  concessum  est  Apollinem  Didymaeum,  Dianam  Ephesiam,
matrem  deorum,  etc. I'lpianus  post  Cod.  Tlieodox.  \).  [)2,  (ifiud  .Marsh.

This  answers  not  amiss  to  the  modern  practice  and  expression  of
making  our  son  our  heir,  giving  to  God  what  has  been  taken  sometimes
with  freedom  enough  from  man,  and  conveying  estates  iu  such  a  manner
in  this  world  as  to  make  good  interest  of  them  in  another.  The  reproach
of  the  ancient  satirist  is  at  present  out  of  doors.  'Tis  no  affront  to  religion
nowadays  to  compute  its  profits.  And  a  man  might  well  be  accounted
dull,  who,  in  our  present  age,  should  ask  the  question,  Dicite,  poutifices,  in
sacro  quid  facit  aurum  .''  ["  Reverend  pontiffs,  tell  us  what  good  gold  can  do
iu  a  holy  place .'' "  Persius,  ii.  6!*,  Coniugton's  translation.]  See  below,
p.  213,  and  ch.  iii.,  in  the  notes,  and  p.  211.

205


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

authority  they  were  in  no  small  measure  influenced  and  cor-
rupted, as  may  be  gathered  even  from  the  accounts  given  us  of
these  matters  by  themselves.

When,  together  with  this,  the  schools  of  the  ancient
philosophers,^  which  had  been  long  in  their  decline,  came  now
to  be  dissolved,  and  their  sophistic  teachers  became  ecclesiastical
instructors,  the  unnatural  union  of  religion  and  ,  philosophy
was  completed,  and  the  monstrous  jjroduct  of  this  match
appeared  soon  in  the  world.  The  odd  exterior  shapes  of
deities,  temples,  and  holy  utensils,  which  by  the  Egyptian
sects  -  had  been  formerly  set  in  battle  against  each  other,  were
now  metamorphosed  into  ])hilosophical  forms  and  phantoms ;
and,  like  flags  and  banners,  displayed  in  hostile  manner,  and
borne  offensively  by  one  party  against  another.  In  former
times  those  barbarous  nations  above  mentioned  were  the  sole
warriors  in  these  religious  causes  ;  but  now  the  whole  world
became  engaged  when  instead  of  storks  and  crocodiles  other
ensigns  were  erected ;  when  sophistical  chimeras,  crabbed
notions,  bombastic  phrases,  solecisms,  absurdities,  and  a  thou-
sand monsters  of  a  scholastic  brood  were  set  on  foot,  and  made
the  subject  of  vulgar  animosity  and  dispute.

Here  first  began  that  spirit  of  bigotry  which  broke  out  in
a  more  raging;  manner  than  had  been  ever  known  before,  and
was  less  capable  of  temper  or  moderation  than  any  species,
form,  or  mixture  of  religion  in  the  ancient  world.  Mysteries
which  were  heretofore  treated  with  profound  respect,  and  lay
unexposed  to  vulgar  eyes,  became  public  and  prostitute,  being
enforced  with  terrors,  and  urged  with  compulsion  and  violence
on  the  unfitted  capacities  and  apprehensions  of  mankind.  The
very  Jewish  traditions  and  cabalistic  learning  underwent  this
fate.  That  which  was  naturally  the  subject  of  profound  specula-
tion and  inquiry  was  made  the  necessary  subject  of  a  strict  and
absolute  assent. The  allegorical,  mythological  account  of  sacred

^  As  above^  ch.  i.  eud.
2  Supra,  ch.  i.,  and  Advice,  part  ii.  §  3,  in  the  notes.

206


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

things  was  wholly  inverted;  liberty  of  judgment  and  exj)o.sition
taken  away;  no  ground  left  for  iiujuirv,  search,  or  meditation,
no  refuge  from  the  dogmatical  .spirit  let  loose.  Every  (juarter
was  taken  up  ;  every  portion  prepossessed.  All  was  reduced  to
article  and  pro})osition.^

Thus  a  sort  of  philosophical  enthusiasm  overspread  the
world.  And  bigotry  -  (a  species  of  superstition  hardly  known
before)  took  place  in  men's  affections,  and  armed  them  with  a
new  jealousy  against  each  other.  Barbarous  terms  and  idioms
were  every  day  introduced,  monstrous  definitions  invented  and
iiUj)osed,  new  schemes  of  faith  erected  from  time  to  time,  and
hostilities,  the  fiercest  imaginable,  exercised  on  these  occasions.
So  that  the  enthusiasm  or  zeal,  which  was  usually  shown  by
mankind  in  behalf  of  their  particular  worships,  and  which  for
the  most  part  had  been  hitherto  defensive  only,  grew  now  to  be
universally  of  the  offensive  kind.

It  may  be  expected  of  me  perhaps,  that  being  fallen  thus
from  remote  antiquity  to  later  periods,  I  should  speak  on  this
occasion  with  more  than  ordinary  exactness  and  regularity.  It
may  be  urged  against  me  that  I  talk  here  as  at  random  and
without  book  ;  neglecting  to  produce  my  authorities  or  continue
my  (quotations,  according  to  the  professed  style  and  manner  in
which  I  began  this  present  chapter.  But  as  there  are  many
greater  privileges  by  way  of  variation,  interruption,  and  digres-
sion allowed  to  us  writers  of  Miscellany,  and  especially  to  such
as  are  commentators  upon  other  authors,  I  shall  be  content  to
remain  mysterious  in  this  respect,  and  explain  myself  no  further
than  by  a  noted  story,  which  seems  to  suit  our  author's  purpose,
and  the  present  argument.

'Tis  observable  from  Holy  Writ,  that  the  ancient  Ephesian

^  Infra,  Misc.  v.  ch.  iii.  in  the  notes  ;  et  .supra,  p.  V,)o.

-  Let  any  one  who  considers  distinctly  the  meaning  and  force  of  the  word
higotry,  endeavour  to  render  it  in  eitlicr  of  tlie  ancient  languages,  and  he
will  find  how  peculiar  a  passion  it  implies  ;  and  how  different  from  the
mere  affection  of  enthusiasm  or  superstition.

207


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

worshippers,  however  zealous  or  enthusiastic  they  appeared,  had
only  a  defensive  kind  of  zeal  in  behalf  of  their  temple  ;  ^  when-
ever they  thought  in  earnest,  it  was  brought  in  danger.  In  the
tumult "  which  happened  in  that  city  near  the  time  of  the  holy
apostle's  retreat,  we  have  a  remarkable  instance  of  what  our
author  calls  a  religious  panic.  As  little  bigots  as  the  people
were,  and  as  far  from  any  offensive  zeal,  yet  when  their  estab-
lished church  came  to  be  called  in  question,  we  see  in  what  a
manner  their  zeal  began  to  operate.^  All  with  one  voice,  about
the  space  of  two  hours,  cried  out,  saying,  "  Great  is  Diana
of  the  Ephesians.'"  At  the  same  time  this  assembly  was  so
confused,  that  the  greater  part  knew  not  wherefore  they  were
come  together;*  and  consequently  could  not  understand  why
their  church  was  in  any  danger.  But  the  enthusiasm  was  got
up,  and  a  panic  fear  for  the  church  had  struck  the  multitude.
It  ran  into  a  popular  rage  or  epidemical  frenzy,  and  was  com-
municated (as  our  author  expresses  it  ^)  "  by  aspect,  or,  as  it
were,  by  contact  or  sympathy."

It  must  be  confessed  that  there  was  besides  these  motives  a
secret  spring  which  forwarded  this  enthusiasm.  For  certain
parties  concerned,  men  of  craft,  and  strictly  united  in  interest,
had  been  secretly  called  together,  and  told,  "  Gentlemen  !  ^  (or

1  The  magnificence  and  beauty  of  that  temple  is  well  known  to  all  who
have  formed  any  idea  of  the  ancient  Grecian  arts  and  workmanship.  It
seems  to  me  to  be  remarkable  in  our  learned  and  elegant  apostle^  that
though  an  enemy  to  this  mechanical  spirit  of  religion  in  the  Ephesians,
yet  according  to  his  known  character  he  accommodates  himself  to  their
humour^  and  the  natural  turn  of  their  enthusiasm^  by  writing  to  his  con-
verts in  a  kind  of  architect  style,  and  almost  with  a  perpetual  allusion  to
building,  and  to  that  majesty,  order,  and  beauty  of  which  their  temple
was  a  masterpiece.  iwoLKo5op.rjdevTes  iirl  rip  Oe/xeXlip  tQjv  diro<TT6'\wv  /cat  ttpo^tjtQi^,
6vT0S  aKpoycJVLaiov  avrou  Xpi(XTOu  'l-rjaov  iv  w  wdaa  t;  oLKodofiri  crvvapfMoXoyov-
fiivri  au^et  ih  vabv  dyiov  iv  Kvpitf,  iv  y  Kal  v/xeTs  <xvvoi.Ko5oiJ.uade  els  KaTOiKrjTrjptov
Tou  QeoO  iv  irvevfiaTi. Eph.  ii.  20,  21,  22  ;  and  so  iii.  17,  18,  etc.  ;  and  iv.

16,  29.

^  Act.  Apost.  xix.  2S.  3  Ih.  xix.  28,  34.  "  lb.  xix.  32.

»  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  2.  '^  Act.  Apost.  xix.  25,  etc.

208


MISCELLANEOUS UEFLECTIONS

sirs!)  Ve  know  that  by  tliis  luvsterv  or  craft  we  liave  our
wealth.  Ye  see  withal  and  have  heard  tiiat  not  only  here  at
Ephesus,  but  almost  throughout  all  Asia,  this  Paul  has  per-
suaded and  turned  away  many  people,  by  tellini;"  them,  they  are
no  real  Ciods  who  are  figured  or  wrought  with  hands,  so  that
not  only  this  our  craft  is  in  danger,  but  also  the  temple  itself."

Nothing  could  be  more  moderate  and  wise,  nothing  more
agreeable  to  that  magisterial  science  or  j)olicy  which  oiu*  author
recommends, 1  than  the  behaviour  of  the  town  clerk  or  recorder
of  the  city,  as  he  is  represented  on  this  occasion  in  Holy  Writ.
I  must  confess  indeed,  he  went  pretty  fav  in  the  use  of  this
moderating  art.  He  ventured  to  assure  the  people,  "  that
every  one  ac{|uiesced  in  their  ancient  worship  of  the  great  God-
dess, and  in  their  tradition  of  the  image  which  fell  down  from
Jupiter ;  that  these  were  facts  undeniable,  and  that  the  new
.sect  neither  meant  the  pulling  down  of  their  church,  nor  so
much  as  offered  to  blaspheme  or  speak  amiss  of  their  Goddess."

This,  no  doubt,  was  stretching  the  point  sufficientlv,  as  may
be  understood  by  the  event  in  after  time.  One  might,  perhaps,
have  suspecteil  tliis  recorder  to  have  been  himself  a  dissenter,
or  at  least  an  occasional  conformist,  who  could  answer  so
roundly  for  the  new  sect,  and  A\arrant  the  church  in  being
secure  of  damage  and  out  of  all  danger  for  the  future.  IVIean-
while  the  tumult  was  appeased;  no  harm  befell  the  temple  for
that  time.  The  new  sect  acquiesced  in  what  had  been  spoken
on  their  behalf.  They  allowed  the  apology  of  the  recorder.
Accordingly,  the  zeal  of  the  heathen  church,  which  was  only
defensive,  gave  way,  and  the  new  religionists  were  prosecuted
no  further.

Hitherto,  it  seems,  the  ftice  of  persecution  had  not  openly
shown  itself  in  the  wide  world.  'Twas  sufficient  security  for
every  man  that  he  gave  no  disturbance  to  what  was  publicly
established.  But  when  offensive  zeal  came  to  be  discovered  in
one  party,  the  rest  became  in  a  manner  necessitated  to  be
^  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  2.

VOL.  II  209  p


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

aggressors  in  their  turn.  They  who  observed  or  had  once  experi-
enced this  intolerating  spirit  could  no  longer  tolerate  on  their
part.^ And  they  who  had  once  exerted  it  over  others,  could

^  Thus  the  controversy  stood  before  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Julian,
when  blood  had  been  so  freely  drawn  and  cruelties  so  frequently  exchanged
not  only  between  Chi-istian  and  heathen,  but  between  Christian  and
Christian,  after  the  most  barbarous  manner.  What  the  zeal  was  of  many
early  Christians  against  the  idolatry  of  the  old  heathen  church  (at  that
time  the  established  one)  may  be  comprehended  by  any  person  who  is  ever
so  slenderly  versed  in  the  history  of  those  times.  Nor  can  it  be  said
indeed  of  us  moderns,  that  in  the  quality  of  good  Christians  (as  that
character  is  generally  understood)  we  are  found  either  backward  or
scrupulous  in  assigning  to  perdition  such  wretches  as  we  pronounce  guilty
of  idolatry.  The  name  idolater  is  sufficient  excuse  for  almost  any  kind  of
insult  against  the  person,  and  much  more  against  the  worship  of  such  a
misbeliever.  The  very  woi-d  Christian  is  in  common  language  used  for
man,  in  opposition  to  brute-beast,  without  leaving  so  much  as  a  middle
place  for  the  poor  heathen  or  pagan,  who,  as  tlie  greater  beast  of  the  two,
is  naturally  doomed  to  massacre,  and  his  Gods  and  temples  to  fracture  and
demolishment.  Nor  are  we  masters  of  this  passion  even  in  our  best
humour.  The  French  poets,  we  see,  can  with  great  success  and  general
applause  exhibit  this  primitive  zeal  even  on  the  public  stage  :  Polyeucte,
Act  ii.  Sc.  6  : —

Ne  perdons  plus  de  temps,  le  sacrifice  est  pret,
Allons-y  du  vrai  Dieu  soutenir  I'inte'ret ;
Allons  fouler  aux  pieds  ce  foudre  ridicule
Dont  arme  un  bois  pourri  ce  peuple  trop  credule  ;
Allons  en  eclairer  I'aveuglement  fatal,
Allons  briser  ces  Dieux  de  pierre  et  de  metal ;
Abandonnons  nos  jours  a  cette  ardeur  celeste,
Faisons  triompher  Dieu  ;  qu'il  dispose  du  reste.

I  should  scarce  have  mentioned  this,  but  that  it  came  into  my  mind
how  ill  a  construction  some  people  have  endeavoured  to  make  of  what  our
author,  stating  the  case  of  heathen  and  Christian  persecution  in  his  Letter
of  Enthusiasm,  has  said  concerning  the  Emperor  Julian.  It  was  no  more
indeed  than  had  been  said  of  that  virtuous  and  gallant  Emperor  by  his
greatest  enemies,  even  by  those  who  (to  the  shame  of  Christianity)  boasted
of  his  having  been  most  insolently  aifronted  on  all  occasions,  and  even
treacherously  assassinated  by  one  of  his  Christian  soldiers. As  for  such

210


MISCETJ.ANEOl  S llEFLECTTONS

expect  no  better  (juarter  i'ov  themselves.  So  that  notliing  less
than  mutual  extirpation  became  the  aim  and  almost  open
profession  of  each  religious  society.

autliors  as  these,  sliould  I  cite  tliem  in  tlieir  proper  invective  style  and
saint-like  plirase,  tliev  would  make  no  very  aj^reeahle  appearance,  especially
in  Miscellanies  of  the  kind  we  have  here  undertaken.  IJut  a  letter  of  that
eleifant  and  wittv  Emperor  may  not  he  improperly  ])laced  amonj^-st  our
citations  as  a  pattern  of  his  humour  and  fjenius,  as  well  as  of  his  principle
and  sentiments  on  this  occasion. Julian's  Epistles,  No.  .52.

Jri.IAN TO THK IJoSTKK.VS

"  1  slinuld  liave  thought,  indeed,  that  the  Galihean  leaders  would  have
esteemed  themselves  more  indehted  to  me  tlian  to  him  who  preceded  me
in  the  administration  of  the  Empire.  For  in  his  time  many  of  them
suffered  exile,  persecution,  and  imprisonment.  Multitudes  of  those  whom
in  their  religion  they  term  heretics  were  put  to  the  sword  ;  insomuch
that  in  Samosata,  Cyzicum,  Paphlagonia,  Bithynia,  Galatia,  and  many
other  countries,  whole  towns  were  levelled  with  the  earth.  The  just
reverse  of  this  has  heen  ohserved  in  my  time,  llie  exiles  liave  heen  re-
called, and  the  proscribed  restored  to  tlie  lawful  possession  of  their  estates.
But  to  that  height  of  fury  and  distraction  are  this  people  arrived,  that
heing  no  longer  allowed  the  privilege  to  tyrannise  over  one  another^  or
persecute  either  their  own  sectaries,  or  the  religious  of  the  lawful  church,
thev  swell  with  rage,  and  leave  no  stone  unturned,  no  opportunity  unem-
ployed of  raising  tumult  and  sedition  ;  so  little  regard  have  they  to  true
piety,  so  little  obedience  to  our  laws  and  constitutions,  however  humane
and  tolerating.  For  still  do  we  determine  and  steadily  resolve  never  to
suffer  one  of  them  to  be  drawn  involuntarily  to  our  altars.  ...  As  for
the  mere  people,  indeed,  they  appear  driven  to  these  riots  and  seditions
by  those  amongst  them  wliom  they  call  clerics,  who  are  now  enraged  to
find  themselves  restrained  in  the  use  of  tlieir  former  i)Ower  and  intemperate
rule.  .  .  .  They  can  no  longer  act  the  magistrate  or  civil  judge,  nor
assume  authority  to  make  people's  wills,  supplant  relations,  possess  them-
selves of  other  men's  patrimonies,  and  by  specious  pretences  transfer  all
into  their  own  ])Ossession.  .  .  .  For  this  reason  I  have  tliought  fit  by  this
public  Edict  to  forewarn  the  people  of  this  sort,  that  they  raise  no  more
commotions,  nor  gather  in  a  riotous  manner  about  their  seditious  clerics,
in  defiance  of  the  magistrate,  who  has  been  insulted  and  in  danger  of  being
stoned  by  these  incited  rabbles.  In  their  congregations  they  may,  not-
withstanding, assemble  as  they  please,  and  crowd  about  their  leaders,
performing  worship,  receiving  doctrine,  and  praying,  according  as  thev

211


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

In  this  extremity,  it  might  well  jjerhaps  have  been  esteemed
the  happiest  wish  for  mankind,  that  one  of  these  contending
parties  of  incompatible  religionists  should  at  last  prevail  over
the  rest,  so  as  by  an  universal  and  absolute  power  to  determine
orthodoxy,^  and  make  that  opinion  effectually  catholic  which
in  their  jjarticular  judgment  had  the  best  right  to  that  denomi-
nation. And  thus  by  force  of  massacre  and  desolation,  peace
in  worship,  and  civil  unity  by  help  of  the  spiritual,  might  be
presumed  in  a  fair  way  of  being  restored  to  mankind.

I  shall  conclude  with  observing  how  ably  the  ]{oman-
Christian  and  once  catholic  church,  by  the  assistance  of  their
converted  emperors,-  proceeded  in  the  establishment  of  their
growing  hierarchy.  They  considered  wisely  the  various  super-
stitions and  enthusiasms  of  mankind,  and  })roved  the  different
kinds  and  force  of  each.  All  these  seemino-  contrarieties  of
human  passion  they  knew  how  to  comprehend  in  their  political

are  by  them  taught  and  conducted  ;  but  if  with  any  tendency  to  sedition,
let  them  beware  how  they  hearken  or  give  assent^  and  remember  'tis  at
their  peril  if  by  these  means  they  are  secretly  wrought  up  to  mutiny  and
insurrection.  .  .  ,  Live  therefore  in  peace  and  quietness,  neither  spite-
fully opposing  or  injuriously  treating  one  another.  You  misguided
people  of  the  new  way,  beware^,  on  your  side  ;  and  you  of  the  ancient  and
established  church,  injure  not  your  neighbours  and  fellow-citizens,  who  are
enthusiastically  led  away  in  ignorance  and  mistake  rather  than  with  design
or  malice  I  'Tis  by  discourse  and  reason,  not  by  blows,  insults,  or  violence
that  men  are  to  be  informed  of  truth  and  convinced  of  error.  Again
therefore  and  again  I  enjoin  and  charge  the  zealous  followers  of  the  true
religion,  no  way  to  injure,  molest,  or  affront  the  Galilaean  people."  Thus
the  generous  and  mild]  Emperor,  whom  we  may  indeed  call  heathen,  but
not  so  justly  apostate,  since  being  at  different  times  of  his  youth  transferred
to  different  schools  or  universities,  and  bred  under  tutors  of  each  religion,
as  well  heathen  as  Christian,  he  happened,  when  of  full  age,  to  make  his
choice  (though  very  unfortunately)  in  the  former  kind  and  adhered  to  the
ancient  religion  of  his  country  and  forefathers.  See  the  same  Emperor's
letters  to  Artabius,  No.  7,  and  to  Hecebolus,  No.  43,  and  to  the  people  of
Alexandria,  No.  10. See  Treatise  i.  §  3.

1  Infra,  at  the  end.

2  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iv.  §  1,  end  ;  supra,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.

212


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

model  aiul  subservient  system  of  divinity.  They  knew  liow  to
make  advantage  both  from  the  high  specuhvtions  of  philosophy
and  the  grossest  ideas  of  vidgar  ignorance.  They  saw  there  was
nothing  more  different  than  that  enthusiasm  which  ran  upon
spirituals,  according  to  the  sim])ler  views  of  the  divine  existence,^
and  that  which  ran  upon  external  proportions,^  magnificence
of  structures,  ceremonies,  processions,  choirs,  and  those  other
harmonies  which  captivate  the  eye  and  ear.  On  this  account
they  even  added  to  this  latter  kind,  and  displayed  religion  in  a
yet  more  gorgeous  habit  of  temples,  statues,  paintings,  vest-
ments, copes,  mitres,  purple,  and  the  cathedral  pomp.  With
these  arms  they  coidd  subdue  the  victorious  Goths,  and  secure
themselves  an  Attila  when  their  Caesars  fjiiled  them.^

The  truth  is,  'tis  but  a  vulgar  species  of  enthusiasm  which
is  moved  chiefly  by  show  and  ceremony  and  wrought  upon  by
chalices  and  candles,  robes  and  figured  dances.  Yet  this,  we
may  believe,  was  looked  upon  as  no  slight  ingredient  of  devotion
in  those  days,  since  at  this  hour  the  manner  is  found  to  be  of
considerable  efficacy  with  some  of  the  devout  amongst  ourselves,
who  pass  the  least  for  superstitious,  and  are  reckoned  in  the
number  of  the  jiolite  world.  This  the  wise  hierarchy  duly  pre-
ponderating,^ but  being  satisfied  withal  that  there  were  other
tempers  and  hearts  which  could  not  so  easily  be  captivated  by
this  exterior  allurement,  they  assigned  another  part  of  religion
to  proselytes  of  another  character  and  complexion,  who  were

^  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  3.

2  Siijini,  Misc.  i.  cli.  ii.

'  A\'lieu  this  victorious  ravaji'er  was  in  full  march  to  Ronie^  St.  Leon
(the  then  pope)  went  out  to  meet  him  in  solemn  pomp.  The  (ioth  was
struck  with  the  appearance,  obeyed  the  priest,  and  retired  instantly  with
his  whole  army  in  a  panic  fear,  alleging'  that  among  the  rest  of  the  ponti-
fical train  he  had  seen  one  of  an  extraordinary  form  who  threatened  him
with  death  if  he  did  not  instantly  retire.  Of  this  important  encounter
there  are  in  St.  Peter's  Church,  in  the  \'atican,  and  elsewhere  .'it  Rome,
many  fine  sculptures,  paintings,  and  representations,  deservingly  made  in
honour  of  the  miracle.  '  [I.e.  considering,]

213


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

allowed  to  proceed  on  a  cjuite  different  bottom,  by  the  inward
way  of  contemplation  and  divine  love.

They  are  indeed  so  far  from  being  jealous  of  mere  enthusiasm
or  the  ecstatic  manner  of  devotion,  that  they  allow  their  mystics
to  write  and  preach  in  the  most  rapturous  and  seraphic  strains.
They  suffer  them  in  a  manner  to  su})ersede  all  external  worship
and  triumph  over  outward  forms,  till  the  refined  religionists
proceed  so  far  as  either  expressly  or  seemingly  to  dissuade  the
practice  of  the  vulgar  and  established  ceremonial  duties.  And
then,  indeed,!  they  check  the  supposed  exorbitant  enthusiasm,
which  would  prove  dangerous  to  their  hierarchal  state.

If  modern  visions,  prophecies,  and  dreams,  charms,  miracles,
exorcisms,  and  the  rest  of  this  kind  be  comprehended  in  that
which  we  call  fanaticism  or  superstition,  to  this  spirit  they
allow  a  full  career ;  whilst  to  ingenuous  writers  they  afford  the
liberty,  on  the  other  side,  in  a  civil  manner,  to  call  in  question
these  spiritual  feats  performed  in  monasteries,  or  up  and  down
by  their  mendicant  or  itinerant  priests  and  ghostly  missionaries.

This  is  that  ancient  hierarchy  which,  in  respect  of  its  first
foundation,  its  policy,  and  the  consistency  of  its  whole  frame
and  constitution,  cannot  but  appear  in  some  respect  august  and
venerable,  even  in  such  as  we  do  not  usually  esteem  weak  eyes.
These  are  the  spiritual  conquerors,  who,  like  the  first  Csesars,
from  small  beginning's  established  the  foundations  of  an  almost
universal  monarchy.  No  wonder  if  at  this  day  the  immediate
view  of  this  hierarchal  residence,  the  city  and  court  of  Rome,
be  found  to  have  an  extraordinary  effect  on  foreigners  of  other
latter  clmrches.  No  wonder  if  the  amazed  surveyors  are  for
the  future  so  apt  either  to  conceive  the  horridest  aversion  to  all
})riestly  government,  or,  on  the  contrary,  to  admire  it  so  far  as
even  to  wish  a  coalescence  or  reunion  with  this  ancient  mother
church.

In reality, the exercise of power, however arbitrary or

'  Witness  the  case  of  Molinos,  and  of  the  pious,  woilhy,  and  ingenious
Abht'  Fenelon,  now  Archbishop  of  Cambray.

214


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

despotic,  seems  less  intolerable  under  such  a  spiritual  sovereignty,
so  extensive,  ancient,  and  of  such  a  long  succession,  than  under
the  petty  tyrannies  and  mimical  polities  of  some  new  pretenders.
The  former  may  even  persecute  with  a  tolerable  grace ;  ^  the
latter,  who  would  willingly  derive  their  authority  from  the
former,  and  graft  on  their  successive  right,  must  necessarily
make  a  very  awkward  figure.  And  whilst  they  strive  to  give
themselves  the  same  air  of  indey)endency  on  the  civil  magistrate,
whilst  they  affect  the  same  authority  in  government,  the  same
grandeur,  magnificence,  and  pomp  in  worship,  they  raise  the
highest  ridicide  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  have  real  discernment,
and  can  distinguish  originals  from  copies  : —

O  imitatores,  servuni  pecus  !  -


CHAPTER III

Of  the  force  of  humour  in  religion— Support  of  our  author's  argument
in  his  essay  on  the  freedom  of  wit  and  raiflery  —  Zeal  discussed.
Spiritual  surgeons  ;  executioners  ;  carvers  —  Original  of  human
sacrifice  —  Exhilaration  of  religion  —  Various  aspects  from  outward
causes.

Thi-;  celebrated  wits  of  the  miscellanarian  race,  the  essay  writers,
casual  discoursers,  reflection  coiners,  meditation  founders,  and
others  of  the  irregular  kind  of  writers,  may  plead  it  as  their
peculiar  advantage  "  that  they  follow  the  variety  of  Nature."*'
And  in  such  a  climate  as  ours  their  plea,  no  doubt,  may  be  very
just.  We  islanders,  famed  for  other  mutabilities,  are  particu-
larly noted  for  the  variableness  and  inconstancy  of  our  weather.
And  if  our  taste  in  Letters  be  found  answerable  to  this  tempera-
ture of  our  climate,  'tis  certain  a  writer  must,  in  our  account,
be  the  more  valuable  in  his  kind,  as  he  can  agreeably  surprise

'  Infra,  p.  224.  -  Hor.  Ep.  i.  xix.  ID.

215


SHxVFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

his  reader  by  sudden  changes  and  transports  from  one  extreme
to  another.

Were  it  not  for  the  known  prevalency  of  this  rehsh,  and
the  apparent  deference  paid  those  geniuses  who  are  said  to
elevate  and  surjirise,  the  author  of  these  Miscellanies  might,  in
all  probability,  be  afraid  to  entertain  his  reader  with  this
multifarious,  complex,  and  desultory  kind  of  reading.  ''Tis
certain,  that  if  we  consider  the  beginning  and  process  of  our
present  work,  we  shall  find  sufficient  variation  in  it.  From  a
professed  levity  we  are  lapsed  into  a  sort  of  gravity  unsuitable
to  our  manner  of  setting  out.  We  have  steered  an  adventurous
course,  and  seem  newly  come  out  of  a  stormy  and  rough  sea.
'Tis  time  indeed  we  should  enjoy  a  calm,  and  instead  of  expand-
ing our  sails  before  the  swelling  gusts,  it  befits  us  to  retire
under  the  lee-shore  and  ply  our  oai's  in  a  smooth  water.

'Tis  the  johilosopher,  the  orator,  or  the  poet  whom  we  may
compare  to  some  first-rate  vessel  which  launches  out  into  the
wide  sea,  and  with  a  proud  motion  insults  the  encountering
surges.  We  essay-writers  are  of  the  small  craft  or  galley  kind.
We  move  chiefly  by  starts  and  bounds,  according  as  our  motion
is  by  frequent  intervals  renewed.  We  have  no  great  adventure
in  view,  nor  can  tell  certainly  whither  we  are  bound.  We
undertake  no  mighty  voyage  by  help  of  stars  or  compass,  but
row  from  creek  to  creek,  keep  up  a  coasting  trade,  and  are
fitted  only  for  fair  weather  and  the  summer  season.

Happy  therefore  it  is  for  us  in  particular,  that  having
finished  our  course  of  Enthusiasm,  and  pursued  our  author  into
his  second  treatise,^  we  are  now  at  last  obliged  to  turn  towards
pleasanter  reflections,  and  have  such  subjects  in  view  as  must
naturally  reduce  us  to  a  more  familiar  style.  Wit  and  humour
(the  professed  subject  of  the  treatise  now  before  us)  will  hardly
bear  to  be  examined  in  ])onderous  sentences  and  poised  discourse.
We  might  now  perhaps  do  best  to  lay  aside  the  gravity  of  strict
argument  and  resume  the  way  of  chat,  which,  through  aversion
^  Viz.  E.s.viy  on  the  Frrrdom  of  Wit  (uid  llumour.

21G


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

to  a  contrary  formal  luaimer,  is  generally  relished  with  more
than  ordinary  satisfaction.  For  excess  of  physic,  we  know ,  has
often  made  men  hate  the  name  of  wholesome.  And  an  abund-
ancy  of  forced  instruction  and  solemn  counsel  may  have  made
men  full  as  averse  to  any  thing  delivered  with  an  air  of  high
wisdom  and  science,  especially  if  it  be  so  high  as  to  be  set  above
all  human  art  of  reasoning,  and  even  above  reason  itself,  in  the
account  of  its  sublime  dispensers.

However,  since  it  may  be  objected  to  us  by  certain  formalists
of  this  sort  "that  we  can  prove  nothing  duly  without  proving
it  in  form,'"  we  may  for  once  condescend  to  their  demand,  state
our  case  formally,  and  divide  our  subject  into  parts,  after  the
precise  manner  and  according  to  just  rule  and  metliod.

Our  purpose,  therefore,  being  to  defend  an  author  who  has
been  charged  as  too  presumjituous  for  introducing  the  wav  of
wit  and  humour  into  religious  searches,  we  shall  endeavour  to
make  appear : —

1st.  That  wit  and  humour  are  corroborative  of  religion,  and
promotive  of  true  faith.

2nd.  That  they  arc  used  as  proper  means  of  this  kind  i)y
the  holy  founders  of  religion.

3rd.  That  notwithstanding  the  dark  complexion  and  sour
humour  of  some  religious  teachers,  we  may  be  justly  said  to
have  in  the  main  a  witty  and  good-humoured  religion.

Among  the  earliest  acquaintance  of  my  youth,  I  remember,
in  particular,  a  club  of  three  or  four  merry  gentlemen,  who  had
long  kc])t  company  with  one  another,  and  were  seldom  separate
in  any  })arty  of  pleasure  or  diversion.  They  happened  once  to
be  u\)on  a  travelling  adventure,  and  came  to  a  countrv  where
they  were  told  for  certain  they  should  find  the  worst  entertain-
ment, as  well  as  the  worst  roads  imaginable.  One  of  the
gentlemen,  who  seemed  the  least  concerned  for  this  disaster,
said  slightly  and  without  any  seeming  design,  "  that  the  best
expedient  for  thenj  in  this  extremitv  would  be  to  keep  them-
selves in  high  humour,  and  endeavour  to  commend  everything

217


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

which  the  place  afforded."  The  other  gentlemen  immediately
took  the  hint,  but,  as  it  happened,  kept  silence,  passed  the
subject  over  and  took  no  further  notice  of  what  had  been
proposed.

Being  entered  into  the  dismal  country,  in  which  they  j)ro-
ceeded  without  the  least  complaint,  "'twas  remarkable,  that  if
by  great  chance  they  came  to  any  tolerable  bit  of  road  or  any
ordinary  prospect,  they  failed  not  to  say  something  or  other  in
its  praise,  and  would  light  often  on  such  pleasant  fancies  and
representations,  as  made  the  objects  in  reality  agreeable.

When  the  greatest  part  of  the  day  ^as  thus  spent,  and  om*
gentlemen  arrived  where  they  intended  to  take  their  quarters,
the  first  of  them  who  made  trial  of  the  fare,  or  tasted  either
glass  or  dish,  recommended  it  with  such  an  air  of  assurance
and  in  such  lively  expressions  of  approbation,  that  the  others
came  instantly  over  to  his  opinion,  and  confirmed  his  relish  with
many  additional  encomiums  of  their  own.

Many  ingenious  reasons  were  given  for  the  several  odd
tastes  and  looks  of  things  which  were  presented  to  them  at
table.  "  Some  meats  were  wholesome,  others  of  a  high  taste,
others  according  to  the  manner  of  eating  in  this  or  that  foreign
country."  Every  dish  had  the  flavour  of  some  celebrated
receipt  in  cookery ;  and  the  wine  and  other  liquors  had,  in  their
turn,  the  advantage  of  being  treated  in  the  same  elegant  strain.
In  short,  our  gentlemen  ate  and  drank  heartily,  and  took  up
with  their  indifferent  fare  so  well,  that  'twas  apparent  they  had
wrought  upon  themselves  to  believe  they  were  tolerably  well
served.

Their  servants,  in  the  meantime,  having  laid  no  such  plot
as  this  against  themselves,  kept  to  their  senses,  and  stood  it
out,  "  that  their  masters  had  certainly  lost  theirs.  For  how
else  could  they  swallow  so  contentedly  and  take  all  for  good
which  was  set  before  them  ? ''

Had  I  to  deal  with  a  malicious  reader,  he  might  perhaps
pretend  to  infer  from  this  story  of  my  travelling  friends,  that  I

218


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

inteiidecl  to  represent  it  as  an  easy  matter  for  jieople  to  persuade
themselves  into  what  o})inion  or  belief  they  pleased.  But  it
can  never  surely  be  thought  that  men  of  true  iud<;-ment  and
understanding  should  set  about  such  a  task  as  that  of  perverting
their  own  judgment  and  giving  a  wrong  bias  to  their  reason.
They  must  easily  foresee  that  an  attempt  of  this  kind,  should
it  have  the  least  success,  would  prove  of  far  worse  consecjuence
to  them  than  any  perversion  of  their  taste,  appetite,  or  ordinary
senses.

I  must  confess  it,  however,  to  be  my  imagination  that  where
fit  circumstances  concm*,  and  many  inviting  occasions  offer  from
the  side  of  men's  interest,  their  humour,  or  their  passion,  'tis  no
extraordinary  case  to  see  them  enter  into  such  a  plot  as  this
against  their  own  understandings,  and  endeavour  by  all  possible
means  to  jjersuade  both  themselves  and  others  of  what  they
think  convenient  and  useful  to  believe.

If  in  many  particular  cases,  where  favour  and  affection
prevail,  it  be  found  so  easy  a  thing  Avith  us  to  impose  upon
ourselves ;  it  cannot  siu'ely  be  very  hard  to  do  it  where,  we
take  for  granted,  our  highest  interest  is  concerned.  Now  it  is
certainly  no  small  interest  or  concern  with  men  to  believe  what
is  by  authority  established,  since  in  the  case  of  disbelief  there
can  be  no  choice  left  but  either  to  live  a  hypocrite  or  be
esteemed  profane.  Even  where  men  are  left  to  themselves,  and
allowed  the  freedom  of  their  choice,  they  are  still  forward
enough  in  believing,  and  can  officiously  endeavour  to  persuade
themselves  of  the  truth  of  any  flattering  imposture.

Nor  is  it  unusual  to  find  men  successful  in  this  endeavour ;
as,  among  other  instances,  may  appear  by  the  many  religious
faiths  or  opinions,  however  preposterous  or  contradictory,
which,  age  after  age,  we  know  to  have  been  raised  on  the
foundation  of  miracles  and  pretended  commissions  from  heaven.
These  have  been  as  generally  espoused  and  passionately  cherished
as  the  greatest  truths  and  most  certain  revelations.  'Tis  hardly
to  be  sujiposed  that  such  combinations  should  be  formed,  and

219


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

forgeries  erected  with  such  success  and  prevalency  over  the
understandings  of  men,  did  not  they  themselves  co-operate,  of
their  own  accord,  towards  the  imposture,  and  show  "  that  by  a
good-will  and  hearty  desire  of  believing,  they  had  in  reality  a
considerable  hand  in  the  deceit.""

'Tis  certain  that  in  a  country  where  faith  has  for  a  long
time  gone  by  inheritance,  and  opinions  are  entailed  by  law,
there  is  little  room  left  for  the  vulgar  to  alter  their  persuasion,
or  deliberate  on  the  choice  of  their  religious  belief.  When-
soever a  government  thinks  fit  to  concern  itself  with  men's
opinions,  and  by  its  absolute  authority  impose  any  particular
belief,  there  is  none  perhaps  ever  so  ridiculous  or  monstrous  in
which  it  needs  doubt  of  having  good  success.  This  we  may  see
thoroughly  effected  in  certain  countries  by  a  steady  policy  and
sound  application  of  punishment  and  reward,  with  the  assistance
of  particular  courts  erected  to  this  end,  peculiar  methods  of
justice,  peculiar  magistrates  and  officers,  proper  inquests  and
certain  wholesome  severities,  not  slightly  administered  and
played  with  (as  certain  triflers  propose),  but  duly  and  properly
enforced,  as  is  absolutely  requisite  to  this  end  of  strict  conform-
ity, and  unity  in  one  and  the  same  profession  and  manner  of
worship.

But  should  it  happen  to  be  the  truth  itself  which  was  thus
effectually  j)ropagated  by  the  means  we  have  described,  the
very  nature  of  such  means  can,  however,  allow  but  little  honour
to  the  propagators,  and  little  merit  to  the  disciples  and  believers.
'Tis  certain  that  Mahometism,  Paganism,  Judaism  or  any  other
belief  may  stand  as  well  as  the  truest  upon  this  foundation.
He  who  is  now  an  orthodox  Christian,  would  by  virtue  of  such
a  discipline  have  been  infallibly  as  true  a  Mussulman  or  as  errant
a  heretic,  had  his  birth  happened  in  another  place.

For  this  reason  there  can  be  no  rational  belief  but  where
comparison  is  allowed,  examination  permitted,  and  a  sincere
toleration  established.  And  in  this  case,  I  will  presume  to  say,
"  that  whatever  belief  is  once  espoused  or  countenanced  by  the

220


IVrTSCETJ.ANKOUS REFLECTIONS

inagistratc',  it  will  liavu  a  sullicitnt  :iclvaiita<;e,  witliouL  any  lielp
from  foive  or  menaces  on  one  hand,  or  extraordinary  favour  and
partial  treatment  on  the  other."  If  the  belief  be  in  any  measure
consonant  to  truth  and  reason,  it  will  find  as  much  favour  in
the  eves  of  mankind  as  truth  antl  reason  need  desire.  What-
ever difficulties  there  may  be  in  any  ])articular  sj)eculatioiis  or
mysteries  belonoing  to  it,  the  better  sort  of  men  will  enileavour
to  pass  them  over.  They  will  believe  (as  our  author^  says)  to
the  full  stretch  of  their  reason,  and  add  spurs  to  their  faith,  in
order  to  be  the  more  sociable,  and  conform  the  better  with
what  their  interest,  in  conjunction  with  their  good -humour,
inclines  them  to  receive  as  credible,  and  oijserve  as  their  relii^ious
duty  and  devotional  task.

Here  it  is  that  good-humour  will  naturally  take  place,  and
the  hospitable  disj)osition  of  our  travelling  friends  above  re-
recited  will  easily  transfer  itself  into  religion,  and  operate  in
the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  established  faith  (however
miraculous  or  incom])rehensible)  under  a  tolerating,  mild,  and
gentle  government.

Every  one  knows,  indeed,  that  by  heresy  is  understood  a
stubbornness  in  the  will,  not  a  defect  merely  in  the  under-
standing. On  this  account  'tis  impossible  that  an  honest  and
STOod-humoured  man  should  be  a  schismatic  or  heretic,  and
affect  to  separate  from  his  national  worship  on  slight  reasons  or
without  severe  provocation.

To  be  pursued  by  petty  incpiisitors ;  to  be  threatened  with
punishment  or  penal  law  s ;  to  be  marked  out  as  dangerous  and
suspected  ;  to  be  railed  at  in  high  places  with  all  the  studied
wit  and  art  of  calunmy,  are  indeed  sufficient  provocations  to
ill-humour,  and  mav  force  people  to  divide  who  at  first  had
never  any  such  intention.  But  the  virtue  of  good-humour  in
religion  is  such  that  it  can  even  reconcile  persons  to  a  belief
in  which  thev  were  never  bred,  or  to  which  they  had  conceived
a  former  prejudice.

'  Letter  of  Entftusiasin,  §  4.

221


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

From  these  considerations  we  cannot  but  of  course  conclude,
"  That  there  is  nothing  so  ridiculous  in  respect  of  policy,  or  so
wrong  and  odious  in  respect  of  common  humanity,  as  a
moderate  and  half-way  persecution.""  It  only  frets  the  sore ;
it  raises  the  ill-humour  of  mankind  ;  excites  the  keener  spirits  ;
moves  indignation  in  beholders ;  and  sows  the  very  seeds  of
schism  in  men's  bosoms.  A  resolute  and  bold-faced  persecution
leaves  no  time  or  scope  for  these  engendering  distempers  or
gathering  ill-humours.  It  does  the  work  at  once,  by  extirpa-
tion, banishment,  or  massacre;  and,  like  a 'bold  stroke  in
surgery,  dispatches  by  one  short  amputation  what  a  bungling
hand  would  make  worse  and  worse,  to  the  perpetual  sufferance
and  misery  of  the  patient.

If  there  be  on  earth  a  proper  way  to  render  the  most  sacred
truth  suspected,  'tis  by  supporting  it  with  threats,  and  pretend-
ing to  terrify  people  into  the  belief  of  it.  This  is  a  sort  of  daring
mankind  in  a  cause  where  they  know  themselves  superior,  and
out  of  reach.  The  weakest  mortal  finds  within  himself  that
though  he  may  be  outwitted  and  deluded,  he  can  never  be
forced  in  what  relates  to  his  opinion  or  assent.  And  there  are
few  men  so  ignorant  of  human  nature,  and  of  what  they  hold
in  common  with  their  kind,  as  not  to  comprehend  "  that  where
great  vehemence  is  expressed  by  any  one  in  what  relates  solely  to
another,  'tis  seldom  without  some  private  interest  of  his  own."

In  common  matters  of  dispute,  the  angry  disputant  makes  the
best  cause  to  appear  the  worst.  A  clown  once  took  a  fancy  to
hear  the  Latin  disputes  of  doctors  at  a  university.  He  was  asked
what  pleasure  he  could  take  in  viewing  such  combatants,  when
he  could  never  know  so  much  as  which  of  the  parties  had  the
better.  "  For  that  matter,"  replied  the  clown,  "  I  a'n't  such  a
fool  neither,  but  I  can  see  Avho's  the  first  that  puts  t'other  into
a  passion."  Nature^  herself  dictated  this  lesson  to  the  clown,
that  he  who  had  the  better  of  the  argument,  would  be  easy  and
well-humoured  ;  but  he  who  was  unable  to  support  his  cause
by  reason,  would  naturally  lose  his  temper  and  grow  violent.

222


MISCETJ.ANEOUS KEFT.ECTTONS

AV^ere  two  travellers  agreed  lo  tell  their  story  separate  in
public,  the  one  being  a  man  of  sinceinty,  but  positive  and
dognuitical;  the  other  less  sincere,  but  easy  and  good-humoured;
though  it  ha])pened  that  the  accounts  of  this  latter  gentleman
were  of  the  more  miraculous  sort,  they  would  yet  sooner  gain
belief,  and  be  more  favourablv  received  by  mankind,  than  the
strongly  asserted  relations  and  vehement  narratives  of  the  other
fierce  defender  of  the  truth.

That  good -humour  is  a  chief  cause  of  comj^liance  or
acquiescence  in  matters  of  ftiith,  may  be  proved  from  the  very
spirit  of  those  whom  we  commonly  call  critics.  'Tis  a  known
prevention  against  the  gentlemen  of  this  character,  "  that  they
are  generally  ill-humoured  and  splenetic."  The  world  will
needs  have  it  that  their  spleen  disturbs  [them.  And  I  must
confess  I  think  the  world  in  general  to  be  so  far  right  in  this
conceit,  that  though  all  critics  perhaps  are  not  necessarily
splenetic,  all  splenetic  people  (whether  naturally  such,  or  made
so  by  ill-usage)  have  a  necessary  propensity  to  criticism  and
satire.  When  men  are  easy  in  themselves  they  let  others
remain  so,  and  can  readily  comply  with  what  seems  ])lausible,
and  is  thought  conducing  to  the  quiet  or  good  corresjiondence
of  mankind.  They  study  to  raise  no  difficulties  or  doubts.
And  in  religious  affairs  'tis  seldom  that  they  are  known  forward
to  entertain  ill  thoughts  or  surmises,  whilst  they  are  unmolested.
But  if  disturbed  by  groundless  arraignments  and  suspicions,  by
unnecessary  invectives  and  bitter  declamations,  and  by  a  con-
tentious quarrelsome  aspect  of  religion,  they  naturally  turn
critics,  and  begin  to  question  everything.  The  spirit  of  satire
rises  with  the  ill  mood  ;  and  the  chief  passion  of  men  thus
diseased  and  thrown  out  of  good  humour  is  to  find  fault,
censure,  unravel,  confound,  and  leave  nothing  without  exception
and  controversy.

These  are  the  sceptics  or  scrupulists,  against  whom  there  is
such  a  clamour  raised.  Tis  evident  in  the  meanwhile  that
the  very  clamour  itself,  joined  with  the  usual  menaces  and  show

223


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEHISTICS

of  force,  is  that  which  chiefly  raises  this  sceptical  spirit,  and
helps  to  multiply  the  number  of  these  inquisitive  and  ill-
humoured  critics.  Mere  threats,  without  power  of  execution,
are  only  exasperating  and  provocative.  They  ^  who  are  masters
of  the  carnal  as  well  as  spiritual  weapon  may  apply  each  at
their  jileasure,  and  in  what  })roportion  they  think  necessary.
But  where  the  magistrate  resolves  steadily  to  reserve  his  fasces
for  his  own  proper  province,  and  keep  the  edge-tools  and  deadly
instruments  out  of  other  hands,  'tis  in  vain  for  spiritual
jiretenders  to  take  such  magisterial  airs.  It  can  then  only
become  them  to  brandish  such  arms  when  they  have  strength
enough  to  make  the  magistrate  resign  his  office,  and  become
provost  or  executioner  in  their  service.

Should  any  one  who  happens  to  read  these  lines  perceive
in  himself  a  rising  animosity  against  the  author  for  asserting
thus  zealously  the  notion  of  a  religious  liberty  and  mutual
toleration,  'tis  wished  that  he  would  maturely  deliberate  on
the  cause  of  his  disturbance  and  ill-humour.  Would  he  deign
to  look  narrowly  into  himself,  he  would  undoubtedly  find  that
it  is  not  zeal  for  religion  or  the  truth  which  moves  him  on  this
occasion.  For  had  he  happened  to  be  in  a  nation  where  he  was
no  conformist,  nor  had  any  hope  or  expectation  of  obtaining
the  precedency  for  his  own  manner  of  worship,  he  would  have
found  nothing  preposterous  in  this  our  doctrine  of  indulgence.
'Tis  a  fact  indisputable,  that  whatever  sect  or  religion  is  under-
most, though  it  may  have  persecuted  at  any  time  before,  yet
as  soon  as  it  begins  to  suffer  persecution  in  its  turn  it  recurs
instantly  to  the  principles  of  moderation,  and  maintains  this
our  plea  for  complacency,  sociableness,  and  good  humour  in
religion.  The  mystery  therefore  of  this  animosity  or  rising
indignation  of  my  devout  and  zealous  reader  is  only  this :
"  That  being  devoted  to  the  interest  of  a  party  already  in
possession  or  expectation  of  the  temporal  advantages  annexed
to  a  particular  belief,  he  fails  not,  as  a  zealous  party-man,  to
1  Supra,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.,  end.

224


MISCET.LANEOITS REFLECTIONS

look  with  jealousy  on  every  iiiK'oiit'oniiabk'  oj)iiiioii,  and  is  sure
to  justify  those  means  which  he  thinks  proper  to  prevent  its
growth."  He  knows  that  if  in  matters  of  reh'i^ion  any  one
beheves  amiss,  "'tis  at  his  own  peril.  If  opinion  chunns,  vice
certainly  does  as  much.  Vet  will  our  gentleman  easily  find,  if
he  intjuires  the  least  into  himself,  that  he  has  no  such  fiu'ious
concern  for  the  security  of  men's  morals,  nor  any  such  violent
resentment  of  their  vices,  when  they  are  such  as  noway  in-
commode him.  And  from  hence  it  will  be  easy  for  him  to
infer  "  that  the  passion  he  feels  on  this  occasion  is  not  from
pure  zeal,  but  private  interest  and  worldly  emulation.""

Come  we  now  (as  authentic  rhetoricians  express  themselves)
to  our  second  head,  which  we  should  again  subdivide  into  firsts
and  seconds  but  that  this  manner  of  carving  is  of  late  days
grown  much  out  of  fashion.

'Twas  the  custom  of  our  ancestors,  perhaps  as  long  since  as
the  days  of  our  hospitable  King  Arthur,  to  have  nothing  served
at  table  but  \\hat  was  entire  and  substantial.  ""Twas  a  whole
boar  or  soHd  ox  which  made  the  feast.  The  figure  of  the
animal  was  preserved  entire,  and  the  dissection  made  in  form
by  the  appointed  carver,  a  man  of  might  as  well  as  profound
craft  and  notable  dexterity,  who  was  seen  erect,  with  goodly
mien  and  action,  displaying  heads  and  members,  dividing
according  to  art,  and  distributing  his  subject  matter  into
proper  parts,  suitable  to  the  stomachs  of  those  he  served.  In
latter  days  "'tis  become  the  fashion  to  eat  with  less  ceremony
and  method.  Every  one  chooses  to  carve  for  himself  The
learned  manner  of  dissection  is  out  of  request;  and  a  certain
method  of  cookery  has  been  introduced,  by  which  the  anatomical
science  of  the  table  is  entirely  set  aside.  Ragouts  and  fricassees
are  the  reigning  dishes,  in  which  everything  is  so  dismembered
and  thrown  out  of  all  order  and  form  that  no  part  of  the  mass
can  properly  be  divided,  or  distinguished  from  another.

Fashion  is  indeed  a  powerful  mistress,  and  by  her  single
authority  has  so  far  degraded  the  carvhag  method  and  use  of
VOL.  II  225  Q


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

solids,  even  in  discourse  and  writing,  that  our  religious  pastors
themselves  have  many  of  them  changed  their  manner  of  dis-
tributing to  us  their  spiritual  food.  They  have  quitted  their
substantial  service  and  uniform  division  into  parts  and  under-
parts,  and  in  order  to  become  fashionable,  they  have  run  into
the  more  savoury  way  of  learned  ragout  and  medley.  'Tis  the
unbred  rustic  orator  alone  who  presents  his  clownish  audience
with  a  divisible  discourse.  The  elegant  court  divine  exhorts  in
miscellany,  and  is  ashamed  to  bring  his  twos  and  threes  before  a
fashionable  assembly.

Should  I  therefore,  as  a  mere  miscellanarian  or  essay  writer,
forgetting  what  I  had  premised,  be  found  to  drop  a  head  and
lose  the  connecting  thread  of  my  present  discourse,  the  case
perhaps  would  not  be  so  preposterous.  For  fear,  however,  lest
I  should  be  charged  for  being  worse  than  my  word,  I  shall
endeavour  to  satisfy  my  reader  by  pursuing  my  method  pro-
posed, if  peradventure  he  can  call  to  mind  what  that  method
was.  Or  if  he  cannot,  the  matter  is  not  so  very  important  but
he  may  safely  pursue  his  reading  without  further  trouble.

To  proceed,  therefore.  Whatever  means  or  methods  may
be  employed  at  any  time  in  maintaining  or  propagating  a
religious  belief  already  current  and  established,  'tis  evident
that  the  first  beginnings  must  have  been  founded  in  that
natural  complacency  and  good  humour  which  inclines  to  trust
and  confidence  in  mankind.  Terrors  alone,  though  accompanied
with  miracles  and  prodigies  of  whatever  kind,  are  not  capable
of  raising  that  sincere  faith  and  absolute  reliance  which  is
required  in  favour  of  the  divinely  authorised  instructor  and
spiritual  chief.  The  affection  and  love  which  procures  a  true
adherence  to  the  new  religious  foundation  must  depend  either
on  a  real  or  counterfeit  goodness^  in  the  religious  founder.
Whatever  ambitious  spirit  may  inspire  him,  whatever  savage
zeal  or  persecuting  principle  may  lie  in  reserve  ready  to  disclose
itself  when  authority  and  power  is  once  obtained,  the  first  scene
1  Wit  and  Humour,  part  ii.  §  2  ;  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  5.

226


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

of  doctrine,  however,  fails  not  to  present  us  with  the  agreeable
views  of  joy,  love,  meekness,  gentleness,  and  moderation.

In  this  respect  religion,  according  to  the  common  practice
in  many  sects,  may  be  compared  to  that  sort  of  courtship  of
wliich  the  fair  sex  are  known  often  to  complain.  In  the
beginning  of  an  amour,  when  these  innocent  charmers  are  first
accosted,  they  hear  of  nothing  but  tender  vows,  submission,
service,  love.  13ut  soon  afterwards,  when  won  by  this  appear-
ance of  gentleness  and  humility,  they  have  resigned  themselves,
and  are  no  longer  their  own,  they  hear  a  different  note,  and
are  taught  to  understand  submission  and  service  in  a  sense  they
little  expected.  Charity  and  brotherly  love  are  very  engaging
sounds ;  but  who  would  dream  that  out  of  abundant  charity
and  brotherly  love  should  come  steel,  fire,  gibbets,  rods,  and
such  a  sound  and  hearty  application  of  these  remedies  as  should
at  once  advance  the  worldly  greatness  of  religious  pastors  and
the  particular  interest  of  private  souls,  for  which  they  are  so
charitably  concerned  't

It  has  been  observed  by  our  author  ^  "  that  the  Jews  were
naturally  a  very  cloudy  people."  That  they  had  certainly  in
religion,  as  in  everything  else,  the  least  good-humour  of  any
people  in  the  world  is  very  apparent.  Had  it  been  otherwise,
their  holy  legislator  and  deliverer,  who  was  declared  the  meekest
man  on  earth,^  and  w  ho  for  many  years  together  had  by  the
most  popular  and  kind  acts  endeavoured  to  gain  their  love  and
affection,  would  in  all  probability  have  treated  them  afterwards
with  more  sweetness,  and  been  able  with  less  blood  and  massacre  ^
to  retain  them  in  their  religious  duty.  This,  however,  we  may
observe,  that  if  the  first  Jewish  princes  and  celebrated  kings
acted  in  reality  according  to  the  institutions  of  their  great
founder,  not  only  music  but  even  play  and  dance  were  of  holy
appointment  and  divine  right. The  first  monarch  of  this  nation,

^  Letter  of  Enthusiasm ,  §  2  ;  aud  above,  Misc.  ii.  cb.  i.

2  Num.  xii.  3.

^  Exod.  xxxii.  27,  etc.  ;  aud  Num.  xvi.  41.

227


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

though  of  a  melancholy  complexion,  joined  music  with  his
spiritual  exercises,  and  even  used  it  as  a  remedy  under  that
dark  enthusiasm  or  evil  spirit,^  which  how  far  it  might  resemble
that  of  prophecy,  experienced  by  him  -  even  after  his  apostasy,
our  author  ^  pretends  not  to  determine.  'Tis  certain  that  the
successor  of  this  prince  was  a  hearty  espouser  of  the  merry
devotion,  and  by  his  example  has  shown  it  to  have  been  funda-
mental in  the  religious  constitution  of  his  people.  The  famous
entry  or  high  dance  ^  performed  by  him,  after  so  conspicuous  a
manner,  in  the  procession  of  the  sacred  coffer,  shows  that  he
was  not  ashamed  of  expressing  any  ecstasy  of  joy  or  playsome
humour^  which  was  practised  by  the  meanest  of  the  priests  or
people  on  such  an  occasion.''

Besides  the  many  songs  and  hymns  dispersed  in  Holy  Writ,
the  Book  of  Psalms  itself.  Job,  Proverbs,  Canticles,  and  other
entire  volumes  of  the  sacred  collection,  which  are  plainly  poetry
and  full  of  humorous  images  and  jocular  wit,  may  sufficiently
show  how  readily  the  inspired  authors  had  recourse  to  humour
and  diversion  as  a  proper  means  to  promote  religion  and
strengthen  the  established  faith.

1  1  Sam.  xviii.  TO ;  and  xix.  9.  2  /^ 23,  24.

3  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  G.  M  Sam.  vi,  5,  14,  IG.  ^  lb.  22.

^  Though  this  dance  was  not  performed  quite  naked,  the  dancers,  it
seems,  were  so  slightly  clothed  that,  in  respect  of  modesty,  they  might  as
well  have  worn  nothing,  their  nakedness  appearing  still  by  means  of
their  high  caperings,  leaps,  and  violent  attitudes  which  were  proper  to
this  dance.  The  reader,  if  he  be  curious,  may  examine  what  relation
this  religious  ecstasy  and  naked  dance  had  to  the  naked  and  processional
prophecy  (1  Sam.  xix.  23,  24),  where  prince,  priest,  and  people  prophesied
in  conjunction,  the  prince  himself  being  both  of  the  itinerant  and  naked
party.  It  appears  that  even  before  he  was  yet  advanced  to  the  throne  he
had  been  seized  with  this  prophesying  spirit,  errant,  processional,  and
saltant,  attended,  as  we  find,  with  a  sort  of  martial  dance  performed  in
troops  or  companies,  with  pipe  and  tabret  accompanying  the  march,
together  with  psaltry,  harp,  cornets,  timbrels,  and  other  variety  of  music.
See  1  Sam.  x.  5 ;  xix.  23,  etc.  ;  2  Sam.  vi.  5  ;  and  above,  Letter  of
Enthusiasm,  §  6.

228


MISCET.LANEOUS REFLECTIONS

^Vhen  the  affairs  of  the  Jewish  nation  grew  desperate,  and
everything  seemed  tending  to  a  total  concjuest  antl  captivity,
the  style  of  their  holy  writers  and  jirophets  might  well  vary
from  that  of  earlier  days  in  the  rise  and  vigour  of  their  common-
wealth, or  during  the  first  splendour  of  their  monarchy,  when
the  ])rinces  themselves  prophesied  and  ])otent  kings  were  of  the
number  of  the  sacred  penmen.  This  still  we  may  be  assured
of,  that  however  melancholy  or  ill-humoured  any  of  the  prophets
may  appear  at  any  time,  'twas  not  that  kind  of  spirit  which
God  was  wont  to  encourage  in  them.  Witness  the  case  of  the
prophet  Jonah,  whose  character  is  so  naturally  described  in
Holy  Writ.

Pettish  as  this  prophet  was,  unlike  a  man,  and  resembling
rather  some  refractory  boyish  pupil,  it  may  be  said  that  God,
as  a  kind  tutor,  was  pleased  to  humour  him,  bear  with  his
anger,  and  in  a  lusory  manner  expose  his  childish  frowardness
and  show  him  to  himself

"  Arise  (said  his  gracious  Lord),  and  go  to  Nineveh."  ^  "  No
such  matter,"  says  our  jn'ophet  to  himself,  but  away  over  sea
for  Tarshish.  He  fairly  plays  the  truant,  like  an  arch  school-
boy, hoping  to  hide  out  of  the  way.  But  his  Tutor  had  good
eyes  and  a  long  reach.  He  overtook  him  at  sea,  where  a
storm  was  ready  prepared  for  his  exercise,  and  a  fish's  belly  for
his  lody-ing.  The  renegade  found  himself  in  harder  durance
than  any  at  land.  He  was  sufficiently  mortified.  He  grew
good,  prayed,  moralised,  and  spoke  mightily  against  lying
vanities. -

Again  the  prophet  is  taken  into  favour,^  and  bid  go  to
Nineveh  to  foretell  destruction.  He  foretells  it.  Nineveh
repents ;  God  pardons,  and  the  prophet  is  angry.

"  Lord  !  did  I  not  foresee  what  this  would  come  to  ?  A\'as
not  this  my  saying  when  I  was  safe  and  quiet  at  home  ?  AMiat
else  should  I  have  run  away  for  ?  As  if  I  knew  not  how  little
dependence  there  Avas  on  the  resolution  of  those  who  are  always

1  Jonali  i.  etc.  ^  //,_  ji_  ^  "  ji,_  iii,  \^  etc.

229


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

so  ready  to  forgive  and  repent  of  what  they  have  determined.
No  !  Strike  me  dead  !  Take  my  Hfe  this  moment.  'Tis  better
for  me. If  ever  I  prophesy  again ""  ^

"  And  dost  thou  well  then  to  be  thus  angry,  Jonah  ?  Con-
sider with  thyself.  Come !  Since  thou  wilt  needs  retire  out  of
the  city  to  see  at  a  distance  what  will  come  of  it,  here,  take  a
better  fence  than  thy  own  booth  against  the  hot  sun  which
incommodes  thee.  Take  this  tall  plant  as  a  shady  covering
for  thy  head.  Cool  thyself,  and  be  delivered  from  thy
grief"  2

When  the  Almighty  had  shown  this  indulgence  to  the
prophet  he  grew  better-humoured,  and  passed  a  tolerable  night.
But  the  next  morning  the  worm  came  and  an  east  wind ;  the
arbour, was  nipped,  the  sun  shone  vehemently,  and  the  prophefs
head  was  heated  as  before.  Presently  the  ill  mood  returns,  and
the  prophet  is  at  the  old  pass.  "  Better  die  than  live  at  this
rate.  Death — death  alone  can  satisfy  me.  Let  me  hear  no
longer  of  living. No  ! ""Tis  in  vain  to  talk  of  it."  ^

Again  God  expostulates  ;  but  is  taken  up  short,  and
answered  churlishly  by  the  testy  prophet.  "Angry  he  is,
angry  he  ought  to  be,  and  angry  he  will  be  to  his  death."*
But  the  Almighty,  with  the  utmost  pity  towards  him  in  this
melancholy  and  froward  temper,  lays  open  the  folly  of  it,  and
exhorts  to  mildness  and  good  humour  in  the  most  tender
manner  and  under  the  most  familiar  and  pleasant  images ;
whilst  he  shows  expressly  more  regard  and  tenderness  to  the
very  cattle  and  brute-beasts  than  the  prophet  to  his  own  human
kind,  and  to  those  very  disciples  whom  by  his  preaching  he  had
converted.^

In  the  ancienter  parts  of  sacred  story,  where  the  beginning

of  things  and  origin  of  human  race  are  represented  to  us,  there

are  sufficient  instances  of  this  familiarity  of  style,  this  popular

pleasant  intercourse  and  manner  of  dialogue  between  God  and

1  Jonah  iv.  1,  2,  3.  ^  ji^ 4^  ,5^  q  3  jj, 7^  ^^

*  lb.  9.  ^  See  the  last  verse  of  this  prophet.

230


MISCELLAXEOT  S REFLECTIONS

man ;  ^  I  niioht  add,  even  between  man  and  beast ;  -  and  what
is  still  more  extraordinary,  between  God  and  Satan. ''

Whatsoever  of  this  kind  may  be  allegorically  understood,
or  in  the  way  of  parable  or  fable,  this  I  am  sure  of,  that  the
accounts,  descriptions,  narrations,  expressions,  and  phrases  are  in
themselves  many  times  exceedingly  pleasant,  entertaining,  and
facetious.  But  fearing  lest  I  might  be  misinterpreted  should  I
offer  to  set  these  passages  in  their  proper  light,  which,  however,
has  been  performed  by  undoubted  good  Christians  and  most
learned  and  eminent  divines  of  our  own  church,*  I  forbear  to  go
any  further  into  the  examination  or  criticism  of  this  sort.

As  for  our  Saviour's  style,  ''tis  not  more  vehement  and
majestic  in  his  gravest  animadversions  or  declamatory  discourses
than  it  is  sharp,  humorous,  and  witty  in  his  repartees,  reflections,
fabulous  narrations,  or  parables,  similes,  comparisons,  and  other
methods  of  milder  censure  and  reproof,  his  exhortations  to
his  disciples,  his  particular  designation  of  their  manners,  the
pleasant  images  under  which  he  often  couches  his  morals  and
prudential  rules ;  even  his  miracles  themselves  (especially  the
first  he  ever  wrought^)  carry  with  them  a  certain  festivity,
alacrity,  and  good  humour  so  remarkable  that  I  should  look
upon  it  as  impossible  not  to  be  moved  in  a  pleasant  manner  at
their  recital.

Now,  if  what  I  have  here  asserted  in  behalf  of  pleasantry
and  humour  be  found  just  and  real  in  respect  of  the  Jewish
and  Christian  religions,  I  doubt  not  it  w^ill  be  yielded  to  me,  in
respect  of  the  ancient  heathen  establishments,  that  the  highest
care  was  taken  by  their  original  founders  and  following  reformers
to  exhilarate  religion,  and  correct  that  melancholy  and  gloomi-
ness to  which  it  is  subject,  according  to  those  different  modifica-
tions of  enthusiasm  above  specified.''

'  Geii.  iii.  0,  etc.  -  Num.  xxii.  28,  etc.

3  (1)  Job  i.,  ii.  ;  (2)  2  Chron.  xviii.  18,  etc.

*  See  Burnet,  Archa'ol.  cap.  7,  p.  280,  etc.

^  St.  John  ii.  11.  ^  Above,  ch.  i.,  ii.

231


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Our  author,  as  I  take  it,  has  elsewhere  ^  shown  that  these
founders  were  real  musicians  and  improvers  of  poetry,  music,
and  the  entertaining  arts,  which  they  in  a  manner  incorporated
with  religion  ;  not  without  good  reason,  as  I  am  apt  to  imagine.
For  to  me  it  plainly  appears,  that  in  the  early  times  of  all
religions,  when  nations  Avere  yet  barbarous  and  savage,  there
was  ever  an  aptness  or  tendency  towards  the  dark  part  of
superstition,  which  among  many  other  horrors  produced  that
of  human  sacrifice.  Something  of  this  nature  might  possibly
be  deduced  even  from  Holy  Writ.^  And  in  other  histories  we
are  informed  of  it  more  at  large.

Every  one  knows  how  great  a  part  of  the  old  heathen
worship  consisted  in  play,  poetry,  and  dance.  And  though
some  of  the  more  melancholy  and  superstitious  votaries  might
approach  the  shrines  of  their  divinities  with  mean  grimaces,
crouchings,  and  other  fawning  actions  betraying  the  low
thoughts  they  had  of  the  divine  nature ;  yet  'tis  well  known
that  in  those  times  the  illiberal  sycophantic^  manner  of  devo-


1  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  ii.  §  2.

^  Gen.  xxii.  1,  2,  etc.  ;  and  Judges  xi.  30,  31,  etc.

These  places  relating  to  Abraham  and  Jephthah  are  cited  only  with
respect  to  the  notion  which  these  primitive  warriors  may  be  said  to  have
entertained  concerning  this  horrid  enormity,  so  common  among  the
inhabitants  of  Palestine  and  other  neighbouring  nations.  It  appears  that
even  the  elder  of  these  Hebrew  princes  was  under  no  extreme  surprise  on
this  trying  revelation.  Nor  did  he  think  of  expostulating  in  the  least  on
this  occasion,  when  at  another  time  he  could  be  so  importunate  for  the
pardon  of  an  inhospitable,  murderous,  impious,  and  incestuous  city.  Gen.
xviii.  23,  etc.  See  Marsham's  Citations,  pp.  76,  77  :  "  ex  istis  satius  est
colligere  hanc  Abrahami  tentationem  non  fuisse  KeKaivovpyniievqv  irpd^iv,
actionem  innovatam ;  non  recens  excogitatam,  sed  adjpristinos  Cananaeorum
mores  designatam."  See  the  learned  Capel's  Dissertation  upon  Jephthah,
"ex  hujus  voti  lege  (Lev.  xxvii.  28,  29)  Jephte  filiam  omnino  videtur
immolasse,  hoc  est,  morte  affecisse,  at  executus  est  in  ea  votum  quod
ipse  voverat,  Jud.  xi.  39."

2  See  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  4.

232


MISCELI>ANEOUS REFLECTIONS

tion  was by the  wiser sort contemned and  oft susj)ected  as
knavish  and  indirect.^

How  diiferent  an  air  and  aspect  the  f^ood  and  virtuous  were
presumed  to  carry  with  them  to  the  temple,  let  Phitarch  singly,
instead of  many  others,  witness  in  his  excellent  treatise^  of

'  .  . .  Non  til  prece  poscis  emaci,  etc.

Ilaud  cuivis  promptum  est,  murinurque  liumilesijue  susurros

Tollere  de  teniplis. . . .

De  Jove  quid  seutis? Estiie,  ut  praeponere  cures

Huuc  cuinani  ?  . . .

. . . Qua  tu  mercede  deorum

Emeris  auriculas  ?  .  .  .

O  curvae  in  terris  animae  et  coelestium  inanes  !

Quid  juvat  hoc,  templis  nostros  immittere  mores,

Et  bona  diis  ex  liac  scelerata  ducere  pulpa?
["  You  are  not  the  man  to  make  hijrf^ling-  prayers.  ...  It  is  not  every-
one who  is  ready  to  do  away  witli  muttering  and  whispering-  from  our
temples.  .  .  .  \\liat  is  your  view  of  Jupiter.''  May  I  assume  that  you
would  think  of  putting  him  above — '  above  whom .'' '  .  .  .  ^\'hat  is  the
price  you  pay  for  the  ears  of  the  Gods .''...  O  ye  souls  that  cleave  to
earth  and  have  nothing  heavenly  in  you  !  How  can  it  answer  to  introduce
the  spirit  of  the  age  into  the  temple-service,  and  infer  what  the  Gods  like
from  this  sinful  pampered  flesh  of  ours.-*" — From  Persius,  Sat.  2;  Coning-
ton's  translation.]

Non  est  meum,  si  mugiat  Africis
Malus  procellis,  ad  miseras  preces
Decurrere. . . .
["  It  is  not  for  me  to  betake  myself  to  pitiful  entreaties  if  my  mast
roar  with  the  south-west  wind." — Horace,  Od.  iii.  xxix.  57-59.]

See  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iii.  §  1  ;  and  above,  p.  205,  in  the  notes.
2  S)  ^apfiap  €^€vp6vTes"E\\T]V€S  Kara  ry  deiaiSaiixoviq.,  Tn^Xoio-eis,  Kara^ap^apiliaeis,
aa^pariff/Jiovs,  pl\p€is  fVt  Trpdaiowov  alaxpas,  irpoffKadijeis,  dWoKdrovs  TrpocKwrjaeis,
etc.  "  O  wretched  Greeks  (says  he,  speaking  to  his  then  declining
countrymen),  who  in  a  way  of  superstition  run  so  easily  into  the  relish
of  l)arbarous  nations,  and  bring  into  religion  that  frightful  mien  of  sordid
and  vilifying  devotion,  ill-favoured  humiliation  and  contrition,  abject  looks
and  countenances,  consternation,  prostrations,  disfigurations,  and  in  the
act  of  worship,  distortions,  constrained  and  painful  postures  of  the  body,
wry  faces,  beggarly  tones,  mumpings,  grimaces,  cringings,  and  the  rest  of
this  kind.  ...  A  shame  indeed  to  us  Grecians  !  .  .  . For  to  us  (we  know)^

233


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

superstition,  and in another  against the  Epicurean  atheism,

'tis  prescribed  from  of  old  by  our  peculiar  laws  concerning  music  and  the
public  choruses,  that  we  should  perform  in  the  handsomest  manner,  and
with  a  just  and  manly  countenance,  avoiding  those  grimaces  and  contortions
of  which  some  singers  contract  a  habit.  And  shall  we  not  in  the  more  im-
mediate worship  of  the  Deity  preserve  this  liberal  air  and  manly  appear-
ance ?  or,  on  the  contrary,  whilst  Me  are  nicely  observant  of  other  forms
and  decencies  in  the  temple,  shall  we  neglect  this  greater  decency  in  voice,
words,  and  manners,  and  with  vile  cries,  fawnings,  and  prostitute  behaviour
betray  the  natural  dignity  and  majesty  of  that  divine  religion  and  national
worship  delivered  down  to  us  by  our  forefathers,  and  purged  from  every-
thing of  a  barbarous  and  savage  kind  ?  "

AV'hat  Plutarch  mentions  here  of  the  just  countenance  or  liberal  air,
the  (jrhtia  diKaiov,  of  the  musical  performer,  is  agreeably  illustrated  in  his
Alcibiades.  'Twas  that  heroic  youth,  who,  as  appears  by  this  historian,
first  gave  occasion  to  the  Athenians  of  the  higher  rank  wholly  to  abandon
the  use  of  flutes  ;  which  had  before  been  highly  in  favour  with  them.  The
reason  given,  was  "the  illiberal  air  which  attended  such  performers,  and  the
unmanly  disfiguration  of  their  looks  and  countenance  which  this  piping  work
produced."  As  for  the  real  figure  or  plight  of  the  superstitious  mind,  our
author  thus  describes  it  :  "  Gladly  would  the  poor  comfortless  mind  by
whiles  keep  festival  and  rejoice  ;  but  such  as  its  religion  is,  there  can  be
no  free  mirth  or  joy  belonging  to  it.  Public  thanksgivings  are  but  private
mournings.  Sighs  and  sorrows  accompany  its  praises.  Fears  and  horrors
corrupt  its  best  afi'ections.  When  it  assumes  the  outward  ornaments  of
best  apparel  for  the  temple,  it  even  then  strikes  melancholy  and  appears
in  paleness  and  ghastly  looks.  While  it  worships,  it  trembles.  It  sends
up  vows  in  faint  and  feeble  voices,  with  eager  hopes,  desires,  and  passions,
discoverable  in  the  whole  disorder  of  the  outward  frame  ;  and,  in  the
main,  it  evinces  plainly  by  practice,  that  the  notion  of  Pythagoras  was  but
vain,  who  dared  assert  that  we  were  then  in  the  best  state,  and  carried  our
most  becoming  looks  with  us,  when  we  approached  the  Gods.  For  then
above  all  other  seasons  are  the  superstitious  found  in  the  most  abject
miserable  state  of  mind,  and  with  the  meanest  presence  and  behaviour,
approaching  the  sacred  shrines  of  the  Divine  Powers  in  the  same  manner  as
they  would  the  dens  of  bears  or  lions,  tlie  caves  of  basilisks  or  dragons,  or
other  hideous  i*ecesses  of  wild  beasts  or  raging  monsters.  To  me  therefore
it  appears  wonderful,  that  we  should  arraign  atheism  as  impious,  whilst
superstition  escapes  the  charge.  Shall  he  who  holds  there  are  no  Divine
Powers  be  esteemed  impious,  and  shall  not  he  be  esteemed  far  more  impious
who  holds  the  Divine  Beings  such  in  their  nature  as  the  superstitious

234


JNnSCEIJ.ANEOT^S REFLECTIONS

where  it  will  pljiinly  enoufrh  appear  ^  what  a  share  good
humour  had  in  that  whieh  the  politer  ancients  esteemed  as
piety  and  true  religion.

But now, ujethinks, I have been sufficiently grave and
serious  in  defence  of  what is  directly  contrary  to seriousness

believe  ami  represent?  For  my  owu  part,  I  liad  rather  men  should  say  of
me,"  etc.  See  Treatise  i.  §  .5  in  the  notes.  Nothing  can  he  more  remark-
able than  what  our  author  says  aji^ain,  a  little  below.  "  The  atheist  believes
there  is  no  Deity,  the  relig'ionist  or  superstitious  believer  wishes  there  were
none.  If  he  believes,  'tis  aj^ainst  his  will ;  mistrust  he  dares  not,  nor  call
his  thoug-ht  in  question.  But  could  he  with  security,  at  once,  throw  off
that  oppressive  fear  which  like  the  rock  of  Tantiillus  impends  and  presses
over  him,  he  would  with  equal  joy  spurn  his  enslaving'  thought,  and  em-
brace the  atheist's  state  and  opinion  as  his  happiest  deliverance.  Atheists
are  free  of  superstition,  but  the  superstitious  are  ever  willing  atheists,
though  impotent  in  their  thought,  and  unable  to  believe  of  the  Divine
Being  as  they  gladly  would,  vwi  di  t<^  fih  dOe(x}  SeKndaifxofias  ovOiw  nereaTiv,
o  8i  dcKndaifiwv  rrj  irpoaipeffet  dOeos  wy,  dadeveo'Tepos  icFTw  9j  tou  So^dj'ed'  irepl  6eu)v  6
jSotyXerai." See  Treatise  i.  §  4.5.

^  WTiere  speaking  of  religion  as  it  stood  in  the  heathen  church  and
in  his  own  time,  he  confesses  "That  as  to  the  vulgar  disposition  there  was
no  remedy.  Many  even  of  the  better  sort  would  be  found,  of  course,  to
intermix  with  their  veneration  and  esteem  something  of  terror  or  fear  in
their  religious  worship,  which  might  give  it  perhaps  the  character  of
superstition  ;  but  that  this  evil  was  a  thousand  times  over-l)alaiu;ed  by  the
satisfaction,  hope,  j(»y,  and  delight  which  attended  religious  worship.
This  (says  he)  is  plain  and  evident  from  the  most  demonstrable  testimonies,
for  neither  the  societies  or  public  meetings  in  the  temples,  nor  the
festivals  themselves,  nor  any  other  diverting  parties,  sights,  or  entertain-
ments, are  more  delightful  or  rejoicing  than  what  we  ourselves  behold,
and  act  in  the  divine  worship  and  in  the  holy  sacrifices  and  mysteries
which  belong  to  it.  Our  disposition  and  temper  is  not,  on  this  occasion,
as  if  we  were  in  the  presence  of  worldly  potentates,  dread  sovereigns,  and
despotic  princes.  Nor  ai*e  we  here  found  meanly  huml)ling  ourselves,
crouching  in  fear  and  awe,  and  full  of  anxiety  and  confusion  as  would  be
natural  to  us  in  such  a  case.  But  where  the  divinity  is  esteemed  the
nearest  and  most  immediately  present,  there  horrors  and  amazements  are
the  furthest  banished  ;  there  the  heart,  we  find,  gives  freest  way  to
pleasure,  to  entertainment,  to  play,  mirth,  hiunour,  and  diversion,  and
this  even  to  an  excess."

235


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  gravity.  I  have  very  solemnly  pleaded  for  gaiety  and
good  humour;  I  have  declaimed  against  pedantry  in  learned
language,  and  opposed  formality  in  form ;  I  now  find  myself
somewhat  impatient  to  get  loose  from  the  constraint  of  method ;
and  I  pretend  lawfully  to  exercise  the  privilege  which  I  have
asserted  of  rambling  from  subject  to  subject,  from  style  to
style,  in  my  miscellaneous  manner  according  to  my  present  pro-
fession and  character.

I  may,  in  the  meanwhile,  be  censured  probably  for  passing
over  my  third  head.  But  the  methodical  reader,  if  he  be
scrupulous  about  it,  may  content  himself  with  looking  back,
and  if  possibly  he  can  pick  it  out  of  my  second,  he  will  forgive
this  anticipation  in  a  writing  which  is  governed  less  by  form
than  humour.  I  had  indeed  resolved  with  myself  to  make  a
large  collection  of  passages  from  our  most  eminent  and  learned
divines,  in  order  to  have  set  forth  this  latter  head  of  my
chapter,  and  by  better  authority  than  my  own  to  have  evinced
"  that  we  had  in  the  main  good-humoured  religion."  But
after  considering  a  little  while,  I  came  to  this  short  issue  with
myself,  "  that  it  was  better  not  to  cite  at  all  than  to  cite
partially."  Now  if  I  cited  fairly  what  was  said  as  well  on  the
melancholy  as  the  cheerful  side  of  our  religion,  the  matter,  I
found,  would  be  pretty  doubtfully  balanced,  and  the  result  at
last  would  be  this,  "  that,  generally  speaking,  as  oft  as  a  divine
was  in  good  humour,  we  should  find  religion  the  sweetest  and
best  humoured  thing  in  nature,  but  at  other  times  (and  that
pretty  often)  we  should  find  a  very  different  face  of  matters."

Thus  are  we  alternately  exalted  and  humbled,  cheered  and
dejected,  according  as  our  spiritual  ^  director  is  himself  in-
fluenced, and  this,  peradventure  for  our  edification  and
advantage  "  that  by  these  contrarieties  and  changes  we  may  be
rendered  more  supple  and  compliant."  If  we  are  very  low  and
down  we  are  taken  up,  if  we  are  up  and  high  we  are  taken
down. This  is  discipline,  this  is  authority  and  command. Did

1  Supra,  p.  179.
236


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

religion  carry  constantly  one  and  the  same  face,  and  were  it
always  represented  to  us  alike  in  every  respect,  we  might
perhaps  be  overbold  and  make  acquaintance  with  it  in  too
familiar  a  manner ;  we  might  think  ourselves  fully  knowing  in
it  and  assured  of  its  true  character  and  genius.  From  whence
perhaps  we  might  become  more  refractory  towards  the  ghostly
teachers  of  it,  and  be  apt  to  submit  ourselves  the  less  to  those
who  by  a])pointment  and  authority  represent  it  to  us  in  such
lights  as  they  esteem  most  proper  and  convenient.

I  shall  therefore  not  only  conclude  abruptly  but  even
sceptically  on  this  my  last  head,  referring  my  reader  to  what
has  been  said  already  on  my  preceding  heads  for  the  bare
probability  "of  our  having  in  the  main  a  witty  and  good-
humoured  religion.""

This,  however,  I  may  presume  to  assert,  that  there  are  un-
doubtedly some  countenances  or  aspects  of  our  religion  which
are  humorous  and  pleasant  in  themselves,  and  that  the  sadder
representations  of  it  are  many  times  so  over-sad  and  dismal,
that  they  are  apt  to  excite  a  very  contrary  passion  to  what  is
intended  by  the  representers.


237


MISCELLANY III


CHAPTER  I

Further  remarks  on  the  author  of  the  treatises — His  order  and  design —
His  remarks  on  the  succession  of  wit,  and  progress  of  letters,  and
philosophy— Of  words,  relations,  affections — Countrymen  and  country
— Old  England — Patriots  of  the  soil — Virtuosi  and  philosophers — A
taste.

Having  already  asserted  my  privilege  as  a  miscellaneous  or
essay  writer  of  the  modern  establishment,  to  write  on  every
subject  and  in  every  method  as  I  fancy,  to  use  order  or  lay  it
aside  as  I  think  fit,  and  to  treat  of  order  and  method  in  other
works,  though  free  perhaps  and  unconfined  as  to  my  own ;  I
shall  presume,  in  this  place,  to  consider  the  present  method  and
order  of  my  author's  treatises  as  in  this  joint  edition  they  are
ranged.

Notwithstanding  the  high  airs  of  scepticism  which  our
author  assumes  in  his  first  piece,  I  cannot,  after  all,  but  imagine
that  even  there  he  proves  himself  at  the  bottom  a  real
dogmatist,  and  shows  plainly  that  he  has  his  private  opinion,
belief,  or  faith,  as  strong  as  any  devotee  or  religionist  of  them
all.  Though  he  affects  perhaps  to  strike  at  other  hypotheses
and  schemes,  he  has  something  of  his  own  still  in  reserve,  and
holds  a  certain  plan  or  system  peculiar  to  himself,  or  such  at
least  in  which  he  has  at  present  but  few  companions  or
followers.

On  this  account  1  look  upon  his  management  to  have  been

238


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

much  after  the  rate  of  some  ambitious  architect,  who  being
called  perhaps  to  prop  a  roof,  redress  a  leaning  wall  or  add  to
some  particular  apartment,  is  not  contented  with  this  small
specimen  of  his  mastership  ;  but  pretending  to  demonstrate  the
unserviceableness  and  inconvenience  of  the  old  fabric,  forms  the
design  of  a  new  building,  and  longs  to  show  his  skill  in  the
principal  part  of  architecture  and  mechanics.

'Tis  certain  that  in  matters  of  learning  and  ])hilosophy  the
practice  of  pulling  down  is  far  pleasanter  and  affords  more
entertainment  than  that  of  building  and  setting  up.  Many
have  succeeded  to  a  miracle  in  the  first,  who  have  miserably
failed  in  the  latter  of  these  attempts.  We  may  find  a  thousand
engineers  who  can  sa]),  undermine,  and  blow  up  with  admirable
dexterity,  for  one  single  one  who  can  build  a  fort  or  lav  the
platform  of  a  citadel.  And  though  compassion  in  real  war
may  make  the  ruinous  practice  less  delightful,  'tis  certain  that
in  the  literate  warring-world,  the  springing  of  mines,  the  blow-
ing up  of  towers,  bastions,  and  ramparts  of  philoso])hy  with
systems,  hypotheses,  opinions  and  doctrines  into  the  air,  is  a
spectacle  of  all  other  the  most  naturally  rejoicing.

^Our  author,  we  suppose,  might  have  done  well  to  consider
this.  We  have  fairly  conducted  him  through  his  first  and
second  letter,  and  have  brought  him,  as  we  see  here,  into  his
third  piece.  He  has  hitherto,  methinks,  kept  up  his  sapping
method  and  unravelling  humour  with  tolerable  (jood  g-race.
He  has  given  only  some  few  and  very  slender  hints  ^  of  going
further  or  attempting  to  erect  any  scheme  or  model  which  may

^  Viz.  in  the  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §§  5  and  6  ;  so  again,  Treatise  ii.
part  i.  §  G  ;  and  iii.  §  3 ;  and  again.  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  1  ;  where  the
inquiry  is  proposed  and  the  system  and  genealogy  of  the  affections
previously  treated  ;  with  an  apology  (p.  202)  for  the  examining  practice
and  seeming  pedantry  of  the  method.  And  afterwards  the  apology  for
Treatise  iv.  in  Treatise  v.  part  ii.  §  3.  Concerning  this  series  and  de-
pendency of  these  joint  treatises  see  more  particularly  below,  ^fisc.  iv.
beginning.

239


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

discover  his  pretence  to  a  real  architect-capacity.  Even  in  this
his  third  piece  he  carries  with  him  the  same  sceptical  mien,  and
what  he  offers  by  way  of  project  or  hypothesis  is  very  faint,
hardly  spoken  aloud,  but  muttered  to  himself  in  a  kind  of
dubious  whisper  or  feigned  soliloquy.  What  he  discovers  of
form  and  method  is  indeed  so  accompanied  with  the  random
miscellaneous  air,  that  it  may  pass  for  raillery  rather  than
g-ood  earnest.  'Tis  in  his  followino;  treatise  ^  that  he  discovers
himself  openly  as  a  plain  dogmatist,  a  formalist,  and  man  of
method ;  with  his  hypothesis  tacked  to  him,  and  his  opinions
so  close  sticking  as  would  force  one  to  call  to  mind  the  figure
of  some  precise  and  strait-laced  professor  in  a  university.

What  may  be  justly  pleaded  in  his  behalf  when  we  come  in
company  with  him  to  inquire  into  such  solemn  and  profound
subjects,  seems  very  doubtful.  Meanwhile  as  his  afl'airs  stand
hitherto  in  this  his  treatise  of  advice,  I  shall  be  contented  to
yoke  with  him  and  proceed  in  my  miscellaneous  manner,  to  give
my  advice  also  to  men  of  note,  whether  they  are  authors  or
politicians,  virtuosi  or  fine  gentlemen  ;  comprehending  him,  the
said  author,  as  one  of  the  number  of  the  advised,  and  myself
too  (if  occasion  be)  after  his  own  example  of  self-admonition
and  private  address.

But  first  as  to  our  author's  dissertation  in  this^  third
treatise,  where  his  reflections  upon  authors  in  general  and  the
rise  and  progress  of  arts  make  the  inlet  or  introduction  to  his
philosophy  ;  we  may  observe  that  it  is  not  without  some  appear-
ance of  reason  that  he  has  advanced  this  method.  It  must  be
acknowledged  that  though  in  the  earliest  times  there  may  have
been  divine  men  of  a  transcending  genius  who  have  given  laws
both  in  religion  and  government  to  the  great  advantage  and
improvement  of  mankind ;  yet  philosophy  itself  as  a  science
and  known  profession  worthy  of  that  name,  cannot  with  any
probability  be  supposed  to  have  risen  (as  our  author  shows)  till

^  Viz.  Treatise  v.  the  Inquiry  concerning  Virtue.
2  Part  ii.  §  2.

240


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

other  arts  head  been  raised,  and  in  a  certain  proportion  advanced
before  it.  And  as  this  was  of  the  <rreatest  di<^nity  and  weight,
so  it  came  last  into  form.  It  was  long  clearing  itself  from  the
affected  dress  of  sophists,  or  enthusiastic  air  of  poets,  and
appeared  late  in  its  genuine,  simple,  and  just  beauty.

The  reader  perhaps  may  justly  excuse  our  author  for  having
in  this  place  so  overloaded  his  margin  with  those  weighty
authorities  and  ancient  citations,^  when  he  knows  that  there
are  many  grave  professors  in  humanity  and  letters  among  the
moderns  who  are  puzzled  in  this  search,  and  write  both  re-
pugnantly to  one  another  and  to  the  plain  and  natural  evidence
of  the  case.  The  real  lineage  and  succession  of  wit  is  indeed
plainly  founded  in  Nature,  as  our  author  has  endeavoured  to
make  appear  both  from  history  and  fact.  The  Greek  nation,
as  it  is  original  to  us  in  respect  to  these  polite  arts  and  sciences,
so  it  was  in  reality  original  to  itself.  For  whether  the  Egyptians,
Phoenicians,  Thracians,  or  barbarians  of  any  kind  may  have  hit
fortunately  on  this  or  that  particular  invention,  either  in  agri-
culture, building,  navigation,  or  letters,  whichever  may  have
introduced  this  rite  of  worship,  this  title  of  a  deity,  this  or  that
instrument  of  music,  this  or  that  festival,  game,  or  dance  (for
on  this  matter  there  are  high  debates  among  the  learned),  'tis
evident,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  the  arts  and  sciences  were  formed
in  Greece  itself.  'Twas  there  that  music,  poetry,  and  the  rest
came  to  receive  some  kind  of  shape  and  be  distinguished  into
their  several  orders  and  degrees.  AVhatever  flourished  or  was
raised  to  any  degree  of  correctness  or  real  perfection  in  the
kind  was  by  means  of  Greece  alone,  and  in  the  hand  of  that
sole  polite,  most  civilised,  and  accomplished  nation.

Nor  can  this  appear  strange  when  we  consider  the  fortunate
constitution  of  that  people.  For  though  composed  of  different
nations,  distinct  in  laws  and  governments,  divided  by  seas  and
continents,  dispersed  in  distant  islands,  yet  being  originally  of
the  same  extract,  united  by  one  single  language,  and  animated
^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  ii.  §  2.
VOL.  II  241  R


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

by  that  social  public  and  free  spirit  which,  notwithstanding
the  animosity  of  their  several  warring  states,  induced  them  to
erect  such  heroic  congresses  and  powers  as  those  which  consti-
tuted the  Amphictyonian  councils,  the  Olympic,  Isthmian,  and
other  games,  they  could  not  but  naturally  polish  and  refine
each  other,  'Twas  thus  they  brought  their  beautiful  and  com-
prehensive language  to  a  just  standard,  leaving  only  such  variety
in  the  dialects  as  rendered  their  poetry,  in  particular,  so  much
the  more  agreeable.  The  standard  was  in  the  same  proportion
carried  into  other  arts ;  the  secretion  was  made ;  the  several
species  found  and  set  apart ;  the  performers  and  masters  in
every  kind  honoured  and  admired  ;  and,  last  of  all,  even  critics
themselves  acknowledged  and  received  as  masters  over  all  the
rest.  From  music,  poetry,  rhetoric,  down  to  the  simple  prose
of  history,  through  all  the  plastic  arts  of  sculpture,  statuary,
painting,  architecture,  and  the  rest;  everything  muse -like,
graceful,  and  exquisite  was  rewarded  with  the  highest  honours
and  carried  on  with  the  utmost  ardour  and  emulation.  Thus
Greece,  though  she  exported  arts  to  other  nations,  had  properly
for  her  own  share  no  import  of  the  kind.  The  utmost  which
could  be  named  would  amount  to  no  more  than  raw  materials  of
a  rude  and  barbarous  form.  And  thus  the  nation  was  evidently
original  in  art ;  and  with  them  every  noble  study  and  science
was  (as  the  great  master,  so  often  cited  by  our  author,  says  of
certain  kinds  of  poetry)  self-formed,^  wrought  out  of  Nature,
and  drawn  from  the  necessary  operation  and  course  of  things,
working,  as  it  were,  of  their  own  accord  and  proper  inclination.

1  atrocrxeSiao-Ti/cij.  Treatise  III.  part  ii.  §  2.  'Tis  in  this  sense  of  the
natural  production  and  self-formation  of  the  arts,  in  this  free  state  of
ancient  Greece,  that  the  same  ^reat  master  uses  this  word  a  little  before,
in  the  same  chapter  of  his  Poetics,  viz.  the  4th,  speaking  in  general  of  the
poets  :  Kara.  fiiKphv  ■jrpodyoi'Tes,  iyiyvrjaav  Tr}v  irol-qcnv,  iK  tQ)v  ai^rocrxfSia-
cr/xdrw!'.  \^'  Advancing  step  by  step  they  produced  poetry  out  of  their  im-
provisations."— Arist.  Poet.  iv.  6.]  And  presently  after,  X^^ews  5e  yevofxev-qs,
avTT)  7)  cj)V(jLs  rb  olKelov  fxirpov  evpe.  ["When  dialogue  was  introduced,  Nature
herself  found  out  the  appropriate  metre." — lb.  iv.  1-i.]

242


MISCELLANEOUS HEFLECTIONS

Now,  accordiiit;  to  tliis  natural  growtli  of  arts  peculiar  to  Greece,
it  would  necessarily  happen  that  at  the  beginning,  when  the
force  of  language  came  to  be  first  proved,  when  the  admiring
world  made  their  first  judgment  and  essayed  their  taste  in  the
elegancies  of  this  sort,  the  lofty,  the  sublime,  the  astonishing
and  amazing  would  be  the  most  in  fashion  and  ])referred.
Metaphorical  speech,  multiplicity  of  figures  and  high-sounding
words  would  naturally  prevail.  Though  in  the  conmionwealth
itself  and  in  the  affairs  of  government  men  were  used  originally
to  Y)\am  and  direct  s})cech,  yet  when  speaking  became  an  art
and  was  taught  by  sophists  and  other  pretended  masters,  the
high  jioetic  and  the  figurative  way  began  to  prevail  even  at  the
Bar  and  in  the  public  assemblies,  insomuch  that  the  grand-
master, in  the  above-cited  part  of  his  Rhetorics,  where  he  extols
the  tragic  poet  Euripides,  upbraids  the  rhetoricians  of  his  own
age,  who  retained  that  very  bombastic  style,  which  even  poets,
and  those  too  of  the  tragic  kind,  had  already  thrown  off,  or  at
least  considerably  mitigated.  But  the  taste  of  Greece  was  now-
polishing.  A  better  judgment  was  soon  formed  when  a  Demo-
sthenes was  heard  and  had  found  success.  The  people  themselves
(as  our  author  has  shown)  came  now  to  reform  their  comedy
and  familiar  manner,  after  tragedy  and  the  higher  style  had
been  brought  to  its  perfection  under  the  last  hand  of  an
Euripides.  And  now  in  all  the  })rincipal  works  of  ingenuity
and  art,  simplicity  and  Nature  began  chiefly  to  be  sought ;
and  this  was  the  taste  which  lasted  through  so  many  ages,  till
the  ruin  of  all  things  under  a  luiiversal  monarch.

If  the  reader  should  peradventure  be  led  by  his  curiosity  to
seek  some  kind  of  comparison  between  this  ancient  growth  of
taste  and  that  which  we  have  experienced  in  modern  days  and
within  our  own  nation,  he  may  look  back  to  the  speeches  of
our  ancestors  in  Parliament.  He  will  find  them,  generally
speaking,  to  have  been  very  short  and  plain,  but  coarse  and
what  we  properly  call  home-spun,  till  learning  came  in  vogue
and  science  was  known  amongst  us. When  our  princes  and

243


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

senators  became  scholars  they  spoke  scholastically.  And  the
pedantic  style  was  prevalent  from  the  first  dawn  of  letters,
about  the  age  of  the  Reformation,  till  long  afterwards.  Witness
the  best  written  discourses,  the  admired  speeches,  orations,  or
sermons,  through  several  reigns,  down  to  these  latter,  which  we
compute  within  the  present  age.  ""Twill  undoubtedly  be  found
that  till  very  late  days  the  fashion  of  speaking  and  the  turn  of
wit  was  after  the  figurative  and  florid  manner.  Nothing;  was
so  acceptable  as  the  high-sounding  phrase,  the  far-fetched  com-
parison, the  capricious  point,  and  play  of  words ;  and  nothing
so  despicable  as  what  was  merely  of  the  plain  or  natural  kind.
So  that  it  must  either  be  confessed  that  in  respect  of  the
preceding  age  we  are  fallen  very  low  in  taste,  or  that,  if  we  are
in  reality  improved,  the  natural  and  simple  manner  which
conceals  and  covers  art  is  the  most  truly  artful,  and  of  the
genteelest,  truest,  and  best  studied  taste,  as  has  above  been
treated  more  at  large.^

Now,  therefore,  as  to  our  author''s  philosophy  itself,  as  it  lies
concealed  in  this  treatise,^  but  more  professed  and  formal  in
his  next,^  we  shall  proceed  gradually  according  to  his  own
method,  since  it  becomes  not  one  who  has  undertaken  the  part
of  his  airy  assistant  and  humorous  paraphrast  to  enter  suddenly
without  good  preparation  into  his  dry  reasonings  and  moral
researches  about  the  social  passions  and  natural  affections,  of
which  he  is  such  a  punctilious  examiner.

Of  all  human  affections,  the  noblest  and  most  becoming
human  nature  is  that  of  love  to  one's  country.  This,  perhaps,
will  easily  be  allowed  by  all  men  who  have  really  a  country,  and
are of  the  number  of  those  who  may  be  called  a  people,*  as

^  Misc.  i.  3  ;  and  Treatise  iii.  part  ii.  §  2.

^  Viz.  Soliloquy,  or  Advice  to  an  Author ;  Treatise  in.

^  Viz.  Inquiry,  etc.  ;  Treatise  iv.

*  A  multitude  held  together  by  force,  though  under  one  and  the  same
head,  is  not  properly  united.  Nor  does  such  a  body  make  a  people.  'Tis  the
social  league,  confederacy,  and  mutual  consent,  founded  in  some  common
good  or  interest,  which  joins  the  members  of  a  community  and  makes  a

244


MISCELLANEOUS KEFLECTIONS

enjoying  the  happiness  of  ca  real  constitution  and  pohty  by  which
they  are  free  and  independent.  There  are  few  such  countrymen
or  freemen  so  degenerate  as  directly  to  discountenance  or  con-
demn this  passion  of  love  to  their  community  and  national
brotherhood.  The  indirect  manner  of  opposing  this  principle
is  the  most  usual.  We  hear  it  commonly  as  a  complaint,  "  That
there  is  little  of  this  love  extant  in  the  world.''  From  whence
'tis  hastily  concluded,  "  That  there  is  little  or  nothing  of  friendly
or  social  affection  inherent  in  our  nature  or  proper  to  our
species."  'Tis  however  apparent  that  there  is  scarce  a  creature
of  human  kind  who  is  not  possessed  at  least  of  some  inferior
deffree  or  meaner  sort  of  this  natural  affection  to  a  country.

Nescioqua  natale  solum  dulcedine  captos
Ducit.i

'Tis  a  wretched  aspect  of  humanity  which  we  figure  to  our-
selves when  we  would  endeavour  to  resolve  the  very  essence  and
foundation  of  this  generous  passion  into  a  relation  to  mere  clay
and  dust,  exclusively  of  anything  sensible,  intelligent,  or  moral.
'Tis,  I  must  own,  on  certain  -  relations  or  respective  proportions
that  all  natural  affection  does  in  some  measure  depend.  And  in
this  view  it  cannot,  I  confess,  be  denied  that  we  have  each  of  us
a  certain  relation  to  the  mere  earth  itself,  the  very  mould  or
surface  of  that  planet  in  which,  with  other  animals  of  various
sorts,  we  (poor  reptiles  !)  were  also  bred  and  nourished.  But  had
it  happened  to  one  of  us  British  men  to  have  been  born  at  sea,
could  we  not  therefore  properly  be  called  British  men  ?  Could
we  be  allowed  countrymen  of  no  sort,  as  having  no  distinct
relation  to  any  certain  soil  or  region  ;  no  original  neighbourhood
but  with  the  watery  inhabitants  and  sea-monsters  ? Surely,  if

people  one.  Absolute  power  annuls  the  public.  And  where  there  is  no
public  or  constitution  there  is  in  reality  no  mother  country  or  nation.  See
Treatise  ni.  part  iii.  §  1.

^  Ovidj  Pont.  1.  iii.  35.  ["Our  own  country  charms  and  draws  us
with  a  certain  sweetness."]

-  TO.  Ka.9r]K0VTa.  rah  J'x^o'fcrt  TapafifrpeiTai.

245


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

we  were  born  of  lawful  parents,  lawfully  employed,  and  under
the  protection  of  law,  wherever  they  might  be  then  detained,  to
whatever  colonies  sent,  or  whithersoever  driven  by  any  accident,
or  in  expeditions  or  adventures  in  the  public  service  or  that  of
mankind,  we  should  still  find  we  had  a  home  and  country  ready
to  lay  claim  to  us.  We  should  be  obliged  still  to  consider  our-
selves as  fellow-citizens,  and  might  be  allowed  to  love  our  country
or  nation  as  honestly  and  heartily  as  the  most  inland  inhabitant
or  native  of  the  soil.  Our  political  and  social  capacity  would
undoubtedly  come  in  view,  and  be  acknowledged  full  as  natural
and  essential  in  our  species  as  the  parental  and  filial  kind,  which
gives  rise  to  what  we  peculiarly  call  natural  affection.  Or
supposing  that  both  our  birth  and  parents  had  been  unknown,
and  that  in  this  respect  we  were  in  a  manner  younger  brothers
in  society  to  the  rest  of  mankind,  yet  from  our  nurture  and
education  we  should  surely  espouse  some  country  or  other,  and
joyfully  embracing  the  protection  of  a  magistracy,  should  of
necessity  and  by  force  of  nature  join  ourselves  to  the  general
society  of  mankind,  and  those  in  particular  with  whom  we  had
entered  into  a  nearer  communication  of  benefits  and  closer
sympathy  of  affections.  It  may  therefore  be  esteemed  no
better  than  a  mean  subterfuge  of  narrow  minds  to  assign  this
natural  passion  for  society  and  a  country  to  such  a  relation  as
that  of  a  mere  fungus  or  common  excrescence  to  its  parent-
mould  or  nursing  dunghill.

The  relation  of  countryman,  if  it  be  allowed  anything  at  all,
must  imply  something  moral  and  social.  The  notion  itself  pre-
supposes a  naturally  civil  and  political  state  of  mankind,  and  has
reference  to  that  particular  part  of  society  to  which  we  owe  our
chief  advantao-es  as  men  and  rational  creatures,  such  as  are^
naturally  and  necessarily  united  for  each  other's  happiness
and  support,  and  for  the  highest  of  all  happinesses  and
enjoyments,  "  the  intercourse  of  minds,  the  free  use  of  our
reason,  and  the  exercise  of  mutual  love  and  friendship."
^  Treatise  ii.  part  iii.  §  1  ;  Treatise  v.  part  ii.  §  4.

24G


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

An  ingenious  physician  among  the  moderns,  having  in  view
the  natural  depcndencv  of  the  vegetable  and  animal  kinds  on  their
common  mother  earth,  and  observing  that  both  the  one  and  the
other  draw  from  her  their  continual  sustenance  (some  rooted  and
fixed  down  to  their  first  abodes,  others  unconfined  and  wandering
from  place  to  })lace  to  suck  their  nourishment),  he  accordingly,
as  I  remember,  styles  this  latter  animal  race,  her  released  sons,
filios  terrae  cmancipatos.  Now  if  this  be  our  only  way  of
reckoning  for  mankind,  we  may  call  ourselves  indeed  the  sons  of
earth  at  large,  but  not  of  any  particular  soil  or  district.  The
division  of  climates  and  regions  is  fantastic  and  artificial  ;  much
more  the  limits  of  particular  countries,  cities,  or  provinces.  Our
natale  solum,  or  mother  earth,  must  by  this  account  be  the  real
globe  itself  which  bears  us,  and  in  respect  of  which  we  must
allow  the  common  animals,  and  even  the  plants  of  all  degrees,
to  claim  an  ecjual  brotherhood  with  us  under  this  common
parent.

According  to  this  calculation  we  must  of  necessity  carry  our
relation  as  far  as  to  the  whole  material  world  or  universe,  where
alone  it  can  prove  complete.  But  for  the  particular  district  or
tract  of  earth,  which  in  a  vulgar  sense  we  call  our  country,
however  bounded  or  geographically  divided,  we  can  never,  at
this  rate,  frame  any  accountable  relation  to  it,  nor  consequently
assign  any  natural  or  proper  affection  towards  it.

If,  unhappily,  a  man  had  been  bom  either  at  an  imi  or  in
some  dirty  village,  he  would  hardly,  I  think,  circumscribe  him-
self so  narrowly  as  to  accept  a  denomination  or  character  from
those  nearest  appendices  or  local  circumstances  of  his  nativity.
So  far  should  one  be  from  making  the  hamlet  or  parish  to  be
characteristical  in  the  case,  that  hardly  would  the  shire  itself,  or
county,  however  rich  or  flourishing,  be  taken  into  the  honorary
term  or  appellation  of  one\s  country.

"  What,  then,  shall  we  presume  to  call  our  country  ?  Is  it
England  itself  ?  But  what  of  Scotland  .''  Is  it  therefore  Britain  ?
But  what  of  the  other  islands,  the  Northern  Orcades,  and  the

247


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Southern  Jersey  and  Guernsey  ?  AVhat  of  the  Plantations  and
poor  Ireland  ?  " Behold,  here,  a  very  dubious  circumscription  !

But  what,  after  all,  if  there  be  a  conquest  or  captivity  in  the
case  ?  a  migration  ?  a  national  secession,  or  abandonment  of  our
native  seats  for  some  other  soil  or  climate  ?  This  has  happened,
we  know,  to  our  forefathers.  And  as  great  and  powerful  a
people  as  we  have  been  of  late,  and  have  ever  shown  ourselves
under  the  influence  of  free  councils  and  a  tolerable  ministry,
should  we  relapse  again  into  slavish  principles,  or  be  administered
long  under  such  heads  as,  having  no  thought  of  liberty  for  them-
selves, can  have  much  less  for  Europe  or  their  neighbours,  we  may
at  last  feel  a  war  at  home,  become  the  seat  of  it,  and  in  the  end  a
conquest.  We  might  then  gladly  embrace  the  hard  condition
of  our  predecessors,  and  exchange  our  beloved  native  soil  for  that
of  some  remote  and  uninhabited  part  of  the  world.  Now  should
this  possibly  be  our  fate,  should  some  considerable  colony  or
body  be  formed  afterwards  out  of  our  remains,  or  meet  as  it
were  by  miracle  in  some  distant  climate,  Avould  there  be  for
the  future  no  Englishman  remaining  ?  No  common  bond  of
alliance  and  friendship  by  which  we  could  still  call  countrymen,  as
before  ?  How  came  we,  I  pray,  by  our  ancient  name  of  English-
men ?  Did  it  not  travel  with  us  over  land  and  sea  ?  Did  we
not  indeed  bring  it  with  us  heretofore  from  as  far  as  the
remoter  parts  of  Germany  to  this  island  ?

I  must  confess,  I  have  been  apt  sometimes  to  be  very  angry
with  our  language  for  having  denied  us  the  use  of  the  word
Patria,  and  afforded  us  no  other  name  to  express  our  native
community  than  that  of  country,  which  already  bore  two  differ-
ent significations  abstracted  from  mankind  or  society.^  Reign-
ing words  are  many  times  of  such  force  as  to  influence  us
considerably  in  our  apprehension  of  things.  Whether  it  be
from  any  such  cause  as  this,  I  know  not,  but  certain  it  is,  that
in  the  idea  of  a  civil  state  or  nation  we  Englishmen  are  apt  to
mix  somewhat  more  than  ordinary  gross  and  earthy.  No  people
1  rus  and  regio,  in  French  canipa(jne  and  pays.

248


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

who  owed  so  much  to  a  constitution,  and  so  little  to  a  soil  or
climate,  were  ever  known  so  indifferent  towards  one,  and  so
passionately  fond  of  the  other.  One  would  imagine  from  the
common  discourse  of  our  coiuitrymen  that  the  finest  lands  near
the  Eu{)hrates,  the  Babylonian  or  Persian  j)aradises,  the  rich
plains  of  Egy})t,  the  Grecian  Tempe,  the  Uoman  Campania,
Lombardy,  Provence,  the  Spanish  Andalusia,  or  the  most
delicious  tracts  in  the  Eastern  or  Western  Indies  were  con-
temptible countries  in  respect  of  Old  England.

Now  by  the  good  leave  of  these  worthy  patriots  of  the  soil,
I  must  take  the  liberty  to  say,  I  think  Old  England  to  have
been  in  every  respect  a  very  indifferent  country,  and  that  Late
England,  of  an  age  or  two  old,  even  since  Queen  Bess"'s  days,
is  indeed  very  much  mended  for  the  better.  We  were,  in
the  beginnino-  of  her  o:randfather''s  reifjn,  under  a  sort  of  Polish
nobility,  and  had  no  other  liberties  than  what  were  in  common
to  us  with  the  then  fashionable  monarchies  and  Gothic  lordships
of  Europe.  Eor  religion,  indeed,  we  were  highly  famed  above
all  nations,  by  being  the  most  subject  to  our  ecclesiastics  at
home,  and  the  best  tributaries  and  servants  to  the  Holy  See
abroad.

I  must  go  further  yet,  and  own  that  I  think  Late  England,
since  the  Revolution,  to  be  better  still  than  Old  England  bv
many  a  degree,  and  that  in  the  main  we  make  somewhat  a
better  figure  in  Europe  than  we  did  a  few  reigns  before.  But
however  our  people  may  of  late  have  flourished,  our  name  or
credit  have  risen,  our  trade  and  navigation,  our  manufactures
or  our  husbandry  been  improved,  'tis  certain  that  our  region,
climate,  and  soil  is  in  its  own  nature  still  one  and  the  same.
And  to  whatever  politeness  we  may  suppose  ourselves  already
arrived,  we  must  confess  that  we  are  the  latest  barbarous,  the
last  civilised  or  polished  people  of  Europe.  ^Vc  must  allow
that  our  first  conquest  by  the  Romans  brought  us  out  of  a  state
hardly  equal  to  the  Indian  tribes,  and  that  our  last  conquest  by
the  Normans  brought  us  only  into  the  capacity  of  receiving  arts

^  249


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

and  civil  accomplishments  from  abroad.  They  came  to  us  by
degrees  from  remote  distances,  at  second  or  third  hand ;  from
other  courts,  states,  academies,  and  foreign  nurseries  of  wit  and
manners.

Notwithstanding  this,  we  have  as  overweening  an  opinion
of  ourselves  as  if  we  had  a  claim  to  be  original  and  earth  born.
As  oft  as  we  have  changed  masters,  and  mixed  races  with  our
several  successive  conquerors,  we  still  pretend  to  be  as  legitimate
and  genuine  possessors  of  our  soil  as  the  ancient  Athenians  ac-
counted themselves  to  have  been  of  theirs.  'Tis  remarkable,
however,  in  that  truly  ancient,  wise,  and  witty  people,  that  as
fine  territories  and  noble  countries  as  they  possessed,  as  indis-
putable masters  and  superiors  as  they  were  in  all  science,  wit,
politeness,  and  manners,  they  were  yet  so  far  from  a  conceited,
selfish,  and  ridiculous  contempt  of  others,  that  they  were  even,
in  a  contrary  extreme,  "  admirers  of  whatever  was  in  the  least
degree  ingenious  or  curious  in  foreign  nations."  Their  great  men
were  constant  travellers.  Their  legislators  and  philosophers  made
their  voyages  into  Egypt,  passed  into  Chaldea  and  Persia,  and
failed  not  to  visit  most  of  the  dispersed  Grecian  governments
and  colonies  through  the  islands  of  the  JEgean,  in  Italy,  and  on
the  coasts  of  Asia  and  Africa.  'Twas  mentioned  as  a  prodigy,
in  the  case  of  a  great  philosopher,  though  known  to  have  been
always  poor,i  "  that  he  should  never  have  travelled,  nor  had
ever  gone  out  of  Athens  for  his  improvement."  How  modest  a
reflection  in  those  who  were  themselves  Athenians  !

For  our  part,  we  neither  care  that  foreigners  should  travel
to  us,2  nor  any  of  ours  should travel  into  foreign countries.

^  Socrates.

2  An  ill  token  of  our  being'  thoroughly  civilised,  since  in  the  judgment
of  the  polite  and  wise  tliis  inhospitable  disposition  was  ever  reckoned
among  the  principal  marks  of  barbarism.  So  Strabo,  from  other  preceding
authors,  Koivbv  fxiv  elvai  toTs  l3ap[3dpot.s  iraaiv  ^dos  ti]v  ^evTjXacriav.  ['^' The  ex-
pulsion of  foreigners  is  a  common  measure  with  all  barbarians." — Erato-
sthenes in  Strabo,  xvii.  i.  802.]

The  Zfi>y  Se'ftos  of  the  ancients  was  one  of  the  solemnn  characters  of

250


MISCEI.LANEOUS REI  LECTIONS

Our  best  policy  and  I)ic'ecliiiLr  is,  it  sccnis,  "  to  look  ahrojul  as
little  as  possible,  contract  our  views  within  the  narrowest  com-
pass, and  despise  all  knowledge,  learnin<>;,  or  manners  which  are
not  of  a  home  growth."  For  iiardly  will  the  ancients  themselves
be  regarded  by  those  who  have  so  resolute  a  contempt  of  wiiat
the  politest  moderns  of  anv  nation  besides  their  own  mav  have
advanced  in  the  way  of  literature,  ])oliteness,  or  pliilosophy.

This  disposition  of  our  countrymen,  from  whatever  causes  it
may  possibly  be  deri\ed,  is,  I  fear,  a  very  prepossessing  circum-
stance against  our  author,  whose  design  is  to  advance  something-
new,  or  at  least  something  different  from what is commonlv

divinity  :  the  peculi.-ir  attribute  of  tlie  supreme  DeitV;,  benig-n  to  mankind,
and  recommending  universal  love,  nnitual  kindness,  and  benignity  between
the  remotest  and  most  unlike  of  human  race,  llius  their  divine  poet,  in
harmony  with  their  sacred  oracles,  which  were  known  frequently  to  con-
firm this  doctrine —

^e^v',  ov  /J.OL  Oi/j.LS  ^ct\  ovo'  el  KaKiwv  aedev  ?\6oi,
^eivov  drifxrjaai '  irpbs  yap  Atos  elcriv  dwavTes
^eivoi.

["  My  guest,  I  may  not  slight  a  stranger,  even  if  he  were  a  meaner
man  than  thou  art;  for  from  Zeus  are  all  strangers." — Homer,  Odi/ssey,
xiv.  56,  .58.] Again, —

ovd^  Tis  dfx/xi  ^porQu  iirifxicryfTai  dWos.
dXK  6'5e  tu  SvcTTrivos  dXti/xevos  ivOdb'  iKavfi,
rbv  vvv  XPV  Ko/xieiv'  Trpbs  yap  Ai6s  eicnu  fin-acrej
^elvoi.

["And  no  other  mortals  hold  intercourse  with  us.  But  this  is  some
luckless  man  who  has  come  hither  in  his  wanderings,  and  we  must  tend  him
well,  for  from  Zeus  are  all  strangers." — Odyssey,  vi.  205-20^.] And  again, —

acpveib^  ^l6toio,  (piXos  5'  Tjv  avdpuiroiai'
Trdvras  yap  (fnXeejKev  6o(^  'im  oiKia  valuyv.

["  Rich  he  was,  and  beloved  among  men,  for  he  lived  by  the  roadside
and  entertained  all." — Homer,  Tliad,  vi.  14,  15.]

See  also  Odyssey,  lib.  iii.  .'U,  etc.,  and  (57,  etc.  ;  lib.  iv.  30,  etc.,  and  60.

Such  was  ancient  heathen  charity  and  pious  duty  towards  the  w^hole
of  mankind,  both  those  of  different  nations  and  different  worships.  See
Inquiry  concem'wg  Virtue,  bk.  ii.  part  ii.  §  3.

251


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

current  in  philosophy  and  morals.  To  supjjort  this  design  of
his  he  seems  intent  chiefly  on  this  single  point,  "  to  discover  how
we  may  to  best  advantage  form  within  ourselves  what  in  the
polite  world  is  called  a  relish  or  good  taste."

He  begins,  it  is  true,  as  near  home  as  possible,  and  sends  us  to
the  narrowest  of  all  conversations,  that  of  soliloquy  or  self-dis-
course. But  this  correspondence,  according  to  his  computation,
is  wholly  impracticable  without  a  previous  commerce  with  the
world ;  and  the  larger  this  commerce  is,  the  more  practicable
and  improving  the  other,  he  thinks,  is  likely  to  prove.  The
sources  of  this  improving  art  of  self-correspondence  he  derives
from  the  highest  politeness  and  elegance  of  ancient  dialogue  and
debate,  in  matters  of  wit,  knowledge,  and  ingenuity.  And
nothing,  according  to  our  author,  can  so  well  revive  this  self-
corresponding  practice  as  the  same  search  and  study  of  the
highest  politeness  in  modern  conversation.  For  this,  we  must
necessarily  be  at  the  pains  of  going  further  abroad  than  the
province  we  call  home.  And  by  this  account  it  appears  that
our  author  has  little  hopes  of  being  either  relished  or  compre-
hended by  any  other  of  his  countrymen  than  those  who  delight
in  the  open  and  free  commerce  of  the  world,  and  are  rejoiced  to
gather  views  [and  receive  light  from  every  quarter  in  order  to
judge  the  best  of  what  is  perfect,  and  according  to  a  just
standard  and  true  taste  in  every  kind.

It  may  be  proper  for  us  to  remark,  in  favour  of  our  author,
that  the  sort  of  ridicule  or  raillery  which  is  apt  to  fall  upon
philosophers  is  of  the  same  kind  with  that  which  falls  commonly
on  the  virtuosi  or  refined  wits  of  the  age.  In  this  latter  general
denomination  we  include  the  real  fine  gentlemen,  the  lovers  of
art  and  ingenuity,  such  as  have  seen  the  world,  and  informed
themselves  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  several  nations  of
Europe  ;  searched  into  their  antiquities  and  records ;  considered
their  police,  laws,  and  constitutions ;  observed  the  situation,
strength,  and  ornaments  of  their  cities,  their  principal  arts,
studies,  and  amusements ;  their  architecture,  sculpture,  paint-

252


MISCEIJ.AXEOUS REFLECTIONS

ing,  music,  and  their  taste  in  poetry,  learning,  language,  and
conversation.

Hitherto  there  can  lie  no  ridicule,  nor  the  least  scope  for
satiric  wit  or  raillery.  But  when  we  push  this  virtuoso
character  a  little  further  and  lead  our  polished  gentleman  into
more  nice  researches,  when  from  the  view  of  mankind  and  their
affairs,  our  speculative  genius  and  minute  examiner  of  Nature's
works  proceeds  with  equal  or  perhaps  superior  zeal  in  the  con-
templation of  the  insect  life,  the  conveniencies,  habitations,  and
economy  of  a  race  of  shell-fish ;  when  he  has  erected  a  cabinet  in
due  form,  and  made  it  the  real  pattern  of  his  mind,  replete  with
the  same  trash  and  trumpery  of  correspondent  empty  notions
and  chimerical  conceits,  he  then  indeed  becomes  the  subject  of
sufficient  raillery,  and  is  made  the  jest  of  common  conversations.

A  worse  thing  than  this  happens  commonly  to  these  inferior
virtuosi.  In  seeking  so  earnestly  for  rarities  they  fall  in  love
w^ith  rarity  for  rareness'  sake.  Now^  the  greatest  rarities  in  the
w^orld  are  monsters.  So  that  the  study  and  relish  of  these
gentlemen,  thus  assiduously  employed,  becomes  at  last  in  reality
monstrous  ;  and  their  whole  delight  is  found  to  consist  in  select-
ing and  contemplating  whatever  is  most  monstrous,  disagreeing,
out  of  the  way,  and  to  the  least  purpose  of  anything  in  Nature.

In  philosophy,  matters  answer  exactly  to  this  virtuoso
scheme.  Let  us  suppose  a  man  who,  having  this  resolution
merely,  how  to  employ  his  understanding  to  the  best  purpose,
considers  "  who  or  what  he  is ;  whence  he  arose  or  had  his
being; ;  to  what  end  he  w-as  designed ;  and  to  what  course  of
action  he  is  by  his  natural  frame  and  constitution  destined '"' ;
should  he  descend  on  this  account  into  himself  and  examine  his
inward  powers  and  faculties,  or  should  he  ascend  beyond  his  own
immediate  species,  city,  or  community,  to  discover  and  recognise
his  higher  polity  or  community  (that  common  and  universal  one
of  which  he  is  born  a  member),  nothing  surely  of  this  kind  could
reasonably  draw  upon  him  the  least  contempt  or  mockery.  On
the  contrary,  the  finest  gentleman  must  after  all  be  considered

253


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

but  as  an  idiot,  who,  talking  much  of  the  knowledge  of  the
world  and  mankind,  has  never  so  much  as  thought  of  the  study
or  knowledge  of  himself,  or  of  the  natui-e  and  government  of
that  real  public  and  world  from  whence  he  holds  his  being.

Quid  sumuSj  et  quidnam  victuri  gignimur  ?  ^ —

"  Where  are  we  ?  under  what  roof?  or  on  board  what  vessel  ?
whither  bound  ?  on  what  business  ?  under  whose  pilotship,
government,  or  protection  ?  "  are  questions  which  every  sensible
man  would  naturally  ask  if  he  were  on  a  sudden  transported
into  a  new  scene  of  life.  'Tis  admirable,  indeed,  to  consider,  that
a  man  should  have  been  long  come  into  a  world,  carried  his
reason  and  sense  about  with  him,  and  yet  have  never  seriously
asked  himself  this  single  question,  "  where  am  I 't  or  what .'' ""
but,  on  the  contrary,  should  proceed  regularly  to  every  other
study  and  inquiry,  postponing  this  alone,  as  the  least  consider-
able, or  leaving  the  examination  of  it  to  others  commissioned,
as  he  supposes,  to  understand  and  think  for  him  upon  this  head.
To  be  bubbled,  or  put  upon  by  any  sham  advices  in  this  affair,
is,  it  seems,  of  no  consequence.  We  take  care  to  examine
accurately,  by  our  own  judgment,  the  affairs  of  other  people,
and  the  concerns  of  the  world  which  least  belong  to  us.  But
what  relates  more  immediately  to  ourselves,  and  is  our  chief
self-interest,  we  charitably  leave  to  others  to  examine  for  us,
and  readily  take  up  with  the  first  comers,  on  whose  honesty  and
good  faith  'tis  presumed  we  may  safely  rely.

Here,  methinks,  the  ridicule  turns  more  against  the  philo-
sophy-haters than  the  virtuosi  or  philosophers.  Whilst  philo-
sophy is  taken  (as  in  its  prime  sense  it  ought)  for  mastership  in
life  and  manners,  'tis  like  to  make  no  ill  figure  in  the  world,
whatever  impertinencies  may  reign,  or  however  extravagant  the
times  may  prove.  But  let  us  view  philosophy,  like  mere
virtuosoship,  in  its  usual  career,  and  we  shall  find  the  ridicule
rising  full  as  strongly  against  the  professors  of  the  higher
^  Pei's.  Bat.  iii.  G7-

254


MISCELl.ANEOUS REl  LECTIONS

as  the  lower  kind.  Cockle-shell  abounds  with  each.  Many
thinjTS  exterior  and  without  ourselves,  of  no  relation  to  our
real  interests  or  to  those  of  society  and  mankind,  are  dili<rently
investigated ;  Nature's  remotest  oj)erations,  deepest  mysteries
and  most  difficult  ])henoniena  discussed  and  whimsically  ex-
plained ;  hypotheses  and  fantastic  systems  erected,  a  universe
anatomised,  and  by  some  notable  scheme  ^  so  solved  and  reduced
as  to  a})])ear  an  easy  knack  or  secret  to  those  who  have  the  clue.
Creation  itself  can,  upon  occasion,  be  exhibited  ;  transmutations,
projections,  and  other  philosophical  arcana,  such  as  in  the
corporeal  world  can  accomplish  all  things ;  whilst  in  the  intel-
lectual a  set  frame  of  metaphysical  phrases  and  distinctions  can
serve  to  solve  whatever  difficulties  may  be  propounded  either
in  logics,  ethics,  or  any  real  science  of  whatever  kind.

It  appears  from  hence  that  the  defects  of  philosoj)hy  and
those  of  virtuosoship  are  of  the  same  nature.  Nothing  can  be
more  dangerous  than  a  wrong  choice  or  misapplication  in  these
affairs.  But  as  ridiculous  as  these  studies  are  rendered  by  their
senseless  managers,  it  ap])ears,  however,  that  each  of  them  are,
in  their  nature,  essential  to  the  character  of  a  fine  gentleman
and  man  of  sense.

To  philosophise,  in  a  just  signification,  is  but  to  carry
good -breeding  a  step  higher.  For  the  accomplishment  of
breeding  is,  to  learn  whatever  is  decent  in  company  or  beautiful
in  arts;  and  the  sum  of  philosophy  is,  to  learn  what  is  just  in
society  and  beautiful  in  Nature  and  the  order  of  the  world.

■"Tis  not  wit  merely,  but  a  temper  which  must  form  the  well-
bred  man.  In  the  same  manner,  'tis  not  a  head  merely,  but  a
heart  and  resolution  which  must  complete  the  real  philoso])her.
Both  characters  aim  at  what  is  excellent,  aspire  to  a  just  taste,
and  carry  in  view^  the  model  of  what  is  beautiful  and  becoming.
Accordingly,  the  respective  conduct  and  distinct  manners  of
each  party  are  regulated  ;  the  one  according  to  the  ])erfectest
ease  and  good  entertainment  of  company,  the  other  according
^  Moralists,  part  i.  §  1.

255


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

to  the  strictest  interest  of  mankind  and  society  ;  the  one  accord-
ing to  a  man's  rank  and  quaHty  in  his  private  station,  the  other
according  to  his  rank  and  dignity  in  Nature.

Whether  each  of  these  offices  or  social  parts  are  in  them-
selves as  convenient  as  becoming,  is  the  great  question  which
must  some  way  be  decided.  The  well-bred  man  has  already
decided  this  in  his  own  case,  and  declared  on  the  side  of  what
is  handsome ;  for  whatever  he  practises  in  this  kind,^  he
accounts  no  more  than  what  he  owes  purely  to  himself,  without
regard  to  any  further  advantage.  The  pretender  to  philosophy,
who  either  knows  not  how  to  determine  this  affair,  or  if  he  has
determined,  knows  not  how  to  pursue  his  point  with  constancy
and  firmness,  remains  in  respect  of  philosophy  what  a  clown  or
coxcomb  is  in  respect  of  breeding  and  behaviour.  Thus,  accord-
ing to  our  author,  the  taste  of  beauty  and  the  relish  of  what  is
decent,  just,  and  amiable  perfects  the  character  of  the  gentle-
man and  the  philosopher.  And  the  study  of  such  a  taste  or
relish  will,  as  we  suppose,  be  ever  the  great  employment  and
concern  of  him  who  covets  as  well  to  be  wise  and  good  as
agreeable  and  polite.

Quid  varum  atque  decens  euro  et  rogo,  et  omnis  in  hoc  sum.^


CHAPTER II

Explanation  of  a  taste  continued— Ridiculers  of  it— Their  wit  and  sin-
cerity— Application  of  the  taste  to  affairs  of  government  and  politics
—  Imaginary  characters  in  the  State — Young  nobility  and  gentry —
Pursuit  of  beauty — Preparation  for  philosopliy.

By  this  time,  surely,  I  must  have  proved  myself  sufficiently
engaged  in  the  project  and  design  of  our  self-discoursing  author,
whose  defence  I  have  undertaken. His  pretension,  as  plainly

1 Wit  and  Humour,  part  iv.  §  1.
-  Hor.  Epist.  1.  i.  11.

256


MISCELLANKOUS REFLECTIONS

appears  in  this  third  treatise^  is  to  ruconiiiiciKl  morals  on  the
same  foot  with  \shat  in  a  h)wer  sense  is  called  manners,  and  to
advance  j)hilosophv  (as  harsh  a  sul)ject  as  it  may  appear)  on  the
very  foundation  of  what  is  called  agreeable  and  polite.  Ami
"'tis  in  this  method  and  management  that,  as  his  interpreter  or
paraphrast,  I  have  ))roposed  to  imitate  and  accom[)any  liini,  a.s
far  as  niv  miscellaneous  character  will  permit.

Our  joint  endeavour,  therefore,  nuist  appear  this:  to  show
"that  nothing  which  is  found  charming  or  delightful  in  the
polite  world,  nothing  which  is  adopted  as  pleasure  or  entertain-
ment, of  whatever  kind,  can  any  way  be  accounted  for,  supported,
or  establishetl,  without  the  pre-establishment  or  suj)})osition  of
a  certain  taste."  Now  a  taste  or  judgment,  'tis  supposed,  can
hardly  come  ready  formed  with  us  into  the  world.  Whatever
princi})les  or  materials  of  this  kind  we  may  possibly  bring  with
us,  whatever  good  faculties,  senses,  or  anticipating  sensations
and  imaginations  may  be  of  Nature's  growth,  and  arise  ]:)roperly
of  themselves,  without  our  art,  promotion,  or  assistance,  the
"■eneral  idea  which  is  formed  of  all  this  management  and  the
clear  notion  we  attain  of  what  is  preferable  and  ])rincipal  in  all
these  subjects  of  choice  and  estimation  will  not,  as  I  imagine,
by  any  person  be  taken  for  innate.  Use,  practice,  and  culture
must  precede  the  understanding  and  wit  of  such  an  advanced
size  and  growth  as  this.  A  legitimate  and  just  taste  can  neither
be  begotten,  made,  conceived,  or  produced  without  the  ante-
cedent labour  and  pains  of  criticism.

For  this  reason  we  presume  not  only  to  defend  the  cause  of
critics,  but  to  declare  open  war  against  those  indolent  supine
authors,  performers,  readers,  auditors,  actors  or  spectators
w  ho,  makino-  their  humour  alone  the  rule  of  w  hat  is  beautiful
and  agreeable,  and  having  no  account  to  give  of  such  their
humour  or  odd  fancy,  reject  the  criticising  or  examining  art,
by  which  alone  they  are  able  to  discover  the  true  beauty  and
worth  of  every  object.

^  Treatise  m.  part  iii.  §  3.

VOL.  II  257  S


SHAFTESBURY'S CHAIIACTEIUSTICS

According  to  tliat  afi'ected  ridicule  which  these  insipid
reniarkers  pretend  to  throw  upon  just  critics,  the  enjoyment
of  all  real  arts  or  natural  beauty  would  be  entirely  lost ;  even
in  behaviour  and  manners  we  should  at  this  rate  become  in
time  as  barbarous  as  in  our  })leasures  and  diversions.  I  would
presume  it,  however,  of  these  critic  -  haters,  that  they  are  not
yet  so  uncivilised  or  void  of  all  social  sense  as  to  maintain
"  that  the  most  barbarous  life  or  brutish  ])leasure  is  as  desirable
as  the  most  polished  or  refined.'^

For  my  own  part,  when  I  have  heard  sometimes  men  of
reputed  ability  join  in  with  that  effeminate  plaintive  tone  of
invective  against  critics,  I  have  really  thought  they  had  it  in
their  fancy  to  keep  down  the  growing  geniuses  of  the  youth,
their  rivals,  by  turning  them  aside  from  that  examination  and
search,  on  which  all  good  performance  as  well  as  good  judgment
depends.  I  have  seen  many  a  time  a  well-bred  man,  who  had
himself  a  real  good  taste,  give  way  with  a  malicious  com-
plaisance to  the  humour  of  a  company,  where,  in  favour  chiefly
of  the  tender  sex,  this  soft  languishing  contempt  of  critics  and
their  labours  has  been  the  subject  set  afoot.  "Wretched
creatures  !  (says  one)  impertinent  things,  these  critics,  as  ye
call  them  !  As  if  one  could  not  know  what  was  agreeable  or
pretty  without  their  help.  'Tis  fine,  indeed,  that  one  should  not
be  allowed  to  fancy  for  oneself. Now  should  a  thousand  critics

tell  me  that  Mr.  A 's  new  play  was  not  the  wittiest  in  the

world,  I  would  not  mind  them  one  bit."

This  our  real  man  of  wit  hears  patiently,  and  adds,  perhaps
of  his  own,  "  that  he  thinks  it  truly  somewhat  hard,  in  what
relates  to  people's  diversion  and  entertainment,  that  they  should
be  obliged  to  choose  what  pleased  others  and  not  themselves.""
Soon  after  this  he  goes  himself  to  the  play,  finds  one  of  his
effeminate  companions  commending  or  admiring  at  a  wrong-
place.  He  turns  to  the  next  person  who  sits  by  him,  and  asks
privately,  "  what  he  thinks  of  his  companion's  relish."

Such  is  the  malice  of  the  world  ! They  who  by  pains  and

258


MISCELLANEOT^S 1?EFT.ECTI()\S

iiulustrv  luivo  nctiuirc'cl  ;i  real  tustc  in  arts,  rejoice  in  tlieir
advantage  over  others,  who  have  either  none  at  all  or  siuh  as
renders  them  ridiculous.  At  an  auction  of  books  or  pictures,
von  sliall  liear  these  oentlcinen  persuading  every  one  "to  bid
for  what  he  fancies.""  IJut  at  the  same  time  they  would  he
soundiv  mortified  themselves  if,  by  such  as  tiiey  esteemed  good
judges,  thev  should  be  found  to  have  purchased  by  a  wrong
fancy  or  ill  taste.  'I'he  same  gentleman  who  commends  his
neighbour  for  orilering  iiis  garilen  or  apartment  as  his  humour
leads  him,  takes  care  his  own  should  be  so  ordei-ed  as  the  best
judgments  would  advise.  Being  once  a  judge  himself,  or  but
tolerablv  knowing  in  these  affairs,  his  aim  is  not  "to  change
the  beinii'  of  thiniis,  and  brin**-  truth  and  Nature  to  his  humour;
but,  leaving  Nature  and  truth  just  as  he  found  them,  to  accom-
modate his  humour  and  fancy  to  their  standard."'  Would  he
do  this  in  a  yet  higher  case,  he  might  in  reality  become  as  wise
and  great  a  man  as  he  is  already  a  refined  and  polished  gentle-
man. By  one  of  tliese  tastes  he  vmderstantls  how  to  lay  out  his
garden,  model  his  house,  fancy  his  e([ui})age,  appoint  his  table ;
bv  the  other  he  learns  of  what  value  these  amusements  are  in
life,  and  of  wliat  importance  to  a  man's  freedom,  happiness,  and
self-enjoyment.  For  if  he  would  try  effectually  to  accpiire  the
real  science  or  taste  of  life,  he  would  certainly  discover  "that
a  right  mind  and  generous  affection  had  more  beauty  and  charn)
than  all  other  svnniietries  in  the  world  besides.'""  And  "  that
a  grain  of  honesty  and  native  worth  was  of  more  \alue  than
all  the  adventitious  ornaments,  estates,  or  preferments;  for  the
sake  of  which  some  of  the  better  sort  so  oft  turn  knaves,  for-
saking their  principles  and  quitting  their  honour  and  freetlom
for  a  mean,  timorous,  shifting  state  of  gaudy  servitude."

A  little  better  taste  (were  it  a  very  httle)  in  the  affair  of
life  itself  would,  if  I  mistake  not,  mend  the  manners  and
secure  the  happiness  of  some  of  our  noble  countrymen,  who  come
with  high  advantage  and  a  worthy  character  into  the  public.
But  ere  they  have  long  engaged  in  it,  their  worth unhappily

259


SHAFTESBURY  S CHARACTERISTICS

becomes  venal.  Equipages,  titles,  precedencies,  staffs,  ribbons,
and  other  such  o-litterino;  ware  are  taken  in  exchange  for  inward
merit,  honour,  and  a  character.

This  they  may  account  perhaps  a  shrewd  bargain.  But
there  will  be  found  very  untoward  abatements  in  it  when  the
matter  comes  to  be  experienced.  They  may  have  descended  in
reality  from  ever  so  glorious  ancestors,  patriots,  and  sufferers
for  their  nation's  liberty  and  welfare ;  they  may  have  made  their
entrance  into  the  world  upon  this  bottom  of  anticipated  fame
anti  honour ;  they  may  have  been  advanced  on  this  account  to
dignities  which  they  were  thought  to  have  deserved.  But  when
induced  to  change  their  honest  measures,  and  sacrifice  their
cause  and  friends  to  an  imaginary  private  interest,  they  will
soon  find,  by  experience,  that  they  have  lost  the  relish  and
taste  of  life ;  and  for  insipid  wretched  honours  of  a  deceitful
kind  have  unhappily  exchanged  an  amiable  and  sweet  honour,
of  a  sincere  and  lasting  relish  and  good  savour.  They  may,
after  this,  act  farces  as  they  think  fit,  and  hear  qualities  and
virtues  assigned  to  them  under  the  titles  of  graces,  excellencies,
honours,  and  the  rest  of  this  mock  praise  and  mimical  appella-
tion. They  may  even  with  serious  looks  be  told  of  honour  and
worth,  their  principle,  and  their  country ;  but  they  know
better  within  themselves,  and  have  occasion  to  find  that  after
all  the  world  too  knows  better,  and  that  their  few  friends
and  admirers  have  either  a  very  shallow  wit  or  a  very  profound
hypocrisy.

'Tis  not  in  one  party  alone  that  these  ])urchases  and  sales
of  honour  are  carried  on.  I  can  represent  to  myself  a  noted
patriot  and  reputed  pillar  of  the  religious  part  of  our  constitu-
tion, who  having  by  many  and  long  services  and  a  steady
conduct  gained  the  reputation  of  thorough  zeal  with  his  own
party,  and  of  sincerity  and  honour  with  his  very  enemies,  on  a
sudden  (the  time  being  come  that  the  fulness  of  his  reward  was
set  before  him)  submits  complacently  to  the  proposed  bargain,
and  sells  himself  for  what  he  is  worth,  in  a  vile,  detestable  old

260


MISCETJ>ANEOrS KEFLECTIOXS

ajje,  to  which  he  has  reserved  the  infaiiiv  of  betraving  both  his
friends  and  country.^

I  can  imagine,  on  the  other  side,  one  of  a  contrary  party,
a  noted  friend  to  liberty  in  Church  and  State ;  an  abhorrer  of
the  sUwish  dependency  on  courts,  and  of  the  narrow  ])rinciples
of  bigots.  Such  a  one,  after  many  pubhc  services  of  note,  I  can
see  wrought  upon,  by  degrees,  to  seek  court  preferment,  and
this  too  under  a  j)atriot  character,  liut  having  perhaps  tried
this  way  with  less  success,  he  is  obliged  to  change  his  charactei-,
and  become  a  royal  flatterer,  a  courtier  against  his  nature ;
submitting  himself  and  suing,  in  so  much  the  meaner  degree,  as
his  inherent  princijiles  are  well  known  at  court  and  to  his  new
adopted  party,  to  whom  he  feigns  himself  a  proselvte.

The  greater  the  genius  or  character  is  of  such  a  person,  the
greater  is  his  slavery  and  heavier  his  load.  IJetter  had  it  been
that  he  had  never  discovered  such  a  zeal  for  public  good,  or
signalised  himself  in  that  party  which  can  with  least  grace  make
sacrifices  of  national  interests  to  a  crown,  or  to  the  private  will,
appetite,  or  j)leasure  of  a  prince.  For  supposing  such  a  genius
as  this  had  been  to  act  his  part  of  courtship  in  some  foreign
and  absolute  court,  how  much  less  infamous  would  his  j)art
have  proved  ?  how  much  less  lavish,  amidst  a  peo])le  who  were

^  [The  reference  is  presuinalily  to  Iliirley,  wlio,  cdiiiiiiy-  of  a  Puritan
family,  set  out  as  a  strong  \\'lii^,  had  cdnie  round  to  Toryism,  was  made
successively  Secretary  of  State  aiul  Chancellor  of  the  K\-che(|uer,  and  in
1711  was  raised  to  the  peeraf^e  as  Karl  of  Oxford  and  appointed  Lord
High  Treasurer.  Macaulay  (chap,  xx.,  .Student's  ed.,  ii.  4(54-4()7)  mentions
two  other  noted  converts  from  A\  higgism  to  Toryism,  Foley  and  Howe  ;
Iiut  the  passage  in  the  text  fits  only  Harley  in  full,  his  foreign  policy
Iteing  regarded  hy  Shafteshury  as  a  betrayal  of  his  country.  Macaulay
tells  (p.  4G3)  how  Shaftesbury  was  bewildered  by  the  different  case  of
Wliarton,  whom  he  described  as  "  the  most  mysterious  of  human  beings,
as  a  strange  compound  of  best  and  worst,  of  private  depravity  and  public
virtue,  and  owned  himself  unal)le  to  understand  how  a  man  utterly  without
principle  in  everything  but  politics  should  in  politics  be  true  as  steel."
The  case  indeed  failed  to  chime  with  Sliaftesbury's  general  theory  of
human  nature.]

261


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

all  slaves  ?  Had  he  perad venture  been  one  of  that  forlorn
begging  troop  of  gentry  extant  in  Denmark  or  Sweden,  since
the  time  that  those  nations  lost  their  liberties ;  had  he  lived
out  of  a  free  nation  and  happily  balanced  constitution ;  had  he
been  either  conscious  of  no  talent  in  the  affairs  of  government
or  of  no  opportunity  to  exert  any  such  to  the  advantage  of
mankind  :  where  had  been  the  mighty  shame,  if  perhaps  he  had
cmploved  some  of  his  abilities  in  flattering  like  others,  and
paying  the  necessary  homage  recpiired  for  safety's  sake  and
self-preservation,  in  absolute  and  despotic  governments  ?  The
taste,  perha])s,  in  strictness,  might  still  be  wrong,  even  in  this
hard  circumstance ;  but  how  inexcusable  in  a  ([uite  contrary
one  !  For  let  us  suppose  our  courtier  not  only  an  Englishman,
but  of  the  rank  and  stem  of  those  old  English  patriots  who
were  wont  to  curb  the  licentiousness  of  our  court,  arraign  its
flatterers,  and  purge  away  those  poisons  from  the  ear  of  princes  ;
let  us  suppose  him  of  a  competent  fortune  and  moderate
appetites,  without  any  apparent  luxury  or  lavishment  in  his
manners:  ^hat  shall  we,  after  this,  bring  in  excuse,  or  as  an
apology,  for  such  a  choice  as  his  ?  How  shall  we  explain  this
preposterous  relish,  this  odd  ])reference  of  subtlety  and  in-
directness to  true  wisdom,  open  honesty,  and  uprightness  ?  ^

'Tis  easier,  I  confess,  to  give  account  of  this  corruption  of
taste  in  some  noble youth of  a  more  sumptuous, gay  fancy ;

^  [The  reference  here  is  doubtless  t(»  llarley's  eoUeag-ue,  Henry  ^t.
Joliii,  afterwjirds  Viscount  Bolinj^hroke.  His  family  and  circumstances
and  early  leaniujirs  answer  to  the  description  in  the  text ;  and  he  is  tlie
only  pulilic  man  of  the  day  describable  as  a  f;enius.  Shaftesbury  and  he,
so  sym])athetic  in  their  j)liilosophical  opinions,  had  probably  been  ac-
(luaintani^es  ;  and  his  and  Harley's  deliberate  adoption,  in  17K',  of  a  Hi^h
C'hurch  poli<'y,  as  well  as  his  previous  support  of  the  Occasional  Conformity
Bill,  fits  closely  with  the  description  of  a  "  preference  of  subtlety  and
indirectness  to  true  wisdom,  open  honesty,  and  uprightness."  After
such  a  criti('ism  it  is  ({uite  intellif^ible  that  Bolinjjbroke  should  make
no  acknowledgment  of  his  philosophical  debt  to  the  author  of  the
Characters  ,stki<.]

2G2


MISCELLANEOUS HEFLECTIOXS

supposing  liiin  born  truly  (rrcat  aiul  of  honouialjle  (icscent,
with  a  generous  free  mind,  as  well  as  ample  fortune.  Even
these  circumstances  themselves  may  be  the  very  causes  perhaps
of  his  being  thus  ensnared.  The  elegance^  of  his  fancy  in
outward  things  may  have  made  him  overlook  the  worth  of
inward  character  and  proportion  :  and  the  love  of  grandeur  and
magnificence,  wrong  turned,  may  have  possessed  his  imagination
over  -  strongly  with  such  things  as  frontispieces,  parterres,
ccpiipages,  trim  varlcts  in  ])arti- coloured  clothes,  and  others
in  gentlemen's  apparel, — magnanimous  exhibitions  of  honour
and  generositv  !  "  In  town,  a  ])alace  and  suitable  furniture  !
In  the  country  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  such  edifices  and
gardens  as  were  unknown  to  our  ancestors,  and  are  unnatural  to
such  a  climate  as  Great  Britain  ! "

Meanwhile  the  year  runs  on,  but  the  year's  income  answers
not  its  expense.  For  "  which  of  these  articles  can  be  re-
trenched ?  ^^'hich  way  take  up,  after  having  thus  set  out  ? "
A  princely  fancy  has  begot  all  this,  and  a  jjrincely  slavery  and
court  dependence  must  maintain  it.

The  young  gentleman  is  now  led  into  a  chase,  in  which  he
will  have  slender  capture,  though  toil  sufficient.  He  is  himself
taken.  Nor  will  he  so  easily  get  out  of  that  labyrinth,  to  which
he  chose  to  conmiit  his  steps,  rather  than  to  the  more  direct
and  plainer  paths  in  which  he  trod  before.  "  Farewell  that
generous,  proud  spirit,  which  was  wont  to  speak  only  what  it
approved,  commend  only  whom  it  thought  worthy,  and  act
only  what  it  thought  right!  Favourites  must  be  now  ob-
served ;  little  engines  of  power  attended  on  and  loathsomely
caressed ;  an  honest  man  dreaded,  and  every  free  tongue  or  pen
abhorred  as  dangerous  and  reproachful."  For  till  our  gentle-
man is  become  wholly  ])rostitute  and  shameless;  till  he  is
brought  to  laugh  at  public  virtue,  and  the  very  notion  of
conmion  good ;  till  he  has  openly  renounced  all  ])rinciples  of
honour  and  honesty,  he  must  in  good  policy  avoid  those  to
' ]Vif  rnifl  ffiininiir,  jiart  i\'.  §  2.

263


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

whom  he  lies  so  much  exposed,  and  shun  that  commerce  and
familiarity  which  was  once  his  chief  delight.

Such  is  the  sacrifice  made  to  a  wrong  pride  and  ignorant
self-esteem,  by  one  whose  inward  character  must  necessarily,
after  this  manner,  become  as  mean  and  al)ject  as  his  outward
behaviour  insolent  and  intolerable.

There  are  another  sort  of  suitors  to  powers,  and  traffickers
of  inward  worth  and  liberty  for  outward  gain,  whom  one  would
be  naturally  drawn  to  compassionate.  They  are  themselves  of
a  humane,  compassionate,  and  friendly  nature,  well-wishers  to
their  country  and  mankind.  They  could,  perhaps,  even  embrace
poverty  contentedly  rather  than  submit  to  anything  diminutive
either  of  their  inward  freedom  or  national  liberty.  But  what
they  can  bear  in  their  own  persons  they  cannot  bring  them-
selves to  bear  in  the  persons  of  such  as  are  to  come  after  them.
Here  the  best  and  noblest  of  affections  are  borne  down  by  the
excess  of  the  next  best,  those  of  tenderness  for  relations  and
near  friends.

Such  captives  as  these  would  disdain,  however,  to  devote  them-
selves to  any  prince  or  ministry  whose  ends  were  wholly  tyrannical
and  irreconcilable  with  the  true  interest  of  their  nation.  In
other  cases  of  a  less  degeneracy,  they  may  bow  down  perhaps  in
the  temple  of  Rimmon,  support  the  weight  of  their  supine  lords,
and  prop  the  steps  and  ruining  credit  of  their  corrupt  patrons.

This  is  drudgery  sufficient  for  such  honest  natures,  svich  as
by  hard  fate  alone  could  have  been  made  dishonest.  But  as
for  ])ride  or  insolence  on  the  account  of  their  outward  advance-
ment and  seeming  elevation,  they  are  so  far  from  anything
resembling  it  that  one  may  often  observe  what  is  very  contrary
in  these  f^iirer  characters  of  men.  For  though  perhaps  they
were  known  somewhat  rigid  and  severe  before,  you  see  them
now  grown  in  reality  submissive  and  obliging.  Though  in
conversation  formerly  dogmatical  and  overbearing  on  the  points
of  State  and  government,  they  are  now  the  patientest  to  hear,
the  least  forward  to  dictate,  and  the  readiest  to  embrace  any

264


MISCEIJ.AXEOrS REFLECTIONS

entertaining  subject  of  discourse,  rather  than  that  of  the  puhHc
and  their  own  personal  advancement.

Nothing  is  so  near  virtue  as  this  l)ehaviour ;  and  notlunff
so  remote  from  it,  nothing  so  sure  a  token  of  the  most  profligate
manners,  as  the  contrary.  In  a  free  government,  'tis  so  much
the  interest  of  every  one  in  ])hice,  who  profits  bv  the  public,  to
demean  himself  with  modesty  and  submission,  that  to  a))pear
immediately  the  more  insolent  and  haughtv  on  such  an  ad-
vancement is  the  mark  only  of  a  contemptible  genius,  and  of  a
want  of  true  understanding,  even  in  the  narrow  sense  of  interest
and  i^rivate  good.

Thus  we  see,  after  all,  that  "'tis  not  merely  what  we  call
principle,  but  a  taste  which  governs  men.  They  may  think  for
certain,  "this  is  right,  or  that  wrong":  they  may  believe  "this
a  crime,  or  that  a  sin  ;  this  punishable  bv  man,  or  that  bv  God  '' :
yet  if  the  savour  of  things  lies  cross  to  honesty  ;  if  the  fancy  be
florid  and  the  appetite  high  towards  the  subaltern  beauties  and
lower  order  of  worldly  symmetries  and  proportions,  the  conduct
will  infallibly  turn  this  latter  way.

Even  conscience,  I  fear,  such  as  is  owing  to  religious  dis-
cipline, will  make  but  a  slight  figure  where  this  taste  is  set
amiss.  Among  the  vulgar,  perhaj^s,  it  may  do  wonders.  A
devil  and  a  hell  may  jirevail  where  a  jail  and  gallows  are  thought
insufficient.  Rut  such  is  the  nature  of  the  liberal,  polished,
and  refined  part  of  mankind.  So  far  are  thev  from  the  mere
simplicity  of  babes  and  sucklings  that,  instead  of  a])plying  the
notion  of  a  future  reward  or  jiunishmcnt  to  their  innnediate
behaviour  in  society,  they  are  a})t  much  rather,  through  the
whole  course  of  their  lives,  to  show  evidently  that  thev  look  on
the  pious  narrations  to  be  indeed  no  better  than  children's  talcs
or  the  anuisement  of  the  mere  vulgar  : —

Esse  aliquos  Manes,  et  subterranea  rcfjua,

Nee  pueri  credunt,  nisi  qui  iionduin  acre  lavantur.^
'  ["  'riiat  our  ghosts  exist  and  realms  below  the  earth  .  .  .  not  even

205


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Somethino-  therefore  should,  methinks,  be  further  thought
of  in  behalf  of  our  generous  youths  towards  the  correcting  of
their  taste  or  relish  in  the  concerns  of  life.  For  this  at  last  is
what  will  influence.  And  in  this  respect  the  youth  alone  are
to  be  regarded.  Some  hopes  there  may  be  still  conceived  of
these.  The  rest  are  confirmed  and  hardened  in  their  way.  A
middle-aged  knave  (however  devout  or  orthodox)  is  but  a
common  wonder ;  an  old  one  is  no  wonder  at  all ;  but  a  young
one  is  still  (thank  heaven !)  somewhat  extraordinary.  And  I
can  never  enough  admire  what  was  said  once  by  a  worthy  man
at  the  first  appearance  of  one  of  these  young  able  prosti-
tutes, '•  that  he  even  trembled  at  the  sight,  to  find  nature
capable  of  being  turned  so  soon ;  and  that  he  boded  greater
calamity  to  his  country  from  this  single  example  of  young
villany  than  from  the  practices  and  arts  of  all  the  old  knaves
in  being."

Let  us  therefore  proceed  in  this  view,  addressing  ourselves
to  the  grown  youth  of  our  polite  world.  Let  the  appeal  be  to
these  whose  relish  is  retrievable,  and  whose  taste  may  yet  be
formed  in  morals,  as  it  seems  to  be  already  in  exterior  manners
and  behaviour.

That  there  is  really  a  standard  of  this  latter  kind  will
immediately,  and  on  the  first  view,  be  acknowledged.  The
contest  is  only,  "  which  is  right ;  which  the  unaffected  carriage
and  just  demeanour;  and  which  the  affected  and  false."  Scarce
is  there  any  one  who  pretends  not  to  know  and  to  decide  what
is  well-bred  and  handsome.  There  are  few  so  affectedly  clownish
as  absolutely  to  disown  good  breeding,  and  renounce  the  notion
of  a  beauty  in  outward  manners  and  deportment.  With  such
as  these,  wherever  they  should  be  found,  I  nnist  confess  I
could  scarce  be  tempted  to  bestow  the  least  })ains  or  labour
towards  convincing  them  of  a  beauty  in  inward  sentiments
and  principles.

children  believe,  except  those  ^vho  are  [on  youiiii;  to  ])ay  at  the  1)aths."
Juv.  ii.  141-1.51.]

206


INIISCELLANEOrS KEFT.ECTIONS

Whoever  has  any  impression  of  what  we  call  (gentility  or
politeness  is  already  so  acquainted  with  the  decorum  and  ^race
of  things  that  he  will  readily  confess  a  pleasure  and  enjoyment
in  the  very  survey  and  contemplation  of  this  kind.  Now  if  in
the  way  of  polite  pleasure  the  study  and  love  of  beauty  he
essential,  the  study  and  love  of  symmetry  and  order,  on  which
beauty  depends,  must  also  be  essential  in  the  same  respect.

'Tis  iinj)ossil)le  we  can  advance  the  least  in  any  relish  or
taste  of  outward  symmetry  and  order,  without  acknowledging
that  the  proportionate  and  regular  state  is  the  truly  prosperous
and  natural  in  every  subject.  The  same  features  which  make
deformity  create  inconnnodiousness  and  disease.  And  the  same
shapes  and  proportions  which  make  beauty  afford  advantage  by
adapting  to  activity  and  use.  Even  in  the  imitative  or  designing-
arts  (to  which  our  author  so  often  refers)  the  truth  or  beauty
of  every  figure  or  statue  is  measured  from  the  ])erfection  of
Nature  in  her  just  adapting  of  every  limb  and  proportion  to
the  activity,  strength,  dexterity,  life  and  vigour  of  the  particular
species  or  animal  designed.

Thus  beauty  and  truth  are  plainly  joined  with  the  notion
of  utility  and  convenience,^  even  in  the  apprehension  of  every
ingenious artist, the architect,- the statuary,  or  the jiainter.

'  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  o.

-  Ill  Graecis  operibus  iiein»»  sul)  imitulo  deiiticulos  coiistituit,  etc.
Quod  ergo  supra  cantherios  et  tenipla  in  veritate  debet  esse  collocatum,
id  ill  inia<riiiibus,  si  infra  eonstitutum  fuerit,  mendosani  babebit  operis
rationem.  Etiain(|ue  anti(|Mi  non  probavorunt,  neque  instituerunt,  etc.
Ita  «iuod  non  potest  in  veritate  fieri,  id  non  putaverunt  in  ima^^'inibus
factum,  posse  certani  rationem  babere.  Onniia  enim  certa  proprietate
et  a  veris  naturae  deductis  moribus  traduxerunt  in  operum  perfectiones  :
et  ea  probaverunt  <|uorum  explicationes  in  disputationibus  rationem
possunt  habere  veribitis.  Ita(|ue  ex  eis  originibus  symmetrias  et  pro-
portiones  iuiiu>^cujus(iue  jr^iieris  constitutas  reli(|uerunt.  [''In  (Ireek
Imiblini^s  no  one  placed  denticules  under  nnitules.  .  .  .  ^\  hat  tliercfoi-e
ought  in  reality  to  be  put  above  l)eams  and  small  timbers  will,  if  in  imita-
tions it  be  put  below,  be  faulty  in  theory  :  and  so  the  ancients  did  not
approve  of  this  or  practise  it. . . . Thus  they  tlmu^.'-ht  tliat  what  cannot

267


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

'Tis  the  same  in  the  physician's  way.  Natural  health  is  the
just  proportion,  truth,  and  regular  course  of  things  in  a  con-
stitution. 'Tis  the  inward  beauty  of  the  body.  And  when  the
harmony  and  just  measures  of  the  rising  pulses,  the  circulating
humours,  and  the  moving  airs  or  spirits,  are  disturbed  or  lost,
deformity  enters,  and  with  it,  calamity  and  ruin.

Should  not  this  (one  would  imagine)  be  still  the  same  case
and  hold  equally  as  to  the  mind  ?  Is  there  nothing  there  which
tends  to  disturbance  and  dissolution  ?  Is  there  no  natui'al
tenour,  tone,  or  order  of  the  passions  or  affections  ?  No  beauty
or  deformity  in  this  moral  kind  ?  Or  allowing  that  there  really
is,  must  it  not,  of  consequence,  in  the  same  manner  iuiply  health
or  sickliness,  ])rosperity  or  disaster .''  AVill  it  not  be  found  in
this  respect,  above  all,  "that  what  is  beautiful  is  harmonious
and  proportionable ;  ^ what  is  harmonious  and  ])roportionable

be  done  in  reality  cannot  lie  correct  if  done  in  a  copy  thereof.  For  they
transferred  everytliinf^  to  tlieir  ])erfect  \v(trks  with  exact  accuracy  and
attention  to  tlie  true  laws  of  Nature,  and  ajiproved  only  those  points  tlie
explanation  of  which  can,  when  discussed^  show  truthfulness.  And  so
from  this  beginning  they  left  us  proportions  and  canons  ready  established
in  every  kind."]  Vitruvius,  iv.  2,  whose  commentator  Philander  may
1)6  also  read  on  this  place.  See  above,  Treatise  in.  part  i.,  end;  part
iii.  §  3  ;  and  below,  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.

^  This  is  the  honestum,  the  ])ulclirum,  to  xaXof^  on  which  our  author
lays  the  stress  of  virtue,  and  the  merits  of  tliis  cause  ;  as  well  in  his  other
Treatises  as  in  this  oi  Solihqinj  here  commented.  This  beauty  the  Roman
orator,  in  his  rhetorical  way,  and  in  the  majesty  of  style,  could  express  no
otherwise  than  as  a  mystery.  "  Honestum  igitur  id  intelligimus,  quod
tale  est,  ut,  detracta  (mini  utilitate,  sine  ullis  praemiis  fructibusve,  per
seipsum  possit  jure  laudari.  Quod  quale  sit,  non  tam  detinitione  (|ua  sum
Hsus  intelligi  ])otest  (<juanquam  ali(|uantum  potest)  (juam  communi  omnium
judicio,  et  optimi  cujus(jue  studiis,  atque  factis  ;  ()ui  permulta  ob  eam
unam  causam  faciunt,  quia  decet,  quia  rectum,  (|uia  honestum  est;  etsi
nullum  consecuturum  emoliimentum  videiit."  ["'J^y  right  therefore  I
understand  what  is  such  tliat,  apart  from  expediency,  without  any  reM'ard
or  profit,  it  can  properly  be  praised  on  its  own  account.  AVliat  sort  of
thing,  that  is,  may  be  understood,  not  so  much  from  the  definition  I  have
given  (though  to  some  extent  it  may  be so understood)  as  from the

268


MISCKTJ.ANEOITS UEFLKC'TIOXS

is  true;  ;uk1  \vli;it  is  at  once  hdth  beautiful  auci  true  is,  of
consequence,  a«>;reeable  aiul  ^ood?"

general  agreement  of  all^  and  t'min  the  entliusiasni  anil  acts  of  the  best
men  ;  they  do  many  a  thing  for  this  one  reason,  tliat  it  is  becoming,  is
j)roi)er,  is  right,  even  thougli  they  see  no  gain  likely  to  follow." — Cicero,
De  Finibus,  ii.  4.).]  Our  author,  on  the  other  side,  having  little  of  the
orator,  and  less  of  the  constraint  of  formality  belonging  to  some  graver
characters,  can  be  more  familiar  on  this  occasion  ;  and  accordingly  descend-
ing without  the  least  scruple  into  wJiatever  style  or  humour,  he  refuses
to  make  the  least  difficulty  or  mystery  of  this  matter.  He  pretends,  on
this  head,  to  claim  the  assent  not  only  of  orators,  poets,  and  the  higher
virtuosi,  but  even  of  the  beaux  themselves,  and  such  as  go  no  farther  than
tlie  dancing-master  to  seek  for  grace  and  beauty.  He  pretends,  we  see,
to  fetch  this  natural  idea  from  as  familiar  amusements  as  dress,  equipage,
the  tiring-room,  or  toy-shop.  And  thus  in  his  proper  manner  of  solilocjuy
or  self-discourse^  we  may  imagine  him  running  on,  beginning  perhaps
A\  ith  some  particular  scheme  or  fancied  scale  of  beauty,  wliich,  according
to  his  philosophy,  he  strives  to  erect  by  distinguishing,  sorting,  aud
dividing  into  things  animate,  inanimate,  and  mixed,  as  thus  : —

In  the  inanimate  :  beginning  from  those  regular  figures  and  symmetries
with  wliicli  children  are  delighted,  and  proceeding  gradually  to  the  pro-
portions of  arcliitecture  and  the  other  arts.  The  same  in  respect  of  sounds
and  music.  From  beautiful  stones,  rocks,  minerals,  to  vegetables,  woods,
aggregate  parts  of  the  world,  seas,  rivers,  mountains,  \ales.  The  globe.
Celestial  bodies  and  their  order.  The  higher  architecture  of  Nature.
Nature  herself  considered  as  inanimate  and  passive.

In  the  animate  :  from  animals  and  their  several  kinds,  tempers,
sagacities,  to  men.  And  from  single  persons  of  men,  their  private  char-
acters, understandings,  geniuses,  dispositions,  manners,  to  public  societies,
communities  or  commonwealths.  From  flocks,  herds,  and  other  natural
assemblages  or  groups  of  living  creatures,  to  human  intelligencies  and
correspondencies,  or  wliatever  is  higlier  in  the  kind.  The  correspondence,
union  aud  harmony  of  Nature  herself,  considered  as  animate  and  intelligent.

In  the  mixed  :  as  in  a  single  person  (a  body  and  a  mind)  the  union
and  harmony  of  this  kind,  which  constitutes  the  i*eal  person  ;  and  the
friendship,  love,  or  whatever  other  affection  is  formed  on  such  an  object.
A  household,  a  city  or  nation,  with  certain  lands,  buildings,  and  other
appendices  or  local  ornaments  which  jointly  form  that  agreeable  idea  of
home,  family,  country.

"And  what  of  this.^"  says  an  airy  spark,  no  friend  to  meditation  or
deep  thought. "  ^Vhat  means  this  catalogue  or  scale,  as  you  are  pleased

269


SHAFTESBl^RY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Where  then  is  this  beautv  or  harnioiiy  to  be  foiind  ?  How
is  this  synimetrv  to  be  chscovei-ed  and  applied  ?  Is  it  any  other
art  tlian  that  of  ])hiloso[)hy  or  the  study  of  inward  numbers  and
proportions  wliich  can  exhibit  this  in  Hfe  ?  If  no  other,  who
then  can  possibly  have  a  taste  of  this  kind,  without  being
beliolden  to  pliilosopliy  ?  A\'ho  can  admire  the  outward  beauties
and  not  recur  instantly  to  the  inward,  whicli  are  the  most  real

to  call  it?  Only,  sir^  to  satisfy  myself"  that  I  am  not  alone  or  single  in  a
certain  fancy  I  have  of  a  thing  called  beauty  ;  that  1  have  almost  the
whole  world  for  my  companions  ;  and  that  each  of  us  admirers  and  earnest
pursuers  of  beauty  (such  as  in  a  maimer  we  all  are)  if  peradventure  we
take  not  a  certain  sagacity  along  with  us,  we  must  err  widely,  range  ex-
travagantly, and  run  ever  upon  a  false  scent.  A\  e  may  (in  the  sportsman's
])hrase)  have  many  hares  afoot,  but  sliall  stick  to  no  real  game,  nor  he
fortunate  in  any  caj)ture  which  may  content  us.

'•'See  with  what  ardour  and  vehemence  the  young  man,  neglecting  his
proper  race  .and  fellow-creatures,  and  forgetting  what  is  decent,  handsome,
or  becoming  in  human  affairs,  pursues  these  species  in  those  common
objects  of  his  affection,  a  horse,  a  hound,  a  hawk  !  What  doting  on  these
beauties  !  \Vliat  admiration  of  the  kind  itself !  And  of  the  particular
animal,  what  care,  and  in  a  manner  idolatry  and  consecration,  when  the
beast  beloved  is  (as  often  happens)  even  set  apart  from  use,  and  only  kept
to  gaze  on  and  feed  the  enamoured  fancy  witli  liighest  deliglit  !  See  in
another  youth,  not  so  forgetful  of  human  kind,  but  remembering  it  still
in  a  wrong  way  !  a  (piXoKaXos  of  another  sort,  a  Chaerea.  Quam  elegans
formarum  spectator  !  See  as  to  other  beauties,  where  there  is  no  posses-
sion, no  enjoyment  or  reward,  but  barely  seeing  and  admiring ;  as  in  the
virtuoso-passion,  the  love  of  painting  and  the  designing  arts  of  every  kind
so  often  observed.  How  fares  it  with  our  princely  genius,  our  grandee
who  assembles  all  these  beauties,  and  within  the  bounds  of  his  sumptuous
palace  incloses  all  these  graces  of  a  thousand  kinds  ?  What  pains  !  study  !
science  !  Behold  the  disposition  and  order  of  tliese  finer  sorts  of  apart-
ments, gardens,  \illas  !  The  kind  of  harmony  to  the  eye  from  the  various
shapes  and  colours  agreeably  mixed  and  ranged  in  lines,  intercrossing
without  confusion,  and  fortunately  coincident.  A  parterre,  cypresses,
groves,  wildernesses.  Statues  here  and  there  of  virtue,  fortitude,  temper-
ance. Heroes'  busts,  philosophers'  heads,  with  suitable  mottoes  and  in-
scriptions. Solemn  representations  of  things  deeply  natural — caves,
grottoes,  rocks,  urns  and  obelisks  in  retired  places  and  disposed  at  proper
distances  and points  of  sight,  with  all those  symmetries  which  silently

270


MISCELT.AXKOrS IJEFLECTIOXS

and  essential,  the  most  naturally  aH'ettino-,  and  of  the  hij^hcst
pleasure,  as  well  as  profit  and  advantage?

In  so  short  a  compass  does  that  learning  and  kn(Ms  leilge  lie
on  which  manners  and  life  depend.  "I'is  we  ourselves  create
and  form  our  taste.  If  we  resolve  to  have  it  Just,  'tis  in  our
j)ower. We  mav  esteem  and  resolve,  approve  and  disaj)[)rove,

express  :i  reii:iiiii;;-  (uder,  peace,  liaiiiuuiy,  and  heauly  !  .  .  .  liut  what  is
there  aiisHeral)le  to  tliis  in  the  miiiils  of  the  possessors.''  W'liat  possession
or  propriety  is  theirs.'  What  constancy  or  security  of  enjoyment .''  A\'liat
peace,  what  harmony  within  }"

Thus  our  monolo^ist,  or  self-discoursiui^  author,  in  liis  usual  strain,
when  incited  to  the  searcli  of  Beauty  and  the  Decorum  hy  vulvar  admira-
tion and  the  universal  acknowledgment  of  tlie  sj)ecies  in  outward  tilings,
and  in  the  meaner  aiul  siil)ordinate  subjects,  liy  tliis  inferior  species,  it
seems,  our  strict  inspector  disdains  to  Ite  allured  ;  and  lefusinu;  to  he
captivated  hy  anything  less  than  the  superior,  original,  and  ireiniine  kind,
he  walks  at  leisure,  without  emotion,  in  deep  philoMipliical  reserve,
through  all  these  pompous  scenes ;  passes  unconcernedly  l)y  those  court
pageants,  the  illustrious  and  much  envied  potentjites  of  the  place ;  over-
looks the  rich,  the  great,  and  even  the  fair,  feeling  no  other  astonishment
than  what  is  accidentally  raised  in  him  hy  the  view  of  these  impostures
and  of  this  specious  snare.  For  here  he  ol)serves  those  gentlemen  chiefly
to  he  caught  and  fastest  held  who  are  the  highest  ridiculers  of  such
reflections  as  his  own,  and  who  in  the  very  height  of  this  ridicule  prove
themselves  the  impotent  c(»ntemners  of  a  species  which,  whether  they
w  ill  or  no,  they  ardently  pursue,  some  in  a  face  and  certain  regular  lines
or  features,  others  in  a  palace  and  apartments,  others  in  an  ecjuipage  and
dress.  ^'O  effeminacy,  effeminacy!  WTio  would  im.igine  this  could  he
the  vice  of  such  as  a})pear  no  inconsiderable  men  ?  But  person  is  a  subject
of  flattery  which  reaches  beyoiul  the  bloom  of  youth,  'llie  experienced
senator  and  aged  general  can  in  our  da\s  dispense  with  a  toilet  and  take
his  outward  form  into  a  very  extraordinary  adjustment  and  regulation.
All  embellishments  are  affected,  besides  the  true.  And  thus,  led  by
example,  whilst  we  run  in  search  of  elegancy  and  neatness,  pursuing
beauty,  and  adding,  as  we  imagine,  more  lustre  and  value  to  [our  ow n
person,  we  grow,  in  our  real  character  and  true  self,  deformed  and  mon-
strous, servile  and  abject,  stooping  to  the  lowest  terms  of  courtship,  and
sacrificing  all  internal  proportion,  all  intrinsic  and  real  beauty  and  worth
for  the  sake  of  things  which  carry  scarce  a  shadow  of  the  kind."  Supra,
Monili.sts,  part  iii.  §  2  ; ^Vit  (Uitl  llamonr.  part  iv.  §  2  ;  Advice,  part  iii.  §  3.

271


SHAFTESIUJRY'S CHAUACTEllISTICS

as  we  would  wish.  For  who  Mould  not  rejoice  to  be  always
equal  and  consonant  to  himself,  and  have  constantly  that  opinion
of  things  which  is  natural  and  pro})ortionable  ?  But  who  dares
search  opinion  to  the  bottom,  or  call  in  question  his  early  and
prepossessing  taste?  Who  is  so  just  to  himself  as  to  recall  his
fancy  from  the  power  of  fashion  and  education  to  that  of  reason  ?
Could  we,  however,  be  thus  courageous,  we  should  soon  settle  in
ourselves  such  an  opinion  of  good  as  would  secure  to  us  an  in-
variable, agreeable,  and  just  taste  in  life  and  manners.

Thus  have  I  endeavoured  to  tread  in  my  author's  steps,  and
prepare  the  reader  for  the  serious  and  downright  philosophy
which  even  in  this  ^  last  commented  treatise,  our  author  keeps
still  as  a  mystery  and  dares  not  formally  profess.  His  pretence
has  been  to  advise  authors  and  polish  styles,  but  his  aim  has
been  to  correct  manners  and  regular  lives.  He  has  affected
soliloquy,  as  pretending  only  to  censure  himself,  but  he  has  taken
occasion  to  bring  others  into  his  company  arid  make  bold  with
personages  and  characters  of  no  inferior  rank.  He  has  given
scope  enough  to  raillery  and  humour,  and  has  intrenched  very
largely  on  the  province  of  us  miscellanarian  writers.  But  the
reader  is  ^  now  about  to  see  him  in  a  new  aspect,  "  a  formal  and
professed  philosopher,  a  system-writer,  a  dogmatist  and  ex-
pounder." Habes  confitentem  reum.

So  to  his  philosojjhy  I  commit  him.  Though,  according  as
my  genius  at  present  disposition  will  ])ermit,  I  intend  still  to
accompany  him  at  a  distance,  keep  him  in  sight,  and  convoy  him,
the  best  I  am  able,  through  the  dangerous  seas  he  is  about  to  pass.

1  Treatise  iii.  {Advice  to  cui  Autlior).
-  Treatise  iv.  {The  Inquiry).


272


MISCELLANY IV


CHAPTER I

Connection  and  union  of  the  subject-treatises  —  Philosophy  in  form  —
Metaphysics — Egoity— Iilentity^Moral  footing — Proof  and  discipline
of  the  fancies  —  Settlement  or  opinion  —  Anatomy  of  the  mind  —  A
fable.

We  have  already,  in  the  beginning  of  our  preceding  Miscellany,
taken  notice  of  our  author's  plan  and  the  connection  and
dependency  of  his  joint  tracts/  comprehended  in  two  preceding
volumes.  We  are  now,  in  our  commentator  capacity,  arrived
at  length  to  his  second  volume,  to  which  the  three  pieces  of
his  first  appear  preparatory.  That  they  were  really  so  designed,
the  advertisement  to  the  first  edition  of  his  Soliloquy  is  a
sufficient  proof.  lie  took  occasion  there,  in  a  line  or  two
under  the  name  of  his  printer,  or  (as  he  otherwise  calls  him)  his
amanuensis,  to  prepare  us  for  a  more  elaborate  and  methodical
piece  which  was  to  follow.  We  ha\e  this  system  now  before  us.
Nor  need  we  wonder,  such  as  it  is,  that  it  came  so  hardly  into
the  world,  and  that  our  author  has  been  delivered  of  it  with  so
much  difficulty  and  after  so  long  a  time.  His  amanuensis  and
he  were  not,  it  seems,  heretofore  upon  such  good  terms  of
correspondence.  Otherwise  such  an  unshapen  foetus  or  false
birth  as  that  of  which  our  author  in  his  title-page  -  comj^lains
had not formerly  appeared  abroad. Nor  had it  ever  risen

*  Above,  p.  239 ;  again  below.  Misc.  v.  2.
-  Viz.  to  the  Inquiry  (Treatise  w.).

VOL.  II  273  T


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

again  in  its  more  decent  form  but  for  the  accidental  publication
of  our  author's  first  letter,^  which,  by  a  necessary  train  of  conse-
quences, occasioned  the  revival  of  this  abortive  piece,  and  gave
usherance  to  its  companions.

It  Avill  appear,  therefore,  in  this  joint  edition  of  our  author's
Five  Treatises  that  the  three  former  are  preparatory  to  the
fourth,  on  which  we  are  now  entered,  and  the  fifth  (with  which
he  concludes)  a  kind  of  apology  for  this  revived  Treatise  con-
cerning virtue  and  religion.

As  for  his  Apology,  particularly  in  what  relates  to  revealed
religion  and  a  Morld  to  come,  I  commit  the  reader  to  the
disputant  divines  and  gentlemen  whom  our  author  has  intro-
duced in  that  concluding  piece  of  dialogue  writing  or  rhapsodical
philosophy.  Meanwhile  we  have  here  no  other  part  left  us
than  to  enter  into  the  dry  philosophy  and  rigid  manner  of  our
author,  without  any  excursions  into  various  literature,  without
help  from  the  comic  or  tragic  muse,  or  from  the  flowers  of
poetry  or  rhetoric.

Such  is  our  present  pattern  and  strict  moral  task,  which
our  more  humorous  reader,  foreknowing,  may  immediately,  if
he  pleases,  turn  over,  skipping  (as  is  usual  in  many  grave  works)
a  chapter  or  two  as  he  proceeds.  We  shall,  to  make  amends,
endeavour  afterwards,  in  our  following  Miscellany,  to  entertain
him  again  with  more  cheerful  fare,  and  afford  him  a  dessert  to
rectify  his  palate,  and  leave  his  mouth  at  last  in  good  relish.

To  the  patient  and  grave  reader,  therefore,  who  in  order  to
moralise  can  afford  to  retire  into  his  closet,  as  to  some  religious
or  devout  exercise,  we  presume  thus  to  offer  a  few  reflections  in
the  support  of  our  author  s  profound  inquiry.  And,  accordingly,
we  are  to  imagine  our  author  speaking  as  follows.

How little regard soever may be shown to that moral

speculation  or  inquiry  which  we  call  the  study  of  ourselves,  it

must,  in  strictness,  be  yielded  that  all  knowledge  whatsoever

depends  upon  this  previous  one,  "and  that  we  can  in  reality

1  Viz.  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,

274


SHAITESIUUIVS CnARACTf:i{ISTICS

be  assured  of  uotliini;-  till  we  are  first  assured  of  what  we  are
ourselves."'''  For  hv  this  alone  we  can  kntnv  what  certainty  and
assurance  is.

That  there  is  something  undoubtedly  which  thinks,  our
very  doubt  itself  and  scrupulous  thought  evinces.  But  in  what
subject  that  thought  resides,  and  how  that  subject  is  continued
one  and  the  same,  so  as  to  answer  constantly  to  the  supposed
train  of  thoughts  or  reflections  which  seem  to  run  so  harmoni-
ously through  a  long  course  of  life,  with  the  same  relation  still
to  one  single  and  self-same  })erson,  this  is  not  a  matter  so  easily
or  hastily  decided  by  those  who  are  nice  self- examiners  or
searchers  after  truth  and  certainty.

'Twill  not,  in  this  respect,  be  sufficient  for  us  to  use  the
seeming  logic  of  a  famous  modern,^  and  say,  "  We  think,
therefore  we  are."  Which  is  a  notably  invented  saying,  after
the  model  of  that  like  phiIoso})hical  ])ropositi()n,  that  "  What
is,  is."  jNIiraculously  argued !  "  If  I  am,  I  am."'  Nothing
more  certain  !  For  the  Ego  or  I  being  established  in' the  first
part  of  the  proposition,  the  crgu,  no  doubt,  must  hold  it  good
in  the  latter.  But  the  question  is,  "  What  constitutes  the  ^^'e
or  I .? "  and  "  whether  the  I  of  this  instant  be  the  same  with
that  of  any  instant  preceding  or  to  come  ? "  I'or  we  have
nothing  but  memory  to  warrant  us,  and  memory  may  be  false.
We  may  believe  we  have  thought  and  reflected  thus  or  thus ;
but  we  may  be  mistaken.  We  may  be  conscious  of  that  as
truth  which  perhaps  was  no  more  than  dream,  and  we  may
be  conscious  of  that  as  a  past  dream  which  perhaps  was  never
before  so  much  as  dreamt  of.

This  is  what  metaphysicians  mean  when  they  say  "  that
identity  can  be  proved  only  by  consciousness,  but  that  con-
sciousness, withal,  may  be  as  well  false  as  real  in  respect  of  what
is  past."  So  that  the  same  successional  A\'e  or  I  nmst  remain
still,  on  this  account,  undecided.

To  the  force  of  this  reasoning  I  confess  I  must  so  far  submit
'  Monsieur  Des  Cartes.

275


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

as  to  declare  that,  for  my  own  part,  I  take  my  being  upon  trust.
Let  others  philosophise  as  they  are  able :  I  shall  admire  their
strength  when,  upon  this  topic,  they  have  refuted  what  able
metaphysicians  object  and  Pyrrhonists  plead  in  their  own  behalf.

Meanwhile  there  is  no  impediment,  hindrance,  or  suspension
of  action  on  account  of  these  wonderfully  refined  speculations.
Argument  and  debate  go  on  still.  Conduct  is  settled.  Rules
and  measures  are  given  out  and  received.  Nor  do  we  scruple
to  act  as  resolutely  upon  the  mere  supposition  that  we  are,  as
if  we  had  effectually  proved  it  a  thousand  times,  to  the  full
satisfaction  of  our  metaphysical  or  Pyrrhonean  antagonist.

This  to  me  appears  sufficient  ground  for  a  moralist.  Nor
do  I  ask  more  when  I  undertake  to  prove  the  reality  of  virtue
and  morals.

If  it  be  certain  that  I  am,  "'tis  certain  and  demonstrable
who  and  what  I  ought  to  be,  even  on  my  own  account,  and  for
the  sake  of  my  own  private  happiness  and  success.  For  thus  I
take  the  liberty  to  ])roceed.

The  affections  of  which  I  am  conscious  are  either  grief  or
joy,  desire  or  aversion.  For  whatever  mere  sensation  I  may
experience,  if  it  amounts  to  neither  of  these,  'tis  indifferent  and
no  May  affects  me.

That  which  causes  joy  and  satisfaction  when  present  causes
jjrief  and  disturbance  when  absent ;  and  that  which  causes
grief  and  disturbance  when  present  does,  when  absent,  by  the
same  necessity  occasion  joy  and  satisfaction.

Thus  love  (which  implies  desire,  with  hope  of  good)  must
afford  occasion  to  grief  and  disturbance  when  it  acquires  not
what  it  earnestly  seeks.  And  hatred  (which  implies  aversion
and  fear  of  ill)  must,  in  the  same  manner,  occasion  grief  and
calamity  when  that  which  it  earnestly  shunned,  or  would  have
escaped,  remains  present  or  is  altogether  unavoidable.

That  which  being  present  can  never  leave  the  mind  at  rest,
but  nmst  of  necessity  cause  aversion,  is  its  ill.  But  that  which
can  be  sustained  without  any  necessary  abhorrence  or  aversion

"^276


I


SHAlTESHrHVS CIIAIIACTEIUSTIC  S

is  not  its  ill,  hut  rcniaiiis  iiulift'cTcnt  in  its  own  nature,  the  ill
bein<^  in  the  afi'crtion  only,  which  wants  redress.

In  the  same  manner,  that  wliich  being  absent  can  never
leave  the  mind  at  I'est,  or  without  disturbance  and  regret,  is  of
necessity  its  good,  lint  that  which  can  be  absent  without  any
present  or  future  disturbance  to  the  mintl,  is  not  its  good,  but
remains  in(hfferent  in  its  own  nature.  From  wlience  it  nmst
follow,  that  the  affection  towards  it,  as  supposed  good,  is  an  ill
affection,  and  creative  only  of  disturbance  and  disease.  So  that
the  affections  of  love  and  hatred,  liking  and  dislike,  on  which
the  happiness  or  prosperity  of  the  j)erson  so  nuich  de])ends,
being  influenced  and  governed  by  oj)iiiion,  the  highest  good  or
happiness  nuist  dej)end  on  right  opinion  and  the  highest  misery
be  derived  from  wrong.

To  explain  this,  I  consider,  for  instance,  the  i'ancy  or
imagination  I  have  of  death,  according  as  I  find  this  subject
naturally  passing  in  my  mind.  To  this  fancy,  ])erhaps,  I  find
vniited  an  opinion  or  apprehension  of  evil  and  calamity.  Now
the  more  my  apprehension  of  thi.s  evil  increases,  the  greater  I
find  my  disturbance  proves  not  only  at  the  approach  of  the
supposed  evil,  but  at  the  very  distant  thought  of  it.  besides
that,  the  thought  itself  will  of  necessity  so  nuich  the  oftener
recur,  as  the  aversion  or  fear  is  violent  and  increasing.

From  this  supj)osed  evil  I  nmst,  however,  fly  with  so  nuich
the  more  earnestness  as  the  ojiinion  of  the  evil  increases.  Now  if
the  increase  of  the  aversion  can  be  no  cause  of  the  decrease  or
diminution  of  the  evil  itself  but  rather  the  contrary,  then  the
increase  of  the  aversion  must  necessarily  prove  the  increase  of
disaj^pointment  and  disturbance.  And  so,  on  the  other  hand,
the  diminution  or  decrease  of  the  aversion  (if  this  may  any  way
be  effected)  must  of  necessity  prove  the  diminution  of  inward
disturbance,  and  the  better  establishment  of  inward  quiet  and
satisfaction.

Again,  I  consider  with  myself,  that  I  have  the  imagination  ^
'  Of  the  iieccssarv  beinu' and  pro\alciu"v  of  some  sufli  imag-iiiati(>n  or

277


MISCELLANEOUS KEFLECTIONS

of  sometliing  beautiful,  great,  and  becoming  in  tilings.  This
imagination  I  apply  perhaps  to  such  subjects  as  plate,  jewels,
a})artments,  coronets,  jjatents  of  honour,  titles,  or  precedencies.
I  must  therefore  naturally  seek  these,  not  as  mere  conveniencies,
means,  or  helps  in  life  (for  as  such  my  passion  could  not  be
so  excessive  towards  them),  but  as  excellent  in  themselves,
necessarily  attractive  of  my  admiration,  and  directly  and  im-
mediately causing  my  happiness  and  giving  me  satisfaction.
Now  if  the  passion  raised  on  this  opinion  (call  it  avarice,  pride,
vanity,  or  ambition)  be  indeed  incapable  of  any  real  satisfaction,
even  under  the  most  successful  course  of  fortune ;  and  then  too,
attended  with  j)erpetual  fears  of  disappointment  and  loss,  how
can  the  mind  be  other  than  miserable  when  possessed  by  it  ?
Eut  if  instead  of  forming  thus  the  opinion  of  good,  if  instead
of  placing  worth  or  excellence  in  these  outward  subjects  we
place  it,  where  it  is  truest,  in  the  affections  or  sentiments,  in  the
governing  part  and  inward  character,  we  have  then  the  full
enjoyment  of  it  within  our  power;  the  imagination  or  opinion
remains  steady  and  irreversible,  and  the  love,  desire,  and  appetite
is  answered,  without  apprehension  of  loss  or  disappointment.

Here,  therefore,  arises  work  and  employment  for  us  within,
"  to  regulate  fancy  and  rectify  ojnnion,^  on  which  all  depends."

sense  (natural  and  common  t(»  all  men,  irresistible,  of  original  growth  in
the  mind,  the  guide  of  our  affections,  and  the  ground  of  our  admiration,
contempt,  shame,  honour,  disdain,  and  other  natural  and  unavoidable  im-
pressions), see  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  2  ;  Treatise  iii.  part  iii.  §  3 ;  Treatise
IV.  bk.  i.  part  ii.  §  3  ;  Treatise  \'.  part  iii.  §§  2,  3  ;  and  above.  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.  ;
iii.  ch.  ii.  in  the  notes.

^  OTL  TrdvTa  i)  VTVoK-q^pLS,  Kal  avrrj  (ttI  aoL  &pov  ovv  ore  deXeis  ttjv  vTroK7}\j/iv,  Kal
uairep  Ka.fj.^avTt.  tt)v  a,Kpav  yaXrjVT],  cTTadepa  TravTa  Kal  KdXiros  clkv/xuv.  ["  VV^hat
view  you  take  is  everything,  and  your  view  is  in  your  power.  Remove  it
then  when  you  choose,  and  then,  as  if  you  had  rounded  the  cape,  come
calm  serenity,  a  waveless  bay." — Marcus  Aurelius,  xii.  22.]

olov  ioTLV  7]  XeKdvT)  rod  vdaros,  toiovtov  tj  ^vxV'  olov  tj  avyi)  i]  TTpoaivLiTTOvcra  t(^
vdari,,  TOLOVTOV  al  (pavracriai.  'orav  ovv  to  v8wp  Ktvrjdrj,  doKel  /xev  Kal  i]  avyi]  KiveTaOai.
ou  fievTOL  KLveiraL'  Kal  orav  rolvvv  UKorudri  ris,  ovx  o-l  rixvo-t-  Kal  at  dperal  avyxeovTai
dXXa  TO  ■wvivij.a  e(p'  ov  elai KaTaaTavTos  8e, KadlaraTai  Ko.KHva. ["  As  is  the

278


SHAFTESP>URY'S CHARACTERISTICS

For  if  our  loves,  desires,  hatreds,  and  aversions  are  left  to
themselves,  we  are  necessarily  exposed  to  endless  vexation  and
calamity  ;  but  if  these  are  found  capable  of  amendment  or  in
any  measure  flexible  or  variable  by  opinion,  we  ought,  methinks,
to  make  trial,  at  least,  how  far  we  mifrlit  bv  this  means  acquire
felicity  and  content.

Accordingly,  if  we  lind  it  evident  on  one  hand,  that  by
indulging  any  wrong  appetite  (as  either  debauch,  malice,  or
revenge)  the  ojMnion  of  the  false  good  increases,  and  the  appetite,
which  is  a  real  ill,  grows  so  much  the  stronger,  we  may  be  as
fully  assured,  on  the  other  hand,  that  by  restraining  this  affec-
tion and  nourishing  a  contrary  sort  in  opj)osition  to  it,  we  can-
not fail  to  diminish  what  is  ill,  and  increase  what  is  properly
our  happiness  and  good.

On  this  account  a  man  may  reasonablv  conclude,  "that  it
becomes  him,  by  working  upon  his  own  mind,  to  withdraw  the
fancy  or  opinion  of  good  or  ill  from  that  to  which  justly  and
by  necessity  it  is  not  joined,  and  a})ply  it  with  the  strongest
resolution  to  that  \\ith  which  it  naturally  agrees."  Tor  if  the
fancy  or  opinion  of  good  be  joined  to  what  is  not  durable  nor
in  my  power  either  to  acquire  or  to  retain  ;  the  more  such  an
opinion  prevails,  the  more  I  must  be  subject  to  disappointment
and  distress.  But  if  there  be  that  to  which,  whenever  I  apply
the  opinion  or  fancy  of  good,  I  find  the  fancy  more  consistent,
and  the  good  more  durable,  solid,  and  within  mv  power  and
command,  then  the  more  such  an  opinion  prevails  in  me  the
more  satisfaction  and  happiness  I  must  experience.

Now,  if  I  join  the  opinion  of  good  to  the  possessions  of  the

water-dish,  so  i.s  the  soul  ;  as  is  tlie  ray  whioli  falls  on  the  water,  so  are
the  appearances.  A\'heii  tlieu  the  water  is  moved  the  ray  too  seems  to  be
moved,  yet  is  not.  And  when,  accordingly,  a  man  is  giddy,  it  is  not  the
arts  and  the  virtues  which  are  thrown  into  confusion,  but  the  spirit  to
which  ihey  belong;  and  when  he  is  recovered  so  are  they." — Epictetus,
Di.s.'i.  iii.  .'3.]  See  Treatise  in.  part  i.  §  2  ;  part  iii.  §§  1,  2  ;  Treatise  v.  part
iii.  §  3.

279


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

mind,  if  it  be  in  the  affections  themselves  that  I  place  my
highest  joy,  and  in  those  objects,  whatever  they  are,  of  inward
worth  and  beauty  (such  as  honesty,  faith,  integrity,  friendship,
honour),  'tis  evident  I  can  never  possibly,  in  this  respect,  rejoice
amiss  or  indulge  myself  too  far  in  the  enjoyment.  The  greater
my  indulgence  is,  the  less  I  have  reason  to  fear  either  reverse  or
disappointment.

This,  I  know,  is  far  contrary  in  another  regimen  of  life.
The  tutorage  of  fancy  and  pleasure,  and  the  easy  philosophy
of  taking  that  for  good  which  pleases  me,^  or  which  I  fancy
merely,  will  in  time  give  me  uneasiness  sufficient.  'Tis  plain,
from  what  has  been  debated,  that  the  less  fanciful  I  am  in  what
relates  to  my  content  and  happiness,  the  more  powerful  and
absolute  I  must  be  in  self-enjoyment,  and  the  possession  of  my
good.  And  since  'tis  fancy  merely  «hich  gives  the  force  of
good,  or  power  of  passing  as  such,  to  things  of  chance  and
outward  dependency,  'tis  evident  that  the  more  I  take  from
fancy  in  this  respect  the  more  I  confer  ujjon  myself.  As  I  am
less  led  or  betrayed  by  fancy  to  an  esteem  of  what  depends  on
others,  I  am  the  more  fixed  in  the  esteem  of  Avhat  depends  on
myself  alone.  And  if  I  have  once  gained  the  taste  of  liberty,-
I  shall  easily  understand  the  force  of  this  reasoning  and  know
both  my  true  self  and  interest.

The  method,  therefore,  required  in  this  my  inward  economy,
is  to  make  those  fancies  themselves  the  objects  of  my  aversion
which  justly  deserve  it,  by  being  the  cause  of  a  wrong  estima-
tion and  measure  of  good  and  ill,  and  consequently  the  cause  of
my  unhappiness  and  disturbance.

Accordingly  (as  the  learned  masters  in  this  science  advise)
we  are  to  begin  rather  by  the  averse^  than  by  the  prone  and
forward  disposition. We  are  to  work  rather  by  the  weaning

^  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  2  ;  Treatise  v.  part  ii.  §  1.
2  Treatise  v.  part  iii.  §  .'3 ;  and  below,  Misc.  v.  8.

^  d.pov  ovv  TTfV  iKKXiaiv  dwb  irAvTWV  xtDv  ovk  i(p'  V/mi/,  Kal  fierddes  enl  to.  irapd
(pvaiv  tQv  €(p'  ij/Mv. ["  Give  up  tlieu  aversion  from  all  things  which  are  not

280


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

than  the  engaging  passions ;  since  if  we  give  way  chieHy  to
indination,  by  loving,  applauding,  and  admiring  what  is  great
and  good,  we  may  possii)lv,  it  seems,  in  some  high  objects  of
that  kind,  be  so  amused  and  ecstasied  as  to  lose  ourselves  and
miss  our  ])roper  mark  for  want  of  a  steady  atid  settled  aim.
But  being  more  sure  and  infalliable  in  what  relates  to  our  ill,
we  should  begin,  they  tell  us,  by  a])plying  our  aversion  on  that
side  and  raisinj;  our  indiy-nation  ao;ainst  those  meannesses  of
opinion  and  sentiment  which  are  the  causes  of  our  subjection
and  perplexity.

Thus  the  covetous  fancy,  if  considered  as  the  cause  of  misery
(and  consequently  detested  as  a  real  ill),  must  of  necessity  abate  ;
and  the  ambitious  fancy,  if  opposed  in  the  same  manner  with
resolution,  by  better  thought,  must  resign  itself  and  leave  the
mind  free  and  disencumbered  in  the  ]KU'suit  of  its  better  objects.

Nor  is  the  case  different  in  the  ])assion  of  cowardice  or  fear
of  death.  For  if  we  leave  this  passion  to  itself  (or  to  certain
tutors  to  manage  for  us)  it  may  lead  us  to  the  most  anxious
and  tormenting  state  of  life.  But  if  it  be  opposed  by  sounder
opinion  and  a  just  estimation  of  things,  it  must  diminish  of
course,  and  the  natural  result  of  such  a  practice  must  be  the

iu  our  power  ;  transfer  it  to  the  tilings  contrary  to  nature  which  are  in  our
power." — Epictetus,  Ench.  ii.]

op€^iv  S.pai  ce  del  TraireXtDs,  ^KKXicTif  tTrl  fi6va  /j.fTaduvat  to.  irpoaipeTiKO..
["  You  must  do  away  with  desire  altogether,  and  transfer  aversion  to  those
things  only  which  are  within  the  sc()j)e  of  the  will."— -Epictetus,  /y/.v.v.  iii.
22.]  This  suhdued  or  moderated  admiration  or  zeal  in  the  highest  suhjects
of  virtue  and  divinity,  the  philosopher  calls  avunirpov  Kal  Kadiarafi^v-iiv  tt^v
6p€^iv.  ["Desire  settled  and  proportioned  to  its  objects." — Epict.  Z>j.v.v.  iv.
1.]  The  contrary  disposition,  rb  aXoyov  Kal  d}<rriK6v.  ['' Unreasonable  and
pushing." — Epict.  Di.s.s.  iv.  1.]  Hie  reason  why  this  over-forward  ardour
and  pursuit  of  high  subjects  runs  naturally  into  enthusiasm  and  disorder
is  shown  in  what  succeeds  the  first  of  the  passages  here  cited,  viz.,  tCiv  Si
€(/)'  Tj/i^v,  ocraf  opeyeffdai  koKou  dv,  ovdev  oiiMwtji  <xoi  irapeaTi.  [''And  of  things  ill
our  power,  such  as  it  would  be  well  to  desire,  no  one  is  yet  set  before
you." — Epict.  Ench.  ii.]  And  hence  the  repeated  injunction,  airoaxov  wore
Trai'TO.Traaii'  opi^euis,  iVa  Trorf  Kal  evXdyus  opex^V^V  "' ^'  ei'^^Ywj,  orav  exS'  ''■''  ("

281


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

rescue  of  the  mind  from  numberless  fears  and  miseries  of
other  kinds.

Thus  at  last  a  mind,  by  knowing  itself  and  its  own  proper
powers  and  virtues,  becomes  free  and  independent.  It  sees  its
hindrances  and  obstructions,  and  finds  they  are  wholly  from
itself,  and  from  opinions  wrong  conceived.  The  more  it
conquers  in  this  respect  (be  it  in  the  least  particular)  the  more
it  is  its  own  master,  feels  its  own  natural  liberty,  and  con-
gratulates with  itself  on  its  own  advancement  and  prospei'ity.

\\' hether  some  who  are  called  philosophers  have  so  applied
their  meditations  as  to  understand  anything  of  this  language,

creavTw  dyaObv  ev  opexOvcri].  ["  Keep  away  altogether  from  desire,  in  order
tliat  you  may  some  day  have  a  desire  witli  good  reason  ;  and  if  with  good
reason,  when  you  have  anything  good  in  you,  you  will  desire  well.'' — Epict.
JJiss.  iii.  13.]  To  this  Horace,  in  one  of  his  latest  epistles  of  the  deeply
philosophical  kind,  alludes.

Insani  sapiens  nomen  ferat,  aecjuus  iniqui,

Ultra  quam  satis  est  virtutem  si  petat  ipsam. — Epist.  i.  vi.

["  The  wise  man  must  he  called  mad,  the  fair  man  unfair,  if  he  seek
even  virtue  too  keenly."]

And  in  the  heginning  of  the  epistle, —

Nil  admirari  prope  res  est  una,  Numici,

Sola([ue  quae  posset  facere  et  servare  heatum. — lb.

["  Not  to  admire  is  all  the  art  I  know,

To  make  men  happy  and  to  keep  them  so." — Pope's  version.]

For  though  these  lirst  lines  (as  many  other  of  Horace's  on  the  suhject  of
pliilosophy)  have  the  air  of  the  Epicurean  discipline  and  Lucretian  style  ;
yet,  by  the  whole  taken  together,  it  appears  evidently  on  what  system  of
ancient  philosophy  this  epistle  was  formed.  Nor  was  this  prohibition  of
tlie  wondering  or  admiring  habit  in  early  students  peculiar  to  one  kind  of
philosophy  alone.  It  was  common  to  many,  however  the  reason  and
account  of  it  might  differ  in  one  sect  from  the  other.  The  Pythagoreans
sufficiently  checked  their  tyros  by  silencing  them  so  long  on  their  first
courtship  to  philosophy.  And  though  admiration,  in  the  Peripatetic  sense,
as  above  mentioned,  may  be  justly  called  the  inclining  principle  or  first
motive  to  philosophy,  yet  this  mistress,  when  once  espoused,  teaches  us  to
admire  after  a  different  manner  from  what  we  did  before.  See  above,
Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.  ;  and  Treatise  i.  §  5.

282


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

I  know  not.  JJiil  well  I  ;uii  assured  lliaL  iiiaiiv  an  lioiicsl  and
free-hearted  fellow,  ainon<^  the  vulvar  rank  of  jjeople,  has
naturally  some  kind  of  feeling-  or  ajjprehension  of  this  self-
enjoyment  when,  refusing  to  act  for  lucre  or  outward  profit
the  thing  which  from  his  soul  he  abhors  and  thinks  below  him,
he  goes  on,  with  harder  labour,  but  n)ore  content,  in  his  direct
j)lain  path.  He  is  secure  within,  free  of  what  the  world  calls
policy  or  design,  and  sings  (according  to  tlie  old  ballad) —

My  mind  to  nic  a  kinodoni  is,  etc.

Which  in  Latin  w'e  may  translate, —

Kt  niea
Virtute  me  involvo,  probamque
Paiipcricni  sine  dote  quaei'u.'

IJut  I  forget,  it  seems,  that  I  am  now  speaking  in  the  person
of  our  grave  inquirer.  I  should  consider  I  have  no  right  to
vary  from  the  ])attern  he  has  set,  and  that  whilst  I  acconq)any
him  in  this  particular  treatise,  I  ought  not  to  make  the  least
escape  out  of  the  high  road  of  demonstration  into  the  diverting
paths  of  poetry  or  humour.

As  grave  however  as  morals  are  presumed  in  their  own
nature,  I  look  upon  it  as  an  essential  matter  in  their  delivery
to  take  now  and  then  the  natural  air  of  pleasantry.  The  first
morals  which  were  ever  delivered  in  the  world  were  in  parables,
tales,  or  fables.  And  the  latter  and  most  consummate  dis-
tributers of  morals,  in  the  very  politest  times,  were  great  tale-
tellers and  retainers  to  honest  ^Esop.

After  all  the  regular  demonstrations  and  deductions  of  our
grave  author,  I  daresay  'twould  be  a  high  relief  and  satisfaction
to  his  reader  to  hear  an  apologue  or  fable  well  told,  and  with
such  humour  as  to  need  no  sententious  moral  at  the  end  to
make  the  application.

As  an  experiment  in  this  case,  let  us  at  this  instant  imagine

1  Hor.  Od.  III.  xxix.  ["  I  wrap  myself  in  my  own  merits  and  seek
as  my  bride  honest  poverty,  undowered."]

283


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

our  grave  inquirer  taking  pains  to  show  us,  at  full  length,  the
unnatural  and  unhappy  excursions,  rovings,  or  expeditions  of
our  ungoverned  fancies  and  opinions  over  a  world  of  riches,
honours,  and  other  ebbing  and  flowing  goods.  He  performs
this,  we  will  suppose,  with  great  sagacity,  to  the  full  measure
and  scope  of  our  attention.  Meanwhile,  as  full  or  satiated  as
we  might  find  ourselves  of  serious  and  solid  demonstration,  'tis
odds  but  we  might  find  vacancy  still  sufficient  to  receive
instruction  by  another  method.  And  I  dare  answer  for  success
should  a  merrier  moralist  of  the  ^sopean  school  present
himself,  and,  hearing  of  this  chase  described  by  our  philosopher,
beg  leave  to  represent  it  to  the  life  by  a  homely  cur  or  two  of
his  master's  ordinary  breed,

"  Two  of  this  race,"  he  would  tell  us,  "  having  been  daintily
bred  and  in  high  thoughts  of  what  they  called  pleasure  and
good  living,  travelled  once  in  quest  of  game  and  rarities,  till
they  came  by  accident  to  the  seasitle.  They  saw  there,  at  a
distance  from  the  shore,  some  floating  pieces  of  a  wreck,  Avhich
they  took  a  fancy  to  believe  some  wonderful  rich  dainty,  richer
than  ambergris  or  the  richest  jDroduct  of  the  ocean.  They
could  prove  it  by  their  appetite  and  longing  to  be  no  less  than
quintessence  of  the  main,  ambrosial  substance,  the  repast  of
marine  deities  surpassing  all  which  earth  afforded.  .  .  .  By
these  rhetorical  arguments,  after  long  reasoning  with  one
another  in  this  florid  vein,  they  proceeded  from  one  extravagance
of  fancy  to  another,  till  they  came  at  last  to  this  issue.  Being
unaccustomed  to  swimming,  they  would  not,  it  seems,  in  prudence,
venture  so  far  out  of  their  depth  as  was  necessary  to  reach  their
imagined  prize,  but  being  stout  drinkers,  they  thought  with
themselves  they  might  compass  to  drink  all  which  lay  in  their
way,  even  the  sea  itself,  and  that  by  this  method  they  might
shortly  bring  their  goods  safe  to  dry  land.  To  work  therefore
they  went,  and  drank  till  they  were  both  burst."

For  my  own  part  I  am  fully  satisfied  that  there  are  more
sea-drinkers  than  one  or  two  to  be  found  among  the  principal

284


MISCELLAXEOUS REFLECTIONS

personages  of  mankind,  and  that  if  these  dogs  of  ours  were  silly
curs,  many  who  pass  for  wise  in  our  own  race  are  little  wiser,
and  may  jn'operlv  enough  be  said  to  have  the  sea  to  drink.

'Tis  pretty  evident  that  they  who  live  in  the  highest  sphere
of  human  affairs  have  a  very  uncertain  view  of  the  thing  called
happiness  or  good.  It  lies  out  at  sea,  far  distant,  in  the  offing,
where  those  gentlemen  ken  it  but  very  imperfectly,  and  the
means  they  employ  in  order  to  come  up  with  it  are  very  wide
of  the  matter,  and  far  short  of  their  proposed  end.  "  First  a
general  accpiaintance.  \  isits,  levees.  Attendance  upon  the
great  and  little.  Popularity.  A  place  in  Parliament.  Then
another  at  Court.  Then  intrigue,  corruption,  prostitution.
Then  a  higher  place.  Then  a  title.  Then  a  remove.  A  new
Minister !  Factions  at  court.  Shipwreck  of  Ministries.  The
new,  the  old.  Engage  with  one,  ])iece  up  with  t'other.
Bargains,  losses,  after-games,  retrievals.'"'  Is  not  this  the  sea
to  drink  ?

At  si  divitiae  prudentem  reddere  possent,

Si  cupidum  timidiimqiie  minus  te  ;  nempe  ruberes,

Viveret  in  terris  te  si  quis  avarior  uno.'

But  lest  I  should  i)c  teni])ted  to  fall  into  a  manner  I  have  been
obliged  to  disclaim  in  this  part  of  my  miscellaneous  performance,
I  shall  here  set  a  period  to  this  discourse,  and  renew  my  attempt
of  serious  reflection  and  grave  thought  by  taking  uj)  my  clue
in  a  fresh  chapter.

'  Hor.  Ep.  II.  ii.  ["  But  if  riches  could  make  you  wise,  if  they  could
make  you  less  lustful,  less  easily  frightened,  of  course  you  would  hlush
to  have  any  one  alive  more  avaricious  than  you."]


285


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEllISTICS


CHAPTER II

Passage  from  term  incognita  to  the  visible  world  —  Mistress-sliip  of
Nature — Animal  confederacy,  degrees,  subordination — Master  animal
man — Privilege  of  his  birth — Serious  countenance  of  the  author.

As  heavily  as  it  Avent  with  us  in  the  deep  philosophical  part  of
our  preceding  chapter,  and  as  necessai'ily  engaged  as  we  still  are
to  prosecute  the  same  serious  inquiry,  and  search  into  those
dark  sources;  'tis  hoped  that  our  remaining  philosophy  may
flow  in  a  more  easy  vein,  and  the  second  running  be  found
somewhat  clearer  than  the  first.  However  it  be,  we  may  at
least  congratulate  with  ourselves  for  having  thus  briefly  passed
over  that  metaphysical  part  to  Mhich  we  have  paid  sufficient
deference.  Nor  shall  we  scruple  to  declare  our  opinion  "  that
it  is  in  a  manner  necessary  for  one  who  would  usefully
philosophise,  to  have  a  knowledge  in  this  part  of  philosophy
sufficient  to  satisfy  him  that  there  is  no  knowledge  or  wisdom
to  be  learnt  from  it.''  For  of  this  truth  nothing  besides
experience  and  study  will  be  able  fully  to  convince  him.

When  we  are  even  past  these  empty  regions  and  shadows  of
philosophy,  'twill  still  perhaps  appear  an  uncomfortable  kind  of
travelling  through  those  other  invisible  ideal  worlds,  such  as  the
study  of  morals,  we  see,  engages  us  to  visit.  Men  must  acquire
a  very  peculiar  and  strong  habit  of  turning  their  eye  inwards
in  order  to  explore  the  interior  regions  and  recesses  of  the
mind,  the  hollow  caverns  of  deep  thought,  the  private  seats  of
fancy,  and  the  wastes  and  wildernesses,  as  well  as  the  more
fruitful  and  cultivated  tracts  of  the  obscure  climate.

But  what  can  one  do  ?  Or  how  dispense  with  these  darker
disquisitions  and  moonlight  voyages,  when  we  have  to  deal  with
a  sort  of  moon-blind  wits,  who  though  very  acute  and  able  in
their  kind,  may  be  said  to  renounce  daylight  and  extinguish  in
a  manner  the  bright  visible  outward  world,  by  allowing  us  to

286


MISCELLANEOUS H El  LECTIONS

know  nothing  beside  what  we  can  j)rove  bv  stiict  and  fbinial
demonstration  ?

'Tis  therefore  to  satisfy  such  rigid  iiu|uirers  as  these,  that
we  have  been  necessitated  to  proceed  bv  the  inward  way  ;  and
that  in  our  preceding  chapter  we  have  built  onlv  on  such
foundations  as  are  taken  from  our  verv  percej)tions,  fancies,
appearances,  affections  and  opinions  themselves,  without  regard
to  anything  of  an  exterior  world,  and  even  on  the  supposition
that  there  is  no  such  world  in  being.

Such  has  been  our  late  dry  task.  No  wonder  if  it  carries,
indeed,  a  meagre  and  raw  appearance.  It  may  be  looked  on  in
philosophy  as  worse  than  a  mere  Egyptian  imposition.  For  to
make  brick  without  straw  or  stubble  is  ])erhaps  an  easier
labour  than  to  ])rove  morals  without  a  world,  and  establish  a
conduct  of  life  without  the  supposition  of  anything  living  or
extant  besides  our  innnediate  fancy  and  world  of  imagination.

But  having  finished  this  mysterious  work  we  come  now  to
open  day  and  sunshine,  and  as  a  poet  perha]:)s  might  express
himself,  we  are  now  ready  to  quit

The  dubious  labyrinths,  and  Pyrrliouean  cells
Of  a  Cimmerian  darkness.

We  are  henceforward  to  trust  our  eyes  and  take  for  real  the
whole  creation,  and  the  fair  forms  which  lie  before  us.  "\\'e  are
to  believe  the  anatomy  of  our  own  body,  and  in  jiroportionable
order  the  shapes,  forms,  habits,  and  constitutions  of  other
animal  races.  Without  demurring  on  the  profound  modern
hypothesis  of  animal  insensibility,  we  are  to  believe  firmlv  and
resolutely  "  that  other  creatures  have  their  sense  and  feeling,
their  mere  passions  and  affections,  as  well  as  ourselves."  And
in  this  manner  we  proceed  accordingly,  on  our  author's  scheme,
to  inquire  what  is  truly  natural  to  each  creature,  and  whether
that  which  is  natural  to  each,  and  is  its  perfection,  be  not
withal  its  happiness  or  good."

To  deny  there  is  anything  properly  natural  (after  the  con-

287


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

cessions  already  made)  would  be  undoubtedly  very  preposterous
and  absurd.  Nature  and  the  outward  world  being  owned
existent,  the  rest  must  of  necessity  follow.  The  anatomy  of
bodies,  the  order  of  the  spheres,  the  proper  mechanisms  of  a
thousand  kinds,  and  the  infinite  ends  and  suitable  means
established  in  the  general  constitution  and  order  of  things ;  all
this  being  once  admitted  and  allowed  to  pass  as  certain  and  un-
questionable, 'tis  as  vain  afterwards  to  except  against  the  phrase
of  natural  and  unnatural,  and  question  the  propriety  of  this
speech  applied  to  the  particular  forms  and  beings  in  the  world,
as  it  would  be  to  except  against  the  common  appellations  of
vigour  and  decay  in  plants,  health  or  sickness  in  bodies,
sobriety  or  distraction  in  minds,  prosperity  or  degeneracy  in
any  variable  part  of  the  known  creation.

We  may,  perhaps,  for  humour's  sake,  or  after  the  known
way  of  disputant  hostility,  in  the  support  of  any  odd
hypothesis,  pretend  to  deny  this  natural  and  unnatural  in
things.  'Tis  evident,  however,  that  though  our  humour  or
taste  be  by  such  affectation  ever  so  much  depraved,  we  cannot
resist  our  natural  ^  anticipation  in  behalf  of  nature  ;  according
to  whose  supposed  standard  we ])crpetually  approve  and  dis-

1  See  what  is  said  above  on  the  word  soisus  coiiinitaii.s,  in  that  second
Treatise,  part  iii.  §§1,2;  part  iv.  §  2  ;  Treatise  iii.  part  iii.  §  3  ;  Treatise
V.  part.  ii.  §  4 ;  part  iii.  §  2,  etc.,  concerning  the  natural  ideas,  and  the
preconceptions  or  presensations  of  this  kind  ;  the  irpoK-n^peis,  of  which  a
learned  critic  and  master  in  all  pliilosophy,  modern  and  ancient,  takes
notice  in  his  lately  published  volume  of  Socratic  dialogues,  where  he  adds
this  reflection,  with  respect  to  some  philosophical  notions  much  in  vogue
amongst  us  of  late  here  in  England.  Obiter  dumtaxat  addemus,
Socraticam  quam  exposuimus  doctrinam  magno  usui  esse  posse,  si  probe
expendatur,  dirimendae  inter  viros  doctos  controversiae,  ante  paucos
annos,  in  Britannia  praesertim,  exortae,  de  ideis  innatis,  quas  dicere
possis  ifKJjvTovi  evvola^.  Quamvis  enim  iniUae  sint,  si  adcurate  loquamur,
notiones  a  natura  animis  nostris  iniixae  ;  attamen  nemo  negarit  ita  esse
facultates  auimorum  nostrorum  natura  adfectas,  ut  quam  primum  rations
uti  incipimus,  verum  a  falso,  malum  a  bono  aliquo  modo  distinguer©
incipiamus. Species veritatis nobis semper placet ; displicet contra

288


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

approve,  and  to  whom  in  all  natnral  appearances,  all  moral
ac-tions  (wliatever  we  contemjilate,  whatever  we  have  in  dehate)
we  inevitably  appeal,  and  })ay  our  constant  homage  with  the
most  apparent  zeal  and  passion.

Tis  here,  above all other places,  that  we  say with strict
justice —

inendacii  :  inio  et  honestum  iulionesto  praeferiinus  ;  ob  semina  nobis
iiidita,  (|uae  turn  <lemuni  in  lucem  prodount,  cum  ratiocinari  possumus,
coque  uberiores  fructus  proferuiit,  quo  melius  ratiociuamur,  ad  curatioreque
iustitutione  adjuvamur.  Aesch.  Dial,  cum  Silvis  Philol.  Jo.  Cler.  ann.
1711,  p.  17R.  They  seem  indeed  to  be  but  weak  philosophers,  thoug^h
able  sophists,  and  artful  conft)unders  of  words  and  notions,  who  would
refute  Nature  and  common  sense.  But  Nature  will  be  able  still  to  shift  for
herself,  and  j^et  the  better  of  those  schemes,  which  need  no  other  force
against  them  tlian  that  of  Horace's  siuj^le  verse  : —

Dente  lupus,  cornu  taurus  petit :  uude,  nisi  intus
Monstratum  ?

["The  wolf  bites,  the  bull  tosses  you  :  how  did  tliey  learn  it,  but  by
instinct?" — Sat.  ii.  i.  o2.]

An  ass  (as  an  English  author  says)  never  butts  with  his  ears  ;  though
a  creature  born  to  an  armed  forehead  exercises  his  butting  faculty  long
ere  his  horns  are  come  to  him.  And  perhaps  if  the  philosopher  would
accordingly  examine  himself  and  consider  his  natural  passions,  he  would
find  there  were  sucli  belonged  to  him  as  Nature  had  premeditated  in  his
behalf,  and  for  which  she  had  furnished  him  with  ideas  long  before  any
particular  practice  or  experience  of  his  own.  Nor  would  he  need  be
scandalised  with  the  comparison  of  a  goat  or  boar  or  other  of  Horace's
premeditating  animals,  who  have  more  natural  wit,  it  seems,  than  our
philosopher;  if  we  may  judge  of  him  by  his  own  hypothesis,  which  denies
the  same  implanted  sense  and  natural  ideas  to  his  own  kind.

Cras  donaberis  haedo,

Cui  frons  turgida  cornibus
Primis  et  venerem  et  proelia  destinat.

["To-morrow  a  kid  shall  be  sacrificed  to  you,  a  kid  whoso  brow  just
sprouting  with  horns  promises  him  a  life  of  love  and  fighting." — Od. in.
xiii.  3-5.]
An.l

Verris  oblicjuum  meditantis  ictum.

["The  boar  who  practises  his  side-long  slash." — Od.  in.  xxii.  7  ]

VOL.  II  289  u


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Naturam  expellas  furca,  tamen  usque  recurret.^

The  airy  gentlemen,  who  have  never  had  it  in  their  thoughts
to  study  Nature  in  their  own  s})ecies,  but  being  taken  with  other
loves,  have  applied  their  parts  and  genius  to  the  same  study  in
a  horse,  a  dog,  a  game-cock,  a  hawk,  or  any  other  animal  "^  of
that  degree,  know  very  well  that  to  each  species  there  belongs
a  several  humour,  temper,  and  turn  of  inward  disposition,  as
real  and  peculiar  as  the  figure  and  outward  shape  which  is  with
so  much  curiosity  beheld  and  admired.  If  there  be  anything
ever  so  little  amiss  or  wrong  in  the  inward  frame,  the  humour
or  temper  of  the  creature,  'tis  readily  called  vicious ;  and  when
more  than  ordinarily  wrong,  unnatural.  The  humours  of  the
creatures,  in  order  to  their  redress,  are  attentively  observed,
sometimes  indulged  and  flattered,  at  other  times  controlled  and
checked  with  proper  severities.  In  short,  their  affections,
passions,  appetites,  and  antipathies  are  as  duly  regarded  as
those  in  human  kind  under  the  strictest  discipline  of  education.
Such  is  the  sense  of  in\\'ard  proportion  and  regularity  of  affec-
tions, even  in  our  noble  youths  themselves,  who  in  this  respect
are  often  known  expert  and  able  masters  of  education,  though
not  so  susceptible  of  discipline  and  culture  in  their  own  case,
after  those  early  indulgences  to  which  their  greatness  has
entitled  them.

As  little  favourable,  however,  as  these  sportly  gentlemen  are
presumed  to  show  themselves  towards  the  care  or  culture  of
their  own  species  ;  as  remote  as  their  contemplations  are  thought
to  lie  from  Nature  and  philosophy,  they  confirm  plainly  and
establish  our  philosophical  foundation  of  the  natural  ranks,
orders,  interior  and  exterior  proportions  of  the  several  distinct
species  and  forms  of  animal  beings.  Ask  one  of  these  gentlemen,
unawares, when  solicitously careful and busied in the  great

1  ["  You  may  turn  out  nature  with  a  pitchfork,  yet  back  she  will  keep
coming." — Horace,  Ep.  i.  x.  24]

2  Treatise  iv.  bk.  ii.  pai-t  i.  §  3  ;  part  ii.  §  1  ;  Treatise  \'.  part  ii.  §  4.

290


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

concerns of his stable or kennel, "  whether his hound or
greyhound-bitch who eats her puppies is as  natural as the
other  who  nurses  them  ?  "  and  he  will  think  you  frantic. Ask
him  ao-ain,  "  whether  he  thinks  the  unnatural  creature  who  acts
thus,  or  the  natural  one  who  does  otherwise,  is  best  in  its  kind
and  enjoys  itself  the  most?"  and  he  will  be  inclined  to  think
still  as  strangely  of  you. Or  if  ])erhaj)s  he  esteems  you  worthy
of better  information, he will tell you "that his  best-bred
creatures  and  of  the  truest  race  are  ever  the  noblest  and  most
generous  in  their  natures ;  that  it  is  this  chiefly  which  makes
the  difference  between  the  hoi*se  of  good  blood  and  the  arrant
jade  of  a  base  breed ;  between  the  game-cock  and  the  dunghill
craven ;  between  the  true  hawk  and  the  mere  kite  or  bu/zard ;
and  between  the  right  mastiff,  hound,  or  spaniel  and  the  very
mongrel." He  might,  withal,  tell  you  perhaps  with  a  masterly
air  in  this  brute-science,  "  that  the  timorous,  poor-spirited,  lazy
and  gluttonous  of  his  dogs  were  those  whom  he  either  suspected
to  be  of  a  spurious  race,  or  who  had  been  by  some  accident
spoiled  in  their  nursing  and  management,  for  that  this  was  not
natural  to  them. That  in  every  kind  they  were  still  the  miser-
ablest  creatures  who  were  thus  spoiled ;  and  that  having  each
of  them  their  proper  chase  or  business,  if  they  lay  resty  and
out  of  their  game,  chambered  and  idle,  they  were  the  same  as
if  taken  out  of  their  element. That  the  saddest  curs  in  the
world  were  those  who  took  the  kitchen  chimney  and  dripping-
])an  for  their  delight,  and  that  the  only  happy  dog  (were  one
to  be  a  dog  oneself)  was  he  who  in  his  proj)er  sport  and  exercise,
his  natural  pursuit  and  game,  endured  all  hardships  and  had  so
much  delight  in  exercise  and  in  the  field  as  to  forget  home  and
his  reward."

Thus  the  natural  habits  and  affections  of  the  inferior
creatures  are  known,  and  their  unnatural  and  degenerate  part
discovered.  Depravity  and  corruption  is  acknowledged  as  real
in  their  affections  as  when  any  thing  is  misshapen,  wrong,  or
monstrous  in  their  outward  make. And  notwithstanding  much

291


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

of  this  inward  depravity  is  discoverable  in  the  creatures  tamed
by  man,  and  for  his  service  or  pleasure  merely  turned  from
their  natural  course  into  a  contrary  life  and  habit;  notwith-
standing that,  by  this  means,  the  creatures  who  naturally  herd
with  one  another  lose  their  associating  humour,  and  they  who
naturally  pair  and  are  constant  to  each  other  lose  their  kind
of  conjugal  alliance  and  affection ;  yet  when  released  from
human  servitude  and  returned  again  to  their  natural  wilds  and
rural  liberty,  they  instantly  resume  their  natural  and  regular
habits,  such  as  are  conducing  to  the  increase  and  prosperity  of
their  own  species.

Well  it  is  perhaps  for  mankind  that  though  there  are  so
many  animals  who  naturally  herd  for  company ""s  sake  and
mutual  affection,  there  are  so  few  who  for  conveniency  and  by
necessity  are  obliged  to  a  strict  union  and  kind  of  confederate
state.  The  creatures  who,  according  to  the  economy  of  their
kind,  are  obliged  to  make  themselves  habitations  of  defence
against  the  seasons  and  other  incidents ;  they  Avho  in  some
parts  of  the  year  are  deprived  of  all  subsistence,  and  are  there-
fore necessitated  to  accumulate  in  another,  and  to  provide
withal  for  the  safety  of  their  collected  stores,  are  by  their
nature  indeed  as  strictly  joined,  and  with  as  proper  affections
towards  their  public  and  community,  as  the  looser  kind,  of  a
more  easy  subsistence  and  support,  are  united  in  Avhat  relates
merely  to  their  offspring  and  the  propagation  of  their  species.
Of  these  thoroughly  associating  and  confederate  animals,  there
are  none  I  have  ever  heard  of  who  in  bulk  or  strength  exceed
the  beaver.  The  major  part  of  these  political  animals  and
creatures  of  a  joint  stock  are  as  inconsiderable  as  the  race  of
ants  or  bees.  But  had  Nature  assigned  such  an  economy  as
this  to  so  puissant  an  animal,  for  instance,  as  the  elephant,
and  made  him  withal  as  prolific  as  those  smaller  creatures
commonly  are,  it  might  have  gone  hard  perhaps  with  mankind ;
and  a  single  animal,  who  by  his  proper  might  and  prowess  has
often  decided  the  fate  of  the  greatest  battles  which  have  been

292


MTSCET.LANEOUS REFLECTIONS

fought  bv  liunKUi  race,  should  hi'  have  <jjrowu  up  into  a  society,
with  a  genius  for  architecture  and  mechanics  |)roj)ortionahle  to
what  we  observe  in  those  smaller  creatures;  we  should,  with  all
our  invented  machines,  have  found  it  hard  to  dispute  with  him
the  dominion  of  the  continent.

W^ere  we  in  a  disinterested  view,  or  with  somewhat  less
selfishness  than  ordinary,  to  consider  the  economies,  parts,
interests,  conditions  and  terms  of  life,  which  Nature  has  dis-
tributed and  assigned  to  the  several  species  of  creatures  round
us,  we  should  not  be  apt  to  think  ourselves  so  hardly  dealt  with.
But  whether  our  lot  in  this  respect  be  just  or  ecjual,  is  not  the
question  with  us  at  present.  'Tis  enough  that  we  know  "  there
is  certainly  an  assignment  and  distribution  ;  that  each  economy
or  part  so  distributed  is  in  itself  uniform,  fixed,  and  invariable ;
and  that  if  anything  in  the  creature  be  accidentally  im])aired,
if  anything  in  the  inward  form,  the  disposition,  tem})er  or
affections,  be  contrary  or  unsuitable  to  the  distinct  economy  or
part,  the  creature  is  wretched  and  unnatural."

The  social  or  natural  affections,  which  our  author  considers
as  essential  to  the  health,  wholeness,  or  integrity  of  the  particular
creature,  are  such  as  contribute  to  the  welfare  and  prosperity
of  that  whole  or  species,  to  which  he  is  by  Nature  joined.  All
the  affections  of  this  kind  our  author  comprehends  in  that
single  name  of  natural.  But  as  the  design  or  end  of  Nature  in
each  animal  system  is  exhibited  chiefly  in  the  support  and
propagation  of  the  particular  species,  it  happens,  of  consequence,
that  those  affections  of  earliest  alliance  and  mutual  kindness
between  the  parent  and  the  offspring  are  known  more  particu-
larly by  the  name  of  natural  affection.^  However,  since  it  is
evident  that  all  defect  or  depravity  of  affection  which  counter-
works or  opposes  the  original  constitution  and  economy  of  the
creature,  is  unnatural,  it  follows  "that  in  creatures  who  bv
their  particular  economy  are  fitted  to  the  strictest  society  and
rule  of  conmion  good,  the  most  unnatural  of  all  affections  are

1  (TTopyrj. For  whicli  we  have  no  particular  name  in  our  language.

293


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

those  which  separate  from  this  community ;  and  the  most  truly
natural,  generous  and  noble  are  those  which  tend  towards
public  service  and  the  interest  of  the  society  at  large."

This  is  the  main  problem  which  our  author  in  more  })hilo-
sophical  terms  demonstrates  in  this  treatise,^  "  that  for  a
creature  whose  natural  end  is  society,  to  operate  as  is  by  Natin'e
appointed  him  towards  the  good  of  such  his  society,  or  whole,
is  in  reality  to  pursue  his  own  natural  and  proper  good.  And
that  to  operate  contrariwise,  or  by  such  affections  as  sever  from
that  common  good  or  public  interest,  is  in  reality  to  work
towards  his  own  natural  and  proper  ill.""  Now  if  man,  as  has
been  proved,  be  justly  ranked  in  the  number  of  those  creatures
whose  economy  is  according  to  a  joint-stock  and  public  weal ;
if  it  be  understood,  withal,  that  the  only  state  of  his  affections
which  answers  rightly  to  this  public  weal  is  the  regular,  orderly,
or  virtuous  state ;  it  necessarily  follows  "  that  virtue  is  his
natural  good,  and  vice  his  misery  and  ill.''

As  for  that  further  consideration,  "  whether  Nature  has
orderly  and  justly  distributed  the  several  economies  or  parts,
and  whether  the  defects,  failures,  or  calamities  of  particular
systems  are  to  the  advantage  of  all  in  general,  and  contribute
to  the  perfection  of  the  one  common  and  universal  system "" ;
we  must  refer  to  our  author's  profounder  speculation  in  this
his  Inquiry,  and  in  his  following  philosophic  dialogue.  But  if
what  he  advances  in  this  respect  be  real,  or  at  least  the  most
probable  by  far  of  any  scheme  or  representation  which  can  be
made  of  the  universal  nature  and  Cause  of  things ;  it  will  follow
"  that  since  man  has  been  so  constituted,  by  means  of  his  rational
part,  as  to  be  conscious  of  this  his  more  immediate  relation  to
the  universal  system  and  principle  of  order  and  intelligence ;
he  is  not  only  by  Nature  sociable  within  the  limits  of  his  own
species  or  kind,  but  in  a  yet  more  generous  and  extensive
manner.  He  is  not  only  born  to  virtue,  friendship,  honesty,
and  faith ;  but  to  religion,  piety,  adoration,  and  a  generous
'  Viz.  the  Inquiry  concerning  Virtue.

294


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

surrender^  of  his  mind  to  whatever  happens  from  that  Supreme
Cause  or  older  of  tilings,  wliich  he  nc-kuowledges  entirely  just
and  perfect."

These  are  our  author's  formal  and  grave  sentiments,  whieh
if  they  were  not  ti"ulv  liis  and  sincerelv  esj)oused  In'  him  as  the
real  result  of  his  hest  judgment  and  understanding,  he  would
be  guilty  of  a  more  than  common  degree  of  ini[)osture.  For,
according  to  his  own  nde,-  an  affected  gravity  fiud  feigned
seriousness  carried  on  tlu'ough  any  subject,  in  such  a  manner  as
to  leave  no  insight  into  the  fiction  or  intended  raillery,  is  in
truth  no  raillery  or  wit  at  all ;  but  a  gross,  innnoral,  and
illiberal  way  of  abuse,  foreign  to  the  character  of  a  good  writer,
a  gentleman,  or  man  of  \\  orth.

liut  since  we  have  thus  acquitted  ourselves  of  that  serious
part,  of  which  our  reader  was  beforehand  well  apprised,  let  him
now  expect  us  again  in  our  original  miscellaneous  manner  and
capacity.  ""Tis  here,  as  has  been  explained  to  him,  that  raillery
and  humour  are  permitted,  and  flights,  sallies,  and  excursions  of
every  kind  are  found  agreeable  and  requisite.  Without  this,
there  might  be  less  safety  found,  ]ierhaps,  in  thinking.  Every
light  reflection  might  run  us  up  to  the  dangerous  state  of
meditation.  And  in  reality  profound  thinking  is  many  times
the  cause  of  shallow  thoughts.  To  ])rcvent  this  contemplative
habit  and  character,  of  which  we  see  so  little  good  effect  in  the
world,  we  have  reason  perhaps  to  be  fond  of  the  diverting
manner  in  writing  and  discourse,  especially  if  the  subject  be  of  a
solemn  kind.  There  is  more  need,  in  this  case,  to  interrupt  the
long-spun  thread  of  reasoning,  and  bring  into  the  mind,  by  many
different  glances  and  broken  views,  what  cannot  so  easily  be
introduced  by  one  steady  bent  or  contiimed  stretch  of  sight.

^  Treatise  iv.  l)k.  i.  part  iii.  §  '■),  near  end.
-  Treatise  ii.  part  i.  §  2.


295


MISCELLANY V


CHAPTER I

Ceremonial  adjusted  between  author  and  reader  —  Affectation  of  pre-
cedency in  the  former  —  Various  claims  to  inspiration  —  Bards,
prophets,  Sibylline  Scripture  —  AVritten  oracles,  in  verse  and  prose
— Common  interest  of  ancient  letters  and  Christianity — State  of  wit,
elegance,  and  correctness — Poetic  truth — Preparation  for  criticism
on  our  author  in  his  concluding  treatise.

Of  all  the  artificial  relations  formed  between  mankind,  the  most
capricious  and  variable  is  that  of  author  and  reader.  Our
author,  for  his  jjart,  has  declared  his  opinion  of  this,  where  he
gives  his  advice  to  modern  authors.^  And  though  he  supposes
that  every  author  in  form  is,  in  respect  of  the  particular  matter
he  explains,  superior  in  understanding  to  his  reader,  yet  he
allows  not  that  any  author  should  assume  the  upper  hand,  or
pretend  to  withdraw  himself  from  that  necessary  subjection  to
foreign  judgment  and  criticism,  which  must  determine  the  place
of  honour  on  the  reader's  side.

'Tis  evident  that  an  author's  art  and  labour  are  for  his
reader's  sake  alone.  'Tis  to  his  reader  he  makes  his  application,
if  not  openly  and  avowedly,  yet  at  least  with  implicit  courtship.
Poets  indeed,  and  especially  those  of  a  modern  kind,  have  a
peculiar  manner  of  treating  this  affair  with  a  high  hand.  They
pretend  to  set  themselves  above  mankind.  "Their  pens  are
sacred,  their  style  and  utterance  divine." They  write  often  as

1  Viz.  Treatise  iii.

296


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

in  a  language  foreign  to  luniian  kiiul,  and  woukl  disdain  to  he
renjinded  of  those  poor  elements  ol'  speech,  their  alphahet  and
grammar.

But  here  inferior  mortals  presume  often  to  intercept  their
flight  and  remind  them  of  their  fallible  and  human  j)art.  Had
those  first  ])oets  who  began  this  pretence  to  inspiration  been
taught  a  manner  of  comnumicating  their  rapturous  thoughts
and  high  ideas  bv  some  other  medium  than  that  of  style  and
language,  the  case  might  have  stood  otherwise.  But  the  inspiring
divinity  or  muse  having,  in  the  explanation  of  herself,  submitted
her  wit  and  sense  to  the  mechanic  rules  of  human  arbitrary
composition  ;  she  must  in  conse(|uence  and  by  necessity  submit
herself  to  human  arbitration  and  the  judgment  of  the  literate
world.  And  thus  the  reader  is  still  su})erior  and  keeps  the
upper  hand.

'Tis  indeed  no  small  absurdity  to  assert  a  work  or  treatise,
written  in  human  language,  to  be  above  human  criticism  or
censure.  For  if  the  art  of  writino-  be  from  the  "rammatical
rules  of  human  invention  and  determination  ;  if  even  these  rules
are  formed  on  casual  practice  and  various  use,  there  can  be  no
scripture  but  what  must  of  necessity  be  subject  to  the  reader's
narrow  scrutiny  and  strict  judgment,  unless  a  language  and
grammar,  different  from  any  of  human  structure,  w  ere  delivered
down  from  heaven,  and  miraculously  accommodated  to  human
sei'vice  and  capacity.

'Tis  no  otherwise  in  the  granmiatical  art  of  characters  and
painted  speech  than  in  the  art  of  painting  itself.  1  have  seen,
in  certain  Christian  churches,  an  ancient  piece  or  two,  affirmed,
on  the  solemn  faith  of  priestly  tradition,  "  to  have  been  angelic-
ally and  divinely  wrought  by  a  su})ernatural  hand  and  sacred
pencil."  Had  the  piece  happened  to  be  of  a  hand  like  Raphael's
I  could  have  found  nothing  certain  to  oppose  to  this  tradition.
But  having  observed  the  whole  style  and  manner  of  the  pretended
heavenly  workmanship  to  be  so  indiffi^rent  as  to  vary  in  many
particulars  from  the  truth  of  art,  I  j^resumed  within  myself  to

297


SHAFTESBURY'S CHAKACTEKTSTICS

beg  pardon  of  the  tradition  and  assert  confidently,  "  that  if  the
pencil  had  been  heaven-guided  it  could  never  have  been  so  lame
in  its  performance."  It  being  a  mere  contradiction  to  all  divine
and  moral  truth  that  a  celestial  hand,  submitting  itself  to  the
rudiments  of  a  human  art,  should  sin  against  the  art  itself,  and
express  falsehood  and  error  instead  of  justness  and  proportion.

It  may  be  alleged,  perhaps,  "  that  there  are  however  certain
authors  in  the  world  who,  though  of  themselves  they  neither
boldly  claim  the  privilege  of  divine  inspiration  nor  carry  indeed
the  least  resemblance  of  perfection  in  their  style  or  composition,
yet  they  subdue  the  reader,  gain  the  ascendant  over  his  thought
and  judgment,  and  force  from  him  a  certain  implicit  veneration
and  esteem."  To  this  I  can  only  answer,  "  that  if  there  be
neither  spell  nor  enchantment  in  the  case,  this  can  plainly  be
no  other  than  mere  enthusiasm " ;  except,  perhaps,  where  the
supreme  powers  have  given  their  sanction  to  any  religious  record
or  pious  writ.  And  in  this  case,  indeed,  it  becomes  immoral
and  profane  in  any  one  to  deny  absolutely  or  dispute  the  sacred
authority  of  the  least  line  or  syllable  contained  in  it.  But  should
the  record,  instead  of  being  single,  short,  and  uniform,  appear  to
be  multifarious,  voluminous,  and  of  the  most  difficult  interpreta-
tion, it  would  be  somewhat  hard,  if  not  wholly  impracticable  in
the  magistrate  to  suffer  this  record  to  be  universally  current,
and  at  the  same  time  prevent  its  being  variously  apprehended
and  descanted  on  by  the  several  differing  geniuses  and  contrary
judgments  of  mankind.

'Tis  remarkable,  that  in  the  politest  of  all  nations  the
writings  looked  upon  as  most  sacred  were  those  of  their  great
poets,  whose  works  indeed  were  truly  divine  in  respect  of  art  and
the  perfection  of  their  frame  and  composition.  But  there  was
yet  more  divinity  ^  ascribed  to  them  than  what  is  comprehended
in  this  latter  sense.  The  notions  of  vulgar  religion  were  built
on  their  miraculous  narrations.  The  wiser  and  better  sort  them-
selves paid  a  regard  to  them  in  this  respect,  though  they
1  Supra,  p.  251  in  the  notes.

298


MISCET.LANEOUS RRFl.ECTIOXS

interpreted  tlu'iii  iiulfcd  iiion-  .•illfi;()iic-;illv.  Mvfii  the  philo-
sophers who  eritieised  them  with  most  severity  were  not  theii*
least  aihiiirers,  when  they  ascribed  •  to  them  that  divine  inspira-
tion or  subHme  enthusiasm  of  which  our  author  has  larf^ely
treated  elsewhere."

It  would,  indeed,  ill  become  any  preteiuler  to  divine  writini;"
to  publish  his  work  untler  a  character  of  divinity,  if,  after  all
his  endeavours,  he  came  short  of  a  consunnnate  and  just  per-
formance. In  this  respect  the  Cumean  Sibyl  was  not  so  indiscreet
or  frantic  as  she  might  appear,  jierhaps,  by  writino-  lier  pro})hetic
warninfrs  and  pretended  inspirations  upon  joint  leaves,  which,
innnediately  after  their  elaborate  superscription,  were  torn  in
pieces  and  scattered  by  the  wind.

Insanam  vatem  aspicies ;  quae  riijie  sub  inia
Fata  canity  foliisque,  notas  et  nomina  mandat.
Quaecunque  in  foliis  deseripsit  cannina  virgo,
Digerit  in  numerum,  atque  antro  seelusa  relinquit.
Ilia  manent  immota  locis,  neque  ab  ordine  cedunt.
Verum  eadem,  verso  tenuis  cum  cardine  ventus
Inpulit^  et  teneras  turbavit  janua  frondcs  ;
Nunquam  deinde  cavo  volitantia  prendere  saxo,
Nee  revocai'C  situs^  aut  jungere  carmina  curat.
Inconsulti  abeunt,  sedemque  odere  Sibyllae.^

'Twas  impossible  to  disprove  the  divinity  of  such  writings
whilst they could be perused only in fragments. Had the

^  Treatise  i.  end.

2  Viz.  Letter  of  Enthimasm. And  ahove.  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.  2.

3  ["  You  will  see  an  inspired  proplietess,  who  chants  destiny  at  tlie
foot  of  her  rock  and  entrusts  her  marks  and  words  to  leaves.  W'liatever
lines  the  maid  has  written  on  the  leaves,  she  sorts  into  order  and  shuts
them  within  her  cave.  There  they  remain  unmoved  nor  shift  from  their
order.  Yet  when  the  liinge  turns  and  a  hreath  of  wind  has  stirred  them,
and  the  door  has  disordered  the  light  leaves,  never  thereafter  does  she
trouble  to  capture  them  as  they  flutter  in  her  cavern  or  to  restore  their
order  or  join  the  leaves.  Away  men  go  without  advice  and  hate  the
Sibyl's  home." — \'irgil,  Aeneid,  iii.  44o-4.32.]

299


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

sister  priestess  ^of  Delphos,  who  delivered  herself  in  audible
plain  metre,  been  found  at  any  time  to  have  transgressed  the
rule  of  verse,  it  would  have  been  difficult  in  those  days  to
father  the  lame  poetry  upon  Apollo  himself.  But  where  the
invention  of  the  leaves  prevented  the  reading  of  a  single  line
entire,  whatever  interpretations  might  have  been  made  of  this
fragile  and  volatile  scripture,  no  imperfection  could  be  charged
on  the  original  text  itself.

AVhat  those  volumes  ^  may  have  been  which  the  disdainful
Sibyl  or  prophetess  committed  to  the  flames,  or  what  the
remainder  was  which  the  Roman  prince  received  and  con-
secrated, I  will  not  pretend  to  judge;  though  it  has  been
admitted  for  truth  by  the  ancient  Christian  fathers,  that  these
writings  were  so  far  sacred  and  divine  as  to  have  prophesied  of
the  birth  of  our  religious  founder,  and  bore  testimony  to  that
Holy  Writ  which  has  preserved  his  memory,  and  is  justly  held  in
the  highest  degree  sacred  among  Christians.

The  policy,  however,  of  old  Rome  was  such  as  not  absolutely
to  rest  the  authority  of  their  religion  on  any  composition  of
literature.  The  Sibylline  volumes  were  kept  safely  locked,  and
inspected  only  by  such  as  were  ordained  or  deputed  for  that
purpose.  And  in  this  policy  the  new  Rome  has  followed  their
example  in  scrupling  to  annex  the  supreme  authority  and  sacred
character  of  infallibility  to  Scripture  itself,  and  in  refusing  to
submit  that  Scripture  to  public  judgment,  or  to  any  eye  or
ear  but  what  they  qualify  for  the  inspection  of  such  sacred
mysteries.

^  Libri  tres  in  sacrarium  conditi,  .Sil)ylliiii  a])j>ellati.  Ad  eos  quasi  ad
oraculum  quiiidecimviri  adeunt,  cum  dii  iinmortales  publice  consulendi
sunt.  Aul.  Gell.  i.  19;  Plin.  xiii.  13.  ["The  three  books  were
placed  in  a  shrine  and  called  the  Sibyl's  books.  The  College  of
Fifteen  consults  them,  like  an  oracle,  whenever  the  Gods  have  to  be
consulted  by  the  state."]  But  of  this  first  Sibylline  scripture,  and  of
other  canonised  books  and  additional  sacred  writ  among  the  Romans,  see
what  Dionysius  Halicarnasseus  cites  (from  Varro's  Roman  Theologies)  in  his
History,  iv.  02.

300


MISCELT>ANEOUS REFLECTIONS

The  Mahometan  clergy  seem  to  have  a  (Hd'eient  poHcy.
They  boldly  rest  the  foundation  of  their  religion  on  a  book  :
such  a  one  as  (according  to  their  pretension)  is  not  only  ])erfect,
but  inimitable.  ^Vere  a  real  man  of  letters  and  a  just  critic
permitted  to  examine  this  scripture  by  the  known  rules  of  art,
he  would  soon  perhaps  refute  this  plea.  Kut  so  barbarous  is
the  accompanying  policy  and  temper  of  these  Eastern  religion-
ists that  they  discourage  and  in  effect  extinguish  all  true
learning,  science,  and  the  politer  arts,  in  company  with  the
ancient  authors  and  languages,  which  they  set  aside ;  and  by
this  infEillible  method  leave  their  sacred  writ  the  sole  standard
of  literate  performance.  For  being  compared  to  nothing  besides
itself,  or  what  is  of  an  inferior  kind,  it  must  undoubtedly  be
thought  incomparable.

'Twill be yielded,  surely,  to  the honour  of  the Christian

world, that their faith (especially that of the Protestant

churches) stands  on  a  more  generous foundation. They  not

only  allow  comjjarison  of  authors,  but  are  content to  derive

their  proofs  of  the  validity  of  their  sacred  record  and  revelation

even  from  those  authors  called  jn-ofane ;  as  being  well  a})prised,

(according  to  the  maxim  of  our  Divine  Master  ^)  "  that  in  what

we bear witness only to ourselves, our witness cannot be

established  as  a  truth." So  that,  there  being  at  present  no

immediate  testimony  of  miracle  or  sign  in  behalf  of  Holy  Writ,

and there  being  in  its  own  particular composition or style

nothiuiT  miraculous  or  self-convincing: ; if  the  collateral  testi-
er c^  ^

mony  of  other  ancient  records,  historians,  and  foreign  authors
were  destroyed  or  wholly  lost,  there  w^ould  be  less  argument  or
plea  remaining  against  that  natural  suspicion  of  those  who  are
called  sceptical,  "  tha.t  the  holy  records  themselves  were  no
other  than  the  pure  invention  or  artificial  compilement  of  an
interested  party  in  behalf  of  the  richest  corporation  and  most
profitable  monopoly  which  could  be  erected  in  the  world."

Thus,  in  reality,  the  interest  of  our  pious  clergy  is  necessarily
1  John  V.  31.

301


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

joined  with  that  of  ancient  letters  and  polite  learning.  By  this
they  perjoetually  refute  the  crafty  arguments  of  those  objectors.
When  they  abandon  this,  they  resign  their  cause.  When  they
strike  at  it,  they  strike  even  at  the  root  and  foundation  of  our
holy  faith,  and  weaken  that  pillar  on  which  the  whole  fabric  of
our  religion  depends.

It  belongs  to  mere  enthusiasts  and  fanatics  to  plead  the
sufficiency  of  a  reiterate  translated  text,  derived  to  them  through
so  many  channels  and  subjected  to  so  many  variations,  of  which
they  are  wholly  ignorant.  Yet  would  they  persuade  us,  it
seems,  that  from  hence  alone  they  can  recognise  the  Divine
Spirit  and  receive  it  in  themselves,  unsubject  (as  they  imagine)
to  any  rule,  and  superior  to  what  they  themselves  often  call
the  dead  letter  and  unprofitable  science.  This,  any  one  may
see,  is  building  castles  in  the  air  and  demolishing  them
again  at  pleasure,  as  the  exercise  of  an  aerial  fancy  or  heated
imagination.

But  the  judicious  divines  of  the  established  Christian
churches  have  sufficiently  condemned  this  manner.  They  are
far  from  resting  their  religion  on  the  common  aspect  or  obvious
form  of  their  vulgar  Bible,  as  it  presents  itself  in  the  printed
copy  or  modern  version.  Neither  do  they  in  the  original
itself  represent  it  to  us  as  a  very  masterpiece  of  writing,  or  as
absolutely  perfect  in  the  purity  and  justness  either  of  style  or
composition.  They  allow  the  holy  authors  to  have  written
according  to  their  best  faculties,  and  the  strength  of  their
natural  genius :  "  A  shepherd  like  a  shepherd ;  and  a  prince
like  a  prince.  A  man  of  reading,  and  advanced  in  letters,  like
a  proficient  in  the  kind ;  and  a  man  of  meaner  capacity  and
reading,  like  one  of  the  ordinary  sort,  in  his  own  common  idiom
and  imperfect  manner  of  narration."

'Tis  the  substance  only  of  the  narrative,  and  the  principal
facts  confirming  the  authority  of  the  revelation,  which  our
divines  think  themselves  concerned  to  prove,  according  to  the
best  evidence  of  which  the  matter  itself  is  capable. And  whilst

302


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

the  sacred  authors  themselves  allude  not  only  to  the  unnais  and
histories  of  the  heathen  world,  but  even  to  the  philosoj)hical
works,  the  re<rular  poems, ^  the  very  plays  and  comedies-  of  the
learned  and  polite  ancients,  it  nmst  be  owned  that,  as  those
ancient  writin<;s  are  impaired  or  lost,  not  only  the  light  and
clearness  of  Holy  ^Vrit,  but  even  the  evidence  itself  of  its  main
facts,  must  in  pro})ortion  be  diminished  and  brought  in  (picstion.
So  ill  advised  were  those  devout  churchmen^  heretofore,  who  in

'  Aratusj  Acts  xvii.  :28  ;  and  K]»iineiiides,  Titus  i.  12,  "even  one  of
their  own  prophets"  ;  for  so  the  lioly  apostle  deifjned  to  speak  of  a  lieathen
poet,  a  physloh)gist,  and  divine,  who  pnipliesied  of  events,  wrouj^'ht
miracles,  and  was  received  as  an  inspired  writer  and  author  of  revelations
in  the  cliief  cities  and  states  of  Greece.

■^  Menander,  1  Cor.  xv.  33.

^  Even  in  the  sixth  century  the  famed  Grej^orius,  Bishop  of  Rome,
who  is  so  hif^hly  celebrated  for  havinj?  planted  the  Christian  religi(»n  by
his  missionary  monks  in  our  English  nation  of  heathen  Saxons,  was  so  far
from  being  a  cultivator  or  supporter  of  arts  or  letters,  that  he  carried  <m  a
kind  of  general  massacre  upon  every  product  of  human  wit.  His  own
words  in  a  letter  to  one  of  the  French  bishops,  a  man  of  the  highest  con-
sideration and  merit  (as  a  noted  modern  critic  and  satirical  genius  of  that
nation  acknowledges),  are  as  follow  : — Pervenit  ad  nos  (juod  sine  verecundia
memorare  non  possumus,  fraternitatem  tuam  grammaticam  quibusdam
exponere.  Quam  rem  ita  moleste  suscepimus,  ac  sumus  vehemeutius
aspernati,  ut  ea  quae  prius  dicta  fuerunt,  in  gemitum  et  tristitiam  ver-
teremus,  cjuia  in  uno  se  ore  cum  Jovis  laudibus  Christi  laudes  non  capiunt.
.  .  .  Unde  si  post  hoc  evidenter  ea  (juae  ad  nos  perlata  sunt,  falsa  esse
claruerint,  nee  vos  nugis  et  secularibus  Uteris  studere  cctntigerit,  Deo
nostro  gratias  agimus,  ([ui  cor  vestrum  macular!  blasphemis  nefandorum
laudibus  non  permisit. — Gregorii  Opera,  Epint.  xlviii.  D,  Paris,  aun.
1.5.'};3.  ["A  story  has  reached  me  which  I  am  ashamed  to  mention,  that
your  brotherhood  teaches  certain  pupils  grammar  !  This  news  I  received
with  such  grief  and  rejected  with  such  scorn  that  1  turned  what  was  said
before  into  groans  and  lamentations ;  for  one  mouth  cannot  hold  the
praise  of  Jupiter  and  of  Christ  too.  ...  So  if  hereafter  the  news  proves
false,  and  you  have  not  spent  your  time  upon  trifles  and  worldly  literature,
I  return  thanks  to  (Jod,  who  would  not  have  your  hearts  stained  with  the
blasphemous  praise  of  the  wicked."]  And  in  his  dedication,  or  first
preface  to  his  Morals,  after  some  very  insipid  rhetoric  and  figurative
dialect,  employed  against  the  study  and  art  of  speech,  he  has  another  fling

303


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  height  of  zeal  did  their  utmost  to  destroy  all  footsteps  of
heathen  literature,  and  consequently  all  further  use  of  learning
or  antiquity.

But  happily  the  zeal  of  this  kind  is  now  left  as  proper  only
to those  despised  and ignorant  modern enthusiasts we  have

at  tlie  classic  authors  and  discipline^  betraying  his  inveterate  hatred  to
ancient  learnings  as  well  as  the  natural  effect  of  this  zealot-passion^  in  his
own  barbarity  both  of  style  and  manners.  His  words  are  : — TJnde  et
ipsam  artem  locjuendi^  quam  magisteria  disciplinae  exterioris  insinuant,
servare  despexi.  Nam  sicut  hujus  (juo(iue  epistolae  tenor  enunciate  non
metacismi  collisionem  fugio ;  non  barbarismi  confusionem  devito,  situs
motusque  praepositionum  casusque  servare  contemno ;  quia  indignum
vehementer  existimo,  ut  verba  coelestis  oraculi  restringam  sub  regulis
Donati.  ["  So  I  think  scorn  of  observing  even  the  art  of  speech^  which  the
wider  education  is  bringing  in  upon  us.  For,  as  the  course  of  this  letter
shows,  I  do  not  avoid  the  frequent  use  of  M  ;  I  do  not  shun  barbarisms  ;
I  despise  rules  about  the  position  or  the  changing  or  the  cases  of  preposi-
tions :  for  1  strongly  hold  it  to  be  unfitting  to  bind  the  words  of  heaven
by  the  rules  of  Donatus. "]  That  he  carried  this  savage  zeal  of  his  so  far
as  to  destroy  (what  in  him  lay)  the  whole  body  of  learning,  with  all  the
classic  authors  then  in  being,  was  generally  believed.  And  (what  was  yet
more  notorious  and  unnatural  in  a  Roman  pontiff)  the  destruction  of  the
statues,  sculptures,  and  finest  pieces  of  antitjuity  in  Rome,  was  charged  on
him  by  his  successor  in  the  see  ;  as,  besides  Platina,  another  writer  of  his
life,  without  the  least  apology,  confesses.  See  in  the  above-cited  edition
of  St.  Gregory's  works,  at  the  beginning,  viz.  Vita  JJ.  Gregorii  ex  Joan.
Laziardo  Coelestino.  'Tis  no  wonder,  therefore,  if  other  writers  have
given  account  of  that  sally  of  the  prelate's  zeal  against  the  books  and
learning  of  the  ancients,  for  which  the  reason  alleged  was  very  extra-
ordinary, "  that  the  Holy  Scz-iptures  would  be  the  better  relished  and
receive  a  considerable  advantage  by  the  destruction  of  these  rivals."  It
seems  they  had  no  very  high  idea  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  when  they
supposed  them  such  losers  by  a  comparison.  However,  'twas  thought
advisable  by  other  fathers  (who  liad  a  like  view)  to  frame  new  pieces  of
literature  after  the  model  of  these  condemned  ancients.  Hence  those
ridiculous  attempts  of  new  heroic  poems,  new  epics  and  dramatics,  new
Homers,  Euripides,  Menandei-s,  which  were  with  so  much  pains  and  so
little  effect  industriously  set  afoot  by  the  zealous  priesthood ;  when
ignorance  prevailed,  and  the  hierarchal  dominion  was  so  universal.  But
though  their  power  had  well  nigh  compassed  the  destruction  of  those

304


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

described.  Tlie  Roman  Church  itself  is  so  recoveretl  from  this
primitive  fanaticism  that  their  <^reat  men,  and  even  their
pontiffs,  are  found  ready  to  ^ive  their  helping  hand,  and  confer
their  bounty  liberally  towards  the  atlvancement  of  all  ancient
and  polite  learning.^  They  justly  observe  that  their  very
traditions  stand  in  need  of  some  collateral  proof.  The  con-
servation of  these  other  ancient  and  disinterested  authors  they
wisely  judge  essential  to  the  credibility  of  those  principal  facts,
on  which  the  whole  religious  liistory  and  tradition  depend.

'Twoulil  indeed  be  in  vain  for  us  to  bring  a  Pontius  Pilate
into  our  Creed,  and  recite  what  happened  under  him  in  Judea,
if we knew not "  under whom he himself  governed, whose

great  originals,  tliey  were  far  from  being  able  to  procure  any  reception
for  their  puny  imitations.  The  mock  works  have  lain  in  their  deserved
obscurity,  as  will  all  other  attempts  of  that  kind,  concerning  which  our
author  has  already  given  his  opinion.  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  :i.  But  as  to  the
ill  policy  as  well  as  barbarity  of  this  zealot — enmity  against  the  works
of  the  ancients,  a  foreign  Protestant  divine,  and  most  learned  defender  of
religion,  making  the  best  excuse  he  can  for  the  Cireek  Fathers,  and
endeavouring  to  clear  them  from  this  general  charge  of  havoc  and  massacre
committed  upon  science  and  erudition,  has  these  words  :  "  Si  cela  est,
voila  encore  uu  nouveau  sujet  de  me'priser  les  patriarches  de  Constanti-
nople qui  n'e'toient  d'ailleurs  rien  moins  que  gens  de  bien  ;  mais  j'ai  de  la
peine  a  le  croire,  parce  qu'il  nous  est  reste  de  poetes  intiniment  plus  sales
(jue  ceux  qui  se  sont  perdus.  Persoune  ne  doute  qu'Aristophane  ne  soit
beaucoup  plus  sale  que  n'utoit  Me'nandre.  Plutarque  en  est  un  bon
te'moin  dans  la  comparaison  qu'il  a  faite  de  ces  deux  poetes.  11  pourroit
etre  neanmoins  arrive,  que  quelques  ecclesiastiques  ennemis  des  belles
lettres  en  eussent  use  comme  dit  Chalcondyle,  sans  penser  qu'en  con-
servant  toute  I'antiquite'  grecque,  ils  conserveroient  la  langue  de  leurs
predecesseurs  et  une  infinite  de  faits  qui  servoient  beaucoup  a  I'intelligence
et  a  la  confirmation  de  I'histoire  sacree,  et  meme  de  la  religion  chretieune.
Ces  geus-lu  devoient  au  moins  nous  conserver  les  histoires  anciennes  des
Orientaux,  comme  des  Chaldeens,  des  Tyriens,  et  des  Lgyptiens ;  mais  ils
agissoient  plus  par  ignorance  et  par  negligence  que  par  raisou."-  Bibl.
Chois.,xiv.  131,  132,  133.

»  Such  a  one  is  the  present  prince,  Clement  XL,  an  encourager  of  all
arts  and  sciences.

VOL.  II  305  X


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

authority  he  had,  or  what  character  he  bore  in  that  remote
country  and  amidst  a  foreign  people."  In  the  same  manner,
'twould  be  in  vain  for  a  Roman  pontiff'  to  derive  his  title  to
spiritual  sovereignty  from  the  seat,  influence,  power,  and  dona-
tion of  the  Roman  Caesars  and  their  successors,  if  it  appeared
not  by  any  history  or  collateral  testimony  "  who  the  first
Caesars  were,  and  how  they  came  possessed  of  that  universal
power  and  long  residence  of  dominion."

My  reader,  doubtless,  by  this  time  must  begin  to  wonder
through  what  labyrinth  of  speculation  and  odd  texture  of
capricious  reflections  I  am  offering  to  conduct  him.  But  he
will  not,  I  presume,  be  altogether  displeased  with  me  when  I
give  him  to  understand  that,  being  now  come  into  my  last
Miscellany,  and  being  sensible  of  the  little  courtship  I  have
paid  him,  comparatively  with  what  is  practised  in  that  kind  by
other  modern  authors,  I  am  willing,  by  Avay  of  compensation,
to  express  my  loyalty  or  homage  towards  him,  and  show  by  my
natural  sentiments  and  principles  "  what  particular  deference
and  high  respect  I  think  to  be  his  due."

The  issue  therefore  of  this  long  deduction  is,  in  the  first
place,  with  due  compliments,  in  my  capacity  of  author,  and  in
the  name  of  all  modest  workmen  willingly  joining  with  me  in
this  representation,  to  congratulate  our  English  reader  on  the
establishment  of  what  is  so  advantageous  to  himself— I  mean
that  mutual  relation  between  him  and  ourselves,  which  naturally
turns  so  much  to  his  advantage  and  makes  us  to  be  in  reality
the  subservient  party.  And  in  this  respect  'tis  to  be  hoped  he
will  long  enjoy  his  just  superiority  and  privilege  over  his
humble  servants  who  compose  and  labour  for  his  sake.  The
relation,  in  all  likelihood,  must  still  continue  and  be  improved.
Our  common  religion  and  Christianity,  founded  on  letters  and
Scripture,  promises  thus  much.  Nor  is  this  hope  likely  to  fail
us  whilst  readers  are  really  allowed  the  liberty  to  read — that  is
to  say,  to  examine,  construe,  and  remark  with  understanding.
Learning and science must of  necessity flourish, whilst the

306


MISCELLANEOUS KEFLECTIONS

langua<^e  of"  the  wisest  and  most  learned  of  nations  is  acknow-
ledged to  contain  the  principal  and  essential  part  of  our  holy
revelation.  And  criticism,  examinations,  judgments,  literate
labours,  and  inc|uiries  must  still  be  in  repute  and  practice,
whilst  ancient  authors,  so  necessary  to  the  supjwrt  of  the  sacred
volumes,  are  in  re([uest,  and  afford  employment  of  such  infinite
extent  to  us  moderns,  of  whatever  degree,  who  are  desirous  to
signalise  ourselves  by  any  achievement  in  letters,  and  be  con-
sidered as  the  investigators  of  knowledge  and  politeness.

1  may  undoubtedly,  by  \  irtue  of  my  })rcceding  argument  in
behalf  of  criticism,  be  allowed,  without  suspicion  of  flattery  or
mere  courtship,  to  assert  the  reader's  jjrivilege  above  the  author,
and  assign  to  him,  as  I  have  done,  the  upper  hand  and  place  of
honour.  As  to  fact,  we  know  for  certain  that  the  greatest  of
philosoj)hers,  the  very  founder  of  philosophy  itself,^  was  no
author.  Xor  did  the  Divine  Author  and  Founder  of  our  religion
condescend  to  be  an  author  in  this  other  respect.  He  who
could  best  have  given  us  the  history  of  his  own  life,  with  the
entire  sermons  and  divine  discourses  which  he  made  in  public,
was  pleased  to leave it to others  "  to take  in  hand."  - As

^  Socrates.

2  So  Luke  i.  1,  2,  3,  4  :  "(1)  Forasmuch  as  many  have  taken  in  hand
to  set  forth  in  order  a  declaration  (exj)osition  or  narrative,  Sirjyrjaii')  of
tliose  thinf^s  which  are  most  surely  helieved  among  (or  were  fulfilled  in
(»r  among)  us,  (2)  Even  as  they  delivered  them  unto  us,  which  from  the
beginning  were  eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the  word  ;  (.3)  It  seemed
good  to  me  also,  having  had  perfect  understanding  of  all  things  from  the
very  first  (or  having  looked  hack  and  searched  accurately  into  all  matters
from  the  beginning  or  highest  time,  TrapTjKoXovO-qKdn  dfwOev  iraaiv  d/cpt^ScDs),
to  write  unto  thee  in  order,  most  excellent  Theophilus,  (4)  'ITiat  thou
mightest  know  the  certainty  (or  validity,  sound  discussion,  aacpaXuav)  of
those  things  wherein  thou  hast  been  instructed  (or  catechised),  irept  Hiv
KaT-qxvSv^-"  \\'hether  the  words  w€iv\r}po(t>opT)txivujv  ev  rin'iv  in  the  first  verse
should  be  rendered  "  believed  among,"  or  "  fulfilled  in,"  or  "  among  us,"
may  depend  on  the  different  reading  of  the  original.  For  in  some  copies  the
iv  next  following  is  left  out.  However,  the  exact  interpreters  or  verbal
translators  render  it  "fulfilled"  :  vide  Ar.  Montan.,  edit.  Plantin.,  1584.

307


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

there  were  many,  it  seems,  long  afterwards,  who  did,  and  under-
took accordingly  "  to  write  in  order,  and  as  seemed  good  to
them,  for  the  better  information  of  particular  persons,  what
was  then  believed  among  the  initiated  or  catechised  from
tradition  and  early  instruction  in  their  youth,  or  what  had
been  transmitted  by  report  from  such  as  were  the  presumed
auditors  and  eye-witnesses  of  those  things  in  former  time."

Whether  those  sacred  books  ascribed  to  the  divine  legis-
lator of  the  Jews,  and  which  treat  of  his  death,  burial,  and
succession,^  as  well  as  of  his  life  and  actions,  are  strictly  to  be
understood  as  coming  from  the  immediate  pen  of  that  holy
founder,  or  rather  from  some  other  inspired  hand  guided  by
the  same  influencing  spirit,  I  will  not  presume  so  much  as  to
examine  or  inquire.  But  in  general  we  find  that,  both  as  to
public  concerns,  in  religion,  and  in  philosophy,  the  great  and
eminent  actors  were  of  a  rank  superior  to  the  writing  worthies.
The  great  Athenian  legislator,^  though  noted  as  a  poetical
o-enius,  cannot  be  esteemed  an  author  for  the  sake  of  some
few  verses  he  may  occasionally  have  made.  Nor  was  the  great
Spartan  founder^  a  poet  himself,  though  author  or  redeemer
(if  I  may  so  express  it)  to  the  greatest  and  best  of  poets,*  who
owed  in  a  manner  his  form  and  being  to  the  accurate  searches
and  collections  of  that  great  patron.  The  politicians  and  civil
sages,  who  were  fitted  in  all respects  for  the  great  scene  of

In  verse  4  the  word  certainty,  d<T(pd\€iav,  is  interpreted  dKpl^eiav,  validity,
soundness,  good  foundation,  from  the  sense  of  the  preceding  verse.  See
the  hite  edition  of  our  learned  Dr.  Mill,  ex  recensione  Kusteri,  Rot.  1710.
For  the  word  catechised,  Kar-qxhO-qs  (the  last  of  the  fourth  verse),  Rob.
Constantine  has  this  explanation  of  it  :  "  Priscis  theologis  apud  Aegyptios
mos  erat,  ut  mysteria  voce  tantum,  veluti  per  manus,  posteris  relin-
querent.  Apud  Christianos,  qui  baptismatis  erant  candidati,  iis,  viva
voce,  tradebantur  fidei  Christianae  mysteria,  sine  scriptis  :  quod  Paulus  et
Lucas  Karrixflf  vocaiit.  Unde  qui  docebantur,  catechumeni  vocabantur,
qui  docebant,  catechistae."

1  Deut.  xxxiv.  5,  G,  7,  etc.  ^  Solon.

2  Lycurgus.  *  Homer.

308


IMISCEI.LANEOUS llEFLECTTOXS

business,  could  not,  it  seems,  be  well  taken  out  of  it  to  attend
the  slender  and  minute  affairs  of  letters  and  scholastic  science.

'Tis  true,  indeed,  that  without  a  capacity  for  action  and  a
knowledge  of  the  world  and  mankind  there  can  be  no  author
naturally  (|ualified  to  write  with  dignity,  or  execute  any  noble
or  great  design.  ]Jut  there  are  many  who,  with  the  highest
capacity  for  business,  are  by  their  fortune  denied  the  privilege  of
that  higher  sphere.  As  there  are  others  who,  having  once  moved
in  it,  have  been  afterwards,  by  many  impediments  and  obstructions,
necessitated  to  retire,  and  exert  their  genius  in  this  lower  degree.

'Tis  to  some  catastrophe  of  this  kind  that  we  owe  the  noblest
historians  (even  the  two  princes  and  fathers  of  history^)  as  well
as  the  greatest  })hilosophical  writers,  the  founder  of  the  academy-
and  others,  who  were  also  noble  in  respect  of  their  birth,  and
fitted  for  the  highest  stations  in  the  public,  but  discouraged
from  engaging  in  it,  on  account  of  some  misfortunes  experienced
either  in  their  own  persons  or  that  of  their  near  friends.

'Tis  to  the  early  banishment  and  long  retirement  of  a  heroic
youth  out  of  his  native  country  that  we  owe  an  original  system
of  works,  the  politest,  wisest,  usefullest,  and  (to  those  who  can
understand  the  divineness  of  a  just  simplicity)  the  most  amiable
and  even  the  most  elevating  and  exalting  of  all  uninspired  and
merely  human  authors.^

To  this  fortune  we  owe  some  of  the  greatest  of  the  ancient
poets.  'Twas  this  chance  w^hich  produced  the  muse  of  an
exalted Grecian lyric,* and of  his follower Horace,^ whose

^  Herodotus  and  Thucydides.  -  Plato.

3  Tov  TJStaToi/  Kal  xapteororo;'  'S.evocpCjvTa,  as  Atheiiaeus  calls  hirrij  xi.  See
Treatise  in.  i)art  ii.  §  2.

^  Et  te  sonaiitem  plenius  aureo,
Alcaee,  plectro  dura  navis,
Dura  fugae  mala,  dura  belli.
["And  thou^  Alcaeus,  who  tellest  in  a  fuller  tone  on  a  lyre  of  gold
the  hardships  of  the  sea^  of  exile^  and  of  war." — Hon,  Od.  ii.  xiii.  26-28.]
^  . . . Age  die  Latinum,
Barbite,  carmen,

309


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

character,  though  easy  to  be  gathered  from  history  and  his  own
works,  is  httle  observed  by  any  of  his  commentators.  The
general  idea  conceived  of  him  being  drawn  chiefly  from  his
precarious  and  low  circumstances  at  court,  after  the  forfeiture
of  his  estate,  under  the  usurpation  and  conquest  of  an  Octavius
and  the  ministry  of  a  Maecenas,  not  from  his  better  condition
and  nobler  employments  in  earlier  days,  under  the  favour  and
friendship  of  greater  and  better  men,  whilst  the  Roman  state
and  liberty  subsisted.  For  of  this  change  he  himself,  as  great  a
courtier  as  he  seemed  afterwards,  gives  sufficient  intimation.^

Lesbio  primum  modulate  civi^
Qui  ferox  bello,  etc.
["  Come^  my  lyre,  utter  for  me  a  Latin  song,  though  tliou  vvert  first
tuned  by  a  citizen  of  Lesbos,"  etc. — Hor.,  Od.  i.  xxxii.  3-5.]
'  Dura  sed  emovere  loco  me  tempora  grato,
Civilisque  rudem  belli  tulit  aestus  in  arma,
Caesaris  Augusti  non  responsura  lacertis.
Unde  simul  primum  me  dimisere  Philippi,
Decisis  liumilem  pennis,  inopemque  paterni
Et  laris  et  fundi,  paupertas  impulit  audax
Ut  versus  facerem.
["  But  the  cruel  times  tore  me  away  from  that  pleasant  spot,  and  civil
strife  hurried  me,  with  all  my  ignorance  of  war,  to  take  up  those  arms
which  were  to  be  no  match  for  the  might  of  Augustus  Caesar. As  soon  as
Philippi  set  me  free  from  arms,  humbled,  my  wings  clipped,  my  father's
house  and  estate  lost,  the  fearlessness  of  a  poor  man  drove  me  to  write
verses." — Hor.,  Ep.  ii.  ii.  46-52.]

At  olim
Quod  mihi  pareret  legio  Romana  tribuno.

["A  legion  of  Roman  soldiers  obeyed  me  as  its  officer." — Hoi-.,  Sat.  i.
vi.  47,  48.]

Viz.  under  Brutus. Whence  again  that  natural  boast  :

Me  primis  url)is  l)elli  placuisse  domique.

\^'  I  pleased  the  first  men  of  the  city  in  war  and  peace." — Hor.,  Ejmt.  i.
XX.  23.]

And  again.

Cum  magnis  vixisse  invita  fatebitur  usque
Invidia.

310


MISCETJ.ANKOUS HEl  LECTIONS

Let  authors  therefore  know  themselves,  and  though  conscious
of  worth,  virtue,  and  a  genius,  such  as  may  justly  place  them

["  Envy  shall  confess  against  lior  will  that  I  have  ever  lived  with  the
jfreat." — Hor. ,  Sat.  ii.  i.  7<>,  77.]

Where  the  vixisxe  shows  plainly  whom  he  principally  meant  by  his
magni,  his  early  patrons  and  great  men  in  the  State  ;  his  apology  and
defence  here  (as  \v«ill  -as  in  his  fourth  and  sixth  satires  of  his  first  liook,
and  his  second  epistle  of  his  second  and  elsewhere)  being  supported  still  by
'the  open  and  bold  assertion  of  his  good  education  (e(|ual  to  the  highest
senators,  and  under  the  best  masters),  his  employments  at  home  and
abroad,  and  his  early  commerce  and  familiarity  with  former  great  men,
before  these  his  new  friendships  and  this  latter  court  acquaintance,  which
was  now  envied  him  by  his  adversaries.

Nunc  quia  sim  tibi,  Maecenas,  c<uivictor  :  at  olini
Quod  mihi  pareret  legio  Romana  triltumt.

["  Now  they  envy  me  because  I  live  familiarly  with  thee,  Maecenas,
but  formerly  because  a  legion  of  Roman  soldiers  obeyed  nie  as  officer."
Ilor.,  Sat.  1.  vi.  47,  48.]

Tlie  reproach  now  was  with  respect  to  a  Maecenas  or  Augustus.  Twas
the  same  formerly  with  respect  to  a  Brutus  and  those  who  were  then  the
principal  and  leading  men.  The  complaint  or  murmur  against  him  on
account  ()f  his  l»eing  an  upstart  or  favourite  under  a  Maecenas  and  Augustus^
could  not  be  answered  by  a  i-i.iisse  relating  to  the  same  persons,  any  more
than  his  placuisse  joined  with  his  belli  doDiique  could  relate  to  those  under
whom  he  never  went  to  war  nor  would  ever  consent  to  bear  any  honours.
For  so  lie  himself  distinguishes  {Snt.  vi.  to  Maecenas) —

Quia  non,  ut  forsit  honorem
Jure  mihi  invideat  quivis,  ita  te  quoque  amicum.

["  The  two  reasons  are  unlike  because,  though  perhaps  a  man  might
fairly  grudge  me  my  commission,  yet  he  cannot  fairly  grudge  me  your
friendship  ioo."—  Snt.  i.  vi.  49,  50.]

He  was  formerly  an  actor,  and  in  the  ministery  of  affairs  ;  now  only
a  friend  to  a  minister,  himself  still  a  private  and  retired  man.  That  he
refused  Augustus's  offer  of  the  secretaryship  is  well  known.  But  in  these
circumstances,  the  politeness  as  well  as  artifice  of  Horace  is  admirable,
in  making  futurity  or  posterity  to  be  the  speaking  party  in  both  those
places,  where  he  suggests  his  intimacy  and  favour  with  the  great,  that
there  might  in  some  measure  be  room  left  (though  in  strictness  there  was
scarce  any)  for  an  Octavius  and  a  Maecenas  to  be  included.  See  Treatise
III.  part  ii.  §  3,  in  the  notes.

311


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

above  flattery  or  mean  courtship  to  their  reader,  yet  let  them
reflect  that  as  authors  merely  they  are  but  of  the  second  rank
of  men.  And  let  the  reader  withal  consider,  "  that  when  he
unworthily  resigns  the  place  of  honour,  and  surrenders  his  taste
or  judgment  to  an  author,  of  ever  so  great  a  name  or  venerable
antiquity,  and  not  to  reason  and  truth,  at  whatever  hazard,  he
not  only  betrays  himself  but  withal  the  common  cause  of  author
and  reader,  the  interest  of  letters  and  knowledge,  and  the
chief  liberty,  privilege,  and  prerogative  of  the  rational  part  of
mankind."

'Tis  related  in  history  of  the  Cappadocians,  that  being
offered  their  liberty  by  the  Romans  and  permitted  to  govern
themselves  by  their  own  laws  and  constitutions,  they  were  much
terrified  at  the  proposal,  and  as  if  some  sore  harm  had  been
intended  them,  humbly  made  it  their  request,  "  that  they  might
be  governed  by  arbitrary  power,  and  that  an  absolute  governor
might  without  delay  be  appointed  over  them  at  the  discretion
of  the  Ronians."  For  such  was  their  disposition  towards  mere
slavery  and  subjection,  that  they  dared  not  pretend  so  much  as
to  choose  their  own  master.  So  essential  they  thought  slavery,
and  so  divine  a  thing  the  right  of  mastership,  that  they  dared
not  be  so  free  even  as  to  presume  to  give  themselves  that  bless-
ing, which  they  choose  to  leave  rather  to  Providence,  fortune,  or
a  conqueror  to  bestow  upon  them.  They  dared  not  make  a
king,  but  would  rather  take  one  from  their  powerful  neighbours.
Had  they  been  necessitated  to  come  to  an  election,  the  horror
of  such  a  use  of  liberty  in  government  would  perhaps  have
determined  them  to  choose  blindfold,  or  leave  it  to  the  decision
of  the  commonest  lot,  cast  of  die,  cross  or  pile,  or  whatever  it
were  which  might  best  enable  them  to  clear  themselves  of  the
heinous  charge  of  using  the  least  foresight,  choice,  or  prudence
in  such  an  affair.

I  should  think  it  a  great  misfortune  were  my  reader  of  the
number  of  those  who,  in  a  kind  of  Cappadocian  spirit,  could
easily  be  terrified  with  the  proposal  of  giving  him  his  liberty,

312


MISCEIJvANEOUS REFLECTIONS

and  making  him  his  own  judge.  My  endeavour,  I  nmst  confess,
has  been  to  show  him  his  just  prerogative  in  this  respect,  and
to  give  him  tlie  sharpest  eye  over  his  author,  invite  him  to
criticise  honestly,  without  favour  or  affection,  and  with  the
utmost  bent  of  his  parts  and  judgment.  On  this  account  it
may  be  objected  to  me,  perhaps,  "  that  I  am  not  a  Httle  vain
and  presumptuous  in  my  own  as  well  as  in  my  author^s  behalf,
who  can  thus,  as  it  were,  challenge  my  reader  to  a  trial  of  his
keenest  wit."

But  to  this  I  answer,  that  should  I  have  the  good  foiiune
to  raise  the  masterly  spirit  of  just  criticism  in  my  readers  and
exalt  them  ever  so  little  above  the  lazy,  timorous,  over-modest,
or  resigned  state  in  which  the  generality  of  them  remain,  though
by  this  very  spirit  I  myself  might  possibly  meet  my  doom,  I
should,' however  abundantly  congratulate  with  myself  on  these
my  low  flights,  be  proud  of  having  plumed  the  aiTows  of  better
wits,  and  furnished  artillery  or  amnnmition  of  any  kind  to  those
powers  to  which  I  myself  had  fallen  a  victim.

Fungar  vice  cotis.^

I  could  reconcile  my  ambition  in  this  respect  to  what  I  call
my  loyalty  to  the  reader,  and  say  of  his  elevation  in  criticism
and  judgment  what  a  lloman  princess  said  of  her  son's  advance-
ment to  empire,  "  occidat,  dum  imperet.'"'  "^

Had  I  been  a  Spanish  Cervantes,  and  with  success  equal  to
that  comic  author,  had  destroyed  the  reigning  taste  of  Gothic
or  INIoorish  chivalry,  I  could  afterwards  contentedly  have  seen
my  burlesque  work  itself  despised  and  set  aside,  when  it  had
wrought  its  intended  effect  and  destroyed  those  giants  and
monsters  of  the  brain,  against  which  it  was  originally  designed.
Without  regard,  therefore,  to  the  prevailing  relish  or  taste
which,  in  my  own  person,  I  may  unhappily  experience,  when

^  ["  I  will  play  the  part  of  a  whetstone." — Hor.,  De  arte  poet.  .'304.]
^  ["Let  him  kill  me,  so  long  as  he  comes  to  the  throne." — Tacitus,
Annals,  xiv.  9.]

313


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

these  my  miscellaneous  works  are  leisurely  examined,  I  shall
proceed  still  in  my  endeavour  to  refine  my  reader''s  palate,
whetting  and  sharpening-  it  the  best  I  can  for  use  and  practice
in  the  lower  subjects,  that  by  this  exercise  it  may  acquire  the
greater  keenness,  and  be  of  so  much  the  better  effect  in  subjects
of  a  higher  kind  which  relate  to  his  chief  happiness,  his  liberty
and  nianliood.

Supj)osiiig  me  therefore  a  mere  comic  humorist  in  respect
of  those  inferior  subjects,  which  after  the  manner  of  my  familiar
prose  satire  I  presume  to  criticise ;  may  not  I  be  allowed  to  ask,
"  whether  there  remains  not  still  among  us  noble  Britons  some-
thing of  that  original  barbarous  and  Gothic  relish  not  wholly
purged  away,  when,  even  at  this  hour,  romances  and  gallantries
of  like  sort,  together  with  works  as  monstrous  of  other  kinds,
are  current  and  in  vogue,  even  with  the  people  Avho  constitute
our  reputed  polite  world  ? "  Need  I  on  this  account  refer  again
to  our  author,^  where  he  treats  in  general  of  the  style  and
manner  of  our  modern  authors,  from  the  divine  to  the  comedian?
What  person  is  there  of  the  least  judgment  or  understanding,
who  cannot  easily,  and  without  the  help  of  a  divine  or  rigid
moralist,  observe  the  lame  condition  of  our  English  stage,  Avhich
nevertheless  is  found  the  rendezvous  and  chief  entertainment  of
our  best  company,  and  from  whence  in  all  probability  our  youth
will  continue  to  draw  their  notion  of  manners  and  their  taste
of  life  more  directly  and  naturally  than  from  the  rehearsals  and
declamations  of  a  graver  theatre  ?

Let  those  whose  business  it  is  advance,  as  they  best  can,  the
benefit  of  that  sacred  oratory  which  we  have  lately  seen  and
are  still  like  to  see  employed  to  various  purposes  and  further
designs  than  that  of  instructing  us  in  religion  or  manners.
Let  them  in  that  high  scene  endeavour  to  refine  our  taste  and
judgment  in  sacred  matters.  ""Tis  the  good  critic''s  task  to
amend  our  common  stage,  nor  ought  this  dramatic  performance
to  be  decried  or  sentenced  by  those  critics  of  a  higher  sphere.
1  Viz.  in  his  Advice  to  Authors,  Treatise  in.

314


MISCELLAXEOUS REFLECTTOXS

The  practice  and  art  is  honest  in  itself.  Our  foundations  are
well  laid.  And  in  the  main  our  Kn<rlish  sta<;e  (jls  has  been
remarked  ^)  is  capable  of  the  highest  improvement,  as  well  from
the  present  genius  of  our  nation  as  from  the  rich  ore  of  our
early  jioets  in  this  kind.  Ikit  faults  are  easier  imitated  than
beauties.

We  find,  indeed,  our  theatre  become  of  late  the  subject  of  a
growing  criticism.  We  hear  it  openly  comj)lained  "that  in  our
newer  j)lays  as  well  as  in  our  older,  in  comedy  as  well  as  tragedy,
the  stage  presents  a  proper  scene  of  ujiroar, — duels  fought,
swords  drawn,  many  of  a  side,  wounds  given  and  sometimes
dressed  too,  the  surgeon  called  and  the  ])atient  probed  and
tented  upon  the  spot.  That  in  our  tragedy  nothing  is  so
common  as  wheels,  racks,  and  gibbets  properly  adorned,  execu-
tions decently  performed,  headless  bodies  and  bodiless  heads
exposed  to  view,  battles  fought,  murders  committed,  and  the
dead  carried  off  in  great  numl)ers.'" Such  is  our  politeness!

Nor  are  these  plays,  on  this  account,  the  less  frequented  by
either  of  the  sexes,  which  inclines  me  to  favour  the  conceit  our
author-  has  suggested  concerning  the  nuitual  correspondence
and  relation  between  our  royal  theatre  and  ])opular  circus  or
bear-garden.  For  in  the  former  of  these  assembhes,  'tis  un-
deniable that  at  least  the  two  upjier  regions  or  galleries  contain
such  spectators  as  indifferently  freciuent  each  place  of  sport.
So  that  'tis  no  wonder  we  hear  such  applause  resounded  on  the
victories  of  an  Almanzor,  when  the  same  parties  had  ])ossiblv,
no  later  than  the  day  before,  bestowed  their  applause  as  freely
on  tlie  victorious  butcher,  the  liero  of  another  stage ;  where
amidst  various  frays,  bestial  and  human  blood,  ]:)romiscuous
wounds  and  slaughter,  one  sex  are  observed  as  frecjuent  and  as
pleased  spectators  as  the  other,  and  sometimes  not  spectators
only,  but  actors  in  the  gladiatorian  parts.  These  congregations,
which we may  be  a})t to  call heathenish (though in reality

1  Treatise  ni.  part  ii.  §§1,2,  3.
^  Treatise  iii.  part  ii.  §  3.

315


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

never  known  among  the  politer  heathens)  are,  in  our  Christian
nation,  unconcernedly  allowed  and  tolerated  as  no  way  injurious
to  religious  interests,  whatever  effect  they  may  be  found  to  have
on  national  manners,  humanity,  and  civil  life.  Of  such  in-
dulgences as  these  we  hear  no  complaints.  Nor  are  any
assemblies,  though  of  the  most  barbarous  and  enormous  kind,
so  off*ensive,  it  seems,  to' men  of  zeal,  as  religious  assemblies  of  a
different  fashion  or  habit  from  their  own.

I  am  sorry  to  say  that,  though  in  the  many  parts  of  poetry
our  attempts  have  been  high  and  noble,  yet  in  general  the  taste
of  wit  and  letters  lies  much  upon  a  level  Avith  what  relates  to
our  stage.

I  can  readily  allow  to  our  British  genius  what  was  allowed
to  the  Roman  heretofore  : —

Natura  sublimis  et  acer  :
Nam  spiral  tragicum  satis  et  feliciter  audet.^

But  then  I  must  add  too,  that  the  excessive  indulgence  and
favour  shown  to  our  authors,  on  account  of  what  their  mere
genius  and  flowing  vein  afford,  has  rendered  them  intolerably
supine,  conceited,  and  admirers  of  themselves.  The  public
having  once  suffered  them  to  take  the  ascendant,  they  become,
like  flattered  princes,  impatient  of  contradiction  or  advice.
They  think  it  a  disgrace  to  be  criticised,  even  by  a  friend,  or  to
reform  at  his  desire  what  they  themselves  are  fully  convinced
is  negligent  and  uncorrect.

Sed  turpeiTi  putat  in  scriptis  metuitque  lituram.^

The  limae  labor  ^  is  the  great  grievance  with  our  country-
men. An  English  author  would  be  all  genius. He  would  reap

'  ["  By  nature  full  of  elevation  and  passion  ;  for  he  has  tragic  inspira-
tion enough  and  happy  holdness." — Hor.  Epist.  ii.  i.  1G5,  166.]
^  [''  . .  . wanted  or  forgot
The  last  and  greatest  art,  the  art  to  blot."

Hor.  Epist.  II.  i.  167,  Pope's  imitation.]
^  Ars  Poet.

316


MISCELLANEOUS KEFLEX TIONS

the  fruits  of  art,  but  without  study,  pains,  or  application.  He
thinks  it  necessary,  indeed  (lest  his  learning  should  be  called  in
(juc'stion),  to  show  the  world  that  he  errs  knowingly  ai^ainst  the
rules  of  art.  And  for  this  reason,  whatever  piece  he  j)ublishes
at  any  time,  he  seldom  fails,  in  some  prefixed  apology,  to  speak
in  such  a  manner  of  criticism  and  art  as  may  confound  the
ordinary  reader,  and  prevent  him  from  taking  up  a  ])art  which,
should  he  once  assume,  would  prove  fatal  to  the  impotent  and
mean  performance.

'Twere  to  be  wished,  that  when  once  our  authors  had  con-
sidered of  a  model  or  plan,  and  attained  the  knowledge  of  a
whole  and  parts ;  ^ when from  this  beginning  they  had pro-

^  6\oi'  S'  ioTL  rb  ^X^"  ^RXV"  '^'^^  fiicrov  Kal  TeXfvrrjv.  dpxv  oe  iaTLV  8  aiirb  fiiv
fjLT)  i^  dvdyKrjs  /xer'  &\\o  earl,  /xer'  iKeivo  5'  'irepov  irecpvKev  dvai  7)  ytveadai.  rlXevTrj
5^  TovvavTLOV  6  avrb  /uer'  fiXXo  ■ir€<pvKev  ehai  •^  e^  avdyKr]^  t)  ws  iirl  rb  ttoXi',  puTo.  Si
TovTo  dWo  ovdiv.  fxeaov  Si  6  Kal  avrb  fier  &Wo  Kal  fier  eKflvo  'irepov,  ["  A  whdle
is  that  which  has  heg-innin<f,  middle,  and  end.  A  he^iniiiiig  is  that  which
does  not  itself  follow  on  anythiiij^^  hy  necessity,  hut  after  which  sometliing
else  naturally  is  or  arises.  On  the  contrary,  an  end  is  that  which  naturally
follows  on  something  else,  either  of  necessity  or  as  a  rule,  while  it  is
followed  hy  nothing.  A  middle  is  that  which  itself  follows  on  something
else,  and  has  something  following  on  it." — Arist.  De  poet.  ch.  7.]  And  in
the  following  chapter,  fivdos  6'  iffrlv  eh  ovx  Hxrirep  rifi^  otovrai  iav  irepl  eva  y,
etc.  ["  Unity  of  plot  is  not,  as  some  people  think,  secured  hy  having  unity
of  hero."]

Denique  sit  quod  vis  simplex  duntaxat  et  unum.

["  Let  it  be  what  you  will,  provided  only  it  be  consistent  and  uniform."
Hor.  De  arte  poet.  23.] See  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  3.

'Tis  an  infallible  proof  of  the  want  of  just  integrity  in  every  writing,
from  the  epopee  or  heroic  poem  down  to  the  familiar  epistle  or  slightest
essay,  either  in  verse  or  prose,  if  every  several  part  or  portion  fits  not  its
proper  place  so  exactly  that  the  least  transposition  would  be  impracticable.
VVliatever  is  episodic,  though  perhaps  it  be  a  whole  and  in  itself  entire,
yet  being  inserted  as  a  part  in  ;i  work  of  greater  length,  it  must  appear
only  in  its  due  place.  And  that  place  alone  can  he  called  its  due  one  whidi
alone  befits  it.  If  there  be  any  passage  in  the  middle  or  end  which  might
have  stood  in  the  beginning,  or  any  in  the  begiiuiing  which  might  have
stood  as  well  in  the  middle  or  end,  there  is  properly  in  such  a  piece  neither
beginning,  middle,  or  end. 'Tis  a  mere  rhapsody,  not  a  work. And  the

317


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

ceeded  to  morals,  and  the  knowledge  of  what  is  called  poetic
manners and truth ;  ^ when they had learnt  to reject  false

more  it  assumes  the  air  or  appearance  of  a  real  work,  the  more  ridiculous
it  becomes. See  above,  p.  171 ,  and  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  3.

1  Respicere  exemplar  vitae  morumque  jubebo
Doctum  imitatorem  et  veras  hinc  ducere  voces.

["  I  shall  bid  the  well-trained  imitator  look  to  the  pattern  which  life  pre-
sents, and  there  learn  the  language  of  reality." — Hor.  De  arte  poet.  317, 818.]
The  chief  of  ancient  critics,  we  know,  extols  Homer  above  all  things,  for
understanding  how  "  to  lie  in  perfection,"  as  the  passage  shows  which  we
have  cited  above.  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  3.  His  lies,  according  to  that
master's  opinion,  and  the  judgment  of  many  of  the  gravest  and  most
venerable  writers,  were  in  themselves  the  justest  moral  truths,  and  ex-
hibitive  of  the  best  doctrine  and  instruction  in  life  and  manners.  It  may
be  asked,  perhaps,  "  how  comes  the  poet,  then,  to  draw  no  single  pattern  of
the  kind,  no  perfect  character,  in  either  of  his  heroic  pieces.''"  I  answer,
that  should  he  attempt  to  do  it  he  would  as  a  poet  be  preposterous  and
false.  'Tis  not  the  possible  but  the  probable  and  likely  which  must  be  the
poet's  guide  in  manners.  By  this  lie  wins  attention  and  moves  the  con-
scious reader  or  spectator,  who  judges  best  from  within,  l)y  what  he  natur-
ally feels  and  experiences  in  his  own  heart.  Tlie  perfection  of  virtue  is
from  long  art  and  management,  self-control,  and,  as  it  were,  force  on
nature.  But  the  common  auditor  or  spectator,  who  seeks  pleasure  only,
and  loves  to  engage  his  passion  by  view  of  other  passion  and  emotion,
comprehends  little  of  the  restraints,  allays,  and  corrections  which  form
this  new  and  artificial  creature.  For  such  indeed  is  the  truly  virtuous
man,  whose  art,  though  ever  so  natural  in  itself  or  justly  founded  in
reason  and  nature,  is  an  improvement  far  beyond  the  common  stamp  or
known  character  of  human  kind.  And  thus  the  completely  virtuous  and
perfect  character  is  unpoetical  and  false.  Effects  must  not  appear  where
causes  must  necessarily  remain  unknown  and  incomprehensible.  A  hero
without  passion  is  in  poetry  as  absurd  as  a  hero  without  life  or  action.
Now  if  passion  be  allowed,  passionate  action  must  ensue.  The  same  heroic
genius  and  seeming  magnanimity  which  transport  us  when  beheld,  are
naturally  transporting  in  the  lives  and  manners  of  the  great  who  are
described  to  us.  And  thus  the  able  designer  who  feigns  in  behalf  of  truth
and  draws  his  characters  after  the  moral  rule,  fails  not  to  discover  Nature's
propensity,  and  assigns  to  these  high  spirits  their  proper  exorbitancy  and
inclination  to  exceed  in  that  tone  or  species  of  passion  which  constitutes
the  eminent  or  shining  part  of  each  poetical  character. The  passion  of  an

318


MISCETJ.ANEOUS llEFLECTIOXS

thought,  embarrassing  uiul  niixecl  metaphors,  the  ridiculous
jjoint  ill  c'omedv,  and  the  false  sui)liiiie  and  bomhast  in  heroic,
they  would  at  last  have  some  regard  to  numbers,  harmony,  and

Achilles  is  towards  that  f^lory  which  is  actiiiiied  l)y  urnis  and  personal
valour.  In  favour  of  this  character  we  forj^^ive  the  generous  youth  his
excess  of  ardour  in  the  field,  and  his  resentment  when  injured  and  pro-
voked in  council  and  hy  his  allies.  'I'he  j)assion  of  an  Ulysses  is  towards
that  t,'lory  which  is  accjuired  hy  prudence,  wisdom,  and  ahiiity  in  affairs.
'Tis  in  favour  of  this  character  tliat  we  fori^ive  him  his  subtle,  crafty,  and
deceitful  air  ;  since  the  intriufuintr  spirit,  the  over-reachinj^  manner,  and
over-refinement  of  art  and  policy  are  as  naturally  incident  to  the  ex-
perienced and  thorough  ])oliticiaii  as  sudden  resentment,  indisci-eet  and
rash  behaviour,  to  the  open  undesigning  character  of  a  warlike  youth.
The  gigantic  force  and  military  toil  of  an  Ajax  would  not  be  so  easily
credible  or  engaging,  l)ut  for  the  honest  simplicity  of  his  nature  and  the
lieaviness  of  his  parts  and  genius.  For  strength  of  body  being  so  often
noted  by  us  as  unattended  with  e([ual  parts  and  strength  of  mind,  when
we  see  this  natural  effect  expressed  and  find  our  secret  aiul  malicious  kind
of  reasoning  confirmed  on  this  hand,  we  yield  to  any  hyperbole  of  our
poet  on  the  other.  lie  has  afterwards  his  full  scope  and  liberty  of  enlarg-
ing and  exceeding  in  the  peculiar  virtue  and  excellence  of  his  hero.  He
may  lie  splendidly,  raise  wonder,  and  be  as  astonishing  as  he  pleases.
Everything  will  be  allowed  him  in  return  for  this  frank  allowance.  Thus
the  tongue  of  a  Nestor  may  work  prodigies,  whilst  the  accompanying  allays
of  a  rhetorical  fluency  and  aged  experience  are  kept  in  view.  An
Aganiennion  may  be  admired  as  a  noble  and  wise  chief,  whilst  a  certain
princely  liaughtiness,  a  stiffness  and  stately  carriage  natural  to  the  char-
acter, are  represented  in  his  person  and  noted  in  their  ill  effects.  For  thus
the  excesses  of  every  character  are  by  the  poet  redressed.  And  the  mis-
fortunes naturally  attending  such  excesses  being  justly  applied,  our  passions,
whilst  in  the  strongest  manner  engaged  and  moved,  are  in  the  wholesomest
and  most  effectual  manner  corrected  and  purged.  A\'^ere  a  man  to  form
himself  by  one  single  pattern  or  original,  however  perfect,  he  would  him-
self be  a  mere  copy.  But  whilst  he  draws  from  various  models,  he  is
original,  natural,  and  unaffected.  We  see  in  outward  carriage  and
behaviour  how  ridiculous  any  one  beccmies  who  imitates  another,  be  he
ever  so  graceful.  They  are  mean  spirits  who  love  to  copy  merely,  nothing
is  agreeable  or  natural  but  \vhat  is  original.  Our  manners,  like  our  faces,
though  ever  so  beautiful,  must  differ  in  their  beauty.  An  over-regularity
is  next  to  a  deformity. And  in  a  poem  (whether  epic  or  dramatic)  a  com-

319


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

an  ear,^  and  correct,  as  far  as  possible,  the  harsh  sounds  of  our
language,  in  poetry  at  least,  if  not  in  prose.

But  so  much  are  our  British  poets  taken  up  in  seeking  out
that  monstrous  ornament  which we  call  rhyme,^  that  'tis  no

plete  and  perfect  character  is  the  greatest  monster^  and  of  all  poetic
fictions  not  only  the  least  engaging  but  the  least  moral  and  improving.
Thus  much  by  way  of  remark  upon  poetical  truth  and  the  just  fiction  or
artful  lying  of  the  able  poet,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  master-
critic.  \Vliat  Horace  expresses  of  the  same  lying  virtue  is  of  an  easier
sense,  and  needs  no  explanation.

Atque  ita  mentitur,  sic  veris  falsa  remiscet ;
Primo  ne  medium,  medio  ne  discrepet  imum.
["  Such  is  his  use  of  fiction,  such  his  combination  of  true  and  false,  that
the  middle  does  not  clash  with  the  beginning  or  the  end  with  the  middle.'
— Hor.  De  arte  poet.  151,  152.]

The  same  may  be  observed  not  only  in  heroic  draughts,  but  in  the  in-
ferior characters  of  comedy.

Quam  similis  utercjue  est  sui  !

["  How  like  himself  each  man  acts"  ! — Terence,  Phorm.  iii.  ii.  10.]
See  Treatise  i.  §  1  ;  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  3 ;  Treatise  iii.  part  iii.  §  3,
in  the  notes  at  the  end.

1  Treatise  iii.  part  ii.  §  1.

2  Tlie  reader,  if  curious  in  these  matters,  may  see  Is.  Vossius  De  viribus
rhythmi,  and  what  he  says  withal  of  ancient  music,  and  the  degrees  by
which  they  surpass  us  moderns  (as  has  been  demonstrated  by  late  mathema-
ticians of  our  nation),  contrary  to  a  ridiculous  notion  some  have  had,  that
because  in  this,  as  in  all  other  arts,  the  ancients  studied  simplicity  and  affected
it  as  the  highest  perfection  in  their  performances,  they  were  therefore
ignorant  of  parts  and  symphony.  Against  this.  Is.  Vossius,  amongst  other
authors,  cites  the  ancient  Peripatetic  irepl  Kda-fiov  at  the  beginning  of  his
fifth  chapter.  To  which  he  might  have  added  another  passage  in  chapter
vi.  ITie  suitableness  of  this  ancient  author's  thought  to  what  has  been
often  advanced  in  the  philosophical  parts  of  tliese  volumes,  concerning  the
universal  symmetry  or  union  of  the  whole,  may  make  it  excusable  if  we
add  here  the  two  passages  together,  in  their  inimitable  original,  la-m  de
Kal  Twv  ivavriuiv  i]  ^vais  yXlx^Tai,  /cat  €K  tovtwv  aTroTeKilv  t6  avix(p<j3vov,  oiiK  e/c  rGiv
bfxolwv,  ilicnrep  dfx^Xei  to  dppev  ffvvrjyaye  irpbs  rb  dTJXv,  Kal  ovx  eKdrepov  irpb^  rb
b/j.6<pv\ov,  Kal  Tr\v  TrpiirTjv  bfidvoLav  dia  tQiv  ivavTiwv\(Tvvri\pev ,  ov  Sid  tCjv  bfioiwv.  ^oiKe
5^  Kal  7)  TiX^V  tV  (pvaiv  /jLifiovfx&T]  tovto  Troie?v.  iioypa<j>la  fxiv  ydp,  XevKuiv  re
Kal  /xeXdvwu,  CjxP^v  re  Kal  ipvOpwv  xpoofidruv  eyKepaaap-ev-q  (pvjeis  rots  e'lKdvas  roiy

320


xAIISCELLiVNEOUS IIEFI.ECTIONS

wonder  if  other  ornaments  and  real  graces  are  unthought  of
and  left  unatteiHi)ted.  However,  since  in  some  parts  of  poetry
(esj)ecially  in  the  chamatie)  we  have  been  so  liappy  as  to  triumph
over  this  barbarous  taste,  'tis  imaceountal)le  tliat  our  poets,  who
from  this  privilege  ought  to  undertake  some  further  refinements,
should  remain  still  upon  the  same  level  as  Ix-fore.  'Tis  a  shame
to  om'  authors  that,  in  their  elegant  style  and  metred  prose,
there should not l)e found a peculiar grace and harmony

7r/)07j70ii/ueVo(s  dTrerAecre  ffvixipuvovs.  fj-ovaiKri  5^,  o^eis  dfia  Kal  ^apds,  (xaKpovs
T€  Kal  /3paxf'J  <pd6yyovi  jxi^aaa,  ev  5ia(p6poi.s  (pcouats,  /xiav  dner^Xfcrev  apfjiovlav.
ypaixixaTiKJ)  54,  €K  (pwvyjivTWv  Kal  d(pui'wv  ypa/xfidrwi/  Kpdatu  iroirjira/jJi'r],  rr\v  SXtji/
TeYVTjv  dw'  avrCiv  (Tt'cecrr^craTO.  ravrb  ok  tovto  rjv  Kal  rb  irapa  ti^  CKOTdvif)  Xe-yd-
fievov  'llpaKXeirif).  (xvvdipfias  ouXa  ^'Ot  ovxl  ov\a,  crvfJicpepo/Mevov  Kal  Oi.a(f>epbiJ.ivov,
crvvadov  Kal  oiadov,  Kal  e'/c  irdvTijiv  'iv,  Kal  i^  ivb'!  irdvTa.  And  ill  tlie  followiiitj
passage,  /*'<*  ^^  ^'^  ivdvTwv  dpfiovla  (tvv(}S6vtcjv  Kal  x^P^^^"''''^''  Kara  t6v  ovpavbv,  i^
ivds  re  yiverat,  Kal  ds  if  diroXT^yei.  Kdafiov  5'  irvfius  t6  ffi/fXTrav,  dX\'  ovx  dKocr/jilav
6i>o/j.d(raLS  du.  Kaddirep  Si  ev  x°PV  Kopv(paiov  Kardp^avToi,  avvewqxei  irds  6  x°P^^
dv5pQ>v,  ?(t6'  Sre  Kal  yvvaiKQv,  ev  5ia(p6pois  <puvah  d^vripai^  Kal  ^apvripais,  puav
dpfiovlav  i/jLfieXij  Kepavvvvruv,  ol'rus  l'x«  xal  eirl  rov  rb  avfiirav  diiirovTos  QeoO.
["  And  perliaps  Nature  wants  opposites  too,  and  wants  to  make  harmony  out
of  them,  not  out  of  siniihirs  ;  as,  for  instance,  she  brings  tlie  male  to  the
female  and  not  each  of  these  to  one  of  liis  or  her  own  sex  ;  and  slie  made
the  first  ccuicord  by  means  of  opposites,  not  similars.  Art  too  seems  to  do
this  in  imitation  of  nature.  For  paintiuj^r,  by  combininjj:  the  natures  of
black  and  white,  yellow  and  red,  makes  its  representations  correspond  with
their  types.  Music,  unitinj?  sharp  and  jjrave  notes,  and  lonj^  and  sliort
syllables,  makes  one  harmony  among  different  sounds.  Grammar  too,
bringing  together  vowels  and  consonants,  builds  her  whole  art  upon  them.
This  is  the  very  point  which  was  given  forth  by  Ileraclitus  the  Obscure,
who  said,  "  combine  wholes  and  parts,  that  which  is  dispersed  and  that
which  is  united,  that  whi(;h  makes  discord  and  that  which  is  in  unison,  and
out  of  all  comes  one  and  out  of  one  comes  all."  .  .  .  There  is  one  harmony
arising  from  all  the  bodies  which  sound  together  and  circle  in  the  sky,  and
it  springs  from  one  thing  and  ends  in  one.  We  might  with  correct
etymology  call  the  universe  an  order,  but  not  a  disorder.  And,  just  as  in
a  chorus,  when  the  leader  has  led  off,  all  the  band  of  men  (and  sometimes
women)  joins  in,  making  by  combination  of  different  voices,  higher  and
lower,  one  harmony  in  unison,  so  it  is  also  in  the  case  of  the  Deity  who
controls  the  universe." — Ps.-Arist.  De  Mundo,  cc.  5,  0.]  See  Treatise  v.
part  i.  §  3  ;  and  above,  pp.  2(38-270,  in  the  notes.

VOL.  II  321  Y


I


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

resulting  from  a  more  natural  and  easy  disengagment  of  their
periods,  and  from  a  careful  avoiding  the  encounter  of  the
shocking  consonants  and  jarring  sounds  to  which  our  language
is  so  unfortunately  subject.

They  have  of  late,  'tis  true,  reformed  in  some  measure  the
gouty  joints  and  darning -work  of  whereunto's,  whereby's,
thereofs,  therewith's,  and  the  rest  of  this  kind,  by  which
complicated  periods  are  so  curiously  strung  or  hooked -on  one
to  another,  after  the  long-spun  manner  of  the  bar  or  pulpit.
But  to  take  into  consideration  no  real  accent  or  cadency  of
words,  no  sound  or  measure  of  syllables,  to  put  together,  at  one
time,  a  set  of  compounds  of  the  longest  Greek  or  Latin  termina-
tion, and  at  another  to  let  whole  verses,  and  those  too  of  our
heroic  and  longest  sort,  pass  currently  in  monosyllables,  is,
methinks,  no  slender  negligence.  If  single  verses  at  the  head,
or  in  the  most  emphatical  places  of  the  most  considerable  Avorks
can  admit  of  such  a  structure  and  pass  for  truly  harmonious  and
poetical  in  this  negligent  form,  I  see  no  reason  why  more  verses
than  one  or  two  of  the  same  formation  should  not  be  as  well
admitted,  or  why  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  these  well-
strung  monosyllables  might  not  be  allowed  to  clatter  after  one
another,  like  the  hammers  of  a  paper  mill,  without  any  breach
of  music  or  prejudice  to  the  harmony  of  our  language.  But  if
persons  who  have  gone  no  farther  than  a  smith's  anvil  to  gain
an  ear  are  yet  likely,  on  fair  trial,  to  find  a  plain  defect  in  these
ten-monosyllable  heroics,  it  would  follow,  methinks,  that  even
a  prose  author,  who  attempts  to  write  politely,  should  endeavour
to  confine  himself  within  those  bounds,  which  can  never  without
breach  of  harmony  be  exceeded  in  any  j  ust  metre  or  agreeable
pronunciation.

Thus  have  I  ventured  to  arraign  the  authority  of  those
self-])rivileged  writers  who  would  exempt  themselves  from
criticism  and  save  their  ill-acquired  reputation  l^y  the  decrial
of  an  art  on  which  the  cause  and  interest  of  wit  and  letters
absolutely  depend. Be  it  they  themselves,  or  their  great  patrons

322


MISCELLAXEOrS ]{EFEECTI()\S

in  their  beluilf,  who  wouhl  thus  arhitraiilv  Mippoit  the  cre(Ht  of
ill  writings,  the  attempt,  I  liopc,  will  prove  unsuccessful.  Jk>
they  moderns  or  ancients,  foreigners  or  natives,  ])on(lerous  and
austere  writers  or  airy  and  of  the  humorous  kind,  whoever
takes  refuge  here  or  seeks  protection  hence,  whoever  joins  his
party  or  interest  to  this  cause,  it  apjjears  from  the  very  fact
and  endeavour  alone  tliat  there  is  just  ground  to  suspect  some
insufficiency  or  imposture  at  the  bottom.  And  on  this  account
the  reader,  if  he  be  wise,  will  the  rather  redouble  his  ap])lication
and  industry  to  examine  the  merit  of  his  assuming  autiior.  If,
as  reader  and  judge,  he  dare  once  assert  that  liberty  to  which
we  have  shown  him  justly  entitled,  he  will  not  easily  be
threatened  or  ridiculed  out  of  the  use  of  his  examining  capacitv
and  native  privilege  of  criticism.

'Twas  to  this  art,  so  well  understood  and  practised  heretofore,
that  the  wise  ancients  owed  whatever  was  consummate  anil
})erfect  in  their  productions.  'Tis  to  the  same  art  we  owe  the
recovery  of  letters  in  these  latter  ages.  To  this  alone  we  must
ascribe  the  recognition  of  ancient  manuscripts,  the  discovery  of
what  is  spurious  and  the  discernment  of  whatever  is  genuine  of
those  venerable  remains  which  have  passed  through  such  dark
periods  of  ignorance  and  raised  us  to  the  improvements  we  now
make  in  every  science.  ""Tis  to  this  art  that  even  the  sacred
authors  themselves  owe  their  highest  purity  and  coiTectness.
So  sacred  ought  the  art  itself  to  be  esteemed,  when  from  its
su})plies  alone  is  formed  that  judicious  and  learned  strength  by
which  the  defenders  of  our  holy  religion  are  able  so  successfully
to  refute  the  heathens,  Jews,  sectarians,  heretics,  and  other
enemies  or  opposers  of  our  primitive  and  ancient  faith.

But  having  thus,  after  our  author's  example,  asserted  the  use
of  criticism  in  all  literate  works,  from  the  main  frame  or  plan  of
every  writing  down  to  the  minutest  particle,  we  may  now
proceed  to  exercise  this  art  upon  our  author  himself,  and  by
his  own  rules  examine  him  in  this  his  last  treatise,  reserving
still  to  ourselves  the  same  privilege  of  variation  and  excursion

323


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

into other subjects, the  same  episodic liberty and right of
wandering  which  we  have  maintained  in  the  preceding  chapters.


CHAPTER  II

Generation  and  succession  of  our  national  and  modern  wit — Maimers
of  the  proprietors — Corporation  and  joint  stock  —  Statute  against
criticism — A  coiFee-house  committee— Mr  Bays — Other  Bays'  in
divinity — Censure  of  our  author's  dialogue  piece^  and  of  the  manner
of  dialogue  writing  used  ])y  reverend  wits.

According  to  the  common  course  of  practice  in  our  age,  we
seldom  see  the  character  of  writer  and  that  of  critic  united  in
the  same  person.  There  is,  I  know,  a  certain  species  of  authors
who  subsist  wholly  by  the  criticising  or  commenting  practice
upon  others,  and  can  appear  in  no  other  form  besides  what  this
emjjloyment  authorises  them  to  assume.  They  have  no  original
character  or  first  part,  but  wait  for  something  which  may  be
called  a  work  in  order  to  graft  upon  it,  and  come  in  for  shares
at  second  hand.

The  penmen  of  this  capacity  and  degree  are,  from  their
function  and  em]jloyment,  distinguished  by  the  title  of  answerers.
For  it  happens  in  the  world  that  there  are  readers  of  a  genius
and  size  just  fitted  to  these  answering  authors.  These,  if  they
teach  them  nothing  else,  will  teach  them,  they  think,  to  criticise.
And  though  the  new  practising  critics  are  of  a  sort  unlikely
ever  to  understand  any  original  book  or  writing,  they  can
understand  or  at  least  remember  and  (juote  the  subsequent
reflections,  flouts,  and  jeers  which  may  accidentally  be  made  on
such  a  piece.  Wherever  a  gentleman  of  this  sort  happens  at
any  time  to  be  in  company,  you  shall  no  sooner  hear  a  new
book  spoken  of,  than  "'twill  be  asked,  "  Who  has  answered  it .'' "
or,  "  When  is  there  an  answer  to  come  out  ? ""  Now  the  answer,
as  our  gentleman  knows,  must  needs  be  newer  than  the
book  ;  and  the  newer  a  thing  is,  the  more  fashionable  still  and

324


MISCELLAXEOrS UEFLECTIOXS

the  <;c'iitc'clcr  tlic  subject  of  tliscourse.  For  this  the  bookseller
knows  how  to  fit  our  gentleman  to  a  nicety,  for  he  has  commonly
an  answer  rcadv  besj)oke,  and  perhaps  finished  bv  the  tin)e  his
new  book  conies  abroad.  And  'tis  odds  but  our  fashionable
g-entienian,  who  takes  botli  together,  niav  reail  the  latter  first
and  droj)  the  other  for  good  and  alk

Ikit  of  these  answering  wits,  and  the  maimer  of  rejoinders
and  reiterate  replies,  we  have  saiil  what  is  sufficient  in  a  former
Aliscellanv.^  We  need  only  remark  in  general,  "that  'tis
necessary  a  a\  riting  critic  should  understand  how  to  write.  And
though  every  writer  is  not  bound  to  show  himself  in  the  capacity
of  critic,  every  writing  critic  is  bound  to  show  himself  ca])able  of
being  a  writer.  For  if  he  be  a})parently  impotent  in  this  latter
kind,  he  is  to  be  denied  all  title  or  character  in  the  other."

To  censure  merely  what  another  ])erson  writes ;  to  twitch,
snap,  snub-up  or  banter ;  to  torture  sentences  and  phrases,  turn
a  few  expressions  into  ridicule,  or  write  what  is  nowadays
called  an  answer  to  any  piece,  is  not  sufficient  to  constitute  what
is  properly  esteemed  a  writer  or  author  in  due  form.  For  this
reason,  though  there  are  many  answerers  seen  abroad,  there  are
few  or  no  critics  or  satirists.  But  whatever  may  be  the  state  of
controversy  in  our  religion  or  politic  concerns,  'tis  certain  that
in  the  mere  literate  world  affairs  are  managed  with  a  better
understanding  between  the  principal  parties  concerned.  The
writers  or  authors  in  ])ossession  have  an  easier  time  than  any
ministry  or  religious  party  which  is  uppermost.  They  have
found  a  way,  by  decrying  all  criticism  in  general,  to  get  rid  of
their  dissenters,  and  prevent  all  })retences  to  further  reformation
in  their  state.  The  critic  is  made  to  appear  distinct  and  of
another  species,  whollv  difFercnt  from  the  writer.  None  who
have  a  genius  for  writing  and  can  })erform  with  any  success  are
presumed  so  ill-natured  or  illiberal  as  to  endeavour  to  signalise
themselves  in  criticism.

'Tis  not  difficult,  however,  to  imagine  why  this  practical
^  A'iz.  supra,  Misc.  i.  ch.  ii.

325


SHAFTESBURY'S CHxVRACTERISTICS

difference  between  writer  unci  critic  has  been  so  generally
established  amongst  ns  as  to  make  the  provinces  seem  wholly
distinct  and  irreconcilable.  The  forward  wits  who,  without
waiting  their  due  time  or  performing  their  recjuisite  studies,  start
up  in  the  world  as  authors,  having  with  little  pains  or  judgment
and  by  the  strength  of  fancy  merely  accjuired  a  name  with
mankind,  can  on  no  account  afterwards  submit  to  a  decrial  or
disjjaragement  of  those  raw  works  to  which  they  owed  their
early  character  and  distinction.  Ill  would  it  fare  with  them,
indeed,  if  on  these  tenacious  terms  they  should  venture  upon
criticism,  or  offer  to  move  that  spirit  which  would  infallibly  give
such  disturbance  to  their  established  title.

Now  we  may  consider  that  in  our  nation,  and  especially  in
our  present  age,  whilst  wars,  debates,  and  public  convulsions
turn  our  minds  so  wholly  u})on  business  and  affairs,  the  better
geniuses  being  in  a  manner  necessarily  involved  in  the  active
sphere,  on  which  the  general  eye  of  mankind  is  so  strongly  fixed,
there  must  remain  in  the  theatre  of  wit  a  sufficient  vacancy  of
place,  and  the  quality  of  actors  upon  that  stage  must  of  con-
sequence be  very  easily  attainable,  and  at  a  low  price  of  ingenuity
or  understanding.

The  persons,  therefore,  who  are  in  possession  of  the  prime
parts  in  this  deserted  theatre,  being  suffered  to  maintain  their
ranks  and  stations  in  full  ease,  have  naturally  a  good  agreement
and  understanding  with  their  fellow- wits.  Being  indebted  to
the  times  for  this  happiness,  that  wdth  so  little  industry  or
capacity  they  have  been  able  to  serve  the  nation  with  wit,  and
supply  the  place  of  real  dispensers  and  ministers  of  the  muses'
treasures,  they  must  necessarily,  as  they  have  any  love  for  them-
selves or  fatherly  affection  for  their  works,  conspire  with  one
another  to  preserve  their  common  interest  of  indolence  and
justify  their  remissness,  uncorrectness,  insipidness,  and  downright
ignorance  of  all  literate  art  or  just  poetic  beauty.
Magna  inter  molles  concordia.^
1  Juveii.  Sat.  ii.  47. ["Great  is  tlie  unity  of  the  effeminate."]

326


MISCEIJ.ANP^OUS llEFLECTIONS

For  tliis  reason  voii  see  tlicni  imituallv  courteous  ami
benevolent,  gracious  anil  ol)li<ring  beyond  measure  ;  complinient-
ing  one  another  interchan<;eablv,  at  the  liead  of  their  works,  in
reconnneiulatory  verses,  or  in  separate  paneo;yrics,  essays,  and
fragments  of  poetry  ;  sucli  as  in  the  Miscellaneous  Collections
(our  yearly  retail  of  wit)  we  see  curiously  compacted  and  accom-
modated to  the  relish  of  the  world.  Here  the  tijroc'in'nnii  of
geniuses  is  annually  displayed.  Here,  if  you  think  fit,  you  may
make  ac({uaintance  with  the  voung  offspring  of  wits  as  they  come
up  grailually  under  the  old  ;  with  due  courtship  and  homage
paid  to  those  high  predecessors  of  fame  in  liope  of  being  one
tlay  admitted,  by  turn,  into  the  noble  order  and  nuide  wits  by
patent  and  authority.

This  is  the  young  fry  which  you  may  see  busily  surrounding
the  grown  poet  or  chief  ])lay house  author,^  at  a  coffee-house.
They  are  his  guards,  ready  to  take  up  arms  for  him,  if  by  some
presumptuous  critic  he  is  at  any  time  attacked.  They  are  indeed
the  very  shadows  of  their  innnediate  predecessor,  and  represent
the  same  features,  with  some  small  alteration  perhaps  for  the
worse.  They  are  sure  to  aim  at  nothing  above  or  beyond  their
master,  and  would  on  no  account  give  him  the  least  jealousy  of
their  aspiring  to  any  degree  or  order  of  writing  above  him.
From  hence  that  harmony  and  reciprocal  esteem,  which,  on  such
a  bottom  as  this,  cannot  fail  of  being  perfectly  well  established
among  our  poets :  the  age,  meanwhile,  being  after  this  manner
hopefully  provided  and  secure  of  a  constant  and  like  succession
of  meritorious  wits,  in  every  kind  !

If  by  chance  a  man  of  sense,  una})prised  of  the  authority  of
these  high  powers,  should  venture  to  accost  the  gentlemen  of
this  fraternity,  at  some  coffee-house  committee,  whilst  thev  were
taken  up  in  mutual  admiration  and  the  usual  praise  of  their

'  [In  view  of  the  references  to  "ten-monosyllable  heroics"  above
(p.  '"322),  and  to  "Mr.  Bays"  in  the  sequel,  it  is  probable  that  here  also
Dryden  is  aimed  at.  As  he  died  in  1700,  there  is  room  for  a  presumption
that  this  portion  of  the  Miscellanies  had  been  written  before  that  date.]

327


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

national  and  co-temporary  wits,  'tis  possible  he  might  be  treated
with  some  civility,  whilst  he  inquired,  for  satisfaction  sake,  into
the  beauties  of  those  particular  works  so  unanimously  extolled.
But  should  he  presume  to  ask  in  general,  "  AVhy  is  our  epic  or
dramatic,  our  essay  or  common  prose  no  better  executed  ?"  Or,
"  Why,  in  particular,  does  such  or  such  a  reputed  wit  write'  so
incorrectly,  and  with  so  little  regard  to  justness  of  thought  or
language?"  The  answer  would  presently  be  given,  "That  we
Englishmen  are  not  tied  uj)  to  such  rigid  rules  as  those  of  the
ancient  Grecian  or  modern  Irench  critics."

"  Be  it  so,  gentlemen !  'Tis  your  good  pleasure.  Nor  ought
any  one  to  dispute  it  with  you.  You  are  masters,  no  doubt,  in
your  own  country.  ]Jut,  gentlemen,  the  question  here  is  not
what  your  authority  may  be  over  your  own  writers :  you  may
have  them  of  what  fashion  or  size  of  wit  you  please,  and  allow
them  to  entertain  you  at  the  rate  you  think  sufficient  and
satisfactory.  But  can  you,  by  your  good  pleasure,  or  the
approbation  of  your  highest  patrons,  make  that  to  be  either  wit
or  sense,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  bombast  and  con-
tradiction ? If  your  poets  are  still  Mr.  BaysV  and  your  prose

^  To  see  the  iiicorrigibleness  of  our  poets  in  their  pedantic  manner,
their  vanity,  defiance  of  criticism,  their  rhodomontade  and  poetical  bravado,
we  need  only  turn  to  our  famous  poet-laureate  (the  very  Mr.  Bays  himself)
in  one  of  his  latest  and  most  valued  pieces,  writ  many  years  after  the
ingenious  author  of  the  liehearsul  had  drawn  his  picture.  "  I  have  been
listening"  (says  our  poet  in  liis  preface  to  Don  Sebastian)  "  what  objections
had  been  made  against  the  conduct  of  the  play,  but  found  tliem  all  so
trivial,  that  if  I  should  name  them  a  true  critic  would  imagine  that  I  played
booty.  .  .  .  Some  are  pleased  to  say  the  writing  is  dull.  But  aetatem
habet,  de  se  loquatur.  Others,  that  the  double  poison  is  unnatural.  Let
the  common  received  opinion,  and  Ausonius  his  famous  epigram,  answer
that.  Lastly,  a  more  ignorant  sort  of  creatures  than  either  of  the  former
maintain  that  the  character  of  Dorax  is  not  only  unnatural  but  inconsistent
with  itself.  Let  them  read  the  play  and  think  again.  A  longer  reply
is  what  these  cavillers  deserve  not. But  I  will  give  them  and  their  fellows

to  understand,  that  the  Earl  of was  pleased  to  read  the  tragedy  twice

over  before  it  was  acted,  and  did  me  the  favour  to  send  me  word  that  1  had

328


MISCELLAXKOIS IJEFLECTIOXS

authors  Sir  Jiogcrs,  without  offl-ring  at  a  better  nianufr,  must
it  follow  that  the  manner  itself  is  good  or  the  wit  genuine?
AVhat  say  you,  gentlemen,  to  this  new  ])iece  ?  Let  us  examine
these  lines  which  you  call  shining!  This  string  of  sentences
which  you  call  clever!  This  pile  of  metaphors  which  vou  call
sublime!  Are  you  unwilling,  gentlemen,  to  stand  the  test?
Do  vou  desj)ise  the  examination  ?

"  Sir !  since  you  are  pleased  to  take  this  libertv  with  us,  may
we  ])resume  to  ask  you  a  question  ?  Oh,  gentlemen  !  as  many  as
you  ])lease :,  I  shall  be  highly  honoured.  AMiv  then,  prav  sir  !
inform  us  whether  you  have  ever  writ  ?  \  ery  often,  gentlemen,
especially  on  a  ])ost-night.  lint  have  you  writ,  for  instance,
sir,  a  J^lay,  a  song,  an  essay,  or  a  ])a])er,  as,  by  way  of  eminence,
the  current  ])ieces  of  our  weekly  wits  are  generally  styled  ?
Something  of  this  kind  I  may  ])erhaps,  gentlemen,  have
attem})tcd,  though  without  publishing  my  work.  But  prav,
gentlemen,  what  is  my  waiting  or  not  writing  to  the  question  in
hand  ?  Only  this,  sir,  and  you  may  fairly  take  our  words  for  it,
that  whenever  you  jiublish  you  will  find  the  town  against  you.
Your  piece  will  infallibly  be  condemned.  So  let  it.  But  for
what  reason,  gentlemen  ? I  am  sure  you  never  saw  the  piece.

written  beyond  any  of  my  former  plays,  and  tliat  lie  was  displeased  any-
thing should  be  cut  away.  If  I  have  not  reason  to  prefer  his  single  judg-
ment to  a  whole  faction,  let  the  Morld  be  judge  :  for  the  oppt)sition  is  the
same  with  that  of  Lucan's  liero  against  an  army,  concurrere  helium  atijue
virum. I  think  I  may  modestly  conclude,  etc."

Thus  he  goes  on  to  the  very  end  in  the  self-same  strain,  ^^'ho,  after
this,  can  ever  say  of  the  RehcurKal  author  that  his  picture  of  our  poet  was
over-charged,  or  the  national  humour  wrong  described  ?

[Shaftesbury  might  have  mentioned  that  Uryden  in  his  closing  paragraph
writes,  "  At  least,  if  I  appear  too  ])ositive,  I  am  growing  old,  and  thereby  in
j)ossession  of  some  experience,  which  men  in  years  will  always  assume  for  a
right  of  talking."  He  had,  besides,  been  deprived  of  his  offices  of  poet-
laureate  and  historiograj)her-royal  at  the  Revolution,  and  being  forced  to
return  to  ])lay-writing  for  a  livelihood,  after  having  given  it  up  for  eight
years,  saw  in  the  attacks  on  Don  Sebdstitnt  an  ungenerous  hostility  to  himself.
'I'he  play  was  published  in  1(J!H),  his  tifty-ninth  year.]

329


SHAITESIUJRY'S CHAKACTERISTICS

No,  sir.  IJut  you  are  a  critic.  .Viid  we  know  by  certain  ex-
perience that,  when  a  critic  writes  according  to  rule  and  method,
he  is  sure  never  to  hit  the  English  taste.  Did  not  Mr.  Rymer,
who  criticised  our  English  tragedy,  write  a  sorry  one  of  his
own  't  If  he  did,  gentlemen,  'twas  his  own  fault,  not  to  know
his  genius  better.  But  is  his  criticism  the  less  just  on  this
account.'^  If  a  musician  performs  his  part  well  in  the  hardest
symphonies  he  must  necessarily  know  the  notes  and  understand
the  rules  of  harmony  and  music.  IJut  must  a  man,  therefore,
who  has  an  ear,  and  has  studied  the  rules  of  nnisic,  of  necessity
have  a  voice  or  hand  "^  Can  no  one  possibly  judge  a  fiddle  but
who  is  himself  a  fiddler .?  Can  no  one  judge  a  picture  but  who
is  himself  a  layer  of  colours  ?  "

Thus  far  our  rational  gentleman  })erhaps  might  venture
before  his  coffee-house  audience.  Had  I  been  at  his  elbow  to
prompt  him  as  a  friend,  I  should  hardly  have  thought  iit  to
remind  him  of  any  thing  further.  On  the  contrary,  I  should
have  rather  taken  him  aside  to  inform  him  of  this  cabal  and
established  corporation  of  wit,  of  their  declared  aversion  to
criticism,  and  of  their  known  laws  and  statutes  in  that  case
made  and  provided.  I  should  have  told  him,  in  short,  that
learned  arguments  would  be  missj)ent  on  such  as  these,  and  that
he  would  find  little  success,  though  he  should  ever  so  plainly
demonstrate  to  the  gentlemen  of  this  size  of  wit  and  understand-
ing, "  that  the  greatest  masters  of  art,  in  every  kind  of  writing,
were  eminent  in  the  critical  practice."  But  that  they  really
were  so,  Avitness,  among  the  ancients,  their  greatest  philo-
sophers,^ whose  critical  pieces  lie  intermixed  with  their  profound
philosophical  works  and  other  politer  tracts  ornamentally  writ  ^
for  public  use.  Witness,  in  history  and  rhetoric,  Isocrates,
Dionysius  Halicarnasseus,  Plutarch,  and  the  corrupt  Lucian
himself; the only one perhaps of these authors  whom our

1  Viz.  PlatOj  Aristotle. See  iu  particular  the  Phaedrus  of  the  former,
where  an  entire  piece  of  the  orator  Lysias  is  criticised  in  form.

-  The  distinction  of  treatises  was  into  the  aKpoa/xaTiKoi  and  e^corepLKol.

330


MISCELLANEOUS UKl  LECTIONS

<i;ciitlL'iiicii  iiiav,  ill  sonic  uiodcni  translation,  ha\c  looked  into
with  any  c-iniositv  or  clclii;lit.  To  these  anioM^-  lh(j  Jloinans  wc
may  add  Cicero,  NaiTo,  Horace,  (^)iiintiliaii,  IMinv,  and  many
more.

Anioii^-  the  moderns,  a  IJoileau  and  a  Corneille  are  siiliicient
j)recedents  in  the  case  before  us.  They  a]){)lied  their  criticism
with  just  seyerity,  eyen  to  their  own  works.  This  indeed  is  a
manner  hartlly  practicable  witli  the  poets  of  oui-  own  nation.
It  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  of  them  tliat  they  sliould
brini>-  such  measures  in  use  as,  beino*  apj)lied  to  their  works,
would  discoyer  them  to  be  wholly  defoiinetl  and  disproportion-
able.  ^Tis  no  wonder,  therefore,  if  we  haye  so  little  of  this
critical  ijenius  extant  to  uuide  us  in  our  taste,  "ris  no  wonder
if  what  is  generally  current  in  this  kind  lies  in  a  manner  buried,
and  in  disguise  under  l)urles(jue,  as  particularly  in  the  witty
comedy  ^  of  a  noble  author  of  this  last  age.  To  the  shame,  how-
ever, of  our  })rofessed  wits  and  enterprisers  in  the  higher  spheres
of  poetry,  it  may  be  observed  that  they  have  not  wanted  good
advice  and  instruction  of  the  oniver  kind  from  as  hi<>h  a  hand
in  respect  of  cjuality  and  character;  since  one  of  the  justest  of
our  modern  poems,  and  so  confessed  even  by  our  poets  them-
selves, is  a  short  criticism,  an  Art  of  Poetry  ;  -  by  \\hich,  if  they
themselves  were  to  be  judged,  they  must  in  general  appear  no
better  than  mere  bunglers,  and  void  of  all  true  sense  and
knowledge  in  their  art.  But  if  in  reality  both  critic  and  poet,
confessing  the  justice  of  these  rules  of  art,  can  afterwards  in
practice  condenui  and  approve,  perform  and  judge  in  a  (][uite
different  manner  from  what  they  acknowledge  just  and  true;  it
plainly  shows  that  though  perhaps  we  are  not  indigent  in  wit,
we  want  what  is  of  more  consecpiencc,  and  can  alone  raise  wit  to
any  dignity  or  worth,  even  plain  honesty,  manners,  and  a  sense
of  that  moral  truth  on  which  (as  has  been  often  expressed  in

^  The  Rehearsal. See  Treatise  iii.  part  ii.  §  2  ;  and  just  above,  p.  028.
-  Or  Essay  on  Poetry, by J. Sheffield, Duke of  BuckingliamsJiire.
[Note  in  small  ed.  of  1733.]

331


SHAFTESBURY'S CHAllACTERISTICS

these  volumes)  1  poetic  truth  and  beauty  must  naturally  depend.

Qui  didicit,  patriae  quid  debeat  et  quid  amicis,
(^uo  sit  amore  parens^,  quo  frater  amandus  et  hosi)cs,
(^uod  sit  conscripti^  quod  judicis  otficium,

. . . ille  pi'ofecto
Reddere  personae  scit  conveiiientia  cuique.^

As  for  this  species  of  morality  which  distinguishes  the  civil
offices  of  life  and  describes  each  becomino-  personage  or  character
in  this  scene,  so  necessary  it  is  for  the  poet  and  polite  author
to  be  apprised  of  it,  that  even  the  divine  himself  may  with  juster
pretence  be  exempted  from  the  knowledge  of  this  sort.  The
composer  of  religious  discourses  has  the  advantage  of  that  higher
scene  of  mystery,  which  is  above  the  level  of  human  commerce.
'Tis  not  so  much  his  concern  or  business  to  be  agreeable.  And
often  when  he  would  endeavour  it,  he  becomes  more  than
ordinarily  displeasing.  His  theatre  and  that  of  the  polite
world  are  very  different,  insomuch  that  in  a  reverend  author  or
declaimer  of  this  sort,  we  naturally  excuse  the  ignorance  of
ordinary  decorum,  in  what  relates  to  the  affairs  of  our  inferior
temporal  world.  But  for  the  poet  or  genteel  writer,  who  is  of
this  world  merely,  'tis  a  different  case.  He  must  be  perfect  in  this
moral  science.  We  can  easily  bear  the  loss  of  indifferent  poetry
or  essay.  A  good  bargain  it  were,  could  we  get  rid  of  every
moderate  performance  in  this  kind.  But  were  we  obliged  to
hear  only  excellent  sermons,  and  to  read  nothing  in  the  way  of
devotion  which  was  not  well  writ,  it  might  ])ossibly  go  hard
with  many  Christian  people  who  are  at  present  such  attentive
auditors  and  readers. Established  pastors  have  a  right  to  be

1  Viz.  Treatise  iii.  part  i.  §  3  ;  part  ii.  §  .'3  ;  part  iii.  §  S.  So  above,
p.  318,  and  in  the  notes.

^  ["The  man  wlio  has  learned  what  are  his  duties  to  his  fatherland  or
to  his  friends  ;  what  affection  is  due  to  a  fatlier,  a  brotlier,  or  a  guest ;
what  is  the  duty  of  a  senator,  M-liat  of  a  juryman,  .  .  .  he  to  be  sure  knows
how  to  find  suitable  language  for  each  character." — Hor.  De  arte  poet.,
312-316.]

332


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

indifferent.  ]kit  voluntary  discourses  and  attempters  in  wit
or  poetry  are  as  intolerable,  when  they  are  indifferent,  as  either
fiddlers  or  painters  : —

I'otcral  (hici  (jiiia  totii.i  sitir  istis.i
Other  IJays'  and poetasters  may  he lawfully  baited,  though  we
patiently  submit  to  our  iVays'  in  divinity.

Had  the  author  of  our  subject  treatises-  considered
thoroughly  of  these  literate  affairs,  and  found  how  the  interest
of  wit  stood  at  present  in  our  nation,  he  would  have  liad  so
much  rejrard  surely  to  his  own  interest,  as  never  to  have  writ
unless  either  in  the  sinole  capacity  of  mere  critic,  or  that  of
author  in  form.  If  he  had  resolved  never  to  })roduce  a  re<i;ular
or  legitimate  piece,  he  might  ])retty  safely  have  writ  on  still
after  the  rate  of  his  first  volume  and  mixed  manner.  He
mio-ht  have  been  as  critical,  as  satirical,  or  as  full  of  raillery  as
he  had  pleased,  liut  to  come  afterwards  as  a  grave  actor  u})on
the  stage,  and  expose  himself  to  criticism  in  his  turn,  by  giving
us  a  work  or  two  in  form,  after  the  regular  manner  of  comjiosi-
tion,  as  Ave  see  in  his  second  volume ;  this  I  think  was  no
extraordinary  proof  of  his  judgment  or  ability,  in  what  related
to  his  own  credit  and  advantage.

One  of  these  formal  pieces  (the  Incjuiry,  already  examined)
we  have  found  to  be  wholly  after  the  manner  which  in  one  of
his  critical  pieces  he  calls  the  methodic.  IJut  his  next  piece
(the  ^Moralists,  which  we  have  now  before  us)  must,  according  to
his  own  rules,^  be  reckoned  as  an  undertaking  of  greater  weight.
'Tis  not  only  at  the  bottom  as  systematical,  didactic,  and  pre-
ceptive as  that  other  piece  of  formal  structure;  but  it  assumes
withal  another  garb  and  more  fashionable  turn  of  wit.  It  con-
ceals what  is  scholastical  under  the  ajipearance  of  a  polite  work.
It  aspires  to  dialogue,  and  carries  with  it  not  only  those  poetic

1  ["Because  a  (liiiiier  could  be  carried  on  without  them." — Ilor.  De
arte  poet. ,  370.

-  Supra,  Misc.  iii.  ch.  i.  ; iv.  ch.  i.
^  Treatise  in.  part  i.  §  •'> ;  part  ii.  §  1.

333


SHxVFTESlUJRY'S CHAllACTERISTICS

features  of  the  pieces  anciently  called  mimes  ;  but  it  attempts  to
unite  the  several  personages  and  characters  in  one  action  or
story,  within  a  determinate  com])ass  of  time,  regularly  divided
and  drawn  into  different  and  proportioned  scenes ;  and  this,
too,  with  variety  of  styles ;  the  simple,  comic,  rhetorical,  and
even  the  poetic  or  sublime,  such  as  is  the  aptest  to  run  into
enthusiasm  and  extravagance.  So  much  is  our  author,  by  virtue
of  this  piece,^  a  poet  in  due  form,  and  by  a  more  apparent
claim  than  if  he  had  writ  a  play  or  dramatic  piece  in  as  regular
a  manner,  at  least,  as  any  known  at  ])resent  on  our  stage.

It  appears,  indeed,  that  as  high  as  our  author  in  his  critical
capacity  would  pretend  to  carry  the  refined  manner  and
accurate  simplicity  of  the  ancients,  he  dares  not,  in  his  own  model
and  principal  performance,  attempt  to  unite  his  philosophy  in
one  solid  and  uniform  body,  nor  carry  on  his  argument  in  one
continued  chain  or  thread.  Here  our  author's  timorousness  is
visible. In  the  very  plan  or  model  of  his  work,  he  is  apparently

^  That  he  is  conscious  of  this,  we  may  gather  from  that  line  or  two  of
advertisement,  which  stands  at  the  beginning-  of  liis  first  edition.  "As
for  the  cliaracters  and  incidents,  they  are  neither  wholly  feigned,"  says  he,
"  nor  wholly  true ;  but  according  to  the  liberty  allowed  in  the  way  of
dialogue,  the  principal  matters  are  founded  upon  truth,  and  the  rest  as
near  resembling  as  may  be.  'Tis  a  sceptic  recites,  and  the  hero  of  the
piece  passes  for  an  enthusiast.  If  a  perfect  character  be  wanting,  'tis  the
same  case  here  as  with  the  poets  in  some  of  their  best  pieces.  And  this
surely  is  a  sufficient  warrant  for  the  author  of  a  philosophical  romance."
ITius  our  author  himself,  who  to  conceal,  however,  his  strict  imitation  of
the  ancient  poetic  dialogue,  has  prefixed  an  auxiliary  title  to  his  work,
and  given  it  the  surname  of  Rhapsody.  As  if  it  were  merely  of  that  essay
or  mixed  kind  of  works,  which  come  abroad  with  an  affected  air  of
negligence  and  irregularity.  But  whatever  our  author  may  have  affected
in  his  title  page,  'twas  so  little  his  intention  to  write  after  that  model  of
incoherent  workmanship,  that  it  appears  to  be  sorely  against  his  will  if
this  dialogue  piece  of  his  has  not  the  just  character  and  correct  form  of
those  ancient  poems  described.  He  M'ould  gladly  lun'e  constituted  one
single  action  and  time,  suitable  to  the  just  simplicity  of  those  dramatic
works. And  this,  one  would think,  was  easy  enough  for  him to  have

334


INIISCELLANEOIJS REFLECTIONS

put  to  a  liard  shift  to  contrive  liow  or  with  wliat  |)rol)abihty  ho
might  introduce  men  of  any  note  or  fashion,  reasoninji;  expressly
an(l  purposely,^  without  ])lay  or  trifling,  for  two  or  three  hours
together  on  mere  ])hiIosophy  and  morals.  He  finds  these
subjects  (as  he  confesses)  so  wide  of  connuon  conversation,
and  by  long  custom  so  a])pro]n-iated  to  the  school,  the
university  chair  or  ])ul])it,  that  he  thinks  it  hardly  safe  or
practicable  to  treat  of  them  elsewhere  or  in  a  different  tone.
He  is  forced  therefore  to  raise  particular  machines,  and  con-
strain his  principal  characters  in  order  to  carry  a  better  face
and  bear  himself  out  against  the  appearance  of  pedantry.
Thus  his  gentleman  philosoj)her  Theocles,  before  he  enters  into
his  real  character,  becomes  a  feigned  preacher.  And  even  when
his  real  character  comes  on,  he  hardly  dares  stand  it  out ;  but
to  deal  the  better  with  his  sceptic  friend  he  falls  again  to  per-
sonating, and  takes  up  the  humour  of  the  poet  and  enthusiast.
Palemon  the  man  of  quality,  and  who  is  first  introduced  as
speaker  in  the  piece,  must,  for  fashion-sake,  appear  in  love,  and
under  a  kind  of  melancholy  produced  by  some  misadventures  in
the  world.  How  else  should  he  be  supposed  so  serious  ?
Philocles  his  friend  (an  airy  gentleman  of  the  world  and  a
thorough  railleur')  must  have  a  home  charge  upon  him,  and  feel
the  anger  of  his  grave  friend  before  he  can  be  supposed  grave

done.  He  needed  only  to  have  brouirht  his  first  speakers  immediately
into  action,  and  saved  the  narrative  or  recitative  part  of  Philocles  to
Palemon,  by  producing-  them  as  speaking  personages  upon  his  stage.
The  scene  all  along  might  have  been  the  park.  From  the  early  evening
to  the  late  hour  of  night,  that  the  two  gallants  withdrew  to  their  town
apartments,  there  was  sufficient  time  for  the  narrator  Philocles  to  have
recited  the  whole  transaction  of  the  second  and  third  part,  which  would
have  stood  throughout  as  it  now  does ;  only  at  the  conclusion,  when  the
narrative  or  recitative  part  had  ceased,  the  simple  and  direct  dialogue
would  have  again  returned  to  grace  the  exit.  By  this  means  the  temporal
as  well  as  local  unity  of  the  piece  had  been  preserved.  Nor  had  our
author  been  necessitated  to  commit  that  anachronism,  of  making  his  first
part  in  order  to  be  last  in  time.

1  Treatise  u.  part  i.  §  3.  -  [Shaftesbury  wrote  "  Kaillyer."]

335


SHAFTESHURYS CHARACTERISTICS

enough  to  enter  into  a  philosophical  discourse.  A  quarter  of
an  hour's  reading  must  serve  to  represent  an  hour  or  two's
debate.  And  a  new  scene  presenting  itself,  ever  and  anon,  must
give  refreshment,  it  seems,  to  the  faint  reader,  and  remind  him
of  the  characters  and  business  going  on.

'Tis  in  the  same  view  that  we  miscellanarian  authors,  being
fearful  of  the  natural  lassitude  and  satiety  of  our  indolent  reader,
have  prudently  betaken  ourselves  to  the  ways  of  chapters  and
contents,  that  as  the  reader  proceeds,  by  frequent  intervals  of
repose  contrived  on  purpose  for  him,  he  may  from  time  to  time
be  advertised  of  what  is  yet  to  come,  and  be  tempted  thus  to
renew  his  application.

Thus  in  our  modern  plays  we  see,  almost  in  every  other  leaf,
descriptions  or  illustrations  of  the  action,  not  in  the  poem  itself,
or  in  the  mouth  of  the  actors,  but  by  the  poet  in  his  own
person ;  in  order,  as  appears,  to  help  out  a  defect  of  the  text
by  a  kind  of  marginal  note  or  comment,  which  renders  these
pieces  of  a  mixed  kind  between  the  narrative  and  dramatic.
'Tis  in  this  fashionable  style  or  manner  of  dumb  show  that  the
reader  finds  the 'action  of  the  piece  more  amazingly  expressed
than  he  possibly  could  by  the  lines  of  the  drama  itself,  where
the  j^arties  alone  are  suffered  to  be  speakers.

'Tis  out  of  the  same  regard  to  ease,  both  in  respect  of  writer
and  reader,  that  we  see  long  characters  and  descriptions  at  the
head  of  most  dramatic  pieces,  to  inform  us  of  the  relations,
kindred,  interest,  and  designs  of  the  dramatis  personae ;  this
being  of  the  highest  importance  to  the  reader,  that  he  may  the
better  understand  the  jilot,  and  find  out  the  principal  characters
and  incidents  of  the  piece,  which  otherwise  could  not  possibly
discover  themselves  as  they  are  read  in  their  due  order.  And
to  do  justice  to  our  play-readers,  they  seldom  fail  to  humour
our  poets  in  this  respect,  and  read  over  the  characters  with  strict
application,  as  a  sort  of  grammar  or  key,  before  they  enter  on
the  piece  itself.  I  know  not  whether  they  would  do  so  much
for  any  philosophical  piece  in the  world. Our  author  seems

336


MISCELI^AXEOIS KKl  LKCTIONS

very  imicli  lo  (|iu^li»)ii  it,  and  lias  I  here  I  ore  made  that  j)art  easy
enoutfh  which  relates  to  the  distinction  of  his  characters,  by
niakin<i,'  use  of  tlie  narrative  manner.  'i'hou<;h  he  had  done  as
well,  perhaps,  not  to  have  <yo\\c  out  of  the  natural  plain  way  on
this  account.  For  with  those  to  whom  such  philosophical
subjects  are  a<^reeable,  it  could  be  thou<j;ht  no  laborious  task  to
give  the  same  attention  to  characters  in  dialogue  as  is  given  at
the  first  entrance  by  every  reader  to  the  easiest  play  composed
of  fewest  and  plainest  personages.  But  for  those  who  read
these  subjects  witli  mere  supineness  anil  indifference,  they  will
as  much  begrudge  the  pains  of  attending  to  the  characters  thus
particularly  jiointed  out  as  if  they  had  only  been  discernible  by
inference  and  deduction  from  the  mouth  of  the  speaking  parties
themselves.

More  reasons  are  given  by  our  author^  himself  for  his  avoid-
iiig  the  direct  way  of  dialogue,  which  at  present  lies  so  low,  and  is
used  only  now  and  then  in  our  party-pamphlets  or  new-fashioned
theological  essays.  For  of  late,  it  seems,  the  manner  has  been
introduced  into  Chm'ch  controversy,  with  an  attempt  of  raillery
and  humour,  as  a  more  successful  method  of  dealing  with  heresy
and  infidelity.  The  burlesque  divinity  grows  mightily  in  vogue.
And  the  cried-up  answers  to  heterodox  discourses  are  generally
such  as  are  written  in  drollery  or  with  resemblance  of  the
facetious  and  humorous  language  of  conversation.

Joy  to  the  reverend  authors  who  can  afford  to  be  thus  gay,
and  condescend  to  correct  us  in  this  lay-wit.  The  advances  they
make  in  behalf  of  piety  and  manners  by  such  a  popular  style
are  doubtless  found  upon  experience  to  be  vei-y  considerable.
As  these  reformers  are  nicely  qualified  to  hit  the  air  of  breeding
and  gentilitv,  they  will  in  time,  no  doubt,  refine  their  manner
and  improve  this  jocular  method,  to  the  edification  of  the  polite
world,  who  have  been  so  long  seduced  by  the  way  of  raillery
and  wit.  They  may  do  wonders  by  their  comic  muse,  and  may
thus,  perhaps,  find  means  to  laugh  gentlemen  into  their  religion
^  Treatise  v.  part  i.  §  1.
VOL.  II  337  Z


SHAFTESHURVS CHARACTElilSTICS

who  have  unfortunately  been  laughed  out  of  it.  For  what
reason  is  there  to  suppose  that  orthodoxy  should  not  be  able
to  laugh  as  agreeably,  and  with  as  much  refinedness,  as  heresy
or  infidelity  ?

At  present,  it  nuist  be  owned,  the  characters  or  jiersonages
employed  by  our  new  orthodox  dialogists  carry  with  them  little
proportion  or  coherence,  and  in  this  respect  may  be  said  to  suit
perfectly  with  that  figurative  metaphorical  style  and  rhetorical
manner,  in  which  their  logic  and  arguments  are  generally
couched.  Nothing  can  be  more  complex  or  multiform  than
their  moral  draughts  or  sketches  of  humanity.  These,  indeed,
are  so  far  from  representing  any  particular  man  or  order  of  men,
that  they  scarce  resemble  anything  of  the  kind.  'Tis  by  their
names  only  that  these  characters  are  figured.  Though  they
bear  different  titles  and  are  set  up  to  maintain  contrary  points,
they  are  found,  at  the  bottom,  to  be  all  of  the  same  side ;  and,
notwdthstanding  their  seeming  variance,  to  co-operate  in  the
most  officious  manner  with  the  author,  towards  the  display  of
his  own  proper  wit,  and  the  establishment  of  his  private  opinion
and  maxims.  They  are  indeed  his  very  legitimate  and  obse-
quious puppets,  as  like  real  men  in  voice,  action,  and  manners
as  those  wooden  or  wire  engines  of  the  lower  stage.  Philotheus
and  Philatheus,  Philautus  and  Philalethes  are  of  one  and  the
same  order:  just  tallies  to  one  another;  questioning  and
answering  in  concert,  and  with  such  a  sort  of  alternative  as  is
known  in  a  vulgar  play,  where  one  person  lies  down  blindfold
and  presents  himself,  as  fair  as  may  be,  to  another,  who  by  favour
of  the  company  or  the  assistance  of  his  good  fortune,  deals  his
companion  many  a  sound  blow,  without  being  once  challenged,
or  brought  into  his  turn  of  lying  down.

There  is  the  same  curious  mixture  of  chance  and  elejrant
vicissitude  in  the  style  of  these  mock  personages  of  our  new-
theological  drama;  with  this  difference  only,  "that  after  the
poor  phantom  or  shadow  of  an  adversary  has  said  as  little  for
his  cause  as  can  be  imagined,  and given  as  many  opens  and

338


MISCEIJ.AXKOUS RRFT.KCTIOXS

;ul\;uil;ii;(.'.s  ;i.s  roiilcl  l)c  (Icsircd,  he  lies  down  tor  i^ood  ami  all,
and  ])assivcly  submits  to  llu-  killiiii;-  strokes  of  his  unmerciful
c'()n(|UL'r()r.'"

Hardly,  as  1  conceive,  will  it  be  objected  to  our  moralist
(the  author  of  the  philosojihic  dialo<;ue  above)  "that  the  per-
sonages who  sustain  the  sce])tical  or  ()l)jectin<i;  parts,  are  over-
tame  and  tractable  in  their  disjjosition."''  Did  I  })erceive  any
such  foul  dealing;  in  his  piece,  I  should  scarce  think  it  worthy  of
the  criticism  liere  bestowed.  For  in  this  sort  of  w•ritinf^  where
personages  are  exhibited  and  natural  conversation  set  in  view  ;
if  characters  are  neither  tolerably  ])reserved  nor  maimers  with
any  just  similitude  descri])ed,  there  remains  nothini>;  but  what  is
too  gross  and  monstrous  for  criticism  or  examination.

'Twill  be  alleged,  })erhaps,  in  answer  to  what  is  here  ad-
vanced, "that  should  a  dialogue  be  wrought  up  to  the  exactness
of  these  rules,  it  ought  to  be  condenmed  as  the  worse  piece,  for
affording  the  infidel  or  sceptic  such  gootl  quarter  and  giving  him
the  full  advantage  of  his  argument  and  wit.""

But  to  this  I  reply,  that  either  dialogue  sliould  never  be
attempted,  or,  if  it  be,  the  parties  should  appear  natural  and
such  as  they  really  are.  If  we  paint  at  all,  Ave  should  endeavour
to  paint  like  life  and  draw  creatures  as  tliev  are  knowable,  in
their  proper  shapes  and  better  features,  not  in  metamorphoses,
not  mangled,  lame,  distorted,  awkward  forms,  and  impotent
chimeras.  Atheists  have  their  sense  and  wits  as  other  men,
or  why  is  atheism  so  often  challenged  in  those  of  the  better
rank  ?  Why  charged  so  often  to  the  account  of  wit  and  subtle
reasoning  P

Were  1  to  advise  these  authors,  towards  whom  I  am  ex-
tremely well-affected  on  account  of  their  good-humoured  /eal
and  the  seeming  sociableness  of  their  religion,  1  should  say  to
them,  "  gentlemen !  be  not  so  cautious  of  furnishing  your
representative  sceptic  with  too  good  arguments  or  too  shrewd
a  turn  of  wit  or  humour.  Be  not  so  fearful  of  giving  quarter.
Allow  your  adversary  his  full  reason,  his  ingenuitv,  sense,  and

339


SHAFTESIUJIIY'S CHARACTERISTICS

art.  Trust  to  the  chief  character  or  hero  of  your  piece.  Make
him  as  dazzhng  bright  as  you  are  able.  He  will  undoubtedly
overcome  the  utmost  force  of  his  op})oneiit,  and  dispel  the
darkness  or  cloud  which  the  adversary  may  unluckily  have
raised.  But  if  when  you  have  fairly  wrought  up  your  antagonist
to  his  due  strength  and  cognisable  proportion,  your  chief  char-
acter cannot  afterwards  prove  a  match  for  him  or  shine  with  a
superior  brightness;  whose  fault  is  it.''  The  subject's  .f*  This,
I  hope,  you  will  never  allow.  AVhose,  therefore,  beside  your
own  ?  Beware  then,  and  consider  well  your  strength  and
mastership  in  this  manner  of  writing,  and  in  the  qualifying
practice  of  the  polite  world,  ere  you  attempt  these  accurate  and
refined  linniings  or  portraitures  of  mankind,  or  offer  to  bring
gentlemen  on  the  stage.  For  if  real  gentlemen  seduced,  as  you
pretend,  and  made  erroneous  in  their  religion  or  philosojjhy,
discover  not  the  least  feature  of  their  real  faces  in  your  looking-
glass,  nor  know  themselves  in  the  least  by  your  description,
they  will  hardly  be  apt  to  think  they  are  refuted.  How  wittily
soever  your  comedy  may  be  wrought  up,  they  will  scarce  appre-
hend any  of  that  wit  to  fall  upon  themselves.  They  may  laugh
indeed  at  the  diversion  you  are  pleased  to  give  them,  but  the
laugh  perhaps  may  be  different  from  what  you  intend.  They
may  smile  secretly  to  see  themselves  thus  encountered ;  when
they  find,  at  last,  your  authority  laid  by  and  your  scholastic
weapons  quitted,  in  favour  of  this  weak  attempt  to  master  them
by  their  own  arms  and  proper  ability."

Thus  we  have  performed  our  critical  task,  and  tried  our
strength  both  on  our  author  and  those  of  his  order,  who
attempt  to  write  in  dialogue  after  the  active  dramatic,^  mimical,
or  personating  way,  according  to  which  a  writer  is  properly
poetical.

What  remains,  we  shall  examine  in  our  succeeding  and  last
chapter.

^  See  Treatise  in.  part  i.  §  3.

340


MISCET.LAXEOT\S KEFT.ECTIONS


CHAPTER III

Of  extent  or  latitude  (if  tliou^'-Iit  —  Free-tliitikers — Tlieir  cause  and  cliar-
acter — Dislimiesty,  a  half-tliouj^lit — Slidi-t-thiukiiitr,  cause  «)f  \ice  and
bigotry — Aij'reenH'nt  of  slavery  and  superstition^Liherty,  civil,  moral,
spiritual — rree-thinkini,^  divines — Representatives  incog-nito — Ambas-
sadors from  tbe  moon — Ertectual  determination  of  Cbristian  contro-
versy and  relijiious  lielief

Bein'c;  now  come  to  the  coneliisioii  of  niv  work,  after  liavincr
defended  the  cause  of  critics  in  oeneral,  and  emploved  what
strength  1  had  in  tliat  science  upon  our  adventurous  author  in
particular;  I  may,  accordino-  to  ccpiity  and  with  the  better
grace,  attem])t  a  Hue  or  two  in  defence  of  that  freedom  of
thought  wliich  our  author  has  used,  particularly  in  one  of  the
])er.sonages  of  his  last  dialogue  treatise.

There  is  good  reason  to  suppose  that,  however  ecjuahlv
framed  or  near  alike  the  race  of  mankind  may  appear  in  other
respects,  they  are  not  always  ecjual  thinkers,  or  of  a  like  ability
in  the  management  of  this  natural  talent  which  we  call  thought.
The  race,  on  this  account,  may  therefore  justly  be  distinguished,
as  they  often  are,  by  the  ajipellation  of  the  thinking  and  the
unthinking  sort.  The  mere  mithinkiug  are  such  as  have  not
yet  arrived  to  that  happy  thought  by  which  they  should
observe  "  how  necessary  thinking  is,  and  how-  fatal  the  want
of  it  must  ])roye  to  them.""  The  thinking  ])art  of  mankind,  on
the  other  side,  having  discovered  the  assiduity  and  industry
requisite  to  right  thinking,  and  being  already  connnenced
thinkers  upon  this  foundation,  are  in  the  ]irogress  of  the  affair
convinced  of  the  necessity  of  thinking  to  good  purpose  and
carrying  the  woi-k  to  a  thorough  issue.  They  know  that  if
they  refrain  or  stop  once  upon  this  road,  they  had  done  as  well
never  to  have  set  out.  They  are  not  so  su])inc  as  to  be  with-
held by  mere  laziness,  when  nothing  lies  in  the  way  to  interru])t
the  free  course  and  progress  of  their  thought.

341


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Some  obstacles,  'tis  true,  may  on  this  occasion  be  pretended.
Spectres  may  come  across  and  shadows  of  reason  rise  up  against
reason  itself.  But  if  men  have  once  heartily  espoused  the
reasoning  or  thinking  habit,  they  will  not  easily  be  induced  to
lay  the  practice  down ;  they  will  not  at  an  instant  be  arrested
or  made  to  stand  and  yield  themselves  when  they  come  to  such
a  certain  boundary,  landmark,  })ost,  or  pillar,  erected  here  or
there  (for  what  reason  may  probably  be  guessed)  with  the
inscription  of  a  ne  phis  ultra.

'Tis  not,  indeed,  any  authority  on  earth,  as  we  are  well
assured,  can  stop  us  on  this  road,  unless  we  please  to  make  the
arrest  or  restriction  of  our  own  accord.  'Tis  our  own  thought
which  must  restrain  our  thinking;.  And  whether  the  restrainin";
thought  be  just,  how  shall  we  ever  judge,  without  examining  it
freely  and  out  of  all  constraint  ?  How  shall  we  be  sure  that
we  have  justly  quitted  reason  as  too  high  and  dangerous,  too
aspiring  or  ))resum])tive ;  if  through  fear  of  any  kind  or  sub-
mitting to  mere  command  we  (|uit  our  very  examining  thought,
and  in  the  moment  stop  short,  so  as  to  put  an  end  to  further
thinking  on  the  matter  ?  Is  there  nuich  difference  between  this
case  and  that  of  the  obedient  beasts  of  burden,  who  stop  pre-
cisely at  their  appointed  inn,  or  at  whatever  point  the  charioteer
or  o-overnor  of  the  reins  thinks  fit  to  <>ive  the  signal  for  a  halt  ?

I  cannot  but  from  hence  conclude  that  of  all  species
of  creatures  said  commonly  to  have  brains,  the  most  insipid,
wretched,  and  preposterous  are  those  whom  in  just  propriety  of
speech  we  call  half-thinkers.

I  have  often  known  pretenders  to  wit  break  out  into  admira-
tion on  the  sight  of  some  raw,  heedless,  unthinking  gentleman,
declaring  on  this  occasion  that  they  esteemed  it  the  hap})iest
case  in  the  world,  "  never  to  think  or  trouble  one's  head  with
study  or  consideration."  This  I  have  always  looked  upon  as
one  of  the  highest  airs  of  distinction  which  the  self-admiring
wits  are  used  to  give  themselves  in  public  company.  Now  the
echo  or  antiphony  which  these  elegant  exdaimers  hope,  by  this

342


MTSCETJ.ANEOUS REFLECTIONS

reflection,  to  draw  necessarily  from  their  audience,  is  "  tliut  tlicv
tlicmselvcs  arc  over-freiolitcd  with  tliis  niercliandise  of  thoii<rlit,
and  have  not  only  enough  forhallast,  but  such  a  cari^o  over  and
above  as  is  enough  to  sink  them  by  its  weifrht."  I  am  apt,
however,  to  imasjine  of  tliese  frentlemen  that  it  was  never  their
over-thinkino-  which  oppressed  them,  and  that  if  their  thought
had  ever  really  become  oppressive  to  them,  they  might  thank
themselves  for  having  under-thought  or  reasoned  short,  so  as  to
rest  satisfied  with  a  very  superficial  search  into  matters  of  the
first  and  highest  importance.

If,  for  example,  they  overlooked  the  chief  enjovments  of  life,
which  are  founded  in  honesty  antl  a  good  mind ;  if  ,they  pre-
sumed mere  life  to  be  fully  worth  what  its  tenacious  lovers  are
j)leased  to  rate  it  at ;  if  they  thought  j^ublic  (hstinction,  fame,
power,  an  estate  or  title  to  be  of  the  same  value  as  is  vulgarly
conceived,  or  as  they  concluded  on  a  first  thought  without
further  scepticism  or  after-deliberation  ;  'tis  no  wonder,  if  being
in  time  become  such  mature  dogmatists  and  well-practised
dealers  in  the  affairs  of  what  they  call  a  settlement  or
fortune,  they  are  so  hardly  put  to  it  to  find  case  or  rest  within
themselves.

These  are  tlie  deeply-loaded  and  over-pensive  gentlemen,
who,  esteeming  it  the  truest  wit  to  pursue  what  they  call  their
interest,  wonder  to  find  they  are  still  as  little  at  ease  when  they
have  succeeded  as  when  they  first  attempted  to  advance.

There  can  never  be  less  self-enjoyment  than  in  these  supposed
wise  characters,  these  selfish  computers  of  hap])incss  and  private
good,  whose  pursuits  of  interest,  whether  for  this  world  or
another,  are  attended  with  the  same  steady  vein  of  cunning  and
low  thought,  sordid  deliberations,  perverse  and  crooked  fancies,
ill  dispositions  and  false  relishes  of  life  and  manners.  The
most  negligent,  undesigning,  thoughtless  rake  has  not  only  more
of  sociableness,  ease,  tran(|uilHty  and  freedom  from  worldly
cares,  but  in  reality  more  of  worth,  virtue,  and  merit  than  such
grave  plodders  and  thoughtful  gentlemen  as  these.


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

If  it  happens,  therefore,  that  these  graver,  more  circumspect,
and  deeply  interested  gentlemen  have,  for  their  souPs  sake  and
through  a  careful  provision  for  hereafter,  engaged  in  certain
speculations  of  religion,  their  taste  of  virtue  and  relish  of  life
is  not  the  more  improved  on  this  account.  The  thoughts  they
have  on  these  new  subjects  of  divinity  are  so  biassed  and  per-
plexed by  those  half-thoughts  and  raw  imaginations  of  interest
and  worldly  affairs,  that  they  are  still  disabled  in  the  rational
pursuit  of  happiness  and  good ;  and  being  necessitated  thus  to
remain  short-thinkers,  they  have  the  power  to  go  no  further
than  they  are  led  by  those  to  whom,  under  such  disturbances
and  perplexities,  they  apply  themselves  for  cure  and  comfort.

It  has  been  the  main  scope  and  jirincipal  end  of  these
volumes,  "  to  assert  the  reality  of  a  beauty  and  charm  in  moral
as  well  as  natural  subjects,  and  to  demonstrate  the  reasonable-
ness of  a  proportionate  taste  and  determinate  choice  in  life  and
manners.""  The  standard  of  this  kind  and  the  noted  character
of  moral  truth  appear  so  firmly  established  in  Nature  itself,  and
so  widely  displayed  through  the  intelligent  world,  that  there  is
no  genius,  mind,  or  thinking  jirinciple  which  (if  I  may  say  so)
is  not  really  conscious  in  the  case.  Even  the  most  refractory
and  obstinate  understandings  are  by  certain  reprises  or  returns
of  thought  on  every  occasion  convinced  of  this  existence,  and
necessitated,  in  common  with  others,  to  acknowledge  the  actual
right  and  wrong.

'Tis  evident  that  whensoever  the  mind,  influenced  by  passion
or  humour,  consents  to  any  action,  measure,  or  rule  of  life
contrary  to  this  governing  standard  and  primary  measure  of
intelligence,  it  can  only  be  through  a  weak  thought,  a  scantiness
of  judgment,  and  a  defect  in  the  application  of  that  unavoidable
impression  and  first  natural  rule  of  honesty  and  worth,  against
which  whatever  is  advanced  will  be  of  no  other  moment  than
to  render  a  life  distracted,  incoherent,  full  of  irresolution,
repentance,  and  self-disapprobation.

Thus  every  immorality  and  enormity  of  life  can  only  happen

3U


MISCELLANEOl^S REFLECTIONS

from  a  ])artial  and  narrow  view  of  hap])incss  and  i^ood.  \\'hat-
evcr  takes  from  the  lari>ene.ss  or  freedom  of  tliouirht  must  of
necessity  detract  from  tliat  first  relish  or  taste  on  which  virtue
and  worth  depend.

Foi-  instance,  wlien  the  eye  or  a|)j)etite  is  eagerly  fixed  on
treasure  and  the  monied  bhss  of  ba<5s  and  coffers,  "tis  phiin
there  is  a  kind  of  fascination  in  the  case.  The  sif^ht  is  instantly
(Hverted  from  all  other  views  of  excellence  or  wortli.  And  l)ere,
even  the  vulgar,  as  well  as  the  more  liberal  part  of  mankind,
discover  the  contracted  genius  and  acknowledge  the  narrowness
of  such  a  mind.

In  luxury  and  intemperance  we  easily  apprehend  iiow  far
thouglit  is  oppressed  and  the  mind  debarred  from  just  reflection,
and  from  the  free  examination  and  censure  of  its  own  oj)ini()ns
or  maxims,  on  which  the  conduct  of  a  life  is  formed.

Even  in  that  complicated  good  of  vulgar  kind  whieh  we
commonly  call  interest,  in  which  we  comprehend  both  pleasure,
riches,  power  and  other  exterior  advantages,  we  may  discern
how  a  fascinated  siglit  contracts  a  genius,  and  by  shortening  the
view  even  of  that  very  interest  whicli  it  seeks,  ])etrays  the  knave,
and  necessitates  the  ablest  and  wittiest  })roselyte  of  the  kind
to  expose  himself  on  every  emergency  and  sudden  tuni.

But  above  all  other  enslaving  vices  and  restrainers  of  reason
and  just  thought,  the  most  evidently  ruinous  and  fatal  to  the
understanding  is  that  of  superstition,  bigotry,  and  vulgar
enthusiasm.  This  passion,  not  contented  like  other  vices  to
deceive  and  tacitly  sup})lant  our  reason,  jiiofcsscs  o})en  war,
holds  up  the  intended  chains  and  fetters,  and  declares  its
resolution  to  enslave.

The  artificial  managers  of  this  human  frailty  declaim  against
free-thought  and  latitude  of  understanding.  To  go  beyond
those  bounds  of  thinking  which  they  have  prescribed  is  by  them
declared  a  sacrileire.  To  them  freedom  of  mind,  a  masterv  of
sense,  and  a  liberty  in  thought  and  action  imply  debauch,  cor-
rupticm,  and  dcjn'avity.

34.J


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEIllSTICS

In  consequence  of  their  moral  maxims  and  political
establishments  they  can  indeed  advance  no  better  notion  of
human  happiness  and  enjoyment  than  that  which  is  in  every
respect  the  most  opposite  to  liberty.  'Tis  to  them  doubtless  that
we  owe  the  opprobriousness  and  abuse  of  those  naturally  honest
appellations  of  free-livers,  free-thinkers,  latitudinarians,  or  what-
ever other  character  implies  a  largeness  of  mind  and  generous
use  of  understanding.  Fain  would  they  confound  licentiousness
in  morals  with  liberty  in  thought  and  action,  and  make  the
libertine,  who  has  the  least  mastery  of  himself,  resemble  his
direct  opposite.  For  such  indeed  is  the  man  of  resolute  purpose
and  immovable  adherence  to  reason  against  everything  which
passion,  prepossession,  craft  or  fashion  can  advance  in  favour
of  aught  else.  But  here,  it  seems,  the  grievance  hes.  'Tis
thouo;ht  danoerous  for  us  to  be  over-rational  or  too  much
masters  of  ourselves  in  what  we  draw  by  just  conclusions  from
reason  only.  Seldom  therefore  do  these  expositors  fail  of
bringing  the  thought  of  liberty  into  disgrace.  Even  at  the
expense  of  virtue  and  of  that  very  idea  of  goodness  on  which
they  build  the  mysteries  of  their  profitable  science,  they  derogate
from  morals  and  reverse  all  true  philosophy,  they  refine  on
selfishness  and  explode  generosity,  jn'omote  a  slavish  obedience
in  the  room  of  voluntary  duty  and  free  service,  exalt  blind
ignorance  for  devotion,  reconmiend  low  thought,  decry  reason,
extol  voluptuousness,^  wilfulness,  vindicativeness,  arbitrariness,
vain  glory,  and  even  deify  those  weak  passions  which  are  the
disorace  rather  than  ornament  of  human  nature.-

But  so  far  is  it  from  the  nature  of  liberty  to  indulge  such
passions  as  these,^  that  whoever  acts  at  any  time  under  the
power  of  any  single  one  may  be  said  to  have  already  provided
for  himself  an  absolute  master.  And  he  who  lives  under  the
power  of  a  whole  race  (since  "'tis  scarce  possible  to  obey
one  without  the  other) nuist  of  necessity untlergo the  worst

*  Moralists-,  part  ii.  §  2,  and  below,  ]>.  .348. -  Treatise  i.  §  4,  end.
•'  Mnra/isf.w  part  ii.  §  2  ;  j)art  iii.  §  o.

346


INITSCELLAXEOCS KEFLECTTONS

of servitudes, under tlie most ca])ricious juid domineerin<T
lords.

That  this  is  no  jmradox  even  the  writers  for  entertainment
can  inform  us,  however  others  may  moraHse  who  discourse  or
write  (as  they  pretend)  for  profit  and  instruction.  Tlie  poets
even  of  the  wanton  sort  give  ample  testimony  of  this  slavery
and  wretchedness  of  vice.  They  may  extol  voluptuousness  to
the  skies  and  point  their  wit  as  sharply  as  they  are  ahle  against
a  virtuous  state.  But  when  they  come  afterwards  to  pay  the
necessary  tribute  to  their  commanding  pleasures,  we  hear  their
pathetic  moans  and  find  the  inward  discord  and  calamity  of
their  lives.  Their  example  is  the  best  of  precepts,  since  they
conceal  nothing,  are  sincere,  and  speak  their  passion  out  aloud.
And  'tis  in  this  that  the  very  worst  of  poets  may  justly  bo
preferred  to  the  generality  of  modern  philosophers  or  other
formal  writers  of  a  yet  more  specious  name.  The  muses'  j)upils
never  fail  to  express  their  passions  and  write  just  as  they  feel.
'Tis  not,  indeed,  in  their  nature  to  do  otherwise,  whilst  they
indulge  ,  their  vein  and  are  under  the  power  of  that  natural
enthusiasm  which  leads  them  to  what  is  highest  in  their  jier-
formance.  They  follow  Nature.  They  move  chiefly  as  she
moves  in  them,  without  thought  of  disguising  her  free  motions
and  genuine  operations,  for  the  sake  of  any  scheme  or  hypothesis
which  they  have  formed  at  leisure  and  in  particular  narrow
views.  On  this  account,  though  at  one  time  they  (|uarrcl
])erhaps  with  virtue  for  restraining  them  in  their  forbidden
loves,  they  can  at  another  time  make  her  sufficient  amends,
when  with  indignation  they  complain  "  that  merit  is  neglected,
and  their  worthless  rival  preferred  before  them."  ^
C'ontrane  lucrum  nil  valcrc  caiididuin
Pauperis  ingeniuni  ? -

And thus even in common elegiac,  in  song,  ode,  or  epigram

^  Treatise  ii.  ])art  iv. 2.

2  ["To think  that  the  honest  lieart  of  a poor man slioiild lia\e no
weight  against  f^ohl  !" — Ilor. ,  l-Jpod.  xi.  11,  12.]

347


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

consecrated  to  pleasure  itself,  we  may  often  read  the  dolorous
confession  in  behalf  of  virtue,  and  see  at  the  bottom  how  the
case  stands : —

Nam  verae  voces  turn  demum  pectore  ah  imo
Eliciiintur.^

The  airy  poets  in  these  fits  can,  as  freely  as  the  tragedian,
condole  with  virtue,  and  liemoan  the  case  of  suffering  merit : —

The  oppressor's  wrong,  the  proud  man's  contumely,
The  insolence  of  office,  and  the  spurns
That  patient  merit  of  the  unworthy  takes.

The  poetic  chiefs  may  give  what  reason  they  think  fit  for
their  humour  of  representing  our  mad  ajipetites,  especially  that
of  love,  under  the  shape  of  urchins  and  wanton  bovs  scarce  out
of  their  state  of  infancy.  The  original  design  and  moral  of  this
fiction,  I  am  persuaded,  Avas  to  show  us  how  little  there  was  of
great  and  heroic  in  the  government  of  these  pretenders,  how
truly  weak  and  childish  they  were  in  themselves,  and  how  nnich
lower  than  mere  children  Ave  then  became  when  we  submitted
ourselves  to  their  lilind  tutorage.  There  was  no  fear  left  in
this  fiction  the  boyish  nature  should  be  misconstrued  as  in-
nocent and  gentle.  The  storms  of  passion,  so  well  known  in
every  kind,  kept  the  tyrannic  (juality  of  this  wanton  race
sufficiently  in  view.  Nor  could  the  poetical  description  fail  to
bring  to  mind  their  mischievous  and  malignant  play.  But
when  the  image  of  imperious  threatening  and  absolute  command
was  joined  to  that  of  ignorance,  puerility,  and  folly,  the  notion
was  completed  of  that  wretched  slavish  state  which  modern
libertines,  in  conjunction  with  some  of  a  graver  character,  admire
and  represent  as  the  most  eligible  of  any.  "  Happy  condi-
tion!"" says  one. "Happy  life,  that  of  the  indulged  passions,

^  ["  F(»r  tlien  and  tlien  only  are  tlie  vvoi-ds  of  truth  drawn  from  the
bottom  of  a  man's  lieart."— Lucretius,  iii.  57.]

348


MISCKLLAXEOrS KKI  LK( TIOXS

ini<>-ht  wc puisiic iL  ! MisL-ruhle  c-omlilion  I llli^^■^Hl)lL•  life,  lluit
of  reason  and  virtue,  wliicli  we  are  hid  pursue!"^

'Tis  the  same,  it  seems,  with  men  in  morals  as  in  politics.
AVlien  they  have  heen  unha})pilv  horn  and  l)red  to  slavery,
they  are  so  far  from  hein<;-  sensihle  of  their  slavish  course  of  life,
or  of  that  ill  usa^e,  indignity,  and  misery  they  sustain,  that
they  even  admire  their  own  condition,  and  being  used  to  think
short,  and  carry  their  views  no  further  than  those  bounds  wliich
were  early  jnx-scribed  to  them,  thev  look  upon  tyranny  as  a
natural  case,  and  think  mankind  in  a  sort  of  dangerous  and
degenerate  state  when  under  the  power  of  laws,  and  in  the
possession  of  a  free  government.

AVe  may  by  these  reflections  come  easily  to  apprehend  what
men  they  were  who  first  brought  reason  and  free  tlu)ught  under
disgrace,  and  made  the  noblest  of  characters  (that  of  a  free
thinker)  to  become  invidious.  'Tis  no  wonder  if  the  same
interpreters  would  have  those  also  to  be  esteemed  free  in  their
lives,  and  masters  of  good  living,  who  are  the  least  masters  of
themselves,  and  the  most  impotent  in  passion  and  humour  of
all  their  fellow-creatures.  But  far  be  it,  and  far  surely  will  it
ever  be  from  any  worthy  genius  to  be  consenting  to  such  a
treacherous  language  and  abuse  of  words.  For  my  own  part,  I
thoroughly  confide  in  the  good  powers  of  reason,  "  that  liberty
and  freedom  shall  never  by  any  artifice  or  delusion  be  made  to
pass  with  me  as  frightful  sounds,  or  as  reproachful,  or  invidious,
in  any  sense."

I  can  no  more  allow  that  to  be  free  living,  where  unlimited
passion  and  unexamined  fancy  govern,  than  I  can  allow  that  to
be  a  free  government  where  the  mere  people  govern,  and  not
the  laws.  For  no  people  in  a  civil  state  can  possibly  be  free,
^\  hen  they  are  otherwise  governed  than  by  such  laws  as  they
themselves  have  constituted,  or  to  which  they  have  freely  given
consent.  Now,  to  be  released  from  these,  so  as  to  govern  them-
selves by  each  day's  will  or  fancy,  and  to  vary  on  every  turn  the
^  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  '1.

349


SHAFTESIUJRV'S CHARACTERISTICS

rule  and  lueasurc  of  oovenuiient,  without  rc'.sj)ect  to  any  ancient
constitntions  or  establishments,  or  to  the  stated  and  fixed  rules
of  equity  and  justice,  is  as  certain  slavery  as  it  is  violence,  dis-
traction, and  misery,  such  as  in  the  issue  nuist  })rove  the  estab-
lishment of  an  irretrievable  state  of  tyranny  and  absolute
dominion.

In  the  determinations  of  life,  and  in  the  choice  and  o-overn-
ment  of  actions  he  alone  is  free  who  has  within  himself  no
hindrance  or  control  in  acting  what  he  himself,  by  his  best
judgment  and  most  deliberate  choice,  approves.  Could  vice
agree  possibly  with  itself,  or  could  the  \  icious  any  way  reconcile
the  various  judgments  of  their  inward  counsellors,  they  might
with  justice  perhaps  assert  their  liberty  and  independency.  But
whilst  they  are  necessitated  to  follow  least  what,  in  their  sedate
hours,  they  most  af)prove,  whilst  they  are  passively  assigned
and  made  over  from  one  ])ossessor  to  another^  in  contrary
extremes,  and  to  different  ends  and  purposes  of  which  they  are
themselves  wholly  ignorant,  'tis  evident  that  the  more  they  turn
their  eyes  -  (as  many  times  they  are  obliged)  towards  virtue  and
a  free  life,  the  more  they  must  confess  their  misery  and  subjec-
tion. They  discern  their  own  captivity,  but  not  with  force  and
resolution sufficient to redeem themselves  and become their

1  Huiicciiie  ;iu  liunc  sequeris.^ Subeas  .iltenms  oportet
Aiicipiti  obsequio  dumiiios.

["  Are  you  for  following  this  hook  or  that  "i  You  must  submit  to  each
master  in  turn,  with  wavering  allegiance."] — Pers.,  8at.  v.  155,  15(5.  See
Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §§  1,  2,  etc.

2  Magne  pater  tlivum,  saevos  punire  tyrannos
Haud  alia  ratione  velis,  cum  (lira  libido
Mo\'erit  ingenium  ferventi  tiucta  veneno,
Virtu  tern  videant,  intabescantque  relicta.

["  Great  father  of  the  Gods,  condescend  to  punish  the  cruelty  of  tyrants
in  no  other  way,  when  fierce  passion  dipped  in  fiery  poison  has  stirred
their  souls.  Let  them  look  upon  virtue  and  pine  to  think  that  they  have
abandoned  her." — Persius,  iii.  35-38.]

350


MISC^ELLAXKorS REFLECTIONS

own.  SiK'li  is  tlic  real  tia«;ii-  stale,  as  tlie  old  tragedian
represfiits  it  : —  ^

\  idi'o  imliora  |)r()l)o(]iU',
DcttrioiM  sfcjuor.''

And  tlius  tiie  highest  spirits  and  most  refractory  wills  con-
tribute to  the  lowest  servitude  and  most  submissive  state.
Reason  and  virtue  alone  can  bestow  liberty.  Vice  is  unworthy,
and  unhappy  on  this  account  onI\,  "  that  it  is  slavisli  and
debasing,"

Thus  have  we  pleaded  the  cause  ol'  lil)i'it\  in  general,  and
vindicated  withal  our  authors  particular  tVeeilom  in  takin";
the  person  of  a  sceptic,  as  he  has  done  in  this  last  treatise,-'  on
which  we  have  so  largely  paraphrased.  We  may  now  j)erhaps,
in  compliance  with  general  custom,  justly  presume  to  add  some-
thing in  defence  of  the  same  kind  of  freedom  we  ourselves  have
assumed  in  these  latter  miscellaneous  comments,  since  it  would
doubtless  be  very  unreasonable  and  unjust  for  those  who  had  so
freely  played  the  critic  to  expect  anything  less  than  the  same
free  treatment  and  thorouo-h  criticism  in  return.

As  for  the  style  or  language  used  in  these  connnents,  ''tis
very  different,  we  find,  and  varies  in  proportion  \\ith  the  author
commented,  and  with  the  different  characters  and  persons  fre-
quently introduced  in  the  original  treatises.  So  that  there  will
undoubtedly  be  scope  sufficient  for  censure  and  correction.

As  for  the  observations  on  antiquity,  we  have  in  most
passages,  except  the  very  connnon  and  obvious,  jjroduced  our
vouchers  and  authorities  in  our  own  behalf,  \\'hat  may  be
thought  of  our  judgment  or  sense  in  the  application  of  these
authorities, and in the deductions and reasonings we have

'  KCil  /xavOoLfw  /xtf  Ota  To\)j.i]ffu)  KaKo.'  dv/xos  ok  Kpeiaauv  tCjv  e/xQv  jSoiXei/idrwv.
["  Aud  well  1  knuw  the  crime  I  shall  commit,  yet  ruge  is  strontrer  than
all  counsel."— Eur.,  Med.  1078,  107S>.]

■^  ['•  I  see  aud  1  esteem  the  better  coarse,  I  follow  tlie  worse." — Ovid,
Metaniorpho.se.'^,  vii.  21.]

•^  Viz.  The  Moralist.s  or  Philosophic  Dia/of/ne  recited  in  the  person  of
a  sceptic,  uuder  the  name  of  Pliilocles. See  Treatise  v.  part  i.  §  2.

351


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

Ibrniotl  from  such  learned  topics,  must  be  submitted  to  the
opinion  of  the  wise  and  learned.

In  morals,  of  which  the  very  force  lies  in  a  love  of  discipline
and  in  a  willingness  to  redress  and  rectify  false  thought  and
erring  views  ;  we  cannot  but  patiently  wait  redress  and  amicable
censure  from  the  sole  competent  judges,  the  wise  and  gootl ;
whose  interest  it  has  been  our  whole  endeavour  to  advance.

The  only  subject  on  which  we  are  perfectly  secure,  and  with-
out fear  of  any  just  censure  or  reproach,  is  that  of  faith  and
orthodox  belief.  For  in  the  first  place  it  will  appear  that
through  a  jjrofound  respect  and  religious  veneration,  we  have
forborne  so  nmch  as  to  name  any  of  the  sacred  and  solemn
mysteries  of  revelation.^  And  in  the  next  place,  as  we  can  with
confidence  declare  that  we  have  never  in  any  writing,  public
or  private,  attempted  such  high  researches,  nor  have  ever  in
practice  acquitted  ourselves  otherwise  than  as  just  conformists
to  the  lawful  church ;  so  we  may,  in  a  proper  sense,  be  said
faithfully  and  dutifully  to  embrace  those  holy  mysteries,  even
in  their  minutest  particulars,  and  without  the  least  exception  on
account  of  their  amazing  depth.  And  though  we  are  sensible
that  it  would  be  no  small  hardship  to  deprive  others  of  a
liberty  of  examining  and  searching,  with  due  modesty  and  sub-
mission, into  the  nature  of  those  subjects;  yet  as  for  ourselves,
who  have  not  the  least  scruple  whatsoever,  we  pray  not  any
such  grace  or  favour  in  our  behalf,  being  fully  assured  of  our
own  steady  orthodoxy,  resignation,  and  entire  submission  to  the
truly  Christian  and  catholic  doctrines  of  our  holy  church  as  by
law  established.

'Tis  true,  indeed,  that  as  to  critical  leai'ning-  and  the  ex-
amination of  originals,  texts,  glosses,  various  readings,  styles,
compositions,  manuscripts,  compilements,  editions,  publica-
tions, and  other  circumstances  such  as  are  common  to  the  sacred
books  with  all  other  writings  and  literature,  this  we  have  con-

1  Supra,  Misc.  i.  ch.  ii.

2  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  3.

352


MISCELLANEOUS UEFLFXTIOXS

fidently  asserted  to  be  a  just  and  lawful  study.  We  liave  even
represented  this  species  of  criticism  as  necessary  to  the  preserva-
tion and  purity  of  Scripture ;  that  Sacred  Scripture  wiiich  has
been  so  miraculously  preserved  in  its  successive  copies  and
transcriptions  under  the  eye  (as  we  must  needs  suppose)  of  holy
and  learned  critics,  throui;;h  so  many  dark  aj^es  of  Christianity
to  these  latter  times,  in  which  learnin<>-  has  been  happily  revived.

13ut  if  this  critical  liberty  raises  any  jealousy  a<rainst  us,  we
shall  beg  leave  of  our  offended  reader  to  lay  before  him  our
case  at  the  very  worst ;  that  if  on  such  a  naked  exposition  it
be  found  criminal,  we  may  be  absolutely  condennied  ;  if  other-
wise, acquitted,  and  with  the  sa)ne  favour  indulged  as  others  in
the  same  circumstances  have  been  before  us.

On  this  occasion,  therefore,  we  may  be  allowed  to  borrow
something  from  the  foim  or  manner  of  our  dialogue  author,  and
represent  a  conversation  of  the  same  free  nature  as  that  recited
by  him  in  his  night  scene,^  where  the  supposed  sceptic  or  free-
thinker delivers  his  thoughts  and  reigns  in  the  discourse.

'Twas  in  a  more  considerable  company,  and  before  a  more
numerous  audience  that,  not  long  since,  a  gentleman  of  some
rank  (one  who  was  generally  esteemed  to  carry  a  sufficient
caution  and  reserve  in  religious  subjects  of  discourse,  as  well  as
an  apparent  deference  to  religion,  and  in  particular  to  the
national  and  established  Church)  having  been  provoked  by  an
impertinent  attack  of  a  certain  violent  bigoted  party,  was
drawn  into  an  open  and  free  vindication  not  only  of  free-think-
ing but  free  professing  and  discoursing  in  matters  relating  to
religion  and  faith.

Some  of  the  company,  it  seems,  after  having  made  bold
with  him  as  to  what  they  fancied  to  be  his  principle,  began  to
urge  "  the  necessity  of  reducing  men  to  one  profession  and
belief.""  And  several  gentlemen,  even  of  those  who  passed  for
moderate  in  their  way,  seemed  so  far  to  give  in  to  this  zealot
opinion  as  to  agree,  "•  that  notwithstanding  the  right  method
I  Treatise  v.  part  ii.  §  5.

VOL.  II  353  2  A


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

was  not  yet  found,  'twas  highly  requisite  that  some  way  should
be  thought  on  to  reconcile  differences  in  opinion ;  since  so  long
as  this  variety  should  last,  religion  they  thought  could  never  be
successfully  advanced."

To  this  our  gentleman  at  first  answered  coldly,  that
"  what  was  impossible  to  be  done,  could  not  he  thought  be
properly  pursued  as  necessary  to  be  done."  But  the  raillery
being  ill  taken,  he  was  forced  at  last  to  defend  himself  the  best
he  could  upon  this  point,  "  that  variety  of  opinion  was  not  to
be  cured."  And  "that  'twas  impossible  all  should  be  of  one
mind."

"  I  well  know,"  said  he,  "  that  many  pious  men,  seeing  the
inconveniences  which  the  disunion  of  persuasions  and  opinions
accidentally  produces,  have  thought  themselves  obliged  to  stop
this  inundation  of  mischiefs,  and  have  made  attempts  accord-
ingly. Some  have  endeavoured  to  unite  these  fractions  by  pro-
pounding such  a  guide  as  they  were  all  bound  to  follow,  hoping
that  the  unity  of  a  guide  would  have  produced  unity  of  minds.
But  who  this  guide  should  be,  after  all,  became  such  a  question
that  'twas  made  jiart  of  that  fire  itself  which  was  to  be  ex-
tinguished. Others  thought  of  a  rule.  This  was  to  be  the
effectual  means  of  union  !  This  was  to  do  the  work  or  nothing;
could  !  But  supposing  all  the  world  had  been  agreed  on  this
rule,  yet  the  interpretation  of  it  was  so  full  of  variety,  that  this
also  became  part  of  the  disease."

The  company,  upon  this  preamble  of  our  gentleman,  pressed
harder  upon  him  than  before,  objecting  the  authority  of  Holy
Scripture  against  him,  and  affirming  this  to  be  of  itself  a
sufficient  guide  and  rule.  They  urged  again  and  again  that
known  saying  of  a  famed  controversial  divine  of  our  Church
against  the  divines  of  another,  "  that  the  Scripture,  the  Scripture
was  the  relio-ion  of  Protestants."

To  this  our  gentleman  at  first  replied  only  by  desiring  them
to  explain  their  word  Scripture,  and  by  inquiring  into  the
original  of  this  collection  of  ancienter  and  later  tracts,  which

354


MTSCEIJ.ANKOUS KEFLECTIOXS

in  general  they  tompiehended  under  that  title:  whether  it  were
the  apocr\  phal  Scripture  or  the  more  canonical  ?  The  full
or  the  halt'-autliorised  ?  Tlie  (h)uhtf"ul  or  the  certain  ?  The
controverted  or  uncontroverted  ?  The  singly-read  or  that  of
various  reading  ?  The  text  of  these  manuscripts  oi-  of  those  ?
The  transcripts,  co))ies,  titles,  catalogues  of  this  Church  and
nation,  or  of  that  other  ?  of  this  sect  and  party  or  of  another  ?
of  those  in  one  age  called  orthodox,  and  in  possession  of
power,  or  of  those  who  in  another  overthrew  their  predecessors'
authority,  and  in  their  turn  also  assumed  the  guardianship  and
power  of  holy  things  ?  For  how  these  sacretl  records  were
guarded  in  those  ages,  might  easily  (he  said)  be  imagined  by
any  one  who  had  the  least  insight  into  the  history  of  those
times  which  we  called  ])riniitive,  and  those  charactei*s  of  men
whom  we  styled  Fathers  of  the  Church.

"  It  must  be  confessed,"  continued  he,  "  'twas  strange  industry
and  unlucky  diligence  which  was  used,  in  this  i-espect,  by  these
ecclesiastical  forefathers.  Of  all  those  heresies  which  gave  them
employment,  we  have  absolutely  no  record  or  monument  but
what  themselves  who  were  adversaries  have  transmitted  to  us ;
and  we  know  that  adversaries,  especially  such  who  observe  all
o})portunities  to  discredit  both  the  persons  and  doctrines  of
their  enemies,  are  not  always  the  best  recorders  or  witnesses
of  such  transactions.  We  see  it,"  continued  he,  in  a  very  em-
phatical  but  somewhat  embarrassed  style,  "  we  see  it  now  in
this  very  age,  in  the  present  distemjjeratures,  that  parties  are
no  ffood  reiristers  of  the  actions  of  the  adverse  side :  and  if  we
cannot  be  confident  of  the  truth  of  a  story  now  (now,  I  say,
that  it  is  possible  for  any  man,  especially  for  the  interested
adversary,  to  discover  the  imposture),  it  is  far  more  unlikely
that  after-ages  should  know  any  other  truth  than  such  as  serves
the  ends  of  the  representers."

Our  gentleman  by  these  expressions  had  already  given  con-
siderable offence  to  his  zealot  auditors.  They  plied  him  faster
with passionate reproaches than with arguments or  rational

355


SHAFTESBURY'S CHAllACTERISTICS

answers.  This,  however,  served  only  to  animate  him  the  more,
and  made  him  proceed  the  more  boldly,  with  the  same  assumed
formahty  and  air  of  declamation,  in  his  general  criticism  of  holy
literature.

"  There  are,""  said  he,  "  innumerable  places  that  contain  (no
doubt)  great  mysteries,  but  so  wrapped  in  clouds  or  hid  in
umbrages,  so  heightened  with  expressions  or  so  covered  with
allegories  and  garments  of  rhetoric,  so  profound  in  the  matter
or  so  altered  and  made  intricate  in  the  manner,  that  they  may
seem  to  have  been  left  as  trials  of  our  industry,  and  as  occasions
and  opportunities  for  the  exercise  of  mutual  charity  and  tolera-
tion, rather  than  as  the  repositories  of  faith  and  furniture  of
creeds.  For  when  there  are  found  in  the  explications  of  these
writings  so  many  commentaries,  so  many  senses  and  interpreta-
tions, so  many  volumes  in  all  ages,  and  all  like  men"'s  faces,  no
one  exactly  like  another :  either  this  difference  is  absolutely  no
fault  at  all,  or  if  it  be,  it  is  excusable.  There  are,  besides,  so
many  thousands  of  copies  that  were  writ  by  persons  of  several
interests  and  persuasions,  such  different  understandings  and
tempers,  such  distinct  abilities  and  weaknessess,  that  'tis  no
wonder  there  is  so  great  variety  of  readings  .  .  .  whole  verses
in  one  that  are  not  in  another  .  .  .  whole  books  admitted  by
one  church  or  communion  which  are  rejected  by  another :  and
whole  stories  and  relations  admitted  by  some  P'athers  and  re-
jected by  others.  ...  I  consider,  withal,  that  there  have  been
many  designs  and  views  in  expounding  these  writings;  many
senses  in  which  they  are  expounded  ;  and  when  the  grammatical
sense  is  found  out,  we  are  many  times  never  the  nearer.  Now
there  being  such  variety  of  senses  in  Scripture,  and  but  few
places  so  marked  out  as  not  to  be  capable  of  more  than  one ;
if  men  will  write  commentaries  by  fancy,  what  infallible  criterion
will  be  left  to  judge  of  the  certain  sense  of  such  places  as  have
been  the  matter  of  (juestion  ?  I  consider  again,  that  there  are
indeed  divers  places  in  these  sacred  volumes,  containing  in  them
mysteries  and  questions  of  great  concernment ;  yet  such  is  the

356


MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS

fabric  und  constitution  of  the  whole,  that  there  is  no  certain
mark  to  (leterniine  whether  the  sense  of  these  passages  sliould
be  taken  as  hteral  or  fi<;urative.  There  is  nothing  in  the  nature
of  the  thing  to  determine  the  sense  or  meaning  ;  but  it  must
be  gotten  out  as  it  can.  And  therefore  'tis  unreasonably
required,  that  what  is  of  itself  ambiguous  should  be  understood
in  its  own  prime  sense  and  intention,  under  the  pain  of  either
a  sin  or  an  anathema.  V  cry  wise  men,  even  the  ancient  Fathers,
have  expounded  things  allegorically,  when  they  should  have
expounded  them  literally.  Others  expound  things  literally
when  they  should  understand  them  in  allegory.  If  such  great
spirits  could  be  deceived  in  finding  out  what  kind  of  senses
were  to  be  given  to  Scrijitures,  it  may  well  be  endured  that  we
who  sit  at  their  feet  should  be  subject  at  least  to  ecjual  failure.
If  we  follow  any  one  translation,  or  any  one  man's  commentary,
what  rule  or  direction  shall  we  have  by  which  to  choose  that
one  aright.''  Or  is  there  any  one  man  that  hath  translated
perfectly,  or  expounded  infallibly  ?  If  we  resolve  to  follow  any
one  as  far  only  as  we  like  or  fancy,  we  shall  then  only  do  wrong
or  right  by  chance.  If  we  resolve  absolutely  to  follow  any  one
whithersoever  he  leads,  we  shall  probably  come  at  last  where,  if
we  have  any  eyes  left,  we  shall  see  ourselves  become  sufficiently
ridiculous."

The  reader  may  here,  ])erhaps,  by  his  natural  sagacity,
remark  a  certain  air  of  studied  discourse  and  declamation,  not
so  very  proper  or  natural  in  the  mouth  of  a  mere  gentleman,
nor  suitable  to  a  company  where  alternate  discourse  is  carried
on  in  unconcerted  measure  and  unpremeditated  language.
Something  there  was  so  very  emphatical,  withal,  in  the
delivery  of  these  words  by  the  sceptical  gentleman,  that  some  of
the  company  who  were  still  more  incensed  against  him  for  these
expressions,  began  to  charge  him  as  a  preacher  of  pernicious
doctrines,  one  who  attacked  religion  in  form,  and  carried  his
lessons  or  lectures  about  with  him  to  repeat  by  rote,  at  any
time,  to  the  ignorant  and  vulgar,  in  order  to  seduce  them.

357


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEllISTICS

'Tis  true,  indeed,  said  he,  gentlemen,  that  what  I  have  here
ventured  to  repeat  is  addressed  chiefly  to  those  you  call
ignorant ;  such,  I  mean,  as  being  otherwise  engaged  in  the
world,  have  had  little  time,  perhaps,  to  bestow  upon  inquiries
into  divinity  matters.  As  for  you,  gentlemen,  in  particular,
who  are  so  much  displeased  with  my  freedom,  I  am  well  assured
you  are  in  effect  so  able  and  knowing,  that  the  truth  of  every
assertion  I  have  advanced  is  sufficiently  understood  and  ac-
knowledged by  you,  however  it  may  happen  that,  in  your  great
wisdom,  you  think  it  pro])er  to  conceal  these  matters  from  such
persons  as  you  are  pleased  to  style  the  vulgar.

■'TIS  true,  withal,  gentlemen,  continued  he,  I  will  confess  to
you,  that  the  words  you  have  heard  repeated  are  not  my  own.
They  are  no  other  than  what  have  been  publicly  and  solemnly
delivered even by  one  ^ of  the episcopal order, a celebrated

1  The  pious  and  learned  Bishop  Taylor,  in  his  treatise  0«  the  Liberty  oj
Prophesyimj,  printed  in  his  collection  of  Polemical  and  Moral  Discourses,
anno  1G57.  The  pages  answering  to  the  places  above  cited  are,  401,  402
(and  in  the  epistle  dedicatory,  three  or  four  leaves  before),  4.38,  4.39-444,
4.51,  4.52.  After  which,  in  the  succeeding  page,  he  sums  up  his  sense  on
this  subject  of  sacred  literature,  and  the  liberty  of  criticism,  and  of  private
judgment  and  opinion  in  these  matters,  in  the  following  words:  "Since
there  are  so  many  copies,  with  infinite  varieties  of  reading  ;  since  a  various
interpunction,  a  parenthesis,  a  letter,  an  accent,  may  much  alter  the
sense ;  since  some  places  have  divers  literal  senses,  many  have  spiritual,
mystical,  and  allegorical  meanings ;  since  there  are  so  many  tropes,
metonymies,  ironies,  hyperboles,  prf)prieties  and  improprieties  of  language,
whose  understanding  depends  u])on  such  circumstances,  that  it  is  almost
impossible  to  know  the  proj)er  interpretation,  now  that  the  knowledge  of
such  circumstances  and  particular  stories  is  irrecoverably  lost ;  since  there
are  some  mysteries,  which  at  the  best  advantage  of  expression  are  not
easy  to  be  apprehended,  and  whose  explication,  by  reason  of  our  imper-
fections, must  needs  be  dark,  sometimes  weak,  sometimes  unintelligible  :
and  lastly,  since  those  ordinary  means  of  expounding  Scripture,  as
searching  the  originals,  conference  of  ])laces,  parity  of  reason,  and  analogy
of  faith  are  all  dubious,  uncertain,  and  very  fallible ;  he  that  is  the
wisest,  and  by  consequence  the  likeliest  to  expound  truest,  in  all  proba-
bility of  reason  will  be  very  far  from confidence,  because  every  one  of

358


JMISCEIJ.AXEOUS REFLECTIONS

Churchman,  and  one  of  the  highest  sort,  as  appears  hy  his  many
devotional  works,  which  carry  the  rites,  ceremonies,  and  pomp
of  worship  with  the  honour  and  dignity  of  the  priestly  and
episcopal  order  to  the  highest  degree.  In  effect,  we  see  the
reverend  doctor's  treatises  standing,  as  it  were,  in  the  front  of
this  order  of  authors,  and  as  the  foremost  of  those  good  hooks
used  by  the  politest  and  most  refined  devotees  of  either  sex.
They  maintain  the  principal  place  in  the  study  of  almost  every
elegant  and  higli  divine.  They  stand  in  folios  and  other
volumes,  adorned  with  variety  of  pictiues,  gildings,  and  other
decorations,  on  the  advanced  shelves  or  glass-cupboards  of  the
ladies'  closets.  They  are  in  use  at  all  seasons  and  for  all  places,
as  well  for  church-service  as  closet-preparation ;  and,  in  short,
may vie with any  devotional books in British Christendom.

these,  and  iiiauy  more,  are  like  so  many  degrees  (»f  improbability  and
uncertainty,  all  depressing^  our  certainty  of  finding  out  truth  in  sucli
mysteries  and  amidst  so  many  difficulties.  And,  therefore,  a  wise  man
that  considers  this,  would  not  willingly  be  prescribed  to  by  others  ;  for  it
is  best  every  man  sliouhl  be  left  in  that  liberty,  from  which  no  man  can
justly  take  him,  unless  he  could  secure  him  from  error."  The  Reverend
I'relate  had  but  a  few  pages  before  (viz.  p.  427)  acknowledged,  indeed,
"  that  we  had  an  apost<dical  warrant  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith.
But  then,"  says  the  good  bishop,  very  candidly  and  ingeniously,  ''as
these  things  recede  farther  from  the  foundation,  our  certainty  is  the  less.
.  .  .  And  therefore  it  were  very  fit  that  our  confidence  should  be
according  to  our  evidence,  and  our  zeal  according  to  our  confidence."
He  adds,  p.  507,  ''all  these  flisputes  concerning  tradition,  councils,
Fathers,  etc.,  are  not  arguments  against  or  besides  reason,  but  contesta-
tions and  jtretences  of  the  best  arguments,  and  the  most  certain  satisfaction
of  our  reason.  But  then  all  these  coming  into  (|uestion  submit  themselves
to  reason,  that  is,  to  be  judged  by  human  understanding,  upon  the  best
grounds  and  information  it  can  receive.  So  that  Scripture,  tradition.
Councils  and  Fathers  are  the  evidence  in  a  (luestion,  but  reason  is  the
judge  :  that  is,  we  l)eing  the  ]>ersiuis  that  are  to  be  persuaded,  we  must
see  that  we  be  persuaded  reasonably  ;  and  it  is  unreasonable  to  assent  to
a  lesser  evidence  when  a  greater  and  dearer  is  propounded  ;  but  of  that
every  man  for  himself  is  to  take  cognisance,  if  he  be  able  to  judge  ;  if  he
be  not,  he  is  not  bound  under  the  tie  of  necessity  to  know  anything  of  it."

359


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEllIS TICS

And  for  the  life  and  character  of  the  man  himself,  I  leave  it
to  you,  gentlemen  (you,  I  mean,  of  the  zealot  kind),  to  except
against  it,  if  you  think  proper.  ""Tis  your  manner,  I  know,  and
what  you  never  fail  to  have  recourse  to  when  any  authority  is
produced  against  you.  Personal  reflection  is  always  seasonable
and  at  hand  on  such  an  occasion.  No  matter  what  virtue,
honesty,  or  sanctity  may  lie  in  the  character  of  the  person  cited.
No  matter  though  he  be  ever  so  much,  in  other  respects,  of  your
own  party  and  devoted  to  your  interest.  If  he  has  indiscreetly
spoken  some  home  truths,  or  discovered  some  secret  which
strikes  at  the  temporal  interests  of  certain  spiritual  societies,  he
is  quickly  doomed  to  calumny  and  defamation.

I  shall  try  this  experiment,  however,  once  more  (continued
our  gentleman),  and  as  a  conclusion  to  this  discourse  will  venture
to  produce  to  you  a  further  authority  of  the  same  kind.  You
shall  have  it  before  you  in  the  exact  phrase  and  words  of  the
great  author  in  his  theological  capacity,  since  I  have  now  no
further  occasion  to  conceal  my  citations,  and  accommodate  them
to  the  more  familiar  style  and  language  of  conversation.

Our  excellent  Archbishop  ^  and  late  Father  of  our  church,
when  expressly  treating  that  very  subject  of  a  rule  in  matters

of  belief,  in  opposition  to  Mr.  S and  Mr.  R ,  his  Romish

antagonists,  shows  plainly  how  great  a  shame  it  is  for  us  Protest-
ants at  least,  whatever  the  case  may  be  with  Romanists,  to  dis-
allow difference  of  opinions  and  forbid  private  examination  and
search  into  matters  of  ancient  record  and  Scriptural  tradition,
when  at  the  same  time  we  have  no  pretence  to  oral  or  verbal ;
no  claim  to  any  absolute  superior  judge  or  decisive  judgment  in
the  case ;  no  polity,  church,  or  community ;  no  particular  man
or  number  of  men  who  are  not,  even  by  our  own  confession,
plainly  fallible  and  subject  to  error  and  mistake.

"  The  Protestants,"  says  his  Grace  (speaking  in  the  person  of

Mr.  S and  the  Romanists),  "  cannot  know  how  many  the

books  of  Scripture  ought  to  be ;  and  Avhich  of  the  many  con-
^  Viz.  Archbishop  Tillotson  in  his  liiilc  nf  FaHh,  p.  G77.

360


MISCELLANEOUS KEl  LECTIONS

trovcrted  ones  may  be  securely  })ut  in  that  cataloirue,  which
not.  But  I  shall  tell  him  (replies  his  Grace)  that  we  know  that
just  so  many  ou^ht  to  be  received  as  uncontroverted  books,
concerning  which  it  cannot  be  shown  there  was  ever  any  con-
troversy." It  was  not  incumbent  perhajis  on  my  lord  Archbishop

to  help  Mr.  S so  far  in  his  objection  as  to  add,  that  in

reality  the  burning,  suppressing,  and  interj)olating  method,  so
early  in  foshion  and  so  tightly  practised  on  the  epistles,  com-
ments, histories,  and  writings  of  the  orthodox  and  heretics  of
old,  made  it  imjiossible  to  say  with  any  kind  of  assurance,
"  what  books,  co})ies,  or  transcripts  those  were,  concerning  which
there  was  never  any  controversy  at  all."  This  indeed  would  be
a  point  not  so  easily  to  be  demonstrated,  But  his  Grace  proceeds
in  showing  the  weakness  of  the  Romish  pillar,  tradition.  "  For
it  must  either,"  says  he,  "  acknowledge  some  books  to  have  been
controverted,  or  not.  If  not,  why  doth  he  make  a  sup})osition
of  controverted  books  ?  If  oral  tradition  acknowledges  some
books  to  have  been  controverted,  then  it  cannot  assure  us  that
they  have  not  been  controverted,  nor  consequently  that  they
ought  to  be  received  as  never  having  been  controverted ;  but
only  as  such,  concerning  which  those  Churches  who  did  once
raise  a  controversy  about  them,  have  been  since  satisfied  that
they  are  canonical.^  Where  is  then  the  infallibility  of  oral
tradition  ?  How  docs  the  living  voice  of  the  present  Church
assure  us  that  what  books  are  now  received  by  her  were  ever
received  by  her  ? And  if  it  cannot  do this,  but the matter

'  His  (Jrace  subjoins  inniu'(li;itcly  :  "  Tlie  tniditioiiary  Chm-cli  now
receives  tlie  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  as  canonical.  1  ask,  do  they  receive
it  as  ever  delivered  for  such  ?  That  they  must,  if  they  receive  it  from
oral  tradition,  which  conveys  things  to  them  under  this  notion  as  ever
delivered  ;  and  yet  St.  Hierom  (speakinfj  not  as  a  speculator  but  a  testifier)
says  expressly  of  it  that  the  custom  of  the  Latin  Church  d(»th  not  receive  it

amoufr  the  Canonical  Scriptures. A\"hat  saith  Mr.  S to  this? It  is

clear  from  this  testimony  tliat  the  Roman  Church  in  St.  Hierom's  time  did
not  acknowledfje  this  epistle  for  canonical  ;  and  'tis  as  plain  that  the
present  Roman  Chui'ch  dotli  receive  it  fm*  canonical."

361


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

must  come  to  be  tried  by  the  best  records  of  former  ages  (which
the  Protestants  are  wilHng  to  have  the  catalogue  tried  by),  then
it  seems  the  Protestants  have  a  better  way  to  know  what  books
are  canonical  than  is  the  infallible  way  of  oral  tradition.  And
so  long  as  'tis  better,  no  matter  though  it  be  not  called  in-
fallible."

Thus  the  free  and  generous  archbishop.  For,  indeed,  what
greater  generosity  is  there  than  in  owning  truth  frankly  and
openly,  even  where  the  greatest  advantages  may  be  taken  by
an  adversary  ?  Accordingly,  our  worthy  Archbishop  speaking
again  immediately  in  the  person  of  his  adversary,  "  the  Pro-
testants,'"''^  says  he,  "cannot  know  that  the  very  original,  or  a
perfectly  true  copy  of  these  books,  hath  been  preserved.  Nor
is  it  necessary,''"'  replies  the  archbishop,  "  that  they  should  know
either  of  these.  It  is  sufficient  that  they  know  that  those
copies  which  they  have  are  not  materially  corrupted.  .  .  .  But
how  do  the  Church  of  liome  know  that  they  have  perfectly  true
copies  of  the  Scri])tures  in  the  original  languages  ?  They  do
not  pretend  to  know  this.  The  learned  men  of  that  Church
acknowledge  the  various  readings  as  well  as  we,  and  do  not
pretend  to  know,  otherwise  than  by  probable  conjecture  (as  we
also  may  do)  which  of  those  readings  is  the  true  one.'"'  -

1  V.  678.

^  The  reader  perha])S  may  find  it  worth  wliile  to  read  after  this  what
the  Archbishop  represents  (pp.  JW,  etc.)  of  tlie  plausi1)le  introduction  of  the
grossest  article  of  belief  in  the  times  when  the  habit  of  making  creeds
came  in  fasliion.  And  accordingly  it  may  be  understood  of  what  effect
the  dogmatising  practice  in  divinity  has  ever  been.  "  We  will  suppose,
then,  that  about  the  time  when  universal  ignorance  and  the  genuine
daughter  of  it  (call  her  devotion  or  superstition)  had  overspread  the  world,
and  the  generality  of  people  were  strctngly  inclined  to  believe  strange
things,  and  even  the  greatest  contradictions  were  recommended  to  them
under  the  notion  of  mysteries,  being  told  by  their  priests  and  guides  that
the  more  contradictious  anything  is  to  reason,  the  greater  merit  there  is
in  believing  it,  I  say,  let  us  suppose  that  in  this  state  of  things  one  or
more  of  the  most  eminent  then  in  the  Church,  either  out  of  design  or  out
of  superstitious  ignorance  and  mistake  of  the  sense  of  our  Saviour's  words

362


MISCELLANEOUS KEl  LECTIONS

And  tlius,  continued  our  lav-<;x'iitl(-inaii,  I  liave  finished  my
quotations,  which  I  have  been  necessitated  to  brinfj  in  my  own
defence  to  prove  to  you  that  I  have  asserted  nothing;  on  this
head  of  religion,  faith,  or  the  sacred  mysteries  whidi  has  not
been  justified  and  continued  by  the  most  celebrated  churchmen
and  respected  divines.  Vou  may  now  proceed  in  your  invectives;
bestowing  as  free  language  of  that  kind  as  your  charity  and
breeding  will  j)ermit.  .Vnd  vou,  reverend  sirs,  who  have  assumed
a  character  which  sets  you  above  that  of  the  mere  gentlemen,
and  releases  you  from  those  decorums  and  constraining  measures
of  behaviour  to  which  we  of  an  inferior  sort  are  bound,  you
may  liberally  deal  your  religious  compliments  and  salutations
in  what  dialect  you  think  fit,  since,  for  my  own  part,  neither  the
names  of  heterodox,  schismatic,  heretic,  sceptic,  nor  even  infidel
or atheist itself  will in the least scandalise me, whilst the

used  in  the  consecration  of  the  Sacrament,  sliouhl  advance  this  new
doctrine^  tliat  the  words  of  consecration,  etc.  .  .  .  Such  a  doctrine  as
this  was  very  likely  to  be  advanced  hy  the  ambitious  clerfrv  of  that  time
as  a  probable  means  to  draw  in  the  peo])le  to  a  j^reater  veneration  of  them.
.  .  .  Nor  was  such  a  doctrine  less  likely  to  take  and  prevail  amonj;  the
people  in  an  ajre  prodij^iously  ijfuorant  and  stroujtfly  inclined  to  su])erstition,
and  thereby  well  prepjired  to  receive  the  grossest  absurdities  under  the
notion  of  mystery.  .  .  .  Now  supposing  such  a  doctrine  as  this,  so  fitted
to  the  liumour  and  temper  of  the  age,  to  be  once  asserted  either  by  chance
or  out  of  design,  it  would  take  like  wildfire,  especially  if  by  some  one  or
more  who  bore  sway  in  the  Church  it  were  but  recommended  with  con-
venient gravity  and  solemnity.  .  .  .  And  for  the  contradictions  c(»ntained
in  this  doctrine,  it  was  but  telling  the  peo))le  then  (as  they  do  in  effect
now)  that  contradictions  ought  t<»  be  no  scruple  in  the  way  of  faith  ;  that
the  more  impossil)le  anything  is  'tis  the  fitter  to  be  believed  ;  that  it  is  not
praiseworthy  to  believe  plain  possibilities,  but  this  is  the  gallantry  and
lieroical  power  of  faith,  this  is  the  way  to  oblige  God  Almighty  for  ever
to  us,  to  believe  flat  and  downright  contradictions.  .  .  .  The  more  absurd
and  unreasonable  anything  is,  it  is  for  that  very  reason  the  more  proper
matter  for  an  article  of  faith.  And  if  any  of  these  innovations  be  objected
against  as  contrary  to  former  belief  and  practice,  it  is  but  putting  forth  a
lusty  act  of  faith  and  believing  another  contradiction,  that  though  they
be  contrary  yet  they  are  the  same.  " Above,  pp.  20(1-208.

3(j'S


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTEllISTICS

sentence  comes  only  from  your  mouths.  On  the  contrary,  I
rather  strive  with  myself  to  suppress  whatever  vanity  might
naturally  arise  in  me  from  such  favour  bestowed.  For  whatever
may  in  the  bottom  be  intended  me  by  such  a  treatment,  'tis
impossible  for  me  to  term  it  other  than  favour,  since  there  are
certain  enmities  which  it  will  be  ever  esteemed  a  real  honour  to
have  merited.

If,  contrary  to  the  rule  and  measure  of  conversation,  I  have
drawn  the  company''s  attention  towards  me  thus  long,  without
affording  them  an  intermission  during  my  recital,  they  will,  I
hope,  excuse  me,  the  rather  because  they  heard  the  other  recitals
and  were  witnesses  to  the  heavy  charge  and  personal  reflection
which,  without  any  real  provocation,  Avas  made  upon  me  in
public  by  these  zealot  gentlemen  to  whom  I  have  thus  replied.
And  notwithstanding  they  may,  after  such  breaches  of  charity
as  are  usual  with  them,  presume  me  equally  out  of  charity  on
my  own  side,  I  will  take  upon  me,  however,  to  give  them  this
good  advice  at  parting :  "  that  since  they  have  of  late  been  so
elated  by  some  seeming  advantages  and  a  prosperity  which  they
are  ill  fitted  to  bear,  they  would  at  least  beware  of  accumulating
too  hastily  those  high  characters,  appellations,  titles,  and  ensigns
of  power,  which  may  be  tokens,  jierhaps,  of  what  they  expect
hereafter,  but  which,  as  yet,  do  not  answer  the  real  power  and
authority  bestowed  on  them."  The  garb  and  countenance  will
be  more  gra(;eful  when  the  thing  itself  is  secured  to  them  and
in  their  actual  possession.  Meanwhile,  the  anticipation  of  high
titles,  honours,  and  nominal  dignities  beyond  the  common  style
and  ancient  usage,  though  it  may  be  highly  fashionable  at
present,  may  not  prove  beneficial  or  advantageous  in  the  end.

I  would,  in  particular,  advise  my  elegant  antagonists  of  this
zealot-kind,  that  among  the  many  titles  they  assume  to  them-
selves they  would  be  rather  more  sparing  in  that  high  one  of
ambassador,  till  such  time  as  they  have  just  means  and  founda-
tion to  join  that  of  plenipotentiary  together  with  it.  For  as
matters stand hitherto in our British world, neither their

364


MTSCET.T.ANEOUS REFLECTIONS

commissioii  IVoni  the  sovereign  nor  lli.it  wliicli  IIhn  picteinl
from  heaven,  amounts  to  any  ahsohite  or  determining-  | tower.

The  first  holv  messenL|;ers  (("or  that  I  take  to  l)e  tlie  hij^hest
apostolic  name)  hroiif^lit  with  them  their  j)r()|)ei'  teslimoniais  in
their  lives,  theii'  manners,  and  behaviour,  as  well  as  in  powerful
works,  miracles,  and  sii^ns  from  heaven.  And  thou<;h,  indeed,
it  might  well  be  esteemed  a  miracle  in  the  kind,  should  oui'
present  messengers  go  about  to  re))resent  their  predecessors  in
any  part  of  their  demeanour  or  conversation,  yet  there  are
further  miracles  remaining  for  them  to  pei-form  ere  they  can  in
modesty  plead  the  apostolic  or  messenger  authoiitv.  For  thougli
in  the  torrent  of  a  sublime  and  tigurative  style  a  holy  aj)ostle
may  have  made  use,  perhaps,  of  such  a  phrase  as  tliat  of  en)bassy
or  ambassador  to  express  the  dignity  of  liis  errand,  'twere  to  be
wished  that  some  who  were  never  sent  of  any  errand  or  message
at  all  from  God  himself,  would  use  a  niodester  title  to  express
their  voluntary  negotiation  between  us  and  heaven.

I  must  confess,  for  my  own  part,  that  I  tliink  the  notion  of
an  embassy  from  thence  to  be  at  best  somewhat  high  strainetl
in  the  meta])horical  way  of  speech.  But  certain  I  am  that  if
there  be  any  such  residentship  or  agentship  now  established,
'tis  not  immediately  from  God  himself,  but  through  the
magistrate  and  by  the  prince  or  sovereign  power  here  on  earth,
that  these  gentlemen  agents  are  appointed,  distinguished,  and
set  over  us.  They  have  undoubtedly  legal  charter  ^  and  character,
legal  titles  and  precedencies,  legal  habits,  coats  of  arms,  colours,
badges.  But  they  may  do  well  to  consider  that  a  thousand
badges  or  liveries  bestowed  by  men  merely  can  never  be  sufficient
to  entitle  them  to  the  same  authority  as  theirs  who  bore  the
immediate  testimony  and  miraculous  signs  of  power  from  above.
For  in  this  case  there  was  need  only  of  eyes  and  ordinary  senses
to  distinguish  the  commission  and  acknowledge  the  embassy  or
message  as  divine.

But  allowing  it  ever  so  certain  a  tnith,  "  that  there  has
'  Treatise  ni.  near  the  end.

365


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

been  a  thousand  or  near  two  thousand  years'  succession  in  this
commission  of  embassy,"  where  shall  we  find  this  commission  to
have  lain  ?  How  has  it  been  supplied  still,  or  renewed  ?  How
often  dormant  ?  How  often  divided,  even  in  one  and  the  same
species  of  claimants  ?  What  party  are  they  among  moderns
who  by  virtue  of  any  immediate  testimonial  from  heaven  are
thus  entitled  ?  Where  are  the  letters  patent  ?  the  credentials  ?
For  these  should  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  be  open,  visible,  and
apparent.

A  certain  Indian  of  the  train  of  the  ambassador  princes  sent
to  us  lately  from  some  of  those  ])ao:an  nations,  beiuir  ensrae-ed
one  Sunday  in  visiting  our  churches  and  happening  to  ask  his
interpreter,  "  who  the  eminent  persons  were  whom  he  observed
haranguing  so  long,  with  such  authority  from  a  high  place  ? "
was  answered,  "  they  were  ambassadors  from  the  Almighty,  or
(according  to  the  Indian  language)  from  the  sun."  Whether
the  Indian  took  this  seriously  or  in  raillery  did  not  appear.
But  having  afterwards  called  in,  as  he  went  along,  at  the
chapels  of  some  of  his  brother-ambassadors  of  the  Romish
religion,  and  at  some  other  Christian  dissenting  cono-reoations,
where  matters,  as  he  perceived,  were  transacted  with  greater
privacy  and  inferior  state,  he  asked  "  whether  these  also  were
ambassadors  from  the  same  place."  He  was  answered  "  that
they  had  indeed  been  heretofore  of  the  embassy,  and  had
possession  of  the  same  chief  places  he  had  seen,  but  they  were
now  succeeded  there  by  others."  "  If  those,  therefore,"  replied
the  Indian,  "  were  ambassadors  from  the  sun,  these,  I  take  for
granted,  are  from  the  moon."

Supposing,  indeed,  one  had  been  no  pagan  but  a  good
Christian,  conversant  in  the  original  Holy  Scriptures  but
unacquainted  with  the  rites,  titles,  habits,  and  ceremonials,  of
which  there  is  no  mention  in  those  writings,  might  one  not
have  inquired,  with  humble  submission,  into  this  affair  ?  Might
one  not  have  softly  and  at  a  distance  applied  for  information
concerning  this  high  embassy,  and  addressing  perhaps  to  some

366


MISCELLANEOUS UEFLECTIONS

inferioi'  officer  or  livery-man  of  the  train  asked  modestly,  "  How
and  whence  they  came  ?  whose  eqiiipaf^e  thcv  appeared  in  ?
at  whose  chari^es  they  were  entertained  ?  and  hy  wliose  suH'ra<^e
or  command  appointed  and  authorised?  Is  it  true,  pray  sirs !
that  their  Excellencies  of  the  present  establishment  are  the
sole-connnissioned  ?  or  are  there  as  many  real  conunissioners
as  there  are  pretenders  ?  If  so,  there  can  be  no  great  danger
for  us,  whichever  wav  we  a})plv  ourselves.  AVe  have  ample
choice,  and  may  adhere  to  which  connnission  we  like  best.  If
there  be  only  one  single  true  one,  we  have  then,  it  seems,  good
reason  to  look  about  us,  search  narrowly  into  the  affair,  be
scrupulous  in  our  choice,  and  (as  the  current  physic  bills
admonish  us)  beware  of  counterfeits,  since  there  are  so  many
of  these  abroad  with  earthly  powers  and  tenijioral  commissions
to  back  their  spiritual  {)retences."'

'Tis  to  be  feared,  in  good  earnest,  that  the  discernment  of
this  kind  will  prove  pretty  difficult,  esj)ecially  amidst  this
universal  contention,  embroil,  and  fury  of  religious  challengers,
these  high  defiances  of  contrary  believers,  this  zealous  opposition
of  commission  to  commission,  and  this  din  of  hell,  anathemas,
and  danmatious  raised  everywhere  by  one  religious  partv  against
another.

So  far  are  the  ])retendedly  connnissioned  parties  from  pro-
ducing their  connnission  openly,  or  proving  it  from  the  original
record  or  court-rolls  of  heaven,  that  they  deny  us  inspection
into  these  very  records  they  plead,  and  refuse  to  submit  their
title  to  human  judgment  or  examination.

A  poet  of  our  nation  insinuates  indeed  in  their  behalf,  that
they  are  fair  enough  in  this  respect.  For  when  the  nuuniuring
people,  speaking  by  their  chosen  orator  or  spokesman  to  the
priests,  says  to  them, —

With  ease  you  take  what  we  jirovide  with  care,
And  we  who  your  legation  must  maintain,

Find  all  your  tribe  in  tlie  commission  are.

And  none  but  Heaven  could  send  so  large  a  train,

3G7


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS

the  apologist,  afterwards  excusing  this  boldness  of  the  people
and  soothing  the  incensed  priests  with  fairer  words,  says  to
them,  on  a  foot  of  moderation,  which  he  presumes  to  be  their
character : —

You  with  such  temper  their  intemperance  bear.

To  show  your  solid  science  does  rely
So  on  itself  as  you  no  trial  fear  :

For  arts  are  weak  that  are  of  sceptics  shy.^

The  poet,  it  seems,  never  dreamt  of  a  time  when  the  very
countenance  of  moderation  should  be  out  of  fashion  with  the
gentlemen  of  this  order,  and  the  word  itself  exploded  as
unworthy  of  their  profession.  And,  indeed,  so  far  are  they  at
present  from  bearing  with  any  sceptic  or  inquirer,  ever  so
modest  or  discreet,  that  to  hear  an  argument  on  a  contrary  side
to  theirs,  or  read  whatever  may  be  writ  in  answer  to  their
particular  assertions,  is  made  the  highest  crime.  Whilst  they
have  among  themselves  such  differences  and  sharp  debates  about
their  heavenly  commission,  and  are  even  in  one  and  the  same
connnunity  or  establishment  divided  into  different  sects  and
headships,  they  will  allow  no  particular  survey  or  inspection
into  the  foundations  of  their  controverted  title.  They  would
have  us  inferior  passive  mortals,  amazed  as  we  are,  and  behold-
ing with  astonishment  from  afar  these  tremendous  subjects  of
dispute,  wait  blindfold  the  event  and  final  decision  of  the
controversy.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  we  are  merely  passive.
'Tis  required  of  us,  that  in  the  midst  of  this  irreconcilable
debate  concerning  heavenly  authorities  and  powers,  we  should
be  as  confident  of  the  veracity  of  some  one,  as  of  the  impostin-e
and  cheat  of  all  the  other  pretenders ;  and  that,  believing  firmly
there  is  still  a  real  commission  at  the  bottom,  we  should  endure
the  misery  of  these  conflicts  and  engage  on  one  side  or  the  other
as  we  happen  to  have  our  birth  or  education,  till  by  fire  and
sword,  execution,  massacre,  and  a  kind  of  depopulation  of  this

' GomUbert,  bk.  ii.  canto  1.

368


MISCEIJ.AXKOUS HKFLECTIOXS

earth,  it  be  (letcnnincd  at  la^t  anionn;.st  us,i  "  Which  is  the  true
commission,  exclusive  of  all  others  and  suj)erior  to  the  rest/'

Here  our  secular  gentleman,  who  in  the  latter  end  of  his
discoiu'sc  had  already  made  several  motions  and  <restnres  which
betokened  a  retreat,  made  his  final  bow  in  form  and  (juitted  the
place  and  company  for  that  time,  till  (as  he  told  his  auditoi"s)
he  had  another  opportunity  and  fresh  leisure  to  hear,  in  his
turn,  whatever  his  antagonists  might  anew  object  to  him  in  a
manner  more  favourable  and  moderate,  or  (if  they  so  approved)
in  the  same  temper  and  with  the  same  zeal  as  thcv  had  done
before.

^  Supra,  p.  111.


VOL.  II  369  2  B


INDEX


Abkaham,  ii.  232

Absohitisni,  i.  Ill

Academic  Philosophy,  ii.  9,  309

Addison,  i.  xv,  xvi,  xix,  xlv

Admiration,  ii.  177,  178

Advice  to  an  Author,  i.  103

Advice,  i.  103

Affectation,  ii.  53

Affection,  natural,  public,  and  private,  i.

74-81, 82-85, 247-250, 280-336  ; ii.

77,  291-294
AtNswuRTH,  M.,  i.  xliii
Alchemy,  ii.  10
Alcibiades,  ii.  234
Ambition,  i.  210,  327
Anachausis,  i.  61
Anatomy,  ii.  &'>,  73,  135
Anger,  i.  99,  320
Animals,  i. 245, 285,  314  ;  ii.  72, 74,

7t),  120,  2S7,  289
Al'ELLES,  i.  220

Apollo,  i.  7

Appetite  and  Reason,  i.  123

Aratus,  ii.  303

Architecture,  ii.  133,  208

Aristophanes,  i.  160  ;  ii.  305

Aristotle,  i.  xxii,  52,  94,  96,  129,  156,

163,  223  ;  ii.  243
Art  and  Nature,  ii.  135
Art,  Shaftesbury's  views  of,  i.  xliii,  132,

218,  219,  227  ;  ii.  11,  267,  317-321
Arthur,  ii.  225
Arts  and  Morality,  i.  217,  227
Arts  and  Sciences,  promotion  of,  i.  145-

149,  151-157
Atellan  plays,  i.  164
Atheism,  i.  240,  241,  257,  261,  275  ;  ii.

47,  49,  89,  93,  196,  339


Athens,  i.  161,  162  ;  ii.  242,  243
Augustus,  i.  148,  175
Authors,  i.  104-112,  127,  131,  139,  172,
179,  197,  223  ;  ii.  316,  322

Babylonian  empire,  ii.  188

Bacchic  worship,  i.  33

'Bacon,  ii.  199

Bart'leniy  Fair,  i.  21

Baumgarten,  i.  xliii

Bays,  Mr.,  ii.  328,  329,  333

Beauty, i. 90,  91, 94  ;  ii. 20,  21,  69,

125, 126, 128, 130-137, 141-144,

147,  268
Beggars,  i.  26
Belief,  ii.  219-221
Berkeley,  i.  xxv,  xlv
Bible,  i.  229-231  ;  ii.  228-232,  302
Bigotry,  i.  307  ;  ii.  207,  345
Blank  verse,  i.  142
Blount,  C,  i.  238
BoiLEAU,  i.  142  ;  ii.  331
BoLiNGBROKE,  i.  xxvi,  xxviii  ;  ii.  262
Bossu,  i.  94
BoYLE,  ii.  10
Breeding,  i.  86
Britain,  i.  73,  139,  143, 175, 177  ;  ii.

215,  247-249
Brown,  J.,  i.  xv,  xxvii, xxxviii,  xxxix,

52
Browning,  i.  xxxiv
Buffoonery,  i.  50,  51,  85
Bury,  Rev.  A.,  i.  238

Cabala,  ii.  206
Caesar,  i.  146,  149
Canton ising,  i.  76
Tappaducians,  ii.  312


371


SHAFTESBURY  S CHARACTERISTICS


Caraccio,  i.  218

Carnival,  i.  58

Casaubons,  i.  70,  226

Catechisms,  i.;197

Catholicism. See  Rome

Cervantes,  ii.  313

Chance,  i.  29

Charles  I.,  i.  140

Charity,  ii.  227

Chivalry,  i.  177

Christianity,  i.  xxiii,  19  ;  ii.  19,  51,  55,

201,  306
Church  and  Clergy,  ii.  363-369
Cicero,  ii.  168
Circumcision,  ii.  189
Club  method.'',  i.  53
Collins,  A.,  i.  xxviii
Comedy,  i.  157-160,  164,  165,  166,  169
Common  sense,  i.  55,  69
Conscience,  i.  305

Controversy,  i.  47,  48  ;  ii.  161,  223
Conversation,  polite,  ii.  6
CORNEILLE,  ii.  210,  331
Courage,  i.  79
Credulity,  i.  222  ;  ii.  88
Criticism,  i.  30,  150,  152,  156,  170  ;  ii.

258,  313,  324-331
CuDWOKTH,  ii.  50,  196
Cumberland,  i.  xxxii,  xxxvii
Cybelb,  ii.  45

Daemons,  i.  112,  116,  240

Dancing,  ii.  228

Death,  i.  203

Defoe,  i.  223

Deism,  i.  238  ;  ii.  19,  53

Deity, i. 240,  242, 258-265, 266-280,

305  ;  ii. 57, 91, 93, 98, 103, 110,

113,  114
Demosthenes,  ii.  243
Descartes,  i.  xxxiii,  191  ;  ii.  275
Despotism,  i.  72,  144,  155
Dialogue,  i.  51,  132,  133  ;  ii.  9,  337-340
Diana,  ii.  208
Dion  Cassius,  ii.  171
Dogmatism,  ii.  238
Drama,  ii.  160,  315. See  Comedy  and i

Tragedy
Dryden,  i.  XV,  xvii,  142  ;  ii.  322,  327-

329. See  Bays  \

Education,  i.  82,  125,  215,  331  j

Egypt, Priesthood  of,  ii. 181-185,  188-
194,  206  I


England  and  Englishmen,  i.  73, 141, 175  ;

ii.  215,  248,  315-320
Enthusiasm,  Letter  concerning,  i.  4
Enthusiasm,  i.  12,  32, 35  ;  ii.  54,  129,

173,  179,  198
Ephesians,  ii.  208
Epicdrus  and  Epicureanism,  ii.  41,  42,

53
Epimenides,  ii.  303
Ethiopia,  ii.  186

EUPHKANOR,  i.  219

Euripides,  i.  157  ;  ii.  243

Fables,  ii.  283

Faction,  i.  76

Fairies,  i.  7

Fanaticism,  ii.  89,  195,  196. See  Zeal

and  Bigotry
Fancy,  i.  122,  201,  208-210,  218,  302  ;

ii.  149,  278,  349
Fear,  i.  191
Fenelon,  ii.  214
Fowler,  Bishop,  i.  7
Fowler,  Prof.,  i.  x,  xix,  xxiv,  xl,  xliii
Free  thought,  ii.  341-353
Free  trade,  i.  46
French  literature,  i,  142,  216
Friendship,  i.  67,  68  ;  ii.  37,  41
Future  state,  i.  268-277  ;  ii.  59

Gataker,  i.  70

Genius. See  Deity

Genius,  i.  127,  151

Gnostics,  ii.  203

Gondibert,  ii.  368

GORGIAS,  i.  52

Gospels,  ii.  307

Gothicism,  i.  141,  153,  227  ;  ii.  313

Government,  i.  15,  74,  138,  155,  272

Gravity  and  fraud,  i.  44,  52

Greek  culture, i. 145, 161,  163, 178;

ii.  241-243
Gregory  the  Great,  ii.  303,  304

Harley,  ii.  261
Heart,  wisdom  of,  i.  180
Helmont,  Van,  i.  186
Herbert  of  Cherbury,  i.  238
Herder,  i.  ix
Herodotus,  ii.  309
History,  i.  146

HoBBES, i. xix, xxviii, xxxiii, xxxvii,
61,  79,  238,  281


372


INDEX


HOMEK,  i.  129,  157, 160, 166  ;  ii.  17,

26,  175,  318
Honesty,  i.  69,  83,  114,  171  ;  ii.  175,

177
Houour.  i.  81,  83

HuK.vCK,  i.  70,  211  ;  ii.  168,  282,  310
Hume,  i.  .xxxvii,  xli
Humour,  i.  17  ;  ii.  337
HuTCHESON,  i.  xiv,  xxxvii,  xxxviii

Inquiry  concerning  Virtue,  etc.,  i.  237

Inspiration,  i.  32

Instinct, i. 248, 250, 257, 259, 288,

289  ;  ii.  76
Insularity,  English,  ii.  251
Intere.st,  self,  i.  77,  80,  183
Intolerance,  i.  16,  22
Isis,  ii.  185
Italians,  i.  51,  216

James  I.,  i.  140

Jephthah,  ii.  232

Jews,  i. xxiii,  22,  23,  69;  ii. 188-19.3.

204,  227.  229
Job,  i.  xxxiii,  25
Jonah,  ii.  229
Joseph,  ii.  192,  193
Joshua,  i.  229,  230
Julian,  ii.  210-212
Jupiter,  i.  262

Kant,  i.  xiv

''  Kind,"  instinct  of,  i.  74

King,  Archbishop,  i.  xxxi

Kings,  i.  138

Knavery,  i.  64,  87,  113,  136

Knights  Templars,  i.  59

Lamb,  i.  xv

Leclerc,  ii.  288,  305

Leibnitz,  i.  xiv,  xxvi,  xxxi,  187

Leon,  St.,  ii.  213

Liberty,  i.  144,  145,  155-219  ;  ii.  44

Life,  love  of,  i.  317-319

Light,  ii.  117

LiVY,  cited,  i.  33

Locke,  i.  x,  xi,  xx,  xxxvii,  xxxviii,  223

Love,  i.  116-121,  200,  213,  311  ;  ii.  125

Lucian,  i.  xxii  ;  ii.  330

Lucretius,  i.  34,  37  ;  ii.  175

Luke,  ii.  307

Lycuugus,  ii.  308


Macaulay,  i.  xi

Magi,  i.  59,  60

Magic,  ii.  193

Mahometanisni,  i.  227  :  ii.  301

Mandevillk,  i.  xxxviii  xli

Mah.sham,  ii.  189-191

Maktineau,  Dr.,  i.  xxxiv

Mathematics,  i.  188

Melancholy,  i.  12,  24  ;  ii.  198

Menandek,  i.  160,  167  ;  ii.  305

Messiah,  ii.  205

-Metaphysics,  i.  188  ;  ii.  27.'<

Milton,  i.  141,  142,  180

Miracles,  i.  222  ;  ii.  87,  90,  200,  201

Miscellaneiius  Reflections,  ii.  157

MoLiNOS,  ii.  214

Montaigne,  i.  ix,  xv,  331

Montesquieu,  i.  ix

Moralists,  The,  ii.  3

Morals,  and  art,  i.  171,  179,  181  ;  ii.  217,

227
Morals,  basis  of,  i.  63-93,  227-338  ;  ii.  137
Moral  sense,  i.  262
More,  Dr.  H.,  i.  xxxiii  ;  ii.  197
Moses,  ii.  190-193,  227
Muses,  the,  i.  5-8,  142,  204  ;  ii.  175
Music,  i.  152-154,  227
Mystery  in  religion,  ii.  206
Mysticism,  ii.  55

Nature,  i.  78,  95,  215,  228,  240,  243,
260,  261,  314,  324  ;  ii.  10,  14,  22,
39,  62,  71-84

Nature,  state  of,  i.  73  ;  ii.  78-84

Nero,  ii.  169

Novels,  i.  222-225

Nymjjlwlepti,  i.  35

Olympic  games,  i.  179
Opinion,  ii.  139,  146,  152
Oracles,  ii.  90

Oratory,  i.  49,  155  ;  ii.  243,  244
Orthodoxy,  ii.  220

Painting,  i.  xliii,  132

Pan,  i.  12

Panegyric,  i.  175

Panics,  i.  13

Parody,  i.  130,  160

Pascal,  i.  xxvii

Passions,  the,  i.  62,  289-293,  297,  320,

321,  330  ;  ii.  348
Patria,  ii.  248


a7i3


SHAFTESBURY'S CHARACTERISTICS


Patriots,  ii.  244-250,  262
Patrons,  i.  147,  148,  149,  181,  197
Paul,  St.,  i.  xxiii,  23  ;  ii.  202,  209
Persecution,  ii.  209,  220-224
Persians,  i.  60  ;  ii.  185,  186
Persuasion,  i.  154
Petronius,  cited,  i.  126
Philosophy,  i.  82-88,  156,  166, 186,  187,

193,  194,  225  ;  ii.  3-9,  195,  240,  255
Phonetics,  i.  187
Plato,  i.  38,  101  ;  ii.  309
Pleasure,  ii.  29-33,  147,  280,  349
Pliny,  i.  219

Plutarch,  i.  29,  38  ;  ii.  233
Poets  and  Poetry,  i.  5,  129, 135,  136,

157,  166  ;  ii.  197,  320
Polytheism,  i.  241
Pope,  i.  ix,  xxv-xxvii,  xxxiii-xxxv
Pre-seusation,  ii.  76
Press,  i.  198
Priests and Priesthoods, ii. 181-185,

188-194,  205
Prometheus,  ii.  15,  16
Prophecy,  i.  32
Prophets,  French,  i.  20,  31
Property  and  dominion,  ii.  185,  186
Protestantism,  i.  19  ;  ii.  360
Public  spirit,  i.  27,  66,  85,  287  ;  ii.  38
Punning,  i.  46,  141
Puppet-shows,  i.  21,  22
PyrrHO  and  Pyrrhonism,  ii.  101,  104
Pythagoreanism,  i.  14  ;  ii.  234,  282

Quietists,  ii.  214

Raillery,  i.  43-65,  85,  238

Reason,  i.  49,  54,  62,  123

Rehearsal,  The,  i.  169

Religion,  i. 17,  232,  237, 273,  303  ;  ii.

85,  90,  177,  179,  231-235
Revelation,  ii.  90
Revenge,  i.  320
Rewards  and  punishments,  i.  268-277  ;  ii.

59
Rhyme,  ii.  320

Ridicule,  i.  9-11,  81  ;  ii.  253,  254
Robinson,  H.  C,  i.  xl
Rochefoucauld,  i.  80
Rochester,  i.  79
Rome,  Church  of,  i.  20,  22  ;  ii.  212,  214,

305,  306,  361
Rome,  empire  and  civilisation  of,  i.  143-

145,  164,  176,  219  ;  ii.  204,  205


Rymek,  ii.  330

Sacheverel,  i.  xlii

Sadducees,  ii.  204

Salmasius,  i.  70

Satire,  i.  173  ;  ii.  84

Saul,  i.  32,  68

Scepticism,  ii. 17-20,  34, 53,  85,  103,

105,  201,  202,  238
Scholarship,  i.  215
Scriptures,  ii.  298-300
Self  and  selfishness,  i.  81,  247-250,  329
Seneca,  ii.  169
Sensus  Communis,  i.  43
Shakspere,  i.  xvi,  xviii,  141,  179,  224
Sibyls,  i.  33  ;  ii.  299
Society,  rise  and  basis  of,  i.  74  ;  ii.  82
Socrates,  i.  23  ;  ii.  307
Soliloquy,  i.  101

Soliloquy,  practice  of,  i.  105-112
Solitude,  i.  113

SOMERS, i. 8

Sophists,  i.  156,  167

Sophocles,  i.  157

Species,  i.  74,  246,  249  ;  ii.  289,  293

Spencer,  J.,  cited,  ii.  191,  192

Spicker,  i.  xxix

Spinoza,  1.  xxxi-xxxiv,  243,  269,  280,

302  ;  ii.  10
Spirits,  i.  33
Spirits,  animal,  i.  50
Strabo,  i.  136,  164
Style,  i.  142,  151,  161, 168  ;  ii.  169,  171,

243
Sublime,  the,  i.  165,  169
Superstition,  ii.  122,  184
Swift,  i.  xix,  xlv

Taste,  i.  216-228  ;  ii.  243,  252-256,  257
Taylor,  Bishop,  cited,  i. 67  ;  ii. 180,

181,  358,  359
Theism,  i.  240,  241, 261-265,  266-280  ;

ii. 19, 52, 54-59, 91, 93, 94, 98,

103-124
Thucydides,  ii.  309
TiLLOTSON,  ii.  360-363
TiNDAL,  i.  xiv

Toland,  i,  xii,  xxiv,  xliii,  238
Toleration,  i.  21  ;  ii.  354,  sq.
Tragedy,  i.  157,  161,  164,  165,  180
Trajan,  i.  148
Truth,  i.  94-98  ;  ii.  220,  259
Turks,  i.  148
Tyranny,  i.  72,  144,  155


374


INDEX


Uniformity,  in  religion,  i. 15  ;  ii. 353-

369
Uuitariaiiisni,  i.  xxxvi,  238
Universe. Seu  Nolun'
Universities,  i.  215

Vaninus,  ii.  196

Vice,  i.  310,  323

Virgil,  ii.  27

Virtue,  Inquiry  concerning,  etc.,  i.  237  ;

ii.  50
Virtue, basis  of, i. 83, 171, 252-258,

265-338  ;  ii.  58,  291
Virtuosoship. See  Taste
Vossius,  ii.  320

War,  i.  75


Wakbl'Rto.v,  i.  xxvii

Water,  ii.  117

Wharton,  ii.  261

Whichcote,  i.  xii

Will,  freedom  of,  i.  122

Will  to  believe,  ii.  219-221

\^'^i  and  Ilinnour,  i.  43

Wit,  i.  46,  52,  53, 56,  65,  80, 165  ;  ii.

216,  231
Women,  i.  80,  177,  178
Worldliuess,  ii.  263,  285
Worship,  public,  i.  14

Xknoph(jn,  i.  146,  167  ;  ii.  309

Zeal  and  zealotry, i. 46, 48, 98, 110,
307  ;  ii.  122,  162,  197,  181,  353-369


THE EKD


Printed  l>y  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Editiburgh.
