The Shah Nameh of Firdausi (Ferdowsi (trans. James Atkinson), 1832)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1832 Oriental Translation Fund edition (https://archive.org/details/shhnmehtrans00firduoft). The first English Shahnameh — Atkinson's pioneering abridged prose-and-verse rendering.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE


SHAH NAMEH.


THE  |

SHAH NAMEH


A

e;/


THE PERSIAN POET


FIRDAUSI,


TRANSLATED  AND  ABRIDGED


IN PROSE AND VERSE,


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.


BY  JAMES  ATKINSON,  ESQ.

Of  THE  HONOURABLE EAST-INDIA COMPANY'S BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE.


LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  THE  ORIENTAL  TRANSLATION  FUND
OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND.

SOLD BY

JOHN  MURRAY,  ALBEMABLK  STREET;  AND  PARBURY,  ALLEN,  &  Co.
LEADENHALL  STREET.

M.DCCC. XXXII.


PK


A/A0


844200


Ill


TO

THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE

THE  EARL  OF  MUNSTER,

I)lSTI\(il  IM1KO FOR HIS /EAL A\T) EXERTIONS
IN PROMOTING

A  MORE  GENERAL  DIFFUSION


ORIENTAL  LITERATURE,


ABRIDGMENT OF THE SHAH NAMEH


MOST  RESPECTFULLY  INSCRIBED


u  v


THE  AUTHOR.


PREFACE.


THE  work  here  submitted  to  the  public,  presents  for  the
first  time  in  the  English  language  an  abridgment  of  the
heroic  poem  of  the  great  poet  of  Persia.  It  is  now  about
five-and-twenty  years  since  I  first  contemplated  an  abstract
of  the  Shah  Nameh,  in  prose  and  verse ;  and  it  was  in  the
course  of  reading  for  that  purpose  that  the  episode  contain-
ing the  story  of  Sohrab,  which  I  published  with  the  original
text  in  Calcutta  in  1814,  struck  me  as  peculiarly  meriting,
from  its  highly  chivalrous  spirit  and  pathetic  denouement,
a  more  full  translation  than  could  be  given  to  the  whole
poem.  But  it  was  not  till  1829  that  the  sea-voyage  from
India  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  making  such  progress  in  the
present  undertaking,  as  to  enable  me  to  bring  it  to  a  speedy
conclusion,  and  prepare  it  for  the  press.  The  general  reader
will  now  have  the  means  of  forming  his  own  estimate  of  a
production  so  celebrated,  and  so  often  referred  to  under  the
flattering  designation  of  the  Iliad  of  the  East.  He  will  at
any  rate  see  through  an  unpretending  but  intelligible  me-
dium, of  what  materials  it  is  composed.

The  Shah  Nameh  is  indeed  a  history  in  rhyme.  It  com-
prises the  annals  and  achievements  of  the  ancient  kings  of
Persia,  from  Kaiumers  down  to  the  invasion  and  conquest
of  that  empire  by  the  Saracens,  in  636,  an  estimated
period  of  more  than  3,600  years  !*  It  was  finished

*  Kaiumers  is  understood  to  be  the  Adam  of  the  fire-worshippers,
and  the  grandson  of  Nii,  or  Noah,  of  the  Mahommedans.


tl  PREFACE.

early  in  the  eleventh  century,  gathered  from  the  tales
and  legends  for  ages  traditionally  known  throughout  the
country,  and  in  accordance  with  that  origin,  it  abounds  in
adventures  of  the  most  wild  and  romantic  description,  in
prodigious  efforts  of  strength  and  valour,  and  there  are
heroines  to  be  met  with  in  the  Persian  bard  as  intrepid
and  beautiful  as  ever  vanquished  heart  or  wielded  sword
in  western  poetry.  It  is,  in  fact,  considered  one  of  the
finest  productions  of  the  kind  which  Oriental,  or  rather,
perhaps,  Mahommedan  nations  can  boast ;  and  though
the  general  character  of  Persian  composition  is  well
known  to  be  excess  of  ornament  and  inflation  of  style,
the  language  of  Firdausi  is  comparatively  simple,  and
possesses  a  greater  portion  of  the  energy  and  grace  of  our
own  poets  than  has  been  commonly  admitted,  as  will  be
seen  from  the  copious  notes  and  illustrations  at  the  end  of
this  work.  His  verse  is  exquisitely  smooth  and  flowing,
and  never  interrupted  by  inverted  and  harsh  forms  of  con-
struction. He  is  perhaps  the  sweetest  as  well  as  the  most
sublime  poet  of  Persia.  In  epic  grandeur  he  is  above  all,
and  he  is  besides  one  of  the  easiest  to  be  understood.

The  author  of  the  Shah  Nameh  has  usually  been  called
the  Homer  of  the  East,  but  it  certainly  could  not  be  from
any  consideration  of  placing  the  Greek  and  Persian  toge-
ther in  the  same  scale  of  excellence.  Each  may  be  more
properly  looked  upon  as  the  best  of  his  own  country.  Sir
William  Jones,  in  his  essay  on  the  Poetry  of  the  Eastern
Nations,  does  "  not  pretend  to  assert  that  the  poet  of
Persia  is  equal  to  that  of  Greece ;  but  there  is  certainly,"
he  observes,  "  a  very  great  resemblance  between  the  works
of  those  extraordinary  men ;  both  drew  their  images  from
nature  herself,  without  catching  them  only  from  reflection,
and  painting,  in  the  manner  of  the  modern  poets,  the  like-
ness of  a  likeness ;  and  both  possessed,  in  an  eminent  de-


1>  HE  PACK.  VII

grec,  the  rich  and  creative  invention,  which  is  the  very  soul
of  poetry/1  There  is  another  resemblance,  which  is,  how-
ever, unconnected  with  their  comparative  merits  ;  but  it  is
one  which  has  chiefly,  I  think,  given  occasion  to  the  Per-
sian being  called  the  Homer  of  the  East ;  the  heroic  poems
of  Firdausi  are  held  exactly  in  the  same  estimation  with
reference  to  the  works  of  other  poets  of  Persia,  as  those  of
Homer  are  in  the  west.  Like  Homer,  too,  he  describes  a
rude  age,  when  personal  strength  and  ferocious  courage
were  chiefly  valued,  and  when  the  tumultuous  passions  of
the  mind  had  not  been  softened  and  harmonized  by  civili-
zation, or  brought  under  the  control  of  reason  and  re-
flection. Firdausi  is  also  as  much  the  father  of  Persian
poetry  as  Homer  is  of  the  Greek  ;  but  it  would  be  little
less  than  sacrilege  to  draw  a  critical  comparison  between
the  Shah  Nameh  and  the  Iliad  !

It  has  been  observed  by  Dr.  Hurd,  in  his  letters  on
Chivalry  and  Romance,  that  "  there  is  a  remarkable
correspondence  between  the  manners  of  the  old  heroic
times,  as  painted  by  their  great  romancer  Homer,  and
those  which  are  represented  to  us  in  the  modern  books  of
knight-errantry."  The  correspondence  is,  however,  in-
finitely more  striking  between  the  manners  described  by
Firdausi  and  those  of  the  age  of  European  chivalry.  It
is  well  known  that  the  Moors  carried  into  Spain  the  fictions
and  romances  of  Arabia  and  Persia,  and  most  of  our  best
tales  are  supposed  to  be  derived  from  the  same  source.
It  has  already  been  said  that  Firdausi  wrote  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  eleventh  century,  but  it  was  not  till
the  twelfth  that  romances  of  chivalry  began  to  amuse
and  delight  the  western  world.  Although  the  Roman
de  la  Rose  was  the  first  considerable  work  of  the  tdnd
in  verse,  the  poem  which  gave  life  and  character  to  all  suc-
ceeding tales  of  chivalry  was  the  Orlando  Innamorato  of


Till  PREFACE.

Boyardo,  afterwards  improved  and  paraphrased  by  Berni.
To  this  production  we  are  indebted  for  the  Orlando
Furioso  of  Ariosto  ;  and  in  a  similar  relation  to  each  other
stand  the  Bastan-Nameh,  of  which  we  shall  presently
speak,  and  the  Shah  Nameh  of  Firdausi.

In  the  series  of  romantic  adventures  which  constitute  the
Shah  Nameh,  the  principal  hero  is  Rustem.  He  is  born
during  the  reign  of  Minuchihr,  and  it  is  not  till  some  cen-
turies afterwards  that  he  perishes  by  treachery,  whilst
Gushtasp  is  sovereign  of  Persia,  to  avenge  the  death  of
Isfendiyar,  involuntarily  slain  by  the  champion.  The  ca-
reer of  this  prodigy  of  strength,  and  piety,  and  valour,  must
thus  have  been  of  more  than  antediluvian  duration,  unless
indeed  it  could  be  imagined  that  Rustem  was  adopted  by
the  champion  of  every  successive  reign  as  a  name  or  title
of  distinction ;  but  that  is  impossible,  for  his  brother
Zuara  dies  with  him  :  he  is  always  the  son  of  Zal,  who
indeed  survives  him,  and  the  grandson  of  Sam,  and  there
can  be  no  doubt  of  his  being  the  same  individual  through-
out, the  same  everlasting  conqueror.*  So  well  has  Firdausi
preserved  the  indomitable  spirit  of  this  heroic  character,
that,  even  in  his  last  moments,  he  slays  the  wretch  who
had  betrayed  him.

Rustem  has  been  generally  called  the  Persian  Hercules,
and  in  bravery  and  power  the  two  heroes  present  many  points
of  resemblance.  Sir  William  Ouseley,  in  his  valuable  travels,
has  drawn  an  ingenious  parallel  between  them,  especially


*  But  the  Shah  Nameh  cannot  be  said  to  have  any  pretensions  to
true  history,  and  chronology  is  equally  disregarded  in  the  poetical
imagination  of  Firdausi ;  for,  according  to  him,  Jemshid  had  reign-
ed seven  hundred  years  before  he  was  inspired  with  the  impious  am-
bition which  occasioned  his  downfall,  and  the  despotism  of  the  usur-
per Zohak  is  stated  to  have  lasted  one  thousand  years !


PRKFACK.  1\

with  regard  to  the  labours  of  these  celebrated  champions.
The  labours  of  Rustern  were  however  only  seven,  whilst  those
of  Hercules  were  twelve.  It  is  not,  I  believe,  understood  that
the  series  of  exploits  performed  by  the  Persian  hero  are  at
all  figurative,  like  those  of  the  Grecian  god ;  for  accord-
ing to  the  theory  of  Dupuis,  Hercules  is  considered  as  no
other  than  the  sun,  and  his  twelve  labours  are  regarded  as
a  representation  of  the  annual  course  of  that  luminary
through  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac.*  In  the  Shah  Nameh,


*  Fancy  is  ever  active  in  attempts  to  explain  fabulous  or  extraordinary
events.  "  If  we  compare,"  says  the  Bibliotheca  Classica,  by  Barker,
"  the  progress  of  the  sun  through  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  with  the
twelve  labours  of  Hercules,  a  very  striking  coincidence  is  instantly
observed.  A  few  examples  will  be  adduced : — In  the  first  month  the
sun  passes  into  Leo,  and  in  his  first  labour  Hercules  slew  the
Nemsean  lion.  In  the  second  month,  the  sun  enters  the  sign  Virgo,
when  the  constellation  of  the  Hydra  sets  ;  and  in  his  second  labour,
Hercules  destroys  the  Lernsean  Hydra.  In  the  third  month,  the  sun
enters  the  signLibra  at  the  beginning  of  autumn,  when  the  constellation
of  the  Centaur  rises,  represented  as  bearing  a  wine-skin  full  of  liquor,
and  a  thyrsus  adorned  with  vine  leaves  and  grapes.  At  this  same  period,
what  is  termed  by  some  astronomers  the  constellation  of  the  boar
rises  in  the  evening ;  and  in  his  third  labour,  Hercules,  after  being
hospitably  entertained  by  a  Centaur,  encountered  and  slew  the  other
Centaurs,  who  fought  for  a  cask  of  wine  :  he  slew  also,  in  this  labour,
the  Erymanthian  boar.  In  the  fourth  month,  the  sun  enters  the  sign
of  Scorpio,  when  Cassiopeia  rises,  a  constellation  in  which  an-
ciently a  stag  was  represented ;  and  in  his  fourth  labour,  Hercules
caught  the  famous  stag  with  golden  horns  and  brazen  feet.  In  the
fifth  month,  the  sun  enters  Sagittarius,  consecrated  to  Diana,  who
had  a  temple  at  Stymphalus,  in  which  were  seen  the  birds  called
Stymphalides.  At  this  same  time  rise  the  three  birds,  namely,  the
constellations  of  the  vulture,  swan,  and  eagle,  pierced  with  the  ar-
rows of  Hercules ;  and  in  his  fifth  labour,  Hercules  destroyed  the
Harpies  near  lake  Stymphalus,  which  are  represented  as  three  in
number  on  the  medals  of  Perinthus.  In  the  sixth  month,  the  sun


X  PREFACE.

Isfendiyar  has  also  his  seven  labours  as  well  as  Rustem,
and  both  consist  in  the  overthrow  of  devouring  monsters,
and  the  destruction  of  talismans  and  works  of  enchantment.
Rustem,  however,  performs  his  exploits  alone,  mounted  on
his  famous  horse  Rakush,  whilst  Isfendiyar  is  accompanied
and  assisted  by  a  numerous  party  of  horsemen.  All  nations,
indeed,  have  had  their  unconquerable  knights  and  destructive
dragons.  We  had  our  St.  George  ;  and  other  countries  can
no  doubt  boast  of  cavaliers  equally  valiant,  and  of  monsters
equally  pestiferous  and  horrible.

Of  Abul  Kasim  Firdausi,  the  author  of  this  celebrated
work,  little  is  satisfactorily  known.  He  was  born  at  Tus,
a  city  of  Khorassan,  about  the  year  950.  But  in  Daulet
Shah's  account  of  the  Persian  poets,  his  proper  name  is
said  to  have  been  Hassan,  and  that  of  his  father  Ishak
Sherif  Shah,  who  worked  as  a  gardener  on  the  do-
main of  the  governor  of  Tus.  The  following  cir-
cumstances, respecting  the  origin  of  the  poem  and  the
life  of  the  poet,  are  chiefly  derived  from  the  preface
to  the  copy  of  the  Shah  Nameh  which  was  collated
in  the  year  of  the  Hijreh  829,  about  400  years  ago,  by
order  of  Bayisunghur  Bahader  Khan.  In  appears  from
that  preface  that  Yezdjird,  the  last  king  of  the  Sassanian
race,  took  considerable  pains  in  collecting  all  the  chro-

passes  into  the  sign  C&pricomus,  who  was,  according1  to  some,  a
grandson  of  the  luminary.  At  this  period,  the  stream  \vhich  flo\vs
from  Aquarius  sets ;  its  source  is  between  the  hands  of  Anstaeus,
son  of  the  river  Peneus.  In  his  sixth  labour,  Hercules  cleansed,  by
means  of  the  Peneus,  the  stables  of  Augeas,  son  of  Phoebus.  A
similar  explanation  may  be  given  of  the  other  labours  of  this  demi-
god; but  enough,  it  is  conceived,  has  been  advanced  to  shew  that  the
theory  upon  which  these  remarks  have  been  based,  although  very
questionable  in  some  of  its  astronomical  details,  is  notwithstanding
extremely  plausible."


PR  E  FACT-;.  XI

nicies,  histories  and  traditions,  connected  with  Persia  and
the  sovereigns  of  that  country,  from  the  time  of  Kaiumers
to  the  accession  of  the  Khosraus,  which,  by  his  direction,
were  digested  and  brought  into  one  view,  and  formed  the
book  known  by  the  name  of  Syur-al-Muluk,  or  the  Bastan-
Nameh.  When  the  followers  of  Mahommed  overturned
the  Persian  monarchy,  this  work  was  found  in  the  plun-
dered library  of  Yezdjird.  The  preface  above  alluded  to
minutely  traces  its  progress  through  different  hands  in
Arabia,  Ethiopia,  and  Hindustan.  The  chronicle  was
afterwards  continued  to  the  time  of  Yezdjird.  In  the
tenth  century,  one  of  the  Kings  of  the  Samanian  dynasty
directed  Dukiki  to  versify  that  extensive  work,  but  the
poet  only  lived  to  finish  a  thousand  distiches,  having  been
assassinated  by  his  own  slave.  Nothing  further  was  done
till  the  reign  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Sabuktugin,  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  eleventh  century.  That  illustrious  con-
queror, whose  restless  ambition  extended  his  dominion  from
the  Tigris  to  the  Ganges,  and  from  the  mountains  of  Tartary
to  the  Indian  Ocean,  with  the  intention  of  augmenting  the
glories  of  his  reign  projected  a  history  of  the  kings  of  Persia,
and  ordered  the  literary  characters  of  his  court  conjointly  to
prepare  one  from  all  accessible  records.  While  they  were
engaged  upon  this  laborious  undertaking,  a  romantic  ac-
cident, which  it  is  unnecessary  to  describe,  furnished  the
Sultan  with  a  copy  of  the  Bastan  Nameh,  the  existence  of
which  was  till  then  unknown  to  him.  From  this  work
Mahmud  selected  seven  Stories  or  Romances,  which  he
delivered  to  seven  poets  to  be  composed  in  verse,  that  he
might  be  able  to  ascertain  the  merits  of  each  competitor.
The  poet  Unsari,  to  whom  the  story  of  Rustem  and  Soh-
rab  was  given,  gained  the  palm,  and  he  was  accordingly
engaged  to  arrange  the  whole  history  in  verse.

Firdausi  was  at  this  time  at  Tus,  his  native  city,  where


Xll  PJIKFACF..


he  cultivated  his  poetical  talents  with  assiduity  and  suc-
cess. He  had  heard  of  the  attempt  of  Dukiki  to  versify
the  history  of  the  kings  of  Persia,  and  of  the  determina-
tion of  the  reigning  king,  Mahmud,  to  patronize  an  under-
taking which  promised  to  add  lustre  to  thie  age  in  which  he
lived.  Having  fortunately  succeeded  in  procuring  a  copy
of  the  Bastan  Nameb,  he  pursued  his  studies  with  unre-
mitting zeal,  and  soon  produced  that  part  of  the  poem  in
which  the  battles  of  Zohak  and  Feridun  are  described.
The  performance  was  universally  read  and  admired,  and  it
was  not  long  before  his  fame  reached  the  ears  of  the  Sultan,
who  immediately  invited  him  to  his  court.

Another  notice  of  his  life  states,  that  he  and  his  brother
Mahsud  were  originally  husbandmen, occupied  in  the  labours
of  the  field  at  Tus,  and  that  it  was  the  persecution  of  a  ma-
licious enemy  which  drove  the  poet  from  his  native  place.
Firdausi  told  his  brother  that  he  was  unable  to  endure  the
insults  that  were  continually  heaped  upon  him,  and  pro-
posed that  they  should  depart  together  to  another  country ;
but  Mahsud,  not  disposed  to  abandon  his  home,  objected
to  this  scheme.  Firdausi  however  was  determined  to  re-
main no  longer  at  Tus,  and  immediately  set  out  unfriended
and  alone  on  his  way  to  Ghuznin.

When  our  author  had  reached  the  vicinity  of  the  ca-
pital, he  happened  to  pass  near  a  garden  where  Unsari,
Usjudi,  and  Furroki  were  sitting  drinking  wine.  These
celebrated  poets  observed  a  stranger  approach,  and  one
of  them  said :  "  If  that  fellow  comes  hither  he  will  spoil
our  pleasure,  let  us  therefore  get  rid  of  him  at  once  by
scolding  him  away.1'1  But  the  others  disapproved  of  this
harsh  mode  of  proceeding,  and  thought  it  would  be  better,
and  more  consistent  with  their  condition  and  character,  to
overcome  him  by  some  stroke  of  learning  or  waggery.  It
was  at  length  agreed  among  them  that  each  should  recite  an


PR  K  FA  CM.  Xlll

extemporaneous  verse,  terminating  with  a  word  to  which
they  supposed  there  were  only  two  other  rhymes  in  the
language ;  "  for  doubtless,"  said  one  of  them,  "  he  will  be
puzzled  to  find  a  fourth,  and  will  consequently  quickly
leave  us  to  our  own  enjoyments."  Soon  after  this  preliminary
step  had  been  settled,  Firdausi  drew  near,  and  mutual  sa-
lutations having  passed  between  them,  they  thus  familiarly
addressed  him  :  "  Here  we  are,  engaged  in  making  extem-
poraneous verses,  and  whoever  is  able  to  follow  them  up  with
promptitude  and  effect,  shall  be  admitted  as  an  approved
companion  to  our  social  board."  Firdausi  was  willing  and
ready  to  submit  to  this  test,  and  Unsari  thus  commenced
upon  an  apostrophe  to  a  beautiful  woman :

The  light  of  the  moon  to  thy  splendour  is  weak.
Usjudi  rejoined  :

The  rose  is  eclipsed  by  the  bloom  of  thy  cheek.
Then  Furroki :

Thy  eye-lashes  dart  through  the  folds  of  the  joshun.
It  was  now  Firdausf  s  turn  ;  and  he  said  without  a  mo-
ment''s  pause,  but  with  admirable  felicity  :

Like  the  javelin  of  Gfw  in  the  battle  with  Poshun.*

The  poets  were  astonished  at  the  readiness  of  the  stranger
in  producing  a  fourth  rhyme ;  and  being  totally  ignorant  of
the  story  of  Gf  w  and  Poshun,  inquired  of  him  from  whence
it  was  derived,  when  Firdausi  related  to  them  the  onslaught


*  In  the  Persian,  the  four  lines  run  thus:


XIV  PREFACE.

or  encounter  as  described  in  the  Bastan  Nameh.  Upon  which
they  treated  him  with  the  greatest  kindness  and  respect,  and
were  so  pleased  with  the  power  and  genius  he  displayed  on
other  subjects,  that  they  recommended  him  to  the  patronage
of  Shah  Mahmud  ;  an  instance  of  disinterestedness,  if  true,
highly  honourable  to  the  rival  poets.

It  is  also  related  that  the  Sultan,  when  Firdausi  was  first
introduced  to  him,  requested  the  poet  to  compose  some
verses  in  his  presence;  upon  which,  Firdausi  instantly
pronounced  the  following  distich  :

The  cradled  infant,  whose  sweet  lips  are  yet
Balmy  with  milk  from  its  own  mother's  breast,
Lisps  first  the  name  of  Mahmud.

This  rare  compliment  delighted  the  king,  and  confirmed
his  high  opinion  of  the  extraordinary  merits  of  the  poet.

When  Firdausi  arrived  at  Ghaznin,  the  success  of  Un-
sari,  in  giving  a  poetical  dress  to  the  romance  of  Rustem
and  Sohrab,  was  the  subject  of  general  observation  and
praise.  Animated  by  this  proof  of  literary  taste  at  court,
he  commenced  upon  the  story  of  the  battles  of  Isfendiyar
and  Rustem ;  and  having  completed  it,  he  embraced  the
earliest  opportunity  of  getting  that  poem  presented  to  the
Sultan,  who  had  already  seen  abundant  evidence  of  the
transcendent  talents  of  the  author.  Mahmud  regarded
the  production  with  admiration  and  delight.  He  without
hesitating  a  moment  appointed  him  to  complete  the  Shah
Nameh,  and  ordered  his  chief  minister  *  to  pay  him  a
thousand  miskals  for  every  thousand  distichs,  and  at  the
same  time  honoured  him  with  the  surname  of  Firdausi,
because  that  he  had  diffused  over  his  court  the  delights  of
paradise.')-  Unsari  himself  liberally  acknowledged  the  su-

*  Ahmed  Mymundi.  t  Firdaus  signifies  paradise.


PREFACE.  XV

periority  of  Firdausi's  genius,  and  relinquished  the  under-
taking without  apparent  regret.

The  minister,  in  compliance  with  the  injunctions  of  Mah-
mud, offered  to  pay  the  sums  as  the  work  went  on ;  but
Firdausi  unfortunately  preferred  waiting  till  he  had  com-
pleted his  engagement,  and  receiving  the  whole  at  once,
as  he  had  long  indulged  the  hope  of  being  able  to  do
something  of  importance  for  the  benefit  of  his  native  city.

It  appears  that  Firdausi,  in  his  new  situation,  did  not
act  with  becoming  discretion.  He  had  composed  verses  in
honour  of  the  minister  whose  office  it  was  to  supply  him
with  whatever  he  might  require,  but  did  nothing  to  conciliate
the  good  graces  of  Aiyar,  one  of  the  principal  favourites  of
Mahmud.  In  consequence  of  this  omission,  Aiyar  sought
every  opportunity  to  injure  Firdausi  and  ruin  his  interests
with  the  king.  Several  passages  in  his  poems  were  ex-
tracted and  invidiously  commented  upon,  as  containing
sentiments  contrary  to  the  principles  of  the  true  faith  !  It
was  alleged  that  they  proved  him  to  be  a  hypocritical  phi-
losopher, and  a  schismatic.  The  king  was  highly  indig-
nant on  hearing  that  the  poet  was  guilty  of  cherishing
impious  doctrines ;  upon  which  occasion  Firdausi  solicited
an  audience,  and  throwing  himself  at  the  feet  of  Mahmud,
protested  against  the  malignant  calumny  which  had  been
brought  against  him ;  but  Mahmud  replied  that  all
the  people  of  Tus  were  of  the  same  character,  all  he-
retics alike !  The  situation  of  the  poet  under  royal  dis-
pleasure had  thus  become  critical,  and  he  remained  at
Ghaznin,  though  still  prosecuting  his  labours,  in  a
state  of  great  anxiety  and  alarm.  But  in  spite  of  all
that  artifice  and  malignity  could  frame,  the  poet  rose
in  the  esteem  of  the  public.  Admiration  followed  him
in  the  progress  of  the  work,  and  presents  were  shower-
ed upon  him  from  every  quarter.  The  poems  were  at


XVI  PKEFACM-.

length  completed.  The  composition  of  sixty  thousand
couplets  *  appears  to  have  cost  him  the  labour  of
thirty  years.  The  Sultan  was  fully  sensible  of  the  value
and  excellence  of  that  splendid  monument  of  genius  and
talents,  and  proud  of  being  the  patronizer  of  a  work  which
promised  to  perpetuate  his  name,  he  ordered  an  elephant-
load  of  gold  to  be  given  to  the  author.  But  the  malignity
of  the  favourite  was  unappeased,  and  he  was  still  bent  upon
the  degradation  and  ruin  of  the  poet.  Contriving  to  esta-
blish his  own  success  with  the  king,  instead  of  the  elephant-
load  of  gold,  he  managed  to  get  sent  to  him  60,000  .silver
dirhems  !  Firdausi  was  in  the  public  bath  at  the  time ;  and
when  he  found  that  the  bags  contained  only  silver,  he
was  so  enraged  at  the  insult  offered  to  him,  that  on  the
spot  he  gave  20,000  to  the  keeper  of  the  bath,  20,000  to
the  seller  of  refreshments,  and  20,000  to  the  slave  who
brought  them.  "  The  Sultan  shall  know,"  said  he,  "  that
I  did  not  bestow  the  labour  of  thirty  years  on  a  work,  to  be
rewarded  with  dirhems  !"  When  this  circumstance  came  to
the  knowledge  of  the  king,  he  was  exceedingly  exasperated
at  the  conduct  of  his  favourite,  who  had,  however,  ar-
tifice and  ingenuity  enough  to  exculpate  himself,  and  to


*  In  a  dissertation  called  Yamini,  it  is  said  that  the  ancient  poet
Rudiki,  who  flourished  half  a  century  before  Firdausi,  had  written
one  million  and  three  hundred  verses;  an  Oriental  Lope  de  Vega!

The  copies  of  the  Shah  Nameh  now  generally  met  with,  vary  in
extent  many  thousand  couplets — few  of  them  containing-  the  original
number.  This  inequality  has  been  thus  accounted  for ;  the  katibs,  or
copyers,  engaged  upon  so  immense  a  work,  are  apt  to  expedite  the
accomplishment  of  their  task  by  omissions  in  different  parts,  whilst,
on  the  other  hand,  many  of  them  have  not  only  interpolated  passages
but  whole  episodes.  The  curious  in  composition  and  style  have  long-
been  amused  in  conjecturing-  what  is  genuine,  and  what  is  added  or
doubtful,  but  to  very  little  purpose,  some  of  the  questioned  stories
being  fully  equal  to  the  best  parts  of  the  poem.


PK  EFAC I  .


cast  all  the  blame  upon  the  poet.  Firdausi  was  charged
with  disrespectful  and  insulting  behaviour  to  his  sovereign  ;
and  Mahmud,  thus  stimulated  to  resentment,  and  no  longer
questioning  the  veracity  of  the  favourite,  passed  an  order
that  the  next  morning  he  should  be  trampled  to  death  under
the  feet  of  an  elephant!  The  unfortunate  poet  was
thrown  into  the  greatest  consternation  when  he  heard  of
the  will  of  the  Sultan.  He  immediately  hurried  to  the  pre-
sence, and  again  falling  at  the  feet  of  the  king,  begged  for
mercy,  pronouncing  at  the  same  time  an  elegant  eulogium
on  the  glories  of  his  reign,  and  the  innate  generosity  of  his
heart.  The  king,  touched  by  his  agitation,  and  still
respecting  the  brilliancy  of  his  talents,  at  length  condes-
cended to  revoke  the  order.

But  the  wound  was  deep,  and  not  to  be  endured  without
a  murmur.  He  immediately  obtained  from  the  librarian  of
Mahmud  the  copy  of  the  Shah  Nameh  which  he  had  presented
to  the  king,  and  wrote  in  it  his  satire  on  the  Sultan  with  all
the  bitterness  of  reproach  which  insulted  merit  could  devise,
and  instantly  fled  from  the  court.  He  passed  some  time  at
Mazinderan  (Hyrcania,)  and  afterwards  took  refuge  at  Bag-
dad, where  he  was  in  high  favour  with  the  Kalif  al  Kader
Billah,  in  whose  praise  he  added  a  thousand  couplets  to  the
Shah  Nameh,  and  for  which  he  received  a  robe  of  honour
and  60,000  dinars.  He  also  wrote  a  poem  called  Joseph
during  his  stay  in  that  city.

Another  account  says,  that  after  abandoning  his  own
country,  Firdausi  remained  for  some  time  in  the  house  of  Abu
el  Maali,  a  dealer  in  books  at  Herat.  Mahmud  had,  after  his
escape,  sent  persons  in  search  of  him  in  every  direction ;  and
havingmade  known  thepurposeof  theirmission  in  every  town
they  came  to,  our  poet  in  great  sorrow  returned  to  Tus;
but  afraid  of  not  being  safe  there,  he  took  leave  of  his  rela-
tions and  friends  and  obtained  a  place  of  refuge  in  Rustem-

b


Xviii  PREFACE.

dar.  The  governor  received  him  with  kindness,  and  offered
him  one  hundred  and  sixty  miskals*  of  gold  if  he  would
cancel  from  the  Shah  Nameh  the  satire  composed  by  him
against  Mahmud.  Firdausi,  adds  this  account,  agreed  to
the  proposal,  cancelled  the  verses,  and  then  returned  to
Tus,  where  he  lived  obscurely  to  an  old  age.

It  is  further  said  that  Mahmud  at  length  became  ac-
quainted with  the  falsehood  and  treachery  of  the  vizir,whose
cruel  persecution  of  the  unoffending  poet  had  involved  the
character  and  reputation  of  his  court  in  disgrace.  His  indig-
nation appeared  to  be  extreme,  and  the  favourite  was  ba-
nished for  ever  from  his  presence. Anxious  to  make  all
the  reparation  in  his  power  for  the  injustice  he  had  been
guilty  of,  whether  purposely  or  otherwise,  he  immediately
dispatched  a  present  of  60,000  dinars  and  a  robe  of  state
with  many  apologies  for  what  had  happened. But  Fir-
dausi did  not  live  to  be  gratified  by  this  consoling  acknow-
ledgment. He  had  returned  to  his  friends  at  Tus,  where
he  died  before  the  present  from  the  king  arrived. His  fa-
mily, however,  scrupulously  devoted  it  to  the  benevolent
purposes  which  the  poet  had  originally  intended,  wi*.  the
erection  of  public  buildings,  and  the  general  improvement
of  his  native  city.

This  latter  circumstance  is  somewhat  differently  related
in  Daulet  Shah's  biography.  Mahmud,  it  is  said,  in
one  of  his  twelve  expeditions  to  India,  hearing  his  minister
repeat  a  passage  from  the  Shah  Nameh  happily  descriptive
of  his  situation  at  the  time,  was  strongly  reminded  of
Firdausi;  and  recollecting  with  regret  the  injustice  he
had  done  the  poet,  inquired  what  had  become  of  him.
The  minister  replied  that  he  was  now  very  old  and  infirm,
and  living  obscurely  at  Tus.  The  Sultan  instantly  or-
dered a  present,  worthy  of  the  poet  and  of  himself,  to

*  A  miskal  is  about  a  drachm  and  a  half  in  weight.


PREFACE.  XIX

be  forwarded  to  him;  but  at  the  moment  the  persons
in  charge  of  this  present  entered  the  gate  of  Tus,  the
body  of  Firdausi  was  being  conveyed  through  the  same
gate  to  be  buried.  When  the  funeral  ceremony  was  over,
however,  the  amount  was  carried  to  his  surviving  sister :
but  she  refused  to  receive  it,  saying,  "  What  have  I  to  do
now  with  the  wealth  of  kings  ?"

This  brief  biographical  notice  is  the  sum  of  all  that  is
known  of  the  great  Firdausi.  The  poet  seems  to  have
lived  to  a  considerable  age.  When  he  wrote  the  satire
against  Mahmud,  according  to  his  own  account,  he  was
more  than  seventy.

When  charity  demands  a  bounteous  dole,
Close  is  thy  hand,  contracted  as  thy  soul ;
Now  seventy  years  have  marked  my  long1  career,
Nay  more,  but  age  has  no  protection  here !

Probably  about  ten  years  elapsed  during  his  sojourn  at
Mazinderan  and  Bagdad,  after  he  quitted  the  court  of
Ghuznin,  so  that  he  must  have  been  at  least  eighty  when
he  died.  It  appears  from  several  parts  of  the  satire,  that
a  period  of  thirty  years  was  employed  in  the  composition
of  the  Shah  Nameh,  from  which  it  must  be  inferred  that
he  had  been  engaged  upon  that  work  long  before  the  ac-
cession of  Mahmud  to  the  throne,  for  that  monarch  sur-
vived Firdausi  ten  years,  and  the  period  of  his  reign
was  only  thirty-one.  Although  there  be  nothing  in  the
preceding  memoir  to  indicate  that  the  poet  had  commenced
versifying  the  Bastan  Nameh  nine  years  before  the  reign  of
Mahmud,  the  circumstance  can  hardly  be  questioned.  All
oriental  biography  is  so  vague,  metaphorical,  and  undeter-
mined, that  there  is  always  great  difficulty  in  arriving  at
the  simplest  fact,  yet  it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  the  round
number  of  thirty  years  was  falsely  assumed  by  the  poet.
Notwithstanding  the  turn  which  is  given,  by  the  preface


XX  PREFACE,

just  mentioned,  to  the  cause  of  Firdausf  s  disappointment,  in
referring  it  solely  to  the  rancour  of  the  minister,  the  conduct
of  Mahmud  appears  to  have  been,  in  the  highest  degree,  in-
considerate and  cruel.  He  must  have  well  known  that
dirhems  had  been  sent  instead  of  the  elephant-load  .of  gold,
and  it  was  unworthy  of  the  conqueror  of  the  world  to  suffer
himself  to  be  flattered  and  cajoled  into  petty  resentment
against  the  man  who  had  immortalized  the  exploits  of  so
many  ancient  heroes,  and  who,  in  the  opening  verses  of  the
poem,  had  done  such  honour  to  his  name.  The  present
of  60,000  dinars  which  he  afterwards  sent  to  him  seems
at  any  rate  to  shew  (upon  the  presumption  of  his  having
been  purposely  unjust)  that  he  felt  some  stings  of  con-
science, and  that  he  wished  to  recover  from  the  disgrace
which  attached  to  him,  as  a  patron  of  literature,  from  so
dishonourable  a  transaction.

A  more  favourable  construction,  however,  may  be  enter-
tained from  the  facts  adduced.  The  order  for  an  elephant-
load  of  gold  to  be  presented  to  the  poet,  whatever  might  be
meant  by  that  imposing  term,  appears  to  have  arisen  from
a  spontaneous  impulse  of  generosity.  Mahmud  may  have
been  afterwards  the  dupe  of  the  minister,  and  his  last
atoning  act  of  liberality  would  seem  to  favour  that  con-
clusion ;  but  no  dependence  can  be  placed  on  the  humour
of  an  Asiatic  despot.  Yet  it  might  be  presumed  that  the
sovereign  who  had  the  justice  and  magnanimity  to  punish
with  death  an  offender  whom  he  would  not  see  till  after
execution,  suspecting  him  to  be  his  own  son,*  would  hardly
treat  a  poor  poet  so  disgracefully.  However  this  may  have
been,  the  satire  of  Firdausi,  written  at  the  moment  of  pro-
vocation, and  with  strongly  exasperated  feelings,  appears

*  The  story  is  told  by  Gibbon  in  his  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman
Empire.


PREFACE.  XXI

to  have  had  the  power  of  stamping  with  obloquy  in  this
respect  the  character  of  Mahmud,  and  of  giving  negative
effect  to  the  adulation  which  he  had  lavishly  bestowed  upon
the  same  individual  at  the  commencement  of  his  poem.
Thus  singularly  enough  the  work  begins  with  an  extravagant
eulogy,  and  ends  with  the  most  scornful  vituperation  of  his
patron.

The  tomb  of  Firdausi  is  in  the  city  of  Tus,  and  much  fre-
quented by  pilgrims.  It  is  said  of  Shaik  Abul  Kasim  Korkani
that  he  refused  to  offer  up  the  customary  prayer  for  Firdausi,
because  he  had  written  so  much  in  praise  of  the  fire-wor-
shippers. But  upon  the  following  night  he  dreamt  that  he  saw
Firdausi  in  Paradise  raised  to  a  high  degree  of  glory,  when
he  asked  him  how  he  had  merited  that  distinction,  and  the
poet  replied,  "  On  account  of  the  passages  in  which  I  have
celebrated  the  greatness  and  the  unity  of  God."

In  delivering  this  abridgment  to  the  public,  I  have  been
anxious  to  make  it  as  comprehensive  and  interesting  to  the
general  reader,  as  the  extent  of  the  labour  I  had  pre-
scribed to  myself,  and  my  own  ability  would  allow.  But
it  necessarily  contains  merely  the  substance  of  the  Shah
Nameh,  though  in  many  parts  in  considerable  detail ;  and
I  have  therefore  deemed  it  important,  with  the  view  of
showing  more  fully  Firdausfs  powers  as  a  poet,  to  add
a  revised  edition  of  my  translation  of  Sohrab.  Thus
whilst  the  abridgment  exhibits  the  scope  and  character  of
the  poem,  this  favourite  episode  will  at  once  display  the
force  and  spirit  with  which  Firdausi's  outlines  are  traced
and  his  colouring  supplied.

But  I  must  not  conclude  without  remarking,  that  Fir-
dausi's  great  work  continues  to  be  held  in  the  highest  esti-
mation throughout  Persia,  and  favourite  passages  from  the
various  adventures  are  still  treasured  up  and  quoted  on  all
fitting  occasions.  So  popular  is  our  old  romancer,  that  the


XX11  PREFACE.

copies  of  the  Shah  Nameh  are  innumerable,  and  some  of
them  are  not  only  admirable  specimens  of  fine  ornamental
writing,  but  they  are  generally  enriched  with  coloured
drawings  of  exquisite  finish,  illustrative  of  the  most  pro-
minent events  of  the  work.  One  of  the  copies  which  I  used
in  the  execution  of  the  present  abridgment  was  of  this
kind,  splendidly  illuminated  and  sprinkled  with  gold,  and
cost  upwards  of  one  hundred  guineas.  In  India  even,  that
is  Hindustan  and  the  southern  regions  of  the  East,  wher-
ever the  Persian  language  is  understood  and  cultivated,  the
Shah  Nameh  is  also  highly  prized ;  but  it  is  perhaps  most
known  by  a  very  clever  epitome  of  it,  written  in  the  same
language,  by  Shumshir  Khan  in  the  year  1063  of  the  Ma-
hommedan  era.  The  original  work  has  outlived  eight
centuries  with  undiminished  lustre,  in  countries,  too,  where
copies  can  only  be  multiplied  at  a  great  expense,  veri-
fying the  prophecy  of  the  poet,  who  predicted  the  immor-
tality of  his  verse  with  as  much  confidence  as  Ovid  when  he
wrote  his  celebrated  peroration —

Jamque  opus  exegi ;  quod  nee  Jovis  ira,  nee  ignes,
Nee  poterit  ferrum,  nee  edax  abolere  vetustas.


London,  May  1,  1832.


CONTENTS.


Page
Invocation xxix

Kaidmers,  the  first  king  of  Persia ]

Husheng  ascends  the  throne,  and  founds  the  religion  of  the  Fire-wor-
shippers 4

Tahumers,  the  Binder  of  Demons 6

Jemshid,  his  ambition  and  the  declension  of  his  power 10

Mirtas-Tazi,  his  generosity 11

Zohak,  instigated  by  Iblis,  causes  his  father's  death 12

Two  black-serpents  rise  out  from  his  shoulders,  and  are  fed  with "  the

brain  of  man  " 15

Jemshid,  a  wanderer, — his  misfortunes, — marries  the  daughter  of  the  king

of  Zabul 27

Is  obliged  to  fly,  to  avoid  being  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  Zohak ....  31

Jemshid  in  fetters  before  Zohak 33

Put  to  death 34

Zohak's  dream,  prophetic  of  his  fall 35

The  birth  of  Feridun,  and  death  of  his  father,  Abtin , 36

Faranuk  escapes,  with  Feridun  her  son,  to  the  mountain  Alberz 37

Feridun  vows  vengeance  against  Zohak,  for  the  murder  of  his  father . .  39

Kavah,  the  Blacksmith,  rebels  against  Zohak  on  account  of  his  cruelty  40

Brings  Feridun  from  his  retreat,  and  accompanies  him  against  Zohak  43

The  capture  of  Zohak's  palace,  and  release  of  Feridun's  two  sisters . .  45

Zohak  wounded,  and  buried  alive  in  a  deep  cave 49

The  revolt  of  Feridun's two  sons,  Silim  and Tur,  and  their  enmity

against  their  younger  brother,  Irij 52

Irij  proceeds  on  a  conciliatory  mission  from  his  father,  and  is  put  to  death

by  them 57

The  agony  of  Feridun 59


XXIV  CONTENTS.

Page

The  birth  of  Minu'chihr 60

Preparations  of  Minu'chihr  against  Silim  and  Tur,  who  in  vain  sue  for

peace  with  Feridun 62

A  battle  ensues,  in  which  the  two  brothers  are  defeated 67

Tur  and  Silim  slain 67-68

The  birth  of  Zal 71

He  is  abandoned  on  the  mountain  Alberz,  on  account  of  having  white

hair — is  nourished  by  the  Simurgh 72

In  a  dream, Sam,  his father,  is  warned  to  bring  back  his  child,  now

grown  up,  and  of  great  promise 75

ZaPs  amour  and  marriage  with  Rudabeh 84

The  birth  of  Rustem 94

Whilst  yet  a  boy,  kills  the  white  elephant  of  Minu'chihr 90

The  exploits  of  Sam  described  to  Minu'chihr 97

His  expedition  against  the  fort  on  the  mountain  Sipund 99

The  death  of  Minu'chihr 102

The  tyranny  of  Nauder  his  successor 104

Afrasiyab  marches  against  Nauder 107

Becomes  the  ruler  of  Persia 113

Puts  Nauder  to  death 114

And  also  his  own  brother,  Aghriras ,...  115

Zal  places  Zau  on  the  throne  of  Persia,  and  Afrasiyab  is  driven  back  into

Turan— Garshasp,  the  son  of  Zau,  ascends  the  throne 117

Poshung's  grief  on  account  of  the  murder  of  Aghriras,  his  son 118

Zal  equips  Rustem  for  battle  against  Afrasiyab,  but  first  sends  him  to

discover  the  retreat  of  Kai-kobad 122

Kai-Kobad raised  to  the  throne 126

The  battle  between  the  Persians  and  Turanians,  in  which  Rustem  carries

off  Afrasiyab's  crown  and  girdle 1 28

Kai-kaus  succeeds  his  father,  and  longs  for  the  invasion  of  Mazinderan  134

His  expedition  fails— he,  and  the  army  are  captured  by  the  Demons  ..  140

Rustem  engages  to  liberate  them,  and  proceeds  by  the  Heft- Khan — First

Stage,  encounters  and  overcomes  a  lion 142

Second  Stage. Traverses  a  burning  desert 143

Third  Stage. Kills  a  furious  dragon 146

Fourth  Stage. Destroys  a  sorceress 147

Fifth  Stage. Conquers  Aulad,  who  describes  the  caves  of  the  demons,

and  kills  Arzang,  the  demon  chief 151


CONTENTS.  XXV

Page
Sixth  Stage. Enters  the city  of Mazinderan,  and  releases  Kai-kaus,

though  still  blind  by  the  sorcery  of  the  demons 152

Seventh  Stage. Overthrows  and  kills  the  white  Demon 155

The  blood  of  the  white  Demon's  heart  restores  Kaus's  sight 156

Rustem  kills  the  magician-king  of  Mazinderan 161

Kaus  makes  a  tour  of  the  provinces  of  Persia 161

The  rebel  Shah  of  Hamaveran  subdued 162

Kaus  marries  Sudaveh,  his  daughter,  and  is  deceived  and  imprisoned  by

the  father 164

In  consequence  Afrasiyab  invades  and  takes  possession  of  Iran ib.

Rustem  collects  an  army,  and  defeating  the  Shah  of  Hamaveran,  restores

Kaus  to  liberty 168

Afrasiyab  is  driven  back  to  Turan 169

Kaus  is  persuaded  to  explore  the  Heavens,  supported  by  eagles 171

Is  thrown  down  into  a  desert,  and  rescued  by  Rustem 1 72

Rustem  and  his  seven  companions  proceed  towards  Turan  on  a  hunting

excursion,  and  a  great  battle  ensues 1 76

story  of  Sohrab,  the  son  of  Rustem 178

Sohrab  is  encouraged  by  Afrasiyab  to  fight  against  Kaus 183

Captures  the  barrier  fort 186

Rustem  is  sent  to  oppose  his  progress 189

Sohrab's  anxiety  to  discover  his  father 192

They  engage  in combat  unknown  to  each  other,  and  Sohrab  is  slain.

—  Rustem's  agony  in  discovering  that  he  was  his  son 203

Tahmineh  inconsolable 206

The  story  of  Saiawush 207

A  damsel  met  with  in  a  forest,  is  espoused  by  Kaus,  and  gives  birth  to

Saiawush 208

When  he  grows  up,  Sudaveh,  one  of  his  father's  wives,  becomes  ena-
moured of  him — her  intrigues 212

In  her  despair  she  accuses  him  of  outrage 215

He  is  sentenced  to  the  ordeal  of  fire,  and  his  innocence  proved 218

Afrasiyab  threatens  another  invasion  of  Iran,  is  defeated  and  has  a  terrible
dream,  which  induces  him  to  sue  for  peace  and  deliver  hostages  to

Saiawush 222

Kaus  disapproves  of  the  terms  and  supersedes  Saiawush,  who  in  anger

joins  Afrasiyab  225

Saiawush  marries  the  daughter  of  Piran-wisah,  and  afterwards  the  daugh-
ter of  Afrasiyab 262


XXVI  CON  T  E  N  T  S.

Intrigues  of  Gersiwaz  against  Saiawush,  who  is  put  to  death  by  order
of  Afrasiyab 235

Condemns  also  his  daughter  Ferangis  to  death,  but she  is saved  by
Piran,  and  gives  birth  to  Kai-khosrau 237

The  young  prince  is  brought  up  in  secret 238

Rustem  upbraids Kai  Kaus  for  his  conduct to Saiawush,  and  puts
Sudaveh  to  death 242

Proceeds  against  Afrasiyab — the  conflict  and  defeat  of  the  Turanians  . .  244

Rustem  conquers  Turan,  and  rules  the  country  seven  years -  245

Kai-Khosrau  and  his  mother  Ferangis  brought  from  their  retirement  by

Giw — their  escape  across  the  Jihun 255

Friburz  and  Khosrau,  each  attack  a  demon-fortress,  the  latter  succeeds  . .  263

Kai-Khosrau  raised  to  the  throne 264

A  severe  battle  between  the  Persians  and  Turanians,  the  latter  victorious  271

Baru  the  magician  put  to  death 274

Piran  Wisah  victorious 275

Rustem  opposed  by  Kamus,  the  Khakan  of  Chin,  and  Piran  Wisah  . .  276

Is  victorious — Kamus  slain 279

Piran  sues  for  peace 284

The  Khakan  of  Chin  slain * 289

Kafur,  the  cannibal 290

Defeat  of  Puladwund,  and  flight  of  Afrasiyab 293

Akwan  Diw 294

His  combat  with  Rustem  and  death 299

The  loves  of  Byzun  and  Manijeh,  the  daughter  of  Afrasiyab 300

Afrasiyab's  wrath  against  them,  and  punishment  of  Byzun 312

Byzun  released  by  Rustem 321

Barzu  and  his  conflict  with  Rustem 324

Susen  the  sorceress,  and  Afrasiyab 339

Her  plot  to  get  the  Iranian  warriors  into  her  power 340

Rustem  frustrates  her  views,  and  Afrasiyab  is  defeated 346

The  expedition  of  Gudarz  against  Afrasiyab  351

Piran  Wisah  is  slain  in  battle 353

The  death  of  Afrasiyab 359

The  mysterious  death  of  Kai-khosrau  367

The  reign  of  Lohurasp 368

Gushtasp  abandons  his  father's  house 370


CONTENTS.

Page
{_  la  married  to  Kitabun,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Rum 375

His  bravery  and  exploits 379

Gushtiisp  is  restored  to  favour  by  the  king  of  Rum  and  subdues  Khuz  . . 380

Succeeds  his  father  Lohurasp 385

^The  valour  of  his  son  Isfendiyar 393

He  propagates  the  faith  of  Zerdusht 394

Gurzam  stimulates  his  father  against  him 395

He  is  put  in  prison 398

Arjasp  invades  the  kingdom, Gushtasp  is  defeated  and  his  household  and
daughters  made  prisoners 401

Isfendiyar  is  released,  to  rescue  the  kingdom  and  his  sisters,  and  pro-
ceeds against  Arjasp  by  the  Heft- Khan 407

First  Stage — destroys  two  wolves 410

Second  Stage — a  lion  and  lioness 412

Third  Stage — a  great  dragon 414

Fourth  Stage — an  enchantress 417

Fifth  Stage— kills  a  Simurgh 419

Sixth  Stage — is  overtaken  by  a  tempest  of  wind  and  snow,  and  escapes
unharmed 421

Seventh  Stage — passes  a  burning  desert 423

Capture  of  the  brazen  fortress  and  death  of  Arjasp 426

The  return  of  Isfendiyar 435

His  fate  foretold 438

Gushtasp  orders  him  to  bring  Rustem  to  him  in  fetters 439

Proceeds  reluctantly  against  the  champion 444

Altercation  with  Rustem 448

The  combat 459

The  death  of  Isfendiyar 465

The  death  of  Rustem 471

Bahman  succeeds  Gushtasp 478

Humai,  and  the  birth  of  Darab 482

The  reign  of  Darab 492

Dara 495

•_/£  Sikander,  his  victories 499

His  death 510

Firdausi's  Satire  on  Mahmud 511


XXV111  CONTENTS.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Page
On  Demons 515

On  Love 516

On  Wine 518

On  the  Simurgh 520

On  Oriental  Beauty 522

Uncertainty  of  Life 529

Amulets 534

Wrestling 537

Singing  Girls 538

The  story  of  Sohrab,  with  notes 541


ERRATA.

Page  line

40,  et  passim,  for  GAVAH  read  KAVAH,
106—28,  for  grandson  read  grandfather,
115,  /or  Ri  read  Rai.
183—11,  for  the  fitness  read  his  fitness.
466— 14,  for  prosperity  read  property.


The  system  of  Sir  William  Jones  in  the  printing  of  Oriental  words  has
been  kept  in  view  in  the  following  work,  viz.  The  letter  a  represents  the
short  vowel  as  in  bat,  a  with  an  accent  the  broad  sound  of  a  in  hall,  i  as  in
lily,  z  with  an  accent  as  in  police,  u  as  in  bull,  u  with  an  accent  as  in  rude,
6  with  an  accent  as  o  in  pole,  the  diphthong  at  as  in  aisle,  au  as  in  the  German
word  kraut  or  on  in  house.


INVOCATION.


THEE  I  invoke,  the  Lord  of  Life  and  Light !
Beyond  imagination  pure  and  bright !
To  thee,  sufficing  praise  no  tongue  can  give,
We  are  thy  creatures,  and  in  thee  we  live  !
Thou  art  the  summit,  depth,  the  all  in  all,
Creator,  Guardian  of  this  earthly  ball ;
Whatever  is,  thou  art — Protector,  King,
From  thee  all  goodness,  truth,  and  mercy  spring.
O  pardon  the  misdeeds  of  him  who  now
Bends  in  thy  presence  with  a  suppliant  brow.
Teach  him  to  tread  the  path  thy  Prophet  trod ;
To  wash  his  heart  from  sin,  to  know  his  God;
And  gently  lead  him  to  that  home  of  rest,
Where  filled  with  holiest  rapture  dwell  the  blest.

Saith  not  that  book  divine,  from  Heaven  supplied,
"  Mustafa  is  the  true,  the  unerring  guide,
The  purest,  greatest  Prophet !" Next  him  came
Wise  Abu  Buker,  of  unblemished  name ;
Then  Omer  taught  the  faith,  unknown  to  guile,
And  made  the  world  with  vernal  freshness  smile ;
Then  Othman  brave  th1  imperial  priesthood  graced ;
All,  led  by  him,  the  Prophet's  faith  embraced.


XXX  INVOCATION.

The  fourth  was  AH  ;  he  the  spouse  adored
Of  Fatima,  then  spread  the  saving  word.
All,  of  whom  Mahommed  spoke  elate,
"  I  am  the  city  of  knowledge — he  my  gate."
Ali  the  blest. Whoever  shall  recline
A  supplicant  at  his  all-powerful  shrine,
Enjoys  both  this  life  and  the  next ;  in  this,
All  earthly  good,  in  that,  eternal  bliss  !

From  records  true  my  legends  I  rehearse,
And  string  the  pearls  of  wisdom  in  my  verse,
That  in  the  glimmering  days  of  life's  decline,
Its  fruits,  in  wealth  and  honour,  may  be  mine.
My  verse,  a  structure  pointing  to  the  skies ;
Whose  solid  strength  destroying  time  defies.
All  praise  the  noble  work,  save  only  those
Of  impious  life,  or  base  malignant  foes ;
All  blest  with  learning  read,  and  read  again,
The  sovereign  smiles,  and  thus  approves  my  strain
"  Richer  by  far,  Firdausi,  than  a  mine
Of  precious  gems,  is  this  bright  lay  of  thine."
Centuries  may  pass  away,  but  still  my  page
Will  be  the  boast  of  each  succeeding  age.

Praise,  praise  to  Mahmud,  who  of  like  renown,
In  battle  or  the  banquet,  fills  the  throne ;
Lord  of  the  realms  of  Chin  and  Hindustan,
Sovereign  and  Lord  of  Persia  and  Turan,
With  his  loud  voice  he  rends  the  flintiest  ear ;
On  land  a  tyger  fierce,  untouched  by  fear,


INVOCATION.  XXXI

And  on  the  wave,  he  seems  the  crocodile

That  prowls  amidst  the  waters  of  the  Nile.

Generous  and  brave,  his  equal  is  unknown;

In  deeds  of  princely  worth  he  stands  alone.

The  infant  in  the  cradle  lisps  his  name ;

The  world  exults  in  Mahmud^s  spotless  fame.

In  festive  hours  Heaven  smiles  upon  his  truth ;

In  combat  deadly  as  the  dragon's  tooth ;

Bounteous  in  all  things,  his  exhaustless  hand

Diffuses  blessings  through  the  grateful  land;

And,  of  the  noblest  thoughts  and  actions,  lord ;

The  soul  of  Gabriel  breathes  in  every  word.

May  Heaven  with  added  glory  crown  his  days ;

Praise,  praise  to  mighty  Mahmud — everlasting  praise !


THE SHAH NAMEH.


KAIUMERS.

ACCORDING  to  the  traditions  of  former  ages,
recorded  in  the  Bastan-nameh,  the  first  person
who  establishad  a  code  of  laws  and  exercised  the
functions  of  a  monarch  in  Persia,  was  Kai timers.
It  is  said  that  he  dwelt  among  the  mountains,  and
that  his  garments  were  made  of  the  skins  of
beasts.

His  reign  was  thirty  years,  and  o'er  the  earth
He  spread  the  blessings  of  paternal  sway  ;
Wild  animals,  obsequious  to  his  will,
Assembled  round  his  throne,  and  did  him  homage.
He  had  a  son  named  Saiamuk,  a  youth
Of  lovely  form  and  countenance,  in  war
Brave  and  accomplished,  and  the  dear  delight
B


THE SHAH NAMEH.


Of  his  fond  father,  who  adored  the  boy,

And  only  dreaded  to  be  parted  from  him.

So  is  it  ever  with  the  world — the  parent

Still  doating  on  his  offspring. Kaiumers

Had  not  a  foe,  save  one,  a  hideous  Demon,

Who  viewed  his  power  with  envy,  and  aspired

To  work  his  ruin. He,  too,  had  a  son,

Fierce  as  a  wolf,  whose  days  were  dark  and  bitter,

Because  the  favouring  heavens  in  kinder  mood

Smiled  on  the  monarch  and  his  gallant  heir.

— When  Saiamuk  first  heard  the  Demon's  aim

Was  to  overthrow  his  father  and  himself,

Surprise  and  indignation  filled  his  heart,

And  speedily  a  martial  force  he  raised,

To  punish  the  invader. Proudly  garbed

In  leopard's  skin,  he  hastened  to  the  war ;

But  when  the  combatants,  with  eager  mien,

Impatient  met  upon  the  battle-field,

And  both  together  tried  their  utmost  strength,

Down  from  his  enemy's  dragon-grasp  soon  fell

The  luckless  son  of  royal  Kaiumers,

Vanquished  and  lifeless. Sad,  unhappy  fate  !

Disheartened  by  this  disastrous  event,  the  army
immediately  retreated,  and  returned  to  Kaiumers,
who  wept  bitterly  for  the  loss  of  his  son,  and  con-
tinued a  long  time  inconsolable.  But  after  a  year  had
elapsed  a  mysterious  voice  addressed  him,  saying :
— "  Be  patient,  and  despair  not, — thou  hast  only


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  ,'j

to  send  another  army  against  the  Demons,  and  the
triumph  and  the  victory  will  be  thine.

Drive  from  the  earth  that  Demon  horrible,
And  sorrow  will  be  rooted  from  thy  heart."

Saiamuk  left  a  son  whose  name  was  Husheng,
whom  the  king  loved  much  more  even  than  his
father.

Husheng  his  name. There  seemed  in  him  combined,

Knowledge  and  goodness  eminent. To  him

Was  given  his  father's  dignity  and  station.

And  the  old  man,  his  grandsire,  scarcely  deigned

To  look  upon  another,  his  affection

For  him  was  so  unbounded.

Kaiumers  having  appointed  Husheng  the  leader
of  the  army,  the  young  hero  set  out  with  an  im-
mense body  of  troops  to  engage  the  Demons,  father
and  son,  for  it  is  said  that  at  that  time  every
species  of  animal,  wild  and  tame,  was  obedient  to
his  command.

The  savage  beasts,  and  those  of  gentler  kind,
Alike  reposed  before  him,  and  appeared
To  do  him  homage.

The  wolf,  the  tyger,  the  lion,  the  panther,  and
even  the  fowls  of  the  air,  assembled  in  aid  of
Kaiumers,  who,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  slew
the  Demon  and  his  offspring-  with  his  own  hand

B  2


THE SHAH NAMEH.


After  which  the  army  of  Kaiumers,  and  the  de-
vouring animals  that  accompanied  him  in  his
march,  defeated  and  tore  to  pieces  the  scattered
legions  of  the  enemy.  Upon  the  death  of  Kaiu-
mers Hiisheng  ascended  the  throne  of  Persia.


HUSHENG.

It  is  recorded  that  Ilusheng  was  the  first  who
brought  out  fire  from  stone,  and  from  that  circum-
stance he  founded  the  religion  of  the  Fire-wor-
shippers, calling  the  flame  which  was  produced,
the  Light  of  the  .Divinity.  The  accidental  disco-
very of  this  element  is  thus  described  :—

Passing,  one  day,  towards  the  mountain's  side,

Attended  by  his  train,  surprised  he  saw

Something  in  aspect  terrible — its  eyes

Fountains  of  blood ;  its  dreadful  mouth  sent  forth

Volumes  of  smoke  that  darkened  all  the  air.

Fixing  his  gaze  upon  that  hideous  form,

He  seized  a  stone,  and  with  prodigious  force

Hurling  it,  chanced  to  strike  a  jutting  rock.

Whence  sparks  arose,  and  presently  a  fire

Overspread  the  plain,  in  which  the  monster  perished.

— Thus  ITdsheng  found  the  element  which  shed

Light  through  the  world. The  monarch  prostrate  bowed,


THE SHAH NAMEH.


Traising  the  great  Creator,  for  the  good

Bestowed  on  man,  and,  pious,  then  he  said,

"  This  is  the  Light  from  Heaven,  sent  down  from  God  ;

If  ye  be  wise,  adore  and  worship  it !"

It  is  also  related  that,  in  the  evening  of  the  day
on  which  the  luminous  flash  appeared  to  him
from  the  stone,  he  lighted  an  immense  fire,  and,
having  made  a  royal  entertainment,  he  called  it
the  Festival  of  Siddeh.  By  him  the  art  of  the
blacksmith  was  discovered,  and  he  taught  river
and  streamlet  to  supply  the  towns,  and  irrigate
the  fields  for  the  purposes  of  cultivation.  And  he
also  brought  into  use  the  fur  of  the  sable,  and  the
squirrel,  and  the  ermine.  Before  his  time  mankind
had  nothing  for  food  but  fruit,  and  the  leaves  of
trees  and  the  skins  of  animals  for  clothing.  He
introduced,  and  taught  his  people,  the  method  of
making  bread,  and  the  art  of  cookery.

Then  ate  they  their  own  bread,  for  it  was  good,
And  they  were  grateful  to  their  benefactor  ;
Mild  laws  were  framed — the  very  land  rejoiced,
Smiling  with  cultivation  ;  all  the  world
Remembering  Husheng's  virtues.

The  period  of  his  government  is  said  to  have
lasted  forty  years,  and  he  was  succeeded  by  his
son,  Tahumers.


THE SHAH NAM EH.


TAHUMERS.


This  sovereign  was  also  called  Dew-bund,  or
the  Binder  of  Demons.  He  assembled  together
all  the  wise  men  in  his  dominions,  to  consider
and  deliberate  upon  whatever  might  be  of  utility
and  advantage  to  the  people  of  God.  In  his
days  wool  was  spun  and  woven,  and  garments
and  carpets  manufactured,  and  various  animals,
such  as  panthers,  falcons,  hawks,  and  syagoshes,
were  tamed,  and  taught  to  assist  in  the  sports  of
the  field.  Tahumers  had  also  a  vizir,  renowned
for  his  wisdom  and  understanding.  Having  one
day  charmed  a  Demon  into  his  power  by  philters
and  magic,  he  conveyed  him  to  Tab  timers  ;  upon
which,  the  brethren  and  allies  of  the  prisoner,  feel-
ing ashamed  and  degraded  by  the  insult,  collected
an  army,  and  went  to  war  against  the  king.
Tahumers  was  equally  in  wrath  when  he  heard  of
these  hostile  proceedings,  and  having  also  ga-
thered together  an  army  on  his  part,  presented
himself  before  the  enemy.  The  name  of  the
leader  of  the  Demons  was  Gnu.  On  one  side
the  force  consisted  of  fire,  and  smoke,  and  De-
mons; on  the  other,  brave  and  magnanimous
warriors.  Tahumers  lifted  his  mace,  as  soon  as
he  was  opposed  to  the  enemy,  and  giving  Gnu  a
blow  on  the  head,  killed  him  on  the  spot.  The
other  Demons  being  taken  prisoners,  he  ordered


THE SHAH NAMEH.  7

them  to  be  destroyed;  but  they  petitioned  for
mercy,  promising,  if  their  lives  were  spared,  that
they  would  teach  him  a  wonderful  art.  Tahumers
assented,  and  they  immediately  brought  their
books,  and  pens  and  ink,  and  instructed  him  how
to  read  and  write.

They  taught  him  letters,  and  his  eager  mind
With  learning  was  illumed. The  world  was  blest
With  quiet  and  repose,  Peris  and  Demons
Submitting  to  his  will.

The  reign  of  Tahumers  lasted  thirty  years  and
after  him  the  monarchy  descended  to  Jemshid,
his  son.


JEMSHID.

Jemshid  was  eminently  distinguished  for  learn-
ing and  wisdom.  It  is  said  that  coats  of  mail,
cuirasses,  and  swords,  and  various  kinds  of  armour,
were  invented  and  manufactured  in  his  time,  and
also  that  garments  of  silk  were  made  and  worn
by  his  people.

Helmets  and  swords,  with  curious  art  they  made.
Guided  by  JemshioVs  skill ;  and  silks  and  linen
And  robes  of  fur  and  ermine. Desert  lands
Were  cultivated ;  and  wherever  stream
Or  rivulet  wandered,  and  the  soil  was  good,


8  THE SHAH NAMEH.

He  fixed  the  habitations  of  his  people;

And  there  they  ploughed  and  reaped :  for  in  that  age

All  laboured ;  none  in  sloth  and  idleness

Were  suffered  to  remain,  since  indolence

Too  often  vanquishes  the  best,  and  turns

To  nought  the  noblest,  firmest  resolution.

Jemshid  afterwards  commanded  his  Demons  to
construct  a  splendid  palace,  and  he  directed  his
people  how  to  make  the  foundations  strong.

He  taught  the  unholy  Demon-train  to  mingle
Water  and  clay,  with  which,  formed  into  bricks,
The  walls  were  built,  and  then  high  turrets,  towers,
And  balconies,  and  roofs  to  keep  out  rain
And  cold,  and  sunshine. Every  art  was  known
To  Jemshid,  without  equal  in  the  world.

He  also  made  vessels  for  the  sea  and  the  river,
and  erected  a  magnificent  throne,  embellished  with
pearls  and  precious  stones ;  and  having  seated  him-
self upon  it,  commanded  his  Demons  to  raise  him
up  in  the  air,  that  he  might  be  able  to  transport  him-
self in  a  moment  wherever  he  chose.  He  named
the  first  day  of  the  year  Nu-ruz,  and  on  every
Nu-ruz  he  made  a  royal  feast,  so  that  under  his
hospitable  roof,  mortals,  and  Genii,  and  Demons,
and  Peris,  were  delighted  and  happy,  every
one  being  equally  regaled  with  wine  and  music.
His  government  is  said  to  have  continued  in  ex-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  9

istence  seven  hundred  years,  and  during  that
period,  it  is  added,  none  of  his  subjects  suffered
death,  or  were  afflicted  with  disease.

Man  seemed  immortal,  sickness  was  unknown,
And  life  rolled  on  in  happiness  and  joy.

After  the  lapse  of  seven  hundred  years,  how-
ever, inordinate  ambition  inflamed  the  heart  of
Jemshid,  and,  having  assembled  all  the  illustrious
personages  and  learned  men  in  his  dominions  be-
fore him,  he  said  to  them: — "  Tell  me  if  there
exists,  or  ever  existed,  in  all  the  world,  a  king  of
such  magnificence  and  power  as  I  am?"  They
unanimously  replied  : — "  Thou  art  alone,  the
mightiest,  the  most  victorious :  there  is  no  equal
to  thee  !"  The  just  God  beheld  this  foolish  pride
and  vanity  with  displeasure,  and,  as  a  punishment,
cast  him  from  the  government  of  an  empire  into  a
state  of  utter  degradation  and  misery.

All  looked  upon  the  throne,  and  heard  and  saw
Nothing  but  Jemshid,  he  alone  was  king,
Absorbing  every  thought ;  and  in  their  praise,
And  adoration  of  that  mortal  man,
Forgot  the  worship  of  the  great  Creator.
Then  proudly  thus  he  to  his  nobles  spoke,
Intoxicated  with  their  loud  applause,
"  I  am  unequalled,  for  to  me  the  earth
Owes  ah1  its  science,  never  did  exist


10  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

A  sovereignty  like  mine,  beneficent

And  glorious,  driving  from  the  populous  land

Disease  arid  want. Domestic  joy  and  rest

Proceed  from  me,  all  that  is  good  and  great,

Waits  my  behest ;  the  universal  voice

Declares  the  splendour  of  my  government,

Beyond  whatever  human  heart  conceived,

And  me  the  only  monarch  of  the  world."

— Soon  as  these  words  had  parted  from  his  lips,

Words  impious,  and  insulting  to  high  heaven,

His  earthly  grandeur  faded, — then  all  tongues

Grew  clamorous  and  bold. The  day  of  Jemshid

Passed  into  gloom,  his  brightness  all  obscured.

What  said  the  Moralist  ? "  When  thou  wert  a  king

Thy  subjects  were  obedient,  but  whoever

Proudly  neglects  the  worship  of  his  God,

Brings  desolation  on  his  house  and  home."

— And  when  he  marked  the  insolence  of  his  people,

He  knew  the  wrath  of  Heaven  had  been  provoked,

And  terror  overcame  him.


MIRTAS-TAZI,  AND  HIS  SON  ZOHAK.

The  old  historians  relate  that  Mirtas  was  the
name  of  a  king  of  the  Arabs ;  and  that  he  had
a  thousand  animals  which  gave  milk,  and  the  milk
of  these  animals  he  always  distributed  in  charity
among  the  poor.  God  was  pleased  with  his  good-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  11

ness,  and  accordingly  increased  his  favour  upon
him.

Goats,  sheep,  and  camels,  yielded  up  their  store
Of  balmy  milk,  with  which  the  generous  king
Nourished  the  indigent  and  helpless  poor.

Mirtas  had  a  son  called  Zohak,  who  possessed
ten  thousand  Arab  horses,  or  Tazis,  upon  which
account  he  was  surnamed  Biwurasp ;  biwur
meaning  ten  thousand,  and  asp  a  horse.  One  day
Iblis,  the  Evil  Spirit,  appeared  to  Zohak  in  the
disguise  of  a  good  and  virtuous  man,  and  conversed
with  him  in  the  most  agreeable  manner.

Pleased  with  his  eloquence,  the  youth
Suspected  not  the  speaker's  truth ;
But  praised  the  sweet  impassioned  strain,
And  asked  him  to  discourse  again.

Iblis  replied,  that  he  was  master  of  still  sweeter
converse,  but  he  could  not  address  it  to  him,
unless  he  first  entered  into  a  solemn  compact,  and
engaged  never  on  any  pretence  to  divulge  his
secret.

Zohak  in  perfect  innocence  of  heart
Assented  to  the  oath,  and  bound  himself
Never  to  tell  the  secret ;  all  he  wished
Was  still  to  hear  the  good  man's  honey  words.


12  THE SHAH NAMEH.

But  as  soon  as  the  oath  was  taken,  Iblis  said
to  him :  (t  Thy  father  has  become  old  and  worth-
less, and  thou  art  young,  and  wise,  and  valiant.
Let  him  no  longer  stand  in  thy  way,  but  kill  him ;
the  robes  of  sovereignty  are  ready,  and  better
adapted  for  thee."

The  youth  in  agony  of  mind,

Heard  what  the  stranger  now  designed ;

Could  crime  like  this  be  understood  !

The  shedding  of  a  parent's  hlood  !

Iblis  would  no  excuses  hear —

The  oath  was  sworn — his  death  was  near.

"  For  if  thou  think'st  to  pass  it  by,

The  peril's  thine,  and  thou  must  die  1"

Zohak  was  terrified  and  subdued  by  this  warn-
ing, and  asked  Iblis  in  what  manner  he  pro-
posed to  sacrifice  his  father.  Iblis  replied,  that
he  would  dig  a  pit  on  the  path- way  which  led  to
Mirtas  Tazi's  house  of  prayer.  Accordingly  he
secretly  made  a  deep  well  upon  the  spot  most  con-
venient for  the  purpose,  and  covered  it  over  with
grass.  At  night,  as  the  king  was  going,  as  usual,
to  the  house  of  prayer,  he  fell  into  the  pit,  and
his  legs  and  arms  being  broken  by  the  fall,  he
shortly  expired.  O  righteous  Heaven  !  that  father
too,  whose  tenderness  would  not  suffer  even  the
winds  to  blow  upon  his  son  too  roughly, — and  that


THE SHAH NAMEH.  13

son,  by  the  temptation  of  Iblis,  to  bring  such  a
father  to  a  miserable  end  !

Thus  urged  to  crime,  through  cruel  treachery,
Zohak  usurped  his  pious  father's  throne.

When  Iblis  found  that  he  had  got  Zohak  com-
pletely in  his  power,  he  told  him  that,  if  he  followed
his  counsel  and  advice  implicitly,  he  would
become  the  greatest  monarch  of  the  age,  the
sovereign  of  the  seven  climes,  signifying  the  whole
world.  Zohak  agreed  to  every  thing,  and  Iblis
continued  to  bestow  upon  him  the  most  devoted
attention  and  flattery  for  the  purpose  of  moulding
him  entirely  to  his  will.  To  such  an  extreme
degree  had  his  authority  attained,  that  he  became
the  sole  director  even  in  the  royal  kitchen,  and
prepared  for  Zohak  the  most  delicious  and  savoury
food  imaginable  ;  for  in  those  days  bread  and  fruit
only  were  the  usual  articles  of  food.  Iblfs  him-
self was  the  original  inventor  of  the  cooking  art.
Zohak  was  delighted  with  the  dishes,  made  from
every  variety  of  bird  and  four-footed  animal.
Every  day  something  new  and  rare  was  brought
to  his  table,  and  every  day  Iblis  increased  in
favour.  But  an  egg  was  to  him  the  most
delicate  of  all!  "  What  can  there  be  superior
to  this  ?"  said  he.  "  To-morrow,"  replied  Iblis,
"  thou  shalt  have  something  better,  and  of  a  far
superior  kind."


14  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Next  day  he  brought  delicious  fare,  and  dressed
In  manner  exquisite  to  please  the  eye,
As  well  as  taste  ;  partridge  and  pheasant  rich,,
A  banquet  for  a  prince. Zohak  beheld
Delighted  the  repast,  and  eagerly
Relished  its  flavour  ;  then  in  gratitude,
And  admiration  of  the  matchless  art
Which  thus  had  ministered  to  his  appetite,
He  cried  : — "  For  this,  whatever  thou  desirest,
And  I  can  give,  is  thine.11 Iblis  was  glad,
And,  little  anxious,  had  but  one  request —
One  unimportant  wish — it  was  to  kiss
The  monarch's  naked  shoulder — a  mere  whim.
And  promptly  did  Zohak  comply,  for  he
Was  unsuspicious  still,  and  stripped  himself,
Ready  to  gratify  that  simple  wish.

Iblis  then  kissed  the  part  with  fiendish  glee,
And  vanished  in  an  instant.

From  the  touch

Sprang  two  black  serpents  ! Then  a  tumult  rose
Among  the  people,  searching  for  Iblis
Through  all  the  palace,  but  they  sought  in  vain.

To  young  and  old  it  was  a  marvellous  thing ;
The  serpents  writhed  about  as  seeking  food,
And  learned  men  to  see  the  wonder  came,
And  sage  magicians  tried  to  charm  away
That  dreadful  evil,  but  no  cure  was  found.

Some  time  afterwards  Iblis  returned  to  Zohak,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  15

but  in  the  shape  of  a  physician,  and  told  him  that
it  was  according  to  his  own  horoscope  that  he
suffered  in  this  manner — it  was,  in  short,  his  des-
tiny— and  that  the  serpents  would  continue  con-
nected with  him  throughout  his  life,  involving  him
in  perpetual  misery.  Zohak  sunk  into  despair,
upon  the  assurance  of  there  being  no  remedy  for
him,  but  Iblis  again  roused  him  by  saying,  that
if  the  serpents  were  fed  daily  with  human  brains,
which  would  probably  kill  them,  his  life  might  be
prolonged,  and  made  easy.

If  life  has  any  charm  for  thee,

The  brain  of  man  their  food  must  be  !

With  the  adoption  of  this  deceitful  stratagem,
Iblis  was  highly  pleased,  and  congratulated  himself
upon  the  success  of  his  wicked  exertions,  think-
ing that  in  this  manner  a  great  portion  of  the  hu-
man race  would  be  destroyed.  He  was  not  aware
that  his  craft  and  cunning  had  no  influence  in  the
house  of  God ;  and  that  the  descendants  of  Adam
are  continually  increasing.

When  the  people  of  Iran  and  Turan  heard
that  Zohak  kept  near  him  two  devouring  serpents,
alarm  and  terror  spread  everywhere,  and  so  uni-
versal was  the  dread  produced  by  this  intelligence,
that  the  nobles  of  Persia  were  induced  to  abandon
their  allegiance  to  Jemshid,  and,  turning  through
fear  to  Zohak,  confederated  with  the  Arab  troops


16  THE SHAH NAMEH.

against  their  own  country.  Jemshid  continued  for
some  time  to  resist  their  efforts,  but  was  at  last  de-
feated, and  became  a  wanderer  on  the  face  of  the
earth.

To  him  existence  was  a  burthen  now,
The  world  a  desert — for  Zohak  had  gained
The  imperial  crown,  and  from  all  acts  and  deeds
Of  royal  import,  razed  the  very  name
Of  Jemshid  hateful  in  the  tyrant's  eyes.


THE  STORY  OF  JEMSHID  RESUMED.

The  Persian  government  having  fallen  into  the
hands  of  the  usurper,  he  sent  his  spies  in  every
direction  for  the  purpose  of  getting  possession  of
Jemshid  wherever  he  might  be  found,  but  their
labour  was  not  crowned  with  success.  The  un-
fortunate wanderer,  after  experiencing  numberless
misfortunes,  at  length  took  refuge  in  Zabulistan.

Flying  from  place  to  place,  through  wilderness,
Wide  plain,  and  mountain,  veiled  from  human  eye,
Hungry  and  worn  out  with  fatigue  and  sorrow,
He  came  to  Zabul.

The  king  of  Zabulistan,  whose  name  was  Gu-
reng,  had  a  daughter  of  extreme  beauty.  She


THE SHAH NAMEH.  17

was  also  remarkable  for  her  mental  endowments,
and  was  familiar  with  warlike  exercises.

So  graceful  in  her  movements,  and  so  sweet,
Her  very  look  plucked  from  the  breast  of  age
The  root  of  sorrow, — her  wine-sipping  lips,
And  mouth  like  sugar,  cheeks  all  dimpled  o'er
With  smiles,  and  glowing  as  the  summer  rose —
Won  every  heart.

This  damsel,  possessed  of  these  beauties  and
charms,  was  accustomed  to  dress  herself  in  the
warlike  habiliments  of  a  man,  and  to  combat
with  heroes.  She  was  then  only  fifteen  years  of
age,  but  so  accomplished  in  valour,  judgment,  and
discretion,  that  Minuchihr,  who  had  in  that  year
commenced  hostile  operations  against  her  father,
was  compelled  to  relinquish  his  pretensions,  and
submit  to  the  gallantry  which  she  displayed  on
that  occasion.  Her  father's  realm  was  saved  by
her  magnanimity.  Many  kings  were  her  suitors,
but  Gureng  would  not  give  his  consent  to  her
marriage  with  any  of  them.  He  only  agreed  that
she  should  marry  the  sovereign  whom  she  might
spontaneously  love.

It  must  be  love,  and  love  alone,
That  binds  thee  to  another's  throne ;
In  this  thy  father  has  no  voice,
Thine  the  election,  thine  the  choice.
C


18  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

The  daughter  of  Gureng  had  a  Kabul  woman
for  her  nurse,  who  was  deeply  skilled  in  all  sorts

of  magic  and  sorcery.

t

The  old  enchantress  well  could  say,
What  would  befall  on  distant  day ;
And  by  her  art  omnipotent,
Could  from  the  watery  element
Draw  fire,  and  with  her  magic  breath,
Seal  up  a  dragon's  eyes  in  death.
Could  from  the  flint-stone  conjure  dew ;
The  moon  and  seven  stars  she  knew ;
And  of  all  things  invisible
To  human  sight,  this  crone  could  tell.

This  Kabul  sorceress  had  long  before  intimated
to  the  damsel  that,  conformably  with  her  destiny,
which  had  been  distinctly  ascertained  from  the
motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  she  would,  after
a  certain  time,  be  married  to  king  Jemshid,  and
bear  him  a  beautiful  son.  The  damsel  was  over-
joyed at  these  tidings,  and  her  father  received
them  with  equal  pleasure,  refusing  in  conse-
quence the  solicitations  of  every  other  suitor.
Now  according  to  the  prophecy,  Jemshid  arrived  at
the  city  of  Zabul  in  the  spring  season,  when  the
roses  were  in  bloom  ;  and  it  so  happened  that  the
garden  of  king  Gureng  was  in  the  way,  and  also
that  his  daughter  was  amusing  herself  at  the  time


THE SHAH NAM EH.  19

in  the  garden.  Jemshfd  proceeded  in  that  direc-
tion, but  the  keepers  of  the  garden  would  not
allow  him  to  pass,  and  therefore,  fatigued  and
dispirited,  he  sat  down  by  the  garden-door  under
the  shade  of  a  tree.  Whilst  he  was  sitting  there
a  slave-girl  chanced  to  come  out  of  the  garden,
and,  observing  him,  was  surprised  at  his  melan-
choly and  forlorn  condition.  She  said  to  him  in-
voluntarily :  "  Who  art  thou  ?"  and  Jemshid  rais-
ing up  his  eyes,  replied : — "  I  was  once  possessed
of  wealth  and  lived  in  great  affluence,  but  I  am
now  abandoned  by  fortune,  and  have  come  from  a
distant  country.  Would  to  heaven  I  could  be
blessed  with  a  few  cups  of  wine,  my  fatigue  and
affliction  might  then  be  relieved."  The  girl
smiled,  and  returned  hastily  to  the  princess,  and
told  her  that  a  young  man,  wearied  with  travel-
ling, was  sitting  at  the  garden  gate,  whose  coun-
tenance was  more  lovely  even  than  that  of  her
mistress,  and  who  requested  to  have  a  few  cups  of
wine.  When  the  damsel  heard  such  high  praise
of  the  stranger's  features  she  was  exceedingly
pleased,  and  said : — "  He  asks  only  for  wine,
but  I  will  give  him  both  wine  and  music,  and  a
beautiful  mistress  beside."

This  saying,  she  repaired  towards  the  gate,
In  motion  graceful  as  the  waving  cypress,
Attended  by  her  hand-maid ;  seeing  him,
She  thought  he  was  a  warrior  of  Iran
c  2


20  THE SHAH NAMEH.

With  spreading  shoulders,  and  his  loins  well  bound.

His  visage  pale  as  the  pomegranate  flower,

He  looked  like  light  in  darkness. Warm  emotions

Rose  in  her  heart,  and  softly  thus  she  spoke :

"  Grief-broken  stranger,  rest  thee  underneath

These  shady  bowers ;  if  wine  can  make  thee  glad,

Enter  this  pleasant  place,  and  drink  thy  fill."

Whilst  the  damsel  was  still  speaking  and  in-
viting Jemshid  into  the  garden,  be  looked  at  her
thoughtfully,  and  hesitated  ;  and  she  said  to  him  :
"  Why  do  you  hesitate?  I  am  permitted  by  my
father  to  do  what  I  please,  and  my  heart  is  my
own.

"  Stranger,  my  father  is  the  monarch  mild
Of  Zabulistan,  and  I  his  only  child ;
On  me  is  all  his  fond  affection  shewn ;
My  wish  is  his,  on  me  he  doats  alone."

Jemshid  had  before  heard  of  the  character  and
renown  of  this  extraordinary  damsel,  yet  he  was
not  disposed  to  comply  with  her  entreaty ;  but  con-
templating again  her  lovely  face,  his  heart  became
enamoured,  when  she  took  him  by  the  hand  and
led  him  along  the  beautiful  walks.

With  dignity  and  elegance  she  passed —

As  moves  the  mountain  partridge  through  the  meads  ;

Her  tresses  richly  falling  to  her  feet,

And  filling  with  perfume  the  softened  breeze.


THE S1IA11 N'AMEU;  21

In  their  promenade  they  arrived  at  the  basin  of
a  fountain,  near  which  they  seated  themselves
upon  royal  carpets,  and  the  damsel  having  placed
Jemshid  in  such  a  manner  that  they  might  face
each  other,  she  called  for  music  and  wine.

But  first  the  rose-cheeked  handmaids  gathered  round,
And  washed  obsequiously  the  stranger's  feet ;
Then  on  the  margin  of  the  silvery  lake
Attentive  sate.

The  youth,  after  this,  readily  took  the  wine  and
refreshments  which  were  ordered  by  the  princess.

Three  cups  he  drank  with  eager  zest,

Three  cups  of  ruby  wine ;
Which  banished  sorrow  from  his  breast,

For  memory  left  no  sign
Of  past  affliction ;  not  a  trace
Remained  upon  his  heart,  or  smiling  face.

Whilst  he  was  drinking  the  princess  observed
his  peculiar  action  and  elegance  of  manner,  and
instantly  said  in  her  heart :  "  This  must  be  a
king  1"  She  then  offered  him  some  more  food,  as
he  had  come  a  long  journey,  and  from  a  distant
land,  but  he  only  asked  for  more  wine.  "  Is
your  fondness  for  wine  so  great  ?"  said  she.  And
he  replied  :  "  With  wine  I  have  no  enemy ;  yet,
without  it  I  can  be  resigned  and  contented.


22  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Whilst  drinking  wine  I  never  see
The  frowning  face  of  my  enemy  ;
Drink  freely  of  the  grape,  and  nought
Can  give  the  soul  one  mournful  thought;
Wine  is  a  bride  of  witching  power,
And  wisdom  is  her  marriage  dower  ;
Wine  can  the  purest  joy  impart,
Wine  inspires  the  saddest  heart ;
Wine  gives  cowards  valour's  rage,
Wine  gives  youth  to  tottering  age ;
Wine  gives  vigour  to  the  weak,
And  crimson  to  the  pallid  cheek  ;
And  dries  up  sorrow,  as  the  sun
Absorbs  the  dew  it  shines  upon."

From  the  voice  and  eloquence  of  the  speaker
she  now  conjectured  that  this  certainly  must  be
king  Jemshid,  and  she  felt  satisfied  that  her
notions  would  soon  be  realized.  At  this  moment
she  recollected  that  there  was  a  picture  of  Jemshid
in  her  father's  gallery,  and  thought  of  sending  for
it  to  compare  the  features;  but  again  she  con-
sidered that  the  person  before  her  was  certainly
and  truly  Jemshid,  and  that  the  picture  would  be
unnecessary  on  the  occasion.

It  is  said  that  two  ring-doves,  a  male  and
female,  happened  to  alight  on  the  garden  wall
near  the  fountain  where  they  were  sitting,  and
began  billing  and  cooing  in  amorous  play,  so  that


THE SHAH N^MEH.  23

seeing  them  together  in  such  soft  intercourse,
blushes  overspread  the  cheeks  of  the  princess,  who
immediately  called  for  her  bow  and  arrows.  When
they  were  brought  she  said  to  Jemshid,  "  Point
out  which  of  them  I  shall  hit,  and  I  will  bring
it  to  the  ground.  Jemshid  replied :  "  Where  a
man  is,  a  woman's  aid  is  not  required — give  me
the  bow,  and  mark  my  skill ;

However  brave  a  woman  may  appear,
Whatever  strength  of  arm  she  may  possess,
She  is  but  half  a  man  !"

Upon  this  observation  being  made,  the  damsel
turned  her  head  aside  ashamed,  and  gave  him  the
bow.  Her  heart  was  full  of  love.  Jemshid  took
the  bow,  and  selecting  a  feathered  arrow  out  of
her  hand,  said: — "Nor  for  a  wager.  If  I  hit
the  female,  shall  the  lady  whom  I  most  admire  in
this  company  be  mine?"  The  damsel  assented.
Jemshid  drew  the  string,  and  the  arrow  struck  the
female  dove  so  skilfully  as  to  transfix  both  the
wings,  and  pin  them  together.  The  male  ring-dove
flew  away,  but  moved  by  natural  affection  it  soon
returned,  and  settled  on  the  same  spot  as  before.
The  bow  was  said  to  be  so  strong  that  there  was
not  a  warrior  in  the  whole  kingdom  who  could  even
draw  the  string ;  and  when  the  damsel  witnessed
the  dexterity  of  the  stranger,  and  the  ease  with


24  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

which  he  used  the  weapon,  she  thought  within  her
heart,  "  There  can  be  no  necessity  for  the  picture ;
I  am  certain  that  this  can  be  no  other  than  king
Jemshid,  the  son  of  Tahumers,  called  the  Binder  of
Demons."  Then  she  took  the  bow  from  the  hand
of  Jemshid,  and  observed :  "  The  male  bird  has
returned  to  its  former  place,  if  my  aim  be  successful
shall  the  man  whom  I  choose  in  this  company  be
my  husband  ?"  Jemshid  instantly  understood  her
meaning.  At  that  moment  the  Kabul  nurse  ap-
peared, and  the  young  princess  communicated  to
her  all  that  had  occurred.  The  nurse  leisurely
examined  Jemshid  from  head  to  foot  with  a  slave-
purchaser's  eye,  and  knew  him,  and  said  to  her
mistress, — "  All  that  I  saw  in  thy  horoscope  and
foretold,  is  now  in  the  course  of  fulfilment.  God
has  brought  Jemshid  hither  to  be  thy  spouse.
Be  not  regardless  of  thy  good  fortune,  and  the
Almighty  will  bless  thee  with  a  son,  who  will  be
the  conqueror  of  the  world.  The  signs  and
tokens  of  thy  destiny  I  have  already  explained."
The  damsel  had  become  greatly  enamoured  of  the
person  of  the  stranger  before  she  knew  who  he  was,
and  now  being  told  by  her  nurse  that  he  was
Jemshid  himself,  her  affection  was  augmented
two-fold.

The  happy  tidings,  blissful  to  her  heart,
Increased  the  ardour  of  her  love  for  him.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  25

And  now  the  picture  was  brought  to  the  princess,
who,  finding  the  resemblance  exact,  put  it  into
Jemshid's  hand.  Jemshid,  in  secretly  recognising
his  own  likeness,  was  forcibly  reminded  of  his
past  glory  and  happiness,  and  he  burst  into  tears.

The  memory  of  the  diadem  and  throne
No  longer  his,  came  o'er  him,  and  his  soul
Was  rent  with  anguish.

The  princess  said  to  him :  "Why  at  the  com-
mencement of  our  friendship  dost  thou  weep?
Art  thou  discontented — dissatisfied,  unhappy  ?
and  am  I  the  cause?"  Jemshid  replied:  "No,
it  is  simply  this  ;  those  who  have  feeling,  and  pity
the  sufferings  of  others,  weep  involuntarily.  I
pity  the  misfortunes  of  Jemshid,  driven  as  he  is
by  adversity  from  the  splendour  of  a  throne,  and
reduced  to  a  state  of  destitution  and  ruin.  But
he  must  now  be  dead;  devoured,  perhaps,  by
the  wolves  and  lions  of  the  forest."  The  nurse
and  princess,  however,  were  convinced,  from  the
sweetness  of  his  voice  and  discourse,  that  he  could
be  no  other  than  Jemshid  himself,  and  taking  him
aside,  they  said :  "  Speak  truly,  art  thou  not
Jemshid  ?"  But  he  denied  himself.  Again,  they
observed  :  "  What  says  this  picture  ?"  To  this  he
replied  ;  "  It  is  not  impossible  that  I  may  be  like
Jemshid  in  feature  ;  for  surely  there  may  be  in  the
world  two  men  like  each  other?"  And  notwithstand-


26  THE SHAH NAMEH.

ing  all  the  efforts  made  by  the  damsel  and  her
nurse  to  induce  Jemshid  to  confess,  he  still  reso-
lutely denied  himself.  Several  times  she  assured
him  she  would  keep  his  secret,  if  he  had  one,  but
that  she  was  certain  of  his  being  Jemshid.  Still
he  denied  himself.  "  This  nurse  of  mine,  whom
thou  seest,"  said  she,  "has  often  repeated  to  me
the  good  tidings  that  I  should  be  united  to  Jemshid,
and  bear  him  a  son.  My  heart  instinctively  ac-
knowledged thee  at  first  sight :  then  wherefore  this
denial  of  the  truth  ?  Many  kings  have  solicited  my
hand  in  marriage,  but  all  have  been  rejected,  as  I
am  destined  to  be  thine,  and  united  to  no  other."
Dismissing  now  all  her  attendants,  she  remained
with  the  nurse  and  Jemshid,  and  then  resumed  : —

"  How  long  hath  sleep  forsaken  me  ?  how  long
Hath  my  fond  heart  been  kept  awake  by  love  ?
Hope  still  upheld  me — give  me  one  kind  look,
And  I  will  sacrifice  my  life  for  thee  ;
Come,  take  my  life,  for  it  is  thine  for  ever."

Saying  this,  the  damsel  began  to  weep,  and
shedding  a  flood  of  tears,  tenderly  reproached  him
for  not  acknowledging  the  truth.  Jemshid  was  at
length  moved  by  her  affection  and  sorrow,  and
thus  addressed  her : — "  There  are  two  considera-
tions which  at  present  prevent  the  truth  being  told.
One  of  them  is  my  having  a  powerful  enemy,  and
Heaven  forbid  that  he  should  obtain  information  of


THE SHAH NAMEH.  27

my  place  of  refuge. The  other  is,  I  never  intrust
my  secrets  to  a  woman  !

Fortune  I  dread,  since  fortune  is  my  foe,
And  womankind  are  seldom  known  to  keep
Another's  secret. To  be  poor  and  safe,
Is  better  far  than  wealth  exposed  to  peril."
To  this  the  princess  :  "  Is  it  so  decreed,
That  every  woman  has  two  tongues,  two  hearts  ?
All  false  alike,  their  tempers  all  the  same  ?
No,  no  !  could  I  disloyally  betray  thee  ?
I  who  still  love  thee  better  than  my  life  ?"

Jemshid  found  it  impossible  to  resist  the  damsel's
incessant  intreaties  and  persuasive  tenderness,
mingled  as  they  were  with  tears  of  sorrow.  Van-
quished thus  by  the  warmth  of  her  affections,  he
told  her  his  name,  and  the  history  of  his  misfor-
tunes. She  then  ardently  seized  his  hand,  over-
joyed at  the  disclosure,  and  taking  him  privately
to  her  own  chamber,  they  were  married  according
to  the  customs  of  her  country.

Him  to  the  secret  bower  with  blushing  cheek
Exultingly  she  led,  and  mutual  bliss,
Springing  from  mutual  tenderness  and  love,
Entranced  their  souls.

When  Giireng  the  king  found  that  his  daugh-
ter's visits  to  him  became  less  frequent  than  usual,


28  THE SHAH NAMEH.

he  set  his  spies  to  work,  and  was  not  long  in  as-
certaining the  cause  of  her  continued  absence.
She  had  married  without  his  permission,  and  he
was  in  great  wrath.  It  happened,  too,  at  this  time
that  the  bride  was  in  a  state  of  pregnancy,  and  on
that  account  pale  and  delicate.  Her  cypress  form
had  become  bent  like  a  bow.

The  mystery  soon  was  manifest,
And  thus  the  king  his  child  addrest,
Whilst  anger  darkened  o'er  his  brow  : —
"  What  hast  thou  done,  ungrateful,  now  ?
Why  hast  thou  flung,  in  evil  day,
Thy  veil  of  modesty  away  ?
No  need  of  words ;  that  shape  reveals
The  secret  which  thy  tongue  conceals ;
That  cheek  the  bloom  of  spring  displayed,
Now  all  is  withered,  all  decayed ;
But  daughters,  as  the  wise  declare,
Are  ever  false,  if  they  be  fair.""

Incensed  at  words  so  sharp  and  strong,
The  damsel  thus  repelled  the  wrong  : —
"  Me,  father,  canst  thou  justly  blame  ?
I  never,  never,  brought  thee  shame  ;
With  me  can  sin  and  crime  accord,
When  Jemshid  is  my  wedded  lord  ?"

After  this  precipitate  avowal,  the  Kabul  nurse,
of  many  spells,  instantly  took  up  her  defence,  and


THE SHAH NAMEH.  29

informed  the  king  that  the  prophecy  she  had  for-
merly communicated  to  him  was  on  the  point  of
fulfilment,  and  that  the  Almighty  having,  in  the
course  of  destiny,  brought  Jemshid  into  his  king-
dom, the  princess,  according  to  the  same  planetary
influence,  was  pregnant  by  him.

And  now  the  damsel  grovels  on  the  ground

Before  king  Gureng.  "  Well  thou  know'st,"  she  cries,

"  From  me  no  evil  comes. Whether  in  arms,

Or  at  the  banquet,  honour  guides  me  still :

And  well  thou  know'st  thy  royal  will  pronounced

That  I  should  be  unfettered  in  my  choice.

And  free  to  take  the  husband  I  preferred.

This  I  have  done ;  and  to  the  greatest  king

The  world  can  boast,  my  fortunes  are  united,

To  Jemshid,  the  most  perfect  of  mankind."

With  this  explanation  the  king  expressed  abun-
dant and  unusual  satisfaction.  His  satisfaction,
however,  did  not  arise  from  the  circumstance  of  the
marriage,  and  the  new  connection  it  established,
but  from  the  opportunity  it  afforded  him  of  betray-
ing Jemshid,  and  treacherously  sending  him  bound
to  Zohak,  which  he  intended  to  do,  in  the  hopes
of  being  magnificently  rewarded.  Exulting  with
this  anticipation,  he  said  to  her  smiling : —

Glad  tidings  thou  hast  given  to  me,
My  glory  owes  its  birth  to  thee ;


30  THE SHAH NAMEH.

I  bless  the  day,  and  bless  the  hour,
Which  placed  this  Jemshid  in  my  power.
Now  to  Zokak,  a  captive  bound,
I  send  the  wanderer  thou  hast  found ;
For  he  who  charms  the  monarch's  eyes,
With  this  long-sought,  this  noble  prize,
On  solemn  word  and  oath,  obtains
A  wealthy  kingdom  for  his  pains."

On  hearing  these  cruel  words  the  damsel  groan-
ed, and  wept  exceedingly  before  her  father,  and
said  to  him  :  "  O,  be  not  accessary  to  the  murder
of  such  a  king  !  Wealth  and  kingdoms  pass  away,
but  a  bad  name  remains  till  the  day  of  doom.

Turn  thee,  my  father,  from  this  dreadful  thought,

And  save  his  sacred  blood  :  let  not  thy  name

Be  syllabled  with  horror  through  the  world,

For  such  an  act  as  this. When  foes  are  slain,

It  is  enough,  but  keep  the  sword  away

From  friends  and  kindred ;  shun  domestic  crime.

Fear  him  who  giveth  life,  and  strength,  and  power,

For  goodness  is  most  blessed. On  the  day

Of  judgment  thou  wilt  then  be  unappalled.

But  if  determined  to  divide  us,  first

Smite  off  this  head,  and  let  thy  daughter  die."

So  deep  and  violent  was  the  grief  of  the  prin-
cess, and  her  lamentations  so  unceasing,  that  the


THE SHAH NAMEH.  31

father  became  softened  into  compassion,  and,  on
her  account,  departed  from  the  resolution  he  had
made.  He  even  promised  to  furnish  Jemshid  with
possessions,  with  treasure,  and  an  army,  and  re-
quested her  to  give  him  the  consolation  he  re-
quired, adding  that  he  would  see  him  in  the  morn-
ing in  his  garden.

The  heart-alluring  damsel  instant  flew
To  tell  the  welcome  tidings  to  her  lord.

Next  day  king  Gureng  proceeded  to  the  garden,
and  had  an  interview  with  Jemshid,  to  whom  he
expressed  the  warmest  favour  and  affection ;  but
notwithstanding  all  he  said,  Jemshid  could  place
no  confidence  in  his  professions,  and  was  anxious
to  effect  his  escape.  He  was,  indeed,  soon  con-
vinced of  his  danger,  for  he  had  a  private  intima-
tion that  the  king's  vizirs  were  consulting  together
on  the  expedience  of  securing  his  person,  under
the  apprehension  that  Zohak  would  be  invading
the  country,  and  consigning  it  to  devastation  and
ruin,  if  his  retreat  was  discovered.  He  therefore
took  to  flight.

Jemshid  first  turned  his  steps  towards  Chin,
and  afterwards  into  Ind.  He  had  travelled  a  great
distance  in  that  beautiful  country,  and  one  day
came  to  a  tower,  under  whose  shadow  he  sought
a  little  repose,  for  the  thoughts  of  his  melancholy


32  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

and  disastrous  condition  kept  him  almost  constant-
ly awake.

And  am  I  thus  to  perish  ? Thus  forlorn,
To  mingle  with  the  dust  ? Almighty  God !
Was  ever  mortal  born  to  such  a  fate,
A  fate  so  sad  as  mine ! O  that  I  never
Had  drawn  the  breath  of  life,  to  perish  thus !

Exhausted  by  the  keenness  of  his  affliction  Jem-
shid  at  length  fell  asleep.  Zohak,  in  the  mean-
while, had  despatched  an  envoy,  with  an  escort  of
troops,  to  the  Khakan  of  Chin,  and  at  that  moment
the  cavalcade  happened  to  be  passing  by  the
tower  where  Jemshid  was  reposing.  The  envoy,
attracted  to  the  spot,  immediately  recognized  him,
and  awakening  him  to  a  sense  of  this  new  mis-
fortune, secured  the  despairing  and  agonized
wanderer,  and  sent  him  to  Zohak.

He  saw  a  person  sleeping  on  the  ground,
And  knew  that  it  was  Jemshid. Overjoyed,
He  bound  his  feet  with  chains,  and  mounted  him
Upon  a  horse,  a  prisoner.

What  a  world !

No  place  of  rest  for  man  ! Fix  not  thy  heart.
Vain  mortal !  on  this  tenement  of  life,
On  earthly  pleasures ; — think  of  Jemshid's  fate ;
His  glory  reached  the  Heavens,  and  now  this  world
Has  bound  the  valiant  monarches  limbs  in  fetters,
And  placed  its  justice  in  the  hands  of  slaves.


THE  SHAH NAMEH.  33

When  Zohak  received  intelligence  of  the  appre-
hension of  his  enemy,  he  ordered  him  to  be  brought
before  the  throne  that  he  might  enjoy  the  triumph.

All  fixed  their  gaze  upon  the  captive  king,
Loaded  with  chains ;  his  hands  behind  his  back  ;
The  ponderous  fetters  passing  from  his  neck
Down  to  his  feet ;  oppressed  with  shame  he  stood,
Like  the  narcissus  bent  with  heavy  dew.
Zohak  received  him  with  a  scornful  smile,
Saying,  "  Where  is  thy  diadem,  thy  throne,
Where  is  thy  kingdom,  where  thy  sovereign  rule  ;
Thy  laws  and  royal  ordinances — where,
Where  are  they  now  ?  What  change  is  this. that  fate
Has  wrought  upon  thee  ?" Jemshid  thus  rejoined  :
"  Unjustly  am  I  brought  in  chains  before  thee,
Betrayed,  insulted — thou  the  cause  of  all,
And  yet  thou  wouldst  appear  to  feel  my  wrongs  !"
Incensed  at  this  defiance,  mixed  with  scorn,
Fiercely  Zohak  replied,  "  Then  choose  thy  death ;
Shall  I  behead  thee,  stab  thee,  or  impale  thee,
Or  with  an  arrow's  point  transfix  thy  heart !
What  is  thy  choice  ?" —

"  Since  I  am  in  thy  power,

Do  with  me  what  thou  wilt — why  should  I  dread
Thy  utmost  vengeance,  why  express  a  wish
To  save  my  body  from  a  moment's  pain  !"

As  soon  as  Zohak  heard  these  words  he  re-
solved upon  a  horrible  deed  of  vengeance.  He  or-
dered two  planks  to  be  brought,  and  Jemshid  being


34  THE SHAH NAMEH.

fastened  down  between  them,  his  body  was  di-
vided the  whole  length  with  a  saw,  making,  says
Firdausi,  two  figures  of  Jemshld  out  of  one !

Why  do  mankind  upon  this  fleeting  world

Place  their  affections,  wickedness  alone

Is  nourished  into  freshness ;  sounds  of  death,  too,

Are  ever  on  the  gale  to  wear  out  life.

My  heart  is  satisfied — O  Heaven  !  no  more,

Free  me  at  once  from  this  continual  sorrow.

It  was  not  long  before  tidings  of  the  foul  pro-
ceedings, which  put  an  end  to  the  existence  of  the
unfortunate  Jemshid,  reached  Zabulistan.  The
princess,  his  wife,  on  hearing  of  his  fate,  wasted
away  with  inconsolable  grief,  and  at  last  took  poison
to  unburthen  herself  of  insupportable  affliction.

It  is  related  that  Jemshid  had  two  sisters,
named  Shahrnaz  and  Arnawaz.  They  had  been
both  seized,  and  conveyed  to  Zohak  by  his
people,  and  continued  in  confinement  for  some
time  in  the  King's  harem,  but  they  were  after-
wards released  by  Feridun.

The  tyrant's  cruelty  and  oppression  had  become
intolerable.  He  was  constantly  shedding  blood,
and  committing  every  species  of  crime.

The  serpents  still  on  human  brains  were  fed,
And  every  day  two  youthful  victims  bled  ;
The  sword,  still  ready — thirsting  still  to  strike,
Warrior  and  slave  were  sacrificed  alike.


THE SHAH NAMKH.  35

The  career  of  Zohak  himself,  however,  was
not  unvisited  by  terrors.  One  night  he  dreamt
that  he  was  attacked  by  three  warriors;  twa  of
them  of  large  stature,  and  one  of  them  small.
The  youngest  struck  him  a  blow  on  the  head  with
his  mace,  bound  his  hands,  and  casting  a  rope
round  his  neck,  dragged  him  along  in  the  pre-
sence of  crowds  of  people.  Zohak  screamed,
and  sprung  up  from  his  sleep  in  the  greatest  horror.
The  females  of  his  harem  were  filled  with  amaze-
ment when  they  beheld  the  terrified  countenance
of  the  king,  who,  in  reply  to  their  enquiries,  said,
trembling  :  "  This  is  a  dream  too  dreadful  to  be
concealed."  He  afterwards  called  together  the
Mubids,  or  wise-men  of  his  court ;  and  having
communicated  to  them  the  particulars  of  what
had  appeared  to  him  in  his  sleep,  commanded
them  to  give  him  a  faithful  interpretation  of  the
dream.  The  Mubids  foresaw  in  this  vision  the
approaching  declension  of  his  power  and  dominion,
but  were  afraid  to  explain  their  opinions,  because
they  were  sure  that  their  lives  would  be  sacrificed
if  the  true  interpretation  was  given  to  him.  Three
days  were  consumed  under  the  pretence  of  study-
ing more  scrupulously  all  the  signs  and  appear-
ances, and  still  not  one  of  them  had  courage  to
speak  out.  On  the  fourth  day  the  king  grew
angry,  and  insisted  upon  the  dream  being  inter-
preted. In  this  dilemma,  the  Mubids  said,
'"  Then,  if  the  truth  must  be  told,  without  eva-
D  2


36  THE SHAH NAMEH.

sion,  thy  life  approaches  to  an  end,  and  Feridim,
though  yet  unborn,  will  be  thy  successor." —
"  But  who  was  it,"  enquired  Zohak  impatiently,
"  that  struck  the  blow  on  my  head  ?"  The  Mu-
bids  declared,  with  fear  and  trembling,  "  it  was
the  apparition  of  Feridun  himself,  who  is  destined
to  smite  thee  on  the  head." — "  But  why,"  rejoined
Zohak,  "  does  he  wish  to  injure  me?" — "  Be-
cause, his  father's  blood  being  spilt  by  thee,  ven-
geance falls  into  his  hands."  Hearing  this  inter-
pretation of  his  dream,  the  king  sunk  senseless  on
the  ground  ;  and  when  he  recovered,  he  could
neither  sleep  nor  take  food,  but  continued  over-
whelmed with  sorrow  and  misery.  The  light  of
his  day  was  for  ever  darkened.

Abtin  was  the  name  of  Feridun's  father,  and
that  of  his  mother  Faranuk,  of  the  race  of  Tahu-
mers.  Zohak,  therefore,  stimulated  to  further  cru-
elty by  the  prophecy,  issued  an  order  that  every  per-
son belonging  to  the  family  of  the  Kais,  wherever
found,  should  be  seized  and  fettered,  and  brought
to  him.  Abtin  had  long  avoided  discovery,  con-
tinuing to  reside  in  the  most  retired  and  solitary
places  ;  but  one  day  his  usual  circumspection  for-
sook him,  and  he  ventured  beyond  his  limits.
This  imprudent  step  was  dreadfully  punished,  for
the  spies  of  Zohak  fell  in  with  him,  recognized
him,  and  carrying  him  to  the  king,  he  was  im-
mediately put  to  death.  When  the  mother  of
Feridun  heard  of  this  sanguinary  catastrophe,


III1, SHAli XA.MEII.  37

she  took  up  her  infant  and  fled.  It  is  said  that
Feridun  was  at  that  time  only  two  months  old.
In  her  flight,  the  mother  happened  to  arrive  at
some  pasturage  ground.  The  keeper  of  the  pas-
ture had  a  cow  named  Pur'maieh,  which  yielded
abundance  of  milk,  and  he  gave  it  away  in  cha-
rity. In  consequence  of  the  grief  and  distress  of
mind  occasioned  by  the  murder  of  her  husband,
Faranuk's  milk  dried  up  in  her  breasts,  and  she  was
therefore  under  the  necessity  of  feeding  the  child
with  the  milk  from  the  cow.  She  remained  there
one  night,  and  would  have  departed  in  the  morn-
ing; but  considering  the  deficiency  of  milk,  and
the  misery  in  which  she  was  involved,  continually
afraid  of  being  discovered  and  known,  she  did  not
know  what  to  do.  At  length  she  thought  it  best
to  leave  Feridun  with  the  keeper  of  the  pasture,
and  resigning  him  to  the  protection  of  God,  went
herself  to  the  mountain  Alberz.  The  keeper
readily  complied  with  the  tenderest  wishes  of  the
mother,  and  nourished  the  child  with  the  fondness
and  affection  of  a  parent  during  the  space  of  three
years.  After  that  period  had  elapsed,  deep  sorrow
continuing  to  afflict  the  mind  of  Faranuk,  she  re-
turned secretly  to  the  old  man  of  the  pasture,  for
the  purpose  of  reclaiming  and  conveying  Feridun
to  a  safer  place  of  refuge  upon  the  mountain  Al-
berz. The  keeper  said  to  her  :  "  Why  dost  thou
take  the  child  to  the  mountain?  he  will  perish
there;"  but  she  replied  that  God  Almighty  had


38  THE SHAH NAMEH.

inspired  a  feeling  in  her  heart  that  it  was  necessary
to  remove  him.  It  was  a  divine  inspiration,  and
verified  by  the  event.

Intelligence  having  at  length  reached  Zohak
that  the  son  of  Abtin  was  nourished  and  protect-
ed by  the  keeper  of  the  pasture,  he  himself  pro-
ceeded with  a  large  force  to  the  spot,  where  he
put  to  death  the  keeper  and  all  his  tribe,  and
also  the  cow  which  had  supplied  milk  to  Feridun,
whom  he  sought  for  in  vain.

He  found  the  dwelling  of  his  infant-foe,
And  laid  it  in  the  dust ;  the  very  ground
Was  punished  for  the  sustenance  it  gave  him.

The  ancient  records  relate  that  a  dirvesh  hap-
pened to  have  taken  up  his  abode  in  the  mountain
Alberz,  and  that  Faranuk  committed  her  infant  to
his  fostering  care.  The  dirvesh  generously  di-
vided with  the  mother  and  son  all  the  food  and
comforts  which  God  gave  him,  and  at  the  same
time  he  took  great  pains  in  storing  the  mind  of  Fe-
ridun with  various  kinds  of  knowledge.  One
day  he  said  to  the  mother  :  "  The  person  foretold
by  wise  men  and  astrologers  as  the  destroyer  of
Zohak  and  his  tyranny,  is  thy  son  !

This  child  to  whom  thou  gavest  birth,
Will  be  the  monarch  of  the  earth  ;"

and  the  mother,  from  several  concurring  indica-
tions and  signs,  held  a  similar  conviction.


IMF. S  II A  II \AMKII.  30

When  Feridun  had  attained  his  sixteenth  year,
he  descended  from  the  mountain,  and  remained
for  a  time  on  the  plain  beneath.  He  inquired  of
his  mother  why  Zohak  had  put  his  father  to  death,
and  Faranuk  then  told  him  the  melancholy  story;
upon  hearing  which,  he  resolved  to  be  revenged
on  the  tyrant.  His  mother  endeavoured  to  divert
him  from  his  determination,  observing  that  he  was
young,  friendless,  and  alone,  whilst  his  enemy  was
the  master  of  the  world,  and  surrounded  by  armies-
"  Be  not  therefore  precipitate,"  said  she.  "  If  it
is  thy  destiny  to  become  a  king,  wait  till  the  Al-
mighty shall  bless  thee  with  means  sufficient  for
the  purpose."

Displeased,  the  youth  his  mother's  caution  heard,
And  meditating  vengeance  on  the  head
Of  him  who  robbed  him  of  a  father,  thus
Impatiently  replied: — "  'Tis  Heaven  inspires  me  ;
Led  on  by  Heaven,  this  arm  will  quickly  bring
The  tyrant  from  his  palace,  to  the  dust."
"  Imprudent  boy  !"  the  anxious  mother  said  ;
"  -Canst  thou  contend  against  imperial  power  ?
Must  I  behold  thy  ruin  ? Pause  awhile,
And  perish  not  in  this  wild  enterprize."

It  is  recorded  that  Zohak's  dread  of  Feridun
was  so  great,  that  day  by  day  he  became  more
irritable,  wasting  away  in  bitterness  of  spirit,  for


40  THE SHAH KAMEH.

people  of  all  ranks  kept  continually  talking  of  the
young  invader,  and  were  daily  expecting  his  ap-
proach. At  last  he  came,  and  Zohak  was  subdued,
and  his  power  extinguished.


GAVAH,  THE  BLACKSMITH.

Zohak  having  one  day  summoned  together  all
the  nobles  and  philosophers  of  the  kingdom,  he
said  to  them :  "  I  find  that  a  young  enemy  has
risen  up  against  me ;  but  notwithstanding  his
tender  years,  there  is  no  safety  even  with  an
apparently  insignificant  foe.  I  hear,  too,  that
though  young,  he  is  distinguished  for  his  prowess
and  wisdom  ;  yet  I  fear  not  him,  but  the  change
of  fortune.  I  wish  therefore  to  assemble  a  large
army,  consisting  of  Men,  Demons,  and  Peris,
that  this  enemy  may  be  surrounded,  and  conquer-
ed. And,  further,  since  a  great  enterprize  is  on
the  eve  of  being  undertaken,  it  will  be  proper  in
future  to  keep  a  register  or  muster-roll  of  all  the
people  of  every  age  in  my  dominions,  and  have  it
revised  annually."  The  register,  including  both
old  and  young,  was  accordingly  prepared.

At  that  period  there  lived  a  man  named  Gavah,
a  blacksmith,  remarkably  strong  and  brave,  and
who  had  a  large  family.  Upon  the  day  on  which  it


THE SHAH NAMEH.  41

fell  to  the  lot  of  two  of  his  children  to  be  killed  to
feed  the  serpents,  he  rose  up  with  indignation  in
presence  of  the  king,  and  said  :

"  Thou  art  the  king,  but  wherefore  on  my  head
Cast  fire  and  ashes  ?  If  thou  hast  the  form
Of  hissing  dragon,  why  to  me  be  cruel  ?
Why  give  the  brains  of  my  beloved  children
As  serpent-food,  and  talk  of  doing  justice  ?"

At  this  bold  speech  the  monarch  was  dismayed,
And  scarcely  knowing  what  he  did,  released
The  blacksmith's  sons. How  leapt  the  father's  heart,
How  warmly  he  embraced  his  darling  boys !
But  now  Zohak  directs  that  Gavah's  name
Shall  be  inscribed  upon  the  register.
Soon  as  the  blacksmith  sees  it  written  there,
Wrathful  he  turns  towards  the  chiefs  assembled,
Exclaiming  loud:  "Are  ye  then  men,  or  what,
Leagued  with  a  Demon  !" All  astonished  heard,
And  saw  him  tear  the  hated  register,
And  cast  it  under  foot  with  rage  and  scorn.

Gavah  having  thus  reviled  the  king  bitterly,
and  destroyed  the  register  of  blood,  departed  from
the  court,  and  took  his  children  along  with  him.
After  he  had  gone  away,  the  nobles  said  to  the
king:

"  Why  should  reproaches,  sovereign  of  the  world,
Be  thus  permitted  ?  Why  the  royal  scroll


42  THE SHAH NA.MEH.

Torn  in  thy  presence, with  a  look  and  voice

Of  proud  defiance,  by  the  rebel  blacksmith  ?

So  fierce  his  bearing,  that  he  seems  to  be

A  bold  confederate  of  this  Feridun."

Zohak  replied :  "  I  know  not  what  overcame  me,

But  when  I  saw  him  with  such  vehemence

Of  grief  and  wild  distraction,  strike  his  forehead,

Lamenting  o'er  his  children,  doomed  to  death,

Amazement  seized  my  heart,  and  chained  my  will.

What  may  become  of  this,  Heaven  only  knows,

For  none  can  pierce  the  veil  of  destiny.""

Gavah,  meanwhile,  with  warning  voice  set  forth
What  wrongs  the  nation  suffered,  and  there  came
Multitudes  round  him,  who  called  out  aloud
For  justice  !  justice  !  On  his  javelin's  point
He  fixed  his  leathern  apron  for  a  banner,
And  lifting  it  on  high,  he  went  abroad
To  call  the  people  to  a  task  of  vengeance.
Wherever  it  was  seen  crowds  followed  fast,
Tired  of  the  cruel  tyranny  they  suffered.
"  Let  us  unite  with  Feridun,"  he  cried,
"  And  from  Zohak's  oppression  we  are  free  1"
And  still  he  called  aloud,  and  all  obeyed
Who  heard  him,  high  and  low. Anxious  he  sought
For  Feridun,  not  knowing  his  retreat;
But  still  he  hoped  success  would  crown  his  search.

The  hour  arrived,  and  when  he  saw  the  youth,
Instinctively  he  knew  him,  and  thanked  Heaven
For  that  good  fortune. Then  the  leathern  banner


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  43

Was  splendidly  adorned  with  gold  and  jewels,
And  called  the  flag  of  Gavah. From  that  time
It  was  a  sacred  symbol ;  every  king
In  future,  on  succeeding  to  the  throne,
Did  honour  to  that  banner,  the  true  sign
Of  royalty,  in  veneration  held.

Feridun,  aided  by  the  directions  and  advice  of
the  blacksmith,  now  proceeded  against  Zohuk.
His  mother  wept  to  see  him  depart,  and  con-
tinually implored  the  blessing  of  God  upon  him.
He  had  two  elder  brothers,  whom  he  took  along
with  him.  Desirous  of  having  a  mace  formed  like
the  head  of  a  cow,  he  requested  Gavah  to  make
one  of  iron,  and  it  was  accordingly  made  in  the
shape  he  described.  In  his  progress,  he  visited  a
shrine  or  place  of  pilgrimage  frequented  by  the
worshippers  of  God,  where  he  besought  inspira-
tion and  aid,  and  where  he  was  taught  by  a  ra-
diant personage  the  mysteries  of  the  magic  art,
receiving  from  him  a  key  to  every  secret.

Bright  beamed  his  eye,  with  firmer  step  he  strode,
His  smiling  cheek  with  warmer  crimson  glowed.

When  his  two  brothers  saw  his  altered  mien,  the
pomp  and  splendour  of  his  appearance,  they  grew
envious  of  his  good  fortune,  and  privately  me-
ditated his  fall.  One  day  they  found  him  asleep
at  the  foot  of  a  mountain,  and  they  immediately


44  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

went  to  the  top  and  rolled  down  a  heavy  fragment
of  rock  upon  him  with  the  intention  of  crushing
him  to  death ;  but  the  clattering  noise  of  the  stone
awoke  him,  and,  instantly  employing  the  know-
ledge of  sorcery  which  had  been  communicated
to  him,  the  stone  was  suddenly  arrested  by  him  in
its  course.  The  brothers  beheld  this  with  asto-
nishment, and  hastening  down  the  mountain,
cried  aloud  :  "  We  know  not  how  the  stone  was
loosened  from  its  place  :  God  forbid  that  it  should
have  done  any  injury  to  Feridun."  Feridun,
however,  was  well  aware  of  this  being  the  evil
work  of  his  brothers,  but  he  took  no  notice
of  the  conspiracy,  and  instead  of  punishing
them,  raised  them  to  higher  dignity  and  conse-
quence.

They  say  that  Gavah  directed  the  route  of  Fe-
ridun over  the  mountainous  tracts  and  plains
which  lie  contiguous  to  the  banks  of  the  Dijleh,  or
Tigris,  close  to  the  city  of  Bagdad.  Upon  reach-
ing that  river,  they  called  for  boats,  but  got  no
answer  from  the  ferryman ;  at  which  Feridun
was  enraged,  and  impatiently  plunged,  on  horse-
back, into  the  foaming  stream.  All  his  army  fol-
lowed without  delay,  and  with  the  blessing  of
God  arrived  on  the  other  side  in  safety.  He  then
turned  towards  the  Bait-el-Mukaddus,  built  by
Zohak.  In  the  Pahlavi  language  it  was  called
Kunuk-duz-mokt.  The  tower  of  this  edifice  was
so  lofty  that  it  might  be  seen  at  the  distance  of


THE SHAH NAMEH.  45

many  leagues,  and  within  that  tower  Zohak  had
formed  a  talisman  of  miraculous  virtues.  Feridun
soon  overthrew  this  talisman,  and  destroyed  or  van-
quished successively  with  his  mace  all  the  enchant-
ed monsters  and  hideous  shapes  which  appeared
before  him.  He  captured  the  whole  of  the  building,
and  released  all  the  black-eyed  damsels  who  were
secluded  there,  and  among  them  Shahrnaz  and
Arnawaz,  the  two  sisters  of  Jemshid  before  alluded
to.  He  then  ascended  the  empty  throne  of  Zo-
hak,  which  had  been  guarded  by  the  talisman,  and
the  Demons  under  his  command  ;  and  when  he
heard  that  the  tyrant  had  gone  with  an  immense
army  towards  Ind,  in  quest  of  his  new  enemy,  and
had  left  his  treasury  with  only  a  small  force  at  the
seat  of  his  government,  he  rejoiced,  and  appro-
priated the  throne  and  the  treasure  to  himself.

From  their  dark  solitudes  the  Youth  brought  forth
The  black-haired  damsels,  lovely  as  the  sun,
And  Jemshid's  sisters,  long  imprisoned  there ;
And  gladly  did  the  inmates  of  that  harem
Pour  out  their  gratitude  on  being  freed
From  that  terrific  monster  ;  thanks  to  Heaven
Devoutly  they  expressed,  and  ardent  joy.

Feridun  inquired  of  Arnawaz  why  Zohak  had
chosen  the  route  towards  Ind ;  and  she  replied,
"  For  two  reasons  :  the  first  is,  he  expects  to  en-
counter thee  in  that  quarter ;  and  if  he  fails,  he


46  THE SHAH NAMEH.

will  subdue  the  whole  country,  which  is  the  seat
of  sorcery,  and  thus  obtain  possession  of  a  re-
nowned magician  who  can  charm  thee  into  his
power.

He  wishes  to  secure  within  his  grasp
That  region  of  enchantment,  Hindustan,
And  then  obtain  relief  from  what  he  feels ;
For  night  and  day  the  terror  of  thy  name
Oppresses  him,  his  heart  is  all  on  fire,
And  life  is  torture  to  him."


FERIDUN.

Kandru,  the  keeper  of  the  talisman,  having
effected  his  escape,  fled  to  Zohak,  to  whom  he
gave  intelligence  of  the  release  of  his  women,  the
destruction  of  the  talisman,  and  the  conquest  of
his  empire.

"  The  sign  of  retribution  has  appeared,

For  sorrow  is  the  fruit  of  evil  deeds."1'

Thus  Kandru  spoke  :  "  Three  warriors  have  advanced

Upon  thy  kingdom  from  a  distant  land,

One  of  them  young,  and  from  his  air  and  mien

He  seems  to  me  of  the  Kaianian  race.

He  came,  and  boldly  seized  the  splendid  throne,

And  all  thy  spells,  and  sorceries,  and  magic,

Were  instantly  dissolved  by  higher  power,


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  47

And  all  who  dwelt  within  thy  palace  walls,

Demon  or  man,  all  utterly  destroyed,

Their  severed  heads  cast  weltering  on  the  ground."

Then  was  Zohak  confounded,  and  he  shrunk

Within  himself  with  terror,  thinking  now

His  doom  was  sealed  5  but  anxious  to  appear

In  presence  of  his  army,  gay  and  cheerful,

Lest  they  too  should  despair,  he  dressed  himself

In  rich  attire,  and  with  a  pleasant  look,

Said  carelessly  :  "  Perhaps  some  gamesome  guest

Hath  in  his  sport  committed  this  strange  act.""

"  A  guest,  indeed  !"  Kandru  replied,  "  a  guest,

In  playful  mood  to  batter  down  thy  palace !

If  he  had  been  thy  guest,  why  with  his  mace,

Cow-headed,  has  he  done  such  violence  ?

Why  did  he  penetrate  thy  secret  chambers,

And  bring  to  light  the  beautiful  Shahrnaz,

And  red-lipped  Arnawaz  ?" At  this,  Zohak

Trembled  with  wrath — the  words  were  death  to  him ;

And  sternly  thus  he  spoke :  "  What  hast  thou  fled

Through  fear,  betraying  thy  important  trust  ?

No  longer  shalt  thou  share  my  confidence,

No  longer  share  my  bounty  and  regard.11

To  this  the  keeper  tauntingly  replied  :

"  Thy  kingdom  is  overthrown,  and  nothing  now

Remains  for^thee  to  give  me  ;  thou  art  lost.""

The tyrant immediately turned towards his
army,  with  the  intention  of  making  a  strong  effort


48  THE SHAH NAMEH.

to  regain  his  throne,  but  he  found  that  as  soon  as
the  soldiers  and  the  people  were  made  acquainted
with  the  proceedings  and  success  of  Feridun,  re-
bellion arose  among  them, and  shuddering  with  hor-
ror at  the  cruelty  exercised  by  him  in  providing
food  for  the  accursed  serpents,  they  preferred  em-
bracing the  cause  of  the  new  king.  Zohak,  seeing
that  he  had  lost  the  affections  of  the  army,  and
that  universal  revolt  was  the  consequence,  adopted
another  course,  and  endeavoured  alone  to  be  re-
venged upon  his  enemy.  He  proceeded  on  his
journey,  and  arriving  by  night  at  the  camp  of
Feridun,  hoped  to  find  him  off  his  guard  and  put
him  to  death.  He  ascended  a  high  place,  himself
unobserved,  from  which  he  saw  Feridun  sitting
engaged  in  soft  dalliance  with  the  lovely  Shahr-
naz.  The  fire  of  jealousy  and  revenge  now  con-
sumed him  more  fiercely,  and  he  was  attempting
to  effect  his  purpose,  when  Feridun  was  roused
by  the  noise,  and  starting  up  struck  a  furious  blow
with  his  cow-headed  mace  upon  the  temples  of
Zohak,  which  crushed  the  bone,  and  he  was  on
the  point  of  giving  him  another ;  but  a  supernatural
voice  whispered  in  his  ear,

"  Slay  him  not  now, — his  time  is  not  yet  come,
His  punishment  must  be  prolonged  awhile ;
And  as  he  cannot  now  survive  the  wound,
Bind  him  with  heavy  chains — convey  him  straight
Upon  the  mountain,  there  within  a  cave,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  49

Deep,  dark,  and  horrible — with  none  to  soothe
His  sufferings,  let  the  murderer  lingering  die.""

The  work  of  heaven  performing,  Feridun
First  purified  the  world  from  sin  and  crime.

Yet  Feridun  was  not  an  angel,  nor
Composed  of  musk  or  ambergris. By  justice
And  generosity  he  gained  his  fame.
Do  thou  but  exercise  these  princely  virtues,
And  thou  wilt  be  renowned  as  Feridun.


FERIDUN AND  HIS  THREE  SONS.


Feridun  had  three  sons.  One  of  them  was
named  Silim,  the  other  Tiir,  and  the  third  Irij.
When  they  had  grown  up,  he  called  before  him  a
learned  person  named  Chundel,  and  said  to  him  :
"  Go  thou  in  quest  of  three  daughters,  born  of
the  same  father  and  mother,  and  adorned  with
every  grace  and  accomplishment,  that  I  may  have
my  three  sons  married  into  one  family.  Chundel
departed  accordingly,  and  travelled  through  many
countries  in  fruitless  search,  till  he  came  to  the
King  of  Yemen,  whose  name  was  Saru,  and
found  that  he  had  three  daughters  of  the  character
and  qualifications  required.  He  therefore  de-
livered Feridun's  proposition  to  him,  to  which  the


50  THE SHAH NAMEH.

King  of  Yemen  agreed.  Then  Feridun  sent  his
three  sons  to  Yemen,  and  they  married  the  three
daughters  of  the  king,  who  gave  them  splendid
dowries  in  treasure  and  jewels.  It  is  related  that
Feridun  afterwards  divided  his  empire  among
his  sons.  To  Silim  he  gave  Rum  and  Khawer ;
to  Tiir,  Turan;  and  to  Irij,  Iran  or  Persia.
The  sons  then  repaired  to  their  respective  king-
doms. Persia  was  a  beautiful  country,  and  the
garden  of  spring,  full  of  freshness  and  perfume  ;
Turan,  on  the  contrary,  was  less  cultivated,  and
the  scene  of  perpetual  broils  and  insurrections.
The  elder  brother,  Silim,  was  therefore  discon-
tented with  the  unfair  partition  of  the  empire,  and
displeased  with  his  father.  He  sent  to  Ttir,
saying  :  "Our  father  has  given  to  Irij  the  most
delightful  and  productive  kingdom,  and  to  us,  two
wild  uncultivated  regions.  I  am  the  eldest  son,
and  I  am  not  satisfied  with  this  distribution, —
what  sayest  thou  ?"  When  this  message  was  com-
municated to  Tur,  he  fully  concurred  in  the  sen-
timents expressed  by  his  brother,  and  determined
to  unite  with  him  in  any  undertaking  that  might
promise  the  accomplishment  of  their  purpose,  which
was  to  deprive  Irij  of  his  dominions.  But  he
thought  it  would  be  most  expedient,  in  the  first
instance,  to  make  their  father  acquainted  with
the  dissatisfaction  he  had  produced  ;  "  for,"  he
thought  to  himself,  "  in  a  new  distribution,  he
may  assign  Persia  to  me."  Then  he  wrote  to


THE SIIAII NAMEH.  51

Silim,  advising  that  a  messenger  should  be  sent  at
once  to  Feridun  to  inform  him  of  their  dissatis-
faction, and  bring  back  a  reply.  The  same  mes-
senger was  dispatched  by  Silim  accordingly  on
that  mission,

Charged  with  unfilial  language. "  Give,""  he  said,
"  This  stripling  Irij  a  more  humble  portion,
Or  we  will,  from  the  mountains  of  Turan,
From  Rum,  and  Chin,  bring  overwhelming  troops,
Inured  to  war,  and  shower  disgrace  and  ruin
On  him  and  Persia."

When  the  messenger  arrived  at  the  court  of  Fe-
ridun, and  had  obtained  permission  to  appear  in
the  presence  of  the  king,  he  kissed  the  ground
respectfully,  and  by  command  related  the  purpose
of  his  journey.  Feridun  was  surprised  and  dis-
pleased, and  said,  in  reply  :

"  Have  I  done  wrong,  done  evil  ? None,  but  good.
I  gave  ye  kingdoms,  that  was  not  a  crime ;
But  if  ye  fear  not  me,  at  least  fear  God.
My  ebbing  life  approaches  to  an  end,
And  the  possessions  of  this  fleeting  world
Will  soon  pass  from  me. I  am  grown  too  old
To  have  my  passions  roused  by  this  rebellion ;
All  I  can  do  is,  with  paternal  love,
To  counsel  peace. Be  with  your  lot  contented ;
Seek  not  unnatural  strife,  but  cherish  peace.11
E2


52  THE SHAH NAMEH.

After  the  departure  of  the  messenger  Feridun
called  Irij  before  him,  and  said  :  "  Thy  two  bro-
thers, who  are  older  than  thou  art,  have  confede-
rated together,  and  threaten  to  bring  a  large  army
against  thee  for  the  purpose  of  seizing  thy  king-
dom, and  putting  thee  to  death.  I  have  received
this  information  from  a  messenger,  who  further
says,  that  if  I  take  thy  part  they  will  also  wage
war  upon  me."  And  after  Irij  had  declared  that
in  this  extremity  he  was  anxious  to  do  whatever
his  father  might  advise,  Feridun  continued :  "  My
son,  thou  art  unable  to  resist  the  invasion  of  even
one  brother ;  it  will,  therefore,  be  impossible  for
thee  to  oppose  both.  I  am  now  aged  and  infirm,
and  my  only  wish  is  to  pass  the  remainder  of  my
days  in  retirement  and  repose.  Better,  then,  will
it  be  for  thee  to  pursue  the  path  of  peace  and
friendship,  and  like  me  throw  away  all  desire  for
dominion.

For  if  the  sword  of  anger  is  unsheathed,
And  war  comes  on,  thy  head  will  soon  be  freed
From  all  the  cares  of  government  and  life.
There  is  no  cause  for  thee  to  quit  the  world,
The  path  of  peace  and  amity  is  thine.'"

Irij  agreed  with  his  father,  and  declared  that
he  would  willingly  sacrifice  his  throne  and  diadem
rather  than  go  to  war  with  his  brothers.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  53

"  Look  at  the  Heavens,  how  they  roll  on  ;
And  look  at  man,  how  soon  he's  gone.
A  breath  of  wind,  and  then  no  more  ;
A  world  like  this,  should  man  deplore  ?"

With  these  sentiments  Irij  determined  to  re-
pair immediately  to  his  brothers,  and  place  his
kingdom  at  their  disposal,  hoping  by  this  means
to  merit  their  favour  and  affection,  and  he  said  :

"  I  feel  no  resentment,  I  seek  not  for  strife,
I  wish  not  for  thrones  and  the  glories  of  life ;
What  is  glory  to  man  ? — an  illusion,  a  cheat ;
What  did  it  for  Jemshid,  the  world  at  his  feet  ?
When  I  go  to  my  brothers  their  anger  may  cease,
Though  vengeance  were  fitter  than  offers  of  peace.11

Feridun  observed  to  him  :  "  It  is  well  that  thy
desire  is  for  reconciliation,  as  thy  brothers  are  pre-
paring for  war."  He  then  wrote  a  letter  to  his
sons,  in  which  he  said :  "  Your  younger  brother
considers  your  friendship  and  esteem  of  more  con-
sequence to  him  than  his  crown  and  throne.  He
has  banished  from  his  heart  every  feeling  of  re-
sentment against  you  ;  do  you,  in  the  like  manner,
cast  away  hostility  from  your  hearts  against  him.
Be  kind  to  him,  for  it  is  incumbent  upon  the
eldest  born  to  be  indulgent  and  affectionate  to
their  younger  brothers.  Although  your  considera-
tion for  my  happiness  has  passed  away,  I  still  wish


54  THE SHAH NAMEH.

to  please  you/'  As  soon  as  the  letter  was  finished,
Irij  mounted  his  horse,  and  set  off  on  his  journey,
accompanied  by  several  of  his  friends,  but  not  in
such  a  manner,  and  with  such  an  equipment,  as
might  betray  his  rank  or  character.  When  he  arrived
with  his  attendants  in  Turkistan,  he  found  that
the  armies  of  his  two  brothers  were  ready  to  march
against  him.  Sflim  and  Tur,  being  apprized  of
the  approach  of  Irij,  went  out  of  the  city,  accord-
ing to  ancient  usage,  to  meet  the  deputation  which
was  conveying  to  them  their  father's  letter.  Irij
was  kindly  received  by  them,  and  accommodated
in  the  royal  residence.

It  is  said  that  Irij  was  in  person  extremely  pre-
possessing, and  that  when  the  troops  first  beheld
him,  they  exclaimed  :  "  He  is  indeed  fit  to  be  a
king !"  In  every  place  all  eyes  were  fixed  upon
him,  and  wherever  he  moved  he  was  followed  and
surrounded  by  the  admiring  army  and  crowds  of
people.

In  numerous  groupes  the  soldiers  met,  and  blessed
The  name  of  Irij,  saying  in  their  hearts,
This  is  the  man  to  lead  an  armed  host,
And  worthy  of  the  diadem  and  throne.

The  courtiers  of  the  two  brothers,  alarmed  by
these  demonstrations  of  attachment  to  Irij  con-
tinually before  their  eyes,  represented  to  Silim
and  Tur  that  the  army  was  dissaffected  towards


THE SHAH NAMEH.  55

them,  and  that  Irij  alone  was  considered  deserv-
ing of  the  supreme  authority.  This  intimation  ex-
asperated the  malignant  spirit  of  the  two  brothers  ;
for  although  at  first  determined  to  put  Irij  to
death,  his  youth  and  prepossessing  appearance
had  in  some  degree  subdued  their  animosity.
They  were  therefore  pleased  with  the  intelli-
gence, because  it  afforded  a  new  and  powerful
reason  for  getting  rid  of  him.  "  Look  at  our
troops,"  said  Silim  to  Tur,  "how  they  assemble
in  circles  together,  and  betray  their  admiration  of
him.  I  fear  they  will  never  march  against  Persia.
Indeed  it  is  not  improbable  that  even  the  kingdom
of  Tiiran  may  fall  into  his  hands,  since  the  hearts
of  our  soldiers  have  become  so  attached  to  him.

No  time  is  this  to  deviate  from  our  course,
We  must  rush  on  ;  our  armies  plainly  show
Their  love  for  Irij,  and  if  we  should  fail
To  root  up  from  its  place  this  flourishing  tree,
Our  cause  is  lost  for  ever."

Again,  Silim  said  to  Tur :  "  Thou  must  put
Irij  to  death,  and  then  his  kingdom  will  be  thine."
Tur  readily  undertook  to  commit  that  crime,  and,
on  the  following  day,  at  an  interview  with  Irij,
he  said  to  him  :  "  Why  didst  thou  consent  to  be
the  ruler  of  Persia,  and  fail  in  showing  a  proper
regard  for  the  interests  of  thy  elder  brothers?
Whilst  our  barren  kingdoms  are  constantly  in  a


56  THE SHAH NAMEH,

state  of  warfare  with  the  Turks,  thou  art  enjoying
peace  and  tranquillity  upon  the  throne  of  a  fruit-
ful country  ?  Must  we,  thy  elder  brothers,  re-
main thus  under  thy  commands,  and  in  subordi-
nate stations  ?

Must  thou  have  gold  and  treasure,
And  thy  heart  be  wrapt  in  pleasure,
Whilst  we,  thy  elder  born,
Of  our  heritage  are  shorn  ?
Must  the  youngest  still  be  nursed,
And  the  elder  branches  cursed  ?
And  condemned,  by  stern  command,
To  a  wild  and  steril  land  ?"

When  Irij heard these  words  from Tur, he
immediately  replied,  saying :

"  I  only  seek  tranquillity  and  peace  ;

I  look  not  on  the  crown  of  sovereignty,

Nor  seek  a  name  among  the  Persian  host ;

And  though  the  throne  and  diadem  are  mine,

I  here  renounce  them,  satisfied  to  lead

A  private  life. For  what  hath  ever  been

The  end  of  earthly  power  and  pomp,  but  darkness  ?

I  seek  not  to  contend  against  my  brothers  ;

Why  should  I  grieve  their  hearts,  or  give  distress

To  any  human  being  ? I  am  young,

And  Heaven  forbid  that  I  should  prove  unkind !"

Notwithstanding,  however,  these  declarations  of


THE SHAH NAMEH.  57

submission,  and  repeated  assurances  of  his  resolu-
tion to  resign  the  monarchy  of  Persia,  Tur  would
not  believe  one  word.  In  a  moment  he  sprung
up,  and  furiously  seizing  the  golden  chair  from
which  he  had  just  risen,  struck  a  violent  blow
with  it  on  the  head  of  Irij,  calling  aloud,  "  Bind
him,  bind  him!"  The  youth,  struggling  on  the
ground,  exclaimed:  "  O,  think  of  thy  father,  and
pity  me  !  Have  compassion  on  thy  own  soul !  I
came  for  thy  protection,  therefore  do  not  take  my
life  :  if  thou  dost,  my  blood  will  call  out  for  ven-
geance to  the  Almighty.  I  ask  only  for  peace
and  retirement.  Think  of  my  father,  and  pity  me !

Wouldst  thou,  with  life  endowed,  take  life  away  ?

Torture  not  the  poor  ant,  which  drags  the  grain

Along  the  dust ;  it  has  a  life,  and  life

Is  sweet  and  precious. Did  the  innocent  ant

Offend  thee  ever  ? Cruel  must  he  be

Who  would  destroy  a  living  thing  so  harmless !

And  wilt  thou,  reckless,  shed  thy  brother's  blood.

And  agonize  the  feelings  of  a  father  ?

Pause,  and  avoid  the  wrath  of  righteous  Heaven !"

But  Tur  was  not  to  be  softened  by  the  suppli-
cations of  his  brother.  Without  giving  any  reply,
he  drew  his  dagger,  and  instantly  dissevered  the
head  of  the  youth  from  his  body.

With  musk  and  ambergris  he  first  embalmed
The  head  of  Irij,  then  to  his  old  father


58  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Dispatched  the  present  with  these  cruel  words  : —
"  Here  is  the  head  of  thy  beloved  son,
Thy  darling  favourite,  dress  it  with  a  crown
As  thou  wert  wont ;  and  mark  the  goodly  fruit
Thou  hast  produced. Adorn  thy  ivory  throne,
In  all  its  splendour,  for  this  worthy  head,
And  place  it  in  full  majesty  before  thee  !"

In  the  mean  time,  Feridun  had  prepared  a  mag-
nificent reception  for  his  son.  The  period  of  his
return  had  arrived,  and  he  was  in  anxious  ex-
pectation of  seeing  him,  when  suddenly  he  re-
ceived intelligence  that  Irij  had  been  put  to  death
by  his  brothers.  The  mournful  spectacle  soon
reached  his  father's  house.

A  scream  of  agony  burst  from  his  heart,

As  wildly  in  his  arms  he  clasped  the  face

Of  his  poor  slaughtered  son ;  then  down  he  sank

Senseless  upon  the  earth. The  soldiers  round

Bemoaned  the  sad  catastrophe,  and  rent

Their  garments  in  their  grief. The  souls  of  all

Were  filled  with  gloom,  their  eyes  with  flowing  tears,

For  hope  had  promised  a  far  different  scene  ;

A  day  of  heart-felt  mirth  and  joy  fulness,

When  Irij  to  his  father's  house  returned.

After  the  extreme  agitation  of  Feridun  had
subsided,  he  directed  all  his  people  to  wear  black
apparel,  in  honour  of  the  murdered  youth,  and  all
his  drums  and  banners  to  be  torn  to  pieces.  They


THE SHAH NAMEH.  59

say  that  subsequent  to  this  dreadful  calamity  he
always  wore  black  clothes.  The  head  of  Irij  was
buried  in  a  favourite  garden,  where  he  had  been
accustomed  to  hold  weekly  a  rural  entertainment.
Feridun,  in  performing  the  last  ceremony,  pressed
it  to  his  bosom,  and  with  streaming  eyes  ex-
claimed :

"  O  Heaven,  look  down  upon  my  murdered  boy ;
His  severed  head  before  me,  but  his  body
Torn  by  those  hungry  wolves  !  O  grant  my  prayer,
That  I  may  see,  before  I  die,  the  seed
Of  Irij  hurl  just  vengeance  on  the  heads
Of  his  assassins ;  hear,  O  hear  my  prayer.""
— Thus  he  in  sorrow  for  his  favourite  son
Obscured  the  light  which  might  have  sparkled  still,
Withering  the  jasmine  flower  of  happy  days;
So  that  his  pale  existence  looked  like  death.


MINU'CHIHR.


Feridun  continued  to  cherish  with  the  fondest
affection  the  memory  of  his  murdered  son,  and
still  looked  forward  with  anxiety  to  the  antici-
pated hour  of  retribution.  Inquiring  one  day  in
the  women's  apartments  at  Irij's  palace  if  any  of


60  THE SHAH NAMEH.

the  wives  of  his  son  were  pregnant,  he  learnt  that
Mah-afrid  was  in  the  happy  state  desired,  and
fervently  hoped  that  a  son  might  be  born  to  take
vengeance  for  his  father's  death.  But  it  so  hap-
pened that  Mah-afrid  brought  forth  a  daughter.
When  this  daughter  grew  up,  Feridun  gave  her
in  marriage  to  Pishung,  and  from  that  union  an
heir  was  born  who  in  form  and  feature  resembled
Irij  and  Feridun.  He  was  called  Minu'chihr,  and
great  rejoicings  took  place  on  the  occasion  of  his
birth.

The  old  man's  lips,  with  smiles  apart,
Bespoke  the  gladness  of  his  heart.
And  in  his  arms  he  took  the  boy,
The  harbinger  of  future  joy  ;
Delighted  that  indulgent  Heaven
To  his  fond  hopes  this  pledge  had  given.
It  seemed  as  if,  to  bless  his  reign,
Irij  had  come  to  life  again.

The  child  was  nourished  with  great  tenderness
during  his  infancy,  and  when  he  grew  up  he  was
sedulously  instructed  in  every  art  necessary  to
form  the  character,  and  acquire  the  accomplish-
ments of  a  warrior.  Feridun  was  accustomed  to
place  him  on  the  throne,  and  decorate  his  brows
with  the  crown  of  sovereignty  ;  and  the  soldiers
enthusiastically  acknowledged  him  as  their  king,
urging  him  to  rouse  himself  and  take  vengeance  of


THE SHAH NAMEH.  63

his  enemies  for  the  murder  of  his  grandfather.
Having  opened  his  treasury,  Feridim  distributed
abundance  of  gold  among  the  people,  so  that
Minu'chihr  was  in  a  short  time  enabled  to  em-
body an  immense  army,  by  whom  he  was  looked
upon  with  attachment  and  admiration.

When  Silim  and  Tur  were  informed  of  the
preparations  that  were  making  against  them,  that
Minu'chihr,  having  grown  to  manhood,  was  dis-
tinguished for  his  valour  and  intrepidity,  and  that
multitudes  flocked  to  his  standard  with  the  inten-
tion of  forwarding  his  purpose  of  revenge,  they
were  seized  with  inexpressible  terror,  and  antici-
pated an  immediate  invasion  of  their  kingdoms.
Thus  alarmed,  they  counselled  together  upon  the
course  it  would  be  wisest  to  adopt.

"  Should  he  advance,  his  cause  is  just,
And  blood  will  mingle  with  the  dust,
But  heaven  forbid  our  power  should  be
Overwhelmed  to  give  him  victory ;
Though  strong  his  arm,  and  wild  his  ire,
And  vengeance  keen  his  heart  inspire."

They  determined,  at  length,  to  pursue  pacific
measures,  and  endeavour  by  splendid  presents  and
conciliatory  language  to  regain  the  good-will  of
Feridun.  The  elephants  were  immediately  loaded
with  treasure,  a  crown  of  gold,  and  other  articles
of  value,  and  a  messenger  was  dispatched,  charged


62  THE SHAH NAMEH.

with  an  acknowledgment  of  guilt  and  abundant
expressions  of  repentance.  "  It  was  Iblis,"  they
said,  "  who  led  us  astray,  and  our  destiny  has
been  such  that  we  are  in  every  way  criminal.
But  thou  art  the  ocean  of  mercy ;  pardon  our
offences.  Though  manifold,  they  were  involuntary,
and  forgiveness  will  cleanse  our  hearts  and  restore
us  to  ourselves.  Let  our  tears  wash  away  the
faults  we  have  committed.  To  Minu'chihr  and
to  thyself  we  offer  obedience  and  fealty,  and  we
wait  your  commands,  being  but  the  dust  of  your
feet."

When  the  messenger  arrived  at  the  court  of
Feridun  he  first  delivered  the  magnificent  pre-
sents, and  the  king,  having  placed  Minu'chihr  on
a  golden  chair  by  his  side,  observed  to  him,
"  These  presents  are  to  thee  a  prosperous  and
blessed  omen — they  shew  that  thy  enemy  is  afraid
of  thee."  Then  the  messenger  was  permitted  to
communicate  the  object  of  his  mission.

He  spoke  with  studied  phrase,  intent  to  hide,

Or  mitigate  the  horror  of  their  crime ;

And  with  excuses  plausible  and  bland

His  speech  was  dressed. The  brothers,  he  observed,

Desired  to  see  their  kinsman  Minu'chihr, —

And  with  the  costliest  gems  they  sought  to  pay

The  price  of  kindred  blood  unjustly  shed —

And  they  would  willingly  to  him  resign

Their  kingdoms  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  friendship.


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  G3

The  monarch  marked  him  scornfully,  and  said,
"  Canst  thou  conceal  the  sun  ? It  is  in  vain
Truth  to  disguise  with  words  of  shallow  meaning.
Now  hear  my  answer. Ask  thy  cruel  masters,
Who  talk  of  their  affection  for  the  prince,
Where  lies  the  body  of  the  gentle  Irij  ?
Him  they  have  slain,  the  fierce,  unnatural  brothers,
And  now  they  thirst  to  gain  another  victim.
They  long  to  see  the  face  of  Minu'chihr  !
Yes,  and  they  shall,  surrounded  by  his  soldiers,
And  clad  in  steel,  and  they  shall  feel  the  edge
Of  life-destroying  swords. Yes,  they  shall  see  him  P

After  littering  this  indignant  speech,  Feridun
shewed  to  the  messenger  his  great  warriors,  one
by  one.  He  shewed  him  Gavah  and  bis  two
sons,  Shahpur,  and  Shirueh,  and  Karun,  and
Sam,  and  Nariman,  and  other  chiefs — all  of  ad-
mirable courage  and  valour  in  war, — and  thus
resumed  :

"  Hence  with  your  presents,  hence,  away,
Can  gold  or  gems  turn  night  to  day  ?
Must  kingly  heads  be  bought  and  sold,
And  shall  I  barter  blood  for  gold  ?
Shall  gold  a  father's  heart  entice,
Blood  to  redeem  beyond  all  price  ?
Hence,  hence  with  treachery ; I  have  heard
Their  glozing  falsehoods,  every  word  ;
But  human  feelings  guide  my  will,
And  keep  my  honour  sacred  still.


64  THE SHAH NAMEH.

True  is  the  oracle  we  read  : —
'  Those  who  have  sown  oppression's  seed
Reap  bitter  fruit ;  their  souls,  perplext,
Joy  not  in  this  world  or  the  next.1
The  brothers  of  my  murdered  boy,
Who  could  a  father's  hopes  destroy,
An  equal  punishment  will  reap,
And  lasting  vengeance  o'er  them  sweep.
They  rooted  up  my  favourite  tree,
But  yet  a  branch  remains  to  me.
Now  the  young  lion  comes  apace,
The  glory  of  his  glorious  race  ;
He  comes  apace,  to  punish  guilt,
Where  brother's  blood  was  basely  spilt ;
And  blood  alone  for  blood  must  pay ;
Hence  with  your  gold,  depart,  away  !"

When  the  messenger  heard  these  reproaches,
mingled  with  poison,  he  immediately  took  leave,
and  trembling  with  fear,  returned  to  Silim  and
Tur  with  the  utmost  speed.  He  described  to
them  in  strong  and  alarming  terms  the  appearance
and  character  of  Minu'chihr,  and  his  warriors;
of  that  noble  youth  who  with  frowning  eyebrows
was  only  anxious  for  battle.  He  then  commu-
nicated to  them  in  what  manner  he  had  been  re-
ceived, and  repeated  the  denunciations  of  Feridun,
at  which  the  brothers  were  exceedingly  grieved
and  disappointed.  But  Silim  said  to  Tur  :


THE SHAH NAM EH.  65

"  Let  us  be  first  upon  the  field,  before
He  marshals  his  array. It  follows  not,
That  he  should  be  a  hero  bold  and  valiant,
Because  he  is  descended  from  the  brave ;
But  it  becomes  us  well  to  try  our  power, —
For  speed,  in  war,  is  better  than  delay.11

In  this  spirit  the  two  brothers  rapidly  collected
from  both  their  kingdoms  a  large  army,  and  pro-
ceeded towards  Iran.  On  hearing  of  their  pro-
gress, Feridun  said  :  "  This  is  well — they  come  of
themselves.  The  forest  game  surrenders  itself  vo-
luntarily at  the  foot  of  the  sportsman."  Then  he
commanded  his  army  to  wait  quietly  till  they  ar-
rived ;  for  skill  and  patience,  he  observed,  will
draw  the  lion's  head  into  your  toils.

As  soon  as  the  enemy  had  approached  within  a
short  distance,  Minu'chihr  solicited  Feridun  to
commence  the  engagement, — and  the  king  having
summoned  his  chief  warriors  before  him,  appointed
them  all,  one  by  one,  to  their  proper  places.

The  warriors  of  renown  assembled  straight
With  ponderous  clubs  ;  each  like  a  lion  fierce,
Girded  his  loins  impatient. In  their  front
The  sacred  banner  of  the  blacksmith  waved ;
Bright  scymetars  were  brandished  in  the  air ;
Beneath  them  pranced  their  steeds,  all  armed  for  fight,
A.nd  so  incased  in  iron  were  the  chiefs
From  top  to  toe,  their  eyes  were  only  seen.
F


66  THE SHAH NAMEH.

When  Karun  drew  his  hundred  thousand  troops
Upon  the  field,  the  battle- word  was  given,
And  Minu'chihr  was,  like  the  cypress  tall,
Engaged  along  the  centre  of  the  hosts ;
And  like  the  moon  he  shone,  amid  the  groups
Of  congregated  clouds, or  as  the  sun
Glittering  upon  the  mountain  of  Alberz.
The  squadrons  in  advance  Kabad  commanded,
Garshasp  the  left,  and  Sam  upon  the  right.

The  shedders  of  a  brother's  blood  had  now
Brought  their  innumerous  legions  to  the  strife,
And  formed  them  in  magnificent  array :
The  picquet  guards  were  almost  thrown  together,
When  Tur  sprung  forward,  and  with  sharp  reproach.
And  haughty  gesture,  thus  addressed  Kabad  :
"  Ask  this  new  king,  this  Minu'chihr,  since  Heaven
To  Irij  gave  a  daughter,  who  on  him
Bestowed  the  mail,  the  battle-axe,  and  sword  ?"
To  this  insulting  speech,  Kabad  replied :
"  The  message  shall  be  given,  and  I  will  bring
The  answer,  too. Ye  know  what  ye  have  done  ;
Have  ye  not  murdered  him  who,  trusting,  sought
Protection  from  ye  ? All  mankind  for  this
Must  curse  your  memory  till  the  day  of  doom ;
If  savage  monsters  were  to  fly  your  presence,
It  would  not  be  surprising. Those  who  die
In  this  most  righteous  cause  will  go  to  Heaven,
With  all  their  sins  forgotten  !" Then  Kabad
Went  to  the  king,  and  told  the  speech  of  Tur  :


THE SHAH NAM EH.  67

A  smile  played  o'er  the  cheek  of  Minu'chihr
As  thus  he  spoke  :  "  A  boaster  he  must  be,
Or  a  vain  fool,  for  when  engaged  in  battle,
Vigour  of  arm  and  the  enduring  soul,
Will  best  be  proved. I  ask  but  for  revenge —
Vengeance  for  Irij  slain. Meanwhile,  return ;
We  shall  not  fight  to-day ."

He  too  retired,

And  in  his  tent  upon  the  sandy  plain,
Ordered  the  festive  board  to  be  prepared,
And  wine  and  music  whiled  the  hours  away.

When  morning  dawned  the  battle  commenced,
and  multitudes  were  slain  on  both  sides.

The  spacious  plain  became  a  sea  of  blood ;
It  seemed  as  if  the  earth  was  covered  o'er
With  crimson  tulips ;  slippery  was  the  ground,
And  all  in  dire  confusion.

The  army  of  Minu'chihr  was  victorious,  owing
to  the  bravery  and  skill  of  the  commander.  But
Heaven  was  in  his  favour.

In  the  evening  Silim  and  Tur  consulted  toge-
ther, and  came  to  the  resolution  of  effecting  a
formidable  night  attack  on  the  enemy.  The
spies  of  Minu'chihr,  however,  obtained  informa-
tion of  this  intention,  and  communicated  the  secret
to  the  king.  Minu'chihr  immediately  placed  the
army  in  charge  of  Karun,  and  took  himself  thirty
thousand  men  to  wait  in  ambuscade  for  the  enemy,

F  2


68  THE SHAH NAMEH.

and  frustrate  his  views.  Tur  advanced  with  a
hundred  thousand  men ;  but  as  he  advanced,  he
found  every  one  on  the  alert,  and  aware  of  his
approach.  He  had  gone  too  far  to  retreat  in  the
dark  without  fighting,  and  therefore  began  a
vigorous  conflict.  Minu'chihr  sprung  up  from  his
ambuscade,  and  with  his  thirty  thousand  men
rushed  upon  the  centre  of  the  enemy's  troops,
and  in  the  end  encountered  Tur.  The  struggle
was  not  long.  Minu'chihr  dexterously  using  his
javelin,  hurled  him  from  his  saddle  precipitately
to  the  ground,  and  then  with  his  dagger  severed
the  head  from  his  body.  The  body  he  left  to  be
devoured  by  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  the  head
he  sent  as  a  trophy  to  Feridun  ;  after  which,  he
proceeded  in  search  of  Silim.

The  army  of  the  confederates,  however,  having
suffered  such  a  signal  defeat,  Silim  thought  it
prudent  to  fall  back  and  take  refuge  in  a  fort.
But  Minu'chihr  went  in  pursuit,  and  besieged  the
castle.  One  day  a  warrior  named  Kakii  made  a
sally  out  of  the  fort,  and  approaching  the  centre
of  the  besieging  army,  threw  a  javelin  at  Mi-
nu'cliihr,  which  however  fell  harmless  before  it
reached  its  aim.  Then  Minu'chihr  seized  the
enemy  by  the  girdle,  raised  him  up  in  air,  and
flung  him  from  his  saddle  to  the  ground.

He  grasped  the  foe-man  by  the  girth,
And  thundering  drove  him  to  the  earth ;


THE SHAH NAMEH.  69

By  wound  of  spear,  and  gory  brand,
He  died  upon  the  burning  sand.

The  siege  was  continued  for  some  time  with  the
view  of  weakening  the  power  of  Silim ;  at  last
Minu'chihr  sent  a  message  to  him,  saying :  "  Let
the  battle  be  decided  between  us.  Quit  the  fort,
and  boldly  meet  me  here,  that  it  may  be  seen  to
whom  God  gives  the  victory."  Silim  could  not,
without  disgrace,  refuse  this  challenge :  he  de-
scended from  the  fort,  and  met  Minu'chihr.  A
desperate  conflict  ensued,  and  he  was  slain  on  the
spot.  Minu'chihr's  keen  sword  severed  the  royal
head  from  the  body,  and  thus  quickly  ended  the
career  of  Silim.  After  that,  the  whole  of  the
enemy's  troops  were  defeated  and  put  to  flight  in
every  direction.

The  leading  warriors  of  the  routed  army  now
sought  protection  from  Minu'chihr,  who  imme-
diately complied  with  their  solicitation,  and  by
their  influence  all  the  forces  of  Siiim  and  Tur
united  under  him.  To  each  he  gave  rank  accord-
ing to  his  merits.  After  the  victory,  Minu'chihr
hastened  to  pay  his  respects  to  Feridun,  who
received  him  with  praises  and  thanksgivings,  and
the  customary  honours.  Returning  from  the  bat-
tle, Feridun  met  him  on  foot ;  and  the  moment
Minu'chihr  beheld  the  venerable  monarch,  he
alighted  and  kissed  the  ground.  They  then,
seated  in  the  palace  together,  congratulated


70  THE SHAH NAMEIJ.

themselves  on  the  success  of  their  arms.  In  a
short  time  after,  the  end  of  Feridun  approach-
ed ;  when  recommending  Minu'chihr  to  the  care
of  Sam  and  Nariman,  he  said :  "  My  hour
of  departure  has  arrived,  and  I  place  the  prince
under  your  protection."  He  then  directed  Mi-
nu'chihr to  be  seated  on  the  throne  ;

And  put  himself  the  crown  upon  his  head,
And  stored  his  mind  with  counsel  good  and  wise.

Upon  the  death  of  Feridun,  Minu'chihr  ac-
cordingly succeeded  to  the  government  of  the
empire,  and  continued  to  observe  strictly  all  the
laws  and  regulations  of  his  great  grandfather.  He
commanded  his  subjects  to  be  constant  in  the
worship  of  God.

The  army  and  the  people  gave  him  praise,
Prayed  for  his  happiness  and  length  of  days ;
Our  hearts,  they  said,  are  ever  bound  to  thee ;
Our  hearts,  inspired  by  love  and  loyalty.


THE SHAH NAM EH.  71


ZAL, THE  SON  OF  SAM.

According  to  the  traditionary  histories  from
which  Firdausi  has  derived  his  legends,  the
warrior  Sam  had  a  son  born  to  him  whose  hair
was  perfectly  white.  On  his  birth  the  nurse  went
to  Sam  and  told  him  that  God  had  blessed  him
with  a  wonderful  child,  without  a  single  blemish,
excepting  that  his  hair  was  white ;  but  when
Sam  saw  him  he  was  grieved  :

His  hair  was  white  as  goose's  wing,
His  cheek  was  like  the  rose  of  spring
His  form  was  straight  as  cypress  tree —
But  when  the  sire  was  brought  to  see
That  child  with  hair  so  silvery  white,
His  heart  revolted  at  the  sight.

His  mother  gave  him  the  name  of  Zal,  and  the
people  said  to  Sam,  "  This  is  an  ominous  event,
and  will  be  to  thee  productive  of  nothing  but  cala-
mity;— it  would  be  better  if  thou  couldst  remove
him  out  of  sight.

No  human  being  of  this  earth
Could  give  to  such  a  monster  birth  ;
He  must  be  of  the  Demon  race,
Though  human  still  in  form  and  face.
If  not  a  Demon,  he,  at  least,
Appears  a  party-coloured  beast."


72  THE SHAH NAMEH.

When  Sam  was  made  acquainted  with  these
reproaches  and  sneers  of  the  people,  he  deter-
mined, though  with  a  sorrowful  heart,  to  take  him
up  to  the  mountain  Alberz,  and  abandon  him  there
to  be  destroyed  by  beasts  of  prey.  Alberz  was
the  abode  of  the  Simurgh  or  Griffin ;  'and,  whilst
flying  about  in  quest  of  food  for  his  hungry  young
ones,  that  surprising  animal  discovered  the  child
lying  alone  upon  the  hard  rock,  crying  and  suck-
ing its  fingers.  The  Simurgh,  however,  felt  no
inclination  to  devour  him,  but  compassionately
took  him  up  in  the  air,  and  conveyed  him  to  his
own  habitation.

He  who  is  blest  with  Heaven's  grace
Will  never  want  a  dwelling-place
And  he  who  bears  the  curse  of  Fate
Can  never  change  his  wretched  state.
A  voice,  not  earthly,  thus  addressed
The  Simurgh  in  his  mountain  nest —
"  To  thee  this  mortal  I  resign,
Protected  by  the  power  divine  ;
Let  him  thy  fostering  kindness  share,
Nourish  him  with  paternal  care  ;
For  from  his  loins,  in  time,  will  spring
The  champion  of  the  world,  and  bring
Honour  on  earth,  and  to  thy  name ;
The  heir  of  everlasting  fame."

The  young  ones  were  also  kind  and  affectionate


THE SHAH NAMEH.  73

to  the  infant,  which  was  thus  nourished  and  pro-
tected by  the  Simurgh  for  several  years.


THE  DREAM  OF  SAM.

It  is  said  that  one  night,  after  melancholy  mus-
ings and  reflecting  on  the  miseries  of  this  life,  Sam
was  visited  by  a  dream,  and  when  the  particulars
of  it  were  communicated  to  the  interpreters  of
mysterious  warnings  and  omens,  they  declared
that  Zal  was  certainly  still  alive,  although  he
had  been  long  exposed  on  Alberz,  and  left  there
to  be  torn  to  pieces  by  wild  animals.  Upon  this
interpretation  being  given,  the  natural  feelings  of
the  father  returned,  and  he  sent  his  people  to  the
mountain  in  search  of  Zal,  but  without  success.
On  another  night  Sam  dreamt  a  second  time,
when  he  beheld  a  young  man  of  a  beautiful  coun-
tenance at  the  head  of  an  immense  army,  with  a
banner  flying  before  him,  and  a  Mubid  on  his  left
hand.  One  of  them  addressed  Sam,  and  re-
proached him  thus : —

Unfeeing  mortal,  hast  thou  from  thy  eyes
Washed  out  all  sense  of  shame  ? Dost  thou  believe
That  to  have  silvery  tresses  is  a  crime  ?
If  so,  thy  head  is  covered  with  white  hair ;
And  were  not  both  spontaneous  gifts  from  Heaven  ?


74  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Although  the  boy  was  hateful  to  thy  sight,

The  grace  of  God  has  been  bestowed  upon  him  ;

And  what  is  human  tenderness  and  love

To  Heaven's  protection  ? Thou  to  him  wert  cruel,

But  Heaven  has  blest  him,  shielding  him  from  harm.

Sam  screamed  aloud  in  his  sleep,  and  awoke
greatly  terrified.  Without  delay  he  went  himself
to  Alberz,  and  ascended  the  mountain,  and  wept
and  prayed  before  the  throne  of  the  Almighty,
saying : —

"  If  that  forsaken  child  be  truly  mine,
And  not  the  progeny  of  Demon  fell,
O  pity  me  !  forgive  the  wicked  deed,
And  to  my  eyes,  my  injured  son  restore.""

His  prayer  was  accepted.  The  Simurgh,
hearing  the  lamentations  of  Sam  among  his
people,  knew  that  he  had  come  in  quest  of  his
son,  and  thus  said  to  Zal : — "  I  have  fed  and
protected  thee  like  a  kind  nurse,  and  I  have  given
thee  the  name  of  Dustan,  like  a  father.  Sam,
the  warrior,  has  just  come  upon  the  mountain  in
search  of  his  child,  and  I  must  restore  thee  to  him,
and  we  must  part."  Zal  wept  when  he  heard  of
this  unexpected  separation,  and  in  strong  terms
expressed  his  gratitude  to  his  benefactor  ;  for  the
Wonderful  Bird  had  not  omitted  to  teach  him  the
language  of  the  country,  and  to  cultivate  his  un-


THE SHAH NAiVIEH.  75

derstanding,  removed  as  they  were  to  such  a  dis-
tance from  the  haunts  of  mankind.  The  Simurgh
soothed  him  by  assuring  him  that  he  was  not  going
to  abandon  him  to  misfortune,  but  to  increase  his
prosperity ;  and,  as  a  striking  proof  of  affection,
gave  him  a  feather  from  his  own  wing,  with  these
instructions: — "  Whenever  thou  art  involved  in
difficulty  or  danger,  put  this  feather  on  the  fire,
and  I  will  instantly  appear  to  thee  to  ensure  thy
safety.  Never  cease  to  remember  me.

I  have  watched  thee  with  fondness  by  day  and  by  night,
And  supplied  all  thy  wants  with  a  father's  delight ;
O  forget  not  thy  nurse —  still  be  faithful  to  me —
And  my  heart  will  be  ever  devoted  to  thee."

Zal  immediately  replied  in  a  strain  of  gra-
titude and  admiration;  and  then  the  Simurgh
conveyed  him  to  Sam,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Re-
ceive thy  son — he  is  of  wonderful  promise,  and
will  be  worthy  of  the  throne  and  the  diadem."

The  soul  of  Sam  rejoiced  to  hear
Applause  so  sweet  to  a  parent's  ear ;
And  blessed  them  both,  in  thought  and  word.
The  lovely  boy,  and  the  Wonderous  Bird.

He  also  declared  to  Zal  that  he  was  ashamed
of  the  crime  of  which  he  had  been  guilty,  and
that  he  would  endeavour  to  obliterate  the  recol-


76  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

lection  of  the  past  by  treating  him  in  future  with
the  utmost  respect  and  honour.

When  Minii'chihr  heard  from  Zabul  of  these
things,  and  of  Sam's  return,  he  was  exceedingly
pleased,  and  ordered  his  son,  Nauder,  with  a
splendid  istikbal,  to  meet  the  father  and  son  on
their  approach  to  the  city,  They  were  surround-
ed by  warriors  and  great  men,  and  Sam  embraced
the  first  moment  to  introduce  Zal  to  the  king.

Zal  humbly  kissed  the  earth  before  the  king,

And  from  the  hands  of  Minu'chihr  received

A  golden  mace  and  helm. Then  those  who  knew

The  stars  and  planetary  signs,  were  told

To  calculate  the  stripling's  destiny  ;

And  all  proclaimed  him  of  exalted  fortune,

That  he  would  be  prodigious  in  his  might,

Outshining  every  warrior  of  the  age.

Delighted  with  this  information,  Minu'chihr,
seated  upon  his  throne,  with  Karun  on  one  side
and  Sam  on  the  other,  presented  Zal  with
Arabian  horses,  and  armour,  and  gold,  and  splen-
did garments,  and  appointed  Sam  to  the  govern-
ment of  Kabul,  Zabul,  and  Ind.  Zal  accom-
panied his  father  on  his  return ;  and  when  they
arrived  at  Zabulistan,  the  most  renowned  in-
structors in  every  art  and  science  were  collected
together  to  cultivate  and  enrich  his  young  mind.

In  the  meantime  Sam  was  commanded  by  the


THE SHAH NAMEH.  77

king  to  invade  and  subdue  the  Demon  provinces
of  Karugsar  and  Mazinderan ;  and  Zal  was  in
consequence  left  by  his  father  in  charge  of  Za-
bulistan.  The  young  nursling  of  the  Simurgh  is
said  to  have  performed  the  duties  of  sovereignty
with  admirable  wisdom  and  discretion,  during  the
absence  of  his  father.  He  did  not  pass  his  time
in  idle  exercises,  but  with  zealous  delight  in  the
society  of  accomplished  and  learned  men,  for  the
purpose  of  becoming  familiar  with  every  species
of  knowledge  and  acquirement.  The  city  of
Zabul,  however,  as  a  constant  residence,  did  not
entirely  satisfy  him,  and  he  wished  to  see  more  of
the  world ;  he  therefore  visited  several  other
places,  and  proceeded  as  far  as  Kabul,  where  he
pitched  his  tents,  and  remained  for  some  time.


RUDABEH.


The  chief  of  Kabul  was  descended  from  the
family  of  Zoliak.  He  was  named  Mihrab,  and
to  secure  the  safety  of  his  state,  paid  annual  tribute
to  Sam.  Mihrab,  on  the  arrival  of  Zal,  went
out  of  the  city  to  see  him,  and  was  hospitably
entertained  by  the  young  hero,  who  soon  dis-
covered that  he  had  a  daughter  of  wonderful  at-
tractions.


78  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Her  name  Rudabeh  ;  skreened  from  public  view,

Her  countenance  is  brilliant  as  the  sun  ;

From  head  to  foot  her  lovely  form  is  fair

As  polished  ivory. Like  the  spring,  her  cheek

Presents  a  radiant  bloom, — in  stature  tall,

And  o'er  her  silvery  brightness,  richly  flows

Dark  musky  ringlets  clustering  to  her  feet.

She  blushes  like  the  rich  pomegranate  flower ;

Her  eyes  are  soft  and  sweet  as  the  narcissus,

Her  lashes  from  the  raven's  jetty  plume

Have  stolen  their  blackness,  and  her  brows  are  bent

Like  archer's  bow. Ask  ye  to  see  the  moon  ?

Look  at  her  face. Seek  ye  for  musky  fragrance  ?

She  is  all  sweetness. Her  long  fingers  seem

Pencils  of  silver,  and  so  beautiful

Her  presence,  that  she  breathes  of  Heaven  and  love.

Such  was  the  description  of  Rudabeh,  which
inspired  the  heart  of  Zal  with  the  most  violent
affection,  and  imagination  added  to  her  charms.

Mihrab  again  waited  on  Zal,  who  received  him
graciously,  and  asked  him  in  what  manner  he
could  promote  his  wishes.  Mihrab  said  that  he
only  desired  him  to  become  his  guest  at  a  banquet
he  intended  to  invite  him  to ;  but  Zal  thought
proper  to  refuse,  because  he  well  knew,  if  he  ac-
cepted an  invitation  of  the  kind  from  a  relation
of  Zohak,  that  his  father  Sam  and  the  King  of
Persia  would  be  offended.  Mihrab  returned  to
Kabul  disappointed,  and  having  gone  into  his


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  79

harem,  his  wife,  Sindokht,  inquired  after  the
stranger  from  Zabul,  the  white-headed  son  of
Sam.  She  wished  to  know  what  he  was  like,  in
form  and  feature,  and  what  account  he  gave  of  his
sojourn  with  the  Simurgh.  Mihrab  described
him  in  the  warmest  terms  of  admiration — he  was
valiant,  he  said,  accomplished  and  handsome,
with  no  other  defect  than  that  of  white  hair.  And
so  boundless  was  his  praise,  that  Riidabeh,  who
was  present,  drank  every  word  with  avidity,  and
felt  her  own  heart  warmed  into  admiration  and
love.  Full  of  emotion,  she  afterwards  said  private-
ly to  her  attendants  :

"  To  you  alone  the  secret  of  my  heart

I  now  unfold ;  to  you  alone  confess

The  deep  sensations  of  my  captive  soul.

I  love,  I  love  ;  all  day  and  night  of  him

I  think  alone — I  see  him  in  my  dreams —

You  only  know  my  secret — aid  me  now,

And  soothe  the  sorrows  of  my  bursting  heart.1"

The  attendants  were  startled  with  this  confes-
sion and  intreaty,  and  ventured  to  remonstrate
against  so  preposterous  an  attachment.

"  What !  hast  thou  lost  all  sense  of  shame,
All  value  for  thy  honoured  name  !
That  thou,  in  loveliness  supreme,
Of  every  tongue  the  constant  theme,


80  THE SHAH NAM EH.

Should  choose,  and  on  another's  word,
The  nursling  of  a  Mountain  Bird  !
A  being  never  seen  before,
Which  human  mother  never  bore  I
And  can  the  hoary  locks  of  age,
A  youthful  heart  like  thine  engage  ?
Must  thy  enchanting  form  be  prest
To  such  a  dubious  monster's  breast  ?
And  all  thy  beauty's  rich  array,
Thy  peerless  charms  be  thrown  away  ?"

This  violent  remonstrance  was  more  calculated
to  rouse  the  indignation  of  Rudabeh  than  to  induce
her  to  change  her  mind.  It  did  so.  But  she
subdued  her  resentment,  and  again  dwelt  upon  the
ardour  of  her  passion.

"  My  attachment  is  fixed,  my  election  is  made,

And  when  hearts  are  enchained  'tis  in  vain  to  upbraid.

Neither  Kizar  nor  Faghfur  I  wish  to  behold,

Nor  the  monarch  of  Persia  with  jewels  and  gold  ;

All,  all  I  despise,  save  the  choice  of  my  heart,

And  from  his  beloved  jmage  I  never  can  part.

Call  him  aged,  or  young,  'tis  a  fruitless  endeavour

To  uproot  a  desire  I  must  cherish  for  ever ;

Call  him  old,  call  him  young,  who  can  passion  controul  ?

Ever  present,  and  loved,  he  entrances  my  soul.

'Tis  for  him  I  exist — him  I  worship  alone,

And  my  heart  it  must  bleed  till  I  call  him  my  own."


THE SHAH NAMEH.  81

As  soon  as  the  attendants  found  that  Radii beh's
attachment  was  deeply  fixed,  and  not  to  be
removed,  they  changed  their  purpose,  and  be-
came obedient  to  her  wishes,  anxious  to  pursue
any  measure  that  might  bring  Zal  and  their  mis-
tress together.  Rudabeh  was  delighted  with  this
proof  of  their  regard,  and  she  soon  saw  them
commence  upon  their  amorous  undertaking.

It  was  spring  time,  and  the  attendants  repaired
towards  the  halting-place  of  Zal,  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  city.  Their  occupation  seemed
to  be  gathering  roses  along  the  romantic  banks  of
a  pellucid  streamlet,  and  when  they  purposely
strayed  opposite  the  tent  of  Zal,  he  observed
them,  and  asked  his  friends — why  they  presumed
to  gather  roses  in  his  garden.  He  was  told  that
they  were  damsels  sent  by  the  moon  of  Kabul -
istan  from  the  palace  of  Mihrab  to  gather  roses,
and  upon  hearing  this  his  heart  was  touched  with
emotion.  He  rose  up  and  rambled  about  for
amusement,  keeping  the  direction  of  the  river,
followed  by  a  servant  with  a  bow.  He  was  not
far  from  the  damsels,  when  a  bird  sprung  up  from
the  water,  which  he  shot,  upon  the  wing,  with  an
arrow.  The  bird  happened  to  fall  near  the  rose-
gatherers,  and  Zal  ordered  his  servant  to  bring  it
to  him.  The  attendants  of  Rudabeh  lost  not  the
opportunity,  as  he  approached  them,  to  inquire
who  the  archer  was.  "  Know  ye  not,"  answered
the  servant,  "  that  this  is  Nimriiz,  the  son  of


82  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Sam,  and  also  called  Dustan,  the  greatest  war-
rior ever  known."  At  this  the  damsels  smiled,
and  said  that  they  too  belonged  to  a  person  of  dis-
tinction— and  not  of  inferior  worth — to  a  star  in  the
palace  of  Mihrab.  "  We  have  come  from  Kabul
to  the  king  of  Zabulistan,  and  should  Zal  and
Rudabeh  be  of  equal  rank,  her  ruby  lips  may  be-
come acquainted  with  his,  and  their  wished-for
union  be  effected."  When  the  servant  returned,
Zal  was  immediately  informed  of  the  conversa-
tion that  had  taken  place,  and  in  consequence
presents  were  prepared.

They  who  to  gather  roses  came — went  back
With  precious  gems — and  honorary  robes  ;
And  two  bright  finger-rings  were  secretly
Sent  to  the  princess.

Then  did  the  attendants  of  Rudabeh  exult  in
the  success  of  their  artifice,  and  say  that  the  lion
had  come  into  their  toils.  Rudabeh  herself,  how-
ever, had  some  fears  on  the  subject.  She  anxi-
ously sought  to  know  exactly  the  personal
appearance  of  Zal,  and  happily  her  warmest
hopes  were  realized  by  the  description  she  re-
ceived. But  one  difficulty  remained — how  were
they  to  meet  ?  How  was  she  to  see  with  her  own
eyes  the  man  whom  her  fancy  had  depicted  in
such  glowing  colours  ?  Her  attendants,  suffi-
ciently expert  at  intrigue,  soon  contrived  the


THE SI1A11 NAMK1I.  83

means  of  gratifying  her  desires.  There  was  a
beautiful  rural  retreat  in  a  sequestered  situation,
the  apartments  of  which  were  adorned  with
pictures  of  great  men,  and  ornamented  in  the
most  splendid  manner.  To  this  favourite  place
Rudabeh  retired,  and  most  magnificently  dressed,
awaited  the  coming  of  Zal,  whom  her  attendants
had  previously  invited  to  repair  thither  as  soon  as
the  sun  had  gone  down.  The  shadows  of  evening
were  falling  as  he  approached,  and  the  enamoured
princess  thus  addressed  him  from  her  balcony  : —

"  May  happiness  attend  thee  ever,  thou,
Whose  lucid  features  make  this  gloomy  night
Clear  as  the  day  ;  whose  perfume  scents  the  breeze ;
Thou  who,  regardless  of  fatigue,  hast  come
On  foot  too,  thus  to  see  me — "

Hearing  a  sweet  voice,  he  looked  up,  and  be-
held a  bright  face  in  the  balcony,  and  he  said  to
the  beautiful  vision  :—

"  How  often  have  I  hoped  that  Heaven

Would,  in  some  secret  place,  display
Thy  charms  to  me,  and  thou  hast  given

My  heart  the  wish  of  many  a  day  ;
For  now  thy  gentle  voice  I  hear,

And  now  I  see  thee — speak  again  !
Speak  freely  in  a  willing  ear,

And  every  wish  thou  hast  obtain.11
G 2


84  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Not  a  word  was  lost  upon  Rudabeh,  and  she
soon  accomplished  her  object.  Her  hair  was
so  luxuriant,  and  of  such  a  length,  that  casting  it
loose  it  flowed  down  from  the  balcony  ;  and,  after
fastening  the  upper  part  to  a  ring,  she  requested
Zal  to  take  hold  of  the  other  end  and  mount  up.
He  ardently  kissed  the  musky  tresses,  and  by
them  quickly  ascended.

Then  hand  in  hand  within  the  chambers  they
Gracefully  passed. — Attractive  was  the  scene,
The  walls  embellished  by  the  painter's  skill,
And  every  object  exquisitely  formed,
Sculpture,  and  architectural  ornament,
Fit  for  a  king. Zal  with  amazement  gazed
Upon  what  art  had  done,  but  more  he  gazed
Upon  the  witching  radiance  of  his  love,
Upon  her  tulip  cheeks,  her  musky  locks,
Breathing  the  sweetness  of  a  summer  garden ;
Upon  the  sparkling  brightness  of  her  rings,
Necklace,  and  bracelets,  glittering  on  her  arms.
His  mien  too  was  majestic — on  his  head
He  wore  a  ruby  crown,  and  near  his  breast
Was  seen  a  belted  dagger. Fondly  she
With  side-long  glances  marked  his  noble  aspect.
The  fine  proportions  of  his  graceful  limbs,
His  strength  and  beauty. Her  enamoured  heart
Suffused  her  cheek  with  blushes,  every  glance
Increased  the  ardent  transports  of  her  soul.
So  mild  was  his  demeanour,  he  appeared


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  85

A  gentle  lion  toying  with  his  prey.
Long  they  remained  immersed  in  softest  pleasure,
In  mutual  bliss. At  length  the  warrior  rose,
And  thus  addressed  her : — "  It  becomes  not  us
To  be  forgetful  of  the  path  of  prudence,
Though  love  would  dictate  a  more  ardent  course.
How  oft  has  Sam,  my  father,  counselled  me,
Against  unseeming  thoughts, — improper  deeds, —
Always  to  choose  the  right,  and  shun  the  wrong.
How  will  he  burn  with  anger  when  he  hears
This  new  adventure ;  how  will  Minu'chihr
Indignantly  reproach  me  for  this  dream  !
This  waking  dream  of  rapture  !  but  I  call
High  Heaven  to  witness  what  I  now  declare —
Whoever  may  oppose  my  sacred  vows,
I  still  am  thine,  affianced  thine,  for  ever.""

And  thus  Rudabeh : — "  Thou  hast  won  my  heart,
And  kings  may  sue  in  vain ;  to  thee  devoted,
Thou  art  alone  my  warrior  and  my  love.1'

Thus  they  in  mutual  rapture  passed  the  hours,
Till  dawn  appeared,  and  then  voluptuous  kisses
And  lustrous  eyes  bedimmed  with  pearly  tears,
Bespoke  the  parting  moment. "  O  thou  sun,
The  glory  of  the  world — why  with  thy  beams
Intrusively  divide  two  happy  lovers  T
Thus  they  exclaimed, — then  Zal  with  fond  adieus
Softly  descended  from  the  balcony,
And  hastened  to  his  tent.

In  the  course  of  the  day  he  assembled  together


86  THE SHAH NAMEH.

his  counsellors  and  Mubids  to  obtain  their  advice
on  the  present  extraordinary  occasion,  and  he  re-
presented to  them  the  sacred  importance  of  en-
couraging matrimonial  alliances,  and  the  worldly
necessity  of  offspring.

For  marriage  is  a  contract  sealed  by  Heaven —
How  happy  is  the  Warrior's  lot,  amidst
His  smiling  children  ;  when  he  dies,  his  son
Succeeds  him,  and  enjoys  his  rank  and  name.
And  is  it  not  a  glorious  thing  to  say —
This  is  the  son  of  Z.al,  or  this  of  Sam,
The  heir  of  his  renowned  progenitor  ?

He  then  related  to  them  the  story  of  his  Jove
and  affection  for  the  daughter  of  Mihrab  ;  but  the
Mubids,  well  knowing  that  the  chief  of  Kabul
was  of  the  family  of  Zohak,  the  serpent-king,
did  not  approve  the  union  desired,  which  ex-
cited the  indignation  of  Zal.  They,  however,
recommended  his  writing  a  letter  to  Sam,  who
might,  if  he  thought  proper,  refer  the  matter  to
Minu'chihr,  The  letter  was  accordingly  written
and  dispatched,  and  when  Sam  received  it,  he
immediately  referred  the  question  to  his  astro-
logers, to  know  whether  the  nuptials,  if  solem-
nized between  Zal  and  Rudabeh,  would  be  pros-
perous or  not.  They  foretold  that  the  nuptials
would  be  prosperous,  and  that  the  issue  would  be  a
son  of  wonderful  strength  and  power,  the  conqueror


T1IK SHAH NAM  Ell.  87

of  the  world.  This  announcement  delighted  the
heart  of  the  old  warrior,  and  he  sent  the  messen-
ger back  with  the  assurance  of  his  approbation  of
the  proposed  union,  but  requested  that  the  subject
might  be  kept  concealed  till  he  returned  with  his
army  from  the  expedition  to  Karugsar,  and  was
able  to  consult  with  Minu'chihr.

Zal,  exulting  at  his  success,  communicated  the
glad  tidings  to  Rudabeh  by  their  secret  emissary,
who  had  hitherto  carried  on  successfully  the
amatory  correspondence  between  them.  But  as
she  was  conveying  an  answer  to  this  welcome
news,  and  some  presents  to  Zal,  Sindokht,  the
mother  of  Rudabeh,  detected  her,  and,  examining
the  contents  of  the  packet,  she  found  sufficient
evidence,  she  thought,  of  something  wrong.

"  What  treachery  is  this  ? What  have  we  here  !
Sirbund  and  male  attire  ! Thou,  wretch,  confess  !
Disclose  thy  secret  doings.'1

The  emissary,  however,  betrayed  nothing;  but
declared  that  she  was  a  dealer  in  jewels  and
dresses,  and  had  been  only  shewing  her  mer-
chandize to  Rudabeh.  Sindokht,  in  extreme  agi-
tation of  mind,  hastened  to  her  daughter's  apart-
ment to  ascertain  the  particulars  of  this  affair,
when  Rudabeh  at  once  fearlessly  acknowledged
her  unalterable  affection  for  Zal.


88  THE SHAH NAMEH.

"  I  love  him  so  devotedly,  all  day,
All  night  my  tears  have  flowed  unceasingly  ;
And  one  hair  of  his  head  I  prize  more  dearly
Than  all  the  world  beside ;  for  him  I  live ;
And  we  have  met,  and  we  have  sat  together,
And  pledged  our  mutual  love  with  mutual  joy
And  innocence  of  heart."

Rudabeh  further  informed  her  of  Sam's  consent
to  their  nuptials,  which  in  some  degree  satisfied
the  mother.  But  when  Mihrab  was  made  ac-
quainted with  the  secret  amour,  his  rage  was
unbounded,  for  he  dreaded  the  resentment  of
Sam  and  Minu'chihr  when  the  circumstances
became  fully  known  to  them.  Trembling  with
indignation  he  drew  his  dagger,  and  would  have
instantly  rushed  to  Rudabeh's  chamber  to  destroy
her,  had  not  Sindokht  fallen  at  his  feet  and
restrained  him.  He  insisted,  however,  on  her
being  brought  before  him  ;  and  upon  his  promise
not  to  do  her  any  harm,  Sindokht  complied.
Rudabeh  disdained  to  take  off  her  ornaments  to
appear  as  an  offender  and  a  supplicant,  but,  proud
of  her  choice,  went  into  her  father's  presence,  gaily
adorned  with  jewels,  and  in  splendid  apparel.
Mihrab  received  her  with  surprise.

"  Why  all  this  glittering  finery  ? Is  the  devil
United  to  an  angel  ? When  a  snake
Is  met  with  in  Arabia,  it  is  killed  !"


THE SHAH NAMEH.  89

But  Rudiibeh  answered  not  a  word,  and  was  per-
mitted to  retire  with  her  mother.

When  Minu'chihr  was  apprized  of  the  proceed-
ings between  Zal  and  Rudabeh,  he  was  deeply
concerned,  anticipating  nothing  but  confusion  and
ruin  to  Persia  from  the  united  influence  of  Zal
and  Mihrab.  Feridun  had  purified  the  world  from
the  abominations  of  Zohak,  and  as  Mihrab  was
a  descendant  of  that  merciless  tyrant,  he  feared
that  some  attempt  would  be  made  to  resume  the
enormities  of  former  times ;  Sam  was  therefore
required  to  give  his  advice  on  the  occasion.

The  conqueror  of  Karugsar  and  Mazinderan  was
received  on  his  return  with  cordial  rejoicings,  and
he  charmed  the  king  with  the  story  of  his  tri-
umphant success.  The  monarch  against  whom  he
had  fought  was  descended,  on  the  mother's  side,
from  Zohak,  and  his  Demon  army  was  more  nu-
merous than  ants,  or  clouds  of  locusts,  covering
mountain  and  plain.  Sam  thus  proceeded  in  his
description  of  the  conflict.

"  And  when  he  heard  my  voice,  and  saw  what  deeds
I  had  performed,  approaching  me,  he  threw
His  noose ;  but  downward  bending  I  escaped,
And  with  my  bow  I  showered  upon  his  head
Steel-pointed  arrows,  piercing  through  the  brain ;
Then  did  I  grasp  his  loins,  and  from  his  horse
Cast  him  upon  the  ground,  deprived  of  life.
At  this,  the  demons  terrified  and  pale,


90  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Shrunk  back,  some  flying  to  the  mountain  wilds,
And  others,  taken  on  the  battle-field,
Became  obedient  to  the  Persian  king."

Minu  chihr,  gratified  by  this  result  of  the  ex-
pedition, appointed  Sam  to  a  new  enterprize,
which  was  to  destroy  Kabul  by  fire  and  sword,
especially  the  house  of  Mihrab  ;  and  that  ruler,  of
the  serpent-race,  and  all  his  adherents  were  to  be
put  to  death.  Sam  before  he  took  leave  to  return
to  his  own  government  at  Zabul,  tried  to  dis-
suade him  from  this  violent  exercise  of  revenge,
but  without  making  any  sensible  impression  upon
him.

Meanwhile  the  vindictive  intentions  of  Mi-
nu chihr,  which  were  soon  known  at  Kabul,  pro-
duced the  greatest  alarm  and  consternation  in  the
family  of  Mihrab.  Zal  now  returned  to  his  fa-
ther, and  Sam  sent  a  letter  to  Minu'chihr,  again
to  deprecate  his  wrath,  and  appointed  Zal  the
messenger.  In  this  letter  Sam  enumerates  his
services  at  Karugsar  and  Mazinderan,  and  espe-
cially dwells  upon  the  destruction  of  a  prodigious
dragon.

"  I  am  thy  servant,  and  twice  sixty  years
Have  seen  my  prowess. Mounted  on  my  steed,
Wielding  my  battle-axe,  overthrowing  heroes,
Who  equals  Sam,  the  warrior  ? I  destroyed
The  mighty  monster,  whose  devouring  jaws


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  91

Unpeopled  half  the  land,  and  spread  dismay
From  town  to  town. The  world  was  full  of  horror,
No  bird  was  seen  in  air,  no  beast  of  prey
In  plain  or  forest ;  from  the  stream  he  drew
The  crocodile ;  the  eagle  from  the  sky.
The  country  had  no  habitant  alive,
And  when  I  found  no  human  being  left,
I  cast  away  all  fear,  and  girt  my  loins,
And  in  the  name  of  God  went  boldly  forth,
Armed  for  the  strife. I  saw  him  towering  rise,
Huge  as  a  mountain,  with  his  hideous  hair
Dragging  upon  the  ground  ;  his  long  black  tongue
Shut  up  the  path ;  his  eyes  two  lakes  of  blood  ;
And,  seeing  me,  so  horrible  his  roar,
The  earth  shook  with  affright,  and  from  his  mouth
A  flood  of  poison  issued. Like  a  lion
Forward  I  sprang,  and  in  a  moment  drove
A  diamond  pointed  arrow  through  his  tongue,
Fixing  him  to  the  ground. Another  went
Down  his  deep  throat,  and  dreadfully  he  writhed.
A  third  passed  through  his  middle. Then  I  raised
My  battle-axe,  cow-headed,  and  with  one
Tremendous  blow,  dislodged  his  venemous  brain,
And  deluged  all  around  with  blood  and  poison.
There  lay  the  monster  dead,  and  soon  the  world
Regained  its  peace  and  comfort. Now  I'm  old,
The  vigour  of  my  youth  is  past  and  gone,
And  it  becomes  me  to  resign  my  station,
To  Z  al,  my  gallant  son."


92  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Mihrab  continued  in  such  extreme  agitation,
that  in  his  own  mind  he  saw  no  means  of  avoiding
the  threatened  desolation  of  his  country  but  by
putting  his  wife  and  daughter  to  death.  Sindokht
however  had  a  better  resource,  and  suggested  the
expediency  of  waiting  upon  Sam  herself,  to  in-
duce him  to  forward  her  own  views  and  the  nup-
tials between  Zal  and  Rudabeh.  To  this  Mihrab
assented,  and  she  proceeded,  mounted  on  a  richly
caparisoned  horse,  to  Zabul  with  most  magnificent
presents,  consisting  of  three  hundred  thousand
dinars ;  ten  horses  with  golden,  and  thirty  with
silver,  housings  ;  sixty  richly  attired  damsels,  car-
rying golden  trays  of  jewels  and  musk,  and  cam-
phire,  and  wine,  and  sugar  ;  forty  pieces  of
figured  cloth ;  a  hundred  milch  camels,  and  a
hundred  others  for  burthen;  two  hundred  Indian
swords,  a  golden  crown  and  throne,  and  four  ele-
phants. Sam  was  amazed  and  embarrassed  by
the  arrival  of  this  splendid  array.  If  he  accepted
the  presents,  he  would  incur  the  anger  of  Mi-
nu'chihr  ;  and  if  he  rejected  them,  Zal  would  be
disappointed  and  driven  to  despair.  He  at  length
accepted  them,  and  concurred  in  the  wishes  of
Sindokht  respecting  the  union  of  the  two  lovers.

When  Zal  arrived  at  the  court  of  MiniVchihr,
he  was  received  with  honour,  and  the  letter  of
Sam  being  read,  the  king  was  prevailed  upon  to
consent  to  the  pacific  proposals  that  were  made  in
favour  of  Mihrab,  and  the  nuptials.  He  too  con-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  93

suited  his  astrologers,  and  was  informed  that  the
offspring  of  Zal  and  Rudabeh  would  be  a  hero  of
matchless  strength  and  valour.  Zal,  on  his  re-
turn through  Kabul,  had  an  interview  with  Ru-
dabeh, who  welcomed  him  in  the  most  rapturous
terms  : —

Be  them  for  ever  blest,  for  I  adore  thee,
And  make  the  dust  of  thy  fair  feet  my  pillow.

In  short,  with  the  approbation  of  all  parties  the
marriage  at  length  took  place,  and  was  celebrated
at  the  beautiful  summer-house  where  first  the
lovers  met.  Sam  was  present  at  Kabul  on  the
happy  occasion,  and  soon  afterwards  returned  to
Sistan,  preparatory  to  resuming  his  martial  la-
bours in  Karugsar  and  Mazinderan.

When  Rudabeh  was  advanced  in  her  pregnancy,
she  suffered  extremely  from  constant  indisposition,
and  both  Zal  and  Sindokht  were  in  the  deepest  dis-
tress on  account  of  her  precarious  state.

The  cypress  leaf  was  withering ;  pale  she  lay,
Unsoothed  by  rest  or  sleep,  death  seemed  approaching.

At  last  Zal  recollected  the  feather  of  the  Si-
murgh,  and  followed  the  instructions  which  he
had  received,  by  placing  it  on  the  fire.  In  a  mo-
ment darkness  surrounded  them,  which  was,  how-
ever, immediately  dispersed  by  the  sudden  ap-


94  THE SHAH NAMEH.

pearance  of the Simurgh. "  Why," said  the
Simurgh,  "  do  I  see  all  this  grief  and  sorrow  ?

"  Why  are  the  tear-drops  in  the  warrior's  eyes  ?

A  child  will  soon  appear  of  mighty  power,

Who  will  become  the  wonder  of  the  world,

But  not  in  nature's  course,  unaided,  born  !

The  mother  must  be  drugged  with  soothing  wine,

Till  sense  forsakes  her,  and  she  feels  no  pain ;

Then  must  her  side  be  opened,  and  the  infant

Drawn  through  the  wound. This  being  done,  close  up

The  deep  incision  with  the  nicest  care,

And  take  the  herb,  which  I  shall  give  to  thee,

Prepared  with  milk  and  musk,  and  rub  it  well

Upon  the  severed  flesh,  and  pass  this  feather

Along  the  part,  and  health  will  be  restored."

This  advice  was  implicitly  attended  to,  and  the
result  was  as  foretold.  Rudabeh  endured  no  an-
guish, and  never  was  beheld  so  prodigious  a  child
as  the  Simurgh  thus  brought  forth  into  the  world.
The  father  and  mother  were  equally  amazed.
They  called  the  boy  Rustem.  On  the  first  day
he  looked  a  year  old,  and  he  required  the  milk  of
ten  nurses.  A  likeness  of  him  was  immediately
worked  in  silk,  representing  him  upon  a  horse,
and  armed  like  a  warrior,  which  was  sent  to
Sam,  who  was  then  fighting  in  Mazinderan,  and
it  made  the  old  champion  almost  delirious  with
joy.  At  Kabul  and  Zabul  there  was  nothing  but


THE SHAH NAMEli.  95

feasting  and  rejoicing,  as  soon  as  the  tidings  were
known,  and  thousands  of  dinars  were  given  away
in  charity  to  the  poor.  When  Rustem  was  five
years  of  age,  he  ate  as  much  as  a  man, -and  some
say  that  even  in  his  third  year  he  rode  on  horse-
back. In  his  eighth  year  he  was  as  powerful  as
any  hero  of  the  time.

In  beauty  of  form  and  in  vigour  of  limb,
No  mortal  was  ever  seen  equal  to  him.

Both  Sam  and  Mihrab,  though  far  distant  from
the  scene  of  felicity,  were  equally  anxious  to  pro-
ceed to  Zabulistan  to  behold  their  wonderful
grandson.  Both  set  off,  but  Mihrab  arrived  first
with  great  pomp,  and  a  whole  army  for  his  suite,
and  went  forth  with  Zal  to  meet  Sam,  and  give
him  an  honourable  welcome.  The  boy  Rustem
was  mounted  on  an  elephant,  wearing  a  splendid
crown,  and  wanted  to  join  them,  but  his  father
kindly  prevented  him  undergoing  the  inconvenience
of  alighting.  Zal  and  Mihrab  dismounted  as
soon  as  Sam  was  seen  at  a  distance,  and  per-
formed the  ceremonies  of  an  affectionate  reception.
Sam  was  indeed  amazed  when  he  did  see  the
boy,  and  showered  blessings  on  his  head.

Afterwards  Sam  placed  Mihrab  on  his  right
hand,  and  Zal  on  his  left,  and  Rustem  before
him,  and  began  to  converse  with  his  grandson,
who  thus  manifested  to  him  his  martial  disposition.


96  THE SHAH NAMEH.

"  Thou  art  the  champion  of  the  world,  and  I
The  branch  of  that  fair  tree  of  which  thou  art
The  glorious  root :  to  thee  I  am  devoted,
But  ease  and  leisure  have  no  charms  for  me  ;
Nor  music,  nor  the  songs  of  festive  joy.
Mounted  and  armed,  a  helmet  on  my  brow,
A  javelin  in  my  grasp,  I  long  to  meet
The  foe,  and  cast  his  severed  head  before  thee."

Then  Sam  made  a  royal  feast,  and  every  apart-
ment in  his  palace  was  richly  decorated,  and  re-
sounded with  mirth  and  rejoicing.  Mihrab  was
the  merriest,  and  drank  the  most,  and  in  his  cups
saw  nothing  but  himself,  so  vain  had  he  become
from  the  countenance  he  had  received.  He  kept
saying : —

"  Now  I  feel  no  alarm  about  Sam  or  Zal-zer,

Nor  the  splendour  and  power  of  the  great  Minu'chihr ;

Whilst  aided  by  Rustem,  his  sword,  and  his  mace,

Not  a  cloud  of  misfortune  can  shadow  my  face.

All  the  laws  of  Zohak  I  will  quickly  restore,

And  the  world  shall  be  fragrant  and  blest  as  before.""

This  exultation  plainly  betrayed  the  disposition
of  his  race ;  and  though  Sam  smiled  at  the
extravagance  of  Mihrab,  he  looked  up  towards
Heaven,  and  prayed  that  Rustem  might  not
prove  a  tyrant,  but  be  continually  active  in  doing
good,  and  humble  before  God.


THE SHAH NA.\1£H.  97

Upon  Sam  departing,  on  his  return  to  Karug-
sar  and  Mazindenin,  Zal  went  with  Rustem  to
Sistan, a  province  dependent  on  his  government,
and  settled  him  there. The  white  elephant,  be-
longing to  Minu'chihr,  was  kept  at  Sistan. One
night  Rustem  was  awakened  out  of  his  sleep  by
a  great  noise,  and  cries  of  distress,  when  starting
up  and  inquiring  the  cause, he  was  told  that  the
white  elephant  had  got  loose,  and  was  trampling
and  crushing  the  people  to  death. In  a  moment
he  issued from his apartment, brandishing his
mace  ;  but  was  soon  stopped  by  the  servants,  who
were  anxious  to  expostulate  with  him  against  ven-
turing out  in  the  darkness  of  night  to  encounter  a
ferocious  elephant. Impatient  at  being  thus  in-
terrupted he  knocked  down  one  of  the  watchmen,
who  fell  dead  at  his  feet,  and  the  others  running
away,  he  broke  the  lock  of  the  gate,  and  escaped.
He  immediately  opposed  himself  to  the  enormous
animal,  which  looked  like  a  mountain,  and  kept
roaring  like  the  river  Nil. Regarding  him  with  a
cautious  and  steady  eye,  he  gave  a  loud  shout,  and
fearlessly  struck  him  a  blow, with  such  strength
and  vigour,  that  the  iron  mace  was  bent  almost
double. The elephant  trembled, and  soon  fell
exhausted  and  lifeless  in  the  dust. When  it  was
communicated to Zal that Rustem had killed
the  animal  with  one  blow, he  was  amazed,  and
fervently  returned  thanks  to  heaven. He  called
him  to  him, and  kissed  him, and said : "  My

H


98  THE SHAM NAMEH.

darling  boy,  thou  art  indeed  unequalled  in  valour
and  magnanimity."

Then  it  occurred  to  Zal  that  Rustem,  after  such
an  achievement,  would  be  a  proper  person  to  take
vengeance  on  the  enemies  of  his  grandfather
Nariman,  who  was  sent  by  Feridun  with  a
large  army  against  an  enchanted  fort  situated
upon  the  mountain  Sipund,  and  who  whilst  en-
deavouring to  effect  his  object,  was  killed  by  a
piece  of  rock  thrown  down  from  above  by  the
besieged.  The  fort,  which  was  many  miles  high,
inclosed  beautiful  lawns  of  the  freshest  verdure,
and  delightful  gardens  abounding  with  fruit  and
flowers  :  it  was  also  full  of  treasure.  Sam,  on
hearing  of  the  fate  of  his  father,  was  deeply
afflicted,  and  in  a  short  time  proceeded  against  the
fort  himself :  but  he  was  surrounded  by  a  trackless
desert.  He  knew  not  what  course  to  pursue ;  not
a  being  was  ever  seen  to  enter  or  come  out  of  the
gates,  and,  after  spending  months  and  years  in
fruitless  endeavours,  he  was  compelled  to  retire
from  the  appalling  enter  prize  in  despair.  "  Now,"
said  Zal  to  Rustem,  "  the  time  is  come,  and  the
remedy  is  at  hand;  thou  art  yet  unknown,  and
may  easily  accomplish  our  purpose."  Rustem
agreed  to  the  proposed  adventure,  and  according
to  his  father's  advice,  assumed  the  dress  and
character  of  a  salt-merchant,  prepared  a  caravan
of  camels,  and  secreted  arms  for  himself  and
companions  among  the  loads  of  salt.  Everything


THE SHAH NAMKI1.  99

being  ready  they  set  off,  and  it  was  not  long  before
they  reached  the  fort  on  the  mountain  Sipund.
Salt  being  a  precious  article,  and  much  wanted,
as  soon  as  the  garrison  knew  that  it  was  for  sale,
the  gates  were  opened  ;  and  then  was  Rustem
seen,  together  with  his  warriors,  surrounded  by
men,  women,  and  children,  anxiously  making  their
purchases,  some  giving  clothes  in  exchange,  some
gold,  and  some  silver,  without  fear  or  suspicion.

But  when  the  night  came  on,  and  it  was  dark,
Rustem  impatient  drew  his  warriors  forth,
And  moved  towards  the  mansion  of  the  chief —
But  not  unheard. The  unaccustomed  noise,
Announcing  warlike  menace  and  attack,
Awoke  the  Kotwal,  who  sprung  up  to  meet
The  peril  threatened  by  the  invading  foe.
Rustem  meanwhile  uplifts  his  ponderous  mace,
And  cleaves  his  head,  and  scatters  on  the  ground
The  reeking  brains. And  now  the  garrison
Are  on  the  alert,  all  hastening  to  the  spot
Where  battle  rages ;  midst  the  deepened  gloom
Flash  sparkling  swords,  which  shew  the  crimson  earth
Bright  as  the  ruby.

Rustem  continued  fighting  with  the  people  of  the
fort  all  night,  and,  just  as  morning  dawned,  he  dis-
covered the  chief  and  slew  him.  Those  who
survived,  then  escaped,  and  not  one  of  the  in-
habitants remained  within  the  walls  alive.
Rustem's  next  object  was  to  enter  the  governor's

H  2


100  THE SHAH NAMEH.

mansion.  It  was  built  of  stone,  and  the  gate,
which  was  made  of  iron,  he  burst  open  with  his
battle-axe,  and  advancing  onward,  he  discovered
a  temple,  constructed  with  infinite  skill  and
science,  beyond  the  power  of  mortal  man,  and
which  contained  amazing  wealth,  in  jewels  and
gold.  All  the  warriors  gathered  for  themselves  as
much  treasure  as  they  could  carry  away,  and
more  than  imagination  can  conceive ;  and  Rustem
wrote  to  Zal  to  know  his  further  commands  on
the  subject  of  the  capture.  Zal,  overjoyed  at  the
result  of  the  enterprize,  replied  :

Thou  hast  illumed  the  soul  of  Nariman,
Now  in  the  blissful  bowers  of  Paradise,
By  punishing  his  foes  with  fire  and  sword.

He  then  recommended  him  to  load  all  the  camels
with  as  much  of  the  invaluable  property  as  could
be  removed,  and  bring  it  away,  and  then  burn  and
destroy  the  whole  place,  leaving  not  a  single
vestige ;  and  the  command  having  been  strictly
complied  with,  Rustem  retraced  his  steps  to
Zabulistan.

On  his  return  Zal  pressed  him  to  his  heart,
And  paid  him  public  honours. The  fond  mother
Kissed  and  embraced  her  darling  son,  and  all
Uniting,  showered  their  blessings  on  his  head.


THE SHAH XAMEH.  101


DEATH  OF  MINU'CHIHR.

To  Minu'chihr  we  now  must  turn  again,
And  mark  the  close  of  his  illustrious  reign.

The  king  had  flourished  one  hundred  and
twenty  years,  when  now  the  astrologers  ascer-
tained that  the  period  of  his  departure  from  this
life  was  at  hand.

They  told  him  of  that  day  of  bitterness,

Which  would  obscure  the  splendour  of  his  throne ;

And  said — "  The  time  approaches,  thou  must  go,

Doubtless  to  Heaven, Think  what  thou  hast  to  do  ;

And  be  it  done  before  the  damp  cold  earth

Inshrine  thy  body. Let  not  sudden  death

Overtake  thee,  ere  thou  art  prepared  to  die  F

Warned  by  the  wise,  he  called  his  courtiers  round  him,

And  thus  he  counselled  Nauder : — "  O,  my  son  !

Fix  not  thy  heart  upon  a  regal  crown,

For  this  vain  world  is  fleeting  as  the  wind  ;

The  pain  and  sorrows  of  twice  sixty  years

Have  I  endured,  though  happiness  and  joy

Have  also  been  my  portion. I  have  fought

In  many  a  battle,  vanquished  many  a  foe  ;

By  Feridim's  commands  I  girt  my  loins,

And  his  advice  has  ever  been  my  guide.

I  hurled  just  vengeance  on  the  tyrant-brothers

Selim  and  Tur,  who  slew  the  gentle  Irij  ;


102  THE SHAH NAMEH.

And  cities  have  I  built,  and  made  the  tree
Which  yielded  poison,  teem  with  wholesome  fruit.
And  now  to  thee  the  kingdom  I  resign,
That  kingdom  which  belonged  to  Feridun,
And  thou  wilt  be  the  sovereign  of  the  world  I
But  turn  not  from  the  worship  of  thy  God,
That  sacred  worship  Moses  taught,  the  best
Of  all  the  prophets  ;  turn  not  from  the  path
Of  purest  holiness,  thy  father's  choice.

"  My  son,  events  of  peril  are  before  thee  ;
Thy  enemy  will  come  in  fierce  array,
From  the  wild  mountains  of  Turan,  the  son
Of  Poshung,  the  invader. In  that  hour
Of  danger,  seek  the  aid  of  Sam  and  Zal,
And  that  young  branch  just  blossoming  ;  Turan
Will  then  have  no  safe  buckler  of  defence,
None  to  protect  it  from  their  conquering  arms."

Thus  spoke  the  sire  prophetic  to  his  son,
And  both  were  moved  to  tears. Again  the  king
Resumed  his  warning  voice : "  Nauder,  I  charge  thee
Place  not  thy  trust  upon  a  world  like  this,
Where  nothing  fixed  remains. The  caravan
Goes  to  another  city,  one  to-day,
The  next,  to-morrow,  each  observes  its  turn
And  time  appointed — mine  has  come  at  last,
And  I  must  travel  on  the  destined  road. '

At  the-  period  Minu'chihr  uttered  this  exhor-
tation, he  was  entirely  free  from  indisposition,
but  he  shortly  afterwards  closed  his  eyes  in  death.


THE SHAH N'A.MEH.  103


NAUDER.

Upon  the  demise  of  Minu'chihr,  Nauder  as-
cended the  throne,  and  commenced  his  reign  in
the  most  promising  manner ;  but  before  two  months
had  passed,  he  neglected  the  counsels  of  his
father,  and  betrayed  the  despotic  character  of
his  heart.  To  such  an  extreme  did  he  carry  his
oppression,  that  to  escape  from  his  violence,  the
people  were  induced  to  solicit  other  princes  to
come  and  take  possession  of  the  empire.  The
courtiers  laboured  under  the  greatest  embarrass-
ment, their  monarch  being  solely  occupied  in  ex-
torting money  from  his  subjects,  and  amassing
wealth  for  his  own  coffers.  Nauder  was  not  long
in  perceiving  the  dissatisfaction  that  universally
prevailed,  and,  anticipating,  not  only  an  imme-
diate revolt,  but  an  invading  army,  solicited,  ac-
cording to  his  father's  advice,  the  assistance  of
Sam,  then  at  Mazinderan.  The  complaints  of
the  people,  however,  reached  Sam  before  the
arrival  of  the  messenger,  and  when  he  received
the  letter,  he  was  greatly  distressed  on  account  of
the  extreme  severity  exercised  by  the  new  king.
The  champion,  in  consequence,  proceeded  forth-
with from  Mazinderan  to  Persia,  and  when  he
entered  the  capital,  he  was  joyously  welcomed,
and  at  once  entreated  by  the  people  to  take  the
sovereignty  upon  himself.  It  was  said  of  Nauder :


104  THE SHAH NAMEH.

The  gloom  of  tyranny  has  hid

The  light  his  father's  counsel  gave  ;

The  hope  of  life  is  lost  amid
The  desolation  of  the  grave.

The  world  is  withering  in  his  thrall,

Exhausted  by  his  iron  sway  ;
Do  thou  ascend  the  throne,  and  all

Will  cheerfully  thy  will  obey.

But  Sam  said,  "  No  ;  I  should  then  be  ungrateful
to  Minu'chihr,  a  traitor,  and  deservedly  offensive
in  the  eyes  of  God.  Nauder  is  the  king,  and  I
am  bound  to  do  him  service,  although  he  has
deplorably  departed  from  the  advice  of  his  father."
He  then  soothed  the  alarm  and  irritation  of  the
chiefs,  and  engaging  to  be  a  mediator  upon  the
unhappy  occasion,  brought  them  to  a  more  pacific
tone  of  thinking.  After  this  he  immediately  re-
paired to  Nauder,  who  received  him  with  great
favour  and  kindness.  "  O  king,"  said  he,  "  only
keep  Feridun  in  remembrance,  and  govern  the
empire  in  such  a  manner  that  thy  name  may  be
honoured  by  thy  subjects ;  for,  be  well  assured,
that  he  who  has  a  just  estimate  of  the  world,  will
never  look  upon  it  as  his  place  of  rest.  It  is  but
an  inn,  where  all  travellers  meet  on  their  way  to
eternity,  but  must  not  remain.  The  wise  con-
sider those  who  fix  their  affections  on  this  life,  as
utterly  devoid  of  reason  and  reflection  :


THE SHAH NAMEH.  105

Pleasure,  and  pomp,  and  wealth  may  be  obtained —

And  every  want  luxuriously  supplied  ;

But  suddenly,  without  a  moment's  warning,

Death  comes,  and  hurls  the  monarch  from  his  throne,

His  crown  and  sceptre  scattering  in  the  dust.

He  who  is  satisfied  with  earthly  joys,

Can  never  know  the  blessedness  of  Heaven  ;

His  soul  must  still  be  dark. Why  do  the  good

Suffer  in  this  world,  but  to  be  prepared

For  future  rest  and  happiness  ? The  name

Of  Feridun  is  honoured  among  men,

Whilst  curses  load  the  memory  of  Zohak."

This  intercession  of  Sam  produced  an  entire
change  in  the  government  of  Nauder,  who  pro-
mised, in  future,  to  rule  his  people  according  to
the  principles  of  Husheng,  and  Feridun,  and
Minu'chihr.  The  chiefs  and  captains  of  the  army
were,  in  consequence,  contented,  and  the  king-
dom reunited  itself  under  his  sway.

In  the  mean  time,  however,  the  news  of  the
death  of  Minu'chihr,  together  with  Nauder's  in-
justice and  severity,  and  the  disaffection  of  his
people,  had  reached  Turan,  of  which  country
Poshang,  a  descendent  from  Tur,  was  then  the
sovereign.  Poshang,  who  had  been  unable  to
make  a  single  successful  hostile  movement  during
the  life  of  Minu'chihr,  at  once  conceived  this  to  be
a  fit  opportunity  of  taking  revenge  for  the  blood  of
Selim  and  Tur,  and  every  appearance  seeming  to


106  THE SHAH NAMEH.

be  in  his  favour,  he  called  before  him  his  heroic
son  Afrasiyab,  and  explained  to  him  his  purpose
and  views.  It  was  not  difficult  to  inspire  the
youthful  mind  of  Afrasiyab  with  the  sentiments  he
himself  cherished,  and  a  large  army  was  imme-
diately collected  to  take  the  field  against  Nauder.
Poshang  was  proud  of  the  chivalrous  spirit  and
promptitude  displayed  by  his  son,  who  is  said  to
have  been  as  strong  as  a  lion,  or  an  elephant,  and
whose  shadow  extended  miles.  His  tongue  was
like  a  bright  sword,  and  his  heart  as  bounteous  as
the  ocean,  and  his  hands  like  the  clouds  when  rain
falls  to  gladden  the  thirsty  earth.  Aghriras,  the
brother  of  Afrasiyab,  however,  was  not  so  pre-
cipitate. He  cautioned  his  father  to  be  prudent,
for  though  Persia  could  no  longer  boast  of  the
presence  of  Minu'chihr,  still  the  great  warrior
Sam,  and  Karun,  and  Garshasp,  were  living,  and
Poshang  had  only  to  look  at  the  result  of  the  wars
in  which  Selim  and  Tur  were  involved,  to  be  con-
vinced that  the  existing  conjuncture  required
mature  deliberation.  "  It  would  be  better,"  said
he,  "  not  to  begin  the  contest  at  all,  than  to
bring  ruin  and  desolation  on  our  own  country."
Poshang,  on  the  contrary,  thought  the  time  pecu-
liarly fit  and  inviting,  and  contended  that,  as
Minu'chihr  took  vengeance  for  the  blood  of  his
grandson,  so  ought  Afrasiyab  to  take  vengeance  for
his.  "  The  grandson,"  he  said,  "who refuses  to
do  this  act  of  justice,  is  unworthy  of  his  family.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  107

There  is  nothing  to  apprehend  from  the  efforts  of
Nauder,  who  is  an  inexperienced  youth,  nor  from
the  valour  of  his  warriors.  Afrasiyab  is  brave  and
powerful  in  war,  and  thou  must  accompany  him
and  share  the  glory."  After  this  no  further  obser-
vation was  offered,  and  the  martial  preparations
were  completed.


AFRASIYAB  MAHCHES  AGAINST  NAUDER.


The  brazen  drums  on  the  elephants  were
sounded  as  the  signal  of  departure,  and  the  army
proceeded  rapidly  to  its  destination,  overshadowing
the  earth  in  its  progress.  Afrasiyab  had  penetrated
as  far  as  the  Jihun  before  Nauder  was  aware  of
his  approach.  Upon  receiving  this  intelligence  of
the  activity  of  the  enemy,  the  warriors  of  the
Persian  army  immediately  moved  in  that  direction,
and  on  their  arrival  at  Dehstan,  prepared  for  battle.
Afrasiyab  despatched  thirty  thousand  of  his  troops
under  the  command  of  Shimasas  and  Khazervan
to  Zabulistan,  to  act  against  Zal,  having  heard
on  his  march  of  the  death  of  the  illustrious  Sam,
and  advanced  himself  upon  Dehstan  with  four
hundred  thousand  soldiers,  covering  the  ground
like  swarms  of  ants  and  locusts.  He  soon  dis-
covered that  Nauder's  forces  did  not  exceed  one


08  THE SHAH NAMEH.

hundred  and  forty  thousand  men,  and  wrote  to
Poshang,  his  father,  in  high  spirits,  especially  on
account  of  not  having  to  contend  against  Sam,
the  warrior,  and  informed  him  that  he  had  de-
tached Shimasas  against  Zabulistan.  When  the
armies  had  approached  to  within  two  leagues  of
each  other,  Barman,  one  of  the  Turanian  chiefs,
offered  to  challenge  any  one  of  the  enemy  to
single  combat :  but  Aghriras  objected  to  it,  not
wishing  that  so  valuable  a  hero  should  run  the
hazard  of  discomfiture.  At  this  Afrasiyab  was
very  indignant,  and  directed  Barman  to  follow  the
bent  of  his  own  inclinations.

"  'Tis  not  for  us  to  shrink  from  Persian  foe,
Put  on  thy  armour,  and  prepare  thy  bow."

Accordingly  the  challenge  was  given.  Karun
looked  round,  and  the  only  person  who  answered
the  call  was  the  aged  Kobad,  his  brother.  Karun
and  Kobad  were  both  sons  of  Gaveh,  the  black-
smith, and  both  leaders  in  the  Persian  army.  No
persuasion  could  restrain  Kobad  from  the  unequal
conflict.  He  resisted  all  the  intreaties  of  Karun,
who  said  to  him —

"  O,  should  thy  hoary  locks  be  stained  with  blood,
Thy  legions  will  be  overwhelmed  with  grief,
And,  in  despair,  decline  the  coming  battle.""
But  what  was  the  reply  of  brave  Kobad  ?
"  Brother,  this  body,  this  frail  tenement,
Belongs  to  death. No  living  man  has  ever


THE SHAH NAMEII.  109

Gone  up  to  Heaven — for  all  are  doomed  to  die. —
Some  by  the  sword,  the  dagger,  or  the  spear,
And  some,  devoured  by  roaring  beasts  of  prey  ;
Some  peacefully  upon  their  beds,  and  others
Snatched  suddenly  from  life,  endure  the  lot
Ordained  by  the  Creator. If  I  perish,
Does  not  my  brother  live,  my  noble  brother,
To  bury  me  beneath  a  warrior's  tomb,
And  bless  my  memory  ?"

Saying  this,  he  rushed  forward,  and  the  two  war-
riors met  in  desperate  conflict.  The  struggle  lasted
all  day  ;  at  last  Barman  threw  a  stone  at  his  an-
tagonist with  such  force,  that  Kobad  in  receiving
the  blow  fell  lifeless  from  his  horse.  When  Karun
saw  that  his  brother  was  slain,  he  brought  forward
his  whole  army  to  be  revenged  upon  the  enemy
for  the  death  of  Kobad.  Afrasiyab  himself  ad-
vanced to  the  charge,  and  the  encounter  was
dreadful.  The  soldiers  who  fell  among  the  Tu-
ranians could  not  be  numbered,  but  the  Persians
lost  fifty  thousand  men.

Loud  neighed  the  steeds,  and  their  resounding  hoofs
Shook  the  deep  caverns  of  the  earth ;  the  dust
Rose  up  in  clouds  and  hid  the  azure  heavens —
Bright  beamed  the  swords,  and  in  that  carnage  wide,
Blood  flowed  like  water. Night  alone  divided
The  hostile  armies.

When  the  battle  ceased  Karun  fell  back  upon


110  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Dehstan,  and  communicated  his  misfortune  to
Nauder,  who  lamented  the  loss  of  Kobad,  even
more  than  that  of  Sam.  In  the  morning  Karun
again  took  the  field  against  Afrasiyab,  and  the  con-
flict was  again  terrible.  Nauder  boldly  opposed
himself  to  the  enemy,  and  singling  out  Afrasiyab,
the  two  heroes  fought  with  great  bravery  till  night
again  put  an  end  to  the  engagement.  The  Per-
sian army  had  suffered  most,  and  Nauder  retired
to  his  tent  disappointed,  fatigued,  and  sorrowful.
He  then  called  to  mind  the  words  of  Minu'chihr,
and  called  for  his  two  sons,  Tus  and  Gustahem.
With  melancholy  forebodings  he  directed  them  to
return  to  Iran,  with  his  shubistan,  or  domestic
establishment,  and  take  refuge  on  the  mountain
Alberz,  in  the  hope  that  some  one  of  the  race  of
Feridun  might  survive  the  general  ruin  which
seemed  to  be  approaching.

The  armies  rested  two  days.  On  the  third  the
reverberating  noise  of  drums  and  trumpets  an-
nounced the  recommencement  of  the  battle.  On
the  Persian  side  Shahpur  had  been  appointed  in
the  room  of  Kobad,  and  Barman  and  Shiwaz
led  the  right  and  left  of  the  Turanians  under
Afrasiyab.

From  dawn  to  sun-set,  mountain,  plain,  and  stream
Were  hid  from  view  ;  the  earth,  beneath  the  tread
Of  myriads,  groaned ;  and  when  the  javelins  cast
Long  shadows  on  the  plain  at  even  tide,


THE SHAH NAMEII.  Ill

The  Tartar  host  had  won  the  victory  ;

And  many  a  Persian  chief  fell  on  that  day  ; —

Shahpur  himself  was  slain.

When  Nauder  and  Karun  saw  the  unfortunate
result  of  the  battle,  they  again  fell  back  upon
Dehstan,  and  secured  themselves  in  the  fort.
Afrasiyab  in  the  mean  time  dispatched  Karukhan
to  Iran,  through  the  desert,  with  a  body  of  horse-
men, for  the  purpose  of  intercepting  and  capturing
the  shubistan  of  Nauder.  As  soon  as  Karun
heard  of  this  expedition  he  was  all  on  fire,  and
proposed  to  pursue  the  squadron  under  Karukhan,
and  frustrate  at  once  the  object  which  the  enemy
had  in  view ;  and  though  Nauder  was  unfa-
vourable to  this  movement,  Karun,  supported  by
several  of  the  chiefs  and  a  strong  volunteer  force,
set  off  at  midnight,  without  permission,  on  this
important  enterprize.  It  was  not  long  before  they
reached  the  Duz-i-Sup£d,  or  white  fort,  of  which
Gustahem  was  the  governor,  and  falling  in  with
Barman,  who  was  also  pushing  forward  to  Persia,
Karun,  in  revenge  for  his  brother  Kobad,  sought
him  out,  and  dared  him  to  single  combat.  He
threw  his  javelin  with  such  might,  that  his
antagonist  was  driven  furiously  from  his  horse ;
and  then,  dismounting,  he  cut  off  his  head,  and
hung  it  at  his  saddle-bow.  After  this  he  attacked
and  defeated  the  Tartar  troops,  and  continued  his
march  towards  Iran.


112  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Nauder  having  found  that  Karun  had  departed,
he  immediately  followed,  and  Afrasiyab  was  not
long  in  pursuing  him.  The  Turanians  at  length
came  up  with  Nauder,  and  attacked  him  with
great  vigour,  The  unfortunate  king,  unable  to
parry  the  onset,  fell  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,
together  with  upwards  of  one  thousand  of  his
famous  warriors.

Long  fought  they,  Nauder  and  the  Tartar-chief,
And  the  thick  dust  which  rose  from  either  host,
Darkened  the  rolling  Heavens. Afrasiyab
Seized  by  the  girdle-belt  the  Persian  king,
And  furious,  dragged  him  from  his  foaming  horse.
With  him  a  thousand  warriors,  high  in  name,
Were  taken  on  the  field  ; and  every  legion,
Captured  whilst  flying  from  the  victor's  brand.

Such  are  the  freaks  of  Fortune :  friend  and  foe
Alternate  wear  the  crown. The  world  itself
Is  an  ingenious  juggler — every  moment
Playing  some  novel  trick  ;  exalting  one
In  pomp  and  splendour,  crushing  down  another,
As  if  in  sport, — and  death  the  end  of  all !

After  the  achievement  of  this  victory  Afrasiyab
directed  that  Karun  should  be  pursued  and  at-
tacked wherever  he  might  be  found  ;  but  when  he
heard  that  he  had  hurried  on  for  the  protection  of
the  shubistan,  and  had  conquered  and  slain  Bar-
man, he  gnawed  his  hands  with  rage.  The  reign


THE SHAH NAM  EH.


of  Nauder  lasted only  seven  years. After  him
Afrasiyab  was  the  master  of  Persia.


AFRASIYAB.


It  has  already  been  said  that  Shimasas  and
Khazervan  were  sent  by  Afrasiyab  with  thirty  thou-
sand men  against  Kabul  and  Zabul,  and  when  Zal
heard  of  this  movement  he  forthwith  united  with
Mihrab  the  chief  of  Kabul,  and  having  first  col-
lected a  large  army  in  Sistan,  had  a  conflict  with
the  two  Tartar  generals.

Zal  promptly  donned  himself  in  war  attire,

And,  mounted  like  a  hero,  to  the  field

Hastened,  his  soldiers  frowning  on  their  steeds.

Now  Khazervan  grasps  his  huge  battle-axe,

And,  his  broad  shield  extending,  at  one  blow

Shivers  the  mail  of  Zal,  who  calls  aloud

As,  like  a  lion,  to  the  fight  he  springs,

Armed  with  his  father's  mace. Sternly  he  looks,

And  with  the  fury  of  a  dragon,  drives

The  weapon  through  his  adversary's  head,

Staining  the  ground  with  streaks  of  blood,  resembling

The  waving  stripes  upon  a  tiger's  back.

At  this  time  Rustem  was  confined  at  home
with  the  small  pox.  Upon  the  death  of  Khazer-
van, Shimasas  thirsted  to  be  revenged;  but  when


114  THE SHAH NAMEII.

Zal  meeting  him  raised  his  mace,  and  began
to  close,  the  chief  became  alarmed  and  turned
back,  and  all  his  squadrons  followed  his  example.

Fled  Shimasas,  and  all  his  fighting  train,
Like  herds  by  tempests  scattered  o"er  the  plain.

Zal  set  off  in  pursuit,  and  slew  a  great  number
of  the  enemy  ;  but  when  Afrasiyab  was  made  ac-
quainted with  this  defeat,  he  immediately  released
Nauder  from  his  fetters,  and  in  his  rage  instantly
deprived  him  of  life.

He  struck  him  and  so  deadly  was  the  blow,
Breath  left  the  body  in  a  moment's  space.

After  this,  Afrasiyab  turned  his  views  towards
Tus  and  Gustahem  in  the  hope  of  getting  them
into  his  hands  ;  but  as  soon  as  they  received  inti-
mation of  his  object,  the  two  brothers  retired  from
Iran,  and  went  to  Sistan  to  live  under  the  pro-
tection of  Zal.  The  champion  received  them
with  due  respect  and  honour.  Karun  also  went,
with  all  the  warriors  and  people  who  had  been
supported  by  Nauder,  and  co-operated  with  Zal,
who  encouraged  them  with  the  hopes  of  future
success.  Zal,  however,  considered  that  both  Tus
and  Gustahem  were  still  of  a  tender  age — that  a
monarch  of  extraordinary  wisdom  and  energy  was
required  to  oppose  Afrasiyab — that  he  himself  was
not  of  the  blood  of  the  Kafs,  nor  fit  for  the  duties
of  sovereignty,  and,  therefore,  he  turned  his


THE SHAH NAMFH.  115

thoughts  towards  Aghriras,  the  younger  brother  of
Afrasiyab,  distinguished  as  he  was  for  his  valour,
prudence,  and  humanity,  and  to  whom  Poshang,
his  father,  had  given  the  government  of  Ri.
To  him  Zal  sent  an  envoy,  saying,  that  if  he
would  proceed  to  Sistan,  he  should  be  supplied
with  ample  resources  to  place  him  on  the  throne  of
Persia ;  that  by  the  co-operation  of  Zal  and  all
his  warriors  the  conquest  would  be  easy,  and  that
there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  destroying  the  power
of  Afrasiyab.  Aghriras  accepted  the  offer,  and  imme-
diately proceeded  from  his  kingdom  of  Ri  towards
Sistan.  On  his  arrival  at  Babel,  Afrasiyab  heard  of
his  ambitious  plans,  and  lost  no  time  in  assembling
his  army  and  marching  to  arrest  the  progress  of
his  brother.  Aghriras,  unable  to  sustain  a  battle,
had  recourse  to  negociation  and  a  conference,  in
which  Afrasiyab  said  to  him,  "  What  rebellious
conduct  is  this,  of  which  thou  art  guilty  ?  Is  not
the  country  of  Ri  sufficient  for  thee,  that  thou  art
thus  aspiring  to  be  a  great  king?"  Aghriras  replied  :
"Why  reproach  and  insult  me  thus  ?  Art  thou  not
ashamed  to  accuse  another  of  rebellious  conduct?

Shame  might  have  held  thy  tongue ;  reprove  not  me
Tn  bitterness ;  God  did  not  give  thee  power
To  injure  man,  and  surely  not  thy  kin."
Afrasiyab,  enraged  at  this  reproof,
Replied  by  a  foul  deed — he  grasped  his  sword,
And  with  remorseless  fury  slew  his  brother  !
I  2


116  THE SHAH NAMEII.

When  intelligence  of  this  cruel  catastrophe  came
to  ZaTs  ears,  he  exclaimed  :  "  Now  indeed  has  the
empire  of  Afrasiyab  arrived  at  its  crisis  :

Yes,  yes,  the  tyrant's  throne  is  tottering  now,
And  past  is  all  his  glory."

Then  Zal  bound  his  loins  in  hostility  against
Afrasiyab,  and  gathering  together  all  his  warriors,
resolved  upon  taking  revenge  for  the  death  of
Nauder,  and  expelling  the  tyrant  from  Persia.
Neither  Tus  nor  Gustahem  being  yet  capable  of
sustaining  the  cares  and  duties  of  the  throne,  his
anxiety  was  to  obtain  the  assistance  of  some  one
of  the  race  of  Feridun.

These  youths  were  for  imperial  rule  unfit :
A  king  of  royal  lineage  and  worth
The  state  required,  and  none  could  he  remember
Save  Tahmasp^s  son,  descended  from  the  blood
Of  Feridun.


ZAU.


At  the  time  when  Selim  and  Tur  were  killed,
Tahmasp,  the  son  of  Selim,  fled  from  the  country
and  took  refuge  in  an  island,  where  he  died,  and
left  a  son  named  Zau.  Zal  sent  Karun,  the  son


THE .SHAH NAM  EH.  117

of  Giivah,  attended  by  a  proper  escort,  with
overtures  to  Zau,  who  readily  complied,  and  was
under  favourable  circumstances  seated  upon  the
throne :

Speedily,  in  arms,

He  led  his  troops  to  Persia,  fought,  and  won
A  kingdom,  hy  his  power  and  bravery  —
And  happy  was  the  day  when  princely  Zau
Was  placed  upon  that  throne  of  sovereignty  ;
All  breathed  their  prayers  upon  his  future  reign,
And  o'er  his  head  (the  customary  rite)
Showered  gold  and  jewels.

When  he  had  subdued  the  country,  he  turned
his  arms  against  Afrasiyab,  who  in  consequence  of
losing  the  co-operation  of  the  Persians,  and  not
being  in  a  state  to  encounter  a  superior  force,
thought  it  prudent  to  retreat,  and  return  to  his
father.  The  reign  of  Zau  lasted  five  years,  after
which  he  died,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son
Garshasp.


GARSHASP.

Garshasp,  whilst  in  his  minority,  being  unac-
quainted with  the  affairs  of  government,  abided
in  all  things  by  the  judgment  and  counsels  of
Zal.  When  Afrasiyab  arrived  at  Turan,  his  fa-
ther was  in  great  distress  and  anger  on  account  of


118  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

the  inhuman  murder  of  Aghriras;  and  so  exceed-
ingly did  he  grieve,  that  he  would  not  endure  his
presence.

And  when  Afrasiyab  returned,  his  sire,

Poshang,  in  grief,  refused  to  see  his  face.

To  him  the  day  of  happiness  and  joy

Had  heen  obscured  by  the  dark  clouds  of  night ;

And  thus  he  said :  "  Why  didst  thou,  why  didst  thou

In  power  supreme,  without  pretence  of  guilt,

With  thy  own  hand  his  precious  life  destroy  !

Why  hast  thou  shed  thy  innocent  brother's  blood  !

In  this  life  thou  art  nothing  now  to  me ;

Away,  I  must  not  see  thy  face  again.""

Afrasiyab  continued  offensive  and  despicable  in
the  mind  of  his  father  till  he  heard  that  Garshasp
was  unequal  to  rule  over  Persia,  and  then  thinking
he  could  turn  the  warlike  spirit  of  Afrasiyab  to
advantage,  he  forgave  the  crime  of  his  son.  He
forthwith  collected  an  immense  army,  and  sent
him  again  to  effect  the  conquest  of  Iran,  under
the  pretext  of  avenging  the  death  of  Selim  and
Tur.

Afrasiyab  a  mighty  army  raised,
And  passing  plain  and  river,  mountain  high,
And  desert  wild,  filled  all  the  Persiari  realm
With  consternation,  universal  dread.

The  chief  authorities  of  the  country  applied  to


T1IK S II A  II NAMKII.  J  1 1)

Zal as  their  only  remedy  against  the  invasion  of
Afrasiyab.

They  said  to  Zal,  "  How  easy  is  the  task

For  thee  to  grasp  the  world — then,  since  thou  cans't

Afford  us  succour,  yield  the  blessing  now  ;

For,  lo  !  the  King  Afrasiyab  has  come,

In  all  his  power  and  overwhelming  might."

Zal  replied  that  he  had  on  this  occasion  ap-
pointed Rustem  to  command  the  army,  and  to
oppose  the  invasion  of  Afrasiyab.

And  thus  the  warrior  Zal  to  Rustem  spoke —

"  Strong  as  an  elephant  thou  art,  my  son,

Surpassing  thy  companions,  and  I  now

Forewarn  thee  that  a  difficult  emprize,

Hostile  to  ease  or  sleep,  demands  thy  care.

Tis  true,  of  battles  thou  canst  nothing  know,

But  what  am  I  to  do?  This  is  no  time

For  banquetting,  and  yet  thy  lips  still  breathe

The  scent  of  milk,  a  proof  of  infancy  ;

Thy  heart  pants  after  gladness  and  the  sweet

Endearments  of  domestic  life;  can  I

Then  send  thee  to  the  war  to  cope  with  heroes.

Burning  with  wrath  and  vengeance  ?" Rustem  said, —

"  Mistake  me  not,  I  have  no  wish,  not  I,

For  soft  endearments,  nor  domestic  life,

Nor  home-felt  joys. This  chest,  these  nervous  limbs,

Denote  far  other  objects  of  pursuit,

Than  a  luxurious  life  of  ease  and  pleasure."


120  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Zcil  having  taken  great  pains  in  the  instruction
of  Rustern  in  warlike  exercises,  and  the  rules  of
battle,  found  infinite  aptitude  in  the  boy,  and  his
activity  and  skill  seemed  to  be  superior  to  his  own.
He  thanked  God  for  the  comfort  it  gave  him,  and
was  glad.  Then  Rustem  asked  his  father  for  a
suitable  mace ;  and  seeing  the  huge  weapon  which
was  borne  by  the  great  Sam,  he  tooked  it  up,
and  it  answered  his  purpose  exactly.

When  the  young  hero  saw  the  mace  of  Sam
He  smiled  with  pleasure,  and  his  heart  rejoiced ;
And  paying  homage  to  his  father  Zal,
The  champion  of  the  age,  asked  for  a  steed
Of  corresponding  power,  that  he  might  use
That  famous  club  with  added  force  and  vigour.

Zal  shewed  him  all  the  horses  in  his  possession,
and  Rustem  tried  many,  but  found  not  one  of
sufficient  strength  to  suit  him.  At  last  his  eyes
fell  upon  a  mare  followed  by  a  foal  of  great  pro-
mise, beauty,  and  strength.

Seeing  that  foal,  whose  bright  and  glossy  skin
Was  dappled  o'er,  like  blossoms  of  the  rose
Upon  a  saffron  lawn,  Rustem  prepared
His  noose,  and  held  it  ready  in  his  hand.

The  groom  recommended  him  to  secure  the  foal,
as  it  was  the  offspring  of  Abresh,  born  of  a  Diw,


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  121

or  Demon,  and  called  Rakush.  The  dam  had
killed  several  persons  who  attempted  to  seize  her
young  one.

Now  Rustem  flings  the  noose,  and  suddenly
Rakush  secures. Meanwhile  the  furious  mare
Attacks  him,  eager  with  her  pointed  teeth
To  crush  his  brain — but,  stunned  by  his  loud  cry,
She  stops  in  wonder. Then  with  clenched  hand
He  smites  her  on  the  head  and  neck,  and  down
She  tumbles,  struggling  in  the  pangs  of  death.

Rakush,  however,  though  with  the  noose  round
his  neck,  was  not  so  easily  subdued  ;  but  kept
dragging  and  pulling  Rustem,  as  if  by  a  tether,
and  it  was  a  considerable  time  before  the  animal
could  be  reduced  to  subjection.  At  last,  Rustem
thanked  Heaven  that  he  had  obtained  the  very
horse  he  wanted.

"  Now  am  I  with  my  horse  prepared  to  join
The  field  of  warriors  !" Thus  the  hero  said,
And  placed  the  saddle  on  his  charger. Zal
Beheld  him  with  delight, — his  withered  heart
Glowing  with  summer  freshness. Open  then
He  threw  his  treasury, — thoughtless  of  the  past
Or  future — present  joy  absorbing  all
His  faculties,  and  thrilling  every  nerve.

In  a  short  time  Zal  sent  Rustem  with  a  pro-
digious army  against  Afrasiyab,  and  two  days


122  THE  SHAH  NAMEH.

afterwards  set  off  himself  and  joined  his  son.
Afrasiyab  said,  "  The  son  is  but  a  boy,  and  the
father  is  old ;  I  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  recover-
ing the  empire  of  Persia."  These  observations
having  reached  Zal,  he  pondered  deeply,  con-
sidering that  Garshasp  would  not  be  able  to  con-
tend against  Afrasiyab,  and  that  no  other  prince  of
the  race  of  Feridun  was  known  to  be  in  existence.
However,  he  dispatched  people  in  every  quarter
to  gather  information  on  the  subject,  and  at  length
Kai-kobad  was  understood  to  be  residing  in  ob-
scurity on  the  mountain  Alberz,  distinguished  for
his  wisdom  and  valour,  and  his  qualifications  for
the  exercise  of  sovereign  power.  Zal  therefore
recommended  Rustem  to  proceed  to  Alberz,  and
bring  him  from  his  concealment.

Thus  Zal  to  Rustem  spoke,  "  Go  forth,  my  son,
And  speedily  perform  this  pressing  duty,
To  linger  would  be  dangerous. Say  to  him,
'  The  army  is  prepared — the  throne  is  ready,
And  thou  alone,  of  the  Kaianian  race,
Deemed  fit  for  sovereign  rule.' "

Rustem  accordingly  mounted  Rakush,  and
accompanied  by  a  powerful  force,  pursued  his
way  towards  the  mountain  Alberz ;  and  though
the  road  was  infested  by  the  troops  of  Afrasiyab,
he  valiantly  overcame  every  difficulty  that  was
opposed  to  his  progress.  On  reaching  the  vicinity


THE SHAH NAMEH.  123

of  Alberz,  he  observed  a  beautiful  spot  of  ground
studded  with  luxuriant  trees,  and  watered  by
glittering  rills.  There  too,  sitting  upon  a  throne,
placed  in  the  shade  on  the  flowery  margin  of  a
stream,  he  saw  a  young  man,  surrounded  by  a
company  of  friends  and  attendants,  and  engaged
at  a  gorgeous  entertainment.  Rustem,  when  he
came  near,  was  hospitably  invited  to  partake  of
the  feast :  but  this  he  declined,  saying,  that  he
was  on  an  important  mission  to  Alberz,  which
forbade  the  enjoyment  of  any  pleasure  till  his  task
was  accomplished ;  in  short,  that  he  was  in  search
of  Kai-kobad  :  but  upon  being  told  that  he  would
there  receive  intelligence  of  him,  he  alighted  and
approached  the  bank  of  the  stream  where  the
company  was  assembled.  The  young  man  who
was  seated  upon  the  golden  throne  took  hold  of
the  hand  of  Rustem,  and  filling  up  a  goblet
with  wine,  gave  another  to  his  guest,  and  asked
him  at  whose  command  or  suggestion  he  was  in
search  of  Kai-kobad.  Rustem  replied,  that  he
was  sent  by  his  father  Zal,  and  frankly  commu-
nicated to  him  the  special  object  they  had  in
view.  The  young  man,  delighted  with  the  infor-
mation, immediately  discovered  himself,  acknow-
ledged that  he  was  Kai-kobad,  and  then  Rustem
respectfully  hailed  him  as  the  sovereign  of
Persia.

The  banquet  was  resumed  again —
And,  hark,  the  softly  warbled  strain,


124  .THE- SHAH NAMEH.


As  harp  and  flute,  in  union  sweet,
The  voices  of  the  singers  meet.
The  black-eyed  damsels  now  display
Their  art  in  many  an  amorous  lay  ;
And  now  the  song  is  loud  and  clear,
And  speaks  of  Rustem's  welcome  here.
"  This  is  a  day,  a  glorious  day,
That  drives  ungenial  thoughts  away  ;
This  is  a  day  to  make  us  glad,
Since  Rustem  comes  for  Kai-kobad  ;
O,  let  us  pass  our  time  in  glee,
And  talk  of  Jemshid's  majesty,
The  pomp  and  glory  of  his  reign,
And  still  the  sparkling  goblet  drain. —
Come,  Saki,  fill  the  wine-cup  high,
And  let  not  even  its  brim  be  dry  ;
For  wine  alone  has  power  to  part
The  rust  of  sorrow  from  the  heart.
Drink  to  the  king,  in  merry  mood,
Since  fortune  smiles,  and  wine  is  good  ;
And  ever  choose  those  things  divine,
Night,  and  a  mistress,  lights,  and  wine.
The  Heavens  may  oft  our  choice  condemn,
But  be  not  thou  displeased  with  them.
Quaffing  red  wine  is  better  far
Than  shedding  blood  in  strife,  or  war ;
Man  is  but  dust,  and  why  should  he
Become  a  fire  of  enmity  !
Drink  deep,  all  other  cares  resign,
For  what  can  vie  with  ruby  wine  !"


THE SHAH NAMEH.  125

In  this  manner  ran  the  song  of  the  revellers.
After  which,  and  being  rather  merry  with  wine,
Kai-kobad  told  Rustem  of  the  dream  that  had
induced  him  to  descend  from  his  place  of  refuge
on  Alberz,  and  to  prepare  a  banquet  on  the  occa-
sion. He  dreamt  the  night  before  that  two  white
falcons  from  Persia  placed  a  splendid  crown  upon
his  head,  and  this  vision  was  interpreted  by  Rus-
tem as  symbolical  of  his  father  and  himself,  who
at  that  moment  were  engaged  in  investing  him
with  kingly  power.  The  hero  then  solicited  the
young  sovereign  to  hasten  his  departure  for  Persia,
and  preparations  were  made  without  delay.  They
travelled  night  and  day,  and  fell  in  with  several
detachments  of  the  enemy,  which  were  easily
repulsed  by  the  valour  of  Rustem.  The  fiercest
attack  proceeded  from  Kelun,  one  of  Afrasiyab's
warriors,  near  the  confines  of  Persia,  who  in  the
encounter  used  his  spear  with  great  dexterity  and
address.

But  Rustem  with  his  javelin  soon  transfixed
The  Tartar  knight — who  in  the  eyes  of  all
Looked  like  a  spitted  chicken— -down  he  sunk,
And  all  his  soldiers  fled  in  wild  dismay.
Then  Rustem  turned  aside,  and  found  a  spot
Where  verdant  meadows  smiled,  and  streamlets  flowed,
Inviting  weary  travellers  to  rest.
There  they  awhile  remained  -  -and  when  the  sun


126  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Went  down,  and  night  had  darkened  all  the  sky,
The  champion  joyfully  pursued  his  way.
And  brought  the  monarch  to  his  father's  house.
— Seven  days  they  sat  in  council — on  the  eighth
Young  Kai-kobad  was  crowned — and  placed  upon
The  ivory  throne  in  presence  of  his  warriors,
Who  all  besought  him  to  commence  the  war
Against  the  Tartar  prince,  Afrasiyab.


KAI-KOBAD.


Kai-kobad  having  been  raised  to  the  throne
at  a  council  of  the  warriors^  and  advised  to  op-
pose the  progress  of  Afrasiyab,  immediately  assem-
bled his  army.  Mihrab,  the  ruler  of  Kabul,  was
appointed  to  one  wing,  and  Gustahem  to  the
other — the  centre  was  given  to  Karun  and  Kish-
wad,  and  Rustem  was  placed  in  front,  Zal  with
Kai-kobad  remaining  in  the  rear.  The  glorious
standard  of  Gavah  streamed  upon  the  breeze.

On  the  other  side,  Afrasiyab  prepared  for  battle,
assisted  by  his  heroes  Akbas,  Wisah,  Shimasas,
and  Gersiwaz ;  and  so  great  was  the  clamour  and
confusion  which  proceeded  from  both  armies,  that
earth  and  sky  seemed  blended  together.  The
clattering  of  hoofs,  the  shrill  roar  of  trumpets,  the
rattle  of  brazen  drums,  and  the  vivid  glittering  of


THE SHAH NAMEH.  127

spear  and  shield,  produced  indescribable  tumult
and  splendour.

K<irun  was  the  first  in  action,  and  he  brought
many  a  hero  to  the  ground.  He  singled  out
Shimasas  ;  and  after  a  desperate  struggle,  laid
him  breathless  on  the  field.  Rustem,  stimulated
by  these  exploits,  requested  his  father,  Zal,  to
point  out  Afrasiyab,  that  he  might  encounter  him ;
but  Zal  endeavoured  to  dissuade  him  from  so
hopeless  an  effort,  saying,

"  My  son,  be  wise,  and  peril  not  thyself ;
Black  is  his  banner,  and  his  cuirass  black —
His  limbs  are  cased  in  iron— on  his  head
He  wears  an  iron  helm — and  high  before  him
Floats  the  black  ensign  ;  equal  in  his  might
To  ten  strong  men,  he  never  in  one  place
Remains,  but  everywhere  displays  his  power.
The  crocodile  has  in  the  rolling  stream
No  safety  ;  and  a  mountain,  formed  of  steel,
Even  at  the  mention  of  Afrasiyab,
Melts  into  water. Then,  beware  of  him.'"
Rustem  replied  : — "  Be  not  alarmed  for  me —
My  heart,  my  arm,  my  dagger,  are  my  castle,
And  Heaven  befriends  me — let  him  but  appear,
Dragon  or  Demon,  and  the  field  is  mine."

Then  Rustem  valiantly  urged  Rakush  towards
the  Turanian  army,  and  called  out  aloud.  As
soon  as  Afrasiyab  beheld  him,  he  inquired  who  he


128  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

could  be,  and  he  was  told,  "  This  is  Rustem,
the  son  of  Zal.  Seest  thou  not  in  his  hand  the
battle-axe  of  Sam  ?  The  youth  has  come  in
search  of  renown."  When  the  combatants  closed,
they  struggled  for  some  time  together,  and  at
length  Rustem  seized  the  girdle-belt  of  his  an-
tagonist, and  threw  him  from  his  saddle.  He
wished  to  drag  the  captive  as  a  trophy  to  Kai-
kobad,  that  his  first  great  victory  might  be  re-
membered, but  unfortunately  the  belt  gave  way,
and  Afrasiyab  fell  on  the  ground.  Immediately  the
fallen  chief  was  surrounded  and  rescued  by  his
own  warriors,  but  not  before  Rustem  had  snatch-
ed off  his  crown,  and  carried  it  away  with  the
broken  girdle  which  was  left  in  his  hand.  And
now  a  general  engagement  took  place.  Rustem
being  reinforced  by  the  advance  of  the  king,  with
Zal  and  Mihrab  at  his  side, —

Both  armies  seemed  so  closely  waging  war,

Thou  wouldsthave  said,  that  they  were  mixed  together.

The  earth  shook  with  the  tramping  of  the  steeds,

Rattled  the  drums ;  loud  clamours  from  the  troops

Echoed  around,  and  from  the  iron  grasp

Of  warriors,  many  a  life  was  spent  in  air.

With  his  huge  mace,  cow-headed,  Rustem  dyed

The  ground  with  crimson — and  wherever  seen,

Urging  impatiently  his  fiery  horse,

Heads  severed  fell  like  withered  leaves  in  autumn.


THK SIIAII NA.MKII.  129

If,  brandishing  his  sword,  he  struck  the  head,
Horseman  and  steed  were  downward  cleft  in  twain —
And  if  his  side-long  blow  was  on  the  loins,
The  sword  passed  through,  as  easily  as  the  blade
Slices  a  cucumber. The  blood  of  heroes
Deluged  the  plain. On  that  tremendous  day,
With  sword  and  dagger,  battle-axe  and  noose,
He  cut,  and  tore,  and  broke,  and  bound  the  brave,
Slaying  and  making  captive. At  one  swoop
More  than  a  thousand  fell  by  his  own  hand.

Zal  beheld  his  son  with  amazement  and  de-
light. The  Turanians  left  the  fire-worshippers  in
possession  of  the  field,  and  retreated  towards  the
Jehun  with  precipitation,  not  a  sound  of  drum  or
trumpet  denoting  their  track.  After  halting  three
days  in  a  state  of  deep  dejection  and  misery,  they
continued  their  retreat  along  the  banks  of  the
Jihun.  The  Persian  army,  upon  the  flight  of  the
enemy,  fell  back  with  their  prisoners  of  war,  and
Rustem  was  received  by  the  king  with  distin-
guished honour.  When  Afrasiyab  returned  to  his
father,  he  communicated  to  him,  with  a  heavy  heart,
the  misfortunes  of  the  battle,  and  the  power  that
had  been  arrayed  against  him,  dwelling  with
wonder  and  admiration  on  the  stupendous  valour
of  Rustem.

Seeing  my  sable  banner,
He  to  the  fight  came  like  a  crocodile,
K


130  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Thou  wouldst  have  said  his  breath  scorched  up  the

plain;

He  seized  my  girdle  with  such  mighty  force
As  if  he  would  have  torn  my  joints  asunder ;
And  raised  me  from  my  saddle — that  I  seemed
An  insect  in  his  grasp — but  presently
The  golden  girdle  broke,  and  down  I  fell
Ingloriously  upon  the  dusty  ground  ;
But  I  was  rescued  by  my  warrior  train  !
Thou  knowest  my  valour,  how  my  nerves  are  strung,
And  may  conceive  the  wondrous  strength,  which  thus
Sunk  me  to  nothing. Iron  is  his  frame,
And  marvellous  his  power  ; peace,  peace,  alone
Can  save  us  and  our  country  from  destruction.

Poshang,  considering  the  luckless  state  of  affairs,
and  the  loss  of  so  many  valiant  warriors,  thought
it  prudent  to  acquiesce  in  the  wishes  of  Afrasiyab,
and  sue  for  peace.  To  this  end  Wisah  was  in-
trusted with  magnificent  presents,  and  the  over-
tures which  in  substance  ran  thus: — "Minu'chihr
was  revenged  upon  Tur  and  Selim  for  the  death
of  Irij.  Afrasiyab  again  has  revenged  their  death
upon  Nauder,  the  son  of  Minu'chihr,  and  now
Rustem  has  conquered  Afrasiyab.  But  why
should  we  any  longer  keep  the  world  in  confusion
— Why  should  we  not  be  satisfied  with  what  Fe-
ridun,  in  his  wisdom,  decreed  ?  Continue  in  the
empire  which  he  appropriated  to  Irij,  and  let  the
Jih un  be  the  boundary  between  us,  for  are  we


THE SHAH NAMEH.  131

not  connected  by  blood,  and  of  one  family  ?  Let
our  kingdoms  be  gladdened  with  the  blessings  of
peace."

When  these  proposals  of  peace  reached  Kai-
kobad,  the  following  answer  was  returned :

"  Well  dost  thou  know  that  I  was  not  the  first
To  wage  this  war. From  Tur,  thy  ancestor,
The  strife  began. Bethink  thee  how  he  slew
The  gentle  Irij — his  own  brother ;-— how,
In  these,  our  days,  thy  son,  Afrasiyab,
Crossing  the  Jin  (in,  with  a  numerous  force
Invaded  Persia — think  how  Nauder  died  !
Not  in  the  field  of  battle,  like  a  hero,
But  murdered  by  thy  son — who,  ever  cruel
Afterwards  stabbed  his  brother,  young  Aghriras,
So  deeply  mourned  by  thee. Yet  do  I  thirst  not
For  vengeance,  or  for  strife. I  yield,  the  realm
Beyond  the  Jihun — let  that  river  be
The  boundary  between  us ;  but  thy  son,
Afrasiyab,  must  take  his  solemn  oath
Never  to  cross  that  limit,  or  disturb
The  Persian  throne  again  ;  thus  pledged,  I  grant
The  peace  solicited.

The  messenger  without  delay  conveyed  this
welcome  intelligence  to  Poshang,  and  the  Turan-
ian army  was  in  consequence  immediately  with-
drawn within  the  prescribed  line  of  division.
Rustem,  however,  expostulated  with  the  king
K  2


132  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

against  making  peace  at  a  time  the  most  advan-
tageous for  war,  and  especially  when  he  had  just
commenced  his  victorious  career;  but  Kai-kobad
thought  differently,  and  considered  nothing  equal
to  justice  and  tranquillity.  Peace  was  accordingly
concluded,  and  upon  Rustem  and  Zal  he  conferred
the  highest  honours,  and  his  other  warriors  en-
gaged in  the  late  conflict  also  experienced  the
effects  of  his  bounty  and  gratitude  in  an  eminent
degree.

Kai-kobad  then  moved  towards  Persia,  and  es-
tablishing his  throne  at  Istikher,  he  administered
the  affairs  of  his  government  with  admirable  be-
nevolence and  clemency,  and  with  unceasing  so-
licitude for  the  welfare  of  his  subjects.  In  his
eyes  every  one  had  an  equal  claim  to  consideration
and  justice.  The  strong  had  no  power  to  oppress
the  weak.  After  he  had  continued  ten  years  at
Istikher,  building  towns  and  cities,  and  diffusing
improvement  and  happiness  over  the  land,  he  re-
moved his  throne  into  Iran.  His  reign  lasted
one  hundred  years,  which  were  passed  in  the  con-
tinual exercise  of  the  most  princely  virtues,  and
the  most  munificent  liberality.  He  had  four  sons  :
Kai-kaus,  Arish,  Poshin,  and  Aramin  ;  and  when
the  period  of  his  dissolution  drew  nigh,  he  so-
lemnly enjoined  the  eldest,  whom  he  appointed
his  successor,  to  pursue  steadily  the  path  of  in-
tegrity and  justice,  and  to  be  kind  and  merciful


THE SHAH \  AMI.  II.  133

in  the  administration  of the  empire  left  to  his
charge.


KAI-KAUS.

When  Kai-kaus  ascended  the  throne  of  his  fa-
ther, the  whole  world  was  obedient  to  his  will ;
but  he  soon  began  to  deviate  from  the  wise  cus-
toms and  rules  which  had  been  recommended  as
essential  to  his  prosperity  and  happiness.  He
feasted  and  drank  wine  continually  with  his  war-
riors and  chiefs,  so  that  in  the  midst  of  his  luxu-
rious enjoyments  he  looked  upon  himself  as  su-
perior to  every  being  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,
and  thus  astonished  the  people,  high  and  low,  by
his  extravagance  and  pride.

One  day  a  Demon,  disguised  as  a  musician,
waited  upon  the  monarch,  and  playing  sweetly
on  his  harp,  sung  a  song  in  praise  of  Mazinderan.

And  thus  he  warbled  to  the  king —
" Mazinderan  is  the  bower  of  spring,
My  native  home  ;  the  balmy  air
Diffuses  health  and  fragrance  there ;
So  tempered  is  the  genial  glow,
Nor  heat  nor  cold  we  ever  know ;
Tulips  and  hyacinths  abound
On  every  lawn ;  and  all,  around,


134  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Blooms  like  a  garden  in  its  prime,
Fostered  by  that  delicious  clime.
The  bulbul  sits  on  every  spray,
And  pours  his  soft  melodious  lay  ;
Each  rural  spot  its  sweets  discloses,
Each  streamlet  is  the  dew  of  roses  ;
And  damsels,  idols  of  the  heart,
Sustain  a  more  bewitching  part.
And  mark  me,  that  untravelled  man
Who  never  saw  Mazinderan,
And  all  the  charms  its  bowers  possess,
Has  never  tasted  happiness  !"

No  sooner  had  Kai-kaus  heard  this  description
of  the  country  of  Mazinderan  than  he  determined
to  lead  an  army  thither,  declaring  to  his  warriors
that  the  splendour  and  glory  of  his  reign  should
exceed  that  of  either Jemshid, Zohak, or  Kai-
kobad. The  warriors  however  were  alarmed  at
this  precipitate  resolution,  thinking  it  certain  de-
struction to  make  war  against  the  Demons  ;  but
they  had  not  courage  or  confidence  enough  to  dis-
close their  real  sentiments. They  only  ventured
to  suggest,  that  if  his  majesty  reflected  a  little
on  the  subject,  he  might  not  ultimately  consider
the enterprize so  advisable as  he  had at first
imagined. But  this  produced  no  impression,  and
they  then deemed it  expedient to despatch a
messenger to Zal, to  inform him of the wild
notions  which the Evil One  had  put  into  the


THE SI1AI1 NAMKII.  135

head  of  Kai-kaus  to  effect  his  ruin,  imploring
Zal  to  allow  of  no  delay,  otherwise  the  eminent
services  so  lately  performed  by  him  and  Rustem
for  the  state  would  be  rendered  utterly  useless
and  vain.  Upon  this  summons,  Zal  immediately
set  off  from  Sistan  to  Iran ;  and  having  arrived
at  the  royal  court,  and  been  received  with  cus-
tomary respect  and  consideration,  he  endeavoured
to  dissuade  the  king  from  the  contemplated  expe-
dition into  Mazinderan.

"  O,  could  I  wash  the  darkness  from  thy  mind,
And  show  thee  all  the  perils  that  surround
This  undertaking  ! Jemshid,  high  in  power,
Whose  diadem  was  brilliant  as  the  sun,
Who  ruled  the  demons — never  in  his  pride
Dreamt  of  the  conquest  of  Mazinderan !
Remember  Feridun,  he  overthrew
Zohak — destroyed  the  tyrant,  but  he  never
Thought  of  the  conquest  of  Mazinderan  !
This  strange  ambition  never  fired  the  souls
Of  by-gone  monarchs — mighty  Minu'chihr,
Always  victorious,  boundless  in  his  wealth,
Nor  Zau,  nor  Nauder,  nor  even  Kai-kobad,
With  all  their  pomp,  and  all  their  grandeur,  ever
Dreamt  of  the  conquest  of  Mazinderan  !
It  is  the  place  of  demon-sorcerers,
And  all  enchanted. Swords  are  useless  there,
Nor  bribery  nor  wisdom  can  obtain


136  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Possession  of  that  charm-defended  land,
Then  throw  not  men  and  treasure  to  the  winds  ;
Waste  not  the  precious  blood  of  warriors  brave,
In  trying  to  subdue  Mazinderan  !"

Kai-kaus,  however,  was  not  to  be  diverted
from  his  purpose ;  and  with  respect  to  what  his
predecessors  had  not  done,  he  considered  himself
superior  in  might  and  influence  to  either  Feridun,
Jemshid,  Minuchihr,  or  Kai-kobad,  who  had
never  aspired  to  the  conquest  of  Mazinderan.  He
further  observed,  that  he  had  a  bolder  heart,  a
larger  army,  and  a  fuller  treasury  than  any  of
them,  and  the  whole  world  was  under  his  sway.

And  what  are  all  these  Demon-charms,
That  they  excite  such  dread  alarms  ?
What  is  a  Demon-host  to  me,
Their  magic  spells  and  sorcery  ?
One  effort,  and  the  field  is  won ;
Then  why  should  I  the  battle  shun  ?
Be  thou  and  Rustem  (whilst  afar
I  wage  the  soul-appalling  war),
The  guardians  of  the  kingdom ;  Heaven
To  me  hath  its  protection  given  ;
And,  when  I  reach  the  Demon's  fort,
Their  severed  heads  shall  be  my  sport !

When  Zal  became  convinced  of  the  unalterable
resolution  of  Kai-kdiis,  he  ceased  to  oppose  his


THK S  11 A II NAM  EH.  137

views,  and  expressed  his  readiness  to  comply  with
whatever  commands  he  might  receive  for  the  safety
of  the  state.

May  all  thy  actions  prosper — mayst  thou  never

Have  cause  to  recollect  my  warning  voice,

With  sorrow  or  repentance. Heaven  protect  thee  !

Zal  then  took  leave  of  the  king  and  his  warrior
friends,  and  returned  to  Sistan,  not  without  me-
lancholy forebodings  respecting  the  issue  of  the
war  against  Mazinderan.

As  soon  as  morning  dawned,  the  army  was  put
in  motion.  The  charge  of  the  empire,  and  the
keys  of  the  treasury  and  jewel-chamber  were  left
in  the  hands  of  Milad,  with  injunctions,  how-
ever, not  to  draw  a  sword  against  any  enemy  that
might  spring  up,  without  the  consent  and  assis-
tance of  Zal  and  Rustem.  When  the  army  had
arrived  within  the  limits  of  Mazinderan,  Kai-
kaus  ordered  Giw  to  select  two  thousand  of  the
bravest  men,  the  boldest  wielders  of  the  battle-
axe,  and  proceed  rapidly  towards  the  city.  In
his  progress,  according  to  the  king's  instructions,
he  burnt  and  destroyed  every  thing  of  value,
mercilessly  slaying  man,  woman,  and  child.  For
the  king  said :

Kill  all  before  thee,  whether  young  or  old,
And  turn  their  day  to  night ;  thus  free  the  world
From  the  magician's  art.


138  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Proceeding  in  his  career  of  desolation  and  ruin.
Giw  came  near  to  the  city,  and  found  it  arrayed
in  all  the  splendour  of  heaven  ;  every  street  was
crowded  with  beautiful  women,  richly  adorned,
and  young  damsels  with  faces  as  bright  as  the
moon.  The  treasure-chamber  was  full  of  gold  and
jewels,  and  the  country  abounded  with  cattle.
Information  of  this  discovery  was  immediately
sent  to  Kai-kaus,  who  was  delighted  to  find  that
Mazinderan  was  truly  a  blessed  region,  the  very
garden  of  beauty,  where  the  cheeks  of  the  women
seemed  to  be  tinted  with  the  hue  of  the  pome-
granate flower,  by  the  gate-keeper  of  Paradise.

This  invasion  filled  the  heart  of  the  king  of
Mazinderan  with  grief  and  alarm,  and  his  first
care  was  to  call  the  gigantic  White  Demon  to  his
aid.  Meanwhile  Kai-kaus,  full  of  the  wildest
anticipations  of  victory,  was  encamped  on  the
plain  near  the  city  in  splendid  state,  and  pre-
paring to  commence  the  final  overthrow  of  the
enemy  on  the  following  day.  In  the  night,  how-
ever, a  cloud  came,  and  deep  darkness  like  pitch
overspread  the  earth,  and  tremendous  hail-stones
poured  down  upon  the  Persian  host,  throwing  them
into  the  greatest  confusion.  Thousands  were  de-
stroyed, others  fled,  and  were  scattered  abroad  in
the  gloom.  The  morning  dawned,  but  it  brought
no  light  to  the  eyes  of  Kai-kaus ;  and  amidst  the
horrors  he  experienced,  his  treasury  was  captured,


THE SHAH XA.ME1I.  139

and  the  soldiers  of  his  army  either  killed  or  made
prisoners  of  war.  Then  did  he  bitterly  lament
that  he  had  not  followed  the  wise  counsel  of  Ziil.
Seven  days  he  was  involved  in  this  dreadful  afflic-
tion, and  on  the  eighth  day  he  heard  the  roar  of
the  White  Demon,  saying  :

"  O  king,  thou  art  the  willow-tree,  all  barren,
With  neither  fruit,  nor  flower. What  could  induce
The  dream  of  conquering  Mazinderan  ?
Hadst  thou  no  friend  to  warn  thee  of  thy  folly  ?
Hadst  thou  not  heard  of  the  White  Demon's  power —
Of  him,  who  from  the  gorgeous  vault  of  Heaven
Can  charm  the  stars  ? From  this  mad  enterprize
Others  have  wisely  shrunk — and  what  hast  thou
Accomplished  by  a  more  ambitious  course  ?
Thy  soldiers  have  slain  many,  dire  destruction
And  spoil  have  been  their  purpose — thy  wild  will
Has  promptly  been  obeyed ;  but  thou  art  now
Without  an  army,  not  one  man  remains
To  lift  a  sword,  or  stand  in  thy  defence  ;
Not  one  to  hear  thy  groans  and  thy  despair.""

There  were  selected  from  the  army  twelve
thousand  of  the  demon-warriors,  to  take  charge  of
and  hold  in  custody  the  Iranian  captives,  all  the
chiefs,  as  well  as  the  soldiers,  being  secured  with
bonds,  and  only  allowed  food  enough  to  keep
them  alive.  Arzang,  one  of  the  demon-leaders,
having  got  possession  of  the  wealth,  the  crown


140  THE SHAM NAMEH.

and  jewels,  belonging  to  Kai-kaus,  was  appointed
to  escort  the  captive  king  and  his  troops,  all  of
whom  were  deprived  of  sight,  to  the  city  of
Mazinderan,  where  they  were  delivered  into  the
hands  of  the  monarch  of  that  country.  He  then
returned ;  and  the  White  Demon,  after  thus  putting
an  end  to  hostilities,  returned  to  his  own  abode.

Kai-kaus,  strictly  guarded  as  he  was,  found  an
opportunity  of  sending  an  account  of  his  blind  and
helpless  condition  to  Zal,  in  which  he  lamented
that  he  had  not  followed  his  advice,  and  urgently
requested  him,  if  he  was  not  himself  in  confine-
ment, to  come  to  his  assistance,  and  release  him
from  captivity.  When  Zal  heard  the  melancholy
story,  he  gnawed  the  very  skin  of  his  body  with
vexation,  and  turning  to  Rustem,  conferred  with
him  in  private.

"  The  sword  must  be  unsheathed,  since  Kai-kaus
Is  bound  a  captive  in  the  dragon's  den,
And  Rakush  must  be  saddled  for  the  field,
And  thou  must  bear  the  weight  of  this  emprize ;
For  I  have  lived  two  centuries,  and  old  age
Unfits  me  for  the  heavy  toils  of  war.
ShouloVst  thou  release  the  king,  thy  name  will  be
Exalted  o'er  the  earth. — Then  don  thy  mail,
And  gain  immortal  honour.'1

Rustem  replied  that  it  was  a  long  journey  to
Mazinderan,  and  that  the  king  had  been  six


THE SHAH NAM EH.  141

months  on  the  road.  Upon  this  Zal  observed  that
there  were  two  roads — the  most  tedious  one  was
that  which  Kai-kaus  had  taken  ;  but  by  the  other,
which  was  full  of  dangers  and  difficulty,  and  lions,
and  demons,  and  sorcery,  he  might  reach  Mazin-
deran  in  seven  days,  if  he  reached  it  at  all.

On  hearing  these  words  Rustem  assented,  and
chose  the  short  road,  observing  :

"  Although  it  is  not  wise,  they  say,
With  willing  feet  to  track  the  way
To  hell ;  though  only  men  who've  lost
All  love  of  life,  hy  misery  crossed,
Would  rush  into  the  tyger's  lair,
And  die,  poor  reckless  victims,  there  ;
I  gird  my  loins,  whatever  may  be,
And  trust  in  God  for  victory.""

On  the  following  day,  resigning  himself  to  the
protection  of  Heaven,  he  put  on  his  war  attire,  and
with  his  favourite  horse,  Rakush,  properly  capa-
risoned, stood  prepared  for  the  journey.  His
mother,  Rudaba,  took  leave  of  him  with  great
sorrow  ;  and  the  young  hero  departed  from  Sistan,
consoling  himself  and  his  friends,  thus  :

"  O'er  him  who  seeks  the  battle-field,

Nobly  his  prisoned  king  to  free,
Heaven  will  extend  its  saving  shield,

And  crown  his  arms  with  victory.*"


142  THE SHAH NAMEH.


THE HEFT-KHAN; OR, SEVEN LABOURS OF
RUSTEM.

FIRST  STAGE. — He  rapidly  pursued  his  way,
performing  two  days'  journey  in  one,  and  soon
came  to  a  forest  full  of  wild  asses.  Oppressed  with
hunger,  he  succeeded  in  securing  one  of  them,
which  he  roasted  over  a  fire,  lighted  by  sparks
produced  by  striking  the  point  of  his  spear,  and
kept  in  a  blaze  with  dried  grass  and  branches  of
trees.  After  regaling  himself,  and  satisfying  his
hunger,  he  loosened  the  bridle  of  Rakush,  and
allowed  him  to  graze ;  and  choosing  a  safe  place
for  repose  during  the  night,  and  taking  care  to
have  his  sword  under  his  head,  he  went  to  sleep
among  the  reeds  of  that  wilderness.  In  a  short
space  a  fierce  lion  appeared,  and  attacked  Rakush
with  great  violence ;  but  Rakush  very  speedily
with  his  teeth  and  heels  put  an  end  to  his  furious
assailant.  Rustem,  awakened  by  the  confusion,
and  seeing  the  dead  lion  before  him,  said  to  his
favourite  companion  : —

"  Ah  !  Rakush,  why  so  thoughtless  grown,

To  fight  a  lion  thus  alone ;

For  had  it  been  thy  fate  to  bleed,

And  not  thy  foe,  my  gallant  steed  !

How  could  thy  master  have  conveyed

His  helm,  and  battle-axe,  and  blade,


THE SHAH \AMEH.  143

Kamund,  and  bow,  and  buberyan,

Unaided,  to  Mazinderan  ?

Why  didst  thou  fail  to  give  the  alarm,

And  save  thyself  from  chance  of  harm,

By  neighing  loudly  in  my  ear ;

But  though  thy  bold  heart  knows  no  fear,

From  such  unwise  exploits  refrain,

Nor  try  a  lion's  strength  again."

Saying  this,  Rustem  laid  down  to  sleep,  and  did
not  awake  till  the  morning  dawned.  As  the  sun
rose,  he  remounted  Rakush,  and  proceeded  on  his
journey  towards  Mazinderan.

SECOND  STAGE. — After  travelling  rapidly  for
some  time,  he  entered  a  desert,  in  which  no  water
was  to  be  found,  and  the  sand  was  so  burning
hot,  that  it  seemed  to  be  instinct  with  fire.  Both
horse  and  rider  were  oppressed  with  the  most
maddening  thirst.  Rustem  alighted,  and  vainly
wandered  about  in  search  of  relief,  till  almost
exhausted,  he  put  up  a  prayer  to  Heaven  for  pro-
tection against  the  evils  which  surrounded  him,
engaged  as  he  was  in  an  enterprize  for  the  release
of  Kai-kaus  and  the  Persian  army,  then  in  the
power  of  the  demons.  With  pious  earnestness  he
besought  the  Almighty  to  bless  him  in  the  great
work  ;  and  whilst  in  a  despairing  mood  he  was
lamenting  his  deplorable  condition,  his  tongue  and
throat  being  parched  with  thirst,  his  body  pros-
trate on  the  sand,  under  the  influence  of  a  raging


144  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

sun,  he  saw  a  sheep  pass  by,  which  he  hailed  as
the  harbinger  of  good.  Rising  up  and  grasping
his  sword  in  his  hand,  he  followed  the  animal,
and  came  to  a  fountain  of  water,  where  he  de-
voutly returned  thanks  to  God  for  the  blessing
which  had  preserved  his  existence,  and  prevented
the  wolves  from  feeding  on  his  lifeless  limbs.  Re-
freshed by  the  cool  water,  he  then  looked  out  for
something  to  allay  his  hunger,  and  killing  a  gor,
he  lighted  a  fire  and  roasted  it,  and  regaled  upon
its  savoury  flesh,  which  he  eagerly  tore  from  the
bones.

When  the  period  of  rest  arrived,  Rustem  ad-
dressed Rakush,  and  said  to  him  angrily  :—

"  Beware,  my  steed,  of  future  strife,
Again  thou  must  not  risk  thy  life ;
Encounter  not  with  lion  fell.
Nor  demon  still  more  terrible ;
But  should  an  enemy  appear,
Ring  loud  the  warning  in  my  ear."

After  delivering  these  injunctions,  Rustem  laid
down  to  sleep,  leaving  Rakush  unbridled,  and  at
liberty  to  crop  the  herbage  close  by.

THIRD  STAGE.  —  At  midnight  a  monstrous
dragon- serpent  issued  from  the  forest;  it  was
eighty  yards  in  length,  and  so  fierce,  that  neither
elephant,  nor  demon,  nor  lion,  ever  ventured  to
pass  by  its  lair.  It  came  forth,  and  seeing  the


THE SHAH \AMEH.  145

champion  asleep,  and  a  horse  near  him,  the  latter
was  the  first  object  of  attack.  But  Rakush  re-
tired towards  his  master,  and  neighed  and  beat
the  ground  so  furiously,  that  Rustem  soon  awoke  ;
looking  round  on  every  side,  however,  he  saw
nothing — the  dragon  had  vanished,  and  he  went
to  sleep  again.  Again  the  dragon  burst  out  of
the  thick  darkness,  and  again  Rakush  was  at  the
pillow  of  his  master,  who  rose  up  at  the  alarm :
but  anxiously  trying  to  penetrate  the  dreary  gloom,
he  saw  nothing — all  was  a  blank ;  and  annoyed
at  this  apparently  vexatious  conduct  in  his  horse,
he  spoke  sharply : —

"  Why  thus  again  disturb  my  rest,
When  sleep  had  softly  soothed  my  breast  ?
I  told  thee,  if  thou  chanced  to  see
Another  dangerous  enemy,
To  sound  the  alarm  ;  but  not  to  keep
Depriving  me  of  needful  sleep ;
When  nothing  meets  the  eye  nor  ear,
Nothing  to  cause  a  moment's  fear!
But  if  again  my  rest  is  broke,
On  thee  shall  fall  the  fatal  stroke,
And  I  myself  will  drag  this  load
Of  ponderous  arms  along  the  road  ;
Yes,  I  will  go,  a  lonely  man,
Without  thee,  to  Mazinderan."

Rustem  again  went  to  sleep,  and  Rakush  was
resolved  this  time  not  to  move a  step  from  his

L


146  THE SHAH XA.MEH.

side,  for  his  heart  was  grieved  and  afflicted  by  the
harsh  words  that  had  been  addressed  to  him.  The
dragon  again  appeared,  and  the  faithful  horse
almost  tore  up  the  earth  with  his  heels,  to  rouse
his  sleeping  master.  Rustem  again  awoke,  and
sprang  to  his  feet,  and  was  again  angry ;  but  for-
tunately at  that  moment  sufficient  light  was  pro-
videntially given  for  him  to  see  the  prodigious
cause  of  alarm.

Then  swift  he  drew  his  sword,  and  closed  in  strife
With  that  huge  monster. — Dreadful  was  the  shock
And  perilous  to  Rustem ;  but  when  Rakush
Perceived  the  contest  doubtful,  furiously,
With  his  keen  teeth,  he  bit  and  tore  away
The  dragon's  scaly  hide  ;  whilst  quick  as  thought
The  Champion  severed  off  the  ghastly  head,
And  deluged  all  the  plain  with  horrid  blood.
Amazed  to  see  a  form  so  hideous
Breathless  stretched  out  before  him,  he  returned
Thanks  to  the  Omnipotent  for  his  success,
Saying — "  Upheld  by  thy  protecting  arm,
What  is  a  lion's  strength,  a  demon's  rage,
Or  all  the  horrors  of  the  burning  desert,
With  not  one  drop  to  quench  devouring  thirst  ?
Nothing,  since  power  and  might  proceed  from  Thee.

FOURTH  STAGE. — Rustem  having  resumed  the
saddle,  continued  his  journey  through  an  enchanted
territory,  and  in  the  evening  came  to  a  beau-
tifully green  spot,  refreshed  by  flowing  rivulets,


THE S11AII NAMEH.  147

where  he  found,  to  his  surprize,  a  ready  roasted
deer,  and  some  bread  and  salt. He  alighted,  and
sat  down  near  the enchanted  provisions,  which
vanished  at  the  sound  of  his  voice,  and  presently
a  tambourine  met  his  eyes,  and  a  flask  of  wine.
Taking  up  the  instrument  he  played  upon  it,  and
chaunted  a  ditty  about  his  own  wanderings,  and
the  exploits  which  he  most  loved. He  said  that
he  had  no  pleasure  in  banquets,  but  only  in  the
field  fighting  with  heroes  and  crocodiles  in  war.
The  song  happened  to  reach  the  ears  of  a  sorceress,
who, arrayed  in  all  the  charms  of  beauty,  sud-
denly approached  him,  and  sat  down  by  his  side.
The  champion  put  up  a  prayer  of  gratitude  for  hav-
ing been  supplied  with  food  and  wine,  and  music,
in  the  desert  of  Mazinderan,  and  not  knowing  that
the enchantress was  a demon in disguise, he
placed  in  her  hands  a  cup  of  wine  in  the  name  of
God;  but  at  the  mention  of  the  Creator,  the  en-
chanted form  was  converted  into  a  black  fiend.
Seeing  this, Rustem  threw  his  kamund,  and  se-
cured  the demon ; and, drawing  his  sword,  at
once  cut  the  body  in  two!

FIFTH  STAGE.

From  thence  proceeding  onward,  he  approached
A  region  destitute  of  light,  a  void
Of  utter  darkness. Neither  moon  nor  star
Peep'd  through  the  gloom  ;  no  choice  of  path  remained,
And  therefore,  throwing  loose  the  rein,  he  gave
L  2


148  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Rakush  the  power  to  travel  on,  unguided.
At  length  the  darkness  was  dispersed,  the  earth
Became  a  scene,  joyous  and  light,  and  gay,
Covered  with  waving  corn — there  Rustem  paused,
And  quitting  his  good  steed  among  the  grass,
Laid  himself  gently  down,  and,  wearied,  slept ;
His  shield  beneath  his  head,  his  sword  before  him.

When  the  keeper  of  the  forest  first  saw  the
stranger  and  his  horse,  he  went  to  Rustem,  then
asleep,  and  struck  his  staff  violently  on  the  ground,
and  having  thus  awakened  the  hero,  he  asked  him,
devil  that  he  was,  why  he  had  allowed  his  horse  to
feed  upon  the  green  corn-field.  Angry  at  these
words,  Rustem,  without  uttering  a  syllable,  seized
hold  of  the  keeper  by  the  ears,  and  wrung  them
off.  The  mutilated  wretch,  gathering  up  his  se-
vered ears,  hurried  away,  covered  with  blood,  to
his  master,  Atilad,  and  told  him  of  the  injury  he
had  sustained  from  a  man  like  a  black  demon,
with  a  tiger-skin  cuirass  and  an  iron  helmet;
shewing  at  the  same  time  the  bleeding  witnesses
of  his  sufferings.  Upon  being  informed  of  this
outrageous  proceeding,  Aulad,  burning  with  wrath,
summoned  together  his  fighting  men,  and  hastened
by  the  directions  of  the  keeper  to  the  place  where
Rustem  had  been  found  asleep.  The  champion
received  the  angry  lord  of  the  land,  fully  prepared,
on  horseback,  and  heard  him  demand  his  name,
that  he  might  not  slay  a  worthless  antagonist,  and


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  149

why  he  had  torn  off  the  ears  of  his  forest- keeper  !
Rustem  replied  that  the  very  sound  of  his  name
would  make  him  shudder  with  horror.  Aulad
then  ordered  his  troops  to  attack  Rustem,  and
they  rushed  upon  him  with  great  fury ;  but  their
leader  was  presently  killed  by  the  master-hand,
and  great  numbers  were  also  scattered  lifeless
over  the  plain.  The  survivors  running  away,
Rustem's  next  object  was  to  follow  and  secure,
by  his  kamund,  the  person  of  Aulad,  and  with
admirable  address  and  ingenuity,  he  succeeded  in
dismounting  him  and  taking  him  alive.  He  then
bound  his  hands,  and  said  to  him : —

"  If  thou  wilt  speak  the  truth  unmixed  with  lies,

Unmixed  with  false  prevaricating  words,

And  faithfully  point  out  to  me  the  caves

Of  the  White  Demon  and  his  warrior  chiefs —

And  where  Kaus  is  prisoned — thy  reward

Shall  be  the  kingdom  of  Mazinderan ;

For  I,  myself,  will  place  thee  on  that  throne.

But  if  thou  play'st  me  false — thy  worthless  blood

Shall  answer  for  the  foul  deception."

«  Stay,

Be  not  in  wrath,"  Aulad  at  once  replied, —
"  Thy  wish  shall  be  fulfilled — and  thou  shall  know
Where  king  Kaus  is  prisoned — and,  beside,
Where  the  White  Demon  reigns. Between  two  dark
And  lofty  mountains,  in  two  hundred  caves
Immeasurably  deep,  his  people  dwell.
Twelve  hundred  Demons  keep  the  watch  by  night


150  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Upon  the  mountain's  brow  ; — their  chiefs,  Pulad,
And  Baid,  and  Sinja. Like  a  reed,  the  hills
Tremble  whenever  the  White  Demon  moves.
But  dangerous  is  the  way. A  stony  desert
Lies  full  before  thee,  which  the  nimble  deer
Has  never  passed. Then  a  prodigious  stream
Two  farsangs  wide  obstructs  thy  path,  whose  banks
Are  covered  with  a  host  of  warrior-Demons,
Guarding  the  passage  to  Mazinderan  ;
And  thou  art  but  a  single  man — canst  thou
Overcome  such  fearful  obstacles  as  these  ?

At  this  the  Champion  smiled. "  Shew  but  the  way,
And  thou  shalt  see  what  one  man  can  perform,
With  power  derived  from  God  !  Lead  on, with  speed,
To  royal  Kaiis." With  obedient  haste
Aulad  proceeded,  Rustem  following  fast,
Mounted  on  Rakush. Neither  dismal  night
Nor  joyous  day  they  rested — on  they  went,
Until  at  length  they  reached  the  fatal  field,
Where  Kaus  was  overcome. At  midnight  hour,
Whilst  watching  with  attentive  eye  and  ear,
A  piercing  clamour  echoed  all  around,
And  blazing  fires  were  seen,  and  numerous  lamps
Burnt  bright  on  every  side. Rustem  inquired
What  this  might  be. "  It  is  Mazinderan,"
Aulad  rejoined,  "  and  the  White  Demon's  chiefs
Are  gathered  there. Then  Rustem  to  a  tree
Bound  his  obedient  guide — to  keep  him  safe,
And  to  recruit  his  strength,  laid  down  awhile
And  soundly  slept.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  151

When  morning  dawned,  he  rose,
And  mounting  Rakush,  put  his  helmet  on,
The  tyger-skin  defended  his  broad  chest,
And  sallying  forth,  he  sought  the  Demon  chief,
Arzang,  and  summoned  him  with  such  a  roar
That  stream  and  mountain  shook. Arzang  sprang  up,
Hearing  a  human  voice,  and  from  his  tent
Indignant  issued — him  the  champion  met
And  clutched  his  arms  and  ears,  and  from  his  body
Tore  off  the  gory  head,  and  cast  it  far
Amidst  the  shuddering  Demons,  who  with  fear
Shrunk  back  and  fled,  precipitate,  lest  they
Should  likewise  feel  that  dreadful  punishment.

SIXTH  STAGE. — After  this  achievement  Rus-
tem  returned  to  the  place  where  he  had  left  Aulad,
and  having  released  him,  sat  down  under  the  tree
and  related  what  he  had  done.  He  then  com-
manded his  guide  to  shew  the  way  to  the  place
where  Kai-kaus  was  confined ;  and  when  the
champion  entered  the  city  of  Mazinderan,  the
neighing  of  Rakush  was  so  loud  that  the  sound
distinctly  reached  the  ears  of  the  captive  mo-
narch. Kaus  rejoiced,  and  said  to  his  people :
"  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  Rakush,  and  my  mis-
fortunes are  at  an  end  ;"  but  they  thought  he  was
either  insane  or  telling  them  a  dream.  The  actual
appearance  of  Rustem,  however,  soon  satisfied
them.  Gudarz,  and  Tus,  and  Bahrain,  and  Giw,
and  Gustahem,  were  delighted  to  meet  him,  and


152  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

the  king  embraced  him  with  great  warmth  and
affection,  and  heard  from  him  with  admiration  the
story  of  his  wonderful  progress  and  exploits.  But
Kaus  and  his  warriors,  under  the  influence  and
spells  of  the  Demons,  were  still  blind,  and  he
cautioned  Rustem  particularly  to  conceal  Rakush
from  the  sight  of  the  sorcerers,  for  if  the  White
Demon  should  hear  of  the  slaughter  of  Arzang,
and  the  conqueror  being  at  Mazinderan,  he  would
immediately  assemble  an  overpowering  army  of
Demons,  and  the  consequences  might  be  terrible.

"  But  thou  must  storm  the  cavern  of  the  Demons

And  their  gigantic  chief — great  need  there  is

For  sword  and  battle-axe — and  with  the  aid

Of  Heaven,  these  miscreant  sorcerers  may  fall

Victims  to  thy  avenging  might. The  road

Is  straight  before  thee — reach  the  Seven  Mountains,

And  there  thou  wilt  discern  the  various  groupes

Which  guard  the  awful  passage. Further  on,

Within  a  deep  and  horrible  recess,

Frowns  the  White  Demon — conquer  him — destroy

That  fell  magician,  and  restore  to  sight

Thy  suffering  king,  and  all  his  warrior  train.

The  wise  in  cures  declare,  that  the  warm  blood

From  the  White  Demon's  heart,  dropped  in  the  eye,

Removes  all  blindness — it  is,  then,  my  hope,

Favoured  by  God,  that  thou  wilt  slay  the  fiend,

And  save  us  from  the  misery  we  endure,

The  misery  of  darkness  without  end."


THE SHAil N'A.MEH.  153

Rustem  accordingly,  after  having  warned  his
friends  and  companions  in  arms  to  keep  on  the
alert,  prepared  for  the  enterprize,  and  guided  by
Aulcid,  hurried  on  till  he  came  to  the  Haft-koh,
or  Seven  Mountains.  There  he  found  numerous
companies  of  Demons ;  and  coming  to  one  of  the
caverns,  saw  it  crowded  with  the  same  awful  be-
ings. And  now  consulting  with  Aulad,  he  was
informed  that  the  most  advantageous  time  for  at-
tack would  be  when  the  sun  became  hot,  for  then
all  the  Demons  were  accustomed  to  go  to  sleep,
with  the  exception  of  a  very  small  number  who
were  appointed  to  keep  watch.  He  therefore
waited  till  the  sun  rose  high  in  the  firmament ;
and  as  soon  as  he  had  bound  Aulad  to  a  tree  hand
and  foot,  with  the  thongs  of  his  kamund,  drew  his
sword,  and  rushed  among  the  prostrate  Demons,
dismembering  and  slaying  all  that  fell  in  his  way.
Dreadful  was  the  carnage,  and  those  who  survived
fled  in  the  wildest  terror  from  the  champion's
fury.

SEVENTH  STAGE. — Rustem  now  hastened  for-
ward to  encounter  the  White  Demon.

Advancing  to  the  cavern,  he  looked  down
And  saw  a  gloomy  place,  dismal  as  hell ;
But  not  one  cursed,  impious  sorcerer
Was  visible  in  that  infernal  depth.
Awhile  he  stood — his  falchion  in  his  grasp,
And  rubbed  his  eyes  to  sharpen  his  dim  sight,
And  then  a  mountain-form,  covered  with  hair,


154  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Filling  up  all  the  space,  rose  into  view.

The  monster  was  asleep,  but  presently

The  daring  shouts  of  Rustem  broke  his  rest,

And  brought  him  suddenly  upon  his  feet,

When  seizing  a  huge  mill-stone,  forth  he  came,

And  thus  accosted  the  intruding  chief :

"  Art  thou  so  tired  of  life,  that  reckless  thus

Thou  dost  invade  the  precincts  of  the  Demons  ?

Tell  me  thy  name,  that  I  may  not  destroy

A  nameless  thing  !" The  champion  stern  replied,

"  My  name  is  Rustem — sent  by  Zal,  my  father,

Descended  from  the  champion  Sam  Suwar,

To  be  revenged  on  thee — the  King  of  Persia

Being  now  a  prisoner  in  Mazinderan."

When  the  accursed  Demon  heard  the  name

Of  Sam  Suwar,  he,  like  a  serpent,  writhed

In  agony  of  spirit ;  terrified

At  that  announcement — then,  recovering  strength,

He  forward  sprang,  and  hurled  the  mill- stone  huge

Against  his  adversary,  who  fell  back

And  disappointed  the  prodigious  blow.

Black  frowned  the  Demon,  and  through  Rustem's  heart

A  wild  sensation  ran  of  dire  alarm  ;

But,  rousing  up,  his  courage  was  revived,

And  wielding  furiously  his  beaming  sword,

He  pierced  the  Demon's  thigh,  and  lopped  the  limb  ;

Then  both  together  grappled,  and  the  cavern

Shook  with  the  contest— -each,  at  times,  prevailed ;

The  flesh  of  both  was  torn,  and  streaming  blood

Crimsoned  the  earth. "  If  I  survice  this  day,"


THE SHAH NAMEH.  155

Said  Rustem  in  his  heart,  in  that  dread  strife,

"  My  life  must  be  immortal." The  White  Demon,

With  equal  terror,  muttered  to  himself:

"  I  now  despair  of  life — sweet  life  ;  no  more

Shall  I  be  welcomed  at  Mazinderan."

And  still  they  struggled  hard — still  sweat  and  blood

Poured  down  at  every  strain. Rustem,  at  last,

Gathering  fresh  power,  vouchsafed  by  favouring  Heaven,

And  bringing  all  his  mighty  strength  to  bear,

Raised  up  the  gasping  Demon  in  his  arms,

And  with  such  fury  dashed  him  to  the  ground,

That  life  no  longer  moved  his  monstrous  frame.

Promptly  he  then  tore  out  the  reeking  heart,

And  crowds  of  demons  simultaneous  fell

As  part  of  him,  and  stained  the  earth  with  gore ;

Others  who  saw  this  signal  overthrow,

Trembled,  and  hurried  from  the  scene  of  blood.

Then  the  great  victor,  issuing  from  that  cave

With  pious  haste — took  off  his  helm,  and  mail,

And  royal  girdle — and  with  water  washed

His  face  and  body — choosing  a  pure  place

For  prayer — to  praise  his  Maker — Him  who  gave

The  victory,  the  eternal  source  of  good  ;

Without  whose  grace  and  blessing,  what  is  man !

With  it  his  armour  is  impregnable.

The  Champion  having  finished  his  prayer,  re-
sumed his  war  habiliments,  and  going  to  Aulad,
released  him  from  the  tree,  and  gave  into  his


156  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

charge  the  heart  of  the  White  Demon.  He  then
pursued  his  journey  back  to  Kaus  at  Mazinderan.
On  the  way  Aukid  solicited  some  reward  for  the
services  he  had  performed,  and  Rustem  again  pro-
mised that  he  should  be  appointed  governor  of  the
country.

"  But  first  the  monarch  of  Mazinderan,
The  Demon-king,  must  be  subdued,  and  cast
Into  the  yawning  cavern — and  his  legions
Of  foul  enchanters,  utterly  destroyed.""

Upon  his  arrival  at  Mazinderan  Rustem  related
to  his  sovereign  all  that  he  had  accomplished,  and
especially  that  he  had  torn  out  and  brought  away
the  White  Demon's  heart,  the  blood  of  which  was
destined  to  restore  Kai-kaus  and  his  warriors  to
sight.  Rustem  was  not  long  in  applying  the  mi-
raculous remedy,  and  the  moment  the  blood  touch-
ed their  eyes,  the  fearful  blindness  was  perfectly
cured.

The  champion  brought  the  Demon's  heart,
And  squeezed  the  blood  from  every  part,
Which,  dropped  upon  the  injured  sight,
Made  all  things  visible  and  bright ;
One  moment  broke  that  magic  gloom,
Which  seemed  more  dreadful  than  the  tomb.

The  monarch  immediately  ascended  his  throne
surrounded  by  all  his  warriors,  and  seven  days


THE SHAH NAMEH.  157

were  spent  in  mutual  congratulations  and  rejoicing.
On  the  eighth  day  they  all  resumed  the  saddle,
and  proceeded  to  complete  the  destruction  of  the
enemy.  They  set  fire  to  the  city,  and  burnt  it  to
the  ground,  and  committed  such  horrid  carnage
among  the  remaining  magicians  that  streams  of
loathsome  blood  crimsoned  all  the  place.

Kaus  afterwards  sent  Ferhad  as  an  ambassador
to  the  king  of  Mazinderan,  suggesting  to  him  the
expediency  of  submission,  and  representing  to
him  the  terrible  fall  of  Arzang,  and  of  the  White
Demon  with  all  his  host,  as  a  warning  against  re-
sistance to  the  valour  of  Rustem.  But  when  the
king  of  Mazinderan  heard  from  Ferhad  the  purpose
of  his  embassy,  he  expressed  great  astonishment,
and  replied  that  he  himself  was  superior  in  all
respects  to  Kaus  ;  that  his  empire  was  more  ex-
tensive, and  his  warriors  more  numerous  and
brave.  "  Have  I  not,"  said  he,  "a  hundred  war-
elephants,  and  Kaus  not  one  ?  Wherever  I  move,
conquest  marks  my  way  ;  why  then  should  I  fear
the  sovereign  of  Persia  ?  Why  should  I  submit  to
him?"

This  haughty  tone  made  a  deep  impression  upon
Ferhad,  who  returning  quickly,  told  Kaus  of  the
proud  bearing  and  fancied  power  of  the  ruler  of
Mazinderan.  Rustem  was  immediately  sent  for  ;
and  so  indignant  was  he  on  hearing  the  tidings,
that  "  every  hair  on  his  body  started  up  like  a


158  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

spear,"  and  he  proposed  to  go  himself  with  a  se-
cond despatch.  The  king  was  too  much  pleased
to  refuse,  and  another  letter  was  written  more
urgent  than  the  first,  threatening  the  enemy  to
hang  up  his  severed  head  on  the  walls  of  his  own
fort,  if  he  persisted  in  his  contumacy  and  scorn  of
the  offer  made.

As  soon  as  Rustem  had  come  within  a  short
distance  of  the  court  of  the  king  of  Mazinderan,
accounts  reached  his  majesty  of  the  approach  of
another  ambassador,  when  a  deputation  of  war-
riors was  sent  to  receive  him.  Rustem  observing
them,  and  being  in  sight  of  the  hostile  army,  with
a  view  to  shew  his  strength,  tore  up  a  large  tree
on  the  road  by  the  roots,  and  dexterously  wielded
it  in  his  hand  like  a  spear.  Tilting  onwards,  he
flung  it  down  before  the  wondering  enemy,  and
one  of  the  chiefs  then  thought  it  incumbent  upon
him  to  display  his  own  prowess.  He  advanced,
and  offered  to  grasp  hands  with  Rustem :  they
met ;  but  the  gripe  of  the  champion  was  so  ex-
cruciating that  the  sinews  of  his  adversary  crack-
ed, and  in  agony  he  fell  from  his  horse.  Intel-
ligence of  this  discomfiture  was  instantly  con-
veyed to  the  king,  who  then  summoned  his  most
valiant  and  renowned  chieftain,  Kalahur,  and  di-
rected him  to  go  and  punish,  signally,  the  warrior
who  had  thus  presumed  to  triumph  over  one  of  his
heroes.  Accordingly  Kalahur  appeared,  and  boast-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  159

ingly  stretched  out  his  hand,  which  Rustein  wrung
with  such  grinding  force,  that  the  very  nails
dropped  off,  and  blood  started  from  his  body.
This  was  enough,  and  Kalahur  hastily  returned  to
the  king,  and  anxiously  recommended  him  to
submit  to  terms,  as  it  would  be  in  vain  to  oppose
such  invincible  strength.  The  king  was  both
grieved  and  angry  at  this  situation  of  affairs,  and
invited  the  ambassador  to  his  presence.  After  in-
quiring respecting  Kaus  and  the  Persian  army,
he  said  :

*

"  And  thou  art  Rustem,  clothed  with  mighty  power,
Who  slaughtered  the  White  Demon,  and  now  comest
To  crush  the  monarch  of  Mazinderan  P
"  No  r  said  the  champion,  "  I  am  but  his  servant,
And  even  unworthy  of  that  noble  station ;
My  master  being  a  warrior,  the  most  valiant
That  ever  graced  the  world  since  time  began.
Nothing  am  I ;  but  what  doth  he  resemble  !
What  is  a  lion,  elephant,  or  demon  !
Engaged  in  fight,  he  is  himself  a  host !"

The  ambassador  then  tried  to  convince  the  king
of  the  folly  of  resistance,  and  of  his  certain  defeat
if  he  continued  to  defy  the  power  of  Kaus  and
the  bravery  of  Rustem  ;  but  the  eifort  was  fruitless,
and  both  states  prepared  for  battle.

The  engagement  which  ensued  was  obstinate
and  sanguinary,  and  after  seven  days  of  hard


160  THE SHAH NAMEH.

fighting,  neither  army  was  victorious,  neither  de-
feated. Afflicted  at  this  want  of  success,  Kaus
grovelled  in  the  dust,  and  prayed  fervently  to  the
Almighty  to  give  him  the  triumph.  He  addressed
all  his  warriors,  one  by  one,  and  urged  them  to
increased  exertions  ;  and  on  the  eighth  day,  when
the  battle  was  renewed,  prodigies  of  valour  were
performed.  Rustem  singled  out,  and  encountered
the  king  of  Mazinderan,  and  fiercely  they  fought
together  with  sword  and  javelin  ;  but  suddenly,
just  as  he  was  rushing  on  with  overwhelming  force,
his  adversary,  by  his  magic  art,  transformed  him-
self into  a  stony  rock.  Rustem  and  the  Persian
warriors  were  all  amazement.  The  fight  had  been
suspended  for  some  time,  when  Kaus  came  for-
ward to  enquire  the  cause ;  and  hearing  with  as-
tonishment of  the  transformation,  ordered  his  sol-
diers to  drag  the  enchanted  mass  towards  his  own
tent ;  but  all  the  strength  that  could  be  applied
was  unequal  to  move  so  great  a  weight,  till  Rus-
tem set  himself  to  the  task,  and  amidst  the  won-
dering army,  lifted  up  the  rock  and  conveyed  it  to
the  appointed  place.  He  then  addressed  the  work
of  sorcery,  and  said  :  "  If  thou  dost  not  resume  thy
original  shape,  I  will  instantly  break  thee,  flinty-
rock  as  thou  now  art,  into  atoms,  and  scatter  thee  in
the  dust."  The  magician-king  was  alarmed  by  this
threat,  and  re-appeared  in  his  own  form,  and  then
Rustem,  seizing  his  hand,  brought  him  to  Kaus,


THE SHAH NAMEII.  161

who,  as  a  punishment  for  his  wickedness  and  atro-
city, ordered  him  to  be  slain,  and  his  body  to  be  cut
into  a  thousand  pieces  !  The  wealth  of  the  country
was  immediately  afterwards  secured ;  and  at  the
recommendation  of  Rustem,  Auldd  was  appointed
governor  of  Mazinderan.  After  the  usual  thanks-
givings and  rejoicings  on  account  of  the  victory,
Kaus  and  his  warriors  returned  to  Persia,  where
splendid  honours  and  rewards  were  bestowed  on
every  soldier  for  his  heroic  services.  Rustem  hav-
ing received  the  highest  acknowledgments  of  his
merit,  took  leave,  and  returned  to  his  father  Zal
at  Zabulistan.

Suddenly  an  ardent  desire  rose  in  the  heart  of
Kaus  to  survey  all  the  provinces  and  states  of  his
empire.  He  wished  to  visit  Turan,  and  Chin,  and
Mikran,  and  Berber,  andZirra.  Having  commenced
his  royal  tour  of  inspection,  he  found  the  king  of
Berberistan  in  a  state  of  rebellion,  with  his  army
prepared  to  dispute  his  authority.  A  severe  battle
was  the  consequence ;  but  the  refractory  sovereign
was  soon  compelled  to  retire,  and  the  elders  of  the
city  came  forward  to  sue  for  mercy  and  protection.
After  this  triumph,  Kaus  turned  towards  the
mountain  Kaf,  and  visited  various  other  coun-
tries, and  in  his  progress  became  the  guest  of
the  son  of  Zal  in  Zabulistan,  where  he  staid  a
month,  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  the  festive  board
and  the  sports  of  the  field.

M


162  THE SHAH NAMEH.

The  disaffection  of  the  king  of  Hamaveran,  in
league  with  the  king  of  Misser  and  Sham,  and  the
still  hostile  king  of  Berberistan,  soon,  however,  drew
him  from  Nimruz,  and  quitting  the  principality  of
Rustem,  his  arms  were  promptly  directed  against
his  new  enemy,  who  in  the  contest  which  ensued,
made  an  obstinate  resistance,  but  was  at  length
overpowered,  and  obliged  to  ask  for  quarter.  After
the  battle,  Kaus  was  informed  that  the  shah  had
a  daughter  of  great  beauty,  named  Sudaveh,  pos-
sessing a  form  as  graceful  as  the  tall  cypress,
musky  ringlets,  and  all  the  charms  of  Heaven.
From  the  description  of  this  damsel  he  became
enamoured,  and  through  the  medium  of  a  mes-
senger, immediately  offered  himself  to  be  her  hus-
band. The  father  did  not  seem  to  be  glad  at  this
proposal,  observing  to  the  messenger,  that  he  had
but  two  things  in  life  valuable  to  him,  and  those
were  his  daughter  and  his  property ;  one  was  his
solace  and  delight,  and  the  other  his  support;  to
be  deprived  of  both  would  be  death  to  him  ;  still
he  could  not  gainsay  the  wishes  of  a  king  of
such  power,  and  his  conqueror.  He  then  sor-
rowfully communicated  the  overture  to  his  child,
who  however  readily  consented  ;  and  in  the  course
of  a  week,  the  bride  was  sent  escorted  by  soldiers,
and  accompanied  by  a  magnificent  cavalcade,
consisting  of  a  thousand  horses  and  mules,  a  thou-
sand camels,  and  numerous  female  attendants.
When  Sudaveh  descended  from  her  litter,  glowing


THE SHAH NAMEH.  163

with  beauty,  with  her  rich  dark  tresses  flowing  to
her  feet,  and  cheeks  like  the  rose,  Kaiis  regarded
her  with  admiration  and  rapture;  and  so  impa-
tient was  he  to  possess  that  lovely  treasure,  that
the  marriage  rites  were  performed  according  to
the  laws  of  the  country  without  delay.

The  shah  of  Hamaveran,  however,  was  not  sa-
tisfied, and  he  continually  plotted  within  himself
how  he  might contrive  to regain possession of
Siidaveh,  as  well  as  be  revenged  upon  the  king.
With  this  view  he  invited  Kaus  to  be  his  guest
for  a  while;  but  Sudaveh  cautioned  the  king  not
to  trust  to  the  treachery  which  dictated  the  invi-
tation,  as  she  apprehended  from  it  nothing  but
mischief  and disaster. The warning, however,
was  of  no  avail,  for  Kaus  accepted  the  proffered
hospitality of his new father-in-law. He ac-
cordingly proceeded  with  his  bride  and  his  most
famous  warriors  to  the  city,  where  he  was  received
and  entertained  in  the  most  sumptuous  manner,
seated  on  a  gorgeous  throne,  and  felt  infinitely
exhilirated  with the  magnificence  and  the  hila-
rity by  which  he  was  surrounded. Seven  days
were  passed  in  this  glorious  banquetting  and  de-
light ;  but  on  the  succeeding  night,  the  sound  of
trumpets  and  the  war-cry  was  heard. The  intru-
sion of  soldiers  changed  the  face  of  the  scene  ;  and
the  king,  who  had  just  been  waited  on,  and  pam-
pered with  such  respect  and  devotion,  was  sud-

M  2


164  THE SHAH NAMEH.

denly  seized,  together  with  his  principal  warriors,
and  carried  off  to  a  remote  fortress,  situated  on  a
high  mountain,  where  they  were  imprisoned,  and
guarded  by  a  thousand  valiant  men.  His  tents
were  plundered,  and  all  his  treasure  taken  away.
At  this  event  his  wife  was  inconsolable  and  deaf
to  all  entreaties  from  her  father,  declaring  that
she  preferred  death  to  separation  from  her  hus-
band ;  upon  which  she  was  conveyed  to  the  same
dungeon,  to  mingle  groans  with  the  captive  king.

Alas !  how  false  and  fickle  is  the  world,
Friendship  nor  pleasure,  nor  the  ties  of  blood,
Can  check  the  headlong  course  of  human  passions  ;
Treachery  still  laughs  at  kindred  ; — who  is  safe
In  this  tumultuous  sphere  of  strife  and  sorrow  !


THE  INVASION  OF  IRAN  BY  AFRASIYAB.

The  intelligence  of  Kaus's  imprisonment  was
very  soon  spread  through  the  world,  and  operated
as  a  signal  to  all  the  inferior  states  to  get  posses-
sion of  Iran.  Afrasiyab  was  the  most  powerful
aspirant  to  the  throne  ;  and  gathering  an  immense
army,  he  hurried  from  Turan,  and  made  a  rapid
incursion  into  the  country,  which  after  three
months  he  succeeded  in  conquering,  scattering
ruin  and  desolation  wherever  he  came.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  165

Some  of  those  who  escaped  from  the  field  bent
their  steps  towards  Zabulistan,  by  whom  Rustem
was  informed  of  the  misfortunes  in  which  Kaiis
was  involved  ;  it  therefore  became  necessary  that
he  should  again  endeavour  to  effect  the  liberation
of  his  sovereign  ;  and  accordingly,  after  assem-
bling his  troops  from  different  quarters,  the  first
thing  he  did  was  to  dispatch  a  messenger  to  Ha-
maveran,  with  a  letter,  demanding  the  release  of
the  prisoners ;  and  in  the  event  of  a  refusal,  de-
claring the  king  should  suffer  the  same  fate  as  the
White  Demon  and  the  magician-monarch  of  Ma-
zinderan.  Although  this  threat  produced  consi-
derable alarm  in  the  breast  of  the  king  of  Hama-
veran,  he  arrogantly  replied,  that  if  Rustem  wished
to  be  placed  in  the  same  situation  as  Kaus,  he
was  welcome  to  come  as  soon  as  he  liked.

Upon  hearing  this  defiance,  Rustem  left  Zabul-
istan, and  after  an  arduous  journey  by  land  and
water,  arrived  at  the  confines  of  Hamaveran.  The
king  of  that  country,  roused  by  the  noise  and
uproar,  and  bold  aspect  of  the  invading  army,
drew  up  his  own  forces,  and  a  battle  ensued,  but
he  was  unequal  to  stand  his  ground  before  the
overwhelming  courage  of  Rustem.  His  troops  fled
in  confusion,  and  then  almost  in  despair  he  anxi-
ously solicited  assistance  from  the  chiefs  of  Berber
and  Misser,  which  was  immediately  given.  Thus
three  kings  and  their  armies  were  opposed  to  the


166  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

power  and  resources  of  one  man.  Their  formidable
array  covered  an  immense  space.

Each  proud  his  strongest  force  to  bring,
The  eagle  of  valour  flapped  his  wing.

But  when  the  king  of  Hamaveran  beheld  the
person  of  Rustem  in  all  its  pride  and  strength,
and  commanding  power,  he  paused  with  appre-
hension and  fear,  and  intrenched  himself  well  be-
hind his  own  troops.  Rustem,  on  the  contrary,
was  full  of  confidence.

"  What,  though  there  be  a  hundred  thousand  men
Pitched  against  one,  what  use  is  there  in  numbers
When  Heaven  is  on  my  side :  with  Heaven  my  friend,
The  foe  will  soon  be  mingled  with  the  dust."

Having  ordered  the  trumpets  to  sound,  he
rushed  on  the  enemy,  mounted  on  Rakush,  and
committed  dreadful  havoc  among  them.

It  would  be  difficult  to  tell

How  many  heads,  dissevered,  fell,

Fighting  his  dreadful  way ;
On  every  side  his  falchion  gleamed,
Hot  blood  in  every  quarter  streamed

On  that  tremendous  day.

The  chief  of  Hamaveran  and  his  legions  were
the  first  to  shrink  from  the  conflict;  and  then
the  king  of  Misser,  ashamed  of  their  cowardice,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  167

rapidly  advanced  towards  the  champion,  with  the
intention  of  punishing  him  for  his  temerity,  but  he
had  no  sooner  received  one  of  Rustem's  hard  blows
on  his  head,  than  he  turned  to  flight,  and  thus  hoped
to  escape  the  fury  of  his  antagonist.  That  fortune,
however,  was  denied  him,  for  being  instantly  pur-
sued, he  was  caught  with  the  kamund,  or  noose,
thrown  round  his  loins,  dragged  from  his  horse,
and  safely  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Bahrain,
who  bound  him,  and  kept  him  by  his  side.

Ring  within  ring  the  lengthening  kamund  flew,
And  from  his  steed  the  astonished  monarch  drew.

Having  accomplished  this  signal  capture,  Rus-
tem  proceeded  against  the  troops  under  the  shah
of  Berberistan,  which,  valourously  aided  as  he  was,
by  Ziiara,  he  soon  vanquished  and  dispatched ;  and
impelling  Rakush  impetuously  forward  upon  the
shah  himself,  made  him  and  forty  of  his  principal
chiefs  prisoners  of  war.  The  king  of  Hamaveran,
seeing  the  horrible  carnage,  and  the  defeat  of  all
his  expectations,  speedily  sent  a  messenger  to
Rustem,  to  solicit  a  suspension  of  the  fight,  of-
fering to  deliver  up  Kaus  and  all  his  warriors,
and  all  the  regal  property  and  treasure  which  had
been  plundered  from  him.  The  troops  of  the
three  kingdoms  also  urgently  prayed  for  quarter
and  protection,  and  Rustem  readily  agreed  to  the
proffered  conditions.


168  THE SHAH NAMEH.

"  Kaus  to  liberty  restore,
With  all  his  chiefs,  I  ask  no  more  ;
For  him  alone  I  conquering  came ;
Than  him  no  other  prize  I  claim."


THE  RETURN  OF  KAI-KAUS.

It  was  a  joyous  day  when  Kaus  and  his  illus-
trious heroes  were  released  from  their  fetters,  and
removed  from  the  mountain-fortress  in  which  they
were  confined.  Rustem  forthwith  reseated  him
on  his  throne,  and  did  not  fail  to  collect  for  the
public  treasury  all  the  valuables  of  the  three  states
which  had  submitted  to  his  power.  The  troops  of
Misser,  Berberistan,  and  Hamaveran,  having  de-
clared their  allegiance  to  the  Persian  king,  the
accumulated  numbers  increased  Kaus's  army  to
upwards  of  three  hundred  thousand  men,  horse
and  foot,  and  with  this  immense  force  he  moved
towards  Iran.  Before  marching,  however,  he
sent  a  message  to  Afrasiyab,  commanding  him  to
quit  the  country  he  had  so  unjustly  invaded,  and
recommending  him  to  be  contented  with  the  terri-
tory of  Turan.

"  Hast  thou  forgotten  Rustem's  power,
When  thou  wert  in  that  perilous  hour
By  him  overthrown  ! Thy  girdle  broke,
Or  thou  hadst  felt  the  conqueror's  yoke.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  169

Thy  crowding  warriors  proved  thy  shield,
They  saved  and  dragged  thee  from  the  field  ;
By  them  unrescued  then,  would'st  thou
Have  lived  to  vaunt  thy  prowess  now  ?"

This  message  was  received  with  bitter  feelings
of  resentment  by  Afrasiyab,  who  prepared  his  army
for  battle  without  delay,  and  promised  to  bestow
his  daughter  in  marriage  and  a  kingdom,  upon  the
man  who  succeeding  in  taking  Rustem  alive.  This
proclamation  was  a  powerful  excitement :  and
when  the  engagement  took  place,  mighty  efforts
were  made  for  the  reward  ;  but  those  who  aspired
to  deserve  it  were  only  the  first  to  fall.  Afrasiyab
beholding  the  fall  of  so  many  of  his  chiefs,  dashed
forward  to  cope  with  the  champion  :  but  his  bra-
very was  unavailing ;  for,  suffering  sharply  under
the  overwhelming  attacks  of  Rustem,  he  was  glad
to  effect  his  escape,  and  retire  from  the  field.  In
short  he  rapidly  retraced  his  steps  to  Turan,  leav-
ing Kaus  in  full  possession  of  the  kingdom.

With  anguish  stricken,  he  regained  his  home,
After  a  wild  and  ignominious  flight ;
The  world  presenting  nothing  to  his  lips
But  poison-beverage  ;  all  was  death  to  him.

Kaus  being  again  seated  on  the  throne  of  Persia,
he  resumed  the  administration  of  affairs  with  ad-
mirable justice  and  liberality,  and  despatched


170  THE SHAH NAMEII.

some  of  his  most  distinguished  warriors  to  secure
the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  the  states  of  Mervi,
and  Balkh,  and  Nishapur,  and  Hirat.  At  the
same  time  he  conferred  on  Rustem  the  title  of
Jahani  Pahlvan,  or,  Champion  of  the  World.

In  safety  now  from  foreign  and  domestic  ene-
mies, Kaus  turned  his  attention  to  pursuits  very
different  from  war  and  conquest,  He  directed
the  Demons  to  construct  two  splendid  palaces  on
the  mountain  Alberz,  and  separate  mansions  for
the  accommodation  of  his  household,  which  he
decorated  in  the  most  magnificent  manner.  All
the  buildings  were  beautifully  arranged  both  for
convenience  and  pleasure ;  and  gold  and  silver,
and  precious  stones  were  used  so  lavishly,  and  the
brilliancy  produced  by  their  combined  effect  so
great,  that  night  and  day  appeared  to  be  the
same.

Iblis,  ever  active,  observing  the  vanity  and  am-
bition of  the  king,  was  not  long  in  taking  advan-
tege  of  the  circumstance,  and  he  soon  persuaded
the  Demons  to  enter  into  his  schemes.  Accordingly
one  of  them,  disguised  as  a  domestic  servant,  was
instructed  to  present  a  nosegay  to  Kaus  ;  and
after  respectfully  kissing  the  ground,  say  to  him  : —

"  Thou  art  great  as  king  can  be,

Boundless  in  thy  majesty ;

What  is  all  this  earth  to  thee,
All  beneath  the  sky  !


THE SHAM NAMEH.  171

Peris,  mortals,  demons,  hear
Thy  commanding  voice  with  fear ;
Thou  art  lord  of  all  things  here,
But,  thou  canst  not  fly  !

That  remains  for  thee ;  to  know
Things  above,  as  things  below,

How  the  planets  roll ;
How  the  sun  his  light  displays,
How  the  moon  darts  forth  her  rays ;
How  the  nights  succeed  the  days ;
What  the  secret  cause  betrays,

And  who  directs  the  whole  !"

This  artful  address  of  the  Demon  satisfied  Kaus
of  the  imperfection  of  his  nature,  and  the  enviable
power  which  he  had  yet  to  obtain.  To  him,  there-
fore, it  became  matter  of  deep  concern,  how  he
might  be  enabled  to  ascend  the  Heavens  without
wings,  and  for  that  purpose  he  consulted  his  astro-
logers, who  presently  suggested  a  way  in  which
his  desires  might  be  successfully  accomplished.

They  contrived  to  rob  an  eagle's  nest  of  its
young,  which  they  reared  with  great  care,  supply-
ing them  well  with  invigorating  food,  till  they  grew
large  and  strong.  A  frame-work  of  aloes-wood
was  then  prepared  ;  and  at  each  of  the  four-corners
was  fixed  perpendicularly,  a  javelin,  surmounted  on
the  point  with  flesh  of  a  goat.  At  each  corner  again


172  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

one  of  the  eagles  was  bound,  and  in  the  middle  Kaiis
was  seated  in  great  pomp  with  a  goblet  of  wine  before
him.  As  soon  as  the  eagles  became  hungry,  they
endeavoured  to  get  at  the  goat's  flesh  upon  the
javelins,  and  by  flapping  their  wings  and  flying
upwards,  they  quickly  raised  up  the  throne  from
the  ground.  Hunger  still  pressing  them,  and  still
being  distant  from  their  prey,  they  ascended  higher
and  higher  in  the  clouds,  conveying  the  astonished
king  far  beyond  his  own  country  ;  but  after  long
and  fruitless  exertion  their  strength  failed  them,
and  unable  to  keep  their  way,  the  whole  fabric
came  tumbling  down  from  the  sky,  and  fell  upon
a  dreary  solitude  in  the  kingdom  of  Chin.  There
Kaus  was  left,  a  prey  to  hunger,  alone,  and  in
utter  despair,  until  he  was  discovered  by  a  band
of  Demons,  whom  his  anxious  ministers  had  sent
in  search  of  him.

Rustem,  and  Gudarz,  and  Tus,  at  length  heard

of  what  had  befallen  the  king,  and  with  feelings
of  sorrow  not  unmixed  with  indignation,  set  off  to
his  assistance.  "  Since  I  was  born,"  said-  Gu-
darz, "  never  did  I  see  such  a  man  as  Kaus.  He
seems  to  be  entirely  destitute  of  reason  and  un-
derstanding ;  always  in  distress  and  affliction.
This  is  the  third  calamity  in  which  he  has  wan-
tonly involved  himself.  First  at  Mazinderan,  then
at  Hamaveran,  and  now  he  is  being  punished  for
attempting  to  discover  the  secrets  of  the  Heavens  !"


THE SHAH NAM EH.  173

When  they  reached  the  wilderness  into  which
Kaiis  had  fallen,  Gudarz  repeated  to  him  the  same
observations,  candidly  telling  him  that  he  was
fitter  for  a  mad-house  than  a  throne,  and  exhorting
him  to  be  satisfied  with  his  lot  and  be  obedient  to
God,  the  creator  of  all  things.  The  miserable
king  was  softened  to  tears,  acknowledged  his
folly ;  and  as  soon  as  he  was  escorted  back  to  his
palace,  he  shut  himself  up,  remaining  forty  days,
unseen,  prostrating  himself  in  shame  and  repen-
tance. After  that  he  recovered  his  spirits,  and
resumed  the  administration  of  affairs  with  his
former  liberality,  clemency,  and  justice,  almost
rivalling  the  glory  of  Feridun  and  Jemshid.

One  day  Rustem  made  a  splendid  feast ;  and
whilst  he  and  his  brother  warriors,  Giw  and  Gu-
darz, and  Tus,  were  quaffing  their  wine,  it  was
determined  upon  to  form  a  pretended  hunting
party,  and  repair  to  the  sporting  grounds  of  Afra-
siyab.  The  feast  lasted  seven  days ;  and  on  the
eighth,  preparations  were  made  for  the  inarch,  an
advance  party  being  pushed  on  to  reconnoitre  the
motions  of  the  enemy.  Afrasiyab  was  soon  in-
formed of  what  was  going  on,  and  flattered  him-
self with  the  hopes  of  getting  Rustem  and  his
seven  champions  into  his  thrall,  for  which  purpose
he  called  together  his  wise  men  and  warriors,  and
said  to  them:  "  You  have  only  to  secure  these  inva-


174  THE SHAH NAMEH.

ders,  and  Kaus  will  soon  cease  to  be  the  sovereign  of
Persia."  To  accomplish  this  object,  a  Turanian
army  of  thirty  thousand  veterans  was  assembled,
and  ordered  to  occupy  all  the  positions  and  avenues
in  the  vicinity  of  the  sporting  grounds.  An  immense
clamour,  and  thick  clouds  of  dust,  which  darkened
the  skies,  announced  their  approach ;  and  when
intelligence  of  their  numbers  was  brought  to  Rus-
tem,  the  undaunted  champion  smiled,  and  said  to
Garaz  :  "  Fortune  favours  me  ;  what  cause  is
there  to  fear  the  king  of  Turan  ;  his  army  does  not
exceed  a  hundred  thousand  men.  Were  I  alone,
with  Rakush,  with  my  armour,  and  battle-axe,
I  would  not  shrink  from  his  legions.  Have  I  not
seven  companions  in  arms,  and  is  not  one  of  them
equal  to  five  hundred  Turanian  heroes  ?  Let  Afar-
siyab  dare  to  cross  the  boundary-river,  and  the
contest  will  presently  convince  him  that  he  has  only
sought  his  own  defeat."  Promptly  at  a  signal
the  cup-bearer  produced  goblets  of  the  red  wine
of  Zabul ;  and  in  one  of  them  Rustem  pledged
his  royal  master  with  loyalty,  and  Tus  and  Zuara
joined  in  the  convivial  and  social  demonstration  of
attachment  to  the  king.

The  champion  arrayed  in  his  buberbaian,  mount-
ed Rakush,  and  advanced  towards  the  Turanian
army.  Afrasiyab,  when  he  beheld  him  in  all  his
terrible  strength  and  vigour,  was  amazed  and  dis-


THE SHAH NAME11.  175

heartened,  accompanied,  as  he  was,  by  Tus,  and
Gudarz,  and  Gurgin,  and  Giw,  and  Bahram,  and
Berzin,  and  Ferhad.  The  drums  and  trumpets  of
Rustem  were  now  heard,  and  immediately  the
hostile  forces  engaged  with  dagger,  sword,  and
javelin.  Dreadful  was  the  onset,  and  the  fury  with
which  the  conflict  was  continued.  In  truth,  so
sanguinary  and  destructive  was  the  battle,  that
Afiirsiyab  exclaimed  in  grief  and  terror:  <£  If  this
carnage  lasts  till  the  close  of  day,  not  a  man  of
my  army  will  remain  alive.  Have  I  not  one  war-
rior endued  with  sufficient  bravery  to  oppose  and
subdue  this  mighty  Rustem?  What!  not  one  fit  to  be
rewarded  with  a  diadem,  with  my  own  throne  and
kingdom,  which  I  will  freely  give  to  the  victor !"
Pilsum  heard  the  promise,  and  was  ambitious  of
earning  the  reward  ;  but  fate  decreed  it  otherwise.
His  prodigious  efforts  were  of  no  avail.  Alkus
was  equally  unsuccessful,  though  the  bravest  of
the  brave  among  the  Turanian  warriors.  Encoun-
tering Rustem,  his  brain  was  pierced  by  a  javelin
wielded  by  the  Persian  hero,  and  he  fell  dead  from
his  saddle.  This  signal  achievement  astonished
and  terrified  the  Turanians,  who,  however,  made
a  further  despairing  effort  against  the  champion
and  his  seven  conquering  companions,  but  with  no
better  result  than  before,  and  nothing  remained  to
them  excepting  destruction  or  flight.  Choosing
the  latter,  they  wheeled  round,  and  endeavoured


176  THE SHAH NAMEH.

to  escape  from  the  sanguinary  fate  that  awaited
them.

Seeing  this  precipitate  movement  of  the  enemy,
Rustem  impelled  Rakush  forward  in  pursuit,  ad-
dressing his  favourite  horse  with  fondness  and  en-
thusiasm :

"  My  valued  friend — put  forth  thy  speed,
This  is  a  time  of  pressing  need  ;
Bear  me  away  amidst  the  strife,
That  I  may  take  that  despofs  life ;
And  with  my  mace  and  javelin,  flood
This  dusty  plain  with  foe-man's  blood."

Excited  by  his  master's  cry,

The  war-horse  bounded  o'er  the  plain,

So  swiftly  that  he  seemed  to  fly,

Snorting  with  pride,  and  tossing  high
His  streaming  mane.

And  soon  he  reached  that  despot's  side,
**  Now  is  the  time  !"  the  Champion  cried,

"  This  is  the  hour  to  victory  given,"
And  flung  his  noose — which  bound  the  king
Fast  for  a  moment  in  its  ring ;

But  soon,  alas  !  the  bond  was  riven.

Haply  the  Tartar-monarch  slipt  away,
Not  doomed  to  suffer  on  that  bloody  day ;


THE SHAH VA.MKH.  177

And  freed  from  thrall, lie  hurrying  led
His  legions  cross  the  boundary-stream,

Leaving  his  countless  heaps  of  dead
To  rot  beneath  the  solar  beam.

Onward  he  rushed  with  heart  opprest,
And  broken  fortunes ;  he  had  quaffed

Bright  pleasured  cup, — but  now,  unblest,
Poison  was  mingled  with  the  draught !

The  booty  in  horses,  treasure,  armour,  pavilions,
and  tents,  was  immense  ;  and  when  the  whole  was
secured,  Rustem  and  his  companions  fell  back  to
the  sporting-grounds  already  mentioned,  from
whence  he  informed  Kai-kaus  by  letter  of  the  vic-
tory that  had  been  gained.  After  remaining  two
weeks  there,  resting  from  the  toils  of  war  and  en-
joying the  pleasures  of  hunting,  the  party  returned
home  to  pay  their  respects  to  the  Persian  king.

And  this  is  life  !  Thus  conquest  and  defeat,
Vary  the  lights  and  shades  of  human  scenes,
And  human  thought.  Whilst  some,  immersed  in  pleasure*
Enjoy  the  sweets,  others  again  endure
The  miseries  of  the  world. Hope  is  deceived
In  this  frail  dwelling ;  certainty  and  safety
Are  only  dreams  which  mock  the  credulous  mind ;
Time  sweeps  o'er  all  things ;  why  then  should  the  wise
Mourn  o'er  events  which  roll  resistless  on,
And  set  at  nought  all  mortal  opposition  !

N


178  THE SHAM NAMEH.


THE  STORY  OF  SOHRAB.

Now  further  mark  the  searchless  ways  of  Heaven,
Father  and  son  to  mortal  combat  driven  !
Alas  !  the  tale  of  sorrow  must  be  told,
The  tale  of  tears,  derived  from  minstrel  old.

Firdausi  relates  that  Rustem,  being  on  a  hunt-
ing excursion  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Turan,
killed  an  onager,  or  wild  ass,  which  he  roasted  in
the  forest ;  and  having  allayed  his  hunger,  went
to  sleep,  leaving  his  horse,  Rakush,  at  liberty  to
graze.  In  the  mean  time  a  band  of  Tartar  wan-
derers appeared,  and  seeingso  fine  an  animal  astray,
succeeded  in  securing  him  with  their  kamunds,
or  nooses,  and  conveyed  him  home.  When  Rus-
tem awoke  from  sleep  he  missed  his  favourite  steed,
and  felt  convinced  from  the  surrounding  traces  of  his
footsteps  that  he  had  been  captured  and  carried
away.  Accordingly  he  proceeded  towards  Samen-
gan,  a  small  principality  on  the  borders  of  Turan,
and  his  approach  being  announced  to  the  king,  his
majesty  went  on  foot  to  receive  him  with  due
respect  and  consideration.  Rustem,  however,  was
in  great  wrath,  and  haughtily  told  the  king  that
his  horse  had  been  stolen  from  him  in  his  domi-
nions, and  that  he  had  traced  his  footsteps  to
Samengan.  The  king  begged  that  he  would  not


THE SHAH NAMEH.  179

be  angry,  but  become  his  guest,  and  he  would
immediately  order  a  search  for  the  missing
horse.  Rustem  was  appeased  by  this  conciliatory
address,  and  readily  accepted  the  proffered  hos-
pitality. Having  in  the  first  place  dispatched  his
people  in  quest  of  Rakush,  the  king  of  Samengan
prepared  a  magnificent  feast  for  the  entertainment
of  his  illustrious  guest,  at  which  wine  and  music
and  dancing  contributed  their  several  charms.
Rustem  was  delighted  with  the  welcome  he  re-
ceived ;  and  when  the  hour  of  repose  arrived,  he
was  accommodated  with  a  couch  suitably  provided
and  decorated.  Soon  after  he  had  fallen  asleep,
he  was  awakened  by  a  beautiful  vision,  which
presented  itself  close  to  his  pillow,  accompanied
by  a  slave  girl  with  a  lamp  in  her  hand.

A  moon-faced  beauty  rose  upon  his  sight,
Like  the  sun  sparkling,  full  of  bloom  and  fragrance ;
Her  eye-brows  bended  like  the  archer's  bow,
Her  ringlets  fateful  as  the  warrior's  kamund ;
And  graceful  as  the  lofty  cypress  tree,
She  moved  towards  the  champion,  who  surprised
At  this  enchanting  -vision,  asked  the  cause
Which  brought  her  thither.  Softly  thus  she  spoke  : —
"  I  am  the  daughter  of  the  king,  my  name
Tahmineh,  no  one  from  behind  the  screen  "
Of  privacy  has  yet  beheld  me,  none  ;
Nor  even  heard  the  echo  of  my  voice.
N 2


180  THE SHAH NAMEII

But  I  have  heard  of  thy  prodigious  deeds,
Of  thy  unequalled  valour  and  renown —

Rustem  was  still  more  astonished  when  he  was
apprized  of  the  nature  of  this  extraordinary  ad-
venture, and  anxiously  asked  more  particularly
the  object  of  her  wishes. She  replied  that  she
had  become  enamoured  of  him,  on  account  of  the
fame  and  the  glory  of  his  actions,  and  in  conse-
quence had  vowed  to  God  that  she  would  espouse
no  other  man. "  By  thee  I  shall,  doubtless,  have
offspring. I  employed  spies  to  seize  upon  Rakush
and  secure  him  to  obtain  a  foal  of  his  breed, and
happily  Almighty  God  has  conducted  thee  to  Sa-
mengan  to  fulfill  my  desires. I  have  been  irre-
sistibly impelled  to  make  this  disclosure,  and  now
I  depart ; only, to-morrow,  do  thou  solicit  the
consent  of  my  father  to  our  union,  and  he  certainly
will  not  refuse  to  bless  us." Rustem  acceded  to
the  flattering  proposal,  and  in  the  morning  the
nuptial  engagement  was  sanctioned  by  the  king.

Joyous  the  monarch  smiled,  and  gave  his  child.
According  to  the  customs  of  the  kingdom,
To  that  brave  champion.

Rustem  passed  only  one  night  with  his  bride,
and  when  he  rose  in  the  morning,  he  said  to  her  :
"  If  the  Almighty  should  bless  thee  with  a  daugh-
ter, place  this  amulet  in  her  hair ;  but  if  a  son,


THE SHAH NAM EH.  181

bind  it  on  his  arm,  and  it  will  inspire  him  with  the
disposition  and  valour  of  Nariman."  Having  said
these  words,  and  Rakush  being  at  the  same  time
restored  to  him,  he  took  leave,  and  went  away  to
his  own  country.

How  wept  that  angel-face  at  parting,  grief
Subdued  her  heart ;  but  when  nine  months  had  past,
A  boy  was  born  as  lovely  as  the  moon,
The  image  of  his  father,  and  of  Sam,
And  Nariman — for  in  one  little  month
He  had  attained  the  growth  of  a  full  year  ;
His  spreading  chest  was  like  the  chest  of  Zal.
When  nine,  there  was  not  in  that  country  round
One  who  could  equal  him  in  feats  of  arms.

The  king  of  Samengan  named  him  Sohrab  ;
and  when  the  youth  was  ten  years  old,  he  said  to
his  mother:  "  People  ask  me  who  my  father  is,
and  want  to  know  his  name  !"  To  this,  Tahmineh
replied  :  "  Thy  father's  name  is  Rustem,

Since  the  God  of  creation  created  the  earth,
To  a  hero  like  Rustem  he  never  gave  birth."

And  she  then  described  the  valour  and  renown  of
his  ancestors,  which  excited  in  the  breast  of  Soh-
rab the  desire  of  being  immediately  introduced  to
his  father ;  but  his  mother  endeavoured  to  repress
his  eagerness,  and  told  him  to  beware —


182  THE SHAH NAMf.II.

"  For  if  he  knows  thouVt  bis,  he  will  remove  thee
From  me,  and  thy  sweet  home;  from  thee  divided,
Thy  mother's  heart  will  break  in  agony  P

Rustem  had  sent  a  present  of  jewels  and  pre-
cious stones  to  Tahmineh,  with  inquiries  respecting
her  offspring,  and  the  reply  she  returned  was,  that
a  daughter  was  the  fruit  of  their  union.  This  in-
telligence disappointed  him,  and  he  afterwards
thought  no  more  of  Samengan.  Tahmineh  again
said  to  Sohrab:  "  Beware  also  of  speaking  too
publicly  of  thy  relationship  to  Rustem,  for  fear
of  Afrasiyab  depriving  me  of  thee." — "  Never/7
said  he,  "  will  I  conceal  the  name  of  my  father ;
nay,  I  will  go  to  him  myself : —

Even  now,  I  will  oppose  the  Tartar  host,

Whatever  their  numbers — Kaus  shall  be  hurled

From  his  imperial  throne,  and  Tus  subdued —

To  Rustem  I  will  give  the  crown  and  sceptre,

And  place  him  on  the  seat,  whence  Kaus  ruled

His  myriad  subjects — I  will  seize  the  throne

Of  stern  Afrasiyab  ;  my  javelin's  point

Shall  pierce  the  Heaven  of  Heavens. And  since  'tis  so —

Between  my  glorious  father  and  myself,

No  crowned  tyrant  shall  remain  unpunished.

Tahmineh  wept  bitterly,  but  her  in  treaties  were
of  no  avail — the  youth  being  unalterably  fixed  in
his  determination.  One  day  he  told  her  that  he


•MIL; SHAH XA.MKH.  1S3

wanted  a  suitable  war-horse,  and  immediately  the
royal  stables  were  explored,  but  the  only  animal
of  sufficient  size  and  vigour  that  could  be  found
there,  was  the  foal  produced  from  Rakush,  which
was  at  length  brought  to  him.

His  nerve  and  action  pleased  the  boy,
He  stroked  and  patted  him  with  joy  ;
And  on  his  back  the  saddle  placed,
The  mouth  and  head  the  bridle  graced,
And  springing  on  th'  impatient  steed,
He  proved  the  fitness  and  his  speed.

Satisfied  with  the  horse  he  had  obtained,  and
the  arms  and  armour  with  which  he  was  supplied,
he  announced  his  resolution  of  going  to  war  against
Kaus,  and  conquering  the  kingdom  of  Persia  for
Rustem  !  The  news  of  Sohrab's  preparations  soon
reached  Afrasiyab,  who  hailed  the  circumstance  as
peculiarly  favourable  to  his  own  ambitious  ends  ;
and  taking  advantage  of  the  youth's  enthusiasm,
sent  an  army  to  his  assistance,  declaring  that  Kaiis
was  also  his  enemy,  and  that  he  was  anxious  to
share  with  him  in  the  glory  of  overcoming  the
imperial  despot.  Sohrab  readily  accepted  the  offer,
and  the  Tartar  legions,  his  auxiliaries,  were  com-
manded by  two  noted  warriors,  Human  and  Bar-
man, to  whom  Afrasiyab  gave  the  following  in-
structions :  "  It  must  be  so  contrived  that  Rustem
and  Sohrab  shall  not  know  each  other's  person  or


THE SHAH NAM  EH.

name.  They  must  be  brought  together  in  battle.
Sohrab  is  the  youngest,  and  will  no  doubt  over-
come Rustem,  in  which  case  the  conqueror  may
be  easily  dispatched  by  stratagem,  and  when  both
are  destroyed,  the  empire  of  Persia  will  be  all  my
own !"  Furnished  with  these  instructions,  the
Tartar  leaders  united  with  Sohrab,  and  corn-
commenced  their  march  towards  Persia.  There
was  a  fortress  on  the  road,  in  which  Hujir,  a  fa-
mous warrior,  was  stationed ;  and  when  Sohrab
arrived  at  that  fortress,  he  rushed  out  alone  to  op-
pose the  progress  of  the  invader,  crying  hastily —

"  And  who  art  thou  ?  I  am  myself  Hujir
The  valiant  champion,  come  to  conquer  thee,
And  to  lop  off  that  towering  head  of  thine.""

Sohrab  smiled  at  this  fierce  menace,  and  a  sharp
conflict  ensued  between  the  two  combatants,  in
which  the  vain  boaster  was  precipitately  thrown  from
his  horse,  and  afterwards  made  a  prisoner  by  the
stripling-warrior.  Gurd-afrid,  the  daughter  of
Gustahem,  perceiving  this  unhappy  result,  left  the
fort  precipitately  for  the  purpose  of  encountering
the  youth,  and  being  revenged  upon  him.

When  tidings  reached  her  of  the  fate  Hujir
Had  thus  provoked,  she  dressed  herself  in  mail,
And,  hastily,  beneath  her  helmet  hid
Her  glossy  ringlets ;  down  she,  from  the  fort,


THE SHAH NA.MKH.  185

Came  bravely  like  ft  lion,  nobly  mounted ;

And  as  she  approached  the  hostile  army,  called

With  an  undaunted  voice. Sohrab  beheld

The  gallant  foe  with  smiles,  believing  her

A  boy  of  tender  years,  and,  wondering,  saw

The  vigour  of  the  arm  opposed  to  him  ;

The  force  with  which  the  pointed  spear  was  thrown.

Assailed  so  bravely,  he  drew  forth  his  noose.

And,  casting  it  around  the  enemy,  brought

Her  headlong  to  the  ground. Off  flew  her  helm,

When  her  luxuriant  tresses  scattered  loose,

And  cheeks  of  radiant  bloom,  her  sex  betrayed  !

When  the  astonishment  produced  by  this  un-
expected discovery  had  subsided,  Sohrab  regarded
her  with  tender  emotion,  and  securely  made  her  his
captive  ;  but  Gurd-afrid  promptly  addressed  him,
and  said  :  "  Allow  me  to  return  to  the  fort ;
all  the  treasure  and  property  it  contains  are  at  my
command,  and  shall  be  given  to  thee  as  my  ran-
som. My  father  is  old,  and  his  fondest  hopes
are  centered  in  me.  Be  therefore  considerate  and
merciful."  Sohrab  was  too  young  and  ardent  not
to  be  carried  away  by  his  feelings  ;  he  was  affected
by  her  beauty  and  her  tears,  and  set  her  at  liberty  !
As  soon  as  the  damsel  had  re-entered  the  fortress,
a  council  was  held  to  deliberate  on  the  exigencies  of
the  time,  and  the  garrison  resolved  upon  evacuating
the  place  by  secret  passages  during  the  ensuing


186  THE SHAH X AIM  EH.

night.  When  morning  dawned,  Sokrab  approach-
ed the  gate,  and  not  a  person  was  anywhere  to  be
found.  Grieved  and  disappointed,  sorrow  preyed
deeply  upon  his  heart,  losing,  as  he  had  done  so
foolishly,  the  lovely  heroine  of  whom  he  had  be-
come enamoured.

The  father,  and  daughter,  and  the  garrison,  shaped
their  course  immediately  to  the  court  of  Kaus,  to
whom  they  related  that  a  wonderful  hero  had  come
from  Turan,  against  whose  courage  it  was  in  vain
to  contend,  and  said  to  be  not  more  than  fourteen
years  of  age !  What  then  would  he  be,  they  thought,
when  arrived  at  maturity  !  The  capture  of  Hujir,
and  the  accounts  of  Sohrab's  amazing  prowess,
filled  Kaus  with  alarm,  and  the  warrior  Giw  was
forthwith  deputed  to  Zabulistan  to  call  Rustem  to
his  aid.  The  letter  ran  thus  : — "  A  youthful  war-
rior, named  Sohrab,  has  invaded  Persia  from
Turan,  and  thou  art  alone  able  to  avert  his  des-
tructive progress  ;

Thou  art  the  sole  support  of  Persia ;  thou —
Endued  with  nerve  of  more  than  human  power ;
Thou  art  the  conqueror  of  Mazinderan  ;
And  at  Hamaveran  thou  didst  restore
The  king  to  liberty  and  life ; thy  sword
Makes  the  sun  weep ;  thy  glorious  actions  fling
Unequalled  splendour  o^er  the  kingly  throne.""

When  the  letter  was  received,  Rustem  inquired


THE SHAH NAMI-.H.  187

anxiously  about  the  particular  form  and  character
of  Sohrab,  whom  Giw  described  as  being  like
Sam  and  Nariman.  This  made  him  ponder,  and
he  thought  it  might  be  his  own  son  ;  but  he  re-
collected Tahmineh  had  written  from  Samengan,
that  her  child  was  a  daughter  !  He,  however,  still
pondered,  although  Giw  repeated  the  commands  of
the  king  that  no  time  should  be  lost.  Regardless
of  the  summons,  Rustem  called  for  wine  and  music,
and  made  a  feast,  which  continued  seven  days.
On  the  eighth  he  said,  "  This  too  must  be  a  day
of  festivity ;"  and  it  was  not  till  the  ninth  that  he
ordered  Rakush  to  be  saddled  for  the  journey.  He
then  departed  with  his  brother  Zuara  and  the
Zabul  troops,  and  at  length  arrived  at  the  royal
court.  Kaiis  was  in  great  indignation  at  the  delay
that  had  occurred,  and  directed  both  Rustem  and
Giw  to  be  impaled  alive  for  the  offence  they  had
committed  in  not  attending  to  his  instructions.
Tus  was  commanded  to  execute  this  order ;
but  when  he  stretched  out  his  hand  towards
Rustem,  the  champion  dashed  it  aside ;  and  re-
tiring from  the  assembly,  and  vaulting  upon  his
horse,  thus  addressed  the  king  : —

"  Weak  and  insensate  !  take  not  to  thy  breast
Devouring  fire ;  thy  latest  actions  still
Outdo  the  past  in  baseness. Go,  thyself,
And,  if  thou  canst,  impale  Sohrab  alive  !


188  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

When  wrath  inflames  my  heart,  what  is  Kads  !
What,  but  a  clod  of  earth  ? Him  must  I  dread  ?
No,  to  the  Almighty  power  alone  I  bend.
The  warriors  of  the  empire  sought  to  place
The  crown  upon  my  head  ;  but  I  was  faithful
And  held  the  kingdom's  laws  and  customs  sacred.
Had  I  looked  to  the  throne,  thou  woulcTst  not  now
Have  had  the  power  with  which  thou  art  surrounded,
To  injure  one  who  is  thy  safest  friend.
But  I  deserve  it  all;  for  I  have  ever,
Ungrateful  monarch  !  done  thee  signal  service.""

Saying  this,  Rustem  withdrew  ;  and  as  he  went
away,  the  hearts  of  all  the  courtiers  and  warriors
sunk  with  the  most  painful  anticipations  of  una-
voidable ruin  to  the  empire.  Gudarz  afforded  the
only  spark  of  hope,  for  he  was  in  great  favour  with
the  king ;  and  it  fortunately  so  happened,  that  by
his  interposition,  the  blind  anger  of  Kaus  was  soon
appeased.  His  next  office  was  to  follow  Rustem,
and  to  restore  the  harmony  which  had  been  de-
stroyed. He  said  to  him : —

"  Thou  know^st  that  Kaus  is  a  brainless  king,

Wayward,  capricious,  and  to  anger  prone ;

But  quickly  he  repents,  and  now  he  seeks

For  reconciliation. If  thou'rt  deaf

To  this  good  change  in  him,  and  nourishest

The  scorn  he  has  inspired,  assuredly

The  people  of  our  nation  will  be  butchered  ;


THE SHAH NAMEH  189

For  who  can  now  resist  the  Tartar  brand  ?
Persia  again  will  groan  beneath  the  yoke
Of  the  Turanian  despot. Must  it  be  ?
Have  pity  on  thy  countrymen,  and  never
Let  it  be  bruited  through  the  scornful  world,
That  Rustem  feared  to  fight  a  beardless  boy  !"

The  speech  of  Gudarz  had  its  due  effect ;  and
the  champion,  with  altered  feelings,  returned  to
the  court  of  the  king ;  who,  rising  from  his  throne,
received  him  with  the  highest  honour  and  respect,
and  apologized  for  the  displeasure  into  which  he
had  been  betrayed.

"  Wrathful  and  wayward  in  my  disposition,
I  felt  impatient  at  the  long  delay  ;
But  now  I  see  my  error,  and  repentance
Must,  for  that  insult  unprovoked,  atone."

Rustem,  in  reply,  assured  the  king  of  his  alle-
giance, and  of  his  readiness  to  undertake  what-
ever might  be  desired  of  him  ;  but  Kaus  said  :—

"  To  day  let  us  feast ;  let  us  banquet  to-day,
And  to-morrow  to  battle  well  hasten  away.11

Having  feasted  all  night,  in  the  morning  Kaus
placed  all  his  warriors,  and  his  army,  under  the
command  of  Rustem ;  who  immediately  set  off  to
oppose  the  progress  of  Sohrab.


190  THE SHAH \AMEH.

The  countless  thousands  seemed  to  hide  the  earth ;
The  Heavens,  too,  were  invisible ;  so  great
And  overspreading  was  the  Persian  host.
Thus  they  rolled  on,  until  they  reached  the  fort,
The  barrier-fort,  where  still  Sohrab  remained.

When  the  stripling  from  the  top  of  the  fort  first
observed  the  approach  of  the  Persians,  he  said  to
Human — "  Look,  on  every  side  at  the  coming
legions ;"  at  which  the  Tartar  chief  turned  pale.
But  the  youth  added — "  Fear  not,  by  the  favour  of
Heaven  I  will  soon  disperse  them ;"  and  then  called
for  a  goblet  of  wine,  full  of  confidence  in  his  own
might,  and  in  the  result  of  the  expected  battle.
Descending  from  the  walls,  he  proceeded  to  his
pavilion,  pitched  on  the  plain  in  front  of  the  fort,
and  sat  in  pomp  among  the  chiefs  of  the  Turanian
army.

Rustem  repaired  thither  in  secret,  and  in  dis-
guise, to  watch  the  motions  of  his  formidable
enemy,  and  beheld  him  sitting  drinking  wine,
surrounded  by  great  men  and  heroes.  Zindeh,  a
warrior,  retiring  from  the  banquet,  saw  the  shadow
of  some  one,  and  going  nearer  to  the  spot,  found
it  to  be  a  man  in  ambush.  He  said,  "  Who  art
thou  ?"  when  Rustem  struck  him  a  blow  on  the
neck,  which  stretched  him  lifeless  on  the  ground,
and  effected  his  escape.  In  a  few  minutes  another
person  came,  who  seeing  the  body,  brought  a  light,


THE SHAH NAMEII.  191

and  discovered  it  to  be  Zindeh  dead.  When  the
fatal  circumstance  was  communicated  to  Sohrab,
the  youth  well  knew  that  it  must  have  been  the
work  of  the  enemy,  who  had  secretly  entered  his
pavilion,  and  he  solemnly  vowed  that  next  day  he
would  be  revenged  on  the  Iranians,  and  especially
on  Kaus,  wherever  he  might  be  found.

In  the  mean  time  Rustem  described  to  Kaus
the  appearance  and  splendour  of  Sohrab  :

"  In  stature  perfect,  as  the  cypress  tree,
No  Tartar  ever  boasted  such  a  presence  ;
Turan,  nor  even  Persia,  now  can  shew
A  hero  of  his  bold  and  gallant  bearing ;
Seeing  his  form  thou  would'st  at  once  declare
That  he  is  Sam,  the  warrior ;  so  majestic
In  mien  and  action  !"

When  morning  dawned,  Sohrab  took  Hujfr  to
the  top  of  the  fortress,  and  speaking  kindly  to  him,
promised  to  release  him  if  he  would  answer  truly
what  he  had  to  ask.  Commencing  his  anxious
inquiries,  he  then  said : — "  To  whom  belongs  that
pavilion  surrounded  by  elephants !"  Hujir  re-
plied— "  It  belongs  to  king  Kaus."  Sohrab
resumed — "  To  whom  belongs  the  tent  on  the
right?"-— "  To  the  warrior  Tus."  "  To  whom,
then,  belongs  that  crimson  pavilion?" — "  To  Gu-
darz."  "  Whose  is  that  green  pavilion,  with  the
Gavani  banner  flying  over  it,  and  in  which  a  throne


192  THE SHAH NAMF.H.

is  seen?"  Hujir  knew  that  this  was  Rustem's
tent;  but  he  reflected  that  if  he  told  the  truth,
Sohrab  might  in  his  wrath  attack  the  champion
unprepared,  and  slay  him  ;  better  would  it  be,  he
thought,  to  deny  his  being  present,  and  accord-
ingly he  said  : — "  That  tent  belongs  to  the  chief
of  the  troops  sent  by  the  Emperor  of  Chin  in  aid
of  king  Kaus."  (S  Dost  thou  know  his  name?''
— "  No,  I  do  not."  Sohrab  meditated,  and  said
in  his  heart : — "  I  see  here  the  plain  indications
of  Rustem's  presence,  which  my  mother  gave  me
— why  am  I  deceived?"  He  again  questioned
Hujir,  and  received  the  same  answer.  "  Then
where  is  Rustem's  tent?"  he  asked,  impatiently,
"  It  appears  that  he  has  not  yet  arrived  from
Zabulistan."

At  this  the  stripling's  heart  was  sunk  in  grief  ^
The  tokens  which  his  mother  gave,  were  all
Conspicuous ;  yet  his  father  was  denied  ;
So  Fate  decreed  it. Still  he  lingering  hoped
By  further  question,  and  encouragement,
To  win  the  important  secret  from  Hujir.

Again  he  said,  with  persuasive  gentleness,
"  Look  well  around  ;  try  if  thou  can'st  find  the
tent  of  Rustem,  and  thou  shalt  be  richly  rewarded
for  thy  trouble."  "  Rustem's  tent  may  be  in
some  degree  similar  to  that ;  but  it  is  not  Rus-


THE SHAH NAM EH.  193

tern's." Hujir, then,  went  on  in  praise  of  the
champion,  and  said  :—

"  When  roused  to  fury  in  the  battle-field,
What  is  a  man,  an  elephant,  or  pard ;
The  strength  of  five-score  valiant  men  exceeds  not
Rustem's  unwearied  nerve  and  towering  frame."

Then  Sohrab  said  to  him :  — "  Why  dost  thou
praise  Rustem  in  this  manner  to  me  ?  Where  hast
thou  seen  the  strife  of  heroes  ?"  Hujir  became
alarmed,  and  thought  within  himself,  if  I  point
out  Rustem's  tent,  no  doubt  he  will  be  killed  by
this  ambitious  youth,  and  then  there  will  be  no
one  to  defend  the  Persian  throne."  Sohrab  con-
tinued, with  emotion: — "  Point  out  to  me  the  tent
of  Rustem,  this  moment,  or  thou  shalt  die !"
Hujir  again  paused,  and  said  within  himself: —
"  More  honourable  will  it  be  to  save  the  lives  of
Rustem  and  Kaus  than  my  own. — What  is  my
life  compared  to  theirs? — Nothing!"  He  then
said  aloud  : — "  Why  thus  seek  for  a  pretext  to
shed  my  blood — -why  these  pretences,  since
my  life  is  in  thy  power !"  Sohrab  turned  from
him  in  despair,  and  descending  from  the  rampart
on  which  he  stood,  arrayed  himself  in  armour,
and  prepared  for  battle.  His  first  object  was
to  attack  the  centre  where  Kaus  was  posted;
thither  he  proceeded,  and  called  out  aloud  : — "  I
have  sworn  to  be  revenged  on  Kaus  for  the  murder
o


194  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

of  Zindeh  ;  if  he  has  any  honour  let  him  meet  me
in  single  combat."  Sohrab  stood  alone  on  the
plain,  firm  as  the  mountain  Alberz,  and  such  terror
had  seized  upon  the  hearts  of  the  warriors,  that
not  a  man  had  courage  enough  to  advance  a  step
against  him.  After  a  short  space,  Sohrab  called
out  again  : — "  The  king  cannot  be  excused.  It
is  not  the  custom  of  kings  to  be  without  honour,
or  to  skulk  away  like  foxes  from  the  power  of
lions  in  battle.  O,  Kaus,  wherefore  dost  thou
hesitate  to  enter  the  field  ?"

"  Why  have  they  named  thee,  Kai-Kaus,  the  king-,
If  thouVt  unfit  to  combat  with  the  brave  ?"

Kaus  was  appalled  by  the  insulting  boldness
of  the  youth,  and  called  to  his  friends  to  inform
Rustem  of  the  dilemma  into  which  he  was  thrown,
and  the  panic  of  his  warriors,  who  seemed  de-
prived of  their  senses.  But  Rustem  had  resolved
not  to  fight  on  that  day.  "  Let  another  chief,"
said  he,  "  oppose  the  Tartar,  and  when  he  is  over-
thrown it  will  be  my  turn.  Kaus  then  sent  Tus
to  urge  him  to  comply,  and  the  champion  being
made  acquainted  with  the  distress  and  terror  of
the  king,  hurried  on  his  armour,  and  left  his  tent.
On  the  way,  he  said  to  himself:  "  This  enemy
must  be  of  the  demon -breed,  otherwise  why  should
such  an  impression  have  been  made  on  the  warriors,
that  they  are  afraid  to  oppose  him.*'  Then  throw-


THE  SHAH  NAMEH.  195

ing  aside  all  apprehension  on  his  own  account,  and
placing  his  trust  in  God,  he  appeared  before  Sohrab,
who  invited  him  to  go  to  a  little  distance,  and  fight
apart  from  the  beholders.  The  invitation  being
accepted,  Sohrab  said:  "  No  mortal  has  power  to
resist  this  arm — thou  must  perish  !" — "  Why  this
boasting  ?  Thou  art  but  a  child,  and  where  hast  thou
seen  the  conflicts  of  the  valiant  ?  I  am  myself  an
old  experienced  warrior ;  I  slew  the  White  Demon
and  all  his  Demon-host,  and  neither  lion,  nor
dragon,  nor  tiger,  can  escape  from  me.

Compassion  rises  in  my  heart,
I  cannot  slay  thee — let  us  part !
Thy  youth,  thy  gallantry,  demand
A  different  fate  than  murderous  brand.11

"  Perhaps,''  replied  Sohrab,  "  thou  art  Rus-
tem  !" — "  No,  I  am  only  the  servant  of  Rustem."
At  this  declaration,

Aspiring  hope  was  turned  to  sad  dismay,

And  darkness  quenched  the  joyous  beam  of  day.

At  first  the  two  combatants  fought  with  spears,
which  were  soon  shivered  to  pieces;  then  with
swords,  which  became  hacked  like  saws,  and  then
with  clubs.  So  fiercely  they  contended  that  their
mail  was  torn  in  pieces,  their  weapons  bent,  and
their  horses  almost  exhausted.  Blood  and  sweat
poured  down  on  the  ground  as  they  struggled,  and

o2


196  THE SHAH NAMEH.

their  throats  were  parched  with  thirst. Both  stood
still  for  a  while  to  breathe. Rustem  said  to  him-
self: "  I  never  saw  man  or  Demon  with  such
activity  and  strength  ;"  and  Sohrab  thus  addressed
the  champion  gaily,  "Whenthou  art  ready,  come
and  try  the  effects  of  bow  and  arrow !" They
then  engaged  with  bows  and  arrows,  but  without
any  decisive  result. Afterwards  they  used  their
hands  and  arms  in  wrestling,  and  Rustem  applied
as  much  force  as  might  have  shaken  a  mountain,
to  raise  Sohrab  from  the  ground,  but  he  could  not
move  him. Sohrab  then  endeavoured  to  lift  up  his
antagonist,  but  in  vain. Both  were  satisfied,  and
forsook  each  other's  hold. Sohrab  however  had
recourse  to  his  mace,  and  struck  a  heavy  blow  on
the  head  of  Rustern, who  reeled  with  the  pain  it
inflicted. The  laughing  stripling,  in  consequence,
spoke  tauntingly  to  him,  and  Rustem  said,  "  Night
is  coming  on,  we  will  resume  the  battle  to-morrow."
Sohrab  replied,  "  Go,  I  have  given  thee  enough,  I
will  now  let  Kaus  feel  the  sharpness  of  my  sword  !"
and,  at  the  same  moment  that  he  proceeded  against
the  Persian  king,  Rustem  galloped  forward  to  be
revenged  on  the  Turanians. But  in  the  midstofhis
career,  the  unprotected  situation  of  Kaus  struck  his
mind,  and  returning  to  his  own  army,  found  that
Sohrab  had  slain  a  number  of  his  warriors,  and  was
still  committing  great  havoc. He  called  to  him,  and
said, "  Let  there  be  a  truce  to-night ;  but  if  thou


THE SHAH NAMEH.  197

art  still  for  war,  oppose  thyself  to  me  alone !"
Sohnib  was  himself  weary,  and  closed  with  the
first  proposal.  Both  accordingly  retired  to  their
tents.

In  the  night  Kaus  sent  for  Rustem,  and  ob-
served, that  during  the  whole  period  of  his  life  he
had  never  witnessed  or  heard  of  such  overwhelm-
ing valour  as  had  been  exhibited  by  the  young  in-
vader; to  which  Rustem  replied,  "  I  know  not,
but  he  seems  to  be  formed  of  iron.  I  have  fought
him  with  sword,  and  arrow,  and  mace,  and  he  is
still  unhurt.  In  the  warrior's  art  he  is  my  su-
perior, and  Heaven  knows  what  may  be  the  result
to-morrow."  Having  retired  to  his  own  place  of
rest,  Rustem  passed  the  night  in  petitions  to  the  Al-
mighty, and  to  his  brother  Zuara  he  said,  "  Alas  !
I  have  felt  that  the  power  of  this  youth's  arm  is
prodigious.  Should  any  thing  untoward  happen
in  the  ensuing  fight,  go  immediately  to  Zal,  and
think  not  of  opposition  to  this  triumphant  Tartar,
for  certainly  the  whole  of  Persia  will  fall  under  his
control."

Meanwhile  Sohrab,  having  returned  to  his  tent,
said  to  Human,  "  This  old  man  has  the  strength
and  the  port  of  Rustem ;  God  forbid  that,  if  the
signs  which  my  mother  gave  be  true,  he  should
prove  my  father!"  Human  said,  in  answer  :  "I
have  often  seen  Rustem,  and  I  know  him ;  but
this  is  not  the  champion  of  Persia — and  though  his


198  THE SHAH NAMEH.

horse  is  like  Rakush,  it  is  not  the  same."  From
this  declaration  of  Human,  Sohrab  felt  assured
that  this  was  not  Rustem.

As  soon  as  the  morning  dawned  both  the  com-
batants were  opposed  to  each  other ;  and  when
the  eye  of  Sohrab  fell  upon  Rustem,  an  instinctive
feeling  of  affection  rose  in  his  heart,  and  he  wished
to  close  the  contest  in  peace.

"  Let  us  together  sit  and  shun  the  strife,
Which  sternly  seeks  each  other's  valued  life  ;
Let  others  mix  in  fight,  whilst  we  agree,
And  yield  our  hearts  to  peace  and  amity.
Affection  fills  my  breast  with  hopes  and  fears,
For  thee  my  cheeks  are  overflowed  with  tears ;
How  have  I  ceaseless  sought  to  know  thy  name,
Oh,  tell  it  now,  thou  man  of  mighty  fame."11

To  this  address,  Rustem  replied,  that  the  words
of  the  preceding  evening  were  of  a  different  im-
port, and  the  agreement  was  to  wrestle  to-day.
"  I  am  not,"  said  he,  "a  person  of  trick  or  ar-
tifice, nor  a  child,  as  thou  art,  but  1  am  prepared
to  wrestle  with  thee."  Sohrab  finding  every
effort  fruitless,  all  his  hopes  disappointed,  and
his  views  frustrated  at  every  step,  dismounted
and  prepared  for  the  contest.  Rustem  was  al-
ready on  foot,  tightening  his  girdle  previous  to
the  struggle.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  199

Like  lions  they  together  tugged,  and  strained
Their  nervous  limbs  ; — and  from  their  bodies  flowed
Streams  of  red  blood  and  sweat. Sohrab  with  force,
Equal  to  a  mad  elephant's,  raised  up
The  champion,  and  upon  the  sandy  plain
Dashed  him  down  backward. Then  upon  his  breast.
Fierce  as  a  tiger  on  a  prostrate  elk,
He  sat,  all  ready  to  lop  off  the  head.

But  Rustern  called  out  in  time,  and  said,  "  Ac-
cording to  the  custom  of  my  country,  the  first
time  a  combatant  in  wrestling  is  thrown,  his  head
is  not  severed  from  his  body,  but  only  after  the  se-
cond fall."  As  soon  as  Sohrab  heard  these  words,
he  returned  his  dagger  into  the  sheath,  and  allowed
his  antagonist  to  rise.

When  the  youth  returned  to  his  tent,  and  told
Human  what  he  had  done,  the  Turanian  chief  la-
mented deeply  the  thoughtlessness  of  his  conduct.
"  To  ensnare  the  lion,"  said  he,  "  and  then  set
him  at  liberty  to  devour  thee,  was  certainly  a
foolish  thing!"  But  Sohrab  said,  "  He  is  still  in
my  power,  being  inferior  to  me  in  skill  and
strength,  and  I  shall  to-morrow  be  able  to  com-
mand the  same  advantage."  To  this,  Human  re-
plied, "  The  wise  never  look  upon  an  enemy  as
weak  and  contemptible  !"

When  Rustem  had  escaped  from  the  battle  with
Sohrab,  he  purified  himself  with  water,  and  pros-


200  THE SHAH NAMEH.

trated  himself  all  night  in  devotion  to  the  Almighty,
praying  that  his  former  strength  and  power  might
be  vouchsafed  to  him.  It  is  said  that  in  the  first
instance  God  gave  him  so  much  strength,  that  in
placing  his  foot  upon  a  rock  it  sunk  to  its  centre.
But  as  he  was  thus  unable  to  walk,  he  prayed  for
a  suitable  diminution  of  power,  and  the  prayer  was
accepted.  With  this  diminished  power,  though  still
prodigious,  he  was  now  again  favoured,  and  on  the
following  day  the  fight  was  renewed.  "What!
here  again  ?"  said  Sohrab  triumphantly.

Again  their  backs  they  wrestling  bend,
Again  their  limbs  they  seem  to  rend ;
They  seize  each  other's  girdle-band.
And  strain  and  grasp  with  foot  and  hand,
Doubt  hanging  still  on  either  side,
From  morn  to  sombre  even-tide.

At  length  Rustem  made  a  powerful  effort,  and
got  Sohrab  under  him.  Apprehensive  however
that  he  had  not  strength  enough  to  keep  him
there,  he  plunged  his  dagger  in  the  side  of  the
unhappy  youth,  and  fatally  prevented  all  further
resistance.  Groaning  heavily,  the  dying  Sohrab
said :  "  Alas !  I  came  here  in  anxious  search  of
my  father,  and  it  has  cost  me  my  life.  But  if
thou  wert  a  fish,  and  sought  refuge  at  the  bottom
of  the  ocean,  or  a  star  in  the  heavens,  my  father
will  be  revenged  on  thee  for  this  deed." — "  What


THE SHAH NAMEH.  201

is  thy  father's  name  ?"  said  the  champion.  "  His
name  is  Rustem,  and  my  mother  is  the  daughter
of  the  king  of  Samengan."  On  hearing  these
words,  the  world  faded  before  Rustem's  eyes,  and
he  fell  senseless  on  the  ground.  After  some  time
he  rose  up  in  deep  agitation,  and  asked  Sohrab
what  tokens  he  possessed  to  prove  the  truth  of  his
assertion, — "  for  I  am  Rustem!"  he  said  in  agony.
"Alas!"  rejoined  Sohrab,  "the  instinctive  feel-
ing was  ever  at  my  heart,  but,  wonderful  to  say,  it
received  no  mutual  assurance  from  thine !  If  a
token  is  required,  ungird  my  mail,  and  there  be-
hold the  amulet  which  my  mother  bound  on  my
arm,  and  which  Rustem  gave  to  her,  saying  that
it  would  be  of  extraordinary  use  on  a  future  day/'
The  sight  of  the  amulet  was  an  overwhelming
blow  to  the  father — he  exclaimed  in  bitterness  of
soul:  "  O  cruelly  art  thou  slain  my  son !  my  son  !
What  father  ever  thus  destroyed  his  own  offspring !
I  shall  never  be  released  from  the  horror  of  this
dreadful  crime,  and  therefore  better  will  it  be  that
I  put  an  end  to  my  own  existence!"  But  Sohrab
dissuaded  him  from  this  resolution.  "  It  has  been
my  destiny  thus  to  perish,  it  can  be  of  no  avail
to  kill  thyself.  Let  me  depart,  alone — and  thou
remain  for  ever."  Rustem,  in  utter  despair,  flung
himself  on  the  ground,  and  covered  his  head  with
dust  and  ashes;  whilst  Sohrab  continued  writhing


202  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

and  fluttering  like  a  bird,  from  the  anguish  of  his
wound.

When  the  people  of  Kaus  perceived  Rakush
riderless,  they  reported  to  him  that  Rustem  was
dead,  and  a  loud  wail  of  sorrow  arose  from  the
whole  army.  The  messenger  who  was  sent  to
ascertain  the  particulars  of  the  misfortune,  found
Rustem  rolling  in  the  dust  in  the  deepest  afflic-
tion, and  Sohrab  at  the  point  of  death ;  and  raising
up  the  head  of  the  champion,  asked  him  what
had  happened.  "  I  have  done  that,"  said  he,
"  which  has  made  me  weary  of  life.  I  have,  in
my  old  age,  slain  my  son  !"  Zuara,  his  brother,
hearing  this,  turned  in  sorrow  to  Sohrab,  who  said
to  him :  "  Such  is  my  destiny,  such  the  will  of
fortune.  It  was  decreed  that  I  should  perish
by  the  hand  of  my  father.  I  came  like  a  flash
of  lightning,  and  now  I  depart  like  the  empty
wind."  Both  Rustem  and  Zuara  were  incon-
solable, but  Sohrab  again  tried  to  soothe  them,
and  said,  "  No  person  remains  for  ever  in  the
world;  then  why  this  grief!"  He  then  addressed
Rustem,  "  O  let  not  those  who  have  followed  my
fortunes  be  put  to  trouble,  or  punished  on  my  ac-
count,— they  are  not  to  blame."  And  Rustem  set
his  mind  entirely  at  rest  about  them.

Gudarz  was  now  sent  by  the  champion  to  Kaus
to  ask  him  for  a  cordial  balm  which  he  possessed


THE SHAH NAMEH.  203

of  wonderful  virtue,  in  the  hope  that  it  might  re-
store Sohrab  to  life.  But  when  the  king  heard
the  request,  he  said:  "  Doubtless  the  cordial  will
make  him  better,  but  I  cannot  forget  the  scandal
and  disgrace  which  this  youth  heaped  upon  me
even  in  presence  of  my  own  army.  Besides
which,  he  threatened  to  deprive  me  of  my
crown,  and  give  it  to  Rustem.  I  will  not  serve
him."

When  Giidarz  heard  this  cruel  speech,
Which  flinty  heart  alone  could  teach,
He  hastened  back  and  told  the  tale  ;
But  though  it  was  his  fate  to  fail,
Rustem  himself,  the  king  might  calm,
And  gain  the  life-reviving  balm  !
Then  Rustem  to  his  sovereign  went,
But  scarcely  had  he  reached  the  tent,
Ere  news  arrived  that  all  was  past, —
The  warrior-youth  had  breathed  his  last !

Rustem  returned  with  the  utmost  speed,  and
continued  mourning  intensely.  "  Son  of  the  va-
liant !  thou  art  gone,  the  descendant  of  heroes  has
departed.  Right  would  it  be  were  I  to  cut  off
both  my  hands,  and  sit  for  evermore  in  dust  and
darkness."  The  body  of  Sohrab  was  then  placed
on  a  bier,  and  there  was  nothing  but  lamen-
tation.


204  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Alas  !  for  that  valour,  that  wisdom  of  thine,
Alas !  that  sweet  life  thou  wert  doomed  to  resign  ;
Alas  !  for  the  anguish  thy  mother  must  feel,
And  thy  father's  affliction,  which  time  will  not  heal.

The  champion  now  proceeded  to  his  tent,  and
consigned  all  his  property,  warlike  appurtenances,
and  armour,  to  the  flames.

Why  should  affection  cling  to  this  vain  world,
Still  fleeting,  never  for  a  moment  fixed.
Who  that  has  reason  or  reflection  ever
Can  be  deceived  by  life's  delusive  joys  !

Kaus  himself  now  repaired  to  Rustem,  and
offered  him  the  consolation  he  required  :

"  No  one  is  free  from  sorrow,  all
Who  sojourn  on  this  earthly  ball,
Must  weep  o'er  friends  and  kindred  gone,
And  some  are  left  to  mourn,  alone.
'Twas  ever  thus  since  time  began,
For  sorrow  is  the  lot  of  man.1"

Upon  this  Rustem  observed  :  "  Thus  it  is,  the
arrow  has  reached  the  mark.  My  son  is  dead  !
and  after  this,  1  shall  never  more  gird  my  loins
against  the  Turanians.  Let  me  request  that  Hu-
man may  be  allowed  to  return  with  his  army  un-
molested to  his  own  country,  and  that  peace  be
made  with  Afrasiyab."  The  king  acceded  to  this


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  205

solicitation,  saying,  "  My  heart  bleeds  forthee,  and
on  thy  account  I  will  overlook  the  injuries  and  insults
which  I  have  received  from  my  implacable  enemy.
Let  them  go."  Zuara  was  appointed  to  see  Human
and  the  Tartar  troops  across  the  Jfhun,  and  at  the
same  time  Kaus  with  his  army  returned  to  Iran.

Meanwhile  Rustem  accompanied  the  bier  of
Sohrab  to  Sistan,  and  was  met  by  Zal,  with  his
household  and  troops  in  mourning  raiment,  throw-
ing ashes  over  their  heads.  He  said  to  his  father,
"  Alas  !  in  this  narrow  coffin  lies  the  very  image
of  Sam  Suwar !"  and  when  the  bier  was  conveyed
into  the  house,  loud  and  continued  lamentations
burst  forth  from  the  mother  of  Rustem  and  the
women  of  her  family.  At  length  the  body  of
Sohrab  was  honourably  interred,  and  a  lasting
monument  erected  to  his  memory.

When  the  melancholy  tidings  of  the  stripling's
fate  arrived  at  Samengan,  and  were  communicated
to  Tahmineh,  she  lighted  a  fire  and  threw  herself
into  it ;  and  when  rescued  from  the  flames  by  her
people,  she  burnt  her  flowing  hair,  and  disfigured
her  body  in  the  agony  of  desperation.

With  her  clenched  hand  she  tore  her  raven  locks,
Locks  of  ensnaring  beauty,  as  these  words,
Uttered  with  frenzied  look,  and  trembling  accent,
Fell  from  her  lips  :  "  My  child,  my  darling  child  !
Were  art  thou  now,  mixed  with  the  worthless  earth,
In  a  remote,  inhospitable  land,


206  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Seeking  thy  father,  what  hast  thou  obtained  ?

Death  from  a  parent's  hand  ! O  how  I  loved  thee,

And  watched  thee  night  and  day  ;  whom  can  I  now

Clasp  in  these  longing  arms,  to  whom  relate

The  agony  I  suffer  !  O  my  child  !

Where  were  the  tokens  which  I  gave  to  thee,

Why  didst  thou  not  present  them  to  his  view  ?

But  wherefore  did  I  madly  stay  behind,

And  not  point  out  to  thee  thy  mighty  father  ?"

Thus  wildly  she  exclaimed,  and  all  around

Seeing  her  frantic  grief,  shed  floods  of  tears.

The  stripling's  horse  was  brought,  and  to  her  bosom

She  pressed  the  hoofs,  and  kissed  the  head  and  face,

Bathing  them  with  her  tears. His  mail,  and  helm,

Bow,  spear,  and  mace,  his  bridle,  shield,  and  saddle,

Were  all  before  her,  and  with  these  she  beat

Her  bursting  head,  as  if  she  could  not  feel

Aught  but  the  wounds  of  her  maternal  spirit.

Thus  she  unceasing  raved  and  wept  by  turns,

Till  one  long  year  had  passed — then,  welcome  death

Released  her  from  the  heavy  load  of  life,

The  pressure  of  unmitigated  woe.


THE SHAH NAMKII.  207


THE  STORY  OF  SAIAWUSH.

Early  one  morning  as  the  cock  crew,  Tus  arose,
and  accompanied  by  Giw  and  Gudarz  and  a  com-
pany of  horsemen,  proceeded  on  a  hunting  ex-
cursion, not  far  from  the  banks  of  the  Jihun,
where,  after  ranging  about  the  forest  for  some
time,  they  happened  to  fall  in  with  a  damsel  of
extreme  beauty,  with  smiling  lips,  blooming
cheeks,  and  fascinating  mien.  They  said  to  her  :

"  Never  was  seen  so  sweet  a  flower,
In  garden,  vale,  or  fairy  bower  ;
The  moon  is  on  thy  lovely  face,
Thy  cypress-form  is  full  of  grace  ;
But  why,  with  charms  so  soft  and  meek,
Dost  thou  the  lonely  forest  seek  ?"

She  replied  that  her  father  was  a  violent  man,
and  that  she  had  left  her  home  to  escape  his  anger.
She  had  crossed  the  river  Jihun,  and  had  travelled
several  leagues  on  foot,  in  consequence  of  her
horse  being  too  much  fatigued  to  bear  her  farther.
She  had  at  that  time  been  three  days  in  the  forest.
On  being  questioned  respecting  her  parentage,
she  said  her  father's  name  was  Shiwer,  of  the
race  of  Feridun.  Many  sovereigns  had  been
suitors  for  her  hand,  but  she  did  not  approve  of
one  of  them.  At  last  he  wanted  to  marry  her  to


208  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Poshung,  the  ruler  of  Turan,  but  she  refused  him
on  account  of  his  ugliness  and  bad  temper  !  This
she  said  was  the  cause  of  her  father's  violence,
and  of  her  flight  from  home.

"  But  when  his  angry  mood  is  o'er,
Hell  love  his  daughter  as  before ;
And  send  his  horsemen  far  and  near,
To  take  me  to  my  mother  dear ;
Therefore,  I  would  not  further  stray,
But  here,  without  a  murmur,  stay."

The  hearts  of  both  Tus  and  Giw  were  equally
inflamed  with  love  for  the  damsel,  and  each  was
equally  determined  to  support  his  own  pretensions,
in  consequence  of  which  a  quarrel  arose  between
them.  At  length  it  was  agreed  to  refer  the  matter
to  the  king,  and  to  abide  by  his  decision.  When,
however,  the  king  beheld  the  lovely  object  of
contention,  he  was  not  disposed  to  give  her  to
either  claimant,  but  without  hesitation  took  her  to
himself,  after  having  first  ascertained  that  she  was
of  distinguished  family  and  connection.  In  the
usual  time  a  son  was  born  to  him,  who  was,  ac-
cording to  the  calculations  of  the  astrologers,  of
wonderful  promise,  and  named  Saiawush.  The
prophecies  about  his  surprising  virtues,  and  his
future  renown,  made  Kaus  anxious  that  justice
should  be  done  to  his  opening  talents,  and  was
highly  gratified  when  Rustem  agreed  to  take  him


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  209

to  Zabulistan,  and  there  instruct  him  in  all  the
accomplishments  which  were  suitable  to  his  illus-
trious rank.  He  was  accordingly  taught  horse-
manship and  archery,  how  to  conduct  himself  at
banquets,  how  to  hunt  with  the  falcon  and  the
leopard,  and  made  familiar  with  the  manners  and
duty  of  kings,  and  the  hardy  chivalry  of  the  age.
His  progress  in  the  attainment  of  every  species  of
knowledge  and  science  was  surprising,  and  in
hunting  he  never  stooped  to  the  pursuit  of  animals
inferior  to  the  lion  or  the  tiger.  It  was  not  long
before  the  youth  felt  anxious  to  pay  a  visit  to  his
father,  and  Rustem  willingly  complying  with  his
wishes,  accompanied  his  accomplished  pupil  to
the  royal  court,  where  they  were  both  received
with  becoming  distinction,  Saiawush  having  ful-
filled Kaus  expectations  in  the  highest  degree,
and  the  king's  gratitude  to  the  champion  being
in  proportion  to  the  eminent  merit  of  his  ser-
vices on  the  interesting  occasion.  After  this,
however,  preceptors  were  continued  to  enlighten
his  mind  seven  years  longer,  and  then  he
was  emancipated  from  further  application  and
study.

One  day  Sudaveh,  one  of  the  wives  of  Kaus,
and  daughter  of  the  Shah  of  Hamaveran,  hap-
pening to  see  Saiawush  sitting  with  his  father,
the  beauty  of  his  person  made  an  instantaneous
impression  on  her  heart.


210  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

The  fire  of  love  consumed  her  breast,
The  thoughts  of  him  denied  her  rest.
For  him  alone  she  pined  in  grief,
From  him  alone  she  sought  relief,
And  called  him  to  her  secret  bower,
Haply  to  share  the  genial  hour ;
But  Saiawush  refused  the  call,
He  would  not  shame  his  father's  hall.

The  enamoured  wife  of  Kaus,  however,  was
not  to  be  disappointed  without  further  effort,  and
on  a  subsequent  day  she  boldly  went  to  the  king,
and  praising  the  character  and  attainments  of  his
son,  proposed  that  he  should  be  united  in  marriage
to  one  of  the  damsels  of  royal  lineage  under  her
care.  For  the  pretended  purpose  therefore  of
making  his  choice,  she  requested  he  might  be  sent
to  the  harem,  to  see  all  the  ladies  and  fix  on  one
the  most  suited  to  his  desires.  The  king  ap-
proved of  the  proposal,  and  intimated  to  Saiawush
the  intentions  of  himself  and  the  queen,  but
Saiawush  was  modest,  timid,  and  bashful,  and
mentally  suspected  in  this  overture  some  artifice
of  Sudaveh.  He  accordingly  hesitated,  but  the
king  overcame  his  scruples,  and  the  youth  at
length  repaired  to  the  shubistan,  or  chambers  of
night,  as  the  retired  apartments  of  the  women  are
called,  with  fear  and  trembling.  When  he  en-
tered within  the  precincts  of  the  sacred  place,  he


THE SHAH \AMKH.  211

was  surprised  by  the  richness  and  magnificence  of
every  thing  that  struck  his  sight.  He  was  de-
lighted with  the  company  of  beautiful  women,
and  he  observed  Sudaveh  sitting  on  a  splendid
throne  in  an  interior  chamber,  like  Heaven  in
beauty  and  loveliness,  with  a  coronet  on  her  head,
and  her  hair  floating  round  her  in  musky  ringlets.
Seeing  him,  she  descended  gracefully,  and  clasp-
ing him  in  her  arms,  kissed  his  eyes  and  face  with
such  ardour  and  enthusiasm  that  he  thought  proper
to  retire  from  her  embrace  and  mix  among  the
other  females,  who  placed  him  on  a  golden  chair
and  kept  him  in  agreeable  conversation  for  some
time.  After  this  pleasing  interview  he  returned
to  the  king,  and  gave  him  a  very  favourable  ac-
count of  his  reception,  and  the  heavenly  splendour
of  the  retirement,  worthy  of  Jemshid,  Feridun,
or  Husheng,  which  gladdened  his  father's  heart.
Kaus  repeated  to  him  his  wish  that  he  would  at
once  chuse  one  of  the  lights  of  the  harem  for  his
wife,  as  the  astrologers  had  prophecied  on  his
marriage  the  birth  of  a  prince.  But  Saiawush
endeavoured  to  excuse  himself  from  going  again
to  Sudaveh's  apartments.  The  king  smiled  at  his
weakness,  and  assured  him  that  the  queen  was
alone  anxious  for  his  happiness,  upon  which  the
youth  found  himself  again  in  her  power.  She  was
surrounded  by  the  damsels  as  before,  but,  whilst
his  eyes  were  cast  down,  they  shortly  disappeared,

p2


212  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

leaving  him  and  the  enamoured  queen  together.
Sudaveh  soon  approached  him,  and  lovingly  said :

"  O  why  the  secret  keep  from  one,
Whose  heart  is  fixed  on  thee  alone  !
Say  who  thou  art,  from  whom  descended,
Some  angel  with  a  mortal  blended.
For  every  maid  who  sees  that  face,
That  cypress  form  replete  with  grace,
Becomes  a  victim  to  the  wiles
Which  nestle  in  those  dimpled  smiles  ;
Becomes  thy  own  adoring  slave,
Whom  nothing  but  thy  love  can  save.'1

To  this  Saiawush  made  no  reply.  The  history
of  the  adventure  of  Kaus  at  Hamaveran,  and  what
the  king  and  his  warriors  endured  in  consequence
of  the  treachery  of  the  father  of  Sudaveh,  flashed
upon  his  mind.  He  therefore  was  full  of  appre-
hension, and  breathed  not  a  word  in  answer  to
her  fondness.  Sudaveh  observing  his  silence  and
reluctance,  threw  away  from  herself  the  veil  of
modesty,

And  said :  "  O  be  my  own,  for  1  am  thine,

And  let  us  pass  the  time  in  blessedness,

The  blessedness  of  lovers ;  come  to  me,

And  clasp  me  in  thy  arms  !" And  then  she  sprang

To  the  astonished  boy,  and  eagerly

Kissed  his  deep  crimsoned  cheek,  which  filled  his  soul


THE SHAH NA.MKII,  213

With  strange  confusion. "  When  the  king  is  dead,

0  take  me  to  thyself;  see  how  I  stand,
Body  and  soul  devoted  unto  thee,

Do  but  thy  will  and  pleasure." And  again
She  strained  him  to  her  breast, devouring  him
With  burning  kisses. In  his  heart  he  said,
"  This  is  a  demon's  work — shall  I  be  treacherous  ?
What !  to  my  own  dear  father  ?  Never,  never  ;

1  will  not  thus  be  tempted  by  the  devil ;
Yet  must  I  not  be  cold  to  this  wild  woman,
For  fear  of  further  folly.11

Saiawush  then  expressed  his  readiness  to  be
united  in  marriage  to  her  daughter,  and  to  no
other;  and  when  this  intelligence  was  conveyed
to  Kaus  by  Sudaveh  herself,  his  majesty  was  ex-
tremely pleased,  and  munificently  opened  his
treasury  on  the  happy  occasion.  But  Sudaveh
still  kept  in  view  her  own  intrigue,  and  still  la-
bouring for  its  success,  sedulously  read  her  own
incantations  to  prevent  disappointment,  at  any
rate  to  punish  the  uncomplying  youth  if  she  fail-
ed. On  another  day  she  sent  for  him,  and  ex-
claimed :

"  I  cannot  now  dissemble ;  since  I  saw  thee
I  seem  to  be  as  dead — my  heart  all  withered.
Seven  years  have  passed  in  unrequited  love —
Seven  long,  long  years. O  !  be  not  still  obdurate,
But  with  the  generous  impulse  of  affection,


214  THE SH  All NA.MKU.

Bring  back  to  me  the  pleasures  of  inv  youth.

Oh,  bless  my  anxious  spirit,  or,  refusing,

Thy  life  will  be  in  peril ;  thou  shalt  die  ! '

"  Never,"  replied  the  youth ;  "  O,  never,  never,

Thou  art  my  father's  wife — his  queen,  his  empress,

And  I,  his  son — never,  it  cannot  be  !"

Saiawush  then  rose  to  depart  precipitately,  but
Sudaveh  observing  him,  endeavoured  to  cling
round  him  and  arrest  his  flight.  The  endeavour
however  was  fruitless  ;  and  finding  at  length  her
situation  desperate,  she  determined  to  turn  the
adventure  into  her  own  favour,  by  accusing  Saia-
wush of  an  atrocious  outrage  on  her  own  person
and  virtue.  She  accordingly  tore  her  dress,
screamed  aloud,  and  rushed  out  of  her  apartment
to  inform  Kaus  of  the  indignity  she  had  suffered.
Among  her  women  the  most  clamorous  lamenta-
tions arose,  and  echoed  on  every  side.  The  king,
on  hearing  that  Saiawush  had  preferred  Sudaveh
to  her  daughter,  and  that  he  had  meditated  so
abominable  an  offence,  thought  that  death  alone
could  expiate  his  crime.  He  therefore  summoned
him  to  his  presence ;  but  satisfied  that  it  would
be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  ascertain  the  truth
of  the  case  from  either  of  the  party  concerned,
he  had  recourse  to  a  test  which  he  thought  would
be  infallible  and  conclusive.  He  first  smelt  the
hands  of  Saiawush,  and  then  his  garments,  which


THE SIIAII NAMKII.  2)5

had  the  scent  of  rose-water;  and  then  he  took
the  garments  of  Sudiiveh,  which,  on  the  contrary  ?
had  a  strong  flavour  of  wine  and  musk.  Upon
this  discovery,  the  king  resolved  on  the  death  of
his  wife,  being  convinced  of  the  falsehood  of  the
accusation  she  had  made  against  his  son.  But
when  his  indignation  subsided,  he  was  induced  on
various  accounts  to  forego  that  resolution.  Yet
he  said  to  her,  "  I  am  sure  that  Saiawush  is  in-
nocent, but  let  that  remain  concealed."  Sudaveh
however  persisted  in  asserting  his  guilt,  and  con-
tinually urged  him  to  punish  the  reputed  offender,
but  without  being  attended  to.  Some  time  after-
wards one  of  the  slave  women  belonging  to  the
zenaneh  happened  to  be  clandestinely  with  child,
and  when  Sudaveh  heard  of  it  she  soon  applied
the  circumstance  to  her  own  advantage,  or  rather
to  the  purposes  of  revenge.  Having  sent  for  her,
she  instructed  her  in  the  part  she  was  to  act,  fur-
nishing her  with  some  charmed  medicine  to  pro-
mote premature  delivery.  Accordingly  when  the
time  of  parturition  came,  attending  to  the  direc-
tions she  had  received,  the  woman  made  a  great
clamour,  and  answering  the  inquiries  of  her  com-
panions, she  said  that  Saiawush  had  taken  an  op-
portunity of  triumphing  over  her  virtue,  on  the
day  he  visited  the  shubistan,  and  that  her  present
condition  was  the  consequence  of  his  licentious
behaviour.  Kaus  was  himself  awakened  by  the


216  THE SHAH NA.MEH.

noise,  and  getting  up  found  Sudaveh,  as  he  thought,
innocently  asleep,  but  the  females  immediately  told
him  what  had  so  strangely  occurred,  nothing  less
than  the  birth  of  two  dead  children,  which,  to
verify  the  fact,  they  brought  to  him  on  a  golden
dish.  Kaus  was  amazed  at  the  sight,  and  awoke
Sudaveh.  The  cunning  queen,  seeing  the  dead
children,  inquired  with  seeming  wonder  into  the
circumstances,  and  was  informed  of  the  alleged
misconduct  of  Saiawush  ;  upon  which,  she  broke
out  and  exclaimed  :

My  word  was  scorned  as  void  of  truth,
To  free  from  guile  this  moral  youth  ;
Now  see,  am  I  to  be  believed,
Say,  who  was  right,  and  who  deceived  !

Kaus  immediately  retired,  and  consulted  his
astrologers  on  the  subject  of  the  extraordinary
birth,  and  whether  the  children  were  actually  of
royal  progeny,  or  of  base  origin.  The  astrologers
required  a  week  to  study  the  signs  and  stars  ;  and
at  the  end  of  that  period,  declared  that  the  chil-
dren were  not  of  royal  blood.  The  king  commu-
nicated this  intelligence  to  Sudaveh,  who  how-
ever continued  to  charge  the  prince  with  impure
and  criminal  conduct,  and  declared  that  Rustem
had  compelled  them  to  falsify  the  fact ;  besides,
she  added,  being  afraid  of  Saiawush,  they  could
not  be  expected  to  give  evidence  against  him.


THE SHAH NAMEII.  217

Full  of  resentment,  she  tore  her  face  and  hair,  as
in  the  greatest  agony  of  grief,  and  grasping  his
hands,  cried :

"  Since  thou  hast deemed  thy  offspring  pure  and

spotless,

And  me,  alas  !  unworthy  of  thy  trust,
Faithless  and  false,  why  should  I  live  to  be
The  scorn  of  him  1  love — why, thus  despised
By  thee,  drag  on  a  miserable  life  ?
No,  rather  will  I  die." And  then  she  wept,
Resistless  in  her  sorrow,  and  the  king
Was  moved  to  yield  what  seemed  to  give  relief.

He  resolved  to  ascertain  the  innocence  of  Saia-
wush  by  the  ordeal  of  fire ;  and  the  fearless  youth
prepared  to  undergo  the  terrible  trial  to  which
he  was  sentenced,  telling  his  father  to  be  under
no  alarm.

"  The  truth  (and  its  reward  I  claim),
Will  bear  me  safe  through  fiercest  flame. "

A  tremendous  fire  was  accordingly  lighted  on
the  adjacent  plain,  which  blazed  to  an  immense
distance.  The  youth  was  attired  in  his  golden
helmet  and  a  white  robe,  and  mounted  on  a  black
horse.  He  put  up  a  prayer  to  the  Almighty  for
protection,  and  then  rushed  amidst  the  conflagra-
tion, as  collectedly  as  if  the  act  had  been  entirely
free  from  peril.  When  Sudaveh  heard  the  con-


218  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

fused  exclamations  that  were  uttered  at  that  mo-
ment, she  hurried  upon  the  terrace  of  the  palace
and  witnessed  the  appalling  sight,  and  in  the  fond-
ness of  her  heart,  wished  even  that  she  could
share  his  fate,  the  fate  of  him  of  whom  she  was
so  deeply  enamoured.  The  king  himself  fell  from
his  throne  in  horror  on  seeing  him  surrounded  and
enveloped  in  the  flames,  from  which  there  seemed
no  chance  of  extrication  ;  but  the  gallant  youth
soon  rose  up,  like  the  moon  from  the  bursting  ele-
ment, and  went  through  the  ordeal  unharmed  and
untouched  by  the  fire.  Kaus,  on  coming  to  his
senses,  rejoiced  exceedingly  on  the  happy  occasion,
and  his  severest  anger  was  directed  against  Su-
daveh,  whom  he  now  determined  to  put  to  death,
not  only  for  her  own  guilt,  but  for  exposing  his
son  to  such  imminent  danger.  The  noble  youth,
however,  interceded  for  her  ;  and  though  the  king
for  some  time  afterwards  treated  her  with  inatten-
tion and  indifference,  his  former  affection  returned,
and  it  was  not  long  before  he  was  more  attached
to  her  than  ever.  Sudaveh,  notwithstanding,  still
continued  to  practice  her  charms  and  incantations
in  secret,  to  the  end  that  Saiawush  might  be  put
out  of  the  way ;  and  in  this  pursuit  she  was  indeed
indefatigable.

Suddenly  intelligence  was  received  that  Afra-
siyab  had  assembled  another  army,  for  the  purpose
of  making  an  irruption  into  Iran ;  and  Kaus,  see-


THE S  II  A  II N  A: MKII.  219

ing  that  a  Tartar  could  neither  be  bound  by  pro-
mise nor  oath,  resolved  that  he  would  on  this  oc-
casion take  the  field  himself,  penetrate  as  far  as
Balkh,  and  seizing  the  country,  make  an  example
of  the  inhabitants.  But  Saiawush  perceiving  in
this  prospect  of  affairs  an  opportunity  of  becoming
free  from  the  machinations  and  witchery  of  Su-
daveh,  earnestly  requested  to  be  employed,  add-
ing that,  with  the  advice  and  bravery  of  Rustem,
he  would  be  sure  of  success.  The  king  referred
the  matter  to  Rustem,  who  candidly  declared  that
there  was  no  necessity  whatever  for  his  majesty
proceeding  personally  to  the  war ;  and  upon  this
assurance  he  threw  open  his  treasury,  and  sup-
plied all  the  resources  of  the  empire  to  equip  the
troops  appointed  to  accompany  them.  After  one
month  the  army  marched  towards  Balkh,  the
point  of  attack.

On  the  other  side  Gersiwaz,  the  ruler  of  Bal-
ghar,  joined  the  Tartar  legions  at  Balkh,  com-
manded by  Barman,  who  both  sallied  forth  to
oppose  the  Persian  host,  and  after  a  conflict  of
three  days  were  defeated,  and  obliged  to  aban-
don the  fort.  When  the  accounts  of  this  calamity
reached  Afrasiyab,  he  was  seized  with  the  utmost
terror,  which  was  increased  by  a  dreadful  dream.
He  thought  he  was  in  a  forest  abounding  with
serpents,  and  that  the  air  was  darkened  by  the
appearance  of  countless  eagles.  The  ground  was


220  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

parched  up  with  heat,  and  a  whirlwind  hurled
down  his  tent  and  overthrew  his  banners.  On
every  side  flowed  a  river  of  blood,  and  the  whole
of  his  army  had  been  defeated  and  butchered  in
his  sight.  He  was  afterwards  taken  prisoner,  and
ignominiously  conducted  to  Kaus,  in  whose  com-
pany he  beheld  a  gallant  youth,  not  more  than
fourteen  years  of  age,  who,  the  moment  he  saw
him,  plunged  a  dagger  in  his  loins,  and  with  the
scream  of  agony  produced  by  the  wound,  he
awoke.  Gersiwaz  had  in  the  mean  time  returned
with  the  remnant  of  his  force  ;  and  being  informed
of  these  particulars,  endeavoured  to  console  Afra-
siyab,  by  assuring  him  that  the  true  interpretation
of  dreams  was  the  reverse  of  appearances.  But
Afrasiyab  was  not  to  be  consoled  in  this  manner.
He  referred  to  his  astrologers,  who,  however,  he-
sitated, and  were  unwilling  to  afford  an  explana-
tion of  the  mysterious  vision.  At  length  one  of
them,  upon  the  solicited  promise  that  the  king
would  not  punish  him  for  divulging  the  truth,  de-
scribed the  nature  of  the  warning  implied  in  what
had  been  witnessed.

"  And  now  I  throw  aside  the  veil,
Which  hides  the  darkly  shadowed  tale.
Led  by  a  prince  of  prosperous  star,
The  Persian  legions  speed  to  war.
And  in  his  horoscope  we  scan
The  lordly  victor  of  Turan.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  221

If  thou  shouldst  to  the  conflict  rush,
Opposed  to  conquering  Saiawush,
Thy  Turkish  cohorts  will  be  slain,
And  all  thy  saving  efforts  vain.
For  if  he,  in  the  threatened  strife,
Should  haply  chance  to  lose  his  life  ;
Thy  country's  fate  will  be  the  same,
Stripped  of  its  throne  and  diadem."

Afrasiyab  was  satisfied  with  this  interpretation,
and  felt  the  prudence  of  avoiding  a  war  so  preg-
nant with  evil  consequences  to  himself  and  his
kingdom.  He  therefore  deputed  Gersiwaz  to  the
head-quarters  of  Saiawush,  with  splendid  pre-
sents, consisting  of  horses  richly  caparisoned,  ar-
mour, swords,  and  other  costly  articles,  and  a
written  despatch,  proposing  a  termination  to  hos-
tilities.

In  the  mean  time  Saiawush  was  anxious  to  pur-
sue the  enemy  across  the  Jihun,  but  was  dissuaded
by  his  friends.  When  Gersiwaz  arrived  on  his
embassy  he  was  received  with  distinction,  and  the
object  of  his  mission  being  understood,  a  secret  coun-
cil was  held  upon  what  answer  should  be  given.  It
was  then  deemed  proper  to  demand;  first,  one  hun-
dred distinguished  heroes  as  hostages  ;  and  se-
condly, the  restoration  of  all  the  provinces  which
the  Turanians  had  taken  from  Iran.  Gersiwaz
sent  immediately  to  Afrasiyab  to  inform  him  of
the  conditions  required,  and  without  the  least  de-


222  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

lay  they  were  approved.  A  hundred  warriors
were  soon  on  their  way ;  and  Bokhara,  and  Sa-
merkand,  and  Haj,  and  the  Punjab,  were  faithfully
delivered  over  to  Saiawush.  Afrasiyab  himself
retired  towards  Gungduz,  saying,  "  I  have  had  a
terrible  dream,  and  I  will  surrender  whatever  may
be  required  from  me,  rather  than  go  to  war."

The  negociations  being  concluded,  Saiawush
sent  a  letter  to  his  father  by  the  hands  of  Rustem.
Rumour,  however,  had  already  told  Kaus  of  Afra-
siyab's  dream,  and  the  terror  he  had  been  thrown
into  in  consequence.  The  astrologers  in  his  ser-
vice having  prognosticated  from  it  the  certain  ruin
of  the  Turanian  king,  the  object  of  Rustem 's  mis-
sion was  directly  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  Kaus  ;
but  Rustem  contended  that  the  policy  was  good,
and  the  terms  were  good,  and  he  thereby  incurred
his  majesty's  displeasure.  On  this  account  Kaus
appointed  Tus  the  leader  of  the  Persian  army,
and  commanded  him  to  march  against  Afrasiyab,
ordering  Saiawush  at  the  same  time  to  return,  and
bring  with  him  his  hundred  hostages.  At  this
command  Saiawush  was  grievously  offended,  and
consulted  with  his  chieftains,  Bahrain,  and  Zinga>
and  Shaweran,  on  the  fittest  course  to  be  pursued,
saying,  "  I  have  pledged  my  word  to  the  fulfil-
ment of  the  terms,  and  what  will  the  world  say  if
I  do  not  keep  my  faith  ?"  The  chiefs  tried  to  quiet
his  mind,  and  recommended  him  to  write  again  to


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  223

Kaus,  expressing  his  readiness  to  renew  the  war,
and  return  the  hundred  hostages.  But  Saiawush
was  in  a  different  humour,  and  thought  as  Tus
had  been  actually  appointed  to  the  command  of
the  Persian  army,  it  would  be  most  advisable  for
him  to  abandon  his  country  and  join  Afrasiyab.
The  chiefs,  upon  hearing  this  singular  resolution,
unanimously  attempted  to  dissuade  him  from  pur-
suing so  wild  a  course  as  throwing  himself  into
the  power  of  his  enemy  ;  but  he  was  deaf  to  their
entreaties,  and  in  the  stubborness  of  his  spirit,
wrote  to  Afrasiyab,  informing  him  that  Kaus  had
refused  to  ratify  the  treaty  of  peace,  that  he  was
compelled  to  return  the  hostages,  and  even  himself
to  seek  protection  in  Tiiran  from  the  resentment
of  his  father,  the  warrior  Tus  having  been  already
entrusted  with  the  charge  of  the  army.  This  un-
expected intelligence  excited  considerable  surprise
in  the  mind  of  Afrasiyab,  but  he  had  no  hesitation
in  selecting  the  course  to  be  followed.  The  am-
bassadors, Zinga  and  Shaweran,  were  soon  fur-
nished with  a  reply,  which  was  to  this  effect :
"  I  settled  the  terms  of  the  peace  with  thee,  not
with  thy  father.  With  him  I  have  nothing  to  do.
If  thy  choice  be  retirement  and  tranquillity,  thou
shalt  have  a  peaceful  and  independent  province
allotted  to  thee  ;  but  if  war  be  thy  object,  I  will
furnish  thee  with  a  large  army  :  thy  father  is  old
and  infirm,  and  with  the  aid  of  Rustem,  Persia


224  THE SHAH NAM  KIF.

will  be  an  easy  conquest."  Having  thus  obtained
the  promised  favour  and  support  of  Afrasiyab,
Saiawush  gave  in  charge  to  Bahrain  the  city  of
Balkh,  the  army  and  treasure,  in  order  that  they
might  be  delivered  over  to  Tus  on  his  arrival ;  and
taking  with  him  three  hundred  chosen  horsemen,
passed  the  Jihun,  in  progress  to  the  court  of  Afra-
siyab. On  taking  this  decisive  step,  he  again
wrote  to  Kaus,  saying  :

"  From  my  youth  upward  I  have  suffered  wrong,

At  first  Sudaveh,  false  and  treacherous,

Sought  to  destroy  my  happiness  and  fame  ;

And  thou  hadst  nearly  sacrificed  my  life

To  glut  her  vengeance. The  astrologers

Were  all  unheeded,  who  pronounced  me  innocent,

And  I  was  doomed  to  brave  devouring  fire,

To  testify  that  I  was  free  from  guilt ;

But  God  was  my  deliverer  ! Victory  now

Has  marked  my  progress. Balkh,  and  all  its  spoils,

Are  mine,  and  so  reduced  the  enemy,

That  I  have  gained  a  hundred  hostages,

To  guarantee  the  peace  which  I  have  made ;

And  what  my  recompense  !  a  father's  anger,

Which  takes  me  from  my  glory. Thus  deprived

Of  thy  affection,  whither  can  I  fly  ?

Be  it  to  friend  or  foe,  the  will  of  fate

Must  be  my  only  guide — condemned  by  thee."


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  225

The  reception  of  Saiawush  by  Afrasiyab  was
warm  and  flattering.  From  the  gates  of  the  city
to  the  palace,  gold  and  incense  were  scattered
over  his  head  in  the  customary  manner,  and  ex-
clamations of  welcome  uttered  on  every  side.

"  Thy  presence  gives  joy  to  the  land,
Which  awaits  thy  command  ;

It  is  thine  !  it  is  thine  !

All  the  chiefs  of  the  state  have  assembled  to  meet  thee,
All  the  flowers  of  the  land  are  in  blossom  to  greet  thee !"

The  youth  was  placed  on  a  golden  throne  next
to  Afrasiyab,  and  a  magnificent  banquet  prepared
in  honour  of  the  stranger,  and  music  and  the  songs
of  beautiful  women  enlivened  the  festive  scene.
They  chaunted  the  praises  of  Saiawush,  distin-
guished, as  they  said,  among  men  for  three  things ;
first,  for  being  of  the  line  of  Kai-kobad ;  secondly,
for  his  faith  and  honour ;  and,  thirdly,  for  the
wonderful  beauty  of  his  person,  which  had  gained
universal  love  and  admiration.  The  favourable
sentiments  which  characterized  the  first  intro-
duction of  Saiawush  to  Afrasiyab  continued  to
prevail,  and  indeed  the  king  of  Turan  seemed  to
regard  him  with  increased  attachment  and  friend-
ship, as  the  time  passed  away,  and  shewed  him
all  the  respect  and  honour  to  which  his  royal  birth
would  have  entitled  him  in  his  own  country.

Q


226  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

After  the  lapse  of  a  year,  Piran-wisah,  one  of
Afrasiyab's  generals,  said  to  him  :  "  Young  prince,
thou  art  now  high  in  the  favour  of  the  king,  and  at
a  great  distance  from  Persia,  and  thy  father  is  old  ;
would  it  not  therefore  be  better  for  thee  to  marry  and
take  up  thy  residence  among  us  for  life?"  The  sug-
gestion was  a  rational  one,  and  Saiawush  readily
expressed  his  acquiescence ;  accordingly,  the  lovely
Gulshaher,  who  was  also  named  Jarira,  having
been  introduced  to  him,  he  was  delighted  with
her  person,  and  both  consenting  to  a  union,  the
marriage  ceremony  was  immediately  performed.

And  many  a  warm  delicious  kiss,
Told  how  he  loved  the  wedded  bliss.

Some  time  after  this  union,  Piran  suggested
another  alliance,  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening
his  political  interest  and  power,  and  this  was  with
Ferangfs,  the  daughter  of  Afrasiyab.  But  Saia-
wush was  so  devoted  to  Gulshaher  that  he  first  con-
sulted with  her  on  the  subject,  although  the  hos-
pitality and  affection  of  the  king  constituted  such
strong  claims  on  his  gratitude  that  refusal  was  im-
possible. Gulshaher  however  was  a  heroine,  and
willingly  sacrificed  her  own  feelings  for  the  good
of  Saiawush,  saying  she  would  rather  condescend
to  be  the  very  handmaid  of  Ferangis  than  that
the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  her  lord  should  be
compromised.  The  second  marriage  accordingly


THE SHAH NAMEH.  227

took  place,  and  Afrasiyab  was  so  pleased  with
the  match  that  he  bestowed  on  the  bride  and  her
husband  the  sovereignty  of  Khoten,  together  with
countless  treasure  in  gold,  and  a  great  number  of
horses,  camels,  and  elephants.  In  a  short  time
they  proceeded  to  the  seat  of  the  new  government.

Meanwhile  Kaus  suffered  the  keenest  distress
and  sorrow  when  he  heard  of  the  flight  of  Saia-
wush  into  Turan,  and  Rustem  felt  such  strong-
indignation  at  the  conduct  of  the  king  that  he
abruptly  quitted  the  court,  without  permission,  and
retired  to  Sistan.  Kaus  thus  found  himself  in  an
embarrassed  condition,  and  deemed  it  prudent  to
recall  both  Tus  and  the  army  from  Balkh,  and
relinquish  further  hostile  measures  against  Afra-
siyab.

The  first  thing  that  Saiawush  undertook  after
his  arrival  at  Khoten,  was  to  order  the  selection  of
a  beautiful  scite  for  his  residence,  and  Piran  de-
voted his  services  to  fulfill  that  object,  exploring
all  the  provinces,  hills,  and  dales,  on  every  side.
At  last  he  discovered  a  beautiful  spot,  at  the  dis-
tance of  about  a  month's  journey,  which  combined
all  the  qualities  and  advantages  required  by  the
anxious  prince.  It  was  situated  on  a  mountain,
and  surrounded  by  scenery  of  exquisite  richness
and  variety.  The  trees  were  fresh  and  green,
birds  warbled  on  every  spray,  transparent  rivulets
murmured  through  the  meadows,  the  airwas  neither

Q  2


228  THE SHAH NAMEH.

oppressively  hot  in  summer,  nor  cold  in  winter,  so
that  the  temperature,  and  the  attractive  objects
which  presented  themselves  at  every  glance,  seemed
to  realize  the  imagined  charms  and  fascinations  of
Paradise.  The  inhabitants  enjoyed  perpetual
health,  and  every  breeze  was  laden  with  music
and  perfume.  So  lovely  a  place  could  not  fail  to
yield  pleasure  to  Saiawush,  who  immediately  set
about  building  a  palace  there,  and  garden-temples,
in  which  he  had  pictures  painted  of  the  most  re-
markable persons  of  his  time,  and  also  the  portraits
of  ancient  kings.  The  walls  were  decorated  with
the  likenesses  of  Kai-kobad,  of  Kai-kaus,  Po-
shung,  Afrasiyab,  and  Sam,  and  Zal,  and  Rustem,
and  other  champions  of  Persia  and  Turan.  When
completed,  it  was  a  gorgeous  retreat,  and  the
sight  of  it  sufficient  to  give  youthful  vigour  to  the
withered  faculties  of  age.  And  yet  Saiawush  was
not  happy  !  Tears  started  into  his  eyes  and  sor-
row weighed  upon  his  heart,  whenever  he  thought
upon  his  own  estrangement  from  home  !

It  happened  that  the  lovely  Gulshaher,  who  had
been  left  in  the  house  of  her  father,  was  delivered
of  a  son  in  due  time,  and  named  Ferud.

Afrasiyab,  on  being  informed  of  the  proceedings
of  Saiawush,  and  of  the  heart-expanding  residence
he  had  chosen,  was  highly  gratified  ;  and  to  shew
his  affectionate  regard,  dispatched  to  him  with  the
intelligence  of  the  birth  of  a  son,  presents  of  great


TllK SHAH XAMKH.  229

value  and  variety.  Gersfwaz,  the  brother  of  Afra-
siyab,  and  who  had  from  the  first  looked  upon
Saiawush  with  a  jealous  and  malignant  eye,  being
afraid  of  his  interfering  with  his  own  prospects  in
Turan,  was  the  person  sent  on  this  occasion.  But
he  hid  his  secret  thoughts  under  the  veil  of  outward
praise  and  approbation.  Saiawush  was  pleased
with  the  intelligence  and  the  presents,  but  failed
to  pay  the  customary  respect  to  Gersiwaz  on  his
arrival,  and,  in  consequence,  the  lurking  indigna-
tion and  hatred  formerly  felt  by  the  latter  were
considerably  augmented.  The  attention  of  Saia-
wush respecting  his  army  and  the  concerns  of  the
state,  was  unremitting,  and  noted  by  the  visitor  with
a  jealous  and  scrutinizing  eye,  so  that  Gersiwaz,  on
his  return  to  the  court  of  Afrasiyab,  artfully  talked
much  of  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  the  prince,  and
added  :  "  Saiawush  is  far  from  being  the  amiable
character  thou  hast  supposed ;  he  is  artful  and
ambitious,  and  he  has  collected  an  immense  army ;
he  is  in  fact  dissatisfied.  As  a  proof  of  his  haughti-
ness, he  paid  me  but  little  attention,  and  doubtless
very  heavy  calamity  will  soon  befall  Turan,  should
he  break  out,  as  I  apprehend  he  will,  into  open
rebellion.

For  he  is  proud,  and  thou  hast  yet  to  learn
The  temper  of  thy  daughter  Ferangis,
Now  bound  to  him  in  duty  and  affection  ;
Their  purpose  is  the  same,  to  overthrow


230  TFIE SHAH NAM  EH.

The  kingdom  of  Turan,  and  thy  dominion  ;
To  merge  the  glory  of  this  happy  realm
Into  the  Persian  empire  !"

But  plausible  and  persuasive  as  were  the  ob-
servations and  positive  declarations  of  Gersiwaz,
Afrasiyab  would  not  believe  the  imputed  ingra-
titude and  hostility  of  Saiawush. "  He  has  sought
my  protection,"  said  he  ;  "  he  has  thrown  himself
upon  my  generosity,  and  I  cannot  think  him  trea-
cherous. But  if  he  has  meditated  any  thing  un-
merited by  me, and  unworthy  of  himself, it  will
be  better  to  send  him  back  to  Kai-kaus,  his  father."
The  artful  Gersiwaz,  however,  was  not  to  be  di-
verted from  his  object :  he  said  that  Saiawnsh  had
become  personally  acquainted  with  Turan,  its  po-
sition, its  weakness, its  strength,  and  resources,
and  aided  by  Rustem,  would  soon  be  able  to  over-
run the  country  if  he  was  suffered  to  return, and
therefore  he  recommended  Afrasiyab  to  bring  him
from  Khoten  by  some  artifice,  and  secure  him. In
conformity  with  this suggestion, Gersiwaz  was
again  deputed  to  the  young  prince,  and  a  letter  of
a  friendly  nature  written  for  .the  purpose  of  blind-
ing him  to  the  real  intentions  of  his  father-in-law.
The  letter  was  no  sooner  read  than  Saiawush  ex-
pressed his  desire  to  comply  with  the  request  con-
tained in  it,  saying  that  Afrasiyab  had  been  a  fa-
ther to  him,  and  that  he  would  lose  no  time  in
fulfilling  in  all  respects  the  wishes  he  had  received.


THE SliAll NAME  II.  231

This  compliance  and  promptitude,  however,  was
not  in  harmony  with  the  sinister  views  of  Gersiwaz,
for  he  foresaw  that  the  very  fact  of  answering  the
call  immediately  would  shew  that  some  misrepre-
sentation had  been  practised,  and  consequently  it
was  his  business  now  to  promote  procrastination,
and  an  appearance  of  evasive  delay.  He  therefore
said  to  him  privately  that  it  would  be  advisable  for
him  to  wait  a  little,  and  not  manifest  such  implicit
obedience  to  the  will  of  Afrasiyab  ;  but  Saiawush
replied,  that  both  his  duty  and  affection  urged  him
to  a  ready  compliance.  Then  Gersiwaz  pressed
him  more  warmly,  and  represented  how  incon-
sistent, how  unworthy  of  his  illustrious  lineage
it  would  be  to  betray  so  meek  a  spirit,  especially
as  he  had  a  considerable  army  at  his  command,
and  could  vindicate  his  dignity  and  his  rights.
And  he  addressed  to  him  these  specious  arguments
so  incessantly  and  with  such  earnestness,  that  the
deluded  prince  was  at  last  induced  to  put  off  his
departure,  on  account  of  his  wife  Ferangis  pretend-
ing that  she  was  ill,  and  saying  that  the  moment
she  was  better  he  would  return  to  Turan.  This
was  quite  enough  for  treachery  to  work  upon  ;  and
as  soon  as  the  dispatch  was  sealed,  Gersiwaz  con-
veyed it  with  the  utmost  expedition  to  Afrasiyab.
Appearances,  at  least,  were  thus  made  strong
against  Saiawush,  and  the  tyrant  of  Turan,  now
easily  convinced  of  his  falsehood,  and  feeling  in  con-


232  THE SHAH NAMEH.

sequence  his  former  enmity  renewed,  forthwith  as-
sembled an  army  to  punish  his  refractory  son-in-
law. Gersiwaz  was  appointed  the  leader  of  that
army, which  was  put  in  motion  without  delay
against  the  unoffending  youth. The  news  of  Afra-
siyab's  warlike  preparations  satisfied  the  mind  of
Saiawush  that  Gersiwaz  had  given  him  good  ad-
vice, and  that  he  had  been  a  faithful  monitor,  for
immediate  compliance,  he  now  concluded,  would
have  been  his  utter  ruin. When  he  communicated
this  unwelcome  intelligence  to  Ferangis, she  was
thrown  into  the  greatest  alarm  and  agitation ;  but
ever  fruitful  in  expedients,  suggested  the  course
that  it  seemed  necessary  he  should  instantly  adopt,
which  was  to  fly  by  a  circuitous  route  back  to
Iran. To  this  he  expressed  no  dissent,  provided
she  would  accompany  him, but  she  said  it  was
impossible  to  do  so  on  account  of  her  being  in  a
state  of pregnancy. "  Leave  me,"  she  added,
"  and  save  thy  own  life !" He  therefore  called
together  his  three  hundred  Iranians,  and  request-
ing Ferangis, if  she  happened  to  be  delivered  of
a  son, to  call  him  Kai-khosrau, set  off  on  his
journey.

"  I  go,  surrounded  by  my  enemies ;
The  hand  of  merciless  Afrasiyab
Lifted  against  me."

It  was  not  the  fortune  of  Saiawush, however,


THE S  II  A  11 NAM  EH.  233

to  escape  so  easily  as  had  been  anticipated  by
Ferangis.  Gersiwaz  was  soon  at  his  heels,  and
in  the  battle  that  ensued,  all  the  Iranians  were
killed,  and  also  the  horse  upon  which  the  unfortunate
prince  rode,  so  that  on  foot  he  could  make  but  little
progress.  In  the  mean  time  Afrasiyab  came  up,
and  surrounding  him,  wanted  to  shoot  him  with  an
arrow,  but  he  was  restrained  from  the  violent  act
by  the  intercession  of  his  people,  who  recommended
his  being  taken  alive,  and  only  kept  in  prison.
Accordingly  he  was  again  attacked  and  secured,
and  still  Afrasiyab  wished  to  put  him  to  death ;
but  Pilsam,  one  of  his  warriors,  and  the  brother  of
Piran,  induced  him  to  relinquish  that  diabolical
intention,  and  to  convey  him  back  to  his  own  pa-
lace. Saiawush  was  then  ignominiously  fettered
and  conducted  to  the  royal  residence,  which  he
had  himself  erected  and  ornamented  with  such
richness  and  magnificence.  The  sight  of  the
city  and  its  splendid  buildings  filled  every  one
with  wonder  and  admiration.  Upon  the  arrival  of
Afrasiyab,  Ferangis  hastened  to  him  in  a  state  of
the  deepest  distress,  and  implored  his  clemency
and  compassion  in  favour  of  Saiawush.

"  O  father,  he  is  not  to  blame,
Still  pure  and  spotless  is  his  name  ;
Faithful  and  generous  still  to  me,
And  never — never  false  to  thee.


234  THE SHAH NAMEH.

This  hate  to  Gersiwaz  he  owes,
The  worst,  the  bitterest  of  his  foes ;
Did  he  not  thy  protection  seek,
And  wilt  thou  overpower  the  weak  ?
Spill  royal  blood  thou  ought'st  to  bless,
In  cruel  sport  and  wantonness?
And  earn  the  curses  of  mankind,

Living,  in  this  precarious  state,
And  dead,  the  torments  of  the  mind,

Which  hell  inflicts  upon  the  great
Who  revel  in  a  murderous  course.
And  rule  by  cruelty  and  force.

It  scarce  becomes  me  now  to  tell,
What  the  accursed  Zohak  befel,
Or  what  the  punishment  which  hurled
Selim  and  Tur  from  out  the  world.
And  is  not  Kads  living  now,
With  rightful  vengeance  on  his  brow  ?
And  Rustem,  who  alone  can  make
Thy  kingdom  to  its  centre  quake  ?
Gudarz,  Zuara,  and  Friburz,
And  Tus,  and  Girgin ,  and  Framurz ;
And  others  too  of  fearless  might,
To  challenge  thee  to  mortal  fight  ?
O,  from  this  peril  turn  away,
Close  not  in  gloom  so  bright  a  day ;
Some  heed  to  thy  poor  daughter  give,
And  let  thy  guiltless  captive  live.1'


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  235

The  effect  of  this  appeal,  solemnly  and  urgently
delivered,  was  only  transitory.  Afrasiyab  felt  a
little  compunction  at  the  moment,  but  soon  re-
sumed his  ferocious  spirit,  and  to  ensure,  without
interruption,  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose,
confined  Ferangis  in  one  of  the  remotest  parts  of
the  palace  ;

And  thus  to  Gersiwaz  unfeeling  spoke :

"  Off  with  his  head,  down  with  the  enemy ;

But  take  especial  notice  that  his  blood

Stains  not  the  earth,  lest  it  should  cry  aloud

For  vengeance  on  us. Take  good  care  of  that !"

Gersiwaz,  who  was  but  too  ready  an  instrument,
immediately  directed  Karu-zira,  a  kinsman  of
Afrasiyab,  who  had  been  also  one  of  the  most
zealous  in  promoting  the  ruin  of  the  Persian  prince,
to  inflict  the  deadly  blow ;  and  Saiawush,  whilst
under  the  grasp  of  the  executioner,  had  but  time
to  put  up  a  prayer  to  Heaven,  in  which  he  hoped
that  a  son  might  be  born  to  him  to  vindicate  his
good  name,  and  be  revenged  on  his  murderer.
The  executioner  then  seized  him  by  the  hair,  and
throwing  him  on  the  ground,  severed  the  head
from  the  body.  A  golden  vessel  was  ready  to
receive  the  blood,  as  commanded  by  Afrasiyab  ;
but  a  few  drops  happened  to  be  spilt  on  the  soil,
and  upon  that  spot  a  tree  grew  up,  which  was  after-
wards called  Saiawush,  and  believed  to  possess


236  THE -SHAH NAMElf.

many  wonderful  virtues  !  The  blood  was  carefully
conveyed  to  Afrasiyab,  the  head  fixed  on  the  point
of  a  javelin,  and  the  body  was  buried  with  respect
and  affection  by  his  friend  Pilsam,  who  had  wit-
nessed the  melancholy  catastrophe.  It  is  also  re-
lated that  a  tremendous  tempest  occurred  at  the
time  this  amiable  prince  was  murdered,  and  that
a  total  darkness  covered  the  face  of  the  earth,  so
that  the  people  could  not  distinguish  each  other's
faces.  Then  was  the  name  of  Afrasiyab  truly
execrated  and  abhorred  for  the  cruel  act  he  had
committed,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  Khoten  long
cherished  the  memory  of  Saiawush.

Ferangis  was  frantic  with  grief  when  she  was
told  of  the  sad  fate  of  her  husband,  and  all  her
household  uttered  the  loudest  lamentations.  Pil-
sam gave  the  intelligence  to  Piran,  and  the  pro-
verb was  then  remembered :  "  It  is  better  to  be
in  hell,  than  under  the  rule  of  Afrasiyab  !"  When
the  deep  sorrow  of  Ferangis  reached  the  ears  of
her  father,  he  determined  on  a  summary  pro-
cedure, and  ordered  Gersiwaz  to  have  her  pri-
vately made  away  with,  so  that  the  growing  fruits
of  her  marriage  with  Saiawush  might  be  destroyed.

Piran  with  horror  heard  this  stern  command,

And  hastened  to  the  king,  and  thus  addressed  him  :

"  What !  woulcPst  thou  hurl  thy  vengeance  on  a  woman,

That  woman,  too,  thy  daughter  ? Is  it  wise,

Or  natural,  thus  to  sport  with  human  life  ?


THE SHAH XAMEH.  237

Already  hast  thou  taken  from  her  arms
Her  unoffending  husband — that  was  cruel ;
But  thus  to  shed  an  innocent  woman's  blood,
And  kill  her  unborn  infant — that  would  be
Too  dreadful  to  imagine  ! Is  she  not
Thy  own  fair  daughter,  given  in  happier  time
To  him  who  won  thy  favour  and  affection  ?
Think  but  of  that,  and  from  thy  heart  root  out
This  demon  wish,  which  leads  thee  to  a  crime,
Mocking  concealment ;  vain  were  the  endeavour
To  keep  the  murder  secret,  and  when  known,
The  world's  approbrium  would  pursue  thy  name.
And  after  death,  what  would  thy  portion  be  !
No  more  of  this — honour  me  with  the  charge,
And  I  will  keep  her  with  a  father's  care,
In  my  own  mansion."" Then  Afrasiyab
Readily  answered  : "  Take  her  to  thy  home,
But  when  the  child  is  born,  let  it  be  brought
Promptly  to  me — my  will  must  be  obeyed."

Piran  rejoiced  at  his  success ;  and  assenting  to
the  command  of  Afrasiyab,  took  Ferangis  with
him  to  Khoten,  where  in  the  usual  time  she  was
delivered,  and  the  child,  being  a  son,  was  called
Kai-khosrau.  As  soon  as  he  was  born,  Piran
took  measures  to  prevent  his  being  carried  off  to
Afrasiyab,  and  committed  him  to  the  care  of  some
peasants  on  the  mountain  Kalun.  On  the  same
night  Afrasiyab  had  a  dream,  in  which  he  received


238  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

intimation  of  the  birth  of  Kai-khosrau  ;  and  upon
this  intimation  he  sent  for  Piran  to  know  why  his
commands  had  not  been  complied  with.  Piran
replied,  that  he  had  cast  away  the  child  in  the
wilderness:  "  And  why  was  he  not  sent  to  me?"
inquired  the  despot.  "  Because,"  said  Piran,  "  I
considered  thy  own  future  happiness  ;  thou  hast
unjustly  killed  the  father,  and  God  forbid  that  thou
shouldst  also  kill  the  son  !"  Afrasiyab  was  abashed,
and  it  is  said  that  ever  after  the  atrocious  murder
of  Saiawush,  he  had  been  tormented  with  the  most
terrible  and  harrowing  dreams.  Gersiwaz  now
became  hateful  to  his  sight,  and  he  began  at  last
deeply  to  repent  of  his  violence  and  inhumanity.
Kai-khosrau  grew  up  under  the  fostering  pro-
tection of  the  peasants,  and  shewed  early  marks
of  surprising  talent  and  activity.  He  excelled  in
manly  exercises;  and  hunting  ferocious  animals
was  his  peculiar  delight.  Instructors  had  been
provided  to  initiate  him  in  all  the  arts  and  pursuits
cultivated  by  the  warriors  of  those  days,  and  even
in  his  twelfth  year  accounts  were  forwarded  to
Piran  of  several  wonderful  feats  which  he  had
performed .

Then  smiled  the  good  old  man,  and  joyful  said  :
"  ""Tis  ever  thus — the  youth  of  royal  hlood
Will  not  disgrace  his  lineage,  but  betray
By  his  superior  mien  and  gallant  deeds


THE SHAH XAMEH.  239

From  whence  he  sprung. 'Tis  by  the  luscious  fruit
We  know  the  tree,  and  glory  in  its  ripeness  !"

Piran  could  not  resist  paying  a  visit  to  the  youth
in  his  mountainous  retreat,  and,  happy  to  find  him,
beyond  all  expectation,  distinguished  for  the  ele-
gance of  his  external  appearance,  and  the  superior
qualities  of  his  mind,  related  to  him  the  circum-
stances under  which  he  had  been  exposed,  and
the  rank  and  misfortunes  of  his  father.  An  ar-
tifice then  occurred  to  him  which  promised  to  be
of  ultimate  advantage.  He  afterwards  told  Afra-
siyab that  the  offspring  of  Ferangis,  thrown  by
him  into  the  wilderness  to  perish,  had  been  found
by  a  peasant  and  brought  up,  but  that  he  under-
stood the  boy  was  little  better  than  an  idiot.
Afrasiyab,  upon  this  information,  desired  that  he
might  be  sent  for,  and  in  the  mean  time  Piran
took  especial  care  to  instruct  Kai-khosrau  how  he
should  act ;  which  was  to  seem  in  all  respects  in-
sane, and  he  accordingly  appeared  before  the  king
in  the  dress  of  a  prince  with  a  golden  crown  on  his
head,  and  the  royal  girdle  round  his  loins.  Kai-
khosrau  proceeded  on  hoseback  to  the  court  of
Afrasiyab,  and  having  performed  the  usual  saluta-
tions, was  suitably  received,  though  with  strong
feelings  of  shame  and  remorse  on  the  part  of  the
tyrant.  Afrasiyab  put  several  questions  to  him,
which  were  answered  in  a  wild  and  incoherent  man-
ner, entirely  at  variance  with  the  subject  proposed.


240  THE SHAH NAMEH.

The  king  could  not  help  smiling,  and  supposing
him  to  be  totally  deranged,  allowed  him  to  be  sent
with  presents  to  his  mother,  for  no  harm,  he
thought,  could  possibly  be  apprehended  from  one
so  forlorn  in  mind.  Piran  triumphed  in  the  suc-
cess of  his  scheme,  and  lost  no  time  in  taking  Kai-
khosrau  to  his  mother.  All  the  people  of  Kho-
ten  poured  blessings  on  the  head  of  the  youth,  and
imprecations  on  the  merciless  spirit  of  Afrasiyab.
The  city  built  by  Saiawush  had  been  razed  to  the
ground  by  the  exterminating  fury  of  his  enemies,
and  wild  animals  and  reptiles  occupied  the
place  on  which  it  stood.  The  mother  and  son
visited  the  spot  were  Saiawush  was  barbarously
killed,  and  the  tree,  which  grew  up  from  the  soil
enriched  by  his  blood,  was  found  verdant  and
flourishing,  and  continued  to  possess  in  perfection
its  marvellous  virtues.


The  tale  of  Saiawush  is  told ;
And  now  the  pages  bright  unfold,
RustenVs  revenge — Sudavelr's  fate —
AfrasiyaFs  degraded  state,
And  that  terrific  curse  and  ban
Which  fell  at  last  upon  Turan  !

When  Kai-kaus  heard  of  the  fate  of  his  son,  and
all  its  horrible  details  were  pictured  to  his
mind,  he  was  thrown  into  the  deepest  affliction.


THE SHAH NAM EH.  241

His  warriors,  Tus,  and  Gudarz,  and  Bahrain,
and  Friburz,  and  Ferhad,  felt  with  equal  keenness
the  loss  of  the  amiable  prince,  and  Rustem,  as
soon  as  the  dreadful  intelligence  reached  Sistan,
set  off  with  his  troops  to  the  court  of  the  king
still  full  of  indignation  at  the  conduct  of  Kaus,
and  oppressed  with  sorrow  respecting  the  calamity
which  had  occurred.  On  his  arrival  he  thus  ad-
dressed the  weeping  and  disconsolate  father  of
Saiawush,  himself  at  the  same  time  drowned  in
tears :

"  How  has  thy  temper  turned  to  nought,  the  seed
Which  might  have  grown,  and  cast  a  glorious  shadow ;
How  is  it  scattered  to  the  barren  winds  !
Thy  love  for  false  Sudaveh  was  the  cause
Of  all  this  misery ;  she,  the  Sorceress,
O'er  whom  thou  hast  so  oft  in  rapture  hung,
Enchanted  by  her  charms ;  she  was  the  cause
Of  this  destruction. Thou  art  woman's  slave  !
Woman,  the  bane  of  man's  felicity  !
Who  ever  trusted  woman  ? Death  were  better
Than  being  under  woman's  influence  ;
She  places  man  upon  the  foamy  ridge
Of  the  tempestuous  wave,  which  rolls  to  ruin.
Who  ever  trusted  woman  ? — Woman  ! woman !"
Kaus  looked  down  with  melancholy  mien,
And,  half  consenting,  thus  to  Rustem  said:—
"  Sudaveh's  blandishments  absorbed  my  soul,
And  she  has  brought  this  wretchedness  upon  me."
R


242  THE SHAH NAMEH,

Rustem  rejoined — "  The  world  must  be  revenged
Upon  this  false  Sudaveh ;— she  must  die."
Kaus  was  silent ;  but  his  tears  flowed  fast,
And  shame  witheld  resistance. Rustem  rushed
Without  a  pause  towards  the  shubistan  ;
Impatient,  nothing  could  obstruct  his  speed
To  slay  Sudaveh  ; — her  he  quickly  found.
And  rapidly  his  sanguinary  sword
Performed  its  office. Thus  the  Sorceress  died.
Such  was  the  punishment  her  crimes  received.

Having  thus  accomplished  the  first  part  of  his
vengeance,  he  proceeded  with  the  Persian  army
against  Afrasiyab,  and  all  the  Iranian  warriors
followed  his  example.  When  he  had  penetrated
as  far  as  Turan,  the  enemy  sent  forward  thirty
thousand  men  to  oppose  his  progress ;  and  in  the
conflict  which  ensued,  Feramurz  took  Sarkha,  the
son  of  Afrasiyab,  prisoner.  Rustem  delivered  him
over  to  Tus  to  be  put  to  death  precisely  in  the
same  manner  as  Saiawush  ;  but  the  captive  repre-
sented himself  as  the  particular  friend  of  Saiawush,
and  begged  to  be  pardoned  on  that  account.  Rus-
tem, however,  had  sworn  that  he  would  take  his
revenge,  without  pity  or  remorse,  and  accordingly
death  was  inflicted  upon  the  unhappy  prisoner,
whose  blood  was  received  in  a  dish,  and  sent  to
Kaus,  and  the  severed  head  suspended  over  the
gates  of  the  king's  palace.  Afrasiyab  hearing  of


THE SHAH NAMEH.  243

this  catastrophe,  which  sealed  the  fate  of  his
favourite  son,  immediately  collected  together  the
whole  of  the  Turanian  army,  and  hastened  him-
self to  resist  the  conquering  career  of  the  enemy.

As  on  they  moved ;  with  loud  and  dissonant  clang
His  numerous  troops  shut  out  the  prospect  round ;
No  sun  was  visible  by  day ;  no  moon,
Nor  stars  by  night. The  tramp  of  men  and  steeds,
And  rattling  drums,  and  shouts,  were  only  heard,
And  the  bright  gleams  of  armour  only  seen.

Ere  long  the  two  armies  met,  when  Pilsam,
the  brother  of  Piran,  was  ambitious  of  opposing
his  single  arm  against  Rustem,  upon  which  Afra-
siyab  said  : — "  Subdue  Rustem,  and  thy  reward
shall  be  my  daughter,  and  half  my  kingdom."
Piran,  however,  observed  that  he  was  too  young
to  be  a  fit  match  for  the  experience  and  valour  of
the  Persian  champion,  and  would  have  dissuaded
him  from  the  unequal  contest,  but  the  choice  was
his  own,  and  he  was  consequently  permitted  by
Afrasiyab  to  put  his  bravery  to  the  test.  Pilsam
accordingly  went  forth  and  summoned  Rustem
to  the  fight ;  but  Gi\v,  hearing  the  call,  accepted
the  challenge  himself,  and  had  nearly  been  thrown
from  his  horse  by  the  superior  activity  of  his  op-
ponent. Feramurz  luckily  saw  him  at  the  perilous
moment,  and  darting  forward,  with  one  stroke  of
his  sword  shattered  Pilsam's  javelin  to  pieces,

R2


244  THE SHAH NAMEH.

and  then  a  new  strife  began.  Pilsam  and  Fera-
murz  fought  together  with  desperation,  till  both
were  almost  exhausted,  and  Rustem  himself  was
surprized  to  see  the  display  of  so  much  valour.
Perceiving  the  wearied  state  of  the  two  warriors  he
pushed  forward  Rakush,and  called  aloud  to  Pilsam :
— "  Am  I  not  the  person  challenged  ?"  and  imme-
diately the  Turanian  chief  proceeded  to  encounter
him,  striking  with  all  his  might  at  the  head  of  the
champion  ;  but  though  the  sword  was  broken  by
the  blow,  not  a  hair  of  his  head  was  disordered.

Then  Rustem  urging  on  his  gallant  steed,

Fixed  his  long  javelin  in  the  girdle  band

Of  his  ambitious  foe,  and  quick  unhorsed  him  ;

Then  dragged  him  on  towards  Afrasiyab,

And,  scoffing,  cast  him  at  the  despot's  feet.

"  Here  comes  the  glorious  conqueror,"  he  said ;

"  Now  give  to  him- thy  daughter  and  thy  treasure,

Thy  kingdom  and  thy  soldiers  ;  has  he  not

Done  honour  to  thy  country  ? — Is  he  not

A  jewel  in  thy  crown  of  sovereignty  ?

What  arrogance  inspired  the  fruitless  hope  !

Think  of  thy  treachery  to  Saiawush  ;

Thy  savage  cruelty,  and  never  look

For  aught  but  deadly  hatred  from  mankind ;

And  in  the  field  of  fight  defeat  and  ruin."

Thus  scornfully  he  spoke,  and  not  a  man,

Though  in  the  presence  of  Afrasiyab,


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  245

Had  soul  to  meet  him  ;  fear  overcame  them  all,
Monarch  and  warriors,  for  a  time. At  length
Shame  was  awakened,  and  the  king  appeared
In  arms  against  the  champion. Fiercely  they
Hurled  their  sharp  javelins — Rustem's  struck  the  head
Of  his  opponent's  horse,  which  floundering  fell,
And  overturned  his  rider. Anxious  then
The  champion  sprang  to  seize  the  royal  prize ;
But  Human  rushed  between,  and  saved  his  master,
Who  vaulted  on  another  horse  and  fled.

Having  thus  rescued  Afrasiyab,  the  wary  chief
exercised  all  his  cunning  and  adroitness  to  escape
himself,  and  at  last  succeeded.  Rustem  pursued
him,  and  the  Turanian  troops,  who  had  followed
the  example  of  the  king ;  but  though  thousands
were  slain  in  the  chase  which  continued  for  many
farsangs,  no  further  advantage  was  obtained  on  that
day.  Next  morning,  however,  Rustem  resumed  his
pursuit ;  and  the  enemy  hearing  of  his  approach,
retreated  into  Chinese  Tartary,  to  secure,  among
other  advantages,  the  person  of  Kai-Khosrau ;  leav-
ing the  kingdom  of  Turan  at  the  mercy  of  the  in-
vader, who  mounted  the  throne,  and  ruled  there,  it
is  said,  about  seven  years,  with  memorable  severity,
proscribing  and  putting  to  death  every  person
who  mentioned  the  name  of  Afrasiyab.  In  the
mean  time  he  made  splendid  presents  to  Tus  and
Gudarz,  suitable  to  their]  rank  and  services ;  and


246  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Zuara,  in  revenge  for  the  monstrous  outrage  com-
mitted upon  Saiawush,  burnt  and  destroyed  every
thing  that  came  in  his  way  ;  his  wrath  being  ex-
asperated by  the  sight  of  the  places  in  which  the
young  prince  had  resided,  and  recreated  himself
with  hunting  and  other  sports  of  the  field.  The
whole  realm,  in  fact,  was  delivered  over  to  plun-
der and  devastation ;  and  every  individual  of  the
army  was  enriched  by  the  appropriation  of  public
and  private  wealth.  The  companions  of  Rustem,
however,  grew  weary  of  residing  in  Turan,  and  they
strongly  represented  to  him  the  neglect  which  Kai-
Kaus  had  suffered  for  so  many  years,  recommending
his  return  to  Persia,  as  being  more  honourable  than
the  exile  they  endured  in  an  ungenial  climate.  Rus-
tem's  abandonment  of  the  kingdom  was  at  length
carried  into  effect ;  and  he  and  his  warriors  did  not
fail  to  take  away  with  them  all  the  immense  property
that  remained  in  jewels  and  gold  ;  part  of  which
was  conveyed  by  the  champion  to  Zabul  and
Sistan,  and  a  goodly  proportion  to  the  king  of
kings  in  Persia.

When  to  Afrasiyab  was  known
The  plunder  of  his  realm  and  throne,
That  the  destroyer's  reckless  hand
With  fire  and  sword  had  scathed  the  land,
Sorrow  and  anguish  filled  his  soul,
And  passion  raged  beyond  control ;


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  247

And  thus  he  to  his  warriors  said: —
"  At  such  a  time,  is  valour  dead  ?
The  man  who  hears  the  mournful  tale,
And  is  not  by  his  country's  bale
Urged  on  to  vengeance,  cannot  be
Of  woman  born  ; accursed  is  he  !
The  time  will  come  when  I  shall  reap
The  harvest  of  resentment  deep ;
And  till  arrives  that  fated  hour,
Farewell  to  joy  in  hall  or  bower."

Rustem,  in  taking  revenge  for  the  murder  of
Saiawush,  had  not  been  unmindful  of  Kai-Khosrau,
and  had  actually  sent  to  the  remote  parts  of  Tar-
tary  in  quest  of  him.

It  is  said  that  Gudarz  beheld  in  a  dream  the
young  prince,  who  pointed  out  to  him  his  actual
residence,  and  intimated  that  of  all  the  warriors
of  Kaiis,  Giw  was  the  only  one  destined  to  restore
him  to  the  world  and  his  birth-right.  The  old
man  immediately  requested  his  son  Giw  to  go  to
the  place  where  the  stranger  would  be  found.
Giw  readily  complied,  and  in  his  progress  provided
himself  at  every  stage  successively  with  a  guide,
whom  he  afterwards  slew  to  prevent  discovery,
and  in  this  manner  he  proceeded  till  he  reached
the  boundary  of  Chin,  enjoying  no  comfort  by
day,  or  sleep  by  night.  His  only  food  was  the
flesh  of  the  wild  ass,  and  his  only  covering  the


248  THE SHAH NAMEH.

skin  of  the  same  animal.  He  went  on  traversing
mountain  and  forest,  enduring  every  privation,
and  often  did  he  hesitate,  often  did  he  think  of
returning,  but  honour  urged  him  forward  in  spite
of  the  trouble  and  impediments  with  which  he
was  continually  assailed.  Arriving  in  a  desert  one
day,  he  happened  to  meet  with  several  persons,  who
upon  being  interrogated,  said  that  they  were  sent
by  Piran-Wisah  in  search  of  Kai-Kaus.  Giw
kept  his  own  secret,  saying  that  he  was  amusing
himself  with  hunting  the  wild  ass,  but  took  care
to  ascertain  from  them  the  direction  in  which  they
were  going.  During  the  night  the  parties  sepa-
rated, and  in  the  morning  Giw  proceeded  rapidly
on  his  route,  and  after  some  time  discovered  a
youth  sitting  by  the  side  of  a  fountain,  with  a  cup
in  his  hand,  whom  he  supposed  to  be  Kai-Khos-
rau.  The  youth  also  spontaneously  thought  "  This
must  be  Glw  ;"  and  when  the  traveller  approached
him,  and  said,  "  I  am  sure  thou  art  the  son  of
Saiawush ;"  the  youth  observed,  "  I  am  equally
sure  that  thou  art  Giw,  the  son  of  Gudarz."  At
this  Giw  was  amazed,  and  falling  at  his  feet,
asked  how,  and  from  what  circumstance,  he  recog-
nized him.  The  youth  replied  that  he  knew  all
the  warriors  of  Kaus  ;  Rustem,  and  Kishwad,  and
Tus,  and  Gudarz,  and  the  rest,  from  their  por-
traits in  his  father's  gallery,  they  being  deeply
impressed  on  his  mind.  He  then  asked  in  what


THE SHAH NAMEH.  249

way  Giw  had  discovered  him  to  be  Kai-Khosrau,
and  Giw  answered,  "  Because  I  perceived  some-
thing kingly  in  thy  countenance.  But  let  me
again  examine  thee  !"  The  youth,  at  this  request,
removed  his  garments,  and  Giw  beheld  that  mark
on  his  body  which  was  the  heritage  of  the  race  of
Kai-kobad.  Upon  this  discovery  he  rejoiced,  and
congratulating  himself  and  the  young  prince  on
the  success  of  his  mission,  related  to  him  the  pur-
pose for  which  he  had  come.  Kai-Khosrau  was
soon  mounted  on  horseback,  and  Giw  accompanied
him  respectfully  on  foot.  They,  in  the  first  in-
stance, pursued  their  way  towards  the  abode  of
Ferangis,  his  mother.  The  persons  sent  by  Piran-
Wisah  did  not  arrive  at  the  place  where  Kai-
Khosrau  had  been  kept  till  long  after  Giw  and  the
prince  departed  ;  and  then  they  were  told  that  a
Persian  horseman  had  come  and  carried  off  the
youth,  upon  which  they  immediately  returned,
and  communicated  to  Piran  what  had  occurred.
Ferangis,  in  recovering  her  son,  mentioned  to  Giw,
with  the  fondness  of  a  mother,  the  absolute  neces-
sity of  going  on  without  delay,  and  pointed  out  to
him  the  meadow  in  which  some  of  Afrasiyab's
horses  were  to  be  met  with,  particularly  one  called
Behzad,  which  once  belonged  to  Saiawush,  and
which  her  father  had  kept  in  good  condition  for
his  own  riding.  Giw,  therefore,  went  to  the
meadow,  and  throwing  his  kamund,  secured  Beh-


250  THE SHAH NAMEH.

zad  and  another  horse ;  and  all  three  being  thus
accommodated,  hastily  proceeded  on  their  journey
towards  Iran.

Tidings  of  the  escape  of  Kai-khosrau  having
reached  Afrasiyab,  he  dispatched  Kulbad  with
three  hundred  horsemen  after  him ;  and  so  rapid
were  his  movements  that  he  overtook  the  fugitives
in  the  vicinity  of  Bulgharia.  Khosrau  and  his
mother  were  asleep,  but  Giw  being  awake,  and
seeing  an  armed  force  evidently  in  pursuit  of  his
party,  boldly  put  on  his  armour,  mounted  Behzad,
and  before  the  enemy  came  up,  advanced  to  the
charge.  He  attacked  the  horsemen  furiously  with
sword  and  mace,  for  he  had  heard  the  prophecy,
which  declared  that  Kai-khosrau  was  destined  to
be  the  king  of  kings,  and  therefore  he  braved  the
direst  peril  with  confidence,  and  the  certainty  of
success.  It  was  this  feeling  which  enabled  him
to  perform  such  a  prodigy  of  valour,  in  putting
Kulbad  and  his  three  hundred  horsemen  to  the
route.  They  all  fled  defeated  and  dispersed  pre-
cipitately before  him.  After  this  surprising  vic-
tory, he  returned  to  the  halting  place,  and  told
Kai-khosrau  what  he  had  done.  The  prince  was
disappointed  at  not  having  been  awakened  to  par-
ticipate in  the  exploit,  but  Giw  said,  "  I  did  not
wish  to  disturb  thy  sweet  slumbers  unnecessarily.
It  was  thy  good  fortune  and  prosperous  star,
however,  which  made  me  triumph  over  the  ene-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  251

my." The three travellers  then  resuming  their
journey  :

Through  dreary  track,  and  pathless  waste,
And  wood  and  wild,  their  way  they  traced.

The  return  of  the  defeated  Kulbad  excited  the
greatest  indignation  in  the  breast  of  Piran.  "  What !
three  hundred  soldiers  to  fly  from  the  valour  of
one  man  !  Had  Giw  possessed  even  the  activity
and  might  of  Rustem  and  Sam,  such  a  shameful
discomfiture  could  scarcely  have  happened."  Say-
ing this,  he  ordered  the  whole  force  under  his
command  to  be  got  ready,  and  set  off  himself  to
overtake  and  intercept  the  fugitives,  who  fatigued
with  the  toilsome  march,  were  only  able  to  pro-
ceed one  stage  in  the  day.  Piran,  therefore,  who
travelled  at  the  rate  of  one  hundred  leagues  a  day,
overtook  them  before  they  had  passed  through
Bulgharia.  Ferangis,  who  saw  the  enemy's  ban-
ner floating  in  the  air,  knew  that  it  belonged  to
Piran,  and  instantly  awoke  the  two  young  men
from  sleep.  Upon  this  occasion,  Khosrau  insisted
on  acting  his  part,  instead  of  being  left  igno-
miniously  idle;  but  Giw  was  still  resolute  and
determined  to  preserve  him  from  all  risk,  at  the
peril  of  his  own  life.  "  Thou  art  destined  to  be
the  king  of  the  world  ;  thou  art  yet  young,  and  a
novice,  and  hast  never  known  the  toils  of  war;
Heaven  forbid  that  any  misfortune  should  befall


252  THE SHAH NAMEH.

thee:  indeed,  whilst  I  live,  I  will  never  suffer
thee  to  go  into  battle  !"  Khosrau  then  proposed
to  give  him  assistance ;  but  Giw  said  he  wanted
no  assistance,  not  even  from  Rustem;  "for,"  he
added,  "  in  art  and  strength  we  are  equal,  having
frequently  tried  our  skill  together."  Rustem  had
given  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Giw,  he  himself
being  married  to  Giw's  sister.  "Be  of  good
cheer,"  resumed  he,  "  get  upon  some  high  place,
and  witness  the  battle  between  us.

Fortune  will  still  from  Heaven  descend,
The  god  of  victory  is  my  friend.1'

As  soon  as  he  took  the  field,  Piran  thus  address-
ed him,  "  Thou  hast  once,  singly,  defeated  three
hundred  of  my  soldiers  ;  thou  shalt  now  see  what
punishment  awaits  thee  at  my  hands.

For  should  a  warrior  be  a  rock  of  steel,
A  thousand  ants,  gathered  on  every  side,
In  time  will  make  him  but  a  heap  of  dust."

In  reply,  Giw  said  to  Piran,  "  I  am  the  man
who  bound  thy  two  women,  and  sent  them  from
China  to  Persia — Rustem  and  I  are  the  same  in
battle.  Thou  knowest,  when  he  encountered  a
thousand  horsemen,  what  was  the  result,  and  what
he  accomplished  !  Thou  wilt  find  me  the  same :
is  not  a  lion  enough  to  overthrow  a  thousand  kids  ?


THE SHAH NAMEH.  253

If  but  a  man  survive  of  thy  proud  host,

Brand  me  with  coward — say  I'm  not  a  warrior.

Already  have  I  triumphed  o'er  Kulbad,

And  now  I'll  take  thee  prisoner,  yea,  alive  !

And  send  thee  to  Kaus — there  thou  wilt  be

Slain  to  avenge  the  death  of  Saiawush  ;

Turin  shall  perish,  and  Afrasiyab,

And  every  earthly  hope  extinguished  quite.*"

Hearing  this  awful  threat,  Piran  turned  pale

And  shook  with  terror, — trembling  like  a  reed  ;

And  saying :  "  Go,  I  will  not  fight  with  thee  !"

But  Giw  asked  fiercely:  "  Why  ?"  And  on  he  rushed

Against  the  foe,  who  fled — but  'twas  in  vain.

The  kamund  round  the  old  man's  neck  was  thrown,

And  he  was  taken  captive. Then  his  troops

Showered  their  sharp  arrows  on  triumphant  Giw,

To  free  their  master,  who  was  quickly  brought

Before  Kai-khosrau,  and  the  kamund  placed

Within  his  royal  hands. This  service  done,

Giw  sped  against  the  Tartars,  and  full  soon

Defeated  and  dispersed  them.

On  his  return,  Giw  expressed  his  astonishment
that  Piran  was  still  alive  ;  when  Ferangis  inter-
posed, and  weeping,  said  how  much  she  had  been
indebted  to  his  interposition  and  the  most  active
humanity  on  various  occasions,  and  particularly
in  saving  herself  and  Kai-khosrau  from  the  wrath
of  Afrasiyab  after  the  death  of  Saiawush.  "  If/'


254  THE SHAH NAMEH.

said  she,  "  after  so  much  generosity  he  has  com-
mitted one  fault,  let  it  be  forgiven.

Let  not  the  man  of  many  virtues  die,
For  being  guilty  of  one  trifling  error.
Let  not  the  friend  who  nobly  saved  my  life,
And  more,  the  dearer  life  of  Kai-khosrau,
Suffer  from  us. O,  he  must  never,  never,
Feel  the  sharp  pang  of  foul  ingratitude,
From  a  true  prince  of  the  Kaianian  race.11

But  Giw  paused,  and  said,  "  I  have  sworn  to
crimson  the  earth  with  his  blood,  and  I  must  not
pass  from  my  oath."  Khosrau  then  suggested  to
him  to  pierce  the  lobes  of  Piran's  ears,  and  drop
the  blood  on  the  ground  to  stain  it,  in  order  that  he
might  not  depart  from  his  word;  and  this  humane
fraud  was  accordingly  commitled.  Khosrau  fur-
ther interceded  ;  and  instead  of  being  sent  a  cap-
tive to  Kaus,  the  good  old  man  was  set  at  liberty.

When  the  particulars  of  this  event  were  de-
scribed to  Afrasiyab  by  Piran  Wisah,  he  was  ex-
ceedingly sorrowful,  and  lamented  deeply  that
Kai-khosrau  had  so  successfully  effected  his  es-
cape. But  he  had  recourse  to  a  further  expedient,
and  sent  instructions  to  all  the  ferrymen  of  the
Jihun,  with  a  minute  description  of  the  three  tra-
vellers, to  prevent  their  passing  that  river,  an-
nouncing at  the  same  time  that  he  himself  was  in
pursuit  of  them.  Not  a  moment  was  lost  in  pre-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  255

paring  his  army  for  the  march,  and  he  moved  for-
ward with  the  utmost  expedition,  night  and  day.
At  the  period  when  Gfw  arrived  on  the  banks  of  the
Jihim,  the  stream  was  very  rapid  and  formidable,
and  he  requested  the  ferryman  to  produce  their
certificates  to  shew  themselves  equal  to  their  duty.
They  pretended  that  their  certificates  were  lost,
but  demanded  for  their  fare  the  black  horse  upon
which  Giw  rode.  Giw  replied,  that  he  could  not
part  with  his  favourite  horse;  and  they  rejoined,
"  Then  give  us  the  damsel  who  accompanies  you."
Giw  answered,  and  said,  "  This  is  not  a  damsel,
but  the  mother  of  that  youth  !" — "  Then,"  ob-
served they,  "  give  us  the  youth's  crown."  But
Giw  told  them  that  he  could  not  comply  with
their  demand  ;  yet  he  was  ready  to  reward  them
with  money  to  any  extent.  The  pertinacious  fer-
rymen, who  were  not  anxious  for  money,  then
demanded  his  armour,  and  this  was  also  refused  ;
and  such  was  their  independence  or  their  effrontery,
that  they  replied,  "  If  not  one  of  these  four  things
you  are  disposed  to  grant,  cross  the  river  as  best
you  may."  Giw  whispered  to  Kai-khosrau,  and
told  him  that  there  was  no  time  for  delay.  "  When
Gavah,  the  blacksmith,"  said  he  "  rescued  thy
great  ancestor,  Feridun,  he  passed  the  stream  in
his  armour  without  impediment ;  and  why  should
we,  in  a  cause  of  equal  glory,  hesitate  for  a  mo-
ment ?"  Under  the  inspiring  influence  of  an  aus-


256  THE SHAH NAMEH.

picious  omen,  and  confiding  in  the  protection  of
the  Almighty,  Kai-khosrau  at  once  impelled  his
foaming  horse  into  the  river  ;  his  mother,  Ferangis,
followed  with  equal  intrepidity,  and  then  Giw ;
and  notwithstanding  the  perilous  passage,  they  all
successfully  overcame  the  boiling  surge,  and  land-
ed in  safety,  to  the  utter  amazement  of  the  ferry-
men, who  of  course  had  expected  they  would  be
drowned.

It  so  happened  that  at  the  moment  they  touched
the  shore,  Afr.asiyab  with  his  army  arrived,  and
had  the  mortification  to  see  the  fugitives  on  the
other  bank,  beyond  his  reach.  His  wonder  was
equal  to  his  disappointment.

"  What  spirits  must  they  have  to  brave
The  terrors  of  that  boiling  wave —
With  steed  and  harness,  riding  o^er
The  billows  to  the  further  shore."
— It  was  a  cheering  sight,  they  say,
To  see  how  well  they  kept  their  way,
How  Ferangis  impelled  her  horse
Across  that  awful  torrent's  course,
Guiding  him  with  heroic  hand,
To  reach  unhurt  the  friendly  strand.

Afrasiyab  continued  for  some  time  mute  with
astonishment  and  vexation,  and  when  he  recovered,
ordered  the  ferrymen  to  get  ready  their  boats  to
pass  him  over  the  river;  but  Human  dissuaded


THE SHAH NAM EH.  257

him  from  that  measure,  saying  that  they  could  only
convey  a  few  troops,  and  they  would  doubtless
be  received  by  a  large  force  of  the  enemy  on  the
other  side.  At  these  words,  Afrasiyab  seemed  to
devour  his  own  blood  with  grief  and  indignation,
and  immediately  retracing  his  steps,  returned  to
Timin.

As  soon  as  Giw  entered  within  the  boundary  of
the  Persian  empire,  he  poured  out  thanksgivings
to  God  for  his  protection,  and  sent  intelligence  to
Kaiis  of  the  safe  arrival  of  the  party  in  his  domi-
nions. The  king  rejoiced  exceedingly,  and  ap-
pointed an  honorary  deputation  under  the  direc-
tion of  Gudarz,  to  meet  the  young  prince  on  the
road.  On  first  seeing  him,  the  king  moved  for-
ward to  receive  him  ;  and  weeping  affectionately,
kissed  his  eyes  and  face,  and  had  a  throne  pre-
pared for  him  exactly  like  his  own,  upon  which  he
seated  him ;  and  calling  the  nobles  and  warriors
of  the  land  together,  commanded  them  to  obey
him.  All  readily  promised  their  allegiance,  ex-
cepting Tus,  who  left  the  court  in  disgust,  and
repairing  forthwith  to  the  house  of  Friburz,  one  of
the  sons  of  Kaus,  told  him  that  he  would  only  pay
homage  and  obedience  to  him,  and  not  to  the  in-
fant whom  Giw  had  just  brought  out  of  a  desert.
Next  day  the  great  men  and  leaders  were  again
assembled  to  declare  publicly  by  an  official  act
their  fealty  to  Kai-khosrau,  and  Tus  was  also  in-


258  THE SHAH NAMEH.

vited  to  the  banquet,  which  was  held  on  the  oc-
casion, but  he  refused  to  go.  Giw  was  deputed
to  repeat  the  invitation ;  and  he  then  said,  "  I
shall  pay  homage  to  Friburz,  as  the  heir  to  the
throne,  and  to  no  other.

"  For  is  he  not  the  son  of  Kai-kaus,
And  worthy  of  the  regal  crown  and  throne  ?
I  want  not  any  of  the  race  of  Poshung —
None  of  the  proud  Turanian  dynasty —
Fruitless  has  been  thy  peril,  Giw,  to  bring
A  silly  child  among  us,  to  defraud
The  rightful  prince  of  his  inheritance  !"

Giw,  in  reply,  vindicated  the  character  and  at-
tainments of  Khosrau,  but  Tus  was  not  to  be  ap-
peased. He  therefore  returned  to  his  father  and
communicated  to  him  what  had  occurred.  Gudarz
was  roused  to  great  wrath  by  this  resistance  to  the
will  of  the  king,  and  at  once  took  twelve  thousand
men  and  his  seventy-eight  kinsmen,  together
with  Giw,  and  proceeded  to  support  his  cause  by
force  of  arms.  Tus,  apprized  of  his  intentions,
prepared  to  meet  him,  but  was  reluctant  to  com-
mit himself  by  engaging  in  a  civil  war,  and  said,
internally  :

"  If  I  unsheath  the  sword  of  strife,

Numbers  on  either  side  will  fall,
T  would  not  sacrifice  the  life

Of  one  who  owns  my  sovereign's  thrall.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  259

My  country  would  abhor  the  deed,

And  may  I  never  see  the  hour
When  Persia's  sons  are  doomed  to  bleed,

But  when  opposed  to  foreign  power.

The  cause  must  be  both  good  and  true,
And  if  their  blood  in  war  must  flow,

Will  it  not  seem  of  brighter  hue,
When  shed  to  crush  the  Tartar  foe  ?"

Possessing  these  sentiments,  Tus  sent  an  envoy
to  Gudarz,  suggesting  the  suspension  of  any  hos-
tile proceedings  until  information  on  the  subject
had  been  first  communicated  to  the  king.  Kaus
was  extremely  displeased  with  Gudarz  for  his  pre-
cipitancy and  folly,  and  directed  both  him  and
Tus  to  repair  immediately  to  court.  Tus  there
said  frankly,  "  I  now  owe  honour  and  allegiance
to  king  Kaus ;  but  should  he  happen  to  lay  aside
the  throne  and  the  diadem,  my  obedience  and
loyalty  will  be  due  to  Friburz  his  heir,  and  not
to  a  stranger."  To  this,  Gudarz  replied,  "  Saia-
wush  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  king,  and  unjustly
murdered,  and  therefore  it  becomes  his  majesty
to  appease  and  rejoice  the  soul  of  the  deceased,
by  putting  Kai-khosrau  in  his  place.  Kai-khosrau,
like  Feridun,  is  worthy  of  empire  ;  all  the  nobles
of  the  land  are  of  this  opinion,  excepting  thyself,
which  must  arise  from  ignorance  and  vanity.

s2


260  THE SHAH NAM EH.

From  Nouder  certainly  thou  art  descended,
Not  from  a  stranger,  not  from  foreign  loins ;
But  though  thy  ancestor  was  wise  and  mighty,
Art  thou  of  equal  merit  ? No,  not  thou  !
Regarding  Khosrau,  thou  hast  neither  shewn
Reason  nor  sense — but  most  surprising  folly  !"
To  this  contemptuous  speech, Tus  thus  replied  :
"  Ungenerous  warrior  !  wherefore  thus  employ
Such  scornful  words  to  me  ?  Who  art  thou,  pray  !
Who,  but  the  low  descendant  of  a  blacksmith  ?
No  Khosrau  claims  thee  for  his  son,  no  chief
Of  noble  blood  ;  whilst  I  can  truly  boast
Kindred  to  princes  of  the  highest  worth,
And  merit  not  to  be  obscured  by  thee  !"
To  him  then  Gudarz : "  Hear  me  for  this  once,
Then  shut  thy  ears  for  ever. Need  I  blush
To  be  the  kinsman  of  the  glorious  Gavah  ?
It  is  my  humour  to  be  proud  of  him.
Although  he  was  a  blacksmith ; — that  same  man,
Who,  when  the  world  could  little  boast  of  valour,
Tore  up  the  name-roll  of  the  fiend  Zohak,
And  gave  the  Persians  freedom  from  the  fangs
Of  the  devouring  serpents. Him  it  was,
Who  raised  the  banner,  and  proclaimed  aloud,
Freedom  for  Persia  ! Need  I  blush  for  him  ?
To  him  the  empire  owes  its  greatest  blessing,
The  prosperous  rule  of  virtuous  Feridun."
Tus  wrathfully  rejoined  :  "  Old  man  !  thy  arrow


I  HE S  11 A  II NAM  EH.  201

May  pierce  an  anvil — mine  can  pierce  the  heart
Of  the  Kaf  mountain  !  If  thy  mace  can  break
A  rock  asunder — mine  can  strike  the  sun  !"

The  anger  of  the  two  heroes  beginning  to  exceed
all  proper  bounds,  Kaiis  commanded  silence ;  when
Gudarz  came  forward,  and  asked  permission  to
say  one  word  more  :  "  Call  Khosrau  and  Friburz
before  thee,  and  decide  impartially  between  them
which  is  the  most  worthy  of  sovereignty — let  the
wisest  and  the  bravest  only  be  thy  successor  to  the
throne  of  Persia."  Kaus  replied:

"  The  father  has  no  choice  among  his  children,
He  loves  them  all  alike — his  only  care
Is  to  prevent  disunion  ;  to  preserve
Brotherly  kindness  and  respect  among  them.""

After  a  pause,  he  requested  the  attendance  of
Friburz  and  Khosrau,  and  told  them  that  there  was
a  demon-fortress  in  the  vicinity  of  his  dominions
called  Bahmen,  from  which  fire  was  continually
issuing.  "  Go,  each  of  you,"  said  he,  "  against
this  fortress,  supported  by  an  army  with  which
you  shall  each  be  equally  provided,  and  the  con-
queror shall  be  the  sovereign  of  Persia."  Friburz
was  not  sorry  to  hear  of  this  probationary  scheme,
and  only  solicited  to  be  sent  first  on  the  expedition.
He  and  Tus  looked  upon  the  task  as  perfectly
easy,  and  promised  to  be  back  triumphant  in  a
short  time.


262  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

But  when  the  army  reached  that  awful  fort,

The  ground  seemed  all  in  flames  on  every  side  ;

One  universal  fire  raged  round  and  round,

And  the  hot  wind  was  like  the  scorching  breath

Which  issues  from  red  furnaces,  where  spirits

Infernal  dwell. Full  many  a  warrior  brave,

And  many  a  soldier  perished  in  that  heat,

Consumed  to  ashes. Nearer  to  the  fort

Advancing,  they  beheld  it  in  mid-air,

But  not  a  living  thing — nor  gate,  nor  door ;

Yet  they  remained  one  week,  hoping  to  find

Some  hidden  inlet,  suffering  cruel  loss

Hour  after  hour — but  none  could  they  descry.

At  length,  despairing,  they  returned,  worn  out,

Scorched,  and  half-dead  with  watching,  care,  and  toil.

And  thus  Friburz  and  Tus,  discomfited

And  sad,  appeared  before  the  Persian  king.

Then  was  it  Khosrau's  turn,  and  him  Kaus
Dispatched  with  Giw,  and  Gudarz,  and  the  troops
Appointed  for  that  enterprize,  and  blessed  them.
When  the  young  prince  approached  the  destined  scene
Of  his  exploit,  he  saw  the  blazing  fort
Reddening  the  sky  and  earth,  and  well  he  knew
This  was  the  work  of  sorcery,  the  spell
Of  demon-spirits. In  a  heavenly  dream,
He  had  been  taught  how  to  destroy  the  charms
Of  fell  magicians,  and  defy  their  power,
Though  by  the  devil,  the  devil  himself,  sustained.
He  wrote  the  name  of  God,  and  piously


THE SHAH NAMEH.  263

Bound  it  upon  his  javelin's  point,  and  pressed

Fearlessly  forward,  shewing  it  on  high ;

And  Giw  displayed  it  on  the  magic  walls

Of  that  proud  fortress — breathing  forth  a  prayer

Craving  the  aid  of  the  Almighty  arm  ;

When  suddenly  the  red  fires  died  away,

And  all  the  world  was  darkness. KhosraiTs  troops

Following  the  orders  of  their  prince,  then  shot

Thick  clouds  of  arrows  from  ten  thousand  bows,

In  the  direction  of  the  enchanted  tower.

The  arrows  fell  like  rain,  and  quickly  slew

A  host  of  demons, — presently  bright  light

Dispelled  the  gloom,  and  as  the  mist  rolled  off

In  sulphury  circles,  the  surviving  fiends

Were  seen  in  rapid  flight ;  the  fortress,  too,

Distinctly  shone,  and  its  prodigious  gate,

Through  which  the  conquerors  passed. Great  wealth

they  found,

And  having  sacked  the  place,  Khosrau  erected
A  lofty  temple,  to  commemorate
His  name  and  victory  there,  then  back  returned
Triumphantly  to  gladden  king  Kaus,
Whose  heart  expanded  at  the  joyous  news.

The  result  of  Kai-khosrau's  expedition  against
the  enchanted  castle,  compared  with  that  of  Fri-
burz,  was  sufficient  of  itself  to  establish  the  former
in  the  king's  estimation,  and  accordingly  it  was  an-
nounced to  the  princes  and  nobles  and  warriors  of


264  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

the  land,  that  he  should  succeed  to  the  throne,
and  be  crowned  on  a  fortunate  day.  A  short  time
afterwards  the  coronation  took  place  with  great
pomp  and  splendour ;  and  Khosrau  conducted
himself  towards  men  of  every  rank  and  station
with  such  perfect  kindness  and  benevolence,  that
he  gained  the  affections  of  all,  and  never  failed
daily  to  pay  a  visit  to  his  grandfather  Katis,  and
to  familiarize  himself  with  the  affairs  of  the  king-
dom which  he  was  destined  to  govern.

Justice  he  spread  with  equal  hand,
Rooting  oppression  from  the  land  ;
And  every  desert,  wood,  and  wild,
With  early  cultivation  smiled  ;
And  every  plain,  with  verdure  clad,
And  every  Persian  heart  was  glad.  -


KAI-KHOSRAU.

The  tidings  of  Khosrau's  accession  to  the  throne
were  received  at  Sistan  by  Zal  and  Rustem  with
heartfelt  pleasure,  and  they  forthwith  hastened  to
court  with  rich  presents,  to  pay  him  their  homage,
and  congratulate  him  on  the  occasion  of  his  ele-
vation. The  heroes  were  met  on  the  road  with
suitable  honours,  and  Khosrau  embracing  Rustem


THE SHAH N  A. Mi:  II.  2G5

affectionately,  lost  no  time  in  asking  for  his  assis-
tance in  taking  vengeance  for  the  death  of  Saia-
wush.  The  request  was  no  sooner  made  than
granted,  and  the  champion  having  delivered  his
presents,  then  proceeded  with  his  father  Zal  to
wait  upon  Kaiis,  who  prepared  a  royal  banquet,
and  entertained  Khosniu  and  them  in  the  most
sumptuous  manner.  It  was  there  agreed  to  march
a  large  army  against  Afrasiyab  ;  and  all  the  war-
riors zealously  came  forward  with  their  best  ser-
vices, except  Zal,  who  on  account  of  his  age  re-
quested to  remain  tranquilly  in  his  own  province.
Khosrau  said  to  Kaus  :

"  The  throne  can  yield  no  happiness  for  me,
Nor  can  I  sleep  the  sleep  of  health  and  joy
Till  I  have  been  revenged  on  that  destroyer,
The  tyrant  of  Turan  ;  to  please  the  spirit
Of  my  poor  butchered  father.11

Kaus,  on  delivering  over  to  him  the  imperial
army,  made  him  acquainted  with  the  character
and  merits  of  every  individual  of  importance.  He
appointed  Friburz,  and  a  hundred  warriors,  who
were  the  prince's  friends  and  relatives,  to  situa-
tions of  trust  and  command,  and  Tus  was  among
them.  Gudarz  and  his  seventy-eight  sons  and
grandsons  were  placed  on  the  right,  and  Gusta-
hem,  the  brother  of  Tus,  with  an  immense  levy


266  THE SHAH NAMEH.

on  the  left.  There  were  also  close  to  Khosniu's
person,  in  the  centre  of  the  hosts,  thirty-three
warriors  of  the  race  of  Poshung,  and  a  separate
guard  under  Byzun.

In  their  progress  Khosrau  said  to  Friburz  and
Tus,  "  Ferud,  who  is  my  brother,  has  built  a
strong  fort  in  Bokhara,  called  Kullab,  which  stands
on  the  way  to  the  enemy,  and  there  he  resides  with
his  mother,  Gulshaher.  Let  him  not  be  molested,
for  he  is  also  the  son  of  Saiawush,  but  pass  on
one  side  of  his  possessions."  Friburz  did  pass
on  one  side  as  requested ;  but  Tus  not  liking  to
proceed  by  the  way  of  the  desert,  and  preferring  a
cultivated  and  pleasant  country,  went  directly  on
through  the  places  which  led  to  the  very  fort  in
question.  When  Ferud  was  informed  of  the  ap-
proach of  Tus  with  an  armed  force,  he  naturally
concluded  that  he  was  coming  to  fight  him,  and
consequently  determined  to  oppose  his  progress.
Tus,  however,  sent  Riii,  his  son-in-law,  to  explain
to  Ferud  that  he  had  no  quarrel  or  business  with
him,  and  only  wished  to  pass  peaceably  through
his  province ;  but  Ferud  thought  this  was  merely
an  idle  pretext,  and  proceeding  to  hostilities,  Riu
was  killed  by  him  in  the  conflict  that  ensued.
Tus,  upon  being  informed  of  this  result,  drew  up
his  army,  and  besieged  the  fort  into  which  Ferud
had  precipitately  retired.  When  Ferud,  however,
found  that  Tus  himself  was  in  the  field,  he  sallied


THE SHAH NAMEH.  267

forth  from  his  fastness,  and  assailed  him  with  his
bow  and  arrows.  One  of  the  darts  struck  and
killed  the  horse  of  Tus,  and  tumbled  his  rider  to
the  ground.  Upon  this  occurrence  Gfw  rushed
forward  in  the  hopes  of  capturing  the  prince ;  but
it  so  happened  that  he  was  unhorsed  in  the  same
way.  Byzun,  the  son  of  Gfw,  seeing  with  great
indignation  this  signal  overthrow,  wished  to  be
revenged  on  the  victor ;  and  though  his  father
endeavoured  to  restrain  him,  nothing  could  con-
trol his  wrath.  He  sprung  speedily  forward  to
fulfil  his  menace,  but  by  the  bravery  and  expert-
ness  of  Ferud,  his  horse  was  killed,  and  he  too
was  thrown  headlong  from  his  saddle.  Unsub-
dued, however,  he  rose  upon  his  feet,  and  invited
his  antagonist  to  single  combat.  In  consequence
of  this  challenge,  they  fought  a  short  time  with
spears  till  Ferud  deemed  it  advisable  to  retire  into
his  fort,  from  the  lofty  walls  of  which  he  cast
down  so  many  stones,  that  Byzun  was  despe-
rately wounded,  and  compelled  to  leave  the  place.
When  he  informed  Tus  of  the  misfortune  which
had  befallen  him,  that  warrior  vowed  that  on  the
following  day  not  a  man  should  remain  alive  in  the
fort.  The  mother  of  Ferud,  who  was  the  daughter
of  Wfsah,  had  at  this  period  a  dream  which  in-
formed her  that  the  fortress  had  taken  fire,  and  that
the  whole  of  the  inhabitants  had  been  consumed
to  death.  This  dream  she  communicated  to  Feriid,
who  said  in  reply:


268  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

"  Mother  ! I  have  no  dread  of  death  ;
What  is  there  in  this  vital  breath  ?
My  sire  was  wounded,  and  he  died ;
And  fate  may  lay  me  by  his  side  !
Was  ever  man  immortal  ? — never  !
We  cannot,  mother,  live  for  ever.
Mine  be  the  task  in  life  to  claim
In  war  a  bright  and  spotless  name.
What  boots  it  to  be  pale  with  fear,
From  every  grief  that  waits  us  here  ?
Protected  by  the  power  divine,
Our  lot  is  written — why  repine  ?

Tus,  according  to  his  threat,  attacked  the  fort,
and  burst  open  the  gates,  Ferud  defended  him-
self with  great  valour  against  Byzun  ;  and  whilst
they  were  engaged  in  deadly  battle,  Bahrain,  the
hero,  sprung  up  from  his  ambuscade,  and  striking
furiously  upon  the  head  of  Ferud,  killed  that  un-
fortunate youth  on  the  spot.  The  mother,  the
beautiful  Gulshaher,  seeing  what  had  befallen  her
son,  rushed  out  of  the  fort  in  a  state  of  frenzy,
and  flying  to  him,  clasped  him  in  her  arms  in  an
agony  of  grief.  Unable  to  survive  his  loss,  she
plunged  a  dagger  in  her  own  breast,  and  died  at
his  feet.  The  Persians  then  burst  open  the  gates,
and  plundered  the  city.  Bahram,  when  he  saw
what  had  been  done,  reproached  Tus  with  being
the  cause  of  this  melancholy  tragedy,  and  asked


THE SHAH NAMEH.  2G9

him  what  account  he  would  give  of  his  conduct  to
Kai-khosniu. Tus  was  extremely  concerned,  and
remaining  three  days  at  that  place,  erected  a  lofty
monument to the memory  of the unfortunate
youth,  and  scented  it  with  musk  and  camphor.
He  then  pushed  forward  his  army  to  attack  ano-
ther fort. That  fort  gave  way,  the  commandant
being  killed  in  the  attack ;  and  he  then  hastened
on  towards  Afrasiyab, who had ordered  Nizad
with  thirty  thousand  horsemen  to  meet  him. By-
zun  distinguished  himself  in  the  contest  which
followed,  but  would  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of
the  enemy  if  he  had  not  been  rescued  by  his  men,
and  conveyed  from  the  field  of  battle. Afrasiyab
pushed  forward  another  force  of  forty  thousand
horsemen  under  Piran  Wisah, who  suffered  con-
siderable loss  in  an  engagement  with  Giw ; and
in  consequence  fell  back  for  the  purpose  of  re-
trieving himself  by  a  shubkhun,  or  night  attack.
The  resolution  proved  to  be  a  good  one  ;  for  when
night  came  on,  the  Persians  were  found  off  their
guard,  many  of  them  being  intoxicated,  and  the
havoc  and  destruction  committed  among  them  by
the  Tartars  was  dreadful. The  survivors  were  in
a  miserable  state  of  despondency,  but  it  was  not
till  morning  dawned  that  Tus  beheld  the  full  extent
of  his  defeat  and  the  ruin  that  surrounded  him.
When  Kai-khosrau  heard  of  this  heavy  reverse,
he  wrote  to  Friburz,  saying, "  I  warned  Tus  not


270  THE SHAH NAMEH.

to  proceed  by  the  way  of  Kulhib,  because  my
brother  and  his  mother  dwelt  in  that  place,  and
their  residence  ought  to  have  been  kept  sacred.  He
has  not  only  despised  my  orders,  but  he  has  cruelly
occasioned  the  untimely  death  of  both.  Let  him
be  bound,  and  sent  to  me  a  prisoner,  and  do  thou
assume  the  command  of  the  army."  Friburz  ac-
cordingly placed  Tus  in  confinement,  and  sent
him  to  Khosrau,  who  received  and  treated  him
with  reproaches  and  wrath,  and  consigned  him  to
a  dungeon.  He  then  wrote  to  Piran,  reproaching
him  for  resorting  to  a  night  attack  so  unworthy  of
a  brave  man,  and  challenging  him  to  resume  the
battle  with  him.  Piran  said  that  he  would  meet
him  after  the  lapse  of  a  month,  and  at  the  ex-
piration of  that  period  both  armies  were  opposed
to  each  other.  The  contest  commenced  with  ar-
rows, then  swords,  and  then  with  javelins  ;  and
Giw  and  Byzun  were  the  foremost  in  bearing
down  the  warriors  of  the  enemy,  who  suffered  so
severely  that  they  turned  aside  to  attack  Friburz,
against  whom  they  hoped  to  be  more  successful.
The  assault  which  they  made  was  overwhelming,
and  vast  numbers  were  slain,  so  that  Friburz,
finding  himself  driven  to  extremity,  was  obliged
to  shelter  himself  and  his  remaining  troops  on  the
skirts  of  a  mountain.  In  the  mean  time  Gudarz
and  Giw  determined  to  keep  their  ground  or  pe-
rish, and  sent  Byzun  to  Friburz  to  desire  him  to


THE SHAH NAMEH.  271

join  them,  or  if  that  was  impracticable,  to  save
the  imperial  banner  by  dispatching  it  to  their  care.
To  this  message,  Friburz  replied  :  "  The  traitors
are  trumphant  over  me  on  every  side,  and  I  can-
not go,  nor  will  I  give  up  the  imperial  banner,  but,
tell  Gudarz  to  come  to  my  aid."  Upon  receiving
this  answer,  Byzun  struck  the  standard-bearer
dead,  and  snatching  up  the  Derafsh  Gavahnf,
conveyed  it  to  Gudarz,  who,  raising  it  on  high,
directed  his  troops  against  the  enemy ;  and  so  im-
petuous was  the  charge,  that  the  carnage  on  both
sides  was  prodigious.  Only  eight  of  the  sons  of
Gudarz  remained  alive,  seventy  of  his  kindred
having  been  slain  on  that  day,  and  many  of  the
family  of  Kaus  were  also  killed.  Nor  did  the  re-
lations of  Afrasiyab  and  Piran  suffer  in  a  less
degree,  nine  hundred  of  them,  warriors  and  ca-
valiers, were  sent  out  of  the  world  ;  yet  victory
remained  with  the  Turanians.

When  Afrasiyab  was  informed  of  the  result  of
this  battle,  he  sent  presents  and  honorary  dresses
to  his  officers,  saying,  "  We  must  not  be  contented
with  this  triumph ;  you  have  yet  to  obscure  the
martial  glory  of  Rustem  and  Khosrau."  Piran
replied,  "  No  doubt  that  object  will  be  accom-
plished with  equal  facility."

After  the  defeat  of  the  Persian  army,  Friburz
retired  under  the  cover  of  night,  and  at  length
arrived  at  the  court  of  Khosrau,  who  was  afflicted


272  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

with  the  deepest  sorrow,  both  on  account  of  his
loss  in  battle  and  the  death  of  his  brother  Ferud.
Rustem  was  now  as  usual  applied  to  for  the  pur-
pose of  consoling  the  king,  and  extricating  the
empire  from its  present  misfortunes. Khosrau
was  induced  to  liberate  Tus  from  his  confinement,
and  requested  Rustem  to  head  the  army  against
Piran,  but  Tus  promptly  offered  his  services,  and
the  champion  observed,  "  He  is  fully  competent
to  oppose  the  arms  of  Piran  ; but  if Afrasiyab
takes  the  field,  I  will  myself  instantly  follow  to
the  war." Khosrau  accordingly  deputed  Tus  and
Gudarz  with  a  large  army,  and  the  two  hostile
powers  were  soon  placed  in  opposition  to  each
other. It  is  said  that  they  were  engaged  seven
days  and  nights,  and  that  on  the  eighth  Human
came  forward, and  challenged  several  warriors  to
fight  singly,  all  of  whom  he  successively  slew.
He  then  called  upon  Tus, but  Gudarz  not  per-
mitting him  to  accept  the  challenge, sent  Gi'w  in
his  stead. The  combatants  met ;  and  after  being
wounded  and exhausted  by  their struggles for
mastery,  each  returned  to  his  own  post. The  ar-
mies again  engaged  with  arrows,  and  again  the
carnage  was  great,  but  the  battle  remained  un-
decided.

Piran  had  now  recourse  to  supernatural  agency,
and  sent  Bam,  a  renowned  magician,  perfect  in
his  art,  upon  the  neighbouring  mountains,  to  in-


THE SHAH NAMEFI.  273

volve  them  in  darkness,  and  produce  by  his  con-
juration tempestuous  showers  of  snow  and  hail.
He  ordered  him  to  direct  all  their  intense  severity
against  the  enemy,  and  to  avoid  giving  any  annoy-
ance to  the  Turanian  army.  Accordingly  when
Human  and  Piran  Wisah  made  their  attack,  they
had  the  co-operation  of  the  elements,  and  the
consequence  was  a  desperate  overthrow  of  the
Persian  army.

So  dreadful  wafc  the  carnage,  that  the  plain
Was  crimsoned  with  the  blood  of  warriors  slain.

In  this  extremity,  Tus  and  Gudarz  piously  put
up  a  prayer  to  God,  earnestly  soliciting  protection
from  the  horrors  with  which  they  were  sur-
rounded.

O  thou !  the  clement,  the  compassionate,
We  are  thy  servants,  succour  our  distress,
And  save  us  from  the  sorcery  that  now
Yields  triumph  to  the  foe. In  thee  alone
We  place  our  trust;  graciously  hear  our  prayer  !

Scarcely  had  this  petition  been  uttered,  when  a
mysterious  person  appeared  to  Reham  from  the
invisible  world,  and  pointed  to  the  mountain  from
whence  the  tempest  descended.  Reham  imme-
diately attended  to  the  sign,  and  galloped  forward
to  the  mountain,  where  he  discovered  the  magician
upon  its  summit,  deeply  engaged  in  incantations


274  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

and  witchcraft. Forthwith he drew  his sword
and  cut  off  this  wizard's  arms. Suddenly  a  whirl-
wind arose,  which  dissipated  the  utter  darkness
that  prevailed  ;  and  then  nothing  remained  of  the
preternatural  gloom,  not  a  particle  of  the  hail  or
snow  was  to  be  seen :  Reham, however, brought
him  down  from  the  mountain ;  and  after  present-
ing him  before  Tiis,  put  an  end  to  his  wicked  ex-
istence. The  armies  were  now  on  a  more  equal
footing :  they  beheld  more  clearly  the  ravages  that
had  been  committed  by  each,  and  each  had  great
need  of  rest. They  accordingly  retired  till  the
following  day,  and  then  again  opposed  each  other
with  renewed  vigour  and  animosity. But  fortune
would  not  smile  on  the  exertions  of  the  Persian
hosts,  they  being  obliged  to  fall  back  upon  the
mountain  Hamawun  and  in  the  fortress  situated
there  Tus deposited all  his  sick  and  wounded,
continuing  himself  in  advance  to  ensure  their  pro-
tection. Piran  seeing  this,  ordered  his  troops  to
besiege  the  place  where  Tus  had  posted  himself.
This  was  objected  to  by  Human,  but  Piran  was
resolved  upon  the  measure,  and  had  several  con-
flicts with  the  enemy  without  obtaining  any  ad-
vantage over  them. In  the  mountain -fortress  there
happened  to  be  wells  of  water  and  abundance  of
grain  and  provisions,  so  that  the  Persians  were  in
no  danger  of  being  reduced  by  starvation. Khos-
rau,  however, being  informed  of  their  situation,


THE SHAH NAMEII.  275

sent  Rustem,  accompanied  by  Friburz,  to  their
assistance,  and  they  were  both  welcomed,  and  re-
ceived with  rejoicing,  and  cordial  satisfaction .  The
fortress  gates  were  thrown  open,  and  Rustem  was
presently  seen  seated  upon  a  throne  in  the  public
hall,  deliberating  on  the  state  of  affairs,  surrounded
by  the  most  distinguished  leaders  of  the  army.

In  the  mean  while  Piran  Wisah  had  written
to  Afrasiyab,  informing  him  that  he  had  reduced
the  Persian  army  to  great  distress,  had  forced  them
to  take  refuge  in  a  mountain  fort,  and  requested  a
further  reinforcement  to  complete  the  victory,  and
make  them  all  prisoners.  Afrasiyab  in  conse-
quence dispatched  three  illustrious  confederates
from  different  regions.  There  was  Shinkul  of
Sugsar,  the  Khakan  of  Chin,  whose  crown  was
the  starry  heavens;  and  Kamus  of  Kushan,  a
hero  of  high  renown  and  wonderous  in  every  deed.

For  when  he  frowned,  the  air  grew  freezing  cold ;
And  when  he  smiled,  the  genial  spring  showered  down
Roses  and  hyacinths,  and  all  was  brightness  !

Piran  went  first  to  pay  a  visit  to  Kamus,  to
whom  he,  almost  trembling,  described  the  amaz-
ing strength  and  courage  of  Rustem :  but  Kamus
was  too  powerful  to  express  alarm ;  on  the  con-
trary, he  said :

"  Is  praise  like  this  to  Rustem  due  ?
And  what,  if  all  thou  say'st  he  true  ?
T  2 ^


276  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Are  his  large  limbs  of  iron  made  ?
Will  they  resist  my  trenchant  blade  ?
His  head  may  now  his  shoulders  grace,
But  will  it  long  retain  its  place  ?
Let  me  but  meet  him  in  the  fight,
And  thou  shalt  see  Kamus's  might  V

Piran's  spirits  rose  at  this  bold  speech,  and  en-
couraged by  its  effects,  he  repaired  to  the  Khakan
of  Chin,  with  whom  he  settled  the  necessary  ar-
rangements for  commencing  battle  on  the  follow-
ing day.  Early  in  the  morning  the  different  ar-
mies under  Kamus,  the  Khakan,  and  Piran  Wisah,
were  drawn  out,  and  Rustem  was  also  prepared
with  the  troops  under  his  command  for  the  im-
pending conflict.  He  saw  that  the  force  arrayed
against  him  was  prodigious,  and  most  tremendous
in  aspect ;  and  offering  a  prayer  to  the  Creator,  he
plunged  into  the  battle.

'Twas  at  midday  the  strife  began^
With  steed  to  steed  and  man  to  man  ;
The  clouds  of  dust  which  rolled  on  high,
Threw  darkness  o'er  the  earth  and  sky.
Each  soldier  on  the  other  rushed,
And  every  blade  with  crimson  blushed  ;
And  valiant  hearts  were  trod  upon,

Like  sand  beneath  the  horse's  feet,
And  when  the  warrior's  life  was  gone,

His  mail  became  his  winding  sheet.


'HIE SHAH NAMEH.  277

The  first  leader  who  advanced  conspicuously
from  among  the  Tartar  army  was  Ushkabiis,against
whom  Reham  boldly  opposed  himself;  but  after
a  short  conflict,  in  which  he  had  some  difficulty  in
defending  his  life  from  the  assaults  of  his  anta-
gonist, he  thought  it  prudent  to  retire.  When
Ushkabus  saw  this,  he  turned  round  with  the  in-
tention of  rejoining  his  own  troops ;  but  Rustem
having  witnessed  the  triumph  over  his  friend,  sal-
lied forth  on  foot,  taking  up  his  bow,  and  placing
a  few  arrows  in  his  girdle,  and  asked  him  whither
he  was  going.

Astonished,  Ushkabus  cried,  "  Who  art  thou  ?

What  kindred  hast  thou  to  lament  thy  fall  ?"

Rustem  replied  :  "  Why  madly  seek  to  know

That  which  can  never  yield  thee  benefit  ?

My  name  is  death  to  thee,  thy  hour  is  come  r

"  Indeed  !  and  thou  on  foot,  mid  mounted  warriors,

To  talk  so  bravely  !" — "  Yes,"  the  champion  said ;

"  And  hast  thou  never  heard  of  men  on  foot,

Who  conquered  horsemen  ?  I  am  sent  by  Tus,

To  take  for  him  the  horse  of  Ushkabus."

"  What !  and  unarmed?"  inquired  the  Tartar  chief;

"  No !"  cried  the  champion,  "  Mark,  my  bow  and  arrow !

Mark,  too,  with  what  effect  they  may  be  used !"

So  saying,  Rustem  drew  the  string,  and  straight

The  arrow  flew,  and  faithful  to  its  aim,

Struck  dead  the  foeman's  horse.  This  done,  he  laughed,


278  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

But  Ushkabus  was  wroth,  and  showered  upon

His  bold  antagonist  his  quivered  store —

Then  Rustem  raised  his  bow,  with  eager  eye

Choosing  a  dart,  and  placed  it  on  the  string,

A  thong  of  elk-skin  ;  to  his  ear  he  drew

The  feathered  notch,  and  when  the  point  had  touched

The  other  hand,  the  bended  horn  recoiled,

And  twang  the  arrow  sped, piercing  the  breast

Of  Ushkabus, who  fell  a  lifeless  corse,

As  if  he  never  had  been  born  I Erect,

And  firm,  the  champion  stood  upon  the  plain,

Towering  like  mount  Alberz,  immoveable,

The  gaze  and  wonder  of  the  adverse  host !

When  Rustem,  still  unknown  to  the  Turanian
forces,  returned  to  his  own  army,  the  Tartars  car-
ried away  the  body  of  Ushkabus,  and  took  it  to
the  Khakan  of  Chin,  who  ordered  the  arrow  to
be  drawn  out  before  him ;  and  when  he  and  Kamus
saw  how  deeply  it  had  penetrated,  and  that  the
feathered  end  was  wet  with  blood,  they  were
amazed  at  the  immense  power  which  had  driven  it
from  the  bow  ;  they  had  never  witnessed  or  heard
of  any  thing  so  astonishing.  The  fight  was,  in
consequence,  suspended  till  the  following  day.
The  Khakan  of  Chin  then  inquired  who  was
disposed  or  ready  to  be  revenged  on  the  enemy
for  the  death  of  Ushkabus,  when  Kamus  advanced,
and,  soliciting  permission,  urged  forward  his  horse


THE SHAH NAME1I.  279

to  the  middle  of  the  plain.  He  then  called  aloud
for  Rustem,  but  a  Kabul  hero,  named  Alwund,
a  pupil  of  Rustem's,  asked  his  master's  permission
to  oppose  the  challenger,  which  being  granted,  he
rushed  headlong  to  the  combat.  Luckless  how-
ever were  his  efforts,  for  he  was  soon  overthrown
and  slain,  and  then  Rustem  appeared  in  arms  be-
fore the  conqueror,  who  hearing  his  voice,  cried  :
"  Why  this  arrogance  and  clamour !  I  am  not
like  Ushkabus,  a  trembler  in  thy  presence."  Rus-
tem replied  :

"  When  the  lion  sees  his  prey,
Sees  the  elk-deer  cross  his  way,
Roars  he  not  ? The  very  ground
Trembles  at  the  dreadful  sound.
And  art  thou  from  terror  free,
When  opposed  in  fight  to  me  ?"

Kamiis  now  examined  him  with  a  stern  eye,
and  was  satisfied  that  he  had  to  contend  against  a
powerful  warrior;  he  therefore  with  the  utmost
alacrity  threw  his  kamund,  which  Rustem  avoid-
ed, but  it  fell  over  the  head  of  his  horse  Rakush.
Anxious  to  extricate  himself  from  this  dilemma,
Rustem  dexterously  caught  hold  of  one  end  of  the
kamund,  whilst  Kamiis  dragged  and  strained  at
the  other  ;  and  so  much  strength  was  applied  that
the  line  broke  in  the  middle,  and  Kamiis  in  con-
sequence tumbled  backwards  to  the  ground.  The


280  THE SHAH NAM EH.

boaster  had  almost  succeeded  in  remounting  his
horse,  when  he  was  secured  round  the  neck  by
Rustem's  own  kamund, and  conveyed  a  prisoner
to  the  Persian  army,  where  he  was  put  to  death !
The  fate  of  Kamus  produced  a  deep  sensation
among  the  Turanians,  and  Piran  Wisah,  partaking
of  the  general  alarm,  and  thinking  it  impossible  to
resist  the  power  of  Rustem, proposed  to  retire
from  the  contest, but  the  Khakan  of  Chin  was
of  a  different  opinion,  and  offered  himself  to  re-
medy the  evil  which  threatened  them  all. More-
over the  warrior, Chingush, volunteered  to  fight
with Rustem  ; and having obtained  the  Kha-
kan's  permission,  he  took  the  field, and  boldly
challenged  the  champion. Rustem  received  the
foe  with  a  smiling  countenance,  and  the  struggle
began  with  arrows. After  a  smart  attack  on  both
sides,  Chingush  thought  it  prudent  to  fly  from  the
overwhelming  force  of  Rustem, who, however,
steadily  pursued  him, and  adroitly seizing  the
horse  by  the  tail,  hurled  him  from  his  saddle.
He  grasped  the  charger's  flowing  tail,
Aoid  all  were  struck  with  terror  pale,
To  see  a  sight  so  strange ;  the  foe,
Dismounted  by  one  desperate  blow  ;
The  captive  asked  for  life  in  vain,
His  recreant  blood  bedewed  the  plain.
His  head  was  from  his  shoulders  wrung,
His  body  to  the  vultures  flung.


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  281

Rustem,  after  this  exploit,  invited  some  other
hero  to  single  combat ;  but  at  the  moment  not  one
replied  to  his  challenge.  At  last  Human  came
forward,  not  however  to  fight,  but  to  remonstrate,
and  make  an  effort  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  which
threatened  total  destruction  to  his  country.  "  Why
such  bitter  enmity  ?  why  such  a  whirlwind  of  re-
sentment?" said  he  ;  "to  this  I  ascribe  the  ca-
lamities under  which  we  suffer  ;  but  is  there  no
way  by  which  this  sanguinary  career  of  vengeance
can  be  checked  or  moderated !"  Rustem,  in
answer,  enumerated  the  aggressions  and  the  crimes
of  Afrasiyab,  and  especially  dwelt  on  the  atro-
cious murder  of  Saiawush,  which  he  declared
could  never  be  pardoned.  Human  wished  to  know
his  name  ;  but  Rustem  refused  to  tell  him,  and
requested  Piran  Wisah  might  be  sent  to  him,  to
whom  he  would  communicate  his  thoughts,  and
the  secrets  of  his  heart  freely.  Human  accord-
ingly returned,  and  informed  Piran  of  the  cham-
pion's wishes.

"  This  must  be  Rustem,  stronger  than  the  pard,
The  lion,  or  the  Egyptian  crocodile,
Or  fell  Iblis  ;  dreams  never  painted  hero
Half  so  tremendous  on  the  battle  plain."

The  old  man  said  to  him  :

"  If  this  be  Rustem,  then  the  time  has  come,
Dreaded  so  long — for  what  but  fire  and  sword,


282  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Can  now  await  us? Every  town  laid  waste,
Soldier  and  peasant,  husband,  wife,  and  child,
Sharing  the  miseries  of  a  ravaged  land  !"

With  tears  in  his  eyes  and  a  heavy  heart,  Pinin
repaired  to  the  Khakan,  who,  after  some  dis-
cussion, permitted  him  in  these  terms  to  go  and
confer  with  Rustem.

"  Depart  then  speedful  on  thy  embassy,

And  if  he  seeks  for  peace,  adjust  the  terms,

And  presents  to  be  sent  us. If  he  talks

Of  war  and  vengeance,  and  is  clothed  in  mail,

No  sign  of  peace,  why  we  must  trust  in  Heaven

For  strength  to  crush  his  hopes  of  victory.

He  is  not  formed  of  iron,  nor  of  brass,

But  flesh  and  blood,  with  human  nerves  and  hair.

He  does  not  in  the  battle  tread  the  clouds,

Nor  can  he  vanish,  like  the  demon  race, —

Then  why  this  sorrow,  why  these  marks  of  grief?

He  is  not  stronger  than  an  elephant ;

Not  he,  but  I  will  shew  him  what  it  is

To  fight  or  gambol  with  an  elephant !

Besides,  for  every  man  his  army  boasts,

We  have  three  hundred — wherefore  then  be  sad  ?"

Notwithstanding  these  expressions  of  confidence,
Piran's  heart  was  full  of  alarm  and  terror ;  but  he
hastened  to  the  Persian  camp,  and  made  himself
known  to  the  champion  of  the  host,  who  frankly
said,  after  he  had  heard  Piran's  name,  "  I  am


THE SHAH NAMEH,  283

Rustcm  of  Zabul,  armed  as  thou  seest,  for  battle  !"
Upon  which  Piran  respectfully  dismounted,  and
paid  the  usual  homage  to  his  illustrious  rank  and
distinction.  Rustem  said  to  him,  "  I  bring  thee  the
blessings  of  Kai-khosrau  and  Ferangis,  his  mo-
ther, who  nightly  see  thy  face  in  their  dreams."

"  Blessings  from  me,  upon  that  royal  youth !"

Exclaimed  the  good  old  man. "  Blessings  on  her,

The  daughter  of  Afrasiyab,  his  mother,

Who  saved  my  life — and  blessings  upon  thee,

Thou  matchless  hero  ! Thou  hast  come  for  vengeance,

In  the  dear  name  of  gallant  Saiawush,

Of  Saiawush,  the  husband  of  my  child,

(The  beautiful  Gulshaher),  of  him  who  loved  me

As  I  had  been  his  father. His  brave  son,

Ferud,  was  slaughtered,  and  his  mother  too,

And  Khosrau  was  his  brother,  now  the  king,

By  whom  he  fell,  or  if  not  by  his  word,

Whose  was  the  guilty  hand  ? Has  punishment

Been  meted  to  the  offender  ? I  protected,

In  mine  own  house,  the  princess  Ferangis;

And  when  her  son  was  born,  Kai-khosrau,  still

I,  at  the  risk  of  my  existence,  kept  them

Safe  from  the  fury  of  Afrasiyab,

Who  would  have  sacrificed  the  child,  or  both  !

And  night  and  day  I  watched  them,  till  the  hour

When  they  escaped  and  crossed  the  boundary-stream.

Enough  of  this  ! Now  let  us  speak  of  peace,


284  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Since  the  confederates  in  this  mighty  war
Are  guiltless  of  the  blood  of  Saiawush  !"

Rustem,  in  answer  to  Piran,  observed,  that  in
negociating  the  terms  of  pacification,  several  im-
portant points  were  to  be  considered,  and  several
indispensible  matters  to  be  attended  to.  No  peace
could  be  made  unless  the  principal  actors  in  the
bloody  tragedy  of  Saiawush's  death  were  first
given  up,  particularly  Gerslwaz ;  vast  sums  of
money  were  also  required  to  be  presented  to  the
king  of  kings  ;  and,  moreover,  Rustem  said  he
would  disdain  making  peace  at  all,  but  that  it
enabled  Piran  to  do  service  to  Kai-khosrau.  Piran
saw  the  difficulty  of  acceding  to  these  demands,
but  he  speedily  laid  them  before  the  Khakan,
who  consulted  his  confederates  on  the  subject,
and  after  due  consideration,  their  pride  and  shame
resisted  the  overtures,  which  they  thought  igno-
minious. Shinkul,  a  king  of  Ind,  was  a  violent
opposer  of  the  terms,  and  declared  against  peace
on  any  such  conditions.  Several  other  warriors
expressed  their  readiness  to  contend  against  Rus-
tem, and  they  flattered  themselves  that  by  a  rapid
succession  of  attacks,  one  after  the  other,  they
would  easily  overpower  him.  The  Khakan  was
pleased  with  this  conceit,  and  permitted  Shenkul
to  begin  the  struggle.  Accordingly  he  entered
the  plain,  and  summoned  Rustem  to  renew  the


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  285

fight.  The  champion  came  and  struck  him  with
a  spear,  which,  penetrating  his  breast,  threw  him
off  his  horse  to  the  ground.  The  dagger  was  al-
ready raised  to  finish  his  career,  but  he  sprang  on
his  feet,  and  quickly  ran  away  to  tell  his  mis-
fortune to  the  Khakan  of  Chin.

And  thus  he  cried,  in  look  forlorn,
"  This  foe  is  not  of  mortal  born ;
A  furious  elephant  in  fight,
A  very  mountain  to  the  sight ;
No  warrior  of  the  human  race,
That  ever  wielded  spear  or  mace,
Alone  this  dragon  could  withstand,
Or  live  beneath  his  conquering  brand  !"

The  Khakan  reminded  him  how  different  were
his  feelings  and  sentiments  in  the  morning,  and
having  asked  him  what  he  now  proposed  to  do,
he  said  that  without  a  considerable  force  it  would
be  useless  to  return  to  the  field ;  five  thousand
men  were  therefore  assigned  to  him,  and  with
them  he  proceeded  to  engage  the  champion.  Rus-
tem  had  also  been  joined  by  his  valiant  com-
panions, and  a  general  battle  ensued.  The  hea-
vens were  obscured  by  the  dust  which  ascended
from  the  tramp  of  the  horses,  and  the  plain  was
crimsoned  with  the  blood  of  the  slain.  In  the
midst  of  the  contest,  Sawa,  a  relation  of  Ka-
mus,  burst  forward  and  sought  to  be  revenged  on


286  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Rustem  for  the  fate  of  his  friend. The  champion
raised  his  battle-axe, and  giving  Rakush  the  rein,
with  one  blow  of  his  mace  removed  him  to  the
other  world. No  sooner  had  he  dispatched  this
assailant  than  he  was  attacked  by  another  of  the
kindred  of  Kamus,  named  Kahar, whom  he  also
slew,  and  thus  humbled  the  pride  of  the  Kush-
anians. Elated  with  his  success,  and  having  fur-
ther displayed his valour among the enemy's
troops,  he  vowed  that  he  would  now  encounter
the  Khakan  himself,  and  despoil  him  of  all  his
pomp  and  treasure. For  this  purpose  he  selected
a  thousand  horsemen, and  thus  supported, ap-
proached the  kulubgah, or  head-quarters  of  the
monarch  of  Chin. The  clamour  of  the  cavalry,
and  the  clash  of  spears  and  swords,  resounded  afar.
The  air  became  as  dark  as  the  visage  of  an  Ethio-
pian, and  the  field  was  covered  with  severed  heads,
broken  armour,  and  the  bodies  of  the  slain.  Amidst
the  conflict  Rustem  called  aloud  to  the  Khakan  :
"  Surrender  to  my  arms  those  elephants,
That  ivory  throne,  that  crown,  and  chain  of  gold ;
Fit  trophies  for  Kai-Khosrau,  Persia's  king  ;
For  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  diadem
And  sovereign  power  ! My  noose  shall  soon  secure  thee,
And  I  will  send  thee  living  to  his  presence ;
Since,  looking  on  my  valour  and  my  strength,
Life  is  enough  to  grant  thee. If  thou  wilt  not
Resign  thy  crown  and  throne — thy  doom  is  sealed."


THE SHAH NAMEH.  287

The  Khakan,  filled  with  indignation  at  these
haughty  words,  cautioned  Rustem  to  parry  off  his
own  danger,  and  then  commanded  his  troops  to
assail  the  enemy  with  a  shower  of  arrows.  The
attack  was  so  tremendous  and  terrifying,  even
beyond  the  picturings  of  a  dream,  that  Gudarz
was  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  Rustem,  and  sent
Reham  and  Giw  to  his  aid.  Rustem  said  to  Re-
ham  : — "  I  fear  that  my  horse  Rakush  is  becom-
ing weary  of  exertion,  in  which  case  what  shall  I
do  in  this  conflict  with  the  enemy  ?  I  must  attack
on  foot  the  Khakan  of  Chin,  though  he  has  an
army  here  as  countless  as  legions  of  ants  or  lo-
custs ;  but  if  Heaven  continues  my  friend,  I  shall
stretch  many  of  them  in  the  dust,  and  take  many
prisoners.  The  captives  I  will  send  to  Khosrau,
and  all  the  spoils  of  Chin."  Saying  this  he
pushed  forward,  roaring  like  a  tiger,  towards  the
Khakan,  and  exclaimed  with  a  stern  voice  : —
"  The  Turks  are  allied  to  the  devil,  and  the
wicked  are  always  un prosperous.  Thou  hast  not
yet  fallen  in  with  Rustem,  or  thy  brain  would
have  been  bewildered.  He  is  a  never-dying
dragon,  always  seeking  the  strongest  in  battle.  But
thou  hast  not  yet  had  enough  of  even  me!"  He
then  drew  his  kamund  from  the  saddle-strap,  and
praying  to  God  to  grant  him  victory  over  his  foes,
urged  on  Rakush,  and  wherever  he  threw  the
noose,  his  aim  was  successful.  Great  was  the


288  THE SHAH NAMEH.

slaughter,  and  the  Khakan,  seeing  from  the  back
of  his  white  elephant  the  extent  of  his  loss,  and
beginning  to  be  apprehensive  about  his  own  safety,
ordered  one  of  his  warriors,  well  acquainted  with
the  language  of  Iran,  to  solicit  from  the  enemy  a
cessation  of  hostilities.

"  Say  whence  this  wrath  on  us,  this  keen  revenge  ?
We  never  injured  Saiawush  ;  the  kings
Of  Ind  and  Chin  are  guiltless  of  his  blood  ;
Then  why  this  wrath  on  strangers  ? Spells  and  charms.
Used  by  Afrasiyab, — the  cause  of  all-
Have  brought  us  hither  to  contend  against
The  champion  Rustem  ;  and  since  peace  is  better
Than  war  and  bloodshed,  let  us  part  in  peace."

The  messenger  having  delivered  his  message,
Rustem  replied : —

"  My  words  are  few. Let  him  give  up  his  crown,

His  golden  collar,  throne,  and  elephants ;

These  are  the  terms  I  grant. He  came  for  plunder,

And  now  he  asks  for  peace. Tell  him  again,

Till  all  his  treasure  and  his  crown  are  mine,

His  throne  and  elephants,  he  seeks  in  vain

For  peace  with  Rustem,  or  the  Persian  king.!"

When  the  Khakan  was  informed  of  these  reite-
rated conditions,  he  burst  out  into  bitter  re-
proaches and  abuse ;  and  with  so  loud  a  voice,
that  the  wind  conveyed  them  distinctly  to  Rus-


THE SHAH NAMEH  289

tern's  ear.  The  champion  immediately  prepared  for
the  attack ;  and  approaching  the  enemy,  flung  his
kamund,  by  which  he  at  once  dragged  the  Khakan
from  his  white  elephant.  The  hands  of  the  captured
monarch  were  straightway  bound  behind  his  back.
Degraded  and  helpless  he  stood,  and  a  single  stroke
deprived  him  of  his  crown,  and  throne,  and  life.

Such  are,  since  time  began,  the  ways  of  Heaven  ;
Sucli  the  decrees  of  fate  ! Sometimes  raised  up,
And  sometimes  hunted  down  by  enemies,
Men,  struggling,  pass  through  this  precarious  life.
Exalted  now  to  sovereign  power ;  and  now
Steeped  in  the  gulph  of  poverty  and  sorrow.
To  one  is  given  the  affluence  of  Karun ;
Another  dies  in  want. How  little  know  we
What  hue  our  future  fortune  may  assume  !
The  world  is  all  deceit,  deception  all !

Piran-Wisah  beheld  the  disasters  of  the  day,  he
saw  the  Khakan  of  Chin  delivered  over  to  Tus,  his
death,  and  the  banners  of  the  confederates  over-
thrown ;  and  sorrowing  said : — "'  This  day  is  the  day
of  flight,  not  of  victory  to  us !  This  is  no  time  for  son
to  protect  father,  nor  father  son — we  must  fly  !"  In
the  meanwhile  Rustem,  animated  by  feelings  of  a
very  different  kind,  gave  a  banquet  to  his  warrior
friends,  in  celebration  of  the  triumph.

When  the  intelligence  of  the  overthrow  and
death  of  Kamus  and  the  Khakan  of  Chin,  and

u


290  THE SHAH NAMEH.

the  dispersion  of  their  armies,  reached  Afrasiyab,
he  was  overwhelmed  with  distress  and  conster-
nation, and  expressed  his  determination  to  be
revenged  on  the  conquerors.  Not  an  Iranian,  he
said,  should  remain  alive-;  and  the  doors  of  his
treasury  were  thrown  open  to  equip  and  reward
the  new  army,  which  was  to  consist  of  a  hundred
thousand  men.

Tlustem  having  communicated  to  Kai-khosrau,
through  Friburz,  the  account  of  his  success,  re-
ceived the  most  satisfactory  marks  of  his  sove-
reign's applause  ;  but  still  anxious  to  promote  the
glory  of  his  country,  he  engaged  in  new  exploits,
He  went  against  Kafur,  the  king  of  the  city  of
Bidad,  a  cannibal,  who  feasted  on  human  flesh,
especially  on  the  young  women  of  his  country,
and  those  of  the  greatest  beauty,  being  the  richest
morsels,  were  first  destroyed.  He  soon  over-
powered and  slew  the  monster,  and  having  given
his  body  to  be  devoured  by  dogs,  plundered  and
razed  his  castle  to  the  ground.  After  this  he  in-
vaded and  ravaged  the  province  of  Khoten,  one  of
the  dependencies  of  Turan,  and  recently  the  pos-
session of  Saiawush,  which  was  a-  new  affliction
to  Afrasiyab,  who  alarmed  about  his  o*wn  empire,
dispatched  a  trusty  person  secretly  to  Rustem's
camp,  to  obtain  private  intelligence  of  his  hostile
movements.  The  answer  of  the  spy  added  con-
siderably to  his  distress,  and  in  the  dilemma  he
consulted  with  Piran  Wisah,  that  he  might  have


THE SHAH NAMEH.  291

the  benefit  of  the  old  man's  experience  and  wis-
dom. Piran  told  him  that  he  had  failed  to  make
an  impression  upon  the  Persians,  even  assisted
by  Kamus  the  Kashanian,  and  the  Khakan  of
Chin ;  both  had  been  slain  in  battle,  and  there-
fore it  would  be  in  vain  to  attempt  further  offen-
sive measures  without  the  most  powerful  aid.
There  was,  he  added,  a  neighbouring  king,  named
Puladsvimd,  who  alone  seemed  equal  to  contend
with  Rustem.  He  was  of  immense  stature,  and
of  prodigious  strength,  and  might,  by  the  favour
of  heaven,  be  able  to  subdue  him.  Afrasiyab  was
pleased  with  this  information,  and  immediately
invited  Puladwimd,  by  letter,  to  assist  him  in  ex-
terminating the  champion  of  Persia.  Puladwund
was  proud  of  the  honour  conferred  upon  him,  and
readily  complied ;  hastening  the  preparation  of  his
own  army  to  co-operate  with  that  of  Afrasiyab.  He
presently  joined  him,  and  the  whole  of  the  com-
bined forces  rapidly  marched  against  the  enemy.
The  first  warrior  he  encountered  was  Giw,  whom
he  caught  with  his  kamund.  Reham  and  Byzun
seeing  this,  instantly  rushed  forward  to  extricate
their  brother  and  champion  in  arms  ;  but  they  too
were  also  secured  in  the  same  manner  !  In  the
struggle,  however,  the  kamunds  gave  way,  and
then  Puladwund  drew  his  sword,  and  by  several
strokes  wounded  them  all.  The  father,  Gudarz,
apprised  of  this  disaster,  which  had  unfortunately

u  2


292  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

happened  to  three  of  his  sons,  applied  to  Rustem  for
succour.  The  champion,  the  refuge,  the  protector
of  all,  was,  as  usual,  ready  to  repel  the  enemy.
He  forthwith  advanced,  liberated  his  friends,  and
dreadful  was  the  conflict  which  followed.  The
club  was  used  with  great  dexterity  on  both  sides ;
but  at  length  Puladwund  struck  his  antagonist
such  a  blow  that  the  sound  of  it  was  heard  by  the
troops  at  a  distance,  and  Rustem,  stunned  by  its
severity,  thought  himself  opposed  with  so  much
vigour,  that  he  prayed  to  the  Almighty  for  a
prosperous  issue  to  the  engagement.

"  Should  I  be  in  this  struggle  slain,
What  stay  for  Persia  will  he  left  ?

None  to  defend  Kai-Khosrau's  reign,
Of  me,  his  warrior-chief,  bereft.

Then  village,  town,  and  city  gay,

Will  feel  the  cruel  Tartar's  sway  !

Puladwund  wishing  to  follow  up  the  blow  by  a
final  stroke  of  his  sword,  found  to  his  amazement
that  it  recoiled  from  the  armour  of  Rustem,  and
thence  he  proposed  another  mode  of  fighting,
which  he  hoped  would  be  more  successful.  He
wished  to  try  his  power  in  wrestling.  The  chal-
lenge was  accepted.  By  agreement  both  armies
retired,  and  left  the  space  of  a  farsang between  them,
and  no  one  was  allowed  to  afford  assistance  to
either  combatant.  Afrasiyab  was  present,  and  sent


THI. SHAH NAM  EH.  293

word  to  Piiladwund,  the  moment  he  got  Rustem
under  him,  to  plunge  a  sword  in  his  heart.  The
contest  began,  but  Piiladwund  had  no  opportunity
of  fulfilling  the  wishes  of  Afrasiyab.  Rustem
grasped  him  with  such  vigour,  lifted  him  up  in  his
arms,  and  dashed  him  so  furiously  on  the  plain,  that
the  boaster  seemed  to  be  killed  on  the  spot.  Rus-
tem indeed  thought  he  had  put  a  period  to  his  life ;
.and  with  that  impression  left  him,  and  remounted
Rakush :  but  the  crafty  Piiladwund  only  pre-
tended to  be  dead  ;  and  as  soon  as  he  found  him-
self released,  sprang  up  and  escaped,  flying  like
an  arrow  to  his  own  side.  He  then  told  Afrasiyab
how  he  had  saved  his  life  by  counterfeiting  death,
and  assured  him  that  it  was  useless  to  contend
against  Rustem.  The  champion  having  witnessed
this  subterfuge,  turned  round  in  pursuit,  and  the
Tartars  received  him  with  a  shower  of  arrows  ;  but
the  attack  was  well  answered,  Puladwund  being
so  alarmed  that,  without  saying  a  word  to  Afra-
siyab, he  fled  from  the  field.  Piran  now  coun-
selled Afrasiyab  to  escape  also  to  the  remotest
part  of  Tartary.  As  the  flight  of  Puladwund  had
disheartened  the  Turanian  troops,  and  there  was  no
chance  of  profiting  by  further  resistance,  Afrasiyab
took  his  advice,  and  so  precipitate  was  his  retreat,
that  he  entirely  abandoned  his  standards,  tents,
horses,  arms,  and  treasure  to  an  immense  amount.
The  most  valuable  booty  was  sent  by  Rustem  to  the


294  THE SHAH NAAIEH.

king  of  Iran,  and  a  considerable  portion  of  it  was
divided  among  the  chiefs  and  the  soldiers  of  the
army.  He  then  mounted  Rakush,  and  proceeded
to  the  court  of  Kai-khosrau,  where  he  was  received
with  the  highest  honours  and  with  unbounded  re-
joicings. The  king  opened  his  jewel  chamber,
and  gave  him  the  richest  rubies,  and  vessels  of  gold
filled  with  musk  and  aloes,  and  also  splendid
garments  ;  a  hundred  beautiful  damsels  wearing-
crowns  and  ear-rings,  a  hundred  horses,  and  a
hundred  camels.  Having  thus  terminated  trium-
phantly the  campaign,  Rustem  carried  with  him
to  Zabul  the  blessings  and  admiration  of  his
country.


AKWAN DIW.

And  now  we  come  to  Akwan  Diw,
Whom  Rustem  next  in  combat  slew.

One  day  as  Kai-khosrau  was  sitting  in  his  beau-
tiful garden,  abounding  in  roses  and  the  balmy  lux-
uriance of  spring,  surrounded  by  his  warriors,  and
enjoying  the  pleasures  of  the  banquet  with  music
and  singing,  a  peasant  approached,  and  informed
him  of  a  most  mysterious  apparition.  A  wild  ass,
he  said,  had  come  in  from  the  neighbouring  forest ;
it  had  at  least  the  external  appearance  of  a  wild
ass,  but  possessed  such  supernatural  strength,


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  295

that  it  had  rushed  among  the  horses  in  the  royal
stables  with  the  ferocity  of  a  lion  or  a  demon,
doing  extensive  injury,  and  in  fact  appeared  to  be
an  evil  spirit ! Kai-khosrau  felt  assured  that  it
was  something  more  than  it  seemed  to  be,  and
looked  round among  his  warriors  to  know  what
should  be  done. It  was  soon  found  that  Rustem
was  the only  person  capable  of  giving  effectual
assistance  in  this  emergency,  and  accordingly  a
message  was  forwarded  to  request  his  services.
The  champion  instantly  complied,  and  it  was  not
long  before  he  occupied  himself  upon  the  impor-
tant enterprize. Guided  by  the  peasant,  he  pro-
ceeded in  the  first  place  towards  the  spot  where
the  mysterious  animal  had  been  seen ;  but  it  was
not  till  the  fourth  day  of  his  search  that  he  fell  in
with  him,  and  then,  being  anxious  to  secure  him
alive,  and  send  him  as  a  trophy  to  Kai-Khosrau,
he threw  his  kamund ;  but  it  was  in  vain  •  the
wild  ass  in  a  moment  vanished  out  of  sight !  From
this  circumstance  Rustem  observed,  "  This  can  be
no  other  than  Akwan  Diw,  and  my  weapon  must
now  be  either  dagger  or  sword." The  next  time
the  wild  ass  appeared  he  pursued  him  with  his
drawn  sword  ;  but  on  lifting  it  up  to  strike,  nothing
was  to  be  seen. He  tried  again,  when  he  came
near  him,  both  spear  and  arrow,  still  the  animal
vanished,  disappointing  his  blow  ;  and  thus  three
days  and  nights  he  continued  fighting,  as  it  were


296  THE SHAH NAMEH.

against  a  shadow.  Wearied  at  length  with  his
exertions,  he  dismounted,  and  leading  Rakush  to
a  green  spot  near  a  limpid  fountain  or  rivulet  of
spring  water,  allowed  him  to  graze,  and  then  went
to  sleep.  Akwan  Diw  seeing  from  a  distance
that  Rustem  had  fallen  asleep,  rushed  towards
him  like  a  whirlwind,  and  rapidly  digging  up  the
ground  on  every  side  of  him,  took  up  the  plot  of
ground  and  the  champion  together,  placed  them
upon  his  head,  and  walked  away  with  them.  Rus-
tem being  awakened  with  the  motion,  he  was  thus
addressed  by  the  giant-demon  :

"  Warrior  !  now  no  longer  free  !
Tell  me  what  thy  wish  may  be ;
Shall  I  plunge  thee  in  the  sea,

Or  leave  thee  on  the  mountain  drear,

None  to  give  thee  succour,  near  ?
Tell  thy  wish  to  me  !"

Rustem,  thus  deplorably  in  the  power  of  the
demon,  began  to  consider  what  was  best  to  be
done,  and  recollecting  that  it  was  customary  with
that  supernatural  race  to  act  by  the  rule  of  con-
traries, in  opposition  to  an  expressed  desire,  said  in
reply,  for  he  knew  that  if  he  was  thrown  into  the
sea  there  would  be  a  good  chance  of  escape : —

"  O, plunge  me  not  in  the  roaring  sea,
The  maw  of  a  fish  is  no  home  for  me ;


THE SHAH NAM EH.  297

But  cast  me  forth  on  the  mountain ;  there
Is  the  lion's  haunt  and  the  tyger's  lair  ;
And  for  them  I  shall  be  a  -morsel  of  food,
They  will  eat  my  flesh  and  drink  my  bl<x>d  ;
But  my  bones  will  be  left,  to  shew  the  place
Where  this  form  was  devoured  by  the  feline  race ;
Yes,  something  will  then  remain  of  me,
Whilst  nothing  escapes  from  the  roaring  sea  !"

Akwan  Diw  having  heard  this  particular  desire
of  Rustem,  determined  at  once  to  thwart  him,  and
for  this  purpose  he  raised  him  up  with  his  hands,  and
flung  him  from  his  lofty  position  headlong  into  the
deep  and, roaring  ocean.  Down  he  fell,  and  a  cro-
codile speedily  darted  upon  him  with  the  eager  in-
tention of  devouring  him  alive  ;  but  Rustem  drew
his  sword  with  alacrity,  and  severed  the  monster's
head  from  his  body.  Another  came,  and  was  put
to  death  in  the  same  manner,  and  the  water  was
crimsoned  with  blood.  At  last  he  succeeded  in
swimming  safely  on  shore,  and  instantly  returned
thanks  to  Heaven  for  the  signal  protection  he  had
experienced.

Breasting  the  wave,  with  fearless  skill

He  used  his  glittering  brand ;
And  glorious  and  triumphant  still,

He  quickly  reached  the  strand.

He  then  moved  towards  the  fountain  where  he
had  left  Rakush ;  but,  to  his  great  alarm  and


THE SHAH NAMEH.

vexation  his  matchless  horse  was  not  there.  He
wandered  about  for  some  time,  and  in  the  end
found  him  among  a  herd  of  horses  belonging  to
Afrasiyab.  Having  first  caught  him,  and  resumed
his  seat  in  the  saddle,  he  resolved  upon  capturing
and  driving  away  the  whole  herd,  and  conveying
them  to  Kai-khosrau.  He  was  carrying  into  ef-
fect this  resolution  when  the  noise  awoke  the
keepers  specially  employed  by  Afrasiyab,  and
they,  indignant  at  this  outrageous  proceeding,
called  together  a  strong  party  to  pursue  the  ag-
gressor. When  they  had  nearly  reached  him,  he
turned  boldly  round,  and  said  aloud  : — "  I  am
Rustem,  the  descendant  of  Sam.  -I  have  con-
quered Afrasiyab  in  battle,  and  after  that  dost  thou
presume  to  oppose  me?"  Hearing  this,  the  keepers
of  the  Tartar  stud  instantly  turned  their  backs,
and  ran  away.

It  so  happened  that  at  this  period  Afrasiyab
paid  his  annual  visit  to  his  nursery  of  horses,  and
on  his  coming  to  the  meadows  in  which  they  were
kept,  neither  horses  nor  keepers  were  to  be  seen.
In  a  short  time,  however,  he  was  informed  by
those  who  had  returned  from  the  pursuit,  that
Rustem  was  the  person  who  had  carried  off  the
herd,  and  upon  hearing  of  this  outrage,  he  pro-
ceeded with  his  troops  at  once  to  attack  him.
Impatient  at  the  indignity,  he  approached  Rus-
tem with  great  fury,  but  was  presently  compelled


THE SHAH NAM EH.  299

to  fly  to  save  his  life,  and  thus  allow  his  herd
of  favourite  steeds,  together  with  four  elephants,
to  be  placed  in  the  possession  of  Kai-Khosrau.
Rustem  then  returned  to  the  meadows  and  the
fountain  near  the  habitation  of  Akwan  Diw ;  and
there  he  again  met  with  the  demon,  who  thus
accosted  him  :—

"  What  !  art  thou  then  aroused  from  death's  dark  sleep  ?
Hast  thou  escaped  the  monsters  of  the  deep  ?
And  dost  thou  seek  upon  the  dusty  plain
To  struggle  with  a  demon's  power  again  ?
Of  flint,  or  brass,  or  iron  is  thy  form  ?
Or  canst  thou,  like  the  demons,  raise  the  dreadful  battle
storm  ?"

Rustem,  hearing  this  taunt  from  the  tongue  of
Akwan  Diw,  prepared  for  fight,  and  threw  his
kamund  with  such  precision  and  force,  that  the
demon  was  entangled  in  it,  and  then  he  struck
him  such  a  mighty  blow  with  his  sword,  that  it
severed  the  head  from  the  body.  The  severed
head  of  the  unclean  monster  he  transmitted  as  a
trophy  to  Kai-khosrau,  by  whom  it  was  regarded
with  amazement,  on  account  of  its  hideous  ex-
pression and  its  vast  size.  After  this  extraordi-
nary feat,  Rustem  paid  his  respects  to  the  king,
and  was  received  as  usual  with  distinguished  ho-
nour and  affection  ;  and  having  enjoyed  the  mag-
nificent hospitality  of  the  court  for  some  time,  he


300  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

returned  to  Zabulistan,  accompanied  part  of  the
way  by  Kai-khosrau  himself  and  a  crowd  of  va-
liant warriors,  ever  anxious  to  acknowledge  his
superior  worth  and  prodigious  strength.


THE  STORY  OF  BYZUN  AND  MANIJEH,  THE
DAUGHTER  OF  AFRASIYAB.

One  day  the  people  of  Arman  petitioned  Kai-
khosrau  to  remove  from  them  a  grievous  calamity.
The  country  they  inhabited  was  overrun  with
herds  of  wild  hogs,  which  not  only  destroyed  the
produce  of  their  fields,  but  the  fruit  and  flowers  in
their  orchards  and  gardens,  and  so  extreme  was
the  ferocity  of  the  animals  that  it  was  dangerous
to  go  abroad  ;  they  therefore  solicited  protection
from  this  disastrous  visitation,  and  hoped  for  relief.
The  king  was  at  the  time  enjoying  himself  amidst
his  warriors  at  a  banquet,  drinking  wine,  and
listening  to  music  and  the  songs  of  bewitching-
damsels.

The  glance  of  beauty,  and  the  charm

Of  heavenly  sounds,  so  soft  and  thrilling,

And  ruby  wine,  must  ever  warm

The  heart,  with  love  and  rapture  filling.

Can  aught  more  sweet,  more  genial  prove,

Than  melting  music,  wine,  and  love  ?


THE SHAH NAME1I.  301

The  moment  he  was  made  acquainted  with  the
grievances  endured  by  the  Armenians,  he  referred
the  matter  to  the  consideration  of  his  counsellors
and  nobles,  in  order  that  a  remedy  might  be  im-
mediately applied.  Byzun,  when  he  heard  what
was  required,  and  had  learned  the  disposition  of  the
king,  rose  up  at  on,ce  with  all  the  enthusiasm  of
youth,  and  offered  to  undertake  the  extermination
of  the  hogs  himself.  But  Giw  objected  to  so  great
a  hazard,  for  he  was  too  young,  he  said;  a  hero  of
greater  experience  being  necessary  for  such  an
arduous  enterprize.  Byzun,  however,  was  not  to
be  rejected  on  this  account,  and  observed,  that
though  young,  he  was  mature  in  judgment  and
discretion,  and  he  relied  on  the  liberal  decision  of
the  king,  who  at  length  permitted  him  to  go,  but
he  was  to  be  accompanied  by  the  veteran  warrior
Girgin.  Accordingly  Byzun  and  Girgin  set  off  on
the  perilous  expedition  ;  and  after  a  journey  of  se-
veral days  arrived  at  the  place  situated  between  Iran
and  Turan,  where  the  hogs  were  the  most  de-
structive. In  a  short  time  a  great  number  were
hunted  down  and  killed,  and  Byzun,  utterly  to
destroy  the  sustenance  of  the  depredators,  set  fire
to  the  forest,  and  reduced  the  whole  of  the  cul-
tivation to  ashes.  His  exertions  were,  in  short,
entirely  successful,  and  the  country  was  thus  freed
from  the  visitation  which  had  occasioned  so  much
distress  and  ruin.  To  give  incontestible  proof  of
this  exploit,  he  cut  off  the  heads  of  all  the  hogs,


302  THE SHAH NAMEH.

and  took  out  the  tusks,  to  send  to  Kai-khosrau.
When  Girgin  had  witnessed  the  intrepidity  and
boldness  of  Byzun,  and  found  him  determined  to
send  the  evidence  of  his  bravery  to  Kai-khosrau,
he  became  envious  of  the  youth's  success,  and  an-
ticipated by  comparison  the  ruin  of  his  own  name
and  the  gratification  of  his  foes.  He  therefore  at-
tempted to  dissuade  him  from  sending  the  trophies
to  the  king,  and  having  failed,  he  resolved  upon
getting  him  out  of  the  way.  To  effect  this  pur-
pose he  worked  upon  the  feelings  and  the  passions
of  Byzun  with  consummate  art,  and  whilst  his
victim  was  warm  with  wine,  praised  him  beyond
all  the  warriors  of  the  age.  He  then  told  him  he
had  heard  that  at  no  great  distance  from  them
there  was  a  beautiful  place,  a  garden  of  perpetual
spring,  which  was  visited  every  vernal  season  by
Manijeh,  the  lovely  daughter  of  Afrasiyab.

"  It  is  a  spot  beyond  imagination

Delightful  to  the  heart,  where  roses  bloom,

And  sparkling  fountains  murmur — where  the  earth

Is  rich  with  many-coloured  flowers ;  and  musk

Floats  on  the  gentle  breezes,  hyacinths

And  lilies  add  their  perfume — golden  fruit

Weigh  down  the  branches  of  the  lofty  trees.

The  glittering  pheasant  moves  in  stately  pomp,

The  bulbul  warbles  from  the  cypress  bough,

And  love-inspiring  damsels  may  be  seen

O'er  hill  and  dale,  their  lips  all  winning  smiles,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  303

Their  checks  like  roses — in  their  sleepy  eyes
Delicious  languor  dwelling. Over  them
Presides  the  daughter  of  Afnisiyab,
The  beautiful  Manijeh  ;  should  we  go,
('Tis  but  a  little  distance),  and  encamp
Among  the  lovely  groupes — in  that  retreat
Which  blooms  like  Paradise — we  may  secure
A  bevy  of  fair  virgins  for  the  king  !"

Byzun  was  excited  by  this  description ;  and
impatient  to  realize  what  it  promised,  repaired
without  delay,  accompanied  by  Girgin,  to  the
romantic  retirement  of  the  princess.  They  ap-
proached so  close  to  the  summer-tent  in  which
she  dwelt  that  she  had  a  full  view  of  Byzun,  and
immediately  becoming  deeply  enamoured  of  his
person,  dispatched  a  confidential  domestic,  her
nurse,  to  inquire  who  he  was,  and  from  whence
he  came.

"  Go,  and  beneath  that  cypress  tree,
Where  now  he  sits  so  gracefully,
Ask  him  his  name,  that  radiant  moon,
And  he  may  grant  another  boon  !
Perchance  he  may  to  me  impart
The  secret  wishes  of  his  heart  !
Tell  him  he  must,  and  further  say,
That  I  have  lived  here  many  a  day ;
That  every  year,  whilst  spring  discloses
The  fragrant  breath  of  budding  roses,


304  THE SHAH NAMEH.

I  pass  my  time  in  rural  pleasure ;
But  never — never  such  a  treasure,
A  mortal  of  such  perfect  mould,
Did  these  admiring  eyes  behold  !
Never,  since  it  has  been  my  lot
To  dwell  in  this  sequestered  spot,
A  youth  by  nature  so  designed
To  soothe  a  love-lorn  damsel's  mind  !
His  wonderous  looks  my  bosom  thrill,
Can  Saiawush  be  living  still  ?

The  nurse  communicated  faithfully  the  message
of  Manijeh,  and  Byzun's  countenance  glowed
with  delight  when  he  heard  it.  "  Tell  thy  fair  mis-
tress," he  said  in  reply,  "  that  I  am  not  Saiawush,
but  the  son  of  Giw.  I  came  from  Iran,  with  the
express  permission  of  the  king,  to  exterminate  a
terrible  and  destructive  herd  of  wild  boars  in  this
neighbourhood  ;  and  I  have  cut  off  their  heads,  and
torn  out  their  tusks  to  be  sent  to  Kai  .khosrau,  that
the  king  and  his  warriors  may  fully  appreciate  the
exploit  I  have  performed.  But  having  heard  after-
wards of  thy  mistress's  beauty  and  attractions,  home
and  my  father  were  forgotten,  and  I  have  preferred
following  my  own  desires  by  coming  hither.  If
thou  wilt  therefore  forward  my  views ;  if  thou
wilt  become  my  friend  by  introducing  me  to  thy
mistress,  who  is  possessed  of  such  matchless  charms ,
these  precious  gems  are  thine  and  this  coronet  of
gold.  Perhaps  the  daughter  of  Afrasiyab  may  be


THE SHAH NAMKH.  305

induced  to  listen  to  my  suit."  The  nurse  was  not
long  in  making-  known  the  sentiments  of  the
stranger,  and  Manijeh  was  equally  prompt  in  ex-
pressing her  consent.  The  message  was  full  of
ardour  and  affection.

"  O  gallant  youth,  no  farther  roam,
This  summer-tent  shall  he  thy  home ;
Then  will  the  clouds  of  grief  depart
From  this  enamoured,  anxious  heart.
For  thee  I  live — thou  art  the  light
Which  makes  my  future  fortune  bright.
Should  arrows  pour  like  showers  of  rain
Upon  my  head — "'twould  he  in  vain  ;
Nothing  can  ever  injure  me,
Blessed  with  thy  love — possessed  of  thee!"

Byzun  therefore  proceeded  unobserved  to  the
tent  of  the  princess,  who  on  meeting  and  receiv-
ing him,  pressed  him  to  her  bosom ;  and  taking
off  his  Kaiani  girdle,  that  he  might  be  more  at
his  ease,  asked  him  to  sit  down  and  relate  the
particulars  of  his  enterprise  among  the  wild  boars
of  the  forest.  Having  done  so,  he  added  that  he
had  left  Girgin  behind  him.

"  Enraptured,  and  impatient  to  survey

Thy  charms,  I  brook'd  no  pause  upon  the  way."

He  was  immediately  perfumed  with  musk  and
rose-water,  and  refreshments  of  every  kind  were

x


306  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

set  before  him ;  musicians  played  their  sweetest
airs,  and  dark-eyed  damsels  waited  upon  him.
The  walls  of  the  tent  were  gorgeously  adorned
with  amber,  and  gold,  and  rubies ;  and  the  spar-
kling old  wine  was  drank  out  of  crystal  goblets.
The  feast  of  joy  lasted  three  nights  and  three  days,
Byzun  and  Manijeh  enjoying  the  precious  mo-
ments with  unspeakable  rapture.  Overcome  with
wine  and  the  felicity  of  the  scene,  he  at  length
sunk  into  repose,  and  on  the  fourth  day  came  the
time  of  departure ;  but  the  princess,  unable  to
relinquish  the  society  of  her  lover,  ordered  a  nar-
cotic draught  to  be  administered  to  him,  and
whilst  he  continued  in  a  state  of  slumber  and  in-
sensibility, he  was  conveyed  secretly  and  in  dis-
guise into  Turan.  He  was  taken  even  to  the  palace
of  Afrasiyab,  unknown  to  all  but  to  the  emis-
saries and  domestics  of  the  princess,  and  there  he
awoke  from  the  trance  into  which  he  had  been
thrown,  and  found  himself  clasped  in  the  arms  of
his  idol.  Considering,  on  coming  to  his  senses,
that  he  had  been  betrayed  by  some  witchery,  he
made  an  attempt  to  get  out  of  the  seclusion  :
above  all,  he  was  apprehensive  of  a  fatal  ter-
mination to  the  adventure;  but  Manijeh's  blandish-
ments induced  him  to  remain,  and  for  some  time  he
was  contented  to  be  immersed  in  continual  enjoy-
ment,— such  pleasure  as  arises  from  the  social  ban-
quet and  the  attractions  of  a  fascinating  woman.


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  307

"  Grieve  not  my  love — be  not  so  sad,
""Tis  now  the  season  to  be  glad ;
There  is  a  time  for  war  and  strife,
A  time  to  soothe  the  ills  of  life.
Drink  of  the  cup  which  yields  delight,
The  ruby  glitters  in  thy  sight ;
Steep  not  thy  heart  in  fruitless  care,
But  in  the  wine-flask  sparkling  there."

At  length,  however,  the  secret  amour  of  the
princess  with  a  Persian  youth  was  discovered,  and
the  keepers  and  guards  of  the  palace  were  in  the
greatest  terror,  expecting  the  most  signal  punish-
ment for  their  neglect  or  treachery.  Dreadful  in-
deed was  the  rage  of  the  king  when  he  was  first
told  the  tidings ;  he  trembled  like  a  reed  in  the
wind,  and  the  colour  fled  from  his  cheeks.  Groan-
ing, he  exclaimed :

"  A  daughter,  even  from  a  royal  stock,
Is  ever  a  misfortune — hast  thou  one  ?
The  grave  will  be  thy  fittest  son-in-law  !
Rejoice  not  in  the  wisdom  of  a  daughter ;
Who  ever  finds  a  daughter  good  and  virtuous  ?
Who  ever  looks  on  woman- kind  for  aught
Save  wickedness  and  folly  ? Hence  how  few
Ever  enjoy  the  bliss  of  Paradise :
Such  the  sad  destiny  of  erring  woman !"

Afrasiyab  consulted  the  nobles  of  his  household
x  2


308  THE SHAH NAMEH.

upon  the  measures  to  be  pursued  on  this  occasion,
and  Gersiwaz  was  in  consequence  deputed  to  se-
cure Byzun,  and  put  him  to  death.  The  guilty
retreat  was  first  surrounded  by  troops,  and  then
Gersiwaz  entered  the  private  apartments,  and  with
surprise  and  indignation  saw  Byzun  in  all  his
glory,  Manljeh  at  his  side,  his  lips  stained  with
wine,  his  face  full  of  mirth  and  gladness,  and  en-
circled by  the  damsels  of  the  shubistan.  He  ac-
costed him  in  severe  terms,  and  was  promptly  an-
swered by  Byzun,  who,  drawing  his  sword,  gave
his  name  and  family,  and  declared  that  if  any
violence  or  insult  was  offered,  he  would  slay  every
man  that  came  before  him  with  hostile  intentions.
Gersiwaz,  on  hearing  this,  thought  it  prudent  to
change  his  plan,  and  conduct  him  to  Afrasiyab,
and  he  was  permitted  to  do  so  on  the  promise  of
pardon  for  the  alleged  offence.  When  brought
before  Afrasiyab,  he  was  assailed  with  further
opprobrium,  and  called  a  dog  and  a  wicked  re-
morseless demon.

"  Thou  caitiff  wretch,  of  monstrous  birth,
Allied  to  hell,  and  not  of  earth  !"

But  he  thus  answered  the  king  :

"  Listen  awhile,  if  justice  be  thy  aim,
And  thou  wilt  find  me  guiltless. I  was  sent
From  Persia  to  destroy  herds  of  wild  hogs,


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  309

Which  laid  the  country  waste. That  labour  done,
I  lost  my  way,  and  weary  with  the  toil,
Weary  with  wandering  in  a  wildering  maze,
Haply  reposed  beneath  a  shady  cypress  ;
Thither  a  Peri  came,  and  whilst  I  slept,
Lifted  me  from  the  ground,  and  quick  as  thought
Conveyed  me  to  a  summer-tent,  where  dwelt
A  princess  of  incomparable  beauty.
From  thence,  by  hands  unknown,  I  was  removed,
Still  slumbering  in  a  litter — still  unconscious ;
And  when  I  woke,  I  found  myself  reclining
In  a  retired  pavilion  of  thy  palace,
Attended  by  that  soul-entrancing  beauty  !
My  heart  was  filled  with  sorrow,  and  I  shed
Showers  of  vain  tears,  and  desolate  I  sate,
Thinking  of  Persia,  with  no  power  to  fly
From  my  imprisonment,  though  soft  and  kind,
Being  the  victim  of  a  sorcerer's  art.
Yes,  I  am  guiltless,  andMamjeh  too,
Both  by  some  magic  influence  pursued,
And  led  away  against  our  will  or  choice  !"

Afrasiyab  listened  to  this  speech  with  distrust,
and  hesitated  not  to  charge  him  with  falsehood
and  cowardice.  Byzun's  indignation  was  roused
by  this  insulting  accusation ;  and  he  said  to  him
aloud,  "  Cowardice,  what!  cowardice  !  I  have
encountered  the  tusks  of  the  formidable  wild  hog,
and  the  claws  of  the  raging  lion.  I  have  met  the


310  THE SHAH NAMEH.

bravest  in  battle  with  sword  and  arrow  ;  and  if  it
be  thy  desire  to  witness  the  strength  of  my  arm,
give  me  but  a  horse  and  a  battle-axe,  and  marshal
twice  five  hundred  Turanians  against  me,  and  not
a  man  of  them  shall  survive  the  contest.  If  this
be  not  thy  pleasure,  do  thy  worst,  but  remember
my  blood  will  be  avenged.  Thou  knowest  the
power  of  Rustem!"  The  mention  of  Rustem's
name  renewed  all  the  deep  feelings  of  resentment
and  animosity  in  the  mind  of  Afrasiyab,  who,  re-
solved upon  the  immediate  execution  of  his  pur-
pose, commanded  Gersiwaz  to  bind  the  youth,  and
put  an  end  to  his  life  on  the  gallows  tree.  The
good  old  man  Piran  Wisah  happened  to  be  passing
by  the  place  to  which  Byzun  had  just  been  con-
veyed to  suffer  death  ;  and  seeing  a  great  con-
course of  people,  and  a  lofty  dar  erected,  from
which  hung  a  noose,  he  inquired  for  whom  it  was
intended.  Gersiwaz  heard  the  question,  and  re-
plied that  it  was  for  a  Persian,  an  enemy  of  Turan,
a  son  of  Giw,  and  related  to  Rustem.  Piran
straightway  rode  up  to  the  youth,  who  was  stand-
ing in  deep  affliction,  almost  naked,  and  with  his
hands  bound  behind  his  back,  and  he  said  to
him: —

"  Why  didst  thou  quit  thy  country,  why  come  hither,
Why  choose  the  road  to  an  untimely  grave  ?"

Upon  this Byzun  told  him  his whole  story,


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  311

and  the  treachery  of  Girgin.  Pin'm  wept  at  the
recital,  and  remembering  the  circumstances  under
which  he  had  encountered  Giw,  and  how  he  had
been  himself  delivered  from  death  by  the  inter-
position of  Ferangis,  he  requested  the  execution  to
be  stayed  until  he  had  seen  the  king,  which  was
accordingly  done.  The  king  received  him  with
honour,  praised  his  wisdom  and  prudence,  and
conjecturing  from  his  manner  that  something  was
heavy  at  his  heart,  expressed  his  readiness  to
grant  any  favour  which  he  might  have  come  to
solicit.  Piran  said :  "  Then,  my  only  desire  is
this  :  do  not  put  Byzun  to  death ;  do  not  repeat
the  tragedy  of  Saiawush,  and  again  consign  Tiiran
and  Iran  to  all  the  horrors  of  war  and  desolation.
Remember  how  I  warned  thee  against  taking  the
life  of  that  young  prince ;  but  malignant  and  evil-
advisers  exerted  their  influence,  were  triumphant,
and  brought  upon  thee  and  thy  kingdom  the  ven-
geance of  Kaus,  of  Rustem,  and  all  the  warriors
of  the  Persian  empire.  The  swords  now  sleeping
in  their  scabbards  are  ready  to  flash  forth  again,
for  assuredly  if  the  blood  of  Byzun  be  spilt  the
land  will  be  depopulated  by  fire  and  sword.  The
honour  of  a  king  is  sacred  ;  when  that  is  lost,  all
is  lost."  But  Afrasiyab  replied  :  "  I  fear  not  the
thousands  that  can  be  brought  against  me.  Byzun
has  committed  an  offence  which  can  never  be


312  THE SHAH NAMEH.

pardoned  ;  it  covers  me  with  shame,  and  I  shall
be  universally  despised  if  I  suffer  him  to  live.
Death  were  better  for  me  than  life  in  disgrace.
He  must  die." — "  That  is  not  necessary,"  rejoined
Piran,  "  let  him  be  imprisoned  in  a  deep  cavern  ;
he  will  never  be  heard  of  more,  and  then  thou
canst  not  be  accused  of  having  shed  his  blood."
After  some  deliberation,  Afrasiyab  altered  his  de-
termination, and  commanded  Gersiwaz  to  bind  the
youth  with  chains  from  head  to  foot,  and  hang
him  within  a  deep  pit  with  his  head  downwards,
that  he  might  never  see  sun  or  moon  again ;  and
he  sentenced  Manijeh  to  share  the  same  fate :  and
to  make  their  death  more  sure,  he  ordered  the
enormous  fragment  of  rock  which  Akwan  Diw
had  dragged  out  of  the  ocean  and  flung  upon  the
plain  of  Tartary,  to  be  placed  over  the  mouth  of
the  pit.  In  respect  to  Byzun,  Gersiwaz  did  as
he  was  commanded  ;  but  the  lamentations  in  the
shubistan  were  so  loud  and  distressing  upon  Ma-
nijeh  being  sentenced  to  the  same  punishment,
that  the  tyrant  was  induced  to  change  her  doom,
allowing  her  to  dwell  near  the  pit,  but  forbidding,
by  proclamation,  any  one  going  to  her  or  supply-
ing her  with  food.  Gersiwaz  conducted  her  to  the
place  ;  and  stripping  her  of  her  rich  garments  and
jewels,  left  her  bare-headed  and  bare-footed,
weeping  torrents  of  tears.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  313

He  left  her — the  unhappy  maid ;
Her  head  upon  the  earth  was  laid,
In  bitterness  of  grief,  and  lone,
Beside  that  dreadful  demon-stone.

There  happened,  however,  to  be  a  fissure  in  the
huge  rock  that  covered  the  mouth  of  the  pit,  which
allowed  of  Byzun's  voice  being  heard,  and  bread
and  water  was  let  down  to  him,  so  that  they  had
the  melancholy  satisfaction  of  hearing  each  other's
woes.

The  story  now  relates  to  Girgin,  who  finding
after  several  days  that  Byzun  had  not  returned,
began  to  repent  of  his  treachery ;  but  what  is  the
advantage  of  such  repentance  ?  it  is  like  the  smoke
that  rises  from  a  conflagration.

When  flames  have  done  their  worst,  thick  clouds  arise
Of  lurid  smoke,  which  useless  mount  the  skies.

He  sought  every  where  for  him ;  went  to  the
romantic  retreat  where  the  daughter  of  Afrasiyab
resided  ;  but  the  place  was  deserted,  nothing  was
to  be  seen,  and  nothing  to  be  heard.  At  length  he
saw  Byzun's  horse  astray,  and  securing  him  with
his  kamund,  thought  it  useless  to  remain  in  Turan,
and  therefore  proceeded  in  sorrow  back  to  Iran.
Giw,  finding  that  his  son  had  not  returned  with
him  from  Annan,  was  frantic  with  grief;  he  tore
his  garments  and  his  hair,  and  threw  ashes  over


314  THE SHAH NAMEH.

his  head  ;  and  seeing  the  horse  which  his  son  had
rode,  caressed  it  in  the  fondest  manner,  demand-
ing from  Girgin  a  full  account  of  what  he  knew  of
his  fate.  "  O  Heaven  forbid,"  said  he,  "  that  my
son  should  have  fallen  into  the  power  of  the  mer-
ciless demons  !"  Girgin  could  not  safely  confess
the  truth,  and  therefore  told  a  falsehood,  in  the
hope  of  escaping  from  the  consequences  of  his
own  guilt.  "  When  we  arrived  at  Arman,"  said
he,  "  we  entered  a  large  forest,  and  cutting  down
the  trees,  set  them  on  fire.  We  then  attacked  the
wild  hogs,  which  were  found  in  vast  numbers;
and  as  soon  as  they  were  all  destroyed,  left  the
place  on  our  return.  Sporting  all  the  way,  we
fell  in  with  an  elk  or  wild  ass,  of  a  most  beautiful
and  wonderful  form.  It  was  like  the  Simurgh ;
it  had  hoofs  of  steel,  and  the  head  and  ears  and
tail  of  a  horse.  It  was  strong  as  a  lion  and  fleet
as  the  wind,  and  came  fiercely  before  us,  yet
seemed  to  be  a  thing  of  air.  Byzun  threw  his
kamund  over  him;  and  when  entangled  in  the
noose,  the  animal  became  furious  and  sprung
away,  dragging  Byzun  after  him.  Presently  the
prospect  was  enveloped  in  smoke,  the  earth  looked
like  the  ocean,  and  Byzun  and  the  phantom-elk
disappeared.  I  wandered  about  in  search  of  my
companion,  but  found  him  not :  his  horse  only
remained.  My  heart  was  rent  with  anguish,  for
it  seemed  to  me  that  the  furious  elk  must  have


THE SHAH NAMEH.  315

been  the  White  Demon."  But  Giw  was  not  to
be  deceived  by  this  fabricated  tale  ;  on  the  con-
trary, he  felt  convinced  that  treachery  had  been
at  work,  and  in  his  rage  seized  Girgin  by  the
beard,  dragged  him  to  and  fro,  and  inflicted  on
him  two  hundred  strokes  with  a  scourge.  The
unhappy  wretch,  from  the  wounds  he  had  re-
ceived, fell  senseless  on  the  ground.  Giw  then
hastened  to  Kai-khosrau  to  inform  him  of  his  mis-
fortune ;  and  though  the  first  resolve  was  to  put
the  traitor  to  death,  the  king  was  contented  to
load  him  with  chains  and  cast  him  into  prison.
The  astrologers  being  now  consulted,  pronounced
that  Byzun  was  still  living,  and  Giw  was  con-
soled and  cheered  by  the  promptitude  with  which
the  king  dispatched  troops  in  every  quarter  in
search  of  his  son.

"  Weep  no  longer,  warrior  bold,
Thou  shalt  soon  thy  son  behold.
In  this  Cup,  this  mirror  bright,
All  that's  dark  is  brought  to  light ;
All  above  and  under  ground,
All  that's  lost  is  quickly  found."
Thus  spake  the  monarch,  and  held  up
Before  his  view  that  wondrous  Cup
Which  first  to  JemshicTs  eye  revealed
All  that  was  in  the  world  concealed.


316  THE SHAH NAMEH.

And  first  before  him  lay  exposed
All  that  the  seven  climes  enclosed,
Whether  in  ocean,  or  amid
The  stars  the  secret  things  were  hid  ;
Whether  in  rock  or  cavern  placed
In  that  bright  Cup  were  clearly  traced.
And  now  his  eye  Karugsar  surveys,
The  Cup  the  province  wide  displays.
He  sees  within  that  dismal  cave
Byzun  the  good,  the  bold,  the  brave  ;
And  sitting  on  that  demon-stone
Lovely  Manijeh  sad  and  lone.
And  now  he  smiles  and  looks  on  Gfw,
And  cries :  "  My  prophecy  was  true.
Thy  Byzun  lives  ;  no  longer  grieve,
I  see  him  there,  my  words  believe  ;
And  though  bound  fast  in  fetters,  he
Shall  soon  regain  his  liberty.1'1

Kai-Khosrau,  thinking  the  services  of  Rustem
requisite  on  this  occasion,  dispatched  Giw  with1  an
invitation  to  him,  explaining  the  circumstance  of
Byzun's  capture.  Rustem  had  made  up  his  mind
to  continue  in  peace  and  tranquillity  at  his  Zabul
principality,  and  not  to  be  withdrawn  again  from
its  comforts  by  any  emergency ;  but  the  reported
situation  of  his  near  relative  altered  his  purpose,
and  he  hesitated  not  to  give  his  best  aid  to  restore


THK SHAH NAM  EH.  317

him  to  freedom.  Givv  rejoiced  at  this,  and  both
repaired  without  delay  to  the  royal  residence,
where  Khosrau  gratified  the  champion  with  the
most  cordial  welcome,  placing  him  on  a  throne
before  him,  The  king  asked  him  what  force  he
would  require,  and  he  replied  that  he  did  not
require  any  army  ;  he  preferred  going  in  disguise
as  a  merchant.  Accordingly  the  necessary  mate-
rials were  prepared ;  a  thousand  camels  were  laden
with  jewels  and  brocades,  and  other  merchandise,
and  a  thousand  warriors  were  habited  like  camel-
drivers.  Girgin  had  prayed  to  be  released  from
his  bonds,  and  by  the  intercession  of  Rustem  was
allowed  to  be  of  the  party  ;  but  his  children  were
kept  in  prison  as  hostages  and  security  for  his
honourable  conduct.  When  the  champion,  with
his  kafila,  arrived  within  the  territory  of  the
enemy,  and  approached  the  spot  where  Byzun
was  imprisoned,  a  loud  clamour  arose  that  a
caravan  of  merchandise  had  come  from  Iran,  such
as  was  never  seen  before.  The  tidings  having
reached  the  ear  of  Manljeh,  she  went  immediately
to  Rustem,  and  inquired  whether  the  imprison-
ment of  Byzun  was  yet  known  at  the  Persian
court?  Rustem  replied  in  anger:  "  I  am  a  mer-
chant employed  in  traffic,  what  can  I  know  of
such  things  ?  Go  away,  I  have  no  acquaintance
with  either  the  king  or  his  warriors."  This  answer
overwhelmed  Manijeh  with  disappointment  and


318  THE SHAH NAMEH.

grief,  and  she  wept  bitterly.  Her  tears  began  to
soften  the  heart  of  Rustem,  and  he  said  to  her  in
a  soothing  voice  : — "  I  am  not  an  inhabitant  of
the  city  in  which  the  court  is  held,  and  on  that
account  I  know  nothing  of  these  matters ;  but  tell
me  the  cause  of  thy  grief."  Manijeh  sighed
deeply,  and  endeavoured  to  avoid  giving  him  any
reply,  which  increased  the  curiosity  of  the  cham-
pion ;  but  she  at  length  complied.  She  told  him
who  she  was,  the  daughter  of  Afrasiyab,  the  story
of  her  love,  and  the  misfortunes  of  Byzun,  and
pointed  out  to  him  the  pit  in  which  he  was  impri-
soned and  bound  down  with  heavy  chains.

66  For  the  sake  of  him  has  been  my  fall
From  royal  state,  and  bower,  and  hall,
And  hence  this  pale  and  haggard  face,
This  saffron  hue  thy  eye  may  trace,
Where  bud  of  rose  was  wont  to  bloom,

But  withered  now  and  gone ;
And  I  must  sit  in  sorrow's  gloom

Unsuccoured  and  alone."

Rustem  asked  with  deep  interest  if  any  food
could  be  conveyed  to  him,  and  she  said  that  she
had  been  accustomed  to  supply  him  with  bread
and  water  through  a  fissure  in  the  huge  stone
which  covered  the  mouth  of  the  pit.  Upon  re-
ceiving this  welcome  information,  Rustem  brought
a  roasted  fowl,  and  inclosing  in  it  his  own  seal-


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  319

ring,  gave  it  to  Manijeh  to  take  to  Byzun.  The
poor  captive,  on  receiving  it,  inquired  by  whom
such  a  blessing  could  have  been  sent,  and  when
she  informed  him  that  it  had  been  given  to  her  by
the  chief  of  a  caravan  from  Iran,  who  had  mani-
fested great  anxiety  about  him,  his  smiles  spoke
the  joyous  feelings  of  his  heart,  for  the  name  of
Rustem  was  engraved  on  the  ring.  Manijeh  was
surprised  to  see  him  smile,  considering  his  melan-
choly situation,  and  could  not  imagine  the  cause.
"  If  thou  wilt  keep  my  secret,"  said  he,  "  I  will
tell  the  cause."  "  What !"  she  replied,  "  have  I
not  devoted  my  heart  and  soul  to  thee  ? — have  I
not  sacrificed  every  thing  for  thy  love,  and  is  my
fidelity  now  to  be  suspected  ?

"  Can  I  be  faithless,  then,  to  thee.

The  choice  of  this  fond  heart  of  mine  ;

Why  sought  I  bonds,  when  I  was  free,
But  to  be  thine — for  ever  thine  ?"

"  True,  true  !  then  hear  me  : — the  chief  of  the
caravan  is  Rustem,  who  has  undoubtedly  come  to
release  me  from  this  dreadful  pit.  Go  to  him,
and  concert  with  him  the  manner  in  which  my
deliverance  may  be  soonest  effected."  Manijeh
accordingly  went  and  communicated  with  the
champion ;  and  it  was  agreed  between  them  that
she  should  light  a  large  fire  to  guide  him  on  his
way.  He  was  prompt  as  well  as  valiant,  and


320  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

repaired  in  the  middle  of  the  following  night,
accompanied  by  seven  of  his  warriors,  directed  by
the  blaze,  to  the  place  where  Byzun  was  con-
fined. The  neighbourhood  was  infested  by  de-
mons with  long  nails,  and  long  hair  on  their
bodies  like  the  hair  of  a  goat,  and  horny  feet,  and
with  heads  like  dogs,  and  the  chief  of  them  was
the  son  of  Akwan  Diw.  The  father  having  been
slain  by  Rustem,  the  son  nourished  the  hope  of
revenge,  and  perpetually  longed  for  an  oppor-
tunity of  meeting  him  in  battle.  Well  knowing
that  the  champion  was  engaged  in  the  enterprize
to  liberate  Byzun,  he  commanded  his  demons  to
give  him  intelligence  of  his  approach.  His  height
was  tremendous,  his  face  was  black,  his  mouth
yawned  like  a  cavern,  his  eyes  were  fountains  of
blood,  his  teeth  like  those  of  a  wild  hog,  and  the  hair
on  his  body  like  needles.  The  monster  advanced,
and  reproaching  Rustem  disdainfully  for  having  slain
Akwan  Diw,  and  many  other  warriors  in  the  Tura-
nian interest,  pulled  up  a  tree  by  the  roots  and  chal-
lenged him  to  combat.  The  struggle  began,  but  the
Demon  frequently  escaped  the  fury  of  the  champion
by  vanishing  into  air.  At  length  Rustem  struck  a
fortunate  blow,  which  cut  the  body  of  his  towering
adversary  in  two.  His  path  being  now  free  from
interruption,  he  sped  onward,  and  presently  beheld
the  prodigious  demon-stone  which  covered  the
mouth  of  the  pit,  in  which  Byzun  was  imprisoned.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  321

And  praying  to  the  Almighty  to  infuse
Strength  through  his  limbs,  he  raised  it  up,  and  flung
The  ponderous  mass  of  rock  upon  the  plain,
Which  shuddered  to  receive  that  magic  load  !

The  mouth  of  the  cavern  being  thus  exposed,
Rustem  applied  himself  to  the  extrication  of  By-
zun  from  his  miserable  condition,  and  letting  down
his  kamund,  he  had  soon  the  pleasure  of  drawing
up  the  unfortunate  captive,  whom  he  embraced
with  great  affection ;  and  instantly  stripped  off  the
chains  with  which  he  was  bound.  After  mutual
congratulations  had  been  exchanged,  Rustem  pro-
posed that  Byzun  and  Manijah  should  go  imme-
diately to  Iran,  whilst  he  and  his  companions  in
arms  attacked  the  palace  of  Afnisiyab  ;  but  though
wasted  as  he  was  by  long  suffering,  Byzun  could
not  on  any  consideration  consent  to  avoid  the
perils  of  the  intended  assault,  and  determined,  at
all  hazards,  to  accompany  his  deliverer.

"  Fidl  well  I  know  thy  super-human  power
Needs  no  assistance  from  an  arm  like  mine ;
But  grateful  as  I  am  for  this  great  service,
I  cannot  leave  thee  now,  and  shrink  from  peril,
That  would  be  baseness  which  I  could  not  bear."

It  was  on  the  same  night  that  Rustem  and
Byzun,  and  seven  of  his  warriors  proceeded  against
that  part  of  the  palace  in  which  the  tyrant  slept.


322  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

He  first  put  to  death  the  watchman,  and  also
killed  a  great  number  of  the  guard,  and  a  loud
voice  presently  resounded  in  the  chamber  of  the
king: — "  Awake  from  thy  slumbers,  Afrasiyab,
Byzun  has  been  freed  from  his  chains."  Rus-
tem  now  entered  the  royal  palace,  and  openly
declaring  his  name,  exclaimed : — "  I  am  come,
Afrasiyab,  to  destroy  thee,  and  Byzun  is  also  here
to  do  thee  service  for  thy  cruelty  to  him."  The
death-note  awoke  the  trembling  Afrasiyab,  and
he  rose  up,  and  fled  in  dismay.  Rustem  and  his
companions  rushed  into  the  inner  apartments,  and
captured  all  the  blooming  damsels  of  the  shu-
bistan,  and  all  the  jewels  and  golden  ornaments
which  fell  in  their  way.  The  moon-faced  beauties
were  sent  to  Zabul ;  but  the  jewels  and  other
valuable  property  were  reserved  for  the  king.

In  the  morning  Afrasiyab  hastily  collected  to-
gether his  troops  and  marched  against  Rustem,
who,  with  Byzun  and  his  thousand  warriors,  met
him  on  the  plain  prepared  for  battle.  The  cham-
pion challenged  any  one  who  would  come  forward
to  single  combat ;  but  though  frequently  repeated,
no  attention  was  paid  to  the  call.  At  length  Rus-
tem said  to  Afrasiyab  : — "  Art  thou  not  ashamed
to  avoid  a  contest  with  so  inferior  a  force,  a  hun-
dred thousand  against  one  thousand  ?  We  two,
and  our  armies,  have  often  met,  and  dost  thou  now
shrink  from  the  fight  ?"  The  reproach  had  its  effect,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  323

For  the  tyrant  at  once,  and  his  heroes,  began
Their  attack  like  the  demons  of  Mazinderan.

But  the  valour  and  the  bravery  of  Rustem  were
so  eminently  shewn,  that  he  overthrew  thousands
of  the  enemy.

In  the  tempest  of  battle,  disdaining  all  fear,

With  his  kamund,  and  khanjer,  his  garz,  and  shamshir,

How  he  bound, stabbed, and  crushed,  and  dissevered

the  foe ;
So  mighty  his  arm,  and  so  fatal  his  blow !

And  so  dreadful  was  the  carnage,  that  Afrasiyab,
unable  to  resist  his  victorious  career,  was  com-
pelled to  seek  safety  in  flight.

The  field  was  red  with  blood,  the  Tartar  banners
Cast  on  the  ground,  and  when,  with  grief,  he  saw
The  face  of  Fortune  turned,  his  cohorts  slain,
He  hurried  back,  and  sought  Tiiran  again.

Rustem  having  obtained  another  triumph,  returned
to  Iran  with  the  spoils  of  his  conquest,  and  was
again  honoured  with  the  smiles  and  rewards  of
his  sovereign.  Manijah  was  not  forgotten;  she,
too,  received  a  present  worthy  of  the  virtue  and
fidelity  she  had  displayed,  and  of  the  magna-
nimity of  her  spirit ;  and  the  happy  conclusion  of
the  enterprise  was  celebrated  with  festivity  and
rejoicing.

y  2


324  THE SHAH NAMEH.


BARZU,  AND  HIS  CONFLICT  WITH  RUSTEM.

Afrasiyab  after  his  defeat  pursued  his  way  in
despair  towards  Chin  and  Ma-chin,  and  on  the
road  happened  to  fall  in  with  a  man  of  huge  and
terrific  stature.  Amazed  at  the  sight  of  so  extra-
ordinary a  being,  he  asked  him  who  and  what  he
was.  "  I  am  a  villager,"  replied  the  stranger.
"  And  thy  father  ?"— "  I  do  not  know  my  father,
for  my  birth  is  wrapt  in  mystery.  My  mother
says  that  one  day  a  youthful  warrior  chanced  to
come  into  these  parts  on  a  sporting  excursion,  and
being  hungry  and  thirsty,  requested  her  to  give
him  some  food,  and  water  to  drink.  She  imme-
diately administered  to  his  wants,  supplying  him
with  such  refreshments  as  she  could  command,
and  all  the  comforts  he  required.  Having  regaled
himself  to  his  satisfaction,  he  began  to  look  with
an  eye  of  affection  upon  my  mother,  who  was
nattered  and  overcome  by  his  attentions,  and  at
length  submitted  to  his  desires.  The  youth  then
went  away,  and  the  consequence  of  this  amour
was  the  birth  of  a  son — of  him  who  now  stands
before  you.  My  mother  never  heard  the  name  of
her  lover,  nor  has  she  seen  him  since."  Such  was
the  unvarnished  narration  of  the  stranger,  to  whom
Afrasiyab  now  addressed  himself  and  said : — "  It
is  my  misfortune  to  have  a  bitter  and  invincible


THE SHAH NAMI.H.  325

enemy,  who  has  plunged  me into  the  greatest
distress. If  he  could  be  subdued,  there  would  be
no  impediment  to  my  conquest  of  Iran;  and  T
feel  assured  that  thou,  apparently  endued  with
such  prodigious  strength,  hast  the  power  to  master
him. His  name  is  Rustem." "  What!"  rejoined
Barzu,  "  is  all  this  concern  and  affliction  about
one  man — about  one  man  only?" "  Yes,"  an-
swered Afnisiyab  ; "  but  that  one  man  is  equal  to
a  hundred  strong  men. Upon  him  neither  sword,
nor  mace,  nor  javelin,  has  any  effect. In  battle
he  is  like  a  mountain  of  steel." At  this  Barzu.
exclaimed  in  gamesome  mood  : — "  A  mountain  of
steel !— I  can  reduce  to  dust  a  hundred  mountains
of  steel! — What  is  a  mountain  of  steel  to  me'"
Afrasiyab  rejoiced  to  find  such  confidence  in  the
stranger, and  instantly  promised him his own
daughter  in  marriage,  and  the  monarchy  of  Chin
and  Ma-chin,  if  he  succeeded  in  destroying  Rus-
tem. Barzu  replied  :

"  Thou  art  but  a  coward  slave,
Thus  a  stranger's  aid  to  crave.
And  thy  soldiers,  what  are  they  ?
Heartless  on  the  battle-day.
Thou,  the  prince  of  such  a  host!
What,  alas  !  hast  thou  to  boast  ?
Art  thou  not  ashamed  to  wear
The  regal  crown  that  glitters  there  ?


326  THE SHAH NAMEH.

And  dost  thou  not  disgrace  the  throne
Thus  to  be  awed,  and  crushed  by  one ;
By  one,  whatever  his  name  or  might,
Thus  to  be  -put  to  shameful  flight !"


Afrasiyab  felt  keenly  the  reproaches  which  he
heard ;  but,  nevertheless,  solicited  the  assistance
of  Barzu,  who  declared  that  he  would  soon  over-
power Rustem,  and  place  the  empire  of  Iran  under
the  dominion  of  the  Tartar  king.  He  would,  he
said,  overflow  the  land  of  Persia  with  blood,  and
take  possession  of  the  throne !  The  despot  was
intoxicated  with  delight,  and  expecting  his  most
sanguine  wishes  would  be  realised,  made  him  the
costliest  presents,  consisting  of  gold  and  jewels,
and  horses,  and  elephants,  so  that  the  besotted
stranger  thought  himself  the  greatest  personage  in
all  the  world.  But  his  mother,  when  she  heard
these  things,  implored  him  to  be  cautious  :—

"  My  son,  these  presents,  though  so  rich  and  rare,
Will  be  thy  winding-sheet ;  beware,  beware  !
They'll  drive  to  madness  thy  poor  giddy  brain,
And  thou  wilt  never  be  restored  again.
Never ;  for  wert  thou  bravest  of  the  brave,
They  only  lead  to  an  untimely  grave.
Then  give  them  back,  nor  such  a  doom  provoke,
Beware  of  RustenVs  host-destroying  stroke.
Has  he  not  conquered  demons ! — and,  alone,
Afrasiyab's  best  warriors  overthrown  !


Till-; SHAH NAMKH.  327

And  canst  thou  equal  them? — Alas!  the  day
That  thy  sweet  life  should  thus  be  thrown  away.""

Barzu,  however,  was  too  much  dazzled  by  the
presents  he  had  received,  and  too  vain  of  his  own
personal  strength  to  attend  to  his  mother's  advice.
44  Certainly,"  said  he,  "  the  disposal  of  our  lives
is  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty,  and  as  certain
it  is  that  my  strength  is  superior  to  that  of  Rus-
tem.  Would  it  not  then  be  cowardly  to  decline
the  contest  with  him?"  The  mother  still  con-
tinued to  dissuade  him  from  the  enterprise,  and
assured  him  that  Rustem  was  above  all  mankind
distinguished  for  the  art,  and  skill,  and  dexterity
with  which  he  attacked  his  enemy,  and  defended
himself;  and  that  there  was  no  chance  of  his
being  overcome  by  a  man  entirely  ignorant  of  the
science  of  fighting ;  but  Barzu  remained  un-
moved :  yet  he  told  the  king  what  his  mother
had  said  ;  and  Afrasiyab,  in  consequence,  deemed
it  proper  to  appoint  two  celebrated  masters  to
instruct  him  in  the  use  of  the  bow,  the  sword,
and  the  javelin,  and  also  in  wrestling  and  throw-
ing the  noose.  Every  day,  clothed  in  armour,
he  tried  his  skill  and  strength  with  the  warriors,
and  after  ten  days  he  was  sufficiently  accom-
plished to  overthrow  eighteen  of  them  at  one
time.  Proud  of  the  progress  he  had  made,  he
told  the  king  that  he  would  seize  and  bind  eigh-


328  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

teen  of  his  stoutest  and  most  experienced  teachers,
and  bring  them  before  him,  if  he  wished,  when  all
the  assembly  exclaimed  : — "  No  doubt  he  is  fully
equal  to  the  task  ;

He  does  not  seem  of  human  birth,  but  wears
The  aspect  of  the  Evil  One  ;  and  looks
Like  Alberz  mountain,  clad  in  folds  of  mail ;
Unwearied  in  the  fight  he  conquers  all.""

Afrasiyab's  satisfaction  was  increased  by  this
testimony  to  the  merit  of  Barzii,  and  he  heaped
upon  him  further  tokens  of  his  good  will  and  mu-
nificence. The  vain,  newly-made  warrior  was  all
exultation  and  delight,  and  said  impatiently  :

"  Delays  are  ever  dangerous — let  us  meet

The  foe  betimes,  this  Rustem  and  the  king.

Kai-Khosrau. If  we  linger  in  a  cause

Demanding  instant  action,  prompt  appliance,

And  rapid  execution,  we  are  lost.

Advance,  and  I  will  soon  lop  off  the  heads

Of  this  belauded  champion  and  his  king,

And  cast  them,  with  the  Persian  crown  and  throne

Trophies  of  glory,  at  thy  royal  feet ;

So  that  Turan  alone  shall  rule  the  world."

Speedily  ten  thousand  experienced  horsemen
were  selected  and  placed  under  the  command  of
Barzii ;  and  Human  and  Barman  were  appointed


THE SHAH NA1VIEH.  329

to  accompany  him;  Afrasiyab himself  intending
to  follow  with  the  reserve.

When  the  intelligence  of  this  new  expedition
reached  the  court  of  Kai-khosrau,  he  was  asto-
nished, and  could  not  conceive  how,  after  so  signal
a  defeat  and  overthrow,  Afrasiyab  had  the  means
of  collecting  another  army,  and  boldly  invading
his  kingdom.  To  oppose  this  invasion,  however,
he  ordered  Tus  and  Friburz,  with  twelve  thousand
horsemen,  and  marched  after  them  himself  with
a  large  army.  As  soon  as  Tus  fell  in  with  the
enemy  the  battle  commenced,  and  lasted,  with
great  carnage,  a  whole  day  and  night,  and  in  the
end  Barzu  was  victorious.  The  warriors  of  the
Persian  force  fled,  and  left  Tus  and  Friburz  alone
on  the  field,  where  they  were  encountered  by  the
conqueror,  taken  prisoners,  and  bound,  and  placed
in  the  charge  of  Human.  The  tidings  of  the  result
of  this  conflict  were  received  with  as  much  rejoic-
ing by  Afrasiyab,  as  with  sorrow  and  conster-
nation by  Kai-khosrau.  And  now  the  emergency,
on  the  Persian  side,  demanded  the  assistance  of
Rustem,  whose  indignation  was  roused,  and  who
determined  on  revenge  for  the  insult  that  had  been
given.  He  took  with  him  Gustahem,  the  brother
of  Tus,  and  at  midnight  thought  he  had  come  to
the  tent  of  Barzu,  but  it  proved  to  be  the  pavilion
of  Afrasiyab,  who  was  seen  seated  on  his  throne,
with  Barzu  on  his  right  hand,  and  Piran-Wisah


330  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

on  his  left,  and  Tus  and  Friburz  standing  in  chains
before  them.  The  king  said  to  the  captive  war-
riors : — "  To-morrow  you  shall  both  be  put  to
death  in  the  manner  I  slew  Saiawush."  He  then
retired.  Meanwhile  Rustem  returned  thanks  to
Heaven  that  his  friends  were  still  alive,  and  re-
questing Gustahem  to  follow  cautiously,  he  waited
awhile  for  a  fit  opportunity,  till  the  watchman  was
off  his  guard,  and  then  killing  him,  he  and  Gus-
tahem took  up  and  conveyed  the  two  prisoners  to
a  short  distance,  where  they  knocked  off  their
chains,  and  then  conducted  them  back  to  Kai-
khosrau.

When  Afrasiyab  arose  from  sleep,  he  found  his
warriors  in  close  and  earnest  conversation,  and
was  told  that  a  champion  from  Persia  had  come
and  killed  the  watchman,  and  carried  off  the  pri-
soners. Piran  exclaimed  :  —  "  Then  assuredly
that  champion  is  Rustem,  and  no  other."  Afra-
siyab writhed  with  anger  and  mortification  at  this
intelligence,  and  sending  for  Barzu,  dispatched
his  army  to  attack  the  enemy,  and  challenge
Rustem  to  single  combat.  Rustem  was  with  the
Persian  troops,  and,  answering  the  summons,  said  :
— "  Young  man,  if  thou  art  calling  for  Rustem,
behold  I  come  in  his  place  to  lay  thee  pros-
trate on  the  earth."  "  Ah !"  rejoined  Barzu,
"  and  why  this  threat?  It  is  true  I  am  but  of
tender  years,  whilst  thou  art  aged  and  expe-


THE SHAH NAM  Ell.  331

rienced.  But  if  thou  art  fire,  I  am  water,  and
able  to  quench  thy  flames/'  Saying  this  he
wielded  his  bow,  and  fixed  the  arrow  in  its  notch,
and  commenced  the  strife.  Rustem  also  engaged
with  bow  and  arrows  ;  and  then  they  each  had
recourse  to  their  maces,  which  from  repeated
strokes  were  soon  bent  as  crooked  as  their  bows,
and  they  were  themselves  nearly  exhausted .  Their
next  encounter  was  by  wrestling,  and  dreadful
were  the  wrenches  and  grasps  they  received  from
each  other.  Barzu  finding  no  advantage  from  this
struggle,  raised  his  mace,  and  struck  Rustem  such
a  prodigious  blow  on  the  head,  that  the  champion
thought  a  whole  mountain  had  fallen  upon  him.
One  arm  was  disabled,  but  though  the  wound  was
desperate,  Rustem  had  the  address  to  conceal  its
effects,  and  Barzu  wondered  that  he  had  made
apparently  so  little  impression  on  his  antagonist.
"  Thou  art,"  said  he,  "  a  surprizing  warrior,  and
seemingly  invulnerable.  Had  I  struck  such  a
blow  on  a  mountain,  it  would  have  been  broken
into  a  thousand  fragments,  and  yet  it  makes  no
impression  upon  thee.  Heaven  forbid  !"  he  con-
tinued to  himself,  "  that  I  should  ever  receive  so
bewildering  a  stroke  upon  my  own  head!"  Rus-
tem having  successfully  concealed  the  anguish  of  his
wound,  artfully  observed  that  it  would  be  better  to
finish  the  combat  on  the  following  day,  to  which
Barzu  readily  agreed,  and  then  they  both  parted.


332  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Barzu declared  to Afrasiyab  that  his extra-
ordinary vigour and strength had been of  no
account, for  both  his  antagonist and his  horse
appeared  to be composed  of  materials as  hard
as  flint. Every  blow  was  without effect; and
"  Heaven  only  knows,"  added  he,  "  what  may
be  the  result  of  to-morrow's  conflict." On  the
other  hand  Rustem  shewed  his  lacerated  arm  to
Khosrau,  and  said: — "  I  have  escaped  from  him;
but  who  else  is  there  now  to  meet  him,  and  finish
the  struggle. Feramurz,  my  son,  cannot  fulfil  my
promise  with  Barzu,  as  he,  alas! is  fighting  in
Hindustan. Let  me, however,  call  him  hither,
and  in  the  meanwhile,  on  some  pretext  or  other,
delay  the  engagement.'* The  king,  in  great  sor-
row and  affliction,  sanctioned  his  departure,  and
then  said to  his  warriors:  — "  I  will  fight  this
Barzu  myself  to-morrow;"  but  Gudarz  would  not
consent  to  it,  saying: — "  As  long  as  we  live,  the
king  must  not  be  exposed  to  such  hazard. Giw
and  Byzun,  and  the  other  chiefs,  must  first  suc-
cessively encounter  the  enemy."

When  Rustem  reached  his  tent,  he  told  his  bro-
ther Ziiara  to  get  ready  a  litter,  that  he  might
proceed  to  Sis  tan  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a
remedy  for  his  wound  from  the  Simurgh.  Pain
and  grief  kept  him  awake  all  night,  and  he  prayed
incessantly  to  the  Supreme  Being.  In  the  morn-
ing early,  Zuara  brought  him  intelligence  of  the


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  333

welcome  arrival  of  Feramurz,  which  gladdened
his  heart ;  and  as  the  youth  had  undergone  great
fatigue  on  his  long  journey,  Rustem  requested
him  to  repose  awhile,  and  he  himself,  freed  from
anxiety,  also  sought  relief  in  a  sound  sleep.

A  few  hours  afterwards  both  armies  were  again
drawn  up,  and  Barzu,  like  a  mad  elephant,  full
of  confidence  and  pride,  rode  forward  to  resume
the  combat ;  whilst  Rustem  gave  instructions  to
Feramurz  how  he  was  to  act.  He  attired  him  in
his  own  armour,  supplied  him  with  his  own  wea-
pons, and  mounted  him  on  Rakush,  and  told  him
to  represent  himself  to  Barzu  as  the  warrior  who
had  engaged  him  the  day  before.  Accordingly
Feramurz  entered  the  middle  space,  clothed  in  his
father's  mail,  raised  his  bow,  ready  bent,  and  shot
an  arrow  at  Barzu,  crying : — "  Behold  thy  adver-
sary!— I  am  the  man  come  to  try  thy  strength
again.  —  Advance!"  To  this  Barzu  replied:  —
"  Why  this  hilarity,  and  great  flow  of  spirits  ?  Art
thou  reckless  of  thy  life  ?"  "  In  the  eyes  of
warriors,"  said  Feramurz,  "  the  field  of  fight  is
the  mansion  of  pleasure.  After  I  yesterday  parted
from  thee  I  drank  wine  with  my  companions,  and
the  impression  of  delight  still  remains  on  my
heart.

"  Wine  exhilirates  the  soul,
Makes  the  eye  with  pleasure  roll ;


334  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Lightens  up  the  darkest  mien,
Fills  with  joy  the  dullest  scene  ;
Hence  it  is  I  meet  thee  now
With  a  smile  upon  my  brow."

Barzu,  however,  thought  that  the  voice  and  action
of  his  adversary  were  not  the  same  as  he  had
heard  and  seen  the  preceding  day,  although  there
was  no  difference  in  the  armour  or  the  horse,  and
therefore  he  said  :—  "  Perhaps  the  cavalier  whom
I  encountered  yesterday  is  wounded  or  dead,  that
thou  hast  mounted  his  charger,  and  attired  thyself
in  his  mail."  "  Indeed,"  rejoined  Feramurz,
"  perhaps  thou  hast  lost  thy  wits ;  I  am  certainly
the  person  who  engaged  thee  yesterday,  and
almost  extinguished  thee  ;  and  with  God's  favour
thou  shalt  be  a  dead  man  to-day."  "  What  is
thy  name?"  "  My  name  is  Rustem,  descended
from  a  race  of  warriors,  and  my  pleasure  consists
in  contending  with  the  lions  of  battle,  and  shedding
the  blood  of  heroes."  Thus  saying,  Feramurz
rushed  on  his  adversary,  struck  him  several  blows
with  his  battle-axe,  and  drawing  his  noose  from
the  saddle-strap  with  the  quickness  of  lightning,
secured  his  prize,  He  might  have  put  an  end  to
his  existence  in  a  moment,  but  preferred  taking
him  alive,  and  shewing  him  as  a  captive.  Afra-
siyab  seeing  the  perilous  condition  of  Barzu,  came
up  with  his  whole  army  to  his  rescue ;  but  Kai-
khosrau  was  equally  on  the  alert,  accompanied


THE SHAH NAMEH.  335

by  Rustem,  who  advancing  to  the  support  of
Feramurz,  threw  another  noose  round  the  neck
of  the  already-captured  Barzu,  to  prevent  the
possibility  of  his  escape.  Both  armies  now  en-
gaged, and  the  Turanians  made  many  desperate
efforts  to  recover  their  gigantic  leader,  but  all  their
manoeuvres  were  fruitless.  The  struggle  conti-
nued fiercely,  and  with  great  slaughter,  till  it  was
dark,  and  then  ceased ;  the  two  kings  returning
back  to  the  respective  positions  they  had  taken
up  before  the  conflict  took  place.  The  Turanians
were  in  the  deepest  grief  for  the  loss  of  Barzu ;
and  Piran-Wisah  having  recommended  an  imme-
diate retreat  across  the  Jihun,  Afrasiyab  followed
his  counsel,  and  precipitately  quitted  Persia  with
all  his  troops.

Kai-khosrau  ordered  a  grand  banquet  on  the
occasion  of  the  victory;  and  when  Barzu  was
brought  before  him,  he  commanded  his  imme-
diate execution ;  but  Rustem,  seeing  that  he
was  very  young,  and  thinking  that  he  had  not
yet  been  corrupted  and  debased  by  the  savage
example  of  the  Turanians,  requested  that  he
might  be  spared,  and  given  to  him  to  send  into
Sistan ;  and  his  request  was  promptly  complied
with.

When  the  mother  of  Barzu,  whose  name  was
Shah-rii,  heard  that  her  son  was  a  prisoner,  she
wept  bitterly,  and  hastened  to  Iran,  and  from


336  THE SHAH NAMEH.

thence  to  Sistan.  There  happened  to  be  in  Rus-
tem's  employ  a  singing-girl,  an  old  acquaintance
of  her's,  to  whom  she  was  much  attached,  and  to
whom  she  made  large  presents,  calling  her  by  the
most  endearing  epithets,  in  order  that  she  might
be  brought  to  serve  her  in  the  important  matter
she  had  in  contemplation.  Her  object  was  soon
explained,  and  the  preliminaries  at  once  adjusted,
and  by  the  hands  of  this  singing-girl  she  secretly
sent  some  food  to  Barzii,  in  which  she  concealed  a
ring,  to  apprise  him  of  her  being  near  him.  On
finding  the  ring,  he  asked  who  had  supplied  him
with  the  food,  and  her  answer  was : — "  A  woman
recently  arrived  from  Ma-chin."  This  was  to
him  delightful  intelligence,  and  he  could  not  help
exclaiming,  "  That  woman  is  my  mother,  I  am
grateful  for  thy  services,  but  another  time  bring
me,  if  thou  canst,  a  large  file,  that  I  may  be  able
to  free  myself  from  these  chains."  The  singing-
girl  promised  her  assistance ;  and  having  told
Shah-ru  what  her  son  required,  conveyed  to  him
a  file,  and  resolved  to  accompany  him  in  his  flight.
Barzu  then  requested  that  three  fleet  horses  might
be  provided  and  kept  ready  under  the  walls,  at  a
short  distance ;  and  this  being  also  done,  in  the
night,  he  and  his  mother,  and  the  singing-girl,
effected  their  escape,  and  pursued  their  course
towards  Turan.

It  so  happened  that  Rustem  was  at  this  time  in


THE SHAH NAMEH.  337

progress  between  Iran  and  Sistan,  hunting  for  his
own  pleasure  the  elk  or  wild  ass,  and  he  acciden-
tally fell  in  with  the  refugees,  who  made  an  at-
tempt to  avoid  him,  but,  unable  to  effect  their
purpose,  thought  proper  to  oppose  him  with  all
their  might,  and  a  sharp  contest  ensued.  Both
parties  becoming  fatigued,  they  rested  awhile,
when  Rustem  asked  Barzu  how  he  had  obtained
his  liberty.  "  The  Almighty  freed  me  from  the
bondage  I  endured." — "  And  who  are  these  two
women  ?" — "  One  of  them,"  replied  Barzu,  "  is
my  mother,  and  that  is  a  singing-girl  of  thy  own
house."  Rustem  went  aside,  and  called  for  break-
fast, and  thinking  in  his  own  mind  that  it  would
be  expedient  to  poison  Barzu,  mixed  up  a  dele-
terious substance  in  some  food,  and  sent  it  to  him
to  eat.  He  was  just  going  to  take  it,  when  his
mother  cried,  "  My  son,  beware  1"  and  he  drew
his  hand  from  the  dish.  But  the  singing-girl  did
eat  part  of  it,  and  died  on  the  spot.  Upon  wit-
nessing this  appalling  scene,  Barzu  sprung  for-
ward with  indignation,  and  reproached  Rustem
for  his  treachery  in  the  severest  terms.

"  Old  man  !  hast  thou  mid  warrior-chiefs  a  place,
And  dost  thou  practice  that  which  brings  disgrace  ?
Hast  thou  no  fear  of  a  degraded  name,
No  fear  of  lasting  obloquy  and  shame  ?


338  THE SHAH NAMEH.

O,  thou  canst  have  no  hope  in  God,  when  thou
StancPst  thus  defiled, — dishonored,  false,  as  now ;
Unfair,  perfidious,  art  thou  too,  in  strife,
By  any  pretext  thou  would'st  take  my  life  I"

He  then  in  a  menacing  attitude  exclaimed : —
"  If  thou  art  a  man,  rise  and  fight !"  Rustem
felt  ashamed  on  being  thus  detected,  and  rose
up  frowning  in  scorn.  They  met,  brandishing
their  battle-axes,  and  looking  as  black  as  the
clouds  of  night.  They  then  dismounted  to  wrestle,
and  fastening  the  bridles,  each  to  his  own  gir-
dle, furiously  grasped  each  others*  loins  and
limbs,  straining  and  struggling  for  the  mastery.
Whilst  they  were  thus  engaged,  their  horses  be-
trayed equal  animosity,  and  attacked  each  other
with  great  violence.  Rakush  bit  and  kicked  Bar-
zti's  steed  so  severely  that  he  strove  to  gallop
away,  dragging  his  master,  who  was  at  the  same
time  under  the  excruciating  gripe  of  Rustem.
"  O,  release  me  for  a  moment  till  I  am  disen-
tangled from  my  horse,"  exclaimed  Barzvl ;  but
Rustem  heeding  him  not,  now  pressed  him  down
beneath  him,  and  was  preparing  to  give  him  the
finishing  blow  by  cutting  off  his  head,  when  the
mother  seeing  the  fatal  moment,  approach,  shriek-
ed, and  cried  out,  "Forbear,  Rustem!  this  youth
is  the  son  of  Sohrab,  and  thy  own  grandchild !


THE SHAH NAM EH.  339

Forbear,  and  bring  not  on  thyself  the  devouring
anguish  which  followed  the  death  of  his  unhappy
father.

"  Think  of  Sohrab  !  take  not  the  precious  life
Of  sire  and  son — unnatural  is  the  strife ;
Restrain,  for  mercy's  sake,  that  furious  mood,
And  pause  before  thou  shedd'st  a  kinsman's  blood."

"  Ah  !"  rejoined  Rustem,  "  can  that  be  true  ?"
upon  which  Shah-ru  shewed  him  Sohrab's  bril-
liant finger-ring,  and  he  was  satisfied.  He  then
pressed  Barzu  warmly  and  affectionately  to  his
breast,  and  kissed  his  head  and  eyes,  and  took
him  along  with  him  to  Sistan,  where  he  placed  him
in  a  station  of  honour,  and  introduced  him  to  his
great  grandfather  Zal,  who  received  and  caressed
him  with  becoming  tenderness  and  regard.


SUSEN  THE  SORCERESS,  AND  AFRASIYAB.

Soon  after  Afrasiyab  had  returned  defeated  into
Turan,  grievously  lamenting  the  misfortune  which
had  deprived  him  of  the  assistance  of  Barzu,  a
woman  named  Susen,  deeply  versed  in  magic  and
sorcery,  came  to  him,  and  promised  by  her  potent
art  to  put  him  in  the  way  of  destroying  Rustem
and  his  whole  family.

z  2


340  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

"  Fighting,  disappointment  brings,
Sword  and  mace  are  useless  things ;
If  thou  would'st  a  conqueror  be,
Monarch  !  put  thy  trust  in  me ;
Soon  the  mighty  chief  shall  bleed, —
Spells  and  charms  will  do  the  deed!""

Afrasiyab  at  first  refused  to  avail  himself  of  her
power,  but  was  presently  induced,  by  a  mani-
festation of  her  skill,  to  consent  to  what  she
proposed.  She  required  that  a  distinguished
warrior  should  be  sent  along  with  her,  furnished
with  abundance  of  treasure,  honorary  tokens  and
presents,  so  that  none  might  be  aware  that  she
was  employed  on  the  occasion.  Afrasiyab  ap-
pointed Pilsam,  duly  supplied  with  the  requi-
sites, and  the  warrior  and  the  sorceress  set  off
on  their  journey,  people  being  stationed  conve-
niently on  the  road  to  hasten  the  first  tidings  of
their  success  to  the  king.  Their  course  was  to-
wards Sistan,  and  arriving  at  a  fort,  they  took
possession  of  a  commodious  residence,  in  which
they  placed  the  wealth  and  property  they  had
brought,  and,  establishing  a  house  of  entertain-
ment, all  travellers  who  passed  that  way  were
hospitably  and  sumptuously  regaled  by  them.

For  sparkling  wine,  and  viands  rare,
And  mellow  fruit,  abounded  there.


THE SHAH NAMEII.  341

It  is  recorded  that  Rustem  had  invited  to  a
magnificent  feast  at  his  palace  in  Sistan  a  large
company  of  the  most  celebrated  heroes  of  the
kingdom,  and  amongst  them  happened  to  be  Tus,
whom  the  king  had  deputed  to  the  champion  on
some  important  state  affairs.  Gudarz  was  also
present ;  and  between  him  and  Tus,  ever  hostile
to  each  other,  a  dispute  as  usual  took  place.  The
latter,  always  boasting  of  his  ancestry,  reviled  the
old  warrior  and  said,  "  I  am  the  son  of  Nauder,
and  the  grandson  of  Feridun,  whilst  thou  art  but  the
son  of  Gavah,  the  blacksmith  ;  — why  then  dost
thou  put  thyself  on  a  footing  with  me  ?"  Gudarz,
in  reply,  poured  upon  him  reproaches  equally  ir-
ritating, accused  him  of  ignorance  and  folly,  and
roused  the  anger  of  the  prince  to  such  a  degree
that  he  drew  his  dagger  to  punish  the  offender,
when  Reham  started  up  and  prevented  the  in-
tended bloodshed.  This  interposition  increased
his  rage,  and  in  serious  dudgeon  he  retired  from
the  banquet,  and  set  off  on  his  return  to  Iran.

Rustem  was  not  present  at  the  time,  but  when
he  heard  of  the  altercation  and  the  result  of  it,  he
was  very  angry,  saying  that  Gudarz  was  a  relation
of  the  family,  and  Tus  his  guest,  and  therefore
wrong  had  been  done,  since  a  guest  ought  always
to  be  protected.  "  A  guest,"  he  said,  "  ought  to
be  held  as  sacred  as  the  king,  and  it  is  the  custom
of  heroes  to  treat  a  guest  with  the  most  scrupulous
respect  and  consideration.


342  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

For  a  guest  is  the  king  of  the  feast."

He  then  requested  Gudarz  to  go  after  Tus,  and
by  fair  words  and  proper  excuses  bring  him
back  to  his  festive  board.  Accordingly  Gudarz
departed.  No  sooner  had  he  gone  than  Giw
rose  up,  and  said,  "  Tus  is  little  better  than  a
madman,  and  my  father  of  a  hasty  temper ;  I
should  therefore  wish  to  follow,  to  prevent  the
possibility  of  further  disagreement."  To  this
Rustem  consented.  Byzun  was  now  also  anxious
to  go,  and  he  too  got  permission.  When  all
the  three  had  departed,  Rustem  began  to  be
apprehensive  that  something  unpleasant  would
occur,  and  thought  it  prudent  to  send  Feramurz
to  preserve  the  peace.  Zal  then  came  forward,
and  thinking  that  Tus,  the  descendant  of  the  Kais
and  his  revered  guest,  might  not  be  easily  prevailed
upon  to  return  either  by  Gudarz,  Giw,  Byzun,  or
Feramurz,  resolved  to  go  himself  and  soothe  the
temper  which  had  been  so  injudiciously  and  rudely
ruffled  at  the  banquet.

When  Tus,  on  his  journey  from  Rustem's  pa-
lace, approached  the  residence  of  Susen  the  sor-
ceress, he  beheld  numerous  cooks  and  confec-
tioners on  every  side,  preparing  all  kinds  of  rich
and  rare  dishes  of  food,  and  every  species  of
sweetmeat ;  and  enquiring  to  whom  they  belong-
ed, he  was  told  that  the  place  was  occupied  by
the  wife  of  a  merchant  from  Turan,  who  was  ex-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  343

tremely  wealthy,  and  who  entertained  in  the  most
sumptuous  manner  every  traveller  who  passed  that
way.  Hungry,  and  curious  to  see  what  was  going
on,  Tus  dismounted,  and  leaving  his  horse  with
the  attendants,  entered  the  principal  apartment,
where  he  saw  a  fascinating  female,  and  was  trans-
ported with  joy. — She  was

Tall  as  the  graceful  cypress,  and  as  bright,

As  ever  struck  a  lover's  ravished  sight ;

Why  of  her  musky  locks  or  ringlets  tell  ?

Each  silky  hair  itself  contained  ,1  spell.

Why  of  her  face  so  beautifully  fair  ?

Wondering  he  saw  the  moon's  refulgence  there.

As  soon  as  his  transports  had  subsided  he  sat
down  before  her,  and  asked  her  who  she  was,  and
upon  what  adventure  she  was  engaged ;  and  she
answered  that  she  was  a  singing-girl,  that  a
wealthy  merchant  some  time  ago  had  fallen  in
love  with  and  married  her,  and  soon  afterwards
died ;  that  Afrasiyab,  the  king,  had  since  wished
to  take  her  into  his  harem,  to  be  one  of  his  mis-
tresses, which  alarmed  her,  and  she  had  in  con-
sequence fled  from  his  country  ;  she  was  willing,
however,  she  said,  to  become  the  hand-maid  of
Kai-khosrau,  he  being  a  true  king,  and  of  a  sweet
and  gentle  temper.

"  A  persecuted  damsel  I,
Thus  the  detested  tyrant  fly,


344  THE SHAM NAMEH.

And  hastening  from  impending  woes,
In  happy  Persia  seek  repose ;
For  long  as  cherished  life  remains,
Pleasure  must  smile  where  Khosrau  reigns.
Thence  did  I  from  my  home  dej>art,
To  please  and  bless  a  Persian  heart.*"

The  deception  worked  effectually  on  the  mind
of  Tus,  and  he  at  once  entered  into  the  notion  of
escorting  her  to  Kai-khosrau.  But  he  was  imme-
diately supplied  with  charmed  viands  and  goblets
of  rich  wine,  which  he  had  not  the  power  to
resist,  till  his  senses  forsook  him,  and  then
Pilsam  appeared,  and,  binding  him  with  cords,
conveyed  him  safely  and  secretly  into  the  interior
of  the  fort.  In  a  short  time  Gudarz  arrived,  and
he  too  was  received  and  treated  in  the  same  man-
ner. Then  Glw  and  Byzun  were  seized  and  se-
cured ;  and  after  them  came  Zal  :  but  notwith-
standing the  enticements  that  were  used,  and  the
attractions  that  presented  themselves,  he  would
neither  enter  the  enchanted  apartment,  nor  taste
the  enchanted  food  or  wine.

The  witching  cup  was  filled  to  the  brim,

But  the  magic  draught  had  no  charms  for  him.

A  person  whispered  in  his  ear  that  the  woman  had
already  wickedly  got  into  her  power  several  war-
riors, and  he  felt  assured  that  they  were  his  own


THE SHAH NAMEH.  345

friends.  To  be  revenged  For  this  treachery  he  rushed
forward,  and  would  have  seized  hold  of  the  sorce-
ress, but  she  fled  into  the  fort  and  fastened  the  gate.
He  instantly  sent  a  messenger  to  Rustem,  explain-
ing the  perplexity  in  which  he  was  involved,  and
exerting  all  his  strength,  broke  down  the  gate  that
had  just  been  closed  against  him.  As  soon  as  the
passage  was  opened,  out  rushed  Pilsam,  who  with
his  mace  commenced  a  furious  battle  with  Zal,  in
which  he  nearly  overpowered  him,  when  Fera-
murz  reached  the  spot,  and  telling  the  venerable
old  warrior  to  stand  aside,  took  his  place,  and
fought  with  Pilsam  without  intermission  all  day,
and  till  they  were  parted  by  the  darkness  of
night.

Early  in  the  morning  Rustem,  accompanied  by
Barzu,  arrived  from  Sistan,  and  entering  the  fort,
called  aloud  for  Pilsam.  He  also  sent  Feramurz
to  Kai-khosrau  to  inform  him  of  what  had  oc-
curred. Pilsam  at  length  issued  forth,  and  at-
tacked the  champion.  They  first  fought  with
bows  and  arrows,  with  javelins  next,  and  then
successively  with  maces,  and  swords,  and  daggers.
The  contest  lasted  the  whole  day ;  and  when  at
night  they  parted,  neither  had  gained  the  victory.
The  next  morning  immense  clouds  of  dust  were
seen,  and  they  were  found  to  be  occasioned  by
Afrasiyab  and  his  army  marching  to  the  spot.
Rustem  appointed  Barzu  to  proceed  with  his  Za-


346  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

bul  troops  against  him,  whilst  he  himself  encoun-
tered Pilsam.  The  strife  between  the  two  was
dreadful.  Rustem  struck  him  several  times  fu-
riously upon  the  head,  and  at  length  stretched
him  lifeless  on  the  sand.  He  then  impelled  Ra-
kush  towards  the  Turanian  army,  and  aided  by
Zal  and  Barzu,  committed  tremendous  havoc  among
them.

So  thick  the  arrows  fell,  helmet,  and  mail,

And  shield,  pierced  through,  looked  like  a  field  of  reeds.

In  the  mean  time  Susen,  the  sorceress,  escaped
from  the  fort,  and  fled  to  Afrasiyab.

Another  cloud  of  dust  spreading  from  earth  to
heaven,  was  observed  in  the  direction  of  Persia,
and  the  waving  banners  becoming  more  distinct,
presently  shewed  the  approach  of  the  king,  Kai-
khosrau .

The  steely  javelins  sparkled  in  the  sun,
Helmet  and  shield,  and  joyous  seemed  the  sight.
Banners,  all  gorgeous,  floating  on  the  breeze,
And  horns  shrill  echoing,  and  the  tramp  of  steeds,
Proclaimed  to  dazzled  eye  and  half-stunned  ear,
The  mighty  preparation.

The  hostile  armies  soon  met,  and  there  was  a
sanguinary  conflict,  but  the  Turanians  were  ob-
liged to  give  way.  Upon  this  common  result,
Piran  Wisah  declared  to  Afrasiyab  that  perse-


THE SHAH NAM  Ell.  347

verance  was  as  ridiculous  as  unprofitable."  Our
army  has  no  heart,  nor  confidence,  when  opposed
to  Rustem  ;  how  often  have  we  been  defeated  by
him — how  often  have  we  been  scattered  like  sheep
before  that  lion  in  battle.  We  have  just  lost  the
aid  of  Barzu,  and  now  is  it  not  deplorable  to  put
any  trust  in  the  dreams  of  a  singing-girl,  to  ac-
celerate on  her  account  the  ruin  of  the  country,
and  to  hazard  thy  own  personal  safety.

What !  risk  an  empire  on  a  woman's  word  ?"

Afrasiyab  replied,  "  So  it  is;"  and  instantly
urged  his  horse  into  the  middle  of  the  plain,  where
he  loudly  challenged  Kai-khosrau  to  single  com-
bat, saying,  "  Why  should  we  uselessly  shed  the
blood  of  our  warriors  and  people.  Let  us  our-
selves decide  the  day.  God  will  give  the  triumph
to  him  who  merits  it."  Kai-khosrau  was  ashamed
to  refuse  this  challenge,  and  descending  from  his
elephant,  mounted  his  horse  and  prepared  for  the
onset.  But  his  warriors  seized  the  bridle,  and
would  not  allow  him  to  fight.  He  declared  how-
ever that  he  would  himself  take  revenge  for  the
blood  of  Saiawush,  and  struggled  to  overcome  the
friends  who  were  opposing  his  progress.  "  For-
bear awhile,"  said  Rustem,  "  Afrasiyab  is  expert
in  all  the  arts  of  the  warrior,  fighting  with  the
sword,  the  dagger,  in  archery,  and  wrestling.
When  I  wrestled  with  him,  and  held  him  down,


348  THE SHAH NAMEH.

he  could  not  have  escaped,  excepting  by  the  ex-
ercise of  the  most  consummate  dexterity.  Allow
thy  warriors  to  fight  for  thee."  But  the  king  was
angry,  and  said,  "  The  monarch  who  does  not
fight  for  himself,  is  unworthy  of  the  crown."
Upon  hearing  this,  Rustem  wept  tears  of  blood.
Barzu  now  took  hold  of  the  king's  stirrup,  and
knocked  his  forehead  against  it,  and  drawing  his
dagger,  threatened  to  put  an  end  to  himself,  say-
ing, "  My  blood  will  be  upon  thy  neck,  if  thou
goest;"  and  he  continued  in  a  strain  so  eloquent
and  persuasive  that  Khosrau  relaxed  in  his  deter-
mination, and  observed  to  Rustem  :  "  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  Barzu  is  descended  from  thee."
Barzu  now  respectfully  kissed  the  ground  before
the  king,  and  vaulting  on  his  saddle  with  ad-
mirable agility,  rushed  onwards  to  the  middle
space  where  Afrasiyab  was  waiting,  and  roared
aloud.  Afrasiyab  burned  with  indignation  at  the
sight,  and  said  in  his  heart :  "  It  seems  that  I  have
nurtured  and  instructed  this  ingrate,  to  shed  my
own  blood.  Thou  wretch  of  demon-birth,  thou
knowest  not  thy  father's  name !  and  yet  thou
comest  to  wage  war  against  me !  Art  thou  not
ashamed  to  look  upon  the  King  of  Turan  after
what  he  has  done  for  thee  ?"  Barzu  replied :
"  Although  thou  didst  protect  me,  thou  spilt  the
blood  of  Saiawush  and  Aghriras  unjustly.  When
I  ate  thy  salt,  I  served  thee  faithfully,  and  fought


THE SHAH NAMEH.  349

for  thee. I  now  eat  the  salt  of  Kai-khosrau,  and
my  allegiance  is  due  to  him."

He  spoke,  and  raised  his  battle-axe,  and  rushed,
Swift  as  a  demon  of  Mazinderan,
Against  Afrasiyab,  who,  frowning,  cried  : —
"  Approach  not  like  a  furious  elephant,
Heedless  what  may  befall  thee — nor  provoke
The  wrath  of  him  whose  certain  aim  is  death."
Then  placed  he  on  the  string  a  pointed  dart,
And  shot  it  from  the  bow ;  whizzing  it  flew,
And  pierced  the  armour  of  the  wondering  youth,
Inflicting  on  his  side  a  painful  wound,
Which  made  his  heart  with  trepidation  throb  ;
High  exultation  marked  the  despots  brow,
Seeing  the  gush  of  blood  his  loins  distain.

Barzu  was  now  anxious  to  assail  Afrasiyab  with
his  mace,  instead  of  arrows ;  but  whenever  he  tried
to  get  near  enough,  he  was  disappointed  by  the
adroitness  of  his  adversary,  whom  he  could  not
reach.  He  was  at  last  compelled  to  lay  aside  the
battle-axe,  and  have  recourse  to  his  bow,  but
every  arrow  was  dexterously  received  by  Afra-
siyab on  his  shield;  and  Barzu,  on  his  part,  be-
came equally  active  and  successful.  Afrasiyab
soon  emptied  his  quiver,  and  then  he  grasped  his
mace  with  the  intention  of  extinguishing  his  an-
tagonist at  once,  but  at  the  moment  Human  came
up,  and  said:  "  O,  king!  do  not  bring  thyself


350  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

into  jeopardy  by  contending  against  a  person  of  no
account;  thy  proper  adversary  is  Kai-khosrau,
and  not  him,  for  if  thou  gainest  the  victory,  it  can
only  be  a  victory  over  a  fatherless  soldier,  and  if
thou  art  killed,  the  whole  of  Turan  will  be  at  the
feet  of  Persia."  Both  Piran  and  Human  dis-
suaded the  king  from  continuing  the  engagement
singly,  and  directed  the  Turanians  to  commence
a  general  attack.  Afrasiyab  told  them  that  if
Barzu  was  not  slain,  it  would  be  a  great  mis-
fortune to  their  country ;  in  consequence,  they
surrounded  him,  and  inflicted  on  him  many  severe
wounds.  But  Rustem  and  Feramurz,  beholding
the  dilemma  into  which  Barzu  was  thrown,  hasten-
ed to  his  support,  and  many  of  the  enemy  were
killed  by  them,  and  great  carnage  followed  by  the
advance  of  the  Persian  army.

The  noise  of  clashing  swords,  and  ponderous  maces
Ringing  upon  the  iron  mail,  seemed  like
The  busy  work-shop  of  an  armourer ;
Tumultuous  as  the  sea  the  field  appeared,
All  crimsoned  with  the  blood  of  heroes  slain.

Kai-khosrau  himself  hurried  to  the  assistance  of
Barzu,  and  the  powerful  force  which  he  brought
along  with  him  soon  put  the  Turanians  to  flight.
Afrasiyab  too  made  his  escape  in  the  confusion  that
prevailed.  The  king  wished  to  pursue  the  enemy,
but  Rustem  observed  that  their  defeat  and  dis-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  351


persion  was  enough.  The  battle  having  ceased,
and  the  army  being  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Sistan,  the  champion  solicited  permission  to  re-
turn to  his  home  ;  "  for  I  am  now,"  said  he,
"  four  hundred  years  old,  and  require  a  little
rest.  In  the  mean  time  Feramurz  and  Barzu  may
take  my  place."  The  king  consented,  and  dis-
tributing his  favours  to  each  of  his  distinguished
warriors  for  their  prodigious  exertions,  left  Zal
and  Rustem  to  proceed  to  Sistan,  and  returned  to
the  capital  of  his  kingdom.


THE  EXPEDITION  OF  GUDARZ  AGAINST
AFRASIYAB.

The  overthrow  of  the  sovereign  of  Turan  had
only  a  temporary  effect,  as  it  was  not  long  before
he  was  enabled  to  collect  further  supplies,  and
another  army  for  the  defence  of  his  kingdom  ;  and
Kai-khosrau's  ambition  to  reduce  the  power  of  his
rival  being  animated  by  new  hopes  of  success,
another  expedition  was  entrusted  to  the  command
of  Gudarz.  Rustem,  he  said,  had  done  his  duty
in  repeated  campaigns  against  Afrasiyab,  and
the  extraordinary  gallantry  and  wisdom  with
which  they  were  conducted,  entitled  him  to  the
highest  applause.  "  It  is  now,  Gudarz,  thy  turn


352  THE SHAH NAMEH.

to  vanquish  the  enemy."  Accordingly  Gudarz,
accompanied  by  Giw,  and  Tus,  and  Byzun,  and
an  immense  army,  proceeded  towards  Turan.
Feramurz  was  directed  previously  to  invade  and
conquer  Industan,  and  from  thence  to  march  to
the  borders  of  Chin  and  Ma-chin,  for  the  purpose
of  uniting  and  co-operating  with  the  army  under
Gudarz,  and,  finally,  to  capture  Afrasiyab.

As  soon  as  it  was  known  in  Turan  that  Gudarz
was  in  motion  to  resume  hostilities  against  the
king,  Human  was  appointed  with  a  large  force  to
resist  his  progress,  and  a  second  army  of  reserve
was  gathered  together  under  the  command  of
Piran.  The  first  conflict  which  occurred  was  be-
tween the  troops  of  Gudarz  and  Human.  Gudarz
directed  Byzun  to  attack  Human.  The  two  chiefs
joined  in  battle,  when  Human  fell  under  the
sword  of  his  adversary,  and  his  army,  being  de-
feated, retired,  and  united  in  the  rear  with  the
legions  of  Piran.  The  enemy  thus  became  of
formidable  strength,  and  in  consequence  it  was
thought  proper  to  communicate  the  inequality  to
Kai-khosrau,  that  reinforcements  might  be  sent
without  loss  of  time.  The  king  immediately  com-
plied, and  also  wrote  to  Sistan  to  request  the  aid
of  Rustem.  The  war  lasted  two  years,  the  army
on  each  side  being  continually  recruited  as  neces-
sity required,  so  that  the  numbers  were  regularly
kept  up,  till  a  great  battle  took  place,  in  which


THE SHAH XAMK1I.  353

the  venerable  Piran  was  killed,  and  nearly  the
whole  of  his  army  destroyed.  This  victory  was
obtained  without  the  assistance  of  Rustem,  who,
notwithstanding  the  message  of  the  king,  had  still
remained  inSistan.  The  loss  of  Piran,  the  coun-
sellor and  warrior,  proved  to  be  a  great  affliction
to  Afrasiyab  :  he  felt  as  if  his  whole  support  was
taken  away,  and  deemed  it  the  signal  of  approach-
ing ruin  to  his  cause.

"  Thou  wert  my  refuge,  thou  my  friend  and  brother ;

Wise  in  thy  counsel,  gallant  in  the  field,

My  monitor  and  guide — and  thou  art  gone  !

The  glory  of  my  kingdom  is  eclipsed,

Since  thou  hast  vanished  from  this  world,  and  left  me,

All  wretched  to  myself. But  food,  nor  sleep,

Nor  rest  will  I  indulge  in,  till  just  vengeance

Has  been  inflicted  on  the  cruel  foe.'"'

When  the  news  of  Piran's  death  reached  Kai-
khosrau,  he  rapidly  marched  forward,  crossed
the  Jfhun  without  delay,  and  passed  through  Sa-
merkand  and  Bokhara,  to  encounter  the  Turanians.
Afrasiyab,  in  the  meantime,  had  not  been  neglect-
ful. He  had  all  his  hidden  treasure  dug  up,  with
which  he  assembled  a  prodigious  army,  and  ap-
pointed his  son  Shydah-Poshung  to  the  command
of  a  hundred  thousand  horsemen.  To  oppose  this
force,  Khosrau  appointed  his  young  relative,  Lo-
hurasp,  with  eight  thousand  horsemen,  and  passing

2  A


354  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

through  Sistan,  desired  Rustem,  on  account  of
Lohurasp's  tender  age  and  inexperience,  to  afford
him  such  good  counsel  as  he  required.  When
Afrasiyab  heard  this,  he  added  to  the  force  of
Shydah  another  hundred  thousand  men,  but  first
sent  his  son  to  Kai-khosrau  in  the  character  of  an
ambassador  to  offer  terms  of  peace.  "  Tell  him,"
said  he,  "  that  to  secure  this  object,  I  will  deliver
to  him  one  of  my  sons  as  a  hostage,  and  a  number
of  troops  for  his  service,  with  the  sacred  promise
never  to  depart  from  my  engagements  again. —
But,  a  word  in  thy  ear,  Shydah  ;  if  Khosrau  is  not
disposed  to  accept  these  terms,  say,  to  prevent
unnecessary  bloodshed,  he  and  I  must  personally
decide  the  day  by  single  combat.  If  he  refuses  to
fight  with  me,  say  that  thou  wilt  meet  him  ;  and
shouldst  thou  be  slain  in  the  strife,  I  will  sur-
render to  him  the  kingdom  of  Turan,  and  retire
myself  from  the  world."  He  further  commanded
him  to  propound  these  terms  with  a  gallant  and
fearless  bearing,  and  not  to  betray  the  least  ap-
prehension. Shydah  entered  fully  into  the  spirit
of  his  father's  instructions,  and  declared  that  he
would  devote  his  life  to  the  cause,  that  he  would
boldly  before  the  whole  assembly  dare  Kai-khosrau
to  battle;  so  that  Afrasiyab  was  delighted  with
the  valorous  disposition  he  displayed.

Kai-khosrau smiled when  he  heard  of  what
Afrasiyab  intended,  and  viewed  the  proposal  as  a


THK SHAH NA.MKH.  355

proof  of  his  weakness.  "  But  never,"  said  he,
"  will  I  consent  to  a  peace  till  I  have  inflicted
on  him  the  death  which  Saiawush  was  made  to
suffer.  When  Shydah  arrived,  and  with  proper
ceremony  and  respect  had  delivered  his  message,
Kai-khosrau  invited  him  to  retire  to  his  chamber
and  go  to  rest,  and  he  would  send  an  answer  by
one  of  his  people.  Shydah  accordingly  retired,
and  the  king  proceeded  to  consult  his  warrior-
friends  on  the  offers  that  had  been  made.  "  Afra-
siyab  tells  me,"  said  he,  "  that  if  I  do  not  wish  for
peace,  I  must  fight  either  him  or  his  son.  I  have
seen  Shydah — his  eyes  are  red  and  blood- shot,  and
he  has  a  fierce  expression  of  feature;  if  I  do  not
accept  his  terms,  I  shall  probably  soon  have  a
dagger  lodged  in  my  breast."  Saying  this,  he
ordered  his  mail  to  be  got  ready  ;  but  Rustem  and
all  the  great  men  about  him  exclaimed,  unani-
mously: "  This  must  not  be  allowed;  Afrasiyab
is  full  of  fraud,  artifice,  and  sorcery,  and  noto-
riously faithless  to  his  engagements.  The  sending
of  Shydah  is  all  a  trick,  and  his  letter  of  proposal
all  deceit :  his  object  is  simply  to  induce  thee  to
fight  him  alone.

If  thou  shouldst  kill  this  Shydah — what  of  that !
There  would  be  one  Turanian  warrior  less,
To  vex  the  world  withal ;  would  that  be  triumph  ?
And  to  a  Persian  king  ? But  if  it  chanced,
2X2


356  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

That  thou  shoulcTst  meet  with  an  untimely  death,
By  dart  or  javelin,  at  the  stripling's  hands,
What  scathe  and  ruin  would  this  realm  befall !"

By  the  advice  of  Rustem,  Kai-khosrau  gave
Shydah  permission  to  depart,  and  said  that  he
would  send  his  answer  to  Afrasiyab  by  Karun ;
"  But,"  observed  the  youth,  "  I  have  come  to
fight  thee !"  which  touched  the  honour  of  the  king,
and  he  replied :  "  Be  it  so,  let  us  then  meet  to-
morrow."

In  the  mean  time  Khosrau  prepared  his  letter
to  Afrasiyab,  in  which  he  said  :

"  Our  quarrel  now  is  dark  to  view,

It  bears  the  fiercest,  gloomiest  hue ;

And  vain  have  speech  and  promise  been

To  change  for  peace  the  battle  scene ;

For  thou  art  still  to  treachery  prone,

Though  gentle  now  in  word  and  tone  ;

But  that  imperial  crown  thou  wearest,

That  mace  which  thou  in  battle  bearest,

Thy  kingdom,  all,  thou  must  resign  ;

Thy  army  too — for  all  are  mine  !

Thou  talk'st  of  strength,  and  might,  and  power,

When  revelling  in  a  prosperous  hour ;

But  know,  that  strength  of  nerve  and  limb

We  owe  to  God — it  comes  from  Him  !

And  victory's  palm,  and  regal  sway,

Alike  the  will  of  Heaven  obey.


THE SHAH NAAIEH.  357

Hence  thy  lost  throne,  no  longer  thine,
Will  soon,  perfidious  king !  be  mine  T

In  giving  this  letter  to  Karun,  Kai-khosrau
directed  him,  in  the  first  place,  to  deliver  a  mes-
sage from  him  to  Shydah,  to  the  following  effect :

"  Driven  art  thou  out  from  home  and  life,
Doomed  to  engage  in  mortal  strife,
For  deeply  lours  misfortune's  cloud  ;
That  gay  attire  will  be  thy  shroud ;
Blood  from  thy  father's  eyes  will  gush,
As  Kaus  wept  for  Saiawush."

In  the  morning  Khosrau  went  to  the  appointed
place,  and  when  he  approached  Shydah,  the  latter
said,  "  Thou  hast  come  on  foot,  let  our  trial  be  in
wrestling ;"  and  the  proposal  being  agreed  to,  both
applied  themselves  fiercely  to  the  encounter,  at  a
distance  from  the  troops.

The  youth  appeared  with  joyous  mien,
And  bounding  heart,  for  life  was  new ;

By  either  host  the  strife  was  seen,

And  strong  and  fierce  the  combat  grew.

Shydah  exerted  his  utmost  might,  but  was  un-
able to  move  his  antagonist  from  the  ground  ;
whilst  Khosrau  lifted  him  up  without  difficulty,
and,  dashing  him  on  the  plain,


358  THE SHAH XAMEH.

He  sprang  upon  him  as  the  lion  fierce

Springs  on  the  nimble  gor,  then  quickly  drew

His  deadly  dagger,  and  with  cruel  aim,

Thrust  the  keen  weapon  through  the  stripling's  heart.

Khosrau,  immediately  after  slaying  him,  ordered
the  body  to  be  washed  with  musk  and  rose-water,
and,  after  burial,  a  tomb  to  be  raised  to  his  memory.

When  Karun  reached  the  court  of  Afrasiyab
with  the  answer  to  the  offer  of  peace,  intelligence
had  previously  arrived  that  Shydah  had  fallen  in
the  combat,  which  produced  in  the  mind  of  the
father  the  greatest  anguish.  He  gave  no  reply
to  Karun,  but  ordered  the  drums  and  trumpets
to  be  sounded,  and  instantly  marched  with  a  large
army  against  the  enemy.  The  two  hosts  were
soon  engaged,  the  anger  of  the  Turanians  being
so  much  roused  and  sharpened  by  the  death  of
the  prince,  that  they  were  utterly  regardless  of
their  lives.  The  battle,  therefore,  was  fought
with  unusual  fury.

Two  sovereigns  in  the  field,  in  desperate  strife,
Each  by  a  grievous  cause  of  wrath,  urged  on
To  glut  revenge  ;  this,  for  a  father's  life
Wantonly  sacrificed  ;  that  for  a  son
Slain  in  his  prime. — The  carnage  has  begun,
And  blood  is  seen  to  flow  on  every  side ;
Thousands  are  slaughtered  ere  the  day  is  done,
And  weltering  swell  the  sanguinary  tide ;
And  why  ?  To  soothe  man's  hate,  his  cruelty,  and  pride.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  359

The  battle  terminated  in  the  discomfiture  and
defeat  of  the  Turanians,  who  fled  from  the  con-
querors in  the  utmost  confusion.  The  people
seized  hold  of  the  bridle  of  Afrasiyab's  horse,  and
obliged  him  to  follow  his  scattered  army.

Kai-khosrau  having  dispatched  an  account  of
his  victory  to  Kails,  went  in  pursuit  of  Afrasiyab,
traversing  various  countries  and  provinces,  till  he
arrived  on  the  borders  of  Chin.  The  Khakan,
or  sovereign  of  that  state,  became  in  consequence
greatly  alarmed,  and  presented  to  him  large  pre-
sents to  gain  his  favour,  but  the  only  object  of
Khosrau  was  to  secure  Afrasiyab,  and  he  told  the
ambassador  that  if  his  master  dared  to  afford  him
protection,  he  would  lay  waste  the  whole  king-
dom. The  Khakan  therefore  withdrew  his  hos-
pitable services,  and  the  abandoned  king  was
compelled  to  seek  another  place  of  refuge.


THE  DEATH  OF  AFRASIYAB.

Melancholy  and  afflicted,  Afrasiyab  penetrated
through  wood  and  desert,  and  entered  the  pro-
vince of  Mikran,  whither  he  was  followed  by  Kai-
khosrau  and  his  army.  He  then  quitted  Mikran.
but  his  followers  had  fallen  off  to  a  small  number,
and  to  whatever  country  or  region  he  repaired


360  T  H  K S  H  A  H N  A  M  E  H .

for  rest  and  protection,  none  was  given,  lest  the
vengeance  of  Kai-khosrau  should  be  hurled  upon
the  offender.  Still  pursued  and  hunted  like  a
wild  beast,  and  still  flying  from  his  enemies,  the
small  retinue  which  remained  with  him  at  last
left  him,  and  he  was  left  alone,  dejected,  destitute,
and  truly  forlorn.  In  this  state  of  desertion  he
retired  into  a  cave,  where  he  hoped  to  continue
undiscovered  and  unseen.

It  chanced,  however,  that  a  man  named  Hum,
of  the  race  of  Feridun,  dwelt  hard  by.  He  was
remarkable  for  his  strength  and  bravery,  but  had
peacefully  taken  up  his  abode  upon  the  neigh-
bouring mountain,  and  was  passing  a  religious
life  without  any  communication  with  the  busy
world.  His  dwelling  was  a  little  way  above  the
cave  of  Afrasiyab.  One  night  he  heard  a  voice
of  lamentation  below,  and  anxious  to  ascertain
from  whom  and  whence  it  proceeded,  he  stole
down  to  the  spot  and  listened.  The  mourner
spoke  in  the  Turkish  language,  and  said  : — "  O
king  of  Turan  and  Chin,  where  is  now  thy  pomp
and  power !  How  has  Fortune  cast  away  thy
throne  and  thy  treasure  to  the  winds  ?"  Hearing
these  words  Hum  conjectured  that  this  must  be
Afrdsiyab ;  and  as  he  had  suffered  severely  from
the  tyranny  of  that  monarch,  his  feelings  of  ven-
geance were  awakened,  and  he  approached  nearer
to  be  certain  that  it  was  him.  The  same  lamen-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  3G I

tations  were  repeated,  and  he  felt  assured  that
it  was  Afrasiyab  himself.  He  waited  patiently,
however,  till  morning  dawned,  and  then  he  called
out  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave  : — "  O,  king  of  the
world !  come  out  of  thy  cave,  and  obtain  thy  de-
sires! I  have  left  the  invisible  sphere  to  accom-
plish thy  wishes. — Appear!"  Afrasiyab  thinking
this  a  spiritual  call,  went  out  of  the  cave,  and  was
instantly  recognised  by  Hum,  who  at  the  same
moment  struck  him  a  severe  blow  on  the  fore-
head, which  felled  him  to  the  earth,  and  then
secured  his  hands  behind  his  back.  When  the
monarch  found  himself  in  fetters  and  powerless,
he  complained  of  the  cruelty  inflicted  upon  him,
and  asked  Hum  why  he  had  treated  a  stranger  in
that  manner.  Hum  replied : — "  How  many  a
prince  of  the  race  of  Feridun  hast  thou  sacrificed
to  thy  ambition  ?  How  many  a  heart  hast  thou
broken  ? — I,  too,  am  one  who  was  compelled  to
fly  from  thy  persecutions,  and  take  refuge  here  on
this  desert  mountain,  and  constantly  have  I  prayed
for  thy  ruin  that  I  might  be  released  from  this  mi-
serable mode  of  existence,  and  be  permitted  to
return  to  my  paternal  home.  My  prayer  has  been
heard  at  last,  and  God  has  delivered  thee  into  my
hands.  But  how  earnest  thou  hither,  and  by  what
strange  vicissitudes  art  thou  thus  placed  before  me?"
Afrasiyab  communicated  to  him  the  story  of  his
misfortunes,  and  begged  of  him  rather  to  put  him


362  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

to  death  on  the  spot  than  convey  him  to  Kai-
khosrau.  But  Hum  was  too  much  delighted  with
having  the  tyrant  under  his  feet  to  consider  either
his  safety  or  his  feelings,  and  was  not  long  in
bringing  him  to  the  Persian  king.  Kai-khosrau
received  the  prisoner  with  exultation,  and  made
Hum  a  magnificent  present.  He  well  recollected
the  basin  and  the  dagger  used  in  the  murder  of
Saiawush,  and  commanded  the  presence  of  the
treacherous  Gersiwaz,  that  he  and  Afrasiyab  might
suffer,  in  every  respect,  the  same  fate  together.
The  basin  was  brought,  and  the  two  victims  were
put  to  death,  like  two  goats,  their  heads  being
chopped  off  from  their  bodies.

After  this  sanguinary  catastrophe,  Kai-khosrau
returned  to  Iran,  leaving  Rustern  to  proceed  to
his  own  principality.  Kai-kaus  quitted  his  palace,
according  to  his  established  custom,  to  welcome
back  the  conqueror.  He  kissed  his  head  and  face,
and  showered  upon  him  praises  and  blessings  for
the  valour  he  had  displayed,  and  the  deeds  he
had  done,  and  especially  for  having  so  signally
revenged  the  cruel  murder  of  his  father  Saiawusb.


THE  DEATH  OF  KAI-KHOSHAU.

Kai-khosrau at last became inspired  by an
insurmountable  attachment  to  a  religious  life,  and


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  363

thought  only  of  devotion  to  God.  Thus  influenced
by  a  disposition  peculiar  to  ascetics,  he  abandoned
the  duties  of  sovereignty,  and  committed  all  state
affairs  to  the  care  of  his  ministers.  The  chiefs
and  warriors  remonstrated  respectfully  against
this  mode  of  government,  and  trusted  that  he
would  devote  only  a  few  hours  in  the  day  to  the
transactions  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  remainder  to
prayer  and  religious  exercises;  but  this  he  re-
fused, saying  : — "  One  heart  is  not  equal  to  both
duties  ;  my  affections  indeed  are  not  for  this  tran-
sitory world,  and  I  trust  to  be  an  inhabitant  of
the  world  to  come."  The  nobles  were  in  great
sorrow  at  this  declaration,  and  anxiously  applied
to  Zal  and  Rustem,  in  the  hopes  of  working  some
change  in  the  king's  disposition.  On  their  arrival
the  people  cried  to  them  : —

"  Some  evil  eye  has  smote  the  king ; — Iblis
By  wicked  wiles  has  led  his  soul  astray,
And  withered  all  life's  pleasures. O  release
Our  country  from  the  sorrow,  the  dismay
Which  darkens  every  heart : — his  ruin  stay.
Is  it  not  mournful  thus  to  see  him  cold
And  gloomy,  casting  pomp  and  joy  away  ?
Restore  him  to  himself;  let  us  behold
Again  the  victor-king,  the  generous,  just,  and  bold."

Zal  and  Rustem  went  to  the  palace  of  the  king


364  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

in  a  melancholy  mood,  and  Khosrau  having  heard
of  their  approach,  enquired  of  them  why  they  had
left  Sistan.  They  replied  that  the  news  of  his
having  relinquished  all  concern  in  the  affairs  of
the  kingdom  had  induced  them  to  wait  upon  him.
"  I  am  weary  of  the  troubles  of  this  life,"  said
he  composedly,  "  and  anxious  to  prepare  for  a
future  state."  "  But  death,"  observed  Zal,  "  is
a  great  evil.  It  is  dreadful  to  die  !"  Upon  this
the  king  said  : — "  I  cannot  endure  any  longer  the
deceptions  and  the  perfidy  of  mankind.  My  love
of  heaven  is  so  great  that  I  cannot  exist  one  mo-
ment without  devotion  and  prayer.  Last  night  a
mysterious  voice  whispered  in  my  ear : — The  time
of  thy  departure  is  nigh,  prepare  the  load  for  thy
journey,  and  neglect  not  thy  warning  angel,  or
the  opportunity  will  be  lost."  When  Zal  and
Rustem  saw  that  Khosrau  was  resolved,  and  so-
lemnly occupied  in  his  devotions,  they  were  for
some  time  silent.  But  Zal  was  at  length  moved,
and  said  : — "  I  will  go  into  retirement  and  so-
litude with  the  king,  and  by  continual  prayer,
and  through  his  blessing,  I  too  may  be  for-
given." "  This,  indeed,"  said  the  king,  "  is  not
the  place  for  me.  I  must  seek  out  a  solitary  cell,
and  there  resign  my  soul  to  heaven."  Zal  and
Rustem  wept,  and  quitted  the  palace,  and  all  the
warriors  were  in  the  deepest  affliction.

The  next  day  Kai-khosrau  left  his  apartment,


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  335

and  called  together  his  great  men  and  warriors,
and  said  to  them :  —

"  That  which  I  sought  for,  I  have  now  obtained.
Nothing  remains  of  worldly  wish,  or  hope,
To  disappoint  or  vex  me. I  resign
The  pageantry  of  kings,  and  turn  away
From  all  the  pomp  of  the  Kaianian  throne,
Sated  with  human  grandeur. — Now,  farewell !
Such  is  my  destiny. To  those  brave  friends,
Who,  ever  faithful,  have  my  power  upheld,
I  will  discharge  the  duty  of  a  king,
Paying  the  pleasing  debt  of  gratitude."

He  then  ordered  his  tents  to  be  pitched  in  the
desert,  and  opened  his  treasury,  and  for  seven  days
made  a  sumptuous  feast,  and  distributed  food  and
money  among  the  indigent,  the  widows,  and  or-
phans,  and  every  destitute  person  was  abundantly
supplied  with  the  necessaries  of  life,  so  that  there
was  no  one  left  in  a  state  of  want  throughout  the
empire.  He  also  attended  to  the  claims  of  his  war-
riors. To  Rustem  he  gave  Zabul,  and  Kabul,  and
Nim-ruz.  He  appointed  Lohurasp,  the  son-in-
law  of  Kai-Kaus,  successor  to  his  throne,  and
directed  all  his  people  to  pay  the  same  allegiance
to  him  as  they  had  done  to  himself;  and  they
unanimously  consented,  declaring  their  firm  at-
tachment to  his  person  and  government.  He  ap-
pointed Gudarz  the  chief  minister,  and  Giw  to  the


366  THE SHAH NAMEH.

chief  command  of  the  armies.  To  Tus  he  gave
Khorassan ;  and  he  said  to  Friburz,  the  son  of
Kaus : — "  Be  thou  obedient,  I  beseech  thee,  to
the  commands  of  Lohurasp,  whom  I  have  in-
structed, and  brought  up  with  paternal  care ;  for
I  know  of  no  one  so  well  qualified  in  the  art  of
governing  a  kingdom."  The  warriors  of  Iran
were  surprised,  and  murmured  together,  that  the
son  of  Kai-kaus  should  be  thus  placed  under
the  authority  of  Lohurasp.  But  Zal  observed
to  them  : — "  If  it  be  the  king's  will,  it  is  enough!"
The  murmurs  of  the  warriors  having  reached  Kai-
khosrau,  he  sent  for  them,  and  addressed  them
thus :  — "  Friburz  is  well  known  to  be  unequal
to  the  functions  of  sovereignty  ;  but  Lohurasp  is
enlightened,  and  fully  comprehends  all  the  duties
of  regal  sway.  He  is  a  descendant  of  Husheng,
wise  and  merciful,  and  God  is  my  witness,  I  think
him  perfectly  calculated  to  make  a  nation  happy."
Hearing  this  eulogium  on  the  character  of  the  new
king  from  Kai-khosrau,  all  the  warriors  expressed
their  satisfaction,  and  anticipated  a  glorious  reign.
Khosrau  further  said: — "  I  must  now  address
you  on  another  subject.  In  my  dreams  a  fountain
has  been  pointed  out  to  me  ;  and  when  I  visit  that
fountain,  my  life  will  be  resigned  to  its  Creator."
He  then  bid  farewell  to  all  the  people  around  him,
and  commenced  his  journey;  and  when  he  had  ac-
complished one  stage  he  pitched  his  tent.  Next


THE SHAH NAMEH.  367

day  he  resumed  his  task,  and  took  leave  of  Zal
and  Rustem ;  who  wept  bitterly  as  they  parted
from  him.

"  Alas  !"  they  said,  "  that  one  on  whom

Heaven  has  bestowed  a  mind  so  great,
A  heart  so  brave,  should  seek  the  tomb,

And  not  his  hour  in  patience  wait.
The  wise  in  wonder  gaze,  and  say,

No  mortal  being  ever  trod
Before,  the  dim  supernal  way,

And  living,  saw  the  face  of  God  !"

After  Zal  and  Rustem,  then  Khosrau  took  leave
of  Gudarz,  and  Giw  and  Tus,  and  Gustahem,  but
unwilling  to  go  back,  they  continued  with  him.
He  soon  arrived  at  the  promised  fountain,  in  which
he  bathed.  He  then  said  to  his  followers : —
"  Now  is  the  time  for  our  separation ; — you  must
go;"  but  they  still  remained.  Again  he  said:—
"  You  must  go  quickly;  for  presently  heavy
showers  of. snow  will  fall,  and  a  tempestuous  wind
will  arise,  and  you  will  perish  in  the  storm."
Saying  this,  he  went  into  the  fountain,  and  va-
nished !

And  not  a  trace  was  left  behind,

And  not  a  dimple  on  the  wave ;
All  sought,  but  sought  in  vain,  to  find

The  spot  which  proved  Kai-khosrau's  grave  !


368  THE SHAH NAMEH.

The  king  having  disappeared  in  this  extraor-
dinary manner,  a  loud  lamentation  ascended  from
his  followers ;  and  when  the  paroxysm  of  amaze-
ment and  sorrow  had  ceased,  Friburz  said: —
"  Let  us  now  refresh  ourselves  with  food,  and  rest
awhile."  Accordingly  those  that  remained  ate  a
little,  and  were  soon  afterwards  overcome  with
sleep.  Suddenly  a  great  wind  arose,  and  the
snow  fell  and  clothed  the  earth  in  white,  and  all
the  warriors  and  soldiers  who  accompanied  Kai-
khosrau  to  the  mysterious  fountain,  and  amongst
them  Tus  and  Friburz,  and  Byzun,  and  Giw,
were  while  asleep  overwhelmed  in  the  drifts  of
snow.  Not  a  man  survived.  Gudarz  had  re-
turned when  about  half-way  on  the  road  ;  and
not  hearing  for  a  long  time  any  tidings  of  his  com-
panions, sent  a  person  to  ascertain  the  cause  of
their  delay.  Upon  proceeding  to  the  fatal  place,
the  messenger,  to  his  amazement  and  horror,  found
them  all  stiff  and  lifeless  under  the  snow  !


LOHURASP.


The  reputation  of  Lohurasp  was  of  the  highest
order,  and  it  is  said  that  his  administration  of  the
affairs  of  his  kingdom  was  more  just  and  paternal
than  even  that  of  Kai-khosrau.  "  The  counsel


THE SHAH NAM  £11.  309

which  Khosniu  gave  me,"  said  he,  "  was  wise
and  admirable  ;  but  I  find  that  I  must  go  beyond
him  in  moderation  and  clemency  to  the  poor."
Lohurasp  had  four  sons,  two  by  the  daughter  of
Kai-kaus,  one  named  Ardshir,  and  the  other
Shydasp ;  and  two  by  another  woman,  and  they
were  named  Gushtasp  and  Zarir.  But  Gushtasp
was  intrepid,  acute,  and  apparently  marked  out
for  sovereignty,  and  on  account  of  his  independent
conduct,  no  favourite  with  his  father ;  in  defiance
of  whom,  with  a  rebellious  spirit,  he  collected
together  a  hundred  thousand  horsemen,  and  pro-
ceeded with  them  towards  Hindustan  of  his  own
accord.  Lohurasp  sent  after  him  his  brother
Zarir,  with  a  thousand  horsemen,  in  the  hopes  of
influencing  him  to  return ;  but  when  Zarir  over-
took him  and  endeavoured  to  persuade  him  not  to
proceed  any  further,  he  said  to  him,  with  an
animated  look  :—

"  Proceed  no  farther ! — Well  thou  know'st
We've  no  Kaianian  blood  to  boast,
And,  therefore,  but  a  minor  part
In  Lohurasp's  paternal  heart.
Nor  thou,  nor  I,  can  ever  own
From  him  the  diadem  or  throne.
The  brothers  of  Kaus's  race
By  birth  command  the  brightest  place,
2  B


370  THE SUAH NAMEII.

Then  what  remains  for  us  ? We  must
To  other  means  our  fortunes  trust.
We  cannot  linger  here,  and  bear
A  life  of  discontent — despair."

Zarir,  however,  reasoned  with  him  so  winningly
and  effectually,  that  at  last  he  consented  to  re-
turn ;  but  only  upon  the  condition  that  he  should
be  nominated  heir  to  the  throne,  and  treated  with
becoming  respect  and  ceremony.  Zarir  agreed  to
interpose  his  efforts  to  this  end,  and  brought  him
back  to  his  father ;  but  it  was  soon  apparent  that
Lohurasp  had  no  inclination  to  promote  the  ele-
vation of  Gushtasp  in  preference  to  the  claims  of
his  other  sons ;  and  indeed  shortly  afterwards
manifested  to  what  quarter  his  determination  on
the  subject  was  directed.  It  was,  indeed,  enough
that  this  determination  was  unfavourable  to  the
views  of  Gushtasp,  who  now,  in  disgust,  again
fled  from  his  father's  house,  but  without  any  at-
tendants, and  shaped  his  course  towards  Rum.
Lohurasp  again  sent  Zarir  in  quest  of  him  ;  but  the
youth,  after  a  tedious  search,  returned  without
success.  Upon  his  arrival  in  Rum,  Gushtasp
chose  a  solitary  retirement,  where  he  remained
some  time,  and  was  at  length  compelled  by  po-
verty and  want,  to  ask  for  employment  in  the
establishment  of  the  sovereign  of  that  country,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  371

stating  that  he  was  an  accomplished  scribe,  and
wrote  a  beautiful  hand.  He  was  told  to  wait  a
few  days,  as  at  that  time  there  was  no  vacancy.
But  hunger  was  pressing,  and  he  could  not  suffer
delay;  he  therefore  went  to  the  master  of  the
camel-drivers  and  asked  for  service,  but  he  too
had  no  vacancy.  However,  commiserating  the
distressed  condition  of  the  applicant,  he  gene-
rously supplied  him  with  a  hearty  meal.  After
that,  Gushtasp  went  into  a  blacksmith's  shop,
and  asked  for  work,  and  his  services  were  ac-
cepted. The  blacksmith  put  the  hammer  into  his
hands,  and  the  first  blow  he  struck  was  given
with  such  force,  that  he  broke  the  anvil  to  pieces.
The  blacksmith  was  amazed  and  angry,  and  in-
dignantly turned  him  out  of  his  shop,  uttering
upon  him  a  thousand  violent  reproaches.

Wounded  in  spirit,  broken-hearted,
Misfortune  darkening  o'er  his  head,

To  other  lands  he  then  departed,
To  seek  another  home  for  bread.

Disconsolate  and  wretched,  he  proceeded  on
his  journey,  and  observing  a  husbandman  standing
in  a  field  of  corn,  he  approached  the  spot  and  sat
down.  The  husbandman  seeing  a  strong  muscular
youth,  apparently  a  Turanian,  sitting  in  sorrow
and  tears,  went  up  to  him  and  asked  him  the
cause  of  his  grief,  and  he  soon  became  acquainted
2  B  2


372  THE SHATI NAM  EH.

with  all  the  circumstances  of  the  stranger's  life.
Pitying  his  distress,  he  took  him  home  and  gave
him  some  food.

After  having  partaken  sufficiently  of  the  re-
freshments placed  before  him,  Gushtasp  inquired
of  his  host  to  what  tribe  he  belonged,  and  from
whom  he  was  descended.  "  I  am  descended  from
•Feridun,"  rejoined  he,  "  and  I  belong  to  the  Kai-
anian  tribe.  My  occupation  in  this  retired  spot  is,
as  thou  seest,  the  cultivation  of  the  ground,  and  the
customs  and  duties  of  husbandry."  Gushtasp  said,
I  am  myself  descended  from  Husheng,  who  was
the  ancestor  of  Feridun  ;  we  are,  therefore,  of  the
same  origin."  In  consequence  of  this  connection,
Gushtasp  and  the  husbandman  lived  together  on
the  most  friendly  footing  for  a  considerable  time.
At  length  the  star  of  his  fortune  began  to  illumine
his  path,  and  the  favour  of  Heaven  became  manifest.

It  was  the  custom  of  the  king  of  Rum,  when  his
daughters  came  of  age,  to  give  a  splendid  ban-
quet, and  to  invite  to  it  all  the  youths  of  illus-
trious birth  in  the  kingdom,  in  order  that  each
might  select  one  of  them  most  suited  to  her  taste,
for  her  future  husband.  His  daughter  Kitabiin
was  now  of  age,  and  in  conformity  with  the  esta-
blished practice,  the  feast  was  prepared,  and  the
youths  of  royal  descent  invited;  but  it  so  hap-
pened that  not  one  of  them  was  sufficiently  at-
tractive for  her  choice,  and  the  day  passed  over


THE S  II A II NAM  EH.  373

unprofitably. She  had  been  told  in  a  dream  that
a  youth  of  a  certain  figure  and  aspect  had  arrived
in  the  kingdom  from  Iran,  and  that  to  him  she  was
destined  to  be  married. But  there  was  not  one  at
her father's banquet  who answered to  the  de-
scription of  the  man  she  had  seen  in  her  dream,
and  in  consequence  she  was  disappointed. On
the  following  day  the  feast  was  resumed.  She  had
again  dreamt  of  the  youth  to  whom  she  was  to
be  united. She  had  presented  to  him  a  bunch  of
roses,  and  he  had  given  her  a  rose-branch,  and
each  regarded the  other  with  smiles  of  mutual
satisfaction. In  the morning Kitabim  issued  a
proclamation, inviting all the young men of
royal extraction,  whether  natives of the king-
dom or  strangers,  to  her  father's  feast. On  that
day  Gushtasp and the husbandman  had  come
into  the  city  froni  the  country,  and  hearing  the
proclamation,  the  latter  said  : — "  Let  us  go,  for  in
this  lottery,  the  prize  may  be  drawn  in  thy  name."
They  accordingly  went. Kitabun's  handmaid  was
in  waiting  at  the  door,  and  kept  every  young  man
standing awhile,  that her  mistress  might mark
him  well  before  she  allowed  him  to  pass  into  the
banquet. The keen  eyes  of  Kitabun  soon  saw
Gushtasp, and  her  heart  instantly  acknowledged
him  as  her  promised  lord,  for  he  was  the  same
person  she  had  seen  in  her  dream.


374  THE SHAH NAMEH.

As  near  the  graceful  stripling  drew,

She  cried  : — "  My  dream,  my  dream  is  true  !

Fortune  from  visions  of  the  night

Has  brought  him  to  my  longing  sight.

Truth  has  pourtrayed  his  form  divine ;

He  lives — he  lives — and  he  is  mine  !"

She  presently  descended  from  her  balcony,  and
gave  him  a  bunch  of  roses,  the  token  by  which
her  choice  was  made  known,  and  then  retired.
The  king,  when  he  heard  of  what  she  had  done,
was  exceedingly  irritated,  thinking  that  her  affec-
tions were  placed  on  a  beggar,  or  some  nameless
stranger  of  no  birth  or  fortune,  and  his  first  im-
pulse was  to  have  her  put  to  death.  But  his
people  assembled  around  him,  and  said : — "What
can  be  the  use  of  killing  her  ? — It  is  in  vain  to
resist  the  flood  of  destiny,  for  what  will  be,  will
be.

The  world  itself  is  governed  still  by  Fate,
Fate  rules  the  warrior's  and  the  monarch's  state ;
And  woman's  heart,  the  passions  of  her  soul,
Own  the  same  power,  obey  the  same  control ;
For  what  can  love's  impetuous  force  restrain  ?
Blood  may  be  shed,  but  what  will  be  thy  gain  ?"

After  this remonstrance  he desired  enquiries
to  be  made  into  the  character  and  parentage  of  his


THE SHAH NAM EH.  375

proposed  son-in-law,  and  was  told  his  name,  the
name  of  his  father,  and  of  his  ancestors,  and  the
causes  which  led  to  his  present  condition.  But  he
would  not  believe  a  word  of  the  narration.  He
was  then  informed  of  his  daughter's  dream,  and
other  particulars  :  and  he  so  far  relented  as  to
sanction  the  marriage ;  but  indignantly  drove  her
from  his  house,  with  her  husband,  without  a  dowry,
or  any  money  to  supply  themselves  with  food.

Gushtasp  and  his  wife  took  refuge  in  a  mise-
rable cell,  which  they  inhabited,  and  when  neces-
sity pressed,  he  used  to  cross  the  river,  and  bring
in  an  elk  or  wild  ass  from  the  forest,  gave  half  of
it  to  the  ferryman  for  his  trouble,  and  kept  the
remainder  for  his  own  board,  so  that  he  and  the
ferryman  became  great  friends  by  these  mutual
obligations.  It  is  related  that  a  person  of  distinc-
tion, named  Mabrin,  solicited  the  king's  second
daughter  in  marriage  ;  and  Ahrun,  another  man
of  rank,  was  anxious  to  be  espoused  to  the  third,
or  youngest ;  but  the  king  was  unwilling  to  part
with  either  of  them,  and  openly  declared  his  senti-
ments to  that  effect.  Mabrin,  however,  was  most
assiduous  and  persevering  in  his  attentions,  and  at
last  made  some  impression  on  the  father,  who
consented  to  permit  the  marriage  of  the  second
daughter,  but  only  on  the  following  conditions :
"  There  is,"  said  he,  "a  monstrous  wolf  in  the
neighbouring  forest,  extremely  ferocious,  and  de-


376  THE SHAH XAML1I.

structive  to  my  property.  I  have  frequently  en-
deavoured to  hunt  him  down,  but  without  success.
If  Mabrin  can  destroy  the  animal,  I  will  give  him
my  daughter."  When  these  conditions  were  com-
municated to  Mabrin,  he  considered  it  impossible
that  they  could  be  fulfilled,  and  looked  upon  the
proposal  as  an  evasion  of  the  question.  One  day,
however,  the  ferryman  having  heard  of  Mabrin's
disappointment,  told  him  that  there  was  no  reason
to  despair,  for  he  knew  a  young  man,  married  to  one
of  the  king's  daughters,  who  crossed  the  river  every
day,  and  though  only  a  pedestrian,  brought  home
regularly  an  elk-deer  on  his  back.  "  He  is  truly/'
added  he,  "  a  wonderful  youth,  and  if  you  can
by  any  means  secure  his  assistance,  I  have  no
doubt  but  that  his  activity  and  strength  will  soon
put  an  end  to  the  wolfs  depredations,  by  de-
priving him  of  life."

This  intelligence  was  received  with  great  plea-
sure by  Mabrin,  who  hastened  to  Gushtasp,  and
described  to  him  his  situation,  and  the  conditions
required.  Gushtasp  in  reply  said,  that  he  would
be  glad  to  accomplish  for  him  the  object  of  his
desires,  and  at  an  appointed  time  proceeded  to-
wards the  forest,  accompanied  by  Mabrin  and
the  ferryman.  When  the  party  arrived  at  the
borders  of  the  wilderness  which  the  wolf  fre-
quented, Gushtasp  left  his  companions  behind,  and
advanced  alone  into  the  interior,  where  he  soon


THE SHAH NAMEH.  377

found  the  dreadful  monster,  in  size  larger  than
an  elephant,  and  howling  terribly,  ready  to  spring
upon  him.  But  the  hand  and  eye  of  Gushtdsp
were  too  active  to  allow  of  his  being  surprised,
and  in  an  instant  he  shot  two  arrows  at  once  into
the  foaming  beast,  which,  irritated  by  the  deep
wound,  now  rushed  furiously  upon  him,  without,
however,  doing  him  any  serious  injury  ;  then  with
the  rapidity  of  lightning,  Gushtasp  drew  his  sharp
sword,  and  with  one  tremendous  stroke  cut  the
wolf  in  two,  deluging  the  ground  with  bubbling
blood.  Having  performed  this  prodigious  exploit,
he  called  Mabrin  and  the  ferryman  to  see  what
he  had  done,  and  they  were  amazed  at  his  extra-
ordinary intrepidity  and  muscular  power,  but  re-
quested, in  order  that  the  special  object  of  the
lover  might  be  obtained,  that  he  would  conceal  his
name,  for  a  time  at  least.  Mabrin,  satisfied  on  this
point,  then  repaired  to  the  emperor,  and  claimed
his  promised  bride,  as  the  reward  for  his  labour.
The  king  of  Rum  little  expected  this  result,  and  to
assure  himself  of  the  truth  of  what  he  had  heard,
bent  his  way  to  the  forest,  where  he  was  con-
vinced, seeing  with  astonishment  and  delight  that
the  wolf  was  really  killed.  He  had  now  no  further
pretext,  and  therefore  fulfilled  his  engagement,  by
giving  his  daughter  to  Mabrin.

It  was  now  Ahrun's  turn  to  repeat  his  solici-
tations for  the  youngest  daughter.  The  king  of  Rum


378  THE SHAH NAMEH.

had  another  evil  to  root  out,  so  that  he  was  prepared
to  propose  another  condition.  This  was  to  destroy
a  hideous  dragon  that  had  taken  possession  of  a
neighbouring  mountain.  Ahrun,  on  hearing  the
condition,  was  in  as  deep  distress  as  Mabrin  had
been,  until  he  accidentally  became  acquainted  with
the  ferryman,  who  described  to  him  the  genero-
sity and  fearless  bravery  of  Gushtasp.  He  imme-
diately applied  to  him,  and  the  youth  readily  un-
dertook the  enterprise,  saying : — "  No  doubt  the
monster's  teeth  are  long  and  sharp,  bring  me  there-
fore a  dagger,  and  fasten  round  it  a  number  of
knives."  Ahrun  did  so  accordingly,  and  Gushtasp
proceeded  to  the  mountain.  As  soon  as  the  dragon
smelt  the  approach  of  a  human  being,  flames  is-
sued from  his  nostrils,  and  he  darted  forward  to
devour  the  intruder,  but  was  driven  back  by  a
number  of  arrows,  rapidly  discharged  into  his
head  and  mouth.  Again  he  advanced,  but  Gush-
tasp dodged  round  him,  and  continued  driving  ar-
rows into  him  to  the  extent  of  forty,  which  sub-
dued his  strength,  and  made  him  writhe  in  agony.
He  then  fixed  the  dagger,  which  was  armed  at
right  angles  with  knives,  upon  his  spear,  and  going
nearer,  thrust  it  down  his  gasping  throat.

Dreadful  the  weapon,  each  two-edged  blade
Cut  deep  into  the  jaws  on  eihter  side,
And  the  fierce  monster,  thinking  to  dislodge  it,
Crushed  it  between  his  teeth  with  all  his  strength,


THE SHAH NAM EH.  379

Which  pressed  it  deeper  in  the  flesh,  when  blood
And  poison  issued  from  the  gaping  wounds ;
Then,  as  he  floundered  on  the  earth  exhausted,
Seizing  the  fragment  of  a  flinty  rock,
Gushtasp  beat  out  the  brains,  and  soon  the  beast
In  terrible  struggles  died. Two  deadly  fangs
Then  wrenched  he  from  the  jaws,  to  testify
The  wonderful  exploit  he  had  performed.

When  he  descended  from  the  mountain,  these  two
teeth  were  delivered  to  Ahrun,  and  they  were
afterwards  conveyed  to  the  king,  who  could
not  believe  his  own  eyes,  but  ascended  the  moun-
tain himself  to  ascertain  the  fact,  and  there  he
beheld  with  amazement  the  dragon  lifeless,  and
covered  with  blood.  "  And  didst  thou  thyself
kill  this  terrific  dragon  ?"  said  he.  "  Yes,"  replied
Ahrun.  "  And  wilt  thou  swear  to  God  that  this
is  thy  own  achievement  ?  It  must  be  either  the
exploit  of  a  demon,  or  of  a  certain  Kaianian,  who
resides  in  this  neighbourhood."  But  there  was
no  one  to  disprove  his  assertion,  and  therefore  the
king  could  no  longer  refuse  to  surrender  to  him
his  youngest  daughter.

And  now  between  Gushtasp,  and  Mabrin,  and
Ahrun,  the  warmest  friendship  subsisted.  Indeed
they  were  seldom  parted ;  and  the  three  sisters
remained  together  with  equal  affection.  One  day
Kitabun,  the  wife  of  Gushtasp,  in  conversation


380  THE SHAH NAMEI1.

with  some  of  her  female  acquaintance,  let  out  the
secret  that  her  husband  was  the  person  who  killed
the  wolf  and  the  dragon.  No  sooner  was  this
story  told,  than  it  spread,  and  in  the  end  reached
the  ears  of  the  queen,  who  immediately  commu-
nicated it  to  the  king,  saying  : — "  This  is  the  work
of  Gushtasp,  thy  son-in-law,  of  him  thou  hast  ba-
nished from  thy  presence — of  him  who  nobly
would  not  disclose  his  name,  before  Mabrin  and
Ahrun  had  attained  the  object  of  their  wishes."
The  king  said  in  reply  that  it  was  just  as  he  had
suspected;  and  sending  for  Gushtasp,  conferred
upon  him  great  honour,  and  appointed  him  to  the
chief  command  of  his  army.

Having  thus  possessed  himself  of  a  leader  of
such  skill  and  intrepidity,  he  thought  it  necessary
to  turn  his  attention  to  external  conquest,  and  ac-
cordingly addressed  a  letter  to  Alias,  the  ruler  of
Khuz,  in  which  he  said  : — -"  Thou  hast  hitherto  en-
joyed thy  kingdom  in  peace  and  tranquillity  ;  but
thou  must  now  resign  it  to  me,  or  prepare  for  war."
Alias  on  receiving  this  imperious  and  haughty  me-
nace collected  his  forces  together,  and  advanced
to  the  contest,  and  the  king  of  Rum  assembled  his
own  troops  with  equal  expedition,  under  the  di-
rection of  Gushtasp.  The  battle  was  fought  with
great  valour  on  both  sides,  and  blood  flowed  in
torrents.  Gushtasp  challenged  Alias  to  single
combat,  and  the  warriors  met ;  but  in  a  short  time


THE SHAH NAMEH.  381

the  enemy  was  thrown  from  his  horse,  and  dragged
by  the  young  conqueror,  in  fetters,  before  the  king.
The  troops  witnessing  the  prowess  of  Gushtasp,
quickly  fled  ;  and  the  king  commencing  a  hot  pur-
suit, soon  entered  their  city  victoriously,  subdued
the  whole  kingdom,  and  plundered  it  of  all  its
property  and  wealth.  He  also  gained  over  the
army,  and  with  this  powerful  addition  to  his  own
forces,  and  with  the  booty  he  had  secured,  returned
triumphantly  to  Rum.

In  consequence  of  this  brilliant  success,  the  king
conferred  additional  honours  on  Gushtasp,  who  now
began  to  display  the  ambition  which  he  had  long
cherished.  Aspiring  to  the  sovereignty  of  Iran,
he  spoke  to  the  Rumi  warriors  on  the  subject  of
an  invasion  of  that  country,  but  they  refused  to
enter  into  his  schemes,  conceiving  that  there  was
no  chance  of  success.  At  this  Gushtasp  took  fire,
and  declared  that  he  knew  the  power  and  resources
of  his  father  perfectly,  and  that  the  conquest
would  be  attended  with  no  difficulty.  He  then
went  to  the  king,  and  said  :  "  Thy  chiefs  are  afraid
to  fight  against  Lohurasp ;  I  will  myself  under-
take the  task  with  even  an  inconsiderable  army."
The  king  was  overjoyed,  and  kissed  his  head  and
face,  and  loaded  him  with  presents,  and  ordered
his  secretary  to  write  to  Lohurasp  in  the  following
terms :  "I  am  anxious  to  meet  thee  in  battle,  but
if  thou  art  not  disposed  to  fight,  I  will  permit


382  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

thee  to  remain  at  peace,  on  condition  of  sur-
rendering to  me  half  thy  kingdom.  Should  this
be  refused,  I  will  myself  deprive  thee  of  the  whole
sovereignty."  When  this  letter  was  conveyed  by
the  hands  of  Kabus  to  Iran,  Lohurasp,  upon  read-
ing it,  was  moved  to  laughter,  and  exclaimed,
"  What  is  all  this  ?  The  king  of  Rum  has  happened
to  obtain  possession  of  the  little  kingdom  of  Khuz,
and  he  has  become  insane  with  pride !"  He  then
asked  Kabus  by  what  means  he  accomplished  the
capture  of  Khuz,  and  how  he  managed  to  kill  Alias.
The  messenger  replied,  that  his  success  was  owing
to  a  youth  of  noble  aspect  and  invincible  courage,
who  had  first  destroyed  a  ferocious  wolf,  then  a
dragon,  and  had  afterwards  dragged  Alias  from
his  horse,  with  as  much  ease  as  if  he  had  been
a  chicken,  and  laid  him  prostrate  at  the  feet
of  the  king  of  Rum.  Lohurasp  enquired  his
name,  and  he  answered,  Gushtasp.  "  Does  he
resemble  in  feature  any  person  in  this  assembly  ?"
Kabus  looked  round  about  him,  and  pointed  to
Zarir,  from  which  Lohurasp  concluded  that  it  must
be  his  own  son,  and  sat  silent.  But  he  soon
determined  on  what  answer  to  send,  and  it  was
contained  in  the  following  words  :  "Do  not  take
me  for  an  Alias,  nor  think  that  one  hero  of  thine
is  competent  to  oppose  me.  I  have  a  hundred  equal
to  him.  Continue,  therefore,  to  pay  me  tribute,  or  I
will  lay  waste  thy  whole  country."  With  this  letter


THE SHAH NAMEH.  383

lie  dismissed  Kabus  ;  and  as  soon  as  the  messenger
had  departed,  addressed  himself  to  Zarir,  saying:
"  Thou  must  go  in  the  character  of  an  ambassador
from  me  to  the  king  of  Rum,  and  represent  to  him
the  j  ustice  and  propriety  of  preserving  peace.  After
thy  conference  with  him  repair  to  the  house  of
Gushtasp,  and  in  my  name  ask  his  forgiveness  for
what  I  have  done.  I  was  not  before  aware  of  his
merit,  and  day  and  night  I  think  of  him  with  repent-
ance and  sorrow.  Tell  him  to  pardon  his  old  fa-
ther's infirmities,  and  come  back  to  Iran,  to  his  own
country  and  home,  that  I  may  resign  to  him  my
crown  and  throne,  and  like  Kai-khosrau,  take
leave  of  the  world.  It  is  my  desire  to  deliver  my-
self up  to  prayer  and  devotion,  and  to  appoint
Gushtasp  my  successor,  for  he  appears  to  be  emi-
nently worthy  of  that  honour."  Zarir  acted  scru-
pulously, in  conformity  with  his  instructions ;  and
having  first  had  an  interview  with  the  king,  has-
tened to  the  house  of  his  brother,  by  whom  he
was  received  with  affection  and  gladness.  After
the  usual  interchange  of  congratulations  and  en-
quiry, he  stated  to  him  the  views  and  the  reso-
lutions of  his  father,  who  on  the  faith  of  his  royal
word  promised  to  appoint  him  his  successor,  and
thought  of  him  with  the  most  cordial  attachment.
Gushtasp  was  as  much  astonished  as  delighted
with  this  information,  and  his  anxiety  being  great
to  return  to  his  own  country,  he  that  very  night,


384  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

accompanied  by  his  wife  Kitabun,  and  Zarir,  set
out  for  Iran  Approaching  the  city,  he  was  met
by  an  istikbal,  or  honorary  deputation  of  warriors,
sent  by  the  king  ;  and  when  he  arrived  at  court,
Lohurasp  descended  from  his  throne  and  embraced
him  with  paternal  affection,  shedding  tears  of  con-
trition for  having  previously  treated  him  not  only
with  neglect  but  severity.  However  he  now  made
him  ample  atonement,  and  ordering  a  golden  chair
of  royalty  to  be  constructed  and  placed  close  to
his  own,  they  both  sat  together,  and  the  people
by  command  tendered  to  him  unanimously  their
respect  and  allegiance.  Lohurasp  repeatedly  said
to  him  : —

"  What  has  been  done  was  Fate's  decree,
Man  cannot  strive  with  destiny.
To  be  unfeeling  once  was  mine,
At  length  to  be  a  sovereign  thine."

Thus  spoke  the  king,  and  kissed  the  crown,
And  gave  it  to  his  valiant  son.

Soon  afterwards  he  relinquished  all  authority  in
the  empire,  assumed  the  coarse  habit  of  a  recluse,
and  retired  to  a  celebrated  place  of  pilgrimage  in
those  days  near  Balkh.  There,  in  a  solitary  cell,
he  devoted  the  remainder  of  his  life  to  prayer  and
the  worship  of  God.  The  period  of  Lohurasp's
government  lasted  one  hundred  and  twenty  years.


T1IK SHAH NAMEH.  385


GUSHTASP,  AND  THE  FAITH  OF  ZERDUSHT.

IVe  said  preceding  sovereigns  worshipped  God,

By  whom  their  crowns  were  given  to  protect

The  people  from  oppressors;  him  they  served,

Acknowledging  his  goodness — for  to  Him,

The  pure,  unchangeable,  the  Holy  One  !

They  owed  their  greatness  and  their  earthly  power.

But  after  times  produced  idolatry,

And  Pagan  faith,  and  then  His  name  was  lost

In  adoration  of  created  things.

Gushtasp  had  by  his  wife  Kitabun,  the  daughter
of  the  king  of  Rum,  two  sons  named  Isfendiyar
and  Bashutan,  who  were  remarkable  for  their
piety  and  devotion  to  the  Almighty.  Being  the
great  king,  all  the  minor  sovereigns  paid  him
tribute,  excepting  Arjasp,  the  ruler  of  Chin
and  Ma-chin,  whose  army  consisted  of  Diws,
and  Peris,  and  men ;  for  considering  him  of  su-
perior importance,  he  sent  him  yearly  the  usual
tributary  present.  In  those  days  lived  Zerdusht,
the  Guber,  who  was  highly  accomplished  in  the
knowledge  of  divine  things ;  and  having  waited
upon  Gushtasp,  the  king  became  greatly  pleased
with  his  learning  and  piety,  and  took  him  into  his
confidence.  The  philosopher  explained  to  him
the  doctrines  of  the  fire-worshippers,  and  by  his

2  c


386  THE SHAH NAMEH,

art  he  reared  a  tree  before  the  house  of  Gushtasp,
beautiful  in  its  foliage  and  branches,  and  whoever
ate  of  the  leaves  of  that  tree  became  learned  and
accomplished  in  the  mysteries  of  the  future  world,
and  those  who  ate  of  the  fruit  thereof  became
perfect  in  wisdom  and  holiness.

In  consequence  of  the  illness  of  Lohurasp,  who
was  nearly  at  the  point  of  death,  Zerdusht  went
to  Balkh  for  the  purpose  of  administering  relief
to  him,  and  he  happily  succeeded  in  restoring  him
to  health.  On  his  return  he  was  received  with
additional  favour  by  Gushtasp,  who  immediately
afterwards  became  his  disciple.  Zerdusht  then
told  him  that  he  was  the  prophet  of  God,  and
promised  to  shew  him  miracles.  He  said  he  had
been  to  heaven  and  to  hell.  He  could  send  any
one,  by  prayer,  to  heaven ;  and  whomsoever  he
was  angry  with  he  could  send  to  hell.  He  had
seen  the  seven  mansions  of  the  celestial  regions,
and  the  thrones  of  sapphires,  and  all  the  secrets
of  heaven  were  made  known  to  him  by  his  at-
tendant angel.  He  said  that  the  sacred  book,
called  Zendavesta,  descended  from  above  express-
ly for  him,  and  that  if  Gushtasp  followed  the
precepts  in  that  blessed  volume,  he  would  attain
celestial  felicity.  Gushtasp  readily  became  a  con-
vert to  his  principles,  forsaking  the  pure  adoration
of  God  for  the  religion  of  the  fire- worshippers.
The  philosopher  further  said  that  he  had  prepared


THE SHAH NAMKFI.  387

a  ladder,  by  which  he  had  ascended  into  heaven
and  had  seen  the  Almighty.  This  made  the  dis-
ciple still  more  obedient  to  Zerdusht.  One  day
he  asked  Gushtasp  why  he  condescended  to  pay
tribute  to  Arjasp ;  "  God  is  on  thy  side,"  said  he,
"  and  if  thou  desirest  an  extension  of  territory,
the  whole  country  of  Chin  may  be  easily  con-
quered." Gushtasp  felt  ashamed  at  this  reproof,
and  to  restore  his  character,  sent  a  dispatch  to
Arjasp,  in  which  he  said,  "  Former  kings  who  paid
thee  tribute  did  so  from  terror  only,  but  now  the
empire  is  mine  ;  and  it  is  my  will,  and  I  have  the
power,  to  resist  the  payment  of  it  in  future."  This
letter  gave  great  offence  to  Arjasp ;  who  at  once
suspected  that  the  fire-worshipper,  Zerdusht,  had
poisoned  his  mind,  and  seduced  him  from  his  pure
and  ancient  religion,  and  was  attemptingto  circum-
vent and  lead  him  to  his  ruin.  He  answered  him
thus:  "  It  is  well  known  that  thou  hast  now  for-
saken the  right  path,  and  involved  thyself  in
darkness.  Thou  hast  chosen  a  guide  possessed  of
the  attributes  of  Iblis,  who  with  the  art  of  a  ma-
gician has  seduced  thee  from  the  worship  of  the
true  God,  from  that  God  who  gave  thee  thy  king-
dom and  thy  grandeur.  Thy  father  feared  God,
and  became  a  holy  Dirvesh,  whilst  thou  hast  lost
thy  way  in  wickedness  and  impiety.  It  will
therefore  be  a  meritorious  action  in  me  to  vindicate
the  true  worship  and  oppose  thy  blasphemous  ca-
2  c  2


388  THE SHAH NAMEH.

reer  with  all  my  demons.  In  a  month  or  two  I
will  enter  thy  kingdom  with  fire  and  sword,  and
destroy  thy  authority  and  thee.  I  would  give  thee
good  advice ;  do  not  be  influenced  by  a  wicked
counsellor,  but  return  to  thy  former  religious
practices.  Weigh  well,  therefore,  what  1  say."
Arjasp  sent  this  letter  by  two  of  his  demons,  fa-
miliar with  sorcery;  and  when  it  was  delivered
into  the  hands  of  Gushtasp,  a  council  was  held  to
consider  its  contents,  to  which  Zerdusht  was  im-
mediately summoned.  Jamasp,  the  minister,  said
that  the  subject  required  deep  thought,  and  great
prudence  was  necessary  in  framing  a  reply ;  but
Zerdusht  observed,  that  the  only  reply  was  ob-
vious— nothing  but  war  could  be  thought  of.  At
this  moment  Isfendiyar  gallantly  offered  to  lead
the  army,  but  Zarir,  his  uncle,  objected  to  him  on
account  of  his  extreme  youth,  and  proposed  to
take  the  command  himself,  which  Gushtasp  agreed
to,  and  the  two  demon-envoys  were  dismissed  ^
The  answer  was  briefly  as  follows :

"  Thy  boast  is  that  thou  wilt  in  two  short  months

Ravage  my  country,  scathe  with  fire  and  sword

The  empire  of  Iran  ;  but  on  thyself

Heap  not  destruction  ;  pause  before  thy  pride

Hurries  thee  to  thy  ruin. I  will  open

The  countless  treasures  of  the  realm ;  my  warriors,

A  thousand  thousand,  armed  with  shining  steel,


mi. s ii A ii \. \.MKII.  389

Shall  over-run  thy  kingdom  ; I  myself

Will  crush  that  head  of  thine  beneath  my  feet."

The  result  of  these  menaces  was  the  immediate
prosecution  of  the  war,  and  no  time  was  lost  by
Arjasp  in  hastening  into  Iran.

Plunder  and  devastation  marked  his  course,

The  villages  were  all  involved  in  flames,

Palace  of  pride,  low  cot,  and  lofty  tower  ;

The  trees  dug  up,  and  root  and  branch  destroyed.

Gushtasp  then  hastened  to  repel  his  foes  ;

But  to  his  legions  they  seemed  wild  and  strange,

And  terrible  in  aspect,  and  no  light

Could  struggle  through  the  gloom  they  had  diffused,

To  hide  their  progress.

Zerdusht  said  to  Gushtasp,  "  Ask  thy  vizir,
Jamasp,  what  is  written  in  thy  horoscope,  that  he
may  relate  to  thee  the  dispensations  of  heaven."
Jamasp,  in  reply  to  the  inquiry,  took  the  king  aside
and  whispered  softly  to  him : — "  A  great  number  of
thy  brethren,  thy  relations,  and  warriors  will  be
slain  in  the  conflict,  but  in  the  end  thou  wilt  be
victorious."  Gushtasp  deeply  lamented  the  com-
ing event,  which  involved  the  destruction  of  his
kinsmen,  but  did  not  shrink  from  the  battle,  for
he  exulted  in  the  anticipation  of  obtaining  the
victory.  The  contest  was  begun  with  indescribable
eagerness  and  impetuosity.


390  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Approaching,  each  a  prayer  addrest
To  Heaven,  and  thundering  forward  prest ;
Thick  showers  of  arrows  gloomed  the  sky,
The  battle-storm  raged  long  and  high ;
Above,  black  clouds  their  darkness  spread,
Below,  the  earth  with  blood  was  red.

Ardshir,  the  son  of  Lohurasp,  and  descended  from
Kai-Kaus,  was  one  of  the  first  to  engage  ;  he  killed
many,  and  was  at  last  killed  himself.  After  him,
his  brother  Shydasp  was  killed.  Then  Bishu,
the  son  of  Jamasp,  urged  on  his  steed,  and  with
consummate  bravery  destroyed  a  great  number
of  warriors.  Zarir,  equally  bold  and  intrepid,
also  rushed  amidst  the  host,  and  whether  de-
mons or  men  opposed  him,  they  were  all  laid
lifeless  on  the  field.  He  then  rode  up  towards
Arjasp,  scattered  the  ranks,  and  penetrated  the
head-quarters,  which  put  the  king  into  great
alarm ;  for  he  exclaimed  : — "  What,  have  ye  no
courage,  no  shame  !  whoever  kills  Zarir  shall  have
a  magnificent  re  ward."  Bai-derafsh,  one  of  the  de-
mons, animated  by  this  offer,  came  forward,  and
with  remorseless  fury  attacked  Zarir.  The  onset
was  irresistible,  and  the  young  prince  was  soon
overthrown  and  bathed  in  his  own  blood.  The
news  of  the  unfortunate  catastrophe  deeply  affect-
ed Gushtasp,  who  cried,  in  great  grief:  "  Is  there
no  one  to  take  vengeance  for  this  ?"  when  Isfen-


TIIK SHAH N'AMKIl.  391

diyar  presented  himself,  kissed  the  ground  before
his  father,  and  anxiously  asked  permission  to  en-
gage the  demon.  Gushtasp  assented,  and  told
him  that  if  he  killed  the  demon  and  defeated  the
enemy,  he  would  surrender  to  him  his  crown  and
throne.

"  When  we  from  this  destructive  field  return,
Isfendiyar,  my  son,  shall  wear  the  crown,
And  he  the  glorious  leader  of  my  armies."

Saying  this,  he  dismounted  from  his  famous
black  horse,  called  Behzad,  the  gift  of  Kai-khos-
rau,  and  presented  it  to  Isfendiyar.  The  greatest
clamour  and  lamentation  had  arisen  among  the
Persian  army,  for  they  thought  that  Bai-derafsh
had  committed  such  dreadful  slaughter,  the  mo-
ment of  utter  defeat  was  at  hand,  when  Isfendiyar
galloped  forward,  mounted  on  Behzad,  and  turned
the  fortunes  of  the  day.  He  saw  the  demon  with
the  mail  of  Zarir  on  his  breast,  foaming  at  the
mouth  with  rage,  and  called  aloud  to  him,  "Stand,
thou  murderer  !"  The  stern  voice,  the  valour,  and
majesty  of  Isfendiyar,  made  the  demon  tremble,
but  he  immediately  discharged  a  blow  with  his
dagger  at  his  new  opponent,  who  however  seized
the  weapon  with  his  left  hand,  and  with  his  right
plunged  a  spear  into  the  monster's  breast,  and
drove  it  through  his  body.  Isfendiyar  then  cut
off  his  head,  remounted  his  horse,  and  that  in-


392  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

stant  was  by  the  side  of  Bishu,  the  son  of  the
vizir,  into  whose  charge  he  gave  the  severed  head
of  Bai-derafsh,  and  the  armour  of  Zarir.  Bishu  now
attired  himself  in  his  father's  mail,  and  fastening
the  head  on  his  horse,  declared  that  he  would
take  his  post  close  by  Isfendiyar,  whatever  might
betide.  Firshaid,  another  Iranian  warrior,  came  to
the  spot  at  the  same  moment,  and  expressed  the
same  resolution,  so  that  all  three,  thus  accidentally
met,  determined  to  encounter  A  rj  asp  and  capture
him.  Isfendiyar  led  the  way,  and  the  other  two
followed.  Arjasp,  seeing  that  he  was  singled  out
by  three  warriors,  and  that  the  enemy's  force  was
also  advancing  to  the  attack  in  great  numbers,
gave  up  the  struggle,  and  was  the  first  to  retreat.
His  troops  soon  threw  away  their  arms  and  begged
for  quarter,  and  many  of  them  were  taken  pri-
soners by  the  Iranians.  Gushtasp  now  approach-
ed the  dead  body  of  Zarir,  his  son,  and  lamenting
deeply  over  his  unhappy  fate,  placed  him  in  a
coffin,  and  built  over  him  a  lofty  monument,  around
which  lights  were  ever  afterwards  kept  burning,
night  and  day ;  and  he  also  taught  the  people  the
worship  of  fire,  and  was  anxious  to  establish
everywhere  the  religion  of  Zerdusht.

Jamasp  appointed  officers  to  ascertain  the  num-
ber of  killed  in  the  battle.  Of  Iranians  there
were  thirty  thousand,  among  whom  were  eight
hundred  chiefs ;  and  the  enemy's  loss  amounted


THE SHAH NAMEH.  393

to  nine  hundred  thousand,  and  also  eleven  hun-
dred and  sixty- three  chiefs.  Gushtasp  rejoiced
at  the  glorious  result,  and  ordered  the  drums  to  be
sounded  to  celebrate  the  victory,  and  he  increased
his  favour  upon  Zerdusht,  who  originated  the  war,
and  told  him  to  call  his  triumphant  son,  Isfen-
diyar,  near  him.

The  gallant  youth  the  summons  hears,
And  midst  the  royal  court  appears,

Close  by  his  father's  side,
The  mace,  cow-headed,  in  his  hand ;
His  air  and  glance  express  command,

And  military  pride.

Gushtasp  beholds  with  heart  elate,
The  conqueror  so  young,  so  great,

And  places  round  his  brows  the  crown,
The  promised  crown,  the  high  reward,
Proud  token  of  a  mighty  king's  regard,

Conferred  upon  his  own.

After  Gushtasp  had  crowned  his  son  as  his  suc-
cessor, he  told  him  that  he  must  not  now  waste
his  time  in  peace  and  private  gratification,  but
proceed  to  the  conquest  of  other  countries.  Zer-
dusht was  also  deeply  interested  in  his  further
operations,  and  recommended  him  to  subdue
kingdoms  for  the  purpose  of  diffusing  everywhere
the  new  religion,  that  the  whole  world  might  be


394  THE SHAH NAME11.

enlightened  and  edified.  Isfendiyar  instantly
complied,  and  the  first  kingdom  he  invaded  was
Rum.  The  sovereign  of  that  country  having  no
power  nor  means  to  resist  the  incursions  of  the
enemy,  readily  adopted  the  faith  of  Zerdusht,  and
accepted  the  sacred  book  named  Zendavesta,  as  his
spiritual  instructor.  Isfendiyar  afterwards  invaded
Industan  and  Arabia,  and  several  other  countries,
and  successfully  established  the  religion  of  the  fire-
worshippers  in  them  all.

Where'er  he  went  he  was  received
With  welcome,  all  the  world  believed,
And  all  with  grateful  feelings  took
The  Holy  Zendavesta-book,
Proud  their  new  worship  to  declare,
The  worship  of  Isfendiyar.

The  young  conqueror  communicated  by  letters
to  his  father  the  success  with  which  he  had  dis-
seminated the  religion  of  Zerdusht,  and  requested
to  know  what  other  enterprizes  required  his  aid.
Gushtasp  rejoiced  exceedingly,  and  commanded
a  grand  banquet  to  be  prepared.  It  happened  that
Gurzam  a  warrior,  was  particularly  befriended
by  the  king,  but  retaining  secretly  in  his  heart  a
bitter  enmity  to  Isfendiyar,  now  took  an  oppor-
tunity to  gratify  his  malice,  and  privately  told
Gushtasp  that  he  had  heard  something  highly
atrocious  in  the  disposition  of  the  prince.  Gush-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  395

tasp  was  anxious  to  know  what  it  was ;  and  he
said,  "  Isfendiyar  has  subdued  almost  every
country  in  the  world :  he  is  a  dangerous  person
at  the  head  of  an  immense  army,  and  at  this  very
moment  meditates  taking  Balkh,  and  making  even
thee  his  prisoner !

Thou  know'st  not  that  thy  son  Isfendiyar

Is  hated  by  the  army. It  is  said

Ambition  fires  his  brain,  and  to  secure

The  empire  to  himself,  his  wicked  aim

Is  to  rebel  against  his  generous  father.

This  is  the  sum  of  my  intelligence ;

But  thouVt  the  king,  I  speak  but  what  I  hear.1'

These  malicious  accusations  of  Gurzam  inci-
diously  made,  produced  great  vexation  in  the  mind
of  Gushtasp.  The  banquet  went  on,  and  for  three
days  he  drank  wine  incessantly,  without  sleep  or
rest,  because  his  sorrow  was  extreme.  On  the
fourth  day  he  said  to  his  minister :  "Go  with  this
letter  to  Isfendiyar,  and  accompany  him  hither
tome."  Jamasp,  the  minister,  went  accordingly
on  the  mission,  and  when  he  arrived,  the  prince
said  to  him,  "  I  have  dreamt  that  my  father  is
angry  with  me." — "  Then  thy  dream  is  true,"
replied  Jamasp,  "  thy  father  is  indeed  angry  with
thee." — "  What  crime,  what  fault  have  I  com-
mitted ?


396  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Is  it  because  I  have  with  ceaseless  toil
Spread  wide  the  Zendavesta,  and  converted
Whole  kingdoms  to  that  faith  ? Is  it  because
For  him  I  conquered  those  far-distant  kingdoms,
With  this  good  sword  of  mine  ?  Why  clouds  his  brow
Upon  his  son — some  demon  must  have  changed
His  temper,  once  affectionate  and  kind,
Calling  me  to  him  thus  in  anger  ! Thou
Hast  ever  been  my  friend,  my  valued  friend
Say,  must  I  go  ?  Thy  counsel  I  require."

**  The  son  does  wrong  who  disobeys  his  father,
Despising  his  command," Jamasp  replied.

"  Yet,"  said  Isfendiyar,  "  why  should  I  go?

He  is  in  wrath,  it  cannot  be  for  good."

*

"  Know^st  thou  not  that  a  father's  wrath  is  kindness  !
The  anger  of  a  father  to  his  child
Is  far  more  precious  than  the  love  and  fondness
Felt  by  that  child  for  him. 'Tis  good  to  go,
Whatever  the  result,  he  is  the  king,
And  more — he  is  thy  father  !"

Isfendiyar  immediately  consented,  and  appoint-
ed Bahman,  his  eldest  son,  to  fill  his  place  in  the
army  during  his  absence.  He  had  four  sons  :  the
name  of  the  second  was  Mihrbus ;  of  the  third,
Avir;  and  of  the  fourth,  Nushahder ;  and  these
three  he  took  along  with  him  on  his  journey.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  397

Before  he  had  arrived  at  Balkh,  Gushtasp  had
concerted  measures  to  secure  him  as  a  prisoner,
with  an  appearance  of  justice  and  impartiality.
On  his  arrival,  he  waited  on  the  king  respectfully,
and  was  thus  received  :  "  Thou  hast  become  the
great  king !  Thou  hast  conquered  many  countries,
but  why  am  I  unworthy  in  thy  sight  ?  Thy  am-
bition is  indeed  excessive."  Isfendiyar  replied  :
"  However  great  I  may  be,  I  am  still  thy  servant,
and  wholly  at  thy  command."  Upon  hearing  this,
Gushtasp  turned  towards  his  courtiers,  and  said,
"  What  ought  to  be  done  with  that  son,  who  in  the
lifetime  of  his  father  usurps  his  authority,  and
even  attempts  to  eclipse  him  in  grandeur?  What!
I  ask,  should  be  done  with  such  a  son  !"

"  Such  a  son  should  either  be
Broken  on  the  felon  tree,
Or  in  prison  bound  with  chains,
Whilst  his  wicked  life  remains,
Else  thyself,  this  kingdom,  all
Will  be  ruined  by  his  thrall !"

To  this  heavy  denunciation  Isfendiyar  replied  :
"  I  have  received  all  my  honours  from  the  king,
by  whom  I  am  appointed  to  succeed  to  the  throne;
but  at  his  pleasure  I  willingly  resign  them."
However,  concession  and  remonstrance  were
equally  fruitless,  and  he  was  straightway  ordered
to  be  confined  in  the  tower-prison  of  the  fort  si-


398  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

tuated  on  the  adjacent  mountain, and secured
with  chains.

Dreadful  the  sentence,  all  who  saw  him,  wept ;
And  sternly  they  conveyed  him  to  the  tower,
Where  to  four  columns, deeply  fixed  in  earth,
And  reaching  to  the  skies,  of  iron  formed,
They  bound  him ;  merciless  they  were  to  him
Who  had  given  splendour  to  a  mighty  throne.
Mournful  vicissitude  ! Thus  pain  and  pleasure
Successive  charm  and  tear  the  heart  of  man  ;
And  many  a  day  in  that  drear  solitude,
He  lingered,  shedding  tears  of  blood,  till  times
Of  happier  omen  dawned  upon  his  fortunes.

Having  thus  made  Isfendiyar  secure  in  the
mountain-prison,  and  being  entirely  at  ease  about
the  internal  safety  of  the  empire,  Gushtasp  was
anxious  to  pay  a  visit  to  Zal  and  Rustem  at  Sistan,
and  to  convert  them  to  the  religion  of  Zerdusht.
On  his  approach  to  Sistan  he  was  met  and  re-
spectfully welcomed  by  Rustem,  who  afterwards
in  open  assembly  received  the  Zendavesta  and
adopted  the  new  faith,  which  he  propagated
throughout  his  own  territory  ;  but,  according  to
common  report,  it  was  fear  of  Gushtasp  alone
which  induced  him  to  pursue  this  course.  Gush-
tasp remained  two  years  his  guest,  enjoying  all
kinds  of  recreation,  and  particularly  the  sports  of
the  field  and  the  forests.


THE SHAH NAM EH.  399

When  Bahman,  the  son  of  Isfendiyar,  heard  of
the  imprisonment  of  his  father,  he,  in  grief  and
alarm,  abandoned  his  trust,  dismissed  the  army,
and  proceeded  to  Balkh,  where  he  joined  his  two
brothers,  and  wept  over  the  fate  of  their  unhappy
father.

In  the  mean  time  the  news  of  the  confinement  of
Isfendiyar,  and  the  absence  of  Gushtasp  at  Sistan,
and  the  unprotected  state  of  Balkh,  stimulated  Ar-
jasp  to  a  further  effort,  and  he  dispatched  his  son
Kahram  with  a  large  army  towards  the  capital  of
the  enemy,  to  carry  into  effect  his  purpose  of  re-
venge. Lohurasp  was  still  in  religious  retirement  at
Balkh.  The  people  were  under  great  apprehen-
sion, and  being  without  a  leader,  anxiously  so-
licited the  old  king  to  command  them,  but  he  said
that  he  had  abandoned  all  earthly  concerns,  and
had  devoted  himself  to  God,  and  therefore  could  not
comply  with  their  entreaties.  But  they  would
hear  no  denial,  and,  as  it  were,  tore  him  from  his
place  of  refuge  and  prayer.  There  were  assem-
bled only  about  one  thousand  horsemen,  and  with
these  he  advanced  to  battle  ;  but  what  were  they
compared  to  the  hundred  thousand  whom  they  met,
and  by  whom  they  were  soon  surrounded.  Their
bravery  was  useless.  They  were  at  once  over-
powered and  defeated,  and  Lohurasp  himself  was
unfortunately  among  the  slain.

Upon  the  achievement  of  this  victory,  Kahram


400  THE SHAH NAM EH.

entered  Balkh  in  triumph,  made  the  people  pri-
soners, and  destroyed  all  the  places  of  worship
belonging  to  the  Gubers.  He  also  killed  the
keeper  of  the  altar,  and  burnt  the  Zendavesta,
which  contained  the  formulary  of  their  doctrines
and  belief.

One  of  the  women  of  Gushtasp's  household
happened  to  elude  the  grasp  of  the  invader,  and
hastened  to  Sistan  to  inform  the  king  of  the  disaster
that  had  occurred.  "  Thy  father  is  killed,  the
city  is  taken,  and  thy  women  and  daughters  in
the  power  of  the  conqueror."  Gushtasp  received
the  news  with  consternation,  and  prepared  with
the  utmost  expedition  for  his  departure.  He  in-
vited -Rustem  to  accompany  him,  but  the  cham-
pion excused  himself  at  the  time,  and  afterwards
declined  altogether  on  the  plea  of  sickness.  Be-
fore he  had  yet  arrived  at  Balkh,  Kahram  hearing
of  his  approach,  went  out  to  meet  him  with  his
whole  army,  and  was  joined  on  the  same  day  by
Arjasp  and  his  demon-legions.

Great  was  the  uproar,  loud  the  brazen  drums
And  trumpets  rung,  the  earth  shook,  and  seemed  rent
By  that  tremendous  conflict,  javelins  flew
Like  hail  on  every  side,  and  the  warm  blood
Streamed  from  the  wounded  and  the  dying  men.
The  claim  of  kindred  did  not  check  the  arm
Lifted  in  battle— mercy  there  was  none,


TIIK SHAH NA.MKH.  401

For  all  resigned  themselves  to  chance  or  fate,
Or  what  the  ruling  Heavens  might  decree.

At  last  the  battle  terminated  in  the  defeat  of
Gushtasp,  who  was  pursued  till  he  was  obliged  to
take  refuge  in  a  mountain -fort.  He  again  consulted
Jamasp  to  know  what  the  stars  fore  told,  and  Jamasp
replied  that  he  would  recover  from  the  defeat  through
the  exertions  of  Isfendiyar  alone.  Pleased  with  this
interpretation,  he  on  that  very  day  sent  Jamasp  to
the  prison  with a  letter  to  Isfendiyar,  in  which
he  hoped  to  be  pardoned  for  the  cruelty  he  had
been  guilty  of  towards  him, in  consequence, he
said,  of  being  deceived  by  the  arts  and  treachery
of  those  who  were  only  anxious  to  effect  his  ruin.
He  declared  too  that  he  would  put  those  enemies  to
death  in  his  presence,  and  replace  the  royal  crown
upon  his  head. At  the  same  time  he  confined  in
chains  Gurzam, the  wretch who first  practised
upon  his  feelings.  Jamasp  rode  immediately  to  the
prison,  and  delivering  the  letter,  urged  the  prince
to  comply  with  his  father's  entreaties,  but  Isfen-
diyar was  incredulous and  not so easily  to  be
moved,

"  Has  he  not  at  heart  disdained  me  ?
Has  he  not  in  prison  chained  me  ?
Am  I  not  his  son,  that  he
Treats  me  ignominiously  ?
2  D


402  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Why  should  GurzanVs  scorn  and  hate

Rouse  a  loving  father's  wrath  ?
Why  should  he,  the  foul  ingrate,

Cast  destruction  in  my  path  ?"

Jamasp,  however,  persevered  in  his  anxious  so-
licitations, describing  to  him  how  many  of  his
brethren  and  kindred  had  fallen,  and  also  the  pe-
rilous situation  of  his  own  father  if  he  refused  his
assistance.  By  a  thousand  various  efforts  he  at
length  effected  his  purpose,  and  the  blacksmith
was  called  to  take  off  his  chains  ;  but  in  removing
them,  the  anguish  of  the  wounds  they  had  in-
flicted was  so  great  that  Isfendiyar  fainted  away.
Upon  his  recovery  he  was  escorted  to  the  presence
of  his  father,  who  received  him  with  open  arms,
and  the  strongest  expressions  of  delight.  He
begged  to  be  forgiven  for  his  unnatural  conduct  to
him,  again  resigned  to  him  the  throne  of  the  em-
pire, and  appointed  him  to  the  command  of  the
imperial  armies.  He  then  directed  Gurzam,  upon
whose  malicious  counsel  he  had  acted,  to  be
brought  before  him,  and  the  wicked  minister  was
punished  with  death  on  the  spot,  and  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  injured  prince.

Wretch  !  more  relentless  even  than  wolf  or  pard,
Thou  hast  at  length  received  thy  just  reward !

When  Arjasp  heard  that  Isfendiyar  had  been


THE SHAH NAMKH.  403

reconciled  to  his  father,  and  was  approaching  at
the  head  of  an  immense  army,  he  was  affected
with  the  deepest  concern,  and  forthwith  sent  his
son  Kahram  to  endeavour  to  resist  the  progress  of
the  enemy.  At  the  same  time  Kurugsar,  a  gladiator
of  the  demon  race,  requested  that  he  might  be
allowed  to  oppose  Isfendiyar  ;  and  permission  be-
ing granted,  he  was  the  very  first  on  the  field,
where  instantly  wielding  his  bow,  he  shot  an  ar-
row at  Isfendiyar,  which  pierced  through  the
mail,  but  fortunately  for  him  did  no  serious  harm.
The  prince  drew  his  sword  with  the  intention  of
attacking  him,  but  seeing  him  furious  with  rage,
and  being  doubtful  of  the  issue,  thought  it  more
prudent  and  safe  to  try  his  success  with  the  noose.
Accordingly  he  took  the  kamund  from  his  saddle-
strap,  and  dexterously  flung  it  round  the  neck  of
his  arrogant  foe,  who  was  pulled  headlong  from
his  horse  ;  and,  as  soon  as  his  arms  were  bound
behind  his  back,  dragged  a  prisoner  in  front  of  the
Persian  ranks.  Isfendiyar  then  returned  to  the
battle,  attacked  a  body  of  the  enemy's  auxiliaries,
killed  a  hundred  and  sixty  of  their  warriors,  and
made  the  division  of  which  Kahram  was  the  leader
fly  in  all  directions.  His  next  feat  was  to  attack
another  force,  which  had  confederated  against  him.

With  slackened  rein  he  galloped  oVr  the  field  ;
Blood  gushed  from  every  stroke  of  his  sharp  sword,
2  D 2


404  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

And  reddened  all  the  plain ;  a  hundred  warrriors
Eighty  and  five,  in  treasure  rich  and  mail,
Sunk  underneath  him,  such  his  mighty  power.

His  remaining  object  was  to  assail  the  centre,
where  Arjasp  himself  was  stationed ;  and  thither
he  rapidly  hastened. Arjasp,  angry  and  alarmed
at  this  success,  cried  out, "  What !  is  one  man  al-
lowed to  scathe  all  my  ranks,  cannot  my  whole
army  put  an  end  to  his  dreadful  career  ?" The
soldiers  replied,  "  No !  he  has  a  body  of  brass,  and
the  vigour  of  an  elephant :  our  swords  make  no  im-
pression upon  him, whilst  with  his  sword  he  can
cut  the  body  of  a  warrior,  cased  in  mail,  in  two,
with  the  greatest  ease. Against  such  a  foe,  what
can  we  do  ?" Isfendiyar  rushed  on ;  and  after  an
overwhelming  attack, Arjasp  was  compelled to
quit  his  ground  and  effect  his  escape. The  Iranian
troops  were  then  ordered  to  pursue  the  fugitives,
and  in  revenge  for  the  death  of  Lohurasp, not  to
leave  a  man  alive. The  carnage  was  in  conse-
quence terrible,  and  the  remaining  Turanians  were
in  such  despair  that  they  flung  themselves  from
their  exhausted  horses,  and  placing  straw  in  their
mouths  to  shew  the  extremity  of  their  misfortune,
called  aloud  for  quarter. Isfendiyar  was  moved
at  last  to  compassion,  and  put  an  end  to  the  fight;
and  when  he  came  before  Gushtasp,  the  mail  on
his  body,  from  the  number  of  arrows  sticking  in


THE SI1A1I NAMEH.  405

it,  looked  like  a  field  of  reeds ;  about  a  thousand
arrows  were  taken  out  of  its  folds.  Gushtasp
kissed  his  head  and  face,  and  blessed  him,  and
prepared  a  grand  banquet,  and  the  city  of  Balkh
resounded  with  rejoicings  on  account  of  the  great
victory.

Many  days  had  not  elapsed  before  a  further  en-
terprize  was  to  be  undertaken.  The  sisters  of
Isfendiyar  were  still  in  confinement,  and  required
to  be  released.  The  prince  readily  complied  with
the  wishes  of  Gushtasp,  who  now  repeated  to  him
his  desire  to  relinquish  the  cares  of  sovereignty,
and  place  the  reins  of  government  in  his  hands,
that  he  might  devote  himself  entirely  to  the  service
of  God.

"  To  thee  I  yield  the  crown  and  throne,
Fit  to  be  held  by  thee  alone  ;
From  worldly  care  and  trouble  free,
A  hermit's  cell  is  enough  for  me."

But  Isfendiyar  replied,  that  he  had  no  desire
to  be  possessed  of  the  power :  he  rather  wished
for  the  prosperity  of  the  king,  and  no  change.

"  O,  may  thy  life  be  long  and  blessed,
And  ever  by  the  good  caressed  ;
For  'tis  my  duty  still  to  be
Devoted  faithfully  to  thee  !


406  THE SHAH NAM£H.

I  want  no  throne,  nor  diadem  ;
My  soul  has  no  delight  in  them,
I  only  seek  to  give  thee  joy,
And  gloriously  my  sword  employ.
I  thirst  for  vengeance  on  Arjasp  :
To  crush  him  in  my  iron  grasp,
That  from  his  thrall  I  may  restore

My  sisters  to  their  home  again,
Who  now  their  heavy  fate  deplore,

And  toiling  drag  a  slavish  chain.1'
"  Then  go  !"  the  smiling  monarch  said,
Invoking  blessings  on  his  head,
"  And  may  kind  Heaven  thy  refuge  be,
And  lead  thee  on  to  victory.1''

Isfendiyar  now  told  his  father  that  his  prisoner
Kurugsar  was  continually  requesting  him  to  repre-
sent his  condition  in  the  royal  ear,  saying,  "  Of
what  use  will  it  be  to  put  me  to  death  ?  No  be-
nefit can  arise  from  such  a  punishment.  Spare
my  life,  and  you  will  see  how  largely  I  am  able  to
contribute  to  your  assistance."  Gushtasp  ex-
pressed his  willingness  to  be  merciful,  but  de-
manded a  guarantee  on  oath  from  the  petitioner
that  he  would  heart  and  soul  be  true  and  faithful  to
his  benefactor.  The  oath  was  sworn,  after  which
his  bonds  were  taken  from  his  hands  and  feet,  and
he  was  set  at  liberty.  The  king  then  called  him,
and  pressed  him  with  goblets  of  wine,  which  made


THE SHAH NAMEH.  407

him  merry.  "  I  have  pardoned  thee,"  said  Gush-
tasp,  "  at  the  special  entreaty  of  Isfendiyar-
be  grateful  to  him,  and  be  attentive  to  his  com-
mands." After  that,  Isfendiyar  took  and  con-
veyed him  to  his  own  house,  that  he  might  have
an  opportunity  of  experiencing  and  proving  the
promised  fidelity  of  his  new  ally.


THE  HEFT-KHAN  OF  ISFENDIYAR.

Rustem  had  seven  great  labours,  wonderous  power
Nerved  his  strong  arm  in  danger's  needful  hour ;
And  now  Firdausi's  legend-strains  declare
The  seven  great  labours  of  Isfendiyar.

The  prince,  who  had  determined  to  undertake
the  new  expedition,  and  appeared  confident  of
success,  now  addressed  himself  to  Kurugsar,  and
said,  "  If  I  conquer  the  kingdom  of  Arjasp,  and
restore  my  .sisters  to  liberty,  thou  shalt  have  for
thyself  any  principality  thou  mayst  choose  within
the  boundaries  of  Iran  and  Turan,  and  thy  name
shall  be  exalted  ;  but  beware  of  treachery  or  fraud,
for  falsehood  shall  certainly  be  punished  with
death."  To  this  Kurugsar  replied,  "  I  have  already
sworn  a  solemn  oath  to  the  king,  and  at  thy  inter-
cession he  has  spared  my  life — why  then  should
I  depart  from  the  truth,  and  betray  my  bene-
factor?"


408  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

"  Then  tell  me  the  road  to  the  brazen  fortress,
and  how  far  it  is  distant  from  this  place  ?"  said
Isfendiyar.

•"  There  are  three  different  routes,"  replied
Kurugsar.  "  One  will  occupy  three  months;  it
leads  through  a  beautiful  country,  adorned  with
cities,  and  gardens,  and  pastures,  and  is  pleasant
to  the  traveller.  The  second  is  less  attractive,  the
prospects  less  agreeable,  and  will  only  employ  two
months  ;  the  third,  however,  may  be  accomplished
in  seven  days,  and  is  thence  called  the  Heft-khan,
or  seven  stages  ;  but  at  every  stage  some  monster,
or  terrible  difficulty,  must  be  overcome.  No  mo-
narch, even  supported  by  a  large  army,  has  ever  yet
ventured  to  proceed  by  this  route  ;  and  if  It  is  ever
attempted,  the  whole  party  will  be  assuredly  lost.

Nor  strength,  nor  juggling,  nor  the  sorceror's  art
Can  help  him  safely  through  that  awful  path,
Beset  with  wolves  and  dragons,  wild  and  fierce,
From  whom  the  fleetest  have  no  power  to  fly.
There  an  enchantress,  doubly  armed  with  spells,
The  most  accomplished  of  that  magic  brood.
Spreads  wide  her  snares  to  charm  and  to  destroy,
And  ills  of  every  shape,  and  horrid  aspect,
Cross  the  tired  traveller  at  every  step."

At  this  description  of  the  terrors  of  the  Heft-
khan,  Isfendiyar  became  thoughtful  for  a  while,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  409

and  then,  resigning  himself  to  the  providence  of
God,  resolved  to  take  the  shortest  route.  "  No
man  can  die  before  his  time,"  said  he  ;  "  Heaven
is  my  protector,  and  I  will  fearlessly  encounter
every  difficulty  on  the  road."  "  It  is  full  of  perils,
replied  Kurugsar,  and  endeavoured  to  dissuade  him
from  the  enterprize.  "  But  with  the  blessing  of
God,"  rejoined  Isfendiyar,  "  it  will  be  easy."
The  prince  then  ordered  a  sumptuous  banquet  to
be  served,  at  which  he  gave  Kurugsar  abundant
draughts  of  wine,  and  even  in  a  state  of  intoxi-
cation, the  demon-guide  still  warned  him  against
his  proposed  journey.  "  Go  by  the  route  which
takes  two  months,"  said  he,  "  for  that  will  be
convenient  and  safe  ;"  but  Isfendiyar  replied  :—
"  I  neither  fear  the  difficulties  of  the  route,  nor
the  perils  thou  hast  described."

And  though  destruction  spoke  in  every  word,

Enough  to  terrify  the  stoutest  heart.

Still  he  adhered  to  what  he  first  resolved.

"  Thou  wilt  attend  me,"  said  the  dauntless  prince ;

And  thus  Kurugsar,  without  a  pause,  replied  :

"  Undoubtedly,  if  by  the  two  months'  way,

And  do  thee  ample  service  ;  but  if  this

Heft-khan  be  thy  election  ;  if  thy  choice

Be  fixed  on  that  which  leads  to  certain  death,

My  presence  must  be  useless. Can  /  go

Where  bird  has  never  dared  to  wing  its  flight  ?"


410  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Isfendiyar,  upon  hearing  these  words,  began  to
suspect  the  fidelity  of  Kurugsar,  and  thought  it  safe
to  bind  hirn  in  chains.  The  next  day  as  he  was
going  to  take  leave  of  his  father,  Kurugsar  called
out  to  him,  and  said:  "  After  my  promises  of
allegiance,  and  my  solemn  oath,  why  am  I  thus
kept  in  chains  ?"  "  Not  out  of  anger  assuredly ;
but  out  of  compassion  and  kindness,  in  order  that
I  may  take  thee  along  with  me  on  the  enterprise
of  the  Heft-khan  ;  for  wert  thou  not  bound,  thy
faint  heart  might  induce  thee  to  run  away.

Safe  thou  art  when  bound  in  chains,

Fettered  foot  can  never  fly.
Whilst  thy  body  here  remains,

We  may  on  thy  faith  rely.
Terror  will  in  vain  assail  thee  ;
For  these  bonds  shall  never  fail  thee.
Guarded  by  a  potent  charm,
They  will  keep  thee  free  from  harm."

Isfendiyar  having  received  the  parting  bene-
diction of  Gushtasp,  was  supplied  with  a  force
consisting  of  twelve  thousand  chosen  horsemen,
and  abundance  of  treasure,  to  enable  him  to  pro-
ceed on  his  enterprize,  and  conquer  the  kingdom
of  Arjasp.

FIRST  STAGE. — Isfendiyar  placed  Kurugsar
in  bonds  among  his  retinue,  and  took  with  him


THE SHAH XAMEII.  411

his  brother  Bashutan.  But  the  demon -guide
complained  that  he  was  unable  to  walk,  and
in  consequence  he  was  mounted  on  a  horse,  still
bound,  and  the  bridle  given  into  the  hands  of
one  of  the  warriors.  In  this  manner  they  pro-
ceeded, directed  from  time  to  time  by  Kurugsar,
till  they  arrived  at  the  uttermost  limits  of  the
kingdom,  and  entered  a  desert  wilderness.  Is-
fendiyar now  asked  what  they  would  meet  with,
and  the  guide  answered,  "  Two  monstrous  wolves
are  in  this  quarter,  as  large  as  elephants,  and
whose  teeth  are  of  immense  length."  The  prince
told  his  people,  that  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  wolves,
they  must  at  once  attack  them  with  arrows.  The
day  passed  away,  and  in  the  evening  they  came
to  a  forest  and  a  murmuring  stream,  when  sud-
denly the  two  enormous  wolves  appeared,  and
rushed  towards  the  legions  of  Isfendiyar.  The
people  seeing  them  advance,  poured  upon  them  a
shower  of  arrows.  Several  men,  however,  were
wounded,  but  they  were  themselves  much  exhausted
by  the  arrows  which  had  penetrated  their  bodies.  At
this  moment  Bashutan  attacked  one  of  them,  and
Isfendiyar  the  other;  and  so  vigorous  was  their
charge,  that  both  the  monsters  were  soon  laid
lifeless  in  the  dust.  After  this  signal  overthrow,
Isfendiyar  turned  to  Kurugsar,  and  exclaimed  :
"  Thus,  through  the  favour  of  Heaven,  the  first
obstacle  has  been  easily  extinguished !"  The


412  THE SHAH NAMEH.

\

guide  regarded  him  with  amazement,  and  said  :
"  I  am  indeed  astonished  at  the  intrepidity  and
valour  that  has  been  displayed."

Seeing  the  bravery  of  Isfendiyar,
Amazement  filled  the  soul  of  Kurugsar,

The  warriors  and  the  party  now  dismounted,
and  regaled  themselves  with  feasting  and  wine.
They  then  reposed  till  the  following  morning.

SECOND  STAGE. — Proceeding  on  the  second
journey,  Isfendiyar  inquired  what  might  now  be
expected  to  oppose  his  progress,  and  Kurugsar
replied :  "  This  stage  is  infested  by  lions.''
"  Then,"  rejoined  Isfendiyar,  "  thou  shalt  see
with  what  facility  I  can  destroy  them."  At
about  the  close  of  the  day  they  met  with  a
lion  and  a  lioness.  Bashutan  said :  "  Take  one
and  I  will  engage  the  other."  But  Isfendiyar
observed,  that  the  animals  seemed  very  wild
and  ferocious,  and  he  preferred  attacking  them
both  himself,  that  his  brother  might  not  be  ex-
posed to  any  harm.  He  first  sallied  forth  against
the  lion,  and  with  one  mighty  stroke  put  an  end
to  his  life.  He  then  approached  the  lioness,  which
pounced  upon  him  with  great  fury,  but  was  soon
compelled  to  desist,  and  the  prince  rapidly  wielding
his  sword,  in  a  moment  cut  off  her  head.  Hav-
ing thus  successfully  accomplished  the  second
day's  task,  he  alighted  from  his  horse,  and  refresh-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  413

ments  being  spread  out,  the  warriors  and  the  troops
enjoyed  themselves  with  great  satisfaction,  exhi-
lirated  by  plenteous  draughts  of  ruby  wine.  Again
Isfendiyar  addressed  Kurugsar,  and  said  :  "  Thou
seest  with  what  facility  all  opposition  is  removed,
when  I  am  assisted  by  the  favour  of  Heaven!"
"  But  there  are  other  and  more  terrible  difficulties
to  surmount,  and  amazing  as  thy  achievements
certainly  have  been,  thou  wilt  have  still  greater
exertions  to  make  before  thy  enterprise  is  com-
plete." "  What  is  the  next  evil  I  have  to  subdue  ?"
"  An  enormous  dragon,

With  power  to  fascinate,  and  from  the  deep
To  lure  the  finny  tribe,  his  daily  food.
Fire  sparkles  round  him  ;  his  stupendous  bulk
Looks  like  a  mountain. When  incensed,  his  roar
Makes  the  surrounding  country  shake  with  fear.
White  poison-foam  drops  from  his  hideous  jaws,
Which  yawning  wide,  display  a  dismal  gulph,
The  grave  of  many  a  hapless  being,  lost
Wandering  amidst  that  trackless  wilderness."

Kurugsar  described  or  magnified  the  ferocity
of  the  animal  in  such  a  way,  that  Isfendiyar
thought  it  necessary  to  be  cautious,  and  with  that
view  he  ordered  a  curious  apparatus  to  be  con-
structed on  wheels,  something  like  a  carriage,
to  which  he  fastened  a  large  quantity  of  pointed


414  THE SHAH NAMEH.

instruments,  and  harnessed  horses  to  it  to  drag
it  on  the  road.  He  then  tried  its  motion,  and
found  it  admirably  calculated  for  his  purpose.
The  people  were  astonished  at  the  ingenuity  of
the  invention,  and  lauded  him  to  the  skies.

THIRD  STAGE.  —  Away  went  the  prince,
and  having  travelled  a  considerable  distance,
Kurugsar  suddenly  exclaimed  :  "I  now  begin  to
smell  the  stench  of  the  dragon."  Hearing  this,
Isfendiyar  dismounted,  ascended  the  machine,
and  shutting  the  door  fast,  sat  down,  and  ordered
the  horses  to  be  driven  on.  Bashutan  and  all
the  warriors  upon  witnessing  this  extraordinary
act,  began  to  weep  and  lament,  thinking  that  he
was  hurrying  himself  to  certain  destruction,  and
begged  that  for  his  own  sake,  as  well  as  their's,
he  would  come  out  of  the  machine.  But  he  re-
plied: "  Peace,  peace!  what  know  ye  of  the
matter;"  and  as  the  warlike  apparatus  was  so
excellently  contrived,  that  from  the  exterior  he
could  direct  the  movements  of  the  horses  himself,
he  drove  on  with  increased  velocity,  till  he  arrived
in  the  vicinity  of  the  monster.

The  dragon  from  a  distance  heard

The  rumbling  of  the  wain,
And  snuffing  every  breeze  that  stirred

Across  the  neighbouring  plain,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  415

Smelt  something  human  in  his  power,

A  welcome  scent  to  him ;
For  he  was  eager  to  devour

Hot  reeking  blood,  or  limb.

And  darkness  now  is  spread  around,

No  pathway  can  be  traced ;
The  fiery  horses  plunge  and  bound

Amid  the  dismal  waste.

And  now  the  dragon  stretches  far

His  cavern  throat,  and  soon
Licks  in  the  horses  and  the  car,
And  tries  to  gulp  them  down.

But  sword  and  javelin,  sharp  and  keen,

Wound  deep  each  sinewy  jaw ;
Midway,  remains  the  huge  machine,

And  choaks  the  monster's  maw.

In  agony  he  breathes,  a  dire

Convulsion  fires  his  blood,
And  struggling,  ready  to  expire,

Ejects  a  poison-flood!

And  then  disgorges  wain  and  steeds,

And  swords  and  javelins  bright ;
Then,  as  the  dreadful  dragon  bleeds,

Up  starts  the  warrior-knight,


41G  THE SHAH NAMEH.

And  from  his  place  of  ambush  leaps,

And,  brandishing  his  blade,
The  weapon  in  the  brain  he  steeps,

And  splits  the  monster's  head.

But  the  foul  venom  issuing  thence,

Is  so  overpowering  found,
Isfendiyar,  deprived  of  sense,

Falls  staggering  to  the  ground !"

Upon  seeing  this  result,  and  his  brother  in  so
deplorable  a  situation,  Bashutan  and  the  troops
also  were  in  great  alarm,  apprehending  the  most
fatal  consequences.  They  sprinkled  rose-water  over
his  face,  and  administered  other  remedies,  so  that
after  some  time  he  recovered  ;  then  he  bathed,
purifying  himself  from  the  filth  of  the  monster>
and  poured  out  prayers  of  thankfulness  to  the
merciful  Creator  for  the  protection  and  victory  he
had  given  him.  But  it  was  matter  of  great  grief
to  Kurugsar  that  Isfendiyar  had  succeeded  in  his
exploit,  because  under  present  circumstances,  he
would  have  to  follow  him  in  the  remaining  ardu-
ous enterprizes  ;  whereas,  if  the  prince  had  been
slain,  his  obligations  would  have  ceased  for  ever.

"  What  may  be  expected  to-morrow?"  in-
quired Isfendiyar.  "  To-morrow,"  replied  the
demon-guide,  "  thou  wilt  meet  with  an  enchan-
tress, who  can  convert  the  stormy  sea  into  dry


THE SHAH NAME1I.  417

land,  and  the  dry  land  again  into  the  ocean.  She
is  attended  by  a  gigantic  ghoul,  or  apparition."
"  Then  thou  shalt  see  how  easily  this  enchantress
and  her  mysterious  attendant  can  be  vanquished."
FOURTH  STAGE. — On  the  fourth  day  Isfen-
diyar  and  his  companions  proceeded  on  the
destined  journey,  and  coming  to  a  pleasant
meadow,  watered  by  a  transparent  rivulet,  the
party  alighted,  and  they  all  refreshed  them-
selves heartily  with  various  kinds  of  food  and
wine.  In  a  short  space  of  time  the  enchantress
appeared,  most  beautiful  in  feature  and  elegant
in  attire,  and  approaching  our  hero  with  a  sad  but
fascinating  expression  of  countenance,  said  to  him
(the  ghoul,  her  pretended  paramour,  being  at  a
little  distance)  :

"  I  am  a  poor  unhappy  thing,
The  daughter  of  a  distant  king.
This  monster  with  deceit  and  fraud,
By  a  fond  parent's  power  unawed,
Seduced  me  from  my  royal  home,
Through  wood  and  desert  wild  to  roam ;
And  surely  Heaven  has  brought  thee  now
To  cheer  my  heart,  and  smooth  my  brow,
And  free  me  from  his  loathed  embrace,
And  bear  me  to  a  fitter  place,
Where,  in  thy  circling  arms  more  softly  prest,
I  may  at  last  be  truly  loved,  and  blest."

2  E


418  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Isfendiyar  immediately  called  her  to  him,  and
requested  her  to  sit  down.  The  enchantress
readily  complied,  anticipating  a  successful  issue
to  her  artful  stratagems  ;  but  the  intended  victim
of  her  sorcery  was  too  cunning  to  be  imposed
upon.  He  soon  perceived  what  she  was,  and
forthwith  cast  his  kamund  over  her,  and  in
spite  of  all  her  entreaties,  bound  her  too  fast
to  escape.  In  this  extremity,  she  successively
assumed  the  shape  of  a  cat,  a  wolf,  and  a  de-
crepid  old  man  :  and  so  perfect  were  her  trans-
formations, that  any  other  person  would  have  been
deceived,  but  Isfendiyar  detected  her  in  every
variety  of  appearance ;  and,  vexed  by  her  con-
tinual attempts  to  cheat  him,  at  last  took  out  his
sword  and  cut  her  in  pieces.  As  soon  as  this
was  done,  a  thick  dark  cloud  of  dust  and  vapour
arose,  and  when  it  subsided,  a  black  apparition  of
a  demon  burst  upon  his  sight,  with  flames  issuing
from  its  mouth.  Determined  to  destroy  this  fresh
antagonist,  he  rushed  forward,  sword  in  hand,
and  though  the  flames,  in  the  attack,  burnt  his
cloth-armour  and  dress,  he  succeeded  in  cutting
off  the  threatening  monster's  head.  "  Now,"  said
he  to  Kurugsar,  "  thou  hast  seen  that  with  the
favour  of  Heaven,  both  enchantress  and  ghoul
are  exterminated,  as  well  as  the  wolves,  the  lions,
and  the  dragon."  "  Very  well,"  replied  Kurugsar,
"  thou  hast  achieved  this  prodigious  labour,  but
to-morrow  will  be  a  heavy  day,  and  thou  canst


THE SHAH NAMEH.  -119

hardly  escape  with  life.  To-morrow  thou  wilt  be
opposed  by  the  Simurgh,  whose  nest  is  situated
upon  a  lofty  mountain.  She  has  two  young  ones,
each  the  size  of  an  elephant,  which  she  conveys  in
her  beak  and  claws  from  place  to  place."  "  Be
under  no  alarm/'  said  Isfendiyar,  "  God  will
make  the  labour  easy."

FIFTH  STAGE. — On  the  fifth  day,  Isfen-
diyar resumed  his  journey,  travelling  with  his
little  army  over  desert,  plain,  mountain,  and  wil-
derness, until  he  reached  the  neighbourhood  of
the  Simurgh.  He  then  adopted  the  same  stra-
tagem which  he  had  employed  before,  and  the
machine  supplied  with  swords  and  spears,  and
drawn  by  horses,  was  soon  in  readiness  for  the
new  adventure.  The  Simurgh,  seeing  with  sur-
prise an  immense , vehicle,  drawn  by  two  horses,
approach  at  a  furious  rate,  and  followed  by  a  large
company  of  horsemen,  descended  from  the  moun-
tain, and  endeavoured  to  take  up  the  whole  ap-
paratus in  her  claws  to  carry  it  away  to  her  own
nest ;  but  her  claws  were  lacerated  by  the  sharp
weapons,  and  she  was  then  obliged  to  try  her  beak.
Both  beak  and  claws  were  injured  in  the  effort,  and
the  animal  became  extremely  weakened  by  the  loss
of  blood.  Isfendiyar  seizing  the  happy  moment,
sprang  out  of  the  carriage,  and  with  his  trenchant
sword  divided  the  Simurgh  in  two  parts ;  and  the
young  ones,  after  witnessing  the  death  of  their
parent,  precipitately  fled  from  the  fatal  scene.
2  E  2


420  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

When  Bashutan,  with  the  army,  came  to  the  spot,
they  were  amazed  at  the  prodigious  size  of  the  Si-
murgh, and  the valour  by  which it had been
subdued.  Kurugsar  turned  pale  with  astonishment
and  sorrow. "  What  will be  our  next  adven-
ture ?" said  Isfendiyar to him. "  To-morrow
more pressing ills will surround thee. Heavy
snow  will  fall,  and  there  will  be  a  violent  tempest
of  wind,  and  it  will  be  wonderful  if  even  one  man
of  thy  legions  remains  alive. That  will  not  be
like  fighting  against  lions,  a  dragon, or  the  Sf-
murgh, but against the elements, against  the
Almighty,  which  never  can  be  successful. Thou
hadst  better,  therefore,  return  unhurt."  The  people
on  hearing  this  warning  were  alarmed,  and  pro-
posed to  go  back ; "for  if  the  advice  of  Kurugsar
is  not  taken,  we  shall  all  perish  like  the  com-
panions  of  Kai-Khosrau, and lie  buried  under
drifts  of  snow.

"  Let  us  return  then,  whilst  we  may ;
Why  should  we  throw  our  lives  away  ?"

But  Isfendiyar  replied  that  he  had  already
overcome  five  of  the  perils  of  the  road,  and  had
no  fear  about  the  remaining  two.  The  people,  how-
ever, were  still  discontented,  and  still  murnrured
aloud;  upon  which  the  prince  said,  "  Return
then,  and  I  will  go  alone.

"  I  never  can  require  the  aid
Of  men  so  easily  dismayed.1"1


TIIK SHAH NAMElf.  421

Finding  their  leader  immoveable,  the  people
now  changed  their  tone,  and  expressed  their  de-
votion to  his  cause;  declaring  that  whilst  life
remained,  they  would  never  forsake  him,  no  never.

SIXTH  STAGE.  —  On  the  following  morning,
the  sixth,  Isfendiyar  continued  his  labours,  and
hurried  on  with  great  speed.  Towards  even-
ing he  arrived  on  the  skirts  of  a  mountain,  where
there  was  a  running  stream,  and  upon  that  spot
he  pitched  his  tents.

Presently  from  the  mountain  there  rushed  down

A  furious  storm  of  wind,  then  heavy  showers

Of  snow  fell,  covering  all  the  earth  with  whiteness,

And  making  desolate  the  prospect  round.

Keen  blew  the  blast,  and  pinching  was  the  cold ;

And  to  escape  the  elemental  wrath,

Leader  and  soldier,  in  the  caverned  rock,

Scooped  out  by  mouldering  time,  took  shelter,  there

Continuing  three  long  days. Three  lingering  days

Still  fell  the  snow,  and  still  the  tempest  raged,

And  man  and  beast  grew  faint  for  want  of  food.

Isfendiyar  and  his  warriors,  with  heads  ex-
posed, now  prostrated  themselves  in  solemn  prayer
to  the  Almighty,  and  implored  his  favour  and
protection  from  the  calamity  which  had  befallen
them.  Happily  their  prayers  were  heard,  Heaven
was  compassionate,  and  in  a  short  space  the  snow
and  the  mighty  wind  entirely  ceased.  By  this
fortunate  interference  of  Providence,  the  army  was


422  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

enabled  to  quit  the  caves  of  the  mountain  ;  and
then  Isfendiyar  again  addressed  Kurugsar  trium-
phantly :  "  Thus  the  sixth  labour  is  accomplished.
What  have  we  now  to  fear  ?"  The  demon-guide
answered  him  and  said:  "  From  hence  to  the
Brazen  Fortress  it  is  forty  farsangs.  That  fortress
is  the  residence  of  Arjasp ;  but  the  road  is  full  of
peril.  For  three  farsangs  the  sand  on  the  ground
is  as  hot  as  fire,  and  there  is  no  water  to  be  found
during  the  whole  journey."  This  information  made
a  serious  impression  upon  the  mind  of  Isfendiyar ;
who  said  to  him  sternly :  "  If  I  find  thee  guilty
of  falsehood,  I  will  assuredly  put  thee  to  death."
Kurugsar  replied  :  "  What !  after  six  trials  ?  Thou
hast  no  reason  to  question  my  veracity.  I  shall
never  depart  from  the  truth,  and  my  advice  is,  that
thou  hadst  better  return ;  for  the  seventh  stage  is
not  to  be  ventured  upon  by  human  strength.

Along  those  plains  of  burning  sand
No  bird  can  move,  nor  ant,  nor  fly ;

No  water  slakes  the  fiery  land,
Intensely  glows  the  flaming  sky.

"  No  tiger  fierce,  nor  lion  ever

Could  breathe  that  pestilential  air ;

Even  the  unsparing  vulture  never

Ventures  on  blood-stained  pennons  there.

At  the  distance  of  three  farsangs  beyond  this  in-
accessible belt  of  scorching  country  lies  the  Brazen


THE SHAH NAMEH.  423

Fortress,  to  which  there  is  no  visible  path ;  and
if  an  army  of  a  hundred  thousand  strong  were  to
attempt  its  reduction,  there  would  not  be  the  least
chance  of  success."

SEVENTH  STAGE.  —  When  Isfendiyar  heard
these  things,  enough  to  alarm  the  bravest  heart,
he  turned  towards  his  people  to  ascertain  their
determination ;  when  they  unanimously  repeated
their  readiness  to  sacrifice  their  lives  in  his  ser-
vice, and  to  follow  wherever  he  might  be  dis-
posed to  lead  the  way.  He  then  put  Kurugsar  in
chains  again,  and  prosecuted  his  journey,  until  he
reached  the  place  said  to  be  covered  with  burning-
sand.  Arrived  on  the  spot,  he  observed  to  the
demon-guide  :  "  Thou  hast  described  the  sand  as
hot,  but  it  is  not  so."  "  True;  and  it  is  on  ac-
count of  the  heavy  showers  of  snow  that  have
fallen  and  cooled  the  ground,  a  proof  that  thou
art  under  the  protection  of  the  Almighty."  Is-
fendiyar  smiled,  and  said :  "  Thou  art  all  insin-
cerity and  deception,  thus  to  play  upon  my  feel-
ings with  false  or  imaginary  terrors."  Saying  this
he  urged  his  soldiers  to  pass  rapidly  on,  so  as
to  leave  the  sand  behind  them,  and  they  presently
came  to  a  great  river.  Isfendiyar  was  now  angry
with  Kurugsar,  and  said:  "  Thou  hast  declared
that  for  the  space  of  forty  farsangs  there  was  no
water,  every  drop  being  every  where  dried  up  by
the  burning  heat  of  the  sun,  and  here  we  find
water !  Why  didst  thou  also  idly  fill  the  minds


424  THE SHAH NAMEH.

of  my  soldiers  with  groundless  fears  ?"  Kurugsar
replied :  "I  will  confess  the  truth.  Did  I  not
swear  a  solemn  oath  to  be  faithful,  and  yet  I  was
still  doubted,  and  still  confined  in  irons,  though
the  experience  of  six  days  of  trial  had  proved  the
correctness  of  my  information  and  advice.  For
this  reason  I  was  disappointed  and  displeased  ;
and  I  must  confess  that  I  did,  therefore,  exag-
gerate the  dangers  of  the  last  day,  in  the  hopes
too  of  inducing  thee  to  return  and  release  me  from
my  bonds.

For  what  have  I  received  from  thee,
But  scorn,  and  chains,  and  slavery."

Isfendiyar  now  struck  off  the  irons  from  the
hands  and  feet  of  his  demon-guide  and  treated
him  with  favour  and  kindness,  repeating  to  him
his  promise  to  reward  him  at  the  close  of  his
victorious  career  with  the  government  of  a  king-
dom. Kurugsar  was  grateful  for  this  change  of
conduct  to  him,  and  again  acknowledging  the
deception  he  had  been  guilty  of,  hoped  for  par-
don, engaging  at  the  same  time  to  take  the  party
in  safety  across  the  great  river  which  had  impeded
their  progress.  This  was  accordingly  done,  and
the  Brazen  Fortress  was  now  at  no  great  distance.
At  the  close  of  the  day  they  were  only  one  far-
sang  from  the  towers,  but  Isfendiyar  preferred
resting  till  the  next  morning.  "  What  is  thy
counsel  now?"  said  he  to  his  guide.  "  What


THE SHAH NAMEH.  425

sort  of  a  fortress  is  this  which  fame  describes  in
such  dreadful  colours  ?"  "  It  is  stronger  than
imagination  can  conceive,  and  impregnable." —
"  Then  how  shall  I  get  to  Arjasp  ?

How  shall  I  cleave  the  oppressor's  form  asunder,

The  murderer  of  my  grandsire,  Lohurasp  ?

The  bravest  heroes  of  Turan  shall  fall

Under  my  conquering  sword  ;  their  wives  and  children

Led  captive  to  Iran  ;  and  desolation

Scathe  the  whole  realm  beneath  the  tyrant's  sway.*"

But  these  words  only  roused  and  exasperated
the  feelings  of  Kurugsar,  who  bitterly  replied  :

"  Then  may  calamity  be  thy  reward,

Thy  stars  malignant,  and  thy  life  all  sorrow ;

And  may'st  thou  perish,  weltering  in  thy  blood,

And  the  bare  desert  be  thy  lonely  grave

For  that  inhuman  thought,  that  cruel  menace.""

Isfendiyar,  upon  hearing  this  unexpected  lan-
guage, became  furious  with  indignation,  and  in-
stantaneously punished  the  offender  on  the  spot ;
with  one  stroke  of  his  sword  he  cleft  Kurugsar  in
twain.

When  the  clouds  of  night  had  darkened  the
sky,  Isfendiyar,  with  a  number  of  his  warriors,
proceeded  towards  the  Brazen  Fortress,  and  se-
cretly explored  it  on  every  side.  He  found  it
constructed  entirely  of  iron  and  brass ;  and,  not-


426  THE SHAH NAMEH.

withstanding  a  strict  examination  at  every  point,
discovered  no  accessible  part  for  attack.  It  was
three  farsangs  high,  and  forty  wide  ;  and  such  a
place  as  was  never  before  beheld  by  man.


CAPTURE OF THE BRAZEN FORTRESS,
AND  DEATH  OF  ARJASP.

Isfendiyar  returned  from  reconnoitring  the  for-
tress with  acute  feelings  of  sorrow  and  despair.
He  was  at  last  convinced  that  Kurugsar  had  spoken
the  truth;  for  there  seemed  to  be  no  chance
whatever  of  taking  the  place  by  any  stratagem
he  could  invent.  Revolving  the  enterprize  seri-
ously in  his  mind,  he  now  began  to  repent  of  his
folly,  and  the  overweening  confidence  which  had
led  him  to  undertake  the  journey.  Returning
thus  to  his  tent  in  a  melancholy  mood,  he  saw  a
Fakir  sitting  down  on  the  road,  and  him  he
anxiously  accosted.  "  What  may  be  the  number  of
the  garrison  in  this  fort?"  "  There  are  a  hundred
thousand  veteran  warriors  in  the  service  of  Arjasp
in  the  fort,  with  abundance  of  supplies  of  every
kind,  and  streams  of  pure  water,  so  that  nothing  is
wanted  to  foil  an  enemy."  This  was  very  unwel-
come intelligence  to  Isfendiyar,  who  now  assem-
bled his  officers  to  consider  what  was  best  to  be


THE SHAH NAMEH.  427

done.  They  all  agreed  that  the  reduction  of  the  for-
tress was  utterly  impracticable,  and  that  the  safest
course  for  him  would  be  to  return.  But  he  could  not
bring*  himself  to  acquiesce  in  this  measure,  saying  :
"  God  is  almighty,  and  beneficent,  and  with  him
is  the  victory."  He  then  reflected  deeply  and
long,  and  finally  determined  upon  entering  the
fort  disguised  as  a  merchant.  Having  first  set-
tled the  mode  of  proceeding,  he  put  Bashutan  in
temporary  charge  of  the  army,  saying  :

"  This  Brazen  Fortress  scorns  all  feats  of  arms,
Nor  sword  nor  spear,  nor  battle-axe,  can  here
Be  wielded  to  advantage  ;  stratagem
Must  be  employed,  or  we  shall  never  gain
Possession  of  its  wide-extended  walls.
Placing  my  confidence  in  God  alone
I  go  with  rich  and  curious  wares  for  sale,
To  take  the  credulous  people  by  surprise,
Under  the  semblance  of  a  peaceful  merchant."

Isfendiyar  then  directed  a  hundred  dromeda-
ries to  be  collected,  and  when  they  were  brought
to  him  he  disposed  of  them  in  the  following  man-
ner. He  loaded  ten  with  embroidered  cloths,
five  with  rubies  and  sapphires,  and  five  more  with
pearls  and  other  precious  jewels.  Upon  each  of
the  remaining  eighty  he  placed  two  chests,  and
in  each  chest  a  warrior  was  secreted,  making  in
all  one  hundred  and  sixty ;  and  one  hundred  more


428  THE SHAH-NAMEH.

were  disposed  as  camel -drivers  and  servants.  Thus
the  whole  force,  consisting  of  a  hundred  dromedaries
and  two  hundred  and  sixty  warriors,  set  off  towards
the  Brazen  Fortress,  Isfendiyar  having  first  inti-
mated to  his  brother  Bashutan  to  march  with  his  army
direct  to  the  gates  of  the  fort,  as  soon  as  he  saw  a
column  of  flame  and  smoke  ascend  from  the  inte-
rior. On  the  way  they  gave  out  that  they  were
merchants  come  with  valuable  goods  from  Persia,
and  hoped  for  custom.  The  tidings  of  travellers
having  arrived  with  rubies  and  gold-embroidered
garments  for  sale,  soon  reached  the  ears  of  Arjasp,
the  king,  who  immediately  gave  them  permission  to
enter  the  fort.  When  Isfendiyar,  the  reputed
master  of  the  caravan,  had  got  within  the  walls,
he  said  that  he  had  brought  rich  presents  for  the
king,  and  requested  to  be  introduced  to  him  in
person.  He  was  accordingly  allowed  to  take  the
presents  himself,  was  received  with  distinguished
attention,  and  having  stated  ,his  name  to  be  Kher-
ad,  was  invited  to  go  to  the  royal  palace,  when-
ever, and  as  often  as,  he  might  please.  At  one  of
the  interviews  the  king  asked  him,  as  he  had  come
from  Persia,  if  he  knew  whether  the  report  was
true  'or  not  that  Kurugsar  had  been  put  to  death,
and  what  Gushtasp  and  Isfendiyar  were  engaged
upon.  The  hero  in  disguise  replied  that  it  was
five  months  since  he  left  Persia  ;  but  he  had
heard  on  the  road  from  many  persons  that  Is-
fendiyar intended  proceeding  by  the  way  of  the


THE SHAH NAMEH.  429

Heft-khan  with  a  vast  army,  towards  the  Brazen
Fortress.  At  these  words  Arjasp  smiled  in  deri-
sion, and  said:  "  Ah,  ah!  by  that  way  even  the
winged  tribe  are  afraid  to  venture ;  and  if  Isfen-
diyar had  a  thousand  lives,  he  would  lose  them
all  in  any  attempt  to  accomplish  that  journey."
After  this  interview  Isfendiyar  daily  continued  to
attend  to  the  sale  of  his  merchandize,  and  soon  found
that  his  sisters  were  employed  in  the  degrading
office  of  drawing  and  carrying  water  for  the  kitchen
of  Arjasp.  When  they  heard  that  a  caravan  had
arrived  from  Iran,  they  went  to  Isfendiyar  (who
recognized  them  at  a  distance,  but  hid  his  face
that  they  might  not  know  him),  to  inquire  what
tidings  he  had  brought  about  their  father  and
brother.  Alarmed  at  the  hazard  of  discovery,  he
replied  that  he  knew  nothing,  and  desired  them
to  depart ;  but  they  remained,  and  said :  "  On
thy  return  to  Iran,  at  least,  let  it  be  known  that
here  we  are,  two  daughters  of  Gushtasp,  reduced  to
the  basest  servitude,  and  neither  father  nor  brother
takes  compassion  upon  our  distresses.

Whilst  with  bare  head,  and  naked  feet,  we  toil,
They  pass  their  time  in  peace  and  happiness,
Regardless  of  the  misery  we  endure.'*

Isfendiyar  again,  in  assumed  anger,  told  them
to  depart,  saying :  "  Talk  not  to  me  of  Gushtasp
and  Isfendiyar — what  have  I  to  do  with  them  ?"
At  that  moment  the  sound  of  his  voice  was  recog-


430  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

nized  by  the  elder  sister,  who,  in  a  transport  of
joy,  instantly  communicated  her  discovery  to  the
younger  ;  but  they  kept  the  secret  till  night,  and
then  they  returned  to  commune  with  their  brother.
Isfendiyar  finding  that  he  was  known,  acknow-
ledged himself,  and  informed  them  that  he  had
undertaken  to  restore  them  to  liberty,  and  that
he  was  now  engaged  in  the  enterprize,  opposing
every  obstacle  in  his  way ;  but  it  was  necessary
that  they  should  continue  their  usual  labour  at  the
wells,  till  a  fitting  opportunity  occurred.

For  the  purpose  of  accelerating  the  moment  of
release,  Isfendiyar  represented  to  the  king  that
at  a  period  of  great  adversity,  he  had  made  a  vow
that  he  would  give  a  splendid  banquet  if  ever
Heaven  again  smiled  upon  him,  and  as  he  then
was  in  the  way  to  prosperity,  and  wished  to  fulfil
his  vow,  he  hoped  that  his  majesty  would  honour
him  with  his  presence  on  the  occasion.  The  king
accepted  the  invitation  with  satisfaction,  and  said :
*'  To-morrow  I  will  be  thy  guest,  at  thy  own  house,
and  with  all  my  warriors  and  soldiers."  But  this
did  not  suit  the  scheme  of  the  pretended  merchant,
who  apologized  on  account  of  his  house  being  too
small,  and  proposed  that  the  feast  should  be  held
upon  the  loftiest  part  of  the  fortress,  where  spa-
cious tents  and  pavilions  might  be  erected  for  the
purpose,  and  a  large  fire  lighted  to  give  splendour
to  the  scene.  The  king  assented,  and  every  re-
quisite preparation  being  made,  all  the  royal  and


THE SHAH NAMEH.  431

warrior-guests  assembled  in  the  morning,  and
eagerly  partook  of  the  rich  viands  set  before  them.
They  all  drank  wine  with  such  relish  and  delight,
that  they  soon  became  intoxicated,  and  Kherad
seizing  the  opportunity,  ordered  the  logs  of  wood
which  had  been  collected,  to  be  set  on  fire,  and
rapidly  the  smoke  and  flame  sprung  up,  and  as-
cended to  the  sky.  Bashutan  saw  the  looked-
for  sign,  and  hastened  with  two  thousand  horse-
men to  the  gates  of  the  fortress,  where  he  slew
every  one  that  he  met,  calling  himself  Isfendiyar.
Arjasp  had  enjoyed  the  banquet  exceedingly ;  the
music  gave  him  infinite  pleasure,  and  the  wine
had  intoxicated  him  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  his  hila-
rity and  merriment,  he  was  told  that  Isfendiyar
had  reached  the  gates,  and  entered  the  fort,  killing
immense  numbers  of  his  people.  This  terrible
intelligence  roused  him,  and  quitting  the  festive
board  of  Kherad,  he  ordered  his  son  Kahram,
with  fifty  thousand  horsemen,  to  repel  the  invader.
He  also  ordered  forty  thousand  horsemen  to  pro-
tect different  parts  of  the  walls,  and  ten  thousand
to  remain  as  his  own  personal  guard.  Kahram
accordingly  issued  forth  without  delay,  and  soon
engaged  in  battle  with  the  force  under  Bashutan.
When  night  came,  Isfendiyar  opened  the  lids
of  the  chests,  and  let  out  the  hundred  and  sixty
warriors,  whom  he  supplied  with  swords  and
spears,  and  armour,  and  also  the  hundred  who
were  disguised  as  camel-drivers  and  servants.


432  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

With  this  bold  band  he  sped,

Whither  Arjasp  had  fled;

And  all  who  fought  around,

To  keep  untouched  that  sacred  ground ;

(Resistance  weak  and  vain,)

By  him  were  quickly  slain.

The  sisters  of  Isfendiyar  now  arrived,  and
pointed  out  to  him  the  chamber  of  Arjasp,  to
which  place  he  immediately  repaired,  and  roused
up  the  king,  who  was  almost  insensible  with  the
fumes  of  wine.  Arjasp,  however,  sprang  upon
his  feet,

And  grappled  stoutly  with  Isfendiyar,

And  desperate  was  the  conflict ;  head  and  loins

Alternately  received  deep  gaping  wounds

From  sword  and  dagger. Wearied  out  at  length,

Arjasp  shrunk  back,  when  with  one  mighty  blow,

Isfendiyar,  exulting  in  his  power,

Cleft  him  asunder.

Two  of  the  wives,  two  daughters,  and  one  sister
of  Arjasp  fell  immediately  into  the  hands  of  the
conqueror,  who  delivered  them  into  the  custody
of  his  son,  to  be  conveyed  home.  He  then
quitted  the  palace,  and  turning  his  steps  towards
the  gates  of  the  fortress,  slew  a  great  number  of
the  enemy.

Kahram,  in  the  mean  time  had  been  fiercely  en-
gaged with  Bashutan,  and  was  extremely  reduced.


THE SHAH NAMEH.  433

At  the  very  moment  too  of  his  discomfiture,  he
heard  the  watchmen  call  out  aloud  that  Arjasp  had
been  slain  by  Kherad.  Confounded  and  alarmed
by  these  tidings,  he  approached  the  fort,  where  he
heard  the  confirmation  of  his  misfortune  from  every
mouth,  and  also  that  the  garrison  had  been  put  to
the  sword.  Leading  on  the  remainder  of  his  troops
he  now  came  in  contact  with  Isfendiyar  and  his  two
hundred  and  sixty  warriors,  and  a  sharp  engage-
ment ensued  ;  but  the  coming  up  of  Bashutan's
force  on  his  rear,  placed  him  in  such  a  predica-
ment on  every  side,  that  defeat  and  destruction
were  almost  inevitable.  In  short,  Kahram  was
left  with  only  a  few  of  his  soldiers  near  him,  when
Isfendiyar,  observing  his  situation,  challenged  him
to  personal  combat,  and  the  challenge  was  ac-
cepted.

So  closely  did  the  eager  warriors  close,

They  seemed  together  joined,  and  but  one  man.

At  last  Isfendiyar  seized  Kahram's  girth,

And  flung  him  to  the  ground,  and  bound  his  hands ;

And  as  a  leaf  is  severed  from  its  stalk,

So  he  the  head  cleft  from  its  quivering  trunk ;

Thus  one  blow  wins,  and  takes  away  a  throne.

In  battle  heads  are  trodden  under  hoofs,

Crowns  under  heads.

After  the  death  of  Kahram,  Isfendiyar issued
a  proclamation, offering  full  pardon  to  all  who

2  F


434  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

would unite  under  his banners. They  had  no
king ;

The  country  had  no  throne,  no  crown. Alas  !

What  is  the  world  without  a  governor,

What,  but  a  headless  trunk  ? A  thing  more  worthless

Than  the  vile  dust  upon  the  common  road.

What  could  the  people  do  in  their  despair  ?

They  were  obedient,  and  Isfendiyar

Encouraged  them  with  kind  and  gentle  words,

Fitting  a  generous  and  a  prudent  master.

Having  first  written  to  his  father  an  account  of
the  great  victory  which  he  had  gained,  he  occu-
pied himself  in  reducing  all  the  surrounding  pro-
vinces and  their  inhabitants  to  subjection.  Those
people  who  continued  hostile  to  him  he  deemed
it  necessary  to  put  to  death.  He  took  all  the
women  of  Arj  asp  into  his  own  service,  and  their
daughters  he  presented  to  his  own  sons.

Not  a  warrior  of  Chin  remained ;

The  king  of  Turan  was  swept  away  ;
And  the  realm  where  in  pomp  he  had  reigned.

Where  he  basked  in  prosperity's  ray,
Was  spoiled  by  the  conqueror's  brand,

Desolation  marked  every  scene,
And  a  stranger  now  governed  the  mountainous  land,

Where  the  splendour  of  Poshang  had  been.


THE SHAH NAM  I,  II.


435


Not  a  dirhem  of  treasure  was  left ;

For  nothing  eluded  the  conqueror's  grasp ;
Of  all  was  the  royal  pavilion  bereft ;

All  followed  the  fate  of  Arjasp  !

When  Gushtasp  received  information  of  this
mighty  conquest,  he  sent  orders  to  Isfendiyar  to
continue  in  the  government  of  the  new  empire ;
but  the  prince  replied  that  he  had  settled  the
country,  and  was  anxious  to  see  his  father.  This
request  being  permitted,  he  was  desired  to  bring
away  all  the  immense  booty,  and  return  by  the
road  of  the  Heft-khan.  Arriving  at  the  place
where  he  was  overtaken  by  the  dreadful  winter-
storm,  he  again  found  all  the  property  he  had  lost
under  the  drifts  of  snow ;  and  when  he  had  ac-
complished his  journey,  he  was  received  with  the
warmest  welcome  and  congratulations,  on  account
of  his  extraordinary  successes.  A  royal  feast  was
prepared,  and  the  king  filled  his  son's  goblet  with
wine  so  repeatedly,  and  drank  himself  so  fre-
quently, and  with  such  zest,  that  both  of  them  at
length  became  intoxicated.  Gushtasp  then  asked
Isfendiyar  to  describe  to  him  the  particulars  of
his  expedition  by  the  road  of  the  Heft- khan  ;  for
though  he  had  heard  the  story  from  others,  he
wished  to  have  it  from  his  own  mouth.  But  Is-
fendiyar replied  :  "  We  have  both  drank  too  much
wine,  and  nothing  good  can  proceed  from  a  drunken
man ;  I  will  recite  my  adventures  to-morrow,


436  THE SHAH NAMEH.

when  my  head  is  clear."  The  next  day  Gushtasp,
seated  upon  his  throne,  and  Isfendiyar  placed
before  him  on  a  golden  chair,  again  asked  for  the
prince's  description  of  his  triumphant  progress  by
the  Heft-khan,  and  according  to  his  wish  every
incident  that  merited  notice  was  faithfully  detailed
to  him.  The  king  expressed  great  pleasure  at  the
conclusion  ;  but  envy  and  suspicion  lurked  in  his
breast,  and  writhing  internally  like  a  serpent,  he
still  delayed  fulfilling  his  promise  to  invest  Ts-
fendiyar,  upon  the  overthrow  of  Arjasp,  with  the
sovereignty  of  Iran.

The  prince  could  not  fail  to  observe  the  changed
disposition  of  his father,  and  privately  went  to
Kitabim,  his  mother,  to  whom  he  related  the  so-
lemn promise  and  engagement  of  Gushtasp,  and
requested  her  to  go  to  him,  and  say  : "  Thou  hast
given  thy  royal  word  to  Isfendiyar, that  when  he
had  conquered  and  slain  Arjasp,  and  restored  his
own  sisters  to  liberty,  thou  wouldst  place  upon
his  head  the  crown  of  Iran  ;  faith  and  honour  are
indispensable  in  princes, they  are  inculcated  by
religion,  and  yet  thou  hast  failed  to  make  good  thy
word." But  the  mother  had  more  prudence,  and
said : "  Let  me  give thee  timely  counsel, and
breathe  not  a  syllable  to  any  one  on  the  subject.
God  forbid  that  thou  shouldst  again be  thrown
into  prison, and confined  in  chains. Recollect
thine  is  the  succession  ;  the  army  is  in  thy  favour  ;
thy father  is  old  and  infirm. Have  a  little  pa-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  437

tience,  and  in  the  end  thou  wilt  undoubtedly  be
the  king  of  Persia.

The  gold  and  jewels,  the  imperial  sway,
The  crown,  the  throne,  the  army,  all  he  owns,
Will  presently  be  thine ;  then  wait  in  patience,
And  reign,  in  time,  the  monarch  of  the  world."

Isfendiyar,  however,  was  not  contented  with  his
mother's  counsel,  and  suspecting  that  she  would
communicate  to  the  king  what  he  had  said,  he  one
day,  as  if  under  the  influence  of  wine,  thus  ad-
dressed his  father  :  "  In  what  way  have  I  failed
to  accomplish  thy  wishes  ?  Have  I  not  performed
such  actions  as  never  were  heard  of,  and  never
will  be  performed  again,  in  furtherance  of  thy
glory?  I  have  overthrown  thy  greatest  enemy,
and  supported  thy  honour  with  ceaseless  toil  and
exertion.  Is  it  not  then  incumbent  on  thee  to
fulfil  thy  promise  ?"  Gushtasp  replied  :  "  Do  not
be  impatient — the  throne  is  thine;"  but  he  was
deeply  irritated  at  heart  on  being  thus  reproached
by  his  own  son.  When  he  retired  he  consulted
with  Jamasp,  and  was  anxious  to  know  what  the
stars  foretold.  The  answer  was  :  "  He  is  of  exalted
fortune,  of  high  destiny  ;  he  will  overcome  all  his
enemies,  and  finally  obtain  the  sovereignty  of  the
heft-aklim,  or  seven  climes."  This  favourable  pro-
phecy aggravated  the  spleen  of  the  father  against
the  son,  and  he  inquired  with  bitter  and  unnatural


438


THE SHAH NAM EH.


curiosity: "  What  will  be  his death? Look  to
that."  *

"  A  deadly  dart  from  Eastern's  bow,
Will  lay  the  glorious  warrior  low."

These  tidings  gladdened  the  heart  of  Gtishtasp,
and  he  said  :  "If  this  miscreant  had  been  slain
in  his  expedition  to  the  Brazen  Fortress  I  should
not  now  have  been  insulted  with  his  claim  to  my
throne."  The  king  then  having  resolved  upon  a
scheme  of  deep  dissimulation,  ordered  a  gorgeous
banquet,  and  invited  to  it  all  his  relations  and
warriors ;  and  when  the  guests  were  assembled,
he  said  to  Isfendiyar:  "The  crown  and  the
throne  are  thine ;  indeed,  who  is  there  so  well
qualified  for  imperial  sway  ?"  and  turning  to  his
warriors,  he  spoke  of  him  with  praise  and  admi-
ration, and  added:  "  When  I  was  entering  upon
the  war  against  Arjasp,  before  I  quitted  Sistan,
I  said  to  Rustem  :  '  My  father  Lohurasp  is  killed,
my  wife  and  children  made  prisoners,  wilt  thou
assist  me  in  punishing  the  murderer  and  op-
pressor?' but  he  excused  himself,  and  remained
at  home,  and  although  I  have  since  been  involved
in  numberless  perils,  he  has  not  once  by  inquiry
shewn  himself  interested  in  my  behalf ;  in  short,
he  boasts  that  Kai-khosrau  gave  him  the  prin-
cipalities of  Zabul  and  Kabul,  and  Nim-ruz,  and
that  he  owes  no  allegiance  to  me  !  It  behoves  me,
therefore,  to  depute  Isfendiyar  to  go  and  put  him


THE SHAH N'AMEII.  439

to  death,  or  bring  him  before  me  in  bonds  alive.
After  that  I  shall  have  no  enemy  to  be  revenged
upon,  and  I  shall  retire  from  the  world,  and  leave
to  Isfendiyar  the  crown  and  the  throne  of  Persia,
with  confidence  and  satisfaction."  All  the  nobles
and  heroes  present  approved  of  the  measure,  and
the  king,  gratified  by  their  approbation,  then
turned  to  Isfendiyar,  and  said :  "  I  have  sworn
on  the  Zendavesta,  to  relinquish  my  power,  and
place  it  in  thy  hands,  as  soon  as  Rustem  is  sub-
dued. Take  whatever  force  the  important  occa-
sion may  require,  for  the  whole  resources  of  the
empire  shall  be  at  thy  command."  But  Isfen-
diyar thus  replied :  "  Remember  the  first  time  I
defeated  Arjasp — what  was  my  reward  ?  Through
the  machinations  of  Gurzam  I  was  thrown  into
prison  and  chained.  And  what  is  my  reward
now  that  I  have  slain  both  Arjasp  and  his  son  in
battle?  Thy  solemn  promise  to  me  is  forgotten,
or  disregarded.  The  prince  who  forgets  one  pro-
mise, will  forget  another,  if  it  be  convenient  for
his  purpose.

Whenever  the  Heft-khan  is  brought  to  mind,
I  feel  a  sense  of  horror. But  why  should  I
Repeat  the  story  of  those  great  exploits  !
God  is  my  witness,  how  I  slew  the  wolf,
The  lion,  and  the  dragon ;  how  I  punished
That  fell  enchantress  with  her  thousand  wiles ;
And  how  I  suffered,  midst  the  storm  of  snow,


440  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Which  almost  froze  the  blood  within  my  veins ;

And  how  that  vast  unfathomable  deep

We  crossed  securely. These  are  deeds  which  waken

Wonder  and  praise  in  others,  not  in  thee  !

The  treasure  which  I  captured  now  is  thine ;

And  what  is  my  reward  ? — the  interest,  sorrow.

Thus  am  I  cheated  of  my  recompense.

It  is  the  custom  for  great  kings  to  keep

Religiously  their  pledged,  affianced  word  ;

But  thou  hast  broken  thine,  despite  of  honour.

I  do  remember  in  thy  early  youth,
It  was  in  Rum,  thou  didst  perform  a  feat
Of  gallant  daring  ;  for  thou  didst  destroy
A  dragon  and  a  wolf,  but  thou  didst  bear
Thyself  most  proudly,  thinking  human  arm
Never  before  had  done  a  deed  so  mighty ;
Yes,  thou  wert  proud  and  vain,  and  seemed  exalted
Up  to  the  Heavens ;  and  for  that  noble  act
What  did  thy  father  do  ? The  king  for  that
Gave  thee  with  joyous  heart  his  crown  and  throne.
Now  mark  the  difference ;  think  what  I  have  done,
What  perils  I  sustained,  and  for  thy  sake  !
Thy  foes  I  vanquished,  clearing  from  thy  mind
The  gnawing  rust  of  trouble  and  affliction.
Monsters  I  slew,  reduced  the  Brazen  Fortress,
And  laid  Arj asp's  whole  empire  at  thy  feet,
And  what  was  my  reward  ? Neglect  and  scorn.
Did  I  deserve  this  at  a  father's  hands  ?"


THE SHAH NAMEH.  441

Gushtasp  remained  unmoved  by  this  sharp  re-
buke, though  he  readily  acknowledged  its  justice.
"  The  crown  shall  be  thine,"  said  he,  "  but  con-
sider my  position.  Think,  too,  what  services  Zal
and  Rustem  performed  for  Kai-khosrau,  and  shall
I  expect  less  from  my  own  son,  gifted  as  he  is
with  a  form  of  brass,  and  the  most  prodigious
valour  ?  Forbid  it,  Heaven  !  that  any  rumour  of
our  difference  should  get  abroad  in  the  world,
which  would  redound  to  the  dishonour  of  both !
Nearly  half  of  Iran  is  in  the  possession  of  Rus-
tem." "  Give  me  the  crown,"  said  Isfendiyar,
"  and  I  will  immediately  proceed  against  the
Zdbul  champion."  "  I  have  given  thee  both  the
crown  and  the  throne,  take  with  thee  my  whole
army,  and  all  my  treasure. — What  wouldst  thou
have  more  ?  He  who  has  conquered  the  terrific
obstacles  of  the  Heft-khan,  and  has  slain  Arjasp
and  subdued  his  entire  kingdom,  can  have  no
cause  to  fear  the  prowess  of  Rustem,  or  any  other
chief."  Isfendiyar  replied  that  he  had  no  fear  of
Rustem's  prowess;  he  was  now  old,  and  there-
fore not  equal  to  himself  in  strength  ;  still  he  had
no  wish  to  oppose  him  ;

"  For  he  has  been  the  monitor  and  friend

Of  our  Kaianian  ancestors ;  his  care

Enriched  their  minds,  and  taught  them  to  be  brave ;

And  he  was  ever  faithful  to  their  cause.

Besides,"  said  he,  "  thou  wert  the  honoured  guest


442  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Of  Rustem  two  long  years  ;  and  at  Si'stan
Enjoyed  his  hospitality  and  friendship,
His  festive,  social  board;  and  canst  thou  now,
Forgetting  that  delightful  intercourse,
Become  his  bitterest  foe  ?""

Gushtasp  replied  :

"  'Tis  true  he  may  have  served  my  ancestors ;
But  what  is  that  to  me  ? His  spirit  is  proud,
And  he  refused  to  yield  me  needful  aid
When  danger  pressed  ;  that  is  enough,  and  thou
Canst  not  divert  me  from  my  settled  purpose.

Therefore,  if  thy  aim  be  still
To  rule,  thy  father's  wish  fulfil ;
Quickly  trace  the  distant  road  ;
Quick  invade  the  chiefs  abode;
Bind  his  feet,  and  bind  his  hands
In  a  captive's  galling  bands ;
Bring  him  here,  that  all  may  know
Thou  hast  quelled  the  mighty  foe.'"

But  |Isfendiyar was still reluctant, and  im-
plored him  to  relinquish  his  design.

"  For  if  resolved,  a  gloomy  cloud
Will  quickly  all  thy  glories  shroud,

And  dim  thy  brilliant  throne  ;
I  would  not  thus  aspire  to  reign,
But  rather,  free  from  crime,  remain

Sequestered  and  alone."


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  443

Again  Gushtasp  spoke,  and  said:  "There  is
no  necessity  for  any  further  delay.  Thou  art
appointed  my  successor,  and  the  crown  and  the
throne  are  thine,  thou  hast  therefore  only  to
march  to  the  scene  of  action,  and  accomplish  the
object  of  the  war."  Hearing  this,  Isfendiyar
sullenly  retired  to  his  own  house,  and  Gushtasp,
perceiving  that  he  was  in  an  angry  mood,  re-
quested Jamasp  (his  minister)  to  ascertain  the
state  of  his  mind,  and  whether  he  intended  to
proceed  to  Sistan  or  not.  Jamasp  immediately
went,  and  Isfendiyar  asked  him,  as  his  friend,
what  he  would  advise.  "  The  commands  of  a
father,"  he  replied,  "  must  be  obeyed."  There
was  now  no  remedy,  and  the  king  being  informed
that  the  prince  consented  to  undertake  the  expe-
dition, no  further  discussion  took  place.

But  Kitabun  was  deeply  affected  when  she
heard  of  these  proceedings,  and  repaired  instantly
to  her  son,  to  represent  to  him  the  hopelessness
of  the  enterprise  he  had  engaged  to  conduct.

"  A  mother's  counsel  is  a  golden  treasure;
Consider  well,  and  listen  not  to  folly.
Rustem,  the  champion  of  the  world,  will  never
Suffer  himself  to  be  confined  in  bonds.
Did  he  not  conquer  the  White  Demon,  fill
The  world  with  blood,  in  terrible  revenge,
When  Saiawush  was  by  Afrasiyab
Cruelly  slain  ? O,  curses  on  the  throne,


444  THE SHAH NAMEH.

And  ruin  seize  the  country,  which  returns
Evil  for  good,  and  spurns  its  benefactor.
Restrain  thy  steps,  engage  not  in  this  war ;
It  cannot- do  thee  honour. Hear  my  voice  !
Hear  the  safe  counsel  of  thy  anxious  mother  !
For  Rustem  still  can  conquer  all  the  world.""
Thus  spoke  Kitabun,  shedding  ceaseless  tears ;
And  thus  Isfendiyar :  "  I  fear  not  Rustem ,
I  fear  not  his  prodigious  power  and  skill ;
But  never  can  I  on  so  great  a  hero
Place  ignominious  bonds  ;  it  must  not  be.
Yet,  mother  dear,  my  faithful  word  is  pledged ;
My  word  Jamasp  has  taken  to  the  king,
And  I  must  follow  where  my  fortune  leads."

The  next  morning  Isfendiyar  took  leave  of  the
king,  and  with  a  vast  army,  and  immense  trea-
sure, commenced  his  march  towards  Sistan.  It
happened  that  one  of  the  camels  in  advance  laid
down,  and  though  beaten  severely,  could  not  be
made  to  get  up  on  its  legs.  Isfendiyar,  seeing  the
obstinacy  of  the  animal,  ordered  it  to  be  killed,
and  passed  on.  The  people,  however,  interpreted
the  accident  as  a  bad  omen,  and  wished  him  not
to  proceed ;  but  he  could  not  attend  to  their  sug-
gestions, as  he  thought  the  king  would  look  upon
it  as  a  mere  pretence,  and  therefore  continued  his
journey.

When  he  approached  Sistan,  he  sent  Bahman,
his  eldest  son,  to  Rustem,  with  a  flattering  mes-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  445

sage,  to  induce  the  champion  to  honour  him  with
an  istikbal,  or  deputation  to  receive  him. Upon
Bahman's  arrival,  however,  he  hesitated  and  de-
layed, being  reluctant  to  give  a  direct  answer ;
but  Zal interposed,  saying : "  Why  not  imme-
diately wait  upon  the  prince — have  we  not  always
been  devoted  to  the  Kaitinian  dynasty  ? — Go  and
bring  him  hither, that  we  may  tender  him  our
allegiance, and  entertain  him  at  our  mansion  as
becomes  his  illustrious  birth." Accordingly  Rus-
tem  went  out  to  welcome  Isfendiyar,  and  alighting
from  Rakush,  proceeded  respectfully  on  foot  to
embrace  him. He  then  invited  him  to  his  house,
but  Isfendiyar  said  :  "  So  strict  are  my  father's
commands,  that  after  having  seen  thee,  I  am  not  per-
mitted to  delay  my  departure."  Rustem,  however,
pressed  him  to  remain  with  him,  but  all  in  vain.
On  the  contrary  the  prince  artfully  conducted  him
to  his  own  quarters,  where  he  addressed  him  thus :
— "  If  thou  wilt  allow  me  to  bind  thee,  hand  and
foot,  in  chains,  I  will  convey  thee  to  the  king  my
father,  whose  humour  it  is to  see  thee  once  in
fetters,  and  then  to  release  thee !" Rustem  was
silent. Again  Isfendiyar  said :  "  If  thou  art  not
disposed  to  comply with this  -demand, go  thy
ways."  Rustem  replied :  "  First  be  my  guest,  as
thy  father  once  was,  and  after  that  I  will  conform
to  thy  will." Again  the  prince  said  :  "  My  father
visited  thee  under  other  circumstances; I  have
come  for  a  different  purpose. If  I  eat  thy  bread


446  THE SHAH NAMEH.

and  salt,  and  after  that  thou  shouldst  refuse  thy
acquiescence,  I  must  have  recourse  to  force.  But
if  I  become  thy  guest,  how  can  I  in  honour  fight
with  thee  ?  and  if  I  do  not  take  thee  bound  into
my  father's  presence,  according  to  his  command,
what  answer  shall  I  give  to  him  ?"  "  For  the
same  reason,"  said  Rustem ;  "  how  can  I  eat  thy
bread  and  salt?"  Isfendiyar  then  replied  :  "  Thou
needest  not  eat  my  bread  and  salt,  but  only  drink
wine. — Bring  thy  own  pure  ruby."  To  this  Rus-
tem agreed,  and  they  drank,  each  his  own  wine,
together.

In  a  short  space  Rustem  observed  that  he  wished
to  consult  his  father  Zal;  and  being  allowed  to
depart,  he,  on  his  return  home,  described  in  strong
terms  of  admiration  the  personal  appearance  and
mental  qualities  of  Isfendiyar.

"  In  wisdom  ripe,  and  with  a  form
Of  brass  to  meet  the  battle-storm,
Thou  wouldst  confess  his  every  boon,
Had  been  derived  from  Feridun."

Bashutan  in  the  meanwhile  observed  to  his  bro-
ther, with  some  degree  of  dissatisfaction,  that  his
enemy  had  come  into  his  power,  on  his  own  feet
too,  but  had  been  strangely  permitted  to  go
away  again.  To  this  gentle  reproof  Isfendiyar
confidently  replied,  "  If  he  does  fail  to  return,
I  will  go  and  secure  him  in  bonds,  even  in  his


THE SHAH NAMEH.  447

own  house." — "  Ah  !"  said  Bashutan,  "  that  might
be  done  by  gentleness,  but  not  by  force,  for  the
descendant  of  Sam,  the  champion  of  the  world,
is  not  to  be  subdued  so  easily."  These  words
had  a  powerful  effect  upon  the  mind  of  Isfen-
diyar,  and  he  became  apprehensive  that  Rustem
would  not  return  ;  but  whilst  he  was  still  mur-
muring at  his  own  want  of  vigilance,  the  cham-
pion appeared,  and  at  this  second  interview  re-
peated his  desire  that  the  prince  would  become
his  guest.  "  I  am  sent  here  by  my  father,  who
relies  upon  thy  accepting  his  proffered  hospitality."
— "  That  may  be,"  said  Isfendiyar,  "  but  I  am
at  my  utmost  limit,  I  cannot  go  farther.  From
this  place,  therefore,  thou  hadst  better  prepare  to
accompany  me  to  Iran."  Here  Rustem  paused,
and  at  length  artfully  began  to  enumerate  his  va-
rious achievements,  and  to  blazon  his  own  name^

I  fettered  fast  the  emperor  of  Chin,

And  broke  the  enchantment  of  the  Seven  Khans ;

I  stood  the  guardian  of  the  Persian  kings,

Their  shield  in  danger. I  have  cleared  the  world

Of  all  their  foes,  enduring  pain  and  toil

Incalculable. Such  exploits  for  thee

Will  I  achieve,  such  sufferings  will  I  bear,

And  hence  we  offer  thee  a  social  welcome.

But  let  not  dark  suspicion  cloud  thy  mind,

Nor  think  thyself  exalted  as  the  heavens.

Because  I  thus  invite  thee  to  our  home."


448  THE SHAH NAM EH.

Isfendiyar  felt  so  indignant  and  irritated  by
this  apparent  boasting  and  self-sufficiency  of  Rus-
tem,  that  his  first  impulse  was  to  cast  a  dagger  at
him ;  but  he  kept  down  his  wrath,  and  satisfied
himself  with  giving  him  a  scornful  glance,  and
telling  him  to  take  a  seat  on  his  left  hand.  But
Rustem  resented  this  affront,  saying  that  he  never
yet  had  sat  down  on  the  left  of  any  king,  and
placed  himself,  without  permission,  on  the  right
hand  of  Isfendiyar.  The  unfavourable  impression
on  the  prince's  mind  was  increased  by  this  inde-
pendent conduct,  and  he  was  provoked  to  say  to
him,  "  Rustem  !  I  have  heard  that  Zal,  thy  father,
was  of  demon  extraction,  and  that  Sam  cast  him
into  the  desert  because  of  his  disgusting  and  abo-
minable appearance ;  that  even  the  hungry  Si-
murgh,  on  the  same  account,  forbore  to  feed  upon
him,  but  conveyed  him  to  her  nest  among  her  own
young  ones,  who  pitying  his  wretched  condition,
supplied  him  with  part  of  the  carrion  they  were
accustomed  to  devour.  Naked  and  filthy,  he  is
thus  said  to  have  subsisted  on  garbage,  till  Sam
was  induced  to  commiserate  his  wretchedness,
and  take  him  to  Sistan,  where,  by  the  indulgence
of  his  family  and  royal  bounty,  he  was  instructed
in  human  manners  and  human  science."  This
was  a  reproach  and  an  insult  too  biting  for  Rus-
tem to  bear  with  any  degree  of  patience,  and
frowning  with  strong  indignation,  he  said,  "  Thy
father  knows,  and  thy  grandfather  well  knew  that


THE SHAH NAMEH.  449

Zal  was  the  son  of  Sam,  and Sam  of  Nariman,
and  that  Nariman  was  descended  from  Husheng.
Thou  and  I,  therefore,  have  the  same  origin. Be-
sides, on  my  mother's  side,  I  am  descended  from
Zohak,  so  that  by  both  parents  I  am  of  a  race  of
princes.  Knowest  thou  not  that  the  Iranian  empire
was  for  some  time  in  my  hands,  and  that  I  re-
fused to  retain  it,  though  urged  by  the  nobles  and
the  army  to  exercise  the  functions  of  royalty  ? It
was  my  sense  of  justice, and  attachment  to  the
Kais  and  to  thy  family,  which  have  enabled  thee
to  possess  thy  present  dignity  and  command. It
is  through my fidelity  and zeal  that  thou art
now  in  a  situation  to  reproach  me. Thou  hast
slain  one  king, Arjasp,  how  many  kings  have  I
slain  ? Did  I  not  conquer  Afrasiyab,  the  greatest
and  bravest  king  that  ever  ruled  over  Turan  ?  And
did  I  not  also  subdue  the  king  of  Hamaveran,  and
the  Khakan  of  Chin. Kaus,  thy  own  ancestor,  I
released  from  the  demons  of  Mazinderan. I  slew
the  White  Demon, and the  tremendous giant,
Akwan  Diw. Can  thy  insignificant  exploits  be
compared with mine? Never!" Rustem's  ve-
hemence, and the  disdainful  tone  of his  voice,
exasperated  still  more  the  feelings  of  Isfendiyar,
who  however  recollected  that  he  was  under  his
roof,  otherwise  he  would  have  avenged  himself  in-
stantly on  the  spot. Restraining  his  anger,  he
then  said  softly  to  him,  "  Wherefore  dost  thou
raise  thy  voice  so  high  ;  for  though  thy  head  be

2  G


450  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

exalted  to  the  skies,  thou  wert,  and  still  art,  but
a  dependent  on  the  Kais.  And  was  thy  Heft-
khan  equal  in  terrible  danger  to  mine  ?  Was  the
capture  of  Mazinderan  equal  in  valorous  exertion
to  the  capture  of  the  Brazen  Fortress  ?  And  did
I  not,  by  the  power  of  my  sword,  diffuse  through-
out the  world  the  blessings  of  my  own  religion,
the  faith  of  the  fire-worshipper,  which  was  de-
rived from  Heaven  itself?  Thou  hast  performed
the  duties  of  a  warrior  and  a  servant,  whilst  I
have  performed  the  holy  functions  of  a  sovereign
and  a  prophet !"  Rustem,  in  reply,  said :

"  In  thy  Heft-khan  thou  hadst  twelve  thousand  nlen

Completely  armed,  with  ample  stores  and  treasure,

Whilst  Rakush  and  my  sword,  my  conquering  sword,

Were  all  the  aid  I  had,  and  all  I  sought,

In  that  prodigious  enterprize  of  mine.

Two  sisters  thou  released — no  arduous  task.

Whilst  I  recovered  from  the  demon's  grasp

The  mighty  Kaus,  and  the  monsters  slew,

Roaring  like  thunder  in  their  dismal  caves.

This  great  exploit  my  single  arm  achieved ;

And  when  Kai-khosrau  gave  the  regal  crown

To  Lohurasp,  the  warriors  were  incensed,

And  deemed  Friburz,  Kaus's  valiant  son,

Fittest  by  birth  to  rule. My  sire  and  I

Espoused  the  cause  of  Lohurasp ;  else  he

Had  never  sat  upon  the  throne,  nor  thou

Been  here  to  treat  with  scorn  thy  benefactor.


THE SHAH NAM EH.  451

And  now  Gushtasp,  with  foul  ingratitude,
Would  bind  me  hand  and  foot !  But  who  on  earth
Can  do  that  office  ? I  am  not  accustomed
To  hear  harsh  terms,  and  cannot  brook  their  sting,
Therefore  desist. Once  in  Kaus's  court,
When  I  was  moved  to  anger,  I  poured  out
Upon  him  words  of  bitterest  scorn  and  rage,
And  though  surrounded  by  a  thousand  chiefs,
Not  one  attempted  to  repress  my  fury,
Not  one,  but  all  stood  silent  and  amazed."

"  Smooth  that  indignant  brow,"  the  prince  replied,
"  And  measure  not  my  courage  nor  my  strength
With  that  of  Kaus ;  had  he  nerve  like  mine  ?
Thou  might  have  kept  the  timorous  king  in  awe,
But  /  am  come  myself  to  fetter  thee  /"
So  saying,  he  the  hand  of  Rustem  grasped,
And  wrung  it  so  intensely,  that  the  champion
Felt  inwardly  surprise,  but  careless  said,
*«  The  time  is  not  yet  come  for  us  to  try
Our  power  in  battle." Then  Isfendiyar
Dropped  Rustem's  hand,  and  spoke, "  To-day  let  wine
Inspire  our  hearts,  and  on  the  field  to-morrow
Be  ours  the  strife,  with  battle-axe  and  sword,
And  my  first  aim  shall  be  to  bind  thee  fast,
And  shew  thee  to  my  troops,  Rustem  in  fetters  !"

At  this  the  champion  smiled,  and  thus  exclaimed,
"  Where  hast  thou  seen  the  deeds  of  warriors  brave  ?
Where  hast  thou  heard  the  clash  of  mace  and  sword
2  G  2


452  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Wielded  by  men  of  valour? I  to-morrow

Will  take  thee  in  my  arms,  and  straight  convey  thee

To  Zal,  and  place  thee  on  the  ivory  throne,

And  on  thy  head  a  crown  of  gold  shall  glitter.

The  treasury  I  will  open,  and  our  troops

Shall  fight  for  thee,  and  I  will  gird  my  loins

As  they  were  girt  for  thy  bold  ancestors ;

And  when  thou  art  the  chosen  king,  and  I

Thy  warrior- chief,  the  world  will  be  thy  own ;

No  other  sovereign  need  attempt  to  reign."

"  So  much  time  has  been  spent  in  vain-boast-
ing, and extravagant self-praise," rejoined Is-
fendiyar,  "  that  the  day  is  nearly  done,  and  I  am
hungry;  let  us  therefore  take  some  refreshment
together." Rustem's  appetite  being  equally  keen,
the  board  was  spread,  and  every  dish  that  was
brought  to  him  he  emptied  at  once,  as  if  at  one
swallow;  then  he  threw  aside  the  goblets,  and
called  for  the  large  flaggon  that  he  might  drink
his  fill  without  stint. When  he  had  finished  se-
veral dishes  and  as  many  flaggons  of  wine,  he
paused, and  Isfendiyar  and  the  assembled  chiefs
were  astonished  at  the  quantity  he  had  devoured.
He  now  prepared  to  depart,  and  the  prince  said
to  him, "  Go  and  consult  with  thy  father : if
thou  art  contented  to  be  bound,  well ; if  not,
thou  wilt  have  cause  to  repent,  for  I  will  assuredly
attend  to  the  commands  of Gushtasp." — "  Do
thou  also  consult  with  thy  brethren  and  friends,"


THE SHAH NAME  II.  453

replied  Rustem,  "  whether  thou  wilt  be  our  guest
to-morrow,  or  not ;  if  not,  come  to  this  place
before  sunrise,  that  we  may  decide  our  differences
in  battle-"  Isfendiyar  said,  "  My  most  anxious
desire,  my  wish  to  heaven,  is  to  meet  thee,  for  I
shall  have  no  difficulty  in  binding  thee  hand  and
foot.  I  would  indeed  willingly  convey  thee  without
fetters  to  my  father,  but  if  I  did  so,  he  would  say
that  I  was  unable  to  put  thee  in  bonds,  and  that
would  disgrace  my  name."  Rustem  observed  that
the  immense  number  of  men  and  demons  he  had
contended  against  was  as  nothing  in  the  balance  of
his  mind  compared  with  the  painful  subject  of  his
present  thoughts  and  fears.  He  was  ready  to  en-
gage, but  afraid  of  meriting  a  bad  name.

"  If  in  the  battle  thou  art  slain  by  me,
Will  not  my  cheek  turn  pale  among  the  princes
Of  the  Kaianian  race,  having  cut  off
A  lovely  branch  of  that  illustrious  tree  ?
Will  not  reproaches  hang  upon  my  name
When  I  am  dead,  and  shall  I  not  be  cursed
For  perpetrating  such  a  horrid  deed  ?
Thy  father,  too,  is  old,  and  near  his  end,
And  thou  upon  the  eve  of  being  crowned  ;
But  in  thy  heart  thou  knowest  that  I  proffered,
And  proffer  my  allegiance  and  devotion,
And  would  avoid  the  conflict. Sure,  thy  father
Is  practising  some  trick,  some  foul  deception,
To  urge  thee  on  to  an  untimely  death ,.


454  THE SHAH NAM EH.

To  rid  himself  of  some  unnatural  fear,
He  stoops  to  an  unnatural,  treacherous  act,
For  I  have  ever  been  the  firm  support
Of  crown  and  throne,  and  perfectly  he  knows
No  mortal  ever  conquered  me  in  battle,
None  ever  from  my  sword  escaped  with  life.'*

Then  spoke  Isfendiyar  :  "  Thou  wouldst  be  generous
And  bear  a  spotless  name,  and  tarnish  mine  ;
But  I  am  not  to  be  deceived  by  thee  :
In  fetters  thou  must  go  !" Rustem  replied  :
"  Banish  that  idle  fancy  from  thy  brain  ;
Dream  not  of  things  impossible,  for  death
Is  busy  with  thee ;  pause,  or  thou  wilt  die.""
"  No  more  !"  exclaimed  the  prince,  "  no  more  of  this,
Nor  seek  to  frighten  me  with  threatening  words ;
Go,  and  to-morrow  bring  with  thee  thy  friends,
Thy  father  and  thy  brother,  to  behold
With  their  own  eyes  thy  downfall,  and  lament
In  sorrow  over  thy  impending  fate."
"  So  let  it  be,"  said  Rustem,  and  at  once
Mounted  his  noble  horse,  and  hastened  home.

The  champion  immediately  requested  his  fa-
ther's permission  to  go  and  fight  Isfendiyar  the
following  day,  but  the  old  man  recommended  re-
conciliation and  peace.  "  That  cannot  be,"  said
Rustem,  "  for  he  has  reviled  thee  so  severely,
and  heaped  upon  me  so  many  indignities,  that
my  patience  is  exhausted,  and  the  contest  un-
avoidable." In  the  morning  Zal,  weeping  bit-


TH£ SHAH NAM  EH.  455

terly,  tied  on  Rustem's  armour  himself,  and  in
an  agony  of  grief,  said  :  "If  thou  shouldst  kill
Isfendiyar,  thy  name  will  be  rendered  infamous
throughout  the  world  ;  and  if  thou  shouldst  be
killed,  Sistan  will  be  prostrate  in  the  dust,  and
extinguished  for  ever !  My  heart  shudders  at  the
thoughts  of  this  battle,  but  there  is  no  remedy."
Rustem  said  to  him  :  "  Put  thy  trust  in  God,  and
be  not  sorrowful,  for  when  I  grasp  my  sword  the
head  of  my  enemy  is  lost ;  but  my  desire  is  to
take  Isfendiyar  alive,  and  not  to  kill  him.  I
would  serve  him,  and  not  sever  his  head  from  his
body."  Zal  was  pleased  with  this  determination,
and  rejoiced  that  there  was  a  promise  of  a  happy
issue  to  the  engagement.

In  the  morning  Rustem  arrayed  himself  in  his
war-attire,  helmet  and  breast-plate,  and  mounted
Rakush,  also  armed  in  his  bargustuwan.  His
troops  too  were  all  assembled,  and  Zal  appointed
Ziiara  to  take  charge  of  them,  and  be  careful  of
his  brother  on  all  occasions  where  assistance  might
be  necessary.  The  old  man  then  prostrated
himself  in  prayer,  and  said,  "  O  God,  turn  from
us  all  affliction,  and  vouchsafe  to  us  a  prosperous
day."  Rustem  being  prepared  for  the  struggle,
directed  Zuara  to  wait  with  the  troops  at  a  dis-
tance, whilst  he  went  alone  to  meet  Isfendiyar.
When  Bashutan  first  saw  him,  he  thought  he  was
coining  to  offer  terms  of  peace,  and  said  to  Is-
fendiyar, "  He  is  coming  alone,  and  it  is  better


456  THE SHAH NAMEH.

that  he  should  go  to  thy  father  of  his  own  accord,
than  in  bonds." — "  But,"  replied  Isfendiyar,
"  he  is  coming  completely  equipped  in  mail —
quick,  bring  me  my  arms." — "  Alas  !"  rejoined
Bashutan,  "  thy  brain  is  wild,  and  thou  art  re-
solved upon  fighting.  This  impetuous  spirit  will
break  my  heart."  But  Isfendiyar  took  no  notice
of  the  gentle  rebuke.  Presently  he  saw  Rustem
ascend  a  high  place,  and  heard  his  summons  to
single  combat  He  then  told  his  brother  to  keep
at  a  distance  with  the  army,  and  not  to  interfere
till  aid  was  positively  required.  Insisting  rigidly
on  these  instructions,  he  mounted  his  night-black
charger,  and  hastened  towards  Rustem,  who  now
proposed  to  him  that  they  should  wait  awhile,  and
that  in  the  mean  time  the  two  armies  might  be
put  in  motion  against  each  other.  "  Though,"
said  he,  "  my  men  of  Zabul  are  few,  and  thou
hast  a  numerous  host."

"  This  is  a  strange  request,"  replied  the  prince,
But  thou  art  all  deceit  and  artifice  ;
Mark  thy  position,  lofty  and  commanding,
And  mine,  beneath  thee — in  a  spreading  vale.
Now,  Heaven  forbid  that  I,  in  reckless  mood,
Should  give  my  valiant  legions  to  destruction,
And  look  unpitying  on  ! No,  I  advance,
Whoever  may  oppose  me ;  and  if  thou
Requirest  aid,  select  thy  friend,  and  come,
For  I  need  none,  save  God,  in  battle — none."


THE SHAH NA1YIEH.  457

And  Rustem  said  the  same,  for  he  required
No  human  refuge,  no  support  but  Heaven.

The  battle  rose,  and  numerous  javelins  whizzed
Along  the  air,  and  helm  and  mail  were  bruised  ;
Spear  fractured  spear,  and  then  with  shining  swords
The  strife  went  on,  till,  trenched  with  many  a  wound,
They,  too,  snapped  short. The  battle-axe  was  next
Wielded,  in  furious  wrath ;  each  bending  forward
Struck  brain-bewildering  blows ;  each  tried  in  vain
To  hurl  the  other  from  his  fiery  horse.
Wearied,  at  length,  they  stood  apart  to  breathe,
Their  chargers,  panting  from  excessive  toil,
Covered  with  foam  and  blood,  and  the  strong  armour
Of  steed  and  rider  rent. The  combatants
Thus  paused,  in  mutual  consternation  lost.

In  the  meantime  Zuara,  impatient  at  this  delay,
advanced  towards  the  Iranians,  and  reproached
them  for  their  cowardice  so  severely,  that  Nusha-
wer,  the  younger  son  of  Isfendiyar,  felt  ashamed,
and  immediately  challenged  the  bravest  of  the
enemy  to  fight.  Alwaf,  one  of  Rustem's  followers,
came  boldly  forward,  but  his  efforts  only  ter-
minated in  his  own  discomfiture  and  death.  After
him  came  Zuara  himself:

Who  galloped  to  the  charge  incensed,  and,  high
Lifting  his  iron  mace,  upon  the  head
Of  bold  Nushawer  struck  a  furious  blow,
Which  drove  him  from  his  steed  a  lifeless  corse.


458  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Seeing  their  gallant  leader  thus  overthrown,
The  troops  in  terror  fled,  and  in  their  flight,
Thousands  were  slain,  among  them  brave  Mehrnus,
Another  kinsman  of  Isfendiyar.

Bahman,  observing  the  defeat  and  confusion  of
the  Iranians,  went  immediately  to  his  father,  and
told  him  that  two  of  his  own  family  were  killed  by
the  warriors  of  Zabul,  who  had  also  attacked  him
and  put  his  troops  to  the  rout  with  great  slaughter.
Isfendiyar  was  extremely  irritated  at  this  intel-
ligence, and  called  aloud  to  Rustem :  "  Is  trea-
chery like  this  becoming  in  a  warrior  ?"  The
champion  being  deeply  concerned,  shook  like  a
branch,  and  swore  by  the  head  and  life  of  the
king,  by  the  sun,  and  his  own  conquering  sword,
that  he  was  ignorant  of  the  event,  and  innocent
of  what  had  been  done.  To  prove  what  he  said,
he  offered  to  bind  in  fetters  his  brother  Zuara,  who
must  have  authorized  the  movement;  and  also  to
secure  Feramurz,  who  slew  Mehrnus,  and  de-
liver them  over  to  Gushtasp,  the  fire-worshipper.
"  Nay,"  said  he,  "  I  will  deliver  over  to  thee
my  whole  family,  as  well  as  my  brother  and  son,
and  thou  mayst  sacrifice  them  all  as  a  punishment
for  having  commenced  the  fight  without  permis-
sion."— Isfendiyar  replied,  "  Of  what  use  would
it  be  to  sacrifice  thy  brother  and  thy  son  ?
Would  that  restore  my  own  to  me  ?  No.  In-
stead of  them,  I  will  put  thee  to  death,  therefore


THE SHAH NAMEH.  459

come  on  !"  Accordingly  both  simultaneously  bent
their  bows,  and  shot  their  arrows  with  the  utmost
rapidity;  but  whilst  Rustem's  made  no  impres-
sion, those  of  Isfendiyar  produced  great  effect  on
the  champion  and  his  horse.  So  severely  was
Rakush  wounded,  that  Rustem,  when  he  per-
ceived how  much  his  favourite  horse  was  exhaust-
ed, dismounted,  and  continued  to  impel  his  arrows
against  the  enemy  from  behind  his  shield.  But
Rakush  brooked  not  the  dreadful  storm,  and  gal-
loped off  unconscious  that  his  master  himself  was
in  as  bad  a  plight.  When  Zuara  saw  the  noble
animal,  riderless,  crossing  the  plain,  he  gasped
for  breath,  and  in  an  agony  of  grief  hurried  to  the
fatal  spot,  where  he  found  Rustem  desperately
hurt,  and  the  blood  flowing  copiously  from  every
wound.  The  champion  observed,  that  though  he
was  himself  bleeding  so  much,  not  one  drop  of  blood
appeared  to  have  issued  from  the  veins  of  his  anta-
gonist. He  was  very  weak,  but  succeeded  in  drag-
ging himself  up  to  his  former  lofty  position,  when
Isfendiyar,  smiling  to  see  him  thus,  exclaimed  :

Is  this  the  valiant  Rustem,  the  renowned,
Quitting  the  field  of  battle  ?  Where  is  now
The  raging  tyger,  the  victorious  chief  ?
Was  it  from  thee  the  Demons  shrunk  in  terror.
And  did  thy  burning  sword  sear  out  their  hearts  ?
What  has  become  of  all  thy  valour  now  ?
Where  is  thy  matchless  mace,  and  why  art  thou,


460  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

The  roaring  lion,  turned  into  a  fox,
An  animal  of  slyness,  not  of  courage,
Losing  thy  noble  character  and  name  !"

Zuara,  when  he  came  to  Rustem,  alighted  and
resigned  his  horse  to  his  brother  ;  and  placing  an
arrow  on  his  bow-string,  wished  himself  to  engage
Isfendiyar,  who  was  ready  to  fight  him,  but  Rus-
tem cried,  "  No,  I  have  not  yet  done  with  thee."
Isfendiyar  replied,  "  I  know  thee  well,  and  all
thy  dissimulation,  but  nothing  yet  is  accomplished.
Come  and  consent  to  be  fettered,  or  I  must  compel
thee."  Rustem  however  was  not  to  be  overcome,
and  he  said,  "  If  I  were  really  subdued  by  thee,
I  might  agree  to  be  bound  like  a  vanquished
slave — but  the  day  is  now  closing,  to-morrow  we
will  resume  the  fight !"  Isfendiyar  acquiesced,
and  they  separated,  Rustem  going  to  his  own
tent,  and  the  prince  remaining  on  the  field.  There
he  affectionately  embraced  the  severed  heads  of  his
kinsmen,  placed  them  himself  on  a  bier,  and  sent
them  to  his  father,  the  king,  with  a  letter,  in
which  he  said,  "  Thy  commands  must  be  obey-
ed, and  such  is  the  result  of  to-day;  Heaven
only  knows  what  may  befall  to-morrow."  Then
he  spoke  privately  to  Bashutan :  "  This  Rustem
is  not  human,  he  is  formed  of  rock  and  iron,
neither  sword  nor  javelin  has  done  him  mortal
harm,  but  the  arrows  went  deep  into  his  body,
and  it  will  indeed  be  wonderful  if  he  lives  through-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  461

out  the  night. I  know  not  what  to  think  of  to-
morrow, or  how  I  shall  be  able  to  overcome  him."
When  Rustem  arrived  at  his  quarters,  Zal  soon
discovered  that  he  had  received  many  wounds,
which  occasioned  great  affliction  in his  family,
and  he  said,  "  Alas  !  that  in  my  old  age  such  a
misfortune  should  have  befallen  us,  and  that  with
my  own  eyes  I  should  see  these  gaping  wounds!''
He  then  rubbed  Rustem's  feet,  and  applied  heal-
ing balm  to  the  wounds,  and  bound  them  up  with
the  skill  and  care  of  a  physician. Rustem  said
to  his  father, "  I  never  met  with  a  foe,  warrior
or  demon,  of  such  amazing  strength  and  bravery
as  this  ! He  seems  to  have  a  brazen  body,  for  my
arrows,  which  I  can  drive  through  an  anvil,  can-
not penetrate  his  chest, If  I  had  applied  the  power
which  I  have  exerted  to  a  mountain,  the  mountain
would  have  moved  from  its  base,  but  he  sat  firmly
upon  his  saddle  and  scorned  my  efforts. I  thank
God  that  it  is  night,  and  that  I  have  escaped  from
his  grasp. To-morrow  I  cannot  fight,  and  my
secret  wish  is  to  retire  unseen  from  the  struggle,
that  no  trace  of  me  may  be  discovered." — "  In
that  case,"  replied  Zal,  "  the  victor  will  come,  and
take  me  and  all  my  family  into  bondage.  But  let  us
not  despair. Did  not  the  Simurgh  promise  that
whenever  I  might  be  overcome  by  adversity,  if  I
burned  one  of  her  feathers,  she  would  instantly  ap-
pear ? Shall  we  not  then  solicit  assistance  in  this
awful  extremity?"  So  saying,  Zal  went  up  to  a  high


462  THE  SHAH  NAMEH.

place,  and  burnt  the  feather  in  a  censer,  and  in  a
short  time  the  Simurgh  stood  before  him.  After
due  praise  and  acknowledgment,  he  explained  his
wants.  "  But,"  said  he,  "  may  the  misfortune
we  endure  be  far  from  him  who  has  brought  it
upon  us.  My  son  Rustem  is  wounded  almost
unto  death,  and  I  am  so  helpless  that  I  can  do
him  no  good.*'  He  then  brought  forward  Rakush,
pierced  by  numerous  arrows ;  upon  which  the
wonderful  Bird  said  so  him,  (<  Be  under  no  alarm
on  that  account,  for  I  will  soon  cure  him,"  and  she
immediately  plucked  out  the  rankling  weapons
with  her  beak,  and  the  wounds,  on  passing  a  fea-
ther over  them,  were  quickly  healed.

To  Rustem  now  she  turns,  and  soothes  his  grief,
And  drawing  forth  the  arrows,  sucks  the  blood
From  out  the  wounds,  which  at  her  bidding  close,
And  the  illustrious  champion  is  restored
To  life  and  power.

Being  thus  reinvigorated  by  the  magic  in-
fluence of  the  Simurgh,  he  solicits  further  aid  in
the  coming  strife  with  Isfendiyar,  but  the  mys-
terious animal  laments  that  she  cannot  assist  him.
"  There  never  appeared  in  the  world,"  said  she,
"  so  brave  and  so  perfect  a  hero  as  Isfendiyar.
The  favour  of  Heaven  is  with  him,  for  in  his  Heft-
khan  he,  by  some  artifice,  succeeded  in  killing  a
Simurgh,  and  the  further  thou  art  removed  from  his
invincible  arm,  the  greater  will  be  thy  safety."  Here


TH£ SHAH NAMEH.  463

Zal  interposed,  and  said,  "  If  Rustem  retires
from  the  contest,  his  family  will  all  be  enslaved,
and  I  shall  equally  share  their  bondage  and  afflic-
tion." The  Sfmurgh,  hearing  these  words,  fell
into  deep  thought,  and  remained  some  time  silent.
At  length  she  told  Rustem  to  mount  Rakush  and
follow  her.  Away  she  went  to  a  far  distance;
and  crossing  a  great  river,  arrived  at  a  place  co-
vered with  reeds,  where  the  Kazu-tree  abounded.
The  Simurgh  then  rubbed  one  of  her  feathers
upon  the  eyes  of  Rustem,  and  directed  him  to
take  a  branch  of  the  Kazu-tree,  and  make  it
straight  upon  the  fire,  and  form  that  wand  into  a
forked  arrow ;  after  which  he  was  to  advance
against  Isfendiyar,  and,  placing  the  arrow  on  his
bow-string,  shoot  it  into  the  eyes  of  his  enemy.
"  The  arrow  will  only  make  him  blind,"  said
the  Simurgh,  "  but  he  who  spills  the  blood  of
Isfendiyar  will  never  be  free  from  calamity  during
his  whole  life.  The  Kazu-tree  has  also  this
peculiar  quality  :  an  arrow  made  of  it  is  sure  to
accomplish  its  intended  errand — it  never  misses
the  aim  of  the  archer."  Rustem  expressed  his
boundless  gratitude  for  this  information  and  as-
sistance ;  and  the  Simurgh  having  transported  him
back  to  his  tent,  and  affectionately  kissed  his  face,
returned  to  her  own  habitation.  The  champion
now  prepared  the  arrow  according  to  the  instruc-
tions he  had  received ;  and  when  morning  dawn-


464  THE SHAH NAMEH.

ed,  mounted  his  horse,  and  hastened  to  the  field.
He  found  Isfendiyar  still  sleeping,  and  exclaimed
aloud  :  "  Warrior,  art  thou  still  slumbering?  Rise,
and  see  Rustem  before  thee  !" When  the  prince
heard  his  stern  voice,  he  started  up,  and  in  great
anxiety  hurried  on  his  armour. He  said  to  Bashu-
tan, "  I  had  uncharitably  thought  that  he  would
have  died  of  his  wounds  in  the  night, but  this
clear  and  bold  voice  seems  to  indicate  perfect
health — go  and  see  whether  his  wounds  are  bound
up  or  not,  and  whether  he  is  mounted  on  Rakush
or on some other horse." Rustem perceived
Bashutan  approach  with  an  inquisitive  look, and
conjectured  that  his  object  was  to  ascertain  the
condition  of  himself  and  Rakush. He  therefore
vociferated  to  him  :  "  I  am  now  wholly  free  from
wounds,  and  so  is  my  horse,  for  I  possess  an  elixir
which  heals  the  most  cruel  lacerations  of  the  flesh
the  moment  it  is  applied  ;  but  no  such  wounds  were
inflicted  upon  me,  the  arrows  of  Isfendiyar  being
only  like  needles  sticking  in  my  body."  Bashutan
now  reported  to  his  brother  that  Rustem  appeared
to  be  more  fresh  and  vigorous  than  the  day  before,
and,  thinking,  from  the  spirit  and  gallantry  of  his
demeanour,  that  he  would  be  victorious  in  ano-
ther contest,  he  strongly  recommended  a  recon-
ciliation.


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  -465

THE  DEATH  OF  ISFENDIYAR.

Isfendiyar,  blind  to  the  march  of  fate,  treated  the
suggestion  of  his  brother  with  scorn,  and  mounting
his  horse,  was  soon  in  the  presence  of  Rustem,  whom
he  thus  hastily  addressed  :  "  Yesterday  thouwert
wounded  almost  to  death  by  my  arrows,  and  to-
day there  is  no  trace  of  them.  How  is  this  ?

But  thy  father  Zal  is  a  sorcerer,

And  he  by  charm  and  spell,
Has  cured  all  the  wounds  of  the  warrior,

And  now  he  is  safe  and  well.
For  the  wounds  I  gave  could  never  be
Closed  up,  excepting  by  sorcery.
Yes,  the  wounds  I  gave  thee  in  every  part,
Could  never  be  cured  but  by  magic  art."

Rustem  replied,  "  If  a  thousand  arrows  were
shot  at  me,  they  would  all  drop  harmless  to  the
ground,  and  in  the  end  thou  wilt  fall  by  my
hands.  Therefore,  if  thou  seekest  thy  own  wel-
fare, come  at  once  and  be  my  guest,  and  I  swear
by  the  Almighty,  by  Zerdusht,  and  the  Zenda-
vesta,  by  the  sun  and  moon,  that  I  will  go  with
thee,  but  unfettered,  to  thy  father,  who  may  do
with  me  what  he  lists." — "  That  is  not  enough, "
replied  Isfendiyar,  "thou  must  be  fettered."—
"  Then  do  not  bind  my  arms,  and  take  whatever

2H


466  THE SHAH NAMEH.

thou  wilt  from  me." — "  And  what  hast  thou  to


give


"  A  thousand  jewels  of  brilliant  hue,

And  of  unknown  price,  shall  be  thine  ;
A  thousand  imperial  diadems  too,
And  a  thousand  damsels  divine,
Who  with  angel-voices  will  sing  and  play,
And  delight  thy  senses  both  night  and  day,
And  my  family  wealth  shall  be  brought  thee,  all
That  was  gathered  by  Nariman,  Sam,  and  Zal."

"  This  is  all  in  vain,"  said  Isfendiyar.  "  Imayhave
wandered  from  the  way  of  Heaven,  but  I  will  not
disobey  the  commands  of  the  king.  And  of  what
use  would  thy  treasure  and  prosperity  be  to  me  ?
I  must  please  my  father,  that  he  may  surrender
to  me  his  crown  and  throne,  and  I  have  solemnly
sworn  to  him  that  I  will  place  thee  before  him  in
fetters."  Rustem  replied,  "  And  in  the  hopes
of  a  crown  and  throne  thou  wouldst  sacrifice  thy-
self!"— "  Thou  shalt  see  !"  said  Isfendiyar,  and
seized  his  bow  to  commence  the  combat.  Rustem
did  the  same,  and  when  he  had  placed  the  forked
arrow  in  the  bow-string,  he  imploringly  turned  up
his  face  towards  Heaven,  and  fervently  exclaimed,
"  O  God,  thou  knowest  how  anxiously  I  have
wished  for  a  reconciliation,  how  I  have  suffered,
and  that  I  would  now  give  all  my  treasures  and
wealth  and  go  with  him  to  Iran,  to  avoid  this


THE SHAH NAMEH.  467

conflict ;  but  my  offers  are  disdained,  for  he  is
bent  upon  consigning  me  to  bondage  and  disgrace.
Thou  art  the  redresser  of  grievances — direct  the
flight  of  this  arrow  into  his  eyes,  but  do  not  let  me
be  punished  for  the  involuntary  deed."  At  this  mo-
ment Isfendiyar  shot  an  arrow  with  great  force  at
Rustem,  who  dexterously  eluded  its  point,  and  then,
in  return,  instantly  lodged  the  charmed  weapon  in
the  eyes  of  his  antagonist.

And  darkness  overspread  his  sight,
The  world  to  him  was  hid  in  night ;
The  bow  dropped  from  his  slackened  hand,
And  down  he  sunk  upon  the  sand.

*'  Yesterday,"  said  Rustem,  "  thou  discharged
at  me  a  hundred  and  sixty  arrows  in  vain,  and
now  thou  art  overthrown  by  one  arrow  of  mine."
Bahman,  the  son  of  Isfendiyar,  seeing  his  father
bleeding  on  the  ground*  uttered  loud  lamentations,
and  Bashiitan,  followed  by  the  Iranian  troops,  also
drew  nigh  with  the  deepest  sorrow  marked  on
their  countenances.  The  fatal  arrow  was  imme-
diately drawn  from  the  wounded  eyes  of  the  prince,
and  some  medicine  being  first  applied  to  them,
they  conveyed  him  mournfully  to  his  own  tent.

The  conflict  having  thus  terminated,  Rustem  at

the  same  time  returned  with  his  army  to  where  Zal

remained  in  anxious  suspense  about  the  result.  The

old  man  rejoiced  at  the  issue,  but  said,  "  O,  my

2n2


468  THE SHAH NAMEH.

son,  thou  hast  killed  thy  enemy,  but  I  have  learnt
from  the  wise-men  and  astrologers  that  the  slayer  of
Isfendiyar  must  soon  come  to  a  fatal  end.  May
God  protect  thee!"  Rustem  replied,  "I  am
guiltless,  his  blood  is  upon  his  own  head/'  The
next  day  they  both  proceeded  to  visit  Isfendiyar,
and  offer  to  him  their  sympathy  and  condolence,
when  the  wounded  prince  thus  spoke  to  Rustem  :
"  I  do  not  ascribe  my  misfortune  to  thee,  but  to
an  all-ruling  power.  Fate  would  have  it  so,  and
thus  it  is !  I  now  consign  to  thy  care  and  guardian-
ship my  son  Bahman  :  instruct  him  in  the  science
of  government,  the  customs  of  kings,  and  the
rules  and  stratagems  of  the  warrior,  for  thou  art
exceedingly  wise  and  experienced,  and  perfect
in  all  things."  Rustem  readily  complied,  and
said:

"  That  duty  shall  be  mine  alone,
To  seat  him  firmly  on  the  throne."

Then  Isfendiyar  murmured  to  Bashutan,  that
the  anguish  of  his  wound  was  wearing  him  away,
and  that  he  had  but  a  short  time  to  live.

"  The  pace  of  death  is  fast  and  fleet,

And  nothing  my  life  can  save,
I  shall  want  no  robe,  but  my  winding  sheet,

No  mansion  but  the  grave.


THE  SHAH  \AMI;H.  469

And  tell  my  father  the  wish  of  his  heart

Has  not  been  breathed  in  vain,
The  doom  he  desired  when  he  made  me  depart,

Has  been  sealed,  and  his  son  is  slain  !

And,  O  !  to  my  mother,  in  kindliest  tone,

The  mournful  tidings  bear,
And  soothe  her  woes  for  her  warrior  gone,

For  her  lost  Isfendiyar."

He  now  groaned  heavily,  and  his  last  words
were  :

"  I  die,  pursued  by  unrelenting  fate,
The  hapless  victim  of  a  father's  hate."

Life  having  departed,  his  body  was  placed  upon
a  bier,  and  conveyed  to  Iran,  amidst  the  tears
and  lamentations  of  the  people.

Rustera  now  took  charge  of  Bahman,  according
to  the  dying  request  of  Isfendiyar,  and  brought
him  to  Sistan.  This  was  however  repugnant  to  the
wishes  of  Zuara,  who  observed  to  his  brother :
"  Thou  hast  slain  the  father  of  this  youth ;  do
not  therefore  nurture  and  instruct  the  son  of  thy
enemy,  for  mark  me,  in  the  end  he  will  be  avenged."
— "  But  did  not  Isfendiyar,  with  his  last  breath,
consign  him  to  my  guardianship  ;  how  can  I  re-
fuse it  now  ?  It  must  be  so  written  and  determined
in  the  dispensations  of  Heaven."


470  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

The  arrival  of  the  bier  in  Persia,  at  the  palace
of  Gushtasp,  produced  a  melancholy  scene  of  pub-
lic and  domestic  affliction.  The  king  took  off  the
covering  and  wept  bitterly,  and  the  mother  and
sisters  exclaimed,  "  Alas !  thy  death  is  not  the
work  of  human  hands,  it  is  not  the  work  of  Rus-
tem,  nor  of  Zal,  but  of  the  Simurgh.  Thou  hast
not  lived  long  enough  to  be  ashamed  of  a  grey
beard,  nor  to  witness  the  maturity  and  attainments
of  thy  children.  Alas !  thou  art  snatched  away  at
a  moment  of  the  highest  promise  even  at  the  com-
mencement of  thy  glory/7  In  the  meanwhile  the
curses  and  imprecations  of  the  people  were  poured
upon  the  devoted  head  of  Gushtasp  on  account  of
his  cruel  and  unnatural  conduct,  so  that  he  was
obliged  to  confine  himself  to  his  palace  till  after
the  interment  of  Isfendiyar.

Rustem  scrupulously  fulfilled  his  engagement,
and  instructed  Bahman  in  all  manly  exercises  ;  in
the  use  of  bow  and  javelin,  in  the  management  of
sword  and  buckler,  and  in  all  the  arts  and  ac-
complishments of  the  warrior.  He  then  wrote  to
Gushtasp,  repeating  that  he  was  unblameable
in  the  conflict  which  terminated  in  the  death  of
his  son  Isfendiyar,  that  he  had  offered  him  pre-
sents and  wealth  to  a  vast  extent,  and  moreover
was  ready  to  return  with  him  to  Iran,  to  his  fa-
ther ;  but  every  overture  was  rejected.  Relent-
less fate  must  have  hurried  him  on  to  a  premature


THE SHAH NAME1I.  471

death.  "  I  have  now,"  continued  Rustem,  "  com-
pleted the  education  of  Bahman,  according  to  the
directions  of  his  father,  and  await  thy  further
commands."  Gushtasp,  after  reading  this  letter,
referred  to  Bashutan,  who  confirmed  the  declara-
tions of  Rustem,  and  the  treacherous  king,  willing
to  ascribe  the  event  to  an  overruling  destiny,
readily  acquitted  Rustem  of  all  guilt  in  killing
Isfendiyar.  At  the  same  time  he  sent  for  Bahman,
and  on  his  arrival  from  Sistan,  was  so  pleased
with  him  that  he  without  hesitation  appointed  him
to  succeed  to  the  throne.

"  Methinks  I  see  Isfendiyar  again,

Thou  hast  the  form,  the  very  look  he  bore,
And  since  thy  glorious  father  is  no  more,

Long  as  I  live  thou  must  with  me  remain."


THE  DEATH  OF  RUSTEM.

Firdausi  seems  to  have  derived  the  account  of
Shughad,  and  the  melancholy  fate  of  Rustem,  from
a  descendant  of  Sam  and  Nariman,  who  was  par  •
ticularly  acquainted  with  the  chronicles  of  the
heroes  and  the  kings  of  Persia.  Shughad,  it  ap-
pears, was  the  son  of  Zal,  by  one  of  the  old  war-
rior's maid-servants,  and  at  his  very  birth  the  as-


472  THE SHAH NAMEH.

trologers  predicted  that  he  would  be  the  ruin  of
the  glorious  house  of  Sam  and  Nariman,  and  the
destruction  of  their  race.

Throughout  Sistan  the  prophecy  was  heard
With  horror  and  amazement ;  every  town
And  city  of  Iran  was  full  of  woe,
And  Zal,  in  deepest  agony  and  grief,
Sent  up  his  prayers  to  the  Almighty  Power,
That  he  would  purify  the  infant's  heart,
And  free  it  from  that  quality,  foretold
As  the  destroyer  of  his  ancient  house.
But  what  are  prayers,  opposed  by  destiny  ?

The  child,  notwithstanding,  was  brought  up  with
great  care  and  attention,  and  when  arrived  at  ma-
turity, he  was  sent  to  the  king  of  Kabul,  whose
daughter  he  espoused.

Rustem  was  accustomed  to  go  to  Kabul  every
year  to  receive  the  tribute  due  to  him,  but  on  the
last  occasion,  it  is  said  that  he  exacted  and  took
a  higher  rate  than  usual,  and  thus  put  many  of  the
people  to  distress.  The  king  was  angry,  and  ex-
pressed his  dissatisfaction  to  Shughad,  who  was
not  slow  in  uttering  his  own  discontent,  saying,
"  Though  I  am  his  brother,  he  has  no  respect  for
me,  but,  treats  me  always  like  an  enemy.  For  this
persona!  hostility  I  long  to  punish  him  with  death."
— "  But  how,"  inquired  the  king,  "  couldst  thou
compass  that  end?"  Shughad  replied,  "  I  have


THE SHAH NAMEH.  473

well  considered  the  subject,  and  propose  to  accom-
plish my  purpose  in  this  manner.  I  shall  feign  that
I  have  been  insulted  and  injured  by  thee,  and  carry
my  complaint  to  Zal  and  Rustem,  who  will  no  doubt
come  to  Kabul  to  redress  my  wrongs.  Thou  must
in  the  meantime  prepare  for  a  sporting  excursion,
and  order  a  number  of  pits  to  be  dug  on  the  road
sufficiently  large  to  hold  Rustem  and  his  horse,
and  in  each  several  swords  must  be  placed  with
their  points  and  edges  upwards.  The  mouths  of
the  pits  must  then  be  slightly  covered  over,  but
so  carefully  that  there  may  be  no  appearance  of
the  earth  underneath  having  been  removed.  Every
thing  being  thus  ready,  Rustem,  on  the  pretence
of  going  to  the  sporting  ground,  must  be  conduct-
ed by  that  road,  and  he  will  certainly  fall  into  one
of  the  pits,  which  will  become  his  grave."  This
stratagem  was  highly  approved  by  the  king,  and
it  was  agreed  that  at  a  royal  banquet,  Shughad
should  revile  and  irritate  the  king,  whose  in-
dignant answer  should  be  before  all  the  as-
sembly :  "  Thou  hast  no  pretensions  to  be  thought
of  the  stock  of  Sam  and  Narfman.  Zal  pays
thee  no  attention,  at  least,  not  such  attention  as
he  would  pay  to  a  son,  and  Rustem  declares  thou
art  not  his  brother ;  indeed,  all  the  family  treat
thee  as  a  slave/'  At  these  words,  Shughad  affect-
ed to  be  greatly  enraged,  and,  starting  up  from  the
banquet,  hastened  to  Rustem  to  complain  of  the


474  THE SHAH NAMEH.

insult  offered  him  by  the  king  of  Kabul.  Rustem
received  him  with  demonstrations  of  affection,
and  hearing  his  complaint,  declared  that  he  would
immediately  proceed  to  Kabul,  depose  the  king
for  his  insolence,  and  place  Shughad  himself  on
the  throne  of  that  country.  In  a  short  time  they
arrived  at  the  city,  and  were  met  by  the  king,
who,  with  naked  feet  and  in  humble  guise,  so-
licited forgiveness.  Rustem  was  induced  to  par-
don the  offence,  and  was  honoured  in  return  with
great  apparent  respect,  and  with  boundless  hos-
pitality. In  the  mean  time,  however,  the  pits
were  dug,  and  the  work  of  destruction  in  progress,
and  Rustem  was  now  invited  to  share  the  sports  of
the  forest.  The  champion  was  highly  gratified  by
the  courtesy  which  the  king  displayed,  and  mount-
ed Rakush,  anticipating  a  day  of  excellent  di-
version. Shughad  accompanied  him,  keeping  on
one  side,  whilst  Rustem,  suspecting  nothing,  rode
boldly  forward.  Suddenly  Rakush  stopped,  and
though  urged  to  advance,  refused  to  move  a  step.
At  last  the  champion  became  angry,  and  struck
the  noble  animal  severely ;  the  blows  made  him
dart  forward,  and  in  a  moment  he  unfortunately
fell  into  one  of  the  pits.

It  was  a  place,  deep,  dark,  and  perilous,
All  bristled  o'er  with  swords,  leaving  no  chance
Of  extrication  without  cruel  wounds ;
And  horse  and  rider  sinking  in  the  midst,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  475

Bore  many  a  grievous  stab  and  many  a  cut

In  limb  and  body,  ghastly  to  the  sight.

Yet  from  that  depth,  at  one  prodigious  spring,

Rakush  escaped  with  Itustem  on  his  back ;

But  what  availed  that  effort  ?  Down  again

Into  another  pit  both  fell  together,

And  yet  again  they  rose,  again,  again  ;

Seven  times  down  prostrate,  seven times  bruised  and

maimed,

They  struggled  on,  till  mounting  up  the  edge
Of  the  seventh  pit,  all  covered  with  deep  wounds,
Both  lay  exhausted. When  the  champion's  brain
Grew  cool,  and  he  had  power  to  think,  he  knew
Full  well  to  whom  he  owed  this  treachery ;
And  calling  to  Shughad,  said  :  "  Thou,  my  brother  !
Why  hast  thou  done  this  wrong  ?  Was  it  for  thee,
My  father's  son,  by  wicked  plot  and  fraud,
To  work  this  ruin,  to  destroy  my  life  ?"
Shughad  thus  sternly  answered  :  "  *Tis  for  all
The  blood  that  thou  hast  shed,  God  has  decreed
This  awful  vengeance, — now  thy  time  is  come  P*
Then  spoke  the  king  of  Kabul,  as  if  pity
Had  softened  his  false  heart :  "  Alas  1  the  day
That  thou  shouldst  perish,  so  ignobly  too,
And  in  my  kingdom  ;  what  a  wretched  fate  !
But  bring  some  medicine  to  relieve  his  wounds —
Quick,  bring  the  matchless  balm  for  Ku stem's  cure ;
He  must  not  die,  the  champion  must  not  die  !"
But  Rustem  scorned  the  offer,  and  in  wrath,


476  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Thus  spoke :  "  How  many  a  mighty  king  has  died,
And  left  me  still  triumphant — still  in  power,
Unconquerable ;  treacherous  thou  hast  been,
And  most  inhuman,  but  Framurz,  the  brave,
Will  be  revenged  upon  thee  for  this  crime."

Rustem  now  turned  towards  Shughad,  and  in
an  altered  and  mournful  tone,  told  him  that  he
was  at  the  point  of  death,  and  asked  him  to  string
his  bow  and  give  it  to  him,  that  he  might  seem  as
a  scare-crow,  to  prevent  the  wolves  and  other  wild
animals  from  devouring  him  when  dead.

Shughad  performed  the  task,  and  lingered  not,
For  he  rejoiced  at  this  catastrophe,
And  with  a  smile  of  fiendish  satisfaction,
Placed  the  strong  bow  before  him — Rustem  grasped
The  bended  horn  with  such  an  eager  hand,
That  wondering  at  the  sight,  the  caitiff  wretch
Shuddered  with  terror,  and  behind  a  tree
Shielded  himself,  but  nothing  could  avail ;
The  arrow  pierced  both  tree  and  him,  and  they
Were  thus  transfixed  together, — thus  the  hour
Of  death  afforded  one  bright  gleam  of  joy
To  Rustem,  who,  with  lifted  eyes  to  Heaven,
Exclaimed :  "  Thanksgivings  to  the  great  Creator,
For  granting  me  the  power,  with  my  own  hand,
To  be  revenged  upon  my  murderer !"
So  saying,  the  great  champion  breathed  his  last.
And  not  a  knightly  follower  remained,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  477

Zuara,  and  the  rest,  in  other  pits,

Dug  by  the  traitor-king,  and  traitor-brother,

Had  sunk  and  perished,  all,  save  one,  who  fled,

And  to  the  afflicted  veteran  at  Sistan

Told  the  sad  tidings. Zal,  in  agony,

Tore  his  white  hair,  and  wildly  rent  his  garments,

And  cried :  "  Why  did  not  I  die  for  him,  why

Was  I  not  present,  fighting  by  his  side  ?

But  he,  alas !  is  gone  !  Oh  !  gone  for  ever.11

Then  the  old  man  dispatched  Feramurz  with
a  numerous  force  to  Kabul,  to  bring  away  the
dead  body  of  Rustem.  Upon  his  approach,  the
king  of  Kabul  and  his  army  retired  to  the  moun-
tains, and  Feramurz  laid  waste  the  country.  He
found  only  the  skeletons  of  Rustem  and  Zuara,
the  beasts  of  prey  having  stripped  them  of  their
flesh  :  he  however  gathered  the  bones  together
and  conveyed  them  home  and  buried  them,  amidst
the  lamentations  of  the  people.  After  that,  he
returned  to  Kabul  with  his  army,  and  encounter-
ing the  king,  captured  the  cruel  wretch,  and  car-
ried him  to  Sistan,  where  he  was  put  to  death.

Gushtasp  having  become  old  and  infirm,  he  be-
queathed his  empire  to  Bahman,  and  then  died.
He  reigned  one  hundred  and  eight  years.


478  THE SHAH NAMEH.

BAHMAN.

Bahman,  the  son  of  Gushtasp,  having  at  the
commencement  of  his  sovereignty  obtained  the
approbation  of  his  people,  by  the  clemency  of  his
conduct,  and  the  apparent  generosity  of  his  dis-
position, was  not  long  in  meditating  vindictive
measures  against  the  family  of  Rustem.  "  Did
not  Kai-khosrau,"  said  he  to  his  warriors,  "  re-
venge himself  on  Afrasiyab  for  the  murder  of  Sai-
awush ;  and  have  not  all  my  glorious  ancestors
pursued  a  similar  course ;  why  then  should  not  I
be  revenged  on  the  father  of  Rustem  for  the  death
of  Isfendiyar  ?"  The  warriors,  as  usual,  approved
of  the  king's  resolution,  and  in  consequence  one
hundred  thousand  veteran  troops  were  assembled
for  the  immediate  invasion  of  Sis  tan.  When  Bah-
man  had  arrived  on  the  borders  of  the  river  Beher-
mund,  he  sent  a  message  to  Zal,  frankly  declaring
his  purpose,  and  that  he  must  sacrifice  the  lives  of
himself  and  all  his  family,  as  an  atonement  for
Rustem's  guilt  in  shedding  the  blood  of  Isfendiyar.

Zal  heard  this  menace  with  astonishment,
Mingled  with  anguish,  and  he  thus  replied :
"  Rustem  was  not  in  fault ;  and  thou  can'st  tell,
For  thou  wert  present,  how  he  wept,  and  prayed
That  he  might  not  be  bound. How  frequently
He  offered  all  his  wealth,  his  gold,  and  gems,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  479

To  be  excused  that  ignominious  thrall ;

And  would  have  followed  thy  impatient  father

To  wait  upon  Gushtasp ;  but  this  was  scorned ;

Nothing  but  bonds  would  satisfy  his  pride  ;

All  this  thou  know'st ;  then  did  not  I  and  Rustem

Strictly  fulfil  Isfendiyar's  commands,

And  most  assidiously  endow  thy  mind

With  all  the  skill  and  virtues  of  a  hero,

That,  might  deserve  some  kindness  in  return.

Now  take  my  house,  my  treasure,  my  possessions,

Take  all ;  but  spare  my  family  and  me.""

The  messenger  went  back,  and  told  the  tale
Of  ZaFs  deep  grief  with  such  persuasive  grace,
And  piteous  accent,  that  the  heart  of  Bahman
Softened  at  every  word,  and  the  old  man
Was  not  to  suffer. After  that  was  known,
With  gorgeous  presents  Zal  went  forth  to  meet
The  monarch  in  his  progress  to  the  city ;
And  having  prostrated  himself  in  low
Humility,  retired  among  the  train
Attendant  on  the  king. "  Thou  must  not  walk,"
Bahman  exclaimed,  well  skilled  in  all  the  arts
Of  smooth  hypocrisy — "  thou  art  too  weak  ;
Remount  thy  horse,  for  thou  requirest  help."
But  Zal  declined  the  honour,  and  preferred
Doing  that  homage  which  illustrious  Sam,
His  conquering  ancestor,  had  always  done,
Barefoot,  in  presence  of  the  royal  race.


480  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Fast  moving  onwards,  Bahman  soon  approached
Sistan,  and  entered  Zal's  superb  abode  ;
Not  as  a  friend,  or  a  forgiving  foe ;
But  with  a  spirit  unappeased,  unsoothed ;
True,  he  had  spared  the  old  man's  life  ;  but  there
His  mercy  stopped  ;  all  else  was  confiscate,
For  every  room  was  plundered,  all  the  treasure
Seized  and  devoted  to  the  tyrant's  use.

After  remorselessly  obtaining  this  booty,  Bah-
man inquired  what  had  become  of  Feramurz,  and
Zal  pretended  that,  unaware  of  the  king's  ap-
proach, he  had  gone  a  hunting.  But  this  excuse
was  easily  seen  through,  and  the  king  was  so
indignant  on  the  occasion,  that  he  put  Zal  himself
in  fetters.  Feramurz  had,  in  fact,  secretly  retired
with  the  Zabul  army  to  a  convenient  distance,  for
the  purpose  of  acting  as  necessity  might  require,
and  when  he  heard  that  Zal  was  placed  in  con-
finement, he  immediately  marched  against  the
invader  and  oppressor  of  his  country.  Both  armies
met,  and  closed,  and  were  in  desperate  conflict
three  long  days  and  nights.  On  the  fourth  day,
a  tremendous  hurricane  arose,  which  blew  thick
clouds  of  dust  in  the  face  of  the  Zabul  army,
and  blinding  them,  impeded  their  progress,  whilst
the  enemy  were  driven  furiously  forward  by  the
strong  wind  at  their  backs.  The  consequence
was  the  defeat  of  the  Zabul  troops.  Feramurz,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  481

with  a  few  companions,  however,  kept  his  ground,
though  assailed  by  showers  of  arrows.  He  tried
repeatedly  to  get  face  to  face  with  Bahman,  but
every  effort  was  fruitless,  and  he  felt  convinced
that  his  career  was  now  nearly  at  an  end.  He
bravely  defended  himself,  and  aimed  his  arrows
with  great  precision  ;  but  what  is  the  use  of  art
when  Fortune  is  unfavourable  ?

When  Fate's  dark  clouds  portentous  lour,

And  quench  the  light  of  day,
No  effort,  none,  of  human  power,

Can  chace  the  gloom  away.
Arrows  may  fly  a  countless  shower,

Amidst  the  desperate  fray  ;
But  not  to  sword  or  arrow  death  is  given,
Unless  decreed  by  favouring  Heaven.

And  it  was  so  decreed  that  the  exertions  of
Feramurz  should  be  unsuccessful.  His  horse  fell,
he  was  wounded  severely,  and  whilst  insensible,
the  enemy  secured  and  conveyed  him  in  fetters
to  Bahman,  who  immediately  ordered  him  to  be
hanged.  The  king  then  directed  all  the  people  of
Sfstan  to  be  put  to  the  sword ;  upon  which  Bash-
utan  said  :  "  Alas  !  why  should  the  innocent  and
unoffending  people  be  thus  made  to  perish  ?  Hast
thou  no  fear  of  God  ?  Thou  hast  taken  vengeance
for  the  blood  of  thy  father,  by  slaying  Feramurz,

2 i


482  THE SHAH NAMEH.

the  son  of  Rustem.  Is  not  that  enough?  Be
merciful  and  beneficent  now  to  the  people,  and
thank  Heaven  for  the  great  victory  thou  hast
gained."  Bahman  was  thus  withdrawn  from  his
wicked  purpose,  and  was  also  induced  to  liberate
Zal,  whose  age  and  infirmities  had  rendered  him
perfectly  harmless.  He  not  only  did  this,  but
restored  to  him  the  possession  of  Sistan ;  and  di-
vesting himself  of  all  further  revenge,  returned  to
Persia.  There  he  continued  to  exercise  the  func-
tions of  royalty,  till  one  day  he  happened  to  be
bitten  by  a  snake,  whose  venom  was  so  excru-
ciating, that  remedies  were  of  no  avail,  and  he
died  of  the  wound,  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign.
A  short  time  before  his  death,  he  married  and
took  to  his  bed  his  daughter  Humai,  for  such  was
the  custom  of  the  fire-worshippers,  and  she  had
become  pregnant  by  him.  Although  he  had  a
son  named  Sassan,  he  did  not  appoint  him  his
successor ;  but  gave  the  crown  and  the  throne  to
his  daughter  and  wife,  Humai,  saying  :  "  tf  Hu-
mai, who  is  now  pregnant,  be  delivered  of  a  son,
that  son  shall  be  my  successor ;  but  if  of  a  daugh-
ter, Humai  must  continue  to  reign."


HUMAI  AND  THE,  BIRTH  OF  DARAB.

Wisdom  and  generosity  were  said  to  have  marked
the  government  of  Humai. In  justice  and  bene-


THE SHAH NAMKH.  483

ficence  she  was  unequalled. No  misfortune  hap-
pened in  her  days,  even  the  poor  and  the  needy
became  rich. When  the  period  of  her  pregnancy
had  elapsed,  she  gave  birth  to  a  son,  whom  she
entrusted  to  a  nurse  to  be  brought  up  secretly,
and  declared  publicly  that  it  had  died  the  same  day
it  was  born. At  this  event  the  people  rejoiced,
for  they  were  happy  under  the  administration  of
Humai. Upon the boy attaining  his seventh
month,  however,  the  queen  sent  for  him,  and  wrap-
ping him  up  in  rich  garments,  put  him  in  a  box,
and  when  she  had  fastened  down  the  cover,  gave  it
to  two  confidential  servants,  in  the  middle  of  the
night,  to  be  flung  into  the  Euphrates. "  For,"
thought  she,  "  if  he  be  found  in  the  city,  there
will  be  an  end  to  my  authority,  and  the  crown  will
be  placed  upon  his  head ;  wiser,  therefore,  will
it  be  for  me  to  cast  him  into  the  river;  and  if  it
please  God  to  preserve  him,  he  may  be  nurtured,
and  brought  up  in  another  country." Accordingly
in  the  darkness  of  night,  the  box  was  thrown  into
the  Euphrates, and  it  floated  rapidly  down  the
stream  for  some  time  without  being  observed.

Amidst  the  waters,  in  that  little  ark
Was  launched  the  future  monarch. But,  vain  mortal !
How  bootless  are  thy  most  ingenious  schemes,
Thy  wisest  projects  ! Such  were  thine,  Humai  !
Presumptuous  as  thou  wert  to  think  success
2  I 2


484  THE SHAH NAM EH.

Would  crown  that  deed  unnatural  and  unjust.
But  human  passions,  human  expectations
Are  happily  controlled  by  righteous  Heaven.

In  the  morning  the  ark  was  noticed  by  a  washer-
man; who,  curious  to  know  what  it  contained,
drew  it  to  the  shore,  and  opened  the  lid.  Within
the  box  he  then  saw  splendid  silk-embroidered
scarfs  and  costly  raiment,  and  upon  them  a  lovely
infant  asleep.  He  immediately  took  up  the  child,
and  carried  it  to  his  wife,  saying :  "It  was  but
yesterday  that  our  own  infant  died,  and  now  the
Almighty  has  sent  thee  another  in  its  place."
The  woman  looked  at  the  child  with  affection,
and  taking  it  in  her  arms  gave  it  the  milk  of
her  own  breast,  which  it  eagerly  drank  till  it  was
satisfied.  In  the  box  they  also  found  jewels  and
rubies,  and  they  congratulated  themselves  upon  be-
ing at  length  blessed  by  Providence  with  wealth,
and  a  boy  at  the  same  time.  They  called  him
Darab,  and  the  child  soon  began  to  speak  in
the  language  of  his  foster-parents.  The  washer-
man and  his  wife,  for  fear  that  the  boy  and  the
wealth  might  be  discovered,  thought  it  safest  to
quit  their  home,  and  sojourn  in  another  country.
When  Darab  grew  up,  he  was  more  skilful  and
accomplished,  and  more  expert  at  wrestling  than
other  boys  of  a  greater  age.  But  whenever  the
washerman  told  him  to  assist  in  washing  clothes,


THE SHAH NAMEH.  485

he  always  ran  away,  and  would  not  stoop  to  the
drudgery.  This  untoward  behaviour  grieved  the
washerman  exceedingly,  and  he  lamented  that
God  had  given  him  so  useless  a  son,  not  knowing
that  he  was  destined  to  be  the  sovereign  of  all  the
world.

How  little  thought  he,  whilst  the  task  he  prest,
A  purer  spirit  warmed  the  stripling"^  breast,
Whose  opening  soul,  by  kingly  pride  inspired,
Disdained  the  toil  a  menial  slave  required ;
The  royal  branch  on  high  its  foliage  flung,
And  shewed  the  lofty  stem  from  which  it  sprung.

Darab  was  now  sent  to  school,  and  he  soon
excelled  his  master,  who  continually  said  to  the
washerman  :  "  Thy  son  is  of  wonderful  capacity,
acute  and  intelligent  beyond  his  years,  of  an  en-
larged understanding,  and  will  be  at  least  the
minister  of  a  king."  Darab  requested  to  have
another  master,  and  also  a  fine  horse  -of  Irak,  that
he  might  acquire  the  science  and  accomplishments
of  a  warrior  ;  but  the  washerman  replied  that  he
was  too  poor  to  comply  with  his  wishes,  which
threw  the  youth  into  despair,  so  that  he  did  not
touch  a  morsel  of  food  for  two  days  together.  His
foster-mother,  deeply  affected  by  his  disappoint-
ment, and  naturally  anxious  to  gratify  his  desires,
gave  an  article  of  value  to  the  washerman,  that  he


486  THE SHAH NAMEH.

might  sell  it,  and  with  the  money  purchase  the
horse  required.  The  horse  obtained,  he  was  daily
instructed  in  the  art  of  using  the  bow,  the  javelin,
and  the  sword,  and  in  every  exercise  becoming  a
young  gentleman  and  a  warrior.  So  devouringly
did  he  persevere  in  his  studies,  and  in  his  exertions
to  excel,  that  he  never  remained  a  moment  unoc-
cupied at  home  or  abroad.  The  development  of
his  talents  and  genius  suggested  to  him  an  inquiry
who  he  was,  and  how  he  came  into  the  house  of  a
washerman  ;  and  his  foster-mother,  in  compliance
with  his  entreaties,  described  to  him  the  manner
in  which  he  was  found.  He  had  long  been  mise-
able  at  the  thoughts  of  being  the  son  of  a  washer-
man, but  now  he  rejoiced,  and  looked  upon  him-
self as  the  son  of  some  person  of  consideration.
He  asked  her  if  she  had  any  thing  that  was  taken
out  of  the  box,  and  she  replied  :  "  Two  valuable
rubies  remain."  The  youth  requested  them  to  be
brought  to  him ;  one  he  bound  round  his  arm,  and
the  other  he  sold  to  pay  the  expenses  of  travelling
and  change  of  place.

At  that  time,  it  is  said,  the  king  of  Rum  had  sent
an  army  into  the  country  of  Iran.  Upon  receiving
this  information,  Humai  told  her  general,  named
Rishnawad,  to  collect  a  force  corresponding  with
the  emergency ;  and  he  issued  a  proclamation,
inviting  all  young  men  desirous  of  military  glory
to  flock  to  his  standard.  Darab  heard  this  procla-


THE SHAH NAMEH.  467

mation  with  delight,  and  among  others  hastened
to  Rishnawad,  who  presented  the  young  warriors
as  they  arrived  successively  to  Humai.  The  queen
stedfastly  marked  the  majestic  form  and  features
of  Darab,  and  said  in  her  heart:  "  The  youth
who  bears  this  dignified  and  royal  aspect,  appears
to  be  a  Kaianian  by  birth ;"  and  as  she  spoke,  the
instinctive  feeling  of  a  mother  seemed  to  agitate
her  bosom.

The  queen  beheld  his  form  and  face,
The  scion  of  a  princely  race ;
And  natural  instinct  seemed  to  move
Her  heart,  which  spoke  a  mother's  love ;
She  gazed,  but  like  the  lightning's  ray,
That  sudden  thrill  soon  passed  away.

The  army  was  now  in  motion.  After  the  first
march,  a  tremendous  wind  and  heavy  rain  came
on,  and  all  the  soldiers  were  under  tents,  except-
ing Darab,  who  had  none,  and  was  obliged  to  take
shelter  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather  be-
neath an  archway,  where  he  laid  himself  down,
and  fell  asleep.  Suddenly  a  supernatural  voice
was  heard,  saying :

"  Arch  stand  firm,  and  from  thy  wall
Let  no  ruined  fragment  fall  !
He  who  sleeps  beneath  is  one
Destined  to  a  royal  throne.


488  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

Arch  !  a  monarch  claims  thy  care,
The  king  of  Persia  slumbers  there  !"

The  voice  was  heard  by  every  one  near,  and
Rishnawad  having  also  heard  it,  inquired  of  his
people  from  whence  it  came.  As  he  spoke,  the
voice  repeated  its  caution  :

"  Arch  !  stand  firm,  and  from  thy  wall
Let  no  ruined  fragment  fall !
Bahman's  son  is  in  thy  keeping ;
He  beneath  thy  roof  is  sleeping.
Though  the  winds  are  loudly  roaring,
And  the  rain  in  torrents  pouring,
Arch!  stand  firm,  and  from  thy  wall
Let  no  loosened  fragment  fall.""

Again  Rishnawad  sent  other  persons  to  ascer-
tain from  whence  the  voice  proceeded  ;  and  they
returned,  saying,  that  it  was  not  of  the  earth,  but
from  Heaven.  Again  the  caution  sounded  in  his
ears  :

"  Arch  !  stand  firm,  and  from  thy  wall
Let  no  loosened  fragment  fall,""

And  his  amazement  increased.  He  now  sent  a
person  under  the  archway  to  see  if  any  one  was
there,  when  the  youth  was  discovered  in  deep
sleep  upon  the  ground,  and  the  arch  above  him
rent  and  broken  in  many  parts.  Rishnawad  being
apprized  of  this  circumstance,  desired  that  he


THE SHAH NAMEH.  489

might  be  awakened  and  brought  to  him.  The
moment  he  was  removed,  the  whole  of  the  arch
fell  down  with  a  dreadful  crash,  and  this  wonder-
ful escape  was  also  communicated  to  the  leader
of  the  army,  who  by  a  strict  and  particular  en-
quiry soon  became  acquainted  with  all  the  occur-
rences of  the  stranger's  life.  Rishnawad  also  sum-
moned before  him  the  washerman  and  his  wife,
and  they  corroborated  the  story  he  had  been  told.
Indeed  he  himself  recognised  the  ruby  on  Darab's
arm,  which  convinced  him  that  he  was  the  son  of
Bahman,  whom  Humai  caused  to  be  thrown  into
the  Euphrates.  Thus  satisfied  of  his  identity,  he
treated  him  with  great  honour,  placed  him  on  his
right  hand,  and  appointed  him  to  a  high  command
in  the  army.  Soon  afterwards  an  engagement
took  place  with  the  Rumfs,  and  Darab  in  the
advanced  guard  performed  prodigies  of  valour.
The  battle  lasted  all  day,  and  in  the  evening  Rish-
nawad bestowed  upon  him  the  praise  which  he
merited.  Next  day  the  army  was  again  prepared
for  battle,  when  Darab  proposed  that  the  leader
should  remain  quiet,  whilst  he  with  a  chosen  band
of  soldiers  attacked  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy.
The  proposal  being  agreed  to,  he  advanced  with
fearless  impetuosity  to  the  contest.

With  loosened  rein  he  rushed  along  the  field,
And  through  opposing  numbers  hewed  his  path.
Then  pierced  the  Kulub-gah,  the  centre-host,


490  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Where  many  a  warrior  brave,  renowned  in  arms,

Fell  by  his  sword. Like  sheep  before  a  wolf

The  harassed  Rumi's  fled ;  for  none  had  power

To  cope  with  his  strong  arm. His  wondrous  might

Alone,  subdued  the  legions  right  and  left ;

And  when,  unwearied,  he  had  fought  his  way

To  where  great  Kaisar  stood,  night  came,  and  darkness,

Shielding  the  trembling  emperor  of  Rum,

Snatched  the  expected  triumph  from  his  hands.

Rishnawad  was  so  filled  with  admiration  at  his
splendid  prowess,  that  he  now  offered  him  the
most  magnificent  presents ;  but  when  they  were
exposed  to  his  view,  a  suit  of  armour  was  the  only
thing  he  would  accept.

The  Rumf  s  were  entirely  disheartened  by  his
valour,  and  they  said  :  "  We  understood  that  the
sovereign  of  Persia  was  only  a  woman,  and  that
the  conquest  of  the  empire  would  be  no  difficult
task ;  but  this  woman  seems  to  be  more  fortunate
than  a  warrior-king.  Even  her  general  remains
inactive  with  the  great  body  of  his  army ;  and  a
youth,  with  a  small  force,  is  sufficient  to  subdue
the  legions  of  Rum;  we  had,  therefore,  better
return  to  our  own  country."  The  principal  war-
riors entertained  the  same  sentiments,  and  sug-
gested to  Kaisar  the  necessity  of  retiring  from  the
field ;  but  the  king  opposed  this  measure,  thinking
it  cowardly  and  disgraceful,  and  said  :


THE SHAH NAMEH.


"  Tomorrow  we  renew  the  fight,
To-morrow  we  shall  try  our  might  ;
To-morrow,  with  the  smiles  of  Heaven,
To  us  the  victory  will  be  given.*"

Accordingly  on  the  following  day  the  armies
met  again,  and  after  a  sanguinary  struggle,  the
Persians  were  again  triumphant.  Kaisar  now
despaired  of  success,  sent  a  messenger  to  Rishna-
wad, in  which  he  acknowledged  the  aggressions
he  had  committed,  and  offered  to  pay  him  whatever
tribute  he  might  require.  Rishnawad  readily  set-
tled the  terms  of  the  peace  ;  and  the  emperor  was
permitted  to  return  to  his  own  dominions.

After  this  event  Rishnawad  sent  to  Humai  in-
telligence of  the  victories  he  had  gained,  and  of
the  surprising  valour  of  Darab,  transmitting  to  her
the  ruby  as  an  evidence  of  his  birth.  Humai  was
at  once  convinced  that  he  was  her  son,  for  she
well  remembered  the  day  on  which  he  was  en-
rolled as  one  of  her  soldiers,  when  her  heart  throb-
bed with  instinctive  affection  at  the  sight  of  him  ;
and  though  she  had  unfortunately  failed  to  ques-
tion him  then,  she  now  rejoiced  that  he  was  so
near  being  restored  to  her.  She  immediately
proceeded  to  the  Atish-gadeh,  or  the  Fire-altar,
and  made  an  offering  on  the  occasion  ;  and  order-
ing a  great  fire  to  be  lighted,  gave  immense  sums
away  in  charity  to  the  poor.  Having  called  Darab


492  THE SHAH NAMEH.

to  her  presence,  she  went  with  a  splendid  retinue
to  meet  him  at  the  distance  of  one  journey  from
the  city ;  and  as  soon  as  he  approached,  she
pressed  him  to  her  bosom,  and  kissed  his  head
and  eyes  with  the  fondest  affection  of  a  mother.
Upon  the  first  day  of  happy  omen,  she  relin-
quished in  his  favour  the  crown  and  the  throne,
after  having  herself  reigned  thirty-two  years.


DARAB.


When  Darab  had  ascended  the  throne,  he  con-
ducted the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  with  humanity,
justice,  and  benevolence ;  and  by  these  means
secured  the  happiness  of  his  people.  He  had  no
sooner  commenced  his  reign,  than  he  sent  for  the
washerman  and  his  wife,  and  enriched  them  by
his  gifts.  "  But,"  said  he,  "  I  present  to  you
this  property  on  these  conditions — you  must  not
give  up  your  occupation — you  must  go  every  day,
as  usual,  to  the  river- side,  and  wash  clothes  ;  for
perhaps  in  process  of  time  you  may  discover
another  box  floating  down  the  stream,  containing
another  infant !"  With  these  conditions  the  washer-
man complied.

Some  time  afterwards  the  kingdom  was  invaded


THE SHAH XAMEH.  493

by  an  Arabian  army,  consisting  of  one  hundred
thousand  men,  and  commanded  by  Shaib,  a  dis-
tinguished warrior.  Darab  was  engaged  with  this
army  three  days  and  three  nights,  and  on  the
fourth  morning  the  battle  terminated,  in  conse-
quence of  Shaib  being  slain.  The  booty  was  im-
mense, and  a  vast  number  of  Arabian  horses  fell
into  the  hands  of  the  victor  ;  which,  together  with
the  quantity  of  treasure  captured,  strengthened
greatly  the  resources  of  the  state.  The  success  of
this  campaign  enabled  Darab  to  extend  his  mili-
tary operations ;  and  having  put  his  army  in
order,  he  proceeded  against  Failakus  (Philip  of  Ma-
cedon),  then  king  of  Rum,  whom  he  defeated  with
great  loss.  Many  were  put  to  the  sword,  and  the
women  and  children  carried  into  captivity.  Failakus
himself  took  refuge  in  the  fortress  of  Amur,  from
whence  he  sent  an  ambassador  to  Darab,  saying,
that  if  peace  was  only  granted  to  him,  he  would
willingly  consent  to  any  terms  that  might  be  de-
manded. When  the  ambassador  arrived,  Darab
said  to  him  :  "  If  Failakus  will  bestow  upon  me  his
daughter,  Nahid,  peace  shall  be  instantly  re-esta-
blished between  us — I  require  no  other  terms."
Failakus  readily  agreed,  and  sent  Nahid  with  nu-
merous splendid  presents  to  the  king  of  Persia,
who  espoused  her,  and  took  her  with  him  to  his
own  country.  It  so  happened  that  Nahid  had  an
offensive  breath,  which  was  extremely  disagree-


494  THE SHAH NAMEH.

able  to  her  husband,  and  in  consequence  he  di-
rected enquiries  to  be  made  every  where  for  a
remedy.  No  place  was  left  unexplored  ;  at  length
an  herb  of  peculiar  efficacy  and  fragrance  was  dis-
covered, which  never  failed  to  remove  the  im-
perfection complained  of ;  and  it  was  accordingly
administered  with  confident  hopes  of  success.
Nahid  was  desired  to  wash  her  mouth  with  the
infused  herb,  and  in  a  few  days  her  breath  be-
came balmy  and  pure.  A  state  of  pregnancy
soon  followed  the  happy  union  ;  to  no  one,  how-
ever, did  she  communicate  the  circumstance,  but
requested  permission  to  pay  a  visit  to  her  father.
The  request  was  granted ;  and  on  her  arrival  in
Rum  she  was  delivered  of  a  son.  Failakus  had  no
male  offspring,  and  was  overjoyed  at  this  event,
which  he  at  once  determined  to  keep  unknown  to
Darab,  publishing  abroad  that  a  son  had  been  born
in  his  house,  and  causing  it  to  be  understood  that
the  child  was  his  own.  When  the  boy  grew  up,
he  was  named  Sikander;  and,  like  Rustem,  be-
came highly  accomplished  in  all  the  arts  of  diplo-
macy and  war.  Failakus  placed  him  under  Aris-
tatalis,  a  sage  of  great  renown,  and  he  soon
equalled  his  master  in  learning  and  science.

Darab  married  another  wife,  by  whom  he  had
another  son,  named  Dara ;  and  when  the  youth
was  twenty  years  of  age,  the  father  died.  The
period  of  Darab's  reign  was  thirty- four  years.


THE SHAH NAM EH.  495

D  A 11  A.

Dara  continued  the  government  of  the  empire
in  the  same  spirit  as  his  father ;  claiming  custom
and  tribute  from  the  inferior  rulers,  with  similar
strictness  and  decision.  After  the  death  of  Failakus,
Sikander  became  the  king  of  Rum  ;  and  refusing
to  pay  the  demanded  tribute  to  Persia,  went  to
war  with  Dara,  whom  he  killed  in  battle  ;  the
particulars  of  these  events  will  be  presently  shewn.
Failakus  reigned  twenty-four  years.


SIKANDER.

Failakus,  before  his  death,  placed  the  crown  of
sovereignty  upon  the  head  of  Sikander,  and  ap-
pointed Aristu,  who  was  one  of  the  disciples  of
Jhe  great  Aflatun,  his  vizir.  He  cautioned  him
to  pursue  the  path  of  virtue  and  rectitude,  and  to
cast  from  his  heart  every  feeling  of  vanity  and
pride ;  above  all  he  implored  him  to  be  just  and
merciful,  and  said  :

"  Think  not  that  thou  art  wise,  but  ignorant,
And  ever  listen  to  advice  and  counsel ;
We  are  but  dust,  and  from  the  dust  created ;
And  what  our  lives  but  helplessness  and  sorrow  !"


496  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Sikander  for  a  time  attended  faithfully  to  the
instructions  of  his  father,  and  to  the  counsel  of
Aristu,  both  in  public  and  private  affairs.

Upon  Sikander's  elevation  to  the  throne,  Dara
sent  an  envoy  to  him  to  claim  the  customary  tri-
bute, but  he  received  for  answer  :  "  The  time  is
past  when  Rum  acknowledged  the  superiority
of  Persia.  It  is  now  thy  turn  to  pay  tribute  to
Rum.  If  my  demand  be  refused,  I  will  imme-
diately invade  thy  dominions  ;  and  think  not  that
I  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  conquest  of  Persia
alone,  the  whole  world  shall  be  mine ;  therefore
prepare  for  war."  Dara  had  no  alternative,  not
even  submission,  and  accordingly  assembled  his
army,  for  Sikander  was  already  in  full  march
against  him.  Upon  the  confines  of  Persia  both
armies  came  in  sight  of  each  other,  when  Si-
kander, in  the  assumed  character  of  an  envoy,  was
resolved  to  ascertain  the  exact  condition  of  the
enemy.  With  this  view  he  entered  the  Persian
camp,  and  Dara  allowing  the  person  whom  he
supposed  an  ambassador,  to  approach,  enquired
what  message  the  king  of  Rum  had  sent  to  him.
"  Hear  me !"  said  the  pretended  envoy  :  "Si-
kander has  not  invaded  thy  empire  for  the  exclu-
sive purpose  of  fighting,  but  to  know  its  history,
its  laws,  and  customs,  from  personal  inspection.
His  object  is  to  travel  through  the  whole  world.
Why  then  should  he  make  war  upon  thee  ?  Give


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  497

him  but  a  free  passage  through  thy  kingdom,  and
nothing  more  is  required.  However  if  it  be  thy
wish  to  proceed  to  hostilities,  he  apprehends  no-
thing from  the  greatness  of  thy  power."  Dan!
was  astonished  at  the  majestic  air  and  dignity  of
the  envoy,  never  having  witnessed  his  equal,  and
he  anxiously  said :

"  What  is  thy  name,  from  whom  art  thou  descended  ?

For  that  commanding  front,  that  fearless  eye,

Bespeaks  illustrious  birth. Art  thou  indeed

Sikander,  whom  my  fancy  would  believe  thee  ?

So  eloquent  in  speech,  in  mien  so  noble  ?"

"  No!"  said  the  envoy,  "  no  such  rank  is  mine,

Sikander  holds  among  his  numerous  host

Thousands  superior  to  the  humble  slave

Who  stands  before  thee. It  is  not  for  me

To  put  upon  myself  the  air  of  kings,

To  ape  their  manners  and  their  lofty  state."

Dara  could  not  help  smiling,  and  ordered  re-
freshments and  wine  to  be  brought.  He  filled  a
cup  and  gave  it  to  the  envoy,  who  drank  it  off,
but  did  not,  according  to  custom,  return  the  empty
goblet  to  the  cup-bearer.  The  cup-bearer  de-
manded the  cup,  and  Dara  asked  the  envoy  why
he  did  not  give  it  back.  "  It  is  the  custom  in  my
country,"  said  the  envoy,  "  when  a  cup  is  once
given  into  an  ambassador's  hands,  never  to  receive

2  K


498  THE SHAH NAMEH.

it  back  again."  Dara  was  still  more  amused  by  this
explanation,  and  presented  to  him  another  cup,
and  successively  four,  which  the  envoy  did  not  fail
to  appropriate  severally  in  the  same  way.  In  the
evening  a  feast  was  held,  and  Sikander  partook
of  the  delicious  refreshments  that  had  been  pre-
pared for  him  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  the  entertain-
ment one  of  the  persons  present  recognized  him,
and  immediately  whispered  to  Dara  that  his  enemy
was  in  his  power.

Sikander's  sharp  and  cautious  eye  now  marked
The  changing  scene,  and  up  he  sprang,  but  first
Snatched  the  four  cups,  and  rushing  from  the  tent,
Vaulted  upon  his  horse,  and  rode  away.
So  instantaneous  was  the  act,  amazed
The  assembly  rose,  and  presently  a  troop
Was  ordered  in  pursuit — but  night,  dark  night,
Baffled  their  search,  and  checked  their  eager  speed.

As  soon  as  he  reached  his  own  army,  he  sent  for
Aristatalis  and  his  courtiers,  and  exultingly  dis-
played to  them  the  four  golden  cups.  "  These,"
said  he,  "  have  I  taken  from  my  enemy,  I  have
taken  them  from  his  own  table,  and  before  his
own  eyes.  His  strength  and  numbers  too  I  have
ascertained,  and  my  success  is  certain."  No  time
was  now  lost  in  arrangements  for  the  battle.  The
armies  engaged,  and  they  fought  seven  days  with-


THE SHAH NAM  EH.  4!M)

out  a  decisive  blow  being  struck.  On  the  eighth,
Dara  was  compelled  to  fly,  and  his  legions,  de-
feated and  harassed,  were  pursued  by  the  Rumis
with  great  slaughter  to  the  banks  of  the  Eu-
phrates. Sikander  now  returned  to  take  posses-
sion of  the  capital.  In  the  mean  time  Dara  col-
lected his  scattered  forces  together,  and  again
tried  his  fortune,  but  he  was  again  defeated.
After  his  second  success,  the  conqueror  devoted
himself  so  zealously  to  conciliate  and  win  the  af-
fections of  the  people,  that  they  soon  ceased  to
remember  their  former  king  with  any  degree  of
attachment  to  his  interests.  Sikander  said  to
them  :  "  Persia  indeed  is  my  inheritance :-  I  am
no  stranger  to  you,  for  I  am  myself  descended
from  Darab  ;  you  may  therefore  safely  trust  to  my
justice  and  paternal  care,  in  every  thing  that  con-
cerns your  welfare."  The  result  was.  that  legion
after  legion  united  in  his  cause,  and  consolidated
his  power.

When  Dara  was  informed  of  the  universal  dis-
affection of  his  army,  he  said  to  the  remaining
friends  who  were  personally  devoted  to  him  :
"  Alas!  my  subjects  have  been  deluded  by  the
artful  dissimulation  and  skill  of  Sikander  ;  your
next  misfortune  will  be,  the  captivity  of  your
wives  and  children.  Yes,  your  wives  and  chil-
dren will  be  made  the  slaves  of  the  conquerors,"
A  few  troops,  still  faithful  to  their  unfortunate
2x2


500  THE SHAH NAMEH.


king,  offered  to  make  another  effort  against  the
enemy,  and  Dara  was  too  grateful  and  too  brave
to  discountenance  their  enthusiastic  fidelity,  though
with  such  little chance  of  success. A  fragment
/ of  an  army  was  consequently  brought  into  action,
and  the  result  was  what  had  been  anticipated.
Dara  was  again  a  fugitive  ; and  after  the  defeat,
escaped  with  three  hundred  men  into  the  neigh-
bouring desert. Sikander  captured  his  wife  and
family,  but  magnanimously  restored  them  to  the
unfortunate  monarch,  who,  destitute  of  all  further
hope,  now  asked  for  a  place  of  refuge  in  his  own
dominions, and  for  that  he  offered  him  all  the
buried  treasure  of his  ancestors. Sikander,  in
reply,  invited  him  to  his  presence ;  and  promised
to  restore  him  to  his  throne,  that  he  might  himself
be  enabled  to  pursue  other  conquests  ;  but  Dara
refused  to  go,  although  advised  by  his  nobles  to
accept  the  invitation. "  I  am  willing  to  put  my-
self to  death," said  he  with  emotion, "  but  I
cannot  submit  to  this  degradation. I  cannot  go
before  him,  and  thus  personally  acknowledge  his
authority  over  me." Resolved  upon  this  point,
he  wrote  to  Faur,  one  of  the  sovereigns  of  Ind,
to  request  his  assistance,  and  Faur  recommended
that  he  should  pay  him  a  visit  for  the  purpose
of  concerting  what  measures  should  be  adopted.
This  correspondence  having  come  to  the  know-
ledge of  Sikander,  he  took  care  that  his  enemy


THE SllAlI NA.MKII.  501

should be intercepted  in  whatever  direction  he
might  proceed.

Dara  had  two  ministers,  named  Mahiyar  and
Jamusipar,  who,  finding  that  according  to  the
predictions  of  the  astrologers  their  master  would  in
a  few  days  fall  into  the  hands  of  Sikander,  con-
sulted together,  and  thought  they  had  better  put
him  to  death  themselves,  in  order  that  they  might
get  into  favour  with  Sikander.  It  was  night,  and
the  soldiers  of  the  escort  were  dispersed  at  various
distances,  and  the  vizirs  were  stationed  on  each
side  of  the  king.  As  they  travelled  on,  Jamusipar
took  an  opportunity  of  plunging  his  dagger  into
Dara's  side,  and  Mahiyar  gave  another  blow
which  felled  the  monarch  to  the  ground.  They
immediately  sent  the  tidings  of  this  event  to  Si-
kander, who  hastened  to  the  spot,  and  the  open-
ing daylight  presented  to  his  view  the  wounded
king.

Dismounting  quickly,  he  in  sorrow  placed
The  head  of  Dara  on  his  lap,  and  wept
In  bitterness  of  soul,  to  see  that  form
Mangled  with  ghastly  wounds.

Dara  still  breathed  ;  and  when  he  lifted  up  his
eyes  and  beheld  Sikander,  he  groaned  deeply.
Sikander  said,  "  Rise  up,  that  we  may  convey
thee  to  a  place  of  safety,  and  apply  the  proper  re-
medies to  thy  wounds." — "  Alas!"  replied  Dara,


502  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

"  the  time  for  remedies  is  past. I  leave  thee  to
Heaven,  and  may  thy  reign  give  peace  and  hap-
piness to  the  empire." — "  Never,"  said  Sikander,
"  never  did  I  desire  to  see  thee  thus  mangled  and
fallen — never  to  witness  this  sight ! If  the  Al-
mightly  should  spare  thy  life,  thou  shalt  again  be
the  monarch  of  Persia,  and  I  will  go  from  hence.
On  my  mother's  word,  thou  and  I  are  sons  of  the
same  father. It  is  this  brotherly  affection  which
now  wrings  my  heart !" Saying  this,  the  tears
chaced  each  other  down  his  cheeks  in  such  abun-
dance that  they  fell  upon  the  face  of  Dara. Again,
he  said,  "  Thy  murderers  shall  meet  with  merited
vengeance,  they  shall  be  punished  to  the  utter-
most." Dara  blessed  him, and  said,  "  My  end
is  approaching,  but  thy  sweet  discourse  and  con-
soling kindness  have  banished  all  my  grief. I
shall  now  die with  a  mind  at  rest. Weep  no
more —

>J My  course  is  finished,  thine  is  scarce  begun ;
But  hear  my  dying  wish,  my  last  request :
Preserve  the  honour  of  my  family,
Preserve  it  from  disgrace. I  have  a  daughter
Dearer  to  me  than  life,  her  name  is  Roshung  ;
Espouse  her,  I  beseech  thee — and  if  Heaven
Should  bless  thee  with  a  boy,  Oh  !  let  his  name  be
Isfendiyar,  that  he  may  propagate
With  zeal  the  sacred  doctrines  of  Zerdusht,


THE SHAH NAME1I.  503

Triie  Zendavesta,  then  my  soul  will  be
Happy  in  Heaven ;  and  he,  at  Nau-ruz  tide,
Will  also  hold  the  festival  I  love,
And  at  the  altar  light  the  Holy  Fire ;
Nor  will  he  cease  his  labour,  till  the  faith
Of  Lohurasp  be  everywhere  accepted,
And  everywhere  believed  the  true  religion,"

Sikander  promised  that  he  would  assuredly  fulfil
the  wishes  he  had  expressed,  and  then  Dara
placed  the  palm  of  his  brother's  hand  on  his
mouth,  and  shortly  afterwards  expired.  Sikander
again  wept  bitterly,  and  then  the  body  was  placed
on  a  golden  couch,  and  he  attended  it  in  sorrow
to  the  grave.

After  the  burial  of  Dara,  the  two  ministers,
Jamusipar  and  Mahiyar,  were  brought  near  the
tomb,  and  executed  upon  the  dar.

Just  vengeance  falls  upon  the  guilty  head,

For  they  their  generous  monarch's  blood  had  shed.

Sikander  had  now  no  rival  to  the  throne  of
Persia,  and  he  commenced  his  government  under
the  most  favourable  auspices.  He  continued  the
same  customs  and  ordinances  which  were  handed
down  to  him,  and  retained  every  one  in  his  es-
tablished rank  and  occupation.  He  gladdened
the  heart  by  his  justice  and  liberality.  Keeping
in  mind  his  promise  to  Dara,  he  now  wrote  to  the


504  THE SHAH XAMEH.

mother  of  Roshung, and  communicating  to  her
the  dying  solicitations  of  the  king,  resquested  her
to  send  Roshung  to  him,  that  he  might  fulfil  the
last  wish  of  his  brother The  wife  of  Dara  im-
mediately complied  with  the  command, and  sent
her  daughter  with various  presents  to  Sikander,
and  she  was  on  her  arrival  married  to  the  con-
queror, according  to  the  customs  and  laws  of  the
empire. Sikander  loved  her  exceedingly,  and  on
her  account  remained  some  time  in  Persia,  but  he
at  length  determined  to proceed  into  Ind  to  con-
quer that  country  of  enchanters  and  enchantment.
On  approaching  Ind  he  wrote  to  Kaid,  summon-
ing him  to  surrender  his  kingdom,  and  received
from  him  the  following  answer :  "I  will  certainly
submit  to  thy  authority,  but  I  have  four  things
which  no  other  person  in  the  world  possesses,  and
which  I  cannot  relinquish .  I  have  a  daughter,  beau-
tiful  as  an  angel  of  Paradise,  a  wise  minister,  a  skil-
ful physician,  and  a  goblet  of  inestimable  value !"
Upon  receiving  this  extraordinary  reply,  Sikander
again  addressed  a  letter  to  him,  in  which  he  pe-
remptorily required  all  these  things  immediately.
Kaid  not  daring  to  refuse,  or  make  any  attempt  at
evasion,  reluctantly  complied  with  the  requisition.
Sikander  received  the  minister  and  the  physician
with  great  politeness  and  attention,  and  in  the
evening  held  a  splendid  feast,  at  which  he  espoused
the  beautiful  daughter  of  Kaid,  and  taking  the


THE SHAH NAM  1.11.  505

goblet  from  her  hands,  drank  off  the  wine  with
which  it  was  filled.  After  that,  Kaid  himself
waited  upon  Sikander,  and  personally  acknow-
ledged his  authority  and  dominion.

Sikander  then  proceeded  to  claim  the  allegiance
and  homage  of  Faur,  the  king  of  Kanuj,  and
wrote  to  him  to  submit  to  his  power ;  but  Faur
returned  a  haughty  answer,  saying  :

"  Kaid  Indi  is  a  coward  to  obey  thee,
But  I  am  Faur,  descended  from  a  race
Of  matchless  warriors  ;  and  shall  I  submit,
And  to  a  Greek  !"

Sikander  was  highly  incensed  at  this  bold  reply.
The  force  he  had  now  with  him  amounted  to
eighty  thousand  men  ;  that  is,  thirty  thousand/
Iranians,  forty  thousand  Rumls,  and  ten  thousand  "[
Indis.  Faur  had  sixty  thousand  horsemen,  and
two  thousand  elephants.  The  troops  of  Sikander
were  greatly  terrified  at  the  sight  of  so  many  ele-
phants, which  gave  the  enemy  such  a  tremendous
superiority.  Aristatalis,  and  some  other  inge-
nious counsellors,  were  requested  to  consult  to-
gether to  contrive  some  means  of  counteracting
the  power  of  the  war-elephants,  and  they  sug-
gested the  construction  of  an  iron  horse,  and  the
figure  of  a  rider  also  of  iron,  to  be  placed  upon
wheels  like  a  carriage,  and  drawn  by  a  number


506  THE SHAH NAMEH.

of  horses.  A  soldier,  clothed  in  iron  armour,  was
to  follow  the  vehicle — his  hands  and  face  besmear-
ed with  combustible  matter,  and  this  soldier,
armed  with  a  long  staff,  was  at  an  appointed
signal,  to  pierce  the  belly  of  the  horse  and  also  of
the  rider,  previously  filled  with  combustibles,  so
that  when  the  ignited  point  came  in  contact  with
them,  the  whole  engine  would  make  a  tremendous
explosion  and  blaze  in  the  air.  Sikander  approved
of  this  invention,  and  collected  all  the  blacksmiths
and  artizans  in  the  country  to  construct  a  thou-
sand machines  of  this  description  with  the  utmost
expedition,  and  as  soon  as  they  were  completed,
he  prepared  for  action.  Faur  too  pushed  forward
with  his  two  thousand  elephants  in  advance  ;  but
when  the  Kanuj  ians  beheld  such  a  formidable
array  they  were  surprized,  and  Faur  anxiously
inquired  from  his  spies  what  it  could  be.  Upon
being  told  that  it  was  Sikander's  artillery,  his
troops  pushed  the  elephants  against  the  enemy
with  vigour,  at  which  moment  the  combustibles
were  fired  by  the  Rumis,  and  the  machinery  ex-
ploding, many  elephants  were  burnt  and  destroy-
ed, and  the  remainder,  with  the  troops,  fled  in
confusion.  Sikander  then  encountered  Faur,  and
after  a  severe  contest,  slew  him,  and  became  ruler
of  the  kingdom  of  Kanuj.

After  the  conquest  of  Kanuj, Sikander  went
to  Mekka,  carrying  thither  rich  presents  and  offer-


THE SHAH NAM  K II.  507

ings.  From  thence  he  proceeded  to  another  city,
where  he  was  received  with  great  homage  by  the
most  illustrious  of  the  nation.  He  inquired  of
them  if  there  was  any  thing  wonderful  or  extra-
ordinary in  their  country,  that  he  might  go  to  see
it,  and  they  replied  that  there  were  two  trees  in
the  kingdom,  one  a  male,  the  other  a  female,  from
which  a  voice  proceeded.  The  male- tree  spoke  in
the  day,  and  the  female-tree  in  the  night,  and
whoever  had  a  wish,  went  thither  to  have  his  de-
sires accomplished.  Sikander  immediately  re-
paired to  the  spot,  and  approaching  it,  he  hoped
in  his  heart  that  a  considerable  part  of  his  life  still
remained  to  be  enjoyed.  When  he  came  under
the  tree,  a  terrible  sound  arose  and  rung  in  his
ears,  and  he  asked  the  people  present  what  it
meant.  The  attendant  priest  said  it  implied  that
fourteen  years  of  his  life  still  remained.  Sikander,
at  this  interpretation  of  the  prophetic  sound,
wept,  and  the  burning  tears  ran  down  his
cheeks.  Again  he  asked,  "  Shall  I  return  to
Rum,  and  see  my  mother  and  children  before
I  die  ?"  and  the  answer  was,  "  Thou  wilt  die  at
Kashan.

Nor  mother,  nor  thy  family  at  home
Wilt  thou  behold  again,  for  thou  wilt  die,
Closing  thy  course  of  glory  at  Kashan."

Sikander  left  the  place  in  sorrow,  and  pursued


508  THE SHAH NAM EH.

his  way  towards  Rum.  In  his  progress  he  arrived
at  another  city,  and  the  inhabitants  gave  him  the
most  honourable  welcome,  representing  to  him,
however,  that  they  were  dreadfully  afflicted  by
the  presence  of  two  demons  or  giants,  who  con-
stantly assailed  them  in  the  night,  devouring  men
and  goats  and  whatever  came  in  their  way.  Si-
kander  asked  their  names ;  and  they  replied,
Yajiij  and  Majuj  (Gog  and  Magog).  He  imme-
diately ordered  a  barrier  to  be  erected  five  hun-
dred yards  high,  and  three  hundred  yards  wide,
and  when  it  was  finished  he  went  away.  The
giants,  notwithstanding  all  their  efforts,  were  un-
able to  scale  this  barrier,  and  in  consequence  the
inhabitants  pursued  their  occupations  without  the
fear  of  molestation.

To  scenes  of  noble  daring  still  he  turned

His  ardent  spirit — for  he  knew  not  fear.

Still  he  led  on  his  legions — and  now  came

To  a  strange  place,  where  countless  numbers  met

His  wondering  view — countless  inhabitants

Crowding  the  city  streets,  and  neighbouring  plains;

And  in  the  distance  presently  he  saw

A  lofty  mountain  reaching  to  the  stars.

Onward  proceeding,  at  its  foot  he  found

A  guardian-dragon,  terrible  in  form,

Heady  with  open  jaws  to  crush  his  victim  ;

But  unappalled,  Sikander  him  beholding


THE SHAH NAMEH.  509

With  steady  eye,  which  scorned  to  turn  aside,
Sprang  forward,  and  at  once  the  monster  slew.

Ascending  then  the  mountain,  many  a  ridge,
Oft  resting  on  the  way,  he  reached  the  summit,
Where  the  dead  corse  of  an  old  saint  appeared
Wrapt  in  his  grave-clothes,  and  in  gems  imbedded
In  gold  and  precious  jewels,  glittering  round,
Seeming  to  shew  what  man  is,  mortal  man  !
Wealth,  worldly  pomp,  the  baubles  of  ambition,
All  left  behind,  himself  a  heap  of  dust  !

None  ever  went  upon  that  mountain  top,
But  sought  for  knowledge  ; and  Sikander  hoped
When  he  had  reached  its  cloudy  eminence,
To  see  the  visions  of  futurity
Arise  from  that  departed,  holy  man  !
And  soon  he  heard  a  voice  : — "  Thy  time  is  nigh  !
Yet  may  I  thy  career  on  earth  unfold.
It  will  be  thine  to  conquer  many  a  realm,
Win  many  a  crown ;  thou  wilt  have  many  friends
And  numerous  foes,  and  thy  devoted  head
Will  be  uplifted  to  the  very  heavens.
Renowned  and  glorious  shalt  thou  be  ;  thy  name
Immortal ;  but,  alas  !  thy  time  is  nigh  !"
At  these  prophetic  words  Sikander  wept,
And  from  that  ominous  mountain  hastened  down.

After  that  Sikander  journeyed  on  to  the  city
of  Kashan,  where  he  fell  sick,  and  in  a  few  days,


510  THE SHAH NAM  EH.

according  to  the  oracle  and  the  prophecy,  expired.
He  had  scarcely  breathed  his  last,  when  Aristu,
and  Bilniyas  the  physician,  and  his  family,  en-
tered Kashan,  and  found  him  dead.  They  beat
their  faces,  and  tore  their  hair,  and  mourned  for
him  forty  days.


The  remainder  of  the  Shah  Nameh  contains
nothing  striking  either  in  a  poetical  or  historical
point  of  view,  and  indeed  presents  little  more  than
an  enumeration  of  the  kings  who  reigned  in  Persia
from  the  time  of  Sikander  to  that  of  Yesdjird,
embracing  among  others,  the  names  of  Ardshir,
Shahpur,  Bahram  Gor,  Nushervan,  and  Khosru
Purviz.

In  the  account  of  the  life  of  Firdausi,  (com-
prehended in  the  Preface,)  I  have  mentioned  the
anger  with  which  the  poet  quitted  the  court  of
Sultan  Mahmud,  in  consequence  of  his  labours
having  been  so  ill-requited ;  and  the  subjoined
verses  contain  the  spirit  and  substance  of  the  sa-
tire which  he  is  said  to  have  written  upon  that
occasion.


THE SHAH N.\MF.H.  511

FIRDAUSrS  SATIRE  ON  MAHMUD.

KNOW,  tyrant  as  thou  art,  this  earthly  state

Is  not  eternal,  but  of  transient  date ;

Fear  God,  then,  and  afflict  not  human-kind,

To  merit  Heaven,  be  thou  to  Heaven  resigned.

Afflict  not  even  the  Ant ;  though  weak  and  small,

It  breathes  and  lives,  and  life  is  sweet  to  all.

Knowing  my  temper,  firm,  and  stern,  and  bold,

Did'st  thou  not,  tyrant,  tremble  to  behold

My  sword  blood-dropping  ? Had'st  thou  not  the  sense

To  shrink  from  giving  man  like  me  offence  ?

What  could  impel  thee  to  an  act  so  base  ?

What,  but  to  earn  and  prove  thy  own  disgrace  ?

Why  was  I  sentenced  to  be  trod  upon,

And  crushed  to  death  by  elephants  ?  By  one

Whose  power  I  scorn  ! Couldst  thou  presume  that  I

Would  be  appalled  by  thee,  whom  I  defy  ?

I  am  the  lion,  I,  inured  to  blood,

And  make  the  impious  and  the  base  my  food ;

And  I  could  grind  thy  limbs,  and  spread  them  far

As  Nile's  dark  waters  their  rich  treasures  bear.

Fear  thee  !  I  fear  not  man,  but  God  alone,

I  only  bow  to  his  Almighty  throne.

Inspired  by  Him  my  ready  numbers  flow ;

Guarded  by  Him  I  dread  no  earthly  foe.

Thus  in  the  pride  of  song  I  pass  my  days,

Offering  to  Heaven  my  gratitude  and  praise.


512  THE SHAH NAMEH.

From  every  trace  of  sense  and  feeling  free,
When  thou  art  dead,  what  will  become  of  thee  ?
If  thou  shouldst  tear  me  limb  from  limb,  and  cast
My  dust  and  ashes  to  the  angry  blast,
Firdausi  still  would  live,  since  on  thy  name,
Mahmud,  I  did  not  rest  my  hopes  of  fame
In  the  bright  page  of  my  heroic  song,
But  on  the  God  of  Heaven,  to  whom  belong
Boundless  thanksgivings,  and  on  Him  whose  love
Supports  the  Faithful  in  the  realms  above,
The  mighty  Prophet !  none  who  e^er  reposed
On  Him,  existence  without  hope  has  closed.

And  thou  would'st  hurl  me  underneath  the  tread
Of  the  wild  elephant,  till  I  were  dead  !
Dead !  by  that  insult  roused,  I  should  become
An  elephant  in  power,  and  seal  thy  doom —
Mahmud  !  if  fear  of  man  hath  never  awed
Thy  heart,  at  least  fear  thy  Creator,  God.
Full  many  a  warrior  of  illustrious  worth,
Full  many  of  humble,  of  imperial  birth :
Tur,  Selim,  Jemshid,  Minuchihr  the  brave,
Have  died ;  for  nothing  had  the  power  to  save
These  mighty  monarchs  from  the  common  doom ;
They  died,  but  blest  in  memory  still  they  bloom.
Thus  kings  too  perish — none  on  earth  remain,
Since  all  things  human  seek  the  dust  again.

O,  had  thy  father  graced  a  kingly  throne,
Thy  mother  been  for  royal  virtues  known,


THE SHAH N  A. MM  II.  51-3

A  different  fate  the  poet  then  had  shared,

Honours  and  wealth  had  been  Ins  just  reward  ;

But  how  remote  from  thee  a  glorious  line  !

No  high,  ennobling  ancestry  is  thine;

From  a  vile  stock  thy  bold  career  began,

A  Blacksmith  was  thy  sire  of  Isfahan.

Alas  !  from  vice  can  goodness  ever  spring  ?

Is  mercy  hoped  for  in  a  tyrant  king?

Can  water  wash  the  Ethiopian  white  ?

Can  we  remove  the  darkness  from  the  night  ?

The  tree  to  which  a  bitter  fruit  is  given,

Would  still  be  bitter  in  the  bowers  of  Heaven  ;

And  a  bad  heart  keeps  on  its  vicious  course  ;

Or  if  it  changes,  changes  for  the  worse  ;

Whilst  streams  of  milk,  where  Eden^s  flowrcts  blow,

Acquire  more  honied  sweetness  as  they  flow.

The  reckless  king  who  grinds  the  poor  like  thee,

Must  ever  be  consigned  to  infamy  !

Now  mark  Firdausi's  strain,  his  Book  of  Kings
Will  ever  soar  upon  triumphant  wings.
All  who  have  listened  to  its  various  lore
Rejoice,  the  wise  grow  wiser  than  before ;
Heroes  of  other  times,  of  ancient  days,
For  ever  flourish  in  my  sounding  lays ;
Have  I  not  sung  of  Kaus,  Tus,  and  Giw;
Of  matchless  Rustem,  faithful,  still,  and  true.
Of  the  great  Demon-binder,  who  could  throw
His  kamund  to  the  Heavens,  and  seize  his  foe !
2  L


514  THE SHAH NAMEH.

Of  Husheng,  Feridun,  and  Sam  Suwar,
Lohurasp,  Kai-khosrau,  and  Isfendiyar ;
Gushtasp,  Arjasp,  and  him  of  mighty  name,
Gudarz,  with  eighty  sons  of  martial  fame  !

The  toil  of  thirty  years  is  now  complete,
Record  sublime  of  many  a  warlike  feat,
Written  midst  toil  and  trouble,  but  the  strain
Awakens  every  heart,  and  will  remain
A  lasting  stimulus  to  glorious  deeds ;
For  even  the  bashful  maid,  who  kindling  reads,
Becomes  a  warrior. Thirty  years  of  care,
Urged  on  by  royal  promise,  did  I  bear,
And  now,  deceived  and  scorned,  the  aged  bard
Is  basely  cheated  of  his  pledged  reward  !


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.


Page  2.

The  first  encounter  in  the  Shah  Nameh  is  between  the  son  of
Kaiumers  and  a  demon.  There  does  not  seem  to  exist  among
the  Persians  any  very  well  defined  notion  respecting  these
demons,,  diws,  or  dives.  They  are,  however,  generally  re-
presented in  human  shape,  with  horns,  long  ears,  and  some-
times with  a  tail,  as  Lord  Monboddo  says,  "  depending  from
their  gable  ends,"  yet  possessed  of  superior  power  and  intelli-
gence. They  are  also  enchanters,  and  sorcerers.  The  most
renowned  were  those  of  Mazinderan,  whom  Rustem  overthrew.
They  were  always  considered  superior  to  common  human
beings,  and  always  the  most  effective  allies,  and  the  most
formidable  foes.  They  were  often  of  caliban-aspect,  giants ;
and  though  they  had  the  faculty  of  vanishing  whenever  they
chose,  we  frequently  see  them  dispatched  and  slain  in  battle,
in  the  common  way,  by  sword  or  battle-axe.  They  are
sometimes  like  spirits  of  the  storm,  wild  and  destructive,  and
sometimes  they  are  of  less  consequence,  and  occupied  in  inferior
duties.  Jemshid  had  many  in  his  service.  The  demons  taught
Tahumers  the  use  of  letters,  after  he  had  conquered  them,  and
had  acquired  the  appellation  of  Diw-bund,  or  the  chainer  of
demons.  Diw,  or  demon,  means  also  a  god,  or  personage  of  a
higher  class  in  the  scale  of  earthly  beings.
2  L  2


51(>  NOTES AXD

Page  4.

"  HUSHENG."

Firdausi  speaks  here  of  Husheng,  the  second  king  of  the
Peshdadian  dynasty,  having  founded  the  religion  of  the  fire-
worshippers,  but  from  that  time  the  faith  seems  to  have  slept
till  the  appearance  of  Zerdusht,  in  the  reign  of  Gushtasp,
many  centuries  afterwards,  when  Isfendiyar  propagated  it  at
the  point  of  the  sword.

Page  17.

"  It  must  be  love,  and  love  alone,

"  That  binds  thee  to  another's  throne.'1

Thus  Anacreon  on  the  same  subject.

Tvvai^iv  yx.  ST'  cit%zv,
TV  8i

Avr

ao-a.  Anacreon. Ode  II.


Beauty  fell  to  woman's  share.

She  that's  beauteous  need  not  fear

Sword,  or  flame,  or  shield,  or  spear !

Beauty  stronger  aid  affords,

Stronger  far  than  flames  or  swords;

Stronger  far  than  swords  or  shields,

Man  himself  to  Beauty  yields.  FAWKES.

Love  at  first  sight,  and  of  the  most  enthusiastic  kind,  is  the
passion  described  in  all  Persian  poems,  as  if  a  whole  life  of
love  were  condensed  into  one  moment.  It  is  all  wild  and
rapturous.  It  has  nothing  of  a  rational  cast.  A  casual  glance
from  an  unknown  beauty  often  affords  the  subject  of  a  poem.
The  poets  whom  Dr.  Johnson  has  denominated  metaphysical,
such  as  Donne,  Jonson,  and  Cowley,  bear  a  strong  re-
semblance to  the  Persians  on  the  subject  of  love.


ILLUSTRATIONS.  ,>

Now,  sure,  within  this  twelvemonth  past,
I've  loved  at  least  some  twenty  \vars  or  more  ;
Th'  account  of  love  runs  much  more  fast,
Than  that  with  which  our  life  does  score  :
So,  though  my  life  be  short,  yet  I  may  prove,

The  Great  Methusalem  of  love!  !  !  COWI.EV.

The  odes  of  Hafiz  also,  with  all  their  spirit  and  richness  of
expression,  abound  in  conceit  and  extravagant  metaphor.
There  is,  however,  something  very  beautiful  in  the  following
lines  :

+~~  J


which  may  be  paraphrased  thus  :

Zephyr  thro'  thy  locks  is  straying,
Stealing  fragrance,  charms  displaying  j
Should  it  pass  where  Hafiz  lies,
From  his  conscious  dust  would  rise,
Flowrets  of  a  thousand  dyes  !

Sir  W.  Jones,  in  quoting  this  distich,  seems  to  have  neg-
lected the  peculiar  turn  of  the  thought,  and  has  translated  the
second  line,  a  hundred  thousand  Jlowers  will  spring  from  the
earth  that  HIDES  his  corse  !  But  the  passage  implies  that  even
the  ashes  of  the  Poet  will  still  retain  enough  of  sensibility  to  be
affected  by  the  presence,  or  by  any  token,  of  his  beloved.
Cowley  has  a  similar  notion,  but  he  pursues  and  amplifies  it
till  it  becomes  ridiculous.

'Tis  well,  'tis  well  with  them,  say  I,
Whose  short-lived  passions  with  themselves  can  die  ;

Whatever  parts  of  me  remain,
Those  parts  will  still  the  love  of  thee  retain  ;

My  affection  no  more  perish  can,
Than  the  first  matter  that  compounds  a  man  !
Hereafter,  if  one  dust  of  me,
Mix?d  with  another's  substance  bo  ;
'Twill  leaven  that  whole  lump  with  love  of  thec  !

Let  nature  if  she  please,  disperse
My  atoms  over  all  the  universe  ;
At  the  last  they  easily  shall
Themselves  know,  and  together  call  ;
For  thy  love,  like  a  mark,  is  stampt  on  all  !

ALL-OVER  LOVK.


518  NOTES AND

I  do  not  think  there  is  any  thing  in  the  whole  compass  of
Persian  poetry  in  worse  taste,  or  more  extravagant,  than  this
specimen  from  one  of  our  standard  Poets.

Page  18.
"  Jemshid  arrived  at  the  city  of  Zdbul"

Zabul,  or  Zabulistan,  the  name  of  a  province,  bordering  on
Hindustan,  which  some  place  in  the  number  of  those  now  com-
posing the  country  of  Sind.  It  abounds  in  rivers,  forests,
lakes,  and  mountains.  It  was  also  called  Rustemdar.  The
ancient  Persians  considered  Zabulistan  and  Sistan,  or  Seges-
tan,  as  one  principality,  where  Rustem  usually  resided  with
his  family,  and  which  they  held  in  appanage  from  the  Kings
of  Persia.  Segestan  is  the  Drangiana  of  the  Greeks.  It  was
formerly  the  residence  of  many  Persian  Kings.  One  of  its
cities,  Gazna,  produced  the  celebrated  Mahmud,  the  patron
of  Firdausi,  whence  the  surname  Gaznavi.

Page  21.

" Three  cups  he  drank  with  eager  zest."

It  is  not  unusual  for  Firdausi  to  say  jjj  y  L^*~«  <UJ!>
'  they  were  all  intoxicated  !'  Homer's  heroes  are  more  celebrated
for  eating  than  drinking,  and  the  bravest  always  had  the
largest  share!  The  ancient  as  well  as  the  modern  Persians,
it  appears,  were  passionately  devoted  to  wine.  The  following
lines,  from  the  Saki-nameh  of  Hafiz,  will  shew  their  adoration
of  it,  defended  by  their  notions  of  the  uncertainty  of  life  :


ILLUSTRATIONS.  519


Which  I  have  thus  paraphrased  :

Saki  !  ere  our  life  decline,
Bring  the  ruby-tinted  wine  ;
Sorrow  on  my  bosom  preys,
Wine  alone  delights  my  days  !
Bring  it,  let  its  sweets  impart
Rapture  to  my  fainting  heart  ;
Saki  !  fill  the  bumper  high-
Why  should  man  unhappy  sigh?
Mark  the  glittering  bubbles  swim,
Round  the  goblet's  smiling  brim  ;
Now  they  burst,  the  charm  is  gone  !
Fretful  life  will  soon  be  done  ;
Jemshfd's  regal  sway  is  o'er,
Kai-kobad  is  now  no  more.
Fill  the  goblet,  all  must  sever,
Drink  the  liquid  gem  for  ever  !
Thou  shalt  still,  in  bowers  divine,
Quaff  the  soul-expanding  wine  !


Page  37.

"  The  mountain  Alberz."

Alberz,  according  to  Mr.  Kinneir's  Map  of  Persia,  is  the
chain  of  mountains  which  divide  Ghilan  and  Mazinderan  from
Irak.  Kai-kobad  was  the  first  king  of  the  dynasty  called
Kaianides,  and  of  the  race  of  Feridun.  Alberz  is  also  famous
for  a  number  of  temples  of  the  Magi.


Page  50.

"  The  country  of  Turdn  was  given  to  Tur."
Ancient  Scythia  embraced the  whole  of  Turan and  the
northern  part  of  Persia. The  Turanians  are  the  Scythians  of
the  Greek  Historians,  who  are  said,  about  the  year  B.  C.  639,
to  have  invaded  the  kingdom  of  the  Medes.


5"?0  NOTES AND

For  now  the  Parthian  King1,

In  Ctesiphon  had  gathered  all  his  host,

Against  the  Scythian,  whose  incursions  wild,

Have  wasted  Sogdiana.  MILTON.

Turan,  which  is  the  ancient  name  of  the  country  of  Tur-
kistan,  appears  from  Des  Guignes,  to  be  the  source  and
fountain  of  all  the  celebrated  Scythian  nations,  which,  under
the  name  of  Goths  and  Vandals,  subsequently  overran  the
Roman  empire.  Iran  and  Turan,  according  to  the  Oriental
historians,  comprehended  all  that  is  comprised  in  upper
Asia,  with  the  exception  of  India  and  China.  Every
country  beyond  the  pale  of  the  Persian  empire  was  considered
barbarous,  and  ^jji  3  tj/V.  ^ran  an^  Turan,  is  often  under-
stood in  the  same  manner  as  Arub  ti  Ajum,  Arabs  and  Per-
sians, or  rather  Barbarians,  the  Arabians  pluming  themselves
on  a  similar  distinction.  Thus  also  among  the  Hebrews,
Jews,  and  Gentiles.  The  great  river  called  by  the  Arabs  and
Persians,  Jihun  and  Amu,  and  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans,

y Bactrus  and  Oxus,  divided  these  two  great  countries  from  each

) other.

Page  63.
"  Sam."

Sam,  Sam  Suwar,  or  Sam  Nariman,  was  the  son  of  Kuhur-
man.  He  is  said  to  have  vanquished  or  tamed  a  great  number
of  animals  and  terrible  monsters,  amongst  which  was  one
remarkable  for  its  ferocity.  This  furious  animal  was  called
Soham.,  on  account  of  its  being  of  the  colour  and  nature  of
fire.  According  to  fabulous  history,  he  made  it  his  war-horse,
in  all  his  engagements  against  the  Demons

Page  72.

*' A  voice  not  earthly  thus  addrest
" The  Simurgh  in  his  mountain  nest"

The  sex  of  this  fabulous  animal  is  not  clearly  made  out!  It
tells  Zal  that  it  had  nursed  him  like  a  father,  and  therefore


ILLUSTRATIONS.  521

I  have,  in  this  place,  adopted  the  masculine  gender,  though  the
preserver  of  young  ones,  might  authorise  its  being  considered  a
female.  The  Simurgh  is  probably  neither  one  nor  the  other,  or
both  !  Some  have  likened  the  Simurgh  to  the  Ippogrif  or
Griffin  ;  but  the  Simugh  is  plainly  a  biped  ;  others  again  have
supposed  that  the  fable  simply  meant  a  holy  recluse  of  the
mountains,  who  nourished  and  educated  the  poor  child  which
had  been  abandoned  by  its  father.  The  story  of  Romulus  and
Remus  is  familiar  to  every  body.

The  preternatural  voice  thus  further  addresses  the  Simurgh.

"  Let  him  thy  fostering  kindness  share,
Nourish  him  with  paternal  care  ;
For  from  his  loins  in  time  will  spring-
The  champion  of  the  world,  and  bring
Honour  on  earth,  and  to  thy  name,
The  heir  of  everlasting1  fame."

Such  was  the  prophetic  announcement  of  Rustem.  Virgil  thus
foretells  the  glory  of  Augustus.

Hujus  in  adventum  jam  nunc  et  Caspia  regna,
Responsis  horrent  Divum  ;  et  Maeotia  tellus,
Et  septem  g-emini  turbant  trepida  ostia  Nili.
Nee  vero  Alcides  tantum  telluris  obivit  ;
Fixerit  reripidem  cervam  licet,  aut  Erymanthi
Pacarit  nemora,  et  Lernam  tremefecerit  arcu.

L.  6,  v.  799.


At  his  foreseen  approach  already  qiiake,

The  Caspian  kingdoms  and  Mseotian  lake,

Nile  hears  him  knocking  at  his  seven-fold  gates,

And  seeks  his  hidden  spring  —

Not  Hercules  more  lands  or  labours  knew,

Not  though  the  brazen-  footed  hind  he  slew  ;

Freed  Erymanthus  from  the  foaming  boar,

And  dipped  bis  arrows  in  Lernaean  gore.  DRYDKN.


Page  76.

"  Nauder  with  a  splendid  istikbdl."

This  custom  is  derived  from  the  earliest  ages  of  Persia,  and
has  been  continued  down  to  the  present  times  with  no  abate-


522  NOTES AND

ment  of  its  pomp  or  splendour.  Mr.  Morier  thus  speaks  of  the
progress  of  the  late  Embassy  to  Persia.

"  An  Istiqbal  composed  of  fifty  horsemen  of  our  Mihmandar's
tribe,  met  us  about  three  miles  from  our  encampment ;  they
were  succeeded  as  we  advanced  by  an  assemblage  on  foot,  who
threw  a  glass  vessel  filled  with  sweetmeats  beneath  the  Envoy's
horse,  a  ceremony  which  we  had  before  witnessed  at  Kauzeroon,
and  which  we  again  understood  to  be  an  honour  shared  with
the  King  and  his  sons  alone.  Then  came  two  of  the  principal
merchants  of  Shiraz,  accompanied  by  a  boy,  the  son  of  Maho-
med Nebee  Khan,  the  new  Governor  of  Bushere.  They,  how-
ever, incurred  the  Envoy's  displeasure  by  not  dismounting
from  their  horses,  a  form  always  observed  in  Persia  by  those  of
lower  rank,  when  they  meet  a  superior.  We  were  thus  met  by
three  Istiqbals  during  the  course  of  the  day."  Again.  "  As  we
approached  Teheran,  we  were  met  by  frequent  Istiqbals,  in  the
principal  of  which  was  Norooz  Khan,  one  of  the  King's  rela-
tions, and  master  of  the  ceremonies."  Morier's  Journey  to
Persia,  p.  97  and  184.

Page  77-

"  The  Demon  provinces  of  Karugsar  and  Mazinderdn."
The  province  of  Mazinderan,  of  which  the  principal  city  is
Amol,  comprehends  the  whole  of  the  southern  coast  of  the
Caspian  sea.  It  was  known  to  the  ancients  by  the  name  of
Hyrcania.  At  the  period  to  which  the  text  refers,  the  country
was  in  the  possession  of  demons.

Page  78.
"  Such  was  the  description  of  Ruddbeh,  which  inspired  the  heart  of

Zdl  with  the  most  violent  affection."

Ferdausi  is  very  exuberant  in  his  account  of  Rudabeh.
Female  beauty  has  always  been  a  darling  subject  with  the
poets  of  all  nations,  and  they  have  generally  embellished  it
with  all  their  powers  of  description.  Perhaps  the  first  full
length  picture,  of  classical  authors,  is  contained  in  the  exquisite


ILLUSTRATIONS.  523


Ode  of  Anacreon,  beginning  Ay\  ^uy^uv  a^uri.  In  that
description  there  are  many  points  which  approximate  very
closely  to  the  taste  of  the  Persians.


ATT aAa?  TI  xctt


Paint  her  jetty  ringlets  straying,

Silky  twine  in  tendrils  playing-.  MOORK.

To  ftt<ro<p(>v6v  $1  jttij  (tot


, OTTU^

To,  AgA>]0oTft<5  o-y


Let  her  eye-broMrs  sweetly  rise,

In  jetty  arches  o'er  her  eyes,

Gently  in  a  crescent  gliding,

Just  commingling,  just  dividing.  MOORE.

This  accords  with  the  Persian  poets,  for  with  them,  the  eye-
brows joining  each  other  is  a  peculiar  beauty.  The  Enchan-
tress Alcina  in  Ariosto,  and  the  Armida  of  Tasso,  are  beautiful
amplifications  of  this  description  of  Anacreon's  mistress.  They
are  more  voluptuously  enchanting  than  any  thing  of  the  kind
which  ancient  times  can  boast.  In  comparing  the  Greek  and
Persian  notions  of  female  beauty  and  its  attributes,  we  find
no  important  disparity,  but  a  much  closer  resemblance  than
might  be  expected,  considering  the  physical  difference
between  the  two  countries.  For  the  imagery  of  every  genuine
poet  must  be  derived  from  what  he  is  accustomed  to  see,  from
the  natural  objects  and  circumstances  by  which  he  is  surrounded.
Hence  it  is  that  every  country  must  have  what  Dr.  Johnson
calls,  "traditional  imagery,  and  hereditary  similes."  The
Odes  of  Hafiz  have  all  the  rich  imagery  of  the  Teian  bard,
besides  an  abundance  of  beautiful  epithets,  unknown  to  the
Greek,  drawn  from  the  varied  productions  of  a  still  more
genial  climate.  When  a  poet  is  particular,  as  in  the  ode  above
quoted,  he  cannot  fail  to  be  intelligible;  because,  as  the
painters  say,  he  comes  down  to  the  canvas,  and  therefore  must


524  NOTES AND

be  understood.  Now  no  distinct  impression  can  be  made  by
the  description  of  Venus,  or  her  Cestus,  which  is  the  same
thing,  beginning,


H,  x.oii  a,7To  <rq6i<r!piv  thveano  K.ICOV, &C.

ILIAD,  B.  14,  1.  214.

She  from  her  fragrant  breast  the  zone  unbraced,

With  various  skill  and  high  embroidery  graced,

In  this  was  every  art,  and  every  charm,

To  win  the  wisest,  and  the  oldest  warm

Fond  love,  the  gentle  vow,  the  gay  desire,

The  kind  deceit,  the  still  surviving  fire  ;

Persuasive  speech,  and  more  persuasive  sighs,

Silence  that  spoke  and  eloquence  of  eyes  !  POPE.

This  is  very  beautiful,  but  it  is  all  imagination,  sentiment,  and
feeling;  it  conveys  no  defined  notion  of  form,  and  admits  of  no
comparison.  On  the  contrary,  Alcina  and  Armida,  are  placed
before  our  eyes,  like  the  lovely  being  whom  Anacreon  describes.
The  descriptions  in  Firdausi  are  not  so  regular  as  in  these  ex-
amples, they  are  more  wild,  and  not  under  the  direction  of  so
refined  a  taste,  hut  they  are  essentially  in  the  same  spirit,  and,
as  it  will  be  presently  shewn,  the  imagery  is  highly  similar  to
that  of  our  best  poets.  The  following  is  the  description  of
Rudabeh  in  the  original


525


LUMSDKN'S  Shanama,  Vol.  T,  p.  1?3.

These  verses  I  have  converted  into  English,  thus  :  —  In  the  text
they  are  more  briefly  interpreted.

If  thou  would'st  make  her  charms  appear,

Think  of  the  Sun  so  bright  and  clear  ;

And  brighter  far,  with  softer  light,

The  maiden  strikes  the  dazzled  sight.

Think  of  her  skin,  with  what  compare  !

Ivory  was  never  half  so  fair  !

Her  stature  like  the  Sabin  tree  ;

Her  eyes  !  so  full  of  witchery,

Glow  like  the  Nirgis*  tenderly.

Her  arching  brows  their  magic  fling,

Dark  as  the  raven's  glossy  wing.

Soft  o'er  her  blooming  cheek  is  spread,

The  rich  pomegranate's  vivid  red.

Upon  her  bosom,  white  as  snow,

Two  vermil  buds,  in  secret,  blow.

Her  musky  ringlets,  unconfined,

In  clustering  meshes  roll  behind.

Love  ye  the  moon? Behold  her  face,

And  there  the  lucid  planet  trace.

If  breath  of  musky  fragrance  please,

Her  balmy  odours  scent  the  breeze  ;

Possess'd  of  every  sportive  wile,

'Tis  heaven,  'tis  bliss,  to  see  her  smile  !

This  imagery  is  all  familiar  to  European  taste,  not  excepting


*  The  Narcissus,  to  which  the  eyes  of  beautiful  women,  are usually
compared.


526  NOTES AND

even  the  allusion  to  the  moon,*  which  has  usually  been  consi-
dered peculiar  to  the  Poetry  of  Asia. Firdausi  also  says.


r  us i

ci  Her  cheeks  were  two  roses  mixed  with  lilies  ;"  which  is,
east,  equal  to  Anacreon's,

Pooot  ra  ysihctKTi  pilots,

Roses  mixed  with  milk.

PododetKrvXoi;  "  Rosy-fingered,"  is  common  in  Homer.  Gray
has  got,  "  rosy-bosomed,"  and  the  Persians  have  /»!jj  !J^
"  rosy-form."  ^l^—J  j\J\  A  bosom  like  the  pomegranate,  is
superior  to  Ariosto's,  "  due  pome  acerbe,"  two  unripe  apples.

Spenser  has  a  similar  idea,  in  his  Faery  Queen,

Like  young  fruit  in  May.  B.  2.  c.  3,

Pope  has,

The  sleepy  eye  that  speaks  the  melting  soul  !

And  Firdausi  has  fhe  black  beaming  eye,  C—  >lp-  \  y  full  of  sleep
and  languishing  sensibility.  I  should  be  disposed  to  conclude
from  the  epithet  Po^axrvAos  above  alluded  to,  that,  in  the
days  of  Homer,  the  Greek  women,  like  the  women  of  Asia,
were  accustomed  to  tinge  the  ends  of  their  fingers  with  a  crim-
son dye.  This  practice  is  common  all  over  Bengal,  Hindu-
stan, Persia,  Turkey,  and  as  far  west  as  the  shores  of  the
Mediterranean.  Lady  Wortley  Montague,  speaking  of  the
Greek  and  Turkish  ladies  at  Adrianople,  observes  ;  "  the  ladies
dye  their  nails  a  rose-colour;  but  I  own  I  cannot  enough
accustom  myself  to  this  fashion  to  find  any  beauty  in  it."  But
in  the  note  to  the  first  line  of  the  second  book  of  the  Odyssey,
edited  by  Clark,  the  epithet  is  referred  in  the  scholia  simply  to
the  colour  of  the  dawn,  and  is  there  said,  by  Eustathius,  to  be
used  allegorically  for  a  ray  of  the  Sun.  Efsv


*  "  Who  is  she  that  looketh forth  as  the  morning, fair  as  the  Moon,
clear  as  the  Sun."  SOLOMON'S  SONG.

"  She  came  in  all  her  beauty,  like  the  Moon  from  the cloud  of  the
East."  OSSIAN.

"  The  noble  sister  of  Publicola,
"  The  Moon  of  Rome."  SHAKSPEARK.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


«AA«y«g/«K,  T«  «A/«  «xrW*. Eustath. Pope  understood  it
in  the  same  manner,  and  has  translated  the  line  which  contains,


Soon  as  Aurora,  daughter  of  the  dawn,
Sprinkled  with  roseate  light  the  dewy  lawn.

Although  the  Critics  and  Commentators  are  silent  on  the
subject,  it  is  probable  that  Homer's  acquaintance  with  the  East,
furnished  him  with  the  metaphor.  Rosy-bosom  and  rosy-form,
beautifully  imply  bloom  and  fragrance,  but  the  application  of
rosy-fingered  is  not  so  obvious,  without  we  admit  the  allusion
to  the  custom  just  stated.  Pope,  in  his  letters  to  Lady  Wort-
ley  Montagu,  regrets  that  he  had  not  the  advantage  of  trans-
lating Homer  in  Asia,  where  the  manners  of  the  country  must
have  afforded  him  so  many  illustrations  of  the  Poet.

But  independent  of  particular  similies  applied  to  different
features,  it  is  curious  to  observe,  how  strangely  they  are  some-
times applied  to  express  the  combined  effect  of  a  beautiful
woman.  Thus  in  Solomon's  Song,  "  I  have  compared  thee,
O  my  love,  to  a  company  of  horses  in  Pharaoh's  chariots."
Thus  also  Theocritus  in  the  Epithalamium  of  Helen,


"  She  resembles  the  horse  in  the  chariots  of  Thessaly."  Yet
none  but  a  Hindu  poet  perhaps  ever  thought  of  comparing  a
lovely  woman  to  a  goose  !

"  Nor  with  the  goose  the  smiling  fair,
"  In  graceful  motion  can  compare."

See  the  Cloud  Messenger,  translated  from  the  Sanscrit,  by
H.  H,  Wilson,  Esq.  note  page  15.  The  poem  itself,  is,however,
full  of  pleasing  imagery  ;  and  the  version  is  executed  by  my
friend  with  admirable  taste  and  feeling.  The  thought  which
forms  the  subject,  is  indeed  highly  poetical  and  pathetic  :  —  a
husband  placed  in  melancholy  durance  makes  a  cloud  his  mes-
senger to  convey  to  his  wife  the  sorrows  of  his  heart.


528  NOTES AND

Page  95.

"  In  beauty  of  form  and  in  vigour  of  limb,
te  No  mortal  was  ever  seen  equal  to  him."
In  the  heroic  ages  of  Persia,  as  in  the  early  periods  of  every
nation,  feats  of  personal  activity  and  muscular  strength,  con-
stituted the  most  prominent  features  of  a  champion,  and  accord-
ingly Firdausi  has  thought  it  necessary  to  give  his  hero
extraordinary  size  and  gigantic  breadth  of  limb.  Hercules  had
almost  completed  his  eighth  month  before  he  strangled  the  ser-
pents which  Juno  had  sent  to  devour  him  ;  but  Rustem,  when
a  day  old,  was  like  a  child  of  twelve  months.  When  three
years  old  he  was  fond  of  warlike  pursuits  and  rode  on
horseback,  and  when  ten,  there  was  not  a  man  in  that
country  who  could  contend  with  him  in  battle.  In  wrestling,
and  other  violent  exercises,  he  was  unequalled.  Firdausi  has
thus,  with  a  view  of  making  him  great,  made  him  a  prodigy  ^
But  Homer  is  not  guiltless  of  similar  extravagance,  for  he  says
of  the  giants  Otus  and  Ephialtes:

The  wonderous  youths  had  scarce  nine  winters  told
When  high  in  air,  tremendous  to  behold,
Nine  ells  aloft  they  reared  their  towering  head,
And  full  nine  cubits  broad  their  shoulders  spread ;
Proud  of  their  strength,  and  more  than  mortal  size,
The  gods  they  challenge,  and  affect  the  skies.

ODYSSEY,  B.  xi.

Pope  is  of  opinion  that  this  story  is  only  given  as  a  tradition,
and  Longinus  brings  it  forward  as  an  instance  of  true  subli-
mity !

Page  98.

u  The  fort,  which  was  many  miles  high,  enclosed  beautiful  lawns*"
The  Fort  is  called  KullahSuffeed,  which  still  bears  the  same  name,
and  lies  about  seventy- six  miles  north-west  of  the  city  of  Shiraz.
It  is  of  an  oblong  form,  and  encloses  a  level  space  at  the  top  of
the  mountain,  which  is  covered  with  delightful  verdure,  and
watered  by  numerous  springs.  The  ascent  is  near  three  miles,
and  for  the  last  five  or  six  hundred  yards,  the  summit  is  so  diffi-
cult of  approach,  that  the  slightest  opposition,  if  well  directed.


ILLUSTRATIONS.  529

must  render  it  impregnable.  Lieut.  M'Donald  visited,  this
Fort  in  1810.  It  was  then  in  the  possession  of  the  tribe  of
Mumasenni,  one  of  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  Persia.  Their
means  of  defence,  at  this  period,  were  probably  the  same  as  in
the  days  of  Rustem,  —  a  line  of  large  stones  ranged  in  regular
order  around  the  edges  of  the  precipice.  Each  stone  is  wedged
in  by  one  of  smaller  dimensions  :  when  that  is  removed,  the
large  stone,  or  rather  rock,  is  hurled  down,  and  sweeps  every
thing  before  it  with  irresistible  force.  —  MALCOLM'S  Persia.

Page  102

"  Nauder,  1  charge  thee,
Place  not  thy  trust  upon  a  world  like  this,
Where  nothing  Jixed  remains.

The  Persian  poets,  and  particularly  Firdausi,  are  eminently
distinguished  for  their  apposite  and  striking  reflections  on  fate
and  on  the  instability  of  worldly  grandeur.  The  portion  of  the
Shah  Nameh  which  contains  the  history  of  Jemshid,  abounds
in  beautiful  and  philosophical  observations,  conveyed  in  all  the
enchanting  sweetness  of  harmonious  versification.  The  declen-
sion of  Jemshid's  glory,  occasioned  by  his  impious  ambition  to
rival  the  Deity,  and  his  subsequent  wanderings,  afforded  a
rich  subject  for  our  poet's  peculiar  vein.
Homer  says.

O«j  5>rgg  <pvAA<yv  ym»j,  rot$t  xoii  ctvdgav,  &C. ILIAD,  B.  vi.  146»

Like  leaves  on  trees  the  race  of  man  is  found,
Now  green  in  youth,  now  withering  on  the  ground  ;
Another  race  the  following  spring  supplies  ;
They  fall  successive  and  successive  rise  :
So  generations  in  their  course  decay  ;
So  flourish  these,  when  those  are  pass'd  away.  POPE.

Sadi  is  also  peculiarly  successful  in  the  same  moral  spirit.


"  When  the  pure  and  spotless  soul  is  about  to  depart,  of  what
importance  is  it  whether  we  expire  upon  a  throne  or  upon  the
bare  ground  !"

2  M


530  NOTES AND

Thus  Horace  :

Pallida  mors  aequo  pulsatpede,  pauperum  tabernas,

Regumque  turres.
With  equal  pace  impartial  fate,
Knocks  at  the  palace  as  the  cottage  gate.

And  Young:

What  though  we  wade  in  wealth  or  soar  in  fame  !
Earth's  highest  station  ends  in  here  he  lies  !
And  dust  to  dust  concludes  her  noblest  song.

But  Darwin  takes  a  more  extensive  range  of  thought  in  the
following  lines :

Flowers  of  the  sky !  ye  too  to  age  must  yield,
Frail  as  your  silken  sisters  of  the  field  !
Star  after  star  from  Heaven's  high  arch  shall  rush,
Suns  sink  on  suns,  and  systems  systems  crush,
Headlong,  extinct,  to  one  dark  centre  fall,
And  Death  and  Night  and  Chaos  mingle  all !
—'Till  o'er  the  wreck,  emerging  from  the  storm,
Immortal  NATURE  lifts  her  changeful  form,
Mounts  from  her  funeral  pyre  on  wings  of  flame,
And  soars  and  shines,  another  and  the  same.

BOTANIC  GARDEN, Canto  iv.

Page  126.

"  So  great  was  the  clamour  and  confusion  which  proceeded  from

both  armies,  that  earth  and  sky  seemed  blended  together."
The  numerical  strength  of  the  Persian  and  Turanian  forces
appears  prodigious  on  all  occasions,  but  nothing  when  com-
pared with  the  army  under  Xerxes  at  Thermopylae,  which,
with  the  numerous  retinue  of  servants,  eunuchs,  and  women
that  attended  it,  is  said  to  have  amounted  to  no  less  than
5,283,220  souls  j  yet  this  multitude  was  put  in  check  by  the
valour  of  the  300  Spartans  under  Leonidas.


Page  128.

11  Thou  wouldst  have  said."

This  mode  of  expression,  so  frequent  in  Firdausi,  and  which
makes  the  reader  a  spectator  of  the  scene  described,  is  con-


ILLUSTRATIONS.  531

stantly  to  be  met  with  in  Homer.  Longinus  has  pointed  out
its  peculiar  force  and  beauty,  and  gives  the  following  observa-
tions on  the  subject.  "  A  very  powerful  dramatic  efficacy
arises  from  a  change  of  persons,  which  frequently  makes  the
hearer  or  reader,  imagine  himself  engaged  in  the  midst  of
danger  :

"  Thou  wouldst  have  thought,  so  furious  was  their  fire!

"  No  force  could  tame  them,  and  no  toil  could  tire."*

IMAD,  xv.  844.

"  And  where  the  discourse  is  addressed  to  an  individual ;  as  in
this  example  also  :

"  Thou  hadst  not  known  with  whom  Tydides  fought."

ILIAD,  v.  85.

Page  129.

"  With  sword,  and  dagger,  battle-axe,  and  noose."
Herodotus  speaks  of  a  people  confederated  with  the  army  of
Xerxes,  who  employed  the  noose.  "  Their  principal  depend-
ance  in  action  is  upon  cords  made  of  twisted  leather,  which
they  use  in  this  manner :  when  they  engage  an  enemy,  they
throw  out  these  cords,  having  a  noose  at  the  extremity  ;  if  they
entangle  in  them  either  horse  or  man,  they  without  difficulty
put  them  to  death." — Beloe's  tranls.  Polyhym,  Sec.  85.

Page  132.
"  At  Istikher"

Istikher,  also  called  Persepolis,  and  Chchel-minar.  This
city  was  said  to  have  been  laid  in  ruins  by  Alexander  after  the
conquest  of  Darius ;  that,

Thais  led  the  way,
And  like  another  Helen  fired  another  Troy.

But  this,  for  the  credit  of  Alexander,  does  not  appear  to  be
the  fact.  M.  Langles  in  his  collection  of  travels,  vol.  iii,  p.  199,

*  These  lines  are  from  Pope's  translation.  The  quotation  from  Longinus
is  employed  by  Wakefield  to  illustrate  the  same  apostrophe  in  Homer.

2M  2


532  NOTES AND

has  shown  that  the  destruction of  this renowned city was
owing,  long  afterwards,  to  the  fanatic  Arabs.

Page  133.
"  Kai-kdus^

Kai-kaus,  the  second  King  of  Persia  of  the  dynasty  called
Kaianides.  He  succeeded  Kai-kobad,  about  six  hundred
years  B.  C.  According  to  Firdausi  he  was  a  foolish  tyranni-
cal prince.  He  appointed  Rustem  captain-general  of  the
armies,  to  which  the  lieutenant-generalship  and  the  adminis-
tration of  the  state  was  annexed,  under  the  title  of  jJjl^J  itJ^r?"
"  the  champion  of  the  world."  He  also  gave  him  a  taj,  or  crown
of  gold,  which  kings  only  were  accustomed  to  wear,  and
granted  him  the  privilege  of  giving  audience  seated  on  a  throne
of  gold.

It  is  said  that  Kai-kaus  applied  himself  much  to  the  study  of
Astronomy,  and  that  he  founded  two  great  Observatories,  the
one  at  Babel,  and  the  other  on  the  Tigris.  Many  historians
make  him  contemporary  with  David  and  Solomon,  and  conse-
quently with  Lockman  renowned  for  his  wisdom,  and  they  give
him  a  reign  of  150  years.  D'Herbelot.  Firdausi  has  recorded
that  Kaus  erected  two  palaces  upon  the  mountain  Alberz,  and
embellished  them  with  wonderful  magnificence.  This  was
for  an  extraordinary  purpose.  He  was  pursuaded  by  Iblis  to
explore  the  heavens,  supported  on  a  throne,  secured  upon  the
backs  of  four  eagles.  He  ascended  to  a  great  height,  but  the
eagles  became  fatigued,  and  the  royal  aeronaut  was  landed  in  a
thick  forest,  where  he  remained  a  considerable  time,  before  he
was  found  by  the  indefatigable  Rustem  and  his  army.  Perhaps
his  reputed  fondness  for  astronomical  studies  gave  rise  to  the
able  of  this  aerial  excursion.

Page  142.

"  Oh  Rakush  !  why  so  thoughtless  grown
cc  To  fight  a  lion  thus  alone  ?"

Though  Rakush  was  a  model  of  intelligence  and  sagacity,
he  could  not  speak,  like  Xanthus  and  Balius,  the  two  horses  of


ILLUSTRATIONS.  't'.tt

Achilles  !  The  former,  prophesied  the  doom  of  his  master.
There  is  nothing  therefore  extravagant  in  Rustem  addressing
his  horse  so  familiarly.

"  We  may  be  assured,  says  Cowper,  that  it  was  customary  for
the  Greeks  occasionally  to  harangue  their  horses,  for  Homer
was  a  poet  too  attentive  to  nature,  to  introduce  speeches  that
would  have  appeared  strange  to  his  countrymen.  Hector
addresses  his  horses  in  the  eighth  book,  and  Antilochus,  in  the
chariot  race,  whose  horses  were  not  only  of  terrestrial  origin,  but
the  slowest  in  the  camp  of  Greece.  That  Achilles,  then,  should
have  spoken  to  his  speeds,  is  not  surprising,  seeing  that  they
were  of  celestial  seed.

"  It  adds  a  great  beauty,"  says  Eustathius,  "  to  the  poem,
wherein animate things act like inanimate. Thus the
heavens  tremble  at  Jupiter's  nod,  the  sea  parts  itself  to  receive
Neptune; the  groves of  Ida shake beneath Juno's feet.
As  also  to  find animate  or brute  creatures  addressed  as  if
rational. In  Homer  they  weep  for  Patroclus,  and  stand  fixed
and  immoveable with grief, then  is the hero universally
mourned,  and  every  thing  concurs  to lament  his  loss." As  to
the  particular  fiction  of  weeping  (no fiction  at  all) Gilbert
Wakefield  rightly  says,  that  it  is  countenanced  both  by  scholiasts
and  historians. Aristotle  and Pliny,  write  that  these  animals
often  deplore  their  masters  lost  in  battle,  and  have  shed  tears
for  them — and  Elian  relates  the  same  of  elephants,  who,  like
the  Swiss,  overcome  with  the  maladie  du  pays,  weep  in  far-off
captivity  to think of  their  native  forests. Suetonius,  in  the
life  of  Caesar,  tells  us  that  several  horses  which,  at  the  passage
of  the Rubicon,  had been  consecrated  to Mars,  and turned
loose  on  the  banks,  were  observed  for  some  days  after  to  ab-
stain from  feeding,  and  to  weep  abundantly. Virgil  knew  all
this,  and  could  not,  therefore, forbear  copying  this  beautiful
circumstance  in  those  fine  lines  on  the  horse  of  Pallas  :

Post  Bellator  equus,  positis  insignibus  JEthon
It  lacymans,  guttisque  humectat  grandibus  ora.

"  Is  not  the  whole  Iliad,  in  conception  and  execution,  full


534  NOTES AND

of  speciosa  miracula  ?"  continues  the  writer  of  a  spirited  cri-
tique on  Sotheby's  Homer,  in  Blackwood's  Magazine.  "  In
reading  it  we  can  believe  any  thing,  for  we  feel  that  all  those
fictions  are  truths.  All  those  bold  and  bright  beliefs  burst  in
upon  us,  not  through  chinks,  but  the  wide-flung  open  windows
of  our  souls — and  we  know  that  this  world  of  ours  and  this
life,  now  so  tame  and  terrorless,  so  chilled  by  civilization,  was
once  glorious  in  what  we  vainly  call  barbarism  ;  and  that  it  is
yet  "  mightier  than  it  seems,"  in  the  eyes  and  ears  of  all  who
have  had  their  spiritual  senses  purged,  and  vivified,  and  in-
vigorated, by  the  divine  power  of  song."


Page  178.

"  Hunting  the  wild-ass.^'

Hunting  the  Gor,  or  wild-ass,  appears  to  have  been  a  favourite
sport  in  Persia.  Bahram  the  Sixth  was  surnamed  Gor,  in  con-
sequence of  his  being  peculiarly  devoted  to  the  chase  of  this
animal,  and  which  at  last  cost  him  his  life. — D'Herbelot.


Page  181. '
'<  Bind  this  amulet  on  his  arm."

It  seems  by  the  text  that  the  Mohreh,  or  amulet,  of  Rustem
was  celebrated  throughout  the  world  for  its  wonderful  virtues.
The  Mohrehi  Suliman,  ..l^Lj  ^  Solomon's  Seal,  was  a  talis-
man of  extraordinary  power,  said  to  be  capable  of  rendering
objects  invisible,  and  of  creating  every  kind  of  magical  illusion  *
But  Mohreh  is  more  properly  an  amulet,  or  spell,  against
misfortune.  The  wearer  of  one  of  them  imagines  himself  safe
under  every  situation  of  danger.

The  application  of  the  magical  instrument  to  the  mouth  was
often  indispensable.  Thus  Angelica  in  the  Orlando  Furioso  :

*  Josephus  relates  that  he  saw  a  certain  Jew,  named  Eleazar,  drawn  the
devil  out  of  an  old  woman's  nostril,  by  the  application  of  Solomon's  Seal  to
her  nose,  in  the  presence  of  the  Emperor  Vespasian  !


ILLUSTRATIONS.  535

Del  dito  se  lo  leva,  e  a  mano  a  mano,

Se'lchiude  in  bocca,  e  in  men,  che  non  balena,

Cosi  da  gli  occhi  di  Ruggier  si  cela,

Come  fa  il  Sol,  quando  la  nube  il  vela. CANTO  XT.  St.  6.

Then  from  her  hand  she  took  with  eager  haste,
And  twixt  her  lips,  the  shining  circlet  placed,
And  instant  vanished  from  Rogero's  sight !
Like  Phoebus  when  a  cloud  obscures  his  light. HOOLK.

Hatim  placed  the  talisman  in  his  mouth  when  he  plunged  into
the  caldron  of  boiling  oil.  QSee  Hatim  Ta'i,  a  Persian  Ro-
mance, full  of  magic,  and  the  wild  and  marvellous  adventures  of
Knight-errantry.]  Aristotle  speaks  of  the  ring  of  Battus  which
inspired  the  wearer  with  GRATITUDE  AND  HONOR  !  Faith  in
rings  and  amulets  prepared  at  particular  seasons,  under  certain
mysterious  forms  and  circumstances,  is  an  ancient  superstition,
but  in  Persia,  and  India,  there  is  hardly  a  man  without  his
joj«jb  Bazubund,  or  bracelet,  to  preserve  him  from  the  in-
fluence of  the  Demons.  "  The  women  of  condition,  in  Persia,
have  small  silver  plates  of  a  circular  form,  upon  which  are  en-
graved sentences  from  the  Koran  ;  these,  as  well  as  the  Talis-
mans, they  bind  about  their  arms  with  pieces  of  red  and  green
silk,  and  look  upon  them  as  never  failing  charms  against  the
fascinations  of  the  devil,  wicked  spirits,  &c."  Francklin's  Tour
to  Persia.  Rustem  had  also  a  magic  garment,  or  cloak,  called
according  to  the  Burhani-katia,^.) -J  Buburiyan.  Some  say  that
he  received  it  from  his  father  Zal,  and  others,  that  it  was  made
of  the  skin  of  Akwan  Diw ;  others  again  say,  that  it  was  made
of  the  skin  of  a  leopard,  or  some  similar  animal,  which  Rustem
killed  on  the  mountain  Sham.  It  had  the  property  of  resisting
the  impression  of  every  weapon,  it  was  proof  against  fire,  and
would  not  sink  in  water.  Something  like  the  charm  in  the
curse  of  Kehama.

I  charm  thy  life,
From  the  weapons  of  strife,
From  stone  and  from  wood,
From  fire  and  from  flood,


536  NOTES AND

From  the  serpent's  tooth,
And  the  beasts  of  blood.

j*j  Bubur  is  an  animal  of  the  tyger  kind,  said  to  be  superior  in
strength  to  the  lion.  The  famous  heroes  of  antiquity  usually
wore  the  skins  of  wild  beasts.  Hercules  wore  the  skin  of  the
Nemaean  lion.  The  skins  of  panthers  and  leopards  were  worn
by  the  Greek  and  Trojan  chiefs.  Virgil  says  of  Acestes,

occurrit  Acestes,
Horridus  in  jaculis,  et  pelle  Libystidos  ursse. J£N.  B.  5,  v.  36.

Of  a  rough  Libyan  bear  the  spoils  he  wore.  DRYDEN.


Page  184.

"  There  was  a  fortress  on  the  road.''

The  white  fortress.  In  Rennell,  there  is  a  place  called
Surab  pass,  in  the  mountainous  chain  of  the  Caucasus.  On
the  southern  side  of  the  range,  in  Lieut.  Macartney's  Map  of
the  Punjab  and  countries  west-ward  of  the  Indus,  there  is
a  fortress  marked  Killa  Baizeh,  JUaJ  <u)JJ  which  signifies  white
fortress,  close  to  the  Surab  pass  laid  down  by  Rennell.  This
therefore  may  have  been  the  defile  through  which  Sohrab  in-
vaded Iran.

Page  184.

"  lam  myself  Hujfr,

The  valiant  champion,  come  to  conquer  thee  /"
This  haughty  manner  was  common  amongst  the  heroes  of
antiquity.  ft  And  the  Philistine  said  to  David ;  come  to  me,
and  I  will  give  thy  flesh  to  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  to  the
beasts  of  the  field."  Samuel,  xvii.  44.  This  is  like  the  boast
of  Hujir.  These  denunciations  are  frequent  in  Homer  as
well  as  Firdausi.  Thus  Diomed  to  Glaucus.

E,xj£  T*?  i<r<rt  /3goT#v,  &c. ILIAD,  B.  vi.  142.

If  the  fruits  of  earth,
Sustain  thy  life  and  human  be  thy  birth ;
Bold  as  thou  art,  too  prodigal  of  breath,
Approach  and  enter  the  dark  gates  of  death!  POPE.


ILLUSTRATIONS.  537

Page  190.

"  Rustem  repaired  thither  in  secret  and  in  disguise..''
It  appears  that  in  Rustem's  time  there  was  nothing  dis-
honorable in  the  character  of  a  spy.  The  adventure  of  Diomed
and  Ulysses  in  the  tenth  book  of  the  Iliad  shews  a  similar  con-
clusion with  respect  to  the  Greeks.  Alfred  entered  the  hostile
camp  of  the  Danes,  under  "  the  disguise  of  a  harper,  and  so
entertained  them  with  his  music  and  facetious  humours,  that
he  met  with  a  welcome  reception." — HUME.

Page  200.

"  Again  their  backs  they  wrestling  bend."
Wrestling  is  a  favourite  sport  in  the  east.  From  Homer
down  to  Statius,  the  Greek  and  Roman  poets  have  introduced
werstling  in  their  Epic  poems.  Wrestlers,  like  the  Gladiators
at  Rome,  are  exhibited  in  India  on  a  variety  of  occasions.  Prize
wrestlers  were  common  in  almost  every  European  nation.  The
old  poet  Drayton  in  his  Poly-Olbion  alludes  to  this  manly  exer-
cise in  England.

This  isle  in  wrestling  doth  excel ;

With  collars  be  they  yoked,  to  prove  the  arm  at  length,
Like  bulls  set  head  to  head,  withmeer  deliver  strength  :
Or  by  the  girdles  grasp'd,  they  practice  with  the  hip,
The  forward,  backward,  falx,  the  mar,  the  turn,  the  trip  :*
When  stript  into  their  shirts  each  other  they  invade,
Within  a  spacious  ring,  for  the  beholders  made,
According  to  the  law.


Page  241.

"  Thou  art  woman's  slave  !

" Woman,  the  bane  of  mans  felicity."

Woman's  inconstancy  is  a  fertile  subject  of  comment  and  de-
nunciation among  our  own  poets  :

No  time  shall  see  a  brave  man  do  amiss,

And  what's  the  noble  cause,  what  makes  this  madness  ?

What  big  ambition  blows  this  dangerous  fire?

*  Terms  of  art  in  wrestling.


538  NOTES AND

A  Cupid's  puff,  is  it  not  woman's  breath  ?

By  all  your  triumphs  in  the  heat  of  youth,

When  towns  were  sacked,  and  BEAUTIES  prostrate  lay,

When  my  blood  boiled,  and  nature  worked  me  high,

Clytus  ne'er  bowed  his  body  to  such  shame  :

The  brave  will  scorn  the  cobweb  arts. — The  souls

Of  all  that  whining-,  smiling,  cozening  sex,

Weigh  not  one  thought  of  any  man  of  war.  LEE.

Heph.  Why  is  it,  then,  we  love  ?
Clyt. Because  unmanned —

O  that  a  face  should  thus  bewitch  a  soul,

And  ruin  all  that's  right  and  reasonable !

Where  is  there  room  for  glory  ?  LEE.

You  dream,  you  sleep  away  your  hours,

In  desperate  sloth  ;

Up,  up,  for  honor's  sake!  DRYDEN'S  ALL  FOR  LOVE.

Nay,  but  this  dotage  of  our  general's,

O'erflows  the  measure :  those  his  goodly  eyes,

That  o'er  the  files  and  musters  of  the  war,

Have  glowed  like  plated  Mars,  now  bend,  now  turn,

The  office  and  devotion  of  their  view

Upon  a "woman!"  SHAKSPEARE.

Page  323.
"  In  the  tempest  of  battle  disdaining  all  fear,

With  his  Jcamund  and  Khunjir,  and  Garz  and  Shumshir,
Hoiv  he  bound,  stabbed,  and  crushed,  and  dissevered  the  Joe,
So  mighty  his  arm,  and  so  fatal  his  blow."

This  is  a  favourite  passage  in  the  original.  My  old  Munshi
used  to  be  delighted  with  it,  thinking  the  description  and  effects
of  each  weapon  so  truly  admirable ;  the  entangling  of  the  noose,
the  stabbing  of  the  dagger,  the  crushing  of  the  mace,  and  the
cutting  of  the  sword  being  brought  together  within  so  small  a
compass.  The  same  lines  occur  at  page  129.  Other  favourite
lines,  too,  are  frequently  repeated  throughout  the  poem.

Page  336.

"  There  happened  to  be  in  Rustem's  employ  a  singing-girl."
Theocritus  introduces  a  Greek  singing-girl  in  Idyllium,  xv.
at  the  festival  of  Adonis. But  Anacreon,  more  than  five  cen-


ILLUSTRATIONS.  539

turies  before  the  Christian  era,  alludes  to  the  quires  of  singers
in  India,  in  the  close  of  his  thirty-second  Ode.

Tas  IJCTO<;  ctv  iVtlt^Nfrt

oiuv  Tt  x.'lvda*,


Yet  still  unnumbered,  still  remain,

The  nymph  of  Persia  and  of  Spain,

And  Indians  scorched  by  Titan's  ray,

Whose  charms  have  burnt  my  heart  away. FAWKES.

The  original  says,  the  nymphs  of  Gades  (now  Cadiz),  and
those  on  the  Bactrus  and  the  Indus.  The  women  of  Gades
were  celebrated  for  their  agility  of  body  and  voluptuous  man-
ners. The  Abbe  Raynal  thus  describes  the  dances  peculiar  to
the  East.  "  Les  danses  sont  presque  toutes  des  pantomimes
d'amour;  le  plan,  le  dessein,  les  attitudes,  les  mesures,  les
sons  et  les  cadences  de  ces  ballets,  tout  respire  cette  passion,
&c."  The  description  which  Lady  W.  Montagu  gives  of  the
Turkish  dance  at  Adrianople  is  more  highly  coloured.  The
Persian  text,  however,  simply  speaks  of  music  and  singing.
Dancing  is  of  course  implied,  as  on  festive  occasions  in  ancient
times,  they  were  generally  combined.  In  the  Arabian  Nights,
the  Kaliph  is  represented  at  his  feasts  surrounded  by  troops  of
the  most  beautiful  females  playing  on  various  instruments.
Demodocus  sings  and  plays  at  the  banquet  of  Alcinous,  who
thus  boasts  of  the  renown  of  his  subjects  in  dancing  and
singing :

To  dress,  to  dance,  to  sing,  our  sole  delight,
The  feast  or  bath  by  day,  and  love  by  night.  POPE.

And  the  following  passage  in  the  seventeenth  book  of  the
Odyssey,  is  an  additional  proof  that  it  was  customary  in  Greece
to  have  music  at  meals.

Long  as  the  minstrel  swept  the  sounding  wire,

He  fed,  and  ceased  when  silence  held  the  lyre.  POPE.

The  sacred  writings  also  furnish  many  illustrations  of  this
subject.


540  NOTES.

Page  500.
"  Faur. "

Faur  is  probably  Porus.  The  demand  of  Sikander  and  the
answer  of  Faur  correspond  exactly  with  what  is  said  of  Alex-
ander and  Porus  in  European  history.  Firdausi,  however,  kills
him  j  but  the  Greeks  make  him  become  a  friend  of  Alexander.


Page  507.
"  Kashdn."

Kashan  is  here  made  to  be  the  death-place  of  Alexander,
whilst,  according  to  the  Greek  historians,  he  died  suddenly  at
Babylon,  as  foretold  by  the  magicians,  on  the  21st  April  B.C.
323,  in  the  32d  year  of  his  age.


( 541 )


THE  STORY  OF  SOHRAB.


THE  following  is  the  translation  of  the  story  of  Sohrab  men-
tioned in  the  Preface,  and  abridged  in  the  body  of  the  work.
It  forms  perhaps  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  interesting
episodes  in  the  Shah  Nameh.  Had  the  poet  been  able  to  depict
the  nicer  varieties  of  emotion  and  passion,  the  more  refined
workings  of  the  mind  under  the  influence  of  disappointment,
love,  and  despair,  the  poem  would  have  been  still  more  deserving
of  praise.  But,  as  Dr.  Johnson  observes  of  Milton,  "  he  knew
human  nature  only  in  the  gross,  and  had  never  studied  the  shades
of  character,  nor  the  combinations  of  concurring,  or  the  per-
plexity of  contending  passions  ;"  yet  is  there  much  to  admire.
Sir  William  Jones  had  planned  a  tragedy  of  Sohrab,  and  intended
to  have  arranged  it  with  a  chorus  of  the  Magi,  or  Fire-worship-
pers, but  it  was  found  unfinished  at  the  time  of  his  death.*

It  may  be  here  observed,  that  the  rules  of  poetical  translation
are  now  pretty  generally  understood.  Even  in  European  lan-
guages, which  are  not  essentially  dissimilar  in  idiom  and  imagery
considerable  latitude  of  expression  is  always  allowed.  Those  who,

*  It  is  very  extraordinary  how  this  great  Orientalist  could  have  mistaken
the  Story  so  far  as  the  following  view  of  it,  at  the  end  of  his  History  of
Nadir  Shah,  demonstrates.  "  Rustem,  voyageant  sous  un  nom  emprunte,
avoit  trouve  le  moyen  de  stduire  une  jeune  princesse,  a  qui  la  hont  fit  ensuite
exposer  le  fruit  de  cet  amour  infortune.  Sohareb,  c'est  le  nom  de  cet  enfant
abandonne,  ne  connoissant  point  ses  parens,  entre  au  service  d'Afrasiab,
est  avance  par  ce  roi  aux  premieres  charges  de  1'armie,  et  enfin  envoye
pour  combattre  Rustem,  qui  ne  le  reconnoit  pour  son  fils  qu'apres  1'avoir
mortellement  bless:."  Traite  sur  la  Poesie  Orientale.


542  SOHRAB.

best  know  the  peculiarities  of  the  Persian  will  acknowledge  how
requisite  it  is  to  adopt  a  still  greater  freedom  of  interpretation
in  conveying  Eastern  notions  into  English  verse.  I  have  conse-
quently paid  more  attention  to  sentiments  than  words,  to  ideas
than  expressions,  avoiding  all  the  repetitions  and  redundancies
which  could  not  be  preserved  with  any  degree  of  success  ;  for
it  was  incumbent  upon  me  to  keep  in  mind  that  I  was  writing
a  poem  in  English,  and  that  English-Persian  will  no  more  do
than  English-Greek.  It  was  said  of  Dacier,  respecting  his
translation  of  Plutarch,  that  "  his  book  was  not  found  to  be
French-Greek.  He  had  carefully  followed  that  rule,  which  no
translator  ought  ever  to  lose  sight  of,  the  great  rule  of  humour-
ing the  genius,  and  maintaining  the  structure,  of  his  own
language."


(543 )


SOHRAB.


O  YE,  who  dwell  in  Youth's  inviting  bowers,
Waste  not,  in  useless  joy,  your  fleeting  hours,
But  rather  let  the  tears  of  sorrow  roll,
And  sad  reflexion  fill  the  conscious  soul.
For  many  a  jocund  spring  has  passed  away,
And  many  a  flower  has  blossomed,  to  decay  ;
And  human  life,  still  hastening  to  a  close,
Finds  in  the  worthless  dust  its  last  repose.
Still  the  vain  world  abounds  in  strife  and  hate,
And  sire  and  son  provoke  each  other's  fate  ;
And  kindred  blood  by  kindred  hands  is  shed,
And  vengeance  sleeps  not — dies  not,  with  the  dead.
All  nature  fades — the  garden's  treasures  fall,
Young  bud,  and  citron  ripe — all  perish,  all.

And  now  a  tale  of  sorrow  must  be  told,
A  tale  of  tears,  derived  from  Mubid  old,
And  thus  remembered. —

With  the  dawn  of  day,
Rustem  arose,  and  wandering  took  his  way,
Armed  for  the  chace,  where  sloping  to  the  sky,
Turan's  lone  wilds  in  sullen  grandeur  lie ;
There,  to  dispel  his  melancholy  mood,
He  urged  his  matchless  steed  through  glen  and  wood.
Flushed  with  the  noble  game  which  met  his  view,
He  starts  the  wild-ass  o'er  the  glistening  dew ;
And,  oft  exulting,  sees  his  quivering  dart,
Plunge  through  the  glossy  skin,  and  pierce  the  heart.-
Tired  of  the  sport,  at  length,  he  sought  the  shade,
Which  near  a  stream  embowering  trees  displayed,
And  with  his  arrow's  point,  a  fire  he  raised,
And  thorns  and  grass  before  him  quickly  blazed.
The  severed  parts  upon  a  bough  he  cast,
To  catch  the  flames  ;  and  when  the  rich  repast


544  SOHRAB.

Was  drest ;  with  flesh  and  marrow,  savory  food,
He  quelled  his  hunger  ;  and  the  sparkling  flood
That  murmured  at  his  feet,  his  thirst  represt ;
Then  gentle  sleep  composed  his  limbs  to  rest.

Meanwhile  his  horse,  for  speed  and  form  renown'd,
Ranged  o'er  the  plain  with  flowery  herbage  crown'd,
Encumbering  arms  no  more  his  sides  opprest,
No  folding  mail  confined  his  ample  chest,*
Gallant  and  free,  he  left  the  Champion's  side,
And  cropp'd  the  mead,  or  sought  the  cooling  tide:
When  lo  !  it  chanced  amid  that  woodland  chase,
A  band  of  horsemen,  rambling  near  the  place,
Saw,  with  surprise,  superior  game  astray,
And  rushed  at  once  to  seize  the  noble  prey  ;
But,  in  the  imminent  struggle,  two  beneath
His  steel-clad  hoofs  received  the  stroke  of  death  ;
One  proved  a  sterner  fate — for  downward  borne,
The  mangled  head  was  from  the  shoulders  torn.
Still  undismayed,  again  they  nimbly  sprung,
And  round  his  neck  the  noose  entangling  flung  :
Now,  all  in  vain,  he  spurns  the  smoking  ground,
In  vain  the  tumult  echoes  all  around ;
They  bear  him  off,  and  view,  with  ardent  eyes,
His  matchless  beauty  and  majestic  size ;
Then  soothe  his  fury,  anxious  to  obtain,
A  bounding  steed  of  his  immortal  strain.

When  Rustem  woke,  and  miss'd  his  favorite  horse,
The  loved  companion  of  his  glorious  course;
Sorrowing  he  rose,  and,  hastening  thence,  began
To  shape  his  dubious  way  to  Samengan  ;
"  Reduced  to  journey  thus,  alone  !"  he  said,
l(  How  pierce  the  gloom  which  thickens  round  my  head ;
ic  Burthen' d,  on  foot,  a  dreary  waste  in  view,
"  Where  shall  I  bend  my  steps,  what  path  pursue  ?
"  The  scoffing  Turks  will  cry,  <  Behold  our  might '
"  (  We  won  the  trophy  from  the  Champion-knight !
"  '  From  him  who,  reckless  of  his  fame  and  pride,
"  '  Thus  idly  slept,  and  thus  ignobly  died.'  "

*  The  armour  called Burgustuwan  almost  covered  the  horse,  and  was
usually  made  of  leather  and  felt-cloth.


SOHRAB.  545

Girding  his  loins  he  gathered  from  the  field,
His  quivered  stores,  his  beamy  sword  and  shield,
Harness  and  saddle-gear  were  o'er  him  slung,
Bridle  and  mail  across  his  shoulders  hung.*
Then  looking  round,  with  anxious  eye,  to  meet
The  broad  impression  of  his  charger's  feet,t
The  track  he  hail'd,  and  following,  onward  prest,
While  grief  and  hope  alternate  filled  his  breast.

O'er  vale  and  wild-wood  led,  he  soon  descries,
The  regal  city's  shining  turrets  rise.]:
And  when  the  Champion's  near  approach  is  known,
The  usual  homage  waits  him  to  the  throne.
The  king,  on  foot,  received  his  welcome  guest
With  proffered  friendship,  and  his  coming  blest :
But  Rustem  frowned,  and  with  resentment  fired,
Spoke  of  his  wrongs,  the  plundered  steed  required.
"  I've  traced  his  footsteps  to  your  royal  town,
"  Here  must  he  be,  protected  by  your  crown ;
"  But  if  retained,  if  not  from  fetters  freed,
"  My  vengeance  shall  o'ertake  the  felon-deed."

*  In  this  hunting  excursion  he  is  completely  armed,  being  supplied  with
spear,  sword,  shield,  mace,  bow  and  arrows.  Like  the  knight -errants  of
after  times,  he  seldom  even  slept  unarmed.  Single  combat  and  the  romantic
enterprises  of  European  Chivalry  may  indeed  be  traced  to  the  East.  Rus-
tem was  a  most  illustrious  example  of  all  that  is  pious,  disinterested,  and
heroic.  The  adventure  now  describing  is  highly  characteristic  of  a  chi-
valrous age.  In  the  Dissertation  prefixed  to  Richardson's  Dictionary,
mention  is  made  of  a  famous  Arabian  Knight-errant  called  Abu  Mahom-
mud  Albatal,  "  who  wandered  every  where  in  quest  of  adventures,  and
redressing  grievances.  He  was  killed  in  the  year  738."

f  See  the  Story  of  the  Horse  in  Zadig,  which  is  doubtless  of  Oriental
origin.  In  the  upper  parts  of  Hindustan,  it  is  said  that  the  people  are
exceedingly  expert  in  discovering  robbers  by  tracing  the  marks  of  their
horses'  feet.  These  mounted  robbers  are  called  ^liUi  Kussaks.  The
Russian  Cossack  is  probably  derived  from  the  same  word.

f  Samengan  was,  according  to  Firdausi,  an  independent  principality,
probably  of  no  considerable  extent,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Turan,  and
beyond  the  limits  of  Iran.  D'Herbelot  simply  mentions  it  as  the  country  of
a  princess,  whom  Rustem  married.  In  Rennel's  map,  there  is  a  place
written  Sumenjan,  about  sixty  miles  to  the  south-east  of  Balkh,  in  Great
Bucharia.  Ebn  Haukal,  the  Arabian  traveller,  comprehends  Samengan  in
the  province  of  Balkh,  but  says  nothing  of  its  relative  situation.
2  N


546  SOHRAB.

"  My  honored  guest  !"  the  wondering  King  replied,  —
"  Shall  Rustem's  wants  or  wishes  be  denied  ?
"  But  let  not  anger,  headlong,  fierce,  and  blind,
"  O'ercloud  the  virtues  of  a  generous  mind.
"  If  still  within  the  limits  of  my  reign,
"  The  well  known  courser  shall  be  thine  again  :
"  For  Rakush  never  can  remain  concealed,
"  No  more  than  Rustem  in  the  battle  field  !
"  Then  cease  to  nourish  useless  rage,  and  share
"  With  joyous  heart  my  hospitable  fare."

The  son  of  Zal  now  felt  his  wrath  subdued,
And  glad  sensations  in  his  soul  renewed.
The  ready  herald  by  the  King's  command,
Convened  the  Chiefs  and  Warriors  of  the  land  ;*
And  soon  the  banquet  social  glee  restored,
And  China  wine-cups  glittered  on  the  board  ;
And  cheerful  song,  and  music's  magic  power,
And  sparkling  wine,  beguiled  the  festive  hour.t
The  dulcet  draughts  o'er  Rustem's  senses  stole,
And  melting  strains  absorbed  his  softened  soul.

*  Thus  Alcinous  convenes  the  chiefs  of  Phaeacia  in  honour  of  Ulysses.

f  The  original  gives  to  the  singers  black  eyes  and  cheeks  like  roses.
These  women  are  generally  known  by  the  term  Lulian,  perhaps  referring
to  their  beauty,  as  Lulii  signifies  a  pearl,  a  gem,  a  jewel  ;  though  Lulu  is
also  the  name  of  a  people  or  tribe  of  Persia.

Thus  Hafiz.


Oh,  these  wanton  damsels,  flatterers,  and  disturbers  of  the  city.
The  guests  drank  £j\j  *£jj  «L*£  grief-removing  wine. The  Nepenthe
of  Homer.

g'yS'gy  17TIV6V,

NjjTTSvS'S?  T'  ct^oXov  rt,  x.a,x.&>v  iTrtXq&ov  dTrccvrav.

ODYSSEY,  B.  4,  1.  280.

Charmed  with  that  virtuous  draught  th'  exalted  mind,
All  sense  of  woe  delivers  to  the  wind.  —  Pope.

Thus  Anacreon,  Ode  XXV,  according  to  the  edition  by  Barnes,

2uv  rw  ^s  TT/vg/y  y/^aj,
Eu^so-ii/  a/  [tZQipvot.t.

For  when  wine  transports  the  breast,
All  our  cares  are  lull'd  to  rest  __  Fawkes.


SOHRAB.  547

But  when  approached  the  period  of  repose,
All,  prompt  and  mindful,  from  the  banquet  rose  ;
A  couch  was  spread  well  worthy  such  a  guest,
Perfumed  with  rose  and  musk  ;  and  whilst  at  rest,
In  deep  sound  sleep,  the  wearied  Champion  lay,
Forgot  were  all  the  sorrows  of  the  way.

One  watch  had  passed,  and  still  sweet  slumber  shed
Its  magic  power  around  the  hero's  head  —
When  forth  Tahmineh  came,  —  a  damsel  held
An  amber  taper,  which  the  gloom  dispelled,
And  near  his  pillow  stood  ;  in  beauty  bright,
The  monarch's  daughter  struck  his  wondering  sight.
Clear  as  the  moon,  in  glowing  charms  arrayed,
Her  winning  eyes  the  light  of  heaven  displayed  ;
Her  cypress  form  entranced  the  gazer's  view,*
Her  waving  curls,  the  heart,  resistless,  drew.t
Her  eye-brows  like  the  Archer's  bended  bow  ;
Her  ringlets,  snares  ;  her  cheek,  the  rose's  glow,
Mixed  with  the  lily,  —  from  her  ear-tips  hung
Rings  rich  and  glittering,  star-like  ;  and  her  tongue,
And  lips,  all  sugared  sweetness  —  pearls  the  while
Sparkled  within  a  mouth  formed  to  beguile.
Her  presence  dimmed  the  stars,  and  breathing  round
Fragrance  and  joy,  she  scarcely  touched  the  ground,  J

*  Theocritus  in  his  eighteenth  Idyllium  compares  Helen  to  the  Cypress,

H  Ki&Tru  x.V7roi^i<r<ro<;.

But  with  us,  the  Cypress  is  uniformly  consecrated  to  sorrow,  amongst  the
Asiatics  to  joy  and  gladness.

t  J^kAd  *HMQ  •  «3  Insnaring  ringlets. Thus  Shakspeare;

Here  in  her  hairs,

The  painter  plays  the  Spider,  and  hath  woven
A  golden  mesh  to  entrap  the  hearts  of  men,
Faster  than  gnats  in  cobwebs  :  But  her  eyes  !

\  Beauty  and  fragrance  are  amongst  the  poets  inseparable.  The  Persians
exceed  even  the  Greeks  in  their  love  of  perfume,  though  Anacreon  thought
it  so  indispensable  a  part  of  beauty,  that  in  directing  the  Rhodian  Artist  to
paint  the  mistress  of  his  heart,  he  wishes  even  her  fragrance  to  be  pour-
trayed.

O"  at  x,Yiog  cc


And  if  your  art  can  rise  so  high,
Let  breathing  odours  round  her  fly.

2  N  2


548  SOHRAB.

So  light  her  step,  so  graceful — every  part
Perfect,  and  suited  to  her  spotless  heart.

Rustem,  surprised,  the  gentle  maid  addressed,
And  asked  what  lovely  stranger  broke  his  rest.
"  What  is  thy  name,"  he  said, — "  what  dost  thou  seek
"  Amidst  the  gloom  of  night? Fair  vision  speak  !"

"  O  thou,"  she  softly  sigh'd,  "  of  matchless  fame !
' '  With  pity  hear,  Tahmineh  is  my  name !
"  The  pangs  of  love  my  anxious  heart  employ,
"  And  flattering  promise  long-expected  joy;  ,
"  No  curious  eye  has  yet  these  features  seen,
"  My  voice  unheard,  beyond  the  sacred  screen.*
"  How  often  have  I  listened  with  amaze,
"  To  thy  great  deeds,  enamoured  of  thy  praise ;
"  How  oft  from  every  tongue  I've  heard  the  strain,
"  And  thought  of  thee — and  sighed,  and  sighed  again.
"  The  ravenous  eagle,  hovering  o'er  his  prey,
"  Starts  at  thy  gleaming  sword  and  flies  away:
"  Thou  art  the  slayer  of  the  Demon  brood,
"  And  the  fierce  monsters  of  the  echoing  wood.
"  Where'er  thy  mace  is  seen,  shrink  back  the  bold,
"  Thy  javelin's  flash,  all  trembled  to  behold.
"  Enchanted  with  the  stories  of  thy  fame,
"  My  fluttering  heart  responded  to  thy  name ;
"  And  whilst  their  magic  influence  I  felt,
"  In  prayer  for  thee  devotedly  I  knelt  ;

* As  a  proof  of  her  innocence  Tahmineh  declares  to  Rustem,


"  No  person  has  ever  seen  me  out  of  my  private  chamber,  or  even  heard  the
sound  of  my  voice."  It  is  but  just  to  remark,  that  the  seclusion  in  which
women  of  rank  continue  in  Persia,  and  other  parts  of  the  East,  is  not,  by
them,  considered  intolerable,  or  even  a  hardship.  Custom  has  not  only
rendered  it  familiar,  but  happy.  It  has  nothing  of  the  unprofitable  severity
of  the  cloister.  The  Zenanas  are  supplied  with  every  thing  that  can  please
and  gratify  a  reasonable  wish,  and  it  is  well  known  that  the  women  of  the
east  have  influence  and  power,  more  flattering  and  solid,  than  the  free
unsecluded  beauties  of  the  western  world.


SO11RAB  549

"  And  fervent  vowed,  thus  powerful  glory  charms,

"  No  other  spouse  should  bless  my  longing  arms.*

"  Indulgent  heaven  propitious  to  my  prayer,

"  Now  brings  thee  hither  to  reward  my  care.

"  Turan's  dominions  thou  hast  sought,  alone,

"  By  night,  in  darkness— thou,  the  mighty  one !

"  O  claim  my  hand,  and  grant  my  soul's  desire ;

"  Ask  me  in  marriage  of  my  royal  sire ;

"  Perhaps  a  boy  our  wedded  love  may  crown,

"  Whose  strength  like  thine  may  gain  the  world's  renown.

"  Nay  more — for  Samengan  will  keep  my  word, —

"  Rakush  to  thee  again  shall  be  restored."

The  damsel  thus  her  ardent  thought  expressed,
And  Rustem's  heart  beat  joyous  in  his  breast,
Hearing  her  passion — not  a  word  was  lost,
And  Rakush  safe,  by  him  still  valued  most ;
He  called  her  near ;  with  graceful  step  she  came,
And  marked  with  throbbing  pulse  his  kindled  flame.


*  Distinguished  valour  and  achievements  in  war  have  always  commanded
admiration,  and  there  are  many  instances  in  which  women  have,  like
Tahmineh,  fallen  in  love  with  a  hero's  glory.  Josephus  has  recorded  that
the  king's  daughter  betrayed  the  city  of  Saba,  in  Ethiopia,  into  the  hands
of  Moses,  having  become  enamoured  of  him  by  seeing  from  the  walls  the
valour  and  bravery  which  he  displayed  at  the  head  of  the  Egyptian  army.
Dido  was  won  by  the  celebrity  of  JEneas.  Kotzebue  has  drawn  Elvira
enamoured  of  the  fame  and  glory  of  Pizarro.  Her  passion  is  described
with  great  strength  and  feeling.  When  at  last  she  discovers  the  savage,  the
merciless  disposition  of  the  conqueror,  she  thus  addresses  him.  "  Thinkest
thou  that  my  love  will  survive  thy  fame  ?  No !  thy  glory  is  my  idol !  I  now
find  thee  a  deception,  and  Elvira  is  lost  to  thee  for  ever !"

The  lovely  Desdemona  affords  another  instance.

Oth. Her  father  loved  me  ;  oft  invited  me ;

Still  questioned  me  the  story  of  my  life,

From  year  to  year ;  the  battles,  sieges,  fortunes,

That  I  had  passed.

I  ran  it  through  even  from  my  boyish  days,

Wherein  I  spoke  of  most  disastrous  chances,

Of  moving  accidents  by  flood  and  field.

She  wished  she  had  not  heard  it ;  yet  she  wished,

That  heaven  had  made  her  such  a  man ;  she  thanked  me ;

She  loved  me  for  the  dangers  I  had  passed  ;

Aud  I  loved  her  that  she  did  pity  them — Shakspcare.


550  SOHRAB.

And  now  a  Mubid,  from  the  Champion-knight,
Requests  the  royal  sanction  to  the  rite;*
O'erjoyed,  the  king  the  honoured  suit  approves,
O'erjoyed  to  bless  the  doating  child  he  loves,
And  happier  still,  in  showering  smiles  around,
To  be  allied  to  warrior  so  renowned.
When  the  delighted  father,  doubly  blest,
Resigned  his  daughter  to  his  glorious  guest,
The  people  shared  the  gladness  which  it  gave,
The  union  of  the  beauteous  and  the  brave.
To  grace  their  nuptial  day — both  old  and  young,
The  hymeneal  gratulations  sung  :
"  May  this  young  moon  bring  happiness  and  joy.
"  And  every  source  of  enmity  destroy."
The  marriage-bower  received  the  happy  pair,
And  love  and  transport  shower' d  their  blessings  there.

Ere  from  his  lofty  sphere  the  morn  had  thrown
His  glittering  radiance,  and  in  splendour  shone,
The  mindful  Champion,  from  his  sinewy  arm,
His  bracelet  drew,  the  soul-ennobling  charm  ;
And,  as  he  held  the  wondrous  gift  with  pride,
He  thus  addressed  his  love-devoted  bride  !
"  Take  this,"  he  said,  "  and  if,  by  gracious  heaven,
"  A  daughter  for  thy  solace  should  be  given,
"  Let  it  among  her  ringlets  be  displayed,
"  And  joy  and  honour  will  await  the  maid;
f<  But  should  kind  fate  increase  the  nuptial-joy,
"  And  make  thee  mother  of  a  blooming  boy,
"  Around  his  arm  this  magic  bracelet  bind,
"  To  fire  with  virtuous  deeds  his  ripening  mind ;
"  The  strength  of  Sam  will  nerve  his  manly  form,
"  In  temper  mild,  in  valour  like  the  storm ;
"  His  not  the  dastard  fate  to  shrink,  or  turn
"  From  where  the  lions  of  the  battle  burn  ;
"  To  him  the  soaring  eagle  from  the  sky
"  Will  stoop,  the  bravest  yield  to  him,  or  fly  ;

*  The  marriage  ceremony  was  performed  conformably  to  the  laws  of  the
country. There  was  nothing  of,

Conjugium  vocat :  hoc  practexit  nomine  culpam.— Virgil.


SOU  HAD.  551

"  Thus  shall  his  bright  career  imperious  claim,
"  The  well-won  honours  of  immortal  fame  !  '
Ardent  he  said,  and  kissed  her  eyes  and  face,
And  lingering  held  her  in  a  fond  embrace.

When  the  bright  sun  his  radiant  brow  displayed,
And  earth  in  all  its  loveliest  hues  arrayed,
The  Champion  rose  to  leave  his  spouse's  side,
The  warm  affections  of  his  weeping  bride.
For  her,  too  soon  the  winged  moments  flew,
Too  soon,  alas  !  the  parting  hour  she  knew  ;
Clasped  in  his  arms,  with  many  a  streaming  tear,
She  tried,  in  vain,  to  win  his  deafen'd  ear ;
Still  tried,  ah  fruitless  struggle  !  to  impart,
The  swelling  anguish  of  her  bursting  heart.

The  father  now  with  gratulations  due
Rustem  approaches,  and  displays  to  view
The  fiery  war-horse, — welcome  as  the  light
Of  heaven,  to  one  immersed  in  deepest  night ;
The  Champion,  wild  with  joy,  fits  on  the  rein,
And  girds  the  saddle  on  his  back  again ;
Then  mounts,  and  leaving  sire  and  wife  behind,
Onward  to  Sistan  rushes  like  the  wind.

But  when  returned  to  Zabul's  friendly  shade,
None  knew  what  joys  the  Warrior  had  delayed ;
Still,  fond  remembrance,  with  endearing  thought,
Oft  to  his  mind  the  scene  of  rapture  brought.*

When  nine  slow-circling  months  had  roll'd  away,
Sweet-smiling  pleasure  hailed  the  brightening  day —
A  wondrous  boy  Tahmineh's  tears  supprest,
And  lull'd  the  sorrows  of  her  heart  to  rest ;
To  him,  predestined  to  be  great  and  brave,
The  name  Sohrab  his  tender  mother  gave  ;
And  as  he  grew,  amazed,  the  gathering  throng,
View'd  his  large  limbs,  his  sinews  firm  and  strong  ;
His  infant  years  no  soft  endearment  claimed  :
Athletic  sports  his  eager  soul  inflamed ;

*  In  the  Argonautics of  Appollonius Rhodius,  the  tender  parting  of
Jason  and  Hypsipyla,  is  very  similar  to  that  of  Rustem  and  Tahmineh.


552  SOHRAB.

Broad  at  the  chest  and  taper  round  the  loins,
Where  to  the  rising  hip  the  body  joins ;
Hunter  and  wrestler ;  and  so  great  his  speed,
He  could  o'ertake,  and  hold  the  swiftest  steed.
His  noble  aspect,  and  majestic  grace,
Betrayed  the  offspring  of  a  glorious  race.
How,  with  a  mother's  ever  anxious  love,
Still  to  retain  him  near  her  heart  she  strove  !
For  when  the  father's  fond  inquiry  came,
Cautious,  she  still  concealed  his  birth  and  name,
And  feign'd  a  daughter  born,  the  evil,  fraught
With  misery,  to  avert — but  vain  the  thought ;
Not  many  years  had  passed,  with  downy  flight,
Ere  he, Tahmineh's  wonder  and  delight,
With  glistening  eye,  and  youthful  ardour  warm,
Filled  her  foreboding  bosom  with  alarm.
"  O  now  relieve  my  heart !"  he  said,  "  declare,
"  From  whom  I  sprang  and  breathe  the  vital  air.
"  Since,  from  my  childhood  I  have  ever  been,
"  Amidst  my  play-mates  of  superior  mien  ;
"  Should  friend  or  foe  demand  my  father's  name,
<e  Let  not  my  silence  testify  my  shame  !
"  If  still  concealed,  you  falter,  still  delay,
"  A  mother's  blood  shall  wash  the  crime  away."

"  This  wrath  forego,"  the  mother  answering  cried,
"  And  joyful  hear  to  whom  thou  art  allied.
"  A  glorious  line  precedes  thy  destined  birth,
' '  The  mightiest  heroes  of  the  sons  of  earth.
"  The  deeds  of  Sam  remotest  realms  admire,
"  And  Zal,  and  Rustem  thy  illustrious  sire !"

In  private,  then,  she  Rustem's  letter  placed
Before  his  view,  and  brought  with  eager  haste
Three  sparkling  rubies,  wedges  three  of  gold,
From  Persia  sent — "  Behold,"  she  said,  "  behold
"  Thy  father's  gifts,  will  these  thy  doubts  remove
"  The  costly  pledges  of  paternal  love  !
"  Behold  this  bracelet  charm,  of  sovereign  power
"  To  baffle  fate  in  danger's  awful  hour ;


SOHRAB.  553

u  But  thou  must  still  the  perilous  secret  keep,

"  Nor  ask  the  harvest  of  renown  to  reap  ;

"  For  when,  by  this  peculiar  signet  known,

"  Thy  glorious  father  shall  demand  his  son,

(<  Doomed  from  her  only  joy  in  life  to  part,

"  O  think  what  pangs  will  rend  thy  mother's  heart  !  —

"  Seek  not  the  fame  which  only  teems  with  woe  ;

"  Afrasiyab  is  Rustem's  deadliest  foe  !

"  And  if  by  him  discovered,  him,  I  dread,

"  Revenge  will  fall  upon  thy  guiltless  head."

The  youth  replied  :  "  In  vain  thy  sighs  and  tears,
"  The  secret  breathes  and  mocks  thy  idle  fears.
"  No  human  power  can  fate's  decrees  control,
"  Or  check  the  kindled  ardour  of  my  soul.
"  Then  why  from  me  the  bursting  truth  conceal  ?
"  My  father's  foes  even  now  my  vengeance  feel  ;
"  Even  now  in  wrath  my  native  legions  rise,
"  And  sounds  of  desolation  strike  the  skies  ;
"  Kaus  himself,  hurled  from  his  ivory  throne,
"  Shall  yield  to  Rustem  the  imperial  crown,
"  And  thou,  my  mother,  still  in  triumph  seen,
"  Of  lovely  Persia  hailed  the  honored  queen  !
"  Then  shall  Turan  unite  beneath  my  band,
"  And  drive  this  proud  oppressor  from  the  land  !
"  Father  and  Son,  in  virtuous  league  combined,
"  No  savage  despot  shall  enslave  mankind  ;
"  When  Sun  and  Moon  o'er  heaven  refulgent  blaze,
"  Shall  little  Stars  obtrude  their  feeble  rays  ?*

*  E*


Inscription  on  the  statue  of  Epicharmus.
As  the  bright  Sun  out-shines  the  starry  train.

In  Percy's  Collection,  there  is  an  old  song  which  contains  a  similar  idea.
Ye  meaner  beauties  of  the  night,

Which  satisfy  our  eyes  !
More  by  your  number  than  your  light,
Like  common  people  of  the  skies,
What  are  ye  when  the  Moon  doth  rise  ?
Thus  Lucretius,  speaking  of  Epicurus.

Qui  genus  humanum  ingenio  speravit,  et  omneis
Restinxit,  Stellas  exortus  uti  afirius  Sol.

Whose  vast  mind,

Triumphant  rose  e'er  all  men,  and  excelled,
As,  in  the  heavens,  the  Sun  excels  the  Stars.—  Good's  Transl.


554  SOHRAB.

He  paused,  and  then  :  "  O  mother,  I  must  now
"  My  father  seek,  and  see  his  lofty  brow  ;
l<  Be  mine  a  horse,  such  as  a  prince  demands,
"  Fit  for  the  dusty  field,  a  warrior's  hands;
"  Strong  as  an  Elephant  his  form  should  be,
"  And  chested  like  the  stag,  in  motion  free,
"  And  swift  as  bird,  or  fish ;  it  would  disgrace
"  A  warrior  bold  on  foot  to  shew  his  face."

The  mother,  seeing  how  his  heart  was  bent,
His  day-star  rising  in  the  firmament,
Commands  the  stables  to  be  searched  to  find
Among  the  steeds  one  suited  to  his  mind  j
Pressing  their  backs  he  tries  their  strength  and  nerve,
Bent  double  to  the  ground  their  bellies  curve ;
Not  one,  from  neighbouring  plain  and  mountain  brought,
Equals  the  wish  with  which  his  soul  is  fraught  ;
Fruitless  on  every  side  he  anxious  turns,
Fruitless,  his  brain  with  wild  impatience  burns.
But  when  at  length  they  bring  the  destined  steed,
From  Rakush  bred,  of  lightning's  winged  speed,
Fleet,  as  the  arrow  from  the  bow-string  flies,
Fleet,  as  the  Eagle  darting  through  the  skies,
Rejoiced  he  springs,  and,  with  a  nimble  bound,
Vaults  in  his  seat,  and  wheels  the  courser  round ;
"  With  such  a  horse — thus  mounted,  what  remains  ?
"  Kaus,  the  Persian  King,  no  longer  reigns  !"
High  flushed  he  speaks — with  youthful  pride  elate,
Eager  to  crush  the  Monarch's  glittering  state  ;
He  grasps  his  javelin  with  a  hero's  might,
And  pants  with  ardour  for  the  field  of  fight.

Soon  o'er  the  realm  his  fame  expanding  spread,
And  gathering  thousands  hasten' d  to  his  aid.
His  Grand-sire,  pleased,  beheld  the  warrior-train,
Successive  throng  and  darken  all  the  plain  ;
And  bounteously  his  treasures  he  supplied,
Camels,  and  steeds,  and  gold. — In  martial  pride,
Sohrab  was  seen — a  Grecian  helmet  graced
His  brow — and  costliest  mail  his  limbs  embraced.


SOHRAB.  /i55

Afrasiyab  now  hears  with  ardent  joy,
The  bold  ambition  of  the  warrior-boy,
Of  him  who,  perfumed  with  the  milky  breath
Of  Infancy,  was  threatening  war  and  death,
And  bursting  sudden  from  his  mother's  side,
Had  launched  his  bark  upon  the  perilous  tide.

The  insidious  King  sees  well  the  tempting  hour,
Favouring  his  arms  against  the  Persian  power,
And  thence,  in  haste,  the  enterprise  to  share,
Twelve  thousand  veterans  selects  with  care  ;
To  Human  and  Barman  the  charge  consigns,
And  thus  his  force  with  Samengan  combines  ;
But  treacherous  first  his  martial  chiefs  he  prest,
To  keep  the  secret  fast  within  their  breast : —
"  For  this  bold  youth  must  not  his  father  know,
"  Each  must  confront  the  other  as  his  foe, —
"  Such  is  my  vengeance  ! With  unhallowed  rage,
"  Father  and  Son  shall  dreadful  battle  wage  !
"  Unknown  the  youth  shall  Rustem's  force  withstand,
"  And  soon  o'erwhelm  the  bulwark  of  the  land.
"  Rustem  removed,  the  Persian  throne  is  ours,
"  An  easy  conquest  to  confederate  powers ;
"  And  then,  secured  by  some  propitious  snare,
"  Sohrab  himself  our  galling  bonds  shall  wear.
"  Or  should  the  Son  by  Rustem's  falchion  bleed,
"  The  father's  horror  at  that  fatal  deed,
"  Will  rend  his  soul,  and  'midst  his  sacred  grief,
"  Kaus  in  vain  will  supplicate  relief."

The  tutored  chiefs  advance  with  speed,  and  bring
Imperial  presents  to  the  future  king  ;*

*  Amongst  the  nations  of  the  East,  nothing  can  be  done  without  presents
between  the  parties,  whether  the  negotiation  be  of  a  political,  commercial,
or  of  a  domestic  nature.  Homer  speaks  of  presents,  but  they  are  only  prof-
fered conditionally,  as  in  the  ninth  Iliad,  where  Ulysses  and  Ajax  endeavour
to  conciliate  Achilles.

Ten  weighty  talents  of  the  purest  gold,

And  twice  ten  vases  of  refulgent  mould ;

Twelve  steeds  unmatched  in  fleetness  and  in  force,

And  still  victorious  in  the  dusty  course,

All  these,  to  buy  thy  friendship,  shall  be  paid — Pope.

But  in  the  East,  the  presents  precede  the  negotiation.


556  SOHRAB.

In  stately  pomp  the  embassy  proceeds  ;

Ten  loaded  camels,  ten  unrivalled  steeds,

A  golden  crown,  and  throne,  whose  jewels  bright

Gleam  in  the  sun,  and  shed  a  sparkling  light.

A  letter  too  the  crafty  tyrant  sends,

And  fraudful  thus  the  glorious  aim  commends.  —

"  If  Persia's  spoils  invite  thee  to  the  field,

"  Accept  the  aid  my  conquering  legions  yield  ;

"  Led  by  two  Chiefs  of  valour  and  renown,

"  Upon  thy  head  to  place  the  kingly  crown."

Elate  with  promised  fame,  the  youth  surveys
The  regal  vest,  the  throne's  irradiant  blaze,
The  golden  crown,  the  steeds,  the  sumptuous  load
Of  ten  strong  Camels,  craftily  bestowed;
Salutes  the  Chiefs,  and  views  on  every  side,
The  lengthening  ranks  with  various  arms  supplied.
The  march  begins  —the  brazen  drums  resound,*
His  moving  thousands  hide  the  trembling  ground  ;
For  Persia's  verdant  land  he  wields  the  spear,
And  blood  and  havoc  mark  his  groaning  rear.t

To  check  the  Invader's  horror-  spreading  course,
The  barrier-  fort  opposed  unequal  force  ;
That  fort  whose  walls,  extending  wide,  contained
The  stay  of  Persia,  men  to  battle  trained.
Soon  as  Hujir  the  dusky  crowd  descried,
He  on  his  own  presumptuous  arm  relied,
And  left  the  fort  ;  in  mail,  with  shield  and  spear,
Vaunting  he  spoke,  —  "  What  hostile  force  is  here  ?
"  What  Chieftain  dares  our  war-like  realms  invade?"
"  And  who  art  thou  ?" Sohrab  indignant  said,
Rushing  towards  him  with  undaunted  look  —
<e  Hast  thou,  audacious  !  nerve  and  soul  to  brook


Kus  is  a  tymbal,  or  large  brass  drum,  which  is  beat  in  the
palaces  or  camps  of  Eastern  Princes.

t  It  appears  throughout  the  Shah  Nameh  that  whenever  any  army  was
put  in  motion,  the  inhabitants  and  the  country,  whether  hostile  or  friendly,
were  equally  given  up  to  plunder  and  devastation.


Every  thing  in  their  progress  was  burnt  and  destroyed.


SOHRAB.  557

"  The  crocodile  in  fight,  that  to  the  strife
"  Singly  thou  comest,  reckless  of  thy  life  ?"

To  this  the  foe  replied—"  A  Turk  and  I
"  Have  never  yet  been  bound  in  friendly  tie ;
(e  And  soon  thy  head  shall,  severed  by  my  sword,
4f  Gladden  the  sight  of  Persia's  mighty  lord,
"  While  thy  torn  limbs  to  vultures  shall  be  given,
"  Or  bleach  beneath  the  parching  blast  of  heaven."

The  youthful  hero  laughing  hears  the  boast,*
And  now  by  each  continual  spears  are  tost,
Mingling  together ;  like  a  flood  of  fire
The  boaster  meets  his  adversary's  ire  ;
The  horse  on  which  he  rides,  with  thundering  pace,
Seems  like  a  mountain  moving  from  its  base ;  f
Sternly  he  seeks  the  stripling's  loins  to  wound,
But  the  lance  hurtless  drops  upon  the  ground ;
Sohrab,  advancing,  hurls  his  steady  spear
Full  on  the  middle  of  the  vain  Hujir,
Who  staggers  in  his  seat. With  proud  disdain
The  youth  now  flings  him  headlong  on  the  plain,
And  quick  dismounting,  on  his  heaving  breast
Triumphant  stands,  his  Khunjer  firmly  prest,
To  strike  the  head  off,— but  the  blow  was  stayed —
Trembling,  for  life,  the  craven  boaster  prayed.
That  mercy,  granted,  eased  his  coward  mind,
Though,  dire  disgrace,  in  captive  bonds  confined,

*  The  circumstances  in  Sohrab's  first  encounter  somewhat  resemble  the
first  engagement  of  young  Ascanius  with  the  boaster  Numanus.

'f'  j£~i  \s>-  j\  £j£  ^jj ^j^  J5~ The  simile of  a  moving
mountain  occurs  in  the  Iliad. Hector  with  his  white  plumes,  is  compared
to  a  moving  mountain  topt  with  snow. Book  xiii. But  Virgil  has  added
considerably  to  this  image. The  Trojan  hero  moves  towards  Turnus.
Quantus  Athos,  aut  quantus  Eryx,  aut  ipse  coruscis,
Quum  fremit  ilicibus  quantus,  gaudetque  nivali,
Vertice  se  adtollens  pater  Appenninus  ad  auras.— ^En.  L.  xii,  1.  701.

Thus  translated  by  Dryden,

Like  Eryx  or  like  Athos,  great  he  shows,
Or  father  Appennine,  when  white  with  snows,
His  head  divine  obscure  in  clouds  he  hides,
And  shakes  the  sounding  forest  on  his  sides  !


558  SOHRAB.

And  sent  to  Human,  who  amazed  beheld
How  soon  Sohrab  his  daring  soul  had  quelled.
When  Gurd-afrid,  a  peerless  warrior-dame,
Heard  of  the  conflict,  and  the  hero's  shame,
Groans  heaved  her  breast,  and  tears  of  anger  flowed,
Her  tulip  cheek  with  deeper  crimson  glowed  ;
Speedful,  in  arms  magnificent  arrayed,
A  foaming  palfrey  bore  the  martial  maid  ;
The  burnished  mail  her  tender  limbs  embraced,
Beneath  her  helm  her  clustering  locks  she  placed  ;*
Poised  in  her  hand  an  iron  javelin  gleamed,
And  o'er  the  ground  its  sparkling  lustre  streamed  ;
Accoutred  thus  in  manly  guise,  no  eye
However  piercing  could  her  sex  descry  ;
Now,  like  a  lion,  from  the  fort  she  bends,
And  'midst  the  foe  impetuously  descends  ;
Fearless  of  soul,  demands  with  haughty  tone,
The  bravest  chief,  for  war-like  valour  known,
To  try  the  chance  of  fight. In  shining  arms,
Again  Sohrab  the  glow  of  battle  warms  ;
With  scornful  smiles,  "  Another  deer  !"  he  cries,
"  Come  to  my  victor-toils,  another  prize !"
The  damsel  saw  his  noose  insidious  spread,
And  soon  her  arrows  whizzed  around  his  head ;
With  steady  skill  the  twanging  bow  she  drew,
And  still  her  pointed  darts  unerring  flew  ;
For  when  in  forest  sports  she  touched  the  string,
Never  escaped  even  bird  upon  the  wing  ;
Furious  he  burned,  and  high  his  buckler  held,
To  ward  the  storm,  by  growing  force  impell'd ;
And  tilted  forward  with  augmented  wrath,
But  Gurd-Afrid  aspires  to  cross  his  path  ;
Now  o'er  her  back  the  slacken'd  bow  resounds ;
She  grasps  her  lance,  her  goaded  courser  bounds,

*  Thus  hid  in  arms  she  seemed  a  goodly  knight,

And  fit  for  any  warlike  exercise;
But  when  she  list  lay  down  her  armour  bright,

And  back  resume  her  peaceful  maiden's  guise  ;
The  fairest  maid  she  was  that  ever  yet,
Prison'd  her  locks  within  a  golden  net,
Or  let  them  waving  hang  with  roses  fair  beset.

Fletcher's  Purple  Island,  Cnnt.  x.


SOHRAB.  5f>9

Driven  on  the  youth  with  persevering  might —

Unconquer'd  courage  still  prolongs  the  fight  ;

The  stripling  Chief  shields  off  the  threaten'd  blow,

Reins  in  his  steed,  then  rushes  on  the  foe;

With  outstretch'd  arm,  he  bending  backwards  hung,

And,  gathering  strength,  his  pointed  javelin  flung  ;

Firm  through  her  girdle  belt  the  weapon  went,

And  glancing  down  the  polish'd  armour  rent.

Staggering,  and  stunned  by  his  superior  force,

She  almost  tumbled  from  her  foaming  horse,

Yet  unsubdued,  she  cut  the  spear  in  two,

And  from  her  side  the  quivering  fragment  drew,

Then  gain'd  her  seat,  and  onward  urged  her  steed,

But  strong  and  fleet  Sohrab  arrests  her  speed  :

Strikes  off  her  helm,  and  sees — a  woman's  face,

Radiant  with  blushes  and  commanding  grace  !

Thus  undeceived,  in  admiration  lost,

He  cries,  "  A  woman,  from  the  Persian  host !

"  If  Persian  damsels  thus  in  arms  engage,

"  Who  shall  repel  their  warriors'  fiercer  rage  ?

Then  from  his  saddle  thong — his  noose  he  drew,

And  round  her  waist  the  twisted  loop  he  threw, —

"  Now  seek  not  to  escape,"  he  sharply  said,

"  Such  is  the  fate  of  war,  unthinking  maid  !

"  And,  as  such  beauty  seldom  swells  our  pride,

"  Vain  thy  attempt  to  cast  my  toils  aside."

In  this  extreme,  but  one  resource  remained,
One  only  remedy  her  hope  sustained, —
Expert  in  wiles  each  syren-art  she  knew,
And  thence  exposed  her  blooming  face  to  view  ;
Raising  her  full  black  orbs,  serenely  bright,
In  all  her  charms  she  blazed  before  his  sight  ;*

*  Gurd-Afrid,  engaging  Sohrab,  is  exactly  the Clorinda of  Tasso  en-
gaging Tancred,  in  the  third  Canto  of  Gierusalemme  Liberata.

Clorinda  in  tanto  ad  incontrar  1'  assalto
Vadi  Tancredi,  c  pon  la  lancia  in  resta.
Ferirsi  a  le  visiere,  e  i.  tronchi  in  alto
Volaro,  e  parte  nuda  ella  ne  resta :
Che,  rotti  i  lacci  a  Pelmosuo,  d'un  salto,
(Mirabil  colpo)  ei  le  balzo  di  testa :


5GO  SOHRAB.

And  thus  addressed  Sohrab. — "  O  warrior  brave,
"  Hear  me,  and  thy  emperiled  honour  save,


E  le  chiome  derate  al  vento  sparse,
Giovane  donna  in  mezzo  '1  campo  apparse.

Lampeggiar  gli  occhi

Percosso  il  Cavalier  non  ripercote ;

Ne  si  dal  ferro  a  riguardarsi  attende,

Come  a  guardar  i  begli  occhi,  e  le  gote,

Ond'  Amor  1'arco  inevitabil  tende.— Stanzas  xxi.  and  xxiv.

Meanwhile,  her  lance  at  rest,  the  warrior-dame,
With  eager  haste  t'  encounter  Tancred  came.
Their  vizors  struck,  the  spears  in  shivers  flew ;
The  virgin's  face  was  left  exposed  to  view.
The  thongs  that  held  her  helmet  burst  in  twain,
Hurled  from  her  head,  it  bounded  on  the  plain ;
Loose  in  the  wind,  her  golden  tresses  flowed,
And  now  a  maid  confessed  to  all  she  stood ;

Keen  flash  her  eyes

Th'  enamoured  warrior  ne'er  returns  a  blow,
But  views  with  eager  gaze  her  charming  eyes,
From  whence  the  shaft  of  love  unerring  flies.— Hoole.

Warrior  dames  have  afforded  numerous  episodes  to  the  Poets  from  the
earliest  times.  Penthesilea  aided  the  cause  of  Priam  in  the  Trojan  war.
She  was  killed  in  battle  by  Achilles,  who  was  so  affected  by  her  beauty,
when  she  was  stripped  of  her  r.rmour,  that  he  shed  tears.  Artemisia,
according  to  Herodotus,  assisted  Xerxes  in  his  expedition  against  Greece.
Every  body  is  acquainted  with  the  noble  description  of  Camilla  in  the
eleventh  JEneid.

Quales  ThreXciae  cum  flumina  Thermodontis
Pulsant,  et  pietis  bellantur  Amazones  armis :
Seu  circum  Hippoliten.  ^Eneid,  L.  xi,  1.  659.

So  fought  the  Thracian  Amazons  of  old,

When  Thermodon  with  bloody  billows  rolled,

Such  troops  as  these  in  shining  arms  were  seen

When  Theseus  met  to  fight  their  maiden  queen.— Dryden.

The  Italian  Poets,  and  our  own  Spenser,  have  not  failed  to  take  advantage
of  these  examples,  and  hence  the  beautiful  and interesting  descriptions  of
female  heroism  with  which  their  works  abound.
Where  is  the  antique  glory  now  become,

That  whilsome  wont  in  women  to  appear  ?
Where  be  the  brave  atchievements  done  by  some  ?
Where  be  the  battles,  where  the  shield  and  spear  ?— Spencer's  Fairy  Queen.

The  Warrior-maids,  Marpesia,  Hippolyte,  Lampeto,  and  Penthesilea,  are
amongst  the  first  described  by  the  Historians  and  Poets  of  the  West,  and
they  are  all  of  Asiatic  origin.  The  Amazons  are  said  to  have  inhabited  the
country  now  called  Armenia.  Marpesia  conquered  the  inhabitants  of  Cau-
casus, in  consequence  of  which  the  mountain  was  called  Marpesius  Mons.


SOHRAB.  561

"  Tlicsc  curling  tresses  seen  by  either  host,

i(  A  woman  conquered,  whence  the  glorious  boast  ?*

"  Thy  startled  troops  will  know,  with  inward  grief,

"  A  woman's  arm  resists  their  towering  chief,

"  Better  preserve  a  warrior's  fair  renown,

"  And  let  our  struggle  still  remain  unknown,

ft  For  who  witli  wanton  folly  would  expose

"  A  helpless  maid,  to  aggravate  her  woes ;

"  The  fort,  the  treasure,  shall  thy  toils  repay,

"  The  chief,  and  garrison,  thy  will  obey,

"  And  thine  the  honours  of  this  dreadful  day."

Raptured  he  gazed,  her  smiles  resistless  move
The  wildest  transports  of  ungoverned  love.
Her  face  disclosed  a  paradise  to  view,
Eyes  like  the  fawn,  and  cheeks  of  rosy  hue —

Thus  vanquished,  lost,  unconscious  of  her  aim,

And  only  struggling  with  his  amorous  flame,

He  rode  behind,  as  if  compelled  by  fate,

And  heedless  saw  her  gain  the  castle-gate.

Safe  with  her  friends,  escaped  from  brand  and  spear,

Smiling  she  stands,  as  if  unknown  to  fear.

— The  father  now,  with  tearful  pleasure  wild,

Clasps  to  his  heart  his  fondly-foster'd  child  ;

The  crowding  warriors  round  her  eager  bend,

And  grateful  prayers  to  favouring  heaven  ascend.
Now  from  the  walls,  she,  with  majestic  air,

Exclaims  :  "  Thou  warrior  of  Turan  !  forbear,

"  Why  vex  thy  soul,  and  useless  strife  demand  !

<e  Go,  and  in  peace  enjoy  thy  native  land."

Stern  he  rejoins :  "  Thou  beauteous  tyrant !  say,

"  Though  crown'd  with  charms,  devoted  to  betray,


Gurd-Afrid  may  therefore  be  considered  an  indigenous  character,  and  not
derived  from  Western  Poetry,  although  from  the  circumstance  of  Longinus
having  been  minister  and  preceptor  to  Zenobia,  it  may  be  suspected  that
the  works  of  Homer  and  Virgil  were  known  in  the  East.

*  Namque  et  si  nullum  memorabile  nomen,
Feminea  in  pcena  est,  nee  habet  victoria  laudem.— ^Eneid,  L.  2. 1.  583.

'Tis  true  a  soldier  can  small  honour  gain,

And  boast  no  conquest  from  a  woman  slain !— Dryden.

2  o


562  SOHRAB.

"  When  these  proud  walls,  in  dust  and  ruins  laid,
"  Yield  no  defence,  and  thou  a  captive  maid,
"  Will  not  repentance  through  thy  bosom  dart,
lc  And  sorrow  soften  that  disdainful  heart?"

Quick  she  replied  :  lf  O'er  Persia's  fertile  fields
"  The  savage  Turk  in  vain  his  falchion  wields  ;
"  When  King  Kaus  this  bold  invasion  hears,
"  And  mighty  Rustem  clad  in  arms  appears  !
"  Destruction  wide  will  glut  the  slippery  plain,
"  And  not  one  man  of  all  thy  host  remain.
"  Alas  !  that  bravery,  high  as  thine,  should  meet
"  Amidst  such  promise,  with  a  sure  defeat,
"  But  not  a  gleam  of  hope  remains  for  thee,
"  Thy  wondrous  valour  cannot  keep  thee  free.
' '  Avert  the  fate  which  o'er  thy  head  impends,
"  Return,  return,  and  save  thy  martial  friends  !"

Thus  to  be  scorned,  defrauded  of  his  prey,
With  victory  in  his  grasp — to  lose  the  day  !
Shame  and  revenge  alternate  filled  his  mind ;
The  suburb-town  to  pillage  he  consigned,
And  devastation — not  a  dwelling  spared  ;
The  very  owl  was  from  her  covert  scared  ;
Then  thus  :  "  Though  luckless  in  my  aim  to-day,
lf  To-morrow  shall  behold  a  sterner  fray  ;
"  This  fort,,  in  ashes,  scattered  o'er  the  plain."
He  ceased — and  turned  towards  his  troops  again ;
There,  at  a  distance  from  the  hostile  power,
He  brooding  waits  the  slaughter-breathing  hour.

Meanwhile  the  sire  of  Gurd-afrid,  who  now
Governed  the  fort,  and  feared  the  warrior's  vow  ;
Mournful  and  pale,  with  gathering  woes  opprest,
His  distant  Monarch  trembling  thus  addrest.
But  first  invoked  the  heavenly  power  to  shed
Its  choicest  blessings  o'er  his  royal  head.
"  Against  our  realm  with  numerous  foot  and  horse,
"  A  stripling- warrior  holds  his  ruthless  course.
"  His  lion -breast  unequalled  strength  betrays,
le  And  o'er  his  mien  the  sun's  effulgence  plays :
"  Sohrab  his  name  ;  like  Sam  Suwar  he  shows,
"  Or  Rustem  terrible  amidst  his  foes.


SOHRAB.  563

"  The  bold  Hujir  lies  vanquished  on  the  plain,
"  And  drags  a  captive's  ignominious  chain  ;
"  Myriads  of  troops  besiege  our  tottering  wall,
"  And  vain  the  effort  to  suspend  its  fall.
"  Haste,  arm  for  fight,  this  Tartar-power  withstand,
"  Let  sweeping  Vengeance  lift  her  flickering  brand  ;
"  Rustem  alone  may  stem  the  roaring  wave,
"  And,  prompt  as  bold,  his  groaning  country  save.
"  Meanwhile  in  flight  we  place  our  only  trust,
"  Ere  the  proud  ramparts  crumble  in  the  dust."
Swift  flies  the  messenger  through  secret  ways,
And  to  the  King  the  dreadful  tale  conveys —
Then  passed,  unseen,  in  night's  concealing  shade,
The  mournful  heroes  and  the  warrior  maid.

Soon  as  the  sun  with  vivifying  ray,
Gleams  o'er  the  landscape,  and  renews  the  day  ;
The  flaming  troops  the  lofty  walls  surround,
With  thundering  crash  the  bursting  gates  resound.
Already  are  the  captives  bound,  in  thought,
And  like  a  herd  before  the  conqueror  brought ;
Sohrab,  terrific  o'er  the  ruin,  views
His  hopes  deceived,  but  restless  still  pursues.
An  empty  fortress  mocks  his  searching  eye,
No  steel-clad  chiefs  his  burning  wrath  defy ;
No  warrior- maid  reviving  passion  warms,
And  soothes  his  soul  with  fondly-valued  charms.
Deep  in  his  breast  he  feels  the  amorous  smart,
And  hugs  her  image  closer  to  his  heart.
"  Alas !  that  Fate  should  thus  invidious  shroud
<f  The  moon's  soft  radiance  in  a  gloomy  cloud ;
"  Should  to  my  eyes  such  winning  grace  display,
"  Then  snatch  the  enchanter  of  my  soul  away!
"  A  beauteous  roe  my  toils  enclosed  in  vain,
' '  Now  I,  her  victim,  drag  the  captive's  chain ;
"  Strange  the  effects  that  from  her  charms  proceed,
"  I  gave  the  wound,  and  I  afflicted  bleed  !
<;  Vanquished  by  her,  I  mourn  the  luckless  strife  ;
"  Dark,  dark,  and  bitter,  frowns  my  morn  of  life.
tf  A  fair  unknown  my  tortured  bosom  rends,
"  Withers  each  joy,  and  every  hope  suspends."
2  o  2


564  SOHRAB.

Impassioned  thus  Sohr&b  in  secret  sighed,
And  sought,  in  vain,  o'er-mastering  grief  to  hide.
Can  the  heart  bleed  and  throb  from  day  to  day,
And  yet  no  trace  its  inmost  pangs  betray  ?*
I/ove  scorns  control,  and  prompts  the  labouring  sigh,
Pales  the  red  lip,  and  dims  the  lucid  eye  ;
His  look  alarmed  the  stern  Turanian  Chief,
Closely  he  mark'd  his  heart-  corroding  grief  ;f

*  Moore  has  translated  the  following  thought  from  La  Fosse.

In  vain  the  lover  tries  to  veil

The  flame  which  in  his  bosom  lies  ;
His  cheeks'  confusion  tells  the  tale,

We  read  it  in  his  languid  eyes  :
And  though  his  words  the  heart  betray,
His  silence  speaks  e'en  more  than  they.

Thus  Shakspeare  :

Fire  that  is  closest  kept,  burns  most  of  all  ;

O  !  they  love  least,  that  let  men  know  their  love.

Again,

The  grief  that  does  not  speak,
Whispers  the  o'erfraught  heart,  and  bids  it  break.

And  Dryden  :

Silent  he  wept,  ashamed  to  shew  his  tears.

t  Literally,  Human  was  not  at  first  aware  that  Sohrab  was  wounded  in
the  LIVER.  In  this  organ,  Oriental  as  well  as  the  Greek  and  Roman
poets,  place  the  residence  of  love.  Thus  Theocritus,  Idyll,  xiii,  speaking
of  Hercules  lamenting  the  loss  of  Hylas  :

"KotteTrog  yag  strw  Stog  YITCCIQ  <z[A6<r<rtv.

For  in  his  LIVER  love  had  fixt  a  wound.
Thus  Horace  :

Cum  t  ibi  fervens  Amor  -
Saeviet  circa  Jecur  ulcerosum.

Thus  also  Anacreon  in  the  beautiful  Ode  of  Cupid  benighted  :


M.ZO-OV

With  that  he  bent  the  fatal  yew,
And  to  the  head  an  arrow  drew,
Loud  twanged  the  sounding  string,  the  dart
Pierced  through  my  Liver.  Fawkes.

And  Shakspeare  :

Alas  their  love  may  be  called  appetite,
No  motion  of  the  Liver,  but  the  palate.


SOHRAB.  565

And  though  he  knew  not  that  the  martial  dame,

Had  in  his  bosom  lit  the  tender  flame  ;

Full  well  he  knew  such  deep  repinings  prove,

The  hapless  thraldom  of  disastrous  love.

Full  well  he  knew  some  idol's  musky  hair,

Had  to  his  youthful  heart  become  a  snare,

But  still  unnoted  was  the  gushing  tear,

Till  haply  he  had  gained  his  private  ear  : —

*'  In  ancient  times,  no  hero  known  to  fame,

"  Not  dead  to  glory  e'er  indulged  the  flame ;

"  Though  beauty's  smiles  might  charm  a  fleeting  hour,

*'  The  heart,  unsway'd,  repelled  their  lasting  power,

"  A  warrior  Chief  to  trembling  love  a  prey  ?

t(  What !  weep  for  woman  one  inglorious  day  ?

"  Canst  thou  for  love's  effeminate  control,

"  Barter  the  glory  of  a  warrior's  soul  ?

"  Although  a  hundred  damsels  might  be  gained,

"  The  hero's  heart  should  still  be  free,  unchained.

"  Thou  art  our  leader,  and  thy  place  the  field

"  Where  soldier's  love  to  fight  with  spear  and  shield ;

ff  And  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  tears  and  smiles,

ft  The  silly  victim  to  a  woman's  wiles  ?

"  Our  progress,  mark  !  from  far  Turan  we  came,

"  Through  seas  of  blood  to  gain  immortal  fame  ;

"  And  wilt  thou  now  the  tempting  conquest  shun,

"  When  our  brave  arms  this  Barrier-fort  have  won  ?

"  Why  linger  here,  and  trickling  sorrows  shed,

ie  Till  mighty  Kaus  thunders  o'er  thy  head  !

«  Till  Tus,  and  Giw,  and  Gudarz,  and  Bahrain,

"  And  Rustem  brave,  Feramurz,  and  Reham,

"  Shall  aid  the  war  ! A  great  emprise  is  thine,

"  At  once,  then,  every  other  thought  resign  ;

"  For  know  the  task,  which  first  inspired  thy  zeal,

"  Transcends  in  glory  all  that  love  can  feel.

"  Rise,  lead  the  war,  prodigious  toils  require

"  Unyielding  strength,  and  unextinguished  fire  \

"  Pursue  the  triumph  with  tempestuous  rage,

"  Against  the  world  in  glorious  strife  engage,

"  And  when  an  empire  sinks  beneath  thy  sway,

"  (O  quickly  may  we  hail  the  prosperous  day,)


566  SOHRAB.

"  The  fickle  sex  will  then  with  blooming  charms,
"  Adoring  throng  to  bless  thy  circling  arms  !"

Human's  warm  speech,  the  spirit-stirring  theme,
Awoke  Sohrab  from  his  inglorious  dream.
No  more  the  tear  his  faded  cheek  bedewed,
Again  ambition  all  his  hopes  renewed  :
Swell'd  his  bold  heart  with  unforgotten  zeal,
The  noble  wrath  which  heroes  only  feel ;
Fiercely  he  vowed  at  one  tremendous  stroke,
To  bow  the  world  beneath  the  tyrant's  yoke  !
"  Afrasiyab,"  he  cried,  "  shall  reign  alone,
"  The  mighty  lord  of  Persia's  gorgeous  throne  !"

Burning,  himself,  to  rule  this  nether  sphere,
These  welcome  tidings  charmed  the  despot's  ear.
Meantime  Kaiis,  this  dire  invasion  known,
Had  called  his  chiefs  around  his  ivory  throne :
There  stood  Gurgin,  and  Bahram,  and  Gushwad,
And  Tus,  and  Giw,  and  Gudarz,  and  Ferhad  ;
To  them  he  read  the  melancholy  tale,
Gust'hem  had  written  of  the  rising  bale  ;
Besought  their  aid  and  prudent  choice,  to  form
Some  sure  defence  against  the  threatening  storm.
With  one  consent  they  urge  the  strong  request,
To  summon  Rustem  from  his  rural  rest. —
Instant  a  warrior-delegate  they  send,
And  thus  the  King  invites  his  patriot-friend,

"  To  thee  all  praise,  whose  mighty  arm  alone,
"  Preserves  the  glory  of  the  Persian  throne  !
"  Lo  !  Tartar  hordes  our  happy  realms  invade ;
"  The  tottering  state  requires  thy  powerful  aid ;
"  A  youthful  Champion  leads  his  ruthless  host,
"  His  savage  country's  widely-rumoured  boast.
(<  The  Barrier-fortress  sinks  beneath  his  sway,
"  Hujir  is  vanquished,  ruin  tracks  his  way ;
"  Strong  as  a  raging  elephant  in  fight,
"  No  arm  but  thine  can  match  his  furious  might.
"  Mazinderan  thy  conquering  prowess  knew  ;
"  The  Daemon-king  thy  trenchant  falchion  slew ;


S01I11AB.


"  The  rolling  heavens,  abash'cl  with  fear,  beliokl

"  Thy  biting  sword,  thy  mace  adorned  with  gold!*

"  Fly  to  the  succour  of  a  King  distress'd,

"  Proud  of  thy  love,  with  thy  protection  blest.

"  When  o'er  the  nation  dread  misfortunes  lower,

"  Thou  art  the  refuge,  thou  the  saving  power.

*'  The  chiefs  assembled  claim  thy  patriot  vows,

"  Give  to  thy  glory  all  that  life  allows  ;

"  And  while  no  whisper  breathes  the  direful  tale,

"  O,  let  thy  Monarch's  anxious  prayers  prevail."

Closing  the  fragrant  pagef  o'ercome  with  dread,
The  afflicted  King  to  Giw,  the  warrior,  said  : —
"  Go,  bind  the  saddle  on  thy  fleetest  horse,
"  Outstrip  the  tempest  in  thy  rapid  course,
"  To  Rustem  swift  his  country's  woes  convey,
'«  Too  true  art  thou  to  linger  on  the  way  ;
"  Speed,  day  and  night — and  not  one  instant  wait,
"  Whatever  hour  may  bring  thee  to  his  gate."

Followed  no  pause — to  Giw  enough  was  said,
Nor  rest,  nor  taste  of  food,  his  speed  delayed.
And  when  arrived,  where  Zabul  bowers  exhale,
Ambrosial  sweets  and  scent  the  balmy  gale,


Thy  mace  makes  the  Sun  weep,  and  thy  sword  inflames  the  Stars.  (Lit.
the  planet  Venus. )  Although  this  is  a  strong  hyperbole,  there  are  num-
berless parallel  passages,  containing  equally  extravagant  personification,  in
our  own  Poets.  For  example :  «'  The  Stars  are  ashamed  of  thy  presence,
and  turn  aside  their  sparkling  eyes."  Ossian.

Swift  Severn's  flood,

Affrighted  with  their  bloody  looks,

Ran  fearfully  among  the  trembling  reeds,

And  hid  his  crisped  head  in  the  hollow  bank.  Shakspeare.

f  The  paper  upon  which  the  letters  of  royal  and  distinguished  per-
sonages in  the  East  are  written  is  usually  perfumed,  and  covered  with
curious  devices  in  gold.  This  was  scented  with  amber.  The  degree  of
embellishment  is  generally  regulated  according  to  the  rank  of  the  party.


568  SOHRAB.

The  sentinel's  loud  voice  in  Rustem's  ear,
Announced  a  messenger  from  Persia,  near;
The  Chief  himself  amidst  his  warriors  stood,
Dispensing  honours  to  the  brave  and  good,
And  soon  as  Giw  had  joined  the  martial  ring,
(The  sacred  envoy  of  the  Persian  King,)
He,  with  becoming  loyalty  inspired,
Asked  what  the  Monarch,  what  the  state  required  ;
But  Giw,  apart,  his  secret  mission  told, —
The  written  page  was  speedily  unrolled.

Struck  with  amazement,  Rustem — "  Now  on  earth
"  A  warrior-knight  of  Sam's  excelling  worth  ?
"  Whence  comes  this  hero  of  the  prosperous  star  ?
"  I  know  no  Turk  renowned,  like  him,  in  war  ;
"  He  bears  the  port  of  Rustem  too,  'tis  said,
"  Like  Sam,  like  Nuriman,  a  warrior  bred !
"  He  cannot  be  my  son,  unknown  to  me ;
"  Reason  forbids  the  thought — it  cannot  be  !
"  At  Samengan,  where  once  affection  smiled,
"  To  me  Tahmineh  bore  her  only  child,
"  That  was  a  daughter  ?" Pondering  thus  he  spoke,
And  then  aloud — "  Why  fear  the  invader's  yoke  ?
te  Why  trembling  shrink,  by  coward  thoughts  dismayed,
"  Must  we  not  all  in  dust,  at  length,  be  laid  ?
"  But  come,  to  Nirum's  palace,  haste  with  me,
"  And  there  partake  the  feast — from  sorrow  free  ;
"  Breathe,  but  awhile — ere  we  our  toils  renew,
"  And  moisten  the  parched  lip  with  needful  dew.
"  Let  plans  of  war  another  day  decide,
11  We  soon  shall  quell  this  youthful  hero's  pride.
"  The  force  of  fire  soon  flutters  and  decays
"  When  ocean,  swelled  by  storms,  its  wrath  displays.
"  What  danger  threatens  !  whence  the  dastard  fear  !
"  Rest,  and  at  leisure  share  a  warrior's  cheer."

In  vain  the  Envoy  prest  the  Monarch's  grief;
The  matchless  prowess  of  the  stripling  chief;
How  brave  Hujir  had  felt  his  furious  hand  ;
What  thickening  woes  beset  the  shuddering  land.
But  Rustem,  still,  delayed  the  parting  day,
And  mirth  and  feasting  rolled  the  hours  away  ;


SOHRAB.  569

Morn  following  morn  beheld  the  banquet  bright,
Music  and  wine  prolonged  the  genial  rite  ;
Rapt  by  the  witchery  of  the  melting  strain,
No  thought  of  Kaus  touch'd  his  swimming  brain.*
The  trumpet's  clang,  on  fragrant  breezes  borne,
Now  loud  salutes  the  fifth  revolving  morn  ;
The  softer  tones  which  charm'd  the  jocund  feast,
And  all  the  noise  of  revelry,  had  ceased.
The  generous  horse,  with  rich  embroidery  deckt,
Whose  gilded  trappings  sparkling  light  reflect,
Bears  with  majestic  port  the  Champion  brave,
And  high  in  air  the  victor-banners  wave.
Prompt  at  the  martial  call,  Zuara  leads
His  veteran  troops  from  Zabul's  verdant  meads.  f
Ere  Rustem  had  approached  his  journey's  end,
Tus,  Giidarz,  Gushwad,  met  their  champion-friend,
With  customary  honours  ;  pleased  to  bring
The  shield  of  Persia  to  the  anxious  King.
But  foaming  wrath  the  senseless  monarch  swayed  ;
His  friendship  scorned,  his  mandate  disobeyed,
Beneath  dark  brows  o'er-shadowing  deep,  his  eye
Red  gleaming  shone,  like  lightning  through  the  sky  ;
And  when  the  warriors  met  his  sullen  view,
Frowning  revenge,  still  more  enraged  he  grew  :  —
Loud  to  the  Envoy  thus  he  fiercely  cried  :  —
"  Since  Rustem  has  my  royal  power  defied,
"  Had  I  a  sword,  this  instant  should  his  head
"  Roll  on  the  ground  ;  but  let  him  now  be  led
"  Hence,  and  impaled  alive."  ^ Astounded  Giw
Shrunk  from  such  treatment  of  a  knight  so  true  ;
*  Four  days  were  consumed  in  uninterrupted  feasting. This  seems  to

have  been  an  ancient  practice  previous  to the  commencement  of  any  im-

portant undertaking,  or  at  setting  out  on  a  journey.

t  Zuara,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  the  brother  of  Rustem,  and  had  the

immediate  superintendence  of  the  Zabul  troops.
J  The  original  is,


"  Seize  and  inflict  upon  him  the  punishment  of  the  dar."  According  to
the  Burhani-katia,  dar  is  a  tree  upon  which  felons  are  hanged.  But  the
general  acceptation  of  the  term  is  breaking  or  tearing  the  body  upon  a  stake,


570  SOHRAB.

But  this  resistance  added  to  the  flame,

And  both  were  branded  with  revolt  and  shame  ;

Both  were  condemned,,  and  Tus,  the  stern  decree

Received,  to  break  them  on  the  felon-tree.

Could  daring  insult,,  thus  deliberate  given,

Escape  the  rage  of  one  to  frenzy  driven  ?

No,  from  his  side  the  nerveless  Chief  was  flung,

Bent  to  the  ground. Away  the  Champion  sprung  ;

Mounted  his  foaming  horse,  and  looking  round  —

His  boiling  wrath  thus  rapid  utterance  found  :  —

"  Ungrateful  King,  thy  tyrant  acts  disgrace

'  '  The  sacred  throne,  and  more,  the  human  race  ;

"  Midst  clashing  swords  thy  recreant  life  I  saved,

"  And  am  I  now  by  Tus  contemptuous  braved  ?*

"  On  me  shall  Tus,  shall  Kaus  dare  to  frown  ?

1  '  On  me,  the  bulwark  of  the  regal  crown  ?

"  Wherefore  should  fear  in  Rustem's  breast  have  birth,

"  Kaus,  to  me,  a  worthless  clod  of  earth  !

"  Go,  and  thyself  Sohrab's  invasion  stay,

"  Go,  seize  the  plunderers  growling  o'er  their  prey  !

"  Wherefore  to  others  give  the  base  command  ?

"  Go,  break  him  on  the  tree  with  thine  own  hand.

<e  Know,  thou  hast  roused  a  warrior,  great  and  free,

"  Who  never  bends  to  tyrant  Kings  like  thee  !

"  Was  not  this  untired  arm  triumphant  seen,

"  In  Misser,  Rum,  Mazinderan,  and  Chin  !

"  And  must  I  •  shrink  at  thy  imperious  nod  !

"  Slave  to  no  Prince,  I  only  bow  to  God.

"  Whatever  wrath  from  thee,  proud  King  !  may  fall,

"  For  thee  I  fought,  and  I  deserve  it  all.

*  In  this  speech  Rustem  recounts  the  services  which  he  had  performed
for  Kaus.  He  speaks  of  his  conquests  in  Egypt,  China,  Hamaveran,
Rum,  Suksar,  and  Mazinderan.  Thus  Achilles  boasts  of  his  unrequited
achievements  in  the  cause  of  Greece.


'{vbiKoe,  <pjj|it<  x-oe-Tot  Tgo/jjv  /g^a/Aov.

Iliad,  B.  ix.  1.  328.
I  sacked  twelve  ample  cities  on  the  main,
And  twelve  lay  smoking  on  the  Trojan  plain.  Pope.


SOHKAB.  •><  I

"  The  regal  sceptre  might  have  graced  my  hand,

"  I  kept  the  laws,  and  scorned  supreme  command.

"  When  Kaf-Kobad  on  Alberz  mountain  strayed,

"  I  drew  him  thence,  and  gave  a  warrior's  aid  ;

"  Placed  on  his  brows  the  long-contested  crown,

"  Worn  by  his  sires,  by  sacred  right  his  own ;

"  Strong  in  the  cause,  my  conquering  arms  prevailed,

"  Wouldst  thou  have  reign'd  had  Rustem's  valour  failed

"  When  the  White  Demon  raged  in  battle-fray,

"  Wouldst  thou  have  lived  had  Rustem  lost  the  day  ?"

Then  to  his  friends :  "  Be  wise,  and  shun  your  fate,

"  Fly  the  wide  ruin  which  o'erwhelms  the  state ;

"  The  conqueror  comes — the  scourge  of  great  and  small,

"  And  vultures,  following  fast,  will  gorge  on  all.

"  Persia  no  more  its  injured  Chief  shall  view" —

He  said,  and  sternly  from  the  court  withdrew.

The  warriors  now,  with  sad  forebodings  wrung,
Torn  from  that  hope  to  which  they  proudly  clung,
On  Gudarz  rest,  to  soothe  with  gentle  sway,
The  frantic  King,  and  Rustem's  wrath  allay.
With  bitter  grief  they  wail  misfortune's  shock,
No  shepherd  now  to  guard  the  timorous  flock.
Gudarz  at  length,  with  boding  cares  imprest,
Thus  soothed  the  anger  in  the  royal  breast.
"  Say,  what  has  Rustem  done,  that  he  should  be
"  Impaled  upon  the  ignominious  tree  ?
"  Degrading  thought,  unworthy  to  be  bred
"  Within  a  royal  heart,  a  royal  head.
"  Hast  thou  forgot  when  near  the  Caspian-wave,
tc  Defeat  and  ruin  had  appalled  the  brave,
"  When  mighty  Rustem  struck  the  dreadful  blow,
"  And  nobly  freed  thee  from  the  savage  foe  ?
"  Did  Demons  huge  escape  his  flaming  brand  ?
"  Their  reeking  limbs  bestrew'd  the  slippery  strand.
"  Shall  he  for  this  resign  his  vital  breath  ?
"  What !  shall  the  hero's  recompense  be  death  ?
"  But  who  will  dare  a  threatening  step  advance,
"  What  earthly  power  can  bear  his  withering  glance  ?
"  Should  he  to  Zabul  fired  with  wrongs  return,
"  The  plunder'd  land  will  long  in  sorrow  mourn  !


572  SOHRAB.

"  This  direful  presage  all  our  warriors  feel,

"  For  who  can  now  oppose  the  invader's  steel ;

<f  Thus  is  it  wise  thy  champion  to  offend,

"  To  urge  to  this  extreme  thy  warrior-friend  ?

"  Remember,  passion  ever  scorns  control,

"  And  wisdom's  mild  decrees  should  rule  a  Monarch's

soul."*

Kaus,  relenting,  heard  with  anxious  ear,
And  groundless  wrath  gave  place  to  shame  and  fear ;
f<  Go  then,"  he  cried,  "  his  generous  aid  implore,
"  And  to  your  King  the  mighty  Chief  restore  !"

When  Gudarz  rose,  and  seized  his  courser's  rein,
A  crowd  of  heroes  followed  in  his  train.
To  Rustem,  now,  (respectful  homage  paid,)
The  royal  prayer  he  anxious  thus  conveyed.
"  The  King,  repentant,  seeks  thy  aid  again,
"  Grieved  to  the  heart  that  he  has  given  thee  pain  ;
tc  But  though  his  anger  was  unjust  and  strong,
"  Thy  country  still  is  guiltless  of  the  wrong,
"  And,  therefore,  why  abandoned  thus  by  thee  ?
"  Thy  help  the  King  himself  implores  through  me."
Rustem  rejoined  :  <e  Unworthy  the  pretence,
"  And  scorn  and  insult  all  my  recompence  ?
"  Must  I  be  galled  by  his  capricious  mood  ?
"  I,  who  have  still  his  firmest  champion  stood  ?

*  Literally,  "  Kings  ought  to  be  endowed  with  judgment  and  discretion  j
no  advantage  can  arise  from  impetuosity  and  rage."  Gudarz  was  one  of
the  greatest  generals  of  Persia,  he  conquered  Judea,  and  took  Jerusalem
under  the  reign  of  Lohurasp,  of  the  first  dynasty  of  Persia,  and  sustained
many  wars  against  Afrasiyab  under  the  Kings  of  the  second  dynasty.  He
was  the  father  of  Giw,  who  is  also  celebrated  for  his  valour  in  the  following
reigns.  The  opinion  of  this  venerable  and  distinguished  warrior  appeai-s  to
have  had  considerable  weight  and  influence  with  Kaus.  By  the  persuasion
of  his  friends  he  interferes  between  the  King  and  Rustem,  like  Nestor,
To  calm  their  passions  with  the  words  of  age.— Iliad.

The  language  is  strong,  and  breathes  more  of  independence  than  might  be
supposed  in  an  address  to  a  Persian  despot.  But  Kaiis  was  a  weak  Prince.
He  is  every  where  called  !^  ^  empty  brained !  and  treated  with  very
little  ceremony.


SOHRAB.  573

"  But  all  is  past,  to  heaven  alone  resigned,

"  No  human  cares  shall  more  disturb  my  mind  !'

Then  Gudarz  thus,  (consummate  art  inspired

His  prudent  tongue,  with  all  that  zeal  required)  ;

"  When  Rustem  dreads  Sohrab's  resistless  power,

"  Well  may  inferiors  fly  the  trying  hour  !

"  The  dire  suspicion  now  pervades  us  all,

"  Thus,  unavenged,  shall  beauteous  Persia  fall  !

"  Yet,  generous  still,  avert  the  lasting  shame,

"  O,  still  preserve  thy  country's  glorious  fame  !*

"  Or  wilt  thou,  deaf  to  all  our  fears  excite,

"  Forsake  thy  friends,  and  shun  the  pending  fight  ?

"  And  worse,  O  grief  !  in  thy  declining  days,

"  Forfeit  the  honours  of  thy  country's  praise  ?"

This  artful  censure  set  his  soul  on  fire,

But  patriot  firmness  calm'd  his  burning  ire  ;

And  thus  he  said  —  "  Inured  to  war's  alarms,

"  Did  ever  Rustem  shun  the  din  of  arms  ?

"  Though  frowns  from  Kaus  I  disdain  to  bear,

"  My  threaten'd  country  claims  a  warrior's  care."

He  ceased,  and  prudent  joined  the  circling  throng,

And  in  the  public  good  forgot  the  private  wrong.

From  far  the  King  the  generous  Champion  viewed,
And  rising  mildly  thus  his  speech  pursued  :  —
"  Since  various  tempers  govern  all  mankind,
"  Me,  nature  fashioned  of  a  fro  ward  mind  ;f

* Ulysses  thus  addresses  Achilles  :

But  if  all  this  relentless  thou  disdain,

If  honour  and  if  interest  plead  in  vain  ;

Yet  some  redress  to  suppliant  Greece  afford,

And  be,  amongst  her  guardian  gods,  adored.

If  no  regard  thy  suffering  country  claim,

Hear  thy  own  glory,  and  the  voice  of  fame.  Pope.

f  Kaiis,  in  acknowledging  the  violence  of  his  disposition,  uses  a  singular
phrase  :


"  When  you  departed  in  anger,  O  Champion  !  I  repented  ;  ashes  fell  into
my  mouth."  A  similar  metaphor  is  used  in  Hindustani  :  If  a  person
falls  under  the  displeasure  of  his  friend,  he  says  Mere  khane  men  khak
puri,  ashes  have  fallen  into  my  meat  :  meaning,  that  his  happiness  is  gone.


574  SOHRAB.

"  And  what  the  heavens  spontaneously  bestow,

"  Sown  by  their  bounty  must  for  ever  grow.

"  The  fit  of  wrath  which  burst  within  me,  soon

"  Shrunk  up  my  heart  as  thin  as  the  new  moon  ;*

"  Else  had  I  deemed  thee  still  my  army's  boast,

"  Source  of  my  regal  power,  beloved  the  most,

"  Unequalled. Every  day,  remembering  thee,

lc  I  drain  the  wine  cup,  thou  art  all  to  me  ;

"  I  wished  thee  to  perform  that  lofty  part,

"  Claimed  by  thy  valour,  sanctioned  by  my  heart  ;

"  Hence  thy  delay  my  better  thoughts  supprest,

"  And  boisterous  passions  revelled  in  my  breast  ;

"  But  when  I  saw  thee  from  my  Court  retire

tf  In  wrath,  repentance  quenched  my  burning  ire.

tc  O,  let  me  now  my  keen  contrition  prove,

"  Again  enjoy  thy  fellowship  and  love  :

"  And  while  to  thee  my  gratitude  is  known,

<e  Still  be  the  pride  and  glory  of  my  throne."

Rustem,  thus  answering  said  :  —  "  Thou  art  the  King,
"  Source  of  command,  pure  honour's  sacred  spring  j
"  And  here  I  stand  to  follow  thy  behest,
"  Obedient  ever  —  be  thy  will  expressed,
"  And  services,  required  —  Old  age  shall  see,
'*  My  loins  still  bound  in  fealty  to  thee."

To  this  the  King  :  —  "  Rejoice  we  then  to-day,
"  And  on  the  morrow  marshal  our  array."
The  monarch  quick  commands  the  feast  of  joy,
And  social  cares  his  buoyant  mind  employ,
Within  a  bower,  beside  a  crystal  spring,  -j-
Where  ^opening  flowers,  refreshing  odours  fling,

*  This  is  one  of  Firdausi's  favourite  similes.


My  heart  became  as  slender  as  the  new  moon,

f  The  beautiful  arbours  referred  to  in  the  text  are  often  included  within
the  walls  of  Eastern  palaces.  They  are  fancifully  fitted  up,  and  supplied
with  reservoirs,  fountains,  and  flower-trees.  These  romantic  garden-pavi-
lions are  called  Kiosks  in  Turkey,  and  are  generally  situated  upon  an
eminence  near  a  running  stream.


SOHRAB.  575

Cheerful  he  sits,  and  forms  the  banquet  scene,

In  regal  splendour  on  the  crowded  green ;

And  as  around  he  greets  his  valiant  hands,

Showers  golden  presents  from  his  bounteous  hands  ;*

Voluptuous  damsels  trill  the  sportive  lay,

Whose  sparkling  glances  beam  celestial  day  ;

Fill'd  with  delight  the  heroes  closer  join,

And  quaff  till  midnight  cups  of  generous  wine.

Soon  as  the  Sun  had  pierced  the  veil  of  night,
And  o'er  the  prospect  shed  his  earliest  light,
Ktiiis,  impatient,  bids  the  clarions  sound,
The  sprightly  notes  from  hills  and  rocks  rebound  ;
His  treasure  gates  are  opened  : — and  to  all
A  largess  given ;  obedient  to  the  call,
His  subjects  gathering  crowd  the  mountain's  brow,
And  following  thousands  shade  the  vales  below  ;
With  shields,  in  armour,  numerous  legends  bend ;
And  troops  of  horse  the  threatening  lines  extend.
Beneath  the  tread  of  heroes  fierce  and  strong,
By  war's  tumultuous  fury  borne  along,

* Milton  alludes  to  the  custom  in  Paradise  Lost :

Where  the  gorgeous  east  with  richest  hand
Showers  on  her  Kings  barbaric  pearl  and  gold.

In  the  note  on  this  passage  by  Warburton,  it  is  said  to  have  been  an  eastern
ceremony,  at  the  coronation  of  their  Kings,  to  powder  them  with  gold  dust

and  seed-pearl  The  expression  in  Firdausi  is  Julljl  J&  £  he  showered
or  scattered  gems.  It  was  usual  at  festivals,  and  the  custom  still  exists,  to
throw  money  amongst  the  people.  In  Hafiz,  the  term  used  is  .Uj  nisar,
which  is  of  the  same  import.  Clarke,  in  the  second  volume  of  his  Travels,
speaks  of  the  four  principal  Sultanas  of  the  Seraglio  at  Constantinople  being
powdered  with  diamonds  t  f(  Long  spangled  robes,  open  in  front,  with  pan-
taloons embroidered  in  gold  and  silver,  and  covered  by  a  profusion  of  pearls
and  precious  stones,  displayed  their  persons  to  great  advantage.  Their  hair
hung  in  loose  and  very  thick  tresses  on  each  side  of  their  cheeks,  falling
quite  down  to  the  waist,  and  covering  their  shoulders  behind.  Those
tresses  were  quite  powdered  with  diamonds,  not  displayed  according  to  any
studied  arrangement,  but  as  if  carelessly  scattered,  by  handfuls,  among
their  flowing  locks. "—Vol.  ii.  p.  14.


576


SOHRAB.


The  firm  earth  shook:*  the  dust,  in  eddies  driven,  [
Whirled  high  in  air,  obscured  the  face  of  heaven  ;
Nor  earth,  nor  sky  appeared  —  all,  seeming  lost,
And  swallowed  up  by  that  wide-spreading  host.

*  Belli  trepido  concussa  tumultu,
Horrida,  contrimuere  sub  altis  aetheris  auris.

De  Rer.  Nat.  B.  3,  846.
With  the  rage  of  war,
All  shook  beneath  theaetherial  vault  of  heaven.

f  Thus  Homer:

Vpv t\  ~ T v  v  /  ,

\Lg  ctget.  rav  VTTO  Troff-trt  x
oiXoc.  ^'  ux,a,


Iliad,  3.13.

So  wrapt  in  gathering  dust,  the  Grecian  train,
A  moving  cloud  swept  on  and  hid  the  plain.  Pope.

And  Virgil  :

Hie  subitam  nigro  glomerari  pulverenubem,
Prospiciunt  Teucri,  actenebras  insurgere  campis.

JEneid,  B.  ix.  33.

The  Trojans  view  the  dusty  cloud  from  far,

And  the  dark  menace  of  the  distant  war,

Blackening  the  fields,  and  thickening  through  the  skies.  Dryden.

In  the  Hermosura  de  Angelica  of  the  famous  Lope  de  Vega,  there  is  a
beautiful  simile,  descriptive  of  the  hostile  troops  of  the  Moors  and  Spa-
niards, which  may  be  well  applied,  to  the  motley  appearance  of  a  Persian
army:

Como  en  le  triangular  cristal  se  mira.

De  varios  y  diversos  tornasoles,

Campo,  cielo,  ciudad,  o  mar  ;  y  admira

Ver  tan  diversos  nubes,  y  arreboles  ;

Assi  la  esquadra  que  entra  y  se  retira,

De  Moros  Africanos,  y  Espanoles

A  la  vista,  que  juntos  confundian,

Jardin  florida  en  Mayo  parecian  ;

And  in  English  thus  :

As  in  the  prism  we  pleased  survey,
Rich  prospects  through  the  crystal  play,
The  fields,  the  cities,  clouds,  and  sea,
Appear  commingling  variously  ;
Thus  moving  o'er  the  battle-plain,
The  Moors  are  mixed  with  Knights  of  Spain  ;
The  field,  confusedly  bright  and  gay,
Looks  like  the  garden's  pride  in  May,

In  the  Gulistan  of  Sadi  there  is  a  similar  thought  :


An  assembly  mixed  together  like  a  bed  of  roses  and  tulips.


SOHRAB.  577

The  steely  armour  glitter'd  o'er  tlte  fields,*

And  lightnings  flash'd  from  gold  emblazoned  shields ;

Thou  wouldst  have  said,  the  clouds  had  burst  in  showers,

Of  sparkling  amber  o'er  the  martial  powers.f

Thus,  close  embodied,  they  pursued  their  way,

And  reached  the  barrier-fort  in  terrible  array.

The  legions  of  Turan,  with  dread  surprise,
Saw  o'er  the  plain  successive  myriads  rise ;
And  shewed  them  to  Sohrab  ;  he,  mounting  high
The  fort,  surveyed  them  with  a  fearless  eye  ;
To  Human,  who,  with  withering  terror  pale,
Had  marked  their  progress  through  the  distant  vale,
He  pointed  out  the  sight,  and  ardent  said : —
. fc  Dispel  these  woe-fraught  breedings  from  thy  head,
"  I  wage  the  war,  Afrasiyab  !  for  thee,
"  And  make  this  desert  seem  a  rolling  sea."
Thus,  while  amazement  every  bosom  quell'd,
Sohrab,  unmoved,  the  coming  storm  beheld,
And  boldly  gazing  on  the  camp  around,
Raised  high  the  cup  with  wine  nectareous  crowned  :
O'er  him  no  dreams  of  woe  insidious  stole,
No  thought  but  joy  engaged  his  ardent  soul.

The  Persian  legions  had  restrained  their  course,
Tents  and  pavilions,  countless  foot  and  horse,
Clothed  all  the  spacious  plain,  and  gleaming  threw
Terrific  splendours  on  the  gazer's  view.
But  when  the  Sun  had  faded  in  the  west,
And  night  assumed  her  ebon-coloured  vest,
The  mighty  Chief  approached  the  sacred  throne,
And  generous  thus  made  danger  all  his  own  :
' e  The  rules  of  war  demand  a  previous  task,
"  To  watch  this  dreadful  foe  I  boldly  ask ;
"  With  wary  step  the  wondrous  youth  to  view,
"  And  mark  the  heroes  who  his  path  pursue."

*  In  his  descriptions  of  battle-array,  Firdausi  seldom  omits *a\" • •
golden  slippers,  which,  however,  I  have  not  preserved  in  this  place.

f  The  original  is ,^.  .Jc^-j  Sandurus,  sandaraca ; for  which I  have
substituted  amber. Sandurus  is  the  Arabic  name  for  Gum  Juniper.

2  P


578  SOHRAB.

The  King  assents :  "  The  task  is  justly  thine,

"  Favourite  of  heaven,  inspired  by  power  divine."

In  Turkish  habit,  secretly  arrayed,

The  lurking  Champion  wandered  through  the  shade,

And,  cautious,  standing  near  the  palace  gate,

Saw  how  the  chiefs  were  ranged  in  princely  state.

What  time  Sohrab  his  thoughts  to  battle  turned,
And  for  the  first  proud  fruits  of  conquest  burned,
His  mother  called  a  warrior  to  his  aid,
And  Zinda-ruzm  his  sister's  call  obeyed.
To  him  Tahmineh  gave  her  only  joy,
And  bade  him  shield  the  bold  adventurous  boy  :
' '  But,  in  the  dreadful  strife,  should  danger  rise,
le  Present  my  child  before  his  father's  eyes !
"  By  him  protected,  war  may  rage  in  vain,
"  Though  he  may  never  bless  these  arms  again !"
This  guardian  prince  sat  on  the  stripling's  right,
Viewing  the  imperial  banquet  with  delight  ;
Human  and  Barman,  near  the  hero  placed,
In  joyous  pomp  the  full  assembly  graced ;
A  hundred  valiant  Chiefs  begirt  the  throne,
And,  all  elate,  were  chaunting  his  renown.
Closely  concealed,  the  gay  and  splendid  scene,
Rustem  contemplates  with  astonished  mien ;
When  Zind,  retiring,  marks  the  listener  nigh,
Watching  the  festal  train  with  curious  eye ;
And  well  he  knew,  amongst  his  Tartar  host,
Such  towering  stature  not  a  Chief  could  boast —
"  What  spy  is  here,  close  shrouded  by  the  night  ?
u  Art  thou  afraid  to  face  the  beams  of  light  ?"
But  scarcely  from  his  lips  these  words  had  past,
Ere,  fell'd  to  earth,  he  groaning  breathed  his  last ;
Unseen  he  perish' d.  fate  decreed  the  blow,
To  add  fresh  keenness  to  a  parent's  woe.

Meantime  Sohrab,  perceiving  the  delay
In  Zind's  return,  looked  round  him  with  dismay  ;
The  seat  still  vacant — but  the  bitter  truth,
Full  soon  was  known  to  the  distracted  youth ;
Full  soon  he  found  that  Zinda-ruzm  was  gone,
His  day  of  feasting  and  of  glory  done  ;


SOHRAB.  579

Speedful  towards  the  fatal  spot  he  ran,

Where  slept  in  bloody  vest  the  slaughtered  man.

The  lighted  torches  now  displayed  the  dead,
Stiff  on  the  ground  his  graceful  limbs  were  spread  ;
Sad  sight  to  him  who  knew  his  guardian  care,
Now  doom'd  a  kinsman's  early  loss  to  bear  ;
Anguish  and  rage  devour  his  breast  by  turns,
He  vows  revenge,  then  o'er  the  warrior  mourns  :
And  thus  exclaims  to  each  afflicted  Chief: —
"  No  time,  to-night,  my  friends,  for  useless  grief;
"  The  ravenous  wolf  has  watched  his  helpless  prey,
"  Sprung  o'er  the  fold,  and  borne  its  flower  away  ;
"  But  if  the  heavens  my  lifted  arm  befriend,
"  Upon  the  guilty  shall  my  wrath  descend —
"  Unsheathed,  this  sword  shall  dire  revenge  pursue,
u  And  Persian  blood  the  thirsty  land  bedew."
Frowning  he  paused,  and  check'd  the  spreading  woe,
Resumed  the  feast,  and  bid  the  wine-cup  flow  !

The  valiant  Giw  was  sentinel  that  night,
And  marking  dimly  by  the  dubious  light,
A  warrior  form  approach,  he  claps  his  hands,
With  naked  sword  and  lifted  shield  he  stands,
To  front  the  foe  ;  but  Rustem  now  appears,
And  Giw  the  secret  tale  astonished  hears  ;
From  thence  the  Champion  on  the  Monarch  waits,
The  power  and  splendour  of  Sohrab  relates  :
"  Circled  by  Chiefs  this  glorious  youth  was  seen,
"  Of  lofty  stature  and  majestic  mien  ;*
"  No  Tartar  region  gave  the  hero  birth :
"  Some  happier  portion  of  the  spacious  earth  ;
' '  Tall,  as  the  graceful  cypress  he  appears ;
i(  Like  Sam,  the  l>rave,  his  warrior-front  he  rears  !"
Then  having  told  how,  while  the  banquet  shone,
Unhappy  Zind  had  sunk,  without  a  groan  ;


Girt  with  many  a  baron  bold,

Sublime  their  starry  fronts  they  rear,

In  the  midst  a  form  divine !  Gray.

Beneath  a  sculptured  arch  he  sits  enthroned,

The  peers  encircling,  form  an  aweful  round.  Pope's  Odyssey.

2  p  2


580  SOHRAB.

He  forms  his  conquering  bands  in  close  array,
And,  cheer'd  by  wine,  awaits  the  coming  day.

When  now  the  Sun  his  golden  buckler  raised,
And  genial  light  through  heaven  diffusive  blazed,
Sohrab  in  mail  his  nervous  limbs  attired,
For  dreadful  wrath  his  soul  to  vengeance  fired  ;
With  anxious  haste  he  bent  the  yielding  cord,
Ring  within  ring,  more  fateful  than  the  sword ;
Around  his  brows  a  regal  helm  he  bound ;
His  dappled  steed  impatient  stampt  the  ground.
Thus  armed,  ascending  where  the  eye  could  trace
The  hostile  force,  and  mark  each  leader's  place,
i He  called  Hujir,  the  captive  Chief  addressed,
And  anxious  thus,  his  soul's  desire  expressed  :
"  A  prisoner  thou,  if  freedom's  voice  can  charm,
"  And  dungeon  darkness  fill  thee  with  alarm,
tc  That  freedom  merit,  shun  severest  woe,
"  And  truly  answer  what  I  ask  to  know !
"  If  rigid  truth  thy  ready  speech  attend,
"  Honours  and  wealth  shall  dignify  my  friend."

"  Obedient  to  thy  wish,"  Hujir  replied,
"  Truth  thou  shalt  hear,  whatever  chance  betide  ;
"  For  what  on  earth  to  praise  has  better  claim  ?
"  Falsehood  but  leads  to  sorrow  and  to  shame  !"

"  Then  say,  what  heroes  lead  the  au verse  host,
"  Where  they  command,  what  dignities  they  boast ;
"  Say,  where  does  Kaus  hold  his  kingly  state,*
"  Where  Tus,  and  Gudarz,  on  his  bidding  wait;


*  Similar  descriptions  of  Chiefs  and  encampments  are  common  amongst
the  epic  poets  of  the  West.  In  the  third  book  of  the  Iliad,  Helen  describes
to  Priam  on  the  walls  of  Troy  the  leaders  of  the  Grecian  army.  Upon
this  passage  Pope  says,  "  it  is  justly  looked  upon  as  an  episode  of  great
beauty,  as  well  as  a  master-piece  of  conduct  in  Homer ;  who  by  this  means
acquaints  the  readers  with  the  figure  and  qualifications  of  each  hero  in  a
more  lively  and  agreeable  manner."  Firdausi  is  entitled  to  equal  praise
for  his  address  in  introducing  the  description  of  the  Persian  army.i  The
objection  which  Scaliger  makes  in  asking,  "  how  it  happens  that  Priam,
after  nine  years'  siege,  should  be  yet  unacquainted  with  the  faces  of  the
Grecian  leaders,"  does  not  obtain  here.  Nothing  can  be  more  natural  and


SOHRAB.


581


Giw,  Gust'hem,  and  Bahrain — all  known  to  thee,
And  where  is  mighty  Rustem,  where  is  he?


unforced  than  the  passage  as  it  occurs  in  the  Persian  poet. The  following
is  the  opening  of  the  parallel  passage  in  Homer.

'sOr<5  o$'  irt¥  'A^onog  atv*i(>  ws  ri  pzyx<;  rt,  &C.

Iliad,  B.  iii.  167-

"  But  lift  thy  eyes  and  say  what  Greek  is  he,

"  (Far  as  from  hence  these  aged  orbs  can  see,)

"  So  tall,  soaweful,  and  almost  divine !"

"  The  King  of  Kings,  Atrides  you  survey.

"  Great  in  the  war,  and  great  in  arts  of  sway."

This  said,  once  more  he  viewed  the  warrior-train,

"  What's  he  whose  arms  lie  scatter'd  on  the  plain  ?"

Then  Helen  thus :  "  Whom  your  discerning  eyes

"  Have  singled  out  is  Ithacus  the  wise.

"  See !  bold  Idomeneus  superior  towers

"  Amidst  yon  circle  of  his  Cretan  powers,

"  Great  as  a  God."  Pope.

Chapman's  translation  of  this  passage  is  quaintly  expressed: —
Sit  then,  and  name  this  goodly  Greek,  so  tall  and  broadly  spread ;
Who  than  the  rest,  that  stand  by  him,  is  higher  than  the  head ;
The  bravest  man  I  ever  saw  and  most  majesticall ;
His  only  presence  makes  me  think  him  king  amongst  them  all !  !


1.  In  Warton's  History  of  English  Poetry,  it  is  mentioned  in  a  note,  on  the  authority  of
Reinesius,  that  the  Arabs  had  translated  Homer  and  Pindar,  amongst  other  Greek  books,
so  far  back  as  the  year  750  of  the  Christian  sera,  and  according  to  Abulfaragius,  into  Syriac
in  770.  It  therefore  becomes  a  question  whether  Homer  was  known  in  Arabia,  beyond  a
few  lettered  individuals.  It  would  appear  that  he  was  not,  as  "  every  part  of  the  Grecian
literature  did  not  equally  gratify  their  taste.  The  Greek  poetry  they  rejected,  because
it  inculcated  polytheism  and  idolatry,  which  were  inconsistent  with  their  religion.  Or
perhaps  it  was  too  cold  and  too  correct  for  their  extravagant  and  romantic  conceptions."
Warton.  It  is  certain  that  the  Arabs  were"  solely  anxious  about  the  Greek  philosophers.

Thus  also  the  well-known  imitation  in  the  third  book  of  Gierusalemme
Liberata :

Erminia  il  vide,  e  dimostrollo  a  dito,

Al  Re  pagano,  e  cosl  a  dir  riprese :

Goffredo  e  quel,  che  nel  purpureo  ammanto,

Ha  di  Regio,  e  d'Augusto  in  se  cotanto.

Dimmi  chi  sia  colui,  c'ha  pur  vermiglia,

La  sopravesta,  e  seco  a  par  si  vede.

E'  Baldovin  (risonde)  e  ben  si  scopre,

Nel  volto  a  lui  fratel,  ma  piu  ne  1'opre.  Stanza  Ixi.

Full  on  the  Chief  Erminia  cast  a  look,

Then  shew'd  him  to  the  King,  and  thus  she  spoke  :—

"  There  Godfrey  stands  in  purple  vesture  seen,

"  Of  regal  presence  and  exalted  mien."

"  Say  who  is  he  who  stands  by  Godfrey's  side,

"  His  upper  garments  with  vermilion  dyed  ?"

"  'Tis  Baldwin,  brother  to  the  Prince  (she  cried),

"  In  feature  like,  but  most  in  deed  allied."  Hoole.


582  SOHRAB.

"  Look  round  with  care,  their  names  and  power  display,
"  Or  instant  death  shall  end  thy  vital  day."

"  Where  yonder  splendid  tapestries  extend,*
"  And  o'er  pavilions  bright  infolding  bend,
"  A  throne  triumphal  shines  with  sapphire  rays,
(<  And  golden  suns  upon  the  banners  blaze ;
"  Full  in  the  centre  of  the  hosts — and  round
"  The  tent  a  hundred  elephants  are  bound,
"  As  if,  in  pomp,  he  mocked  the  power  of  fate  ;
"  There  royal  Kaus  holds  his  kingly  state.

"  In  yonder  tent  which  numerous  guards  protect,
"  Where  front  and  rear  illustrious  Chiefs  collect  ;
"  Where  horsemen  wheeling  seem  prepared  for  fight,
"  Their  golden  armour  glittering  in  the  light ;
"  TUB  lifts  his  banners,  deck'd  with  royal  pride,
"  Feared  by  the  brave,  the  soldier's  friend  and  guide.f

"  That  crimson  tent  where  spear-men  frowning  stand,
' '  And  steel-clad  veterans  form  a  threatening  band,
"  Holds  mighty  Gudarz,  famed  for  martial  fire,
"  Of  eighty  valiant  sons  the  valiant  sire ;
r-(  Yet  strong  in  arms,  he  shuns  inglorious  ease,
"  His  lion-banners  floating  in  the  breeze."

"  But  mark,  that  green  pavilion  ;  girt  around
"  By  Persian  nobles,  speaks  the  Chief  renowned;
il  Fierce  on  the  standard,  worked  with  curious  art,
"  A  hideous  dragon  writhing  seems  to  start ;


But  Sohrab  was  more  peculiarly  interested  in  the  description  of  those
warriors  amongst  whom  he  expected  to  meet  his  father.  On  this  account
particularly,  as  well  as  with  regard  to  its  general  fitness,  I  think  that  this
passage  is  equal,  if  not  superior,  to  that  in  Homer,  which  has  given  rise
to  so  many  imitations.

*  The  tents  and  pavilions  of  Eastern  Princes  were  exceedingly  magni-
ficent ;  they  were  often  made  of  silks  and  velvets,  and  ornamented  with
pearls  and  gold.  The  tent  of  Nadir  Shah  was  made  of  scarlet  and  broad-
cloth, and  lined  with  satin,  richly  figured  over  with  precious  stones.

•f  The  banners  were  adorned  with  the  figure  of  an  elephant,  to  denote
his  royal  descent.


SOHRAB.  583

"  Throned  in  his  tent  the  warrior's  form  is  seen,

"  Towering  above  the  assembled  host  between  !*

"  A  generous  horse  before  him  snorts  and  neighs,

"  The  trembling  earth  the  echoing  sound  conveys.

"  Like  him  no  Champion  ever  met  my  eyes,

"  No  horse  like  that  for  majesty  and  size  ;

"  What  Chief  illustrious  bears  a  port  so  high  ?

"  Mark,  how  his  standard  flickers  through  the  sky  !"

Thus  ardent  spoke  Sohrab. Hujir  dismayed,
Paused  ere  reply  the  dangerous  truth  betrayed.
Trembling  for  Rustem's  life  the  captive  groaned  ;
Basely  his  country's  glorious  boast  disowned,
And  said  the  Chief  from  distant  China  came  —
Sohrab  abrupt  demands  the  hero's  name  ;
The  name  unknown,  grief  wrings  his  aching  heart,
And  yearning  anguish  speeds  her  venom'  d  dart  ;
To  him  his  mother  gave  the  tokens  true,
He  sees  them  all,  and  all  but  mock  his  view.
When  gloomy  fate  descends  in  evil  hour,
Can  human  wisdom  bribe  her  favouring  power  ?
Yet,  gathering  hope,  again  with  restless  mien
He  marks  the  Chiefs  who  crowd  the  warlike  scene.

"  Where  numerous  heroes,  horse  and  foot,  appear,
"  And  brazen  trumpets  thrill  the  listening  ear,
"  Behold  the  proud  pavilion  of  the  brave  !
"  With  wolves  emboss'd  the  silken  banners  wave.
"  The  throne's  bright  gems  with  radiant  lustre  glow,
"  Slaves  rank'd  around  with  duteous  homage  bow.
"  What  mighty  Chieftain  rules  his  cohorts  there  ?
"  His  name  and  lineage,  free  from  guile,  declare  !"

"  Giw,  son  of  Gudarz,  long  a  glorious  name,
"  Whose  prowess  even  transcends  his  father's  fame.f

'  <  Mark  yonder  tent  of  pure  and  dazzling  white,
"  Whose  rich  brocade  reflects  a  quivering  light  ;

*  Thus  in  Homer  :

TrV  lv  7n»AAo<<7-<  »#<  ^°X,OV  >>^^ff'(rlv'

Iliad,  B.  2,  483.

m  all.
f  The  text  says  that  he  was  also  the  son-in-law  of  Rustem.


The  King  of  Kings  majestically  tall,

Towers  o'er  the  armies  and  outshines  them  all.  Pope.


584>  SOHRAB.

"  An  ebon  seat  surmounts  the  ivory  throne  ;

"  There  frowns  in  state  a  warrior  of  renown.

"  The  crowding  slaves  his  awful  nod  obey,

"  And  silver  moons  around  his  banners  play  ;

"  What  Chief,  or  Prince,  has  grasped  the  hostile  sword  ?"

"  Fraburz,  the  son  of  Persia's  mighty  lord."

Again  :  "  These  standards  shew  one  champion  more,
11  Upon  their  centre  flames  the  savage  boar;*
"  The  saffron-hued  pavilion  bright  ascends,
"  Whence  many  a  fold  of  tasselled  fringe  depends  ;

"  Who  there  presides  ?"

"  Guraz,  from  heroes  sprung,

"  Whose  praise  exceeds  the  power  of  mortal  tongue."
Thus,  anxious,  he  explored  the  crowded  field,

Nor  once  the  secret  of  his  birth  revealed  ;f

Heaven  will'd  it  so. Pressed  down  by  silent  grief,

Surrounding  objects  promised  no  relief.

This  world  to  mortals  still  denies  repose,

And  life  is  still  the  scene  of  many  woes.

*  The  word  \\  £  Guraz  signifies  a  wild  boar,  but  this  acceptation  is  not
very  accordant  to  Mussulman  notions,  and  consequently  it  is  not  supposed,
by  the  orthodox,  to  have  that  meaning  in  the  text.  It  is  curious  that  the
name  of  the  Warrior,  Guraz,  should  correspond  with  the  bearings  on  the
standard.  This  frequently  obtains  in  the  heraldry  of  Europe.  Family
bearings  seem  to  be  used  in  every  country  of  any  degree  of  civilization.
Krusenstern,  the  Russian  circumnavigator,  speaking  of  the  Japanese,  says,
"  Every  one  has  his  family  arms  worked  into  his  clothes,  in  different  places,
about  the  size  of  a  half  dollar,  a  practice  usual  to  both  sexes ;  and  in  this
manner  any  person  may  be  recognized,  and  the  family  to  which  he  belongs
easily  ascertained.  A  young  lady  wears  her  father's  arms  until  after  her
marriage,  when  she  assumes  those  of  her  husband.  The  greatest  mark  of
honour  which  a  Prince  or  a  Governor  can  confer  upon  any  one,  is  to  give
him  a  cloak  with  his  arms  upon  it,  the  person  having  such  a  one  wearing  hi&
own  arms  upon  his  under  dress.

f  Firdausi  considers  this  to  be  destiny !  It  would  have  been  natural  in
Sohrab  to  have  gloried  in  the  fame  of  his  father,  but,  from  an  inevitable  dis-
pensation, his  lips  are  here  sealed  on  that  subject;  and  he  inquires  of  Rus-
tem  as  if  he  only  wanted  to  single  him  out  for  the  purpose  of  destroying
him.  The  people  of  Persia  are  all  fatalists.


585

Again  his  eye,  instinctive  turned,  descried
The  green  pavilion,  and  the  -warrior's  pride.
Again  he  cries  :  "  O  tell  his  glorious  name ;
"  Yon  gallant  horse  declares  the  hero's  fame  !"
But  false  Hujir  the  aspiring  hope  repelled,
Crushed  the  fond  wish,  the  soothing  balm  withheld,
"  And  why  should  I  conceal  his  name  from  thee  ?
*'  His  name  and  title  are  unknown  to  me."

Then  thus  Sohrab— "  In  all  that  thou  hast  said,
"  No  sign  of  Rustem  have  thy  words  conveyed  ;
"  Thou  sayest  he  leads  the  Persian  host  to  arms,
"  With  him  has  battle  lost  its  boisterous  charms  ?
"  Of  him  no  trace  thy  guiding  hand  has  shewn ;
«'  Can  power  supreme  remain  unmark'd,  unknown  ?"

"  Perhaps  returned  to  Zabul's  verdant  bowers,
"  He  undisturbed  enjoys  his  peaceful  hours,
"  The  vernal  banquets  may  constrain  his  stay,
"  And  rural  sports  invite  prolonged  delay."

"  Ah  !  say  not  thus ;  the  Champion  of  the  world,
"  Shrink  from  the  kindling  war  with  banners  furled  !*
"  It  cannot  be  ! Say  where  his  lightnings  dart,
"  Shew  me  the  warrior,  all  thou  know'st  impart ;
"  Treasures  uncounted  shall  be  thy  reward,
"  Death  changed  to  life,  my  friendship  more  than  shared.
"  Dost  thou  not  know  what,  in  the  royal  ear,
li  The  Mubid  said — befitting  Kings  to  hear  ?
"  e  Untold,  a  secret  is  a  jewel  bright,
"  '  Yet  profitless  whilst  hidden  from  the  light ;
"  '  But  when  revealed,  in  words  distinctly  given,
"  '  It  shines  refulgent  as  the  sun  through  heaven.'  "t

*  The  continued  anxiety  and  persevering  filial  duty  of  Sohrab  are  described
with  great  success.  The  case  is  unparalleled.  Telemachus  at  once  declares
the  object  of  his  inquiries.

My  sire  I  seek,  where'er  the  voice  of  fame,

Has  told  the  glories  of  his  noble  name ;

The  great  Ulysses.  Pope.

But  Sohrab  is  dark  and  mysterious,  and,  as  Firdausi  says  in  another  place,
the  unconscious  promoter  of his  own  destruction.

t  This  passage  will  remind  the  classical  reader  of  the  speech  of  Themis-
tocles,  in  Plutarch,  addressed  to  Xerxes.  The  Persian  King  had  assured


586  SOHRAB.

To  him,  Hujir  evasive  thus  replies:
"  Through  all  the  extended  earth  his  glory  flies  !
«'  Whenever  dangers  round  the  nation  close,
"  Rustem  approaches,  and  repels  its  foes ;
"  And  shouldst  thou  see  him  mix  in  mortal  strife,
"  Thou'dst  think  'twere  easier  to  escape  with  life
"  From  tyger  fell,  or  daemon — or  the  fold
"  Of  the  chafed  dragon,  than  his  dreadful  hold —
"  When  fiercest  battle  clothes  the  fields  with  fire,
"  Before  his  rage  embodied  hosts  retire  !"

"  And  where  didst  thou  encountering  armies  see  ?
"  Why  Rustem's  praise  so  proudly  urge  to  me  ?
"  Let  us  but  meet  and  thou  shalt  trembling  know,
"  How  fierce  that  wrath  which  bids  my  bosom  glow :
"  If  living  flames  express  his  boundless  ire?
"  O'er  whelming  waters  quench  consuming  fire  !
«'  And  deepest  darkness,  glooms  of  ten-fold  night,
«'  Fly  from  the  piercing  beams  of  radiant  light."

Hujir  shrunk  back  with  undissembled  dread,
And  thus  communing  with  himself,  he  said —
"  Shall  I,  regardless  of  my  country,  guide
"  To  Rustem's  tent  this  furious  homicide  ?
"  And  witness  there  destruction  to  our  host  ?
"  The  bulwark  of  the  land  for  ever  lost !
"  What  Chief  can  then  the  Tartar  power  restrain  !
"  Kaus  dethroned,  the  mighty  Rustem  slain  !
"  Better  a  thousand  deaths  should  lay  me  low,
"  Than,  living,  yield  such  triumph  to  the  foe.
"  For  in  this  struggle  should  my  blood  be  shed,
"  No  foul  dishonour  can  pursue  me,  dead  j


him  of  his  protection,  and  ordered  him  to  declare  freely  whatever  he  had  to
propose  concerning  Greece.  Themistocles  replied,  "  That  a  man's  dis-
course was  like  a  piece  of  tapestry  which,  when  spread  open,  displays  its
figures;  but  when  it  is  folded  up,  they  are  sudden  and  lost ;"  therefore  he
begged  time.  The  King,  delighted  with  the  comparison,  bade  him  take
what  time  he  pleased ;  and  he  desired  a  year  ;  in  which  space  he  learned
the  Persian  language,  so  as  to  be  able  to  converse  with  the  King  without
an  interpreter.


SOHRAB.  587

"  No  lasting  shame  my  father's  age  oppress,

"  Whom  eighty  sons  of  martial  courage  bless  !*

"  They  for  their  brother  slain,  incensed  will  rise,

"  And  pour  their  vengeance  on  my  enemies/'

Then  thus  aloud — ' c  Can  idle  words  avail  ?

"  Why  still  of  Rustem  urge  the  frequent  tale  ?

"  Why  for  the  elephant-bodied  hero  ask  ?

"  Thee,  he  will  find, — no  uncongenial  task.

"  Why  seek  pretences  to  destroy  my  life  ?

"  Strike,  for  no  Rustem  views  th'  unequal  strife  !"

Sohrab  confused,  with  hopeless  anguish  mourned,
Back  from  the  lofty  walls  he  quick  returned,
And  stood  amazed.

Now  war  and  vengeance  claim,
Collected  thought  and  deeds  of  mighty  name  ;
The  jointed  mail  his  vigorous  body  clasps,
His  sinewy  hand  the  shining  javelin  grasps  ;
Like  a  mad  elephant  he  meets  the  foe,
His  steed  a  moving  mountain — deeply  glow
His  cheeks  with  passionate  ardour,  as  he  flies
Resistless  onwards,  and  with  sparkling  eyes,
Full  on  the  centre  drives  his  daring  horse — f
The  yielding  Persians  fly  his  furious  course  ;
As  the  wild  ass  impetuous  springs  away,
When  the  fierce  lion  thunders  on  his  prey.  J

*  Hujir  was  the  son  of  Gudarz.  A  family  of  the  extent  mentioned  in
the  text  is  not  of  rare  occurrence  amongst  the  Princes  of  the  East.  The
present  King  of  Persia  had,  in  1809,  according  to  Mr.  Morier,  "  sixty -five
"  sons  !  As  they  (the  Persians)  make  no  account  of  females,  it  is  not
"  known  how  many  daughters  he  may  have  ;  although  he  is  said  to  have  an
"  equal  number  of  both  sexes.  It  sometimes  happens,  that  many  of  his
"  women  are  delivered  on  the  same  night,  and  (if  we  might  give  credit  to  a
"  Persian)  one  of  these  happy  coincidences  occurred  during  our  abode  in  the
"  capital,  when  in  one  night  six  of  his  women  were  brought  to  bed,  four
"  of  sons  and  two  of  daughters." — Morier's  Journey  to  Persia,  page  226.

f  The  $\^i_^Jj>  Kulub-gah,  is  the  centre  or  heart  of  the  army,  where
the  Sovereign  or  Chief  of  the  troops  usually  remains.

J  Firdausi  is  generally  very  brief  in  his  similes.  ^£,*~>.  ami  t^J^l>-
like  a  lion,  like  a  wolf,  occur  repeatedly.  Thus  in  the  fourth  book  of  the


588  SOHRAB.

By  every  sign  of  strength  and  martial  power,

They  think  him  Rustem  in  his  direst  hour  ;

On  Kaus  now  his  proud  defiance  falls,

Scornful  to  him  the  stripling  warrior  calls ;

"  And  why  art  thou  misnamed  of  royal  strain  ?

"  What  work  of  thine  befits  the  tented  plain  ?

"  This  thirsty  javelin  seeks  thy  coward  breast ;

"  Thou  and  thy  thousands  doomed  to  endless  rest.

"  True  to  my  oath,  which  time  can  never  change,

"  On  thee,  proud  King  !  I  hurl  my  just  revenge.

"  The  blood  of  Zind  inspires  my  burning  hate,

"  And  dire  resentment  hurries  on  thy  fate  ;

"  Whom  canst  thou  send  to  try  the  desperate  strife  ?

«  What  valiant  Chief,  regardless  of  his  life  ?

"  Where  now  can  Fraburz,  Tus,  Giw,  Gudarz,  be,

"  And  the  world-conquering  Rustem,  where  is  he  ?"

No  prompt  reply  from  Persian  lip  ensued, —
Then  rushing  on,  with  daemon-strength  endued,
Sohrab  elate  his  javelin  waved  around.
And  hurled  the  bright  pavilion  to  the  ground  ;
With  horror  Kaiis  feels  destruction  nigh,
And  cries :  "  For  Rustem's  needful  succour  fly  !
This  frantic  Turk,  triumphant  on  the  plain,
Withers  the  souls  of  all  my  warrior  train."
That  instant  Tus  the  mighty  Champion  sought,
And  told  the  deeds  the  Tartar  Chief  had  wrought ;
"  'Tis  ever  thus,  the  brainless  Monarch's  due  !
"  Shame  and  disaster  still  his  steps  pursue  !"
This  saying,  from  his  tent  he  soon  descried,
The  wild  confusion  spreading  far  and  wide  ;


Iliad,  the  Greeks  and  Trojans  are  characterized  in  two  words  AVX.OI  tag,  li
wolves,  which  Pope  has  translated  :

As  o'er  their  prey  rapacious  wolves  engage.
But  in  this  place  the  Persian  poet  is  more  circumstantial.


The  chiefs  fled  from  him  like  wild-asses  from  the  claws  of  a  lion.


SOHRAB.  589

And  saddled  Rakush — whilst,  in  deep  dismay,
Girgin  incessant  cried — "  Speed,  speed,  away."
Reham  bound  on  the  mace,  Tus  promptly  ran,
And  buckled  on  the  broad  Burgustuwan.
Rustem,  meanwhile,  the  thickening  tumult  hears
And  in  his  heart,  untouched  by  human  fears,
Says:  "  What  is  this,  that  feeling  seems  to  stun  !
"  This  battle  must  be  led  by  Ahirmun,*
ff  The  awful  day  of  doom  must  have  begun."
In  haste  he  arms,  and  mounts  his  bounding  steed,
The  growing  rage  demands  redoubled  speed  ;
The  leopard's  skin  he  o'er  his  shoulders  throws,
The  regal  girdle  round  his  middle  glows. t
High  wave  his  glorious  banners  ;  broad  revealed,
The  pictured  dragons  glare  along  the  field
Borne  by  Zuara. When,  surprised,  he  views
Sohrab,  endued  with  ample  breast  and  thews,
Like  Sam  Suwar,  he  beckons  him  apart  j
The  youth  advances  with  a  gallant  heart,
Willing  to  prove  his  adversary's  might,
By  single  combat  to  decide  the  fight  ;
And  eagerly,  "  Together  brought,"  he  cries,
"  Remote  from  us  be  foemen,  and  allies,
"  And  though  at  once  by  either  host  surveyed,
"  Ours  be  the  strife  which  asks  no  mortal  aid."

*  Ahirmun,  a  demon,  the  principle  of  evil.

t  This  girdle  was  the  gift  of  the  king,  as  a  token  of  affection  and  grati-
tude. Jonathan  gives  to  David,  among  other  things,  his  girdle :  "  Be-
cause he  loved  him  as  his  own  soul."  1  Samuel, xviii.  3.  Thus  Homer:

Omits  plv  fyw^a,  $idx  ipotvtKi  tpattvov. Iliad,  vi.  219.

OZneus  a  belt  of  matchless  worth  bestowed,

That  rich  with  Tyrian  dye  refulgent  glowed.  Pope.

And  Virgil :

Euryalus  phaleras  Rhamnetis,  et  aurea  bullis,

Cingula,  Tiburti  Remulo  ditissimus  olim,

Quae  mittit  dona,  hospitio  quum  jungeret  absens,

Caedicus:  ille  suo  moriens  dat  habere  nepoti.  Mneid,  ix.  359.

Nor  did  his  eyes  less  longingly  behold,

The  girdle  belt  with  nails  of  burnished  gold;

This  present  Caedicus  the  rich  bestowed,

On  Romulus,  when  friendship  first  they  vowed,

And  absent,  joined  in  hospitable  ties :

He  dying  to  his  heir  bequeathed  the  prize.  Dryden.


590  SOHRAB.

Rustem,  considerate.,  view'd  him  o'er  and  o'er,
So  wonderous  graceful  was  the  form  he  bore,
And  frankly  said :  "  Experience  flows  with  age,
"  And  many  a  foe  has  felt  my  conquering  rage ;
"  Much  have  I  seen,  superior  strength  and  art
cf  Have  borne  my  spear  thro'  many  a  demon's  heart  ;*
"  Only  behold  me  on  the  battle  plain,
"  Wait  till  thou  see'st  this  hand  the  war  sustain,
' '  And  if  on  thee  should  changeful  fortune  smile,
"  Thou  needst  not  fear  the  monster  of  the  Nile  !f
"  But  soft  compassion  melts  my  soul  to  save,
"  A  youth  so  blooming  with  a  mind  so  brave !"

The  generous  speech  Sohrab  attentive  heard,
His  heart  expanding  glowed  at  every  word  :
"  One  question  answer,  and  in  answering  shew,
' '  That  truth  should  ever  from  a  warrior  flow ;
"  Art  thou  not  Rustem,  whose  exploits  sublime,
"  Endear  his  name  thro'  every  distant  clime  ?"

"  I  boast  no  station  of  exalted  birth,
"  No  proud  pretensions  to  distinguished  worth  ;
"  To  him  inferior,  no  such  powers  are  mine,
"  No  offspring  I  of  Nirum's  glorious  line  !"  J

The  prompt  denial  dampt  his  filial  joy,
All  hope  at  once  forsook  the  Warrior-boy,

*  The  following  boast  of  Ulysses  is  less  questionable :

Stand  forth  ye  Champions  who  the  gauntlet  wield,

Or  ye,  the  swiftest  racers  of  the  field  !

Stand  forth,  ye  wrestlers,  who  these  pastimes  grace,

I  wield  the  gauntlet,  and  I  run  the  race !

In  such  heroic  games  I  yield  to  none.  Pope's  Odyssey,  B.  viii.

Again:

Behold  Ulysses !  no  ignoble  name,

Earth  sounds  my  wisdom,  and  high  heaven  my  fame.  B.  ix.

f  A  crocodile  in  war,  with  Firdausi,  is  a  figure  of  great  power  and
strength.

|  It  is  difficult  to  account  for  this  denial  of  his  name,  as  there  appears  to
be  no  equivalent  cause.  But  all  the  famous  heroes,  described  in  the  Shah
Nameh,  are  as  much  distinguished  for  their  address  and  cunning,  as  their
bravery.


SOHRAB.  591

His  opening  day  of  pleasure,  and  the  bloom
Of  cherished  life,  immersed  in  shadowy  gloom.
Perplexed  with  what  his  mother's  words  implied  ; —
A  narrow  space  is  now  prepared,  aside,
For  single  combat. With  disdainful  glance
Each  boldly  shakes  his  death-devoting  lance,
And  rushes  forward  to  the  dubious  fight  ;
Thoughts  high  and  brave  their  burning  souls  excite ;
Now  sword  to  sword  ;  continuous  strokes  resound,
Till  glittering  fragments  strew  the  dusty  ground.
Each  grasps  his  massy  club  with  added  force,*
The  folding  mail  is  rent  from  either  horse  ;
It  seemed  as  if  the  fearful  day  of  doom
. Had,  clothed  in  all  its  withering  terrors,  come.
Their  shattered  corslets  yield  defence  no  more —
At  length  they  breathe,  defiled  with  dust  and  gore ;
Their  gasping  throats  with  parching  thirst  are  dry,
Gloomy  and  fierce  they  roll  the  lowering  eye,
And  frown  defiance. Son  and  Father  driven
To  mortal  strife  !  are  these  the  ways  of  Heaven  ?
The  various  swarms  which  boundless  ocean  breeds,
The  countless  tribes  which  crop  the  flowery  meads,
All  know  their  kind,  but  hapless  man  alone
Has  no  instinctive  feeling  for  his  own  !
Compell'd  to  pause,  by  every  eye  surveyed,
Rustem,  with  shame,  his  wearied  strength  betrayed  ;
Foil'd  by  a  youth  in  battle's  mid  career,
His  groaning  spirit  almost  sunk  with  fear ;
Recovering  strength,  again  they  fiercely  meet ;
Again  they  struggle  with  redoubled  heat  ;
With  bended  bows  they  furious  now  contend,
And  feather'd  shafts  in  rattling  showers  descend  ;
Thick  as  autumnal  leaves  they  strew  the  plain  ,t
Harmless  their  points,  and  all  their  fury  vain.

*  The  original  is  J^c  Umud, which  appears  to  have  been  a  weapon
made  of  iron. Umud  also  signifies  a  column,  a  beam.

t  Thick  as  autumnal  leaves  that  strow  the  brooks
In  Vallombroso,  where  the  Etrurian  shades,
High  over-arched,  imbower.  Milton.


592  SOHRAB.

And  now  they  seize  each  others  girdle-band ;
Rustem,  who,  if  he  moved  his  iron  hand,
Could  shake  a  mountain,  and  to  whom  a  rock
Seemed  soft  as  wax,  tried,  with  one  mighty  stroke,
To  hurl  him  thundering  from  his  fiery  steed,
But  Fate  forbids  the  gallant  youth  should  bleed  ;
Finding  his  wonted  nerves  relaxed,  amazed
That  hand  he  drops  which  never  had  been  raised
Uncrowned  with  victory,  even  when  demons  fought,
And  pauses,  wildered  with  despairing  thought.
Sohrab  again  springs  with  terrific  grace,
And  lifts,  from  saddle-bow,  his  ponderous  mace ;
With  gather'd  strength  the  quick-descending  blow
Wounds  in  its  fall,  and  stuns  the  unwary  foe ;
Then  thus  contemptuous  :  "  All  thy  power  is  gone ;
"  Thy  charger's  strength  exhausted  as  thy  own ;
"  Thy  bleeding  wounds  with  pity  I  behold  ;
"  O  seek  no  more  the  combat  of  the  bold  !"

Rustem  to  this  reproach  made  no  reply,
But  stood  confused — meanwhile,  tumultuously
The  legions  closed  ;  with  soul-appalling  force,
Troop  rushed  on  troop,  o'erwhelming  man  and  horse  ;
Sohrab,  incensed,  the  Persian  host  engaged,
Furious  along  the  scattered  lines  he  raged  ;
Fierce  as  a  wolf  he  rode  on  every  side,
The  thirsty  earth  with  streaming  gore  was  dyed.
Midst  the  Turanians,  then,  the  Champion  sped,
And  like  a  tyger  heaped  the  fields  with  dead.
But  when  the  Monarch's  danger  struck  his  thought,
Returning  swift,  the  stripling  youth  he  sought  ;
Grieved  to  the  soul,  the  mighty  Champion  view'd
His  hands  and  mail  with  Persian  blood  imbrued  ;
And  thus  exclaimed  with  lion-voice — "  O  say,
"  Why  with  the  Persians  dost  thou  war  to-day?
"  Why  not  with  me  alone  decide  the  fight,
"  Thou'rt  like  a  wolf  that  seek'st  the  fold  by  night."

To  this  Sohrab  his  proud  assent  expressed —
And  Rustem,  answering,  thus  the  youth  addressed.
"  Night-shadows  now  are  thickening  o'er  the  plain,
"  The  morrow's  sun  must  see  our  strife  again ;


SOHRAB.  593

"  In  wrestling  let  us  then  exert  our  might !"
He  said,  and  eve's  last  glimmer  sunk  in  night.*
Thus  as  the  skies  a  deeper  gloom  displayed,
The  stripling's  life  was  hastening  into  shade  !

The  gallant  heroes  to  their  tents  retired,
The  sweets  of  rest  their  wearied  limbs  required:
Sohrab,  delighted  witli  his  brave  career,
Describes  the  fight  in  Human's  anxious  ear :
Tells  how  he  forced  unnumbered  Chiefs  to  yield,
And  stood  himself  the  victor  of  the  field  !
"  But  let  the  morrow's  dawn,"  he  cried,  "  arrive,
"  And  not  one  Persian  shall  the  day  survive ;
"  Meanwhile  let  wine  its  strengthening  balm  impart,
"  And  add  new  zeal  to  every  drooping  heart."
The  valiant  Giw  with  Rustem  pondering  stood,
And,  sad,  recalled  the  scene  of  death  and  blood  ;
Grief  and  amazement  heaved  the  frequent  sigh,
And  almost  froze  the  crimson  current  dry.
Rustem,  oppressed  by  Giw's  desponding  thought,
Amidst  his  Chiefs  the  mournful  Monarch  sought ;
To  him  he  told  Sohrab's  tremendous  sway,
The  dire  misfortunes  of  this  luckless  day ;
Told  with  what  grasping  force  he  tried,  in  vain,
To  hurl  the  wonderous  stripling  to  the  plain  :
"  The  whispering  zephyr  might  as  well  aspire
"  To  shake  a  mountain — such  his  strength  and  fire.
"  But  night  came  on — and,  by  agreement,  we
"•  Must  meet  again  to-morrow — who  shall  be
"  Victorious,  Heaven  knows  only  : — for  by  Heaven,
"  Victory  or  death  to  man  is  ever  given."
This  said,  the  King  o'erwhelmed  in  deep  despair,
Passed  the  dread  night  in  agony  and  prayer.

The  Champion,  silent,  joined  his  bands  at  rest,
And  spurned  at  length  despondence  from  his  breast ;
Removed  from  all,  he  cheered  Zuara's  heart,
And  nerved  his  soul  to  bear  a  trying  part : —

*  Thus  in  the  7th  Iliad,  the  single  combat  between  Hector  and  Ajax  is
ended  by  the  approach  of  night.

But  now  the  night  extends  her  awful  shade,

The  goddess  parts  you :  be  the  night  obcy'd  !  Pope.

2 Q


594  SOHRAB.

"  Ere  early  morning  gilds  the  etherial  plain,

<l  In  martial  order  range  my  warrior-train ;

"  And  when  I  meet  in  all  his  glorious  pride,

"  This  valiant  Turk  whom  late  my  rage  defied,

<f  Should  fortune's  smiles  my  arduous  task  requite,

"  Bring  them  to  share  the  triumph  of  my  might ;

"  But  should  success  the  stripling's  arm  attend,

"  And  dire  defeat  and  death  my  glories  end,

"  To  their  loved  homes  my  brave  associates  guide ;

"  Let  bowery  Zabul  all  their  sorrows  hide —

"  Comfort  my  venerable  father's  heart ;

"  In  gentlest  words  my  heavy  fate  impart.

"  The  dreadful  tidings  to  my  mother  bear,*

"  And  soothe  her  anguish  with  the  tenderest  care  ;

*'  Say,  that  the  will  of  righteous  Heaven  decreed,

"  That  thus  in  arms  her  mighty  son  should  bleed.

"  Enough  of  fame  my  various  toils  acquired,

"  When  warring  demons,  bathed  in  blood,  expired.

"  Were  life  prolonged  a  thousand  lingering  years,

1 '  Death  comes  at  last  and  ends  our  mortal  fears ;

"  Kirshasp,  and  Sam,  and  Nariman,  the  best

"  And  bravest  heroes,  who  have  ever  blest

"  This  fleeting  world,  were  not  endued  with  power,

"  To  stay  the  march  of  fate  one  single  hour  ;

"  The  world  for  them  possessed  no  fixed  abode,

"  The  path  to  death's  cold  regions  must  be  trod ;

ff Then,  why  lament  the  doom  ordained  for  all  ?

'*  Thus  Jemshid  fell,  and  thus  must  Rustem  fall."

When  the  bright  dawn  proclaimed  the  rising  day,
The  warriors  armed,  impatient  of  delay  ;
But  first  Sohrab,  his  proud  confederate  nigh,
Thus  wistful  spoke,  as  swelled  the  boding  sigh —
"  Now,  mark  my  great  antagonist  in  arms!
"  His  noble  form  my  filial  bosom  warms  ;
"  My  mother's  tokens  shine  conspicuous  here,
"  And  all  the  proofs  my  heart  demands,  appear  ;

*  In  the  East,  peculiarly  strong  attachment  to  the  mother  is  universal.
Nothing  can  be  more  affecting  than  the  filial  tenderness  of  Rustem,  or
more  rational  and  just  than  his  observations  on  human  glory.


SOHRAR.

"  Sure  this  is  Rustem,  whom  my  eyes  engage  !
"  Shall  I,  O  grief !  provoke  my  Father's  rage  ?
"  Offended  Nature  then  would  curse  my  name,
"  And  shuddering  nations  echo  with  my  shame."
He  ceased,  then  Human  :  "  Vain,  fantastic  thought,
"  Oft  have  I  been  where  Persia's  Champion  fought ;
"  And  thou  hast  heard,  what  wonders  he  performed,
"  When,  in  his  prime,  Maxinderan  was  stormed  ;
"  That  horse  resembles  Rustem's,  it  is  true,
"  But  not  so  strong,  nor  beautiful  to  view."

Sohrab  now  buckles  on  his  war-attire,
His  heart  all  softness,  and  his  brain  all  fire  ;
Around  his  lips  such  smiles  benignant  played,
He  seemed  to  greet  a  friend,  as  thus  he  said  :  —
"  Here  let  us  sit  together  on  the  plain,
"  Here,  social  sit,  and  from  the  fight  refrain  ;
"  Ask  we  from  heaven  forgiveness  of  the  past,
"  And  bind  our  souls  in  friendshipthat  may  last ;
"  Ours  be  the  feast — let  us  be  warm  and  free,
"  For  powerful  instinct  draws  me  still  to  thee  ;
"  Fain  would  my  heart  in  bland  affection  join,
"  Then  let  thy  generous  ardour  equal  mine ;
"  Arid  kindly  say,  with  whom  I  now  contend —
"  What  name  distinguished  boasts  my  warrior-friend !
"  Thy  name  unfit  for  champion  brave  to  hide,
"  Thy  name  so  long,  long  sought,  and  still  denied  ;
"  Say,  art  thou  Rustem,  whom  I  burn  to  know  ?
"  Ingenuous  say,  and  cease  to  be  my  foe  !"

Sternly  the  mighty  Champion  cried,  "  Away, —
'«  Hence  with  thy  wiles — now  practised  to  delay  ;
"  The  promised  struggle,  resolute,  I  claim,
"  Then  cease  to  move  me  to  an  act  of  shame."
Sohrab  rejoined — "  Old  man  !  thou  wilt  not  hear
"  The  words  of  prudence  uttered  in  thine  ear ;
"  Then,  Heaven !  look  on."

Preparing  for  the  shock,

Each  binds  his  charger  to  a  neighbouring  rock  ;
And  girds  his  loins,  and  rubs  his  wrists,  and  tries
Their  suppleness  and  force,  with  angry  eyes  ;
And  now  they  meet — now  rise,  and  now  descend,
And  strong  and  fierce  their  sinewy  arms  extend  ;
2u  2


596  SOHRAB.

Wrestling  with  all  their  strength  they  grasp  and  strain,.

And  blood  and  sweat  flow  copious  on  the  plain ;

Like  raging  elephants  they  furious  close  ;

Commutual  wounds  are  given,  and  wrenching  blows.

Sohrab  now  claps  his  hands,  and  forward  springs

Impatiently,  and  round  the  champion  clings  ;

Seizes  his  girdle  belt,  with  power  to  tear

The  very  earth  asunder  ;  in  despair

Rustem,  defeated,  feels  his  nerves  give  way,

And  thundering  falls. Sohrab  bestrides  his  prey :

Grim  as  the  lion,  prowling  through  the  wood,

Upon  a  wild  ass  springs,  and  pants  for  blood.

His  lifted  sward  had  lopt  the  gory  head,

But  Rustem,  quick,  with  crafty  ardour  said  : — .

"  One  moment,  hold  !  what,  are  our  laws  unknown  ;,

"  A  Chief  may  fight  till  he  is  twice  o'erthrown  ;

"  The  second  fall,  his  recreant  blood  is  spilt,

"  These  are  our  laws,  avoid  the  menaced  guilt."

Proud  of  his  strength,  and  easily  deceived,
The  wondering  youth  the  artful  tale  believed  ;
Released  his  prey,  and,  wild  as  wind  or  wave,
Neglecting  all  the  prudence  of  the  brave,
Turned  from  the  place,  nor  once  the  strife  renewed,,
But  bounded  o'er  the  plain  and  other  cares  pursued,.
As  if  all  memory  of  the  war  had  died,
All  thoughts  of  him  with  whom  his  strength  was  tried-
Human,  confounded  at  the  stripling's  stay,

Went  forth,  and  heard  the  fortune  of  the  day ;
Amazed  to  find  the  mighty  Rustem  freed,

With  deepest  grief  he  wailed  the  luckless  deed.

"  What !  loose  a  raging  lion  from  the  snare.

"  And  let  him  growling  hasten  to  his  lair  ?

"  Bethink  thee  well ;  in  war,  from  this  unwise,

"  This  thoughtless  act  what  countless  woes  may  rise  ;

<e  Never  again  suspend  the  final  blow,

"  Nor  trust  the  seeming  weakness  of  a  foe  !"*

«  Thus  also  Sadi.


SOHRAB.  f)97

"  Hence  with  complaint,"  the  dauntless  youth  replied,
"  To-morrow's  contest  shall  his  fate  decide."

When  Rustem  was  released,  in  altered  mood
He  sought  the  coolness  of  the  murmuring  flood  ;
There  quenched  his  thirst;  and  bathed  his  limbs, and

prayed,

Beseeching  Heaven  to  yield  its  strengthening  aid.
His  pious  prayer  indulgent  Heaven  approved,
And  growing  strength  through  all  his  sinews  moved  ;*
Such  as  erewhile  his  towering  structure  knew,
When  his  bold  arm  unconquered  daemons  slew.
Yet  in  his  mien  no  confidence  appeared,
No  ardent  hope  his  wounded  spirits  cheered.

Again  they  met. A  glow  of  youthful  grace,
Diffused  its  radiance  o'er  the  stripling's  face,
And  when  he  saw  in  renovated  guise,
The  foe  so  lately  mastered ;  with  surprise,
He  cried — "  What !  rescued  from  my  power,  again
"  Dost  thou  confront  me  on  the  battle  plain  ?
"  Or,  dost  thou,  wearied,  draw  thy  vital  breath,
"  And  seek,  from  warrior  bold,  the  shaft  of  death  ?
"  Truth  has  no  charms  for  thee,  old  man  ;  even  now,
"  Some  further  cheat  may  lurk  upon  thy  brow  ;
"  Twice  have  I  shewn  thee  mercy,  twice  thy  age
"  Hath  been  thy  safety — twice  it  soothed  my  rage."
Then  mild  the  Champion  :  "  Youth  is  proud  and  vain  !
"  The  idle  boast  a  warrior  would  disdain  ;
"  This  aged  arm  perhaps  may  yet  controul,
"  The  wanton  fury  that  inflames  thy  soul !"

Again,  dismounting,  each  the  other  viewed
With  sullen  glance,  and  swift  the  fight  renewed  ;
Clenched  front  to  front,  again  they  tug  and  bend,
Twist  their  broad  limbs  as  every  nerve  would  rend  ;

"  Knowest  thou  what  Zal  said  to  Rustem  the  Champion  ? Never  cal-
culate upon  the  weakness  or  insignificance  of  an  enemy."

*  Rustem-is  as  much  distinguished  for  piety  as  hravery.  Every  success
is  attributed  by  him  to  the  favour  of  Heaven.  In  the  achievement  of  his
labours  in  the  Heft- Khan,  his  devotion  is  constant,  and  he  every  where
justly  acknowledges  that  power  and  victory  arc  derived  from  God  alone.


598  SOHRAB.

With  rage  convulsive  Rustem  grasps  him  round  ;*
Bends  his  strong  back,  and  hurls  him  to  the  ground  ;
Him,  who  had  deemed  the  triumph  all  his  own  ;
But  dubious  of  his  power  to  keep  him  down,
Like  lightning  quick  he  gives  the  deadly  thrust,
And  spurns  the  Stripling  weltering  in  the  dust.
—  Thus  as  his  blood  that  shining  steel  imbrues,
Thine  too  shall  flow,  when  Destiny  pursues  ;f
For  when  she  marks  the  victim  of  her  power,
A  thousand  daggers  speed  the  dying  hour.
Writhing  with  pain  Sohrab  in  murmurs  sighed—
And  thus  to  Rustem  —  "  Vaunt  not,  in  thy  pride  ;
"  Upon  myself  this  sorrow  have  I  brought,
<e  Thou  but  the  instrument  of  fate  —  which  wrought
"  My  downfall  ;  thou  art  guiltless  —  guiltless  quite  ;
"  O  !  had  I  seen  my  father  in  the  fight,

*  Thus  Entellus  renews  the  combat  with  increased  vigour.
Acrior  ad  pugnam  redit,  ac  vim  suscitat  ira.
Turn  pudor  incendit  vires,  et  conscia  virtus—

jEneid,  B.  v.  454.

Improved  in  spirit  to  the  fight  he  came,
While  conscious  valour  sets  his  soul  on  Same,
Stung  with  disgrace,  and  more  enraged  by  shame.  Pitt.

f  The  expression  in  the  original  is  remarkable.  "  Assuredly,  as  thou
hast  thirsted  for  blood,  Destiny  will  also  thirst  for  thine,  and  the  very  hairs
upon  thy  body  will  become  daggers  to  destroy  thee."


This  passage  is  quoted  in  the  preface  to  the  Shah  Nameh,  collated  by  order  of
Bayisunghur  Khan,  as  the  production  of  the  poet  Unsari.  Unsari  was
one  of  the  seven  poets  whom  Mahmud  appointed  to  give  specimens  of
their  powers  in  versifying  the  History  of  the  Kings  of  Persia.  The  story
of  Rustem  and  Sohrab  fell  to  Unsari,  and  his  arrangement  of  it  contained
the  above  verses,  which  so  delighted  the  Sultan  that  he  directed  the  poet  to
undertake  the  whole  work.  This  occurred  before  Firdausi  was  introduced
at  Court  and  eclipsed  every  competitor.  In  compliment  to  Mahmud,  per-
haps he  ingrafted  them  on  his  own  Poem,  or  more  probably  they  have  been
interpolated  since.


SOHRAB.  .')«>:

"  My  glorious  father  ! Lite  will  soon  be  o'er,
"  And  his  great  deeds  enchant  my  soul  no  more  !
"  Of  him  my  mother  gave  the  mark  and  sign,
"  For  him  I  sought,  and  what  an  end  is  mine  !
"  My  only  wish  on  earth,  my  constant  sigh,
"  Him  to  behold,  and  with  that  wish  I  die.
"  But  hope  not  to  elude  his  piercing  sight,
"  In  vain  for  thee  the  deepest  glooms  of  night  ;
"  Couldst  thou  through  Ocean's  depths  for  refuge  fly,
"  Or  midst  the  star-beams  track  the  upper  sky  !*
"  Rustem,  with  vengeance  armed,  will  reach  thee  there,
"  His  soul  the  prey  of  anguish  and  despair."
An  icy  horror  chills  the  Champion's  heart,
His  brain  whirls  round  with  agonizing  smart ;
O'er  his  wan  cheek  no  gushing  sorrows  flow,
Senseless  he  sinks  beneath  the  weight  of  woe  ;
Relieved  at  length,  with  frenzied  look,  he  cries  :
ts  Prove  thou  art  mine,  confirm  my  doubting  eyes  !
"  For  I  am  Rustem  !" Piercing  was  the  groan,
Which  burst  from  his  torn  heart — as  wild  and  lone,
He  gazed  upon  him. Dire  amazement  shook
The  dying  youth,  and  mournful  thus  he  spoke  :
"  If  thou  art  Rustem,  cruel  is  thy  part,
"  No  warmth  paternal  seems  to  fill  thy  heart ;
"  Else  hadst  thou  known  me  when,  with  strong  desire,
"  I  fondly  claimed  thee  for  my  valiant  sire  ;
"  Now  from  my  body  strip  the  shining  mail,
"  Untie  these  bands,  ere  life  and  feeling  fail ;
"  And  on  my  arm  the  direful  proof  behold  !
"  Thy  sacred  bracelet  of  refulgent  gold !
"  When  the  loud  brazen  drums  were  heard  afar,
(e  And,  echoing  round,  proclaimed  the  pending  war,

*  Literally,  "  Wert  thou a  fish in  the  sea,  or  a  star  in  the  heavens.
Thus  also  JEneas  to  Turnus  :

Verte  omnes  tete  in  fades ;  et  contrahe,  quidquid,
Sive  Anirais sive arte  vales:  opta  ardua  pennis,
Astra  sequi,  clausumque  cava  te  condere  terra.

*hieid,  B.  xii.  891.
Try  all  thy  arts  and  vigour  to  escape,
Thy  instant  doom,  and  vary  every  shape;
Wish  for  the  morning's  rapid  wings,  to  fly  ;
Shoot  down  to  hell ;  or  vault  into  the  sky  !  Pitt.


600  SOHRAB.

"  Whilst  parting  tears  my  mother's  eyes  o'erflowed,
"  This  mystic  gift  her  bursting  heart  bestowed  :
"  '  Take  this/  she  said,  f  thy  father's  token  wear,
"  '  And  promised  glory  will  reward  thy  care/
"  The  hour  is  come,  but  fraught  with  bitterest  woe,
"  We  meet  in  blood  to  wail  the  fatal  blow."

The  loosened  mail  unfolds  the  bracelet  bright,
Unhappy  gift !  to  Rustem's  wildered  sight ;
Prostrate  he  falls — "  By  my  unnatural  hand,
"  My  son,  my  son  is  slain — and  from  the  land
"  Uprooted." — Frantic,  in  the  dust  his  hair
He  rends  in  agony  and  deep  despair  ;
The  western  sun  had  disappeared  in  gloom,
And  still,  the  Champion  wept  his  cruel  doom  ;
His  wondering  legions  marked  the  long  delay,
And,  seeing  Rakush  riderless  astray,
The  rumour  quick  to  Persia's  Monarch  spread,
And  there  described  the  mighty  Rustera  dead.
Kaus,  alarmed,  the  fatal  tidings  hears ;
His  bosom  quivers  with  increasing  fears.
11  Speed,  speed,  and  see  what  has  befallen  to  day
"  To  cause  these  groans  and  tears — what  fatal  fray  !
"  If  he  be  lost,  if  breathless  on  the  ground,
"  And  this  young  warrior, with  the  conquest  crowned-
"  Then  must  I,  humbled,  from  my  kingdom  torn,
"  Wander  like  Jemshid,  through  the  world  forlorn.*

The  army  roused,  rushed  o'er  the  dusty  plain,
Urged  by  the  Monarch  to  revenge  the  slain  ;
Wild  consternation  saddened  every  face,
Tus  winged  with  horror  sought  the  fatal  place,
And  there  beheld  the  agonizing  sight, —
The  murderous  end  of  that  unnatural  fight.
Sohrab,  still  breathing,  hears  the  shrill  alarms,
His  gentle  speech  suspends  the  clang  of  arms:
"  My  light  of  life  now  fluttering  sinks  in  shade,
"  Let  vengeance  sleep,  and  peaceful  vows  be  made.


*  Jemshid's  glory  and  misfortunes,  as  said  before,  are  the  constant  theme
of  admiration  and  reflection  amongst  the  poets  of  Persia.


SOHRAB.  GUI

•"  Beseech  the  King  to  spare  this  Tartar  host,

"  For  they  are  guiltless,  all  to  them  is  lost ;

"  I  led  them  on,  their  souls  with  glory  fired,

"  While  mad  ambition  all  my  thoughts  inspired.

"  In  search  of  thee,  the  world  before  my  eyes,

"  War  was  my  choice,  and  thou  the  sacred  prize  !

"  With  thee,  my  sire  !  in  virtuous  league  combined,

"  No  tyrant  King  should  persecute  mankind.

"  That  hope  is  past — the  storm  has  ceased  to  rave —

"  My  ripening  honours  wither  in  the  grave  ;

"  Then  let  no  vengeance  on  my  comrades  fall,

"  Mine  was  the  guilt,  and  mine  the  sorrow,  all ;

"  How  often  have  I  sought  thee — oft  my  mind

"  Figured  thee  to  my  sight o'erjoyed  to  find

"  My  mother's  tokens;  disappointment  came,

tf  When  thou  deniedst  thy  lineage  and  thy  name ;

"  Oh  !  still  o'er  thee  my  soul  impassioned  hung,

"  Still  to  my  Father  fond  affection  clung  !

"  But  fate,  remorseless,  all  my  hopes  withstood,

<(  And  stained  thy  reeking  hands  in  kindred  blood."

His  faultering  breath  protracted  speech  denied :
Still  from  his  eye-lids  flowed  a  gushing  tide ;
Through  Rustem's  soul  redoubled  horror  ran,
Heart-rending  thoughts  subdued  the  mighty  man.
And  now,  at  last,  with  joy-illumined  eye,
The  Zabul  bands  their  glorious  Chief  descry ;
But  when  they  saw  his  pale  and  haggard  look,
Knew  from  what  mournful  cause  he  gazed  and  shook,
With  down-cast  mien  they  moaned  and  wept  aloud  ;
While  Rustem  thus  addrest  the  weeping  crowd :
"  Here  ends  the  war !  let  gentle  peace  succeed,
"  Enough  of  death,  I — I  have  done  the  deed!"
Then  to  his  brother,  groaning  deep,  he  said —
"  O  what  a  curse  upon  a  parent's  head  !
"  But  go — and  to  the  Tartar  say — no  more,
"  Let  war  between  us  steep  the  earth  with  gore."
Zuara  flew  and  wildly  spoke  his  grief,
To  crafty  Human,  the  Turanian  Chief,
Who,  with  dissembled  sorrow,  heard  him  tell
The  dismal  tidings  which  he  knew  too  well ;


602  SOHRAB.

"  And  who/'  he  said,  "  has  caused  these  tears  to  flow  ?
"  Who,  but  Hujir? He  might  have  stayed  the  blow,
' '  But  when  Sohrab  his  Father's  banners  sought ;
"  He  still  denied  that  here  the  Champion  fought ;
"  He  spread  the  ruin,  he  the  secret  knew,
te  Hence  should  his  crime  receive  the  vengeance  due  !"
Zuara,  frantic,  breathed  in  Rustem's  ear,
The  treachery  of  the  captive  Chief,  Hujir;
Whose  headless  trunk  had  weltered  on  the  strand,
But  prayers  and  force  witheld  the  lifted  hand.
Then  to  his  dying  son  the  Champion  turned,
Remorse  more  deep  within  his  bosom  burned  ;
A  burst  of  frenzy  fired  his  throbbing  brain  ;
He  clenched  his  sword,  but  found  his  fury  vain  ;
The  Persian  Chiefs  the  desperate  act  represt,
And  tried  to  calm  the  tumult  in  his  breast  :*
Thus  Gudarz  spoke — ec  Alas  !  wert  thou  to  give
( '  Thyself  a  thousand  wounds,  and  cease  to  live  ;
"  What  would  it  be  to  him  thou  sorrowest  o'er  ?
"  It  would  not  save  one  pang — then  weep  no  more  ;
"  For  if  removed  by  death,  O  say,  to  whom
"  Has  ever  been  vouchsafed  a  different  doom  ?
"  All  are  the  prey  of  death — the  crowned,  the  low,
"  And  man,  through  life,  the  victim  still  of  woe."

Then  Rustem  :  "  Fly !  and  to  the  King  relate,
"  The  pressing  horrors  which  involve  my  fate  ;
"  And  if  the  memory  of  my  deeds  e'er  swayed
"  His  mind,  O  supplicate  his  generous  aid ;
fi  A  sovereign  balm  he  has  whose  wonderous  power,
< '  All  wounds  can  heal,  and  fleeting  life  restore  ;t

*  Antilochus  thus  restrains  the  fury  of  Achilles  on  being  told  of  the  fate

of  Patroclus : He

Hangs  on  his  arms,  amidst  his  frantic  woe,

And  oft  prevents  the  meditated  blow.  Pope.

t  These  medicated  draughts  are  often  mentioned  in  Romances.  The
reader  will  recollect  the  banter  upon  them  in  Don  Quixote,  where  the
Knight  of  La  Mancha  enumerates  to  Sancho  the  cures  which  had  been
performed  upon  many  valorous  champions,  covered  with  wounds.  The
Hindus,  in  their  books  on  medicine,  talk  of  drugs  for  the  recovery  of  the
dead!


SOHRAB.  603

<f  Swift  from  his  tent  the  potent  medicine  bring."
— But  mark  the  malice  of  the  brainless  King  !
Hard  as  the  flinty  rock,  he  stern  denies
The  healthful  draught,  and  gloomy  thus  replies  ;
"  Can  I  forgive  his  foul  and  slanderous  tongue  ?
"  The  sharp  disdain  on  me  contemptuous  flung  ?
"  Scorned  'midst  my  army  by  a  shameless  boy,
"  Who  sought  my  throne,  my  sceptre  to  destroy  !
"  Nothing  but  mischief  from  his  heart  can  flow,
"  Is  it,  then,  wise  to  cherish  such  a  foe  ?
"  The  fool  who  warms  his  enemy  to  life,
"  Only  prepares  for  scenes  of  future  strife."

Giidarz,  returning,  told  the  hopeless  tale —
And  thinking  Rustem's  presence  might  prevail  ;
The  Champion  rose,  but  ere  he  reached  the  throne,
Sohrab  had  breathed  the  last  expiring  groan.

Now  keener  anguish  rack'd  the  father's  mind,
Reft  of  his  son,  a  murderer  of  his  kind  ;
His  guilty  sword  distained  with  filial  gore,
He  beat  his  burning  breast,  his  hair  he  tore  ;
The  breathless  corse  before  his  shuddering  view,
A  shower  of  ashes  o'er  his  head  he  threw  ;*
"  In  my  old  age,"  he  cried,  "  what  have  I  done !
ft  Why  have  I  slain  my  son,  my  innocent  son  !
( '  Why  o'er  his  splendid  dawning  did  I  roll
"  The  clouds  of  death, — and  plunge  my  burthened  soul
' '  In  agony  ? My  son  !  from  heroes  sprung ;
"  Better  these  hands  were  from  my  body  wrung  ;
"  And  solitude  and  darkness,  deep  and  drear,
"  Fold  me  from  sight  than  hated  linger  here.


*  Scattering  ashes  over  the  head  is  a  very  ancient  mode  of  expressing  grief.
Thus  2d  Samuel,  c.  iii,  31 :  "  And  David  said  to  Joab,  and  to  all  the  peo-
ple that  were  with  him,  Rend  your  clothes,  and  gird  you  with  sackcloth,
and  mourn  before  Abner."  Also,  c.  xiii,  19  :  "  And  Tamar  put  ashes  on
her  head,  and  rent  her  garments."  And  thus  Homer  in  the  eighteenth
Iliad  ;

A  sudden  horror  shot  through  all  the  Chief,

And  wrapt  his  senses  in  the  cloud  of  grief,

Cast  on  the  ground,  with  furious  hands  he  spread

The  scorching  ashes  o'er  his  graceful  head.  I'ope.


604  SOHRAB.

"  But  when  his  mother  hears,  with  horror  wild,
"  That  I  have  shed  the  life-blood  of  her  child,
((  So  nobly  brave,  so  dearly-loved,  in  vain,
«  How  can  her  heart  that  rending  shock  sustain  !"

Now  on  a  bier  the  Persian  warriors  place
The  breathless  Youth,  and  shade  his  pallid  face;
And  turning  from  that  fatal  field  away,
Move  towards  the  Champion's  home  in  long  array.
Then  Rustem,  sick  of  martial  pomp  and  show,
Himself  the  spring  of  all  this  scene  of  woe,
Doomed  to  the  flames  the  pageantry  he  loved,*
Shield,  spear,  and  mace,  so  oft  in  battle  proved ;
Now  lost  to  all,  encompassed  by  despair  ;
His  bright  pavilion  crackling  blazed  in  air  ;
The  sparkling  throne  the  ascending  column  fed  ;
In  smoking  fragments  fell  the  golden  bed  ;
The  raging  fire  red  glimmering  died  away,
And  all  the  Warrior's  pride  in  dust  and  ashes  lay.

Kaus,  the  King,  now  joins  the  mournful  Chief,
And  tries  to  soothe  his  deep  and  settled  grief;
For  soon  or  late  we  yield  our  vital  breath,
And  all  our  worldly  troubles  end  in  death  !
l(  When  first  I  saw  him,  graceful  in  his  might,
"  He  looked  far  other  than  a  Tartar  knight ;
"  Wondering  I  gazed — now  Destiny  has  thrown
"  Him  on  thy  sword — he  fought,  and  he  is  gone  ;
"  And  should  even  Heaven  against  the  earth  be  hurled,
"  Or  fire  inwrap  in  crackling  flames  the  world,

*  There  is  something  in  Virgil  similar  to  this  paroxysm  of  wrath  against
inanimate  things,  where  Dido  bids  her  sister  erect  a  pile  to  burn  the
arms  and  presents  of  JEneas.

Tu  secreta  pyram  tecto  interiore  sub  auras,

Erige,  et  arma  viri,  thalamo  qua;  fixa  relinquit,

Inpius,  exuviasqueomnis,  lectumque  jugalem,

Quo  perii,  superimponas.  ^Eneid,  B.  iv.  4!M.

Go  then,  erect  with  speed  and  secret  care,

Within  the  court,  a  pile  in  open  air,

Bring  all  the  traitor's  arms  and  robes,  and  spread

Above  the  heap  our  fatal  bridal  bed.  Pitt.

But  there  is  more  of  grandeur  in  the  despairing  anguish  of  Rustem.  I
know  nothing  of  the  kind  in  any  of  our  Epic  or  Dramatic  poets  superior
to  this  fine  burst  of  agonized  feeling  and  remorse.


SOTIRAB.  605

"  That  wliich  is  past — we  never  can  restore,
"  His  soul  has  travelled  to  some  happier  shore.
"  Alas  !  no  good  from  sorrow  canst  thou  reap,
"  Then  wherefore  thus  in  gloom  and  misery  weep  ?''

But  Rustem's  mighty  woes  disdained  his  aid,
His  heart  was  drowned  in  grief,  and  thus  he  said  :
"  Yes,  he  is  gone  !  to  me  for  ever  lost !
"  O  then  protect  his  brave  unguided  host  ;
"  From  war  removed  and  this  detested  place,
"  Let  them,  unharmed,  their  mountain-wilds  retrace  ;
"  Bid  them  secure  my  brother's  will  obey,
"  The  careful  guardian  of  their  weary  way,*
"  To  where  the  Jihun's  distant  waters  stray."
To  this  the  King  :  "  My  soul  is  sad  to  see
"  Thy  hopeless  grief — but,  since  approved  by  thee,
"  The  war  shall  cease — though  the  Turanian  brand
"  Has  spread  dismay  and  terror  through  the  land."

The  King,  appeased,  no  more  with  vengeance  burned,
The  Tartar  legions  to  their  homes  returned  ;
The  Persian  warriors,  gathering  round  the  dead,
Grovelled  in  dust,  and  tears  of  sorrow  shed  ;
Then  back  to  loved  Iran  their  steps  the  monarch  led.

But  Rustem,  midst  his  native  bands,  remained,
And  further  rites  of  sacrifice  maintained ;
A  thousand  horses  bled  at  his  command,
And  the  torn  drums  were  scattered  o'er  the  sand  ;
And  now  through  Zabul's  deep  and  bowery  groves,
In  mournful  pomp  the  sad  procession  moves.
The  mighty  Chief  on  foot  precedes  the  bier  ;
His  Warrior-friends,  in  grief  assembled  near  ;
The  dismal  cadence  rose  upon  the  gale,
And  ZaI  astonished  heard  the  piercing  wail ;
He  and  his  kindred  joined  the  solemn  train ;
Hung  round  the  bier  and  wondering  viewed  the  slain.
"  There  gaze,  and  weep !"  the  sorrowing  Father  said,
"  For  there,  behold  my  glorious  offspring  dead !"
The  hoary  Sire  shrunk  backward  with  surprise,
And  tears  of  blood  o'erflowed  his  aged  eyes ;

*  Zuara  conducted  the  troops  of  Afrasiyab  across  the  Jihiin. Rustem
remained  on  the  field  of  battle  till  his  return.


606  SOHRAB.

And  now  the  Champion's  rural  palace  gate
Receives  the  funeral  group  in  gloomy  state  ;
Rudabeh  loud  bemoaned  the  Stripling's  doom  ;
Sweet  flower,  all  drooping  in  the  hour  of  bloom ,
His  tender  youth  in  distant  bowers  had  past,
Sheltered  at  home  he  felt  no  withering  blast ;
In  the  soft  prison  of  his  mother's  arms,
Secure  from  danger  and  the  world's  alarms.
O  ruthless  Fortune  !  flushed  with  generous  pride,
He  sought  his  sire,  and  thus  unhappy,  died.

Rustem  again  the  sacred  bier  unclosed  ;
Again  Sohrab  to  public  view  exposed  ;
Husbands,  and  wives,  and  warriors,  old  and  young,
Struck  with  amaze,  around  the  body  hung,
With  garments  rent  and  loosely  flowing  hair ;
Their  shrieks  and  clamours  filled  the  echoing  air  ;
Frequent  they  cried ;  "  Thus  Sam  the  Champion  slept !
"  Thus  sleeps  Sohrab  !" Again  they  groaned,  and  wept.

Now  o'er  the  corpse  a  yellow  robe  is  spread,
The  aloes  bier  is  closed  upon  the  dead  ;
And,  to  preserve  the  hapless  hero's  name,
Fragrant  and  fresh,  that  his  unblemished  fame
Might  live  and  bloom  through  all  succeeding  days,
A  mound  sepulchral  on  the  spot  they  raise,
Formed  like  a  charger's  hoof.

In  every  ear

The  story  had  been  told — and  many  a  tear,
Shed  at  the  sad  recital. Through  Turan,
Afrasiyab's  wide  realm,  and  Samengan,
Deep  sunk  the  tidings  ; — nuptial  bower,  and  bed,
And  all  that  promised  happiness,  had  fled  !

But  when  Tahmineh  heard  this  tale  of  woe,
Think  how  a  mother  bore  the  mortal  blow  !*


*  The  death  of  Euryalus,  in  the  ninth  ^Eneid,  exhibits  an  exquisite  dis-
play of  natural  maternal  feeling,  but  less  complicated  and  agonizing  than
the  death  of  Sohrab.  Euryalus  was  killed  in  the  bloom  of  youth  by  the
enemy :  Sohrab  by  his  Father.  It  would  appear  that  Human,  on  his  return,
sent  to  Tahmineh  the  war-horse,  armour,  and  every  thing  belonging  to  her
unfortunate  son.


SOHRAB.  607

Distracted,  wild,  she  sprang  from  place  to  place  ;
With  frenzied  hands  deformed  her  beauteous  face;
The  musky  locks  her  polished  temples  crowned,
Furious  she  tore,  and  flung  upon  the  ground  ;
Starting,  in  agony  of  grief,  she  gazed,—
Her  swimming  eyes  to  Heaven  imploring  raised  ;
And  groaning  cried  :  "  Sole  comfort  of  my  life  !
"  Doomed  the  sad  victim  of  unnatural  strife,
"  Where  art  thou  now  with  dust  and  blood  denied  ?
"  Thou  darling  boy,  my  lost,  my  murdered  child  !
tc  When  thou  wert  gone — how,  night  and  lingering  day,
"  Did  thy  fond  mother  watch  the  time  away  ;
"  For  hope  still  pictured  all  I  wished  to  see,
"  Thy  father  found,  and  thou  returned  to  me  ;
"  Yes — thou,  exulting  in  thy  father's  fame,
"  And  yet,  nor  sire  nor  son,  nor  tidings,  came ;
"  How  could  I  dream  of  this  ?  ye  met — but  how  ?
"  That  noble  aspect — that  ingenuous  brow,
' *  Moved  not  a  nerve  in  him — ye  met — to  part,
"  Alas  !  the  life-blood  issuing  from  the  heart ;
"  Short  was  the  day  which  gave  to  me  delight,
"  Soon,  soon,  succeeds  a  long  and  dismal  night ;
"  On  whom  shall  now  devolve  my  tender  care  ?
"  Who,  loved  like  thee,  my  bosom-sorrows  share  ?
'•  Whom  shall  I  take  to  fill  thy  vacant  place,
u  To  whom  extend  a  mother's  soft  embrace  ?
"  Sad  fate  !  for  one  so  young,  so  fair,  so  brave,
"  Seeking  thy  father  thus  to  find  a  grave.
"  These  arms  no  more  shall  fold  thee  to  my  breast,
"  No  more  with  thee  my  soul  be  doubly  blest ;
"  No,  drowned  in  blood  thy  lifeless  body  lies,
"  For  ever  torn  from  these  desiring  eyes  ;
"  Friendless,  alone,  beneath  a  foreign  sky,
"  Thy  mail  thy  death-clothes — and  thy  father,  by  ;
"  Why  did  not  I  conduct  thee  on  the  way,*
"  And  point  where  Rustem's  bright  pavilion  lay  ?
There  is  a  similar  thought  in  Douglas  :

My  murdered  child  !  had  thy  fond  mother  feared,

The  loss  of  thee,  she  had  loud  fame  defied,

And  wandered  with  thee  through  the  scorning  world.

Home's  Douglas.


608  SOIIRAB.

"  Thou  haclst  the  tokens — why  didst  thou  withhold"
"  Those  dear  remembrances — that  pledge  of  gold  ?
"  Hadst  thou  the  bracelet  to  his  view  restored,
"  Thy  precious  blood  had  never  stained  his  sword."
The  strong  emotion  choaked  her  panting  breath,
Her  veins  seemed  withered  by  the  cold  of  death  ;
The  trembling  matrons  hastening  round  her  mourned,
With  piercing  cries,  till  fluttering  life  returned  ;
Then  gazing  up,  distraught,  she  wept  again,
And  frantic,  seeing  midst  her  pitying  train,
The  favorite  steed — now  more  than  ever  dear,
The  hoofs  she  kissed,  and  bathed  with  many  a  tear ;
Clasping  the  mail  Sohrab  in  battle  wore,
With  burning  lips  she  kissed  it  o'er  and  o'er;
His  martial  robes  she  in  her  arms  comprest,
And  like  an  infant  strained  them  to  her  breast ;
The  reins,  and  trappings,  club,  and  spear,  were  brought,
The  sword,  and  shield,  with  which  the  Stripling  fought,
These  she  embraced  with  melancholy  joy,
In  sad  remembrance  of  her  darling  boy.
And  still  she  beat  her  face,  and  o'er  them  hung,
As  in  a  trance — or  to  them  wildly  clung —
Day  after  day  she  thus  indulged  her  grief,
Night  after  night,  disdaining  all  relief;
At  length  worn  out — from  earthly  anguish  riven.
The  mother's  spirit  joined  her  child  in  Heaven.


THE  END.


LONDON:

PRINTED BY J. L.  COX  AND  SON, GREAT  QUEEN  STREET,

Lincoln's-Inn  Fields.


ORIENTAL  TRANSLATION  FUND


OP


-Britain  anti  Jrrland*


Hatron:

His  Most  Excellent  Majesty
KING WILLIAM THE FOURTH.


His  Majesty  the  KING  of  the  BELGIANS.

His  Royal  Highness  the  DUKE  of  SUSSEX.

His  Royal  Highness  the  DUKE  of  CAMBRIDGE.

His  Royal  Highness  the  DUKE  of  GLOUCESTER.

His  Grace  the  LORD  ARCHBISHOP  of  CANTERBURY.

The  Right  Honourable  the  LORD  HIGH  CHANCELLOR.

His  Grace  the  DUKE  of  WELLINGTON.

The  Most  Noble  the  MARQUESS  of  LANSDOWNE.

The  Right  Honourable  the  EARL  SPENCER.

The  Right  Honourable the EARL AMHERST, late Governor-  General of

India.
The  Right  Honourable  LORD  W.  H.  C,  BENTINCK, G.C.B., Governor-

General  of  India.

The  Right  Honourable  LORD  VISCOUNT  MELVILLE.
The  Right  Honourable  LORD  VISCOUNT  GODERICH.
The  Right  Honourable  LORD  GRENVILLE,  Chancellor  of  the  University  of

Oxford.
The  Right  Honourable LORD ELLENBOROUGH,  late President  of  the

Board  of  Commissioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India.
The  Right  Honourable  CHARLES  W.  WILLIAMS  WYNN, M.P., President  of

the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.
The  Right  Honourable  SIR  ROBERT  PEEL,  Bart.,  M.P.
The  Right  Honourable  HENRY  GOULBURN,  M.P.
The  Right  Honourable  S.  R.  LUSHINGTON,  Governor  of  Madras.
Lieutenant-  General  SIR  E.  BARNES,  K.C.B.,  late  Governor  of  Ceylon.
Major-  General  SIR  JOHN  MALCOLM, G.C.B.,  late  Governor  of  Bombay.
H.  T.  COLEBROOKE,  Esq., F.R.S.,  Director of  the Royal  Asiatic  Society

of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.


Chairman  :

The  Right  Honourable  Sir  GORE  OUSELEY,  Bart.,  Vice-  President  R.A.S.,  F,R.S.,

&c.  &c.  &c.

Deputy-Chairmen  :

The  Right  Honourable  the  EARL  of  MUNSTER,  Vice-  President  R.A.S., F.R.S.,

&c.  &c.  &c.

The  Right  Honourable  Sir  E.  H.  EAST,  Bart.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  &c.  &c.
The  Right  Honourable  CHARLES  WATKIN  WILLIAMS  WYNN,  M.P.,  F.  R.S.,  President

R.A.S.,  &c.  &c.  &c.

Sir  GEORGE  T.  STAUNTON,  Bart.,  M.P.,  V.P.R.A.S.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  &c.  &c.
Sir  ALEXANDER,  JOHNSTON,  V.P.R.A.S.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  &c.  &c.


Auditor,  J.  B.  S.  Mo ii u ITT,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

Treasurer,  The  Right  Honourable the  EARL  of  M  UNSTER.

Honorary  Secretary,  GRAVES  C.  HAUGHTON,  Esq.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  &c.  &c.

Honorary  Foreign  Secretary,  FREDERIC  AUGUSTUS  ROSEN,  Ph.  D.


It  is  requested  that  those  Individuals  or  Institutions  who  are  willing  to  subscribe
to  the  Oriental  Translation  Fund,  will  send  their  names,  addressed  to  "  the  Secretary,
Royal  Asiatic  Society's  House,  No.  14,  Grafton-street,  Bond-street,  London  ;"  and
inform  him  where  their  subscriptions  will  be  paid.  Subscriptions  will  also  be  received
by  the  Branch  Committees  at  Calcutta,  Madras,  and  Rome.


LIST OF WORKS

PRINTED FOR

THE  ORIENTAL  TRANSLATION FUND,

AND SOLD BY

Mr.  MURRAY,  Messrs.  PARBURY,  ALLEN,  and  Co.,  and  Mr.  STRAKER,
London;  Messrs.  THACKER  and  Co.,  Calcutta;  Messrs.  BINNY  and  Co.,
Madras;  Messrs.  LECKIE  and  Co.,  Bombay;  TREUTTEL  and  WURTZ,  and
Messrs.  DE  BURE  freres,  Paris ;  and  ERNEST  FLEISCHER,  Leipzig.

N.B.  The  Title-pages  of  all  works  printed  for  the  Fund,  are  ornamented  with  a
Vignette,  bearing  the  motto  "  Ex  ORIENTE  Lux."

1.
THE  TRAVELS  OF  IBN  BATUTA,

Translated  from  the  abridged  Arabic  Manuscript  Copies  preserved  in  the  Public

Library  of  Cambridge,  with  NOTES,  illustrative  of  the  History,  Geography,

Botany,  Antiquities,  &c.  occurring  throughout  the  Work.

By  the  Rev.  S.  LEE,  B.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew  in  the  University
of  Cambridge,  &c.  &c.

In  Demy  Quarto  ;  price  £1.

2.

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  EMPEROR  JAHANGUEIR,

Written  by  Himself,  and  translated  from  a  Persian  Manuscript,

By  MAJOR  DAVID  PRICE,  of  the  Bombay  Army,  &c.  &c.

In  Demy  Quarto;  12s.


3.

THE  TRAVELS OF  MACARIUS,  PATRIARCH  OF
ANTIOCH,

Written  by  his  attendant  Archdeacon,  Paul  of  Aleppo,  in  Arabic.

Part  the  First.— Anatolia,  Romelia,  and  Moldavia.
Translated  by  F.  C.  BELFOUR,  A.M. Oxon.  &c.  &c.

In  Demy  Quarto;  10s.
For  Part  II.  of  this  Work— see  No.  14.


4.
HAN  KOONG  TSEW,  or  THE  SORROWS  OF  HAN,

A  Chinese  Tragedy,  translated  from  the  Original,  with  Notes,  and  a  Specimen  of

the  Chinese  Text. By  JOHN  FRANCIS  DAVIS,  F.H.S.,  &c.

In  Demy  Quarto;  5s.


5.
HISTORY  OF  THE  AFGHANS,

Translated  from  the  Persian  of  Ncamet  Allah. Part  I .

By  BERNHAKD  DOKN. Ph.  D.,  &c.

In  Demy  Quarto  ;  14s.


6.

THE  FORTUNATE  UNION,

A  Romance,  translated  from  the  Chinese  Original, with  Notes  and  Illustrations';

to  which  is  added,  a  Chinese  Tragedy.

By  JOHN  FRANCIS  DAVIS,  F.R.S.,  &c.

Two  Vols.  DemySvo. ;  16s.

7.
YAKKUN  NATTANNAWA,

A  Cingalese  Poemr  descriptive  of  the  Ceylon  System  of  Demonology ;  to  which

is  appended  the  Practices  of  a  Capua  or  Devil  Priest, as  described

by  a  Budhist :  and  KOLAN  NATTANNAWA,  a  Cingalese

Poem,  descriptive  of  the  Characters  assumed  by

Natives  of  Ceylon  in  a  Masquerade.

Illustrated  with  Plates  from  Cingalese  Designs.

Translated  by  JOHN  CALL  AWAY,  late  Missionary  in  Ceylon.

In  Demy  Octavo ;  8s.

8.

THE  ADVENTURES  OF  HATIM  TAI,

A  Romance,  translated  from  the  Persian. By  DUNCAN  FORBES,  A.M.
In  Demy  Quarto;  16s.

9.
THE  LIFE  OF  SHEIKH  MOHAMMED  ALI  HAZIN,

Written  by  Himself  t translated  from  two Persian  Manuscripts,  and  Illustrated
with  Notes  explanatory  of  the  History,  Poetry,  Geography,  &c.  which

therein  occur.
By  F.  C.  BELFOUR,  M.A.  Oxon.&c.  &c.

In  Demy  Octavo  ;  10s.  6d.
For  the  Persian  Text  of  this  Work— see  No.  16.

10.
MEMOIRS  OF  A  MALAYAN  FAMILY,

Written by  themselves; and  translated  from  the Original,

By  W.  MARSDEN, F.R.S-,  &c.  &c.

In  Demy  Octavo ;  2s.  Qd.


11.

HISTORY  OF  THE  WAR  IN  BOSNIA,

During  the  Years  1737-8  and  9.

Translated  from  the  Turkish  by  C.  FRASER,  Professor  of  German  in  the  Naval
and  Military  Academy,  Edinburgh. In  Demy  Octavo ;  4s.

12.

THE MULFUZAT TIMURY; or AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
MEMOIRS  OF  THE  MOGHUL  EMPEROR  TIMUR,

Written  in  the  Jagtay  Turky  language, turned into Persian by Abu Talib

Hussaini,  and  translated  into  English
By  MAJOR CHARLES  STEWART,  late  Professor  of  Oriental Languages

in  the  Honourable  East- India  Company's  College.
With  a  Map  of  Transoxania. In  Demy  Quarto  ;  12s.

13.

THE  HISTORY  OF  VARTAN  AND  OF  THE  BATTLE  OF
THE  ARMENIANS,

Containing  an  Account  of  the  Religious  Wars  between  the.  Persians  and

Armenians,  by  Elisaeus  Bishop  of  the  Amadunians.
Translated  from  the  Armenian,  by  C. F. NEUMANN,

Member  of  the  Armenian Academy  of  the  Mechitaristes  at  St.  Lazaro,  &c,  &c.
In  Demy  Quarto; 10s.


14.
THE  TRAVELS  OF  MAC  ARIUS,  PATRIARCH  OF  ANTIOCH,

Written  by  his  Attendant  Archdeacon  Paul  of  Aleppo,  in  Arabic.

Part  the Second. — Wallachia, Moldavia,  and  the Cossack Country.

Translated  by  F.  C.  BELFOUR,  A.M.  Oxon.  &c.  &c.

In  Demy  Quarto ; 10s.
For  the  First  Part  of  this  Work— see  No.  3.

15.

THE  LIFE  OF  HAFIZ  UL  MULK, HAFIZ  REHMUT
KHAN.

Written  by  his  Son  Nuwab  Must'ujab  Khan  Buhadar,  and  entitled

Gulistan-i  Uehmut.

Abridged  and  translated  from  the  Persian,  by  CHARLES  ELLIOTT,  Esq.,

Of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service.

In  Demy  8vo  ;  5s.


16.
THE  LIFE  OF  SHEIKH  MOHAMMED  ALI  HAZIN,

Written  by  Himself ;  edited  from  two  Persian Manuscripts,  and  noted  with  their
various  Readings,  by  F.  C.  BELFOUR,  M.A.  Oxon,  &c.  &c.

In  Demy  8vo.  10s.  6d
For  the  English  Translation  of  this  Work— see  No.  9.

17.

MISCELLANEOUS  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  ORIENTAL
LANGUAGES,

Volume  the  First. In  Demy  8vo.  8s.

CONTENTS  :

I.  NOTES  OF  A  JOURNEY  INTO  THE  INTERIOR  OF  NORTHERN  AFRICA. — By  Haji
Ibn-ud-din  Al-Aghwaati.  Translated  from  the  Arabic  by  W.  B.  Hodgson,  Esq.,
late  American  Consul  at  Algiers,  F.M.  R  A.S.


II.  EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  SAKAA  THEVAN  SAASTEUAM,  or  BOOK  OF  FATE. —
Translated  from  the  Tamul  Language,  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  Roberts,  Cor.  M.R.A.S.

III.  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  KRISHNA  AND  THK  SONS  OF  PANDU,  from  the con-
cluding Section  of  the  Mahabharat. Translated  from  the  Persian  version*,"  made
by  Nekkeib  Khan,  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Akbar. By  Major  Duvid  Price,
of  the  Bombay  Army,  M.R.A.S.,  of  the  Oriental  Translation  Committee,  and  of
the  Royal  Society  of  Literature.

IV.  THE  VEDALA  CADAI,  being  the  Tamul  Version  of  a  Collection  of  Ancient
Tales  in  the  Sanscrit  Language  ;  popularly  known  throughout  India,  and  entitle  d
the  Vetala Panchavinsati. Translated  by  B.  G.  Babington, M.D., F.R.S.,
M.R.A.S.,  M.Madras  Lit. Soc.,  &c.

V.  INDIAN  COOKERY,  as  practised  and  described  by  the  Natives  of  the  East.
Translated  by  Sandford  Arnot.

18.

THE  ALGEBRA  OF  MOHAMMED  BEN  MUSA,
ARABIC  AND  ENGLISH.

Edited  and  translated  by  FREDERIC  ROSEN.
In  Demy  Octavo ;  8s.

19.

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  MARITIME  WARS
OF  THE  TURKS,

Translated  from  the  Turkish  of  Haji Khalifeh,  by  JAMES  MITCHELL.
Part  I. In  Demy  Quarto;  7s.

20.
TRANSLATIONS  FROM  THE  CHINESE  AND  ARMENIAN,

By  CHARLES  F.  NEUMANN.
In  Demy  8vo. 12s.  bds,
CONTENTS  :

I.  History  of  the Pirates  who  infested  the  China  Sea,  from  1807  to  1810.
Translated  from  the  Chinese  Original,  with  Notes  and  Illustrations.

II.  The Catechism  of  the  Shamans ; or,  the  Laws  and Regulations  of  the
Priesthood of  Buddha,  in  China. Translated  from  the  Chinese  Original,  with
Notes  and  Illustrations.

III.  Vahram's  Chronicle  of  the  Armenian  Kingdom  in  Cilicia,  during  the  time
of the Crusades. Translated  from the Original Armenian, with Notes  and
Illustrations.


21.
THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  WORKS  OF  SADIK  ISFAHANI'.

Translated  by  J.  C.  from  Original  Persian  MSS.  in  the  Collection  of

Sir  William  Ouseley,  the  Editor.

Octavo.

22.

THE  SHAH  NAMEH  OF  THE  PERSIAN  POET
FIRDAUSI'.

Translated  and  Abridged  in  Prose  and  Verse,  with  Notes  and  Illustrations,

By  JAMES  ATKINSON,  Esq.,

Of  the  Honourable  East-India  Company's  Bengal  Medical  Service.
( >ctavo.


23.

THE  TEZKEREH  AL  VAKIAT;  OR,  PRIVATE  MEMOIRS
OF  THE  MOGHUL  EMPEROR  HUMAYUN.

Written in the  Persian  Language  by  JOUHF.R, a  Confidential  Domestic  of  his

Majesty.

Translated  by  Major  CHARLES  STEWART, of  the  Honourable  East-India

Company's  Service, M.R.A.S.,  &c.  &c.

Quarto.


6

24.
THE  SIYAR-UL-MUTAKHERIN,

A  History  of  the  Mahomedan  Power  in  India,  during  the  last  Century.

By  MIR  GHOLAM  HUSSEIN-KHAN.

Revised  from  the  Translation  of  Haji  Mustafa,  and  Collated  with  the  Persian

Original,  by  Lieut.  Colonel  John  Briggs,  M.R.  A.S.  &c.  &c.

Vol.  I.  8vo.

25.

THE  HOEI  LAN  KI,  ou  L'HISTOIRE  DU  CERCLE  DE  CRAIE,
drame  en  prose  et  en  vers,  traduit  du  Chinois,  et  accompagne  de  notes,  par
STANISLAS  JULIEN.  8vo.


26.

SAN  KOKF  TSOU  RAN  TO  SETS; OU,  APERCU
GENERAL  DES  TROIS  ROYAUMES.

Traduit  de  1' Original  Japonais-Chinois,  par  M.  J.  KLAPROTH.

(Ou\Tage  accompagne  de  cinque  Cartes.)

Octavo.


27.
A  HISTORY  OF  THE  EARLY  KINGS  OF  PERSIA,

Commencing  with  Kaiomars,  the  first  of  the  Peshdadian  Dynasty,  terminating  with

the  Death  of  Dara,  and  the  Conquest  of  Iran  by  Alexander  the  Great.
Translated  from  the  Persian  History  of  Mirkhond,  entitled  "  Rauzat-us-Saffa,"

By  DAVID  SHEA,

Of  the  Oriental  Department  in  the  Honourable  East- India  Company's  College.

Octavo.

28.

ANNALS  OF  THE  TURKISH  EMPIRE,  FROM  1591  TO
1659  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  ERA.

Translated  from  the  Turkish,  by  CHARLES  FRASER.


LIST  OF  WORKS  IN  THE  PRESS.


The  Travels  of  Evliya  Effendi;  translated  by  M.  de  Hammer.

This  work  contains  an  account  in  Turkish,  of  the  travels  of  Evliya  in  all  parts  of  the  Turkish
empire,  and  in  Turkestan,  &c.  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.

Nipon  u  dai  itsi  ran  ;  translated  by  M.  Jules  de  Klaproth.

This  Japanese  work  contains  the  History  of  the  Dairis  or  Ecclesiastical  Emperors  of  Japan  from
the  year  660  Ante  Christum.

The  Fo  koue  ke,  translated  by  M.  Abel  Rrmusat.

This  very  curious  Chinese  work  contains  an  account  of  the  travels  of  some  Buddhist  Priests,
during  the  years  399-411  A.D.  from  the  city  of  Si  ngan  fu  in  China,  through  Tartary,  Hindoos  tan,
Ceylon,  &c.,  and  greatly  elucidates  the  ancient  geography  and  religion  of  Central  Asia  and  India.
It  will  likewise  be  illustrated  by  the  learned  translator  irom  many  original  Chinese  writers.

A  History  of  Morocco ;  translated  by  Walter  Price,  Esq.

An  Arabic  work  containing  a  history  of  the  establishment  of  the  Mohammedan  power  in  the
Barbary  States,  and  in  Spain,  from  the  eighth  to  the  fourteenth  century.

The  great  Geographical  Work  of  Idrisi ;  translated  by  the  Rev.  G.  C.  Re-
nouard,  B.D.

This  Arabic  work  was  written  A.D.  1153,  to  illustrate  a  large  silver  globe  made  for  Roger,
King  of  Sicily,  and  is  divided  into  the  seven  climates  described  by  the  Greek  geographers.

The  Raghu  Vansa ;  translated  by  Dr.  Stenzler.

This  is  a  highly  celebrated  Epic  Poem  by  Kalidasa.  It  will  be  accompanied  by  the  Sanscrit
text.

The  Travels  of  Macarius,  Patriarch  of  Antioch.  Written  by  his  Attendant
Archdeacon  Paul  of  Aleppo  ;  translated  by  F.  C.  Belfour,  Esq.  M.  A.,  LL.D.,
Part  1 1 1.

This  Arabic  Manuscript,  which  is  of  great  variety,  describes  the  Patriarch's  journey  through
Syria,  Anatolia,  Kumelia,  Walachia,  Moldavia,  and  Russia,  between  the  years  1G53  and  166U  of
the  Christian  /Era.


Haji  Khalifa's  Bibliographical  Dictionary;  translated  l>y  Monsieur  Oustave
Flugel.

This  valuable  Arabic  work,  which  formed  the  ground -work  of  d'Herbelot's  "  Bibliotheque
Oriental,"  contains  accounts  of  upwards  of  i:j,(HKt  Arabic,  Persian,  and  Turkish  works,  arranged
alphabetically.

A  Critical  Essay  on  various  Manuscript  Works,  Arabic  and  Persian,  illustrating
the  History  of  Arabia,  Persia,  Turkomania,  &c. ;  translated  by  J.  C.  from  an
original  Persian  MS.  in  the  possession  of  Sir  William  Ouseley,  the  Editor.


LIST  OF  TRANSLATIONS  PREPARING  FOR
PUBLICATION.

Class  1st.  —  THEOLOGY,  ETHICS,  and  METAPHYSICS.

The  Sankhya  Karika  ;  translated  by  Henry  Thomas  Colebrooke,  Esq.

This  Sanscrit  work  contains,  in  seventy-two  stanzas,  the  principles  of  the  Sankhya  System  of
Metaphysical  Philosophy.

The  Li  ki,  translated  by  M.  Stanislas  Jtilien.

This  ancient  Chinese  work,  which  is  attributed  to  Confucius,  was  the  original  moral  and  cere-
monial code  of  China,  and  is  still  the  principal  authority  on  those  subjects  in  that  empire.

A  Collation  of  the  Syriac MSS.  of  the New  Testament, both Nestorian and
Jacobite,  that  are  accessible  in  England,  by  the  Rev.  Professor  Lee.

This  collation  will  include  the various  readings  of  the  Syriac  MSS.  of  the  New  Testament
in  the  British  Museum,  and  the  Libraries  at  Oxford,  Cambridge,  &c.

The  Didascalia,  or  Apostolical  Constitutions  of  the  Abyssinian  Church  ;  translated
by  T.  P.  Platt,  Esq.  A.M.
This  ancient  Ethiopia  work  is  unknown  in  Europe,  and  contains  many  very  curious  opinions.


The  Vrihad  Aranyaka  ;  translated  by  Dr.  Stenzler.

This  ancient  Sanscrit  Upanishad  is  reckoned  part  of  the  Yajur  Veda.  It  consists  of  reflections
and  dialogues  on  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  gods,  men,  fire,  &c.,  and  is  one  of  the  principal
authorities  in  the  Vedanta  system  of  philosophy.

The  Akhlak-i-Nasiri, of  Nasir-ud-din  of  Tus  in  Bokhara  ; translated  by  the
Rev.  H.  G.  Keene,  A.M.

This  Persian  system  of  Ethics  is  an  elaborate  .composition,  formed  on  Greek  models,  and  Is
very  highly  esteemed  in  Persia.

The  Harivansa,  translated  by  M.  Langlois.

This  Sanscrit  work  is  generally  considered  as  a  Supplement  to  the  Mahabharata,  and  throws
much  light  upon  Hindu  Mythology.

Class  2d.  —  HISTORY,  GEOGRAPHY,  and  TRAVELS.

The  Sharaf  Namah  ;  translated  by  Professor  Charmoy.

This  is  a  Persian  History  of  the  Dynasties  which  have  governed  in  Kurdistan,  written  by
Sheref  Ibn  Shams-ud-din,  at  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century.

The  History  of  Mazindaran  and  Tabaristan  ;  translated  by  Professor  Charmoy.

This  is  a  Persian  history  of  part  of  the  Persian  empire,  written  by  Zahir-uddfn,  and  comes
down  to  A.D.  1475.

The  Tarikh-i-  Afghan  ;  translated  by  Professor  Bernhard  Dorn. Part  II.

This  is  a  Persian  History  of  the  Afghans,  who  claim  to  be  descended  from  the  Jews.  It  will  be
accompanied  by  an  account  of  the  Afghan  tribes.

The  Annals  of  Elias,  Metropolitan of  Nisibis  ; translated  by  the Rev.  Josiah
Forshall,  A.M.

This  Syriac  Chronicle  contains  chronological  tables  of  the  principal  dynasties  of  the  world,
brief  memoirs  of  the  Patriarchs  of  the  Nestorian  church,  and  notices  of  the  most  remarkable
events  in  the  East,  from  the  birth  of  our  Saviour  to  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century.

Ibn  Haukal's  Geography  ;  translated  by  Professor  Hamaker.

This  Arabic  work  was  compiled  in  the  10th  century  by  a  celebrated  Mohammedan  Traveller,
and  is  not  the  same  as  the  Oriental  Geography  of  Ebn  Haukal  that  was  translated  by  Sir  William
Ouseley.

The  History  of  Raja  Krishan  Chandra,  translated  by  G.  C.  Haughton,  Esq.,  M.A.
F.R.S..&C.  &c.

This  Bengali  work  includes  an  account  of  the  Rise  of  the  Raja's  family,  of  the  events  that  led  to
the  fatal  catastrophe  of  the  Black  Hole  at  Calcutta,  and  of  the  triumphant  establishment  of  the
English  under  Lord  Clive  in  Bengal.


The  Chronicle  of  Abulfat'h  Ibn  Abulhasan  Alsamari ;  translated  hy  the  Rev.  T.
Jarrctt,  M.A.

This  rare  Arabic  work,  of  which  only  one  perfect  copy  is  known  to  be  in  Europe,  is  a  History
of  the  Samaritans  from  the  creation  to  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century.

Ibn  Khaldiin's  History  of  the  Berbers  ; translated  by  the  Rev.  Professor  Lee.

This  is  a  most  rare  and  valuable  work,  containing  an  account  of  the  origin,  progress,  and
decline  of  the  dynasties  which  governed  the  northern  coast  of  Africa.

Ibn  Koteiba's  History  of  the  Arabians,  translated  by  Dr.  J.  H.  Mealier.

This  celebrated  work  contains  the  History  of  the  Arabians  from  the  time  of  Ismael  the  son  of
Abraham  to  near  the  end  of  the  third  century  of  the  Mahommedan,  or  the  Dth  of  the  Chris-
tian era.

Makrizi's  Khitat,  or History  and  Statistics  of  Egypt; translated by  Abraham
Salame,  Esq.

This  Arabic  work  includes  accounts  of  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  the  Caliphs,  A.D.  640 ;  and
of  the  cities,  rivers,  ancient  and  modern  inhabitants  of  Egypt,  &c.

A  History  of  the  Birman  Empire,  translated  by  Father  Sangermano.

This  work,  which  contains  the  political  and  religious  history  of  Birmah,  was  translated  by  Fa-
ther Sangermano,  who  was  a  missionary  in  Ava  twenty-six  years.  It  also  furnishes  accounts  of  the
natural  productions,  laws,  and  metaphysics  of  that  country.

The  Tuhfat  al  Kibar  of  Haji  Khalifah  ;  translated  by  Mr.  James  Mitchell.  Part  II.
This  Turkish  History  contains  an  account  of  the  maritime  wars  of  the  Turks  in  the  Mediter-
ranean and  Black  Seas,  and  on  the  Danube,  &c.,  principally  in  the  time  of  the  Crusades.

The  Siyar  ul  Mutakherin of  Mir  Gholam Hussein  Khan  ;  translated  by  Lieut.

Col.  John  Briggs. Vol-  II.

1 This  celebrated  Persian  work  comprises  the  annals  of  Hindustan  from  the  time  of  the  Emperor
Aurungzebe  to  the  administration  of  Warren  Hastings  in  Bengal.

The  Khatai  Nameh  ;  translated  by  M.  Fleischer.

This  curious  Turkish  work  contains  a  description  of  China,  with  accounts  of  its  government,
laws,  &c.

The  Tarikh  Tabari ;  translated  by  M.  Dubeux.

• A  highly  esteemed  and  very  authentic history,  written  in  Persian,  containing  accounts  of
the  Patriarchs,  Prophets,  Philosophers,  of  Mohammed  and  of  the  Khalifs.

Class  3d. — BIBLIOGRAPHY,  BELLES-LETTRES,  and  BIOGRAPHY.
Haft  Paiker,  an  historical  Romance  of  Bahrain Gur ;  translated  by  the Right
Hon.  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  Bart.

This  Persian  poem  of  Nazami  of  Ganjah,  contains  the  romantic  history  of  Behram,  the
Vth  of  the  Sassanian  dynasty  of  Persian  Kings.

Mihr-u-Mushteri ;  translated  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  Bart.

This  Persian  Poem,  of  which  an  abridgment  will  be  published,  was  composed  by  Muhammed
Assar,  and  celebrates  the  friendship  and  adventures  of  Mihr  and  Mushteri,  the  sons  of  King
Shapur  and  his  grand  Vizier.

Ibn  Khallikan's  Lives  of  Illustrious  Men :  translated  by  Dr.  F.  A.  Rosen.

This  is  an  Arabic  Biographical  Dictionary,  arranged  alphabetically,  of  the  most  celebrated
Arabian  historians,  poets, warriors,  &c.  who  lived  in  the  seven  first  centuries  of  the  era  of
Mahommed,  A.D.  GOO  to  A.D.  1300.
The  Bustan  of  Sadi ;  translated  by  James  Ross,  Esq.,  A.M.

This  is  a  much-admired  Persian  Poem, consisting  of  Tales,  &c.  illustrative  of  moral  duties.
The  Divan  of  the  Huzeilis ;  translated  by  Professor  Kosegarten.

This  is  a  collection  of  ancient  Arabic  Poems  similar  to  the  Hamasa ;  the  translation  will  be
accompanied  by  the  Arabic  Text  and  scholia.

Royal  Asiatic  Society's  House,
14, Graf  ton  Street,  Bond  Street,  London.
1st  June  1832.


LONDONi

PRINTED  BY J.  L. COX AND SON, GREAT QUEEN STRF.ET,
Lincoln's-Inn  Fields.


BINDING  SECT.  APR  2  4 1964


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


PK

6456

A1A3


Firdawsi


The  Shah  nameh
