The Shahnama of Firdausi, Vol. 3 (Arthur George Warner and Edmond Warner (trans.), 1908)
==========================================================
Vol. 3 of the Warner Shahnama. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

UNIVERSA


cn

Sou

CD


DO

214166 >


UNIVERSA


DAMAGE BOOK


TRUBNER’S
ORIENTAL SERIES.


THE


SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSi


DONE INTO ENGLISH BY

ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, MA

AND

EDMOND WARNER, BA


“ T/ie homes that are the dwellings of to day
Will stvk 'neath showei and sunshine to decay ^

But ^torm and rain shall never rnar what I
Have built— the palace of my poetry

Firdausi


VOL III


LONDON

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO L“

DKYDBN HOUSE, GEBKARD STREET, W

1908


Tht rights of translation and of reproduction ait reserved


Printed by Ballantynk, Hanson Co
At the Ballantyne Press, Edinburgh


CONTENTS


PAGE

Abbreviations 3

Note on Pronunciation 4

THE KAIANIAN dynasty {continued)

Kai Khusrau—

Part I How Kai Khusrau, to avenge Siy^Cwush, sent
A Host against Turan—

SECT

1 The Prelude 1 5

2 How the Nobles did Homage to Kai Khusrau 17

3 How Kai Khusrau made a Pi ogress through his

Realm , ‘19

4. How Kai Khusrau sware to Kai Kaiis to take Venge-
ance on Afrasiyab . 20

5 How Kai Khusrau numbered the Paladins 24

6 How Kai Khusrau bestowed Pleasures upon the

Paladins . . . 26

7 How Kai Khusrau sent Rustam to the Land of Hind 30

8 How Kai Khusrau reviewed the Host 31

The Story op Farud the Son op SiyAwush—

9 The Prelude . 37

10 How Tiis went to Turkistan 38

1 1 How Fariid heard of the Coming of Tiis . 4 1

12 How Fariid and Tukh^,r went to view the Host 44

13 How Bahrdm came to Fariid upon the Mountain 47

14 How Bahram went back to Tiis 51

15 How Rivniz was slam by Fariid 52

16 How Zardsp was slam by Fariid 53

17 How Tiis fought with Fariid 54

18. How Gfv fought with Fariid 57

V


VI


CONTENTS


The Story op FarxJd the Son of SiyAwush ( continued )-—

SECT PAGE

19 How Blzhan fought With Farud 61

20 How Fariid was slam 62

21. How Jarfra slew herself ♦ 66

22 How Tiis led the Host to the Kasa Riid, and how

Paldshdn was slain by Bi/han 68

23 How the Iranians suftered in a Snowstoini 71

24 How Bahr/im captured Kabiida 73

25 How the Irdnians fought with Tazh.iv 75

26 How Afrdsiyab had Tidings of Tus and his Host 78

27 How Piran made a Night-attack on the franians 80

28 How Kai Khusiau recalled Tils 84

29 How Fariburz asked a Truce of Piran 87

30 How the Iranians were defeated by the Turkmans 89

31 How Bahrain returned to look for his Whip on the

Battlefield 95

32 How Bahram was slam by Tazhav 98

33 How Qiv slew Tazhdv in Revenge for Bahram loi

34 How the Irdnians went back to Khusrau 104

Part II The Story of Kamus op KAbHi^N—

1 The Prelude 1 10

2 How Khusrau reviled Tiis 1 1 1

3 How Khusrau pardoned the Iranians 1 1 3

4 How Khusrau sent Tiis to Tiiran 1 1 5

5 The Message of Pirdn to the Army of f ran ' 1 17

6 How Afrdsiyab sent an Army to Pirdn 1 18

7 How Tiis slew Arzhang 1 19

8 How Human fought with Tus 1 20

9 How the Iiamans and Tiirdnians fought the second

Time 125

10 How the Turanians used Sorcery against the Host

of Iran 128

1 1 How the Iranians retreated to Mount Hamawan 131

1 2. How the Host of Tiiran beleaguei ed Mount Hamd wan 1 32

13 How Pirdn went in Pursuit of the Irdnians to Mount

Hamdwan * 137

14, How the Iranians made a Night-attack 139

15 How Kai Khusrau had Tidings of his Host 142

16 How Fariburz asked to Wife Farangis, the Mother

of Kai Khusrau


146


CONTENTS


Vll


Part II. The Siory of Kami5s of Ka&hAn ( continued )--

SECT PAGE

17 How Tiis saw Siyawush m a Dream 149

18 How Afrdsiyab sent the Khan and Kamus to help

Pirdii 1 51

19 How the Khan of Chin came to Hamawan 153

20 How the Iranians took Counsel how to act 155

21 How Giidarz had Tidings of the Coming of Kustam 156

22 How the Khan of Chin went to leconnoitre the

Army of frdn 160

23 How Farlburz reached Mount Hamawan 163

24 How Piran took Counsel with the Khan of Chin 164

25 How Giv and Tus fought with Kamus 168

26 The Coming of Rustam 170

27 How the ficinians and Turdnians airayed their Hosts 174

28 How Rustam fought with Ashkabiis 179

29 How Pirdn held Converse concerning the Coming

of Rustam 182

30 How the frdnirins and Turdmans set the Battle in

Array 185

31 How Alwd was slain by Kdmiis 187

32 How Kdmus was slam by Rustam 188


Part III The Story of Rustam and the Khan op Chin—


1 How the Khdn of Chin had Tidings of the Slaying

of Kamiis 192

2 How Chingish fared with Rustam 194

3 How the Khdn of Chin sent Human to Rustam 196

4 How Plrdn took Counsel with Human and the Khdn 199

5 How Plrdn came to Rustam 201

6 How the Turanians took Counsel for Battle with the

frdiiians 206

7. How Rustam harangued his Troops 2 1 1

8 How the frdnians and Turanians set the Battle in

Axray . 215

9. How Rustam reproached Pirdn . . 217

10 How the Battle was joined 219

1 1 How Shangul fought with Rustam and fled 221

12 How Rustam fought with Sawa 223

13 How Rustam slew Gahdr of Gahdn 224

14 How the Khdn was taken Prisoner 227

15 How the Host of the Turdmans was defeated 230


vni


CONTENTS


Part III The Story op Rustam and the Khan of ChIn


' (continued ) —

SECT PAGE

1 6 How Rustam divided the Spoil . . 232

17 How Rustam wrote a Letter to Kai Khusrau 237

18 How Kai Khusrau made Answer to Rustam’s Letter 239

19 How Afrasiyab had Tidings of the Case of his Army 241

20 How Rustam fought with KAfiir the Man-eater 243

21 How Afrasiyab had Tidings of the Coming of Rustam 249

22 Afr 4 siydb’s Letter to PiiMdwand 254

23 How PuUdwaiid fought with Giv and Tiis . 257

24 How Rustam fought with PiiUdwand 259

25 The Wrestling of Rustam and PiiUdwand 262

26 How Afrdsiyab fled from Rustam 265

27 How Rustam returned to the Court of the Shah 267

28 How Rustam went back to Sfstdn 269


Part IV The Story op the Fight op Rustam with the
Dlv Akwan—


1 The Prelude 272

2 How Khusrau summoned Rustam to fight the Div

Akwdn . . 273

3 How Rustam went in Quest of the Div 275

4 How the Div AkwAn flung Rustam into the Sea 276

5 How Afrdsiydb came to inspect his Steeds, and how

Rustam slew the Div Akwdn 279

6 How Rustam went back to the Land of Iran 281

Part V The Story of BIzhan and ManIzha—

1 The Prelude . 287

2 How the Irmdnians appealed to Khusrau 289

3 How Bizhan went to fight the wild Boars 292

4 How Gurgln beguiled Bizhan 294

5 How Bizhan went to see ManIzha, Daughter of

Afrdsiyab 296

6. How Bizhan went to the Tent of ManIzha 298

7 How ManIzha earned off Bizhan to her Palace 299

8 How Garslwaz brought Bizhan before Afrdsiydb 301

9 How Plrdn begged Blzhan’s Life from Afrdsiydb 305

10 How Afrdsiyab put Bizhan in Ward 309

11 How Gurgin returned to frdn and lied about

Bizhan ... ... 310


CONTENTS


IX


Part V The Story of BfzHAN and MANfzHA (continued)—

SECT PAGE

12 How Glv brought Qurgfn before Khusraii . 315

13 How Kai Khusrau saw Bizhan in the Cup that

showed the World 318

14 How Khusiau wrote a Letter to Rustam 319

15 How Giv bore the Letter of Kai Khusrau to Rustam 321

16 How Rustam made a Feast for Giv 324

17 How Rustam came to Khusrau 326

18 How Kai Khusrau held Feast with the Paladins 329

19 How Rustam made Petition for Gurgin to the Shah 331

20 How Rustam equipped his'Escort 333

21 How Rustam went to the City of Khutan to Piian 334

22. How Manizha came before Rustam 337

23. How Bizhan heard of the Coming of Rustam 340

24 How Rustam took Bizhan out of the Pit 344

25 How Rustam attacked the Palace of Afrasiyab by

Night 347

26 How Afrasiyab went to fight with Rustam 349

27 How Afrdsiydb was defeated by the franians 351

28 How Rustam returned to Kai Khusrau 353

29 How Kai Khusrau made a Feast 355

INDEX . 359


THE SHAHNAMA


VOL III.


A


ABBREVIATIONS


C — Macan’s edition of the Shahnama,


L

— Lurasden’s

do

P

-Mohl’s

do.

T

— Tihran

do

V

— Vullers’

do


BAG A History of Ancient Geography By E H Bunbury.
FRGS

CIG Corpus Inscnptionum Grsecarum

DZA Professor Darmesteter's Trans of the Zandavasta m the
Sacred Books of the East Reference to Parts ^ and
pages

GIP Grundriss der Iranischen Philologie

GKS Kleine Schriften von Alfred von Gutschmid.

HAP History of Ait in Persia from the French of Georges
Perrot and Charles Chipiez

JP Persia Past and Present, by Professor A V Williams
Jackson

LPO A View of the History and Coinage of the Parthians
By John Lindsay, Esq

MGN Narrative of a Journey through the Province of Khoiassan,
&c By Colonel C M MacGregor, C S I , C I E

MHP History of Persia By Sir John Malcolm, G.C B

NIN Das Iranische Nationalepos von Theodor Noldeke

RM The Mahdbharata translated into English Prose By
Pratdpa Chandra Ray, 0 I E

RP Professor Rawlinson’s Parthia in the Story of the Nations’
Series

ZT Chronique de Abou-Djafar-Mo’hammed-Ben-Djarir-Ben-
Yezid Tabari Traduite sur la version Persane d’Abou-
’Ali Mo’hammed Bel’ami par M Heimann Zotenberg

1 The second edition of Part I is referred to unless otherwise

specified


3


NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION

d as in “ water.”
i as in pique.”
it as in rude ”
a as in servant ”

^ as in sin ”
n asin^^oof’
at as t in time ”
au as oil m “ cloud, ’
g IS always hard as in give ”
kh as ch in the German buch ”
zh as z in azure.''


II

THE KAIANIAN dynasty

{Continued)


XIII


KAI KHUSRAU

HE REIGNED SIXTY YEARS
ARGUMENT

Kai Khusrau succeeds to the throne during the lifetime of his
grandfather, Shdh Kai Kdus, and swears to him to avenge the
death of Siyiwush This he achieves after long wars and vicissi-
tudes of fortune , and then, fearing that, like Jamshid, he too may
fall away from holiness by reason of his great successes and half
descent from Tiir, prays that he may be taken from the world,
its temptations, and its evil His prayers are granted, and,
having appointed his successor, he is caught up alive to heaven
In the course of the reign the poet tells two episodic stories,
that of the div Akwdn, and that of Bizhan and Manizha


NOTE

Kai Khusrau is the last of the Shdhs in whose names we can
trace a connexion with Indian mythology In the Vedas he
appears as Sushrdvas In the Zandavasta he is Kavi Husravah
and is mentioned often Like his grandfather Kai Kdiis he
originated in the ancient nature-woiship of the Aryan race, and
a trace of his divine origin still clings to him in the Shahnama,
as IS shown by his exemption from death The story of his birth
and youth will be found in the reign of Kai Kaiis, Parts IV
and V ^

The reign of Kai Khusrau is the longest in the Shdhnama and
forms more than a fifth of the whole poem It 13 nearly twice as
long as Paradise Lost ” and Paradise Regained ” combined It
18 divided into seven Parts, of which Parts IV and V are episodic


^ See Vol 11
7


8


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


The others carry on and bring to a conclusion the story of the
old epic cycle of trin, the deaths of Iraj, Naudar, Ighriras, and
Siydwush are avenged, and the royal house of Tdrdn becomes
extinct Early in the reign a new motive of great importance
IS introduced, that of the slaughter of the descendants of Gudarz,
who in Part VI has his revenge on Pirdn, just as in Part VII
Kai Khusrau avenges himself on Afrdsiydb By the end of the
reign a clean sweep has been made on the Tiirdman side, while
on the Irdnian a great clearance has been effected Many heroic
names drop out of sight, Kai Khusrau and his half-brother Fariid
leave no issue, ^ and in the next reign the curtain rises on a
complete change of scene and motive Only Zdl and his de-
scendants — great relics of the heroic past — still continue to play
their part among new faces, other minds

The story is one of almost unceasing warfare, for even the
episodes end with battles against Afrasiydb Omitting these,
four campaigns are fought, the first in Part I , the second in
Parts II and III , the third in Part VI , and the fourth in
Part VII The successive campaigns become more and more
elaborate in the method of their presentation, and set forth
the gradual progress of the Kdnian arms from total defeat to
absolute triumph

In the course of the reign we find a mass of subject-matter
of comparatively late growth It is only in Part VII that the
older legendary strata crop up, and we again find ourselves in
touch with the Zandavasta, while it is not till the concluding
scenes of all that we come upon the ancient legend which may
be regarded as the bed-rock of the whole Another version of it
occurs near the end of the gieat Indian epic, the Mahdbharata ^
This will be given in the Introductory Note to Part VII in
Vol IV of this translation, where it may be compared most
conveniently with its Irdnian equivalent.

It was stated in the Introduction^ that the Shdhnama was
divisible into two periods — a mythic and a historic — and the
distinction was based not so much on the nature of the subject-
matter as on the names of the chief characters which at a certain
point cease to be mythic and become historic As regards the
names of the Shahs, which were there referred to, this is correct
We are still far from the point in the poem at which such names
begin to appear in their proper historic connexion of time and


^ In the Zandavasta, however, Kai Khusrau is represented as having
a son named Akhrura, whosfe legend is lost DZA, ii 223

* RM, Vol X , Mahdprasthdnika Parva

* Vol 1 p 49


NOTE


9


place, but it does not follow that all the names occurring before
that point IS reached are wholly mythical Real dynastic, family,
and personal names are found thrown back upon and incorporated
with a mythical past with which they have no connexion what-
ever The dynastic title of Ciesar, for instance, occurs in the
reign of Miniichihr,! while the personified name — Karan — of a
family famous in Ashkdnian (Parthian) and Sdsdnian times is very
prominent in the Pishdadian dynasty The most striking in-
stances of personal names and personalities being thus thrown
back occur in the Kaianian dynasty and in the reigns of Kai
Kalis and Kai Khusrau These we will now proceed to con-
sider

About AD 40 the Parthian king Artabanus III died He
left at least two sons living at his death — Vardanes, who suc-
ceeded him, and Artabanus Shortly afterward, and during the
absence of Vardanes from the capital, a certain Gotarzes assumed
the supreme power and caused Artabanus with his wife and son
to be murdered The relationship of Gotarzes tojArtabanus III.
has been a matter of considerable difference of opinion, but seems
fairly settled now by two pieces of contemporary evidence On
the rock of Bihistiin, some three hundred feet below the inscrip-
tion of the great Darius, Gotarzes has left a memorial tablet
of himself Unfortunately it is now almost defaced,*^ but when
the late Sir Henry Rawlmson examined it in 1836 he made out,
in addition to the name Gotarzes, which is still legible,^ the word
Mithrates, and Gotarzes’ description of himself as Satrap of
Satraps ” In one corner of the tablet the words Gotarzes
Geopothros” (Tayrdp^rj^ TfonoOpos:) were also found Sir Henry
Rawlinson’s account was read before the Royal Geographical
Society in January 1838 ^

In the first element in the word “ Geopothros ” we have, as
now seems generally admitted, the historical original of the Giv
of the Shahnama In the second element we have the old Persian
word puthra,” which means son ” The whole word therefore
means son of Glv ” This historical Giv seems to have been
prince of Hyrcania and the father-in-law of Artabanus III ® He
was also, if we accept the evidence of the inscription, the father
of Gotarzes

The second piece of contemporary evidence is a very rare com
of Gotarzes in the conupted legend on which he is described
as the king of kings, the Arsacid, the adopted son of Artabanus ’’


^ /dJ p 262 ^ JP, p 209 ^ Id

* See Journal, Vol ix p 114, and GIG, Vol 111 No 4674
s GIP, 11 504


lo THE SHAhnAma of FIRDAUSt

(vtos K€Ka\oviJL€vos OY K€K\r]fji€vos * ApTaffdvov) ^ It appears therefore
that Gotarzes was closely connected with the reigning Parthian
family both by marriage and adoption, but was not really one
of the sons of Artabanus III as was formerly supposed

Vardanes, on hearing of Gotarzes’ usurpation of the kingdom,
hurried back and expelled him Gotarzes withdrew into his
hereditary principality of Hyrcania, where, with the assistance
of the Dahae, who dwelt between the Caspian and the Aral, he
prepared to renew the struggle The opposing forces met on
the Bactnan plains, but hostilities were averted Gotarzes had
discovered a plot, on the part of the Parthian nobles on both
sides, to kill him and Vardanes, and set up a new king in then
place He informed Vardanes of this, and the two combined
against the common enemy Gotarzes then withdrew to Hyrcania
and Vardanes retained the crown Subsequently another war
broke out between the two and several battles were fought
Tacitus, the chief authority for this part of history, tells us ^
that Vardanes advanced to meet Gotarzes as far as the rivei
Erinde,"* at the passage of which severe fighting took place in
which Vardanes was victorious, who then in several successful
engagements subdued all the nc-cions between that river and
the river Sinde, which divided the Dahae and the Aryans ^ He
returned in triumph, but shortly afterward was assassinated while
hunting, AD 46 Upon this Gotarzes became king, but his
ferocity and self-indulgence speedily rendered him unpopular,
and a Parthian deputation arrived in Rome in a d 49 for the
purpose of obtaining from the Emperor Claudius permission for
Meherdates, who resided there, to accompany them back to
Persia Meherdates was the son of a former Parthian king,
Vonones I As was to be expected in the circumstances the
character of Gotaizes was depicted in very unfavourable colours
by the envoys He had killed all his relations, whether near
or distant, with their wives and children , he was sluggish at
home, unfortunate in war, and sought to cloak his sloth by


^ LCP, p 153 and Plate 3, 70, GKS, 111 68

2 Ann XI 10

^ Generally assumed to be the Charmda mentioned by Ammianus
Marcelhnus (xxiii 6) and by Ptolemy (vi 2), who describes it as
parting Media from Hyrcania

** The rivers Erinde and Sinde have not been identified, but the
latter may be intended for the Oxus That river was confounded with
the Indus (Sind) in ancient times (see Vol 1 p 71) and flowed into
the Caspian in the days of Tacitus, so it might be regarded as
dividing the Dahae and the Aryans


NOTE


II


cruelty ^ Meherdates was sent accordingly, but was defeated
and taken prisoner by Gotarzes, who, however, rather belied his
character for ferocity on this occasion He spared the life of
Meherdates and merely cut oft his ears — a mutilation that dis-
qualified him for the Parthian crown It was to commemorate
this victory that Gotarzes had the bas-relief already referred to
carved on the rock of Bihistiin^ in the neighbourhood of which
the battle probably was fought Gotarzes is represented as
charging at the head of his troops, while above him a winged
Victory IS setting the crown upon his head ^ He died in a D 51
In the lists of the kings of the Ashkanian (Parthian) dynasty,
compiled by oriental historians,^ the name Giidarz occurs in
several connexions We also find the name Blzhan given as
the son of one Giidarz and as the father of another We also
find the name Bahri.m Firdausi, when he reaches Ashkanian
times, includes the above three names in his very scanty list
of the kings of that dynasty He admits that he knows nothing
about any of them, being wholly unaware, as naturally he would
be, of their identity with some of his own most favourite heroes
In the Shdhnama Gotarzes becomes Giidarz, who is represented
as being the father, not the son, of Giv Vardanes becomes
Bahram and is the son, not the adopted brother, of Giidarz
Blzhan becomes the son of Glv and the grandson of Giidarz
Similarly other names of the Parthian period appear in the poem
Meherdates (Mithradates, Mithrates, Mithradat, Mihrdat) appears
as Mlldd, the father of Gurgin, who plays such a prominent part in
the story of Blzhan and Manlzha, (Part V ) Phraates — a common
Parthian name — becomes Farhdd, and there are other instances ^
Some of the names thus transplanted have flourished amazingly,
and Gotarzes’ reputation has not suffered by the change

We conclude this note with a few instances in which the
events of Parthian history summarized above may be traced in
a distorted form in the Shahnama In the war between Gotarzes
and Vardanes we seem to have the origin of the campaigns of
Tiis against Tiiran in Parts I and II The scene of operations
IS the same in both cases, and the battle at the river Erinde
seems reproduced m that of the river Shahd ® The assassination
of king Vardanes on the hunting-held is reproduced in the episode
in which Bahram, having lost his whip on the battlefield, insists
on returnmg to look for it, and is, after a gallant defence, mortally
wounded by the enemy,® It is because Meherdates, after march-


^ Ann xii 10
» GKS, 111 24
® See p 1 1 7 seq


* See HAP, p 39, and RP, frontispiece
^ NIN, p 7
® See p 95 seq


12


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSt


ing through Armenia to attack Gotarzes,^ is let oflf after his
defeat with a slight mutilation that, m the story of Bizhan and
Manfzha, Gurgin the son of Mildd and Bizhan the grandson of
Gddarz set forth together on an expedition to Irmdn, that
Gurgin treats Bizhan badly and, after having brought him into
deadly peril, is lightly punished, then pardoned, and in the end
forgiven by Bizhan himself, ^ while lastly it may be noted that
the battle with Afrasiyab, consequent on the release of Bizhan,
IS stated to have taken place m the neighbourhood of Mount
Bistiin 3


1 Tacitus, Ann xii 12 ^ See pp 292 scg , 316, 331 seq , 345

3 Cf pp II, 350


ERRATA


Page 14, line 30 end, add reference number 5
Page 36, line 8, for ‘ Tis ’ read ‘ ’Tis ’

Page 45, line 23, for ‘ that * read ‘ thou ’

Page 68, line 18, for ‘stoneand ’ read ‘stone and *

Page 134, line 6 end, add ’

,, ,, line 15 end, add ”

Page 148, note, /or ‘Pehlevan* read ‘Pehlewan ’

Page 1 5 1, line 4 from bottom, add full stop at end
Page 172, note, for ‘ Car ’ read ‘ car *

Page 194, line 8, for ‘ Khan ’ read ‘ Kh<ln '

Page 213, line 22, foi ‘ deader * read ‘ 0 leader ’

Page 234, note, for ‘ Et ’ read ‘ et,^ and for ‘ comblan ’ read ‘ comhlant ’
Page 237, line 6, prefix “

Page 241, line 22, delete ‘far’

Page 251, note, for ‘ Sur ’ lead ‘ sur ’

Page 275, line 10 end, delete ’

Page 285, line 8 fiom bottom, for ‘ fraicheur’ read ‘fraicheur ’

„ ,, last line, add reference number 2

Page 287, side refeience, /or ‘V 1063’ read ‘V 1065,’ and subsequent
side references consecutiiely^ t e ‘V 1066,’ ‘ V 1067,’ etc , up to page

305

Page 298, note, for ‘ La ’ read ‘ la ’

Page 304, line 1 1 , delete semicolon and insert comma
Page 305, line 25 add side reference ‘V 1086,’ and read subsequent
side references consecutively^ xe ‘V 1087,’ ‘V 1088,’ etc y up to
page 356

Page 318, note, for ‘ II ’ read ‘ il ’

Page 348, line 15, add comma at end

Page 376, col 2, line 15, /or ‘PuUwand’ read ‘PhUdwand ’


PART I


HOW KAI KHUSRAU TO AVENGE SIYAWUSH
SENT A HOST AGAINST TtiRAN


ARGUMENT

The poet, first having set forth the various qualities that
kings ought to possess, proceeds to tell how Kai Khusrau becomes
joint Shah with Kai Kaus, who exacts from him an oath that he
will avenge the death of Siyawush He accordingly assembles the
host, and sends it, under the command of Tiis, against Afrdsiyib,
strictly enjoining the former not to attack Farad — the half-
brother of Kdi Khusrau — on the march Tus out of dudgeon
with Kai Khusrau disobeys, and Fariid is slam The Iranians
subsequently are surprised in a night-attack by Pirdn and de-
feated Kai Khusrau recalls Tus and appoints Fariburz leader,
who arranges a month^s truce with Piran, after which the fight is
renewed and the Irdnians are overthrown at the disastrous battle
of Ladan They retreat to Iran, and Piran is splendidly rewarded
by Afrdsiyab The poet in this part records various heroic exploits
of Giv, his son Bizhan, and his brother Bahram, who is slain


NOTE

I and 9 There are two Preludes in this Part The first may
be regarded as introductory to the whole reign, specifying as it
does the ideal kingly qualities that are to be exemplified in the
person of Kai Khusrau, while the second is meant to impress upon
the reader the real motives that underlay the conduct of Tus with
reference to his treatment of Fanid Tus, as we have seen, was
a disappointed man ^ Although he was the direct representative
of the ancient Pishdddian Dynasty his claim to the crown in-
variably had been ignored Despairing, moreover, of ever becom-
ing Shah himself he had just been advocating the claims of

^ Vol 11 p 335


14


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSi


Fariburz to the kingship, in opposition to those of Kai Khusraii,
in the hope of becoming at all events a king-maker and the power
behind the throne Again his plans are frustrated, and he vents
his spite on Khusrau's half-brother, Fari\d

§ 6 The name of the slave of Tazhav appears variously as
Isnapwl and Ispanwi We adopt the latter

§ 7 In Rustam’s account of the conquest of part of Zabulistdn
by the Turkmans we seem to have a reminiscence of the permanent
occupation of that country (c loo b c ), from which it received the
name of Sistan ^ Similarly in Kai Kaus, Part II , we had a reference
to the invasions of Mesopotamia by the Arabs ^

§ lo Kaldt IS a word used for forts in general, but if, as
seems probable, the particular stronghold referred to is that
which IS now known as Kalat-i-Nadiri, we here find ourselves in
the poet’s own neighbourhood Tiis, his native place, is said to
have been founded by the legendary hero of that name, who plays
so prominent a part in this portion of the Shahnama, because, in
consequence of the death of Fariid, he was afraid to return to the
court of Kai Khusrau,^ but we find nothing to this effect in the
Shdhnama Kaldt-i-Nadiri was so called because Nadir Shah
(a d 1736-1747), one of the most remarkable of Persian sovereigns,
whose uncle was the ruler of this fortress,* was born in its
neighbourhood and made it his favourite residence It is situated
some forty miles to the north of the ruins of Tiis It is upon
a very high hill, only accessible by two narrow paths An ascent
of SIX or seven miles terminates in a plain about twelve miles in
circumference, watered by several fine streams and covered with
verdure and cultivation A second ascent, by a route of ten or
eleven miles, leads to another plain of greater elevation, but of
equal richness ”

It is a district or a basin,” says another account, “ fortified m
the most wonderful way by nature In shape it is something like
a foot, and it must have a length of twenty miles by a breadth
of two to four miles if the term impregnable can be used

anywhere, it can here For the fifty miles of its circuit, nature
has indeed left hardly anything for man to do ” *

§ 1 5 The Rivmz slain by Fariid should be distinguished from
the hero of the same name slain at Lddan (§ 30) The former was
descended from Pashang and therefore of Pishdfldian descent He
IS quite appropriately the son-in-law of Tds The latter is a son
of Kai Kills and therefore a Kaianian

1 Vol 1 p 19 2 Vol 11 p 81 ® C Persian Preface, p 32.

* MHP, 11 4 ^ zd 1 34, note ® MG-N, 11 53, 56

See p 25


KAI KHUSRAU


15


§ 1 8 Bizhan s friendship with Gustaham, the son of Gazhdaham,
IS one of the features of this reign Another is Giv and Bizhan's
anxiety about one another when either is courting danger The
father can never bring himself to realise that his son is grown up
and well able to take care of himself, while the son, with all the
insolence of youth, persists in regarding his father as played out —
touches not foreign to human nature

§ 30 The battle of L/idan is also known by the name of the
battle of Pashan, and there is a legend that when Firdausi was
on his way to seek his fortune at the court of Mahmud he chanced
to enter a garden where three of the seven poets of Mahmud^s
court were revelling He asked to be allowed to join them, and
they consented on the condition that he should cap their three
rhyming verses with a fourth Firdausi at once obtained the
needful rhyme by a verse referring to the battle of Pashan,
whereby he showed his superior knowledge of the epic history of
his country ^ In this connexion the word has sometimes been
understood as equivalent to Pashang, the name both of the father
and of one of the sons of Afrasiy/ib, but Firdausi’s line was in-
tended to celebrate the prowess of Giv at the battle of Pashan or
Lddan It is possible, however, that these are the names of
distinct battles though fought in the same campaign, in which
case we may regard the former as the night-surprise and the
latter as the occasion when Giidarz lost nearly all his descendants
Giv distinguished himself at both battles

The mountam-skirt ” to which the Iranian army withdrew aftei
its defeat seems to be that of the northern scarp of the province
of Khurasan which still goes by the name of Daman-i-Kuh —
the term used in the poem, cf p 10

§§31-33 Seepp 10, II The historical Bahram (Vardanes) was,
according to Tacitus, a king of exceptional valour and brilliancy ^


§ I

The Prelude

This much achieved, the poet will present
Another tale of yore — how Kai Khusrau
Sat on the throne and sent an armament
Against Tiiran. Thus, if God’s grace allow
Me life and health, shall I one story more V. 765

Leave to the world from this famed book of lore

^ See C Persian Pieface, p 27


2 Ann XI, 10


1 6 THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

When in the garth a cypress sendeth off

A shoot, whose green top mounteth palace-high,
The tree rejoiceth in the height thereof,

Its prudent carriage, and prosperity.

The heart of fortune nourisheth the shoot.

And all the world partaketh of the fruit.


If sovereignty to native worth be due

The wearer of the crown must needs do right ,
Three aspects of the matter let us view,

And presently a fourth will come in sight
Accomplishment thou wilt not fail to find
With high birth and with native worth combined


Such are the three, and all m one content.

For save in company with native worth
How can there ever be accomplishment,

And, lacking that, what scion of high birth
Hast thou beheld ? High birth the father’s seed
Produceth, which may well fair fruitage breed


V. 766 Accomplishment thou leamest painfully

From others, at the cost of many a groan.
While native worth is greatest of the three —
A robe of honour given by God alone
To these be wisdom added, that which will
Discriminate for thee ’twixt good and ill


When any man possesseth all the four

He hath repose from travail, greed, and grief.
But not from death , that is an evil, sore
Beyond all others , there is no relief.

Now Kai Khusrau possessed all four, and he
Was fashioned thus by heaven’s destiny.


KAI KHUSRAU


17


§ 2

How the Nobles did Homage to Kai Khusrau

When Kai Khusrau acceded, and the world
Had been apprised, he sat upon the throne
Of king of kings and donned the crown of greatness
He meted justice out to each, uprooting
Injustice from the earth. Then all the nobles,

Possesse4 of crowns and sprung of royal race.

With foreign monkrchs, potentates, and magnates.

Resorted to Khusrau there was no head

Not taken in his toils He cultivated

Waste lands and freed the mourners’ hearts from woe,

The moisture rained down from the clouds in spring,

And cleansed the face of earth from rust and sorrow ,

’Twas decked like Paradise with goodly havings
By reason of his justice and his bounty

The world was full of happiness and peace, V 767

The hhnds of Ahriman were barred from ill.

While envoys came from all the provinces.

From every man of name and potentate
When tidings had been carried to Nfmriiz,

And reached the chief, the Lustre of the earth —

“ The glorious prince is seated on the throne,

And hath his foot upon the sky of power,”

He summoned his retainers from all sides
To go to offer homage to the Shah,

Departing on the journey in great state
And much content with Zal the son of Sam
The son of Nariman, and all the nobles,

Both great and little of Kabul — a host
Which made the desert as ’twere ebony
What while the tymbals split the leopards’ ears
Zdl with an escort led the way , behind
Came Rustam followed by the violet flag

VOL III. B


1 8 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSt

When tidings reached the Shah “ The loyal Rustam
Is on his way,” the people as one man
Arose prepared to go to welcome him.

The Shdh was glad and bade the courier “ Take
Thy pleasure here, for Rustam reared my father,

And all eyes recognise his excellence ”

The monarch ordered Gfv, Giidarz, and Tiis
To set forth with the tymbals and the pipes,

The drums beat at the portal of the Shah,

And all the warriors assumed their helms
From every quarter of the land all went
With flag and kettledrum to welcome Rustam ,

While those in chief command with many troops
Went forward two days’ journey to receive him
As soon as Rustam’s standard came in sight.

And when the host’s dust mounted o’er the sun,

V 768 Shouts rose with sound of trump and kettledrum,

And from the centre Gfv, Gudarz, and Tus
Approached in haste the elephantine chieftain,

And gave him salutations joyfully

All three of them embraced him , he meanwhile —

The lion-queller — asked about the Shdh.

From Rustam they proceeded next to Z4l,

The son of Sam, with open hearts and happy.

Then turned to Faramarz, rejoiced to see him
Thence they approached the Shah, approached to gaze
Upon the glorious crown Now when Khusrau
Beheld the elephantme warrior
Tears trickled from his eyelids down his cheeks
Descending from the throne he greeted Rustam,

Who kissed the ground The Shah said “ Paladin '
Live ever glad and happy, for thou art
The foster-sire of Siyawush and likewise
Art of all men most wise and reticent.”

He clasped upon his breast the head of Zal,

An d sorrowed for his own sire’s sake the while.


KAI KHUSRAU


19


Then seated both chiefs on the royal throne,

And blessed them in God’s name When Rustam
marked

From head to foot the person of the Shah,

And how he sat, held converse, and advised.

The hero’s cheek flushed up and his heart ached.

So much reminded him of Siyawush
He thus addressed the v/orld’s king “To the world
Thou art, 0 Shah ' the memory of thy sire
I have not seen a king with Grace like thine,

Or one so like thy father ”

When they rose

They had the tables spread and wine prepared.

Khusrau slept not till night was far advanced.

But held more converse touching what had chanced


§ 3

How Km Khtibiau made a P)og)e‘ti> through hu Realm

When Sol had drawn its shining scimitar,

And dark night’s head had vanished, rose the blare
Of trumpets from the court-gate, and such chiefs
As Tiis, Giidarz, and valiant Gfv, Gurgm,

Ruhham the Lion, Gustaham, and others.

Came to the Shah in that famed audience-hall
Now when they had assembled at his throne
He said to them “ I purpose to survey
The glorious realm and marches of Iran
Go we m hunting wise and fleet a while
In happiness ”

The nobles all agreed.

The monarch of the world went forth to hunt
With Rustam, that illustrious paladin,

With Gfv, Giidarz son of Kish wad, Shapiir,

Bahrdm, a wielder of the scimitar.


V 769


20


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Gurgfn, Bizhan expert in archery,

Farhad and Zanga son of Shdwaran,

And one among the fighting-men, Guraza —

A host that darkened both the sun and moon
With helmets, maces, coats of mail, and casques
The tracks and trackless waste were like a field
Of battle with the coipses of the game

Khusrau passed through the country of Irdn,
And subsidised and peopled all the lands
That then were uninhabited or ravaged.

Or ruined by misgovernment , he found
No toil in justice or munificence
He tarried m each city and set up
His throne as fitted fortune’s favourite.

Called for his purse and cup, and Avith dfnai;^
Decked all the world , then sought another city,
Conveying with him crown and throne and wine,

V 770 Until with all the great men and the nobles
He reached at length Azar Abadagan ,

Then quaffing wine, and urging on his steed.
Approached the temple of Azargashasp,

Prayed in that Fane of Fire and praised the Maker
He left in state to go back to Kaiis,

With whom they sat — a merry company —

Not ceasing for a moment from their mirth
Till to their heads the sparkling liquor rose,

And all went eagerly to seek repose


§ 4


How Kai Khusrau sicaie to Kai KM,s to tale Vengeance

on Afidsiydb


When morn brought forth bright day, and scattered
gems

U pon the dusky ground the world-lord sat


KAI KHUSRAU


21


With Kai Kalis — both noble, prosperous Shahs —

With Zal and valiant Rustam. Kai Kaiis
Discoursed at large on matters great and small,

And, first, in speaking of Afrasiydb,

Bathed both his cheeks with blood-drops from his eyes,

Recounting what that king had perpetrated

On Siyawush, and how he had sent up

Dust from Iran, how many paladins

Had died, and how their wives and children suffered,

Thus saying “ Thou beholdest many cities

Waste in Iran, wrecked by Afrd,siyab

Since every needful, God-sent gift is thme —

Men, knowledge, might of hand, Grace, majesty,

And favouring stars — and thou in every point
Of native worth art raised o’er other kings,

I claim of thee an oath, and thou must keep it.

That vengeance on Afrasiyab shall fill

Thy heart, and thou shalt not allay that flame,

Regardless of his kinship with thy mother.

And heeding not what any one may urge
Thou shalt not be seduced by wealth or power,

Howe’er thou be exalted or abased.

Nor shalt thou turn aside to treat with him
For mace or sword or throne or diadem
I will declare the sanction of thine oath —

One binding on thy wisdom and thy soul
Swear by the righteous Judge of sun and moon,

By crown, throne, casque, and signet, by the justice
Of Farfdiin and by his precedent.

The blood of Siyawush, thy life, 0 Sh^h '

The Grace, and by the favourmg stars divme,

That thou wilt never turn aside to ill,

Wilt ask no arbiter but sword and mace.

And rise above thyself in thy resolve.”

Whenas the youthful monarch heard the words
He turned both face and soul toward the Fire,


V 771


22


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSI


And took an oath “ By God, the Lord of all,

By day resplendent and night azure-dim.

By sun and moon, by throne and casque and signet,
By sword and by the Shdh’s own diadem,

I never will inclme toward amity

For him, or dream of looking on his face ”

V 772 This they recorded in the olden tongue

With scented ink upon a royal roll.

And Zdl and Rustam signed as witnesses.

And likewise all the other mighty men.

The written oath attested m due form
Was put for safety into Rustam’s hands.

When this was done they called lor wine and feast,
And held a session of another kind ,

The nobles passed a week with harp and wine
Within the hall of Kai Kauo. Khusrau
Upon the eighth day bathed, composed himself,

Then sought the place of prayer, and, in the presence
Of circling heaven’s Lord, adored the Maker
That night until the rismg of the sun
He cried aloud with eyes fulfilled with tears,

And said “ O righteous Judge, the only God,

The World-lord, the Sustainer, and the Guide '

Thus didst deliver me, a hostless boy.

Out ol the Dragon’s breath Afrd.siy 4 b
Thou knowest reckless, not afraid to mjure ,

His curse is on the waste and peopled lands ,

Revenge against him filleth guiltless hearts

V 773 He hath poured fire upon these goodly coasts.

Hath sifted o’er the brave the dust of woe.

Unjustly shed the blood of Siyawush
Upon the earth, and rent our souls thereby.

The hearts of kings are filled with dread of him ,

His throne and diadem are this world’s bane.

Thou knowest that he is of evil nature.

And both a miscreant and sorcerer.”


KAI KHUSRAU


23


He laid his cheek full oft upon the ground,

And uttered praises to the Lord of all.

Departing thence he went back to the throne,

And thus harangued the exalted paladins —

“ 0 ye my men of name, my gallant hearts.

And swordsmen i I have ridden through Iran,

But, from the temple of Azargashasp
To this place, seen not any one heart-glad,

Possessed of riches or of lands in culture
All have been injured by Afr.'isiyab,

All hearts are filled with blood, all eyes with tears.

I am the first whose liver thus he wounded.

So that my soul and body smart through him,

And next there is that noble Shdh — my grandsire —
Who from his heart still heaveth chilly sighs.

While men and women groan throughout Iran
At massacre and pillage, war and raid
So now if ye are all my trusty friends.

Devoted to me in your hearts indeed,

I will make ready to avenge my father.

And turn this evil from the franians
If ye will, all of you, renew the fight.

Strive, and contend like paids, so too will I ,

Plains in the battles of the brave shall turn
To mountains, and for all the blood shed there
Afrdsiyab the criminal shall be
Responsible If any of our host
Shall fall, their place is Paradise above
What say ye then ? What answer do ye give *
Advise me well Afrasiyab, ye know,

Began the wrong Requital should not rest ”

The chiefs prepared to answer and arose
With rancour m their hearts They said “ 0 Shah '
Keep thy heart glad and ever free from care
Our bodies and our souls are wholly thine.

And thine our grief and joy, our loss and gam


v 774


24


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSi


We ail of us are mother-born to die,

And all of us, though free men, are thy slaves ”
Whenas he heard this answer from the throng.
From Tiis, Giidarz, and elephantine Rustam,

The Shdh’s cheek grew as red as cercis-bloom.
For he was young in person and in fortune
V 775 He called down blessings on the company ,

“ May earth be peopled by the brave,” said he.


§ 5

How Kai Khusrau numbered the Paladins

With matters in this stay the sky revolved
Till Sol appeared in Virgo , then the Shdh
Called all the archimages of the realm,

And spake to them at large in fitting terms

He closed the door of audience for two sennights.

And had the muster-roll compiled afresh

He bade the commissaries to call over

The names of great and small, and had them written

In solemn form befitting paladins

The kin of Kai Kaiis five score and ten —

Chiefs of the host — came first upon the list.

And at their head was Fari'burz the son
Of Kai Kalis — the new Sh 4 h’s kinsman Next

He chose him eighty scions of Naudar,

All armed with maces and all wairiors
Their leader was Zar 4 sp the general.

Who used to make their welfare his concern
In everything — a crown of kings, the son
Of Tiis — the lord of iron mdce, of scimitar,

And drum. Giidarz son of Kishwdd came next,
Whose counsels were the safeguard of the host
His sons and grandsons numbered seventy-eight —
Brave mountameers and horsemen of the plain ,


KAI KHUSRAU


25


They carried Kdwa’s standard and illumed
The throne and fortune of the Kaian race.

The seed of Gazhdaham were sixty-three,

And great men all , their chief was Gustaham
The kmsmen of Mflad — a hundred horsemen —

Had for their chief victorious Gurgi'n
Tawaba’s kindred numbered eighty-five
Brave cavaliers, the wardens of the treasure.

While Barta was the warden over them.

And most illustrious of them all in fight
Next three and thirty scions of Pashang,

Brave men, who bore the double-headed dart
In battle-time, their chieftain was Ri'vm'z —

A mighty man both valiant and discreet,

Who used to go before the drums in war,

The warriors’ warden, son-in-law to Tiis
The kinsmen of Barzfn, three score and ten
In sum, all Lions on the day of battle.

Had over them FarhAd, himself an Anvil
Of steel in fight. Guraza led in person
His kinsmen — five score and five warriors
Apart from these, the lords and paladins,

The princes and the mighty men of worship.

Were more than any archimage could reckon.

So many were the chiefs with Grace and glory '
They wrote upon the monarch’s muster-roll
The names of all efficients, and the Shah
Bade them to quit the city and march out
Toward the wastes and plains He said to them —
“ About the ending of the month must rise
The clarion-blast and sound of Indian bells.

And all must march with joy against Tiiran.”

They bent their heads before him to the ground.
And all called blessings down upon him, sajdng —

“ 0 Shah possessed of Grace divme and glory.

Who givest lustre to the crown and girdle '


V 776


26


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


We all are slaves, thine is the sovereignty,
From Aries to Pisces all for thee ”


Wherever there were horses running wild
Their keepers drove them to the camp in herds
The Shah commanded “ Let the lasso-thiowers —

The warriors brazen-bodied in the fight —

V. 777 Catch these swift Arab chargers in the noose ”

Anon the conquering world-lord took his seat
With mace in hand upon the throne of gold,

Unlocked his treasury of dinars, and said —

“ The treasures of the great should not be hidden
In times of strife and fightmg for revenge
They look with scorn on treasuie and dinars ,

So all our wealth and thrones will we bestow
Upon the brave, to make our Tree fruit sunwaid,

And why delay since treasure holpeth them ? ”

A hundred pieces of biocade of Kum
With jewelled patterns on a golden ground,

With beaver-skms, gold raiment, and a goblet
01 royal gems — he had these brought “ Behold,”

Said he, “ the price set on the woithless head
Of that fierce Dragon, murderous Pal.ishan,

Now made commander by Afrasiyab ^

That he may slumber while that chieftain watcheth
Who m our camp will bring his head and sword
And steed to dust upon the day of battle ? ”

Blzhan the son of 01 v sprang to his feet
Forthwith, he undertook to slay that Dragon,

And carried off the stuffs and cup of gold,

* Pirdn was at that time in disgrace with Afrdsiydb, owing to the
escape of Kai Khusrau See Vol ii p 390


KAI KHUSRAU


27


With all the jewels, blessing Kai Khusrau,

And saying “ May this crowned head live for ever f ”

Then went back to his seat retaining still

The goblet with the jewels in his hand

The Shah then bade his treasurer to bring

Two hundred robes of gold embroidery

With beaver-skms, brocade, rich painted silk.

And two slaves rosy-cheeked with girded loins,

And thus he said “ These presents will I give,

And will confer more favouis on, the man
That bringeth unto me, or to the chieftains
Assembled here, the crown worn by Tazhav,

Which crown Afrasiyab set on his head.

And hailed him as a high-born son-in-law ” ^

Again Bfzhan the son of GiV arose.

Who had a hand far reaching in the hght.

And seized upon the presents and the slaves
While all assembled wondered , he exclaimed —

“ May earth be prosperous under Kai Khusrau > ”

Then sat down gladly giving many thanks
The Shah commanded and the treasurer
Brought out ten slave-boys with their girdles on.

Ten steeds of rapid pace with golden bridles,

And ten veiled maidens in their bravery ,

The watchful ruler of the people said —

“ These steeds and all these Beauties are for one
Who, when Tazhav hath fled, need not possess
A lion’s heart. Tazhav hath by his side
In battle one whose voice would tame a leopard,

A slave with cheeks like spring, of cypress-stature.
With reed-like waist and with a pheasant’s gait,

A Moon- face, Ispanwl by name, a Jasmine
In visage, heart-alluring, breathing musk
Her captor must not strike her with the sword.

For swords are not for such a cheek as hers,

* Tazhdv, an Irdnian by birth, had gone over to Afrdsiydb See p 75


V 778


28


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


V 779


But noose her waist and take her to his bosom ”
B^zhan smote on his breast and volunteered
Again He drew anigh the all-conquering Shah,
Began to laud the monaich of the world,

And supplicate the Maker The gieat king
Kejoiced in him and spake thus “ Famous chief
May paladin like thee ne’er help our foes,

Ne’er may thine ardent soul and body part ' ”

Then said the world-lord to the treasurer —

“ Bring forth ten golden beakers from the hoard.

And let them put pastilles therein , bring also
Ten goblets of pure silver brimmed with jewels.

One topaz goblet filled with musk, and one
Of turquoise, one of lapis-Iazuli,

With emeralds and carnelians showered therein,
Mixed with rose-water and with musk , ten boy-slaves
With belts, and ten fine steeds with golden bridles
These are,” he said, “ for him who, having strength
To fight Tazh4v upon the day of battle,

Shall bear his head off from the stricken field,

And bring it to the warriors of the host.”

Then Giv son of Giidarz smote on his breast,

And undertook to fight that paladin.

Whereat they brought those noble slaves and gifts,
And set them in array in front of him
He called down many blessings on the Shah,

And said “ May crown and signet ne’er lack thee ”
The Shdh commanded then the treasurer —

“ Set out ten golden trays before the throne.

And mix in them dfn4rs and musk and jewels ,

Set too ten Fairy-faced with crowns and girdles.

Two hundred beaver-skms, brocade of gold.

Ten girdles, and a royal diadem.

This is for him,” he said, “ that grudgeth not
His labour for the sake of fame and treasure.

Let such depart hence to the Kasa riid.


KAI KHUSRAU


29


And there salute the soul of Siydwush
He will behold a mighty pile of fire-wood,

Whose height is greater than ten lassos’ length

It IS a pile raised by Afrdsiydb

Upon the spot whereat he crossed the river

He wished that none should pass there from Iran

Tiiran-ward Some bold warrior must go hence,

And make the Kasa rud a sheet of flame,

So that if e’er it be the scene of fight
The wood may prove no cover for the foe ”

Again Giv spake “ This is my quariy , mine
Shall be the task to set the pile a-blaze
I fear not combat if the foe shall come.

But will invite the vultures to a feast ” ^

The Shah bestowed on Gfv those goods as well.

And said to him “ Famed chieftain of the host i ^

May this bright crown ne’er lack thy sword So be it
Oh ' may the Brahman never lack the Idol ’ ”

He ordered “ Let the treasurei produce
Forthwith a hundred divers-hued brocades,”

Chose from his hoards a hundred lustrous pearls —

“ All drops of water frozen,” thou wouldst say —

And brought out from the women’s bower five handmaids.
Whose heads and tresses were concealed by crowns
He said “ This is a present meet tor one
Whose wisdom is the king of his puie mind —

A daring, prudent man and eloquent.

Who turneth not from lions in the fight —

If he will carry to Afrasiyab
A message, weeping not for dread of him,

And will convey his answer back to me
Who of this noble company will dare 2 ”

Gurgfn son of Mflad held forth his hand,

And gat him ready for that enterprise

The Shdh bestowed on him the slaves, the robes

* Reading with P


V 780


30 THE SHAhnAMA OF FlRDAUSl

Of gold-embroidery, and royal gems

He called down blessings on the Shah and said —

“ May wisdom wed the soul of Kai Khusrau ' ”

V 781 Whenas earth’s face grew black as raven’s plumes,

And when night’s Lamp rose o’er the hills, the Shah

V 782 Went to his palace, and his mighty men

Departed, each one to his home again


§ 7


Hoio Ka% Khusrau sent Rustam to the Land of Hind


When daylight made the hills like sandarac,

And cockcrows reached the clouds, the matchless
Rustam

With Faramarz and with Zawara came
Before the Shah to speak about Iran,

The crown, the state, and matters great and small
Then Rustam said “ Illustrious, glorious Shah ’

There is a district m Zabuhstan,

That formed a portion of the realm of Tiir
Till Miniichihr drave all the Turkmans out
It IS a goodly and a glorious land ,

But when Kaiis grew hoar and spiritless.

When fame, the Grace, and prowess quitted him,
Turanians seized it and Iranians ceased
Therein * The folk now carry to Tiirdn
Both toll and tribute, heeding not the Shah
V 783 The march is full of elephants and treasure
The innocent are troubled by this folk
With constant pillage, massacre, and raid.

And all the insolency of Tiirdn.s
*Now that the kingship of Irdn is thine.

Thine from the ant’s foot to the lion’s claws.


^ See Introductory Note to this Part
2 Or ** And have rebelled against Ttirdnian pride ”


KAI KHUSRAU


31


’TwBre well to send a valiant paladin,

And mighty host, to make this people bring
Their tribute to the Shah and look to him
This region ours we can defeat Tiiran ”

The Shah said “ Live for ever ' Thou art right
Take order for sufficiency of troops,

Selecting all the famous warriors,

For since the district marcheth with thine own
Its purchase will be worthy ot thy fame
Commit a mighty host to Faramarz,

As many warriors as shall suffice

The business wdl succeed with him , his hook

Will catch the crocodiles ”

The paladin

With flushing cheeks called many a blessing down
Upon the Shah, who bade the chamberlain
To spread the board, bring wine, call minstrelsy.
And listened spell-bound to their melody


§ 8

H(no Kai Khusiau leviewed the Hubt

When bright Sol rose above the hills, and when
The minstrels tired of song, the kettledrums
Clanged at the court-gate and the troops drew up
Before the palace On the elephants
They bound the tymbals and the trumpets blared
Upon one elephant they set a throne,

That royal Tree bore fruit , the Sliah came forth,
And took his seat, crowned with a jewelled casque
He wore a torque of royal gems and held
An ox-head mace Two earrings, decked with pearls
And precious stones, depended from his ears ,

His bracelets were of jewels set in gold ,

His belt was pearls and gold and emeralds.


V 784


32 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

His elephant with golden bells and bridle
Proceeded to the centre of the host
He had with him the ball within the cup ,

The shouting of the army rose to Saturn ,

The earth grew black and heaven azure-dim
With all the swords and maces, drums and dust
Thou wouldst have said “ The sun is m a net,”

Or “ Water hath o’erwhelmed the arching sky ' ”

The clearest sight could not behold the world.

Or gaze upon the sky and stars for spears ,

Thou wouldst have said “ The billows of the sea
Are using,” as the host marched troop by troop
They brought the camp-enclosure from the palace
Forth to the plain, and shoutings frayed the skies
V 785 The custom was that when that lamous Shah
Upon his elephant let tall the ball
Within the cup, and gut his loins, no place
Remained for any one throughout the realm
Save at the Shah’s own gate Such was the token
To all his realm ot that lamed king of chiefs
The Sh 4 h remained upon his elephant
On that broad plain to see the troops march past
First to defile before the world’s new lord
Was Fariburz with golden boots, with mace.

And sword Behind him was his flag sun-blazoned
He rode a chestnut steed, his lasso coiled
Was in the saddle-straps He passed along
In pride with Grace and lustre, his retainers
Were buried in their gold and silver trappings
The world-lord blessed him, saying “ May the
greatness

And Grace of heroes ever be thine own.

Thy fortune triumph m each enterprise.

Thy whole existence be a New Year’s Day ,

May health be thine in all thy gomgs forth.

And no mfarmity on thy return ”


KAI KHUSRAU


33


Behind him was Giidarz son of Kishwdd,

Whose counsel brought the world prosperity.

A lion clutching mace and scimitar

Was charged upon the flag that followed him

Upon his left hand marched the brave Ruhham,

And on his right the noble Glv , Shfdush
Behind him bore the banner lion-charged,

Which threw a violet lustre on the ground,

While thousands of exalted warriors followed.

All cavaliers and armed with lengthy lances
Behind Glv and accompanied by troops
His sable banner came charged with a wolf.

While of Ruhham, that man of high ambition,

The flag rose cloud ward tiger-charged These sons
And grandsons of Giidarz were seventy-eight
In number, and they crowded that broad plam.

Each followed by his flag distinct in hue —

All valiant men with swords and golden boots.

“The whole world,” thou hadst said, “is ’neath
Giidarz,

The chiefs’ heads are beneath his scimitar ”

He called down blessings on the crown and throne
As he approached , the Shdh returned the blessings
On him, on Giv, and all his warriors
The next behind Giidarz was Gustaham,

The son of Gazhdaham the vigilant ,

His weapon m the battle was a spear.

His comrades were a bow and poplar arrows ,

And when a shaft went flying from his arm
’Twould pierce a rock or anvil to the core
He was attended by a mighty host
With maces, scimitars, and rich array.

His banner blazoned with a moon waved o’er him ,

And raised its head resplendent to the clouds
He called down benedictions on the Shdh,

Who gloried in him. Next came shrewd Ashkash,
VOL. III. C


V 786


34 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSl

Endowed with prudent heart and ready brain
His troops were from Baliichistan and Kutch,

And very rams to fight. No one had seen
Their backs m battle or one finger mailless ,

Their banner was a pard with claws projecting
Ashkash felicitated Kai Khusraii
At largo upon the happy turn of fortune
V 787 Meanwhile the Shah upon his elephant

Surveyed the troops, whose ranks stretched out two
miles,

And in abundant satisfaction blessed
His sleepless fortune and his glorious land
Behind Ashkash was well approved Farhad,

Who tendered all the troops, and everywhere
Was like their foster-father in the fight
He had a bannei charged with a gazelle.

Whose shadow fell upon him as he rode

His troops were all equipped with Indian swords.

With Turkman armoui and with Sughdian saddles
They all were princely scions of Kubiid,

And all were dowered with God’s Grace and with
justice ,

The face of each was like the shining moon.

And like the shining sun m battlefield
Farhad beheld the throne’s new occupant,

And called down blessings on the youthful Shah
Guraza, eldest offspring of Gfvgan,

Came next accompanied by all his km,

A favourite in whom the Shah rejoiced.^

Upon his saddle was a lasso coiled ,

He bore a banner blazoned with a boar ,

His tioops were warriors and lasso-fiingers
These cavaliers and heroes of the plain
Saluted many times and then marched past
Behind him Zanga son of Shawaran

* Reading with F j


KAI KHUSRAU


35


Came rushmg with his gallant hearts and chieftains.
Behind him was his flag charged with an eagle,

And as a moving mountain so moved he
Ofttimes he called down blessings on the Shah,

His mien and stature, sword and signet-ring.

All that were from the country of Baghdad

Were armed with lances and steel swords, and marched

Beneath the eagle while their general

Himself was seated on an elephant

Behind him was the valiant Faiamarz

Of noble stature, Grace, and majesty,

With tymbals, elephants, and many troops.

All eager for the fray, and mighty men
Brought from Kashmir, Kabulistan, Nfmruz,

All noble and the lustre of the world
He had a banner like his valiant sire’s —

That Kustam who could be surpassed by none —

With seven heads, “ The heads as of a dragon
That had escaped from bonds,” thou wouldst have
said.

In favour like a fruitful tree he came,

And uttered many a blessing on the Shah,

Who with a heart that joyed at Faramarz
Gave him much prudent rede and said to him —

“ The nursling of the elephantine chief
Will be pre-eminent among the people
Thou art the son of wary-hearted Rustam,

Thou art from Zal — Sam’s son — and Nariman
Now IS the land of Hindustan thine own.

All from Kanniij up to Si'stan is thine ,

So bear thyself that harm may not befall
Him that assayeth not to fight with thee
In every place be thou the poor man’s friend,

Be noble unto those of thine own km.

See heedfully what friends thou hast, and who
Are men of wisdom and can soothe thy griefs,


V 788


V 789


36


THE SHAHnAMA of FIRDAUSI


Give, entertain, and never say ‘ To-morrow.’

How know’st thou what to-morrow will bring forth ?

I have bestowed on thee this kingship Hold it.

Make no war anywhere m wantonness,

Be not in youth acquisitive of treasure,

Aggrieve not any that hath not grieved thee,

And trust not thou this treacherous dwelling-place ,

Tis sandarac and ebony by turns
Thy duty is to leave a noble name,

And mayst thou never have a sorry heart
For thee and me alike the day will pass,

And turning heaven reckon up thy breaths.

Thou need’st a happy heart, a body hale ,

Consider if a third thing is to seek

May He who made the world be gracious to thee,

And smoke fill thy foes’ hearts ”

The chief, on hearing

The words of this new master of the world,

Dismounted fiom his fleet steed, and invoked
Full many a blessing on the young Sh<ih, saying —

“ Mayst thou wax even as the new moon waxeth ”

He kissed the ground and, having done obeisance,
Turned and departed on his longsome journey,

While matchless Rustam, with his brain distraught
At losing Fararnarz, accompanied

V 790 His son two leagues, instructing him withal

In warfare, feast, and wisdom, wishing him

V 791 A life of joy, then sadly turned and went

Back from the desert to the tent-enclosure.

The Shah got off his lusty elephant.

And, mounting on a rapid-footed steed.

Withdrew in state to his pavilion.

With aching heart and deeply pondering.

When Rustam had returned the wine was brought ,
Khusrau filled up a mighty bowl, and said —

“ Mirth as thy mate sufficeth, and no sage


KAJ KHUSRAU


37


Will name to-morrow. Where are Tiir and Salm
And Farldiin ? All lost and one with dust '

We go about and toil and gather wealth,

Yet frustrate all the wishes of our hearts,

Since in the end the dust will be our shaie,

And not one of us will escape that day ^

Fleet we the darksome night with goblets brimmed,
And when day cometh with its measured steps
We will command that Tus shall blow the tiumpet.
That tymbal, kettledrum, and clarion sound ,

Then shall we see o’er whom the turning sky
Will stretch its hand in love in this campaign.

And yet what proht is our toil to us
Since from the first what is to be will be ?

We shall be quit alike of good and ill ,

Why should a wise man gorge himself with care ^
Still by the aid of Hun who made us all
I will take vengeance for my father’s fall ”


THE STORY OF FARUD THE SON OF
SlYAWUSH

§9

The Pi elude

Let no king, great and warlike though he be.
Intrust his army to an enemy.

One from whose eyelids tears of envy pour,
Tears^ch as leeches know no drugs to cure ,

For such a man, if of a noble race.

Will chafe to be denied the highest place.

To be a slave with wish insatiate,

^ The speaker, however, proved to be an exception


V 792


38


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSt


And only speak as others may dictate
No wisdom can the monarch’s heart attend
Who calleth such a man as this a friend,

For if heaven hostile to his wishes prove,

And hath no blessing for him in its love,

He will be prone to act no inendly part ,

The thwarted wish will rankle in his heart.

No sage would reckon him a man at all
That hath not wisdom for his pedestal.

And thou wilt see, when thou shalt hear this tale,
How far an evil nature may prevail


§ 10

How Ti(b toent to TwkistAn

When Sol arose in all its majesty.

And sat upon its lofty eminence.

Ascendant in the Sign of Aries,

While all the world became like golden wine,

The tymbals sounded from the court of Tus
With blare of trump and roll of kettledrum
The battle-shout went up throughout the realm,

The air was full of war-cries, earth of turmoil
The neighs and the shouts frayed Luna from her course,
While from the clash of arms and trumpeting
Of elephants thou wouldst have said “ The Nile
Hath overflowed the world ' ” The air was yellow,

Red, blue, and violet as Kawa’s standard
’Mid cavaliers — the kinsmen of Giidarz —

Waved. Kai Khusrau with crown and mace and
trumpets

Came to the entering in of his pavilion.

Tiis with the golden boots and K4wa’s flag

Set forth and with the great men that wore torques


KAI KHUSRAU


39


And crowns — the aspiring kindred ot Naudar —

Went proudly from the host before Khusrau
The banner o’er them bore an elephant,

Its golden staft-head rising to the clouds.

They went together, like a darksome mountain.

And sun and moon ceased shining. When they came
With flags and helms in haste before the Shah
He bade the chieftain Tiis present to him
The warriors of distinction in the host.

And thus addressed them “ Tiis is chief , he hath
The flag of Kawa , do as he commandeth ”

Then in their sight he gave his signet-ring
To Tiis, and said “ He is your chief and leader ”

To Tiis himself he said “ Be true to me.

And mark mine institutions and commands
No one must be molested on the march.

Such IS the custom of my crown and throne
Let no cold blast befall the husbandman.

Or artisan, or one that armeth not
Against thee , strive but with antagonists
Refrain from troubling those who are at ease
Since all will have to quit this Wayside Inn
Thou shalt on no account pass by Kalat,

For, if thou dost, things will go hard with thee
To Siyawush (his soul be as the sun.

His place all hopeful in the other world ’)

The daughter of Pir4n once bare a child ^

But little shown in public by his sire
He IS my brother and reseinbleth me
He IS a youth of mine own age, high-fortuned.

And liveth with his mother at Kalat ,

A world-lord he who hath the Grace and troops
He knoweth no Iranian e’en by name.

And from that quarter thou must turn thy bridle.

For he hath troops and famous men of war

^ See Vol 11 p 291


V 794


40 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Upon a mountain steep and hard to reach.

He is a brave and warlike cavalier,

Great through his native worth and famed of person,
And therefore thou must take the desert-road
It is not well to touch the claws of lions.”

' Tiis answered “ In thy counsels is success,

By that way which thou biddest will I go,

For good alone must come of thy behest ”

He then departed quickly, and the Shah
Returned with loyal Rustam to the throne.

Where sitting with that elephantine hero.

The lords, archmages, and the stainless princes,

V 795 He spake at large about Afrasiydb,

His own heart’s anguish and his father’s wrongs.

Tiis for his part with all his warriors
Came to a place where two roads met , the one
Went through a desert dry and waterless,

The other by KaUt and toward Charam.

The elephants and kettledrums were halted
Till Tiis the general should come up, that so
The host might take the road that pleased him best.
When Tiis had at his leisure reached the chiefs
He spake about the waterless, hot road ,

Then to Giidarz “ Although this and waste
Yield ambergris for dust and musk for soil,

Still on a long and toilsome march we need
Repose and water. Our best route will be
Kalat, Charam, encamping at Mayam,

V. 796 With streams and fertile country on both sides
Why choose a desert and its miseries ?

I went along that way in former times.

When Gazhdaham was leader of the host.

And never saw so troublesome a road
Although the ups and downs are few enough
’Tis best to march along the other route.

And measure not the desert and its leagues.”


KAI KHUSRAU


41


Gudarz replied “ The noble Shd,h made thee
Commander of this host , lead as he bade ,

Make not the troops’ march grievous. They should not
By disobedience to the great king’s orders
Be injured thus.”

Tiis said “ 0 famous warrior '
Think not such things , this will not vex the Shdh,

And therefore need not be a grief to thee ”

He spake and bade the army to proceed,

And march toward Kalat and to Charam ,

And, since Khusrau’s commands he minded not.

See what a Tempest proved at last his lot t


§ II


How Famd heaid of the Coming of Tm


News reached Fardd “The bright sun’s face is dark-
ened

By dust raised by the feet of elephants
And camels, earth is like the river Nile.

Thy brother’s army raarcheth from fran
Against Turan for vengeance, purposing
To take the road that leadeth to Kalat
I know not where their battlefield will be ”

The inexperienced youth on hearing this
Grew very sore of heart and dark of soul.

He came down from the hold, unbarred the gate.

And going forth surveyed the lofty mountain.

At his command they brought in all the camels,

The sheep, and horses , none remained on waste
Or hill , he drove them all toward Mount Sapad
And toward Arabiih, returned, secured the gate.

And mounted on a rapid-footed steed.

When from Mayam the sound of drums arose,

And from Charam dust-clouds like ebony.


V 797


42 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRt>AUSt

Jarira, gazing from the castle-roof,

Felt her heart throb m terror of that host
To her, his mother, came the young Fariid,

^ And said “ O chief ol ladies ' from Iran
' A host hath come with elephants and tymbals.

And Tiis the general is in command.

V 798 What sayest thou ^ What is the course to take ?
We must prevent him from attacking us.”

Jarfra said to him “ O warrior '

Be all thy days as fortunate as this '

Thy brother is the new Shah of Iran
A world-lord shrewd is Kai Khusrau, and he
Well knoweth both thy name and native worth
O^e father’s blood and bone are in you both,

Ahd Siyawush was peerless in the world

Well may the age applaud him ' At the outset

Pir4n gave me to him , he would not else

Have sought a Turkman spouse Thus thy descent

On both sides is illustrious and royal

Now, since thy brother seeketh to avenge.

And vindicate, the soul of Siyawush,

Thou shouldst be foremost in the race for vengeance.
In making ready and exacting it.

Don Ruman mail and go with raging heart.

And shouts of battle ringing in thy head.

For, since he seeketh vengeance on your grandsire.
Thy pait should be revenge, not policy.

In that this grief may well make leopards wail,

An d crocodiles come groaning from the river
The birds too and the fishes m the water
Call curses down upon Afrasiyab,

For m the whole world not one sovereign
That girdeth girdle is like Siyawush
In prowess, manhood, fortune, and high birth.

In glory, weight, mtelligence, and justice
Thou art the son of that world-famous chief, •


KAI KHUSRAU


43


Art of the Kaian seed and look’st it too '

Thou must gird up thy loins then to avenge
Thy sire and prove thy birth and native worth
See who the leader is of yonder host,

Show hospitality, invite the lords,

And set upon the tables wine and gifts
Of scimitars, of helmets, of horse-armour,

01 coats of mail, and Indian swords Thy brother
Is wealth sufficient for thee in this woild
Shall such just vengeance fall to aliens ^

At this conjuncture lead his troops thyself,

New in revenge as he is new m reign ”

Fariid said “ Which of them must I address
Since I must have some helper ’mid these men,

These men so haughty on the day of battle.

Because I know not one of them by name ^

How shall I send them greeting and a message ? ”

Jarira answered “ In the dust afar
Raised by the host look for two cavaliers,

Bahram and Zanga son of Shawaran

Search for the blazons of these two great heroes.

For thou and I have nothing hid from them
Oh > may thy head and name survive for ever,

And may the soul of Siyawush be bright '

He and these twain were never separable.

They were his lords, he was their over-lord
Go with Tukhar, but with no further escort.

And do not m thy heart misprize my words
When thou shalt ask about the chiefs and w arriors
The brave Tukhar will point them out, for he,

Well knowing all the Iranians, gieat and small.

Will show thee sheep and shepherds ”

“ Noble lady ’ ”

Replied Fariid, “ thy rede enlighteneth
Thy kin and folk.”

A watchman from the look-out


V 799


V 8oo


44


THE SHAhnAmA of FJRDAUSl


Came, told Fariid about that host, and said —

“ The mountains, vales, and plains are filled with troops.
And thou wouldst say ‘ The sun is put in duress > ’

The expanse of rock up to the castle-door
Is all flag, elephant, and warrior ' ”


§ 12

How Fatfkl and Tukhdr tcent to view the Host

Tukhar departed with Fariid — a youth
Whom fortune had abandoned Whensoever
The sky above us is untowardly
No gentleness or rage availeth thee.

They chose the summit of a lofty mountain.
Commanding all the army of Iran,

And marvelled at the troops and their equipment.

The youth said to his confidant Tukhar —

“ Conceal not aught of what I ask of thee
Tell me the names of all that thou beholdest —

The man of rank, the bearer of the flag,

The lord of partisan and golden boot —

All whom thou recognisest of Iran ”

The franian host defiled between two mountains.
And what with golden helm and golden shield,

With golden ax and golden partisan.

Thou wouldst have said “No gold is left unmined,

A cloud hath risen and rained jewelry ' ”

V 8oi The roar of kettledrums along the pass

Affrayed the vultures as they flew o'erhead,

While thirty thousand sword and buckler men
Marched bravely on m all points dight for war.

Now when Tukhar had scanned the host, the prince
Began to question him. That expert answered —

“ I will clear up what is obscure to thee
Know that yon flag charged with an elephant.


KAI KHUSRAU


45


Those horsemen, and those blue steel scimitars,
Belong to noble Tiis the general —

A bad opponent when he seeketh vengeance
Behind him is another standard bearing
A blazing sun ’tis that of Fariburz,

Son of Kalis, a general, thine uncle,

A man of Grace and purpose Next to him
There is a mighty flag, its charge a moon,

With many valiant warriors The chief
Call Gustaham the son of Gazhdaham,

Whom no two-headed dart or club afirayeth
Next yon tall flag charged with an onager,
Encompassed by a band of warriors.

Is over Zanga son of Shawaran,

Whose troops are mighty men The flag behind
That hath a moon on red, with musk-black fringes,
Belongeth to Gfv’s son Bizhan who spurteth
Blood to the sky The flag charged with a tiger —
One that would make a mighty lion burst.

And, thou wouldst say, is leaping from its field —
Is borne by brave Shfdiish, while that behind him.
Whose blazon is a wild boar, ‘ One to bung,’

As that wouldst say, ‘ the heavens to the shears,’
Pertameth to a brave chief hight Guraza,

Who counteth it but sport to fight a lion
The next flag blazoned with a buffalo.

With cavaliers behind and chiefs m front,

Is famed Farhad’s, the choicest of the chiefs
Thou wouldest say ‘ His stature is sky-high ’

The banner with a wolf for its device

Betokeneth the valiant chieftain Giv

The banner with the lion wrought in gold

Is floating o’er Giidarz son of Kish wad

The streaming standard blazoned with a pard

Precedeth proud, imperious Ei'vnfz

The banner that is charged with a gazelle


V 802


46


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Belongeth to Nastuh son of Giidarz,

And to his troops , that with the mountain-sheep
Pertaineth to another son — Bahram
They all are lion -men — brave cavaliers ,

To name each one were tedious ”

Thus he told

The blazons of the chiefs to prince Fariid,

Who viewed all, great and small His heart grew glad,
His cheek flushed,^ and he spake thus to Tukhar —
“We shall take vengeance for my sire with ease ’

I will not leave m Chfn or in Machfn
A cavalier, when battling for revenge,

But catch the Dragon ^ and reduce their throne
To straits ”

Now when the Iranians had descried
Fariid upon the mountain with Tukhar,

Tiis the commander was incensed, and caused
\The drums and elephants to halt He said —

V 803 I* We need an enterprising cavalier

To hasten to the mountain-top to learn

Who these two warriors are and wherefore there

flf they be ours let him bestow on them

Two hundred lashes on their heads, if foes

Bind them and drag them hither faces downward

If they be slain still let him drag them hither

Along the dust and have no fear of any,

While if they shall prove spies, who want to take
The number of our forces secretly,

Let him cleave both asunder on the spot,

Then fling them down the mountain and return ,

But if a countless host be ambushed there.

Whereof a straggling few have shown themselves.

Let him return and give the intelligence

To us forthwith, and we will drive them thence.”


^ Reading with P


* Afnlsiydb


KAI KHUSRAU


47


§ 13

How Bain dm came to Fa)ud upon the Mountain

Bahrain son of Gtidarz said to the chief —

“ This matter shall not be concealed from us.

I will go forth to do as thou hast said,

And scale the mountain-top ”

He struck his steed,

And went full of surmise toward the height
Fariid said to Tukhar “ Who is this man
That cometh hither with such insolence ?

Good sooth ' he taketh no account of us
At all, but cometh up the steep apace '

He rideth a bay charger with a lasso
Hung in his saddle-straps ”

The counsellor

Replied “ He is not one to treat with rudeness
I know him not by token or by name,

But take him for a kinsman of Gudarz
When Kai Khusrau departed from Turan
He took a helmet of Afrasiyab’s , ^

It IS methmketh on that horseman’s head.

And he hath royal mail to correspond
He must be of the kindred of Gudarz ,

So let us ope our lips and question him ”

Bahram, when he came nearer to the crest.

Cried as a cloud might thunder “ Who art thou
Upon the mountain-top ? Dost thou not see
Yon countless host, or hear their clamouring
And dm of drums ^ Or art thou not afraid
Of Tiis their watchful leader ? ”

Then the prince —

“ Thou wast not rudely treated be not rude
Good words, 0 veteran > Let no harsh challenge
Pollute thy lips. Thou art no warlike lion,

^ See Vol 11 p 377


V 804


48


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


And I am not a desert-onager ,

We are not to be treated in this fashion.

Thou art in no way my superior
In courage or in manliness or strength,

While as for head, foot, hand, heart, brain, and wits.
Tongue speaking fluently and eyes and ears —

See if I too possess them and, if so.

Forbear to threaten m thy foolishness
If thou wilt answer I will ask thee somewhat.

And shall rejoice if thou advise me well ”

Bahrdm said : “ Ask away ' Thou art in heaven
And I am on the earth ”

“ Who is your leader,”

Inquired Fariid, “and wherefore make ye war
Bahrdm said “ Tiis is leader for he hath
The drums and Kawa’s flag. Of warriors
There are Giidarz, Ruhhdm, and Giv, Shi'dush,

Gurgm, Farhad the valiant, Gustaham,

With Zanga son of Shawardn, and ehief
Of all the clan of hghtmg-men — Guraza ”

Fariid returned “ Why nam’st thou not Bahram,
And lea vest thus the matter ineomplete ?

V 80 s In him of all the offspring of Giidarz

We most rejoice, and yet thou nam’st him not
Bahram replied to him “ 0 lion-man '

Who spake to thee in such wise of Bahram ? ”

Fariid said “ From my mother heard I of him
She said to me ‘Now when the host approacheth
Meet it and summon forth Bahram, and also
A noble, Zanga son of Shdwardn,

Because they are thy father’s foster-brothers,

And thou mayst well inquire for news of them ’ ”

Then thus Bahram “ 0 fortune’s favourite '

So thou art Fruit of that Imperial Tree '

Thou art Fariid, young prince ' Live long and happy ' ”
He answered “ Yea, I am indeed Fariid


KAI KHUSRAU


49


The fallen Cypress hath put forth a Shoot.”

Bahrdm rejoined “ Display to me thy person,

Display to me the mark of Siydwush.” ^

Thereat Farud showed to Bahrdm his arm
A mole of ambergris on rosy flesh
Was there — a picture such as none on earth
Could skill to limn with compasses from Chm.

Bahram perceived “ He cometh from Kubdd
Through Siydwush,” then blessed him, did obeisance,

And scaled the lofty steep The prince dismounted.

Sat on a rock, rejoicing, and thus said —

“ Exalted, shrewd, and Lion of the fight >

Were my two eyes to see my sire alive
In sooth It would not be a greater joy
To me than to behold thee glad and happy,

Accomplished, wary, and a paladin.

I came upon this mountain-top to ask V, 806

About the heroes of the Irdnian host.

And learn who are their chief and men of name.

I will provide a feast such as I can.

Will entertain their paladin with joy,

Give many gifts of horses, maces, belts,

And scimitars, then march forth seared of heart
Before the host against Tiiran for vengeance.

The quest befitteth me who am fierce fire
When mounted on my saddle in the combat
Be pleased to ask the paladin to come
With glad heart to the mountain, there to spend
A week that we may well advise together
Upon the eighth day, when the tymbal soundeth.

And Tiis the general mounteth on his steed,

I will make ready to avenge my father,

And, in the anguish of my heart, provide
A conflict which shall teach the warnor-lion,

^ Similarly Giv desired to see the birth-mark of Kai Khusrau,

Vol. 11 p, 372

VOL. III. I)


so THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

While vultures’ feathers testify aloft,

That 'tis no common noble of the world
Who girdeth him for vengeance such as this.”

Bahrdm replied “ O prince young and accomplished,
And valiant cavalier t I will report
Thy words to Tiis, and kiss his hand while urging
Compliance Still our chieftain is not wise.

His head and brains brook not good counselling
He IS accomplished, rich, and nobly born.

But nameth not the Shah When Gi'v brought
home

That glorious one, Tiis was provoked with him,

Giidarz, and GiV, supported Fariburz,

And said ‘I am descended from Naudar
The kingship of the world is rightly mine ’

V 807 He very well may disregaid my woids,

And m his anger quarrel with myself
If any one but I shall come to thee
Let him not look upon thy head and helmet
Tiis said to me ‘ See who is on the summit,

But ask him not what he is doing there
To talk with swoid and mace will bo enough,

For why should any one be there to-day ? ’

When he is calm I will return to thee
With good news and conduct thee to our host,

Rejoicing , but if any one approach
Except myself put little faith in him
More than a single horseman will not come
To thee, such is our noble leader’s rule.

Consider well what is the wisest course,

Take refuge in the hold and quit this spot ”

Farud took from his belt a turquoise mace
With golden haft “ Accept of this,” he said,

“ A keepsake from me , it will prove of service.

It Tiis the general be well-disposed

We will have merry hearts and great content.


KAI KHUSRAU


And I will furnish further other things,

Steeds, sells, gold, crowns, and royal signet-rings ”


§ H

Horn Bah^dm, went hack to Tds

Bahrain returning said to Tiis “ May wisdom
And thy pure soul be mates > This is Farud,

The son of guiltless, murdered Siyawush >

He showed to me the mark which all the race
Inherit from Kaus and Kai Kubad ”

The overbearing general replied —

“ The host, the trumpets, and the drums are mine
My Avords to thee were ‘ Bring the man to me,

Ask him no questions ’ If he be a king
Who then am I, and wherefore am I here
With this array ? A man of Turkman race.

Like some black raven on the mountain there,

Is hindering the progress of the troops i
Among the froward oflEspiing of Giidarz
I can see naught but mischief to the host
Thou wast afraid of one unskilful horseman ’

It was no savage Lion on the height
He saw our host, and duped thee Thou hast gone
Both up and doAvn for naught ' ” Then to the chiefs
“ O men of name and slayers of the foe >

I need some noble and aspiring man

To face the height and Turkman, to behead him.

And bring his head to me before the host.”

Bfvnfz girt up his loins for that encounter,

Which cost his life Then said Bahram to Tus —

‘ O paladm ' stain not thy soul so rashly.

Revere the Ruler of the sun and moon
Respect the Shah, for yonder is his kinsman —

A famous horseman and a warrior ,


52


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSl


And even if a hundred cavaliers
Should go against him to the mountain-top
They would not ’scape his clutches with their lives ,
Thou wilt but bring glad hearts to misery”

V. 809 This angered Tiis, who would not be advised,

But bade some chiefs to hasten to the mountain,
And many valiant men rushed forth and raised
Their heads to make an onslaught on Farud,

But “ Hold not,” thus spake brave Bahram to them,

“ This matter lightly , he on yonder height

Is of Khusrau’s own km, one hair of whom

Is better than a hundred paladins

He that ne’er saw the face of Siyawush

Will find repose in gazing on his son.”

Now when Bahram told of Fariid the men
That had set forth retraced their steps again.


§ 15

How Rivniz teas slam hy FaiM

Then for the second time the son-m-law

Of Tiis came forth — the laughing-stock of heaven —

And left the road that leadeth to Charam

For Mount Sapad, his fierce heart set on outrage

Fariid descried him from the mountain-top.

And, drawing from its case his royal bow,

Said to TukhAr the veteran “ Tiis hath spurned
The message, for a horseman not Bahram
Hath come ' My heart is confident but heavy
See if thou canst remember who he is
Why is he clad m mail from head to foot ? ’

Tukhdr replied “ A valiant cavalier,

Rivnfz by name He is an only son
With forty sisters like the jocund spring.

He is unscrupulous, sly, plausible.


KAI KHUSRAU


53


Accomplished, young, and son-in-law to Tiis,”

FarM returned “ Such talk is not for war-time.

If he approach for combat I will send him
To sleep upon his sisters’ skirts. If merely
Mine arrow make him feel its wind in passing,

And he surviveth, hold me not a man.

Which shall mine arrow slay — the horse or rider ? v. 8io

How sayest thou, 0 veteran Tukhdr ? ”

Tukhar replied “The time lor strife hath come ^

Loose at the man , perchance the heart of Tiis
May be perturbed for him Tiis knoweth not
Thy resolution for thou soughtest peace ,

It he attacketh thee in wantonness

He will but bring disgrace upon thy brother ”

When sword in hand Ri'vnlz drew nigh, Fariid
Strung his curved bow, shot down a poplar shaft.

And pinned the Riiman helmet to the head

Of him that came He fell His fleet steed left him

Rfvnfz came headlong to the dust When Tiis,

The general, beheld this from Mayam
The mountain disappeared before his eyes ’

Now wisdom hath a saw in this regard —

“ Man’s evil nature is its own reward ”


§ i6

Hota Zardbp was slam by Fardd

Then Tiis said to Zarasp “ Let thy heart flame
As ’twere Azargashasp, don horsemen’s armour.
And take good heed of thine own life and person.
Thou mayst perchance avenge this noble chief,
Or if not I myself will seek for vengeance.”

Zardsp departed and assumed his helm.

With vengeful heart and windy pate he went

* Inserted from C


j.


54


THE SHAHnAmA of PIRDAUSl


Toward Mount Sapad, like some fierce, vengeful lion,
V 8ii And scaled the mountain, with uplifted head,

Loud shouts, fierce gestures, and impetuous heart
Fariid, that laging Lion, told Tukhar —

“ Another challenger is on his way ,

See now who this Iranian horseman is
That cometh galloping upon the mountain ”

Tukhar declared at once “ It is the son
Of Tds, by name Zarasp, who wheelcth not
His charger from an elephant of war
His sister was the consort of Ri'vnfz
This athehng hath come for vengeance too '

As soon as he can see thine arm and casque
Let loose a poplar shaft that he may come
Down from his charger headlong to the dust
Sure am I that the heart of Tus will be
As ’twere a leaf in winter at his death.

And that insensate chief will understand
That we are not here to be sport for him ”

When in the sight of all the Iranian host
Zarasp drew near upon the mountain-top.

The valorous Fariid urged on his charger,

Shot at Zarasp and pinned him thiough the mail
And loins against the saddle. His spirit flamed
Upon the point He fell His wmdfoot steed
Abandoned him and galloped back full speed


§ 17

How Tus fought with Fariid

A shout ascended from the Iranian host.

And all the warriors put on their helms
Tiis with a full heart and with weeping eyes
Donned his cuirass in haste. He greatly mourned
Those gallant chiefs and trembled like a leaf


KAI KHUSRAU


55


He mounted on his saddle and appeared
As ’twere the mountain-mass that men up pile
Upon the back of lusty elephants,

And turned his charger’s reins toward Fariid
With heart revengeful and with head a-fiime
Tukhar the spokesman said “ A Mountain cometh
In fury toward the height ’Tis Tiis the chief '
Contend not with the veteran Crocodile.

Secure thee in the hold and wait on fortune
Expect no merryraake since thou hast slam
Alike his son and son-in-law in battle ”

The young Farud, wroth with Tukhar, replied —

“ When war and strife confront us what care I
For Tus 01 elephant or mighty lion,

For wairior-leopard or for tiger ? These
But give a man the heart to hght, and serve not
To scatter earth upon the raging hre ”

Then said Tukhar the much-expeiienced “ Kings
Despise not counsel lion though thou be.

And able to uproot a mount of flint,

Yet art thou but a single cavalier ,

And thirty thousand Avarriors of Iran
Will come against thee to the mountain-top
No strong-hold will be left here, stone or dust
They will sweep all away, and furthermore
If evil by this means shall come to Tiis
His downfall will cause sorrow to Khusrau,

And so defeat the vengeance for thy sire —

A breach which nevermore will bo repaired
Why combat with a Lion in thy lage ?

Go to the hold and fight not foolishly ”

This, which he should have spoken at the first.

He left unsaid till then , so to Farud

All through this worthless, foolish minister

Resulted battle and the loss of life

The youth had eighty moon-faced female slaves


V 812


56


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSt


At home who stood upon the roof to watch him,

813 And babbled ceaselessly. He could not brook
The thought of a retreat before their eyes,

But raised his reins and rushing on like wind
Set to his string another poplar shaft ,

But first Tukhar said “ If thou meanest fight,

The best for thee, or else thou mayest not conquer
The noble Tus, will be to overthrow
His steed, for monarchs do not war afoot.

However much they may be put to it ,

Besides one wooden arrow from a bow
Will never set a period to his life.

And when the general shall reach the summit
His warriors will follow, and thou hast not
The power to oppose , thou hast not looked
His arrows in the face.”

The youth attended

To what Tukhdr said, strung his bow, and shot
The poplar arrow struck the general’s steed —

A bow-shot worthy of a cavalier —

The charger came down headlong and expired
While Tus both raged and blustered He returned
To camp, his buckler hanging from his neck.

On foot, all dusty, and distraught in mind,

Farud the while with gibes pursuing him —

“ What ailed the noble paladin, and how
Will he proceed amid the ranks of war
Who cannot fight a single horseman here ? ”

The women-slaves began to laugh, and sent
Their peals of laughter through the sky. They cried —
“ The old man staggereth down the mountam-slope.
Affrighted at the arrows of a youth ' ”

When Tds descended from the height the chiefs.

Full of concern, approached him, did obeisance.

And said • “ 0 famous paladm of earth 1
What can be better than thy safe return ?


KAI KHUSRAU


S7


We have no cause to bathe our cneeks in tears.

The noble Giv was grievously distressed
Because the valiant general had come back
Afoot, and said " This youth exceedeth bounds v, 814

In turning thus our chieftains’ faces pale '

What though he be a king and weareth earrings,

Is he to flout so great a host as this ?

It is not right that we should acquiesce
In his pretensions thus. If Tus displayed
Some hastiness, Farud hath filled the world
With tumult We would die for Siyawush,

But we must not forget this injury.

Fariid hath given to the winds Zarasp,

That noble cavalier sprung from Naudar '

The body of Rfvnfz is drowned m blood '

What further shame is ours ? Fanid, though he
Jamshfd’s own son, Kubad’s own marrow, be.

Hath made a new departure witlessly.”


§ 18

How Giv /ought vnth Fmud

Gfv spake, armed m hot haste, and came forth proudly
Like wild sheep on the mountain. Seeing him
Farfid heaved from his breast a chilly sigh.

And said “ This warrior-host discerneth not
Between uphill and down ' Each combatant
Is braver than the last — the crown of hosts —

But wit IS lacking in their paladin ,

A witless head is like a soulless body
I fear me they will fail in their revenge
Unless Khusrau himself invade Tiiran ,

Then back to back will we avenge our sire.

And haply get our foes within our clutches.

Now tell me who this noble horseman is,


V.815


58 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSl

if

Whose hand and brand will shortly ask tor tears ? ”
Thereat Tukhdr glanced at the plain below,

And said to him “ It is the raging Dragon,

Whose neezings make birds topple from the air,

Who put Pfrdn thy grandsire’s hands m bonds.

And brake two Turkman hosts > ^ He hath unfathered
Full many a little child. His foot hath been
On many a river, mount, and wilderness
Full many a father too hath ho unsonned,

And treadeth underfoot the lion’s neck
’Twas he that bare thy brother to Iran,

And crossed Jthiin although he saw no boat^

They call him Giv — a very Elephant
Or river Nile upon the day of battle.

When thou shalt sot thy thumbstall to the bow-string
Thy poplar arrow will not pierce his mail.

Because he wearoth that ot Siyawush , ®

So draw thy bow and let the arrow fly

Against his steed The gieat beast may be wounded.

And Gtv the rider may return afoot

With shield on neck as did their general ”

The brave prince bent his bow until the top
Was at his shoulder, shot, and struck Gi'v’s charger
Upon the breast Gfv came down and retreated
Then from the battlements ot Mount Sapad
A shout rose. Gtv’s brain shrank before the jeers.

But all the mighty men approached him, saying —

“ Praise be to God, exalted warrior '

Because the horse is hurt and thou art not.

Nor art thou captured but can’st go again.”

Btzhan the warrior came to Giv like wind.

And uttered words most unacceptable — *

V 8i6 “ My father — lion-quelling paladin.

Whose might is greater than an elephant’s ’


^ See Vol 11 p 378 seq
•> Id p 377


‘ Id p 392
^ Reading with P


KAI KHUSRAU


59


Why did a single horseman see thy back ?

Thy hand was wont to be the heart of fight,

But now because a Turkman shot thy steed
Thou wentest reeling like a drunken man ' ”

Gfv answered saying “ Since my horse was wounded
I should have forfeited my life to him
Immediately ”

He spake in savage tones,

Which when Bizhan perceived he showed his back.

And Gfv in fury at his levity

Lashed at Bfzhan’s head with a riding- whip.

And said “ Did no one ever teach thee this —

That circumspection is required m war ?

Thou hast no wisdom, providence, or brains.

And may he cease to be that nurtured thee ”

Bfzhan was pained because his sire was wroth,

And swore an oath before the Almighty Judge —

“ I will not take the saddle off my steed
Until I have avenged Zarasp or perished ”

Departing with a heart oppressed by care,

And head all vengeance, unto Gustaham
He spake thus “ Let me have a steed of thine —

A handy one, such as will climb with ease
The mountain-side — so that I may assume
My mail that one of us may seem a man
A Turkman hath ascended to the heights.

So as to draw the eyes of all the host,

And I desire to go and fight with him
Because my soul is darkened by his deeds ”

But Gustaham “ This is not well Climb not
The height so rashly > When we have to march
The world will be all ups and downs and waste.

Now of my horses fit to carry armour
I have but two remainmg, and if he
Destroy one I shall not obtain another
To take its place in action, strength, and size.


V 817


6o


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Zardsp — a world-lord — with Rfvnlz, and Tiis,
Who holdeth all the world of no account,

And thine own sire, that hunter of fierce lions,
Who reoketh not how heaven’s wheel may turn.
Have all retreated from him with sore hearts ,
None made a fight against that Mount of Flint.
Would that we had a vulture’s wings or eagle’s.
For none will get inside the hold afoot > ”

Bizhan replied to him “ Break not my heart.
Break not mine arms and shoulders too just now.
For I have sworn a great oath by the moon.

The world’s Judge, and the Shah’s own diadem.

That if I am not slain I will not ride

Back from the mountain but avenge Zarasp.”

Then Gustaham replied “ This is not good.
For wisdom doth not recognise such fierceness."

Bfzhan responded “ I will go afoot.

And so avenge Zarasp I need no horse.”

Then answered Gustaham “ I would not have
A single hair to perish from thy head ,

And if I had a hundred thousand steeds.

Whose manes and tails were full of royal gems,

I would not keep them or my treasure, life.

Or iron mace or falchion back from thee
Go thou, inspect my horses each in turn.

And take whichever of them thou preierrest
Bid that be saddled. If ’tis slam so be it.’’

He had one charger that was like a wolf.

Long in the barrel, tall, and spirited
They mailed it for the brave, young atheling.

Giv, mindful ot Farud’s deeds, fumed at heart
Thereat, then sent and summoned Gustaham,
And uttered many a saw concerning youth.

V. 8i8 He sent Bizhan the mail of Siyawush,

Besides a royal helmet of his own

When Gustaham had brought the mail Bizhan


KAI KHUSRAU


Incased himself as quick as dust and went
To Mount Sapad as one on vengeance bent.


§ 19

How BizTian fought with Farad

Farud said to Tukhar “ Another chief

Hath come > Look forth, see who he is, and who

Will weep for him ”

That man of words replied —
“ There is not one to match him in Iran,

For he is Giv’s son and a valiant hero
Victorious like a lion in all combats
Gfv hath no other son, and this is dearer
To him than life and wealth Direct thy hand
Against the steed, and break not the Shah’s heart.
Bizhan too hath the mail, and Giv hath linked
The gorget of the helm, ot Siyawush
Thereto These neither double-headed dart
Nor shaft can pierce. Bi'zhan may fight afoot.

Thou wilt not shine as his antagonist ,

He graspeth, look ' a sword of adamant.”

Farud ’s shaft struck the charger of Bi'zhan
Thou wouldst have said “ It had no life ” It fell.
And when Bizhan had disengaged himself
He made toward the summit, sword in hand.

And shouted “ 0 thou valiant cavalier '

Remain and see now how a Lion fighteth.

And realise how heroes though unhorsed
Will still advance to battle with the sword.

Thou shalt behold it if thou wilt await me.

For thou shalt never think of fighting more.”

Fariid above was angered too because
Blzhan withdrew not, and again that Lion
Discharged a shaft. Bizhan the brave held up


62


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSf


His shield above his head. The arrow pierced
The shield but missed the mail. Bfzhan sped on,
And, when he reached the summit, drew his sword
Fariid the noble turned away from him ,

The ramparts rang with cries Bi'zhan pursued
Apace, sharp sword m hand, and gashed the bards
Upon the noble steed which came to dust
Fariid howbeit gained the castle-gate.

The garrison secured it with all speed.

And showered many stones down from the walls
Upon Bizhan, who knew that ’twas no spot
To loiter at He cried “ O famous one '

Hast thou — a warrior and cavalier —

Thus turned from one on foot and felt no shame ?
Woe for the heart and hand of brave Fariid > ”

He left the scene of combat, came to Tiis,

And said “ To fight so brave a warrior
Would need a famous lion of the desert.

And if a mount of flint should turn to water
In strife with him the chieftain need not marvel
Imagination boggleth at such prowess ’ ”

The general Tiis swore by the Lord of all —

“ I will send up this hold’s dust to the sun
To avenge beloved Zarasp the cavalier
I will attack without delay, will make
This Turkman wretch a corpse, and with his gore
Engrain the stones like coral to the core ”


§ 20

How Fm t'ul was slam

Now when the shining sun had disappeared.
And dark night led its host across the sky,

V 820 The daughter of PMn approached her son —
Fariid — with anxious mind and aching heart.


KAI KHUSRAU


63


And lay dowQ near her darling, but all night
Remained the spouse of grief and misery
She dreamed that from the lofty castle rose
A flame in front of him she loved so well,

Illuming Mount Sapad and burning all
The castle and the woraen-slaves She woke
In pain, her soul in anguish and dismay.

Went out upon the wall and looking round
Saw all the mountain filled with mail and spears.
Her cheek flushed up and turning at the heart
She hastened to Fariid, and cried to him —

“ Awake from slumber, 0 my son ' the stars
Are bringing down disaster on our heads '

The mountain is all foes, the castle-gate
All spears and mail ’ ”

He said “ Why such to-do >
It life IS o’er for me, and thou canst count not
On further respite for me, mine own sire
Was slam in youth, my life is wrecked like his.
Gurwfs hand put a period to his days,

And now Btzhan is eager tor my death ,

Yet will I struggle, perish wretchedly.

And not ask quarter ot the liamans.”

He gave out mail and maces to the troops.

He placed a splendid helm upon his head.

And with a Riiman breastplate girt about him
Came with a royal bow grasped in his hand
Now when the shining sun displayed its face,

And proudly mounted to the vault of heaven.

The war-cries of the chieftains rose on all sides,
While massive maces whirled amid the din
Of clarions, tymbals, pipes, and Indian bells
Fariid descended from the castle- ramparts
With all his gallant Turkmans. Through the dust
Raised by the horsemen, and the feathered shafts,
The mountain- top was like a sea of pitch.


V S21


64 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

There was no level ground or room to fight ,

The rocks and stones played havoc with the steeds,
While shouts ascended as the armies strove
Tiis ready armed for battle, grasping shield
And trenchant falchion, led the way in person.
Escorted by the chieftains of the host
Afoot. Thus they attacked till noon was high,

And then the troops of brave Fariid were thinned.
The hills and valleys had been filled with slain,

The youth’s good fortune had abandoned him.

The Iranians marvelled at him, none had seen
So fierce a Lion, but as battle pressed him
He saw his fortune adverse , of the Turkmans
No cavalier remained with him , he fought
v 822 Alone , he turned and fled down toward the hold
Ruhhdm sought with Bfzhar to intercept him
They charged him from above and from below
When on the lower ground Bfzhan appeared.

With stirrups firmly pressed and reins held loose.
The youth espied the helm, drew out his mace.

And went like some fierce lion at his foe.

Not knowing what the vaulted sky decreed.

He thought to strike Bfzhan upon the head,

And smash both head and helmet with one buffet.
Bfzhan was staggered by the young man’s stroke.
And lost both sense and power Ruhham behind
Saw this and shouted, clutched his Indian sword,
And struck the lion-man upon the shoulder ,

His hand fell useless. Wounded he cried out.

And urged his steed which, as he neared the hold,
Bfzhan came up and houghed Fariid himself
Afoot with certain of his followers.

Thus stricken in the battles of the brave,

Reached and secured with speed the castle-gate.

Woe for the heart and name of brave Fariid >

His mother and the slaves drew near, embraced him,


KAI KHUSRAU


65


And sadly laid him on his ivory throne
His day, his season for the crown, were over
His mother and the female slaves plucked out
The scented tresses of their musky hair,

While the beloved Farud plucked out their lives
The throne was strewn with hair, the house all
sorrow

Then with a faint glance and a sigh he turned
Toward his mother and the slaves, and said.

With one last effort to unclose his lips —

“ It is no marvel that ye pluck your hair ,

The irdnians will come with girded loins
To sack the hold and make my slave-girls captive.

Make castle, castle- wall, and rampart waste
Let all whose hearts and cheeks burn for my life
Go fling themselves down from the battlements
That none may be the portion of Bizhan
I follow soon because he severeth
My blameless life and is, in this my day
Of youth, my death ”

He spake, his cheeks grew wan.
His spirit soared away ’mid grief and anguish
As ’twere a conjurer this drunken sky
Deludeth us with tucks — threescore and ten —

At whiles employing blast or cloud and then
The sword or dagger or the agency
Of some unworthy wight. At whiles to one
Plunged in calamity ’twill grant relief.

At whiles allot crown, treasury, and throne.

At whiles chain, dungeon, bitterness, and grief ’

Man must accept his lot whate’er it be ,

Mine own affliction is my poverty.

The man of wisdom, had he died at birth.

Had suffered not the heat and cold of earth.

But, living after birth, hath want and stress.
Constrained to weep a life of wretchedness.

VOL. III. E


V 823


66


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Woe for his heart, his usance, and intents ’
His pillow IS the dust in all events


§ 21


How Jmha slew heiself


V 824 Now when in failure thus had passed away

Fariid, the hapless and inglorious son
Of SiyAwush, the slave-girls scaled the roof.

And dashed them to the ground J arlra kindled
A pyre and burned the treasures. Sword in hand
She locked the stable of the Arab steeds,

Hamstrung, and ripped them up All blood anti
sweat

She sought the couch of glorious Fariid,

Upon whose coverlet a dagger lay.

And, having pressed her cheeks upon his face,

Ripped up herself and died upon his breast
The Iranians forced the portal ot the hold.

Prepared for pillaging, but when Bahram
Approached those walls his heart was rent with sorrow
He sought the couch of glorious Fariid,

With cheeks all tears and heart a-fume, and thus
Addressed the Iranians “ Here is one by iar
More wretched and dishonoured than his sire,

For Siy 4 wush did not destroy his slaves,

Nor was his mother slam upon his couch,

Though round him likewise all his palace flamed.

And all his home and goods were razed and burned.
Still heaven’s hands are long enough to reach
The wicked, and it turneth not in love

V 825 O’er men unjust Shall ye not shame before

Khusrau who, charging Tiis so earnestly.

Sent you to take revenge for Siyawush,

And gave you much advice and parting-counsel ?


KAl KHUSRAU


67


When he shall hear about his brother’s death
He will cut short respect and clemency,

And for Ruhham and passionate Blzhan
The world will have but little pleasure left ”

With that came Tiis the general with the drums
Along the road that leadeth to KaUt,

While with him were the chiefs Gudarz and Gi'v,

And therewithal a host of warriors

The general marched along to Mount Sapad,

Advancing swiftly an^ without remorse ,

But when he reached the throne where wretchedly
The poor, slam man lay pillowed with his mother,

While on one hand beside the pillow sat,

All tears and wrath, Bahram, and on the other.

With all the men of battle crowding round
About him, Zanga son of Shawaran,

While tree-like on the ivory throne the hero —

A moon in face, a teak in stature, slept —

A Siyawush upon his throne of gold —

With coat of mail and helmet, mace and girdle.

While Gfv, Gudarz, the other men of name
And gallant chiefs, bewailed him bitterly.

Then Tus poured out his heart’s blood down his cheeks
In anguish for Fariid and his own son,

While Giv, Gudarz, and all the warriors

With sighs and tears turned and upbraided him —

“ Thy fury beareth thee rernoise as fruit
Sow not the seeds of fury in the garden

Thus m thy haste and fury hast thou given v. 826

A youth of Kaian stock with all his Grace,

His stature, form, and bearing to the wind,

Hast given Zarasp, that chief sprung from Naudar,

And given too — that victim of thy rage —

Rivmz ' 111 fortune hath left naught undone '

But parts and wisdom in the passionate
Are like a sword that groweth blunt with rust ”


68


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSI


While thus they spake Tiis wept , his rage and fury
Abated , he replied “ From evil fortune
No lack of toil and moil betalleth man.”

He gave directions to his men to build
Upon the mountain-top a royal charnel
Wherein they placed a throne of gold, the mail,
Sword, mace, and girdle, then prepared the corpse.
Requiring roses, camphor, musk and wine,

And with the camphor they embalmed his head,

His body with rose-water, musk, and gums
They set him on the throne and left him there ,

That famed, accomplished, lion-hearted man
Thus passed away Beside the prince they set
Rlvnfz and great Zarasp, while Tils, with beard
Like camphor, shed a stream ol tears of blood

’Tis always thus > However long we stay
Proud Elephant and Lion must away '

The hearts of stoneand anvil quake with feai
Of death , no root and leaf escape it here.


§ 22

Hoto Tus led the Host to the Kdsa Rud, and how
Paldshdn was slam by Bizhan

V 827 When Tiis the general had made an end

Of fighting with Fariid, and left the heights.

He halted at Charam three days. The blare
Of trumpets rose upon the fourth , then Tus
Led forth the host and sounded pipe and tymbal.
While all the earth from mountain unto mountain
Turned ebon. Whatso Turkman troops he saw
He slew and flung them down upon the road.

Left all the marches neither woof nor warp.

And thus proceeded to the Kasa riid.

Where he encamped the army all the earth


KAI KHUSRAU


69


Was covered by his tents.

“ Troops from frdn

Are at the Kdsa riid ' ” Such tidings reached
Tur^n, and from the Turkmans there came forth
Shrewd Paldshan, a youthful warrior,

The leader of their host, to view the foe.

And count the camp-enclosures and the flags.

Within the lines there was a rising ground
On one side, and unoccupied by troops
There Glv was sitting with Blzhan, conversing
On matters great and small Appeared the flag
Of Paldshan, come from the Turkman host.

Upon the road, whereat the gallant Gfv
Unsheathed his sword “ I will go forth,” quoth he,

“ Behead, or bung him captive to our folk.”

Bfzhan said “ Man of name ’ the Shdh bestowed
A robe of honour on me for this end ,

According to his order I must gird
Myself to fight the warrior PaUshdn ”

“ Haste not to battle with this savage Lion,”

Gfv answered “God forbid that thou shouldst fight
him.

And straiten mine own day A Lion he.

This desert is his feeding-ground, he preyeth
On none but warriors ”

Bfzhan replied —

“ Oh I put me not to shame before the world-lord
By speaking thus, but let me have the armour
Of Siyawush Be mine to hunt this Leopard.”

Then gallant Gfv gave him the coat of mail.

Bfzhan, when he had made the buckles fast,

Bestrode a rapid charger, and rode off
Upon the desert with a spear in hand.

Now Palashdn, who had brought down a deer.

Was roasting some kabab upon a fire,

And eating with his bow upon his arm.


V 828


70 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSt

The while his horse was ranging free to graze
It saw afar the charger of Bizhan,

Neighed loudly, and ran in , so Palashan
Knew that a horseman came prepared for fight,

And shouted to Bizhan “ I fling down lions,

And fetter divs Declare thy name , thy star
Shall weep for thee ”

He said “ Bi'zhan am I —

A brazen-bodied div when fight is toward
My grandsire is a Lion of the fray,

My sire is gallant Gfv, and thou shalt see
My prowess This brave day, when battle breatheth,
Thou, like a carrion wolf ^ upon the mountains,

Eat’st ashes, smoke, and blood ' How cometh it
That thou art leading troops upon the waste ? ”

He answered not but g-'^ve his mighty steed
V. 829 The rein The warriors closed, the dark dust flew
Their spear-points brake , both took their scimitars.
Which shivered with their strokes. The riders shook
Like leaves upon a tree, the steeds were drowned
In sweat, and staggered Then the noble Lions,

The combatants, drew forth their heavy maces
Thus went it till Bi'zhan with mace on shoulder
Sent up a shout, struck valiant Palashan
Upon the waist, and brake his spine His corpse.

All helmed and mailed, fell headlong from his charger
Bizhan, dismounting with the speed of dust.

Cut off the warrior’s head and carried it
Together with the arms and steed to Giv,

Who had been troubled o’er the fight, and thought —

“ How will the wund of battle blow to-day ? ”

And groaned and fidgeted upon the watch

Until Bfzhan’s dust rose upon the road

The youth came bringing head and mail and charger,

' Bizhan compares PaUsh^n at his meal to a wolf at a deserted
camp-fire


KAI KHUSRAU


71


And placed them all before his sire who cried —

“ For ever be victorious, 0 my son ' ”

They went with joy toward the chiefs pavilion,
And brought to him the breastplate, helmet, steed,
And head of Paldshan Tiis gladdened so
That thou hadst said “ He will pour out his soul.”
“ Son of the Backbone of the host,” said he,

“ Head of the famed of our Sh 4 ,h’s diadem '

Live ever joyfully, aspiring still,

And banished far from thee be foeman’s ill ”


§ 23


Hoic the Iidmans sufieied in a Snoic^toiin


Thereafter tidings reached Afrasiyab —

“ The marches of Turan aie like a sea
A host hath reached the Kasa riid, and cai th
Is blackened in revenge for Siy.iwush ”

The king said to Piran “ Khusraii hath made
His object deal , pcichance we may prevent him
By marching foith with flags and diurns in force,

If not the army from Iran will come,

And we shall see not shining sun 01 moon
Go gather troops together from all quarters ,

Few words aie needed ”

On the Iranian side

A tempest rose and none took thought of fight ,

A dense cloud came like flying dust, their lips
Congealed with cold, the tents and camp-enclosuies
Were turned to ice, snow carpeted the mountains.

And lor a sennight’s space earth disappeared
There was but little food or lest or sleep
Thou wouldst have said “ Earth’s face is turned to
stone.”

They slew and ate their horses. Multitudes


V 830


72


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Of men and cattle perished. None at last
Possessed a charger. When the eighth day came
The sun prevailed, the earth was like a sea,

The troops were mustered, and Tiis spake of fight ,

V 831 He said • “ The host hath suffered greatly here ,

’Tis well that we proceed upon our march.

Cursed be these fields and fells, all from Kalat
And Mount Sapad down to the Kasa riid ' ”

Then from the warrior-throng thus spake Bahrdm —
“ I needs must tell the general my mind
Concerning this Thou makest us keep silence ’

Thou fightest with the son of Siyawush 1
I told thee ‘ Do not so it is not right ’

See what a loss hath followed and what ill
May yet confront thee, for the buffalo
Is still within Its hide ' ”

“ Azargashasp

Is not more famed than was Zarasp the brave,”

Said Tiis, “nor was Fariid slain innocent
’Twas written thus, and what hath been hath been
Look through the host and see whom thou canst find
In courage and m aspect like Rfvni'z,

Through whom my cup was filled with wine and milk
His form was youthful but his words were sage
Now let us speak no further of the past.

Or whether he was justly slam or not ,

And since Gfv took a present from the Shah
That he might set that mass of faggots blazing.

Which now is m the way, ’tis time to do it.

And light up heaven with the conflagration ,

Thus we may gam a passage for the troops ”

Gfv said to him “ This will not be a toil.

Or, if it be, a toil not unrequited.”

Bfzhan was grieved “ I cannot give,” he said,

“ Consent to this. Thou rearedst me in stress
And hardihood, without a chiding word .


KAI KHUSRAU


73


It must not be that I a youth sit still,

While thou an old man girdest up thy loins ”

Glv said “ My son i I took this enterprise
Upon my shoulders, ’tis the time for arms,

Not for indulgence and decrepitude

Be not in dudgeon at my going, I

Can burn a flinty mountain with my breath ”

He passed the Kasa rdd albeit with stress.

The world for warp and woof had ice and snow.

And when he reached the barricade of faggots

Its length and breadth were more than he could tell ,

He used a javelm-point to kindle fire,

Threw it upon the mass and burned the pile
For three weeks conflagration, wind, and smoke
Allowed no passage through the burning mass.

But when the fourth week came the army went
Across the river for the fire was spent


§ 24

How Bahrdm captured Kahdda

Tiis, when the host was mustered, left the fire
For Giravgard They marched in fair array.

Camped on the hills and plains, took due precautions.
And hurried out the scouts on every side
Tazhav the cavalier — one used to fight
With lions — dwelt at Giravgard and kept
The herds there, driving them from hill to hill.

News came “ A host hath come forth from fran
The cattle must be driven out bf reach.”

He sent a warrior with all dispatch
To tell a herdsman of Afrdsiydb’s —

Kabiida hight, an able man withal.

And there was need for his ability —

“ Depart at dark and keep thyself unseen ,


V 832


V.833


74 the SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Observe how large the Iranian army is,

And see whose are the standards and the crowns.

My purpose is to make a night-attack,

And fill the mountains and the plains with blood ”
When it was dark Kabiida drew anigh,

Like some black dlv, the army of fran

That night Bahram, whose lasso snared the heads

Of elephants, was on the outpost-guard,

And, when Kabiida’s charger neighed, Bahram
Pricked up his ears, sat firm, and strung his bow ,

Then urged his mighty charger from the spot.

Without a word he let an arrow fly.

Though darkness hid Kabiida from his sight.

And struck the royal herdsman on the belt ,

His face turned black , and falling from his steed
He begged for life. Bahram said “ Tell me truly
Who sent thee hither ? Whom wouldst thou attack ? ”
Kabiida said “ If thou wilt grant me quarter
I will reply to all thy questioning
My master is Tazhav I am his servant.

And sent by him , so put me not to death.

And I will guide thee to his dwelling-place ”

Bahram replied “ Know that Tazhav to me
Is as a bullock to a rending lion ”

He cut Kabiida’s head oflf with a dagger.

Secured it to his royal saddle-straps.

Took it to camp and flung it down in scorn
As that of one unfamed, no cavalier
To fight

The voice of chanticleer and laik
Arose, and yet Kabiida came not back
Tazhav the warrior was sad at heart.

Aware that evil had befallen him ,

Then summoned all the troops that were about
Available, and promptly led them out


KAI KHUSRAU


75


§ 25


Hoiv the Iidnians fought with Tarhdv


Now when the sun had set up on the plain

Its standard, and its sword had turned the rear

Of night to violet, Tazhav the chieftain

Led forth his men Shouts from the look-out reached

The Iranians “ From Tiiran a host hath come

To fight. Their leader is a Crocodile

With flag in hand ”

Then from the nobles Gfv
Went forth to him, escorted by a troop
Of valiant warriors, fiercely asked his name,

And said “ 0 lover of the fray ' hast come
With such a force as this to meet the claws
Of Crocodiles

The bold Tazhav replied —

“ A lusty heart and lion’s claws are mine.

Tazhav am I, I fling down men and pluck
The heads of valiant Lions from their trunks
By birth and worth I am Iranian,

Sprung from the warriors and the Lions’ seed
Now I am marchlord of the country round —

A chosen chief, the king’s own son-in-law.”

Gfv said “ Nay say not so, 'twill dim thy glory
Would any leave fran and settle here
Unless he lived on blood or colocynth t
If thou art marchlord and king’s son-in-law
How IS it that thou hast not mightier powers ?

With such a band as this seek not the fray.

Nor go with vehemence against the brave ,

For I who speak — a hero worshipful

And famous — trample on the heads of marchlords

If thou with all thy troops wilt do my bidding,

And hence depart Iranward to the Shah,


V 834


76


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSl


Go first of all to Tiis our general,

Apply to him, and hearken to his words
I will take care that thou shalt have a gift
From him — goods, slaves, and steeds caparisoned.
This seemeth well to me, O prudent man '

What say’st thou ? Shall I have to fight to-day ? ”
V 83s Tazhav the traitor said “ O gallant one '

' None lowereth my flag Now I have here

The throne and signet, horses, flocks, and soldiers ,

Moreover in Iran no person dreameth

Of such a king as is Afrasiy4b

Slaves too have I, and herds of wind-foot steeds,

Which wander over mountain, vale, and plain.

Look not upon my little band but me.

And at the mace upon my saddle-bow,

For I will maul thy troops to-day till thou
Repent thy coming ”

Then Bizhan exclaimed —
“ O famous chief — engrosser of the fight,

Exalted and shrewd-hearted paladin '

In age thou art not as thou wast in youth.

Why givest thou this counsel to Tazhav ?

Why so much love and amity for him ?

Our business is to draw the sword and mace,

And to cut out these peoples’ hearts and brains ”
He urged his steed , the battle-cry went up ,
They laid upon their shoulders sword and mace
A cloud of murky dust rose in the midst
So that the sun became invisible,

The world grew gloomy as a winter’s cloud,

And men beheld not shining star or moon
Bold Glv who used to rob the sky of lustre
Was in the midst, Bfzhan the deft of hand,

Who dallied not in action, led the van
Tazhav, who wont to fight the rending lion.

And wore his crown, opposed them with Arzhang


KAI KHUSRAU


77


To help him and Mardwl the Lion — two
That wearied not of fight yet gat small fruit
That day, for brave Arzhang withdrew himself,

The more part of the Turkman troops were slam.

And froward fortune turned its head away
Tazhav the valiant fled That famous Lion,

Bfzhan, pursued him, shouting eagerly.

And with a spear in hand Thou wouldst have said — v 836
“ It is a maddened, roaring elephant ' ”

One spear-blow struck Tazhav upon the waist,

And all his lustihood departed from him
The man reeled, but the Riiman coat of mail
Gave not, nor did the fastenings of it break
Blzhan flung down his spear and made a clutch.

Like leopard springing at a mountain-sheep,

And then, as falcon bindeth lark, snatched ofl
That crown of great price which Afrasiyab
Had set upon his head, a crown that never
Was absent from his thoughts and fiom his dreams
He urged his steed toward the castle-gate,

Pursued thus by Bfzhan at lightnmg-speed,

And, when he neared the castle, Ispanwf
Came wailing with her face suffused with tears.

And cried out loudly to him “ 0 Tazhiiv 1
Where are thy host, thy mettle, and thy might
That thou shouldst turn thy back upon me thus.

And leave me in this castle shamefully ?

Give me a seat behind thee , let me not
Be left inside the castle for the foe ”

The heart of proud Tazhav was set on fire.

And his cheeks flamed She mounted swift as wind
Behind him on his steed and clasped his waist
He rushed along like dust with Ispanwi ,

They made toward Turan The charger sped v 837

Awhile till man and beast were both fordone.

And then Tazhav addressed his handmaid, saying —


78


THE ShAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


“ O my fair mate i here is a grievous case >

My charger is exhausted with this work,

Foes are behind, in front is a ravine,

And though we race Bizhan some distance yet
Still they will have their will of us at last ,

So as they are not enemies to thee
Remain behind while I urge on my horse ”

Then Ispanwi alighted from the steed
Tazhav’s face was all tears at losing her,

Yet sped he on to reach Afrasiydb,

And all the while Bfzhan was in pursuit.

Who when he spied the moon-faced Ispanwi,
Her musky hair descending to her feet.

Came to her, took her with all gentleness.

Made room tor her behind him, and returned
Toward the army of the paladin.

He reached the entrance of the tent of Tiis,
Rejoicing, whence arose the sound of drums.
Because Bfzhan, that horseman brave and wary.
Was coming with his quarry from the fight
Tiis and the chiefs — those lovers of the fray —
Then set themselves to pillaging the hold,

And afterward they went to seek the herds
That roamed about the desert of Tiiran
They took, as warriors are wont, their lassos.
And quickly furnished all the host with steeds.
While in the palace whence Tazhav had fled
Were fierce Iranian horsemen lodged instead.


§ 26

How Aftdstydb hcoi Tidings of Tds and his Host

V 838 Now when Tazhav with wet eyes and in dudgeon
Came to the presence of Afrasiyab
He spake thus “ Tiis the general arrived.


KAI KHUSRAU


79


And brought a host with trump and kettledrum,
While as for Paldshan and other nobles,

Their heads were brought down to the dust in angiii^h
The foeman fired the marches and the fields.
Destroying all the herds ”

Afrasiyab

Was grieved thereat and sought a remedy.

He spake thus to Pfran the son of Wfsa —

‘ I bade thee ‘ Gather troops fiom every side,’

But thou hast loitered through old age or sloth.

Or disaffection , many of our km

Are slam, and watchful fortune’s face is from us ,

But now we may not tarry, for the world
Hath grown strait even to the vigilant ' ”

Then all m haste Pfran the general
Went from the presence of Afrasiyab,

Called up the troops from all the provinces.

Served arms out, paid the soldiers, and marched forth
The frontier passed he gave each man his post.

The right wing to Barm/in and to Tazhdv —

Two cavaliers whose strength was that of lions —

The left wing to the valiant Nastfhan —

One m whose clutches lions were as lambs.

The world was failed with blast of clarions,

And clang of cymbals and of Indian bells.

Air was a blaze of or, gules, and purpure
With all the spears and divers- coloured flags.

While what with troops, steeds, elephants, and camels
There was no passage left ’twixt sea and sea
Pfran went forth in haste. Afrasiyab
Departed from his palace to the plains,

And numbered all the army man by man

To see how many noble warriors

There were. He made the total five score thousand —

All lion-men and wielders of the sword —

Then bright and glad oft blessed Pfran, and said —


V 839


8o


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


“Thou settest forth with joy to victory
Ne’er may thine eye behold the bale of time ”

The army marched along troop after troop,

No plain was visible or sea or height ,

Pirin commanded “ Quit the accustomed route,
Take the short road , the foeman must not hear
Of these my noble and illustrious troops,

So may I bring this great host like a mountain
Down unawares upon yon army’s head.”

He sent intelligencers out forthwith,

And shrewdly sought to learn how matters stood ,
Then, stubbornly proceeding on his march.
Advanced toward Giravgard prepared tor battle
V. 840 The chiefs reported what the spies announced —
"Tiis the commander tarrieth where he was
No sound of drums hath risen from the troops.

For all of them are drinking themselves drunk,
And wine is in their hands both day and night.

He hath no mounted outpost on the road.

Not recking of the army of Tiirdn ”

Pfran, when he had heard this, called the chiefs.
Spake unto them at large about the foe.

And said thus “ Never in the fight have we
Held such a vantage o’er the enemy ’ ”


§ 27

Hoto Pirdn made a Night-attach on the tidmans

Out of that noble host Piran made choice
01 thirty thousand horse with scimitars.

Who marched at dead of night , no tymbal sounded,
No trumpet blared, none raised the battle-cry.

Now when the wary chief led forth his troops
Seven leagues remained betwixt them and the foe.
And first they came upon the Iranians’ herds


KAI KHUSRAU


8i


At large upon the desert of Tiiran,

Took many beasts and bore them off withal —

Mishap unparalleled ' The overseers
And herdsmen were all slam, the framans’ fortune
Had grown averse Thence like a murky cloud
The Turkmans marched upon the Iranian host —

All drunken and disposed in groups unarmed ,

Howbeit Gfv was in his tent alert,

Giidarz the chieftain sober Then arose
The war-cry with the crash of battle-axes.

And Glv — that fight-engrosser — was astound
There stood m front of his pavilion
A steed caparisoned in battle-gear
The gallant hero lion-like arrayed
His body in the mail of Siyawush,

And, raging like a leopaid at himself
In shame tor his own indolence and sloth,

“ Up ' Up ' ” quoth he “ How is it that to-night
My brain is filled with fumes instead of wai ? ”

Then having mounted rushed forth like a blast
He saw the heaven dark with night and dust,

And entering the chiefs pavilion
Exclaimed “Up ' Up ' The enemy hath come
While we — the wairiors of the Shah — arc sleeping ' ”
Departing thence he visited his sire,

An ox-head mace m hand As quick as smoke
He went about the host, awoke the sober,

And chodo Bizhan “ Is this the place for wine
Or fighting ? ”

The frAnians weie hemmed m,

The war-cry rose, the tumult dazed the drunken,

A cloud ascended and its ram was arrows
Soft pillows were beneath the drunkards’ heads,

Above were sword, hot mace, and scimitar.

Now when dawn showed forth from the Sign of Leo,
And gallant Glv surveyed the host, he saw
VOL. Ill


V 841


F


82 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The waste all covered with Iranian slam,

And watchful fortune’s head averse from them.

Gudarz too looked about on every side ,

The foemen’s number grew continually ,

Against the little force there ranged itself
A host like ants and locusts Tiis too looked,

And saw no fighting-men save Gi'v, Gudarz,

And other cavaliers all sore bestead ^

V 842 The flags were rent, the kettledrums o’erturned,

And the survivors’ cheeks like ebony.

For sires had lost their sons and sons their sires,

And that great host was utterly o’erthrown.

Since so the siviftly circling vault, which now
Affordeth pleasure and now pain, decreed
Unable to resist they turned their backs.

Abandoning their camp in their confusion,
Disorganised, without their drums and baggage.

And sorely stricken both on left and right
On this wise fared they toward the Kasa riid —

A strengthless mob With vengeful souls and tongues
All jeers the Turkman horsemen followed Tus,

And thou hadst said that maces from the clouds
Rained m the rear on hauberk, helm, and mail
None made a stand, the warriors took refuge
Among the mountains, foundered like their steeds.

And had no spirit, strength, or staying power

Now at the heights the Turkman host turned back,
Exhausted by the fight and long pursuit,

And Tiis no farther feared the foe’s assault.

The Iranian troops bewailed their many lost,

Who if they lived were wounded or in bonds —

Alike a cause for tears No crown or throne
Remained, no tent, no steed, no warrior ,

The land was barren and provided nothing.

While nobody went forth to seek the wounded

^ Inserted from C


KAl KHUSRAU


83


The son bewailed the father bitterly,

And burned in anguish for the suffering.

The use and custom ot the world is this
To keep back from thee what its purpose is
Its juggling tricks behind a veil are done,

It acteth harshly and capriciously,

While in greed’s grip we travail long, and none
Can tell appearance from reality
From wind thou earnest and to dust wilt go
What They ^ will do to thee how canst thou know ?

The more part of the Iranian troops were slam,

The rest had come back wounded , at their beds
No leeches were, but grief and tears of blood
Tiis battle-maddened was beside himself.

So to Giidarz the hoary veteran,

Deprived of child and grandchild, home and land,^
There came the other veteran warriors
With broken hearts to seek his leadership
He placed a watchman on a mountain-top
To keep his eyes intently on the foe,^

While outposts went their rounds on every side
To find perchance a cure for this distress
He bade a noble of the Iranians
To girdle up his loins to give the Shah
The news of what the captain of the host
Had done, and how, by their ill day opprest,

They had small profit from their vengeance-quest

^ The Powers supreme that be

® With regard to the first part of this line, the loss of Gudaiz' sons
and grandsons properly seems to belong to the subsequent battle
(p 89) , the last part seems more applicable to the historical than to
the legendaiy Gtidarz

* “Upland sur la montagne une sentmelle pour observer la route
d^Anbouh (Mohl)


V 843


84


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


§ 28

How Kai Khusrau recalled TAs

The courier carried to the Shah the tidings
Of that eclipse of fortune. Brave Khusrau
Was troubled when he heard, his bosom throbbed
With grief. To anguish at his brother’s case
Was added anguish on the troops’ account.

V 844 That night he uttered malisons on Tus

Till cock-crow. Summoning a prudent scribe,

And pouring out the fulness of his heart.

He wrote a letter in a wrathful strain.

With eyes all tears in mourning for his brother.

To Farfburz the son of Shah Kaiis —

A letter for the chieftains of the host
First in the letter came the praise of Him,

Who made both earth and time, thus “ In the name
Of Him Who IS the Lord of sun and moon,

And giveth power alike to good and bad '

From Him come triumph and defeat, from Him
Both good and bad get might and their desire.

He fashioned the world and place and time.

He fashioned ant’s foot and massy mountain.

And hath bestowed life, lustihood, and wisdom.

High throne and majesty and diadem.

No man can free himself from that control ,

The lot of one is Grace and throne, another’s
Misfortune, want, grief, suffering, and hardship ,

Yet see I that All-holy God is just
In everything, from yonder shining sun
To darksome dust.

Tiis with the flag of Kawa,

And forty warriors wearing golden boots,

I sent out with a host against Tiirdn,

And, first fruit of revenge, my brother perished '


KAI KHUSRAU


Let not Iran have such another chief '

Let not the host have such another leader >

Alas ' Alas ' my brother, young Fariid —

The head of nobles and the stay of heroes ’

I was in tears of anguish for my sire,

A long while was I burning m that sorrow,

And now my brother is the cause of tears *

I know not who are friends and who are foes
‘ Go not,’ I said to Tiis, ‘ toward Charam ,

Breathe not upon KaUt or Mount Sapad,

Because Farud is with his mother there
He IS a warrior of royal race ,

He knoweth not this army whence it is,

And if they be Iranian troops or what ,

He will come forth to stop the way and stake
His head upon the issue of a hght.’

Alas ' that warrior of royal birth

Whom wretched Tiis hath given to the wind >

If he had been commander heretofore
It had been evil hap for Shah Kaus,

And furthermore he slumbereth in battle.

And only rouseth to sit down to drink.

There is no prowess m his neighbourhood.

And may a soul so darkened cease to be ’

When thou shalt read this letter stir thyself ,

Put far away from thee food, rest, and sleep ,

Send Tiis back with all speed, observe mine orders.
And heed not other counsels Thou art chief,

The captain of the host , ’tis thine to wear
The golden boots and hold the flag of Kawa.
Illustrious Giidarz will counsel thee
In all , haste not to fight, keep far from wine,
Abstain from slumber, seek not at the first
To hght through anger, tarry as thou art
Until the wounded are restored to health ,

Then GIv will lead thy van for he possesseth


86


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSf


Grace, stature, and the clutches of a leopard ,

Bring from all sides material for the war,

And God forfend thou think of banqueting ’ ”

They sealed this letter with the Shah’s own signet.
Who thus enjoined the messenger “ Depart
Upon the road, repose not night or day,

And take another horse at every stage ”

So sped the messenger until he came
To Fan'burz and gave him the dispatch.

Who summoned Tiis and Gi'v and all the chiefs,

V 846 Spake of the past, read the Shah’s letter to them,
And then a new Tree fruited in the world
The nobles and the Lions of Iran
All called a blessing down upon the Shah,

The leader Tiis gave up the royal standard,

The drums, the elephants, and golden boots
To Fariburz, and said to him “ They come
As worthy comrades to a worthy man
May fortune always give thee victory.

Be every day of thine a New Year’s Day.”

Then Tiis took all the kindred of Naudar,

Those warlike cavaliers and their command.

And making no delay upon the road
Came from the field of battle to the Shah,

And kissed the ground before him, while Khusrau
Vouchsafed not so much as to look at him.

And only spake to utter malisons.

Disgraced Tiis in the presence of the couit.

And said at last “ Thou man of evil mark '

Let thy name cease among the illustrious
Dost thou not fear the holy Lord of earth ?

Hast thou no awe or reverence for heroes ?

I gave to thee a royal helm and girdle.

And sent thee forth to fight against the foe.

Did not I say ; ‘ Go not toward Charam ’ ?

Yet didst thou go and give my heart to sorrow.


KAI KHUSRAU


87


Didst first of all take vengeance on myself,

And minishedst the race of Siy.iwush '

My noble brother — brave Fariid — whose peei
The age had not thou slowest, and to fight
With him ’twould need a host of men like thee >

Thereafter when thou wen test to the fray v. 847

Thou wast absorbed m minstrelsy and feasting i
Thou hast no place among the throng of men,

The things for thee are chains and straps and madhouse,

Nor hast thou business with the men of rank.

Because thou hast no wise considerance
Thy white beard and descent from Mmiichihr
Have given thee hope of life , else had I bidden
One of thine enemies to be thy headsman.

Go I Let a prison be thy home henceforth,

And let thine evil nature be thy jailor ”

He drave Tiis out, put him m bonds, and tore
The root of gladness from his bosom’s core


S 29

Hoto Fariburz asked a Time of Pirdn

So Fariburz, since he was paladin
As well as prince, assumed the casque and bade
Ruhham display his name and native worth
By going from the mountain to Piran
To treat with him “ Go to Piran,” he said,

“ Convey to him a friendly embassage.

And say ‘ The process of the turning sky
Hath been fraught evei thus with hate and love
It lifteth one to heaven on high, another
It maketh vile, sad, and calamitous.

Him specially that seeketh warriors’ hurt.

Now night-attacks are not the wont of heroes
And mighty men that brandish massive maces


88


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


If thou wilt cease from arms we too will cease ,

If thou preferrest war then we will fight,

V 848 But let there be a one month’s armistice
In order that the wounded may recruit ’ ”

The brave Ruhham went out from Parfbuiz,

And took with him the message and the letter.

He went his way, the Turkman outposts saw him.
And asked him who he was and whence he came
Ruhhdm replied “ A warrior am I,

A man of prowess, weight, and watchfulness —

The bearer of a message to Plran
From Fariburz the son of Shah K4us.”

A horseman of the outpost went like dust
To tell the tidings, and thus spake “ Ruhham,

Son of Gudarz, hath come to see the chief”

Pfran commanded him to be brought m.

And treated with all honour and respect
The eloquent Ruhh4m approached in dread
Of what the foe might purpose, but Piran,

On seeing him, leceived him graciously.

And placed him on the throne Ruhham then told
His business, and Piran said “ 'Tis no trifle ,

Ye stirred up strife , we marked no sloth m Tiis ,

He crossed the border like a savage wolf,

And slaughtered great and small remorselessly.
What multitudes he slew or carried off’

Our country’s weal and woe ivere one to him
Still now, although they took us unaware.

The Iranians aie repaid for their ill deeds,

So if thou art the captain of the host
Demand of me according as thou needest
If thou wilt have a month of armistice
None of our horsemen shall go forth to fight.

If thou wilt fight I too am fain for war ,

Prepare and set the battle in array.

V. 849 If ye will use the month that we accord


KAI KHUSRAU


89


In marching from the frontiers of Thran,

And in a swift retreat to your own borders,

Ye will behold your reputation saved ,

But if not we will close with you in fight ,

Ask not for any armistice henceforth ”

He gave a robe of honour to Ruhham,

One suited to a man of his repute,

And brave Ruhham conveyed to Farfburz
A letter like the one that he had brought.
When Farfburz had gained a month’s delay
He clutched in all directions like a lion
They loosed the fastenings of the money-bags.
They gathered bows and lassos from all sides ,
They went about, reorganised the host,

And partially regained what had been lost.


§ 30

How the trdmans ime defeated hy the Tuihnans

When with the ending of the month came war,

For they observed their compact honourably,

The soldiers’ shouts went up on every side.

And all set forward to the battlefield ,

The dm of trumpet, drum, and bell shook heaven,

While what with chargers’ crests, reins, hands, and
swords.

Bows, battle-axes, lances, maces, bucklers.

And lassos, gnats could find no way “ The world,”

Thou wouldst have said, “ is in the Dragon’s maw, v 850

Or heaven level with earth ' ”

Upon the right

Was Gfv son of Giidarz, an archimage

And marchlord, on the left the skilled Ashkash,

Who shed blood m a river when he fought ,

Before the standard at the army’s centre


90


THE SHAhkAmA of FIRDAUSi


Was Fariburz, the son of Shah Kaus,

With men of battle He harangued his troops,

And said “ Till now our prowess hath been hidden,
But we will hght to-day as lions fight,

And make the world too narrow for our foes ,

Else will our maces and our Riiman casques
Laugh at the host for this disgrace for ever ”

They made a heavy ram of arrows fall
Like autumn tempests beating on a tree
For arrows and the dust of shouting troops
No bird had room to fly, the falchions shone
Like diamonds and flamed amid the dust
Thou wouldst have said “ Earth is a negro’s face ,

The stars are warriors’ hearts.” The multitudes
Of maces, spears, and trenchant scimitars
Brought Doomsday on the \<orld Giv from the centre
Advanced with lips a-foam and raised his war-cry.

He with the noble kinsmen of Gudarz,

With whom the issue lay for good or ill,

V. 851 Strove with their spears and arrows, showering sparks
From steel. Gudarz fought fiercely with Piran,

And slew nine hundred of his km Lahhak
And Farshfdward saw how their mighty host
Was going up in dust and charged on Gfv,

Upon his mace-men and his valiant troops.

Shafts fell in showers from the chieftains’ bows
Upon those famous warriors clad in mail
Till none could see the surface of the ground.

Earth was so hidden by the mass of slam.

While no man turned his back upon another
Or left his post At length Human spake thus
To Farshfdward “We must attack the centre.

And, routing Farfburz, deprive the host

Of his support , it will be easy then

To beat the right wing and to seize the baggage ”

They fell upon the centre, Farfburz


KAl KHUSRAU


91


Fled from Humdn, the fighting Ime was broken,

The haughty chiefs gave way, each took his course,
Not one Iranian warrior stood his ground.

They saw the drums and standard in position
No more, and so with eyes bedimmed with fighting
They turned their backs upon the enemy.

And in that action only grasped the wind.

The tymbals, spears, and standard were o’erthrown.
Men could not tell the stirrup from the rein,

For they had lost all stomach for the fight ,

The mountains and the plains were drenched with blood
Then Fan'burz, as foes were gathering
On every side, made for the mountam-skirt
With those Iranians whose life was whole.

Although for such a life one needs must weep
Giidarz and Giv with many warriorsj
Of fame among the troops still held their own ,

But when Giidarz observed the centre baie,

No flag of Fariburz, no chiefs or troops.

He turned with heart afire as if to flee
’Twas Doomsday for the kindred of Giidarz
Giv said to him “ 0 ancient gencial '

Much hast thou seen of mace, and sparth, and arrow.
And if thy purpose is to flee Piran
I needs must scatter dust upon my head.

Of chieftains and of veteran warriors
There will remain not one alive on earth
For thee and me there is no cure for dying
Death is the very last calamity.

And, since our rugged hour hath come upon us.

The foe should see thy face and not thy back.

I will not quit my post, let us not shame
Thy father’s dust Hast thou heard never then
This ancient saying from some man of lore —

‘ When buttressed back to back two brethren stand
A mountain-mass is but as dust in hand ’ ?


V 852


92 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Thou art alive with seventy valiant sons,

And thou hast many Elephants and Lions
Among thy kindred Break we with our swords
The foe’s heart and uproot him though a Mountain ”
Giidarz, when he had heard the words of Glv,

And marked the helmed heads of his warrior-km,
Repented of his cautious rede and took
A firmer stand. Gur 4 za, Gustaham,

With Barta and brave Zanga came to them,

And made a compact by a binding oath —

V 853 “ Though maces stream with blood we will not quit

This field, but, back to back, strive to retrieve
Our honour lost.”

They took their stand and plied
The mace Full many a noble foe was slam.

But fortune favoured not the Iranians.

Then old Giidarz said to Bfzhan “ Depart
Hence quickly, take with thee thy mace, and arrows.
Direct thy horse’s reins toward Farfburz,

And bring me Kawa’s standard It may be
That Farfburz will come with it himself,

And flush the face of earth with violet ’

Bfzhan on hearing this urged on his steed.

Came like Azargashasp to Faifburz,

And said to him “ Why ait thou hiding here ^
Employ thy reins as warriors use to do.

And stay no longer on the mountain-top ,

But if thou wilt not come entrust to me

The flag and horsemen with their blue steel swords.”

But Farfburz, no mate for wisdom then,

Cried out “ Away ' Thou art in action rash
And new to war. The Shah gave me the standard,
The host, crown, throne, and leadership. This flag
Becofneth not Bfzhan the son of Gfv,

Or any other warrior in the world,”

Bfzhan laid hand upon his blue steel sword.


KAI KHUSRAU


93


Struck at the standard, clove it in the midst,

Seized half thereof and, rushing from the throng,
Made off to bear the banner to the host.

Now, when the Turkmans saw it on the way,

A band of lion-hearted warriors
Went toward Bfzhan and drew their iron sparths.
And blue steel swords, to fight for Kawa’s standard
Then spake Hiirndn “ Yon is the violet flag
Wherein is all the virtue of Iran ,

It we can take it we shall make the world
Strait to the Shdh.”

Bfzhan strung up his bow
As quick as dust, discharged a shower of arrows
Upon his foes, and, as he drove them hack.
Prepared a banquet for the ravening wolf
The cavaliers hard by said unto Gfv
And Gustaham “ The Turkmans are retreating ,
Perchance Bfzhan is commg with the standard ”
The brave chiefs of the Iranian host advancing
With massive maces slew the Tuikman horse
In numbers Famed Bfzhan arrived apace.

And thence the chieftains held the ground tor him
Up to the host. Like lion fieice he came
With Kawa’s flag, the soldiers gathered round it.
And air grew violet-dim with horsemen’s dust
Once more the Iranian host advanced to flght.

And in the foremost rank Rfvnfz was slam.

Who was as dear as life to Kai Kaiis,

A younger son, a prince who woie a crown.

Beloved by Farfburz When that head fell
Full many a noble hero rent his clothes.

And Gfv exclaimed “ Chiefs, valiant warriors ’
Upon this field of battle Farfburz,

The son of Shah Kaiis, esteemed Rfvnfz
Above all else. The grandson and the son
Of old KMs — Fariid the son of Siyawush


V 8s4


94 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSt

And now Klvnfz — have perished all in vain ’

What greater wonder hath the world in store *

^ 855 We must not let his crown fall to the foe
Amid the ranks of war, for that would be
Disgrace upon disgrace through it and through
The slaughter of Ri'vm'z ”

Now brave Pi'ran,

The noble chieftain, heard the words of Gfv,

And o’er that crown the battle rose afresh
On both sides many fell and fortune quitted
The Iranians, yet Bahram the warrior
Charged lion-liko the foe and earned off
The crown upon his spear-pomt, while both hosts
Stood wondering, the Iranians full of joy
At rescuing that crown so late assumed
The combat waxed more fierce, none turned aside,
They raged and smote each other on the head
Until the day grew dark, and eyes were baffled
Eight of the kinsmen of Gfidarz survived ,

The rest had fallen on the battlefield ^

Of Giv’s seed there had perished five and twenty —

Men who were fit for diadem and treasure —

With seventy of the offspring of Kaiis,

All cavaliers and Lions in the fight.

Besides Bfvnfz that crownM warrior.

No unit merely in the reckoning

Nme hundred horsemen, kinsmen of Pfran,

Were missing m the battle on that day.

While of the lineage of Afrasiyab

The fortunes of three hundred slept, howbeit

The field, the day, and therewithal the standard —

The lustre of the world — were with Pfran
v 856 ’Twas not the franians’ day for combating ,

Their combat-seeking ended in mishap,

* See Vol u p 4 The eight survivors include Gtidarz himself and
his grandson Bizhan


KAI KHUSRAU


95


They turned their faces irom the battleheld,
Abandoning the wounded to their fate.

Now Gustaham had had his charger killed
As fortune turned away, and he in mail
Went spear in hand afoot like one bemused.

Bfzhan, approaching him as day grew dark,

Said to him “ Ho ' Get up and ride behind me
There is none dearer to me than thyself.”

So both of them bestrode a single charger.

When day was done they sought the mountain-skirt
Abandoning the battle in a rout
The Turkman cavaliers, with joyful hearts
Released from travail and anxiety.

Returned to their own camp with haughty mien
And fit for fight, while on the fr/inian side
The ears weie deafened by heart-rending cries.

As all mourned on the mountain friend or kinsman

Such IS the process of this ancient sky >

Turn as it may there is no remedy.

And still it turneth o’er us loving none.

But treating friend and enemy as one.

Well may it be a cause of dread to all
Whose fortune’s head is bending to a fall '


§ 31

Hoio Bahiam leturned to loolt toi Jiis Whip on the
Battlefidd

That night, when both the armies were at rest,
Bahram came to his sire in haste and said —

“ 0 mine illustrious sire and worshipful '

When I retrieved that crown, and raised it cloudward

Upon my spear, I lost a whip of mine

Those villain Turkmans, when they pick it up.

Will break their jests upon the great Bahram ,

The world will be all ebon m mme eyes.


V 857


96 THE SHAhnImA OF FIRDAUSt

The Turkman general will use a whip

That hath my name inscribed upon the leather.

I will go quickly and recover it
However great and long the toil may be
Doth this ill come upon me from the stars
That my renown may go down to the dust ^ ”

Said old Gudarz “ O son ’ thou wilt but end
Thy fortunes. Wilt thou face the foemen’s breath
So madly for a stick bound round with leather ? ”

Giv said “ My brother ’ go not forth New whips
Have I m plenty — one whose haft is gold
And silver, two with handles of fine pearls
And other gems When Farangfs unlocked
The treasury and gave so many arms
And belts to me I took this whip and breastplate ,
The rest I left unheeded in Tiiran ^

Moreover Sh6.h Kd.us bestowed upon me
V 858 A whip resplendent as the moon with jewels,

And five I have besides of golden work
Inwrought with royal gems, and all the seven
Will I bestow upon thee Go not forth
And wantonly provoke a new engagement.”

Said brave Bahram to Gi'v “ I cannot hold
This shame of small account Your talk is all
Of colour and design, mine of a name
Now wedded to disgrace I will recover
My whip or, by endeavouring this, will bring
Mine own head to the shears ”

Bahram misread

God’s purpose, and his fortune proved averse
The fool IS all agog to take his leap
Just when his fortune falleth into sleep '

Bahram pricked forth by moonlight to the field.
And bitterly bewailed the slain, those luckless
And heart-seared ones. The body of Ri'vnfz

^ See Vol 11 p 376


KAI KHUSRAU


97


Was whelmed in blood and dust, his tunic rent
Bahram the Lion wept for him and cried —

“ Alas ' 0 young and valiant cavalier i
Men slam like thee are but a pinch of dust '

For nobles palaces, for thee a trench ’ ”

Among his brethren flung on that broad plain
He roamed One, stricken by the scimitar,

Of all those chiefs still lived He marked Bahram,
Wailed, asked his name, and said “ 0 Lion ' I live,
Though flung among the slain, and I have craved
For two days bread and water and a robe
To sleep upon ' ”

Bahram made haste to him
With loving spirit and a kinsman’s heart.

Began to weep and lacerate his cheeks.

Rent his own raiment into strips to bind

The wounds, and said “ Fear not , ’tis but a scratch,

And merely needeth binding Thou shall go.

When I have bound it, to the host again.

And speedily recover of thy hurts ”

He thus restored one that was lost but knew not
That he himself was doomed to lose his way
He said “Stay here, youth ' till I huiry back.

While I was fighting for the crown I dropped
My whip , when I have found it I will come.

And take thee to the aimy with all speed ”

Thence hasting to the centre of the field
He searched about until he found the whip.

Which was amid a heap of wounded men

With much dust showered thereon and blood withal

Alighting from his steed he took it up,

And heard the sound of neighing His steed likewise
Perceived the neighmg of some mares, became
As nimble as Azargashasp, rushed oft.

And turned its head toward them while Bahrdm
In dudgeon followed after in his tunic

VOL. Ill G


V 859


98


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


And helmet, with the sweat upon his face
With hurrying, until he reached the horse
And, having caught it, mounted carrying
In hand an Indian sword , but, when he spurred,

The steed moved not a foot. Both man and horse
Were covered o’er with dust and sweat. Bahrara
Was so chagrined that with his scimitar
He slew the steed Thence to the battlefield
He went as swift as wind There all the plain
Was covered with the dead, and all the ground
V 860 Like cercis-bloom, “ How can wo make our way
Upon the plain,” he said, “without a horse
The foe grew ware of him and from the centre
There hasted forth a hundred cavaliers
To capture him and from the battlefield
Convey him to Piran Bab ram the Lion
Strung up his bow and showered shafts upon them —
A hero’s shafts — so who could bide about him ?

He slew or wounded most of them and sprang

Like some fierce lion at his enemies

The rest withdrew and sought Piran, exclaiming —

“ Behold a Lion both m pluck and might.

Who though afoot will do his kind in fight > ”


§ 32

'How BahrAm was slam by Tarlido

The troops on their return informed Pfran
Of that youth’s deeds, and much talk passed thereon
Plrdn inquired “ Who is this man 1 What name
Hath he among the noble ? ”

One replied —

“ Bahram the lion-queller, the host’s lustre ”

Piran said to Kfiln “ Arise Bahram
Can not escape If thou canst take him living


KAI KHUSRAU


99


The age will rest from strife. Take troops enough,
For he is famed and valiant ”

Hearing this

Riifn went off on hostile thoughts intent
Bahram perceived him quick as dust and showered
Shafts on him, sitting on a mound the while,

A Lion bold with shield before his head.

Riiin son of Pfran was arrow-pierced.

The others lost all keenness foi the fight
They came disheartened to the paladin.

Full of concern and dudgeon, saying thus —

“None ever fought so, and we have not seen
In any stream so fierce a crocodile ”

Piran was sore distraught at this account.

And trembled like the leaf upon the tree ,

Then mounting on his hery steed went forth,
Accompanied by many warriors.

And coming to Bahrdm said “ Famous chief '

Why IS it that thou combatest afoot ?

When thou wast in Tiiran with Siyawush i
Thou usedst to be prudent, shrewd, reserved
We should eat bread and salt togethei, we
Should sit together and become fast fiiends
With such high lineage and native worth,

Such lion-manhood and exceeding prowess.

Thy head must not be levelled with the dust.

And kin and country sorrow for thy sake.

Come let us make a covenant by oath
On such wise as shall satisfy thy heart ,

Then will I make affinity with thee

And, having made it, will advance thee more.

Thou canst not fight against these famous troops
On foot ’ Be not a traitor to thyself ”

Bahr&m said “ Paladin wise, shrewd, and ardent,
My lips have tasted nothing for three days,

^ 8ee Vol ii. p 249 ieq


V 861


loo THE SHAhnAmA OP FIRDAUSI

And day and night have I been combating ,

V 862 But yet I must resume the fight forthwith

Unless thou wilt provide me with a steed
To bear me back to the Iranians,

Back to the old Gudarz son of Kish wad ”

Pfran said “ Know’st thou not, 0 athelmg '

That I can countenance no such design ?

What I suggested is the better course
Thou art a brave man , act not recklessly.

Consider that the horsemen of our host
Hold it no small dishonour to themselves
That many of the scions of the great —

Men who wore diadems, well skilled in war —

Were killed or wounded by thee in the fight.

And smirched with dust Who will approach Iran
Now but with tingling in his blood and brain ?

If there were no fear of Afrdsiyab,

And that his heart would be enraged at me,

I would, 0 youth > provide thee with a steed
To bear thee homeward to the paladin "

He spake thus, turned about, and went his way.
Love in his heart but prudence in his head.

While from the host Tazhav — a man whose might
Surpassed an elephant’s — came forth to meet him,
And asked him what had passed Pfran replied —

“ There is no warrior equal to Bahram.

I gave him out of kindness much good counsel.
Showed him his course, and proffered goodly league ,
Mine offers found no access to his heart ,

He fain would go back to the Iranian host ”

Tazhav replied “ Love will not win his soul ,

Now I will go and if I capture him

Afoot will put him ’neath the stones forthwith.”

V 863 He hurried to the field impetuously,

Where brave Bahram was all alone in arms.

And, when he saw Bahram with spear in hand.


KAI KHUSRAU


loi


Cried loudly like a furious elephant.

And said to him “ Thou wilt not get away
In this fight from these famous warriors
Dost thou expect to go back to Iran ?

Dost thou expect to lift thy head on high ?

Thou hast cut off our princes’ heads Abide,

For now thine own time draweth to a head ”

He bade his mates “ Lay on and give it him
With arrow, double-headed dart, and dagger ”

The troops closed in a body on Bahram,

All who were chief among the valiant men,

While he the hero having strung his bow
Dimmed with his shafts the brightness of the sky
When arrows failed he took his spear in hand,

Till plain and hill were like a sea of gore,

And when the spear was cloven he still shed blood
With mace and sword like raindrops from a cloud
The fight continued on this wise Bahram
Was wounded by the shafts of his brave foes.

And, when the hero’s strength and vigour failed,
Tazhav came up and struck him from behind
A sword-cut on the shouldei Bravo Bahram
Fell from the hillock on his face , the hand
That used to wield the sword was smitten off,

He ceased from combating and all was over.

E’en fell Tazhav grew hot of heart for him.

And, as in shame and grief he turned his reins.

He felt the warm blood tingling m his veins.


§ 33


How G%v blew Tazhav in Revenge for Baht dm


When bright Sol showed its back, Gfv, heart-oppressed
About his brother, spake thus to Bfzhan —

“ Joy of my heart ’ my brother cometh not >


102


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


V 864 We must go forth and ascertam his case ,

Let us not have to sorrow for the slam ”

The valiant pair departed swift as dust
Toward the battlefield — the place of strife.

They sought him everywhere and, having found him,
Rushed anxiously toward him, shedding tears
Of blood He lay — a wreck of gore and dust ,

One hand was severed , all was over with him
The gallant Gfv fell from his charger’s back.

And roared out like a lion At the sound
Bahrain moved, turned, and gaining consciousness
Spake thus to Gfv “ 0 seeker after fame >

When thou hast shrouded me upon my bier
Avenge me on Tazhd,v , that Bull may not
Withstand the Lion From the first Pfran,

The son of Wfsa, proved a fiiend to me.

Unlike the chiefs of Chin who sought revenge.

And then Tazhdv, the injurious, gave these wounds.
Forgetting birth and rank ”

Gfv, when Bahram
Had spoken this, wept tears of gall and said —

" I swear by God the Judge Omnipotent,

By white day and by azure night that till
I shall avenge Bahram my head shall see
No covering save a Riiman helm ”

All vengeance

And grief he mounted, Indian sword in hand.

V 86s Now when the world’s face dusked Tazhav returned

From outpost duty. Spying him afar
Brave Gfv rode toward him with a freer breath
On seeing him thus parted from the host.

No chiefs or warriors near Gfv loosed his lasso.

And caught the foe about the waist forthwith,

Then placed the lasso ’neath his thigh, wheeled round.
And lightly dragged Tazhav from saddle-back,

Flung him to earth disgraced and all forlorn.


KAI KHUSRAU


103


And springing from the saddle bound his hands
Glv, mounting, like a madman haled Tazhav
Along the ground who begged for mercy, saying —

“No fight IS loft in me, thou valiant man '

What have I done that of this countless host
Thou givest me to-night a glimpse of Hell ? ”

Gfv struck him with the whip two hundred times
Across the head, and answered thus “No woids'

Dost thou not know, thou wretch ' that thou hast set
A fresh tree in the garden of revenge —

One that will reach to heaven, one whose trunk
Is fed on blood while daggers are its fruit ?

Since thou must hunt Bahram thou shalt explore

The Crocodile’s strait gullet, for the ill

That robbed Bahram of life wrung GiV’s heart too ”

“ Thou art the eagle and the lark am I,”

Tazhav replied “ I bore Bahram no grudge.

Nor caused his death , the cavaliers of Chfn
Had slain him ere I came ”

“ Pernicious wretch ' ”

Said Gfv, “ spare thine excuse and futile words ”

Gfv dragged him to Bahram, the wounded Lion v 866

And said “ Behold this faithless head ' I pay
The savage with the meed of savagciy
I thank the Maker, the Omnipotent,

That fate hath granted to me time enough
To take thy foeman’s life before thine eyes ”

Tazhdv begged quarter, saying “ That hath been
Which was to be How will it profit thee
To take my head ? ”

Then wallowing in the dust
Before Bahram he cried " 0 noble man '

I will be thy soul’s slave and wait upon
The keeper of thy tomb ”

Then said Bahram

To Gfv “ Whoever liveth hath to die.


104


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Though he hath done me hurt he need not taste
The pangs of death, so spare his guilty head
That he may keep my memory alive ”

But Glv, who saw his brother with such wounds,

And him that did the hurt a captive, seized
Tazh^iv’s beard with a shout and headed him
As ’twere a lark > Bahrdm wept blood and marvelled
At heaven’s processes, then raised a cry
Whose like, so strange it was, none ever heard —

“ If I shall slay, or thou slay in my presence.

My brothers or my kinsmen aviU be slam
This said, the brave Baliram gave up the ghost
’Tis ever thus ivith this world i Ho that would
Obtain the reins must bathe his hands in blood,

Slay or be slam i Shun thou ambition’s mood
V 867 Bravo Gfv wailed o’er Bahnim and strewed dark dust
On his own head, then, having bound his brother
Upon Tazhav’s steed, mounted presently
He brought the body from the battlefield.

And had a royal sepulchre prepared
He filled the skull with spicery and musk.

Enwrapped the corpse m silk of Chin, and set it
In royal state upon an ivory throne
To sleep, suspending over it a crown.

And painting the tomb’s portal red and blue
Thou wouldst have said “ Bahrdm hath never been ”
The famous warriors were absorbed m grief
For fortune changed, and for Bahrain their chief

§ 34

How the hdmans went back to Khusiau

When bright Sol topped the mountains, and the head
And crown of white day showed, the scattered troops
Began to gather, and their converse ran —

“ Full many of the Iranian host are slam '


KAI KHUSRAU


105


Our leader’s fortune hath deserted him,

So mighty were the Turkmans’ hands in fight >

The army must not tarry longer here
We verily must go before the Shah,

And see how fortune turneth If his heart

Be not intent on war then thou and I

Have no occasion to exert ourselves

The sires have lost their sons, the sons their sires.

And most are wounded or in sore distress ,

But it the Shah shall bid us to engage.

And shall equip a noble host, then we

Will march, our hearts filled with revenge and strife,

And make the world too narrow for our foes ”

Thus minded they retreated from those marches.
Their eyes surcharged with tears, their hearts with
anguish,

As brother sorrowed over brother’s blood,

And sighs were on their tongues for kinsmen slam
They marched together to the Rasa rud.

Fare welling with their tongues their fallen friends.

The scouts that went forth fiom the Turkman host
Saw none remaining on the battlefield,

And tidings reached Plran the son of Wi'sa —

“ The land is cleared of the Iranians ”

Plran, on hearing this, without delay
Sent forth spies secretly on every side
And, being certified that that proud foe
Was gone indeed, released his heart from care
He set forth with an escort at the dawn.

And went about to view the battlefield.

The plain and mountains, valleys and ravines,

Had tents and tent-enclosures numberless
He gave them to the soldiers, marched away.

And marvelled at the process of the world
One day a rise, another day a fall.

Now all IS gladness and then terror all,


V 868


io6 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSl

In sooth our best course is the cup to raise
That inaketh earth look bright, and fleet the days
Pfran sent one to tell Afrasiyab,

Who heard and joyed released from care and trouble.
The multitude light-hearted in their gladness
Adorned the road whereby Phan must pass ,

They decorated all the roofs and doors,

And poured out drachms in showers upon his head

As soon as he approached Afrasiyab

The king went forth with gifts to welcome him.

And called down many a blessing on him, saying —

“ Thou hast no peer among the paladins ”

Then from the palace of Afrasiyab
For two weeks rose the sounds of harp and rebeck.
While on the third Pfran resolved to go
Rejoicing to his home The Turkman king
V 869 Made ready presents for him thou wouldst be
Impatient if I told of the dinars.

The royal jewels, belts of gold with gems.

The Arab steeds with golden furniture,

The Indian scimitars with golden sheaths.

The splendid throne of teak and ivory.

The couch of turquoise and the amber crown.

The girls from Chin, the boys from Riim, with beakers
Of turquoise filled with musk and spicery.

This wealth Afr4siy4b sent to Pfran,

And added many other gifts beside.

While as the general left the royal presence
The king addressed him thus “ My loyal hero '

Be prudent, keep the fellowship of priests.

And guard the army from the enemy.

Dispatch in all directions trusty men
To act as spies and privily withal.

For Kai Khusrau is now possessed of wealth ,
Beneficence and justice deck his land
Since noble lineage and crown and throne


KAI KHUSRAU


Are thine desire not any good beside
Be not secure because the foe hath gone,

But seek fresh tidings as occasion serveth.

Thy soul will suffer if thou sleep'st at ease
So long as Rustam is the paladin —

The only man that giveth me concern —

For his whole business is to seek revenge
I fear that he will rouse himself and lead
The armies of fran against Tiiran ”

Pfran, as captain of the host and kinsman,
Accepted all the counsel of the king.

And set forth Avith his troops toward Khutan

Now that the story of Fariid is ended

Hear the campaign wherein Kamiis contended.


PART II

THE STORY OF KAmi:iS OF KASHAn


ARGUMENT

The poet, having offered up his praises to the Maker, goes on
to tell of the wrath of Kai Khusrau with the host Ultimately,
however, at Rustam’s request, he restores Tus to favour, and
sends him against Turin Tus is again unsuccessful, and is
beleaguered on a mountain The news reaches Kai Khusrau, who
dispatches Rustam with reinforcements, while Afrasiyib sends
Kimus of Kashin and the Khan of Chfn with vast hosts to assist
his general Pirin Fierce fighting follows, and Kimus is slain
by Rustam


NOTE

In its earlier scenes this campaign is a variant of the preceding
one In both Tiis commands the Iranians and is defeated, in
both the Giidarzians suffer great losses, in both there are a snow-
storm and a night-attack, and in both the Iranians take refuge
on a mountain Naturally the details vary, but the general
similarity is unmistakable Nothing but the existence of a
variant can account for the fact that Tus is put in command
again after his behaviour in the first campaign, and there is a
legend, probably known to Firdausi, which puts a different com-
plexion on the matter ^ In the poem the difficulty is got over
by the intervention of Rustam, who begs the culprit off, as he
does later on in the case of Gurgin * In the second night-attack,
in which the positions of assailants, and defenders are reversed.
Human takes just the part that Giv is represented as taking on
the first occasion

If we are content to regard the account given in the poem
of the latter part of this campaign merely as Firdausf has pre-
sented it, perhaps we may identify the Kashin with which Kimus'
name is associated as that mentioned by Tabari and situated in

^ See PH ^ See p 331 ^ ZT iv 184

X08


KAI KHVSRAU


109


Ferghdna, which is now a province of Russian Turkistdn We
ought not, however, to overlook the probability that reminiscences
of the Parthian civil wars of the days of Gotarzes and Vardanes
have been embodied in the story In this case, as in that of the
wars of Gushtasp and Arjasp later on, what in reality were civil
broils came in time to be looked back upon as wars between lidn
and Tiiran With the historical fact of the great Persian satraps
ranging themselves in opposing camps before us, there seems no
reason why the Kashan originally intended may not have been
the one in Persia on the highroad between Ispahan and Tihran
Firdausi^s account, however, clearly favours that in Turkist«in,
and we must not forget that the nomads took part in the con-
tention between the iival Parthian princes '

§ 28 The story of Rustam’s fight with Ashkabiis is famous
both on account of its own merits and for the curious legend told
in connexion with it One day, it is said, at the court of Mahmud
a discussion arose as to the merits of Firdausi as a poet, and
it was arranged between his supporters and detractors in the
presence of the Sultdn that he should put one of the legends,
of which nothing but the bare facts remained, into verse the
same day, to ascertain how far his version could be consideied ^
an improvement on the original The story chosen was that of
Rustam’s fight with Ashkabiis of Kashan Firdausi’s rendering
of the episode delighted the assembly, the lines about the string-
ing and discharging of the bow especially fascinating Mahmud,
who repeated them several times and praised them highly That
night Firdausi dreamed that he met Rustam at the gate of
Makna Bad The hero was on foot, fully armed, of teirible
aspect, and with bow in hand, just as the poet had desciibed him
Rustam greeted the poet graciously, but wept and said ‘‘I
desire to pay my debt to thee, but have not powei to do so
However, when I took the torque from the neck of the foe, and
desired not to retain it, I made a hole in the ground yonder with
the head of my spear, and buried the torque there Go now and
take it up ” He pointed out a little hillock on the sand, and,
having placed an arrow upon his bow, shot at it Fiidausi
remembered the dieam and, some time afterward, happening to
pass by Makn*i Bad in attendance on the Sultan, he made the
story known The mound was excavated, and several torques
of led gold were discovered The Sultan gave them to Fiidausi,
who refused to keep them foi himself, and distributed them
among the other court poets *


^ See p 10


2 C Persian Preface, pp 39-41


no


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSI


§ I

The Pi elude

V. 870 In His name Who is Lord of moon and sun,

The name revealed by wisdom to the heart,

The Lord of being and uprightness — One

That brooketh not perverseness on thy part —

The Lord of Saturn, Mars, and Sol, from Whom
Our gospel are, our hopes, and dread of doom '

I know not how to praise Him though m thought
I pour my soul. He fashioned space and time ,
The emmet’s foot with proofs of Him is fraught.

From yonder circling sun to earthly grime,

Bright fire, air, water, all are witnesses.

And give thy soul assurance, that He is

Let it be thine the Maker to revere.

Who hath no need of aught, no need of crown
And throne, of minister and treasurer,

Of less or more, of fortune’s smile or frown ,

Yet, though He needeth naught. His slaves are we.
And bow before His bidding and decree.

Since He created wisdom and the mind.

Past doubt, and set the heaven and stars on high.
In Him supreme the sole Creator find,

And Source of happiness and misery,

V 871 Of night and day, of circling sphere above.

Of food and sleep, of anger and of love.

Of Rustam’s wondrous deeds there is no scant,

His legend in the hearts of all is rife ,

A crocodile in water, elephant

On land, wise, shrewd of heart, a man of strife.


KAI KHUSRAU


III


Consummate both m war and valiancy,

A man of knowledge, wit, and weight was he

His battle with Kamiis I next present
In mine own words but based on document,

So turn now to the rustic minstrel’s lay,

Mark what that man world-proven hath to say


§ 2

How Khnsrau let'iled Tus

The troops with Fan'burz, Giidarz, and Giv —

The shatterer of hosts — went to Iran
In grief with tearful cheeks When they had reached
The road toward Charam and had KaLit
Above, the waters of Mayam below.

They spake about the conflict with Fariid,

And all their gam was anguish and remorse
Fear of the Shah filled every heart with pain.

For they were guilty and their eyes wept blood
They came before Khusrau with souls abashed.

With wounded livers, and as men in fault

For having slam their monarch’s blameless brother.

And yielded crown and signet to the foe ,

They came with hearts seared and with folded arms,
As slaves arc wont, before their sovereign
Khusrau regarded them with angry looks ,

His heart was full of pain, his eyes of tears.

And thus he spake to God “ 0 righteous Judge '
Thou gavest to me fortune, throne, and prowess.

But now I shame before Thee Thou dost know.

Far better than I know, the why and how
Of things, or else I should command to set
A thousand stakes forthwith upon the open,

And Tus and all that carried arms with him


V 872


112


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Should be impaled I mourned my father's death,

My heart was filled with sorrow, pain, and trouble,

And now there is new vengeance for Fariid,

For I must needs smite off the head of Tus.

I said ‘ Avoid Kalat, avoid Charam,

Though people should shower drachms upon thy head,
Because Fariid is with his mother there.

He IS a hero of the Kaian race —

A warrior.’ Should he know vile Tiis or why
The army marched ? Of course he would attack,

And from the mountain slaughter many chiefs.

Why did inhuman and insensate Tiis

March m such haste against that hold ? Good sooth '

The Master of the sky no longer favoureth

Him and the host The kindred of Giidarz

Fared ill through him. Be he his elephants.

And drums accursed I gave him robes of honour
And gifts, and sent him forth to fight — my brother '
Away with chiefs like Tiis son of Naudar i
May no such paladins be generals >

Alas ' alas ' the son of Siyawush —

Fariid — with that stout heart, that mace and sword.
Who, like his sire, was slam though innocent.

Slam by my general and by my troops ’

None know I worse than Tiis, and he is ripe
For chain and pit Brainless and vemless too
The wretch is as a dog to me.”

He writhed

With stricken liver to avenge his brother

And father’s blood, dismissed the troops disgraced,

V 873 Wept his heart’s blood, and shut to them the door
Of audience, being wounded to the soul
With anguish for Fariid. The warriors
Went sad and sorry to the court of Kustam,

And thus excused themselves “ God willed it so '

Who w'lshed to fight Fariid ? Still when the son .


KAI KHUSRAU


”3


Of Ti'is was slain the chieftains’ heads grew dark
At that disgrace and, when his son-in-law
Rfvniz fell too, misfortune’s worst was done
Who knew the name and bearings of Farud,

And wished to wound him through our monarch’s
heart ?

Plead with the Shah Perchance he will refrain
From vengeance on the host Was not Ri'vniz,

The son of Kai Kaiis, slain grievously
In fight as well — a younger son and warrior.

Dear to the father of moon-faced Khusrau ?

Such IS the issue that all battles have.

To this a crown, to that a narrow grave ’ ”


§ 3

✓

How Khustau paidoned the Irdnians

When Sol had gilt earth’s face, and darksome night
Was taken in the toils, shouts rose before
The palace portal and the peerless Rustam
Came to the Shah, and said “ 0 great Khusrau ’
Throne, crown, and signet- ring rejoice in thee
The Shilh is wroth with Tiis and with the host,

But pardon their wrong-doing for niy sake
When Tus beheld his son and son-in-law
Both slaughtered, prudence left his biam and heart.
For first, he is not wise but choleric.

And next, a son’s life is no light concern ,

So when Rivnlz was slam before his face.

And that proud cavalier Zarasp withal.

No wonder if he blazed. The Shah should not
Take vengeance on him Then again the host
Was ill disposed toward thy glorious brother
Because he had not visited the Shah
Know that the date when each must die is fixed,
VOL. III. H


V 874


1 14 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And be not grieved hereat. Our spirit passeth,

Or else is made to pass Three hundred spells
Will not delay it ”

Kai Khusrau replied —

“ O paladin ' I sorrowed for this youth,

But now thy rede is solace to my soul,

Though still I ache at heart ”

Then Rustam kissed

The ground before the monarch of the world.

So when the sun had shot its rays on high,

And hastened to ascend upon its curve,

When It had rent its turquoise robes ol gloom.

So that its ruddy, shining form showed through.

The general, Gfv, and other warriors
Approached the Shah with blessings, and Tiis said —
“ Live fortunate till time shah be no more
Be earth the basis of thy crown and throne.

And heaven the guardian of thy Grace and fortune

My heart is sorrowful, my liver wounded

With pain tor my misdeed, my mind is full

Of shame, my tongue is all excuse, my soul

All fault, I burn as 'twere Azargashasp

In anguish for the pure souls of Faiiid

And of Zarasp. It I am guiltier

Than others I am writhing for my deed

When valued with Bahram a^d with Rfvnfz

Mine own life is not worth a single mite ,

So if the Shah will cease from wrath with me.

And with this noble but offending host,

I will go forth to cancel this disgrace,

And will exalt our fallen heads anew ,

V. 875 I will share all the army’s toils myself.

Be it to keep my life or lose my head
Henceforth I will not look at throne and crown.

My head shall see naught but a helm of Riim ”

The monarch graciously received these words ,


KAI KHUSRAU


ns

His heart grew fresh as roses in the spring
He counselled much with Rustam, with the chiefs
And warriors, then sent Tiis ’gainst Tiiran
With elephants and shawms and kettledrums.

The company dispersed without delay.

And Rustam also homeward took his way


§4

How Khus)au sent Tits to Twdn

When bright Sol showed, and when from night’s bent
bow

Dawn brake, Tiis with the great men of the host
Came to Khusrau who said “ Trace of this feud
Is never lost Begun by Salm and Tiir
It had fresh impulse given by Mimichihr,

But never was a Shah so shamed as I,

Or earth so glutted with his warriors’ gore '

The hills have girt them with Giidarzians’ blood
For whom weep bird and fish by land and sea
O’er the Turanians’ waste the franians’ hands
And feet and trunks lie scattered ' Are your counsels
Auspicious ? Are ye all heart-stirred to vengeance ? ”
The gallant warriors, with folded arms
Before that sunlike and aspiring one.

All kissed the ground together — warriors,

Such as Ruhham, Gurgi'n, Giidarz, and Tus,

Kharrad and Zanga son of Shawaran,

Bfzhan and Gfv and other men of might
They said “Well starred, good-hearted Shah who
hast

The heart withal to pluck out lions’ hearts *

We all of us are slaves of thine and hang
Our heads in reverence, 0 Shdh ' before thee.

If now the Shdh so biddeth we will all


V 876


n6 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAVSt

Pour out our souls in fight, nor shall he mark
Aught ill from us if sun and moon shall lour not.”

Khusrau then summoned Glv and seated him
Upon the throne of greatness, praised him much.
Bestowing many a gift and mark of favour.

And said “ Thou seekest toil on mine account.

But sharest not my treasures Tus though leader
Must not employ the drums and elephants
Against thy counsel rashly. Didst not see
How in Bahram’s case (may his soul rejoice i)

Great skill in warfare fashioned for itself
A dark, strait dwelling through the quest of fame
And ill advice ? Brief though our sojourn be
Fame should remain behind us, not disgrace.”

Khusrau gave money, called the commissaries.
Spake much with Tiis, and sought a lucky day
According to the stars for setting forth
The chieftain Tiis then came as general.

Received the standard, elephants, and drums.

And did obeisance while the soldiers shouted
The earth heaved underneath the chargers’ tramp ,
V 877 A dust-cloud gathered from the horses’ hoofs ,

The trumpet’s blast went up What with the mass
Of mail and Kawa’s flag earth's face all turned
To violet. “ The sun,” thou wouldst have said,

“ Is quenched, the sky and stars are all asleep ”

The Shah abode upon the plain with mace
And elephant till Tus the general
Had passed, who on an elephant outspread
A turquoise litter and thus Shahd-ward sped.


KAI KHUSRAU


117


§ 5

The Message of Phan to the Army of trdn

A cameleer bore blast-hke to Piran

This message “ I have reached the river Shahd

In arms and ready to contend with thee.”

Piran, on hearing this, was sorely grieved
That, ’gainst his will, he needs must pack the loads,
And went forth with his chiefs — choice cavaliers
And brave — to learn about the Iranian host,

How many chiefs, and who, were there with Tiis
He drew his troops up on his side the strea^a.

And sent a greeting to the Iranian chief
He said “ I everywhere showed kindliness
To Farangls and to the Shah I cried.

And seethed as on fierce fire, for Siyawush ,

But now the antidote doth bear the bane,

I share in all these ills ”

Tus was distressed.
Grieved at the words and sufferings of Pfran,

And said “ Go to PMn of ardent soul.

And say ‘ If thou speak’st sooth we have no quarrel
Drop fealty, abandon thy surroundings.

And bar this door of fear and road of loss
Go to the Shah alone, he will requite thee.

Give thee a royal crown and paladinship.

When he recalleth thy good deeds thy pangs
Will pain him to the heart. Giidarz and Gfv
And other chieftains, nobles shrewd of heart.

Agree herein ’ ”

The envoy went like wind
Back to Pfran and told what he had heard
From Tiis and from Giidarz of ardent soul.

PMn made answer • “ I by night and day
Will ope my lips to praise the chieftain Tiis.


V 878


Ii8 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

I Will go over, taking of my kin

Those who are wise and list to mine advice,

And send them, bag and baggage, to Iran
An honoured head is more than crown and throne ”
He did not purpose acting in this way,

But sought to gam occasion by delay.


§6

How Afrdbtydb sent an At my to Pit an

Plrdn dispatched a camel-post by night

To tell Afrdsiydb “ Troops have arrived

With shawms and tymbals from Iran, commanded

By Glv, Gudarz, and Tiis, whom I have duped

And much advised with. Choose a warrior-host

Or else the war will be inglorious

We may uproot the foe and fire their land,

V 879 Else in their vengeance for prince Siyawush
The Iranian army ne’er will rest from strife ”
Afrasiyab thereat convoked his captains,

Told what had chanced, and said “ Prepare for wai ”
Afrasiyab arrayed a power that dimmed
The eye of Sol , that host, so great that earth
Was hidden, on the tenth day reached Piran,

Who having victualled and disposed the troops.

And loaded up the baggage, marched in haste.
Regarding not his promise, to the Shahd
A scout came in to Tiis and said to him —

“ Bind thou the drums upon the elephants
Because Plrd,n, perceiving downfall nigh.

Spake guilefully We see the tyrant’s standard
And army drawn up on the river-bank ”

Tiis put his battle in array They ranged
The elephants and tymbals on the plain
The two Imes, hke two mountams, clashed in fight —


KAI KHUSRAU T19

The franian horsemen and the Turkman troops.

The dust-clouds of the hosts so dimmed the sun
That hre rose from the stream — the flash of sword,

Of dart and javelin — and thou hadst said —

“ Earth planted air with tulips ' ” With the stir
Of horsemen with their golden belts, and all
The golden helmets and the golden shields,

A cloud m hue like sandarach arose,

And earth became like ebony with dust
The horsemen’s heads beneath the mighty maces
Seemed anvils ’neath smiths’ hammers. Thou hadst
said —

“ The river is a wine-press lunning blood.

The air is like a reed-bed Avith the spears ' ”

Then many heads were caught m lasso-coils.

Then many an honoured form was cast away
The shroud Avas mail, the pillow blood and dust ,

The bosom had been hacked by scimitars
Earth was a cercis-bloom, air ebony ,

The dm of tymbals filled the starry heaven •

What though the ambitious man a croAvn may gain
Or but the battle’s surge of blood and dust.

Yet from this world of oui’s depait he must,

Whate’er his portion — antidote or bane
I wot not of the end but, this I knoAv,

It IS a cause for tears to have to go


§7

How Til$ slew Ai?hang

%

There was a famous Turkman named Arzhang,
One Avhose renown m Avarfare reached the clouds
He sent the dust up from the battlefield,

And challenged the trdmans Tus from far
Saw him and shouted, drew his sword and asked


V 880


120


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


That son of Zira “ What name bearest thou ?

Who IS thy fellow in the Turkman host ? ”

He said “ Arzhang am I, a warrior —

A noble Lion who can bide his time.

Now will I make the earth quake under thee,

And cast thy head upon the field of fight ”

V 88i Tiis, hearing but disdaining all reply,

Smote with the glittering falchion in his hand
That chieftam on the helm, and thou hadst said —
“ His body never bore a head at all ' ”

Pfr4n grieved sorely and the Turkman host,

And none came forth, but all the warriors
And chieftains of Tiiran drew scimitar
And massive mace, and shouted to each other.
Those Lions “ Let us charge and make the world
Strait to the heart of Tus ”

Then said Human —

“ To-day we will prepare. Be not cast down
If any noble of the Iranians
Shall come to challenge us we will dispatch
A man to fight him and will mark the issue,

But not provoke them rashly What we need
Is respite for a day, but when the host
Is stirring, and the tymbals sound in camp.

Then from beyond the stream be onslaught made
With mace m hand if God and fortune aid.”


§ 8

How HUmdn fought icitTi Tds

«

Hiiman bestrode and spurred his eagle-steed.
Thou wouldst have said “ He is an iron wall.

Or Mount Alburz m mail ^ He came before
The host to fight and grasped a glittering spear.
Tiis too advanced , earth rang with clarion-blare.


KAI KHUSRAU


I2I


“ And so from luckless Wlsa,” he exclaimed,

“ A miserable Tree like this up-sprmgeth '

Hast thou indeed come forth to fight since thou
Hast come forth mounted and with spear in hand ?
By the ShAh’s life and head I would oppose thee
Without my breastplate, mace, and Human casque.
Just like a pard that clutcheth at its prey
Among the mountains. Thou shalt see how heroes
Fight if thou venturest.”

Human replied —

“ Be not o’er- weening for it is not good
Though fate hath come upon one luckless chief.

And by thy hand, hold not the rest in scorn.

Arzhang had deemed himself no man at all
If matched with me upon the day of battle
But have the franian warriors no shame ?

Doth not the warm blood boil m any breast
In that their leader hath to champion them ?

Have their hands failed to fight ? Where are Bfzhan
And Gi'v — those noble ones — and where Giidarz,

Son of Kishwad, that taker of the world ?

If thou art paladin Avhy hast thou left

The centre for the field ? The wise will own not

Thy kinship and the sane will hold thee mad.

Go, hold up Kawa’s standard , generals
Come not to fight in person Look for one
On whom the Shah bestowed a robe of honour,

Some warrior m quest of crown and signet.

And order him to battle with the Lion,

And bring the hand of the high-handed down
111 would befall this noble host of thine
If thou wert slain by me, thy troops become
Abandoned, spiritless, and, if they lived.

Discomfited. Save Rustam son of Zal,

And Sam the cavalier, I see no noble
Like thee within Iran whose ancestors


v 882


V. 883


122 THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt

Were men renowned and SMhs No need of army
If thou wilt fight in person ' Go thy way
That some aspirant from the host may face me ,
Besides, if thou wilt list to true advice,

Wherein my soul and heart confirm my tongue.

The bravest smart when they encounter me.”

Tiis said “ Exalted man f I am the leader.

But am withal a horseman of the fray
Thou art a leader of the Turkman troops
Thyself ' Why then hast thou come on the field ^

If thy heart will accept advice of mine
Seek, 'tis my counsel, for a league with me
Come with the noble captain of thy host
Before the Shdh because, while one surviveth,

These troops will rest no j6t from this revenge.

Give not thyself thus madly to the wind.

And may my counsel ne’er recur to thee.

Leave those who should be slam to fight with us.

For not one guilty shall escape our vengeance.

So act the wise man’s part The Shdh directed —

‘ Harm not Pi'r4n He is my foster-sire.

Experienced, and my friend Strive not with him
Unjustly, wantonly, and see that he
Hear thine advice ’ ”

Human said “ Right or wrong.
When bidden by a king of glorious race,

V 884 We must go forth . we have no remedy.

But must surrender all our heart to him.

Pfran himself desireth not this strife.

For he is noble, good, and generous ”

While Tiis was parleying, the face of Gfv
Resembled sandarach, he left the host
Like wmd, “ O Tiis of glorious race ' ” he cried,

“ A wily Turkman with his lips afoam

Hath come between the lines , why should he speak

So long with thee apart ? Seek not the door


KAI KHUSRAU


123


Of peace, speak only with thy scimitar ”

Hiimdn, on hearing, raged and said to Giv
Of sleepless fortune “ Wretchedest of all
The free ’ perish Giidarz son of Kishwad '

Upon the day of battle at Ladan
Thou sawest me with Indian sword m hand
Where not one of his seed survived that read not
The inscription thereupon For thee, thy fortune
Is like the face of Ahriman, and mourning
Is ever m thy house. If Tiis slay me
Men still will use the mace and kettledrum
Plran is hying and Afrasiyab,

Who will avenge me promptly, but if Tus
Shall perish by my hand none of his troops
Will reach Iran Bewail thy brothers’ pangs.

Why railest thou at Tiis son of Naudar

“ What wrath is this ? ” said Tiis, “ I am thy foe ,

Come let us wheel about, begin the encounter,

And bend our brows in battle ”

Then Human —

“ All heads beneath a crown or helm must die
Since death must come ’tis best upon the held.

And by the hand of some skilled cavalier,

A leader, prince, and ardent warrior ”

Then, grasping each his massive mace, they charged
Earth reeled, day darkened, and a dust-cloud gathered
Above the scene of strife Thou wouldst have said —

“ The night hath come on them by day, the sun —

The lustre of the world — is blotted out
Those mighty maces clashed and bent like bows
Of Chach, the ring of steel rose to the sky,

The wind of that contention reached the Shahd ’

Thou wouldst have said “Stone heads are in those
helms,

Those warriors’ blows have blackened death’s own face ' ”
They took in hand their Indian scimitars.


V 885


124


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSt


And sent sparks streaming out of stone and steel
V 886 Till with the chieftains’ might the trenchant blades

First bent, then shivered. Dust-smirched and athirst
Each warrior clutched the other’s leathern belt,

And pressed with all his weight upon the sturups.

But neither came to dust Humin’s belt snapped.

He leapt upon a fresh steed while Tus took
His quiver, strung his bow, and set thereon
A poplar arrow He began to shower
His shafts upon his noble foe and wheeled
To left and right as horsemen use to do
The points of steel and eagle-plumes bedimmed
The mid-day sun, the world became as ’twere
Night’s second watch, its face like diamonds
Pierced by a poplar shaft Hiiman’s steed fell ,

He raised his shield to save hio face and head.

On seeing him afoot upon the field.

And holdmg not his own, the Turkman chiefs
Brought him a noble mount, but when Human
Had seated him upon the bark-lined saddle,

With Indian sword in hand, the men of name
And warriors all drew near to him and said —

“ It groweth dark, there is no time, and strife

Is over for the day. May evil eyes

Be far from thee and fighting end in feast ”

V 887 Hiiman the warrior turned his rein (Tus raising
His own lance to him), left the field, and sought
Pfran. A shout rose from the Turkman host —

“ How didst thou fare when face to face with Tus,

0 warrior ? Our hearts were full for thee ’

God only knoweth what we felt t ”

That Lion

Replied : “ 0 brave and veteran warriors >

The day will bring us triumph, we shall take
Yon shming flag, all joy will be your portion.

And I shall have the stars of heaven for mine ”


KAI KHUSRAU


125


Tus for his part was shouting through the night
Till cock-crow “ Is Human the man for me ^

A raging lion should my foeman be.”


§9


Hoie the Itdmans and Tdidmans fought the second Time


Now when high heaven had made its Crown of Jet,

And flung Pastilles on Lapislazuli,

The pickets hurried forth on every side,

And set the watch around the camps, but when
Sol showed in Cancer, and the world became
Fair as a Ruman’s face, from both the camps
The sound of tymbals rose, the world was filled
With the blare of clarions, air was thick with flags.
Which gleamed red, yellow, black, and violet.

The warriors bared their weapons, and rode forth
To battle. Thou hadst said “ Heaven, earth, and time
Don iron,” while the radiant sun was veiled
By dust of caracoling cavalieis,

And, what with neigh of steeds and dm of drums,
Heaven kissed the earth Human the chieftain wheeled
Before the ranks, a shining dart in hand,

And cried “ When I shall raise the battle-shout.

Urge on my charger and seethe up with rage.

Then draw ye forth your falchions as one man.

And hold your shields of Chin above your heads
See nothing but your hoises’ crests and reins,

I want no bow, I want no lance’s point.

But armed with sword and club and massive mace.

As is the use and wont of warriors.

Throw down your reins upon your horses’ necks.

And give and take the buffets as they come.”

This said, the gallant horseman lion-like
Went to Plran “ 0 paladin ' ” he cned,


V 888


126


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSl


“ Unlock the weapons of our warriors,

Keep not dinars within the treasury,

And hoard not arms If we prevail to-day
Thy heart shall pluck the fruit of favouring stars ”

On his side Tus arrayed his host as ’twere
The eye of chanticleer. The warriors blessed him,

And hailed him as the paladin of earth.

Who triumphed in the battle, and whose valour
Sent dust up from Human Then to Giidarz,

Son of Kishwad, said Tus “ Let all wot well
That if we march forth, and our foes prevail.

Our trust must be in God, not in ourselves ,

V 889 He may assist us, else the day is lost.

At present let the chiefs with golden boots
Remam with Kawa’s standard Let none quit
The mountain , this is not the day and season
For strife and stir Good sooth > the enemy
Out-number us two hundred times or more ' ”

Gudarz replied “ If God will but avert
Our evil day the fact of more or less
Importeth not Daunt not the frdmans,

For if the sky turn over us for ill
To wait IS no avail Airay the host ,

Dash not our souls with what may be ”

So Tiis,

The chieftain, put the battle in array —

Men, drums, and elephants of war , the footmen
Went with the baggage to the heights, Gudarz
Was on the right, Ruhham shared with Gurgfn
The left, the troops were ranked, anon the sky
Shook with the roar of drum and clarion,

V 890 'fhe heart of circling heaven was rent, the sun

Was choked with dust, none saw the ground beneath him.
The murky clouds rained showers of diamonds.

Fire flashed from helm and sword, the spear-heads
gleamed,


KAI KHUSRAU 127

And massive maces whirled Thou wouldst have
said —

“ The air is mace and iron, and the earth
Horseshoes and mail ” The plains and dales ran blood,
And swords were lamps that lit a world of night
No one knew head from foot, such was the dm
Of drum and clarion 1 Tiis said to Giidarz • —

“ Night cometh and the astrologer hath told me —

‘ To-day until the night’s third watch is passed
The warriors from their scimitars will pour
Blood on the field, like ram from some dark cloud ,

But victory, I fear me, m the end
Will rest with our revengeful foes

Shi'diish,

Ruhham, Giv, Gustaham, Kharrad, FArh4d,

And brave Barzi'n came forth between the hosts,

Came liver- wounded, eager for revenge.

Like troops of divs upon a murky night,

While m all quarters dm assailed the clouds
Human on his side mountain-huge led forth
His army troop on troop, and none could tell.

Amid the mass of maces, mallets, swords,

And spears, the stirrups from the reins He said —

“ Our work to-day must not be like the fight
Of yesterday, but we must sweep the eaith
Of foernen lest they seek revenge hereaftei ”

Then Tus advanced with foot-men, elephants,

And kettledrums, while spear-men, pavisers.

And javelm-men drew up before the horse-men.

“ Leave not your posts,” he said, “ and hold your shields
And spears m front of you, and we will see
The massive mace-play of their chivalry.”


V 891


128


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


§ lO

How the Tuidnians used Sorcety against the Host of iidn

Among the Turkmans there was one Baziir
By name, adept m magic, versed m guile
And sorcery, and learned in the tongues
Of Chin and ancient Persia. To that warlock
Pfran said “ Scale the mountain-top and send

V 892 Snow, cold, and blast upon the Iranians ”

That sorcerer sped thither, and forthwith
Came snow and storm. The Iranian spearmen’s hands
Failed in the snow and stress Amid the tumult
And icy blast the warriors’ war-cry rose,

And arrows rained “ Let all the army charge,”

Phan bade “ While their hr nds freeze to their spears
None can show prowess.”

With a shout Humdn

Charged like a lusty dfv They slaughtered so
That ’twixt the lines there was a sea of gore.

The vales and wastes were filled with snow and blood,
The horsemen of Irdn were overthrown.

Till corpses left no room to wheel , the ground
Was blocked by snow and fallen Tiis the leader
And other chiefs cried bitterly to heaven —

“ 0 Higher than all knowledge, sense, and reason.

Not at, or in, but everywhere > we all

Are Thy transgressmg slaves and in our straits

Appeal to Thee, for Thou wilt help the helpless.

And art the Lord of fire and icy blast
Deliver us from this excessive cold ,

We look for aid to Thee and Thee alone.”

A sage approached Euhhdm and showed the height

V S93 Where bold B 4 zfir was stationed with his spells

Buhham wheeled round and quitting field and host.
And girding up his mail-skirts to his waist.


KAI KHUSRAU


129


Clomb to the mountain-top. The ■warlock saw him,
And, grasping a steel mace of Chfn, advanced
To fight Ruhham, approaching, quickly drew
His trenchant scimitar and hacked away
The warlock’s hand. Like Doomsday came a blast,
And swept the murk from heaven Staying thus
The sorcerer’s hand the brave Ruhham descended,
Regained the plain, and mounted while the air
Resumed its azure vault and radiant sun
Ruhham said to his sire “ 'Twas sorcerer’s work.
And how he played the mischief as we fought ' ”

The Shah’s troops saw the field a sea ol blood
Strewn with Iranian heads and headless trunks.

Then spake Giidarz to Tiis “No need have we
For elephant or drum-beat Let us all
Draw sword and charge, and slay or else be slam
Good sooth ' our time is coming to an end ,

This IS no day for lasso, shaft, or bow ”

Tiis said “ 0 thou experienced veteran '

The sky is ridded of that icy blast
Why should our heads be scattered to the winds.
Now that the Helper giveth Grace and strength?
Expose not thou thyself, for in this strife
Our warriors will avail to do oui will
Go not to meet thy fate or recklessly
Advance against our foes but tarry thou
With Kawa’s standard at the aimy’s centre.

And blue steel sword in hand Bizhan and Giv
Together lead the right , upon the left
Is Gustaham , Ruhham is with Shidush
Before the lines , Gurdza’s lips are foaming
For vengeance. If I shall be slain, retreat
Back to the Shah, but death is nobler far
For me than shame and every foeman’s jeers.’

Such IS the world, all anguish and all woe
Seek not addition if thou canst forbear,

VOL. III.


V 894


1


130 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

For that will bite thee some day and will ne’er
Prolong existence for thee here below
Again arose the blast of clarions,

The clangour of the gongs and Indian bells
What with the din of warlike cavaliers,

The gleam of sword and crash of battle-ax,

What with darts, maces, shafts, and javelins.

The earth became as ’twere a sea of pitch.

The plain was tilled with trunkless heads and arms.

The crashing of the maces tilled all ears.

But, since the face of cruel fortune loured
The Iranian warriors showed the foe their backs
Then Tus, Gtidarz, and gallant Giv, Shidush,

Bizhan, and lion-like Ruhham all took
Their lives in hand and went in quest of fame
Before the embattled lines All those with Tus,

The nobles and the chiefs, poured out their blood
Before the host, but those behind them fled
Then said an archmage to that warrior-chief —

“ The army is no longer at thy back

The foe must not surround thee and destroy

Both host and general

Tus said to Gi'v —

“ Our soldiers’ brains and wisdom are no mates
Since they have left us thus, and in their folly
Turned from the tight , go thou and rally them ,

Protest our foemen’s jeers, our monarch’s shame ”

Glv went , the host returned , the plain and desert
Seemed tilled with slain Then Tiis addressed the
captains —

“ This is a struggle and a strife of chiefs ’

V 895 But since the cheek of day is darkling now,

And all the land is like a sea of blood.

Seek we a resting-place if night can rest
Our slam perchance a bed of sand may have.

And coverlet of earth by way of grave ”


KAI KHUSRAU


§ II


How the hdmans letreoted to Mount Hamdwan


The iranians drew back with heads abashed
And livers wounded for their friends, and when
The moon rose 'o’er the mountains as it were
A king triumpl\ant on his turquoise throne,

Pfran the chieftain called his warriors,

And said “Not many of the foe remain,

And, when the Topaz Sea shall dash its waves
Upon the Kealm of Lapislazuli,

I will destroy those that survive and make
The Shah’s heart writhe ”

The troops went oft rejoicing.
And all the night before the tent-enclosure
Sat sleepless through the sounds of harp and rebeck ,
But for their part the franians mourned, the sires
Lamented for their sons, the killed and wounded
Hid all the plain, earth ran with great men’s blood.

To right and left the field was strewn with hands
And feet unsortable All night men raised
Their stricken friends, bound up and stitched their
wounds.

Left strangers to their fate, and burned the slam.

Full many of the kindred of Giidarz

Were hurt or killed or captive At the news

He wailed, earth shook beneath the IrAnians’ cries.

The chiefs all rent their raiment, he himself
Cast dust upon his head, exclaiming “None
With hoary head hath seen such ills as mme '

Why must I still survive with my white hairs
Now that so many of my sons are laid
In dust t Since that dark day when I was born
I have not doffed my tunic. When I went
With heroes and my cavaliers to war


V 896


132


THE SHAhnAmA of PIRDAUSt


My grandsons and my sons supported me,

But none of them surviveth our first fight
Upon Tfiranian soil i May be my sun
Was once for all extinguished with Bahram,

And hence I see so many chieftains slam ”

Tiis, hearing of Giidarz, wept tears of blood,

And turned as pale as sandarach He raised
A bitter Magian dry “ Had not Naudar,

That holy man,” he said, “ set in life’s garth
My feet and roots then travail, pam, and grief.
Woe for the dead and anguish in the strife.

Had ne’er been mine, for since I girt my loins
My heart hath oft been pierced though I survive.
Now where there is a pit inter the slam,

Restore each trunk its head, and bear the baggage
Toward Mount Hamawan Take all the army.
The tents, and tent-enclosures to the mountain
We will dispatch the Shdh a camel-post ,

His heart will burn and he will send us troops
I purposed when I sent the cavalier
To carry news of us before the battle.

That Kai Khusrau should send the son of Zal
To lead the reinforcements to the field.”

He loaded up and, thinking of the slam
With anguish, called his men to horse again.


§ 12


How the Host of Tiir&n beleaguered Mount Hamdwan


V 897 Now when the bright sun showed its crown, and strewed
The Ivory Throne with Camphor, Tiis, good sooth >
What while the foe were sleeping with fatigue.

Had marched ten leagues, and fared thus day and night
With heart all sorrow and unbroken fast.

He reached Mount Hamdwan and ranked his troops


KAI KHUSRAU


133


Upon its outskirts. Every eye was bloodshot,

Their hearts were seared, their souls like ravens’ plumes
With anguish Then spake Tiis to Glv and said —

“ 0 full of wisdom and illustrious chief '

For three days we have marched with neither food
Nor sleep > Come eat a little and repose
At ease without thy mail , Piran no doubt
Will follow us anon intent on hght.

Go to the mount thyself, and leave behind
The freshest of our soldiers with Bi'zhan ”

Gfv bare the wounded, weary of the world
And sick of life, up to the mountain-hold,

And chose the freshest of his troops for duty
“ This mountain-top,” he said, “ must be our home
We must recruit ”

The outpost-guards descended
To hold the approaches that no foe might pass,

And, what with challenges and sound of gongs.

Thou wouldst have said “The stones and rocks cry
outt”

Now when the sun rose o’er the mountain- tops
The Turkmans’ hearts weie full of eagerness.

A sound rose from Piran’s pavilion
As of an earthquake He led forth the host
Like file, and told Humsln “ The contest surely
Will soon be over All their cavaliers
Are slam or, being wounded, cannot fight.”

He beat the drums , a shout rose from the waste ,

He led m person. When they reached the field
They only found a camp without an army,

And one who went to spy came to Pi'ran,

And said “ There is not an fr^inian here ' ”

A shout of triumph rose, the troops awaited
The orders of Pfran who thus addressed
The wise men “ Sages famed and worshipful '

What shall we do now that our foes have fled * ”


V 898


134 the SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt

The horsemen of the host, both old and young,
Wroth with the paladin, exclaimed “ The Iranians
Have fled defeated, and the battlefield
Is full of dust and blood i This is no time
To fear them We should follow up the foe
Strange if thou partest with thy wits and wisdom
The fugitive from wind plunged into water.

And we had better hasten than delay ”

Pfrd,n replied “ In war the foot of haste
Is feebler than delay's A sea-like host
Is gathering before Afrdsiyab ,

Let us delay till that great power with all
Its warriors and fightmg-men shall come ,

Then will we leave none living m Iran
Such is the counsel of the wise Enough
Hiiman said to Pfrdn “ C paladin >

Vex not thy soul so much on this account
V 899 A host — all paladins and cavaliers,

Brave men who wield the lasso and the sword —

Have left their ground, their tents, and tent-enclosures,
Abandoned all and fled Be sure of this,

That they were forced to flee and once for all
Show us their backs We will not let them reach
Khusrau and muster at his court afresh ,

Then from Zabulistan will Rustam march
Upon us, this delay cause fearful loss
Now IS the time for me to fall on them,

And put in practice ruse and artifice
We have the certainty of laying hands
Upon Giidarz and Tiis the general.

The royal standard, elephants, and drums
Shall we do better by delaying here ? ”

Pfran replied . “ Be still thus shrewd and ardent.

So do because thy star and rede are good.

And heaven’s vault is not so high as thou.”

He set forth with his armv in nursuit


KAI KHUSRAU


J35


And bade Lahhak “ Now tarry not but ply
The rein with ten score cavaliers and loose not
The girdle from thy loins till thou hast seen
Where the fr.inians are ”

He went like wind,

And took no thought of rest and food. At midnight
The Iranian outpost-guards caught sight of him
Upon the dusky plain, and from the mountain
Rose shout and sound of gong ’Twas not the time,
He saw, to tarry, went back to Pi'ran,

And gave him tidings of the Iranian host —

“’Tis on Mount Hamawan with front well giiaided ”
Plran said to Human “ Ply rein and stiriup
In haste, take with thee cavaliers enough.

Take nobles, warriors, and men ol name.

For with their flag and troops the fninians
Have taken refuge on Mount Hamawan
This war involveth further toil, so sharpen
Thy wits to hnd a remedy , if thou
Canst capture Kawa’s legacy — his standard —

Then daylight will be darkened to our foes
If thou prevailest cleave the flag and staff
To pieces with thy trenchant scimitar
Lo, I will follow after thee like Avind,

And dally not ”

Human chose thirty thousand
Tiiranian horse with shields and scimitars
Now, when the shining sun displayed the face
That filleth earth with love, that army’s dust
Appeared afar and from the look-out lose
The watchman’s shout “ An army from Tiiran
Appeareth ’ Upward to the darksome clouds
Its dust ascendeth ' ”

Tus, on hearing this.

Assumed his mail, rose dm of trump and drum.

And all the Iranian chivalry m mass


V 9CO


136 THE SH Ah NAM A OF FIRDAUSt

Ranged on the mountain’s foot. Whenas Hiiman
Beheld that mighty army brandishing
Sword, mace, and spear, and raging like fierce lions
With Kawa’s standard in their midst, he shouted
Thus to Giidarz and Tiis “Ye left fran
With elephants and drums to be avenged
Upon Tiiran and to invade our coasts ,

Now to the mountain have ye fled like game,

In utter rout and all fordone with fight >

Feel ye no shame hereat and no disgrace ?

Are food and rest and sleep in rocks and stones ?
To-morrow, when the sun shall top the hills.

Will I turn this thy stronghold to a sea
V 901 Will bring thee from this lofty mountain down.

Will make thy hands fast m the lasso’s coils.

And send thee to Afrasiyab, deprived
Of provand, rest, and sleep, and thou shalt know
That this thy shift is but a shiftless one.

And one to be deplored ”

He sent Pi'ran

A camel-post full speed. “ What sort of fight

Did we expect ? ” he said “ Our thoughts were other.

And we made ready to attack the foe.

But all the mount is troops and kettledrums.

The standards wave behind Giidarz and Tiis '

Take order that as soon as bright day shineth.

And when the world’s Light showeth in the sky.

Thou mayst be here with troops in war-array,

And make the plain’s face dark with hosts of men.’

The message roused Pfran , no time was lost ,

That night he marched on with a sea-like host.


KAI KHUSRAU


137


I 13


How Pirdn went tn Pursuit of the fiAnians to Mount
Hamdwan


When Sol, aweary of its veil of gloom,

Had bursten through it and come forth, Pfran,

The leader, reached Mount Hamawan, and earth
Was hidden by the dust of troops “ Abide,”

Thus said he to Hiirnan, “ here where thou art ,

Set not the troops in motion for a while
I will hold parley with the Iranian leader.

And say ‘ Why hast thou set up Kawa’s standard ? ’
Who told him of Mount Hamawan and now
When there what hopeth he ? ”

In hate and vengeance
He came anear the Iranian host and cried —

“ Illustrious Tiis, the lord of elephant.

Of mace and kettledrum ' hve months have passed
Since thou provokedst war, and on the field
The noblest kinsmen of Gudarz he headless.

While thou hast fled, thy soldiers panting after,

And like a mountain-sheep hast taken refuge.

Full of revenge and rancour, in the heights ’

But thou wilt surely come within the toils ”

Exalted Tiis replied “ I mock thy falsehoods
Thou didst set wreak afoot among the mighty
Throughout the world for Siyawush. Hast thou
No shame of thy vain words ? Hot though they be
They will not bring me to those toils of thine
Ne’er may the world possess a paladin
Like thee among the men of might and name
Thou by an oath didst rum Siydwush,

And wreck earth with his blood, thou madest him
Stay in Turin , now war and vengeance stay
In earth through him. Alas > for that great prince


V 902


138 THE SHAhnAma OF FIRDAUSI

And noble man whose face once gladdened all '
Thou by this practice, such deceit and lies.

Wilt gain no lustre in a true man's sight.

We could not forage on the battlefield,

And therefore have I marched to Hamawan
News now hath reached the monarch of the world.
Who with his mighty men will come anon
The great men of the host have gathered — Zal
And Rustam of the elephantine form ,

And when the Sh<ih is fairly on the march
I will not leave Tiiran field, fell, or crop.

Since thou art here behold a task for men
This is no time for ruse and ambuscade ”

Pfran on that sent forward troops to seize
V 903 The approaches, and the army mountain-like

Moved, troop on troop, upon that mountam-skirt
Pfran, when thus the loemen’s foraging
Was straitened, laid his plans

“ We,” said Human,

“ Must get possession of the mountain’s foot.

And I will deal so that the Iranians
Shall never gird themselves tor vengeance more ”
Pfran replied “ The wmd is in our face.

And none would think of fighting with it so ,

But as they have not room for foraging.

And nobody would guard a barren rock.

They will no longer heed their general ,

With warlike eyes grown dim the troops will come
To seek not fight but quarter , 'tis a day
For grace and not for setting in array.”


KA! KHUSRAU


139


§ 14

How the hdnians made a Night-attack

Glidarz and Tiis suspected this , the chiefs
Were in dismay Said old Gddarz to Tds —

“We must fight now If we have three days’ provand
We have not more, and not one road is open '

We have no tents, no huts, no baggage-tram,

And this great host will starve ' So, when the sun
Is wan of face and night’s dark veil is seen,

Choose we brave cavaliers, descend the heights,

And try our fortune in a night-attack.

To perish one by one, or else to gam

The hero’s crown Such is the end of battles '

One hath the dust, another rank and glory ”

Tiis hearkened to Gudarz , his heart was full
Of pain and of the ancient feud He bode
Till night appeared The sun set , all was dark
When one watch passed, and men had fallen silent,
Tiis made him ready, called the men of action.

Gave one wing to Bizhan, one to Shi'diish
And bold Kharr.id , the glorious flag he gave
To Gustaham with much advice and counsel.

Then, shouldermg with Gfv, Ruhham, and others
The massive mace, made for Piran and shocked
Like fire the Turkman centre. All the field
Grew like a sea of blood, a mighty shout
Rose from the host, the standard of Piran
Was cloven, and his troops were panic-stricken.
Hiiman, when he had heard that cry, bestrode
His Arab black, came up, saw many slam,

And many turning from the fight dismayed.

Wept tears of blood upon his breast, and shouted —

“ Was there no outpost here * Had ye no stomach
For fight ? We are three hundred to their one ,


V 904


140 THE SHAhnAmA OF FlRDAUSt

It is ill sleeping on the field of battle '

90s Ho ' out with sword and mace, and up with shield
Of Chin. Now that the moon o’er yonder height
Is drawing forth its sword, cut off the foe
On every side and let none, combatant
Or laggard, ’scape.”

Arose the clarions’ blast.

The warriors pressed forward, and surrounded
The Iranian cavaliers like savage lions.

Sparks flashed from helm and sword thou wouldst
have said —

“ The sky is rainmg maces from the clouds ' ”

Night, scimitars, and dust concealed the stars
And shining moon Thou’dst said “ The Iranians
Are walled by coats of mail and in a murk
As of a sea of pitch 1 ” Then to his men
Hiiman exclaimed “ Enough ’ slay not the chiefs ,
Bring me them captive and not arrow-pierced ”

They shouted back “ Their plight is hopeless now.
Lay on, lay on with mace and javelin.

And crown these chieftains’ heads with crowns of blood ”
Then Tus said to Ruhham and Gi'v “ Good sooth '
Our lives are but a jest 1 Unless the Almighty
Shall save our souls and bodies from this scath
We are but poised upon an eagle’s wings.

Or struggling m the waters of the deep 1 ”

Like savage hons leaping from their lairs
They charged together, while the sound of drum
And pipe and clang of Indian bells and gongs
Rose from the foe, men could not see their reins.

The horses’ crests, or spear-pomts at their eyes.

“ Ye have no room,” exclaimed Human, “for fight
V 906 Or flight, and evil fortune drave you forth.

That ill might reach the guilty.”

’Mid such strife

Abode that warrior-three with paltry powers *


KAI KHUSRAU


141

Much thought they then of Bustam, everywhere
The prowest in the fray, and of Shfdiish,

Bfzhan, and Gustaham, of great and small ,

“ Good sooth > ” said they, “ one of the Iranian host
Would help us here ’ We came not to a fight,

But madly to the maw of crocodiles '

Woe to the throne and portal of the Shah,

For they will capture us anon ' Great Rustam
And Zal are in Zabulistan < trdn
Will be destroyed

The dm of mace and drum
Reached the franian host, and Gfv and Tiis
Returned not ' Said Shidiish and Gustaham,

The Lion “ Tus is long engaged > ”

Guraza

Said to Bfzhan “ Our leader's task is long ' ”

Anon the dm of drums rose from the plain.

Air turned pitch-dark and earth to ebony.

The warriors made toward the voice of Tus
The held ran blood. As they came up behind
All drew their massive maces Tus, aware
That succour had arrived, roared tymbal-like.

Loosed rein, and pressed his stirrups, for he felt
His fortune rising, while Ruhham and Gfv,

Cheered by the voice of brave Bfzhan, became
Like lions Thus they fought till break of day.

Until the world’s Light shone above the mountains,
Then they recalled the host and drew it oft
Toward the rocky heights. The chieftam Tiis
Harangued the troops “ From set of sun to drum-beat
Far from the noble be the evil eye.

And may our fighting end m festival
I never heard of warriors displaying
Such gallantry as I have seen m you
My first prayer is that Holy God will keep
Afar from us the eyes of evil ones.


V 907


142


THE SHAhnAmA of FiRDAUSt


He is my refuge evermore and He

Will take you out of this I trust withal

In Him that presently and swift as smoke

An army may come up to our support

Assuredly my speedy camel-post

Hath reached ere now the monarch of the world.

My letter will inflame his heart anew,

The elephantine chief will come to aid us,

And with a noble company of Lions
We shall return in triumph, well content.

And eager to behold Khusrau again
We will report to that triumphant world-king
All that hath passed in public and in private,

V 908 And through his kindness and his satisfaction
Obtain, each one of us, the fruits of fortune ”

Both hosts ceased fighting, 1 breathed themselves, and
left

The battle drawn On both sides scouts advanced

Upon that plain of valiant warriors

Human came forth, saw corpses block the road.

And thus addressed Pi'ran “Withdraw to-day,

The battle hath not answered our desires.

But when our warriors, approven horsemen.

And men have rested I will make a fight
Such as the sun and moon ne'er saw ”

They went.

Their converse done, each on his schemes intent


§ 15

How Kat Khusrau had Tidings of his Host

News reached Khusrau “ Pfran hath gained the day,
Tus hath retired upon Mount Ham^wan,

And many a chieftain of the host is missing

1 Reading with P.


KAI KHUSRAV


143


The portal of the palace of Gddarz,

Son of Kish wad, is void of men of war
And chiefs. The very stars are wailing them,

The rose no longer groweth in the garden,

The world through them is filled with dust and blood.
And Tiis high star hath fallen ' ”

Kai Khusrau,

The famous, heard, and his heart quaked He bade
The elephantine Rustam come to court.

And with his host The sages and the archmages,
Famed and experienced of frAn, all came,

Khusrau, the chief of chieftains, loosed his tongue.
Told how the host had fought, and said to Rustam —
“ Exalted one > our ancient state, I fear,

Is tottering, whereat my heart is full

Of dread Thou fosterest the crown and throne.

World-ruling fortune hath its light from thee.

The heart of heaven is on thy sabre’s point.

And under thee are sky and time and earth
Thou didst dig out the White Div’s heart and brain
The age’s hopes are based upon thy love.

Earth is the servant ol thy charger’s dust.

And time to thee is like a loving mother.

The sun is set a-burmng by thy sword.

And Venus weepeth at that mace of thine.

Thy plumed and pointed shafts make lions weary
Of fighting with thee on their day of bale
Since thou hast been a man and worn a helm
No foe hath cast his eye upon Iran
Now Tiis, Giidarz, and Gfv and other chiefs.

With many of the warriois of this land.

Have with full hearts and eyes that flowed with tears
Fled from the soldiers of Afrasiyab.

Full many of the kindred of Giidarz
Fell on the day of fight and sleep in dust.

Those of the army that escaped with life


V 909


144 the SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt

Are broken-hearted on Mount Hamawan ,

Their heads are lifted heavenward , they pray
The Almighty, who is Lord of time and place,

That elephantine Rustam may perchance
Come to them in God’s strength at my command
As I perused the letter m the night
I shed my heart’s blood freely on my cheeks
V 910 I told the thing to no one for three days
Save only unto God the Succourer,

But now, because the matter hath surpassed
All bounds, my heart is full of care therefor
Thou art the hope of host and general
Mayst thou be sound in health and bright in mind,

May thy head flourish and thy heart rejoice,

Be thy pure person free from hurt of foe
Ask me for plenty of whate’er thou wilt,

Of steeds, of arms, of treasure, and of troops
Go with good counsels and a joyful heart
So great a work must not be slackly done ”

The hero answered “ May the signet-rmg
And crown ne’er lack thee Heaven remembereth not
A king like thee for Grace, for stature, justice,

And rede Khusrau hath heard that ever since
Kubad assumed the imperial diadem
I have been girded in Iranian quarrels.

And have not sat at rest a single day.

Mine have bien waste, gloom, lion, elephant.
Enchanters, lusty dragons, mighty men
Both of Tiiran and of Mazandaran,

Dark nights, and massive maces, and withal
Long journeyings and thirsts, for I preferred
The door of travail to the stead of ease.

So many toils and hardships have I seen
That I have never asked a day of pleasure
Thou art the world’s king, and a slave am I
Girt to perform thy bests Let not the Shah


KAI KHUSRAU


145


Grieve for the slam, but let thy foes look wan

With belted waist will I draw near to Tiis, v 91 1

And gird me to avenge the Iranians,

For liver-wounded have I been and girt
With mourning for the scions of Gudarz.”

When Kai Khusrau heard Rustam’s words he wept.

And said “ Without thee I desire not life,

Or majesty or crown or royal throne
Now be the welkin in thy lasso’s noose,

And crowned heads in thy bonds ”

The treasurer

Unlocked the royal hoard of jewels, crowns,

Dfndrs, helms, lassos, bows, and belts, oped too
The sacks of drachms. The Shah gave all to Rustam,

Thus saying “ 0 illustrious wan 101 i
Go with the mace-men of Zabulistin,

And mighty men and warriois of Kabul,

Swift as the blast, not tarrying thyself
Or bidding others tarry From the host
Choose thirty thousand swordsmen dight for war,

And give to Fariburz son of Kaiis

Some troops to go on first and seek revenge ”

The peel less Rustam kissed the ground and said —

‘ The bridle and the stirrups are my mates
We will urge on the chiefs, far be repose
And idleness from us ”

He paid the troops,

Went forth upon the plain, prepared for war.

And said to Farfburz “ Lead forth at dawn.

Conduct the van, and sleep not day or night

Until thou come to Tiis the general

Say to him ‘ Risk not fight, use guile, gam time.

And bo not rash. Lo ' like a blast I come.

Not dallying upon the road Gurgfn,

Son of Mfldd, approved m war, will know V 912

What to advise thy host m weal and woe.’ ”

VOL. Ill


K


146


THE SHAhhAmA of FIRDAUSt


V 913


§ 16

H010 Farihmz ashed to Wife FaianqU, the Mother
of Kat KTiust au

“ O warrior, distributor of crowns,

Lord of the breastplate, battle-ax, and Rakhsh ' ”

Said Fariburz, “ I have a secret wish
That I can tell to no one in the world
Except to thee, O paladin of earth.

Who well deservest ring and crown and signet.

And art the stay and refuge of the host ’

In thee the warriors exalt their helms

Know great one of fran i and may God bless thee.

That I and noble Siyawush were brothers.

And one in blood. ’Tis ht that I should take
His widow as my wife, exalted chief '

Urge this upon the Shah, and thou wilt set
A crown upon my head ”

Then Rustam answered —
“ ’Tis thine to bid I will achieve thy wish ”

The elephantine chief went m and said —

“ 0 famed Khusrau > I have a thing to ask
That will exalt my head above the moon,

And I will ask it with the monarch’s leave.

For God approveth Love and justice reach
All men through thee, twin-visaged like the skj
Now Farfburz among the chiefs and princes
Hath not a peer , withal for rede and prowess
I do not see his match, and he desireth
This of the Shah — the place of Siydwush,

So that, when he is marchmg to avenge
His brother’s blood, the guardian of his house
And wealth, the confidant m all his cares,

May be the daughter of Afrdsiyab,

None else, they twain to be as sun and moon ”


KAI KHUSRAU


147


Khusrau on hearing gave consent and said —

“ 0 famous man * the feet of fortune trample
All that reject thy counsel Naught but good
•W ill come from words of thine Live ever glorious ’
I cannot urge this, as thou know’st Such speech
To her would be misplaced, but I will give
My mother, if she will consent to listen,

The counsels most conformable with wisdom ”

They went together to the moonlike dame —

The peerless Rustam and benignant Shah,

Who said to her “ Thou memory of my sire,

In good and ill my refuge ' I may govern.

But thou art Shah to me Thou know’st the toil
And travail of the army in this war,

How many of our mighty men have perished
In battle with Tiiran ' I mean to send
A host with Rustam son of Zal as chief,

While Fariburz will lead the van, and Rustam
Himself be champion He would have thee be
The wife of Farfburz What is thy pleasure
Therein ? Be greatness and all good thy mates ”

On hearing this she thought about old times,
Distressed and vexed at heart , at length in tears
She said “ I blame not Rustam , if I did
It would be misplaced now, for only heaven
Can say him nay when he requesteth aught ”

Then Rustam said to her “O dame oi dames.
Extolled for spotless worth ' Oh ' may thy foes
All perish ' Thou, may be, wilt hear my counsel
Thou knowest that a woman cannot rest
Without a spouse, the young without the young,
And best of all a mate of Kaian race,

For man is for the woman’s sake, and she
Is far more eager than her spouse for her
Victorious Farfburz son of Kaiis,

Fit for the crown, the lustre of the throne,


V 914


148 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The brother and the peer of SiyAwush,

Is ruler of the more part of Iran ,

The peopled land and desert both are his
By leave, advice, and order of the Shd.h
Do I approve thee as the prince’s spouse
What sayest thou ? Is he approved by thee ?

Doth Farlburz appear a fitting mate ?

Thou wilt do well to hearken to my words
Heed what I tell thee and the Shah’s advice ”

The Shah of ladies held her peace awhile
In grief, ashamed to speak before her son,

Then sighmg deeply answered Kustam thus —

“ 0 full of prowess, leader of the folk >

V 915 Although there is none like him in Iran
He cannot take the place of Siyawush ,

Yet IS my tongue, as thou mayst say, in fetters
By reason of thy words, 0 paladin '

What doth the famous monarch now command ?

I must be girded to perform his will ”

Thus, blushing like the roses m the spring,

The monarch’s mother gave consent The matter.

Since Rustam was so instant, was soon sped
They called the archmages and drew up the contract
Then Fariburz became Shah’s sire-m-law.

And being franked by Kai Khusrau and Rustam
Increased his quality and dignity,

And gained a robe of honour and new crown ^

Three days prepared, the fourth achieved, the business.
Then Rustam with his gallant warriors
Fared toward the plain, while Fariburz with troops
Went in advance, resplendent as a star
In heaven. Arose the dm of clarions,

^ “ C’est ainsi que Fenbourz devint, par I’ordre de Kei Khosrou,
beau-pere du rot, et Rustem fut alors libre de pa7 tir Khosrou combla
d’honneurs le Peblevan, et lui donna, un rang plus 41eve, une robe
d’honneur et une nouveUe couronne” (Mohl)


KAI KHUSRAU


149


And matchless Rustam led his army forth
The Shah, the world-lord, with his mmd all care.
Fared with him for two leagues, while Rustam turned
Two stages into one upon his way.

And rested not at all by night or day.


§ 17

How Tus saw Stydwush in a Dream

One night, about the hour of drum-beat, Tus,
Heart-seared and full of trouble, slept and dreamed
That from the deep a radiant lustre rose
About an ivory throne, and Siyawush
Thereon with Grace and crown, with smilmg lips
And tongue fair-spoken, turned a sun-like face
Upon him “ Stay the Iranians here,” he said.

For thou shall conquer m the fight Lament not
The kindred of Giidarz, for there is here
A rosary all new, and we will quad.

How long we wot not, underneath its blooms ”

With joyful heait leleased from pain and grief
Tus woke Then to Giidarz “ World-paladin ’

I have beheld a vision in my sleep >

Take note that Rustam like a rushing wind
Will come anon 1”

He bade the pipes to sound.

The troops upon the mountain left their posts.

The warriors of Iran girt up their loins,

And set up Kawa’s standard, while Pfrdn
Upon the other side led forth his powers ,

The dust-clouds dimmed the sun , its eye was dazed
By warriors’ shouts and by the rain of arrows.

The two hosts met, but not a champion showed
Before the lines HiimAn said to Pfran —

“ We must attack. Why hesitate^ The troops


V 916


150 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Are not out hunting. Man and beast bear weight.”

Pfr 4 n said • “ Peace > ’Tis not the time for haste
Or argument Yestreen from yonder lines,

And unawares, three with a paltry force
Assailed us, hungry lions they, we sheep
Whom cold is driving from the mountain-tops.

V 917 I found the whole plain like a stream of blood,

And famous heads laid low The Iranians hold
A barren rock, their chargers sniff at thorns
Like musk Wait till they burn upon the crags.

And die resourceless Leave no way to pass.

Side, front, or rear- ward Since without your fighting
The foe will come to hand, why change delay
For haste ? Why should we fight ? Ten horse will
serve

As scouts upon the plain Wait we until
Our foes lack food and drink, and ask for quarter
Unless they can subsist on thorns and flints
When provand faileth they will take to them
And die ”

They left the field, went to their tents,

And scouts were posted while the warriors loosed
Their belts and turned to sleep and banqueting
The chieftain Tiis went also to his camp,

With full heart and with cheeks of ebony.

And thus addressed Giidarz “ Affairs grow dark ,

The fortunes of the Iranians are distraught
Troops compass us, our beasts’ feed is all thorny.

And food is not o’er-plenteous with the host >
Unsheathe at dawn Rank on the mountain-skirts.

If our good star prove helpful it Avill give us
Our will upon our foes, while if the Judge
Of heaven shall end us with the scimitar,

No more or less can hap than His decree.

So measure not your breaths in your dismay.

Death too with high renown is goodlier


KAI KHUSRAV


15


Than life with fear and overthrow ”

They clobed

With what their fortune-favoured chiei proposed


§ 18

How Afidstydb sent the Khdn and Kdmiis to help Phdn

When from the sign of Cancer Sol reached out,

And rent the musk-hued Veil, a messenger
Came fiom the monarch to Piran and said —

“ Troops throng from every side — a host whose dust
Would make a desert of the sea ot Chi'n
Upon the battle-day A chief is there
From Ma wara Ti’n-Nahr , his head is raised
O’er circling heaven , a hundred lions’ strength
Is his , he quelleth mighty elephants '

In height a cypress and in looks a moon,

A potentate whose toys aie crowns and thrones,
Kamus, this chief of chiels, will have his will
Upon Gudarz and Tus The troops comprise
All those that dwell ’twixt Sipanj.ib and Kum
I reckon first the Khan ot Chin, whose ciown
Is heaven, his throne the earth, next biave Manshur,
Whose falchion layeth warriois’ heads m dust,

And next Kamus, the swoidsnian of Kashan,

Whose eyes ne’er saw defeat His works all prospei ,
When he is wroth he bnngeth blast and snow ”

Pfran harangued the army of Turan,

And said “Ye chiefs and warriors ot the king '
Rejoice ye, young and old > at this good news.

Sent by the king, and be ye bright of soul ,

Now must we wash the trouble from our hearts
I will not leave Irdn field, fell, or crop.

The pains and troubles of the king are over
In seekmg vengeance and arraying troops,


V 918


152


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


V 919 And ye shall see AfrasiyAb supreme

By land and sea, at home and in Iran.”

From those approaching powers fresh messengers
Kept coming to the captain of the host
With joyful news “ 0 famous paladm i
Live glad and bright of soul for evermore
Be thy heart joyful to behold these kings,

And may thy soul cease troubling From Kashmir
All, till thou comest to the river Shahd,

Is elephants and litters, flags and troops.

While from Sakl4b Kundur the lion-man
Is coming with that warring Heaven Biward
Of Kat, with Garcha from Sagsar, Shangul
From Hind Flags fill the air and swords the earth.
Chaghan hath sent Fartiis, the Light ol hosts,

Gahan hath sent Gahdr, who scorcheth heroes.

With ShamMn of Shakn, first of the age.

Who scattereth poison with his spear and sword
Now lift thy head and take thy pleasure here,

For this glad news would make an old man young ”

Pi'ran laughed out with all his heart and soul,

Thou wouldst have said “ He that was dead reviveth
Thus spake he to Human “ I will go forth
To meet them They have had a longsome march.
Equipped for fight and full of care They hold
Their heads as high as doth Afrdsiydb,

For they have treasure, lustre, throne, and state
I will go forth and see what men they are.

How many, with what chiefs and warriors,

Will do obeisance to the Kh4n of Chfn,

And kiss the ground before his throne withal
I will behold Kdmus, the exalted one.

And find Tiis an opponent in Shangul
Returning hither I will gird myself
To rob the Irdmans of the breath of life.

And, if they cannot hold their own, will make


KAI KHUSRAU


Day dark and strait to them I will secure
With heavy bonds about their feet and necks
Those that survive among the frdnian chiefs,

And then dispatch them to Afrdsiydb,

Not taking rest or sleep till it be done.

Behead the common soldiers that I capture.

Burn them, commit their ashes to the winds.

And take no thought about the place again
Then will I part our army into three,

And darken the irdnian monarch’s day.

I will dispatch one army unto Balkh,

And make day bitter to the trdnians,

Anothei to Kabulistdn and bring
Kdbul the ashes of Zabulistan,

And lead the third compact of mighty Turkmans
And Lions ’gainst ir<in I will spare none.

Not women, little children, young or old.

But overthrow Iran, both field and fell.

May not a hand or foot be left to them i
But till I order matters seek not fight ”

Thus spake Pfran and went with wreakful heart ,
Thou wouldst have said “ His very skin hath burst.
Hiimdn said to the troops “ Away with care ’

For two days let us labour but to keep
Watch on Mount Hamawan, for fear our foes
Steal off by night just when our flags will fill
Completely road, plain, valley, stream, and hill ”


§ 19

How the Khdn of Chin came to Hamdwan

Pirdn on reachmg his allies beheld

The plains and valleys full of horses’ hoofs.

The tents and tent-enclosures filled the world
With red and yellow, blue and violet.


1 54 the SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSi

Amidmost each enclosure was a standard
Wrought of brocade of Chi'n and pamted silk.

V 921 He stood amazed and asked himself in wonder —

“ Is this a paradise, or banquet-hall,

The starry heaven, or orbit of the moon ? ”

He came afoot and kissed the ground before
The Khan, who, seeing him, embraced him, marvelled
At such a chest and neck, much greeted him,

Made much of him, set him upon the throne,

And said “ Oh 1 well is me that I should sit
In such good spirits by the paladin ' ”

He then asked “ Of the army ol Iran
Who hath the signet, and who hath the crown ?

What troops have they ? Who are their warriors.

And wherefore sit they on the mountain-top ? ”

Plrd,n replied “ 0 monarcn ' live for ever.

And may the Maker bless thee who hast joyed
Thy slave’s heart with thy questions. Through thy
fortune

I am both well and happy, and my soul
Desireth but the dust upon thy feet
The king inquire th of the franians
They have no signet, diadem, or throne,

And, having longed for war beyond all measure.

Are left with only rocks to gaze upon ,

For foiled, dishonoured, and i educed in strength.

They went in full flight to Mount Hamawan
Their general is Tiis, a man of valour.

Who feareth not a lion in the field
Their chieftams are Giidarz son of Kishwad,

Gfv, and Ruhhdm — all men of noble birth
Now by the fortune of the illustrious Khan
This is the last host that their chief shall see
They come not on the plain at battle-time,

And save the flmty rocks have naught to hand ”

The Khan said . “ Stay, and bring thy comrades too


KAI KHUSRAU


155


Content of heart to-day will we quaff wine,

And not anticipate ”

He decked the tents
Like gardens in the spring “ ’Tis Paradise,”
Thou wouldst have said, “ for colour and device ”


§ 20

How the hdmaub tool Counbcl how to act

Now when Sol mounted to the vault of heaven
The hearts of Tus and of Gudarz grew troubled —

“ Why are the Turkmans still to-day ? Are they
At counsel or bemused ^ But be they sad
Or glad I look for ill > Know that if aid
Hath come to them ill hap hath come to us '
Consider all the Iranian troops as slam
Or, if still living, fleeing from the fight
If Rustam cometh not upon the field
Disaster will befall us from yon host.

And we shall have no sepulture, no grave.

But horses’ hoofs will trample on our heads
Giv said to Tiis “0 general of the Shah
What aileth thee to think upon mishap ?

We need not look for ill , God is thy Helper ,

We are His worshippers, and have broadcast
Much seed of good. Such fortune hath the Shah,
The lord of scimitar and throne and crown.

That God will not withdraw His help from us,

And leave our enemies to work their will
With Rustam's coming all our soldiers’ cares
Will end. Let no man cease to trust in God
Though day should turn to night. Let not thy heart
Be straitened needlessly because our foes
Forbear to fight one day they have not shut
Heaven's door on us. Fear not the foe’s designs


V 922


156 THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt

V 923 If God most high ordameth loss for us
Quit vam imagmings for come it will
Let us construct a trench before the host,

As warriors use, then draw the sword, provoke
A fight and slay our foes , we shall no doubt
Perceive their aims and lay their secret bare
News from Iran will come and there will be
Light on the boughs of our tall Cypress-tree.”


§ 21

Hoio Giidaiz had Ttdtngs of the Coming of Rustam

Giidarz departed from the host and clomb
The mountain-summit. From the look-out came
A grievous cry “ The Iranian warriors
Are ruined now ’ As yon bright sun declined
The whole world eastward grew as dark as night
With dust, which standard-bearing elephants
Sent up, and through that dust the shining sun
Was lustreless t ”

Giidarz heard that and cried —

“ Dark earth is my sole hiding-place ' ”

His cheeks

Became as pitch, and like one arrow-pierced
He cried “ My share is ever strife and battle.

My lot ill-hap and bane for antidote.

I had a host of sons and grandsons men
Keputed m the land, but all were slain
For Siyawush, and all my luck hath gone '

V. 924 I hope no more from life, my day is dark »

Would that my mother had not brought me forth.
High heaven ne’er turned o’er me ' ”

To the watch

He said “ Long-sighted man and bright of mmd •
Look forth upon the hosts and see who cometh.


KAI KHUSRAU


157


Where is the banner of the Iranian chief ?

Look to our left and right ”

The watchman answered —
“ I see no movement and reconnaissance
On our side, but on theirs all is astir ,

Of us thou wouldest say ‘ They are asleep ’ ”

Thereat the paladin shed bitter tears,

And cried in sorrow “ Saddle me my steed,

And for the future make my bed of brick i
I go to fill mine eyes and arms once more.

Embrace Shidush, Bfzhan, Kuhham, and Gfv,

Those brave, impetuous cavaliers, kiss each
Farewell upon the cheek and shower tears ”

His gallant bay was saddled when there came
The watchman’s shout “ Rejoice, woild-paladm '

And banish care, for on the road that leadeth
Toward fian a black, day-darkening dust
Ariseth, many standards like the moon
Are lifted from the centre of a host ,

The first one hath a wolf, a moon the next,

The third a dragon with a lion’s head
In gold upon the start ' ”

“ Then live for ever,

And may the evil eye be far from thee 1 ”

Giidarz exclaimed. “ When what thou utterest
To such good purpose shall be brought to pass
I will bestow on thee such varied treasures
That thou shalt have no need to toil henceforth.
Hereafter, when we go back to Iran,

Some day, and to the monarch of the brave,

I will forthwith present thee at his throne.

And lift thy head above the nobles there
Now prithee leave thy look-out-post, approach
Our generals, and tell what thou hast seen ,

Be quick , use whom thou wilt upon the road.”

“ I may not leave the look-out for the host,”


V 925


IS8 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

The watchman said, “ but when ’tis grown so dark
That I can see no longer I will carry,

Like the Slmurgh, the tidings to the troops
Down from my station here.”

The paladin

Rejoined “ Be shrewd of heart and bright of soul.
Look forth from this high mountain yet again,

And see how soon they will be here ”

He answered —

“Yon host will reach Mount Hamawan to-morrow
At dawn ”

The paladin conceived such joy
As would have brought a corpse to life

Pfran,

For his part, swift as flying dust-clouds led
Those reinforcements ^ to th^ battlefield.

A horseman went on first to tell at large
The joyful news which when Human had heard
He laughed and said “ Now surely sleepless fortune
Is with us.”

From the field a shout of joy
Rose cloud-ward from the army of Tiiran
The Iranian nobles full of care and pain,

With faces sallow and with livid lips.

Dispersed themselves upon the mountain-side
To give their last instructions. Everywhere
Groups gathered and bewailed themselves, and said —
“Woe for these warriors of royal race.

Who are forgotten by the Iranians,

V 926 For now the lions’ maws will be their tombs,

And earth be saturate with heroes’ blood ' ”

The chief bespake Bfzhan “ Arise, explore
This secret, scale the mountain-top and mark
The character and number of this host.

See by what road they are approaching us,

‘ See §§ 18 and 19


KAI KHUSRAU


159


What camp-enclosures and what thrones they have ”

Blzhan the son of Gfv then went apart,

And climbed the mountain’s solitary peak,

Saw flags and horsemen, elephants and troops
On all sides, ran back to the general.

With heart all pain and soul all care, and said : —

“ Earth’s surface hath become like indigo,

So many are the troops and elephants ’

The flags and spears pass count, the sun is dim
In heaven with dust, the troops are countless, boundless.

The ear is deafened by their kettledrums i ”

Tiis listened, sad at heart and face all tears.

Then called to him the captains, sorely grieved
About his men, and said “ Time showeth me
Naught but the woes of war I have experienced
Full many a rise and fall, but never fear
Like this We have but one resource although
Our arms and troops are few we will get ready,

Attack to-night, and make earth a Jfhun
With blood. • If we shall perish in the fray
There will be generals while there are kings
Men shall not say ‘ He died mgloriously,’

Although they have to lay me in the dust.”

The leaders present all agreed thereto.

Now when the face of earth became like pitch,

When Venus, Mars, and Mercury were hidden.

And when the moon rose from the Sign of Pisces, v 927

And to the navel rent the robe of night.

The watchman with a lace like sandarach
Ran in to Tiis and said “ O General '

The Shah hath sent an army from Iran t ”

The leader Tiis laughed with the other chiefs.

And said “ O men of name and warnois <

We need not now seek fight since aid hath come.

We have our times for haste and for delay
The elephantine hero by God’s strength


i6o THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Will come to our assistance with this host ,

Then on the Turkmans will we satisfy
Our lust, and our renown shall reach the sun ”
They thought no more about a night-attack ,

The troops and leader joyed, the watchman made
Their spirits bright again, and young and old
Told those glad tidings Tiis sent forth his scouts.
Shouts and the clang of bells rose from the mount,
And all the folk, grown happy and soul- bright.
Talked of the chief of paladins all night


§ 22

How the Khdn of Chin went to reconnoitre the
Army of trdn

Whenas the sun arrayed its host in heaven.

And black night disappeared, the Khan of Chin
Assembled the Turanian chiefs and warriors.

And thus addressed Pfran “We will not fight
To-day, and we do need a day’s repose.

But, while our proud chiefs and man-slaying horsemen
Rest from the travail of the tedious road.

And from their hurried march o’er hill and dale,

V. 928 I will survey the Irdnians — how they fare
Upon the field.”

Pfran replied “The Khdn
Is a wise king and worshipful, so let him
Do what he will to-day for he is leader ”

There rose a clamour from the camp-enclosure
With sounds of kettledrum and clarion
They mounted seats upon five elephants,

Housed with brocade of Chfn of turquoise hue.

And broidered with gold thread The seats themselves
Were gemmed with emeralds, the fittings golden.

The saddle-flaps were made of leopard-skin,


KAI KHUSRAU i6i

And golden were bells, gongs, and rattle-boxes
The drivers’ heads were decked with crowns, and all
Wore torques and ear-rings With so many flags
Of painted silk the air was yellow, red.

And violet like some bdzdr in Chin
The troops marched to the field as if to keep
A feast, the earth was beauteous as the eye
Of chanticleer with trappings, colours, drums.

And pipes The kings set forth, the air was filled
With blare of clarions, the spearpoints gleamed.

The plain was black with troops Tus from afar
Saw them and ranged in line what men he had,

The warriors of frd,n girt up their loins.

And Glv brought Kawa’s standard From the plain
Of battle to the summit of the mount
The army of Irdn stood troop on troop

Now when Kamiis went forward with Manshiii,
Bfward, Shangul the prescient, and the Khan
To view Mount Hamawan, they never thought
To face a foe, but when the Khan afar
Looked forth and heard the fianian horsemen’s war-cry
It pleased him and he said “ Behold a host
Of men-o’erthroAving, warlike cavaliers ’

Pfran the chieftain told us otherwise.

But brave men’s qualities should not be hidden
The chieftain masketh the pit’s mouth with brambles,
And thither will his horse speed at the chase
What better is it vainly to besmirch
The foe men’s prowess on the day of fight ?

I have not looked on cavalieis and chiefs
So stamped with chivalry and manliness ”

“ Men reck not of so few,” Pfran replied,

“ Upon a field like this”

“ But,” said the Khan,

“ What shall we do ? ”

Pfrdn said “ Thou hast fared

L


V 929


VOL. III.


i 62 the SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

Far over hill and dale. Let us remain
Three days to rest the troops. I will divide
The host , the day of fight and fear is over.

Half of our warlike, glorious cavaliers
Shall fall upon the foe from dawn till noon
With double-pointed dart, sword, bow, and mace ,
And then till night ariseth from the hills
The other half shall strive At dark will I
Bring up the rested troops and press the foe ,

We will not let them have a moment’s peace —

We and our eager cavaliers m arms ”

Kamiis replied “ Not good ’ No such delay
For me ' With all these men and such strife toward
Why seek so long a respite ? Let us both
Attack and straiten dale and height for them
Hence we will march upon Iran, will leave not
Throne, crown, or diadem, lay waste all fields
And fells, and act as warriors and Lions.

No women, little children, old or young.

No Shdh, or man of rank or paladin
V 930 Will I leave in Iran, no field or fell,

No hall or palace or four-footed beast
Why should we pass so many evil days
To get but care and grief and needless pain ?

But ope not to our foes a door to-night
To get away As soon as mornmg breatheth
The troops must move. I with the king of Hind
Will bear my flag up yonder height. To-morrow
Thou shalt behold a heap of cirpses there
To make the frdnians weep that look thereon ”

The Khan said to Pirdn “ There is no course
Save this he is a peerless general ”

The nobles all agreed to what Kamiis,

The conqueror of Lions, had proposed

The conference being o’er they went their way,

And passed all night m ordering their array.


KAI KHUSRAU 163

§ 23

How Faribniz reached Mount Hamdwan

Whenas the sun had pitched a camp-enclosure
Of gold brocade upon the azure realm
A loud cry from the look-out reached Giidarz —

“ O captain of the host ' the troops have come ’

They are at hand > Their dust hath dimmed the day ' ”
Giidarz sprang up, had his swift charger brought,

And rode toward that dark dust with anxious heart
He came When near to them he spied the flag
Of Farfburz the chief, who led the van.

The well approven and the new Shah’s kinsman ^

Then old Giidarz alighted as withal 2
Did Farfburz the wise, the army’s Lustre
The twain embraced. Giidarz wept tears of blood
Upon his breast “ Old chief,” said Farfburz,

“ Still forced to fight ' revenge for Siyawush
Hath cost thee dear ' Alas ' those cavaliers
Giidarzian < May much good news of them
Still reach thee, may the fortune ot the foe
Be over-turned ' Praise to the Lord of sun
And moon that I have seen thee safe and sound ”
Giidarz wept blood for those that slept m dust
“ Observe,” he made reply, “ how evil fortune
Is ever bringing evil on my head >

No son or grandson hath survived this strife,

No soldiers, flags, and k^ledrums are left '

But I dismiss all thought of conflicts past ,

Now IS the time for fighting and emprise.

The troops on plain and dale have made earth like
A raven’s wing, so many are they, and all
The host of Tiis is as the one black hair


V 93


^ With a slight change of reading
2 Reading with P


V 932


i 64 the SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Upon a white bull by comparison '

The wastes and settlements of Chin, SakUb,

Of Riim and Hind, can have no creature left '

All must have girt themselves to fight with us i
But till thou tellest me where Rustam is
My back will not be straightened from its griefs ”

“ He is behind me,” Fariburz replied,

“ Intent on war All through the night till dawn
He marcheth with all speed Now where shall I
Encamp and whither lead this little band ? ”

Giidarz made answer “ What did Rustam say ?
His words should be reported ”

F ariburz

Replied “ Illustrious one * the peerless Rustam
Bade us not fight ‘ Stay on the field,’ he said
‘ Ye must not show yourselves before the host.

But take your ease until my flag appeareth. ’ ”
Then Farfburz, Giidarz in company,

Marched toward Mount Hamdwan right speedily


§ 24

How Phan took Counsel with the Khdn of Chin

When from his look-out the Turanian watch
Espied these troops he went back to the host
“ Gird all your loins for fight,” he told Phan,

“ For from Iran an army hath.arrived,

Advancing o’er the plain ' ”

The general

Went to the Khan of Chin, and said “ An army
Is coming from Iran, how great I know not,

Or who the leader is. What shall we do ? ”

Kamils said “ Keep thyself to thine own force.
Thou hast the warriors of Afrdsiydb —

An army like the waters of the sea —


KAI KHUSRAU


165


Yet what hast thou accomplished m five months
Against a foe so small ? Now that the earth
Is full of troops led by the Khdn, Manshiir,

And me, let us display our prowess , thou
Hast locked the door but we will bring the key.

Although the world’s face be as silk of Chin
With soldiers from Kabul, Zabul, and Hind,

Yet, should I tight alone, the Iranians
Were nothing Thou wilt say of them ‘They are
not’

Thou wouldest scare me with illustrious Rustam ,

Him will I slaughter first , if once I catch him

His name shall not be talked of any more

Thou art oppressed and fearful of this host

Approaching from Sfstan, but once behold v 933

My hand m battle, when the dust-cloud riseth

Upon the plain, and thou wilt recognise

A hero m the world, what brave men are,

And what fight is ”

Pi'ran said “ Live for ever '

May evil’s hand be always far from thee
Enough > may what thou sayest be fulfilled.

And no one prove thine equal ”

Said the Khan —

“ Thou hast allowed Karniis to lead the attack ,

He will pel form his word, for he hath Mountains
As his allies and Elephants for mates.

Daunt not the troops, for these Iranians
Are no great matter, ant I will not leave
One noble in Iran, but send up dust
From hill and vale , as for the men of worship,

I will dispatch them to Afrdsiy^b
In heavy fetters and behead the rest.

We will not leave Irdn a leaf, a tree,

A Sh 4 h, a palace or a crown or throne ”

Pfran with smiles did reverence to the chiefs.


i66


THE]SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt

And to the Khdn of Chin, then went rejoicing
Back to the camp, where all the nobles sought him,
Such as Hiim.in, Lahhak, and Farshldward —

Great men and Lions on the day of battle.

“ A host,” they said, “ arriveth from Iran,

Led by a sable flag , a noted scout
Went forth to spy and is but now returned
They say ’tis Farlburz son ot Kaiis,

A noble, loyal soldier.”

Said Plran —

“ Let us dismiss our cares In Rustam’s absence
We need not be afraid of Farlburz ,

His breath is no cure for a bane like this.

But though according to Kamiis indeed
The elephantine Rustam is no man
V 934 In war, God grant he come not though Kamiis
Be such a Crocodile ' ”

Hiiman replied —

“ Why dost thou keep thy spirit dark with care ?

This IS not he, or army from Slstan
Here are the blood and dust of Farlburz ”

Plran said “ I have given u p the throne
And state in dudgeon with the sun and moon.

For when I heard that from fran a host
Marched, and was coming to this battlefield.

My brain_ went, anguish filled my soul and head.

And from my heart I drew a chilly sigh ”

Kiilbdd said “ Why this grief ? What need is there
To weep because of Rustam or &f Tus ?

With all our soldiers, maces, elephants.

And scimitars we block the wind itself.

Why fear then Rustam, Tiis, and Kai Khusrau ?

What are the trdnians but as dust to us ?

They were dispersed in flight from yonder field,

And straggled to their tents.”


Anon Tiis heard —


KAI KHUSRAU


167


“ The land is full of beat of kettledrum,

And elephantine Eustam hath arrived
With Farlburz and soldiers from Iran.”

He bade bring forth the drums, Mount Hamawan,
Wherefrom shouts rose, grew ebon with dark dust,
And earth shook underneath the trampling steeds
Then Tus harangued the troops, he spake at large
About Mazandard,n, what Rustam did
In battle with the dfvs, and how he triumphed
Tlie soldiers called down blessings on their chief.

They said “ Be ware of heart and bright of mmd
We may pour out our souls at this good news.

Which easeth them When peerless Rustam cometh
Yon host will not withstand the Crocodile.

Then will we battle on this mount forthwith
To cast this shame off from the Iranians
The standard of the illustrious Khan, the crown,

The golden shields, and throne of ivory.

His elephant-attendants’ crowns of gold.

Their golden girdles and their golden torques.

Their golden cymbals and their golden bells,
Unmatched on earth, his jewelled parasol
Of peacocks’ tails, these will we seize, and more,
When we are fighting with our lives at stake ”

Tus said “We are exposed to fear and blame ,

Our foes surround the mount, our nobles’ heads
Are snared When Rustam cometh he will speak
Upbraidmgly, not asking what hath chanced.

And say ‘ Thou wast a bird caught m a net ,

The cause was sodden but the fight was raw
As with the general so with the host
I have not seen one eager for the fray ' ’

So let us charge like lions, and the foe
May yet be shifted on this side the mount ”

The troops replied to him “ Soar not so high.
Refrain from words like these, let none advance


V 935


i68


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Till Rustam hath surveyed the scene 6f strife
We will make prayer to God, the Guide to good.
By His command, Who holdeth sun and moon,
The matchless Rustam will approach this held
Why have disaster for thy star ? Bestow
Di'ndrs and drachms upon the poor ”

The troops

Raised shouts of joy upon the mountain-top
As merrily they sought their place of rest,

Each man to spend the night as seemed him best


§ 25

How Giv and T-ds fought with Kamils

When Sol laid hand on Taurus, and the larks
Began to carol o’er the plain, a shout
Ascended from the encampment of KAmiis,

That man-o’erthrowing chief who led the van
He massed his troops and gave out mail , his heart
Was full of fight, his head of vapouring
He changed his robe for armour, donned a helm
Instead of crown, a breastplate for a tunic,

And chose troops panoplied m steel and iron.

The armies’ dust began to show itself,

Men could not see their way for scimitars

And coats of mail Then from the Iranian look-out

A shout rose “ On our side a host hath come ,

The standard of the elephantine chief
Is visible behind it. On the other ^

Tiirdnian troops have clouded all the air
Their leader is a horseman like a rock.

And earth is shaken by his charger’s hoots
His mace’s head is like a buffalo’s ,

Troops follow him and spearmen lead the way.


^ Reading with P


KAI KHUSRAU


169


Thou well mayst muse at one that shouldereth
A mace like that t ”

On his side Tus sent up

The drum-roll to the clouds, he heard the watchman,
His soul grew bright, he joyed, while from Giidaiz
A horseman sped to Farfburz to say —

“ The army of Tiirdn arrayed for battle
Is near at hand They must not m full force
Assail us scattered thus and overthrow us
Act as thy nature biddeth, for thou art
A noble and Shdh’s son The dust of Eustam
Is rising from the road, and he is entering
The held ”

Then Farfburz joined force with Tiis
And Gfv They ranged the host on Hamawan,

And raised the glorious flag All being ready.

Right, left, and centre, rear and baggage-tram.

The clarions blared and all the host came on
As ’twere the starry sky , so when Kamhs
Advanced to fight he had no need to wait.

But, like a river speeding down a height,

Led on his troops and fronted Hamawan
Air was like indigo and earth was hidden
When he was near he faced toward the mount.

And with his cheeks all smiles addressed his powers —

“ It IS a coward’s business to oppose

The Iranians, yet a vast, brave host is here

And not Pfran, Humdn, and all that crew '

What champion have they to contend with me ? ”

Then shouting to Mount HamAwan he cried —

“ Ye lion-men upon the day of battle '

Behold my breast, my stature, and my bearing.

This arm of mine, this sword and mace ' ”

Then Gfv,

On hearing, flared up, raged, and drew his sword.

But said, when he drew nearer to Kdmiis —


V 937


170 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

“ None but a furious elephant can match him ’ ”

He took and strung his bow, he called on God,

The Giver of all good, and showered arrows
From bow like clouds in sprmg upon Kamiis,

Who, when he marked Gfv's mastery, concealed
His own head ’neath his shield, and with his lance
Charged wolf-like. Air was full of dust, and earth
Of death. On drawmg near his foe he speared
v. 938 Gfv’s waist, who reeled and, as he reeled, Kdmiis

Plucked out his own sword, shouted, raged, proclaimed
His name, came grimly on the cavalier.

And clave his lance obliquely like a pen.

Tiis from the centre saw the fight with grief,

And thought “ Gfv is not man enough , I only
Can wield a spear like that,”

He left the centre

With shouts to succour Gfv andjoin the fray
Kdmiis wheeled, rode between the chiefs, and struck
The steed of Tiis a sword-blow on the neck ,

That prince’s face became like ebony.

The charger fell, the gallant rider rose ,

Then like a roaring lion took his stand.

And on the battlefield with spear afoot
Contended with Kamiis before the hosts
Two noble warriors fought one cavalier ,

He of Kashdn was still insatiate '

Thus, tilFthe sun’s place darkened, all the field
Was in confusion and, when it grew ebon,

Kamiis and Tiis gave o'er. The hosts again
Went to their several camps on mount and plain.

§ 26

The earning of Rustam

Now when heaven’s sphere grew void of sun and moon.
And when the scouts came forth from both the hosts.


KAI KHUSRAU


171

The watcher in the look-out loosed his tongue —

“ The plain is full of dust, the night is dark,

The level and the upland ring with cries,

And there are many lights among the troops

Good sooth ' the elephantme chief hath come, v 939

And with an army from ZAbul ”

Giidarz,

On hearing this, descended rnid the murk
The rocks in haste, the dragon-standard shone
Though night was dark and earth was violet-dim
He lighted from his steed, while Kustam too
Alighted and advanced like rushing wind.

The twain embraced and from them both arose
A bitter cry o’er those Giidarzian chiefs.

And that gain-seeking which had proved a loss.

Giidarz said “ Brave, wise, ardent paladin ’

Both crown and throne receive their light from
thee.

And what thou utterest is truth indeed

More art thou to the Iranians than father

And mother, treasure, throne, and precious stones.

Without thee we are fish on land, our heads
Are petrified, our bodies in the grave.

When I observed thy goodly countenance.

Thine eager salutations and thy love,

I grieved no longer for the dear ones gone
Through thy good fortune only smiles remained ”

Then Rustam answered him “ Be glad of heart.

And very heedful of thy noble self.

Because the world is but deceit and toil.

It showeth thee its wealth and that is all

One man is rich, another poor , this man v. 940

Is honoured, that despised, but all must go.

There is no remedy , I know no worse [

Calamity than death, but may that pang
Afflict not thee, and may we all die fighting.”


1/2 THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSt

When Ti'is, Gfv, and those valiant warriors,

The frdnian cavaliers, had heard the news
01 Rustam’s coming to Mount Hamawan,

And being seen by veteran Giidarz,

They went like wind, shouts rose, and clarions blared
The soldiers and the chiefs approached afoot,

Their loins were girded but their hearts at ease
They raised a cry of anguish for those slaughtered
Amid the dust of fight , the heart of Rustam
W as moved , he girt himself anew for vengeance ,
Then, hearing what had chanced in that campaign,
Lamented all the sufferings of the troops.

And gave much counsel, saying “Ye chiefs ' to-day
A grave strife faceth us, and war’s result
Is feast to one and funeral to another.”

That warrior, that Lustre of the world.

Set up his camp-enclosure while his powers
Encamped behind him on Mount Hamawan,

And raised their leader’s standard. Mighty Rustam
V. 941 Sat on the throne and all the chiefs assembled
Here sat Giidarz and Gfv, there Tiis and others.
While Rustam, with a lamp in front of him.
Discoursed at large of matters great and small.

How chiefs and troops had fought, and whether now
Bright sun and shining moon would favour them
The chiefs spake to the gallant paladin
Of that Innumerable host of foes.

Spake of Kamus, Shangul, the Khdn of Chfn,
Manshiir, and of the warriors of Tiiran —

“ About Kamiis himself we cannot speak.

For we have had no means of seeing him ^

He IS a Tree whose Fruits are mace and sword.

And, though the clouds rained stones upon his head,
He would not flee from elephants of war
His head is fulFof wreak, his heart of strife.

^ “Car nous n’osons pas le regarder'* (Mohl)


ICAI KHUSRAU


>73


Earth is not able to contain Manshiir ,

No warrior ordereth a host like him ,

And from this mountain to the river Shahd
Stretch flags and litters, elephants and troops,

Whose helmets and cuirasses pass compute
Grim are the looks of all upon the plain.

Which IS a mass ot tents, around are pitched
The tent-enclosures of brocade of Chin,

And had the captain and the host not come
All had been lost Praise to the Lord of victory,

Who thus hath put a period to our stress >

Past doubt we live through thee , we all despaired
Of respite ”

For a while the paladin

Grieved for the slam, wept, and grew dark of soul.
Then said “ Look from the orbit of the moon
Down to the gloomy face of sombie earth ,

All IS distress and anguish, care and toil
Such IS the manner of this Wayside Inn,

Such is the manner of the circling sky —

Whiles strife and poison, and whiles sweets and love '
We die by nature or by violence ,

’Tis better not to mark the why and how.

For all must go as soon as time is up
Blame not the circling of the sky. Now may
The all-victorious World-lord be our aid,

And may our foemen’s fortunes be o’erthrown
Henceforward we will take our full revenge.

And rid the world of foes.”

The mighty men

Praised him and said “ Live ever famed and glad
With signet, crown, and sword, and never be
The court of Kai Khusrau bereaved of thee ”


V 942


174


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


§ 27

How the lidnians and Tiirdmans arrayed their Hosts

When o’er the hills the world-illumer shone,

When day seized on the two dark curls of night,

And, having cast aside its pitchy weeds,

Bit with Its teeth the moon’s lips till they bled.

The sound of drums rose from the camp-enclosures,
The warriors came forth Human the chieftain
Went out to reconnoitre every side.

And thought “ What reinforcement have the Iranians
To need those tents and those pavilions ? ”

He saw a camp-enclosure of brocade
Of turquoise hue with many slaves about.

And in its front a general’s flag and spear
It seemed to him that fortune had changed sides.

He saw another army’s camp-enclosure
With flags as bright as moons, for Farfburz,

Son of K4us, with elephants and drums
Had pitched near Tus Hdman in deep concern
Went to PfrAn and said “ To-day is wedded
To heavy toil. The Iranians’ cries and clamour
Were greater yesternight than heretofore ,

So went I forth alone from camp at dawn,

And vie\?.ed the foe on all sides From Iran
A mighty host hath come to succour them.

Now one pavilion is of green brocade ,

Its standard hath a dragon for device,

V. 943 And soldiers from Zabul are round about

With bucklers and with falchions of Kabul.

I think that Rustam, sent forth by the Shah,

Hath come with reinforcements to the field.”

Pfran made answer “ ’Tis an evil time >

If Rustam taketh part in this campaign
He will not spare Kamiis, the Khan of Chin,


KAI KHUSRAU


175


Shangul or any warrior of Tiiran.”

With that he left the camp and gomg forth
Observed the forces ol the foe, and thence
Came hurrying to Kamiis, came to Manshiir
And to Fartus, and said “ I went this morn,

And made the circuit of the Iranian host.

Great reinforcements have arrived and chiefs
Both numerous and eager for the fray.

Methmketh too that elephantine Rustam,

Of whom I spake before the company,

Hath come to succour them, all bent on vengeance,
Straight from the Shah ”

“ 0 wise one > ” said Kamiis,
“ Thy heart produceth naught but ill surmise.

Know thou that Kai Khusrau hath come to war,

But do not therefore vex thy heart in vain.

Why harp so much on Rustam 7 Name no more

Zibulistan. If he beholdeth me

With flag in hand his heart will mourn at fight.

Go thou, array the host, lead forth the troops.

And bring the standards to the battlefield.

When I go forth to combat with the host
Ye must not loiter. Now shalt thou behold
The combating of men The wilderness
Shall be a sea of blood ”

The paladin

Rejoiced to hear and ceased to fret at Rustam
He came with joyful heart and resolute,

And bathed his spirit in the stream of valour
He gave out helms and mail to all the troops.

And kept in mind the language of Kamiis,

Then going to the Khdn he kissed the ground.

And said to him “ 0 monarch, live for ever >

May wisdom feed upon thy thoughts. The way
That thou hast trod was long and difficult ;

Thou bough test toil, loregoing feasts for us.


V 944


176 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

And to do reverence to Afidsiyab
Hast crossed the sea ^ Our soldiers’ backs are straight-
ened

By thee Now act as native worth requireth,

Bedeck the elephants with bells and gongs,

And stun the world with blare of clarions
To-day I make the attack , do thou remain
At the army’s centre with the elephants
And kettledrums, keep guard upon my rear,

And help to raise my helmet to the clouds
Kamds said thus to me ‘ Lead thou the van.

And brandishing his mace swore many oaths.

And said ‘ I will not tight save with this mace
To-day though stones should shower from the clouds ’ ”
The Khan on hearing bade the clarions sound
Thou wouldst have said “ The very dust hath feet ’ ”
Both earth and heaven shook at the tymbal-din.

And put all love away. He gave command
To set a litter on an elephant,

And earth’s face seemed like indigo He reached
In state the army’s centre, and the sky
Was like a dark cloud with the flying dust.

There was a sound of gongs and Indian bells,

And thou hadst said “Men’s hearts are m their
mouths > ”

V 94S The many turquoise thrones upon the backs
Of elephants and that blue sea of flags
Took all the lustre from the eyes of men,

And none possessed his soul in quietude
Dust filled the eyes and gullet ol the sky
Thou wouldst have said "Its face is smeared with
pitch I ”

Now when the Khdn had reached the army’s centre
The moon went erring from its way in heaven.

The right led by Kdmiis was like a mountain ,

* “ la mer de la Chine*’ (Mohl)


KAI KHUSRAU


177


They took the baggage-train toward the waste
Pfrdn went toward the left wing, and with him
There went Hiimdn his brother and Kulbdd
When Rustam saw the movements of the Khdn
He too arrayed his troops, bade Tus bind on
The drums and dress the army like the eye
Of chanticleer. He said “ We shall behold
O’er whom the heaven turneth in its love.

What are the revolutions of the sky,

And which of these great men hath lived his time
I loitered not, Rakhsh made three stages one.

But now his hoofs are tired , he is o’envrought
By march and toil I dare not tax his strength
By going forth myself as challenger ,

Assist me then to-day and work your will
Upon the foe ”

The captain of the host

Struck up the fifes and drums , the war-cry rose.
And trumpet-blare Giidarz drew up the light.

And sent the baggage to Mount Hamawan,

While Fan'burz arrayed the left , the world
Seemed all a reed-bed ' At the army’s centre
Was Tus son of Naudar Earth was all dust,

And air all storm, so that the world was hidden,

The warriors could not even see themselves >

The mighty Rustam climbed the heights to view
The Khdn and army of Tfiran , he saw
A host so mighty that the sea of Rum
Seemed but a lump of wax compared to them '

The troops were from Kashan and Shakn and Wahr,
With divers coats of mail and divers helms,

Troops from Chaghdn and Chfn, Saklab and Hind,
Gahan and Riim, Sind and the Indus-banks ’

In every quarter there were alien tongues,

Strange flags and meats 1 What with the elephants,

^ So Mohl

VOL III M


V 946


178


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


The adornments of the thrones of ivory,

The armlets and tiaras, torques and crowns,

The world was like the garth of Paradise —

A goodly but terrific spectacle >

He stood astonied on the height and thought —

“ When will the sky show love to us again ?

What will the next jest of old heaven be
He gat down from the mount but lost not heart.
Went not before the army and its chief,

But said * “ Since first I girt me ne’er have I
Dwelt anywhere a year, and I have seen
Full many a host, but greater never saw ”

He bade advance the drums, and Tiis the general
Marched from the mountain to the plain to battle.
Prepared to dip his wreakful spear m blood
They marched till noon, then ranked them two leagues
long,

V. 947 The daylight vanished m the army’s dust.

The sun divided not ’twixt night and' day,

The air was dark with spears and javelins.

The sun became confounded, and the dm
Of horsemen and of horses on the plain
Rose over Mars and Saturn Rocks of flint
Fled at the horsemen’s shouts and crash of axes,

Both sword and forearm reddened o’er with blood.

The ground groaned underneath the horses’ shoes
The body of the coward lost all heart.

While brave men turned their mail to winding-sheets
K4mus addressed the host : “ Since we must tread
The sky to-day, brmg all your lassos, maces.

And swords upon this glorious battlefield.

The aspirant’s head beneath the stones will he
Unless he quit himself with valiancy ” '


^ More literally, “ take his life in hand ”


KAI KHUSRAU


179


§ 28

How Rmtam fought mth AshkabUs

A warrior named Ashkabiis, whose voice
Was like a kettledrum’s, came forth to challenge
The frdmans, bent to lay some foeman’s head
In dust He cried “ Which of you famous men
Will come to fight with me, that I may make
His blood to flow in streams ? ”

Ruhham on hearing

Sent up his battle-cry, stormed like the sea,

Took up his bow — the horseman’s ambuscade —

And showered arrows on that famous chief.

But he was clad in panoply of steel,

And arrows weie like wind upon his tunic
Ruhham then raised his massive mace. The hands
Of both grew weary, but Ruhhdm’s mace failed
Upon the other’s helm, much as he sought
To deal a fatal blow, till Ashkabiis,

His heavy mace m hand, while earth seemed iron
And heaven ebony, smote brave Ruhhdm
Upon the helm and smashed it, who thus worsted
Wheeled round and sought the heights Tiis at the
centre

Raged and spurred forth to go at Ashkabiis,

But matchless Rustam said to him m wrath —

“ Jluhham’s fit comrade is a bowl of wine
He holdeth swords as playthings in his cups.

And vaunteth of himself among the brave ,

Now Avhither hath he gone, who was a match
For Ashkabiis, with cheeks like sandarach ?

Keep m the army’s centre — thy fit place —

And I will fight afoot ”

He slung his bow

Upon his arm, stuck arrows in his belt,


V 948


i8o THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSi

And shouted, saying “ 0 thou man of war '

Thine adversary cometh go not back.”

He of Kashan laughed in astonishment,

Then checked his steed and, calling to his foe,

Said, laughing still, to him “ What is thy name.

And who will mourn thee when thy head is off ? ”

V 949 The peerless Rustam answered “ Hapless one '

Why ask^st thou my name among the folk ?

My mother called me by this name — ‘ Thy death ’ ’

Fate made me for the hammer of thy helm ”

He of Kashdn replied “ Without a horse
Thou givest up thyself to slaughtering ' ”

Then peerless Rustam “ Senseless challenger i
Hast thou ne’er seen foot-soldiers lay proud heads
Beneath the stones ? Do lions, ciocodiles.

And leopards fight on horseback m thy country ?

Now I, foot-soldier as I am, will teach
Thee how to fight, 0 mounted warrior '

Tfis for this purpose sent me forth afoot
That I might get a horse from Ashkabus
He of Kashan like me will foot it then,

And all will laugh at him Afoot one man
Is worth three hundred cavaliers like thee
Upon this plain, this day, and m this fight ”

He of Kashan inquired “ Where are thine arms ?

I see not aught but mockery and jests ”

Quoth Rustam “ Thou shalt see the bow and arrows
Whereby thy life shall end ”

He marked the pride
Of Ashkabiis in his fine steed, and shot
An arrow at its breast , the charger fell
Headforemost Rustam laughed and cried aloud —

“ Sit by thy noble comrade ' Prithee nurse
Its head and rest thee from the fight awhile ”

V 950 Then Ashkabiis, his body quivering.

His face like sandarach, strung up his bow,


KAI KHUSRAV


i8i


And showered shafts on Rustam, who exclaimed —

“ In vain thou weariest thy wicked soul,

Thine arms, and body.”

Choosing from his girdle
A shaft of poplar wood he drew it forth
Bright-pointed, feathered with lour eagle- plumes ,

Then took his bow of Chach in hand and set

His thumbstall to the deer-hide string , he straightened

His left arm, curved his right , the bent bow sang ,

The shaft’s point reached his ear , the deer-hide
hummed ,

The shaft’s pomt bussed his finger and its notch
Was at his back , he loosed and struck the breast
01 Ashkabus , the sky kissed Rustam’s hand ,

Then destiny cried “ Take i ” and fate cried “ Give > ”
The heavens cried “ Excellent ' ” the angels “ Good ' ”
He of Kashan expired, thou wouldst have said —

“ His mother never bare him ' ”

Both the hosts

Beheld that fight. Karniis marked with the Kh.in
The lofty stature, strength, and fire of Rustam,

And, when he had withdrawn, the Khdn dispatched
A cavalier, who drew the arrow forth
All bloody to the plumes i They passed it round
And thought it was a spear ' The Khan’s heart aged
When he beheld the feathers and the point
He spake thus to Pfran " Who is this man ?

What IS his name among the franian chiefs ?

‘ They are a paltry remnant,’ were thy words,

‘ Not on a par with men of high degree,’

Whereas their arrows are like spears ' A mountain
Hath little heart to fight them , thou didst make
The matter small indeed, but thine account
Was false throughout ' ”

“ None know I of this class,
Plran replied, “ within the Iranian host.


V 951


i 82


THE SHAhnAmA of FlRDAUSt


None who can send his arrows through a tree- trunk,
Nor know I what this miscreant’s aims may be
The men possessed of stature, Grace, and prowess
Among the Iranian host are Tiis and Gfv,

And m the fight Humdn hath often made
The world as black as ebony to Tiis
I know not who is this franian.

Or who among our troops will prove his match ,

But I will go and ask among the tents ,

We will make out his name at all events ”


§ 29

How Piidn held Converse coneetning the Coming of Rustam

Pfran went full of care and p'^.le of face
To ask the chiefs. Hiimdn the valiant said —

“ Wise men do not depreciate their foes
The nobles of Iran are in good heart ,

‘ They would break iron,’ thou may’st say , and now
That reinforcements reach them from fran
They raise their war-cry on the battlefield ”

Pfran replied “ Whatever cavalier
Shall come forth from frdn to succour Tiis
We need not fear if Rustam be away
I shall not break my heart about Ruhham
Or yet about Gurgfn , for be assured
That saving Tiis they have no warrior ,

Gurgfn and Farfburz match not Kamiis
V. 952 Each soldier of our host too, with so great
A fight m view, will seek his own renown ”

Thence sped he to Kdmiis, went to Manshi'ir
And to Fartiis, and said “ To-day was fought
A great fight and a Wolf showed 'mongst the Sheep '
See to the cure and who hath shown himself
So harmful m the infliction of these wounds


KAI KHUSRAU


183

Kamiis replied “ Our fight to-day was such
That fame was turned to shame since Ashkabiis
Was slam therem while Giv and Tiis rejoiced
My heart was riven at this man on foot
Because our troops were panic-stricken at him
He IS the tallest man on earth, we have not
One in the host to fight him Thou didst see
His bow j the shaft is here. A savage lion
Hath not his strength , he surely is the warrior,

The man of Sigz, of whom thou spakest oft.

And he hath come upon the held afoot.

Come to give succour to the Iranian host ”

Pi'ran replied “He is not like this one,

But an exalted cavalier and hero ”

Kdmus, whose wary heart was all intent
Upon the matter, said “ Describe to me
How fareth on the field that lion-man
What knowledge hast thou of his heigh^t and strength ?
What language holdeth he with chiefs m fight ?

What sort of man is he, and what his aspect ?

On what wise shall I go to combat with him.

For if he be the one that hath arrived
I take the field myself ? ”

Pi'ran replied —

“ Forbid it, heaven > that Rustam should come hither.
And purpose fight ’ Thou wouldest see a hero.

Tall as a cypress, and with Grace and beauty.

From whom Afrasiyab on many a field
Hath turned with tears , a warrior -liege is he.

The first to draw the scimitar, and fighteth
In wreak for Siyawush his foster-child.

No one can wield his arms though many try.

In battle, when he girdeth up his loins.

His body hath a savage lion’s strength.

No crocodile can lift his mace when dropped
In fight , his bow-string is of lion-hide ,


V 953


184


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


His arrows, shaft and point, weigh ten sitir.

If any flint-rock should encounter him
'Twould turn to wax or something softer still
He weareth, when he goeth forth to battle.
Chain-mail, and buckleth o’er it his cuirass.

And over that a garb of leopard-skm
‘ Babr-i-Bayan ’ he calleth it , ’tis more
Than tunic and cuirass to him, not burning
With tire and wetting not with water. He
Hath wmgs when wearing it The steed whereon
He rideth is, thou wouldst say, Mount Bistiin
In motion, ever neighing m the fight.

And making sparks fly out of dust and stone ,

But, wondrous as he is, it well may be
That thou wilt hold him not a man in battle,

And ’tis not strange that thou art worshipful
Who hast such limbs and shoulders, neck and arms.”

Whenas Kan^us, the man so prudent, heard
He gave his eyes and ears up to PfrAn,

Whose words in sooth proved grateful. All afire
He answered “ Paladin i be shrewd of heart
And bright of mmd Propose what oaths thou wilt —
Oaths such as kings of wakeful fortune take —

And I will swear a greater oath to thee.

One that will cheer thy wounded heart, that I,

V. 954 In His strength Who is Master of the sun,

Will not take off the saddle from my steed
Till I have made thy spirit glad and bright.

And this world as a needle’s eye to them.”

Pfran called many blessings down on him.

And said “ Shrewd-hearted king who sayest sooth '
We are m all thmgs subject to thy will.

Which leaveth little of the fray to us ”

Pfrdn then went the circuit of the host.

And, visiting the enclosures and the tents,

Apprised the Khdn and all of these events.


KAI KHUSRAU


185


§ 30


How the Jrdnians and TAidnians set the Battle in An ay


Whenas the air glowed with the setting sun,

And dark night ’gan to stalk athwart the sky,

The warriors ot the army of Tiirdn,

The men of wisdom and the scimitar.

Came in a body to the Kh4n’s pavilion.

Full of revenge and fight — the lion-man
Kamiis, the conqueror of elephants,

Manshur the brave, the arbiter of battle,

With ShamMn from Shakn, Shangul from Hind,

The king of Smd and from Sakl4b Kundur.

They all advised at large about the war.

And spake much of fran, till all agreed

That they must wash their hands in blood, then parted,

Each to his tent, for rest or pleasure there ,

But when the moon, then slender grown and humped.
Left the dark chevelure of gloomy night,

And, being m the presence of the sun.

Arose with watery looks and bathed its cheeks.

The soldiers ot both hosts began to stir.

And, as their shouts arose, the Khan of Chfn
Exclaimed “ We must not hesitate to fight
As yesterday we did and had to deem
Pfran — the man most needful — non-existent.

Far have we marched with succours to this war.

And if we slack to-day as yesterday
We shall disgrace our name for manliness.

To-morrow too Afr4siy4b will praise us.

And we may rest. Attack we then in force,

And mountam-like advance against our foes ,

The nobles of ten provinces are here.

We must not sleep or feast.”


V 955


The mighty men


i86


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Arose and said “ The conduct of the host
Is thine to-day Thine are the realms of Chi'n
And of the Turkmans. Mark thou here to-day
How scimitars shall shower from darksome clouds '

On his side Eustam thus harangued the troops —

“ The time hath come , it we have lost a few
There is but one in several hundred slam ,

Let not your hearts be straitened , for my part
I will not live except with fame and honour.

With cheeks like ebony the Turkman troops
Withdrew trom Ashkabus, so fill ye, all ’

Your hearts with vengeance, frown, ye cavaliers '

For I have put the shoes on Rakhsh to-day.

And on him will mcarnadine my sword ‘

Be instant for to-day we start atresh,

And all the earth is now the treasury

Of Kai Khusrau Arm for the strife Win crowns

And earrings. Purses shall ye have of me.

Gifts from ZAbul and turbans from Kdbul ”

V 95b The mighty blessed him “Ne’er may crown and
signet
Lack thee

He donned his armour and went forth
With confidence upon the battlefield.

He put his chain-mail under his cuirass.

And over it he donned Babr-i-Bayan.

He wore a helmet wrought of steel of Chin —

One to make foemen meditate on death.

He girded up his loins by God’s command,

And mounted Rakhsh like some mad elephant.

The heavens were confounded at his mien,

Earth darkened where his charger’s hoofs were seen.


KAI KHUSRAU


187


I 31

Hoii Alwd was slam hy Kdm^s

The drums and trumpets sounded trom both hosts,

No room remained for guile or grammarye ,

The mountains and the plains were all a-quake,

The earth was troubled by the tramp of steeds
Kdmus commanded the Turanian right,

Behind him were the mighty elephants
And baggage On the left the loid of Hind
Stood clad in mail, a Ruman sword in hand.

And in the centre was the Khan of Chin
The sky grew dark, the earth shook Fariburz,

Like Sol irradiant in Aries,

Commanded on the left wing of Iran
Gudarz, son of Kishwad, encased m steel,

Was on the right, and in the centre Tus,

Son of N audar, in front were drums and clarions
From all parts of the host a shout arose —

A shout which rent the ears of elephants —

And e’en from water rose the fumes of fire V 9:7

It was a fight surpassing warriors’ dreams
The first man that appeared between the lines.

His heart’s blood all afoam upon his lips.

Was that famed chief Kamus accompanied
By soldiers, elephants, and kettledrums.

He, bearing in his hand an ox-head mace.

Cried like a furious elephant trumpeting —

“ Wheie IS that man on foot who challengeth
Illustrious heroes ? Let him come and see
A bow and arrow that will cost him life ”

The gallant warriors — illustrious Tus,

Ruhham, and Gfv — beheld Kamiis, but none
Desired to strive with him , the field remained
Void of Iranian chiefs, none had the strength


i88 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

To fight with him for he was like a pard ,

They were like deer Yet was there one, Aiwa,

A Z4buh, who promptly drew his sword
He used to bear the spear and guard the back
01 Rustam, was a skilful cavalier.

And had with liver-burning toil and trouble
Acquired from him the use of arrow, mace.

And spear What said the sage, the eloquent.

The ancient man ? Now listen and perpend —

“ Let not thy prowess fill thee with conceit,

But look well to the ground beneath thy feet ,

V 9S8 To match a rivulet against the sea
Would be a contest of insanity ”

Now when Aiwa adventured on Kamiis,

Who for his part was eager for the fray.

They cleared an ample space He of Kashan
Came wolf-like, with his spear unhorsed his foe
With ease, then wheeled his steed and trampled o’er
The fallen till the dust was red with gore.


§ 32

How Kdmiis was slatn by Rustam

The peerless Rustam grieved about Aiwa,

Let loose the twisted lasso from its straps.

And took his massive mace as for a strife
Of chiefs. He roared like some mad elephant
As he advanced with lasso on his arm
And mace m hand Kamus said “ Bluster not
So much about a thread of sixty coils ”

“ The lion roareth bravely,” Rustam said,

“ On catching sight of game. Thou wast the first
To put the girdle on in this dispute.

And thou hast slain a noble of frdn
Thou sayest that my lasso is a thread ,


KAI KHUSRAU


189


Now shalt thou see how tight the knots will hold.
Thy fate doth drive thee on, man of Kashdn •

Since here no place is left thee save the dust.”

Kimiis the valiant urged his dun steed on,

His foe a lasso- bearing Elephant,

And let out with his glittering glaive, intent
To sever Kustam’s head The point alighted
On Kakhsh’s neck and clave the battle-mail,

But failed to wound The elephantine hero
Coiled, whirled, and flung the lasso round his foe,
Then spurred away and made the leather fast
Beneath his thigh while Rakhsh flew eagle-like.
Kdmiis undaunted tightly gripped his steed,

Pressed firmly on the stirrups, loosed the reins,

And sought by force to break the twisted thong,
Becoming frantic, but the raw hide held
The elephantine hero, cheeking Rakhsh,

Wheeled, jerked Karniis headforemost to the ground.
Came up, secured him in the lasso’s coils.

And said to him “ Thou art not dangerous now
In vain are all thy charms and spells , thy soul
Hath made a fiuitless bargain with the Div ”

He bound his prisoner’s hands behind the back.
Firm as a rock, then grasped the coils, leturned
Afoot, his foe beneath his arm, and told
The warriors “ This lover of the fray
Essayed to match himself with me in strength.

But ’tis the wont with this deceitful world
At times to elevate, at times bring low
It causeth both our happiness and grief.

And one is whiles on earth, whiles in the clouds
Now this illustrious warrior, vrho ever
Was wont to prove the lion’s match in hght.

Set forth to desolate frdn, to make
A den of lions of our fields and fells,

And leave behind no palaces or bowers


v 959


190 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Of roses in Zabul or in Kdbul.

He would not lay aside that mace of his
Till he had slaughtered Rustam son of Zal ,

But now his helm and hauberk are his shroud,

His crown is dust, and his juppon the grave
V 960 On what wise do ye purpose slaying him.

Because Kdmiis the warrior’s work is done ? ”

Then Rustam flung Kamiis upon the ground
Before the chiefs , the warriors left their ranks.

They hacked his body with their scimitars,

And drenched the stones and dust beneath with blood
Such IS the course of heaven and destiny.

Now causing joy, then pain and misery t
All IS toil, anguish, trouble, and distress ,

Thy courage will not make it more or less
Thy body hath a load of guih to bear.

Thy spirit dwelleth m a world of care ,

And let not bravery thy thoughts elate.

For stretched above thee is the hand of Fate
With all thy might incline to virtue’s ways.

And offer unto God — the Guide — thy praise

The strife with brave Kamus hath reached its goal
In death when He that gave took back the soul
Now valour and revenge will fill the scene
I tell the battle with the Khan of Chin


PAET III


THE STORY OF RUSTAM AND THE

khAn of chIn

ARGUMENT

There are abortive negotiations, but the campaign continues
Many Turanian chiefs are slain by Rustam, who takes the Khan
of Chin prisoner He also slays Kafur, the man-eater Afrasiydb
summons Pulddwand to his aid, but again Rustam is triumphant
He returns victorious to Irdn, is welcomed and rewarded by Kai
Khusrau, and then departs to Sistdn

NOTE

§ 14 It 18 said that when Firdausi was buried m his own
garden at Tus,^ the gieat Shaikh of the time — Abul Kasim of
Gurgan — refused to be present because, he said, Firdausi, though
a learned and religious man, had deserted his principles and spent
his time in discoursing of men of bad religion and fire-worshippers
That night the Shaikh had a dream of Paradise He saw a
magnificent palace with a jewelled throne, and asked whose it
was ^^It IS for Firdausi,” was the reply Then the poet appeared
wearing a green robe and an emerald-coloured crown upon his
head O Firdausi ’ ” said the Shaikh, whence this rank and
splendour The poet ans\^ered ^‘From a couplet 01 two con-
fessing the Unity of God ” The Shaikh, when he woke, went
and prayed at Firdausi’s tomb Probably the lines referred to
are those at the end of this section ^

^ 20 Cannibalism was not unknown in former times among
the savage tribes of the North, as we learn from Herodotus On
the upper waters of the Borysthenes (the Dnieper) dwelt the
Androphagoi proper, who seem to have been of Finnish race,
some tribes of which appear to have retained their cannibalistic


1 Gf. Vol 1 p 45


* C, Persian Preface, p 60, and note


192


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


p ropensity as late as the Middle Ages ^ On the steppes east
of the Caspian dwelt the Massagetse, and to the north of them,
and south-east of the Ural Mountains, the Issedones Both
these tribes were to some extent cannibals * The legend in the
text of a man-eating community can be accounted for without
difficulty


§ I

How the Khdn of Ohm had Tidings of the Slaying
of Kdmds

Now, 0 enlightened sage ’ speak but to name
God the Sustainer of heaven’s circling frame,

And Guide to good. Thine end of life will come,

V 961 And thou wilt rest within the other home,

But first narrate again this tale of yore
Told by the rustic minstrel from his store.

Anon news reached the Khan “ Kamus is slam
Upon the field, and day is turned to gloom
And bitterness before the chiefs of Balkh,

Kashan, and Shakn.”

All looked on one another,

And asked “ Who can this prowest warrior be ?

What IS his name ? Who is he ? Who can face him ? ”
Thus to Human the Lion spake, Pfran —

“ My soul hath had enough of strife to-day
How shall our warriors desire to fight
When our brave Crocodile hath just been slam ?

He was a peerless noble , not a horseman
Had form more elephantine, and the man
That could in battle bmd him with the lasso
Might well m days of fight seize by the head
An elephant and dash it to the ground ”

^ Herodotus, iv 18 and io6 BAG, Vol 1, p* 193
* Ibid 1 216 and iv 26


KAI KHUSRAU


193


The troops in sore distress about Ki,mds
Came in a body weeping to the Kh4,n,

To whom PMn did reverence sadly, saying —

“ O thou exalted o’er yon azure dome '

Thou hast beheld and heard how we have fared
From first to last upon this battlefield
Devise a remedy for our misfortune
Thyself without consulting any one
Choose from our army’s spies one that can bring
Hid things to light and find out who he is —

This lion-hearted one for whom our host
Hath not a match , then we will all face death,
And fight him on the field ”

The Kh4n replied —

“’Tis what concerneth me , I fain would know
The name of this pernicious paladin,

Who taketh Lions in his lasso’s coils ,

But seemg de^th may not be remedied.

And wishes, prayers, and vigour naught avail.

For to that end we all are mother-born,

And yield our necks thereto agamst our wills.
While none escapeth turning heaven’s decree.
Not if he dash to earth an elephant.

Let not your hearts be sorrowful for him,

Who perished in the twisted lasso’s coils,

For with my lasso I will bring to earth
The man that slew Kamiis, and make Iran
Run river-like with blood to glut the heart
Of king Afrasiyab ”

He then assembled

Full many a noble from the army — swordsmen
And bravest of the brave — and said to them —

“ As for this warrior with his archery,

This lasso-fiinging, hero-taking horseman,

’Tis needful that ye spy out where he is
Upon the left or right wing of their host ,

VOL. III. N


V 962


194


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Inquire withal about his name and land ,
Then will we do his business out of hand.”


§2

How Chinqtsh fajed with Rustam

A lusty cavalier — a faithful hege —

By name Chmgish — a seeker of renown —

A man of valour and adventurous,

Stepped forth and volunteered. He thus addressed
The Khan “ Exalted i all the world would have
Thy love Though this man be a lion I
Will make him lifeless when I take the field,

Will fight him single-handed and convert
The glory of fran to infamy
I will be foremost to avenge Kamus, ,

And thus restore his honour after death ”

The Khan applauded him He kissed the ground
Before his lord, who said “ Achieve this vengeance.
Bring me yon overweening head, and I
V 963 Will give thee from my hoards so many gems
That thou shaft never need to toil again ”

Chmgish spurred forth swift as Azargashasp,
Approached the Iranians, drew a poplar arrow.

And cried “ This is my field, the heads of nobles
Are m my clutch. If that bold lasso-flinger.

Who useth sometimes lasso, sometimes shaft,

And took Kdmus, will come upon the field.

His station shall be void.”

He roamed about.

And cried “ Where is that li'on-warrior ? ”

Then Kustam with his mac^ bestirred himself.

And straightway mounted Ba^ksh “ I am,” he said,
“ That chief-o’erthrowmg, Lioil-capturer,


KAl KHUSRAU


J9S

I have mace, lasso, and artillery.

And now for thee, as for the brave Kdmiis
’Tis time to rub eyes m the dust ”

Chmgish

Rejoined “ What are thy name, thy race, and purpose
That I may know whose blood I shed amid
The dust of battle ? ”

Rustam answered “Wretch'
Ne’er may the tree that taketh thee for fruit
Bloom in the garth To thee my name and spear-pomt
Are death, thy mail and helm thy winding-sheet ”

That insolent came wind-like, strung his bow.

Which seemed a raining cloud, and said to Rustam,

His mail-clad opposite “ Stay, valiant horseman '

Thou shalt have fight enough ”

The other laised

His shield, perceivmg that the shafts would pierce
His mail Chmgish marked well that elephant-form.
Tall as a straight-stemmed cypiess in a garden.

Beheld that steed — a Hill beneath a Hill
And not aweary — thought “ To run away
Is better than to bring myself to harm,”

And spurred his heavy-laden charger on
In flight, intending to rejoin his troops ,

But Rustam, that bold horseman, urged on Rakhsh
Like fire and followed up his noble foe.

As like a furious elephant he gained
Upon Chmgish the plain was full of hubbub,

And both the armies saw amazedly
How Rustam caught the charger of Chmgish
And held it by the tail until the rider
In terror threw himself upon the ground ,

His helm fell oft' him and he begged for life.

But peerless Rustam stretched him on the dust.

Struck oft' his head, and thought of him no more.

The Iranian nobles praised their paladin.


V 964


196 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Who, glittenng spear in hand, rode to and fro
Between the frdnian army and the foe.


§ 3

How the Khdn of Chin sent Hiimdn to Rustam

Much grieved the Khan and raged at that mishap ,

He said thus to Hiimdn “ Now time and place
Are straitened to us Go, for thou art shrewd.

And learn the name of yon great paladin ”

Hiimdn replied “ No anvil I oi ivory
In fight KAmiis the warrior had no peer
For valour and discretion, so despise not
The cavalier that lassoed him. I go
V 965 To learn whom God will favour on this field ”

As swift as wind he went inside his tent.

Took other helmet, flag, and horse, and changed
The fashion of his mail and shield, then went,

And, drawing near to Rustam, paused to scan

That hero’s neck and limbs, and said ; “ Renowned one.

Brave lasso-flinger, warlike cavalier '

By God, I tremble for my monarch’s throne
When I behold a foeman such as thou art
In this great host I see no valiant noble
And chief like thee. One courting such a combat
Could make the dust fly from a lion’s heart >

Tell me about thy country, race, and home.

Inform me of thy parentage and name
I have not seen among the Iranian host
A man save thee who hath the heart to fight
I love a warrior, and most of all
The man that hath the temper of a pard ,

So now it thou wilt let me know thy name.

Land, stock, and home, thou wilt confer a favour.

For thou wilt ease my heart.” •


KAI KHUSRAU


197


The paladm

Said “ Noble warrior of ardent soul '

Why tell not thy name, country, realm, and home ?

Why hast thou come with this bland courtesy.

And so much talk ? If thou desirest peace,

Not further loss in war, find bird that shed
*

The blood of Siydwush, and so involved us
In all the fire of feud. Find in thy host
Alike the guilty and the innocent ,

Find too the men, the steeds caparisoned.

And goods which Siy^wush took from fran ,

Send all to us, and I will wish no longer
To fight the Turkmans , ye shall be my friends
In all, I will not speed revenge, seek strife,

Or lay the heads of nobles in the dust
I will communicate with Kai Khusrau,

Will purge his heart and brain of grief and vengeance.
And send to him the culprits , he may pity them.

And pardon their ottence. Now will I tell thee
Their names, and may their names and schemes both
perish t

The head of the offence was Garsfwaz,

Who sought to trouble and afflict lian
Next any that thou knowest of Tiii’s seed
That made this Water biackish wantonly.

Such as Gurwi the son of Zira, born
Unjust and loveless , perish all his race '

They did the injury to Siyawush,

Which was the key to all these bonds of bale ,

Next those who wrecked their monarch’s brain and
heart,

And made blood flow like water, also those
Who had no quarrel with the Iranians,

And yet have taken part m this campaign,

The mighty men that are of Wfsa’s race.

Men double-faced and pied, to every one,


V 966


198 THE ShAhnAma OF FIRDAUSt

V 967 Such as Hiiiudn, Lahhak, aijid Farshfdward,

Kulb4d and Nastihan the lion-man
If ye accomplish this that I demand,

And end our quest for vengeance, I will shut
The door of our revenge upon thy country ,

Thou shalt not need to clothe thy breast in mail ,
But if thou speakest in another sense
I will renew our quarrel by fresh wars.

And by the life and head of great Khusrau
Make reek the marches of Turan Shangul
Shall not survive nor yet the Khan of Chin,

Or warrior of the country ot Tiirdn.

Thou hast essayed me on this battlefield ,

My way and mode of fight is always this
One of the nobles of Iran am I,

Wont to encounter Lions in ^he fray.

And many heads have I removed from bodies
Whose only wmdmg-sheet was grimy dust
I ne’er have spoken on this wise before,

My purpose first and last hath been revenge ,

Now therefore hearken to me and embrace
These fair proposals ”

At these words Human
Was sore afraid and trembled like a leaf.

For hearing Rustam talk in such a strain
He saw what vengeance would befall his kin,

And answered “ Lion-hearted warrior >

With strength and form and stature such as thine
Thy proper seat is on the Iranian throne.

At least thou art a mighty paladin
Or some redoubtable Iranian chief.

V 968 Thou hast inquired about my race and name.

But not accorded what I asked of thee.

My name is Kiih. A warrior brave am I.

My sire is Busip4s — the lion-like
1 have accompanied this host fr^m far,


KAI KHUSRAU


199


And come a soldier to this scene of strife.

Now that thou hast my name and race aright
I too must ask for thine, which I require
That I may make thy wishes known to all
So now if thou wilt let me know thy name ’

I will return rejoicing to the camp
What thou hast spoken on this battlefield
Will I detail in presetice of the host,

And in the presence of Manshiir, the Khan
Of Chin, and Turkman warriors and chiefs ”

But Rustam said to him “ Seek not my name
Say what I seemed to thee My heart is burnmg
With love toward Pfran, because the slaughter
Of Siyawush hath pierced his liver too ,

He IS the gentlest man in all Tiiran.

Speed him to me forthwith and we will see
What time may bring ”

Human replied “ 0 great one '
Then thou art eager to behold Pfran '

What knowest thou of him or of Kulbad,

Piilad, or of Gurwf the son of Zira ? ”

“Why ask so many questions?” Rustam said
“ Try not to make a river run up-hill
As for these mighty hosts, dost thou not see
That J they fight or not is left to thee ? ”


§ 4

Hoio Phdn took Counsel mth Hdmdn and the Khan

Human withdrew with all his favour changed.

And told Pfrdn “ 0 favourite of fortune ’

Great ill hath come on us ' This lion-heart

Is Rustam of Z6.bul, and we may now

Weep for our troops He talked at large with me,

^ Beading with C and P


V 969


200 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Recalling what we each had done amiss,

And I, my brother i was the first accused.

He spake much of revenge for Siyawush,

Of past events, of waste and settlement.

Of what he purposed and of righteous dealing.
About Bahram and those Gudarzians,

And all that fell. His love is all for thee
Of whom he spake at large with kfndliness
He calleth now for thee of all this host ,

I know not why Go see him spear in hand.

Set like a hill upon another hill.

With mail and mace and leopard-skin cmrass,
Bestriding his great, furious Elephant
Then wilt thou see that I have told no lies ,

E’en fire receiveth brightness from his sword.

He will not budge without pn mterview ,

It is for thy sake that he tarrieth thus
Bespeak him fairly when thou seest him.

Draw not thy sword, and act not hastily ”

Plran replied “ Exalted one ' I fear
My time hath come If yonder warrior
Be Rustam, then this plain will be a scene
Of griet tor us. Our fields already burn ,

I know not what our evil star hath done.”

He went with tearful eyes before the Khan,
Pierced through the liver, angry, seared at heart,
V. 970 And said to him “ 0 monarch ' be not hasty.
Because the case is altered with us now
Whenas Kamiis the warrior’s time had come
The thought occurred to me ‘ This Iron Wall
Is Rustam, with his raw hide lasso-coils ’
Afrasiy 4 b may come m all his pomp.

But none will dream of seeing Rustam’s back ,
Dtvs sicken fightmg him What is one man
Or one whole plain-full in opposing him ?

He hath been long lord of Z^bulistan,


KAI KHUSRAU


201


And foster-sire ere while to Siydwush,

And warreth like a father in his anguish
To make the world strait to Afrdsiyab ,

This elephantme one hath summoned me
Of all this countless host, I know not why ,

But I will go and ascertain his will
Because my spirit is brought low with care.”

The Khdn said “ Go, say that which must be said
With courtesy If he desireth peace
And wealth, why toil our armies on this plain ?

Agree to give great gifts and then return ,

’Tis better not to court so great a fight ;

But, since he is arrayed in leopard-skm,

Good sooth > he may be bent upon a conflict ,

Then we will battle likewise m full force,

And press him closely on the field of strife
Put we our trust m God and war with Rustam
With all our strength , his body is not brass
And iron, but is blood and hair and flesh,

Nor shall we have to fight him m the sky

Why bum thy heart with care and grief ? Know this.

That, even if he feed on stone and iron.

Shafts and two-headed darts will pierce him We
Outnumber them three hundred times 'Tis ill
To be in dudgeon on this battlefield
This ZabuH, this famous warrior,

Outvieth not an elephant in fight.

And I will show him with mine own such play
That he no more will meet me in the fray.”


§ 5

How Piidn came to Rustam

PMn departed full of pain and fear.

Heart-rent at Rustam’s doings He approached


V 971


202 THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt

The array of trdn and cried “ 0 chief,

And lover of the fray i I heard that thou
Hadst called for me of all this countless host
Of Turkmans, and have come forth from my lines
To thine to see what thou wouldst have of me ”

When noble Rustam knew that from the Turkmans ,
A warrior approached he met Pfran
Before the host, an iron helm on head
“ What is thy name, 0 Turkman ' ” he demanded,

“ What IS thy will and purpose m this coming ? ”

The other said “ Piran am I, the chief
Of yonder chieftains Thou hast asked Human,

The son of Wisa, for me in kind words.

Which made my heart yearn toward thee, paladin ’
Declare to me which of the chiefs thou art ”

He answered “ I am Rustam of Zdbul,

My sword is from Kdbul, my clothing mail ”

Pfran, on hearing noble Rustam’s words.

Dismounted and did reverence Rustam said —

“ I greet thee from the bright-souled Sun Khusrau,

V 972 0 paladin ' and from his mother too.

The daughter of Afrdsiyab, who dreameth
Of thy love every night ”

Pi'ran replied —

“ I greet thee also, elephantme chief >

In God’s name and the host’s May He Who giveth
All good things bless thee, may thy signet be
A passport to the sky. Thanks be to God,

My Refuge, that I see thee here. Are Zal,

The son of Sam, Zawdra, Faramarz,

Those men of prudent hearts and prosperous —

May this world never know the want of them —

Are they m health, good spirits, and estate 7
Now will I speak unless thou take it ill
That subjects should complain of those in power
I planted in the Garden once a Tree,


KAI KHUSRAU


203


Whose leaves proved colocynth, whose fruit proved
blood,

And it hath caused me many grievous tears,

For, though ’twas once my treasure and my life.

It now hath brought me grief and yieldeth bane

Instead of antidote, for Siyawush

Esteemed me as his sire and shield from harm.

While I gave him my daughter and a province.

That he might illustrate my race , but some
Have slam him and my daughter cruelly.

And haply thou wilt say it served me right
Great are the care, the anguish, and the pains.

That I have suffered both from king and people,

And God shall be my witness m the world,

Although to call the Almighty as a witness
Is wrong, and though so long a time hath passed,

And I have heard much counsel from the wise.

That mourning hath not ceased within my house.

And that my soul is still aflame with grief.

That I pour out my blood instead of tears.

And constantly am in the leech’s hands.

That act hath ruined me, heaven hath not turned
As I could wish , I, since I learned the fate
Of Siyawush, have done naught, good or ill,

But been between two realms and two great kings
In anguish, misery, and impotence
I risked my life for Farangls, whose father
Had sought to slay her, but I kept her hidden
In mme own house, providing for her there.

She m return would have my life, would have
Her foemen’s heads from me ' All grief am I,

0 paladin ' and both sides rail at me

1 have no way to flee AfrAsiydb,

I have no other resting-place or home ,

I am concerned for treasure, lands, and herds.

And see not any pretext for d^artmg ,


V 97


V.97.


204 THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSl

I have my sons and many women-folk,

Such are the cares and ties of every one.

Whene’er Afrdsiydb commandeth war
He will not suffer me to close mine eyes ,

Against my will I must lead forth the host,

I may not disobey The occasion now
Is one for pity not for war with me
Had f no other p^in and grief at heart
About my km save that Pllsam was slam
But there are many other gallant youths,

Who have not had their fill of combating,

And seeing that I tremble for my life
I speak about my sons and property.

By God the Conqueror, O paladin '

Be not incensed against me, harbour not
A grudge against my km, kf^ep God m mind
v 975 Now by the illustrious soul of Siyawush
I swear that death is better far lor me
Than breastplate, sword, and helm, for if our troops
Engage thou wilt see mountains of the slam ,

Yet those from Shakn, Kash 4 n, Saklab, and Hind —
The lands between the Indus and this march —

Are guiltless of the blood of Siyawush,

Though brought as soldiers to this battlefield
Peace bettereth war with me Be not too hard.
Speak out thy mind , thou art more wise than I,
And mightier in war and prowess.”

Kustam

Replied not as Plran desired but said —

“ Since I and other warriors of the Shah
Armed for the field I have seen naught but good
From thee — the least injurious of Turkmans.

Thou hast done righteously m all and sought
To lead Tfir 4 n aright. The leopard knoweth
That war and strife are evils, rocks and mountains


^ See Vol 11 p 360


KAI KHUSRAU


205


Know that, but when the king of kings is bent
On vengeance we must pour the arrows in.

On two conditions there may be peace yet ,

Consider if ye will consent to them

One IS — that thou shalt send to Kai Khusrau

In bonds all those that through the prince’s death

Insensately have set this scene of strife,

Although not authors of the war, and those.

The guilty of the blood of that just head.

Although they may be not upon the field
The other is — thou shalt prepare thyself.

And come with me to our victorious Shdh
As to the goods which thou wilt leave behind.

And dost esteem so precious, thou shalt have
Ten for each one from him, so prate not thou
About the baggage of the Turkman host ”

Pfran reflected “ To desert Tiiran,

And go before that king were grave indeed >

Again by thus demanding those in fault
In wreak for Siydwush he will bung low
Afrdsiydb’s great men — his kith and km —

The man with thrones and treasure, place and powei
How could I dare to speak of such a thing ?

He asketh what is quite preposterous t
Human, Kulbdd, and Farshidward — the men
That brought about the anguish of Giidarz —

Are all involved, and this can never be
No river m the world can run such water.

I must adopt mine own expedient.

Take mine own way ”

He said “ 0 paladin 1

Mayst thou be ever young and bright of mind,

I will depart and tell this to the chiefs —

Manshiir, Shangul, and to the Khan of Chin —

And send a cameleer to tell the king

Thy words, and rouse him from his slumbering ”


2o6


THE SHAhnAmA of FlRDAVSl


|6

How the T'd'tdmans took Counsel foi Battle with the Irdmans

Pfran departed to the host like wind,

Assembled those that were of Wfsa’s race,

And told the secret, saying “ Our fall or rise
Hath come, for know ye that this Lion-heart
Is Rustam, who hath ta’en the field m grief
With chiefs and Lions from Zabulistdn
And nobles from Kabulistan With him
There are Gudarz and Giv and Tiis, and we
Must fight, though ’gainst our wills, and be disgraced
Since Rustam is the avenger and the leader
No horsemen in the world will Iiold their own
He seeketh of the Turkmans those in fault,

975 And troubleth not about tjie innocent

Who to your knowledge is not guilty here.

And is not much affected by our king ?

Behold our country will be desolate.

The warriors of Iran will work their will,

Y 977 And all be lost, the young, the old, the monarch,

The treasure, army, throne, and diadem.

I said to our unjust king ‘ Be not thou
So fiery and stormful, else some day.

And with no warning, thou wilt be consumed.

Thy wit be burned and thy heart’s eye sewn up ’

The imperious monarch brooked not mine advice.

Or that of the illustrious company.

But made away with noble Siydwush
Without consulting with the brave and wise
Thou wilt see nothing left of state or crown.

Throne, elephants of war, or diadem ,

The Iranian king will be rejoiced thereat
While grief and pain will be our warriors’ portion.

Woe for our gallant hearts and this great host,


KAl KHUSRAU


207


Endowed with Grace, tall stature, crown, and state '

All will be spoiled henceforth before your eyes.

None will turn happy from the battlefield.

For they will tread us ’neath their horses’ hoofs ,

Our wakeful fortune’s light will be bedimmed
My heart is burning for Hiiman, my soul
Is flaming for Ruin, for Rustam’s heart
Is brimming with revenge for Siyawush
For whom his eyebrows are fulfilled with frowns
I will go sadly to the Khan and tell him
What this revenge hath cost me.’*

Swift as dust

He went with full heait and with lips all sighs,

And found the carnp-enclosure full of clamour,

With bloody tulips set on saffron cheeks,

For many of the kindred of Kamiis

Had come demanding vengeance They exclaimed —

“ Afr4siyab will dream no more of greatness '

Why did this king, who hath no man to fight
On days of battle, thus begin the feud ?

We, to avenge Kamus, with tearful eyes
Will lead the army of Kashan to Chin,

And thence and from Barbar, from the Buzgush,

From the Sagsars and from Mazandaran

Will we bring mace-armed troops to slaughter Rustam

That none may hear his voice Afrasiyab,

If fain for vengeance, must not rest or sleep ”

Moreover from the kindred of Chingish
And Ashkabus a dm like beating drums
Arose, while all in anguish for their kinsmen
Were raining tears of gall on saffron cheeks,

And saying midst their tears “ We will not rest
Or sleep henceforth till we have fired Sfstan,

And given its people doleful nights and days.

Have set the head of Rustam of Zabul
Upon the stake in grief for our great dead.


V 978


208 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

And, having burned his body, strewn the ashes
Before his palace-gate ”

Pirdn was dazed,

His favour darkened at their lamentations.

And thus he said “ Afflicted, helpless men,
Possessed by pain and care and fed on grief '

Ye surely cannot know that your own time
Is almost o’er ”

He sought the Kh4n and said —
“ This little war of ours is growing long
A Crocodile, whose mail is leopard-skin,

Hath come up from the river to the fight,

For Rustam hath brought troops from every side,
And famous chiefs , our toils are thrown away.
And unjust deeds receive just punishment.
Afrasiyab was so infatuate
That Siyawush was murdered by his hand.

Urged to it by the insensate Garslwaz.

V 979 Now Siydwush was great, a royal prince
Brought up by Rustam of Zabulistan,

Who fighting to avenge his fosterling
Will bring the heavens down No leopard’s claws
Or trunk of elephant, no lofty mountain
Or river Nile ^ will aught avail with him
When he shall take the field before his host.

He rideth on a horse that needeth not
A ship m seas of blood. We may not reckon
This conflict trifling , all have seen his power.

A fire hath fallen from azure heaven and caused
Our hearts to fume with fear. Convoke the sages.
The priests, the great, and find the remedy —

A champion competent to take the field .

We may perchance escape these ills and reach
Our homes albeit with diminished fortunes.


^ “ nx les flots de Tlndus ” (Mohl)


KAI KHUSRAU


209


Men should act fairly ever, not be first
To seek a quarrel.”

Troubled at Plrdn

The Khan invoked the Maker’s name and said —

“ How shall we act encountered by such hosts ? ”

Then said Shangul “ To what end is this talk,
Exalted one^ We sped o’er flood and waste
From every clime to help Afrasiyab,

Receiving gifts and armlets , if we fight not
We came like lions and shall go like foxes.

We sprang like fearless lions, losing not
One day upon the march, why such alarm
Because one man from Sigz encountereth us ?

Shame on such talk i Thou must take other order
Grant that he is a furious Elephant,

And grappleth Lions on the battle-field,

Still, though he slew Kamiis the warrior.

We must not hesitate, and since ’tis clear,

Because Piran is sleepless with dismay.

That some one holdeth Rustam in respect,

I now extend my hand as succourer
No Elephant is he or Lion’s match.

Nor IS his prowess as Pir4n asserteth
We must be firm herein, and not erase
All thoughts of vengeance on him from our hearts
Draw we our maces at the dawn, advance
Across the plain, make air like clouds m sprmg.

And pour a ram of arrows on the foe ,

Then through the dust of horse and crash of axes
None must know head from foot Observe me
well,

And, when I raise the war-cry, charge amain.

We are — we warriors and cavaliers —

Good sooth I above a hundred thousand strong.

And shall we, lifeless though not slain, thus vilely
Shrink from one man ? When I confront the Sigzian
VOL. III. 0


V 980


210


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Send ye the dust- clouds skyward , let none ’scape ,

A coward’s heart is naught ”

On hearing this,

Plrdn, old as he was, grew young of heart.

And said “ Live happy, free from grief and care,”
While all the nobles and the Khdn of Chin
Acclaimed the king of Hind

Now when Piran

Came to his tent the chiefs resorted thither —

V 981 Human, Barman, and Nastfhan, whose minds

Were poised ’twixt hope and fear. Human inquired —
“ What IS thy purpose ? Doth it furnish ground
For peace, or are the armies to engage

Piran told what Shangul had said, and how
The troops agreed to battle on, whereat
Hiiman was sore displeasured and, incensed
Against ill-starred Shangul, said to Piriin —

“ None can escape the sky and what it bringeth.”

He met Kulbad and said “ Shangul is mad '

If Rustam be what I have seen, and heard
From chiefs, Shangul, Kundur, Manshur, will not
Survive this battlefield, nor Avill the Khan.

Withdraw we for a while and reckon up
Our chance of gain or loss Thou wilt behold
Of this unbounded host, whose massive maces
Might quell the world, the more part laid to earth
With blood-drenched helms and mail for winding-sheet ”
Kulbad replied “ O wielder of the sword >

Keep if thou canst from evil presages.

And sadden not the hearts of thine OAvn side ,

The matter may be other than we think
The better course for thee is not to fret
Or worry over ills not come as yet.”


KAI KHUSRAU


2II


§ 7

How Rustam harangued his Tioops

On his side Rustam called his mighty men —

Tiis, Gfv, Giidarz, Ruhharn, and Farfburz,

Kharrad the warrior and Gustaham,

Gurgtn the veteran, the cavalier,

And that illustrious man of war Bizhan
‘ Yo men of wisdom ' ” said the peerless chief.
Addressing them at large in httmg words,

“ Ye archimages wise and shiewd of heart ’

The man whom God doth render fortunate
Is fit for crown and throne , he will possess
The world, prevail in war, and will not fear
The leopard, elephant, or crocodile
Our strength is all from God, and to what end
Are we upon this darksome earth of ours ^

To think no evil, but to choose the way
Of God and wisdom, since the world is no man’s.

And ’tis not well to take much joy therein ,

Our worth is based on right and hardihood
While knaveiy involveth harm and loss
Piran was heart-seared when he came to me
So hastily, he spake in many words
Of his good offices to Siyawush,

Of his own travail and anxiety.

And how through his entieaties Farangfs
Escaped the Dragon’s breath , and yet withal
My heart foreboded that Pfran would be
Among the hrst to perish in this war.

His son and brother die before his eyes
With many of the noblest of his km.

And that Khusrau would slay Afrasiydb •

Such was my dream. Know that they all will perish
Beneath our feet, not one man will survive


V 982


212 THE SHAhnImA of FIRDAUSI

Howbeit I would not that this hand of mine
Should slay their general , he hath no craft
But honesty, and thmketh not of ill.

If then he shall accomplish what he said,

Be ancient wrongs forgotten , if he yield
The culprits and the goods, the strife is done,

V 983 The war for me is over, in this world

To deal uprightly is the best of all things
If from these chiefs with thrones and elephants —

An army like the blue sea — he dispatch
Both crowns and wealth, I shall not trouble further
About the Turkmans They will all pay tribute
Not being able to contend with us,

And we will spare their lives because the All-giver
Hath taught us wisdom and right ways The world
Is full of treasures, thrones, and crowns a man
Were fortunate indeed to win them all
Giidarz in hearing this stood up and said
To Rustam “ 0 thou chieftain good and just.

The host’s support, the adornment of the throne '

The crown and throne and helm are bright through
thee.

Resplendent wisdom is thy capital

And provand of thy soul Peace is no doubt

A better thing than war, but mark this well —

The ox hath yet his hide. I will repeat
To thee a saying of the olden times —

‘ The souls of evil men shun righteousness
E’en as the shoulders shun the burden’s stress ’

Pfran now giveth pledges in his strait,

But some day he will struggle to evade them
The Maker fashioned him a double-dealer.

So hearken not to him and ’scape his guile
When first we set the battle in array
We held a parley and forwent the fight
Because an envoy came to say from him —


KAI KHUSRAU


213


‘ I am averse from strife and battlefield,

And, recking not of country and of tents,

Have girded up my loins to serve the Shah ’

He heard from us much counsel and advice.

And said ‘ Henceforth is war no mate of mine ,

I will depart and compass this affair
Without delay, announcing to my km
My course herein, for I have throne and treasure
And cattle, and foi them I will provide ’

I said ‘ Thy right course is to come at once ,
Throne, wealth, and goods await thee in Iran ,

But keep the matter secret that thy fault
May not be patent to Afrasiyab ’

Pi'ran, when we had spoken, went his way,

And all that night companioned with the wind
He sent Afrdsiyab a cameleer
To say ‘ Array thy troops , a host hath come '
Thou wouldst have said that we had held no parle.
Because it came to nothing, and Piran
Upon the tenth day led his army forth
Toward the plain and filled the world with troops.
Just now he set, Oleader of the host ’

Upon thy path another toy , just now.

On seeing thy lasso’s coils, he feared foi life
Their whole reliance was upon Kamus,

And generals like Fartiis and like Manshiir .

But since he hath beheld K 4 mus’ fortune
Wrecked, and his slaughter in the lasso’s coils,
Pfr4n now knocketh at the door of peace.

Not daring to remain upon the field.

And, since he knoweth that his fall is nigh,
Employeth colour, stratagem, and guile.

As for the criminals, the wealth, and goods,

‘ Which I,’ he said, ‘ will gather and surrender,’
Thou wilt perceive that when the tymbals sound,
And Tiis and Fariburz advance to war,


v 984


214


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


V 985 He will in person lead the van and ever

Renew the combat. All his words are lies,

And Ahriman alone is his fit mate.

If thou art deaf to me mark what befell
My son Bahram > Plran thus held us back,

And set an ambush such that, when the day
Of battle came, he showed to us so great
A graveyard of Gudarzians that I
Must weep blood all my life, and have for leech
An Indian sword.”

Said Rustam “ Be thy words
And wisdom wedded. He is as thou sayest.

We and that old man differ, ’tis no secret ,

But, in as much as he hath done us good,

I would not fight him to the bitter end
Remember how he acted toward the Sh4h,

And how he mourned the fate of Siyawush
If he should break his word and set on us
I have my lasso at my saddle-straps
To take fierce Elephants. But I will fancy
No ill at first , we may escape a conflict ,

But, if he should be faithless, he shall find
The outcome pain and grief.”

Giidarz and Tus

Praised Rustam, saying “ Sol itself would fail
To cozen thee, and in thy presence sleights.
Deceptions, falsehoods, and Pfran’s own words
Take on no lustre May the earth ne’er lack
Our monarch's head and crown, and mayst thou hold
The chiefest place for ever ”

Rustam said —

“ ’Tis dark and now our brains are dazed with talk ,
Quaff we till midnight, then safeguard our troops.
And we shall see what God hath purposed for us ”

V. 986 He said moreover to the frdmans —

“ To-night as we are drinking I will take


KAI KHUSRAU


215


Some happy omen and, when morrow cometh,
Will shoulder Sam the cavalier’s own mace,
Wherewith I fought against Mazandaran,
Attack the Crocodile m his own lair.

And capture camp-enclosure, crown, tiara,
Mace, mighty elephant, and ivory throne
These will I bring and give the Iranians,

If after all I gird my loins for war.”

The noble lieges raised a shout and went
For rest and slumber each man to his tent


§ 8


How the teamans and I'ladnians i>et the Battle in Aiiay


Whenas the sun displayed its shining crown
The moon appeared as ’twere a silver shield,

But terror-stricken at the rising dm
Declined and hid her lace The tymbals sounded
Before the tent ot Tiis, the world grew ebon
With chargers’ dust , it hlled the air, the giound
Turned indigo, and Rustam donned his mail
The army ot fnin drew up in line.

The sons intent on fight, the sues on vengeance
Giidarz son ot Kishw.id was on the right
In armour, brandishing a mace ot steel,

While Fariburz was stationed on the left,

And washed the vengeance from his chieftains’ hearts ^
Tiis son of Shah Naudar was m the centre,

And all earth thronged with troops Then peerless
Rustam

Advanced to view the opposing chiefs , the Khan,
Whose elephants made earth like indigo.

Was in the centre, on the right Kundur —

A gallant horseman lion-like in battle —

^ J.e. by giving them so much that they wanted no more


V 987


216


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSf


And on the left the veteran Gahar

The earth was wounded ’neath the horsemen’s hoofs

Plr4n, upon his rounds before the host,

Approached Shangul, the lover of the fray,

And said to him “ O famous man of Hind '

Folk from Shlrw4n to Sind perform thy bidding.
Thou said’s t to me ‘ To-morrow with the dawn
Will I from all sides lead the host to fight ,

Then will I challenge Rustam and bring down
To dust that head which reacheth to the clouds.’ ”
He answered “ I abide by what I said.

Thou shalt see from me neither more nor less
Now will I go before this vanquisher
Of chiefs, and nail him through with arrow-points,
Avenge Kamiis and press the Iranians ”

With that he made three battles of his host.

He beat the drums and dust rose from the plain
They marched, each battle, with huge elephants —
An army-front extending o’er two miles
The heads of all the drivers were adorned
With gaudy colours, each man wore a crown
And earrings, with a gold torque round his neck.
And belt of gold about his loins The beasts
Were draped with housings of brocade of Chin
Surmounted by a throne and seat of gold.

Then there arose the blast of clarions,

And all the elephants of war advanced ,

Upon the right marched thirty thousand men —
Illustrious cavaliers armed with the spear —
Another thirty thousand on the left
With bows and shields of Chfn. The elephants
Were in the centre with the Khan, a throng
That rolled earth’s surface as they marched along.


KAI KHUSRAU


§9

How Rustam repioached Phan

Shangul went forth with Indian sword in hand
Between the opposing lines , a parasol
Of Indian make, compact of eagles’ plumes,
O’ershadowed him Around him was an escort
Which followed as he willed On seeing this
Pfran rejoiced, feared not the fight with Rustam,
And thus addressed Human “ To-day will fate
Dispose the matter to our hearts’ content
With this equipment and such cavaliers,

Each one so gallant, proud, and lion-like ,

So go not thou thyself before the line.

Think not of fighting this day or the next ,

Let thy post be behind the Khan of Chin,

Because thou need’st not fight, and if moreover
He of Zabul, he of the sable standard,

Beholdeth thee, our cause is lost Be ours
To note the progress of events, and see
What sport our wakeful fortune will afford ”

Pfran went thence toward the Iranian host
To where the elephantine hero stood ,

Dismounted, did obeisance many times.

And said “ High heaven taketh Grace from thee.
Ne’er may thy days decline ’ Ne’er may thy face
Show grief When I leturned, 0 paladin '

I gave thy message both to old and young
I talked to them of all thine excellence.

Though who on earth can praise thee worthily ?

I spake moreover both of peace and war.
Employing every sort of plea ‘ But how
Can we do this,’ they said at last, ‘ and stay
Revenge as thou advisest ^ We can give
As much as he shall ask of gold and treasure,


2I8


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


But as for giving up the guilty folk
It may not be Consider what it meaneth.

Whom save the kinsmen of Afrasiyab
Know’st thou as guilty ? Be not rash m promise,

For all the men that Rustam asketh of us

Are chiefs — great men with thrones and diadems >

How shall we or how can we give them up ?

Demands like these would make a young man gray
When such an army hath arrived from Chin,

Saklab, KhatUn, and from our own Tiirdn,

How should Afrasiyab desire a peace

When he hath brought such hosts o’er sea and land ? ’

I got no lack of blame in their reply,

And so I have returned to thee m haste
Now of these troops an army like the sea
Is hurriedly preparing for the fight.

And know thee not but call thee ‘ him of Sigz ’ ^

The king of Hind is fain to fight with thee
With bow and arrow and with Indian sword.

But sure am I that in the end this host
Will weep because of elephantine Rustam ”

When Rustam heard this he was very wroth,

And said thus to Pfran “ Thou luckless one '

Why hast thou so much guile and subterfuge ?

Why wilt thou walk upon a precipice ?

The king of earth hath spoken much to me
In public and in private of thy lies.

E’en now when I esteemed thee wise and prudent
Thou wast but one great he from head to foot.

Thou wallowest recklessly in thine own blood
In evil case but worse awaiteth thee.

Although a spot were Hell ’twere Paradise
Contrasted with the soil beneath thy feet
‘ I prithee leave,’ I said, ‘ this black, bad land,

And change it for a settled realm , such life

^ €f Vol 11 p lOO, and note


KAI KHUSRAU


219


As this is wholly worthless, for thy head

Is m the Dragon’s maw Thou mayst behold v

Our gracious, just, young, fair, and courteous Shah'

But eating snakes ^ and wearing leopard-skin
Are sweeter than both colour and brocade
In thine esteem None will contest the point.

And thou wilt eat of that which thou hast sown ”

Pirdn replied “0 foi tune’s favourite,

Thou fruitful, flourishing, and goodly Tree '

Who kuoweth of such things as well as thou ?

And may the homage of the chiefs be thine
My heart and spiiit are at thy command,

My life for thine, I will advise to-night,

And will address the assembled host besides.”

This being said, to join the tioops he went
With guileful heart and head on vengeance bent.


* § 10

How the Battle uak joined

Pfran depaited and the opposing hosts

Stood like two glittering mountains on the earth.

While Rustam thus harangued the Iranians —

‘ My loins are gut for battle, be it youis
To think but of revenge, and let each warrior
Frown, for no small stiife fionteth us to-day.

But one that will appiaise both wolf and sheep
The reader of the stais hath said to me —

‘ My heart is troubled by this coming fight ,

’Twill be betwixt two mountains, troops in mass
Will bathe the world in blood, the veteran chiefs
Will gather, and the strife unman the world ,
Then feud will cease to stalk, the steel mace grow
Like wax.’ Have no misgivings, whosoe’er

^ I € suffering tiouble and hardship


220


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


May come to fight with me, for I will bind

V 991 Hi& hands within the twisted lasso’s coils

Although the starry heavens be his ally
Let no one tremble at yon famous chiefs.

If my life endeth on the battlefield,

And doubtless I shall not die at a feast.

All that thou needest is enduring fame.

Thou canst not stay, why make so much ado ?

Set not thy heart upon this Wayside Inn,

Trust not a Hostelry so perilous,

Where souls allied to wisdom leckon not
Their day as good or ill E’en lords of crown
And treasure may not fix their hearts on this
Our Wayside Inn ”

The troops replied “ Thy bests
Are higher than sky and muon, and our keen swords
Shall make our fame last till the Judgment Day”

The armies closed. “ A black cloud,” thou hadst said,
“ Hath risen raining shafts and Scimitars,

And all the world is like a sea of pitch ”

The glorious visage of the sun grew dark
With eagles’ plumes and arrow-heads of steel.

Thou wouldst have said “ Amid the cloud of dust
The lances’ heads have smirched the stars with gore ' ”
What while the ox-head maces crashed around
Thou wouldst have said “ The sky is raming stones ' ”
And midst the flashing of the diamond swords —

“ A cloud hath risen and its ram is blood ’ ”

The briars and dust were drenched with gore and
brains,

The helms were smashed upon the wearers’ heads.

V 992 Said gray Giidarz “ Since first I girt myself

To play the man I have seen no such strife,

Or heard of such among the haughty chiefs ,

Such IS the slaughter that one half alone
Of men is safe, the other is o’erthrown ! ”


KAI KHUSRAU


221


§ II


How Shangul fought with Rustam and fled


Shangul came forth before the host and shouted
“ I vanquish heroes and I love the fray,

And I will see,” he said, “ what battle-gear
Of manliness this man of Sigz possesseth ”

The voice reached Rustam, who looked forth, beheld
him.

And said “ Mine one petition to the Maker,

Both publicly and privily, hath been
That of this mighty host some alien
Might have the pluck to challenge me to hght
I will not leave Shangul, the Khan of Chfn,

Or any warrior of Tuian alive ”

He came and shouted “ Base-born miscreant '

Zal named me Rustam , wherefore call’st thou me
‘ The man of Sigz ? ’ Know that the man of Sigz
Will be thy death, thy mail and helm thy shroud ”

This said, he grasped a life-destroying spear,

And urged his heavy mountain of a steed.

He charged like wind, loosed his heroic arm.

And thrusting with his spear unhorsed Shangul,
Dashed him down headlong, and rode over him.

Yet harmed him not. Then Rustam quickly drew
His scimitar, but from the hostile host
Came warriors with swords of tempered steel ,

Men from Tiiran, Saklab, and Hind surrounded
The paladin as ’twere an onager,

And snatched Shangul from that fierce Elephant .

He ’scaped from Rustam, scathless ’neath his mail,

Fled with a care-worn visage to the Khan,

And said “ This is no man , he hath no equal
On earth , he is a furious Elephant
Upon a Mountain , we may fight in mass,


V 993


222


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


But let not any one attack the Dragon
In single combat, for he cannot ’scape ”

“ This morn thy views and words were other,” said
The Khan, and bade the troops charge mountain-like
In full force to hem Rustam in and end
His life. That Lion drew his scimitar,

And brake the left wing of the host of Chin ,

Each stroke strewed trunkless heads upon the plain
No mountain could withstand him in the fight,

Or elephant his fury Warriors

Beset him till they dimmed the sun above him.

While from the many spears, swords, shafts, and maces,
Employed against the lion-taking chief,

One would have thought that he was in a reed-bed,
And all the realm a winefat running blood.

V 994 At every blow he sliced a hundred spears.

And as an angry lion roared and raged
Behind him came the warriors of fr4n
With vengeful hearts and eager for the fray
As for the maces, mallets, spears, and swords.

Thou wouldst have said “ Hail falleth ” Corpses,
hands,

Heads, coronets, and helmets of the slam
Filled all the field, high heaven seemed earth with
dust.

And many a neck and breast were cloven piecemeal.
The troops all cried “ The plain is like a mountain
With slain ! ” The hosts of men from Chfn and
Shakn,

Fiom Hind, Saklab, Harat, and from Pahlav ^

Stretched o’er plain, height, and river, and they all
Were smitten by one man '

Then to Kulbad

Pfran turned, saying “ This battlefield hath lost
Its charms, for he is irresistible ,

* ( 7 / p 109


KAI KHUSRAU


223


There is no leader like him in the world
No sage would credit that one cavalier
O’erthrew three hundred thousand warriors
This feud hath brought ill on Afrasiyab ,

Where will he find repose and rest from Rustam ?
Good sooth ' we shall be blamed when he inquireth
Concerning this campaign, and then if he
Is wroth our heads will be m jeopardy ”


§ 12

How Rtibtam fottqlit inth Sana

Said Rustam to the franians “ This fight
Hath harmed us not Now will I take from Chin
These elephants, this wealth, these splendid crowns,
And thrones, bestow them on fran and make
The day a happy and a glorious one
I want no helper from the Iranians,

God and the feet of Rakhsh are help enough
I will not leave a man from Chin, Saklab,

And Shakn to set his foot upon the ground,

For ’tis our day of victoiy ; high heaven
Illumineth our star, but ill betideth
The men of evil words and evil deeds
If God affordeth strength my glossy Rakhsh
Shall show his mettle, I will make this plain
A graveyard, and the fertile land a salt-marsh
Resume ye now your posts, be diligent.

And swift as wind Attend When I advance
Sound gong and bell, and make the whole earth ebon
With dust of cavalieis and tymbal-dm
Ply ye your axes and your massive maces,

Like blacksmiths’ hammers on a mass of steel,

And fear ye not the numbers of the foe,

But make the very water reek to heaven.


V 99)


224 THE SHAhnAmA OF PIRDAUSt

Cleave ye the ranks of Chin and of Saklab ,

Earth must not see the sky Watch well my helm,
And, when I raise the war-cry, charge amain.”

Thence like a raging elephant, and bearing
His ox-head mace and shouting as he went.

He sought the foemen’s right, and first encountered
V 996 Kundur. He routed that wing utterly.

And many a head and helmet disappeared
A kinsman of Kamfis, one Sawa hight,

Proud and o’erweenmg, came to counter Eustam,

With Indian sword in hand He wheeled about
In quest of vengeance for Kamiis and cried —

“ 0 mighty Elephant > now shalt thou mark
A wave of Nile ' ^ I will avenge Kamiis,

The hapless nevermore shalt thou see battle.”

When S4wa’s words reached Rustam he drew forth
His massive mace, raised it aloft, and smote
His foeman’s head and helm. Thou wouldst have
said —

“ That head hath never even seen its body ' ”

He flung down Sdwa, and rode over him
Till every trace was lost. The enemy
Were panic-struck, the banner of Kashan
Was overthrown , none durst withstand him more
Because the hoofs of Rakhsh their fiuitage bore.


§ 13

How Rustam slew Gahdr of Gahdn

Thence Rustam sought the other wing, while all
The foe were in dismay, where stood Gahar
The warrior of Gahan, a lion-nian
Who had a dusky banner He was wroth

* “ 0 Elephant funeux, tu vas voir le tnmulte des flots de I’Indus ”
(Motal).


KAI KHUSRAU


225 ,


On seeing Rustam’s helm, roared lion-like,

And said to him “ I will avenge Tiirdn
And Chfn upon this Sigzian on this field ,

To fight him IS my part among the chiefs
A lion’s heart and massive mace are mine ”

He spurred forth to encounter mighty Rustam,

But turned like flower of fenugreek on seeing
The helm of Rustam close, and thought “ As well
Plunge in the river Nile as fight against
This furious Elephant ' Thou saidst ‘ The fight
Will profit thee,’ but others said ‘Not so ’

Both courses are not well To flee and save
One’s head is better than to have it trampled
By showing prowess ”

Then he fled toward
The centre in the sight of all the troops,

While like a tree upon a mountain-top

Rose Rustam’s standard mid the host He followed

GahAr like dust, earth reddened, air grew dark ,

He speared and pierced the girdle ot his foe.

Rent both the corslet and its clasps, then flung him
Down as the leafage falleth from a bough
Struck by a mighty blast. He overthrew
That dusky flag, and thou hadst said “ Gahdr —

He of Gahan — ne’er lived.” The Iranians marked
That deed, to right and left the dust of battle
Rose, they advanced the drums and glorious standard,
Illustrious Giidarz and Tiis came on.

The trumpets’ blare hailed Rustam’s victory
“ Send me a thousand noble cavaliers,”

He bade, “ and I will take yon elephants,

That ivory throne, the gold, torques, pearls, and crown
From him of Chin and give them to Iran,

To the victorious monarch of the brave ”

A thousand warriors of Iran advanced
In mail with ox-head maces Rustam cried,

VOL III P


v 997


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


. 226

That they might gird them for revenge “ I swear
V By our Shdh’s life and head, the sun and moon,

fran’s host, and the dust of Siyawush,

That if one flee before the prince of Chfn
He shall experience bonds, or pit and gibbet,

And have a paper cap set on his head.”

The troops knew Rustam’s lion-appetite,

Which longed to claw the haunches of the stag,

And made toward the Khan, men seared m heart.
Whose leader aimed at crowns. He led the charge.

Let fleet Rakhsh have the reins, and spurted blood
Up to the moon The stars looked down upon
That battlefield whence such a dust-cloud rose
That none could see the ground. What with the
shouts

Of cavaliers and thud of lances none
Discerned ’twixt rein and stirrup , thou hadst said —
“The sun is veiled, earth tortured 'neath the horse-
hoofs t”

The air grew black, black as an Ethiop’s face ,

They saw no way for slam , mails, helms, and saddles
Filled all the field, and heads farewolled their bodies
The horsemen’s dust went down the wind, the earth
Rang with the clash of steel, and many a chief
Exposed his head for glory. Rustam shouted.

And thou hadst said “ It is the raging sea ' ”

“ These elephants, the bracelets, ivory throne.

Crowns, diadems, and torques will in fran
Be worthy Kai Khusrau, the world’s young king.

What business can ye have with crown and pomp,

Who, spite of all your might and toil and prowess.

Will only set the shackles on your hands.

And bnng a twisted lasso round your loins ?

Then will I send you to the king of earth
I will not spare Manshur or yet the Khan
Of Chfn. I give you life and that is all ,


KAI KHUSRAU


Your crowns and signet-rings are for another ,
Else with our horse-hoofs I, unless ye yield,

Will send dust moonward from this battlefield ”


§ 14

How the Khdn was taken Prisoner

The Khan let loose his tongue, reviling Rustam
“ Thou miscreant,” he said, “ m soul and body >

For quarter for Iran, its Shah and people,

Thou must appeal to me Thou Sigzian,

And vilest ot mankind > wouldst seek to make
A common soldier of the king of Chin ? ”

They sent a very grievous ram of arrows
As when the winds of autumn blast a tree ,

The air was clothed with eagles’ plumes no warrior
E’en dreameth of such strife < Gudarz, beholding
That shower of steel, alarmed for Rustam’s safety.
Said to Ruhham “ 0 laggard ' tarry not.

But with two hundred horsemen ply the reins,

And with your bows of Chach and poplar shafts
Guard m the battle peerless Rustam’s back ”

And then to Giv “ Lead on the host and yield not
Before our foes To-day is not a time
For peace and pageant, leisure or repose
Advance toward the right wing with the troops.
And find out where Piran is with Hiiman.

Mark how before the Khan the peerless Rustam
Is dashing heaven to earth ' Ne'er may the eyes
Be blest that curse him on the day of battle ”
Ruhhdm raged like a leopard and rushed forth
To fight at Rustam’s back, who said to him,

That Lion “ My Rakhsh, I fear, hath had enough ,
When he is weary I will go afoot,

All blood and sweat. This is a host like ants


228


THE SHAhnAma of FIRDAUSt


And locusts i Fight against the elephants

V looo And drivers We will take them to Khusrau —

A novel present from Shingdn and Chin ”

Then from his post he cried “ May Ahriman
Wed Turkistan and Chin i Ho ’ luckless ones,
Resourceless, wretched, fed on grief, and lo&t ’

Have ye ne’er heard of Rustam ? Or hath wisdom
Fled from your brams ? He holdeth dragon- men
Of no account, and chooseth elephants
As opposites Would ye still fight with me
Whose only gifts are mace and scimitar ? ”

He loosed his twisted lasso from its straps,

Flung the raw coil upon his saddle-bow.

And urged his charger on. A shout arose
To split a dragon’s ear. Where’er he cast
The noose he cleared the ground of mighty men.

Yet wished he only to contend with Chin
With lasso on his arm and frowning brow
Now every time that Rustam in the fight
Unhorsed a chieftain with the coiling noose.

The leader Tiis sent cloudward from the field
The sound of trump and drum, while an Iranian
Made fast the prisoner’s hands, and took him off

V looi Toward the heights Now when from elephant-back

The Khdn saw earth rise like the Nile, and there.

Astride a lofty Hill, an Elephant

That grasped a lasso made of lion’s hide.

And brought down vultures from the murky clouds.
While stars and moon looked on, he chose a chief,
Learned in the Iranian tongue, and said “ Approach
Yon lion-man and say ‘ Fight not so fiercely.

These troops of Chin, of Shakn, Chaghan, and Wahr
Have m their hearts no interest in the feud.

Nor have the kings of Chin and of Khatlan
Thou hast no quarrel with these aliens.

But with Afrdsiy^b, who knoweth not


KAI KHUSRAU


229


The fire from water, but hath raised the world,

And by this war brought evil on himself.

We all of us have greed and long for fame,

Yet peace still bettereth war ”

With fluent tongue

And guilelul heart the man drew near to Rustam,

And said “ 0 chieftain, lover of the fray ’ v 1002

Since fight is over for thee now seek feast
Thou surely harbourest not revenge at heart
For what hath passed against the Khan of Chin '

Withdraw as he withdraweth, for the strife
Is ended now. When by thy hand Kamils
Was slam, the heads of all our chiefs were turned ”

But Rustam answered thus “ The elephants.

The crown, and ivory throne must all be mine
Ye set your faces to lay waste fran
What need is there for talk and blandishments ?

He knoweth that his host is in my hands.

And that I check the ardour of mine own
I spare his own head, but his elephants.

Torque, crown, and throne of ivory are mine ”

The messenger replied “ 0 lord of Rakhsh '

‘ Spare ’ not upon the waste the uncaught gazelle ’

The plain is all men, elephants, and troops.

Who hath crown, wealth, and grandeur like the Khan ?

Who knoweth too the outcome of the day,

And who will quit the held with victory ? ”

When Rustam heard he spurred on Rakhsh and
cried —

“ I vanquish lions and apportion crowns.

Am strong, and have a lasso on mine arm
Is this the day for jest, the time for counsel ?

Whenas the Khan of Chi'n shall see my lasso.

When that fierce Lion shall behold mine armlet.

He will be taken and distaste e’en life.”

He flung the lasso coiled and took the heads


v 1003


230 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Of cavaliers, neared that white elephant,

And then the Khdn of Chin, grown desperate,

Smote with the goad the creature’s head and, roaring
Like thunder in the month of Farwardln,

Took and hurled forth at Rustam deft of hand
A double-headed battle-dart in hope
To worst him and to take his noble head ,

But Rustam, scathless, flung his lasso high,

Dragged from his elephant the Khan of Chin
Noosed by the neck, and dashed him to the ground.
Where others bound his hands and drove him on
Toward the Shahd afoot without his crown,

His litter, throne, or elephant, and there
They made him over to the guards of Tiis ,

That chieftain sent the drum-roll to the sky
This tricky Hostelry is ever so
Whiles It exalteth, whiles it layeth low.

And thus it will be while the sky doth move —
Whiles strife and poison, and whiles sweets and love.
Thou raisest one to heaven on high, and one
Thou makest vile, afflicted, and fordone ,

From pit to moon, so dost Thou one elate,

From moon to pit, such is another’s fate '

One hath a throne, one is to fishes hurled
In wisdom not caprice. Lord of the world >

Thou art the height and depth thereof, I trow
Not what Thou art Thyself. Thyself art Thou


§ 15

How the Host of the Tdrdmans was defeated

v 1004 Then peerless Rustam seized his massive mace,
The great and small were all alike to him ,

The battlefield was such that ant and gnat
Had scarcely room to stir on plain and dal e ,


KAI KHUSRAU


231


Blood ran in streams from wounded and from slam
Flung headlong down or headless When the foe’s
Bright fortune loured ’twas nearly night, there came
A blast with murk, light quitted sun and moon,

And then the foe, not knowing head from foot.

Took to the desert and the longsome road
Piran beheld that fight and fortune grown
So gloomy to Manshiir, Fartiis, the Khan,

And Turkman chiefs , saw standards down, the
wounded

Laid vilely m the dust, and thus he said
To Nastfhan the warrior and Kulbad —

“ Wc must lay by two-headed dart and sword ”

Gfv overthrew the sable flag, the foe
Dispersing by the loads and pathless tracts
He routed all the right wing, made the dales
And plains like feathers of a trancolm.

And sought upon the army’s left and right
To find Pfran, but when they found him not
The warriors returned to vengeful Rustam
The war-steeds were disabled with the work ,

They all were wounded and fordone with fight.

The troops went to the mountain well content
With Rustam and his escoit at their head,

Their bodies injured but their hearts rejoicing
About the battle, as is this world’s use
The helms and mail were smirched with blood and
dust.

The horses’ bards were iiven. Heads, feet, swords,

And stirrups were begored, the hills and dales
Were hidden by the slam, the troops so masked
That none could know another till they bathed
They washed their bodies and forgot their pams
Because their foes were bound m heavy chains


V 1005


232 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

§ l6

How Rustam divided the Spoil

“ Disarm,” said Rustam to the Iranians
“ Before the All-conquering we need not mace,

Or belt or treasure Stoop ye all your heads
To darksome dust, then crown them, for the chiefs
Are mimshed not by one for whom our hearts
Would now be mourning When the tidings reached
The world’s king he repeated them to me
Forthwith ; ‘ The chieftain Tiis hath gained the moun-
tains.

Defeated by Pirdn and by Human ' ’

The Shah’s words robbed me of my wits, my brain
Seethed for the fray, while for Giidarz, Bahrdm,

And for Rlvnlz my heart turned ebon-black.

I sped forth from frdn without delay
Intent upon the fight, but when I saw
The Kh4n, the men of name and warriors.

Especially Kamiis, his Grace and stature,

Such shoulders and such limbs, such hands and mace, «
Why then methought ‘ My time is o’er ’ ’ For since
I girt me as a man I have not looked
In my long life on better men or arms
Assembled anywhere I have invaded
V 1006 Mazandaran, a land of dfvs, where nights
Are dark and maces massive, yet my heart
Forwent its courage never and I said —

‘ I tender neither heart nor life ’ Howbeit
In this campaign my days were plunged in gloom.

My heart — the lustre of the world — was darkened '

If now we fall in sorrrow in the dust
Before all-holy God it will be well.

For He hath given strength, success, and aid
From Saturn and the sun. Long be it so.


kAI KHUSRAU 233

God grant that fear may never fall on us ’

Let men too bear the Sh4h the news forthwith ,

Let him adorn his throne, set on his head
The royal cap, give great gifts to the poor,

And may their blessings be upon his soul.

Now put we off our mail and rest in peace
No doubt both grief and longing pass away.

And fate is counting up oui every breath.

But still ’tis good to add up cups of wine.

And not to stare at yon unloving sky
Quad we till midnight then, and let our talk
Be of the mighty men, with thanks to God,

The Conqueror, from whom are manhood, fortune,

And prowess , we should not possess our hearts
Too much in sorrow and laboriousness
In this our Wayside Inn.”

The nobles blessed him.
And said “ May crown and signet lack thee nevei ’

All honour to the stock, the native worth.

And mother that brought forth a son like thee.

A man of elephantine Rustam’a strain
Is more exalted than the turning sky
Thou knowest what thou hast achieved through love
For us Lot heaven rejoice because thou livest
We weie as good as slain, our days were done.

But now we live and light the world through thee ”

Then having bade to fetch the elephants.

Crown, ivory throne, and golden torques, he brought
Forth royal wine and goblets, and first gave —

“ The monarch of the world,” and when he grew
Blythe in his cups they parted glad and gay.

When Luna rent the robe of night and set
Its turquoise throne in heaven the scouts dispersed
About the plains and hills, and when the rust
Of night’s rest passed, when day’s bright Falchion
showed,


V 1007


V ioo8


234 THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


And earth grew jewel-like, the drum-roll rose
Before his tent, the chiefs arrived, and Rustam
Said • “ We have found no traces of Piran '

Return we to the field and send our troops
In quest of him ”

Bfzhan the lion-man
Advancmg came upon a world of corpses,

Of goods, and treasure , all the plain was strewn
With wounded men flung down and bound, of others
Still living they saw none Tents and enclosures
Filled all the earth, and tidmgs came to Rustam —

“ The foe hath fled the field ”


Like lion wroth

He laged about the Iranians’ sloth and slackness.

And said reviling them “ Hath no one wisdom
Paired with his brain ? How when two mountams thus
Shut in our foes could they escape in mass
From us ? Did not I say ‘ Send forward scouts.

And make each gorge and dale like plain and waste ? ’ ^
Ye thought of ease and rest, the foe ot toil
And march. Slack bodies bring forth care and travail.
But he who chooseth labour fruiteth treasure.

How can I say ‘ I am at ease to-day ’ ?

I tremble for fran ”


Then leopard-like

He raged at Tiis and said “ Is this a bedroom ?
Or battlefield ? See to Human, Kulbad,

Piran, Ruin, and to Piilad thyself
Henceforth with thine own host upon this plain
We are not of one province, thou and I.

If ye have strength fight on your own account,
For how should ye have me, when I have gamed
The victory and its results are spoiled ?

See from what company the scouts were drawn.


1 “ Et de convertir en plains les vallees et les ravins en les eomhlan
avec des morts'* (Mohl).


KAI KHUSRAU


235


And who is head man of the family,

And when thou findest any of those scouts

Let him be beaten on the feet and hands

With sticks, take what he hath, make fast his feet.

Set him upon an elephant and thus
Dispatch him to the Shah for execution.

The ivory thrones, the jewels, and dinars.

Brocade, crowns, treasure, coronets, and all
That they took from us, seach for and bring hither.

For there were many kings upon this plain ,

The most illustrious ol the world were here
From Chin and from Saklab, from Hind and Wahr,
And all possessed of realms and treasuries
First let us choose a present for the Shdh,

And then my portion of the spoils and thine ”

Tiis and his warriors went and gatheied all
The golden girdles and the amber crowns.

The ivory thrones and the brocade of Rum,

The arrows, the horse-armour, and the bows.

The iron maces and the Indian swords.

And raised a mountain ’twixt the other two
The troops stood round and gazed Then had an
archer,

A cavalier, broad-chested, strong, and valiant.

Shot a four-feathered arrow o’er the heap.

The carry had not reached from end to end '

When Rustam saw the spoil he stood amazed.

And oft invokmg the Creator said —

“ Our changeful lifetime giveth feast and fight
By turns, transferring wealth from host to host.

It giveth now with curses, then with blessings ,

One gathereth wealth for others to enjoy.

Kamiis was minded, and the Khan as well.

To burn Irdn. With these huge elephants.

These havings, troops, and stores, their joy was all
In them and in their multitudes of men.


V 1009


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


236

And for a while God was not in their thoughts,
God who created heaven and earth and time,
Much manifest and much mysterious
Their host is not, their goodly wealth is not.
Their aims and unjust doings are no more '

Now will I send the Shdh these chosen chiefs
From every realm on their huge elephants,
Together with these golden thrones and crowns.
And goods on lusty camels I will send
Such goods as are most worthy to be sent,

V 1010 And journey hence myself with all dispatch
To Gang, for heroes cannot brook delay
To spare the guilty and the murderers
Is weakness , let us wash our hands in blood
I will allow the bad no rest but bring
The heads of these idolaters to dust,

And show to all the way of Holy God ”

Gudarz replied “ O thou of goodly rede '
Mayst thou remain till place shall be no more ”
Then matchless Rustam sought a messenger
To bear the first news to the imperious Shah,
And chose out Farfburz son of Kaiis,

Commended by his kinship, and thus said —

“ Famed chief, of royal race, thyself a king.
Accomplished, understanding, nobly born,

Both glad thyself and making others glad '

Take up a task Go, bear to our young Shah
My letter, and convey with thee the captives.

The camels, and this wealth — all that there is —
Torques, treasure, bracelets, crowns, and diadems,
The mighty elephants and ivory thrones.”

“ O raging Lion, ’ Farfburz replied,

“ My loins are girded even now to ride.”


KAI KHUSRAU


237


§ 17

Hoiv Rustam wrote a Letter to Kai Khusiau

Then Rustam summoned an experienced scribe,

And wrote a kingly letter in fit terms
With ambergris for ink on pamted silk ;

The letter opened with the praise ot God,

Who is and who will be for evermore.

The Maker of the sun and moon and Saturn ,

Of Grace and crown and might the Artist He ,

Heaven, earth, and time are His , the soul and wisdom
Obey Him May He bless the Shah, and may
The age not have him in remembrance only.

I came between two mountains as thou badest
The troops of three realms were assembled there.

More than a hundred thousand in good sooth
Opposed us, men who drew the scimitar —

Troops from Kashan and Shakn, from Chin and Hind —
A host which stretched from the Indus unto Chi'n —
While from Kashmir to the outskirts of Mount Shahd
We saw but litters, tents, and elephants.

I feared not for the empire of the Shah,

But slew our foes , we fought for forty days ,

Thou wouldst have said ‘ The world is strait to them ’
They all were kings with treasures, crowns, and thrones
Now ’twixt the mountains over dale and waste
One cannot pass along for blood and slam,

And in good sooth for forty leagues the soil
Is turned to clay with blood To tell the whole
Were tedious All the kings that I have bound,
Plucked with my lasso from their elephants,

Lo ' I have sent the Shah, with gifts and jewels
King- worthy, but war on myself, perchance
Gurwf may meet my swoid. His head shall crown
My spear m wreak for our Head — Siyawush


V loi I


V 1012


238


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


May every tongue be filled with praise of thee,

And turning heaven’s summit be thine earth.”

He gave the letter, when it had been sealed,

In charge to Fariburz, that royal prince,

With captive kings and elephants, and set
The spoils upon three thousand camels’ backs.

So Fariburz son of Kaiis went forth
Rejoicing, and made speed to reach Khusrau
The elephantine hero, with the chiefs
And warriors of the army, saw him off
With fond embraces when they said farewell,

While tears rained from the eyelids of the prince
Then Rustam, when the dark night’s tresses showed,
Departed on his way toward the host.

They sat with harp and wine and minstrelsy,

This reveller with harp and that with pipe,

Until they went their ways in full content.

Each to his rest

Hued like a gold dfndr
Sol burst the Veil of Lapis-lazuli,

Whereat the clarion’s blast rose from the court
Before the chiefs pavilion Matchless Rustam,

All ready-girded, mounted his swift steed.

And bade the soldiers take supplies with them
Their way was hard — the longsome desert route
They marched to war, and matchless Rustam said
To Tiis and Gfv “Ye gallant chiefs ' this time
Will I fight strenuously and press the foe
Who knoweth if this crafty man of Sind
Will bring a host from Hind, SakUb, and Chfn ?

But I will so bemuse and daze his wits,

And make his body dust upon the tomb
Of Siydwush, that Hind, Shingdn, Sakldb,

And Chin shall bless him nevermore ”

He beat

The drums, the dust ascending filled the air,


V 1013


KAI KHUSRAU 239

And earth was full of men,’ while shouts rose cloudward
From those illustrious chieftains keen for fight
They marched two stages from th'e battlefield
Because the ground was blackened with the slam
The chieftain saw a wood and called a halt,

And, while his soldiers darkened plain and stream,
Indulged in song and wine till some were filled
With mirth and pleasure, and some lay bemused.

While envoys came from all the districts round,

From all the chiefs and men of name, to bring
Him presents, arms, and many an offering.


§ 18

How Kai Kliusiau incule Amwer to ltiu>tam’s Lettei

Heaven turned, some days elapsed, and then one went
And told the Iranian monarch “ Fariburz,

Son of Kdils, approacheth ”

Shah and chiefs

Went out to welcome him with trumpets, tymbals.

And many troops When Fariburz drew near,

And caught sight of the Shah, he kissed the ground.

And offered many praises, saying thus —

“ 0 Shah of goodly fortune > may high heaven

Be glad of heart through thee and may the world

Thrive through thy justice,” then gave Rustam’s letter v 1014

The king of kings perused it, marvelling

At what the chief reported of that fight.

Inspected prisoners, camels, elephants.

And wounded men, and, having ridden apart.

Put off his royal cap, got off' his steed.

And, wallowing in the dust before his God,

Exclaimed “ 0 holy Ruler of the world '

The oppressor wrought on me oppressively,

And made me fatherless — all grief and angu

^ ** la terre etait couverte de morts ” (Mohl


240 THE SHAhnAmA' OF FIRDAUSt

But Thou didst free me from my pains and woes.

And give me crown and realm. Both earth and time
Became my slaves, the world my treasury ,

I offer thanks to Thee, not to the host.

But grant me one thing — spare me Rustam’s life ”
This done, he passed before the elephants.

And captives whom he sent to join the wretched
In ward, then bade to bear with all dispatch
The booty to the treasurer and make ready
A pleasant dwelling for the Khdn of Chin
He spent a day in writing his response.

And set a new Tree in the garth of greatness
He first praised God, the Author of his triumph,

“ The Master of the sun and turning sky,

From Whom are war, alliances, and love.

Who hath set up the heaven and graced the earth
With night and day. Who giveth unto this
So dark a fortune, and to that the throne
That he deserveth. Grief and gladness come
From Holy God — the Source of courage, awe,

V 1015 And revel ence,” then said “ 0 paladin ’

Be ever pure in body, bright in soul

All that thou spakest of have reached the court —

The prisoners, the elephants, the crowns.

Brocade of Chfn, the thrones of ivory,

Arabian steeds, and torques, and diadems,

With camels in great plenty, tapestries.

And wearmg-stuffs, and showers of offerings.

To grace our hocktides, feasts, and festivals
What man could wish to meet thee in the fight
Unless he was already sick of life ?

Now of thy toils among Turkman foes.

By night and day upon the field, I had
Continual news, yet opened not my lips.

But night and day before all-holy God
Presented broken-hearted my petitions.


KAI KHUSRAU


241


He that hath Rustam for his paladin

May well continue young , heaven hath no servant

Like thee, and may it tender still thy fortune.”

The gracious letter being done, and sealed
By Kai Khusrau, he bade to be prepared
A robe of honour, belts, horse-furniture,

A hundred crisp-locked slaves with golden girdles,

A hundred noble horses with gold trappings,

A hundred camels laden with brocade
Of Chin, a hundred more with tapestries.

Two rings of shining rubies and a crown
Of state compact of gold and lustrous pearls,

A suit of royal raiment worked m gold.

With armlet, torque, and golden belt, and presents —
A treasure in themselves — for every chief
He sent to Farfburz a blue steel sword,

A mace, a golden crown, and golden boots.

And bade him go to Rustam and say thus —

“We must not pause to rest or eat or sleep
In fighting with Afrasiydb Perchance
Thy lasso yet may take that great king’s head.”

So tar Farfburz resumed his journeying,

Such was the pleasure of the Iranian king.


§ 19


How Afidsiydb had Tidings of the Case of Ins At my


Thereafter tidings reached Afrasiyab —

“ A Flame hath issued from the river Shahd,^

And in the persons of Kamiis, Manshur,

And of the Khan, Tiiran hath been o’erthrown

An army came forth from frdn to war

Such as left heaven scarce room to turn The conflict

Continued forty days — days dark as night

‘ So Mohl.

VOL. III. Q


V 1016


242 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Because the horsemen’s dust concealed the sun.

Our fortune slept, no cavalier of all

Our countless host remained still serviceable ,

V 1017 Our mighty men and famous paladins

Have all been bound in heavy bonds and flung
Disgraced upon the backs of elephants
Encircled by a host that reached for miles
The Khan of Chin too and the mighty men
By thousands have been earned to Iran ,

There was no loom upon the battlefield
To pass along, so many were the slam >

Pi'ran, who hath with him a noble army,

Hath marched toward Khutan but none of Chin,
Kashdn, or Hind is left who hath not read
The inscription on the scimitar of Rustam
Now all the marches for two miles and more
Are full of blood, the eai;th is void of chiefs
And elephants, while an Iranian host.

Led on by matchless Rustam bent on war,
Approacheth If they meet us in the fight
Account the hills as plains, the plains as hills ”
Heart-stricken and astound, Afrtlsiyab
Called all his priests and nobles “ From Iran,”

He said, “ a host hath met our chiefs in battle,

Our mighty army with its countless troops
And implements of war hath been o’erthrown.
While I am prostrate, thou mightst say, with grief
Both for Kdmiis and for the Khan of Chin
Now that so many troops are slain or maimed.

The more part of the nobles bound in bonds.

What shall we do ? What cure shall we apply ?
We may not treat the matter with light hearts.

If Rustam is the chief he will not leave
A thorn or weed upon these fields and fells
V ioi 8 He was a reed-like stripling when I marched
On Rai, yet took me from my saddle so


KAI KHUSRAU


243


That warriors wondered. Belt and button broke ,

I tumbled from his grasp beneath his feet.^

Such was the prowess that I saw m him '

And I have heard reports of his exploits,

When single-handed with his massive mace,

Against the mighty of Mizandardn,

As well as of the havoc wrought by him
On our own chiefs in this last battlefield.”

The nobles rose and said “ Although the famous
01 Chin and of SaklAb have fought Iran
Our realm is scathless and our host intact.

Why stimulate the foe by fearing Rustam ?

We all must die, our loins are girt not loosed.

And Rustam, if he trample on our land.

Shall pay the penalty, lor when we arm
For vengeance no frdnian will suivive.”

He heard, preferred those valiant with their tongues.
And called to him his chiefs, refrained from sleep.
Repose, and feast, unlocked his treasury
And gave out pay , his griefs inspired his soul
Eaith was so full of troops that one might say —

“ The starry sky hath come down to the fray ”


§ 20

Hoto Rustam fought toith Kdfur the Man-eater

This coil ot ill grew clear as Farfburz,

Glad-hearted, with the monarch’s robe of honour.
And with the crown with earrings,^ came to Rustam,
Whereat that elephantine hero joyed.

The great men of the army met and praised
The paladin “ May earth be prosperous
Through Rustam, be the Shah’s life glad, and may
Irdn still flourish, field and fell, through him.”

^ See Vol 1 p 374, and Vol li p 14
* The crown of state See p 241


V 1019


244


THE ShAhnAmA of FIRDAVSt


Thence Rustam led the army on its march,

Reached Sughd and spent two sennights there, engaged
In hunting onager and quaffing wine.

And in such pleasures fleeted time a while.

On marching one stage thence he saw a city
By name Bidad ^ — a hold inhabited
By folk whose only food was human flesh.

The lovely there were ever perishing.

While at the table of a king so loathly
The flesh of growing youths alone was served.

Those slaves that were the goodliest, and were
Unblemished in their faces and their forms,
v 1020 Supplied the provand for the monarch’s board ,

Such was his food. The peerless Rustam called
Three thousand cavaliers all clad in mail
On barded steeds and sent them to that hold
With Gustaham and two more valiant chiefs ,

Bfzhan the son of Gfv was one, Hajir 2
The other — both redoutable in hght
The king’s name was Kafiir , he held the city
By patent. When he heard that from fran
A host, led by a famed and warlike chief.

Approached, he armed as did his pard-hke people.

Who were skilled lasso-flingers, cavaliers.

And Stones and Anvils in the fray Kafur
Encountered Gustaham , the armies closed ,

’Twas such a fight as when a lion chargeth

Upon a deer ; full many Iranians

Were slaughtered and keen fighters turned their heads

When Gustaham saw this, and that the world

Was in that curst div’s hand, he bade his troops

To shower shafts — the horseman’s ambuscade

KAfiir said to his chiefs “ No arrow-head

Will dent an anvil Ply sword, mace, and lasso.

And take yon leaders’ heads within the noose ”

* Reading with P


* I.e. “ Unjust.”


KAl KHUSRAU


245


Awhile they fought so that the stream flashed hre,
And many of the Iranians were slam ,

A sky of bale turned o’er them Gustaham

Said to Bizhan in haste “ Ride hence. Tell Rustam - -

‘ Pause not, but come with ten score cavaliers ’ ”

Bizhan the son of Glv went off like wind,

And told the matter to the matchless one.

Whose stirrups felt his weight as with his men
He rode, who heeded neither hill nor dale.

He reached the field of battle, as it were
A torrent rushing from the gloomy hills,

And shouted to Kafur “ Unskilful knave '

Now will I bring thy fighting to an end ”

Kafur came rushing with a furious charge
Against the royal and fruit-bearing Tree,

And hurled his sword, as though it were an airow,

To strike the lion-takmg chief, but Rustam
Received it on his shield and took no harm
Kaffir next flung his lasso o’er the son
Of Zal, who ducked his head. Then Rustam raised
His war-cry like an angry elephant.

Whereat Kslffir stood still m blank amaze.

And Rustam smote his head-piece with the mace.
Which smashed together helmet, head, and neck
His brains ran down his nostrils, and Kaffir
The warrior fell. Then Rustam, slaughtering still
Without distinction as to great or small.

Charged at the castle-gate, but those within
Made fast the portal, poured down showers of arrows.
And called to him “ 0 man of strength and sense.
Thou Elephant arrayed m leopard’s hide '

What did thy father name thee at thy birth ?

‘ The lasso-flmger,’ or ‘ The sky of fight ’ '>

Alas for all thy toil against this city *

Its name is ‘ Warstead ’ with the knowing ones.

When Tfir the son of Farfdfin had left


y 1021


V 1022


246 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Iran he called men skilled in every way,

And by their aid began to build these walls
Of stones and timber, brick and reeds, thus built them
By toil and sorcery, expending toil
And draining treasury, and gallant men
Have striven much to send up dust therefrom.

But none hath mastered them or profited
Here are munitions and abundant food.

With subterranean ways to bring m more

Though thou may St toil for years thou wilt get naught

But strife, for catapults reach not these walls,

Fenced by Tiir’s magic and the breath of piiests ”

Now Rustam when he heard grew full of thought.
His battle-loving heart was like a thicket,

Such fighting liked him not, he brought up troops
From every side, here was Giidarz, there Tiis
With trumpets, drums, and elephants behind ,

The army from Zabul was on the third side.

Mail-clad and armed with falchions of Kabul
The veteran Rustam took his bow in hand.

And all the fortress stood astound at him
As he picked off the head of every one
Who showed himself above the battlements
The shaft-points whispered secrets to those brains —

An intercourse that made no harmony.

In order to dislodge the garrison
He undermined the walls, propped them with posts
V 1023 Smeared with black naphtha and, when half way lound.
Set them on fire He brought Tiir’s ramparts down ,
The troops advanced on all sides Rustam bade —

“ On to the assault, ply bow and poplar shaft ”

The brave defenders threw away their lives
With one accord to save their treasured wealth.

Their children and their country and their km
Far better for them had they ne’er been bom '

The Iranian warriors advanced on foot.


KAI KHUSRAU


247


And took their bows and arrows, and their shields,
Advanced supported by the javelm-men,

And led on by Btzhan and Gustaham
The raging of the fire and shower of shafts
Left no resource but flight, and those that passed
The castle-walls fled weeping o’er the plain.

Then the besiegers barred the castle-gate
And set themselves to pillaging and slaughter
What multitudes they slew ' How many old
And young they carried captive from the city '

Much silver, gold, and other precious things,

With beasts and slaves — both boys and girls — the
Iranians

Bore off with them, and marched back to the camp.

The matchless Rustam, having bathed and prayed.

Said to the Ininians “ God must have m store
Still better things than these , give praise to Him
For victory and benefits vouchsafed”

With one consent the great men laid their faces
Upon the ground and offered thanks to God,

Then lauded Rustam “ Thine inferior,”

They said, “ might sit contented with his fame ,

Thou with thine elephantine form, thy pluck,

And lion’s claws hast never hght enough i ”

The peerless Rustam said ‘ This strength and Grace
Are gifts fiom God , ye also have your shares,

And none can blame the Maker of the world.”

He bade Giv, with ten thousand buckler-men,

On barded steeds to haste and stay the Turkmans
From massing on the marches of Khutan.

When night revealed its dusky curls, and when
The moon’s back bent with trouble, Gfv departed
With those brave cavaliers and spent thiee days
In raiding, then, what time the sun displayed
Its crown and mounted on its ivory throne.

Returned with many noble warriors captive.


V 1024


248 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

With many fair-cheeked Idols of TarAz,

With noble horses, and all kinds of arms.

Then Rustam sent a portion to the Shah,

And gave the rest as booty to the host.

Giidarz, Tiis, Gfv and Gustaham, Ruhhdm,

Shfdush the valiant and Giv’s son Bfzhan

Thereafter rose and lauded him anew

Thus spake Giidarz “ Exalted one t thy love

Is needful to the world. We may not open

Our lips by night or day henceforward save

To praise thee Live glad and bnght-souled for ever.

Still old m wisdom and still young in fortune ,

God gave thee purity of race , like thee
No one hath e’er been born of stainless mother
May sire succeed to sire and son to son,

This native worth ne’er fad Thou needest naught.
Art favoured by the stars, and chief of nobles
V 1025 Thy refuge be the Master of the world.

Be earth and time thy partisans Whoever
Hath travelled o’er earth’s surface and beheld
The world and peace and battle and revenge,

Hath nowhere seen a better host than this.

Nor ever heard from time-worn archimages
Of such kings, elephants, and ivory thrones.

Such men and steeds, such treasure and such crowns.
And yet the stars saw it discomfited '

We pondered but saw none to work our cure
Till, as we cried out in the Dragon’s breath.

Thy bow delivered us Crown of Iran,

The Stay of chieftains, and pre-eminent.

Art thou We are thy lieges God reward thee,

And ever keep the smiles upon thy face.

Repay we cannot, we can only praise ”

Then peerless Rustam lauded them “ May earth,”
Said he, “ be peopled always with the brave.

The nobles of fr4n are my support —


KAI KHUSRAU 249

My bright heart witnesseth to what I say —

My cheek is freshened by your goodly faces,

My spirit IS made radiant by your love "

He added “We will tarry here three days,

Rejoicing and illumming the world,

But march to battle with Afrdsiyab
Upon the fourth and set the streams afire ”

In full assent arose the company,

And called for wine and harp and minstrelsy


§ 21


How Afrdstydb had Tidings of the Coming of Rustam


Afrasiydb had tidings “ Rustam cometh
To battle swiftly ” — news that wrung his heart
While all his silken raiment turned to thorns
He said “ Who can assay to combat Rustam ?

Troops are enough, but where is a commander ?

What man can go and challenge him to battle,

For havoc clingeth to his glittering sword

The host said “ Shun not fight with him so much.
For thou art one that in the dust of strife
Canst send the wave of carnage to the moon
There is no stmt of treasure, arras, and men ,

Why let the quest of battle grieve thy heart ^

Be not concerned because thou hast to fight
This cavalier , look at our gallant troops t
Grant him all iron and brave , he is but one.

Enough of him. Prepare the remedy
With thine own army, and bring down his head
From cloud to dust , that done, we need not fear
Shah or Iran. Then Kai Khusrau, his throne,

The country of Irdn and bough on tree
Will cease to flourish. Mark this noble host,

These youths war-worthy. We for land and child.


V 1026


250 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

V 1027 For wife and kindred, will give up our lives

Before we yield our country to the foe.”

Now when Afrasiyab had heard those words
He put that ancient battle from his thoughts,^

Both for his fatherland and his own sake
He took a fresh resolve and made reply —

“ I will bring forth the implements of war
Since matters press, permit not Kai Khusrau
To rest upon his throne, glad and rejoicing
In fortune, but by long contention bring
The head of Rustam of ZAbul to dust
I will not spare my grandson or his troops.

But lay this quarrel with the scimitar ”

He gave commandment to array the host,

And march forth to new wars The nobles blessed him,
And called the chiefs to vengeance There was one,

A man of lion-heart by name Farghar,

Quick to discern the cage and shun the springe
The kmg, who had observed and everywhere
Approved his feat of arras, put strangers forth,

And said to him “ 0 noble man ' now seek
The Iranian host and spy on warlike Rustam
Observe his horsemen’s numbers and equipment,

And who of ours is acting as their guide
Mark their war-elephants, their warriors.

And all about their host both good and bad.”

Farghdr departed to his work as spy
Upon the trdnians, while the ambitious king.

Absorbed in care, denied himself to strangers,

V 1028 And summoned his son Shfda for consult.

“ 0 thou,” he said, “ who art endowed with wisdom '
When will thy troops be here to share thy cares ?

Riiow that yon countless army, which hath come
With all those cavaliers to fight with us,

^ The battle in which he had encountered Rustam. See p 243
Mohl translates ‘ ‘ oublia les anciennes guerres ”


KAI KHUSRAU


251


Is led by Rustam of the lion-heart,

Whose scimitar converteth dust to clay
Kamiis, Manshiir, the Khan of Chin, Gahar,

The glorious Fartiis, Kundur, Shangul —

The king of Hmd — an armament that stretched
Down to the river Indus from Kashmir —

Are slain or captive through the victory
Of lion-takmg Rustam Forty days,

With lulls at whiles, they fought but Rustam triumphed,
Dragged with his lasso from their elephants
Our warriors and bound them Cavaliers
And noises from all climes, the mighty leaders,

The arms and ivory throne, steeds, crowns, and camels
Dispatched he to Irdn, and by that token
Is now mvading us with his proud chiefs
And famous men. I shall not leave my throne.

Or much wealth here with fortune so inconstant,

But send my treasures, crowns, belts, golden torques,
And bucklers to the banks of the Almas .

This is no time for joyance, haip, and song
I dread deft-handed Rustam, who is safe
E’en in the gullet of a crocodile ,

He IS not human on the day of battle.

He writheth not when hit nor crieth out

For pain, he feareth not spear, sword, and arrow.

Or maces raining from this ancient sky '

‘ He IS of brass and iron,’ thou wouldst say,

‘ And not of man’s race but an Ahriman > ’

So mighty are his arms on days of fight

That earth’s back wearieth with the weight thereof '

He weareth cham-mail, breast-plate, tiger-skm.

And helm , he roareth like a thunder-cloud •

Huge elephants sustain not his attack,

Or ships upon the azure sea ^ his weapons ’

The Mountain under him is swift as wind,


V . 1029


' “ Sur les flots de I’lndus” (Mohl)


252 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

And, thou wouldst say, ‘ begotten by the sky.’

Swift as gazelle and terrible as lion
It goeth gallantly at height and river,

And would, I dare affirm, fare like a ship
If put upon Its mettle Oft have I
Contended with its rider, but his breast-plate
Is made of leopard-skin, which foiled my weapon
Though I tried ax and arrow many a time ,

But now by way of proof I will to war
Once more to see if fortune favoureth us.

And so if God aftordeth us His aid,

And if high heaven revolveth as we would.

We will not leave frdn or Shah perchance
It may be mine to terminate this feud.

While should the might of Rustam’s hand prevail
I will betake me o’er the ^ea of Chin
Betimes and leave these marches of Tiirdn
To him”

Then Shfda answered " Prudent king '

Live happily while crown and throne endure
Thou hast Grace, wisdom, lofty mien, high birth.

And fortune, heart, and manhood, thou dost need
No monitor, yet heed this turn of fate
Men like PMn, Human, and Farshfdward,

Kulbad and Nastihan have had their armour
Destroyed, and their hearts shattered, m the fight •
Thou wouldst have said : ‘ Their grief hath broken
them ’

Launch not thy vessel while these war- winds blow.
Since thou art ware that this great host hath come
V 1030 Thou art the warrior-kmg experienced

And tried in war , now by thy life and head.

By sun and moon, by throne and cap, I swear
This matter of Kdmds and of the Khan
Hath filled my heart with pain, my head with venge-
ance


KAI KHUSRAU


253


Our business is to lead the host to Gang,

Not contemplating battle but to call
An army up from Chfn and from MAchfn,

And after that o’erthrow the enemy ”

When he had spoken he withdrew to rest,

Haste in his head and vengeance m his heart.

The dark night oped its melancholy eyes,

The moon had grown round-shouldered with distress,
And all the world resembled sable musk
What time Farghar came from the Iranian host
He reached the presence of Alrasiyab
By night — the time for quiet and repose —

And thus reported * ‘ From this lofty court
I went to Rustam, binder of the Di'v
I saw a camp-enclosure green and vast
With cavaliers resembling ravening wolves.

A standard stood erect charged with a dragon ,

Thou wouldst have said : ‘ It is alive ' ’ There stood
Within the tent a huge, fierce Elephant,

Whose girded waist was like a tiger’s loins
Before him was a steed, a piebald bay ,

Thou wouldest say ‘ It never taketh rest.’

The bridle hung down from the saddle-bow,

A coiled hide-lasso from the saddle-straps
The chiefs were such as Tus, Giidarz, and Gfv,

And Farlburz, Gurgfn, and brave Shidush.

Guraza is the scout with Gustaham
Accompanied by Giv and by Bizhan ”

The king grieved at the tidings of Farghar
Then came one to Afrasiydb to say —

“ Piran the chieftain hath arrived like dust
With great men and with warriors of the fight ”

The king told what Farghar had said and asked —
“ Who IS a match tor Rustam m the fray ? ”

Ptran said “ What resource have we in war
Except the quest of glory on the field ?


V 1031


254


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSi


So let us struggle for our fatherland,

Our children, and our km ”

AfrAsiydb

Thereat grew instant to engage and bade
Pi'ran march forth ’gainst battle-loving Rustam.

They left the presence and went forth to war
Upon the plain, shouts rose, the tymbals sounded,
The troops’ dust turned the world to ebony.

So mighty was the host that thou hadst said —

“ The whole world will be hidden by the dust > ”

The tymbal-players sent their din on high
As elephant on elephant filed by

§ 22

Afrdstycih's Letten to Pulddwand

Afrasiyab set forward from his palace.

And hasted bent on vengeance to the waste.

He gave all needful orders to Piran,

And then withdrawing cleared his tent of strangers
They set a scribe before him “ Write,” said he,

“ A letter unto Puladwand and make

The matter known First praise All-holy God,

Who stablisheth and overthroweth us —

The Lord of Saturn and the turning sky.

The Lord of Venus and the shining sun.

1032 Give praise next to that binder of the strong —

The fortunate chieftain Puladwand, declare
What we have suffered from this famous fighter.

And these renowned and all-accomplished chiefs.

From Tiis, Gudarz, and other warriors

Then tell him all about my grandson’s case —

The master of Iran, the mighty Shah —

Whom erst I cherished like dear life itself

That no ill blast might reach him Then proceed —

‘ Now, if high heaven taketh side with us.


KAI KHUSRAU


255


Let Puladwand come hither Many troops
Brought from the marches of Saklab and Chm
Have been o’erthrown and writhe, much field and fell
Been harried by the warriors of fran
Their host is like a moving hill, their chiefs
Are such as Rustam who is in command,

Gudarz the warrior and Giv and Tiis
They raise the dm of tymbals to the clouds
When Rustam, who alone hath vexed our land.

Shall have been slain by thee no host will come
Against it Be thou our deliverer
If by thy hand his term shall reach its end
The face of earth will surely be at rest
Then from my populous kingdom will I take
But one half of my treasures as my share ,

The other half, and half my crown, are thine,

Since both the fight and toil are thine to-day.’ ”

They sealed the letter with the royal seal.

And Shida, as the moon arose m Cancer,

Girt up himself m presence of his father
To go grief-laden on the embassage
He came to Puladwand as swift as fire
Through apprehension of calamity.

Saluted him, delivering the letter

And telling Rustam’s deeds. Now Puladwand.

A king whose aspirations reached high heaven.

Lived in the mountain-parts of Chm and had
No peer m all the land He lacked not troops
And men of war , he was a Crocodile ,

His troops were pards He called his governors
And priests, and held discourse with them at large.
Told what the letter said and, being a prince
Both youthful and imperious, commanded
To bear the drums and camp-enclosure forth
Upon the plain. He gathered troops and dfvs.

The battle-cry went up. He led the way.


V 1033


256 THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Equipped with shield, with quiver, and with lasso.
And followed by his standard. He descended
The mountains, crossed the water, and drew near
Afrdsiyab, at whose gate tymbals sounded.

And all went forth to welcome Puladwand.

The veteran monarch first embraced the chief,

Then spake much of the past, told whence arose
The Turkmans’ trouble and the remedy.

While going to the palace they considered
V 1034 New stratagems Afrasiyab discussed
The waiting and the forward policies,

Told of the strife and outcry that had come
Upon him through the death of Siyawush,

Told of the Khdn, Manshiir, and brave Kamus,
Recalling what had passed, and said “ My pain
Is all through one who weareth leopard-skin
Mine arms are impotent on him and on
That hide, that helmet, and that shield of Chfn
Plains hast thou trodden and a longsome road
Now fashion us a remedy for this ”

The mind of Puladwand grew full of thought
How this knot should be loosed He made reply —
“ We must not hurry in so great a war.

This is the self-same Rustam that laid waste
And took Mdzandardn with his huge mace,

Who rent the White Dfv’s side, the liverstead
Of Bfd, and of Pul ad son of Ghundf.

I have not prowess to contend with him,

Or power enough to frustrate his attack ,

Still let my body and my soul await
Thy will, may wisdom ever be thy guide
Do thou incite the host against his host,

Our numbers may bewilder him, and I
Will plan a stratagem, for otherwise
We have not strength to break his breast and neck ”
Afrasiydb grew blythe of mind and brought


KAI KHUSRAU


2S7


Bright wine and harp and lyre. When Puladwand
Was in his cups he roared out to the king —

“ Dark to Jamshfd, Zahhdk, and Faridun
Made I their provand, slumber, and repose >

The Brahman hath been frighted at my voice,

And this my noble host, and I will hew
To pieces with my trenchant sword amain
This Zdbulf upon the battle-plain ' ”

§ 23

How PiUddwand fought with Giv and Tds

As soon as Sol displayed its shining flag,

And night’s deep violet silk grew safHower-hued,
Drums sounded from the portal of the king.

The troops’ shouts reached the clouds, and Pulddwand
Of lusty form with lasso on his arm
Led on the troops.

When both the hosts were ranked
The air turned violet-dim, the earth was darkened
Then matchless Kustam donned his tiger-skm,

And, mounted on his huge, fierce Elephant,^

Raged and assailed the right wing of the foe,
O’erthrowmg many a Turkman warrior
This Puladwand descried and, having loosed
His twisted lasso from the saddle-straps,

Encountered Tiis like some mad elephant,

With lasso on his arm and mace m hand ,

He seized Tus by the girdle, easily
Dismounted him, and dashed him to the ground.

Gfv, when he looked upon the fight and saw
The head of Tiis son of Naudar o’erthrown.

Urged on Shabdfz, devoting soul and body
To fight, and mailed, armed with an ox-head mace,
Strove like a savage lion with the div,

1 Kakhbh

VOL III. R


V 1035


258 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSi

Who flung his lasso round his foeman’s he,ad.
Ruhham was with Blzhan , they both observed
The mace, the prowess, and dexterity
Of Piiladwand, and went to bind his hands
With lassos, but that wary warrior
Urged on his steed and raised his battle-ciy.

Those two brave warriors of noble birth.

Those haughty Lions casting such long shadows.
He flung to earth, and trampled on in scorn.

In sight of all the horsemen on the plain,

V 1036 And reaching Kawa’s standard clave the staff
Asunder with his sword. The Iranians wailed.

No warrior stood his ground upon the field
When Fariburz, Gudarz, and the other chiefs
Beheld the traces of that warrior-di'v
They said to Rustam, that avenging one —

“ There is not left upon this battlefield
A single man of name still* m the saddle.

Or horseman of the warriors of this host.

Whom Piiladwand hath brought not to the ground
With arrow or with lasso, mace or sword '

The field of battle is a held of woe.

And ’tis for Rustam to deliver us ”

Anon arose a cry of pain and grief
From both the wings and centre, then Giidaiz,
The man of eld, supposing that Bfzhan,

The lion-taking chieftain, and Ruhham,

His offspring both, had perished in the fight,

Cried m his anguish to the righteous Judge —

“ I had so many sons and grandsons once
That I extolled my head above the sun.

But they are slam before me m the wars.

So greatly have my day and fortune changed '
Slam m their youth while I live on hoar-headed ' ”
He doffed his casque, he laid his girdle by,

And then began to wail right bitterly.


KAI KHUSRAU


259


§ 24

How Rustam fought with Pulddwand

Now Rustam when he heard was sorely grieved,

He shook as ’twere a bough upon a tree,

And drawing near to Piiladwand, and seeing
His mountain-height grieved for those gallant four
Like onagers contending with a lion.

Saw one host sorely stricken and the other
Unbroken, and he thought ‘ Our day hath darkened,
Our nobles’ heads are dazed > Good sooth > the strife
Hath turned against us and our fortune sleepeth ' ”
Then gripping with his legs he urged on Rakhsh,
And ragmg challenged Piilddwand to light,

Exclaiming “ 0 thou ill-conditioned div '

Thou shalt behold a change ol fortune now ”

The voice ol Rustam reached those warriors.

And he, perceiving them dismounted, said —

“ 0 Thou Almighty Ruler of the world !

Thou art above the unseen and the seen
Far rather would I lose mine eyes in battle
Than look upon this miserable day.

Whereon such cries have risen from Iran,

Such Irom Hurad,n, Plrdn, and yon fierce div >

Glv and Ruhham and Tus are all unhorsed.

And e’en Blzhan who used to mock at lions '

The chargers of the great are pierced with ariows,

The riders fight afoot as best they may ”

Then closmg with the div he threw his lasso.

But PfiUdwand, brave horseman though he was,
Ducked in alarm, he had had fight enough ,

But when the cast had failed and he was safe
He said to Rustam " 0 thou gallant one.

Thou veteran Lion and illustrious,

Who scarest mighty elephants ’ ere long


V 1037


26 o


THE SHAhnAMA of PIRDAUSt


Thou shalt behold the billows of the deep.

1038 Consider now the fire of mine attack,

My lasso, courage, might, and enterprise.

Thou shalt behold no traces of thy Shah,

His nobles, or his mighty men henceforth,

Or of thy land, unless in dream, for I
Will give thme army to Afrdsiyab.”

“ How much more shirking, blustering, and guile ? ”
Said Eustam. “ Let no warrior play the shrew
Or he will give his head up to the winds
Assuredly. Though thou be brave and proud
Thou art not Sam nor yet stitf-necked Garshasp ”

Then Piiladwand recalled a saw of old —

“ They who unjustly seek to cause a fight
Return with livers pierced and faces white ,

It friend or foe harm thee ’tis well thou still
Do thy devoir alike to good and ill ”

He thought “ This is that Rustam who o’ercame
By night with his huge mace Mazandaran,”

And then he said “ 0 man approved m war '

Why stand we here so long to no result ? ”

Two mighty Elephants, two warlike Lions,

Were they , they wheeled, the dust rose from the waste.
And elephantine Rustam with his mace
Struck his foe’s head all present heard the crash
Such darkness filled the eyes of Piiladwand
That he relaxed his hold upon his bridle.

And, swerving to the right hand in his pain.

Exclaimed “ An ill day this ' ”

Now matchless Rustam —
Looked for the brains of Piilddwand to pour
From both his ears but, since he kept his seat.

Invoked the Maker of the world and said —

“ 0 Thou exalted over fortune’s wheel.

The Lord, the All-seeing, and the Nourisher '

If I am fighting in an unjust cause


KAI KHUSRAU


26t


My spirit doteth not upon this world ,

But if the wrong is with Afrasiyab v 1039

Deprive me not of strength and skill in arms.

It IS not meet that thou shouldst loose my soul
From bondage by the hand of Piilddwand,

For if I am to perish by his prowess
No warrior will remain throughout Irdn,

No husbandman and no artihcer,

No dust, no country, and no field or fell ”

He said to Pfiladwand “ What harm hast thou
Got from the whirling mace ? Thy hands relax
Thy sable reins Down, div ' and beg thy life ”

He said “ Thy mace hath harmed me not ”

They closed.

And Piiladwand employed his sword of steel
With many a feint and many an artifice.

But failed to pierce through Rustam’s tiger-skm,

Which filled the liver of the di'v with blood
That fierce one raged at fate because his sword
Availed not on his foeman , he was troubled
At Rustam’s neck and shoulders, and again
Spake to him “ Doff this tiger’s legacy.

This aimour, with that sable helm of thine.

And put on others I will do the like,

And come with speed ”

But Rustam said “ Not so.

That IS no channel for a warrior’s stream
I will not change my gear, do thou keep thine ”

Then both the warriors wheeled till Piiladwand,

Whose massive mace fell but without eftect v 1040

On Rustam’s tiger-skin and coat of steel.

Said “ Wrestling is the test ’twixt man and man
Take we each other by the leathern belt.

That we may know which one the will of fate
Dismisseth worsted from the battlefield.”

'Ihen Rustam said • “ 0 ill-conditioned dfv i


262


THE SHAhnAma of FIRDAUSt


V 1041


Thou canst not stand a warrior’s blow, but like
A fox employest craft What profit is it
To have thy head ensnared ? Hast wile or spell
In wrestling that will free that neck of thine
From mine encircling arms ? ”

They made a pact

That none should interfere from either side,

Then, lighting from their chargers, both the foes
Took time wherein to breathe them and repose.


§ 25

The Wrestling of Rustam and Ptilddicand

These two exalted warriors bent on fight
Prepared themselves to wrestle, and agreed —
“No one on either side shall intervene ”

The space between the hosts was half a league
The stars surveyed that fight as Puladwand
And matchless Rustam — those grim Lions — closed,
Who felt each other, then each warrior
Seized his opponent by the leathern belt

When Shfda looked on Rustam’s chest and neck
He drew a deep, cold sigh and thus bespake
His sire Afrasiyab “ This mighty man.

Whom thou call’st Rustam, binder of the Div,

Will by his strength and prowess lay the head
Of our brave warnor-dfv upon the dust,

And thou wilt see our soldiers take to flight.

So strive not vainly with the turning sky ”

The sire replied “ My brain is fraught with care
On that account, go and observe the prowess
Of Piilddwand in wrestling Speak to him
In Turkman and advise him He may get
The elephantine Rustam off his feet
Tell Piil4dwand • ‘ When thou hast got him down
Let thine appeal be to the scimitar ’ ”


KAI KHUSRAU


263


But Shida said “ This is not what the king
Agreed to in the presence of the host
If thou art rash and breakest covenant
Thy warfare will not issue m success
Befoul not this clear stream, else he that loveth
Fault-finding will discover cause for blame ”
Afrasiyab began to chide, becoming
In his fierce wrath distrustful of his son.

And said to him “ If Puladwand the dfv
Shall be o’erthrown by this antagonist
None will remain alive upon the field ,

Thou hast a valiant tongue, no prowess else.”

He plied his reins and came forth lion-like
Upon the ground, observed the strife and shouts
Like tliiinder, then he said to Piiladwand —

“ If thou, exalted Lion ' gett’st him down
In wrestling rip him open with thy dagger ,

We need not boasting but accomplishment”

Gfv marked the king’s wild words and eagerness.
Then urging on his charger came in haste.

Because the enemy had broken troth.

And said to Rustam “ 0 thou warrior '

What orders givest thou thy servants ? Speak '
Observe Afrasiyab, his eagerness.

And wild words ' He hath come forth to inflame
The heart of thine antagonist and prompt him
To use his dagger in a wrestling-bout ' ”

But Rustam said “ A man of war am I,

And, when engaged in wrestling, bide my time
What do ye fear? Why are your hearts thus
rent?

E’en now will I bring down from heaven above
The head and neck of Puladwand to dust ,

But if I have not strength of hand therefor
What need thus wantonly to break my heart ?
Although this witless warlock doth transgress


V 1042


264 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

The covenant of God, why should ye fear

The breach ? He poureth dust on his own head.”

Then, like a lion, reaching out he clutched
The chest and neck of that fierce Crocodile,

And, straining hard, uprooted Piiladwand,

As though he were a plane-tree, from his place,

Raised him aloft, dashed him upon the ground.

And uttered praises to Almighty God
A shout rose from the army of Iran ,

The drummers marched out with the kettle-
drums ,

The blast of clarion, the clang of gong
And Indian bell ascended to the clouds.

Now Rustam thus imagined “ Piiladwand
Hath not a sound joint in his body left.

His bones are broken and his cheeks become
The colour of the bloom of fenugreek,”

V. 1043 So flung his leg across the gallant Rakhsh,

And left the Dragon’s body as it lay ,

But, when the lion-clutohing hero reached
His army, Piiladwand glanced arrow-like.

And fled with all speed to Afrasiyab

With full heart and with tears upon his face

When Rustam saw that Piiladwand still lived.

And troops were everywhere upon the plain,

His heart grew straitened, he led on the host.

Called unto him the veteran Giidarz,

And ordered “ Let them send a shower of arrows.
And make the air as ’twere a cloud in spring ”

Bfzhan was on one wing, Giv on the other
With veteran Ruhham and brave Gurgfn
Thou wouldst have said “ They have enkindled fire,
And with their falchions set the world ablaze ' ”

Then PiiUdwand said to his troops “With throne,
Renown, and treasure lost, why throw away
Our lives or think at all of further strife ? ”


KAI KHUSRAU


265


And, with his very life-cord snapped in twain
By Rustam, marched his army from the plain.


I 26

How Afidsiydh fled from Eustam

Pi'ran spake thus unto Afrdsiyab —

“ The surface of the world is like a sea '

Did not I say ‘ We cannot tarry here
Secure from Rustam of the deadly hand ? ’

By murdering the youth beloved by him
Thou hast transfixed our hearts with arrow-points
How wilt thou fare ? None of thine own remameth,
And Piiladwand the dlv hath marched away
The horsemen of Iran on barded chargers
Exceed in sooth a hundred thousand men ,

The lion-catchmg Rustam is their leader,

And air is full ot arrows, earth of blood

From sea and plain, from mountain and from waste.

Our warriors assembled , when men failed

We tried the dfvs Great were the strife and shouts.

But now, since Rustam came, no place is left

For thee , the only prudent course is flight

Since thou art here the treasure of the earth

Thou shouldst withdraw to further Chin Leave here

Thy troops thus ranged for battle and betake thee.

Thou and thy kindred, seaward ”

The king saw

That fight was hopeless, took the advice, and fled.
They left his flag but he himself departed.

And went in haste toward Machfn and Chin
The armies came together face to face.

The earth grew like a darksome cloud, anon
The peerless Rustam shouted to his host —

“ Take not your bows and arrows or your spears,


V 1044


266


THB SHAhnAmA op FIRDAUSl


But battle witb the mace and scimitar,

And show a prowess worthy of your standing.

Is it the time for pards to shun the fray
When they perceive the quarry in the lair ? ”

The soldiers left their spears upon the mount,

And, shouting, made the dales and plains of fight
Impassable with corpses. Half the living
Asked quarter, and the others fled pell-mell ,

There was no shepherd and the flock was scattered ,
The plain was filled with handless, neckless trunks
Then Kustam spake and said “ Enough are slam.
These changes are the lot of all, at whiles
Producing bane, at whiles the antidote
Put off your arms and do more good henceforth
V 1045 Why set your hearts upon this Wayside Inn,

Which now is joyful and then sorrowful.

Which now assaileth us like Ahriman,

And then is like a bride all scent and colour ?

Choose calm, untroubled lives, for who can say
That cursing is a better thing than blessing ? ”

He chose gold, silver, raiment yet unworn.

Youths, horses, swords, and casques to send the Shah,
Took for himself crowns, musk, and ambergris.

And lavished on the troops the residue
He fain had found the monarch of Tiiran,

Path and no path they sought him everywhere.

Folk gave no trace of him by land or sea ,

No tidings reached them of Afrasiydb
The Iranians set themselves to desolate
His banquet-houses and his palaces,

And Rustam fired his settlements beside ,

That conflagration blazed up far and wide.


KAI KHUSRAV


267


§ 27

Hotv Rustam returned to tlve Cm) I of the Shah

Before they left Tiiran they loaded up
Crowns, thrones, and precious armour , they had captured
So many camels and such herds of horses
That none could murmur at the lack of beasts
There rose a shouting and a blare of trumpets.

They brought the camel-bells and brazen gongs,

And entered on their march toward Iran,

A host thus decked with colour and perfume.

As soon as news of Rustam reached the Shah
A shout came from the city and the court,

And cloudward from Iran rose tymbal-din
Proclaiming that the lord of mace and mail
Had come. One common joy was m the world
Among all classes and degrees of men.

The Shah’s heart grew like Paiadise above.

He ottered praises to Almighty God,

Bade bring the elephants, and journeyed forth
The world was decked according to the custom,

Wine, harp, and minstrelsy were in request.

The necks of all the elephants that went
Were drenched with saffron, musk, and wine The
drivers

Wore coronets upon their heads, and earrings
Depended from their ears. Men poured down saffron
And drachms, and sifted ambergris on musk.

When matchless Rustam saw the exalted crown.

While all around was echoing applause.

He lighted from his steed and did obeisance.

Khusrau inquired about the tedious march,

Embracing Rustam long and heartily,

And, calling many a blessing down on him,

Bade him remount and, as they fared together


A 104G


268 THE SHAHnAmA OF PIRDAUSt

Hand within hand, said thus “ Why hast thou stayed
So long and burnt us through our love of thee ? ”

“ Apart from thee,” thus Rustam made reply,

“ Our hearts have not enjoyed a moment’s pleasure.”

V 1047 They reached at length the palace of the Shah,

The far-famed court ; there on the golden throne
Sat Kai Khusrau with noble Rustam, Tiis,

Giv, Farfburz, Gudarz, FarhM, Gurgfn,

And brave Ruhham The Shah spake of the war,

The field, and fighting of the Turkman host,

Gudarz replied “ 0 sire t the tale is long 1
Our first needs are the flagon, wine, and rest.

And afterward thou mayest question us ”

They spread the tables and the Shah said smiling —
“ Good sooth ' thou hast been famished by the march ” ^
He set wine on the board, called minstrelsy.

And then inquired of all that had occurred.

About Afrasiyab and Piiladwand,

The twisted lasso and the wrestling-bout.

About the Khan, Kamiis, and Ashkabiis,

And that vast army with its elephants

And drums Gudarz addressed him thus “ 0 Shah !

No mother will bring forth a cavalier

Like Rustam Though a dfv or lion cometh

Or dragon, none escapeth his long clutch.

A thousand blessmgs be upon the king.

Above all on this famous paladin ”

The words so pleased Khusrau that thou hadst
said —

“ He raised his head to Saturn.” He rejoined —

“ World-conquering paladin, alert and shrewd ’

The man with wisdom for his monitor
Is circumspect m time’s vicissitudes.

Be evil’s eye far from this paladin,

And may his life be one long festival.”

1 “ II paralt que la route t’a altere ” (Mohl)


KAI KHUSRAV


269


They spent a week with wine in hand. The crown, V. 1048
The throne, and company rejoiced in Bustam,

While some to melody of pipe and strings
Sang in heroic strains his combatmgs.


§ 28

Hoto Rustam went hack to Sistdn

The peerless Bustam tarried with the Shah
One month m revelry. At length he said —

“ 0 full of virtues, wearer of the crown '

The monarch of the world is wise and good.

But yet I long to see the face of Zal ”

The great Shah then unlocked his treasury-door,
And of the precious things there stoied away
Such gifts as jewels, crowns, and finger- rings,
Brocade and raiment from Barbar, and slaves,

With earrings and with crowns, a hundred steeds
And camels, saddled or for porterage.

With golden trays of aloes and of musk.

Two golden slippers, and a mace to match
Inlaid with jewels that a king might wear,

Gifts that became a man of such renown.

The Shah sent matchless Bustam, and went out
Two stages with him on the journey home ,

And Bustam when the king was wearymg
Of that long road gat down and homaged him,
Bade him farewell, then left Irdn behind.

And hastened onward to Zabuhstan.

The world became obedient to the Shih,

And settled in accordance to his will.

This tale too have I ended and ’tis long —

This battle with Kamus — and from my song
No jot hath fallen. Had but one word been
Left out it would have caused my soul chagrin.


270 THE SHAhnAma OF FIRDAUSI

I joyed o’er Pdladwand who added not

His steel chains to the chains that we have got.^

Now hear the battle with Akwan and know
How famous Rustam fared against that foe

^ PMddwand,” with the change of one letter, would mean “ a steel
chain ”


PART IV


THE STORY OF THE FIGHT OF RUSTAM
WITH THE DlY AKWAN

ARGUMENT

The poet half apologises for introducing this story into the
Shahnama, but pleads that we live in a world of wonders The
tale runs thus Complaints are brought to Kai Khusrau of the
ravages made among the herds by a certain onager which the
Shdh perceives to be the div Akwdn Accordingly he sends
Rustam to the rescue, who is, however, taken at a disadvantage
by the div, and only saves his life by his ready wit He then
falls in with Afrdsiyab and his meiny, and defeats them single-
handed Afterward he again encounters Akwdn, slays him, and
returns home in triumph


NOTE

This story is a variation on the theme the devil is an ass ”
Firdausi probably introduced it into the Shcihnama to explain
the references in Part V Afrasiydb uses, “ the boulder of
the div Akwan,” to cover the entrance of the pit in which Bizhan
IS imprisoned Rustam, when he comes to deliver Bizhan, is
represented as lifting the stone single-handed and flinging it
far away ^

In Zoroastrian theology Ur muzd was supposed to be surrounded
by impersonations of his own divine qualities, who were known
as the Ameshaspentas, the immortal well-doers ” They were
SIX in number, and among them was one named Vohu Manau, i e
Good Thought Corresponding to these on Ahriman^s side were
SIX impersonations of his evil qualities, one of which was Akem
Manau, ^ e Bad Thought These good and evil impersonations
were opposed to one another in pairs Vohu Manau, lor instance,
was antagonised by Akem Manau It has been suggested by


^ See pp 309, 345

271


272 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Professor Noldeke that Akwdn is a mistake of Firdausi or of his
authorities for Akuman, and that the div Akwun is really none
other than Akem Manau in disguise ^ Similarly Aaishma daeva
(div), the demon of wrath, appears to be the Asmodeus of the
Book of Tobit.


§ I

The Prelude

V. 1049 Be adoration as thy duty, sage ’

To God the Lord of soul and wisdom raised,

Yet let this question thy bright mind engage —
Can any praise Him as He should be praised ?
All knowledge that we have is feebleness ,

For such poor weaklings who can tears repress ?
Philosopher ' in vain thou biddest me
In many words to make thy path mine own,

The best word witnesseth God’s unity,

Albeit, said or not said, God is One
What things soever pass before thine eyes
Accord to this conviction of thy mind.

Walk then the beaten track if thou art wise
Or else discussion will no limit find.

Born, soul and body, in a single breath
Of mighty moment is thyself to thee.

Yet here thou hast but brief reprieve from death.
And in another home thy rest will be.

Think first of the Creator then and base
Thy worship on the thought well understood
That He who keepeth turning heaven m place
Is He that is thy Guide to every good.

The world is full of wonders to thy view.

And none hath means to judge them here below
Thy soul IS wonderful, thy body too.

So let thy first task be thyself to know,

And next the sky which turneth over thee

^ NIN, p 10, note.


KAI KHUSRAU


273


In all its daily mutability.

The rustic minstrel’s tale of days of old
Thou mayest not be willing to receive,

For men of wisdom who shall hear it told,

And weigh it learnedly, will disbelieve ;

Yet, if thou wilt the inner meaning scan.

Thou wilt accept it and from carping cease.

So hear the story of the ancient man

'fhough it may be his words will fail to please.


Thus saith the storymg minstrel Kai Khusrau
One morn adorned his Rose-bed like the spring
Such chieftains as Giidarz, Tus, Gustaham,

Barzfn son of Garshasp, sprung from Jamshid,
With Giv and with Ruhham the veteran,

Gurgfn and sage Kharrad sat with the Shah,

And drained the goblet to the king of kings
Right merrily One hour of day had passed
When there arrived a herdsman from the plain.
Who came before Khusrau, first kissed the ground.
And then addressed that Shah of glorious race —

“ An onager hath come amongst the herds.

And seemeth like a div escaped from bond ’

Thou wouldest say ‘ It is a savage lion ' ’

He breaketh our steeds’ necks , he is in colour
As ’twere the sun itself , thou wouldest say —

‘ The sky hath washed him in a bath of gold ’
Drawn from his neck and reaching to his tail
There is a line as black as musk. If thou
Wouldst judge by his round haunches and his feet
Thou wouldest say ‘ He is a noble steed.’ ”
Khusrau, aware that ’twas no onager,

VOL. III. s


V 1050


274 the SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

For onagers surpass not steeds in strength,

And having heard that people near the stream,

Where this man used to turn the herds to graze,

Made much complaint about Akwan the dlv,

Said to the hind “ This is no onager,

And I have knowledge of it. Go thy way.”

He then addressed the chiefs “ Ye paladins,

V 1051 With Grace and state > we need one lion-fierce
Among yourselves to go on this emprise ”

He scanned the warriors but found none to please
him,

For only Rustam son of Zal could help
In such a cause, and so Khusiau prepared
A letter couched in just and loving terms,

And gave it to Gurgm son of Mi'lad,

To whom he said “ Rear to the son of Zal
My letter, go like smoke both night and day,

And slumber not within Zabulistan
Greet Rustam much and lovingly from me.

Say to him ‘ Live while heaven itself shall last,’

And add when ho hath read the letter through —

‘ My Grace is all fiom thee, aspiring chief '

Show us thy face, arise, and come When thou
Hast read the letter stay not in Zabul ’ ”

Gurgfn departed like a rushing wind.

Or onager in terror for its life.

And gave the letter when he reached the chieftain.
Who heard, obeyed, and went to court m state.

There kissed the ground before the throne and blessed
The imperial fortunes, saying thus “ 0 Shah ’

Thou calledst me, and here am I girt up
To do thy will Be might and goodness thine ”
Khusrau, on seeing Rustam, welcomed him,

Gave him a seat upon the royal throne.

And afterward spake thus “ 0 paladin '

Mayst thou live ever glad and bright of soul.


KAI KHUSRAU


275


This day is blessfed since I look on thee
My fortunes all depend on thy shrewd mind.

A work is toward, 0 elephantine one '

For which I summoned thee of all the mighty,

So that, if thou distaste not my command,

Thou mayest gird thee to win crown and treasure
A hind hath said ‘ An onager hath come
Among the herds.’ ”

The Shah told o’er the tale.

And added “ Now, 0 matchless one, make ready '

And undertake this further enterprise
Go, and in dealing with it have a care,

For it may be malicious Ahrirnan ”

“ Through thy good fortune,” Rustam made reply,

“ Now whether it be lion, div, or dragon,

The servant of thy throne is not afraid ,

It shall not ’scape my scimitar’s sharp blade ”

§ 3

How Rustam went in Quest of the Dio

He went forth like a lion to the chase,

A lasso on his arm and under him
A Dragon, went to where that hind was tending
His cattle and that div was roaming loose ^

Three days he searched the champaign mid the steeds.
And on the fourth perceived a Thing careering.

And rushing by him like the north wind’s blast
It was a glossy beast of golden hue.

But with fell mischief ’neath its hide Then Rustam
Spurred fleet-foot Rakhsh but thought as he drew
near —

“ I need not cast but noose it with my lasso ,

There is no call to spoil it with the sword,

I will convey it living to the Shah ”

* Reading with P


V 1052


276 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

So Rustam flung his royal lasso forth,

Intent to take the creature by the head.

The lusty onager perceived the noose,

V. 1053 And vanished instantly. Then Rustam knew —
“ This IS no onager , I must proceed
By craft not force. It is Akwan himself,

And I must smite him with a whiff of steel.

The sages told me that this is his haunt.

But his appearance as an onager
Is strange ' The scimitar must now avail
To make blood overflow that yellow gold ”

J ust then the onager appeared again ,

Again the chieftain urged his swift career,
Strung up his bow and from his wind-like steed
Let fly an arrow like Azargashasp,

But even as he drew his royal bow
The onager was gone the second time.

Then Rustam rode about the open plain
A day and night in want of sustenance,

And nodding in the saddle, till he found
A fountain like rose-water Lighting there
He watered Rakhsh and sank to sleep fordone,
But first ungirthed his steed, took off the saddle
To use its poplar pummel as his pillow.

And spread beside the spring his saddle-cloth
For sleep while Rakhsh to pasturage sped forth


§4

How the Dlv Akwdn flung Rustam into the Sea

When from afar Akw4n saw Rustam sleeping
He came as swift as wind, delved round about
The place where Rustam lay, and raised it skyward.
When Rustam woke from sleep he woke to sorrow,
And his wise head was filled with consternation.


KAI KHUSRAU


277


He thought “ So this foul dlv hath laid lor me
A snare like this ' Woe for my strength and courage,
My neck, and blows with mace and scimitar '

This matter will make desolate the world,

Achieving all Afrasiyab’s desire,

While Tiis, Giidarz, Khusrau, the throne and crown.
The elephants and drums, will be no more
Through me the world will suffer, since Akwan
Hath spoiled my marketing Who will take vengeance
On this curst diV ? No one will match him now.”

Then said Akwan to Rustam m his plight —

“Now, elephantine chieftain > take thy choice
To fall upon the mountains or the waves ,

So whither shall I fling thee far from men ”

The elephantine hero communed thus —

“ In every case naught bettereth artifice
He will do contrary to what I say ,

He will not recognise an oath or keep
A pact It I say, ‘ Throw me in the sea,’

Then will this evil-natured Ahriman
Fling me upon the mountains, dash me there
To pieces, and destroy me. I must use
Some scheme to make him fling me into water,”

Then said “ A sage of Chfn hath spoken well —

‘ Whoe’er is drowned his soul will never see
Surush in Paradise, his lot will be
To tarry in his place in misery.

And not to find a welcome to the sky ’

Let me not therefore fall upon the ocean
To make the fishes’ maws my winding- sheet.

But drop me on the mountains that the lions
And tigers may behold a brave man’s hands ’

Akwdn at this roared like the sea, and answered —
“ Now will I fling thee to the place wherein
Thou wilt be lost for ever to both worlds.”

And, acting contrary to Rustam’s words.


V 1054


V 105


278 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Dropped liim upon the sea As Rustam fell
He drew his sword, and when the crocodiles
Approached they turned aside from hghting him.
He struck out with his feet and his left hand
While with his right he fought his way along,

Not resting for a moment from his toils.

But acting as a warrior in all

If valour could avert the fatal day

Time had not taken Rustam’s stance away,

But know that circling time is ever thus —

At whiles all sweet, at whiles all venomous

He struggled bravely, reached the shore, beheld
The desert, and gave praises to the Maker,

Who had delivered thus His slave from ill
He rested, took his armour off, and laid
His tiger-skin cuirass beside the stream.

Whenas his lasso and his armour dried
That savage Lion donned his coat of mail.

And went back to the stream where he had slept
When that malignant dfv had raged at him .

1056 But glossy Rakhsh was nowhere in the mead.

And Rustam, wroth and raging at his luck,

Went plodding doggedly with reins and saddle
In Rakhsh’s track till in his quest he came
Upon a meadow-land of streams and shaws
Well stocked with francolms and cooing doves.
The herdsman of Afrdsiydb who kept
The steeds lay fast asleep within a coppice,

While Rakhsh was prancing madly like a dfv
Among the herd and neighing. Rustam cast
His royal lasso, caught Rakhsh by the head.

Then rubbed the dust away and saddled him.
With thanks to God, the Giver of all good.

Put on the bridle, mounted, took in hand
His trenchant scimitar, and drove the herd
Therewith, still calling on the name of God.


KAI KHUSRAU


279


The herdsman, at the tumult, raised his head.

Still half asleep, and called the horsemen with him

To mount upon their lofty-crested steeds

They took each man his lasso and his bow

To learn what foe dared come upon the pasture,

And to approach so many cavaliers

These went together hotly in pursuit

To strip the warlike Lion of his hide.

But Rustam, when he saw them rushing on.

Drew quickly from his waist his vengeful sword.
Roared like a lion, and proclaimed “ My name
Is Rustam son of Zal the son of Sam ”

He slew the more part with his scimitar.

Which when the herdsman saw he showed his back,
And fled away with Rustam following.

His bow upon his arm slung by its string.


§ 5


How Afxhiydb came to inspect his Steeds, and how
Rustam slew the D'lv Akwnn


It happened strangely that Afrdsiyab

Had sped forth like a blast to view his steeds.

And brought with him wine, harps, and warriors

To merrymake upon the watered plain

Where every year the herdsman loosed the herds.

The monarch on arriving saw them not

Then suddenly rose clamour, horse on horse

Passed, and Afrasiyab saw far away

The dust of Rakhsh, and other noble chargers

The ancient herdsman rushed up franticly

In evil plight and wounded by an arrow,

Then in amazement told Afrasiyab —

“ Though single-handed, Rustam hath borne off
Our horse-herds, killed no few of us, and gone ' ”


V 105


28 o the SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt

The Turkmans clamoured • “ He is all alone,

And we must arm, for this is past a jest.

Have we become so wretched, weak, and frail
That one can shed our blood ? The very herds
Will shame thereat ' We cannot let it pass ”

The monarch with four elephants and troops
Went in pursuit of Rustam who, when they
Had overtaken him, took from his arm
His bow and charged against them furiously
He rained upon them, as the clouds ram hail.

Shafts from his bow and strokes from his steel sword.
He dropped his arrows and his scimitar.

When sixty gallant chiefs had been o’erthrown,

1058 And taking up his mace slew forty more
Afrasiydb in dudgeon showed his back
While Rustam took the four white elephants
The warriors of Tiiran were in despair,

For Rustam came behind them with his mace.

And, like a cloud in spring, for two leagues onward
Rained blows like hail and beat in helms and casques
He turned back, driving off the elephants
And herds, and took the baggage-tram withal.

Yet when he went back to the spring at leisure
His valiant heart was ready still for fight >

The dfv Akwan again encountered him.

And said “ Art thou not surfeited with strife ?

Thou hast escaped the ocean and the claws
Of crocodiles, and come back to the waste
To battle. Now shalt thou behold thy fate,

For never shalt thou seek to fight henceforth.”

The peerless Rustam, hearing what the dfv
Said, roared out like a lion of the fray,

Released his twisted lasso from its straps,

Flung it, and caught the dfv about the waist ,

Then Rustam, turning in his saddle, raised
His mace as ’twere the hammer of a smith.


KAl KHVSRAU


281


And smote the di'v like some mad elephant
Upon his head and smashed it, brains and neck,

The hero lighted, drew his blue steel sword
And cut the dlv’s head off, then offered up
Thanksgivings to Almighty God through Whom
He had achieved the victory that day,

Know thou that every one that is the thrall
Of ill, and offereth not to God his praise.

And whosoever doth transgress the ways
Of manhood, is a div, not man at all.

The wisdom that rejects th what I tell
May miss the goodly inner sense as well
If then a paladin be full of might —

A man of lusty limbs and lofty height —

Let him, and not Akwan, thy hero be.

And let thy tongue tell tales of chivalry
What sayest thou, 0 man exceeding old.
Experienced much in this world’s heat and cold ?
Who knoweth what vicissitudes will here
Betide us often in time’s long career,

Time which by virtue of its length alone
Will bear away all that we call our own ?

Who knoweth what yon turning vault’s decree
Assigneth him of war or revelry ?

§6

How Rustam went back to the Land of It an

When Rustam had cut off the vile dfv’s head
He mounted on his elephantine steed.

Collected all the herds in front of him,

With all the baggage that the Turkmans left,

And went off with the elephants and goods.
Illustrating the world When to the Shdh
Came tidings “ Rustam hath returned m triumph '
He girt himself to noose that onager,


V 1059


282 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

But he hath taken div and elephant,

The elephant by land, the crocodile
By sea the lions, dfvs, and warriors
That counter him escape not from his sword ' ”
Khusrau prepared to go and welcome Rustam ,

The warriors put their casques upon their heads.

And took the standard of the king of kings
With clarions, bells, and mighty elephants
When Rustam saw the exalted monarch’s flag
Advancing on the way to welcome him
He lighted from his steed and kissed the ground
Midst shouting troops and dm of trump and drum
V 1060 The chieftains of the army went afoot

To him , the king of kings urged on his steed.

That chief of chiefs, the crown-bestowing prince,

Bade Rustam mount, and thus they reached the palace
With open hearts and mutual good-will
Then Rustam portioned to the Iranians
The horse-herds, keeping Rakhsh as his own mount.
And sent the elephants to join the Shah’s,

Since Lions do not fare with elephants
For one week there was feasting m the hall.

Wine, harp, and minstrelsy were in request,

While Rustam o’er the wine discoursed at large.

And told the Shah the story of Akwan —

“ I never saw so fine an onager.

Such neck and limbs, and such magnificence '

But when my scimitar had cleft his hide
No friend or foe had pitied him. His head
Was like an elephant’s, his hair was long.

His mouth was full of tusks like some wild boar’s.

His eyes were white, his lips were black, his form
Was ill to see No camel is so large
And strong. The waste became a sea with blood.
Which spurted, when I had beheaded him.

Up to the welkin and came down like rain > ”


KAI KHUSRAU


283


Then Kai Khusrau amazed put by his cup,

And gave God thanks for such a paladin,

Since none had seen such wonders — that a man
Such as was Rustam should exist at all
In all his manliness and mien and stature
He said “ Unless the Lord had given me
A share both in His justice and His love
I never should have had a liege like this
With whom to hunt down dlvs and elephants.”

Thus spent they two weeks joyfully , their talk
Was all of wine and banquet On the third
The matchless Rustam purposed to go home
Victorious and gUd. “ I yearn for Zal,

The son of Sam,” he said, “ and such desire
May not be blinked, but I will go apace,

And come back to the court We must prepare
Fresh vengeance, for revenge for Siyawush
Is not thus easily to be forgone
By taking steeds and herds ”

The world’s great king
Unlocked the portal of his treasury.

Brought forth the precious jewels hoaided there.

And filled a cup with treasure. Of king’s raiment
Five changes made throughout of cloth of gold,

With golden-girdled slave-boys brought from Rum,
And likewise handmaids decked with golden torques.
With tapestries and thrones of ivory,

Embroideries, dinars, and turquoise crowns.

All these the Shah sent Rustam, saying “ Take
This gift with thee, but stay with us to-day.

And afterward make ready to depart.”

They spent the day together quaffing wme.

But Rustam was resolved to go at dawn

The Shah went two days with him and embraced him

At parting. Rustam cottoned to the road,

Khusrau returned. Well ordered ’neath his signet


V 1061


284 the SHAHnAMA of FIRDAUSf

The world became as he would have it be
The ancient sky revolveth ever so,

At whiles like arrow and at whiles like bow

The matter of Akwan with what befell
’Twixt him and Rustam endeth Now I tell
V 1062 The conflicts of Bi'zhan, and thou shaft hear
Of strivings that will ask of thee a tear.


PART V


THE STORY OF BlZHAN AND MANlZHA
ARGUMENT

The poet describes how the tale was first told to him to while
away the depression caused by a sleepless night, and then narrates
as follows Kai Khusrau at a feast receives a petition for succour
from the people of Irman, whose country is being ravaged by
wild boars, and sends Bizhan and Gurgin to clear the country
of them Bizhan, through the machinations of Guigin, who
envies him, falls in love with Afrasiyab’s daughter Manizha,
who carries off Bizhan to Turan and hides him in her palace
He is discovered and imprisoned in a pit with Manizha as his
attendant In the meantime Gurgfn has returned to Iran, where
his lame story rouses suspicion Kai Khusrau, by means of the
divining-cup, ascertains the situation of Bizhan and despatches
Rustam to deliver him This Rustam achieves, Gurgin is pardoned
by Bizhan, Afrasiyab is defeated, and all ends happily

NOTE

For the historical basis of this story, see p 1 1

The tale of Bizhan and Manizha is the second of the great
love-stories of the Sh«ihnama, that of Zal and Rudaba in Vol I
being the first, ^ and that of Gushtasp in Riim, which will be
given in Vol IV , being the third Mohl probably is right in
considering the present story to be one of Firdausfs early works.

Le caractfere de fraicheur qui se remarque dans ce recit s’accorde
bien avec la supposition que cet episode est une oeuvre de la
3eunesse de Firdousi , et la versification porte quelques traces
de manque d’expenence, telles que Femploi frequent de final
ajoute k cause de la iime ou du metre Cet expedient est re9u
dans la poesie persane , mais Firdousi n’en fait nulle part autant
d'usage qu’au commencement de Thistoire de Bijen et de
Menijeh ”


1 p. 256, seq


285


* P Vol. ill., Preface


286


THE SHAhnAmA ' OF FIRDA USt


The point as to the terminal alif perhaps may be exemplified
sufficiently for the English reader by the following stanza —

“Jog on, 30g on, the foot-path way,

And merrily hent the stile-a
A merry heart goes all the day,

Your sad tires in a mile-a ^

As in the English so in the Persian an a is added arbitrarily
to help out the metre, but the analogy is not exact

In addition to Mohl’s reasons given above we may adduce the
bold Zoroastrian allusions — the outcome perhaps of a youthful
enthusiasm ^ The loss of Bizhan too is regarded as the first
serious trouble of the Giidarzian family/ though it would not be
prudent to lay much stiess upon that in the absence of other
indications

§ I In MohPs opinion the friend referred to both here and
in the Prelude to the Shahnama (§ lo) was Muhammad Lashkari ^
Firdausi, however, has left the sex indeterminate

Hariit was an angel who, with his mate Marut, was suspended
by the feet in a well at Babylon for practising magic arts

§ 2 Such an appeal would be characteristic of the Armenians
(Irmanians) who, broken by adversity, ceased long ago to be a
self-reliant people

§§ lo and 23 For the div Akwan see Part IV
§ 12 According to Zoroastrian belief divine beings, men, the
lower animals, plants, waters, sun and moon, &c , all had their
immortal principle, known as their fravashi These fiavashis
were worshipped especially at the beginning of the Zoroastrian
year, and the month Faiwardm obtained its name fiom the
practice At this season the spiiits of deceased ancestors were
supposed to revisit the houses of their descendants, and such
fravashis, like the manes of the Romans, were objects of peculiar
veneration

§ 17 The divine beings whose blessings are invoked by
Rustam on Kai Khusrau are members of a class formerly known
as Yazatas (gods) and now as Izads Some of them, among other
functions, presided over the Zoroastrian Calendar, and gave their
names to the days of the month and to the months of the
year * They may be regarded as celestial satraps among whom
the divine qualities and the good creation of Urmuzd have
been parcelled out. Bahman presides over Good Thought, Ardi-
bihisht over Perfect Rectitude, Shahrii over Perfect Rule,

^ The Winter * 8 Tale, iv 3 ^ See pp 317, 327.

® Id pp 320, 323, 330 ^ P Vol ill , Prdfaoe

« See Vol 1 p 88


KAI KHUSRAU


287


Sapandarmad over Bountiful Devotion, Murddd over Immortality,
and Khurddd over Health The above are all Ameshapentas ^
Bahrtim presides over Victory, Tir over Mercury, Dai over Business,
Azar over Fire, Aban over Waters, while Farwardin represents
the Fravashfs ^


§ j

The Pi elude

The night was like jet dipped in pitch, there lent
No planet lustre to the hrmanient,

The moon, appearing in her new array
In readiness to take her throneward way,

Much brightness lost by sojourning below ,

Her waist was shrunk, her heart was full of woe.

Her crown was well-nigh lapis-lazuli ,

Through rust and dust she journeyed through the sky
Night’s retinue had spread out everywhere
A carpet black as raven’s plumes, the an
Was like rust-eaten steel , thou wouldst have cried —

“ Its face is smirched with pitch > ” On every side.

Like some black serpent with its jaws stretched wide,

Was very Ahriman, each sigh of whom

Was like a negro making charcoal fume

The garden and the stream’s lip seemed to be

Like billows surging on a pitchy sea

O’er which the circling heaven paused wondermgly.

The sun had lost its power , thou wouldst have said —
“ Earth sleepeth with a pitch-like robe o’erspread.”

The world’s heart trembled at itself , no sounds
Were heard but watchmen ringing on their rounds ,

The birds refrained from song, the beasts were still.

The world’s lips closed alike for good or ill.

And height and depth were lost Amid the woes
Of that long vigil strait at heart I rose
I had one in the house, a loving wight.


V 1063


V 1064


^ See p 271


* See above


288


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


To whom I called and bade to bring a light.
Descending to the garden presently
My darling Idol came and said to me —

“ What need for light ? Will sleep not visit thee ? ”

I said “ Mine Idol » I am not at one
With slumber Bring a candle like the sun,

Set It in front of me, then spread the board,

Take up the harp, and let the wine be poured.”

My darling Idol fetched me lamps a-shine.
Fetched quinces, oranges, pomegranates, wine.

And one bright goblet fit for king of kings.

Then plied at whiles the wine, at whiles the strings
“ Hariit performed enchantment,” thou hadst said,
My heart grew victor over drearihead.

And it seemed day with me in dark night’s stead
Hear what my loving comrade said to me
What time the goblet had joined company
Thus said to me that sun-faced Moon of mine —

“ May heaven have joyance of that life of thme
Quaff thou thy wine while from this volume’s store
I will read out to thee a tale of yore.

Or ever part thereof shall reach thine ear
Thou wilt admire the process of the Sphere.

The theme is love, spell, war, and stratagem,

All worthy that a sage should list to them ”

“ O Moon-face ' ” said I to that Cypress-stem,

“ Recite, recite,” who answered “ That will I,

And thou shalt weave it into poetry.”

I said “ Begin, my fair- faced Moon ’ to read.
And make me love thee more. I may be freed
From my distemperature, and sleep betide
1065 In musings, darlmg mate ' by thee supplied
Then will I turn the story, every whit,

To verse exactly as thou tellest it.

And, telling, offer praise to God above,

O my discreet companion and my love ' ”


KAI KHUSRAU


289


That darling Idol read the tale to me
Out of the book of ancient legendry,

So now give ear the while that I rehearse,
And exercise thy judgment on my verse


§ 2

Hoio the Irmdmans appealed to Khusiau

When Kai Khusrau went forth to take revenge,
And sought to change the order of the world,

The throne and state departed from Tiiran,

But his throne topped the sun because he leagued *
Heaven and Iran together, and lavished love
Upon the noble race, the age renewed
Its youth and bathed his face in loyalty ,

And though the prudent maketh not his couch
A torrent-bed though dry, yet for a while
The more part of the world acknowledged him
That sought to be avenged for Siyawush
One day he sat carousing m his joy,

And drinking to the warriors of the host
His throne was ornate with brocade, a crown
Of gems was on his head, and in his hand
A jewelled cup of wine Thus, all enraptured,

He listened to the harp. The nobles present
Were Fan'burz the son of Kai Kaiis,

And Gustaham, Gudarz son of Kishwad,

Gurgfn son of Mflad, Farhad, and Gfv,

Shapiir the brave, Tiis, shatterer of hosts —

Head of the scions of Naudar — Kharrad,

And bold Bfzhan. These loyal paladins
Had royal wine in hand. Inside the goblets
The wine was like carnelian of Yaman,

An d in the midst were handfuls of dog-roses
Before Khusrau stood slaves with fairy-faces,

VOL. Ill T


V 1066


290 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Whose musk-black ringlets fell on skins of jasmine
The banquet-hall was decked, and in the presence
Girt for attendance stood the chamberlain.

Approaching him discreetly from the curtain
An usher said “ Irmanians wait withoXit —

Chiefs of the march between this and Tiiran
They fain would have an audience of the Shah,

For they have travelled far to seek redress.”

The prudent chamberlain approached the throne,
Announced his tidings, sought the royal pleasure,
And introduced the envoys m due form
They came before the presence of the Shah
With*tears and cries for aid , their arms were folded.
Their faces swept the ground , as they drew nigh
They said “ 0 Shah triumphant ' live for ever,

For thou art worthy of unending life
We come for succour from a distant land,
Khdn-i-Irman, between this and Tiiran,

And bring this message ‘ Ever live, 0 Shah ’

In every clime the succourer from the evil.

O’er all seven climes the king, and in each state
The help agamst the bad Tiiran and we
Confine, which is a source of bale to us.

While toward fran there was a forest-tract - -
Our present cause of trouble What a wealth
V 1067 Of cultivated lands was ours therein.

And fruit trees, our chief means of sustenance '

Now do us right, O monarch of Iran >

Because wild boars m numbers numberless.

With tusks like elephants', and big as hills,

Have seized on all those woods and meads, and put
The country of Irman m consternation
What mighty rum have they brought on us
Both in our cattle and our growing crops !

The boars delight m rending with their tusks
The cultivated trees whereof we speak


. KAI KHUSRAU 291

Hard stones will not withstand such tusks, and fortune
May be hath utterly abandoned us ' ”

Now when the Shah had heard the suppliants’
words

He was much grieved and, pitying them, addressed
The exalted warriors “ Who among my chiefs
And mighty men is eager for renown ?

Let such depart to yon boar-wasted forest.

And, all intent on fame and combating,

Behead them with his sword I will not grudge him
My gems and other treasures ”

At his biddmg

The treasurer laid upon the dais a salver
Of gold whereon they showered mingled gems ,

They brought ten steeds, whose brand-mark was “ Kaus,”

With golden bridles, trapped them with brocade
Of Rum, and called the nobles from the throng.

“ 0 men of name and worship ' ” said earth’s king,

“ What man will make my toil his own and then
My treasure his ? ”

None answered him a word
Except the son of Giv ot glorious race —

Blzhan — who stood folrth midst the warriors.

And called God’s blessing down upon the Shah —

“ Ne’er may thy palace see another master, ^ 1068

And be thy biddmg done throughout the world.

I will adventure on this enterprise
At thy command I only live for thee ”

Gi'v, who was standing by, marked with displeasure
His son’s words, called down blessings on the Shah
Then took Bfzhan to task* “What boyishness
Is this, and this conceit of thme own might ?

A youth may have both wit and native worth,

But he must tram to win accomplishment ,

He must exhaust all kinds of good and ill.

Must taste of every salt and bitter Go not


292 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

By paths that thou hast never trodden or brag
Before the Shah so recklessly.”

Blzhan,

Shrewd, though impulsive, and of sleepless fortune.
Replied in anger “ My victorious sire ’

Impute not weakness to me in thy thoughts.

But bear with what I tell thee I am young
In enterprise but I am old in counsel.

And I, Bizhan, who am the son of Giv,

The army-shatterer, will behead the boars ”

The Shah rejoiced thereat, invoked God’s blessing,
Bade him depart, and said “ Thou man of woiship '
Thou art a buckler ever ’gainst all ill
The lord that hath such lieges as thou art
Would be a fool to fear a foe ”

Ho then

Said to Gurgin son ol Milad “ Bizhan
Is Ignorant of the road toward Irman,

So bear him company with mule and steed
To show the way and be his help in need ”


§ 3


IIo^v Bizhan loent to fight the wild


Bfzhan made ready for his setting forth,

Girt him, and set a casque upon his head
V 1069 He took with him Gurgin son of Mllad
To help in battle and in time of need.

And left the court with cheetahs and with hawks
To hunt withal upon his longsome journey
Like foaming lion he fared and took the heads
From onager and antelope , the plain
Was thick with wild sheep torn, their hearts and
breasts

Felt the warm impress ot the cheetah’s claws.


KAI KHUSRAU


293


His lasso ringed the necks of onagers,

He seemed like Tahmiiras who bound the Dfv,

While overhead the pheasants clutched by falcons
Dyed jasmine-leaves with blood Thus sped the twain,
And thought the road a garden, till they reached
The forest that had caused the Shah’s concern
Now when Bizhan cast eyes thereon the blood
Boiled in him with excitement, while the boars
Roamed freely, knowing not “ Bizhan hath mounted ”
On drawing near the forest to attack
He spake thus to Gurgi'n son of Milad —

“ Go thou inside or stand aside, and when
I go to shoot the boars seek yonder pool
Then, when a tumult riseth from the wood.

Take up thy mace, be ware, and with one blow
Behead each boar escaping ”

But Gurgm,

The Avarrioi, answered “ Such was not the compact
With 0111 young Shah Thou hadst the jewels, silver,
And gold, and didst adventure for this field .

Ask but mine aidance then to show the way ”

Bfzhan heard with amaze, his outlook darkened.

But lion-like he went inside the forest
Undaunted strung his bow, loared mightily
As ’tAvere a cloud in spring, and brought the leaves
Down like a shower of lam, then sAvord in hand
Like some mad elephant he chased the boars
While they rushed at him, tusking up the earth
Then came one boar, a very Ahriinan,

Whose tushes cut through trees like files through
stone.

And rent his hauberk while the reek of fight
Rose o'er the mead. Bfzhan’s sword smote the boar
And clave its elephantine form The beasts
So fierce before grew fox-like , all Avere stained
With blood from sword-cuts , they had had enough


V 1070


294 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Of combating. Bfzhan cut off their heads,

And tied them to his charger’s saddle-straps,
That he might lay the tusks before the Shah ,
And furthermore, in order to display
His courage to the Iranian chiefs, he flung
Some headless trunks, like mountains, on a wain.
And buffalos were wearied with the strain


§ 4

Jfuto Gmqin beguiled JHzlian

V 1071 Malevolent Gurgm, the insensate one.

Apart drew near the forest sullenly.

And all the wood gloomed m his eyes albeit
He praised Bi'zhan and made a show of joy
That mattei grieved his heart, he feared disgiace.

And Ahriman seduced him. He was fain
To do Bizhan a mischief, 'twas his wish.

And so ordamed He thought not of the Makei ,

But he that diggeth pitfalls m the way
Hath reason to walk warily himself
Gurgfn for his own proht and renown
Spread out his nets upon the young man’s path,

And said “ O paladin, thou Heart of combat.

And Soul of wisdom ’ many an enterprise

Like this thou wilt achieve through thy high fortune

And God's support Now I must tell thee somewhat,

For I have been here often in past time

With Rustam and with Gfv and Gustahara,

With Gazhdaham and Tiis son of Naudar
How many a feat of prowess done by us
Hath heaven witnessed on this spacious plain —

v 1072 Feats that have raised our reputations high.

And rendered us the dearer to Khusrau '

There is a pleasure-ground not far away.


KAI KHUSRAU


295


And only two days’ journey from Turan,

Where thou wilt see a plain all red and yellow —

One to rejoice a hero’s heart, all woods

And pleasances and rivulets, a spot

Fit for a paladin, with painted silk

For soil, and airs musk-laden thou wouldst say —

‘ Perchance it is rose-water in the streams ’

The jasmine-branches bend beneath their burden ,
The roses, which the pheasants love to haunt,

Are there the idols, and their worshippers
The bulbuls singing in the cypress-boughs
Now from this present for a little while
Yon river’s marge will be like Paiadise,

And on the plain and uplands tj^u wilt see
In merry parties fay-faced dams^s sitting
Mam'zha, daughter ot Afrasiyab,

Will make that garden radiant as the sun.

And with a hundred handmaids — perfect pictures,
All daughters of the Turkmans, modest maids,

As tall as cypress-trees, with musky hair,

And cheeks like roses, dteainy eyes, and wine
That savouieth rose-water on then lips —

Will set up her pavilion on yon meadows.

Thou wilt behold the plain bedecked thioughout
With riches like an idol-house in Chin
Now if we go toward that pleasure-ground.

And hurry o’er the journey in one day,

We may bear oft’ some ot those fay-taced damsels,
And win the approbation of Khusrau ”

In this wise spake Gurgi'n Bizhan was young.
And all the paladin was stirred in him
He was a youth and followed youthful fashion.

Some whiles pursuing fame and some whiles passion.


296


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


§ 5

How Bizhan went to see Manizha, Daughtei of Afrdsiydh

V 1073 They set olf on the tedious journey, one

Led by desire, the other by revenge
Bizhan, the refuge of the host, alighted
Between two forests after one day’s march
He and Gurgi'n enjoyed two days with hawk
And cheetah in those meadows of Irman
On hearing that that marriageable maid
Had come, and decked the whole waste like the eye
Of chanticleer, Gurgfn informed Bizhan,

And told him of the minstrelsy and feasting.

Whereat “Now will I,” thus Bizhan responded,

“ Go forward and examine from a distance
The scene and manner of the Turkmans’ revels ,

Then with my polished spear-head lifted skyward
Will I turn rein We shall advise the better.

As feeling more assured, when we have seen ”

He bade the treasurer “ Bring the crown that used.
Worn by my sire, to light the banquet-hall,

Because our way is banquet-ward Bring likewise
The earrings and the torque that Kai Khusrau
Bestowed on me, and Giv’s bejewelled armlet.”

He donned a glittering tunic made in Rum,

And stuck an eagle’s feather in his crown.

They put the saddle on his steed Shabrang
While he bade bring the girdle and the signet

V 1074 That marked the paladin, and having mounted

Went to the spot in haste.

He reached the forest,

His heart preoccupied with its desires,

He drew anigh that Fair’s pavilion,

Desire contending in his heart the while.

And went beneath a lofty cypress-tree


KAI KHUSRAU


297


For shelter from the sun. The plain, with all
Its sounds of harp and song gave, thou hadst said.

His soul a welcome When the fair one saw
The visage of the chieftain from her tent —

The cheeks as ’twere Canopus of Yaman,

Or jasmine blossoming mid violets —

While on his head he wore the crown that marked
A chief of paladins, and all his breast
Blazed with brocade of Rum, the maiden yearned
For love of him, who came m quest of love.

And sent her nurse as envoy, saying thus —

“ Go ’neath the boughs of yonder lofty cypress.

And find out who he is — yon raoonlike one
Can it be Siyawush leturned to life.

Or else a fairy ? Question him and say —

‘How hast thou come and who hath brought thee
hither ?

Art thou of fairy-birth or Siyawush

That thou dost fill our hearts with love for thee.

For thou hast lit a raging fire of love.

Unless the Resurrection be upon us.

Because for years have I been holding revel
Upon these meads each spring, and we have seen
None in this pleasance , but I now see thee,

0 noble Cypress ’ and it is enough ’

Say to him ‘ Whether thou art man or fairy
Come to our festival I have not looked
On aught resembling thee, 0 moon-faced one '

Inform us of thy name and whence thou coniest.’ ”

The nurse, when she had come and done obeisance,
Gave him Mam'zha’s message, and his cheeks
Bloomed like the rose He saw his wish achieved.

And answered thus “ I am not Siyawush,

Or fairy-born, sweet-spoken messenger '

But from Irdn — the country of the free
Bfzhan am I, the son of Gfv, and came


V 1075


298


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


All keenly thence to battle with wild boars
I took their heads and threw them by the way
To bear their tushes to the Shdh , but hearing
About this pleasance did not hurry back
To Giv, son of Gudarz, if so good fortune
Might show me though but in a dream the face
Of her — the daughtei ot AfrasiyAb ,

And now I see that all the plain is decked
With treasures like an idol- house m Chin
If thou wilt show me kindness I will give thee
A crown of gold with earrings and a girdle,

And thou shalt lead me to yon lady fair,

And bring her heart to love me ”

She returned,

And bore the secret to Manizha's ear —

“ His countenance and mien are such and such.

In such and such wise hath the Maker made him ”
Manfzha sent an answer back forthwith —

“ What seemed a fancy is within thy grasp,

V 1076 For now come to me with thy noble gait,

And shed a light on this dark soul of mine
Mine eyes will brighten at the sight of thee.

Vale, plain, and tents will turn to rosaries ”

With neither heart nor ear for aught beside
Her words he followed and she acted guide ^


§ 6

How Bizhan went to the Tent of Manizha

No room was left for further parleying
Forth from beneath the shadow of the cypress
Bfzhan proceeded hastily afoot
Toward Manfzha’s tent and entered it,

^ “La rdponse de Menijeh fit du coeur et de I’oreille de Bijen
palais ” (Mohl)


KAI KHUSRAU


299


In favour like a stately cypress-tree,

Girt with a golden girdle round his loins.

Manfzha came and clasped him to her breast,

Unloosed the royal girdle from his waist,

Asked of his journey, equipage, and busmess,

And said “ Who came with thee to fight the boars ?
Why trouble with a mace, 0 comely one,

Who hast a shape like this, such mien and bearing ? ”
They bathed his feet in musk and pure rose-water.
Then hasted to set meat, they spread the board
With various viands m profuse abundance,

And held high revelry with wine and harp,

Excluding every stranger from the tent
The handmaids standing in attendance there
Played on the lyre and lute The ground resembled
The colours of a peacock with brocade
All dappled with dinars like leopards' backs,

While all the tent-enclosure was adorned
With musk and jewels, ambergris and gold
Old wine in crystal cups gave to Bizhan
New strength, but, when three days and nights had
passed

In pleasure, sleep and drink prevailed at last


Mam'zha, when her time for going home
Arrived, still longed to gaze upon Bizhan,

And, since his lace was gloomy, called her handmaids.
And bade them mingle with a grateful draught
A drug that maketh senseless. This they gave him.
And he, bemused already, swallowed it ,

His head sank down and he was lost to sense
She made a litter to transport the sleeper.


V 1077


300 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSt

A couch for him on one side, on the other
An easy seat for her She sprinkled camphor
Upon his couch, and with rose-water drenched
The sandal-wood.

On coming near the city
She veiled the sleeper in a woman’s wrapper.

And, entering the palace privily
By night, preserved her seciet. She prepared
A chamber and, impatient for Bi'zhan
To wake, poured in his ear a rousing potion
To bring his senses back He woke and found
That jasmine-bosomed beauty in his arms.

His head and hers both resting on a pillow,

And in the palace of Afrasiyab '

Distracted with himself he turned for refuge
To God from Ahriman and thus exclaimed —

“ As for myself there will be no escaping,

0 God Almighty ' hence But oh ' that Thou
Wouldst execute my vengeance on Gurgm,

And hear the pains and malisons that I
Invoke on him ' He led me into this.

Reciting over me a thousand spells ”

Manizha said to him “ Be of good cheer,

And treat all save the present as mere wind
V 1078 Adventures of all kinds occur to men,

And feast and hght by turn ”

They banqueted ,

Before them was the gibbet or espousal
They called the rose-cheeked damsels from their bowers,
And decked them in brocade of Ohm , forthwith
These girls with fairy faces took the harp.

And fleeted day and night m merriment
Anon the chamberlain got wind thereof.

And, since one acting on an idle rumour
Will shake the fruit down from the tree of bale,

He took upon him to investigate.


KAI KHUSRAU


301


Inquiring who the man was, from what country,

And what he sought m coming to Tiiran,

So learned the truth and, fearing for his life.

Went, as the only way to save himself,

Before Atrasiyab and said to him —

“ Thy daughter hath a lover from Iran > ”

The monarch called on God, and thou hadst said —

“ He trembled like the willow in a blast ”

Then from the lashes of his eyes he wiped

The tears of blood and raged, and spake this saw —

“ One with a daughter m his house to guard
May have a crown indeed but is ill-starred ”

He was confounded at Mam'zha’s deed,

Called to him princely Kunikhan and said —

“ Advise me in the matter of this wanton ” .

Then Kurakhan “ Examine with more care
“If so It be there is no more to say,

But hearing is not seeing.”

Instantly

The monarch looked at Garsfwaz and said —

“ What we have borne and still bear from Iran '

And why doth fortune link in one ill chain v 1079

Iranian troubles and an evil child ?

Go take with thee some prudent cavaliers.

Keep watch upon the palace — roof and gates —

Look well, and any man whom thou shalt see
Therein secure with bonds and drag to me ”


§ 8

How Oarsiivaz brought Bizhan before Afidstydb

As Garsfwaz approached the gate the sound
Of feast and revelry was heard within,

The music of the rebeck and the harp
Rose from the palace of Afrasiydb.


302


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


The cavaliers seized on the roof and gates,

And occupied the outlets everywhere.

When Garsi'waz found that the palace-portal
Was fastened, and heard revels going on,

He broke down all obstructions, rushed within,

And sought the chamber where the stranger was
Now when he reached the door and saw Bfzhan
His blood boiled up with rage, for in that chamber
There were three hundred handmaids busied all
With harp and wine and singing, and among them.
With red wine at his lips and making merry,

Bfzhan ’ Then Garslwaz cried out in anguish —

“ 0 reckless and abandoned profligate '

Now art thou m the savage Lion’s clutch
How wilt»thou ’scape with life

Bfzhan writhed, thinking —
“ How can I fight unarmed, without Shabrang,

Or aught to ride ? Luck, sure, hath gone to-day '
Where now is Gfv son of Giidarz, that I
Must throw away my life ? I see no helper.

But God”

He always carried in his boot
V 1080 A blue-steel dagger . this he drew and holding
The door exclaimed “ Bfzhan am I and sprung
From that high chief of paladins and nobles,

Kishwad None e’er shall break my skin unless
His body is aweary of its head.

And though ’twere Doomsday none should see my
back ”

He cried to Garsfwaz “ 111 fortune thus
Hath dealt with me Thou knowest my forefathers.

My monarch, and my rank among the chiefs ,

If ye will fight I am prepared to bathe
My hands m blood in battle, and behead
Full many a Turkman chief, if thou wilt bear me
Before the king I will explain. Do thou


KAI KHUSRAU


303


Ask him to spare my life, and make all end
In happmess.”

Then Garslwaz, perceiving
The resolution, the dexterity.

And readiness to fight shown by Bfzhan,
Confirmed a covenant with him by oaths,

And courteously advised him, thus obtaming
The dagger from him by that covenant,

And making him a prisoner by smooth words ,
Then bound him cheetah-like from head to loot
With fortune gone will prowess aught avail ?

Thus is it with yon hump-backed sky above,
Thou’lt feel its harshness when it looketh love
They carried him with sallow cheeks and eyes
Fulfilled with tears before Afrasiyab
The hero, when he came with pinioned arms
And bare of head before the sovereign.

Did reverence and said “ V ouchsafe, 0 king '

To seek the truth I came not to this court
By any wish of mine , none is to blame
I left Iran to fight against wild boars,

And chanced on this Turanian festival
I sent my kindred and my retinue
To seek a falcon that had gone astray.

And went to sleep beneath a cypress-tree.

So that its shade might shield me from the sun
A fairy came She spread her wings and took me.
Still sleeping, in her arms She left my charger,
And bore me where the escort of thy daughter
With troops of cavaliers and many litters
Passed by upon the plain. Then there appealed
Hemmed m by horse a Turkman parasol,

And brand-new litter canopied with silk ,

Within a lovely Idol slept , her crown
Was lying on her pillow. Suddenly
The fairy called on Ahriman, and, rushing


V 1081


V io 82


304 THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

Like wind among the horsemen, set me down
Inside the litter, and recited charms
Above the charmer there, that I might sleep
Until I reached the palace of the king ,

So I was not to blame, nor hath Manlzha
Been smirched by what hath passed. Assuredly
That fay had marred my fortune by her spells.”

Afrasiyab replied “ Thine evil day
Hath come apace Departing from Iran
Thou soughtest fight and fame with mace and lasso ,
Now with hands bound thou tellest women’s dreams ,
Like one bemused, and triest lies upon me
To save thy life ”

Bizhan replied “ O king '

Hear what I say to thee and be advised
Boars with their tusks and lions with their claws
Are alway fit for fighting , so are heroes
That have their scimitars and bows and arrows ,

But how when one is naked with bound hands.

The other in a panoply of steel ?

How can a lion pounce without shaip claws
However fierce ? If now the king would see
My prowess shown to all, let him provide
A horse and massive mace for me, and make
Choice of a thousand chieftains from the Turkmans ,
Then hold me not a man if I leave one
Alive of all the thousand on the field ”

The king regarded him with angry looks
At this, then turned to Garsfwaz, and said —

“ Dost thou not see that this fell Ahriman
Is meditatmg further ills for me.

And not contented with the evil done

Would fight as well ? Take him bound hand and foot.

Just as he is, and rid the world of him.

Command to set a gibbet in the road
Before the gate, there hang the wretch alive.


KAI KHUSRAU 305

And never speak of him to me again,

So that no native of Iran may dare
Henceforth to cast an eye upon Turd.n.”

They dragged him, stricken to the heart with anguish.
His eyes a-stream, forth from Afrasiy4b,

And, when Bfzhan the wretched reached the door,

His feet stuck in the mire made by his tears
He said “ If God Almighty hath decreed
That I must die in miserable plight
I do not fear the dying or the gibbet ,

My smart is for the warriois ot Iran,

And royal fathers’ blame when I am dead
Alas ' mine adversaries will exult,

Their lust will all be satisfaed upon me
Alas > the king of kings > the looks of Gi'v ’

Alas I thus to be parted from the brave '

Go, breezes ' to the country of Iran,

And bear my message to the well-loved Shah
Tell him ‘ Bfzhan is in an evil case ,

His body is beneath the Lion’s claws ’

Say from me to Gudarz son of Kishwad —

‘ My glory hath departed through Gurgfn
He cast me into evil so that now
I see not any one to succour me.’

And to Gurgin ‘ What greeting shall I have
From thee, false warrior i beyond the grave ^


§9

How Pirdn begged Bizhan’s Life fiom Afidsiydh

Howbeit God had mercy on his youth.

And foiled the king’s intent, for as they dug
A hole wherein to plant the gallows-tree,

Pfr^n, for so it chanced, was seen approaching
Now when he reached the place and saw the road
VOL. Ill u


V 1083


306 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

All occupied by Turkmans under arms,

And that a lofty gibbet had been reared,

Wherefrom a twisted lasso dangled down,

He asked the people “ Wherefore is this gibbet ?

Who hath incurred the anger of the king ? ”

Then Garsi'waz made answer “ For Bi'zhan
The Iranian, the monarch’s enemy ”

Piran urged on his charger and, when near
Bfzhan, beheld him stricken to the heart
And naked, with his two hands bound behind him
Firm as a rock, his mouth parched, his cheeks wan
Pi'ran inquired of him “ How earnest thou hither ?
Thou earnest from Iran no doubt for blood.”

Bfzhan related all that he had suffered
From his false friend Pfran had pity on him.

And weeping bade them leave Bfzhan aAvhile
V 1084 Unhung , he said “ Detain him here that I
May have an audience with the sovereign.

And show him what will be the happiest course.”

He galloped palace- ward, approached the king
In humble attitude with folded arms.

And walking quickly to the throne called down
With fervour blessings on Afrasiyab.

When, like an honest guide and minister.

He stood before the throne, the king knew well
That he was standing there to ask a boon.

And smiling said to him “ What wouldst thou ?
Speak.

None IS more honoured with me than thyself.

If thy petition is for gold or jewels.

For realm or army, I will not withhold
My treasures Why hast thou bestowed these pains ' ”
Pfran, the loyal, heard and kissed the ground.
Leaped up and said “ Sit on the throne for ever.

And may good fortune haunt no other place.

The monarchs of the earth proclaim thy praises.


KAI KHVSRAU


307


The bright sun blesseth thee. Through thy good
fortune

I need not horses, followers, or power.

I ask not for myself, none of thy subjects
Hath need to ask , my fortune is thy rule,

My stay thy glorious chiefs Concerned am I
Lest any suffer through my reticence,

And my good name be lost Have I not often
Advised the king erewhile ? But since my words
Availed not I have held my peace of late
‘ Slay not the son of Kai Kaiis,’ I said,

' ’Twill make thee enemies of Tiis and Rustam,

And Siyawush who is of Kaian race
Hath girt his loins to serve thee loyally ,

Peace will be broken and the franians
Will trample on us with their elephants '

Yet didst thou out of simple wantonness
Slay Siyawush, and mingle bane with sweets
It may be that thou hast forgotten Gfv,

And Rustam the brave chief of paladins
Hast thou not seen what ills the Irtoians
Have wrought upon the country of Tiiran
By trampling with their beasts the greater part.

And turning fortune’s stream to bitterness ?

As yet Zal’s sword-point is not worn away
Inside Its sheath, for Rustam scattereth heads
Therewith, and spurteth blood upon the sun.

Wilt thou seek war in peace, and wantonly
Sniff at the bloom of bane ? If thou shall shed
Bfzhan’s blood in this matter from Tiirdn
There will go up a dust-cloud of revenge.

Thou art a wise king , we are only lieges ,

Ope thy heart’s eye, consider how the Shdh
Requited thee for former injuries.

In sooth thou art provoking fresh demands,

And bringing mto fruit the tree of bale.


V 1085


3o8 the SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

We cannot bear, 0 mighty sovereign,

And master of the world i another war
V 1086 Thou knowest Giv, none better > and brave Rustam,
That savage Crocodile, and him who will
Come torth to fight us for his grandson’s sake,
Giidarz, son of Kish wad, whose hand is steel ' ”

As he threw water on the raging fire
Afrdsiyab replied “ Dost thou not know
What he hath done, and brought disgrace upon us
Both here and in Iran ? Dost thou not see
How mine abandoned daughter hath heaped shame
Upon my hoary head, and made the names
Of all my women-folk the common talk ?

For this disgrace all lands and mine own troops
Will ever make ray court their laughing-stock ,

If he shall live all men will wag their tongues
At me, I shall be wretched and despised,

And ever from mine eyes shed teais of gall ”

Pfran did reverence ofttimes and replied —

“ 0 monarch of good fortune and just speech '

’Tis as the king hath said His only object
Is his good name But let my lord consider
The prudent counsel that I offer him.

Let us confine Bfzhan with heavy chains,

Such that he would prefer death on the gibbet ,
’Twill be a warning to the Iranians,

Who will not strive to injul’e us hereafter,

For no one readeth on the muster-roll
The names of captives in thy prison-house.”

The monarch acted as PMn advised.

Perceiving that his heart and tongue agreed.

Good ministers with their good counsellings
Illume the Grace divine and throne of kings.


KAI KHUSRAU


309


§ lO

How Afrastydh put Bizhan %n Ward

Afrasiyab commanded Garsiwaz —

“ Prepare a gloomy pit and weighty bonds,

Secure with chains Blzhan’s hands to a yoke
Bridge-like, as Rumans do, from head to foot
Chain him and make all sure with heavy rivets ,
Then throw him m the pit head first — no more
Of sun and moon tor him ' Take elephants,

And fetch the boulder of the dtv Akwan,

Which God raised from the ocean-depth and cast
Upon a wood in Chi'n Thus will I be
Avenged upon Bizhan Convey this stone.

Which covereth the dungeon ot Arzhang,

Upon high-crested elephants, and cover
Bizhan’s, then leave him to go mad with anguish
Take horsemen, sack the palace ot that wanton —
Mam'zha, who hath shamed her quality —

Deprive her of her fortune, crown, and state,

And say to her ‘ Thou wretched and accursed.

Who art unworthy ot the throne and crown '

Thou hast abased my head among the kings.

And cast my diadem upon the dust ’

Then drag her naked to the pit and say —

‘ Behold him whom thou sawest on the throne
Here m this pit ' Thou art his Spring, console him.
And wait upon him in his gloomy cell ’ ”

So Garstwaz departed from the presence
They carried out the monarch’s evil purpose ,

They haled the son of Gtv back from the gallows.
And bore him to the pit’s mouth in his bonds.

There lettered him from head to foot in iron.

His waist with Riiman chains, his hands with gyves,
While smiths with steel and hammers made secure


V 1087


310


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSf


The massive rivetings, and then they flung him
Head-foremost down the pit and set the stone
Upon it. Garsfwaz thence led his troop
To where the daughter ot Afrdsiydb
V 1088 Dwelt, gave up all her treasury to spoil,

And made a fresh disposal of the wealth
Manizha was reduced to naked feet.

Bare head, and single wrap. He hustled her
Forth to the pit Her eyes wept tears of blood ,

Her cheeks were like the spring

“ Behold,” he said,

“ Thy house and home ' Henceforth thou art to be
This prisoner’s drudge ' ”

He turned back, and Manizha
The spouse of woe, roamed wailing o’er the plain
Now when a day and night had passed she came
With lamentations to the pit, and made
A passage large enough to pass one hand
Thereafter when the sun rose o’er the hills
She used to gather food at every door
By day-long wanderings and pass it through
The crevice to Bfzhan, and weep Thus she
Lived for a while in abject misery


§ II


How Gut gin letuined to lidn and lied about Btzhan


When one week passed, and still Bizhan returned not,
Gurgfn began to search on every side
In haste and bathed his face in tears of blood.
Kepentmg of his ill intents he sought
The place wherein Bfzhan had gone astray,

V 1089 Went all about the forest but saw no one.

And heard not e’en a twitter from the birds.

He sought too m the mead, and all at once


KAI KHUSRAU


3 ”


Spied in the distance on the nver-bank,

With bridle broken and with saddle dragging,

With hanging lip and in an angry mood,

His comrade’s steed, and knew “ Bfzhan is sped ’

He will not live to come back to Iran
By gibbet or by prison or by bonds
111 hath befallen him from Afrasiyab.”

Repentant and perplexed he flung his lasso,i
And turning led Bi'zhan’s steed from the meadow
Back to his tent where he abode one day.

Then, sleepless and unresting, sought Iran
The Shah, on hearing that Gurgfn had come
Without Bizhan, would fain have been the first
To question him, so told not Giv, yet Gi'v
Heard of his brave son’s loss, rushed to the street.

Pierced to the heart with anguish and with cheeks
All tears, and cried “ Bfzhan returneth not '

I wis not why he stayeth in Irman ”

Then, vengeful as a crocodile at heart,

He gave command to put the poplar saddle
Upon Kishwad’s own bay, which he was wont
To hold reserved against the day of need.

And, having mounted, parted like a blast

To meet Gurgfn and ask him where Bfzhan v 1090

Was, and about the case. “ Good sooth > ” he thought,

“ Gurgfn hath done him mischief secretly
I will behead Gurgfn or see my son ”

Gurgfn on catching sight of Gfv dismounted.

Ran up to him and, wallowing in the dust

With head uncovered and torn cheeks, exclaimed —

“ 0 thou that art the chosen of the host.

Chief of fran and captain of the Shah ’

Why hast thou come to meet me on my way ?

Why hast thou come thus weeping tears of blood ?

I shall not wish to hve if aught more wretched
^ “ II laissa toraber son lacet” (Mohl)


312


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Shall now betide me. All ashamed am I
To look thee m the face , I too am pouring
The hot blood from mine eyes, but be not troubled
About his life No harm hath come to him
As I will prove to thee ”

Gfv, when he saw

His son’s horse and Gurgfn, all dust and dazed
Like one bemused, thus leading it, and when
He heard those words, fell from his steed and swooned.
His head was hidden by the dust He rent
The raiment that he wore as paladin,

Plucked out his hair, and with a cry of anguish
Poured dust upon his head.

“0 Thou,” he said,

“ Who art the Almighty Master of the sky,

And hast endowed my heart with sense and love '

I hold It good, now that my son is lost.

That thou shouldst snap my cord of life and take
My spirit to the mansions of the blest
Thou knowest best the anguish of my heart.

I had no son but him to soothe my griefs
Or aid me , now ill hap hath severed us.

And I am left thus in the Dragon’s maw ' ”

He asked Gurgfn again “ How went it all ?

V 1091 Hath fate filled up his place or did he will

To quit thy sight ? What ill befell him ^ Speak ’
Who flung at him the meshes of the sky ?

What dfv encountered him upon the mead ?

Who murdered him and ruined everything ^

How didst thou find this charger riderless ?

Where didst thou quit Bfzhan ? ”

Gurgfn replied —

“ Compose thyself and listen. In respect
To fighting with the wild boars in the wood,

Know, 0 thou paladin ! and understand.

And be for aye the lustre of the throne,


KAI KHUSRAU 313

We went to fight the boars and reached Irmdn.

We saw a wood converted to a waste,

With trees cut down and trampled pasturage.

It was a haunt of boars, the people melted
Because of them ' We raised our spears in fight,

And made a mighty shouting in the wood ,

Wild boars came charging like so many mountains,

Not one by one but everywhere in herds.

We battled like two lions, and day failed

Before our hearts were satiate of strife

We threw their elephantine cai cases

In heaps and prized their teeth out Thence we set

Our faces toward Iran and merrily

Went after game An onager was started.

And none will see a goodlier sight. Its coat
Was like Gulgiin’s, the charger of Giidarz ,

Its face was like Farhad’s grey Shabahang,

With limbs like the Slmurgh’s, and hoofs like steel
’Twas like Bfzhan’s Shabrang in head and ear
And tail, its neck was lion-like, its speed
Like wind Thou wouldst have said ‘ Its sire is
Rakhsh.’

Like some tall elephant it charged Bizhan,

Who flung his lasso o’er its head To fling
Was one with to be borne away ' Off rushed
The onager ' Bfzhan sped after it.

And through the beast’s pace and the horseman’s
dust

A reek arose, the earth heaved like the sea.

The lassoer and onager both vanished
My steed was weary, so I ran o’er hill
And plain, but found no traces of Bfzhan,

Except this steed whose saddle dragged behind.

My heart burned at his plight ‘ How will he fare
In his contention with the onager ? ’

I tarried long upon the pasture, searching


V 1092


314 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

On all sides for him, and have come back hopeless,

For that fierce onager was the White Di'v ' ”

Shrewd Gfv, on hearing, deemed “ Bfzhan is sped ' ”
He marked Gurgfn's confused account, those eyes
That could not look him in the face, those cheeks
Grown wan with terror of the Shah, that body
A-tremble, and that conscience-stricken heart.

And ascertaining that his son was lost.

And that the whole account was fraudulent,

Was moved by Ahriman to lay Gurgin
Dead on the road in vengeance for Bizhan,

The well-beloved, although disgrace might follow.

Albeit on reflection he perceived

That this would leave the matter dark, and said —

“ What shall I gam by slaying him save pleasing
Malignant Ahiiman ? How will it aid
Bi'zhan to slay Gurgfn ? We must employ
Another means , revenge is no great task .

He is no wall to stop my lance’s point ,

V 1093 So let us tarry till his guilt is clear
Before the Shah.”

He cried out at Gurgfn —

“ Thou wicked and injurious Ahriman '

Thou hast deprived me of my Sun and Moon —

The choicest of the horsemen and my Shah —

And set me searching all the world for aid
Where through thy practice, guile, and lies shall 1
Henceforward find contentment, rest, and sleep ?

I will not suffer thee to go at large
Until I have an audience with the Shah ,

Then with my poniard will I wreak on thee
Revenge for him who was mine Eye to me ”


KAI KHUSRAU


§ 12

How Cfiv brought Ouigin before Khusrau

With bloodshot eyes and vengeance in his heart
Gfv went before the Shah, blessed him, and said —
“ For ever fleet the world in joy, 0 king '

Thou blessed, well-starred monarch * seest thou not
What hath befallen me ? I had one son —

A youth who was my care both night and day,

I wept for fear of danger to him, burned
For fear of losing him , and now, 0 Shah '

Gurgln hath come back with an idle tongue,

With guilty soul, and evil news of him —

My stainless and illustrious minister.

Gurgin hath brought a steed in disarray,

But not another token of Bizhan >

If now my lord will carefully consider
My case, and see me righted in the matter.

He will do justice for me on Gurgfn —

The man that put this dust upon my head.”

The Shah was troubled at Gfv’s grief, assumed
The crown in anger, sat upon the throne
With pallid cheeks in sorrow for Bizhan,

And said to Giv “ What is Gurgin’s account ?
Where saith he that he left his upright comrade ? ”

Gfv told the tale about his gallant son
As given by Gurgin. Then said Khusrau —

“ Brood not nor fret , Bizhan is safe , be easy
And hopeful touchmg that lost son of thme,

For I but now heard from the archimages —

The men of wisdom shrewd of heart and famous —
That I shall lead the Irdnian cavaliers
Against Tiiran anon to seek revenge
For Siyawush, and with mine elephants


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


316

Destroy that land. Blzhan will take the field
And fight like Ahriman Depart in peace ,

Good sooth, I greatly long for him myself ”

So Gfv withdrew in tears, pale and distraught.
Gurgln, on coming to the palace-gate,

Found it deserted , all the paladins
Had gone with Glv lamenting for Bizhan.

Gurgfn, his wicked soul fulfilled with shame,

Went in to audience Having reached Khusrau
He kissed the ground and offered reverence.

Then laid the boars’ tusks hard as diamonds
Before the throne and did obeisance, saying —

“ May Kai Khusrau be all victorious.

His life like New Year’s Day, and may the heads
Of all thy foes be severed by the shears.

E’en as the heads of these wild boars ”

The Shah

Gazed on the tusks and asked “ How went the
journey ?

Where did Bfzhan part company ? What evil
Hath Ahriman wrought on him ? ”

V 1095 When Khusrau

Spake thus Gurgfn stood all confused with tongue
That idly blabbed and guilty soul His cheeks
Were pale, he shook in terror of the Shah,

And babbled much and incoherently
Of forest, onager, and pasturage
Now, when his words accorded not, Khusrau,
Perceiving him malicious and confused,

Was wroth and drave him out, upbraiding him.

And saying “ Hast thou heard not Zal’s old saw —

‘ To meet the offspring of Giidarz m strife
Would put a period to a lion’s life ? ’

But for the shame, and that thou wouldest make
An evil ending m the sight of God,

I would bid Ahriman pluck off thy head.


KAI KHUSRAU


317


As ’twere a bird’s.”

Then said he to a smith —

“ Forge heavy shackles with the rivets strong.”

He had Gurgin’s feet fettered presently,
Because the knave is schooled by bonds, and said
To Gfv “ Compose thyself Do thou be instant
In seeking for him eveiy where, and I
Will send out many cavaliers well armed
In all directions to obtain some news
About him, and be prompt and vigilant ,

But if I hear not soon, still keep thy wits
And wait for Farwardfn, until the sun —

The object of our worship — groweth bright
When roses glad the garden, breezes strew
The petals o’er thy head, when earth is donning
Its robe of green, and zephyrs sigh o’er roses,
Then sjhall my pious prayers rise to Urmuzd —
Prayers that our God commandeth Then will I
Call for the cup that mirroreth the world,

And stand before God’s presence In that cup
I shall behold the seven climes of earth.

Both field and fell and all the provinces.

Will offer reverence to mine ancestors.

My chosen, gracious lords, and thou shalt know
Where thy son is The cup will show me all.”

Giv was rejoiced, ceased from solicitude,
And^miling did obeisance, saying thus —

“ May time and earth ne’er be deprived of thee '
May heaven above attend thy will, and may
No ill befall thee from the evil eye ”

When Gi'v had gone the Shah sent cavaliers
To search in every quarter for Bi'zhan ,

In all Iran and all Tiiran they sought
For traces of him, but discovered naught


V 1096


3i8 the SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

§ 13

How Kat Khusrau saw Btzhaii in the Cup that
showed the World

When jocund New Year’s Day arrived Giv yearned
For consultation with that glorious cup,

And came, bent double on his son’s account
But hopeful, to Khusrau who, seeing him
With shrunken cheeks and sorely stricken heart.
Went and arrayed himself in Riiman garb
To seek God’s presence Then before the Maker
He cried and ofttimes blessed the Shining One,^
Imploring of the Succourer succour, strength.

And justice on pernicious Ahnman,

V 1097 And, thence returning to his throne, assumed
The Kaian crown, took up the cup, and gazed.

He saw the seven climes reflected there.

And every act and presage of high heaven.

Their fashion, cast, and scope, made manifest.

From Aries to Pisces he beheld
All mirrored in it — Saturn, Jupiter,

Mars, Leo, Sol and Luna, Mercury,

And Venus. In that cup the wizard-king
Was wont to see futurity He scanned
The seven climes for traces of Bfzhan,

And, when he reached the Kargasdrs, beheld him
By God’s decree fast fettered in the pit.

And praymg in his misery for death.

With one, the daughter of a royal race,

Attending him. The Shah, with smiles that lighted
The dais, turned his face to Gfv and said —

“ Bfzhan is yet alive , be of good cheer ,

Thou wilt not mind, I wot, his being chained
And prisoned since his life is whole in him,

* “ II invoqua longtemps ses graces sur la coupe bnllante ” (Mohl).


KAI KHUSRAU


3*9


For he is now a pnsoner in Tiirdn,

Attended by a maid of noble birth
Yet filled am I with sorrow for his plight,

He hath such travail, hardship, and affliction ,
And both of them are weeping like a cloud
When it is springtide, such a life is theirs '

He hath no hope ot seeing kith or km,

But pmeth trembling like a willow-bough.

Blood in his eyes and anguish in his heart
He calleth on his kinsmen and he weepeth
As ’twere a cloud in spring , his life is such
That he desireth death i Who will come forward
To rescue him, who rise with girded loins ?

Who IS there that will brave the Dragon’s breath.
Who from this durance liberate Bfzhan ?

None save deft Rustam — he who from the deep
Will drag the crocodile. Gird up thy girdle.
Haste to Nfmruz, and rest not night or day
Bear him my letter and breathe naught hereof.
Him will I summon to me, let him know
The case, and soon, O Gfv ' abate thy woe ”


§ 14

How Khusrau wrote a Letter to Rubtam

A scribe was called, the Shah instructed him
To write to Rustam as from lord to lieg^ —

“ 0 paladin by birth and worshipful,

Exalted o’er the warriors of the world '

Thou dost remind me of thine ancestors,

And art for ever girdled for the fray

Thou Heart of monarchs and thou Prop of kings.

With loins girt up to succour every one '

Pards yield them to thy manhood, crocodiles
Howl m the deep for fear of thee. Thou cleansedst


V 1098


320 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

The world of the Mdzandardnian dfvs,

And torest off the heads of evil men

How many a crownM head hast thou dethroned,

And severed from the dais ' Many a foe
Is dead through thee, and many a land laid waste.

Chief paladin and refuge of the host ’

Thine influence is mighty with the Shdhs ,

Thou hast o’erthrown all sorcerers with thy mace,

And by thy bearing lit the crown of kings
As for Afrasiydb and for the Khan,

Thy name is writ in full upon their signets
’T would break the heart of any to undo
Knots tied by thee while thou undoest all.

And art a blessed heaven to the Kaians
V 1099 Grod, who hath given thee elephantine might,

Breast, arm, and hand, and glorious birth, bestowed
them

For succouring those that cry, and lifting them
From their dark pit An instance for thine aid.

And to a worthy kinsman, hath occurred.

Such as no scion of Giidarz before
Experienced from dfv-faced Turanians
Giidarz and Gfv both place their trust in thee.

Who art a hero now in every land ,

Thou know’st what place they have in mine esteem.
Thou know’st their courage, speech, and prudent
counsel ,

Kegard not then this thmg as burdensome,

And ask whatever men and means thou wilt.

Because this family ne’er grieved till now
The world hath heard of few moie glorious
Gfv had not any son excepting this.

Who was at once a son and succourei.

Gfv’s influence with me is very great ,

He hath been both my grandsire’s friend and mine ,

I always find him where I look for him.


KAI KHUSRAU


321


And he hath stood by me in weal and woe.

When thou hast read my letter tarry not, V noo

But rise and come to me with Gfv forthwith,

That we may take advice that shall result
In all points gloriously I will provide
Men, treasure, and all requisites I swear
By thine exalted name and glorious footsteps
That thou shalt work thy will upon Turan
Take order for the road Bizhan will be
Delivered haply from captivity ”


§ 15

How Giv boie the Lettei of Kai Khu<~rau to Runt am

Giv took the letter when the Shah had sealed it,

Did reverence and, departing to his house.

Prepared to take his journey to Slstan
He mounted all the horsemen of his kin,

And, having first commended him to God,

Departed thiough the desert to the Hfrmund,

As one that rideth post, or like the game
That he put up, performing two days’ journey
In one With wounded hearts and eager steps
The party faced the deserts and the heights

Now when the watchman saw Giv from the look-out
He passed the word on to Zabulistan —

“ A cavalier with mounted troops hath reached
The Hirmund, a standard fluttereth behind him ,

A falchion of Kabul is in his hand ”

Zal heard the watchman’s shout and bade his steed
Be bridled, then pricked forth to meet the comers,
Who haply might prove foes, but when he saw
Giv’s withered face he was astound and hasted.
Supposing . “ Something hath befallen the Shdh
Since Giv hath been sent hither from frdn ' ”

VOL. XII


X


322 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

When near at hand the paladin and escort
Drew up across the road and greeted Zdl,

V noi Who asked about the frdnians and the Shah,

The chieitains and Turkmans Gfv then gave
To Ziil the greetings of the great — the Shah’s
And high-born warriors’ — and told his anguish
For his lost son “ Thou seest me wan, mine insteps
All dappled leopard-hke with teais of blood ' ”

Then asked where Rustam was, and Zal replied —

" He will return from hunting onager
At sunset ”

“ I will go,” Giv said, “ and see him ,

I have a letter for him from Khusrau.”

“ Go not,” Zdl answered, “ he will come anon,

So till he cometh tarry in the house,

And pass one day with us in happiness.”

Reflecting on the case they reached Zal’s palace.
And even as Giv entered Rustam came
Giv went to meet him and, on drawing nigh.
Dismounted from his horse and did obeisance.

His heart was yearning and he wept. When Rustam
Saw Gfv heart-stricken and in tears he thought —

“ lr4n then and the Shah — our age’s Moon —

Have perished ' ”

Lighting and embracing Gfv
He asked about the wearer of the crown —

Khusrau — about Giidarz, Tiis, Gustaham,

And all the warriors both great and small —

Shapur, Ruhham, Bfzhan, Farhdd, Gurgfn,

And every one At mention of Bfzhan
Gfv uttered an involuntary cry,

V 1102 And said to Rustam “ O thou worshipful.

The choicest of the princes of the earth >

J oy hath returned to me at sight of thee,

And through thy kindly greetings and thy words.

All those whom thou hast named are well and send


KAI KHUSRAU


323


Thee salutation, peace, and messages.

Except Blzhan, 0 champion of the mighty >

Who IS reported fettered in a dungeon.

Now seest thou not what stroke of evil fortune
Hath fallen full upon my hoary head ?

I had but one son in the world, and he
Was both a son and upright minister.

And I have lost him ' None e’er saw our race
In such affliction • Ever since have I
Been m the saddle, as thou seest me.

And speeding like the bright sun, night and day,

Just like the mad, to find some trace of him ’

The Sh 4 h hath in his world-reflecting cup .

He stood before the Maker, much imploring
And praising on the royal feast — the Urmuzd
Of Farwardm — then left the Fane of Fire,

Went to his throne, girt up his loins, assumed
The crown, and set the shining cup before him.

He searched therein past measure for Bi'zhan,

And indicated him as in Tiiran,

In heavy fetters and disastrous plight.

And, having thus revealed him by the cup,

Sent me to thee in haste. I come m hope.

Although my cheeks are pale and dun mine eyes.

Because I look to thee alone for aid.

Who girdest up thy loins to succour all ”

Gfv spake, the lashes of his eyes were charged V 1103

With tears of gall, and from his heart he heaved
A chilling sigh When he had given the letter
To Kustam he narrated what Gurgfn
Had done, then bitterly bewailed Blzhan,

And poured down tears of blood upon his breast ,

For he and Rustam had been long akin,

That chieftain’s daughter was the wife of Gfv,

While Rustam had Gfv’s sister for his spouse,

And gallant Faramarz by that brave dame.


324


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Blzhaii withal, that hero eminent
In every company, had for his mother
The daughter of the elephantine Rustam,

Who said to Gfv “ Be not concerned hereat,
Because I will not take from Rakhsh the saddle
Till I have clasped Bfzhan’s hand m mine own.
And have demolished all his bonds and prison.
By God’s strength, since the Shah requireth it.
Will I release him from that darksome pit.”


§ i6

How Rmtam made a Feast for Giv

Thence they departed to the hall of Rustam,
Discussing as they went what course to take.

When Rustam had perused the monarch’s letter
He was o’erwhelmed at what Khusrau had said,

And all the praises that the worldlord Shah
Gave to his famous captain of the host
Then Rustam said to Gi'v “ I will dispatch.

And ready me to go as he coinmandeth
I know how thou hast laboured, thine achievements.
And thy concernment in all enterprise.

How mighty is thine influence with me,

Who hast wooed war on every battlefield,

Alike m the revenge for Siyawush,

And in the war against Mazandaran i
Thou hast borne travail too m coming hither,

And faring by a route so arduous
I joy exceedingly to look upon thee
Although I am concerned about Bi'zhan
1104 I cannot bear to see thee in such grief.

And fortune-stricken As the Shah coinmandeth
In this his letter I will take the road.

And also out of my concern for thee


KAI KHUSRAU


325


Will undertake the matter of Blzhan,

Will do my best and, if All-holy God
Shall leave my body and my soul together,

I will not grudge Bizhan life, troops, and treasure,

I gird me in God’s strength and by the fortune
Of our victorious worldlord I will rescue
Bi'zhan from bondage and from darksome pit.

And will re-seat him on the famous dais.

Abide Avith me three days m joy, quaff wine,

Be free from care, for no division parteth
My house from thine, and thou and I are one
In treasure, soul, and body ”

At his words

Gfv sprang up, kissed his hands and head and feet.
Applauded him, and said “ O man of name.

Endowed with strength and manhood, worth and
fortune '

Mayst thou have ever thus the heart and strength
Of elephants and archimages’ prudence
Thou dost partake all excellence, and so
Hast cleansed my heart from rust ”

When Rustam saAv

Gfv’s heart content, and felt himself assured
That all would turn out well, he told his steivard —

“ Set out the board and call the chiefs and sages ”

Then Fararaarz, Zawara, Zal, and Gfv
Sat at the banquet of the valiant chief
Cup-bearers and musicians with their harps
Came to the hall of jewelled tracery ,

The handles of the goblets blushed with wine.

The harps descanted and the cups went round
Carousing thus m Rustam’s palace Gfv
Abode three days and made no haste to leave.


V 1105


326


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSt


§ 17

Hoio Rustam came to KJmstau

The fourth day they prepared to go, ’twas tune ,

So Rustam bade to pack the loads and make
All ready for the journey to Iran,

While at his gate his noble horsemen gathered,

Dight for the road. He came forth, mounted Rakhsh,
Girt up his loins, put on a Riirnan vest,

And hung his grandsire’s mace beside the saddle.
Intent on feats of arms and strategy.

Rakhsh struck the sky above him, but the head
Of crown-bestowing Rustam topped the sun
They took their loads up, leaving Faramaiz
Within Zabul, and Rustam, Gi'v, and troops —

Picked Z4buli's, a hundred thousand strong —

Set forth upon the march toward Iran
All huiried on with vengeance in their hearts
When Rustam reached Iian, and when the throne
Of Kai Khusrau was coming into sight,

V 1106 A sweet breeze wafted to him in its love
And gaiety the welcome of the sky
Then Gi'v drew near to Rustam saying thus —

“ ’Tis ht that I go hrst and tell the Shah

That matchless Rakhsh hath measured all the road.”

Said Rustam “ Go rejoicing, say to him —

‘ Be quit of thy distress.’ ”

When Gi'v approached
The royal presence with much praise and homage
The Shah demanded “ Where was Rustam left ?

How have ye sped ^ ”

Gfv answered “ Shah renowned >
Thy fortune brmgeth all things to success
He disobeyed thee not, I found? his heart
Devoted to thee. When I gave thy letter


KAI KHUSRAU


327


He pressed it to his face and eyes, and hitched
His reins to mine as should a faithful liege
I have pushed on that I might tell the Shah
That matchless Rustam is upon the road ”

“ But,” said Khusrau, “ where is that Prop of chiefs,
That Seed of loyalty ^ We needs must honour
One both so good and faithful ”

Gfv replied —

“ Two stages back , I came on hrst to tell thee ”

Then Rai Khusrau gave orders to the sages,

The royal princes, and the mighty men.

To go forth with the host to welcome Rustam,

Who came obedient to the Shah’s command
They told Gudarz son of Kishwad, Farhad,

And Tiis — chief of the offspring of Naudar
The more part of the warriors and nobles,

Mace-bearers and foe-slayers, then arose

And dight themselves to go and meet the guest.

According to the usance of Kaiis

The world ivas azure-dun with hoi semen’s dust.

The standards fluttered, and the chargers neighed
When they drew near to Rustam they dismounted
And did obeisance That chief paladin,

Alighting, greeted all the veteians,

And asked about the Shah and how things went
Beneath resplendent sun and shining moon ,

Then swiftly as the bright Azargashasp

The warriors and Rustam all remounted

He came before that Shah, who loved his lieges,

With measured tread and offered reverence.

For ’twas his duty to revere and love,

Then raised his head, gave praise, and said “Be
thou

Associate with the throne throughout thy years,
Urmuzd himself be present in this court,

Bahman be guardian of thy throne and ciown.


V 1107


328 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

May good Ardfbihisht, Bahrain, and Tfr
Watch over thee, and may Shahrir endow thee
With triumph, fame, Grace, majesty, and prowess.
Be thine own sentinel Sapandarmad,

May wisdom be the life of thy bright soul ,

May Dai and Farwardln bless thee, the door
Of ill be barred, and may Azar make night
As bright as day to thee, thyself rejoice.

Thy crown illume the world, and may Aban
Make all thine undertakings glorious ,

Be turnmg heaven before thee as a slave.

And may Murdad protect thy flocks and herds
Be ever glad m person and m fortune,

V I io8 May ancestor and issue smile on thee.

And may Khurdad spread joy o’er held and fell ”
When Rustam standing there had offered praise
The king of kings accorded him a seat
Upon the throne, and said “ Thou art well come ,
Far be the hand of evil from thy life
Thou art the paladin of this world’s Kaians,

Who readest others but art read of none.

The Kaians’ choice, the backbone of the host,

The warden of Iran, the army’s refuge
Thou hast rejoiced me by the sight of thee.

Who art so vigilant and worshipful '

Zawara, Faramarz, and Zal — are they
Hale, happy, and content ? ”

And Rustam answered.
Descending from the throne and kissmg it —

“ O Shah most honoured and of sleepless fortune '
Thereby all three are well and happy blest
Indeed is he whom thou reinemberest ”


KAI KHUSRAU


329


§ 18

How Kai Khusrau held Feast with the Paladins

The chamberlain threw wide the garden-gate,

And made all ready for a royal revek
He gave command to set the golden crown
And throne beneath a bower that scattered roses,

And laid down court-brocade o’er all the pleasance,
Which shone as 'twere a lamp. They had a tree
Set up above the Shah’s throne to enshadow
It and the crown The stem thereof was silver,

The branches were of gold and jewelry,

The jewels manifold and clustering,

The leaves of emeralds and carnelians,

And fruit hung down, like earrings, from the boughs
The fruits were golden oranges and quinces
All hollow and all perforate like reeds,

And charged with musk worked up with wine that
when

The Shah set any one upon the throne

The breeze might shower musk on him , such showers

Descended on the Shah what time he came.

And took his seat upon the throne of gold
All the cup-bearers wearing coronets
Of jewels, gold brocade, and robes of Chin,

With torques and earrings, stood before the throne.

All clad in gold All hearts were full of mirth.

The wine was in their hands, their cheeks were flushed.
Though no one was bemused, like cercis-bloom.

Or like brocade of Chfn. The aloe-wood
Burned and the harps descanted Then the Shah
Gave orders to the chamberlam on duty.

And said • “ Call Tiis, Gddarz, and all the chiefs.”

He ordered Rustam to approach the throne.

And sit with him beneath the tree. He said —


V 1109


330 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

“ Thou happy bond ’twixt fortune and ourselves '

Thou art a shield betwixt Iran and ill

For aye with outstretched wings like the Sfmurgh,

And oft hast toiled for country and for king
Thou knowest how the offspring of Giidarz
In peace and war, m proht and in loss,

Stand in my presence with their loins girt up,

And always are my guides to what is good,

While, more than all, Gfv shielded me from harm.
Such grief ne’er came before upon this house
(What greater sorrow than to lose a son ?)

And wert thou not to undertake the task
I see none other helper in the world
Now remedy this matter of Bi'zhan’s,

Who hath been ill-entreated by Tiiran,

And take of steeds and armour, men and treasure,
Whate’er is needed Think it not a toil.”

When Rustam heard he kissed the ground, sprang up
And blessed the Shah “ 0 thou fair- famed,” he said,

“ Who like the sun art potent everywhere *

V I no Be greed and wrath and need afar from thee,

And may thy foe’s heart burn and agonize
Thou art Shah, lord, and chief above all kings,

And monarchs are the dust upon thy feet
The throne, the bright sun, and the shining moon
Have never looked on such another Shah
Thou hast discerned between the good and bad.

And bound the Dragon with thy charms and chains
My mother gave me birth to toil for thee ,

Thine own part is enjoyment and repose
I am obedient to the Shah’s commands,

And go where thou shalt bid By royal Grace,

And by my massive mace, I plucked the heart
Out of the dfvs erst in Mazandaran ,

E’en so for Gfv sake, though the sky should ram
Fire on my head, I will not heed and, though


KAI KHUSRAU


331


The spear-points reach the lashes of mine eyes,

I will not turn rein from Khusrau's behest,

But by thy Grace will compass this achievement,
And ask for neither* chief nor warriors ”

When Rustam had thus said, Giidarz and Giv
With Farfburz, Farhad, the brave Shapiir,

And other chiefs, invoked on him God’s blessing.
They took the cup and, pledging Zal and Rustam,
Became bemused with wine Thus revelling
The Shdh oped festively the door of spring.


§ 19

How Rustam made Petihon fot Gw gin to the Shdh

Gurgtn heard bruit of Rustam and, aware
That thus a key to loose his grief had come.

Dispatched this message “ Man of fortune, Grace,

And fame, thou Tree of greatness, loyalty.

And treasure Gate of noble men and Bond
Of bale ' if words of mine afflict thee not
I will address thee touching what 1 did

Mark the behaviour of this hump-backed sky v un

In quenching wantonly the light within me,

And pointing out to me the path of darkness >

’Twas written thus, and what hath been hath been
I will he down in fire before the Shah
If I may find forgiveness , all is over
With my hoar head if my good name be lost ,

So, if thou wilt plead for me, I will go,

Swift as a mountain-sheep, along with thee,

And wallow in the dust before Bfzhan
If I may win mine unstained honour back.”

When Rustam heard he heaved a deep, cold sigh ,

The anguish shown and message sent perturbed him ,

He grieved at that request so fondly urged.


332 THE SHAhnAmA OP FIRDAUSt

And bade the envoy “ Go, return, and say —

‘ Insensate wretch i hast heard not what the leopard
Said by the deep stream to the crocodile —

‘ “ If passion gain the upper hand of wit,

Then nobody will ’scape the clutch of it ” ?

The sage that quelleth passion hath a record
As of a noble Lion , thine hath been
An ancient fox’s, yet thou didst o’erlook
The snare > I should not grant thy frantic wish
That I should bring thy name before Khusrau,

Yet, since I see thee m such straits and all
Confounded, I will ask him to forgive thee.

And lighten thy dark moon. Then, if Bfzhan
By God the Ruler of the world’s command
Escape, thou wilt be freed and save thy life
From Gfv’s revenge Should heaven will otherwise
Deem life and person as unworth thy love.

First will I go forth on my quest and vengeful
In God’s strength at the bidding of the Shd.h,

1 112 But if I fail that man of prowess Gfv

Will then take wreak on thee for his brave son ’ ”

Thus passed a night and day, and Rustam spake
Naught to the Shah, but when upon the morroiv
The sun displayed its crown and took its seat
Upon its silver-sheening ivory throne.

Came *Rustam flying unto Kai Khusrau
To ask a boon of that victorious Shdh
While speaking of Gurgfn, his fallen fortune,

And wretched plight. The Shah said “ Chieftain
mine'

Thou wouldst then break my bonds and break with me.
Because I swore by throne, crown. Mars, and Venus,
And sun and moon ‘ Gurgfn shall see but ill
From me unless Bfzhan be freed from bondage.’
Excepting this ask of me what thou wilt
Of swords and signet-rings, X)f thrones and crowns.”


KAI KHUSRAU


333


He answered “ Virtuous and famous prince >

If he intended harm he suffereth,

And IS prepared to offer up his life ,

But if the Shdh will not forgive him first
He will be outcast from the Faith and honour
Whoever turneth from the way of wisdom
Will writhe for his ill-domg at the last
Vouchsafe to call to mind Gurgfn’s exploits,

How he hath taken part in every fight,

And been a champion with thine ancestors ,

If for my sake the Shah will pardon him
His fortunes may be somewhat brightened yet
The Shdh, that Kustam might not plead in vain,
Released Gurgfn from gloomy pit and chain


§ 20

Jloto Rustam equipped his Ebcoit

The Shah asked Rustam “ When wilt thou depart
For this campaign ? Demand whate’er thou wilt —

Troops, treasure, and companions for the journey
Malevolent Afrasiydb, I fear me, v 1113

Will not long spare Bfzhan The king is headstrong.

And the mjurious Dfv, who taught him magic,

Anon will turn his heart aside and prompt him
To slay our swordsman ”

Rustam thus replied —

“ I will achieve this enterprise by stealth,

For only craft will loosen such a coil
We must not give occasion for alarm,

But set off m the guise of merchantmen,

And tarry for a while within Tiir^n
This IS a case for drawing in the rein,

And not a time for maces, swords, and spear-pomts
I shall require much silver, gold, and gems ,


334


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


We start in hope but we shall stay in fear.

I shall need garments too and carpetings
For giving presents and as merchandise ”

On hearing Rustam’s words Khusrau commanded
His treasurer to bring him whatsoever
His minister directed from the hoards
Laid up of yore. The royal treasurer
Undid the purses and bestrewed the throne
With jewels and dinars Came matchless Rustam,
Inspected all, and chose whate’er was needed.

He took ten camel-burdens of dinars,

Five score of other ware, he next commanded
The chamberlain “ Choose out a thousand horse
Some of the proud and noble lion-men
Must also gird themselves — Gurgln and Zanga,

The son of Shawaran, next Gustaham,

The Falchion of the brave, and fourth Guraza,

The sentinel of warriors, throne, and crown,

V 1114 To lead the host, Ruhhim, Farhad, two men
Of valour, and Ashkash that lion-hero.

These seven warriors must make them ready
To overlook the escort and the goods ”

These, every one m his allotted part,

Vied m their preparations for the start


§ 21

How Rustam went to the City of Khutan to Pirdn

Then Rustam bade those chieftains, those mace-
wielders,

Those dealers out of death, to gird themselves

At dawn what time the officer on duty

Came to the gate At daybreak, when the cock crew.

They bound the drums upon the elephants.

While Rustam came forth like a lofty cypress,


KAI KHUSRAU


335


Mace in his hand and lasso on his saddle
He left the royal portal with his troops,

And called down blessings on the land. The chiefs
Went first, the soldiers followed, and all took
Their lives in hand, their guides were spears and
arrows.

And every hand had been imbrued m blood.

When Rustam reached the marches of Tiirdn
He picked out all the chiefs, then bade the troops —

“ Abide here cheerfully, move not unless
All-holy God deprive me of my life.

Be dight for battle and prepared for bloodshed ”

Thus in those marches of Iran he left them,

And went, he and the chiefs, towards Tiiran
Ho doffed his mail and donned a merchant’s dress,

The warriors undid their silver girdles,

And he arrayed them all in woollen robes.

They fared toward Tiiran — a caravan

All scent and colour There were eight fine steeds.

One Rakhsh, the others were the warriors’ mounts.

Ten camels bearing bales of jewelry,

And five score bearing soldiers’ uniforms.

The waste rang like the horn of Tahmiiras
With bdls and shouting Rustam journeyed on
Until he reached the city of Pfran,

For there was one in those Tiiranian marches
Belonging to that chief, but he himself
Was at the chase , his palace was unguarded
Now when he came back from the hunting-field
The matchless Rustam saw him on the road.

And having covered over with brocade
A golden goblet filled with precious stones
Gave It and therewithal two splendid steeds.

With saddles made of gold adorned with jewels,

To the attendants, and preceding them
Strode to PMn’s throne swiftly, did obeisance.


V ms


336 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

And said : “ 0 prince whose fortune and whose prowess
Are famous in Irdn and in Tiiran !

Thy Grace and crown are peerless, for thou art
King’s mmister and glory of the throne ”

Plrdn, so God ordained it, knew not Rustam,

But questioned him and said “Whence art thou?
Speak '

What man art thou and wherefore hast thou come ? ”
He said “ I am thy subject God assigned me
A cistern in thy city I have measured
A long and grievous journey from Iran
V 1116 To traffic in Tiiran I sell and buy,

And deal in every sort of merchandise
My soul hath good assurance ot thy love,

Such was the power of hope within my heart '

It now the paladin will take me ’neath
His wing I will buy cattle and sell jewels
Through thy just dealing none will do me hurt,

The cloud-rack of thy love rain gems upon me ’’

Then Rustam offered him before the lords
The cup of royal gems, and splendid Arabs
With coats too sleek to hold the wmd-borne dust
This wealth with many a blessing Rustam gave,

And fairly clinched the matter. When Ptran
Beheld the jewels m the brilliant cup
He praised and welcomed Rustam, seating him
Upon the turquoise throne, and said “ Depart
Content and enter with all confidence,

For I will lodge thee near me , be at ease
About thy goods, thou hast no foeman here.

Go fetch thy wares, seek buyers on all sides,

Make my son’s house thy home, and be to me
As ’twere a kinsman ”

Rustam answered thus —

“ I will abide here with my caravan,

0 paladin ’ What goods I have are thme.


KAI KHUSRAU


337


And 'twill be well with me be where I may,

But in that I have jewels ot all kinds,

And must not lose one, by thy conquering fortune
We will- remain outside in great content ”

Pfran replied “ Go then and choose thy place,

And I will station guards for thy defence ”

So Rustam chose a house, appointed it,

And filled the warehouse with his goods and packs
News spread “ A caravan out of Iran
Hath visited the noble paladin,”

And buyers everywhere pricked up their ears
When tidmgs reached them of those jewel-mei chants.
Those that would buy brocade or stuffs or gems
Departed toward the court-gate of Pi'ran,

And when the sun arose the world to grace
The waiehouse had become a market-place


§ 22

How Manirlia came before Rustam

Manfzha heard and hurried to the city ,

Bare-headed, weeping bitterly, she came —

That daughter of Afrasiyab — to Rustam,

And, wiping from her lashes with her sleeve
The tears of blood, blessed, greeted him, and said —

“ Enjoy’st thou hfe and wealth ? God grant that thou
Mayst ne’er have reason to repent thy toils.

May heaven perform thy will, the evil eye
Not harm thee, and smce thou hast heart of hope
May this thy travail not result in loss.

May wisdom ever be thy monitor.

And may Iran be blessed and fortunate.

What know’st thou of the warriors of the Shah,

Of Gfv, Giidarz, and the frdnian host ?

Have tidings of Bizhan not reached iran ?

VOL. III. Y


V 1117


338


THE SHAhnAmA op FIRDAUSI


Will not his supplications aught avail,

That such a youth — a scion of Giidarz —

May be released from irons ? His feet are galled
With fetters and his hands with blacksmiths' rivets ’

He hath been dragged in chains, made fast in bonds '
Poor wretch > his clothes are soaked in his own blood >

I get no rest myself for I must beg.

His lamentations fill mine eyes with tears.”

V iii8 Then Rustam in alarm roared out at her.

And drave her forth “ Be off ' ” he cried “ I know not
Khusrau or this young chief I have no tidings
About Giidarz and Gfv, and thou hast chattered
My wits away ”

Manizha looked at Rustam,

Wept bitterly, and showered tears oi blood
Upon her bosom in her wretchedness.

She said to him “ 0 chieftain full of wisdom ’

Such heartless words as these become thee not
Drive me not from thee if thou wilt not talk,

For I am stricken to the heart with anguish
Is it indeed the custom of Iran
To tell the poor no news ? ”

He answered thus —

“ What ailed thee, woman, then ? Did Ahriman
Give thee a foretaste of the Day of Doom ?

Thou didst prevent my trafficking, and therefore
I rated thee , but do not take to heart
My hastmess, my thoughts were on my trade
Besides I have no home within the land
Of Kai Khusrau, I know naught of Giidarz
And Giv, and ne’er have travelled m those marches ”
He bade to give the mendicant such food
As was at hand, then questioned her at large —

“ Why is’t that fortune is so dark with thee ?

Why ask about the Shah’s throne and Iran ?

Why look upon the road that leadeth thither ? ”


KAI KHUSRAU


339


She said to him • “ Why ask about my case,

My travail, and my trouble ? From the mouth
Of yonder pit have I with aching heart
Made haste to thee, 0 noble man ' to ask
The latest news of Giv and of Gudarz,

The warriors, and thou didst shout at me
As fighters shout ! Fear’st not the Judge of all ?

The daughter of Afr^iyab am I —

Manlzha Never had the sun beheld
My form unveiled, but now with eyes all blood.

And heart all pain, with sallow cheeks I roam
From door to door and gather barley bread, V 1 1 19

So hath God willed ' Can fortune be more
wretched ?

Oh I that Almighty God would end it for me.

Because resourceless and in yon deep pit
Bizhan beholdeth neither night nor day.

Nor sun nor moon, but yoked and riveted
In heavy bonds is praying God for death
Hence are my griefs redoubled, hence these tears
Thou mayst, if thou art journeying to Iran,

Hear of Gudarz son of Kishwad, or see
About the court-gate Gfv or gallant Rustam ,

Then say ‘ Bizhan is in a pit and, save
Thou comest quickly, all is over with him
If thou wouldst look upon him tarry not,

Foi iron is below him, stone above.’ ”

Thus Rustam answered her “ O fair of face ’

Why rain these tears of love ? Why not invite
Thy nobles’ intercession with thy sire ?

He may be pitiful, his blood may stir,

His liver burn , but for my fear of him
I would have furnished thee with countless things ”

Then said he to the cooks “ Bring forth for her
Of every kind of victual that she needeth.”

He bade them fetch a bird hot from the spit.


340


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


And, as he wrapped it in soft bread, ^ slipped in,
As with a fairy’s touch, his signet-rmg,

And said “ Convey this to yon pit. A guide
Art thou to those who have no help beside ”


§ 23


How Bizhan heard of the Coming of Rmtam


V U20 Manizha came back to the pit’s mouth, running,

The food wrapped in a cloth clasped to her breast.

And gave all to Bizhan He saw amazed.

Called to the sun-faced damsel from the pit,

And said “ Where didst thou get the food, ray love '
That thou hast speeded thus ? How much of toil
And hardship hath befallen thee, and all
On mme account, my love and succourer ’ ”

Mani'zha answered “ From a caravan
A merchantman — a man possessed of wealth —

Came hither from Iran in search of gam,

With merchandise of all kinds great and small —

A holy man of Grace and understanding,

Who brmgeth many jewels of all sorts
He IS a man of might and open heart.

And hath put up a booth before his house ,

He gave to me the cloth just as it is
‘ Pray for me to the Maker,’ were his words
‘ Go to the dungeon to the man in bonds.

And take from time to time what he may need.’ ”

Bizhan with hope amid his fears unrolled
The good bread, in perplexity began
To eat, observed the ring, and read the name.

Then burst out laughing in his joy and wonder
It was a turquoise ring with “ Kustam ” graven

^ Bread in Persia usually is made up into flexible loaves about one
foot wide, two or three feet long, and half an inch thick


KAI KHUSRAU


Fine as a hair thereon Bfzhan beholding
The fruit upon the tree of faithfulness,

And wotting that the key to loose his sorrow
Had come, laughed out and that right royally,

So that the sound was heard outside the pit.
Manizha marvelled when she heard him laugh
From that dark dungeon fettered as he was,

And said “ The mad will laugh at their own acts ' ”
She paused in sheer amazement, then she said —
“ O destined to high fortune ' why this laughter ?
Why laugh, for thou discern’st not night from day ?
What is the mystery ? Reveal it ’ Tell me '

Doth better fortune show thee countenance ? ”
Bfzhan replied to her “ I am in hope
That fortune will undo this grievous coil
Now if with me thou wilt not break thy faith.

And make a covenant with me by oath,

I will reveal the matter every whit.

For ‘ though foi fear of harm one go about
To sew up women’s lips the words will out ’ ”
Manizha hearing this wept bitterly —

“ What hath malicious fortune brought,” she said,

“ Upon me ? Woe is me ’ My day is done,

My heart is stricken, and mine eyes o’erflow ’

I gave Bizhan my heart and home and wealth,

And now he treateth me with such distrust ’

My father and ray km abandoned me,

I run about unveiled before the folk,

I gave withal my treasures up to spoil,

My crown, dfndrs, and jewels, every whit.

I did hope in Bfzhan but hope no more.

My world is darkened and mine eyes are dim.

For he concealeth secrets thus from me.

But Thou dost know me better, O my God ' ”
Bfzhan replied : “ ’Tis true Thou hast lost all
For me, and I,” he added, “ needs must tell thee,


342 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

0 my beloved mate and prudent comrade '

'Tis fit thou counsel me m all, my brain
Is void through suffering, so know that he —

The jewel-merchant, he whose cook provided
The dainty meal for thee — came to Turan
On mine account, for else he had no need
Of gems The Maker pitied me, and I
Perchance shall see earth’s broad expanse This man
Will free me from these longsome griefs and thee
From plodding to and fro m heat and anguish
Do thou draw near and say to him in private —

‘ O thou the paladin of this world’s Kaians,

V 1122 Affectionate of heart and good at need i

Inform me if thou art the lord of Rakhsh ? ’

Manfzha left the forest like the wind.

And gave the message Rustam hearing her,

Who from afar had come to him for help,

Knew that Bfzhan had made the secret known
To that slim Cypress with the rosy cheeks
He pitied her and said “ My Fair ' may God
Ne’er take away from thee Bfzhan’s devotion
What toils must thou have borne these many days
That thou hast grown so woe-begone with care >

Tell him ‘ Yea ' God Avho heareth cries for help
Hath given unto thee the lord of Rakhsh,

Who from Zabul franward, from frdn
Turanward, trod the weary way for thee ’

When thou hast said this keep the matter seciet,

And give good ear at night to any sound
Collect dry fuel from the wood to-day
And, when night cometh, set the pile ablaze
To guide me to the opening of the pit ” ^

Manfzha, joyful at the words and freed
From trouble, hastened to the mountain-top.

Where in the pit her lover was confined,

* Line inserted from P


KAI KHUSRAU


343


And said . “ I have repeated all thy message
To that illustrious, glorious one whose steps
Are blessed He answered ‘ I indeed am he,
Whose name and sign are asked for by Blzhan.

0 thou who goest with a heart so seared.

And washest both thy cheeks with tears of blood i
Say “ We are dappled like a pard with galls
On hands and girdlestead on thine account.

And now that we have certain news of thee
Thou shalt behold our deadly falchion’s point.

Now will I rend the earth beneath my grasp.

And fling that seated boulder to the sky ” ’

He said to me ‘ As soon as heaven is dark,

And night freed from the clutches of the sun,

Set thou a fire, as ’twere a mount, ablaze.

And make it bright as day about the pit.

To guide me on the road ’ ”

Bizhan rejoiced.

Although a prisoner still, and, looking up
To Him, the Almighty Maker of the worid,

Said “ 0 compassionate and holy Judge '

Thou art my Helper out of every ill.

Pierce with Thy shaft my foeman’s heart and
soul.

Now do me right on him that did the wrong :
Thou knowest all my sorrows, pain, and grief
Perchance I may regain my native land.

And leave behind me this malignant star '

And thou, my toil-worn mate, thou who hast made
Life, body, heart, and goods a sacrifice
For me, and in thy toil on my behalf
Hast counted every trouble as a ]oy.

Hast given up the crown and throne and girdle,
Thy parents and thy kindred and thy treasure ’

If I do but escape this Dragon’s clutch.

While I am still within the time of youth.


V 1123


344


THE ShAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


I, like the devotees who worship God,

Will run toward thee with mine arms outstretched,

And, like a servitor before a king.

Gird up my loins to make thee fair return
Bear yet this toil, thy guerdon shall be great
In goods and treasure.”

Bird-like to the boughs

She flew for wood, with arms full watched the sun,

And thought “ Oh ' when will night rise o’er the
hills?”

When Sol had vanished and dark night had led
Its army o’er the mountain-tops what time
The world, its features hidden, taketh rest,

Manizha went and set a-blaze a fire.

That scorched the eye of pitch-black night, and listened

To hear the clanging of the kettledrum

Which told that Kakhsh the brazen-hoofed had come


S 24

How Rustam took Bizhan out of the Pit

V 1124 Then Rustam buckled on his Riiman mail.

With prayers for succour and support to Him,

Who IS the Lord of sun and moon, and said —

“ Oh I may the eyes of evil men be blinded.

And may I have the strength to save Bfzhan ”

At his command the warriors girt themselves
With girdles of revenge, put on their steeds
The poplar saddles, and prepared for combat *

Then matchless Rustam led them toward the fire
When he approached the boulder of Akwdn,
Approached that pit of sorrow, smart, and anguish,

“ Dismount,” he told the seven warriors,

“ And strive to clear the pit’s mouth of the stone.”
They strove m vain and sorely galled their hands.


KAI KHUSRAU


345


Now while their sweat ran, for the stone stood still,

The lion-chief alighted, hitched his skirt
Of mail beneath his belt and, asking strength
From God its source, grasped, raised, and hurled the
boulder

Back to the forest of the land of Chfn
Earth shook thereat Then asked he of Bizhan
With lamentable cries “ How earnest thou
To such a luckless plight ? Thy portion here
Was wont to be all sweetness, why hast thou
Received then from the world a cup of poison ? ”

Bfzhan replied “ How fared the paladin
Upon the way ^ Thy greeting reached mine ear.

And this world’s poison was made sweet to me
Such as thou seest is my dwelling-place.

Mine earth is iron and my heaven stone,

While through exceeding anguish, hardship, sorrow,
And toil I have renounced this Wayside Inn ”

Said Rustam “ God had pity on thy lite,

And now, O man wise and magnanimous >

There is one thing that I desire of thee

Grant pardon to Gurgm son of Milad

For my sake, putting from thee hate and malice ’

He answered “0 my friend’ how shouldst thou
know

What conflicts have been mine ? And know’st thou not,
0 noble lion-man ’ that which Gurgin
Hath done to me ? If I behold him ever
My vengeance shall bring Doomsday down on him.”

“ If thou show’st malice and wilt not attend
To what I say,” said Rustam, “ I will leave thee
Bound m the pit, and mount, and hie me home ”

When Rustam’s answer reached the captive’s ear
A wail went up from that strait prison-house
As he replied • “ The wretchedest am I
Of warriors, of my kindred, and my people '


V 1125


346 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

I must put up to-day too with the wrong —

The great wrong — which Gurgfn hath done to me '

Yea I will do so and will be content ,

My heart shall rest from taking vengeance on him.”

Then Rustam let his lasso down the pit,

And drew up thus Bfzhan with fettered feet,

With naked body, with long hair and nails,

And wasted by affliction, pain, and want.

His form blood-boltered, and his visage wan
By reason of those bonds and rusty fetters.

Now Rustam cried aloud when he beheld
Bfzhan with body hidden by the iron.

And puttmg forth his hands he snapped the chains
And bonds, and freed Bfzhan from ring and fetter
They went toward Rustam’s house , on one side of him
Bfzhan rode, on the other side Manfzha.

V 1126 *The youthful pair sat in their sorry plight,

And told their story to the paladin
Then Rustam bade them bathe the young man’s head.
And clothed him in new robes When afterward
Gurgfn approached and, prone upon the dust.

Sought to excuse his evil deeds, and writhed
For words so ill-advised, Bfzhan condoned
The matter. Then they loaded up the camels.

And put the saddles on the steeds, while Rustam
Assumed his favourite mail and mounted Rakhsh.

The warriors drew forth their scimitars
And massive maces, sent the baggage on.

And dight themselves for strife. Ashkash the shrewd —
The army’s Ear — went with the baggage-train

Then matchless Rustam bade Bfzhan “ Away,

And journey with Manfzha and Ashkash,

For m my vengeance on Afrasiyab
To-night I shall not eat, repose, or sleep.

Now will I do such exploits at his gate
That on the morn his troops shall If^ugh at him.


KAI KHUSRAU


347


Thou hast endured enough with bonds and pit,

And shouldst not share the tight.”

Bizhansaid “Nay,
I lead since ye for me renew the fray ”


§ 25

Hoio Rustam attacked the Ralate of Afidsiydh hy Night

The baggage thus consigned to shrewd Ashkash,

The seven warriors set forth with Rustam
With bridles on their saddle-bows they diew
The sword of vengeance While all slept within
He reached the court-gate of Afrasiyab,

And, breaking with his hands both bolt and bar.
Fierce as a lion flung himself inside
In every quarter sounds of tumult rose.

Swords glittered, arrows rained, the chieftains’ heads
Were all struck off, their hands were tilled with dust.
Their mouths with blood, while Rustam in the porch
Cried “ May sweet sleep distaste thee ’ Foi thy bed
Thou hadst a throne, Bi'zhan had but a pit
Didst see an iron wall between us ? I
Am Rustam of Zabul, the son of Zal,

And ’tis no season this for sleep and couching.

I have burst through thy prison, door and bar.

Where that huge boulder stood on guard for thee
Bfzhan is free both head and foot from bonds
Let no one thus maltreat a son-m-law '

Of flghting and revenge for Siyawush,

And dust from Rakhsh’s feet upon the plain.

Thou hadst enough yet fain wouldst slay Bfzhan ’

I know thy wicked heart and drowsy head.”

Bfzhan too cried " Dense and malignant Turkman ’
Bethink thee of yon throne, thy glorious seat,

And me withal that stood in chains before thee.


V 1127


348


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


I challenged combat leopard-like, but thou
Didst bind my hands together firm as rock
Now see me free upon the plain — a man
Whom savage lions will not seek to fight.”

V 1128 Afrasiyab exclaimed “ Hath sleep enfettered

My warriors ? Cut off these men’s retreat,

All ye who seek a signet or a crown * ”

On all sides was the sound of hurried steps,

The bloodshed made a river at the gate.

And when a soldier of Turan appeared
His place was void forthwith. The Iranians
Came seeking vengeance, but Afrasiyab
Escaped by flight The lord of Rakhsh rode m
Upon the carpets of brocade The wariiors
Took the fair slaves who caught them by the hand
Took too the noble steeds with poplar saddles,
Whose flaps of pard-skm were beset with gems,
Then left the royal palace, packed the baggage,
And stayed not m Tiiran but hastened on
To save the booty and avoid mishap.

So spent was Rustam that he scarce endured
His helmet, while the horses and their riders
Had no pulse left He sent to bid the host —

“ Unsheathe your vengeful scimitars , no doubt
The earth will be bedimmed by horses’ hoofs,
Because Afrasiyab will gather him
A mighty host whose spears will veil the sun ”
They marched along, those warlike cavaliers.

All ready for the fray, with sharpened lances
And reins well gathered in. A scout ascended
The look-out and from far surveyed the route
Whereby the Turkman cavaliers would come.
Mam'zha then was sitting in her tent ,

Before her were her handmaids and her guide,

V H29 And matchless Rustam spoke to her this saw —

“ If musk be poured away the scent will stay ”


KAI KHUSRAU


349


Such IS the fashion of this Wayside Inn,

Whiles sweets and smiles, whiles travail and chagrin >


§ 26

How Afidstydh went to fight imth Rustam

When Sol rose o’er the hills the Turkman horsemen
Prepared to march The city was astir.

And, thou hadst said, a deafening clamour 1 ose
Before the court-gate of Afrasiyab
The troops formed rank, the great men loosed their
loins.

And bowed their heads in dust before the king.

Exclaiming “ Things with us have passed all bounds '

What must be done ^ This business of Bfzhan

Will be a lasting stigma, the iranians

Will call us men no more, but women armed ”

Thereat Afrasiyab raged like a pard.

And bade them fight for shame He bade Piran
To bind the tymbals on, and thus he said —

“ This flouting from Iran is over-much ’ ”

The brass blared at the court-gate of the king,

The troops were all m motion in Tiiran,

The warriors ranked themselves before the palace,

Arose the dm of trump and Indian bell,

And to the frontier from Turan a host
Marched that left earth no surface save the sea.

Now when the Iraman watchman from the look-out
Saw earth heave ocean-hke he came to Rustam, v 1130

And said “ Make ready, for the world is black
With dust of horsemen ' ”

Rustam made reply —

“We fear not, we will strew it on their hands.”

He left Manfzha with the baggage, donned
His battle- mail, went to a height, observed


350 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSi

The foe, and roared out like a savage lion
That gallant horseman spake a proverb, saying —

“ What doth a fox weigh in a lion’s claws ? ”

Then to his valiant warriors he shouted —

“ The wage of war confronteth us to-day.

Where are the swords and iron-piercmg darts ?

Where are the ox-head maces and the spears ?

Now is the season to display your prowess,

And rank yourselves upon the battlefield.”

Anon arose a sound of clarions,

While matchless Rustam mounted Rakhsh and led
His army plamward from the heights what time
The foe was seen approaching ^ Both the hosts
Deployed upon that broad expanse and formed
Two camps empanoplied. Then Rustam chose
His battle-ground, whereat the world giew black
With horse-raised dust. Ashkash and Gustaham
Were on the right with many cavaliers.

Upon the left were Zanga and Ruhham
All rose superior to that conflict. Rustam,

The warriors’ warden and the host’s support.

Was at the centre with Bi'zhan the son
Of Gi'v Behind the host was Mount Bfstun,

In front a citadel of scimitars.

Afrasiyab, when he beheld that host.

With Rustam who was seen commanding it,

In dudgeon donned his armour for the battle,

And bade his troops to halt. He drew them up
In due array against the foe. The earth
Was hidden and the air like indigo.

The left wing he intrusted to Pfrdn,

While brave Human departed to the right ,

The centre he consigned to Garsfwaz
And Shida , he himself o’erlooked the whole.

^ aussltdt que Tarmee ennerme eut paru dans le ddfild de la
TTvontagne opposee^' (Mohl)


KAI KHUSRAU


351


The matchless Rustam went about the host,

And seemed a sable mountain in his mail.

He cried “ Thou luckless Turkman, thou disgrace
To province, crown, and throne ' thou hast no heart
To fight like cavaliers, yet shamest not
Before thy warriors, but assailest us.

And coverest the earth with men and steeds,
Though when the armies grapple I shall see
Thy back toward the fight Hast thou not heard
Those sayings of old times which Zk\ repeateth —

‘ No lion IS affrighted at a plain
Of onagers , stars ape the sun m vain ,

The lusty mountain-sheep if it shall hear
A wolfs claws named will shiver, heart and ear ,

No fox 18 daring, try he e’er so much,

No onagers the lion’s claws will touch’ ?

Be never king as light of wit as thou,

Oi he will give his kingdom to the winds.

Upon this plam thou shalt not get away
Alive and scathless from my hands to-day ”


§ 27


Hoic Afidsiydb tvai> defeated by the Irdmans


As soon as that grim Turkman heard the words
He shook, drew one quick breath, then cried in iury —
“ 0 warriors of Turan ' are we engaged
In banquet, feast, or battle on this field ?

Ye must endure hard toil in this emprise,

For I will give you treasure m return.”

They shouted when they heard the monarch’s words ,
The sun so gloomed with dust that thou hadst said —
“ Earth is submerged ’ ” Upon the elephants
The drums were beaten, horns and trumpets blown.
The warriors with their breastplates formed a wall


V 1131


V 1132


352 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Of iron on the battlefield. The plain
Shook and the hills re-echoed with the shouts
Raised by the cavaliers upon both sides ,

The trenchant swords flashed mid the clouds of dust ,
Thou wouldst have said “The Day ot Doom hath
come ' ”

Steel sparths descended like a storm of hail
Upon the coats of mail, the helms, and casques,

While at the gleam of Rustam’s dragon-flag
The bright sun’s face grew azure-dim , he veiled
The air with arrows, “ Smearing,’’ thou hadst said,

“ The sun with pitch ’’ Where’er he urged on Rakhsh
He trampled on the heads of cavaliers
Grasped in his hand he bore an ox -head mace,

And seemed a dromedary broken loose
He came forth from the centre like a wolf,

And scattered all the foemen’s vast array.

Then horsemen’s heads were shed as leaves are shed
Before the blast, and fortune left the Turkmans
Swift as the wmd Ashkash upon the right
Sought to engage the swordsman Garsi'waz,

Giirgfn, Farhad, and brave Riihham o’erthrew
The left wing of the monarch of Turan,

While in the centre dexterous Bi'zhan
Esteemed the battlefield a banquet-hall
Blood flowed in streams, the Turkman monarch’s
standard

V 1133 Sank, he beheld his fortunes all averse.

The warriors of Turan all slam, so flung
His Indian scimitar away and, mounting
A fresh steed, fled attended by his nobles
Toward Turan, balked of revenge, and followed
By lion-takmg Rustam, who rained mace
And arrow on the enemy, and blasted
For two leagues, thou hadst said, like dragon grim
The warriors. A thousand cavaliers


KAI KHUSRAU


353


Were captured. Bustau) then returned to camp
In order that he might divide the spoil.

And, when the elephants were loaded, he
Marched back to Kai Khusrau victoriously.


§ 28

How 'Rustam Tt^uined to Kat Khusiau

When tidings reached the gaiil*?^ Shdh “ The Lion
Hath come back from the Wood vict»ri‘^'^® ’

Bizhan is free from prison and from bonds, '

And from the clutches of his dragon- foe ,

The army of Tiirdn is overthrown,

The foe’s whole purpose foiled,” he went rejoicing,
And fell upon his face, before the Maker.

Whenas Giidarz and Gfv received the news
They hasted to the conquering Shdh A shout
Went up, troops mustered, and the tymbal-players
Set forth, the trumpet sounded at the gate.

The soldiers shouted All the riding-ground
Was black with chargers’ hoofs, the kettledrums
Roared through the city, horsemen proudly pranced.
And mighty elephants tusked up the earth.

Before the army went the drums and horns,

Giidarz and Tiis came after with the standard
Upon one side were pards and lions chamed.

Upon the other were brave cavaliers
In such wise the victorious Sh&h commanded
The troops to go to meet their paladin.

They set forth on their journey troop on troop ,

The earth was mountain-like with warriors
When they distinguished Rustam from the rest,
Giidarz and Glv alighted, as did all
The other mighty men and Rustam also.

To whom both young and old did reverence

VOL. III. Z


V 1134


3S4


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Gddarz and Gfv saluted him and said —

“ O thou illustrious and valiant chief '

May God be thy protection now and ever,

May sun and moon both circle to thy wish.

Of thee the lion learneth to be bold,

Of thee may heaven weary nevermore '

Thou hast made all our kindred slaves to thee
Through whom we have recovered our losi son
Thou hast delivered us from pain and grief.

And made us all thy servants in Iran.”

The chiefs rem^jiuted and approached in pomp
The palace of the monarch of the world.

And, wb§n that chief — the refuge of the host —

Orev/ near the city of the king of kings,

Tne Shdh himself, — the warden of the troops
And crown of chiefs — went out to welcome him.

When Kustam by the pomp knew that the Shah
Had come, he lighted and did homage, grieved
That Kai Khusrau had come so far. The world-lord
Took Rustam in a close embrace and said —

“ Thou Stay of chieftains and thou Soul of honour >

As glorious as the sun are all thy gests.

And thine achievements broadcast through the world.”

Then quickly taking by the hand Blzhan,

Who was abashed before his Shah and sire,^

V. 1135 The matchless Rustam brought, presented him.

Rose to his feet, and made the bent back straight
Thereatter he delivered to the Shah
A thousand captives from Tiiran m bonds.

The monarch blessed him lovmgly and said —

“ May heaven ever favour thy desires.

May thy hand flourish, may thy heart rejoice.

And thy pure body ’scape all hurt from foes.

How blest IS Zal, who will bequeath the world
A Memory like thee ' Blest is Zabul,

^ Reading with P


KAI KHUSRAU


355


^hose milk hath nourished such undaunted heroes
Blest is IrAn, blest are its warriors,

Possessing such a paladin as thee ,

Yet is my fortune higher than them all
In having such a servant of my throne.

Thou art lrd,n’s crown and the chieftains’ stay,

And lacking thee I care not for the world.”

Then said the monarch of the world to Giv —

“ The Almighty’s purposes toward thee are good,

Who hath restored to thee by Rustam’s hand
Thy son, thy well beloved, and in triumph.”

Glv blessed the Shah and said “ Live and rejoice
As long as time shall be, may thy head flourish
Through Rustam ever, and may he possess
The heart of glorious Zal with happiness ”

§ 29

How Km Khusrau made a Feast

Khusrau commanded “ Let the board be spread,

And call the chiefest nobles to the feast ”

Now when the guests had nsen from the table
They had the place set for a drinking-bout.

Fair slaves illumed the hall, with cup-bearers
And earrmged harpers harping on their harps ,

Their heads were crowned with massive coronets
Of gold with patterns traced thereon in gems
All cheeks were ruddy as brocade of Riim,

And fairy fingers made the harps resound
There were gold chargers full of purest musk,

And in the front a laver of rose-water.

The Shdh, resplendent with imperial Grace,

Shone like a full moon o’er a straight-stemmed cypress.
The paladins, the lieges of Khusrau,

All left the palace, well bemused.

Next morning

Came Rustam to the court, with open heart


V 1136


356 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

And girded loins, for leave to hie him home.

He took much prudent counsel with the Shah,
Who gave commandment, and a change of raiment
Bejewelled, with a tunic and a crown,

A vase of royal gems, a hundred steeds
All saddled and a hundred laden camels,

A hundred fair-faced handmaids ready girt,

A hundred slaves adorned with torques of gold,
Were brought before the master of the woild.

Who gave them all to Rustam of Zdbul

That hero kissed the ground and then stood upiight

He set upon his head that royal crown.

He bound that royal girdle round his loins,

Did homage to the Shdh, then left the presence.
And made his preparations for Sfstdn.

Next to the nobles that had been with Rustam
In toil and fight, m happiness and sorrow.

The Shdh gave gifts, to each in his degree
They left the palace of Khusrau, rejoicing

The Shah, when he had finished with the chiefs.
And sat at leisure on his throne, commanded
Bfzhan to come, and spake of all his troubles.

While for his part Bfzhan informed the Shah
At large of that strait dungeon, of his conflicts.

And what had happened in those evil days.

The Shah forgave him and much pitied too
The pains and sorrows of the luckless damsel,

V 1 137 Called for a hundred garments of brocade

Of Rum, gem-patterned on a ground of gold,

A crown, ten purses also of dfndrs.

Girl-slaves and carpets and all kinds of wealth.

And said thus to Bfzhan “ These precious things
Bear to the lady of the mournful soul.

Use her not hardly, speak no chilling word.

Consider all that thou hast brought on her.

Go through this world rejoicmg by her side,


KAI KHUSRAU


And take thou heed of time’s vicissitudes.

How it will raise one to the heights of heaven.
And bear him all unharmed by care and anguish.
Then how that heaven will fling him to the dust.
Where all is fear, anxiety, and dread '

The man whom fortune cherished on its breast
It casteth wantonly to depths of need.

And raiseth thence another to the throne,

And setteth on his head a jewelled crown '

The world is not ashamed of such ill doings,

For it respecteth no one , and, although
For ever dominating good and bad,

Ensueth not the peace of any one ”

Such IS the manner of our earthly lot ’

It leadeth us alike to good and ill.

And noble hearts may hve untroubled still
So long as poverty oppresseth not

The story of Giidarz I next unfold
And of Pird,n , that of Bizhan is told
As I have heard it m the tales of old


INDEIX


This Index and the Table of Contents at the beginning of the volume are
complementary References to the latter are in Roman numerals


A

AAISHMA DAh'VA, 272
Abdn, geniub, 287, 328
Abbieviations, list of, 3
AbAl Kdsim of Gurgdn, sha»kli,
191

his dream conceiniiig Fii-
daiisi, 191

Afrdsiydb, lulei of v, vi,

vii, vni, IX, 8, 12, 13, 15,
21, 23, 26, 27, 29, 40, 42,
47> 73» 76 eeq , 94, 100,

106, 108, 1 18, 123, 134, 136,
143, 146, 152, 153, 164, 165,
176, 183, 185, 191, 193, 2CX>
seq , 207 sea , 21 1, 213, 218,
223, 228, 24T, 242, 249 seq ,
260 seq , 268, 271, 277

seq, 285, 29s, 298, 300,
304 seq, 320, 333, 337,
339, 346 seq

Kai Khusrau’s oath to take
vengeance on, 21
hears of the appioach of the
Tidnian host, 71
bids Phdn gathei tioops, 71,
79

numbeis the host, 79
loss of kindred in battle, 94
rewards Phdn, 106
leinforces Piidn, 118
referred to, 206
announces to his chiefs the
defeat of his host, 242
exhorted by his host to con-
tinue the war, 243, 249


AfnCsiydb, makes his prepaia-
tions, 243, 250
sends Faighdi to spy on
Rustam, 243, 250
consults with Shida, 250
describes Rustam, 251
receives Farghdr’s report, 253
consults with Pirdn, 253
bids Pirdn continue the A\ai*,
254

sends Sliida to summon Puldd
wand, 255

consults PuUdwand, 256
interferes 111 the fight be-
tween Rustam and Pdldd-
wand, 263

withdraws to Chin and
Mdcliin, 265

goes in puisuit of Rustam
and IS defeated, 280
Iieais of the case of Bizhan
and Manizha, 301
consults Kurakhdn, 301
->611 ds Garsiwaz to search
Manizha*s palace, 301
sentences Bizhan to death,

304

lespites Bizhan, 308
imprisons Bizhan, 309
disgraces Manizha, 309
escapes from Rustam, 348
bids Pirdn piepare for wai,
349

airays the host against
Rustam, 350
flees from Rustam, 352
Ahiiman, the Evil Principle, 17,


^59


36o


INDEX


123, 214, 228, 251, 266, 27s,
277, 287, 293, 294, 300, 303,
304, 314, 316, 318, 338
Akem Manau, 271, 272
Aktim^n> 272

Akw^Ln, div, viii, 7, 270 seq , 280
seq , 284, 309
Story of, viii, 7, 271

Professor Noldeke on
the, 271

Firdausi on, the, 273, 281
boulder of, 271, 276, 309, 343,
344i 347

removed from pit’s moutii
by Rustam, 345
appears in the form of an
onagei, 273 seq
pursued by Rustam, 275
foils Rustam, 276
takes Rustam at a disadvan-
tage, 276

offers Rustam a choice of
deaths, 277

outwitted by Rustam, 277
slam by Rustam, 281
described by Rustam, 282
Alburz, mountain, 120
Alif, teiminal, Fiidausi’s use or,

Almds, river, 251
Alwd, Rustam's spear beaiei, vii,
188

slam by Kdmds, 188
Ambuh, place, 41
Ameshaspentas, the, 271
Aiidrophagoi, the, 191
Apologue, 332

Apothegms, 53, 91, 96, 167, 188,
212, 260, 277, 301, 316, 341,
348, 350, 351
Arabs, the, 14
Aral Sea, lo

Ardibihisht, ameshaspenta, 286,
328

Aries, constellation, 26, 38, 187,
318

Arj^sp. ruler of Tdrdn, 109
Armenia, countiy (Irm^n), 12


Armenians (Iirndnians), the, 2S6
Arsacid, dynastic title, 9
Artabanus 111 , Parthum king
9. 10

Artabanus, son of Aitabanus III, 9
Aiyans, 10

Arzhang, Tdidniaii hero, vi, 76,
77, 119 seq

challenges the rrdnians, 1 19
Arzhang, dungeon of, 309
Ashkabus, Tdrd.nian hero, vii, 109,
179 seq , 183, 186, 207, 268
Rustam’s fight with, 109, 179
worsts Ruhhdm, 179
parleys with Rustam, 180
slam by Rustam, 18 1
Ashkdnian, dynasty, 9, 1 1
Ashkash, rrdnian heio, 33, 34,
89 » 347 » 3 SOf 352
goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, 334

conveys baggage toward
I'ldn, 346

Asmodeus, demon, 272
Azai, genius, 287, 328
Azar Abddagdn, Tabriz or tlie
Fire-temples there, 20
Azaigashasp, spiiit of the light-
ning, 20, 23, 53, 72, 92, 97,
1 14, 194, 276, 327

B

Babr i-BayAn, a surcoat of
leopard 01 tigei skin worn
by Rustam in battle, 184,
186

referred to, 278
Babylon, 286
Bcictrian plains, 10
Baghdad, city, 35
Bahnian (Vohu Manau), ames-
haspenta, 286, 327
Bahrdm, genius, 287, 328
Bahrdni (Vardanes), Tranian heio
and Parthian king, v, vi,
II, 13, 15, 19, 43, 46 seq ,
67, 72, 74, 94 seq, 114
1 16, 132, 200, 214, 232


INDEX


361


Bahrain, the loss of his whip, 1
95

his interview with Fariid, 47
seq

Fardd presents his mace to, 50
reports his interview with
Fardd to Tds, 51
tiies to save Fardd, 51, 52
leproaches the Tidnians, 66
slays Kabuda, 74
rescues the crown of Rivniz,
94

becomes fey, 95
succours a wounded brother,
97

finds his whip, 97
loses his horse, 97
attacked by Tiiikmans, 98
Rdin, 99

wounds Ruin, 99
his interview with Pirdn, 99
attacked by Tazhfiv, loi
found by Giv, 102
his death and burial, 104
Balkh, city, 153, 192
Baldchistdn (Makrdn), 34
Baibai, Barbaiistdn, country, 207,
269

Bdimdn, Tdrdnian hero, 79, 210
Bcirta, ricCnian hero, 25, 92
Barzin, Tidnian hero, 25, 127, 273
Bdzdr, Tdrdnian warlock, 128
Bid, a div, 256
Biddd, city, 244 seq

stormed by Rustam, 246
Bihistdn, rock of, 9

Gotarzes* inscription on, 9, 1 1
Birthmark, of Siydwush, 49
Fardd, 49

Kai Khusrau, 49 note
BIstdn, mountain, 12, 184, 350
Biward, Tdidnian hero, 152, 161
comes to aid Piidii, 152
Bizhan, frdnian hero, vi, via, ix,
II eeq , 15, 20, 45, 59 seq ,
67, 69 seq^ 76 seq ^ 81, 92,
93 » 9S» loi, 102, 1 15, 121,
129, 130, 133, 139, 141, 157


seq , 21 1, 234, 247, 248, 253,
259, 264, 271, 284 seq , 289,

291 seq , 330 seq , 337 seq ,
349 » 350 , 352 seq

and Manizha, Story of, viii,
IX, 7, II, 12, 285

historical basis of, 1 1
Mohl oil, 285
Firdausi on, 287
his friendship with Gusta-
ham the son of Gazhda-
ham, 15

his relations with Giv, 1 5
nndei takes to slay Paldshdn,
26

to carry off the crown
and handmaid of Taz-
hdv, 27

swears to avenge Zardsp, 59
borrows a steed from Gusta-
ham, 59

the mail of Siydwush, 60,
69

worsts Fardd, 62
praises Fardd to Tds, 62
tights with Faiud, 64
Paldshdn, 70
pursues Tazhdv, 77
takes Ispanwi captive, 78
his prowess with Kdwa’s stan
dard, 93

shates Ins steed with Giista-
ham, 95

goes in quest of Bahrdm, 102
attacks Biddd, 244
goes to summon Rustam, 245
worsted by Pdlddwand, 258
volunteers to go to the help
of the Irmdnians, 291
goes to Irmdn with Guigln,

292

destroys the wild boars, 293
envied by Gurgin, 294
his steed, 296, 302, 313
his Intel view with Manizha’s
nurse, 297
visits Manizha, 298
drugged, 299


INDEX


362

Bizhan, wakes 111 Afrdsiydb’s
palace, 300

holds revel with Manizha, 3cx>
discovered by Garsiwaz, 302
taken before Afrdsiydb, 303
sentenced to death, 304
his lament, 305
imprisoned, 309
searched for by Gurgln, 310
his parentage, 324
receives Rustam’s ring, 340 1

Rustam’s conditions of le- j
lease for, 345
released, 346
pardons Gurgin, 346
joins in attack on AfiAsiydb’s
palace, 347

presented to Kai Khusiau by
Rustam, 354

holds converse with Kai
Khusiau, 356

Boars, wild, devastate Irmdn, 290
slam by Bizhan, 293
Borysthenes, iiver (Dnieper), 191
Boulder, of the div Akwdn, 271,
276, 309, 343 m » 347
removed from pit’s mouth by
Rustam, 345
Biahman, 29

Brand>mark of Kdiis, 291
Biisipas, nonce name assumed by
Hiimdn, 198
Buzgdsh, tiibe,^ 207

0

CiESAR, 9

Calendar, Zoroastrian, 286
Cancer, constellation, 125, 15 1,
255

Cannibalism, 191, 244
Canopus, star, 297
of Yaman, 297
Caspian, sea, 10, 192
Chdch, city of Tdrdn famous for
its bows (Tdshkand), 123,
181, 227


Chaghdn, place, 152, 177, 228
Charam, place, 40, 41, 52, 68,
85, 86, III, 1 12
Charmda, river, 10 note
Chin, country (often =:Tt\rdn),
46, 49, 103, 104, ^06, 125,
128, 129, 140, 152, 161, 164,
177, 186, 207, 218, 222 seq ,
235 » 237, 238, 240 seq ,
2515^/7, 25s, 265, 277, 295 »
298, 309. 345

Khdn of, vii, viii, 108, 151
seq y 160, 164^62^, 172, 185,
187, 190, 191, igS seq y 205,
207 seq , 217, 221, 226 seq ,
240 seq , 25 1

Story of Rustam and the,
vii, viii, 191
silk of, 104, 165
shield of, 125, 140, 256
mace of, 129
sea of, 151, 252
biocade of, 154, 160, 173,

216, 240, 241, 300, 329
steel of, 186
prince of = Khdn, 226
kingof^Khdn, 227, 228
lobes of, 329

Chingish, Tiii*dnian heio, vii, 194,
195, 207

volunteeis to avenge Kdiniis,
194

challenges Rustam, 194
slam by Rustam, 195
Claudius, Emperor, 10
Climes, the seven, 290, 317, 318
Ciocodile=Kdmiis, 192

D

Dahae, nomad tribe, 10
Dai, genius, 287, 328
Ddman-i-Kuh (mountain-skirt), 1 5
Div, demon (Dadva), 70, 74, 200,
232, 244, 2SS, 257 seq ,261,
268, 273 eeq , 320, 330


' See Vol 11, p 55 note


INDEX


Div, the White, I43» 256, 314
=Ahnman, 189, 293, 333
binder of the, = Rustam, 253,
262

Akwdn, viii, 7, 270 8eq , 280
seq , 284, 309

Divinmg-cup, Kai Khusrau’s, ix,
285, 317, 318, 323
Dnieper, river (Boiysthenes), 191
Di agon = Afrjlsiydb, 22, 46, 2 1 1 ,
219, 222, 248, 319, 343
Paldshdn, 26
Giv, 58
Rustam, 222
Pdlddwand, 264
Ahnman, 330


E

Elephant = Rustam, 221, 253
=:Rakhsh, 257
Erinde, river, 10, ii
Ethiop, 226

F

FarXmarz, son of Rustam, 18, 30,
31. 35 » 36, 202, 323, 325,
326, 328

appointed to expel the Turk-
mans fiom Zdbulistdn, 31
his parentage, 323
Farangis, daughter of AfnCsiy^b,
wife of Siydwush, mother
of Kai Khusrau, vi, 96,
1 17, 203, 21 1
referred to, 146 seq , 202
her marriage to Fariburz ,
148

Fargh^r, Ttirtoian heio, 250
goes to spy on Rustam, 250
reports to AfrAsiydb, 253
Faihdd (Phraates), Trdnian hero,
II, 20, 25, 34, 45, 48, 127,
268, 289, 313, 327, 331, 352
his steed, 313,

goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, 334


363

Fariburz, son of Kai K^ds, vi,
vu, 13, 14* 24, 32, 45, 50,
84 seq , 145 seq , 163, 164,
166, 167, 169, 174, 177, 182,
187, 211, 213, 215, 238, 239,
241, 253, 258, 268, 289, 331
his claims to the throne sup-
ported by Tds, 13
Kai Khusrau^s letter to, 84
leads to the chiefs Kai Khus-
rau's lettei, and supersedes
Tiis, 86

sends Ruhhilm to Piidn, 87
obtains an armistice and pre-
pares to renew the cam
paign, 89

fights and is defeated, 90
returns to TrAn, iii
asks Rustam to support his
suit to Farangis, 146
marries Farangis, 148
leads the van of Rustam’s
expedition to succour Tds,
148

meets Gddarz, 163
joins foices with Tds, 169
goes to Kai Khusiau with
tidings of victory, 236 seq
leturns to the host, 241, 243
Fariddii, Slidh, 21, 37, 245, 257
Farshidward, Tuidiiian hero, 90,
166, 198, 205, 252
Fartds, Tdr.iiiian hero, 152, 182,
213, 231, 251
comes to aid Piidn, 152
hears of the coming of
Rustam, 175

Fardd, son of Siydwush and half-
brother of Kai Khusrau, v,
VI, 8, 13, 14, 42 eeq , 72, 85,
87. 93 » 107 » III seq
hostility of Tds to, 13
Stoiy of, V, VI, 37
referred to, 39

advised by Tukhdi , 47, 52
seq

his interview with Bahrdm,
47 seq


INDEX


364

Far6d, birth-mark of, 49

gives his mace to Bahrdm, 50
his eighty slaves, 55

their mockery of Tds, 56
of Giv, 58

slays the steed of Tds, 56
wounds the steed of Giv, 58
slays the steed of Bizhan, 61,
worsted by Bizhan, 62
attacks the Trciuians, 63
his prowess, 64
mortally wounded, 64
dies, 65

his mother and his slaves de-
stroy themselves, 66
his burial, 68

Kai Khusrau’s grief for, 84
seq , I 12

Farwardin, genius, 287, 328

name of day and month, 230,
286, 317, 323

Ferghdna, region in Turkestdn,
109

Firdausi, ii, 108, 109, 191, 269,
271, 272, 285, 286
and the three poets, legend
of, 15

his version of Rustam’s fight
with Ashkabds, 109
legend about, 109
legend of Shaikh Abiil Kdsim
of Gurgdn’s dream about,

191

on the Story of KAmiis, 269
his Stoiy of Bizhan and Ma-
il izha^an early work, 285
his use of the terminal Alif,
285, 286

his account of how he came
to write the Story of Bizhan
and Manlzha, 287

Fravashl, immortal principle, 286,

2^7

G

GahXn, place, vii, 152, 177,224, 225

Gahdr, Tiirdnian hero, vii, 152,
216, 224, 225, 251


Gahdr, comes to aid Pirdn, 152
Gang, stronghold, 236, 253
Garcha, Tdrdnian hero, 152
comes to aid Pirdn, 152
Garshdsp, Tidnian hero, 260, 273
Garslwaz, brother of Afidsiydb,
vni, 197, 208, 301 seq , 306,
309, 310, 350, 352
goes to Manizha’s palace, 301
finds Bizhan, 302
takes Bizhan before Afrd-
siydb, 303 ‘

oideied to execute Bizhan,
304

impuson Bizhan, 309
disgiace Manizha, 309
Gazhdaham, Tidnian hero, 15, 25,

33* 40, 45* 294
Geopothros (Gotarzes), 9
Ghundi, a div, 256
Giiavgaid, Tfirdnian stronghold
on the Oxus, 73, 80
occupied by tlie Trumans,
78

Giv, rrdnian heio, v, vi, vii, viii,
ix, 9, II, 13, 15, 18, 19, 27,
33, 45, 48 seq , 57 seq, 67,
69 seq , 75, 76, 81, 82, 85, 86,
89 seq , 96, loi seq , 108, 1 1 1 ,
1 14 seq , 121 seq, 127, 129,
130. 133* 139 seq , 143, 154,
155* 157* 159* 161, 169, 170,
182, 183, 187, 2®6, 21 1, 227,
231, 238, 244» 245, 247, 248,
253* 25s, 259, 264, 268, 273,
289, 291, 292, 294, 296 seq.,
302, 305, 307 seq, 31 1 seq.,
330 seq , 337 seq , 350, 353
seq

an historical character, 9
his lelations with Bizhan, 15
undertakes to slay Tazhdv, 28
bum the barricade at the
Kdsa rdd, 29

his horse wounded by Fardd,
58

lends Bizhan the mail of Siyd-
wush, 60, 69


INDEX


Giy,sees Paldshdn approaching, 69
bums the barricade at the
Kdsa iiid, 73
parleys with Tazhdv, 75
rouses the rrdnians, 81
rallies the host, 91
has many of Ins kindred
slain, 94

urges Bah i dm not to letum
to the battleliehl, 96
goes in quest of Bahrdm, 102
takes Tazlidv captive, 102
buiies Bain dm, 104
made adviser to T<!is, 1 16
Intel riipts Tiis’ pailey with
Hfinidn, 122
laids Khutan, 247
his steed, 257

worsted by Pdlddwand, 258
interferes in the hght be-
tween Rustam and Ptildd
wand, 263

opposes Bizhan's expedition j
to Irmdn, 291

questions Gurgin about
Bizhan, 31 1

wroth with Gurgin, 314
appeals to Kai Khusrau, 315
comforted by Kai Khusrau,

315. 318

sent to summon Rustam, 319
met by Zdl, 321
tells Bizhau’s case to Rus
tani, 322

his wife Rustam’s daughtei,

323

his Bistei Rustam’s wife, 323
announces Rustam’s ap-
pioach to Kai Khusiaii, 326
goes to welcome Rustam, 353
(Uvgdn, Tianian hero, 34
Gotarzes (Gtidaiz), Paithian king
and Tidnian hero, 9 aeq , 109
memorial tablet of, 9
Geopothios, 9
coin of, 9

his war with Vardanes, 10, ii
Meherdates, 10 seq


365

Gotarzes, his character in history,
10

Grace, or Glory, the divine, 19, 21,
25. 30. 32. 34. 35. 39. 67,
86, 1 14, 129, 144, 149. >82,
183, 207, 217, 247, 252,
274. 328, 330, 33*. 340. 355

Gddaiz (Gotarzes), Tidnian hero
and Parthian king, vii, 8,
II, 12, 15, 18, 19, 24, 28, 33,
38, 40, 41, 45 . SO. 5*. 67.

81 seq , 85, 88 seq , lOO, HI,
112, 115, 117, 118, 121,123,
126, 127, 129 seq, 134, 136,
*37. *39, *43, *45. *49
seq, 154 seq , 163, 164, 169,
171, 172, 177, 187, 205, 206,
21 1 aeq , 220, 22$, 227, 232,
236, 246, 248, 253 . 258,

264, 268, 273, 277, 289, 298,
302, 305, 308, 313, 320, 322,
327, 329 aeq, 337 fieg , 353,
3547 357

his numeious descendants, 33
advises Tus to avoid Kaldt,

41

supersedes Ttis, 83
loss of his descendants, 83
note, 94, 1 31

informs Kai Khusrau about
Farud and the defeat of
the rrdnians, 83
sends Bizhan for Kdwa’s
standaid, 92

and the Tidnian watchman,
156 aeq

meets Faribuiz, 163
Rustam, 171

warns Rustam not to tiust
Piidn, 212

sends Ruhhdm to help Rus-
tam, 227

praises Rustam, 248
his steed, 3r3

goes to welcome Rustam,
353

Gtidarzians, the, 108, 115, 200,
214


366


INDEX


Gulgiin, steed of Gtidarz, 313
Gur^a, ridnian hero, 20, 25, 34,
4S, 48, 92, 129, 141, 253
goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, 334

Gurgdn, Shaikh Abtil Kdsim of,
191

Gin gill, ridiiian hero, vin, ix, ii
12, 19, 20, 25, 48, 108, 115,
126, 145, 182, 21 1, 253, 264,
i68, 273, 285, 289, 292, 294
seq , 300, 305, 310 seq , 322,
323» 331 345. 346, 352

undertakes embassage to
Afidsiydb, 29

goes with a letter from Kai
Khusrau to Rustam, 274
accompanies Bizhan to
Irmdn, 292

refuses to help Bizhan
against the wild boars,

293

envies and beguiles Bizhan,

294

goes with Bizhan in quest of
Manizha, 296
searches foi Bizhan, 310
finds Bizhan ’s steed, 31 1
questioned by Giv about
Bizhan, 312

his false account of Bizhan’s
disappearance, 313
Giv’s wrath with, 314
appears before Kai Khusiaii,
. 316

imprisoned, 317
appeals to Rustam, 331
released, 333

goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, 334

paidoned by Bizhan, 346
Guiwi, Tiirdnian hero, 197, 199,

237

Gushtdsp, Shah, 109

in Riim, Stoiy of, refeired to,

285


Gustaham, son of Gazhdaham,^
IS, 19, 25, 33, 45, 48, 59 »
60, 92, 93, 127, 129, 139,
141, 2 1 1, 244, 245, 247, 248,
2S3, 273, 289, 294, 322, 350
hisfiiendship with Bizhan, 15
lends Bizhan a steed, 60
mounts behind Bizhan, 95
attacks Bidtld, 244
sends Bizhan to summon
Rustam, 245

goes with Rustam to lescue
Bizhan, 334

H

HajIr, rrdnian hero, 244
attacks Biddd, 244
Hamdwan, mountain, vi, vii, 132,
13s* 137, 138, 142, 144, iS3»
154, 158, 161, 164, 167, 169,
172, 177

occupied by the Tidnians, 132
Haidt, city, 222
Hiirdt, angel, 286, 288
Herodotus, 191

Hind, V, 30, 152, 162, 164, 165,
177, 204, 221, 222, 235, 237,
238, 242

king of = Shangul, 162, 210,
218, 251

lord of = Shangul, 187
man of=Shangul, 216
Hiimund, iiver, 321
Hdmdn, Tdidnian hero, vi, vii,
90, 9i»93» 108, 120 seq, 133
seq , 142, 149, 152, 153, 158,
166, 169. 174, 177, 182, 192
196 seq , 202, 205, 210, 217,
227, 232, 234, 252, 259, 350
parleys with Tds, 121
leads the host against Tds,
127

counsels Piidn, 134
pursues the Tifluians to
Mount Hamdwan, 135


^ Cf Vol, 11. 418 note


INDEX


367


rallies the Tdrdnians, i

139 '

reconnoitres the Tidnians, 174
informs Phan of the arrival
of Rustam, 174
parleys disguised with Rus-
tam, 196

Hyicania, country (Mdzandardn), j
9, 10 I

Gfv, prince of, g |

!

I

I

IghrIras, biother of Afrtlsiydb, 8
Indus, nver, 177, 204, 237, 251
fraj, youngest son of Faiidtin, 8
rrdn, VI, vii, viii, 8, 13, 19, 20,
andjoa^^^m

rrdnians, the, vi, vii, ix, 13, 23,
30, 46, 63, and pcuiatm
Irmdn, country (Aimenia), 12,

285, 290, 292, 296, 31 1
devastated by wild boars,

290

Irmdmans (Armenians), the, viii,

286, 290

complain to Kai Khusrau of
the wild boars, 290
Isnapwi, See Ispanwi
Ispahan, city, 109
Ispanwi, the slave giil of Tazhiiv,
14, 27, 77

taken captive by Bizhaii, 78
Issedones, tube, 192
Izads (Yazatas), the, 286

J

Jamshid, Shdh, 7, 57, 257, 273
Jarira, daughtei of Pirdn and
mothei of Fariid, vi, 43
referred to, 39
advises Fanid, 42
her dream, 63
her anguish, 63, 66
Jewelled tree, Kai Khusrau's,

329

Jihiin, river (the Oxus), 58, 159
Jupiter, planet, 318


K

Kabab, small pieces of meat
skewered together for
roasting, 69

Kabiida, one of AfrdsiydVs lierds
men, vi, 73
slain by Bahrdm, 74

Kdbul, Kdbulistdn, city and coun-
try, 17, 35. 145 , * 53 , 165,
174, 186. 190, 202, 206, 321

KdMr, king of Biddd, viii, 19 r,
244

worsts the fidnians, 244
slam by Rustam, 245

Kaian, Kaidinan, lace and d^ -
nast3% V, 5 seq , 9, 14, 43,
67, 112, 147, 307, 318, 320,
328, 342

Kai Kdds, Shdh, v, 7, 9, 13, 14,
20 seq , 24, 30, 45, SI, 84,
85, 88, 90, 93, 96, 1 1 3, 145,
147, 166, 174, 236, 238, 239,
289, 307, 327

requires Kai Khusrau to
swear vengeance on Afrd-
siydb, 21

Kell Khusrau, Shdh, v, vi, viii, ix,
7 seq , 13 seq , 47, 49 note,
55 > 57 , 66, 84, io6r 108, III
seq , 132, 134, 142 seq , 166,

I 73 > *75, 1S6, 191, 197, 198,
202, 205, 21 1, 226, 228, 238
seq , 249, 250, 267 seq, 271,
273> 277, 282, 283, 285, 286,
289, 294 seq, 315 seq, 326
seq , 338, 353 seq
the last Jink with the Vedas, 7
Ills reign, the longest in le-
spect of subject-matter in
the poem, 7
divisions of, 7
episodes of, 7, 8
warlike chaiacter of, 8
subject-mattei of, 8
accession of, 17
goes on a hunting expedition,

19


368 INDEX


Kai Khusrau, swears to take ven-
geance on Afrdsiydb, 21
prepaies for wai, 23 seq
offers a reward for the head
of Paldshdn, 26

crown of Tazhdv, 27
slave of Tazlidv, 27
head of Tazhdv, 28
for binning the bairicade
at the Kdsa itid, 28
for going on an embas-
sage to Afrdsiydb, 29
warns Tds to avoid Kaldt, 39
bn th-mark of, 49 note
hears of the death of Faidd,

84

hears of the defeat of the
frdnians, 84

his wiath with Tub, 84 seq,
III

Wiites to Fariburz, 84
disgraces Ttis, 86
imprisons Tds, 87
paidoiis Tds and therrdiiians,

114

hears of the peril of the
frdnians on Mount Hamd
wan and summons Rustam,
142 seq

sends Rustam to succour the
frdnians, 145

further s the suit of Faiibuiz
to Faiangis, 147
hears of Rustam’s victoiy,

239

disposes of the captives and
spoil, 240

sends gifts to Rustam and |
the host, 241 '

goes to meet Rustam on his
letuin in tiiumph, 267
gives a feast to the chiefs* 268
rewaids Rustam, 269
holds a court and hears of
the doings of the div |
Akwdn, 273 I

writesto summon Rustam, 274 '
goes to welcome Rustam on


his return from slaying the
div Akwdn, 282
rewards Rustam, 283
heais at a feast of the case of
the Irmdnians, 290
calls foi volunteers, 291
sends Bizhan and Gurgin to
Iimdn, 292

comforts Giv for the loss of
Bizhan, 315, 318
impiisons Guigin, 317
promises Giv to consult the
divining-cup about Bizhan,

317

sends Giv to summon Rustam,

319

sends the host to meet Rus-
tam, 327

welcomes Rustam, 328
his jewelled tree, 329
requests Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, 330

releases Gurgin at Rustam’s
request, 333

equips Rustam for his quest
of Bizhan, 333

welcomes Rustam on his
return, 354

rewards Rustam and his
comrades, 356

liolds conveise with Bizhan,

356

gives gifts to Manizha, 356
Kai Kubdd, Shdh, 34, 49, 51, 57,
144

Kaldt, stronghold, 14, 39, 41, 67,
72, 85, III, 112
-i-Nddiri, 14

Kdmtis, T6idnian heto, vi, vii,
107, 108, 151, 152, 161, 162,
164 seq , 168 seq f 172, 175,
176, 178, 181 seq, 187 seq,
200, 207, 209, 213, 216, 224,
229, 232, 235, 241, 242, 251,
252, 256, 268, 269
of Kashdn, Story of, vi, vn,
108

Firdausi on the, 269


INDEX


Kdmtis, comes to the aid of Plrto,

* 151

his plan of campaign adopted,
162

leads the attack, 168
hears of the coming of Rus-
tam, 175

Rustam described by Pirdn
to, 183

challenges Rustam, 187
paileys with Rustam, 188
fights, and is taken prisoner
by, Rustam, 189
his end, 190
Kanndj, city, 35
Kdran, Trdnian hero, 9
Kargas^rs, tribe, 1 318
Kdsa rdd, river, vi, 28, 29, 68, 69,
71, 72, 82, 105
barricade at the, 29
burnt by Giv, 73
Kashdn, city, vi, vii, 108, 109,
151, 170, 177, 180, 181, 188,
192, 204, 207, 224, 237, 242
Kdnids of, Story of, vi, vii, 108
in Tdi^n, 108
in frdn, 109
man of = Kj£md8, 189
Kashmir, country, 35, 152, 237,251
Kdt, region, 152
Kdds, Sbdh See Kai Kdds
brand-mark of, 291
Kdwa, flag of, 25, 38, 39, 48, 84,
85, 1 16. 121, 126, 129, 135
seq , 149, 161

Bizhan^s prowess with, 93
half of It taken by PiriCn, 94
staff of, cloven by Ptlldd-
wand, 258

Khfin of Ghin, the, vii, viii, 108,
151 seq., 160 seq, 164 seq ,
172, 175 seq , 181, 184, 185,
187, 190 seq, 196, 198 seq,
205, 207 seq , 215, 217, 221,
222, 226 seq, 235, 241, 242,
251, 252, 256, 268, 320


369

Khdn of Chin, the, comes to the
aid of Phdn, 151
holds a council of war with
the chiefs, 185

Rustam and, Story of, vii,
viii, 191

hears of the death of Kdmds,
192

referied to, 225
sends envoy to Rustam,
228

fights with Rustam, 230
impiisoned by Kai Khusrau,
240

Khdn i-Irmdn = Iim^n, 290
Kharrdd, Truman hero, 115, 127,
139, 21 1, 273, 289
Khatldn, name of a district in
Badakhshdn, 218, 228
lOiurddd, ameshaspenta, 287, 328
Khutan, legion in Tiiidn, ix, 107,
242, 247

raided by Giv, 247
King, the ideal, 16
of Smd, 185

Kishwiid, rrdnian hero, 19, 24,
33, 45, 100, 121, 123, 126,
I 43 f 154, 187, 215, 289, 302,
305 f 308, 31 327. 339
Kubdd, Shdh See Kai Kub6-d
Kiih, nonce name used by Hfimdn,
198

Kulb^d, Tdrdnian hero, 166, 177,
198, 199, 205, 210, 222, 231,
234, 252

Kundur, Tiiriinian hero, 152, 185,
210, 215, 251

overthrown by Rustam, 224,
Kurdkhdu, Tfirdnian heio, 301
counsels Afr^siydb, 301
Kutch, region, 34

L

LAdan (Pashan), battle of, 13
seq , 80 seq , 89 seq., 123


2 A


VOL. Ill


1 See Vol. 1 p. 253 note


370 INDEX


Lahh^k, Ttir^nian hero, 90, 135,
166, 198

pursues the rrdnianstoMount
Hamdwan, 135
Leo, constellation, 81, 318

M

MachIn (China), 46, 253, 265
Mahdbhdrata, the, Indian Epic, 8
Mahmtid, Sultdn, 15

his approval of Firdausi’s ver-
sion of the fight between
Rustam and Ashkabds, 109
Mail of Siydwush, 58, 60, 61, 69, 81
Maknd Bdd, city in ridn, 109
Manizha, daughter of Afiilsiydb,
viii, ix, 285, 29s seg , 304,
308 seg , 337 seg , 348, 349
Bizhan and, Story of, viii, ix,
7, It, 12, 285
historical basis of, 1 1
Mohl on, 285
Firdausi on, 287
sends hei nurse to Bizhan,
297

invites Bizhan to visit her, 298
drugs Bizhan, 299
wakes him in Afrdsiydb’s
palace, 300

holds revel with Bizhan, 300
disgraced, 309

made Bizhan’s attendant, 310
referred to, 318, 319
hears of the ai rival of Rus-
tam’s caravan, 337
her intei views with Rustam,
337, 342

bears Rustam’s nng to Biz-
han, 340

kindles signal fire forRustam,
344

receives gifts from Kai Khiis-
rau, 356

Manshtir, Tdidmanhero, 151, 161,
165, 172. 175* 182, 185, 199,
205, 210, 213, 226, 231, 241,
251 256


Manshiir , comes to the aid of Pirdii,

151

heais of the coming of Rus-
tam, 175

Mardwi, Tdrdnian hero, 77
Mark of Siydwush See Birth-
mark

Mars, planet, no, 159, 178, 318,
332

Mdiiit, angel, 286
Massage tae, tribe, 192
Md wara’u’n - Nahi (Kuhistdn,
Transoxania), 151
Mayam, place, 40, 41, 53, in
Mdzandardn, country (Hyrcania),
144, 167, 207, 215, 232, 243,
256, 260, 324, 330
Mehei dates (Mildd), 10 seg
Mercury, planet, 159, 318
Mesopotamia, Arab invasions of,

14

Mihrddt See Mehei dates
Mildd, Trdnian hero, ii, 12, 25,
29, 14s, 274, 289, 293, 34S
Minuchihr, Shdh, 9, 30, 87, 115
Mithraddt See Meherdates
Mithrates See Meherdates
Mohl, on the Story of Bizhan
and Manizha, 285, 286
Mountain = Rakhsh, 221, 251
Mountain skirt (Ddman-i-Kuh),
15* 91* 95

Muhammad Lashkaii, friend of
Firdausi, 286

Muiddd, ameshaspenta, 287, 328
N

NdDiR, Shdh, 14

Narimdn, fidnian hero, father of
Sdm, 17, 35

Nastihan, Tdidnian hero, 79, 198,
210, 231, 252
Nastdh, Tidnian hero, 46
Naudai, Shdh, 8, 24, 39, 50, 57,
67, 86, 112, 123, 132, I77t
187, 215, 257, 289, 294, 327
Nile, 38, 41, 58, 208, 224, 225


INDEX


371


Nimrdz, country, i 17, 35, 319
Nbldeke, Professor, on the div
Akwdn, 271
Nurse, Manizha’s, 297

her interview with Bizhan,
297

O

Onager, the di\ Akwdn as, 273
seq

Oxus, river (Jihiin), 10 note


P

Pahlav, city and district, 222
Palishdn, Tdrdnian hero, vi, 26,
69, 70, 79

surveys the frdnian host, 69
Parthian, dynasty, 9, 1 1

history, events of, reproduced
in distorted form m the
Shdlindma, ii

Pashaii (Lddan), battle of, 15,
80, 89

Pashang, father of Afrdsiydb, 15
Pashang (Shida), son of Afrdsiydb,

15

Pashang, father of Mindchihr, 2 5
Persia, 109, 128
Phiaates (Farhdd), ii
Pllsam, Ttlidnian heio, 204
Piidn, Tiirdnian hero, vi, vii, viii,
IX, 13, 26 note, 39, 42, 58,
71, 87 seq, 90, 9T, 94, 98
seq, 102, 108,117, 1 18, 120,
122, 123, 125, 128, 131, 133
seq, 142, 149 seq, 158, 160,
161, 16^ seq, 169, 174 seq,
181 seq , 192, 193, 199 seq,
216 seq, 222, 227, 231, 232,
234, 242, 252, 253, 259, 305

y 335 349» 35o» 357

appointed to oppose the
frdnians, 71, 79


Pirdn, marches on Giravgard to
surprise the frdnians, 80
captures the frinians* herds,
81

defeats the frdnians, 82, 94
Ruhhdm*s embassy to, 87
grants a month^s armistice to
Fariburz, 88
his losses in battle, 94
takes half of Kdwd’s standard,
94

sends Kiiin to attack Bahrdm,
8

goes to see Bahrdm, 99
hears of the Tidnians' retreat,
los

informs Afrdsiydb and re-
turns in triumph, 106
goes to Khutan, 107
goes to oppose Tiis, 117
informs Afrdsi\ db of the
frdnian invasion, 118
IS reinforced, 118
joins battle with Tiis, 118
«<ends a warlock to bring a
snowstoim on the Tidnians,
128

defeats the frdnians, 131
takes counsel with his chiefs,

133

pursues the Tidnians, 134
sends Lahhdk and Hdmdn on
in advance, 135
reaches Mount Hanidwan,

137

beleaguers the Tidnians, 138
attacked by Tds, 139
hears of the approach of rem-
forcements, 151
haiangues his host, 15 1
goes to meet Ins allies, 153
his plan of campaign rejected,
162

hears of the arrival of frdnian
succours, 164 seq
of Rustam, 174


1 See Vol, !• p, 396 note.


INDEX


372

Pirdn, takes counsel uith Kdmtis
and the chiefs, 175, 182
attacks the Tnlnians, 176
describes Rustam to Kdnitls,

183

parleys with Rustam, 202
reports to his kindred his
interview with Rustam,
206

declines Rustam’s terms, 217
retieats, 231
counsels Afrdsiy^b, 253
urges Afr^iydb to withdraw
to Chin, 265
city of, 335

entei-tains Rustam in dis
^^uise, 336

piiisues Rustam, 349
Pisces, constellation, 26, 159, 318
Pishdddian, dynasty, 9, 13
Pronunciation, note on, 4
Pdldd, Tiirdnian hero, 199, 234
Pdldd, a div, 256
Ptilddwand, Tdrdnian heio or div,
viii, 191, 254 seq , 268, 270
summoned by Afrdsiydb, 254
goes to help Afidsiydb, 255
takes counsel with Aiidsiydb,
256

woists Ttis, 257

Giv, Ruhhdm, and Biz-
han, 258

cleaves in twain Kdwa’s
standard, 258

challenged by Rustam, 259
overthrown by Rustam, 264
withdraws with his aimy
from the held, 265

R

Ra. 1, city, 242

Rakhsh, Rustam’s steed, 146, 177,
186. 189, 194, I95t 223, 224,
226, 227, 229, 259, 264. 27s,
276, 278, 279» 31 3t 324, 326,
335. 342, 344» 346 seq , 350,
352

referred to, 184, 228^ 253


Rawlinson, Sir Henry, his ac-
count of Gotarzes’ inscrip-
tion at Bihistdn, 9
Rivniz, son-in-law of Tiis, v, 14,
25. 45.51 seq,S7f 60,68, II
prepares to attack Fardd, 51
ref ei red to, 55
his burial, 68

Rivniz, son of Kai Kdiis, 14, 93,
94, 96, 1 13. 1 14. 232
slain, 93

the battle for his ciown, 94
Romans, the, 286
Riiddba, the mother of Rustam,

28s

Story of Zil and, referred to,

28s

Ruhhdm, frdnian hero, 19, 33; 48,
64 67, 87 seq , 1 15, 126, seq ,
139 seq, IS4. 157, I79. 182,
187, 21 1, 227, 248, 258, 259,
264, 268, 273, 322, 350, 352
mortally wounds Farild 64
his embassy to Pirdn, 87
attacks Bdziii, 128
worsted by Ashkabiis, 179
goes to the help of Rustam,
227

worsted by Piilddwand, 258
goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, 334

Rtiin, son of Piidn, 98, 207, 234
sent by Pirdn to attack Bah-
rdm, 98

wounded by Bahidm, 99
Rdm, the Eastein Roman Empiie,
106, 1 51, 164, 296
sea of, 177

brocade of, 26, 235, 291, 297,
355

helm of, 1 14

Gushtdsp in, Stoiy of, re-
feired to, 285
Rtimans, the, 309
Rustam, Tirdnian hero, v, vii, viii,
IX, 14, 17 seq., 24, 35, 36,
40, 107 seq , 121, 134, 138,
141 seq, 15s, 164 seq, 171


INDEX


^^91 f I77» seg ,

274 seg, 294, 307, 308, 319
seg.

his account of the Turkman
occupation of Zdbulist^n, 14
goes to do homage to Kai
Khusrau, 17

witnesses Kai Khusrau’s oath
to avenge Siydwush, 22
pioposes to Kai Khusrau to
expel the Turkmans from
Zdbulistdn, 30

his fight with Ashkabiis,
legend about, 109
asks Kai Khusrau to pardon
Tds and the fitinians in the
matter of Faidd, 113
summoned by Kai Khusrau,

143

advocates the mariiage of
Fariburz and Farangis, 146
marches to succour Tds, 148
meets Gddarz, 17 1
takes counsel with Tds and
the chiefs, 172
arrays the host, 177
parleys with Ashkabiis, 180
slays Ashkabds, 181
described by Pirdn, 183
harangues the troops, i86,
219, 223, 232, 235
challenged by Kdmds, 187
his spear - bearer slam by
Kdmtis, 188

parleys with Kdiiids, 188
takes Kamtis prisoner, 189
and the Khdn of Chin, Stoiy
of, vii, Mil, 191
referied to, 193
slays Chingish, 195
parleys with Hdmdn, 196
his conditions of peace, 197,
205

parleys with Pirdn, 202
proposes peace on terms to
the fidnians, 21 1
warned by Giidaiz not to
tiust Piidn, 212


373

Rustam, his wrath with Pirdn,
218

unhorses Shangul, 221
his prowess m battle, 222 seg
overthroAvs Kuiidur, 224
slays Sdwa, 224
Gahdr, 225

attacks the Khdn of Chin,
225 seg

IS victorious, 231 seg
is wroth with Tds and the
rrdnians, 234

sends Fariburz to Kai Khus-
lau with tidings of victory,
236 seg

leads on the host, 238
reaches Sughd, 244
sends troops to attack Biddd ,
244

slays Kdfdr, 245

besieges and storms Bidtid,

246

sends Giv to raid Khutan,

247

praised by Gddarz, 248
described by Afrasiydb, 251
attacks the Tdrdniaiis, 257
challenges P^lddwand, 259
ovei throws Piilddwand, 264
defeats the Tdrdnians, 266
divides the spoil, 266
ravages Tdrdn, 266
returns in triumph, 267
asks Kai Khusrau’s leave to
return to Zal, 269
rewarded by Kai Khusrau,
269

his fight with the div Ak»an,
Story of, viii, 271
summoned to couit by Kai
Elhusrau, 274

pursues the div Akwdn, 275
foiled by Akwdn, 276
taken at a disadvantage by
Akwdn, 276

offered a choice of deaths by
Akwdn, 277
outwits Akwdn, 277


INDEX


374

Kustam, finds Bakhsh among
Afrdsiydb’s herds, 278
encounters Afrdsiydb^s heids-
men, 279

defeats Afrisiydb, 280
slays Akw^n, 281
caiLies off the spoil, 281
welcomed by Kai Khusiau,

282

tells his adventure with
Akwto, 282

rewarded by Kai Khusiau,

283

returns home, 283
summoned to court in the
matter of Bizhan, 319 seq
visited by Giv, 322
his daughter Giv’s wife, 323
his wife Giv's sister, 323
promises to help Giv, 324
goes with Giv to court,

326

his address to Kai Khusrau,

327

undertakes the rescue of
Bizhan, 330
his plan, 333

chooses his comrades, 334
goes disguised to Ttirdn, 335
gives presents to Pirdn, 336
welcomed by Pirdn, 336
opens a maiket, 337
his interviews with Manizha,
337, 342

sends food and his ring to
Bizhan, 340

removes boulder of Akwdn
from pit’s mouth, 345
makes conditions foi release
with Bizhan, 345
leleases Bizhan, 346
arrays his troops against
AJrdsiydb, 350
mocks Afrdsiydb, 351
defeats Afidsiydb, 352
his triumphant return, 353


Bustam, presents Bizhan to Kai
Khusrau, 354

rewarded by Kai Khusrau, 356
goes to Sistdi), 356

S

SagsaR and Sagsdis, district and
tribe, ^ 152, 207

Sakldb, countiy (Slavonia), 152,
164, 177, 185, 204, 218, 221
seq , 235, 238, 243, 255
Salm, eldest sou of Faridiin, 37,
IIS

Sim, Trdnian hero, father of Zdl,
35, 121, 202, 215, 260, 279,
283

Sapad, mountain, 41, 52, 54, 58,
61, 63, 67, 72, 85

Sapanddrmad, ameshaspenta, 287,
328

Sdsdnian, dynasty, 9
Saturn, planet, 32, no, 178, 232,
237> 254, 268, 318
Sdwa, Tiirdiuaii lieio, vii, 224
slain by Bustam, 224
Shabdhang, Faihdd’s steed, 313
Shabdiz, Giv’s steed, 257
Shabrang, Bizhan* s steed, 296,
302, 313

Shahd, river, ii, 116, 118, 123,
152, 173, 230, 241
Shahd, mountain, 237
Shdhndma, 7, 9, ii, 14, 271, 286
editions of, 3

historic element in mythical
Period of, 8 seq
Prelude to, refeired to, 286
Shahrii, ameshaspenta, 286, 328
Shakn, legion, 152, 177, 185 192,
204, 222, 223, 228, 237
Shamirdn, Tdrdman hero, 152, 185
comes to aid Pirdn, 152
Shangul, king of Hind, vii, 152,
161, 172, 185, 198, 205, 209,
210, 216, 217, 221, 251


I See Vol. 1 p 279 note


INDEX


375


Shangul, comes to aid Pir^n, 152
volunteers to fight Rustam,
209, 216

challenges Rustam, 221
Shapfir, rrdnian hero, 19, 289,
322, 331

Shdwardn, Trdnian hero, 20, 34,
43» 4Si 48, 67, 1 15, 334
Shlda (Pashang), son of Afrdsiy^b,
250 seq , 262, 263, 350
consulted by his fathei, 250
seq

goes on embassy to PuLld-
wand, 255

refuses to interfeie in the
faght between Rustam and
PdUdwand, 263

Slddush, fr^niaii here, 33, 45, 48,
127, 129, 130, 139, 141. 157,
248, 253

Shingiln, legion, 228, 238
Shirwiln, city, 216
Sigz, man of (Rustam), 1 183, 209,
218, 221

Sigzian = Rustam, 209, 225, 227
Siniurgli, mythical bird, 158, 313,
330

Sind, legion and river (Indus),
lo note, 177, 185, 216, 238
king of, 185
Sinde, river, 10
Sipanjib, region, 151
Slstdn, countiy,2 yiii, 165, 166,
191, 207, 321, 35b
Sitlr, Persian measure of weight,
184

Siyiiwusli, son of Kai Kdds, v,
VI, vii, 8, 13, 18, 19, 21, 22,
29, 39> 42, 43. 49> SI, 52,
57,66, 67,71, 72, 87,93,99,
1 12, 1 17, 1 18, 137, 146, 148,
149, 156, 163, 183, 197, 199.
200, 201, 203 seq , 21 1, 214,
226, 237, 238, 256, 283, 289,
297. 307. 315. 324, 347
bn th -mark of, 49


Siydwush, mail of, 58, 60, 61, 69,
81

Snowstorm, 108

rrdnian host distressed by,
71, 128

Sughd, district and city (Samar-
kand), 244

Sultdii, Mahmdd, 109
Surdsh, angel, 277

T

J'ABARf, historian, 108
Tacitus, historian, 10 and note, 15
Tahratiras, Shdh, 293
horn of, 335

Tardz, city and district, 248
Idols of, 248

Tauius, constellation, 168
Tawdba, frdnian hero, 25
Tazhdv, an I^rdniau desertei to
Afrdsiydb, vi, 27, 28, 73
seq , 100 seq

sends Kabdda to spy out the
fidnian host, 73
paile>s with Glv, 75
defeated, 77
flees with Ispanwl, 77
pursued by Bizhaii, 77
escapes to Afidsiydb, 78
attacks Bahidm, icx>
taken piisonei by Giv, 102
'Iihidn, city, 109
Tir, genius, 287, 328
Tobit, Book of, 272
Tukhdi, Faiud’s counsellor, v, 43
seq

tells Far fid the blazons of the
rrdnian chiefs, 44
counsels Fardd, 47, 52 stq
Tdr, second son of Farlddn, 7,
3C>, 37. IIS* ^97. 245, 246
Turdn, v, \i, 8, ii, 15, 25, 29,
and passim

TCirdnians (Tuikmans), vi, vii,
30, IIS, 320, 322


I See Vol 11 p 100 note


2 See Vol 1 p 396 note^


INDB^


376

Turkisttfn, v, 109, 228
Tuiknians (Ttirtoians), vi, 30,
63, 81, 93, and paeetm
Tua, son of Naudar, v, vi, vii, viu,
II, 13, 18, 19, 24, 25,137 ,

45 62, 64, 66 seq ,

76, 78, 80, 82 seq , 108, III
seq , 132 seq , 136 seq , 145,
149563^,154,155,159 i6i,
163, 166, 167, 169, 170,

172, 174, 177 182, 183,

187, 206, 211, 213 seq , 225,
228, 230, 232, 234, 23s,

238, 246, 248, 253, 254,

25s, 257, 259, 268, 273,

277, 289, 294, 307, 322.

327. 329

his hostility to Fardd, 13, 51,
62

marches on Kaldt, 40
sends chiefs to attack Fardd,
47

Bahrain’s remonstrance with,

51

his horse slain by Fardd, 56
resolves to attack Kal^t, 62
his remoise for the death of
Fardd, 67

builds a charnel for Fardd,
Rlvnlz, and Zardsp, 68
marches from Kaldt, 68
defeats Tazhdv, 77
occupies Giiavgard, 78
defeated by the Turkmans, 82
dejinved of his command, 83
Kai Khusrau^s wrath with,
84, HI, 112
superseded, 86
returns to Kai Khusrau, 86
disgraced, 86
imprisoned, 87
pardoned, 114

challenges Pfrdn to battle, 1 17
joins battle with Pirdn, 118,
126

parleys with Htimdn, 121
prays to be delivered from
snowstorm, 128


Tds, retreats to Mount Ham^Cwan,
f 132

makes a night-attack upon
Pirto, 139

harangues the host, 14 1
hears of the approach of
succours, 159

takes counsel with the host,
167

aiTays the host, 169
and chiefs take counsel with
Rustam, 172

Rustam’s wrath with, 234
collects the spoil, 235
worsted by Pdldwand, 257
Tds, city, 14

legendary oiigiii of, 14
legend concerning Fiidausi’s
burial at, 19 1

U

Ural Mountains, 192
Urmuzd, the Good Principle, 271,
286, 317, 327

the name of the fiist day of
the month, 323

V

Vardanes (Bahi-fCm), Parthian
king and ridnian hero, 9
seq , 109

his wars with Gotarzes, 10, 1 1
assassination of, 10, 1 1
chaiacter of, 15

Venus, planet, 143, 159, 254, 318,

332

Virgo, constellation, 24
Vohu Manau (Babman), ames-
haspenta, 271

Vonones I,, Parthian king, 10

W

Wahr, region, 177, 228, 235
Warstead=Bld^d, 245
White Div, the See Div
Wisa, Tdittnian heio, 79, 102, 105,
121, 197, 202, 206


INDEX


Y

Yaman, country, 289, 297
camelian of, 289
Canopus of, 297

Yazatas (Izads), the, 286

Z

ZAbul, ZdbulistAn, country,^ 14,
134, 141, 145, 153, 165, 171,
174. 175. *86, 190, 199, 200,
202, 206 aeq , 217, 246, 250,
269, 274, 321, 326,342, 347,
354 , 356

Zdbul, occupied by the Turkmans,
14, 30

Zdbull, a native of Zdbul, 188,
201, 257, 326

Zahhdk, Shdh, 257

Zdl, father of Kustam, 8, 17, 18,
22, 35, 121, 132, 138,
141, 147, 190,202, 221, 245,
269, 274, 279, 283, 307, 321,
322, 325, 328, 331, 347, 351,
354 » 355


377

Zdl, goes to do homage to K[ai
Khusrau, 17

vritnesses Kai Khusrau’s
oath to avenge Siydwush,
22

son of=: Rustam, 132
and Rtlddba, Story of, referred
to, 285

meets Giv, 321
sayings of, 316, 351

Zandavasta, 8

Zanga, frdnian hero, 20, 34, 43,
45, 48, 67, 92, 115, 350
goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, 334

Zardsp, son of Tiis, v, 24, 53, 54,
57» 59, 60, 67, 72, 1 13,
1 14

goes against Farud, 53
referi ed to, 5 5
his burial, 68

Zawdra, bi other of Rustam, 30,
202, 325, 328

Zira, Ttirdnian hero, 120, 197,
199


1 See Vol 1 p 396 note


END OF VOL. Ill


Printed by Ballantynk, Hanson «5r* Co
Edinburgh ^ London
