The Shahnama of Firdausi, Vol. 6 (Arthur George Warner and Edmond Warner (trans.), 1912)
==========================================================
Vol. 6 of the Warner Shahnama. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

TRUBNER’S

ORIENTAL SERIES


Six Volumes now Ready. Post 8vo, cloth, puce los. 6d each.

THE SHiHNiMA OF FIBDAUSl

Done into English by
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A.,

AND

EDMOND WARNER, B.A.

The yoai A D loio saw the corapletion of the Shahn^ma, the great
Persian epic. ^ Its author, the poet Eiidau^i, spent ovei thiit} labori-
ous years in its composition, only to expeiience, "when the task had
been achieved, a heart-breaking disappointment well -worthy of in-
clusion in any record of the calamities of authors. His work has
survived the test of time, and by general consent is accounted to be
one of the few great epics of the world Geographically, and in some
other respects, it may be said to stand half-way between the epics of
Europe and those of India In i-ts own land it has no peer, while in
construction and subject-matter it is um(|,ue. Other epics centre
round some heroic character or incident to which all else is subservient
In the Shahnama theie is no lack cither of heroes oi of incidents, but
its real hero is the ancient Persian people, and its theme their whole
surviving legendary history from the days of the Fust Man to the
death of the last Sasanian Shah in the middle of the seventh century
of our era It is the gloiy of the Poisian lace that they alone among
all nations possess such a record, based as it is on their own ti.iditions
and set foith in the words of their greatest poet In another sense,
too, the Shdhnama is unique. The authors of the other great epics
tell us little or nothing of their own personalities or of their souices
of information. Their works are fairy palaces suspended in mid air ,
we see the result, but know not how it was achieved. The author of
the Shdhn^ma takes us into his confidence from the first, so that in
reading it we are let into the secret of epic-making, and can apply
the knowledge thus gained to solve the problem of the construction
of its great congeners. To the studen-t of compaiative mythology
and folk-lore, to the lover of histone romance or romantic history,
and to all that are fond of tales of high achievements and the gests
of heroes, the Shahnama is a stoiohouse of iich and abundant material
To set forth a complete presentment of it with the needful notes and
elucidations is the object of the present tianslation, made from two
of the best printed texts of the original— that of Vullers and Lan-
rlauer, and that of Turner Macan.


THE


SHAHNAMA of FIEDAUSl


DONE INTO ENGLISH BY

ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A

AND

EDMOND WARNER, B.A.


homes that are the diodhngs of to-day
W%ll sink 'ncath shozver and sunshine to decay t
But storm and rain shall never mar what I
Have hmlt — the palace of my poetry


VI


LONDON

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO

nROADWAY HOUSE, CARTER LANE, E.C.

1912


The rights of tianslation and of repiodnction a)e


Printed by Ballantynb, Hanson dr* Co.
At the Ballantyne Pi ess, Edinburgh


CONTENTS


PAQB

UENEALUiiCUAL TAIiLE UF THE SaSXNIAN.s . ^

Aebrea'iations . . 5

Note on Proisonciation ... 8


THE KAIANIAN DVNAi^TY (untdadtd)

Darae—

SECT '

I. How Dtir.lb built 'the <Jity of Daiab^ird . 20

2 How Diirab defeated the Host of Shu’ib . . 21

3. How Dui/ib fought with Pailakus and took to Wife

Ills Daughter 22

4 How Dar/ib sent back the Daughter of Failaki'is to

Riim, and how Sikandar was born . . .25


Dara, Son of Darae—

1, How Darh harangued the Chiefs and took Older for

the Realm

2. The Death of Failakiis and Sikandar’s A{*eession

to the Throne . . ....

3 How Sikandar went as his own Ambassador to
Dara ,

4. How Dara fought with Sikandar and was worsted .

5. How Dara fought with Sikandai the second Time .

6. How Sikandar fought with Dtlra the third Time,

and how Dara fled to Kirman

7. How Dard wrote to Sikandar to propose Peace

8. How Dard was slain by his Ministers

9. How Dara told his last Wishes to Sikandar and

died . .

10. How Sikandar wrote to the Nobles of Iran


34

35
38

42

43

46

49

50
52

57


Sikandar—

1. How Sikandar sat upon the Throne of Iran . . 85

2, How Sikandar wiote to DiL'nai and Rtishanak, the

Wife and Daughter of Dara, touching the
Nuptials of Riishanak . . . 85

3 How Dildrai answered the Lettei of Sikandar . 87


C0NIENT6


Hi BANDAR {iu/ilitUu (I ) —

siirT

4 R<.)U Sikaiiclctr sunt lius Motlior, Nahitlj to fetch
llushaiiiik, mid how liu Mamed her
5. How Kaid ul Hind iud a Hi earn, and how Mihran
mtevpiotod it

6 How Sikaiidai inaiched against Kaul ot Hind and
wioto a Let tor to him

7. Huw Kaid of Hind aiisweiud Sikainlai’s Letter and
annouiioed the i^eiiding of the Four VVondeis .
ti Huw Sikaiidar sent back the Messenger to receive

the h\)Ui Wonders

y. How’ JSikandar sent Ten Sages wnth a Letter to
ins[tecfc the Fuiii Wundeis of Kaid of Hind
10. How" the l^eii Sages brought the Daughter, the
(Jup, the Leeoli, and the Sage, from Kaid of
Hind to Sikandar ....

11 Huw^ Sikundai tested the Sage, the Leech, and

the Cup sent b> Kaid of Hind ....

12 How Sikandar led a Host against Fui of Hind and

wiote a Letter to him . ...

13. How Fiir answered the Lettei ot Sikandar

14. How Sikandar arrayed his Host to fight with Fur

of Hind and made iron Steeds and Hiders
tilled with Naphtha . ...

15. How the Host of Sikandar fought with the Host

of Fur, how Fiir w’as slam by Sikandar, and
how Sikandar seated Sawurg upon the Throne
of Fur . ...

16. How Sikandar went on a Pilgrimage to the House

of the Kaaba . ....

17. How Sikandar led his troops fiom Judda toward

Misr .... ...

18. Sikandar’s Lettei to Kaidafa, <^ueen of Andalds,

and her Answer

19. How Sikandar led his Troops to Aiidalus and took

the Hold of King Faryan

20. How Sikandar went as an Ambassador to Kaidafa

and was recognised by her ....

21. How Kaidafa counselled Sikandar . . . .

22. How Tainilsh, the Son of Kaidafa, was wroth with

Sikandar, and how Sikandar took Precaution
against him


PAGr

89

91

98

99

100

101

103

104
no

111

11 2

II6

II9

I 2 I

123

124

127

132

134


CONTENTS


SiKANDAR (contmiiul ) —

SECT

23. IIow Sikaiiclar made a Oompaci with Kaid/ifa and

returned to his Troops . . . .

24. How Sikandar went to the Country of the Brah-

mans, inquired into their Mysteiies, and re
ceived an Answei

25. How Sikandar came ti» the Western Sea and saw

Wonders .

26. How Sikandar reached the Land of Habasii, fought,

and was victoiious

27. How Sikandar leached the Laud ot the Narmpai,

how he fought and was victorious, how he slew
a Dragon, ascended a Mountain, and was fore-
warned of his own Death .....

28. How Sikandar reached the City of Women, named

Harfim, and saw Wonders there

29. How Sikandar went into the Gloom to seek the

Watei of Life and spake with Buds and Isnifil

30. How Sikandar went to the East, saw Wonders, and

built a Barrier against Yajdj and Mdjdj .

31. How Sikandar saw a Corpse m a Palace of Jewels

on the Top of a Mountain, and the Speaking
Tree, and how he was warned of his Death

32. How Sikandar max died his Army to Ohm, carried

his own Letter to Faghfdr, and returned to his
Army with the Answer

33. How Sikandar returned from Chin, made war

against the Sindians, and went to Yaman

34. How Sikandar marched toward Babil and found

the Treasure of Kai Khusrau in a City .

35. How Sikandar went to the City of Bdbil, wrote a

Letter to Arastalfs, and received his Answer .

36. Sikandar’s Letter to his Mother ....

37. How Sikandar’s Life ended and how they carried

his Coffin to Iskandariya .

38. How the Sages and other Folk lamented Sikandar

39. How the Mother and Wife of Sikandar lamented

him

40. Firdausi’s Complaint of the Sky and Appeal to

God . . . ....


vii

PAGL

138

143

147

149

150

153

159

163

166

169

174

176

178

181

183

185

187

189


Vlll


CONTENTS


rHfc: ai^^hkXnian dynasty

^siur

1 The Pi aibe ut Mahmiul

2 The I’nliiil Kings , ...

3. How Papak saw Sasau iii a Dream and gave

him a Daughter m Mariiage

4. How Ardshir Papakan was born, and ot his Case

with Ardawau

5 How Ardawtin’s Slave-girl fell m Love with Ai dshir

and liow ho Hed \Mth her to Pais

6 How Ardawdn heaid ot the Flight of Ardshh with

the Damsel and putsued them .

7. How Ardaw.hi wrote to Bahman, his Son, to take

Ardsliir

8. How Tabilk helped Ardshii, fought with Bahman,

and conquered him

9. How Ardawan led forth his Host for Battle with

Ardsliir and was slain

10. How Ardsliir fought with the Kurds and was

ilofeated . ... . ,

11. How Ardshir attacked the Kurds by Night and

overthrew them .... . .

12 The Story of Haftwdd and the Case of the Worm .

1 3 How Ardshir fought with Haf twad and was worsted

14 How Mihrak of Jahram sacked the Palace of

Ardsliir . . . .

15. How Ardshir heard about the Worm and made
Shift to slay it

16 How Ardshir slew Haft wad

THE SIsANIAN dynasty
Ardshi'r Papakan—

1. How Ardshii Papakun sat upon the Throne in

Baghdad , , . . . .

2. The Case of Ardshir and the Daughter of Ardawan

3. How Sliapur was born to Ardshir by the Daughter

of Ardawdn, and how after seven Years Ardshir
heard of his Son and acknowledged him

4. How Ardshir, to find out the Future of his Eeign,

sent to Kaid of Hind, and Kaid’s Reply .

5. The Adventure of Shapiir with the Daughter of

Mihrak, and his taking her to Wife .


i^AUl;:

207

210

2II

213

217

220

223

225

227

230

232

232

236

237

239

244

258

259

261

266

268


CONTENTS


IX


ArDSHIR PAPAKA^ (rnntwned ) —

SECT

6 How TJrniuzd was born to Shapiii by the Daughter

of Mihrak . . .271

7. Of the Wisdom of Ardshir and his Method of

administeimg the Realm . . 273

8. How Kharrad praised Ardshir . . 284

9 On the Faithlessness of Fortune 285

10 How Aidshii charged Shapiir and died . 286

II. Thanksgiving to the Maker and Piaise of Mahmi'id,

the great King 291


STUriTR, Son of Ardshir—

I . How Shapiir sat upon the Throne and delivered a

Charge to the Chieftains 295

2 How’ Shapui fought with the Runuins, how Bazii-
nush, their General, was taken Prisoner, and
how Cmsar made Peace with Shapiir . . 296

3. How Shapiii seated Urmuzd upon the Throne and

died . . 299


Urmuzd, Son of Shapttr —

1 How Urmuzd addressed the Assembly . 302

2 How Urmuzd gave up the Throne to Bahram,

charged him, and died . . . 303

Bahram, Son of Urmuzd—

I. How Bahram succeeded to the Throne, charged

the Nobles, and died . . . . 307

Bahram, Son of Bahram —

I How Bahram, Son of Bahram, ascended the Throne,

charged the Nobles, and died . . -311

Bahram Bahramiyan—

I. How Bahram Bahramiyan succeeded to the Throne

and died four Months after . . -313

Narsi, Son of Bahram—

I, How Narsi succeeded to the Throne, counselled

his Son, and died 315

Urmuzd, Son of Narsi—

I, How Urmuzd, Son of Narsi, ascended the Throne,

and how his Life ended 318


X


CONTENTS


Shaptjr, Son of LTiuilzp, suunamli) ZiVl Aktaf—

I. How Shcipiu, Son of Urmuzd, was bom foity Days
after his Father’s Death, and how he was
crowned ... ...

2 How T/dr, the Arab, carried off the Daughter of

Haisi and married her, how Shdpur wont to
Yaman to fight him, and how his Daughter
fell 111 Love with Shapiir

3 How Tiur was bemused by his Daughter and how

she came to Slidpui, who took the Hold and
slew Tdfr

4 How Shapui went disguised as a Merchant to Hum,

how ho was taken by OcCsar, and how Oiesar

ravaged the Land of Ii/ui

5. How the Damsel took Measures to free Slid pur,
and how he fled with her from Eum
6 Hov the High Priest and the Captain of the Host,
healing of Shdpur’s Arrival, went to him with
the Troops .

7. How Shapiir made a Night-attack, and how Ooosar

was taken

8. How Shapiir went to Hiim and fought with Yanus,

Oeesdi's Brother

9. How the Eiimans placed Bazaniish upon the

Thione of Cmsar ; his Letter to Shapiir and the
Answer

10. How Bazaniish went to Shapiir and made a Treaty

of Peace

11. How Mani, the Painter, came to Shilpiii with

Pretence of being a Prophet, and was slain
12 How Shapiir made his Brother Ardslnr Eegent till
his own Son should grow up, and how his Days
ended . . . .

Ardshir, Brother op Shapur —

I How Ardshii sat upon the Thione and gave a
Charge to the Ofticeis

Shapur, Son op Shapur—

I How Shdipiir, Son of Shapiir, sat upon the Throne
rind £»ave a Charge to the Officers


I’AGL

328

330

333

335

339

345

346
351

353

355

358

360

363

365


CONTENTS


XI


Bahram, Son of Siiafur —
mtt

T. How Bahichn sat upon the Thioiie and ^^ave a
Charge to the Ofticois

Yazdac^rd, Son of Sijapur —

I How Yazdagird sat upon the Tin one and gave a
Charge to the Ofiiceis

2. How Bahrain Gur, Son of Yazdagird, was born and

sent to be brought up by Munzii, the Arab

3. How Bahnim went to the Chase with a Damsel

and how he displayed his Accomplishment
4 How Bahnlni showed his Accomplishment 111 the
Chase be foie Munzii . . ...

5. How B.ihicim came with JSTu’man to Yazdagird
6 How Yazdagiid put Bahrj'nn in Bonds, how he
escaped by the good Offices of Taiinisli, and
how he returned to Munzir

7, How Yazdagird, by the Advice of an Archmage,

went to the Spiing of Sav and was killed by a
Water-hoise .... . .

8. How the Irciinaiis took Counsel and placed Khusrau

upon the Throne

0. How Bahram Gur heard of the Death of his Father
and invaded Iian

10. How the Iranians heard of Bahram ’s Pillaging and

wrote to Munzir, and how he replied

11. How Bahram Giir arrived at Jahram with the Host

of Munzir, and how^ the Iranians went out to

him

13 . How Bahr.im Giir harangued the Iranians as to his
Fitness to rule, how they rejected him but pro-
mised him the Kingship if he would take the
Crown from between the Lions
13 How Bahram and Khusrau went to the Waste, and
how Bahram slew the Lions and took his Seat
upon the Throne . . ...


PAGE

368

374

375
382
384

386

389

391

394

395
397

400

402

409


Index


' 413


THE SHAHNAMA


VOL. VI.


GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE SASANIANS

(Accovding to the Shahiiaina
Stisan = c? of Papak
Aidhhii Papakin (23) = t7. of Ardawan

tShapfir {2S) = d. of Mxhrak
Uimuzd (24)

PaliLtm (25)

Bahitim (2lJ)

I

Dahl am (27)

Naisi (28)

Ntisha=Tuii Uimiizd (29)

Malika =Shap\ii (30) = Dilafrdz-i-Fariukbp(ii Aidshii (31)

Shipiir (32)

Babidm (33) Yazdagird (84)

a daughtei Sapini'id d of Shangul=Bahrim Gili (35) Narsi
and many other I

wives I

Yazdagnd (36)

Pinlz (38) Hurmuz (37)

Persian lady =Kubdd (40) BaKsh (39) Jiiri^sp

d. of the Khan=Ntishirwun (41)= a Christian lady

Huimuzd (42) five Nfishzdd
I other

I sons

Rustam Maryam = Khusrau (43) = Shirin and Guidya s. of Bahi.im
d. of Paiwiz Chubina

Cmsar

Kubad (44) | | | |

(Shirwi) Kastfir Shahryai Fanid Mardanshah

Aidshii (45) Yazdagird (50)

Guiiiz(46) Fariukhzad (49) many Pinandukht (47) Azarmdukht (48)
(usurper) other sons

^ liom Khusrau Parwiz onwaid some of the relationships, left vague in
the poem, are given from other souices.


ABBREVIATIOTTS


C. — Macau's edition of the Shahnama.

L — Lumsdeii'b

do.

P.— MohPs

do

T. — Tiliran

do.

V — Yullors’

do.

The Voiage and Travayle

of Sir John Maundeville,

Knight. . . . Edited . .

by John Ashton.


AS. The Shah Njimeh of . . . Firdausi. Translated and
abiidged . . . By James Atkinson, Esq.

BAG. A History of Ancient Geography. By E H. Bunbury,
F.B.G S.

BAN. A Plain and Literal Translation of the Arabian Nights^
Enteitainments . By Richard F. Burton

BBR. Buddhist Records of the Western World Translated from
the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (a.d 029). By Samuel
Beal.

BHA. The History of Alexander the Great, being the Syriac
Version of the Pseudo-Callisthenes. Edited . , . with
an English Translation and Notes, by Ernest A. Walhs
Budge, M.A.

BLEA. The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great, being a
Series of Translations of the Ethiopic Histories of
Alexander . . . ByE. A Wallis Budge, Litt D.,F S. A.

DAA. Arriani Anabasis. . . . F. Diibner.

DAI. Arriani Indica. . . F. Dubner.

DEI. J. Darmesteter, ^3tudes Iraniennes.

DHA. The History of Antiquity. From the German of Professor
Max Duncker. By the late Evelyn Abbott, M.A.

5


6


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


EHI. The History of India as told by its own Historians. By
Sir H. M. Elliot, K.O.B.

GBF. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Homan Em-
pire. By Edward Gibbon, Esq. With Notes by Dean
Milman and M Guizot, Edited, with additional Notes,
by William Smith, LL.D

GH. The Land of the Hittites .... By J ohn Garstang, D.Sc,

GKS. Kleine Schiiften von Alfred von Gutschmid,

HB. The Country of Balochistan ... By A W. Hughes,
F H.G.S.

HQO. Q. Cuitius Hufus. , . . ed Edmundus Hedicke.

JRGS. The Journal of the Royal Geographical Society.

LAN, The Arabian Nights’ Enteitamments A New Transla-
tion from the Arabic . . . By Edward William Lane.

MA. Alexandre le Grand . . Par Paul Meyer.

MCAI. Ancient India as described by Megasthoncs and Arrian.
. . , By J. W M^Crindle, M.A.

MCI, The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great, . , , By
J. W. M^Crindle, M A . . , New Edition.

MF. Reliqua Arriani et Scriptorum de rebus Alexandri M.
Fragmenta collegit. . . . Carolus Muller.

MM. Magoudi • Les Prairies d*Or. Texte et Traduction, par
0. Barbier de Meynard et Pavet de Courteille.

MPC. Pseudo-Callisthenes, primum edidit Carolus Mullerus.

NAR. Beitrage zur Geschichte des Alexanderromans, von Prof.

Dr. Th. Noldeke in Denkschnften der . . . Akademie
der Wissenschaften. . . . Wien, 1890.

NIN. Das Iranische Nationalepos von Theodor Noldeke.

NK. Geschichte des Artachsir i PapakJn aus dem Pehlewi
ubersetzt , . von Th. Noldeke

NT. Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden
. . . von Th. Noldeke.

RK, The Koran : Translated ... by the Rev. J. M. Rodwell,
M.A.


ABBREVIATIONS


7


JRM. The Rauzat-us-safa , or, Gaiden of Purity. . , By .
Mirkhond, , , . Translated ... by E. Rehatsek

RSM. The Seventh Groat Oriental Monarchy. By George
Rawlinson, M.A.

SK, The Koran. . . . Translated . . . by Geoige Sale, Gent.

SM, History of the Early Kings of Persia. , . . TransLited

from the original . . . Persian of Mirkhond . . by
David Shea,

SP. The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. . . Translated
from the Greek and annotated by Wilfred H. Schoff,
AM.

WPT. Dr. E. W. West’s Translation of the Pahlavi Texts in the
Sacred Books of the East. Reference to Parts and
pages.

YMP. The Book of Ser Marco Polo . . . newly translated, , . .
By Colonel Henry Yule, O.B.

ZT. Chronique de Abou-Djafar-Mo^hamnied-Ben-Djarir-Ben-
Yezid Tabari, traduite. . . . Par M. Hermann Zotenburg.


NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION


(I as in “ water ”
i as in “ pique ”
ft as in “ rude.”
a as in servant.”

^ as in sin ”
u as in “ foot.”
ai as in “ time.”
au as Oil in cloud.”
g IS always hard as in gu e.”
Ill as ch in the German “ bueh ”
as » in “ azure ”


II


THE KAIANIAN DYNASTY

{Gonduded)


XVIII

DARAB


HE REIGNED TWELVE YEARS


ARGUMENT

Uarab establishes himself upon the throne, defeats the Arabs
and the Rumans, and marries the daughter of Failakiis, the
Osesar. Conceiving, however, a dislike for his spouse, he sends
her back to hei father, at whose court her child is born, named
Sikandar, for the reason given in the story, and brought up by
Failakus as his own son and heir. Darab meanwhile marries
again, has another son — Dard — falls into ill-health, appoints D/iril
his successor, and dies


NOTE

At this point in the Shtlhnuma, m as much as this and the two
following reigns deal almost entirely with the subject of Alexander
the Great, who is known to Orientals under the name of Iskandar
or Sikandar, there is an important change in the provenance and
character of the subject-matter. We have had an instance already
in which it seemed probable that recourse was being had indirectly
to Greek writers,^ but in the present case the debt to them is
indisputable. The basis of the whole account is Greek, and so in
a great measure is the superstructure, but the latter to some
extent has been pulled down and rebuilt, modified in detail, and
added to, by Egyptian, Arabic, and Persian hands. As a general
introduction to the three following reigns, therefore, it will be
well to set before the reader in outline such facts as are necessary
for the proper understanding of the accounts given in the leigns
in question.

Alexander the Great, in his expedition to the East, was accom-
panied by a literary and scientific staff, in order that the results

^ See Vol. v. p. 281.

11


12


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


achieved mi^ht he handed do\\n to posteiitv m a way worthy of
so £freat an occasion Thus Eumenes kept the royal diary/ Bseton
and Dioi^netus lecoided the distances traversed/ Aristohulus was
interested in matters cjeogiaphical, ethnological, and hotamcal/
while Gallisthenes and others drew up general histones Some
of Alexander s commanders too, such as Ptolemy, son of Lagus,
who became King of Egypt, Nearchus, the admiral, and Onesi-
cntus, the pilot, of Alexander’s fleet, also left accounts, as did
others who weie contemporaries but took no part in the expedi-
tion. The result was a large assortment of kindred works, not
one of which is extant in its original foim, though later writers
have piesoived a good deal of the substance, and in some cases
hagments, of the originals. Thus Arrian, our best authority on
the whole subject, based his Anaha^is on Ptolemy and Aristo-
bulus,*aiid in his I/uhca made much use of Nearchus.^ Arrian,
however, tells us that even Ptolemy and Aristobulus were not
always in agreement,® and further, that though Alexander’s ex-
pedition served to explode many fables, it at the same time led
to the fabrication of fresh ones ’ Onesicritus, for instance, who,
though only the pilot, claimed in his account to have been the
admiral,^ of Alexander’s fleet, heard tell of two dragons, or
serpents, measuring 8o and 140 cubits in length respectively,®
and speaks of whales ofl: the coast of Baluchistan as being half a
stade, ^.e, over 100 yards, long, and broad in proportion.^®
Bieton relieved the prosaic details of mensuration with the
account of a sylvan folk — natives of Mount Imaus — vho had
backward-pointing feet Again, the question as to whether or
no the Amazons visited Alexander split the early authorities into
two separate camps. We may conclude, therefore, that the
seeds of the Romance that grew up in later times round the
personality of Alexander the Great were sown in his lifetime.
The growth thus started not merely increased in bulk by a
natural process of evolution in succeeding centuries, but also
absorbed materials that originally had no connexion at all with
him and his undertakings. Thus, for example, when the historic
facts of his career had grown somewhat dim in the popular mind,
the expedition in d.c. 332 of his uncle Alexander I. of Epirus to

1 MF, p. I2I. 2 7^ 3

^ DAA, Pref., Bk. v. c. 7 ^ DAI, c. 18 seq. ® p^A, iii. 4 ; iv. 14.

7 Id, V. 4 8 Id. vi 2. 8 MF, p. 50, fr. 7.

Id p. 57, fr. 30 This, however, was quite a modeiate estimate.
Pliny, in his Nat. Sist, hb. ix. sect 2, ed. Ludovicus Janus, speaks of
“ Balaense quaternum jugeium ”

Id. 135, fr 3. " 12 Plutarch, Life of Alexander, c. 46.


dArab


13


Italy became part of his legend/ and he was credited later on
with having visited Candace, the Ethiopian queen, at Meroe. We
may assume, too, that the expeiienees of the rank and file of his
time-expired veterans, military and naval, lost nothing in the
telling. Speaking generally too, the travellers’ tales, often based
on misunderstood metaphor or misinterpieted natural phenomena
— tales such as in after-times weie told by the friar Odorico and
Sir John Maundeville — would add their quota to the lomance of
the subject. The reader will find examples of such fables in the
reign of Sikandar Long before his time, however, they had made
their way from India to Greece. Homer knew something of
them, so did Herodotus, so did Hecatseus probably, and so
beyond doubt did Ctesias. Moreover, no form was too monstrous
or abnormal for the Indian imagination to conceive with lespect
to god or demon or beings, like the Bakshasas, who were a
blend of demon and of man. The companions of Alexander merely
heard over again what earlier adventurers had heard, but their
association with Alexander brought about a special association of
such tales with him.

It should be noted further that the Greeks, like oui selves, had
two Indies — an Eastern and a Western — and consequently the
fables derived fiom and respecting the Indians or, as they were
called, Ethiopians, were held to apply to the West as well as to
the East.^

It was in Egypt — the land which he had delivered from the
hated Persians and where Ptolemy and his successors had main-
tained the Alexandrian tradition and had ruled with so much
glory — and it was at Alexandria, which the great conqueror had
founded and where he was buried, that the Greek Eomance of
Alexander, so far as we are aware, first received literary form and
expression The author is unknown, but appears to have written
about the third century of the Christian era. The authorship
IS attributed in one of the extant MSS. of the work to the
historian Callisthenes, the relative of Aristotle through whose
influence it came about that he accompanied Alexander to the
East. His lougli comments, however, on Alexander’s adoption
of Persian customs were not well received by the conqueror ,* he
was imprisoned and died in captivity. The title of The Pseudo-
Callisthenes,” by which the Bomance now is known, is said to have
been bestowed upon it in the first instance by Isaac Casaubon.^

The work no longer is extant in what we may call its primitive
form, but this, branching in three directions, gave rise to a
numerous progeny of MSS , of which some twenty still survive.


^ NAE, p. 4; MFC Bk, i, c. 29.


^ See p. 6B.


® MA, li. 4


14


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Thiee of them, known as A, B, and 0 respectively, are preserved
in the National Libraiy in Pans, and to one or other of these
three the rest of the MSS. are said to conform in charactei.^
The MS. known as A, a very early Latin version of the Romance
supposed to have been made by one Jnhus Valerius early in the
fifth century a n , and an Armenian version of about the same
date,® are looked upon as representing collectively the nearest
approximation that we possess to the original work. The MS
known as B is the only one of the three that attributes the
authoiship to Callisthenes.®

During the seventh century a.d. some Greek text of the
Romance, conforming generally to the A type, was translated
into middle Persian, or Pahlavi, as it is called, and this Pahlavi
version was letranslated shortly afterwards into Syriac. No
trace of the Pahlavi version remains, and there is no scrap of
historical evidence to indicate that such a work ever existed, but
the Syriac veision is still extant, and has been edited with an
English translation by Budge. We call it BHA, and shall have
occasion frequently to refer to it in the ensuing pages.

It was the publication of this Syiiac version that led Professor
Noldeke to infer, and satisfactorily to prove, that a Pahlavi version
of the Pseudo-Callisthenes once must have existed. Such proofs
naturally are very technical, but one example may be given by
way of illustration. It concerns the transliteration of proper
names unknown to the Syriac translator. Noldeke found that in
the Syriac version the letter I was substituted for the letter r in
such words as Osins, Abdera, Kraterus, Parmenion, and others,
while, on the other hand, r was substituted for I in Platsea,
Eumelus, Candaules, &c. Now, there is nothing in the form of
these two letters, as they are written in Greek, Arabic, or in
Syriac itself to account for such substitutions and interchanges,
but it so happens that in Pahlavi the same sign stands for both
I and ?, and the conclusion follows that the Syriac version was
made not from the Greek or Arabic, but from the Pahlavi.*

Appended to all the MSS of the Syriac veision, distinct from
it, but, like it, based upon the Pseudo-Oallisthenes, there is

^ Id 2 MPC, p. xxvi. 3 Id. viii. and i.

* The pioofs refeiied to above will be found set out at large in
NAR, p. 1 1 seq. The present writer desiies to take this opportunity
to acknowledge geneially and once for all his indebtedness not only to
this work, but also to Piofessor Noldeke’s edition of the Kiiinsimak-i-
Ardshir-i'Papakdiii (NK) and of Tabari’s Histoiy of the Sdsdnians (NT).
The first two ooncein the present volume of this tianslation only, but
the last will bo in constant requisition till the end. All thiee, and to
them we must add the Iranian National Epos (NIN), aie invaluable.


dArAb


>5


extant a Syriac Ohristian Legend of Alexander which claims to
be taken from the manuscripts in the house of the ai chives of the
kings of Alexandria.^ This Legend was composed about the yeais
a.d. 514 or 515, and seems to have been suggested by an incursion
of the Huns through the Caucasus, which took place at that time.
The author writes as one horror-stricken at the uncouth aspect
and savagery of the invaders, and at the rum caused by them.
Shortly after its composition, it was turned into verse, with some
additions by the Syriac poet, Jacob of Sarug, who died in A D. 521
The legend, and the additions thus made to it, derive respectively
from branches B and 0 of the Pseudo-OalJisthenes, and their
subject-matter became known to Muhammad, who made use of it
in the Kurdn, where Alexander is referred to under the title of
“ ZiWl-karnam,’’ or ^'The Two-horned,” that name having been
suggested by the Legend, where we read : The Lord said to
him (Alexander), ‘ Behold I have magnified thee above all king-
doms, and I have made horns of iron to grow on thy head, that
thou mayest thrust down the kingdoms of the earth with them.” ^
Naturally, Zii- 1 -karnain became an interesting personality to the
followers of Muhammad. The passage in the Kuran referring to
him was much commented on, and the Syriac accounts of him
were translated into Arabic. Now it was to the interest of
learned Persians, living under Arab rule in the centuries succeed-
ing the Muliammadan conquest of Irdn, to imj)ress their masteis
with the sense of the past greatness of the empire that they had
subdued, and for this purpose the legends of the vanquished race
were translated into Arabic It obviously was desirable that so
great a hero as Alexander, and one so interesting to the followers
of the Prophet, should be utilised, and in order to effect this the
whole Persian traditional view of Alexander was altered. As we
have seen already,® he was held in hate and horror in Sdsanian
times as the arch-persecutor and would-be exterminator of Zoroas-
trianism ; he was one of a trinity of ill, of which the other two
were Zahhdk and Afrasiyab. Persians, however, that had been
converted to, or had been brought up in, the Muhammadan Faith
soon came to regard Alexander from another standpoint. To
them he was no longer an evil being who had striven to uproot
the true religion, but the hero commissioned by God to overthrow
a false one, in fact another Asfandiydr with other and better
aims, for had not his credentials been countersigned by the

1 BHA, p. 144.

2 Id, 1 56. Theie is a similai passage, p. 146. For the Syiiac Legend
generally see NAE, 27 seq. For the passage in the Kuian see pp 77-78.

See Vol. i. pp, 59, 61, 63, and cf. pp. 224, 240.


I6 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Prophet himself ? This change of view robbed such memoiies as
still suivived of x^lexander’s triumph over Darius Oodomanus of
much of their bitterness, and it only remained to abate it al-
together by legitimating the conqueror^s position. This was
easily managed, for the author of the Pseudo-Callisthenes had
suggested a way. Concerned for the honour of his country by
birth 01 adoption, he had made Alexander out to be the son of
the last native king of Egypt — Nectanobus II. — who had suc-
ceeded, it was said, in passing himself off to Olympias, the wife of
Philip II. of Macedon, during the latter^s absence at the wars, as
no less a person than Amen-E.a, the two-horned god of Egypt.
The Egyptians were old hands at this sort of falsification. Hero-
dotus tells us ^ that Cambyses, after his conquest of Egypt, was
made out by the Egyptians to be the son of Nitetis, a daughter
of Apries. What Egyptians had done the Persians could do, the
necessary story was substituted for that of Nectanebus, as we
shall lead in this leign, Sikandar became the eldest son of Shah
Darab, and the oppressoi of Iran one of its national heroes.

At what precise period Alexander assumed his station in the
long line of the Shahs is not known, and probably never will be
In the Pahlavi version, made, it would seem, by some one who
was neither an orthodox Zoroastnan nor an orthodox Muhamma-
dan, he was still, as we see from its Syriac representative, the son
of Nectanebus ; in Firdausi he is the son of Darab. Between the
two accounts there is a space of some three centuries or more.
We may reduce the interval somewhat by assuming, as we may,
that the metamorphosis had been completed in the days when
Firdausi was growing up, and a new edition of the Bastan-nama
in modern Persian was being compiled in the middle of the tenth
century by order of Abii Mansur ^ This, we may assume, con-
tained a version of the Pseudo-Callisthenes as it existed after
centuries of adaptation by Persian and Arabic hands. The ascrip-
tion of a Persian paternity to Alexander can be traced further
back. It was known to Tabari who died in a.d. 922, and to
Dinawari who died m a d. 896.^ Neither of them endorses the
story, but merely gives it a place among the other accounts that,
in accord to the method of Arabic historians, they give of the
same event. As these accounts consist of the statements of older
authorities, we may consider that the story was current early m
the ninth century a.d. Most unfortunately the work that, more
than all others, would have thrown light upon that and many
another point, and taken us back to the middle of the eighth cen-
tury, is no longer extant. This was the Arabic translation of the

1 Bk. ill. c. 2. 2 geg yqj^ n ygg NAE, pp. 35, 44.


dArab


17


Bust/m-niima made by Ibn Mnkafla. He was a Zoroastrian who
became a Muhammadan late in life, thereby, as was said of hmi,
merely exchanging one corner of hell foi another, as his orthodoxy
was more than suspect. He was learned both in the'^Pahlavi and
in the Aiabic, and was put to death about a d. 760. It is not
unlikely that he was responsible for the inclusion of Alexandei
among the legitimate Slnihs. By all accounts he was just the
right man in the right place for such an undei taking.

It is hoped that the above sketch may be sufficient to indicate
the provenance of the Eomance of Alexander the Great and how it
came about that it was incorporated into Iranian national legend
It will be seen that it reached Firdausi in a mingled stieam
The basis is Greek, and the Pseudo-Oallisthenes itself is based on
history. The broad facts are there. It tells us that Alexander
was a Grecian king, that he conquered Egypt, invaded and sub-
dued Iran, penetrated into India, defeated Porus, leturned, died
at Babylon, and was buried at Alexandria. Its author introduced
Egyptian elements and additions, and it underwent further adap-
tations at Persian and Aiab hands. These wull be noted and
dealt with as they occur in this and the two following reigns
The vogue of the Pseudo-Calhsthenes, however, is not to be cir-
cumscribed within such limits as these For many centuries it
superseded the more historic accounts of Alexander that still are
extant , and versions, in addition to those already mentioned,
have appeared in Latin, Hebrew, Turkish, Ethiopia,^ Coptic,
English, Flench, German, Italian, Spanish, Norwegian, Swedish,
Dutch, Slavonic, Malay, and Siamese.^

Daiab, the last of the mythical Shahs, does not appeal in the
Zandavasta, with which at this point we part company In order
to connect him with the Kauinian dynasty he was made the hero
of a foundling legend, as we saw 111 the previous volume ® His
name was suggested by that of his successor Daril — the historical
Darius Oodomanus — who was remembered in connexion with the
invasion of Peisia by Alexander the Great, and his inclusion
among the Shahs was due to the necessity of providing his suc-
cessor with a father. Later on he was called upon again to act in
that capacity to his successor’s conqueror.

§ I. Dclrabgiid, now Ddrab, is in P«'us, some fifty miles south of
the salt lake Niris, which also is referred to.

§ 2. Border wars between the lianians and the northern Arabs
were of frequent occurrerce.* For Shu’ib c/. NT, p. 57, note.

1 Also edited and tianslated by Budge, and lefened to in this work
as BLEA

® See BHA, p. Ixxxviii. seq. ® Yol, v. p 294 seq,

^ Cf pp. 322 , sat), Yol. 1. p. II, 11. p. 81.

YOL. YI. B


i8


THE SHAHNJMA of FIRDAUSI


§§ 3-4. The account heie t,nven of the incidents that led up to
the hiith of Sikandar is a Peisian substitution for the Egyptian
story told in the Pseudo-Oalhsthenes,^ and in the Syiiac version. ^
The oft-told tale is briefly as follows. Nectanebus ® was king of
Egypt and a groat magician By his magic arts he had tiiumphed
on all occasions ovei his enemies. At length the time came when
lie peieoived that his spells no longer would avail to protect his
country from invadeis, so, disguising himself, he fled to Mace-
donia, where ho set up as a soothsayer. His fame soon reached
the ears of Olympias, the wife of Philip of Macedon, who then was
absent on a campaign She had heaid a lumour that he intended
to divorce her and take another spouse Accordingly she made
up hei mind to consult Nectanebus, and summoned him He
came, and at once was smitten with her beauty. She sought his
advice on the matter of the divorce, and he told hei that the
rumoui was not false, but that he could help her He then went
on to inform her that she would have a son by the two-horned
god of Egyiit — Amen With the aid of dreams sent by his magic
arts lib reconciled first her and then Philip to the situation, per-
sonated the god himself, and thus became the fat hoi of Alexandei
the Great, taking good care that the birth of the child should
occur at the most auspicious astrological moment

The foal, stated in the text to have been born at the same time
as Alexander, is of course the famous steed Bucephalus, which
accompanied him in his campaigns as far as the river Hydaspes,
the modern Jhilam, and either was killed by the son of Poius
V, hen Alexander was forcing the passage of that river or died
shortly afterwaids of toil and decrepitude at the age of thiity
years. Alexander founded two cities by the river in memory of
his charger and of his victory over Porus, and named them respec-
tively Bucephala (Jaldlpur?) and Nicsea (MongP) * It is only m
the Persian and Ethiopic versions of the Pseudo-Oallisthenes
that the biiths of Alexander and Bucephalus are made to syn-
chronise, which shows that both accounts come from an Arabic
source, for as the Syriac version represents a no longer extant
Pahlavi version, so the Ethiopic derives from a lost Arabic one.
In the Ethiopic version Bucephalus is a mare.®

1 MFC, Ek 1. c 1-12. 2 3 hA, Bk. i. c. 1-12

® Histoiically, Nectanebus II., 01 moie pioperly Nekht-neb-f, of the
thiitieth dynasty, was the last native king to lule in Egypt. The
Peisian bbtih, Aitaxeixes Oohus, after having been repulsed by him in
se\ eral campaigns, succeeded in conqueiing the oountiy in b.c. 343.
Nectanebus escaped to Ethiopia.

* DAA, Bk v , c 14, 19 ; JMCI, p. no, note.

® BLEA, pp. 19, 37


dArIb


19


§ 3. AYe have heie a refeienco to Russia if tho reading is correct.
P reads Siis ” The woid Riis ’ (Byzantine 'PcSff) dates from
the ninth century a D.jWlien Northmen (Scandinavians) founded the
Russian Empiie. It may be a coiruption of lofJisnitm, “rowers.”^
The Russians were in evidence in Firdausi’s days.“

§ 4 In the Pseudo-Calhsthenos, Bk. 1 c 13, and in the
S5’iiac veision lo(, at , Philip is said to have chosen the name
Alexander in memory of a dead son, so called, whom he had had by
a foimer wife Accoiding to one of the accounts in Tabaii, the
mother of Alexandei was the daughtei of the king of the Rumans
and named Halai (Olympias ^). The Shah, her husband, finding
that she was troubled by an unpleasant odour, gave orders that
means should be found to remedy this. The doctors agreed to
exhibit the wood of a tree called in Persian sandtn They boiled
it and washed her with the extract. This, to a gieat extent, did
awaj' with the smell, but not entirely, and, as the cure was not com-
plete, the Shclh sent her back to her father She was already with
child, however, and when her son was born she composed his name
by putting her own and that of the tree together, and called him
Halili-Sandarus, that is the primitive form of A 1 Iskandarus.®
Sandar appears to be a shortened form of scitultt} the Arar tree,
Callitris (luad) ivalasj a native of north-west Africa, which pro-
duces the resin known as gum juniper ” or “ sandarach,’’ the
latter a word often used in the Shahnama,* Firdausi takes a
difterent view of the meaning of Iskandar He makes that word
equivalent to Iskandarus, but he attributes to it apparently
its proper meaning It is derived either from the Greek sKopoSov,
gallic ; 01 the Latin ciscalomum^ shallot. In any case the treat-
ment that the lady underwent appears to have been more or
less homoeopathic in character

^ See GBP, vii. So, and Jiote. Encyclopccdia Entdnnica, nth ed.,

Russia.

Cf Yol IV. p. 316. 3 nar, p. 44. Of, Vol. i. p. 74.


20


THE SHAHNAMA of FlRDAUSt


§ I

Hoid Ddmh hiilt the City of Ddrdhyird

V. 1775 Now from the Maker on earth's king call we
A benediction down. That Shah sun-faced,

Who, 0 Abu 1 Kasim i the woild hath graced
With lovingkindness and with equity,

Doth make of right and justice all his quest,

And in his justice sufiereth naught amiss.

Oh 1 be the world bright with that crown of his —
Mahmud’s — and may his whole career be blest.

May he be young till youth itself be o’er,

And live till life itself shall be no more t

What said the ancient, rustic bard who told
About Gushtasp, renowned Bahman,^ and chiefs
Whose counsels prospered, told about Darab,

And of the rede and usance of Humai ?

Now when Danib ^ sat on the Kaian throne
He girded up his loins, oped wide his hand,

And thus harangued the archmages and the chiefs.
The magnates and the prudent-hearted sages : —

“ I did not woo the world by toil and justice ;

God set the crown upon my head, and none
V 1776 Will see a case in public or in private

More wonderful than mine ; while as for me
I can but make return by doing right
That men may bless me after I am gone.

None must be irked by travail for my sake
In this my season for amassing treasure.

May this age prosper under my just rule,

And may my subjects’ hearts be jubilant.”

^ Ardshtr m the original, but c/. Vol v. p 282.

® Ddru m the oiigmal, but vf id p. 297 and mtc.


dArAb


21


Then out of Hindustan and out of Riiin,

From every -wealthy inarch and peopled land,
Ambassadors with gilts and offerings
Came to secure the favour of the Shah.

It happened that one day he went to view
The herds of horses that were running wild,

And, (joining from the lowlands to the mountains.
Observed a deep and boundless lake. He gave
Commandment that from Hind and from the Rumans
Experienced master-workmen should bo bi ought
To open out a channel from the lake,

And send a river into all the land.

When these skilled men had set the water free
He bade them to erect a splendid city,

And, when the wall around it was complete,

They gave thereto the name of Darabgird.

He lit the Fire upon the mountain-top,

Whereto the woi shippers of Fire resorted,

And then artificers of every craft

Were summoned, and the city was adorned.

The Shah sent countless hosts to every quarter,
Safeguarded all the world from enemies.

Released it from the fear of any foe,

And rent in twain their hearts that wished him woe.


§2

How Ddrctb defeated the Hod of Sliu^th

It came to pass that five score thousand Arabs,

Brave, spear-armed cavaliers, marched forth. Shu’ib —

A chief sprung from Katib — commanded them.

The monarch of Iran led forth a host, V. 1777

’Tis said, beyond compute. The armies met;

The world was all in dudgeon at the troops ;


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


The earth could not support them , none had room
To stir within that land. The rain of arrows,

And double-headed javelins, made the soil
A cistern seem of blood. On every side
The war-cry rose, and corpses showed in piles.

Thus for three days and nights the battle waged,
The age was straitened to the combatants.

The Arabs on the fourth day turned away,

And in the mght fled from the scene of strife,

ShuTb himself was slam upon the field
Of battle, and the Arabs’ day was done.

A host of Arab steeds with poplar saddles,

A mass of helmets, spears, and coats of mail —

The havings of the fugitives — remained
With that -world’s lord the offspring of Humai,

Who gave the whole thereof — the steeds and spears
The helms and swords — in largess to the troops.

He chose a marchlord, one among the host,

Who understood the language of the folk.

And sent him to demand the tribute due
From those waste parts, that year’s and last year’
too.


§ 3


Hoio Ddrdh foiujlit mtli FmlaJeds and fooL to Wife Im
Daughter


Darab marched from the desert of the spearmen
Rum-ward to war against that prosperous land.
Now Failakiis was monarch of the realm ;

He and the king of Riis were close allies.

They wrote to say : “ The offspring of Humai
Hath led forth countless troops.”

On hearing this

The prince of Rum bethought him of old feuds,


dArab


23


And levied soldiers in 'Ammiiriya,^

All men renowned upon the day of battle.

The chiefs of Bum, what time Darab drew nigh, v 177S

Abandoned all the coast and borderland,

While from ’Ammuriya marched Failaktis,

He and his captains, warriors, and troops.

They fought two mighty battles in three days,

And on the fourth day when the sun arose
Both Failakiis and all his army fled ;

Not one retained his helm or Riiman casque.

The Iranians took the wives and children captive,

And slaughtered many with their showers of arrows
When fleeing from Darab the Rumans reached
The city but two thirds of them arrived,

The other had been slain erewhile or wounded ;

The spear had been insistent at their backs.

They sheltered there within that stronghold. Many
Sought peace. An envoy came from Failakus,

Wise, shrewd, a bearer both of weal and woo,

With purses, slaves, and, as an offering,

Two caskets filled with royal jewelry.

This was the message : “ Of the only God
I ask for guidance that we may conclude
This fight in feast. Ne’er may we strive again,

But all be honesty and uprightness :

Dark ways and crooked only end in loss.

It to ’Ammuriya, which is my seat.

Thou comest and art fain to capture it,

My heart will throb for honour and for fame,

And I will leave the feasting for the fighting.

Act in the manner that becometh kings ,

Thy father was, and now his son is, Shah.”

Darab, on hearing this, convoked his lords, ^

^ Ancyra probably, the modern Angoia, an important place on the
route fiom Byzantium to Armenia and Syria. Theie was also an
ancient Amonum in Phrygia, not far from the borders of Galatia.

2 Reading with P.


24 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSl

And told before them every circumstance.

“What say ye/’ said he, “touching this appeal.
Since Failakus is fain to save his face 'i ”

The chiefs all called down blessings on the Shah,
And said * “ 0 Shah, shrewd-hearted, pure of Faith !
The king of kings is greatest of the great,

Let him detc^i-mine what is best to do.

That famous monarch hath an only daughter
Of cypress-height and spring-like cheek. In Cbm
3779 One will not look upon so fair an Idol;

She shineth mid the others like a signet.

The king of kings on seeing will approve her,

And that tall Cypress come within his Garden.”

The Shah called in the ambassador from Kum,
Told him the counsel of those loyal lieges.

And said : “ Go say to Ccesar . ‘ It thou art
So fain to save thine honour thou possessest
Within thy bower a daughter, one who is
The crown upon the head of womanhood,

A perfect picture whom thou calFst Ndhi'd, ^

And settest on a golden throne. Send her,
Together with the tribute due from Kum,

If thou wouldst dwell untroubled in that land/’

The envoy heard and, coming like the wind,
Reported this to Cinsar, Failakus,

And all the army, were rejoiced thereat,

Because the Shah would be his son-in-law.

The question of the tribute was discussed.

As to how much the king of Rum could pay,

And they agreed that in the month of Mihr
In every year the Shah should take from Caesar
A hundred thousand eggs of solid gold,

And with each egg a royal gem, each egg
To be two score miskals ^ in weight, each gem

^ The planet Veans.

- A miskal=a diam and three sevenths.


DARAB


25


Of highest excellence. First, Failakus
Rewarded all his frontier-chiefs that dwelt
Within the peopled parts of Rum^ and then
Commanded the philosophers, and all
That had an interest in those parts, to give
Their whole attention to prepare a road.

The nobles that escorted the princess

Brought every one his present. They made ready

A golden litter, slaves, and crown of gold,

Ten camels laden with brocade of Riim
With jewelled patterns on a golden ground.

Three hundred camel-loads of carpetings,

With other presents for the Shah. Within

The litter sat the entrancing Riiman maid v. 17S0

With prelate and with priest conducting her.

Nahid had sixty damsels m her train.

Each with a golden goblet in her hand.

Within the goblet there were royal gems,

And every Idol wore her crown and earrings.

The bishop gave the fair one to Darab,

And paid the jewels to his treasurer.

The Shah remained no longer on the field,

But marched back to Iran. He came to Pars,

Rejoicing, with his charming spouse, and set
Upon her head the royal coronet.


§4


How Ddrdh sent hach the Daughter of Fmlakixs to Efun^ and
lioio Sikandar iias hom


One night that Moon was sleeping with the Shah,
All gems and colour, scent and loveliness,.

But verily her breathing was not sweet.

And grew disgustful to the king of kings,


26


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Who shrank and turned his head away from her
Upon the couch because her breath was foul.

The monarch of Iran was grieved thereat,

His mind was troubled and his soul all care.

They summoned skilful leeches to Nahid,

And one of them, a shrewd and prudent man,
Examined tijl he found a remedy — •

A herb whereby the gullet is inflamed,

Called in the Riiman tongue ‘‘ iskandar.” This
He rubbed upon the palate of the queen,

And caused her eyes ^ to water lustily.

The fetor fled away, her palate burned,

Her face shone like brocade , but though the Fair
Was sweet as musk Darab had ceased to love her.

The monarch's heart turned coldly from his bride,

And so ho sent her back to Failakiis.

She was with child but told not any one.

V. 1781 Nine months passed and from that fair dame was born
A babe like radiant Sol. She used to call him
Sikandar ^ since he was so tall, well favoured,

And sweet of breath, for she esteemed the name
Of what had sweetened her own palate lucky.

While Ciesar told each chief : “ There hath appeared
A Cajsar of my seed."

None named Darab,

Sikandar was the son and Caesar sire,

For Cicsar shamed to say to any one : —

‘‘ Darab hath put away my child."

What time

Sikandar’s holy mother brought him forth.

And one went to his grandsire with the tidings,

There was within the stable a brown mare,

In body lusty, swift and tall, and she
That very night produced a foal all white,
Short-shanked, and breasted like a lion. Caesar

^ Literally eyelashes. ® Sikandar =Iskandar.


dArAb


27


Exulted o’er that mare because he deemed
That birth would prove a lucky sign for him.

He used at dawn to have the inlant fetched,

Would have the trappings put upon the mare,

And then caress the foal on eyes and mane
Because it was coeval with Sikandar.

The sky revolved awhile with matters thus,

And years ot varied fortune passed away,

Sikandar came to have a monarch’s heart,

The utterance of heroes Caesar held him
More dearly than a son and used to place
The due adornments on his martial breast.

He gained in wisdom, aptitude, good sense,

Weight, and intelligence. Ho was acknowledged
Successor on the throne to Eailakus,

Who held him in regard in weal and 'woe.

He learned from tutors kings’ accomplishments.

And thou hadst said that he was made to judge,

To found an empire, and to fill the throne.

Now when Nahid had gone back to her sire
Darab took unto him another wile.

And had by her a son of Grace divine v. 1782

And puissance, and younger than Nahid’s,

Named the same day Dara in hope that he
Might be yet more successful than his sire.

Thereafter, when twelve years had passed away,

The Shah failed both in fortune and in limb ;

Humai’s illustrious offspring ’gan to fade.

And he was summoned to the other world
He called to him the magnates and the sages.

Conversed at large about the throne of power,

And said to them : ‘‘ Dara, son of Darab,

Now will become your leader in all good.

Give ear to him, perform what he commandoth
And be his will the music of your souls,

Because this throne of kingship lasteth not,


THE SHAhnJMA of FIRDAUSI


And -when joy comcth it is soon recalled.

Be instant ye, let love unite with justice,

And think on mo too gladly.’'

This he said,

x\.nd heaved a sigh. The colour of his cheek
Turned from pomegranate-bloom to fenugreek.


XIX

dIrA, son of darab

HE REIGNED FOURTEEN YEARS


ARGUMENT

After the death of Darab, his son DArii ascends the throne and
administers the realm. Meanwhile Eailakiis dies, and Sikandar
succeeds him in Rdm. Dilrii sends to demand tribute of Rdm,
and Sikandar replies by invading Iran. He visits the camp of
Ddrii as his own ambassador, and is recognised, but escapes.
Three great battles are fought, in which Dara is defeated, and
subsequently murdered by his own ministers. Sikandar finds
Dtira mortally wounded, promises to carry out his last wishes,
executes his murdereis, and universally is recognised as Shdh


NOTE

With Diira we enter upon the historic period of the Sh^hnuma,^
In the last reign he was represented as being the youngei son of
Darab, with Sikandar for his elder brother. Historically, Dara's
prospect of ever becoming Shah had been remote m the extreme.
Artaxerxes Ochus, who had put Nectanebus to flight and con-
quered Egypt, was murdered in B c. 338, with all his sons, by the
eunuch Bagoas, with the exception of the youngest, Arses, whom
Bagoas made Shah. Two years later Bagoas murdered him also,
and all his family, and raised a distant collateral of the royal
house to the throne, who is the Dara of the Shahniima and the
Darius Oodoraanus of Greek writers Him too 111 his turn
Bagoas tried to do away with, but was put to death himself
instead. Historically, Dilra reigned six years, not fourteen.

§ 2. When Alexander was fourteen yeais old, his father Philip
sent for Aristotle to become his son’s tutor.

^ See Yol. i. p. 49
2a


30


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


For the tiibute due from Hum see p 24. In the Pseudo-
Callisthenes and the fSyriac and Ethiopic veisions the ambassadors
come in Philip’s iifotimo and are interviewed by Alexander ^ The
^^olden eggs are mentioned in the Syiiae, which, with the Greek,
also says that the ambassadois einplo5’’ed a paint ci to take
Alexander's portrait, which they presented to Darius The Syriac
makes the fuithei addition that Darius ordered the picture to be
carried to his daughter Roxana, and their several heights to be
compared, after which he flung it away in scorn, but Roxana
se'emed it, honouied it greatly, and fiom that time fell in love
’vvith the original.®

Sikandar in the text is represented as beginning his expedi-
tion to the East by the invasion of Misr (Egypt), but a good
deal happened fiist both in lustoiy and romance. Historically,
he spent the first eighteen months of his reign in Greece, and
ciossed into Asia Minor in the spimg of b c. 334, where, having
won the battle of the Granicus, he established his power suffi-
ciently to allow him to advance thiougli the passes into Syria.
Having encountered and defeated Darius at Issus in the autumn
of I 5 .C. 333, he proceeded to make himself master of the coasts of
Syiia and Palestine, the sieges of Tyre and Gaza together taking
about nine months, after which he invaded Egypt. Romantically,
after the Granicus and Asia Minor, Alexander sails to Sicily and
Italy, where he is well received by the Romans, who present him
with a jewelled crown, thence voyages to Afiica, where he inter-
views the Carthaginians, and proceeds by way of the oasis of
Ammon to Egypt.®

§ 3. This corresponds with the Greek Pseudo-Callisthenes * and
with the Syi’iac version® in general, but these texts add the
picturesque incidents that, after Alexander’s flight from the
feast, the effigy of King Xerxes, which Darius loved, fell from the
wall or ceiling of the banquet-hall, and that Alexander in his
flight had to cross a frozen river, on which the ice gave way as he
reached the other side, his horse being carried ofi* by the current
and drowned, while the pursuing Persians were unable to follow
him across.

§§ 4-6. The Syriac version only mentions one battle between
Alexander and Darius, at which both were present.® In the
Shahndma there are three, of which the fiist corresponds with
the one in the Syriac. According to Tabari, who quotes Hisham
bin Muhammad, the two kings fought for a year in Mesopotamia.^

1 MPO, Bk. 1 c. 23 , BHA, Bk. 1. c. 23 , BLEA, p. 34.

- BHA, id. and 1. 36, cf. note on § 8. ® MFC, 1. 28-31,

^ MFC, 11. I 4 j is* ® BHA, 11. 6, 7.

Id. 11 9. 7 NAR, p 42.


dArA


31

Firdausi i^laces the scene of at least two of the battles of which
he speaks to the west of the Euphrates. He was drawing
piobably from Arabic sources of information. The three battles
cannot be regarded as in any way intended for those of the
Graiiicus, of Tssus, and of Gaugamela. The number is peihaps
a tiibute to the importance of the occasion ^

In the Shtihnama Dili a, after his final defeat, goes to Kirmdn.
According to the Pseudo-Callisthenes ^ and the Syriac version,® he
withdrew to his palace, and next is heaid of locally in connexion
with Ekbatana and the Caspian Gates ^ This is more accurale
histoiicalty. Ariian says that Darius, after his defeat at Gauga*
mela (October ist, b.c 331), fled towaids Media, rightly supposing
that Alexander would march upon Susa and Babylon ^

§ 7. In the Pseudo-Callisthenes Darius, in his letter, asks for
the return of his wife and family, ofteiing land and treasures in
exchange , ** in the Syriac veision he is ready to surrendei every-
thing if he may have mercy shown to him ‘ Alexander’s reply is
softened in the Persian In the Greek and Syriac he takes the
view that he is only recovering his own, Darius having been the
aggressor, and in the latter makes no rejily to him. Alexandei’s
honourable treatment of Darius* family, whom he had taken at
Issus, IS a matter of history,® and the same sentiment toward
them is preserved in the Pseudo-Callisthenes
§§ 8-9. In the Gieek and Syriac versions the letter to Porus is
given at somewhat gi eater length. Darius invites Porus to meet
him with an army at the Caspian Gates, and promises him half
the spoil and Alexandei’s hoise Bucephalus® Poius, of which
the Arabic form Fur is used in the Shahnama, is a dynastic or
family name, and lepresents the Pauiavas who are mentioned in
the Mahabhclrata as reigning in the neighbourhood of Kashmir
The Porus of Alexander’s time ruled between the Hydaspes
(Jhilam) and the Akesmes (Chinab), and was allied to the king of
Kashmir

With regard to the death of Darius at the hands of two of his
satraps,^ ^ the historical account is that, after Gaugamela, he went,
accompanied by remnants of his broken army, to Ekbatana
(Hamadan), where he endeavoured to raise fresh foices. Alexander,
m the meantime, had made himself master of Babylon and Per-
sepolis, and, hearing of Darius’ doings, advanced noithwaid

1 Of, Vol. i. p 349 scq. 8 MFC, 11. 16. 3 BHA, Bk. 11 c 9.

^ MFC, 11. 19; BHA, li II. ® DAA, 111. i( 5 .

« MFC, 11 17 ’ BHA, 11. 9.

® DAA, 11. 12. MFC, 11. 19; BHA, 11. ii

DHA, iv. 399. MFC, 11, 20; BHA, ii. 13


THE SHJHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


32

against him in the spimg of bc. 330 Dai ins did not wait for
Alexandei’s anival, hut left Ekbatana, intending to take refuge
with his cousin Bessus^ the satiaj) of Bactiia Dai ms wont, of
course, by the well-known route tliat connects western with
eastern Iran ^ He had consideiable toices with him, but his
counsels were distiacted, and his troops i;iadually deseitod him.
Alexander leached. llai by toiced maiches fioui Ekbatana, but,
healing that Darius was tar ahead, abandoned the puisuit, and
rested for live dajs Ho then resumed his maieh, and halted in
the neiglibouihood of (Jiiduin Siidaira, which appeals to be the
Caspian Gates of Aiiian, passed through them the second day
and heard, when encamped beyond them, that Daiius was a
pnsoiiei in the hands of Bessus, the satiap of Dactiia, of Bar-
saeiites, the satrap of Aiachosia and Diangiana (Sistan), and of
Nabaizanes, the c(.»mmandei of Darius’ cavalry. On this Alexandei
resumed the pursuit, and, four 01 five days later, came up with
the fugitives, wheieupon Nabaizaiies and Baisaentes mortally
wounded Daiius and abandoned him He was dead before
Alexandei reached him ^ This was 111 July n.c. 330. Nabarzanes
soon after suirendeiod to xllexaiidoi, and was pardoned ** Bessus
and Barsaontes escaped to their own satrapies, where the former
assumed royal state and the name of Artaxeixes Ultimately
both weie captured and executed ^ Their resistance to Alexandei
seems to have been a more serious crime than their removal of
his chief opponent. An Arabic account ^ attirms that the death
of Darius was brought about with the connivance of Alexandei,
and although Firdausi’s version naturally omits this feature, it in
other respects follows the Arabic very closely with regard to the
scene between the two kings. The names of the two assassins
are in the Pseudo-Callisthenes Bessus and Aiiobarzanes,** in the
Syiuac version Bagiz and Anabdeh, and in the Ethiopic Hashish
and Arsalc'is. The names in Fn’dausi seem to be of his own
invention. The ariangement made between the two kings that
Alexander should mairy Roxana or Rushanak appears in all the
versions, and is not histoiical. She was not the daughter of
Darius, but of Oxyartes, a Bactiian chief, whose stronghold
Alexander escaladed He fell in love with her at sight, and
mail led her,’ b.c. 328 Subsequently, on his return from his

^ See Vol. 11 p. 2$. 2 DA, 111. 19-21.

HQC, \i. 5. ^ DAA, 111 25, 30 5 ]S[AR, pp. 44, 50.

® Historically, there was a worthier holder of that name who, after
Gaugamela, held the eutiance to Pars against Alexander, and died,
fighting to the last, outside Persepolis. HQC, \ . 4.

" DA, IV. 19, r/. note on § 2.


dArA


33


Indian expedition, he did marry a daughtei of Darius — Barsme
or Stateira — at Susa m n.c. 324 Rushauak, the Persian form of
Poxaiia, is a diminutive fiom the adjective riishan,” bright.

For the feast of Sada Yol 1 p. 123. Nauriiz, jS'ew Year’s
Day, was also the name of a feast then held Cf id, 74 For Mihi
id 175 and

The coipse of Darius was sent to P/us ^ In the Pomance the
punishment of his assassins follows quickly. In the Gieek,
Syiiac, and Ethiopic versions of it, Alexander announces his
intention of “exalting” the doers of the deed, and so induces
the culprits to declaie themselves, who thereupon ai e “ exalted ”
on the gibbet, set up ovei the giave of Daiius.*^ Firdausi’s
version leheves Sikandar fiom all imputation of sharp practice
In the Arabic account mentioned above, Alexander gives the
murdereis all that they baigained for, but they had forgotten
to include their lives in the compact^ and are put to death.

§ 10. Sikandai’s proclamation to the Persians and his coi-
respondence with the women-folk of Dard appear in the other
versions,"* but the correspondence is reserved for the next reign
Here we have a message only. The passage about the hand-
maids in Firdausi’s version of the proclamation runs in the
Sjuiac. “And we command that damsels . . shall enter into the
temple of the god whom my mother Olympias worships, for the
space of one year for the service of the gods ; and when they
have arrived at the age for marriage, they shall go forth from the
mimstiy, and shall receive a dowry of five thousand dinars fiom
the treasuiy of the god, and shall marry.” Expressions 111
Firdausi’s version show that it came to him, in part at least
through the Arabic.

^ DAA lii. 22 Foi the accounts given in the Gieek, Syiiac, and
Ethiopia versions, see MFC, 11. 21 , BHA, 11. 13 ; BLEA, p. 95.

^ Id ^ Id and ^eq.


VOL. vr.


c


34


THE SHAhnImA of FIRDAUSI


§ I

How Ddrd hara/ujued the Chiefs and took Order
for the Realm ^

V. 17S3 Dara, when he had ceased to mourn Darab,

Exalted to the sun the Kaian crown.

He was a man of action^ and lusty .

A sword was blunt contrasted with his tongue.

He took his seat upon the thione and said : —

Ye princes, noble chiefs, and warriors ^

I want not any that hath fallen low,

Nor will I summon such to crown and state.

And if one disobeyeth my commands
Let not his body count its head its own,

While if he hath disloyalty at heart,

That will 1 frustrate with the scimitar.

If others too have wealth Tis not for me
To vex their happy hearts on that account,

And shall I wish for any as a guide,

Who am myself the guide and gladdener ?

Sun, fortune, and the right to fealty

Are mine, mine greatness, kingship, and command.”

He summoned unto him a ready writer,

And held talk with him of affairs at large.

That worthy wrote a letter from Dara,

Son of Danib, son of Bahman ^ Wherever
Eeigned independent kings the Shah commanded
To send a letter trenchant as a sword , —
v. 17S4 “ Whoever turneth him from my behest.

And rede, shall mark how I will scatter heads.

Give all obedience whether I command
To take another’s life or yield your own.”

He opened up his father’s treasure-hoard,

^ This heading is not in the original.

® Dara and Ardshir in the oiiginal. See Vol. v. pp 282, 297 note.


DARA


35


Called out the troops, and gave allowances.

The stipend varied from lour drachms to eight ,
This had a cupful, that a basonful.

He gave moreover drachms, dinars, and bards,

As well as breastplates, swords, and massive maces,
Appointing veteran chiefs to provinces^

To one among the notables the marches,

And largessing the troops with things of price.
Ambassadors arrived from every quarter.

From every man of name and potentate,

From Hind, from the Faghfur, the Khan of Chin,
From Eiim and likewise from the provinces.

Each of them carried tribute, dues, and gifts,

For none could stand or strive against Dara.

He built a city which he named Zarniish —

A cause of much rejoicing in Ahwaz.

He gave to every mendicant his due.

And freely unto those that came to sue.


§ 2

T/ie Death of Failakus and Sikandar's Accessiori
to the Throne

In those days was the death of Failakus —

A cause of trouble for a while in Eum ,

Then sat Sikandar on his grandsire’s throne,

Sought virtue, and restrained the hands of evil,

For in those days there lived one known to fame
In Eum, a joy to all that land and hight
The erudite Arastalis ^ — a man
Of visdom, vigilance, and influence.

That sage adviser came before Sikandar,

And, as he took his place, held forth, and said : —

^ AiastcitiUis in the oiiginal Fiidansi uses both forms, and theie
arc others.


36


THE SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI


0 ruler happy in tliy full desire >

By acting as thou dost thou wilt abate
Thy fame because the royal throne hath looked
On many such as thee but will not rest
17^5 With any. When thou sayest : ' I have gained
Mine end and need not any to direct me/

Know that there is no greater fool than thou,

If thou wilt hearken not the rede of sages
We are from dust, arc destined from our birth
To go back thither, and must needs submit ;

But thou wilt live in fame if thou art good,

And be successful on the throne of kings,

While from ill-doing thou wilt reap but ill,

And never pass a night of peaceful sleep.

Well-doing is a monarch’s adjutant,

And none hath won good days by doing wrong.”

Whenas Sikandar heard he was well pleased,

And used to court the speaker’s company,

Did every act according as he bade
In fight and festival, in war and strife,

Bestowed new favours on him every day,

And, when he came, would seat him on the throne

It chanced one day that an ambassador,

A Persian shrewd of heart and eloquent,

Came from Dar/i to Bum to ask for tribute
Due from that prosperous land. He came and spake
About it to Sikandar who was irked
By reason of that tribute and old tax,

And said to him : “Go say before Dara : —

‘ Our tribute now hath lost its hue and scent,

For since the bird that laid the golden eggs
Is dead the tribute is no more in force.’

The ambassador, on hearing such an answer.

Was frighted and was seen no more in Eiim.
Sikandar summoned all his troops and told
Of what had passed. He said : ‘‘ The well-disposed


DARA


37


'Scape not tlie revolutions of the sky.

I have to tread the world's face and account
Much weal and woo, so now ye must make ready.
And banish home and country from your hearts."

He oped his grandsire's hoai^ds and bade his troops
Prepare. At dawn the war-cry rose from Bum
Both from the city and the young king's court.

The standard that was carried after him
Was red inscribed upon a turquoise giound.

He started on his march by way of Misi%

With troops and trumpets, drums and warriors.

The king of Misr with hostile troops forthwith
Went to encounter him The armies met
And fought for s^ven days, but on the eighth
Misr was o’erthrown, Sikandar cut them off,

And at a blow enough were taken captive
To paralyse the taker’s hands. Of maces,

Steeds and horse-armour, jupons, Indian daggers,

Of golden girdles, silvern harness, swords
Of Misr with golden scabbards, of brocade
And of dinars, he compassed such a store
That e'en the beasts of burden could not bear it,
While multitudes of noble warriors,

Of chiefs and cavaliers, came in for quarter.

Sikandar thence made ready to invade
Iran, took lions’ hearts and warriors' hands.

Now Avhen Dara had heard A host hath marched
From Bum and reached our borders and coniines,”

So great an army issued from Istakhr,

That e'en the wind was hampered by the spears.

He purposed to advance on Bum from Pars,

And fire the peopled parts. When he had led
His troops more many than the blades of grass
To the Farat he drew up on the shore,

And none could see the stream for armature.


V. 17S6


V. 17S7


THE SHAHnIhA op FIRDAUSI


§ 3

Hotv SiLandfir nent a'^ his ov'ii Ambassador to Ddrd

Now when Sikaiidar heard : The host hath come/'
He marched to meet it, and when two leagues’ space
Was left between he called to him the magnates,
Who spake with him at large about Dara
Until outworn by his advisers’ words,

He said : There is one way and only one —

That I should go as an ambassador
To him and weigh his state.”

He bade to fetch

A girdle decked with jewels fit for kings.

And royal robe embroidered. They brought forth
A led horse all betrapped with gold. A sword
Hung from its saddle in a golden scabbard.

Sikandar chose ten Ruman cavaliers,

Men good at parleying, and left the host
At dawn with those ten famed interpreters.

As soon as he approached the exalted Shah'

He lighted from his steed and did obeisance.

Dara, the world-lord, called him, greeted him,

And seated him below the throne. The courtiers,
Amazed, invoked the Maker of the world,

Such were Sikandar’s aspect, Grace, and prudence,
His stature, limbs, and dignity ! Ho took
His seat but rose forthwith, delivered well
Sikandar’s message, blessing first the king,

And said : For ever may the crowned head live.
Thus said Sikandar : ‘ 0 illustrious.

Whose will prevaileth everywhere on earth ^

I have no wish to fight against the Shah,

Or sojourn in Iran. Mine aim is this —

V. 17SS To roam about the earth a little space,

And see the w^orld for once. My whole intent


DARJ


39


Is good and lionest, and especially
Since thou art now the ruler of Iran.

It* thou forbiddest me to use the ground
[ cannot travel in the air like clouds
But thou, unwitting of my purposes,

Hast met me in this fashion with a host.

If thou wilt tight then I will tight with thee,

And not depart without a stricken field.

Choose for thyself the season for the fray,

And hold thereto * let not thy purpose change,

Because I shrink not from a war with chiefs,

However great their host.’*'

Now when Diira

Observed his counsel, courage, eloquence,

His Grace and bearing, so that thou hadst said : —

It is Dara ^ upon the ivory throne
With armlets, torque, with Grace and crown,’' ho
asked : —

“ What is thy name and stock because thy Grace
And limbs denote a king ^ Thou art no subject.
Methinketh that thou art thyself Sikandar.

Thee with thy Grace and stature, speech and face,
Heaven peradventure nurtured for a throne.’'

Sikandar answered : “None hath acted thus
In peace or war, and men of eloquence —

The crown of all the sages of the world —

Are not so lacking at Sikandar’s portal
That he should take a message from himself,^

And he so great a king, the people’s head ?

Sikandar’s wit is not of such a sort

That he should pass from his forefathers’ ways.

This was the message that my master gave me,

And I have told the Shah his words.”

They lodged him

^ Dcira=Darab heie peibaps
^ Or, with stop at portal,” “How should he,” &c.


40 THE SHIhnAma OF FIRDAUSI

In fitting state. The monarch of Iran,

As soon as they had spread the board, commanded
The chamberlain : Invite the ambassador.’'

Forthwith they summoned him and gave to him
The envoys’ seat. They eat and then prepared
To revel, calling out for wine and harp
V. 1789 xbnd minstrelsy, but as Sikandar drained

The pleasant wine he lightly laid each goblet
Within his lap till as the cups and wine
Passed round and round their sum passed reckoning.
The server came before Dani and said • —

“ The guest to-day hath cottoned to the cups ’ ”

The Shah bade : '' Ask him : Why dost thou thus
tender

The wine-cups ^ ’ ”

Said the server “ Kingly man 1
Why keep these golden cups upon thy lap ? ”

Sikandar made him this reply: ''These cups,

Are, my good sir, the envoy’s perquisite.

If such be not the usage in Iran
Restore them to the royal treasury.”

The monarch smiled to hear of such a custom,

And bade to set within the envoy’s hand
A goblet filled -with jewels fit for kings,

And lay a ruby on the top thereof.

Just at that moment those that went to make
Demand for tribute from the land of Riim
Came from outside within the banquet-hall,

Advancing toward the Shah with measured tread.

He that was envoy recognised Sikandar,

Went to the Shah, and did obeisance, saying* —

'^This is Sikandar — Coesar’s self — who hath
The throne, the mace, and diadem 1 What time
The Shah commanded us to go and ask
For tribute he was wroth, entreated us
With scorn, and spake of war with thee, while we


dArA


41


Had to escape by night and urge our steeds.

We saw not any like to him in Eiim.

Now boldly bath he come within thy borders
To weigh thy host, thy treasure, throne, and crown/'

The Shah, on hearing what his envoy said,

Gazed at Sikandar yet more earnestly,

Who apprehended what it was they spake
In secret to the monarch of the world,

But waited till the day was growing darker, v. 1790

And sunlight was declining in the west,

Then gained the entrance of the Shah’s pavilion,

And mounted boldly, saying to his horsemen,

His fortunate and noble followers : —

Our lives are now dependent on our steeds.

And if they fail us we shall grasp the wind.”

Then he and all his meiny plied the spur,

^nd fled forth from the monarch of the world,

Who missed Sikandar’s head and coronet,

Then lost amid night’s gloom, and sent his guards
At once to seek his foeman in his tent.

They Avent to find that wary one departed,

So sleepy was the fortune of the Shah ^

Dara dispatched a thousand cavaliers,

Bold fighters, in pursuit as swift as wind,

But in the dark they lost their way, beheld
The outposts of the foe, and turned unguerdoned
Save with the travail of their longsome journey.

Now when Sikandar reached his own encampment
The warriors of Rum approached and found
Their king well pleased that night. There is,” they
cried,

A cup of gems before him ! ”

Said Sikandar ; —

'' Hail and exult in this our glorious omen.

For this cup is the triumph of my life;

The stars themselves are subject to me now.


42


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


I hixve obtained the number of the foe ,

Their horsemen are much fewer than we heard.
Draw, all of you, your falchions for the iray.
Advance and quit the desert and the plain.

If in this fight ye give yourselves to toil,

The toil shall both enrich you and content you.
The Maker of the world is mine ally.

And fortune’s head is lying on my breast.'’

The mighty men called blessings down on him,
And said : ‘ May all the earth rejoice m Ca3sar,
And may our souls and bodies be thy ransom ,

To that we pledge ourselves for evermore,

V. 1791 For who among the kings can vie with thee
In stature, goodliness, and bravery ? ”


§4

How Dura Jowjlit loith SiLandar ami worsted

Now when the sun rose o’er the Raven’s back,

And earth grew as it were a lamp aflame,

Dara, the world-lord, led his army forth ,

The w^orld drew o’er its head a veil of pitch.

He marched his army on from the Farat,

And men were more than grass-blades on the plain.
Whenas Sikandar heard : ‘‘ A host hath come,”

He beat the kettledrums and marched to fight.
What with the jupons and the Indian swords,

The steeds and armour both for man and horse,

The baggage and the warriors on both sides,

Earth seemed a sea, and dust rose mountain-high.
Both hosts drew up for battle, and the falchions
Flashed in the sun. They led the elephants
Before the army, and the world became
As ’tvrere the river Nile. The cavaliers
Were in the rear, the elephants in front,


darA


43


And all men ceased to set their hearts on lile.

Thou wouldst have said : ‘‘ Air is blood-clamouring,
And earth is rocking underneath the cry ^ ”

So loudly sounded horn and Indian bell
That all men’s hearts were moved and therewithal,
What with the neighing of the steeds, the shouts
Of captains, and crash of massive macics,

Thou wouldst have said • Earth is a mount of war,
And heaven with flying dust an Ethiop’s face ? ”

For one whole week those valiant warriors
Confronted. On the eighth day rose a murk
Of dust such that the sun turned azure-dun.

And veiled the Iranians' eyes, who saw but dust
Upon the battlefield. Dara, the world-lord,

Turned with his noble host of warriors
The army reached the banks of the Farat,

Retreating in confusion from the field.

Sikandar’s troops pursued them : of those hosts
One was o’erwhelmed with sorrow, one o'erjoyed.
Sikandar pressed on to the river-bank ,

They slew Iranians innumerable,

But turned back at the river , he forbade
To cross and occupied victoriously
The battlefield with his picked soldiery.


§5

How Ddrd fought with SiLantlar the second Time

Whenas Dara had fled before Sikandar

He sent ofi* cavaliers on every side

In haste and called the chieftains of Iran

And of Turan. He gave out pay, he summoned

The commissaries and, by next new moon,

Reorganised the troops and filled with bluster

The chieftains’ heads. Again he crossed the river


V 1792


44 the SHAHNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

And ranged his army on the spacious plain.
Sikandar, hearing this, marched forth ; he went
To meet Dara and left behind his baggage.

When those two hosts encountered, earth and time
Contended too. They battled for three days
Till all the field was straitened by the slain.

Vast numbers of the Iranians perished there,

Tho day was lost to the aspiring Shah,

Who turned in anguish from the battlefield
When sun and moon alike refused him aid.
Sikandar followed swift as flying dust.

Invoking much tho Maker of the world.

A proclamation went forth to the troops . —

Ye subjects who are wandering astray f
There is no fear that I shall injure you,

And ye are no concernment to my troops.

V'. 1793 Abide in safety in your own abodes.

And trust your persons and your lives to God.

Ye have escaped the Riimans safe and sound,
Although ye have imbrued your hands in blood.’'

The soldiers, quarter being granted, turned
Their faces toward the Riimans, while Sikandar
Went on the battlefield, collected all
The spoil, and gave it to his troops. His army
AVas all equipped anew. They stayed awhile
Upon the field till king and hosts were rested.

Dara, the world-lord, reached Chahram where lay
His treasures’ key. The chiefs all came to him,
Fulfilled with sorrow, misery, and anguish.

There sire lamented, seeing not his son,

And son in like wise, seeing not his sire ,

The country of Iran was full of wailing,

And tears like hailstones were in every eye.

Then from Chahram he journeyed to Istakhr —

The Persians’ glory. Envoys went on all sides
To all the chieftains and the paladins.


DARA


45


The soldiers mustered at the royal palace,

They set a golden throne for Shiih Dara,

And when ho sat upon that seat of gold
The nobles, faithful still to him, drew nigh,

And he harangued the Iranians 0 ye chiefs,

Ye men of wisdom, Lions, warriors >

Consider now our course.”

He spake in anguish,

And wept awhile, then added : Bettei die
To-day with fame than live while Humans triumph.

Of old our ancestors and Shahs took tribute
Each year from them , Eiim was submiss in all
To us j but now the Persians’ fortune loureth,

Sikandar hath possessed him of all kingship,

Become 'world-lord, hath compassed throne and crown,
And will not pause, but presently be here ,

All Pars will bo as ’twere a sea of blood,

Men, women, children will be taken captive.

And neither young nor old left in the land.

If ye will give me aid I will avert
This anguish, travail, and calamity.

The Riimans used to be our nobles’ quarry,

They used to be in terror of Iran,

But we are now the quarry, they the leopards,

And in each battle we forsake the field.

Yet still if ye Avill struggle back to back
Ye shall renew your clutch upon their land,

But if one showeth slackness in the fight,

And striveth not to hazard his own life.

Abandon hope of this Avorld in that Rum
Is the Zahhak and we are the Jamshid.” ^

He spake in tears with anguish in his heart ,

His lips were livid and his cheeks Avere Avan.

The prudent nobles rose to make reply ,

A mournful Avail ascended from the court : —

' See Vol. 1. p. 139.


i' 1794


46 THE SHIhnImA OF FIRDAUSI

“We would not liave the world without the Shah.
W e all will face the conflict, make the world
Strait to our foes, and bind our skirts together ^
For conquest or the grave.”

Of all that coast
He paid and armed the leaders and the host.


§ 6


How Sihtntlar Jonijlit wiili Dcird the third Ihme, and how
Ddni d^d to Kiinym


Sikandar, ware of what Dara was doing,

And how he had become upon the throne
The moon’s own diadem, led from ’Irak
His powers while all invoked on him God’s blessing.
His army had no middle and no end ,

Lira’s good fortune was not young withal,

But still the Shah prepared to meet his foe,

And led so vast an army from Istakhr
V 1795 That thou hadst said : “ The earth can not sustain them,
And heaven itself wdll have not room to turn ’ ”

Both kings arrayed the forces of both realms,

They all had spear and mace and sword in hand,

And such a shout ascended from both hosts
As split the ears of heaven The earth became
A sea of warriors’ blood, and all the field
Of battle was o’erstrewn with headless trunks,

Paternal love itself grew pitiless.

And heaven revolved indifferent to all.

Night came, Dara was worsted, while Sikandar
Was girding up his loins for fresh assaults.

The Shah fell back upon Kirman and thus
Escaped alive the clutches of his foe ,

Meanwhile Sikandar reached Istakhr of Pars —

^ Qf. Vol iv. p 85 and note


DARA


47


The crown of Shalis, the glory of that land.

A proclamation went up at the courtgate : —

^ Ye noble men and showers of the way !

Whoe'er desireth quarter for his life,

And is a penitent before his God,

Shall be 'neath my protection, one and all.

And know it if they arc but true to me.

All that are wounded will we recompense,

And likewise cease to shed our foemen’s blood.

We will forbear the goods of private folk.

And make our wisdom manifest. Since God,

The Conqueror, hath given us Grace divine,

With greatness and the imperial diadem,

A man had better trample on the neck
Of dragons than transgress our ordinance.”

Whatever spoil was taken on the field
Sikandar shared in full among his troops.

When from Iran Dara had reached Kirman
He missed the more part of the Iranian chiefs.

A wail rose from amid the troops Thej^ saw
Not any one with helmet on his head.

Dara assembled all the great and wise,

All those who had been with him in the fight.

They came together grievously lamenting,

And burning at the evil of their lot.

Thus spake Dara ‘‘We verily have brought v. 1796

Heaven's wrath upon ourselves. None in the world
E'er hath experienced such discomfiture.

Or heard of such from statists of old time.

The wives and children of Iran are captives,

Our souls are hurt by fate, our flesh by arrows.

What are your views and what device have ye
To make our enemy repent hereof ?

We have no realm, no city, throne or crown,

No kingship, children, treasury or host,

And we are ruined if God pity not ’ ”


48 THE SHIhnAma OF FIRDAUSI

The chiefs that still survired Avept bitterly
Before Dara, and cried : ‘‘We all, 0 king !

Are stricken by the evil of the time.

The matter is beyond the host’s endeavours,

The Avaves have risen higher than our heads.

The sire is sonless and the son is sireless,

For so revolving heaven hath decreed.

Our mothers and our sisters and our daughters
Ai’o all within the clutches of Sikandar,

While all the ladies of thy family,

Who trembled for thy safety, all the wealth
Transmitted by thy noble ancestors,

Whereto thou wast the undisputed heir,

The royal offspring and the Kaians’ treasure,

Are in possession of thine enemies.

No longer can we stand against our foe
To battle with him in the Avay of fight.

Complete submission is our one resource,

For none can keep the croAvn of majesty,

And this same turning sky is passing too
O’er him as every man of wisdom knoAveth.

Present thyself in person as his liege,

And make thy court Avith many flatteries.

Then shall Ave see hoAv matters Avill result.

For heaven’s process is beyond our ken.

So Avrite a letter unto him and fill
His gloomy soul Avith thought because the man
V* 1797 Whose tongue is bright with knoAvledge Avill make shift
To pluck up evil from its base.”

Dara,

On hearing this, announced his own intent —

One in accord to royal precedent.


dArA


49


§ 7

Hoir DCird rote to Sikmidar to propose Peace

The Shall then called a veteran scribe who brought
His paper and musk-scented ink. The Shah,

In pain and grief with livid cheeks and eyes
Fulfilled with tears of blood, wrote from Dara,

Son of Darab, son of Bahman, a letter
To lion-capturing Sikandar Ciesar.

He first gave praises to the Omnipotent,

The Author of his good and evil fortune,

Then said : “ Assuredly the sage himself
Will not escape the process of the sky
Whereby we are made joyful and appalled,

At whiles exalted and at whiles abased.

The battles of our hosts turned not on valour,

But on the processes of sun and moon.

W^hat was to be hath been. Our heart is sore :

^Vhat hath yon azure vault in store for us ^

If, heart-repentant now for having sought

The fray, thou wilt consent to terms, the treasures

Both of Gushtdsp and of Asfandiyar,

The earrings and the armlets and the torques,

With all that we ourselves have gained, will I
Dispatch now from our treasury to thine.

Moreover I will aid thee in thy wars,

And when thou shalt be instant will not lag.

As for my wives and children, now thy captives,

I should not deem their restoration strange.

They who would rule the world must not be vengeful,
And from revenge on women mighty kings
Get nothing but reproach. The lord of wisdom,

Who hearkeneth to knowledge, having read
What I have written will improve thereon/'

VOL VI.


D


50


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


A cameleer departed from Kirman
In all haste to Sikandar, the arch foe,

Who, when he had perused the letter, said : —

May wisdom be the consort of his soul 1
Whoever injuroth his family.

His ladies or the children of his house.

Shall see no throne except a coffin-board,

Or dangle from the branches of a tree
I will not trouble any in Iran

And God forbid that we should take their treasures.
If thou returnest to Iran ’tis well ,

The sovereignty is altogether thine.

What thou commandest ne’er vrill I transgress,

And draw no breath unless advised by thee.'’

The camel voyaged homeward vessel-wise,

Dara was filled with anguish, heart and eyes.


§8

iZb?/? Ddni nas slain Ijy Ins Ministers

V. 1799 Dara, when he had read that answer, mused
In wonder at the process of the world.

At last he said • “ 'Tis worse than to be slain
For me to gird myself before the Euman.

A grave is better for me than disgrace,

For, as a wise man said in this regard : —
When any river riseth in its pride
A drop of rain is viewless in the tide.’

I used to succour every one in war,

But, since disaster hath befallen me,

I see not any helper in the world,

And I have none to cry to, saving God.”

As there was no one far or near to help
He wrote to Filr a humble, flattering letter


dArA


51


In deep distress and, having first of all
Praised God, said : “ Euler of the men of Hind,

Thou man of wisdom, rede, and ardent soul ’

Thou surely must have heard of my misfortune *

Sikandar hath led forth a host from Riim ,

No crops or settlements or kin or children,

Or crown or throne or royal diadem,

Or treasury or host are left to us.

Now if thou Avilt help me to keep aAvay
Destruction from myself I will dispatch
So many gems to thee out of my treasures
That never shalt thou need to toil for more.

Moreover thou shalt be renowned on earth,

And held in honour by the great/'

He sent

Like wind a cameleer who came to Fiir,

The scion of the race of Furs.

Sikandar,

On hearing what Dara, son of Darab,

Had done, bade bloAv the trumpet. There arose
The din of kettledrum and Indian bell.

Sikandar from Istakhr led forth such powers

That Sol was lost in heaven. Dara too marched

For his part, and his Grace reneAved the Avorld. V. 1800

The Avar-cry rose from both sides and the troops

Had little rest. Sikandar ranged his host,

The air groAv dark, earth viewless. When Dara
Led forth his troops — no army bent on strife,

But broken-hearted and groAvn sick of Avar —

The fortune of the Iranians drooped its head.

They closed not Avith the Rdmans hand to hand ;

They were the fox, the Riimans were the lion,

And all the chiefs asked quarter, having come
DoAvn from their pride to deep humility.

Dara saw, turned away, and fled lamenting.

With him there Avent three hundred cavaliers—


S3 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

The noblest of Iran. He had withal
Two ministers of high degree, who used
To comrade him in tight. The name of one —

An archimage — was Mahiyar, the other

Was called Jantisiyar. These twain, on seeing

Their etforts fruitless and the star ere while

So lofty, and the glory, of Dara

Thus set, held talk and said * “ This luckless man

Henceforth will see not crown and throne again .

We needs must poniard him upon the breast,

Or smite his head with Indian sword. Sikandar
Will give to us a province. We shall be
A crown upon the kingdom.'’

Both of them,

One minister, the other treasurer.

Went with the Shah, Janhsiyar, the chief,

Upon the left hand, Mahiydr to right.

Night gloomed, a storm arose, Jantisiyar
Laid hand upon a dagger, stabbed the king
LTpon the breast, that famed head reached its fall,
And then the troops deserted, one and all


§ 9

How JDdrd told Jus last Wislie^i to Sil^andar and died

The ministers came to Sikandar, saying * —

“ 0 Shah victorious and endowed with knowledge !

V. iSoi We have surprised and slain thine enemy ,

The crown and throne of chiefs are his no more.”

Sikandar, having heard Jamisiyar,

Said thus to Mahiyar : “ Where is the foe
Whom thou hast overthrown ^ Show me the way.”

The two led on. The Riiman’s heart and soul
Were filled with rage and grief. On drawing nigh


dJrA


53


He gazed upon Dara and saw his breast
All blood, his countenance like fenugreek,

Gave orders to alight and set a guard
O’er those two ministers, and then, dismounting
As swift as Avind himself, took on his lap
The Avounded monarch’s head and, tarrying
Until the stricken should begin to speak.

Chafed Avith his hands the visage of Dara,
Eemoving from the head the royal croAvm,
Unclasping from the breast the warrior’s mail,
While shoAvermg tears on him because no leech
Was then at hand to tend upon the Avounded,

And saying “ All yet shall be Avell Avith thee .

It is thy foemen’s hearts that shall be Avrung.

Arise and seat thee on this golden litter,

Or, if thou hast the strength, mount on thy steed.

I Avill have leeches brought to thee from Hind
And Rum, and mourn thy pain Avith tears of blood.
I Avill resign to thee the realm and throne.

When thou art better we will pack and go,

But these that thus have Avronged thee Avill I hang
Head-doAvnAvard from tAvo gibbets presently.

When yesterday these two old men informed me
My heart flowed over, and I cried aloud,

Because we tAvain are of one root and piece :

Why for ambition should Ave Avreck our race ? ”
Dara, on hearing this, began to speak.

And said . “ May wisdom alAvay be thy mate.

Sure am I that thou Avilt be recompensed
By God, the all-holy Judge, for these thy words;
But as for Avhat thou said’st : ‘ Imn is thine,

Thine are the crown and throne’s seat of the brave,’
Death is much nearer to me than the throne ;

’Tis quit of ruined men. High heaven so Avilleth,
Whose joy is travail and Avhose profit loss.

Beware of saying : ‘ I by mine own might


V. 1802


54 THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI

Prevailed o’er tins famed people ’ Know that good
And ill are both of God, and while thou livest
Give Him the praise. I illustrate my words,

And am a sign to all. What majesty,

Kingship, and wealth were mine ' I injured none.
What arms, what troops withal, what noble steeds,
What thrones and crowns, what children, what allies
Allies I My biand was burnt upon their hearts ^

Then earth and time were bondslaves in my presence
And thus it was while fortune proved my friend.
Then by this token I grew quit of good,

And captive in the hands of murderers ,

I had no hope in children or in kin,

The world was darkened and mine eyes were glazed
01 all my kindred there is none to help me ,

My sole hope is in Him who giveth all.

Thus stricken am 1 lying in the dust ,

The world hath got me in the net of ruin.

Such is the custom of this turning sky
Alike with monarch and with paladin :

All kingship too departeth in the end ,

It is the quarry and the hunter death.”

Sikandar wept blood-drops upon the Shah,

Thus stricken in the dust, who at the sight
Of all that heart-felt grief and tears o’erflowing
His pallid cheeks, said: ‘‘ Weep not, tears are vain.
The smother is my portion of the fire.

He that bestowed so much on me, and fortune
That so illumed me, have apportioned this
Now give thine ear to this my last request,

Receive arid keep it wisely in thy heart.”

Sikandar said to him : ‘‘ ’Tis thine to bid :

Say what thou wilt, I pledge to thee my word.”

V. 1803 Dara spake quickly and recounted all

His last requests, beginning thus : “ 0 chief ?

Fear thou the almighty Ruler of the world,


dAra


55


For He created the heaven, the earth, and time,

The mighty and the weak. Protect my children,

My kindred, and the consorts that I love ,

Ask me for my chaste daughter as thy vrife,

And let her share thy throne m happiness.

Her mother used to call her Eushanak,

And made the world both glad and fair to her.

Thou wilt have no reproaches from my child,

Nor any jibings from the ill-disposed,

For kings have nurtured her, and she is fit
In rede to be the crown upon the noble
Thou mayst see born to her a youthful prince
Who will revive the name Asfandiyar,

Eelume the altar of Zarduhsht, take up
The Zandavasta, heed the presages,

The feast of Sada and the Fanes of Fire,

With glorious Nauriiz, TJrmuzd, and Mihr,

And lave his soul and face in wisdom’s stream,

Eestore the customs of Luhrasp and follow
The doctrine of Gushtasp, maintain both high
And low in their degree, illume the Faith,

And see good days.”

Sikandar made reply : —

“ 0 monarch of kind heart and honest speech '

I do accept thy rede and last requests,

And I will tarry in thy borders only*

To compass these good matters, and herein
Take wisdom for my guide.”

The world-lord graspetl
Sikandar’s hand, began to wail, then pressed
The palm upon his mouth, and said : Be God
Thy refuge. I resign my place to thee,

Depart to dust, and give my soul to Him.”

He spake, his soul passed, and folk wept him sorely, v, 1804
Sikandar rent his garments and strewed dust
Upon the Kaian throne. Then for Dara,


56 THE SH Ann AM A OF FIRDAUSI

According to the custom of his race,

And honouring his Glory and his Faith,

Sikandar built a charnel-house. They washed
The monarch’s blood away with clear rose-water,
Now that the time of endless sleep was come.

And draped him in brocade of Riim ; the pattern
Was all in jewelry, the ground was gold.

The corpse was hid by camphor, none beheld
Dara’s face more. They set within the charnel
A golden throne, overhead a crown of musk,

And laid him out upon a golden bier,

While every eye rained blood, then lifting it
They passed it on from hand to hand. Sikandar
Preceded it afoot, went too the nobles.

Their eyes all charged with blood, and thus ho fared
Until the rites were o’er, and thou hadst said . —

His very skin hath burst » ”

When he had placed

The Shah’s bier on the throne, had gone the way
Of royal precedent, left that grand charnel.

And made the lofty portals fast without,

He set a gibbet for Janiisiyar,

AVith one for Mahiyar of equal size,

And hung those miscreants alive thereon —

Those regicides — head downward. From the host
Came warriors with stone in hand and slew them
Upon the gibbet all despiteously :

So perish every slayer of a king *

Now when the Iranians saw how much Sikandar
Was troubled for the Shah — that noble man —

They all of them began to laud his worth,

And hailed him as the ruler of the earth.


57


§ lO

Hoii i^ihamlar ryoU to the Nohlcs of Iran

One left Kirmaii to go to Ispahan,

Wherein the Iranian chieftains were assembled.

One too — a man of high authority — V. 1S05

Approached the women-folk of Shah Dtira,

Gave greetings on Sikandar’s part, recounted
All that had happened to Dara, and then
Spake thus : The hearts of foe and friend alike
Rejoice not at the death of lawful Shahs.

Know ye to-day then that I am Dara.

If he is hidden I am manifest,

And greater favours are m store for you.

There is no cause to rend your hearts with grief ,

We all are born to death, both Shah and host,

It is the sole way though thou tarry long.

Convey your havings to Istakhr and gain
New glory by affinity to us.

Iran is now as ever it hath been ;

May health of body and glad hearts be yours.’'

They wrote to every province, prince, and peer
As from Sikandar, son of Failakus,

The great, the lord of earth and dread of foes,

A letter to the kinglike potentates,

Brave cavaliers and ready for the fray.

He sent withal a letter to the archmages,

All brilliancy, excuse, and compliment.

This was the heading : “ From the king of Kaians
To all the administrators of Iran,”

And, when the pen of Chm had dipped in ink
Gris-ambered, first there came the praise of God,

The righteous J udge, the Maker of the world,

And things invisible and visible.


58 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Both worlds were made by His creative word *

Thou canst not call in question His decree.

The sky, which thou bcholdest thus revolving
AVill, while it lasteth, never scape His ken.

Whate’er He willeth is at His command ,

We all are slaves and He is sovereign.

From Him be greetings to the men of name
Above their own deserts. Remember naught
Of all that passeth in this world of ours
Save honest fame, accomplishment, and justice.
Amid my conquests griet hath come to me,

And mourning at a feast. I swear by Hiiu,

1806 The Lord of sun on high, that ne’er I purposed
Harm to Dara’s life. They that wished him ill
Were of his household, and the act was not
A stranger's but a servant’s who hath felt
God’s chastisement and sutfered for his crimes.

Now seek ye justice, do as I command,

And stake your lives upon your fealty
As ye would have success from heaven, would have
At my hands purses, captives, thrones, and crowns
Mine ardent heart is woeful for Dara,

And I shall strive to do his last behests.

Whoe’er he be that cometh to my court

Shall have drachms, honours, thrones, and diadems .

But, if he will abide at his own house,

Let him not swerve from his hdelity
Send ye my treasury its dues, and then
No one shall suffer either pain or travail.

Coin money with Sikandar’s superscription,

Be diligent, and break not faith with him ,

Maintain henceforth your kings’ seat as of old ,

Let not your marches be without a guard,

And in this matter let each show his worth ,

Take care that there shall be in each bazar
A watch to call our name continually


DARA


59


That thieves may do no harm and ye abide
In all success and joy. Send to our bower,

To those devoted to us, from each city
A goodly handmaiden, a slave of sense
And modesty, fit for our golden chambers,

One knowing all the doctrines of our Faith,

And having no reluctance to be sent.

For wrong must not be done to any captive.

Those strangers who pass through our provinces V. 1S07

Afoot, in abstinence, heart-free from vice.

Content to live the life of mendicants,

And called Siifi's,^ distinguish from mere beggars,

And let them stand the foremost on the roll.

If any of you are unfortunates,

Afflicted by an officer of mine,

Break ye the unjust doer’s heart and back,

And rase him utterly, both root and branch.

I will suspend alive that miscreant,

Who hath led fair beginnings all astray.

Enrich your hearts by alms and equity,

And make nobility your diadem,

Because your lives will pass and time account
Our every step. Whoever doth trangress
Our will shall suffer for it in the end.”

The letter having been dispatched, he went
And took serene possession of the world.

He left Kirman and coming to Istakhr
Encrowned him with the Kaians’ glorious crown.

Seek not the secrets of the world to pry
It turneth from the seeker’s scrutiny ;

Make knowledge in this life thy chief pursuit,

For in the next thou wilt enjoy the fruit.


^ A sect of mystics


XX


SIKANDAR

HE REIGNED FOURTEEN YEARS

AEOITMBNT

fiikaiiJtLi, on cibceiiLliug ibe tliioiie, haidnijiies the nobles and
nianiob luishanak, the daui^hbor of Daia. The poet then tells of
SikandcUb dealin^i> with Kaid and Fiii (Poius) of Hind, his visit
to the Kaaba, to Queen Kaiddfa (Candace), to the Brahmans, to
the Western Sea, to the land of Habash and of the Narmp^ii, to
the City of Women, to the Darkness in search of the Water of
Life, and to the Angel Isr»lfil. Sikandar then again turns east-
ward, and erects a baiiier against Yajuj and Majii] (Gog and
Magog), reaches the End of the World, and is warned of his own
death by the Speaking Tiee The poet then tells of Sikandai’s
relations with Faghfur of Chin, of his visit to Babil, of his corre-
spondence with Aristalis (Aiistotle), and of the circumstances
attending his death and biuial

NOTE

The Vullers-Landauei text, from which we have translated thus
far, does not extend beyond the leignof Dar/i, and from this point
to the end we have made our version fioni the text of Macan.
Mohl’s edition of the text — the alternative — is, apart from other
reasons for our choice, too ponderous for j^ractical purposes ; the
volume of it coiitaming the leign of Sikandai, for instance,
measiues i8 x 13 x 2,“* inches and weighs 17 lbs 2 ozs. * The prin-
ciples of our translation remain the same as laid down 111 the
Introduction,^ but it is necessary to add that in Macan’s edition
there are many misprints not included in the Errata at the end
of his volumes These misprints we have corrected in our trans-
lation, but have not thought it necessary to call attention to them

^ Vol. 1. p 77.


SIKANDAR


6i


in footnotes The coriections for the most part are quite obvious,
and sufficiently indicated in our version to any one acquainted
with the original

§§ 2-4. These correspond general^ with the Pseudo-Callisthenes,
Book II. chap, 22, and with the Syriac version, Book II chap 14.
For Roxana, see p 32

§§ 5~ii. Alexander on his ai rival in India naturally came into
contact with the Fakirs — the mendicant and ascetic orders which
are such a feature of that comitry His pilot, Onesiciitus,
has left an account of an embassy on which he was sent to
them. He describes how he found fifteen men standing, sitting,
or lying in various attitudes naked in the sun, and conversed
with two of them, Oalanus and Mandanes, of whom the lattei was
the older, the wiser, and the more generally amenable.^ The
former, however, accompanied Alexander back to Persia, where,
having fallen into bad health, he was burnt to death by his own
request. 2 Calanus is mentioned also by Alexander’s admiral,
Nearchus,^ and by Chares of Mytilene * According to Plutarch
his real name was Sphincs, and Calanus was a name given him by
the Greeks because 111 salutations he used the word kale^ “ hail.” ®
The accounts in the original authorities of Calanus and Mandanes,
or Dandamis — a name by which also he is known — were freely
used by later wiiteis ^ Palladius, who was bishop of Helenopolis
at the beginning of the fifth century a d., wrote a treatise on the
peoples of India and the Brahmans in which he gives an account of
Calanus and Bandamis, diawn from the oldei authorities. This
work was interpolated into Codex A of the Pseudo-Callisthenes,
wheie it foims chaps. 7-16 of Book III, thus bringing Calanus
into the Romance Dandamis had appealed already in chap. 6
The passage from Palladius is given 111 the eaily Latin version of
the Romance by Julius Valerius, but not m the Syriac translation
from the Pahlavi The first oriental mention of the Indian sages
seems to be in the little Pahlavi treatise known as the Kctrnamak-i-
Ardshir-i-Papakilii, which will engage our attention later on in the
present volume " In that treatise, which dates back probably to
the seventh century A.D., the foimdei of the Sasiinian dynasty
consults the wise Indian, K.ait. It is true that Ardshir Papakaii
lived five centuries after Sikandar, but 111 the Shtihnama this
would be no bar to the reappearance of the sage. Ya’kiibi, the
Aiabic histoiian, writing towards the end of the ninth century


1 MF, p. so. ^ DAA, vii. 3. MF, 60, 71. * /ci. 118

® Life of Alexander, chap. 65. There is a Sanskrit woid lalycinu,
which means “ lucky.” See MCI, p. 386.

® 392 7 seg pp^ 2^5^


62


THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI


A D , has <111 account of Sikandar's meeting with a wise Indian king
named Kaihan. In Palilavi the letter t well might be taken for
the letteis h and n, and these with the short vowel a interposed
would make Kaihan ^ The story of the Indian sage seems rapidly
to have developed in oriental hands, as is evident fiom the account
given by Mas’udi, who died in a.d 956, of the dealings of Sikandar
with the wise Indian king, Kand - Mas’udi, indeed, professes to give
an abridgment only, but his version, with one exception, agrees
closely with that of Fiidausi The exception is the mtioductory
matter contained 111 § 5, which appears to be the poet’s own con-
tiibution to the stoiy Kaid’s dreams are a veiled presentment
of Firdausi’s own discontent with the ciicumstances of his own
time, and contain a fierce airaignment of Sultan Mahmud himself ^
Kait, Kaihan, Kand, and Kaid evidently represent the same per-
sonality, which IS none other than that of the Mandanes 01
Dandamis of classic authors, while the sage whom he sends as one
of his four gifts to Sikandai is the histoiical Calanus ^ Firdausi
adopted the foiin Kaid for ihjnning purposes Kaid, w^e aie told
m § 6, dwelt at Milud Historically tins would be Taxila, a city
situated betw’een the Indus and the Hydaspes (Jliilam) and Attock
and Ra^valpindi. Omphis, the king of Taxila, who was at enmity
with Ins neighbour King Porus, was on very friendly terms with
Alexander. Both Calanus and Mandanes or Dandamis weie resi-
dent at Taxila. In the Shahnama Sikandar’s dealings with Kaid
aie placed coirectly before the war with Fiir In the Pseudo-
Callisthenes the interpolation from Palladius is inserted after
the account of Alexandei’s interview with the naked Indian sages
in Book III. chaps 5 and 6, a passage which is an integral part
of the work and will be dealt with later on, for the interview is
represented both in the Pseiido-Callisthenes and in the Shahnama
<is taking place after the war with Porus (Fui).® In Mas’iidi and
Mirkhcind the aiiair wuth Kaid also takes place after that war.^
Their account of Sikandar’s passage of wits with the sage agrees
closely wnth that of Fiidausi in §11, save that when Sikandar
returns the lusted mirror to the sage the latter makes a cup that
will float of it , on which Sikandar sends it back filled with earth,
and the sage returns it to him mtliout alteration, earth being the
last word in all matters Such symbolism is common 111 the
East, and the whole passage might be interpreted thus. The Shah
liegins by suggesting that the sage had better get into training
if Ins wits are to be of any use to his new master. The sage

1 XAR, 47. 2 MM, 11. 260 « Of Vol 1. p. 33.

^ NAR, 47 5 See p 61. e

^ MM, 11. 260 , RM, Pait I. vol. ii. p. 253.


SIKANDAR


63


leplies that they are already as shaip as needles The Shtlli le-
toits that, thoui^h they may be sharp they are unpolished, and
the sago rejoins that on the contrary they are exceedingly bright.
T'he Shith then observes that he can soon take the shine out of
them, and the sage retorts that he knows a trick worth two of
that At this point the Shah, hoping to take the sage at a dis-
advantage, summons him and lequests him to interpret what had
passed between them, thinking that he may not like to put Ins
symbolism into plain speech The sage, howevei, is equal to the
occasion, and on the spur of the moment gives an unexpected turn
to his interpretation, and one which meets -with the Shah’s
approval The tiue interpretation seems to be this The Shah by
sending a bowl full of ghee indicates that already he is so charged
with knowledge that he has no occasion foi the sage’s services.
The sage, by inserting many needles into the ghee, suggests that
there is room for improvement. The Shah lephes that his finer
faculties have become too blunted by the cares of his station.
The sage rejoins that he can amend that. The Shah retorts that
the improvement will not last, but this the sage denies. Mas’udi
<idds that ultimately Sikandar allowed the sage to leturn to liis
own country ^

A similar stoiy is told by Hiuen Tsiang of two great Buddhist
saints who lived about the first century b.c. One visited the
other to hold discussion with him. The visitor was not admitted
at once. The other sent a disciple to him with a begging bowl
full of water, symbolising the fulness, depth, and lucidity of the
wisdom of his master The visitor said nothing but dropped a
needle into the bowl The disciple returned and reported what
had happened to his mastei, who at once recognised the worth of
the visitor and gave orders that he should be admitted.-

§§ 12-15 These correspond with Book III chap. 1-4 of the
Pseudo-Callisthenes and of the Syriac version of it, and like them
are quite unhistoiical, as ivill be seen from the following summary
of what really happened. On quitting Taxila, Alexander marched
to the Hydaspes ( Jlnlani), on the opposite bank of which he found
Porus with his forces prepared to dispute the passage. He
deceived Porus so often by feints that after a time the latter
ceased to believe that Alexanders intention of crossing the river
was serious , and Alexander, m a night of storm and ram, suc-
ceeded ill effecting the passage — one of his most biilliant feats of
aims. Immediately after the crossing he was attacked by the son
of Porus with a small force, which he defeated without much
difiiculty, and the son of Porus was slain. The general engage-


^ MM, 11 276.


2 BBR, 11. 310 , 315 note.


64


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


merit with Porus hiinsolf followed. Alexander* w as again victorious,
and Porus, who had behaved throughout with great gallantry and
was wounded, surrendered after Alexander had sent several mes-
sengers to beg him so to do Alexander treated Porus with evei\
consideration, restored his kingdom to him, and enlarged it. The
battle with Porus was fought in the late spring or early summer
of J 3 .C 326. Alexander then continued Ins advance into India,
crossed the Akesines (Ohiiiab) and the Hydiaotes (Eavi), and
reached the Hyphasis (Beas). At this point his army refused to
proceed further, and he acceded to their wishes, though with
the greatest reluctance In the Pseiido-Callist Irenes such histo-
rical features as survive aie adapted so as to contribute to the
gloiy of its hero Thus the protest of the army takes place before
the battle with l^oi us and pi eves ineflective, because it was incum-
bent that Alexander should meet with no check The difficulty
of tianspoiting hoises across a inei on the fuithei bank of which
a strong force of elephants was drawn up to oppose them, and the
known antipath} of horses to elephants, suggested the device of
the non steeds A tradition, resting on good authority, that
Porus was very tall, “more than five cubits m height” according
to Aiiian,^ suggested that Alexander should be made out to be
very small The death of the son of Porus may have suggested,
01 been mistaken tor, that of his father, which naturally is repre-
sented as having been caused by Alexander’s own hand
The difteiences between the Pseudo-Oalhsthenes and Fiidausi
are not important and chictiy 111 matters of detail In the foimer
Porus begins the coiiespondence ; he has wild boasts as well as
elephants in his arm}. In branches B and C Alexander, disguised
as a sutler, visits the city of Porus and has an interview with
him. In the battle that ensues Bucephalus falls, in branch A by
the hand of Porus The battle lasts for tw^enty days, and so forth.

In the latter the kingdom of Fiii is situated beyond Kami 113 a

cit} on the Ganges — and it is there that the correspondence with
Fill* takes place After the correspondence conies the protest of
the army against proceeding further. JSikandai appoints Sawuig
king in Fur’s stead.

§ 16. This IS deiived, of course, not from the Pseudo-Callis-
thenes, but from independent Arabic sources. It appears 111
Dinawari, who died in a d. 896 ^ The insertion makes wild w'ork of
the geography, for it brings Sikandar back from Kanndj, accord-
ing to Firdausi, to Mecca. Later on,-* he has to go eastward again
in order to interview the Brahmans
The neighbourhood of Mecca has been a sacied spot from time

^ DAA, u 19 - NAK, 39 1 § 24.


SIKANDAR


65


iiniiieiiiorial. Tiie city stands 111 a sacied tcnitor} kiiuwn as

Haram,” i e piohibiied,” and contains the still moie sacied
Kaaha, into the wall of which, and perhaps most sacred of all, is
built the inoteoiite known as the Black Stone.’' The Kaaba
itseit, aceoidmg to the Kurjin, was built by Abraham and IshmaeiJ
The custody of the Haram — a position of great honom and pioht
— was in the hands now of one, now of another, of the Arab tribes.
In Muhammad’s time the Kiuaish, whose ancestoi was Nasi, son
of Katib, were in charge Previously it had been in that of the
Khuza'. The fact that the change of guardianship is attributed
to Sikandai is an eloquent testimony to his fame.- Kahtan,
according to Aiah tradition, ivas descended from Shem, and was
one of the great piogemtors of the race. He was identified with
Joktau

§ 4 ? 17-23. We learn from Quintus Curtins that when Alexandei
was besieging Mazaga, a city situated piohably on the Swat Bivei ,
and the inhabitants despaired of the defence, their queen Cleophis,
attended by many noble ladies, came out to him, was leceived
graciously, and confirmed 111 her sovereignty Some people, how-
evei, i\eie ill-natuied enough to say that her personal charinb
lather than Alexander’s humanity brought about this lesult. At
all events she is said to have had a son later on whom she named
Alexander * Alexander’s relations with Cleophis and his visit to
the Oasis of Ammon may have suggested to the author of tlie
Pseudo-Callisthenes the episode wluch is the sub3ect of the above
sections The story is, of course, unhistorical , but it is easy to
see how it would suggest itself to an Egyptian, whethei native 01
natuialised Both before and after the Christian era Candace
seems to have been the dynastic name of the queens, whether sole
regnant, consort, or dowagei, of that part of Nubia which is
bou^ided by the Nile, the Blue Nile, and the Atbara, and known
as the Island 01 as Meroe, the latter being also the name of one
of its two principal cities, the other being Napata. Excavations
liave brought to light remains of tombs and palace, and reliefs of
various queens of a pronounced negioid type. Whethei Alexander
was intioduced into some already existing stoiy, told oiiginally
in another connexion, of one of the old queens of Meioe, 01
whether the i^bole thing is the invention of the Egyptian authoi
of the Pseudo-Callisthenes, it is impossible to say. Firdausis
veision of the story corresponds with the Pseudo-Callisthenes,
Bk - III chaps 18-24, ^^d with the Syriac version of it, Bk
HI. chaps 8-14 The three are closely in accord in most points,

^ RK, p. 446. 2 XAR, 39, and note.s.

' Gen. X. 25 ; I Chron, i. 19-20 * HQC, Bk. viii. c. 10

VOL. VI. E


66


THE SHAHHAuA of FIRDAUSI


nut there «ire ditferences in uiatteis of detail and m the nameh
of the oharacteis in the story. The Kandake (Candace) of the
Pseudo-Callisthenes and of the Syriac veision becomes Kaidafa
in Firdausi, which shows that his account came to him through
the Arabic, in which the name, in the absence of diacritical points,
could be read eithei way. Similarly the Kandaules of the Greek,
the Kandiiins of the Syriac,^ became Kaidriish, the story having
]>asbed fioiii Gieek into Pahlavi, fiom Pahlavi into Syriac, from
Syiiae into Arabic, and from Arabic into Persian again (modern
instead of middle) befoio Fiidausi dealt with it. In the Pseudo-
Oallisthenes and the Syriac version Ptolemy takes Alexander’s
place when Kaidiush is brought into court, and Alexander assumes
the name of Antigoiius In Firdausi the latter becomes the name
of Sikandar's chief ininistei (ISTaitkiin), and the two exchange their
lespective positions. In the Gieek and the Syriac the wife of
Kandaules is taken prison ei by a hostile king, while Kandaules
himself escapes to the camp of Alexander, who legains his wife for
him In Fiidausi the pair are taken prisoners by Sikandar while
celebrating their wedding-feast in the city of king Faryan, the
father of the bride. This version is more considerate of the
lady, who does not get oft so easily in the Greek and Syriac In
the Greek too the scene of the action is laid in the kingdom of
Semiiamis, whose descendant ^ Kaidafa is stated to be In the
Syiiac the name Semiiamis is corrupted into that of a people In
the Shahnama the scene is laid in Andaliis, ^ e in Spam, which was
conquered by the Arabs early in the eighth century a.d. In the
Greek, Candace’s other son, who had married a daughter of Porus,
IS unnamed, but is called Charogos in the early Latin version of
Julius Valerius. In the Syriac he appears as Keiator, and in the
Shdhnama as Tainirsh, who is represented theie as being the eldest
son, as in the Ethiopic, where he is called Kanir.® The Ethiiopic
too alone coincides with the Shdhnama in giving the dramatic
conclusion of the story — the discovery by Tainiish (Kanir) that
the ambassador to Ins mothei was Alexander himself — from which
we might conclude that both versions derived the incident from a
common Arabic source Another view, however, may be suggested
The hand of a poet is visible in Firdausi’s presentment of the
whole story He enlists our sympathy by making Kaidriish and
his wife a newly married couple, which is found in no other ver-
sion, suppresses the worst of the lady’s misfortunes, which is

1 The I being lead as a cy. i». 14.

® Proneptis in the version of Julius Valeiius, fiom which the Gieek
IS restored. HPC, p 126.

® BLEA, p. 206.


SIKANDAR


67


expressed or implied 111 the othei versions, and m.ikes two other
oonsequeiitial alteiations Tainiisli is described as being the elder
instead of the younger son, because Firdausi repiesents him as
having been longer mariicd , and Farydn, who stands for the
abductor of the lady 111 the other versions, becomes her own fathei
Further, the Ethiopia version appeals to have been a late produc-
tion which came into being some time between the fourteenth
and sixteenth centuries, ^ when the Sh.dinama itself had become a
great authority, and it seems not unlikely that the dramatic con-
clusion in the Bthio]iic version was derived through the Arabic
from Fiidausi’s own handiwork.

§ 24 This coiresponds with Bk. III., chaps. 5-6, of the Pseudo-
Oallistlienes and of the Syriac version, in both of which the order
of events IS the wai with Poius, the interview with the Bialmians,
the aftair with Candace. In Firdausi the order of the last two
IS transposed. This is due to the inteipolation from Arabic
sources of Sikandar’s expedition to the Kaaba, in § 16, imme-
diately after the war with Fiir. Consequently he has to make
a second expedition eastward His interview with the Biahmans
m<iy be lei* aided as a liteiary invention based paitly on the
account of Onesicritus ® and partly on some other souice, which is
responsible for his questions and their answers. These appear in
Plutaich's Liji of Aleutndei, ch. 64. That historian makes the
interview take place in the course of Alexander’s voyage down
the Indus to the sea The questions and answeis vary in the
different accounts The question as to whether the living 01 the
dead are the most numerous is found in Plutaich, whoie the
answer IS, the living, in the Pseudo-Callisthenes, m Julius Valerius,
and in the Syiiac and Ethiopic versions
The question whether there is most land or water occuis in the
Pseudo-Calli&thenes and Julius Valerius. In the Syriac version
the question is as to whether the land 01 the water is the older.
In Plutarch the question is whether the earth or sea produces
the largest beast. In both cases the answer is, the earth.

The question as to who are the sinners, or the most sinful, is
found in the Pseudo-Oallisthenes, in Julius Valerius where it
occurs 111 the form, which is the most cunning of beasts 111 the
Syriac and in the Ethiopic.

Alexander’s question as to what the Brahmans would have of
him is found in the Pseudo-Callisthenes, in Julius Valerius, and
in the Syriac and Ethiopic versions.

Several of the questions occuiiing 111 other versions do not
appear in the Sh.lhn/uiia, such, for instance, as those m the Syiiac

1 PHA, V. lxx>ix ^ S-e p 61 , and cf NAR. p. 6


68


THE SHAHNAma of FIRDAUSI


ab to wliothei dej'tii or life is the mightier; wlucli existed first,
day or ni^Iit , and i\hethei the limbs on the left side of the bod\
01 on the right side are the better, and so forth,

25-27. At thn'i point the adventiiies of Sikandar become
moie loniantic. In codex A of the Pseiido-Oalbsthenes, and in
the Latin version of Julius Valeiius, they foim the subject of
d letter, purporting to be written bj" Alexander to Anstotle, and
come between the visit to the Liabnians and that to Candace.
The lettei is a long one, and is lengthier still in the Syriac
veision, whn li contains incidents no longei extant in the Greek
but found in the Shuhn.lma In the Greek the letter forms
eh. 17 and in the Syiiac ch 7 of Bk III

[t may be well to quote here a shoit passage from M‘Orindle’fc
Aii('ieiit Iwha ih'^ruheJ hy Mutjthfhfju'i and A/iuni^ which is veiy
apposite in the present connexion. Speaking of the ancient
Greeks' conception of India, he says — ‘‘ They imagined it to be
an Eastern Ethiopia which stretched away to the uttermost
verge of the wtuld, and which, like tlio Ethiopia of the West, was
inhabited by a lace of men whose visages were scoiched black by
the fieice ra}s of the sun. See Homer, Od. 1. 23-24, wdiere we lead

AiHioTres, roi 0(,x&a bedaiaraiy e'cr^aroi dpbpwv,

Oi (j.kv 5v<TOfj.ipov'TTr€pioPO^ oi S’ dPLdvTos

(The Ethiopians, who aie divided into two, and live at the w^orld’s
end — one part of them tow’aids the setting sun, the othei tow^ards
the rising ) Herodotus in several passages mentions the Eastern
Ethiopians, but distinguishes them from the Indians (see par-
ticularly Bk. vii. 70) Ktcsias, however, who wrote somewhat
later than Heiodotus, frequently calls the Indians by the name
of Ethiopians, and the final disci iminat ion between the two races
was not made till the Makedonian invasion gave the Western
woild more coiiect view^s of India Alexander himself, as w^e
leal 11 from Strabo, on first reaching the Indus mistook it foi the
htiie Much lies 111 a name, and the error made by the Gieeks in
thus calling India Ethiopia led them into the further error of
consideiing us pextinent to both these countries narrations,
wdiether of fact or fiction, which conceined but one of them
exclusively This explains why we find in Greek literature men-
tion of pecuhai or fabulous races, both of men and othei animals,
which existed appaieiitly m duplicate, being represented some-
times as located in India, and sometimes 111 Ethiopia or the
coimtiies theieto adjacent.’' ^ Bearing this passage in mind, it
IS easy to understand that the oiigmal author of the Romance of


^ 3ICAI, p 3aiid«oift.


SIKANDAR


69


AleXiindei, wliobG idea was to make his heio tiaveise the whole
world, and the Liter ledactors of the Homance, found it easy to
piovide a ciop of marvels, of which the Persian version in the
Shillin/tma fuinishes a by no means exhaustive account. The
Macedonian invasion may have given the Western world more
collect idea^ of India, but it did not prevent the Pseudo-CVilhs-
thenes fiom coming into being some five centimes later and
houiishing exceedingly The let urn of Alexander from India to
Peisia by soa and land along the desolate shores of Makion
'Oedrosia) naturally gave rise to a crop of marvels not all without
h mndatioii.

^25 The people eiicouiitored by Sikandar after leaving the
Brahmans ivoie known to Ariian as the Ontie. They dwelt in
the neighbourhood of the Pur- All Piver He desciibes them as
wealing a diess and using arms similar to those of the Indians,
but as difieimg in language and customs ^ The shore-dwelling
Oiitte are responsible for one of the etymologies suggested for
the name of their countiy — Makivin — n\ “ Mrihi-khuiaii,” “ Fish-
eateis, ’ “ Iclithyophagi,” which, even if it be not correct, is at least
appropnate Two extracts fiom Arrian’s Indicccy based on the
account of Nearchus, Alexander’s admiral, and others fiom modern
sources, will serve to show that the habits of the shore-dwelleis
in that region have not altered materially during a period of ovei
two thousand years, if we except the employment of the skeletons
of whales for house-building — a custom that would be mentioned
by modern tiavellers in those jiarts if it still obtained. The
dwellings now consist of mats held together by poles or else take
the form of mud huts ^ “ The Ichthyophagi live on fish, whence
their name Few of them indeed fish, few indeed have boats for
the purpose, or know the art of fishing, but catch most at the ebb
of the tide. Some even have made nets to do this, most of such
a size that they stretch two stades ® These they make of palm-
bass, which they twist like flax When indeed the sea recedes,
deserts the land, and leaves it dry, it is generally void of fish, but
when the land retains the water in some deeper indentation, then
they find a great abundance. Of these most are small, others
large. These they encircle with their nets and take. The finer
sorts they eat raw as they draw them from the watei , the laiger
and coaiser they dry 111 the sun, and, as soon as they are baked
through, reduce them to flour by grinding and convert them into


1 DAI, c. 25.

* Diary of Proceedings of the Mission into MeLran, By Major F. J
Ooldsmid, in JKGS, Vol. xxxiii. pp. 189, 198, 200, 203.

2 llathei ovei 400 j^aids.


70


THE SH Ah NAM A OF FIRDAUSI

bread. Some make it into a paste. They even give their beasts
fish- flour instead of f odder. All the region, in the absence of
meadows, pioduces no herbage. They take withal in these parts
a gieat (jiiantit} of ciabs, oysters, and shell-fish The region
al&i> natuially pioduces salt, from which they make (an equi-
valent 01 substitute foi oil. Those of them indeed that in-
habit the deseit paits, and a region productive of neither trees
noi fiuit, live on fish only* a few sow a little ground, and eat
bread as a relish with their fish, for fish are then com They
build then houses thus The wealthiest of them take whatever
bones of the whale the sea throws up, and use them in the iilace
of timber, making the hugest into doors The indigent majoiity
make then houses of fish bones ^ In the following chaptei Airian
enteis inoie into detail —“Some of the whales aie diiv’-en ashoie
occasioiitdh in vaiious places, and are stranded when the tide
recedes, others aie cast on to the land by violent storms, and
peiish of putiefaction , then fiesh dioppmg off leaves then bones
foi men to employ in house-building. Their gi eater ribs are
selected foi the beams, the smaller foi the planks , the 3aw-bones
are taken for doois.” ”

A modem account says — ‘^Nearchus . . names the vrliole of
this coast, from the river Indus to Charbai, the country of the
Ichthyophagi or fish-eaters, and the inhabitants still live entirely
on fish, the cattle having much the same diet as their masters, foi
the countiy is w'holly destitute and barren, and yields no sort of
grass. Vast stoies of oysteis, ciabs, and all kind of shell-fish are
found on the coast, of which Nearchus’s description is geneially
veiy accurate. In many places, both here and in Arabia, the
cattle are fed entirely on clued fish and dates mixed together, on
account of the great scarcity of grass in these sun-burnt and
sandy regions.”

A latei account says — “ Fi&h, to this day, is the staple article
of food for those of the inhabitants living on the sea-board, and in
this respect they fully beai out the name of %chthyoflia(j'i given to
their ancestors by ancient writers.” ^ And again . — “ Nearchus . . .
coasted along the shores of Balochistan, and his account of the
natives he met with, and the difficulty he found in obtaining
supplies, is as ci edible as if the voyage had been carried on under
similar ciicumstances at the present day ”


1 DAI, c. 29. 2

^ Notes made on a Suvtey alotuj the Eastern Slioies of the Persian Gulf
in 1828. Communicated by Lieutenant G. B. Kempthoine. Ii>
JliGS, Yol, V* p, 270, original seiies.

HB, p. IQ.


® Id, 178.


SI K AND A R


There is further mention of the Ichthyophagi m § 34
The story of Sikandar’s adventiiie with a basking whale which
was mistaken for an island, with disastrous consequences to those
that visited it, has not been lost sight of by the romancers and
poets of latei ages. In the fiist voyage of Sindbad the sailor, 111
the Aiahiun Xujhhj he lands upon an island “like a gaith of the
gardens of Paradise,” but which proves to be a gieat fish, ami
sinks when fires aie lighted on it for cooking purposes ^ Foi
the poets the leader may be referred to the passage in Paiach-^e
Bk. 1. line 200 seq , Aldine ed.“

The reeds mentioned are of course bamboos, of which one of
the many uses is foi house-building
§ 26. Here we are introduced to the true Etliiops, who, accoid-
ing to Greek notions, occupied the extremities of the world both
in the East and West ^

§ 27. The above remaik applies equally to the Narmpiii * ^I'he
story of the diagon is not extant in the Pseudo-Callisthenes 01 in
the Latin version of Julius Valerius It is found, howevei, in
the Syriac version and in the Ethiopic,^ which repiesent the
monstei as being regarded as a god by the natives In the
Syiiac it IS desciibed as killing its victims by drawing in its
breath, and so sucking them down its throat

The temple that Sikandai visits is that of Dionysus, and the
coiiesponding passage in the Psendo-Callisthenes is Bk III.
ch 28. There is a doublet of the visit m § 31

§ 28 Modern histoiical research, which is lestoiing to us the
knowledge of the great Hittite empire once dominant 111 Asia
Minor and northern Syria, appears incidentally to have thrown
light on the origin of the legend of the Amazons. The period of
the historical importance of the Hittites dates approximately
from B c 2000 to B c 700 ; and it appears that their great goddess
Ma— the piototype of Cybele, the Gieat Mother — was served by
women “ who in later centuries, on the decline of the Hittite
power, at the coming maybe of the Phrygians, at first for the
defence of their religion, and later separating in independent
action, developed into aimed priestesses” ^ In the Introductoiy
Note to the work her© quoted Professor Sayce says — “ The Amazons
of Greek legend prove to have been the wan 101 -priestesses of the


1 BAN, VI. 5. 2 See too id. owtes^ and LAN, 111. 83 •' See p, 68.

They aie refen ed to in Pliny’s Nat. Bk. v., sect. 46. as

‘‘ Himantopodes loiipedes quidam quibus seipeiido ingiedi natuia
sit.” Cf. Vol li. p. 55, and note.

® BHA, p. 107; BLEA, p 166
’ GH, pp. 170, 357


Cf. Vol. y. p. 233, noti'.


THE SHAHNIMA of FIRDAUSI


i^ieat llittitti i^^oildess ‘ The seat of the Amazons, which legend
[ilaces on the ii\ei Tliermodon, is quite m concoid with the above
idciititication, and their legend itself extends from Homer ^
through Heiodotus and many other writeis to 8ii John Maunde-
As to the oiigm of the legend that bi ought Alexander
into connexion witii the Amazons we aie told by Arrian that
vhen that king vas in Sughdiana he leceiveu a visit from Phaias-
niaiies, king of the Kharazmians, who stated that his dominions
marched vith those of the CVilchians and Amazons, and that if
Alexandoi desiiod to proceed to those regions and subjugate the
laces in the neighlionrhood of the Euxine he would act himself
as guide iind fuinish iiecessaiies foi the troops ^ The land of
Kliaiazm is now repiesented by the modem Khi\a, and the whole
breadth of the Caspian Sea intei veiled between Phaiasmanes and
his iieaiest neighbouis to the west , but tlie mere suggestion
seems to have taken root, and soon it was ahiimed by some of the
more lumantic, oi less sciupulous, histoiians of Alexander that the
queen of the Amazons had visited him in person — the view adopted
liy (Juintus Cui tills, who tells us ho\^ their queen Thalestris
arrived with liei suite of thiee bundled women tiom the vicinity
of the liver Tliermodon, and spent about a foitnight with the
kiiig.^ In the Pseudo-Oallist hones it is Alexander who visits the
Amazons, and the \isit takes place immediately after that to
Candace, queen of Ethiopia, in which the ground is laid foi it by
1 epresenting her sou and daughter-m-law as being on then w\iy
to peiform religious iites in the land of the Amazons wdien the
lady was abducted. Fiidausi, who omits the passage about the
abduction, natuially leaves out the refeience to the Amazons and
gives his account of them in anothei connexion ^ His version
corresponds with that of the Pseudo-Callisthenes, Bk. HI. cln
25-37, and with the Syriac version, Bk. Ill ch. 15-17. In
these versions and in the Sliahiiama the Amazons are repre-
sented as living on an island, and the account of their marriage-
customs in the Pseudo-Callisthenes and in the poem may owe
something to the stones of the Male and Female Islands that
no doubt were current in Egypt in connexion with the country
— southern Arabia — whence it obtained its supplies of frankin-
cense. It seems to have been tlie custom of the incense-gatherers,
who w’eie always men, to leave then wives and children at home,
wteh in this case wmuld mean, among other localities, the Kuna
Muria Islands, while they themselves crossed over to the main-
land for the purposes of their tiade Sons, when grown up, would


1 GH, p. IX.

* DAA, IV. 15.


“ Iliad, in. 187 seq., vi 186.
^ HQC, vi. 5.


3 AM, cap. li.
® Seep 153,


SIKANDAR


73


accompany theii fathers, while the daughters would remain with
the niotheis The seven Kuna Mima Islands thus became known
collectively as “ The Female Island,” while the mainland lepre-
sented The Male Island ^ There appears to be a leference to
the same custom in Hiuen Tsiang — To the south-west of Fo-hn,
in an island of the sea, is the kingdom of the western women
heie theie are only women, with no men , they possess a large
(quantity of gems and precious stones, which they exchange in
Fo-lin. Therefoie the king of Fo-hn sends certain men to live
with them h>r a time. If they should have male children, they
ire not allowed to bring them up ’ ^

By the black race encountered by Sikandar on his way to the
city of the Amazons the negroes seem to be intended, and the
description is quite in the style of one in the Arabifui NitjUtH • —
“ Then sprang with a drop-leap from one of the trees a big slob-
bering blackamooi with rolling eyes which showed the whites, a
truly hideous sight ” ^ The bringing of frost and snoiv would be
a great marvel in then hot country. Similarly Sarv, king of
raman, tries to overcome the three sons of Faridun.^

It does not seem possible to identify the fair-haired race that
Sikandar met after leaving Harum. The type is too common and
his wanderings are too vague. There is the Berber race in North
Africa among which the blond type with blue eyes is not un-
common, and in noithern Europe the Scandinavian Herodotus
too speaks of the Budim, whom he places north of the Palus
Mteotis, as having blue eyes and red hair , ^ and Tacitus desciibes
in similar teims the peoples of Geimany.® Moreover, tribes with
led beards and blue eyes are mentioned in Chinese annals as
living in Central Asia "

The notion of “ The Gloom,” about which Sikandar makes
inquiries, seems to have been the outcome of tivo distinct concep-
tions. One was that as the sun set m the West, and thereupon
night ensued, there was a Land of Baikness in that qiiaiter.
This notion is as old as Homer, who opposes the East to the
West by describing the former as being Tpos ^Hc 5 r’ 'HfXtoj/ re,
“ towards the dawn and the sun,” and the latter as being ttotI
C6<l>op, “towaids the gloom.^’® The other was based on the
accounts that filtered through to the sunnier South of the dark-


^ SP, p. 144

® BBR, li. 279. Fo-lm is bupj)osed to stand foi the Byzantine
empiie. JcL p. 278, note* Of, too YMP, Bk. 111 c. xxxi,, and note.

3 BAN, 1. 6. ,4 See Vol. 1. p. 184, s ^k. iv. c. loS.

® Gerniania, c 4 BAG, 1. 193, and note

** JUadf XU. 239-240 ; Odtfssey, xiii. 240, &c


74


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


ness of the North — the lung sunless winters of the Arctic Circle.
Atttiched to each conception was the idea of an earthly paradise —
in the AVest the garden of the Hesperides, and in the North the
elysimn of the Hyperboreans, who had then counterpart, oi
original, in Indian legend which told that towards the North,
bej^ond the Himalaya, dwelt the Uttarakiiii, a people who enjoyed
a long and happy life, to whom disease and caie weie unknown, and
who levelled in ery delight in a land all paradise ” ^ Hesiod knew
of tlie Hyperboreans ® There is an interesting chapter on “ The
Land of Darkness ” in Marco Polo ’

§ 29. At the close of § 28 we have the beginning of the story
of Sikandai s famous expedition into the Land of Darkness and
t<-> the Fount of Life. This does not ajppcar in branch A of the
Pseudo-Callisthenes, in the early Latin veision of Julius Valoi ms,
or in the Syiiac version It is given at large, however, in blanch C,
which has Chiistian leanings, and it is found also in the Ethiopic
version It is obvious that Firdausi’s account had passed thiough
the Arabic The Aiabic in its turn came fiom the Syiiac, and the
existence of the account ui the Syiiac is due to the fact that
Jacob of Saiug * inserted it in his metrical version of the Syiiac
Chiistian Legend of Alexander already referred to.^ The basis
of the whole is branch 0 of the Pseudo-Calhsthenes, where the
account runs as follows — “ Thence Alexander set forth again
with his host, retiring to a level place in the midst whereof was a
ravine Having thrown a bridge across ho wrote thereon in
Greek, Persian, and Egyptian, and the wiitings signified ‘Alex-
ander, arriving hither, built this arch, and crossed it with his
w hole host, being desirous of possessing the ends t J the earth,
God willing ’ And in three days he came to regions where the
sun did not shine. The name thereof is ‘ The Country of the
Blest ’ And Alexander, having left the baggage and the infantry
with the old men and the women, was minded to take chosen
youths with him to investigate and see these regions. His fiiend
Callisthenes advised him to make his entiy with forty friends,
one hundi ed youths, and twelve hundred soldiers King Alexandei
set forth, instructing them to take no old man with them. An
inquisitive elder, however, who had two sons — noble and trusty
soldiers — said to them ‘ Children, hearken to your father and
take me with you, and I shall be found not empty on the journey,
for I wot that in tune of difliculty the old will be sought after,
and you theiefore, as having me with you, will be honoured much

^ MCAI, p 24. - Heiodotus, i\. 32.

® YMP, Vol. ii. p. 483 st% and note^i See p, 1 5.

® Id.


SIKANDAR


75


by your king. Lest, being found to transgiess lus ordinance, ye
be deprived of life, now, bestiriing yoiu selves, ciop my head and
beard ; thus altering hair and appearance I will go with you and
prove of groat use to you in the time of need.’ So doing their
father’s bidding, they took the old m.in with them Thus they
fared with Alexander and reached a murky spot. Being unable to
advance further, owing to the impassable iiatme of the place, they
removed thence their tents. Next day, Alexander, taking with
him a thousand soldiers, went to ascertain if the end of the earth
were there. Going leftward he saw a part that w’as lighter, and
fared over places waste and precipitous for half the day. This he
knew not from the sun but by taking measurement of the way
geometrically Afterwards he turned back in alarm because
the route was impracticable. Emerging, he was minded to go to
the right because the plain was level, albeit dark and gloom}’.
But being in dithculties because none of the youths ivere
willing for him to enter that dark place in that, the horses
being weaned out by the glooms of that dark load, they would be
unable to return, Alexander said to them — ' 0 noble soldieis ’ ye
all know now that in wars nothing is done nobly without counsel
and advice, for in good sooth an old man coming w ith us w^ould
direct us how we ought to enter this dark legion If now’ there
be some noble man among you let him go and bring into our camp
for me an elder, and he shall have much gold of me ’ Howbeit
none of them was found to do this thing by reason of the length
of the way and of the lightless an. Then, presenting themselves,
the sons of the old man said to Alexander — ‘ It thou wilt hear us
w’lth forbearance, 0 king * we will tell thee somewhat.’ King
Alexander said — ^ Say what ye will, foi I sw’ear by divine Provi-
dence not to wrong you ’ Forthwith they told him about then
sue, and ran and brought the old man to him. Alexander, on
seeing, embraced him and asked him to counsel them. The old
man said ‘ It is fit, 0 king Alexander > for you to know this,
that if horses enter you will see the light never more. Choose
therefore mares wuth foals, and leave the foals there, going your-
selves with the mares , they will lead us thithei ’ ^ Alexander
therefore made search among all those with him, but only found
a hundred mares with foals. Taking these and another hundred
selected ones, as w^ell as many others to carry their provand, he
enteied according to the counsel of the old man, leaving the foals
without. The old man instructed his sons that whatever they
should find lying on the ground as they went they were to collect
and place in their pouches. There entered with Alexander three


^ /.£?. back to the foals


76


THE SHARK AM A OF FIRDAUSI


handled tind sixty soldiers, and thus advanciiiiJ^ aloii" the dark
road for fifteen they saw a certain place wherein was a

bright fountain whereof the water Hashed like lightning , the air
was fragiant and most sweeb. Now Alexander, the king, becom-
ing hungry, ivished to eat biead, and calling his cook, who was
named Aiidieas, told him to jirepaie a meal Taking a dried fish
he went to the shining water of the fountain to wash the meat.
On being wetted in the water it came to life forthwith and escaped
from the hand of the cook, who told nobody of what had happened,
but took hmisolf some of the same water in a silver vessel and
safe-gu«iided it, the i\hole place indeed gushed uitli waters
whereof all drank and partook of food Alexander, after he had
eaten, again journeyed on for thirty /n, and further saw a
light without sun, moon, 01 stars, and he beheld three birds Hying,
bat having the aspect of men, and crying to him from aloft in the
(irrecian tongue ‘ The land whereon thou tieadest, Alexander ’ is
that of God alone Return, thou wretch ’ thou art not able to
tread the Country of the Blest. Go back then, 0 man ^ and
tread the earth bestowed upon thee, and prepare not troubles
for thyself ’ Being affrighted, Alexander gave instant heed to
the words spoken to him by the birds, one of which cried to him
again — ‘ The East calleth thee, Alexander ’ and the realm of
Porus shall become subject to thee by conquest ’ Thus saying
the bud Hew off Alexandei, having lesigned himself to Pi evi-
dence, bade Antiochus to signify to the troops — ‘ Let each that
wisheth take of what is here, be it stone or earth oi wood ’ To
some it seemed good so to do, while to others Alexander’s woids
appeared madness. Now as they went he said to Pinion • — ‘ Dis-
mount and take up whatever cliauceth’ Philon, dismounting,
found a stone that seemed to him one of the worthless sort, and
taking this he faied with Alexander Many of the troops too
took what each found fiom the material lying in that place, and
the sons of the old man in particular, according to the bidding of
then father, filled their wallets till they could w^alk no longer.
Alexander, having guides, sent on the asses m front, marched by
the 'Wain, and in some days arrived within hearing of the neighing
of the mares, and in this mannei issued from the land of night.
So they came to the light where were the rest of the troops, and,
looking on one another, found pearls and stones of price When
they saw this those that had taken none repented, while all those
that had taken them blessed the old man and Alexander for then*
good counsel. Philon brought his stone to Alexander, and it was


^ A measure of length varying from 6o t() 30 stades. A stade =
6064- English feet..


SIKANDAR


77


all gold Then the cuok told how the meat had come to hte.
Alexandei, eniaged, oidered him a teirible scouigiiig He said
however to Alexander — ‘ What boots it, x\lexatidei ’ to repent ti.
past matter ' He did not say that he had drunk of the water oi
that he had kept some of it This the cook refiained from con-
fessing save as to the dried fish coming to life Then that wicketl
cook going to Kale, the daughter of Alexander and of the concu-
bine Une, seduced her, promising to gi\e hei to dunk of the
Watei of the Fount of Immortality, which he did Alexandoi ,
healing of this, envied their immortality He called his daughtei
and said to her — ‘ Take thy clothes and depart, foi behold thou
hast become a goddess, being immortal, and thou shalt be called
Ifeieis as having immoitality from water, and therein shalt thou
dwell ’ Weeping and mourning she departed from him, and con-
sorted 111 waste places with the spiiits As for the cook, Alexander
gave orders for a stone to be fastened to his neck, and that he
should he flung into the sea Being cast away thus he became a
god and dwelt in a part of the sea that on this account was called
Andreanticiis So much for the cook and the daughter of
Alexander, who took these things to signify that the end of the
eaith was in those parts When they came to the arch that
Alexander had built, he engraved thereon again to this efifect -
‘ Let those that wish to enter the Land of the Blest fare to the
right ’ ” ^

This legend thiough the Syriac became known to Muhammad,
who gives his veision of it in the chapter of the Kuian known as
“ The Cave ” Of part of the stoiy he makes Moses the hero and
of the rest ZVi-’l-kainaiii, i e The Two-horned (Alexander the
Gieat) 111 the Kuran the part of the legend concerned with the
salt fish IS told in connexion wnth Moses and, being somewhat
obscure and fiagmentary, has given a fine oppoituinty to the
commentators To elucidate the passage in the Kuran it was
explained that on one occasion when Moses had made an eloquent
addiess to his followers they were so impressed that they asked
him if he knew of any one wiser than himself, and he replied that
he did not. The Almighty leproached him for his vanity and
told him that if he would go to a certain rock, wheie tivo seas
met, he would find his master in wisdom. He was to take wnth
him a fish m a basket and, when he missed the fish, w’ould know’
that he had reached the right place Accordingly Moses and
Joshua set forth, arrived at the rock, forgot all about the fish,
and faied onward. At length Moses became hungry, bethought
him of the fish, and told Joshua to bring it. Joshua had to admit

1 MFC, Bk. 11. cc. 39 - 41 .


78


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


that he had forgotten all about it. The fish in the meantime had
made its way to the sea in some marvellous manner, as Muhammad
says. Moses and Joshua therefore returned to the rock, where
they met one of God’s seivants who by his proceedings proved his
superiority in understanding He is identified by Muhammadans
with the prophet A1 Khidr, known from the hue of his raiment as
“ The Green Prophet,” and the friend of the Faithful in their dis-
tress. He is familiar to readers of the Axthutn Niyhts, and is a
curious development of the leprobate cook, Andreas, of the Pseudo-
Callisthenes.i

The angel Israfil, whose introduction into Fndausi’s account is
another sign of his indebtedness to Arabic sources, is one of the
four archangels and the sounder of the Tiump of Doom which will
slay all creatures, himself included, aftei which the general
E,esuiTection -will ensue ^

§ 30. The legend of the iron gates built by Alexander in the
Caucasus to exclude fiom the civilized world the savage tribes of
the Noith Ls absent in bianch A of the Pseudo-Callisthenes, in
the Latin version of Julius Yalerms, and in the Syriac version.
It is found, however, in blanches B and C ** Thence the account
passed into the Ohiistian Legend of Alexander and thence into
the poem of Jacob of Sarug and the Kuran. ^ In the latter the
passage is as follows — “ Then followed he {t e Zii-’l-karnam) a
route until he came between the two mountains, beneath vliicli
he found a people who scarce understood a language. They said —

‘ 0 Dhoulkarnain ’ verily, Gog and Magog waste this land , shall
we then pay thee tribute, so thou build a rampart between us and
them ^ ’ He said, ‘Bettei than yoiu tnhide is the might where-
with my Lord hath strengthened mo, but help me strenuously,
and I will set a barrier between you and them Bring me blocks
ot iron’ — until when it tilled the space between the mountain
sides— ‘Ply,’ said he, ‘your bellows’ — until when he had made
it led with heat (fire) he said, — ‘Bring me molten brass that 1
may poui upon it.’ And Gog and Magog were not able to scale
it, neither were they able to dig through it.” ^

Naturally this account appealed to the commentators on the
Kurun and to xirabio histoiians, and as embellished by them pro-
vided the mateiial for Fiidausi’s picturesque veision. Tabari,
for instance, compares the piomiscuity of the excluded races to
that of beasts, speaks of their sleeping on one oar and covering

^ See on the stoiy of the fish in the Kui/m and Al Khidi, SK, li. ii(>
,sv7 and iwtcs , LAN, 1. 22, 233, 11 420.

2 LAN, 1. 30. ^ MFC, 111 26 (C), 29 (B)

^ See p 15 ^ RK, p 222


SIKANDAR


79


themselves with the other, a-iid as havinj^ a thousand childien
each 1 — traits found in the Shahnama - The word used an that
poem for the monsters whereon V/giij and IMajuj are said to
batten is tmni'n ” — the same as th.it vaiioiisly translated in the
Old Testament It V., as sea-monster,® drai^on,^ and surpcnt.^

It IS a ((uestion as to which of the p.asses throu<rh the Caucasus
Sikandar’s bairior is to be leferred The most probable, because
the most exposed, is the one between the lanire and the Caspian,
but the desciiption in the text, and still more in the oldei
authoiities, v Inch dosoiibe the wall as beini^ built fioin mountain
to mountain, seems to favour the pass of I).iriel, whoie the road
luns thiou^h vertical walls of rock nearly 6000 feet Ini^h.

The method of vitrifying fortifications by means of heat was
known in ancient times and was used in the new woild as well as
the old. The opeuition is said to be not ditiicult if the proper
rocks are used foi the purpose, some of the piimaries fusing
easily when exposed to the heat of wood-tires Theie are stated
to be some tifty examples of such vitrified forts in Scotland
alone "

§ 31. We haie had already a veision of the account of the coipse
111 the palace of jewels in § 27

The speaking tiees of the sun and moon aio found in all the
branches of the Pseudo-Callisthenes, 111 A as part of the contents
of a lettei fiom Alexander to Aristotle, and in B and C as pait of
the narrative® They occui also m the Syriac version® and in
Julius Valerius The tiees, which in the above veisions aie
described as resembling cypresses, s>eem akin to those of the
iiddle piopounded by the aichimages to Z.iP® In fact it is not
improbable that the riddle was suggested by this passage in the
Romance of Alexander. Other passages in the Sh/ilmama may
have been suggested similarly, the wonders, foi instance, seen by
Kai Khusrau during his voyage in pursuit of Afr.isiyah,^ and the
account of how Asfandiyjii, whom Persian tradition may have
liked to regard as forestalling Sikandar, wandered over the whole
world and reached the Gloom. In the same chapter of the Syriac
version as that mentioned above we have the account of another solar
tree, corresponding to a passage in the Pseudo-Callisthenes —
“ From thence we set out again and came to a river (the ocean-


^ ZT, 2, 521, 2 See p. 163 - Gen 1. 21 ; Job vii. 12.

Ps Ixxiv. 13. ^ Id xci. 13. « Of, Vol 1 p 16.

" See the article on “ Vitrified Foits” in But , iith ed.

® MFC, 111. 17, and note, BHA, 111. 7.

See Vol, 1. p. 308 iscq Id iv. 245.

Id. V. 76 BHA, p. 100; MFC. i) SS,


8o


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


stream And upon the hank of the liver there was a tree, which
grew and increased from dawn until the sixth hour, and from the
sixth hour until evening it diminished in height until there was
nothing to be seen of it. Its smell was very pleasant .

In Zaps riddle the sun only was taken into consideration In
Sikandar's case the tree has a double trunk to provide for the
moon as well The male trunk (the sun) speaks by day, the
female (the moon) by night Much has been written about these
trees, but the allegoij" seems faiily obvious.

§ 32 Sikandai’s expedition to Chin and his dealings with the
Faghfui aie extant only in the Syiiac version of the Pseudo-Cal-
listhenes, whence it passed into the Arabic as DinawaiPs account,
which follows the Syriac closely, shows. ^ Firdausi’s is closer still and
agiees with the Syiiac in making the Faghfur, though conscious
01 his powei, fall 111 with Sikandai’s wishes through sheer love of
peace — a point omitted by Duiawari - This is the thud occasion
on uhich Alexander is lepiesented as going as his own ambas-
sador * — a notion oiiginating no doubt with the Egyptian authoi
of the Pseudo-Callisihenes

§ 33, According to Fiidausi’s version, this is the third time that
Sikandar goes to Hind Historically, after the defeat of Poius,
Alexander had some trouble with that king’s nephew, who, aftei
having sent ambassadors to Alexander out of enmity towards Ins
uncle, became disaflected when he found that ,Porus was held in
such groat honour by his conqueror.^ Part of Alexander’s army,
undei Ciaterus, returned from India by way of Nimriiz.

^ 34 This has some correspondence with the Pseudo-Cal-
listhenes, IJk III ch. 28, and with the Syiiac version, Bk. III.
oh 18. In the former the priest of the sun is described as
being an Ethiop, and seems to reappear in the Gush-bistiir of the
Shuhn.lma We have had Gush-bistars already, in fact if not 111
name in Firdausi’s description of the races excluded by Sikandar’s
barrier —

“ They sleep upon one ear,

And use the othei as a coverlet ” ’*

In this connexion the following passage is of interest “ The
Enotokoitai are called m Sanscrit KarnapnmndmcU, and are
frequently referred to in the great epic poems — e ij, MaMhh. II.
1170, 1875. The opinion was universally prevalent among the

1 NAR, p 40, liHA, p 109 heq. Id, note

Or the fourth if we include his visit to the oit\ of Poius, which iis
not mentioned in the Shahniima. See p. 64

^ See p. 64. ^ Id p. 163.


SIKANDAR


Si

Indiaiis. tliat ]ui])aroiib had Liri^e eiirb . . “It ii>

Stiys "Wheelei (IfisL frti , Vol iii p. 17LJ,, “ h>r <iiiy one eon
\ersaiit with India to point out the (»n^in of many of the so-
called fables . Mon do not hiuceuis han»jjnii; down to then
feet but both men and women wull occasimiall} eloii'^ate then
ears after a very oxtraordinai y fashion by thiiistintf ai tides
tliKuii^h the lobe , If theie was one stoiy muie than anothei
wdnch excited the WTath of Stiabo, it was that of a people whose
eais huni» dowm to their feet Vet the stoiy is still current in
Hindust/tn. B.ibii Johan Das says — * An old woman once told
me that liei husband, a sepoy in the Biitish army, had seen a
people who slept on one ear, and covered themselves with the
othei ' (Jhm^'sfir Mnnihis amf of tlw Ihnihi^, JBaiiaras,

1S60 ) The story may be referred to the Himalayas Fitch, w^ho
tiavelled in India about 1585, says tli.it a people in Bhut<ln had
eais a span lon^r.” 1

For the Ichthyopha^i»i see p 69 >oy

^ 35. The corie&pondence with Aristotle wutli regard to tlu
succession is of course an Oriental addition wdiich came to Firdausi
thiougdi the Arabic. Dfnawaii has it to the same etteet, the
chief difference being that he makes the mattei the subject of
an interview between Alexandei and Aiistotle at Jerusalem
W'iiere, according to him, the f(»rmei died ^ The device w'as
intended to account for the long inteival — five centuiies and a
half — that separated the last of the Kai.uiiaiis (Sikandai) from
the iiist of the S/is.iiiians (Aidshii Papakan). The Persians made
it out to be much short ei '

The prodigious hirth that occurred on Sikandai's ariival at
Babylon is described in the Pseudo-Callisthenes, Bk III. ch. 30,
in the Latin Veision of Julius Valerius, and in the Syriac, Bk. Ill
ch 19.

§ 36 The veision of Alexandex's will 111 the Pseudo-Oalhstheues,
Bk III, ch. 33, IS longest in codex A, wdnch unfortunately is much
mutilated The corxespunding passage m the Syiiac version is
Bk III. ch 22, and this agiees w'lth Fiidausfs in the follo%vmg
points — the request to his mother not to grieve, the instruction
to the chiefs to honour her, the gift of the kingdom of Macedonia
(of Klim in Firdausi) to the sou of Kiishanak, if she shall have
one and the direction that his (Sikandar’s) body shall be laid
in a golden cofiin filled wuth honey, and conveyed for interment
to Egypt Most of the provisions of the w'lll as given in the
Greek and Syriac would have little 01 no interest for latei


^ MCAI, p. 75, note rf AM, p. 275
VOL. VL


^ See XI 193
F


NAR, 41


82


THE SHAH NAM A Ob FIRDAUSI

Persian or Arabic writers, or for Firdausi himself, and naturalb
are lacking in the Shuhnuma.

§ 37 This corresponds with the Pseudo-Calli&thenes, Bk III
ch 32, 34, and with the Syriac version, Bk III ch. 21, hu
the latter omits the dispute of the Gieeks and Peisians over tin
disposal of Alexandei’s body According to the Gieek versioi
the oracle of the Babylonian Zens was consulted, by whose direc
tion the coipse was conveyed to Memphis whence, at the m
stigation of the high priest of that city, it vras taken to Alexandii.
and there buried Accoidmg to Firdausi the oracle was consulte<
at a place called Khurm, a word which means vapour ” or ex
halation ” Similar emanations aie said to have existed at Delphi

Alexander died at Babylon on June 13th B.c. 323 His deatl
was no doubt a natural one, the result of a fever, but it gav^
use to a legend, leferred to by Arrian only to be io.]ected
that poison was employed for the purpose by Antipater whc
fearing that his position as regent 111 Macedonia had been under
mined by the intrigues of Olympias, sent his son Oassaiider t*
bring about the death of his master Oassandei found a willnij
instrument in lollas, Alexaudei’s cup~beaier, who had injurie
of his own to avenge, and the fatal draught was administered a
a banquet The Pseiido-Callisthenes repeats the story, “ <ind 1
appears in the Syiiao and Bthiopic versnins,'* but not m th
Shilhnama

§ 38 The sentences of the sages over the corpse of Sikaiida
are not in the Pseudo-Oalhstheues or in the Syiiac version c
it They are an Oriental addition, and Mashitli gives anothe
version of them.^

§ 39. Alexander’s burial at Alexandria of couise is historica
His mother, according to Mas’iidi, removed the corpse from it
golden coffin, lest the cupidity of future kings should b
aroused and the tomb desecrated. Mash'idi, wlio spent some c
his last years in Egypt, and died about a ]>. 956, states that
pedestal of white and other coloured marbles, and known as th
tomb of Alexander, was to be seen at Alexandria in a.d. 943-944
S Chrysostom, however, says that the tomb was destroyed 1
his time (a.d. 345-407), and the annual observance at Aloxandri
of the day of Alexander’s death abolished.^’ Perhaps there ma
have been some lestoration of the tomb by the Arabs, to whoi
the personality of Alexander was of interest,^ after their conqiies
of the city m the middle of the seventh century a.d.


^ DAA, vii. 27. MPC, m. 31.

« BHA, Bk. 111. c. 20; BLEA, j) 339 - MM, 11. 251 , NAR, p. 4I

5 Id, 259. ® MPO, p xx\i See p 15.


SIKANDAR


S3


Firdausi says that Sikamlar built ton cities In tho Pseudo-
Oallisthenes the nainber is twelve or thirteen,^ tliiitoen in tho
Syriac version,- and twelve in the Etlnopio." One at least of them
has not become a biako of thorns, and tho Pomance of Alexander,
which theie hrst took littraiy form, has done more to extend his
fame and make his name a household woid th,in all the sobei
histones (»f him evei written.

To conclude then, in the thiee leigns of D/irab, Di'ir.i, and
Sikaiidar, taken collectively, we have the Persian version of the
Pseudu-Callisthenes which, if it does not possess a complete
histoiical skeleton, has at least a historical backbone, some of the
vertebrie of which reappear in the Sh<Lhn/ima — e.g. Sikandar’s
invasion of Iian, the defeat and death of Baiius, 8ikaiidar‘s
accession to the throne of Iran^ his maina^^e with an Oiiental
princess, his invasion of India, his defeat of Porus and inter-
com se with Indian sages, his return to irln, his death at Babylon,
and interment at Alexandiia Of the elements introduced into
the Pseudo-Caihbthenes by its Egyptian author the Persian
version reproduces two — the device of Sikandar going as his o\\ n
ambassador, and the story of Kaid/ifa Of Persian and Arabic sub-
stitutions and additions, not appearing in veisions of the Pseudo-
Calhsthenes other than the Persian, the most important are the
account of the birth of Sikandar, his address to the chiefs on his
accession to the Ir/inian throne, and his correspondence with
Aristotle as to the succession. The purely Arabic are the story
of Kaid, the pilgrimage to the Kaaba, the interview with the angel
Isi\ifil, and the sentences of the sages at SikandaFs interment.

The appended diagram may help to show the provenance of the
Persian version of the Pseudo-Callisthenes.


I 3 IPC, 15 1, iwtf, - BHA, Bk. 111. c. 24 BLEA, p. 351*


the Great
(Sikandar)


Pstudi) Ctillihthf iu“>,


&vnai Chrfistian
legend and the
nietncal veibion


Reigns of Dardh, Dai a, and Siliuidai m the Babtin nama


ditto in modem Ferbian \eis,ion o£ ditto


ditto in tlie Shahnama


SI/CANDAR


ss


§ 1

HuU' SihawUn bat upon ihe Throne of hflit

When seated on the throne, Sikandar said — c 1286

Be wisdom wedded to the minds of kings,

For God is all-prevailing in the Avorkl
And wicked is the world-lord that doth fear
Not Him. Our good and ill beyond all doubt
Will pass and not escape time’s clutch. Whoever
Shall come to this our court and shall appeal
For justice to ourselves against ourselves.

At audience-time or midnight, shall receive
An answer to his plaint, for in that God,

Who giveth victory, hath granted us

The Grace and oped the door of conquering fortune,

My subjects all on mountain and on waste,

In city and at sea, shall share therein.

We do not ask for tribute from the world

For five years, saving from the man that saith : —

Sikandar s peer am I.’ We will bestow
Much wealth on mendicants, but ask not aught
From him that hath.”

At these his gracious words.

And at this union of his heart with justice,

There went up a thanksgiving from Iran
To that just-dealing monarch of the earth,

And then the assembly scattered, but the king
Sat on with his advisers counselling.


§ 2


Hoio Silandai wrote to Dildrdi awl RtXdianak, the Wife and
Daughter of Dard, tourhing the Wuptidls of Rdshanak


Sikandar ordered that a scribe should come,
And called for reed of Rum and silk of Chin.


86


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The scribe, when he had made the kex a pen
Indited this epistle to the mother
Of Riishanak : The guerdon of the good
God grant to thee and mind-peace after pam.

I wrote to thee erewhile with more advice
Than is contained herein. What time the days
Of him who was thy spouse had reached their close,
And he was murdered by a servant’s hand
I buried him with royal obsequies,

And have accomplished all the days of mourning.
Oft-times before the war I sued for peace.

But he refused because his time had come.

His very foemen sorrowed for his blood.

May God receive him into Paradise,

The Just One give him place among the Saints,

And to his foes the bane of arrow-points

None maketh shift to scape death’s clutch, ’tis like

An autumn-blast, and we are as the leaves.

Now ye have all the world at your disposal.

Not few bear witness to Dara’s last wish,

How he gave Riishanak to me, and said : —

‘ Thou hast no equal to her in thy bower.’
bo send her to me, and that presently,

Escorted by her guardians and her slaves,

And by the chiefs and nobles of Iran,

To bring the light upon my darkling soul
Make Ispahan ^ thine own as in the past,
bend out intelligencers everywhere,

And keep in oflice those just, modest men
Appointed by Dara, son of Darab.

If ye would live not there choose -where ye will,

The cities of Iran are all before you ,

But be ye reconciled to me in heart,

And give me in the world the name Dara.’’

He wrote a letter too to Riishanak,

^ The text has the Arabic form Isfahan


SIKANDAR


87


And made the pen’s point eloquent. He first
Gave praise to God, the Euler of the world,

The Wise, the All-sustainer , then ho said : —

‘ The stock of kings begetteth but men pious,
Attractive, well-advised, refined, and modest,

Men eloquent of speech and soft of voice.

Thy father gave thee to me ; then ho died,

And bare away with him a goodly name.

When thou arrivest hither, and beholdost
My bower and palace, thou shalt be my queen
Chief consort, the adornment of my throne,

The lustre of my Grace, my name, and fortune.

A letter have we written to thy mother
To bid her send thee hither in a fashion
Befitting issue of the king of kings,

And with an arehimago of Ispahan
Preceding thee, with servants of the crown,

With elephants and litters, and with her
Who gave thee milk and honey Dwell within
Our house with joy — chief lady of the bower.

Now be high heaven circling to thy will,

Thy person far from foe and far from harm.”

Came, swift as flying dust-cloud, one well versed
In wisdom, and the world's king’s words rehearsed


§ 3

Hov' Dildrdi answered the Letter 0/ Sihamlar

When Dilarai heard this she heaved a sigh,

And weeping for Dara in tears of blood,

So that the dust beneath was saturate,

Called for a scribe and wrote a fair response
In well instructed terms and well inspired.

She first gave praises to the Omnipotent,

The Lord of counsel, peace, and excellence,


C. 1288


SS THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Then : From the process of revolving heaven
Whence are strife, peace, and love, we used to ask
All Grace upon Dara’s behalf and made
His name the jewel of our tongues , but since
His day is over, and he is enthroned
Upon a coffin-board, it is for thee,

And thee alone that I ask blessings might,

With triumph, kingship, and the world’s obedience .

L ask it openly without reserve,

For 1 have heard (may heaven joy in thy soul 0
What courteously thou hast conveyed to me
About the obsequies of Shah Dara,

How Mahiyar was gibbeted and how
Malevolent Janusiyar was punished.

Brief is his life that murdereth his master.

Thou hast sought peace, too, and passed many a day
In counsel. Service is not for the Shahs,

And none expect eth thraldom in the great.

Thou’rt in Dara’s place, who was king of kings,

And as the Sun hath set thou art our Moon.

Since he that was the monarch of the age
Chose thee not one will dare transgress his rede.
Next as to what he said of Riishanak,

That wish of his which made our heart rejoice ■

She is thine handmaid, and we are thy slaves ,

We bow our heads to thy command and will.

She sendeth greetings and hath writ to thee
A letter like the garth of Paradise.

We have, moreover, written to the magnates,

The frontier-chieftains and the men of war,

That thy commands are as Dara's commands,

And none will swerve from fealty to thee.”

She gave the envoy purses, slaves, and treasures
Of all kinds. When that Riiman reached Sikandar,
And told what he had seen and heard of court, •

Of precedents obtaining, and of throne.


SIKANDAR


89

Whereon thou hadst declared : “ The Shah still liveth’’
Sikandar was rejoiced at what was said,

And placed the crown in peace upon his head.


§4


How Sikandar senf Jinf JJuflipr, Hdh/d, to Mrh RihlianuL,
and J/o/r lip Martwd he)


He called his mother from ’Animiiriya 1 c. 1289

Told her upon her coming what Dara
Had said, and added ‘ Go to Hilarai,

And enter into gracious intercourse
With her, see Rushanak within the bower,

And, having seen her, greet her on my part.

Take her a bracelet, eairings, torque and crown
Of royal gems, a hundred mules with loads
Of tapestries and furthermore ten camels
With gold brocade of Riim, and place withal
In purses thirty thousand m dinars
Out of the treasury by way of largess,

And take with thee three hundred Ruman damsels,

Or more if more are needed. Give each one
A goblet worthy of a queen's fair handmaid ,

Take servants to escort thee and forgo
No circumstance of royal etiquette
The mother of the Shah, as he commanded,

Made ready and set oht* upon her journey.

With her interpreters escorting her —

Ten of the honcy-tongued philosophers.

Now as she drew anigh to Ispahan
A crowd of nobles went to give her welcome,

While Dilarai came forward from the palace,

She and the magnates, as their custom was,

And gave such largess in the court that treasure

^ Of. p. 23 an<l iiotp.


90 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And money grew misprized. They held a conclave
Of counsellors within the palace , all
The chiefs attended . Bilarai the while
Prepared such wedding-gear that the bazars
Looked busy everywhere, and league-long files
Of camels carried stuffs for clothes and carpets,

For hangings and for tapestries inwoven
With gold and silver thread, and diverse-hued.

There were such Arab steeds with golden bridles,

Such Indian scimitars with golden scabbards,

Surtouts and morions and bards withal,

With golden sparths and maces ponderous,

With stuffs for raiment cut or in the piece
That no one in the world e’er looked on more ;

Such aloe- wood, gris-amber, and pure musk,

As gave to enemies good cause to writhe.

They requisitioned servants from the palace,

And made them ready forty golden litters.

In one of them with parasdl and slaves
Sat Riishanak rejoicing. From the halls
C. 1290 Of Bilarai, for half the route, the way

Was all gold, jewels, horses, and attendants.

They raised triumphal arches in the cities ;

All lips were smiling, all hearts full. They showered
Drachms on the bride’s brocaded parasol,

And mingled overhead musk and dinars.

When that Moon reached the Shah’s own bower
Sikandar

Much scanned her stately form and goodly face :

Thou hadst said : Wisdom nurtured her on love.”
Whenas her mother set her on the throne
Of gold he poured out all his soul to her,

And passed a se’nnight in her company,

Conversing much with her, observed her shrewdly,

And saw in her but majesty and meekness,

Discretion, modesty, and fair behaviour,


SIKANDAR


So that his heart was joined to her in love.

Then all the paladins throughout Iran

Called blessings down on him as Shah, and brought

Great gifts of gold and royal jewelry,

While justice o’er the world’s whole face was spread,
And everywhere the waste inhabited.


§ S

How Kaul of Hind had a Dream, and how
Milirdn intei'preted it

A speaker of the tongue of days of old
A tale that thou wilt muse to hear thus told . —
There was in Hind a monarch, Kaid by name,
Whose solo pursuit was knowledge and advice ,
He had a sage’s heart, a prince’s brain,

King’s bearing and the Grace of archimages.

He dreamed a dream ten nights successively —
A portent : mark it well. The men of learning
In Hindustan, the mighty both in word
And lore, the sages and the counsellors.

Met at his bidding, and he told his dreams
At large without reserve ; but every heart
Was full of deep concern, each visage wan,

For there was none that could interpret them.
Then said a sage to Kaid : “ 0 sovereign,
Memorial of the great and man of wisdom ^
There is a famous one by name Mihran.

Who hath attained his hll of earthly lore.

He will not sleep or rest him in a city,

And liveth but with cattle of the field.
Subsisting on the herbs upon the mountains,
And not accounting us as fellow -men ,

His home is with the onager and deer,

Apart from habitation and mankind ;


92 THE SHJHnImA OF FIRDAUSI

c. 1291 Naught in the world doth injure him , devout
Is he, and of high fortune/'

To the sage

Thus said king Kaid : “ One must not overlook
This virtuous man ”

Moved by Mihran’s renown
He mounted then and there upon his steed,

While, lest ho should grow downcast, men of lore
Escorted him. The monarch reached Mihran,

Saluted courteously the sago, and said —

‘‘ Thou devotee who with the mountain-sheep
Tnhabitest the heights ' hear thou with care,

And then interpret wisely, those my dreams :

Know that one night, 0 wise and holy man '

I slept in peace, unfrighted, undismayed.

No care at heart, no impulse in my head,

And in my chamber there was none with mo
Night's noon had passed, but dawn was not. I saw
A habitation like a vasty palace ,

Therein a huge, fierce elephant. The dwelling
Showed doorless, but had one strait aperture
Wherethrough that savage elephant would pass
Uninjured by the straitness , its black bulk
Would pass therethrough, but leave its trunk behind.
Next night I saw the throne devoid of lord
Fair- fortuned, but upon the ivory seat
Sat one who donned the heart-delighting crown.

The third night came , I made me haste to sleep.

And dreamed that I beheld a goodly kerchief
Whereat four men tugged till their cheeks turned blue
With pulling, yet the kerchief was not rent,

Nor were the men fordone. Upon the fourth night
I saw, illustrious sage ' a man athirst
Beside a stream. O'er him a fish kept pouring
The water, yet his droughty head was dry
Although the water followed as he moved !


SIKANDAR


93


How read'st thou this, good iriend ^ Upon the hfth night
My mind dreamed of a city by the water.

The citizens though blind seemed none the worse,

For thou hadst said ‘ The wdiole place is afire
With liberality and trafficking i ’

Upon the sixth night, honoured lord ! I saw

A city, all whose citizens were sicK

And went to question those in health, who first,

Preventing them, inquired ' How came ye thus
With body aching and with heart overcharged ? *

And then the sick, whose soul had reached their lips, C. 129
Sought of the healthy for a remedy.

When half the seventh night had passed I saw
A horse that grazed at will upon the plain ;

It had two fore, two hind, feet, and two heads ^

And cropped the grass off quickly with its teeth.

It grazed on both sides with its double mouth
And yet its body was without a vent ’

I saw upon the eighth night, holy man I
Three vases on the ground set all a-row,

Two filled with water but the central empty,

And dry for many a year. Two worthies tried
To fill it from the others whose contents
Were minished not by pouring while the dry
Eemained wuth lip unmoistened. On the ninth night
I dreamed that I beheld a cow reposing
’Mid grass and water in the sun. A calf.

Small, gaunt, and wizened, with lack-lustre face,

Was standing just before her, and she sucked it J
The cow was lusty and the calf was weak.

If thou wilt lend thine ear to my tenth dream
Thou wilt not grow aweary ere I end.

Upon a spacious plain I saw a spring

With streams and dykes about it. All the champaign

Was watered yet the fountain-head was dry.

I prithee answer and reveal the future.”


94


THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSf


Mihriin, when he had heard this thing from Kaid,
Said : Be not sick at heart about this dream ;

Thy fame shall fail not, ill not reach this realm.
Sikandar will lead forth a mighty host,

The chosen chieftains of Iran and Rum,

And, if thou wouldst still rule, consort with wisdom,
And fight him not. Four things thou hast whose
equals

None, great or small, e’er saw. One is thy daughter.
Like Paradise above through whom thy crown
Is bright on earth, the next thy privy sage,

Who telleth thee the secrets of the world ;

The third thy -worthy leech, most famed of doctors ,

The fourth a cup wherein, if thou pour water.

That water will not heat for sun or fire,

No drinking mmish it. Those will defeat
All his endeavours, for when he shall come
Confide in these, and not in war, if thou
Wouldst have him gone betimes. Thou canst not face
His troops, his strategy, his realm, and treasure.

As wisely I advise thee so will I
Interpret these thy dreams. Thou didst behold
C 1293 A dwelling and strait aperture wherethrough
Passed elephant but left its trunk behind.

Now hear the rede of the interpreter.

Know that this dwelling imageth the world,

The elephant a thankless king, unjust.

False in his words, and royal but in name,

A man of mean heart and of feeble body,

Keen in his greed and gloomy m his soul.

At length, when he shall pass away, his name
Abideth in dishonour in the end.

Thy second dream concerning crown and throne,

Which one man voided and another gained,

Illustrateth that this inconstant world
Removeth one and speedeth up another.


SIKANDAR


95


As for tliy third dream of that goodly kerchief,
Clutched by four righteous men yet never rent
Though they that tugged thereat were never weary •
Hereafter there will come a man renowned
Forth from the desert of spear- wielding horsemen,

A holy, virtuous man by whom the Faith
Of God will come to be four-square, and, know,

’Tis imaged by that kerchief, while the four
That tug thereat tug in safe-guarding it.

One Faith is the Dihkan's who worshippeth
The Fire, and taketh not the sacred twigs
Save with a muttered prayer.^ Another one
Is that of Moses, which thou calFst the Jew’s
Who saith : ‘ None other should be praised ’ , another
That of Yunan,2 a good Faith making just
The great king’s ^ heart ; and, fourth, the Arabian,
Pure and exalting from the dust the prudent.

Four parties thus assuming to be guardians
Tug at the kerchief in their several ways,

And, as they pull against each other thus.

Antagonize for their religion’s sake.

Then, fourthly, for the droughty man who shunned
Sweet water which a lish threw after him :

A time will come when holy men will be,

J ust like that fish, despised as having drunk
Of wisdom’s stream , but evil-doers’ heads
Will be exalted to the Pleiades.

When one shall call the thirsty to the water
None wisely will respond, but all will shun
The wisdom-seeker and combine to curse him.

In thy fifth dream thou sawest a busy city.

The burghers spent their lives in feasting, largess,
And trafficking, but ‘Fortune,’ thou hadst said,

^ See Vol. i. pp. So, 8i s v. Dihhdn, JSdj^ and JSaJsam.

® 7.C. Javan, the son of Japheth and the progenitor of the Greeks

® Sikandar.


96 THE SHAHNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

* Had sown their eyes up so that none could see
c 1294 Another/ This referreth to a time

When wise men will be slaves to ignorant,

Who will despise the erudite and these,

Their tree of wisdom fruiting not for them,

Will laud, and openly commend, the witless,

Though conscious of their own hypocrisy,

And that such service is inglorious
As for the sixth dream, when the ailing sick
All went to question those in health a time
Will come wherein the wretched mendicant
Will he misprized in the rich man’s eyes,

And turn in his resourcelessness to any
Possessed of goods, who will not give him aught,

So that he will become a wagcless servant,

Or else a slave without the purchasing.

As for the ventless and two-headed steed

Of thy seventh dream : a time will come when men

Will joy in wealth and never have enough.

The beggar, student, and celebrity

Will get no share from them, for they will think

Of no one save themselves and help not any.

As to thine eighth dream of two vases brimming,

And one left wholly void, two vases filled
With lucid water, and the middle one
All dry and moistureless : a time will come
Wherein the poor will grow so weak and wretched
That, though the clouds of springtide, charged with
showers,

Shall hide the sunshine from the mendicant,

Those very showers not e’en then will descend
On him, and he will be heart-stricken. The rich
Will lavish gifts among themselves and bandy
Their honied compliments while beggars go
With droughty lips and so pass day to night.

As for the ninth wherein a lusty cow


SIKANDAR


97


Sucked its lean calf when Saturn entereth Libra
Tl^e world will be beneath the strong arm, poor
And sick fare ill, and yet the well-to-do
Will still exact from them, will never open
Their own hoards, nor abate the others’ travail.

In thy tenth dream thou sawest a fountain dry,

With waters all about it savouring musk,

Yet no clear stream of w’ater bubbled forth,

And sped to mingle with those other waters.^

A time is coming when the Avorld will hav e
A king that is devoid of understanding,

A king whose dark soul will be full of dudgeon.

The whole world gloom beneath his tyranny,

And never good be found among his treasures.

He ever will be gathering fresh hosts
To win his crown new fame, but in the end
This monarch and his hosts will pass away,

And there will be a change of dynasty.

But our time is the epoch of Sikandar,

Who is the crown upon the heads of nobles
Upon his coming give him these four things ; -
Methinketh not that he will ask for more,

But, when thou dost content him, pass thee by.

For he is diligent to learn and wise.”

Kaid, having heard the matter from Mihran,
Eegained the vigour of his former years,

Came, kissed the sage’s head and eyes, and went
His ways triumphant, ha^py, and content.

^ Peihaps this maj’ mean “ I have jiations among the nobles but
Mahmud is obdurate,” Of. what follows and Vol i. p. 33

- I e. the Feui Wondeis Cf. p. 94.


VOL. VI.


G


58


THE SHAhnImA of FIRDAUSI


§ 6


How Stkandar maruhed against Raid oj Hind
and urote a Letter to Mm


Now when Sikandar had surveyed Iran,

And knew that crown and throne were his, he led
His host toward Kaid of Hind and, road or none,
Pursued his march, while as he went along
The people of the cities on his way
Unbarred their gates to him. In all that coast
He found none worthy to be called a man,

And raised his helm o’er Venus On approaching
The mighty city, named by valiant Kaid
Milad, they called a scribe and seated him
Before Sikandar who, like lion lusting
Por quarry, wrote to Kaid : ‘‘ This from Sikandar
The mighty and victorious, the lord
Of scimitar, of crown, and belt.”

The letter

Began with praises of the man that laveth
His heart with knowledge, “ for in his desire
To eat the fruitage of his toils he chooseth
The easiest course, adoreth holy God,

And trusteth, feareth, reverenceth Him,

While knowing that we top the throne and are
The Shadow of the all-conqueijpg Lord. Now I
Have written thee a letter to enlighten
Thy darkling mind ; so when thy scribe shall read it
Lay it not out before thee and consider.

But, if it come by night, wait not for day,

And do my will forthwith. If thou shalt slight
My words so will not I, but trample down
Beneath my feet thy throne and head and crown.”


SI K A NBA R


99


§ 7

Iloin Raid of Hind answered Sikandads Letter and an-
nounced the Sending oj^ the Four Wonders

Now when this letter came to Kaid of Hind
He interviewed the great king’s envoy, praised
And favoured him exceedingly, assigned him
In courtesy a seat upon the throne,

And said * ' I joy to do the Shah’s behest,

And alway will be true to him , but still
That one so great as I am should set forward
So quickly and unreadily would please not
The Maker and the monarch of the earth.”

Then calling for a scribe, for pen of Chin,

And silk of Hind, he wrote at once an answer,

And decked it like the garth of Paradise
He gave, first praises to the Omnipotent,

The Lord of victory and time, the Lord
Both generous and just, the Lord of manhood,

Of sense and prowess , then : The good man’s head
Will turn not from the great, illustrious king,

Nor are we well advised in keeping aught
From him who hath the army, crown, and sword.
Four things have I that none else in the world
E’er hath possessed in public or in private,

And after me none will possess the like.

These, if the Shah shall bid me, I will send
To give new vigour to his heart and rule.

And afterward, if he commandeth me,

Will come and slave-like do him fealty.”


C 1296


THE SHAHNxiMA OF FIRDAUSI


IOC'


How St Lauda t haoL the Mes^euffer to receive the
Foiii Woiitters


The envoy came as swiftly as the wind,

Told all that he had heard, and gave the letter.
Sikandar said to him • “Go to, return
To that famed man, and saj . ' What things are these
That none e’er had in public or in private,

For we ourselves have seen whatever is,

And heaven Avill not create afresh ”

The envoy

Went from the presence, journeyed swdft as fire,
e' 1297 And said to Kaid : “ The Shah is fain to know

What things they are that no one else possesseth,

For seeing is believing.”

When he heard,

Kaid cleared the court and sat with his advisers
In council, set the envoy in his presence,

And courteously entreated him, then said —

“ I have within mj" bowser a daughter such
That if the sun on high should gaze on her
’Twould gloom contrasted wuth my darling’s face.

Her locks are lassos of one hue with pitch,

Milk savoureth on her lips, a cypress-stem
Is crooked to her, she scattereth pearls in speech,

Her looks and countenance make wisdom fly,

Yet ’tis the food of her discourse. When silent
She is the soul of modesty, and none
Hath seen her peer in this age. Sprung from chiefs.
And pious, she is chaste of heart and modest,

I have a cup which thou mayst fill with wine,

Or pour therein cold w^ater and although
Thou sat’st with boon-companions for ten years


SIKANDAR


lOI


The wine would fail not , Avliether wine or water
The cup affordeth thee, the marvel is
i^o drinking draineth it. My third possession
Is this : a youthful leech who diagnoscth
Disease by making a uroscopy.

So long as he is at the court the Shall
Will never ail , and, fourthly, I possess,

Though privily, a sage Avho will foretell

The Shah all that will chance from circling sun

And shining moon.’’

The noble messenger

Withdreiv, made ivind his mate, came and informed
Sikandar, and the heart of the world-king
Bloomed like a rose. He said • If what is spoken
Be true could this world purchase all the four ?

Kaid will illume my dark soul if he send them.

His country heath my feet T will not tread,

But with this good will hie me home instead


§9

How Sikandar t^ent Ten'^ Sages with a Lethr to insj>ed the
Four Wonders of Raid of Hind

The Shah made choice of Rumans learned, Avise,

And well disposed, then wrote a letter all
Excuse and perfume, colour and device —

Ten trusty chiefs of mine, world- veteran, 0. 1298

And in my confidence, wise men and modest,

Endowed with Grace and counsel, shrewd observers,

Learned and directing, lo • I have dispatched thee :

They will not deviate from thy shrewd counsels.

Exhibit those four wonders unto them,

And suffer them to stay with thee awhile.

When I receive the letter of mine ancients,

Those men expert and erudite, to say : —

^ Nine in P.


102


THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI


‘ The four things — those whose like none e'er beheld —
Have passed before our eyes,’ I will indite
A patent drawn on silk to this effect : —

Kaid, while he liveth, is the king of Hind/ ’’

So those ten Ruman sages left Sikandar,

And sped to Kaid -who, when he saw those chiefs,

Had much to ask of them and heard their answers,
Received them graciously and lodged them featly.

Nest day, when heaven grew pallid and the sun
Drew forth its sword of battle, they adorned,

Although the moon requireth no adornment,

The monarclTs daughter, and within the palace
Set up, and decked with ornaments of Chin,

A golden throne whereon she sat sun-faced,

Outshining Venus in the sky The sages,

Those ancient men fair-spoken and observant.

Drew near. The monarch sent them to the bride.

As bade Sikandar, son of Failakiis

The ancients, seeing the king's daughter's face

Illumining the palace, crown, and tlxrone.

Were lost in wonder and astonishment:

Feet failed them at the sight They stood stock-still,
Their tongues all busied with the praise of God,
Unable to withdraw or look elsewhere,

Till one arrived to call them, since they lingered
Before the king, who said : Why such delay ?

The owner of that face is but a human.

Endowed with goodliness by every star.''

A Ruman answered “None, 0 king’ boholdeth
A picture like her in his halls , so now
We each of us will send the Shah a letter
Describing somewhat of the lady's charms.”

They all sat down with paper, ink, and pens.

Each wrote what he had noted, covering all
The paper with his words , then from ^ Milad

^ lieading with P.


SIKANDAR


103


They sent in haste a horseman to Sikandar,

Who marvelled as he read, for every sage c. 129U

Had written some description of the lady.

He wrote to them and said : ‘‘ Ye have done well

Ye ancients! ye have looked on Paradise.

Return wdth those four things and ask naught else
When ye have given the patent unto Kaid
Make ready for the way and load the beasts.

No man henceforth shall do him injury,

For I have found him just, and that sufficeth.’'

The envoy quitted that green coimtiy-side,

And to those Rhman ancients’ presence hied.


§ 10

How the Ten Sages brought the Daughter^ the Cup, the
Leech, and the Sage, from Kaid of Hind to Sikandar

Now when those sages heard their Shah's reply,

Brought by the toilful cavalier, they went
Forth from their palace and approached king Kaid,

And his famed court. The king of Hindustan,

When he had read the answer to his letter —

The message of the imperious world-aspirant —

J oyed to be free from trouble with Sikandar,

And chose withal a hundred men of Hind
Of honied tongue and eloquent, unlocked
Hoards not by him amassed, and chose therefrom
Crown, throne, and armlet, and of gems withal.

And raiment in the piece, all that was best.

They brought three hundred camel-loads of raiment.

And royal jewelry ; ten of dinars.

And five score all of drachms, there ^vas vithal
A splendid litter of green aloe-wood.

Inlaid with gold and gems. Kaid placed gold thrones ,
Upon ten elephants and on another,


104 SHJh.VAMA of FJFDAUSI

More sploiiclidlj’ caparisoned, the Boaut3^

Who was escorted by the sage and leech,

And showered tears of blood. A magnate bare
The cup, whose wine made all the chiefs bemused.
When that Moon reached the royal women’s house
Tliere was a crown of black musk on her head ;

She had let fall her tresses o’er her cheeks,

Like mail o’er cercis-blossom, and appeared
A slender cypress neath the full orbed moon.

To gaze was perilous. Her eyes were like
To twin narcissi grown in Paradise.

Thou woiildst have said • ‘ She is compact of charms.”

Sikandar gazed upon her stately form

Her# hair, her face, and all from head to foot,

And said : '' Behold the Lustre of the world ! ”

While privily invoking benisons
Upon the All-just, the Maker of the sky,

Who had created such a form and face.

He gave command, and all the men of lore,

And understanding, in the host of Riim
Sat by while he demanded her in marriage,

The which he solemnised with Christian rites,

And showered dinars upon her from above
Out of his hoards till scarcely she could move.


§ II

J^o?r SiKandar teded the Sage^ the LeecJi^ and the Cup
hy Raid of Hind

The matter of the Cypress- tree ^ achieved,

And an abode fit for her rank prepared,

The Shah was free to find out how the sage


* Tlu^ daughter of Kaid.


SIKANDAR


105


Would come off in a strife of wits, and so
He sent a large bowl all abrim with ghee
To that redoubtable philosopher.

And said : Anoint thy limbs herewith, loins, waist,
Breast, back, and neck withal, repose thyself
Till thou hast shaken off thy weariness,

Then fill for me my mind and brain with knowledge.’’

The sage, when he beheld the ghee, observed : —

' This should not prove a mystery to me ! ”

He placed a thousand needles m the bowl,

And then returned it to the sovereign.

Who, when he saw them, summoned privily
A smith and bade him melt them to an ingot,

And fashion out of it a disk. Sikandar
Dispatched this to the sage who furbished it,

And sent back in the place of that dull iron
A mirror free from rust and luminous.

They took this to Sikandar in the night.

Who, saying naught, exposed it to the wet
Till it grew dark and dull , then he returned it,

And thus prolonged the riddle of the iron.

The sage refurbished it to brilliancy.

And sent it back forthwith, but first applied
That which would prove preservative from damp.
Sikandar, seeing, called to him the sage
And, greetings done, assigned to him a seat
Below the throne, then spake about the bowl
Of ghee to further test that famed man’s wit.

Who said : “ Ghee will not penetrate the frame.

Thou said’st : ‘ I pass the sages of the state
In knowledge.’ 1 replied : ‘ 0 mighty Shah !

A man that is both wise of heart and pure
Will like a needle pierce both feet and bones.

Or e’en a stone if one is in the way.’

I said in fact to thee : ‘ My goodly speech,

My heart and soul and prudent purposes


C. 1301


xo6 THE SHJHNAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Make use of words still finer than a hair,

And thou hast not a heart more dense than iron.’

Thy answer to me was : ' In bygone years
My heart grew rusty m the midst of bloodshed.

How shall the gloom depart, for why should I
Continue thus distraught ? ’ I answered thee : —

‘ I will refurbish by celestial wisdom
Thy heart if it becometh malcontent,

And when it shinetli with a brilliant lustre
How shall it rust again ^ ”

His goodly words

Found favour with the Shah whose heart grew keener
By dint of the procedure of the sage.

He ordered that the treasurer should bring
A robe, gold, silver, and a vase of gems.

These they presented to the sage who said . —

‘‘ I have a privy jewel of mine own,

Which is both brighter and immune from foes.

And not, like wealth, the mate of Ahriman.

I need not hire a watchman for the night,

And when I go abroad I fear no thieves.

Since in the night-time knowledge is my warden,

And wisdom my soul’s crown when it is waking,^

For wisdom, knowledge, right, are necessaries
Smee error knocketh at the door of loss.

The Shah will see that I have food and raiment
Enough for public and for private uses ;

Why should I joy in superfluities,

And have to safeguard all this wealth ? Command
To carry hack these havmgs, and may wisdom
Direct thy soul. ’

Sikandar mused at him,

And turned the matter o’er, then said : ‘‘ The Lord
Of sun and moon will find me not in fault
In future since I have thy counsel, rede,

^ Order of couplets as in P


SIKANDAR


107


And useful talk/’

He bade the leech approach
That judged diseases by uroscopy,

And asked : '' Who is the greatest sufferer
Whose pangs compel our tears ^ ”

The leech replied —

The glutton, one without restraint at table.

Excessive food conduceth not to health,

And great is he who maketh health his aim
Now will I gather herbs from every side,

And will exhibit unto thee a medicine,

One that will keep thee sound , no need to purge .
Thine appetites will greaten too, and when
Thou eatest much it will not injure thee.

Heed thou my skilled advice, then blood and brain
Will wax in thee, thou wilt grow strong of frame,

Thy heart will be as blithe as jocund spring.

’Twill bring back colour to thy face and make
Thy judgment sound in all, thy flowing locks
Shall turn not grey, not soon shalt thou despond. '
Sikandar said : I have not seen or heard
Of any king thus favoured, but if thou
Produce this noble potion thou wilt be
My guide to good, and I with mine own soul
Will purchase thee. The malice of thy foes
Shall harm thee not.”

Sikandar got prepared
A robe of honour and fair gifts for him.

And made him chief among the learned physicians.
That suasive leech departed to the mountains
Without attendants. With his ample knowledge
He could distinguish bane and antidote.

And, having gathered many mountain-herbs,

And put the worthless by, chose such as were
Medicinal, and out of these compounded
The needed potion. With these mountain-simples


C 1302


loS THE SHAHNAhA OF FIRDAUSI

He pur<>’ed the Sliah and kept him sound and whole,

So that for nights he slept not but enjoyed
Society, atfected nmch the Fair,

And sought their soit embraces nil he ailed,

Because he tendered not himself, and so
One day the leech came, by uroscopy
Detected signs of decadence, and told him —

Youths surely age by intercourse with women
Methinketh that for three nights thou hast slept not ,
Speak unto me and give me a reply/’

Howbeit Sikandar answered “ I am well
None of the ills of life is troubling me.”

Yet still the approven leech of Hindustan
Would not admit the matter to be so,

But sought that night among Ins books, and mixed
A medicine against that decadence.

That night Sikandar had no lovely mate.

The leech, when morning came, found him alone,

And, having ended the uroscopy,

Flung down the potion, sat in high delight,

And, taking in his hand a goblet, bade
The board be spread and wine and minstrels ordered,
c 1303 The Shah inquired: ‘‘Why hast thou poured away
The draught that thou hadst mixed so carefully ? ”

He said : “ Last night the world-lord sought no mate
But slept alone, and when thou sleepest thus
Thou needest, sire ' no draught.”

Sikandar smiled,

Delighted with the leech, to whom he said : —

Ne’er may this world lack Hind, for thou wouldst say
That all the leeches and astrologers
Flock thither.”

CalHng for a purse of gold,

And for a sable steed whose reins were hung
With golden balls, he gave that skilled leech both,

And said : “ Be honest rede thy tongue’s companion.”


SIKANDAR


109


Then bade he, and they brought the golden goblet
Brimmed with cold water. All folk drank thereof
From morn till bed-time as in revelry,

But all the drinking did not minish it.

Then to the sage the Shah said : Kaid hath not
His equal in the world, and from this time
No longer shall we speak of Hindustan,

But Jadiistan,^ as being Raid's abode.

The people are no more than other folk
In looks but wonderlul in tricks and magic
Then said the Shah to that philosopher : —

This knowledge must not be concealed from us .
How is the water in the cup renewed ^

Is it the stars or Indian jugglery ^ ”

“ Despise not, sire ! the cup,” the sage replied,

‘‘ For they were many years in making it,

And labours underwent in that behoof.

From all the provinces the astrologers,

Where'er there was a master known to fame,
Assisted Kaid, when fashioning the cup,

Both day and night, and passed full many a day
In noting all the aspects of the stars
Take thou the loadstone, that wherewith a man
Attracteth iron, as an illustration.

This cup by innate force attracteth water,

Receiving fresh additions from the sky.

It catcheth water to replace the waste
Too quickly for man's eyes to follow it.”

The Shah, on hearing that wise man's discourse,
Approved thereof , he thought the words of profit.
Thus said he to the elders of Milad • —

I will observe the compact made with Kaid
In honour while I live, for he is one
Before whose presence other folk should stand.
Since I have gotten from him four such things

^ Sorceier-land.


no


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Wo Will not ask tor more/’

Now afterward

Sikandar sot the goods that he possessed,

With all the treasures that he had amassed,

1304 And therewithal a hundred jewelled crowns,

Upon two hundred carriers and stored
All with dinars and jewels in the rough,

Upon a mountain. When they vanished there
None saw again what was reposited ,

From that time forward no one e’er beheld
That treasure and the men that hoarded it.
Sikandar only knew where, hid from sight,

AVere laid those treasures on the mountain-height/


S 12

How Sikimdar led a Host nyaiwd Fur oj Hind and
icrote a Letter to him

Sikandar swift as wind marched from Milad,
Abandoning his treasures, reached Kannuj
And, having led his army near to Fur,

Bade write to him a harsh and hostile letter
As from Sikandar, king of kings, the son
Of Failakus, the illuminer of knowledge,

Of vreal and woe, to Fiir, the king of Hind,
High-starred, and chief of Sind.

First praised he God,

Who hath been and will be for ever Then • —

“ W^th one whom He hath made victorious

Realm crown, and throne will last, whom He despisetli

Will be still wretched and the sun on high

AVill shine not on him. Surely thou hast heard

What in this darksome earth all holy God

Hath given to us of victory and fortune,

^ Sikantlai’s method of hiding his tieasures beais a suspicious
re'?emblancp to that of Captains Kidd and Flint.


SIKANDAR in

Grace, diadem, and throne of king of kings,

But not for long . our day will pass ; another
Will come and be partaker of these fruits,

And so I strive to leave an honoured name
In this small circle compassed by the Moon.

When they deliver this possess thy soul,

Thine unenlightened soul, with what is right,

Exchange thy throne of greatness for thy steed,

Advise not with the priests, thy counsellors
But ask immunity from us, and practise
No craft because the crafty labour long.

If in thy pride and thine audacity.

Thou wilt not do my bidding thou shalt rue
Thy dallying when with my cavaliers
I come to fight with thee.”

When thus these words
Had been indited, and the scribe had done,

They scaled the letter with Sikandar’s signet.

And for the journey chose a prudent envoy,

Who reached the court of Fiir and held discourse
At whiles of strife, at whiles of feast and revel.

They summoned to the king that man discreet.

And by the throne appointed him a seat


§ 13

ffoir Fur UTiswered the Letter of Sikandar

Bold Pur, when he had read the letter, raged
Against that famous magnate and forthwith
Wrote fiercely in reply, and set a tree
Within the garth of vengeance. He began : —
“ ’Tis ours to fear and reverence holy God.

We will not speak so many empty words ;

The boaster is a man without resource.

Art thou so shameless as to summon me ^


c. 1305


1 12 THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI

Is wisdom to thy mind so lii»ht a thing ^

[f Failakiis on this wise \srote to Fur
Do thou begin too and provoke a quarrel ^

But ’tis Dara who thus hath heartened thee,

Because of him revolving heaven was weary,

And when good tortune goeth from a race
They heed not the advice of counsellors.

Thy strife with Kaid Avas but a merry-make ,

Thou thinkest kings thy prey. No such address
Or words proceeded fiom the ancient Kaians.

Fiir am I and the son of Fur. We take
No thought of Ciesars. When Dara asked help
And I perceived Ins heart and fortune failing,

I sent him mighty elephants and gave him
Words of encouragement. When he was slain
By that slave’s hand the Iranians’ fortunes fell,

And when earth’s face Avas franchised from Dara
That trenchant bane became thine antidote
Why lose thy head because bad ministers
Ill-treated him ? Talk not of Avar so proudly,

Because Avith me it is another story.

Thou shalt behold mj mighty elephants
And host, Avhich bar the Avind, confronting thee.

Thy whole aim is supremacy, thy nature
One rust with Ahriman. Do not thou soav
The seed of harshness in the Avorld, but be
In fear of misadventure and the ills
Of fortune. In this letter ’tAvas my part
To seek thy Avelfare and instruct thy heart ”

§ 14

Hoir Sikandar arrayed his Host to fight with F4r of Htnd
and made iron Steeds and Riders filled with Naphtha


C. 1306 ForthAAuth Sikandar, Avhen Fur’s ansAver reached him,
Chose from the host chiefs fit and enterprising.


SI K AND AN


1^3


Young but luuturo lu wisdom, and led fuitli
To war against that Endian such an army
That all the earth sceincd sea, and thou hadst said : —
Sikandar is sole monarch in the world ’’

But all those inoimtains, seas, and rugged paths
Quenched in the soldiers hearts the flame of w’ar
The troops were all alveary of a march
By roads so grievous, steep, and profitless
Once at a stage they gathered round the Shah
And said : 0 Gesar and the lord of Chm ’

Earth is not aide to sustain tliy host.

Not Fiir of Hmd not the Faghfur himself,

Or king of Sind, will seek to tight with thee.

AVhy must thou bring disaster on thy troops
By this vile country and by such a road ^

We see no sound steed left ^vhereon to fight
With vigour, and it e’er the troops turn back
From warfare neither horse nor foot ivill find
The way. When we have triumphed hitherto
It hath been o’er an army of our foes,

But now w'e are opposed by seas and mountains,

And none of us is weary of his life.

Convert not all our glory into shame ,

None hath made war with water and with rocks ”

The words displeased Sikandar, and in wrath
He frustrated their scheme. Such words,” thus said
he,

“ Befit but mutineers. What time 1 marched
From Bum Iranward we beheld all garden
And settlement, our Kiinian slain reached not
A hundred, and our costs were small. Iran
Is yours. What better could ye ask of God ^

111 came upon Dara from his own slaves ;

No one of you hath seen one weak or wounded !

I wdll proceed ivithout you and set foot

Upon the Dragon’s heart Come what come maj’^

VOL. YI. H


114


THE SHJnyAMA OF FIRDAUSI


(_)t ti,L»ht and feast henceforth ye shall behold me
x\bandon not for good my task with Fiir.

What time I quit him T march to Rum,

And by my valour overcome the land
1307 With God to aid me, and Iranian troops,

I ask not I a Ruiuan to liefriond me.’’

On seeing that their w'ords enraged the Shiih
The troops sought to excuse themselves, and said —

• W e all are Caesar’s slaves, we only walk

The earth to do his best, will strive, and when

Our horses fail will foot it to the field

Of strife. Though foes make earth sea with our blood,

And valleys into mountains with our fallen,

None in the day of fight shall see our backs
Though sea and mountain-crag contend with us.

We all are slaves, and it is thine to bid :

In thy calamities our lives are thine.”

Sikandar, hearing this, prepared fresh strife,

And chose a hundred thousand of Iran,

Equipped for war. Behind were Riiman captains.

All clad m mail, and stalwart warriors

Thus forty thousand veteran cavaliers

Marched in support of the Iranians

Succeeding these came mounted men world-taking,

And falchion-brandishers, from Misr. Then Ccesar

Chose from the men of Rum, Misr, and Barbar

Twelve thousand cavaliers efficient, martial,

For battle eager all and all renowned.

So that with this array supporting him

The dales and plains seemed heights ! He took withal

Of readers of the stars and priests three score —

Wise men well known to fame and veteran —

To choose the days for battle.

When Fiir heard : —

^ A host hath come” he picked his battle-field.

And all his troops assembled on the plain ;


SIKANDAR


^15

Tlie earth \vas mountain-like with elephants.

The army stretched four miles with troops behind
And elephants in h‘ont.

Now spies arrived

From Hind before the world-lord and informed him
At large of how the elephant contendeth
In warfare: “ It will rout two miles of horse.

No cavalier will dare to face that beast,

Or. if he did so, ever come again,

Because its trunk is higher than the air,

And Satin n is its helper in the sky.”

They drew a picture of an elephant.

And showed it to Sikandar who commanded
That the philosophers ot Rum should model
One out of wax for him, and then inquired —

Who can propound a scheme to cope with such ^ ”

The sages held a session and devised
A plan in all its details. Then the Shah
Assembled all the master-smiths of Rum, C

Of Misr, and Pars, twelve hundred men in sum,

Who made a horse, Avith saddle and with rider
Complete, of iron, fastening the joints
With bolts and rivets Horse and man were furbished
They charged it with black naphtha, and then ran it
On wheels before the troops At sight thereof
Sikandar was well pleased for, being wise.

He felt the gain thereof, and bade to make
A thousand such and more : who e'er beheld
On chargers dappled, chestnut, black, and grey
An iron host ? The matter took the month,

And then the workmen rested from their labours
Thus led they forth on wheels an iron host
That of all things resembled horsemen most.


. 130S


THE SHAhnAmA of IHRDAUSJ


1 16


§ iS

Hoiv the Ho^r oj SfliUi/flar fouijlit ultli the Ho^^t or Fih\
how Fih' ua.'^ Ham by SiFtiidai , and hon Sihtndar
seated Sowunj upon ffu^ Thnone oi Fin

Now when Sikandar was approaching Fiir,

And from atar one host behold the other,

On l)Oth sides rose the shout and dust of battle,

And eager for the iiay the warriors
Advanced They lit the naphtha in the steeds :

Fur’s troops were in dismay. The naphtha blazed
Fur’s troops recoiled because those steeds were iron,
Whereat tlie elephants, when their own trunks
Were scorched, fled likewise, and their drivers marvelled.
Thus all the Indian host and all those huge,
High-crested elephants were put to flight
Sikandar like a raging blast pursued
The loe until the air turned indigo,

And opportunity for fight was over.

The monarch with the Riimans in full force
Dismounted ’twixt two mountains and sent scouts
On all the roads to guard his host from foes
Now when the ingot of the sun’s crown showed,

And all the world became as ’twere white crystal,

There rose a blare of trumpets and the sound
Of fife, oi cornpipe, and of kettledrum.

Both hosts made ready for the fray and raised
Their spear-heads to the clouds. Sikandar came
C. 1309 Between the lines, with Rum an sword in hand,

And sent a cavalier to cry from far
To Ffir * “ Sikandar hath come forth and seeketli
An interview with thee. He is prepared
To name his own conditions and hear thine,

And if thy terms are just he is amene.”

When Fur, the Indian, heard the herald’s words


SIKANDAR


117


Ho rushed forth from the centre of his troops.

Sikandar said to him : “ O noble man !

Our two hosts have been shattered by the fight.

The wild beasts batten on the brains of men,

The horses’ hoofs are trampling on their bones.

Now both of ns are heroes brave and young,

Both paladins of eloquence and brain,

Why then should slaughter be the soldiers’ lot,

Or bare survival after combating ^

Let us two arm ourselves and light it out
Since one of us must needs obtain the realm.

When one of us hath proved victorious,

The troops, the crown, and throne all will be his.”

Fur joyfully agreed to light Sikandar,

For w’ell he knew that he had lion-strength.

And rode a charger dragon-like, whereas
Sikandar was a reed-like cavalier,

Armed lightly and ill-mounted, so he said : —

' Agreed . we will engage in single combat "

Both took their swords and wheeled betw^een the lines,
But when Sikandar realised the bulk
Of that mad Elephant, wdio rode a Mountain
And graspe<l a Diagon, he grew dazed in tight,
Despaired of life at heart and kept his distance,

Till, as he wheeled with Fur upon the held,

A mighty shout arose behind the host.

Which filled Fur’s heart with dudgeon and distracted
His heart and eyes and ears. Then like a blast
Sikandar issued from the dust and smote
The hero with his sword, clove crest, head, neck.

And from the steed the body sank to earth.

The Kuman army raised its head to heaven.

The warriors charged. Now Fiir possessed a drum
Of lion-skin whose sound rose o’er the clouds.

That drum’s din and the trumpets’ blare arose,

Earth turned to iron, air to ebony,


ii8 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

While by that token those bravo troops of Hind
Advanced to face their foes, but from the plain
Was proclamation made: “Ye righteous men,

The ehicfest ol the realm ot Hindustan J
The head of Indian Fur is m the dust,

His elephantine torm is cloven asunder,
c, 1310 What is the purpose of this present struggle,

Such strife of scimitars and such reluctance ^

What Fur was to you is Sikandar now,

And yo must look to him in fight and feast.”

The Avarriors of Hindiistan assented ,

They AV'ent and saAv Fur’s head all dust and blood.

His body hacked up by the scimitar
A bitter cry ascended from his troops,

AVho dropped their weapons and Avent grieved and
wailing

To Ciesar, dust upon their heads Sikandar
Restored the Avcapons of the Avarriors,

Addressed them Avith all courtesy, and said —

“ Though Fur of Hind is dead ye need not yield
Your hearts to grief because I Avill entreat you
More graciously than he did, I will banish
Both fear and anguish from them, and Avill give
In largess all his treasures To my troops
These are forbidden. I aauII make the folk
01 Hind all Avealthy and administer
The croAvn and throne AAith vigour ”

Thence he mounted

With mingled feelings to the throne of Fur.

So is it with this Hostel by the Avay ’

It never is content to let thee stay.

Enjoy, leave naught for other folks to take.

Why shouldst thou labour for another’s sake ?

For tAvo months Cscsar filled the throne and lavished
Fur’s Avhole Avealth on his troops. There Avas a man
Of parts, SaAAUirg by name, a mighty chief


SIKANDAR


119

Of Hindustan ; to him Sikandar gave

The throne of kingship ‘‘Never hoard dinais,”

He said. Give and enjoy whate’er thou gettest,

Not giorjing in the fleeting crown and throne,

For ^vhiles it is Sikandar and whiles Fur,

Whiles pain and wrath, whiles feast and banqueting ”
Bestowing as a present on his host
PiMclims and dinars he ordeied all that coast.


^ 16

Silandar (lent on aPihinmane io the House of the Kaaha

Now in a little while, when all the troops
Were satiate of wealth, a sudden impulse
Came on Sikandar, and he greatly longed
To journey to the Kaaba. So at dawn
The drum-roll rose/ the air grew like the eye
Of chanticleer, while all the mass of spears,

And silken pennons, formed a canopy
Of yellow, red, and violet.^ Sikandar

Departed with his diadem and treasures c 1311

To look upon the house of Ibrahim*

Who bare no little toil to build that shrine,

Which God hath named Baitul Haram, and there
Thou hast His perfect Way who calleth it,

By reason of its purity, His house,

And thither summoneth His worshippers,

Though needing not the world, or any place,

Or food, enjoyment, rest, or blandishment ,

But still, since place had being, that hath been
A place of worship — God's memorial.

Sikandar then dreiv near to Kadisi,

World-conquering up to Jahram of Pars.


^ Reading with P.


* Couplet omitted.


120 THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

When news of him reached Nasr, son of Katib,

Who was the Grace and ornament of Mecca,

He went to meet the Shah with warlike chiefs,

And valiant, spear-armed cavaliers. Meanwhile
From Mecca sped a horseman to Sikandar
And said ‘ The famous chief now on his way,

But not in quest of treasure, crown, and host,

Is sprung from Isma’il, the prophet, son
Of Ibrahim the favoured of the stars ''

When Nasr arrived Sikandar welcomed him,
Assigning him an honourable rank.

Nasr, joying, told Sikandar of his race,

And of his secret purposes He answered * —

“ Good-hearted chieftain, speaker of the truth !

AVho, next to thee, is greatest, most esteemed^

And honoured in the tribe ^ ’’

Nasr said ‘‘ 0 world-lord
Khuza IS master here When J small
Had passed a^vay Kahtan, the monarch, came
With mighty hosts of swordsmen from the waste,

And seized the country of Yaman unjustly.

Of our race many guiltless folk were slam.

So that the day was over for our tribe.

Now this displeased the Maker of the world ,

High Heaven frowned upon Kahtan . but when
He was reduced to dust Khuza’ appeared,

Unjust, audacious, and tyrannical ,

All from Haram ^ up to Yaman is his,

His angle is within the sea of Misr.

He hath transgressed from justice and the way,

And hath no thought of goodness in his heart,

The world is in his clutch, the hearts of all
The race of Isma’il are full.”

On hearing,

Sikandar slew such scions of Khuza’


^ Weoca and the Kaaba


SI KAN DA R 12 s

As lie could dnd and scalped tiieiii sparing none
Of friend or foe, delivering Hajaz,

And therewithal Yaman, from the oppressor
By policy and by his warnor-swordsinen
And set up of the seed of Isniahl
All that were worth} of supremacy.

He visited afoot Baitul Haram ;

The seed of Isma’il ]‘ejoicod in him.

At every step of Caesar’s pilgrimage
His treasurer showered dinars. The Shah, when he
Returned and reached the throne, bestowed on Nasr
Dinars and treasure while the mendicant,

And they that lived by toil, grew free from want.


§ 17

If^w StJeandar Utf lut> Tioojis from Jiuhla toward Mit<i

He led his army thence with ail dispatch,

And came to Judda. He abode not long

But bade the soldiers build abundant ships

And transports, and departed with his host

For Misr. The monarch there was named Kabtiin ,

His troops exceeded all imagining.

On hearing that a conquering king had come
Forth from Haram vaingloriously, he went
To meet him with a numerous retinue,

Slaves, purses, crown, and throne. At sight of him
Sikandar joyed, and all his foemen’s words
Proved wind. The Shtih abode a year in Misr
To rest himself and troops.

There was a lady.

The queen of Andaliis, and she was wise,

Ambitious, bounteous, with a countless host.

Famed and victorious through her own deserts,

And named Kaidafa. From her warriors


1312


13 2


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Whe chose a cavalier, a clever draughtsman,

And said ; Go to Sikandar, naming not
This country and ourselves, mark everything
Minutely — his appearance, stature, court ,

Then make a full length picture of him, showing
His favour, face, and bearing.’"

When he heard

He mounted, girt him to perform her bidding,

And went in courier-wise from Andaliis
To Misr to eminent Sikandar Cccsar,

Observed him both upon the throne and saddle,
Brought paper out and implements of Ohm,

And, having limned him to the life, returned
With all dispatch Kaidafa, when she saw
Sikandar s likeness, grieved, concealed her feelings,
Sighed, and thus said . By Avar and policy
This man Avill trample on the world, and brief
Will be their lives that come to fight vith him ^ ”
While for his part Sikandar asked Kabtun . —

" Who IS Kaidafa s peer on earth ? ”

0 king • ”

He made reply, “she is unique. None knowetli
The number of her troops without at least
Much searching of the muster-roll In treasure
In matters courteous and of obligation,

In counsel and benevolence of speech.

Thou wilt behold not in the Avorld her equal
She hath a city that is built of stone ,

A leopard could not Avrest it from her grasp
The ground it covereth is four leagues long,

And four leagues wide Avithal. If thou inquirest
About her treasure ’tis past measuring :

Her doings in the lA-orld are no new thing.”


SI K AND A R


123


§ 18

Sikamiars LetUr h) Kaiddja^ Queen oj And(jlu<^
aw! her Ansupi

Sikandar, having heard that mindful man,

Bade come a scribe. They wrote on silk a letter —
“ This from Sikandar, who o’erthroweth lions
And taketh cities, unto wise Kaidafa,

Whose name is eminent in majesty.

First, praise be to the Master of the sun,

Who lighteth up the moon and turning sphere,

The Lord that uieteth justice out aright,

And granteth more than any one can ask .

We have not sought thy throne by violence,

But have respected thine exalted state.

When they deliver unto thee this letter,

And light is thrown upon thy darkened counsels,
Thou wilt dispatch what we impose as tribute,

As knowing that thou canst not strive with us.

To act thus will be wise and provident ,

It will be strength in thee and true religion ,

Oppose and thou wilt see but change of fortune.
Draw thy conclusions from Dara and Fiir ;

Thou needest go no further for instruction.’’

Whenas the wind had dried the superscription
They sealed the letter with a seal of musk.

A cameleer sped to that famous queen
Who marvelled at the letter as she read.

In answer, first, she poured her praises forth
To that just Judge, the Maker of the earth,

Who raised the turning sky and set therein
The seat of good and ill. He made thee victor
O’er Fur of Hind, Dara, and chiefs of Sind.

Thy head hath been elated by success


C 1314.


124


I HE SHAhnAhA of FIRDAUSI


Against those famous swordsmen . but dost thou
Rank me with them or think by conquering me
To vv^ear my crown when I surpass them all
In Grace and greatness, troops and royal treasure ^
Shall I obey a Ciesar, fear his threats
And quail ? A thousand thousand warriors
Are at my gate, and kings are in command
Of each contingent. Called I all my lieges
My land Avould not attbrd them room to camp,
While treasures wait my chiefs when they go forth
To war across our inarches. What vain words
Thou speakest in thus crowing o’er Dara ’ ”

This ’neath her golden signet-ring she past,

Then sent a camt^leer swift as a blast


§ 19

Hoio SiJmtiflar led hn Troops to Amlalds and took the
Hold of King Faryan

Sikandar, having read the queen’s reply,

Let blow the brazen trumpets and set forth.

When he had been one month upon the road
He reached the marches of Kaidata’s realm,

Where reigned a monarch who was named Faryan,
Possessed of ti'easure, troops, and puissance
He had a city well supplied with arms ;

No crane had seen the summit of its walls.

He gathered troops and garrisoned that hold,

And cavaliers patrolled the ramparts round.

Sikandar bade the bishops ^ bring their wains
.\jid catapults, and in a sennight took
That lofty hold . his noble army entered,

As did Sikandar who forbade all bloodshed.

One of Kaidafa’s sons, the son-in-law

^ Cy Vol V. p 30 j tind nott


SIKANDAR


125


Of king Faryan who had muchjo} 111 him,

Was there within. To him Faryan had given
A favourite daughter, and Ins crown had been
Exalted by the queen The son-in-law
Was named Kaidrush and he w’-as all in all
To king Faryan for whom the sky decreed
Death in the fight , his daughter and her spouse
Were taken by the hands of one Shahrgi'r.

Sikandar, knowing Avho the spouse was, thought : —

“ What cure is there for this contingeric3^ ? ”

Bade his wazir to come and gave to him

Authority and crown and throne. This sage

Was named Naitkun, a counsellor, a man 0. 1315

Of influence, to whom Sikandar said • —

“ They will produce the wedded pair before thee,

And I will title thee Sikandar, son
Of Failakiis. Assume the Kaian throne.

And, wiien I come before thee girt for service,

Bid some fierce deathsman to behead Kaidriisli .

Then I will come to thee and intercede,

Exhibiting the lowliest submission ,

Make thou the audience private and, when I
Am waxing urgent, grant me my request.''

The minister was troubled, knowing not
What was the hidden purpose of the Shah,

Who added . “ We must keep this secret. Call me,

Like other envoys, talk much of Kaidafa,

Send me right gladly with ten horse, and say : —

* Go to, take this, and bring an answer quickly.’

Dispatch Kaidrush with me and hide all from him.

Naitkun said • “ I wdll do so and will practise
Deception at thy bidding."

When the sun

Had drawn its sword at daAvn, and gloomy night
Had vanished in dismaj’^, Naitkun assumed
The throne, but ill at ease, ashamed, and sorry .


126


THE SHJHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


Sikandar stood before the presence girded.

They shut the door and oped the path of guile.

Now when Shahrgir brought in Kaidafa’s son,

A captive weeping mth his wife beside him,

And clinging to his hand m all her charms,

Naitkun spake hastily What man is this
Whose pains enforce such tears ^ ’’

' Be calm/’ replied

The youth, ‘ because I am Kaidafa’s son,

Kaidriish. Save for this daughter of Faryan’s
I have no spouse concealed behind my curtains.

I went to bring her home to cherish her
As mine own life but noAv the lion-taker
Hath ta on me prisoner The stars have smitten
My soul and shafts my body.”

When Naitkun

Heard what the young man said he was distressed,

His heart grmv full, howbeit he showed anger,

And then addressed the deathsman : “ Earth must hide
them.

Behead them with thine Indian scimitar —

The husband and his consort in their bonds ”

Then came Sikandar, kissed the ground and said : —
“ O Shah of Ciesar’s race • if thou wilt spare
The blood ot this young couple for my sake
My head will be exalted o’er the people.

Why in thy wrath behead the innocent,

For God will not approve thee ? ”
c 1316 Shrewd Naitkun

Replied “ Thou hast preserved the blood of both.”
Then added quickly Thou hast saved thy head,
Kaidrush ’ when thou hadst lost it ! Now will I
Send him with thee to tell thy mother all.

If she shall send me tribute, it is well,

And none shall burst his skin on that account.

Tend well my worthy minister, for he


SIKANDAR


127


Will proffer unto her a light or feast
With me. Repay him for his kindliness,

For good men’s hearts are moved by gratitude,
And, when he hath the answer of the queen,
Dismiss him kindly on his homew'ard way.’'

Kaidriish replied My heart and eyes and ears
Are his. Oh ' how shall 1 express myself ^

I tender him as dearly as my life

Because I o-we him that and world and wufe.”


§ 20

Ho'ir SiTianJar irent an Amhassador to KauliUa and
icas lecoifmsf^d hy her

Sikandar chose ten Riimans, men of name,

All confidants who would respect his secret,

And said to them : ‘ While we are on our way
Call me Naitkun.”

Kaidnish led on , Sikandar,

Put trust 111 him. The chieftains spurred like fire,

And reached a mountain ^vherc the rocks were crystal
Upon it there were fruit-trees of all sorts,

And on the top they noticed grass in plenty.

They left this mountain and kept speeding on
Toward the country where Kaidafa dwelt,

Who eagerly heard tidings of Kaidrush,

And went to meet him with a mighty host.

All men of name and favoured by the stars
He, -when he saw his mother, lighted down.

And did obeisance, but she bade him mount.

They rode, hand clasped in hand. Kaidnish described
All that he had gone through and paled in telling
His troubles in the city of Faryan,

Where he had lost crown, army, throne, and treasure.
The man that cometh with me/’ he proceeded,


I 3 S THE SHAH NAHA OF FIRDAUSI

‘‘ Presei’Yed me and my consort from Sikandar,

Who else had given orders to behead me,

And burn my corpse in fire. Do what he wisheth
With right good will and thwart not his request.”

C. 1317 Now when Kaidafa heard her son’s account
Her heart was overset by that affliction.

She summoned from the palace to her presence
The envoy, placed him m the nobles’ seat,

Gave him much greeting and a kindly welcome,
Assigned to him a splendul residence,

And sent all kinds ot provaiid, robes, and carpets.

He tarried there that night and at the dawn
Went to the court to otfor his respects.

The attendants raised the curtain and allowed him
To enter through the portal on his steed
When he beheld Kaidafa on her throne
Ot ivory, crowned with a crown of gems
And turquoise, and arrayed in robes of Chin
Inwrought with gold, the attendance of her servants,
Her tace bright as the sun, her throne supported
By crystal feet, and o’er her robe a net
Ot onyx of Yaman on golden thread,

Impleached with many a gem, and slaves, with torques
And earrings, standing in that rosary ^

All arabesqued with gold, he stood astound,

Oft times invoking to himseli God’s name.

To Ctesar, gazing on that court, Iran
And Rum seemed even as nothing, and he kissed
The ground like other courtiers in her presence.
Kaidafa gazed on him, received him well,

Much questioned him, and made him sit. Now when
Bright Sol set, and the audience-time for strangers
Had passed, she gave command to deck the palace
And call attendants, and for harp and 'wine.

They ranged in one hall tables made of teak

^ I e com t.


SI KAN BAR


129


With gold stars and designs in ivory,

Meats were provided past all reckoning.

Wine was brought forth and, when the eating ceased
And gold and silver cups won) handed lound,

The company drank first Kaid<if<i s health
That noble queen gazed often at Sikandar
Amid the revel till at length she bade
The keeper of her treasures. ‘‘Bring to 1110
The lustrous silk with that delightful portrait,

Just as it is, and handle it with care.”

He brought it to the queen, who scanned it much
And, having scrutinised Sikandar’s face,

Found the presentment just, so that she knew —

‘ ’Tis Ctusar, chief of yon famed arm} ’ H(‘

Hath made himself his own ambassador,

And boldly reached this court. Imperious sir I ”

She said to him, “ come give Sikandar’s message.”

He thus replied . “ The monarch of the world
Thus charged me in the presence of his nobles
To say to pure Kaidafa * ' Here below
Ensue naught but the right. See that thou shun not
My bidding but observe shrewd fealty,

For if in aught thou art perverse in heart
I will lead forth a host heart-shattering,

Rob all thine army of the breath of life,

And give up all thy kingdom to the flames
I had some intimation of thy virtues.

And therefore was not instant to assail thee,

For thou possessest modesty and wisdom ,

Thy shrewd rede is the world’s sc-curity.

Thou knowest that if thou refusest tribute
Thou canst withstand me not , but thou shalt have
Naught that is not both flxir and just if thou
Wilt turn from falsehood and from fraud.’ ”

Kaidafa

Was wroth thereat but saw no salve but silence,

VOL. VI. 1


C. 13KS


130 THE SHJHNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

And said to him ‘ Return to thine abode,

And for the present rest there with thy friends.
To-morrow when thou comest we will answer,

And take fair older for thy homeward way.’’

Thereat Sikandar went back to his lodging,

And thought all night how to secure himself.

Now AYhen the bright Lamp rose above the mountains
And plain and upland glittered like brocade,
lie went to court again with smiling lips,

But heart o’ercast with care. The chamberlain
Saw, greeted him, and took him to the queen.

He saw a thiong of strangers and a hall
^V'here was a ciystal throne with patterns traced
1 11 emeralds and cornelians, every boss
A royal gem. The dais w'as compact
Of sandal and lign-aloe, and the pillars
Of onyx and turquoise. The edilice.

The queen’s Grace throne, and puissance much amazed
him.

He cried : “ This is indeed an audience-chamber ’

God’s worshippers behold not such another.”

He paced toward her, and they set a seat
Tor him below the throne. Kaidafa said . —

‘ Why marvel at our palace thus, Naitkun ?

Is Rum indeed so other that thou needs
Must wonder at our land ^ ”

He said to her : —

‘‘ 0 queen ' misprize not thine own dwelling-place.

Thy head is higher than the heads of kings
Because thine ocean is a mine of gems ”

Kaidiifa smiled : his speech and conduct charmed
her.

She then dismissed her court and, having seated
The envoy graciously before her, said : —
o 1319 ‘‘ 0 son of Failakiis * thou art a master

In fight and festival, in good and ill.


SIKANDAR


131


Thou hast approached me boldly to ask tiibute.
Although I know not what incited thee.’'

On hearing this Sikandar's favour changed ,

His soul w\as full of pain, his cheeks were livid.

He said " 0 most wise queen ' such -words as these
Become thee not. I thank the All-provider
That none of all our famous chiefs arc liero
To tell this to the master ot the world
And take my life anon, Naitkiin am J
0 mistress of the world ’ so call mo not
The son of Failakiis.”

Kaidata said . —

Dispute it not because thou art Sikandar,

And, when thou seest the portrait of thyselt,

Cease to dissemble and display no wrath."

She brought and showed to him the silk all limned
With that fair portrait and so vividly
That, given motion, it had been himself.

He bit his lips ; day grew for him like midnight
He said • ‘ Let no one be without a dagger
Concealed about him ^ "

‘ 11 thou hadst one here
Suspended from thy shoulder,” she replied,

* No strength or trenchant scimitar would serve ,
There is no room for fight or road for flight."

Sikandar said * The great are eager ever
To win the world by valour, and must shun not
The path of danger, for the faint of heart
Excel not. Had I but my weapons now
The whole house would become a sea of blood,

And I, confronted by mine enemy.

Would rend my liver's seat or slaughter thee ! ”


132


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§

Ifoir Kanhtja roim'-pllcil Fihtanhi)

Kaidafa, suiiling at Sikandar s bearm^ii,}

His gallantry, and angry A\or(ls, replied —

“ O monarch lion-like ! become not headstrong
In valour It was not through Grace of thine
That Fur of Hind^ DAra son of Darab,

And all those warriors of Sind were slam,

But ’tw^as because those world-lords’ day was over,
And thy star in the ascendant Thine own valour
Hath made thee so piesuiuptuous as to deem
Thyself the lord of time and earth, but know
That ail our blessings are derived from God
So while ihou livest give the thanks to Hun.
e 1320 Thou said’st : ‘ The wisdom ot the world is iiiine ’

I do not look upon thy words as true.

What protit hath thy wisdom been to thee
Since thou hast come within the Dragon’s breath,
And, while still youthful, hemraest thine own shroud
By going as thine own ambassador ’

But bloodshed or a reckless strife with kings
Is not my wont. The ruler who is strong.

And justly generous, is wise withal.

For, know, the shedder of king’s blood will see
But tire at last. Be easy, go rejoicing,

And in departing make a new departure,

For henceforth thou wilt do no embassies
Since all the earth will recognise Sikandar.

I know not any of the great whoso portrait,

Limned thus on silk, is not in my possession.

And in a careful keeper s hands, and I
Have used the judgment of astrologeis
Thereon to learn if I should trust or dread,

For when a prudent king hath been vouchsafed.

The age proclaimeth it to man and woman.


SIKANDAR


J33


Thee will 1 call Naitkun while thou art here,

And by that token scat thee at a distance
That none may know thy secret, hear thy name,
(Jr fame. I will dismiss thee with all kindness
But thou must be a master of discretion,

Aud, further, jjromise never more to be
A foe or ill-disposed toward my sons.

My king’dom or my kindred or allies
And treat me as thy peer/’

Sikandar hoard

And joyed lelievcd from fear and slaughter, swore
By that just Judge, who ruleth all, the Faith
Of Christ, and by the sword of war, and said : —

‘ So long as thy dominions, thine own sons,

And potentates allied to thee, endure
I will do naught but what is good and right ,

I ^sill not think of fraud or knavery.”

When he had sworn Kaidafa said to him : —

I must not fail to warn thee of one thing :

Know this then that Taintish my son misprizeth
llv knowledge and my counsel. Ho is wayward,
Fur’s son-in-law, and must not hear from near
Or far that thou art one skin with Sikandar,

Or friend withal, tor he would fain avenge
Fur and in battle dash down heaven to earth,
fieturn now to thy house in peace and joy
And utter naught about the world’s concerns.”

Sikandar went, his heart was big within him,

For wise men think of death with seriousness.
Kaidafa brought no frown upon his face,

And never disregarded he her counsel.

He stayed that night and early in the morn
Went from his lodging and approached the queen,
Who sat within the hall of audience,

Surrounded by a crowd of warriors.^

^ ‘‘ toute paiee et entoui^e de bouquets de fieurs ” (Mobl).


C. 1321


134


THE SHAHNAMA OF FTRDAUSt


The ceiling was of ivory and gold,

And in the gold were divers jewels set.

In front of all the musky-scented throng
Before the queen there stood two proper sons ,

One was Tainush, the cavalier, the other
Kaidriish who used to hearken to her words
The younger son spake to his mother thus : —

“ 0 queen Avell favoured of the stars and just *

Take order that Naitkun glad, well content,

And with a guide, may leave thee, so that none
May harm or treat him as a foe, forwhy
He saved my life, and as bright life I hold him.”

She said Mm<‘ actions shall increase his groat
ness."'

Then to Sikandar spake that noble queen —

‘ Now make the secret patent to us What
Hast thou to say ? What is Sikandar’s purpose ?

What knowest thou about the Shah, and whom
Hath he for minister ’ ”

Sikandar answered —

“ Great lady ! I have tarried long. The Shah
Said : ‘ Go, ask tribute from her land Tf thou
Delayest I will lead the army thither.

And leave her not the kingdom, crown, and throne,
Grace, queenship, might, or fortune for her own ’ ”


§ 22

How lYiifiihli, the )So?i of Kmdafu^ }i)a^ wroth with Silaivlar,
and hoif Sihandai took Precavboyi aqaimt him

Tainush, when he had heard Sikandar’s words,

Raged like a blast, and said : “ Thou worthless fool !

No man could reckon thee a man at all '


SI K AND A R


135


Know’st not before whose presence thou art seated ^

Assume the bond slave’s pose ! ^ Thy head is full
Of wrath and arrogance. Inform me who
Thy monarch is. Save for our sovereign's Grace
I would pluck oh thy head as I would pluck
An orange from its bough. This very night,

Because I grieve for Fur, will I display
Thy trunkless head in presence of the host ' ’

His mother called to him, for his hot head
Was growing more distraught, and said : “ The words
Are not his owm ! Address the envoy's sender,

Whose utterance they are."

She bade: “Conduct c 13
Tainiish outside the court. Thou scowling one > "

She added, show not thy vile temper here
He saved Kaidrush, thy brother, from the Shah,

And reached our court, and yet thou railest thus
Against him and art wToth and sore displeasured * "

The son went forth fulfilled with rage and dudgeon
With bloodshot eyes. In private to Sikandar
She said “ Tainush is foolish and the tool
Of divs. In private he must not devise
Some loss or crime. Thou seekest after knowledge,

And thou art w’ise. Consider what to do."

Sikandar said : So be it then Thy course
Is to recall Tainush ”

Thereat the queen

Sent for her son and set him 'neath the throne.

Sikandar said . “Imperious prince ! if thou
Wouldst have thy wish command thyself, and 1
Will not oppose thee. I accept each word
Of thine. Sikandar, who is Shah and hath
The throne and crown, hath plunged me into gloom.

^ Liteially “ Sit not before the qaeen. Show not thy hands,” the
propel attitude for slaves being to stand with folded arms, with the
hands under the arm-pits. In this position they cannot do mischief


136 THE SHAHNJ'MA OF FIRDAUSI

He sent me to the queen with this command . —

' Ask tribute from that famous sovereign/

So that whatever dl grow manifest

From foes toward him may come on me. Hear, prince

Eage not nor storm — another’s due — at me

For much have I been wronged by him myself,

And I have seliemed to slay him. To thy hands

Will 1 deliver him, and then the world

Will bo well quit, and 1 fare free, of him

Tliou know'st not yet my jdan and what good thouglits

T harbour I will go to him to-day

With my reply and will advise him finely I

If I shall grasp his hand and from his camp

Conduct him to thee, and in such a fashion

That he shall have no troops with him, and thou

Shalt look not on his scimitar, his throne,

And crown, then what wilt thou bestow upon me
Of all the realm, how recognise my service ^ ”

Tainiish thereat made answer : I have heard
Thy words, and we must act thereon forthwith,

For if thou shalt achieve this, and wilt do
Thine utmost honestly, I will bcstow
His treasures and his purses, steeds, and men —
Devoted lieges — and my thanks upon thee .

Thou shalt possess the world, know good become
My loyal minister, and in this land
c 1323 My treasurer.”

Sikandar rose and shook
Hands on the bargain, and Tainush inquired : —

How wilt thou compass this and by what spell
Effect this sorcery ? ”

Sikandar said : —

“ Thou must go with me, when I quit the queen,

And take a thousand horsemen of thy host,

All famed in fight. Upon my journey hither
I marked a wood where I will put in ambush


^IKANDAR


f37


Thee and thy soldiery and l»o myself
To him, will look on that malignant soul
And say : The queen hath sent so much that thou
Ne’er wilt want more. Her elder son, Taimish
By name, hath brought the Shah her salutations
And messages, but saith I dare not hice him
Amidst his host.'* Now if my lord would deign
Escorted only by his priests and sages.

To meet Taimish then in that interview
He' could receive the goods and hoarded treasures
Of all sorts, for Taimish would come, on seeing thee
Without thy host or else be free to go.’

Sikandar when he heareth my smooth words.

Will never guess my colour and design
But seek the shade beneath those tiees requiring
From thee those crowns and thrones. Do thou sur-
round him

With thy lierce troops and make the future certain .
This will achieve my vengeance and thy wishes
And thy fame soar by favour of the stars.

When thou hast taken him I am all thine,

And, when thou biddest I will be tliy watchman.

Then mine affairs will prosper and my market
Grow hot and brisk, for thou shalt carry off
Much wealth and slaves and steeds caparisoned.’*
Taimish rejoiced on hearing him^ appeared
A noble cypress-tree, and answered thus . —

My hope is that his day may turn to night,

And that he may be taken unawares
Within my toils, for all the bloodshed made
By him within the world — that of Dara,

Son of Darab, the warriors of Sind,

And that great man of Hind, the valiant Fur.”

Now when Kaidafa heard Sikandar’s words,

And marked and ainderstood his stratagem,

She smiled at his device behind her lips,


I3i5 THE SHAHI^AmA OF FIRDAUSI

And hid those corals underneath her veil
Sikandar left her presence in a mood
Overshadow ed by his great solicitude.


§ 23

Hov^ Sihindar inadf* a (Jomjiad With Kaiddfa and
returned fo liis Troops,

0 . 1324 That livelong night Sikandar laid his plans

And, when the sun displayed its fringe of Chin
And set its golden banner o’er the heights,

While sank night's silken robe of violet
He visited the queen and asked for audience
From her attendants. As their custom Avas
They caused him to alight, and then that seeker
Of world-dominion paced before the queen
They cleared the hall and hastened to present
The envoy. When ho saw Kaidafu throned
He said : May Jupiter espouse thy counsels ’

By Christianity, the law oi right,

By God who witnesseth to what I say,

By the religion of the mighty Cross,

By a brave monarch’s life and head, priest's girdle,
And Holy Ghost, ^ I promise that henceforth
The soil of Andalds shall not behold me,

Nor wuU I send a host to battle thither.

I wdll employ no colourable ruse,

I will entreat not ill thy stainless son
By act or best of mine, but bind true faith
To thee upon my soul and no wise seek
Thine injury. Thy friend shall be my brothei
Thy throne as sacred to me as the Cross.”

Kaidafa marked his oath, his singleness
Of heart, and honest pledge. She ha 4 the palace

^ Oi the angel Gabiiel ma;^ be intended.


S IK AN DA R


39


jb’illed with gold seats, and set foitli gauds ot Chin
Called for her nobles and the well-starred chiefs
Set them, each one, upon a seat ot gold
And, having sent for both her well-loved sons
And for her kith and km, harangued thorn thus . —

‘ It is not well that wo be o-v er-troubled
Within this Wayside Inn, and changeful tortime
Must make not battle and revenge my lot.

Sikandar still will be insatiate
Of treasure though he over-top the sky,

And tor that reason seeketh war with us
Though all earth's treasures arc not worth the toil.

I purpose that we do not tight with him ,

I will not bring distress upon the realm .

But we will make a politic response
At once exalting and exhorting him
It alter mine advice he seeketh war,
ignoring both my dory and m} throne,

I with the host will face him so that sun
And moon shall pity him. Still what we try
Will do no harm, and peace may be preserved.

What say ye ? What lespond ^ Advise me well.”

The chiets all raised their heads and answered hei
0 queen ot counsel and of justice ^ none
Can call to mind a chiet like thee, and thou
Speak’ st naught but good. Oh J tair befall the land
That hath a chiet like thee • If this great Shah
Become thy triend, what more can good men wish ^
The Shah will not attack thee for ihj wealth ,

To vex thee would cost more than all thy treasures.
When a Sikandar cometh out ot Bum,

Converting earth to ocean with his sword
And then departeth from thy gates with gifts,

The fact outvalueth the whole world’s havings
We cannot favour any course but peace,

For he is foolisli that desireth war.”


0. 13


uo THE SHAhnIma of FIRDAUSt

When she had heard the words of those wise men,
Of those approved and holy-hearted priests,

She oped her treasures and took out the crown
Worn hy her sire, with bracelet and gold torque
t It was a crown the value of whose gems
None in the city or the country' knew\

And to the messenger she said '' This crown
I s priceless , those that others have are naught
And, seeing that Sikandar hath deserved
This crown of chiefs, I have adopted him
As son adult ”

Now she possessed a throne
That was compact of seventy parts and more
Well gifted ho that could dismember it ’

The pattern was of intricate design.

And every juncture fitted cmiously
The feet had terminals of dragons’ heads.

None knew its jewels' worth, but it comprised
Four hundred royal gems, an equal sum
Of brilliant rubies, two whereof, in hue
Pomegranate-grain, weighed one miskal apiece,

And emeralds four hundred, several stones,

Bright as a rainbow, and uncut She added
Of raiment more than forty camel-loads ,

The lady’s heart was bounteous as the sea.

There were five hundred tusks of elephants ;

What tusks they were’ Their total length reached
miles ’

There were four hundred leopard-skins and more,

The sort brought from Barbar : of dappled deer-skins
A thousand plain or dyed, all fair to see,

Besides a hundred hounds keen in the chase,

Which sped like arrows over hill and plain.

Kaidafa’s servants then led forth before her
Two hundred buffaloes : there were withal
Four hundred seats upholstered in brocade


SIKANDAR


141

And silken stuffs, the frames oi ebon^,

And of fresh aloe- wood foui hundred more 0 1326

With sunbeams saturate and golden hue
She ordered too a thousand Indian swords
With daggers and with coats of battle-mail,

While from the plain they brought a hundred steeds.
High-bred and harnessed, with the other wealth,

Besides tw^elve hundred casques and morions.

She bade her treasurer ' Now, tarry not,

Account for all these to Naitkiin, and say —

‘ Be ready to depart at dawn to-morrow'.’ ”

Whenas the morning showed its Hag on high
When heaven’s violet face grew" camphor-like,

When earth w"as fresh and height like sandarac
A sound of drums rose from the palace-gate
Sikandar, having leave to go, bestrode
His steed and, wdien the brave Tainush had bidden
The troops to mount, proceeded from his palace
To court, and to Kaid4fa said : ‘ Farewell,

And, w-hile the world shall last, may it and thou
Be Avoof and w"arp.”

They journeyed stage by stage
Until they drew anear the scene of action —

The camp of that famed Shah, the fortune-favoured
Sikandar, w"ho left baggage in the forest
Where there w’ere streams and manj- trees, and told
Tainush : “ Here rest and, rested, take the cup
In hand. I will depart, make good my w-ords,

And do all for the best.”

Sikandar reached

The encampment. All the host came forth and show-ed
Their gladness by their shouts, while making ready
The Kaian crowm, because they had despaired
Of their aspiring lord. Who ever thought
To see his face again i With tongues all praise
The soldiers bent their faces to the ground.


142 THE SHJHNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

Sikaiidar then selected from the host
A thousand of the Ruman men of name,

Who, warriors as they were intent on strife,

With ox-head maoes and in coats of mail,

Set forward and begirt the wood about —

A line of men and weapons. Then he cried : —

Rash man ' art thou resolved on fight or flight ^ ^
Repenting of his plots and cleverness
'Faiiiush quaked and exclaimed . ‘‘ High-minded Shah ’
Thou shouldst choose rather to bo praised than blamed.
This was not thine agreement with my mother.

Didst thou not say : ‘ I will not quit the right ’ ?
Display, as in the instance of Kaidrush
True greatness and endeavour righteousness.'*

Sikandar said : “ 0 prince i why hast thou grown
So feeble in this weighty enterprise ?

1327 But have no fears for thou art safe with me.

I will not harm one of thy kin or shun
Kaidafa's bidding I ! ’Tis ill for kings
To break their faith.”

Tainush forthwith alighted
And kissed the ground, displaying deep abasement.

The world-lord grasped his hand and reaffirmed
The former covenant, and said withal • —

Bo of good cheer and harbour no suspicions.

I feel no hate toward thee When thy mother
Sat on her throne of gold, and when I clasped
Thy hand in mine, I told thee : ' I will lay
The king of earth's hand thus within thine own.'

This very day my promise is performed,

For hasty speeches come not well from Shahs.

1 am the same Sikandar that held forth

So pleasantly to thee. Kaidafa knew

That V017 day that thou didst grasp his hand."

Then Caesar bade the attendants . “ Set a throne


^ Reading with P


SI K A NBA R


i J-3


Beneath a blossom-scattering tree ”

He bade

To spread the board and call for wine and harpers.
They spent a while in pleasure and delights.

Now when the ruddy wine had made them glad
'Fhe Shah gave orders for a royal gift
Of stuffs of Eiim, of Chin, and Persian make,

And gave it to Taimish with gold and silver
For his companions, crowns and belts withal
To those that merited, and thus enjoined him : —

‘ Stay not, this wood is distant, not thy home.

Say to Kaidafa ‘ 0 thou prudent lady.

Thou ruler shrewd of heart and well advised ^
While life endureth I will constant be.

And have possessed my soul with love for thee ’ ”


§ 24


How Sikamlar umt to the Country 0/ flit' Bnilutians^ inqmmJ
into their and rert^ned on Ant^ner


He marched thence to the country of the Brahmans
To make inquiry of their ancient rites
From those abstemious men. The Brahmans heard
News of the Shah that he was marching thither,

And from the heights came down those devotees,

Assembling at the tidings. Then the sages
Wrote to Sikandar, chief of priests. The letter
Began with heart-felt blessings from the Lord
Of all upon the monarch of the world : —

‘‘ May the Shah ever conquer, wax, and have c. 132S

Both mastery, and knowledge,” then proceeded : —

* God hath bestowed on thee the mighty world,

Brave king I What wouldst thou in our meagre land

The dwelling of God’s worshippers ? If thou

Dost come for wealth, good sooth ’ thy wits are failing ’


144


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


It is our part to sufter and be Aviso .

Yea, knoAvledgc maketli musical our souls.

Thou canst not rob us of long-sufforiQg,

While knoAAiedge hariiieth none. Thou Avilt but see
A naked flock dispersed by Avind and snoAv,

And fain oat grass-seed if thou tarriest ' ''

The envoy, girt AMth roots of grass, approached
The Shah AA^ho, having seen him and the letter,
Resolved to act aright and do no hurt
He halted all his host and then proceeded
Himself Avith the philosophers ol Riim.

Informed thereof the devotees all came
To meet him on his Away with paltry gifts,

Because they had no treasure, tilth, or crops,

And blessed that noble monarch of the earth.
Sikandar marked the Brahmans’ looks and talk,
How they Avent bare of body, foot, and head,

Their bodies barren Avhile their souls bare knowledgi
With grass for raiment and its seeds for food,

At ease from feast and battle-day, and hoAv
They ate, reposed, and slept on plain and mountain,
And gathered everjAvhere in naked troops ,

Their provand all of tree-fruits and the seeds
Of grasses on the mountain-tops, their girdles
The pelts of game, their raiment ready-made,^

He asked them of their v^ays of sleep and provand,
Rest and good days and fight : ‘‘ What share have y
Of this world’s good ^ Hath Heaven no antidote
For bane save this alone ^ ”

A sage replied —

‘‘ 0 conqueror of the Avorld < none of us talketh
Of war and strife , AV'e need not clothes, stuffs, foods.
Man being born in mother-nakedness
Should not be dainty in his garniture,

And hence returneth naked to the dust,


in the sense explained belo^s


SI K A NBA R


145


Wlieru all is fear, anxiety, and dread.

Earth couchetli and heaven clotheth us , our eyes,
Expectant of the ending, watch the way.

How much the ambitious strh^eth alter things
Which, strife and all, are hardly worth a doit,

For Avheii he goeth from this Wayside Inn 0 . 13

Behind are left his gold and crown and treasure ‘

But, know, his virtues bear him company
While both his head and state descend to dust
Sikandar asked of them : ‘ Which number most —

The hidden or the manifest, to wit

The living or the dead whose needs are over ^

The sago replied Know, king * the hidden far
Exceed the mamiest, for thou mayst reckon
Upon a hundred thousand dead and more
For each alive, and blest is one not outcast
In Hell. The living too must die. One goeth.

And leaveth his position to another.”

The Shah inquired : ''Is there most land or water
Illumined by the sun ”

The Brahman answered : —

The water is the keeper of the land.”

He asked : ' Who are the aw^akened, who the sinners
On earth ^ They make a stir, and many live
Not knowing wherefore they are here at all ’ ”

The Brahman answered . " Know thou pure in heart
And justice-seeking chief > the awakened man
Is he whom little of this world sufficeth ,

The guiltiest, one whose wisdom hath been docked
By hate and greed. If thou wouldst know such well
Look first upon thyself, for all earth’s face
Is thine, and one would say that restless heaven
Is kin to thee, yet still thou schem’st for more,

And to withhold thy wits from grimy dust,

For greed is thy soul’s hell, and it may be
That these our words may cause thee to repent.”

VOL vi. " K


146 THE S HAHN Am A OF FIRDAUSI

The Shiih inquired. ‘ What is our ruling passion,
And our companion everywhere for evil ^

The Brahman answered . * Greed — the sum of hate,
And soul of sin.”

‘What is its nature then,”

The Shah asked, “ seeing there is cause to weep
O'er this its passion for aggrandisement?”

The Brahman made this answer- “Greed and Need
Are two divs and long-drawn calamities.

One hath its lips dried up with poverty,

The other sleepeth not to compass more,

While both are hunted by the evil day
How blest is he whose soul is fed on wisdom ! ”

Now, when Sikandar heard, his face resembled
The bloom of fenugreek, his cheeks were pale.

Tears filled his eyes, his smiling countenance
Was drawn with frowns. The imperious Shah in-
quired : —

c 1330 ‘‘ What would ye have of us ? I will not grudge you

My treasures, nor regret what they have cost me.”

One said • “ Exalted Shah * deliver us
From eld and death.”

Death is inexorable,”

TIhj Shah made answer. “ How canst thou escape
That Dragon’s piercing clutch ? For wert thou iron
Thou wouldst not find release, while youth, if here
It tarrieth, is not exempt from eld.”

The Brahman said to him : ‘ 0 mighty Shah,

The world-lord, sage, and one whose word is law J
Thou knowest death to be remediless,

And that there is no worse calamity

Than eld. Why seek to win the world by toil,

Why in thy madness snitt* the bloom of bale ?

Thou wilt but leave the product of thy travail
Behind thee and bestow what thou hast toiled for,

And treasures, on the foe. To undertake


SIKANDAR


IS7

To toil for others is both ignorance

And folly. White hair is Death’s inossenger

^V^'hy hope so much to live ? ”

The shrewd Shah said —
If any of God’s servants could escape
From His decree, I had escaped withal
By observation of the turning sky .

But neither man of lore nor warrior
Evadeth that decree, strive how ho ma}".

Moreover they that perished in my wars
Or had their days cut short by destiny,

Deserved their fate by bloodshed and ill deeds,

For no oppressor ’scapeth. They have suffered
God’s chastisement lor quitting wisdom’s way.

'Tis not m man to limit heaven’s powers,

Or shun the process of the passing hours.’’


§ 35

How Sihawlar came to the Westei'a Sea and mio IVondcrfi

Sikandar proffered many a gilt, but none
Accepted them , the Brahmans had small greed.

He did no hurt, set off upon his march.

By that same token fared toward the West,

And from the Brahmans’ country reached a spot
Whence he beheld a deep and boundless sea ,

The men there had their faces veiled like women,

And went arrayed, all colour and perfume.

They spake not Persian, whether old or modern,

Or Arabic, or Turkman, or Chinese :

’'fhey lived on fish alone . there was no means
Of bringing aught by road. Sikandar stood
Astound at them and in the Riiman tongue
Invoked God’s name. Then from the water rose
A rock as bright and yellow as the sun.


c. 1331


idS THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSi

The Shall desired a swift ship whence to view

The thing arighV Of his philosophers

One said : 'Tis not for thee to cross the Deep ,

Wait till some man of loro survey the rock.”

Then thirty men, some Persian and some Ruman
Embarked. That bit of rock turned out to be
xV yellow tish which, as they came anigh,

Drew down the vessel swiftly, dived, and vanished ^

Sikandar’s soldiers were aghast, and all

Invoked God’s name. A priest said to the Shah —

“ A goodly thing is knowledge, for the man
That hath it is in this world chief of folk.

Now if the Shah had gone and perished thus
Blood would have filled the souls of this great host.’’

Departing thence he led the army on
To where a novel water came in view.

Around it there were reeds as large as trees :

Thou wouldst have said : They are the mighty stems
Of planes.” They were above ten cubits thick,

And measured forty cubits in their height.

The houses were of reeds and built thereon.

They might not tarry in that reed-bed , no one
Drank of its water for ’twas salt. Sikandar
Fared thence until a deepsome lake appeared ;

The world was jocund, w’ater honey-like ,

The soil exhaled the scent of musk. They ate,

And set themselves to sleep, when from the water
Came writhing snakes in swarms while from the wood
Flame-coloured scorpions issued, and the world
Grew black and straitened to those slumberers.

On every side there perished multitudes,

Men great in lore and war. On one side came
Herds of wild boars with long tusks diamond-bright,
And on the other lions that out-bulked
An ox none could withstand them , so the host,
Withdrawing from the mere and flinging fire


SIKANDAR


149


tJpon that reed-bed set themselves to sky
Ho^s in such numbers as to block the way.


§ 26

ffoio Si/iainJar coached the Land at jowiht, and

na^ victoiioas^

Departing thence the sun-like Shah in haste c 1332

Came to the country of Habash and saw
A land as ’twere a raven’s plume with men
Black-faced with eyes like lamps. A lusty crowd
Of able-bodied folk, large-limbed and naked,

Raised, when they saw afar the army’s dust
Their war-cry to the clouds. A. thousand thousand
Assembled. All turned black before the Shah.

They came on him and slaughtered many troops
Transfixing them with bones instead of spears.

He bade his soldiers arm. Those lion-men
Discomfited the blacks, who charged unclad
And slew above a thousand while the rest
Turned from the fray. Earth’s face seemed like the sea
Of Chin with bloodshed. When the dales and deserts
Were smirched with gore, and slain piled everywhere,

The soldiers scattered fuel on the heaps,

And then Sikandar bade to kindle them.

When it was dark the wolves began to howl :

Sikandar donned his helmet and cuirass.

A pack approached, all big as buffaloes.

Their leader, larger than an elephant.

Had on its head a dusky horn It slew
Full many a chief and, oft attacked, ne’er showed
Its back. With arrows they made shift to kill
At last that elephant-taking iron Hill.


150


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


§ 27

Ho^!' S?La7idar readierl the Land oj- the Harinpctl, lion liejought
ami virlonouSy lioir he ,deiv a Dragoriy ascended a
Mountain^ and nas forenarned, oflih oim Death

Thence marched he quickly and invoking oft
The just World-lord. On reaching the Narmpai
He saw a countless folk who had no steeds,

Or breastplate, sword, or mace, and every one
Was lion-like in form. Now when the host
Neared the Narmpai the world grew black to them ,
They roared like rattling thunder, catnc like divs
Upon Sikandar, running on their knees.

With martial bodies and contentious hearts,

And showered stones fiercely as the autumn-blasts
Beat on the trees. The Euman host advanced
With sword and arrow, and thou wouldst have said •— «

‘ Bright day is dimmed "

When few Narmpai were left
Sikandar rested, then led on the host.

And reached what seemed a boundless city whence
All, as their wont was went to meet him gladly,

Asked naught but brought all kinds of tapestries,

Of raiment and of provand while Sikandar
Saluted, well received, and honoured them
According to their station. Then he bade
The common folk, the chiefs, and those star- favoured
To carpet all the plain. The sands and soil
Were tricked out with brocade. Upon the waste
They pitched the Shah’s pavilion, and the brave
Took post around. All revelled, Shah and horsemen.
Thus, as he fleeted time with feast and wine,

Or rest, the host, inured to heat and cold,

Eeposed from war. Thereafter ceaselessly
He sought a lucky day whereon to march


SIKANDAR


15 *

Sought for intelligence from all, but none
GaTe him auspicious counsel He observed
A mountain with its summit midst the stars
Thou wouldst have said : “ It will arrest the sky ’ ’

Few were the folk thereon, and none of them
Remained at night Of these he asked * ‘‘ What -way
Is there, and how must I conduct the host ?

All blessed him, saying . Famous king of earth !

‘ The way is o*er the mount if guide could go,

But on its farther side there is a dragon,

Whose grievous venom doth confound the wolf.

Thy troops can pass it not , its venom’s fumes
Mount to the moon Haines issue from its maw,

And its two side-locks would avail to snare
An elephant. Our folk can not withstand it.

It needeth for its food five oxen nightly.

We buy, and drive, them on yon rocky mount,

Drive them with care and trouble, lest the dragon
Gome hither, and our folk in numbers suffer.”

Sikandar, at the dragon’s feedmg-time,

Chose troops and bade to give it naught that day.

The dragon, when its hour for battening
Was o’er, came down the pass like fire. Sikandar
Bade his troops shower thereon their arrows swiftly.
That laidly dragon drew one breath and sucked
Some warriors in The son of Failakus
Bade beat the tymbals and the kettledrums,

Enkindle mighty fires and make a blaze
In every quarter. When the mountain rang
With tymbal-din the monster feared and fled.

When Sol ascended from the Sign of Taurus,

And soared the lark’s note from the garths of roses,

The warrior-chieftain brought with him five oxen,
Procured with money from his treasury.

He slew and skinned them, heads and all ; his scheme
Gave courage to his friends. He charged the hides


c 1334


152 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Willi bane and naplitlia, and made speed toward
The dragon. Blowing up the skins he called
Upon the Giver oi all good and l^ade
Men pass the hides along from hand to hand.

As he drew near the dragon it appeared
Black like a cloud, its tongue was livid, its eyes
Seemed blood, its mawl)elched flame. They cast the
oxen

Down from the mountain-top and closely marked
The dragon, which engorged them, swift as wind,

Or ever they had left those warriors' hands.

Now w’-heii its frame Avas hide-stutied, and the bane
Had spread throughout its body, it pierced through
The entrails and invaded brains and feet.

The dragon dashed its head on mount and rocks.

And thus a long time lapsed while all tlie troops
ShoAvered arroAvs on it till that Jiiountain-form,

That hunter fell. Thence fared the host AAith speed,
And left in scorn the dragon’s body there.

Sikandar led them to another mountain
One that amazed the troops. The keen of sight
Could mark its height from far and that its peak
Was like a scimitar-blade and thereupon,

Apart from folk and distant from the throng,

Was sot a golden throne. A hoary corpse
0 . 1335 Was on it verily still full of grace

In death, palled in brocade, upon its head
A crown of gems of all kinds, and heaped round
With gold and silver. None could pass that Avay,

For all that scaled the mountain-top to seek
Aught of that corpse began to quake though fearless,
Died, and returned to dust Sikandar clomb
The mountain-top to vieAv the corpse Avith all
Its gold and silver but he heard a voice : —

“ 0 Shah ] thou hast accomplished thy career.

Hast voided many a monarch’s throne, exalted


SI K AND A R


1


Thy head to heaven, and slaughtered many a foe
And friend. Tis time for thee to quit the world.’’

Burned like a lamp the Shah’s cheeks as he heard ,
He left that mount and with a heart all seared.


§ 28

Hun Si/iitndar reached the CiLij of Wouvui^ iuitned
Harfun^ and mn Wondeni there

On marching with his chiefs of Bum Sikandar
Fared toward the city that thou call’st Hanim,
Which was inhabited by women only,

Who suffered none to come within their gates.

Their left breasts were like eager warriors’.

Who don the breastplate on the day of battle,

While on the right hand they resembled women’s, —
Pomegranate-like on silk. The Shah with all
His mighty men ot Burn approached Harum,

And wrote a letter tit and fair and worthy
Of his high birth, addressed thus : “ From the king
Of Bum and of Iran to her that is
The ruler in Harum.

The letter first

Named Him who ruleth o’er the starry heaven,

Of whom are justice, love, and bounteousness.

And then went on “ Whoe’er is wise of soul,

And walketh yet alive upon the world,

Hath heard of what we have achieved on earth,

And how we have exalted sovereignty.

While he that hath refused to do our bidding
Hath no couch save dark dust. Fain would I have
No place concealed from me throughout the world.

I roam not for addition’s sake but ache

For knowledge. Be my hand withheld from gain,

And justice ever comrade of my soul.


^54


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


If I approach ’tis not to light with you ,

My heart is set on peace and jollity.

13^6 If ye have any sage wise, shrewd, and clerkly,
When he hath read my letter of advice
Let all of you of worth prepare to meet me,

For none shall lose by coming/’

He commanded

That a philosopher of Rum should bear
The letter to the city of Hariim
And added many honied words. The envoy
Was vase himself. When he arrived he saw
The city full of women and no men,

And all the people went forth to the plain
To see the Riiman. All the counsellors
In that assembly gathered round the letter
And, when a city-sago had read it over.

And grew possessed of what the Shah proposed,
They sat, and wrote back : 0 exalted Shah ’

Live ever. We have set thy messenger
Before us and have read thy letter through.

First as to what thou sayest touching kings,

Thy victories, and former fights : if thou
Shalt march against the city of Harum
Thou wilt not see the ground for hoofs and feet
The districts of our city pass compute,

And in each one there are ten thousand women.
We sleep in arms and battle for addition.

We all are spouseless, modest maidens we.
Whichever way thou comest to this land
There is deep water to be ferried over.

When one among us hath a mind to wed
We none of us behold her face again,

And she must cross the water be the day
Fine, blusterous, or snowy. Having married,

If she shall have a daughter — one refined
And fond of hues and scents — that child of hers


SIKANDAR


155


Abicleth ever in her native air .

But if she proveth masculine and proud
Her mother will dispatch her to Hariim :

While if the mother bring eth forth a son
He tarneth, coming not to dwell with us.

Each night ten thousand maidens guard the rivei .
When one of us unhorseth in the light
Some lion-man we set a golden crown
Upon her head and raise o’er Gemini
Her throne, and surely there are thirty thousand
Among us, wearing crown of gold and earrings
By whose hands some illustrious warrior
Hath turned to dust upon the day of battle.

Thou art a great man, and thj" fame is high ,

Close not the door thereof upon thyself,

Else folk will say that thou didst fight with women.
And, alter lighting, fled’st, and this will shame thee
And ne’er be obsolete while this world lasteth ;

But if thou, with thy famous men of Riim,

Wilt come and go about Harum, observing

All faith and courtesy, thou shalt behold

But mirth and kindness. If thy choice, 0 Shah !

Be other thou wult shrink from us in battle.

We will lead forth against thee such a host
That sun and moon shall darken.”

When this answer

Was finished an ambassadress departed
With crown and royal raiment, and wuth ten
Eair cavaliers. When she approached the Shah
In state he sent some troops to welcome her.

The noble lady gave to him the letter.

And told the message of the valiant w^omen.

Sikandar, having read that answ^er, chose
A man discreet and wise, sent this reply,

And said : '' Be wisdom wedded to men's brains.

No kings or chiefs, exalted though they be


156


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And favoured by tlio stars, are left on earth
That are not subject unto me. Black dust
And camphor-dust, and feast and battlefield,

Are one to me. I have not come with drums,

With elephants, with players on the tymbals,

And such a host that plain and mountain quake
Beneath the horses’ hoofs, to fight with women.

1 fain would see your city, and if ye
Will make approaches to me all is well.

When I have seen I will march hence the host,

And not abide here long. We will behold
Your policy and glory, how ye manage
Your steeds, your grace, and potence. Privily
Will I inquire as to your works and ways,

How women can exist, men absent, how
Death's ravage is repaired, and find the outcome ”

The envoy went and did his embassage
At large. The magnates met and made reply * -
‘ We will select two thousand women, fluent,

Learned, and discreet , each hundred have in charge
Ten crowns of gold each set with many gems,

Two hundred crowns in all, and none but kings
c 133S Are digne of them. Wo will collect and heap them,
Each with its jewels weighing thirty ratL"^

We will go forth to meet the Shah when we
Are ware of his approach, for we have heard
About his knowledge and his Grace.”

The envoy

Returned and spake those words instinct with wisdom.
Sikandar marched forth from his resting-place,

And marvelled at the conduct of those women.

He went two stages, then a storm arose,

Whose snow-drifts made all level with the hills,

And many followers perished on that day

Through cold and snow. The Shah pursued his march

^ A latl now= 1 0J4 lb. av. P. reads “ thiee ” foi ‘‘ thirty.”


SIKANDAR


iS7


Two stages farther through that grievous frost,

Then reached a burning land whence vapours rose,

And murky clouds ; ‘'The host/’ thou wouldst have said,
Was marching over fire.” The hauberks burnt
The shoulders of the Persians, and the earth
Glowed with the horse-shoes of the cavaliers,

And thus it was until they reached a land
Where they beheld all folk as black as night,

With pendent, slobbering lips; all lips and slobbei
Were thej^ all slobber and lip ? Their eyes seemed
blood ,

Flames issued from their mouths ? Their warriors
Brought many elephants and offerings
Before the Shah, and said “ We caused this storm
And snow to harm you, for none e’er hath traversed
This route as we have seen your army do.”

The Shah abode a month. When he and host
Had been refreshed he sped thence merrily,

His heart prepared, toward the women’s city,

And o’er the stream two thousand women passed
With crowns and earrings on. There w’as a forest
Thick and well watered ; all the place was glad,

And flourishing. The women brought a store
Of provand and bright, figured tapestries
Out to a mead and, when Sikandar reached
The city of Hariim, they flocked to him
Out of their settlements. Full many a crown
They proffered him, as well as raiment, gems,

And things both fair and sweet. These he accepted,
Beceived the women with all courtesy.

And gave them quarters in that charming spot.

When night turned day he visited the city,

And occupied himself in seeing it,

Investigating all its usages

Till all had been made clear. He questioned much.
Surveyed the river, and departed westward.


ISS THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

He found a mighty city of brave men
^339 With ruddy faces and with flaxen hair,

All fit for battle and the day of tight.

They came before Sikandar at his bidding
With bodies bent and hands upon their heads.

He asked their chiefs . “ What wonders have ye here ^ ”
An elder thus replied * ^ Star-favoured Shah
And lion-capturer ^ there is a Deep
Beyond the city. Brighter than that water
Naught have we seen for when the radiant sun
Arriveth there it setteth in those depths.

Beyond it all is dark and lost to sight,

While of that place of darkness I have heard
So many tales that they are numberless.

A man of lore, a worshipper of God,

Deolareth that there is a fountain there,

And mine informant, who is wise and great,

Ileferreth to it as the Fount of Life.

That wise, discerning man said ‘ How shall one
AVho drinketh of the Fount of Life e’er die
From Paradise it runneth , wash therein
The body and thy sins will pass away ’ ”

Then Occsar said: “As to this place of gloom,

How can beasts fare therein ? ”

The devotee

Made answer • ‘ Ye must ride upon, young horses.”

The Shah bade herdsmen gather to the camp
The herds at large and chose ten thousand steeds,

All four-year-olds and fit for battle-needs.


SIKANDAR


159


§ 29


Hofr S^kandar went into the Gloom to the Water of Lift
and ^_pake loith Biixh and I^rdfd


Sikiindar, summoning his prudent chiefs,

Marched cheerly thence his host and reached a city
Whereto he saw no middle and no end.

And having all things needful in abundance
’Twas full of garths, parks, halls, and palaces.

There he dismounted and at dawn next day
Went forward unattended towai'd the Source
Which in his story of the hero’s fortunes
The rustic minstrel calleth that of Life.

He tarried there until the sun, grown pale.

Sank in that fount of lapis-lazuli.

Ho saw the wonder wrought by holy God —

The Bright One’s disappearance from the world —

Eeturned to camp, and pondered much. That night
He prayed to God, mused on the Fount of Life, c 1340

First chose the most enduring of his troops.

Took with him food for forty days and more,

And went forth eagerly to look on wonders.

He camped his other troops within the city,

And sought and found a guide. Khisr, who was chief
Among the nobles of that folk, advised him.

Sikandar did as Khisr enjoined, surrendered
Both heart and soul to his allegiance,

And said • Shrewd-hearted man ! be diligent
Herein, and if we shall obtain the Water
Of Life then we will pass much time in prayer.

Ho will not die who nurtureth thus his soul.

And in his wisdom refugeth with God.

I have two signets that in sight of water
Shine out at night like suns. Take one, lead on,

And tender well thy person and thy life .


i6o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Tlie other one shall light me on my way.

I go amid the Darkness with mine escort.

And we will see what God omnipotent
Preservoth hidden where so much is seen.

Thou art my leader, and He is my refuge,

And showeth me the Water and the Way.”

Now when the troops marched toward the Fount of
Life

A shout rose from the desert “ God is great ’ ’ ^

Kliisr left that station and all food behind him ,

And iared thus tor two days and nights while none
Bestirred his lips to eat. Upon the third
Two waj’s showed mid the Darkness, and the Shah
Lost trace of Khisr. What while the prophet went
Toward the Fount of Life, exalting thus
His living head to Saturn, bathed his body
And head in that bright Water, sought no guard
Save God, drank, rested, and returned apace,

More instant over both in jirayer and praise,

Sikandar reached the light and saw a mountain
Both high and bright, and on its top four columns
Of aloe- wood uplifted to the clouds.

On every column was a mighty nest,

And in each nest there sat a huge, green bird,

Which, speaking loudly in the Ruman tongue,

Hailed the victorious master of the world,

Who hurried to them when he heard. One said • —

“ 0 votary of toil i what seekest thou
Within this Wayside Inn, for though thou raisest
Thj" head to heaven above it will dismiss thee
. 1341 In grief at last ^ But now that thou hast come,

Hast seen aught built of reeds or reed-baked bricks ? ”
He answered : Both : our dwellings are directly
Or indirect^ made with reeds.”

The bird,

^ AlUh akbai. Propeilv “ G-ocl is gieatest ” This pait is vei j Arabic.


SIKANDAR


i6i

On hearing this reply, perched loAver down,

Astonying that worshipper of God,

And asked him : Hast thou heard within the world
The sounds of harp, of reveller, and song ? ”

He made this answer* ‘'One, wdiose lot it is
To have no share in joy, the glad account not
Although for them he pour out heart and soul/’

From that tall column of lign-aloe-wood
The bird flow to the ground , its musky perch
Was void. The bird inquired • “l)o understanding
And right prevail or do defect and guile ? ”

The Shah made answer : “ He that seeketh know-
ledge

Is eminent in every company.”

Back from dark ground to column went the bird
And, having cleaned its talons with its beak,

Inquired of Cc-esar : “ Why do devotees
Dwell on the mountains ^ ”

“ The devout,” he said,

“ Find not another place so good for worship.”

The bird ran up the column to its nest.

The monarch was delighted with that fowl.

Which with its talons sharpened up its bill
In full security. Then it instructed
Sikandar to ascend the topmost peak,

Afoot and unescorted, there to see

That which would cause the merriest to weep.

On hearing this he went toward the mountain
Alone to view the sight upon its summit,

And there saw Israfil, with trump in hand
And head uplifted, standing at his post,

Wind on his lips and moisture in his eye,

Till God shall bid him blow. On seeing Sikandar
He roared like thunder : " O thou slave of greed !

Toil not so much, because some day a Call
Will reach thine ears. Be less concerned for crown.

VOL VI. L


i 63 the SHAHNJmA of FIRDAUSt

And throne. Make ready to depart and bind
The baggage on.”

‘‘ It is my lot from fortune,”

The Shall replied, for save by stir and roaming
I may not look on sight and mystery.”

He then descended, wailing and imploring
The Giver of all good, and, with a guide
Preceding him, advanced along that route,

Involved in gloom, which when the army entered
A cry ascended from the darksome heights : —

He that shall take a stone up from the road
Will grieve for what he beareth in his hand,

0 1342 And if he taketh none he will repent,

And heartily in each case seek a cure.”

The soldiers all gave ear, and every one
Grew thoughtful at that cry since, whether they
Took stones or no, must they not count on ills ?

One said : ‘ It is the punishment of guilt
To bear repentance and the stones as well.”

Another said: '‘We should take some, perchance
We may not have to savour pain and toil.”

One man took of the stones , another left them ;

A third through indolence took little ones.

When from the region of the Fount of Life
They reached the plain, emerging from the Gloom,
Each sought the truth and then perceived the trick.
One had his bosom full of jewels cut.

Another his with jewels in the rough,

And both regretted that they had so few ,

Why had they passed by emeralds as vile ?

But sorrier still was he that picked up none
At leaving precious gems as he had done.


SIKANDAR


163


§ 30

Hoif^ SiLaiidar uenf to the IJabt, saw Wonders, a7id Imilt a
Banter against Ycljitj and MdJitj

Two weeks lie tarried and, when rested, marched.

He set forth eastward, having seen the west ;

His purpose in the world was wayfaring.

Now as ho went he saw a noble city ,

^ No wind or dust passed o’er it,” thou wouldst say.
Whenas the drums beat on the elephants
The chiefs came out two miles to welcome him.

The Shah, on seeing them, received them well.

Exalting them o’er circling Sol, and asked : —

“ What matchless marvels have ye in these parts ? ”
They loosed their tongues and thus bewailed their
fortune : —

A very grievous case confronteth us,

And we will tell it to the conquering Shah.

By reason of this cloud-capt mountain-range
Our hearts are full of anguish, toil, and grief.

Since for resistance we are powerless
Yajiij there and Majiij give us no sleep,

For when a portion of them reach our city
Our portion is all misery and travail.

Their faces all resemble those of beasts.

Their tongues are black, their eyes like blood, their
faces

Are black, their teeth are like wild boars’ J Who dareth
Draw nigh to them ? Their bodies all are clad
With hair, the hue of indigo, their breasts,

Their bosoms, and their ears resemble those
Of elephants. They sleep upon one ear,

And use the other as a coverlet.^

The mothers have a thousand children each,

^ See p. 80.


C. 1343


i64 THE SHJ'HNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

And who can reckon them ^ They herd like beasts.
They go apace and run like onagers.

In spring, when clouds roar and the green sea heaveth,
The clouds draw up great monsters from the waves,
While air is roaring like a mighty lion,

And pour them down m masses : then these folk
Come troop on troop and batten year by year
Upon these monsters and thereby grow lusty
In limbs and body Afterward they feed
On herbage, scattering to gather it.

In winter they are pale and thin, their voices

Like doves’ , but through those monsters in the spring

They are as wolves and roar right lustily.

Now if the great Shah could devise a means
To liberate our hearts from this distress,

He will receive the praise of every one,

And will prolong his sojourn in the world.

Exert thy power and do this work for us,

For thou too needest help from holy God.’’

Sikandar mused at them, grew grave, and pondered,
Then answered thus . I will defray the cost ;

Your city must provide both aid and labour.

By help of God, our Guide and Succourer,

I will reduce this way of theirs to reason.”

All cried : ‘‘ May fortune’s ills be far from thee,

0 Shah ! We are the slaves of thy good pleasure.

Thy lifelong servitors. We will supply
All that thou need’st, for we have no concern
More urgent.”

So Sikandar came and viewed
The heights, and took with him a troop of sages.

He ordered to bring blacksmiths, copper, brass.

And heavy hammers, mortar, stone, and fire- wood
Past reckoning, bring all things requisite.

They brought him everything that he demanded
In measureless supplies. When all was ready,


6IA\-1NDAR


i6s

And planned, the masons and the smiths all those
Of mastery in their trade throughout the world,

Assembled to Sikandar to assist him
In that most needful work. From every province
The experts mustered, and he built two walls
Across the mountain-pass from base to crest,

One hundred royal cubits broad, one cubit

Of charcoal, one of iron, in between ^ 1344

Strewed copper, and showered sulphur in the midst,

Such is the craft and subtlety of kings >

He laid thus his materials course on course,

And when from top to bottom all was sot,

They mixed much ghee and naphtha, poured it over
Those substances, and on the top shot charcoal
In ass-loads. Then the Shah bade fire the whole,

And five score thousand smiths blew up the flames,

As bidden by that king victorious.

A sound of blowing went up from the mountain,

The stars were frighted at the glowing fire.

Thus passed a season with the fire in blast,

And smiths a-toil. They ran the substances
Together, fusing them in that fierce blaze.

Thus was the world delivered from Yajiij
And from Majiij, and earth grew habitable.

For by Sikandar’s famous barrier

The world escaped the misery of strife

It was five hundred cubits high, about

One hundred broad. The nobles blessed the Shah,

And said : May neither time nor earth lack thee.”

They brought before him in abundant store
Whatever was the produce of those parts.

He would accept of naught and went his ways ;

His doings filled the whole world with amaze.


i66


THE SHJHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


§ 31

Hole SiJcandar saw a Corp,^e in a Palace of Jeinfb on the Top
of a Mountain^ and the Speahing Tiee, and how he nm
waiued of Ins Death

He marched one month till Shah and troops were
weary.

At length he reached a mount where he beheld not
A man or beast. Its peak he saw to be
Of lapis-lazuli and thereupon
A palace built of topazes, with lustres
Of crystal everywhere, and in the middle
A fount of brackish water. A ruby served
For lamp and lighted palace, mount, and heights ,

The light fell on the water, and the jewel
Illumed the palace like the sun. Beside
The fount was set a double golden throne
Where lay a hapless one with human body
And with a wild boar’s head — a helpless corpse
On that fine throne. His couch beneath was camphor,
And o’er him spread a mantle of brocade,
c. 1345 Whoever went to carry aught away,

Or even trod the dust upon the floor,

Died in convulsions on the spot. A cry
Came from that briny fount : “ 0 slave of greed ^

Be not so mad. Much hast thou seen that none
Besides hath seen. ’Tis time to draw thy rein
Because thy life is ending, and thy throne
Of sovereignty is going all astray.”

Sikandar feared, turned him about apace,

And came back to his camp as swift as smoke.

He marched thence quickly, wailing and invoking
The name of God, then from that mountain took
The desert-route in dudgeon and concerned
About his life. All sorrow and in tears


SIKANDAR


167


He went with troops behind and guides before
Till, by that desert-route, he reached a city.

And joyed to hear the voice of men. The land

Was all a gaiden, gladding to delight

The heart of man. The magnates of the city —

The men of valour — went to welcome him ;

All praised him, showering on him gold and gems,

And said ; “ 0 Shah ! how blessed Tis that thou
Shouldst traverse thus our coasts » No host before
E’er visited this city, none of us
E’er heard the name of Shah, but now that thou
Hast come our souls are thine, and mayst thou be
In spirit lucid and in body hale.”

Sikandar gladdened in his heart at them.

He rested from the desert-march, and asked : —

“ Of marvel what is there for me to note ? ”

The guides thus answered : ‘‘ 0 victorious Shah,

And pure of rede ! there is a wonder here,

Whose match none in the world of small and great
E’er hath beheld — a tree with double trunk —

A marvel manifest. One trunk is female.

The other male , they speak, have boughs, and flourish.
At night the female yieldeth speech and perfume.

The male doth speak by day,”

Sikandar went

With cavaliers of Eum and native chiefs
Of whom he asked : '' This tree — when speaketh it
Aloud ? ” The interpreter replied : ‘‘ One trunk
Will talk or ever day’s ninth hour hath passed,

So that the auspicious Shah will hear its voice.

When it is night the female trunk will speak ,

Its foliage will savour as ’twere musk.”

The Shah asked : When we pass the tree, good friend J
What marvel meet we then ? ”

“ Of going further,”

The interpreter replied, there is no question.


0. 1346*


i6S THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

There is no place beyond it, and guides call it
^The World’s End/”

Then the blest Shah with his Riimans
Set forward. When he reached the speaking tree
The ground was seething hot^ and all its surface
Was hid by beasts’ skins

“ What are those, and ho
Hath torn beasts thus ^ ” he asked of his informant,
Who said : The tree hath many devotees,

Who, if they hunger while engaged in worship,

Feed on the Hosh of beasts.”

When Sol attained

Tlio apex of heaven’s vault Sikandar heard
Aloft a cry proceeding from the leaves
Of that tall tree — an awful, boding cry.

He feared and asked of the interpreter . —

Shrewd, trusty friend ^ what say the talking leaves,
Because they bathe my heart in lymph of blood ”

The guide replied : “ 0 favourite of fortune i
The leaves upon the boughs of this tree say : —

' Why doth Sikandar roam so o’er the world.

For he hath had Ins portion of good things,

And, when he shall have reigned for twice seven years,
Must quit the throne of sovereignty ^ ”

Sikandar

Wept tears of blood ; the guide’s words wrung his heart.
Thenceforth ho spake to no one, but remained
All sorrowful till midnight. Then the loaves
Upon the other trunk gave utterance.

Again the Shah asked of his friendly guide —

‘‘ What is it that the other branches say ^ ”

Thus his informant solved the mystery : —

' The female branches say : ' Thou travailest
In this wide world for greed and for addition.

Why torture thus thy soul ? It is thy passion
To go about the world, afflicting folk


SIKANDAR


169


And slaying kings Tliou hast not long to live ,

Do not thyself cloud and contract thy days/ ”

The great king asked of the interpreter : —

0 good, discerning man ^ inquire if I
Shall be in Rum when my dark day shall come
And if my mother see mo not alive
Will she at last enshroud this face of mine ^

The speaking tree said to the Shah : Be speedy,

And hind the baggage on. Thy mother, kindred

In Rum, and face-veiled ladies there will look

On thee no more. Death in an alien land c 1 547

Will come ere long, crown, diadem, and throne

Grow tired of thee/’

He heard and left the tree
Heart-stricken by the scimitar of fortune.

"When he reached camp the noble native chiefs
Went home and, when they had made ready gifts.

Came hurrying to the Shah. There were a breastplate,
Resplendent as the Nile and wide and broad
As is an elephant’s hide, two elephant-tusks
Five cubits long — a toil to lift — mail-coats
And rich brocade, and, made of solid gold,

A hundred eggs, each weighing sixty mans 1
If weighed as drachms, and a rhinoceros
In gold and gems. Accepting these he led
His host away and tears — ^his heart’s blood — shed.


§ 32

How Sihanflar mairhed his Army to carried his oicn

Letter to Faglif(m\ and retimied to his Army 'with the Ansicer

He led his army thence toward Chin and raised
The chiefs’ heads to the Pleiads. Stage by stage
He crossed the desert till in forty days

^ The weight of the “man” vanes with the locality. The “ man
of Tabriz” — the smallest — = from 7 to 7Jlt>s. av.


170 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

He readied the sea,^ dismounted there his troops
And pitched the camp-enclosure of brocade.

He ordered then a scribe to write a letter
As from Sikandar, conqueror of citieS;

Bade that the letter should comprise all kinds
Of fair and foul, and, when the scribe had finished.
Went as ambassador. He chose a Persian,

A shrewd man, one with him in heart and word,

To bid him “ Do ’’ or “ Do not/’ Then ho gave
The captain of the host charge of the troops,

And of the Rumans took with him five sagos.

When tidings reached Faghfiir : “ There is an envoy
Approaching Ohm ” he sent a force of troops
To meet him, and Sikandar fared in state.

He reached that spacious court. Faghfur beheld
That chosen troop of valiant men and came,

With mind averse and anxious, from the entry
To meet Sikandar ivho ran up to him,

Did him obeisance, and sat long within
The hall of audience. Faghfiir gave greeting,

Received him well, and lodged him splendidly.

Now when the bright Lamp rose above the mountains
They brought a horse caparisoned with gold,
c. 1348 And summoned the Shah’s envoy to the presence.
Sikandar spake at large, said what was fit,

Then gave the letter, and recalled what Ciesar
Had said. The letter’s superscription ran : —

“ From Riim’s Shah, who is world-lord and the prince
Of every march and land, whom other monarchs
Praise, to Faghfiir, the glory of the realm.”

The letter thus began : '' Praise to the Maker
From us His slaves,” and then went on to say : —

Our will for Ohm is this, that it should prosper.

Ye should not fight us , that cut short Fiir’s life.

So was it with Dara, who ruled the world,

1 Cf. p. 174.


SIKANDAR


171

Faryan the Arab, and with other chiefs.

From west to east none hath escaped our sway.

Heaven knoweth not the number of my troops
Though Venus, Mercury, and Sol shall count them.

If thou infringest my command in aught
Thou wilt but vex the country and thyself.

Prepare thy tribute when thou readest this.

Be not aggrieved, and meddle not with evil.

If thou wilt come and see me and my host
I will regard thee as ally and friend.

Assure to thee thy throne and crown, and fortune
Shall harm thee not , but if thou wouldst not come
Before thy lord, send to my treasury
The rarities of Chm, as golden ware,

Swords, steeds and signets, raiment, slaves, and thrones
Of ivory, rich brocade and torques and crowns —
Whatever thou hast — as thou wouldst be unscathed
By us. Kepulse mine army by these means.

And keep in safety crown and throne and treasure.
Thou know’st both courses now : my host expecteth
Thy fall or rise. The Maker bless thee. Mayst
Thou ne'er have reason to recall my words !

The lord of Chm, on seeing such a letter,

Was wroth but showed it not and with a smile
Said to the envoy : “ Heaven is thy Shah's consort !

Tell what thou canst about his looks, his stature,

His prowess, and his speech.'^

The envoy said : —

0 chief of Chin ! know, none is like Sikandar
On earth. In prowess, bounty, rede, and wisdom.

He passeth man's conception. Cypress-tall
Is he, an elephant in strength, a Nile
In bounty, and in tongue a trenchant sword.

His blandness draweth eagles from the clouds."

Faghfiir, on hearing this, took other order.

He bade serve meat and wine, and deck a hall


c. 1349


172 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Within the garth. They quatfed till it was dark,

And they wore all bemused. The lord of Chin
Said to the ambassador “ Be Jupiter
Thy Shah’s ally. Tomorrow I will answer,

And make the day right glorious in thy sight/'

Now when Sol rose in Leo, and the sky
Had night alow, Sikandar drew anear,

But not with ill prepense. Faghtur inquired . —

“ How went the night, for thou wast flushed wmo-red
Yestrc'en when going hence ? ” then bade a scribe
To come with paper, musk, and spicery.

And wrote a warm rejoinder, and adorned.

Like Paradise, that paper wrought in Ohm ,

And first he praised the Judge, the Lord of manhood,
Of justice, and accomplishment, the Lord
Of learning, self-control, and Faith, ‘‘ and may
He bless the king of Eiim. Thy courteous envoy
Hath reached us with the letter of the Shah,

That seeker after knowledge. We have read
Thy royal words and with the groat discussed them.
For what in fight and feast befell Dara,

Son of Darab, Faryan, and Fiir whom thou
Didst triumph over and become the shepherd,

With monarchs as the flock : the Lord of sun
And moon so ordered it , impute it not
To prowess and the number of thy troops,

For when a chiefs life endeth 'tis all one
To die in feast or fight. Thou foughtest them
Upon their fated day which altereth not.

Boast not and vaunt not over them, for thou
Past doubt wilt pass thyself, though thou be iron.
Where are J amshid, Zahhak, and Faridiin ?

They came from wind and went to wind again.

I neither fear thee nor will fight with thee.

Not, as with thee, doth bluster fill my head,

Who am not used to bloodshed, while ill-doing


SIKANDAR


173


Is not accordant to my Faitli. Thou calTst mo
Before thee but in vain, for I serve God,

Not king, I send thee more than thou dost ask ,

Eegarding largess I am not contentious/’

Upon his cheek Sikandar felt the blush
Of shame, his liver arrow-pierced with what
Faghfiir had said, and thought : None shall behold me
Fare in disguise henceforth.”

He left the palace, c. 1350
Went to his lodging, and prepared to leave.

The great Faghfiir unlocked his treasury ;

He grudged not bounty. First he bade make ready
An ivory throne and fifty crowns inlaid
With gems, and load with gold and silver ware
A thousand camels and a thousand more
With silk and satins, with brocade of Chfn,

With camphor, aloe, musk, and spicery.

He liveth at his ease who scorneth gold.

Of squirrel, ermine, and of sable pelts.

Of rugs, of horse-hides, and of weazel-skins.

The prudent treasurer brought forth and packed
Of every sort two thousand, brought withal
High-mettled steeds caparisoned with gold.

And slave-boys too, three hundred, with gold girdles.

They brought three hundred red-haired camels laden
With many a rarity of Ohm Faghfiir
Chose from among the elders one of weight,

And sugared speech, and bade him go with greeting
And message to the Shah, and bear to him
The glad news that the chiefs would do him homage
So long as he was in the coasts of Chin,

The envoy set forth with Sikandar. Who

Would think that he was Shah? But when the sailors

Saw him, sprang up, and lightly spread the sails.

And when the viceroy met him with the troops.


174


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


Eeporting what had chanced,^ while all the soldiers
Praised him and bent their faces to the ground,
The man of Chm perceived . '' It is the Shah ’ ”

And went to him afoot protesting loudly.

Sikandar said to him : “ Make no excuses,

And mention not the matter to Faghfiir.’’

That night he rested and next day at dawn,
When he was set in peace upon his throne,

He gave the envoy gifts, and said : “ May wisdom
Be ever thine. Go to Paghfur and say : —

'' With us thou hast great honour. Chin is thine,

It I may say so, and what more thou wilt.

I shall abide at present where I am ,

One cannot hurry with so large a host.”

Back with the speed of wihd the envoy hied,

And told Faghfiir what Ccosar had replied.


§ 33

Hoh Sikandar vetnined from Chin, made War againd
the Sindiam, and went to Yaman

1351 The Shah abode a month and when the troops

Were rested led them back. From that green sea -
They fared by wilderness and longsome ways.

Stage after stage, until they reacM Chaghwan,

And saw a fortified and prosperous city.

The magnates of the land, those famed and wise,

Came to SikandaPs presence while the chiefs
Set forward from Chaghwan with offerings.

And presents to his gate. At once Sikandar
Began to question them : ‘‘ What sights have ye
Of marvel here ? ”

One said : We know of none,

0 king 1 worth seeing. Beggary and toil

Oi “ when Sikandar had announced the lesult of his undertaking ”
^ Or the Green Sea. Uf NAE, p. 40.


SIKANDAR


175


Are here, and thou wilt take naught hence but wind.”

The Shah, on hearing what the speaker said,

Marched from Chaghwan toward Sind whose cavaliers
Went out to meet him while from Hind came help.

All those heart-stricken on account of Fur,

Their hands all bathed in blood, brought elephants,

And Indian bells. Arose the battlocry,

And clarion’s blare. The Sindians’ chief was named
Bandawa, an illustrious cavalier,

And puissant. The armies shocked together,

And earth became all mountain-like with slain.

Night came , no Sindian stayed upon that field.

Sikandar led his army in pursuit,

And captured elephants fourscore and five.

As well as golden crowns and scimitars
And treasures. Women, children, and old men
Went weeping to the Shah while on his way,

And said : ‘‘ 0 prudent Shah ^ restrain thyself,

Burn not our land, slay not our little ones,

For thy day too will pass, and blest is he
That walketh innocently.”

He had no ruth,

Not sparing e’en the wounded. They enslaved
A host of women, children, young, and old.

He went toward Nimruz by way of Bust,

And purged the world of foes. Thence he proceeded.
World-conquering with his famed host, Yaman-ward,

Whose monarch, hearing, went with chiefs to meet
him,

Selecting native gifts of price and fair, c. 1352

As was most fit — of striped stuff of Yaman
Ten camel-loads and five of gold, ten more
Of drachms (when drachms are had hearts are not sad),

A thousand frails of saffron, with brocade

And raiment past compute. Among his treasures

He had a cup of emerald and pearls


176


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSt


Unpierced, m number seventy-five, besides
A cup of lapis-lazuli containing
Three score of topazes and on the top
Ten ruby signet-rings. These ho delivered
To those in waiting with his benisons.

They reached the camp-enclosure of the Shah
With all these gifts and offerings. Sikandar
Saluted and received the monarch well,

And seated him beside the throne, and he —

The monarch of Yaman — blessed him and said : —

' Be victor with thy troops. Twill give me joj”

If thou wilt sojourn with me for two months
That Shah and host may rest them from the road.”

Sikandar blessed him, saying : '' May thy mate
Be wisdom ever.”

When the morning came
Yaman's king went his way, and all that coast
Resounded with the romage of the host.


§ 34


How SiKandar marched toward Bdhil and found the
Treasure of Kat Khunrau in a City


Sikandar led his troops toward Babil ;

The air was hidden by their dust. He marched,

He and his host, a month ; they saw no rest-place.

At length they reached a mount whose top was
hidden.

A black cloud rested on it ; thou hadst said : —

‘‘ Twas near to Saturn.” They could find no road,

And Shah and army halted in dismay.

They scaled laboriously the craggy height,

And even light-armed troops were overworn.

When they were all exhausted by the march
A deep sea showed upon the farther side.


SIKANDAR


177


The host rejoiced to view sea, plain, and roarl.

They marched toward that deep sea, and praised the
Maker

The place was full of Leasts, the army lived
On game Far off a savage showed all haiiy.

With mighty ears. His body ’neath its fell c 1355

Seemed indigo, his ears like elephant s

In breadth. On seeing such the soldiers seized

And bore him to Sikandar who beheld

Amazed, invoked o’er him the name of God

And said ^ What man art thou ^ What is thy name

What get’st thou from the sea'^^ What seekest thou ^ ’’

' My father and my mother,” he replied,

“ Gave me, 0 Shah ’ this name of Giish-bistar.” ^

The Shah asked * “ AYhat is that amid the water
Out yonder toward the rising of the sun ? ”

‘‘ 0 Shah J ” he said, “ for ever live renowned
There is a city there like Paradise,

And not, thou wouldest say, compact of earth.

Thou wilt not look on palace there or house
Whose outside is not made throughout of bonts.

And, brighter than the sun, within the halls
Are limned the visage of Afrasiyab,

And that of Kai Khusraii, the combativcs
His greatness, manliness, and enterprises.

All these are painted on the bones of fish :

Thou wilt see nowhere any dust or earth ;

The people live on fish and naught besides.-
Myself I will escort the army thither
[f the famed Shah shall bid.”

Sikandar said

To him with ears . ‘‘ Go to, fetch me a native
That I may look upon a novelty.”

So Gush-bistar set forth at once and made
All speed to go to city and to folk,

1 Le. Eai-bed p. 163
VOT., VI


2 bee p 69.
M


178


THE SHARK AM A OF FIRDAUSI


And gave them Ccesar's message saying The Sh^h,
That famed one calleth for you/'

Of that city,

When young and old and high and low heard this,
There went across the water seventy men,

Possessed of wisdom or advanced in years,

And clad in silks, and some were young, some old.

The old and famed bare each a golden cup
A-brim with pearls, the young bare each a crown.

They came to CcCsar, bowed, and reverenced him ,

They held long talk with him and said: “The trea-
sures

Of Kai Khusrau are in our custody,

And would betit a new Shah like thyself."

Thereat Sikandar hurried o’er the water
Toward their city, viewed it all — its marts,

And streets — and visited the treasure-house.

The hoard was all of crowns and thrones of gold.

With coronets and necklaces and girdles.

None knew its worth for none could reckon it.
c 1354 The Shah took all and sped to camp, rejoicing

He stayed that night, but when cock-crow had come
Rose at his gate the sound of kettledrum.


§ 35

Ho// Sihmdar vent to the City of Bdhtl, iv/'oie a Letter to
Ar/istdlis, and received his A7iswer

Sikandar marched thence to Babil ; the earth
Was hidden by his host. He knew that death
Was near and that his day was overcast.

And thought to leave none of the royal race
To lead an army to make war on Riim,

And set his foot upon that prosperous land.

When this thought gat possession of his brain


SIKANDAR


179


He wrote a letter to Arastalis,

And said : It is my purpose not to leave
One of the royal seed. I have been round
The seven climes and taken many princes.

In sooth my death is nigh, so day hath darkened.”

He bade that oveiy one of Kaian seed
Should make him ready to appear at court,

Not dreaming of foul play. Now when they bare
The letter to the sage his heart was riven.

He answered instantly and, thou hadst said,

Made of the lashes of his eye his pen-point • — 1
' The letter of the world’s king hath arrived.

Thou must withhold thy hand from evil-doing,

Abandon this ill purpose, expiate

The thought by giving alms, restrain thyself,

Commit thyself to God and in the world
Sow only seed of good. We live for death,

For die we must past help. None hath borne off
The kingship with him, but hath gone and left
His greatness to another. So be ware,

Shed not the blood of princes else a curse
Will be upon thee till the Resurrection
Again, when for the Iranian troops no Shah
Shall sit upon the throne hosts will arrive
From Turkistan and Hind, Saklab and Chin,

Arrive from all sides, and ’tAvill be no marvel
If they that take Iran shall war with Riim.

Not e’en a breath must harm the Kaian-born.

Convoke the Riiman and Iranian chiefs
To merrymake, feast, conference, and banquet.

Appoint to every chief a fitting province, C. 1355

And start a new roll with the names of Ruman

And of Iranian chiefs at whose expense

Thou hast obtained the world, but give to none

1 J,c either ‘*with the fceais lumiine: down liis pen” or 'with
^leat subtlety ”


I So THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The lordship o’er another and withal
Call none of them the Shall, and let these Kaians
Serve as the shields of thine own land if thou
Wouldst have not Eiiin invaded.”

When Sikandai*

Eeceivod this answer he made haste to chanijo
His purpose and bade summon to his court
The Euman and Iranian notables
That were possessed of valour, ranked them duly
And drew the patents so that none should seek
The least addition to the share assigned him.

To these renowned and independent princes
They gave the name of ‘‘ Tribal Kings.”

The night

Whereon Sikandar reached Babil, and saw
The chiefs right glad to look on him again,

A woman bare a child that filled beholders
With wonderment. It had a lion’s head
W^'ith hoofs for feet, an ox’s tail, the breast
And shoulders of a man. The monster died '

At birth but, though such things are best forgotten.
They bare it to the Shah forthwith who gazed
Thereon with horror, held it ominous.

And said : ‘‘ Let this be hidden by the dust.”

He summoned many readers of the stars.

And held discourse at large of that dead child.

In great dismay they veiled their views thereon
From that fair-fortuned Shah who raged, and said : —

‘ If aught be hid forthwith I will behead you.

And naught but lions’ maws shall be your shroud ! ”
The Shah being wroth, they told him * Famous king
That thou wast born beneath the Sign of Leo
Was patent both to archmage and to chief.

Thou seest the lion-like head on this dead child ;

So will the head of thine own empire droop.

All thine astrologers have said as much


SIKANDAR


eSi


Already and adduced the signs.”

Sikanda,!’,

On hearing this, was grieved , his wit s and counsel
Failed, and he said ‘‘ Death is past cure. My heart
Is not concerned thereat. No longer life
Is mine. Our period waxeth not nor wiineth.”

He sickened at Babil that very day,

Knew that calamity was near and called
A veteran scribe before him to impart
The dispositions that he had at heart.


§ 36

Sda?iflars to las 2IotJLer

He bade to write a letter to his mother, C. i?i;6

And said to her : ‘‘ One cannot blink Death s presage '

In this world I have had the appointed share,

And waned life waxeth not. Grieve not at all
About my death, for death is no new thing
Royal or base whoe’er is born must die.

I will instruct the Ruman chiefs that when
They quit this land they must consult thy pleasure
In all things and obey thee loyally.

On every prince among the Iranians,

That might have caused calamity to Riimans
I have bestowed a province. Now wdien each
Of these hath entered on his government,

Good sooth, he will have no desire for Rum ;

Our marches and our land will rest from foes
Embalm me dead upon the soil of Misr,

And spill no word of mine. Of my dinars
Bestow one hundred thousand every year
Upon the husbandmen: and should a son
Be bo]*n to Rushanak his father’s name
In truth will live, and Rum must have no king


THE SHJHNJMA of FIRDAUSI


1 82

Save him, for he will icnovate that land ,

But in her travail if she boar a daughter
Espouse her to the son of Failakus ,

Call him my son, not son-in-law, and keep
Within the world through him my memory gi’cen
Send back too scathless to her sire in state
Kaid's daughter with her own devoted slaves,

And purses. Furnish litteis for the journey ,

Send too the ciowns and gems, the gold and silver,
Brought by her from her sire, to Hindustan
Whene’er she would depart I have achieved
All that I purposed here and now perforce
Must think of death. List to my last requests,

And add not thereunto. First fashion me
xA golden coffin Let my shroud bo made
En worthy fashion of gold cloth of Chm,

And saturate with ambergris, and let
No pains be spared for me, but seal my coffin
With pitch and camphor, musk and spicery
First pour in honey, let it be above,

And let there be brocade of Chm below ,

0. 1357 Then let my corpse be laid inside the coffin,

And, when ye veil my visage, there an end.

0 my wise mother 1 keep in mind my counsel
While life endureth. All that I have gathered
From Hind, Tiiran, Makran, Iran, and Chm,

Keep thou, but give thy superfluities.

What thou canst not enjoy thyself, away
’Tis my desire for thee, my loving mother ^

That thou be watchful and serene of soul,

And not too toilful, for none tarrieth here
For ever Surely when thy day is done
Our souls will meet again. Tis nobler far
To suffer than to love, and ’tis the mean
That yield to passion. Since my body once
Was all thy care for months and years, now pray


SIKANDAR


183


To God for my pure soul and help me thus.

For prayer is all in all. Behold and see
If there be any in earth’s round whoso soul
Is stricken not at death.”

He sealed and closed

The letter, and bade men on speedy steeds
Convoy those tidings from Babil to Bum * —

‘ The Grace of king of kingship is bedimmed ^
Now when the army was aware thereof
The world was darkened to the chiefs, who set
Their faces toward the throne of majesty,

And all the world was full of hue and cry


§ 37


Hoio Sihandor\ Lne ended ami how they earned
Ins Colfin to Tdandariya


On hearing how the army was bestead
And knowing that his time was near, Sikandar
Bade carry from the palace to the tield
His throne. The troops bewailed his malady
■WTien they beheld the Shah’s pale face. The plain
Was one great cry ; they seethed as on quick fire
All said : “ What misadventure for the Rumans
To lose their king i 111 fortune is upon us,

And field and fell henceforth are desolate ,

Our foes have won their wish and gained their goal
The world becometh bitter to us now ;

In public and in private we shall wail ’ ”

With failing voice said Cnesar : ‘‘ Be devout,

Wise, modest, and heed all my last requests,

If ye would prosper both in soul and body.

When I have gone the work is left for you,

And fortune is not dealing ill with me.”

He spake, his life departed, and that Shdh


0. 1358


1 84 THE SH Ah NAM A OF FIRDAUSI

So famous, that host-shat terer, passed away.

A ciy went up from all the host and split
'J'he ears of heaven The soldiers all strewed dust
Upon their heads and strained their hearts’ blood
through

The lashes of their eyes. They fired his palace,

And docked a thousand steeds, reversing all
Their saddles. Thou hadst said* '‘The earth lamenteth
They boro the golden bier out to the plain
And wailing pierced the sky. A prelate laved
The corpse with clear rose-water, and besprinkled
Thereon pure camphor. Of gold-woven brocade
They made his winding-sheet, while all bewailed him.
And, having shrouded thus that noble form
Beneath brocade of Ohm, they covered it
With honey to the feet and then sealed doAvn
Tlie lid of that strait coftin • passed away
That Tree so fruitful and so shadowing !

Thou bidest not within this Hostel. AVhy
Toy then with crown or cling to treasury ^

Now when they raised the coffin from the plain.

And passed it on from hand to hand, two voices—

A Ruman and a Persian — rose, and all
The talk was of the coffin. All the Persians
Said thus : “ He should be buried in Iran
Where are the ashes of the kings of kings :

^Vhy should ye speed the coffin round the world ^ ”

One of the Riiman counsellors replied : —

' It is not fitting here to bury him.

If ye will hear my rede aright Sikandar

Should pass back to the soil Avherofroiu he sprang ”

A Persian said withal : How^e’er ye talk
This will reach no fair ending. I will show you
A field commemorating Shahs of old.

Wise ancients call it Khurm. It hath a lake
And forest, and in answer to thy questions


SIKANDAR


185

A voice, which every one may hoar, will speak
Out of the mountain Thither bear some ancient
In his decrepitude, and there too stay
The coffin Let him ask. Then if the niountaxn
Reply ’twill rede you avcIL’

Like mountain-sheep

They hurried to the wood that he called Khurm,

They asked their question and this answer came • —
Why long delay the coffin of the Shah ?

Iskandanya, which he built m life,

Is destined to contain Sikandar’s dust.*’

The soldiers heard the voice and bare away
The coffin from the wood without delay


§

Hou: the and other Folk lamented SiJkandar

Now when they brought him to Iskandanya 0. 1359

Another dispensation ruled the world.

They set his coffin on the plain , all earth
Was full of hue and cry. Mon. women, children,

Above a hundred thousand had one reckoned,

Flocked to Iskandariya to the coffin
The wise Arastalis stood forth ; a world,

With eyes all tears of blood, was Avatching him.

He laid his hand on that strait coffin, saying : —

‘‘ God-fearing Shah ’ where are thy prudence, knowledge
And rede that this strait coffin should become
Thy home ? In youth’s day, after these few years.

Why hast thou chosen the dust for pillowing ? ”

The Ruman sages all assembled there •

One said : “ 0 brazen-bodied Elephant !

Who overthrew thee ? Who desired ihy place ?

Where now are all thy shrewdness and wise counsel ? ”


i86


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


Another said • Thou laidest up much gold :

Why now is gold embracing thus thy body ? ”

Another said * “ No man escaped thy hand,

But why, 0 Shah ! didst thou rub hands with Death ’ ”
Another * “ Thou hast rest from pain and toil
As well as from the quest of rule and treasure.”

Another • ‘‘ When thou goest before thy Judge
That which thou so wed’s t thou shalt reap Avithal ”
Another * Impotent is he that used
To shed the blood of kings ”

Another said —

‘ Soon shall we be as thou an, thou that wast
An uncut gem.”

Another said : The Master,

On seeing thee, will teach thee things forgotten.”

Another said : '' Since he hath been death-smitten
We should not clutch at self-aggrandisement.”

Another said : “ 0 higher than moon and sun ’

Why hidest thou from all thy goodly face ^ ”

Another said : A man of many parts
Is fain to coyer him face-deep in gold,

But now, 0 man of such accomplishment.

And brave ! the yellow gold hath whelmed thee ^ ”
Another said: ‘'Thou hast put on brocade,

And veiled to us therewith thy lovely looks.

Now lift thy head therefrom, for crown and armlet,

And ivory throne, of thee are all in quest.”

‘'Thou hast been severed from thy moon-faced
youths,”

Another said, “and thralls of Ohm and Ehm,

And huggest gold to thee. Oh ^ deal not thus,

Tis not kings’ usage, with brocade and gold.”
c 1360 Another said. “ What well advised reply
Will come to thee now that the Questioner
Will question thee, and say • ‘ Why didst thou shed
The blood of great men, and with so much stress


SIKANDAR


iS


Didst struggle after treixsiire ^ Didst not see
Hoav many of the great have died and borne
Naught from the world with them except the fame
Of their good deeds ? ' ’’

Another said : ‘ Thy day
Is over-passed, thy tongue hath ceased to parle.

Now wilt thou see a mighty Court — a world
Wherein the sheep is parted from tlie wolf'd
The observer of thy throne and crown should turn
His reins from greatness for, as ’tis with tliee,

It will abide with none. The tree of greatness
Should not be planted ' ”

Said another : Thy deeds
Are turned to wind, the chiefs’ heads quit of thee
Another said Why in this Wayside Inn
Laboriously didst thou employ thyself,

Since this is all that thou hast gained by toil ''

A narrow coffin is thine only wealth.

Thou seokest not the trumpet-call but choosest
The bondage of a bier ^ ”

Another said —

What time thy troops depart thou wilt remain
All by thyself on this wide waste, good sooth !

With longing eyes pursue them as they go

And mourn thine own lost life with boundless woe ”


§ 39

How the Mofhrr am/ Wije of Sihcnn/ar lauieniei/ Inm

Then came Sikandar s mother hurrying,

And long while pressed her visage over him.

She said : 0 thou illustrious king of kings,

Lord of the world, star-favoured and devout ’


^ Reading with P


iS8 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Near ay tliou art, thou art yet far from me,

Far from thy host, thy kingdom, and thy people.

May my soul wait on thine, and be their hearts
Plucked out that joy hereat

Then Kiishanak

Caine full of anguish, saying : Noble Shah ’

Where are Dara, son of Darfih the master
And up-stay of the world ^and all the kings
Whose head the blast sent dustward on the day
Ot battle ^ Like a tierce cloud charged with hail
W ast thou and safe, 1 would have said from death.
With so much warfare, combating, and bloodshed
In single action and in stricken held,

I would have said that fate had given thee
Safe conduct, and thou keepest from thy men
The secret, yet hast thou when thou hadst voided
The world of chiefs, cast oti the imperial crown,
c. 1361 And when the tree which thou hadst planted bore
1 see thee with the dust to comrade thee * ”

Now when the Crown of heaven had sot, and when
The mighty men had had their till of talk,

They hid SikandaFs coffin in the dust.

To do such things the world is not afraid ,

It merely giveth back what it conveyed
From wind at tirst, and this I hold to be
Not clearly justice yet not tyranny.

To thee the how and why are hidden things.

And past the reach of subjects and of kings.

Yet beauty, kindness, generosity,

With good andjoyance, still are left to thee;

And, be thou chief or subject, with such store
I see not aught that thou canst wish for more ,

But if thou leavest here a name for vice
Thoiilt lose God’s grace and jocund Paradise.*-^

The ancient Hostel’s wont is still the same ;

^ Couplet omittefl ® Rt‘ading with P.


SIKANDAR


189


Sikandar went, but left behind him fame.
Though able six and thirty kings to slay
Where is his portion in the world to-day/

Ten cities were erected ’neath his sway,

All splendid, but ten thorn-brakes now are they.
He sought what no man ever sought before,

And wide-spread fame is left him but no more,
Yet fame is good for fame will not decay
Like some old dwelling weather-worn away.

The barrier of Sikandar wo have past,

May all be well and of auspicious cast,

And may the monarch ol the world ^ bo still
Of joyous heart and free from every ilk


§ 40

FiulausVs Complaini of ihe t>Ky and A^ppeal to Srod

High-springing arch of heaven ’ Oh ’ -why dost thou,
When eld is on me, keep me thus forlorn ^

Thou madest much of me in youth but now
Thou passest my decrepitude with scorn.

The pampered blossoms take a sallow hue,

The pictured silk is cheapened by much stress,

The dainty cypress-tree is bent in two

Within the garth, the bright lamp lustreless,

The mountain-top once black is capped with snow,
The soldiers mark the Shah’s deficiencies :

Thou wast a mother to me long ago.

Who needs shed blood-drops at thy tyrannies
I find no wisdom or good faith in thee ,

Thy dark proceedings aggravate my lot.

Oh ! would that thou hadst never nurtured me,

Or, having nurtured, persecuted not '


^ Mahmiid.


rgo THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSi

Whene’er I quit this gloom 1 will arraign
This tyranny of thine before the Just,

Of thee befor(; iho All Holy One complain
With clamourings and head bestrewn with dust
c 1362 Time saw how eld increased my misery,

But laid the more part of the blame on me,

And thus to me high heaven made reply : —

‘ 0 thou that art not wronged and yet dost cry '

Why lookest thou to me for good and ill ^

Do such complaints as thine become the sage ?

In everything thou betterest me still,

And canst the famine of thy soul assuage
With knowledge. Food, sleep, choice of home are thine
To good and ill tis thine to seek the path ,

All that thou chargest is no fault of mine,

For neither sun nor moon such knowledge hath.

Ahk Him that made them to be Guide to thee,

Made day and night, religion, law, who saith : —

‘ Be,’ and all is as He would have it bo.

A fool is he that knoAveth other Faith.

In His creation I am but a thrall,

A servant unto Him who fashioned me ,

To do His bidding is mine all in all .

I never SAverve from His authority.

Turn then to God, to Him for succour fly,

Imploring no unconscionable boon.

And own that none is master of the sky

Save He that kindled Venus, Sun, and Moon
His blessing on Muhammad’s spirit be,

And on his comrades all increasingly ^

^ See i». 196


Ill

THE A8HKANIAN DYNASTY


XXI

THE ASHKANIANS

THEY REIGNED TWO HUNDRED YEARS


ARGUMENT

The poet praises Sultan Mahmud and then, having no subject-
matter in connexion with this dynasty, proceeds to narrate the
story of the rise of the race of Sastin in the person of Ardshir
Papakiln and of his triumph over Ardawan, the last of the
Ashkanians. He then goes on to tell of Ardshir’s campaign
against the Kurds, and of the strange case of Haftwad and the
■Worm.


NOTE

The abridgment of the epoch of the Ashkdnians to 200 years
is more drastic even than that of other Oriental writers. Mas’iidf s
curious explanation of this matter will be found later on.^

In one respect at least the Shahnama presents a remarkable
analogy to the land of its origin: the central portion of both
is a barren waste. Of the five centuries and more that intervened
between the day of the death of Sikandar (Alexander the Great)
and that on which Ardshir Papakan (Artaxerxes I.) was acclaimed
King of kings by his victorious troops on the battle-field of
Hurmuzdagan,® that is to say between June 13th b.c. 323 and
September 26th a.d. 226, Firdausi knew absolutely nothing save
a few names and the semi-mythical circumstances attendant on
the coming into being of the second Persian or Sasdnian Empire.
Consequently, for convenience sake, the period covered by the
Ashkanian dynasty has come to be regarded merely as a single
reign — the twenty-first in the long series of the fifty Shahs.
After all, however, this dearth of subject-matter in the core of
the poem is not so complete as it seems. Firdausi took his


^ bee p. 251.
VOL. YI.


2 Id . p, 199,

N


193


194 THE SHAhnImA OF FIRDAUSI

authorities as he found them, and long before his days Iranian
tradition already had assigned all of heroic or noteworthy that
had remained in memory of Ashkanian times to the mythical
epochs of the Pishdadian and Kaianian dynasties. He spoke
of the ancient tongue (Pahlavi) and of the paladins (Pahlavdns),
he told at large the gests of Karan, Giidarz, Glv, Blzhan, and
others, but had no notion that he was dealing with words, names,
personalities, and subject-matter, that had originated in a period
dismissed by him in a few couplets as a legendary blank.^ Again,
apart from those heroes of secondary importance, there can be
little doubt but that to the invasion of the Sacse, which took
place in Parthian times,^ we owe the Personification of that
warrior-race, Kustam himself, the great paladin of paladins
The importance of the Ashkanian djuiasty in the p)rovenance of
the subject-matter of the Sliahiiama therefore is much greater
than superficially is apparent, and if all the legendary material
of the poem could be replaced in its proper setting there would
be no longer such discrepancies in length and interest between
this and the two preceding dynasties. Histoiically of course
it synchronises with one of the most important periods in the
world’s history, that of the successors of Alexander the Great,
of the Parthian dynasty, and of the dominance of Rome. No one,
least of all a translator, would wish that the Shiilinama were
longer, but one may regret that the misplaced material, which
so inordinately prolongs the Kaianian dynasty, was not kept
in its proper connexion in the Ashkanian. As things stand the
latter is a mere prelude to the Sasanian dynasty, and is concerned
with the rise to power of Ardshir Papakan, its founder, between
which and that of Cyrus the Great there is a remarkable resem-
blance. In both cases there had been a previous incursion of
nomads which had resulted in the establishment of their supremacy
in western Iran. In the first case it was the Manda who, being
confounded with the Mada or true Medes,® brought about the
establishment of the so-called Median Empire under which the
dynasty of the Acheemenids occupied a subordinate position in
Elam and Pars till the successful rebellion of Cyrus, king of
Elam, against his over-lord Astyages, and his other conquests,
reduced all western Asia underneath his rule. In the second
case it was the Parthians, also nomads, who established a like
empire over the same regions, and under whom the rulers of the
house of Papak or Sasan similarly occupied a subordinate position
in Pars. As in the case of Cyrus, so Ardshir, the son of Pipak,
successfully rebelled against his over-lord, and founded a great


Cf. Vol. 111. p. 8 seq.


® See Vol. i. p. 19.


® Id. 17.


THE ASH KAN IANS


195


Persian empire. Again, the rise to power of Cyrus and Ardsjiir
was embellished in each case by legend. In that of Cyrus two
distinct accounts have come down to us, from Herodotus and
Ctesias respectively. The former is that given, miitatis mutandis^
by Firdausi in his story of the early years of Kai Khusrau,^ the
latter was transferred in Iianian legend from Cyrus to Ardshir
as Gutschmid pointed out, who says, speaking of the fable that
forms the kernel of the story — ^^The hero is a Peisian shepherd’s
son ; from dreams shared by his parents the dream-interpreters
predicted his future greatness ; in his youth he came to the
Median Court and there, through a strange fatality, has to do
hard service; the crisis comes at last, and with it the flight
of the hero to his home in Persis. Directly he has fled the
astrologers declare that unless he be brought back in a given
time he certainly will gain the kingdom, which comes to pass.
This in a short sketch is the story of Ardshir; it is, however,
exactly that of Cyrus, translated by Median hands but founded
on Persian national sagas as given by Ctesias. The resemblance
extends even to trifles ; from the stable, where he has to do the
most menial work, Ardshii starts on the flight which is to end
in his gaining the sovereignty; at the moment when Cyrus
resolves to break with Astyages he is met by a Persian slave,
Hoibaras, carrying horse’s dung in a basket, and that is in-
terpreted as a good omen, horse’s dung signifying riches and might
(Nicolaus of Damascus, fr. 66, by Muller, lii. p. 400). So great
a similarity certainly is not accidental, rather we recognise in
it an old national saga transferred from the founder of the old
Persian kingdom to the founder of the new.”^

The franian version of this legend, as applied to Ardshir, is
extant in the Shahnama and in a Pahlavi text very similar
in provenance and character to the Yatkar-i-Zariran with which
we were concerned in the previous volume of this translation.®
The work in question begins, after an invocation to Urmuzd,
thus . — “ In the history of Ardshir, son of Papak, the following
is written.” The word for history ” in the original is ‘‘ karnEimak,”
which is used now as the title of the extant work, and not of
the one, now lost, from which it was taken. Our extant Karndmak
appears to date from the seventh century a.d., and is separable


^ See Vol. li. p. 190. ® GKS, 111. 133.

® See Vol. V. p. 24. The reader may be refeired to the remarks
there made as to the position of such works as the above as con-
tributories to the mam stream of frdnian legend.


196


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


into portions 'each of which, once, in all probability, formed ao
independent legend. Thus we have

1. The adapted Cyrus legend,

2. Ardshxr’s war with the Kurds.

3. The story of the Worm.

4. The two stones of Shdpur.

These are strung loosely together as illustrations,^ each in it&
degree, of the process that led to the restoration of Iranian unity
at the hands of Ardshir Papakdn and his immediate successors.
The subject-matter of the Kiirnumak corresponds with §§ 3-16
of the Ashkilnians, and with §§ 1-6 of Ardshir Pdpak/in, but, like
the Yatkilr-i-Zariran in Dakiki’s case, it is not the actual authority
followed by the poet but a collateral one. This is clear from the
fact that it omits a very important passage given by Firdausi,^
while it contains a somewhat touching episode which is not in
the Shuhnama, though it seems incredible that the poet should
have made no use of it had he known it ^ The episodes of the
self-mutiiation of Ardshir’ s minister,® and of the game of polo,
whereby the Shah recognised his son, also are lacking in the
Kdrniimak, though the polo-episode is found there in another
connexion.^ Other diflerences are due to Firdausi's more poetical
and artistic way of looking at things, and to the toning down
of the somewhat pronounced Zoroastrianism that appears in the
Pahlavi original, but he may have found this already done in
the version that he followed, which was, in all probability, that
contained in the modern Persian tenth century prose Shahnama,®
The compilers of that work seem, however, on the whole to have
preferred, or at all events for the most part to have followedr
the Arabic versions, and this preference is reflected in the poem.

Wherever in the following notes a comparison is instituted
between the Kdrnamak and Firdausi the former will be referred
to as K and the latter as F.

§ I. In the text of 0 this forms the concluding portion of
§ 40 of the previous reign. We follow the arrangement in P.

For Nasr, who is referred to again under the title of AbiVl
Muzaifar just below, see Vol. 1. p. 100.

At first sight there seems to be a chance here of our being
able to determine at what date this passage was written, owing
to Firdausi's reference to some occasion on which Mahmiid
remitted a year’s land-tax, but the fatality which attends all
matters of date in the poem is operative even here, and there
appears to be no account of this remission elsewhere.^

^ See p. 205. ® Id, p. 255, ® Id. p. 261 seq. ^ Id, pp. 257, 271 scq*

« See Vol. i. p. 67 seq. e Id. 24, and NIN, p. 50, note.


THE ASHKAnIANS


197

§ 2. As to who the thane (dihkan) of Chach was nothing more
£ieems to be known.

It IS the fashion of Iranian legend to connect the dynasties
by means of fictitious genealogies. Accordingly the Ashkcinians
are represented as being descended from Kai Arasli, the second
son of Kai Kubad, the words Ashk and Arash being sufficiently
n.like to have suggested the connexion, Ashk is a word expressive
of kingly virtues such as “wise,” “pure,” “holy.” In the West
it took the form of Arsaces. In the Oriental lists of the kings
of the Ashkanian dynasty the other names here mentioned by
Firdausi occur, sometimes more than once. There are two
Ashks, one Shapiir, several of the name of Gudarz, one or two
Bizhans, two or three Narsis, one or two of the name of Urmuzd
or Hurmuz, no Arash, who perhaps is inserted in the Shahnama
to keep up the nominal connexion with the second son of Kai
Kubad, and three or four Ardawans.^ The one here mentioned
by Firdausi is the last of that name, and the poet, it appears,
considered that his real name was Bahram, but in the lists there
is only one so called, and he is placed much earlier. Some account
of Bahriim, Gudarz, and Bizhan, m this connexion, has been
given already.^

In the last reign we had Firdausi’s story of the establishment
by Sikandar of the system of Part or Tribal Kings and his motives
in so doing. ^ Though Sikandar ’s share m the matter is of course
wholly unhistorical, the view taken in franiau legend of the
political system that obtained after his death is, broadly speaking,
fairly correct. Iran never again was organised under one supreme
head, as it had been m the days of the first Persian empire, till
the establishment of the second empire five and a half centuries
later. The death of Alexander was followed by long wars due
to the rival ambitions of his generals and their descendants.
Later on came wars with Rome and the rise of the Parthian
power, which remained for centuries the great bulwark of the
East against Roman aggression. The system of Parthian rule,
however, was a nomad one. It originated in the victories of a
nomad tribe, and it was to the nomads that the Parthian kings
turned for succour in their hours of need. They called themselves
indeed by the title of King of kings, as the Achsemenids did
before them, and some of them at all events professed the same
religion, but national Iranian tradition never recognised their
right to use the ancient Persian title of supreme ruler though,
in a sense, it was more applicable to them than to their pre-


^ See the lists in GKS, in. 24.
^ See p. 178 seq. |


- See Vol, iii. p. 9 sey.


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


198

decessors. With the Achsememds it was a claim to universal
sovereignty, with the Arsacids a claim to the suzerainty of Iran*
The geographical extent of the lands ruled by themselves, or
by their governors on their behalf, was not very great, and the
remainder of their empire consisted of kingdoms that retained
at least a semi-independence under native rulers. Such, for
instance, were the kingdoms of Osroene, Gordyene, and Atropatane
(Azarbilijaii) in the north, Elymais (Elam) and Pars 111 the south,
and Sistan and Bactria in the east. Further, in the case of Pars,
as we learn from Tabari, and, we may presume, elsewhere also,
these Part or Tribal Kings had under them small local kings
or princes. In the days of Firdausi’s Ardawan, the last Parthian
Gieat King, there seem to have been four such lulers in Pais,
one of whom was Papak, under his immediate over-lord, the Part
or Tribal King who ruled at Istakhr. Thus in Parthian times
Iran was split into two great divisions, one under the Parthian
Great King and organised into eighteen provinces administered
by satraps directly responsible to him; the other under semi-
independent potentates who held the same position with reference
to their regal underlings as he held towards them According
to the Kiirnaniak there were in all 240 kings, according to Arab
authorities there were 90,' so the Parthian over-loid was entitled
to describe himself as King of kings.

§§ 3-9* Tabari’s account of the rise of the S{ts<inian dynasty
IS brieily as follows — Ardshlr was the son of P.'lpalc, king of
Khlr, and was born at a village named Tlriidih in the same
neighbourhood. His grandfather, Stlsan, was the superintendent
of a Fire-temple in Istakhr. His grandmother, Siisan’s wife, was
of the royal house of the Btizrangl, and was named Rtimbihisht.
Papak succeeded his father, and to him was born Ardshlr. The
king of Istakhr at that time was of the race of the Bazrangl,
and his name was Guzihr. He had a eunuch called Tirl whom
he made commandant of Darabgird. When Ardshlr was seven
years old his father Papak took him to see Guzihr, who lived
at Baida, “ and asked him to allow Tlrl to bring up Ardshlr, who
ultimately was to succeed Tlrl at Darabgird. Giizihr assented,
and Ardshlr in course of time succeeded Tlrl as had been
arranged. For a while he remained free from ambition till it
was loused in him by the predictions of astrologers and the


^ NK, p. 36, and note.

^ I.e. “The White”— an Arabic tianslation of the Persian name
of the hill-fort (now Bardi ?) of which a description will be found
in Vol. i. p. 236, note, but Professor Noldeke places it only six German
miles north of Shiraz. NT, p. 5, note.


THE ASHKANIANS


199


announcement to him by an angeP in a dream, that he was
destined to rule Iran. Thereupon he began to assert himself
by attacking and slaying three local kings in Pars, and setting
up adherents of his own in their stead. He then wrote to his
father Pdpak, urging him to rise against Guzihr at Baidii. Papak
did so, slew Giizihr, and took his crown. Then Papak wrote
to Ardawan for permission to crown his (Papak^s) son, Shilpur,
with the crown of Guzihr, Ardawan replied that Papak and
Ardshir had acted as rebels. Pdpak died, his son Shdpiir became
king and summoned his brother Ardshir to court. Ardshir
refused to come, Shdpiir marched against him, but on the way
to Ddrdbgird was killed by the fall of part of one of the buildings
of Humdi.^ On this Ardshir went to Istakhr and, with the
assent of his other brothers, became king. However, on the
pretext, or in consequence, of a conspiracy on their part against
him, he put many of them to death later on. He then reduced
Ddrdbgird, where the people had taken the opportunity of his
absence to rebel against him. Next he conquered the king of
Kirmdn, and annexed that district, of which he made one of his
own sons governor. After this he slew Astawadh, a king on the
coast of the Persian sea. Next he conquered Mihrak, a king in
the district of Ardshir-Khurra, where he founded the town of
Giir, and, while thus engaged, received a hostile letter from
Ardawan, which he answered m a similar tone, and returned to
Istakhr. After this he made thiee distinct expeditions from
Pars. In the first he subdued Ispahan, Ahw^lz, a district on the
small Tigris,® and other ]places In the second he went to Ahwiiz
by way of Girih and Kazirun and on to Maishan where he built
the town of Karakh-Maishan. In the third he encountered
Ardawan at Hurmuzdagan, slew him, and the same day was hailed
King of kings. The date of this battle seems to have been
September 26th, a.d. 226, but the actual site, according to Pro-
fessor Noldeke, is unknown, and he is of the opinion that the
three expeditions of Ardshir from Pars, mentioned above, corre-
spond with the three battles that, according to Western writers,
took place before Ardawan was disposed of for good and all.*
The plain of Pam Hurmuz, south of Shushtar, has been suggested
as the probable scene of the decisive battle.®

§ 3. In the Shahndma the Sdsanian dynasty is connected with
the Kaianian by a double genealogy, one already given under


^ No doubt, as Professor Noldeke suggests, Suiiish in the original
Pahlavi. NT, 6, and note.

2 See Vol. V. p. 293.

* NT, pp. i~iS, and notes. Cf. ESM, 35 seq.


® The Kdrdn.
5 Id.


200


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


the roign of Bahman,* the other here. Both aio fictitious, Tabari’s
account making it clear with regard to the latter that Ardslnr
was the son, not the grandson on the female side only, of Pcipak.-
In Tabari also two genealogies aie given, both of which servo
to connect the line of Papak with the Kai/niians They run as
* follow . —


I

11

Kai Manush (Minuchihi ?)

Lulu asp

1

Kai Ugi (?)

1

Gubhtdsp

1

Luhi abp

Abfandi^ii

Gushtasp

1

1

Bahman

1

1

Abfaudiyai

1 ,

Bahman

1

Ihhalridh


Susdn Zaiai

Mihrmas Pj'ijw'ik


l-'apak

\

S.is.in

Has, in

1

j

Pa]»ak

Pctpak

1

j

Aulshii

Hdban

1


1

Paiiak

1


Ai dshii


Two similar genealogies, tracing back the line of Ardshir to
Luhrasp, are given by Mas’Vidi * Neither he nor Tabari credits
the legends, found in the Karnamak and in the Shi'ihnjlma, that
Sc'isan was a shepherd m the employment of P<ipak, who adopted
him and gave him a daughter in marriage. In Piidausi Piipak
is called the son of P)Udy«ib, but as the poet makes that name
a rhyme word it is open to suspicion apart fiom the fact that
it does not appear in any of the above-mentioned genealogies.
The same reason, probably, led Firdausi (F) to put the visit of
the master of the lieids (lamah) to Pa^iak lu the winter-season
(damah)— a touch not found in the Kainilmak (K). In K IVipak
has three dreams. The first of them, in which he sees the sun


- fcJee p. 198.

* MM, n. 15 1.


^ See Vol. V. p. 290.
^ NT, p. I.


THE ASHKAnIANS


201


illuminating tlie whole woild from the head of Siscln, is not in F.
In K too the thiee Fires are Frub/i, representing the priestly class,
Gushasp, the warrior-class, and Milir Barzm, the agricultuial.^
The sending of S.istin to the bath, doubtlessly a veiy necessary
preliminary, is not in the more primitive K.

§ 4 Aidawan, the Aitabanus III. or IV. of Western writers,
the last ruler of the Paithiau dynasty, was regaided in Persian
historical tradition as being himself the chief Tribal or Part King,
the pnitnif, infer paics, not as the geneial suzerain, and as having
Media Magna as his teiiitory. Hence F assigns him Rai as his
capital “

K adds chess to the accomplishments learnt by Ardshir at
Court, but F tells us fuither on, under the leign of Niishiiwan,
the story of its introduction into Persia

The present of money that accompanied Ptipak’s reply to
Ardshii is not mentioned in K.

§ 5. The details of the slave-girPs descent by means of a lasso
in order to visit Ardshir, and her name, are not in K, which
omits too the mention of Papak’s death and Ardawan’s appoint-
ment of a successor, and makes Ardawan the Part King over
Ispahan, Pars, and the neighbouring lands, and Ptlpak himself
the prince_of P/irs.®

The account of the astrologers working out their calcula-
tions in the house of the slave girl, and her over-hearing them,
IS lacking in K, which gives no reason for her knowledge in
the matter On the other hand the pronouncements of the
astrologers are moie elaborate and technical in K, where also
they state that the servant who escapes from his master in the
course of the next throe days will supplant him ^

§ 6. In K the fugitives ariive at a village, where they are
afraid to stop, and are met by two women who tell Ardshir to
fear not, and to hasten to the sea where he will be safe. In F
the fugitives reach a pool where they want to drink and rest,
but are warned by two young men to hasten on. In K Ardawan
thrice in the course of his iiursuit inquires of those whom he
meets as to how far the fugitives are ahead. On the third
occasion it is a caravan that he comes upon F omits the
caravan passage.

For the mountain-sheep see Vol, 1, p. 374.

§ 7 F IS more detailed here In K the corresponding jDassage
runs thus : — Then he (Ardawan) sent an equipped army to Pars,


^ See Vol. i. pp. 7, 130, 132 - NT, p. 7, note.

^ NK, p. 36. * NK, 1. 42. Of. p. 195 -


302


THE ShAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


under his own son, to take Ardshir prisoner.^ In the meanwhile
Ardshlr went his way to the coast. As ho proceeded, some of
the men of Pars, who were hostile to Ardawin, handed over to
him goods and chattels and their own persons, and pioniised him
fealty and obedience

The city founded by Ardshir was called Piv-Aidshfr ®

§ 8. In K we have Banuk of Ispahan with six sons for the
Tabi'ik of Jahram with seven sons of F, The Persian for “ seven ”
comes m handily as a rhyme-word ; hence the change In K
it IS stated that Ardshir called the district where he first mot
Banuk “Rumishn-i-Aidshir,’’ le “Joy of Ardshir,’’ founded
a city there of the same name and also known as “Tltim Ardshii,”
i,t\ “Happy Aidshir”^ It was natural that he should, or be
thought to, have founded a Fire-templo there, and this may bo
the oiigm of F’s Piim in that connexion.

The account of Aidsliir’s battle with Bahman, son of Ardaw<ln,
is not in K.

§ 9. Fiidausfs description of this battle is in his usual stylo.
The corresponding passage m K may be read to indicate throe
battles or campaigns.'" It rims as follows —“Then ho (Ardshir)
began war with Ardawan, slaughteied his wliolo army, and took
from him his goods and chattels, houses, and property. Thou
he settled in Istakhi, and assembled from Kirmiin, Maki<in,
Ispahan, and the different regions of P/irs, a voiy great host.
Then ho began another war witli Ardaw/in. For four months
there were daily much fighting and slaughter ArdawJin collecti‘d
from various regions — Pai, Damawand, Dilannln,^’ and Patash-
wargar ’ —armies and horses ; but as the Majesty of the Kanhiians
had descended on Ardshir he was successful, killed Ardawiin, and
all his possessions came into Aidshir’s hands. He took Ardaw<in’s
daughter to wife and went back to Pars.” ^

§§ 10, II. Here we have the account of an “unfortunate in-
cident, and shall meet, later on, with others that bofoll Ardshir
aftei his triumph over Ardawan. He still had to light hard to
make good the title of “ King of kings ” conferred on him by his
tioops on the field of Hurmuzdagan.® Naturally this would bo so.
A dynasty that had endured for centuries could not fail to have
many adherents and dependants ; Ardawiln had left sons ;
Chosroes, the king of Armenia, was either his bi other or at


^ Accoidiiig to F Aidawau’b eldest son, Bahman, was established
already as ruler in Pais. See p. 21S.

2 NK, p. 46. ^ NT, p. 19, and note. ^ NK, ]>. 46.

s (7/. p. 199. « Giliin. 7 Tabari&tan 01 Mazandau}n.

® NK, p. 47> and notes. See p. 199.


THE ASHKAnIANS


203


all events had been set on the throne by him ; the Pait Kings
too had everything to lose by Ardshir’s success, for it was
manifest that he had no intention of leaving them m the semi-
independent position that they had enjoyed under Parthian
suzerainty ; his view with regaid to them was, as we have seen
already, that “ stone dead hath no fellow ” ^ Aidshir followed up
his success over Ardawan by striking at the heart of that king^s
power which, according to franian tradition, lay in Media, and
here is recorded for us in the account of his expedition against
the Kurds, by whom the people of Media aie meant, lor 111 K
the name of the Kurd king is M.idik, which simply means the
Mede.” ® These, so far as Media Magna was concerned, Ardslui
seems to have conquered, but Tabari’s statement that he subdued
Azarbilijan and Armenia appears to be an exaggeration. The
case of Azarbaijan is doubtful, but Armenia, whither some of the
Arsacid princes had iied for refuge, succeeded with the help of
Rome in maintaining its independence.*^

§§ 12-16. To the exegesis of this strange story, as Firdausi calls
it, three great authorities — Mold, Darmesteter, and Kuldeke —
have contributed The two latter see reason to connect it with
other more ancient Indo-European myths of dragons, such as
Indra with Vritra, Apollo with the Python, cfcc., and Darmesteter
quotes an interesting Scandinavian parallel which he considers
more primitive and unattected by industrialism — “Le comte
Herraudr a donne* ^ sa fille, la belle Thora, un seipent qu’il a
trouvo dans un ceiif de vautour Le seipent plait a Thoia qui
lui fait un lit d'or dans un eofliet Le seipent gi audit, Uoi
(j)ancht avec lui, le coffre devient trop ctroit pour Im, et memo
la maison de la jeiine Idle qu’il eiiveloppe de son corps. II etait
mediant et malicieux . nul n’osait I’ajipi ocher que Thomme qui
lui apportait chaque jour sa nourriture, consistant eii un bceuf
entier. Le comte promet sa fille et Tor a qui tuera le dragon
Ragnar, %e de quinze ans, se fait un vetement garni de poix
(pour se garder du poison du serpent), surprend le monstre et le
tue de la point e de son epieu qu’il lui laisse dans la gueule. • II
se retire sans dire son nom et plus tard se fait reconnaitre
publiqueraent au manohe de son epieu • il re9oit Thora eu manage.*' *
Still more to the point are MohTs explanation and illustration,
which are as follow — “Je sms dispose a croire que ce conte est
un vague souvenir de I’lntroduction du ver i\ soie en Perse et de
la prosperito que cette nouvelle Industrie devait avoir repandue
On me permettra peut-etre de citer a I’appui de cette supposition


^ See p 199* ® NK, p. 48, and note.

® NT, p. IS, and note, Cf, RSM, p. 37 seq * DEI, li. S3.


204


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


un conte analogue et presque aiissi etrange, qui date cle nos jours.
Je me rappelle avoir vu, il y a une trentaine d’annt'us, an mimstLU'o
du commcice, uii lapport clu pivfet d’un dos departemonts do la
Ilietagne au sujet de la deticsso que ivpandait dans la cainpagno
1 mti eduction du til de lin pioduit par les machines, et do la
dilhcultc que les hleuses a la main trouvaiont a hitter coutio
cette concurience. Le prefet raconto, a cette occasion, que ces
pauvies fommes avaient fini par composer une h'gendo, selon
laquelle il y avait une fee, appelce Mathutd, qiu avait sept doigts
d’acier et pouvait ainsi filer plus et plus vito qu’ellos no pouvaiont
le faire avec leurs cmq doigts humains ” '■

The full piocoss of silk manufacture from tho woini {Fo'iitbi/d
to the finished fabric was known in Ohina fiom time
immemorial, and the secret was guaided veiy eaiefully. Long
befoie the Christian era the raw silk had begun to bo impoitod
into Europe, and a famous manufactory foi weaving it was estab-
lished ill the island of Cos in the ^Egean Soa The secret of tho
method of the production of the raw material itself was kepi till
much latei times, sufficiently, at all events, for tlie maintenance
of the Chinese monopoly, though Aiistotlo in his II Aon/ of
AmmaU^ Bk V., ch xvii , sec. 6, od Bclineidei, speaks of a
ceitain great worm with horns, as it were, winch produces bom-
bycina or cocoons which the women use m weaving. Aristotle’s
knowledge probably came to him as one of the results of
Alexander’s expedition to the Bast. The silk-woiui itself, of
winch the seciet had spiead during the fouith century
thiough India to liun and the West, was brought foi tho first
time into Bui ope by two Persian monks, at the special request
of the Bmperor Justinian, m a.d. 550. They smuggled tho eggs
from China in the hollow of a bamboo, and thus fouiulod the
Western silk industry. Justinian’s object was to break the
monopoly of the silk-tiade then, by land and sea alike, in Persian
hands ^

Tuo reasons may be suggested why the scene of our story was
laid on the shores of the Persian sea. One is that .1 Part King
of that region, e g. of Hurmuz (Ormus), may have grown lapidly
rich in the latter days of the Parthian dynasty by means of tho
silk or cotton tiade of the Persian Gulf, and sufiered for his
piosperity at the hands of Ardsln'i P/ipak,ln The other is to ho
found in the popular etymology of the woid Kirrn.in—a region


1 P, Vol. V., Picface.

^ See GBF, v. 56 seq, ; Ency. Brit, nth ed s./*, “Silk”; and SP,
pp* 179, 263.


THE ASHKAnIANS


205


more famous for its date (khurmil) than for its silk. In ^^rsiari.,,^,-
howevei, it so happens that “kiim” means "‘worm,” and -

IS the same woid Kirmln was supposed to mean The Land of
the Worm/’ and thus to be a suitable scene foi some ancient
Dragon-myth,^ or a story may have been invented to account foi
the name. Loth in K and F, it should be noted, Ardshii, after
killing the Worm, proceeds to conquer Kirmiin, so that we have
the romantic and histone accounts of the same event put side by
side, the former given at large and the latter very shortly. In
Tabari too we have the historic version and two brief rationalised
versions of the lomantic side of the story. He informs us that
Ardshir subdued Kirmiin, slew its king Balash (Vologeses, an
Arsacid), and made his own son luler. This is lepresented as
taking place befoie the war with Ardawan Then (here begins
one of the romantic versions) he went against a king named
Astawadh, who lived on the coast of the Persian sea, and to
whom divine honours were paid, killed him, cut him in two wuth
his sword, slew also his retinue, and brought out from his treasuie-
house, and carried off, much treasure that was stored there -
Astawadh, Piofessor Noldeke notes, is a corruption by misreading
of the Pahlavi name,® which becomes Haftwad in the Shahnama
According to the other account there was in ALir, a village in the
province of Kujtlran, which belonged to the coast-land of Ardshir-
Khuria (Gur), a queen who enjoyed divine honours and possessed
great wealth and many soldiers Ardshir, toward the end of his
reign, killed the queen and captured much gold and treasure
which she had,*

In these accounts divine honours are transferred, in the first,
from the dragon to Haftwad and, in the second, to his daughter.

§ 12 This passage is not found elsewhere, but there is no
reason to assume that the poet invented, though very likely he
embellished, it. Fiomwhatwe can gather of Firdausi's literary
methods, he would not have introduced such a string of incidents
without authority for so doing. When “gravelled for lack of
matter," he does not “ take occasion to j^J^vent, but passes on as
we see in the case of the present dynasty, where he had an
unequalled opportunity for the exercise of his imagination had he
been disposed to avail himself of it. The absence of the passage
in the Karriclmak and in the Arabic may be accounted for easily.
In the former, Haft wild (Haftanbiikht) is introduced quite
abruptly,® and the story of his rise to power was omitted not


1 DEI, ii 81. 2 p, 10, 3 See p. 206. NT, p. 19.

® “ But the aimy of Haftanbiikht, the lord of the Woim, attacked
him (Ardshir)," &c. ; NK, p. 49.


2o6 the SHAHnImA of FIRDAUSi

because it was well known or unknown, but because it was foreign
to the purpose in hand, which was to show by what steps Ardshir
rose to supreme power, effected the unification of Iran, and
founded a new dynasty. Fiom this point of view the destruction
of Haftwcid and the Worm was of importance, but not their
genesis In the latter we have a much more drastic system of
lopping in the interests, apparently, of rationalism. In the
second of Tabari’s versions we get a hint that it was the one
which, in its uniationalised state, Firdausi followed. The queen
there is the daughter here

The name of Aidshir’s opponent in K — Haft/mbiikht, which
dues not scan — becomes Haftw/id in F, as it may be so road in
the Pahlavi if the central letters are omitted. Haftanbiikhi,
accoi ding to Piofessoi Nuldeke, means The Seven have re-
deemed” with reference to the seven planets which, as ci cations
of Aliriman ^ might be expected, from the orthodox Zoi oast nan
lioint of view, to watch over the fortunes of Haftanbukht and
the Worm. In Piofessor Darmosteter’s opinion, howovoi, Fir-
dausi’s etymology is correct, though based on a luisapprohension.
The word wad ” was due to a misreading of the Pahlavi, hut the
woid “biikht” does mean “son,” and the seven sons arc the
sevenfold coils, or the seven heads, of the dragon. Both agico
that in the original foim of the stoiy Haft/mbiikht was the
dragon -

According to K, Haftanbukht’s seat was at Guliir in Kujaxau.
In Tabari, Haft.lnbiikht becomes Astawadh, and GuLlr, in the
version which substitutes a queen for a king, becomes Al.ir
The situation of Kujiiian is unknown.

In K the food of the dragon is the blood of sheep and bullocks, ‘
not rice, milk, and honey, as m F

§ 13 In K the aimy of Haftanbiikht is represented as the
aggressor. The forces of Ardshir, who is not present, are attacked
after his return fiom his victory over the Kurds. This ]>re-
limiiiary engagement is omitted by F. Haftw.ld’s son crossed
over from Arabia to help his father,® The water belnnd Ardshir
was piobably the sea, but the Persian word is a vague one

§ 14 In K the older form Mithrak is preserved. According to
Tabari, who places Ardshir’s war with him befoie the defeat of
Aidawun, he lived in a district of Ardshir-Khurra ”

§ 15 In K Aidshir, after his defeat by Haftiinbfikht, reaches
the shoie of the sea quite alone and almost abandoned by the


^ See Vol. 1 p. 52. 2 Of. NK, pp. 29, 49, and note , DEI, 11. 82.

3 NK, p so; NT, pp. 10, 19. * NK, p. 56 ® hi 49-52, and

® NT, p. II.


THE ASHkAnIANS


207


divine Grace, but then it stood in front of him and led him out
of danger to the village where the two brothers, named Burjak
and Burjatur, dwelt. ^

In K Ardshir gets admitted into the castle with the two young
men of the village only. In F he takes seven men with him.
Seven is a favourite number in Peisian story, and if, as we have
seen above, one of the legends told of Cyrus the Great could be
transferred to Ardshir, there seems no reason why a fragment of
the legend of the Seven, who made the famous expedition against
the stronghold of the mage Gaumata — the false Smeidis — in the
days of Darius Hystaspis, should not be transferred here in like
manner.^ In K Ardshir appoints, for some reason not clear to
us, the 27th day of the month as the one for decisive action, and
Haftanbiikht appeals to have perished in the fight, not afterwards
by formal execution as in F.®


§ I

The Praise of Mahmud

Now be the monarch of the world our theme
As one in feast and fight and lore supreme —

The great Mahmiid ; much prosperous rede hath he
And doth uphold the fame of majesty,

A king, Abu’l Kasim i most sage and wise
Beyond e’en wisdom in his policies.

Glad be his heart for evermore and free
From toil and trouble. King of kings is he
Both of Iran and of Zabulistan,

And from Kannuj ^ up to Kabulistan.

On him, upon the troops of his command,

On his allies, his kindred, and his land,

On that world-lord and chief, Nasr the amir,

A source of joyance to time’s circling sphere.

Be praise, while o’er the moon the army’s head
Ascendeth by Abii’l Muzaffar led ;

^ NK, p. 53. ® Of. Vol. 1. p. 58 ; DHA, vi. 201 seq.

® NK, p. 56, and note. ^ Of. Vol. 1. p. 99 .


2o8 the SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI

By fortune and by name victorious he,

Whose arrows in their flight out-top the tree.

Oh ^ may the Shah live scathless evermore,

And be his seat upon his treasury's store,

And may his general be happy too,

In heart illumed, in treasure well to do.

Thus while revolving heaven maintain its place
Ne’er may its love be severed from this race,

But be it ever a victorious one,

And crowned from sire to sire and son to son.

Upon this day, the fourteenth of Shawwal,

May benediction on our sovereign fall
Bor this good news about the tax — that he,

The Shah with Grace and crown, hath made docroo
To claim no contribution for a year
From men of ardent Faith and godly fear.

The age of Niishirwan hath come anew,

And all hath been transfigured to our view.

When on this wise no little time hath sped.

And when the robe of right shall be outspread,
Thoult see him (such liis justice and his love ’)
Keceivc the robe of honour from above —

One that upon him ne'er will wear away,

While on his head the imperial crown will stay.
May his head flourish, harm approach not near,

His magnanimity transcend heaven's sphere.

One telling o’er the years and months that T
Have lived will not despise my prophecy.

Look well, because this book a flag will be
O'er sages' heads to all eternity,

And, in original, will seem to spring
From Gaiumart whose praise all people sing.

Thus Niishirwan, son of Kubad, once said : —

When any monarch turn from right his head
Heaven will black out the patent of his reign,

The stars acclaim him not as king again.


THE A SHE AN IANS


209


Injustice is the notice to depart

To kings that vex the blameless to the heart ” ^

For ever may this family, endued
With worth, with wisdom, and with rectitude,

Continue. Lasting foothold here hath none,

But his good name will last when he is gone.

Where now are Fariddn, Zahhak, Jamshid,

The chiefs of Arab and of Persian breed ^

Where are the great of the Stisanians,

Those of Bahrain’s race, and the Ashkanians ^

Zahhak the Shah was most reviled, for he
Was all injustice and impurity,

While glorious Faridiin approval won ;

He died, and his renown still liveth on.

In this world fame is our memorial —

A better thing than gems imperial ^

The man unjust, whose joyance was in throne
And treasure, never hath made praise his own ,

His reputation in the world is naught.

And none is fain to pleasure him in aught.

Because of our toe-quelling king’s decree
May he still throne it in felicity.

Forth from their homes the people plain-ward hied,
With praise transcending heaven, and thus they cried : —

Aye may he live, the crowned head of our state,

And may time’s course to him prove fortunate ;

Here may he look on naught save what doth please,

His name be graven on the palaces,

^Lnd may our benisons withal embrace
Eis kin, host, land, his royal form, and face.”

1 Similar sentiments were attributed to Aidshir Pjipakjln, See p. 283.


VOL. VI.


O


210


THE SH Ann Am A of firdausI


The Tdhal Kings

C. 1364 0 tliou that singost in extreme old age ’

Now let the Ashkanians’ times thy thoughts engage.
What hath the author of the history
Still left to tell us from the legendry ?

What mighty chieftains hath he to enthrone
Upon the world, Sikandar being gone ^

The thane of Chach, mine author, saith that none
Thenceforward had the throne and crown, but princes,
Brave, headstrong, proud, and scions of Arash,

Each in his corner made himself a realm
Out of some portion of the provinces.

And when they sat rejoicing on their thrones
Folk called them “Tribal Kings/’ Two centuries
passed,

And thou hadst said: “There is no Shah/’ These
princes

Regarded not each other, and earth rested,

Sikandar having ordered matters thus,

To guard the land of Riim. The first was Ashk,
Sprung from Kubad, while others wore vShapur,

A royal warrior, Giidarz the Ashkanian,

Bizhan of Kaian lineage, Narsi,

The great Urmuzd, Arash a warrior famed,

And after him the noble Ardawan,

Wise, prudent, and of ardent soul, for when
BAhram, the Ashkanian, sat upon the throne
He lavished treasure on the poor, but folk
Were wont to call him Ardawan’ the Great
Because he kept the wolfs claws from the sheep.

He governed in Shiraz and Ispahan,


^ Je, arta= great, and wan or b{ln=a guardian.


THE ASHKInIANS


211


Which scholars call the “ Marches of the princes.''
He set up in Istakhr Papak i as ruler,

Whose thumb-stall used to make the monsters - yelL
How all these princes perished, root and branch.
Their time-worn chronicle narrateth not.

Naught have I heard of them except the name.

And in the Book of Kings seen but the same.


§ 3

Ho (I Pdjpah sain Sdsd?i in a Dream and gave him a
Daughter in MarriOAje

Now when Dara had perished in the war, 0. 1365

And all his family had had their day.

He left one son behind — a potent prince,

A wise and valiant man by name Sasan,

Who, when he saw his father slain, and fortune

Averse from the Iranians, fled before

The host of Kiim and 'scaped the net of bale.

He died in wretched plight in Hindustan,

And left a little boy. Thus every sire
Throughout four generations gave his son
The name Sasan. They all were camel-drivers,

Or shepherds, and hard workers all their years.

The youngest of the race came to Papak,

Beheld his master-shepherd on the plain,

And said : Hast thou employment for a hireling,

Whose life is being spent in sore distress ? "

The master-shepherd took that luckless one.

And worked him day and night. His industry

i In the text the Aiabic form of the word “Bdbak” is used,
but the propel Persian form is Pdpak, which wo have adopted
throughout

^ The word is the same as that used in the pievious reign to
describe the monsters on [which Yajfij and Majiij fattened in the
spring. See p. 164.


212 THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

round faYoiir, and he rose to be chief shepherd.

Papak, son of Riidyab, one night thus dreamed : — -
He saw upon a mighty elephant
Sasan and in his hand a Indian sword,

While all that came to him saluted him,

And did him homage , he addressed them kindly,

And purged their gloomy hearts of grief. Next night;
When sleeping much perturbed, he dreamed about
Fire-worshippers who bore three blazing Fires,

Such as Azargashasp, Kharrad, and Mihr,^

Bright as Sol, Mars, and Venus ; all blazed up
Before Sasan, their fuel aloe-wood.

Papak awoke, his soul and heart possessed
By care. Those skilled in dreams and in that lore
Puissant, magnates, sages, counsellors.

Assembled in the palace of Papak,

And as he set forth what had chanced, and told
His dreams to them at large, the adviser mused,

The interpreter gave ear, and in the end
Said : 0 exalted king ’ this must be scanned,

c. 1366 For one whom thou beheldest thus in sleep
Will raise his head above the sun as Shah,

Or, if the dream be not of him, his son
Will have the world.”

Papak rejoiced on hearing,
Rewarded each according to his rank,

Then bade his master-shepherd to forsake
The flock and come. It was a winter’s day.

Wrapped in his cloak, its wool was thick with snow,

His heart with fears, he came m haste. Papak
Dismissed all strangers, slave and counsellor
Went, and he graciously received Sasan,

Assigning him a seat beside his lord,

And asked him of his quality and birth.

The herd, through terror of him, answered not,

^ The names of Fire-tomj)les.


THE ASHKANIANS


213


But said at last : 0 prince ’ if thou wilt give

A promise to respect thy shepherd’s life

1 will inform thee of my quality

When thou shalt grasp my hand and pledge thyself

To harm me not in public or in private.”

Papak, on hearing this, loosed his own tongue,
Invoked the Giver of all good, and said : —

I will not harm but make thee glad and honoured,”
Then spake the youth • I am, 0 paladin ’

Son of Sasan and sprung from Shah Ardshir,

Whom chroniclers call by the name Bahman,

The great son of the brave Asfandiyar,

Who was Gushtclsp’s memorial.”

Piipak

Wept from those shrewd eyes that had seen the dream,
Then brought the raiment of a paladin,

And steed with royal trappings, saying thus : —

Go to the bath what while they fetch fresh raiment.”

He raised Sasan o’er that chief shepherdship,
Prepared for him a noble residence.

And, having lodged him there, provided slaves,

Both boys and girls, to wait on him, bestowed
Addition by all means, set him past need
Of wealth, then gave the Crown on his own brows —

A daughter well beloved — to him as spouse.


§ 4

Hoir ArdsMr Pdpalcdn teas horn, and of his Case Kith
Ardandn

When nine months had elapsed the beauteous dame
Brought forth an infant like the radiant sun,

The image of illustrious Ardshir,

A growing, glorious, heart-delighting child.

His sire withal, who joyed to gaze upon him,


0. 1367


214 the SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSt

Named him Ardshir and fostered him through all
His years of need. A long while thus elapsed.

(The learned now call him Papakan Ardshird)

They taught him all accomplishment, wherein
He bettered e'en the promise of his birth.

He was so wise and goodly that the sky,

Thou wouldst have said, was luminous through him.
Nows of the youth’s intelligence and knowledge
Reached Ardawan : '' He is a savage Lion
In fight,'' it ran, ‘and like Nahid in feast.”

The king wrote to that famous paladin,

Piipak, and said: “ 0 counsellor of mine,

Wise, trusty, eloquent, and good i thy son,

Ardshir, is, I have heard, a cavalier
Of eloquence and heed. On reading this
Be pleased to send him unto us forthwith.

I will supply his every want, advance him
Among the chiefs and, when ho is associate
With mine own sons, deny him not my kinship.”

Papak, on reading this, wept tears ol‘ blood ;

He bade a writer, and that rising youth,

Ardshir, attend, and said : “ Peru>sc this letter
Of Ardawan's and let thy clear mind scan it ;

Behold, I write an answer to the king,

And send it by some friend to this effect •—

‘ Lo ! I have sent to thee a gallant youth,

One much approved, who is my heart and eyes,

And whom I have advised. When ho shall come
To thy high court treat him right royally,

And suffer not the blast to blow upon him.' ”

Then swift as wind ho oped the treasury-doors,

And gratified the youth with various gifts
Of golden harness, swords, and iron maces,

There was not aught that he refused the boy.

^ He IS generally known as Ardshii IMnakiin, i,c. Aulsh'u of the farailv
of Papak. ^


THE ASHKANIANS


215


The treasurer brought forth brocade, dinars,

Steeds, slaves, with stuifs of Chin and cloth of gold.

Such as kings wear, and gave them to the youth
What time he went to wait on Ardawan.

The favoured youth, departing from his grandsire,

Went to the court of Ardawan at Kai,

Who, hearing of his coming, graciously
Received him, spake at large about Papak,

Assigned Ardshir a place beside the throne, C 1368

Lodged him near by, fed, clothed, and furnished him.

Now when the sun sat on its throne, and when
The world became fair as a Riiman’s face,

Ardshir called for a servant and therewith
The gifts of obligation, and dispatched
The envoy of Papak, the paladin,

To Ardawan, the king, who viewed the gifts ;

They pleased him, and the young man profited
Thereby : the monarch held him as a son.

A while passed well with him. The twain consorted
In revel, feast, and at the chase.

One day

It happened that the escort of the king,

And his own sons, were scattered in the chase.

Ardshir himself attended Ardawan,

Who found that gallant youth acceptable.

Now Ardawan had four sons of his own.

Each king-like. Onager had come in sight,

And that great company was all astir.

They urged their wind-foot steeds and mixed the dust
With sweat. Ardshir pressed on in front and, nearing
The quarry, placed an arrow on his bow,

And struck an onager upon the haunch.

The arrow-point and feather went right through.

Anon came Ardawan who, when he saw

The strength of that young archer, cried • ‘‘ May he

That shot possess a soul to match his hand.'"


2I6


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


Ardsliir replied : “ I shot the onager/'

A son said : ‘‘ It was I that brought it down,

And I am looking out for one to match it/’
Ardshir retorted : ‘‘ Well the plain is broad,
And there are onagers and arrows too.

By that same token slay another such
It is a sin for noble men to lie.”

Now Ardawan was angry with Ardshir
Thereat and roared at him : “ Mine is the blame,
Because this bringing up is all mine own.

Why should I have thee in my company,

Both in the banquet and the hunting-field,

In order that thou mayst surpass my sons,

And show olf thine address and excellence ?
Begone. See to mine Arab steeds and choose
,^1369 A handy residence. Be stable-master,

And keep all companies/'

Ardshir in tears

Went to be keeper of the Arab steeds,

And in his wretchedness and discontent
Wrote to his grandsire thus • ‘‘ In what a way
Hath Ardawan dealt with us ^ Anguish take
His body, care his soul.”

He told the matter,
And why king Ardawan was wroth with him.
Papak was troubled when the letter came,

But held his peace, and from his treasury
Dispatched ten thousand to his son in gold
By camel and by cavalier, commanded
A scribe to come, and wrote . 0 foolish boy 1

When thou wast hunting game with Ardawan
Why didst thou pass his sons although thou art
His servant, not his kin ? He wronged thee not
In malice; 'twas thine own insensate deed.

Now strive to make him pleased and satisfied.
And do his will in all. I have dispatched thee


THE ASHKANIANS


217


Gold and this letter of advice Avithal.

When thou hast spent the money ask for more
Until the times shall change.”

The dromedary

Sped with the ancient veteran to A-rdshir,

Who when he read the letter was content.

And plotted and dissembled, chose a lodging*

Near to his steeds, though one not worthy of him,
Provided it with carpets, food, and raiment,

And spent his days and nights in revelry,
Companioning with wine and minstrelsy


§ 5

Hoi( Ardawdn's Slave-qiil fell in Lo\e with ArdbMr and
how he fled nith her to Pars

Now Ardawan possessed a lofty palace,

Wherein there dwelt a favourite slave of his.

She was a Moon-face hight Gulnar ^ — a picture
All jewelry and colour and perfume.

She ministered to Ardawan and kept
His treasury. He loved her more than life,

And joyed and smiled to look on hor.^ One day,
When she had mounted to the palace-roof,

And gladdened at that mirth, ^ she saw Ardshir ,

His lips were smiling, and he won her heart.

She waited till the eve or rather night,

Then tied a lasso to the battlements

With many a knot. She proved it with her hand,^

And then, invoking Him who giveth good,

Descended boldly. When in all her gems,

^ Following the division of the text m P.

® / c. Pomegianate-blooin.

•5 In C the section ends heie.

^ See above.

® “la langa avec sa main ” (Mohl)


0. 1370


21 8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And savouring musk and other spicery,

She reached Ardshir she raised his head, which lay
Upon the pillow of brocade, and clasped him,

When he was wakened, tightly to her breast.

The young man marked that lovely one, her face,

Her hair, and scented bravery, and said : —

"'Whence hast thou sprung to grace my troubled hearts’’
A slave am I and love thee, heart and soul,''

She answered. "" I am Ardawan’s beloved.

His treasurer, his darling, and delight,

But, if thou wilt accept me, thy slave now
To live but in thy sight and visit thee,

Whene'er thou wilt, and brighten thy dark days.”

A while passed thus and then mishap befell
Ardshir's inspirer. Veteran, shrewd Papak
Died and resigned this ancient homo to others.

When news reached Ardawan he sorrowed much ,

His soul grew dark. The chiefs all asked for Pars,

But he bestowed it on his eldest son,^

Bade bring the drums and march forth to the waste.

As for Ardshir the world gloomed to his heart
For his protector's sake, old, shrewd Papak.

He loathed his service under Ardawan,

And, when those tidings came, formed new designs,

For he was rash through grief and fain to flee.

Anon king Ardawan brought to his court
Some shrewd men of the readers of the stars
To learn his future, to direct his course.

And find whom fortune would inspire thereafter,
c. 1371 He sent them to the mansion of Gulnar
To make their observations of the stars.

They worked for three days at his horoscope.

The treasuress could hear the talk thereon
And other secrets, and spent all the days
And three-fourths of the night in listening

^ Bahman, as we learn later on, pp. 225 seq , 259.


THE ASHKjiNIANS


With longing heart and sighs upon her lips,

But very mindful of each word that passed.

Upon the fourth day these shrewd men set out
To tell the secrets to king Ardawan,

And with their magic tablets at their breasts
Went to him from the damsel’s dwelling-place.

They told the secrets of the lofty sky,

To whom it turned, the time, and the degree : —

“ A thing will happen at no distant date —

A matter that will wring the monarch’s heart.

The least among his magnates will take flight,

A chieftain of high birth, a warrior,

And afterward become a mighty king,

A world-lord fortunate and iortune-giving.”

The heart of that renowned and prosperous prince
Was in great dudgeon at their words.

The damsel,

When all was black as pitch, went to Ardshir.

That youth was troubled like the sea and could not
Rest for one day because of Ardawan.

She told him what those shrewd men had apprised
The famous king, whereat Ardshir grew calm
And silent yet his heart was moved thereat.

He thought of fJight and asked : “ If I quit Rai
And seek Iran, the country of the brave,

Consider whether thou wilt go with me,

Or tarry with the king. If thou wilt go
Thou shalt be great, the Crown of all the realm.”

She said with many a sigh and bitter tears : —

** Thy slave am I, and death alone shall part us,”
Ardshir replied: “We must escape to-morrow,'’
And she went back resolved to risk her all.

As soon as earth was gilded by the sun,

And dark night had been taken in the noose.

She oped the treasury and made her choice
Among the royal gems, took what dinars


220


THE SHJHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


She needed, went back to her home, and there
0. 1372 Secured the jewels, waited till the night

Eose o’er the hills, till Ardawan was sleeping,

The coast all clear, then quitting arrow-like
The palace, took the jewels to Ardshir.

She found the atheling with cup in hand.

And all the equerries in drunken sleep.

He had picked out two noble steeds, and these
Were feeding ready saddled in their stalls.

When he behold Gulnar, the gold, and rubies,

He laid the cup aside and forthwith bridled
The Arab steeds, put on his armour, mounted,

And grasped a watered sword. The lady rode
The other steed, and so they fled together
Toward Pars with gladsome hearts.

Now Ardawan

Was never happy either day or night
Without the fair Gulnar and would not quit
His couch unless in her auspicious presence.

When it was time to rise and have the throne
Draped with brocade, and still the damsel came not.

He was both angry and aggrieved at her.

The guards were posted at the gate without,

Throne, crown, and palace were in readiness
While from the court-gate rose the chamberlain,
Approached the famous king, and said : '' There wait
The chief men of the kingdom at the gate.”

§ 6

How Ar/lawdn heard of the Flight of Ardshir mth the Damsel
and pursued them

The monarch asked the slaves : “ Why doth Gulnar
Neglect the rule and come not to my pillow ?

Is she offended with me ? ”


Thereupon


THE ASHKAnIANS


221


The chief scribe entered, saying : “ Yesternight
Ardshir went off incontinent and took
A grey steed and a black steed from the stables —

The riding horses of the illustrious king—

Companioned by thy well-loved treasuress.”

The warrior-king much moved bestrode his bay,

Escorted by a host of gallant horsemen •

Thou wouldst have said He goeth over fire/’

Upon the road he saw a place of note
With many men and cattle, and inquired. —

Did any hear the sound of hoofs ere day ^ 0 . 1373

Did two pass on a grey steed and a black ? ”

One said : Two passed on two steeds desertward,

And at their heels a goodly mountain-sheep.

Which kicked the dust up horse-like.”

Ardawan

Said to his minister : Why ever went
The mountain-sheep with them ? ”

He made reply : —

“ It is his Grace — the wings that will exalt him
To kingship through the favour of the stars.

If this sheep followeth him our task is lengthened.”

There Ardawan dismounted, ate, and rested.

Then hurried on. They followed up Ardshir,

And Ardawan in person led the way
With his wazir. Swift as a blast the youth
Rode with the damsel with no moment’s pause,

But he who hath high heaven for his ally
Will take no harm from any enemy.

Ardshfr at length, exhausted by the ride,

Beheld a pool of water from the height.

And as he rode said to Gulnar : “ Since we
Have wedded toil, dismount we by this pool,

For steed and rider are alike fordone.

Repose we here and drink and start refreshed.”

Now when the twain had drawn anigh the water


222


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt


Their visages as yellow as the sun,

And when Ardshir was fain to light him down,

He saw beside the watering-place two youths,

Who called out quickly : ‘‘ There is need to ply
The reins and stirrup still for thou hast ’scaped
Thus far the breath and gullet of the Dragon,

And to drink water now will cost thee dear,

Yea even thy life.”

Ardshir, on hearing this,

Said to Gulnar : Attend to what they say.”

He pressed his stirrups, gave his steed the reins,

And laid his glittering spear upon his shoulder.

Behind them Ardawan like rushing wind
Continued the pursuit with soul all gloom.

When half the day had passed, and while the
orb —

The lustre of the world — still paced the sky,

He saw a city — one in goodly case —

Whence many flocked to meet him, and he asked
The archimages: ^'When passed two on horse-
back?”

Their leader said : “ 0 prosperous, prudent king !

Just as the sun was growing pale, and night
Spread out the cloak of lapis-lazuli,
c. 1374 Two hurried through the city, soiled with dust

And parched with thirst, while after one of them
There came a mountain-sheep, and I have seen
None like it pictured in the palaces ! ”

Said the wazir to Ardawan ; Stop here.

Unless thou wilt return and get thee ready
Both soldiers and the implements of war.

Because the fashion of this strife hath changed
In that his fortune backethjhim ; to follow
Is but to grasp the wind. Write to thy son,

And tell him all. Perchance he may discover
Trace of Ardshir whom we must suffer not


THE ASHKAnIANS


223


To milk this mountain-sheep

Now Ardawan,

On hearing this, knew that it was too late,

And so alighting at that city prayed
To God — the Giver of all good — for aid.


At dawn the monarch bade the host return,

And pale as reeds re-entered Eai by night.

He wrote a letter to his son and said : —

Deceit hath taken action, and Ardshir
Hath left me quicker than the shaft the bow,

And gone to Pars. Seek for him privily,

But say no word to any.”

For his part

Ardshir approached the water and thus prayed : —

0 Thou who art our Helper » Thou hast saved
Me from my foeman : never may he prosper.*’

Now when he had reposed he called a boatman.

And spake much of the past. The shrewd, old sailor
Observed ArdshiVs high stature, mien, and breast,
Knew : ‘‘ He can be but of the Kaian stock,”

Rejoicing in his Grace and Majesty,

Then hasting to the water sent his boats
To every part. At news of famed Ardshir
A host assembled by the water-side.

While in Istakhr the kindred of Papak
All gloried at those tidings of the Shah,

While those too of Dara, who dwelt resigned
xVbout the realm, exulted and grew young
Of heart though old, while troop on troop the folk

1 Or, reading with P, “ We must not let this mountain-sheep turn
lion.”


224


THE SHJHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


Flocked to the youtk from mountain and from sea,

0. 1375 And from each city counsellors and sages

Assembled round that claimant of the -world.

The young Ardshir loosed tongue and said : “ Ye chiefs
Of ardent soul > of all this noble throng
There is no sage or counsellor but knoweth
What shame the infamous Sikandar ^ wrought
Upon the world, slew all mine ancestors,

And laid his hand on it unrighteously.

Now I am one sprung from Asfandiyar,

Yet Ardawan is king ! We may not speak
Or think of this as just. If ye will help mo
I will not yield the crown and lofty throne
To any. What have ye to say hereto
Give me a fair reply.”

Then all the assembly,

Both warriors and counsellors, stood up,

And, speaking from their hearts, made answer thus : —

‘‘ All we that are the kindred of Piipak
Rejoice to see thy face, and we that arc
Descendants of Sasan will gird ourselves
For vengeance. Wo are thine both soul and body,

Our joys and griefs, our less and more, are thine.

Thy quality from father and from mother
Surpasseth ours, the sovereignty and sway
Are thine of right, and wo at thy command
Will turn the hills to plains, and with our swords
Make streams run blood.”

ArdshiVs head, when he heard
That answer, rose o’er Mercury and Venus,

He blessed the chiefs and mused upon revenge.

He founded by the water>side a city

To be his seat of power. An archimage

Said : “ Well-starred Shah who winneth over hearts !

Thou fram’st anew the head of sovereignty,

^ Observe the SttsiCnian view of Sikandar. Of* p. 15.


THE ASHKANIANS


225


But must clear Pars of Weeds and afterward
Make war on Ardawan, whilst thou and fortune
Are young, because in treasure he surpasseth
The other Tribal Kings , ’twill tax thy strength
To fight with him, but when thou hast cast down
His throne none else will hold his own with thee.”

Whenas the illustrious Ardshir heard this
The words approved themselves and pleased his heart,
And when the sun rose from the mountain-tops
He set forth from the water toward Istakhr.

News reached Bahman, the son of Ardawan,

And filled him, heart and soul, with grief and gloom.
He tarried not upon the throne of might,

But gathered troops and weapons for the fight.


§ 8


JETofn Tahtik helped Ardiihir, fought inth Bahman, and
ccmgtmed him


There was a noble hight Tabak, possessed
Of arms, of soldiery, and prudent counsels,

The ruler of the city of Jahram,

A veteran sage and one whose word was law.

He had seven noble sons, and at the news
About Ardshir went from Jahram to him.

With tymbals and a host, prepared for battle,
Abandoning Bahman. When he beheld
Ardshir he lighted as the custom was,

Ean to him, kissed his feet, and spake at large
Of the Sasanians. The atheling
Showed him much favour, setting store upon
That speedy coming, yet suspected somewhat,
And dreaded that old man and watched him well
Upon the march because his force was great.

The veteran was shrewd, knew what Ardshir
VOL. VI.


0 1376


p


226


THE SHJHNIma of FIRDAUSt


Thought, and came with the Zandavasta, saying : —

“ May God cut off Tahak's all worthless life
If in my heart be aught but honesty.

As soon as I heard news of Shah Ardshir,

How he had reached the water with his host,

I loathed king Ardawan as young men loathe
An aged spouse. Know that I am thy slave
To love and prosper thee, to serve thee well,

And keep thy secrets.’’

Thereupon Ardshir
Began to estimate him differently,

And treat him like a sire, appointing him
Chief of the men of name, ceased to suspect,

Went to the temples of Kharrad and Ram,

And prayed to God to guide him to all good,

To give him all success and make his tree
Of majesty bear fruit, then sought his tent
Where both the counsellors and muster-master
Appeared before him, and he numbered all
The host, both horse and ioot, and ascertained
Who were the leaders and the warriors,

Became acquaint with each, inquired his name.

And was rejoiced at such a mighty host.

C. 1377 He gave his soldiers pay, accoutred them.

Called on the just Bestower of all good
And, when the host was like a fierce pard, went
To fight Bahman, the son of Ardawan.

The armies met, the heroes sought the fray.

The troops drew up, lance, sword, and dart in hand.

Whenas the Azure was unveiled the host
Led by Tabak advanced, like warrior-lions
Closed with the foe, and poured blood streamlike. Thus
Dust filled the air, and men the earth, till sunset.
Arose a blast with pitchy clouds of dust,

And from the army’s centre came Ardshir.

Whereat Bahman, the son of Ardawan,


THE ASHKAnIANS 227

Fled pierced with arrows and liis soul all gloom,

While Shah Ardshir was instant in pursuit,

With blaring trumpets and with arrow-rain,

Until they reached the city of Lstakhr,

Seat of the fame and glory of Bahman.

The Shah’s fame filled the world, and countless troops
Flocked to him. He was shown the many hoards
Of treasure that Papak had toiled to gather.

Ardshir gave them in largess. When at length
He marched from Pars it was with growing strength.


§ 9


How Ardawdn led forth his Host for Battle with Ardshir
and was slam.


When news reached Ardawan fear filled his heart,

And gloom his mind. He said : “ A lord of counsel

Told me this secret of the lofty sky,i

But can one ’scape by pains unthought of ills ?

I did not fancy that Ardshir would prove
To be ambitious and a lion-taker ”

He oped his treasury, gave rations out,

Bound on the baggage, and led forth the host ,
Contingents came from Gil and from Dilam :

The army’s dust rose moon-ward while the Shah 2
Led forth a host that barred the wind. Two bow-shots
Divided power from power ; snakes found no rest,

Such was the din of drum and clarion,

The clangour of the gongs and Indian bells.

The armies shouted and the banners waved,

While blue steel falchions scattered heads around.

The battle lasted thus for forty days,

The world was straitened to the common folk


^ See p. 219,


“ Lt Ardshh.


228


THE SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI


137S The plain grew mountam-like with all the slam,

The wounded wei*e aweary of their life.

At last there rose a mighty, sable cloud,

And men could strive no more. A frightful storm
Succeeded, and the warriors lost all heart.

The mountains echoed and the plain was rent
While air reverberated. Then the troops
Of Ardawan were frayed and all exclaimed
With one consent : This storm hath come from God
On Ardawan ; this host will need our tears.”

So all the wise one day, when fight was fiercest.
Asked quarter, and Ardshh* charged from the centre ;
Arose a clashing while the arrows showered.

Amidmost of the mellay Ardawan

Was ta’en, and for his crown gave up sweet life.

The hand of one Kharrad seized on his bridle,

And bare him captive to the atheling.

Ardshir saw him from far. King Ardawan
Lit from his steed, his body arrow-pierced,

His soul all gloom, and Shah Ardshir commanded
The deathsman : Go, seize on the great king’s foe,
Cleave him asunder with thy sword, and make
Our evil-wishers quail.”

So did the deathsman :

That famous monarch vanished from the world.

Such is the usage of the ancient sky ?

The lot of Ardawdn Ardshir top found ;

Him whom it raiseth to the stars on high
It giveth likewise to the sorry ground '

Two sons of him by whom Arash’s seed
Thus had been brought to shame were taken too.

The noble Shah Ardshir imprisoned them
With fetters on their feet. Two elder sons
Succeeded in escaping from the fight,

And were not taken in the net of bale.

They went in tears to Hindustan, and thou


THE A SHK. IN I A NS 229

Mayst well narrate a tale concerning them.^

The battle-field was full of reins and girdles.

The weapons of the host, and gold and silver,

Which were collected by the ShalTs command,

And given to the troops. Among the chiefs
Tabak was most concerned to cleanse the corpse
Of Ardawan from blood, lamenting while
He washed away the dust of fight, and built
A charnel as the royal custom was.

He robed the wounded bosom in brocade,

He placed a crown of camphor on the head.

And none of all the troops that went to Eai
Might tread the palace-dust of Ardawan.-

Tabak thereafter came before Ardshir,

And said : O Shah who seckest after wisdom !

Demand the child of Ardawan to wife, 0. 1379

For she hath Grace and beauty, crown and throne.

Then will this diadem and all the treasures
That he collected with such toil be thine.’'

He listened to the words of wise advice.

And asked the daughter for his spouse forthwith.

Then stayed a month or twain within the palace,

A mighty leader with a mighty host.

From Eai the aspirant went toward Pars and rested
From travail and dispute. He built a city,

All palaces and gardens, and therein
Were fountain, plain, and dale, and to this day
The noble, ancient thane ^ doth speak thereof
As Khurra-i-Ardshir.^ Within, a spring

^ Firdausi does so later on. See p 259.

2 As a rule the belongings of a fallen king or minister weie given
up to spoil, and this is implied in C, but the context seems to show
that the reading of P, followed in the translation, is coirect. Of. Vol.
iv, p. 212 seq. Tabaifs account, howevci, favours C. See p. 255.

3 The thane of Chdeh mentioned above, p. 210.

* Khmia-i-Aidshii, “The Giace of Ardshir,’’ was the name given by
him to the distnct and city of Gur, not Zur as in the text, now
Fiidzabdd. See NT, p, ii and note.


230 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

That never failed gave water for canals.

Beside it he set up a Fane of Fire,

Eevived the feasts of Sada^ and Mihi-gan,"

And round it splendid edifices raised,

With pleasances and parks and palaces.

(When that wise Shah of Grace and might was dead
The border-chieftain named the city Ziir).

He founded villages all round about.

And there he settled folk when all was ready.

He saw within one quarter a deep lake.

But needs must pierce a height that intervened.
They brought picks and artificers, and clove
The mountain with a hundred water-ways.

He led them thence to Zfir. It was a seat
Abounding both in dwellings and m neat.


§ 10

How AnhMr fouijht iiith the Eunh awl was ile/eafed

Then Shah Ardshir led from Istakhr a host
Innumerable to war against the Kurds,

Who, when he came anear, encountered him
In numbers numberless. What seemed a trifle
Became of moment, for the country round
All sided with the Kurds who both outnumbered
And hemmed the Shdh’s host in. All day till night
The fight raged, then the world-lord’s forces fled,

The field was straitened by the killed and wounded.

No man of name survived except the Shah,

And some few troops whose tongues were cracked with
thirst

Through blazing sunshine and the clouds of dust.

When night had reared its flag, and ended strife
And stir, the Shah marked on a mountain-side

' See VoL i p. 12.1. 2 Id. 175 and note.


THE ASHKANIANS


231


A fire, and went toward it with Ins men.

He found there hinds in charge of sheep and goats. 0. 13S0
He and his men alighted with their mouths
Filled with the dust of fight. He asked in haste
For water which they brought and curdled milk.

He rested, ate of what he found, took off
His breastplate, used it as his fittest couch,

And made his royal helmet serve as pillow
When dawn rose from the deep, and he awoke,

The chief hind visited his couch and said * —

“ Be evil far from thee both day and night
What ill hath caused thy journey hitherward.

And made thee make a couch of thy cuirass ? ”

The Shah then questioned him about the way : —

Where can I shelter next ?

The chief herd said : —

Thou wilt not find a habitable place.

Without a guide, but wilt, with one to lead thee,

Discover such, four leagues away, and thence
The villages, each with a well-known chief,

Are frequent.”

So he took old herds as guides.

When he arrived the head man of the village
Came out at once to meet him. He sent horsemen,

Both young and old, to Khurra-i-Ardshir ,

The host at news of him set forth rejoicing.

He sent men also to spy out the Kurds.

These men went forth, returned, and said . They all
Are boasting of their deeds and making merry ;

None recketh of the Shah, regarding him
As out-worn in Istakhr with ageing fortune.”

The Shah rejoiced and deemed the past mere wind
Chose from his famous host three thousand horsemen
With scimitars, and took in company
A thousand archers with artillery.


332


THE SHIhnJMA of FIRDAUSI


§ “

Hon Ar(hMr attanled the Kurdh hy Ntglit and
overthrew tlieni

0. 1381 He led the host forth as the sun grew pale,

Left all the unfit behind, and in the dark
And dead of night came on the Kurds, and saw
Earth strewn with sleepers while his own troops raged.
The chieftain reached the pillow of the Kurds,

He gave his fleet steed rein, unsheathed, and charged.
He crowned the grass with blood. The plain Avas all
The heads and hands of Kurds who strewed earth’s face
By scores, and countless of them were made captive *
Their truculence and folly Avere brought Ioav.

He gave their lands to spoil, to all his troops

Both croAvns and purses, and from that time forth

If some old man had borne upon his head

A tray of gold across those deserts, none

Would e’en have glanced thereon, such Avas the fortune

And justice of the Shah ^ He tarried not

To celebrate his victory but marched

Back to Istakhr and issued these commands : —

Repose your steeds, repair your arms, and cheer
Yourselves Avith feasts, for ye may have to think
Of Avar ere long.”

The Avarriors fell to eating,

But when their waists had rested from their girdles
Ardshfr devised neAV warfare. Mind it Avell,

This tale, Avhen thou shalt hear, of Avhat befell.

§ 12

The Story oj Haftndd and the Care of the Worm

Now mark this strange, eventful history
Of Kujaran, a city on the sea


THE ASHKANIANS


333


Of Pars, told by a rustic bard for lie
Hath dealt at large with Persian legendry.

There was a city strait but full of men,

Who all must work to eat, and many girls
Therein were poor and earned their bread withal.

On one side was a mountain near at hand
Whereto the damsels all were wont to faro,

Each with her distaff-case of poplar-wood,

And with her weighed-out stint of unspun cotton.

They used to gather at the city-gate

Before they started and to club whatever

They brought of provand, but their talk ne’er ran

On resting or on eating , their concern

Was cotton which at night they brought back spun.

There dwelt within that city, one Haftwad,

Who was so named because he had seven sons,^

A man of cheerful turn but indigent.

He had too one dear daughter and no more,

But daughters he esteemed of no account.

One day it happened that the troop of girls
Sat at their spinning on the mountain-side.

They clubbed together all the food they had,

And during meal-time laid their distaff’s by.

’Twas then it happened that this lucky girl
Beheld a windfall lying on the path,

An apple which she picked up hastily.

Now list to this strange tale. When that fair maid
Had bitten the fruit she saw a worm inside.

She picked it from the apple and then gently
Transferred it to her distaff-case, and said,

As she resumed her spinning: “In the name
Of God who hath no partner and no peer,

111 show you wondrous spinning done to-day
All through the good luck of an apple-worm ! ”

The girls grew merry and began to laugh,

^ See p. 206.


C 1382


234 the SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

Grew blithe of blee and showed their silver teeth.

That day she spun a double quantity,

And marked the sum thereof upon the ground,

Then hurried home like smoke and showed her mother
The yarn. Her mother praised her fondly, saying : —

“ Thou hast done well, thou Moon with sunlike face ! ’’
Next morning, having measured off the twist,

She took a double stint, and all agog,

Heart, soul, and body, on her spinning joined
That busy band and told those fixir-famed girls : —

Ye moon-faced and well favoured by the stars ’

By this worm’s fortune I have spun so much
That never I shall -want f ”

She spun that stint,

And might have dealt with more. She carried home
What she had spun, whereat her motlior’s heart
Became like jocund Paradise. Each morning
The pretty damsel gave the worm some apple.

And spun oft* all the cotton howsoever
The tale might be increased, the little witch i

One day the parents asked their worthy daughter : —
Hast thou obtained a fairy for thy sister
That thou dost spin so much, thou goodly one ^ ”
c. 1383 Forthwith the fair maid told her mother all
About the apple with the little worm
Concealed therein, and showed the glorious creature
To both her parents who rejoiced the more.

Haftwad, who took it for an augury,

Gave up his work ; he talked of nothing save
The luck of the Worm. His fortune which had aged
Grew young. Thus time passed and his prospects
brightened.

They did not slight the Worm but fed it well.

It grew in size and strength, its head and back

Were beautifully hued, and it outgrew

The distaff-case. Its coat, which turned as dark


THE ASHKAnIANS


235


As musk, had saflron spots throughout. Haftwad
Prepared a goodly, sable cabinet,

And lodged the creature there. It came to pass
That in that city everybody looked
For counsel and for justice to Haftwad,

Who grew in honour, consequence, and wealth,

And all his seven sons were rich as well.

The city had a governor — a man

With rank, renown, and soldiery — who sought

Occasion to deprive Haftwad, the base-born,

Of his dinars, but many of the nobles

Took sides with him and his seven warlike sons.

The trumpet-call was heard in Kujaran •

They marched out with their spears, and swords, and
arrows,

Led by Haftwad who played the man in fight.

Seized on the city, slew the governor,

And captured all his jewels and his treasures.

A crowd of folk assembled round Haftwad.

He went from Kujaran toward the mountain,

Upon whose top he built a hold whereto
The citizens migrated in a mass.

H*e fitted up the hold with iron gates ,

’Twas serviceable both in peace and war.

Upon the mountain-top there was a spring.

Which by good fortune rose amidst the hold ,

Around he built a wall of viewless height.

Now when the Worm outgrew its cabinet
They made a tank of masonry ^ and, when
The air had dried it, tenderly disposed
The Worm within. Each day at dawn its keeper
Would hurry from Haftwad to dress its food —

A cauldronful of rice. The growing Worm
Consumed it all. Years passed; its neck and limbs
Grew large as elephant's, and then Haftwkl

i Beading with P.


0. 1384


236


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Sumamed the hold Kirman/ his own bright daughter
Became the guardian of the Worm, and he
The leader of its troops. Wazir and scribe
Attended it , it fed on rice, milk, honey,

While at its door Haftwad, the chieftain, stood
To answer for it both in bad and good.^


§ 13


Half' Anhlilr fowjld nith Haft u ad and umded


Now when ArdshiT heard of Haftwad the news
Displeased him, and he sent against that chief
A host of Taliant, high-starred Avarriors.

Haftwad, on hearing of them, took it lightly.

He set an ambush in a mountain-coign,

And went himself to combat Avith his troops.

Noav when the battle raged, and Avhilo the soldiers
Plied mace and battle-ax, the force in ambush
AdA^anced, earth gloomed to those Iranians,

For none kneAv head from foot, and thou hadst said : —
‘‘ Earth manacled their hands/’ Such Avore the slain
On desert, dale, and mountain that the victors
Tired of the slaughter. The survivors sped
Back to the Shah. Noav Avhen renoAvned Ardshir
Heard of the fight, the slaughter, and the plunder.

He sorroAved, summoned to him all his host,

And hasted to distribute arms and pay.

He set forth Avrathfully against HaftAvad ,

The head of that base-born one rose to heaven ,

He brought forth arms and treasure from the hold,
Misprizing both that army and the Avar.

Noav Avhen his eldest son, then far aAvay,

Heard that his father Avas engaged in strife
He left ease, feasting, and repose, and crossed

^ See p. 204. 2 gjj- couplets omitted.


THE ASHKANIANS 237

The water in a boat. That atheling,

An ill-conditioned youth, was named Shahwi. 0 . 13S5

He thus rejoined HaftwM who joyed but kept
The right wing and the chief command himself.

Both hosts were goodly, furnished, well equipped.

And combative. The young Shah’s heart grew old
With trouble at the sight. They ranged their ranks,

The scimitars flashed out, the reek went up.

And when the drums beat on the elephants
•Folk deafened two miles off. The trumpets blared,

The world re-echoed with the brazen cymbals,

While earth reeled ’neath the horse-shoes and the
nails ;

The air was tulip-hued with flags of chiefs,

The crash of axes on the crests of helms,

Eeverberated from heaven while the rush
Of wind-foot chargers rent the ground asunder,

And pass and plain were full of headless corpses.

Such was HaftwM’s host that thou wouldst have said : —

The sea is wind-tossed.” Ant and fly were cramped
For room, those armies so fulfilled the plain.

Thus was it till day waned and night outspread

Its cloak of lapis-lazuli. Ardshi'r

Drew in his troops. Behind him was the sea.

Now when eve’s rusty livery grew dark.

And when the scouts went out from both the hosts,

The soldiers of the Shah became the prey
Of hunger for his foeman barred the way.


§ 14

How MiTirak of Jahram sacked the Palace of Ardslw*

Lived at Jahram a man of low degree^ —

Mihrak son of Niishzad — who, when he heard

' Of Kaian race, according to P.


238


THE SHJHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


About the expedition of Ardshir,

His tarrying by the sea, and how his host
Was starving, with communications barred,

Marched on the palace of the Shah, assembled
Troops past all count, and sacked it, lavishing
No stint of crowns and purses on his soldiers.

The Shah received the tidings by the sea,

And said in grief : ‘‘ Why did I leave my homo
Defenceless and attack an alien foe ? ''

Called all the chiefs, spake of Mihrak at large,

C. 1386 think ye, leaders of the host !

Of such an impasse ^ I have tasted much
Of fortune's bitterness, but reckoned not
On trouble from Mihrak ^ "

They cried ‘‘ 0 Shah !

Ne er may thine eyes behold ill-luck. Why take
Things ill because Mihrak hath proved thy foe
In secret ^ Thou hast greatness, and the world
Is thine. Thy slaves are we, ’tis thine to bid."

He gave command to have the tables sot ;

They called for wine and cups and minstrelsy.

They served up divers lambs ^ upon the board,

And all the guests disposed themselves to eat,

But when Ardshir himself took bread there came
A pointed shaft and deeply lodged itself
Within the dainty plumpness of a lamb.

Whereat those brave, wise chiefs forbore to eat.

All sorely grieved. One drew the arrow forth.

They saw that there was writing on the shaft ,

Those that were clerkly of the magnates read it ,

The writing on the arrow was old Persian,

And thus it ran : “ If thou wilt hear, wise Shah '

This issued from the hold's top which is safe
Through the luck of the Worm. Had I directed it

^ Lambs aie still served up whole at feasts m Peisia. 0 . J Wills,
Ldiid of the Lwn and the San, p 91.


THE ASHKAnIANS


239


Against Ardshir tlie feathers would have pierced him.
No monarch, such as he is, in our days
Can overthrow the Worm.”

Then to the archmages

The Shah read out the script on that sharp arrow.
The hold was two leagues off! The nobles’ hearts
Were straitened, but they all evoked upon
The Glory of earth’s king God’s benison.


§ IS

How ArilsMr heard about the Worm and made
Shift to day it

The Shah mused much that night about the Worm
And, when the sun displaced the moon, set forth
With all his army from the sea and hurried
Toward Pars. The foe pursued him, seized the roads.

And slaughtered all the chieftains, but the Shdh

Escaped with his own meiny while behind him

The foe cried ‘ May the Worm’s luck light its throne.”

All said ; ‘ A marvel — one for all to ponder ' ” c 1387

Now as he fled in fear o’er hill and plain
He saw a spacious city, and they urged
Like wolves their steeds. As he approached he saw
A house and at the door two stranger youths.

There halted he and his. The honest pair
Asked bim : “ Whence come ye so unseasonably.

So dusty from the road, and travel-worn ? ”

He said : “ Ardshir hath come this way, and we
Lagged on the route. He fleeth from the Worm,

HaftwM, and that base man’s ignoble creiv.”

The youths had ruth upon him ; they grew sad
And dark of soul, made him dismount and greeted
His nobles well, prepared him pleasant quarters.

And furnished food that was acceptable.


240


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSI


The mighty men sat with the Shah at meat
While those two youths began to entertain him,

And said aloud : “ Exalted one J no grief
Or joy will last, Mark what Zahhak, the tyrant,
Brought on the throne of kingship, how kings’ hearts
Ached through malevolent Afrasiyab,

And how Sikandar, in these latter days,

Slew all the monarchs of the world , all these ^

Have passed a^vay, have left an evil name,

And not attained to jocund Paradise.

’Twill be thus with Haftwad , that miscreant
AVill writhe at last.”

The Shah’s heart at their words
Became as fresh as roses in the spring.

The speech of those two gracious ones consoled him,

He told his secret, and, declared himself.

I am,” he said, ‘‘ Ardshir, son of Sasan,

And am in need of comforting advice.

How deal we with this Worm and with Haftwfid ?

May both his name and lineage c.oaso on earth.”

Thereat the two young men did homage, saying : —

“ All hail J Be ill’s hand ever far from thee.

Be we thy bond-slaves both in soul and body,

And thou confirmed in spirit evermore.

As for the matter that thou askest us
W e will advise thee well that thou mayst use
Craft from the first. In battle with the Worm,

And with Haftwad, thou wilt not bo approved
Unless thou shalt adopt the proper course.

They have their seat upon the mountain-peak,

Within it arc the Worm, the troops, and treasure,

0 138S Before it is the city and behind

The sea, the hold is on the mountain-top,

And access diflScult. The Worm withal
Derivetli from the brain of Ahriman —

* /.e, ZahhjCk, Afnisiytlb, and Sikandar. Of, pp. 15, 224 and note, and

Vol, i. p 59.


THE ASHKANIANS


The foeman of the Maker of the world.

Thou callest it a Worm, but in its skin
There is a combative, blood-thirsty diV ’ ”

Ardshir, on hearing this, which won his love
And pleased his hearty replied : ‘‘ So be it then,

And ye shall have the credit or the blame.”

The young men’s answer pleased his prudent heart
We stand before thee ever as thy slaves.

And guides to good.”

Made happy by their words
He fared triumphant and with heart all justice,

And, when he left, the youths companioned him.

He went with ardent heart and full of heed,

With head held high to Khurra-i- Ardshir.

Troops, magnates, men of lore, and counsellors
Flocked to the Shah, who rested for a while.

Gave out supplies, then marched against Mihrak,
Son of Ndshzad, to whom the world grew dark
And strait because he dared not fight , that traitor
Hid when the great king drew anear Jahram.

The great king’s heart was wrathful. He abode
Until Mihrak was taken, then smote through
His neck with Indian scimitar, consigned
The headless body to the flames, and put
All captives of his kindred to the sword.

Howbeit one daughter was concealed despite
The hue and cry for her throughout the city.

Thence he departed to attack the Worm,

As all his host desired, and took with him
Twelve thousand horsemen proved and veteran.
When he had concentrated all his troops
He led them to a spot between two mountains.

A prudent man, Shahrgir by name, commanded
The host of Shah Ardshir, who said to him : —
Remain here^'^n the watch with outposts, set
Both day and night, shrewd cavaliers and guides,
VOL. VI. Q


242 THE SHAhnAiVIA OF FIRDAUSI

And furthermore both day and night employ
Patrols and sentries to safe-guard the host.

For my part I shall use a stratagem,

As did mine ancestor Asfandiyar,^

And if the watch should see a smoke by day,

Or in the night a blazing like the sun,

Eiiow ye that all is over with the Worm,

Its luck and traffic gone.’'

•c. 1389 Ho chose seven men,

All brave and Lions on the day of battle,

Among his chiefs. Those in his confidence
Ne’er breathed a word. He chose too many a gem
Out of his hoards, brocade, dinars, and goods
Of every kind, and wisely spared not wealth.

He packed two boxes full of lead and solder,

And added to the load a brazen pot.

Because he was a master of his craft.

When all the baggage was in readiness
He ordered his chief equerry to bring
Ten asses, put a driver’s blanket on,

And chose the gold and silver as his load.

When anxiously they started for the hold
He took with him the two young country-folk,

Who had received him on a former day,

As friends and counsellors. When near at hand
They rested on the mountain and drew breath.

The servants of the Worm were sixty men,

And every one was busy at his work.

One saw the company and called to them : —

“ What is there in these packs ? ”

The Bhah replied

“ All sorts of goods — clothes, gold and silver, trinkets,
Brocade, dinars, silk stufts, and jewelry.

I am a merchantman of Khurasan,

And have no rest from toil, am well to do

1 When taking the Brazen Hold. See Vol, v. p, 143.


THE ASHKAnIANS


243


By favour of the Worm and now have come
Rejoicing to its seat. It blesseth me,

And, if I may but serve it, all is well.’’

Thereat the servants of the Worm flung back
The castle-gate. When they had brought the loads
Inside, the noble Shah took charge, undid
A pack forthwith, and made the needful gifts.

He spread before the attendants of the Worm
The leathern table of the traveller.

And stood as slaves are wont, unlocked the chests,

Brought and filled cups with wine, but those whose
turn

It was to feed the Worm with milk and rice
Refused to drink ; their duty kept them sober.

Now as they sat Ardshir sprang up and said * —

Abundance both of rice and milk have I
And, if the Worm’s chief servitor permit teth.

Will gladly feed it for three days myself ;

Fame may ensue, and I shall share its luck.

For three days then be merry and drink wine, 0. 1390

At sun-rise on the fourth I will erect
A spacious warehouse higher than the walls,

For as a chapman seeking purchasers
I fain would curry favour with the Worm. ”

This gained his end. They said : Do thou provide.”

So that ass-driver undertook the toil,

While sat the servitors Avith wine in hand.

And feasted and greAv drunk, and came to be
The servitors of Avine, not of the Worm.

Now Avhen the wine-cup had bemused their minds
The master of the world came Avith his hosts, 1
Brought forth the metal and the brazen pot,

And lit a tire by daylight. When ’tAvas time
To feed the Worm its food was of boiling lead.

He bore the molten metal to the tank,

^ /.c. his former enteitaineis — ^the two youths. See p 239.


244


THE SHAHNAma of FIRDAUSf


Whence that tame creature raised its head. They sai>.
Its tongue thrust out, just like an Arab cyniljal
As when it used to eat the rice Tlie youths
Poured down the molten stuff and quelled the Worm,
There came a rumble from its maw and shook
The tank and ground. Came hko the wind ArdshiT
With those two youths; they plied sword, mace, anu
shaft,

And none among those drunken servitors
Escaped their hands with life. Ardsliir sent up
A black smoke from the castle-roof to tell
The exploit to the captain of the host,

To whom the look-out hurried to announce : —

ArdshiT hath won i”

ShahrgiT made no delay.

But marched to meet the Shah i\ith his array


§

Hoir ArdsJflr '^leir Ilajtxodd

Now when Haftwad was ware thereof his heart
Grew full of anguish and his head of sighs.

He came to repossess the hold. The king
Ascended to the walls in haste. Haftwad
Strove but to small result, for on the ramparts
There was a Lion’s foot.^ The Iranian host
Came mountain-like, but halted seared and sore.-
Then Shah ArdshiT cried from the battlements ; —

0 valiant lion-catcher t ^ fall upon them,

For if Haftwad escapeth from our midst

^ Peisian etymology deiives Ardshir fiom “ ard,” anger, and “ shii,’"
a lion. The true is “ arta,'’ gicat, and “ khshathr.i,’’ king.

Their pie^ious cxpeiienoes with Haftwdd had been imfoi t imato.
Cf. p. 236 BCq.

3 The name of Aidshir’s general was Shahrgir — / e. Oity-takei»
Ardshir addresses him as Shngir, ?.r. Lion-takei.


THE ASHKAnIANS 245

Thou wilt have naught in hand but toil and wind.

I have given the molten metal to the Worm ,

Gone is its luck, its fierce career abated.'*

The troops all heard the Shah's words, donned their
helms G. 1391

And, grieved at past discomfiture, took hearts
And girt their loins for vengeance. Then the wind
Turned on the Worm's troops. Soon Haft wad was taken,

As was that knave Shahwf — his eldest son
And general. Ardshir descended quickly ,

Shahrgir met him afoot. They brought a steed
With golden trappings, and the famed king mounted ;

Then ordered to set up beside the sea
Two lofty gibbets and suspended thence
His two opponents living and woke up
The heart of all his foes. As for the twain,

He came forth from the centre of the host,

And put them both to death with showers of arrows.

He gave the wealth to spoil and thus enriched
His troops. The servants brought down from the hold
All that there was. Such of the wealth as pleased him
He hurried off to Khurra-i- Ardshir.

The Shah set up a Fire-fane on the mountain,

Restored Mihrgan and Sada, and bestowed
Upon his lucky hosts ^ crown, throne, and province,

And thence departing, triumphing and glad,

Spread justice over Pars. When man and beast
Had rested he led on his host to Ziir, "

Sent to Kirman an army, and a man

Fit for the crown and throne, proceeded thence

To Taisafun and brought his foe’s throne down.

Of this our whirling world it is the way
To keep concealed from thee its mystery.

Conform to it, 'twill not conform to thee,

Because its favour changeth every day.

1 Cf. p. 243, note-


IV

THE SASANIAN DYNASTY


IV

THE SASANIAN DYNASTY


ARGUMENT

Tlie poet, 111 this tlio concludmi^ dynasty of the Sh<ihii.ana, tells
of the Liso, piogiess, and fall of the B/is.iiiiaii empire from the
days of its fouiidei, Ardshir Ptipakaii, to those of Yazdagiid, the
last Shah of the dynasty He commemorates the leigns of its
twenty-nine Sh/dis, for the most pait very briefly, but in some
instances at great length, as in the cases of Bahram Gui, Nushir-
Wiiii, and Khusiau Parwiz. He records, so far as Iranian tiadition
kept such things in memory, the foreign lelatioiis of the empire
with other kings, races, and peoples, its mtoinal administration
and domestic concerns, the adventuies that befell and the wisdom
that was utteied, the invention of chess and the coming of the
Gipsies. He then describes the conquest of Irjin by the Aiabs
and ends with a short passage of personal lemimscence


NOTE

Having passed, as Firdausi says, “ Sikandar’s barrier ^ and the
great historic void of five centuries and more, peopled for us in
the Shahiiclma by a few shades of names only, we alight at length
on the authentic but unstable soil of the S/isanian dynasty , for
even here the information presented to us is by no means con-
sonant with modern Western canons of accurac3^ The names are
historic, and so are many of the events recoided, but there aie no
dates, and often what is histoiic is misplaced chronologically and
attributed to the wrong actors and the wrong causes, sometimes
very trivial ones — those, for instance, assigned by the stieet
story-teller. Of many of the Shahs only the facts of their acces-
sion, the length, often wrongly given, of then reigns, their
inaugural speeches, and deaths aie recorded. The oceunence,
more than once, of a whole series of such reigns has a somewhat
depressing effect on the reader and gives an appearance of truth

^ p. 189.

249


250


THE SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI


to Atkinson’s view that the interest of the Shiihnama ends with
the reign of Sikandar.^ From this it might be thought that the
poet, weary with his long labours and soured l)y hope deferred,
had hurried over or scamped the concluding poition of his vast
undertaking. It might be thought that even in the places where
material is abundant his version of it had not the technique and
attractiveness foui^ in the earliei dynasties. In the opinion of
the present writer such views are not justitied by the facts of the
case. It IS true that hero the visions of the childhood of the
world fade into the light of common day, and the superhuman
gives place to the human, but there is a measui o of componsation
in that very fact, and the study of the history of a whole epoch
as it was conceived, interpreted, and handed down by popului
tiadition, cannot fail of interest and instruction Lt must be
lemembered too that no other gieat p{)ot evei nnposod such
strict limitations on himself, or so sternly adhered to them, as
did Firdausi. He puts himself at the mercy of his authoiities,
and where they fail him, as they do sometimes in this [lortion of
the Shuhmima, he makes no attempt to invent incudents, but
leaves a blank and passes on. This is a pioceeding foi which the
poet should be jiraised rather than blamed. He was engaged m
a high task, no doubt behoved lu the tales that he retold, just as
his countrymen believe in them still, and he refused to add t<»
the sacred story of his race as he found it in tradition In (uses,
however, wheie his authoiities olFeied him an o|>]>ortunity he
shows no falling ofi m vigour, as the reign of Balin'im (hir, which
will be found in the next volume, is in itself sullicient to prove.
In it we seem to discern the soil and the seed whence sprang in
after ages the well-belovod Nights called Arabian, but cortuuily
of Persian origin, for we have the Sla'di roaming disguised, or at
least unrecognised, among his subjects ot all classes, the freaks of
despotic power, the humorous exaggerations, the Habolaisian
tale, and the clash of the cymbals of the Brides of tho Treasure
Finally, m the story of Bahriim Ohubina, which JVlacan admired
so much," the Susanian dynasty possesses a historical romance ])oth
admirable in itself an(i admirably set foith by the poet. It
remains to call attention to a tew othei points in connexion with
this dynasty.

Ardshir Piipak/m laid it down as a fundamental principle of
government, if Iranian tradition may be credited, that tho Throne
and the Faith were interdependent. Tho Faith could not exist
without the Throne, nor the Throne without the Faith. The two


1 AS, p. 510.


- C, Vol. 1. p. Nxxvii.


NOTE


251

were brothers; they wore one cloak; they were two pieces of
brocade interwoven, the slanderer of the Throne and the per-
secutor of the Faith were alike impious.^ Whether Ardshir
really spoke to this eJQtect or not matters little. If he did not
say so in word his deeds said it for him, and most of his suc-
cessors followed his example. Latei ages, noting this marked
feature of the dynasty— the close union between the Throne and
the Faith— naturally may have attributed corresponding senti-
ments to its founder. Accordingly the leligion of Zoroastei, as
represented by its official priesthood and supported by the
till one, obtained during Sasanian times a position of influence
and dignity such as it never previously had enjoyed, at all events
since the semi-mythical epoch of Gushtasp and of Asfandiyar.
Even with all its official advantages, however, the priesthood had
much ado to maintain itself, amid the religious ferment of those
centuries, alike against the antagonism of rival Faiths without
and heresy v ithin.^ Orthodox Zoroastrianism was more than once
almost in the position of an Athanas%%is contra mimdum,^ The
Sasanian Shiihs, for the most part, seem to have done their best
to support the priesthood, and the latter showed its gratitude by
a deep and loyal devotion to the House of Sasun. This loyalty to
the throne, coupled with aversion from all that was heterodox or
unorthodox, was reflected in the national tradition as handed
down by the chroniclers of the time, who for the most part were
Zoroastiian priests themselves Consequently in this part of the
Shahnuma the reader will find a strong legitimist feeling, expiessed
by occasional remarks or asides, running like a thread through the
poem. This feeling takes the form of devotion to the House of
Susan as a whole, with the exception of Yazdagird, son of Shapiir,
“ The Wicked,” and to the interests of the supposed light ful Shah
or heir for the time being as agamst usurpers or other claimants
of the throne. These little outbursts certainly are not expressions
of the poet's own personal views on such matters ; he found them
in his authorities and reproduced them. This remark also applies
to passages of religious polemics. The poet's own views on such
matters probably^ may be found in the parable of the kerchief.'^
These polemics represent the devotion of the Zoroastrian priest-
hood to orthodoxy, as they understood it, just as their legitimist
outbursts expressed their loyalty to the throne, provided that it
was occupied by rightful and orthodox Shahs of the House of
Sasun.

A curious instance of this close union between Church and State


^ See p. 286
® Cy.^Vol. V. p. 16, note


“ <7/. pp 327. 3 SS
* See pp. 92, 95


252 THE SH Ah NAM A OF FIRDAUSI

m Stis/miaii times is given by Mas’iidi in his Book of Indication
and Revision/’ but a few words may be said by way of preface.
According to Zoroastrianism there are to be twelve millennia, at
the expiration of the last of which — the piesent one — will come
the Restoration of all things. ISow the tenth millennium began
on the day when the Revelation came to Zaiduhsht/ and in the
Dinkard we find a prophecy, after the event, that the last tw o
centuries of that particular millcnmmn would bo periods of great
misery and wretchedness. “ The Dinkard was compiled during the
ninth century a.d , and Mas’iidi tiouiished dining the first Iniif of
the tenth This is what he tells us . — ^^Thoie is a gio«it diflorence
between the opinion of the Pei sums and that of other people with
rofeionce to the epoch of Alexander, which most folk have not
noticed. It is one of the seciets of the lohgiou and io)al policy
of the Persians and is known only to the most erudite among the
priests, as we have soon for oui selves in the piovinee of Pais,
Kiiman, and other countries where the Peisiaus lule. It is not
found in any of the books on Pei sum history or in any chronicle
or annals [t is tins Zoroastei . . in the Avasta — the book
revealed to him — announces that m three centiuios the umpire of
the Peisians will expeiienco a gieat rovuliitiun, without de-
struction to the religion, but that at the end of a thous.md years,
starting fiom the same o])och, that of Zoroastei, the umjixi’o and
the religion will perish togethei. Now betw^een Zoroastei and
Alexandei thoie is about thioe hundied ye.iis, for Zoioaster
appeared in the time of Oushtasp . . Ardshii, son of JMpak,
possessed himself of the empire . . . about five lunidred years
*ifter Alexander, We see then tluit there remained not moie than
two hundred years or thereabouts before the completion of the
thousand years of the prophecy Ardshir wished to augment by
two hundred years this space of time . . . because ho feared that
when a hundred years should have elapsed after him men would
refuse aid to the king, and to repulse his enemies, owing to their
belief in the truth of the tradition relating to the futuie ruin of
the empire. To obviate this he retrenched about half the time
that had elapsed between Alexander and himself, and accordingly
only made mention of a ceitain number of the Part Kings, who
had occupied this period, and suppressed the remainder. Then
he took pains to disseminate in his empire that ho had made his
appearance and possessed himself of the lule tw^o hundred and
sixty years after Alexander, Consequently this period was
recognised and spread among men, Poi this reason there is a


fSee Vol. V. p i6.


“ WrT, 94


NOTE


253


difference between the Persians and other nations with respect t( >
the era of Alexander, and this is why confusion has been importe d
into the annals of the Part Kings ” ^ Whatever we may think
with regard to the histoiical value of tins explanation the fact
remains that the duration of the epoch between Alexander the
Great and Ardshir P.'ipakiin is reduced by Oriental historians
generally Its standard length may be put, as given by them, at
266 years. The above account makes Ardshir stiike out 288 years
of the actual historical numbei of 548 years.

In the notes to the vaiious leigns of this dynasty no attempt
will be made to present a complete historical sketch of the Persian
histoiy of the period by adding details and filling up the frequent
IcicmcR fiom other sources. Such history as the poem offers will
be dealt with, but such as it ignores, e,(j, many of the wars with
the Eastern Eomaii empire, \\ ill be passed over in silence save
where leference to some omitted historical event is needed for
the bettei understanding of what has been included but mis-
represented, Readers that desire to supplement the Shahnuma
will find ample material in th,e late Professor Eawlinson’s “ Seventh
Great Oriental Monarchy,” and in the Bibliography appended
thereto, especially if they add Professor Noldeke’s ^^Geschichte
der Perser und Ara-ber zur Zeit des Sasaniden,” which was
published three years later and is invaluable

The form of the names of the various Shahs, taken from
Professor Eawlinson, and the duration of thoir respective reigns,
as calculated by Professor Noldeke, are given between brackets
A genealogical table of the Sasanians, according to the Slnihnilma,
will be found at the beginning of the volume.


^ MM, IX. 327.


XXII

ARDSHIR PAPAKAN

HE REIGNED FORTY YEARS AND TWO MONTHS


ARGUMENT

Ardtilnr, having become King of kings, marries the daughter of
ArdaWi'm, who attempts to poison him and is saved by Ardshi'r’s
minister Shapur is born and recognised by his father Ardshir.
Ardsliir consults Kaid about the future. Raid's reply. The
adventuie of Shapui with the daughtei of Mihrak The birth
of Urmuzd, who is acknowledged by Ardshir as his grandson.
Account of Ardshir's administration. He counsels Shapdr and
dies The poet ends the reign with praises of Mahmiid.

NOTE

§ I. The forty years and two immths assigned by Firdausi to
the reign of Ardshir (Artaxerxes 1 ., ad 226-241) is much too
long. Tabari makes it, from the fall of Ardawan, fourteen years
or, according to some of his authorities, ten months longer.^ No
doubt Ardshir was a king, with his seat of government at Pars,
from soon after the death of his father P.lpak.'-^ Probably he
served, and won his spurs, in Ardaw/in’s war against the Romans
which was ended by the peace of Nisibis in a.d. 217. Nine event-
ful years followed and he became King of kings in a d. 226,
Firdausi, according to the text of 0, makes him seventy-eight,
according to the text of P sixty-eight, at the time of his death. ‘
Theie had been a city of Baghdad in Babylonian times, but the
Arab city of that name was not founded till the days of the
Khalifa A1 Mansur in ad 762. The city here meant is J3ih-
Ardshir, the Seleucia newly founded by Ardshir. ^

We have two accounts of the assumption of the title King of
kings by Ardshir For the othei see p 273. Prom Firdausi’s


^ NT, p. 21 “ See p. 199. Id, p. 2S6 ^ NT, p 16, and note,

254


ARDSHIR pApAKAn


255


wording it might be held that the formei was the popular, the
latter the official, ascription of the title For its import in
connexion with Ardshir see p. 197 Gf. too p 199.

§§ 2, 3. Fiidausi’s account agrees partly with the Kirnamak
and partly with the Arabic versions, showing clearly that the
former was not his direct authority. According to K two of
Ardaw/m’s sons had fled to Kabul and thence incited Ardawiln’s
daughter, whose name is given as Zijanak. to poison Ardshir, her
husband One day accordingly, on his return fiom the chase, she
presents to him a cup of roast meal and milk with which she has
mingled the poison. As he was about to drink, the sacred Fire,
Fniba, descended on the cup and it fell from his hand. A cat
and clog ate the spilt food and died on the spot. Ardshir at once
ordered the high priest (the chief nuibid) to have Zij/inak put to
death. Instead of so doing, however, he concealed her in his own
house, where she gave birth to a son whom she called Shiipiir, i,e^
son of the king, and brought him up till he was seven years old.
The stoiy of the self-mutilation by the high priest is omitted.^
One day Ardshir went to the chase and followed a female onager,
whereupon the male came towards Ardshir and exposed himself
to death in her stead. Ardshir spared him and rode after the colt,
whereat the female onager came up and offered herself to be slain
in her young one’s place Ardshir, reflecting on his own conduct
to his wife, whom he knew to have been with child at the time
when he ordered her to execution, wept. The high priest seized
the opportunity to tell Ardshir the leal state of the case, and
Shapur is presented to him. Ardshir in great joy bounteously
lewards the high priest and founds the city of R/is-Shfipiir and
a sacred Fire in commemoration of the occasion.^ According
to Tabari, when Ardshir had obtained the sovereignty he de-
stroyed utteily, in accoi dance to an oath sworn by his graiidsire,
the elder Sasan, the royal race of the Arsacids ® with the exception
of one gill, Aidawun’s daughter, whom he found in the loyal
palace. She was very beautiful, and, as she gave herself out to be
merely the handmaid of one of Ardawan’s wives, he married her.
Later on, thinking herself secure, as she was with child by him,
she told him who she was. On this he ordered his minister, an


^ A similai btoiy is told by Lucian m his tieatiso on "‘The tSyiian
Goddess” of Seleucus Nicatoi, his queen Stratonice, and one of his
favourites — a handsome youth named Combabus — and by Hiuen Tsiang
of the youngei brother of a king of K’lu-obi who was left in chaige of
the government while the king himself went on pilgrimage. BBR, 1. 22.

2 NK, pp. 57 stq» ® Historically this is inconect. See p. 202.


256


THE ShAhNAMA op FIRDAUSI


aged man, to put hei to death, ^ and then follows the rest of the
story as told in the Shdhnama. All these accounts make Sh.ipiir
much too young. According to Tabari he was present at the
battle of Hurmuzdagan and slew with his own hand Ardawan’s
secretary^ Tabari thus appears to contradict himself, but the
reader should bear in mind that it is the custom of Oriental
historians to give several versions, derived from ditterent sources,
of the same event or peison, not to digest such versions, as a
Western wiiter would do, into a single narrative,

A similai account of the rewards bestowed by the grateful
Ardshh on his faithful minister is given by Dinawari and in some
veisions of the Persian translation of Tabari, but there is no
evidence that the statement that Ardshir had his ministei’s head
engraved and stamped on the coinage is histoiically correct. It
is true that another head besides Ardshir’s appears on his earliest
and some of his latest coins, but the heads are those of Papak and
and of Shapiir respectively ^

The Jund-i-Sha]3ur of F appears to be the equivalent of the
Ras-ShApiir of K.‘

§§ 4-6 Tins IS both in K and m the Arabic versions In F the
wise Indian king of the days of Sikandar — Kaid, the Kait of K —
reappears, takes the place held by the astrologers in Tabari, and,
in K, declares that only two races can hold sway in Inin— that of
Ardshir and that of Mihrak.® F more poetically puts it that the
Shtih can only find peace by the wiioti of his family itli that of
Mihrak. On this Ardshir, aware that one daughter of Mihrak had
escaped the previous massacre, tries in vain to find her It seems
worth suggesting that, in the primitive form of the legend,
Ardawan, Mihrak, and Muhdik were one and the same personality.
Mihrak is Mithrak in K, a very Parthian name, and Mudik or
Mc'ihdik is the king of the Kurds. Milhdik merely means the
Mede’^ and thus symbolises the Parthian power which, accoiding
to Iranian tradition, had its headquarters in Media Magna. In
this view Aidshir’s expeditions against the Kurds and Mihrak
would be mere variants of his advance into, and conquest of,
Media after the decisive battle of Hurmuzdagan when doubtlessly
he put to death all that he could find of his late rival’s family.
That he wittingly spared any of them, male or female, is most
unlikely, and a legend given in Tabaii ® had to be invented to
explain how it came about that he married ArdawAn’s daughter,
the story of this marriage being a later device, as here in Shupi'ir’s


^ NT, pp. 2$ seq. ® Id. 14. ® Id. 30 note, and RSM, pp. 65 scq,

* NK p. 63 5 ^2 ; NK, p 64. » See p. 255.


ARDSHIR PJPAKAN


257


case, to connect the Sasunians^ with their piedocessors It is
worth noting too that in the Aiahic historian Hamza the daiightei
of Mihrak is called Ivurdzad, ^ e ‘‘the child of the Kurds ” ^ " This
explains the woi ds of Kait’s prophecy in K and, what is hard to
understand otherwise, why such great importance should be
attached to Mihrak and his family in the various versions of the
legends unless we legard them as all originating from a single
historical incident in Ardshir P.lpakan’s career, F’s insight in
varying the form of Raid’s prophecy brings out the historical
truth that Iran could be restored to internal peace only by the
voluntary union of the old and new political dispensations.

The scene at the well between Shapiir and the daughtei of
Mihrak is not found in the Arabic versions In Tabari the giil
takes refuge with shepherds and provides Shilpiir with water one
day when he is hunting. He falls in love with her and takes her
in marriage, after which she tells him of her parentage. The
Arabic veisions, both in this case and that of Ardshir, represent
the marriage into the enemy’s family as having been made ‘through
ignoiance.^

The recognition scene on the polo-giound, which, we have had
already in connexion with Shilpiir,® here occurs, as in K, in its
proper place. F adds the touch of Ardshlr’s unexpected leturri
from the chase and consequent discovery In Tabari it is brought
about by a sudden visit paid to his son’s palace by Ardshir who
thus encounters Uimuzd.*

At this point K, after giving a brief and exaggerated account of
the reign of Urmuzd, comes to an end.

§§ 7, 8, 10 In addition to K there was once in existence a
Pahlavl work known as the Ahdn/imak ” or “ Andaiznamak ” i.e.

Book of the Exhortations ” .sr of Ardshir. In all probability its
contents much resembled the subject-matter found in these
sections ^

Tabari states that Ardshir himself crowned his son Shupur,^ and
the incident seems to be recorded in a bas-relief of Ardshlr’s at
Takht-i-Bustiin and in some of his later coins ’ Mas’udl says that
Ardshir became a religious recluse. ®

The duration of the Sasanian dynasty was 435 years — a.d.
226-651. Gf. with Ardshlr’s prophecy the account of Mas’udl on
p. 251, and for the length of his reign p. 254. Tabari ® credits him
with the foundation of eight cities.


^ NK, p. 65, note,
* NT, p. 44
^ ESM, pp. 64 ACg.
VOL. VI.


2 NT, pp. 26, 44.
5 NK, pp. 26, 27.
® MM, 11. 159.


p 263
® NT, p. 19
s Id.

E


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


258


§ I

How Anhkhi' Fd})aldn sat upon the Throne
in Baghdad

Now at Baghdad Ardshir assumed his seat
Upon the ivory throne and donned the crown
That maketh glad the heart, with girdle girt,

The sceptre of the Shahs in hand, the palace
Prepared. Thenceforth folk called him King of
kings,’' 1

And no one knew him from Gushtasp. Whenas
1392 He donned the crown of majesty he spake,

Victorious and glad, upon the throne
Thus; ‘‘Justice is my treasure in this world,

Which is reviving ’noath my busy hands,

A treasure this that none can take from me ;

Ill-doing ’tis that bringoth ill on men.

All-holy God, if 1 find favour with Him,

Will not begrudge to me this sombre earth.

The world is wholly under my protection.

My policy is to approve of j’ustice.

None — friend or foe — must slumber with his heart
All care through act of any officer,

Or chief, or warrior-cavalier of mine :

This court is free to all, both foe and friend. ”

The whole assembly blessed him and exclaimed : —
Oh ! may thy justice make earth prosperous ! ”

Where there were hostile chiefs he sent forth
troops

To bring them to submission or make known
The usage of the scimitar and throne.


' ty. pp. 193, 197, 199, 254, 273,


ARDSHIR PAPA KAN


259


§ 2

The Case of Anlshir and the Daughter of Ar daman

Now when the Shah slew Ardawan, thus winning
The world, he took to wife the slain king’s daughter
To tell him where her father s hoards were hidden.
There were two sons of Ardawan in Hind,
Companions in distress, and two in ward
With full hearts and with weeping eyes. The eldest
Of these — Bahman — who was in Hindustan,
Perceiving that the realm was lost to him,

Chose a discreet and prudent messenger,

A youth who was possessed of ears to hear,

Gave him some poison secretly, and said : —

‘‘Go to my sister, tell her ‘ Seek not thou
Our foe’s aifections, for in Hindustan
Thou hast two brothers, exiles both, and two
Bound in the prison-house of Shah Ardshir,

Our sire is slain, his sons are pierced, by arrows.

And thou, as it would seem, hast ceased to love us ’
How can the Maker of the sky commend it ?

As thou wouldst queen it in Iran, and win
In this world the approval of the brave,

Take thou this mortal Indian bane and use it
Forthwith upon Ardshir.’ ”

The envoy came

At eve and gave the noble girl that message.

Her soul and heart burned for her brother’s sake,

Her heart was all a-flame. She took the bane
To do his will. Now Shah Ardshir one day
Went forth to hunt and shoot the onager,

Returned at noon and visited the daughter
Of Ardawan. That moon-faced lady ran,

And proffered to the Shah a topaz cup
Full of cold water, sugar, and fine meal,


c. 1393


26 o the SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSi

And mixed tlierowitli tlic bane to please Balimano
As Shab Ardshir received the cup it fell
Out of his hand and shivered on the ground.

The queen shook with affright, her heart was riven*
Her agitation made the Shah suspect,

Who, doubting what the turning sky would bring,
Enjoined a slave to fetch four fowls. They thought
That his surmise was false, but when the birds
Were put down to the meal they ate and died >

Thus certified the pious monarch summoned
An archimage — his minister — and said : —

“ If thou shouldst scat a foe upon thy throne.

Who by thy kindness groweth so bemused
As rashly to lay hand upon thy life,

What is the punishment for one so raised,

How shall we remedy our own default ?

The archimage replied. ‘‘If any subject
Attempt the world-lord’s life thou must behead
The guilty and accept no other counsel.”

Thereat the Shah commanded . “ Make the daughter
Of Ardawan a corpse.”

The archimage

Went out behind the queen, who quaked convicted.
But said : “ 0 sage f my day and thine will pass
I cannot say thee nay if thou wilt slay me,

But — I am now with child, and by Ardshir ;

So if ’tis right to cause my blood to flow,

And gibbet me on high, wait till my babe
Be born, then carry out the Shah’s behest.”

The shrewd archmage returned and told his master,
But he made answer : “ Hearken not to her,

But do my bidding.”

“ Tis an evil day,”

The archimage reflected, “when such orders
Come from the Shah ! We all, both young and old,
Must die, and he is sonless ! Though he live


ARDSHIR pIpAKAn


261


To count unnumbered years yet when he dieth
A foe will have his throne. Well may I dare
To substitute high policy for such
A feckless action. I will save her life.

I may induce him to repent or else

Can do his bidding when her child is born.’'

He got apartments ready m his palace
That he might tend her as his soul and body,

And told his wife : “ I would not have a breath
Of air behold her.”

Then “ I have,” he thought,
Foes and to spare, and doubts for good or ill
Attach to every one, so I will take
Such order that no slanderer shall foul
My stream.”

He went his way and gelt himself,
Used cautery and drugs and bandages,

Then put his genitals in salt forthwith,

As swift as smoke enclosed them in a casket.

And sealed it up. With pallid face and groaning
He came before the lofty throne, laid down
The casket closed and sealed, and said : Now let
The Shah entrust this to his treasurer
With an inscription thereupon to state
The matters appertaining and the date ”


§ 3

Mow STidpUrtoas horn to Ardf^htr hij tlie Daughter of Ar da irdn^
and how after seoen Years Ardshir heard of his Son arul
acLnovdedged him

Now, when the time of birth drew near, the archmage
Told not the secret e’en to the air. The daughter
Of Ardawan brought forth a son — one ardent
And with the royal mien. The minister


262


THE SHAhnImA of FIRDAUSI


Excluded all folk, named the babe Shapur/

And hid him seven years till he became
A king in looks, in mien, and Grace. It chanced
One day that the wazir drew near, perceived
Tears on Ardshi'r’s face, and addressed him thus : —

0 Shah ! successful art thou yet thy soul
Is fed on care * In this world thou hast gained
Thy full desire and cast thy fooman’s head
Down from the throne. Now is the time for mirth
And quaffing wine, not for solicitude.

C. 1395 Earth’s seven climes are’neath thy sway, and thmu
Are troops and state and policy.’'

He answered . —

0 holy archimage and confidant »

Our scimitar hath justified the age,

Grief, travail, and distress have passed away.

My years amount to fifty-one, my hairs
Once musk are camphor, and my roses gone
I ought to have a son before me now,

A joy of heart, a source of strength, a guide.

A sonless sire is like a sireless son,

And taken only to a stranger’s breast.

A foe succeedeth to my crown and wealth.

And all my gains are travail, pains, and dust.”

Then thought that shrewd old man • ’Tis time to
speak.”

He said : “ 0 Shah t who cherishest thy lieges,
Magnanimous, shrewd-hearted, and supreme ^

If thou wilt promise me to spare my life
I will remove my lord’s distress.”

" The Shah

Replied : 0 sage » why shouldst thou fear for that ?

Say what thou knowest and enlarge thereon.

For what is better than a wise man’s words ?”

He made reply : “ Pure and shrewd-hearted Shah !

^ /.tf. Shah’s son.


ARDSHIR pApAKJN 263

I gave a casket to tliy treasurer :

Now let the Shah vouchsafe to ask for it ”

The Shah said to his treasurer : He asketh
For that which ho consigned to thy safe keeping.

Restore it that we may examine it,

And haply cease to live a life of care.”

The treasurer produced and gave the casket
Back to the minister. The Shah inquired . —

“ What is there in it under lock and seal ? ”

He made reply : The blood of mine affliction,

And parts of shame dissevered by the roots
To me thou gavest Arda wan’s own daughter
Until thou shouldst require her corpse of me
I slew her not because she was with child,

And I feared God, but sacrificed my manhood,

When thou didst give that order, and cut off
My parts of shame that none might slander me,

Or plunge me into infamy. Thy son
Hath been in keeping of thy minister
Seven years. No other king hath son like him,

And his sole semblance is the moon in heaven.

In love I gave to him the name Shapiir,

And may his fortune jubilate the sky.

His mother too is with him, educating
The prince her son.”

The world’s king marvelled at him,

Began to muse upon that child, then said : —

“ 0 shrewd of heart and well advised ! much toil 0 . 1396

Hast thou endured ! I will not let it age
With thee. Select a hundred of his years,

Like him in face and stature, breast and limb,

And all in like garb, neither worse nor better.

Send them to play at polo on the ground.

And furnish balls. When those fair youths are there
My soul will yearn for love upon my child,

My heart will be a witness to the truth,


264 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

And make me know my son/*

At break of day

The minister arrived and brought the boys

In dress, in stature, and in mien so like

As not to be distinguished. Thou hadst said . —

‘ A holiday is toward in the park,

And prince Shapur is in the thick of it,’*

For when the youth began to play he boro
The ball off from the rest so that ArdshiT,

On coming to the ground, accompanied
By young and old, and looking at the boys,

Could from his bosom heave a deep, cold sigh,

Could point his son out to his minister,

And say : “ Behold a young ArdshiT is yonder 1
The counsellor replied • ' 0 Shah i thy heart
Hath testified to thine owm son, but wait
Till yon fair children drive the ball anear thee/*

Then Shah ArdshiT bade an attendant . “ Go,

And drive the ball from them that I may see
Which boy will come forth bravely midst the brave,

As though a lion, and bear off the ball
Before my very eyes, regarding none
Of all this company, for such will bo.

Past doubt, my very son in blood and body.

In limbs and race.”

The servant did his bidding,

And drove the ball before the cavaliers.

The boys as swift as arrows followed it,

But, when they neared ArdshiT, came to a stand,

Albeit unwillingly. Shapur alone,

That Lion, still came on, seized, and bore off
The ball before his sire, and then, withdrawing,
Kestored it to the boys. The Shah*s heart joyed,

As when an old man groweth young again.

The horsemen raised the young prince from the ground,
And passed him on from hand to hand until


ARDSHIR pApAKJN


265


The king of kings could clasp him to the breast,

And bless the Judge of all. He kissed Sluipur

On head and face and eyes, and said : “ Such wonders

Should not be hidden. I ne’er dreamed of this, C. 1397

For I presumed him slain just as God greatened

My kingship and increased my monuments

Within the world ’ Thou canst not shun His bidding

Though thou shouldst raise thy head above the sun.”

He called for gold and many precious stones
Out of his treasury. They poured them Forth
And sifted ^ musk and ambergris withal
Upon Shapur until his head was hidden
With gold, and none could see his face for jewels.

The Shah heaped gems too on his minister,

Set him upon a seat inlaid with gold.

And gave him wealth enough to furnish all

His house and halls. The Shah then bade the daughter

Of Ardawan to go in peace and joy

Back to the palace, pardoned all her fault,

And cleansed his Moon of rust. He had all men
Of parts within the city brought to teach
The boy to write the ancient tongue, to wear
The mien of royal haughtiness, to wheel
His steed in battle, and thus mounted show
His spear-point to the enemy, to quaff,

Give largess, entertain at feasts, array
The host, and all the toil and work of war.

He had a new die struck for all the coinage
Both gold and silver, large and small alike ,

On one side was his own name, on the other
That of his great wazir — one held in honour
As an experienced man and counsellor.

Both names appeared on documents. The Shah
Gave him the ring, the signet, and the rule,

Bestowed a treasure on the poor that lived

1 Beading witli T.


266


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


By labour, cliose a site where brambles grew,
And made thereof a jocund seat, its name
Jund-i-Shapiir, thus only known to fame.


§ 4

Ho/n Ardf^hir, to find out the Future of his Reign, mif
to Kairl of Htrul, and KaifVs Rqdg

Shapur grew cypress-tall and, since they feared
The evil eye, was ever with Ardshir,

Attending like wazir and minister.

The Shah had not a day’s repose from warfare,

Or leisure to disport himself, for when
0. 139S He had relieved a place of enemies

They rose elsewhere. He said • '' I pray the Maker,
Both publicly and privily, that I
May hold earth free frofn foes and then become
A devotee.”

His glorious minister

Eeplied 0 Shah, whose heart is bright, whose words
Are true ! dispatch we an ambassador
To Kaid of Hind who is a man of knowledge,

And good at need, can estimate high heaven,

And tell the door of joy, the road to ruin.

He will divine, accounting it no toil,

Nor asking guerdon for his answering.

If thou without a rival wilt possess
The seven climes.”

On hearing this the Shah
Chose him a high-born youth of ready wit
To go as envoy to the sage of Hind,

With many steeds, with gold, and silk of Clirn,

And said to him : Go to the sage and say : —

‘ 0 man of fortune and of truthful speech t


ARDSHIR PAPAKAN 267

Find from the stars when I shall rest from war,

And win me full possession of the realm,

For if I must be evermore in toil
I will not be so lavish of my treasure/ ''

The envoy came to Kaid with gifts and largess,

And gave the message of the king of kings,

Explaining all. Kaid greeted him, grew grave,

Turned to his arts, brought forth his astrolabe,

Observed the stars, and placed upon his lap

An Indian planisphere to ascertain

High heaven’s purpose touching peace, success.

Woe, and mishap, and then informed the envoy: —

'' I have discerned the fortunes of Iran,

And# of the Shah. If he will blend with his
The offspring of Mihrak, son of Nushzad,

The Shah will sit in peace upon his throne,

And need not send his armies anywhither,

His wealth will wax, his travail wane. Depart.

Weigh not these two realms’ feud.^ Iran will prove
Conformable when this hath been achieved,

And he will compass all his heart’s desire.”

He gave the envoy gifts, and said ‘‘ My sayings
Must not be hidden. If he shall obey,

High heaven will give him cause to prize my
words.”

The envoy went back to the Shah and told
What he had heard from noble Kaid, whereat
Ardshir was vexed, his visage grew like gall.

He answered : “ God forbid that I should see

Descendants from Mihrak and bring my foe

Out of the street inside my house to war ^399

Against my realm * Woe for my lavished treasure,

^ We must su^jpose that the troubles of the Shah arose fiom the fact
that two of the sons of Ardaw.in had taken refuge in Hind which,
either directly or indirectly, was assisting them and their adheients
in liin, P reads “ between these two families,” i.€, the rival dynasties
of Ardshir and Ardawdn.


268


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Mine expeditions sent, and labours borne !

Mihrak hath but one daughter loft, and none
Hath seen her. I will bid men searcli for her
In Eiim, in Hind m Chin, and in Taraz,

And when I find her I will have her burned,

And make the dust lament for her with tears.”

He sent one skilful in pursuit of foes,

And horsemen also, to Jahram. Now when
The daughter of Mihrak heard this she fled,

And lay concealed within a house ton months.

While she was hidden with a village-chieftain,

Who hold her in high honour, she grew up

Like some straight cypress and increased in wisdom,

In Grace, and beauty ; not a peer had she ,

The realm had not so tall a cypress-tree.


§ S


The Adoenture of JShdpdr with the Daiujhter of Mihnil,
and his taking her to Wife


Within a little while the monarclTs fortune
Grew bright. He Avent to hunt at dawn one day
With Avise Shapur. The horsemen ranged around,
And cleared the plain of game. A spacious seat
Appeared afar Avith garth, park, hall, and palace.
Shapiir rode on until he reached the village,

And halted at the mansion of the chief.

There Avas a pleasant garth inside the A\ralls,

A verdant spot, and Avhen the youth went in
He saAv a maiden like the moon, Avho plied
A Avheel and bucket at a Avell. Noav Avhen
She saAV Shapur she came and shoAvered blessings : —
Be happy, smiles and joy be thine, and all
Thy years unscathed ! Thy courser is athirst,


ARDSHIR PAPA K An

No doubt, and all the water in the village
Is brackish, but in this well cold and sweet.

With thy permission I will water him.”

Shapur replied : '' What words are these,

maid •

I have attendants , they shall draw the water.”

The maiden turned her back upon the youth ;

She went apart and sat beside a stream.

He bade a servant : ' Bring a bowl and draw.”

The attendant heard and ran, rope, wheel,
bucket

Were there, but when the bucket sank and filled
It rose not though he strove with knitted brows, •

So heavy was it. Chidingly Shapiir
Came up, and said to him : “ Why, thou half woman t
Did not a woman work rope, wheel, and bucket ?

She pumpeth what she will but thou art pumped.

And askest help ’ ”

He took the rope himself,

But found the work severe. Discovering
The bucket’s weight he praised that fair-cheeked
maid,

And said ; Good sooth, she is of royal race
To raise a bucket of such weight as this » ”

When he had drawn the bucket up the damsel
Came and saluted him most graciously,

And said : “ Live happily while time endureth.

May wisdom ever be thy monitor.

The virtue of Shapiir, son of Ardshfr,

Could doubtless turn the water in the well
To milkt”

He said to that sweet-spoken maid : —
How know’st thou, moon-face i that I am Shapur ? ”
She answered him : “ Full often have I heard
This saying from the lips of truthful men : —

* The brave Shapiir is like an elephant


269


fair


and

C 1400


270 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

In strength, as bounteous as the river Nile,

In height a cypress, with a frame of brass.

And like Baliinan in all/

He said : ‘‘ 0 moon-face 1
Tell truly what I ask. Declare thy stock.

Because thy mien is royal.”

She replied : —

“ The daughter of the village-chieftain I,

From whom I get my comeliness and strength.”

“ Lies never pass with princes,” he rejoined,

‘‘ A tiller of the soil would not possess
A moon-faced daughter, fair, all scent and hue.”

“ 0 prince,” she said, ‘'when life is guaranteed me,

I will inform thee fully of my birth.

Safe from the anger of the king of kings.”

He said : “ Revenge on friends is not a plant
That groweth in our garden, so say on,

And fear not me or our just, noble Shah.”

“ The very truth is that I am,” she said,

“ The daughter of Mihrak, son of Nuslizad.

A pious person brought me as a child,

And gave mo to this worthy village-chief ;

So now, for fear of the illustrious Shah,

I draw the water and do other chars.”

Shapur took up his lodging there and, when
The village-chief was waiting on him, said : —

0. 1401 “Give me, with Heaven as witness, this fair maid.”

The village- chief accorded his desire
With all the rites of those that worship Fire,

^ Fiom whom, according to one of the two genealogies in the
Shi'ihnama, the House of Sasan was descended. See p. 199.


ARDSHIR pApAKAN


271


§ 6

Ho 10 Urmu,ul u.as horn to SJirqydr hy the Daughter
of Mihrdk

It came to pass that soon that straight -stemmed
Cypress,

Like blossom, came to fruit. Shapur conveyed her
To his own palace from the chieftain's house.

And cherished her like some ripe quince.^ Now when
Nine months had passed that Moon-face bare a son,

The image of his sire. Thou wouldst have said : —

“ Asfandiyar hath come again or famed
Ardshir, the cavalier.” ^ The prince, his sire,

Named him Urmuzd, for he was like a cypress
Midst herbs, and after seven years possessed
No equal in the world. His parents hid him,

And never let him go abroad to play.

Once when Ardshir went hunting for a week,

As did Shapdr withal, Urmuzd escaped
Unnoticed, weary of his tasks, and ran
Forth to the riding-ground of Shah Ardshir,

A lasso in one hand and in the other

Two shafts, with other boys with balls and sticks,

Just as the world-lord with his retinue.

And with his shrewd high priest, came from the chase.
When he was nigh the ground one of the youths
Smote strongly and awry so that the ball
Rolled near the Shah. None followed it, the boys
Stopped short, balked in their game, except Urmuzd
Who, rushing like a blast before the Shah,

Bare off the ball before his grandsire’s face,

* This sentence is inserted fiom P.

2 Piobably Shdh Bahman is meant Cf pievious note and Vol. v

p. 282 .


272 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Amid the soldiers' hue and cry, and shouted,

So that the conquering Shah was all amazement : —

“ The sticks, the riding-ground, and pluck arc mine,
And mme it is to battle with the brave 1 ”

Thus to the archmage said Ardshir : “ Inquire
About the lineage of this noble youth."

The archmage asked. None knew, or would not say.
Take up the youth and bring him,” said the king.

The archmage went and raised him from the dust,
Then bare him to the Shah of noble men,

Who said : ** Illustrious child ' what is thy stock ? ”

He answered in loud tones . “ My name and race
0. 1402 Should not be hidden : thy son’s son am I —

Shapiir’s — born from the daughter of Mihrak.”

The monarch of the world was in amaze
Thereat, smiled, mused, bade come Shapdr, and asked
Questions past count. Shapiir, that noble man,

Was terrified, his heart was sorrowful,

His cheek was wan. The great Shah smiled on him.
And said : “ Hide not thy child ; we need a son.

And wdiencesoe'er he cometh, it is well,

Since, so they say, he is a prince's child.”

Shapur replied . “ Be blest and with thy looks
Sustain the world 1 He cometh from my loins,

And he is named Urmuzd ; he shineth like
A tulip midst the grass. I have awhile
Concealed him from the king until the fruit-tree
Should bring forth fruit. The daughter of Mihrak
Bare this illustrious child, who is my child
Beyond all doubt.”

Then, while his father listened,

He told at large what happened at the well.

Ardslhr rejoiced to hear the tale and went
Back to the palace with his minister,

Embraced that darling child, then sought his throne.

He had a golden ante-throne prepared,


ARDSHIR pAPAKAn


^73


And bade bring torque and golden coronet
Wherewith they decked the young child's head, then
fetched

Both gold and jewels from the treasury,

And heaped them till the boy's head disappeared,
Whereat his grandsire drew him from the heap,
Bestowed the gold and jewels on the poor,

And still more splendid presents on the sages,

Decked with brocade the Fire-fanes and the hall
Wherein were held Nauriiz, and Sada-feast,^

Made ready with his lords a banquet-house.

Placed minstrels everywhere, and then addressed
The land's wise chieftains : Never should one slight
The sayings of a learned astrologer,

For thus said Kaid of Hind : ‘Ne'er will thy fortune,
Thy throne, thy realm, thy croTO, thy treasure, host,
Thy royal diadem, thy Grace, and state,

Be glad and jocund till the families
Of thee and of Mihrak, son of Ndslizad,

Shall be conjoined in blood.' For eight years now
The sky hath blessed our wishes. Ever since
Urmuzd was added to my peace the world
Hath granted what I would, earth's seven climes
All have been ordered, and my heart hath had
Its will of fortune,"

All his underlings

Gave him thenceforth the style of “ King of kings." 2


§ 7


Of the Wisdom of Ardshir and Ms Method of adminis-
tenng the Realm


Now hear and learn the wisdom of Ardshir, C. 1403

Who toiled, gave virtue vogue, and everywhere

1 See Vol. % pp. 74, 123. ® Cf, p. 254.

VOL. VI. S


274 THE SHAhnJMA OF FIRDAUSI

Spread love and justice. As his forces grew
At court he sent his agents to all parts
To say : Let none of you that hath a son
Allow him to grow up in ignorance,

But teach him horsemanship and how to fight
With mace and bow and shafts of poplar-wood.’'

A youth, when trained to strength and grown
efficient,

Would come up from his province to the court,

The Shah’s famed court, and then the muster-master
Would have him registered and give him quarters.
These young recruits, Avhen war broke out, went forth
Commanded by some paladin, some archmage
Among the officials anxious to excel,

One to each thousand youths. He went with them
To note their dispositions — cowardly.

Or too infirm for war — and to report
On all by letter to the king of kings.

Who when he had perused it and received
The messenger, would have a robe of honour
Of what was choicest in the treasury
Prepared for those that showed accomplishment ;

But non-efiectives carried arms no more.

Thus grew his troops so many that they passed
The purview of the stars, and men of counsel
Keceived promotion at his hands. A herald
Used to make circuit of the host, proclaiming : —

Ye men of name and warriors of the Shah !

Whoe’er hath sought for favour in his sight,

And washed earth with the blood of valiant men,

Shall have from me a royal gift and leave
His fame as his memorial.”

He ordered

The whole world with his troops, a shepherd he
With soldiers for his flock.


He kept a staff


ARDSHIR pIpAKJN


275


Of experts in liis public offices,

Committing naught to those incompetent.

They made a point of style and penmanship,

And when one showed superiority,

And when his principal reported it, 1404

The king of kings increased for him his pay.

The second-rate served not the Shah himself,

But gave assistance to his officers ,

He only kept the scribes that were adepts,

And, when he saw such, he would praise them, saying : —

A scribe that filleth up the treasury,

And by his talent lesseneth toil, availeth
State, host, and subjects pleading for redress.

The scribes are as the sinews of my soul,

And monarchs in disguise.'’

When governors

Went to their provinces he used to chj^ge them • —

‘ Hold money vile and sell no man for pelf,

Because this Hostel bideth not with any.

But seek for wisdom and all righteousness ;

Let greed and madness be afar from thee.

And take none of thy kith and kin , the troops
That I have given thee are friends enough.

Give largess monthly to the poor, but naught
To foes. If by thy j'ustice thou shalt make
Thy province prosper thou wilt prosper too
And j’oy in justice, but if any poor
Sleep there in fear thou sellest thine own soul
For gold and silver.”

All that came to court
On state affairs, or to require redress
Were met by trusty henchmen of the Shah,

And asked about the royal governors —

“ Are they just men or covetous ? Do any

Lie wronged by them ^ What learned men are there ^

Are any faint through want ? Would any be


276 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Of service to the Shah as being old
And veteran, or devout ? The king of kings
Saith : ' Let my toils and treasure gladden none
Except the men of wisdom and of lore,

For what is better than one wise and aged ^

I seek experienced men and youths approved,

And patient, for if youths are wise and apt
To learn they fittingly replace the old/ ”

As often as his host wont forth to war
He acted prudently and cautiously,

And chose some scribe — a wise, learned, heedful man — ■
And charged him with a courteous embassage
Lest there be unjust strife. The envoy used
To visit the Shah’s foe to learn his case,

And list to him if he were wise and held
War’s sorrows, toils, and ills calamities.

0. 1405 If so he would hfbve presents from the Shah,

With grant, with patent, and remembrances.

But if he had a wrathful head, a heart
Kevengeful, and blood boiling in his liver
The Shah would give the host a donative.

That no one might be malcontent, appoint
Some paladin aspiring, watchful, wise.

And placable, and therewithal a scribe —

A man of precedent and mastery —

To keep watch that the soldiers did no wrong ;

Then mounted on an elephant a man,

Whose voice could reach two miles, thus to proclaim : —
‘‘ Ye chieftains of the fray, brave, famed, and bold !

No harm must come on poor or rich and noble.

Pay for your provand at each stage and earn
My subjects’ thanks, and let God’s worshippers
Touch not another’s goods. Whoe’er shall show
The foe his back his outlook will be gloomy,

Because his grave will be at hand, or chains
Will gall his neck and breast, or else his name


ARDSHIR PAPA KAN 277

Will be struck off the roll, and he himself
Will feed on dust and on dark dust repose.’"

Then he would charge the captain of the host . —

Be neither slack nor rash to attack, keep always
The elephants in front and push out scouts
Four miles. Be instant, when a fight is toward,

To go among the troops, bid them remember
Both who and what they are, why in the field : —

“ They are a hundred horsemen to our one
And yet their hundred to our one are few ’

For every one of you, both 5^oung and old
I shall receive a present from Ardshir.’

When cavaliers advance upon both sides
Let not thy warriors, in their eagerness
To fight, press on till they expose the centre,

However large the host. Dispose thy left
Against the foe’s right wing that all may have
A chance of fighting and array thy right
Against his left. Let all look to their baggage.

The centre must stand fast, let no one there
Advance a foot , but if the opposing centre
Advance, advance thine own. When thou hast
triumphed

Forbear to shed the blood of foes in flight,

While, if they ask for quarter, grant it them,

And be not vengeful. When thou seest the foe
Retreat, haste not to quit thine own position,

Or deem thyself secure from ambuscade,

But, once thou art assured, see that thou heed not
Another’s words. Bestow the spoil on those
That sought the fray and bravely washed their hearts
Of love of life, and bring withal all captives
Without fail to my court. I will erect them
A city where a thorn-brake stood.^ As thou
Woiildst live unvexed and scathless turn in naught

^ Eeading with P


C. 1406


278 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

From these my counsellings, and in thy triumphs
Incline to God because He is past doubt
Thy guide.”

Whenever there arrived an envoy
From any part, Bum, Turkistan, or Persia,

The marchlords got to know it, for they held
Such things of moment , lodging was provided,

This was the business of the governors,

With provand, raiment, and no stint of carpets.

Upon the route. They would inform themselves
As to the envoy’s business with the Shah,

And then a scribe upon a noble beast
Would go to Shah Ardshfr that troops might meet
The envoy. Then the conquering Shah would have
His throne made ready and attendants ranked
On either side thereof in cloth of gold,

Would have the envoy summoned to the presence,
Seat him beside the throne, greet him, and learn
His business good or ill, name, and repute,^

His views of right and wrong, about his land,

About its customs, king, and armaments,

Conduct him to a palace with the state
That was befitting an ambassador,

And furnish what he needed, then invite him
To feast and revel, seat him by the throne,

Would take him out on royal hunting-days,

Escorted by a countless retinue.

Dismiss him with the forms due to an envoy,

And fashion him a monarch’s robe of honour.

He sent withal archmages to all parts —

Men wise and shrewd and kindly — to build cities,

And lavish wealth thereon, that every man
Resourceless, homeless, and estranged from fortune,
Might have a living and a dwelling-place,

And thus increase the number of his subjects

^ Reading with P.


ARDSHIR PAPA KAN


279


So his good name is current now as then
Upon the lips and in the thoughts of men,

And one sole monarch ’ in the world wc find
That now recalleth lost ArdshiT to mind,

And mine Tis living glory to bestow c 1407

Upon him.^ May his end all goodness know.

The Shah had many secrets, for he kept
His agents everywhere Whene’er the rich
Grew poor the Shah would help him, if informed,

And leave him prosperous with fertile lands.

Home, slaves, and underlings, arranging all
Without the city’s ken, and put his children,

If they had talent, in the charge ot tutors.

In every quarter of the towns were schools,

With colleges for worshippers of Fire
He suifered none to want save such as kept
The fact a secret, and his custom was
To go at daybreak to the public ground,

Where all that sought redress could come, and there
Judged subject and friend’s son impartially.

His justice made the whole world prosperous,

And all his subjects’ hearts rejoiced in him.

When any king to justice is allied.

In time’s despite his footprints will abide.

Observe the policy of this brave chief,

Who, thou wouldst say, engrossed all excellence.

His agents, wise and watchful officers,

Went through the world. Where any land lay waste.

Or streams ran low, he took the taxes off,

No holding was too mean for his regard.

If any thane was poor, and losing all,

The Shah supplied both implements and cattle
And let him not be ousted from his home.

Now hear, 0 king » the sayings of this sage
And make the world as bright as in his age ,

3 Beading with P.


1 Mahmiid.


2S0


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


As thou untroubled and unvexed wouldst be,

And pile up wealth not gained injuriously,

Seek that thy subjects may be unvexed too,

And have from all the praises justly due.

In Eiim and Chin, in Turkistan and Hind,

The world grew as ’twore Euman silk to him,

Both toll and tax came in continually

From all lands, none opposing him. Ho summoned

The nobles of Iran and set those worthy

Upon the royal throne, then rose and made

Oration to them well and graciously —

“0 chieftains of the state, ye that are wise
And prudent ! know that swiftly turning heaven
Assaileth not through justice nor embraceth
C. 1408 Through love, but setteth whom it will on high,

And then consigneth him to sorry dust ,

His name alone surviveth, all his toils
Go with him to oblivion , one whose aims
Are good may leave a good name, naught besides.
Xow as for thee, Urmuzd • thy lot will be
As holy God approveth. Turn and open
Thyself to Him who is the Lord of all,

And multiplieth good. From every ill
Take shelter with the Euler of the world,

For ill and good are in His power, and He
Will make all hardship easy to thee, give
A bright heart to thee, and victorious fortune.

Judge first by mine experience and perpend
Mine own past good and evil while still fresh.

When I took refuge with the Lord of all
My heart was gladdened by the crown and throne.

I rule the seven climes for so seemed good
To His authority. From Eum and Hind
I take a tribute, and the world hath grown
Like Eiiman silk to me. Thanks be to God,

Who gave me strength, exalted star, and favour


ARDSHIR PAPA KAN


381


From Sol and Saturn ; yet who knowoth how
To praise Him worthily or give Him worship
Proportioned to His work so that He may
Be mindful of my service and set forth
His greatness and omnipotence ^ And now
AVhat from our sense of justice — our delight —

We purpose we will tell. Although one tenth
From all communities is due to me,

As thane and archimage will testify,

I ask it not, I give it back to you —

The tithe on land and impost on the Hocks —

Except the tithe on increase which the agent
Will pay into our treasury.^ The tithe,

That erst I took, and impost less or more,

I have employed on useful works and kept
A countless host at court. I sought your good,

Your safety, and the abatement of the Faith
Of Ahriman. Clasp, all ? your hands to God,

Be diligent and break not His behest,

Who is the Lord and Giver of all things.

The Artist of the sky above, the Helper
Of the oppressed ; but glory not o'er others
By reason of His favour, nor thereby
Deceive thy heart, for pride will have a fall.

Where are the men whose crowns erst frayed the
clouds ^

Where those whose quarry was the mighty lion ?

They, all of them, are couched on dust and brick,

And he is blest that sowed but seed of good.

List, all of you that are within my realm i

To these my final counsels. Now will I

Point out -to you five courses that will profit C. 1409

Far more than throne and treasury, so list,

Ye young and old ! the words of famed Ardshfr.

1 “ espdrant que vos chefs apporteront dans mon tresor ce que vous
amez de superflu” (Mohl).


282 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The man who knoweth that the J ust One is
Will worship holy God and Him alone.

Again, misprize not knowledge, whether thou
Be liege or lord, and, thirdly, be assured
That wise men ne’er forget, and, fourthly, know
That fear of doing wrong availeth more
Than gibbet, bonds, and dungeon. Fifthly, none
Approveth of a slanderer’s words To these
I add one counsel more, a counsel bettor
Than eyes and life and goods : blest is the man
That maketh this w^orld prosper, is the same
In public and in private, and moreover
Soft-spoken, modest, wise, and cordial.

Spend not thy money for the sake of show,

Or waste it foolishly on vanities,

Else there will be no profit, none will praise,

Nor holy men approve, but choose the mean.

Maintain it, and the wise will call thee prudent.

Again, there are five ways of making bright
Thy Faith and conduct, and of furthering
Thy comfort and thy joy, for in their honey
There is no bane to harm thee. First of all.

Seek not to pass by greed or pains the lot

Assigned to thee by God , the man content

Is rich, for each spring's blooms have borne him fruit.

Next, break the neck of greed, and tell no secret

Before the women. Thirdly, court not war

And strife, for they bring toil and anguish. Fourthly,

Seclude thy heart from grief and be not troubled

O’er ills not come, and, fifthly, meddle not

With things irrelevant, for know that they

Are not thy quarry. Hear ye all J my counsel.

My profitable speech ; Twill be right dear
To all men’s hearts, for they will get thereby
Security from loss. Pause not from learning
If thou wouldst fire thy mind. If thou hast children


'ARDSHIR PAP A KAN


283


Have them instructed and cut short their play.

Heed, all ! my words and pains on your beliah*.

Let all the just and shrewd of heart break not
Their mutual intercourse, and compass ye
Heart’s peace in four ways good and profitable :

First, fear, respect, and reverence holy God
That He may be thy Helper and thy Guide ,

Next, rule thyself and look to thine own skirt.

Take God’s commands to heart and tender them
Like thine own body ; thirdly, make the right
Plain and ban fraud and falsehood, fourthly, swerve
not

In thought or action from the Shah’s behest,

But love him like thyself so that thy face
May clear at his command. Confine thy heart
To loyalty to him, let not thy soul
Swerve from his bidding, love him as thy life.
Perceiving that his justice guardeth thee.

The cares of royalty are with the Shah,

He seeketh the world’s gain and not its loss.

If, knowing that his marchlords and his troops
Afflict his realm, he interveneth not
He is no world-lord, and the crown of kingship
Befitteth him not , he hath blacked out his patent
As king of kings, his Grace is gone.i Know this :

An unjust monarch is a ravening lion
Upon the pasture-land , so is the subject
That heedeth not with diligence and pains
The Shah’s command ; his life will be all grief
And toil, and never will he reach old age
Within this Hostelry. If thou hast need
Of goodness and of greatness thou wilt win them
Not by thine avarice and arrogance.

May all my subjects’ hearts be glad, and may
The world too prosper ’neath my righteous sway.”

1 Cy. 1), 208 and note.


I. 1410


"412


204


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSt


§ 8

Ho/r Kliarmd praUed Ardsh'tr

Wlien Shah Ardshir resumed his seat, an elder,

By name Kharrad, one just in word and thought,
Adyanced before the throne, thus saying : 0 king ^

Be blest while time endureth, ever glad,
xind of victorious fortune. May realm, crown,

And throne rejoice in thee. Thou hast attained
To such an eminence that bird and boast
- lank at thy throne, before it and behind,
k'-xalted over all that wear the crown
£ rt thou — the greatest man in all the world.

can describe thy justice ? Thou art based
Efo Qstice and on greatness More and more
No: offer up our praise and thanks to God
Mai we live in thy days and are thy lieges
Aga 1 things, eager to behold thy face.

Thy yearning for thy gracious words and love.

Thy G thou be safe as we are safe through thee.
Theme’ er may we break fealty. Thou hast barred
Seels and to our peers the foe’s approach
Assq Hmd and Chin, and rapine, war, and tumult
Is - e passed away ; the shouts of enemies
Ne cli not our cars. Remain for ever happy,
let archmages bear the toils of state.

^0 king is wise as thou, no thought transcendeth
-Tiy counsel, and thou so hast founded justice
vVithin Iran that it will glad our sons.

Thy words have grown so potent that thy counsels
Make old men young, and all the nobles here
Joy in thee and thy justice. Thou increasest
The stock of wisdom by thy deeds, the world
Hath been illumed by sight of thee. Thou art
A robe of honour God-bestowed on fortune.


ARDSHIR pApAKAn


285


On girdle, crown, and throne. Still may the Shiih
Continue loved and just , the world hath not
A king like thee in mind. The world is safe
By reason of thy might and Grace, and blest
Are they beneath the shadow of thy wings.

For ever be thy seat upon the throne,

The world beneath thy word and will alone.”


§ 9

071 the Faithlessness of Fortune

Thou, who the marrow of the tale wouldst win !

Divorce thy heart from this old Wayside Inn,

Which hath seen many like to thee and me
But with none resteth ; whatsoe’er thou be —

King or attendant — it will outstay thee.

For be thou drudge, or lord of crown and throne,

Thou hast to pack thy baggage and be gone.

The sky will melt thee, though of iron mould,

And favour thee no more when thou art old ,

So when the charming Cypress bendeth low,

And when the dark Narcissi overflow,

When cheeks of cercis take a saffron hue,

And he is grave anon that erst was gay.

Then, since souls slumber not as bodies do,

Bide not alone, thy mates are on their way.

Be thou a monarch or of subject birth

Thou It have no dwelling-place save darksome earth.

Where are the chieftains with their crowns and thrones,

The cavaliers of fortune ever bright ?

Where are the sages and the warlike ones, 0. 1412

The princes and the leaders in the fight ?

On pillows made of bricks and dust they rest,

And he that sowed but seed of good is blest.

A great exemplary is king Ardshir,

So bear in mind my tale when thou shalt hear.


286


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


§ lO

How ArthMr charged Shupdr and died

Aged eight and seventy years ^ the watchful world-lord
Grew sick , he knew that death was drawing nigh,

That his green leaf would wither, so he summoned
Shapiir, addressed him counsel past compute,

And said : Be mindful of my charge, but hold
The words of evil speakers merely wind.

When thou hast heard my sayings practise them,
Discerning haply worth from worthlessness.

I with the scimitar of justice righted
The world and honoured men of noble birth.

That done, the earth waxed but mine own life waned
When I had toiled and sweated much, and treasures
Had multiplied to me. So now I leave
The travail and the pleasure all to thee.

We are in turn exalted and abased,

Such is the process of the circling sky,

Which whiles afllictoth, whiles affecteth, us i
Now fortune is a vicious steed, and scath
Will wreck thee in prosperity, anon
A horse well trained whose neck is arched for theo
In ail good will. Know, son ! that this false Hostel
Hath terrors even for the happy man.

Bo heedful of thine own and wisdom’s case

If thou wouldst ’scape ill days. When monarchs honour

The Faith then it and royalty are brothers,

For they are mingled so that thou wouldst say . —

‘ They wear one cloak.’ The Faith endureth not
Without the throne nor can the kingship stand
Without the Faith; two pieces of brocade
Are they all interwoven and set up


^ Cf, p. 254.


ARDSHIR PAPA KAN


287


Before the wise. The Faith doth need the Shah,

The Shah, were Faith to seek, would not be praised.

Each needeth other, and we see the pair
Uniting in beneficence. The man
Of Faith will carry ofi:*both worlds when he
Shall prove a lord of counsel and of wisdom.

Whenas the great king watcheth o’er the Faith, c 1413

Call it and kingship brothers . when he vexeth
The pious, call him impious. Disallow
In Faith the slanderer of pious kings.

What said the man approved and eloquent ^

' The Faith, if thou considerest, is the brain
Of Justice.’^

Three things vex the royal throne :

The first one is the unjust sovereign,

The second, the exalter of the worthless

Above the worthy, and the third is he

That weddeth treasure and is instant still

For more. Be thine aim bounty, Faith, and wisdom,

And let no lie pass current for it darkeneth
A man^s face , ne’er will he be great and famous.

See that thou heed not treasure, for dinars
Involve mankind in toil. If greed of treasure
Possess the great king he will vex his subjects,

For where the thane’s wealth is there is the Shah’s
Who, whatsoe’er the toil and pain may be,

Should guard it for him and should bring to fruit
His travail’s bough. Strive to put wrath away.

And boldly blink the faults of other men.

If thou art wroth thou wilt repent withal.

So, when they make excuse, seek how to salve them.

Whene’er the Shah is wroth the good misprize him,

And since he is to blame in seeking ill
He should adorn his heart with good. If once
Thou sufierest fear to come within thy heart
i qf . p. 250.


288 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The counsels of thy foes’ hearts will prevail.

Bo boundless too in bounty , if thou canst,

My son i esteem not wealth. He should be king
The limit of whose bounty is the sky.

Whenever trouble is a monarch’s lot
Let him hold counsel with his archimages,

Let him inquire too of the right and wrong
Thereof, and lay the matter up at heart.

On days when thou art purposing to hunt,

And use the binding hawk, mix not thy pleasures,
As wine and feast with open air and chase ,

Wine maketh heavy as all leaders know.

Abandon such pursuits when foes appear,

Spend money freely, edge the swords, and summon
The troops of all the realm. Defer not thou
The day’s work to the morrow and seat not
An evil counsellor beside the throne.

0. 1414 Search not the hearts of common folk for truth,

For from such questing loss will come to thee.

And if they bring ill tidings hearken not.

Nor grieve ; they worship neither God nor king.
And clutching at their feet thou hast their heads.
Such are the common people, but mayst thou
Be ever wise. Fear those that compass ill
In secret, for this straiteneth the world.

Tell naught to confidants for they have theirs,

And thou wilt meet thy sayings in the fosse,

Or find them spread abroad, and when thy secrets
Are common talk the sages will lose patience.

Thou wilt be wroth, the sage that calmeth thee
Will call thee light of head Seek not for faults
In others, that will manifest thine own,

While if thy wisdom be o’er swayed by passion
The sage will count thee not a man at all.

The Shah and worldlord should be wise that he
May be benevolent to every one.


ARDSHIR PAPAKAN 289

If any man is rash, and insolent,

Prone to accuse and to calumniate,^

Let such have no place near to thee although
One of thy counsellors. When thou art Shah
Lay down revenge and wrath if thou wouldst have
The praises of the pious. He that sitteth
Upon the throne of state should be a wise,

God-fearing man. Be not a chatterer,

Nor make a show of sanctimoniousness

In others’ eyes. Hear what men say, lay up

The best, and note what pleaseth thee , weigh well

Thy words to sages, being complaisant

And bright to all , scorn not the poor that beg ,

Seat not an adversary on a throne ;

Forgive the penitent, requiring not
Revenge for what is passed ; be just to all,

And cherish all , the bounteous, patient man
Is blest. What time the foe doth flatter thee
Through fear, array the host, bind on the tymbals,

And go forth to the fight while he is shrinking,

And weak of hand ; but if he seeketh peace
And right, and harboureth, as thou perceivest,

No mischief in his heart, take tribute from him,

Seek not revenge, and save his face. Adorn
Thy heart with knowledge , that hath worth ; that
know

And practise. Thou wilt be beloved if bounteous,

And famed if wise and just. Keep thy sire's charge 1415
In mind and leave a like one to thy son.

As I have given my son his heritage,

And injure none thereby, do ye transmit it ,

Take not the spirit of my words amiss.

Now when five hundred years have passed away,

Thy dynasty will end, for thy descendants,

And others of thy kin, will turn aside

^ Reading with P.

VOL. VI. ' 1 ’


290


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


From this my charge, depart from rede and knowledge
Not heeding the monitions of the wise,

But, faithlessly neglectful of my charge,

Be unjust, harsh, and tyrannous, oppress

Their subjects, scorn the pious, don the robe

Of wickedness, and grow up in the Faith

Of Ahriinan. Then will be loosed what we

Have bound, this Faith that we have fulled be fouled.

This rede and charge of mine will come to naught.

My country seem all desolate. I pray
The Maker of the world, who knoweth both
The hidden and the manifest, to guard you
From every evil and that all your deeds
May win fair fame God's blessing and our own
Shall be upon the man whose warp is wisdom,

Whose woof is justice, who in these regards
Attempteth not to break my charge or strive th
To turn my honey into colocynth.

Two score years and two months have passed since I
Assumed the crown of kingship. I possess
Six cities, all in pleasurable climes,

And all of them well-watered. [ have named
One Khurra-i-Ardshir , ^ its airs are all
Musk-perfumed and its streams run milk , the second
Is titled Earn Ardshir ; ^ thence reached I Pars ;

The third Urmuzd Ardshir,® whose airs would make
An old man young — the lustre of the province
Of Khiizistan , ^ it hath folk, trade, and water.

Another one is Birka-i- Ardshir, ^

Well stocked with gardens, pools, and rosaries,

And two are in the district of Baghdad
And the Farat, and rich in cattle, springs,

And grass — foundations both, as thou mayst say,

^ The G-lory of Ardbhii. ^ See j). 202,

^ Of, p. 302, note, ^ Reading with P and T.

The Cistern of Ardbhii.


ARDSHIR pAPAKJN


291


Of Shah Ardshh’J Bear them in mind when thou
Hear’st aught concerning me.

T have prepared

My baggage for the charnel-house. Bestow
My bier and take my seat. In this world I
Have borne great toils in public and in private.

Rejoice my soul with justice and be glad,

And conquering, on the throne.”

He spake, and fortune

Grew dark. Woe for his head and throne and crown !

The fashion of this jocund world is thus .

It will not make its secrets known to us.

Blest is the man who greatness ne’er hath known,

And hath no need to vanish from the throne.

Thou strivest, winning wealth in every way,

But man and wealth abide not in one stay ;

Dust in the end is wedded to us all,

Our cheeks must be enshrouded by a pall.

Come bear we all a hand good to fulfil,

And tread not this unstable world for ill.

Oh well is he that taketh cups of wine
To toast the Shahs — those men of Faith divine —

For, as his cup of wine is slowly drained,

He droppeth off with ecstasy attained.

§ II

Tlianlisgiving to the Maker and Praise of Mahmiid^
the great King

To Him who made it let all praise ascend ,

The Maker of space, time, and earth is He ,

From Him are the beginning and the end.

From Him are passion and tranquillity :

1 These may be Bih-Aidshlr built to lejilace Seleucia, destroyed by
Avidms Cassius in A.D 164, and Kaiakh-Maish^n on the lowei Tigiis,
They are given in Tabari’s list of Aidshii’s foundations. NT, p 19


THE SEAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


He made the starry heavens, earth, and time
The great and little of the world are His,
From worthless stubble to the throne sublime
All things bear witness to us that He is.


Call none but Him the Author of the whole,

Whoso ken naught open or concealed can shun,

Who showered blessings on Muhammad’s soul,

And on his comrades also, every one.

They all were holy men and continent ,

None can compute the words which erst they said :

Now by us too let countless words be spent
In thanking Him by whom the world was made.

Praise we the crown too of the king of kings,

Whose throne doth cause the moon itself to shine,

World-lord Mahmhd, the source whence largessings
And bounties spring, and who hath Grace divine.

Brave, bounteous, dowered with Grace, and just is he.
The age hath grown all joyful ’neath his sway —

The lord of peace, of crown, and treasury,

The lord of scimitar, of ax, and fray.

Our gracious world-lord, conscious what is meant
By merit, thanketh God through whom his hold

Is on the crown. Wise, fair, and eloquent
Is he, in years a youth, in wisdom old.

His Grace compelleth rain from Jupiter,

We sport beneath the shadow of his wings,

In fight he maketh heaven his echoer,

He scattereth jewels at his banquetings.


ARDSHIR PAPAKJN


293


When he is wroth the mountains melt away,

The welkin qiiaketh o’er the dust below ;

His sires were Shahs and monarchs ere his day,

And sun and moon toy with him as they go.

May his renown last ever, may he see c, 1417

Till his last day increasing happiness.

I head my story with his eulogy,

His majesty, his conduct, and address.

Throughout the world I witness his renown ,

Until the end may good attend him still;

His mien hath given lustre to the crown,

And fortune been his breastplate ’gainst all ill.

Throughout the world all men of Faith divine,

And all the kings, rejoice in him alone,

Whose glorious fortune maketh heaven to shine,

For earth but baseth his illustrious throne.

He is a mighty Elephant of bale
In fight and at the feast a faithful sky,i

For there, since his bright projects never fail,

Each billow of his ocean runneth high.

Earth’s monarchs are his quarry in the chace.

Wild beasts and cattle in his peace abide,

In battle-days the whizzing of his mace
Dissundereth lion’s heart and leopard’s hide.

May his head flourish, justice fill his heart,

And with the world his head and crown ne’er part.

^ A sky that fulfils its promise of lam.


XXIII


shApiIr, son of ardshi'r

HE REIGNED THIRTY YEARS AND TWO
MONTHS

ARGUMEN'r

Slidpur tiscends the throne and addresses the chiefs. He wars
with success against Rum, appoints Uiinuzd his successor, and
dies.


NOTE


This reign atiords a good illustiation of the inaccurate way in
which events are recorded even m the most historical of the four
dynasties of the Sh/ihnama. Sh<'ipiir, son of AidshiT (Sapor 1 .,
A D 241-272), IS confused with Shapiir, son of Urmuzd (Sapor
II., A.D. 309-379). Important historical events are transferred
from the formei^s reign to the latter’s where, to save repetition,
they will be dealt with Again, Shapiir son of Ardshir’s two wars
with Rome, which historically are paited by a considerable
interval of time, are rolled into one. The first wai ended in a.d.
244, and the second did not begin till some fourteen or more years
later. The latter is the one chielly commemorated in the
Shahnama. In the course of it the Roman Emperor Talorian, the
Bazdmish of Firdausi, was defeated and taken prisoner m Mesopo-
tamia owing to the tieachery of Maciianus, Ins Prietonan prefect,
and died in captivity. Shapiir then made a raid into Oihcia and
Cappadocia— names which appear as Kaidafa and P/dawina in the
poem.i Subsequently he withdrew his forces, and during his
retreat was handled very roughly by Odenathus, piince of
Palmyra, who later on made himself master of Mesopotamia and
ruled from the Tigris to the Mediterranean till his assassination
in A.D. 267* A trace of Shiipiir’s mishap seems to survive, but


1 NT, p. 32, and note,

294


SHAPUR son of ARDSHIR 29S

the tale is told in connexion with Shdpiir, son of Urmuzd. The
triumph over Valerian was commemorated in many memorials hy
his conqueror.^ The name of the city built for the Roman captives
was Gund-i-Shapiir, probably the Shapiir Gird of Firdausi as both
cities are described as being in Susiana It was between Susa
and Shiishtar, and its situation is indicated by the nuns of
Shahiibcld ^ The great dam in connexion with the river Kanin is
still in existence. It is very likely that Shapiir’s Roman piisoners
helped to make it. It is known as the Band-i-Kaisar.”


§ I

How STid])ur sat u}jon the Throne and delivered a Charge
to the Chieftains

To tell the kingship of Shapur be thine,

And hold discourse on festival and wine.

Whenas Shapiir sat on the throne of justice,

And donned the heart-illuming crown, the sages,

Wise magnates, and archmages, met before him.

He thus harangued the noble gathering —

The great and understanding counsellors : —

I am the lawful son of Shah Ardshir,

The utterer and layer up of knowledge.

Heed, all of you ^ my bidding and be loyal,

Scan what I say and blame it if ’tis crude.

In mine experience as to good and ill
Two dispensations are conspicuous.

One is the Shah, the warden of the world,

And guardian of the wealth of high and low.

If he is just and fortunate ’tis clear
That wisdom watcheth over, helpeth, him.

And o’er the dark clouds will exalt his head.

His whole quest is for justice, and for knowledge
That maketh music in his soul. The other
Is whosoever manfully essayeth
To compass wisdom and is wise in knowing

^ See the illustiatious in RSM, pp. 82, 91. ® NT, 41, note,

3 Of. Enoy, Brit,, nth ed„$,v, “ Shushter.”


0. 141S


296


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


That it is God to whom his thanks are due.

Blest is the sage that knoweth God , the wise
Is worthy of the kingship ; gold is worthless
In wisdom’s stead. The man that is content
Is well to do ; the avaricious heart
Is but a house of smoke. The more the greed
The more the care, so strive to shun its fruits.

Incline to peace and things of good re[)ort,

And flee the ill-disposed, for little wits
Will grasp at others’ goods I love you more
Than there are stars to glitter in the sky ,

The customs of the exalted Shah Ardshir
Assuredly will I confirm to you,

And take a thirtieth only from the thanes
To pay my soldiers somewhat. I have weal,

An ample treasure, courage, manliness,

And constancy. We covet no man’s goods,

For they turn friends to foes. The way is open
For you to us. We love the suppliant.

We will send agents everywhere, search shrewdly
The world’s affairs, and ne’er ask other ble^ssings
Than those which men invoke from God on me.”

Rose high and low, prepared their tongues to make
A fair reply, called praises down on him,

And scattered emeralds on his crown. The customs
Of Shah Ardshir revived withal, and then
Both young and old joyed in that regimen.


§ 2

How Bhd'pdr fought with the Rdmdm^ how Bazdnmh, thair
General, was talcen Prisoner, and hoio Ooesar made
Peace loith Shd^jdr

Then tidings spread : The throne of king of kings

Is occupied no more, wise Shah Ardshir

Hath died and left Shapxir the throne and crown.”


SHAPVR SON OF ARDSHIR


297


The battle-cry went up in all the coasts,

And hubbub from Kaidafa ^ unto Kiim.

When -news reached Shah Shapdr he made him ready
Troops, flags, and drums, and led toward Palawma
A flying column with no baggage-train.

An army that bedimmed the sun with dust

Marched from Kaidafa, and a host withal

From Palawma hieath a paladin

Hight Bazanush, a noble cavalier

Of ardent soul, a chief and lasso-thrower

Prized by the Ciosars. When from those two hosts

Rose tymbal-din came from the Ruman centre

An eager warrior, from the Iranian

A famous chieftain hight Garshasp the Lion ,

What man or lusty elephant could match
That valiant cavalier in battle-tide ^

These two engaged and strewed the stars with dust,
Used all their skill, but neither could prevail.

Then clashed the hosts together mountain-like ;

Rose their drum-roll and shoutings. Bold Shapdr
Bestirred him at the centre At the din
Of trump and Indian bell thou wouldst have said
That heaven shook , the earth rocked, and the air
Was full of dust, the war-spears gleamed like fire,

And all the men of wisdom called on God.

Amid the central host brave Bazanush,

All sorrowful of heart, was taken captive.

While of his Rumans were ten thousand slain
At Palawina in the ranks of war,

And twice eight hundred taken prisoners ,

Those warriors’ hearts were full of sore distress.

Then Csesar sent a well-instructed envoy
To ask Shapiir, the son of Shah Ardshir . —

How much blood wilt thou pour out for dinars ?
What wilt thou say to our just Judge and Guide

^ See p. 294.


C. 1419


298 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

When questioned at the Day of Reckoning ?

How make excuse to Him who giveth all ^

Add not to our distress for I will pay
The wonted tribute, will submit, dispatch
Abundant hostages of mine own kin,

And, if thou wilt withdraw from Palawfna,

Will send thee in addition what thou wilt.’’

Shapiir remained till Caesar sent to him
The tribute in ten ox-hides of dinars
Of Caesar’s coinage with much wealth besides —

A thousand male and female Ruman slaves,

And countless splendid pieces of brocade.

Shapur abode a week in Palawma,

Then leaving Riim he journeyed to Ahwaz,^

And there he built a city named Shapiir Gird :

He finished it upon the day of Ard.

0, 1420 It took a year besides much toil and treasure.

He built a city for the prisoners
From Riim and filled it with inhabitants ;

The district is the gate of Khiizistan,^

And in the great high-way whereby all pass.

He built himself a city too in Pars,

Great, fair, and wealthy, and the ancient fortress ^
Of Nishapiir, they say, without forced labour.

He carried Bazamish about with him,

And heeded him. Now there was at Shushtar
A stream so broad that fish could cross it not.

He said to Bazamish : If thou hast skill
Make over this a bridge as ’twerc a rope,

For we return to dust but it will bide
Firm through the science of its architect.

’Twill be a thousand cubits long ; request
Whate’er thou needest from my treasury.

Employ thou to some purpose in this land

^ Susiana. 2

® Mohl keeps Kuhandizh (old fort) as a proper name.


SHAPl^R SON OF ARDSHIR 299

The skill of Rum an engineers and, when
The bridge is finished, come and be my guest
For life in mirth and safety, and afar
From evil and the hand of Ahriman.”

Brave Bazamish began the work and built
The bridge in three years’ space, then left Shiishtar
And set his face to hurry to his home.

Shapur was just, in counsel well approved.

His star exalted and his throne unmoved.^


§ 3

Ho7o Shdpvr seated Unnuzd upon the Throne and died

AVhen thirty years and two months had gone by
The Grace and glory of the Shah were spent.

He called Urmuzd. The freshness of my face,”

He said, “ is sere , be vigilant, be world-lord,

And ever rule with justice, but be ware
Of putting trust in sovereignty , peruse
Both day and night the volume of Jamsln'd ,

Do only what is just and good; be thou
The lowly’s shelter and the mighty’s Grace ;

Toy little with dinars, be bounteous, just.

And glorious ; exclaim not at slight ills u. 1421

If thou wouldst have good fortune as thy friend,

And keep in mind my counsels, every whit,

As I myself possess them from Ardshlr,”

He spake, the colour paled upon his cheek.

The heart of that wise man grew full of anguish.

What can this Wayside Hostel do for thee ^

Wouldst hug renown ? Wouldst fill thy treasury ?

A narrow coffin will be all thy spoil.

Some worthless one will batten on thy toil,

^ In C, the reign ends here, but we have followed the anangement
of P, which seems pieferable.


300 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Thou wilt be clean forgotten by thy sons,

Thy nearest kinsfolk and companions,

The heritage wherein thoult have thy share
Is that of malediction, for where'er
Bezoar is the poison too is there.

Turn then to God and multiply His praise,
Who feedeth thee and guideth all thy ways.


XXIV

URMUZD, BON OF SHAPI^R

HE REIGNED ONE YEAR AND TWO MONTHS

ARGUMENT

Uimuzd, whoso reign proved to be a very brief one, succeeds his
father and harangues the nobles. Feeling the approach of death
he summons his son Bahrnm, appoints him successor, gives him
good counsel, and dies.


NOTE

The romantic story of Urmuzd’s (Hormisdas I , a.b. 272-273),
birth, ^ is all that survives in connexion with him, apart from
Firdausi’s common form m dealing with the short reigns,^ in the
Shahmlma. In the Karnumak he is represented as a great prince,
being confused probably with his father. It is likely that he
made a reputation for courage and energy m the wars against
Borne and as governor in Khuiasan At all events, according to
tradition, ho earned for himself the title of the hero It is told
of him that, being falsely accused of disloyalty, he cut off one of
his hands and sent it, wrapped in silk, to his father to prove his
innocence as no mutilated person could succeed to the throne.
His father, deeply distressed, arranged that mutilation should be
no bar in that instance.®


^ See p 268 ® Id. p. 249

3 NK, 68, and note, NT, 43, 45, and RM, Ft I., vol.

P- 335 *


%


301


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


302


§ I

Hoio Urmuid addressed the AssemUy

Now will I make the diadem and throne
Of Shah Urmuzd as brilliant as the moon
Upon the day whose name and his are oned
His reign had but one fault — it ended soon.
Whenas great Shah Urmuzd had ta’en his seat
The sheep and wolf alike came to his cistern.

He thus addressed the noble men of lore,

And chieftains veteran and experienced : —

‘‘ I shall pursue the just and right, for he
That keepeth in his mind his sire's advice
Is blest. Since God, the Giver of all good,

Hath given good to me, and therewithal
The crown that is upon the head of kings,

I would by kindness win you as my friends,

And share your secrets. Know that self-willed men
Are hated by the mighty ; led away
By their impatience they have ne’er enough,

For envy is the scimitar of fools,

And fortune ever mocketh them. Again,

Short will the life and provand be of one
Ashamed to work. Avoid the common folk
If so thou canst, their hearts are doors of greed.

Pass not in life his portal whom thou findest
Devoid of knowledge ; but the men of wisdom,

With prudence and good rede, confirm the throne.
May thy heart live by prudence and good sense ;

Do thou thine utmost to avoid all ill.

Knowledge and wisdom are like earth and water.
And should combine. What marvel if the heart


^ Uimuzd was the name of the fiist day of each solar month — a day
con&ideied paiticulaily propitious for beginning any undertaking —c.p.
a journey.


303


URMUZD SON OF SHAPUR

Of any king that putteth from liim love
Shall darken ? May my subjects all rejoice
And worship God, may He approve of them,

And wisdom aid them inly and without.

The sage, conversing with the devotee
About the Shah, should weigh his utterance,
Because good speech is never out of date ,

Speak but good words thyself and list to none
That speaketh ill, the great king’s heart wdll note
Thy secret, and his ear will hear thy voice,

For ^ Walls have ears/ as one that could both speak,
And listen, said.”

The whole assembly blessed
That Shah so shrewd of heart and pure of Faith,
And broke up glad in that o’ershadoAving Cypress.

That Avise Shah kept the precepts of Shapur,

The son of Sbah Ardshir, and all the Avorld
Rejoiced in him. Hoav good are kings Avhen just
And generous 1 He ruled Avith modesty
And justice till a Avhile had passed, and then
The place of musk Avith camphor Avas overspread,
And in the garth the Cercis-bloom lay dead.


§ 2


Holo Ur?nu::d tjaoe up the Throne to Bahrdm, rharged
him, and died


Urmuzd, Avhen Avare that death could not be shunned,
Wept many a tear of blood. He had a son,

Imperious, Avhom the wise Shah called Bahram.

He had the carpet laid Avithin his hall.

Bade, and Bahram appeared, to whom he said —

“ Mine own true son exalt in manliness

And knoAvledge ^ feebleness hath come upon me,

And made my face sclt-coloured with my hair.


304 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Bent is tlie straight-stemmed Cypress, and the rose,
Erst crimson, hath the colour of the quince.

Be world-lord when thy time shall come, be wise,
And do no hurt , turn not from those that cry
For justice, pardon not oppressors' faults,

Refrain thy tongue from falsehood if thou wouldst
Illume thy throne ; let wisdom be thy soul
And modesty thy minister ; in speech
Be eloquent, and let thy toicc be soft ,

Be thine ally the Lord of victory,

And may thy quarry be thy subjects' hearts.

Abate strife and make passion alien ;

God grant it rule thee not. Refuse thyself
To scandal-mongers, foolish folk, and knaves.

C. 1433 Thou wilt but suffer from the ignorant,

So heed them not. Know that none honoureth
The shameless and the babbler. Let thy lord
Be wisdom, wrath thy slave, and bo not hasty
Against the temperate. Be ware lest greed
Encompass thee bocauso it causeth wrath
And fear and need, but practise all forbearance,

And uprightness, and banish from thy heart
Both fraud and falsehood. Shun an evil name,

For that will mar thy fortune No wise quit
The way of wisdom. Haste will bring repentance,
But tarriance will show the proper course.

Quit not the path of virtue. Patient men
Will keep their temper and will shut their eyes
To what is not to be, yet, since the bold
Take patience in excess for feebleness,

The master of the throne will choose the mean
Of wisdom. Neither haste nor slackness servo ;

Let wisdom guide thy soul. See to it, thou !

That no detractors win thine approbation.

And seek no friendship with thine enemy
Although he hail thee king ; that tree is green


URMUZD SON OF SHAP' 6 r 305

Its fruit is colocynth, and if tlioii graspest
His feet thou hast his head. Exalt or base,

Whichever thou art, be not illuded. Fortune
Is ill to the malignant , be not so.

The assemblies of the noble scorn a chief
That breaketh covenant. Take hold on wisdom,

For that will grace thy soul, crown, host, and wealth.
Guard word and covenant, and read the motions
Of sun and moon. Affect not wealth and pleasure
Because this Wayside Inn will cease for thee;

Consult the wise alone and keep the customs
Of former Shahs , fray foemen by thy hosts,

And look with heed behind thee and before.

He that will flatter worthless men to gain
His ends may by his words destroy thyself,

Let such not age with thee, yet hold one less
Than man that hath no use for praise, for God
Appro veth praise and straiteneth slanderers’ hearts.

He that can wink at others’ faults, and swallow
His wrath with ease, will grow each day in wealth,
While hasty men will have full hearts. No sage
Is he that seeketh combat with the sea.

Slight not my sayings, make thy heart a bow,

Thy tongue an arrow, let thy chest be broadened,

And thine arm straight, then shoot at what thou wilt.
Conform thy tongue and heart withal to wisdom.

Then please thyself in talk. The brainless man
Hath all his counsel and his words inept.

When with thy counsellors consult in private.

If thou hast counsel and experience
Thou wilt be day by day more prosperous,

Thy spirit will be shrewder than thy foe’s.

Thy heart and brain and counsel more prevailing.

One that is led by passion will not prosper.

By gratifying friends thou wilt increase

Their pleasure and their welfare. Frown on foes,

VOL. VI.


J. 1424


3o6


THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI


And make the faces of ill-wishers pale.

Give alms ; so is thy treasure best employed.

Shun envy ; from it spring hot tears of blood.

And upright men condemn it in a king.

For fourteen months I reigned unwittingly,
Expecting to retain the crown and throne
For years, but now my time hath come, and thou
Must gird thyself to rule.”

A noble scribe

Wrote out this testament, and the wazir
Laid it before the Shah, who heaved a sigh,

While his flushed face became like withered leaves.
Now, when those cheeks grew golden, pain and grief
Became the portion of Bahram who mourned
For forty days and left the lofty throne
Unoccupied, for he was sorrowful.

Thus will It be while heaven shall turn above,

At whiles all anguish and at whiles all love.

’Tis the Urmuzd of Dai, and night , be thine
To rest from speech and put thy hand to wine.


XXV


bahrAm son of urmuzd

HE REIGNED THREE YEARS, THREE MONTHS,
AND THREE DAYS

NOTE

To the reign of Balirs'im (Varahran L, 273-276) properly
belongs the end of the caieer of the great heresiarch, Milni, who,
having been banished by Shapur, son of Ardshir, and lecalled by his
son Urmuzd, was executed by order of Bahr,'im. Main', however,
Is relegated in the Shahnama to the reign of Shaphr, son of
Urmuzd (Sapor II.). ^

Historically Bahrain appears to have been the son of Shapur,
son of Ardshir (Sapor I.), not of Urmuzd, son of Shapx'ir.^


§ I

How Balircm mcceeded to the Throne^ charged the Noble.%
and died


The diadem of Shah Bahram essay —

A Shah whose kingship swiftly passed away.^

Whenas Bahram sat on the throne of gold,

In grievous trouble at his sire’s decease,

The Iranian chiefs all came to him in tears,
x\nd girt to serve him. They invoked God’s blessing
Upon him, saying: ‘'Be while place endureth,
Because the royal throne becometh thee ;


1 See p 358.

The pievious reign ends heio m C.

307


NT, p. 49, note.


\ 1425


3


3o8 the SHAHNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

Thou hast the kingship from thme ancestors.

Be thy foes’ faces pale, and may thy soul
Cease to deplore the dead/’

He answered : '' Chiefs,
Brave cavaliers, and nobles ^ lot no thane,

Or other liege, put hand to ill. Behold
How this unresting Dome respecteth neither
The fostered nor the fosterer. Bind fast
The hands of passion and reject its bidding.
Whoever shall abstain from evil-doing,

And smircheth not himself by his ill deeds.

Will live glad days and pass in peace. The Shah
Should guard the wealth of others, tender dearly
Men of good conduct, and protect the Faith,
Because it is the crown upon his head.

He that is wise m wiath, and acteth not
Injuriously, is blest. In times of stress
His heart is great and glad. Oh » may the world
Lack not the sage, and sage indeed is he
That trampleth not^ upon a vanquished foe.
Vindictiveness proceedeth ill from those
That seek renown. Abstain and use it not.

Know that thanes, troops, and kings unoccupied "
Hold no set course ; the idle slumbereth,

And waketh to remorse ; well said, ill done,

Gain thee no praise or jocund Paradise.

Seek fame, do well, and break no good men’s hearts,
c. 1426 I am possessed of treasure and dinars

In plenty, I have majesty and kingship,

And might of hand. Enjoy your own and know
That one who hath not is of those that have
Because my purse is open : none must want,”

Not many days passed by ere that crowned head
Came to the shears. The Shah possessed a son —
His heart’s delight — Bahram, son of Bahram,

1 Reading with P. a Reading with P and T.


BAHRAm son of URMUZD 309

For whom he sent, set him beneath the throne,

And said • Green otfshoot from my stem ^ not long
Have I enjoyed the crown, but be thy time
All glorious. Rejoice, increase, and pass
Thy days and nights in mirth. So walk that thou
When questioned at the Great Account, hast not
To turn in shame from Him who gave thee all.

By justice and by bounty cause the world
To flourish and thy subjects’ hearts to joy,

For whether one be king or archimage
The world abideth not with him for ever.”

Three years, three months, three days passed o'er his
head,

And then the world-illuming throne was void.

And as Bahr^m gave to Bahram the world
The son gave to the sire the charnel’s peace.

Know, ’tis no outrage of the turning sky ,

It holdeth but as wind that passeth by
All that hath breath, and till it cease to roll
Thus will it be , why then afflict thy soul ?

Why seek or speak concerning what should be ^
Discourse on things like these is not for thee.

E’en though in greed thy soul be grown not sere
Thy resting place is but a narrow bier.

Since death then cometh of such wolfish breed
A mighty bowl of wine will fill my need,

And one of silvern form and cypress-tall,

A charmer sweet of speech and kind withal,

With jasmine scent, bright cheeks, a moon in mien,
Musk-scented, and with looks of sun-like sheen.


XXVI


BAHEAM, SON OF BAHRAM

HE REIGNED NINETEEN YEARS


NOTE

The reign of this Bahrain (Varahran TT , a.tk 276-293), is 111 tlio
Shahnama as bare of events as that of Ins predecessor, and
Tabari has next to nothing to say of him. Mas’udi, however, tells
us that he began badly till once, when returning from the chase,
the Shah in com]3any with the high priest passed through a
hamlet, recently abandoned, amid whose rums naught was hoard
but the hooting of the owls. The Shah asked the high pi lest if
he knew any one that understood their language. The high priest
answered that ho himself had that gift, and that what the bird
said was true. The Shall inquired what it was, and the high priest
replied : — “ This owl is a male and w ishes to wed. Uo asked the
female owl to accept him as her mate so that their olispnng miglit
bless God and perpetuate their name. The female said that she
should like it of all things, but that she would accept him only on
certain conditions. To begin with he must piesent her with
twenty villages chosen from the chief demesnes that liad become
vacant under the reigning sovereign.” “What was the male’s
reply ^ ” asked the Shah. " Your majesty ! ” answered the high
priest, “ the owl made this response — ‘ [f the reign of this
monarch prove a long one I shall be able to give you a good
thousand villages, but what do you propose ? ’ ‘ From our union ’
rejoined the female, ‘will spring a numerous succession of childien,
and we shall be able to give each of them a share of these rums.*
^Notlnng can be simpler and easier than what you wish’ replied
the male, ‘ and I agree in advance, for I am overstocked with this
kind of wealth. Tell me what you want more.’ ” The Sluili was
struck by the high priest’s apologue, and ruled theroaftei for his
people’s good.^


^ MM, n. 169 $eq

310


BA HR Am son of BA hr Am


§ I


Holo Bahrdm, Son of Bakrdm^ ascended the Throne^ charged
the Nohles^ and died


While mourning Shah Bahram for forty days
Bahram himself did not assume the crown.

The warriors, the men exceeding wise,

All grief, all wailing, and all lamentation,

Came and sat with him in his woe and mourning,
Wan-cheeked with lips of lapis-lazuli,

Until a prudent archmage came and said : —

‘‘ Will not the Shah be seated on the throne ? ’’

For one whole se’nnight urgently he strove,

And ceased not till the throne was occupied.^

No\v when Bahram assumed his seat, rejoicing, c 1427
And crowned himself as kings are wont, he first
Praised God — the Light of circling time, the Increaser
Of knowledge and of uprightness, the Marrer
Of falsehood and of fraud, the Lord of Saturn
And of revolving heaven, who asketh naught
But love and justice from His slaves — and then
Said thus : Tried sages and pure archimages t
Hold knowledge groat and be not bold wdth kings.

The man endowed with increase, eloquence,

And leadership by God will strive, if wise,

To compass excellence and cultivate
Humanity, whose attribute is patience.

Because the rash are held contemptible.

Security produceth happiness,

For then distress and toil have turned to wind,

And gathering wealth is like wind too to one
Of noble heart for he is rich already.

Yet get some havings if thou hast them not,


1 The previous reign ends here in 0. We follow the arrangement
in V


312 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

For folk despise the indigent. The man
Possessed of nothing hath no influence,

And none respect him. When thou art content
Thou feel’st at ease, but practise greed and thou
Wilt live in fear, so toil not thus to vox
Thy body and thy soul for greed of treasure.

Choose thou the mean if thou wouldst have folk's praise
In matters temporal. If thou contentest
The world with justice thou wilt bo made glad
Thyself thereby and rich. Security
And uprightness, and no default in justice,

Are needful. When joy faileth spirit faileth.

And wisdom ’twixt the twain is impotent.

While if greed clutch thy heart thy soul romaincth
Within the gullet of the Crocodile."

When he had reigned for twenty years save one
Life mourned him, that crowned Shah espoused the
dust,

A charnel hid him from the jocund world.

142S Such is the fashion of the turning sky.

Though thou art feeble it hath mastery,

And such the fashion of this world as well ,

It hath its secrets but it ne’er will tell ’


XXVIl

BAHEAM BAHRlMIYAN

HE REIGNED FOUR MONTHS


NOTE

According to Tabari this Shah (Varahran III., a.d. 293) reigned
four years, 1 but Mas’iidi, like Firdausi, says four months “
Piofessor Noldeke suggests that he reigned for four months only
in the capital, but ruled longer m other parts of the kingdom,
probably in conflict with Narsi,® his uncle, historically, as Bahrum
Bahramiyan appears to have been the son of Urmuzd, son of
Shapi^ir/ The true ownei of the title of “ Kirmanshilh’' is Bahram,
son of Shilpiir (Varahran IV., A.D. 388--399).


§ I


Horn Bahrdm Bahrdmiydn succeeded to the Throne and died
four Months after


Bahram Bahramiyan sat on the throne,

And girt himself for justice and for bounty.

They sprinkled emeralds upon his crown,

They called him Kirmanshah, and thus he said : —

May God, the just and only God, bestow
Upon us wisdom for our portion, justice,

And counsel. This our Wayside Hostelry
Abideth not with any. Goodness help us,

Lean we and cleave thereto, and make our heart
Our witness by our justice and our bounty,

NT, p 50. ® MM, ii. 174 ® NT, p. * Id. 436 a.

313


314 the SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSt

For since the good and evil that wo do

Are our memorials sow thou naught but good.”

When he had reigned four months the throne and
crown

Bewailed him bitterly. When certified

That death was near — that crocodile which hunteth

Rhinoceros and elephant — ^he gave

His son the world, and said : “ Be thy reign glorious *

Array thyself, drink wine, walk delicately,

Be bountiful ; make not thy day with throne
And crown unfortunate.” ^

Thus moments speed.

Their breaths uncounted by the man of greed !

0 happy fortune ! bring red wine to mo,

For now the poet’s years are sixty-three.

1 In the glossaiy to 0 “mveited.” The word ijropcily has the*
meaning of “bright,” but what is bright is easily icflccted, what is
leflected is inverted, and luveision well may imply misfortune.


XXVIII

NARSf, SON OF BAHRAM

HE REIGNED NINE YEARS
NOTE

Narsi (Narses, a.d, 293-302) does not appear to have heen the
son of Bahrain Bahramiyan but of Shapiir, son of Aidshir Pilpakan ^
Historically his reign was an important one as we learn from
sources other than Persian and Arabic. Firdausi, Tabari, and
Mas’udi have little or nothing to record of him, but Miikhund
states that he abdicated in favour of his son CJrmuzd, and, furthei,
that his prowess in the chase won him the title of * The mighty
Hunter.’ ®


§ I

How Nard succeeded to the Throne^ counselled Ms
Son, and died

Bahram, when fortune’s day no longer shone,
Surrendered to Narsi the crown and throne.

This is the way ; there is no end thereto,

The wanton sky hath ever something new ’

Whenas Narsi sat on the ivory seat,

And donned the crown that gladdeneth the heart,
The nobles all approached with offerings,

And mourning in their sorrow for his sire.

The chief blessed them, and said : My loving lieges,
Adherents both of justice and the Faith I

^ NT, p. 50, note. 2 EM, Pt. I., vol. ii. p 340

31S


0. 1429


3i6 the SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Know that the Maker so hath ordered all]

That me of all the world He hath endowed
With wisdom and with generosity,

Good counsel, modesty, and gentle speech,

And if my star shall prove beneficent
1 will secure prosperity for you.^

When any wise man hath become "thy friend
Know that he is one skin with thee.^ Expect
Great deeds from great men, wisdom from the sage.
True courage hath reflection for its base,

And valiant men are worthy of all praise ,

But he that fleeth from the work in hand
Will ne’er find fame and honour on the field.

The indolent are cowardly as well,

For indolence and cowardice agree ”

This man of rede and counsel lived nine years,

And by his sayings profited the world ;

But when his day approached, when fortune loured,
And when his casque of steel became like wax,
Urmuzd, bright as a tulip midst the grass.

Ran to the pillow of the noble Shah,

Whose son he was and splendent as the moon
At night The Shah said : “ Gently nurtured youth ’
Refrain thy hand Avith all thy strength from ill.

Soul of Narsi art thou, Bahram’s own fortune.

Crown- worthy and the glory of the throne.

Oh ! may the crown ne’er weep, the people’s heart
Consume, for thee Avho hast such stature, Grace,
Limbs, and unmatched achievement in all knowledge.
Rule thou the Avorld by royal precedents
As thou hast learned them from thy pious sire.

At length thine own day too will pass away,

And restless heaven tread thee down , so act then
That Avhen thy God shall question theo thine answer


^ Reading with P.


r Cf, Vol, i. p. no.


NARSi SON OF BAHRAm
May make thy bliss secure/’

This said, he drew

The mantle o’er his head and heaved a sigh.

That day thou wo^uldst have said that he was not,
And had no throne or seat or diadem.

Thy lot is naught but toil and misery ;

’Tis so — a mystery to every eye ^


XXIX


URMUZD, SON OF NARSf

HE REIGNED NINE YEARS


NOTE

The rei^n of this Shah (Hormisdas II., a.d 302-309) seems to bo
rei^arded as uneventful by all authorities He left, apparently,
three sons, Azarnarsi, Urmuzd, and one unnamed, in addition to
one or more posthumes. After the Shah’s death Azarnarsi suc-
ceeded, but within a year was deposed for cruelty, Urmuzd was
imprisoned but escaped long afterwards to the Romans, ^ the un-
named one was blinded, and a posthumous child became Shah.®
He proved to be one of the most famous of the dynasty.


§ I

How Unmzd, Son of Narsi, ascended the Throne and how
his Life ended

c. 1430 When great Urmuzd came to the throne wolves’ claws
Were hindered of their quarry, he maintained
Tlie world in peace, the work of Ahriman
Was in abeyance. First of all he praised
Almighty God, all-knowing, all-providing : —

‘‘ He fashioned night and day and turning heaven,

Sol, Mars, and Saturn. Victory and Grace,

The just heart and the imperial diadem.

Proceed from Him. May justice ever fill
Our heart, and may our subjects’ hearts rejoice.

" O'- P- 325- ^ NT, p. 51, no^e.

318


3^9


URMUZD SON OF NARSt

The hearts of men ignoble win not praise ;

If so thou canst consort not thou with such,

And take not counsel with the ill-disposed,

But, if thou seekest it, incline to good.

The pious will not call him bountiful
Whoso bounty is designed to gain applause.

While men will hold the thankless flatterer
As naught. The hard man trembleth being friendless.

Iho wise man taketh not the slack as guide,

And if thou ask the indolent to help thee
Thou art no judge of men and lack’st ambition.

Beware of thinking highly of thyself.

And be not fierce because thou hast a throne.

When one ill-natured groweth poor and vile
He laycth all to fortune and will spend
His years in indolence,^ bewailing fortune,

Is not possessed of rede and understanding.

And IS no ornament to any throne.

The simple deprivation of all wealth
Will ruin him in heart and soul and brain ,

Ho will take pride in want and evil nature,

And hold his head up high in his unwisdom,

His lack of goods, of knowledge, rede, achievement.

Of Faith and of all thankfulness to God.

May both your nights and days be prosperous.

The marrow of your foemen’s lives plucked out.”

The chiefs applauded and saluted him
As earth’s great king. When heaven had turned nine
years

Above his head his face that had resembled
Pomegranate-bloom became like yellow roses,

The head that wore the crown was sick to death ;

Ho died without a son beside his couch.

That famed man, who discoursed so pleasantly, 0 . 1431

Left in his youth this ancient hostelry ;

^ Reading with P


320


THE SHJhNAMA of FIRDAUSI


Such while the heavens endure will be the event,
For they are strong and we are impotent.

The people mourned for him for forty days,
Regardless of the throne, which for a while
Remained unoccupied : the nobles’ heads
Were full of care. Meanwhile an archimage
Surveyed the women’s bower of Shah Urmuzd ;

One tulip-cheeked and radiant as the moon,

With lashes like a dagger of Kabul,

And locks like mazy Babylonian script,

All intertwined and knotted on her head,

Was there, and that fair lady was with child,

The world rejoiced in her. The archimage
Brought her and set her on the lofty throne
Ot kings with joy, o’er her they hung the crown,
And on that golden circlet drachms showered down.


XXX


shApue, son of urmuzd, suenamed

ZTJ’L AKTAF

HE REIGNED SEVENTY YEARS
ARGUMENT

Shupur is born Sh/ih. In his youth he builds a bridge at Taisafiin
and punishes the Aiabs for their raids during his minority.
Later on ho goes to Riim in disguise, is imprisoned, but escapes,
defeats the Riimans, takes Gsesar prisoner, and dictates terms
of peace, which include the cession of Nasibin (Nisibis). The
poet then tolls of the heiesiareh Muni, his doctrine and death.
Shapi'ir appoints his brother Ardshir regent, and dies soon after.


NOTE

The duration of the ruign of Shapiir (Sapor TI., a.d. 309-379),
as given by Fiidausi, is correct. He was Shuh all his life, con-
temporary with ten Roman Emperors, and one of the gieatest
of Susjinian rulers.

As has been stated already, some of the events attributed in
the Shuhnilma to the reign of this Shah leally belong to that of
his predecessor, the first of his name.^

§ I. The stoiy of the building of the bridge over the Tigris
at Taisafiin (Otesiiihon) is told also by Tabari, who says that the
additional bridge was constructed by sunset on the same day
as that on which the command for its election was given ’ ^

Shapiir's chief places of residence were in Susiana and Meso-
potamia, not in Purs as Firdausi states.

§§ 2, 3. Two Shupiirs (Sapoi I. and Sapor IT ) and much history
are confused in this account, in which the taking ot Hatra in the
early days of the Sasanian dynasty and probably by Shapiir, son


^ See p. 294 and below.
VOL. VI. 321


2 NT, p 54 .

X


322


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


of Ardshir, is bound up artificially by a lomantic incident with
the expedition made by Sliapur, son of Uiniuzd, into Arabia
to avenge the Arab incursions into Persian territory that had
taken place during his minority. Hatra or A 1 Hadr was the capital
of a small principality which had become independent during
the later days of Paithian rule. It grew up in the Mesopotamian
desert, some forty miles west of the Tigris, in an oasis formed
by the liver Tharthar Its magnificent ruins stand some forty
miles south of Mosul and some two hundred north of Baghdad
winch is itself some twenty miles higher up the Tigris than the
sites of the twin cities of Ctesiphon and Seleucia The ruins
form a complete ciicle surrounding a cential square The ciicle
has a diameter of a little over a mile and is made up as follows
Outside of all is a broad rampart , within this is a deep moat,
now diy, and within this again an immense stone wall with
towers at intervals. Within the wall are the ruins of what was
once the city. The dwellings of the inhabitants now are repre-
sented for the most part by mounds of earth, but in the contie of
the area surrounded by the city wall is a s(j[uare walled enclosure
with bastions or towers similar to those of the city wall itself.
The four sides of this enclosure front to the four cardinal points,
and each side measures 340 yaids in length. This enclosuie may
be regarded as the citadel, and within it were the palace and the
temple of both of which the ground-story, consisting of vaulted
halls and othei buildings, is still upstanding The whole of the
remains, walls, bastions, and all, are of coaise limestone beautifully
fitted, every stone also being marked with a letter or number
and often carved to represent human faces, foliage, buds, griffins,
and other monsters.^ The place, as will have been seen from
the above description, was immensely strong, its inhabitants were
warlike, it was only a little over two hundred miles from Ctesiphon
and Seleucia — attractions that, as expeiience was to show, \\eie
not beyond the reach of laids from the more distant Palmyra ^ —
and Ardshir Papak/in not unnaturally desired its reduction.
This he, or his son Shapur, actually achieved. The stronghold
had withstood successfully sieges by the Emperors Trajan and
Seveius. It fell at last through treachery According to the
story the Arabs had made a successful foray in the noighbouihood
of Ctesiphon and Seleucia during the absence of Shapiir The
leader of this raid was a certain Daizan or, as Firdausi calls him,
Tciir, and there may be heie some reminiscence of the capture
by Odenathus of some of Shapur’s haiem after the wai with


^ p. 3-25.


^ See JiiGS, Vols. ix. 467, xi. ii.


SHlPtfR SON OF URMUZD 323

Valerian.^ At all events the raider was some Aiab chief, but
in our story was the king of Hatra Shapiir, informed of what
had happened, beleaguered the city. ^Tow Daizan had a daughter,
the MtUika of Firdausi, and it so happened that in the course
of the siege, which lasted four years, she and Shapur fell in love
with one another, and he promised, if she would get him possession
of Hatra, to make her his queen. This she accomplished, hei
father was put to death, and Shapur married the traitress Now
she had a very delicate skin, and, when she was leposmg on silk
stuffed with law silk, complained of discomfort. Tt was found
that a myrtle-leaf was pressing against her ! Sh/ipur asked lier
on what her fathei had fed her She told him on cream, marrow,
the honey of virgin bees, and the finest wine. “And yet,” he
said, “though you have known me only a shoit time you love
me better than youi father who gave you such food * ” ^ He had
hor hound by the hair to the tail of a wild hoise and dashed to
death. By rights this story should come under the reign of
Sha])iir, son of Ardshir, or of Ardshir himself , it has been brought,
howovei, into connexion with that of Sh/ipur, son of Urmuzd,
by the romantic addition, found in Dinawari and Firdausi, that
the treacherous daughter— the M.'dika of the Sh/diiiiima— was
the child of the king of Hatra by the daughter of Narsi —
Dukhtniish in Dinawari and Ni'isha in Firdausi— wliom he had
made captive in tho raid above mentioned. Now Sh/ipui, son
of Urmuzd, was noted far more than his predecessor, Sh/ipiu,
son of Ardshii, for his dealings with the Arabs, and is said to
have <icquire(l his title of “ Zu’l Aktsif on account of the seventy
with which he treated them. Zu’l Akt.if has been explained to
mean that ho dislocated then shoulders, oi leinoved then
shoulder-blades, or strung his captives together in couples by
boring their shoulders and passing a ring through them Origi-
nally, however, the title may have been one of honour only, “the


^ Of. p 294

® Tins ignoies the fact that love often ousts affection when the two
come into antagonism Hence the i)Opulaiity in the past of G-retna
Green The story seems to show that, though the lady was in love
with tShapur, he himself was only pietending. That in tho classics of
Nisiis and Scylla is \eiy similai. Nisus, king of Megaia, had a lock
of hail on which his existence depended. He had too a daughtci
named Scylla. Minos, king of Ciute, besieged Megara, and Scylla,
who had fallen in love with him, cut oh fiom her fathei ’& head the
fatal lock, and he peiishcd m consequence. Mmos, lik(‘ Shapiii, was
not leally in love and, like him, had the lady put to death. .


324


THE SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI

broad-shouldered” like Dinizdast ‘^the long -handed.”^ Be this
as it may, the above story was adapted in Iranian legend to
make it applicable to the better known of the two first Sliapiirs
and the one whose dealings with the hated Arabs redounded
most to the credit of the empire. It is, as will be seen, softened
somewhat in the adapted version. The half Peisian descent of
Malika is meant to account for and excuse hei treachery,^ and
Shapings conduct to hei is not biutal. A tiace of the eailiei and
harsher version may siiivive in the woids of T/iir/ where he saye
m eftect, anticipating those of Biabantio to Othello —

“ She has deceived hei fathei and may thee ” *

But we are not told that Shapiir acted on the hint.

The scene of the stoiy is laid by Firdausi in distant Yaman,
the Tnt'uiians, of vhoin Tail is made the king, being a tube in
that region.

In one place Firdausi loters to Niisha as the ^‘dauglitoi of
Bahrain.” She was the granddaughter

§§ 4-10. Here we have another historical confusion but on a
larger scale. Sliiihs, Emperors, times, and events are con-
founded and transformed so into teims of lomance that it is
not easy to ^‘disentangle from the puzzled skein the threads
of” history.

First, Shapur, son of Ardshir, is confused with Shapiir, sou
of Urmuzd.

Secondly, the Emperor Valerian is mixed up with the Arab
prince Odenathus and with the Emperors Julian and Jovian.
The Bazaniish of the Shahiiama, who in the reign of Shiipiir, sou
of Ardshir, represented Valerian, here represents Jovian, and
Julian, the Yanus of Firdausi, leads, not as Caesar but as Cmsar’s
brother, an expedition against Persia.

Thirdly, a few dates are instructive. Shtlpiir, son of Ardshir^
reigned a.d. 241-272, Shapiir, son of Urmuzd, reigned a.d.
309-379. The Emperor Valerian was taken prisoner in a.d. 258^
Julian died, and Jovian made his treaty with Persia, in a.d 363.
Odenathus, prince of Palmyra, was assassinated in a.d. 267.

Fourthly, the historical events here confused are

The second war of Shapiir, son of Ardshir, against Borne ii>


1 See Vol. V. p. 281, and foi the above generally NT, p. 33 seq. and
notes^ p 53 seq. and notes.

So too the damsel who rescues Shdpiii from his imprisonment by
Cfesai IS described as being an liviman by birth. Seo pp. 338-9.

* P' 334 * ^ Act i, scene 3, s See p. 334.


shJpjjr son of urmuzd


3=5

which the Emperor Valerian was taken prisoner and died, some
years later, in captivity.

The ensuing war of Odonathus, prince of Palmyra, against the
conqueror of Valerian, in the course of which he captured part
of the great king’s harem, and matched up to the gates of
Ctesiphon

The expedition of the Emperor Julian against Shapur, son of
Uiiiiuzd, which ended in a disastrous letreat, his own death, and
the humiliating tieaty made by his successor Jovian

§ 4. Already we have had instances of kings and chiefs going 111
disguise to spy out the enemy So Itustammade Ins way into the
camp of Suhr.lh,^ and Sikandar to that of Dani,- to the court of
queen Kaid/ifa,*^ and to the palace of the Faghf lir ^ We shall find too
Bahr/im Giu, in the next volume, going as his own ambassador to
Shangul, king of Hind. The exploits of Odeiiathus in connexion
with Sh/ipiii, son of Aulshii, and the caiitiiie of the great king’s
iiaiem, seem to be adumbrated heio m the capture and misf 01 tunes
of the second Shapdr at the court of Otosar. V^aleiian, whose
own capture is heie post-dated, is ci edited with the successes of
the Arab chieftain Shiipur’s misfortunes aie ante-dated as a foil
to Ins final triumph latei on ^

The denouncer of Sluipiir at the court of Oiesar may be iden-
tified perhaps, historically, with the Poisian pi nice Urmuzd
(Hormisdas) who was imprisoned by the nobles after the death of
his father Urmuzd, son of Narsi, and after a long captivity escaped
in A D. 323 to the Bomans, by whom he was held m high honour,
and accompanied Julian m his campaign to the East.*'

We have had an instance already 111 the case of (jfaisiwaz of the
punishment of being sewn up in fiesh law' hide, which contracts
and stiliens as it dries, and is very pamtul if not always fatal.
According to some accounts the Khalifa Walid (a.d. 705-715)?
under a misappiehonsion, had Ins great general Muhammad Kasim
put to death in this hishion,^ but this does not seem to 1)L7
historically correct.

§ 5. Sympathetic damsels are much in evidence m this poition
of the Sh.dinaina as aids to embarrassed heroes. One helped
Ardshir Papakan,^’ as did two more according to the Karnamak **
Shapiir is aided thus here for the second tnno.‘‘“

Such scones of lowly life as that between Sh/tpiu and the


1 Vol. 11. p. 149. 2 See p. 38. ® kh p. 127.

* Id, p 170. ® KT, p. 65, and nott,

® NT, p. 51, and tiote , liSM, pp. 149, 194. Of. p. 318.

’ Vol. IV. p, 265 , EHI, 1. p. 209.

8 p. 217. ® p 201.


For the first time see p. 331.


326 THE SHJHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

gardener become more frequent in the latter part of thu
poem.

§ 7, BCei’e we have, for the second time, the account of the
captuie of Valerian, post-dated by moie than a century. His
treatment in captivity is repiesented as being much more seveie
in this version on account of his lough usage of the fehtih which,
historically, lepiesents the successes gained by Odenathus ovei
Shapiir, son of Aidslur, after the defeat of Valerian. The proposed
teims of peace similaily are luoie strmgont. Their parallel is the
building of the bridge at Shushtar.^

§ 8. This appears to be an account of J iilian’s expedition to the
East in A.D 362-3. It will be seen that he is not regarded as an
Empeior but as the Emperoi’s brother. This was necessary owing
to the foini that the story took in Firdausi’s authorities. Cfesar
(Valerian) was supposed to be still alive though a captive and was
engaged in collecting all the ransom that was possible from Hum “
The throne was not technically vacant, so Yanus could not be
Emperor. Later on the troops of Eiim make a new choice alto-
gether and elect Bazdnush (Jovian) The repetition of the story
of Valerian has the ellect of dwarfing the more historically placed
expedition of Julian, and Julian’s status suflers accordingly.

§ 9. Here, after the overthiow of Yanus (Julian) Bazanush
(Jovian) IS elected Emperor in succession, romantically, to Cicsai
(Valeiian), historically, to Julian. Historically, too, the negotia
tions for peace were begun a few days after the death of Julian,
and during the letreat of the Homan army, not by the newly
elected Emperor Jovian but by Shapiir, who took that step to delay
the retirement of the Homans till some definite agreement had
been arrived at. The result was a gieat triumph for Fersian
diplomacy.

§ 10. That we have heie a version of the historical treaty of
peace between Jovian and Shapiir is clear from the stipulation for
the cession of Nasibin (Nisibis) — one of the most important pro-
visions of the actual treaty. Shapiir had besieged it three times
already without success. There was a stipulation that the Homan
inhabitants of that and other places ceded should have liberty to
withdraw. Tabari tells us that in the case of Nisibis they were
leplaced by twelve thousand natives of Istakhr and elsewhere ^

Both the accounts of Valerian in the Shahnama agree that he
ended his days in captivity, and the general consensus of historians
IS to the same effect. Whether he died a natural death or not is
uncertain, but the former seems the more probable.^


i p. 298. 2 p. 357

** NT, p. 63. 4 Cf. %d pp. 33, 66, and mtes, H8M, pp. 86, 87, 125.


shApur son of urmuzd


327


Shapiir continued the ancient practice of transporting conquered
populations to new homes, settling them in cities that he him-
self had built, restored, 01 renamed. The two in Khiizistan
mentioned in the text — Khurram Abt'id and Kinjim-i-Asinin — may
be represented by the rums of Karkh and 8hiis, now known as
Iwtln-i-Kerkh, not far from the rums of Susa Plriiz Shapur is
better known as Ambar, a city on the Euphrates J It served as
the original capital of the Abbasid Khalifat but was superseded
before long by Baghd.id.

§ II There was so much in common between the first two
Shiipiirs — similarity of name, wars with the Arabs and the Romans,
leligious excitement and consequent persecution, and, in addition
to all this, the fact that the six intervening Slnihs had failed to
impress then personalities on the popular mind and consequently
left hardly any trace of themselves in popular tradition — that it
was only natural for events properly belonging elsewhere to
gravitate towards the later, longer, and more important reign of
the two. Wo have had several instances of this tendency already,
and here we have another in the case of the famous herosiarch,
M«ini, whose career, historically speaking, ended before the second
Shi'ipiii was born. M/uiPs life seems wdiolly to have been included
within the third century a d — a period when new religious ideas
were being disseminated broadcast, and old religions were passing
through a season of revival. In the Sasanian ompiie Zoroastrianism,
Ohiistiamty with its many gnostic ofishoots, and Judaism, wore
striving to assert themselves, and m the midst of the ferment
M.lni was born A D. 215-16. He is said to have begun his public
career as a religious teacher on Sunday, March 20th a d. 242 — the
day appaieutly of the coiouation ot Shapur, son of Ardshir.-
Shfipiii, at first disposed to listen to the new teacher, aftoi wards
banished him, and he remained in exile till he was allowed to
return by Shapiir’s successor, Urmuzd, who allowed him evangelical
freedom and presented him with a j)lace of residence. Urmuzd’s
leign, however, proved to he a very brief one, and under the next
Shtih, his son or brother, Bahram, Mani is said to have been fiayed
alive, and his body, stuffed with straw, exposed on one of the gates
of Gund-i-Shapur, which gate consequently became known as fclio
Mani gate.” According to some accounts Milni was recalled by
Bahnim and afterwards put to death by him or by his son and
successor, but at all events the great gnostic died before the time
of Shripi'ir, son of Urmuzd. Main’s followers of course were
persecuted.


^ On Shapiir’s cities see NT, p 57 seq, and notat.
2 NT, pp. 47 and note 412 seq.


328 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Mclni’s teaching was an eclectic one, and the materials for it
were drawn from the various Faiths amid which he grev\' up or
with which he came into contact later on No doubt in his
enthusiasm he hoped to find a formula that would leconcile them
all. In the lesult he was regarded by the orthodox of each as the
false friend who is woise than the open enemy, and sutteied
accoidingly. His chief opponents were the priests of the state-
leligioii — Zoi oast nanism — 3ust then in the llowing tide of its
revival, but the arguments put into the high priest’s mouth by
Fiidausi are moie Mohammedan than Zoioastrian Maiu’s ofience,
so far as his doctiine was distinguished from Ohristianity, lay in his
high and puie asceticism, which was antagonistic to the somewhat
self-indulgent Faith of Zoroaster The Zoroastiian was a family
man, a flesh-eatei, and a wine-drmker The Manichican was not per-
mitted to iiijuie any living thing_, whethei animal oi plant, foi the
sake of obtaining food, and was a celibate, a vegetal lan, and a
lechabitc.

The followeis of Muni weie famous for the neatness and
oinamentation of their sacred books, and this gave use to the
notion that Maui himself had been a painter Theie aie allusions
to him in that capacity in the Shahnama.^

§ 12. For Aidshir see the next leign


I


IIoio jShdpur, Son of JJrinuzd^ was horn forty Days after
his Fatlier^s Deaths and how he loas crowned


Passed forty days, then like the shining sun
A babe was born of that fair dame. The archmago
Named him Shapur and gave a feast for joy.

Thou wouldst have said : “ The infant is all Grace,
And wisdom is his banner and his shade.”

Por forty days they revelled, then prepared
The child a royal throne. The nobles came
With golden girdles and hung over it
The crown of gold. That babe of forty days
They set, when fed and swaddled up in silk,

Upon his glorious father’s throne beneath

^ See Vols. ii. p. 19 and note, v. iiS*


SHAPtR SON OF URMUZD 329

The crown of gold , the chiefs all homaged him,

And showered gems An archimage by name
Shahrwi, wise, apt, and potent, came and sat
Upon a golden seat to serve the babe
As minister, and with good rede and justice
Kuled o’er the world. He led the folk to good,

Collected troops and treasure, and adorned
Tlie palace and the throne, for young Shapiir,

Who grow in stature with the passing yeais 0 . 1432

Attended by that wise archmage the SJiah
Was sitting on an eve in 'J'aisafun.

When Sol grew wan, and night’s dark livery showed,

A din rose at the -way o’er the Arwand.

‘ Greet they ^ ” he asked.

0 famed and valiant prince * ”

Tlie archmago answered thus the little Shah,

‘‘ The merchants and the workmen are returning
Home from their shops and, as they pass each other,

Tliey fear to jostle, for the bridge is narrow,

So crow like cocks at drum-boat.”

Said Shapiir : —

‘‘Ye famous sages and my counsellors !

Then let us have two bridges, one to go,

The other to return, so that our subjects,

Both soldiers and civilians, may cross
At ease, our treasury shall bear the costs.”

The archmages all joyed much that that young Tree
Was showing leaf, and, as the young Shah bade.

Their chief gave orders for a second bridge.

His mother s heart rejoiced, she gave him tutors,

But by his rapid progress he outstripped them.

At seven years old ho went upon the ground
To learn the art of war and play at polo ;

At eight he learned the etiquette of courts,

Thou wouldst have said that he was Shah Bahnim.'

‘ Reading with P. Perhaps Bahiaiii Ghr is meant. Of, p. 378 mj.


330


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


He exercised himself in every grace,
And made Istakhr his royal residence
By his OAvn glorious fathers’ precedent,
Men pure, accepted, and preeminent.


§2

How Tdii\ the Arah^ carried off the Daughter of Narsi and
married her, how Shdpnr iceni to Yaman to fight Imn,
and hoio Ms Daughter fell in Luoe 'idih Shaper

Anon, and when the world-illuming crown
Grew bright, Tair, the Inanian lion-hearted.

Whose scimitar would bolden heaven, led forth
From Rum and Pars, from Kurdistan, Bahrain,

And Kadisiya, up to Taisafdn
c. 1433 A host surpassing all compute of knowledge.

He gave the country up to pillage. Who
Could fight or fly him ^ Hearing tell of Niisha,

Who was the Shah’s aunt and a youthful Spring,

He sought her palace, while all Taisafun
Was full of hue and cry. They bore her off,

And made her prisoner, for he and his
Were coarse and ignorant. When she had spent
One year of grief and care with him she bore him
A daughter like the moon and like Narsf,

Thou wouldst have said, Avhen he had crown and
throne.

Her father called her Mdlika on seeing
That she was fit for queenship.

When Shapur

Was six and twenty, and had grown to be
A valiant, sun-like monarch, he reviewed
His troops upon the plain and chose him out
Twelve thousand warriors and for each a camel
Wind-footed, and a hundred guides withal.

The warriors mounted, leading each his steed.


SHAPVR SON OF URMUZD 331

Then too the Shah himself and his own meiny
Took seat upon their beasts. He girded up
His royal belt for raiding and pursued
The monarch of the Tnanians — Tair,

That over-weening one, that raging Lion —

And slaughtered many of his warriors,

Which when Tair perceived he showed his back.

Then followed hue and cry, and many captives
W ere taken while that host fled to a stronghold
Within Yaman , men, women, children wailed.

Shapiir led forth such forces that the ways
W ere barred to ant and gnat. He found ^ Tair
AVith troops within the hold, and turned from him
The means of fight and flight. The siege continued
A month both day and night, the garrison
Ilan short of food. One morning full of ardour
Shapiir, the hero, mounted on his steed
With bow in hand, a kingly, black cuirass
Upon his breast and black flag fluttering o’er him.

Now Malika looked from the castle-walls,

And saw that flag and head of chiefs, whose cheeks
Wore then like rose-leaves and his hair like musk,

His lips like jujubes and his breath musk-scented.

Both sleep and peace went from her; with her heart
Possessed by love, she sought her nurse, and said * —

“ This sun-like Shah, come hither for revenge,

Is great, my very blood, and him 1 call
‘ The world’ because he is the world to me.

Now boar a message for mo to Shapiir ,

He came to fight us, bid him to a feast

With me. Say : ‘ Thou and I are of one race, 0. 1434

And of the seed of brave Narsi as well.

Moreover I will aid in thy revenge.

For I am of thy kindred — Niisha’s daughter.

If thou wilt marry me the hold is thine,

1 Keadmg with P.


332


THE SHJHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


And with the palaeo thou shalt have its Picture.
Arrange all with my nurse and pledge thy word
Of honour.’’’

She replied ; “ As thou commandest
So will I speak and bring thee news of him.'’

When night and murk took kingship of the earth
From sea to sea, when it became pitch-hued,

The hills like indigo, the stars like lamps,

And thou hadst said : “ Three hundred thousand lights
Have been suspended from the eighth heaven,” the nurse
Went quaking, lull of fear and fright. Her heart
Was sundered through her terror of Tair.

She reached the camp, approached a trusty man,

And said : ‘‘If thou wilt bring me to the Shah,

Thou shalt receive from me a crown and ring.”

That Avise and prudent man conducted her
Toward the valiant monarch from the gate.

She came, with her eyelashes swept the ground.

And told him all. Her words rejoiced the Shah,

Who smiled. He gave her fifty score dinars,

A necklace, pair of bracelets, crown, and cloak
Embroidered with brocade of Chin, and answered : —

^ Speak much and kindly to the moon-faced maid,

And say to her; ‘ He sware by sun and moon.

The girdle of Zarduhsht,i the throne and crown . —

“ Whate’er thou askest of me, though it be
To cantle mine own realm, thine ear shall hear
No angry word from me, nor will I seek
To part from thine embrace.” ’ For I will buy her,

God willing, at the cost of throne and crown,

Of treasure and of host.”

On hearing this

She hurried from the camp back to the hold,

Informed the silver Cypress what had passed,

And added : “ Venus is conjunct with Sol.”

^ Cf. Yol. V. p. 1 6.


shApur son of urmuzd


333


She told of Shiili Shapur, his looks and height,
All she had noted of that Moon so bright.


§ 3


Hoio 7Y/[r was beimised by his Daughter and how she came
to Shdpiir, who tool the Hold and slew Tuir


Now Malika, when Sol’s crown westward shone,

And on the earth its yellow flower became
Like teak in hue, won from the treasurer
And minister of king Tair the keys
That oped the stores of provand and of wine.

And sent the loaders and the veteran chiefs c. 1435

Supplies thereof with sweet narcissus-blooms
And fenugreek. She called to her the server,

Spake much and graciously to him, and said : —

Thou pourost wine to-mght ; give it Tair
Neat, and keep all of them with wine in hand
That they may fail asleep and be bemused/’

The server answered her : Thy slave am I,

And only live because thou wiliest it”

Now when the sun was yellow in the west,

And murky night bade it Avaunt,” Tai'r
Called for a cup of royal wine, and first
They drank “The Inanians.” When one watch had
passed

Tair slept careless of the din around.

And all withdrew to rest, whereat that Moon
Bade her slaves speak in whispers and undo
With stealth the castle-gate. Now Shah Shdpur
Was waiting, angered at the drunken din,

But when the light shone through the gate he cried : —

“ Our mate is sleepless fortune ! ”

Then he bade

To lodge that fair maid daintily in camp,


334


THE SH Ah NAM A OF FIRDAUSI

Collected all Ms forces, chose out men,

Both mounted and afoot, approved in valour
And fitted for the fray, and entering
The hold ’gan slay, and seized the ancient treasures.
The more part of the garrison were drunk.

The rest, but half awake, prepared to fight ;

None showed his back through fear. The noble Shah
Slew many while Tair, who was made captive.

Came naked and, albeit unwillingly,

Apace before him. Hold and goods were both
Shapur’s. One man was rich and only one !

He waited till the dawn and, when Sol showed
Its golden cap, they set a throne of turquoise.

As was the custom, in the hold and held
An audience When the Shah had made an end
The Eose of early Spring drew near to him ;

She wore a ruby coronet and shone
In cloth of gold of Chin. He seated her
Beside him on the throne and presently
Called for TaiT in bonds who, when he came,
Bare-headed, and behold his daughter crowned,
c 1436 Knew that the sorcery was hers and she

Had wrought the mischief, and he said : 0 Shah,

And noble man ^ see how my child hath dealt
With me ^ Be thou too wary of her love.

And hold all strangers enemies henceforth.”

Shapur made answer to that miscreant . —

‘ When thou didst take the daughter of Bahram
From her seclusion, and insult our race,

Thou didst arouse a sleeping feud.”

He bade

The deathsman to behead Tair and fling
His body to the flames. The head he trailed
In blood contemptuously and flung away.

He would not let his Arab captives speak.

But had their shoulder-blades removed — an act


shJpur son of URMUZD 3:

Which horrified the world. The Arabs used
To call him ZiVl Aktaf because he wrenched
Their shoulders from the spine. Thence he returned
To Pars where all men came and homaged him.

All that got quarter with their shoulders whole
Eefused to him no longer tax and toll.


§ 4

IIoiv SJid2'>iir went diH(}ui,se<l as a Mp) chant to Rthn, lioio he
aas taken by Caesar, and lioxo Ctesar ramyed the Land
of trail

Thus heaven revolved awhile, then changed its favour.

The day came when Shapur, although possessed
Of crown and treasure, dreaded what might be.

And, when two watches of the night had passed.

Called his astrologers and asked concerning
The imperial throne and weal and woe to come.

The astrologers brought forth their astrolabes.

And cast his prospects of repose and rest,^

To see if ill would reach, or Grace divine

Grow greater with, the Shah. This seen, they said : —

'' Great king, world-lord, of ardent lieait and pure ^

A grievous, painful task confrontetli thee,

But what none dareth tell.”

Shapur replied : —

‘‘ 0 learned men and seekers of the way ^

By what device can this bo made to pass
Prom me, and mine ill star not tread me down ? ”

The astrologers made answer . None, O Shah i
By courage and by knowledge can escape
The revolution of the restless sky ; 0, 1437

Wo cannot strive with it , what is to be


^ Oi “ And banislied icbt and slamboi fui his sake


THE SHAHNJMA of FIRDAUSI


336

Will happen all, past doubt.”

The noble Shah

Rejoined : '' God is our refuge from all ill,

For He created circling heaven above,

Created strength and weakness.”

He spread out

His justice through the realm and for a while
Was glad and free from trouble. Having rendered
The whole land prosperous he greatly yearned
To visit Rdm and see the state of Coesar,

His army, treasury, and puissance.

He told his minister, a paladin

Both just and prudent, of his secret purpose,

But hid it from all other folk, and added . —
Administer the realm with equity,

For that will make you glad.”

He had prepared

Ten caravans of camels — noble beasts ;

There was a chief to every caravan.

He loaded thirty camels with dinars,

The rest with jewels and brocade. He left
The peopled parts and journeyed full of care
Till he arrived in Rum and saw a suburb
Where dwelt both thanes and citizens. He entered
The dwelling of a man of means and asked : —

‘‘ Can I have lodging here ? ”

With many greetings
The goodman said : '' Receive we not such guests ? ”
Shapiir abode that night, ate, and gave presents,
Receiving back the blessings of the thane.

At morn he packed and went to Cesar’s palace,

Like wind, and coming to the chamberlain
Saluted Mm and gave him gifts, who asked : —

Who art thou ? Say, because thou art a king
In limbs and looks.”

Shapiir replied : “ Not I.


shJpur son of urmuzd


337


T am a Persian, a religious man,

And with my merchandise have come from Jaz.

I have a caravan of silks and linens,

And came to court in hope to be received
By Ciesar. If among my merchandise
Aught liketh him, or of my gems and arms,

Let him accept such from his slave and place them
Among his treasures. This will please, not grieve, me.

The rest T shall sell boldly in reliance
On his protection, purchase what I need
In Riim, and boar it to Iran/’

The elder

Went and told Ciesar, who bade raise the curtain, c 14 , 1 s
And granted audience. When Shapur approached
The presence he gave praises as was fitting.

While Caesar, gazing on him, liked him well,

Bade spread the board, and put all strangers forth.

There was in Riim a native of fran,

A man of much experience, but withal
Injurious, oppressive, and accursed,

Who said to Caesar : 0 exalted one ^

List to my news in secret : this great merchant,

Who taketh our dinars for his brocade,

Is, I assert, Shapiir, the king of kings,

In speech, in countenance, in Grace, and bearing.”

When Ciesar heard he was amazed, looked black,

And set a watch, but kept the matter close.

And scanned Shapiir as he arose bemused.

The guard came up, and said : Thou art Shapiir,

Son of Narsi, disguised.”

They carried him

Off to the women’s house and bound his hands ;

None ’scapeth from the net of bale by valour.

What booteth to consult astrologers
Since all their calculations naught availed ?

They lit a candle by the drunken man,

VOL VI.


Y


338 THE SHJHNJmA OF FIRDAUSI

And vilely sewed him up in ass’s hide.

All said : '' The wretch hath gained an ass’s skin,

And lost a throne ’ ”

There was a dark, strait cell
Whereto they bare, and whereinto they flung,

That luckless one forthwith and locked the door.

Now Csesar gave the custody of key,

And of that captive wrapped in alien hide,

To his own wife, and told her : “ Give him bread
And water lest his soul may pass too soon.

If he survive awhile he will perceive

The worth of throne and crown, and none that is not

Of Caesar’s race will covet Caesar’s throne.”

She looked the cell. Her own home was elsewhere.
She had for treasuress and confidant
A moon-faced girl, Iranian by descent,

Who knew her lineage from sire to sire,

And Caesar’s wife put in her charge the key,

And brave Shapur fast in the ass’s skin,

Whom Caesar left thus straitened, and that day
Led forth his host. Now when he reached Iran
His army drew the falchion of revenge,

0 1439 And bore off many captives. Their brave foes
Had none to aid them, and Iran was stripped
Of men and women, children and all havings.

Both great and small. No news came to the host

Of Shah Shapur alive or dead. Iran

Fled before Eiim, the land was void of folk,

While countless others had a Christian call,

And flocked before the bishops, one and all


shAp^jr son of urmuzd


339


§ 5


How the Damsel took Measures to free Shdpih\ and how he
fled \(ith her from Rum

Time passed, the army of fran was scattered,

And all the while in Rum the keepers watched
Rhapur both day and night, howbeit the damsel,

That was Iranian-born, rejoiced not o'er him,

But wept for him, thus clad in ass's hide.

Incessantly; her heart burned for Shdpiir.

One day she said : “ 0 goodly man > who art thou ?
Speak and fear not, for in this ass’s skin
Thy graceful form hath neither sleep nor rest.

Thou wast a Cypress with the moon full-orbed
Above it, and that moon had musk-black curls.

But now thy cypress-form is like a hoop,

Thine elephantine body like a reed.

My heart is burning, mine eyes weep, for thee
Both day and night. What wouldst thou in thine
anguish ?

Why tell not me thy secret ^ ”

Said Shapur : —

If thou art well disposed to me, my Fair !

I ask thy promise — one confirmed by oath
That thou wilt keep it — not to tell my foes
My secret, but be mindful of mine anguish ,

Then will I tell thee what thou wouldst — the truth.”

The damsel sware to him by the All-just,

The cincture of the priest ^ — that stalwart guide —

The life of Christ, the Passion of the Cross,

The master of Iran, and love and fear : —

I will not tell or benefit thereby.”


^ Ox of “Shammas,” a Icgendaiy foandei of Fne- worship, in which
case we may suppose that the lady, to make assuiance doubly sure,
pledged hex self by both icligions.


340


THE SHJHNJMA of FIRDAUSI


He told all, hiding neither good nor bad,

And said to her : “ Now if thou wilt perform
My best, and pledge thy heart to keep my secret,
C. 1440 Thy head shall he exalted o’er all dames,

The world be at thy feet. At meal-time thou
Shalt bring warm milk and supple me this hide.
Soak it because it shall become world-famous,
And after my decease the men of wisdom
Will tell the tale for many a year.”

The damsel

Used her endeaYOurs to obtain hot milk,

But furtively and speaking ’neath her breath.

On coming back with milk she used to sot
Upon the fire a bowl thereof, then bear it
In secret to Shapur, informing none.

In two weeks’ time the ass’s hide was moistened,
And when with aching body and full heart
Shapiir came forth therefrom he said to her
In confidence : “ 0 pure one, vigilant,

And kindly in thy deeds ^ we must advise,

And frame a stratagem to ’scape from Eiim :

May blessing never light on such a land ! ”

The damsel said to him • “ Tomorrow morn
Our chiefs will set forth to the banquet-place.
There is a feast in Kiim that men and women.
And children will attend. Whenas the queen
Shall leave the city for the merrymake
Upon the plain, the coast will be all clear,

And I will manage, reckless of mishap ,

My wits shall get for thee two steeds, two maces.
And bow and arrows.

Hearing this, he praised
That worshipful, foreseeing maid, grew bold,

And in this case took wisdom for his guide.

Whenas the Pount of Light sank in the west.
And night drew o’er its head the Veil of Pitch,


SHAPJJR SON OF URMUZD


341


Shapiir mused much What will she do tomorrow ^
When Sol arose in Leo, when day waxed
And slumber waned, the groat men of the city
Wont to the feast That damsel, like a man
Full of resource, began to ply her schemes.

She had the empty palace to herself,

Had lion’s heart withal and leopard’s claws.

She brought two noble horses from the stalls,

Chose weapons fit for valiant cavaliers
With all that she had need of m dinars,

In pearls, in rubies, and in every thing.

When all was ready, and the night had come,

The pair resolved to act and started forth
Toward Iran, both full of secret joy,

In quest of safety. Night and day alike
They hurried onward, neither slept nor ate.

And from the city through the thornbrakes reached
A province civilised. When steeds and riders
Grow faint with hurrying they sought a place
To halt at, came upon a pleasant village
With gardens, park, and pleasances, and there,
Toil-worn and fleeing from calamity.

Knocked at a gardener’s door, who hurried out —

A hospitable man of kindly heart —

And, seeing two with armour, spears, and helms,

Said to the Shah : Why is this visitation ?

Whence hast thou sprung at this untimely hour,
Armed for an expedition ^ ”

Said Shapiir : —

Good friend ! thou askest much of one astray !

A traveller I, a native of Iran,

And bent on flight. I am in Caesar’s danger
And in his troops’, and never may I see
His head and crown ! If thou wilt be my host
To-night, and play the marchlord’s part discreetly,^

1 i.c. in lecoivmg those who have just crossed the frontier.


C 1441


343 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAVSt

Sure am I that one day ’twill profit thee ;

The tree that thou shalt plant will bear thee fruit.”

The gardener said . “ The house is thine, the gardener
Himself thy guest. Whate’er I can I will,

Informing none.”

Then Shah Shapiir alighted.

He and the damsel, and the gardener’s wife
Gat ready food for them as best she could.

When they had eaten bread they turned to wine,

And had a lowly chamber dight. The gardener
Gave to Shapiir the wine forthwith, and said : —

Drink thou to whom thou wilt.”

“ My host,” he answered,
** And gardener eloquent and excellent !

The man that bringeth wine should drink it first,

When first in years and wisdom. Thou art older
Than I and, since thou furnishest the wine,

Thou shouldst begin.”

Great sir!” the gardener said,
The man of Grace should drink first. Lead the way
As old in wisdom though more young in years.

I seem to scent a crown upon thy locks ,

Thy visage too is like the sun.”

Shdpiir

Smiled, took the wine, and sighed. “ 0 pious man 1 ”
He said, ‘'what tidings from Iran hast thou ?”

0. 1442 The gardener said : “ 0 thou of kingly mind I

May foe ne’er harm thee.^ May the ills that Cc^sar
Hath brought upon the Iranians now befall
Our foemen. All are scattered in fran,

And tilth and crop remain not. Massacre
And pillage have dispersed our mighty folk,

While many have turned Christians and come zoned
Before the bishops, many don priests’ caps
That they may have a land and resting-place ! ”

The other said : “ Where then was Shah Shapiir,


shApur son of urmuzd


343


Who used to shine resplendent as the moon
Upon Urmuzd, that Csesar thus should dare,

And fortune overcast the Iranians’ lustre ? ”

The gardener answered him : “ Exalted one !

Be majesty and pleasure ever thine.

No tidings of his whereabouts, alive

Or dead, hath reached the franian potentates :

The people of fran are slaves in Riim.”

The gardener, the Shah’s host, wept bitterly,

And added : “ Thou shalt stay three days, and then
My house will be the lustre of the world
Because a sage said when the world was young : —

' Unwise is he whose courtesy is scant
To guests , black fortune will ensure him want.’

So tarry, rest, and take a cup of wine.

And when thy heart is merry tell thy name.”

Shapiir said : “ Good ! Our host is our Great King,

At present.”

He abode, ate, and conversed,

That night, and when mom rose above the mountains,
When rose the Golden Banner from the dales,

The master of the garden visited
His guest, and said • Good day to thee, and may
Thy head be o’er the rain-clouds. This abode
Was not a fitting resting-place for thee.

Nor was the season suited for repose.”

Shapiir replied : “ My friend ! I should prefer
This house to crown and throne. And now bring forth
A Zandavasta and thy sacred twigs
That while I mutter I may ask thee questions.” ^

He did according to the Shah’s command,

Made the twigs ready and the place of prayer.

Then as he prayed the Shah said : “ Tell me truly
Where the high priest is now.”

His host replied : —

^ See Vol. 1. p. So, s,v. Bai, and Barmm.


344 the SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Sweet-tongued and holy man ! I can discern
His house from here.”

The Shah said privily —

“ Request some seal-clay of the village-chief.”

C. 1443 The gardener got it and returned at once.

The world-lord pressed his signet on the clay,

Returned it to the gardener with his thanks,

And said to him : '^Give this clay to the high priest,
And mark his words.”

That morn the gardener
Went with the impress of the royal signet,

But on arrival found the portal barred,

And armed men stationed round. He clamoured loudly
To be admitted and proceeded straightway
Before the high priest, showed the signature,

And did obeisance. When the high priest looked,

And saw the impress, that wise statist's heart
Began to throb with joy and, weeping greatly
Upon that name, he asked “ What man is this ? ”

The gardener said : “ My lord I the cavalier
Is staying at my house and hath with him
A Moon, slim cypress-like, wise, fair, and graceful.”

The high priest said: Now as to this aspirant, ^
What is he like in stature and in face ? ”

The gardener answered : One that ne'er hath seen
Spring, and a cypress by the water's side,

Would yet at sight of this man's looks and stature
Find music in his heart. His arms are like
A camel’s thighs, his chest is like a lion's,

His cheek like blood. Shame reddeneth at his grace,
The crown's decore proceedeth from his face.”

^ Reading with P


SHAPtR SON OF VRMVZD


345


§ 6

IIow the High Pried and the Captain of the Host^ hearing
of Shdpiir’s Arrival, went to him loith the Troops

The wise high priest, while listening to the gardener,
Perceived with his shrewd mind : “ This Lion-heart
Can be none other than the Shah ; his mien
Befitteth but the throne ' ” and seeking out
A wary messenger he sent to tell
The captain of the host : “ The Grace of Shah
Shapiir is manifest. Assemble troops
From every side.''

The high priest's messenger
Came speeding to the captain oi the host,

Who gladdened at the words and then and there
Set both his cheeks upon the ground, and said
To God : 0 righteous Judge ’ I serve Thee only.

Who ever thought that Shiih Shapiir and army
Would see each other more ? 0 one just God,

The Master ot the world and Guido to good 1
I thank Thee."

When night raised its sable flag,

And stars began to twinkle round the moon,

Troops gathered from all quarters, and wherever
Chiefs were they made their way, by ones and twos,
Toward that city and reached joyfully
The hospitable gardener’s door. Now when
The troops had gathered, that good man approached
The Shah who bade that they should be admitted
Although his court was lowly. As they came
They bent their faces to the ground before him.

The Shah embraced the chieftains and began
To wail his woes, told of his sufferings
Within the ass's skin, of Caisar's words,


C, 1444


346 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And what that fair Iranian slave had done
For love of him : I have through her and God
Preserved my life. May Fortune smile on her.

Grant but a virtuous slave and thou wilt be
The slave of such though king and glorious,

I am the slave of this fond slave whose heart
Is open and who keepeth secrets well
^Vherove^ I have forces, and my rule
Is recognised, send thither men and give
The tidings. Scatter scouts upon the roads,

Secure them, and the one to Taisafun
In chief. The news must not transpire. If CiBsar
Hear of me that the Grace of king of kings
Appeareth he will come, destroy my host.

And break the Iranians’ hearts and backs. We cannot
Withstand him yet or cope with his lush fortune.

But when the high priest cometh and shall bring
Troops we will bar the road to ants and gnats.

We will be instant then and take new order
To clear our garden quietly of weeds.

To every corner spies shall be dispatched.

And outposts be on guard by day and night.
Thenceforth I give no Riiman liberty
To sleep in peace or lay his armour by.”


§7


How Shap'd r made a Night-attack^ and hoio CcBsar loas tahen


Shapdr, whose troops were soon six thousand strong,
Sent veteran chiefs to spy out Taisafun,

C. 1445 And notify his high and glorious court
Of Ciesar, Instantly they went to find
How matters stood, then told the exalted Shah : —
'‘No thought hath CfBsar save for wine and chase.
His troops are scattered everywhere to pillage.


SHjptfR SON OF URMUZD


347


There are no guards or sentries day or night,

His troops are like a flock without a shepherd.

He seeth not a foe on any side,

And so it pleaseth him to live at ease.’’

Shapiir rejoiced , his troubles turned to wind.

He chose three thousand of the Iranians,

All horsemen mailed on barded chargers, armed
Himself, and marched on Taisafun by night.

He marched by night and turned aside by day.

His route lay over wilderness and mountain
By track or no track, and two leagues and more
Ahead wore scouts till Taisafun was nigh.

In the third watch he reached the camp of Ciesar,

Of whom he felt no fear, heard no man’s voice,

No sentries’ challenge and no tinkling bells.

Tents and pavilions covered all the waste.

Who wotted of that onset ? In his tent
Lay Ciesar drunk, his troops were all abroad.

Shapiir, the valiant, gave his royal steed
The rein, on seeing this, led on his powers
Against the camp, and grasped his massive mace.

Rang cloudward clarion, mace, and Indian bell ;

Rose battle-cry and tumult everywhere.

Thou wouldst have said ‘‘ May be the heaven is rent,
And through the air blood droppeth from the sun ! ”
Gleamed Kawa’s flag, gloomed night, flashed violet
swords ,

Thou wouldst have said : “ The air is raining them ;

The world is in a mist i ” Heaven disappeared
Amid the dust, the stars drew in their skirts,

And brave Shapiir wrecked worthless Ccesar’s camp.
They slew twelve thousand Riiman cavaliers
And over, fired the camp, dashed heaven to earth,

And in the end made Csesar prisoner.

His good stars grew averse. Among the tents
They captured many of his nobles, horsemen


C. 1446


348 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Elect and brave, and put them into bonds
Sucb is tbe action of the lofty sky
At whiles up-lifting and at whiles low-laying,

At whiles delighting and at whiles afiraying »

The innocent that hath humanity
Is best 5 almighty God is his ally.

When It was day, when night withdrew its skirt,

And Sobs flag showed aloft, Shapur commanded
A scribe to come with writing implements.

They wrote to every provmce, to each king,

And chief. Shapur began : “ Our heart-felt praise
Be to almighty God who helpeth others
To good but hath no need of others’ help.

Since Coesar hath kept not God’s laws, but sown
Naught but the seed of wrong within Iran,

Bonds chafe him sorely, for he had not wisdom
To guide his soul. He hath resigned to us
The crown of kingship and reserveth only
His infamy. His host and court are broken
By God’s own might who pointed out the way.

Those Rumans whom ye capture in your cities
Must have their portion of the scimitar.

Seek ye all justice, do as I command,

And swear allegiance unto me afresh.”

A cameleer came to each quarter quickly,

And brought the letter of the ardent Shah,

Who left the camp for Taisafiin and there
Held session safely with his counsellors,

And, having donned the ancestral crown, gave thanks
To God, the Giver of all good. He bade
A scribe to go inside the prison-house.

And make a list of all the captives’ names.

There were a thousand and five score and two
Of Ciesar's kindred and high rank in Efim.

The world-lord lopped the hands and feet of those
That had been chief in ill, and then commanded


shApvr son of urmuzd


349


To bring in Caisar, lord of Rum. Tbc guard
Brought him from prison like a man insane.

That tyrant, when he saw Shapiir’s crown, wept ,

Ho rubbed his visage red upon the ground,

And swept it with his lashes, grovelling,

And blessing crown and throne.

‘ 0 thou compact

Of ill,” the Shah said, “ Christian and God’s foe,
Ascribing unto Him who hath no mate,

No period, and no origin, a son ’

Thou art a very knave, a lunatic,

A miscreant, fool, and utterest naught but lies,

Which are an evil, unilluming fire.

Where arc thy counsel, modesty, and heart
Inciting thee to good, if thou art Caesar ?

Why bind mo in an ass’s hide and so

Fling greatness to the dust ^ I came to feast

In merchant's guise, I came not forth to fight

With drums and troops, but thou didst clothe thy guest

In ass’s skin and march against Iran.

Now shalb thou feel the clutch of valiant men,

And seek no more to fight Inin ”

"OShah!”

Said Ciesar, who can ’scape God’s ordinance ^

The royal throne put wisdom far from me,

And made my soul a hireling of the DiV.

Thou wilt be famous, doing good for ill.

Because thy name ne’er will grow old, and thou
Wilt compass all thy longing by thy prowess.

If I have safeguard for my life from thee
Wealth and dinars are worthless in mine eyes,

Then will I be a slave about thy court,

And seek for nothing but to grace thy throne.”

The Shah replied; “Vile wretch! why didst thou
turn

This country upside down ? If all the spoil


0 1447


350


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


That thou didst bear to Rum (ne'er mayst thou look
On that cursed land again » ) thou wilt restore
Back from thy house to this exalted folk ,

Next, if whatever was harried in fran.

And made the lair of lions and of pards,

Thou wilt recover at thine own expense,

And in requital for thine evil deeds ;

Next, if for those Iranians whom thou slowest
Thou choosest Riimans of the royal race.

And givest me ten for every one of ours,

Surrendering their lives as hostages,

And I will take but men of Caesar’s stock
To be with me here in this happy land ,

And, next, if for each tree felled in fran,

(None well-disposed would fell the trees of others)
Thou plant another, reinstate all walls.

And thus abate the anger in our hearts.

Shall I not bind thee as thou bindest me ?

Can I forgive thee for the ass’s skin ?

1448 If thou shalt fail in aught that I have said

My men shall rend thy skin from head to foot.’*’

As soon as he had finished his demands
Shapdr, the world-lord, as the conqueror
Split with his dagger both his prisoner’s ears,

And having bored his nostrils put a bit
Therein in memory of the ass’s hide,

And loaded both his feet with heavy chains ,

The guard moreover bare him back to ward.

They held review and muster, and demanded
The treasury-key. The monarch massed and paid
The host, then, bent on justice and revenge.

Marched from Iran upon the coast of Riim.

All that were in the desert and that land
They slew and set the houses there on fire,

So that the world was lighted by the blaze.

When news reached Rdm : Our fertile lands are wasted,


SHAPER SON OF URMUZD 351

And in a night-attack illustrious Ca3sar
Hath been made captive/* all the people wept,

And at Shapur’s name were consumed with dread.
Ungenerous CcCsar wrought this woe,’* they said.


§ 8


lIo((> Shdpnr went to R 4 m and fought with Ydnus, Gttsar^s

Brother


Though Ciusar’s sire was dead, his mother lived ;

He had a younger brother too — ^Yanus —

A generous and potent atheling.

Troops mustered at his gate, his warlike mother
Gave them a donative, and said to him —

‘ Avenge thy brother : seest not that a host
Hath come forth from Iran ? **

He beat the drums,

And carried out the Cross. The Cross was great.

The army fierce. The hosts met face to face ,

The warriors had no rest. The ranks were ranged ,

A shout went up , Yfinus led on the van.

Black dust-clouds rose, and none could see his way
Amid the murk. Upon one flank were mountains.

And on the other, where the troops were massed,

A river ran. The din of battle rose,

Sword, mace, and arrow flashed, while azurc-dim
Was air with dust of horsemen, spearheads gleamed,
And banners fluttered while the stars looked down
Upon that strife — all wreak and malison.

The warriors of Riim all girt their loins,

Like furious lions, for that strife. The air
Was lapis-lazuli, the ground was iron.

Dark dusk rose cloud-ward, and thou wouldst have
said : —

“ The air is all a mist whence diamonds pour.**


C 1449


352 THE SHAHNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

The Shah’s troops likewise girt their loins for blood
shed.

Thus blew the blast of battle till the sun
Grew dim. They slew until earth’s surface turned
To iron with the breast-plates of the slain.

Then from the centre Shah Shapiir advanced
His battle, calling on his left and right,

And on his moiny. Shah and chiefs made hot
Their steeds, earth trembled, and the armies reeled.

He charged the Kiiman host, and great and small

Were one. Aware that he could not withstand

The Shah, Yanus fled with his troops, pursued

By valorous Shapur, who robbed the air

Ot lustre with his dust-clouds. On all sides

He piled the foe in heaps, smirched earth with brains,

And slew so many of the host of Riim

That all the plain was heads and feet and trunks.

No host and Cross remained upon the held,

No crucifix and bishop in the holds.

He took such spoil on all sides that the troops
Were in amaze. He gave it all to them,

Keserving to himself but Caesar’s wealth,

Who had seen travail in amassing it,

And found his travail end not with his treasure !

The host of Kum, assembling, said of him : —

Be such chief ours no more ^ May Caesar’s name
Cease out of Rum ! The girdle of the priests,

And their archbishop’s crozier are consumed i
So now for us Riim and Kanniij are one,

Because the call of Christ’s Faith is fordone ’ ”


SHAptTR SON OF URMUZD


353


§ 9


How the Rdmans placed Ba'dnthh 'tipxm the Throne of Cctsar ,
his Letter to Shdpur and the Answer


There was a man of noble lineage,

And of the famous Cyesars’ stock withal,

A man of wisdom, Bazaniish by name,

Fraught with good counsel both in mind and tongue,

To whom the army said : Be Ciesar thou, c. 1450

This very day the captain of the host ;

The troops will be attentive to thy words :

Illume the crown and renovate the throne/’

They set for him the throne of ivory
Whereon he sat in all his glory crowned,

While all the Kiimans hailed him as the Ciosar.

He sat and mused on war and battlefield.

And, knowing that to strive in fight agamst
The exalted Shah would bring disaster, chose
An envoy shrewd and modest who could speak
Wise words with gentleness — a scribe expert,

Experienced, learned, wise, and well approved —

Set him hard by, dictated subtle words,

And wrote a letter full of benisons

From God almighty on the king of earth . —

Be thy crown ever bright and all the groat
Thy slaves. Thou know’st that pillaging and bloodshed,

And harrying the innocent, are hateful
To noble men both in Iran and Eiiin.

If this feud first began about Iraj
’Twas settled by the might of Mimichihr,

Now Salm is dust, and Tur is swept away.

In vengeance. If Sikandar and Dara
Embroil us now that feud is obsolete
In Riim , the one good fortune left, the other

VOL. VI.


z


354 SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSt

Was slain by his two ministers, while Caesar,

If he he cause, is galled within thy prison
By fetters. Riim must not be desolate,

For never there hath been a land like Riim.

Now, if thy purpose is to waste and slay.

The Riimans cannot either fight or flee.

Their wives and children are thy prisoners,

Or wounded by thy swords and shafts. ’Tis time
To minish wrath and vengeance, wrath and Faith
Ne’er fare together. Be our ransom then
All our possessions, for this feud is wasting
Our lives. Be kind, burn not so many cities.

Such days must cease. The Maker of the world
Will not approve a worlddord set on wrong,

And vengeance. May He bless the Shiih, and may
The Shah’s exalted star enciown the moon.”

The scribe laid down his pen when he had written
That royal letter whereunto they set
The seal of Caesar, and the ambassador
3 1451 Set forward to the Shah. The wise man came.

And tendered Caesar’s letter to Shapiir
Of glorious race, who, when they read to him
The letter, showering on him those fair words,

Was gracious, wept, and bent his warrior-brows.

He wrote at once an answer and detailed
All that had happened both for good and ill ;

He said: “Who sewed his guest in ass’s hide ?

Who lighted up the mart of ancient feuds ?

If thou art wise arise and come to me,

Thou and thy honest counsellors, for I
Have granted quarter and I will not fight.

The world is never straitened to the wise.”

The messenger returned with this reply,

And word for word discharged his embassy.


SHJPtfR SON OP URMUZD


355


§ 10

How BazdntUli went to Slidpnr and made a Treaty of Peace

When Bazaniish saw that reply the heart
In his pure body throbbed with joy. He bade
A hundred nobles quit fair Rum with him.

They made up sixty asses’ loads of drachms,

Of gems, and full-dress robes, and thirty thousand
Dinars for largess gathered from all sides.

They went before the Shah with naked feet
And heads all bare, and, as they poured dinars.

Bestrewed the gold with gems. Shapiir received
The Riimans graciously and seated them
In duo degree. He said to Bazanush : —

‘‘ From Riim no lack of curst and unjust men
Hath come. Where there were cities in fran
Now there are thorn-brakes. I demand redress
For what hath been laid waste and made the lair
Of pard and lion.'’

Bazanush replied : —

‘‘ Say what thou wilt and since thou gav’st us quarter
Frown not upon us.”

Said the noble Shah : —

“ If thou wouldst have full pardon for the wrong
Thou must pay tribute in dinars of Riim —

Two hundred thousand thrice in every year,

And further give up Nasibin to me,

If thou wouldst end my vengeance.”

Bazanush

Replied : ‘‘ Iran, Arabia, Nasibm

Are thine, and I agree to this vast tribute.

For we can not withstand thy wrath and vengeance.”

Shapiir agreed by treaty not to march
On Riim thenceforth, excepting by permission c. 1452


3S6 the SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

In friendly wise, that Riim might not be injured.
Then he dismissed those magnates graciously
And honourably, on their departure marched,

And thanked his Maker much. He sought Istakhr —
The world-famed glory of the land of Pars —

Rejoicing.

When the news of these events
Reached Nasibin the people rushed to arms,
Exclaiming : “ We will not let Shah Shapiir
Take Naslbm or bring an army hither
Because he is not Christian but observeth
The Zandavasta and the cult of Fire.

He will not hear us when he cometh hither,

And we will not accept the Zandavasta,

And ancient Faith.'’

The populace prevailed,

The Faithful mounted for the war. When tidings

o

Reached Shah Shapiir that Hasibln rebelled
He was enraged against the Christian Faith,

And set a countless host upon the march.

He said: “ Applaud I cannot an evangel
Whose author suffered death among the Jews.”

For one whole week they fought ; the city's gate
Grew all too narrow for the combatants;

The Iranians slew a multitude of chiefs.

And placed those that survived in heavy bonds.

The citizens wrote to the Shah for quarter.

Who pardoned them and bade his host withdraw.

He gained renown in all parts of the earth,

He gained supremacy o'er all the world.

Men used to call him “The victorious Shah,"

And long did he possess the throne and crown.

She who had freed and given him his greatness,

Whom he named Dilafriiz-i-Farrukhpai, ^

Was dearer to him than all other fair.

1 i.e. The lucky-footed lustre of the heart.


SHAPUR SON OF URMUZD


357


Moreover on the gardener he bestowed

Great treasure and dismissed him well provided ;

But CcGsar stayed in prison and in bond,

In abject, evil case, and lasso-bound,

While all the treasure that he had m Ruin,

And toiled to gather in from every side,

He had convoyed and given to Shapur.

He lived awhile with sighs upon his lips.

Within his prison-house, and there he died,

And let another have the crown of might.

Then Shah Shapur dispatched the corpse to Rum,
Encrowned with musk upon a bier, and said : —

This is our end but where we shall hnd rest
I know not. One is covetous and foolish,

Another wise and dowered with Grace, but life
Will pass with both. The good and abstinent
Alone are blest.’’

He mounted on the throne
Of kings and ruled the world awhile Thereafter
He settled many folk for good or ill
Within the land of Kliuzistan and built
A city for his prisoners : folk at large
Shared not therein.^ ’Twas called Khurram Abad,^
But who were they who shared that pleasant place ^
The men whose hands Shapur had stricken off
Had this assigned to them as their abode ,

They had it all, and every year a robe
Of honour. He erected too in Sham
A city which he called Piruz Shapiir,®

And in Ahwdz a third with palaces
And hospitals, Kiniim-i-Asiran ^

They called it , prisoners there had rest and ease
He reigned until he passed his fiftieth year
Of sovereignty ; the age had not his peer.


0. 1453


^ Reading with P.

® Victorious Shdp'iu*


® Pleasant Abode.

^ The Prisoners' Nest.


358


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


0. 1454


§ II

Hoio Mdn% the Painter^ came to Shdpnr with Pi'etenceiof
being a Projphet, and wah slam

There came from Ohm a man of eloquence,

Whose peer in painting earth will not behold,

By which accomplishment he gained his ends.

He Avas a man of might by name Mani.

He said : '' I prove my mission by my painting,

And am the greatest of evangelists/'

He came from Chin, asked audience of Shapdr,
Soliciting his help in that evangel,

And speaking Avith such unction that the Shah,

Filled with misgivings and keen interest,

Convoked the archmages and held talk at largo
About Mani : “ This suasive man of Chin
Hath plunged me into doubts about his Faith :

Hold converse with him ; ye may be converted.”

They said : “ This man — a worshipper of pictures —
Is not the equal of our own high priest ;

Hear what Mam saith and then call for him :

Man! Avill be dumfoundered in his presence.” ^

The Shah bade that Man! should come who spake
At large, discoursing with the archimages,

In presence of the Shah, of Light and Darkness
Until Man! was checked in full career
By what the high priest said to him concerning
The ancient Faith : “ Thou worshipper of pictures !
Why layest thou thy daring hand on God —

The Being that created Heaven above,

Created space and time, Avith light and darkness.
Therein, and is supreme of principles ^

The nights and days of high, revolving heaven


^ Reading with P


2 Lit. of white and black.


shApvr son of urmuzd


359


Are both thy source of safety and mishap.

How canst thou take a picture for a proof,

And disregard the counsel of the Faithful,

Who say that holy God is One, and thou
Hast no alternative to serving Him ^

If thou wilt give these pictures motion, then

Thou mayst appeal thereto. Thy proof, thou knowest

Is naught, and no one will esteem it valid.

Were Ahriman God’s equal, darksome night
Would be like shining day, and both would be
Of equal length throughout the year, and neither
Would in their revolutions wax or wane.

The Maker of the world is compassed not
By thought, for He is higher than thought and space.
Thy words are those of lunatics. Enough f
No one will side with thee.”

He spake much else,

For he was one of knowledge and of courage.

Miini was all confounded by the words,

His favour changed, the king was wroth with him,

So that his days were straitened, bidding some
To drag him from the court disgraced, and said —
This worshipper of pictures is unfit
To live, so since he causeth turmoil here
Flay him from head to foot, and let his skin
Be stuffed with hay, and then, that no one else
May make pretences to like dignity,

Hang up the skin upon the city-gate,

Or on the wall outside the hospital.”

So did they. All the people blessed the Shah,

And cast dust on the body of the slain.

The fortune of Shapiir was such that men
Saw in his garth no thorn upon the rose.

He was so just, so wise, and politic,

Brave, bounteous, active, that not anywhere
Was left a foe, or evil e’en a lair.


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


360


§

How Shdpiir made his Brother Ardshir Retjent till Ms on a
Son should grow up, and lioto his Days ended

c. 1455 When he had naught to hope for from high heaven,
For he had passed his three score years and ten,

He called a scribe, the high priest, and Ardshir,

His younger brother, youthful still and crowned
With justice and with wisdom. ISTow the Shah
Had but one son — an infant — named Sha})iir,
jN'ot yet matured by fortune, so the king*,

In presence of the magnates and the scribes,

Said to Ardshir • If thou wilt make a pact
With me in all good faith, and pledge thyself
To keep it, that what time my son shall come
To man’s estate, and when the breath of greatness
Shall breathe on him, thou wilt resign to him
The treasure and the throne and crown, and bo
His loyal minister, I will commit
To thee this crown of kingship and transfer
Withal to thee the treasure and the host.”

Ardshir agreed before the great and wise
To give up to the child when grown to manhood,

And fit for diadem and throne of might,

The kingship and intreat him lovingly.

Whereat Shapur, in presence of the lords.

Gave the world’s crown and signet to Ardshir,

Then said : Take seriously the world’s affairs.

Know, 0 my brother 1 that an unjust king
Eegardeth not the interests of the realm,

But yearneth to fill up his treasuries,

Exceeding all his officers in greed.

Blest is the upright king that serveth God
Because in him his subjects’ hearts delight;

He groweth rich by equity and bounty,


SHJptfR SON OF URMUZD


361


He leadetli every one toward the Taith,

He guardeth all his kingdom from the foe,

He lifteth to the clouds his head and crown,

He gathereth wealth by justice and in peace,

Disperseth trouble from the heart by largess,

He passeth o’er the ottences of ill-doers.

And ever practiseth humanity.

He that hath sought these virtues will attain
To wisdom and right rede and watchfulness.

Kings must be wise and teach both young and old,

For subjects not instructed in God’s way

Will err, and if the king is wroth with such C. 1456

He violateth justice and the Faith.

Man’s heart and brain are joint kings of his body,

The other members are the soldiery.

When, then, the heart and brain have been defiled,

And lost to good advice in their despair,

The life within that body is distraught ,

Will troops left chiefless live on happily ^

Left in the dark they are dispersed and cast,

A corpse, to dust. So with an unjust king :

The world ^ is turned by him all upside down.

He will be held accursed when he is dead.

And men will know him as ‘ The impious Shah.’

Keep both thine eye and body in the Faith,

For eye and body both belong to God.

The king who chooseth any other way

Should wash both heart and hands of this our w^orld.

He scattereth his subjects from his realm,

His lieges from his gate, ignoring all

The sage’s words which cleanse thy heart of guile.

The tyrant is>ccursed : haunt not the portal
Of men intent on greed. Know, 0 my brother ’

That from a king the sage expecteth much —

First, that he be victorious, not turning

1 Reading with P


363 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

From foes in fight ; again, that he entreat

His troops with equity and recognise

The greatness of the high-born : whosoever

Is fitted for the kingship will not put

The men of rank into the ranks , ^ next thirdly,

That he be upright and defeat not justice ;

And fourthly, that to those who are his subjects,

And to the old retainers of his court,

He keep not tightly barred his treasury's door,

But from his branches drop a shower of fruit.

The king's gate should be not without a host,

And he should keep his treasure for his troops.

Thou wilt rejoice in treasuries increased
By justice, and thy troops will joy in thee
Look on thy mail as thy true ornament ,

Some night it may bestead thee well. Trust not
Thy guards too much ; direct thine own concerns
As thou wouldst be secure though, whether thou
Shalt prove obscure or thy own age’s lustre,

Death past all doubt will come to thee at last.”

The brother, hearing this, wept sore. Shapur
Wrote his last wishes out, lived on one year.

Then passed, and left this saying in men's minds : —

Sow not within the world the seed of greed
Because thy days will pass, and foes enjoy
The product of thy toils. Whene’er the laws
Both of Urmuzd and of Bahman ^ are kept
This palace will become a happy home.”

0. 1457 Bring tulip-tinted wine, 0 Hiishimi 1 ^

From jars that never need replenishing.

Why seek I, who am deaf at sixty-three,

The world’s grace and observance ^ Now I sing
(Mark thou) the story of Ardshir, the king.

^ Beading with P.

2 Cf Voi. 111. p. 327.

® Le. 0 descejidant of Muhammad’s great-grandfather (Hdshim) !


XXXI


aedshIe, beothee of shapue

HE EEIGNED TEN YEARS


NOTE

The reign of Shiipiir, son of Urmuzd, was preceded, as wc have
seen, by those of six Shahs, none of whom left any mark on
Iranian legend, and it was followed b} those of throe others no
less insignificant. Some of the six preceding Shtlhs had been
men of importance liistoiically, but oven this cannot be said of
Ardshir (Artaxerxes II , a.d. 379-383) and his two successois
Ardshir must have been either an eldei brother of Shapui or
else, like him, a posthumous child. At any late ho must have
boon seventy years old or more at the time of his accession.
Shapiir lb represented elsewhere in the Shahnama as brotheiless,^
but historically this was not the case.-
Ardshir is ciodited by most authorities with a leign of four
yeais only. Tabaii says that he was deposed by his sub3ects.®


§ I


Uoio Ardshir sat upon the Throne and gave a Charge
to the Offi.cers


Wlienas Ardshir sat in the royal seat, <

And graced the throne of old Shapiir, he girt
His loins and called the franians, seating them
Beneath the golden throne, and thus he said : —

I would not that the process of high heaven
Should injure any. All the world shall bo

^ See p. 319 2 See p. 318. ^ a NT, p 70.

363


364 THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI

Within my peace if it obey my will ,

But if this giddy world prove recusant
We will lake order for it. Now my brother
Left me the world in trust because his son
Is but a child. Our blessings on his soul,

For he hath purged the earth of wicked men.
Whenas Shapiir, son of Shapur, shall reach
To man’s estate, and knoweth how to prize
The crown and throne, 1 will resign to him
Them and the host according to my pledge
To Shall Shapiir. I only hold the throne
As viceroy and in memory of his sire.

Know this : what we enjoy will pass away ,

At death our tiavail -will be turned to wind.”

Through his ten years of rule he took his fill
Of joy and lavished bounty as he would.

He asked from no man tribute, toll, or tax,

But made the crown and throne a charge to none ,
Mm therefore called him “ The Beneficent,”

For all felt safe with him.

Noiv when Shapiir
Was fit for crown and throne Ardshir resigned
The glorious crown, made good what he had spoken
And, like a man, maintained his pledge unbroken.


XXXII


SHAPUR, SON OF SHAPTJR

HE REIGNED FIVE YEARS AND FOUR MONTHS


NOTE

According to Tabari, the death of this Shtlh (Sapor III., A.n.
383-388) was not due to the accidental fall of a tent-pole ; the
tent-ropes were cut, and the tent fell and killed him.^


§ I

How Slia{pih\ Son of Shdpih', sat upon the Throne and
(jaiie a Charge to the Officers

Wheaas Shapiir sat in his uncle’s place 0 . 1458

Most joyed but some were sorry in Iran.

He thus harangued the noble men of lore,

And veteran, adviceful archimages : —

Know that henceforth we favour not the liar,

For lying is not policy and that
Ensureth greatness. Treat not nidderings
As friends and sow not weeds within the garden.

The man of brains should make a mock of none.

Tongues should be guarded, not imbued with bane,

For he that speaketh much in the assembly
Will minish his repute, but when a sage
Discourseth,‘hear, for learning ageth not.

The covetous have aching hearts, do thou


" NT, p. 71 .
365


366


THE SHJHNJMA of FIRDAUSt


Abstain from greed and make not friends with liars,

Or men of evil rede. Four qualities

Are needful in a man : first, being modest.

Just, and accomplished ; secondly, sincere
And single-hearted ; thirdly, moderate
And welcoming whatever fortune bringeth ,

And, fourthly, never speaking foolishly.

But using fools for profit not for sport.

The hearts of noble men obtain both worlds.

But justice pleaseth not the hearts of churls.

Who in this world possess an evil name,

And in the other win not Paradise.

The vain withal hath but a brief career
Because he dissipateth wealth in folly,

While he is lauded that doth choose the mean ,

He showereth benedictions on himself.^

God aid you, be your fortune ever bright,

And may He help us, for the throne of greatness
Abideth not with any.’’

Thus he said.

The nobles rose and blessed him.

1459 When five years

And four months had passed by, the Shah one day
Went out to hunt, the world was full of cheetahs,

Of hawks, and hounds, these flying and those coursing.
A tent was pitched to make a resting-place
Where when the Shah had eaten he reposed ;

He drank three goblets full of royal wine.

And, musing, drowsed. His comrades all dispersed
While he reclined. He slept. Then from the waste
A tempest rose, so great that none recalled
The like, and brought the wood-work of the tent
Down on the Shah’s head ’ He that had aspired
To win the world — the valorous Shapur —

Died and resigned the royal crown to others.

^ Couplets transjDOsed.


SHJpTJR son of SHAPtfR


3^7


This whirling world is evermore the same,

And constant only to the knavish one,

Who in his jugglery is void of shame
To filch from any or to foist upon.

Act, then, enjoy, disport, but fret thee not.

Why grasp at vengeance, toy with treasury ?
Within this gloomy orb accept thy lot,

Seek honour, and let this world’s secret be.
Discovery will make thee writhe with pain ;
Then pry not, let its mystery remain.


XXXIII


BAHEAM, SON OF SHAPl^E

HE REIGNED FOURTEEN YEARS
NOTE

The Oriental title of this Shah (Varahran lY., a.d. 388-399)
renders it doubtful whether he was the son of the second or
third Shi'ipdr, and the authorities differ on the point He is
supposed generally to have reigned eleven years. He was the
ruler of Kirman at the time of his accession, and to him rightly
belongs the title of Kirmanshah which Firdausi gives to Bahiam
Bahramiyan.^ A seal of his, so describing him (“Varahran
Kerman Malka”) is extant.® Tabari says that he built a city
in Kirmdn, perhaps the existent Kirmanshahaii south-east of
Yazd/ and that he was killed by an arrow shot at him by
assassins.^


§ I

Hoio Bahrdm sat upon the Throne and gave a Charge
to the Officers

Wise, prudent Shall Bahriim mourned for his sire
Some months. When seated on the place of power
He spake thus from the imperial throne : “ This know :
The kings that justly gather freely spend.

May holy God be gracious unto us,

And may the foemen’s hearts be filled with smoke.

His is all knowledge, and we are His slaves
For weal or woe. He is supremely just ,

See p. 313. ® See RSM, p. 265 " NT, p, 71, and note, Id, ji. 72.

36S


1


bahrAm son of shApzir 3^9

His kingdom knoweth neither gain nor loss.

One that is rich in generosity,

Discreet, intelligent, and vigilant,

Should lock not fast his treasures, least of all
If he IS lord of throne and diadem,

And if a wealth of words be thine to give,

Be lavish, knowledge faileth not. Incline

To God in good and ill as thou wilt have

Thy good endure. If thou acknowledgest C. 1460

That all thy good and evil are from Him

Thy guerdon will be jocund Paradise ,

But if thou choosest this world’s vanities
Thou wilt remain unransomed in their clutch.

If God shall cease to keep thee ’neath His hand
Thou wilt abide in endless woe. I trust
To holy God that, when I lay my head
Within this darksome dust, He may account me
A conquering king, a Lustre of the world.

Is it not better then to lavish justice
Than to get wealth unjustly, for our labours
Endure here but our wealth will be past doubt
Our foe’s. We leave our memory good or bad ,

Forbear thine utmost to sow seed of ill.”

When this Shah’s reign had come to twice seven years
The graceful Cypress of the Orchard slept ;

The Shah was sick awhile, his subjects grieved.

He had a daughter, but no son, and likewise
A younger brother unto whom he gave
Perforce the host and treasure, crown and throne.

And royal signet, then, when he had ruled

For twice seven years, this youthful world-lord died.


Old man, whose years amount to sixty-three !

Shall wine be still the burden of thy lay ?
Without a warning life may end with thee ;

Think of repentance then, seek wisdom’s way.
VOL. VI. 2 A


370


THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI


May God approve this slave. May he attain
In wisdom riches and in singing gain ,

For mid his song he plucketh at his hair,

Yea teareth it in his obscure estate.

No wonder, if a work — ^his manhood’s care —
Completed in old age, he dedicate
To him who hath the sword — the king of kings,
A whole head higher than his underlings.

May his throne’s seat serve Luna for a crown,
The age be wholly subject to his sway,

For his is might and with him is renown.

Oh ! may the crown rejoice in him, and may
He walk in knowledge and in majesty,

From all his foemen’s clutches ever free I


XXXIV

YAZDAGIRD, SON OF SHAPtlR

HE REIGNED THIRTY YExlRS


ARGUMENT

Yazdagird succeeds his brother as Shah and rules wickedly.
His son Bahrain is born and brought up by the Arabs, to whom
he returns after a visit to, and imprisonment by, his father.
Yazdagird is warned of his death by the astiologers and tries
to evade his fate, but is killed by a mysterious hoise The
Iranians, resolved that none of his family shall succeed him, elect
Khusrau Bahrilm, supported by the Arabs, claims the throne,
proves his right to it by ordeal, and becomes Shiih


NOTE

The authorities are divided on the question whether Yazdagird
(Isdigerd I., a.d 399-420) was a son of Bahrain, the previous
Shah, or of Shapur Tabari takes the former view,^ Mas’i'idi the
latter,^ which leaves it still uncertain as to which Shapur —
Shapin’, son of Urmuzd, or Shapiir, son of Shapur — wa^ intended.

Like Aknaton of Egypt Yazdagird seems to have been a man
of remarkable character. He sought peace and ensued it, he
attempted to win over furiously raging fanatics to the piinciples
of religious toleration, failed in the attempt, tried to prevent
persecutors from persecuting — an act which in those days was
regarded as a kind of persecution in itself — assumed the title of
“The Most PeacefuH^ on his coins, and acted up to it in his
political relations with foreign states even when most tempting
opportunities for aggrandisement presented themselves, w’as
honouied, at least in legend, by being appointed formally by will
the guardian of the son of an Eastern Roman Emperor — an office

^ NT. p. 72 - M'M, 11. 190.

37t


372 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

which he is said to have accepted and faithfully executed—died a
mysterious death, and received from his subjects the titles of
‘‘The Sinner” and “The Harsh.” The indictment of him m
Tabari is very severe Among Ins other enormities it is i ecorded
that if any one dared to address him on behalf of another he said
immediately “How much does he pay you, for whom you ask
me, or what have you received already on which Professor
Nolcleke obseives that he knew his Persians. Apparently he didy
and the native chiomclers, diawn for the most part from a class
that could not understand oi appieciate him, have covered his
memory with infamy Against them may be placed a contem-
poiary testimony fiom another souice “ The good and merciful
king Yazdagiid, the Chiistian, the blest among kings, whose
raemoiy may be a blessing and his future life still more beautiful
than his former , every day he did good to the poor and wretched ” ^
This perhaps was wiitten after he had begun to punish the Magi
for inteifeimg with the Christians, and before Abdaas, bishop of
Ctesiphon, had burnt down, and lefused to reinstate, the great
Pire-temple of that city^ — acts that forced Yazdagird’s hand
and compelled him to allow the Magi to retaliate, which they did
in drastic fashion.

§§ 2-5. This account agiees closely with that given in Tabari,'*
but scarcely can be regarded as historical, being, as Professor
Noldeke says of the lattei, too poetically finished.^

§ 2 Surush is the name of the messenger of Urmuzd, but is
used here as a rhyme-word. Hushyar, the name of the other
astrologer, means “ wuse In Tabari the astrologers advise the
Shah that Bahram should be brought up in a foreign land.'

Nu’mdn was prince of Hira during the reign of Yazdagird and
was succeeded by his son Munzir. Firdausi reverses the re-
lationship, Munzir being the more prominent historically of the
two. The poet makes him monarch of Yaman.®

§ 6 It IS highly probable that such a youth as Bahram did not
get on well with his father, and he may have been sent to Hira
for a while in semi-disgrace.

The name of the Roman ambassador that pleaded for him —
Tami'ish— is a form of Theodosius, the reigning Eastern Roman
Emperor at the time — Yazdagird’s ward according to the legend.’

§ 7. We have here one of the legends localized in Firdausi’s
own neighbomhood, Sav being the spring of Tiis — the poet’s
birth-place. Similar instances of such localization have occuri’cd


^ NT, p. 74, and noteb. ® BSM, p. 275. •’ NT, p. 8q beq,
® Id, p. 86. ® A/., fiotCf and cf. p. 3S7.


^ /(/., note,
’ See p. 371^


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHA'PUR


373


already.^ Tabari, howevei, says that Yazdagird’s death is sup-
posed to have taken place m Gurgan ('Hyicania or Mazandaran),
and omits the details about the presage of the astrologers and
the expedition to the spring of Sav. According to Tabari the
horse was sent in answer to the piayeis of Yazdagird’s oppressed
subjects. Professor Noldeke thinks that conspirators took ad-
vantage of the absence of the Shah in distant Hyrcania to n under
him and then, to cover themselves, spread abroad a fiction to
account for his end, and that the various stones of the death of
this Shall may be referred to a common origin — the version of
the B.lstan-narr>a made by Ibn Mukaft'a ^

§§8-13. This account agrees closely with that of Tabari.®
Historically it would appear that Yazdagird, at the time of his
death, had another son living — Sh/ipiir — whom he had made king
of Armenia some years previously. Shapiii, heaiing that his
father was in ill-health, returned to court and after Yazdagird s
death attempted to seize the throne, but there was another
candidate for it whom the nobles preferred, and Sliapui “was
assassinated. On some of Yazdagird’s coins a second name
appears, which may be read either as Aidshi'r or Bahram ^ Theie
seems no doubt that Yazdagird had made himself so unpopular
with the Persian nobility and clergy that they were anxious that
no son of Ins should succeed him Bahram, moreover, w^as con-
sidered probably to be too much under Arab influence as Tabaii
expressly states.

§ 10 As soon as Jawanwi sees Bahrain he is conscious that he is
in the presence of the rightful Slnih, on whom the divine Grace
of kingship already had descended ®

§ 12. The selection of a successor to Yazdagird by a process of
elimination is not in Tabaii.

We had instances of the mutilation of prisoners 111 the reign
of Shapur, son of Uimuzd ® It is said too that Alexander the
Great, on appioachmg Persepolis, was met by a band of about 4000
Greek captives whom the Persians had maltreated grievously
§ 13 Bahram is said to have been twenty years old at the
time of Ins accession ® It was followed by a great persecution
of the Christians and war with Eome. He had to put himself
right with the Magi and also to find employment for his tuibu-
lent chiefs wearied of the political self-restiamt of Yazdagird,
The Most Peaceful.

1 Vols i. pp 23s, 296, ill. 14; IV. 295 ; v 202.

3 See p. 16, and NT. 77, and note " Id. 91 scq. ^ RSM, 277 saj.

5 (/. ioo pp 221, 251. 406. See pp. 323, 334, 348, 357

7 HQO, V. S. NT, p. 98.


374


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§ I


How Yazdaqird ,sat upon th^ Thone and (jare a Cliaryt'
to the O^cem


When Yazdagird became the world’s great king
He gathered all the soldiers of the realm,

Assumed the crown which once his brother Avore,

At whose sad death he joyed, and thus harangued
C. 1461 The notables All ye disposed to justice ’

Make first your bemsons to God, your hearts
All jubilant and laughing through our justice.

I will let not the wicked live ^vllo strive
To compass evil. He that cometh to ns
For justice shall have rest from fraud and falsehood,

I Avill increase his state and banish greed
And vengeance from the heart. We will consult
None but the great men and the archimages,

Wise and shreAvd-hearted , but the vicious man,
Intoxicate Avith power, tyrannizing
The helpless, and elated Avith conceit
Of his oAvn wealth, aviU we Avithstand and quell,

But multiply our favours to the poor.

The neck of him that heedeth not our Avrath,

And fareth insolently in our eyes,

Is longing for an Indian sword, his body
To pilloAv in the dust. Scan well our bidding.

And, thus endeavouring, make your breast-plate
wisdom.”

Thereat the men of mace and scimitar
All shook like Avillow-trees.

Noav Avhen his poAver

Waxed strong his love waned as his greatness greAv ;

He scorned the sages and greAv negligent
Of royal usages. The governors,


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHJPUR


37 S


The paladins, the notables, and all
The learned and noble sages, were as wind
To him 5 his dark soul had grown tyrannous ,
Both love and justice ceased within his heart ;

He answered no petitions; he misprized
All men alike and paused not on their faults.

All that were at his gate as ministers —

The Lustre of his fortune and his crown —

Agreed to speak not of the land to him,

And all men writhed with fear and died of fright
Because of him. When envoys came, or subjects
That clamoured for redress, a minister,

When notified, would learn their business,

And then with warm and kindly words dismiss
The envoys shamefastly, and say : The Shah
Will not transact affairs , ye cannot see him.

I have acquainted him with all your case.

But in his judgments right hath little place ^ ”


§ 2


How Bahrain Gar, Son of Ya‘(la(jird, ivas horn and senf
to he brought up hy Mun?Ar, the Arab


When of his reign seven years had passed, and all
The archmages were in travail and dismay.

In Farwardin, when the eighth year began,

And showed the world the sun which they adored.
Upon Urmuzd's day there was born a child
With good stars and earth-brightening presages.
His sire forthwith gave him the name Bahram,
Bejoicing in that little one. At court
There were astrologers, for it is well
To hearken to their words. One was a noble
With Grace and sense, an Indian chieftain named
Suriish, another hight Hushyar, a Persian,


C, 1462


376


THE SHAHNJmA of FIRDAUSI


Wlio by his arts could curb tlio sky itself.

These prudent seekers of the Way appeared
Before the Shah at his command. They used
Their astrolabes to take the stars and sought
To read the future with their Kiiman tablets.

The stars ordained : “ The child will be a king,

Lord of the seven climes, glad-hearted, holy.''

They went before the Shah forthwith and took
Their astrolabes and tablets. Thus they said : —

We have collected knowledge of all kinds,

And learned that heaven will love this goodly child.
The seven climes will be his realm, and he
Will bo a mighty Shah and worshipful."

As soon as they had left the court, the chiefs,

And ministers, the holy archimages
Sat and consulted o'er some shift whereby
The babe might favour not his sire but be
A righteous sovereign, '‘for if he hath
His father's temper he will wreck the realm,

The archimages and the paladins
Will not rejoice, and he will be not glad,

And bright of soul."

Then all the archimages
Approached the Shah with open, loyal hearts,

And said : “ This sprightly babe is far beyond
Reproach and calumny, Now all the world
Is under thy command , the toil and service
Of every clime are thine. Look for some place
Where knowledge is, and its possessors make
<C. 1463 Their land rejoice, and choose among the great
Some statist who is lauded in that land,

And let this virtuous prince learn worth from him,
So that the world may joy in his behests."

The Shah, on hearing this, assembled all
The envoys of his realm and sent them forth
To Riim, to Hind, to Chin, and other lands


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHjPlfR

Inhabited. A chief, too, went among
The Arabs to discern if they would prove
A gain or loss. To every quarter fared
A crier seeking one to educate
Bahram, some man of eloquence and learning,
Accomplishment and knowledge , so there came
From every clime an archmage wise, advised,

And fortunate, and, as they reached the court,

Each sought for that appointment from the Shah,
Who, after welcoming them graciously,

Assigned to each a lodging in the city.

Thus on a night Nu’man came with Munzir,

And likewise many famous Arab spearmen.

When all these chiefs had gathered thus in Pars
They came to Yazdagird, the king, and said: — 4

We are thy slaves to hear and answer thee.

Who of these nobles is so fortunate

As to embrace the world-lord’s precious child,

To be his teacher, and to cause the light
To shine upon the darkness of his heart ^

We out of Klim and Hindustan and Pars,
Geometricians and astrologers,

Philosophers and men exceeding wise.

Men of affairs and rhetoricians,

Are all of us the dust upon thy feet.

And all thy guides to knowledge. See thou then
Which one among us is approved by thee,

And which of us will profit thee the most.”

Then spake Munzir on this wise : “We are slaves
Who only live in this world for the Shah.

He knoweth all the worth of us, for he
Is as the shepherd, we are as the flock.

Bold, riders we, adept in horsemanship,

More than a match for sages. We possess
No readers of the stars in figures versed,

But we have minds devoted to the realm,


378 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And in this matter we are strong, 0 Shah ’

Moreover we are slaves before thy son,

And sing the praises of his majesty/’

When Yazdagird had heard he summoned up
His spirits and his wisdom, and, perceiving
From such an outset what would be the outcome,
Consigned Bahram, the precious, to Munzir,

For whom, for so the Slidh bade, they prepared
A robe of honour and exalted sky-ward
1464 His head* They robed his person and then called
The charger ot the monarch of Yam an.

Then plain- ward from the hall of Yazdagird
Went camels, horses, litters, slaves, and nurses,

Past count, and stretched from palace to bazar.

The road through the bazars were draped with hangings,
And all was decked from city-gate to court.

Now when Munzir approached Yaman the men
And women all went out to welcome him.

Or ever he reached home he ’gan to seek
For many women of illustrious birth,

And made his choice among the landed folk
Of Persian race, among the Arabians,

Among the wealthy, great, and eminent,

And chose four ladies — two of Arab stock
And two of royal Persian — whose high strain
Was manifest in their accomplishment,

To serve as nurses.^ Thus they tended him
Four years. When he had had his fill of suckling,

And grew apace, they weaned him, which was hard
To do, and reared him delicately. At seven
What said he to Munzir in princely fashion
“ G-reat chief! make me not out a babe unweaned !
Entrust me unto tutors that are learned.

My time is being wasted ; scorn me not.”

Munzir replied : '"Not yet, 0 prince ’ hast thou

^ Beading with P


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHAPtJR 379

A need for knowledge. When that time shall come,

And thou hast grown solicitous to learn,

I will not leave thee playing in the house :

But playing is the thing to make thee grow/’

Bahram rejoined : ‘‘ Make me not out to be
An idle child for, though my years are few.

And though my neck and chest are not yet those
Of warriors, I have wisdom. As for thee,

Thou hast small wisdom though thou hast the 3’ears.

I am not as thou deemest. Know’st thou not
That one in quest of opportunities
Will start with matters that concern him most
To seek twice is to sacrifice one’s prospects.

What is ill-timed is fruitless Of man’s body
The head is chief, and thou shouldst have me taught
What the great kingshould know. The first thing needful
Is knowledge since it is the head of right,

And blest is he that from the first ensueth
His proper end/’

Munzir scanned him with wonder,

Invoking God beneath his breath, and sent
Upon a dromedary to Shiirsan
A chief forthwith who found three archimages,

Accomplished men and well reputed there.

One was to teach the young prince penmanship, 0. 1465

And lighten the dark places in his heart ,

The second to instruct him in the use
Of hawk and cheetah for his recreation,

As well as polo, archery, swordmanship
Against the foeman, how to rein his steed,

And to exalt himself among the brave ,

The third to inculcate the arts of kingship,

The style and business of administration,

And everything that he should bear in mind.^

1 “As well as m mind,” following the readings and

airangement of P


38 o the SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

When these urchmages came before Munzir
They held much talk with him, and in their charge
He placed the prince, because Munzir himself
Was both a scholar and a warrior.

Bahram, that seed of kings, grew so adept
That he was competent to play the man,

And when he heard of new accomplishments
He longed to learn them. When ho was eighteen
The Taliaut warrior was like the sun ,

He needed not archmaoes to instruct him

O

[n erudition, how to play at polo,

In manage of the cheetah and the hawk,

To wheel a steed upon the battlefield.

And charge Thus said he to Munzir • “ 0 man
Of honest rode i send these professors home/’
Thereat Munzir bestowed great gifts upon them,
And they returned rejoicing. Then the prince
Said to Munzir : “ Call for the spearmen’s steeds,
And bid the cavaliers to wheel before mo,

To** couch their lances, and then name the price
Of what 1 fancy , I will better it/’

Munzir said : '‘0 accomplished atheling ’

The keeper of my steeds is thine to bid,

The master of the horse is all thine own ,

Why should I toil and trouble for such things
If thou art forced to purchase Arab steeds ? ”
Bahram replied • “ 0 famous one ! may all
Thy years be satisfied with good. I want
A steed that I may spur adown the height,

And never draw the bridle in alarm.

Then, having rendered him so sure of foot,

Cause him to vie with winds upon the course,
Because one should not press a beast untried ”
Munzir then bade Nu’man : ‘‘ Go thou and choose
A drove of our own valiant herdsmen’s horses ,

Go round the desert of the spearmen, see


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHJPUR


381


What chargers thou canst get.’'

Ho hurried forth,

Chose, and produced a hundred warriors’ mounts.

Bahnim, on seeing them, went on the plain, C. 1466

And wheeled about upon them for a while,

But every steed, albeit fleet as wind,

Possessed no wings when ridden by Bahrdm.

At length he chose a chestnut broad of breast,

With feet like wind, and, of another brand,

A bay. Thou wouldst have said : A crocodile
Hath come forth from the deep*” His shoes flashed
fire,

And from his ruddy breast fell drops of blood.

Munzir paid for the two what they were worth
(The wood of Kiifa was their native place)

And bold Bahram accepted the two steeds,

Bright as Azargashasp, and guarded them,

Like some fresh apple, lest a blast should harm.

One day the young prince spake thus to Munzir
‘‘ 0 man of understanding, bright of mind !

Thou hast no pretext for thus keeping me.

Not sparing me a moment from thy sight.

There is a secret impulse in the hearts
Of all that thou beholdost. As griet paleth.

So pleasure greateneth, a man. In short
Some fair-faced damsel will increase my joy,

For woman is the solace of our pains.

In woman doth a young man find repose,

Be he a monarch or a paladin ,

She is his guide to Faith and to all good.

Command to have some damsels brought to me,

Some five or six, like suns and full of charm.

Perchance, when I have chosen one or two,

My thoughts will fix on justice and the Faith.

It may be too that I shall have a child

To ease my heart, the world-lord will approve me,


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


382

And I shall have the praise of every one.”

On hearing such words from the youth, Munzir
The aged, blessed him and then bade a man ^

To make all haste to the slave-dealer's shop
Upon that quest, who brought out forty damsels
Of Eum, all fit to please and soothe the heart,

As tall in stature as a cypress-tree.

All objects of desire, of charm, and grace.

Bahram chose two, among those rosy-cheeked,
With rosy skins and bones of ivory.

One of these Stars could play upon the lute,

The other with her cheeks all tulip-like
Was as Canopus of Yaman, in height
A cypress, and with tresses lasso-wise.

Munzir paid for them when they were approved.
With cheeks bright as the gem of Badakhshan ^
Bahram gave thanks with smiles upon his face,
And spent his days at polo and the chace.


§ 3

How Bahrain went to the Chase with a Damsel and how
he displayed hzs Accomplishment

c 1467 It happened that one day without attendance
Bahram went with the lutist to the chase.

Azada was the Human damsel's name ;

Her cheeks were coral-hued. Bahram had mounted
A dromedary with the noble ^ Cypress,

Who had her lute in hand. She was his charmer,

His love 5 her name was ever on his lips.

For such occasions he required a camel,

And set thereon a housing of brocade,

While from it hung four stirrups. Thus he pricked

^ Beading with P.

® i.2ada, to pun on the girl’s name.


® The ruby.


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHJPJJR


383


O’er hill and dale. Two stirrups were of silver,

Two were of gold, and all were set with jewels,

And furthermore he had beneath his quiver
A stone-bow , that brave youth was all-accomplished.

He came upon a pair of deer and laughing
Said to Azada : “ 0 my Moon 1 when I
Have strung my bow and in my thumb-stall notched
The string, which shall I shoot ? The doe is young.

Her mate is old.”

She said : ‘'0 lion-man !

Men do not light with deer. Make with thine arrows
The female male, the aged buck a doe.

Then urge the dromedary to its speed,

And, as the deer are fleeing from thy shafts,

Aim with thy cross-bow at one creature’s ear
That it may lay its ear upon its neck.

And when the beast shall raise its foot to scratch
The ear that hath been tickled though not hurt,

Pm with one arrow head and ear and foot
Together if thou wouldest have me call thee '

‘ The Lustre of the world. ’ ”

Bahrain Giir ^ set

The string upon his bow and caused commotion

Upon that quiet plain. Within his quiver

He had a double-headed shaft for use

While hunting on the waste and, when the deer

Sped off, he shot the buck’s two horns away

Much to the girl’s amaze. Forthwith the sportsman

Shot two shafts at the doe which struck her head

Just where the horns should be and furnished her

Therewith Her breast grew red with blood. He rode

Toward her mate again, set in his stone-bow

A bolt, hit the buck’s oar, and was well pleased, 0 . 146S

For he had aimed thereat. The creature scratched

^ The fiibt occurrence of his full title — “ Onager Bahr/im ” — as we
might say “Buffalo Bill.”


384


THE SHAHNJmA of FIRDAUSI


Its ear. Forthwith within his bow of Ghach

He set an arrow and pinned head and ear

And foot together , but Azada’s heart

Was vexed about the deer, and when the prince

Said : When I hunt I bring them down by thousands

Thus/’ she replied Thou art an Ahriman,

Else how canst thou shoot thus ^ ^

Bahram stretched out.

Flung her from saddle headlong to the ground,

And made his dromedary trample her,

Besmearing hands and breast and lute with blood.

He said to her . 0 thou lute-playing fool ^

Why shouldst thou seek for my discomfiture
If I had drawn mine arms apart in vain
My race had been dishonoured by the shot.”

When he had trampled her beneath his camel
He never more took damsels to the chase.-

Next se’nnight with a noble troop he went
Forth to the hunting-ground with hawk and cheetah,
And near a mountain saw a lion that tore
An onager’s flanks. Impetuously he strung
His bow and notched therein a shaft three-feathered,
Then pinned both preyer’s back and heart of prey
That underneath the blood-stained lion lay ^


§ 4

How Bakrdm showed Ms Accomplishment in the Chase
before Munzir

Another week Nu’man went with Munzir
To be Bahram’s companion in the chase,


^ Reading -with T.

^ Bahrain’s feelings, though the outcome of them is more tragic, aie
somewhat like those of De Lorge in Biowning’s poem The Glove,”
and Azdda, when she sought to shame Bahram by setting him what
slie intended to be an impossible task, had not the excuse that the
English poet ingeniously puts into the mouth of the French lady.


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHAPUR


385


And took withal some Arab men of name
As judges ol his failure or success.

Munzir desired Bahram Gur to display

His horsemanship and strength belore these men.

Anon a flock of ostriches appeared,

Each running like a dromedary loose
On seeing them Bahram Giir rushed like wind.

He handled smilingly his bow and stuck

Four poplar arrows in his belt. He laid

The arrows in his bow successively

To slay those birds, and pierced in sportsman’s fashion

Their plumes. No arrow by a needle’s breadth

Was lower than another, none more high,

And, when the nobles went to see the outcome,

They found the horseman’s shots true to a hair,

Whereat Munzir called blessings down on him.

As did the other spear-armed warriors.

Munzir said : 0 my king ^ I joy o’er thee c 1469

As roses joy o’er springtide. May thy Moon
Ne’er wane, thy girdlestead be weakened never ’

Munzir, returning to his palace, held
Bahram Giir high as Saturn. Many a painter
He sought for in Yaman, and all the best
Assembled at his court He bade them limn
On silk a picture of Bahram Giir shooting.

They drew with ink thereon a cavalier
To represent him, thews and all, as seated
On his tall camel, shooting wondrously ,

The stone-bow, lion, deer, and onager ,

His breast expanded, all his markmanship,

And strength ; the ostriches, the wilderness,

And impact of the arrow. Then Munzir
Dispatched a cavalier to bear the picture
To Yazdagird, and all the host assembled
At that communication. In amaze
The chiefs all called down praises on Bahram.

VOL. VI. 2 B


386


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


Thenceforth, whenever he did anything
Of note, they sent it pictured to the king.


§5


How Balirdm came with NvJmnn to Yazdagird


The Shah was eager to behold Bahram —

Bahrain ? Nay rather an imperious Sun '

That Lion said thus to Munzir : Albeit
I could abide however long with thee
My father’s wish incite th me to go,

And, since I shall be safe, mine own heart urgetli.”

Munzir prepared whatever was required —

Gifts from Yaman, exceeding all compute,

As Arab steeds with golden furniture,

And other things of noted costliness.

Striped cloth, and falchions, of Yaman, and what
The mines afforded in ’Adan. Nu’mdn,

Who was in favour at the Persian court,

Went with Bahram, conversing of the Shahs,

Until they reached Istakhr. When tidings came
About the Shah’s son and Nu’man the Arab,

The archimages and shrewd-hearted sages

Went from the court to meet them. When the Shah

Saw from afar Bahram, his Grace, his limbs.

And girth, he stood amazed at seeing him
So tall, well trained, and fair to look upon.

Received him well and lodged him near at hand,
c. 1470 He chose Nu’man a dwelling in the city.

And for the prince a palace as was meet.

Supplying him with handmaids and with slaves
Befitting his degree. The son attended
His sire by night and day, and had not time
To rub his head. Nu’man abode a month,

And then requested licence to depart.i


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHJPJJR 387

The monarch summoned him by night, then set him
Upon the throne, and said : “ Munzir hath seen
Much toil in fostering high-born Bahram,

And I must make him a return therefor,

For your esteem is as Urmuzd to me.

I laud the weighty counsels of Munzir,

For he inclineth, as I see, to wisdom ;

Still, while thou tarriest at our court, I trow
That he is looking for thee on the road.’’

Then of dinars out of the treasury
They gave him fifty thousand with king’s raiment.

And from the stalls ten steeds that bore a name,

With gold and silver trappings, gave withal
Slaves, carpetings, perfumes, and coloured stuffs,

And goods of all kinds These Mihran produced
Out of the world-lord’s treasures and bestowed them
All on Nu’man, son of Munzir. He opened
The door of largess gladly to bestow
Upon Nu’man’s companions fitting gifts.

The Shah then wrote a letter to Munzir,

A letter that was worthy of the state,

With thanks for his entreatment of the prince,

Whose love the monarch of Yaman had gained : —

I will endeavour to repay thy deeds ,

Mine own head is exalt by such a son.”

Bahram Giir wrote : “ My lot here is not happy.

It was not what I hoped for from the Shah
That he should look upon his subject thus.

I am not here as either son or servant,

Or, like a younger brother, light of heart.” ^

He told Nu’man, what had been hidden from him,
The evil ways and customs of the world-lord.

Nu’man, when he had left the royal court,

Came to renowned Munzir and gave to him

The world’s king’s letter which, when he had kissed,

^ Or “ Or as a liege glad-hearted at a court.”


3S8 the SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

He laid upon his head, joyod at those gifts,

And multiplied his praises. Afterward

The envoy spake in private to Munzir

At large about Bahram Giir. When the scribe

Had read the other letter out to him

His visage grew like gall. He wrote forthwith

An answer full of good advice • Famed prince !

See that thou turn not from thy father's way
0, 1471 Approve both good and evil from the Shah,

Be wise and serve. When princes are submiss
Ills pass. Men's heads have need to compass wisdom,
'Tis all the doing of the circling sky,

And we are impotent. It hath a heart
All love, a heart all hate, a face all frowns.

The Master of the world hath framed it so,

And we must be disposed as He disposoth.

Henceforth I will dispatch to thee dinars.

And royal gems, according to thy needs.

Let not thy heart be troubled, for thy trouble
Importeth more to me than heaped up treasure.

Lo ’ now by way of offering I send
Five hundred score dinars and lo i withal
The handmaid that was erst thy confidant,

And thine own heart's delight behind thy curtains,

To brighten thy dark soul. When thou hast^spent
All these dinars lean not upon the king,

For I will send to thee still many more,

And things of all descriptions from this realm ;

But do thy service, utter words of praise.

And serve with an increasing instancy.

For e'en in thought thou canst not separate
111 temper and the monarch of the world.”

He sent off ten Arabian cavaliers —

Men who were loyal, shrewd, and eloquent.

They came to prince Bahram with sacks of coin,

And with his loyal slave-girl. Wise Bahram


Y A ZD A GIRD SON OF SHAPUR


389

Rejoiced thereat, his sorrows turned to wnnd,

And thenceforth, as Munzir advised was right.

He failed not in attendance day and night.


§ 6


How Ya'xlarjtrd 2)ut Baliuim in Bonds, liowUie escaped hy the
good Offices oj' Tainnsh, and how he returned to Mun\ir


It chanced that in the banquet-hall one day
Bahram was in attendance on the Shah ,

That night came on and he was wearied out
By standing long and could not keep awake.

His father, seeing that his eyes were closed,

Cried violently in an angry voice.

And bade an executioner : ‘‘ Arrest him.

Henceforth he shall not look on crown and girdle.

Ward him within this house and then return
He graceth not this place of fame and fight.'’

Within the palace, with a broken heart,

That year he looked not on his father’s face

Save on Nauriiz and at the Sada feast c. 1472

When he drew near among the other nobles.

It happened that Taimish, the Ruman, came
As envoy to the Shah with purses, slaves.

And with the tribute sent from Rum by Csesar.

The king of kings received him graciously,

And lodged him worthily. Bahram dispatched
This message to him : “ Shrewd and potent man !

No grievance hath the Shah against his subject,

Yet guiltless I am banished from him thus !

Ask him to grant me pardon for thy sake,

That so my withered fortunes may revive,

And send me to my fosterers : ^ Munzir


^ Eeading with P.


390


THE SHAhnJmA of FIRDAUSI

Was more to me than mother and than father,”
Tainush gave ear, accomplished his desire,

And made Bahram’s afflicted heart rejoice.

He was released from his degrading bonds,

Bestowed much largess on the menaicants.

And gat him ready to depart in haste.

He called his followers and, when the night
Was dark, led forth the company like wind,
Exclaiming to his friends : Thanks bo to God
For our escape and safety from distress.”

When he came near the monarch of Yaman,

Men, women, children, went to welcome him ,

So did Nu’man, so did Munzir, so did

Their honest spearmen. As Munzir drew nigh

Bahram the day was darkened with the dust

Of troops, both chiefs dismounted, and Bahram

Detailed his sufferings whereat Munzir

Wept much, and said : “ What is the Shah’s star then,

For ne’er he walketh in the way of wisdom ?

I fear that he will suffer for his deeds.”

Bahram said : Never may the Shah himself
Grow conscious even of his own ill star 1”

Munzir received him then and there as guest,

And heaped new benefits upon the old.

Bahram Gur’s whole employ was banqueting,
Disporting on the riding ground, gift-giving,

And combating. Thenceforth the grief and joy
Of Yazdagird were to his son but breezes
Upon the day of Ard.^ Time passed. Bahram
Was glad in hall and glorious on the waste.

Now Yazdagird, concerned about the realm,
Assembled archimages from all quarters,

And bade the readers of the stars discover
How he would die and darkness whelm his head.

And, when this happened, where his royal cheeks

^ One of the lucky days.


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHAPtR 3

Would wither. They replied : “ Let not the Shah
Take thought of death, but when the royal fortune
Shall founder he will seek the spring of Sav,

Take thither with him troops with trump and drum,
And set out joyfully to visit Tds.

That is the place wherein the Shah will die.

Of such a day as that his ear hath heard not,

And pondering such knowledge is not good ;

It is a secret veiled by God Himself.”

The Shah, on hearing this, swore by Kharrad,

And by Barzin, and by the yellow sun : —

“ I will not, whether 1 be glad or wroth,

Behold the spring of Sav.’’

Three month rolled by,
And then the Shah’s blood caused the age concern.
One day his nostrils bled, and leeches came
From every qiiarter to advise thereon ,

They made a shift the bleeding to restrain
One week with drugs, then it began again.


§ 7


Hotp Ya::dagirdf hy the Advice of an Archmage, went to the
S]pring of Sav and wan killed hy a Water-horse


An archmage said to him : “ Thou hast, 0 king !
Departed from the ways of Providence.

Thou said’st : ‘ I will escape the hand of death ! ’
But where is death not alway in full leaf ?

The course for thee is this : by way of Shahd
Go in a litter to the spring of Sav,

There make thy prayer before all-holy God,

Go in abasement round that burning soil.

And say thus ; ‘ I, a feeble slave, whose oath
Hath set a snare before his soul, have come
Now to inquire how long I have to live,


0. 1473


392


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI


0 righteous Judge ”

The Shah approved thereof
As helpful to his anguish, had brought forth
Three hundred litters, and, thus borne, proceeded
Toward the river Shahd both night and day
Post haste, his nostrils bleeding still at whiles.

As soon as he had reached the spring of Sav
He left his litter, gazed upon the stream.

Poured somewhat o^the water on his head,

And called on God, the Giver of all good.

Anon the bleeding ceased He ate and rested
Among his counsellors, grew proud, and said —

This was the course ! Why need I tarry longer ? ’’
Now when the Shiih in his conceit imagined
That he had wrought the cure upon himsell,

A white steed issued from the stream, with buttocks
Round like an onager’s, and short of leg.

0 . 1474 It pranced and seemed as ’twere an angry lion ;

’Twas stately, black of belly, raven-eyed ,

It had a trailing tail, a crest, and mane,

Black hoofs, and foamed , it was a lion-slayer.

Thus to his chiefs said Yazdagird Let troops
Encircle it ”

The herdsman with the help
Of ten rough-riders hemmed it in and took
A saddle and a lengthy coiled up lasso.

How could the Shah wot of the World-lord’s purpose
In bringing him that dragon of a steed ?

It foiled alike the herdsman and the troops,

Whereat the monarch was exceeding wroth,

And taking up the saddle and the reins
Drew near the horse exultingly which proved
So docile that it did not stir a foot.

The monarch took the bridle from the herdsman,
And gently put the saddle on the mount.

He girthed it. That fleet Crocodile stood stirless.


393


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHApVR

He went to put the crupper on. That charger,
Flint-hoofed, neighed and kicked him on the head ■

His head and crown descended to the dust.

The dust received him and the dust begot.

From yon seven heavens on high what wouldst thou
ask?

Their revolution thou escapest not ,

To pay them worship is a fruitless task.

Incline to God — the Master of the sky.

Of sun, and moon — to Him for refuge fly.

The water-horse, when Yazdagird was slain,

Keturned like flying dust to that blue spring,

And vanished ’neath the surface * None o’er looked
On such another marvel. Like a drum-roll
Rose from the host a shout : 0 Shah J thy fate

Led thee to Tus ’’

The chieftains rent their clothes,
And flung dust on their heads. The archimages
Then oped the head and body of the Shah,

Embalmed them both with musk and camphor, wrapped
The dry corpse in brocade, draped therewithal
His shining breast, and set upon his head
A crown of musk. Then on a bier of gold.

And on a teaken litter, he departed
Unthroned and crownless back again to Pars.

Thus is it with this Wayside Hostelry i
Will peace, though thou ensue it, come to thee ?
Though meek thyself, the world is unrestrained ,

So having eaten let the cup be drained.

Religion is a better thing than sin

For one that hath the power to walk therein.


394


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


§8

How the trtinians took Gowned and placed Khtismu
wpon the Throne

0. 1475 Now when the monarch of the world was buried,
And from fran the chieftains came in tears —
Archmages, governors, and paladins,

With prudent ministers, men shrewd of heart —

All met in Pars and gathered round his charnel.

As Gustaham, who rode down elephants,

And slaughtered them, Karan the warrior.

Son of Gashasp, Milad, Arash the rn archlord,

Parwiz the horseman of Gurzban, and others.

Withal too those in hiding in Iran —

The great men and the leaders of the world,

Whom Yazdagird was wonted to abase —

Assembled in the city, and Gashasp,

The scribe — a man of eloquence — thus spake : —

Ye nobles young and old! since God created
The world none hath beheld a king like this,

Who knew but how to slaughter and contemn.

To cause distress and travail, and withhold
His counsel and his treasure from his subjects,
Kespecting none and setting all at odds.

No man hath seen a fouler Shah or heard
Of one among the paladins of yore.

We want no more of this race on the throne.

And cry against his very dust to God.

Illustrious Bahram is his own son,

His very kin in purpose, heart, and brain.

His talk is all Munzir. We will not have
A tyrant on the throne.”

Then all that were
Chiefs in Iran swore mighty oaths and said : —


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHAPUR


395


“We will not have another of this race

As king of kings with crown and throne of might/’

That done, they rose and sought another Shah,
When tidings of the death of Yazdagird
Spread ’mongst the chiefs — the monarch of the Alans,
The paladin of Pars, Bfward, Shikban,

The warriCr of the world, Bihzad who had
Barzin to sire and was of Rustam’s race.

And Sam the hero sprung from Kai Kubad —

All said : “ The sovereignty is mine from earth
To Pisces,” and the whole world was fulfilled
With tumult, for the head that wore the crown
Had vanished from the throne. Then in Iran
Chief, paladin, and archmage, all that were
Of ardent soul, met to debate m Pars : —

“ Who is there worthy of the throne of kings ^
Consider who can enter on the work.

We see not any one, approved by God,

To wear the golden girdle on the throne,

And to allay the troubles of the time .

A kingless world is but a pasturage.”

There was an ancient man, by name Khusrau,

Of generous instincts, masterful, and ardent.

Moreover he was born of noble race,

And one among the wealthy of the land.i
The nobles gave to him the crown and state,

And troops from all sides gathered at his gate.


§ 9

How Bahrdm Gur heard of the Death of his Father
and invaded Iran

Thereafter to Bahram Giir tidings came
“ Heaven hath apportioned to thy sire the grave ;

1 Beading with B and T.


C, 1476


396 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Thy father, eminent midst kings, is dead,

And ta’en with him the name of sovereignty ,

They have enthroned another and acclaimed him
As monarch by the title of Khusraii.

The warriors have bound themselves by oaths : —

‘ We will not have a monarch of the race
Because Bahram, the son, is like the sire,

And, skin and marrow, of his father s seed.’ ”

Bahram Giir, when he heard it, tore his cheeks.

So troubled was he at his father’s death,

And for two se’nnights went up from Yaman
Wails from child, man, and woman. When Bahram
Had sorrowed for a month he graced the throne.
Nu’man drew near togethei- with Munzir,

And Arabs of Yaman both great and small.

All shedding tears of sorrow with their Shah,

While anguish wrought on them the effects of fire.
Then setting loose their tongues they counselled thus —
“ 0 virtuous and most exalted prince •

We came to this world to be turned to dust,

Came not in quest of any remedy.

All mother-born will die, and to God’s justice
We must resign our hearts.”

Bahram Giir said

Thus to Munzir : “ Already is the water
Grown brackish in our stream J What time my race
Shall lose its royal title it will lose
Its Grace divine, men will send up in dust
The desert of the horsemen and convert
The country of the Arabs to a ditch.

Consider well, assist me, and deplore
My father’s death.”

Munzir gave ear and answered
Eight manfully: “ This is my chance and this
C. 1477 My hunt-day on the waste. Sit on the throne,

Observe, and wear through all thy years the crown,


YA ZD A GIRD SON OF SHJpUR


397


And bracelet/'

All the chiefs approved the course
Suggestedby Nu’man and by Munzir.

They left the presence and prepared for war
Munzir gave orders to Nu'man and said . —

Go gather our brave Lions in a host —

Two thousand of Shiban, ten of Kibtis,^

All dight for battle. I will show the Iranians
Who is the Shah with treasure, crown, and troops ’ "
Nu'man assembled him a mighty power
Of swordsmen and of spearmen, bade them raid,

And trample down the realm. To Taisafhn
All the salt desert route shook with their hoofs.

The women and the children were made captive,
There was no helper, and the world was full
Of fire and harrying since the imperial throne
Was impotent. News came to Kiim and Chin,

To Turkistan, to Hind, and to Makran : —

“ The Iranian throne is void, and none is fit
To rule," and all made ready, in despite
Of justice, to invade the land. They all
Stretched out their hands toward the Iranian throne,
And rose to claim the empire lor their own.


§ lo

Motv the Iranians heard of Bahrdm’s Pdlagtng
and xorote to Munzir, and how he replied

The Iranians heard and sought a remedy.

Distracted by their woes they met, and said : —

“ These Kiimans, Indians, and desert-horsemen
Have passed aU bounds ! We must adopt some means
To rid our hearts and souls of this distress.”

They chose a noble envoy shrewd and fluent,

^ Le. Copts.


398 THE SHJHNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

A warrior higlit J awanwi, a scribe,

A man of high degree and eloquence,

To go to parley with Munzir and say : —

‘‘ 0 noble lord » the world doth need thy name,
c 1478 Thou watchest o’er Iran and o’er Tiiran,

And thou art eyery where the warriors’ stay.

What time this throne grew void of Shah and crown,
And when the inarches of our land with blood
Were like the plumage of the francolin,

We said that thou wouldst rule our coasts, for they
Were worthy of thee. Now thou raidest us,

And sheddest blood with rapine and contention
On every side ! Thou used’st not to be
An evildoer and wast wont to fear
Eeproach and malison. Consider now
If this doth please thee and doth benefit
Thee with thy hoary head. There is a J udge
Besides thyself. One higher than all thought.

The envoy will narrate what he hath seen.

Or heard from persons in authority.”

Wise Jawanwf went from the chieftain’s presence,
He journeyed toward the desert of the spearmen,
Spake with Munzir, and gave him the dispatch.

The Arab chief made no reply thereto.

But said to him : ‘‘ Wise seeker of the way !

Repeat the matter to the king of kings.

Repeat what thou hast said to Shah Bahram,

And, when thou seekest for an answer, he
Will point thee out the way.”

He sent a chief

With Jawanwf who reached the monarch’s gate.

That man of knowledge, when he saw Bahram,
Invoked God’s blessing on the Shah whose breast.
Whose stature, and whose limbs astonished him.
Shrewd-hearted though he was : “ Thou wouldest say
That wine distilleth from his face, the scent


399


Y A ZD A GIRD SON OF SHAP^JR
Of musk exhaleth from his hair!’’

That man

Of eloquence grew void of Grace and sense,

And utterly forgot his embassage ^

Bahram Gdr, noting his amaze, and how
The spectacle bedimmed his eyes and heart,

Much greeted him, showed him all courtesy,

And set him graciously upon the throne.

Now when the envoy seemed at ease the Shah
Asked : “ Wherefore hast thou toiled thus from Iran ^
Hereafter thou shalt have the fruit of toil,

And well filled treasury, from us.”

He sent

A sage to take him to Munzir and say : —

“ Write thou an answer and indite fair words.

See if the envoy hath a verbal message,

And, if so, hear it and reply at large.”

Came J awanwi and spake, at whose wise speech
Munzir’s cheek flushed ; he heard that shrewd one out.
Prepared to make his answer to the letter,

And said to Jawanwi : “ 0 full of wisdom >

All that do ill will smart therefor. Now I

Have heard thy message and the nobles’ greeting. 0. 1479

Say thus : ‘ Who was the first to cause the ill ?

Who needs must seek this senseless feud ? Bahram Giir,

The king of kings, with stature, Grace, and host,

Is with us here, and they who draw the snake
Out of its hole will trail their skirts in blood.

Albeit, were I to advise, no harm
Would come upon the Iranians.’ ”

Jawanwf

Had seen and hearkened to the king of kings,

Had questioned him to see if he was fit
For throne and greatness, fortune and success,

And, as he listened to Munzir, conceived
A brilliant notion, and replied : Great sir,


400


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


C. 1480


Who needest not the wits of other men !

If wisdom failed the Iranians, many a chief
Among them hath been slain through that defect.
Now I, old as I am, still seek for fame.

And I will speak if thou wilt hear. Our land
We gladly yield to thee and brave Bahram,

The king of kings. With hawk and cheetah make

A royal progress in Iran to hear

What folk will say : no harm will come of it.

Speak too whatever is right. The sage will best
The fool. Foigo all mischievous intent,

And shrink not at reproach and calumny.''

Munzir, on hearing, gave him gifts and sent
Him home from that fair country, well content.


§ II


How Bahram Gur a'iumd at Jahiam with the Host of
Munzir^ and hoxo the trdnians went out to him


Munzir, Bahram Giir, and the counsellors
All met in privy conclave and resolved
To march upon Iran. Munzir made choice
Of thirty thousand warlike Arab spearmen.

Gave ample pay, and filled the chieftains' heads
With vapouring.^ As tidings reached Iran
Of these things Jawanwl himself returned.

And all the potentates, in deep concern.

Betook them to the Fire-fane of Barzi'n,

And prayed to God to change their strife to joy
And feasting.

When Munzir had led his troops
Across the unwatered waste, and reached Jahram,
Great Shah Bahram Giir pitched his camp-enclosure.
His troops surrounded it, and to Munzir

^ Keadmg with P and T.


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHjPtR


401


He spake thus : From the country of Yaman
Thou hast come to Jahram, my counsellor !

Which shall it be, when host confronteth host,

A fight or parley ?

Said Munzir : “ Invite

The chiefs and, on their coming, spread the board.

And speak with them. When any are provoked
So be not thou, and we shall learn whom they
Are fain to hail as monarch of the world.

That known, we will take order and avoid
Strife if soft means suffice If they seek war,

Turn, and display the bearing of a pard,

Then will I make this desert of Jahram
As ’twere a sea,^ and turn the shining sun
To Pleiades. I wot when folk behold
Thy stature, mien, and lovingkindliness,

Thy wisdom, counsel, and initiative,

Thy gravity, thy knowledge, and thy patience,

That they will want none else to have the crown,

The throne, the fortune, and the pageantry ;

But if they err, and wish to take away

The throne from thee, then will I with these horsemen,

And our sharp swords, bring Doomsday on the world ,

Then shalt thou see me frown, and may my soul

And body be thy ransom. When they mark

My countless troops, the order that I take.

Our deeds of blood, that God is our ally,

And that the realm is thine inheritance
By right established through a long descent,

They will acclaim as Shah none save thyself
As fit for crown and to adorn the throne.”

The Shah heard smiling, his heart throbbed with

joy-

Now when the sun rose o’er the mountain-tops
The mighty men and nobles of Iran
1 (Mohl).


VOL. VI.


2 C


402


THE SHAHNJMA of FIRDAUSI


Made ready to go forth to meet Bahnim Giir
The sages were convoked, an ivory throne
Was set up for the prince, and he assumed
The glorious crown, and ordered all his court
According to the use of king of kings,

Because he was the monarch ol the world.

On one hand sat Munzir and on the other
Nu’man with sword in hand, while all about
The tent-enclosure there were warriors,

But none that was not on the Arab side.

Then those Iranians that were loyalists
Came to the antechamber of the Shah,

0. 1481 Who had the curtain lifted and the names
Of those that entered called out at the door.

They came before the presence of Baliram Gur,

The Shah, beheld a splendid crown and throne.

And shouted, saying : Mayst thou live for ever ,

Bar from thee ever be the evil eye.”

The king of kings received them graciously,

And ranked them every one in his degree.

§ 12

How Balirdm Gth harangued the iremmns as to Ms Fitness to
rule, how they rejected him hut promised him the Kingshi])
if he would tahe the Croton from between the Lions'^

Bahram said ‘‘ Princes, old, experienced chiefs !

The kingship is mine own by long descent.

Why this to-do of yours ? ”

‘‘ Expect us not,”

The Iranians shouted, ‘‘ to endure more loss ’

Not one of us will have thee as the Shah.

Thou hast an army, but the land is ours.

Thy race hath caused us anguish, toil, and woo ,

By night and day we writhe and heave cold sighs.”

1 This heading combines those of two sections in 0.


403


Y A ZD A GIRD SON OF SHAPUR

Bahrain thus answered : Yea, ’tis true, for passion
Is king of every heart. If ye reject
Me, why thus seat another in my room
Without consulting me ? ’’

An archmage said : —
'"None, whether he be prince by birth or subject.

May shun the path of justice. Join with us,

And choose a Shah that every one will bless/*

They spent three days upon the task of choosing
A monarch from Iran, and then wrote down
A hundred nobles* names — fit Lustres all
JFor crown and throne and belt. Bahram Giir’s name
Was one of them because he charmed the realm.
They cautiously and anxiously reduced
The hundred names to fifty, and of these
Bahram’s name stood the first, who, if he sought
His sire’s place, sought but justice Of the fifty
They wrote down thirty, and they wore the choicest.
Most famous, and most potent of Iran.

Bahram amongst the thirty led again
Because he was a prince — the destined Shah.

The wise arohmages brought the thirty down
To four, of whom Bahrain was leader still.

When the decisive moment was at hand
The franian ancients said : We will not have
Bahram who is too headstrong and self-willed.
Though brave.”

An outcry rose among the chiefs,
The hearts of all were darkened, and Munzir
Addressed the framans thus : ‘‘ I fain would know,
For good or ill, why ye are full of pain,

And stricken in your souls, about the Shah
In his untime-worn youth ? In excellence
No king on earth can match him, and in looks
No moon in heaven. His poplar shafts pierce anvilsj
While with his strength he can uproot a mountain.


C 1482


404


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Though still a youth he is a sage in counsel,

Well skilled, with bright heart and retentive mind/’
The chiefs, by way of answering him, sought out
Full many a stricken Persian, and assembled
Out of fran upon that plain all those
That Yazdagird had maimed. One still survived
Lopped hand and foot but still intact of trunk ,
Another had lost oars and hands and tongue,

And seemed a lifeless body, while another
Had lost both shoulders, and Ni/miin was all
Astound at those maimed forms. The eyes of one
Had been dug out with nails, and when Munzir
Beheld that sight his anger rose. Bahram
Was sorely grieved, invoked his father's dust.

And cried : “0 hapless one ! why didst thou close
The eyes of thine own joy and burn thy soul
In fire ? ’’

Munzir the aspiring said to him • —

‘‘We cannot blink such evil. Thou hast heard
What they have had to say, now answer them,

For kings should not be at a loss.”

Bahrdm

Then spake on this wise . “ Chiefs and veterans !

Ye all said sooth, and this is even worse ^

Well may I blame my sire since I myself
Have had a sample, for he darkened all
My fine resolves ; his palace was my prison,

When God had mercy, and Tainiish released me
Out of the clutches of my sire, his hook
Had pierced me to the soul, for which cause I
Took shelter with Munzir, because I never
Saw kindness from the Shah. May none possess
His temper, for the man is lost that lacketh
Humanity. Now I, thanks be to God,

Have wisdom, my soul eateth of its fruits,

And to this present I have prayed to Him


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHJpUR 405

To be my guide to good that I might purge
My heart and spirit of such crimes as those
Wrought by the Shah on these men. I will live
To gratify my subjects' hearts, exist
To worship God according to the Way.

I am the shepherd and my subjects form
My flock. Let all of us seek peace and justice.

Then I have character, discretion, counsel,

And virtue, which no unjust king possesseth,

Because he needs must be unjust and froward,

And we should weep for one that is unjust.

With me are greatness, kingship, and discretion, 0. 14S3

Benevolence and wisdom. From Shapiir,

Son of Bahnim, back to Ardshir my sires,

Both old and young, were Shahs, and are my guides
To wisdom and the Faith, while through my mother
I am the grandson of king Samiran,^

And every way have wisdom for my comrade.

I am possessed of virtue, wisdom, might.

With courage, strength of hand, and horsemanship.

I know none other fit to call a man
In feast, in battle, or in anything.

I have a secret treasury well filled,

And men of name leal to their sovereign.

My justice shall make populous the world,

And all my subjects shall abide m joy.^

Moreover I will make a pact with you,

And pledge my tongue to God. Let us bring forth
The imperial throne of ivory, and set
The bright crown over it, then let us bring
Two savage lions of the wood and, placing
The crown between them, chain them on each side.

Then let the would be Shah advance and take
The famed crown from the throne of ivory,

1 “ do la leine Schemiian ” (Mohl). Possibly Semiramis is meant.

The § ends here in C.


4 o 6 the SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Place it upon lus head and sit between
The lions as the Shah, the crown above him,

And under him the throne, for we will have
None else, provided he be just and holy.

If ye reject what I have said then choose.

Ye all ! some noble, and Munzir and I,

For Arab chieftains know not how to flee,

With mace and trenchant scimitar will send
The dust up from your king of kings, and strew
Your heads upon the moon. Now for your answer,
And speak advisedly in this contention ’’

He spake, then rose and went inside Ins tent.

All marvelled at his words. The chiefs, archmages.
And all the people of Iran that heard
The wise Shah's words, exclaimed : This is the Grace
Of God, not craftiness or lack of wit ^

He speaketh naught but what is just, and justice
Well may rejoice our hearts. For his proposal
About the savage lions with the throne,

0. 1484 And royal crown, between them • if they rend him
The Judge will not require his blood of us ;

’Tis his own plan, and if he perisheth
We are content, while if he shall achieve
The crown he will have distanced Farldiin
In Grace, and we will have no other king.

In brief we give acceptance to his words."

That night passed by , at dawn the Shah came forth,
And sat upon the throne. He sent and summoned
The Iranians, and discoursed of yesterday
At large. The archimages cried : “ 0 Shah,

More knowing than the wise i how wilt thou rule
When thou hast eminence and mastery ^

How wilt thou deal concerning right and justice,

So that both fraud and falsehood may abate ? "

He answered thus those sages, warriors,

And chiefs : “ I will be better than my words,


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHAPITR 407

Will make injustice and informing cease,

And not appoint unworthy goYernors,

Will rule the world by counsel and by justice,

And, having pacified it, will rejoice
At what my justice hath achieved, will give
Some of my hoarded wealth withal to those
In want, admonish those that are in fault,

And bind them if they err the second time.

Will pay the army promptly and rejoice
The sages' hearts, make tax-collectors just,

And turn their souls from darkness and chicane.

If any one shall die, not having kindred,

And leave excessive wealth, I will bestow it
On mendicants, not add it to my treasures,

Or be enamoured of this Wayside Inn.

I will hold counsel with the experienced.

And take such order as will frustrate greed.

I will consult my ministers whenever
I purpose some new scheme, and not dismiss
The assembly when a man is asking me
For justice, but will give to such their due.

Will utter righteous judgment, and requite
The ill with ill as well becometh rulers.

My witness is all-holy God, and wisdom
Is master of my tongue.”

Then the high priest
And sages — well approved and veteran chiefs —
Exclaimed : We are thy slaves and bow our heads
To thy command and will.”

Then Shah Bahram
Said thus : “ Ye men of wisdom and our guides '

If in a year I make my soul and wisdom
Belie my promises I will renounce
Crown, throne, and heritage, and sit thenceforth
Among the luckless.”


0 14S5


Hearing this the sages,


4o8 the SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The magnates, and archmages shrewd of heart,
Eepented of past words and, being in fault.

Desired to make all well again, exclaiming,

One to another “ Who is worthier
To be the Shah than he in manliness.

Speech, counsel, birth ? None purer hath been born
Within the world ' God fashioned him of justice.
May mischief ne’er befall him. Wo shall have
All good from him, and turn us to the Faith,

And justice. If now wo shall speak perversely.

And send our wits to sleep, he with such stature.
Such nock, and arms, is peerless in the world.

While at his back there is the Arab host.

Because in weal and woo Munzir will help him.

And if he win the throne that is his own
Who in the world is better than Bahram ?

What cause hereafter would he have to foar
The Iranians, for what are we but a pinch
Of dust to him ? ”

They said : “ 0 prosperous one !
Our minds approve thee for our Shah. None know
Thy virtues, purity of person, wisdom.

And counsel, and we all of us have paid
Our homage to Khusrau, son of Pashin,i
As Shah, we all are under oath to serve him.

And stand within his danger, so to speak.

Hereafter if he ruleth in Iran

Our borders will be desolate with war.

One party taketh pleasure in Bahram,

Another is in favour of Khusrau.

Thine own plan is the right one, and the world
Thereafter will be under thy command .

Ordeal by the lions will suffice.

And thenceforth none will seek the sovereignty.”
Bahram gave his assent , ’twas his proposal.

^ Beading with P and T


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHJPtfR 409

At the accession of a lawful Shah

The high priest with three sages used to go

To him, enthrone him, and felicitate

The throne, then bring the crown of gold — the source

Of glory, right, and Grace — and, crowning him.

Would press both cheeks upon his breast in joy

The Shah then would bestow on suppliants

All gifts presented to him. So they put

The crown and throne in charge of the high priest, C. i486

And from the city fortunate Bahram

Departed to the waste. Brave Gustaham

Had two fierce lions which he gave in chains

To the high priest. They dragged the savage beasts

Along, the draggers seeming mad with fright,

And to the footings of the ivory throne
Chained them, and set the crown within a nook
Upon it. All the world — spectator there
Of crown and throne — watched how the prince would
fare


§ 13


IIo2u BaJirdm and Khum^au went to the Wade, and how Bahrdm
slew the Lions and took Ms Seat upon the Throne


Bahram Gfir and Khusrau went on the waste,

And with full hearts approached the lions. Khusrau,
On seeing the fierce beasts with the crown between
them,

Said to the archimages : “ He that seeketh
The sovereignty should be the first to try.

Moreover he is young and I am old —

Too feeble to resist fierce lions’ claws —

So let him use his youth and vigour first.”

Bahram made answer, saying : Good, 'tis well.

We will not blink fair words.”


With that he took


410 THE SHJHNJMA OF FlRDAUSt

An ox-head mace while the world wondered at him.
An archmage said . 0 wise and holy king »

Who biddeth thee fight lions ? Canst thou have
More than the soyereignty ^ So in its quest
Give not thy life and person to destruction
Thus wantonly. Herein no blame attacheth
To us, Tis thine own act, the world is thine/’

Bahr/im said : 0 explorer of the Faith ^

Thou and the other folk arc not to blame.

I am the man to fight these savage lions ;

Tis my delight to battle with the brave.”

The archmage answered: “Eefngcthon with God,
And, it thou needs must go, first purge thy heart
Of sin.’’

He did according to that word,

Eepented, purged his heart, bathed in a stream.

And sought upon the plain a place of prayer.

Then as ho prayed before all-holy God,

And laid his cheeks upon the dusky ground,

He said . Almighty i let Thy servants triumph.

If I — Thy servant— justly seek to cleanse
The world of evil give my soul assurance
In this strife, let me overcome the lions.”

0. 1487 Thence came the wise Shah and at once set forth
Upon his way, armed with the ox-head mace.

Now when the valiant lions saw him cominL^

One on the instant snapped its chain and charged
The exalted king. That hero smote its head,

And dimmed its eyes, then going to the other
Smote its head whence the blood ran down its breast,
Then took his seat upon»t^- ivory throne,

Placed on his head the’^loart-de![ighting crown.

And put his trust in God who is our Refuge,

The Guider of the lost. Khusrau drew near.

Did homage, and thus smd : “ Exalted Shah !

Blest be thy sitting on the throne, and may


YAZDAGIRD SON OF SHAPUR 411

The heroes of the world be slaves before thee.

Thou art the Shah, we are thy slaves and further
Thy good in everything.”

The mighty men
Showered jewels over him, invoking blessings
Upon his crown. A universal shout
Ascended from the world. That jubilance
Was on Surush’s day in month Azar
Whereon Bahram assumed the sovereignty,

And won fruition of the crown and Grace.

A cloud hath risen and the moon's obscured ,

From that dark cloud a shower of Milk is poured ,

No river, plain, or upland can I spy,

The raven's plumes are lost against the sky ,

In one unceasing stream egg-apples^ fall :

What is high heaven's purpose m it all ?

No fire-wood, salted meat, or barley-grain
Are left me, naught till harvest come again 1
Amid this gloom, this day of tax and fear,

When earth with snow is like an ivory sphere,

All mine affairs in overthrow will end

Unless my hand is grasped by some good friend.^

Now will I tell to thee so strange a tale
That in the wonder wonder’s self will fail.

^ The fiuit of the egg-i)lant {Solanum esculcntum), of which theie are
two varieties — a white and a purple
2 Reading with P.


INDEX


Tlm\Tnde^ and the Table of Contents at the beginning of the volume aie
complementary, Beferences to the latter aie m Boman nmieuds.


A

’Abbarid, 327
Abbieviations, list of, 5
Abdaas, bishop, 372
Abiaham, the patriarch, 65
Abti’l Ivasim, Fiitlauhi, 20, 207
Abti’l Muzaffai. ^ee Nasr.

Abd Mansui, 16

Accession of a Sh^h, ceremony
at, 409

Achaemenids, 194, 197, 198
dynasty of, 194

Adan, seaport and tenitory in
southern Aiabia, 386
/Egean sea, 204

Afiasiyab, lulei of Ttiran, 15, 79,
177, 240 and note
Afiica, 30

Ahdufinnik (Aiidarzn^mak), Pall-
ia vi tieaiise, 257

Ahiiniaii, the Evil Principle, 106,
112, 206, 240, 281, 290, 299,

31S, 384

Faith of, 281, 290
Ahwaz (Khdzistdn, Susiana), 35,
199. 298, 357

Akesines (Chinab), Indian iivei,
64

Aknaton, Phaiaoh, 371

a lover of peace like Yazda-
gird, son of Shapui, 371
Aldus (Alain), the, people, 395
nionaich of, 395
Aldi, place, 205


Alexandei I., king of Epiius, 12 ,
his Italian expedition, 12
Alexandei the Gieat (Iskandai,
Sikandai, qv,)t 11 seq ,
15 seq , 29 seq , 61 seq , 72,
74 84, 193, 194, 197,

204, 252, 253, 373
accompanied by expeits to
the East, 1 1

oiigin and giowth of the
lomance of, 12 seq,

Syiiac Chiifetian Legend of.
See Syiiac.

refen ed to by Muhaininad in
the Kurdn, 15, 77
how he became a Peisian
national heio, 15
pateinity of, 16, 18
founds cities, 13, 18
why so named, 19
tutoied by Aristotle, 29
and Koxana (Itdshanak), 30,

32

historic and romantic ac-
counts ot the fiist years of
his reign, 30

his flight from Darius’ ban-
quet, 30

his pm suit of Darius, 31
his historical tieatment of
the muiderers of Darius,
32

his romantic tieatment of the
muideiers of Darius, 33
mairies Darius’ daughter, 33


INDEX


Alexandei the Great, and the
Fakirs, 6i
and Calanus, 6i
and Poms, historical account
of, 63

his device of the iron steeds,
64

his stature, 64

his visit to the camp of Poius,
64

and Cleopliis, 6$
his visit to the Oasis of
Ammon, 65

and Candace (Kaiddfa), S^segr
assumes the name of Aiiti-
gonus (Naitkun), 66
Life of, Plutaich’s, 67
his visit to the Bialinians, 67
his letter to Aristotle, 68
mistakes the Indus foi the
Nile, 68

his leturn maich pioductive
of maivels, 69
his admiial (Neaichus), 69
and the Amazons, 12, 72
legend of, 72

his expedition to the Gloom
and the Fount of Life,
legend I of, in the Pseudo-
Callisthenes, 74seq
legend of his cook (Andreas),
76

veision of, in the Kurdn,

77

his hariier in the Caucasus,

78

legend of, m the Kuidn,

78

his coiie-spondence with
Aiistotle about the suc-
cession, 81
his Will, 81

provisions of, 81
death of, 82

dispute over his place of
interment, 82

his coipse taken to Memphis,
82


Alexandei the Gieat, interred at
Alexandria, 82
tomb of, 82

Mas’udi on, 82
S Chiysostom on, 82
diagiam to illustrate the
Persian Romance of, 84
wars on the death of, 197
Alexandei, son of Alexandei the
Gieat and Cleophis (’), 65
Alexandria (Iskandaiiya), city,
i3» IS) 17) 83, lefeiied to,

83

the Pseudo Callisthenes ori-
ginates at, 13
Alexandei buiied at, 82
his tomb at, 82
Mas’ddi on, 82
S Chiysostom on, 82
A 1 Hadi. See Hatia.

A 1 Iskandards. See Ilalai
A 1 Khidi (Khisr, qv), the Green
Piophet, 78 and note
oiigm of, 78

A 1 Mansui, Khalifa, 254
Amazons, the, 12, 71 seq

then disputed visit to Alex-
andei, 12, 72
origin of, 71.
described, 153 scg»

Sikandai’s correspondence
with, and visit to, 153 seq,
Ambai (Piidz Shdpur), city on
the Euphrates, 327
Ambassadois, instances of kings
and chiefs going in peison
as ambassadois or spies,

325

Amen-Pi-a, Egyptian god, 16

personated by Nectanebus, 16
Ammon, Oasis of, 30, 65

Alexander’s visit to, 30, 65
Amorium See ’Ammdiiya.
’Ammdiiya (Ancyia, Angoia),
stionghold, 23 and note, 89
Failakiis marches from, to
encounter Daidb, 23
Andbdeh, 32


INDEX


Ancyia See ’Amniiiiiya.

Andahls (Spain), vi, 66, 121, 122,

138

queen of, 12 1 scq

Andaiznamak (Alidndmak), Pali-
lavi tieatise, 257
AndieauticuR, sea, 77
Andreas, Alexandei the Gi cat’s
cook, 76 seq,
legend of, 76
in Kmdn, 77

Angola See ’Ammtiiiya
Antigonns (Naitkiin), name
assumed by Alexander,
66

Antiochus, Macedonian geneial,
76

Antipatei, regent in Macedonia,
82

mtiigued against by Olym-
pias, 82

Apollo and the Python, 203
Apologue, 310
Apothegms, 50, 303, 343
Apiies, 16

Aiab, Aiabs, the, x, xi, 17, 21, 22,
66, 1 71, 209, 254, 321
377, 385, 396, 398, 402, 406
their wais 'with the tianians,
17, 21

Ddrdb demands tribute from,

32

cymbal, 244

their incursions into Persian
teiritory, 322
steeds, 380

Aiabia, 70, 72, 206, 322, 355

Sh^pdi son of Uimuzd’s ex-
pedition to, 322

Aiabian, Aiabians, the, 378, 388.
Faith, 95

Arabian Nights, The, 71, 78, 250
quoted, 73

Aiabic language, 147, 205

veisions of Pahlavi texts,
255 seq.

Aiachosia, 32
Arar tiee, 19


41S

Aiash, son of Kai Kubdd Sec
Kai Aiash.

Aiash, Ashkanian king, 197, 210
Aiash, Ti liman wan lor, 394
Aiastalis (Aiistotle, q,v ), vii, 35 ,
counsels Sikandar, 35, 179
his sentences ovei the coffin
of Sikandai, 1S5
Aid, day, 298, 390 and note
Ai dawdn ( Bain am , Ai tabanus) ,
the last Ashkdniaii (Pai-
thian)kiug, viii, 3, 197
201 seq, 205, 214 562 ', 254
seq., 259 seq

— Bahiam, 197, 209 (’), 210
his status in Peisian tiadi-
tiou, 201
daughtei of, 202

m an les Ai dshir Papa-
kan, 202, 229
incited by her brother
Bahman to j)Oison Aid-
shh Pdpakan, 259
condemned to death, 260
saved by Aidshii Pdpa-
kaii's mmibtei, 260
gives biith to Shilpdi,
261

lestoied to favoui, 265
wiites to Pdpak, 214
summons Ai dshir Ptlpakdn
to couit, 214

receives gifts fiom Ardshii
Pdpaktln, 215

highly esteems Aidshii Pdpa-
kan, 215

his sons, 215, 25s, 267 note
their fate, 228, 229 and
note, 259

disgraces Ardshir Papakdn,
216

his slave -gill intrigues with
Ardshii Pipakan, 217 seq.
Ins eldest son made lulei of
Pdrs, 218 and note
consults the astiologeis, 218
his vain pursuit of Ai dshir
Piipakan, 221 seq


INDEX


416

Ardawdn, returns to Rai, 223
writes to his son about Aid-
shir Papakan, 223
Ardshii Papakan inaiches
against, 227

piepaies to encountei Ard-
shii Papakcln, 227
defeated, captuied by Kliar-
lad, and slam by Aulsliir
Papakan, 228
bulled by Tabak, 229
his palace at Ilai spaied (’)
by Aidsbir Papakan, 229
and 7iote

his secietaiyslain bj- Sbapdi,
256

= Mibi ak = Mithrak = Madik
(’), 256

Ardshir (Bahman, g'.r.), Shdh, 213,
271 and note

Aidslui, bi other of Shiptir (Ai-
taxeixes 11 . ), Sbdh, x, 3,
328, 360 seq.

Sbclphi arianges foi the suc-
cession with, 260 seq
his title, 364
resigns the ciowii, 364

Ardshir Khun a, city and distiict,
199, 205, 206, 229 and note,
231, 241, 245, 290 and note
Aidsliir Papakan builds a
Piie-temple 111, 230
makes 11 rigation - works
in, 230

meaning of, 290 note

Aidshii Papakan, Shiih (Aitax-
eixes L), vm, ix, 3, 61, 81,
I93> 196, 198 seq^ 209 note, I
213 seq,, 238 seq,, 250 seq,
294 seq, 303, 307, 315, 322,
325) 405

bis rise compaied with that
of Cyius the Great, 194
legend of Cyius the Gieat,
tiansfeired to, 195
his war with the Kuids (in
Kurndmak), 196
minister of, story of, 196


Aidshii Pdpakdii, Shall, Tabari’s
account of, 198
ni allies the daughter of Ar-
dawan, 202, 229, 259
his various defeats leferred
to, 202
hiitli of, 213

summoned to couit by Aida-
wdii, 214

equipped by Pdpak, 214
pieseiits gifts to Aidawan,
215

in favour with Aidawdn, 215
his piowess m the chase, 215
disgiaced, 216
wiites to Papak, 216
advised by Pdpak, 216
iiitiigues with Gulnii, Ai da-
wan’s slave-gill, 217 seq
lieais fiom Guhidi of the pie-
sage of the astrologeis, 219
dees with Giilndi to Pdis,
220 seq

followed by the divine Giace
in tlie foiin of a mountain-
sheep, 221 seq
adheients Hock to, 223
addi esses his suppoiteis, 224
founds a city, 202, 224
leceives pioniises ot help, 224
joined by Tabak, 225
and Tahdk defeat Bahman,
son of Aidawdn, 226
maiches fiom Pdis against
Aidawan, 227

defeats and slays Ardawan,

228

gives the spoil to the tioops,

229

spaies (’) Ardawdn’s palace
at Rai, 229 and note
counselled by Tabak to many
Aidawdii’s daughter, 229
letuins to Pais, 229
builds Khuna-i-Ardshli, 229
and note

his 11 ligation- works at Khui-
la-i- Ardshii, 230


INDEX


417


Ardshii P/ipakan, his wai with
the Kinds, 230 seq
and Haftwad, 236 seq,
message sent by aiiow to, 23S
woihted hy Ha ttwad and
entei tamed and counselled
hy two youths, 239 seq
slays Mihiak, 241
maiches to attack the Woim,
241

gives instiuctions to Shahigii,
241

his stiatagem against the
Worm, 242

slays the Woini and its
attendants, 244
summons Shalugi'i, 244 and
note

takes Haftwdd’s stionghold,
244

defeats and slays Haftwad
and Shahwi, 245
caiiies otf the spoil, 245
builds a File- temple, 245
lewaids the two youths, 245
his invasion of Kirmdn, 205,

24s

goes to Taisafiiu, 245
his pimciples of government,
250, 273 seq , 286 srq.
his leign, 254 seq.
length of, 254
Taibaii on, 254
and the daughtei ot Aida wan,
stones of, 255
coins of, 256, 257, 265
Clowns Shapdr, 257
his cities, 257
his piophecy, 257
enthioned at Baghdad, 258
his title of King of kings,
i 93 » 199^ 254, 25S, 273
his inaugural address, 258
Bahman’s plot willi lii^ sistei
to poison, 259

discovers plot against him,
260

consults his minis tei, 260
VOL. VI


Aidshi'r Papakan, condemns the
daughter of Alda^^t^n to
death, 260

his minis tei saves hei, muti-
lates himself, and makes
lecoid of the tact, 261
his son Shd-yiui horn, 261
heais about Shapdrfioni his
ministei, 262

lecognises and acknowledges
Shapur, 204

restores the daughter of
Alda wan to favoui, 265
lewaids his minister, 265
makes a new coinage in
honour of his ministei , 265
hnilds Jund-i-Shapdi, 266
haiassed wais, consults
Kaid, 266

wioth at Kaid’s advice, 267
seeks in vain for the daughtei
ot Mihiak, 268
lef erred to, 270
discoveis Uimiizd, 271
counsels Uiinuzd, 280
calls and counsels Shapfii,
286 seq.

on Chuich and State, 286
on the duiation of his
dynasty, 289
death of, 291

Aiiobarzanes, the muideiei of
Dai Ills Codomanus, 32
Aiioharzanes, satiap, 32 and note
Aristobulus, Gieek wiitei, 12
Aiistotle (Aiastdlis, qv), 29, Si
Alexandei’s tutor, 29
lettei to, 68

con espondeiice wit li, about
the succession, 81, 83
on the silkworm, 204
Aimenia, 202, 203
Aimeinan version of the Pseudo-
Callisthenes, 14

Arrian, lustoiian, 12, 31, 64, 68, 82
his AnabasiSf 12
his Indica^ 12
Caspian Gates of, the, 32
2 D


INDEX


418

Anian, on the stature of Poius, 64
Ichthyophagi, 69 seq.
Alexandei and the
Amazons, 72
the death of Alexandei,
82

Aisaces, 197

Aisacid, Aisacids, the, 198, 203,
205, 255

then impel ial system, 198
some of, escape from Ardslifr
Psipakdn to Armenia, 203
Aisalas, 32
Arses, 29

Aitabaiius (Aidawan, q ?;.)» 201
Artaxeixes Oclius, 18 7 iote, 29
con(iueis Nectanehus II., 18
note^ 29
murdered, 29

Aitaxerxes I. See Aidshir
Pitpakhn

Aitaxeixes 11 . (Ardshfi, hi other
of Slidpiii), 363
Aiwand (Tigiis), 329
Asfandiyar (Spe>/to-data, Span-
dat), son of Gushtasp, 15, 49,
55, 200, 213, 224, 242, 251, 271
Ashk, Ashkaniaii king, 197, 210
meaning of, 197

Ashkanian, Ashkdniaiis, the, race
and dynasty, viii, 193,
194, 196, 197, 209
diiiation of then lule, 193
times, Fiidausi’s lack of
mateiials foi, 193
sutviving traditions of,
tiansfeiied to othei
dynasties, 194
impoitance of, 194
genealogy of, 197
Asia Min 01, 30
Cential, 73

Astawadh. See Haftwad.
Astyages, 194
Athaia, iivei, 65
Atkinson, James, 250
on the Slidhnama, 250
Atiopateue, kingdom, 198


Attock, 62

Avasta. See Zandavasta.

Avidius Cassius, Roman geneial,
291 note

Azdda, Rdnian slave-giil, 382
goes liiiiitiiig with Bahrani
Gdi, 382

tiies to shame Bahiam Gdi
m Ills maikmanship 383
slam hy Bahiam Giii, 384
and note

Azai, month, 41 1
Azaihaijan, 198, 203
Azargashasp, the spiiit of the
lightning, 381
= Gusliasp, 212 and note
Azarnaisi, son of Uiniiizd, son of
Naisi, 318

B

Babak See Pdpak
Bahil (Biibylon, q v.), vii
Babylon (Bdbil), 17, 31, 81, 83,
176, 178, 180, 181, 183
Sikaiidai marches towaids,
176, 1 78

piodigioiis biith at, 81, 180
Sikandai sickens at, 18 1
dies at, 8 1, 183
Babylonian, 254
sciipt, 320
Bactria, 32, 198

Badakhslidn, legioii in northern
Afghdnisttin, 382
gem of, 382 and note
Bseton, Gieek wiitei, 12
Baghdad, city, vm, 254, 290, 322,

327

Aidslui Pdpakan enthroned
at, 258
Bdgiz, 32
Bagoas, 29

Bahman (Vohu Manau), amesha-
spenta, 362 and note
Bahman (Aidshh), son of Asfan-
diydi, Shah, 20 note, 34 and
note, 49, 200, 213, 270 and
note


INDEX


Balmian, son of Aidawaii, viii,
202, 218 and note, 225, 227,
260

made lulei of Pais, 218
leferiod to, 222
bidden by Aidawdn to seek
out Aidshii Papakdn, 223
defeated by Aidsliii and
Tabcik, 226

escapes to Hiud after the
defeat of Ardawan, 228
uiges his sister to poison
Aidawdii, 259

Bahiain, island in the Peisian
Gulf, 330
Bahram, 197, 209

= Aidaw{ln, 197, 209 (*''), 210
Bahictm, son of Uimuzd, Shall
( Vaiahiau L), ix, 3, 303, 306
leign of, 307 seq , 327
Bahrain, son of Bahrain, Sli.lh
(Vaiahian II ), ix, 3, 308
leign of, 310 seq.
stoiy told of, 310
Bahi\ini Balucimiyan, Shah,
(V'aialiian III ), ix, 3, 315,
316, 324, 334, 368, 405 (’)
reign of, 313

Ins inauguial address, 313
resigns the thione to his son,

314

Bahrain, son of Shapiir, Shah
(Vdiahian IV ), xi, 3, 313,

368. 371

nilei of Kiiindn, 368
his title, 368
his seal, 368
Tabari’s account of, 368
his daughtei , 369
resigns the thione to lus
brothei, 369
dies, 369

Bahiaiu Chiibina, 250
Balaam Gur, Shdh (Varahian V.),
xi, 3» 250, 325, 329 and
note, 372, 373, 394 seq.
his stay at Hiia, 372
his age at accession, 373


419

Bahrdm Gur, his peiseciition of
the Chiistians, 373
his wai with Home, 373
biith of, 375

the magnates advise Yazda-
gild to choose a governoi
foi, 376

put in Munzii’s charge, 378
goes with Munzir to Yaman

378

his nuises, 37S
his education, 37S serj.
has Ins tutois dismissed,
380

makes choice of steeds, 380
slave-gills, 3S1
goes to the chase with a slave-
gal, 382

his maiksmanship, 383 seq.
slays Ins slave-girl, 384 and
?iote

goes hunting with Nu’mdn
and Miinzii, 384
pictuie of, hunting, sent to
Yazdagiid, 385
leturns with Nu’indn to Yaz-
dagiid, 386

complains of Yazdagiid to
Munzii, 387

leceives advice and Ins slave-
gill fiom Munzii, 388
falls into disgiace at couit,

389

asks Tainiish to inteicede
foi him, 389

leleased and leturnsto Muii-
711 , 390

welcomed by IMunzir, 390
heals of his tathei’s death
and of the election of
Khusiau, 395, 396
claims the kingship and is
supported by Munzir, 396
seq.

his interview vith Jawanwi,

398

negotiates with the rranians,
401 seq.


INDEX


420


Balaam Giir^tlie rianian&piodace
examples of Yazdagiid’s
ciuelty to, 404
addi esses the riamans, 404
pioposes to decide the ques-
tion of the kingship hy 01-
deal, 405

pi onuses to lule pistly, 406
agiees to be the hist to face
the 01 deal, 409

BaidfC (Baidi), hill foit, 19S and
7 ioU, 199

Baitd’l Haidin (the Kaaha), 119,
121

Balash, king of Kiiinaii, 205
Baldchisthii (Balochistaii, Ged-
losia, IMtikian), countiy,
12, 70

Bandk, ritUiian chief, 202
Bandawti, ^Sindian duel, 175
defeated by 8ikandai, 175
Band-i-Kaisai, 295
Baibai, countiy, 114
Baidi. See Baida
Baniei , Alexandei ’s (Sikandai’s),
in the Caucasus, 78, 249
legend of, 78
site of, 79
desciihed, 164
Baisaentes, satiap, 32
executed, 32

Baisine (Staten a), daughter of
Baiius Codomanus, 33
man les Alexander the Gieat,
33

Barziii, rianian chief, 395
Bdizin, sacied Eire, 391, 400
the ridnians worship at, 400
Bdstdn-iidma, 16, 17, 84, 373
Bazdntish (Yaleiian), ix, x, 294,

297

his defeat and captuie by
Sliapdi, son of Ardshh,
294, 295

his suigle combat with Gar-
shctsp, 297

builds budge at Slidshta’i,

298


I Bazandsli (Jovian), x, 324, 326,

I 353 seq

elected eniperoi, 353
sues for peace, 353
accepts Slutpui’s teims, 355
Bjfzrangi, dynasty of Ti ibal Kings,
198

Beas (Hyphiisis), Indian inei, 64
Beibei, lace, 73
Bessus, satia]j, 32
executed, 32

Bhutan, Indian kingdom, 81
Bihafiidh, 200

Bili-Aidslur, city, 254, 291 note
Bihzad, Tiamaii duet, 395
Biids, green, 160

81 ka 1 1 da r 1 lold s con v ei se wit h,
vii, 160

Bn ka-i- A 1 dslui , city, 290 an d 71 ote
Biwaid, Tianian chief, 3115
Bfzhan, fiinian heio, 194
Bfzhan, Ashkaiaan king, 197, 210'
Black 8tono, the, 65
Blest, Countiy of, 74, 76
Bombij.e Moi'i See Silk
Book ot Indication *ind lleviHion,
Mas’udi’s, 252
quoted, 252

Bowl, the full, symbolism of, 63
Brabantio, 324

Brahmans (Gyinnosophistso), the^
vh, 61, 64, 67, 143 seq.
PalLidius on, 61
Sikandar’s inteiview with^

67, 143 ««!/•

countiy of, 143, 147
liear of Sikandar’s coming
and wiite to him, 143
descubed, 144

leply to Sikandai’s questions^
144 aeq,

Sikiindar quits, 147
Brides of the I’reasuie, 250
I Biowning, Bobert, his poem of
I “The Glove,” 3 84

Encephala, city, 18
' Bucephalus, hoise of Alexander
I the Gieat, 18, 31


INDEX


r>uceplialus, biith of, iS, 26
death of, 18, 64
a male, 18 (Etliiopic V(‘i&ion)
city hiult hy Ale\audei in
memory of, 18

olfeied hy Daiiiis to Poiub, 31

Buddhist saints, stoiv of two, 63

Budge, Di EA.\Valli& , 14, 17 7WtC
his editions of the Syriac and
Ethnipic veibions of the
Pseudo - Callisthenes, 14,
17 note

Biidmi, i<ice, 73

Buijah and Buijittiii /S^ee Youths,
the two.

i>ust, foitiess ciiul distiict 111
Sistaii, 175

0

4 '- ESAR, IX, X, 24, 26, 49, 1 12 6e<7 ,
122, 124, 126, 297, 298, 324
seij,, 336 srq., 341 seq, 345
seq„ 389

= Fciilaktis, 24 f 26, 27
= Sikand»ii 40, 42, 49, 113,
1 14, iiS, 121, 122, 124, 128,
129, 142, 158, 161, 170, 174,
178, 183

=:V«ileiian (Bazamish, q.v),
ix, X, 326

= Jovian (Bazantish, qv)yX,
3 S 3 , 354

pays tiibute to Shapiii, son
of Aidshh, 298
Shilpiii m disguise visits, 336
entei tains Shdpiir, 337
iliscoveis who Shdptii is, 337
aiiests Shapur, 3^7
has Shapdr sewn uj) in an
ass’s skin and imprisoned,
338

chaiges his wife with the
custody of Shapdi, 338
invades and i«ivages I'ldn, 33S
Shapdi piepaiesto attack, 346
overthrown by Shapdr at
Taisafdii, 346 seq.


421

Csesai, his tientmeut by Sliapui,

349^ 357
iiiothei ot, 351

Calamis (Sphines), Indian ascetic
61

Onesiciitus and, 61
Alevandei the Gieat and, Oi
death ot, 61
deiivatioii of, 61
identical with tlu‘ sage sent
by Kaicl to Sikandai, 62
Sec Foiii Woiideis, tlie
Callisthenes, Gietdc liistorian, 12,
74

the KoiUciiKe of Ale\andei
fatheied on, 13

Callitris qiiach imlviSi the Aiai
tiee, 19

Cambyses, sou of Cyi us the (iieat,
16

Candace ( Kaiulake, Kaidafa, qv),
dynastic title ot the queens
of Ethiopia, 13, 65, 72
and Alexandei, 65 seq
Canopus, stai, 382
Cappadocia (Palawlna), 294
Captain of the host, x
Captives, mutilation of, 323, 334,
348, 357

settlement of, 327, 357
Caithaginians, the, 30

Alexandei ’s legendary visit
to, 30

Casaubon, Isaac, 13
Caspian Gates, 31, 32
Cassandei , son of Aiitipatei, 82
Caucasus, the, 15, 79

Alexanders bariiei in, 78
legend of, intheKuian, 78
site of, 79

Chjich (Tashkand), city in Tdidii,
197

thane of, 197, 210

lefeired to, 229 and yiote
bow of, 384

Cliaghwau, place, 174, 175
Sikandai ai lives at, 174
I quits, 175


INDEX


422

Chain am (Jahiam), city lu Pdis,
44

Btiia goes to, 44

Chaibai, place on the coast of
Baliichistan (Makidii), 70
Chares of Mytilene, Gieek water,
61

Chaiogos See Taimi&h
Chess, 201

its intiod action into Persia,
201

Chin, countiy (often =TLuan), vii,
So, 179, 182, 186, 268, 280,
284, 358. 376, 397
Klicin of, 35

anihassadois fioni, come
to JD{(nC, 3 5
pen of, 57, 99

Sikandai’b expedition to, So
silk of, 85, 266
ornaments of, 102, 139
lord of = Hikandai ,113
=PaghMr, 17 1
luiplemonts of, 122
lobes of, 128
fiiuge of, 138
stuffs of, 143, 215
sea of, 149

Sikandai goes to, 169
laiities of, 1 71, 173
paper of, 172
coasts of, 173

brocade of, 173, 182, 184, 332
gold cloth of, 182, 334
China, 204

silk industry of, 204
Chindb (Akesmes), Indian livei,
3b 64

Chinese language, 147
Chosroes, king of Ainienia, 202
Christ, 133, 339

Faith of, 133, 352
Christian, 342, 356

rites of mairiage, 104
Faith, 356
Chiistianity, 138
Cilicia (Kaidafa), 294
City of Women (Haidm), vii


Cleophis, Indian queen, 65

and Alexander the Gieat, 65
Climes, the seven, 179, 262, 266,
273, 280, 376
Colchians, the, 72
Contents, Table of, v
Cos, island, 204

silk industiy or, 204
Country of the Blest, 74, 76
Cietc, island, 323 tiote
Cioss, the, 351, 352
the religion of, 138
Passion of, 339
Cfcesias, lustoiian, 13, 68
legend of Cyius 111, 195
Gutschinid on, 195
Cte&ijdion (Taisafun, 321,

322, 325, 372

Cup of Kaid, the. See Four
Wondeis, the
desciibed, 94, 100
piiuciplo of, explaine<l, 109
Cybele, goddess, 71
= IIittite Ma, 71
Cyrus the Gieat, 194

his iiso compared to that of
Aidshli Papakan, 194
legend of, tiansf cured to Aid-
shh Papakdn, 195

D

Dai, month, 306

Daizan (Tair, g-.v.), Arab chief, 322,

323

legend of, 323
daughter of, legend of, 323
Dakiki, poet, 196
Damascus, Nicolaus of, 195
Damdwand, mountain, 202
Dandamis. See Mandanes.

Daia, son of Danib, ShiUi (Dai ms
Codomanus, qv.),Y, 17, 27,
29) 33 835^(7., 1 13 , 1 13,

123, 124, 132, 137, 170, 172,
188, 32s, 353

legendary son of Ddiitb, 17,
27


INDEX


Biiia, appointed by Ddrdb to suc-
ceed him, 27
histoiical account of, 29
movements of, aftei his (mal
defeat by Alexaiidei (Si-
kaiidar), 31

Sikandai ’s coi i espondence

with the wife and daughter
of, 33

accession of, 34
his lettei to tlie kings, 34
pays his tioops, 35
anibassadois come to, 35
demands tribute fiom Sik-
andai, 36

marches against Sikandai, 37
Sikandai ’s visit to the camp
of, 38

invites Sikandai toabanquet,
40

his ambassadoi lecogmses
Sikandai, 40

sends hoi semen in pm suit of
Sikandai, 41

defeated bv Sikandai, 43
collects anothei ainiy, 43
again defeated, 44
goes to Chahram, 44
goes to Istakhi, 44
takes counsel with his chiefs,
45

collects a new host, 46
marches from Tstakhr, 46
is defeated, 46
withdraws to Kiimin, 46
bewails himself, 47
his lettei to Sikandar, 49
his lettei to Fdi, 50
marches against Sikandai, 51
abandoned by his tioops and
flees, 51

murdeied by his ininisteis, 52
his muideiers aiiested by
Sikandar, 53

his dying inteiview with
Sikandar, 53

vengeance promised him by
Sikandai, 53


423

D^id, tells his last w ishes to Si-
kandai, 54

bestows Kushanak upon
Sikandai, 55, 86
dies, 55
las biiiial, 56
his son Sasaii, 211
his kindled siippoit Aulsbii
Pdpakan, 223

Baitib, Shah, v, ii, 16, 20 se^ ,
34 and 7 iote^ 49, S3, 84, 86
132, 137, 172, 188
father of Sikandai m Peisian
legend, 16

legendai}’- fathei of Bara, 17
haiangnes the chiefs, 20
amhassadois come to, 21
employs Rdman artihceis, 21
wais with the Aiahs, 21
defeats and demands tiibute
fiom them, 22
wais with Iliim, 22
defeats Pailakiis, 23
giants teims of peace to
Failakus, 24

maiiies the daughtei of
Failakds, 25
letiiins to Pais, 25
becomes disaffected towards
his wufe (Nahid), 25
maiiies again, 27
Baiu is boin to him, 27
fails in health, 27
appoints Ddid to succeed
him, 27
dies, 28

Bdiab, Bauibgiid, city, v, 17,
19S, 199

Baiiel, Pass of, 79

Barius Codomaniis (Bdrjf, qv)^
16, 17, 29,30
defeated at Issus, 30
Alexandei escapes fiom the
banquet of, 30
defeated at Gaugamela, 31
asks that liis family may be
restored to him, 31
wiites to Poms, 31


INDEX


434

Daiius Codomaniis, the histoiical
account of the death of, 31
his daughtei mairies Alex-
ander, 33

his coipse sent to Pais, 3 ?
the punishment of his assas-
sins, 33

Daikuess, Land of. lyee Gloom,
the.

Darmesteter, Piofessoi, 203

on the story of the Woini, 203
Haft wad, 206

Daughtei of Raid. See Foiii
Wondeis, the
tleseiihcd, 94, 100, 102, 104
maiiicd to Sikandai. 104
Dhoulkai nain, See Zu-’l-kaiiiam
Dingiam to illustiate tlie Peisiau
Romance of Alexandei, 84
Dihkan, 95 and noie
Faith of 95

DiUfriiz-i-Fan ukhpii, ri/uiian
slave-gul, 3, 33S seq
icfeiied to, x

slave to CoesaPs wife, 338
has compassion on Shapdi,
339

discoveis who Sh^ipui is, 339
flees Sluipiii fioiu the ass’s
skin, 340

escapes with Shapiii from
Riim, 340 sefj,

entertained by a gaidener,
342

piaised by Shapiii, 346
named and honoiiied by
Shapiir, 356

Dilam, city in Gilan, 227
Dilamaii, legion, 202 and note
Dilarai, wife of Dai a and mothei
of Riishanak, v, 87 seq,
visited by Nahtd, 89
Dmawaii, histoiian, 16, 64, So,
81, 256, 323

Dinkaid, Pahlavi text, 252
Diognetus, Gieek wiitei, 12
Dionysus, temple of, visited by
Sikandai, 71


Diiazdast, title, 324 and note
Div (Daeva), demon, 135, 146,
1^0, 241

= Ahiiman, 349
Diagon, vii, 71, 132, 146

Sikandai ’s advtntuie with,
7 h 151
= Fui, 113
= Aidawan, 222

Diangiana (Makiaii, Laliichi-
stan), 32

Dreams, Raid’s, 91 seq.
Dukhtniish See N lisha.


E

Egypt (Misi), 12, 13, 16, 17, 72,
8t, cS2

the Pseudo-CaJlisthenes wi it-
ten in, 13

invaded l)v Alexander the
Groat, 30
Egyptians, the, 16

falsification of histoiy by, 16
EkbataiM (Hamadan), 31, 32
Elam, kingdom, 194, 198
Elephants, 115
Filr’s, 1 15

Sikandai ’s device to
oveicome, 115
Elymais, kingdom, 19S
Enotokoitai, the, 80
Epirus, coiintiVj 12
Alcxandoi I of, 12

Ins expedition to Italy,
12

Ethiopia, 18 7 wtCt 72

flight of Nectanebus to, 18
note

a western and an eastern, 68
= India, 68

Ethiopians, Ethiops, 43, 71, 80
Indians, 13, 68
western and easteiu, 68, 71
Etlnopic veision of the Pseu<lo-
Callisthenes, 17 and note,
IS, 30, 33> 66, 67, 71, 74,
82, 83


INDEX


425


Eimieiies, Gieek ephemeribt, 12
Euphrates, iivei, 31, 327
Euxiiie sea, 72

F

FAGiiFUfi, the, dynastic title of
the pimces of Ginn and
Miichin, vii, 35, So, 113

169 Heq , 325

ainl)assadoib tioni, come to
Delia, 35

Sikandai visits, as Ins own
ambassador, 170
yives audience to Sikandai,

170

entei tains Sikandai, 17 1
answeis Sikandai, 172
Ills gifts to Sikandai, 173
sends envoy with Sikandai,

173

Failakiis, Philip II. of Macedon,
the lathei of Alexander
the Gieat, v, 22 66(2., 575
102, 112, I2S, 130, 131, 151,
1 82

wais with Danlb, 22
allied itli the king of Rds,
22

matches fiom ’Aminiiiiya to
encounter Dai lib, 23
is defeated and 1 etui ns to
’Amindriya, 23
sues foi peace, 23
agiees to send tiibute, and
give his daughtei 111 mai-
iiagc to Daiab, 24, 25
adopts Sikandai as his heir,
27

Faith, Faiths, the foiii, 92, 95
of Chnst, Christian, 133, 352,

356

of Ahiiinan, 281, 290
Fakiis, the, 61

Alexander and, 61
Onesiciitus and, 61
Fault (Euidirates), 37, 42, 43, 290
Fan'ddn, Shah, 73, 172, 209, 406


Farwardin, month, 375
Faiyan, king, fathei-in-law of
Kaididsh, vi, 66, 67, 124
seq , 171, 172

his city taken by Sikandai,
124

slam, 125

his daughtei and son-in law
taken piisoners, 125
1)1 ought befoie Naitkun,
126

sentenced to death, 126
paidoiied, 126

Fiidausf, vn, 16, 17, 31 scq., 62,
64 seq , 72, 78, So seq , 197,
198, 200, 202, 250, 254, 255,

294. 295, 313, 315, 321 seq,
326, 328, 308, 372

his deiivation of Iskandai
(Sikundar), 19

his puiises of Mahmud, 20,
207, 279, 292, 370
his account of Alexander’s
battles with Dainis, 31
invents names foi Darius’
muideieis, 32
mtioduction to the stoiy
of Kaid, 62

his veiled attacks on Mah-
mdd, 62, 92 seq , and ?ioie
his lack of subject-mattei for
Ashkdnian times, 193
and the Cyrus legends, 195
Karnaniak, 196, 200 seq.,
255 seq.

on jMahmdd’s 1 emission of
the land-tax, 196
his treatment of the shoit
leigns, 249, 301
his fondness foi wine, 291,

295. 306, 309. 314, 362.
369

gives his age as sixty-three,

314, 369

lefers to his woik, 370
level ses the historical le-
lationship of Nu’m/in and
Munzii, 372


426


INDEX


Fire, Fiies, sacied, 21
Fhiiztlb/id. Sec Gdi.

Fish, the salt, legend of, 76 seq.

-eateis, See Ichthyophagi.
Foliii, 73 and note
Foitilications, vitiihed, 79
Fount of Life, the, 74, 158 seq
Sikandar’s expedition to, 74
seq, 158 seq.

account of, mthe Pseudo-
Callisthenes, 74 seq,
Sikandai heais ot, 158
piepaies to visit, 158
goes 111 search ot, 159
tails to find, 160

Four ^yondels, the, ot Raid, vi,
94, 97 and note, 99 seq
F«xiths, the, 91, 95
Fnlbd, sacred Fiie, 201, 255
Fiir (Poius, qv.), dynasty and
Indian king, vi, 31, 50, 51,
62, 64, no seq , 123, 132,

i 35 i 137, 170, 172, 175
Daia’s lettei to, 50
Sikandar’s war with, 67,
112 seq

routed by Sikandai iion
steeds, 116

his single combat with
Sikandar, 117
slam, 1 17

his troops submit to Sikaii-
dar, 1 18


G

Gabriel, angel, 13S note
Gaiiimait, Shah, 20S
Ganges, iiver, 64
Garden of the Hespeiides, 74
Gaidener, a, 341

entertains Shapiii, son of
Uinmzd, 341 seq.
sent hy Shapiir to the high
priest, 344

describes Shapiii, 344
lewaided by Shapih, 357


Gaishasp, ridnian chief, 297
his single combat ith
Bazainish, 297

Gashasp, rianian wan 101, 394
addi esses the nobles on the
succession to the tin one, 394
Garsiwaz,bi other of Afi asiyab,3 25
Gaugamela, 31, 32 note
battle of, 31

Gaumata, the false Smeidis, 207
Gaza, city, 30
siege of, 30

Gediosia (Makian, Baluchistan),
69

Gemini, constellation, 155
Genealogies, iictitious, 199
of Papak in Tabaii, 200
Mas’iid'i, 200
Genealogical table, 3
Geimauy, 73
Ghee, 10$

Gil (Gilan), legion, 227
Giiduni 8iidaiia, pass, 32
Giiih, 199

Giv, rianian heio, 194
Gloom, the (Land ot Daikness),
vii, 73» 74, 79
conception of, 73
Sikandai 's expedition to, 74
seq.

account of, in the Pseudo-
Callisthenes, 74 seq.
Sikandai heais of, 158
enteis, 159 seq
the jewels of, 162
emeiges fioni, 162
Gloiy See Grace.

Glove, The, Browning’s poem of,
retell ed to, 3S4 note
Gog and Magog (Yajdj and
Majiij, qv ),yS
legend ot, in Kuran, 78
Goidyene, kingdom, 198
Giace, or Glory, the divine, 27,
47> SL 85 and passim.
follows Ardshir Papak/in in
the form of a mountain-
sheep, 221 seq,


INDEX


427


Granicus, river, 30
battle of the, 30, 31
Greece, 30

Greek, GieeLs, the, 68, 82

then conception of India, 68
captives, mutilation of, by the
Persians, 373

Gieeii Prophet, the. See A 1 Khidi
Sea, the, 174 note
Gretna Gieen, 323 7 iote
Gi'idarz, ritinian hero, 194
Giidarz, Ashkanian king, 197,210
Gulai, place, 206
Gulnai, slave-gnl of Ardawan,
217 and note

hei intrigue with Aidshir
PApakan, 217 seq.
lepoits the piesage of the
astiologeis to Aidshh Pii-
pakan, 219

flees with Aidshir Papakan
to Pars, 220

Gund-i-Shapili (Shaptir Giid ?),
city, 29s, 327
M<ini-gate of, 327
Gill (Ziii, Philzabad), city, 199,
205, 229 note, 230, 245
Guigan, legion, 373
Gurzban, a city between Balkh
and Haiat (‘O, 394
Gushasp, sacied Pue, 201
Gdsh-bistdi, 80, 177 and note
his interview with Sikandai,
177

Gushtasp, Shah, 20, 49, 55, 200,
213, 251, 252, 258
Gustahani, Tranian waiiior, 394
his lions slain by Bah i am
Gdi, 409

Gutschnud, Alfred von, 195

on the Cyius legend in
Ctesias, 195

Gdzihi, Tubal King, 198, 199
H

Habasii (Ethiopia), vii, 149

people of, encounteied by
Sikandai, 149


Haftanbiikht. See Haftwad.
Haftwad (Haftanbiikht, Asta-
wadh), Tubal King, viii,
I99> 205 seq,y 232 seq,
account of, m Tabaii, 205
daughter of, 205, 206, 233,

234

becomes guaidian of the
Worm, 236

Noldeke and Barmestetei on,
206

son of, 206, 236

helps his fathei against
Aidshii Papakan, 236
story of, 232 seq.
his seven sons, 233, 235
his use to powei, 235
builds, and migiates to, a
stionghold, 235
and Aidshii Papakan, 236
seq.

slam by Ardshfi, 245
Halai (Olympias (’), Nalnd),
daughtei, in legend, of
Philip II. of Macedon, 19
leasoii for hei repudiation bj
Daiab and her naming hei
son Iskandai (Sikandar),

19

Halai-Sandaiils. See Halai.
Hamadan (Ekbatana), 31
Hamza, Arabic historian, 257
Haram, 65, 120 and note, 121
Baitu’l, 1 19, 121

Haiiim, the City of \Yoinen, vii,
73 » 153

visited by Sikandai, 153 seq.
Sikandar’s coiiespondeiice
with the rulei of, 153 seq.
Haslunu, 362 and note
Hashish, 32

Hatra (A 1 Hadr), city, 321 seq.
account of, 322
besieged, 322
fall of, legend of, 322
king of, 323
Hecatseus, 13
Heleno])olis, 61


INDEX


428

Heiodotus, 13, 16, 68, 72, 73
legend of Cyius in, 195
tiespeiules, Gaiclen of the, 74
Hii»h pi lest, X, 343 seq,

lieais of Slhipiii’s retain, 344
infoinis the ca[)taiii of the
host, 345
Himalaya, 74, 81
Hind, Hindiistan, vi, viii, 21, 51,
So, Si, 91, 98 and passim
amhassadois tiom, come to
Daial), 21

amh.issadois fiom, come to
Baia, 35
lulei of = Fill, 51
Sikaiidai invades, 98
silk of, 99
king ()f=lCaid, 103
Sik<iiidai hecomes king of,
118

people of, help the Sindians
against Sikandai, 175
Hiia, city, 372
Hishani bin Muhammad, 30
Ilittite, Hittites, 71
empiie of, 71

Hmen Tsiang, Chinese tiavellei,

63

<iiioted, 63, 73
Hoibaras, 195

Holy Gliost, the, 138 and note
Honiei, 13, 72
quoted, 68, 73

Hormisdas I. (Uiniuzd, son of
Shapiii), 301

Hormisdas (Urmuzd), son of Ui-
muzd, son of Naisi, 318,

325

Ilumai, Shah, mothei of I)aiab,
20, 22, 199
Huns, the, 15

Huimuz, Ashkcinian king, 197
Huimuz (Oimus), 204
Huinmzdagan, 193, 199

battle ot, 193, 199, 202, 256
Hushytii, astiologei, 372, 375
takes Bahrain Gilr’s lioro-
scope, 375


Hydaspes (Jln'lam), Indian iiver,
18, 31, 62, 63

Hydiaotos (llavi), Indian iivei, 64
Hypeiboieaus, the, 74
Elysium^of, 74

Hyphasis (Bens), Indian iivei, 64
Hyicania (Mazandaiaii), 373

I

Ibn Mukaffa, 17, 373
IbiAliim, Abiaham, the patii arch,
119, 120

house of = the Kaaba, 119
Ichthyophagi, the, 69 scq , Si
Sikandai and, 69, 147
Aiiian on, 69
modem accounts of, 70
then city desciibed, 177
go to meet, and aie visited
by, Sikandai, 178
hand ovei the tieasuies ,of
Kai Khusiau to Sikandar,
178

Imans, mountain, 12
Hndnian, ’Ini'uiians, the, Aiab
tribe, 324, 330, 331, 333
India, 17, 61, 64, 81, 83, 204
PalladiuH on, 61
Ancient^ M‘Ci indie’s, rpioted,
68

= Ethiopia, 68

Indian, Indians, the, 81, 375, 397
= Ethiopians, 13, 68
sages, 61, 83, 91 syy , 143 scq,,
266

bells, 175
bane, 259

Indies, Gioek conception of two,

13

duplicate races in, 68
India, Indian god, 203
and Vutra, 203
Indus, liver, 62, 67, 70

mistaken for the Nile, 68
Tollas, Alexander’s cup-beaier, 82
Iraj, the youngest son of Faiidiin,
353


INDEX


429


I'ldn, V, X, 16, 17, 21, 38, 39, and
passim

monarch of=Ddiab, 21, 26
and Shalmilmacompaied, 193
invaded by Mimzir and
Nu’man, 397

Tidnian, futnians, the, xi, 17,43
seq, 51, 112, 114, 179 and
passim

tlieii wais with the Arabs, 17
Sikandai’s proclamation to,
44

bewtiil themselves, 48
counsel Dtlra to come to
tenns with Sikandai, 48
ask quaiter of Sikandai, 51
hail him as then* king, 56
aftei Yazdagiid’s death meet
toi counsel in Pais, 394
send Jawanwi toMunzii, 397
offei piayei at the Fire-fane
of Baizi'n, 400

the loyal, support Bain am
Odi, 402

then piocedure to elect a
Shah, 403

decide to reject Bain am Giii,

403

remon&tiated with by Miinzii .

403

then object-lesson to Munzii,

404

accept Bain am Giir’s pio-
posal foi settling the ques-
tion of the kingship by
01 deal, 406

lion steeds, Sikaiidar’s, vi, 115
Isdigeid 1. (Yazdagiid, son of
Shapdr), Sasanian king,

371

Ishmael (Isma’il), 65, 120, 121
Iskandai. See Sikandai.
Xskandai, herb, 26
IskandariyafAlexandua), vu, 185
Sikandar buried at, 185
Island, the=Meroe, 65
Islands, Male and Female, 72
origin of legend of, 72


Ismdi’il. See Ishmael
Ispahan, 57, 86, 87, 199, 201, 202,
210

Israfil, aichangel, 78

Sik.iiidai’s inteiMew with,

vii, S3, 161
Tssus, 30

battle of, 30, 31
Darius’ family taken at, 31
Istakhi (Peisepolis), 37, 57, 59,
198, 199, 202, 21 1, 223, 225,
23 1 » 326, 356, 38b
Dani maiclies from, to en-
couiitei Sikandai, 37, 46
returns to, 44

Sikandar ci owned Slnih at, 59
taken by Aidshh Papakan,
227

Aidshii Papakan maiches
from, against the Kinds,
230

1 etui ns victoiious to, 232
Italy, Alexandei of Epniis’ ex-
pedition to, 12

Alexandei the Gieat’s le-
gendaiy expedition to, 12,

30

fwan-i-Kerkh, 327
J

Jacob of Saidg, Syiiac poet, 15,
84

Syiiac Chufetian Legend of
Alexandei veisifiedby, 15,
74, 78, 84
hib death, 15
Jadiistan, 109 and note
Jahram (Chaiam), city in Pais,

viii, xi, 1 19, 202, 225, 237,

241, 400, 401

deseit of, 401
Jalalpiii, Indian city, 18
Jamshid, Shah, 45 and note, 172,
209

Jamlsiydi, minister of Daiii, 52,
88

murders Dara, 52


430


INDEX


Jdniisiyjli, tells Sikandar of
Diha’s murdei, 52
anested by Sikandai, 53
executed, 56, 88

Jaw.imvi, rr/inian magnate, 373,
398

goes as ainbassadoi to Mun-
zii, 39S

his inteiview with Munzii,
39S seq.

lecogiiises the divine Giace
in Bahiiim (Uh, 398
suggests a couise of action to
Munzii, 400
1 etui ns to Ti^n, 400
Jaz, Mesopotamia, 337
Jeiusalem, 81
Jew, Jews, the, 95, 356
Faith of, 95

Jhilam (Hydaspes), Indian liver,
18, 3 i» 63

Johan Das, Babu, quoted, Si
Joktaii, 65

=Kahtan, 65
Joshua, 77

Jovian, Empeioi, 324 srq.

confa^ed with Valei uin, 324
Judaism, 327

Judda, the iioit of Meccii, \i, 121
Sikaiidar ai rives at, 12 1
Julian (Ytlmis), Enipeior, 324, 325
confused with Valerian, 324
not an cmperoi in the Sh/ili-
naraa, 324, 326
his expedition against Peisia,
324 seq.

Julius Valeiius, eaily Latin trans-
lator of the Pseudo- Call is-
thenes, 14, 61, 66 seq, 71,
74, 78, 79, Si
Jund-i-Shi'qnii, city, 256
= Ras-Shapiii, 256
Aidshir Papakan builds, 266
Jiipitei, planet, 13S, 172, 292
Justinian, Empeioi, 204

thcsilkwoim nitioduced into
the West duiing liis leign,
204


K

Kaaba, the, vi, 65

Sikandai ’s expedition to, 67,

83, 119

Kabtiiii, king of Misr and the
piogenitor of tlie Copts, 121
welcomes Sikandar, 121
praises Kaidafa to Sikiindai,
122

Kabul, Kabulistdii, 207
daggei of, 320

Kadisi, Kadisiya, place, 119, 330

KahUn, Aiab chief, 65, 120
=Joktan, 65

Kaian, Kaulnian, race and dyn-
asty, v, 9 seq,, 17, 34» 48> 55,
57, 59, 81, 112, 125, 141,
179, 180, 194, 199, 200, 202,

^ 210, 223, 237 7 iote

Kai Aiash, 197, 210, 228

Kaid, Indian king, vi, viii, 61, 62,
83, 91 iicq , 1 12, 256
identical with Mandanes
(Dandamis), 62
Sikandai and the sago of, 62,
104 seq

consults Million about his
dreams, 92 seq.

Ills Foui Wonders, 94, 97 and
7 iofe, 99 seq.

bis di earns inteipieted by
Mihuln, 94 seq
danghtei of, loo
desciibed, 100
leference in Sikandai ’s
will to, 182
cu]) of, desciibed, 100
leecli of, loi
sage of, loi

sends his Four Wondeis and
other gifts to Sikandar, 103
leappeaianceof, 256
Ills piophecy, 256, 257, 267
consulted by Aidshfr iVipa-
k{£n, 266

his advice to Aidshfr Pdpa-
kaii, 267, 273


INDEX


431


Kaidflfa (Cilicia), 294, 297
Kaiddfa (Kandake, Candace, q.v,)t
VI, S3, 121 seq., 325
obtains Sikandar’s portrait,

122

piaibed by Kabtiin to Si-
kandar, 122

leceives a letter fioni Si-
kandtii, 123

anHweis Sikaiidai’s lettei,

123

welconies Kaidriish on his
letmn fiorn captivity, 127
receives Naitkiin (Sikandar)
giaciou&ly, 128
her state desciibed, 128, 130,

133

gives audiences to Naitkiln
(SikandiU), 128 seq.
recognises Sikandar, 129 seq.
heals Sikandai’s embassage,
129

liei covenants with Sikandar,

132. *38

wains Sikimdai against
Tainiish, 133
chides Taiiiiish, 135
takes counsel with Sikandar
about Tainiish, 135
approves of Sikandar’s
scheme, 137

takes counsel with liei
nobles, 139

her gifts to Sikandai, 140
Sikandai’s hnal iiieissage to,

143

ICaidriish (Kaiidaros, Candaules),
son of Kaidata (Candace),
66, I34» ^35
wife of, 66

and his wife taken by Si-
kandai, 125

biought before Naitkiin,
126 •

sentenced to death, 126
paidoned, 126
gratitude of, 127
returns to Kaidafa, 127


Kaidriish, presents Naitkiin (Si-
kandai) to Kaidafa, 127
Kailian. See Kaid.

Kai Kliii&iau, Shall, 79, 177

the treasures of, found by
Sikandai, 178
Cyrus legend of, 195
Kai Kubeid, Slkili, 197, 210
Kai Manusb, 200
Kait. See Kaid
Kai Ugi, 200

Kal6 (Neieis). dauglitei of Alex-
ander in the Pseudo-Cal-
listlienes, 77

and the cook Andieas, legend
ot, 77

Kand See Kaid.

Kandake (Candace, g.v,, Kaidafa,

qv)t 66

Kandai os. See Kaidi lisli .
Kandaules . See Klaid i iish
Kami. See Tainiisb
Kanniij, city in Hmdiistan, 64,
no, 207, 352
Sikandai reaches, no
Kaiakh-Maish/m, 199, 291 note
Kaian, iTaiiiaii heio, 194
Ivciian, I'raiiian chief, 394
Kaikh=Khuiiam Abiid {% 327
Kainamak-i - Ardshii -i-Pcipakiin,
Pahlavi text, 14 noie, 61,
198, 200 seq. , 205 seq , 255
seq , 301, 325
account of, 195
resembl es Y atkai -i-Zai 11 an ,
195, 196
puipoit of, 196
portion of Shahnama corre-
&ponding to, 196

compared with, 200
seq , 205 seq., 255 seq,
Ivaiiuiinak, and Piidausi, 196
polo episode in, 196
Karnapravaramas, 80
Kanin, rivei, 199 note
dam on, 295
1 Kashmir, 31
1 king of, 31


433


INDEX


Katib, Aiab chief, 21, 65, 120
Kdwa, flag of, 347
Kazmin, 199
Kerat6r See Tainii&li.

Khiin, the, 35
of Clirn, 35

ainhassadois from, come
to Daiti, 35
Khaiazm (Khiva), 72
Khaiazniians, the, 72
Khairad, rr/unan waiuoi, ix, 228,
2S4

takes Aidawan pnsonei, 228
Khaiiad, sacred Fiie, 212 and
note, 226, 391
Khh, distil ct, 1 98
Kliisi (A1 Khidi, q.v), chief and
piopliet, 159

goes with 8ikandar to the
Gloom, 159

parts company with Sikan-
dai, 160

linds the Fount of Life, 160
Khuiiisaii, 242, 301
Ivhmm, 82, 184
meaning of, 82
oracle of, consulted, 184
Khuria-i-Ardshu See Ardshir
Khun a.

Khuirani Abiid (Kaikli ’), city,
327, 357 and note
Khusiau, Shall. See Kai Khus-
rau.

Khusiau, rianian noble, xi, 395,

408

refeired to, 406
elected Shah in succession
to Yazdagird, 395
proposes that Bahuim Giii
should begin at the 01 deal,

409

does homage to Bahuim Giii,

410

Khuzii’, Arab tribe, 65, 120

their lule ended by Sikan-
dai, 120

Khiizistaii (Susiana), 290 and
note, 298, 327, 357


Kibtis, 397 and note
Kimim-i Asir/in (Shiis ^), 327, 357
and note

King of kings, title of, 193, 197
meaning of, in Achscmenian
and Paithian times, 198
assumed by Aidshi'i Papa-
kaii, 193, 199, 254, 258, 273
Kings, Tubal, q,v
Kirnicin, legion m southein Tian,
V, 31, 46, 47, 57, 59, I99r
202, 205, 245, 252
Delia letiies to, 46
etymology of, 204, 236
Aril&hh Papakiin’s invasion
of, 205, 245

Kiimanshcih, title, 313, 368
Kirmanslialuin, place, 368
Ktesias. See Ctesias.

Kubtid, Shall. See Kai Kubad.
Kubeid, Shiih, fathei ot NiisMi-
wan, 3, 208
Kiifa, city, 381
wood of, 381

Kujaian, city and province, 205,
206, 232

Haftwacl migiates fiom, to
stionghold, 23s
Kuiaish, Aiab tube, 65
Kuian, the, 15, 65, 84

references to Alexander m,
IS, 78, 84

legend of Moses and the salt
fisli in, 77

Gog and Magog in, 78
Kuidi&tan, 330

Kurd, Kinds, the, viii, 193, 203,
230 seq , 257

Aidshir P/ipakan’s wai witli,
in Kiiinamak, 196, 206, 256
ill Shahuama, 230 seq>
Knidzad, daughtei of Mihiak, q,v.
Kuna Muna Islands, 72

m

h

Laus, Ptolemy, son of. Sec
Ptolemy.


INDE.Y


433


Land of Daikness. See Gloom,
the.

Land-tax, Malniuid's remission
of, 196, 208

Latin version, eaily, of Pseudo-
Call isthenes See Jnlms

Valeiiiis

Leech of Kaid See Four Won-
ders, the

Legend, Syiiac Chiistian, of
Alexandei See Syriac.
Leo, constellation, 172, iSo
Libra, constellation, 97
Life, Fount of, q v
Watei of, vii

of Alexandei, Plutaicli’s, 67
Luhrdsp, Shall, 55, 200

M

Ma, Hittite goddess, 71
= Cybele, 71

priestesses of = Amazons, 71
Macan, Turnei, 250

his edition of the Shahiiama,
60

M‘Cimdle, 68

Ins Ancient India quoted,
68, 80

Macedonia, 81, 82
Macedonian invasion of the East,
68, 69

Maciianus, Praetoiian piefect,
294

his tieachery to Valerian, 294
Madd, Medes, the, 194
Mildik, king of the Kurds, 203
meaning of, 203, 256
Magi, the, 372, 373
Magog (Mdjilj). See Gog
Mahahhaiata, Indian epic, 31, So
Miihiyar, minister of Daid, 52, 88
refeired to, v
murdeis D/iid, 52
tells Sikandar of the murder,

52

aiiested by Sikandar, 53
executed, $6, 88
VOL. VI.


Mahmiid, Sultan, viii, ix, 20, 193
piaise of, 20, 207, 279, 292,

370

Fiidausfs \eiled attacks on,
62, 92 seq and note
his 1 emission of the land-tax.
196, 208
Maifahiin, 199

Miijiij (Magog). See Yajui
Makidn (Gediosia, Baliichistdn),
69, 1 82, 202, 397
Alexanders letuin by, pro-
ductive of marvels, 69
etymology of, 69

Mdlika, daughter of Tdir, 3, 323,

324, 330

lefeired to, x
legend of, 323, 330 seq
offeis to betiay her fathei’s
htiongliold to Shapiir, 331
makes the garrison diunk,
333

opens the gate to Shnpiii, 333
goes to Sliapik’s camp, 333
Manda, the, nomad tubes, 194
Mandanes (Dandamis, Kait,
Kailian, Kand, Kaid), 61
and Onesiciitus, 61
identical with Kaid, 62
Maui, heiesiarcli, x, 307, 327,

358

account of, 327
-gate, 327, 359
his teaching, 328
his disputation with the high
priest, 358
executed, 359
Mai CO Polo, 74
Mars, planet, 212, 31S
Mas’iidi, historian, 62, 63, 82,

193. 257, 313, 315

his genealogies of Pdpuk, 200
his “Book of Indication and
Bevision,” 252

his apologue ot the owls, 310
on the paientage of Yazda-
giid, son of Shiipiir, 371
Maundeville, Sir John, 13, 72
2 E


INDEX


434

Mazaga, Indian city, 65
taken by Alexander, 65
Mdzandaian (Hyicania), 373
Mecca, 64, 120

Sikandar’s visit to, 64, 119
seq

account of, 64

Mede, Medes (Mada), the, 194,
203

Media, 31, 201, 203

Magna, 201, 203, 256
Median, 194, 195
empire, 194

Mediterianean, the, 294
Megaia, city, 323 note
Megasthenes, 68
Memphis, city, 82

Alexandei’s body taken to,
82

Mercuij^ planet, 171, 224
Mcioe, island and city of, 13, 65
Mesopotamia, Mesopotamian, 30,
294, 321
deseit, 322

Mihr See Mihr Barzin.

Miiii, month, 24, 33, 5 5
Mihiak, Tiibal King, viii, ix, 3,
i99> 237, 238, 257, 267,
268, 270, 272, 273
=Mitluak, 206
slain by Aidshii P/ipakan,
241

his daughter, viii, ix, 3, 241,
256, 257, 268 seq,, 272
escapes, 241, 256, 268
refeiied to in Kaid’s pio-
phecy, 267

discoveied by Shapdr,
26S seq.

inf 01 ms Shapiii of iiei
biith, 270

maiiies Shtipih, 270
birth of her son Ur-
muzd, 271

=Mithiak = Madik = Ai-
dawan (’), 256

his inipoitance in legend, 257,
267


Mihian, Indian sage, vi, 91, 97
consulted by Kaid about his
di earns, 92 seq

inteipiets Kaid’s di earns, 94
seq.

Mihiaii, tieasuiei to Yazdagiid,

387

Mihi Baizin, sacied File, 201,
212 and 7 iot 6

Mihrgan, feast, 230 and note, 245
Mihrmas, 200

MiUd, Ti/mian wan 101, 394
Milad (Taxilci), Indian city, 62,
98, 102, 109, no
Sikandar appi caches, 98
Minos, 323 7 iote
Miniichihi, Shah, 200, 353
Mhkhdnd, historian, 62, 315
Miskdl, measuic of weight, 24
and note

Misi (Egypt), VI, 37, 1 14, ns,
122, 181

invaded by Sikandai, 37, 121
king of, defeated by Sikan-
dar, 37

welcomes Sikandar, 121
sea of, 120

Sikandai stays foi a yeai 111,
121

Mithrak, 206

= Mihiak, 206

= Mihrak = Madik = Arda-
wan (’), 256
Mohl, Jules, 60

his edition of the Shahnania,
60

on the stoiy of the Worm,
203

Mong, Indian city, 18
Moses, piophet, 77, 95

and the salt fisli, legend of,
77

Faith ot, 95
Mosul, city, 322

Muhammad, the Pro] diet, 15, 65,
190, 292

Ins lefeience to Alexander in
the Kuran, 15, 77


INDEX


435


Muhammad Kasim, Aiabgeneial,

325

Muhammadans, the, 78
Mukaffa. ^ee Ibn Mukaffa.
Mutilation, instances of, 261,
323» 334, 34S, 357, 404
Munzii, prince of Hiia, xi, 372,

377 segr., 384 se^., 394, 406,
408

visits Yazdagiid, 377
monaich of Yaman, 378
leturns to Yaman with Bah-
rain, 378

chooses nuises foi Bahrani,

378

dismisses Bahiam’s tutor s,
380

provides Bahiain Giir with
steeds, 380

piovides Baliiam Giii with
slave-girls, 381
goes to the chase with Bah-
lam Giii, 384

sends a pictuie of Bahiiim
Gilr shooting to Yazdagird,

385

sends Bahrain Giir wuth
Nu’m«in to Yazdagiid,
386

receives a lettei fiom Yaz-
dagiid, 3S7

counsels and sends Bahiam
Giir a slave-gill and pres-
ents, 388

welcomes Bahrain Giir on
letmn, 390

supports Bahiaiu Giii’s
claim to the throne, 396
scq

invades Tran, 397
his mteiview wath Jawainvi,
398 seq.

lefeis Jawiinwi to Bain am
Giii, 398

advises Bahiam Giir to
negotiate with the Tian-
lans, 401, 404
Mytilcne, Chaies of, 61


N

Nabarzanes, Peibian geneial,
32

paidoiied by Alexandei, 32
Nahld (Halai (’), Olympias),
(laughter of Failakiis, v,
24 seq, and note, 89
luaiiies Daiab, 25
troubled bj’- offensive hi eat h,
26

cured, but lepudiated by
Diiicib, 26

letuins to Failakiis and gives
birth to Sikandai, 26
visits Dilarai and Khslianak,
89

lefeired to, 1S7
Niihid, the planet Venus, 214
Naitkiin (Antigoims), mmistei of
Sikandai, 66

his name assumed by Sikan-
dai, 66, 125 seq
personates Sikandai, 125 seq
kaulriish and his wife bi ought
befoie, 126

sentenced to death hy,
126

paidoned by, 126
= Sikandai, 131. i33» I34» 141
Napata, city, 65
Naphtha, vi, 115, 116, 165

Sikandai ’s non steeds filled
with, 1 15

Fur’s elephants and tioopb
routed by the use of, 116
used to vitrify Sikandar’s
bciriier, 165

Narmpcii, the, fabulous tube, vii,
71 and note
Sikandar and, 150
Naises (Naisi, son of BahiAni),
SaSiiiiian king, 315
Narsi, Ashkiinian king, 197, 210
Ndisi, son of Bahrain, Sluih
(Narses), ix, 3, 313, 316,
325» 330» 33G 337
his leign, 315 seq.


INDEX


436

NarsI, his title, 315

his inaugural addiess, 315
daughter of See Nusha.
Naslbm (Nisibis, q.v.)y 326, 355
cession of, 355

inhabitants ot, lefiise to sub-
mit to SIiApiii, 356
taken by Shiipiii, 356
Nasi, Amir, biotliei of Mahmiid,
196, 207
praise of, 207

Nasi, Aiab chief, 65, 120, 121
appeals to Sikandai toi help,
120

made luler at Mecca, 121
Nauniz, 33, 55, 273, 389
Neaichus, ailmiial ot Alexandei
the Gieat, 12, 61, 70
his account of tlie Ichthy-
ophagi quoted by Ariian,
69, 70

Neciaiiebus II , king ot Egypt,
16, 18

pel senates Amen-Ila and be-
comes the legendaiy fathei
of Alexandei the (heat, 16
stoi^ of, 18 and note
Negioes, the, 73

described, 73, 157
cause tiost and snow to haim
Sikandar, 156, 157
Nekht-neb*f. See Nectanebus
Nereis. See Kald.

Nicsea, Indian city, 18
Nicolaus of Damascus, 195
Nile, 42, 65, 169, 17 1, 269
the Blue, 65
mistaken toi Indus, 68
Nimniz,! 175

Sikandar inaiches to, 175
Nnis, lake, 17
ref ei led to, si
Nislidpur, city, 298
Nisibis (Nasibin, q.v ), 254
peace of, 254
cession of, 326


Nisus and Scylla, stoiy of, 323
note
Nitetis, 16

Noldeke, Piofessor, 14 and note^
198 note, 199 and yiote, 253,

313. 372

Ins tieatise on the Alexander
Romance, &c., 14 and note
on the story of the Woiin,
203, 205, 206
Haftwad, 206
Noithmen, the, 19

found Russian einpii<‘, 19
Note on Piominciation, 8
Nubia, 65

Nu’man, piince ot Iliia, xi, 372,

^ 396, 404

visits Yazdagiid, 377
goes to the chase Mith I>ah-
ram Gih, 384

goes to the Peisian couii
with BahiiUu Giii, 386
letuins to Yaman withletteiS'
and pi esents, 3S7
welcomes BaluamGiii on his
levisitmg Vainan, 390
invades I'lan, 397
Niisha {Diikhtiiiish), daughtei of
Naisi, X, 3, 323, 324, 331
carried otri)) the Aiabs, 323,
310

Niishiiwan, Shah, 3, 201, 208
quoted, 208, 209 and note
Niibhzad, fathei of Mihiak, 237^
241, 267, 270, 273

O

Oasis of Ammon, 65

Alexandei ’s visit to, 65
Odenathus, Aiah clnet, 294, 322,
324 scq.

and Sliai»ur, son of Ardshiiv

294*325

confused with Ahileiiau, 324
seq.


^ See Vol, i. p. 396 note.


INDEX


437


Odoiico, Minorite Friar and
tiavellei, 13

Olympias (HaUi (’), Naliid), wife
of Philip of Macedon and
niothei ot Alexandei the
Gieat, 16, 82

hei legendaiy connexion with
Nectanehus, 16, 18
hei legendaiy choice of a
name foi hei son, 19
liei mtiigues, 82
Omphis, Indmn king, 62
Onesiciitus, pilot of Alexandei
the Gieat, 12, 61, 67
an untiustworthy wntei, 12
the Fakiis and, 61
Calami s and, 61
Mandanes and, 61
Ornius (Huiinuz), city on the
Pei Sian Gulf, 204
O.sroene, kingdom, 198
Othello, play of, quoted, 324
Owls, Mas’iidi’s apologue of the,
310

Oxyaites, fathci of Roxana
(Riishauak), wife of Alex-
andei the Gieat, 32

P

Pahlavan, Pahlavans, 194
Pahlavi, vei&iou of the Pseudo-
Callisthenes, 14, 16, 84
wiiting and leading, con-
fubioii in, 14, 62, 205, 206
language, 194
text, 19s, 196, 257
Piilawina (Cappadocia), 294, 297,
298

Palestine, 30
Palladiiis, bishop, 61, 62

Ills treatise on the Biahnians,
61

interpolated into the
Pseudo - Callistheiies,
61

Palmyra, 294, 322, 324
Pains Maeotis, 73


Papak, Tribal King, viii, 3, 194,
195, 198 .seg., 21 1 note and
SCq, 227, 252, 254, 256
and Sasan, 212
daughtei of, 213

maiiies Sasan, 213
Aidaw^u’s lettei to, 214
equips Aidshir Papakan for
couit, 214
dies, 218

his kindled suppoit Aidshir
Pipakan, 223 segf

Papakan, Aidshir. See Aidshir
Papakan.

Paradise Lost lefeired to, 71

Pans, MSS of the Pseudo- Callis-
thenes m National Libuiiy
at, 14

Pars, countiy, 17, 25, 32 note,
37 * 4 S> 1 15. ii9» 194 and
passim

the coipse of Daiius sent to,
33

Aidsliii Papakan dees to, 220
maiches fiom, against
Aidawaii, 227
letuins to, 229
the Tianians, aftei Yazda-
giid’s death, meet to con-
sult in, 394

Pait Kings. See Tubal Kings.

Paithian, Parthians, the, 194,
203, 256, 322
dynasty, 194, 201

uses the title of King of
kings, 197
Great king, 198

Paiwiz, fidniaii chief, 394

Pashiu, ridniau noble, 408

Patashwdigar, region, 202 and
note

Panravas, Indian lace and dyn-
asty, 31

Peisepolis (Istakhi), 31, 32 note,
373

Persia, 61, 201, 278

introduction of chess into,
201


INDEX


438

Persian, Peisians, the, 30, 44, 45,
81, 82, 143, 148, 157. 170,
201 and 'passim
language, 147, 205
dispute with the Rdmans
ovei Sikandai’s buiial,
184

einpiie, 197

monks intioduce the silk-
worm into Em ope, 204
sea 01 gulf, 204, 205
mutilation of captives, 323,
334 , 348, 357 , 404
Peisis (Pars), 195
Pliaiasmanes, king, 72
Philip 11 . of Macedon (Failakiis),
the fathei of Alexandei
the Great, 16, 18, 19, 29
and Nectanebus, stoiy of,

18

names his son Alexander,

19

Phiion, Macedonian noble, 76
Phiygians, the, 71
Pirdz ShjCpili (Anibai), city, 327,
3 S 7

Pisces, constellation, 395
Pishdddian, dynasty, 194
Planets, the seven, 206
Pleiads, Pleiades, 169, 401
Plutarch, histoiian, 67
Polo, 196, 329, 379 , 382

episode 111 Kctindmak and
Shdhnama, 196, 257, 263,
271

Poius(Eur, (pu,), Indian king, 17,
62 seq, 66, 67, 76, 80, 83
son of, 18, 63
Dai ms’ letter to, 31
oiigin of name of, 31
kingdom of, 31
and Alexander, histoiical
account of, 63
in the Pseudo - Callis-
thenes, 64, 67
his stature, 64
nephew of, 80
Pronunciation, Note on, 8


Pseudo-Callisthenes, the, Gieek
Romance of Alexandei the
Great, 13 seq^ 30 seq,^ 62
72, 74 beq,, account,
and veisions of, 13 ass' , 17
vogue of, 17

treatise of Palladius inter-
polated in, 61

Alexandei and Poms in, 64
historic elements in, S3
Egyptian, 83
Pei Sian, 83
Aiabic, 83

diagiam to illustiate, 84
Ptolemy, son of Lag us, one of
Alexandei ’& geneials, king
of Egypt and histoiian, 12,
13,66

Python, Apollo and tlie, 203

Q

Quintus Cuitius, historian, 65
on the Amazons, 72

R

Races, duplicate in West and
East, 68
fair-haired, 73

Rai, city and district ueai Tihran,
32, 201, 202, 219, 229
Ardawan’s capital, 201
Rakshasas, 13
Rdm, File- temple, 202, 226
Rdm Aidshir, city, 202, 290 and
note

Rdmbihisht, wife of Sasan, 19S
Rdm-Hurmuz, plain of, 199
Rdinislm-i- Aidshir, distiict, 202
Rds-Shdpiii, city, 255
= Gund-i-Shapiir, 256
Rati, weight, 156 and 'note
Ravi (Hydiaotes), Indian river,
64

Rawalpindi, 62
Rawlinson, Professor, 253
Reeds (bamboos), 71


INDEX


439


Keeds, gigautic, seen by Sikandar,
148

used in house-bmlding, 71,
148

Riv-Aidslnr, city, 202
referied to, 224

Roman, Romans, the, 30, 254,

318, 325* 326

Alexander’s legendary visit
to, 30

empiie, Eastern, 253
emperois, 321, 371, 372
Romance of Alexandei the Great,
the, II seq.^ 88

its incoiporation in the Shdh-
nama, 16
vogue ot, 17

souices of maivels in, 12, 69
diagiam to ilhistiate, 84
Rome, 194, 197, 203, 301, 324
Shapiir sou of Aidshii’s wars
with, 294, 297

Tbihiain Giii’s wai with, 373
Roxana (iliishanak, q.v.), 30, 33
and Alexandei , 30
account of, 32

Rildydb, father of Papak (in
Shalmama), 200, 212
Rdm, the Eastein Roman Em-
piie, V, X, 21 seq., 35 seq,,
40, 4i» 4S> S3. 8i, 94,

104, 1 13 seq., Q.'adi passim
ambassadois fiom, come to
Daiab, 21

Ddrab wais with, 22
inince of, 22
chiefs of, 23, 153

witlidiaw on Dili jib’s
approach, 23
tiibiite of, to Ddidb, 24
ambassadors from, come to
Dai a, 35

biocade of, $6, 89
leed (pen) ot, 85
stuffs of, 143
philosopheis of, 1 15, 154
cavaliers ot, 167
iShiih of = Sikandar, 170


Rdm, king of =Sikcindar, 172
Sikandar’s policy to safe-
guaid, 178

Aiastalis’ advice to Sikandai
concerning, 179
invaded by Shapiii, 350
slave-gills of, chosen by
Bahiam Gxir, 382
Riiman, Rdman'., the, ix, x, 19,
21, 44, 45, loi seq, 113,
114, 127, 142, 148, 168,170,
179 seq,i and passim
king of = Philip of Macedoii,

19

cairy out woiks in Tuin, 21
= Sikandar, 50, 52, 154
the rranidiis ask quaitei of,
SI

tongue, 160

dispute with the Persians as
to Sikandai ’s buiial, 184
sages, 185

then sentences over the
coffin of Sikandai, 185
seq,

silk, 2S0

defeated by Shaptir, son of
Aidshh, 297

engineeis build budge at
Shushtar, 299
astiologic tablets, 376
slave-girls, 382
Rus (Russia), 19, 22
king of, 22

Rdshanak (Roxana, q.v.), daugh-
tei of Ddia (111 Shahnama)
and wife of Sikandar, v,
VI, 86 seq , 181, 1S8
account of, 32
deiivation of, 33
bestowed by Dard on Si-
kandar, 55
son of, 81, 181
visited by Nahid, 89
maiiied to Sikandar, 90
refeience in Sikandar s Will
to, 181

Russia (Rus), 19


INDEX


440

Hussiaii, Russians, the, 19
einpiie, 19

foundcitiou of, 19
Rustam, sou of Zal, ndiuan hero,
194, 325. 395

<i P(‘i.sonilicalion of the
Sacai, 194

S

SAau, Scythians, the, 194

Rustam a Peisoiiihcation of,
194

Sada, feast of, 33, 55, 230 and
noie, 245 273, 389
Sage, ft.ige.s, vi, mi, 10 i, 103
Indian, 62

naked (Riahmans, qv.^
Gyninosoidiistie)
of Kaid. ^I6e Calaims cmd
Pour Wondois, tlie
Sikandar and, 62, 104
aeq

dosciibed, 94, loi
explains tlie piinciple of
the Ciii), 109
SakUb, Slavonia, 179
Salni, eldest son of Rariddn, 353
Salt iisli, the legend of, 76 aeq.
Sam, I'ldiiian hero, 395
Samiian, 405 and note
Sandal, Sandards, the Aiar tiec,

19

Sapoi I (Shnpiii, son of Aidslnr),
Sdstiiiian king, 294, 321
Sapor 11 (Shapdi, sou of Uimuzd),
Sitsunian king, 294, 321
Sapoi III. (Shapdi, son of ShiCpdr),
365

Sarug, Jacob of, Syriac poet.
See Jacob.

Sarv, king of Yanian, 73
Sdsan, name of Bara’s son and
seveial of his descendants,
200, 21 r, 224, 255
descendants of, helj) Ardshir
Pdpakdn, 224

House of, 251, 270 and 7iote


SJsJii, fathei of Aidshli Papakun,
viii, 3, 193, 198, 200, 201,
21 1 scq , 240
legend of, 211 seq.
matiies daughtei of P.ijiak,
213

Sasanian, SasJnians, the, viii, 81,
209, 225, 249 i^eq , 253, 257,

321, 327

genealogical lahlo of, 3, 253
Tahaii’s histoiy of, 14 note
Byn.isty, vni, 61, 199, 249 seq,
Takui on the use of the,
1 98

chaiacteiised, 249 aeq.

Zo 1 < lasti ianisin u n d ei , 25 1
JMas’iidi on Chinch and
State uiidei, 251
dnrat-ion of, 257
Empiie, 193, 327
fictitioiiK goiHMlogies of, 199,
21 1, 256

view of Sikandai, 15, 224 and
noiCi 240 and 7 wte
Satuin, pianct, 97, 115, 176, 281,

31S, 3S5

Sav, spiing of, xi, 372, 373, 391,

392

legend of, 372, 391 scq.
Sawing, Indian king, vi, 64, 118
Sayce, Professoi, on the Amazons,
71

Scandinavians, 19, 73

found the Russian empire, 19
Scotland, 79

vitiified forts in, 79
Scylla, Nisus and, stoiy of, 323
note

Seleucia, city, 254, 291 note^ 322
Seimramis, queen, 66, 405 note
Seven clinics, the. See Climes.
Pei Sian nobles, tJie, legend
of, 207

tiansfeiied to Ardshir
PJpakan (’), 207
planets, 206
Severus, Empeior, 322
his siege of Hatia, 322


INDEX


Sliiih, accession of, ceiemony at,
409

Shtihaljad, city, 295
Slialid, iivei, 391, 392
Sliitlmania, 3 and note, ii, 19, 30,
31, 66 seq, 72, 79, 82 seq,
194 uq , 200 seq , 205 seq ,
349 seq., 253, 256, 270 note,
294 > 301 , 307* 310, 325. 326 i
Gicek Miliject'inatter in, ii
deiivation of Sihandar ^iven
in, 19

liistoiic penod of, 29
and Tntn, analo<ry between,

193

poition of, couesponding to
Kchnainak, 196
])ioHe, 196

and Kanuiniak compaied,
200 s^^q., 255 seq

Hhalii .yir, chief in Sikandai’s host,
125, 126

takes Kaiddfa’b son and
daiightei -indaw piisoneis,
12s

Shahigii, cajitain of the host to
Aidbhh Piiiiakin, 241
-Vidshir’s insti actions to, 241
goes to Aidshii’s help, 244
and note

Sluihrwi, aichimage, 329

minister dining Shapiii
son of Uimiizd’s ininoiity,

329

ShiUiwi, eldest son of Haftwdd,

237

lefeiicd to, 206
helps his fathei against
Aidshir P«ipakiln, 236
executed, 245
Shihn (Syiia), 357
Shangul, Indian king, 325
Shitpdi, Ashkanian king, 197, 210
Slutpilr, sou of IMpak, 199
Shapiii, sou of Aidshir P.tpakdn,
Shah (Sapoi 1 .), viii, ix, 3,
196, 256, 262 seq., 268 seq.,
303» 307* 313, 3 I 5 » 321 seq .


441

Shdpui, stories of, in Kamaniak,
196,255

m Tahau, 255, 257
Clowned 111 his father’s life-
time, 257

secret biith of, 261
oiigin of name, 262 and note
lecognisedaud acknowledged
by Aidshh Papakan, 264
discoveis the daughtei of
Mihiak, 268 seq.
summoned and counselled by
Aid&hii P.ipakcin, 286 seq.
confused with Shapiii, son of
Uimuzd, 294, 321, 324, 327
Ins loign, 294 seq.

its histoiical inaccma-
cies, 294

Ins wais with Rome, 294,

297

and Odenathua, 294
defeats the Riimans, 297
receives tribute fioiu Csesai,

298

builds cities, 298
bids Bazandsh build a budge
at Shdshtai, 298
summons and counsels Ui-
muzd, 299

Shdpdi, sou of Uimuzd, Shdh
(Sapoi II ), X, 3, 294, 29s,
307, 321 seq., 371, 373,

405 ?)

lefened to, 318

reign of, 321 seq.

his bridge at Taisafiin, 321,

329

his places of residence, 321,

330

confused with Shdpiii, son
of Aidshh, 294, 321, 324,

327

his triumphant tieaty with
the Riimans, 326, 355
his cities, 327, 357
birth of, 328

Clowned as an infant, 328
his education, 329


INDEX


442

Sh^pui, bon of Urmiizd, Malika
offeis to betray hei father's
stronghold to, 331
opens the gate to, 333
sends Malika to his camp,
333

his tieatment of his Aiah
captives, 323* 334
receives the title of Zii’l
AkUf, qv , SSS
returns to Pais and receives
tiibute, 3 35

consults the astiologeis, 335
visits Coesai 111 disguise, 336
enlei tamed by Caesai, 337
denounced by a Persian re-
sident at Csesai’s couit, 337
airested, 337

sewed up in an ass's skm
and imprisoned, 3 38
pitied by an rrdiiian slave-
gill. 339

freed from ass’s skin by
slave-gill, 340

entertained by a gardenei,
341 seq.

sends the gardener to the
high pi lest, 344
desciibed by the high priest,
344

praises the slave-girl, 346
piepares to attack C^sar,
346

sends spies to Taisafdii, 346
sends tidings of his victory
over Ca3sai to the provinces,
348

his treatment of Cie.sar, 349
invades Kdni, 350
defeats Ydnus, 352
bids Bazaniish come to him,
354

dictates terms of peace, 355
leturns to Istakhr, 356
takes Nasibin, 356
names and honours the slave-

girl, 356

rewards the gaidener, 357


Shapiii, keeps Caesar captive, 357
sends Caesar’s corpse to Rum,
357

arianges a disputation be-
tween Mdni and the high
piiest, 358

has Mdni executed, 359
arianges foi the succession
with his brothel Ardslui,
360 seq.
dies, 362

Shdpi'ir, son of Shapiii, Shah
(Sapoi 111 ), X, 3, 251, 360,
364 seq , 371

Aidslni, son of Uirnuzd, re-
signs the throne to, 364
Tahaii on the death of, 365
death of, 366

Shdpiii, son of Yazdagiid, king
of Ainicma, 373

Shitpiii Criid (Gund-i-Shuinii %
city, 295, 298

Shawwdl, the tenth Muham-
madan month, 208
Shem, ])ati larch, 65
Shi'bitii, 397

Sliikban, fianian waiiioi, 395
Shiidz, city, 198 7 iote, 210
Shii’ib, Aiab chief, v, 21
attacks Ddrdb, 21
defeated and slam, 22
Shiiibdn = Siiiisttin (Babylonia),
379

Shiis=Kinam-i-Asirdn {’), 327
Slnishtar, city, 199, 295 and noie,
299

dam and bridge at, 298, 326
Sicily, 30

Alexander’s legendaiy visit
to, 30

Sikandur (Iskandai, Alexander
the (rieat, q,v)^\ seq 11,
13, 16, 18, 19, 26, 27, 29,
30, 33, 35 193, 210,

240 and note, 325, 353
derivation of, in Talniii, 19
in Sbdhndma, 19, 26
birth of, 18, 26


INDEX


Sikaudai, adopted as his heir by
Failakus, 27

counselled by Aiastdlis, 35
lefuses tiibnte to Dira, 36
prepaies for wai with Data,

37

invades, and defeats king of,
Misi, 30, 37
invades Trdn, 37
his visit to the camp of Duia,

38

invited to banquet with Dard,
40

takes the golden cups of
Dard, 40
recognised, 40
escapes, 41

defeats Ddid, 43, 44, 46
ihsucs proclamation to the
I'ldnians, 44, 47
gives the spoil to his troops,
44, 47

niaiches fioiu ’Iidk against
Ddid, 46

enters Istakhi, 46
answers Ddrd’s lettei, 50
null dies fioiii Istakhr, 51
heais of Daia’s murdei, 52
ai rests Dara’s muiderers, 53
finds Ddrd still living 53
promises to avenge Ddrd, 53
promises to cany out Ddid’s
last wishes, 54

I)aui bestows Riishanak
upon, 55, 86

laments f 01, and buries Bara,

55, 56

executes Ddra’s murdei eis, 56
hailed as rulei by the fidn-
lans, 56

sends envoys to Ispahdn and
to the family of Bdrd, and
letters to the iirovinces, to
announce his accession, 57
crowned Shah at Istakhi, 59
leigu of, 60 $eg[,
diagiam to illustrate Persian
Komance of, 84


443

Sikandai, his inaugural addiess,

85

his coiiespondence with the
wife and daughter of Daid
33, 86 seq.

maiiies Riishanak, 90
invades Hind, 98
and Kaid, 61, 98
appioaches Mildd, 98
inquiies about the Foiii
Wondeis of Kaid, 100
the Foul Wondeis and othei
gifts sent by Kaid to, 103
mairiesdaughtei of Kaid, 104
and the sage of Kaid, 62,
104 seq,

the piinciple of the cup ex-
plained to, 109
conceals his tieasuies, no
and note

advances to Kanniij, no
his tioops piotest, H3
remonstrates with his tioops,

113

his tioops ask pardon, 114
his wai with Fiii (Poius), 67,

1 10 seq,

heais of Fill’s elephants, 115
his device to oveicome,

115

challenges Fiii to single
combat, 116
slays Fill, 117
Fill’s tioops submit to, 118
becomes king of Hind, 118
bestows Hind on Sawurg, 118
his visit to Mecca and the
Kaaba, 64, 67, 119 seq.
ends the rule of the Khuza’
m Aiabia, 120

sets up Nasi instead of the
Khuza’, 120
goes to Judda, 12 1
marches to Misr, 121

welcomed by king of, 121
stays for a yeai m, 121
and Kaidafa (Candace), 65,
12 1 seq.


444


INDEX


Sikandai, his poitiait obtained by
Kaiddfa, 122

Kaulafa piaised by Kabtiin
to, 122

wntes to Kaidafa, 123
Kaiddfa’s aiiswei to, 123
asj'snines the name of Naitkiin
(Anti^onus)j 66, 125 seq,
jdeads (as Naitkim) foi Kaid-
iiihli and lus wife, 126
goes (as Ncutkiiu) to KauUfa,

127

gracious Iv leioived liy Kai-
duta, 128

lias audiences ot Kaidafa,

128 seq

lOcomiised by Ivaidahi, 129
si q

delivcisi his message, as
envov, to Kaiddta, 129, 134
Ins covenant with KauUfa,
132, 138

allied by XaiJata against
Tiiiiiitbli, 133
insulted by Tainitsh, 134
(‘ounsels Kaidafa about Taiu-
udi, 1^5

makes covenant with Tain-
lish, 136

Kaidafa’s gifts to, 140
loiiuns NAith Taimish, 14 1
Avelcoined by Ins tioops, 141
leveals himself to Taindsh,

142

entei tains at a banquet, gives
gifts to, and dismisses
Tainii&h, 143

his final message to Kaidafa,

143

the Biahniaiis hear of the
coming ot, and wiite to,

143

his iiiteivjcAv with the Biah-
inaiis, 67, 144 seq.
quits the Bialmians, 147
meets the Fish-eaters (Ichthy-
ophagi, 3.!;.), 69 seq., 147,
177


Sikandar, his ad veil tin e with a
whale, 7x, 147

sees gigantic leeds (bamboos),
71, 148

attacked by snakes, scor-
pions, and boais, 148
the people of Habash, 149
the Nainijiai, 160
Ills adventiiic with a diagon,

71* 151

visits the temple of Dionysus,
71, 152, 166

w«mie(l of Ins death, 152,
161, 166

maiches towaid Ilaiimi, the
(hty of Women, (Amazons,
153 sen,

encouiiteis snow andhost, 156
gieatheat, 157
the negioos, 157
reach(‘s and insjiects Haiiim,

157

inaiches wcstwaid and finds
a fan -ha ned lace, 73, 158
hears of the ({loom, 7 v , and
of the Fount of Life, qv.^
and piepaies to visit them,

158

sets foith with Khisr as
guide, 159

and Kliisi pait conijiaiiy, 160
fails to find the b\>unt of
Life, 160

Ins Intel vieAV with hiids, 160
Isidfil, 78, 161

emeiges fiom the (iloora, 162
maiches eastwaid, 163
heaisof yajig and Mjfjiij, 163
hauler of, 78, 164, 249
and the Male ami Female
Tiee, 79, 167 seq.
leaches ‘‘The Woi Id’s End,

168

receives gifts, 169

lus expedition to Chin, 80,

169 seq*

goes as his own ambassador
to the Faghfiir, 170


INDEX


445


Sikandai, desciibes himself, 171
Faghfur’s gifts to, 173
depaits with FaghMi’s en-
voy, 173

his identity discoveied by
the envoy, 173

dismisses the envoy witli
gifts and a message to
Faghfiii, 174
ariives at ChaglnA an, 174
iiiaichcs to Sind, 175
defeats Bandawa, chief of
the Sindians, 175
inarches to Nimiiiz, 175
receives gifts fiom the kmg
ofYaman, 175
meets Giish-bistai, 177
cairies off the tieasures of
Kai Khusiau, 178
his policy for safeguarding
Itiini aftei his decease, 81,

178, 197

adopts the advice of Aias-
tdlis, 180

aiiives at Bdbil, 180

inodigious biith at, 81, j
180

consults the astro-
logeis on, 1 80
waiiied of lus end, iSo
sickens, 181
his Will, 81, 181
grief of the troops for, 183, 184
dies, 183

dispute as to where he should
be buried, 184

his body taken to Iskan-
dariya, 185

sentences of sages over, 82,

83. 185

his cities, 83, 189
the Sdsaiiiaii view of, 15 and
note

Silk, account of, 204

its inti eduction into the
West, 204 *


Silk-woim. See Silk.

Sind, region and livei (Indus), 1 13
king of, 1 13
chiefs of, 123
wail 101s of, 133, 137
Sikandai maiches to, 175
Smdbad, the sailoi, 71
lands on a ^\hale, 71
Sindians, the, vii, 175

defeated by Sikandai, 175
SisMn,^ 32, 198
Smerdis, the false, 207
Spain (Andaliis), 66
Speaking tiee, the, vii, 79, 167
seq.

Sphinds See Calanus
Staten a See Baisine
Steeds, non, Sikandai ’s, vi, 115
filled with naphtha, 115

Fiir’s elephants and
tioops louted by, 116
Stone, the Black, 6$

Strabo, geographer, 68, 81
Siifis, 59 and note
Sughdiana (Sughd), 72
Suhidb, son of Kustani, 325
Sunisli, angel, 199 note, 372
dav, 41 1

Surfish, astrologei, 372, 375

takes Bahiam Giii’b hoio-
scope, 375

Susa, city, 31, 33, 295, 327

Alexander marries the daugh-
ter of Darius at, 33
Susiana (Khiizistan), 295? 321
Swat, river, 65
Syiia, 30

Syriac, veisiou or the Fseiido-
Callistlienes, 14, 16, 18, 30,
31 seq, 61, 63, 65, 66, 68,
7i» 72, 74, 78 seq,

Chiistian Legend of Alex-
ander, 14, I5» 74, 78, 84
quoted, 15

metucal veision of, 15,

I 78. 84


1 See Vol. 1. p. 396 note.


446


INDEX


T

Tabak, rniniaii chief, viii, 202,
225

suspected by ArdsMr Papa-
kan, 225

justifies Inniself, 226
and Aidshh Papakjin defeat
Btihman, 226
billies ArdaM.in, 229
advises Aidsliir Papaktin to
niairy the daiightei of
Ardawaii, 229

Tabari, histoiiaii, 14 notef 16, 19,
30, 198, 200, 291 note, 310,

313. 315. 321. 326

his history oi the >S<'isiiniaiis,
14 note

places Alexandei’s battles
with Daiius m Mesopo-
taniui, 30

on Yajiij and IVTajiij, 78
his account of the use of the
Sasaiiian dynasty, 198
Ins account of Aidsliu Papa-
kdn, 198, 203

genealogies of Papak in, 200
on the stoiy of the Woiin,
205, 206

his account of Haftwad, 205,
206

on the length of Ardshh
Pdpakdn’s leign, 254
on Ardawan’s daughtci, 255
on Shapiu, son of Ardshu
Papakan, 255, 257
on the death of Shilpili, son
of Shapiii, 365

on Bahiam, son of >Shupur,
368

on Yazdagiid, son of Shiipdi,
371 seq

Table ot Contents, v
genealogical, 3
I’acitus, histoiian, 73
Tainiish (Oliaiogos, Keiatdi,
Kaiiii), son of Kaiddfa, vi,
66, 67, 1345^2'.


Taindsh, Kaidilfa wains Sikandar
against, 133
Fiir’s son-iudaw, 133
insults Sikandai, 134
Kanhifa chides, 135
Kaidafa and Sikandar con-
sult about, 135
makes a covenant with Sik-
andai, 136

accompanies Sikandai on his
letinn, 141

Sikandai discovers himself
to, 142

asks giace ol Sikandai, 142
]»ardoned by Silvandar, 142
entei tamed at a banquet,
jneseiited with gitts, and
dismissed, by Sikandar,

143

Tainiish (TIkmmIosiuh), xi, 372,
^89. 404

goes to Yazdagiid as aiidias-
sadoi, 389

asked by Babi*uii (bir to
intciced <5 with Yazdagiid
foi him, 3S9

obtains Ilahiain (iiii’s 1 (dense,
390, ^04

Tdii (Daiz.m, q v ), Aiab chief, x,
3, 322, 324, 330 8 cq
Taisafiin ((fU‘Hi])hon, r/w), 245,
321,330, 346 seq, 397
Aidhbir P<q>akan goes to, 245
Sbainii’s 1 ) ridge at, 321, 329
•sackinl by 'J’llir, 330
Shapiii sends spies to, 346
Ciesar (UMtsited and taken
]niKOii(M by ShiLjnir at, 347
Taklit-i-Biistdn, 257

Silsunian iiiHcu])tiou at, 257
Taiuz, city in Tuikistan and dis-
trict in liadakhshun, 268
Tam us, constellation, 151
Taxila (Mildd), Indian city, 62,

63

Thai that, iiver, 322
'PlieodosiuK (Tainiisli), Bomau
Emperoi, 372


INDEX


447


Thermodon, iivei, 72
Tigris, river, 294, 322

small, the, 199 and note
lowei, 291 note
bridge ovei, 321
Tiri, eunuch of Giizihi, iqS
Tirddih, village, 198

birthplace of Ardshii Papa-
kan, 19S

Tiajan, Emperoi, 322

his siege ot Hatia, 322
Tree, the speaking, vii, 79, 167
seq.

description of, 167 seq.
Sikandar visits, 167 seq
wains Sikandar of his death,
168, 169

Tribal, 01 Pait, Kings, the, vm,
180, 197, 198, 201, 203, 204,
210, 225, 252, 253
origin of, 179, 181,210
chaiactei of theii lule, 197,
198

numbei of, 198
Ardawan the chief of, 201
Firdausi on, 210
Till, second son of Faridiin, 353
Tdr^ii, 43, 182, 398
TuikisMn, 179, 278, 280, 397
Tuikman language, 147
Tds, citv, 372, 391, 393

local legend of, 372, 391 seq
Tyre, city, 30
siege of, 30

U

Uroscopy, ioi, 107, 108
Uimuzd, the Good Principle, 55,
362, 372, 387

day, 302 and note, 306, 375
Urnxuzd, Ashkaniau king, 197,
210

Urmuzd, son of Shapfii, Shah
(Hoimisdas L)» ix, 3, 257,
273. 280, 313, 327
his disco veiy by Aidshir
Papakan, 257, 271


Urmuzd, birth of, 271

counselled by Ardshir Papa-
kiln, 280
Shapi'u, 299
icigii of, 301 seq.
his title, 301
story about, 301

Uimuzd son of Naisi, Sh^h (Hoi-
niisdas II ), ix, x, 3, 294, 295,
307» 315. 316, 325
leign of, 318 seq.
his sons, 318

his inauguial addiess, 318
a piegnant wife of, enthroned,
320

Urmuzd (Hoimisdas), son of
Naisi, Pei Sian piince, 318,

325

lefeiied to (’), 337
Uimuzd Aidshir, city, 290 and
note
Une, 77

Utteiakun, the, 74

y

Valerian (Bazitiuish), Emperor,
294» 295, 323 seq.
his defeat and capture by
Shdpdi, son of Aidshii, 294,

295

memoiials of, 295
confused with Odenathus,
Julian, and Jovian, 324 seq.
his death in ca]>tivity, 326
Vaiahian I. (Baliiam, son of Ui-
muzd), Sasanian king, 307
Vaiahiaii II. (Bahiam, son of Bah-
idm), Sasiinian king, 310
Yaiahiaii III. (Bahicim Bahia-
miyan), Sasjinian king, 313
Varaliran IV. (Bahiam, son of
Shapui ), SiCsdnian king, 313,
368

Venus, planet, 98, 102, 17 1, 190,
212, 224, 332

Vitiified foitifications, 79, 165
Vologeses, king of Kirmdn, 205


44 S


INDEX


Viitia and India, 203

Tulleis-Landauei edition of the
Sliaiinaina, 60

W

Walii), KlialUa, 325

'VVatei-hoiae, xi, 373, 392
leferrod to. 373
legend of Yazdagiid and the,
392

Western sea, the, \ii, 158

Whale, 71, 147

inihtaken foi island, 71, 147
Sikaiidai's athentiiie with a
7 h 147

Wlieelei, James Talbovs, quoted,
Si

Will of Alexaiidei, Sr
pioMsioiis of, Si, iSi

Women, city of, \ii See Haiiim.

Wondeis, the Poiu of Kanl, vi,
94 . 97 , 99

Woim, the, \iii, 193, 206, 23S seq
fttoi^ of, 196, 203 seq . 232 seq.

Mold Dainiestetei, and
Noldeke on, 203 seq,
cult of, 23s

Aidsliir Pdpakdn’s stiatagem
against, 242
servants of, 242 seq.

X

Xeexes, 30

effigv of, falls, 30

Y

YAJtJJ and Mdjiij (Gog and Ma-
gog), vii, 78, 79, 163 seq , 21 1
note

legend of, 111 the Kuidn, 78
Tabaii on, 78
described, 163

Ya’kdbi, histoiian, 61

Yaman, country, vii, x, 73, 120,
121, 175, 324, 331, 385, 3S6,
396, 401
onyx of, 128
striped stuff of, 175


Yaman, monarch of, 175

gives gifts to Si-
kandai, 175
= Munzii, 378, 387,

390

Bah 1 dm Gili goes to, 378, 390
Canopus of, 382

Ydnus (Julian) hi other of Caesai.
X, 324, 326

leads a host against Shapiii ,

351

deteated, 352

Ydtkii -i-Zai 11 an, Palila\ 1 text, 195
resembles Kdniamak, 195, 196
Yazd, city, 36S

Yazdagiid, Shah (Isdigerd I ), xi,
3, 371 seq
leteiied to, 369
leign of, 371 seq
his paientage unceitain, 371
a lover of peace like Aknaton
of Egypt, 371
hib titles, 371, 372
Tabaii on, 372, 373
death of, 373

Noldeke on, 373
coins of, 373

his evil admini&tiation, 374,
404

makes search for a gOA ernor
for Ins son Bahiiim Giir,
^376 seq

Nu’mdii andMunzii visit, 377
puts Bain dm Gdi in Munzir’b
chaige, 378

leceivestiom Munzii apictuie
of Bahiam Giii shooting, 3S5
Balndm Gui returns to, 386
gives piebcnts to, and sends a
lettei by, Nu’man to Mim-
zir, 387

disgraces Bahiam Gdr, 3S9
sends Bahiam Gdi back to
Munzir, 390

consults the astrologeis, 390
his death foietold, 391
attacked by bleeding of the
nofee, 391


INDEX


Yazdnoircl, his death 393

Ids coipse embalmed .iiid
take?i to Pdis, 393
Youths, the two, that ])id Aul-
slui Papakan not to taii\
in his flij^ht, 201, 222
enteitam and counsel
Aidshii Papakan 111
the mattei oi the
Woiin, 207, 239 seq
help Aidshii Pdpakaii to
slay the W 01 m, 242,244
Yun.ui, 95 and note
Faith of, 95

Z

Zabulistak,^ 207
Zalihak, iShuh, 15, 45, 172, 209,
240 and note

ZAl, son of Sam and fatliei of
Rustam, 79

Zandavasta (Avasta), 17, 55, 226,

252. 343. 356

Zaiar, 200

Zardulisht (Zaiatliushtia, Zoro-
aster), 55, 252, 328, 332


4dv

Zaiduhslit, ieli'j;itui ot, iindei the
Sasauiau empiie, 251
oirdle of, 332
Zaindsh, city, 35
Zeus, Bahyloman, 82

oracle ot, consul ted, 82
Zipinak, daiightei ot Aidawan,
viu, 255

story of, in Kaiuainak, 255
Taibail,255
Shahnuma, 259 s-er/.
Zoioastei. /Vcc Zaidiilislit
Zoioastiiaii, Zoioastiiaiiism, 15,
196, 206 251. 252, 327,
32S

iiiidei the Sdstinian empire,

251

millennia ot, 252

Zu'l Aktif, title of Shatrdr, sou ot
Uimuzd, X, 323
meaning of, 323

Zii’l - karnaiu (Sikaiidai, Alex-
ander the Gieat), i5i S4
legend of, in Ivuian, 78, 84
baniei of, 78
site of, 79
^ee Gdr.


Ziii.


1


See


END OF VOL. tl.


2 F


VOL. VI.


Punted by Lallantyne, Hanson Co
Edinburgh London
