The Shahnama of Firdausi, Vol. 9 (Arthur George Warner and Edmond Warner (trans.), 1925)
==========================================================
Vol. 9 of the Warner Shahnama. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

TRUBNER’S 

ORIENTAL SERIES 


Complete Work now Ecadr» Post 8vo. cloth, price 10s. Cd. each 


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI. 
Done into English hy 
AJITHUE GEOItGE WARNER, M.A. 

AND 


EDMOND WARNER, B.A. 


been achieved, a heart-breaking disappointment well woi'thy ol in- 
cinsipn m any record of the calamities ol authors. His work has 
survived the test ol time, and by general consent is aecouuted to b<' 
one of the lew great epics ol the world. Geographically, and in sonie 
other respects, it may be said to stand half-way between the epics ol 
Europe and those ol India. In its own land it has no peer, while in 
construction and subject-matter it is imi(jue. Other epics centre 
round some heroic character or incident to which all else is subHor* 
vient. In the Sbahndiua there is no lack cither of heroes or ol in- 
cidents, but its real hero is the ancient JAmsian people, and ils tiiennj 
their whole surviving legendary history from the days ol the Eirst 
Man to the death ol the last 8ilstoian «hdh in the middle of the sevcntii 
century of our era. It is the glory of the Persian race that they alone 
among all nations iiossess such a record, based as it is on their own 
traditions and set lortlj in the words of their greatest poet,. In another 
sense, too, the SMhndrna is uniciue. The authors ot the other great 
epics tell US httle or nothing of their own persona li ties or of their 
sources of information. Th<*ir works are lairy palaces suspended in 
mid air ; we see the result, but know not how it, was achieved. The 
autjipr ot the Shalinania takes us into his confidence Irom the first, h<i 
that in reading* it we are let into the secret of epic-inakmg, and can 
apply the knowlo<lg<'! thus gained fo solve (he problem ol the con* 
Htniction ol Its great corigemu's. To the htudenl of comparativi^ 
mytliology and folk-lore, to the lover of historic romance? or romantic 
history, and h) all tiiai are fond of tales of high achievements and the 
gests of henics, the {^didhndma is a storehouse of rich and alnmdani 
material. To set forth a complcto prosentment of it with the needful 
notes and elucidatipiis is the object of the present translation, made 
from two of the best printed texts of the original— that of Vullers and 
Landauer, and that of Turner Maean. 


THE 


SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI 


DONE INTO ENGLISH BY 

ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A, 

AND 

EDMOND WARNER, BA. 


‘ The homes that are the dwellings of io-dag 
]Vill smk "nenth shower and sumhiue to decay. 
But storm and rain shall uemr mar what 1 
Jlam biiUt — the pdace of my poetry.** f 

FrUDAlIHU 


VOL. IX 


LONDON: 

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO.. L™ 

BKOADWAY HOUSB CAETER BANE, B.C. 

1925 


The rights of translation and of retroduction arc reserved. 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY TEE DEVONSHIRE PRESS* TORgUAY 


prefatory note 

The General Index at the end of this vohime should 
be consulted in preference to the Indexes to the 
separate volumes of this work. — E.W. 


CONTENTS 


FAUE 

Prefatory Note ........ v 

Abbreviations ........ xi 

Note on Pronunciation ....... xii 


THE SAsANIAN dynasty [concluded) 
Kubad (Commonly Called SufEwf) — 

SECT. 

I. Plow Siiirwi ascendd’d the Throne, announced his 
Will, and sent Chiefs to his Father with 


Counsel and Excuses .... 8 

2. Plow Khusrau Parwi2 answered Shirwx . . 15 

3. How Shirwi grieved for Khusrau Paiwiz and how 

the Chiefs were displeased thcfcat . . 27 

4. Plow Barbad lamented Khusrau Parwfz, cut off his 

own Fingers, and burned lus Instruments of 
Music ....... 29 

5. IIow the Chiefs demanded from Sliirwf the Death 

of Khusrau Parwfz and how he was slain by 
Mihr Piurmuzd ..... 32 

6. How Shirwf asked Shfrin in Marriage, how Shirfn 

killed herself, and how Slnrwf was slain . 36 

Ai^DsnfR, Son of SnfRwf — > 

1. How Ardshir, Son of Shfrwf, ascended the Throne 

and harangued the Chicls . * • 4*1 

2. How Curdz was displeased at Ardshir being Shfih 

and how lie caused Ardshir to be slain by 
Plrhz Son of Khusrau .... 


Gvulz (AESO CAEPEI) li'ARAyfN)— 

I. Plow Gurdz (also called Fardyfn) received News of 
the Slaying of Ardshir, hastened to 1 rdn, took 
Possession of the Throne, and was killed by 
Shahrdngnrdz . . . * ^5^ 

PdRXNDtJKHT — 

I. How Phrdndukht ascended the Throne and slew 
Viftz, Son of Khusrau, and how her own 
Life ended ...... 56 

ix 


X 


CONTENTS 


Azarmdukht — 

SECT. PAGE 

I. How Azarmdukht ascended the Throne and how 

she died ...... 59 

FarrukhzAd — 

I. How Farrukhzad ascended the Throne and how he 

was slain by a Slave . . . .61 

Yazdagird — 

1. How Yazdagird ascended the Throne and addressed 

the Chiefs ...... 70 

2. How Sa'ad, Son of Wakkas, invaded fran, how 

Yazdagird sent Rustam to oppose him, and 


how Rustam wrote a Letter to his Brother 72 

3. How Rustam wrote to Sa’ad, Son of Wakkas, 

and how he replied .... 78 

4. How Rustam fought with Sa*ad, Son of Wakkas, 

and was slain ..... 83 

5. How Yazdagird consulted with the Iranians and 

went to Khurdsdn . . . . *85 

6. How Yazdagird wrote to Mdhwi of Sdr . , 89 

7. How Yazdagird wrote to the Marchlords of Tds 90 

8. How Yazdagird went to Tds and how Mahwi of 

Sdr met him ...... 95 

9. How Mahwi of Siir incited Bizhan to war with 

Yazdagird and how Yazdagird fled and hid 
himself in a Mill . . . ... 96 

10. How Mdhwi of Sflr sent the Miller to kill Yazdagird, 
and how the Archmages counselled Mdhwi 
to forbear ...... loi 

IX. How Yazdagird was slain by Khusrau, the Miller 107 
12. How Mdhwf of Stir was informed of the Obsequies 

of Yazdagird and ascended the Throne . 112 


13. How Bizhan, hearing of the Slaying of Yazdagird, 

and of Mdhwf of Sflr's Accession to the 
Throne, led forth the Host to fight with him 115 

14 . How Mdhwi of Sdr was taken and slain by Order 


of Bizhan . . . . . .118 

15. Account of the Completion of the Sh^hndma . 121 

Index . ......... 123 

General List of Abbreviations . , , . .135 

General Table of Contents . . . . . -3:39 

Corrections and Additions . . . . , .177 

General Index . . . . . . , .191 


THE SHAHNAMA 


VOL. IX. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


C, — »Macan's edition of the Sliahnama 


L.- 

-Lnmsden’s 

do. 

P.-- 

-Mohrs 

do. 

T.- 

-Tihran 

do. 

V.- 

-Vullers’ 

do. 


BCM. The Chahdr Maqala Four Discourses '*) of Nidhami-i- 
’Anidi-i-Samarqandi. Translated into English !)y 
Edward G, Browne, M.A., M.B. 

CTC. Theophanis Chronographia, Ex Recensione loanni i 
Classoni. 

LEG. The Lands of the Eastern Califate. By G. Le Strange. 

NIN. Das Iranischc Nationalepos von Theodor Ndldeke. 

NT. Geschichte der Perser and Araber snr Zeit der Sasaniden 
. . . von. Th, Ndideke. 

RM, The Rauzat-us-safa ; or. Garden of Purity. ... By 
Mirkhond. . . . Translated ... by E. Rehatsek. 

RSM. The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy. By George 
Rawlinson, M.A. 

ZT. Chronkjue de Abou-Djafar-MoTiammcd-Bcn-Djarir-Ben- 

Yezid-Tabari, tx*aduite . . . Par M. Hermann Zoten- 
bprg. 


xiii 


note on pronunciation 

d as ill water,” 
i as in ” pique.” 

{i as in ” rude.” 

as in ” servant.” 
i as in ” sin.” 
u as in ” foot.” 
ai as in ” time.” 
au as in ou in cloud.” 
g is always hard as in ” give,” 
kh as ch in the German ” buch.” 
z in ” azure.” 


XV 


IV 


. THE SISANIAN ‘DYNASTY 


{Concluded) 


VOL. IX. 


A 


XLIV 


KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIEWI) 

HE BEIGNED SEVEN MONTHS 


AKGUMElSfT 

Kubad on liis a(*.GCssion sends two cliiefs to ac-cuse of nils- 
government the fallen and imprisoned Shall, Klnisrau Parwfz, 
who justifies himself at great length. His fall is made the 
subject of a lament by Barbad, the minstrel, who afterwards 
mutilates himself. The chiefs, noticing symptoms fd‘ remorse 
in Kubad, insist upon the death of Klnisrau Parwiz who is 
killed with all his other sons. Kubad falls in love with, 
and wishes to many, Bhirxn, wdxo poisons herself rath<*.r than 
consent, and Kubad himself is poisoned soon afterwards. 


NOTE 

The days of fchc reign of Kubad (Kobad II., Feb. -Sept., 
AJ3. 628) were few and evil. Tradition already had prepared 
the ground for this in the unfavourahle account given of 
Ids early yearsP The murder of his father was followed by 
that of all his brothers, and by the tragic death of Shlrfn, 
while in addition to all tliese horrors a filghtfiil jiestilence 
broke out in his reign and the great mortality that ensue.cl 
still further weakened the resources of an, already almost 
exhausted country and hel])ed to pave tin? way for the suc- 
cessful Arab invasion of a few years later on, Kubdd is 
represented in the poem as a loutish, uneducated youth, ^ 
but even if his abilities had been great it is difficailt to see 
how he could have extricated himself from the coil in which 

^ See Vol, viii„ p. 390 * id, 

3 


4 ^THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSt 

lie found himself involved without mishap to himself or 
others- He .owed his release from prison and perhaps his 
life to the very conspirators that subsequently demanded 
of him for their own security the death of his father. To 
have refused would have been fatal to himself, while in all 
probability his 'father and his brothers, with the exception 
of one who would have been made Shah, would have perished 
all the same. It is inconceivable that the conspirators would 
have run the risk to themselves of restoring Khiisrau Parwiz, 
with his black record of ingratitude as instanced by his treat- 
ment of Bandwi and Gustahanl,^ to his former position as 
ruler. With the exception of his infatuation for Shirm, which 
hardly can be regarded as historical, Kubad throughout his 
short reign was the victim of circumstances. 

§§ 1 and 2. Kharrad, son of Barzfn, was one of the most 
trusted ministers of Khusrau Parwiz and planned the assassina- 
tion of Bahrain Chubina.^ According to Tabari he fell at 
the battle of I)hu Kar.^ 

As the epoch of the Sasanian Dynasty draws to an end 
through scenes of deepening tragedy the legitimist leanings 
of the tradition seem to become more and more pronounced 
and we have an instance here. It is hardly to he supposed, 
historically speaking, that formal charges of misgovernment 
were drawn up against, and as formally answered by, Khusrau 
Parwiz, hut rather that someone, desirous of^ vindicating 
that Sbah’s memory and conversant with the circumstances 
of the time, soon after his death drew up the charges and the 
replies thereto. Yeraions of them are given in both the 
Arabic and Persian Tabari and elsewhere. Pour of the 
charges are found in both the Tabaris as well as in the Sluih- 
nama.^ They are : — 

1. The murder by Khusrau Parwiz of his father Hurmuzd, 

2. The illegitimate accumulation of treasure as a result 

of the financial oppression of the people. 

3. The harsh treatment of the royal princes. 

d. The refusal to restore the True Gross. 

To these the Arabic Tabari adds : — 

1. The general ill-treatment of all prisoners. 

2. Enforced recruiting for the royal Harara even of 

women already married. 


» See Vol. viii., p. 354 seq. * Id, p. 33 ^ ® Id. p. 190, 

"NX, 363 seq, ZT, ii„ 334 seq. 


KUBAD [COMMONLY CALLED SUlEWl) 5 

3. The keeping of the troops for a long period absent 

from liome. 

Tlie .Persian Tabari adds : — 

1. Tile imprisoiiineiifc of the troops defeated by the Arabs 

at DM Kar and by Heraclins. 

2. The exactions of arrears of tribute for the previous 

twenty or thirty years. 

3. The attempt to slay the youthful Yazdagird (after- 

wards the last Sasanian Bhah). 

4. The deposition of Nu’man, prince of HIraA 

5. The mutilation and subsequent execution of Mardan- 

shah,^ 

In the Arabic Tabari eight cliarges are made against 
Khusrau Parwiz two of which — those relating to the royal 
Haram and the refusal to restore the “ True Cross ” — are 
left unanswered. 

In the Persian Tabari eleven charges arc formulated to 
each of which in the same order an answer is made. Borne 
of the charges, however, must be regarded as later additions 
while that relating to NuTnan is not likely to have sugg< 3 sted 
itself to a Persian and must come from an Arab source. In 
the Shahnama there are eight charges, all of which are more 
or less answered, but not in the same order as they are pre- 
ferred, but in the following: — 1, 6, 7, 8, 2, 5, 3, 4. Thus 
Khusrau Parwiz replies to the most serious accusations — 
those of offences against persons — first. The Shihnama 
agrees most closely with the Arabic Tabari, supplies the missing 
answer with regard to the True Cross/’ but does not deal 
with the grammen of the royal Haram question, as that par- 
ticular charge is not one of those mentioned in the poem. 

Gallnush subsequently served in the war against the Arabs, 
fougbt at the Battle of the Bridge, and was perhaps slain at 
KMisiya.^ 

§ 5. Indignant legitimate tradition is naturally very 
wroth with Mihr Hurmuzd, the murderer of Khusrau Parwiz, 
whom it describes as the lowest of the low and vilest of the 
vile. According to Tabari, however, Mihr Hurmuzd was the 
son of MardansMli, the governor of Nimruz and one of the 
most obedient and faithful of Khusrau Parwiz’ officials. In 
the Persian Tabari’s version of the Romance of Bahrdm 


^ See Vob viii„ p. 190. * See p. 6. 

® NT, p, 365 note,' RM, Pt. XI., vol, iii., pp. 95, 116, 


6 Vf/E SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 

OhiiMna tliat hero’s brotlior, Yalao-sima in the Sliahnaina, is 
called Mardanshali. Yalan-sfna is always r(‘]}rese3itod as 
one of Bahrain (!hubma‘s most loyal adherents just as 
the other brother, Giirdwi, was a firm supporter of Khusrau 
Parwiz, while their sister Gurdya hold an intermediate position, 
faithful to Bahram Chubina, but opposing his kingly ambition 
in every way in her power. Later on when married to Giis- 
tahain, the maternal uncle of Khusrau Parwiz, she agreed, 
on condition that she should become the Shah’s wife and that 
a full amnesty should be given to all her adherents, to murder 
her husband and did so. There would be nothing strange 
therefore in Mardanshah, if identical with Yalan-sma, becoming 
reconciled to, and receiving high office from, Khusrau Parwiz. 
Pie would serve one master as faithfully as he served the other. 
In the circumstances the strange thing would have been for 
the treacherous Shah not to have taken the first convenient 
occasion against him. According to the story the Shah, 
two years before his deposition, consulted the astrologers 
who informed him that Lis death would come from JSfimruz, 
He therefore began to suspect and summoned Mardanshah, 
but finding no pretext for putting him to death, as he was 
perfectly loyal and withal an aged man, determined merely 
to cut off his right hand and make liim a large present of money 
as compensation. The sentence was carried out. Mardan- 
shah regarded such a mutilation as worse than death and, 
when shortly afterwards the Shah was good enough to send 
and express his regret for what had occurred, asked the 
Shah to grant liim a boon. The Shah swore to do so, on which 
Mardanshah requested that his head should be struck of! 
in order to wipe out the disgrace put upon him. Iffie Sh4h, 
bound by his oath, felt himself obliged to consent and the 
execution took place accordingly. The Shah wished to make 
Mardanshah’s son governor of Mmruz, but he refused and 
withdrew from the armyP He joined the conspiracy against 
Khusrau Parwfz‘^ and by avenging his father on the Shdh 
justified the prediction of the astrologers. 

The account given by Theophanes of the last days of the 
Shill IB different. As a general rule it is not prudent to put 
iaith in stories of what occurred in Oriental ])alaces or prisons, 
but owing to the special circumstances of the case his in- 
formation may be good in this instance, as it appears to be 


» NT, p. 579. ZX, ii.* 33<5- 


» See VoL viii., p, 196, 


7 


KUBAD [COMMONLY CALLED SHlR^Vl) 

based on letters written by Heraclius. After tbe capture oC 
Khusrau Parwfz by the conspirators, he was bound and 
confined in the House of Darkness,’’ wliicli he had himself 
built as a stronghold for his treasures. Here he was sparingly 
fed on bread and water for, said SMrwi : Let him cat the 
gold that he has vainly amassed, and for whose sake he has 
starved many, and made the world itself a desert.” Slilrwi 
also sent satraps to revile and spit upon him, had his so3i 
Mardasas, whom he had wished to crown, slain before his eyes, 
and all his other sons as well, sent Ms enemies to beat and 
spit upon him, and, after five days of such treatment, liad him 
put to death with arrows, Shirwi then wrote to Heraclius 
to announce the death of the detested Khusrau Paiwiz, 
arranged terms of peace, released all the captives, and restored 
the ‘‘ True Cross.” ^ With regard to these latter statements 
of Theophanes it should be observed that peace was not 
concluded, and the “ True Cross ” restored, till after tlie death 
of SMrwi. 

According to Tabari Kubad had Mihr Hurmuzd put to 
dcath.^ 

§ 6. The association of Khusrau Parwiz and Shirin began, 
it would seem,^ before his accession to the throne, and he 
reigned for thirty-eight years. If Shirwi really wished to 
marry Shirin it must have been for political motives and 
because she had been so much in his fatlier’s confidence and 
might furnish useful information. For a son to marry his 
father’s wives was, according to Persian ideas, quite tlie correct 
procedure in the circumstances. 

Kubad is said to have been bitterly reproached by bis 
two sisters, Purindukht and Azarmdukht, for his share in 
the deaths of his father and brothers, and to have suffered 
much from sickness and remorse. He died at Dastagird, 
but from what cause is uncertain.^ The plague was very 
virulent at the time. Poison was often made to account 
for what was really due to disease. 


1 CTC, i., 502. * NT, p. 392 and noia. ® Id. p, 3B2. 

« See vol. viii., p. 3B3. “NT, p, 384 and noies. 


8 ''Tim SHAIINAMA op FIRDAUSt 


§1 

How SMrwi ascended the Throne, announced Ms Will, 
and sent. Chiefs to his Father ivith Counsel and 
Excuses 

Now when Shirwi safe on the goodly throne. 

And donned the royal crown so much desired, 

The leaders of the Iranians each drew near 
To prolTer him the homage due to kings. 

Exclaiming : “ Worshipful and honoured Shah ! 
Know, God gave thee the crown, and now thou sittest 
Securely on the throne of ivory. 

And may thy sons and scions have the world.” 

Kubad replied : “ Be ever conquering 
And happy. Never will we practise ill. 

How good is justice with benevolence ! 

The world will we keep peaceful and cut off 
The works of Ahriman by every right, 

Ancestral precedent that greatem.'th 
The Glory of our Faith. X will dispatch 
A message to ray sire and tell him all. 

He is in evil odour in the world 
Through his ill deeds : let him excuse his faults 
To God and turn to custom and the way. 
c. 2027 If he shall heed me he will not resent 

My conduct. Then will I devote myself 

To state-affairs and strive to comi)ass justice 

Both publicly and privily, do good 

Where good is due, and break no poor man’s heart. 

I need two honest men of goodly speech, 

Whose memories are charged wilh ancient lore.” 


9 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWI) 

He asked the assembly : “ Whom shall I em[)]oy ? 
Wlio is most shrewd and honest in Iran V ” 

The warriors all suggested by their looks 
Two men ol lore if they shoulcl give consent. 

Knbad perceived whom the Iranians 
Agreed to choose : one of them was Ashtad, 

The other was Kharrad, son of Barzfn, 

The old — two sages eloquent and heedful. 

Kubad addressed them thus : “ O ye wise men. 

Ye chiefs experienced and veteran ! 

Deem not the conduct of the world too toilsome. 
Because the Great by travail comptiss treasure. 

It is for you now to approach the Shah ; 

Perchance through you he may conform himself. 
Appeal to him by instance new or old 
As there is need.” 

With tears unwillingly 

Those sagos made them ready. When Kharrad, 

Son of Barzin, and when Ashtad, who had 
Gashasp for sire, had mounted on their steeds. 

As bidden, Kubad said : “ Now with right good will 
’Tis yours to take the road to Taisafun,i 
To carry to my glorious sire a message. 

And bear it all m mind from first to last. 

Say : ’Twas no faidt of ours nor did the Iranians 
Cause this, but having left the way of Faith 
Thou hast thyself incurred God’s chastisement, 

For, first, no son legitimate will shed 
His sire’s blood though impure or give assent 
Thereto and fill the hearts of upright folk 
With pain. Again, thy treasures fill the world, 

And thine exactiops reach all provinces, 

While, thirdly, many horsemen brave and famed 
Within Iran who gladdened there have left 
Son, country, and their own pure kith and kin, 

' * CoHjplot omitted. 


lo ^THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 

Have parted, this to Chin and that to Riim, 

And now are scattered o’er each march and land. 
Again, when Caesar, who had done and borne 
So much for thee, had given thee a host 
And daughter too with treasure and much else. 
Desired of thee the Cross of Christ for Rum, 

So that his land might be revived thereby, 

C. 20 >8 How did the Cross of Jesus profit so 

Thy treasures when complaisance on thy part 
Would have made Cmsar glad ? But thou didst not 
Restore it, hadst not wit enough for that, 

Or one to guide thee to humanity. 

Again, thy greed was such that wisdom’s eye 
Was all obscured in thee, and thou didst seize 
The chattels of the poor whose curses brought 
111 on thy head. Thou slowest thy mother’s brothers,^ 
Two loyal men who gave thy throne a lustre. 
Moreover thou hadst sixteen sons whose days 
And nights were passed in prison while no chief 
Could sleep secure from thee but hid in fear/^ 

Know, that which hath befall’n thee is from God ; 
Reflect on thy foul deeds. As for myself, 

I am but as the instrument in all 

This wrong, am but the heading of the tale. 

By God, ’twas not my fault, no aim of mine 
To wreck the Shah’s throne ! Now for all seek grace, 
And say so to these chieftains of Iraix ; 

Turn from ill deeds to God — ^the Guide to good— 
Who may abate the woes that thou hast brought 
Upon thyself.’ ” 

On hearing this the twain 
Departed with their hearts all seared and sore 
Till, sorrowful and weeping, they arrived 
At Taisafun and in that city sought 

^ Bandwl and Gustaliam. 

® This scatenco comes at the end of the speech in the text. 


II 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SfllRWl) 

Tiie palace of Marusipand for there 
The exalted king resided. Galiniish 
Sat at the ])alace-ga,te : thou wouldst have said : — 

Earth is convulsed before him ! ” He was armed 
111 helm and breastplate, all the Arab steeds 
Wore bards, and all his soldiers were drawn up. 
Equipped, and sword in hand. He grasped a niaee 
Of steel, his heart all fire and storm. Now vhen 
Kharrad, son of Barzin, and when Ashtad, 

Son of Gashasp, those sages twain, dismounted, 

He rose forthwith, rejoiced to look on them, 

And gave them place befitting, hailing them 
As famous chiefs. The eloquent Kharrad 
First laved his tongue in valour and then said 
To Galiniish : ‘‘ Kubad the glorious 
Hath donned in peace the Kaian crown. Iran, 

Tiiran and Rum have tidings that Shirwi^ 

Is seated on the throne of king of kings. 

Why this cuirass and helm and massive mace ? 

Who is thine enemy ? 

Said Galiniish : — 

O veteran ! may all thy doings prosper. 

Thou art concerned about my tender frame C, 

Because I am in iron garniture. 

I bless thee for thy kindness ; thou deservest 
That I shall sprinkle Jewels over thee. 

Thy words are naught but good, and may the sun 
Be thine associate in the woxfid. Declare 
Wliy tlion hast come, then look for my reply/' 

He thus gave answer : “ Glorious Kubad 
Commissi )iicd me to bear Khusrau Farwiz 
A message and if now thou wilt ask audience^ 

I will deliver what the world-lord said— 

* That being the name by which he had been generally known, 
his real name (Kubad) having been kept secret^ See Vol. viii., 
pp. 371, 416. 

® Reading with P. 


ZOZi) 


12 


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 


Tliat moiiarcli of the flock/’ 

Said Caliiiush : — 

“ Wlio can rciiieiiiber words so well as thoiij 
O worshipful ? Yet nathless Shah Kiibad 
Gave me Ml many a counsel touching this, 

And charged me, saying : ‘ Let none have by day 
Or night an audience of Khusrau Parwiz 
Unless thou hearest what the messenger 
Hath got to say in Persian new or old.’ ” 

Ashtad said : ‘‘ I hold not my message secret^ 

0 fortunate ! It is M The sword is fruiting, 

And nuzzling princes’ heads.’ In this regard 
Now ask tor audience of Khusrau Parwiz 
That we may tell the message of the Shah.” 

This hearing Galimish arose, made fast 
His mail, went to the Shah with folded arms, 

As servants should, and said thus : “ Live for ever, 
0 Shah ! May evil never vex thy heart. 

There cometh by x4shtad and by Kharrad, 

Son of Barzin, a message from the Shah 
From court.” 

Khusrau Parwiz laughed out and said :~ 
Speak wiser words for if he be the king 
Then what am I, and why am I within 
This narrow prison, and why need’st thou ask 
That I shall grant an audience unto any. 

Be their words false or true ? ” 

So Galirnish 

Returned to those two warriors, reported 
The answer of the paladin, and said : — 

Now go with folded arms, declare your message, 
And hearken his reply.” 

Those sages twain 

Of honest speech inswathed their visages 
In sashes brought from Chin and, when they saw 
The Sh4h, did reverence and waited long 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SFlllflVl) 13 

What while he sat upon a lofty throne 
Adorned with effigies of sheep and wolves, 

Impleached with gold and gems, with under him 
A couch of yellow broidery. He leaned 
On cushions hued like lapis-lazuli. 

Held a fine quince and drowsed there all amort. 

When he beheld those chiefs supreme in wisdom C. 2030 

He roused himself and secretly invoked 
God’s help. He laid that fine quince on the cushions 
That he might welcome those two wayfarers.^ 

The quince slipped from the cushions, rolled unhruised 
Upon the couch and thence from throne to floor. 

Ashtad ran, took it up, wiped off the dust. 

And laid the qiduce upon his head. The world-lord 
Turned from Ashtad that he might neither see 
Nor scent the quince. They set it on the throne, 

And stood themselves. The matter of the quince^ 

Perturbed Khusrau Parwfz who boded ill, 

Looked up to heaven, and said : “ O truthful Judge! 

Who can establish one whom Thou o’erthrowest, 

Who join what Thou hast broken ? When bright 
fortune 

Departeth from a race it bringeth sorrow 
Because the day of joy is passed away.” 

Then to Ashtad : “ Now for thine amhas.sage 
From mine unnatural child of ill repute, 

And from that handful of conspii’ators. 

My hateful and black-hearted enemies. 

Malignant fools are they and in their folly 
Most wretched. Fortune will desert our race ; 

None will rejoice again ; the crown and throne 
Will pass to those unfit ; this royal Tree 
Will be destroyed ; the Base will be exalted ; 

The spirits of the Great grow sorrowful. 

^ ' C€s deux esclaves/ MoliL 
* licading witfci P. 


14 


*THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 


C. 20j[ 


The majesty will bide not with our sons, 

Or with our kindred or posterity ; 

Their friends all be their chiefest enemies, 

Revilers and destroyers of the race. 

This quince hath made the secret evident ; 

The throne of king of kings will bear no fruit. 

Now tell to me the words that thou hast heard : 

I count his less than water in the stream.” 

Then those two men released their tongues to speak. 
And told all that Kubad, his son, had said. 

Not keeping e’en a whisper back from him. 

The king of kings, when he had heard the mes'-ages 
Writhed with distress and heaved a deep, cold sigh. 
Then said he to those chiefs : “ Hear my response. 
And bear it to the young iwinec, every word. 

Say : ‘ Quit thine owir misdeeds ere blaming <flheis’. 
What thoti hast uttercal arc they words of thine V 
A murrain on the prompter R Speak not so 
As to rejoice thy foe wilh thy fool’s talk, 

And let him learn that thou hast not the v isdom 
To furnish speech with knowledge from thy brains. 

If thy trust is in words that profit not 
Thou mak’st default in soul and wisdom too. 

He that shall call thee wicked, then acknowledge 
Thee to be world-lord, should not sit before thee. 
And order matters whether great or small. 

Think not in future of such messages 
Or thou wilt cause thy focmen to rejoice. 

My state hath been appointed me by (lod ; 

My hopes are set upon the other world. 

And thou by these thy charges which arc lies 
Wilt gain no glory in the nobles’ eyes.’ ” 


‘ Reading with P. and T. 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHIrWI) 15 


§‘2 


How Khusrau Parioiz answered Shirnd 

Now will I make full answer that thou mayst 
Repeat my words in public. They will serve 
As my memorial when I am gone — 

A truthful statement ol* my case — and thou 
Wilt know, when I reveal my grief and travail, 
That all my treasures were derived from toil. 
Thou speakest in the first place of Ilurmuzd, 
His anger with me, and those bygone days : 

My father’s wrath against us wuis aroused 
By slanderer’s words and thus confusion came. 
When I had learned what occupied his thoughts 
I left fran by night, avoiding roads. 

He sought my death by poison ; I perceived 
No antidote but flight and so I fled, 

And was not taken in the net of bale. 

I heard that ill had come upon the Shah, 

And quitted Barda’Avhen the news arrived. 

That knave Bahrain Chubina with his troops 
Opposed us on the battlefield. I fled 
From him too on the day of fight that I 
Might fall not in bis clutches. Afterwards 
I came a second time and bravely fought, 

My troublous fortune passed away and all 
l^Thc realm, that I had lost returned to me. 

My contest with him was no brief alTair ; 

The whole wmrld were spectators of the strife. 
By the command of God who multiplieth 
His benefits on us, and is the Guide 
In good and ill, Iran and TurkistAn^ 

» Tiirdrx in tlie text. 


i6 ^ THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USl 

Submitted and Bahrain Chubina’s plans 

Were foiled. Released from war with him I hasted, 

First, to take vengeance for my father’s death. 

C. 2032 Bandwi and Gustaham, my mother’s brothers, 

Men that had not a peer in any land, 

Had risked their lives for me and were all mine 
In love as well as kinship, but there were 
My father’s death and mine own grief thereat ; 

I was not sluggish to avenge his blood. 

I lopped Bandwi both hand and foot for he 
Had made the Shah’s place dark, while Giistaham, 
Wlio disappeared and sought some distant nook. 
Was slain all unawares by my command : 

Tliose murderers’ lives and aims all came to naught. 
Next, as to what thou said’st of thine own case, 

Of thine own strait confinement and affairs ; 

It was to keep my sons from evil deeds 
That would recoil u})on themselves. Ye were 
Not straitly bound in prison, not misprized, 

And had no harm to fear. I did not then 
Treat you with scorn but held my treasury 
At your disposal, acting as the Shahs 
Had done before, not idly or without 
A precedent. Chase, minstrelsy, and polo — 

All that befitteth chiefs — were yours at will, 

With hawks and cheetahs, Jewels and dinars. 

Your so called prison was a palace where 
Ye lived in Joy. I dreaded thee moreover 
Through what the readers of the stars had said. 

That was the cause of thine imprisonment 
That thou mightst do us naught of injury— 

The very injury that thou art doing, 

I never parted with thy horoscope 
Till I had sealed and given it to Shirin. 

When I had reigned for six and thirty years, 

And thou past doubt amidst such pleasant days 


KUBAD [COMMONLY CALLED SlHRWt) 17 

Gav’st all the matter to the wind, although 
Much time had passed o’er us, there came to thee 
A letter out of Hindustan but not 
Without my cognizance. The chief of Rajas 
Sent us a letter, jewels, divers stuffs, 

An Indian scimitar, white elephant. 

And all that I could hope for in the world, 

And with the scimitar w^as gold brocade 
With all varieties of gems uncut. 

To thee the letter was on painted silk ; 

So when I saw the Indian script 1 called 
An Indian scribe, a fluent, heedful speaker, 

Who when he read the Indian Raja’s words 
Wept for the letter ran : ' Live joyfully 
For thou art worthy both of jo}^ and realm, 

And on the day of Dai in month Azar 
Thou wilt be king and ruler of the world. 

Thy sire will reign for eight and thirty years. 

For so the stars ordain. Good times will shir.e 
Upon thee ; thou wilt don the crown of greatness.’ 
These words have been fulfilled to me to-day, 

But we should wash hot from our hearts alTcetion. 

I was aware that fortune had decreed 

That when thy throne had gained its brilliancy 

Mine only portion wotild be toil and pain, 

And that mj^ bright day wu)u]d be turned to gloom ; 
But as I gave, had l^aith, made friends, and loved 
I did not lour by reason of that letter. 

I gave it, having read it, to Shirin, 

And pondered much upon it. In her keeping 
Are both the letter and the horoscope, 

And no one great or small is ware thereof. 

If thou wouldst sec it make request of her ; 

Thou haply mayst regard it more or less. 

I wot that seeing it thou wilt repent, 

And seek to heal the past. For what thou saidtst 

a 


VOL, IX, 


1 8 ^THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Of bonds and of imprisonments, and liow 
We have done others hurt, ’tis this world’s way, 

And that of former chiefs and kings of kings, 

And if thou know'st it not speak with an archmage ; 
He will enlighten thee thereon and tell thee : — 

‘ ’Tis ill to keep God’s enemy alive.’ 

Those that were in our prison were mere dfvs 
Complained of by the righteous. Neither bloodshed 
Nor utter harshness ever was our trade. 

I shut up criminals and did not hold 
Of small account wrongs done by them to others ; 
But now I hear that thou hast freed these men — 
Men worse than dragons — and for this thou art 
A sinner guilty both in w'ord and deed 
In God’s sight. Now that thou art lord be prudent, 
x\nd if thou know’st not how consult the wise. 
Forgive not those that vex thee though thou hopest 
For wealth through them, and what can better bonds 
For one in whom thou seest naught but harm ? 

In talking of my wealth thou hast not shown 
Good sense and wisdom. We have never asked 
For more than toll and tax. When these were paid 
If any were still rich, though men might say 
That they were foes and miscreants of the seed 
Of Ahrinuin, wc thought of God and passed 
Such nuittcTS lightly by. From Him I had 
The crown and throne, and they have cost me dear, 
c, 2034 The Maker of the world, the righteous Judge, 

Hath willed this change of fortune. In the world 
His will is paramount, so when He would 
Our minishment we seek not for addition. 

We sought to please our Judge, but by our toils 
Have not evaded TIis apportionment, 

And when He asketh me I will tell all. 

That Questioner is wiser than thou art, 

And one more potent in all good and ill. 


19 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHIR^Vl) 

The miscreants that stand before thee now 
Are not thy friends or kin, and what they say 
Of me that also will they say of thee 
Before thy iocs. They arc but slaves of gold 
And silver : thou wilt find in them no helper. 

They have possessed thy heart and there instilled 
Each fault of mine. Such words as these are not 
In thy philosophy and will not profit 
Those miscreants’ minds, but I haxe uttered them 
For my foes’ sake that they who read tliis letter, 
Writ in the ancient tongue, may know that lies 
Lack lustre even from the mouths of Shahs. 

'Twill be too a memorial in the world, 

A consolation to the man of wisdom. 

And after our decease whoe'er shall rca.d 
These words of ours will learn our policy. 

I gathered armies from Bartas and Chin, 

And eveiywherc ap])ointed generals, 

Then made attacks upon mine enemies 
Till none dared raise his head. When they were 
scattered 

Our treasuries were all filled. The wliole land toiled 
For us, and from the sea so many gems 
Were brought us that the shipmen grew aweary. 
Plain, sea, and mountain, all were mine. Now when 
The treasury of drachms had been expended 
The coffers wxu’c refilled witli new dinars. 

With precious stones and royal Jewelry, 

As well as clothes and implements of war, 

And when our crown was twenty-six years old 
Our treasuries were rich with many gems. 

I struck a new die for my drachms and turned 
To Joy and merriment. That year when I 
Had ta’en account I found the total sum 
Ten million of dhidrs. Paidawasis,^ 

* Sou Vol, vii., p. 95 note. 


20 


^THE SHAHNAMA op FIRDAUSI 

In Persian reckoning, I spent and squandered. 

Each purse contained twelve thousand in dinars, 

And those thus spent were royal, while besides 
The tribute and dinars from Hindustan, 

The realm of Rum and land of sorcerers ; 

Besides from every province gifts and tribute 
From all the sovereigns and potentates ; 

C. 2035 Besides New Year and Autumn offerings, 

The gifts of horses and of fair-faced slaves ; 

Besides cuirasses, helmets, axes, swords. 

Which every one sent to us liberally ; 

Besides musk, camphor, sables, beaver-skins, 

Red weasels’ and white wolves’, our subjects all 
Set suchlike loads upon their beasts and sought 
Our court in ha.ste ; none was recalcitrant. 

Abundant toil of all sorts have wc spent 
To amass a treasure — one additional 
To those known as Khuzra and as ’Ariis,’^ 

Reserved by me against an evil day. 

We long discussed what name the hoard should have. 
And in the end wc called it Bad Awar.® 

Thus in my six and twentieth year of reign 
Heaven till the eight and thirtieth favoured me ; 

My chieftains were all safe, my foes all quaked. 

And now I hear that thou art sovereign— 

An evil juncture this for all the world, 

Which reft of pleasure must jierforce be mute. 

Thou wilt make earth calamitous, fulfilled 
With suffering and profitless. Moreover, 

Those same injurious persons that surround thee. 
And are the Light* of thy dark nights, will give 
Thy throne up to the wind that thou mayst not 
Enjoy the world. Were there with thee a sage, 

So that thy darkened mind might be illumed, 

Thou wouldst not do amiss in giving gifts 

> See Vol, viii., p. 406. « Id. * Urmuzd in text. 


21 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWI) 

So that tl\y wealth might reach the poor. My son. 

Whose cla3"s are few, whose wisdoni is but scant ! 

Solicitude will rob thy soul of joy. 

This know, that these our treasures are thy stay ; 

The opportunity is in thy grasp. 

They are the appanage of royalty ; 

A world that is all moneyless is lost. 

A pauper Shah will be unjust, and he 

Whose hand is empty hath no strength or worth. 

Without the means of largess he by all 
Will be declared a fraud and not a Shah. 

Moreover, if thy riches reach thy foes. 

And all the idols come to Brahmans’ hands. 

The worshippers will turn from God, thy name 
And fame be spurned. If thou art treasureless 
Thou wilt not have an army, and thy subjects 
Will hail thee not as Shah. The dog is good 
At begging bread, but if thou fillest him. 

He threaten eth thy life. Again, thou said’st 
About my strategy that I have stationed 
The troops along the roads, and blamest me 
Through ignorance, not knowing gain from loss. 

The answer is that by my toil I gathered C. 2036 

My splendid treasures, captured foreign cities, 

And shattered all my foes that we might sit 

Without vexation, toil, or injury 

In peace upon the pleasant throne. I scattered 

My horse about the frontier, and (to show 

The difference ’twixt the worthless and the worthy) 

When thou recall’ st the troops from every side 
The foe will see the road clear, for Irdn 
Is like a garden in the jocund Spring, 

Whose happy blossoms never fail to flower, 

A garden of pomegranate and narcissus. 

Of apples and of quince ; but when the orchard 
Becometh void of men the enemy 


22 


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUS! 


Will root up all i*hc marjoram ajul snap 
All ]>rfciiif*hes of |)omt*;;‘nuudc n.ncl of qniiuaa 
frdiits walls are its troops and !i„';(*ar of war, 

Its thorns all arrows on its balLlcnienls, 

And if ill waiitonness Ihoii flingesL (hnvn 
The garden-wall tlie garden is as waste, 

As sea or upland. Ca.st not down its wall 
Or thou wilt break the Iranians*’ hearts and backs, 
For then will raid and ravag^c, horsemen’s shouts, 
And all the incidents of war ensue. 

Expose not thou our children, wives, and land 
To trouble : let but one such year elapse. 

And sages will describe thee as a fool. 

Now I have heard that thou dost give high place 
To men unworthy. Know that Niishirwan, 

Son of Kubad,^ recorded in his Letter 
Of Counsel that whoe’er doth give his arms 
To foes doth give himself to slaughtcriiig, 

Since, Avhen he askclh back those arms for use, 
The enemy will fight. As for the message 
Of Chesar, which hath made thee call me heartless, 
And sclf-willcxi tlioii rccallcst not the facts ; 

Thy words were pi^impted by some <*ounsdior. 

As for my tyranny and his good faith, 

Canst thou discern good faitJi from tyranny ? 
Receive mine answer, thou of little wit ! 

But let me say withal, as is but right, 

Thou art the plaintiff and the witness too — 

A thing no man of wisdom would allow. 

When Caesar washed off from Ms face the dust 
Of bale he chose me as his son-in-law 
For valourks sake. Whoever walketh not 
The earth for ill, and hath some sha,rc of wisdom 
WitMn him, knoweth that Bahram Chdbina 
Began the feud and that the frauiuns 

* Reading with P. and T. ® See Vol, viii., p. 27. 


23 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWI) 

Took sides with him. The Riimans did not triumph 
O’er him ; the drifting sand can not bind fast 
The inoiintaiii 1 But in that tight God vouchsafed 
To aid me, and the armies of tiic world 
Were naught to me. The Iranians have heard 
Of those events, and thou shouldst liear from them. 
As for myself, I did whate’er I could, 

Upon the day of fight, for Niyatus 
With kindness and with magnanimity, 

But have not reckoned that day’s recompense. 

And Farruklizad will tell thee just the same : 

Look not upon the world with boyish eyes. 

Gashasp, who was our treasurer, can tell. 

And that good archimage, our minister. 

That I bestowed upon the Ruman troops 
A hundred thousand purses from our treasures. 

I gave to Niyatus a thousand nuggets, 

With earrings and red gold. Each nugget’s weight 
Was as a thousand trcasury-miskals 
I reckoned. I bestowed on him withal 
Fine watered pearls that experts had found flawless. 
And every one worth thirty thousand drachms 
To jewellers, and five score noble steeds, 

Selected from my stables — fifty saddled, 

The others very choice, housed in brocade, 

Mates for the wind upon the waste. I sent 
All these to Caesar with my thanks witlial. 

For what thou said’st about the Cross of Christ, 
That bit of old wood flung among my treasures — 

A matter of no loss or gain to me — 

Thou hast been listening to some Christian’s talk. 

I mused that one like Caesar, great and mighty, 
Surrounded as he is by learned men — 

Philosophers and potentates and priests — - 
Should call one that was executed God ! 

While as for this dry, rotten wood, if this 


24 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Mere useless Cross were God ‘twould be IJniiuzd, 
Whose name wc give to every month’s first chi}', 
And would have vanished from onr i.reasiu'y 
As Christ himself departed fj'uni the world. 

Again for what thou said’st : ' Make thine excuse, 
Amend thy conduct and ensue God’s path/ 

I answer : ‘ May the two hands of Kubad, 

His feet and lips and tongue rot ! It was God 
Who placed the crown upon my head : I took, 
And revelled in the gift. I have returned it 
Since He demanded it. What next I wonder ? 

To Him will I confess, not to a boy 
Scarce able to distinguish good and ill.’ 

All that God doth is welcome unto me 
Though I have seen much woe and bitterness. 

For eight and thirty years have I been Shah, 

And none among the kings hath been my peer. 

He that bestowed this world on me may give 
Another but will have no thanks of mine ! 
c. 2038 I will pronounce a blessing on the realm 

‘ May earth be ever teeming with the wise.’ 

So long as God shall help and succour us « 

None will dare curse.” 

Then said he to Kharrad 
“ 0 Memory of the great ones of the world ! 

Say to that foolish and impetuous boy : — 

‘ The lustre of our countenance is dimmed : 
Farewell to thee for ever. As for me, 

May all our converse be henceforth with sages.’ 

As for yourselves, illustrious messengers, 

Ye Persians eloquent and eminent ! 

To both of you I also bid farewell. 

Say nothing but the words that ye have heard. 

I give my blessing to the world at large, 

Which we have looked on as a passing thing. 

All mother-born must die— whome’er t-hou hast 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHlRWt) 25 

111 iiiiiid — Khnsraii Parwiz back to Kubad. 

So too IIusha.]\q', Janishid, and Tahmuras — ■ 

To all tlie world the foiiuts of fear and hope — 
Whom div and beast acknowledged, passed and died 
When their day ended. Faridiin, the blest, 

Wdio banned ill, close or open, from the world, 

And stayed Zahhak the Arab’s hand from evil, 
Scaped not by bravery the clutch of fate. 

So was it with Arish whose arrow’s flight 
Was one farsang A victorious Karan, 

The capturer of cities ; Kai Kubad, 

Who having come from Mount Alburz became 
Through manhood world-lord over all the folk. 

And built himself a world-famed house of crystal,^ 
Adorned with lustrous pearls and gates of gems.’'* 

So was it with Kaiis, that man of might, 

Who took the world by skill and policy, 
lie that adventured toward the sky above, 

Unwitting of the processes of time ; 

So too with Siyawush, that lion famed, 

Who slew two tigers in his youthful days,^ 

And built Gang-dizh^" with toil but gat therefrom 
No treasure. Where are now AfriisiyAb, 

The Turkman king, whose semblance e’en in dream 
None seeth ; where Rustam, Z41, Asfandiyar, 

Whose fame is their memorial with us ; 

Giidarz and his choice sons, three score and ten, 
Those cavaliers upon the riding-ground. 

And lions of the fray ; where Kai Khusrau, 

The noble lion-man who in the fight 
Made lions prisoners ; and Shah Gushtdsp, 

The convert to ' The Good Faith,’ he by whom 

■» Much further according to the legend. See Vol, v., p. 12, 

^ This is attributed to Kai Kdds elsewhere. See Vol. li., pp. 81, loi. 
» This line occurs three couplets too low in C. 

* This is not mentioned elsewhere in the poem. 

® See Vol. ii., pp. 189, 279, 


2(5 "" THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USl 

Grace was renewed ; where went renowned Sikaiidar, 
Who overtimied the world, and where Janiasp, 

Wlio shone in astrolo,^i(* lore more brightly 
C. 2039 Than. Sol or Venus ? Where is that famed Shahj 

Bahram Gur, matchless in his strength and courage ? 
No Shah was like him in miuiifieence ; 

The turning heaven dared not to touch his head. 
Where is that Shah, my grandsirc, bright of soul 
Who ruled the world as Kisra Niishirwan ? 

Where are the seven and forty world-lords Gone 
Is all their work, gone arc the Great and Wise, 

The warrior-liorscmen and the men of lore, 

These passing those in prowess and those these 
In years ? They all have left this spacious world, 
Left palace, hall, and riding-ground. Midst Shahs, 
Though some were older far, I liad no peer. 

I walked the world for good and ill, and held 
The evil day aloof. ’Twas mine to traverse 
Full many a rugged path and sweep away 
Full many a foe. My treasures fill all lands ; 

Where earth and water arc my toil is seen. 

When with me too the world shall cease, and all 
The nobles’ hopes grow dim, with my son also 
The throne will not abide, for he will quit it, 

And all his fortune end. What time the angel 
That taketh souls approacheth I shall say : — 

‘ Take my soul gently,’ 1 will clear my heart 
By penitence, and freedom from offence 
Sliall be my breastplate. Well have men of wisdom, 
Good, veteran, learned, declared : * If wakeful fortune 
Decline one must expect fears manifold, 

And he whose day of greatness hath gone by 

^Khuf>rau Parwiz was only the forty-third Shfih, R.rliaps 
some, who never became Shilhs, sneh as Siydwush and AsfandiyAr, 
arc included, or it may be that the author of this defence (sec p. 
4) wrote from his own point of view, not that of the supposed 
speaker. 


KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWl) 27 

Is [oolisli if lie asketh its return.’ 

This is my message to tlie world, to mean 
Aiid mighty too : ere long the Shah and all 
His famous troops will fall to slaughtering 
Each other and fliiig fire on field and fell ; 

Then sires will fall by sons and sons by sires ; 

Our enemies, the people that discoursed 
Of evil deeds and chilling words, will pay 
The smart when we are gone and not for long 
Enjoy the world. Since rule and greatness end 
With me what reck if Lion or another 
Shall have the sw'ay ? ” 

Ashtad and brave Kharnid, 

Son of Earzin, those sages, when they heard 
The message of that leader, were licart-pierced, 

And smote their heads. Both sorrowed for their 
words ; 

They buffeted their faces, rent tlicir robes 
In grief, and scattered dust upon their heads. 

Those ancients fared forth from his presence, wx'cping, 
In anguish, with their hearts all arrow-poiots. 

With furrowed faces and in sore distress 
They went before Slurwi and every whit 
To that man brainless and incom[>ctent 
Detailed the message that the Slnlh had sent. 


§3 


How SHrwi grieved for Kh%israu Parwiz and hoio the 
Chiefs were displeased thereat 

Shirwl wept bitterly on hearing this ; 

His heart quaked for the crown and throne, and when 
The company dispersed that had dismayed him 


C. 2040 


28 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSl 

With foul words clamouring for his father’s blood, 
And burning tlie youth’s heart, he left the throne 
Of kingship, clasped with honoured hands his head, 
And wept blood on his breast. News of that weeping 
And of the lamentation of the king, 

Came to the hovst and all were in dismay. 

They met, discussed Khusrau Parwiz, and cried : — 

If he shall sit upon the throne again 
He will disgrace the captains of the host.” 

Whenas the sun rose o’er the darksome hills 
The malcontents awoke and went to court. 

The Shah, on hearing of it, took his seat 
Upon the throne, and those of high degree, 

Akin or alien, approached the presence. 

They took their seats with scowls but no one spoke. 
The king said : “ Gibbeting is the desert 
Of him that mourneth not my father’s woes. 

I call such misbegotten and a knave. 

Let none depend on such because that man 
Is rottener than a rotten willow-tree.” 

He gat this answer from the men in fault : — 

“ Call whosoever saith : " I serve two Shahs ’ 

A fool at heart and vile whate’er his rank.” 

Shirwi rejoined : For Shahs no wealth no troops ! 
For one month we will utter pleasant words, 

And give no hint of duress to my sire ; 

He may make statements that will gladden us 
Because his treasures are in every coast.” 

C. 2041 On hearing this they rose to seek their homes. 
Then Shah Shfrwi gave orders to the cooks 
Let nothing be denied Khusrau Parwiz : 

Serve up Tiis food iipon a golden service, 

And let the food itself be rich and grateful.” 

The servers brought it but he would not eat 
The viands that were proffered, hot or cold. 

Shirin’s hand brought to him all that he ate 


29 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHlRlft) 

Because she sorrowed with him. hi liis grief. 

She was his sole good friend and soothed his woes 
Both day and night, shared all his hopes and fears, 
And quaked for him like willow in the wind. 

A month passed and mean'vvhile Khusrau Parwiz 
Was full of pain and anguish night and day, 

His faults and crimes recalled to memory. 

And little relish of that life had he. 


§ 4 

Hotv Bdrbad lamented Khusrau Parwiz, cut off his own 
Fingers, and burned his Instruments oj Music 

Now list the lamentation of Barbad,^ 

And grow forgetful of the world at large. 

On hearing that the Shah, not by advice 
And ’gainst his will, no longer filled the throne, 

That “ men are seeking how to murder him ; 

The soldiers arc renouncing fealty,” 

Barbad came from Chahram to TaisaMn 
With tearful eyes and heart o’crchargcd ; he came 
To that abode and saw the Shah whereat 
His tulip-cheeks became like fenugreek. 

He bode awhile in presence of the Shah, 

Then went with wailing to the audicnce-halL 
His love flamed in his heart, his heart and soul 
Burned in his anguish for Khusrau Parwiz ; 

His eyes rained like a cloud in Spring and made 
His bosom as the margent of the sea. 

He fashioned him a dirge upon the harp, 

And to that dirge he sang a mournful plaint. 

»For the story of B 4 rba<l s«e Val. viii., p, 396 


30 


THE SHAHNAMA of FlRDAUSl 


With visage wan and heart fulfilled with grief 
He thus lamented in the olden tongue : — 


0 Shah ! 0 noble chieftain ! O Khusraii ! 

O great ! 0 strong ! O hero ne’er cast down ! 

Where are thy mastery and greatness now. 

Where all thy Grace, thy fortune, and thy crown ? 


“ Where that imperial circlet, towering height ? 

Where arc thine armlets and thine ivory throne? 
Where all tliy manliness, thy Grace, and might, 
Who ’ncath thy wings hadst this world for thine 
own ? 

Oh ! whither arc thy dames and minstrels gone, 
Gate, audience-hall, and leaders of thy clay, 

C.. 2042 The diadem and Kawa’s gonfalon, 

And all the blue-steel falchions, where are they ? 

‘‘ Where are the head, the crown that loved it well— 
Mate of the earrings and the throne of gold ? 
Where are Shabdiz, his slirru|)s and his sell — 

The steed that hicath thee ever <*arac(>rd ? 


Where are thy helmet, head, and habergeon 
All golden and compacted gem to gem, 

Thy cavaliers in gold caparison, 

Whose sworcls made enemies the sheaths for them? 


Where all the camels for thy progresses, 

The golden litters and attendance rife, 

Led steeds, white elephants, and dromedaries ?. 
Have one and all grown hopeless of thy life ? 


31 


KUBAD [COMMONLY CALLED SH!rW1) 

“ Where are thy fluent tongue and courteous, 

Thy heart, thy purpose, and thine ardent soul ? 
Why reft of all art thou abandoned thus ? 

Hast read of such a day in any roll ? 

“ Oh ! trust not to this world whose remedy 
Is weaker than its bane. ’Twas thy desire 
To have a son to aid and succour thee : 

Now through the son the gj’ves are on the sire ! 

“ It is by sons that kings obtain their might, 

And are unblemished by time’s travailings ; 

Yet ever as his sozis increased in height 

Both Grace and vigour failed the king of kings. 

“ None that shall lend an ear while men recall 
The story of Kliusrau Parwiz must dai’e 
To trust the world. Account as ruined all 
Iran and as the pards’ and lions’ lair. 


“ Of the Sdsanian race the Shah was head — 

^ One peerless in the sight of crown and state : 
The loeman’s wishes arc accomplished. 

And, like Iran, the race is desolate. 


“ No man possessed a larger host than he. 

Yet who had cause for justice to beseech ? 

The great fzroteetor brought the misery, 

.A.nd now the wolves are making for the breach ! 

‘ O Shah devoid of shame ! ’ thus tell Shirwi, 

‘ Such conduct is not worthy of this court. 
Count not upon thy troops’ fidelity 
When war is rife on all sides.’ God support 


32 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSl 

“ Thy soul, my master ! and it is my prayer 

That He thy foemen’s heads may headlong fling. 
By God and by thy life, my king ! I swear 

By New Year’s Day, by sun, and jocund Spring, 

“ If e’er this hand of mine again shall turn 
To harping may no blessing light on me ; 

Mine instruments of music will I burn 
That I may ne’er behold thine enemy.” 

He cut four fingers off and grasped the stumps 
Within his other palm. Returning home 
He kindled fire and burned his instruments, 

While those about Kubad both day and night 
At all that might befall them quaked with fright. 


How the Chiefs demanded from Shirwi the Death of 
Khusrau Panoiz and how he was slain by Mihr 
■ Hurmuzd 

C. 2043 Shirwi, a timid, inexperienced youth. 

Found that the throne beneath him was a snare, 
While readers of mankind saw that ’twas time 
For men of might. Those that had done the ill, 

And had produced that coil, went from the hall 
Of audience to the presence of Kubad 
To mind him of their infamous designs : — 

“ We said before and now we say again 
Thy thoughts are not on government alone. 

There are two Shihs now seated in one room, 

One on the throne and one on its degree, 


KUUAlJ (COMMONLY CAIJJlD SHlRlfl) 33 

And wlicii relations grow 'twixt sire and son 
They will be] lead the servants one and all. 

It may not be, so speak of it no more.” 

Shirwi was frigiitcned and he played poltroon 
Because in their hands he was as a slave. 

He answered : “ None will bring him to the toils 
Except a man whose name is infamous. 

Yc must go homeward and advise thereon. 

Inquire : ' What man is there that will abate 
Our troubles secretly ? ’ ” 

The Shah’s^ ill-wnshcrs 
Sought for a murderer to murder him 
By stealth, but none possessed the pluck or courage 
To shed the blood of such a king asid hang 
A mountain round his own neck. Everywhere 
The Slialds foes sought until Miey met with one 
Blue-eyed, paJe-eheeked, his body parched and hairy, 
With lips of lapis-la/iuli, with feel 
All dust, and belly ravenous ; the head 
Of that ill-docr was bare. None knew his name 
Midst high and low. This villain (may he never 
See jocund Paradise !) sought Earruldiza<l, 

And undertook the deed, '' Tins strife is mine,” 

Tie said. '' If ye will niake it ‘W’^orth iny while 
This is my quarry.’^ 

“ (Jo and do it then 

‘‘ If thou art able,” Farrukhzad replied. 

“ Moreover open not thy lips herein. 

I have a purse full of dinars for thee. 

And 1 will look upon thee as my son.” 

lie gave the man a dagger keen atid briglit, 

And then thc' murderer set forl-h in haste. 

The iniscrea,nlu when he approached the Shah, 

Saw him upon the throne, a slave attending. 

Kluisrau Parwiz quaked when he saw that nuin, 

* Klnusrau Parwiz. 


<; 


yoL. IX, 


3 f ^ THE SEAHNAMA OF BIRD A USt 

And shed tears from his c}mlids on his checks 
Because his heart bare witness tha.t the day 
Of heaviness was near. lie cried : O wretch ! 
Wiiat is thy naine ? Thy mother needs must wail 
thee.” 

The man replied : They call me Mihr Hurmuzcb 
A stranger here with neither friend nor mate,” 

Thus said Klmsrau Parwiz : “ My time hath come, 
And by the hand of an unworthy foe, 

Whose face is not a man’s, whose love none secketh.” 

He bade a boy attending him : Go fetch, 

My little guide ! an ewer, Avater, musk, 

And ambergris, with cleaner, fairer robes.” 

The boy-slavc heard, unwitting what was meant, 
And so the little servant went away, 

And brought a golden ewer to the Shah 
As well as garments and a bowl of watei*, 

Whereon Khusraii Farwlz made haste to go, 

Gazed on the sacred twigs and muttered prayers : 

It was no time for words or private talk. 

The Shah put on the garments brought, he made 
Beneath his breath confession of his faults. 

And wrapped a new simarre about his head 
In order not to see Jus murderer’s face. 

Then Mihr Hurmuzd, the dagger in his hand, 

Made fast the door and coming quickly raised 
The great king’s robe and pierced liis liversteacL 
Such is the process of this wdiirling world, 

From thee its secret keeping closcily furled ! 

The blameless speaker and the boastful Si‘e 
That all its doings arc but vanity, 

For be thou wealthy or in evil case 
This Wayside Inn is no abiding-place ; 

Yet be offeiiceless and ensue right ways 
If thou desirest to receive just praise. 

When tidings reached tlic highways and bAz4rs : — • 


35 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHlRWl) 

‘‘ Khiisraii Parwiz was slaughtered thus,” his foes 
Went to the palace-prison of the sad, 

Where fifteen of liis noble sous were bound. 

And slew them there, though innocent, w’hat time 
The fortune of the Shah was oveidhrown. 

Shirwi, the world-lord, dared say naught and hid 
His grief though he wept sorely at the news, 

And afterwards sent twenty of his guards 
To kee|) his brothers’ wi\ms and children safe C. 20^5 

Now that the Sliah liad been thus done i.o death. 

So passed that reign and mighty host away, 

Its majesty, its manliood, and its sway 
Such as no kings of kings possessed before. 

Or heard of from the men renowmed of yore. 

It booteth nothing what tlie wise man saiih 
Wlicn once his head is in the dragon’s breath. 

Call this world “ crocodile ” for it doth gnaw 
The prey that it hath taken with its claw. 

The work of Shah Khusrau Parwiz is done ; 

His famous hoards a!)d throne and host arc gojic. 

To put one’s trust in this world is to be 
In quest of dates upon a willow’'-tree. 

Why err in such a fashion from the way 
Alike by darksome night and shining <lay ? 

Whate’er thy gains let them suffice thee still 
As thou art fain to save thy soul from ill, 

And in tt>y day of strength hold thyself weak ; 

For kindly impulses and justice seek, 

And be intent on good. For what is tiuiic 
To give or sj)eud do a.s thou dost incline ; 

All else is pain and toil. How goodlier 
Than wc arc friends whose faithfulness is clea.r ! 

Such faithfulness of friends is greatly dear. 


36 


*THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 


§6 

IIow Shirwi ashed Sldrin in Marriage, how Shirin 
killed herself, and lioiv Shirwi ivas slain 

Sinee I have ended with Khusraii Parwiz 
I speak next of Shirwi and of Shirin. 

As soon, as three and fifty days had passed 
Since that whereon that glorious Shah was slain 
Shirwi dispatched Shirin a messenger 
To say : ‘‘ Thou wicked, potent sorceress, 

Learned but in necromancy and black arts ! 

In all Iran thou art the guiltiest. 

By necromancy didst thou gain the Shah, 

And by thy craft thou bringest down the moon. 
Quake, guilty one ! and come to me. Abide not 
Thus in thy palace, joyful and secure.” 

Shirin raged at his message and abuse 
So foul and senseless. Thus she said : God grant 

That parricides possess not Grace or presence. 

I will not see the wretch e’en from afar 
At funeral or feast.” 

That mournful dame 
Sent for a scribe and had a document 
Drawn in the olden tongue, instructing him 
Regarding her last wishes and estate. 

C. ^046 She kept a little poison in a pyx ; 

She could not well procure it in the city. 

She kept it on her, sewed a winding-sheet 
To wrap her form — that cypress of the garden— 

And then returned this answer to Shirwi : — 

‘‘ Exalted Shah, the wearer of the crown ! 

Now perish all thy words and perish too 
The villain’s heart and spirit that hath heard 


KUBAD {COMMONLY CALLED SHlRWl) 37 

Of witchcraft save by name and joyed therein. 

Had Shah KliTisrau Panvl?: been one to cheer 
His soul with sorcery Lhci-e would have been 
A sorceress within his bower, and she 
Had seen his face.^ He kept me for his pleasure, 
And when the dawn was peeping he was wont 
To call me from the golden bower and joy 
At sight of me. Shame on thee for such words ! 
Such knavish talk beeometh not a king. 

Remember God, the Giver of all good. 

And utter not such words in others’ hearing.” 

They brought the answer to the Shah. Shfrwi 
Raged ’gainst the guiltless dame** and said : “ Thou 
needs 

Must come. None is blood- thirstier than thou. 

Come and behold my crown’s top. If it be 
Magnifical then do it reverence.” 

Shirin, on hearing this, was full of pain ; 

She writhed ; her cheeks grew wan. She thus 
replied : — 

“ I will not come to thee save in the presence 
Of those wise men that are about thy court, 

Men of experience and clerkly skill.” 

Shirwl dispatched and summoned fifty men 
Both wise and old, then sent one to Shirfn, 

To say : “ Arise and come. Enough of talk.” 

Thereat she robed herself in blue and black, 

And drew anear the Sh4h, approached apace 
The Rosary of Revellers® — ^the spot 
Wherein those fluent Persians were — and sat 
Behind the great king’s curtain as became 

» Heading with P. 

* So far as the charge of witchcraft was ooncerned, SliMn (VoL 
viii.,,p. 389) had murdered Maryam, Kiihid's mother. 

elle alia droit salle.de t^te.'de Schadeg4n/' Mold or, 
more strictly, BarMet de Moyaard^whb completed the trawlatioo' 
from §4 to the ehd of th»s poem* ■ ■■ ''''''' 


38 "^THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

The virtuous. He sent to her to say 
“ Two months^ of mourning for Klmsrau Parwiz 
Are o’er. Now be my wife that thou mayst take 
Thy pleasure and avoid a mean estate. 

I will maintain thee as my father did, 

And e’en with more respect and tenderness.” 

Shirfn replied : “ Let me be righted first, 

And then my life shall be at thy dispose. 

I will not hesitate in answering 
The hest and purpose of thy glorious heart.” 
Shirwi agreed to that fair dame’s request, 

C. 2047 Whereat the noble lady raised her voice 

Behind the royal curtains, saying : “ O Shah ! 

Be happy and victorious. Thou said’st 
That I was a bad woman and a witch. 

Remote from purity and rectitude.” 

Shirwi replied : “ ’Twas so, but generous folk 
Do not take dudgeon at mere hastiness.” 

Shirfn addressed the other Persians present 
Within the Rosary of Revellers, 

And asked : “ What have ye seen in me of ill, 
Guile, folly, and dark ways ? For many a year 
I was the mistress of IrAn and helped 
The Brave in everything. I ne’er ensued 
Aught but the right ; fraud and deceit I banned. 
Through my word many were made governors, 
And took their portions of the world full oft. 

Who hath beheld my shadow in Ir4n 
Away from home ? If any one hath marked 
My shadow, crown, and state let such declare 
■What he hath seen or heard and by his answer 
Reveal the truth.” , . 

The magnates in attendance 
All spake her fait. In all the world,” they said, 
“ She hath no peeir ip, public and in private.” 

, , - * ' Jig with P. . 


KUBAd [COMMONLY CALLED SllMvi) 30 

Shinn proceeded thus : “ Ye lords and chiefs 
Both veteran and redoubted ! thi-cc lliings make 
The worth of women that bedecik the throne 
Of greatness ; one is modesty and wealth 
Wherewith her husband may adorn his house ; 

The next is bearing blessed sons, that she 
May e’en exceed her spouse in happiness ; 

The third is having beauty and fine form, 

Joined with the love of a sequestered life. 

When I was mated to Khusrau Parwi'/,, 

And entered on seclusion, he had come 
Weak and dispirited from Hum to live 
Within our land, but after reached such pow'er 
As none had heard of or had looked upon. 

Moreover I have had four sons by him 
To his great joy — Nastiir, Shahryar, Fariid, 

And Marddtishah, blue heaven’s coronal. 

Jarashid and Fariddn had not such sons ; 

May my tongue perish if I lie herein ! 

Their bodies all are now beneath the dust, 

Their spirits roaming in pure Paradise.” 

Unveiling then her lovely countenance. 

And musky hair, “ There is my face,” she added, 

“ Such as it is. If there be falsehood show it. 

My hair was all ray hidden excellence, 

For none on earth e’er used to look thereon. 

What I display is all my sorcery. 

Not necromancy, fraud, and evil bent.” 

None had beheld her hair before, no chief c. 2048 

Had heard thereof. The elders were astound, 

And their mouths watered. When Shirwf beheld 
The visage of Shirfn his spirit flew 
Unmarked away from him. Her face so dazed him 
That love of her filled all his heart. He cried 
“ I want none but thyself. If I have thee 

For wife Irto can ^iye me hbtMng wore. 


40 'the SHAHNAMA of PlRDAUSt 

I will not go from thy commands, but limn 
My loyalty to thcc upon mine eyes.” 

The lady of tlie lovely face replied : - 
“ I still need somewhat of the Iranian king. 

I have two wants if thou wilt bid me speak, ^ 

And may thy king of kingship last for ever.” 

Shirwi replied : “ My soul is thine, thy wish, 
Whate’er it be, is granted.” 

Said Shfrfn : — 

“ All treasures laid up by me in this land 
Thou shaft assign mo as mine own before 
This noble company and write thyself 
Upon this roll tliat thou renouncest all, 

Both small and great.” 

Shirwl made haste to do 

Her bidding. Having gained her wish she (piittcd 
The Rosary of Revellers, the chiefs 
And noble Persians, went home, freed her slaves, 
And made them happy with that wealth of hers 
Whereof she gave a part to mendicants. 

And to her family a larger share. 

She gave too somewhat to the h’anes of Fire, 

The feasts of New Year’s Day and Mihr and Sada, 
To ruined homes and caravan.sarui.s 
Then turned to lions’ lairs. All this she gave 
As offerings from Khu.srau Parwiz, the world-lord, 
And joyed his soul thereby. She .sought the garden 
And taking off her veil sat unadorned 
Upon the ground and summoning her folk 
Assigned with courtesy a place to each, 

Then dried thus loudly : “ Hear, yo unaggrieved 1 
For none will ever see my face again. 

Fear ye the Judge of those, that seek for justice. 

The Lighter of the sun and moon and stars, 

And .speak but truth ; deceit is not for sages. 

Sihee fir^ L oahie before. Klnisrau Parwf?, 


KUDAD [COMMONLY CALLED SHfRl^A) 41 

First made mine eiitiy to his ^i^oldcu bower, 

And wa,s chiei* wife and Glory of the Shall, 

Hath any fault at a,0 a{)})cared in me Y 
There is no need to speak to save niy face : 

What booteth that to woman in lier need ? 

All rose to make re])ly : Famed dame of dames, ( 
So eloquent and wise and Im^'lit of soul ! 

By God ! none ever saw thee, ever heard 
Thy voice behind the curtains. Verily 
Thy like hath sat not on the goodly tlirone 
Since Shah Hushang.” 

Then all iln^ servitors, 

Slaves emulous and vigilant of heart, 

Exclaimed : Exalted lady jiraiscd in Chin, 

In Rum and in Tara/. ! who would presume 
To speak aught ill of thee ? Could evil-doing 
Befit that fane of thine ? ” 

Thus said Shlrin : — 

‘‘ This rcprohaic, whom heaven above will curse. 

Slew his own sire to compass crown and throne, 

And may he never more see fortune’s face ! 

Hath he himself shut death out by a wall 
Who liglitly reeked thus of a father’s blc^od ? 

He sent a message to me that bedimmed 
Mine own shrewd soul. I answered : ^ While I live 
My heart shall serve my Maker/ 1 declared 
My purpose fully, fearful of my foe : 

He may defame me publicly when dead. 

Ye arc free agents and my slaves no longer.” 

They wept much at her words and futthermore 
Consumed with anguish for Khustau Parwf/i. 

Informants went before the Bhih and told 
What they had heard abput that guiltless dame. 

He asked : Hath that good' lady further wishes ? ” 

She sent to say : 1 have one wish,. no more ; 

1 fain would ope the late, Sh^h’'^' oha^rneGhodse 


42 


THE SHAHNAMA of FlRDAUSt 


I have a great desire to look on him.” 

Sliirwi replied : So do, ’tis Jiatural.” 

The keeper oped the door. That pious lady 
Began her wailing, went and laid her face 
Upon the visage of Khusrau Parwiz, 

Spake of the past and took the mortal bane d 
She sent the dust up from her own sweet life. 

She sat beside the Shah with visage veiled, 

Clad in a single camphor-scented robe ; 

She set her back against the wall and died ; 

She died and won the plaudits of the world. 

Shirwi fell sick when he had heard the news, 

For such a spectacle affrighted him. 

He bade construct another sepulchre, 

And make her diadem of musk and camphor, 
c. 2050 He shut the old Shdh’s charnel. Soon they gav<^ 
Shirwi the bane ; the world had had its fill 
Of Shahs ! Thus luckless both in birth and death 
He left the throne of kingship to his son. 

One reigneth seven months and in the eighth 
Doth don the camphor crown ! Of earth’s good things 
To have possession of the throne is best, 

Of evils life cut short is evilest. 


» C/. p, 36. 


XLV 


ARDSHIR, SON OF SHlRWl 

HE REIGNED SIX MONTHS 


ARGUMENT 

Ardslifr’s accession is well received by the people, lie 
makes Plriiz, son of Kbusrau, the captain cjf the host. Guraz, 
on the pretext of avenging Khnsrau Parwfz, Init really with 
the intention of seizing the kingship for liimsilf, schemes to 
bring about the death of the Shah wiu> is murdered at a 
banquet by Pfniz. 


NOTE 

Ardshir (Artaxorxes III., September, A.T). G28— April, 
A.D. 630) was, according to Tabari, only seven years old 
at his accession. By some accounts ho was only one year 
old at the time.^ He was of course a mere puppet in the 
hands of the nobles. The “ True Cross,” if the date of its 
elevation at Jerusalem — Sept. 14th, A.D. 629 bo correct, 
must have been restored during his reign.®* 

§ 1. The Arabic Tabari says that the realm was administered 
by Mih-izar-Qushnasp (Mihr ’Hasis in the Persian version), 
the High Steward, who had oha,rge of the Shdh’s person. 
This may account for his being made out to be a regicide in 
the Shdhndma. He really seems to have b-en a well-inten- 
tioned man who did his best in very difficult circunistawces. 
At all events, according to the Persian Tabari, Shahrbartiz, 
after taking possession of Ctosiphon, stew him and other 
nobles on the preitext of avenging the death of Khusrau 
Parwfz. , 

— — I — 

» NT, p. a'ae, ' zt„ si,,' 347 - ■; ' * nt,, p. ,394 mk. ■ 

'''43 V 


44 * THE SHAHNAMA OF FIEDAUSt 

§2. It appears that Shahrhamz (Giiraz) was not con- 
sulted when Ardshir was raised to the throne, and lie made 
this an excuse for taking violent measures. The occasion 
was a favourable one for an ambitious general in command 
of an army. Moreover, he had an understanding, confirmed 
by matrimonial alliances, with Heraclius, who no doubt 
promised to recognise him if he became Shah. He accordingly 
marched upon Ctesiphon with 6,000 or, according to another 
account, 60,000 troops. The High Steward made an attempt 
at resistance, but Shahrbaraz with the connivance of the 
captain of the guard and other chiefs was vsuccessfui and the 
usual scenes of outrage and massacre ensued.^ 


§1 

How Afdshir, Son of SJdrwi, ascended the Throne and 
harangued the Chiefs 

Now as the next confronting mo I voice 
The reign of Sh^h Ardshir, I have no choice. 

When Shah Ardshir sat on the throne both young 
And old flocked to him from Ir 4 n, for many 
Were chiefs grown old, to hear what he would say.^ 
The young Ardshir then loosed his tongue and thus 
He spake : ‘‘Ye well-tried warriors ! may one. 
Whoe’er he be, that sitteth on the scat 
Of sovereignty possess an open mind, 

And worship God. We will ensue the course 
Of former Shihs, ensue too Grace and Faith. 

May we remember God who giveth good, 

May all our acts be just I I will advance 
The pious and make tyrants, bleed. I trust 
The army to Pirhz, son of Khusrau, 

'^^o loveth , equity and loyal lieges, , ' ■ 

VEortbe ^bove Id., p. noUs. Zt, 6., 347.' 541 

' ’ Offldttedr , , ' 


ARDSHlR, SON OR SlllRWt 

They for their part with such a paladiu 
Still will be happy and serene of soul.” 

Full many were contented with his speech ; 
A peaceful ruler was the wish of each. 


§‘•2 

How Gurdz was displeased at Ardshir being 8hdh and 
how he caused Ardshir to he slain by IHruz, Aon of 
Khusrau 

Then tidings rcachc;<l (luraz, who hatl involved 
Khusrau Purwiz in sorrow and distress. 

And he dispatched from Rum a man to say : — 

“ The crown of vile Shirwi is in the dust. 

Hell take his soul and be his charnel-house c. 2051 

O’erturned ! Who over knew a lofty cypress 

Wrecked in the garden by the grass, and one 

Like to Khusrau Parwiz, whose peer as king 

Time’s eye and heart jicrceive not, who be.stowed 

My greatness on me, and I have not turned 

From his behest ? Now fate dethroneth him. 

And fortune’s face is utterly averse ; 

The circling heaven is hi.s foe and maketh 
His portion to be hidden in the earth ; 

The sun and moon amerce him of his sway, 

And take the crown and throne from such a king, 

Bestow the sovereignty upon Shirwi, 

And give up all frAn to wretchedness ! 

When he passed and Ardshir aK^umed the crown 
Both young and old rejoiced ih him, but I, 

If I have any portion in Ir&n, 

Wdi suffer not ouf cduntry’s air to breathe 


46 * THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS! 

Upon Mm. Have I not received the news 
Of Sliah Khusrau Parwiz wrecked by the words 
Of one of evil mark ? I will not have 
A king like this one though the age be Shahless, 

For there is much contention in his head, 

And he adviseth with another host. 

Now will I come in force with chosen chiefs 
Of Riim and of fran, and we shall see 
What sort of Head that is to whom such schemes 
Appeal. I will uproot liini so that never 
Shall he name kingship more.” 

He sent a runner 

To seek the ancients of the Irdnian host, 

And strove in other favsliion to advance 
His ill designs by writing to Piruz, 

Son of Khusrau, thus : The SasMiians’ fortune 
Is louring and we need a world-aspirant 
To gird himself for action. Haply thou 
Art ware of what to do and how to take 
The needful steps, wilt seek for many helpers, 

Both young and old, wilt clear away Ardshlr, 

And afterwards attain thy whole desire, 

Be safe and well contented ; but if thou 
Reveal this plot, and feed the sword of war 
With blood, I will lead forth such hosts from Rdm 
That I shall make the world dark in thine eyes. 
Heed well my words, and mayst thou think no scorn 
Of mine intent ; thou must not fall through folly. 
Oh ! pass not from the throne of majesty 
To underneath the dust. Repentance then 
Will not avail thee when in wreak my sword 
Is reaping heads*” , '' ' 

, PMz, son of Khusrau, 

When he hnd"i^ead that fetter and perceived 
The' whole intendment of self-willed man, 
i'; Much, pondered' on ‘and cOnsnlted 


ARDS Hi R, SON OF SHlRlVl 47 

The ancient magnates, saying : This affair 
Hath come upon me unawares and like 
A revelation ! ” 

This was their reply : — 
Famed and redoubted chieftain ! if our Shah 
Shall perish we shall rightly perish too 
For such a crime. Let not Gurax’ words move thee 
To perpetrate such ill, biat take occasion 
For doing good. Write him a fitting answer, 

And wake him from his dream. Say : ^ Thwjut not 
thou 

God’s purposes ; give not the Div a way 
To thine own heart. Reflect upon liic ease 
Of Shah Khusrau Parwiz and all the wre^ng 
That led to his undoing, for what limci 
Thou didst depose him the Sfisaniaii fortune 
Went at one l}low, and when Shfrwi ascusided 
The royal throne and girt his kingly loins 
Folk hoped sucli days as when Khusrau Farwiz 
Was Shdh whose wits were keen in all rcgnrds. 

And if the world became what it became, 

And gat no profit from the state of things. 

It was because the world dealt foolishly, 

And by one stroke lost its advantages. 

Now that Ardslur, succeeding to Kubdd, 

Is seated as the Shdh upon the throne. 

The world rejoicing in his majesty, 

And earth and time exulting in his Grace, 

Why should the world, now tranquil, he convulsc^d 
By pain and war ? Knock not at evils’ door ; 

Those that slay blameless 'kings will prosper not. 

In this strife circling heaven mpst not raise 

frdn in dust. I fear that, God will end 

The Irdnians’ terai for ills nlore heinous still’ ” 

‘ Pirdx, on this, wise counseEed, wrote Gurdx— 
;Tbdt, villain 'pf vilp race lifsp Mm 


^8 ® THE SHJHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Be ever chief !) — a profitable letter, 

Aacl thou hadst said that one had his heart 
Between the shears when he had read tliosc 'words. 
In fierce wrath with Piriiz, son of Khusrau, 

He gathered all his baggage and commanded 
The host to inarch forth plainwards. At the news 
Piruz dispatched a cameleer to go 
In all haste to Tukhar to summon him, 

Informing him at large of the affair, 

Of what Guraz was doing and the strife 
About the imperial throne. Then from Tukhar 
This answer reached Piriiz, son of Khusrau : — 

C. 2053 Risk not the blood of the Iranian cliicfs, 

O noble man ! but hear what stiith Guraz. 

Since thou hast written on such wise pcrclumec 
He may not come to fight with thee.” 

Now when 

Piriiz, son of Khusrau, had seen that letter 
His heart had no repose from evil thoughts, 

But gloomed with thinking how to harm the Sh 4 h, 
Whose wont it was to summon him, for he 
Was an observant man and eloquent, 

And served as minister and treasurer. 

He came one dark night for an audience, 

And found the wine bright and the welcome warm. 
Ardshir was seated in his palace diall ^ 

In company with many young and old, 

And when Piriiz, son of Khusrau, came raised, 

Thou wouldst have said, his head to heaven, called 
For harp, and all the hall was filled with music. 
Piriiz, son of Khusrau, when midnight came, 

Had drunk one man^ of wine while the companions 
Of Sh 4 h ArdsMr were all bemused ; no minstrel 
Was left that kept his wits. The miscreant 
Dismissed dhe company , :■ he 'and. the Sh 4 h ' 


AO 


ARDSHiR, SOM OF SHlRlVl * 

Alone remained. That man of outrage rose, 
Laid hand upon the Shah’s lips unawares. 

And held it there until Ardshir was dead. 

The palace filled with scimitars and arrows. 
All there — ambitious youths and warriors — 
Were fautors of Piriiz, son of Khusrau. 

Upon this manner ceased Ardshir to be 
When he had had six months of sovereignty. 


yoL. IX 


p 


XL VI 


GUEIZ (ALSO CALLED FARAYIN) 

HE REIGNED FIFTY DAYS 


ARGUMENT 

Guiaz, bcariBg of Ardshir’s death, marches on Taisafun and 
urged on by his younger, though dissuaded by bis elder son, 
usurps the throne. His rule described. A plot is fornu^d 
against him and he is slain while returning from the chase. 
The throne remains vacant for a while. 


NOTE 

Of. note to previous reign. Gnmz (Shahr-Barz, April 
27th — June 9th, A.D, 630) reigned for forty days.^ He was 
one of the three chief generals emjdoyed by Khusrau ParwiiS 
in his long war against the Eastern Roman Empire. His 
real name, according to Tabari, was EarruhAn. This in 
Pahlavi would be Parrukhin, which by a misreading has 
become Pardyin in the Shdhn^ma. Sbahrbar^z (Shahrgurdz, 
or Shahrwari^;) is, says Tabari, a title. Firdausi uses the 
shortened form Gurd-z, which means ‘‘ boar,’’ because it 
is more convenient metrically. The title may have been 
appropriate enough. In the Bhihnima the general is split 
up into two personalities— Gur^ 2 i or Far4yin, the usurper, 
and Sha/hr£ngur£z, the avenger of the breach made by the 
upstart in, the sacred line,of Sfeinian Suceession.^ In Tabari 
the leader of , the tevolt^is a native, of Istakhr named Pusfar-^ 
rukh^^ > Shahrfegurfa ih the ^h^h'n4m>a is also of tiie'same 
city. C ' - ' 

1 NT,' p. 3^0 and, mie , ' ,» Jd, pp. ' stpe hud noU, 38 ^ and 'ild * " ' 
.V,' ' .,50 , y-' 


51 


GUl^JZ {ALSO CALLLJJ FARAyJN)* 


§ 1 

Hoio Gurdz {aho called Fardijin) received News of the 
Slayvmf of ArdsMr, hastened to Iran, took Pos- 
session of the Throne, and was killed by Fhahrdn- 
gurdt 

Pfruz, son of Khiisran, dispatcliccl a post. 

And letter too, in secret to Guriiz, 

Whose sombre soul, what time Uie messenger 

Arrived, grew like the sun, and from (hose j arts 

He led forth such an army that tlu.- way 

Was barred to fly and emmet. Like the; wind 

He sped to Taisafun, his soldiers’ hands 

All had been bathed in blood. When he arriveel 

The chiefs went out to welcome him, but none 

Among the troops dared breathe for they were few. c. 2054 

Guraz, on entering the city, stayed not 

For minister and counsellor but chose 

A void place, and the magnates privily 

Conferred with him. Pirdz, son of Khusrau, 

Set loose his tongue and said : “ Famed paladin ! 

Whom hast thou chosen to be king of kijrgs. 

And illustrate the crown of majesty ? ” 

The warrior Guriz nmde answer thus 
“ I have not any sperets from Irte. 

To-rnorrow look ye out for some new ShAh 
To sit like some new moon upon the throne.” 

Since knowledge If thfe gloify of a man 
Walk not, if thou capst help it, foolishly, 
that ^ hath ; wisdom fipo'aketh goodly wor^s^, , 

■'And^as it grOi^rcth\hc ;^esortkth'iU* ' ^ 


52 ' THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

It is the best ol man’s accomplishments, 

The world’s endeavour and the way ol God. 

Of things that grace one not there is no need 
To speak at large for he will foolishly 
Disgrace himself howe’er he nray exalt 
The case in point. When wisdom hath deserted 
The head,' and shame the eye, fame and disgrace. 
And cold and hot, are one— no terror this 
To any coward whether quick or dead. 

Make, if thou canst, all good thy business 
Because the world abideth not with any. 

Let all thy usance be humanity. 

Munificence and uprightness thy Faith. 

When Farayin assumed the royal crown 
He uttered what was in his mind and said 
“ Let me assume the kingship for a while, 

And sit upon the throne of gold in joy. 

Far better scatter wealth and be exalted 
Than purchase sixty years of servitude. 

Thus will I sit a while in sovereignty, 

Arrayed in satin^ and in painted silk. 

And after me my son shall take my throne. 
Assume this royal crown, be king as was 
His sire, and be exalted and renowned. 

Whoe’er shall minister to our delight 
Shall be a happy man among mankind. 

In feast-time we will drink with joyful hearts, 

In war-time we will hunt our enemies.” 

His elder son said privily to him ; — 

“ Who of us, father ! ever wore the crown ? 

Feel not secure, take means to compass wealth ; 
Thou wash the world’s protector ; keep to that. 

If any member of the royal race 

Shalt come thpu wilt not long be here ; thy heart 

Will keep of king^p only gi;ief and pain ; 

?-pf " 


53 


GURAZ (ALSO CALLED FARAyIN) 

Thou wilt be wretched, destitiile, and waw."’ 

Then said Ihe younger son : “ Thou hast become C. 2055 
Crowned in the world a, ml hast both troops and 
treasures 

Befitting royalty, but trcasurclcss 
Wilt have to laboux' still, ^^'hat ancestor 
Of Faindun, who had x\btm to sire, 

E’er wore the crown ? Hold fast the world by courage 
And treasure. Nobody is born a king,’*’^ 

The younger’s words pleased Farayin ihe best, 

Who bade his elder son : Be not so raw.” 

He laid out in the royal oflfiees 
The muster-roll and called all iroojxs to court. 

He gave drachms night and day and many robes 
Of honour ill-deserved. Within two w(‘(‘ks 
Of all the treasury of Sliah Ardshir 
Remained not what would buy an arrow’s plume ! 

Whene’er Guraz would go forth to the pleasanec 
The lights were torc^lies made of axnbcrgris, 

Four score before and four score after him : 

Behind them came his friends and partisans. 

Of gold and silver were the goblets all, 

The golden gem-encrusted.^ ’Twas his use 
To feast all night. The nobles’ hearts were full 
Of vengeance on him. ’Twas his wont to roam 
A-nights the gardens and the riding-ground. 

Save but to sleep and wake, to eat and plunder, 

That slight, wcak-wittcd one knew naught. He went 

Drunk ever to repose and with a sash 

From Chin about Ms head. The troops were all 

Vexed to the heart at him while all the province 

'Was full of turmoil and distress* He lost 

All trace of generosity and grew 

Unjust, unfortunate,, and good ,'for naught. 

The world was wrecked by his, iniqxjity, . 

»But cf. Voti' yi,' 


54 


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 


And at his handling people smote tlicir heads. 

He shed the blood ol innocents until 

The troops grew wroth with him. He used to shut 

His eyes for gold and would have sold the world 

To win dinars. Folk cursed him. All desired 

His death and meeting privily discussed 

His deeds. Hurmuzd Shahranguraz, a horseman 

Redoubted of the city of Istakhr — 

The glory of the chieftains — ^thus addressed 
One night the Iranians secretly : ‘‘Ye chiefs ! 

The time of Fardyln is proving grievous ; 

He holdeth all the chiefs in light esteem. 

Why have your brains and hearts become thus 
straitened ? 

Through him all eyes are tearful, livers charged 
With blood. Is no physician to be found ? 

He is> not royal or S4s4nian ; 

Why gird the loins before him ? Of a truth 
C. 2056 Your hearts have flown out of your breasts or else 
Your pluck hath disappeared ! ” 

The folk replied : — 

“ Since there was no one left fit for the throne 

None is inspired by jealousy to take 

This base-born’s heart away ; but we adopt 

Thy counsel. Tell us from thy stores of lore 

How to release hkxi frona this insane 

And hot-brained Sh4h ill both in word and deed. 

May he be never blessed ! ” 

Shahringur4z 

Replied : “ Th^ frdnians have suffered long. 

If ye will harm me ndt but play the Persian 
E’en now by holy God’s aid will I bring him 
Down from his throne tp: dust.” 

■ He gat , this answer' > 

“ May no^ harfia.epme tp thee, All; we the host « 

' To-dayare;thysui>|>ortetis: and’ thy strong ' 


55 


GURAZ {ALSO CALLED FARAVlNy 
11' ill herefrom befall thee.” 

Ileariii^u' ihis 

That royal warrior s()Ui>hi how to set 
Hands on the worthless Siiah. Now he one day 
Took order and departed frojn the eity 
To hunt, and ol the Iranians a troop 
Of lords and lieges fared, escorting him. 

He urged his courser on and rode about 
As ’twere Azargashasp, the cavaliers 
Encircling him and beating up the game. 

Now at what time they turned back city-wards 
Shahranguraz looked at the hapless Shah 
With boldness, chose an arrow from his (piiver. 

One that was straight and had a point of steel. 

And urged his black steed while the host looked on. 
He stretched the bow and drew it out at whiles 
To chest or head, then notched, as if in sijort, 

An arrow on the string and drew the bow 
Till it concealed the point, and loosed his thumb. 
Forthwith the shaft struck on the monarch’s back. 
Who dropped his whip. The arrow was all blood 
Up to the feathers and the iron head 
Protruded from his navel. All the trot)ps 
Unsheathed and all that night while dust-cloiKis rose 
They plied their swords and knew not whom they 
fought, 

But took and gave back blows and cursed or blessed 
That deed. Now when the yellow Veil appeared. 

So that the world seemed, like a leopard’s back, 
There was a multitude of slain and mainied, 

And cavaliers and leaders were astound. 

That great host was dispersed like timid sheep 
When they perceive a wolf^ Hong they remained 
Without a king : nolle cated to claim the cro'wn, 

For long they sought and sought ill vain to trace 
Some royal scidn of the noblh’ race. 


C. *057 


XL VII 


PORINDUKIIT 

SHE REIGNED SIX MONTHS 


NOTE 

Pur4ndukht (Piiranducht, summer A.D. 630— autumn 
A.l). 631) reigned, according to Tabari, for one year and 
i^ur months. Her name, it appears, should be spelt with a 
not with_ a P. She is said to have restored the “ True 
Cross, but it seems more probable that this was done in the 
reign of Ardshir. She made the leader of the successful 
conspiracy against Shalirbardz her prime minister.^ She 
was the first historical female Shdb and it was in allusion to 
her reign and that of her sister Izarmdukht that the distich 
la quoted in Mfr Khdnd 

“ No dignity remains in a household 
In which the hens are crowing like cocks.”^ 


§1 


How Pwdniukhi ascended the Throne and slew Pirdz, 
Son of Khimau, and how her own Life ended 


’Tis but crude policy when women rule, 
But yet there was a lady— Purdndukht— 
Surviving of the lineage of S4s4n, 


^ ®®® NT, p. 390 i«f. and notes; ZT. ii., 349 . 

Ft. Pk, vol, XOX* , 

56 


P-QrANDUKHT 


57 


And well read in the royal volume : h(‘r 
They seated on the throne of sovcrcijL*‘nty, 

The Great strewed jewels over her, and then 
She spake upon this wise : '' I will not liave 
The people scattered^ and I will enrich 
The poor with treasure that they may not !)ide 
In their distress. God i^rant that in the world 
There may be none aggrieved because his pain 
Is my calamity. I will ex])cl 
Foes from the realm and walk in royal ways.” 

She made search for Piriiz, son of Khusrau, 
Who was delated by an alien, 

Whereat she chose some warriors from the host 
Who bi'ought PhnV/ before licr. She exclaimed : — 

‘‘ Foul-purposed miscreant P thou sha-lt receive. 

As infamous, the guerdon for thy deeds.” 

She bade bring from the stalls a colt unbroken, 
And bound, firm as a rock, Pirtiz thereto 
Without a saddle and with yoke on neck. 

The vengeful lady had that untamed stecai 
Brought to the riding-ground and thither sent, 

With lassos coiled up in their saddle -straps,- 

A band of warriors to urge the colt 

To utmost speed, to strive from time to time 

To throw Piruz and ever roll itself 

Upon the ground. That colt won much applause 

Until with skin in shreds and dripping blood 

Piriiz gave up the ghost right wretchedly. 

Why having done wrong seekest thou for justice ? 
Nay, ill for ill ; that is the course of right. 

Piirdndukht ruled the world with gentleness ; 
No wind from heaven blew npon the dust. 

But when six months had passed, beneath, her sway 
The circle of her life bent suddenly f ' ‘ ^ _ ' 

For one week she was ailing,’ then' ex|)|red, ' 

^ 'Tliroitf h misgovemmeat. ' omitted ' 


C. 3058 


58 *' THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSt 

Aik! took away with her a fair renown. 

Such is the process of the turning sk\% 

So potent while so iinpolent are ! 

If thine be opulence or poverty, 

If life affordeth gain or loss to thee, 

If thou shalt win what thou desircst so. 

Or disappointed be in wi’etchedness, 

And whether thou be one of wealth or w^oe, 
Both woe and wealth will pass away no less. 
Reign as a Shah a thousand years, five score. 
For sixty yea^rs or thirty, ten or four. 

It cometh to one thing, when all is done, 

If thou hadst many years or barely one. 

Oh ! may thine actions thine own comrades be, 
For they in every place will succour thee. 

Let go thy clutch upon this Wayside Inn 
Because a goodlier place is thine to win. 

If thine endeavour be to learning given 
Thou wilt by knowledge roam revolving heaven. 


XLVIII 


IZAIIMDUKHT 

SHE REIGNED FOUR MONTHS 


NOTE 

Before Amnndiiklit (Azerinidoclit, end of A*D. G3J— 
beginning of A.D. 632) came to the throne there seems to 
have been a short interval during which a distant scion of the 
royal House, who took the name of ruled for less than a 

month. The chief noble of the time, who was governor of 
Khurds^n, wished to make Azarmdukht his wile cm wliicdi she 
liad him privately execaited. This noble’s son was the iUistam 
that fouglit and fell at Kadisiya some years later. On 
hearing of his father’s fate Rustam, who wuis in temporary 
authority in Khurasan, inarched with a great army against 
Azarmdukht, overtlirew licr and put hcir to death after sho 
had reigned six months. Her nam(3 [mjbably moans “ modest 
girl.”^ ~ 


§1 

How Awmduhht ascended the Throne and how she died 

There was another dame hight Azarmdukht, 

Who had fruition of the crown of greatness. 

She came, sat dlown upon the royal throne. 

And made herself the mistress of the world. 

Her first words were : “ 0 sages; veterans. 

And masters of affairs 1 be jiiist in a,lt * 

“For the 'above '.See; NT, ,p.' 'jgi'aaii ftote8,'''ZT, ii, 350 seq. 


6o ^ THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

And follow precedent, for ye hereafter 

Must make the bricks your pillow. I will foster 

The loyal liege, assist him with dinars. 

And if he erreth be longsuffering ; 

But him that is disloyal and deserteth 
The way of wisdom and of precedent 
Will I suspend in shame upon the gibbet. 

Be he an Arab, Rdman cavalier. 

Or Persian thane.” 

She filled the throne four months. 
But with the fifth disaster came thereto, 
c. 2059 For she too died, the throne had not a Shah, 

But was the plaything of the ill-disposed. 

With the revolving sky ’tis everything 
To be all vengeful with its fosterling. 


XLIX 


FAREUKHZAD 

HE REIGNED ONE MONTH 


NOTE 

Between, and even tarlier than, tlie (ieath of Xy^anndnklit 
and the at'oesHion of Yaxdagird .11 J., the order of the dynantie 
siKmsvsion ])econie» very confiiKcd* The nanieB of the Bhahs 
vary in the different lists. The reason is that it was a period 
of great internal unrest and various aspirants to tlje throne 
held contemporaneously some short-lived authority in different 
provinces of the empmn One of these prin(*.es, Earrukhzdd 
(FaTrukhzad-Khusrau) has reecdved the honour of being 
included in the list of the Shdlm as recorded in the Shillmdnia. 
Two accounts of the length of his reign are given in Tabari. 
According to one, it lasted for six raonths, according to the 
other, for a year. BotJi agree that ho did not die a natural 
death, and one of them states that his death was instigated 
by the adherents of Ya/^dagird,^ 


n 

Flow FarruJc.’izdd ascended the Throne and hovo he was 
slain hy a Slave 

Thon from Jahtam they summoned FarrukhaiM, 

And seated him Upon the throne of kingfsMp, 

There with a pious spui he praised the Maker, 

‘'.uit, 'p. 307 lattd no'te/, ' ■ "Ck p, ‘$4^. . 


62 


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 


And said : Son ol the kings of kings am I, 

And would have naught but quiet in the world, 

'The mischief-maker shall not be exalted 
While I am Shah, but him that from his heart 
Ensueth right, and is not mischievous, 

Will I hold dear as my pure soul, and seek not 
To harm the harmless. Him that beareth toil 
On our behalf we will reward with treasure. 

We will hold dear all friends and raise the fame 
Of chieftains everywhere, but all my subjects. 

Both friends and enemies, arc safe with me.” 

The troops all blessed him : Ne’er may earth and 
time 

Lack thee.” Yet when his throne was one month old 
The head of all his fortune came to dust. 

He had a slave, a cypress-tree in stature, 

Fair, lusty, and well-liking. That knave’s name 
Was Siyah Chashm.^ May heaven ne’er bring his 
like ! 

The Shah too had a handmaid whom he loved. 

She chanced on Siyah Chashm. all unawares 
One day, who sent to say : "" If thou wilt meet me 
At such a place thou shalt have endless gifts, 

And I will deck thy crown with jewelry.” 

The handmaid heard, made no reply, but went 
And told the thing to FarrukhzM who raged. 

And could not eat or sleep in his concern. 

He put the feet of Siyah Cbashm in fetters, 

And cast him into prison. When the knave 
Had been confined awhile the Shdh released him, 
c. 2060 For many |)fed for him. The slave returned 
To Serve the Shih and extt his lifetime short, 

' For just as "such a ;bad^malignant' slave 
Would dp he sought revefige uppn the Shdh, 

__ And seizifig on^a time' when /h’arrukhzM' ' = - 
* Black-eyeU.; 


FARRUKHZAp 6: 

Reposed himself put poison in Ihe n’iiie. 

The Shah drank, lived one week, and all that heard 
About his fate lamented him. The kingsliip 
Was in extremities and foes appeared 
On eveiy side. The throne of king of kingvS, 
Through these ill doings of the Iranians, 

Was overturned. 

Of such a fashion are 
Time’s revolutions ! Let it be thy care 
To gather for thyself therefrom thy share. 

Eat what thou hast and trust the morrow not, 

For it may hold for thee a different lot : 

To give to others it may lake from thee. 

Thou callest this a world and verily 
It doth whirl ! So enjoy thine own, let go 
The sur])lusage that thou hast toiled for so 
To other folk but never i-o thy foe, 

Else whensoe’er thy day is overpast 
Thy hoards will be as is the desert-blast, 

Thy treasures all become thine enemy’s ; 

So give away to set thy mind at ease. 


L 


YAZDAGIRD 

HE REIGNED TWENTY YEARS 


ARGUMENT 

Yazdagird becomes Shah, The country is invaded by the 
Arabs. He sends Rustam, the captain of the host, to oppose 
them. Rustam takes a despondent view of the situation, 
and after some attempt at negotiations is defeated by the Arabs 
at Kddisiya and slain. The war continues, and Yazdagird 
withdraws to Khurdsdn to get help from Mdhwi of Sur, the 
governor. Mahwi plots with Bizhan, a Turkish prince, 
against Yazdagird, who is betrayed in battle and takes refuge 
in a mill, where he is slain by the miller at the bidding of 
Mdhwf, Mdhwf assumes the crown, makes war on Bizhan, 
is taken prisoner, and put to death. The poem ends with a 
brief passage, in which Firdausi gives some account of the 
completion of his undertaking, of help afforded him and of 
discouragements undergone, and concludes with a well founded 
assurance of his own future fame. 

NOTE 

Yazdagird (Isdegird III., A.I). 6S2-652 or 65S) has given 
his name to a chronological era which still obtains among the 
Parsis. It dates from June 16th, A.D. 6S2. He was the son 
of Sh^hrj4r, son of' Rhusrau^, Ra^fz,' and was an infant at 
the, time when that . ShiE arid ' his sons, were put to. death 
after the accession ;;bf Shfrwf '(Kubid,;^)' ’On that occasion 
he was taken for .safety' to I,stah;hri’'\ Tabari says that he* was' 

35v,' 


YAZDAGIRD 


65 

murdered at the age of twentj-eight after a reign of twenty 
years. He was therefore only eight j^ears old when a party 
among the nobles set him up as a puppet Icing at Jstakhr 
(Persepolis), tine old seat of empire, Ctcsiphoii at that time 
being in the hands of a rival claimant of the throne. In the 
contention that followed Ya^sdagird was successful, and in 
the course of A.D. 633 he became recognised as sole Shah, 
the administration remaining in the hands of the chiefs.^ 
He had succeeded to a heritage of woe. His empire was 
ill-prepared for the troubles that were in store for it. Ex- 
hausted by long wars, torn })y domestic dissontions, and 
lately devastated by plague, it had to confront a new and 
vigorous organi^iation inspired by religious enthusiasm ami 
impelled thereby to extend its borders on every side. Had 
Yazdagird been a born leader of men and come to the throne 
in the juime of life, he might for tlic time at least have been 
successful, but in the circumstances, and taking into con- 
sideration what we can gather as to his own cliaracter, we 
can now see how hopeless from the outset his prospects were. 
Students of Persian, however, have pro])abIy reason to feel 
grateful to his reign, for even though we put aside as unsatis- 
factory what tradition tells us on tlie subject, a reasonable 
presumption remains that with the return of settled govern- 
ment to a distracted country there was a revival of interest 
in the story of the /r4nian race and its heroes, and that com- 
pilations were then made from which we still though indirectly 
benefit.^ 

§§ 2-11. The following is intended to supplement Firdausf s 
inadequate account of the Arab conquest of the S4s4nian 
empire. He appears to assign it to tlie last years of Yass- 
dagird’s then nominal sovereignty. From time immemorial 
the Mnians and Semites had been at enmity.^ In frinian 
legend this feeling had found expression in the story of the 
wicked Sh4h ZahhAk, who, though originally an Aryan 
mythP came to be regarded in succeeding ages as an earthly 
king with his seat at Babylon.^ When, later still, the frAnians 
again felt the weight of Seinitie oppression, he was turned 
into an Arab.® Although during SiaAnkn times the semi- 
independent kingdom of , Hfra servmi to some extent as a 
hufier-state between the Persian', em|nre and the wilder Arab 


I NT, p. 307 ■ « C/.YoiT., p. ^ 7 . ' , » M. p. 

. , , 'H- P- .7f ’ ' , 

m i ' 


66 


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 


tribes there was alw«ays the liability of raids and the danger 
was much increased when Khusraii Parwiz was so unwise 
as to put an end to the long-standing dynasty of the princes 
of Hira and appointed a governor of his own in their steadd 
In his reign too bad occurred the disastrous battle of Dhii 
Kar, in which the smallness of the forces engaged were out 
of all proportion to the in]])ortancc of the result. The Arabs 
celebrated their iriefcory with songs of triumph. ^ With that 
inspiring memory and revelation of Persian weakness, with 
the prospect of rich spoil to be won, and a nation of infidels 
to be converted, it is not surprising that hostilities should 
break out between the young and vigorous and the old and 
enfeebled empire. Muhammad himself, tradition tells us, 
addressed a threatening letter to Khusrau Parwiz, who tore 
it up, and the Prophet, on hearing of this, said : “ Ife has 
rent his own • Muhammad died in June, A.D. 632 — 

the month of the child Yazdagird’s accession. Abu Bakr, 
the first Khalifa, being apprised by an Arab chieftain, who 
had embraced Islam, of the state of the Persian empire, 
sent his great general, Khalid, to begin hostilities. Khalid 
was very successful in numerous engagements, and tem- 
porarily the whole tract bordering the western bank of the 
Eu])hratcs from the Roman frontier almost to the Persian 
Gulf came into the hands of the Arabs. Khdlid made Hfra 
his headquarters, and was preparing to attack Ctesiphon 
and invade fran when he was recalled by Ahu Bakr to take 
command of the forces destined for the Syrian campaign. 
‘‘ This is ’Umar’s doing,” said Khdlid. “ He does not want 
to see me conquer ’Ir4k.”^ The departure of Khalid was the 
Persians’ opportunity. Encouraged by Rustam, who under 
Yazdagird had become commander-in-chief, the inhabitants 
of the conquered region rose against the Arabs but unsuccess- 
fully. At this' juncture Abb Bakr died and was shecoeded 
by ’Umar, who began his reign by giving Abti ’Ubaida the 
chief command in Syria in the place of Khilid. Then, it 
is said; he appealed 'publicly to the Faithful to volunteer 
for the invasion nf Persia and for two days in vain, the super- 
session of ,Khalid* having- caused^ great indignation. It may, 
however, have bhen' thought that' the acquisition of so, much 
fertile territor}^ and thc'Chnsequent proximity to the, Persian 

V ,«KT,p.,342. 

" Id. in., 348. 


VoU'viii./p; r9o. 


** ZT, ii.,, 335. 


YAZDAGIRI) 


67 

capital, were a sufficient achievement for the time being. 
Nevertheless, on the third day, when ’Umar made his appeal, 
Abii ’Ubaida (not Khalid’s successor) offered himself and 
Sa’ad, son of Wakkas, followe<l suit. A thousand otfiers 
imitated their example. ’Umar gave Abii ’Ubaida the chief 
command as he had been the first to volunteer. The Persians 
in the meantime had withdrawn to Ctesiplion, whence Rustam 
dispatched a force, which had with it the flag of Kawad 
to watch the enemy. Abu ’Ubaida, who was very inferior 
in numbers, threw a bridge across the Euphrates, attacked tlie 
Persians, was defeated and slain. This battle is known as 
“ The Battle of the Bridge,” and took place in November, 
A.I). 634-. An attack, however, by the Persians on Hfra 
failed, and the Arabs raided the Persian settlement of Baghdad 
(not of course the woll-kmjwn ('ity of tliat iiarae^) where 
twice a year a fair was held. ’Umar appointed Ba’aci, son of 
WakkAs, to succeed Abu ’Ubaida, and both sides made efforts 
to reinforce their respective armies. The Persian adlierents 
west of the Enplirates again rose, i^ustam crossed the river 
with a great host, and ad vane*, ed to KMisiya where the Arabs 
had concentrated. The battle that ensued is said to have 
lasted four days with varying fortune till a dust-storm turned 
the scale in favour of the Arabs. The slaxightor was very 
great and so was the S])oiL ’Umar forbade the Arabs to make 
any further advance for the present, but as the situation 
of their camp proved to be very unhealthy he directed Sa’ad 
to choose a more suitable site, whereupon Sa’ad founded 
Kufa. Thenceforth the wdiolc of the region west of the 
Euphrates was lost to the Persians^ To secure the lower 
course of the Euphrates and Tigris ’Umar also founded Basra, 
west of the Shatt-al-Arab. The battle of Kl,disfya seems to 
have been fought A.I>. 636-7, but the chronology of the period 
is somewhat uncertain* Then came a considerable pause in 
the Arab advance. The Arabs seem to have spent the in- 
terval well in securing what they had gained while the I^ersians 
on the other hand appear to have been paralysed by their 
misfortunes. At ^ all events, when the invasion was resumed 
and Sa’ad, crossing the Euphrates, marched oH' Otesiphon, 
no resistance was offered and YaMagird,' who, had' Imgered 
there too late to secure the removal oPinost df hi®' treasures, 
fled with his court to Hulwin.^' Hi® etomple oi flight seems 

^ yoL 3 ., p. 154 Uf, ' y See, 'Yob - See Yob idi,, 'p., 1S7. 


68 "" THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

to have been followed by a majority of the inhabitants. The 
Arabs came in for an immense booty according to Oriental 
accounts. If, however, we take into consideration the 
domestic troubles of the years preceding Yazdagird’s accession, 
and what must have ]>een the financial needs of the short-lived 
Shahs of that period, we are justified in suspecting that the 
amount of precious metals and of the more portable forms 
of wealth generally was not so groat as has been affirmed. 
Sa’ad, when he had established himself in the Persian ca})itai, 
asked permission of ’Umar to pursue Yazdagird who had 
gathered a considerable army under the command of a 
Mihran^ at Jalula in the neighbourhood ot Hulwan. ’Umar 
refused to allow Sa’ad to go in person and instructed Inni to 
send instead Hashim who was cither his brother or his nephew. 
Hashim was much inferior in point of numbers, and it was 
six months bcfoie he brought the Persians to a decisive en- 
gagement. He then won a complete victory, and followed 
up his success at Jalula by the capture of Hulwan. Yazdagird 
fled to Eai and ’Umar, content for the moment witli what 
had been achieved, forbade any furtlier advance* The next 
stage of the Arab conquest was made outside the sphere, of 
Sa’ad’s axithority, who sent, however, by ’Umar’s command 
.troops to assist. In the north Mesopotamia, and in the 
south Khuzistdn, were invaded and annexed. A raid was 
made, also across the Persian Gulf from Bahrain into P^rs, 
but without lasting results, as the Arab forces got into diffi- 
culties and had to be rescued by an expedition sent for the 
purpose from Basra. About A.D. 640 in consequence, it 
is said, of complaints made by the peojdc of Kiifa, ’Umar 
recalled Sa’ad and Yazdagird seized the opportunity to make 
a supreme effort to recover his lost possessions. A large 
army, summoned from the yet unconquered provinces of the 
empire, was concentrated at Nahdvand, some fifty miles 
south of Hamad^n, and placed under a Persian general named 
Pfriizdn, On this ’Umar ordered Nu’m4n,, who was in com- 
mand in Khfizist^n, to gather all, available forces from ti^e 
regions already annexed and marcji' against the enemy. 
Nu’m4n,^who was greatly inferior in point of numbers, found 
the Persians 'Strongly 'encamped' at' Nah^vand , and tried in 
vain, to bring on a generafengagement. In the end he rnanaged 
to efeot his purpose by means 'of a stratagem.^ He byoke up 


VAZDAGIRD 


{>g 


his camp and made a liasty retreat. Plriizan went- in pursuit, 
on whicli Nii’man turned upon Idm and won wluit tlH‘ Arabs 
call Tiie Victory of Victories” {A.l>. IM V2). Firiizan 
was taken ])rison('r and slain, and Nu’man liimsi^lf bdl in ilie 
fight. This was the last effort of tlie Persians at a national 
resistance. Hencefortli their o})])osition was merely ])ro" 
vineial or local, and wholly ineffective. f)ne after another 
the remaining provinces of the Basanian em])ire were over- 
run by the Arabs and permanently annexed, while Yazdagird, 
who had fled from Rai after the disaster of Nahavand, re- 
mained a fugitive till his death some t(m years later. 

§ 2. In Tabari Rustam’s father is calh‘cl Farrukh-Hnnmizd, 
the governor of Khurasan, who was slain, it is said, by Azarm- 
dukht and avenged by his son.^ Khurasan^ ])ro]>ahly formed 
part of the satrapy of Nimriiz, one of the four iiito whicfli Kushfr- 
wan divided his cm])ire.‘^ Tradition makes the gov<irnors 
ot that satrapy, and their sons ])Iay a very important part 
during the last few ^ears of the R^vsanian dynasty.*^ The 
position of conmiandeV-in-chief Imld hy Rustam at the battle 
of K4disfya, probably indicates that lie fiad Ixaui insi-runumtal 
in bringing about the elevation of Yazdagird to the tlirone."^ 

Rustam’s brother was named FarrukhzM. 

§ 3. Mughfra, son of Shu’ba, was one of the companions 
of Muhammad, and played a ])rominent rohj in the affairs of 
the time. He went on a similar embassy to the Persians 
before the battle of Nahavand.® He was governor for a time 
at Basra, ^ Mecca,’ and Kufa, where he died in A. I). 670.^ 

§ 4. Sa’ad took no personal part in the battle of KAdisfya. 
He was suffering from sores at the tiine and had to content 
himself with merely directing operations.^ Consequently 
he did not’ slay Rustam in single combat as Firdausf states. 
When the dust-storm came on the fourth day of the battle, 
Rustam was seated under an awning erected on the bank 
of the canal of KAdisfya and surrounded by the oatnols that 
carried his treasure. The awning was blown into the water, 
and Rustam took sluelter' among, them. In the confusion 
caused hy the storm, the Arabs broke 'the Persian centre. 
One of them,, named HiWl, striking in tfie darkness at random 
among the camels, happened, to hit the one under which 


70 


THE SIIAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI 


Rustaiid was seated, and cut tlae cord that secured its load 
ol treasure which loll on Rustam’s head. Though injured, 
he made an attejupt to swim across ilie canal, hut was caught 
bj Hilal and slain d 

§§941. There is a general agreement in ?(u‘siaii tradition 
that Yazdigird did not die a natural deatli. The scene of it 
is mostly laid at Marv, and the most popular vei’sion associat(‘s 
it with a mill. Firdausi’s story evidently has been worked uj) 
as the appeals addressed to Mahwi show. The villain’s 
guilt too is more emphasized, and he is made more directly 
responsible for the tragedy. Elsewhere the miller murders 
the Shdh for mere greed. Marv appears to he a likely place 
for Yazdagird to have chosen to reside in, as he could easily 
escape thence across the Oxus in case of need. In some 
accounts he does cross and negotiates to little purpose with 
the Turks, but is brought back across the river for the final 
scene. What the truth ol the matter was seems to he quite 
uncertain. 

§ 14, According to the account in the Persian Taliari, 
Mdhwi, after the death of Yazdagird, remained at Marv t-ill 
he was compelled to leave owing to the approach of the Arabs, 
when he fled across the Oxus and took refuge with the Turks.^ 
Their Khdn is the Bfzhan of the Shdhndma. 


§1 

Hoto Yazdagird ascended the Throne and addressed the 

Chiefs 


When FarrrukhziAd departed Yazdagird 
Became the ShAh npon the day of Ard 
In month SapandArmad. What said the man 
Brave,; eloquent but weary of life’s span ? 
Would that my^ mother 'bad- not brought me 
, High heaven mot turned oV rue j' 


The days of- greatnb'^ the' days of; want 


forth, 


YAZDAGIJRD 


71 


For all soon cease to be. 

Time, as tliou lookcst, passe th ; none can lake 
Anns to eontcaid with it. 

So furnish forth the board and drain the cup, 

And sad talk intermit. 

What though thou ride high heaven yet bri(‘ks will 
prove 

Thy pillow at the last ; 

If thou be king what of the end ? First throne. 

But what when life hath past ? 

Let not thy heart be troubled, trust not much 
High heaven as thy support ; 

It acteth as it wilieth ; elephant 
And lion are its sport, 

’Twill outlast thee, its tale is long ; be not 
With pride of life o’erflown ; 

Thou canst not better Farkltin or be C. 2061 

ParwiVA with crown and throne.^ 

From those exalt seven planets do thou well 
Consider what to Yazdagird befell.” 

When he sat happy on the throne, of kingship, . 

And placed upon his head the crown of might, 

He said : “ By process, of the turning sky . 

I am the truerborn son of Niishirw 4 n. 

Mine is the sway from sire to sire and minej 
Are Virgo, Sol, and Pisces. I will seek 
For greatness, wisdom, hardihoqd, contention, 

And manliness, for life and fortune stay 

With none, nor treasure, kingship, crown, and throne. 

Fame will abide for^ aye but not desire ; 

Put off desire thennnd exalt thy fame*! ^ 

It is by fame that than' 'Shall live for ever 
While^his, dead body. liethTh ’the, dust. 

How good, are'. Faith an^’|,pstiee'in a Sh 4 h 
iim'es ate full o'f btosiiigs 'oh .fame. 


72 ' THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

I purpose while I live to pluck up ill, 

Both root and branch.” 

The chiefs applauded him, 
And hailed him as the monarch of the earth. 
And thus it was, till sixteen years had sped. 
That sun and moon revolved above his head. 


How So’ ad. Son o[ Wakhds, invaded Iran, how Yazda- 
gird sent Rustam to op'pose him, and how Rustam 
wrote a Letter to his Brother 

It was so that ’Umar, the famous Arab, 

Commander of the Faithful, ^ he whose sword 
Turned day to night, the man approved by God, 
Who hath no equal, sent the chosen Sa’ad, 

Son of Wakkds, with troops against the Sh^h. 

When Arab fortune worsted Persian, 

And the Sasanians’ fortune had grown dark. 

The world had had full measure of its Sh4hs ; 

Gold was not seen, the mite was manifest, 

Good turned to evil, evil turned to good. 

The path lay Hellward, not to Paradise, 

The wheel of circling heaven was changed and cut 
All kindness for the Persians clean away. 

The slave must do the , almighty Maker’s will, 

And bear what He inflicteth. Save with Him 
There is no life or joy. 

When Yazdagird 

Learned what had chanced he gathered troops on all 
sides, 

c, 2063 And b^e Hprijiuzd’s km lead them forth. His name 

> He lixis title. 


YAZDAGIRD 


73 


Was Rustam. He was wary, wise, a warrior 
And potentate, a reader of the stars. 

Exceeding shrewd and all attent to hear 
The archimages’ woi’ds. He marehed away 
With all the noble, those that were alert 
And brave, and after thirty months they sought 
To fight at Kiidisiya. Being learned 
In heaven’s lore as an astrologer, 

And one both just and good, he said : “ No time 
Is this to fight, the river of the Shahs 
Will flow not in this bed,” and so he took 
His astrolabe, observed the stars and smote 
His head beca\ise it was a day of bale. 

Then wrote in grief and told his brother all, 

First offering praise to God who had ordained 
His good and evil fortune, and proceeded : — 

“ Well may the revolutions of the sky 
Fill the observer with disquietude ! 

I am the guiltiest person of the time, 

And therefore have been caught by Ahriman, 
Because the kingship passeth from this House ; 

No season this of conquest and the Grace ! 

From the fourth heaven Sol is looking down 
To hasten to the fight of mighty men. 

Both Mars and Venus bode mishap to us. 

And none can ’scape high heaven. Mercury 
And Saturn are opposed, the former too 
Hath entered Gemini. Such is the case, 

A great event is toward, and my heart 

Is weary of its life. I can discern 

All that will be but fain would hold my peace. 

When I agnized this secret of the sky— 

That it assigneth us bht grievous trayail— 

I wept right, sorely 'for fir, Attians/ ' 

And hhrned for the' S^&piiahSi/ ;",'Woe is, 'Hoe , ' 
For head And'drown^, ior.State'h»d't^one,';Attd'Woe 


■74 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

For majesty, for fortune, and for Grace 
Because ]i.ei'eafter Avill defeat betide tlieni 
From the Arabians, the stars not turn 
Save to our hurt, and for four hundred years 
None of our royal race will rule the world ! 

An envoy from our foemen came to me. 

And divers parleyings followed. ‘ We,’ they said, 

‘ Will give up to the Shah the tract between 
The river-bank and Kadisiya ; ye 
Shall grant us access to some trading centre 
That we may sell and buy ; we will not ask 
For more hereafter ; we will pay large dues. 

And will not seek the chieftains’ diadems, 

C. 2063 But will obey withal the king of kinp. 

And render hostages at his demand.’ 

Such is the talk. No action hath ensued, 

But still the stars are adverse. Long will be 

The strife. Fierce Lions will be slain by hundreds. 

The chieftains that, are with me in the war — 

Galbwi of TabaristAn and Armani, 

Who do the deeds of Ahriman in fight, 

Mahwi, he of Surhn, and other chiefs. 

Who wield the heavy mace and battle-ax — 

Heed not our foes proposals but observe 
‘ Who are these haughty folk and what do they 
Both in Irdn and in Md7.andar4n ? 

For road and territory, weal and woe. 

We must employ the mace and scirhitar ; 

We will exert ourselves, quit us like men. 

And make the world both dark and strait to them.’ 
None of them knoweth circling heaven’s design. 

And how its aspect hath been changed to ys. 

On teading thi^.take measures with the chiefs, 

Make preparations an<J. ,kad forth the host, 

Collect the treasures, handmaids, ^nd state-irobes, 

'' Then 'hasten^A^at:, AMdagin— ■ , 


YAZLAGIRD 


75 


The dwelling of the Mighty luul the Free. 
Whatever herds of horses thou inaysl liave 
Send to the treasurer of Azargasha.sp. 

If soldiers seek thee froiu Zabulistan, 

Or from Iran, imjiloring thy protection. 

Receive and treat with kindness their excuses 
In view of what the turning sky is doing — 

The cause of joy and terror to us all, 

At whiles exalting and at whiles abasing. 

Let mother know my words for of a truth 
She will not look upon my face again. 

Greet her from us and counsel her at large 

Not to be troubled here below. If any 

Shall bring bad news of me be not too downcast, 

For know that in this Wayside Hostelry 

He that amasseth treasure by his toil 

Will find his toil more than such worldly treasure, 

And that another will enjoy the fruit. 

What need was there for so much toil and greed ? 
Desire is lessened not by having more. 

At all times worship God and purge thy heairt 
Of all affection for this Wayside Inn 
Because our fortupc is in straits, the king 
Will see me not again. Do thou and, all 
Our House, both old and young, unceasingly 
Piaise God and pray the Maker, for with thi^ 

My host I am in stress, in travail, grief, 

And bitter fortune, and shall not escape 
At last. May this sweet country of Iran , 

Be in prosperity t Whenas’the world 
Is straitened 'to the king; hold treasure, life, 

And person of , small worth* *for of that race , 

So famed ,and honoured'ithero is- no one left ' ' 

^ Save that exalted one,; _ Watch nver him ^ 

By;day and night till Ivtew'fdnght the Ambs;;' 
JBe not 3r©miss''in toil foW: fee ' 


C '20% 


76 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

All that we have to look to in this world, 

And the Sasanians’ memorial, 

For no one will behold that House again. 

Woe for the head and crown, for seal and right 
Since royal throne will go adown the blast ! ’ 

Fare well, be not concerned, and ever be 
Before the world-lord, and if ill betide him 
First give thine own head to the scimitar 
Ungrudgingly. When pulpit fronteth throne. 

And when Abu Bakr and ’Umar shall be 
As household words, our long toils will be lost. 

And long will be the fall before the rise. 

Thou wilt not see throne, diadem, or state 
The stars award the Arabs everything.^ 

There will not be throne, crown, or golden boot, 

Or gem, or coronet or flaunting flag. 

One man will toil, another will enjoy ; 

None will give heed to justice or to bounty.® 

Then warriors will be men that fight afoot 
While horsemen will be mocked and flouted at ; 

The warlike husbandman will be despised. 

High birth and majesty will bear no fruit ; 

Then men will rob each other, none will know 
A blessing from a curse, and secret dealing 
Prevail o’er open, while the hearts of men 
Will turn to flint, sire will be foe to son. 

And son will scheme ’gainst sire ; a worthless slave 
Will be the king, high birth and majesty 
Will count for nothing ; no nne will be loyal. 

There will be tyrnhny of soul and tongue. • 

A mongrel racn-^IrAninn, Tprkman, Afab-^ 

Will come to be and talk in gibberish.® 

2065 They will collect all treasures ’neath their skirts. 
Toil and resign the product to their foes. 

» Tto couplets Onuttftd'. , ’ Three couglets omitted. 

■ •See'V'ol.i./p. 34. . ' ' 


YAZDAGIRD 


77 


Grief, travail, bitterness will thus prevail 
As joy did in Bahram Giir’s days ; feasts, song, 

Race and renown will cease ; men will set traps, 

Will seek their profit in another’s loss. 

And make their pretext Faith ; no difference 
Will be ’twixt Spring and Winter there will be 
No wine at feasts ; they will not recognise 
Degree and place but live on barley-bread. 

And dress in wool. When much time hath passed 
thus 

None will regard the noble Persian stock. 

They will be shedding blood for lucre’s sake, 

An evil age will be inaugurate. 

My heart is full, my face is wan, my mouth 
Is parched, my lips are filled with sighs to think 
That after I — the paladin— -have gone 
SAsanian fortune shall become thus dark ; 

So faithless hath revolving heaven grown, 

Ta’cn umbrage, and withdrawn from us its love ! 

If with my lance I strike a brazen mountain 
I pierce it, being brazen-bodied too, 

But now my shafts with steel-transfixing heads 
Are impotent with men that wear no mail ! 

My sword, which felled the necks of elephants 
And lions at a blow, can not cut through 
An Arab skin ! My knowledge bringeth loss 
On loss upon me. Would that I possessed not 
This wisdom since it causeth me to know 
Of this ill day ! The chiefs that are with me 
From Kddisfya are both hardy men 
And hostile to the Arabs. They expect 
That this brake will be fiiUed, that earth will run 
Like the Jfhfin, with oiir Iocs’ blood. None knoweth 
The secret of the skies and that this strife 

1 years being, monib# , e,re assooiated wi|;h 

|io jpiaxtifsute'' seasebf', ' ' , ' 


C, 2066 


78 ^ THE SIIAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 

Can not be quickly cuclcd ; but Avhcn fortune 
Departeth from a race what profit cometh 
Of travail and of fight ? Be prosperous, 

My brother ! May the Shah’s heart joy in thee 
Because this Kadisfya is my charnel, 

My breastplate is my shroud, my helmet blood : 
Such is the secret of the lofty sky. 

Bind not thine own heart to my griefs but keep 
Thine eyes upon the Sliah, and sacrifice 
Thyself for him in fight, because the day 
Of Ahriman is coming on apace 
When circling heaven will show us enmity.” 

When he had sealed the letter he said thus : — 
“ My blessing be upon the messenger 
That shall convey this letter to my brother. 

And tell him not what I have said, but other ! ” 


§3 


How Rustam wrote to Sa’ad, Son 0/ WakJeds, and how 
he replied 

He sent a messenger in swiftness like 

The .flash and thunder-clap to Sa’ad. They wrote, 

In apprehension yet not , in despair, 

A letter on white silk and thus endorsed 
“This from the paladin of paladins — 

The warlike Rustam, son of Hurmuzdshiih^— 

To Sa’ad, son of Wakkds, the prudent, wise. 

And circumspect, who hath come forth to fight.” 

It thus began : We still must fear the World-lord, 
The Holy, who sustaineth turning heaven, 

, ' ‘ C/ asa'propWHamO'^ftdp. 59; ' ^ 


YAZDAGIKD 


T) 


Whose mile is Justice and bcneliccnce. 

May blessings I'rom Him rest n[)on the king. 

The lustre of the signet, crown, and throne, 

The lord of sword, of diadem and lasso. 

Whose Grace restraincth Ahrimmi in bonds. 

A hateful matter hath occurred to us 
In these uncalled for labours and this strife. 

Reply to me and say who is your king, 

Who thou art, what tliy rule aiul custom are. 

And whose assistance is it that ye seek 
With unmailcd soldiery and unmailed chief ? 

Fed uj) with bread thou art still ravenous ; 

Thou hast no clciihants, no throne, no baggage. 
Enough for thee to live within fran. 

For crown and signet are another man s. 

Who hath Grace, elephants, and crown and throne — 
A famous Shah of lengthy lineage. 

No throned king hath such stature or the moon 
In heaven such aspect. When enthroned he sittclh 
With smiles that make his silvern teeth appear ; 

His gifts would purchase Arabs in the gross, 

And not impoverish his treasury. 

His dogs, his hawks, and cheetahs arc twelve thousand, 
And they arc decked with golden bells and varvels. 
The whole waste of the wieldcrs of the spear 
Could find not in a year from end to end 
Enough to feed his cheetahs and his hounds 
When he is hunting on the plain. The Arabs, 

From drinking camels’ fnilk and eating lizards, 

Have reached a pitch whereat the Persian throne 
Is coveted ! Shame, shame on circling heaven ! 

Ye have no veneration in,: your ey^, 

Or, in your wisdom, loye or rtivcitdncc. 

With sucb a 'visage'an'd isnch'Aastes and'.iyays • , 

'Is thy', heart'' Set upon.''' the ' nnd throne ? 

:IfAhoix'art'':seeidng/pcnyeij'.yrittnathy - 


C. 2067 


80 ^ THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAVSt 

And art not merely speaking words in jest, 
Dispatch to us some man of goodly speech, 

Send some brave veteran and man of lore. 

That he may tell me thine intent and who 
Doth lead thee to attempt the royal throne. 

Then will I send a horseman to the Shah 
To ask of him whatever thou wilt ask. 

But seek not with so great a king to fight. 

For shame at last will come upon thy face. 

His grandsire was the world-lord Nushirwan, 
Whose justice made the aged young again. 

His fathers have been Shahs, and he is king ; 

The age remembereth none like to him. 

Fill not the world with curses on thyself. 

Misprize not thine own precedents. Regard 
This letter of advice and bar not thou 
Thine eyes and ears to wisdom.” When the letter 
Was sealed he gave it to high-born Piruz, 

Son of Shapur. To Sa’ad, son of Wakkas, 

This paladin and magnates from IrAn, 

Of ardent soul, went whelmed in iron, silver, 

And gold, with golden shields and golden girdles. 
On hearing, Sa’ad, that noble man, set forth. 

Swift as the flying dust, to meet Pfriiz 

With troops, forthwith dismounted and inquired 

About the army and its paladin, 

About the ShAh, his minister and host. 

The watchful leader and his provinces. 

He spread his cloak beneath Pirfiz and said 
“ We hold the sword and spear to be our mates : 
Brave warriors make no mention of brocade. 

Of gold and silver or of food and slumber. 

Ye have no prt in manhood but arc like 
To women with your colours, scents, and forms. 
Your prowess js in donning broidery, 

Adorning roofs and decorating doors,” 


YAZDAGIRD 


8i 


Piriiz then gave the letter and told Sa’ad 
The words ol Rustam. Sa’ad heard, read, and 
wondered. 

He wrote an answer back in Arabic, 

Announcing good and ill. He wrote there first 
The name of God and of His messenger, 

Muhammad, who directeth to the truth. 

lie spake of Jins and men, of what the Prophet, 

The Hashimite,^ had said, the Unity 
Of God, of the Kuran, of promise, warning, 

Of menace and of novel usages. 

Of liquid pitch, of fire, and icy cold, 

Of Paradise, its streams of milk and wine, 

Of camphor and of musk, of bubbling springs, 

Of wine and honey and the trees of heaven.*^ 

Then : If the Shah accepteth the true Faith 
He will obtain both worlds with Joy and kingship, 

And have withal the earrings and the crown, 

Perpetual beauty and prosperity. 

His intercessor there will be Muhammad, c. 2068 

His form like pure rose-water. In as much 
As Paradise will be thy recompense 
We must not plant thorns in the garth of bale. 

The personality of Yazdagird, 

This spacious world, such gardens, riding-grounds. 

And halls and palaces with all the thrones 
And crowns, the festivals and revelries, 

Are less worth than one hair of an Hourf. 

In this our Wayside Hostelry thine eyes 

Are dazed by crown and treasure, and thou, trustest 

Too much in ivory throne, in wealth, and signet, 

In fortune 'and in crown. ' Why coheerned 
About a world when one draught of cold water 
Out-prizeth , it ? Whoever; eometla-" forth 

«TI;k£s,tafeeafr0im,the!!)^a^ G/. , 

VOL. IX ' '' ' ' ' 'V ' ^ ^ 


82 ^ THE SHAHNAMA OF FllWAVSt 

To figlit with me will see a narrow gi’ave. 

And Hell, naught else ; but Paradise is his 
If he believeth. Mark how he should fare. 

He still will choose the one and shun the other 
As every wise man knoweth.” 

Then he set 

The Arab seal thereon and praised Muhammad. 
The messenger of Sa’ad, son of Wakkas, 

Went with all speed to llustam. Now what time 
Shu’ba Mughira went forth from the chiefs 
To journey to'the paladin, a noble, 

One of the Iranians, came in from the way 
Before the captain of the host, and said 
“ A messenger hath come — a weak, old man— 
Without a horse or weapons and ill-elad, 

With thin sword slung about his neck and shirt 
All plainly tattered.” 

Rustam thus apprised 
Prej)ared a tent-enclosure of brocade. 

They laid a carpet of gold thread of dun ; 

The soldiery turned out like ants and locusts. 

They set a golden ante-throne whereon 
The captain of the host assumed his seat 
With eight score warriors attending him — 
Horsemen and lions on the day of battle — 

With crowns, with violet robes, and golden boots. 
With torques and earrings, while the tent-enclosure 
Was royally adorned. Shu’ba Mughira^ 

On corning to the tent-enclosure, walked not 
Upon the cloth but humbly on the ground. 

And used his scimitar as walking-stick. 

He sat upon the dust without a look 
At any — captain of the host or chief. 

Then Rustam said to him : “ May thy soul joy, 
And by Its knowledge make thy body strong.” 
Shu’ba Mhghlra said : If thou, good sir ! 


YAZDAGIRD 


83 


Acceptest the true Faith, peace unto thee.” 

Now Rustam, hearing this, was vexed and I'rowncd. 
He took and gave the letter to a reader. 

That learned man told him what was writ, and Rustam 
Made answer : “ Tell him : ‘ Thou art neither king 
Nor an aspirant to the diadem. 

But thou hast seen my fortune in eclipse,^ 

And so thy heart ambitioneth my throne. 

The ease is one of moment to the wise. 

But thou hast not eonsidered it. If Sa’ad 
Had the Sasanian throne I well might share 
His feasts and fights, but since the faithles,s stars 
Bode ill, what shall I say ? This is the day 
Of bale. If for my guide I take Muhammad, 

And this new Faith for old, all will go wrong 
Beneath this crook-backed sky, and all go hard 
With us.’ But as for thee, depart in peace ; 

The day of battle is no time for words. 

Tell Sa’ad : ‘ To die with honour is a thing 
Far better for me than crude parleying.” 


§4 

How Rustam fought with Sa’ad, Son of Wakkds, and 
was slain 

Shu’ba Mughira went his way, and Rustam 
Bade to array the host and sound the trumpet. 

From aU sides troops assembled, clouds of dust 
Arose, and din that deafed the sharpest ears. 

“ The steely lattoC'-hea^ iriid l;he murky reck 
Are,” thou hadst md, “ stars mid night’s azure 
gloom,” ' ' ^ . , ' * 


§4 "^THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

While spears ne’er ceased to smite on glittering helms. 
The strife endured three days, till water failed 
The Iranians, and their warriors’ hands and steeds 
Became unfit for combat. Rustam’s lips 
Grew as the dust with drought, his tongue was split, 
And men and horses battened on moist clay, 

So grievous was the stress ! 

Shouts rose like thunder 

From Rustam and from Sa’ad as they advanced, 
Each from his post. Each left his army’s centre, 
And drew off from the field. Departing thus 
They came beneath a steep-up eminence, 
x4nd there those chieftains twain assailed each other 
Revengefully upon that scene of strife 
Till Rustam, roaring like a thunder-clap, 

Smote with his sword Sa’ad’s charger on the head. 
Smote the swift charger which came headlong down, 
^^70 And brave Sa’ad was unhorsed. Then Rustam reared 
Aloft a trenchant blade to show to him 
The Day of Doom, and was in mind to strike 
His head off, but by reason of the dust 
Raised by the troops they could not see each other. 
Then Rustam lighted from his steed and saddle 
Of leopard-skin and fastened to his belt 
His charger’s reins but, while dust blinded him, 

Sa’ad hurried up and smote him with the sword 
Upon his helm whence blood ran down his face, 

And while his eyes were blinded by the gore 
The aspiring Arab gained the upper hand, 

Again smote Rustam bn the head and neck. 

And flung his warrior-body on the dust. 

None in the two hosts were aivare thereof, 

Or whither those two paladins had gone, 

But searched until they found the scene of strife. 

The Iranians, when they spied their paladin 
Slashed by the seinxitar from head to foot, 


YAZDAGIRD 


85 


Fled. Many a cliicftain perished in the press. 

And many failed for thirst upon the saddle. 

The world had had full measure of the Shalis. 

The host fared to the monarch of Iran, 

And hastened on the way both da,y and night. 

When Rustam had been slain in fight, and when 
The chiefs’ heads were all turned, the Muslim host 
Sped like a savage lion in pursuit.^ 

At that time Yazdagird was at Baghdad ; 

To him the troops came flocking and announced 
That Rustam was no more, and that tlie sea 
Was dry with grief, that many meii had fallen, 

And that the rest had fled the battlefield. 

The hosts, both Persian and Arabian, 

Reached Karkh, and Farrukhzad, son of Ilurmuzd, 
Wroth and with tearful eyes eamc from the Arwand, 
Arrived at Karkh, fell on the cmnny, 

And not an Arab warrior survived. 

The Persians marched out from Baghdad intent 
To meet the foe, and bloody was the event. 


§5 

How Yazdagird consulted tvilh the frdnians and went 
to Khurdsdn 

When FarrukhzM had gone back to the Sh4h, 

All over dust and in his flghtirig-gear, 

He lighted from his charger, did obeisance, 

* The French version of the rest of this section is m follows ;-«• 
" Yezdegird «itait k Bagdad lorsqwo s©s troupes affiuferent an tour 
do lui, Farrukhzad, his d'Hormuzd, furiexix et rdpaiidant des 
larmes, traverse le Tigre, entta dans’ Kerkh ot livra un assaut 
terrible qiti m lasSa vivant , aucuU' do® fuerriers' armds do lances. 
Les troupes sortireht 'anssitdt 40 ' Bagdad et alldreut chercher le 
combat dans la plaihe irtais forsque la ponsai^re d© la lutte a© fat 
dissipde, les'.lrhniem dtaient an 


r 

86 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Blood in liis eyes and anguish in his heart, 

And said to Yazdagird : “ Why weep so much ? 

Is it to wash the throne of kings with tears ? 

C. 2071 Thou only of the royal race art left 

To wear the crown and sit upon the throne. 

One, with a hundred thousand enemies, 

How canst thou battle when exposed to all ? 

Betake thee to the forest of Narwan ; 

The folk will gather to thee there and thence, 

Like valiant Faridun, do thou renew 
The fight like fire.’’ 

The king of kings gave ear. 

New thoughts occurred. Upon the morrow’s morn 
He sat upon his throne, assumed the crown, 

Held an assembly with his men of lore. 

The magnates and shrewd-hearted arebimages, 

And said : ‘‘ What seemeth good to you herein ? 
What precedents recall ye from the past ? 

Saith Farrukhzdd to me : ‘ Depart and trike 
Thy followers to the forest of Narwan : 

The people of Amul, are servitors, 

The people of Sari all slaves, to thee, 

And, when thy troops are many, come again 
With puissance to battle with the Brave,’ 

Do ye approve ? ” 

They all of them exclaimed 

That is the course.” 

The king of kings rejoined 
It is not well. I purpose otherwise. 

Shall I desert dhe chieftains of txin, 

And this great host, our country, throne, and crown 
To save myself ? That were pot majesty, 

Or manliness or polcy. To fight 
The fde is better for me than disgrace. 

The leopardkpake. a, , saw ip this regard ' - 
y Whenever the of'Stres's shall copae on' thee, 


YAZDAGIRD 


87 


Turn not in folly from thine enemy.’ 

For just as subjects should obey their king 
In good and ill so he must not desert them 
In their distress and go off to his treasures.” 

The great men blessed him, saying : “ Ci'own 

and signet 

Exist for ends like those. Think what thy will 
And wishes are, and what assurances 
Thou worddst of us.” 

The Shah thus answered them : — 

“ Anxiety is ruin to the heart. 

Our best course is to go to Khiir4san 

Where we shall feel secure from strife with foes, 

For there we are possessed of many troops. 

And valiant paladins. The Turkish chiefs 
And Khan of Chin will come and do us homage 
While I will make the union stronger still 
By marriage with the daughter of Faghfiir. 

A groat host will arrive to succour ns, 

The magnates of Tdran and mighty men. 

There is the warden of the marches too, 

M4hwf, with horsemen, elephants, and w'ealth 
Of all kinds. He is our chief governor, 

The highest of the guardians of our coasts. 

I raised him when he was a vagabond, 

A minstrel and a braggart, giving him, 

Though worthless, name and worth, men, government, 
Lands, elephants. Base though he be and vile 
Still his advancement hath been at my court. 

Now I have heard an archmage quote this saw 
‘ Of one whom thou hast wrongly , harmed beware ; 
Of one made rich by thee thy hopes, arc fair.’ 

I never injured him in aught? he 
Will ’venge me on my foO.,” , 

- ' But .Fhjrrukhz^l ; ' , 

Smote his two ^ hands ;.tbgette,hhd .ekclaimcd 


C. 207« 


c, «073 


88 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

0 Shah who learest God ! put little trust 
In those of evil bent. In this regard 
There is a modern saw which runneth thus : — 

^ Howe’er on birth thou practise witclicry, 

And strivest such an one from rust to free, 

Since the All-giver framed him thus to be 
To loose God’s bonds thou wilt not find a key.’ ” 

‘‘ 0 mighty, raging Lion ! ” said the Shah, 

“ To make this trial will work me no hurt.” 

He stayed that night and, when the morning broke, 
Those noble men set forth and left Baghdad 
For Khurasan, and took their travail lightly. 

The chieftains of Iran all sorrowful 
Accompanied their Shah, that noble man, 

And called down blessings on him, saying : “ May 
time, 

And earth, ne’er lack thee.” 

From the host rose wails 
For grief and at the going of the king, 

And all the frdnian thanes — the warriors’ stay — 
Drew near to him with outcries and in tears, 

And said to him : O Shdh ! we are thy slaves 
With souls and bodies filled with love for thee. 

We all will go with thee to learn how fortune 
Will sport with our king’s life, lor it we lose 
Our Shdh how can our hearts find joy in home, 

And country ? We will quit our settlements, 

Our children, and our wealth to share thy toils. 

We care not for our lives without thy throne : 

May fortune ne’er abandon thee.”^ 

With eyes 

All tears the king of kings said to those nobles 
“ Be ever more intent in praising God. 

It may be I shall took oti you again, 

And that' out '$orro:w^ and'. distress will cease. 

^ Three ’ceyplets oaiitt^d. 


YAZDAGIRD 


89 


Ye all are my true helpers anti the heirlooms 
Left by my sires. I would not have you harmed : 
Share not mine ills then. We will mark the intent 
Of circling heaven, its progress, and to whom 
It showeth love. Resign yourself thereto : 

None can evade its secret purposes.” 

Then said he to the merchantmen of Chin :• — 

“ Make no long tarrying here, else will the Arabs 
Convert your quest of gain to loss.” 

They parted 

With pain and trouble, sorrow, care, and wailing. 
So Farrukhzad, son of Ilurmuzd, led forth 
The troops and called the veterans of Iran, 

And then the Shah set out with wail and woe. 

The leader led the van. Stage after stage 
He marched to Rai and tarried there for wine. 

And minstrelsy, thence went he to GurgAn, 

Like wind, and stayed one sc’nnight sad or glad. 
Departing thence toward Bust he set his lace 
With wrinkled cheeks and body in ill case. 


§6 

IIow Y azdagird wrote to Mdhwi of S4r 

The world-lord, resolute to go to Marv, 

Wrote to Mdhwi of Sdr, the governor. 

In rage and pain, in tears and hope deferred. 
And calling an experienced scribe poured forth 
His heart, and it was Ml, Ho first praised God, 
The all-wise Lord, the Fosterer, the ^stcr 
Of circling Mars and Sol, of elephant 
And ant, at will creating out of nanght. 

And needing no instnictbr, Wroh proceeded 


C, 2074 


90 * THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 

^ What hath befallen us ! And gone are all 
l^is kingship’s hue and perfume. Rustam’s death 
Upon the battlefield and by the hand 
Of one whose name is Sa’ad, son of Wakkas, 

A landless, low-born, witless, aimless man. 

Hath straitened all the world to us through sorrow. 
Now that Sa’ad’s army is at Taisafiin, 

With W'oods and foot-hills fronting them, array 
Thy host to fight with his and summon all 
Thy troops to that same end.i Lo ! I will follow 
Behind my letter swiftly as the wind. 

And give thee what I purpose in my mind.”^ 


§ 'i' 

How Yaziagird wrote lo the MarMords of Tils 

He wrote moreover to the folk of Tiis, 

With full heart and with face like sandarac, 

First offering his praises to the Judge 
“From whom are fortune, strength, and excellence, 
Grace, triumph, throne, and diadem of kingship. 
From foot of ant to soaring eagle’s plume, 

From elephant on land to crocodile 
In water, all arc faithful, do His will. 

And draw no breath unless by His command. 

This from the world’s Shih, mighty Yazdagird, 
bon of a famous king and valorous. 

Victorious leader of the frdnian host, 

Who guardeth his domain, desireth more. 

And cometh of a great, God-fearing race 

That thank their stars that they possess the crown, 

‘ Three coapletsoitutW^^ f Two,' couplets .emitted. 

' •Read-itig'witli.P, ; 


YAZDAGIRD 


91 


Have peopled earth aad made crown^ throne, and 
signet 

Resplendent, to his marchlords with their tli rones 
And treasures, Grace, high-bearing, crowns and host 
At Shamiran, Ruina,^ and Mount Rada, 

Kalat and elsewhere. May the Fosterer 
Watch over 11s and keep you from the scath 
Of evil hap. In sooth the chiefs have heard, 

For it hath been an ensigir in the wnrld, 

That in regard to warfare, valour, birth, 

Our hearts are full of kindness, love, and justice. 

High birth especially consbraincth us — 

The Shdhs — to let our toils exceed our treasures 
On your behalf. What time Bahrain Chiibina, 

That malcontent, grew noted and rejeeied 
Our rule and diadem yc all abandoned 
Your marches, spacious cities, pleasances, 

Your parks and palaces, and in that case. 

In terror of disaster, made your homes 

On dale and lofty height. If God almighty C, 2075 

Shall grant me strength and fortune favour us 
I will repay your good deeds ’lavishly. 

And pray to Him who wateheth o’er the world. 

In sooth ye must have heard of what the wStars 
Have brought upon our head by these vile Snakes 
With looks like Ahriman, who lack all knowledge, 

Shame, fame, and treasure, fortune and descent. 

And fain would let the world go to the winds. 

It is the compass of the Ipfty sky 
That tribulation $hall befall %Mb realm 
By these vile miscreants, these, Rayen -heads, ^ 

Devoid of sense and, knowledge/ fame and shame. 

These greedy men, who <^orei diadems, 

^ '' ' , ' ^ 

^Xhe* J'ersiaiis, traa$fata4' hy; and 

^p'3>lied tke axprassioid.to"ti!:^o» Satfed > 


92 “■ THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Have fixed their eyes upon this royal state, 

And Nushfrwan once dreamed th.at this our throne 
Would lose its brilliant lustre. He beheld 
A hundred thousand Arabs — raging camels 
With bitsi snapped — seeking how to cross the Arwand, 
And bring destruction on our fields and fells. 

Saw that both Fire and Fane of Fire would perish. 
The light of New Year end and Sada feast. 

That in Ii-an and Babylon dark smoke 
Would rise from tilth and crop to Saturn’s sphere. 
While on the world-king’s hall the battlements 
Would tumble to the ground. ^ The dream is now 
Fulfilled and heaven’s favour fain to quit us. 

Those that we value most will be misprized, 

The base will be set up on high by fortune, 

111 scattered through the world, mishai) apcrt 
And good concealed. In all the provinces 
Some tyrant, some obscene calamity. 

And signs of dark night’s coming will appear, 

Our glorious fortune be cut off from us. 

Now as our counsellors and paladins — 

Men of pure rede— advise we purpose going 
To Khurhs4n and to its warlike marehlords. 

Because now of the governor of Tiis 
Have I led here the elephants and drums. 

And we shall see bow fortune will make bonds 
Of our frail knobs. I am girt up for battle 
That I may meet the Arabs face to face, 

While FarrukhzM— my very veins and skin. 

And my firm friend— is now at Altdnfya, 

Intent on fight, and host confronteth host. 

While Kashmigdn, that warrior’s son, hath reached 
Our court and spoken well and loy^ally. 

• Jl. pi®ce of, wood’paissed through, a perloratioft made 

in ,tho Eostrjls Of a, camel tO guide it by. 

’,See, Vol. ' 


YAZDAGIRD 


93 


I heard what he could tell about these maiches, 

Their heights and depths, their caves, retreats, the 
hold 

Upon Mount Gumbadan and Jarmana, 

The fort of Lazhawardf for our stores, 

Spots such as Al, Makhziim, and waste of Gil : 

He kindly opened all his heart to me. 

My host for battle is too numerous 
To tarry long within these narrow holds. 

We have held council ; all the paladins 
Attended ; we debated and resolved 
To take with us crown, throne, and seal and 
signet. 

All garments of Kashmir and Rum and Chin, 

Such goods as we can gather from Kibchdk 
And from Kirwan, all that wc have in hand 
Of clothes and carpets, articles of gold. 

With gems uncut and all that most we prize. 

And provand and equipment for the future. 

Of oxen forty thousand will drag loads 
Of unthrashed corn and after these will come 
Twelve thousand asses drawing loads of dates 
For us. A trusty archimage will bring 
Pistachios, millet, and pomegranate-juice. 

Attending on the outcome they will send 
Thereafter many asses’ loads of salt, 

And add a thousand camels’ loads of millet. 

Fat from the tails of sheep and butter-skins. 

A thousand Bactrian camels will bring dates. 
Another thousand sugar, as their loads. 

Twelve thousand also will bring drums of honey. 

All these will come at one time to the holds. 

Besides all these my servants will bring in 
Some forty thousand salted carcase^, 

And of black naphtha in the next tivo months 
Three hundred caineldoads. Ah. atchimage 


94 '' the SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSt 

With escort will arrive from^ Shamiran, 

And from Mount Rada while, in sight of all 
The elders and the wise, the mountain-chiefs, 

Sent by the mai'chlords, will eonvey whate’er 
Is needed to the gates and give the list 
To our own treasurer, and if the Great 
Among the folk will but restrain themselves 
They will in sooth receive no injury 
Among the valleys and the lofty hills 
From Arab or from Turkman. Help from you 
Iii these oiu- strenuous times will aid us much. 

Our minister, that wise and holy man. 

Will now give orders to our treasurer 
To send five robes of Persian make to all 
c. 2077 That toil for us and, when those toils are over, 

A splendid turban of gold broidery. 

In the.se our present troubles each shall have 
Two score drachms from our trcasurc.s, afterwards, 
For service rendered, for each drachm three-score, 
Each worth more than ten ddngs,^ and he will read 
This legend ; ‘ In the name of holy God, 

The Object of our reverence, hopes, and fears,’ 

Upon one side. The other side will bear 
Our face and crown, the legend : ‘ Through our love 
The earth becometh fruitful.’ These have been 
Prepared for New Year’s Day, the nobles’ eyes 
Fulfilled with wealth. God’s blessing on the man 
Whose faults are few and who forgetteth not 
Our diadem.” 

The ShAh when he had sealed 
The letter sent it to the army-chiefs. 

With this king’s missive in his hand there came 
A horseman of high fortune and high aim, 

^ Reading with 1^. 

> « Tjb.©' ding f>roporly ,*w4s of a 'di^aichm. 


YAZDAGIRD 


95 


§8 

Ilotv 'Yazdagird tvent io Tils and how Mdhwi of 84 f 

met him 

Thence they conveyed the drums and came to Tiis 
Fi'om Nishapiir. Mahwi of Siir had news : — 

‘‘ The Shah is on the road to DaliisLan/’ 

And went to meet him with a mighty power, 

All spearmen and in coats of mail, and when 
The Glory of the royal state appeared. 

The flag of majesty and such a host, 

Alighted from his steed forthwith and paid 
His duty to the king of kings, walked softly 
Upon the burning dust and from his eyes 
Shed tears of reverence. He kissed the ground, 
Prolonging his obeisance. All his troops 
Acclaimed the Shdh and touched earth with their 
heads, ^ 

While Farrukhzad enranked his powers when he 
Beheld the visage of Mahwi of Siir 
By whom his heart was joyed and whom he couii- 
selled 

At large : “ This Shah of royal race do I 
Commit to thee to serve him, suffering not 
The blast to blow on him> and none save thee 
To earn his thanks. I must depart to Rai, 

Uncertain whether I shall see again 

The royal crown for ’gainst these Arab spearmen 

Full many such as I have die^i in battle. 

There was not one within the 'world like Rustam, 

The horsonxan^ never hath 'the, ear of sage 
Heard tell of, such,'' yet- by, a Raven-head^ ^ 


C* 2073 


96 ' THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Was he cut off, so adverse was our day ! 

God grant to him a place among the Just, 

And give the swarthy Ravens to our spears ! 

Mahwi replied : “ O paladin ! the Shah 
Is eye and soul to me. I undertake 
In thy place to defend thy king, thy Heaven.” 

So Farrukhzad, son of Hurmuzd, departed 
To Rai as bidden by the Shah. The sky 
Revolved awhile with matters in this stay, 

And all love passed from that malignant’s brain. 

And none dared go to battle with the Arabs 
Because the azure sky was helping them ; 

The visage of the monarch of Iran 

Grew wrinkled ; the foe’s deeds made strait his heart. 

Mahwi saw that the Shdh was at a stay. 

And driven on by fortune helplessly, 

Ambitioned speedily the throne and changed 
In policy, in manners, and dispose. 

Then for a season he began to affect 

111 health and barely showed the Shah respect. 


How JMtdtJiwI of Stif ifiGitcd H'tzhdTi to wav with 

da^ird and how Yaidayifd fled and hid himself 
in a Mill 

There was a paladin, a Turk by race, 

A man of influence and named Bizhan ; 

He dwelt within the coasts of Samarkand 
Where he had many kin. , Ill-starred Mahwi, 
Becoming self-assertive, wrote to him 
Thou prosperous deioh of the paladins ! 


YAZDAGIRD 


97 


A strife hath risen that will bring thee profit : 

The Shah is of all places here at Marv^ 

And with no troops ! His head and crown and state^ 
Wealth, throne, and host, are thine if thou wilt come. 
Recall the vengeance owing to thy sires, 

And give this unjust race its just reward.” 

Bizhan, considering the letter, saw 
That insolent Mahwi would win the world, 

Then spake thus to his minister : ‘‘ Thou chief 
Of upright men ! what sayest thou to this ? 

. If I lead forth a host to aid Maliwi 
’Twill be my ruin here.”^ 

The minister 

Replied : O lion-hearted warrior ! 

’Tworc shame to help Mahwi and then withdraw. 
Command Bars am to set forth with a host 
To aid upon this scene of strife. The sage 
Will term thee daft to go and fight in person 
At the insistence of this man of Sur.” 

Bizhan replied : ’Tis well, I will not go 
Myself.” 

He therefore bade BarsAm to lead 
Ten thousand valiant cavaliers and swordsmen 
To Marv with all the implements of war 
If haply he might take the wShdh, That host 
Went like a flying pheasant from Bukhdra 
To Marv within one week. One night at cock-erow 
The sound of tymbals went up from the plain. 

How could the king of kings suspect Mahwi 
Of Sdr to be his enemy ? Shouts rose. 

A cavalier reached Ya^idagird at dawn 

To say : Mdhwi saith thus ‘ A host of Turks 

Hath come. What is the bidding of the Shih ? 

The Khdn and the Faghft^tr of Chin command ; 

Earth is not able, to stipport; thei!if boat 1 ^ 

^ ^ ' / p omitted^ 

von XX 


2079 


cjS • THE SEAENAMA OF FIBDAUSi 

The Shah wroth donned his iiiaiL The armies 
ranged.^ 

He formed his troops to right and left, and all 

Advaiieed to battle. Spear in hand he held 

The centre, and the whole world was bedimmed 

With flying dust. He saw how lustily 

The Turks engaged, unsheathed his sword, and came, 

As ’twcrc an elephant before his troops. 

Earth Nile-wise flowed. Like thundering cloud he 
charged, 

But not a warrior supported liiin ; 

All turned their backs upon that nuui of name, 

And lett him mid the horsenuMi of the foe. 

The world’s king, when Mahwi withdrew, perceived 
The practice hid till then — the intent and plan 
To capture him—yet played the man in light, 
Displaying valour, strength, and warriorship, 

Slew many at the centre, but at length 
Fled in despair, with falchion of Kabul 
In hand, pursued by many Turks. He sped 
Like lightning mid night’s gloom and spied a mill 
On the canal of Zark^. Alighting there 
The world’s king lay in hiding from his foes 
Within the mill. The horsemen searched for him ; 
All Zark was hue and cry. The Shah abandoned 
2080 His gold-trapped steed, his mace, and scimitar 

With golden sheath. The Turks with loud shouts 
sought him, 

Excited by that steed and equipage. 

The Sh 4 h within the mill-house lurked in hay* • 

With this false Hostel thus ,it ever is : 

The ascent is lofty apd profound the abyss. 

With Ya^idagird, while, fortune slumbered not, 

A throne enskied^ by heaven was his lot, 

'And np-y^’ it, w*as a toill ■! ;Elxees$ of sweet 

Co'tfpfet ^ '' ■» LfEC, p. 400, , * Reading with X. 


YAZDAGJRD 


99 


Bred bane for him and, if thoxi art discreet, 

Affect not this world for its end is ill. 

Whiles a tame serpent to the touch it still 
At whiles will bite, and hot that bite will bc« 

Why then affect this cozening hostelry 
While like a drum the signal to be gone 
Thou hearest, bidding : Bind the baggage on, 

And for sole throne the grave’s floor look upon ? ” 
With mouth untasting and with tearful eyes 
The Shah abode until the sun arose. 

And then the miller oped the mill-house door. 

He bore a truss of grass upon his back. 

A low-born-man was he, by name Khusrau, 

Poor, foolish, unrespected, purposeless. 

He lived upon the profits of his mill, 

Which gave him full employment. He beheld 
A warrior, like a lofty cypress, sitting 
In dolour on the ground with kingly crown 
Upon his head and with brocade of Rum 
Bright on his breast ; his eyes a stag’s, his chest 
And neck a lion’s ; of beholding him 
The eye ne’er tired. He was unique in form ; 

Wore golden boots ; his sleeves were fringed with 
pearls 

And gold. Khusrau looked, stood astound, and 
called 

On God, then said : “ O man of sunlike mien ! 

Say in what sort thou earnest to this mill f 
Why didst thou take it for thy resting-place 
Full as it is of wheat and dust and hay ? 

Who art thou with such form, such Grace and looks ? 
Sure, heaven never saw the like of thee ! ” 

The Sh^h replied : I am frinian-born, 

In flight before the'amy 'of ,Tiir'^n.^’; 

The miller said,, abashed'; 1 have nO comrade 
Save penury,, hut 


C. 2081 


100 " THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSt 


With some poor cresses from the river-bank, 

Will serve thee I will bring them ; naught have I 
Besides : a man so straitened well may wail.” 

Through stress of fight the Shah hud rested not. 
Or eaten, for three days and so replied : — 

“ Bring what thou hast, that and the sacred twigs 
Will serve my turn.” 

The poor and lowly miller 
Brought him the cresses and the barley -bread. 
Made haste to fetch the sacred twigs and, rcachiini' 
The toll-house^ on the way, crossed to the chief 
Of Zark to Tnake request for them. Mahwi 
Had sent men on all sides to fiiul the Shah, 

And so the chieftain asked the miller : “ Friend ! 
For whom nced’st thou the sacred twigs ? ” 

Khusrau 

Replied : “ There is a warrior at the mill. 

And seated on the hay, a cypress slim 
In height, a sun in looks, a man of (iraec, 

With eyebrows arched and melancholy eyes : 

His mouth is full of sighs, his soul is sad. 

I set stale fare before hinr— barley-bread. 

Such as I cat myself— but he is fain 

To take the sacred twigs while muttering grace.® 

Thou well mayst muse at him.” 

The chief rejoined : — 

“ Go and inform MAhwf of Sfir hereof, 

For that foul miscreant must not reveal 
His proper bent when he shall hear of this.”® 
Forthwith he charged a trusty man to take 


_ * The toll-house was at the! ford or forry. The same word 
. might also mean a place of wotsliip and accordingly Mohl or rSr 
.translates " 11 se rondit au lieu ofi 

! ,*See VoL i., p, 80 sjti, Bij. 

^onld learn that we Anew and did 


YAZDAGIRD 


lOI 


The miller to Maliwi who asked of him. 

Then anxious for himself; ‘‘ For whom didst thou 
Require the sacred twigs ? Tell me the triitin” 

The miller all a-tremble made reply : — 

‘‘ I had been out to fetch a load and flung 
The mill-door open roughly, when know this : 

The sun was in mine eyes, but his are like 
Those of a startled fawn ; his locks are dark 
As the third watch of night ; his breath siiggestetli 
Musk, and his face embellisheth his crown. 

One that hath never seen the Grace of God 
Should take the mill-house key. His diadem 
Is full of uncut jewels, and his breast 
Bright with brocade of Rum. The mill hath grovm 
As Twere a sun through him, and yet his food 
Is barley-bread, his scat tipon the hay ! 

‘ Spring,’ thou woxddst say, ‘ in Paradise is lie : 

No thane e’er set so tall a cypress-tree^.’ ” 


§10 

How MdJiwi of 84r sent the Miller to kill Yazdagird, and 
how the Archimages counselled Mdhwi to jorhear 

Now when Mihwi had taken thought he knew 
’Tis none but Yazdagird ! ” and bade the miller : — 
Haste and cut off his head forthwith or I 
Will cut thine own off presently and leave 
None of thy, stock alive.” 

The chiefs, the nobles, 

And mighty m,en heard this ■ and all the assembly 
Were filled,' with ^ wrath', Him;, ,;their tongues were 

charged ' ' ' ' ■ ' ' ■ " ' 


102 


^THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSt 

With words, their eyes with tears. An archimage, 

By name Radwi, whose mind wore wisdom’s bridle. 
Said to Mdhwi : “ O thou malignant one ! 

Why hath the Div conhised thine eyes ? This know : 

The royal and prophetic offices 

Are two gems set wdthin one fmger-ring. 

To break one is to trample life and wisdom 
Beneath thy feet. Reflect upon thy words, 

And then forbear. Be not the Maker’s foe. 

First will disaster come on thee herefrom. 

Then thou wilt leave a seed-plot for thy child, 

With fruit of colocynth and leafage blood. 

Ere long thou wilt behold thy head abased ; 

Thy villainy will be exposed ; thy sons 
Will reap what thou hast sown. This deed of thine 
Will wreck the Faith of God, and crown and throne 
Will curse thee.” 

Then a devotee devout. 

Who never put his hand forth to injustice. 

By name Hurmuzd, son of Kharrdd, a man 
Who rested in the Faith, said to Mdhwi : — 

“ O thou oppressor ! quit not thus the way 
Of holy God. I see thy heart and sense 
Bedimmed. We see thy breast a tomb. Though 
strong 

Thou hast no brain ; thy mind is weak ; thou seckest 
The smoke and not the fire. I see that thou 
Wouldst have the malediction of the world, 

And, when thou quit’st it, travail, smart, and anguish. 
Now will thy lifetime prove a wretched one, 

And fire thy dwelling-place when thou departest.” 

He sat. Shahrdn rose and addressed Mdhwi — 

“ Why this andacity ? Thou hast opposed 
The kihg of kings and cottoned with the Khdn 
And the Faghfffijr FuU.ndiany of this race 
Have oroved of nO account vet men he’ er hasted 


YAZDAGTRD 


T03 


To slay them. Shed not, as thou art a slave^ 

The blood of Shahs because thou wilt be cursed 
Till Uooinsday/’ 

Tliis he said/ and sal clown weeping 
111 anguish with heart full and eyes all gall. 

Then Mihr-i-Nush stood forth in deep distress, 

With lamentation, and addressed Mahwi : — 

“ O evil man of evil race, who art 
Not w^ell advised or just ! a crocodile 
Rcspecteth royal blood, a leopard finding 
A slain king dotli not rend him. O thou worse 
In love and instinct than the licasts of prey ! 

Thou covetest the Shah’s crown ! When Jamshid 
Was slaughtered by Zahhak did that alTeei 
Heaven’s will ? Nay, wh(‘n Zahhak had won the earth 
Abtfn appeared, the glorious Faridiin 
Was born, the fashion of the world wa.s (‘hanged, 

And thou hast heard what tyrannous Zahhak 
Brought on himself as seciucl of Iiis crimes, 

For though he lived above a tliousaud years 
Still ill the end the avenger came to him. 

Then, secondly, when Trir, the exalted otic, 

Afflicted by his longing for fr4n. 

Slew in his folly virtuous Iraj, 

On whom the very dust looked pityingly, 

Dispatched him^ to the hero Farfdun, 

And gave the world to sorrow, Miniiehihr, 

One of the race, appeared and undid all 
Those bonds. When, thirdly, princely Siydwush 
Went forth to war, albeit reluctantly, ^ 

AfrAsiyAb, inspired by Garsfwa:?;, 

Washed shame and honour from his mind and wits, - 
And slew the youthful and right royal prince. 

So that the world beoame his enemy. . , 

Spruiig' from that pripee the vbrld-'lord'Kai Khusrau 
» Hid ^ a<5oordiag tko itojryi. See' Tot ■ k,' p. 202 \ ' , , ■ ■ 


104 ' THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Came and Med all bhc world with hubbub, clave 
Asunder with his scimitar his grandsire,^ 

And frayed all those that else had sought revenge. 
The fourth count is the feud against Arjasp. 

The slayer of Luhrasp. Asfandiyar 

Went forth to fight with him and took swift wreak. 

Fifth, is the vengeance ta’en for Shah Hurmuzd. 

Khusrau Parwfz, whenas he felt confirmed 

In heart and power, dealt in the way w'c know 

Both with Bandwi and Gustaham. The sky. 

Which then revolved, revolveth still. ^ Forgetting 
What they had done for him, when his sire’s blood 
And love and family appealed to him, 

He in his day of strength abated theirs. 

One may not scorn the occasion of revenge. 

For such a time will quickly come to thee, 

And thou wilt suffer for thine evil thoughts, 

Thy son will reap what thou hast sown, and fate 
Will not rest long from vengeance ; so refrain 
From all this treasure-hoard, this heritage 
Of crown and precious things. Thou art revolting 
Because the Dfv enjoineth, and abjuring 
The way of God. The Dfv, as thou wilt learn, ‘ 

Is tempting thee with things not for thine honour. 
Burn not thy soul and body in Hell-fire ; 

Dim not this world-illuming crown but gather 
Thy scattered troops ; recant what thou hast said ; 
Go ask the Shdh to pardon thee and when 
Thou seest him renew thy fealty, 
c. 2084 From there prepare to battle with the foe ; 

Be instant both in counsel and excuse. 

For not to hearken to the words of sages 
Will mark thee out as evil in both worlds. 

Men bring to naught things done a day too late. 

'Afr&siyib, whose daughW ikarangls married Slyhwush. 
M.i. history ;repeats itself, ‘ ’Vol viit., pp, 354, 358, 


YAZDAGIRD 


105 


Wilt thou treat Yazdagird, the king of kings. 

Worse than malignant Turks, for in the fray 
He is a lion, on the throne a Shah 
As bright as sun and moon, a memory 
Of the Sasanians ? None is girdle-girt 
Like him. From sire to sire his ancestors 
Were mighty men and compassers of wisdom 
From Niishirwan, the Shah, back to Ardshir, 

While, seventh backward from Ardshir, Sasan, 

The world-lord, had the crown, for God entrusted 
To him the Kaian crown, and all the kings 
Were of that glorious race. Now many a man 
Hath been thy better, but they ne’er conceived 
Designs like these. As for Bahram (hiibma. 

Three hundred thousand skilful cavaliers 
On barded steeds fled at one shaft of his,^ 

And left the held of fight to him ; but when 
His heart grew weary of the race of Shahs 
The head of his resplendent fortune fell. 

So Farayin, who sought the throne of kings 
Unworthily and bathed his hands in blood, 

Was in like manner miserably slain : 

This age endureth not such mockeries. 

Fern: Him, the Lord, the Maker of the world, 

For He created throne and crown and signet. 

Defame not thine own person wantonly 
Because ere long such things will rise against thee. 
Know that whoever speaketh not the truth 
To thee is thy soul’s foe. Now thou art sick 
While I am as the leech, a leech that waileth, 

» De ju¥$ act facto. The hirst hero referred to, was 

the son of and after Ms father''s overthrow by Sikandar took 
refuge in obscurity. Several ' generations later a descendant of 
his of the same name became the father of ArdsMr Papakin— the 
founder of the Sasinian Dynasty. The Sasanians, naturally sought 
to connect themselves wifhL the old line of Persian monarchy, with 
the Achaemenids in hist<|iry and with the 'l^aiinians in legend, Cf 
VoL vi, p. 199. ' ' ' ■ , 

* See' Voh <viii,, p* 


io6 ' THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

And slieddcth drops of blood. Thou art thyself 
Less than the slave of slaves. Be not ambitious 
In thy heart’s thoughts. Leave strife to holy God, 
And seek in honour’s way the throne of greatness.” 

The shepherd-born^ had set his heart upon 
The throne : the archimages’ rede was hard. 

So hath it ever been ; ’tis no new thing : 

The flouts of fortune are past reckoning, 

Exalting to the sky above this one, 

And making that vile, wretched, and undone. 

Not leagued with that, on war with this not bent, 
But void of wit, shame. Faith, and precedent. 

The arehmages all, till the world gloomed and moon 
Succeeded sun, warned that vindictive man. 

Who was not one hair better for their talk. 

And said when night came : “ Ye must leave me now 
c. 2085 o sages ! I will ponder this to-night. 

And take all kinds of wisdom to my breast. 

We will call twenty wise men from the host 
That we may need not to deplore this ill.” 

The prudent arehimages went their ways, 

The men of war arrived. Mdhwi held session 
With his confederates® and said : “ Wliat think ye 
Herein ? If Yazdagird remain alive 
Troops will collect to him from every side ; 

My secret purposes have been exposed, 

And all, both great and small, have heard thereof ! 
My life will end through his hostility, 

And neither folk nor field and fell be left.” 

A wise mail, said : ■ ‘ Thou shouldest not have acted 
At first so. If the monarch of Irdn , 

Be ill-disposed tbward thee then past doubt 
111 will befall thee from him, yet ’tis ill 
To shed his blood for then God will avenge him. 

To left and right are cares and pains of all kinds : 

, ' " '> Mihwf.' ',<?/, p.. Sy.,' * KAading'wilb P. 


YAZDACIRD 


T07 


Consider how thou need’st must act herein.” 

Mahwf s son said to him : “ Well counselled sire ! 
Since thou hast made the Shah thine enemy 
Be rid ol him ; troops from Machin and Ciun 
Will come to him and earth grow strait for us. 

Hold this no trifle. Since thou hast prevailed 
Tempt not the maws of lions. Thou and all 
Thy host will be uprooted from the world 
If standard-wise the Shah’s skirt be unfurl’d.” 


§11 

flow Yazdagi-rd was slain hi/ Khusrau, the Miller 

Thereat the shameless, infamous Mahwi 
Turned fiercely to the miller, saying : “ Up 
Take cavaliers and shed my focman’s blood.” 

The miller, hearing, knew not what to do. 

But when at night the moon as.sumed her throne 
Departed mill-ward to the ShAh and when 
He left the court-gate of Mdhwi his eyes 
Were charged with tear-drops and his heart was full. 
Forthwith Mdhwi dispatched some cavaliers 
To follow swift as smoke, instructing them 
“ See that ye sully not the crown and earrings. 

The signet and the royal robes with blood, 

And strip the ShAh when lifeless.” 

With his eyes 

All tearful and cheeks yellow, as the sun 

The miller went, exclaiming ; “ Judge almighty, 

■Who art above the processes of time 1 

Wring presently his heart and Soul for this C. ao86 

Abhorred behest 1 ” 

■With llhart all shame and qualm, 


io8 * THE SHAHNIMA OF FIRDAUSI 

With wetted cheeks and tongue all charged with dust, 
He reached the Shah and drawing nigh with caution, 
As one would speak a secret in the ear, 

Stabbed with a dirk his middle. At the blow 
The Shah cried : '' Ah ! ” Then tumbled head and 
crown. 

And barley-bread before him, to the dust ! 

He that abideth when he might depart 
From this world hath no wisdom in his heart, 

And wisdom is not in the turning 
Whose love is as its stress and enmity. 

’Tis well to look not on the world and so 
From these its doings love and wrath not know. 

The planets weary of their fosterlings, 

And guiltless folk like Yazdagird are slain ; 

None else hath perished thus of all the kings, 

Nor of Ms host a plier of the rein. 

The horsemen of accursed Mahwi, on seeing 
That royal Tree thus laid to rest afar 
From palace and his scenes of ease, drew near, 

Gazed, one and all, upon his face, removed 
His cincture, violet robe, and coronet, 

His torque and golden boots, and left him there 
In miserable case upon the ground — 

The monarch of Irdn flung on the dust, 
Blood-boltered, with gashed side Those emissaries, 
When they arose, all framed their tongues to curse 
Oh 1 may M4hwi himself fare, prostrate thus, 

All gory on earth’s face.” 

They told Mihwi 

The exalted Sh4h hath passed away from throne, 
From l^attle and delights,” and he commanded 
,To take, when it was ni^ht, the monarch’s corpse, 
And' ping it in the stream., ^ The miller took 
’.The ' body of' the Sh4h, forth 'from' the ' mil, ' ' * 

' ' '1 * foEowi;, two coapkts lower. 


YAZDAGIRD 


109 


And flung it (mark the horror !) in the waterA 
And there it floated with a bobbing head ! “ 

When it was day and people went abroad 
Two men of worship visited the spot. 

One of these men austere and sober reached 
The river-bank and, when he saw the corj)se 
All naked in the water, hurried back 
In consternation to the monastery. 

And told the other monks what he had seen 
“ The Shah, the master of the world, is drowned. 
And naked in the water-way of Zark ! ” 

Then many of those holy men — ^thc chief 
And others of all ranks — set forth. A cry 
Of anguish rose from them : “ O noble man. 

And royal crown-possessor ! none e’er saw 
The wearer of it in such plight as this, 

Or ever heard before the time of Christ 
A case like this king’s through his wicked slave. 

This misbegotten dog, this reprobate, 

Who fawned upon his master till ill came ; 

Mahwi’s Just portion is to be accursed. 

Woe for the head and crown, the height and mien ! 
Woe for the breast and arms, the hands and mace ! 
Woe for the last descendant of Ardshfr ! 

Woe for that cavalier so young and goodly ! 

Strong wast thou ; thou hadst wisdom in thy soul. 
And thou hast gone to bear the news hereof 
To Niishirw4n that, though thy face was moonlike. 
And though thou wast a king and soughtest crowns. 
Yet in the mill they pierced thy liverstead. 

And flung thy naked body in the stream ! 

Four of the monks went stripped into the water, 
Seized the bare body of the youthful king, 

1 if we interpret: the p'^ssage litrict 'Zhtoastriarx prioci- 
ples, ppEiiting ohe'Of €1©; elements aiid aadiwg saorxiege to regicide, 
hat i 5 /.*VoL iy,, p» ■ ‘ ' , ' 

* Coiplet.omittedf ' ; ' ' ' oopplet^ /ppiitt#- 


C 2087 


no 


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 

That grandson of the world-lord Nushlrwan, 

And drew it to the bank while young and old 
Lamented greatly. They prepared for him 
Within the garth a charnel-house and raised 
Its summit to the clouds. They sealed his wound 
With gum, with pitch, with camphor, and with musk, 
And then arrayed him in brocade of gold. 

With fine Egyptian linen underneath. 

And dark-blue Russian cloth o’er all. They_ decked 
His place of rest with wine and gum and camphor. 
With musk and with rose-water. 

When the form 

Was hidden of that noble Cypress-tree 
What said that honoured thane of Marv ? “ In secret 

A guerdon waiteth him that after travail 
Departeth with good conscience from the world.” 

Another said : “ Though man may laugh, yet know 
That he is of the sufferers, for he 
Will find the falseness of the turning sky, 

Which will reveal to him both rise and fall.” 

Another said : “ Call not him one of wit 
That serveth his own form with princes’ blood, 

And seeketh wealth, despite of infamy, 

With soul unfearful of an evil end.” 

Another said : “ Since the Sh4h’s lips are closed 
I see not crown or royal seat or signet. 

Or courtiers or a realm or diadem, 

Or throne or helmet, and if these possess 
No moment in themselves why this expense 
Of toil and time ? ” 

C. 2088 “ Thy good report, I sec,” 

Another said, “ will win thee worthy praise. 

Thou in the garth of Paradise didst set 
A cypress : now thy soul beholdcth it.” 

Another said ; “ God took thy soul and gave 
Thy body to the care 0 ! the devout. 


YAZDAGIRD 


III 


Hereby tliy soul is profited, Iiereby 
Will harm betide the foe. The Shah hath now 
His work in Paradise ; his focniaii’s soul 
Is on the road to Hell.” 

Another said : — 

Wise, kno^vlcdgc-loving Shah sprung from zlrdsliir ! 
Thou reapest now the crop that thou didst sow : 

The lamp of sovereignty is still alight.” 

Another said : “ Though thouTt asleep, young king! 
Thy spirit is awake. Thy lips arc mute, 

'And with full many a groan thy s])irit pa,ssed 
And left thy body free. Thy work is done : 

Thy soul is busy now. Thy foeman’s head 
Is on the stake. Although thy tongue is tic‘(l 
Thy spirit speaketh, and thy soul is ])urged 
Although thy form is j)ierced, while if thy liaiid 
Have dropped the reins tJiy spirit still will wield 
The spear in battle.” 

Said anoilier one : — 

0 famous warrior ! thou hast departed 
With thine own works as guide. Thy royal seat 
Is now in Paradise ; this earth of bale 
Is now another’s share.” 

“ The man that slew 

One such as thee,” another said, will look 
Upon harsh days anon.” 

The prelate said 

Thy slaves are we and laud thy holy souk 
Be tMs> thy charnel, as a garth all tulips, 

This bier thine u|)land and thy plain of joy.” 

,They spake, ^ took up the bier and carried it 
From waste to mausoleum. Thithet came 
The hapless Sh&h, , crown, 'throne,. and casque at end. 
0 man pf many' years, whose wbrds still run ! 

'Turn from the' path, bf greed, 'break.' off' thy strain. 
'What $hairwe<say,;het 0 Of',f ;Wh$.'|ustice done, ' 


XJZ THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Or vengeance by the seven planets ta’en^ 

On Yazdagird ? The sage, if unresolved 
Upon the point, could make me no reply, 

Or if he spake ^twould be in words involved 
That keep the answer still a mystery. 

If thou hast means, good man ! indulge thy heart ; 

Trust not to what the morrow promiseth, 

Because the world and thou perforce must part, 

And time accounteth for thine every breath; 

Thou shouldest sow not any save good seed 
In what rcmaineth of thy mortal strife ; 

Control the door of appetite and greed ; 

He that provided will provide through life. 

And life itself will but produce for thee 
Fair fame and happiness, good friend ! Then still 
C, 2089 With all thy might eschew iniquity, 

For from a wise man should proceed no ill. 

Bring wine ; our day is nearly o’er and hence 
We must away, for what hath been will be. 

Had I incomings balancing expense 
Then time would be a brother unto me. 

The hail this year like death on me hath come, 
Though death itself were better than the hail, 

And heaven’s lofty, far-extending dome 
Hath caused my fuel, wheat, and sheep to fail. 


§12 

How Mdhwi of S4 t wa$ informed of the Obsequies'^ of 
Yazdagird and ascended the Throne 

One came and told Mdhwi of Sdr : ‘‘ The woiid-lprd 
Is hidden in the dust* The prelates, priests, 

* Slaying in tlie text. 


YAZDAGIRD 


113 

And monks of RuiH' — all those of life austere, 

Both young and old, throughout that march and 
land — 

Went wailing, took his body from the stream, 

And made for him within the garth a charnel — 

A great one, higher than the mountain-slopesd’^ 

Mahwi, that luckless wretch, exclaimed : Iran 
Had ne’er before affinity with Rum.” 

He sent and slew the builders of that charnel, 

With those that mourned, and gave that march to 
spoil. 

Such was his will and worth ! Thereafter he 
Made search throughout the world and found not one 
Of that great stock. He had a crown and signet. 

The Shah’s erewhile, and to that shepherd-born 
The throne appealed. He called his intimates. 

Announced the purpose that he had at heart, 

And told his minister : Experienced man ! 

The day of strife and battle is upon us. 

I have no treasure, fame or lineage, 

And may but give my head up to the winds. 

The name that is upon my signet-ring 
Is Yazdagird : my scimitar hath failed 
To make men yield to me. Throughout Iran 
Men are his slaves although his kin is scattered. 

The sages do not hail me as the Shdh, 

The soldiers do not recognise my seal, 

My machinations tended otherwise. 

Oh ! wherefore did I shed the world-king’s blood ? 

All night am I sore-troubled in my thoughts ; 

The World-lord knoweth how it i$ with me,” 

The counsellor replied : , The thin^ is done, , 

And common talk. ^ ^ Act for ihiUe own behoof, 

For thou hast burst thy belt.' ' The Sh 4 b is, dust , c, ,2090 
Within the' cix^ml ; , -dust 'hath heahd his ,souh ' , 

' ' '1 - EjeMilig' iWth , ■ /, 

',vpt, IX ' ' H '' , , 


1 14 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSl 

Cali round tliee all the world-experienced men, 

And set thy tongue to words of pleasantness. 

Say thus : ' The Shah gave me the crown and signet 
As emblems of authority, perceiving 
The coming of an army from the Turks, 

Called me at dead of night, and said : When bruit 

Of war ariseth who can say which side 

The dust will be, so take this crown and ring, 

For they may help thee on the day of battle. 

I have one daughter only left to me : 

In truth she is in hiding from tlie Arabs. 

Hereafter yield not to the foe my throne, 

And by these tokens walk thou in my steps.” 

I have then from the Shah as legacy 
This crown and in accord to his behest 
Am sitting on the throne.’ By this device 
Give thou thine acts a gloss for who will know 
The truth from falsehood ? ” 

Good ! ” exclaimed Mahwi, 
Thou art a minister — a peerless one ! ” 

He summoned all the captains of the host, 

And spake at large to them to that effect. 

They knew : “ It is not true, and well it were 
To cut his head off for his shamelessness.” 

A paladin observed : “ ’Tis thy concern 
If what thou sayest be the truth or not.” 

He heard and sat him down upon the throne, 

By his deceit gat hold of Khurdsto, 

Distributed the earth among his chiefs, 

And said : I 'am the world’s king with the signet.’ 

He called his kin and said the same at large ; 

He .took the whole earth as it were a gift ; 

The stars were, in amaze at him. He chose 
Thewidbus as' ''accorded to his nature, 

'Debased tho sages and 'niiado,eyory where 
'Chie^s^of .the bad* The hegd of right was humbled. 


YAZDAGIRD 


115 


And knavery on all sides manifest. 

He gave his elder son Balldi and Harat, 

And sent troops to each quarter. As his host 
And treasures grew the heart of that ingrate 
Was gratified. He gave his troops rewards 
And put them in good case ; he filled the heads 
Of his own kith and kin with vapourings. 

Then with his troops and valiant warriors^ 
Preceded by the scouts and Garsiyun — 

A veteran chief — they marched upon Bukhara, 
Intent on war, for Chach and Samarkand 
Are ours,” Mahwl said, and they must be made 
The captives of this crown and seal, for so 
Did Yazdagird, king of the world, command — 
Chief of the planets seven. With the sword 
Will I take vengeance on Bizhan by whom 
The fortune of earth’s king was turned to gloom.” 


§18 

flow Bizhan, hearing of the Slaying of Yaziagiri and 
of Mdhwi of Sdrh Accession to the Throne, led 
forth the Host to fight with him 

In time news reached Bizhan : MAhwi hath seized 
The throne of might and everywhere imposeth 
His seal and signet ; earth accepteth him, 

And now with warlike troopS' his face iS' turned 
Toward the Jihdn for battle.” 

, , , Who bestowed 

The signet on him ? ” asked Bizhan, ^ and one 
Acquainted him'' with alli Wheh, thou -didst reach 
The desert of Farhb,-' and-|Ortun'e^^ lips ' ■,"> . 

Weie closed f 0 . ^00-d' 'and 'i!!/' pa-^ed , hence, 


C. 2091 


ii6 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

To him. a force of haughty cavaliers 
In quest of fame, for he had said : ' If thou 
Wilt send me troops I will dispatch to thee 
By privy pact the crown of king of kings 
With golden throne and signet. In the world 
The sovereignty is fitly thine.’ Thy troops 
Went hence in haste and found the Shah at Marv. 
They compassed him about. The Iranians fled. 
When that wise king was left alone he feared 
That ill might come upon him from the host. 

There was a certain mill upon the ford, 

And thither went the Shah, a sun in Grace. 

Mahwi of Siir heard of him, sent and slew him, 

And through the royal signet gained the world 
When he had slain his master. Now the more part 
Of praise and blame in this affair is thine, 

Thine were the valiant horsemen and the strife,” 
Barsam said thus : O king ! what time^ I took 
A mounted force from ChAch^ Mahwi had said 
To thee : ‘ The golden throne of Yazdagird, 

His armlets set with gems, his crown withal 
And treasure, will I send to Balkh. The throne 
And crown within the world must needs be thine.’ 

I fought three days at Marv. When on the fourth 
The world’s light shone I battled furiously. 

For I was pressed. Tyrannical Mdhwi 
Displayed his hack. The Iranian king of kings. 
Abandoned, like a furious lion charged 
c. 2092 My troops and slaughtered many of my chiefs. 

But, when he had no comrades left, he too 
Displayed his back ; but how that master -slayer, 
That faithless slave, put him to death I know not. 
Thus with no toil M^wi obtained and used 
His master’s treasures. Then the miscreant, 
Becoming dazed by so much'-wealth, appeared^ 


YAZDAGIRD 


tiy 


Thou niiglitcst say, as if he ne’er had seen me ! 
Although my troops remained two months at Marv 
lie gave us no kind look but put to death. 

And privily, his lord, so great a king, 

The lustre of the world, a cavalier 

That haiseth o’er the orbit of the mooji 

His head amidst the host ’ thou wouldst have said. 

No Turk encountered and escaped his niaee : 

He broke our nobles’ hearts. I have not seen 
Such breastplate, hand, and macc. Mahwi thus 
furnished 

Seized on the realm in this unholy wise. 

Now that the foe in arms invadeth thee 
Thou and thine army must be ujj and doing. 

Let not weeds blossom in the royal garden 
Or it will be forgotten.” 

Hearing tliis, 

Bizhan raged much at liaving helped to dim 
The fortune of the Shah, then bade assemble 
His host of Turks, his horsemen of the day 
Of battle, sped forth from Kach4r Bashi, 

And lost no time upon the road, Whenas 
He drew anear Bukhara all the waste 
Was covered with his troops to whom he said 
'' Haste not and let Mahwi be first to lead 
His host across the water^ to contend 
With me. Perchance on him I may avenge 
The Shah.” 

He asked thereafter : Bid the king 
Leave no availM child ? Had he no brother ? 

In the default of sons had he no daughter, 

Whom we might carry with us and assist, ^ 

And take full satisfaotidn of 'M4hwi ? ” 

Bars Am replied,: '^‘Bly'lord ! ,this race’s day 
is passed ; the, Arab, s hold those proyincos ; 


ii8 " THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSf 

No Shah is left or worshipper of Fire.” 

Bizhan, on hearing this, resumed his march, 
Astound at this world’s doings. Scouts announced : — 
“ A host hath come and campeth at Baigand. 

They crossed in boats, their dust obscured the sun.” 

Bizhan, the chief, led on his troops to war. 

And when Mdhwi of Siir beheld them thou 
2093 Hadst said: “His soul took flight.” He was in 
dudgeon 

At all those breastplates, helmets, shields of Chin, 

At all those maces, spears, and battle-axes 
Of Chach. The air grew dark and earth was lost 
To sight therein as he arrayed his host. 


■ § 14 

How Mdhwi of Siir was taken and slain by Order of 

Bizhan 

Bizhan, when he had drawn up his array, 

Prepared an ambush for the frdnians ; 

Mdhwi knew of it and with loud exclaims 
Departed from among his troops. Bizhan 
Looked forth, beheld the flag, and knew : “ Mdhwi 
Is minded to take flOight,” and bade Barsdm ; — 

“ Lead from the central host what troops thou hast, 
And draw toward one side ; we must not let 
Mdhwi decline the battle and haste thus 
Jihdn-wards. Speed and keep him well in sight, 

For we must deal with him in other wise.” 

Barsdm of Chin observed the flag and drew 
His troops apart until with frowning face, 

Arid naalisons upon his lips, he reached 
The desert of Earah, there found Mdhwi, 


YAZDAGIRD 


119 

And, with his weight upon the stirrups, charged ; 
Then, closing face to face, he ])licd liis sword, 
Disjdaying valour, seized his focnian’s belt. 

Unseated him and dashed him to the ground. 
Alighted, bound his hands, and then remounting 
Drove him along in front. With that came up 
Barsam’s own comrades, and the bruit of him 
Filled all the plain. They said : “ O chief ! Mahwf 
Should be beheaded on the way.” 

He answered : — 

“ Not so ; Bfzhan as yet is not informed 
About the capture.” 

Presently Bizhan 

Gat news : “ That ill-conditioned slave is taken,” 
Heard and grew glad of heart, lie hugged himself, 
And thus released from care roared lion-like. 

Then many valiant Turks came and discussed 
The fashion of the slaying of Mahwl. 

All that they recognised as of his court 
They put to death — a countless multitude. 

They looted all the baggage and dragged off 
Mdhwi stripped bare of all. The guilty wretch 
Lost all his wits when he beheld Bfzhan, 

Was as a soulless body with affright, 

And strewed upon his head the unstable sand. 
Bfzhan said : “ O thou miscreant ! may none have 
A slave like thee ! Why didst thou put to death 
That righteous Sh4h, the lord of victory 
And throne, and by ancestral right both Shdh 
And king, the memory of Ndshfrw4n ? ” 

Mdhwf made answer thus : “ The evil-doer 
Can look for naught l?ut slaying and reproach. 

Now smite my neck for wrong done and fling down 
My head in presence of this company.” 

The other gave reply ;; ‘‘ I witi so act 
That ,1, shall banish, veugeitice'ftrb& my''h^:tt/’ ; , 


C, 2094 


120 


' THB SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSf 

Struck off Mahwi’s hand with the scimitar, 

And said : “ This hand hath not a peer in crime.” 

Tlic hand thus lopped, he said : “ Cut off his feet 
That he may not escape,” and further bade 
Cut off his nose and ears, let him be placed 
Upon a horse out on the burning sand 
Until he sleepeth in his shame.” 

They bound him 

From head to foot with cords, the clarions sounded, 
A herald went the circuit of the host. 

And, as he passed the entry of the tents, ► 

Made proclamation ; “ Slaves that slay your masters ! 
Indulge no foolish thoughts, and may all those ■ 
Without compunction for a monarch’s life 
Be as MAhwl and never see the throne.” 

There was a prince, by name Guraz, at once 
The glory and the pleasure of Mhhwl. 

He was the governor of Marv what time 
Mdhwf died wretchedly. As eldest son 
He was his father’s lustre, who had made 
A crown of gold for him. When fortune loured 
Upon Mdhwi the horsemen rode to Marv 
From all sides. Tumult spread. The war-cry rose. 
And strife and turmoil filled the land. Gurdz 
Was slain mid those dark doings, and the day 
Of all his race was done. He had three sons 
Among his troops, three favourite sons possessed 
Of crown and throne. A lofty pyre was kindled. 
And he and his three sons were burned thereon. 
None of the seed remained or if some did 
Men harried them. The chieftains cursed that race, 
All vengeful for the slaughter of the Sh^ 

“ May it be cursed and may there never fail 
A man td curse it as it hath deserved.” 

Bizhan, the Ttirk, too was an evil-doer, 
own time came, his wiisdoin was estranged, 


YAZDAGIBD 


121 


And I have heard that he gi’cw mad at last, 

And was so till he slew himself. Well done. 

Thou still revolving, crook-backed sky ! Since then 
Hath been the epoch of ’Umar, made known 
The Faith, and to a pulpit changed the throne. 


§15 


Account of the Completion of the Shdhndma 

When five and sixty years had passed me by 
I viewed my task with more anxiety. 

And as my yearning to achieve it grew 
My fortune’s star receded from my view. 

Persians well read and men of high degree 
Wrote all my work out and would take no fee. 

I over-looked from far, and thou hadst said 
That they had rather handselled me instead ! 

Naught but their praises had I for my part, 

And while they praised I had a broken heart. 

The mouths of their old money-bags were tied. 
Whereat mine ardent heart was mortified. 

Of famous nobles of this town ’Ali, 

The Dilamite,'- most shared the work with me. 

For he, a man of ardent temper made, 

Through kindliness of soul forwent no aid. 

Husain, son of Kutib, a Persian lord, 

Asked me for naught without its due rew'ard. 

But furnished gold and silver, clothes and meat, 

And found me ways and means, and wings and feet, 
As for taxation, naught thereof know I ; 

All at mine ease in mine own quilt I lie. 

» In Vol. in p- 35, tlie n^ntea aa?®' 0rtia according to 'the reading 
ofBCM..' 


C 2095 


122 ' THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI 

What time my years attained to ten times seven 
And one my poetry surmounted heaven. 

For five and thirty years I bore mueh pain 
Here in this Wayside Inn in quest of gain. 

But all the flve and thirty years thus past 
Naught helped ; they gave my travail to the blast, 
And my hopes too have gone for evermore 
Now that mine age all but hath reached fourscore. 
I end the story of Sh 4 h Yazdagird, 

And in Sapandarmad, the day of Ard, 

And year four hundred of Muhammad’s Flight, 

The last words of this royal book I write. 

For ever flourishing be Sh 4 h Mahnuid, 

His head still green, his heart with joy imbued. 

I have so lauded him that publicly 
And privily my words will never die. 

Of praises from the Great I had much store ; 

The praises that I give to him are more. 

May he, the man of wisdom, live for aye, 

His doings turn to his content alway. 

This tale of sixty thousand couplets I 
Have left to him by way of memory. 

2096 My life from days of youth to eld hath sped 
In talk and hearkening what others said. 

When this, my famous tale, was done at last 
O’er all the realm my reputation past. 

All men of prudence, rede, and Faith will give 
Applause to me when I have ceased to live. 

Yet live I shall ; the seed of words have I 
Flung broad-cast and henceforth I shall not die. 


The ShhhnAma of Firdausi is ended. 


INDEX 


This Index and the Table of Contents at the beginning of ^ the 
wlwne are complementary. References to the latter are in 
Roman numerals. 


A 

Abbreviations, list of, xi 
Abtin, father of Faridhn, 53, T03 
Abd Bakr, Khalifa, 76 

begins war with Persian 
Empire, 66 

Abii ’Ubaida, Arab general, 66 
supersedes Kh41id in Syria, 
66 

Abh ’Ubaida, Arab general, 67 
made commander in Persian 
campaign, 67 
slain, 67 

Afrdsiy&b, ruler of Thrdn, 25, 
103 

Ahriman, the Evil Principle, 8, 

18, 73, 7 A> 19 > 91 
Al, place, 93 
Alburz, Mount, 25 
'AH, the Bilanaite, friend of Fir- 
dausi, 121 
Alt duly a, place, 92 
Amul, city in Mdzandardn, 86 
Apologue, 86 
Apothegms, 87^ 88, no 
Arab, Arabs, 3, 5, 23. 60, 69, 70, 
72, 75 s$q,t 79, 89, 92, 
94, seq., 1 14. 1 17 
invasion of Irin by, 3, 63 
seq. 

steeds, IX 
tribes, 65' 

triumph of, 'over 'DM. fcdr,' 

' 66 ' _ ' , ' , 

chieftaha, incites’ Ab'd , l^akr 
to invaide' Persia^ b6 - ? 
concentrate ab 


Arab, Arabs, booty found by, at 
Ctesiphon (?), 68 
annex Mesopotamia, 68 
Khuzistdn, 68 
= 'Umar, 72 
seal, 82 
=Sa’ad, 84 
defeated, 85 

NdshirwdiPs dream of, 92 
Arabian, Arabians, 74, 85 
Arabic, 81 
Archmages, viii 
Ard, (lay, 70, 122 
Ardshfr Pdpakdn, first Sdsdnian 
Shdh, L05, 109, TTi 
Ardshfr, son of Shfrwl, Shdh, 
vii, 43 seq. 

makes Pirdz general, 44 
entertains Pfrdz at feast, 
48 

death of, 49 

treasury of, scjuandcrcd by 
Guriz, « 

Arish, famous frinian archer, 25 
Arjisp, king of Tdrin, 104 
Armani, Xrinian chief, 74 
'Ards, treasure, 20 
Arwand (Tigris), river, 85, 92 
Asfandiyir, son of Shdh Gush- 
tisp, 25, 26 not$» 104 
Ashtdd, Irdnian chief, 1 1 seq. 
chosen to ’visit Khusrau 
Parwfz at Taisafdn, 9 
and^ Kharrdd parky with 
'' "Oalfndsh,,ix - 
" , visit Kbusrau Parwlz, 

X2 

, ' ; \ / repdrt to Shlrwl, 27 
, Astrolabe* 73- ; ' 


124 


INDEX 


Astrologer, 73 
Azar, month and clay, 17 
Azar, Abddagdn (Azargasliasp 
. 74 

Azaigashasp, spirit of the light- 
ning, 55 

temple of (Azar Abddag 4 n) 
at Shfz (Takht-i-Salai- 
m 4 n) in Azarbdijdn, 75 
Azarmdukht, Sliih, viii, 56, 59, 
69 

reproaches Kiihdd, 7 
end of, 59, 60 


B 

Babylon, 65, 92 

Zahhdk, king of, 65 
Bactrian, camels, 93 
BM Awar, treasure, 20 
Baghdad, Persian settlement of, 
67 

raided by Arabs, 67 
Bagliddd, city {Cf. Vol. viii, p. 
109 note), 88 
Yazdagird quits, 88 
Bahrain, group of islands in 
Persian Gulf, 68 
Bahrdm Clnibfna, frdnian hero, 
6, 15, 16, 22, 91, 105 
assassination of, referred 
to, 4 

Romance of, 5 
Bah rim Gir, Shih, 26, 77 
Baigand, city and fortress 
between Bukhiri and 
Ojcus, 

Mihwi encamps at, ttS 
Balkh, city, 116 

bestowed by Mihwf on his 
son, 1:15 

Bandwi,' maternal uncle of Khus- 
ratiParwfz 4 

execution of, referred to, 4, 
16, '104 ' ' 

Birbad, minstrel, yii, 29 and 
'n0ie , 

' ' visits Khn^rau Parwfz .in 

. , ; , ' -prison^ a9 , '' // ' ' 

- ' kkemt A ' ' '■ ’ 


Barda’, city on the borders of 
Azarbaijin and Armenia, 

15 

Barsain, general of Bizhan 97^ 
1x7 

marches on Marv, 97, 116 
Mihwf’s conduct to, 117 
pursues and overtakes 
Mihwi, 1x8 
captures Mihwi, 119 
Bariis, region in Turkistiii, 19 
Barzin, father of Kharrid, 4, 9, 
12, 27 

Basra (Bassora), city on the 
Shatt-el-Arab, 68, 69 
founded by 'Umar, 67 
Battle of the Bridge, 5, 67 
Bizhan, Khin of Turks, viii, 70, 
96 

Mihwi writes to, 96 
consults his minister, 97 
sends troops to Marv, 97 
Mihwi makes war on, x 15 
m£ relies against Mihwi, T17 
lays ambush for Mihwi, 1x8 
sends Barsim in pursuit of 
Mihwi, 1 18 

hears of Mihwi's caiiture, 
119 

puts Mihwi to death, 120 
goes mad and kills himself, 
120, 121 
Brahman, 21 

Bridge, Battle of the, 5, 67 
Bukhiri, city on the Zarafshin 
river in the province of 
Sughd, 97, 1 15. 117 
Bust, city in Sistin, 89 


C 

C-?ESAR, 10, 23 

letter pf; about the True 
Crpss referred to, 22 
'Cl;iich (Tishkand), city, in Tiirin, 
115, tx6 

" ' batBe-asces 'Of, it 8 
Ckahram (Jahram), city in Pirs ' 

.A' 


INDEX 


125 


Chin country (often =Thran), 10, 
19, 41, 107, 118 
sashes from, 12, 53 
gold thread of, 82 
Kh^ti of, 87 
merchantmen of, 89 
shields of, 118 
Christ, 24, 109 
Cross of, 23 
Christian, 23 

Commander of the Faithful, 72 
'Umar, the first 72 and note 
Contents Table of, vii 
Cross, the true, 4, 5, 10, 24 
restoration of, 7, 56 
of Christ, 23 
Elevation of, 43 
Crystal, House of, 25 and note 
Ctesiphon (Taisafun q>v.), 65 

seq. 

taken by Shahrbarfiz, ^3, 44 
Sa’ad, 67 

booty found at, 08 


D 

DahistAn, town, also district 
north of the Atrak. 95 
Dai, day, 17 
D4ng, coin, 94 and note 
Darkness, House of, 7 
Dastagird, city, 7 
Dhd Kdr, Battle of, 4, 5, 66 
Dflamite, 'Alf the, friend of Fir- 
dausi, 12 1 
Dfv, divs, 18, 25 

sssAhriman, 47, 102, 104 


E 

Egyptian, iio 
linen, 170 

' , ’ '' F , ' - ^ ^ 

FAGErdR of Chfn,, 87/97, 102' . 
Faithful, domnrahdeir .of .the; ^72 ’ 

, '''Hmar, , the first, , , 


Farab (Firabr), town on the 
Oxus opposite to Aniwi, 
desert cf, 115, it8 

Faraym (GurAz, Shahrbaraz q^v.), 
Sh4h, vii, 50, 53, 105 
accession-speech of, 52 
counselled by his eldest son, 
52 

counselled by his youngest 
son, 53 
misrule of, 53 
plot against, 54 

Fandun, Shah, 25, 39, 53, 71, 
86, 103 

FarruhAn (Fariukhdn). See Far- 
aym. 

Farruklidn (Farruhdn). SeeFtir- 
kyin. 

Farrukh-Hurm u zd (H urmuzd 
q.v.), father of Rustam, 69 

FarruklizAd, Shdh, viii, 61 seq., 
70 

Siyah Chaslim and, 62 
poisons, 63 

Farrukhzdd, son of Hurmuzd, 
brother of Rustam, and 
favourite of Khusrau Par- 
wfz, 23, 87, 92, 95 
bribes Mihr Hurmuzd to 
murder Khusrau Paiwfz, 
33 

defeats the Arabs, 85 
counsels Yazdagird, 86 , 87 
leads the host to Khurdsdn, 
89 

entrusts Yazdagird to 
Mdhwf, 95 
goes to Rai, 96 

Farild, son of Shfrfn and Khusrau 
Parwfz, 39 

Firdausi, 69 

account of Arab conquest 
by, supplemented, 65 
Yazdagird 's death, 70, 
107 

redoctiotts on, 108, 
'tXX '' 

on conrptetion of Shdhndma, 

. friend, ^ assistant of, 121 

. 9scoiti]pt''wm taajiatiott, 12 1 


126 


INDEX 


Firdausi, time spent on Shdh- 
ntoa, by, 122 
praise of Sultan Mahmud, 
by, 122 

Flight of Muhammad, referred 
to, 122 

Ford and toll-house of Zark, 100 
and note^ 116 


G 

GALBwf, frdnian chief, 74 
Galmhsh, Persian general, 5, ii, 
12 

parley of, with Kharrdd and 
Ashthd, II 

Gang-dizh, stronghold, 25 
Garsfwaz, brother of Afrdsiydb, 
103 

Garsiydn, Iranian chief, 115 
Gashasp, father of Ashthd q-v.,ii 
Gemini, constellation, 73 
Gil (Gfl, Gxldn ?), district on 
south-west coast of Cas- 
pian, 93 

Glory. See Grace. 

Grace or Glory, the divine, 8, 26, 
30, 31, 41, 44, 47, 73, 74» 
79, 90, 91, 95, 99, 100, 
101, 116 

Giidarz, frinian hero, 25 
seventy sons of, 25 
Gumbad^n, Mount, 93 
stronghold on, 93 
Gur^z (Shahrbardz, Fariyfn 

q,v.) general of Khusrau 
Parwfz and Sh^, vii, 44 
rebellion of, 43 
message of, 45 
writes to Pirdz, 46 
Pfniz writes to, 47 
account of,- 50 
meaning of, 50 
dual personality^ of, 50 - 
marches on taisafdn, 51 
confers with, frdnian tnag- 
- , nates, 51 ' 

misrule of, .53 , . ' , , ■ 

, ppnspwcyagaihst, 54, 

,;goei' hunting;', 53 ', 


Guraz, end of. 55 
Guraz, son of Mdhwl, 
referred to, 107, 115 
governor of Maiv, 120 
put to death with his sons, 
120 

Gurdwf, brother of Bahrdm 
Chdbfna, 6 

Gurdya, sister of Bahrdm Chh- 
bina, 6 

Gurgdn, province on the south- 
eastern shores of the 
Caspian, 89 
Gushtdsp, Shdh, 25 
Gustaham, maternal uncle of 
Khusrau Psrwfz, 4, 6 
assassination of, referred to, 
16, 104 


H 

Hamad An, city in Irdk 'Ajami, 
68 

Haram, of Khusrau Parwiz, 4, 5 
Hardt, city in north-western 
Afghdnistdn, 115 
bestowed by Mdhwf on his 
son, I 15 

Hdshim, Arab general, 68 

sent by 'Umar in pursuit of 
Yazdagird, 68 
wins battle of Jaldld, 68 
takes Hulwdn, 68 
Hdshimite= Muhammad, 81 and 
note 

Heraclius, Eastern Roman Em- 
peror, 5, 7 
Shfrwi's letter to, 7 
alliance of, with Shahr- 
bardz, 44 
Hildl, Arab, 69 

' slayer of Rustam son of 
Farrukh-Humuzd, 70 
Hinddstdn, 17, ^0 
Hfra, city,' west of the - Ehphrates 
, neat Kd-djef, 5, 6-6 ' 
kingdom of, 65 
' abolished by - Khusrau 
, ^ , , Ratwfz, 66 / ^ - 

^ ' attacked by Persians, 0^7 ; 


INDEX 


Houri, 8 1 

House of Darkness, 7 
Crystal, 25 and note 
Hulwan, town on the border of 
'Irak 'Ajamf, west ofKir- 
mansliah 

Yazdagird retires to, 67 
taken by Hlshim, 68 
Hurmuzd, son of Nhshxrwan, 
Shdii, 4, 15, 104 
Hurmuzd (Hurmuzdshdh, Far- 
rukh-Hurmuzd q.v), 
father of Rustam, 72, 78 
85, 89, 96 

Hurmuzd Sbahranguriz (Shah- 
raiigiirdz q.v.), 54 
Hurmuzd, devotee, 102 

pleads with M^hwf for Yaz- 
dagird, 102 

Husain, friend of Firdausi, 121 
Hdshang, Shdh, 25, 41 


I 

Indian, scimitar, 17 
script, 17 
scribe, 17 

fraj, son of Farfddn, 103 

'Ir^k, 66 

frdn, vii, viii, 9 seq .^ 15, 21, 22, 
3D 3 S, 39» 4D 45» 5D 
74» 75 ’ 79 ’ 85, 86, 88, 
92, 96, 103, 106, 108, 1 13 
Iranian, Iranians, viii, 22, 23, 
40, 47, 48, 63, 73, 76, 88, 
90, 1 16 

homage Shfrwf, 8 
choose two chiefs to visit 
Khusrau Farwfz in prison, 
9 

plot against Gur 4 z, 54 
go hunting with Guriz, 55 
race, 65 

enmity of, with Semite, 

65 ' 

announces g*nivhX of Shu'ba 
, 'J^ughfra tb ' Eusfam,. 82 ! 
defeat df» at liM-isfya, 84 ,1 ' 
'"retreat to > Ya^riagitct* 85 ; ■ 

'---horh„ 99 '! ■' ' 


127 

Iranians, defeat of, at Marv, 116 
ambushed, 118 
Istakhr (Persepolis), 50, 54 
Yazdagird taken to, 64 
made Shah at, 63 


J 

Jahram. See Chahram. 

JaliiU, 68 

Jamisp, minister of Gushtasp, 26 
Jamshid Shdh, 25, 39, 103 
Jarman a, jdacc, 93 
Jerusalem, 43 

Elevation of the True Cross 
at, 43 
Jesus, 10 

Jihiin (Oxus), river, 77, T15, 118 
Jins, 81 


R 

KABUL, city 

falchion of, 98 

Kdchdr B 4 shf, city in Tdrdn, 117 
Kddisfya, town west of Euph- 
rates and near 
Nedjef, 5, 73, 74, 77, 78 
Battle of, 5, 67, 69 
date of, 67 
canal of, 69 

Rustam advances to, 73 
Kaian, crown, 11, 105 
Kai K 46 s, Shdh, 25 
Kai Khusrau, Sh§.h, 25, 103 
Kai Knhid, Shih, 25 
Kalit, stronghold, 91 
liton, Iranian hero, 25 
Karkh, a suburb of Baghdad, 85 
Arab defeat at, 85 
Kashmigin, son of Fai*rukhz 4 d, 
"9^ 

K4wa, the smith, 30 ' ■ 

. ' hag of, 30, 67 , , 

Khdlid, 'Arab general 66 

. ' "begins .hgain^t 

' - , 'Persian. ' ■ 

recalled: 'tp ''^ea4 


INDEX 


Klidn of Chin, 87, 102 
=B]zhan, 97 

Kharr 4 d, son oi Barzfn, fr^nian 
ministei', 4, ii, 12, 24 
end of, 4 

chosen to visit Khusraii 
Parwiz at Taisa fun, 9 
Ashtdd and, parley with Gal- 
iniish, II 

visit Khusraii Parwfz, 12 
report to Shfnvf, 27 
Kharrdd, father of Hurmuzd, 102 
Khurds^n, province in north- 
eastern frdn, viii, 59, 69, 
87, 88, 92 

Mdhwf becomes master of, 
114 

Khusrau Parwfz, Shdh, vii, 
4 seq,, II, 12, 25, 26 note, 
3B 33 seq., 38 seq., 
45 seq. 

charges against, 4, 5, 9, 10 
reply of, to charges, 5, 14 
seq. 

Haram of, 4, 5 
last days of, Theophancs' 
account of, 6 
Shfrwf’s treatment of, 7 
sons of, executed, 7, 35 
Shfrfn and, 7 

imprisoned at Taisafun, 9 
companioned by Shfrfn, 29 
Bdrbad visits, 29 
laments over, 30 
steed of, 30 
son of, 31 

referred to, 33 and note 
kingdom , of Hfra abolished 
by, 66 

Muhammad's letter to, 66 
Khusrau, father of Pfrdz, vii, 44, 

46, 48, 49, 51, 57 
IChusrau, a miller, iii, 99. See 

Miller. 

Khdzistdn (Susiana), province at 
head of Persian Gulf 
annexed by Arabs, 68 
Khuzri, treasure, 20 
Kibchdk, region, ea$t of the Jax« 
^rtos and north, cf Tdsb- 
Mnd, 93 ^ ^ ^ 


Kfrwan (Karwan, district north 
of Jaxartes ?), 93 
Kisrd Ndshfrwdn. See Ndsbfr- 
wdn. 

Kubdd, son of Pfriiz, Shdh, 22, 

25 

Kubad (Shfrwf q.v ), Shdh, vii, 
3,4,9, II, 12, 14, 24, 32, 
47. 64 

tragic reign of, 3 
pestilence during, 3 
boorishness of, 3 
difficult situation of, 3 
I'cproached by his sisters, 7 
Ivfifa, city, west of Euphrates 
and north of Nedjcf, 68, 
69 

founded by Sa'ad, 67 
Kuran, 81 

quoted, 81 and note 
Kutlb, father of Husain, 12 1 


L 

Ldzhawardf fort, 93 
Luhrdsp, Shdh, 104 


M 

MAcHfN (China), 107 
Mahindd, Sultdn, praise of 122 
Makhzdm, place, 93 
Mdhwf, I^ersian chief, viii, 70, 74, 
89, 95, 97. 100 seq, 1 18 
described, 87 

Farrukhzid entrusts Yaz- 
dagird to, 95 

accepts charge of Yazda- 
gird, 96 

becomes disaffected to Yaz- 
dagird, 96 

wriths to Bfzhan, 96, 116 
betrays Yazdagird, 97, 98, 
116, 117 

quest of, for Yazdagird, 100 
has tidings of Yazdagird, 
xoi 

consults his warriors, 106 
' son of, counsels, 107 


INDEX 


MMiwi, son of, receives Balkh and 
Harat, 115 

governor of Marv, 120 
put to death with his 
sons, 120 

sends miller to slay Yazda- 
gird, 107, 1 16 
troops after miller with 
.instructions, 107 
troops of, strip corpse of 
Yazdagird, 108 
hears of death of Yazdagird, 
loS 

bids miller throw corj^se of 
Yazdagird into stream, 
108 

slays monks, 113 
consults his intimates and 
minister, 1x3 

advised by his minister, 113 
claims the throne on false 
pretences, 114 
becomes master of Khur- 
ds 4 n, 1 14 
evil rule of, XI4 
makes war on Bizhan, 115 
conduct of, to Barshm, 117 
crosses Oxus and camps at 
Baigand, 118 
flees, 1 18 

overtaken by Bars 4 m, 118 
captured by Barsdm, 119 
put to death by Bfzhan, 120 
Marchlords, viii 

Marddnshhh (Yaldn-sfna 6 

son of, 5, 6 

conspires against Khusrau 
Parwfz, 6 

mutilation and execution of, 
6 

Marddnsh^h (MarcUsas), son of 
Shfrfn and Khusrau Par- 
wfz, 39 

Mardisas (Mardinshdh q^v,), 7 
execution of, 7 
Mars, planet, 73, 89 
Mirhsipand, palace, 11 
Marv, oasis and city in ancient 
northern Khur^s^n* hoiy. 
in Turkistan, 70, 89, ri6, 

^ . 117 ' 

VOL. m/' ' ■ 


129 

Marv, tiaditional scene of Yaz- 
dagird's death, 70 
Yazdagird at, 97, 116 
thane of, no 

a|)othegm of, no 
conduct of Maliwi to Bar- 
sdm at, II 7 

Guriz, son of Mahwf, gov- 
ernor of, 120 

Mdzandarhn, region between 

Alburz range and Caspian, 
74 

Mecca, city, 69 
Mercury, planet, 73 
Mesopotamia, 

annexed by Arabs, 68 
Mih-Azar-Gushnasp, minister of 
Ardshir, son of Sliirwf, in 
Arabic Tabari, 43 
put to death, 43 
Mi hr, feast, 40 

Mihr 'Hxisis, minister of Ardslifr, 
son of Shfrwf, in lYu'sian 
Tabari, 43 
put to death, 43 

Mihr Hurmuzd, murderer of 
Khusrau Parwiz, vii, 34 
account of, 5 
referred to, 6, 33 
conspires against Khusrau 
Parwfz, 6 
put to death, 7 
described, 33 
Milir-i-Nhsh, 103 

pleads with M 4 hwi for Yaz- 
dagird, 103 
Mill, viii, 98, 116 
Miller, viii, 70 

Yazdagird and, 99 
informs chief of Zark about 
Yazdagird, 100 
informs Mihwi about Yaz- 
dagird, loi 

bidden to slay Yazdagird, 

,'107 

, Mddep to ting corpse into 
. , ,''streatn» xo8 ' ‘ 

, MCiniiohlhi:^ Sh 4 hv X03 

distich of, qnoted, 56 

' .'iad, ! Y^zdS^glrd, X09 

‘ ' , , I 


INDEX 


130 

Monks, lament over and entomb 
Yazdagird, 109 seq. 

sentences of, over Yazda- 
gird, no 

slain by Mdhwf, 1 1 3 
Mughira, son of Shu’ba. S^e 

Shu’ba Mnghfra, 69 
Muhammad, the Prophet, 69, 81 
seq. 

letter of, to Klmsrau Par- 
wiz, 66 

Flight of, referred to, I2^ 
Muslim, 85 


N 

NaiiAvand, city, south of Ham- 
adAn, 68, 69 

Yazdagird concentrates his 
forces at, 68 
Battle of, 69 
N 4 rwan, forest of, 86 
Nastdr, son of Shfrin and Khiis- 
rau Parwfz, 39 
Nile, 98 
Nlmniz*'', 5, 6 

satrapy of, 69 

Nishdpdr, city in KhurAsdn, 95 
NiyAtiSs (Theodosius, son of 
Maurice), 23 

Note on Pronunciation, xii 
Nu'min bin Munzir, prince of 
Hfra, 5 

Nrf min, Arab general, 68 

sent by ’ Umar to fight Yaz- 
dagird, 68 

defeats FMzin at Nah 4 - 
vand, 68 
slain, 69 

NhsMrwin, Shih, az, 26, 71, 80, 
9a, 105, 109, no, 1 19, 
Letter of Counsel of, a a 
division of Empire by, 69 
dream of, 9a 


o 

Omen of the quince, 13, 14 
Oxus (Jihun), river 

referred to, 1 1 7 and note, 118 


P 

PahlavI, middle Peisian lan- 
guage of Ashkdniaii (Par- 
thian) and Sdsdnian times, 

Paidawasis, Persian coin = five 
dfndrs, 19 

Pars (Persis, Farsistau), country 
on eastern shore of Per- 
sian Gulf, 68 

Parsis, 64 

Parwlz. See Kbusrau Parwiz. 

Persepolis (Istakhr), 65 

Persia, 66 

Persian, Persians, 5, 7, 20, 37, 
40, 54, 60, 66, 67, 69, 70, 
72, 77, 79, 85, 121 
ideas on marriage, 7 
language, 12, 65 
=:Ashtdd and Kharrdd, 24 
exonerate Shfrin, 38 
empire, 65, 66 
Gulf, 66, 68 

win “The Battle of the 
Bridge," 67 

fail in attack on Hfra, 67 
defeat of, at Kddisfya, O7, 

34 

Jaldld, 68 
Nahdvand, 69 

Shu'ba Mughfra's embassy 
to, 69 
robes, 94 

transcribe Shdhnima for 
Firdausi, 121 

Pestilence, in reign of Kubdd, 
7 

Pfrdzj, son of Khusrau, minister 
of Ardshfr son of Shfrwf^ 

; 

appointed general, 44' 


fSee p, 3:33 


INDEX 


131 


PiriSz, letter of Guraz to, 46 
takes counsel, 46 
writes to Guraz, 47 
Gur 4 z marches against, 48 
appeals to Tukhar, 48 
feasts with Ardshfr, 48 
informs Guraz of the death 
of Ardshfr, 51 
put to death, 57 
Pfruz, frhnian prince, 59 
Pfriiz, son of Shapur, Iranian 
noble 

takes Rustam's letter to 
Sa'ad, 80, 81 

Pfrhzan, Persian general, 

commands Persian forces at 
Nahavand, 68 
slain, 69 

Pisces, constellation, 71 
Plague. See Pestilence. 
Pronunciation, Note on, xii 
Purhndukht, Shhh, vii, 56 
reproaches Kubhd, 7 
makes Shahrdngurhz prime 
minister, 56 
True Cross and, 56 
Pusfarrukh, 50 


Q 

Quince, omen of the, 13, 14 


R 

RXda, Mount, 94 
Rhdwf, archimage 

pleads with Miihwl for Yaz- 
dagird, loz 

Rai, city and district near Tih- 
r 4 n, 68, 69, 89, 95, 96 
R 4 ja, 17 

letter of, 17 

put in charge of Shfrfn, 17 
Raven, Raven-head, and note, 
95 note, 96 ' , / ' 

Revellers Rosary of 38^40 
Roman, 50, 66' ' 

Rhsary of Revellers, .38, ' 40' ' * , 

Rhfna, place, 91 , ’ 


Rdm, Eastern Roman Empire, 
10, II, 20, 39, 41, 45, 46. 
113 

brocade of, 99, 10 1 
monks of, slam by Mahwf, 
113 

Ruman, Riimans, 23, 60 

Russian, cloth, no 

Rustam, son of Zal, franian iiero, 

25 

Rustam, Persian commander 
in chief under Yazdagird 
III., viii, 66, 67, 69, 73, 
81 seq., 90, 95 

overthrows Azarmduklit, 59 
advances to Khdisi'ya, 67, 
73 

end of, 69 

finds evil aspects in the stars, 
73 

writes to his brother, 73 
hears of Shu'ba Mugln'ra's 
arrival, 82 


S 

Sa'ad, son of Wakkis, Arab 
general, viii, 67, 68, 82 
seq,, 90 

succeeds Abd 'Ubakla, 67 
at Kddisfya, 67, 69 
founds Kdfa, 67 
takes Ctesiphon, 67 
recalled, 68 

sent by 'Umar to invade 
Irin, 72 

letter of Rustam to, 78 
taken by Pfrdz 80, 8x 
Sada, feast, 40, 92 
Samarkand, city in Turkistdn, 
96, 115 

Sapandtenad, month, w, 122 
Sarf,'City in Mizandaran, 86 
Sds^n, of 1 05 and note 

' lineage of 56, to5 

Sdeinian,- Sisdnians, 4,^ 5, 46/ 

■ ' "47-5^3i 7».'73. 7^^ 

' : 77 ^ 83,'.' 195; ; 


INDEX 


132 

Sasanian, Empire, conquered by 
tlie Arabs, 65 seq. 

Satrapy, satrapies, Nushxrwan’s 
four, 69 

Saturn, planet, 73 
sphere' of, 92 

Seasons, confusion of the, 77 note 
Semite, race, enmity of, with 
Iranians, 65 

Shabclfz, steed of Khusraii Par- 
wi'z, 30 

Shahnama, viii, 4 seq., 43, 50, 61, 
70 

completion of, Firdausi on, 
121 

length of, 122 

date when completed, 122 
Shahran, 102 

pleads with Mahwi for Yaz- 
dagird, ro2 

Shahrangurfiz (llurmuzd Shah- 
rdnguraz, Guraz q.v,), vii, 

50 

heads conspiracy against 
Gur^z, 54 

Shahrbardz (Gurdz q.v.), frdniaii 
general, 43, 50 
rebellion of, ^3, 44 
alliance of, with Fleraclius,44 
Shahr-Barz. See Shahrbardz. 
Shahgurdz (Shahrbardz q.v,), 50 
Shahrwardz (Shahrbardz q,v,), 50 
Shahrydr, son of Shfrin and 
Khusrau Parwfz, 39 
father of Yazdagird, 64 
Shamirdn, stronghold north of 
Hardt (?), 91, 94 
Shipdr, father of iHviiz, 80 
Shatt-al-Arab, the combined 
streams of the Tigris and 
Euphrates, 67 

ShxHn, wife of Khusrau Parwfz, 
vii,, 28, 36 

Khusrau Parwfz and, 7 
has chdrge of ^hfrwFs horo- 
scope, x6 
Raja's letter, 17 
compauious Khusrau Par- ; 

wfz in prison^ 29 , , , ' , 
roprodched and ' suiumdued 
Shffwl, 3d' 


Shfrfn, makes her will, 36 
goes to Court 37 
justifies herself, 38, 40 
sons ot, 39 

unveils to the Court, 39 
Shirwi falls in love with. 
39 

makes request of Shirwi, 40, 
41 

goes home, 40 
distributes her wealth, 40 
frees her slaves, 41 
poisons herself, 42 
Shii wi (Kubad q.v.)y Shah, vii, 
7, 8, II, 27, 28, 31 seq , 
36, 45, 47, 64 

treatment of Khusrau Par- 
wiz by, 7 

writes to Heracliiis, 7 
horoscope of, 16 
kept by Shiiin, 16 
Ashtdd and Kharidtl report 
their interview with Khus- 
rau Parwiz to, 27 
reproaches and summons 
Shirin, 36, 37 

falls in love with Shirin, 39 
grants Shiriu's requests, 40, 

poisoned, 42 
son of, 42 

length of reign of, 42 
Shu'ba Mughira, companion of 
the Prophet, 69, 83 
embassy of, 69, 82 
Sikandar (Alexander the Great), 

! Shdh, 26 

Siyah Chasm, slave of Farrukli- 
z 4 d, 62 

handmaid of Farruklizdd 
and, 62 

imprisoned, 62 
released, 62 

poisons Famikhzid, 63 
Siydwush, son of Kai K 4 hs, 25 
and notet 26 note^ 103 
Snaked » Arabs, ,91' 

Sdr* Shrdn, city mcar Ispahdn, 

' 74r Sp, 95 . 97> fc)0, JC 16 , 
irS 

' ,Syrian|, M - 


INDEX 


T 33 


T 

Tadari, histoiiaii, *.|, 56, 01, 

69 

Arabic, 5» 45 , 5 ^ 

Persian, 4, 5, 43, 70 
Tabaristdn (Mazandaran), 74 
Table of Contents, vii 
Talimuras, Sh^h, 25 
Taisafun (Ctesiphon), city on left 
bank of Tigris, 9, 10, 90 
Khusrau Parwi'z inipiisonccl 
at, 9 

B^rbad visits Kbusrau I\ir- 
wiz at, 29 

TaiAz, city north-east of Tash- 
kand, 41 

Taxation, Firdausi's exemption 
from, 12 1 

Theopliancs, Greek Chronicler, 
account of last days of 
Khusrau Parwiz by, C 
Tigris, river, 67 

Toll-house and ford of Zark, 100 
and note, ij 6 
Tukhir, Irdnian general, 

refuses to help Piriiz against 
Gur 4 z, 48 

Thr, son of Farfdun, 103 
Tiirdn, ii, 89, 99 
Turk, Turks, 70, g 6 seq., 105, 114, 
117, 120 
Turkish, 87 
Turkistdn, 15 

Turkman, Turkmans, 25, 76, 94 
king = Afr!§.siydb, 25 
Ths, city in Khur^s^n, viii, 90, 
95 

governor of, 92 
V 

'Umar, Khalifa, 66 seq.^ 72, 76, 
121 

founds Basra, 67 
sends Hdshim in pursuit of 
Yazdagird, 68 
Hu'mAn ,to fight Yaz<ia-.;' 
gird, 68 ’ 

Sa’ad to, invade frih* 7^ , ' 
Urmuzd, fhe deod-Fripciple; 5^4', 


V 

Venus, planet, 26, 73 
Victory oJ Victories, Tiie, 09 
Viigo, c<jnstellation, 71 


W 

Wakkas, fatlier of Sa/ad q.v,, 
viii, 72, 78, 82. 90 


Y 

YalAn-sIna (Marddnshdh q.v.), 
6 

Yazdagird, Shhh, viii, 5, 61, 64 
seq., 68 seq., 72, 81, 90, 
10 1, T05, to6, 1x3, 115, 
1x6, 122 
Era of, 64 

taken for safety to Istakhr, 
64 

age of, at accession, 65 
difficult position of, 65 
historical importance of 
reign of, 65 

flight of, from Ctesiphon, 67 
Hulwdn, 68 

last attempt of, to recover 
his empire, 68 
concentrates his forces at 
Nahdvand, 68 
defeated, and a fugitive, 69 
death of, referred to, 69 
host returns to, after Kdd- 
isfya, 85 

hears of Eustam's death, 85 
quits BaghdM> 88 
makes for Marv, 89 ' 
entrusted to Mihwf by 
Earrukhzdd, 95, 96 
■at , Marv, .97, A 'X 6 
'heats of the coming of the 
' tuV)£Bf '97 ' 

by Mih#f, 98 , 

' 'A defeated, ) 9 ' 8 i X 16 ^ 


INDEX 


t34 

Yazdagird, miller and, 99 seq. 
described, 99, loi 
Mdbwi bids miller slay, 107, 
116 

slain, stripped and flung into 
stream, 108, 109 and note 
corpse of, recovered, lam- 
ented over and entombed, 
109 seq. 

Firdausi on, 1 1 1 


Z 

ZAbuustAn, 75* 

Zabli^k, Sbdh, 25, 65, 103 


Zahhak, an Aryan mytli, 65 
king of Babylon, 65 
an Arab, 65 

Zal, son of S 4 m and father of 
Rustam, 25 

Zark, town south-east of Marv, 
98 

canal of, 98 

corpse of Yazdagird flung 
into, 109 

recovered from, 109 
ford and toU-housc of, 100 
and note 
chief of, 100 

hears from miller about 
Yazdagird, 109 


GENERAL LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


C. — Macan’s edition of the Shalmdma 
L. — Lumsclen's Dc>. 

P.—Mohrs do. 

T. — ^Tihr4n do. 

V.— Vullcrs^ dc‘, 

AM. The Voiage and Travayle of Sir John Maundeville, Knight 
. . . Edited ... by John Ashton, 

AS. The Sh4h Namch of . . Firdausi. Transiated and 
abridged. ... By James Atkinson Esq. 

BAG. A History of Ancient Geography. By E. PI. Bunl)iiry 
F.R.G.S. 

BAN. A Plain and Literal Translation of the Arabian Nights' 
Entertainments. . . . By Richard F. Burton. 

BBR. Buddhist Records of the Western World. Translated 
from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (A.D. 629). By 
Samuel Beal, 

BCM. The Chah^r Maq41a C* Four Discourses of Nidh4m!4- 
'Anidi-i-Samarquandl. Translated into English by 
Edward G. Browne, M.A., M.B. 

BGDF. The Plistory of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 
By Edward Gibbon. Edited by J. B. Bury, M A. 

BHA. The Plistory of Alexander the Great, being the Syriac 
Vei’sion of the Pseudo-Callisthenes. Edited . . . 'with 
an English Translation and Notes, by Ernest A. Wahis 
Budge, M.A. 

BLEA. The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great, being a 
Series of Translations of the Ethiopic Histories of 
Alexander. ... By E. A. Wallis Budge, M,A. 

BLPIP. A Literary Plistory of Persia. By Edward G. Browne, 
M.A. 

BLRE. History of the Lower Roman Empire. By J. B. Bury. 

BPB. Photius : Bibliotheca. 3£x Recensione Immannelis Bek- 
keri. . ■ , 

CIG. Corpus Inscdptionum Grae<jarum. 

CTC. Thoophanis Chrono^aphia, ' Ex .Recensiohc Ioann is 
Classeni. , ' ^ ^ , . . , ' 

DA A. Arrlani Anabasis - y Ip, 'Dilbner.-' - , 

DAI, ^ Arris ni pndica ' 

' DEI. , ' , J, Daripesiteter, 


136 GENERAL LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

D F KH P. H’btory of tlic Parsis. By Dcsabliai Framji Kaiaka, 
C.S.I. 

DIIA The Plistory of Antiquity. From tlie German ot Piolc'ssor 
Max Dunckcr. By the late Evelyn Abbot, M A. 

DZA. Professor Da rmcste tor’s Trans, of the Zandavasta in the 
Sacred Books of the East. Reference to Parts 1 and pages. 

EHL The History of India as told by its own Historians. By 
Sir H. M. Elhot, K.C.B. 

EP. Eastern Persia, an Account of the Journeys cf the Persian 
Boundary Commission, 1870-71-72. 

GDF, The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 

Py Edward Gibbon, Esq. With Notes by Dean Milman 
and M. Guizot. Edited, with additional Notes, by 
William Smith, L.L.D. 

GH. The Land of the Hittites. ... By John Garstang, D.Sc. 

GHP. Histoire dcs Pcrscs par Ic Comte dc Gobineau. 

GIP. Grundriss der Iranischen Philologie. 

GKS. Kleinc Schriften von Alfred von Gutschniid. 

GYZ. Geiger : Das Y 4 tkdr-i Zarfrdn und sein Verhaltniss zum 
Sdhndme. Sitzungsberichte der philosophisch-pbilolo- 
gischen und historischen Classe der k.b. Akademie der 
Wisscnschaften zu Munchen. 189c. Bd. II. Heft I. 
P- 43 * 

HAP. History of Art in Persia from the French of Georges Perrot 
and Charles Chipicz. 

HB. The Country of Balochistan. ... By A. W. Hughes, 
F.R.G.S. 

FTEP. Essays on the Sacred Language, Writing and Religion of 
the Paisis. By Martin Haug, Ph. D. Edited and 
enlarged by E. W, West, Ph. D. 

HIE. The Indian Empire. By W. W. Hunter, C.S.I., C.I.E., 
L.L.D. 

HLP. The Legend of Perseus. By E. S. Hartland. 

HQC. Q. Curtius Rufus , . . ed. Edmundus Hedicke. 

HRVP, Veterum Persarum , . . Religionis Historia. Ed, 2nd, 
By Thomas Hyde. 

HS. Syntagma Dissertationum quas olim auctor doctissimus 
Thomas Hyde S.T.P. separatim edidit. 

JFB. The earliest English version of the Fables of Bidpai . . . 
now again edited and induced by Joseph Jacobs. 

JP. Persia Past and Present, by Professor A. V. Williams 
Jackson. 

JRGS, The Journal of the Royal Geographical Society. 

JZ, Zoroaster. By A. V. Williams Jackson. 

KA. Asia. By A. H. Keane, F.R.G.S. 

KUR. Kitab-i-Yamini of A 1 Utbi. Translated' by the Rev. 
James Reynolds, B.A. 

LAN. The Arabian Nights' Entertainm,ents. A New Translation 
from the Arabic. . „ By Edward Wiiliam Lane. 

LEG. The ^ Lands .of the Eastern . Caliphate. ,By G. I> Strange. 

'Second of ;Pwt I, is to nnleaftotherwis© 'Specified. 


GENERAL LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 137 

LPC. A View of the History and Coinage of the Partliiaiis. By 
John J^indsay, Esq. 

MA. Alexandre lo Grand . . . Par Paul Meyer. 

MCAI. Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Aiiiari. 
. . . By J. W. M’Crindlo, M.A. 

MCI. The Invasion of India by Alexander the C^reat. ... By 
J. W. M’Crindlc, M.A. . . . New Edition. 

MF. Reliqua Arriani ct Scriptorum dc rebus Alcxandri M. 

Fragmcnta collegit . . . Carolus Muller. 

MGN. Narrative of a Journey through the Province of Khorassan, 
etc. By Colonel C. M. MacGregor, C.S L, C.I.E. 

MHP. History of Persia. By Sir John Malcolm, G.C.B. 

MLM. The Life of Muhammad. By William Muir, Esq. 

MM. Magoudi : Les Prairies d'Or, Texte ct traduction par C 
Barbicr de Meynard ct Pa vet de Courteille. 

MPC. Pseudo-Callisthenes, primum edidit Carolus Mullerus. 
MSJP. A Second Joui-ncy through Persia, etc. By James Morier 
Esq. 

MZA. Rev. L, PI. Mills’ Trans, o£ the Zandavasta in the 
Sacred Books of the East, l^eferencc to Part and 
pages. 

NAR. Bcitrage zur Gcschichte dcs Alcxanderromans, von Prof. 

Dr. Th. Ndldekc in Denkschriften der . . . Akademie 
der Wissenschafton . . . Wien, 1890. 

NIN. Das Iranische Nationalepos von Theodor Noldeke. 

NK. Gcschichte dcs Artachsir i Papak^n aus dem Pellowi hber- 
vsetzt . . . von Th. Noldoke. 

NPS. . Ndldekc : Persische Studion, JI. Sitzungsberichte der 
Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften. CXXVI, 
Band, 

NSEH. Sketches from Eastern History. By Theodor Ndldeke. 
English Translation. 

NT. Gcschichte der Parser imd Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden 
. . . von Th. Ndldekc. 

OHS. The History of the Saracens. By Simon Ockley. Fourth 
Edition. 

RFGM. The Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World. 
By George Rawlinson, M.A. 

RH. The History of Herodotus. ... By George Rawlinson, 
M.A. 

RK. The Koran translated from the Arabic. By J. M. Rodwell. 

Second Edition. , ' , 

RM. {In Vok. Ill and IV) Tbe Mahibhdrata translated into 
English Prose ( 5 y Kis an Mahan 'GmguH), Published by 
Pratipa Chandra Rii, , C.I.E. ' , 

The Rauzat-us'^safa ; ot,, Garden of Purity. . . 
By , . . Mirkhend . ♦ . Translated by ‘E. Rehatsek. 
RP. (In Voh* I and' V) Records olthe Past* EEst Series. 

" .PrO'fessdr Rkwlid^n^,, Parthia in 'the Story of 

the JJ^atiO'UsPS^rlwri , 


138 

RPNS. 

RSM. 

SAC 

SHC. 

SK. 

SM, 

SP. 

STB. 

WLS. 

WPP. 

WPT. 

YMP. 

ZT, 


GENERAL LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

Records of the Past. Second Series. 

The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy. By Georee Raw- 
linson, M.A. 

The Chronology of Ancient Nations ... of Albirdna 
translated ... by Dr. C. Edward Sachau, 

The Higher Criticism and the Verdict of the Monu- 
ments. By the Rev. A. H. Sayce. 

The Koran . . . Translated ... by George Sale, Gent 

History of the Early Kings of Persia . . . Translated from 
the original . . . Persian of Mirkhond ... by David 
Shea, 

The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea . . . Translated from 
the Greek and annotated by Wilfrid H. Schoff, A M. 

The Dabistin . . . Translated 1 . . by David Shea and 
Anthony Troyer. 

In the Land of the Lion and Sun . . . By C. J. Wills. M.D. 

The Fdrsi Religion. By John Wilson. 

Dr. E. W. West's Trans, of the Pahlavi Texts in the Sacred 
Books of the East. Reference to Parts and pages. 

The Book of Sir Marco Polo . . . newly translated. . . 
By Colonel Henry Yule, C.B. 

Chronique de' Abon-Djafar-Mo'hammed-Ben-Diarir-Ben- 
Yezid Tabari, traduite . . . Par M. Hermann Zotenburg. 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


VOLUME I Vol. I 

PA<1E 

Preface .......... vii 

INTRODUCTION 

Chapter I.— Land and People ..... 3 

Chapter II. — Poet and Poem 23 

Chapter III. — ^Text and Translation .... 76 

List of previous Translators 87 

Ancient Persian Calendar . ... . . .88 

Genealogical Tables go 

Abbreviations 93 

Note on Pronunciation ....... 95 

THE SHAHNAma 

The Prelude — 

SECT. 

1. Invocation loo 

2. Discourse in Praise of Wisdom . . . .101 

3. Of the Making of the World .... 102 

4. Of the Nature of Man ..... 104 

5. Of the Nature of the Sun ..... 105 

6. Of the Nature of the Moon . . . , , 105 

7. In Praise of the Prophet and his Companions . 106 

8. On the Compilation of the Sh 4 hn 4 ma , , . 108 

9. Of the Poet Dakfki ...... 109 

10. Hovr the present Book was begun . . .109 

1 1 . In Praise of Abd Mansdr, Son of Muhammad . 1 10 

12. In Praise of Snltin Mahmiid . , * .112 

THE 'BEOINHINO OF ,THE HISTORY: THE 
PISHDADIAN OYNASTY 

GAldMART-—* , - 

1. The Creatness , Qf Gaidmart and the Envy of 

' Ahriman a, ; * ; . • . 118 

2. HowBfydhmfc'wassMnby'theDfv, , . . , .120 

3 . pow ^ Hdshahg ; and ■ Went ' to %ht the 

' Black t^fy. mX‘ 


140 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 

H^shang — VOL. I 

SECT, P^’qe 

X. Tho Accession of Husliang and liis civilising Arts . 122 

2. How the Feast ol Sada was louuded . . • £23 

XAHMliRAS — 

I. Tahmtiras ascends the Throne, invents new Arts, 

subdues the Df vs, and dies . . . .126 


jAMSHfp — 

1. The Greatness and Fall of Jamshfd . . -131 

2, The Story of Zalih4k and his Father . . *135 

3 , How Iblis turned Cook . . . . -137 

4. How the Fortunes of Jamshfd went to Wrack . 139 


ZahhAk — 

1. The evil Customs of Zahhdk and the Device of 

Irmd'fl and Karnidhl , . , . . 

2. How Zahhdk saw Farfdun in a Dream . 

3. The Birth of Farfddn 

4. How Farfdiin questioned his Mother about his 


Origin 152 

5. The Story of Zahhdk and Kdwa the Smith . *154 

6. How Farfdiin went to Battle with Zahhdk . . 159 

7. How Farfdi'm saw the Sisters of Jamshfd . . i6r 

8. Tho Story of Farfdhn and tho Minister of Zahhdk. 164 

9. How Farfdiin bound Zahhik . . . .166 


FARfoiiN — 

1. How Farfdiin ascended the Throne 

2. How Farfddn sent Jandal to Yaman . 

3. How the King of Yaman answered Jandal , 

4. How tho Sons of Farfddn went to the King of 

Yaman ....... 

5. How Sarv proved the Sons of Farfdhn by Sorcery, 

6. How Farfddn made Trial of his Sons . 

7. How Farfdhn divided the World among his Sons . 

8 . How Salm grew envious of fraj .... 

9. How Salm and Tdr sent a Message to Farfdhn 

10. How Farfdun made Answer to his Sons 

11. How fraj went to his Brothers . , . . 

12. How fraj was slain by his Brothers 

13. How Farfdiin received Tidings of the Murder of 

m 

14. How a Daughter was born to fraj 

15. The Birth of Miniichihr . , . . . 

16- ITow Salm and Xiir had Tidings of Mindchihr 

17, How Fatfddn received his, Sons' Message * 

18, How Farfdiin made ^ Anawer ho Jais Sons 

19, How, Farfddh sent IMintiohihr to fight ,Xiir and Salm 
iio. How Miniichihr attacked the' Host of Tdr . ' ' 


174 

177 

181 

183 

184 
186 
189 
189 
191 

193 

^97 

3:99 

202 

205 

206 

208 

209 
211 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


141 


FAR^DUN (continued) Vol. I. 

SECT. PAGE 

21. How Tiir was slain by Miniicliilir . . .220 

22. How Miniichihr wrote to announce his Victory to 

Fan'dun . , . . . . .221 

23. How Karan took the Castle of the Alans . . 223 

24. How Kakwi, the Grandson of Zalihdk, attacked the 

franians . . . . . . -225 

25. How Salm fled and was slain by Minuchihr . . 227 

26. Flow the FIcad of Salni was sent to I'aridiin . .229 

27. The Death of Faridun ..... 232 


MiNdcniHR — 

1. How Minuchihr ascended the Throne and made an 

Oration , . , . . . - 237 

2. The Birth of Zkl ...... 239 

3. How Sam had a Dream touching the Case of his Son 243 

4. How Minuchihr took Knowledge of the Case of Sam 

and Zkl ....... 248 

5. How Z41 went back to Zibulistdn . , .251 

6. Flow S^m gave the Kingdom to Zal . . . 253 

7. Flow Z41 visited Mihrdb of Kdbul . . . 256 

S. Flow Kddaba took Counsel with her Damsels . 259 

9. How Rdddba’s Damsels went to sec Zkl . . 263 

10. How the Damsels returned to RheUba , . . 267 

11. Flow Z41 went to Riiddba ..... 270 

12. How Zkl consulted the Archimages in the Matter 

of Riiddba ...... 273 

13. How Zdl wrote to Sdm to explain the Case . . 275 

14. How S4m consulted the Archmages in the Matter 

of Zkl ....... 278 

1 5. How Smdukht heard of the Case of Rddiba . .280 

16. How Mihrdb was made aware of his Daughter's 

Case ....... 284 

17. Flow Mindchihr heard of the Case of 7 Al and 

Rfidiba . 288 

1 8. How Sim Clime to Mimichihr . . ’ . . 289 

19. How Sim went to fight Mihrib .... 292 

20. How Zil went on a Mission to Minichihr . . 295 

21. How Mihrib was wroth with Sfndukht . . 299 

22. How Sim comforted Sfndukht , , , , 301 

23. How Zil came to Minichihr with Sim's Letter . 306 

24. Flow the Archmages q^uestioned Zil . . . 308 

25. How Zil answered fho Archmages . . . 309 

2d. How Zil displayed hia ^ Accomplishment before 

Minichihr . . , *311 

27. Min dchihr's Answer to S'im*s Letter r . . ,314 

28. Flow Zil came to $im , . ' , . . * 3^6 

29- The Story of the Hirfdh of Eust^ . . . 320 

30. How Sim.eama'l» see';,Etistant’ . . 324 

31. ; Hp# , • * 3«7 


1^2 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 
MiniJchihr [continued) Vol. I. 

32. How Rustam went to Mount Sipand . . , 330 

33. How Rustam wrote a Letter announcing his 


Victory to Zdl ...... 332 

34. The Letter of Z41 to Sam . . . . *334 

35. Miniichihr’s last Counsels to liis Son . . -335 

Naodar — 

1 . How Naudar succeeded to the Throne . . . 339 

2. How Pashang heard of the Death of Mindchihr . 342 

3. How Afrdsiydb came to the Land of frdii . -345 

4. How B4rm4n and KuMd fought together and how 

Kub4d was slain . . . . .346 

5. How Afrisiydb fought with Naudar the second 

Time ....... 350 

6. How Naudar fought with Afrdsiydb the third Time 352 

7. How Naudar was taken by Afrdsiyab . . * 355 

8. How Wfsa found his Son that had been slain . 356 

9. How Shamdsds and Khazarwdn invaded Zdbu- 

listdn ....... 358 

10. How Zdl came to help Mihrdb . . . -359 

11. How Naudar was slain by Afrdsiydb . . . 362 

12. How Zdl had Tidings of the Death of Naudar * 364 

13. How Ighrfras was slain by his Brother, . . 367 

Zav — 

I. Zav is elected Shdh ...... 370 


GarshXsp — 

1. How Garshdsp succeeded to the Throne and died, 

and how Afrdsiydb invaded frdn , . -374 

2. How Rustam caught Rakhsh , . . *378 

3. How Zdl led the Host against Afrdsiydb . . 381 

4. How Rustam brought ICai Kubdd from Mount 

Alburz 382 

Index . . , . . . . . . . . 389 

VOLUME II 

^ ^ PAGIE 

Genealogical Tables 3 

Abbreviations, ........ 5 

Note on Pronunciation 6 


THE KAIANIAN dynasty 

Kai KubAd— 

SECT. . FAO® 

1 , How Kai Kubdd ascended the tThrono and warred 

against Tdrdn . , , . . .11 

2. How Rhstam fought with Afrdsiydb * . . 13' 

How Afrdsiydb came to his Father , . . 16 

' , '4. How Pashang sued t6 Kai Kubdd for Peace , , . . 18 : 

iv How Kai Kubdd' 'Cjame to 'Istakhr, of Pdrs ^ 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 143 

Kai KAtJs— Vol. II 

Part I. The War with MAzandarAn — 

SECT. PAGE 

1. Tiie Prelude , 29 

2. How Kd4s sat upon the Throne and was tempted 

to invade Mazandar^n. . . . *30 

3. How Zdl gave Counsel to KAiis . . . * 36 

4. How Kdiis went to Mazandaran. ... 38 

5. The Message of Kai Kdus to Z4I and Rustam . 43 


The Seven Courses of Rustam — 

6. The First Course. How Rakhsh fought with a 

Lion ... ..... 

7. The Second Course. How Rustam found a Spring 

8. The Third Course. Plow Rustam fought with a 

Dragon ....... 

9. The Fourth Course. How Rustam slew a Witch . 

10. The Fifth Course. How Rustam took Xjldd cap- 

tive ........ 

11. The Sixth Course. How Rustam fought with the 

Div Arzhang ...... 

12. The Seventh Course. How Rustam slew the 

White Dfv 

13. How Kdds wrote to the King of MdzandarAn 

14. Plow Rustam went on an Embassy to the King of 

Mdzandardn ...... 

15. How Kdds fought with the King of Mdzandardn . 

16. How Kdds returned to the Land of frdn and fare- 

welled Rustam ...... 

Part II. The Doings of Kai KAds in the Land 
OF BarbaristAn and other Tales — 

1. How Kai Kdds warred with the King of Hdmd- 

vardn ....... 82 

2. How Kdds asked to Wife Sdddba, the Daughter 

of the King of Hdmdvardn . • . . 86 

3. How the King of Hdmdvardn made Kdds Prisoner 88 

4. Plow Afrdsiydb invaded the Land of frdn . . 91 

5. How Rustam sent a Message to the King of Hdm- 

dvardn ....... 93 

6. How Rustam fought with Three Kings and deliv- 

ered Kdds . * ,• • ' • * 95 

7. How Kdds sent a Message to Afrdsiyib . . 98 

8. How Kdiis ordered the World . . . .101 

9. How Kdds beguiled by IlblfS; ascended the Sky . 102 

10. Plow Rustam brought back Kdds . « * 104 

The Story of the Fight of t^bce . 

1 1. HoW Rustam' went yith the .Sey^' Wattiors to the^ 

Huntiag-gtbh'ad'Of ‘ ' • ^^7 

i2> ITow llustahiioiight . '* it* 


44 

46 

48 

50 

5 ^ 

57 

59 

<>3 

66 

70 

76 


144 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Kai KatJs — 

Part II The Story of the Fight of the Seven Warriors 

[ continued ) — . . Vol. II 

SECT. TAGE 

13. How Pilsani fouglxt with the Iranians . . . 112. 

14. How AMsiydb fled from the Battlefield . . iiS 

Part III, SuhrAb — 

1. The Prelude . . . . . . .119 

2. How Rustam went to the Chace . . . .120 

3. How Rustam came to the City of Sainangha . 122 

4. How Talirama, the Daughter of the I^ing of Samaii- 

g4n, came to Rustam . . . . • ^23 

5. The Birth of Suhrhb. . . . , .126 

6. How Suhrdb chose his Charger . . . .127 

7. Plow Afrasiydb sent Bdrm4n and Hiimhii to Suhrnb 129 

8. How Suhrdb came to White Castle » . -131 

9. How Snhrdb fought with Gurddfrfd . . *132 

10. The Letter of Gazhdaham to Khds . . * 136 

11. Plow Su hr Ab took White Castle . .. . *137 

12. How Khhs wrote to Rustam and sunimoued him 

from ZAbulistdn . . . . •. . • 138 

13. How K4hs was wroth with Rustam . . .142 

14 How Kdhs and Rustam led forth the Host * . . 148 , 

15. How Rustam slew Zhanda Razm . , .149 

16. Plow Suhrdb asked Hajfr the Names of the Chiets 

of frdn . , . , . . *152 

17. How Suhrdb attacked the Army of Kdfis . , 159 . 

ik' How Rustam fought with Suhrdb . . .162. 

19. Plow Rustam and Suhrdb returned to Camp. . 163 

20. Plow vSuhrdb overthrew Rustam, . .. . 168 

21. How Suhrdb was slain by Rustam' * . ' . . 172 

22. Plow Rustam asked Kd ds for an Elixir. . . . ^77 

23. How Rustam lamented for Suhrdb * . . • *79 

24. How Ptustam returned lo Zdbulistdn , . .182 

25. Plow Suhrdb’s Mother received the Tidings of his 

Death . . 184 

Part IV, The Story of SiyAwhsk — 

1. The Prelude . . . . ' . . , igt' 

2. The Story of the Mother of Siydwush . . < , ^93 

3. The Birth of Siydwush * . • / . • ^95 . 

4. How Siydwush arrived from Zdbulistdn ^ . , * 197 

5. The Death bf the Mother of Siydwush. 199 

6. How Sdddba fell in Ibovowith Siydwush' . •. 2cio 

7. plow visited Sdd’dba -• , . * , . 

8. Plow Siydwush visited the 'Bower the second Time ' 206' 

9. Ho*# ‘Siydwush ^visited 'the Bower the third Time* ' 2 ip 

10. How‘ Sdddhfifc bppiled )Kdds' ^ / , .» ,2p 

11/ PIPW' S'iddba' and d ^proeresi? devised a Scheme , » * ' 2,1 4- _ 
12. How Kids 'ittquir#’into ike Mdtter of the Babes' 1' '.'2^15,' 

‘13* How,5SiTAwu®h'paSsed>hrpugh hhO'Elire , ■ . > ' - . " 


GENERAL TABLE OP CONTENTS 


145 


KaI KaI^S . ^ 

Part IV. The Story of Siyawush (coiiUnuea ) — ^ ol. 

How Siyawush begged Sudaba's LTe of his Father 

15. How Kaiis heard of the Coming of Afrdsiydb 

16. How Siydwush led forth the Host ^ 

17. The Letter cf Siydwush to Kai Kaus . 

18. The Answer of Kai Kaus to the Letter of Siyawusi 
19! How Afrasiydb had a Dream and was afraid . 

20. How Afr^siyib inquired of the Sages coricernlng 

his Dream 

21. How Afrdsiydb took Counsel with the Kobles * 

22. How Garsfwaz came to Siyawush ^ 

23. How Siydwush made a Treaty with Afrasiydb 

24. HowfeSiyAwush sent Rustam to K 4 us 

25. How Rustam gave the Message to Kdiis 

26. How K^us sent Rustam to Sistin 

27. The Answer of Kdiis to the Letter of Siydwush 

28. ' How Siyawush took Counsel with Bahram and Zang 

29. How Zanga went to Afrdsiydb . 

30. How Afr^siydb wrote to Siyawush 

31. How Siydwiish gave up the Host to Bahi dm . 

32! The Interview of Siyawush with Afrdsiyab . 

33. How Siydwush displayed his Prowess bclca 

■ Afr^siyib . » . • « 

34. How Afrdsiyab and Siyawush went to the Chase 

35. How Pir 4 n gave his Daughter to Siyawush 

36. How Pirdn spake to Siyawush about Farangfs 
37’. How Pirdn spake with Afrisiydb 

38. The Wedding of Farangfs and Siydwush 

39. Plow Afrisiydb bestowed a Province on Siydwush 

40. 'Plow Siydwush built, Gang-dizh - 

41. Plow Siyawush discoursed with Pirdn about th 

P'uture * » » ‘ 

42. How Afrdsiydb sent Pfrdn into the Provinces 

43. H6w Siydwush bnilt Siydwushgitd 

44. How Pirdn visited Siydwushgird . . ^ 

45. How, Afrdsiyib sent Garsfwaz to Siydwush . 

46. The Birth of Fardd, the Son of Siydwush . 

47. *' How Siydwush played at . 

48. Plow Gatsfiyaz. returned, and spake Evil befo 

49. How 0ar$fwdZ'r#dtned to Siyawush, . 

50; The LetterdfBiyd?^sti'to' 4 feMiy 4 ^ » • , 

51. Hoiy Afrisiyib daW; with ‘Siyiwttsh ^ , 

52. How, Siyiwush'had’a'Dreaip • , • , 

53. The.partfeg Words.ofiSiy^'wusi^tp/F^^ _ 

• <4, HoWSiy^wtish was talfon Aftd^iydh * • 

■ 55. , How,Fdrangfs -be5y^il^d;;het^elf, t>e'fbrh Aftis^ydb 

56. ' liow Sij^dyhish by Garwf^ ' ; • , 

57. How Pltih Wyed - . ■*, ; 

''''Vpt' tx,"'. ' ' ; 


II 

■AGE 

222 

224 

226 

229 

230 
232 

234 

235 

238 

239 

242 

243 

246 

247 
249 

252 

255 

257 

261 

263 

267 

268 
270 
272 
274 
276 
279 

282 

285 

285 

2S7 

289 

291 

292 

296 

301 

S'od 

507 

308 
310 
3:12 
, 3 W 
,320 

ic 


146 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Kai Kami's — 


Part IV. The Story of Siyawush ( continued )-— Vc 

SECT. 

58. The Biith of Kai Kliusrau . . . . 

59. How Pfrdn entrusted Kai Khusrau to the Shep- 

herds • 

60. How Pirin brought Kai Khusrau before Afrdsiydb 

61. How Kai Khusrau went to Siydwushgird 
Part V. How Rustam avenged Siyawush and how 

Gfv BROUGHT Kai Khusrau to Iran — 


VOL. II 

PAGE 

• 325 


1 . Firdausi's Lament over his old Age 

2. How Kdtis heard of the Case of Siydwush 

3. How Rustam came to KMs .... 

4. How Rustam slew Sudiba and led forth the Host*. 

5. How Fardmarz slew War^zid . , . . 

6 . How Siirkha led his Troops to fight with Rukam 1 

7. How Afr 4 siy 4 b led forth the Host to avenge his 

Son 

8. How Pflsam was slain by Rustam 
g. Plow Afr 4 siy 4 b fed from Rustam 

10. How Afr 4 siydb sent Khusrau to Khutan 

11. How Rustam reigned over Turin for Seven Years. 

12. How Zawira went to the Hunting-ground of 

Siyiwush ....... 

13. How Rustam harried the Land of Tfirdn 

14. How Rustam returned to Irin .... 

15. How Gfidarz had a Dream of Kai Khusrau . ] 

16. How Giv went to Tfirin in Quest of Kai Khusrau. 

17. The Finding of Kai Khusrau .... 

x8. How Giv and Kai Khusrau went to Siyiwushgird , 
rg. How Kai Khusrau won Bihzid • . . . 

20. How Farangis went with Kai Khusrau and Giv to 

Irin ........ 

21. How Kulbid and Nastihan fled from Giv * 

22. How Pirin pursued Kai Khusrau 

23. How Pirin contended with Giv . 

24. How Pirin was taken by Giv . . , ] 

25. How Farangis delivered Pirdn from Giv 

26. Plow Afrisiyib found Pirin on the Way . 

27 - How Giv disputed with the Toll-man . 

28. How Kai Khusrau crossed the Jihfin , 

29, How Kai Khusrau came to Ispahan . 

50. How Kai Khusrau came to KMs 

31. How Tiis refused Allegiance to Kai Khusrah. 

32. How Gfidarz was wroth with Tfis , - , 

33. How Gudarz* and' Tiis went before Kdfis 'on the 

Matter of tiae Kingship ^ \ .1 

34. How Tds ' and ^F^imarz went to th.Oi Castle of 

,, /Bahman.andnahieAbacIrdoilbd . 

35. Bdw Kai- Khustaui,wehFtO'thfe‘ Castle of Bahman/' 


336 

337 

338 

340 

341 

344 

348 

350 

353 

355 

357 

359 

360 

361 
363 
365 
3fl9 

373 

374 

377 

378 
380 
382 

385 

386 
388 
390 

392 

394' 

397 

399 

402 

403’ ^ 

405' 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


M7 

Kai KAx^rs— 

Part V. Plow Rustam Avenged Siyawush, etc, {continued ) — 

VOL. II 


SECT. PA(JE 

36. How lAai Khusrau returned in Triiimpli . , 409 

37. How Kalis set Khusrau upon the Throne of King- 

ship . . . . . . . .411 

Index 413 

VOLUME III 

PAGE 

Abbreviations. ........ 3 


Note on I^ronunciation 


THE KAIANIAN dynasty [continued) 

Kai Khusrau — 

Part I. IIow Kai Khusrau, to avenge Siyawush, 

SENT a PIost against TiinAN — 

SFOCT. 

1. The Prelude . . . . , . *15 

2. How the Nobles did Homage to Kai Khusrou . 17 

3. How Kai Khusrau made a Progress through his 

Realm ....... 19 

4. Plow Kai Khusrau sware to Kai K^iis to take 

Vengeance on Afrdsiy^b , 20 

5. How Kai Khusrau numbered the Paladins . . 24 

6. How Kai Khusrau bestowed Treasures on the 

Paladins ....... 26 

7. How Kai Khusrau sent Rustam to the land ot 

Hind ....... 30 

8 . How Kai Khusrau reviewed the Host . . *31 

The Story of FARdn the Son of SiyAwush — 

9. The Prelude ....... 37 

10. Plow Tiis wont to Turkistin , . . - 3^ 

11. How Farhd heard of the Coming of Tiis , . 41 

12. How P"'anid and Tukh^r went to view the Host . 44 

13. How Hahrdm came to l^ariid upon the Mountain . 47 

14. How Bahr^rn went back to Ths . . • 5^ 

15. How Xtfvniz was slain by I^''arhd . . -52 

16. How 2 ar 4 sp was slain by FarM . . * 53 

17. How Tiis fought with FarM .... 54 

18. How Giv fought with FarM . * . - 57 

19. How Bizhan fought with FarM . . . . 6x 

20. How Farhd wetwS slain ' . . ' , , , .62 

21. How Jarira slow herself . , ♦ , ' • - . 66 

22. How Tds led the Host'tp the Riid, and Iiow 

PalishM was slain by Bizhan , . , „ . 68 

23. How the friniatts Suffered in a Snowstorm . . ' 71 

24. How, Bahr^m’ captured KabMa , . ' . 73 

25. HIow'tho;fe4niam fought with’ Ta'zh 4 v . 75 

26. How Afrfey&b bid TSliixgs of Xds';ind Ms Host . ' 78 


148 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Kai Khusrau— 

The Story of Fari^jd the Son of Siyawosh {continued) 

VOL 

SECT. 

27. How P/ran made a Night-attack on the Iranians . 

28. How Kai Khusrau recalled Tds 

29. How Farihurz asked a Truce of Pirdn . 

30. How the frinians were defeated by the Tui kmans . 

31. How Bahrim returned to look for his Whip upon 

the Battlefield . . . . . 

32. How Bahrain was slain by Tazhdv 

33. How GiV slew Tazh 4 v in revenge for Bahrain 

34. How the Irdnians went back to Khusrau 


in 

FAG K 

80 

84 

87 

89 


95 

98 

lOI 

104 


Part II. The story of Kam^s of Kashan^ — 


1. The Prelude 

2. How Khusrau reviled Tfis . . , . 

3. How Khusrau pardoned the Iranians . 

4. How Khusrau sent Tus to Turdn 

5. The Message of PIr 4 n to the Army of frdn . 

6. How Afrisiydb sent an Army to Pfrdn . 

7. How Tfis slew Arzhang - . . . . 

8. How Hdmdn fought with Tfis .... 

9. How the Iranians and Tdrdnians fought the second 

Time 

10. How the Tdrdnians used Sorcery against the Host 

of Irdn 

11. How the Iranians retreated to Mount Hamdwan . 

12. How the Host of Tdrin beleaguered Mount 

Hamdwan 

13. How Pfrdn went in Pursuit of the Irdnians to 

Mount Hamdwan ..... 

14. How the Irdnians made a Night-attack 

T5. Flow Kai Khusrau had Tidings of his Host . 

16. How Farxburz asked to Wife Farangfs, the Mother 

of Kai Khusrau ..... 

17. How Tiis saw Siyiwush in a Dream 

18. How Afr^siydb sent the Khdn and KimAs to help 

‘Ptin 

19. How the Khin of Chfn came to Ham^wan . 

20. How the Irdnians took Counsel how to act . 

21.. How Gfidar^ had Tiding^, of the Coming of Rustam 

22. Flow the Khin of, Chfn 'went to reconnoitre the 

, , Armyoflr^n- 

23, Flow Farfburz reached Mount Hamiwan 

24.. Bow Pfrin took Counsel with the Khin of Chin . 

25. Hoy^ Gtv and fought with Kdmhs . , . ' . 

26. 'The Comiug' of 'Rustam . 

27. Flow’- Fhe , Iranians , and Tdripians arrayed' their 

4 '' '''Ho$ts,v 'i. . ■' *; ■ . 'i' c . ' ' .7 ''' . . 

'Eust^iU' fought wdt^ v. , , 


I TO 
I I I 

II3 

II7 

IlS 

119 

120 

123 

I2S 

131 

132 

137 

139 

142 

146 

H 9 

151 

153 

I 5'5 

15^ 

160 

1 63 

164 
168 
170 

* 74 ' 

t:f 9 


GENERAL TABLE OP CONTENTS 


149 


IVAI KtIUSRAU — ' 

Part H The vStory of Kamilas of Kastian { muinnnuf ) — A"ol HI 


KiRH'. r\<;E 

2<j. How Piran held C(>n\eisc ccmoLiniog the Coming 

of Rustam . . . . . . 1S2 

30. How the Iranians and Turanians set the liattle in 

Array . . . . . • • 

31. How Aiwa was slain by Kam us . . . .187 

32. How Kdmiis was slain by Rustam . . .188 

Part III. The Story of Rustam and the Kuan of 
Chin — 

I. ITow the Khan of Chin had Tidings of the Slaying 

of Kimus ....... 192 

2. How Chingish fared with Rustam . . . 194 

3. Plow the Kh 4 n of Chin sent Hhinin to Rustam . 196 

4. How Phan took Counsel with Hdmdii and the 

Kh 4 n ....... 199 

5. Plow Pirdn came to Rustam . . . .201 

6. Plow the Turanians took Counsel for Battle with 

the frdnians ...... 206 

7. How Rustam harangued his Troops , . .211 

8. How the frinians and Tdrinians set the Battle in 

Array . . . . . . .215 

9. How Rustam reproached Pfr^n . , . ,217 

10. How the Battle was joined .... 219 

II. Plow Shangul fought with Ru.stam and fled . .221 

12. How Rustam fought with Sdwa . . . . 223 

13. How Rustam slew Gahdr of Galiin . . • , 224 

14. Plow the Khdn was taken Prisoner . . *227 

15. How the Plost of the Tflrdnians was defeated . 230 

16. Plow Rustam divided the Spoil . . . - 232 

17. How Rustam wrote a Better to Kai Khusrau . 237 

ik How Kai Khusrau made Answer to Rustam's 

Letter ....... 239 

19. How Afrisiydb had Tidings of the Case of his 

Army . . . . . - .241 

20. How Rustam fought with K^Mr the Man-eater . 245 

21. How Afr^siy^b had Tidings of the Coming of 

Rustam ....... 249 

22. Afrdsiyib's Letter to PiiUd wand . . . 254 

23. How P^iilMwand fought with Gfv and Tds . . 257 

24. How Rustam fought with PtilM wand . . . 259 

23. The Wrestling of Rustant and FiSlMwand - ♦ 262 

2b. How Afrisiyw fled from , Rustam , * ^ ' . 265 

27, How RustamTeturned 'to 'the Court of the Shih . 267 

2k flow Rustam went'bfiick to Sfstin t . * ^69 

Part IV. ,Thb Story ' or > PmBT'poip -R ustaM'; , ' 

, WITH THE ,p'fv 'k ' k' ', 

I* ^ prelude ',4, k'^fk''''..^ * ' 272 


150 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


K\t Khusrau VOL. Ill 

Px\RT IV. The Story of the Fight of J^-Ustam, cU. (continued)-- 

SECT. i'AUE 

2. tlow Ivfuisrau suiiiincmcd Rustam to figlit Pic 

J”)iv Akwan . . . . . • -73 

3- I fow Rustam wont in Quest of the Di'v. . . 275 

4. How the Div Akwan flung Ru.stam into the Sea . 276 

5. How Afrdsiydb came tc inspect his Steeds, and 

how Rustam slew the Dfv Akwdn. . .279 

6. How Rustam went back to tlie Land of frdn . . 28 1 

Part V, The Story of Bizhan anb ManIziia — 

1. The Prelude ....... 287 

2. How the Trmdnians appealed to Khusrau . . 289 

3. How Bfzhan went to fight the wild Boars . . 292 

4. How Gurgfn beguiled ] 3 i'zhan .... 294 

5. How Biziian w'cnt to see Manfzha, Daughter of 

Afrasiydb ....... 296 

6. How Bfzhan went to the Tent of Manfzha . . 298 

7. How Manfzha carried off Bfzhan to her Palace . 299 

8. How Garsfwaz brought Bfzhan before Afr^siydb . 301 

9. How Pfrdii begged Bfzhan 's Life from Afr^siydb . 305 

10. How Afrdsiydb put Bfzhan in Ward . . . 309 

1 1 . How Gurgfn returned to frdn and lied about Bfzhan 3 1 o 

12. How Gfv brought Gurgfn before Khusrau . '3^5 

13. Plow Kai Khusrau saw Bfzhan in the Cup that 

showed the World . . . . .318 

14. How Khusrau* wrote a Letter to Rustam , *319 

15. How Gfv bore the Letter of Kai Khusrau to 

Rustam ....... 321 

16. How Rustam made a Feast for Gfv . . . 324 

17- How Rustam came to Khusrau .... 326 

ik How Kai Khusrau hold Feast with the Paladins . 329 

19. How Rustam made Petition for Gurgfn to the Shdh 331 

20. How Rustam equipped his Escort . . . 333 

21. How Rustam went to the City of Khutan to Pfrdn 334 

22. Plow Manfzha came before Rustam . . *337 

23. How Bfzhan heard of the Coming of Rustam . 340 

24. How Rustam took Bfzhan out of the Pht . , 3.^(4 

25. How Rustam attacked the Palace of Afrdsiydb by 

Night ....... 347, 

26. Plow Afrdsiyib went to fight with Rustam . . 349 

27. How Afrdsfydb was defeated by the frdnians . 351 

28. How Rustam returned to Kai Khusrau . . 353 

29. Plow Kai Khusrau made a Feast . . . 355 

Index . , . ' . . . . . . 359 

VOLUME IV 

, , ^ ; ' - ' ^ ^ ‘ ' , , , , ^ ' RAGE 

Afia&VliTtONSp - . ♦ • • 3', 

HOTEpt^'-F^ONWClAtlON' ^ , . ,4' 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 151 

THE KAiANIAN dynasty (continued) 

VOL. IV 

Kai KiiusRAU {continued ) — 


Part VI. The Battle of the Twelve Rukhs-- 

SECT. _ ^ ^ 

1. The Prelude . . . • ♦ * • 

2. How Afrasiyab called together his Host . ^ . 

3. How Kai Khusrau sent Gudarz to fight the Tur- 

anians 

4. How Giv was made the Bearer of Over tines from 

Gudarz to Pirdn ...••• 

5. How Giv visited Pfrdn at Wisagird 

6. The Arraying of the Hosts. . . . ♦ 

7. liow Bizhan went to Giv to urge him to fight 

8. How Humin asked Piraii for Leave to fight . 

9. How Hfim^n challenged Ruhhdni 

10. How Hiimdn challenged Fariburz 

11. How Hum4n challenged Gddarz. 

12. Plow Bizhan heard of the Doings of Idfim^n . 

13. Plow Giv gave the Mail of Siyiwush to Bizhan 

14. How Hfimdn came to battle with Bizhan . 

15. How Hhm^n was slain by Bizhan 

iG. Plow Nastihan made a Night-attack and was slain 

17. Plow Gfidarz asked aid of Khusrau 

18. The Answer of Khusrau to the letter of Giidarz 

19. How Khusrau arrayed the Host. 

20. Plow Pirhn wrote to Giidarz Son of Kisliw^d . 

2 1 . The Answer of Gddarz to the Letter of Pirdn . 

22. How Pirdn asked Succour from Afrisiy^b * 

23. The Answer of Afrisiyib to the I^ettcr of Idi^n 

24. Plow the fr^nians and Tiirdnians fought a pitched 

I3attle 


9 

10 


I 2 


16 
19 
2 2 
26 

29 

31 

34 

35 

30 

44 

47 

49 

53 

56 

58 


6 1 
b3 
68 
75 


78 


81 


25. Plow Giv fought with Pir^n and how Giv*s Horse 

jibbed ..... * * 

26. How Giidarz and Pirin arranged a Battle of 

Eleven Rukks 

27. How Pirin harangued his Men of Name 

28. How Giidarz and Pir4n chose the Warriors for the 

Battle of the Eleven Rukhs 

29. How P'arfburz fought with Kulbdd 

30. How Giv fought with Gurwf .... 

31. How Gurto fought with Siyimak 

32. How Furiihil fought with Zangula 

33. How RuhhAnt fbught with Bhrmin . 

34. How Bizhan fdught with Eiiin . . * 

35. HowHajirfpught-^ithSipuhram 

36. How fought with' Mdarimin , . , . 

37. How Barta fought with Kuhxam 

38 ., How Zangay Son pi Sh4wat4n. fought with Akhist 
39, How^GhtlarziOiight.ynth ^ , 


84 

88 

93 

95 

99 

99 

100 

101 

102 
102 

103 

104 

IO< 

105 

106 


152 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Kai Kiiuskau — Voi 

Part VI. The Battle of the Twelve Rukfis { contumcd )--- 

SECT- 

40. How Gildarz returned to the Waniras of Tran 

41. How Lalihak and Farshidward bewailed Piran 

42. How Lahliak and Farshidward took the Road to 

Tur^ii ....... 

43. How Gnstaham pursued I^ahhak and Farshidward 

44. How Bizhan followed after Gxistaham . 

45. How Lahhdk and Farshidward were slain by Giista- 

liam ........ 

46. How Rizhan beheld Gustaham in the Mead . 

47. How Kai Khusrau built a Charnel-house for Piran 

and for the other Chiefs of Thrdn, and* how he 
slew Gurwi the Son of Zira .... 

48. How the Thranxans asked Quarter of Kai Khusrau 

49. How Bizhan returned with Gustaham . 

Part VII. The Great War of Kai Khusrau with 
AfrAsiyai^ — 

1. In Praise of Sultdn Mahmiid . , . * . 

2. How Kai Khusrau arrayed his Host against 

AfrAsiyAb ....... 

3. How AfrdsiyAb heard that PirAn was slain and 

that Kai Khusrau had arrayed his Host. 

4. How Kai Khusrau had Tidings that AfrAsiyAb 

advanced to fight with him. 

5. How Shida came before his Father AfrAsiydb 

6. How AfrAsiyAb sent an Embassage to Kai Khusrau 

7. How Kai Khusrau sent an Answer to AfrdsiyAb . 

8. How Kai Khusrau fought with Shfda the Son of 

AfrAsiydb ....... 

9. How Shida was slain by Khusrau 

JO. How the Battle was joined between the Hosts 

11. How AfrAsiyAb fled ...... 

12. How Kai Khusrau announced his Victory to KAiis 

13. How AfrAsiyib went to Gang-bihisht . 

14. How Khusrau crossed the Jihxln 

15. How Kai Khusrau fought with AfrAsiyAb the 

second Time ...... 

16. How Afrisiyib took Refuge in Gang-bihisht 

17. The Letter of Afrdsiydb to the Faghf Ar of. Chfn 

18. How Kai Khusrau arrived before Gang-bihisht . 

19. How J.ahQ came to Kai Khusrau with an Embas- 

sage from AfrAsiyAb' . ■ , . 

20. Kow Kai Khusrau made Answer to Jahn . 

21. How Kai Khusrau fought ■with AfrAsiyAb and took 

Gang-bihisht ' , ■ . . ' ' , 

22* Ifow AMsiyib from, Gang-bihisht ' 

23. How Kai Khusrau gave Quarter to the Family of 
, Aft 4 siy 4 bi > , , j _ , 


. IV 

PAGE 

log 

II2 

II 5 

IT7 

119 

I2I 

123 


126 

129 

132 


139 

145 

150 

157 

158 

I6I 

168 

171 

175 

177 

1^3 

185’ 

186 

187 

190 

193 

196 

198 

200 

204 

207' 

211 

212 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


153 


Kai Ktiusrau — 

Part VI f. Thr (Irkat War, etc. ( coiiFHKt ’ cf )— Vol IV 

BKt’T. ^ ^ IWOR 

24. How Kai Kimsrau exhoiicd the Iranians . ,216 

25. How Kai Khusrau wrote a Letter with the News 

of his Victory to Kai Kads . . . .217 

26. How Kai Khusrau had Tidings of the Coming of 

Afrlsiyab with the Idost ot the Faghfiir. . 219 

27. The Message of Afrasiyab to Kai Khusrau . . 221 

28. How the Iranians and Tuianians fought . . 223 


29. How Afrasiyab made a Kight-attack upon Kai 

Khusrau and was defeated .... 

30. How the Faghfiir of Chin sent an Envoy to Kai 


Khusrau ....... 229 

31. How Afrasiyab crossed the Sea .... 230 

32. How Kai Khusrau sent the Prisoneis and Pleasure 

to Kaiis with a Letter . , . . .232 

33. The Answer of SlHh K^iis to the Letter of Khiisiau 237 

34. The Embassage of Kai Khusrau to the Faghfiir of 

Chin and the King of Makrdn . . . 238 

35. How Kai Khusrau fought with the King of Makrdii 

and how the King of Makrdn was slain . .241 

36. How Kai Khusrau crossed the Sea . . *245 

37. How Kai Khusrau reached Gang-dizh. . *247 

38. How Kai Khusrau returned from Gang-dijh to 

Siydwushgird ...... 250 

39. How Kai Khusrau returned from Tiirdn to the 

Land of Ir 4 n ...... 254 

40. How Kai Khusrau returned to his Cirandsire . 256 

41. How Afrisiydb was captured by Hiim of the Pace 

of Farid tin ....... 259 

42. I [ow Afrdsiydb escaped from Htim . . .261 

43. How Miis and Khusrau came to Hum . . 264 

44. How Afrisiydb was taken the second Time and 

how he and Garsiwaz were slain . . . 266 

45. How Kiiis and Khusrau returned to P 4 rs , . 269 

46. The Death of Kai KU $ 270 

47. How Kai Khusrau fell into Melancholy ■ . . 272 

48. How the Nobles inquired why Khusrau had closed 

his Court ....... 275 

49. How the frinians summoned 2^1 and Rustam . 277 

50. How Kai Khusrau saw Suriish in a Dream . . 280 

5 X. How Z 41 admonished Kai Khusrau . . 282 

52. How Kai Khusrau answered Z 4 L . ' . , . 284 

53. How,Zdl rebuked Kai Khusrau., . ' . . 286 

54. How'K^i Khusrau answedand'how Z'^1 excused 

hinrself ' . .. . 288 

53. How I^ai Khusrah gaVe his' last' Charge to the 

Irdhians 9 " , | . 291 

56, How- Kai KhhSrau,,;'a39pomted-. Cddarz 'to , be his 

Ha|xdatar^'; '' ''Av . 294 


154 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Kai Khusrau — 

Part VII. The Great War, eic. [contimied ] — Voi 

SECT. 

57. How Zkl asked of Kai Khusrau a Patent for Rustam 

58. How Kai Kausrau gave a Patent to Giv 

59. How Kai Khusrau gave a Patent to Tus 

60. How Kai Khusrau gave the Kingship to Luhrasp . 

61. How Kai Khusrau farewelled his Women 

62. How Kai Khusrau went to the Mountains and 

vanished in the Snow ..... 

63. How the Paladins were lost in the Snow 

64. How Luhrasp had Tidings of the Disappearance 

of Kai Khusrau ...... 

LuhrAsp — 

1. How Luhrisp built a Fire-temple at Balkli . 

2. How Gushtasp quitted Luhrisp in Wrath . 

3. How Gushtasp returned with Zarir 

4. How Gushthsp set off for Rum .... 

5. How Gushtdsp arrived in Rhm .... 

6. How a Village-chief entertained Gushthsp . 

7. The Story of Kat^yhn the Daughter of Caesar 

8. How Caesar gave Kat^yun to Gushtdsp 

9. How Mirin asked in Marriage Caesar’s second 

Daughter ....... 

10. How Gushthsp slew the Wolf .... 

11. How Ahran asked Cae.sar’s third Daughter in 

Marriage ....... 

12. How Gushtdsp slew the Dragon and how Cccsar 

gave his Daughter to Ahran .... 

13. How Gushthsp displayed his Prowess upon the 

Riding-ground ...... 

14. How C<esar wrote to Ily^s and demanded Tribute. 

15. How Gushtisp fought with Ilyds and slew him 

x6. How Caesar demanded from Luhrhsp Tribute for 
fr^n ........ 

17. How Zarir carried a Message from Luhrhsp to 

Cassar ....... 

18. How Gushtdsp returned with Zarfr to the Land of 

ilka and received the Throne from Luhrdsp . 

Index 


VOLUME V 


Abbreviations 

Note on Pronunciation 

THE KAIANIAN dynasty {conhnwed) 

GUSHXisP — 

Part I. The Coming of Zarduhsht and the War 

WITH , 

ShCT. ^ , ' ' . ' 

I. How Firdausi. D^kikf in a Dream. 

. a.^JIoWXuhi^sp went to BalkL and Gushtdsp sat 
, ' ' ' 'upop * 


. IV 

‘AGE 

296 

298 

299 

300 

304 

305 

308 

3^1 

316 

318 

320 

323 

324 

327 

329 

331 

333 

337 

342 

346 

349 

352 

355 

356 
359 

361 

367 


PAGE 

3 

5 


30 

it 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


155 


Gusiitasp — 

Part I. The Coming of Zardithsiit, ric. {continued) — Vol. V 

SECT. PAGE 

3. How Zardiihshfc appeared and liow Gusiitasp 

accepted his J^vangel . * • - . 33 

4. How Gusiitasp refused to Arjasp the Tribute for 

fran ........ 35 

5. How Arjasp wrote a Letter to Gushtisp . , 37 

6. How Arjasp sent Envoys to Gushtasp. . . 40 

7. How Zarfr made Answer to Arjasp . . .42 

8. How the Envoys returned to Arjasp with the 

Letter of Gushtdsp . . . . *43 

9. How Gushtdsp assembled his Troops ... 47 

10. How Jdmasp foretold the Issue of the Battle to 

Gushtasp . . . . . . .48 

11. How Gushtasp and Arjasp arrayed their Hosts . 54 

12. The Beginning of the Battle between the franians 

and Turanians, and how Ardslur, Shfrii, and 


Shidasp were .slcin ..... 

13. How Giramf, JamAsp’s Son, and Nfvzar were slain 

14. How Zarfr, the Brother of Gushtasp, was slain by 

Bfdirafsh 

15. How Asfandiyar heard of the Slaying of Zarfr 

16. How Asfandiydr went to Battle with Arjhsp 

17. How Nastur and Asfandiyir slew Bfdirafsh. 

18. How Arjdsp fled frem the Battle 

19. How the Turkmans received Quarter from Asfan- 

diy^r ....... 

20. How GushtAsp returned to Balkh 

21. How Gushtdsp vSent Asfandiyar to all the Provinces, 

and how the Folk received, from him the good 
Religion ....... 

22. How Gurazm spake Evil of Asfandiydr 

23. How J 4 m 4 sp came to Asfandiyir 

24. How Gushtdsp imprisoned Asfandiydr, 

25. How Gushtasp went to Sfstin and how Arjdsp 

arrayed his Host the second Time . 

26. The Words of Bakfkf being ended, Firdausi 

resumeth, , praising Sh^h Mahmiid and criti- 
cising Dakfkf . . , . 

27. How the Host of Arjisp inarched to Balkh and 

how Luhrisp was slain . . 

28. How Gushtasp heard of the Slaying of Luhr 4 sp and 

led his Army toward Balkh ^ . 

29. How Gushtasp was put ,to Flight by Arjisp 

30. How jamisp visited Asfandiyar. 

3 X . How' Asfandiyar saw 'ki&^ Brothe r FarsMd war d 

32. How Asfandiyar' came to the Mountain to Gush- 

■ tasp, . 

33. Ho^v^ Qns'htasp .sent the second Time 


5 ^ 

Oi 

<>5 

66 

69 

71 

72 
74 


76 

78 

80 

82 

85 

87 

89 


93 

96 

98 

103 

1 06 


1:14 


156 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Gushtasp — 

Pakt 1L The Story of the Seven Stages 

SECT. 

I. The Praise ol hlahinnd the great King 


The Seven Stages of Asfandiyar — 

2. The lorst Stage : How Asfandiyar slew two 
Waives , . . . ' . 

3 The Second Stage: How Asfandiyar slew two 
Lions 

4. The Third Stage: How Asfandiydr slew a 

j^ragon 

5. The Fourth Stage: How Asfandivhr slew a 

Witch 

6. The Fifth Stage: dfow Asfaiidiyhi slew the 

Simurgh ....... 

7. The Sixth Stage: How Asfandiyhr passed 

through the Snow 

8. The Seventh Stage: How Asfandiyar crossed the 

River and slew Gurgshr .... 

9. How Asfandiydr wont to the Brazen Hold in the 

Guise of a Merchant 

10. How the Sisters of Asfandiydr recognised Inni 

11. How Ihshdtan assaulted the Brazen Hold . 

12. How Asfandiydr slew Arjdsp .... 

13. How Asfandiydr slew Kuhram . . , 

14. How Asfandiydr wrote a Letter to Guditdsp and 

his Answer ...... 

15. How Asfandiydr returned to Gushtdsp 


119 


124 


125 

128 


131 


134 


L39 


143 

147 

150 

15-2 

155 


L59 

161 


Part HI. The Story of AsfandiyAr’s Fight with 
Rustam — 

1. How Asfandiydr ambitioned the Throne and how 

Gushtdsp took Coun.sel with the Astrologers. 

2. Plow Asfandiydr demanded the Kingdom from his 

Father 

3. How Gushtdsp answered his Son . . ] 

4. How Katdydn counselled Asfandiydr . 

5. How Asfandiydr led a Host to Zdbul . 

6. How Asfandiydr sent &hman to Rustam . 

7. How Bahman came to 2 dl 

8. Plow Bahman gave a Message to Rustam . 

9. How Rustam made Answer to Asfandiydr . 

10, How Rahman' returned ..... 
r t . The Meeting of Rustam and Asfandiydr 
12. How Asfandiydr , summoned not Rustam to the 
. Feast . 

13 ’ IPow, Asfandiydr, excused himself for not'summon- 
iri^ 'Rustam tO' the 

14*, How' Asfandiydr, ' spake' Shame of the' ,Race pf 
, , ‘ ',1 ' Rustam i ' ' .A," ' - ' 


167 

170 

172 

175 

177 
T79 
182 
' 184 
187 
190 
192 

196 

198 

200 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


137 


Gushtasp — Vot V 

Part III TiIE Story of Asfandiyar’s Fight, etc, {continued ) — 

SHOT. PAGE 

15. How Rustam answered Asfandtyar, praising his 

own Race and Deeds , . . . , 202 

16. How As fandiyar "boasted of his Ancestry . . 204 

17. How Rustam vaunted his Valour . . . 207 

T 8. Plow Rustam drank wine with Asfandiyar . .210 

19. Plow Rustam returned to his Palace . ' . .215 

20. How Zal counselled Rustam. . . . .218 

21. How Rustam fought with As fandiydr . . . 222 

22. How the Sons of Awsfandiyar were slain by Zawaia 

and Fardmarz . . . . , -225 

23. How Rustam fled to the Pleights . . .229 

24. Plow Rustam took Counsel with his Kin . . 234 

25. How the Si'murgh succoured Rustam . . . 235 

26. How Rustam went back to light Asfandiyir. . 240 

27. How Rustam shot Asfandiydr in the Eyes with an 

Arrow ....... 243 

28. Plow Asfandiydr told his last Wishes to Rustam. 247 

29. How Bishtitan bare the Coffin of Asfandiydr to 

Gushtasp . . . . . . *251 

30. How Rustam sent Bahman back to frdn . .256 

Part IV. The Story of Rustam and ShaghXd 

1. The Prelude . . . , , . .261 

2. How Rustam went to Kdbul on behalf of his 

Brother Shaghdd , . . . .263 

3. How the King of Kdbul dug Pits in the Plun ting- 

ground and how Rustam and ZawAra fell s 
therein . ..... 268 

4. Plow Rustam slow ShaghAd and died . , .271 

5. How Z41 received Hews of the Slaying of Rustam 

. and Zaw4ra, and how P'^arimarz brought their 

Coffins and set them in the Charnel-house . 273 

6. How FarAmarz led an Army to avenge Rustam and 

slew the King of Kibul . . . .276 

7. How RficUba lost her Wits through Mourning for 

Rustam - . . . . .. , , . 27S 

8. How Gushtisp gave the Kingdom to Bahman and 

died f . 279 

Bahman, Son, oe AsEANoiYi^R— 

T. Plow pahman , sought , Re vehge for the Death of 

4‘^fandiyir ' ' ' . / ♦ ' . . ' . 283 

'2, How Bahman' put, in iBontds ' . . ' . 285 

3. How FarAmiarz fpnght 'with Bahman and was put 
, ^to'De^th' r' '* ,v . . 287 

4,.; How Barman role^pd^Zli.ahd :t<s^turned tp, fr^n , 2S8 

, 5. ,Ho^'' Bahman' his,, own" Daughter, ,HumAi 

a'nd appointed y. , . 290 


158 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


HUMi.1 — VoL. V 

SECT. PACJE 

1. How Humdi cast away her Son Dardb on the River 

Farat in an Ark . . . . . .294 

2. Flow the Laundercr brought up Darab. . . 296 

3. Flow JDirdb questioned the Laiinderer's Wife about 

his Parentage, and how he fought against the 
Rhmans ...... 300 

4. How Rashnaw^d learned the Case of Ddrab. . 302 

5. How D 4 r 4 b fought against the Host of Rum . . 305 

6. How Humii rcc'"gnised her Son. . . . 307 

7. How Humdi seated Hdrab upon the Throne. . 309 

Index .......... 


VOLUME VI 


Genealogical Table of the Sasanians .... 3 

Abbreviations. ........ 3 

Note on Pronunciation ....... 8 

THE, KAIAniAN dynasty [concluded) 

DArAb — 

1. How D 4 rAb built the City of DAribgird . . 20 

2. Flow Dirib defeated the Host of Shu hb . . 21 

3 How Dirhb fought with Failakiis and took to Wife 

his Daughter . . . . . .22 

4. How DArAb sent back the Daughter of Failakiis 

to Rdm, and how Sikandar was born . . 25 


DArA, Son of DArAb-— 

I. How DAr 4 harangued the Chiefs and took Order 


for the Realm . . . . . *34 

2. The Death of Failakds and Sikandar's Accession 

to the Throne . , . . . *35 

3. How Sikandar went as his own Ambassador to 

DArA ....... 38 

4. Flow DAr A fought with Sikandar and was worsted . 42 

5. Flow DAr A fought with Sikandar the second Time. 43 

6. Flow Sikandar fought ^Vith DArA the third Time, 

and how DArA ftod to KirmAn ... 46 

7. How DArA wrote to Sikandar to propose Peace . 49 

8. How DArA was slain by his Ministers , ' . *50 

9. How DArA told his last Wishes to Sikandar and 

died . , . ' " . . . . , . ' . ' ^2 

10. Flow Sikandar Wrote to the Nobles pf frAn . ' , , 37^ 

SikANDAR— . , ^ 

L' I-ibw Sikandpr sat upon thoThro'ne of frAn . . . ' ‘85 

,2. tdqw-Sikandar wtpte' to.liilArAi and ' RAshanak, 

^ ^ 'thoWife and Daughter '.df DArA^ touching the' ' 

F ''' shl'hptiAfe'bf'Rtoanak,, $5 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


159 


SiKANDAR {continued ) — ■ Vol. VI 

SECT. PAGE 

3. How Dilarai answered the Letter of Sikandar . S7 

4. How Sikandar sent his Mother, Ndhi'd, to fetch 

Rushanak, and how he married her . . 8g 

5. How Kaid of Hind had a Dream, and how Mihr^n 

interpreted it . . . . . .91 

6. How Sikandar marched against Kaid of Hind and 

wrote a Letter to him . . , . .98 

7. How Kaid of Hind answered Sikandar's Letter 

and announced the Sending of the Four 
Wonders ....... 99 

8. How Sikandar sent back the Messenger to receive 

the Four Wonders . , . . .100 

9. How Sikandar sent Ten Sages with a Letter to 

inspect the Four Wonders of Kaid of Hind . loi 

10. How the Ten Sages brought the Daughter, the Cup, 

the Leech, and the Sage, from Kaid of Hind 
to Sikandar ...... 103 

11. How Sikandar tested the Sage, the Leech, and the 

Cup sent by Kaid of Hind . . . .104 

12. How Sikandar led a Host against Fiir of Hind 

and wrote a Letter to him . . . ,110 

13. How Fur answered the Letter of Sikandar . . iii 

14. How Sikandar arrayed his Host to fight with Fdr 

of Hind and made iron Steeds and Riders filled 
with Naphtha . . . . , .112 

15. How the Flost of Sikandar fought with the Host 

of Fdr, how Fdr was slain by Sikandar, and 
how Sikandar seated Sawurg upon the Throne 
of Fdr . . . . . . .116 

16. How Sikandar went on a Pilgrimage to the House 

of the Kaaba . , . . . .119 

17. How Sikandar led his Troops from Judda toward 

Misr ........ 121 

18. Sikandar's Letter to Kaidifa, Queen of AndaMs, 

and her Answer . . . . . ^ 123 

19. How Sikandar led his Troops to Andalds and took 

the Hold of King Farydn . . , .124 

20. IJlow Sikandar went as an Ambassador to Kaid&fa 

and was recognised by her . . , .127 

21. How Kaidifa couii^elled Sikandar ' ’ . . . , . 132 

22. How Xaindsh, the Son gt Kaid 4 fd> was wroth with 

Sikandar, _ and hew 'Sikandair tdpk Precaution 
, against \ , 134 

23. How Sikandar made a"Compadt‘'Wi-th'|CaiclMa and ■ 

’r'etnrned to hi® Troops- ',1 138 

24* How' ' Sikandar wfe'ht tg .Cp'hni^, pp the Hrah- ' 

' inqnir^' '''into'' /'their/ 

' reicOiv'ed'ah'Aia^'w./ ' ''■’’+/■ /"/*:' ,'/'''''» . ' 143 


i6o GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SiKANDAR {coniimied ) — Vol VI 

SECT. 

25. How Sikandar came to the Western Sea and saw 

Wonders 147 

26. How Sikandar reached the Land of Habash, 

fought, and was victorious . . . .149 

27. How Sikandar reached the Land of the Narmpai, 
how he fought and was victorious, how he 
slew a Dragon, ascended a Mountain, and was 
forewarned of his own Death . . *150 

28. How Sikandai reached the City of Women, named 

Harum, and saw Wonders there . . . • 153 

29. How Sikandar went into the Gloom to seek the 

Water of Life and spake with Birds and 
IsrMil . . . . . • ' • X59 

30. How Sikandar went to the East, saw Wondcis, and 

built a Barrier against Ydjhj and Mdjhj . .163 

31. How Sikandar saw a Corpse in a Palace of Jewels 

on the Top of a Mountain, and the Speaking 
Tree, and how ho was warned of his Death . 1 66 

32. How Sikandar marched his Army to Chin, carried 

his own Letter to Faghfhr, and returned to 
his Army wi ch the Answer . . . .169 

33. How Sikandar returned from Chin, made War 

against the Sindians, and went to Yaman . 174 

34. How Sikandar marched toward Bhlpil and found 

the Treasure of Kai Khusrau in a City . .176 

35. How Sikandar went to the City of Bibil, wrote a 

Letter to Arast 41 fs, and received his Answer . 1 78 

36. Sikandar's I etter to his Mother . . * , iSi 

37. How Sikandar's Life ended and how they carried 

his CofEn to Iskandarfya . . . . i S3 

38. How the Sages and other Folk lamented- Sikandar 185 
39* How the Mother , and Wife of Sikandar lamented 

him ,187 

40. Firdausi's Complaint of the Sky and Appeal to God 189 


THE ASH'KANIAN DYNASTY'* 

SECT, 

%, The Praise of MahmEd. ■ ,T, , . . . ,20/ 

.i, The Tribal, Kings • ' ^ • , t ' eto 

,3.,, Hox P^pak i&aw,$' 4 s 4 n in, a Dream aad. ,gave him ' 

a-Danght^T in lita-rriage ' . , . . ,, 2 it', 

4. Ho^ Ardslifr ;p^paMji;was born* and of his Casei , ' '' ' 
"1^, i-with; Ardkw^h' , > ' ,,''213 
'^5, jtto# Ardaw 4 ri'S ' jS'lavevgkJ ’f<^ll ,in .Love with, ' 

\ ^ ; AidsWrand tmw'he,Eod''withh^rt^ , ^ . ''-2,17 

d, ' Uow Ardayrih.liiearij, pf^ the 'Flight pf- '^rdshif, wiih,^- ' . 

V , 't^e iS^atosel'and ppa^suedLhem'|\ ‘ . , * ' ' ' 

' 7.'' pfp^‘ 'A,rdawto/_#ipte ,td J^hnian* 'ii&' Son, ’'to,, take 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS i6i 


The Ashkanian Dynasty {continued ) — 

SECT. 

8. How Tabak helped Ardshir, fought with Bahman, 

and conquered him . . . * . 

9. How Ardawan led forth his Host for Battle with 

Ardshir and was slain ..... 

10. How ArdshiT fought with the Kurds and was 

defeated ....... 

11. How Ardshir attacked the Kurds by Night and 

overthrew them . . ... 

12. The Story of Haftwid and the Case of the Worm . 

13. How Ardshir fought with Haftw 4 d and was worsted 

14. How Mihrak of Jahram sacked the Palace of 

Ardshir ....... 

15. How Ardshir heard about the Worm and made 

Shift to slay it ..... . 

16. How Ardshir slew I laftwad .... 


VoL. VI 

PAfiE 


225 

227 

230 

232 

232 

236 

237 
239 

244 


THE SAsAniAN HYNASTT 


ARDsnfR PapakAn — 

SECT. 

1. How Ardshir P 4 pak 4 n sat upon the Throne in 

Baghdad 258 

2. The Case of Ardshir and the Daughter of Ardawdii 259 

3. How Sh 4 ptjr was born to Ardshir by the Daughter 

of Ardawdn, and how after seven Years Ard- 
shir heard of his Son and acknowledged him# 261 

4. How Ardshir, to find out the Future of his Reign, 

sent to Kaid of Hind, and Kaid*s Reply . . 266 

5. The Adventure of Shiphr with the Daughter of 

Mihrak, and his taking her to Wife . . 268 

6. How Urmuzd was born to Shdpdr by the Daughter 

of Mihrak ....... 271 

7. Of the Wisdom of Ardshir and his Method of 

administering the Realm . . , .273 

8. How Kharrdd praised Ardshir . . . .284 

9. On the Faithlessness of Fortune. . , . 285 

10. How Ard5|hir charged Shdpdr and died . . , 28a 

• II. Thanksgiving to the Maker and Praise of Mahmdd, 

the great King . . . , . . .291 


SnipdR, Son of AnosHlR'-*-" 

1. How Sh^pdr safi^upon the, Throne and delivered 

a Charge to the ChiC'ltains . >' « . . 295 

2. How Shiphr fought 'm'th the fldmans* how Baz- 

^ ^hdsh, their , General, /w4® tahen Prisoner, and 

ho^yCi^ar'ni^de Peace ’^thShAp&r ' .. . 296 

3. Ship hr seated Tlw ’ 

,, - ' died ; . a, . 299 


r62 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


303 


307 


311 


313 


Urmuzd, Son of ShApi!ir — Vol. VI 

SECT. PAGE 

1. How Urmuzd addressed the Assembly . . . 302 

2. How Urmuzd gave up the Throne to Bahrdm, 

charged him, and died ..... 

BahrAm, Son of Urmuzd — 

I. How Bahrara succeeded to the Throne, charged 
the Nobles, and died ..... 

BahrAm, Son of Bahram — 

I. How Bahram, Son of Bahrim, ascended the 
Throne, charged the Nobles, and died . 

BahrAm BahrXmiyXn — 

I . How Bahrdm Bahramiydii succeded to the Throne 
and died lour Months after .... 

NARsf, Son of BahrAm — 

I. How Narsi succeeded to the Throne, counseiled his 

Son, and died , . . . . *315 

Urmuzd, Son of NarsI — 

I. How Urmuzd, Son of Narsi, ascended the Throne, 

and how his Life ended , . . .318 

SiUpdR, Son of Urmuzd, surname© ZdT AktAf — 

1 . How ShApdr, Son of Urmuzd, was born forty days 

after his Father’s Death, and how he was 
crowned ....... 

2. How T 4 ir, the Arab, carried off the Daughter of 

Narsi and married her, how ShApdr went to 
Yaman to fight him, and how his Daughter 
fell in Love with Ship fir . . , , 

3. How Tfiir was bemused by his Daughter and how 

she came to Shfipfir, who took the Hold and 
slew Tafr ....... 

4. How Shfipfir went disguised as a Merchant to Rfim, 

how ho was taken by Caesar, and how Caesar 
ravaged the Land of Irin .... 

5. How the Damsel took Measures to free Shfipfir, and 

how he fied with her from Rfim 

6. How the High Priest and the Captain of the PIo«t, 

hearing of Shfipfir’s Arrival, went to him 
with the Troops , . . ' . 

7. How Shfipfir.made a Night-attack, and how Ca-sar 

was taken . . . ' . 

' 8. How Shdpfir yrent to Rfim and foeght with Yfinns, 

' C^sar> Brothh^t, . ■ , . - , . ' , 

9. How ^ the ;Rfi'taans', placed' Bazfinfish ! upon thh 
' , Throne;" :Of;C®sar ,* his Hotter, , to ; Sh^pfir ' and 


328 


330 


333 


335 

$39 


345 

34 ^ 


35L 


'm' 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 163 

Shap^jr, Son of Urmuzd, {continued ) — VoL. VI 

SKOT. page 

10. How Bazanush went to Sliapdr and made a Treaty 

cf Peace ....... 355 

11. How Mam', the Painter, came to Shapiir with Pre- 

tence ot being a Prophet, and was slain . . 358 

12. How Shapur made his Brother Ardshir Regent till 

his own Son should grow up, and how hi? Days 
ended ....... 360 

ArdsiiIr, Brother of SiiApdR — 

I. How Ardshir sat upon the Throne and gave a 

Charge to the Officers . . . . .363 

SiiAPdR, Son of SriAPdR — 

I. How Shipdr, Son of Shapur, sat upon the Throne 

and gave a Charge to the Officers . . . 365 

BahrAm, Son of SnApdR — ■ 

I. How Bahrdm sat upon the Throne and gave a 

Charge to the Officers . . . , .368 

Yazdagird, Son of Shaper — 

1. How Yazdagira sat upon the Throne and gave a 

Charge to the Officers . . . . *374 

2. How Bahrini Giir, Son of Yazdagird, was born and 

sent to be brought up by Munzir, the Arab . 375 

3. How Bahrim went to the Chase with a Damsel and 

how he displayed his Accomplishment * - 382 

4. How Bahrdm showed his Accomplishment in the 

Chase before Munzir ..... 384 

5. How Bahrim came with Nu'mdn to Yazdagird . 386 

6. How Yazdagird put Bahrdm in Bonds, how he 

escaped by the good Offices of Taimish, and 
how he returned to Munzir .... 389 

7. Plow Yazdagird, by the Advice of an Archmage, 

went to the Sjiring of Sav and was killed by 
a Water-horse ...... 391 

8. How the frinians took Counsel and placed Khus- 

ran upon the Throne ..... 394 

9. How Bahrim Ghr hoard of the Death of his P’ather 

and invaded Trin . . . . * 395 

10. How the frdnians heard of Bahrim's Pillaging 

and wrote to Munzir, and how he replied . 397 

1 1 . How Bahrim Ghr arrived at Jahram' with the Host 

of Munzir, and how the Irinians went out to 
him . # . . ^ . . 400 

12. How Bahrim Ghr harangued the frinians as to his 

Fitness 1;0', rule,,, how they rejected ' him' but 

' proiSi^bd him'the 

the (itowndrom ''between, me ;Di©^ . 402 


i64 general table OF CONTENTS 
Yazdagird, Son of ShApxJr { continued ) — Vol. VI 

SECT. PAGE 

13. How Bahram and KhUsran wen|: to the Waste, and 
how Bahram slew the Lions and took his Seat 
upon the Throne . . . . • -ijOO 

Index .......... 413 

VOLUME VII 

PAGE 

Prefatory Note v 

Abbreviations. ........ xyi 

Note on Pronunciation • xviii 

THE SA-SANIAN dynasty (continued) 


BahrAm GdR — 

SECT, 

1. How Bahrdm ascended the Throne, charged the 

Officers, and wrote I eiters to all the Chiefs . 7 

2. How Bahram pardoned the Fault of the frdnians, 

farewelled Munzir and Nu’mdn, and remitted 
the Iranians' Arrears of Taxes ... 9 

3. How Bahrdm went to the House of Lambak, the 

Water-carrier, and became his Guest . . 12 

4. How Bahrim went to the House of Bardhdm, the 

Jew, who treated him scurvily . . .16 

5. How Bahrdm bestowed the Wealth of Bardhdra 

upon Lambak . . . . . . 19 

6. How Bahrdm slew Lions and forbade Wine- . 

drinking ....... 21 

7. The Story of the young Shoemaker and how 

Bahrdm allowed Wine again .... 24 

8. How Rdzbih, Bahrim’s High Priest, ruined a 

Village by a Stratagem and restored it . . 26 

9. How Bahrdm married a Country Miller's Daughters 31 

10. How Bahram found the Treasures of Jamshid and 

bestowed them upon the Poor . . . 34 

11. How Bahrim, returning from Hunting, went to the 

House of a Merchant and departed displeased . 39 

12. How Bahrhm slew a Dragon and went to a Yokel’s 

House ....... 42 

13. How Bahr4m went' to the ChaSe and espoused the 

■ Daughters of the Thane Barzfn 4® 

14. How Bahram slew Lions, went to the House of a 

' Jeweller, and^m^ried Ms Daughter. ^ . 55 

15., How'Hu-hrto went to the Chase ^ and. passed the 

! , N%htdn the House of ^7 

16. How ,,a Bramble^g!wbber'''Y^eMe4; th^ ''Case of', ,, 

; .Fatshidward,'- and ; tow Bahrim Bestowed 
' : , ' , tfit Hdtts9hpl<|^'d upbn; tte ' Boor; ' ',-,^.'70' 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 165 

Baiiram GiJr [continued ) — ■ VoL. VII 

SECT. I’\CE 

17. How Bahrain w(miI to tho Chase and slew Lions , 74 

iS. How Bahrain wont to hunt the Onager, showed 
his Skill before the Princes, and returned to 
Baghdad and Istakhr ..... 80 

19. How the Khan of Chin led forth a Host to war 

with Bahrim, and how the Iranians asked 
Quarter of the Khan and submitted to him . 84 

20. How Bahrdni attacked the Host of the Khan and 

took him ....... 89 

21. Plow Bahram took a Pledge from the Tdr^nians, 

how he set up a Pillar to delimit the Realm, 
and placed Shahra upon the Throne of Tiirdn . 90 

22. How Bahram wrote to announce his Victory to his 

Brother Narsi and returned to (ran . . 92 

23. How Bahrim wrote a Letter of Directions to his 

Officials ....... 95 

24. How Bahrdm called before him the E nvoy of Ciesar, 

and how the Envoy questioned and answered 
the Archmages . . , . . .101 

25. How Bahram dismissed Cmsar’s Envoy and 

charged his own Officials . . . .106 

26. How Bahrdm went with his own Letter to Shangul 

King of Hind . . . . . . log 

27. How Shangul received the Letter from Bahrdni 

and made Reply . . . . .114 

28. How Shangul prepared a Feast for Bahr 4 m, and' 

how Bahrdm displayed his Prowess - . 116 

29. How Shangul suspected Bahrim and kept him from 

frin 118 

30. How Bahrdm fought with the Wolf at the Bidding 

of Shangul and slew it . . . . ,121 

31. How Bahrim slew a Dragon . . . .124 

32. How Shangul became troubled about Bahrim and 

gave a Daughter to him , . . .126 

33. How FaghMr of Chin wrote to Bahrdm and how 

ho replied . . . . . . *129 

34. How Bahrim fled from Hindistin to Irin with the 

Daughter of Shangul . . ♦ . .131 

35. How Shangul followed Bahrim, learned who he 

was, and was reconciled to him . . * ^(35 

36. Plow Shangul went back to Hind and Bahrim to 

trim'. ' . . 137 

37. How Shangul with seven Icings visited Bahrim - X40 

38. How Shangul returned 'to Hindistin^ and how 

Bahrim 'remitted the Property-tax to tho^ 
/Band-owners, , ; . . ' ' , 144 

39. How inmmmted’ Oipsiea from Plindistin . , 148 

40. ' 150 


r66 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 

YazdaCxIRd, Son of Batik am Gt^tr — Vol. VIl 

SEOT, PA(JK 

I. H(3w Yazdagiid sat upon the Ylirune and exhoited 

the Captains ot the Host . . . .154 


Hurmuz — 

I. How Hiirmuz, Son of Yazdaprird, ascend<‘d the 

Throne ....... 157 


PfRhz — ’ 

1. How Piniz sat upon the Throne and made an 

Oration ....... 161 

2. How Piriiz built the Cities ot PiThz-Rani and 

Bdd4n-Pi'rijtz, and how he went to war with 
Tiirdn ....... 1(33 

3. The Letter of Khushnawiz to Ph uz . . . 165 

4. How Pfrdz fought with Kiiushnawaz and was 

slain . . . . . . . .167 


BalAsh — 

1. Plow Baldsh ascended the Throne and harangued 

the Iranians . . . . . ,171 

2. How Siifarai had Tidings of the Slaying of Pfri'iz, 

how he wrote a I^cttcr to Khhshnawaz, and 
how Khhshnawdz replied . . . .173 

3. Plow Siifarai fought with Khhshnawdz, and how 

KubM was released from hi.s Bondage . .176 

KubAd, Son of PfRdz — 

1. Plow Kubdd sat upon the Throne and made an 

Oration to the IrAnians . . . .188 

2. How Siifarai went to Shfriz, bow the frAnians 

slandered him to KubAd, and how Kubdd slew 
him ........ 190 

3. Plow the frAnians put Kub^d in Bonds and com- 

mitted him to Kizxnihr, the Son of Siifarai, 
and how JAmisp. the Brother of Kubdd, was 
set upon the Throne 195 

4. How Kubid escaped from Ward with Rizmihr, 

how he wedded the Daughter of a Thane, and 
how ho took Refuge with the Haitdiians . 197 

5. How Kubid returned from Haitil to frin, how 

he had Tidings of the Birth of his Son, Niishlr- 
win, and reascended the Throne , . *199 

6. The Story of Kubid and Mazdak, and how Kpbid 

adopted the Faith of Mazdak . . .201 

7. PfowKiShirwin rejected the Faith of Mazdak and 

slew him and his Followers . , . ^ , . 205 

8t How Kubid nominated Kisri as Successor* 
and liioW the. ^reit 'gaye him the name of 
; Kishfrwih . .‘',209 


GENERAL TABLE OP CONTENTS 

NtrSHfRWAN VOL 

Part 1. Ni^fshirwan’s Administration of the 
Realm, nis Wars with Frontier-Trides 

AND WITH RdM, AND THE REVOLT OF 

Nushzad — 

SKt'T. 

1. The Prelude 

2. Plow Nuslurwan ascended the Throne and made 

an Oration to the Iranians .... 

3. How Nhshfrwdii divided his Realm into four 

Parts and wrote a Decree to his Officers on 
the Administration of Justice 

4. Plow Nushirwdn required Bibak to muster the 

liost ........ 

5. Plow Niishirwd-n harangued the franians, and how 

the Flings acknowledged his Supremacy. 

6. How Niishlrwdn went round his JCinpirc and built 

a Wall in the 1-^ass between fran and I'dran . 

7. Plow Niislnrwin chasti.sed the Alins and the Men 

of Baluch and Gilin ..... 

8. Plow Munzir, the Arab, came to Ndshfrwin for 

Succour against the Injustice of Cmsar . 

9. The Letter of Shih Nhshfrwin to Ca\sar of Rfim . 

10. Plow the I^etter of Nh.shfrwin reached Cmsar and 

how he replied ...... 

11. How Niishfrwin went to war with Cmsar 

12. How Nhshirwin took divers Strongholds in Ins 

March to Rhra ...... 

13. The Battle of Ndshhwin with P'arfhriyi'is, the 

Leader of Caisar's Host, the Victory of Ndshir- 
win, and his Capture of Kihniyds and Anti- 
kiya ........ 

14. How Ndshirwin built the City of Zfb-i~Khusrau in 

the likeness of Aniikiya and settled the 
Rdman Captives therein .... 
13, How Caesar wrote to N'dshfrwin and sent Tribute. 

16. The Birth of Ndshz 4 d, the Son of Ndshirwin, by a 

Woman who was a Christian 

17. The Sickness of Kdsbfrw^n and the Sedition of 

Ndshzdd ^ . 

18. The Letter of Niishfrwin to Rim Barzin, the 

Warden of the March of Madiln, respecting 
the Taking of Ndshzid .... 

19. How Rim Barzfn fought with NMizicl, and how 

Nishzid 


Part II. The Story. ' of Bd'ztrRlMHHR -and the 
Seven Bahofets of 

I. How Nishfrwin had a Breto and' how, BiaitjuiUir 
interpreieddt ‘ * ' 


167 

VII 

p\(m 

220 

221 

224 

230 

'^54 

230 

'.^39 

244 

247 

24 H 
2^9 

254 

255 

239 

20 l 

263 

2O5 

267 

272 

a8i 


i68 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


NdSufRWiN — 

Part II. The Story of BiJzurjmihr, etc. {conlinued) — Vol. VII 

SROT. PAGK 

2. The first Banquet of Niibliiivvan to the Sa.gcs, and 

the Counsels of Buzurjmihr .... 287 

3. The second Banquet of Nuslurwdn to Buzurjniihr 

and the Archimages . . . . -290 

4. The third Banquet of Ndshfrwdn to Buzurjinihr 

and the Archimages . . . . .296 

5. The fourth Banquet of Ndshfrwdn to Buziirjmihr 

and the Archimages 3 c>i 

6. The fifth Banquet of Ndshfrwdn to Bdziirjmihr 

and the Archimages . . . . . 304 

7. The sixth Banquet of Ndshfrwdn to Bdzurjmihr 

and the Archimages . . . . .307 

8. The seventh Banquet of Ndshfrwan to Buzurjniihr 

and the Archimages . . . . • 3 ^ ^ 

Part III. The Story of MAHudo and other 
Matters — 

SECT. 

1. The Story of Mahbud, the Wazfr of Ndshfrwdn, 

and how Mahhdd and his Sons were slain by 
the Sorcery of Ziirin and a Jew . . • 3 iS 

2. How the Sorcery of Zdr^n and the Jew in the 

Matter of Mahbud was disco vennh and how 
both were slain by Command of Niishfrwdn . 323 

3. In Prs'isc of the Wisdom of Nhshirwdn, and how 

he built the City of Sursan . . . .326 

4. The Story of the War of the Khdn with Ghdtkar, 

the Prince of the Haitilians, the Defeat of 
Ghitkar, and how they set Faghinfsh upon 
the Throne ...... 328 

5. How Ndshfrwdn had Tidings of the Battle of the 

Kh 4 n with the Haitilians and how he led a 
Host against the Khin . , , * 333 

6. HOw the Khin had Tidings of the Coming of the 

Host of Ndsliirwin to Gurgin and wrote a 
Letter in the Cause of Peace , * . *337 

7. How Niishfrwin answered the Letter of the Khin 342 

8. How the Khin bethought himself and wrote offer- 

ing his Daughte in Marriage to Ndshfrwin . 345 

9. How ^ Ndshfrwin answered the Letter, and sent 

Mihrin Sitid to see and 'fetch the Daughter 
of the Khin ... . . , . 349 

10. How thC'Khfo sent his .Daughter, csdorted by 

Mihrin, with a tetter and , Treasures to 
NisMrwin^ 354 

11, How' the' Khin withdrew,,' 'and how Ndshfrwin 

' mirched tom Gurgin to Taisafdn . , , , 358 

12* Discourse on -the Justice ol Ndshfrwin and 'how 

'' Mortals had 'Heaoe under his- tJsages a ' 364^ 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


i 6 g 

N i^siiIrwan — 

Part 111. The Story of ^KIaiibOh, cfc . [ umiinited ) — Vol. VlJ 

MKi'T. I’AGR 

13. How Bu7Airjmihr tomiselled Nushirwaii and dis- 
coursed on good Deeds and Words. . .366 

Part IV. The Introduction of the Game of Chess 
INTO Iran. The Legend of the Inven- 
tion OF THE Game. The Discovery of 
the Book of KalIla and Dimna 

1. liow the Raja of Hind sent the Game of Chess to 

Nushirwan . , . . . .38.1, 

2. How Buzurjmihr invented Nard, and how Nhshfr- 

wdn sent it with a Letter to the Raja of Hind . 389 

3. The Story of Gav and Talhand, and the Invention 

of > Chess 394 

4. How Ni'ishmvan sent Barzwf, the I.eech, to ilin- 

dhstan to fetch a wondrous Drug, and how 
Barzwf brought back the Book ot Kallla and 
Dimna ....... 423 

Index 433 

VOL. VI 1 1 

PAGE 

Abbreviations . . , . . . , . xv 

Note on Pronunciation ...... xvi 

THE SAsANIAN dynasty {continued) 

N dsHfRwAN [continued) — 

Part V. The Fall and Restoration to Favour of 
BdzURJMIHR, AND THE WISDOM OF NdSII- 
IrwAn — 
sect. 

1. How Nhshfrwin was wroth with Bhzurjmihr and 

ordered him to be put in Ward ... 4 

2. How the Ambassador of Cmsar came to NiishfrwAn 

with a locked Casket and how Bdzurjmihr 


was set at large to declare its Contents , ♦ 8 

3. Discourse on the Responses of NdshIrwAn , . 14 

4. Nhshirwin's Letter of Counsel to his Son Hurimwd 25 

5. Plow an Archmag® questioned Ndshfrwin and how 

he made Answer * ' . , , , , . 28 

Part VI. The ShAh*s last,Years-^ 

I. How Ndshfrwin made ready to war against 

Caesar « , » 4$ 

2* How NhshirwAtt toolp the Stronghold of ^Saldla 

and, how a Sbqemaher had ' Dealings, with him . 46 

3. How' the ;p:nvoy*e of Cassair Came to PThshlrwin 

, with Apdk^it»/ajad:Pr;«tttS'.\ L'' ^ . 51 

4, Horr Nd»hlrW 4 n':ehoia as',hi| Successor. 54 


lyo 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


isr fell fRWAN- 
Part V[. 

SECT. 

5 - 


The Sjau’s Last Years {contimied)-- Vol 

How the Arcliimages (iuesiioned llunuuiid and 
how he icphed 

How Niislurwan appointed Ilurimizd as his Suc- 
cessor and gave him parting Counsels 

How Nushi'rwan had a Dream and how Bdzurjmihr 
interpreted it as signifying tlio A])pearance of 
Muhammad ...... 


ITurmuzd, Son of NdsHfRWAN — 

1. The Prelude ....... 

2. How Hurmiizd ascended the Throne and harangued 

the Chiefs ....... 

3. How Hurmuzd slew fzid Gashasp, Zarduhsht, 

Simah Barziii, and Bahram Azarmihdn, his 
Father's Ministers ..... 

4. How Hurmuzd turned from Tyranny to Justice , 

5. How Hosts gathered from all Sides against Hur- 

miizd. and how he took Counsel with his 
Wazxrs ....... 

6. How Hurmuzd heard of Bahrdm Chiibina and 

sent for him ...... 

7. How Bahrdm Chdbfna came to TTurmuzd and was 

made Captain of the Host .... 

8. How Bahr 4 m Chdbiiia went with twelve thousand 

Cavaliers to fight King Sfiwa 

9. How King Sdwa sent a Message to Bahrfim 

Chiibina and his Answer .... 

10. How King Siwa and Bahr 4 m Chiibina set the 

Battle in Array against each other . 

11. How King Siwa sent another Message to Bahrfim 

Chiibina and his Answer .... 

12. How Bahrdm Chiibina had a Dream in the Night, 

how he gave Battle the next Morning, and 
how King SAwa was slain .... 

13. How Bahrfim Chiibina sent a Letter announcing his 

Victory, and the Head of King S 4 wa, to Hur- 
muzd, and his Answer * . . . . 

14. How Bahrim Chiibina fought with Parmiida, Son 

of King Siwa, and overcame him, and how 
Parmiida took Kefuge in the Hold of Awiza . 

15. How Bahrdm Chiibina sent a Message to Parmiida 

and how Parmiida asked Quarter . 

16. How Bahrim Chiibfna asked of 'Hurmuzd a War- 

raht to spare the Lih of Parmiida and the 
Answer . . , , . 

^ 17. How Hurttiuzd’s^ Letiter, granting Quarter to Par- 
' , reached ^ahrim •, Chiibina, and how 

- ' , ^Bahr 4 m ChhMna was wroth with Parmiida , 


vnr 

PACE 

57 


61 


66 


77 

78 

81 

90 


92 


96 


106 


113 


115 


117 


121 


X29 


134 

138 


141 


U 3 - 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Hurmuzd, Son of Nt^siifiuvAN [contiimed ) — ■ VoL. 

8 F<T. 

iS. How Panuuda came btdore TJminozd with the 
Tieasiires S(;nt by Pahram C'liuhfna 
19. Ilow Hurmuzd hoard oi the Ill-doing of I3ahram 
Chubina and inado a Compact witli the Khan 
'20. How Hurmuzd wrote a chiding Letter to Balirdm 
Chubi'na atul sent him a JMstah-case, Cotton, 
and Women's Raiment .... 

21. How Bahram Chubina put on the Woman’s Dress 

and showed himselt therein to the Chiefs of the 
Host ....... 

22. How Bahram Chubi'na went to hunt and saw a 

I^ady who foretold the Ihiture to him 

23. How Bahrain C]ii'd:>ina assumed the royal Style 

and how Kharrad, Sou of liarzfn, and the 
Archscribc fled ...... 

24. How Hurmuzd iec<dvcd News of Bahr4ni Clui- 

bma’s Doings, and how Bahrain Cluibiiia sent a 
Frail of Swords to Hurmuzd. 

25. How Bahrdm Chiibfna made known to the Chiefs 

his Designs upon the Throne, and how his 
vSistcr Gurdya advised him .... 

26. Bahrdm Chiibfna’s Letter to the Kluin and how he 

coined Money with the name of Khusrau 
Parwfz and sent it to Hurmuzd 

27. How Babrdm Chhbfna wrote to Hurmuzd and how 

Khusrau l^arwfz ded from his h'ather . 

28. How Hurmuzd sent Ayfn Gashasp with an Army 

to fight Bahrd.m Chdbfna and how he was slain 
by his Comrade ..... 

29. How Hurmuzd grieved, refused Audience to the 

frdnians, and was blinded by Bandwi and 
Gustaharn ....... 

30. How Khusrau Parwfz heard of the Blinding of 

Hurmuzd ....... 

KIIUSRAXJ l^ARWfZ — 

1. The Prelude ....... 

2. How Khusrau Parwfz sat upon the Throne and 

made an Oration . , . . ' . 

3. How Khusrau Parwfz visited his Father and asked 

Forgiveness . . . " . 

4. How Bahr 4 m Chdbfna heard of the Blinding of 

Sh^li Plurmuzd and , how he leej. his Troops 
against Khusrau Parwfz .... 

5. How Khusrau Parwfz, Bahrim Chhbfna mot 

and parle;^ed ' . 

6. How Bahritn Chijbfna ^and I<husrau Parwfz 

returned, hdw Gatdyi >d vised Bahrim' Chd-^ 
bina/' 4 nd how' Ktomu 'Parwfz 'told his Pur- 
pose' to, the ' ' ' ''' 


171 
VIII 

VAUK 

149 

I5T 

L53 

1 54 
X5b 

160 

H>3 

172 

173 

^77 

182 

184 

196 

197 
T98 

200 

204 

220 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


172 


Kmltsrau ParwIz {coniiniu'd ) — Vol VTII 

HKCT. ^ 1*A(JE 

7. How fiaiiram Chu]>iiia a<Uu:k{‘d the Auny of 

Kbu'^rau Parwiz by Higlit and how Kliiisiaix 
Parwiz (led . . . . . . 226 

8. How Khnsraii Farwiz went to his Sire and fled to 

Riini, and how Hurmuzd was slam . , 230 

9. How Bahrdin Chiibina sent Troops after Khusiau 

Parwiz and how Bandwf contrived to rescue 
him from their Hands. .... 233 

10. How Bahrdm, the Son of Siyiwush, took Bandwf 

and carried him to Bahram Chiibfna . .237 

11. How Bahr 4 m Chubfna summoned the Magnates of 

Irdn, how they discussed his Pretensions to 
the Kingdom, and how he acceded to the 
Throne . . . . . . .239 

12. How Bandwf plotted with Baluam, the Son of Siyd- 

wush, to slay Bahrdm Chubfna, and how 
Bandwf fled from Bond .... 245 


13. How Khusrau X^arwfz went toward Rdm by the 

Besert-route and how a Hermit told him of 
the Past and Future . . . . ,2^9 

14. How a Cavalier of Ciesar came to Khusrau Parwfz 

and how he sent an Answer by Ciistaham, 

Bdlwf, Andiydn, Khatrad, Son of Jhxrzfn, and 
Shdpiir to Caesar. . . . . .257 

15. How Caesar answered the Letter of Khusrau Parwfz 260 

16. How Caesar wrote to Khusrau Parwfz, declining to 

help him, and his Answer . . , .261 

17. How Cassar wrote the second Time to Khusrau 

Parwfz about giving him Aid . . .264 

18. How Khusrau Parwfz answered C^sar about the 

Alliance ^ . * . . . , 269 

19. How Caesar made a Talisman and deceived the 

Envoys of Khusrau Parwfz, and how Kharrdd, 

Son of Barzfn, solved the Mystery . . .271 

20. How KharrM, Son of Barzfn, expounded the 

Faith of the Indians and exhorted C«sar . 27^ 

21. How Cse^ar sent a Host and his Daughter to Khus- 

rau parwfz. ^ . . 278 

22. How Khusrau Parwfz Ie 4 his Host to Azar Abdda- 

gin and hdw Bandwf mot him on the Way . 281 

23. How Bahrdm Chubfna had Tidihgs of the Coming 

'Ol Khusrad ParvHz and, wrote a' Letter to the ’ 
Chiefs of ‘Irih^'and how! the Letter fell into the 
Hands of 'Khnsran Parwfz and' his Answer . ' 4 284 

24. How Khusrau, Parwfz 'fought with'Bahrhm -Chh- 

bfna and'KowHdt* the Kdman, was s|ain 4 188 

25. How, Khusrau, PartHz f'o,hght,. with BahriiU' Chh- ' ' '' 
/ 'bto the ‘seoondMtim^i, Viiefo^te 4 

’ , escaped ftomhlm by ol Suriish * ; ,■ 


GENERAL TAl'.LE OP CONTENTS 


VoL. 


2S. 


29‘ 


30. 


3 t. 

3 ^* 


Khusrau Parwi'z [ continued ) — 

*^^2(1' How Khusrau Parwiz fought the third dime with 
Bahrain Chiibina and defeated him 
27. How Khusrau Parwiz sent an Army under Hast till 
after Bahrain Chribiiia, and how Bahiani 
Chubi'na captured him and reached the Khan 
of Chin 

How Khusrau Prrwiz pillaged the Camp of Bali- 
ram Chubina and wrote a Letter to Cmsar who 
answered it with a Kobe of Honour and Gifts 
How Niydtus was wroth with Jhindwx and how 
Maryam made Peace between them / 

How Khusrau Parwiz gave Tl-esents to Kiydtiis 
and the Rumans, how he dismissed them to 
Klim, and wiote Patents for the Nobles of Iran 
Firdausi’s Lament for the Heath of his Son .. ^ 

The Story of Bahrain Chiibfiia and the Khan of 
Chin ^ * 

33. How Makitura was slain by Bahrain Cluibma, ^ . 

34. How the Lion-a])e slew a Daughter (jf the Klu'in, 

how it was slain by Bahrain C hiibma, and Jiow 
the Kluiii gave him a Daughter and the King- 
dom of Chin . . . 

How IHiusrau Parwiz heard of the Case ol Baiiram 
Chiibina and wrote a Letter to the Klhin, and 
how he rejilied’' . . . • ‘ ’ 

How Khusrau Parwiz sent Kharr^ul, Son of fhirzin, 
to the Kh 4 n and how he sclienied to slay Bah- 
r^m Chi'ibina . • • * ^ L ‘ 

How Bahrim Chhbina was slain by Kuhin as 
Kharrdd, Son of Barzin, had planned . 

38. How the Khin had Tidings of Bahrdm Chiibma s 
Death and how he destroyed the Ploase and 
Family of Kulhn . . • * . x 

How Khusrau Parwfz had Tidings of the Slaymg ot 
Bahrim Chdbina and honoured KharrM* Son 
of Barzin 

How the Kbdn sent Ms Brother to Gurdya, the 
Sister of Bahrim Cihi'ibina, with a Letter 
touching her Brother’s Death and asking her 
in Marriage as his Queen, and her Answer 
How Gurdya consulted fter Hoblos and ded from 
Jdarv ♦ ' “ ' * " “ " * * 

How the Khin; tecibived, .Tidings of the Flight of 
CMrdya and, how hO'^ent tnWurg with Army 
after her, and how Omrdya ^lew Tuwurg . 

43, HOw Gurdya wrote td 'Gnrdwf - ' ' . ' . 

44. How MpM '' ' . ' , ^ , ; 

43. How Gdstdhant' Khusrau, Parwlat 

. / ^ahd'f0okGnrdyd;td,Wlfd^' ^ a 


173 

viit 

UAOB 


35 * 


3 d. 


37 - 


39. 


40. 


4I. 


42. 


300 

303 

306 

309 


3 ^^ 

3L5 

310 

320 


322 

3^7 

331 

336 

343 

345 

34 f> 

349 


351 

354 

354 

'355 


174 GENERAL TADLE OF CONTENTS 
Kousrau Farwiz [ continued ) — ■ Vol. 

SRCT. 

46. How Khusrau Parwiz took Counsel with Gurdwi 

concerning Gustahani and how Gurdya, 
prompted by Gnrclwi, slew him 

47. How Gurdya wrote to Khusrau Parwfz and how 

he summoned and married her 

48. How Gurdya showed her Accomplishment before 

Khusrau Parwi'z ...... 

49. How Khusrau Parwi'z sent an ill-disposed March- 

lord to Kai and how he oppressed the Folk 
there ....... 

50. How Gurdya made Sport before Klunsran Parwiz 

and how ho gave Rai to her .... 

51. How Khusrau Parwiz portioned out his Realm 

52. How Shi'rwi, the Son of Khusrau Parwfz, was born 

of Maryam with bad Auspices and how Khus- 
rau Parwiz informed Caisar .... 

53. How Cx'sar wrote a Letter to Khusrau Paiwfz, 

sent Gifts, and asked for the Cross of Chiist . 

54. How Khusrau Parwfz answered Ckesar's Lcttt^r and 

sent Gifts ....... 


The Story of Khusrau ParwIz and SnfRfN — 

55. The Prelude .... ... 

56. How Khusrau Parwiz loved Shfrln, how they 

parted, how he met her again while hunting 
and sent her to his Bower .... 

57. Plow the Nobles heard that Shfrln had come to the 

Bower oL Khusrau Parwiz and how they 
advised him and were satisfied with his Answer 

58. How Shlrln murdered Maryam and Khusrau Par- 

wiz put Shlrwl in Bonds . 

59. How Khusrau Parwiz made the Throne of T 4 kdls 

60. The Story pf Sarka$h' add Birbad, the Minstrel, 

and Khusrau Parwiz, . ' . . ' . 

61. How Khutou Parwlz'hmlt tjxe Palace of^Madd'ia 

62. Discourse on the Splendour and Gteatne^? hi' 

Khusrau Parwiz., . 

63. How Khuferau , Parwiz .turned from Justice, how 

' the Chiefs revolted/ and ' how Gurdz, called 
ip Cmsar . . . ■ . ' 

64. How C^sm withdrew through an Expedient of 

Khusrau Parwiz and how the Chiefs released 
' Shirwf from Bonds ..... 

65. Hpw Khusrau Parwfzi was taken and how Shlrwl 

sent him to Taisaf lin ; ■ . 


VI TI 

FACE 

353 

361 

363 

3^5 

3^37 

371 

374 

379 

382 

333 

386 

339 

39 1 

396 

400 

405.; 

407 

409 

418 

423 


GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 175 

VOL. IX 

PAGE 

Prefatory Note ........ v 

Abbreviations. ........ xi 

Note on Pronunciation ....... xii 


THE SAsANIAN dynasty (concluded) 

Kubad (commonly called ShIrwI) — 
sect. 

1. How Shirwi ascended the Throne, announced his 

Will, and sent Chiefs to his Pallier with Counsel 
and Excuses ...... 8 

2. How Khiisrau Parwiz answered Shi'rwd . . 15 

3. How Shirwi grieved for Khusrau Parwiz and how 

the Chiefs were displeased thereat . . 27 

4. How Bdrbad lamented Khusrau Parwiz, cut off 

his own Fingers, and burned his Instruments 
of Music ....... 29 

5. How the Chiefs demanded fiom .Sliirwi the Death 

of Khusrau Parwiz and how he was slain by 
Mi hr Hunnuzd . . . . . .32 

6. How vSliirwf asked Shfrin in Marriage, how Shirin 

killed herself, and how Shirwi was slain . 36 

ArdsiiIr, Son ok SufRwf — 

1. How Ardshir, Son of Shirwi, ascended the Throne 

and harangued the Chiefs . , . .44 

2. How Guriz was displeased at Ardshir being Shdh 

and how he caused Ardshir to be slain by Pirhz 
Son of Khusrau. ..... 45 

GurAz also called FARiyfN — 

I. How Gur^z, (also called Fardyin,) received News 
of the Slaying of Ardshir, hastened to trin, took 
l-^ossession of the Throne, and was killed by 
Shahrdngurdz ‘ . .51 

PdRdNDUKHT— 

I. How Phrindukht ascended the Throne and slew 
I^irtiz, Son of Khusrau, and how her own Life 
ended * , » - • . . • 5b 

Azarmdukht— 

I. How Azarmdukht ascended the Throne and how 

she died . >59 

FARRUKHziiD — ' ; ■ ' 

I. How FerrnkhzM -ascended, the'lfhrone 'md how 

wae sJaia $ Slave ; ' . ' ' f ^ ' 6f 


1/6 GENEBAL TABLE OF CONTENl S 

Yazdagird — VOL. IX 

SHOT. I>A({E 

1. How Yazdagird ascended the Throne and ad- 

dressed the Chiefs ..... yo 

2. How Sahid, Son of Wakkls, invaded fr^n, how 

Yazdagird sent Rnstam to oppose him, and 
how Rustam wrote a Letter to his Brother . y2 

3. How Rustam wrote to Sa*ad, Son of Wakkds, and 

how he replied . . . . , .78 

4. How Rustam fought with Sa’ad, Son of Wakk4s, 

and was slain . . , . . • ^3 

5. How Yazdagird consulted with the frdnians and 

went to Khurdsin . , . , *85 

6. How Yazdagird wrote to Mdhwi of Si'ir . . 89 

7. How Yazdagird wrote to the March! ords of Tus , 90 

8. How Yazdagird went to Tus and how Mdhwf of 

Sur met him ••••■• 95 

9. How Mihwi of Siir incited Bfzhan to war with 

Yazdagird and how Yazdagird fled and hid 
himself in a Mill ...... 96 

10. How Mdhwf of Stir sent the Miller to kill Yazdagird, 
and how the Archimages counselled MMiwi to 
forbear ....... loi 

XT, How Yazdagird was slain by Khusrau, the Miller 107 

12. How Mdhwl of Sdr was informed of the Obsequies 

of Yazdagird and ascended the Throne . . 1 1 2 

13. How Bfzhan, hearing of the Slaying of Yazdagird 

and of Mihwf of Sdr's Accession to the Throne, 
led forth the Host to fight with him . . 1 15 

14. How Mihwf of Siir was taken and slain by Order 

of Bfzhan ....... nS 

15. Account of the Completion of the Shsihntoa . 12 1 


CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 


VOLUME I. 

Page xii, line 21, for ‘ PIvil ’ read ' evil/ 

Page xiii, line 15, for * Born ’ read ' bom.' 

Page /j, line 4, delete ‘ still/ 

Page 5, line 22, after ' camel ' add * of which the red-Iiairod variety 
was most esteemed/ 

Page 6, line 21, for ‘ Scythian ' read * Elamitic/ 

Page 7, line 19, for ‘ was ’ read * became/ line 25 and elsewhere, for 
‘ Trita ' and ‘ Traitdna ' read * Trita ' and ' Trailaiia/ 
Page 9, line 16 and elsewhere, for ' Azarbijiln ' read * Azarbiijdn/ 
Page 10, bottom The date of the fall of Nineveh has lately been 
assigned to the year b.c, 612. See ' The P'all of Nineveh,’ 
p. g seq. By C. J, Gadd. 
reference number 2, after R insert P, 

Page 1 1, line 29 and elsewhere, /oy ' Hira and Anbar ' read ' HIra and 
Ambar/ 

Page 13, reference number 2, for ' NESH * read ‘ NSEIT/ 

Page 14, line 25, for ' S^mdnides ’ read * Sdmdnids/ 

Page 17, delete lines 7-10. 

reference number i, add * See too A. V. Williams Jackson/ 
' From Constantinople to the Flomo of Omar Khayyam,' 
Ch. v/ 

Page 19, line 19, for ' Sacaestan * read * Sacacstdn/ 
reference number 3, delete ' hi/ 

Page 21, line 7 and elsewhere, for * Nuh ' read ' Ndh/ 
line 12, for ‘ appealed ' read ‘ turned/ 

Page 29, lino 12 from bottom, c:/LEC, pp. 206, 207 ami note. 

Page 31, delete lino's 13-16, and read ‘that I^azl, son of Ahmad, is 
referred to on both occasions/ 

Page 33, line 23, delete full stop, imert comma, and for* Such is not ' 
read * not be in/ 

Page 34, five lines from bottom, delete ‘ While I sat looking on ' and 
read ‘ While I o'erlooked from far.' 

Page 37, line 22, for * Arfidf read * 'Ajrtidf/ ^ 

Pago 38, seven lines from boi:tom, for Ba«Jh ' read * B 4 zh/ 

six lines from bottom, after ‘ city ' add reference number x, 
at bottom add note ‘ » The quarter in which 'Bizi”! was situated 
was known as Tabar^n/ '• ^ 

Page 39, bottom, reference number x, delate L§x’ and 7 ' and read * The 
- ' too spiritual cottcepl^o^' of tlt©:l)eityda f^and the refer- 

, , , ehoesTO 'AHin|i^/’. ' ''' 

'"VQL. IX". " ; ' ' '' ' ' M 


lyS CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 

Page 41, last line, for ' axe ’ read ' ax/ 

Page 43, note 2, for ‘ fakki ’ read ' fakka/ and for ‘ Oil read ' Cf.’ 

Page 45, line 24, after ‘ indigo ’ reference number 2. 

line five from bottom, after ‘ Cemetery ' add reference number 3. 
at bottom add ‘ ^ Cf. End. Bnt. (nth ed.), Vol. ii, p. 917, 
col. 2. 

« Professor A. V. Williams Jackson’s suggestion that, as 
burial in the Muhammadan cemetery was refused, the 
corpse of Firdausi was reconveyed within the walls and 
buried in ground belonging to him, seems far fi om im- 
probable. From Constantinople to the Tomb of Omar 
Khayyam, p. 291. 

Page 50, line 7, for ‘ Ahriman ’ read ' Ahriman.’ 

Page 51, line 23, add reference number i. 

bottom, add ‘ ^ Thus Pfrfin (sec p. 55) may represent Perun, 
the Slavonic god of thunder.' 

Page 61, line 3, delete 'which' and to end of sentence, and insert ‘ i.e. 
of Azargashasp/ 

Page 62, bottom, after reference number 7 insert DZA, i, 209, 

Page 67, line 18, end, add 'bin.' 

Page 68, line 9, end add ' or identical with.' 

bottom, reference number r, add NIN, 15. 

Page 69, bottom, for ' 108 ’ read '107.' 

i^age 71, line 19, after ‘ Oxus ’ insert ‘ Caspian.’ 

line 20, after ' Dardanelles ’ insert ‘ Mediterranean.’ 
bottom, reference number 6, after * 80 ’ add ‘ notes.’ 

Page 73, line 8 from bottom, for ' land ’ read ' earth.’ 

„ 7 ,, after ' Shihs ’ add reference number i. 

,, 3 ,, after ' canal ’ add reference number 2. 

bottom, add ‘ ^ Kai Kub4d. See Vol. ii, p. 22. ® Id, 192.’ 

Page 74, line 8, after ' tree ’ add reference number i. 
bottom, add ‘ ^ Cercis SiliquasiumI 

Page 77, lino it, for ' the first half ’ read ' three-fifths.' 

line 8 from bottom, after ‘ repetitions ' add reference 
number x. 

bottom, add ’ ^ These of course do not include the great 
duplications of tradition in the poem.' 

Page 82, line 11, for ' regarded ’ read ' looked upon/ 
line 25, after ' farr ' add reference number 2. 
bottom, add * *pp., 369* 37®-’ 

Pago 83, line 18, before ' ’ insert — 

line 25, after ' subject ' add reference number 2. 
bottom, add * « The e:?;pression is used, however, of Bahrdm 
' Gfir (Vol vii, p. 78) and of Ntishlrwfin (viii, p. 14). 
It is also applied to non-fr^nians, to Suhrib, who was 
opposing tl^e frini^ns (ii 145), Pfrin (ii, 261, 275, 324, , 
iii,, lofi), Pflsam (ix, 352>,'Xa2h4v, an Irinian deserter 
/ (iii, ',28), Jteinfish , .(vi, 297), and , there are other ^ 

, ' ' , ^ ^ ,, '' ' i I , ' 

Page - 84, iine 3* /pr eatnp eixcilospre ^ read *,camp-enclpsmT'* 


CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 


179 


Page 85, line 20, for ‘ end ' read ‘ beginning/ 

Page 87, bottom, add ‘ Rogers, The Shah-namah of Fardiisi. Trans- 
lated from the original Persian. 1909. (A version 
partly in verse and partly in epitomized prose ) 

Page 88, lines ii and 27, for ' Ardibihisht ' read ‘ Ardilnhisht/ 
line 12 and bottom, for ' Sharivar ' read ' Shalirfvar/ 
lines 12 and 26, for ‘ Farvardin ' read ‘ Farwardin.* 
line 17 and page 89, line 3, for ‘ Adar ' read ' Azar.' 

Page 89, line 4, for ‘ Din ’ read ' Dai/ 

Page 90, line 9, for ‘ 3 generations ’ read * 4 generations ^ ' and aid at 
bottom f 1 See Vol. v. p. 203/ 
for ‘ Barmaiiin. Kataiun.' read ' Piinnaya. Kaianiish/ 
15 add as son to Minitchihr ^ Zarasp/ 

17, add as son to Tus * Zardsp.* 

Page 92, line 5 add as descendant from Tur ‘ Mali Atrid, d/ 
line 10, add as descendant of W"tsa ‘ Kurukhan.' 
line II, for ‘ Pirdn ’ read ‘ ldrdn = Gidsliahr/ 
line 15, to descendants of AJrdsiydb add ‘ Manizha, d.= 
Bizhan ' 

and delete * Rdin/ 

line 17, for ‘ Kiirakhdn ' read ' Kurakhdn/ 
lAige 93, lines 20 and 22, transpose ' EI^ ' and * ETIL' 

Pago 94, delete lines 4-5. 

bottom, add ' ZT. Gliromkpie do Abon-Djafar-Mo'ham- 
med-Bcn-Djarir-Ben-Vezid Tabari. Traduite sur la 
version Pensane d’Abou-’Ali Mo’hammcd Bci'ami par 
M. Hermann Zotenberg.' 

Page 100, line 4, for ‘ Shaddad son of Ad ’ read * Shadddd son of 'Ad/ 
Page 100, line 7, for * Shaddad ’ read ' Shadddd/ 

Page 100, line 10, for ' Nasiru'd ' read * Ndsiru’d.* 

Page 104, after line 4 insert — 

‘ Thus is it now : what the world's end will be 
None knoweth openly or privily/ 

Page 106, line 12, for * The' read * Inf 
Page 108, line 15, for ‘ with ' read ^ to/ 

Page 112, line 2, for *The* read * Inf 

8 from bottom, for * light ’ read * blaze/ 

Page 113, line 7 and elsewhere, for * Ind read ' Hind/ 
line I9i &nd, add full stop. 

Page 1 1 7, line 2, Delete ^ FOE/ 

Page 1 18, lino 4, for * motmtain o,f the' holy ' read * Moimtafo of the 
Holy/ , , ' 

Page 120, line ' i, foifSlain '' read '' ' and delete ' the Mand off 
Page 121, line 5> for read *>figMf • 

Page 1-26/ line 5, ^fonblets in tho'poem/ 

line Tb/', /hr gold ^ „ 

pa,ge 129, Me' f <rom;b'Ot^n^7^:/or;;''b 


i8o COMRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 

Page 130, line ii, after ' gallery' insert . . . 

line 23, for ' have ' read * find/ and add to reference 4 
‘ WPT. i. 142. ’ 

Page 13 1, line 15, for * They ' read ‘ they/ 

Page 132, line ii, add full stop at end. 

Page 135, line 3, for ‘ departed from ' read ‘ abandoned/ 

line II from bottom, end, delete comma and insert full stop. 
Page 138, line 8 from bottom, delete * thou my ' and read ' any/ 
Page 1 41, line 4 from bottom, for ‘ light ' read ' Grace/ 

Page 142, line 5 from bottom, for ‘ downstricken ’ read ‘ down- 
stricken.’ 

line 4 from bottom, /or ‘ Aspikin ' read * Aspikan.’ 

Page 143, line 7, for ‘ i ’ read * 2.' 

15, for * 2 ’ read * 3.' 

20, for ‘ Baghdad ' read * Baghdad.’ 

25, after ' Ispahan ' add reference number 4. 

31, far reference number 3 read 5. 

33 , for reference number 4 read 6. 
bottom, after reference 3 insert ‘ ^ ZT, i, 117,’ and for 
reference numbers 4 and 5 read 5 and 6. 

Page 145, line 25, for ‘ Evil * read ' evild 
I^agc 147, line 7, for ‘ Kfirds ' read ‘ Kurds/ 

Page 1 61, line 6, for ^ Bait al ’ read ' Baitul/ 

l>agc 1 71, line 2, for ‘ UlS HEIGN WAS ' read ‘ HE REIGNED/ 

Page 173, line 31, for ‘ glory ’ read ‘ Glory/ 

Page 174, after line 21 add *§24. We have here another doublet, 
Cf. p. 290/ 

Page 175, line 13, for ‘ He/ read * Be/ 

Page 181, line 13, delete ' never' and insert it after ' children/ 

2 from bottom, end, insert comma. 

Page 184, line 18, for ^ except ' read * unless/ 

Page 189, lino 4 from bottom, for * Envious ' read ‘ envious,* 

Page 199, line 7 from bottom, for ' Slain * read ‘ slain,* 

Pago 201, note, line 4, for * N 4 m^h ' read * Ndmah/ 

Page 205, line g, for * Born. * read ‘ horn.* 

Page 207, line 13, for * Chach ' read ' Chich/ 

Page 208, line 12, for ' wagons did they fill * read ' wains they 
filled/ 

Page 209, line ip, for * no longer harbouroth ’ read * hath ceased 
" to harbour.* 

line 20^ for * evident * read ' plain/ 

Pago 211, delete line 2 and read ^ With - treasure and brocade, 
dfnte'afid gems/ 

Page 212, _ line zt.Jor 'Alb* redd 'ell/ 

' line 7 front -bottom; /or ' torquoise ' read * turquoise/ 
Pag-c 219, bne ,5 frOna- boftom./ for * k* read * the * and after * ball * 
'add fefmme number i, ' - 

' / .bottom* , , 

Page 223:, -line ^Bffir- *'-;Aii,mounoe, *, read * announce/ 

, , , ' „ .M/ah r^dd, '* 'tie/ 


CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 


i8i 

Page 224, line ii, after ‘ me ’ insert * stay/ 

Page 224, line 12, for ‘ Stop to draw bicath ’ rctal ‘ To breethc/ 

22, for ‘ moialising ’ lead ‘ moralling 
Page 226, lino 4, delete ‘ oi oni ’ 

Page 227, line 21, for ' Slain ’ n ad ‘ slain ’ and tielete ' the Hand 

of.' 

Page 228, line g, for ' produce of it ' read ‘ fiuit thereof.’ 

Page 230, line g, for ' our avenging ' read ‘ vengeful.’ 

Page 236, after line 7 insert ‘ §t8 Cf. previous leign, '§24.’ 
line 8, beginning, insert ‘ §29 ’ 

5 from bottom, beginning, insert ‘ §31/ 

Page 237, bottom, note i, add ‘ But cf, VoL v. p 30.’ 

Page 250, side reference, prefix ‘ V.’ 

Page 252, line 15, for ' Danbar ’ read ‘ Dambar.’ 

Page 256, line 4, for ‘ Dunbar ’ read * Dambar.’ 

Page 275, line 3 from bottom, for ‘ Explain * read ' ex plain I 
Page 280, line 9, and clsewbcre, for ‘ Almighty * wad ‘ almighty ’ 
when not absolute. 

Page 284, line i, for ‘ Aware ’ read ' aware I 
Page 292, line 20, for ‘ War against ’ lead ‘fight.* 

Page 293, end of note, add ' 309.’ 

Page 299, line C from bottom, for ‘ Wroth ’ read ‘ wroth.’ 

Page 307, line 7 from bottom, add reference number i after ' lasso.’ 
Page 325, line ii, for * S 4 m ’ read ‘ 

Page 337, line 2, delete ‘ FOR.' 

l^age 338, line 6, for ‘ Vast ’ read ‘ Ya.sht,' and at bottom, note i, 
after i insert ‘ Cf. p. 59.* 

From 342, line 3 from bottom, for * Knowhow ' read ‘ Know 
how.' 

Page 347, line 10, for * lowered ' read ‘ loured.* 

Page 351, side reference, insert 2. 

4 lines from bottom, insert comma after ‘ throb.’ 

Page 352, line 4, delete semicolon. 

Page 354, line 21, for * Guzhdabam * read ‘ Gazbdaham.’ 

Page 355, line 4 from bottom, delete comma at end. 

Page 358, line 6 and elsewhere, for ‘ Flirmund ’ read ‘ llirmimd.’ 
Page 366, line 12* delete ‘ not.' 

I^age 373, line 2, for ‘ HIS REIGN WAS * read * HE X^KIGNED.’ 

Page 37S, line 7, for ' lance ' read ‘ spear.* 

Page 380, line 6 from bottom, after ‘ harm * add reference number i, 

and at bottom add ‘ ^Cf. BEHP, i, 452. Jackson, 

“ From Constantinople to the Tomb of Omar 
Khayyam,** p. xigi , 

Page 381, line 4 from bottom, for * plants * rmd * plans.’ 

VOLUME XL 

Page V, line 3:3,' end,. aSd^ • \ ■; ,4 ^ , 

Page ix, line' 25, delete f | 'V: \ " 

Pago ‘ 3 ^ line, t % 'for * I’ . * ' 


1 82 CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 

Page 3, li'ic 15, to claildren ol Gushtisp add I'aisliidward, Slurii, 
and thirty-seven others (un-iiamed), for ' I h'sh ti- 
tan ’ read ‘ Bishiitan and for ‘ AMd ’ ‘lead ‘ Afrld. 
bottom, after (20) imeri ~d. oE Kaid. 

Page 5, line 20, after ‘ d’Or,’ add tull stop, and for ' texte ’ read 
* Texte.* 

Page 6, heading, for ‘NOTE ON PRONUNCiATlON ’ read 
‘ ABBREVIATIONS.’ 

Page 1 8, line 4, for ‘ Kharzarwdn ' read ‘ Khazarwan.' 

Page IQ, line 18, for ‘ Turkestan ’ read ‘ Turkisthn.’ 

Page 27, line t, delete full stop at end. 

line 4 from bottom. ‘ There is actually a tribe existing to 
this day among the Elburz Mountains, or the 
fastnesses of ancient Hyrcania, which still bears 
the name Div Sapeed.’ S. G. W. Benjamin, 
Persia and the Persians, p. 302. 

Page 29, note i, add ‘ Vol. v, p. 116.’ 

Page 61, line 9, for ‘ bears ’ read ‘ bear.’ 

Page 69 line 20 add semicolon at end. 

Page 81, line 3 from bottom, after ‘ crystal ’ insert reference number 9 
and at bottom add ' Rums near Aivan-i-Kait EKai ?) 
some forty miles South-east of Tihr 4 n arc still 
traditionally ascribed to Kai K 4 hs. See A. V. 
Williams Jackson. From Constantinople to the 
Home of Omar Khayyam, p. 123.' 

Page 89, line 25, end, insert comma. 

26 after ‘ Kihs ’ insert comma. 

Page 96, line 6 from bottom, after ‘ Zawdra ’ add reference number t 
and at bottom add ' * This is the first mention of 
Rustam's brother.’ 

Page 97, line 5, for ' a Zam of ’ read * Zam’s stream with.’ 

bottom, delete ‘ The name of a river ’ and read ‘ i.e. the 
Oxus.* 

Page X03, line 12, for ‘What ever* read ‘Whatever.’ 

Page 1 1 8, bottom, for ‘ i, p. 23G ’ read ‘ v, p. 30.’ 

1 -^age 1 19, bottom, after ‘ V ’ insert full stop. 

Page 1 21, line 21, after ‘him’ insert reference number i, and at 
bottom add ' » C. adds rightly 

They led him herdwards 

That they might have their portion from that steed ; 
As I have heard, he covered forty mares 
And one became with foal. 

Cf. p. 128 and NIN, p. 45 note i.’ 

Page 157, line 7, for ‘ spoken* read ‘ unspoken.’ 

Page 196, line 16, for ' heart and eyes * read ‘ Heart and Eyes/ 

Page- aoo, fine fof ‘ she * read ‘ She/ 

Page 223 :, line 13; /nr / nnled * ’ nnsoiled/ 

Page 224, , end' of last line^ irksert reference number 1' and add at 

Page' 1^25, „ Ihi'e'' 12^ /nr ' f ' '^^dd^ ' albrighteou^/ '' 

page 'a29,.'hne t6ffor ^'1|y'ho'/^Wi<f''*'W;ho;* , * and elmiBb'cre- . 


CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 183 

Page 247, line 5 and elsewhere, for ‘ Almighty ' read ' almighty ' 
when not absolute. 

Page 252, line 4, for ‘ my ’ read ‘ mine.’ 

Page 256, line 6 from bottom, /ar ‘ caj^arisoned ’ read ' bctiapped.’ 
Page 257, line 2 from bottom, delete full stop and insert comma at 
end. 

Page 261, line 21 and elsewhere, for * ffoly ’ read ' holy * when not 
absolute. 

Page 265, line 18, delete comma at end. 

Page 281, line 22, for ‘Iran ’ read ‘ Tiiran.’ 

Page 285, line i, for ‘ dressed ’ read * drest.’ 

Page 306, line 14, end, insert semicolon. 

Page 310, line 4 from bottom, for ' All-holy ’ read * all-holy.’ 
Page 312, line 4 from bottom, after ‘ league ’ insert comma. 

Page 313, lino 5 from bottom, end, comma. 

4 from bottom after ‘ hearing ’ insert comma. 

Page 321, line i, end, add reference number i. 

12, end, add reference number 2. 
bottom, insert * ^ See p. 261, » See p. 293.’ 

Page 328, line ii, for ' Kaldr ’ read * Kald.’ 

5 from bottom, for ' blunt ’ read ' pointless.' 

4 from bottom, for * would go ’ read ' hunted,' and 
insert full stop at end. 

3 from bottom, delete * To hunt,’ and for ' at ' read 
‘ At.’ 

Page 34 T, line 8 from bottom, /o?'* Kawd ' read ‘ Kdwa.' 

Page 374, line 6 from bottom, end, insert reference number r, 
bottom, insert * 1 Sec j). 312.' 

Page 377, line 22, insert reference number i. 
bottom, insert * ^ See p. 273.' 

Page 384, line 7 from bottom, delete comma and imerl full stop at 
end. 

Page 390, bottom, delete and insert ’ 'h 
Page 395, line 3, end, insert reference number 1. 

bottom, insert ‘ See p. 363/ 

Page 412, last line, for * toward ’ read ' tow'rd.* 

VOLUME III, 


Page 3, line 24, end, Kisdri Mohan Ganguli and published by/ 

Page 14, line 30, end, add reference number 5 ttnd ‘ The text also 
allows the view that’ P’ardd dwelt on Mount 
Sapad. , See Vol, v, p. 30.’ 

Page 15, Note i, end, add " There was no difhculty in finding an 
additional 'rhyme without using ' Pashan/ 
‘Gashan'’ (much) rhymes with ’Pashan' in 
VoL vJii, p, 397 and 

Page 20, line md,/ aM'> fs/ereme .^nuinber at bottom 

* CA' Voh.E/p. 61 f*' '' 


18^ CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 

Pago 59, lino 1 7 and elsowhoro, for ‘ Almighty ’ read ‘ almighty ’ 
zsjlic7i not absolute. ^ 

Pago 6Sj line i.S, for ‘ stoneand * read * stone and ^ 

Page 83, nott‘ 2, end, add * (p. ro).' 

Page 84, line 7 from bottom and elsowlicrc, for ‘ All-lioly ’ read 
‘ all-holy ’ when not ahsohtle. 

Page 102, lino 22 for ‘ Omnipotent * read ‘ omnipotent/ 

Pago no, line 2 and elsewhere, for ‘ Who ' rend ' who/ 

6, for ‘ Whom ' read * whom/ 

Page 130, line ii, add oommz, at end. 

Page 134, line 6, end, add ! 

line 15, end, add 

Page 141, line 2 from bottom and elsewhere, for ' Holy ' read ' holy ' 
when not absolute. 

Page 148, note, for ‘ Pehlevan ' read ‘ Pchlewan ’ and after ‘ donna ' 
delete comma 

Page 151, line 4 from bottom, add full stop at end. 

Page 172, note, for ' Car ' read ' car/ 

Page 191, line 12, for ' Abul ' read ' ’Abnl/ 

Page 194, line 8, for ‘ Khan ' read ' Khdn/ 

Page 213, lino 22, for ' Oleadcr ' read ‘ O leader/ 

Page 234, note, for ' Et ’ read ‘ et ^ and for ‘ comblan ’ read ' com- 
blant.* 

Page 237, line 7, prefix 
Page 241, line 22, delete "far/ 

Page 251, note, for ' Sur' read "sur/ 

Page 275, line ro, end, delete I 

Page 285, line 8 from bottom, for " fraicheur ' read ' fraichenr/ 
last line, add reference number 2, 

I age 287, side reference, for * V. 1063 * read * V, 1065 ’ and suhse-^ 
queni side references consecutively, i.e., * V, 1066,’ 

" V. ro67,' etc., up to page 305. 

Page 294. lino 7, for " buffalos " read ‘ buffaloes/ 

Page 298, note, for ' La ^ read ' la/ 

Pnge 304, lino II, delete semicolon and insert comma. 

P^S^^ line 25* add side reference ‘ V. 1086,’ and read subsequent 
side references consecutively, i.e., " V, 1087/ 
‘V. 1088/ etc., up to page 356, 

Page 318, note, for " II * read " iV 
Page 328, line 12, end, insert semicolon. 

Page 348, line 15, add comma at end* 


VOLUME IV, 

Page V, line 5* end, delete full stop and insert — 

Page ix, line, 10, for ‘ wrath * read ' Wrath/ > 

Page 8^ line 10,' end,' add^ '3ee' Vol. vii, pp. 381, 422.’ ' 

Page 3i,Jine ^deUte oQtpm^\,anddHsert%Qmimlj!yxk, 

Page '40^ liae^ 9, epd, add reference number i, and insert af bcUom 
, ' ' ' , \ '^.'Cf, VdL'.'i, t)» and noted ' ' ■ 


CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 


185 


Page S5, note, prefix reference vumher i. 

Page 139, note 2, add ' It is interesting to find the dog appearing 
in the Pock of Tobit in which there aie Tranian 
elements. C/. Vol. iii, p. 271 and Enel. Bnt. 
I ith Ed. A' V. Tobit.' 

Page 1 41, line 9, end, delete 

Page 1 43, line 6, from bottom, insert comma at end. 

Page 1.^4, line 8, delete comma and insert semicolon. 

Page 150, line 8, for ‘ bn Halos ' read ' buffaloes.’ 

§3. There appears to be a doublet here as Afrasiyab is 
first said to be beyond Jaz and then at Baigand, 
%,e., in the neighbourhood first of the Jaxartes and 
then of the Oxiis, but the context favours the 
latter position. 

Page 155, line 10, delete and insert ' He ranged the army's centre 
and its wings.’ 

Page 256, lino i, delete and insert ‘ All filled with minstrelsy and 
harp and wine.’ 

bottom, delete comma and insert semicolon. 

Page 259, line 7 from bottom, delete ' Barda’, a cavern ’ and insert 
‘ to Barda’, one ’ 

Page 262, note 2, Add * Tlic situation of Barda’ would, however, 
make X^ake (lokcha more appropriate. Cf. 
p. 259.’ 

Pago 304, line 14, end, deJeie comma and insert smnicolon. 

Page 324, line 12 from bottom, for ‘ shore ’ read ' river h’ and at 
bottom add note * » The Euphrates.’ 

Page 325, line 8 after * city ' add reference mmber 1 and at 
bottom add note ‘ ^ Shfirib. Cf. Vol. vii, p, 

254*, 

Page 339, lino i, for * sea ’ read ' river.’ 

Page 340, line 3, for ’ sea ' read ’ stream/ 

Page 344, line 16, far * sea * read ‘ stream.’ 

25, for * sea ’ read ' river/ 
ah, for ^ sea ’ read ‘ stream/ 

31, for ‘ sea ’ read ’ stream.’ 

Page 346, line 18, end, add reference number i, and at bottom add 
note * ^ Cf, Vol. v, p. 233 note,* 


VOLUME V. 

Page 14, line 2 from bottom, end, add reference number it, and at 
bottom • Spitima seems to mean ' White/ 
See JZ, p. 1$/ , 

Page 30, line 19, for ' Cirdknh*' read ’ Girdkhb/ 

line 24, \add Itbae'beefi stated 'by an oriental authority 
that Uhsh. Grhm'badin f the IDomed 'Fort ’) and 
Oirdfciih were See" LEG, ,p.' 365/ 

Page 71* line '’hfe ■' read * a.*'" 


l86 COMRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 

’Page 71, line 17, end, add reftrence number i and at bottom ' » In 
Firdausi Nash Azar is the son of Asfandiyar, 
but in L)akiki may of course be a, brother and 
the one rcferied to above/ 

Page ii:6, line 4, end, add reference number 1 and at bottom ‘ ^ Cf. 
p. 233 noted 

133, line 21, for ' wisdon ’ read ‘wisdom/ 

Page 160, lino 23, end, add quotation niavkd 
Page 1 61, last line, end, insert full stop. 

Page 2x4, line x.^, end, add quotation mart: I 
Page 277, line 8, in%yt full stop. 

6 from bottom, end, insert semicolon. 

Page 288, note i, add ‘ Cf, E.P. i, 256.’ 

VOLUME Vf. 

Page vi, line 3, for ‘ Married ' read ‘ married.’ 

Page ix, Jine 14, for ‘ RuinAns ’ read ‘ Kumans.’ 

Page 3, line. 8 from bottom, delete ' Rustam/ 

7 from bottom, for ‘ Chublna ’ read ‘ Chdbfna/ 

^ from bottom, for * Shirwf ’ read ‘ Shfrwi ’ 

Page 6, Hip 2 X, for ‘ Muller ' read ‘ Miillcr.’ 

^ 5 * Hue ro, for ‘ legend ’ read * Legend/ 
note 3, add ‘ Cf, Vol. vii, p. 70/ 

Page 17, line i, for ‘ Mukaffa ' read ‘ Mukaffa’ ’ 

Page 39, line 6 from bottom, end, delete ? and insert ! 

Page 64, b‘ne 8, for ‘ Ravi ’ read ' R 4 vi.’ 

Page 8r, line 2, end, insert hyphen. 

Page 89, line 5, for ‘Married' read * married.' 

Pago 98, line 14, end, insert comma. 

Page 133, line 4, end, insert semicolon. 

Page 135, line 12 from bottom, read * He must not privily devise,’ 
10 from bottom, for ‘ wise ' read ' sage.’ 

Page 136, lino 4, end, insert ! 
l^age 137, lino 7, end, insert comma. 

Page 150, bottom line, end, insert comma. 

Page 154, line 13 from bottom, end, insert full stop. 

Page i6x, line 20, end, insert reference number i. 

bottom, insert note ‘ » Of. VoL i, pp. 118, 132/ 

Page 207, line 7, after ‘ above ’ insert ‘ {p, 195).^ 

Page 209, line 10, end, insert reference number 2, and at bottom add note 
‘ * Molil,. rightly according to Ndldcke (N IN, p. 26 
and note), reads ^Siminians’ for ‘Ashkdnians.’ The 
' former claimed 'descent' from Bahrslm Chfibfna/ 
Page a 10, line 13 from bottom, end, delete comma. 

Page aia, note, add-*Cf, p. aoi/ ,, ' 

Page, 23 1, line 4 froiii 'Bottom; tp,d, Jnsert comma. 

page '2.50^ line 9 from bbttom^ fbf ^fehubfna ’ read ‘ Chebina/ 

Page a%:4ine'.9, beginrii%,' ' ' 

Page' 291, lino to ftom r ' 

Page 29a,: lino t, epd; 


COJiRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 187 

Page 296, line 6 from bottom, for ' Runtclns ’ road ‘ liumans.’ 
Page 298, line 13 from bottom, for ‘ Pars ^ read ‘ Pars/ 

P<\ge 304, bottom hno, end, insert comma. 

Page 312, lino 3, for 'respect’ read ' respecteth ' and for ‘thou 
art ’ ' thou’rt.^ 

Page 316, second note, prefix 2. 

Page 323, note, line 5 from bottom, end, insert comma. 

Page 327, line 7, for ' Ambar ’ read ‘ Ambir.’ 

line 8, for ‘ ’Abbasid ’ read ‘ 'Abbdsid/ 

Page 339, note, for ' Shammas ' read * Shammas.’ 

I>age 372, line 2 from bottom, for * the spring of ’ read ‘ a lake 
near.’ 

bottom line, after ' birth-place ’ add, reference number 8, 
and at bottom add note ‘ » The lake in question 
being the source of two rivers the expres.sion 
‘ Spring ’ used by Firdausi in connexion with 
it is not wholly inappropriate.’ 

Page 376, line 7 from bottom, for ' great ’ read ‘ Great/ 

Page 387, line 12 from bottom, prefix ", 

Page 402, lino i, end, insert comma. 


VOLUME vir. 


Page vii, line 4, for * SASANIAN ’ read * SAsANIAN. ^ 

Page xi, line 13 from bottom, for ' Feasts ’ read ' Banquets.’ 

Page 85, line iV> from bottom, insert comma at end. 

3 from bottom, /or' Kharasarwdn *read* Khazarwdn/ 
Page 95 , line 18 end delete comma and insert semicolon. 

Page 106, line 15, after ‘ scabbards’ insert comma, 
l^age no, line 15, for ' an as ’ read ‘ as an/ 

Page 1 1 8, line x'l from bottom, for * Irdn * read ‘ Jn/w/ 

Page 155, line 9 from bottom, semicolon wsef/ comma. 

Page 156, line 6, afbu" ' Hormisdas ’ delete comma and insert ‘ III. 
Page 184, note, line 14 from bottom, after ‘bunch’ delete . and 
insert ? 

Page 1 85, bottom note, prefix 4. 

Page 207, heading, for * KTJBAD ’ read ’ KUBAD/ 

Pago 209, line 2, after * below ’ insert reference number i , and at 
bottom, add * * Cfi MHP, ii, 77» 3 R.H, Bk. iii, 
ch. 35 and noUf 

line 3 from bottom, end, detete 1 and insert 2, and before 
note delete i and insert 2* 

Page 217, line 4 from 'bottom/ Sura appears to be identical with 
thapsacns'of whAch Tipltsah {t Kings, iv. 24) 

' ' meaning probably ' tord seems to have been 
the fiebrew 'form.' The' aripy of Cyrus the 
^ounger.ih’his/^aditibn a^ninst his bi^ether 
Arta^erxes II, erdssed the river there 

phiopt. '.':K:enpphi^ni Anhbaski L iy* 1,7, 


i 88 CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 

Page 227, line 5 from bottom, after ' crown ’ insert comma. 

Page 231, bottom line, delete full stop and insert comma. 

Page 239 and 247, heading, read ‘ NCSHfRWAN ’ 

Page 251, line 13 from bottom, for ‘ Garshasp ’ read ' Gashasp ’ 
Page 263, line 6 Ironi bottom, delete comma and insert semicolon. 
Page 275, bottom line, end, insert comma. 

Page 300 line ii, insert comma after ‘For’ and ‘know.’ 

33i» 4. delete ‘the’ and insert ‘from.’ 

Page 34 <S, line 20, for ‘ S 4 hh ’ read ‘ Shdh.’ 

Page 369, line iS, for ‘ frowning face ’ read ‘ looks afrown.’ 

Page 395, line 10, for '* was ’ read ‘ were.’ 

Ti, far ‘ were ’ read ‘ was.’ 

Page 400, line i, for ‘ crown * read ' treasii'*e.’ 

2, for ' treasure, for ’ read ' crown because,’ 

Page 410, bottom line, for ‘Almighty’ read ‘almighty.’ 

VOLUME VIII 

Page V, line 17, for ‘ answer ’ read ‘ Answer.’ 

Page viii, line 13 from bottom, add ‘ to Caesar.’ 

Page XV, line 20, for ‘ PCHAP ’ read ‘ IIAP.’ 

Page 72, line 21, for ‘ Kh 4 n‘s read * Khin’s.’ 

Pago 91, note, for ‘ Parwiz read ‘ Parwfz.’ 

Page 122, line 14, delete fix^tlxyghan. 

Page 138, line 19, delete id. 

Page 143, line ro, insert comma after 'Letter* and ' Parmuda,* 
Page X47, line 11, for ‘great’ read ‘ Great.’ 

Page 153, line 18, delete in\\ ^top and insert commo.. 

Page 189, line x6, for ‘ Zab’ read ‘Zdb.’ 

Page 190, line 16, for ‘ Garabzin,’ ‘ Galabzin ’ read ‘ Garibzi'n * 

‘ Galdbzfn ’ 

Page 191, line 12, according to Muir's ‘ The life of Mohammad,’ 
edited by T. H. Weir {1923), p. 431 note, the 
battle of Dhii K 4 r was fought A.D. 61 1. 
Page X92, note, for ’ PCHAP’ read ‘ HAP.’ 

Page 205, line 6 from bottom, after ‘ take ’ insert reference number i 
and at bottom add ‘ 1 See Vol. 5, p. 156 note,* 
Page 225, justify line 25, 

Page 265, line 22, delete full stop and insert comma. 

Page 270, line s, for ‘ Luhrasp ’ read ‘ Luhrisp/ 

line 6, for ‘ Asfanfiyar ’ read ‘ Asfandiyir.’ 

Page 272, line i, insert comma after ' one.’ 

Page 279, line 4 from bottom, for ‘ and readers of the stars ' read 
‘ with the astrologers/ 

Page 285, line 5, for ' gi*eat ’ Had ' Great/ 

Page 287, line 20, for * achieved ' read ‘ accomplished/ 

Page 313, line 21, end, delete full ;stop and insert comma. 

Page 317, line from bottoin, delete comma. 

Page ,327, line 13, for * bjreve'', ‘ Brave/' ‘ , 

Page 3 28, bottom,' for ‘ ih haste ^ nad ‘ vrtth 'Speed/' 

34?* bottom, ‘;gdry ’ redd ‘ ^lory/; ' - 


189 


CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 

Page 348, line 6 from bottom, for ‘ in a letter to the lung ' 
read ‘ to the monaich in a letter/ 

Page 353, line 5, foi' * If’ read ' It ’ 

Page 362, line ii from bottom, delete hyphen. 

Page 374, line 8, for ‘ Ot ’ read * Of/ 

Page 41 1, line 8, for ' the ’ read ' thy/ 

Page 421, line 12 from hottom, for ‘ Gah'nus ’ read ‘ GaHnhsh/ 


GENERAL INDEX 

This Index and ilie General Table of Contents in this volume are 
complementary , References to the latter are %n Italics. 


A 

Aaishma Daeva, demon, iii., 272 
=Asmodeus probably, iii, 
272 

Abdn, genius, iii, <287, 328 

'Abbds, Arab chief, attacks Hur- 
muzd, viii, 93 

*Abb 4 sid, 'Abbdsids, Muhamma- 
dan dynasty, vi, 327 
rise of, i, 13 
fall oi i, 14 

Abbreviations, General List of, 

ix, 135 

Abdaas, bishop, vi, 372 

Abraham, patriarch, vi, 65 

Abtin (Ap^a, Athwya), mythi- 
cal Iranian hero, husband 
of Fardnak and father of 
l^aridhn, ix, 53, 1,03 
legend of, i, 145 
Zahhdk slays, i, 151, 153 
Farfdun avenges, i, 170 
mythological origin of, i, 
171, T72, 174 

Abd-’AH Muhammad, Persian 
poet, Shdhndma of* i> 69 

Abii Bakr, the first Kdiafffa 
(A.D. 632-4), i, T2, ix, 76 
be^ns war with^ Persian 
Empire, ix, 66 

Abti Dulaf, friehd of Eirdausf, i, 

36 , . ‘ ' , 

assists ^ Eitdausi^ i*, / 3.5' ^ ■ ’ 
reciter' of tfie, Shdfiridnaa, 

‘ ’ ' ' ' ' 


AbiVl *Abbds Fazl bin Ahmad, 
minister of Mahnii'id and 
perhaps a patron of Fir- 
dausi, i, 30, 100, iv, 141 
account of, i. 36 
disgrace of, may have af- 
fected Firdausi, i, 37 
Abd’l Fazl, minister under the 
Sdmdnids, father of Abfi 
'AH al Bar ami who trans- 
lated Tabari, vii, 430 
patron of Rfidagi, vii, 383 
Abfi'l Kdsira (Firdausi, ci.v), i, 
24, 38, 99, 1 12, iv, 140, 
V, 89, 1x9, vi, 20, 207, 
viii, 28 

AbfiT Kdsim of Gurgdn, shaikh, 
iii, 191 

dream of, about Firdausi, iii, 
191 

Abd* Muzafiar. See Nasr, 

Abd Mansdr bin Abdu'r Razzdk, 
prince of Tds, i, 67 se^* 
vi, 16 

Shdhndma of, vi, 16 
probably compiled by 
Magi for, i, 69, vxH, 71, 
73 

importance of^ for Fir- 
dausi, viii, 73* 

'Abd Mansdr bin.Muhammad, son 
, i ' of abpve (?), 139 

patron of Firdausi, i, 29, no 
mnrd€te<i,,i, 29, XII 
, ^ ■' pratee 'of, U txo ^ • 

advice' of, _ to, Firdausi, i, 
' '' ‘''' ' ' '- ' ^ '' 


X92 GENERAL 

Abii Raihan Muhammad. See 
Albi'runi. 

Abd Tdlib, uncle of Muhammad, 
i, 12 

Abii 'Ubaicla, Arab general, ix, 66 
supersedes Khdlicl in Svria, 
ix. 66 

Abd 'tJhaida, Arab general, ix, 

67 

made commander in Persian 
campaign, ix, 67 
slain, ix, 67 

Accession of a Shdh, ceremony 
at, vi, 409 

xAchaemenid, Aehacmcnids, the, 
first historical Persian 
dynasty, i, 64, v, 10, 281, 
vi> 194. ^97* 193 
Achshunwar. See A kh shun war, 
'Ad, father of Shadddd, 

Arab tribe, viii, 276 
'Adan, seaport and territory in 
southern Arabia, vi, 386 
Adar, See Azar. 

Adarbdd, son of Mahraspand, 
Zoroastrian Samt, v, 16 
note 

ordeal of, v, 16 note 
Aden. See 'Adan. 

Adonis, iv, 315 
^.gean sea, vi, 204 
Afrdsiydb. son of Pashang, ruler 
of Tdrdn and one of the 
arch-enemies of Irdn, X42-^ 

I 53 t h 4 ^, 55» 72, ii, jx, 13, 

14, 16 seq.f 20, 79, 81, 

93 e&q., xi8, 127, 149, X84, 

189, 242 seq,, 257 seq,, 283, 

286, 288, 322 seq., 333, 347 
seq,, 360 seq„ 369,' 373, 

380, 381, 386, 392 $eq., 

401 seq,,m, 8,12,13,15, 23, 

26, 27,' 29,, 40, 42, 47^ 7^,^ 
7()S$q„%oo, 108, 123, 134, 

?3b; 143» 3 : 45 , X52, X3X 
3:64, 163, ,176; 1%, 

X93, 200 seq,f,i2iQ7 2t t, 

■ 2J23, 22B, 241, 

2'6o ''Seq^i^ 268,' ' 2^iC|' ’277 
«^^v''285;' 2'93.' a#, '300,''' 

; a?Ov^^ 33B*/''t3;7.,3J9. '34'^; 


INDEX 

Afrasiyab — conL 

5 ^ 7 -. iv. 7, 8, 17, 19 seq., 
25, 29, 46, 56, 58 seq,, 65’ 
70, 75, seq , 83, 89, 93' 
94, 96, 103, 108, no, 1 13' 
1x7, X28, 129, i.|5, 145^ 
1^0 seq., I92scf/, 235, 252, 
253, 273, 287, 289, 294 V, 
12, 13, 21, 44^ 62, 176, 

203, 208, VI, 15, 79^ 

240 and note, vii, 330, 
335» 337, 359, viii, 242, 
300 , 349, LX, 25, T03 
one of the Zoroastrian triad 
of evil, i, 59 and note 
mythological origin of, i 
337 

first mention of, in Shdh- 
nima, i, 342 
advocates war with Nau- 
dar, i, 343 

bidden by Pashang to in- 
vade frdn, i, 343 
sends Shamdsds 'and Khaz- 
arwdn to invade Sfstdn, i, 
345 

marches to Bahistdn, i, 346 
writes to Pashang, i, 346 
encourages Bdrmdn to' chal- 
lenge the frdnians to 
single combat, i, 347 
rewards Bdrmdn, 1,348 
fights with Naudar, i, 348 
and seq. 

encounters Kdraii, i. 350 
victorious, i, 350, 352' 
beleaguers Haudar in Dah- 
istdn, i, 353 

sends Kurdkhdn to attack 
Pdrs, i, '353 

takes Naudar and other 
chiefs prisoners, i, 355 
hears of 'the death of Bdr- 
mdn - and bids Wisa pur- 
, sue ' Kdranv i, 356 , , 
hears of . the l^rkman de- 
, ' feats, i, ^ 362 
sends for, and slays, Naudar, ' 
h' $62 1 . ' ; ' 

: 's|^ates' the othdr onptiyes, at 
/ ; Ightfedd' , ro(|nbs,t,, ; 'i,' 363 '' 


GENERAL INDEX 


193 


Afrasiyab, imprisons the cap- 
tives at Snri, i, 363 
advances to Rai, i, 363 
wroth with, and slays, Xgh- 
n'ras, i, 367 

fights v/ith Zal, i, 368 
Pashang’s v/rath with, i, 


invades Iran, 
3S1 


i. 374 seq., 


sends Kuliin to intercept 
Rustam, i, 382 
fights with Arabs for Iran 


and takes it, ii, 92 
king of Turan and Chin, ii, 


99 , 

expelled from Irdn by Kai 
Kaus and Rustam, ii, loi 
fights with the Seven 
Warriors, ii., iii seq, 
nearly taken prisoner by 
hiustam, ii, 14, 116, 35^:1, 

iii, 242, 250 and note 
plot of, against Siihrdb and 

Rustam, ii, 129 
gifts ot, to Suhr^b, ii, 130 
identical with A sty ages in 
legend, ii, 19 1 
referred to, ii, 322, 347, 394, 
lii, 206, iv, 145, J50, 194 
invades Irdn, ii, 224 seq. 
dream of, ii, 232, 243, 297, 

iv, 170, 267 

determines to sue for peace 
and sends hostages, ii, 
235 seq. 

receives Zanga and consults 
Pfrdn, ii, 253 seq. 
sends Pfrdn to welcome 
Sxyiwush, ii, 25 S 
plays at polo with Siyd- 
wush, ii, 264 

marries Farangis to Siy 4 - 
wUvSh, ii, 273 

recalls Siyiiwush, from 
Gang-di2h, ii, 2 <$5 
sends Garsiwaz' to Siy 4 -' 
wushgird, ii, 289 
deceived by Garsiwaz 'res- 
pecting SiyiwiiSh, ' ii, 2''§'6 
seq. . ; ' / > ^ . y ^ 

von, ' 


Afrasiyab, sends Garsiwaz to 
summon Siyawush and 
Farangis to court, ii, 300 
seq. 

attacks, takes, and has 
Siyawush executed, ii, 314 
seq. 

appealed to by Farangis, ii, 
3^7 

iil-treatnient of Farangis by, 

ii, 320, 322^ 
referred to, iv, 204 

appeal of Pir^n to, ii, 324 
referred to, iv, 205 
spares Farangis, ii, 325, and 
her son Kai Kliiisrau, ii, 

327 

interview of, with Kai Kims- 
ran, ii, 332 
referred to, iv,.205 
sends Surkha against the 
Iranians, ii, 344 
marches to avenge Sur- 
kha, ii, 348 

fights willi Pfis, ii, 353 
rescue of, from Rustam by 
JIfimdn, ii, 354 
crosses the sea of Chin, ii, 
356 

consults Pirdn about Kai 
Khusrau, ii, 356 
returns, ii, 362 
vengeance of, on fr^n, ii, 
3^>3 

pursues Kai Khusrau, ii, 
388 seq. 

disgraces Pfrdn, ii, 390 
turns ‘back at the Jfhdn, ii, 
394 

Kai Khusrau 's oath to take 
vengeance on, iii., 21 
hears of the approach of 
the Irdnian host, iii, 

bids Pfrin gather troop$, 

iii, yr, 79 

numbers the host, iii, 79 
loss ;0f kindred of, in battle, 
,''iiV'94' ' ' ' 

tW'ards' Pfrin, iii^ rob 
, roi-Mdroosi'Pfrih,' iii, A 18 


GENERAL INDEX 


Afrdsiyab, announces to Ms 
chiefs the defeat of Ms 
host, lii, 242 

exhorted by his host to con- 
tinue the war, iii, 243, 240 
makes his preparations, iii, 
243, 250 

sends Farghar to spy on 
Rustam, iii, 250 
consults with Shida, iii, 250 
describes Rustam, iii, 251 
receives Farghdr's report, 

iii, 253 

consults with Pfrhn, iii, 253 
bids Pfrdn continue the war, 
iii, 254 

sends Shida to summon 
Piilddwand, iii, 255 
consults Piilhdwand, iii, 256 
interferes in the fight be- 
tween Rustam and PiiUd- 
wand, iii, 263 
withdraws to CMn and 
M 4 clun, iii, 265 
goes in pursuit of Rustam 
and is defeated, iii, 280 
hears of the case of Bfzhan 
and Manizha iii, 301 
consults Kur^khdn, iii, 301 
sends Garsfwaz to search 
Manfzha's palace, iii, 301 
sentences Bizhan to death, 
iii, 304 

respites Bfzhan, iii, 308 
imprisons Bizhan, iii, 309 
disgraces Manizha, iii, 309 
escapes from Rustam, iii 
348 

bids Pfrin prepare for war, 
iii, 349 

arrays the host against 
Rustam, iii* 350 
11 ee^ from Rustam, iii, 352 
goes to Khallukh, iv, xo 
addresses his nobles, iv, 10 
sends Shl 4 a to'- Rharazm, 
iy, IX. ' ' ' - , ' V 

jplritt against £r 4 n; iv, i 1 

I '' reinforcements' bids 
him bree*h' pft'degotia-:’ 
' ' ti'Ons with_<yfv/iv,;2b ^ 


Afrasiyab, receives tidings from 
Plran,iv, 77 
==king of Gang, iv. 134 
Kai Khusrau’s great war 
with, T52, iv, 135 seq, 
encamped at Baigand (Kiin- 
duz), iv, 15 1 

hears ill tidings of Plrdn and 
of the host, iv, 15 1 
distress of, iv, 152 
swears to be avenged on Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 152 
hears of the advance of Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 153 
harangues and equips his 
host, iv, 153 

patrols the Jlhiin with boats, 
iv, T53 

holds a council, summons 
Kurdkhdn, and crosses the 
Jlhtm, iv, 154 
sends Kur 4 kh 4 n with half 
the host to Bukhird, iv, 

marches to Amwl, iv, 154 
encamps in Glldn, iv, 155 
arrays his host, iv, 155 
takes his post at the centre, 
iv, 155 

gives SMda command of the 
left wing, iv, 155 
sends Jahn to guard Shlda^s 
rear, iv, X55 

gives a grandson command 
of the right wing, iv, 
156 

commands to Gurdglr, 
Nastfih, Ighrlras, and 
Garslwaz, iv, 156 
proposes to invade Nlrarfiz, 
iv, 156 

reviews the host and pre- 
pa-res to encounter Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 158 
, ' urged by Shida not to 
delay the attack, iv, 159, 

, reply -oi iv, 1,60 ; 
vviishes to 'meet I^ai Khusrau' 
in, single 'Compat, iv, 161 ^ 
\ . , ' - sends Shida' on’ an epibasshge 
' , " ‘ to.' Kai , Khnsrau,, ' iv,- ' loi" 


GENERAL INDEX 


195 


Afrasiyab, hears of Shida’s 
death, iv, 176 
grief of, iv, 176 
commands 111 person against 
Kai Khnsrau, iv, 179 
sends Jahn to the left, iv, 

180 

reinforced by Garsfwa?:, iv, 

181 

forced by Garsiwaz and 
Jahn to quit the field, iv, 

182 

returns to camp, iv, 183 
abandons his camp and re« 
crosses the Jihiin, iv, 184 
joins forces with Kurakhdn, 
iv, 1 86 

stays at Bukhdrd, iv, t86 
withdraws to Gang-bihisht, 
iv, 187 

reinforced by Kdkula, iv, 
188 

sends troops to Ch4ch, iv, 
188 

under Tawu rg desertward , 
iv, 188 

m<irches to meet Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 190 

commands the centre, iv, 190 
hears of Kurdkhdn's defeat 
and return, iv, 193 
hears that Rustam is ad- 
vancing, iv, 194 
fails in attempt to surprise 
Rustam and withdraws to 
Gang-bihisht, iv, 194, 
seq. 

asks aid from the Faghfiir, 
iv, 196 

prepares Gang-bihisht for a 
siege, iv, 197 

besieged in Gang-bihisht, 
iv, 198, 208 seq. 
offers terms of peace to Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 203 
rallies his troops -at the 
storming of Gang-bihisht, 
iv, 209 ' / ' ' 

escapes, iV, 2XX ^ ' 

gets possession pf _the trpa- 
surbs of Pfr4n;/,’iv,, grp , 


Afrasiyab, arrays his host to 
fight with K?i Khusrau, 
iv, 220 

offers Kai Khusrau peace or 
single combat, iv, 221 
fights a general engagement 
against Kai Khusrau, iv* 
223, 226 

defeated and escapes by 
flight, iv, 227 

army, of, surrenders to Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 228 
takes refuge at Gang-dizh, 
iv, 230 

captive kindred of, sent to 
Kai Kdds by Kai Klius- 
rau, iv, 232 
Kai Kdus on, iv, 237 
Khusrau ’s inquiries concern- 
ing, iv, 247 

hears of Kai Khusrau's ap- 
proach and quits Gang- 
dizh, iv, 248 

searched for by Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 248 

fears of tiie Iranians concern- 
ing, iv, 249 

Kai Khusrau takes counsel 
with Kai Kids about, iv, 
25S 

wanderings and wretched 
plight of, iv, 259 
takes refuge in a cave near 
Barda', iv, 259 
lament of, overheard by 
Hdm, iv, 260 

capture of, by Hdm, iv, 
261 

Darmesteter on, iv, 136 
pitied and unbound by Hdm, 
iv, 262 

escapes into lake XJrumiah, 
iv, 26:2 and mte 
attracted, by the . voice of 
Oarsfwaz, iv, 265' 

■holds converse with Gaxsi- 
‘'Wa2, iv, ,■ ' 

redapture of, ' by ' Hdm, iv, 

' '-266,',' ' '■'/-' !' 

' by ; Kai-' Khusrau, iv, 

,, ■;■ ; ■''. ' '''■: ' 


ic)(S GENERAL INDEX 


Afrasiyab, daughter of = Fa- 

langi'^, IV, 3o.| 

Khan of Chin descended 
from, vii, 334 

hoard of, viii, 148, 406 
Africa, vi, 30 

Afn'gh, king of Khlrazm, ii, 190 
’Airft, genie, i, 42 
Agani, Sargon I. of, v, 293 
Age, old, Firdausi’s lament over 

Ids, li, 336 

Golden. See Golden. 
Aghraeratha {Ighn'ras, q,v.), iv, 

137 

Aghrt'rad (Tghriras. i, 338 

Aghriras. Sec Ighriras. 

Agni, Vedic personification of 
fire, ii, 25 

Ahdiiamak (Andarzndmak), Pah- 
lavi treatise, vi, 257 
Ahmad, son of Isma’ il, Sdmdnid, 
vii, 383 

Alitnaci, son of Sahl, lord of Marv, 
V, 260, 261 

Ahmad, Fazl son of. See Abul 
’Abbds Fazl. 

Ahmad Hasan Maimandi, minis- 
ter of Mahmdd, i, 32, 39, 
45 

Ahmad ibn Muhammad, patron 
of Firdausi, i, 29 
Ahran, Rdnian chief, 154, iv, 
342 seq,, 353 

hidden by Caesar to slay the 
dragon of Mount Sakila, 
IV, 342 

takes counsel with Mirim, 
iv, 342 

referred by Mirin to Hishwf, 
iv, 344 

Ahran, required by GushtAsp to 
furnish him with arms, iv, 
345 

goes with GushtAsp and 
Hishwi to Mount Sakila, 
iv, ^45 ‘ ^ ’ ■ 

' Hf^hwl and; welcop® Gush- 
t4sp ott, his' return, iy, 

■ ' 347 ' ^ ■' ‘ 

fives gffts'to Gn^htisp/ iv, 


I Ahran, has the dead dragon con- 
: ve^T-ed to Caesar’s court, 

iv, 348 

marries Caesar’s third 
daughter, iv, 348 
Mirin and, display their 
accomplishment on the 
riding-ground, iv, 349 
Caesar’s wrath with Mirin 
and, iv, 351 

Mirin and, send a scornful 
message to Caesar, iv, 353 
set to guard the baggage, 
iv, 355 

Ahriman, the Zoroastrian Evil 
Principle, sometimes used 
metaphorically, 139, i> 5, b, 
50, 134, 138, 159, i 94>205, 
218, 236, 238, 24T, 245, 
287, 315, 360 ; ii, 34, 42, 
43. 5C 53. 5b, 7^. ibo, 
208, 214, 217, 250, 260, 
303, 315, 324, 358, 361, 
374 seq., 405 seq, ; iii, 
17, 123, 214, 228, 251, 266, 
275, 277, 287, 293. 294. 
300, 303, 304, 314, 316, 
318, 338 ; iv, 23, 41 seq,, 
45, 46, 89, 103, 124, 128, 
130, 162, 163, 179, 206, 
243, 272, 288, 342, 348, 
352 ; V, 17, 33. 3b, 45. 50, 
90, 99, 103, 122, 123, 125, 
X47, 177, 198, 206, 24b, 
271, 276; vi, 106, 112, 
206, 240, 281, 290, 299, 
318, 384; vii, 89, 233, 
265, 27T, 290, 312, 323, 
334. 359. Sbb, 367, 369 ; 
viii, X9, 21, 22. 8b, 87, 176, 
177, 198, 210, 219, 243, 
293. 333. 3b4. 421 ; ix, 
18, 73, 74, 79, gx 
envies Gaidmart, i, 118 
son of (the Black I)fv), i, 119 
Sqrdsh -warns Gaidmart 
'against, h'-iiq 
,nd<S€n by, Tahrqdtas, i, 125, 
‘'r'27 ' - 

^^ahhdk, i, i 62 ;, ; ' ^ 


GENERAL 

Aliriman=Afrcisiyab, i, 366 I 
Faith of, ii, 35S ; vi, aSj, 290 I 
= idolater, viii, 5.1 
= Bandwi or Gustaliam, 
viii, 89 

==Kharrad, son of Barzin, 

viii, III 

— Bahram Chdblna, viii, 295 | 
Ahuna Vairya, Zoroastrian 
sacred formula, v, 17 
Ahiira Mazda (Urmuzd), the 
Zoroastrian Good Prin- 
ciple, i, 1 1 6, 235 ; ii, 25 
81 ; iv, 137 

Aliwdz, city and province 
(Khiizistdn, Siisiana), i, 
286 ; vi, 35, 199, 298, 357; 
vii, 197, 198, 201, 214, 
224 ; viii 400, 402 
Airdn-ve^6 (trdn-vej q.v), ii, 189 
Akem Manau, Zoroastrian de- 
mon, hi, 271, 272 
s=:Akdmin=:Akw 4 n, iii 272 
assails Zarduhsbt v, 17 
Akesincs (Chinib), Indian river, 
vi, 31, 64 

Akhdst, Tiirdnian hero, 15 j ; 
iv, 105 

choseh to fight with Zanga, 
iv, 97 

slain by Zanga, iv, 106 
Akhshunwar (Achshnnwar), 
Haitdlian king, vii, 160 
Akki, foster-father of Sargon I 
of Agani, v, 293 
Aknaton, Pharaoh (XVIII 
dynasty) 

lover of peace like Yazda- 
gird, son of Shipiir, vi, 37t 
'Akr Bhbil, prison, viii, 194, 196 
Akiimto. Se& Akem ikanan. 
Akw 4 n, dfv, X50, iii, 270 SBq., a 80 
^&q,, 284, 309 
Story of, iii, 271 
Professor Ndldeke on the, , 
iii, 271 

Firdausf on, iii, _ 273’, ' 281 
boulder of, iii, 271,-276, 309, - 
343 . 344 , 347 , ; 

removed front piPs mouth 
by Etts,tam, -iii^ ,345'-' ' , 


INDEX 197 

Akwan, appears in the form of 
an onager, iii, 273 scq. 
pursued by Rustam, lii, 275 
foils Rustam, 111, 270 
takes Rustam at a disad- 
vantage, ill, 276 
oilers Rustam a choice of 
deaths, iii, 277 
outwitted by Rustam, iii, 
277 

slain by Rustam, iii, 281 
described by Rustam, iii, 282 
Al, place, ix, 93 

Aldns (Alani), people, now the 
Ossetes of the Caucasus, 
j./j, 267, 1, 217; IV, r.f, 
60, 05, 301 ; vi, 395 ; 
viii, 3(}9 

invade Iran, i, 19 
castle of the, i, 223 
taken by Kdran, i, 223, 
seq, 

castellan of, duped by 
Kiran, i, 224 
monarch of, vi, 393 
HhshfrwdiFs dealings with, 

vii, 216, 239 s$q. 

King of=Khusrau Pamlz, 

viii, 208, 209, 213 

A 14 r, a village in Ardshfr-Khurra 
vi, 205 

Albfriinf, Abii Raihdn Muham- 
mad, Oriental author and 
chronologist (A,B. 073- 
1048), ii, 189 

account of Alffr (Gangdizh ?) 
by, ii, 190 

Alburz, mountain-range south of 
the Caspian, also mythi- 
cal ^ range (Hara-bcre- 
zaiti) surrounding the 
earth, 14a, i, 4, 71, 145, 
235, 248, 230, 277, 
373 J iK 23, 
?7. 79. 9b, 144,' 33b. 401; 
ifi, 120 ; iv, 136 ; v, 202^• 

i ■’^ib-t77** 95 

■ Farfdhn 'taken, by his mother 
, , ' ; ' . to, i,- ' , 

'.Z^, cast: ,a^ay, and found, 


GENERAL INDEX 


igS 

Albiirz, Kai Kiibad brought by 
Rustam from, i, 382 sr(j 
Kai Kails' buildings on, ii, 
81 

Aleppo (Chalybon - Bcroca), city 
in northern Syria, vii, 
218 ; viii, 4T 

Alexander I, king of Epirus 

Italian expedition of, vi, 12 
attributed to Alexander 
the Great, vi, 12 

Alexander the Great (Sikandar 
q.ij.), B.C. 356-323» son of 
Philip II of Macedon and 
his queen Olympias, i, 14, 
49 ; ii, 8 seq, ; iv, 314 ; 
V, 30 ; vi, 193, 194, 204, 
252, 253, 373 ; vii, 383 
harrier of, i, 16 ; vi, 78 
legend of, in the Kurdn, 
vi, 78 

persecutor of Zoroastrian- 
ism, i, 15, 59, 61, 63, 338 
paternity of, i, 55 and note ; 
vi, 16, 18 

one of the Zoroastrian triad 
of evil, i, 59 and note 
said to have burnt the Zoro- 
astrian scriptures, i, 63 
Zoroastrianism under, i, 63 
Era of, ii, 190 

accompanied by experts to 
the East, vi, 11 
Romance of, origin and 
growth of, vi, 12 seq. 
diagram to illustrate, vi, 
84 

Syriac Christian Legend of. 
See Syriac. 

Mohammad's references to, 

‘ in the Kur 4 n# vi, 15, 77 
Persian national hero^ how 
he became, vi, 15 ’ 
cities founded by, vi, ts, ' 
18 . ^ , ' ' “ ' ' , 

name, Persian' legend of his,' 
vi, 19 , ' 

Aristotle* ' tutor of, vi, ' 2^' , 
’ letter to,' vi,- 68 \ ■ 

< 'cerrespondenoe'abqut the , 

, V '''sTfocession vi, ' Bt. \ 


Alexander the Great, Roxana 
(Rush an a k) and, vi, 30, 32 
reign of, first ycais of lu 
history and romance, vi, 
30 

Darius’ banquet, his flight 
from, vi, 30 
his pursuit of, vi, 31 
murderers of, his treat- 
ment of them in history 
and romance, vi, 32, 33 
daughter of, marries, vi, 
33 

Fakirs and, vi, 61 
Calanus and, vi, 61 
Porus and, historical ac- 
count of, vi, 63 
‘ camp of, his visit to, vi,64 
iron steeds, his device of, vi, 

64 

stature of, vi, 64 
Cleophis and, vi, 65 
Ammon, Oasis of, his visit 
to, vi, 65 

Candace (Kaiddfa) and, vi, 

65 seq. 

Antigonus (Naitkiin), as- 
sumes name of, vi, 66 
Plutarch’s Life Of, vi, 67 
Brahmans, visit of, to the, 
vi, 67 

Indus mistaken for the Nile 
by, vi, 68 

marvels of his return-jour- 
ney, vi, 69 , 

admiral of (Nearchus), vi, 69 
Amazons and, vi, 12, 72 
legend of, vi, 72 
Gloom and Fount of Life, 
legend of his expedition 
to, in ,the Pseudo-Cal- 
listhcnos, vi, 74 seq, 
Andreas* his cook, legend of, 
vi, 76 

, in the Kurin, vi, 77 
Will of, vi, 81 
deafh of, vi, 82 

' 'dispute ;over his place' of 
” .intei:mehtf yi, ,82 ; 

' ooirpse of, 'taken ‘po Memphis, ; 

■' : '' ! , ' - 


GENERAL INDEX I99 


Alexander, tlie Great, interred at I 
Alexandria, vi, 82 
tomb of, vi, 82 
MasYidi on, vi, 82 
S. Chrysostom on, vi, 82 
wars on the death of, vi, 
197 

Alexander, son of Alexander the 
Great and Cleoidiis (?), vi, 
65 

Alexandria (Iskandarfya q,v.), 
city and sea-port in 
Egypt, vi, 13, 15, 17, 83 
founded by Alexander the 
Great, vi, 13 

Pseiido-Callisthcnes orig- 
inated at, vi, 13 
Alexander, the Great, buried 
at, vi, 82 
his tomb at, vi, 82 
Mas’hdf on, vi, 82 
S. Chrysostom on, vi, 82 

Alfir (Gangdizh ?), palacc-forfc- 
tress of the capital of 
Khdrazm, ii, 190 

A1 Hadr. See Hatra. 

’AH, husband of Fdtima, daugh- 
ter of Muhammad, and 
fourth Khalifa (A.D. 656 
—.661) 

Muhammad on, i, 12, 106 
cult of, i, 13 

known as “ the Lion,” i, 13, 
107 

assassination of, i, 13 
Ibrdausi's references to, i, 
24, 37, 40, 41, 106, 107; 

ii, 337 and note 

'AH, the Dilamite, friend and 
helper of Firdausi, i, 35 ; 
ix, 121 

transcriber of the , Shih- 
ndma, i, 39 

AHf, terminal, Firdausi'^s use 'Of, 

iii, 283 

A1 IskandardSk 

A1 KhidrM(Khisr, f , 
'Froph^t^ vi* ^ 78 ., 0 tod,,f^p# 
AlkdS; ' XdrMian h^ro*.' 4 i, 1 ^ 


Alkus, fights with, and worsts, 
Zawara, li, 115 
slam ]>y Rustam, h, 115 
Allah, Muhammadan name of 
the Deity, i, 50 

A 1 Mansdr, ’Abhasid Khalifa 
(A.D. 754-775) » founder of 
Baghdad, vi, 254 
Almas, river, iii, 251 
Alp-Arselan (Arslan), Seljuk Sul- 
tan (A D. 1063-1073), ii, 
219 note 

Alptigm, founder of the Ghazni- 
vid dynasty, i, 20 
Altuniya, place, ix, 92 
Aiwa, Rustam *s spear-bearer, 
slain by Kdmhs, J49, 
hi, 188 

Alwd, Iranian hero, probably 
identical with the above, 
V, 166 

slain by Niish Azar, v, 
226 

Amasis, viii, 193 
Amazons, their disputed visit to 
Alexander, the Great, vi, 
12, 72 

origin of, vi, 71 
described, vi, 153 seq, 
Sikandar’s correspondence 
with, and visit to, vi, 153 
seq. 

Ambdr (Anbdr, Pfrdz - Shdpdr), 
city on the left bank of 
the Euphrates some forty 
miles west of Baghdad, 
founded by Shdpdr son of 
Urmuzd (Sapor II,) The 
word means ” granaries.” 
vi, 327 t viii, 188 
foundation of, attributed to 
‘ thO'Azdites, i, tt 
‘ Ambassadors, instances of Mpgs 
, and chiefs going in person 
as ambassadors or spies, 

' ' vi* 

' Ambilb, plsoe*,iifss 4X ' 

, 'i^gyptian god per- 
aoiiated ,by Hectanebus, 


200 


GENERAL INDEX 


Amcshapentas, the, personifica- 
tions' of good qualities in 
Zoroastrian theology, ui, 
271 ; V. 15 scij, 

Aniida (Diyarbakr), city on the 
upper Tigris, vii, 1S7 
Ainm, 'Abbdsid Khalifa, (A.D. 
809-813), i, 14 

Ammianus Marcellinus {4th cen- 
tury A.D.) Roman histor- 
ian, V, 13 

Ammon, Oasis of, Alexander the 
Great’s visit to, vi, 30, 65 
'Ammiiriya, Rdman stronghold 
in Asia Minor between 
Sfvrf Hisdr and Ak-Shahr 
probably rei^rescnting the 
ancient Amorium but 
sometimes confounded 
with Angora (Angdriya) 
the ancient Ancyra fur- 
ther to the north-east, vi, 
23 note, 89, viii, 46 {Of. 
LEC. pp. 134, 153) 
Failakiis marches from, 
against Ddrdb, vi, 23 
Amorium. See 'Ammdriya. 
Amr, Arab chief, attacks Hur- 
muzd, viii, 93 

Amul, city in Mdzandardn, i, 145, 
177, 2^9, 298, 344, 366, 
367 ; ii, 18, X04 ; v, 284 ; 

vii, 89, 237; viii, 355, 
35 d, 35 ^* 392 ; ix, 86 

Amul. See Amwi. 

Amulet, of Kai Rhusrau, iv, 133 
given by Zardulisht to As- 
fandiydr, v, 130 
Amwf (Amul, Amdyah, now 
Charjdi), city on the left 
bank ojf the Oxus where 
crossed by the route from 
Marv to Bukh 4 rd,,iv, ii, 
65, 154, 184, 206 ; vii, 
91 and note, 331, 357, 359 ; 

viii, 334 
Andbd^h^ vi, 32 

Anassthotics,, employment of, i, , 
236, , 3^1 seq. ' , ' ^ ' 

Anbdr. S^f,Ambdr# ; ' , 1 '',1 

Ancyra*' Ammd»ya/,|, '' 


Andalus (r.and of the West or of 
tiic Vandals), Spam, 159, 

Vl, <)d, 12 2, 13(S 

queen ol (Kaidala q.v), vi, 
121 seq. 

Andaman, Iranian noble, viii, 
202 

Andarab, town in Afghanistan 
between Balkh and Kabid, 
iv, 65 

Andariman, l^uranian hero, 151, 
ii, 264 ; iv, 26 ; v, 29 
fights with Gustaham, iv, 87 
steed of, slain by Tl ajir, iv, 
87 

re.se lied by the Turkmans, 
iv, 87 

chosen to fight with Gurgin, 
iv, 97 

slain by Gurgfn, iv, 104 
Andarfmdn (Vaiidaremaini), 

brother of Aiqdsp, v, 12, 
14 1, 155 

commands one wing of the 
host, v, 46 

executed by Asfandiydr, v, 
158 

Andarznhrnak (Ahdndmak), 
Pahlavf treatise, vi, 257 
Andfv, country, viii, 313 
Andiydn, Iranian wairior, 172 
viii, 225, 257, 259, 269, 293, 
294, 296 

deceived by Caesar's talis- 
man, viii, 273 
Bahrim Chdbina writes to, 
viii, 285 

receives Kxrmdn, viii, 313 
Andreanticus, sea, vi, 77 
Andreas, Alexander the Great’s 
cook, 

legend of, vi, 76 seq. 
in Kurin, vi, 77 
Androphagoi, the, iii, 191 
Ahestres Castri * N dshfrwin, vii, 

383 

Angora. See ’Ammdriya. 
'Angra Mainyu«Ahriman, ii, 2'8 
'Animals, domeS'tication of, i, 126 
' Ant, tdie, Fir<itosCs' plea for, i, 

, . ! ^ ' and', n^^te ' 


201 


GENERAL 

Antdliiya (Aiitiocli), city in 1 
Syria on the Orontes, i6y, 
vm, 41 

taken by Nuslii'rwan, vij, 
218, 25S sr(j, 

Antigoiius (Naitkun), name as- 
sumed by Alexander the 
Great in legend, vi, 

66 

Antioch. See Antakiya. 

New, vii, 218, 259 

Antiochus, Macedonian general, | 
vi, 76 

Antiochus Sidetes, ii, 80, 81 

Aogcmaide, Pahlavi treatise, iv, 
136 

Anlipater, regent in Macedonia 
for Alexander the Great, 
intrigued against by 
Olympias, vi, 82 

Aphrodite, goddess, iv, 315 

Apollo, god, and the Python, 
vi, 203 

Apologues, i, 242, 265, 285 ; 
iih 33-2 ; iv, 18, 21, 28, 

47 ; vi, 310 ; ix, 86 

Apothegms, i, 259, 260 ; ii, 157, 
158, 170, 224, 254, 273, 
298, 300, 313, 315, 330, 
357. 383 ; iii. 53. 91, 96. 
167, 188, 212, 260, 277, 

301, 316, 341, 348, 350, 

351 ; iv, 13, 32, 33, 38, 

39, 59, 93, 108, 121, 131, 

268 ; V, 78, 103, 168, 214, 
242, 249, 250, 265 ; vi, 

50, 303, 343 ; vii, 17, 18, 

20, 42, 270, 277, 296, 301, 
403; viii, 119, 166, 206, 

215, 22J, 235, 295 ; ix, 

87, 88, xio , 

Apprentice, a merchant^, enter- 
tains, and finds favour 
with, Bahrim Gfir, vii, 

40 seq, 

Aprios (Pharoah-Hophra, B.C. 

589-57<>), vi,^ Id 

Apsheron, pn ’ the 

'western' ,^hoie oi 'the 
pian, :■ 

Aptya. > Abtfn», -'J' 


INDEX 

Arab, Arabs, 163, 16 j, ii, 79, Sr, 
99; ill, 14; iv, 14; V, 
31 ; vi, 66, 1 71, 209, 254, 
321 seq., 377, 3S5, 396, 

398, 402, 406 ; vii, 10, 

107, 201, 219, 244, 245, 

247 ; viii, 67, 94, 188, 190, 
191, 208, 230, 24 X, 250, 

251 ; ix, 3, 5, 25, 60, 69, 
70, 7^, 75 79. 89, 92, 

94 ^^ 7 : 1 14, 117 
migration of, northward, i, 

11 

raids of, into Persian terri- 
tory, i, 12 ; vi, 17, 21, 
3^-2 

domination of, over Iran, i, 

12 seq, 

king=iMardas, i, 135 
==Zahhak, i, 139, 275 
rebellion of, against kai 
Kdhs, ii, % 

Afrdsiyhb fights with, for 
frdn, ii, 92 

Ddrdb demands tribute from 
vi, 22 

steed, i, 243, 251, 290 ; vi, 
380 ; viii, 126, 302 ; ix, ii 
cymbal, vi, 244 
invasion of, viii, 72, 93 ; ix, 
3, 65 seq, 

withdraw, viii, 96 
sage, sages, vji, 406 
quoted, vii, 277 
tribes, ix, 63 

triumph of, over Dhfi Kdr, 
ix, 66 

chieftain, incites Abh Bakr 
to invade Persia, ix> 66 
concentrate at Kddisfya, ix, 
67 

booty found by, at Ctesi- 
‘phon (?), -ix, 68 

' annex Mesopotamia,- ix, 68 
Khiizistin, ix, 68 
, w'Umhr, ix, 73 
- ^'Seab iic, 

■ - 84^ ' 

, ' 'defeate^kixi! ^'5 V 

"4 dleam"0fi viii, 

' ' i'd6; 92'' ' 


202 


GENERAL INDEX 


Arabia, ii, loo ; vi, 70, 72, 206, 
322, 355 : viii, 24 note 
trade ot, ancient, i, 1 1 
Iran and, the portion of 
Iraj, i, 189 

Shdpdr son of Urniuzd’s 
expedition to, vi, 322 
Arabian, Arabians, vi, 378, 388, 
ix, 74 . 85 
Faith, vi, 95 

Nights, i, 51 ; vi, 71, 78, 250; 
vii, 317 

provenance of, vi, 250 ; 
vii, 3 

quoted, vi, 73 

Arabic, language, i, 32 ; vi, 
147, 205 ; viii, 73 ; ix, 
81 

infrequent in Shdlminia, i, 
47 

versions of Pahlavf texts, vi, 
255 seq. ' 

Fables of Jiidpai (Kalfla and 
Dimna) translated into, 
vii, 382, 430 
Tabari, See Tabari. 
Arachosia, the district about 
Kandahar, vi, 32 
Aragdn (Kdmkiibdd), town, vii, 
188 

Aral Sea, i, 57 note ; iii, 10 
Arar tree, vi, 19 
Aras (Araxes), river in A^ar- 
bdijin, V, 13, 14 
confused with the Oxus, i, 

. 7 b 370 

Arash, king of the Khd2ians 
q.v,, iv, 1:46, 148 
Arash, son of Kai Kubdd. See 
Kai Arash* 

Arash, Ashktoian king, vi, 197, 
210 

Arash, frinian chief; vi, 394 
Arash, city. See Hulwin. 
Arastilfs (Aristotle q.v.), x6o^ 
vi, 35 

counsels' Bikandar, vv/17^ 
se'ntencds dt- over the,oofSh 
6f 'Sikandar,/vi, 185 
Ardsti^. ' nhc^le ; pf , Zwdtihs^t' ■' 

’ , : has'tdr),;V;' t7 , ' 


Araxes (Aras q.v ), battle of, vin, 
7 h 

Arayish-i- Ruin (Hieiapolis), city 
in northern Syria, west 
of the Euphrates and 
north of Aleppo, vii, 217, 
218, 254 ; vni, 188 
taken by Ndshu’wdn, vii, 

255 

Arba, river, viii, 194, 195 
Archer, iv, 179 

constellation, v, 86 
Archery, i, 263, 297, 312, 359 ; 
ii, 163, 266, 293, 328 ; 
hi, 53 74, 93, 98 seq., 

I7<) seq , 24G ; iv, 38, 48, 
99, 10 J, 102, 104, 107, 122, 
179, 33 ^; V, III, 122, 
229, 239 seq., 272 ; vi, 
379 » 3^3 seq- * vii, 54, 
55, 80, 1 18, 122, 125 
An'Eimagcs, iqx, j 68, jyo, lyG 
Architect, Jihman, and Khusrau 
Parwfz, viii, ^01 seq. 
Architecture, invention of, i, 
129 , 133 

Archscribc, 17 r. See Izid Gas- 
hasp and Mihrdn. 

Ard, day, i, 88, q.v., ii, 287 ; iv, 
252 ; vi, 298, 390 and 
note; vii, 112; ix, 70, 
122 

Shdiin^,raa finished on the 
day of, i, 24 

Ardabfl (Biddn - PMz q.v.), city 
in Azarbiijdn, ii, 336, 405, 
iv, X47, 188 ; vii, 89, 163, 
224 ; viii, 93, 99, 100, 
184, 226 

Ardawin, Bahrim,' Artabanus 
III or IV, the last Ash- 
k^nian ' (Parthian) king, 
x6o, x6x, vi, 3, 205, 214 
$eq., 254 $$q., viii, 214, 285 
IVIadrinus, hi^ war and treaty 
with,'i, 8x, , 

V offect Qf, - oh Persian coin** - 
' age,, 4 ,/ Sr \ ' ' , , ' 

, / ttss-Baht^; ' ' vi,, ' , 197,, ^^210 
' , ' , ^ai^atus ' , of, , ';in 'Pet^ian ' tradi- , 

, '^on^, vi,,' 2br ' ' ' ’ 


GENERAL INDEX 


Ardawan, daiiglitcr oX X(5 j, vi, 
20 z 

marries Ardshir P4pakan, 
vi, 202, 229 

incited by her brother 
Bah man to poison Ard- 
shir P4pakan, vi, 259 
condemned to death, vi, 

260 

saved by Ardshir P4pa- 
kdn’s minister, vi, 260 
gives birth to Shaphr, vi, 

261 

restored to favour, vi, 
265 

writes to Phpak, vi, 214 
summons Ardshir Pipakdn 
to court, vi, 214 
receives gifts from Ardslifr 
Pipak^n, vi, 215 
highly esteems Ardshfr 
Pfipakdn, vi, 215 
sons of, vi, 215, 255, 267 
note 

their fate, vi, 228, 229 and 
note, 259 

disgraces Ardshfr Pdpakdn, 
vi, 216 

Ardshfr Pdpakdn intrigues 
with slave-girl of, ido, vi, 
201, 217 seq» 

eldest son of, made ruler of 
P4rs, vi, 218 and note 
consults the astrologers, vi, 
218 

Ardshfr Pipak^n, vainly 
pursued by, vi, 221 seq, 
returns to Rax, vi, 223 
writes to his son about 
Ardshfr Pipakto, vi, 223 
Ardshfr Pipakin _ marches 
against, vi, 227 
prepares to, encotintet Ard-> 
shfr Pipakdn, vi, 227' ’ ' 
defeated, captoted' by Khar- ' 
r4d,‘ and, slaxh bj?' Atdshfr 
PipakAn,' vi, 2,28 ; ‘ ^ , 
buried by pabAl?:. , vi, 229 , 
palaed of,,' 'at ’Rki spared. {'?)' ; 

' by , ' Pipikim ' 

1”' 2,29'ahd''#a^i, '' ' ‘ --f 'i !;J', /- 


203 

Ardawan, secretary of, slain by 
Shapur, vi, 256 
Mihrak = Mithrak — 
Mddik (?), vi, 256 
Ardibihisht, ameshaspenta q.v,, 
iii, 286, 328 

month, i, 82 ; v, 16, 39, 
92 note 

Ardshfr, son of Bfzhan, 

goes with Zarfr to Rhm, iv, 
360 

hails Gushtdsp as ShAh, iv, 
362 

Ardshfr, son of GushtAsp, J55, v, 
26, 51 

death of, foretold by JAm- 
Asp, V, -49 
slain, V, 57 

Ardshfr, XrAiiian hero, perhaps 
the son of Bfzhan, supra 
tells NastAr where to find 
Zarfr, v, 67 

takes lAirdmarz prisoner, v, 
2S8 

Ardshfr (Bahman q,v), ShAh, vi, 
2x3, 2ji and note 
meaning of, v, 259 and note 
Ardshfr (Artaxerxes II), brother 
of ShApAr, SAsAnian ShAh, 
jAj, vi, 3, 328 
ShApAr arranges for the suc- 
cession with, vi* 360 seq, 
title of, vi, 364 
abdication of, vi, 364 
Ardshfr, high priest temp,^ 
HrA2, vii, 179 seq, 
released by KhAshnawAz, 
vii, 180 

Ardshfr* high priest temp. 
NAshfrwAn, vii, 304, 333, 
38A 343 

discourse of, vii, 305 
■ i(|uestions BAzurjmihr, vii, 

, ' 30$: ' ' ' : 

Adshh 'Khurra (Khnrra - i «* Ard- 
' shit)r city* ’ (OAr or JAr, 

' RfrA^AbA4)» And dis- 

'' ' - 'tidAt ' in' PArs, 'V X, A 1 " 

231, 

;'y|i,..S2Eod i 'Viih 

, , ' 2| t'l ;43:2 ^andf , 


GENERAL INDEX 


ArdshiV Klnirra, city, Ardshir 
Papakan builds a Idrc- 
templc ill, VI, 230 
makes irrigation-works in, 
vi, 230 

meaning of, vi, 290 nole 
Ardsliir Papakdn (Artaxerxes I), 
Shdli and founder of the 
Sasinian dynasty, 160, 
161 ; i, 42 ; ii, 10 ; v, 10 ; 
vi, 193, 209 note, 213 seq., 
294 seq., 303, 307, 315, 
322, 325, 405 ; vii, 79, 

185, 212 ; viii, 191, 214, 

222, 265, 270, 285, 392, 

393; ix, 105, 109, III 

Notes on, vi, 193 seq., 254 
seq. 

founds a new national 
dynasty, restores Zoroas- 
trianism, and collects its 
scriptures, i, 62 seq. \ 
genealogical table of his 
descendants, vi, 3 
rise of, compared to that of ; 
Cyrus the Croat, vi, 194 
Tabari’s account of, vi,i98 
legend of Cyrus the Great 
transferred to, vi, 195 
birth of, vi, 213 
summoned to court by Arda- 
wdn, vi, 214 

equipped by P4pak, vi, 2T4 
presents gifts to Ardawdn, 
vi, 215 

Ardaw^n favours, vi, 215 
prowess of, in the chase, vi, 

disgraced, vi, 2id 
writes to P4pak, vi, 216 
advised by Pipak, vi, 216 
intrigues with Gulnir, vi, 
21-7 seq. 

hears from Gulndr of the ^ 
presago of th^ astrologers, ' 
yi, 219 

iees with Gulnir to Pits, ^ 
vi, 220 seq. . ^ 

followed by the diyipe Grace', , 
in the forth of n mbpilthiui- ,, 

, ^eep; i,' ^74 ; ' vi^ 'zn' s$q* 


Ardshir Papakan, adherents flock 
to, vi, 223 

addresses Ins supporters, vi, 
22^ 

founds a city, vi, 202, 224 
receives promises of help, 
vi, 224 

joined by Tabdk, vi, 225 
Tabdk and, defeat Bah- 
man, son of Ardawdn, vi, 
226 

marches from Pdrs against 
Ardawdn, vi, 227 
defeats and slays Ardawdn, 
vi, 228 

as recorded in Kdrnaniak, 
vi, 202 

gives the s|)oil to the troops, 
vi, 229 

spares (?) Ardawdn's palace 
at Rai, vi, 229 and nole 
Tabdk counsels, vi, 229 
marriage of, with Ardawdn's 
daughter, vi, 202, 229, 259 
returns to l^drs, vi, 229 
builds Khurra-i-Ardshfr, vi, 
229 and note 
irrigation-works of, at 
Khurra-i-Ardshfr, vi, 230 
war of, with the Kurds, vi, 
196, 230 seq. 

and Haftwdd,vi, 236 seq. 
message sent by arrow to, 
vi, 238 

worsted by Haftwdd and 
entertained and coun- 
selled by two youths, vi, 
2‘39 seq. 

slays Mihrak, vi, 241 
marches to attack the Worm 
vi, 241 

gives instructions to Shahr- 
g/r, vi, 241 

stratagem of, against the 
Worm, viy 242 
slays the Worm and its 
. ' attehdants, vi,'244 
summons Shahtgfr, vi,. 244 
'"andwqf^ 

bakes HaftwM's stronghold, ' 

' ' ' ■ 'vi, 244. ' ' '' 


GENERAL INDEX 


205 


Ardshir Papakan, defeats and 
slays Haftwad and Shih- 
wi, vi, 245 

carries oft the spoil, vi, 245 
builds a Fire-tem])lc, vi, 245 
rewards the two youths, vi, 

245 

invasion of Kirmdn by, vi, 
205, 245 

goes to TaisaMn, vi, 245 
principles of government of, 
vi, 250, 273 seq,, 28C scq. 
Reign of, 161, vi, 254 scq. 
Note on, vi, 254 
length of, vi, 254 

Tabari on, vi, 254 
coins of, vi, 256, 257, 265 
Shdphr crowned by, vi, 257 
cities of, vi, 257 
prophecy of, vi, 257 
enthroned at Baghdad, vi, 
258 

title of King of kings of, vi, 
193. 199, 254, 258, 273 
inaugural address of, vi, 258 
daughter of Ardawhn and, 
stories of, vi, 255 
plot of, with her brother 
Bahman, to poison, yi, 

259 

discovers plot against him, 
vi, 260 

consults his minister, vi, 260 
condemns the daughter of 
Ardawdn to death, vi, 260 
minister of, saves daughter 
of ArdawAn and mutilates 
himself, vi, 196, 261 
Sh^pdr, son of, born, vi, 261 
hears about Sh^pdr from his 
minister, vi, 262 
recognises and ' acknow- 
ledges Sh 4 pdr,\vi, 
restores thd 
Ardawin to favour, vi, 1^65 
rewards Us minister, vi, 2,6^ 
makes' a new ‘coinage 
honpur 0^ Ms minister, ,yi^ 
256, 2$$ ; ; , * ' ' J ' 

knilds ’ , 


1 ' 

Ardshfr Papakan, hara®^ Dy 
wars, consults Kmi, vi, 

266 

wroth at Kaid’s advicef^^ 

267 

seeks in vain for the daugh- 
ter of Milirak, vi, 268 
referred to, vi, 270 
discovers Urmuzd, vi, 271 
counsels Urmuzd, vi, 280 
calls and counsels Shdpur, 
vi, 286 seq. 

Church and State, his views 
on, vi, 250 seq., 286 
duration of his dynasty, vi, 
252, 257, 289 
death of, vi, 291 
Baluchistdn, his failuie to 
conquer, vii, 242 
Hard, invention of, attri- 
buted to, vii, 382 
True Cross in treasury of, 
viii, 380 

Ardshfr, son of Sliirwf, Shdli, 
J75, ix, 43 seq. 
makes Pfrdz gcnei’al, ix, 44 
entertains Pfrhz at feast, ix, 
48 

death of, ix, 49 
treasury of, squandered by 
Gurdz, ix, 53 

Arega/-aspa. See Arjdsp. 

Aries, constellation, i, 88, 118, 
335 i 2<5, 38, 187, 
318 ; iv, 24, 147, 158, 180; 
v, 39, 109, 118, 3:19, 126; 
viii, 342, 394 

Ariobarzancs, the murderer of 
Iiarius Codomanus, vi, 32 

Ariobarzanes, satrap, vi, 32 arid 
' m^s 

Arieh, legendary Xrinian archer, 

' V, '62 ; vii, 234 and pole ; 
viii, 75, 219 and nole ; ix, 

■ 25 

Ari^tobulps, Greek writer, temf, 

• ' ; Alexander' the, Great, vi, 

, '' t2' ‘h . ' , 

Aristotle ,'i (Arastdlfs ; .Greek 
' ',';;^hildsopher , (BX. 384- 


GENERAL INDEX 


206 

Aristotle, Alexander the Great’s 1 Ariisp, gives Kuliram the corn- 


tutor, vi, 29 
letter to, vi, 68 
correspondence with, 
about the succession, vi, 
8r, 83 

silk-worm, his account of, 

vi, 204 

Arjdsp, Tiirdnian hero, ii, 264 ; 
iv, 26 

Ar|4sp (Are^a^aspa), king of 
Tiir^n, 155, 136, i, 61 ; 
ii, 9, 29 ; hi, 109 ; v, 9, 
II seq., 20, 22, 24 seq., 29, 
31, 51 seq., 89, 98, 99, 107 
seq., 116, 141, 142, 159, 
167, X71, 172, 180, 206; 

vii, 330, 335» 337» 3591 

viii, 95, 104, 148 ; ix, 104 
hoard of, viii, 148 

in receipt of tribute from 
Gushtdsp, V, 32 
hears of Gushtisp’s resolve 
not to pay tribute, sum- 
mons, and harangues his 
priests, v, 36 

sends Bidirafsh and N4m- 
khist to Gushtdsp, v, 37, 
40 

receives Gushtisp’s answer 
and calls out the host, v, 
45 

gives one wing to Kuhram, 
V, 46 

the other to Andarfmdn, 
V, 46 

the chief command to 
Gurgs^r, v, 46 
banner to Bidirafsh, v, 46 
vanguard to Khash^sla, v, 
46 

rehJ^ to Hd8hdfv,"v, 46 
marches against Irdn, y, 46 
defeat of, foretold hy Jim’- 
Asp, V, 52 ' , ‘ ^ , 

gives one wihg to Adirafsh, 

V. 55 

the ' othet to Onrg$4r>, v, 

V' 

/ ' / :oenttetoN4Eq,i]k:Mst;y^;5d 

, ' ^fak^s ‘ ,the , rear, Winstll, % '56 


mand in chief, v, 56 
thrice offers rewards to any 
that will fight Zarir, v, 61, 
62 

offer of, accepted by Bi'di- 
rafsh, V, 62 

calls for Bfdirafsh to fight 
Nastfir, v, 69 

fights with the frfinians, v, 

71 

defeat of, v, 72 

proclaimed by Gushtasp, 
V, 75 

hears of Asfandiy fir’s im- 
prisonment and of Gush- 
tfisp’s absence in Sfstfin, 

V, 86 

Summons his chiefs, v, 86 
sends Sitfih as spy to frfin, 

V, 86 

on receiving Sitfih’s report 
calls out the host, ¥,87 
sends Kuhram to attack 
Balkb, V, 90 

marches against Gushtfisp, 
V, 94 

commands the centre, v, 
95 

defeats Gushtfisp and be- 
leaguers him on a moun- 
tain, V, 96 

Asfandiyfir’s vow of, and 
prayer for, vengeance on, 
V, 103, 104 

hears of Asfandiyfir's arrival, 
V, 108 

proposes to retreat, v, 108 
sends away the spoil of 
Balkh, V, 108 
five sons of, V, X08 
persuaded by Gurgsfir to re- 
main and fight, V, 108, 109 
makes Gurgsfir leader of the 
'host, V, 109 ' 
arrays the h6st, v, 109 
' oojnmands the centre, v, 109 
sutvdys the battlefield, from 
a height, V, no, 
prep^^s for tight if needfuh 
V, 'n9' ''' ' , ' , ' 


207 


GENERAL 

Arjasp, dismayed at Asfandi- 
yar’s prowess, reproaches 
Gurgsar V, iii 
hears of Gurgsar’s capture 
and flees, v, 112 
entertains Asfandiyar dis- 
guised as a merchant, v, 

145 

questions Asfandiyar, v, 146 
allows Asfandiyar to enter- 
tain the Turkman chiefs, 

V, 149 

prepares to attack Bishiitan, 

V, 151 

bids Kuhram prepare for 
war, V, 151 

sends out Turkhdn with 
troops to reconnoitre, v, 
151 

hears from Kuhram that As- 
fandiyir has come, v, 152 
bids the Turkmans march 
out in force, v, 152 
palace of, attacked by As- 
fandiyir, v, 153 
arms and encounters As- 
fandiydr, v, 153, 154 
beheaded by Asfandiyar, v, 

154 

palace of, fired and his wo- 
men carried ofE by Asfan- 
diydr, v, 154, 162, 
head of, thrown from the 
ramparts of the Brazen 
Hold, V, 157 

sons of, grieve for, v, 137 
Asfandiyar takes the trea- 
sure of, V, 1 61 
Kh4n of Chfn descended 
from, vii, 334 

Arjtma, one of the five P4n- 
davas (Indian mythology) 
fv-, 13a, 139 ' 

Ark, 1^8 

, Arman, Armenia or dist,rict; in, 
Azarbdijin, 'v^t' ^^63,' 
Armani, , fiAnian chief, ' 74 ' , 
Armenia , (iUeman, ‘ - Irmin 
counfry; iii, ta ; , 

. 203 vh, I53,/"2'Z4,; , trift , 

, , ' ' ‘ > 9 $, 9 ^,^ 16.4, 3:93, ''^ 0 % 377 , 


INDEX 

Armenia, Roman, vii, 187 
Armenian, Armenians (Irmdn- 
ians), iii, 286; viii, 188, 
X95> 226, 248, 282 
version of the Pseud o-Cal- 
listhenes, vi, 14 
— like, viii, 254 
= Mausfi, viii, 293 and note 
Armfn, son of Kai Kubad. See 
Kai Armm. 

Arnawaz, sister of Jamshfd, wife 
of Zahhdk and Fariddn, 
and mother of fraj, i, 142 
married to Zahhdk, i, 146 
seq. 

counsels Zahhdk as to his 
dream, 1, 148 
Faridun meets, i, 162 
Zahhdk tries to kill, i, 167 
son of, by Farfdiin, i, 177 
Arnold, Mathew, his Sohrab 
and Rustum,'' ii, 118 
Arrdn, the modern Karabagh, 
the region between the 
Kur and Aras rivers, i, 9 
Arrian, Greek historian (A.D. 
96-180), vi, 31, 68 
Anabasis of, vi, 12 
indtea of, vi, 12 
Caspian Gates of, vi, 32 
on the stature of Porus, vi, 
64 

Ichthyophagi, vi, 69 seq. 
Alexander and the 
Amazons, vi, 72 
death of Alexander, vi, 82 
Arrow-shots, three famous, viii, 
75 

Bahr4m Chdbi'na's, viii, 126 
Arsae’es, name of the founder and 
other kings of the Parth- 
ian (Ashkinian) dynasty, 
vi, 197 

Arsacid^ Airsaoids, dynastic title 
of the above, iii, 9,; vi, 

, " , 295, 235 ; ^ vii, 156, 185, 

■, 'Tmpierial system of, vi, 198, 

■ of,; eSpape Aom Aird.- 

sWt'Pipaktoto Arm-enia, 

/-' / ; vi;.' , , ' ' 


2o8 general index 


AKac'd, rivalry oi, with S 4 sa- 
nians, viii, 73 

Arsaias, murderer of Darius 
Codoniauus, vi, 32 
Arses, SMh (B.C. 33 ^- 356 ) vi, 29 
Arslan Jdzib, one ot Mabmdd's 
generals, i, 100 
referred to, i, 114 
Artabanus III (II according to 
some reckonings), Parth- 
ian king (A.D. 10-40), iii, 
9, 10 

Artabanus, son of above, iii, 9 
Artabanus, Persian captain of 
the guard temp. Xerxes, 
V, 282 

Rustam and, v, 282 
Artabanus III or IV (Ardawdn 
q.v.), vi, 201 

Artang, the house of the hercsi- 
arch Mdni, ii, 19 and note ; 
vh, 355 and note ; viii, 
172 and note, 3C2 and note 
Artaxerxes Dongimanus, Shdh, 
V, 281, 282 
Bahman and, v, 282 
Aitaxerxes Mnenion, Shdh, i, 59 
Artaxerxes Ochus, Sh^h (B.C. 
359-33^^). vi, 18 note, 29 
Ncctanebus II conquered 
by vi, 29 
murdered, vi, 29 
Artaxerxes I, Sds^nian Shdh. 

See Ardshfr Fdpak 4 n. 
Artaxerxes IX (Ardshfr brother 
of Shiphr), S^sinian 
Shdh, vi, 363 

Arts, invention of the. See 
Gaihmart, Hhshang, 
Tahmhras, and Jamslifd. 
'Ards, treasure, viii, 406 and 
note, ix, 20 

Arwand (Dijla, Tigris), ii, 392^ 
404 ; vi, 329 ; viii, 90 ; 
ix, 85,^ 92 ■ ' ^ 

Tarfdin^s crossing of the, i, 
. rbo ^ ^ 

Arzltang, a dfv and commander 
of the troops of , 

' , , H'f ''V, ‘203, ' , 


Arzhang, put in charge of Kai 
Kalis and his troops when 
taken prisoners, ii, i 
slain by Rustam, ii, 57 
Arzhang, dungeon of, iii, 309 
Arzhang, Turanian hero, i^jS, 
111, 76, 77 

challenges the Iranians, iii, 
119 

slam, iii, 120 

Arzhang, Mdni the heresiarch’s 
house. See Artang. 
Aryan, Aryans, race, hi, 10 and 
note, iv, 137 
race, i, 7 
early scats of, i, 7 
meaning of, i, 7 
organization of, i, 7 
primitive religion of, i, 7 
belief in magic of, i, 8 
division of, i, 8 
India and frdn conquered 
by, i, 8 

Indian, their relations with 
the Iranians, i, 15 
Arzh, daughter of Sarv and wife 
of Salm, i, 188 and note 
referred to, i, 17B seq. 

Arzh, daughter of Mdhiydr the 
jeweller, vii, 59» 
referred to, vii, 55, 56, 58 
sings to Bahrdm Ghr, vii, 60 
Bahrdm Ghr woos and weds, 
vii. 61 seq. 

meaning of, vii, 65 note 
Ascalon, city in Palestine, v, 292 
AscUpias acida, plant. See 
Horn a. 

Asfandiy^r (Spewto-data, Span- 
ddt), mythical trinmn 
hero, son of Shih Gush- 
tasp, and the rival in 

legend of Rustam, X 55 “ 

- XS 7 , i 4^^ 55 ; ii, a 9 1 v, 
9, 10, 12, 24'^^^., 29, 30, 

. 41 ; seq., 45, 49, f>9 m** 

• , 90 seq., 258, 239, '201, 

' 279, 28t seq., 289, 290,' 
29'3»‘ 'Vi, Td, 49, 55, 

^00, 213,' 224,, 242, '251, 

, ^ 271; vhi, 104 , and’ 


GENERAL INDEX 209 


Asfandiyar— 

note, 1 71, 270, 332, 395 
note ; ix, 25, 26 note, 10^ 
invulnerability of, v, 19 
sisters of, 156, v, 20, 22 
carried oft by the Turk- 
mans, V, 93 , 100, 1 71 
rescued by, v, 153, 162 
lament over, v, 252 seq. 
marriage of, with Humai, 
V, 22, 77 

ignored by Firdausi, v, 22 
birth of, V, 32 

answers, in conjunction with 
Zan'r and Jdmdsp, Ar- 
jdsp's letter, v, 42 
triumph of, over Arjdsp 
foretold by Jdmdsp, v, 52 
given command of one wing, 


V, 55 

addresses his five brothers, 


V, 65 

hears his father’s offer of 
the crown and throne to 
the avenger of Zarfr, v, 66 
slays Bidirafsh, v, 70 
presents the head of Ih'dira- 
fsh and the steed of Zarfr 
to Gushtd.sp, V, 71 
divides the host, v, 71 
attacks, with Nastfir and 
Nfish Axar, the Turkmans, 
V, 71 

grants quarter to the Turk- 
mans, V, 72 

made chief ruler of Irdn 
under Gushtdsp and sent 
by him to convert the 
world, V, 76 

rests from his labours, v, 77 
makes Farshfdward gover- 
nor of Khur^sin, v, 77 
reports the success of his 
administration to -Oush- 
t 4 sp, V, 77 : ' I ’ 

slandered by' Gursiii'm, v, 78 
recalled to court, v, So 
Sons of, J57,, V," 80, Si ' 

' ; resigns hi$ host tO' /Rahman, 

V,''$2 ' \ , 

/arraighed by <?usht4^p, v,'S$ 
yon* I'x, , ' 1 


Asfandiyar, put in bonds, v. 
84 

sent to Gumbadan, v, 84 
solaced by Bahman and 
others, v, 85 

JamdvSp advises Gushtdsp 
to release, v, 97 
hears of arrival of Jdmdsp, 
V, 98, 99 

parley of, with Jdniasp, v, 
99 seq. 

eight and thirty brothers 
of, V, loi, 103, III, 160 
bids J dm asp send for black- 
smiths, V, lor 

breaks his bonds himself, v, 
X02, 2o5 

calls for his steed and arms, 
V, J02 

sets off with JUmdsp, Bah- 
man, and Nfish Axar, v, 
103 

vow of, v, 103 
laments over Farshfdward, 
y, X04 

prays that he may avenge 
Farshfdward on Arjdsp, v, 
X04 

shrouds Farshfdward, v, 105 
sees and addresses the corpse 
of Gura^m, v, 105 
passes the Turkman trenches 
and defeats the outposts, 
y, 106 

interview of, with Gush- 
tdsp, V, 106 

receives the promise of the 
crown and undertakes to 
deliver Gushtisp, v, 107 
arrays and leads the host, 

' V, 109 

attacks the Xurlcmans, v, 

no 

’■defeats' Kuhram, v, no 
takes 'Gurgsir jprisoner,' v* 

t't'l 

defeats, y#, tm, 206 
' grmts^ <juarter to ' the ' Turk- 
■V, A;,wian%' 'v, 'ill ■ 
'thC' Spoib V# 

‘ 


210 


GENERAL INDEX 


Asfandiyar, undertakes to rescue 
kis sisters from the Turk- 
mans, V, 1 15 

prepares to invade Tdrdn, 
V, 1 15 

Seven Stages (Haft Khwan) 
of, ii, 29 ; V, 27, 118, 119, 

121, 135, 162 ; viii, 171 
Story of, J56, V, 116 seq. 
compared with Rustam's, 

V, 117 

rivalry in legend between 
Rustam and, v, 116 
quits Balkh and goes, with 
Gurgsdr as guide, to 
Tdran, v, 120 
offers the kingdom of the 
Turkmans to Gurgsdr in 
return for faithful service, 
V, 120 

questions Gurgsdr, v, 120 
seq., 124, 125, 128, 131, 
134. 139 , 141 

during his adventures in 
the Seven Stages, leaves 
Bishiitan in command, v, 

122, 124, 126, 129, 132 
note, 144 

praised by Bishdtan and the 
host, V, 123, 125, 131, 133 
scythed chariot made by, 
V, 126 

revived by Bishiitan after 
encountering the dragon, 
V, 127 

song of, V, 129 
amulet given to, by Zar- 
duhsht, V, 130 
encourages the Iranians to 
persevere, v, 136 
prays for deliverance from 
the snow, v, 138 
leaves the baggage behind, 
V, , 138 

rejproaches Gu?:gsir for giv- 
ing false information, v, 
139, 140 

offers to make Gurgsiir 
eaptain of the , ' Brazen 
Hold if he will be a. tm$t:y 

ghide, V, 1^0 ' i ; ' ' . ' \ , 


Asfandiydr, guided by Gurgsdr 
crosses ford with host, 
V, 140 

cursed by Gurgsdr, v, 14 1 
slays Gurgsar, v, 141 
surveys the Brazen Hold, v, 
142 

captures, questions, and 
slays two Turkmans, v, 

142 

Bishiitan and, consult, v, 

143 

stratagem of, to take the 
Brazen Hold, v, 116, 143 
disguised as a merchant, 
interviews Arjdsp, v, 145 
assumes the name of Khar- 
rdd, V, 146 

questioned by Arjdsp, v, 146 
trades as a merchant in the 
Brazen Hold, v, 147 
meets his sisters, v, 147 
gives a banquet to the Turk- 
man chiefs, V, 149 
surprises the Brazen Hold, 
V, X52 seq. 

provides for his sibters’ 
safety, v, 153 

attacks the palace of Arjdsp, 

V, 153 

encounters Arj^sp, v, 154 
beheads Arjdsp, v, 154 
fires Arjdsp's palace, v, 154 
carries off the women, v, 

154 

quits the Brazen Hold and 
leaves Sdwa in charge, v, 

154 

joins Bishiitan, v, X55 
pursues Kuhram to the 
Brazen Hold, v, 156 
encounters and takes Kuh- 
ram prisoner, v, 157 
grants no quarter to the 
Turkmans, v, 158 
puts to death Andarfmdn 
and Kuhram, v, 158 
announces ^his victory to 
^ Gushtisp, V, 139 
disposes of the spoilj i v^ 


GENERAL INDEX 


21 1 


'Vsfandiyar, carries oil his sisters, 
the womenfolk of Arj^sp, 
and others from the 
Brazen Hold, v, 162 
sets fire to, and dismantles, 
the Brazen Hold, v, 162 
sends his sons homeward by 
different routes, v, 162 
returns himself by the Seven 
Stages, V, 162 
picks up his left baggage, 
V, 162 

hunts while waiting for his 
sons, V, 162 

rejoined by his sons, v, 163 
welcome of, on his return 
to Ir 4 n, V, 163 
banquets with Gushtdsp, v, 

fight of, with Rustam, 
Story of, 156 
recited by Nadr, son of 
Hdrith, at Mecca, v, 166 
complains to his mother of 
Gushtdsp's treatment of 
him, V, 167 

counselled by his mother, 
V, 168, 175 

fate of, foretold by J 4 mdsp, 
V, 169 

recounts his deeds before 
Gushtdsp, V, 170 
promised the throne by 
Gushtdsp when he has 
brought Rustam and his 
kin in bonds to court, v, 
173, 174 

meets with an ill omen on 
starting for Zibulistin, v, 

177 

consults with Bishhtan^ v, 

178 

sends Bahman on an em- 
bassage, V, 1^9 seq. 
message of, to Rhstam, T, 

179 

receives Rustam^^ ^ answer ' 
from, -and' is wrotli with, ' 
Bahman, v, 19'X 
oonvetses of Rustam, with'; 

, ^ Bishhtan, V, 3:92 \ . 


Asfandfyar, goes attended to 
meet Rustam, v, 192 
parleys with Rustam, v, 
1 92 seq. 

declines Rustam’s invita- 
tion to visit him, v, 193 
invites Rustam to a feast, 
V, 195 

repents of having invited 
Rustam, v, 196 
counscdlcd by Bishiitan to 
keep on friendly terms 
with Bustam, v, 190, 217 
docs not summon Rustam 
to the feast, v, 197 
wrangles with Rustam, v. 
198 seq, 

docs not assign Rustam his 
proper seat at the feast, 
V, 200 

remonstrat(‘d with by Rus- 
tam, V, 200 

bids Bahman resign his own 
seat to Rustam, v, 200 
vilifies Zdl and Xiustam, v, 
201 

recounts liis lineage, V, 205 
his exploits, v, 205 
hi^ capture of a hilbfort, 
V, 206 

tries a handgrip with Rus- 
tam, V, 208 

challenges Rustam, v, 209 
astonished at Rustam’s 
prowess at the board, v, 
210 

declines Rustam’s overtures, 
V. 21 1 saq. 

calls Z 4 bulist^n “ Babble- 
^tead,” V, 216 
parodies Rustam's address 
to royal tent-enclosuro, 
V,' 2X6 

arms four fight with Rustaiti, 
% 

refuses ; ' I^ustam/s ' sugges- 
^ ' '' tion of' a general engage- 
' / , ' ' 'mont, y, 2.24 . , ' , 

■ , iafotmed .biy .Baltman of tliO' 

; : ' ' slayiitig pf A^Jar'hhd 


212 


GENERAL INDEX 


Asfaodiyar, enraged with Rus- 
tam, V, 228 

wounds Rustam and 
Rakhsh, V, 229 
jeers at Rustam v, 229 
calls upon Rustam to sur- 
render, V, 230 
returns to camp, laments 
for Nfisli Azar and Mihr-i- 
Niish, and sends their 
corpses to Giishtdsp with 
a message, v, 232 
converses with Bishutan of 
the fight with Rustam, v, 
232, 240 

Sfmurgh instructs Rustam 
how to overcome, v, 237 
seq, 

branch of tamarisk fatal to, 
V, 239 and note 
summoned by Rustam to 
fight and becomes des- 
pondent, V, 240 
Rustam’s final effort for 
peace with, v. 241 seq. 
Bahman and Bishhtan hear 
of the overthrow of, v, 244 
address of, to Bishfitan, v, 

245 

Rustam bewails, v, 246 
confides Bahman to Rustam, 
V, 248 

foretells evil for Rustam, v, 
248 

gives his last charge to 
Bishfitan, v, 249 
death of, v, 250 
Rustam laments over, v, 250 
corpse of, sent to Gushthsp 
by Rustam, v, 251 
funeral procession of, con- 
ducted by Bishfitan, v, 
251 

lamentations over, v, 252 
seq. 

corpse of, displayed by 
Bishfitan, y, 253 
Rp^tam writes ^ to Gushtisp 
to excuse fiimaelf in 'the 

v, 256 , ’ ; / ^ ■, 

,X«rx^S'and> "282, 


Asfandiyfir, Bahman on the ven- 
geance, due for, v, 283 
referred to, v, 288 
Asfandiyfir-nfima (Spand-dat- 
ndma), v, 26, '27 
Ashemaogha, vii, 188 
Ashi Vanguhi, the genius of 
piety, iv, 137 

Ashk, presumed founder of the 
Ashkinian (Parthian) 
dynasty, vi, 197, 210 
meaning of, vi, 197 
Ashkabfis, Tfirdnian hero, 14S* 
iii, 183, 186, 207, 268 
challenges the Iranians, iii, 
179 

Ruhhhm worsted by, iii, x 79 
Rustam’s fight with, iii, X09, 
179 seq. 

referred to, viii, 75 
parleys with Rustam, iii, 180 
slain by Rustam, iii, i8r 
Ashkhnian, Ashkdnians, race and 
dynasty, i, 49 ; iii, 9, 1 1 ; 
V, 10, 282 ; vi, 196, 209 ; 
viii, 214 

duration of rule, vi, 193 
times, Firdausi’s lack of 
materials for, vi, 193 
surviving traditions of, 
transferred to other 
dynasties, vi, 1 94 
importance of, vi, 194 
genealogy, vi, 197 
Ashkash, frfiman hero, iii, 35, 34, 
347, 330, 352 ; iv, 13, 
57. 61, 65 

Rustam and, go to rescue 
Bfzhan, iii, 334 
conveys baggage toward 
frfin, iii, 346 

Kai Khusrau sends, to 
Khdrazm, iv, 15 
Shida defeated by, iv, 60, 72 
'troops of, recalled, iv, 143 
sent with a host to Zam, iv, 

157 

! pillage of , Makrdn by, 
stopped by Kai Khu^ran, 

,'i . ' ^43 ' ' ' ' ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Ashkasli, appointed governor of 
Makran, iv, 24-1 
Kai Khusrau welcomed by, 
on Ms return from Gang- 
dizli, iv, 25 T 

Ashtad, Iranian cMef, ix, 11 scq. 
chosen to visit Khusrau 
Parwiz at Taisafun, ix, 9 
and Kharrdd parley with 
Gall'll lish, ix, it 
visit Khusrau Parwiz, ix, 
12 

report to Shfrwf, ix, 27 
Asia, iv, 315, v, 293, viii, 387 
Minor, vi, 30 ; viii, 193, 194 
Central, vi, 73 
Asmodeus, demon, hi, 272 
Asoka, Indian king (B.C. 264- 
228-7). i, 15 

Asp, as Persian termination, ii, 9 
Assiirbanipal, Assyrian king, and 
Khusrau Parwiz, reigns 
of compared, viii, 193 
Assyria, v, 292 
Assyrians, i, 10 

invasions of Irdn b59 i, 10 
Astawadh. See HaftwAd. 
Astivihdd, demon, iv, 137 
Astrolabe, i, 104, 188, 310 note; 
ii, 215, 273 ; iv, 158, 297 ; 
vi, 376 ; vii, 353 ; ix, 73 
Astrologer, Astrologers, Astro- 
logy, i, 104, x88, 255, 310 
and note ; ii, 233, 284, 
409 ; iv, 27, 158, 159,279, 
284, 334, 335 ; V, 48, 168 
seq., 263 ; vi, 108, 109, 
114, T32, 195, xpS, 201, 
218, 227, 377 ; ix, 73 
importance of, in Sh 4 h- 
n 4 m 4 , i, 52 

consulted by l**arfddn, i, 194 
Mindchihr i, 25 1, 307 
Z 41 i, 255. 

S 4 in I, 278 ' , ’ ’ 

Kai KMs ii,, 103, 215, 217 
Afr 4 siyib,ii, 273 ; tv, ' 
Siyiwush, iip282 
Rnstam/iii,' 

Kai , Kbu^ran,* it, ' % 5,$ ’ ’ ' 
, t, ,310' - 


213 

Astrologer, consultc'd by Sikan- 
dar, vi, 180 
Ardawan, vi, 2i<S 
\'azdagird, son of Shapur, 
vi, 375 scy., 390 
Bahrain Ciur, vii, T44, 145 
Khan of Chm, vii, 353 
Talhand, vii, ^08, 413, 418 
Khusrau Panvfz, viii, 372 
Astyages (Istiivegu), king of the 
Modes (Manda q.v., B.C. 

5S4-550) 

conquered by Cyrus, i, 18 ; 
vi, 194 

identified by Armenian his- 
torians with Zahhdk, i, 72, 
144 

Mandane and, legend of, ii, 

190 

Afrdsiydb and, in legend, ii, 

191 

Asura. See Ahdra. 

Atbara, tributary of the Kile, vi, 
b 5 

Athenaeus, Greek writer {2nd-3rd 
centuries A.D.), iv, 316 
Dcipnosophistac of, ii, xo 
quoted, iv, 314 

Athens, schools ol, closed by 
Justinian, vii, 2 So 
Athravans, priests of the Cult of 
Fire, i, 56 

Athwya, See Abtin. 

Atkinson, James, on the Sh^h- 
ndma, vi, 250 

Atossa, wife of Cambyses and 
Darius Hystaspis, v, ii 
sallutaosa, wife of Gush- 
tdsp (?), V, II 

Atropatene (Azarbdijin q.v.), i, 

9i 61 

' primitive seat of Fire-wor- 
: ship, i, 56 

sub-kingdom, in PaxtMan 
times, Vi, ,198 

Atto<sk* town the Indus in 
^ ^ nprthcrn 'India, vi, > 52 

Abraadv ' 'father of, Shih Luhrisp, 

", ' ":t, ao-s ^ ' ' , 

';Aurtal'-jaspa. (Iibhrhsp' iv," 
t't'' ' A . 


GENERAL INDEX 


214 

Autumnal equinox, iv, 313 
Kai Luhrasp crowned at, iv, 

313 

Avars, Caucasian tribe, viii, 104 
Avasta. See Zandavasta 
Avidius Cavssius, Roman general, 
vi, 291 note 

Awa, Iranian hero, iv, 149 
Awdza, stronghold, lyo, viii, 134, 
138 

Axuniite, Ethiopian, dynasty, 
viii, 24 note 

Ayds, region, v, 61, 74, 107 
Ayin Gashasp (Yazddnbakhsh), 
Iranian noble, lyr, viii, 
75, 150 note, 222 
Hiirmuzd consults, viii, 174, 

177 

and the prisoner, story of, 
viii, 177 se^i. 

marches to Hamad dn, viii, 

178 

consults a seer, viii, 178 
murdered, viii, 181 
avenged by Bahrdm Chd- 
bma, viii, 18 r 

troops of, disperse, viii, 181 
Azdd Sarv, Firdausi's authority 
for the Story of Rustam 
and Shaghdd, v, 260 se^. 
Azdd Sarv, archmage and agent 
of Ndshirwdn, v, 261, vii, 
283 and note 
goes to Marv, vii, 283 
discovers BiUurjmihr, vii, 
283 

returns with Bdzurjmihr to 
court, vii, 283 

Azdda, Riiman slave-girl, vi, 382 
goes hunting with Balirdm 
Gdr, vi, 382 

tries to shame Bahrdm Gdr 
iu ^his markmanship, vi,' 

' ^lain by Bahrdm' vi 
" , $$4 and 

Azar (Azarbdijdn ii, 103 ' > 
«ar, genius, mAg87,,3'28, ' 

Az^ (4ldir),,> month ahd day.d, '■ 
A' 'B'g ;' ' .vi,' 414 ■; vim ' 

't, ■he,; 3t7' : t' , 


Azar Abad agan ( A zarakl 1 sh , 

Azargashasp (/ u ), lu’re- 
temple at Sln'z (TakUt-i- 
Sulaiman) near the smith- 
eastern burfler oi Azar- 
btiijan, not at Talin'z with 
which the place has been 
wrongly identified (NT, 
p. TOO, note), iy2, IV, 
^50 ; vii, 86, 224, 362 ; 
viii, 282 ; ix, 74 
importance of, i, 6 t 
visited by Kai Khusrau, 
iii, 20 

Kai Khusrau and Kai Ke'ii'ilj 
go on a pilgrimage to, iv, 
258 

Khatiin, wife of Klidn, sent 
to serve at, vii, 5 
Bahrdm Gur visits, vii, 86, 

94 ^ 

Ndshirwdn visits, vii, 250, 

363 

Azar Afrdz, third son of Asfan- 
diydr, v, 8r 

Azarakhsh (Azargashasp, Azar 
Abddagdn q.v,), Fire- 
temple, i, 61 
importance of, i, 61 
Azarbdijdn (Atropatene q>vX 
province in north-western 
Persia, i, 9, 61 ; ii, 336 ; 
iv, 136; V, x6; vi, 198, 
203; vii, t6o, 214 
meaning of, i, 56 
Azargashasp. spirit of the light- 
b 73 . 24^. 309. 349'; 
il. 57 . 294. 345 ; ihi 23, 53, 
72, gt , 97, XI4, 194, 276, 
327; iv, 84, TOO, 147, 
3:75. 275, 307, 360; vi, 
381: vii, 21, 79, 232; 
viii, 45, 122, , 152, 176, 

245^.256, 413 

temple of (Azar Abddagdn 

' iv, 136, 258, 259; 

q ' vii^' 89, 250, 317, 365; 

' viii, 68, 18,4, 2x0 and mt $ 

, ,, ; .visited , by Kai 'KJmsrau, 

,, ; iii,'4p ' - 


215 


GENERAL INDEX 


Azargasiiasp, temple of, Kai ^ 
Khusrau and Kai Kdus 
go on a pilgrimage to, 
iv, 258 

referred to, iv, 264 | 

^Gushasp q.v , vi, 212 j 
and note j 

Bahrain Gdr visits, vii, ' 

86 , 139 

high priest of, converts 
Sap'nud to Zoroastrian- 
ism, vii, 139 
Ndshirwan visits, vii, 250, 
3^3 

Khusrau Parwfz visits, 
viii, 283, 307, 312 
Azargasiiasp, frinian warrior, 

viii, 296 

Azar Mak^n, father of Farnikh- 
zM, viii, 408 

Azarmdukht, Shdh, J 75 » J 

ix, 59, <>9 
reproaches KubM, ix, 7 
end of, IX, 59, 60 

Azarnarsf, son of Hurmuzd son 
of Narsi, vi, 318 
Azditos, Arab tribe, i, ix 
Azhi, (Dahika, Zahhik q.v), 
i, X42 ; ii, 81 


B 

BAbaic, Tribal King. Sm P4pak. 

Bdbak, muster-master of Ndshir- 
w 4 a 

bidden to enrol the host, 
167, vii, 230 

insists on Ndshfrwin's at- 
tendance for enrolment, 
vii, 231 

asks pardon of the ShAh, vii, 
232 

Bibar, founder of 'the Mogul 
dynasty in India ' 
resolutions ' of, as to ?5vine- 
drinkihg, vii, 75 mte. 

Babblestead, nonce naftie given ^ 
by Asfandiydir bp' Z 4 %nl-] 
' istin, V, 'gt'A ■ ' M '' '■ 

B 4 bil,(^abylph e.v,), 16 ^ 


Babr-i-Bayan, a surcoai of leo- 
pard or tiger skin worn by 
Rustam in battle, lii, 1S4, 
1S6 

referred to, iii, 278 
Babylon (Babil, gate of the god), 
city on the left bank of 
the Euphrates, now repic- 
sented by the modern 
Hillah on the right bank, 
ii, 80; iii, 286; vi, 17, 
31, 81, 83 ; viii, I 94 » -49 ; 
ix, 65, (-jz 

hanging gardens of, v, 293 
Sikandar inarches toward, 
vi, 176, 178 

prodigious birth at, vi, 81, 
180 

Sikandar sickens at, vi, 181 
dies at, vi, 81, 183 
Zahhdk king of, ix, 05 
Babylonia, ii, 80, 81 
Babylonian, vi, 254 
script, vi, 32a 

Bacchus, Saint xind Martyr, viii, 
188 

Bactria, region between the 
Hindu Kush and the 
Oxus, vi, 32, 198 
Bactrian plains, iii, 10 

camels, viii, 47 ; ix, 93 
BadakshAn, region south of the 
Upper Oxus and east of 
Balkh, famous for its 
rubies, iv, 65, 19'^ 
signet-ring of, i, 300 
gem of, vi, 3 82 and note 
BM^n-Firdz (Shkirim - Firdz, 
Ardabfl 

by Shill Pfrhz in Azar- 
biijin, 166, vii, 160, 163 
Badar, Badr, battle of, ii, 337 

note, V, ' 166 

Bid Awat, treapre viii., 4^^, 
and 

Baeton, Greek' writer, temp* 

' Aleicander the Great, vi, 

- . t2 . 

' oily "Ph the^ Tigris, 
,'1 '.idtmded;'' l5y ' the/'' 'Ab- 
'' Al Mpnsdr 


2T6 


GENERAL INDEX 


Baghdad — cant. i 

as his capital in A.D. 7O2 
on the site of an old Ba by- 
loiHciii city (Baghdadu), 
i6t, 165, i, 160; iii, 
35 ; iv, 147, 256 ; V, 28 ; 
vij 254, 290, 3>2, 327 ; 
vii, 83 and note ; viii, 109 
note, 1 1 2, 174, T93, 203, 

393 ; ix, 68 

Ardsliir P^pakdn enthroned 
at* vi, 258 

Yazdagird quits* ix, 88 
Persian settlement of, ix, 67 
raided by Arabs, ix, 67 
Bdgiz, vi, 32 
Bagoas, vi, 29 

Bahdr, district in Turkistin 
where Siydwushgird was 
built, ii, 286 

Bahman (Vohu Manau), ame- 
shaspenta q.v., iii, 286, 
327 ; V, 16 ; vi, 362 and 
note 

Yasht, PahlaviText, vii, 188 
month and day, iv, 81 note, 

V, 310; vii, 31 and 
note 

Bahman (Ardshir, Artaxerxes), 
son of Asfandiyir, Sh4h, 

157, h 42 ; ii, 9 ; 

V, 8r, 1 66, 251, 254, 293, 
297. ; vi, 20 note, 34 

and note, 49, 200, 213, 

270 and note ; viii, 270 
eldest son of Asfandiyir, v, 

80 

Asfandiyir resigns the host 
to, V, 82 

hears of Asfandiydr^' im- 
prisonment, V, 85 
goes with others , to- solace 
him, V, 85 ' ^ 

accompanies Asfandiy^ 
from;.Gumbadia, v, 103.., 
sent ,,dtt an emba^agey 
,179 ' ", ' ' ' , ; . i 

crokes ihe Hirnmnd, y, > 
hemihg .te|prt6d to ZM / ' 
y* ! V ' '• ' , 

laien^V Vitfc Zk, y;.'i83 : 


Uahmau, follows Rustam to tlio 

hunting-ground, v, 184 
tiies tu kill Rustam, v 
184 

interview of, with Rustam, 
V, 185 scq. 

entertained by Rustam, v 
186 

astonished at Rustam’s 
appetite, V, 186 
leaves Rustam, v, 190 
gives Rustam’s answer to 
Asfandiydr, v, 191 
Asfandiyar's wrath with, v 
1 91 

resigns his scat at the feast 
to Rustam, v, 200 
informs Asfandiydr of the 
slaying of Nush Azar and 
Mihr-i-Ndsh, v, 227 
hears of Asfandiydr’s over- 
throw, V, 2^4 

confided to Rustam by 
Asfandiydr, v, 248 
Zawdra warns Rustam 
against, v, 250 
remains with Rustam, v, 
252, 256 ' 

instructed by Rustam and 
profits thereby, v, 256 
Gushtdsp advised by Jdrn- 
dsp to write to, v, 258 
Gushtdsp’s letter of recall 
to, V, 258 

equipped by Rustam for his 
journey, v, 258 
welcomed and 'called Ard- 
shfr by Gushtdsp, v, 239 
apd note 

long arms of, V,’ 28 i 
appointed by Gushtdsp to * 
'succeed him, v, 279 
historical position of, in 
Fetsiaa legend, v, 281 
adeends' the throne and liar- 
^ anguee the chiefs ,on the 
, vengeance 'due, for' Asfan- 
, ! <iiydr> y, '2B3, , , 

^pddm Sf^tdn, y,' 284 seq. 
^■$^OTdd„ a hostile message tO' ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


217 


Balinian, rejects Zal’s concilia- 
tory overtures, v, 2 86 
sacks Zaks palace, v, 286 
pillages Zabulistan, v, 287 
fights, defeats, and exe- 1 
cutes Fardmarz, v, 2 88 j 
Bishiitan intercedes for ZAl | 
with, V, 288 I 

stops the pillage of Zabul 
and releases Zal, v, 289 
quits Z 4 bul by Bishh tan’s 
advice, v, 290 

passes over his son Sdsdn i 
and nominates Humdiand j 
her issue as successors to j 
the throne, ¥,291 
death of, v, 294 
referred to, v, 310 
Bahman, son of Ardaw^n, 160, 
161, vi, 202, 225, 227, 260 
made ruler of X^di's, vi, 218 
and note 

referred to, vi, 222 
bidden by Ardawin to seek 
out Ardshfr Pdpak^n, vi, 
223 

wounded and put to flight 
by Ardshfr Pdpakdn and 
Tabdk, vi, 227 
escapes to Hind after the 
defeat of Ardawdn, vi, 228 
urges his sister to poison 
Ardawdn, vi, 259 
Bahman, frdnian magnate, temp. 
Niishfrwdn, vii, 312; viii, 

22 

Bahman, castle of, in Azar- 
* bdijdn, 146, ii, 336, 405 
seq. 

Bahrain, group of islands 0:® 
the Arabian shore of the 
Persian Gulf, vi, 330 : ix, 

68 

Bahrdm, genius, iii, 287, 328 ; 
vii, 406 and note 
day, viii, ’ 279 ^ 

fatal to ,Bahr 4 m Ohdblna, 

, , viii, '$8-7 Ap'd 3^9^^ 

' , ' and note , « ' 

j&phrdm,; mnrali^t, . ' quoted’., . by; 

V ' - hlrdabiA' ii,,US8 


Ball! am (Vardaiics), son of 
(liularz and firotlier ol Giv, 
Iranian hero and Parth- 
ian lung, J45, I /7, i4iH ; 
h, 33. 3*=^, b2, 85, 

127, 138, 144, 158, 249, 

257, 258, 271, 290, 318, 

33 ‘^, 340; lii, I 3 > 15. Id. 
43, 46 seq., 67, 72, 95 seq., 
114, itG, 132, 200, 214, 

232; iv, 8,' 312; vi, 

197 

takes part in the Fight of the 
Seven Warnois, ii, 107 
seq. 

goes with Siyawusli against 
Afrdsiydb, ii, 226 
put in command by Siyd- 
wush, ii, 250, 257 
interviews Fariid, iii, 47 seq. 
Farfid presents his mace to, 
iii, 50 

reports his interview with 
Fariid to Ths, iii, 51 
tries to save Fariid, iii, 52 
reproaches the Iranians, iii, 
66 

slays Kabdda, iii, 74 
rescues the crown of Rfv- 
nfz, iii, 94 

loses his whip, ill, 1 r, 95 
becomes fey, iii, 95 
succours a wounded brother, 
iii, 97 

finds his whip, iii, 95 
loses his horse, iii, 95 
set on by Turkmans, iii, 98 
Rfifn, iii, 99 
wounds Rfifn, iii, 99 
interviews Pfrdn, iii, 99 
attacked by Tathiv, iii, 
101 

found by Gfy, X02 
death and burial oi iii, 104 
Bahrintr sop pf Zarasp, Irinian 
' / beto, ^oes with Zarfr ' to 
dv, 360 , 

; M eppuriahds, ' ‘ the , ' host in 
, ; iy;' 36 o 
. ' Gu^htAsp"-as Sh)^/iv,' 

'' ' ' ' ' .. • 'V' 


GENERAL INDEX 


218 

Bahrain, friiiian warrior or king, 
iv, 268 

Bahr 4 m?=Ardawdn, vi, 197, 210 
Bahrdra, son oi Piriiz, Iranian 
warrior, temp. Bah ram 
Giir, vii, 85 

Bahrdm, father of Shfrwf temp. 

Niishirwin, vii, 251, 262 
Bahrim, son of Urmuzd, Sdsdn- 
ian Shdh (Varahran 1 ), 
162, vi, 3 

receives the throne from, 
and is counselled by, 
Urmuzd, vi, 303 seq. 
mourns for Urmuzd, vi, 
306 

Reign of, vi, 307 seq. 

Note on, vi, 307 
appoints his successor and 
dies, vi, 309 
M 4 nf and, vi, 327 
Bahr 4 m, son of Bahrain, Sdsdn- 
ian Sh 4 h (Varahran II), 
162, vi, 3, 308 
appointed to succeed his 
father, vi, 309 
Reign of, vi, 310 
Note on, vi, 310 
story told of, vi, 310 
Bahrain, son of Shdphr, SisAn- 
ian Shdh (Varahran IV), 
^^3, vi, 3, 371 
Reign of, vi, 368 
Note on, vi, 368 
ruier of Kirmdn, vi, 368 
title of, vi, 3x3, 368 
seal of, vi, 368 
Tahan'^s account of, vi, 368 
daughter of, vi, 369 
resigns the throne to his 
t^rother, yi, 369 
dies, vi, 369 ’ ' 

Bahrim, .son' of Siyi-ymsh, 
viiii , 75 ; f 63 ,,a 45 ' ' ' 

.reported viii, ,x28 ' , 

, return^ ^ with 'captive' sor- 
!cerer,',viii, 128 ! ', ^ '■ 

’^eeoh .of, , viii,,;;t66 ,, I 

' related ; to , 38 ahr 4 fn ; 

viiviSj'': ^ ' 


Bahrain, soil of Siyawusli, wife of, 
warns Bahrain Chubma, 
viii, 247 

pursues Khtisrau Parwfz, 
viii, 233 

besieges Khusrau Parwfz, 
viii, 236 

beguiled by Bandwf, viii, 
236, 245 

returns with Bandwf to 
Bahrdm Chhbfna, viii, 
238 

blamed by Bahrdra Clifi- 
bfna, viii, 238 

given custody of Bandwf, 
viii, 238 

slain by Bahrdm Chiibma, 
viii, 247 

Bahrdm, frdnian general, left in 
charge of host by Khus- 
rau Parwfz, viii, 296 
Bahrdm, father, in Persian 
Tabarf, of Bahrdm did- 
hfna, viii, 77 

Bahrdm, name of, inscribed on 
cup incites Khusrau Par- 
wfz to afflict Rai, viii, 
365 and note 

Bahrdm Azarmihdn, Irdnian 
scribe, 170 

Hurmuzd attempts to 
suborn, viii, 85 seq. 
reveals state-secret to Hur- 
muzd, viii, 88 
put to clcath, viii, 89 
l^ahrdm Bahrdmiydn, Sdsdnian 
Shdh (Varahran HI), 162, 
vi, 3. 3x6, 324, 334 
Reign of, vi, 313 
' Note on, vi, 313 
miscalled ‘‘ Kirmdnshdh/^ 

' , vi, 313, 368 

appoints his son to succeed 
him, vi, 3x4, 3x5 ' 
^Bahrdfp' Chdbfna, $0n of Oas- 
' hasp, marchlord of Rai, 

; Rersiah_ warxior and usur- 
■' per,, J70-171, I, 14; vi, 

' ' .h.'. 209 i'' 7 70, ,73, 

' '' ' ’ ‘ ! 184, ,.187,, 799, • 20.9; _ 2,4, ' 
'.»i5i'.'343 353, ’'5^9 


GENERAL INDEX 


2 J 0 


Balirani Cliiibi'na — t out, 

356 seq , 360, 383 ; ix, 6, 
15, 16, 22, 91, 105 
Romajice viii, 72 6 cq , 
1S7, 191, 303 note; IX, 5 
Noldeke on, viii, 73 
account of, viii, 72 
seller of sheep’s heads and, 
viii, 74, 107 
dream of, viu, 75 
withholding of booty by, 
vin, 76, 148 

insult of Hurmuzd to, viu, 
7 <> 

defeat of, in Lazic war, viii, 
76 

sends swords to Huniiuzd, 
viii, 76 

pai*entage of, viii, 76, 77 
malicious speech about, viii, 
77, 150 

coinage of, viii, 77, [73 
brought to notice of Hur- 
muzd, viii, 98 
described, viii, 98, 206 
identified by ZAd Farrukh, 
viii, 99 

sent for by JIurmuzd, viii, 
100 

consulted by Hurmuzd, viii, 
100 

made commander-in-chief, 
viii, 102 

selects his troops, viii, X02 
justifies Jiis method in so 
doing, viii, 104 
receives Rustam*s banner 
from Hurmuzd, viii, 105 
Mihrin as recorder from 
Hurmuzd, viii, 106 
marches from Taisafhn, viii, 
106 

refuses to be recalled, viii, 

108 

marches to , viii* 

109 and nok 
hay-$ell:er and* ‘Viif, 
marches toward ' Dittia- 

ghitt, viii, 3:09 ‘ , i,.,;'; 

, parley ' of; ; vith' 

viM* 112,: '/ i, "V . 


Ihihram Chubfna, refuses Sawa’s 
oflers, viu, 113 seq, 117 
seq, 

counselled by Kliarrad, viu, 

I2I 

arrays his host, viii, 122 
prayer of, before battle, 
viii, 123 

' encourages the franians 
against Sawa’s sorcery, 
etc., viii, 124 seq, 
defeats and slays Shwa, viii, 
126 

doings of, after battle with 
Shwa, viii, 130 
rewarded by Hurmuzd, viii, 

ordered to attack Parmhda, 

133 

holds revel in a garden, 
viii, T35 

attacked by and defeats 
Parmilda, viii, 135 seq, 
besieges Parmuda in Awdza, 
viii, 138 

informs Hurmuzd, viii, 138 
negotiates for surrender of 
Aw^za with Parmfida, 
viii, 138 seq, 

receives surrender of, and 
insults, Parmhda, viii, 143 
blamed by Kharrid ami 
archscribe, viii, 144 
tries to appease ParmMa, 
viii, 145 

has inventory made of the 
wealth in Aw4za, viii, 147 
sends fzid Gashasp with 
spoil to frdn, viii, 148 
Hurmuzd begins to suspect, 
viiii 151 

advances of, to Khin re** 
jectod, viii, 133 
goes to Balkh,' viii, 153 
'.guided by ' an .onager, viii, 

, ^ ^ incited , to ’ iSC'Cfc the king- 
; ship* viii, 158 ‘ , 

; '■ chapge hi, viih ' 

„ ' " ' , ' .<jhesyiOtted. by l^harrdd^ 'viii, 

■' " ' '' 1 , ' 


220 


GENERAL 

Baliram Chiibi'na, sends Yalan- j 
sma alter Kharrad and j 
arcliscrile, viii. 159 
pardons arclihcribe, viii, 160 
Luck of, viii, 162 
renounces allegiance to 
Hurmuzd, viii, 162 
intercepts tke royal letters, 
viii, 163 

consults tlie chiefs, viii, 163 
becomes Mends with the 
Khdn, viii, 172 
appoints a prince for Khuri- 
sdn, etc., viii, 173 
marches to Rai, viii, 173 
avenges murder of Ayin 
Gashasp, viii, 18 1 
historical campaign of, 
against Khusrau Parwfz, 
viii, 189 

carline and, viii, 189, 303 
marches to ,the Nahrawdn, 
viii, 201 

spies' report of, to Khusrau 
Parwfz, viii, 201 
Khusrau Parwfz inarches to 
meet, viii, 203 
interview of, with, viii, 

204 seq. 

tampers with troops of 
Khusrau Parwfz, viii, 225 
combat of, with Khusrau 
Parwfz, viii, 228 
arrives at Taisafhn, viii, 231 
sends BahrAm, son of Siy4- 
wush, in pursuit of Khus- 
rau Parwfz, viii, 233 
blames Bahrim, viii, 238 
chides, warns and im- 
prisons Bandwl, viii, 238 
addresses tte magnates, viii^ 

' i ?39 , , ' ‘ 

elected , Sh;^h, vih, 243 
'gives ' rhaicohtehts 'three 
days to <iuit viii, 244 
plot against^, . 245 '' s 4 q, ' 

warned^ vrih ''247 , " , , 

''' sl^ysfBnhrimi eo-n of , ; 
vHi;,; 247 ^ 

Kbhm, of , Band#f s '' ^'Oape, 
'Y/yhi; 24^iy ' v’. 


INDEX 

Bahrain Chubma, deceived by 
ferged letteis, viii, 287, 
293, 294 

maiches against ivhiisrau 
Parwiz, viii, itSy 
goes to Azar Abadagdn, 
viii, 288 

arrays his host, viii, 289 
fights with and slays Ivdt, 
viii, 290 

sends back corpse of Kdt, 
viii, 2()r 

worsts Rdmans, viii, 292 
Harvest of," viii, 292 
charges and routs Khusrau 
Parwfz' centre, viii, 294 
fights with Giirdwf, viii, 294 
goes to fight Khusrau Par- 
wfz and his body-guard, 
viii, 207 

leaves Jdnfurdz in charge 
of host, viii, 297 
puts to flight ami j ursiies 
Khusrau Parwfz, viii, 298 
Surdsh saves Khusrau Par- 
wfz from, viii, 299 
deserted by his chiefs, viii, 
302 

retreats, viii, 302 
releases Nastdh, viii, 306 
goes to Rai, viii, 306 ' 
welcomed by Kh 4 n, viii, 316 
asks oath of Khdn, viii, 317 
counsels Kh 4 n to resist 
Makdthra, viii, 318 
challenged by Mak^tdra, 
viii, 319 

' fight of, with Makdtdra, viii, 
320 

Klidn sends gifts to, viii, 321 
asked by Khdn's wife to . 
ayenge death of her 
daughter on lion-ape, viii, 

' 324 

' battle of, with' lion-ape, viii, 
323 

^ .extradition of;, demanded by 
' / , iChusrau Parwfz, ' vifi^ ,328 
;Ur^S'';'Kh 4 n., tp. make y^ar 
, Ipn 'fr 4 fi„' viii, 330 
' , Idt'i Irlh,:; viii;^ 331 ' , ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


221 


Bahrini Chublna, Kharrad at- i Bahram Gur, returns witli 


tempts to prejudice, with 
Khan, viii, 333 
arrives at Marv, viii, 336 
fatal day of, viii, 337, 339 
Kulhn seeks interview with, 

viii, 339 
stabs, viii, 340 

sister of, mourns, viii, 340 
dying speech of, viii, 341 
makes Yal^n-shia his man- | 
datory, viii, 342 j 

letter of. to Khdn, viii, 343 | 
burial of, viii, 343 
name of, on cup, viii, 365 
and 7zA3 

assassination of, referred to, 

ix, 4 

Bahrdm Gdr, Sdsdnian Sh 4 h 1 
(Varahran V), 163-16$, i, 
42 ; vi, 3, 250, 325, 329 
and note, 394 seq, ; vii, 

160, 164, J65, 170 and 

not$, 174, 178, 187, 334, 

359; viii, 75, 129 and 

note ; ix, 26, 77 
birth of, vi, 375 
Yazdagird advised by mag- 
nates to choose governor 
for, vi, 376 

put in Munzir’s charge, vi, 

372. 378 

goes with Munzir to Yaman, 
vi, 378 

nurses of, vi, 378 
education of, vi, 3 78 seq, 
obtains his tutors’ dismissal, 
vi, 380 

makes choice of steeds, vi, 
380 

slave-girls, vi, 381 
goes to the chase with' a 
slave-gui, vi, 3 82' 
markmahship of, vi, 3 S3 ' 

seq. ", ' > . 

slays his ^laye^girl, vi, 3S4 
and'Wo^<^ . : ' 

goes hunting'' with ’’ 

, and Mtnh2ir,yn''3S4',', - ' ’ 

picture, of, ’liuntihg^ io , ' 


Nii’min to Yazdagird, vi, 

386 

complains of Yazdagiid to 
Munzir, vi, 387 
receives advice and bis slave- 
girl from Munzir, vi, 388 
falls into disgrace at couit, 
vi, 389 

asks Tainiish to intercede 
for him, vi, 389 
released and returns to Mun- 
zir, vi. 390 

welcomed by Munzir, vi, 390 
hears of his father's death 
and of the election of 
Khnsrau, vi, 395, 39b ^ 
claims the kingship and is 
supported by Munzir, vi, 
396 5^?^. 

interview of, with Jaw^nwi, 
vi, 398 

negotiates w^th the Iran- 
ians, vi, 401 seq, 
Iranians produce examples 
of Yazdagird’s cruelty to, 
vi, 404 

addresses the Iranians, vi, 
404 

proposes to decide the ques- 
tion of the kingship by 
ordeal, vi, 405 
promises to rule justly, vi, 
406 

agrees to be the first to face 
the ordeal, vi, 409 
Keign of, 164, vii, 3 seq. 
Note on, vii, 3 seq, 
length of, vii, 3 
largely legendary, vii, 3 
character of, vii, 3 
tesembles James V of Scot- 
land, vh, 3 
aoceesion of, vii, 7 
age; of, at, vi, 373 ' ' , 
'inaugural measures ' 'at, 
vii* 7 seq. / 
hdl,cis''‘m|ht days' Court, vii, 
, 't ‘ " ' , : ' / ' 
'*ap|!«oint$" nunisters,' yii, 4» 


222 


GENERAL INDEX 


Bahrain Giir, sends letters to 
the chiefs, vii, 8 
pardons his enemies, vii, 9 
makes festival for three 
days, vii, 9 

rewards Nii’mhn and Mun- 
zir, vii, 10 

honours Khusrau, vii, 10 
remits arrears of taxes> vii, 

11 

restores the nobles exiled 
by Yazclagird to their 
honours, vn, ii 
proclamations of, vii, 12, 
79, 82 

persecutes the Christians, 

vi, 373 ; vii, 4 

war of, with Rhm, vii, 4 
adventures of, 164, vix, 4, 

12 seq, 

forbids wine-drinking, vii, 

23 

allows wine-drinking again, 

vii, 25 

whip of, vii, 47, 54, 63, 64 
equipage of, for the chase, 
vii, 48, 76 

loses and finds his tughral, 
vii, 49, 50 

visit of, to Barzfn, vii, 49 seq, 
marries Barzin^s daughters, 
vii, 53 

hunting-feats of, vi, 383 
seq. ; vii, 54, 55, 77, 80, 81 
visits a jeweller, vii, 56 seq, 
course of life of, bewailed by 
Rtizbih, vii, 56 
many wives of, vii, 56 
asks and obtains Arzu in 
marriage, vii, 61 seq, 
visit of, to Farshfdward, vii, 
68 

forbids ail plundering, yii, 

79 ' , ' ' 

ear-marks and ' brands 
onagers, vii, ,8 X' 
rerhits, the tribute pi Barjkt^h 
' and dai:, vii, 82 
visits Saghd'M, vh,' 83 , 
holds' ''XWh at' '• Baghdad, 
'Vih ' 81 '/ ' ' 


Bahram Gur reproaches Riizbih 
for parsimony, vii, 83 
reported to be given up to 
pleasure, vii, 84 
reproached by his chiefs, 
vii, 84 

secret preparations of, 
against the Khdn, vii, 85 
summons his chiefs, vii, 85 
levies a host, vii, 86 
makes Narsi viceroy, vii, 86 
goes to Azar Abadagan, vii, 

86 , 94. 139 

march of, to Marv against 
the Khdn, vii, 89 
defeats the Khdn at Kash- 
mihdn, vii, 4, 5, 90, 170 
pofe 

marches on Biikhdrd, vii, 

90 

defeats the Turkmans, vii, 

91 

grants peace to the Turk- 
mans, vii, 91 

boundary pillar of, vii, 92, 
160, 161, 164 

makes Shahra ruler of 
Turdn, vii, 92 
goes to Istakhr, vii, 95 
makes gifts of treasure, vii, 
95> 96 

deposits the Khdn’s crown 
in a Fire-temple, vii, 95 
goes to Taisafi'm, vii, 95 
welcomed by Narsi and the 
chiefs, vii, 96 
remits taxes for seven years, 
vii, 3, 97 

happiness of the world 
under, vii, 99 
bestows Khurhsin on Narsi, 
vii, 99 

inquires about Caesar's en- 
, voy, vii, 100 
gives audience to Ca&sar's 
envoy, vii, 10 x 
Cae$ar's ques'tipns to, vii, 102 
, ' parting gifts of* to Caesar's 
envoyy vH,, xo6 , ^ . 

' 'a4dr^ses, the, yrehmages, 

' , vii,' iqd, 


GENERAL INDEX 


Bahrain Gur, wazir complains of 
Shangul to, vii, ioq 
writes to Shangul, vii, no. 
visit of, to Hind, vii, 5, 112 
scq. 

motive of, vii, 5 
fabulous, vii, 6 
bears his own letter to Hind, 
vii, 1 12 

audience of, with Shangul, 
vii, 1 12 

entertained by Shangul, vii, 

116 

wrestles before Shangul, vii, 

117 

displays his markmanship 
before Shangul, vii, 1x8 
calls himself Barzwf, vii, 
121 

slays monsters, vii, 1:2 x seq, 
ottered a daughter and great 
advancement by Shangul, 
vii, 127 

takes to wife one of Shan- 
gul’s daughters, vii, 128 
receives an invitation from 
Faghfi'ir, vii, 129 
i-eply of, vii, 130 
tells Sapintid of his wish to 
quit Hind, vii, 131 
meets some Iranian mer« 
chants and pledges them 
to secrecy, vii, 133 
feigns sickness, vii, 134 
escapes with Sapindd, vii, 

134 

reproached by Shangul, vii, 

135 

makes a league with Shan- 
gul, vii, 137 

welcome of, on his return, 

vii, X37 

addresses the nobles, vii, 

138 ' , , 

praised by the nobles, ’ vii, 
m : ^ ' ' ' , 

makes a new treaty tviib- 
Shangul, ^ vii, ^ 140^ 
entertains ' Shan^b . and 
' seven ‘'Otlw' kings,;, vH, 

, - [ 


223 

Balirdm Gur, appointed Shan- 
guhs heir, vii, [43 
parting gifts of, to Shangul, 
vii, 1^4 

takes account of his trea- 
sures, vii, 144 
term of life of, foretold by 
the astrologers, vii, 144 
resolves to levy no more 
taxes, vii, 145 

unsuccessiul attempts of, to 
benefit his subjects, vii, 
T46 scq. 

Gipsies introduced into Xrdn 
by, vii, 6, 1^9 
appoints Yazdagird his suc- 
cessor, vii, 150 
death of, vii, 6, 150 
Inrdausi's reflections on, 
vii, 150, 151 
mourning for, vii, 15 1 
Bahrain” Gushnasp, father, in 
Arabic Tabari, of Bahram 
Chxlbina, viii, 77 
Bahram Tal, viii, 138 and note 
BaUia (White), a town in Pars a 
few miles north of Shirdz, 
not to be confounded 
with the stronghold 
known as'* White Castle'* 
further north, i, 236 ; vi, 
198 and note, 199 
Baigand, city and fortress 
(Kuhandizh ?) between 
Bukhara and the Oxus, 
vii, X76 

Afrasiyafo encamps at, iv, 

X51 

marches from, iv, 154 
Mahwi encamps at, ix, xiS 
Baisinghar Khdii, grandson of 
Tfmhr the Lame, hfe of 
Flrdan$f by, I, 23 
, edition of Shahnima of, 1# 
353 ' 

, ' , proface to, I, 67 
'Baitul Mukadda®' (Gang-i-Diz- 
f hukhtj,\ Zahhik's capital 
, \ ' (l^ibyion also, an Arab 
i'i '"natnC' for 'Jerusalem,' i 
‘ i6i / ''' - , ' , 


GENERAL INDEX 


224 

Baitu'l Ilaram, the Kaaba g.v., 

vi, 119, 121 

Zoroastrian system of pray- 
iag, i, 80 

Bakhtagdn, father of Biiznrj- 
raihr, vii, 279 

Baku, town on the peninsula of 
Apsheron on the -western 
shores of the Caspian and 
a chief centre of the 
petroleum industry, i, 58 
note 

Bakyfr, mountain where Afrd- 
siydb had a palace, iv, 136 
Balaam, prophet, v, 15 
Bal'ami, Abii 'AH Muhammad 
aK (died A.D. 99 <^), 
S^mdnid minister and 
compiler of the Persian 
version of Tabari's An- 
nals, vii, 5 

Balas (Balish q^v.), Sdsinian 
Shdh, vii, 170 seq. 

Baldsh, king of Kirmdn, slain by 
Ardshfr Pipakin, vi, 205 
Baldsh (Balas), Sishnian Shdh, 
j66, vi, 3 

appointed regent by Pfriiz, 

vii, 164 

hears of the overthrow of 
PiT-dz, vii, 169 
Reign of, vii, 170 seq, 

Rote on, vii, 170 
character of, vii, X71 
introduces public baths, vii, 
xqx 

end of, vn, 171 
title of, vii, 171 
accession of, vii, 171 
Sdf^rai's letter to, vii, 173 
■w:elcomeS Sdfarai on his 
return from Tiir^n, vii, 
I'Si ; ' ' 

; dethroned, ,yil, 182 ' 

Balkb, ' city ip ,nor-riiexn AfghMi- ' 

' - / _ stin, iot, ^2^ ' 

' : ! ,2^1, <242, ' >46, 249 7 'Tifi, , 

'r 9 * ' 

i 'xS, 2'o,. 

3 $., , 

2^5: 'j; 


Balkh — cont 

vii, 94 . 331. 359 . 384 ; 

viii, 22, 74, 95. 153, 159, 

161, 173 ; ix, 116 
ancient seat of Aryan civili- 
zation, 1, 7 

situated on ancient trade- 
route, i, 57 

seat of the Magi, i, 6o seq. 
Zoroaster's successful evan- 
gel at, i, 61 ; V, 18 
Zoroaster slain at, i, 6i v, 
92, 93 

rhyme-word, Firdausi’s dif- 
ficulty with, i, 74 
ShahnAma, scene ol, shifted 
to, ii, 9,; iv, 317 
SiyAwush defeats Garsfwaz 
at, and takes, ii, 229 
Luhrdsp makes, his capital, 
iv, 713 

becomes a devotee at, v, 
3 x 

Kuhram sent by Arjasp to 
attack, V, 90 
stormed, v, 92, 93 
Liibr^sp slain at, v, 91, 93 
spoil of, sent away by 
Arjdsp, V, 108 
Asfandiy^r quits, to invade 
Thrdn, v, 120 
aphorist of, viii, 221 
bestowed by M 4 bwf on his 
son, ix, ri5 

Baliich, Balhchistin (Gedrosia, 

. Makrin), country, 167, ii, 
80, 226 ; iii, 34 ; iv, 136 ; 
vi, 12, 70 ; vii, 340 
Ardshfr PdpakAn’s ill suc- 
cess against, vii, 242 
Nhshfrwdn conquers, vii, 242 
^ becomes prosptous, vii, 362 
Baidchfs, people, vii, 241 seq, 

, ravages, of, vii, 217, 241 
chastised by Ndsbfrwto, vii, 
242. 

B^Wf, frinian noble* 17^* viii, 
/ ' ' X 37 / S 0 q, 

'' ' / dwived/ by Csesar's ‘talis- 
, man, viii/ 273 '' ^ 


GENERAL INDEX 


225 


l‘alwi', praised by Cicsar, viii, 279 , 
receives Cliach, viii, 314 j 
Bamddt, lather of Mazdak, vii, } 
18S j 

Bdmiyan, city in Afgbanistdn, j 
north of the Kuh-i-Baha ; 
mountains and famous j 
for its Buddhist remains, 
iv, 65 

Bandk, Iranian chief, te7Hp, Ard- 
shir Pdpakdn, vi, 202 
Bandawa, Sindian chief, defeated 
by Sikandar, vi, 175 
Band"i~Kaisar, dam at Shdsh- 
tar, vi, 295 

Bandwi, Iranian noble te^np. 

Kubdd, vii, 207 
Bandwi, maternal uncle of 
Khiisrau Parwlz, 171-/73, 
viii, -200, 202, 204. scq , 224, 
225, 227, 231, 234, 245 
seq., 289, 296, 298, 35G, 
357 ; ix, 4 

imprisonment of, viii, 77, 
176 

Gustaham and, escape and 
revolt, viii, 182 
referred to, viii, 189 
put to death, viii, 191, 355 
accompanies Khusrau Par- 
wlz in his flight, viii, 231 
turns back and murders 
Hurmuzd, viii, 232 
rejoins Khusrau Parwlz, viii, 

233 

promises to save Khusrau 
Parwlz, viii, 234 
disguises himself as Khus- 
rau Parwlz, viii, 235 
beguiles Bahrdm^ sou of 
Siydwush, viii, 236, 245 
imprisoned by ' Bahr^m 
Chhblna, viii, 2$S ' 

Bandwi, Bahrim. Chiiblna bea:r$ 
of escape of, viiii,, 24S ' ■ 
entertained by Wausll, viii, 

'' H 9 . ‘ ‘ , ' , 

^oes with Mhuad 'to 
Khusrau; Parwfe; "282, 
Bahri'm Ohdblna .tviites' 
viii, 2'8^^ , ' ; ’ ' ' ly V 
vou \ 


Band, VI, causes defection oi Bah- 
ram Chublna’s chiefs, viii, 
302 

insults of, to Kiyatus, viii, 
Sog, 310 

reconciled to Niyatiis, viii, 
311 

minister of Khusrau Parwlz, 
viii, 313 

adherents of, beheaded, viii, 
370 

execution of, referred to, ix, 
16, 104 

Ban! Tayy, Arab tribe, viii, 
188 

Bant) nets, the Seven, of Niishlr- 
wdn, x68. See Niishlr- 
wdn. 

Baniigashasp, daughter of Rus- 
tam and wife of Glv, 
ii, 4 

stays with Rustam while 
Glv seeks Kai Khusrau, li, 

365 

suitors of, ii, 3 S3, 384 
rejoins Glv, ii, 395 
Bdr, mountain -range in Khurd- 
sdn, V, 30 

B 4 r, treasure, viii, 406 and note 
Bardhim, a Jew, 164, vii, 13 
entertains Bahr 4 m Giir 
scurvily, vii, 16 seq, 
goods of, confiscated, vii, 20 
Bdrbad, minstrel, /75, viii, 396 
seq,t 406, ix, 29 and note 
supersedes Sarkash, viii, 399 
visits Khusrau Parwlz in 
prison, ix, 29 
lament of, ix, 30 
Bairbar, Barbaristin, town and 
country (British Somali- 
land), X4S, ii, 82 seq,, 90, 
9 $, 98 ; iii, 207, 269 : Iv, 

; ' 136, 3:4$'; Vi," ti4 ; >vii, 

327 ; ’ viii, 'SBr, ' 

' 'identiheation of, , ii, 79 
' ' king of, ii, , 83, 94- 95 

prisoner Ijy (Juriza, 

, '1 ■' ' ' ' 

; steads 'oksf&Msy'to.'Gttsfe- 

' ' , ' 

' ' ','1 


GENERAL INDEX 


Barda', city in Arran g.u., nowin 
ruins, on the Tliarthiir a 
tributory of the Kur, iv, 
147 ; vii, 341 ; viii, 99» 
100, 184, 222, 226 ; ix, 15 
Afrdsiydb takes refuge in a 
cave near, iv, 259 
Bardi. See Baid4. 

Barkdh, city between Tstakbr 
and Yazd, vii, 79, 80 
tribute of, remitted by Bah- 
rain Gdr, vii, 82 
Barmaidn ^urmdya q,v.}, 
brother of Faridun, i, 90, 91 
Barmin, son of Wisa, Turanian 
hero, 142, 144, 151, i, 
92, 342 ; ii, 18, 129, 130, 

• 150^ 349 J iib 79 ' 

149 

spies out the Iranian host, 1, 

34^ , 

challenges the Iranians to 
single combat and slays 
Kubdd, i, 347 
rewarded by Afr^siydb, i, 

348 

besieges Gazhdaham in 
White Castle, i, 354 
defeated and slain by Kdran, 
i, 354 

revival of, in legend, ii, 119 
marches on frdn, ii, 228 
defeated by Siydwush, ii, 

229 

chosen to fight Ruhhdm, iv, 
97 

slain by Ruhhim, iv, 102 
Barrier, Alexander's (Sikan- 
dar’s), in the Caucasus, 
160, i, 16, vi, 189, 249 
legend of, vi, .78 
site of, vi, 79 
described, vi, 164 ' 
Barsaentes, satrap, vi, 32 

murderer of D'arius Codo- 
mantis, vi, 32 
executed, - vi, 32 
BarsAm, general Of Bfzhaii, ix, 

' ' 97f ^^7/ ’ , ' ' ' 

marches on-Mary, ix^ ^7^, 1 
Idihwf's ,cori4tict''to,, ix, .1x7 


Bar 'am, pursues and overtakes 

Mdhwi, IX, X18 

captures Mdhwi, ix, 119 
Barsam, the sacred twigs, imple- 
ment in Zoroastrian reli- 
gious ceremonial, 1, 80 
Barsine (Stateira), eldest daugh- 
ter of Darius Codomaniis, 
vi, 33 

marries Alexander the Great, 
vi, 33 

Barta, Iranian hero, 151, iii, 25, 
92 ; iv, 149 

chosen to light with Kuh- 
ram, iv, 97 
slays Kuhram, iv, 105 
Bartds, region in Turkistdn, ix, 
19 

Barzfn, sacred Fire and Fire - 
temple on the Binalfid 
Kuh, south west of Xus 
and Mash ad in Khurdsdn, 
i, 237 ; ii, 107 ; vi, 391 ; 
viii, 216 

Iranians worship at, vi, 400 
Barzin, Fire-temple built by 
Luhrdsp at Balkh, iv, 318 
Barzfn, fr^man hero, i, 365 ; ii, 
12, 22, 73 ; iii. 25, 127, 

273 

Barzfn, father of BihzM, temp. 
Yazdagird son of Sh^pfir, 

vi, 395 

Barzfn, Iranian noble, temp. 
Bahrdm Gfir, 164 
visited by Bahr4m Gi^r, 

vii, 49 , 

entertains Bahrdm Gfir, vii, 
50 seq, 

gives his daughters in mar- 
riage to Bahrdm Gfir, 164, 
vii, 53 

Barzfn, fathdr of Rdd and Did, 
temp. Bahrim Gir, vii, 86 
Barzfn, father of Dstid, Ump. 

Nishfrwin, vii, 251 ^ 
Barzfn, father of Shidin, ■ vii> 
3B,2> 423; 

-Bar^sfh^ bower' of, vii, 83 
Baxzfm genetaf ^ ^ of , Nishfrwia, 
/ , ,viii, 17 ' , ' ' , ' ' ^ 


GENERAL INDEX 


Barzin, father of Kliarrad, 

173, viii, 74, 76, igo, 205 
and passim, ix, 4, 9, 12, 
27 

Barzi'n, father of Jalin, viii, 391 

Barzwi, noncc-iiame assumed by 
Balirani Gur in Hind, 
vii, 12 1, 134 

Barzwi, physician and sage, 
temp. Niishirwan, 169, vii, 

383 

goes on a mission to Hind, 
vii, 424 

consxilts a sage, vii, 427 
hears of the book of Kalila 
and Billina (Fables of 
Bidpai), and procures it 
for N iishirwhn, vii, 427, 428 
translates the above into 
Pahlavi, vii, 382, 428 
asks boon of Nhshirwdn, 
vii, 429 

Basra (Bassora), city on the 
Shatt-cl-Arab, ix, 68, 69 
founded by 'Umar, ix, 67 

Bastdm, city near Ddmaghdn on 
the road to Nishdpdr, vii, 
357 

Bdstdn-ndma (Khuddi - ndma), 
Firdausi's chief authority, 
V, 24, 27, 261 ; vi, 17, 84 
traditional origin of, i, 67 
discussed, i, 68 
translated into Arabic by 
Ibn Mukaffa', vi, 16, 373 
modern X^ersian, i, 67 seq. ; 
vii, 382 

Bastavairi, Bastvar (Nastilr^,?:;.), 
V, 12, 25 

Bitarim (Marcian), Rdman 
general, viii, 41, 47, 52 

Baths, public, introduction of, 
by Balish, vii, 171: 

Battle of the Twelve Rukhs, 15J* 
iv, 7 seq.^ v. 29 ' 
Firdausi's rdflections on, Tv, 
98, ' 106 ' ; 

Eleven Rnkhs, J5X,' iv, $8' 
arranged' by^ Oddar^i %nd 
jRirih, 'iv„ 95 ‘ \ ‘ ' 

of the Bridge,, 1^, 67' i ; ; ^ 


227 

Battlestead = Brazen Hold, v, 
121 

Bazanush (Valerian, q.v.), j6i 
defeat of, and capture by, 
Sliapdr son of Ardshir, vi, 

^ 294. 295 

single combat of, with Gar- 
shdsp, vi, 297 

bridge built by, at Shush- 
tar, vi, 298 

Bazanush (Jovian q.v ), 162, 163, 
vi, 324, 326 

elected Emperor, vi, 353 
sues for peace, vi, 353 
accepts Sildpdr's terms, vi, 
355 

Bazh, suburb of Tds, i, 38 
JBdzrangf, dynasty of Tribal 
kings, vi, 198 

Bdziir, Tdrdnian warlock, hi, 128 
uses magic against the Jrdn- 
ians, hi, 128 

wounded by Ruhhdm, iii,i29 
Beas (Hyphasis), easternmost of 
the rivers of the Punjdb, 
vi, 64 

Bedouins, i, 135, 179 

desert of the, iv, 148 
commanded by Zahir in Kai 
Khnsrau's host, iv, 148 
Bel, Babylonian god, v, 293 
temple of, v, 293 
BcUsarius, Roman general (A.B, 
505-565), vii, r86, 187, 
217, 218 

Berber, race in northern Africa, 
vi, 73 

Berbera, ' trading-station in the 
Gulf of Aden, ii, 79 
Berlin, viii, 192 
Berozias, Barzwi q.p., vii, 383 
Bessus, satrap, temp. Alexander 
the Great, vi> $2 
, assume® > royal , state in 
Bactria, vl, 32 
executed, , vi, 32 ’ 

Bhiiha, -one of ThO' live Pin- 
;daVai,, iv^, 138,, 13:9 
■Bhntin, , Ihdian' kingdom, bet- 
' , ' ^ ' .'treed „ Aishm and 'Thibet, 
vi, "#/' •' , 


228 


GENERAL INDEX 


Bibliotheca, of Diodorus, v, 293 
Bid, a div, ii, 44, 54, 55, 93 
slain, ii, 59, 64 ; iii, 256 ; 
iv, 296 ; V, 204 
Bidid, city of Cannibals in the 
vicinity of Sughd, iii, 244 
seq, 

meaning of, iii, 244 note 
stormed by Rustam, iii, 246 
Bidirafsh (Vidrafsh), Turanian 
hero, J55, v, 24, 25, 41, 
51, 52, 62 seq, 
goes as envoy to Gushtisp, 
V, 37, 40 seq. 

returns with Gushtdsp's 
answer, v, 44 

receives banner from Ar- 
jisp, V, 46 

commands one wing, v, 56 
volunteers to fight Zarir, v, 
62 

slays Zarir, v, 63 
fights Nastiir, v, 70 
slain by Asfandiydr, v, 70 
head of, presented to Gush- 
tisp, V, 71 

Bidpai, Indian sage, vii, 383 
Fables of (Book of Kalila 
and Dimna), brought to 
Persia, Jdp, vii, 213, 382 
Bill Afrfd, daughter of Gush- 
tisp, ii, 3 ; V, 22 
taken captive by the Turk- 
mans, V, 93, 94, 100 
goes with Humdi to draw 
water and meets As- 
fandiy^r, v, 147 
escapes ftom Arjdsp's 

palace, v, 153 
laments over Asfandiyir, v, 

, , 

reproaches GushtAsp, v, 254 
Bihifrxdh, ancestor of Axdshfr 
, _ pApakin; yi, 200^ 

Bih ‘ Ardshft,'. 3 olcucia 

rebuilt bjr Ardshfr Pipa- 
kin, vi^/254, note, ' 
^ viw, 194, "X96' ' ' ' , 

Bihbib^ni towii' -,nba» tbc' \left’ 

, bfink of'‘Bie,TAb : 

PArs,' 'yiii't’SS; ,','1' I 


Bihisht (Paradise), name of the 
country round Gang, iv, 

195 

Bihistun. See Bis tun. 

Bihrdz, a scribe temp. Bahram 
Gur, vii, 71 seq. 
makes an inventory of the 
goods of the miser 
Farshfdward, vii, 72 
BihzAd (" well bred "), the horse 
of Siyawush and sub- 
sequently of Kai Khus- 
rau, 146, ii, 391 ; iv, 172, 

303 

SiyAwush's last charge to, 
ii, 312 

Farangfs instructs Kai 
Khusrau how to obtain, 
ii, 374 seq. 

Bihzdd, Gushtdsp's horse, v, 56, 
69 

BihzAd, frAnian chief, temp. 
Yazdagird son of ShApur, 
vi, 395 ; vii, 85 (?) 

BihzAd, frAnian chief, temp. 
KubAd son of Pfriiz, vii, 
207 

Binalud, mountain-range, west 
of Mashhad, north of 
NishApAr, v, 29 
Birds, Sikandar holds converse 
with, 160, vi, 160 
Birka-i-Ardshfr, city in PArs 
founded by Ardshfr PApa- 
kAn, vi, 290 and note 
BirmAya, cow, i, 151 

supplies the infant FarfdAn 
with milk, i, 151 
slain hy ZahhAk, i, 1 52, 1 53, 
X62 

Birthmark, characteristic of 
Kaian race, ii, 372 ; iii, 
49 and note 

^ described, ,ii, 37^2^ ; hi, 49 
' SiyAwush’s, hi, 49 
Kai Khusrau 's, ii, 372 ; hi, ■ 
49 and , moie ' 

ParAd's, m,^^49 ' ; ' , , ' 

BisAy(FasA, Pas'A, , city ■ south ,of 
' Pakh. Bakh'tigAh in, 'PAr$,| 

■ / '.,vh,, % ?) . \ \ 


GENERAL INDEX 


229 


Bisliop or prelate q v , iv, 34 T, 348 
iia militaribt, i, 373, 378 ; 

IV , 197 ; V, 309 , vi, 352 
advises Ciesar, iv, 330 
Nushzad's last requests to, 

vii, 275 

Bishiitan (Peslio-tanii), brother 
of Asfandiydr, 156, 157, 

V, 66, 1 1 7, 178, 179, 182, 
195, 216, 223, 244 seq., 
249 seq., 261, 288 seq, 

an immortal, v, 12, 19 
birth of, V, 32 
commands the host during 
Asfandiyar’s absence in 
the Seven Stages, v, X22, 
124, 126, 139, 132, 144, 
150 

Asfandiydr praised by the 
host and, v, 123, 125, 131, 

133 

revives Asfandiydr after his 
encounter with the dragon 
V, X27 

prays for deliverance from 
the snow, v, 138 
Asfandiydr and, consult, v, 

3:43 

sees Asfandiydr’s signal and 
approaches the Brazen 
Hold, V, 150 

passes himself off as Asian- 
diy 4 r, v, 143, 151, 152 
joined by Asfandiydr, v, 

155 

advises Asfandiyir, v, 179 
Asfandiyir holds talk about 
Rustam with, v, 192 
advises Asfandiyir to main- 
tain friendly relations 
with Rustam, 196, 217 
Rustam served with un- 
tompered wine by, v, 2a:x 
despair of, at the situation ' 
between Rustam ‘and ' 
A$fan 4 iyi 3 ^, , v, ' 
laments for Ndsh; A.zar and , 
Mihr-i-Rhsh, v*- 23^ 
Asfandiyit .talks. -the ^ 
%ht ' tyith . Rnstatp. , ^ 

240.'"''' ' , ‘ . 


I Ihshutan, hears of Asfandiyar’s 
j overtlinjw and laments 

ior him, v, 244 
Rusiaiu bewails Asfandiyar 
to, V, 246 

Asfandiyar's last charge to, 
V, 249 

heads Asfandiyar's funeral 
train, v, 251 

displays the corpse of As- 
fandiydr, v, 253 
reproaches (lushtisp, v, 253 
Jamisp, V, 254 
consoles Katiyim, v, 255 
supports Rustam's over- 
tures to (hishtasp, v, 257 
intended by Clushtasp to be 
Jiahman's minister, v, 279 
intercedes for Z 41 , v, 288 
intercession of, accepted, v, 
289 

counsels Bahman to quit 
Zibul, v, 290 

Bistdm (Gusiaham q.v.), viii, 255 
and note, 256 

Bfstdn ('Bagistana i.e, *' Place of 
God/' Behistiin, Bfsi- 
tdn), a lofty rock a few 
miles cast of Kirminshih 
and famous for its in- 
scriptions, i, 379 ; ii, 128 ; 
iii, 12, 184, 330 ; iv, 190 ; 
V, 56, 184 ; vii, 61, 363 ; 
viii, 209 

inscription of Darius Hys- 
taspis at, i, 6 ; v, 1 1 
Gotarzes at, iii, 9, xt 
KstZhl's white elephant, i, 328 
ssa Rustam, v, 229 
Bfwarasp (Zahhhk), i, 72, 144 
meaning of, i, 135 
Bit ward, Thrlmian hero, iii, 16 x 
comes to aid Pfrhn, iii, 132 
Bfward, frinian chief temp, 

,, , Yazdagird son of 'Shhpdr, 

- vi, 395, 

Bfzhan, Iranian herp, son of Gfv, 

. ' . X4y, ' ii, 4y 366 

,/ ' add 'mpte ii„ 4; 366 and 
, ih>' 20, 45 j,'67, 7^. 

: ''/'i/,, -X 15 ,'I 2 X, 


GENERAL INDEX 


Bizlian — cont. 

120 , 130. I 33 » 130. 

T57 seq., 2ri, 23/^, 2.17, 
2 z}.8, 253, 259, 26/|, 271, 
2S4 seq.^ 289, 330 seq , 337 
seq,, 349, 35^, 352 seq.; 
iv, 7, 13, 26 56, 77, 

88, 91, 102, 123 seq,, 147, 
292 ; vi, 194 

favourite with the poet, iv, 8 
parentage of, iii, 324 
friendship of, with Gnsta- 
ham the son of Gazhda- 
ham, lii, 15 

relations of, with Giv, iii, 15 
undertakes to slay Paldshan, 
iii, 26 

to carry off the crown 
and handmaid of Ta- 
zhdv, iii, 27 

swears to avenge Zar 4 sp, iii, 
59 

borrows a steed from 
(iustaham, iii, 59 
the mail of Siydwush, 
iii, 60, 69 

worsts Farud, iii, 62 
praises Fariid to Tds, iii, 62 
fights with Fardd, iii, 64 
Pal 4 sh 4 n, iii, 70 
pursues Tazhd-v, iii, 77 
takes Ispanwf captive, iii, 78 
prowess of, with K^wa's 
standard, iii, 93 
shares his steed with Gusta- 
ham, iii, 95 

goes with Giv in quest of 
Bahrim, iii, 102 
attacks Bfdid, iii, 244 
goes to summon Rustam, 
iii, 245 

worsted by PfilAdwand, iii, 
258 

Story- of, and Manizha, 150, 
iii, 12, 28,5 &&q. 

' - historical Tbasis of, iii, ii 
: ' Mohl on,,iii, 2'85_ 

' I ‘ ' Firdausi qn, iiii ' 287 ' 
•referredi to, v^ii,. 72 ' '' 

iroluntddrs tq g:o'|;o 'the' help 
‘ ' '6f‘;the,Ijdndhians, ^2', 91 


Bizhan, goes to liman with 
Giirgm, iii, 292 
desiioys ilie wild boars, iii, 

293 

envied by Giirgin, lii, 294 
steed ot, iii, 296, 302, 313 
interview of, with Mani'zha's 
nurse, iii, 297 
visits Manizlia, iii, 29S 
drugged, iii, 299 
wakes in Afrdsiyab’s palace, 
iii, 300 

holds revel with Manizha, 
ill, 300 

discovered by Garsiwaz, iii, 

302 

taken before Afrasiyab, lii, 

303 

sentenced to death, iii, 304 
lament of, iii, 305 
imprisoned, iii, 309; v, 1x6 
searched for by Gurgin, 
iii, 310 

receives Rustam’s ring, iii, 

340 

Rustam’s conditions of re- 
lease for, iii, 345 
released, iii, 346 
pardons Gurgfn, iii, 346 
joins in attack on Afrd- 
siydb’s palace, iii, 347 
presented to Kai Khfisrau 
by Rustam, iii, 354 
holds converse with Kai 
Khusrau, iii, 356 
desires to fight Hfimdn, iv, 
39 

asks GIv to lend him the 
mail of Siydwush, iv, 40 
seeks Gfidarz’ permission to 
fight Hdmdn, iv, 41 
receives the mail of Siyd- 
wush from Gfv, iv, 45 
parleys with Hdmin, iv, 
45 

returns after the fight in 
Hdmdn’s armour, iv 51, 
defeats night-attack and 
- ^ slays Nastfhan, iv, 54 
' attacks yrith ' Olv Pfrin's 
> , , centre, 'iv, 83. , _ - , ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Bfzhan, fights with Farshiclw^ard, 

IV, 87 

chosen to fight witii Ruin, 
iv, 97 

slays Ruin, iv, 103 
asks Ghdarz for heli) for 
Gustaham, iv, 117 
rescues Gustaham, iv, 124 
seq„ 132 

brings back the corpses of 
Lahhdk and Farshid- 
ward, iv, 126, 132 
Kai Khusrau remonstrated 
with by, and other nobles, 
for refusing audience, iv, 
275 

Kai Khusrau gives audience 
to, and other nobles, iv, 
283 seq. 

Kai Khusrau ’s gift to iv, 

295 

brings Luhrhsp before Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 300 
sets out with Kai Khusrau 
on his pilgrimage, iv, 306 
refuses to turn back when 
bidden by Kai Khusrau, 
iv, 307 

Kai Khusrau farewells and 
warns, and his comrades, 
iv, 308 ^ I 

disappears and is sought 
in vain by, and his 
comrades, iv, 308 
end of, iv, 309 
Ghdarz’ grief for, iv, 310, 
312 

sons of, go with Zarfr to 
Rhm, iv, 360 
hail Gushtdsp as Sh 4 h, iv, 
362 

Bizhaih Ashkdnian king, vi, J97, 
2x0 

Bfzhan, KhAn of Turks^ xy6, ix, 
70, 96 ' 

MAhwi writes to, 0 
consults his minister^ ix, 97 , 
sends troops to Marv* xx,' 97 
MAhwf makes;WAr on, x 15 - 
marches agaihst ix, 

- ' xxy ' . ' " 


231 

Bizhan, Kh 1 n of Turks, lays am- 
bush for Maliwf, ix, ti 8 
sends Barsam in pursuit of 
Mahwi, ix, 118 
hears of MAhwi’s capture, 
ix, XI 9 

puts Mahwi to death, ix, 12a 
goes mad and kills himself, 
ix, .120, 12 1 
Black Div. See Div. 

horse, GushtAsp’s, v, 18 
cured by Zarduhsht, v, 1 8 
Stone, meteorite built into 
the wall of the Kaaba at 
Mecca, ii, 163 and note, 
vi, 65 

Blest, Country of the, vi, 74, 76 
Boars, wild, devastate IrniAn, 
iii, 290 

slain by Bizhan, iii, 293 
Bombyx Mori. Se& Silk. 

Book of Kings, Firdausi’s ShAh- 
nAma, i. 43 

Indication and I^e vision, 
Mas'udi’s, vi, 252 
quoted, vi, 252 
Boot, golden. See Golden. 
Borysthencs, river (Dnieper q.v.)^ 
hi, 19X 

Boulder of the Div AkwAn, iii, 
271, 343 347 

Rustam carried off on, iii, 
276 

flung into the sea with, 
iii, 278 

raised from the sea, iii, 309 
used to cover Bizhan ’s pris- 
on, iii, 3^9 

removed from pit’s mouth 
by Rustam iii, 345 
Boundary-pillar, BahrAm GAr’s, 
vii, 92, 160, i6x, 164 
Bowl, the full, symbolism of, vi, 
63 

Brabantio, his warning to 
. , Othello, vi, 324 
BrAiirbk-r&h; a' Karap, v, 15 
^ slayer of Zarduhsht, v, 13 
, !Btabman,'Hinda priest, iii, 29 J 
' , s iv, '50; .y,i 207, vii, 4254 

2X , 


GENERAL INDEX 


232 

Bralniians (Gyniiiosopliistrc) , 159 
vi, 64 

Pall.'idius on, vi, fd 
country of, vi, 143, 147 
hear of. Sikandar’s coming 
and write to him, vi, 

143 

Sikandar’s interview with, 
vi, 67, 143 seq. 
described, vj, 144 
reply to Sikandar’s ques- 
tions, vi, 1^4 seq. 
Sikandar quits, vi, 147 
Brahmanism supersedes Budd- 
hism in eastern frdn, i, 16 
Brains, human, prescribed to 
Zahhdk by Iblfs, i, 139, 
146 

Bramble-grubber, 164. See 
Bilifriiz. 

Brand-mark, iii, 291 
of Kids, iii, 291 

Brazen Hold, the 1^6, v, 116, 
117, 119 seq., 159, 197, 
206, 255 

route to, V, 120, 135 
described, v, 121, 135, 141: 
Asfandiyir's stratagem for 
taking, v, 116, 143 
surprised from within by 
Asfandiydr, v, 132 seq. 
left in charge of Sdwa, v. 

154 

Arjdsp's head thrown from 
the ramparts of> v, X57 
Asfandiyir destroys, v, 162 
referred to, viii, 171 
Bride, the, one of the Kai Kids' 

' treasures, iv, 295 
given by Kai Kbnsrau to 
Gfv, Zil, and Rustam, iv, 
«95 

^Brides of tbe , Treasure, Genii 
that watch. ! over secret 
. hoards^ ^ vi, 250 
.Bridge, Battle' of ttie, isc, '-5, 67 
Browning* Robert, 'his poem ' of 
, ^ f:* The Gloye/*' 3,^4 ' ' 
Bucephala; ' of-ty ' founded i ,by' 
. '' ,! . , "'Ajmnher' the- Great,' vi,’ 


Bucephalus, horse of Alexander 
the (Ijeat, vi, i8 
Inrtli ol, vi, 2<) 
a mare {Kthiopic veision), 
vi, 1 8 

offered by Darius to Porus, 
vh 31 

death of, vi, i8, 64 
city built by Alexander in 
memory of, vi, 18 
Buddha, birth stories of, vii, 383 
BuddhivSm, in eastern frdn and 
Kdbulistan, i, 15 
superseded by ih'ahman- 
ism, i, 16 

regarded as idolati*ous by 
Zoroastrians, i, 16 
Buddhist saints, story of two, vi, 

63 

Budge, Dr. E. A. Wallis, his 
editions of the Syriac 
and Ethiopic versions of 
the Pscudo-Callisthencs, 
vi, 14, 17 note 
Budini, race, vi, 73 
Bditi, demon, assails Zarduhsht 
i, 62 ; V, 17 

Bukhdra, city on the Zarafshdn 
river in the province of 
Sughd, ii, 24 1 ; iv, 65 ; 
vh, 33B 34S, 359i 3^4; 
ix, 97, 1 15, 117 
Kurikhdn sent to, iv, 154 
Afrdsiydb joins Kurdkhdn 
at, iv, 186 

Fire-temple built by Tdr at, 
iv, 225 

Bahrdm Ghr attacks, vii, go 
receives tribute from, vii, 
94 

Bukhtakte. See Bakhtagdn. 
Bulghdr (Bulgaria), viii, 406 
Bull, mythological, i, 71 ; ii, 
407; vii, 245 
, -hsh, ii, rzB 

Bundahish, Pahlavf text, i, gi, 
92, X17, 235,, 

' ' ' , 23^* 337 33^, 369 ; 

: , ’.hi 3 wte. 26, Sr, Its, 

' , '/ , ' ; 
; nteaning of, i, '70, Hofe , 


GENERA L INDEX 233 


Ell iclahi’h, account of Creation 
ill, i, 117 

Btirab, court-farrier to Cfesar, 
IV, 326 

refuses to employ GusMasp, 
iv, 327 

15urdza, minister under Yazda- 
gird son of Shdpdr, vii, 4 
Burial-place of Rustam's race, 
the scene of the battle be- 
tween Bahman and Far4- 
marz, v, 287 

Burjak and Burjdtiir, vi, 207. 

See Youths, the two. 

Burjdsp, Turdnian hero, iv, 2O 
commands the loft wing, iv, 

26 

Burns, quoted, viii, 3 
Burrus, Praitorian prefect temp. 
Nero, vii, 279 

Burzmihr, Irdnian warrior, vii, 
80 

bears Narsbs letter to Bah- 
rdm Gdr, vii, 94 
Burzmihr, scribe, viii, 8x, 87, 313 
s=Bdziirjmihr (?) q.v.^ viii, 
71 

Burzdyald, Turdnian hero, iv, 
182 

fights and flees from Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 183 
Bdsipds, nonce name used by 
Hdmdn when parleying 
with Rustam, iii, 198 
Bust, city in Sfstdn, situated at 
the junction of the Kan- 
dahdr and Helmund 
rivers, i, 252 ; iv, 65 ; v, 
173, 277, 287; vi, 175; 
vii, 173, 3951 ^9 

stream of, i, 232 
Buzgdsh, name of tribe, ii, 55 
and not&^ iii, 207 
Bdzurjmihr, chief counselipr of 
Ndshfrwdn in - frdnian 
tradition and famous fox 
his ' wisdom, 

27 E V, 261 j .vih, ^ 

3 ,,67 mq .' ,, 1' -''b 

^ associated'^ lyith ^thoi -Pehsidh , 


Biizurjmilir, a semi-mythical 
personage, vii 280 
found by Azad Sarv at I\Iarv, 
vii, 2 S3 

undertakes to inteipret 
Ndshirwan’s dream vii, 
283 

goes with Azdd Sarv to 
court, vii, 283 
adventure of, with a snake, 
vii, 284 

interprets Ndshfrwdn's 
dream, vii, 2 84 
rewarded and honoured by 
Ndslurwdn, vii, 2<Sb, 289, 
304, 311, 315, 388 
accomplishments of, vii, 286 
discourses of, at the Seven 
J^anquets of Nushfrwdn, 
vii, 287 seq. 

on fate and fortune, vii, 291 
on the attainment of great- 
nes.s, vii, 291, 296 
on what is worthiest, vii, 
291 

on sages, vii, 288, 291, 292, 
294, 296 seq,, 309 
on fools, vii, 297, 298, 306 
on conduct, vii, 288, 291 
seq., 299, 309 

on kings, vii, 290, 294, 295, 
301, 312 

on the wise administrator, 
vii, 294 

on sons, vii, 295, 303, 311, 
on riches and poverty, vii, 
^95 

questioned by Ardshir and 
Yazdagird, vii, 308 
on Scribes, i* 27 ; vii, 3x1 
on loyalty, viC 312' 
discourse of, vii* 366 
questioned by ' Ndshfrwin, 
vii, 367 S 6 q. 

■ ' , expounds' the game Of chess, 

' ' ^ ^ vh, 380, 3S8 
' invents the game ,ol naxd, 

/ 'vii,'#!, '389 

; , 'Weiopmod ■ dh Ms retutn from 
, ,|m,d'^dy^'!K1MWrw4n,■ vii, , 

■■'.''V: 


234 GENERAL INDEX 


Biizurjmihr, goes hunting with, 
and is suspected of theft 
by, Nushh'wan, viii, 4 
disgraced by Ndshi'rwan, 
viii, 5 

instructs Nushirwdn's page, 
viii, 5 

refuses to admit himself in 
the wrong, viii, 6 seq. 
treated with increasing 
rigour, viii, 7, 8 
released, viii, 9 
divination by, viii, 10 seq. 
advises with Ndshirwdn, 
viii, 47 seq. 

instructed by Ndshfrw 4 n 
to prove Hunnuzd, viii, 
56 seq, 

abolition of Fire-worship 
foretold by, viii, 68 
death of, viii, 69, 71 
==Bur2mihr (?), viii, 71 
Mas’iidx on, viii, 71 
Byzantine title, vii, 2x8 


C 

tosAR, the dynastic title of the 
kings of the West or Mm 
who were regarded as be- 
ing descended from Salm, 
the son of Fariddn, J54, 
idj, 162, X65, i6y, 
X72-zy4, i, 262 ; ii, 383 ; 
iii, 9.; vi, 112, 297, 353; 
vii, 163 ; viii, 8 seq., 19, 
43 5 ^ 230, 232, 

245, 252 seq,, 257 seq,, 299, 
306 seq., 334, 373 seq., 

1 408 seq. ; ix, 10, 23 
transliteration of, i, 84 and 
note 

temp, Luhrisp, 154, iv, 339 
.s^q , ; V, tr, 32,, 167 ' 
daughter of^stetfchtdyda, iv, 
314 ; : 4 r,' 205 ' 

, capital of, fouiidedj by Salm, 

, ''iv,, 3 :^ 5 ' ' 4. ^ , 


Ca'sar, temp. Luhrasp, Nastar, 
master of the herds to, iv, 

3-25 

refuses to employ Gush- 
tasp, IV, 326 

Burab, court-farrier to, iv, 
326 

refuses to employ Gush- 
tdsp, iv, 327 

proposes to give his eldest 
daughter in marriage, iv, 

329 

wrath^ of, at his daughter’s 
choice of Gushtdsp, iv, 

330 

yields to bishop’s counsel, 
iv, 331 

refuses to provide for his 
daughter and Gusht^sp, 
iv, 331 

bids Mirfii slay the wolf of 
Fdskdn, iv, 333 
inspects the slain wolf, iv, 

341 

marries his second daugh- 
ter to Mfrhi, iv, 341 
bids Alxran slay the dragon 
of Mount Sakila, iv, 342 
third daughter of, iv, 342 
seq. 

married to Ahran, iv, 

, . 34 ^. 

rejoices in his two sons in 
law, iv, 348 

proclaims the tidings of the 
slaying of the wolf and 
the dragon, iv, 349 
sons-in-law of, display their 
accomplishment on the 
riding-ground, iy, 349 
sees Gushtdsp's prowess and 
questions him, iv, 330 
learns the truth aboxit the 
wolf^ and the dragon and 
, ' asks' pardon of Gushtisp 
' and Katdyun, iv, 3^1 
' wrath of, with Mfrin and 
Ahtan, iv, , 331 , 

, 'seeks ' to * find .out ihtough 
JCaidyhit' who Oushtisp 
'' " ds, iv, 331 ; ' ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Cavsar, temp. Luhrasp, receives . 
Gusliiasp with honour at | 
court, IV, 352 _ ; 

Ilyas lefuscs to pay tribute | 
to IV, 352 i 

receives a scornful message i 
from Mfrin and Ahran, iv, | 

353 , i 

takes counsel with Gushttisp, | 

iv, 353 I 

bids Gushtdsp lead forth ! 

the host, iv, 354 j 

arrays the host, iv, 355 , 

Gushtdsp brings tlie dead j 
body of 11yds to, iv, 355 ! 

welcomes Gushtasp after his | 
victory, iv, 35O , 

consults Gushtdsp about j 
demanding tribute from j 
Inin, iv, 356 1 

sends an envoy to Luhrdsp, j 
iv, 35b 

gives audit; nee to Zarfr, iv, 
360 

replies, to, and dismisses 
Zarfr, iv, 301 

questions tiushfcdsp, iv, 361 
sends (iushtdsp to Zarfr's 
camp, iv, 3OT 

goes to feast with Gush- 
tdsp and discovers who 
he is, iv, 363 

gives gifts to Katdydn, iv, 

the Irdnian chiefs, iv, 364 
parts in good will from 
Gushtdsp, iv, 364 : 

sends embassy to Gushtdsp 
on hearing of Arjisp's de- 
feat, V, 75 

temp- Humdi, sues to Rush- 
nawM for peace, v, 307 
attFailakds q.D-^ vi, 24,, 26* 27 
sasSikandar q.v., vi, 40, 4^2, 49 
113, 1:14, I'l8, X2I, % 2Z , 
124, X28, X29, 142, 

163C, 176, X74, 1:78, 183 ' 

»s Valerian , 

vi, 3/26 '' ' 

sajoyian ; 

„ ' , vi,^i53r,3'5f,; - ''y; , 


235 

Cresar, temp. Sliapiir son of 
Ardsltir, l 6 i 
]>ays tribute, vi, eo8 
temp, Sliajjur son <jl Urrnuzd, 
26 J, VI, 341 seq,, 345 

Sha]>iir in disguise visits, vi, 
33b 

entertaint‘d lijq vi, 337 
discovered by, vi, 337 
arrested by, vi, 337 
sewn up in an ass’s skin 
by, vi, 338 

put in charge of wife of 
vi, 338 

invades and ravages irdn, 
vi, 338 

Shdpfir ])reparcs to attack, 
vi, 34b 

overthrown by Shdpur at 
'Paisafun, vi, 346 seq, 
Shdpiir's treatment of, vi, 
34d. 357 

mother of, vi, 351 
brother ol (Vdm'is q.v.), vi, 

351 

temp. Yazdagird son of Sha- 
phr, vi, 3H9 
pays tribute, vi, 3 89 
temp. Bahrdm Gdr, 165 
embassage of, to Bahrdm 
Gdr, vii, 3, 86, 100 
marches on irdn, vii, 84 
propounds questions to Bah- 
, rdm Ghr, vii, 102 

envoy of, questioned by the 
high priest, vii, 104 
t&mp. Ndshirwift, xdy, x6g, 
vii, 244 seq., 269, 

273 

replies to Ndslurwin con- 
cerning Munzir, , vii, 245 
treastires of, taken by N dsh- 
frwin, vii; 255, 238 
' sues to NdsMrwdu for peace, 

' , ^ Vii, 261 

sends „twbute to' NAslifrwdn, 
yib 362 - ' , ' ' 

■ > ' death of, viiL 43 '' ■ ' , 

b 1 and;iKhhsriu I^arwfe,. 27a 


236 GFNERAL INDEX 


Ca 3 sar, ienip. Niishiiwaii, etc., 
ollends Nusliirwan, viii, 
44 

marches against Nhshir- 
win, viii, 46 

attacks Hnrmnzd, viii, 93 
retakes cities, viii, 93 
makes peace with Hurmuzd, 
viii, 95 

welcomes Khusrau Parwfz, 
viii, 257 

otfers help to Khusrau Par- 
wiz, viii, 261 

changes his mind, viii, 262 
consults the astrologers, vin, 
264 

decides to help Khusrau 
Parwiz, viii, 265 
offers daughter to Khusrau 
Parwiz, viii, 266 
offers of,. accepted by Khus- 
rau Parwfz viii, 269, 270 
talisman of, viii, 271, 275 
deceives Biiman envoys, 
viii, 272 

mastered by Kharrdd, 
viii, 274 

gifts of, to Kharr.id, viii, 278 
writes to Khusrau Parwfz, 
viii, 279 

praises Ruman envoys, viii, 

279 

counsels Maryam, viii, 279, 

280 

gives Hiydtds charge of 
Maryam, viii, 280 
corpse of Kdt sent to, viii, 
291 

Khusrau Parwfz announces 
death of Bahr^m Chd- 
bfna to, viii, 345 
daughter of, gives birth to 
Shfrwf, viii, 371 , 

Khusrau Parwfz^ letter to, 
viii, 373 

rejoicing' 'Of, at birth of 
Shfrwf, 'Viii, 374 
embassy, of, to' Khusrau 
'Par’vyiz, viii, 374 
, gifts of, giyep by . IChusrau*’ 
Barwfz' td Shiryp^, viii, $Bx 


Cmsar, temp Niishiiwan, etc., 
invited to seize Iran, viii, 
40S 

tricked by Khusrau Parwfz 
and i*etreats, viii, -;jio 
letter of, about the True 
Cross referred to, ix, 22 

Caesarean birth, of Rustam, i, 
236, 32 T seq. 

Calanus (Sphincs), Indian as- 
cetic, vi, 61 
Onesicritus and, vi, 61 
Alexander the Great and, 
vi, 61 

death of, vi, 61 
derivation oj, vi, 61 
identical with the sage sent 
by Kaid to Sikandar 
{see Four Wonders), vi, 62 

Calendar, Zoroastrian, i, 88 ; iii, 
286 

adopted by Darius Hystas- 
pis, i, 59 

Callinicus. See Kdliniyds. 

Callisthenes, Greek historian 
temp, Alexander the Great 
vi, 12, 74 

Romance of Alexander 
fathered on, vi, 13 
account of, vi, 13 

Callitris quadrivalvis, the Arar 
tree, vi, 19 

Cambyses, father of Cyrus the 
Great, ii, 190 

identical with Siydwush in 
legend, ii, 191 

Cambyses, son of Cyrus the 
Great and King of Persia 
(B.C. 528-521), V, 10, II ; 
vi, 16 

Camel, piece in chess, vii, 422 
position of, vii, 422 
move of, vii, 422 

Cancer, constellation, iii, 125, 
151, 255 vii, 257 
moon in, an evil omen, i, 1 88 ; 

, hh (?) 

Chndace (Kandake, ' Kaiddfa 
dynastic title of the 
' queens pf Ethiopia, vi 


GENERA!. INDEX 


Candace Alexander the CJreat 
and, VI, 65 seq. 

Candahar. See Kandahar 
Cannibalism, hi, 19 1, 2^4 
Canopus, star, i, 188 

of Yaman, i, 266 ; ii, 203 ; 
hi, 297 ; vi, 382 
Cappadocia (Palawina), vi, 294 
Captives, mutilation of, vi, 323, 

334. 348- 357 

settlement of, vi, 327, 357 
Carline and Bahrdni Cliubina, 
vih, 189, 303 
Carnelians, ii, 123 
of Yaman, h, E23 
Carrhm, defeat of Crassus at, i, 15 
Carthagenians, the, vi, 30 

Alexander the Great's 
legendary visit to, vi, 30 
Casaubon, Isaac, vi, 13 
Caspian >Sea, i, 3, 4, ib, 19, 56, 
37. 338; ii. ->89. 33i^; 
hi, 10, 192 ; iv, 136 ; v, 
13 

Cas^han Gates, iv, 315; vi, 31, 
32 

Cassander (B.C. 350-297), eldest 
son of Antipatcr and 
King of Macedonia, vi, 82 
Castellan, bishop as. See Bishop. 
Castes, division of Aryans into, 

i' ^ 

Iranians into, 1, 130, X32 
Castle, White. See White Castle, 
of the Alins. See Alans, 
Bahman. See Baliman. 
Oblivion, vii, 184 

Kubid son of Pfrhz 
confined in, vii, 184 
escapes from, vih, X84 
Catholicus, viii, 195 
Catullus, Roman poet (B.C. 84-* 

54) » ii 

on Petsian pext of' kin 
marriage, - i, bo 

Caucasus, mountain-tango rtin-t 
ning : in 4 sontb-easteriy ' 
'directioh 'from the/ Black; ' 
Sea to ^ the Caspian* ' 4 , 
iy^ p 'iM, 'M^r 

. y|iir72 , ’;C;, , , 


237 

I Caucasus, passes in, i, i6 ; vi, 79 
lortilied, I, 16, vii, 153, 
187, 216, 239 
Mas'udhs account oh 
vii, 215 

barrier (mythical) of Alex- 
aiKier the Great (Sikaii- 
dar) in, i, lO ; vi, 78, 189, 

249 

legend of, in the Kurin, 
vi, 78 

site of, v], 79 
described, vi, 164 
Cave, cavern, in Maxandardn, ii, 
2<S 

White DiV's, ii, 28, 55, 58 
seq. 

Afrasiydb's, in A/arbdijdn, 
iv, 136 seq., 259 seq. 
Central clime. See Clime. 
Clidch (Shdsh, Old 'rdshkand, 
now in ruins), city on the 
right bank of the Jax- 
artes west of I'crglidna, 
famous for its bows, ii* 
241, 258 ; iv, 19, 187, 188, 
255; Vii, 167, 329, 334, 
340, 343, 348, 358, 359; 
vih, 314, 377 ; ix, X15, 116 
bow of, i, 227 ; hi, 123, 181, 
227; v, 244; vi, 384; 
vih, 125, 126, 294 
government of, given to Tds 
by Rustam, ii, 358 
thane of, one of Firdausi's 
authorities, vi, 197, 210 
referred to, vi, 229 and 
.note 

daughter of governor of, 
vh, 285 

intrigue of, vii, 285 
executed, vii, 28b 
battle-axes of, ixy .118 
■Chagh^m, .district, on^ tbb right 
; - , bank pi the Cixus where 
: ; , ' ' thht, river is crossed from 
■ ^irhtid, , ani ' city f grther 
; , ' ; I north ,'ohi the upper ymters ' 
„ ' , 'pi h'a'm,fe, 

; ' vii, ,'94, 


233 GENERAL 

Chaghan, ceded by Kiibad to 
tlic Haitdlians, vii, 198 
monarcli of=Faghanish, vii, 
333 

Chaghwdn —Chaghan (?), vi, 174 
Sikandar visits, vi, 174 
quits, vi, 175 

Chaha, hostelry of, i, 45 

Chah^r Makila, Persian treatise, 
i 23 

account of Firdausi in, i, 38, 

39, 45 

Chahram (Jahram q^v.), city in 
Pdrs 

Chalah, viii, 193 

Chdlandshdn. See Cliiinland" 
sh^n. 

Chalcedon, viii, 194, 195 

Chalybon-Beroea (Aleppo), city 
in northern Syria, vii, 218; 
viii, 41 

held to ransom by Ndshir- 
wAn, vii, 218 

Champions, the Twelve, vii, 156. 

See Rukhs. 

Chamrosh, mythical bird, i, 235 

Chdnlandshdn ( K h d 1 a n j 4 n . 
Khdnlanjdn), district and 
town (Firiizdn) near Ispa- 
han on the Zayinda river 
(i>ee LEC. pp, 206, 207 
and note), i, 29 
Ahmad ibn Muhammad of, 
patron of Firdausi, i, 29 
Firdausi's escape from 
drowning at, i, 26, 29 
Chao-wou=Sdwa q^v., viii, 72 
Characters, chief, of Shdhndma, 
i, 49 

Characteristics, of Xrdn, i, 3 seq. 
Characteristics of a Happy Man, 
Pallia vi text, vii, 279 
Charam, place in Irdn, hi, 40, 41, 

52, dS, 85, 86, III, X12 
Charbar, place on the coast of 
Balhchistdn (Makrin), vi, 

70 

Chares of Mytilene, Creek writer 
and o:®dal at the court of • 

^ ! Alexander the Great ii 

m; vi/di ' " ' j 


INDEX 

Chai C' of Mytilene, story by, of 
Hystaspcs and Zariadrcs 
quoted, iv, 314 
Charinda, river, hi, 10 note 
Charjui (Amwi q.v ), city on the 
Oxus, vii, 91 note 
Charogos. See Tainhsh. 

Chase, equipage for, vii, 48, 76 ; 
viii, 384 

Chess, game of, i6g, vi, 201 ; 
vh, 14 and note, 280, 385 
seq. ; viii, 371 
Note on, vii, 380 
sent by the Rdja of liind to 
Niishfrwdn, vii, 5, 380, 
384 seq. 

expounded hy Ildzurjinihr, 
vii, 380, 388 
symbolism of, vii, 381 
two forms of, vn, 381, 388, 
422 

changes in powers of pieces 
in, vii, 381 
Mas'hdi on, vii, 382 
invention of, Story of the, 
i6g, vii, 394 seq. 
Chess-.board, vii, 14, 385, 388 
Chess-men, vii, 14, 380, 388 
Chevy Chase, li, 82 
Chigil (Naryn ?) district and 
river, tributary of the 
Jaxartes, iv, 155 
monarch of, v, no 
commands the left, v, no 
—Arjdsp, V, 54, 86 
Turkman of, ^Gurgsdr, v, 
139 

Chihrzad (Humdi), daughter and 
wife of Slidh Bahman, ii, 

3 ; v, 290 and note 
meaning of, v, 290 and note 
Chijast (Klumjast, TJrumiah), 
lake in Azarbdijdn, iv, 
136 note 

Children, sometimes brought up 
un-named, 1, 8, 379 
Chin, country, China, but gen- 
erally in the Shdhndma 
equivalent to Chinese 
Tartary ,ancl sometimes 
' to Tdrdn, i6o, x6^, xys, 


GENERAL INDEX 


239 


Chin, count y, Chma — coni. 

1, 207, 229, 230, 261, 267, 
351, 371 ; ii, 77, 82, III, 
1*13. -154. 156. 237. 277, 
286, 2S7, 289, 297, 305, 
307. 357. 359, 3‘'^3. 39^1 i , 
hi, 46, 49, 103, 106 and j 
passim. 1 

assigned by Farid lin to Thr, 

i, 189 

brocade of, i, 269, 233 and 
passim 

coasts of, vi, J73 

cloth of gold from, ii, 275 ; 

vi, 182, 334 
dinhrs oi, iv, 241 
Faghfiir of. See Faghfur, 
helm oi, i, 132 
images of, v, 35 
implements of, vi, 122 
Kh4n of. See Kh4n, 

King of ^AMsiydb, ii, 90; 
iv, 165, 170, 230 
.— Kh^n, iii, 227, 228; 
vii, 87 

=«Arjfisp, V, 36, 52, 55, 
O9, 86, 108 
Faghfiir, vii, 131 
lord of -^Mahmiid, iv, 142 
=sSikandar, vi, 113 
a Faghfdr, vi, 171 
mace of, iii, 129 
ornaments of, ii, 232 ; vi, 
102, 139 

paper of, vi, 172 
pen of, vi, 57, 99 
prince of«IiMn, iii, 226 
sasAfrisiydb, iv, 194 
asArjAsp, V, 35 
sa-Parnnida, viii, 142 
&»SAwa, viii, 222 
rarities of, vi, 171, 173 ; vii, 

49 ' ^ ' 

- robes of, iii, 329 ; viii 205, 

«57 . , 

Rose ofatedanghter of the, 
KhAn, viif 365 mid.-mU 
sea oft i IIS, 140,' 252, 34^;' 

ii, 12, 256, 276,; 283, ,336, , ■' 

357,; iii. *5*. *5*!' ;iy, ^ 
237. >54';.' ?f»3. ■ 


Chin, sea of — runi. 

233. 239 note; vi, 149; 

vii, 343 ; viii, 377 
shield of, iii, 125, 140, 256 ; 

IX, 118 

Si ka Ildar goes to, vi, 1G9 
silk ol, 1, 157 ; lii, 104, 165 ; 
V, 159, 295 ; vi, 85, 266; 
vn, 73, 92, 347. 3^4, 4^^ i 

viii, 258, 269, 374 
steel of, iii, 186 
stuffs of, vi, 143, 215 
ware of, vii, 78 

sage of, viii, 235 * 
sashes from, ix, 12, 53 
gold thread of, ix, 82 
' merchantmen of, ix, 89 
China, country, vi, 204 

.silk industry of, vi, 204 
ChinAb (Akesines), river in the 
Punjab, vi, 31, 64 
Chinese, viii, 72 

language, vi, 147 
Chingish, Turanian hero, I 40 > iii. 
207 

volunteers to avenge KAmds, 
iii, 194 

challenges Rustam, iii, 194 
slain by Rustam, iii, 195 
Chfnwi, noble of Chfn, viii, 331 
Chionitae, people, v, 13 

geographical position of, v, 
13 

Choreno, Moses of. See Moses. 
Chosrau, Chosroes I (Kisri), 
SAsAnian ShAtx, vii, 212, 
281. See NusWrwAr# 
Chosroes, king of Armenia, vi, 
202 

Christ, vi, 339 ; yii, 207, 
249, 264, 270, 273, 276 ; 
531, 24, 109 

, Faith of, vi, 133, 339 ; vii, 

' ',274; viii, '43, 191, 272, 

' , 3B0, ' 

^ account of, ytii, 276 
' %thei:, of, viic '27^ 

' ' tmbther 'of, viii,, 27^- 
' pf, viii, 477. . 3^0 i 1^. 

' ■ " * ‘i , 

' -kugltori'di, vM,T'^4, ,^80 


GENERAL INDEX 


Christian, Christians, i6y, vi, 
342 ; vii, 171, 254, 270 ; 
vm, 21, 67, 195, 196, 256, 
272, 30S, 310, 381 ; ix, 23 
rites of marriage, vi, 104 
Faith, vi, 356 
persecution of, vii, 153 
Firdausi's view of, vii, 219 
wife of Nushirwin, vii, 263, 
274 

mother of Nushzdd, vii, 
263 

helps Nushzdd in his 
revolt, vii, 266 
laments for Niishzdd, 
vii, 276 

support Niishzdd, vii, 266, 
272 

shut gates of Kdrs^n against 
Khiisrau Parwfz, viii, 252 
Christianity, vi, 138 

polemics against, vii, 219, 
270, 273 

Chhbin (Jiibin), father, accord- 
ing to Mas'ddi, of Bahrdm 
Chdbina, viii, 77 
Chhbina, viii, 215, 222 

meaning of, viii, 98 note 
Cilicia (Kaiddfa), most south- 
easterly province of Asia 
Minor, vi, 294 
Circesium, viii, 188 
City of Women, x6o. See Hardm. 
Claudius, Roman emperor (A.P. 

' 41-5^), iii, 10 

Cleophis, Indian queen, vi, 65 
Alexander the Great and, 
vi, 65 

Climate, of Irdn, i, 4, 5 
Mdzandardn, ii, 27 
CEme, Climes, the seven, i, 40, 
7i> 122/123, 238; 'u, 15, 
mie, 372 ; ‘ iii, / 290, 317 ; 
vi, 179, 262, 2^6, '273, zSq, 
37^^' 377 i ;'vEi, 395 ' ' 

Kai JChusrap sutveyS, in Ms 
„ divining-cpp, ip, 3x8 ; 
Central, i^ 71, 122 /;E, 27 , 
Cloud, emhienx bl prc^perity, 

: ' ' . 73, x.X3> X14 ; E, 12 , 6 ^ ahd 

nv, ■14X / vi, .96 


Cloud, thunder-, as watcr-sh’al 
ing demon, i, 7 
of bale=Afrasiydb, li, 13 
name given by Rustam to 
himself, ii, 53 
Clough, quoted, viii, 187 
Cocks and hens, taught to crow 
daybreak, i, 126 
Colchians, people of the south- 
eastern shores of the 
Euxine, vi, 72 
Colic, cure of, vii, 39 
Commander of the Faithful, ix, 
72 

'Umar, the first, ix, 72 and 
note 

Commons, king of the, vii, 3 
Communists (Mazdakites, q^v.), 
vii, 1 85 

Companions of the Prophet 
(Muhammad), ijg 
praise of, 139, i, 106 
Constantinople, vii, 316 ; viii, 
19^ 

conspirator against Niislhr- 
whn escapes to, vii, 316 
Contents, General Table of, ix, 

139 

Cook, chief, of Ndshirwdn, griev- 
ance of, viii, 18 
Cordwainer. See Shoemaker. 
Corn-land, taxes on, vii, 215 
Corpse, 160 

Cos, island in the iSgean sea, vi, 
204 

silk industry of, vi, 204 
Cosmogony, ancient Iranian, i, 
5. 71 

Firdausi's, 102, iv, 136 
Country of the Blest. See Blest. 
Courses, the Seven, of Rustam, 

^ 743, ii, 29, 44 seq, 
'Crassiis,' the triumvir (B.C.' 115- 
■ ' '53)> i. ,15 , 

" ' I ' 'defeat of, at Carrhfe, i* 15 
'■Creation, Zoroasttian account of, 

' ' ' % 5 * ^^7 ' . , 

' Firdausi' S' account of, i, '102 
, ' , 'seq^ ' ' . ' ' 

Crete, island, sCuth of Greece, 

/ ^i,, 3.23 note. 


GENERAL INDEX 


Crete, Minos king of, legend of, 
vi, 323 note 
Crocodile, iii, 278 
= assassin, 1, in 
=:Kdmus, iii, 192 
Cross, the, iy4, vi, 351, 352 ; 
vii, 249, 270, 276 ; viii, 308, 
309, 374 

captured by Bdrdb, vi, 306 
and note 

religion of, vi, 138 
Passion of, vi, 339 
the true, viii, 191, 196, 253, 
377. 378. 380; ix, 4, 5, 
10, 24 

restoration of, ix, 7, 56 
of Christ, ix, 23 
Elevation of, ix, 43 
Crows and Owls, story of, viii, 
263 and note 

Crystal, liouse of, ix, 25 and note 
Ctesias. See Ktesias. 

Ctesiphon (Taisafun q.v.)^ city on 
the left bank of the Tigris 
some 25 miles below Bagh- 
dad, originally an exten- 
sion of Scleucia on the 
right bank of that river, 

ii, 80 ; vi, 321, 322, 325, 
372 ; viii, 42, 188, 189, 
193. 194. 196 ; ix, 65 seq. 

taken by Shahrbardz, ix^, 

43, 44 
Sa^ad, ix, 67 
booty found at, ix, 68 
Culture-heroes. See Gaii'imart, 
Hhshang, Tahmhras, and 
Jamshid, i, 118 seq. 

Cup, divining-, of Kai Khusrau, 

iii, 317. 3:18, 323 
inexhaustible, of Kaid, 159, 

yi, 94, xoo, 109 
poisoned, proffered to Ard- 
shfr P4pak4n, vi, 259 
crystal, to detect poison (?), 
vii, 51 

Cybelo, Greek goddess, vi, 71 
=s=Hittite Ma, vi, 71 
Cymbals, of the Brides of. the 
Treasure, vi, 250; vii, 33. 
and note 

von, jtx. 


Cypress, of Kislimar. See Kish- 
mar. 

Cyrus the Great (B.C. 558-528), 
son of Cambyses and 
founder of the Persian 
empire 

legend of, in Herodotus 
identical with that of Kai 
Khusrau, ii, g, 190 
in Ctesias transferred to 
Ardshir Phpakan, vi, 

195 

rise of, i, 18 

compared to that of Ard- 
shir P^pakdn, vi, 194 
historical parallel with Kai 
Khusrau, v, 10 


! ^ 

Dabistan, 17th century Persian 
treatise, v, 28 
Cypress of Kishmar, account 
of, in, V, 28 

D4d, frdnian warrior, vii, 86 

Ddddfrfd, melody, viii, 398 and 
note 

Dadvas. See Biv. 

Baghwf, desert in Turkistin, ii, 
^93; iv, 1x7 

Bahaef.^., “ foes or"' robbers,’* 
a name given by the Iran- 
ians to the nomad tribes 
dwelling east of the Casp- 
ian and north of the 
Atrak in the region now 
occupied by the Yamut 
Turkmans, i, 19 ; iii, 
10 

Bahika (Azhi, Azi, Zahhik 
g.t/.), evil spirit, i, 7, 142, 
172 

Bahistdn, stead or home of the 
Bahae q,v. and town 
between Har4t and Marv, 
i, 280, 344 seq,, 349, 363, 
iv, 61, '72, 79, 148, 157 ; 
is:, 95 

.Kaudar beleaguered in, by 
'Afrisiy^b, i, 353 

' ' . . ' a 


242 GENERAL 

Dai, genius, i, 88, 89; iii, 287, 

328 

montli or day, i, 88, 89 ; v, 

43 ; vi, 306 ; viii, i73» 

421 ; ix, 17 

pa Mihr, day, i, 88 ; v, 

16 

D4i Mar], place where Bahrdm 
Gur is said to have been 
drowned, 'vii, 6 
Dditya, river, v, 13 
Daizan (Tdir q,v.), vi, 322 
legend oi, vi, 322 
daughter of, legend of, vi, 

323 

Dakhma, '' Tower of Silence,’’ i, 

81 and note 

Daklld, Persian poet, 139, i 54 > 
T55> ih 3 note, 8 ; v, 

10, 13; vi, iQd ; viii, 

190 

account of, i, 28, 67, 69, 
109 ; V, 20 

Firdausi and, v, 21 seq., 

30, 87, 88 

work of, compared with the 
Ydtkdr-i-Zarirdn, v, 24 
seq. 

Ddmaghin, city on the road from 
Tihrd.n to Nishdpdr and 
the capital of the province 
of Kdmis, ii, 15 5 ^55 I 

viii, 109, 189 

Ddmand-Kuh, the northern 
mountain-skirt” of mod- 
ern Persia, iii, 15 

Damascus, chief city m Syria, 

vi, 195 , , . 

Nicolaus of, Greek his- 
torian, tefnp. Augustus, 
vi, X95 

Damdwand, volcano nearly 
20,000 feet high and the 
culminating of the 
mountain.'^range south of 
the Caspian, i, 143? 

148 : vC 202 ; viii, 39 ^ , , 
'Zahh4k fettered h 
, ' 17s ' , ' 

. Arish's' artO'vr-slrbt ,v, , 

''n<i \ / ' ' , ' 


INDEX 

Dambar, city in Kabulistdn (? ) 
which was regarded as 
Indian, i, 252, 256; iv, 
278, 283, 284 ; vii, 39b, 
399, 421 

Ddmdid, Nask, i, 70 
Daradr, Tdrdnian hero, li, 296, 
319; iv, 156 

overthrown by Siydwusli, 
ii, 295 

advocates execution of Siyd- 
wush, ii, 317 
Danbar. See Dambar. 

Dandamis, See Mandancs. 

Dang, coin, ix, 94 and note 
Ddnishwar, the dihkdn, sup- 
posed compiler of the 
Bdstan-ndma, temp. Yaz- 
dagird III, i, 67, 68 
Danube, river, v, ii 
I Darius' expedition to, v, ii. 

I Ddrd, son of Ddrdb, Shdh (Darius 
Codomanus q.v.) 158, i, 
42 ; ii, 3? 9 ; V, 281 ; vi, 
83 seq., 112, 113? 123. 
124, I3'^» 137. ^70, 172? 
188, 325, 353 : 220, 

242, 387 

first historic Shdh in the 
Shdhndma, i, 49 
origin of name, v, 297 n>ote 
legendary son of Ddrdb, vi, 
17, 27 

appointed by Dir4b to 
succeed him, vi, 27 
Reign of, 158, vi, 29 seq. 

Note on, vi, 29 seq. 
historical account of, vi, 29 
movements of, after his 
final defeat by Alex- 
ander (Sikandar), vi, 31 
Sikandar’s correspondence ' 
with the wife and daugh- 
ter of, vi, 33^ 
accession of, vi, 34 
’ letter of, to the kings, vi, 

34 

, pays his troops, vi, 35 ^ 
ambassadors corhe to, vi, 35 
' .demands ^ ' tribute from 
- ,, Sikandar, vi, 36/ 


GENERAL INDEX 


Dara, marches against Sikandar, 
.vi, 37 

Sikandar’s visit to the camp 
of, vi, 38 

invites Sikandar to a ban- 
quet, vi, 40 

ambassador of, recognises 
Sikandar, vi, 40 
sends horsemen in pursuit 
of Sikandar vi, 41 
defeated by Sikandar, vi, 43 
collects another army, vi, 

defeat of vi, 44 ^ 
goes to Chahram vi, 4^ 
Istaklir vi, 44 
takes counsel with his chiefs 
vi, 45 

collects a nev7 host vi, 46 
marches from Istakhr, vi, 46 
defeat of, vi, 46 
withdraws to Kirmdn, vi, 
46 

bewails himself, vi, 47 
letter of, to Sikandar, vi, 49 
J'h'ir, vi, 50 

marches against Sikandar, 
vi, 51: 

abandoned by his troops 
and hoes, vi, 31 
murdered by his ministers, 
vi, 52 

murderers of, arrested by 
Sikandar, vi, 53 
dying interview of, with 
Sikandar, vi, 53 
vengeance promised to, by 
Sikandar, vi, 53 
tells his last wishes to 
Sikahdar, vi, 54 
bestows Rdshanak upon 
Sikandar, vi, 55, 86 
dies, vi, 55 
burial of, vi, 56 
S&s 4 n, son of, vi, 211 
kihdred of, support Ard- 
sMr PApakin, vi, 

DArA (Daras), city, yiii,' 41,' 194 
taken by iSFAshftwAn, vjii, 41 
ceded by Khusrau Farida, 
viii, tss/, / ' ^ 


243 

DAra PanAh, viii, 189, 284 

goes disguised to Khusraii 
Parwiz' camp, viii, 286 
betrays Bahram Chilian a, 
viii, 286 

returns to Bah r Am Chfibi'na, 
with forged letter, viii, 2S7 
DArAb, ShAh, son of Bahman 
and Hn mAi, 1^8, 3, 42 ; 
in 3r 9 ; V, 281, 292, 297 
seq. ; vi, ii, 34 and note, 
49. 83, 84, 86, 132, 137, 
172, x8S; vii, 2x5; viii, 
191 

foundling legend of, ii, 11 ; 
V. 293 scq. 

Tabari’s version of, v, 
297 note 

birth of,* V, 294 
referred to, v, 294 seq, 
cxpos<id on the IhirAt, v, 
^95 

found and adopted by a 
laundcrer, v, 296 seq, 
royal birth of, asserts itself, 
V, 298 

youthful escapades of, v, 298 
brought up as a cavalier, v, 

299 

feels lack of natural aflfec- 
tion for the laundcrer, v, 

300 

heais of his case from the 
laundercr's wife, v, 300 
enlists, v, 30 x 
seen by IdurnAi, v, 302 
and the adventure of the 
ruined vault, v, 303 
receives gifts from Rashna- 
wAd, V, 304 

questioned by RashnawAd, 
V, 304 

' ’ ptowess of, against the 
RAmam, v, 305, 306 
' ' praised' and rewarded by 
' ' RashnawAdi' v, 305, 306 

' captures Cross, v, 306 
' , ^ * and' , 

' ,, takes, df 'the 'spoil one spear, 

, 'reidrhktd irAnj v, 367' 


GENERAL INDEX 


241 

Darib, Rasbnawad hears from 
the laimderer and his wife 
of the case of, v, 308 
Rashnawdd writes to Humai 
about, V, 308 

recognised by Hnmdi as 
being her son, v, 308 
appears with Rashnawdd 
before Humdi, v, 309 seq. 
crowned by Humdi and 
accepts her excuses, v, 310 
liumdi proclaims the ac- 
cession of, V, 31 1 
visited by, and rewards, the 
launderer and his wife, 
V, 311, 312 

Reign of, vi, ii seq. 

Note on, vi, ir seq 
father of Sikandar in Per- 
sian legend, vi, 16 
legendary father of Ddrd, vi, 
17 

harangues the chiefs, vi, 20 
ambassadors come to, vi, 21 
employs Rdman artificers, 
vi, 21 

wars with the Arabs, vi, 21 
defeats and demands tribute 
from Arabs, vi, 22 
wars with Rfim, vi, 22 
defeats Failakiis, vi, 23 
grants terms of peace to 
I^ailafcfis, vi, 24 
marries the daughter of 
Faiiakfis, vi, 25 
returns to P 4 rs, vi, 25 
becomes disaffected towards 
* his wife (Nhhid), vi,, 25 
marries again, vi, 27 
D 4 r 4 is born to him, vi, 27 
fails in health, vi, 27 
appoints D 4 r 4 to* succeed 
him, vi,,,27 

dies, vi, 28 ' ’ ' . 

Oirdb, Dhribgird, city in Pirs, 
Xf^S, yi, :%7, xg^', 199; 

viii, 313' ' . . ^ 

Parband, town and pass 

tween* CauchshS'.,. q*Vy ' 
and the Caspian,'’ ii>' 336 

3,^9 ‘ '' 


Darband, Pass of, desciibod, 
i, 16 

fortification of, i, 16, 17 
and note, vii, 213, 239 
Mas’iidi's accounts of, 
vii, 215 

Dari, vii, 430 and note 
Dariel, Pass of, in the Caucasus, 
vi, 79 

Darius, Idystaspis, Shdh, i, g, 65 ; 
V, 10 ; viii, 187 
trilingual inscription of, at 
Bihisti'in, i, 6 

Zoroastrian calendar adopt- 
ed by, i, 59 

reign of, and Giishtdsp's 
compared, v, 11 
conversion of, v, 11 
Darius, Codomanus (Darh q.v.) 
Shdh, i, 49 ; vi, 16, 17, 29 
defeated at Issus, vi, 30 
Alexander escapes from the 
bancpiet of, vi, 30 
defeated at Gaugamela, vi, 

31 

asks that his family may be 
restored to him, vi, 31 
writes to Porus,^vi, 31 
historical account of the 
death of, vi, 31 
daughter of, marries Alex- 
ander, vi, 33 

corpse of, sent to P 4 rs, vi, 
33 

assassins of, punished, vi, 33 
Pareja, river in Azarb^ij^-n, v, 
14 

Darkness, Land of, See Gloom. 

House of, ix, 7 ; 

Dirmin, viii, 202 
Darmesteter, l^rofessor, on Fir- 
dausi's geography, ii, 79, 
80 

*on. Afrdsiydb's capture by 
Hdm, 'iv, 136 
Story of the Worm, vi, 203 
HaftwM, ' vi, 20b 
Dardn, Zoroastrian* religious ritc^/ 

; y, X9'- / , ' ' * ' C ; , 

Daiyai’j^hd, tiydr ifi.A^iarbdpii,' 

' '^'pV,;t4, „ '' '' ’ 


GENERAL INDEX 


Daslagird, city, viii, 193, 196 ; 
ix, 7 

taken by Heracliiis, viii, 19^ 
Dashma, franian hero, iv, 148 
Dastan (Zdl {/.a.), 1, 84, ^[48, 264 
Ddstan-i-Sam (Zal qv.), i, 84 
Dastin-i-Zand (Zal q.v ), i, 245 
and note, 248 
Date-palm, i, 4 

taxes on, vii, 215, 225 
Daughter of Kaid. See Kaid, 
Four Wonders of. 

Daulat Shdh, author of Lives 
of the Poets,"' i, 24 
Death, early, Firdausi’s justifi- 
cation of, ii, 1 19 
Dead Sea, viii, 192 
Deinon. See Dinon. 
Deipnosophistre, of Athenaeus, ii, 
10 

quoted, iv, 314 
Derketo, goddess, v, 292 
legend of, v, 292 
Destiny, Muhammadan and Zor- 
oastrian conceptions of, i, 
52 

Ddwass^rm, king of Hind, vii, 381 
sends the game of chess to 
Nushirwfin, vii, 380 
Dharma, Indian god of righteous- 
ness, iv, 138 

frdlow.s in the form of a dog 
the Pdndavas in their pil- 
grimage, jiv, X39 

Dhoulkarnain, See Zu-l-kar- 
nain. 

Dhfi Kir, battle of, viii, 188, ix, 

historical account of, viii> 
190 

date of, viii, 191 

Diagram to illustrate reign of 
Gushtisp, V, 27 
Persian Romance of Alex- 
ander the Great, vi, 84 
Diba-i-Khusrauf, treasure, viii, 
406 and note 

Dice, vii, 381 ' y ' 

used in the game' of nard; 
vii, 381, 

symbolismi of; vii; 3'Sr,„3te. 


j Dihkan, Persian generic title, i, 

I 5b. Si 

I Faith of, vi, <"15 

Dijla (Arwaiid, Tigris q.v ), river, 
i, lOo 

Faridfin’s crossing of, i, i(>o 
Dilafruz, frdnian hero, iv, 147 
Dildtrfiz, a bramble-grubber, 
Bahrain Gur and, vii, 70 
scq. 

Dildfruz-i-Farriik' .pdi, framan 
slave-girl, 162, vi, 3 
slave to Cmsar’s wife, vi, 

338 

pities Shdpur, vi, 339 
discovers who Shapfir is, vi, 

339 

frees Shdpiir from the ass's 
skin, vi, 340 

escapes with Shapfir from 
Rdm, vi, 340 seq, 
entcidaincd by a gardtaicr, 
vi, 342 

praised by Shdpi'ir, vi, 34b 
named and honoured by 
Slid p dr, vi, 35b 
meaning of, vi, 356 note 
Dflam, Dflamdn, district on the 
Caspian now represented 
hy Talish and part oj 
Gildn, vi, 202, 227 ; vii, 
243, 244, 362 

Dflamkls (Buyids), dynasfy rul- 
ing in south-western frdn 
in the rath century AJJ>., 
i, 14, 21, 45 

Dflamite, 'AH the, friend an<l 
helper of Firdausi, i, 35 ; 
ix, X2I 

Dildnjdm, Caesar's {temp. Fuji- 
rdsp) second daughter, iv, 
333 

asked in niarriag© by Mfrfn, 
iv, 333 

married to MM11, 'iv, 341 
Difdrii, to Dir^i and mother 
of Mshanak, xSS* X59, vi, 

; Bj I I 

' , ..visited' by,: Hdifcifd, vi, ^9 
' 'Dimna, "KalHa arid, ,769 • 

; , 'k,,, ', 'MhtmMi DWimi. 


GENERAL INDEX 


246 

Dina~i Mainog-i Kiiira^i, Palilavi 
text, ii, X(S9 
quoted, vii, 27<} 

J3inar, gold com, i, Si, 231, 303 
and passim 

Dlnawari, Arabic historian 
(niiitli century), vi, ib, 
64, 80, 81, 256, 323 ; vii, 
6, 156, 186, 214 

Dinkard, Pahiavi text, i, 70 noic, 
373 ; ii, 26, 8t ; vi, 
252 

Diodorus, Greek historian, temp. 
Julius Caesar and Augus- 
tus, V, 293 

Bibliotheca of, v, 293 

Diognetus, Greek writer, temp. 
Alexander the Great, vi, 
12 

Dionysus, Greek god, vi, 71 
temple of, visited by Si- 
kandar, vi, 71 

Diram. See Drachm. 

Dirizdast (Longimanus), title, 
V, 281 ; vi, 324 and note 

Div, divs (Daevas), demons or 
foreign devils," X40, 143, 
130, i, 42, 82, 130, 1 3 1, 
134, 148, 227, 290 ; ii, 
33> 34; 3^; 41 seq., 57 
$eq., 68, 73, loi, 102, 
144 ; iii, 70, 74, 200, 232, 
244, 255, 257 seq., 261, 
268, 273 seq., 320, 330 , 

■ iv, 86, 87, 177, 288, 296, 
V, 32, 58, 66, 71, io8> 174; 
20t, 202, 213, 220, 236; 
245; vi, 135, 146^ *50, 
24X; vii, 115, 154, j:74, 
368 seq, ; vih, 139, ’t6l, ■ 
206, 209, 211, 217, 218, 
290; 34t;' 34^; 399 and 
43 c 8 ix, 18, 25 , 

rebel agdnst ' Xahmtes^ 

, . 127' 

overthrown hy XaHiniiras, i; 
127 

teach ' Tahmhras the art' of 
/writing, i, 127:, ; , , '' 
bpild edihee® for JahiaMd. i , 

' 'd ' a'/', 


Div, clivs, carry Jamsliul on his 
throne up to tiie sky, i, 133 
title oi honour, ii, 2(j 
song oi a, li, 31 
Arjasp iidunn(‘(i by a, oi 
Ciushtcisp's resolve not to 
pay tribute, v, 36 
Mazda k's five, vii, 205 
Buzurjmihr’s ten, vii, 368 
Akwdn. Sea Akwan. 
"Ahriman, 739, i, 82, 126, 
15b, X95, 2()o ; ii, 4b, 324, 
342, 370, 386, 400 ; iii, 
293, 333 ; iv, 63, 84, 
201, 206, 27H, 282, 28b, 
289 seq., 301, 322, 341 ; 
V, 35, 8j, 180, 188, 189, 
194 seq., 218, 228, 242 ; 
vi, 349 ; vii, 93, 107, 109, 
117, 143, 154, 20O, 227, 
268, 289, 303, 304, 323, 
332, 368 seq., 376, 390; 

viii, 27, 50, 87, 123, 215, 
222, 304, 341, 346, 4x1, 

ix, 47, 102, 104 
!=Bahr 4 m Chiibina, viii, 

153, 219, 293, 298 
— witch, viii, ibi 
ssZahhak, viii, 242 
ssKuli'm, viii, 342 
Binder of the^Tahmhras, 
i, 42, 125, 126, 214 
»:GMax'z, iv, 35 
«? Rustam, iii, 253, 262 
Black, son of Aliriman, 139, 
i, 82, 117 ; ii, 53 ; v, 199 ; 
viii, 17X 

' White, X4S, i, 82 ; ii, 27, 39 
seq., 43, 44, 54, 53, 58 seq., 
b6, 93, 163, 373 ; iii, 143, 
256, 31:4 ; iv, 136, 296 ; 
V, 1 1 7, 176, 203, 207, 234 
<iefeats Kids, ii, 40 
' , blood of, cures blindness, 
M, 58, 62, 

' ^ slain by Eustam, ii, 60 
Dtvining-cup. See Cup. , 
Drxetp^r (Borysthenes), river in 
. ' ' southern European Eus- 
. ' , , '“'nia, ho'WihgJnto the Black ' 

' ' ; Sea, iih . \ ,u ' ' 


GENERAL 

Don (Tanais), river in southern 
Juiropean l^ussia, flowing 
into the Sea of Azov, iv, 
315 note, 316 

Duni, The AIoKtll Philobophic oj, 

vii, 383 ^ I 

Drachm (diram), silver com, i, | 

81 I 

Dragon, 143, 134, 156, 160, 164, | 
165, i, 42, 123; vi, 132, 
146 

Farid lin takes the form of, 
i, 186 

of the ivashaf, i, 235 
Sim and the, i, 29G seq,, 

V, 202 

slain hy Rustam and 
Rakhsh, ii, 48 seq, 
of Mount Sakfla, iv, 342 seq. 
Gushtisp and, iv, 343 seq. 
teeth of, produced by 
Hishwf to Cmsar, iv, 351 
referred to, iv, 358 
Sikandar's adventure with, 

vi, 71, 151 

slain by Bahrim Gir, vii, 
42, X23 seq. 

described, i, 123, 296; iv, 
345 ; v, 202 * vx, 151 ; 

vii, 43, 123 

Dragon A frdsiydb, iii, 22, 46, 
21 1, 219, 222, 248, 319, 
343 ; iv, 270 

—Ahriman, i, 195 ; iii, 330 
s^Ardawdn, vi, 222 
asFhr, vi, 113 
»-Gfv, iii, 58 
KsIItimin, iv, 43, 52 
sss PalMi 4 n, iii, 26 
wsPhlMwand, iii, 264 
sssRakhsh's dam, i, 379 
spa Rakhsh, i, 580 
aas Rustam, iii, 222 
aaZahhik, i, 155, ,158, x 6 x, 
163, 168, 169, 275, 28S* 
2925 ^ - ' 

Dtagon*s child swRildiba^ i, 30'4 
Dranglana '(SfstinJ, |)rbviuce;iu 
^ast^rn irdh, '^'32 
dreams, ve^dicah' .i, .jr, 
'FirdatiM'dh>''yii, T !*' 


INDEX 2 17 

Dream, Abul Ka'sim of Giirgaids, 
iii, J90 

Afrasiyab's, ii, 232 seq, 
lefeiied to, 11, 243, 297 , 
iv, 170, 2O7 

Firdausi’s, ot Mahmiid, i, 1 12 
Dakikf, v, 23, 30 
Gudarz’s, ii, 363, 404 ^ 

Gushtasp’s, V, 19 
Raid's, V, 62, 91 
Katayim's, iv, 316, 329, 330 
Nushirwan's, vii, 282 seq. ; 
ix, 92 

Odatis', iv, 315 
Papak's, vi, 200, 212 
Iriran's, 11, 325 
Sam's, i, 243, 244 
Siyawush's, ii, 309 
Xus’, iii, 149 
Zariadres', iv, 315 
Draupadi, joint wife of the five 
Pdndavas, iv, 13H and 
note, 139 

Drought and famine in fr^n, i, 
3. 5. 37»; 371 : h, 3^3 J 
vii, i5<x, 162 

Piriiz’s measures to allev- 
iate, vii, 159, Jbz 
breaking up of, described, 
vii, 163 

Mazdak's parable concern- 
ing, vii, 201 

Drvispa, genius of cattle, iv, 137 
Dualism, i, 5, 49, 50» 5 ^) 5 ^ 

taught by Urmuzd to Zar- 
duhsht, V, 16 
DughdhdvA v, 14, 15 
account of, v, 14 
Dhk, plain, viii, 282, 284 
mountain* viii, 289 
Dukhtndsh. Sm Ndsha. 

Dunbar, See Dambar, 

Duneker, Professor,, ii, 9 

on date of Zahdavasta,, ii, 9 
, DdniStdbd^ A -Karap v, 15 
pirev^lenoe of, in irdn, i, 3 
a$ a metaphor, h 73' and 
'' ' ' 

; 'PynAsW d^ynastioav Iranian^ i, 49 
■ 1 ; 'iCaiinlah , 


GENERAL INDEX 


248 

Dynasty, Ashk^ioiaii q.v, 
S^saniati q.v. 


E 

Eclipse of sun, total, temp. 
Piri^iz, vii, 150 

Edessa, S. James of, i, 374 ^ 

Eggs, golden, as tribute, vi, 24, 
36, 160, 169 

Egypt (Misr, q.v.), ii, 80 ; vi, 12, 
16, 17, 72, 81, 82 ; viii, 

187, 193 

Pseudo-Callisthencs written 
in, vi, 13 

invaded by Alexander tlie 
Great, vi, 50 

Egyptian Egyptians, vi, 16 ; 
viii, 193 ; ix, no 
falsification of liistory by, 
vi, 16 

thorn, viii, 210 
linen, ix, no 

Ekbatana (Hamaddn), the capi- 
tal of Media, i, 17 ; ii, 
m ; vi, 31, 

capital of the Manda, q.v.^ 
i, 17 

Elam (Susiana, Khfizistto), 
ancient kingdom and Per- 
sian province at the head 
of the Persian Gulf, i, 9 ; 
vi, 194, 198 

Elburz. See Alburz. 

Elements, the four, i, 102, 286 

Elephant, elephants, i, na and 
passim 

towers on, iv, 179 
FfiPs, vi, 1 15, 116 
Sikandar^s device to over- 
come, vi, 115, 
sssEustaro, iii, 221, 253. 
awRakhsh, hi, 257 
pfftEfir, vi, XI7 , ' . 
piece ' in chess, vii, 283, 

433 ' ' , 

' position ^ of* vii, 388, ’422 
'moyc of^, vii^'425l: ■ , , ' ' 


Elephantine, the-'Enstam, ii, 
65, 67 

Eleven Euklis, Baltfe of ihe, iv, 
88 

an*anged by Giidaiz ami 
Pfraii, iv, 95 seq. 
l^dausi’s reflections on, iv, 

7, 98, 1 06 

Ellipi, kingdom of, i, 9, 17 
E.lixir, J44, ii, 177, 178 
Elymais (Elam, q v.), kingdom, 
vi, 198 

Endless peace, the, vii, 217 
Itnbtokoitai, the, vi. 80 
Epirus, ancient kingdom in 
northern Greece, vi, iz 
Alexander 1 of, vi, 12 
his expedition to Italy, 
vi, 12 

Equinox, autumnal, iv, 313 
Erindc, river, iii, 10 and note, ii 
Esdras (Ezra), Jewish pri(‘st and 
scribe, supposed by the 
Muhammadans to have 
restored from memory the 
law lost during the cap- 
tivity, vii, 207, 264 
Ether, viii, 275 

Ethics, Muhammadan, respected, 
viii, 74 

Ethiop, Ethiopian, Eihiopic, i, 
44; hi, 226; vi, 43, 71, 
80 

-wrlndian, vi, 13, 68 
western and eastern, vi, 13, 
68, 71 

version of the Pseudo-Callis- 
thones, q.v., vi, 17 and 
note, 18, 30, 33, 66, 67, 
71, 74, 82, 83 
Ethiopia, vi, 72 

flight of Nectanebus to, vi, 
18 note 

western and eastern, vi, 68 
sa» India, vi, 68 

Eumenes, Greek ephemCrist, ^ 
'Ump. Alexander the 
Great,;, vk 12 

Euphrates '(Farit/ ri,ver; ii, ' ^ 

, ;8c * V, 292 ; vi, 31,^327 

^ ' vii, 2x7 J 'Vhk 'x88; 190 , ' 


2-19 


GENERAL INDEX 


Eiixinc, sea, i, i6 ; ii, igi, 33O ; 
VI, 72 

Eye, metaphor for child, i, 178, 
x8o, 18 1, 185, ; ii, 

297, 32S ; V, 272 ; vii, 
276, 356 

evil, ii, 204, 252 ; hi, 141, 
337 ; iv, 144. 282 ; 

V, 194, 245, 25T, 290; 

VI, 266, 402 ; vii, 78, 81, 
172 ; vi]i, 16, 417 

turns milk to bane, vii, 320 
scq., 324, 325 


E 

Fables of Bidpai (Book of 
Kalila and Dimna), vii, 
213, 427 scq. ; viii, 202 
fioie, 390 

introduction of, inlo Persia, 
vii, 2x3 

translation of, vii, 382, 383 
Jdrdaubi’s account of, vii, 

430 

vogue of, vii, 383 
origin of, vii, 3S3 
Nhshfrwdn's acquisition of, 
vii, 423 seq. 

Faghdnfsk, temp, Pin'u, king of 
the Haitdlians, j6fV, vii, 
E57 

helps Pirfiz for a considera- 
tion, vii, 157 , 

temp, Ni'ishfrwin, 16S 
made king instead of 
Ghdtkar, vii, 333 
Nhshfrwdn takes counsel 
about, vii, 333 
descent of, from Bahrim 
Ghr, vii, 334 

Nhshfrwdn writes to, vii, 
337 

makes sxibmission to Niish- 
frwih, 'vii, 360 

Faghfhr, dyhastic title of the 
rulers of C%in and Michln, ' 
^53; . x60, , i, - *62 ; 

ii, 383 ; iv, II, 135, 

838 seq , ; v, aai-; ,vi, 35, 


Faghflir — cant. 

80, 1 1 3, i(k} seq, 325; 
vib 310 , 343 , 40*'^; viii, 
74 ; ix,^ 87, 97, 102 
ieinp. Kai Kliiisrau, helps 
Afrasiyab, iv, 2ig 
Kh4n and, sue to Kai 
Khusrcui for peace, iv, 
229 

orders Afrasiydb to quit 
Khiitan and Chfn, iv, 
230 

grants facilities to Kai 
Khtisraii for his march 
through Chin, iv, 239 
Khan of Chin and, welcome 
Kai Kluisrau, iv, 240 
confirmed in the posses- 
sion of Chin and 
Macliin, iv, 252 
temp. Sikandar, ambassa- 
dors from, come to J)dr4, 
vi, 35 

Sikandar visits as his own 
ambassador, vi, 170 
gives audience to Sikandar, 
vi, 170 

entertains vSikaudar, vi, 171 
answers Sikandar, vi, 172 
gifts of, to Sikandar, vi, 

173 

stmds envoy with vSikandar, 
vi, 173 

temp. Bahrdm Gfir, 16$ 
daughter of, the wife of 
Shangul, vii, 115 
hears of Bahrim G fir's ex- 
ploits in Hind, vii, 129 
invites Balirfim Gfir to visit 
him, vii, X29 

Bahrdm Gfir's reply to, vii, 
130 

temp. Kfishirwin, viii, 97 
FagMiir, son of Siwa, viii, 74, 
75, 120 

confused with Faghffir of 
CMn, viii, 74 

paxkiy of* with Bahrdm 
; 'Chfihfn&,'Viii, 1x2 
' , ; hbh^' ' of, ' on spear, viiL 


250 GENERAL 

Failaki'is (Philip TT of Macodon), 
grandfather in Iranian 
legend of Sikandar (Alex- 
ander the Great), Z36’, vi, 1 
57, 102, I r2, t25, 150, 15 1 , 
151, 182; vii, 215; viii, 
387 

wars with Dirdb, vi, 22 
allied with the king of RdvS, 
vi, 22 

marches from ’Amniuriya to 
encounter Ddrdb, vi, 23 
defeated and returns to 
’Amniuriya, vi, 23 
sues for peace, vi, 23 
agrees to send tribute, ami 
give his daught(?r in 
marriage, to Darhb, J5<V, 
vi, 24, 25 

adopts Sikandar as his heir, 
vi, 27 

Faith, P'aiths, the four, vi, 92, 
95 

of Christ, Christian, vi, 133, 
352. 35 d 

of Ahriman, ii, 558; vi, 
281, 290 

Faithful, Commander of the, ix, 
72 

' Umar, the first, ix, 72 and 
note 

Fakirs, the, vi, 61 

Alexander the Great and, 
vi, 6t 

Onesicritus and, vi, 61 
Fakkd", a kind of drink, i, 43 
note 

Falitdn (Plato), vii, 100 ; viii, 
264 

Falconry, ii, 108, 196 ; vi, 176 

vH, 42, 48 seq.. 34, 55, 76 ■ 

and mk > ' , 

origin of,;i»’ 1:^6, , , ' 'A 
Fathine, ' Uronght* 

Farab iv, 3:65 

FaraI>'>(Fitabr), desert and town '■ 
' ^ ph the right. the" 

'dxns plipPsite tp,, Atnwl, 

, f,,%' 91, '92 : -i''' ' ' V:' 


INDEX 

lAnramarx, son oi Rustam, r./6’ 
r 57 . 1* 3 JO. 14 i 

MO, 15 G 35 1 : jib J' 3 , 10. 

15 , y>, 20J, ^ icfj* 

1j 8 ; iv, I j . \, 171, 174, 

182, I (Si, ItJ'S, 21 S, 2 (XJ!, 
2(>I, 272, 274, 2«Sl, 283, 
284 

par{;ntag(‘ of, iii, 323 
appointed to exp(d the 
'Ihirkmans from Zabulis- 
tdn, iii, 31 
referred to, v, 184 
Zawdra and, sent by Rustam 
to bid Zal and Riidhba 
prepare to receive Asfan- 
diyar, v, 190 

slays Mihr-i-Niish, v, 227 
goes io Rustam and Asfan- 
diydr, v, 247 

marclies against Kdbul, v, 
274, 27b 

takes the corpses of (tnstam, 
Zawdra, and Rakhsh from 
the pits, and conveys 
them to Zdbul for burial, 
v, 274 seq. 

fights with the king of 
Kdbul and puts him 
and his kin to death, v, 
276, 277 

makes a Zdbull king of 
Kdbul, V, 277 
returns to Zdbul, v, 277 
hears of BahnmrPs invasion 
and marches against him, 
V, 287 

defeated and put to death, 
V, 288 

Faxinak^ wife of Abtfn and 
mother of P’aridhn, i, 90, 
‘ ' J45, r 57 

Faiiddn brought up by, on 
' ■ Birmaya's ■, milk, i, i5X 
, taken by,, ' to , Mount 

' , . '7, ' Albure,, i, , 

/ ' ^ , '7 told by,. ' ab'out ' hi'S origin. 

; "d'/G .1 ; ' , , ' ; ' , ' \ 

prky^ for 'Fariddn^s 

■ 'g . b. ' ' V' ’ , ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


]''aranak, rejoices over Farid un's 
success, i, 175 
gilts ol, to Fan'dun, i, 176 
Faranak, daughter ot iJaizin, 
vii, 53 

married to Bahrain Gur, 
yii, 53 

Ftirangis, daughter of Afrdsiyab, 
"Wife of Siyawush, and 
mother of Kai Khusrau, 
14$, 146, 148, li, 270 seq., 
2S8 seq., 299, 306, 373, 
381:, 386 seq. ; in, 9G, 117, 
203, 21 1 

MandaiKi and, identical in 
legend, ii, 191 
Siyhwusli marries, ii, 270 
Afrhsiyhb summons, to 
court, ii, 300 seq, 
Siyiwush confides in, ii, 307 
seq. 

Afrdsiyhb appealed to by. 

ii, 317 seq, 
imprisoned, ii, 320 
sentenced, ii, 322 
Pirdn saves and takes charge 
of, ii, 324 seq. 

Kai Khusrau born of, ii, 326 
dweds at Siyhwushgird, ii, 
333 

instructs Kai Khusrau how 
to find Bih24<l, ii, 374 
gives Gfv the mail of 
Siydwudi, ii, 376 
crosses the Jlluin, ii, 392 
provided for by Kai Kdfis, 
a 399 

Fariburz marries, iii, 148 
referred to, iii, 146 seq., 202 ; 

iv, 205, 213, 216 
death of referred to, iv, 394 
Far4t (Euphrates), river, 

V, 294, 309 ; vi, 57, 42, 
43, 290 ; viii, 93, 250 
D^rib cast away upon, v, 

m 

Far4yfn (Ouriz, Shahrbariz^.^.), 
Sh4h, te,, ’ 

accession-speech of> - ' ix, _ 5,2 

, counselled, by Ms eweet icm, 

"'ix, ;$2; , ; 


25^ 

Farayfn, counselled by his 
youngest son, ix, 53 
misrule of, ix, 33 
plot against, ix, 54 
Failuiiyius (Porpliyrogisiitus ?), 
Riimaii general, i6y, vii, 
218 

defeated by Nhshirwhn, vii, 
256 

makes report to Ca'sar, vii, 
260 

Farghan, Ruman architect, and 
Khusrau Parwfz, viii, 40 1 
seq. 

Farghana, region south of the 
Jaxartes, east of Sughcl, 

iii, 109 

I Farghar, Xhrhniaii hero, iii, 250 
goes to spy on Rustam, iii, 
250 

reports to Afrhsiyhb, iii, 253 
Farhdd, frinian hero, ii, 73, 85, 
13^^. 31b, 338, 340 ; iii, ii, 
20, 25, 34, 45, 48, 127, 
268, 289, 313, 327, 331, 
352; iv, 13, 15, 21, 25, 
42, 147, 292 

l^arthian origin of, iii, 11 
goes as envoy to the king of 
MdzandarUn, ii, 63 
takes part in the flight of 
the Seven Warriors, ii, 
111 

steed of, iii, 313 
goes with Rustam to rescue 
Bfzhan, iii, 334 
left in command by Giv, 

iv, 83 

put in command of the left 
wing, iv, 92 

left at Gang-bihisht, iv, 219 
Farhdd, Irinian general, temp. 
KCsWrwin, vii, 251: 
commands left wing, vii, 251 
ParMd, lover of ShMn, viii, 192 
Fariburz, son of Kai KdUs, 148, 

' J51, ii, 3c 62, 199, 316, 

335, 336, 340, 358, 405 

' ~4eq,, 409," iv, 14, 24, 32, 

. ,, ; ; 45,,5o,,-'r4^' uq., 164, ibb, 

; '3:74, ' T77, t$f, 


GENERAL INDEX 


252 

¥duxi\)iixz—-cmt, 

211, 213, 215, 238, 230, 
253, 258, 208, 289, 331 ; 
iv, 13, 34> 37> 91 
encampment of, described, 

ii, 155 

claims of, to tke throne sup- 
ported by Tiis, ii, 401, 

iii, 13 

recognises Kai Khusrau as 
Shhli, ii, 410 

Kai Klmsrau’s letter to, 
iii, 84 

reads to the chiefs Kai 
Khusrau’s letter, and 
supersedes Ths, iii, 86 
sends Rulilihm to Pfr4n, iii, 
87 

obtains an armistice and 
prepares to renew the 
campaign, iii, 8g 
fights and is defeated, iii, 90 
returns to trhn, iii, 1x1 
asks Rustam to support his 
suit to Farangi's, iii, 146 
marries Farangfs, iii, 148 
leads the van of Rustam's 
expedition to succour Ths, 

iii, 148 

meets Gtldarz, iii, 163 
joins forces with Tds, iii, 
169 

goes to Kai Khusrau with 
tidings of victory, iii, 236 
seq. 

returns to the host, iii, 241, 
243 

commands the right wing, 

iv, 24 

suf)erseded pro Um, by 
Katmdra, iv, 92 
chosen to hght with Kulb4d, 
iv* 97 

slays KulbM, iv, 99 
commands with Tuk^xir the 
troops 'from Kh4war* iv, 
148 

slays Fartiis, iv* 181 
commands the tight, iv, 19 1 
; takes part ih the' siege , of ■ 

; ;Gahg-hiHrtrt' 


Fanbiirz, Kai Khusrau lemon- 
strated with !)y, and 
oilier nobles Cor refusing 
audience, iv, 275 
Kai Khusrau 's gift to, iv, 
^95 

sets out with Kai Khusiau 
on his pilgrimage, iv, 306 
refuses to turn back when 
bidden by Kai Khusrau, 
iv, 307 

Kai Khusrau farewells and 
warns, and his comrades, 
iv, 308 

disappears and is sought 
in vain by, and his com- 
rades, iv, 308 
vainly reminds his com- 
rades of Kai Khusrau 's 
warning, iv, 309 
end of, iv, 309 

Faridihi (Thradtaona), Shhh, son 
of Abtin and Farhnak, 140, 
J41, 153, i, 3o» 42> 54> 55i 
go seq., 142, 286, 336, 341, 
349> 35X1 3t>4, 370. 382, 

384, 385; ii, II, 17, 19, 
21, 29, 33, 36, 37, 99, 193. 
195, 204, 237, 274, 318, 

327, 392, 400, 4041 im 

2X, 37 > M 5 > «57; iv, 17, 
66, 69, 89, 91, 142, 149, 
153, 3:68, 174, 203, 

204, 221, 222, 255, 239, 

260, 262* 266, 269, 286, 

289, 299. 3^3. 32S ; V, 32, 
34, x6o, 180, 196, 204 

seq,, 245, 260, 261, 271* 

283 ; vi, 73, 172, 209, ' 

406 ; vii, 37, 38* ,60, 62, 
73» 79* lox, 120, 199, 207 ; 
viii, 129, 205, 218, 231, 

242, 260* 300, 376 seq., 

391, 392 ; ix, 25, 39, 53. 
7t, 86, 103 

mythological origin of* i, 171 

, ^ , ’ 

, Z^ahhik’s dJrdamr of* i,, 147 
advent' ''of*, prophesied* i* 


GENERAL INDEX 


253 


Farid i^m, birth of, i, 150 

father of, slain by Zahhak, i, 
151 

brought up on the milk of 
the cow Birmhya, i, 151 
taken by his mother to 
Mount Albiirz, i, 152 
palace of, burned by Zahhak, 

h 152, 153 

questions his mother about 
his origin, i, 152 
contemplates revenge on 
Zahhhk, i, 154 
dissuaded by his mother, i, 
154 

Kawa revolts to, i, 157 
resolves to war with Zahhdk, 
i, 157 

brothers of, i, 158 
ox-head mace invented by, 

i, 15^ 

rewards the smiths, i, 158 
goes to fight Zalihdk, i, 159 
seq, 

visited and instructed by 
Surhsh, i, 359 
life of, attempted by his 
brothers, i, 160 
savers himself by his magic 
power, i, 160 

van of, Iccl by Khwa, i, 160 
crosses the Arwand (Dijia, 
Tigris), i, 160 

enters Zahhik's capital, i, 
i 6 x 

overthrows Zahh 4 k*s talis- 
man, i, 161 

seeks in vain for Zahhdk, i, 
162 

finds the sisters of, Jamshid, 
i, 162 

hears where ZahliAk is, 163 
Story of, ahd Zahhik’s 
istcr (Kuhdrav^, i, 1:64 
doings of, reported to Zah* 
hik by ' EnndrhT, U , 
attacked by, ’'and dyer- 
throws, iZahhdk, 'xdS, 

2S8' ' I A ' i.'' 

edun$eH^d' by' Shrtifelt abdnl:, 

,ZahMfe‘i ibB, ,,, , 


Farfdun, becomes Shah, i, 168 
fetters Zahhdk upon Mount 
Damdwand, i, 169 
Reign of, 140, i, 171 seq. 

Note on, i, 171 seq. 
three sons of, i, 174, 177 
ethnical significance of, i, 
54 

accession of, i, 174 
holds a feast, i, 175 
makes a progress through 
the world, i, 176 
builds himself a seat, i, 177 
sends Tandal on a mission, i, 
177 

receives Jandals report, i, 
182 

instructs his sons how to 
deal with Sarv, i, 182 
sons of, outwit Sarv, i, 184 
receive Sarv's daughters 
in marriage, i, 185 
return home, x, 186 
proved by Faridfin, i, 186 
naimM by FAridfin, i, 187 
wives of, named by l%r£- 
dhn, i, 188 

horoscopes of, taken by 
Faridun, i, 188 
divides the world among 
his sons, i, 189 
grows old, i, 1:89 
Sahn and Tilr write to, to 
demand the abdication of 
fraj, i, lyi 

makes answer to his sons, i, 

m ‘ . 

holds converse with I raj, i, 
J 95 

writes to Salm. and Tfir, i, 197 
Iiaj's head sent to, 202 

mourning h 203 

. , sight of, injured' by mourn- 
'ittgforlraj» i, 204 , 

' hopes tot issue from Iraj, b 

' rqcjpyerk Ms dght^ i 206 
■ "gfita' obiq'ftinfichihr, 'i, 207 
' , " giye? ' : least ' to the nobto, 


GENERAL INDEX 


254 

Farfdiin, receives an embassage 
from his sons, i, 209 
makes answer to his sons, 
i, 21 1 

sends Miniichihr to fight 
with vSalm and Tur i, 215 
hears of Minuchihr’s vic- 
tory, i, 222 

Minfichihr sends the heads 
of Salm and Tfir to, i, 222, 
229 

welcomes Minuchihr on his 
return in triumph, i, 230 
confides Minfichihr to Salin, 
h 231 

gives thanks to God and 
prays for death, i, 232 
distributes the spoil to the 
troops, i, 232 

enthrones Minuchihr, i, 232 
passes his last days in 
austerities, i, 232 
dies, i, 232 
burial of, i, 233 
mourning for, i, 233, 237 
Firdausi's reflections on, i, 
170, 232 

final warfare of Zahhhk 
with, i, 2 7$, cf, 173 
Mount Sipand besieged by 
order of, i, 329 
Grace of, i, 335 
saying of, ii, 219 and note 
flag of =5= flag of Kdwa, vi, 59 
capital of, vii, 215, 238 
Fhrikin (Maiyafdrikin, Martyr- 
opolis), cit/ in Roman 
Armenia, vii, 200 
taken by Kubhd, vii, 200 
Fhriyib, city half way between 
the town of Marvrfid and 
Balkh, iv, 65 
Farr, i, 82. See Grace, 

Farruhdn (Farmkhdn). Se$ 
Fariyfn. 

Farrukh, ruler of Nfmrfiz, viii> 

' 375 

Fatrukfidn (Farruh^Ji). , , See 
' ' ' , Fard3in. ‘ \ \ . 

Farrukhini?dd (Fmtikhzid q.vJ), 

' ; yhi, ^95. ^ ; 


Farrukh-Hurmuzd (Hurmuzd 
q.v.), father of Rustam, 
IX, 69 

Farrukhzad (of glorious birth), 
name assumed by Gush- 
tdsp in Rum, iv, 351 seq., 
' 357. 3i^o 

Farrukhzad, Shdh, 175, ix, 61 
seq., 70 

Siyah Chashm and, ix, 62 
poisons, ix, 63 

Farrukhzdd (Farrukhanzdcl q.v.), 
son of Hurmuzd, brother 
of Rustam, and favourite 
of Khusrau l^arwiz, ix, 23, 
«7. 92 , 95 

conspires with Gurhz, viii, 
408, 4T2 

goes to the host, viii, 4 r 2 
rebels in favour of Shfrwi, 

viii, 413 

brother of, viii, 413 and 
note 

conspires with Tukhdr, viii, 
^14 

proclaims Shfrwf Shdh, viii, 
-^16 

hears where Khusrau Far- 
wfz is hiding, viii, 419 
holds talk with Khusrau 
Parwiz, viii, 420 
bribes Mihr Hurmuzd to 
murder Klmsrau Paiwfz, 

ix, 33 

defeats the Arabs, ix, 85 
counsels Yazdagircl, ix, 86, 

87 

leads the host to Khurdsdn, 
ix, 89 

entrusts Yazdagird to 
Mdhwf, ix, 95 
goes to Rai, ix, 96 
Farrukhzdd, Iranian ’ warrior, 
viii, 241, 296 
speech of, viii, 240 
Farsang (parasang), measure of 
length, about 3,88 miles, 
i, 82 

Farshfdward, son ^ of Wish and' 

■ , , ' brother of 'i^frdn, Tfirdn- ' 
;; ito; hero,, 13-2, i,. 92 ; iti, 


GENERAL INDEX 


Farslii'dward — cont. 

90, 166, 198, 205, 252 ; 
iv, 7, 10, it9, 122, 125, 
133, 153, 160, 162 
summons Pir4n to save 
Farangis, li, 322 
commands with Lahhik the 
light wing, iv, 26 
attacks the Iranians in 
flank, iv, 82 

opposed by Zanga, iv, 83 
goes to help X^iran and 
attacks Giv, iv, 85 
prowess of, iv, 86 
iights with Guraza, iv, 87 
Bizlian, iv, 87 

Lahbdk and, put in joint 
command, iv, 84 
Pfran’s instructions to, 
iv, 95 

hear of the death of Pirin 
and the coming of Kai 
Kimsrau, iv, 112 
lament for Piran, iv, 112 
take counsel with the 
host, iv, 1 13 

fight and escape Iranian 
outpost, iv, 1 16 
referred to, iv, iiB, 120, 
126 

repose themselves, iv, 12 1 
corpses of, brought back 
by Bizhan, iv, 126, 132 
deaths of, announced to 
AMsiyhb, iv, 152 
Farshfdward, brother of Asfan- 
diy4r, 155, v, 20, 22, xio, 
X14, 141, 17X 

governor of Khuris^a, v, 77 
stationed on the Iranian 
right, V, 94 

mortally wounded by Kuh- 
ram, v, 95, 10 1, 104 
Asfandiyir laments for, v, 
loi, 104 

'resolves to avenge, v, 104 
dies, V, XQ4 

shrouded by Asfandiyir, v, 

X05 

Farshfdward, a ^ miser* . 164, vii* 
67 seq. 


255 

Farshfdward, a miser, Bahrflm 
Gflr visits, vii, 68 seq. 
pretended destitution of, 
vii, 68 seq. 

wealth of, described, vii, 70, 
72, 73 

Fartus, Tflrhnian hero, iii, 182, 
213,231,251^ 

comes to aid Pfrdn, hi, 152 
hears of the coming of 
Rustam, iii, 175 
slain by Farfhurz, iv, 181 

Farhd, son of Siyawush and 
Jarfra daughter of Phan, 
and half brother of Kai 
Khusrau, 14$, 147, i, 92 > 
370 ; ii, 3, 29 T ; iii, 8, 14, 
42 seq., 72, 85, 87, 93, 107, 
III seq.; iv, 42, 135; 
v, 30 

birth of, ii, 291 
hostility ot Tiis to, iii, 13 
Story of, 147, iii, 37 seq, 
referred to, iii, 39 
advised by Tukhdr, iii, 47, 
52 seq. 

interview of, with Bahrhni, 
iii, 47 seq. 

birth-mark of, iii, 49 
gives his mace to XXahrdm, 

hi, 50 

eighty slaves of, the, iii, 55 
their mockery of Tfls, iii, 

their mockery of Gfv, iii, 
5^ 

slays the steed of Ths, iii, 56 
wounds the steed of GIv, hi, 
58 

slays the steed of Bizhan, 
hi, 6 s: 

worsted by Bfzhan, hi, 62 
attacks the Irinians, iii, 63 
prowess of, hi, 64 
mortally wounded, hi, 64 
dies, hi, 65 

mother and slaves of, 
destroy tliemselves, iii, 66 
burial of, hi, 68 
Kai Khusratds grief for, hi, 
, 84 tt2 


256 GENERAL 

Farud, son of Shfrin and Kliusran , 
Parwi>, IX, 30 ! 

Farnklizad. Sec Farnikhzdd. i 

Farwardfh, genius, j, S8 ; iii, i 
287, 328 

name of month and day, i, 
T33, 263 ; iii, 230, 286, 
317, 323; vi, 375; vii, 
363 ; viii, 367, 371 
origin of, iii, 286 
Faryin, king, fathcr-iu-law of 
Kaidrush, 159, vi, 66, 67, 
124 seq., 1 71, 172 
city of, taken by Sikandar, 

VI, 124 
slain, vi, 125 

daughter and son-in-law of, 
taken prisoners, vi, 125 
brought before Naitkdn, 
vi, 126 

sentenced to death, vi, 12G 
pardoned, vi, 126 
Fiskdn, forest in Rdm, iv, 333, 

335 

Wolf of, I $4 
described, iv, 333, 336 
Mfrin bidden by Caesar to 
slay, iv, 333 

Gusht^sp undertakes to 
slay, iv, 336 
keeps tusks of, iv, 338 
tusks of, produced before 
C^sar by FIfshwf, iv, 

351 

referred to, iv, 359 
FAtima, daughter of Muhammad 
and wife of 'AH, i, 12 
Fazl. Abd’l ^Abbds FazL 
Feast. See Mihrgdn, Nauriiz, 
New Year's Day, Sada, 
Ferghana. See Farghdna. 

Fight of the Seven Warriors, 143, 
ii, 82, 107 seq, 

Firdausi, Persian poet and 
author of the Shdhnima, 

X5^, J55, 160, IJ3, 
i, 3. 22 seq, ; ii, 9, 10, 82, 
xiy; in, xi, 108, 271, 

272; iv, 136, 138, 3x4, 

3x6; y, 10, 20 seq., 29, 

282; vi, 16, 17, ^4 $^q.^ 


INDEX 

Firdsiiisi—cmit . 

72, 78, 80 seq, 1 07, 198, 
202, 250, 254, 294, 313, 

3x5, 321 seq., 32G, 32S 

368 ; vii 3, 4, 6, 153, 156, 
159, 185, 186, 18S, 213, 

2x4, 2x7 seq., 317; vin, 

7X, 73» 74 , X87, 190, 192, 
193, lx, 69 

materials for the life oi, i, 
23 seq. 

personal references of, in the 
Shhhndma, i, 24 seq. 
conclusions from, i, 35 
date of birth of, 3, 24 
Muhammadan of the Shf'itc 
sect, i, 24, 106, 107 
fond of wine, i, 25 ; iv, 313 ; 
V, 164, vi, 291, 306, 309, 
314, 362, 369; vii, 277 
owned or occupied land, i, 
25 ; vi, 41 1 ; ix 112 
escape of, from drowning, i, 
26, 29 

son of, i, 26 ; viii, 190 
referred to (?), i, 27 ; 
vii, 277, 3 II 

death of, 173, i, 26 ; viii, 

190 

complains of old age, j6o, 
i, 26 ; ii, 336 ; iv, 14 1 ; 
V, 262 ; vii, 220 
patrons, friends and helpers 
of, i, 29 seq., 35, 39, iro ; 
ix, 12 1 

exem}>tcd from taxation, i, 
55 > 39 ; ix, 1 21 
Ffiz^raf's account of, i, 38 
seq,, 45 

later legends of, iii, 15, 109, 
19T ; iv, 8 

Dakfkf, and. See Dakikf, 
Mahmhd and, See Mah- 
mikl. 

Satire of* See Mahm6d. 
Shdhntoa of. See Sh^h- 
nima. 

Yiisuf and Zulfkha of, i, 45 
admits Muhaxnmadan tradi- 
tions into Shihndma, 
viii, 42 


GENERAL INDEX 


^57 


Firdausi, and rhyme-word, vixi, 
397, noie 

account of Arab conquest 
by, supplemented, ix, 
65 

Yazdagird’s death, ix, 70, 
107 

reflections on, ix, 108, 

III 

on completion of Shdhnima, 
ix, 121 

time spent on Shdhnima, 
ix, 122 „ 

praise of Sultan Mahmiid* 
See Mahmiid 

Fire, ancient cult of the Aryans, 
i, 7» 49, 5^ 

priests of. See Magi, 
region of, ii, 56 
Hushang's discovery of, i, 
123 

institution of the Cult of, 
i, 1 1 6, 123 

Feast of Sada, i, 124 
ordeal by, 144, ii, 218 seq. 
sacred, vi, 21, 201, 212 

Fire— -fane or temple, 154. See 
Azar Ab^daghn, Azar- 
gashasp, Barzin. 

— •worship, abolition of, pro- 
phesied, viii, 68 

FIrflz, IrAnian king, iv, 149 

FIrdzhbid, See Gdr. 

Firuzi Kuh, pass in the Alburz 
range, ii, 28 

Fish, mythological, i, 71, 72, 
148, 252 ; ii, 15, 299 ; Nf 
279 ; vii, 34X and note, 
4^06 ; viii, 212 and noie 
salt, the, legend of, vi, 76 
seq, 

--eaters. See Ichthyo- 
phagi. 

Fleece, Golden. See polden. 

Flesh-meats, introduction of, 
attributed to ■ Ahriman, 

Flight, of, Muhammad,, referred 
to* ix, 12:2! 

Flying-maoMhe; of^Kai Kids* ii* 

,, ' 163 ^ \ /' 

' YOU. IX*, ' , ' 


Fo-lin, vi, 73 and note 
Footman (pawn), piece in chess, 
vii, 385 

position of, vii, 388 
move of, vii, 422 
promotion of, vii, 422 
Ford and toll-house of Zark, ix, 
100 and note, 116 
Fort, hill, Malcolm’s descrip- 
tion of a, i, 236 

Fortifications vitrified vi, 79,165 
Fount of Life, the, vi, 74 
seq. ,158 seq. 

Sikandar’s expedition to, 

vi, 158 seq, 

account of, in the Pseudo- 
Callisthcnes, vi, 74 seq, 
Sikandar fails to find, vi, 
160 

Founts, the Seven, viii, 392 
Four, Wonders of Kaid. See 
Kaid. 

Faiths, vi, 91, 95 
Frangrasyan (Afrdsiyfib, q>v.)t 
i, 338 ; ii, 81, 189 ; iv, 
I37» 13S 

XYashokart, son of Gushtasp, v, 
26 

Frfisiydv (Afrdsiydb, q*v.), i, 
338 ; ii, 81 

Fravashi, i, 369 ; ii, 82 ,* iii, 286 
Frazddnava, lake or river, v, 13 
Frdbd, sacred Fire, vi, 20 x, 255 
Ftinj, leader of Khdn’s host, 
temp, Ndshirwdn, vii, 330 
Fur (I^orus, q,v,), dynastic title 
and Indian king, temp. 
Sikandar, 159, vi, 31, 5^^ 
62, 64, xio, seq, X23, X32, 
135» ^37> 1701 172. 175: 

vii, 395 

> Bird's letter to, vi, 50 
Sikandar’s war with, vi, 67, 
112 seq, 

‘ routed by Sikandar' s iron 
steeds, vi, 1x6 
single combat of, with Sik- 
andar, vi, 1 17 
slain, vi, 1 1 7 

trdop'S of, submit to Sikan- 
dar, vi* X18 

' , • E 


258 GENERAL INDEX 


Furiihil, Iranian hero, 151, iv, 
24, 33 

chosen to fight with Zan- 
gala, iv, 97 

slays Zangula, iv, loi 
G 

Gabriel, angel, i, 114 ; iv, 140 ; 
vi, 133 note 

Gallon (Kahan, town above 
Juwayn on the Farah 
river which flows into 
the northern end of the 
Lake of Zirih in Sisthn ?) 
I4g, iii, 152, 177, 224, 225 
Gahdr, Turanian hero, 149, iii, 
216, 224, 251 

comes to aid Pirdn, iii, 152 
slain by Rustam, hi, 225 
Gaiiimart, the first Shdh and 
culture-hero, and the first 
man in Zoroastrian tradi- 
tion, 159, i, 90, 91, X16, 
123 ; vi, 208 ; viii, 24, 
55, 260, 269, 310, 376 
Reign of, i, 117 seq. 

Note on, i, 117 
greatness of, i, 118 
culture-hero, i, 118 
son of, i, 119 

slain by Black Bfv, i, 120 
envied by Ahriman, i, 119 
warned by Suriish, i, 119 
grief of, for the death of 
Siyimak, i, 120 
bidden by Surfish to avenge 
Siydmak, i, 120 
goes with Hiishang to fight 
Black Div, i 121 
death of, i, 121 
Firdausi's reflections on, i, 
121: 

rites, of, vii, 53 . ' 

Faith of, ,vil,' 273 ; \ vii,^ 277 
Galbwi, frdnian be* 74' ■’ ’ , ■ 
Gal£nfish,.,pnt innharge of Khws- 
rdn IParyda; yiii^ 421 ; be, 

' ,5i' X2';| ' . , , . 

parley of, yritjh 'Khaxrdd and 

; /AshW, ix;, ■ 


Gandarep, monster, i, 143 

slam by Keresaspa, i, 172, 

173 

Gang, mountain, iv, 162 ; v, 216 
Gang, sea of, ii, 362 
Gang, stionghold in Tiirdn and 
seat of Afi'asiydb, ii, 241, 
2bi, 309, 344» 357. 3f>9 ; 
ih, 236, 253 ; iv, 258 
king of=Afrdsiydb, iv, 134 
two places known as, iv, 136 
=:Gang-bihisht q.v., iv, 190, 
195. 197, 398, 202, 208, 
2 t 8, 220, 221, 229, 232 
— Gang-dizh q.v., iv, 247 
Gang-bihisht, north of the Jax- 
aries, stronghold and scat 
of Afrdsiydb, 152, iv, 135, 
136, 207 seq., 228 
Afrasiydb at, iv, 187 
marches from, iv, 190 
returns to, iv, 196 
described, iv, 195 
prepared for a siege by 
Afrdsiydb, iv, 197 
besieged by Kai Khusrau, 
iv, 198, 208 seq. 
taken by storm, iv, 209 seq. 
occupied by Kai Khusrau 
for a while, iv, 218 
Gfidarz left in command of, 
iv, 219 

Gustaham, son of Naudar, 
left in command of, iv, 238, 
Kai Khusrau dwells for a 
year in, iv, 254 

Gang-dizh (Gang-i-Siydwiish), 
stronghold, 145, 155, iv, 
335. 13d, 186 note, 203, 
257. 264 ; ix, 25 
possible identification of, ii, 
189 

meaning of, ii, 19 
building and description of, 
u, 279 seq. 

'Afrisiyib takes refuge at, 

iv, ,230 

Kai Khusrau resolves to 
pursue Afrisiy^b to, iv, 
i„ 5SSt ' ' ' - ' 

' ' ’ ■! hiarcbes' t0| ib, 2^7 


GENERAL 

Gangdizli, Kai Khusrati, forbids 
liis troops to injure, iv, 2/^7 
enters, iv, 248 
remains a year at, iv, 249 
advised by his paladins 
to leave, iv, 249 
appoints a governor for, 
iv, 249 

distributes treasure at, iv, 

Gang-i-Dizdiukht (Baitul Muk- 
addas q.v.), i, 161, 226 
Gang-i-Siydwusli. See Gang- 
dizh. 

Ganges, Indian river, vi, 64 
Garamik-kart. See Girimi. 
Garcha, Tdrdnian hero, iii, 15^ j 
comes to aid Pirdn, hi, 152 
Garden of the Hesperides, vi, 74 

Indians, viii, 196 | 

Gardener, a, vi, 341 

entertains Shdpdr son of 
Urmuzd, vi, 341 ^^^4* 
sent by Shdpdr to the high 
priest, vi, 344 
describes Shdphr, vi, 344 
rewarded by Shdpur, vi, 357 
Gargwi. Iranian hero, v, 109 
commands the left, y, 109 
Garib, surface-measure, vii, 215 
and note 

Garshdsp. See Keresispa, 
Gaxshdsp, son of Zav, Shdh, X42, 
i, 90, 91, 174 i ih 33^ 
Eeign of, i, 373 
Note on, i, 373 
relation of, to Keresisp, i, 
174 ^ 

accession of, i, $74 
death of, i, 375 
Garshisp, frdnian hero, i 42* 
144, 207, 212, 214, 239^ 
345 ; ii, 4 ; hi, 260, 273 ; 
V, 202 

relation of, to X^eresispa, h 
174 

Garshisp, Irinian cMcf, tmp^ 
Shiphr son of Ardshfr, vb 
297 ' ; , 

single combat of, wi'lti Bajs- 
■ ' >htSsh| yi, 297, 


INDEX 259 

Garshasp, friiiian noble, iemp^ 
Ndshirwan, viii, 18 ^ 
Gaxsiwaz, brother of Afrasiyab, 

I45> X50, 153, h 92, 342, 
349 J u, 3, 188, 189, 193, 
195, 228, 231 seq., 249, 
253, 264, 268, 269, 286, 
289 55f?-» >’ 197. 

208, 306, 310, 3501 352 ; 
iv, 10, 135 seq., 209 seq., 
252, 268 ; vi, 325 > 

103 

defeated by Siyawush, 11, 
229 seq. 

sues for peace to Siyiwush, 
ii, 237 i>eq. 

fails to string the bow of 
Siyiwush, ii, 266 
visits Siyiwush, ii, 289 seq, 
envies Siyiwush, ii, 292 seq, 
challenges Siyawush, ii, 294 
slanders Siyiwush, ii, 29O 
seq. 

betrays Siyiwush, ii, 3^^ 
seq. 

compasses the death 01 
Siyiwush, ii, 3^5 , 

charged with the execution 
of Farangis, ii, 322 
goes to Manfzha^s palace, 
iii, 301 

finds Bizhan, hi, 302 
takes Bizhan before Afra- 
sxyhb, hi, 3^3 
ordered to execute Bizhan, 
hi, 304 

imprison Bizhan, m, $<^9 
disgrace Manizha, hi, 3^9 
put in charge of the ele- 
phants, iv, 156 
reinforces Afrisiyab, iv, x8x 
]ahn and, compel Afra- 
siy4b to quit the field, iv, 
x 82 

commands the' rear, iv, tpx 
taken prisoner by ' Rustam 
at the storming of Gang- 
bihisht, iv, 2x0 
referred' io, iv, 211 
. ' . eent to Kai Kihs, iv,,233 

' I , ' inxptiscjriedi iv, 235 


GENERAL INDEX 


Garsiwa^, sent for by Kai Kaiis 
and Kai Khusrau, and put 
to tlie torture, iv, 265 
voice of, attracts Afra- 
siydb from lake, iv, 265 
holds converse with Afrd- 
siydb, iv, 266 

slain by Kai Khusrau, iv, 
269 

Garsiyun, frdnian chief, ix, 115 
Gaslian, as rhyme-word, viii, 
397 note 

Gashasp, Iranian chief, vi, 394 
addresses the nobles on the 
succession to the throne, 
vi, 394 

Gashasp, Iranian general, temp, 
JSfiishfrw^n, vii, 251 
put in charge of baggage- 
tram, vii, 251 I 

Gashasp, frdnian noble, viii, 17, 

18 

Gashasp, father in Sh^hndnxa of 
Bahrdni Chdbina, viii, 76, 
99, 162, 169, 304 
Gashasp, father of Ashtdd q.v., 
ix, II 

G^thas, ii, 8; v, ii, 12, 17 
Gaugamela, village near Kineveh, 
vi, 31, 32 note 
battle of, vi, 31 

Gaumata (the false Smerdis), 
Magus, vi, 207 
usurpation, and death of, i, 

5S 

overthrow of, celebrated at 
the Magophonia, i, 59 
Gav, king of Hind, 169, vii, 395 
seq, 

mother of, vii, 395 seq, 
two marriages of, vii, 395, 
396 

two sons of, vii, 395, 
396 

becomes queen, vii, 397 
tries to keep peace be- 
tween her sons, vii, 397 

seq, 

hears of the death of Xal- 
hand, vii, 419 
reproaches Gav, 'vii, 420 ■ 


Gav, mother of, chess invented 
to appease, vii, 421 
death of, vii, 423 
birth of, vii, 395 
tutor of, vii, 397, 39S, 401, 
402, 407, 408, 410, 413, 
417, 421 

rivalry between Talhand 
and, vii, 397 seq. 
war between Talhand and, 

vii, 404 seq. 

attempts of, at accommoda- 
tion with Talhand, vii, 
405, 408, 413 

• defeats Talhand, vii, 412 
proposes a decisive battle to 
Talhand, vii, 414 
victory of, vii, 416 
invents chess to console his 
mother for the death of 
Talhand, vii, 421 
Gaza, city m south-western 
Palestine, vi, 30 
siege of, by Alexander the 
Great, vi, 30 

Gazhdaham, frdnian hero and 
castellan of White Castle, 
144, i, 369 ; ii, 131, 

134, 138, I39i 145. 

iii, 15, 25, 33, 40, 45, 294 ; 

iv, 13, 24, 149 

besieged by Bdrmdn, i, 354 
relieved by Kdran, x, 354 
Suhrdb described by, ii, 136 
evacuates White Castle, ii, 

137 

Gedrosia (Makrdn, Baliichist^n), 
vi, 69 

Gelani, See G 04 n. 

Gemini, constellation, vi, 155 ; 

viii, 86, 203 ; ix, 73 
Genealogical tables 

Pishdidian dynasty, i, 90> 
91 

Kai4nian dynasty, ii, 3 
Sisdnian dynasty, vi, 3 
Kings and heroes of Tdr4n, 
i, 92 

Iranian heroes, ii, 4 
Genealogies, fictitious, v, 282, 
, 290, 29?; vi, 199^ 21 1 


GENERAL INDEX 


261 


Genealogies, of Papak in Tabari, 
VI, 200 

Mas’iidi, vi, 200 
Geography, Firdausi’s, li, 28 
Darmesteter on, li, 79, So 
Geometrician, vi, 377 
' Geopothros (Gotarzes q,v), iii, 9 
George, Armenian general, viii, 

195 

Germaniis, \ii, 218 
Germany, vi, 73 

Gharcha (Georgia), country be- 
tween the Caucasus and 
the Aras, iv, 14, 65 
king of, iv, 149 
Gharchis (Georgians), vii, 94 
Ghdtkar, ruler of the Haitdlians, 
q.v,, 168 I vii, 334, 335 
hears of, and destroys, the 
Khdn’s embassy to Ndsh- 
irwdn, vii, 330 
prepares to oppose the Kh4n 
vii, 330 

defeated, vii, 332 
Ghaznin, city in Afghhnistdn, 
the capital of Sultan 
Mahmiid, i, 20, 257; iv, 
14 i V, 173 ; vii, 173 
Ghee, clarified butter, vi, 105 
Ghiil, a sorceress, i, 42 ; v, 117, 
128 

referred to, v, 121 
described, v, 130 
slain by Asfandiydr, v, 131 
Ghundi, a dfv, ii, 44, 54, 55, 
93 ; iii, 256 ; iv, 296 ; 
V, 204 

Ghiir, district in Afghanistan 
between Hardt and Ghaz- 
nxn, ii, 101 » 

Ghuz, a Turkish tribe and, desert 
east of Gurgin, iv, 60 
Gil, Gfl6.n, district on the south- 
west coast of the Caspian, 
id/, i, 230, 231 ; ii, 226, 
293 ; iv, 148, 263 ; V, 13 ; 
vi, 2^2'7; vii, >224, ’340, 
362, i,3£, ,93 

river ,of«*Kizil Uihn* ’^Iso. 

'' ^ cafled '$aid RM, iv,. 154, 
lyaters of»i»C(aspihd,i, 230*, ' 


GO, Afrasiydb’s camp in, iv, 155 
Nushlrwan’s dealings with, 
vii, 216, 242 seq, 
captives from, vse tiled at 
Sursan, vii, 328 
Gimirrd. See Kimmerians. 
Gipsies, the, 165, vii, 6 
Noldekc on, vii, 6 
language of, vii, 6 
brought into Tran by Rali- 
rdm Gfir, vii, 149 
Girdmf (Garamik-kart), son of 
Jhmdsp, J55, v, 2^ seq,, 58 
death of, foretold by Jam- 
asia, V, 50 

worsts Ndmkhdst, v, 59 
rescues Rawa’s flag, v, 59 
slain, V, 59 

Giravgard, Turanian stronghold 
on the Oxus, iii, 73, 80 
occupied by the Iranians, 
iii, 78 

Girduni, Sirdarra, pass in the 
Albui'z range, ii, 28 ; vi, 

32 

Sawachi, pass in the Alburz 
range, ii, 28 
Girdkuh, fortress, v, 30 
Girih (Jirrah), place south of 
Shfriz, vi, 199 
Gfv, Ixdnian hero, son of Gfidarz, 
and father of Bfzhan, 146* 
15J, J54, ii, 4, 25, 33, 35, 
38, O2, 70, 73, 85, 9jr, 127, 
138 seq,, 148, 151, 158, 

160, 188, X93, 197, 271, 

3^9, 338. 340, 349> 
35X, 362, 38S $eq. ; in, xi, 
X3, x8, 19. 27, 33, 45, 48, 
seq. 57, 67, 75, 76, 8x. 85, 
86, 89 seq., 96, 10 1 seq., 
mS, 111, 114 seq., Ill seq,, 
X27, 129, X30, 133, 139 

seq,, 143. ^54, ^55* 

X59, t6x, X69, 170, xHz, 

183, 187, 206, '2XX, 227* 

' 23X,, :^3S, 244, 245, 247, 

' , ' 24®/353. '2S5.''259. 264,, 

'' 2<|x, 292, 

«P4;» ' 5^96 ,302, 303, 


262 GENERAL INDEX 


CAv—cont. 

307 seq , 3x1 scq , 330 seq., 
337 seq., 35«. 353 seq.; 
iv, 7, 8, IT, S3, 15, x6, 19 
seq , 26 39 seq., 52, 

54, 56, 59, 69, 82 seq., 9O; 
99, io2,'i36, I47> I 57> 223, 
226, 227, 233 seq., 292, 
’296, 306 seq. ; v, 207, 
208 ; vi, 194 ; viii, 168 
meaning of, ii, 335 
liistorical character, iii, 9 
relationship of, to Rustam, 

ii, 155, 365^ 384; iii) 323 

son of Gudarz, ii, 158 
wife of, ii, 365, 384 ; iii, 323 
sister of, ii, 384 ; iii, 323 
father of Bfzhan, ii, 366 
and note 

solicitude of, for Bfzhan, 
iii, 15 

harries M^zandardn, ii, 39 
taken prisoner in Mdzan» 
dardn, ii, 40 

released by Rustam, ii, 58 
taken prisoner in H4m^- 
vardn, ii, 90 

released by Rustam, ii, 97 
goes in search of Kai Kids, 
ii, 104 

takes part in the flight of 
the Seven Warriors, ii, 
107 seq. 

bears letter from Kdds to 
Rustam, ii, 139 
encampment of, described, 

ih 153 

helps to saddle Rakhsh for 
the fight with Suhrib, ii,, 
160 

Subxib described 'by, ii, 166 
quarrels with' Ti*is - over the 
future'' mother -of ' 

, wush,''iii, 1^4 ' ' 

sent by ' Cddar?:, to seek _ l<hi 
Khusrau, ii, $64 seq.' 

, ' ; finds kai KbtiSrau, k 37b' ' 
receives tlfe ;'mait -'bl' 

'wU'Shi"k'37 j'', ; 

, exploits ; 'of, ’ 'in' dbfbhoe ^ ''Oi 

„ , ii 


Gfv, tells how he ca] dared 
Piran’s wife and sister, ii, 

overthrows Pi'ran and his 
host, ii, 385 
xelexises Pfran, ii, 387 
at the Jihfin, ii, 391 seq. 
announces Kai Khusrau’s 
arrival in frdn, ii, 394 
accompanies Kai Khiisrau 
to Ispahdn, ii, 396 
rewarded by Kai Kafis, ii, 

399 

goes on an embassy to Tus, ii 

400 

bears Kai Khusrau*s letter 
to the castle of ikihinan, 

ii, 408 

undertakes to slay Tazhdv, 
hi, 28 

burn the barricade at the 
Kdsa riid, iii, 29 
horse of, wounded by Fankl, 

iii, 58 

lends Bfzhan the mail of 
Siydwuslx, iii, 60, 69 
sees Palishdn approxiching, 
iii, 69 

burns the barricade at ,thc 
Kdsa rfid, iii, 73 
parleys with Tazhdv, iii, 75 
rouses the frinians, iii, 81 
rallies the host, iii, 91 
many kindred of, slain, iii, 94 
urges Bahrdm not to return 
to the battlefield, iii, 96 
goes in quest of Bahrtex, iii, 
102 

takes Tazhiv .captive, iii, 
102 * 

buries Bahrim, iii, 104 
made adviser to Tfis, iii, 1 16 
interrupts Tfis' parley with 
' Hfimin, hi, X22 
’ raids 'Khutan, iii, 247 
steed of, hi, 257 
' 'worsted by PiiMwand, hi, 

' . ' ' ' 

'interferes', in the fi'ght 
,, , ' ; ' ,ibefiw^bn ' , ' Rfistam ' ,and 

. : 'BfiBudwand, ' h'h :263 ' 


GiV, 


GENERAL 

opposes Bizhan’s expedi- 
tion to Irman, iii, 291 
questions Gurgin about Bi- 
zhau, iii, 3^^ 

wroth with Gurgin, ni, 314 
iqipeals to Kai Khusrau, lii, 

31 5 

comforted by Kai Khiisraxi, 
iii, 3G5, 31 S 

sent to summon Rustam, 

iii, 319 

met by Z 41 , iii, 321 
tells Bizhan’s case to Rus- 
tam, lii, y22 

announces Rustam’s ap- 
proach to Kai Khusrau, 

iii, 326 

goes to welcome Rustam, 
iii» 353 

holds parley with Piran, 

iv, 20 

overtures of, rejected and 
returns to Giidarz, iv, 2 r 
commands the rear, iv, 24 
referred to, iv, 30 
tries to stop Bfzhan from 
fighting lliimin, iv, 40, 43 
over-ruled by Ghdarz, iv, 
43 

refuses to lend Bfzhan 
the mail of Siyiwush, iv, 

43 

repents of his refusal, iv, 

44 

son of Bfzhan, iv, 76 
ordered to dispatch troops 
to oppose BahhAk and 
Farshfdward, iv, 82 
sends Zanga and Gurgin, iv, 

83 A 

leaves Farhid %n cO'tnmand 
and attacks y^ith^Bizhan 
Ffr 4 a‘$ centre,, iv/Sa, ; 

defeats Kdin,>y, 84;, 
fights y^ith'PirAp, iv,.84" ' 
attacked' by BahhAt'-and 
FarsMdvrard,;;iTG'3i 1^, ^ 
superseded/ "'bFi 

ShidA^h/'iy» . " 

ebpsen' to-; fight, 

'"'v , 


INDEX 2^3 

Gfv, takes Gurwi prisoner, iv, 100 
opposes Bfzh ail’s going to 
help Gnstaham, iv, no 
consents to Bfzhau’s going 
to help Gustaham, iv, 120 
brings Gurwf before Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 127 
given a command, iv, 149 
commands the real, iv, 191 
takes part in the siege of 
Gang-bihisht, iv, 199 
goes with the captives to 
Kai KAAs, iv, 233 
gives Kai Kaus tidings of 
Kai Khusrau, iv, 234 
rewarded by Ivai KAus, iv, 
236 

returns to Gang-bihisht 
with letter for Kai Klius- 
ran, iv, 238 

made governor of the coun- 
try between the sea and 
Gang-dizh, iv, 246 
welcomes Kai Khusrau on 
his return from Gang- 
dizti, iv, 250 

rewarded by Kai Khusrau, 
iv, 252 

GAdarz and, meet HAm, iv, 
263 

hoar of HAm’s adventure 
with AfrAsiyAb, iv, 263 
Kai Khusrau remonstrated 
with by, and other nobles 
for refusing audience, iv, 

sent by GAdarz to summon 
ZAl and Rustam, iv, 278 
biddeu with other chiefs by 
Kai Khusrau ,to make m 
assembly on the plain,- iv, 

. * 

Kai, Khusrau’^ 'gift to-, w, 

" ' ^^ 5 , ' ' ' ' , v/* ' ' ' -a 

receives gtant of fCum and 

' IspahAn, 'iy, epS-', ' , , 
'opt. with, Kai- KhuarAu 
' '' ''m bis pilgrimage, iv, 306 
: , irefuses 'tb tutU' back 'lyhen 
. . „ ;,bi 4 #h :by , Kai , Khusrau, 


26.4 GENERAL INDEX 


GiV, Kai Khiisran farewells 
and warns, and his c(nii- 
rades, iv, 308 
disappears and is scjught 
in vain by, and his 
comrades, iv, 308 
end of, iv, 309 
grief of Gudarx for, iv, 310, 

Gfvgan, Irdnian hero, ii, log, 
155 ; hi, 34 ; iv, 24 
Gloom, the (Land of Darkness), 
160, V, 30 ; VI, 79 
conception of, vi, 73 
visited by Asfandiyhr, v, 76 
Sikaiiclar's expedition to, 
vi, 74 scg. 

account of, in the Pseudo- 
Callisthenes, vi, 74 seq. 
Sikandar hears of, vi, x 58 
enters, vi, 159 seq. 
emerges from, vi, 162 
jewels of, vi, 162 
Glory, the divine. See Grace. 
Glove, The, Browning’s poem 
of, referred to, vi, 384 
note 

Go-between, old woman as, i, 
280 seq, 

Gog and Magog (Ydjhj and 
q.v.), the barbarous 
nomads of northern Asia, 
i, 16 ; vi, 78 
Golden, Age, i, 129, 134 

boot, iv, 34, 180, 243, 282, 
300, 359 

Fleece, land of the, i, 57 
Gomcr. See Kimrnerians. 

Good Thoughts, Words, and 
Deeds, Zoroastrian foi- 
mula, vii, 317, 3x8 
symbolised', in the game of 
nard, vii, 381 ' 

Gordyeney, kingdom, south of 
Attnenia, vi, 198 
Gotar^es, Barthiain _king and 
Irtoian Viherb,' (Gddari;, 
q.v.), ip 109, ' ' ' ■ 

memorial tablet of, ih,, 9' ; , ' 

■ . ' G^'jpbthtos, l|i^'9 , ' , 

^ '' coin, of,, hi, ',9 , 'd ■ , 


Gotarzes. war of, with Vaidanes, 
hi, ro, ir 

^lohordafcs, iii, 10 seq. 
characier ul, in history, 
iii, 3 0 

Grace or Glory, the divine, i, 
1 13, 1x4, 116, 123, 130 
seq., and passim 
account of, i, 82 
visible appearances of, i, 82, 
130. 374. ; vi, 221 

seq, 

Graniciis, river in Asia Minor 
flowing into the Propon- 
tis (Sea of Marmara), vi, 
3« 

battle of tile, vi, 30, 31 

Grapes, bunch of, Kubad and 
the, vii, 183 note 

Greece, vi, 30 

Greed and Need, personification 
of, vi, 146; vii, 71, 205, 
206, 3(18, 369 

Greek, Greeks, i, 10 ; v, 282 ; 
vi, 82 

relations of, witli the frdn- 
ians, i, 14 

history and legend in rela- 
tion to Persian dto, ii, 9 
conception of India, vi, 68 
captives, mutilation of, by 
the Persians, vi, 373 
philosophers entertained by 
Nflshfrwdn, vii, 280 

Green, Prophet, the, See A1 
Kliidr. 

sea, the, vi, 174 nok^ viii, 
46 and note 

Gretna Green, vi, 323 note 

Griffon, fabulous bird, i, 235 and 
note 

Ghdarz, son of KishwAd, frinian 
hero, and father of Glv, a 
' reminiscence of the Par- 
, thian king Gotarzes, q.v., 

146. 148, 151-^53, i, 42 ; 
ii. 4. 33. 35. , 38. 62, 70. 

' 73. 83, 9X, 127, 138, 142, 

‘ ' , 157. 177, 178, ' *93. 250, 

- : 286,: 290, 316, 318, 335. 

V ;''''338."340,349.37*W,384.'' 


GENERAL INDEX 265 

Chiclarz nmL Giidarz, sends Giv to seek for 


388, 

3yi. ' 

|o6 ; 

lii, 8, 

1 1, ' 

15, I 

8, 19, 

24, . 

i8, 33) 

. 38, i 

40. 4 

15 

, 5o> 

5G 

9 81 ! 

scq., 

85, 8i 

3 seq., 

100, 

Ill, 1 

112, 

115, 

117, 

118, 

1 20, j 


126, 

127, 

129 

seq., 


136, 

137. 

139, 

143. 

I45» 

149 

seq., 

154 

seq., 

104, 

169, 

172, 

W7. 

187. 

205, 

206, 

21 1 

seq , 

220, 

225, 

232, 

23b, 

246, 

253, 

25 

255. 

258, 

264, 

268. 

273, 

277. 

289, 

298, 

3<c>2, 

305. 


322, 

327. 

32<) 

seq., 

337 

MY/., 

354> 

357 

iv, ' 

7, 13. 

79, ! 

80, 85, 88 1 

seq., 

102, 

103, 

iO() 

seq., j 

113 

seq., 

136, 

145 

scq., j 

149, 

. 157. 

162, 

171, 

180, 

1C 91) 

, 206, 

226, 

227, 

292, 

299 

; V, 

207, 

208 ; 

: vi, 


194 ; vui, 104, 168 ; ix, j 


taken prisoner in Mazan- 
dariin, ii, 40 

released by Kusiam, ii, 5« 
leceives Ispahan from Kai 
Kids, ii, 78 

taken prisoner in Himi- 
varin, ii, 9^^ 

released by Kustam, ii, 97 
censures Kai Kiiis, ii, 105 
takes part in the Fight of 
the vSevon Warriors, ii, 107 
mediates between Kai Kdds 
and Rustam, ii, 144 
encampment of, described, 

ii, ^53 , .. 

sons and grandsons of, n, 
153 ; iii, 53 ; 25 , 

loss of, iii, 83 noU, .94, 
i3t ; , , 

survivors of, iv, '^98, ■ 

consoles Siy4wush-for hns 
mother's ' death, ii, ,1 1^99 , 
appdihted ruler ;$ugM; 

; ' and SipanjAb, ft,, 35,3 '■ ' 
returns to, fcin, iir', 3 bi ' ' 

''aces Surdaih,, hft 

'k 3^5,' 


Kai Kbusrau, u, 364 
hcais i)i ivai KliLisraii’s 
arrival in Iran, 11, 305 
welcomes Kiv Klmsraii and 
Giv, ii, 306 

accompanies them to Is- 
takhr, li, 39O 

dispute of, with Tus, ii, 400 
seq, 

goes with Kai Khnsrau to 
the castle of Bahman, ii, 

407 

advises Tiis to avoid 
Kalat, lii, 41 
supersedes Tiis, iii, 83 
ini onus Kai Khusrau about 
Fan'ul and the deleai of 
the franians, iii, 83 
sends IFzhaii for Kdwa's 
standard, hi, 92 
frdnian watchman and, iii, 
150 seq, 

meets I^'aribixrz, iii, 163 
Kusiam, iii, 171 
warns Jtustam not to trust 
PirUn, iii, 212 

sends Ruhhhm to help Rus- 
tam, iii, 227 
praises Rustam, iii, 248 
steed of, iii, 313 
goes to welcome Rustam, 

353 , ^ , 

sent to invade Turin by Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 15 
ordered to negotiate with 
Phin, iv, 15 

negotiations failing, marches 
from Raibad to meet 
l%4n, iv, 22 
arrays his host, iv, 24 
gives the right wing to 
Fariburz, iv, 24^ 

, - -baggage tO' Kalh, iv, 24 
' ' left wing to Ruhhim, iv, 

' ' ^^4 

rear to (Hv, iv, , 24 , 

' ' posts' a: mtchman on the 
, ..''pabuhtaimtop, iv, 25 
t^iikeS'hiU station at the cen- 

;'k ■'''%* iv, 24 ' ' , 


265 GENERAL 

Giadarz, counsels Bi'zhan as to 
liis fight with 
iv, .|i 

over-rules (uV’s objections, 
iv, 43 

rewards Bizlian, iv, 52 
prepares to resist a night- 
attack, iv, 53 

gives a force to Bizhan, iv, 

54 

joins battle with Pfr 4 n, 
iv, 55 

writes to Kai Khusrau, iv, 

56 

sends Hajir with the letter, 
iv, 57 

receives Kai Khusrau ’s 
reply, iv, 62 

prepares to renew the fight, 
iv, 63 

receives Ruin with a letter 
from P(r 4 n, iv, 67 
entertains Rhin, iv, 68 
dismisses Rhin with pre- 
sents and the reply to 
Piriin’s letter, iv, 74 
prepares for the flank-attack 
of Lahhdk and Farshfd- 
ward, iv, 82 

sends Hajir with orders to 
Gfv, iv, 82 

harangues the host, iv, 89 
resolves to hght in person, 
iv, 90, 92, 96 

gives the left wing to Far- 
hid, iv, 92 

right wing to Katmira, iv, 

92 

rear to Shfddsh, iv, 92 
chief command to Gusta- 
ham, iv, 92 

instructs Gustaham, iv, 92 
holds a parley with Fir in 
and arranges with him the 
Battle of the* Eleven 
Hukhs, iv, 95 seq, 
slays Pfrin's steed, iv, 107 
pursues Ffrin, iv, 108 
calls on PMn to surrender, 
iv,' roS' 

Pirin wotlnds, iv, 108' ' /, ■ ' 


INDEX 

Gudarz, slays Pfran, iv, 109 

drinks Piran’s blood, iv, 109 
sends Ruliham to fetch 
Pi'ran’s corpse, iv, no 
harangues the host, iv, 110 
resumes liis command, iv, 
in 

calls for volunteers to pursue 
Lahhik and Farsh’dward 
iv, ti6 

sends Gustaham, iv, 117 
Bizhan to help Gustaham, 
IV, 1 19 

comes before Kai Khusrau 
with the other champions, 
iv, 126 

receives Jspahin, iv, 129 
commands the left wing, iv, 
147 

takes part in the assault on 
Gang-bihisht, iv, 208 
left m command at Gang- 
bihisht, iv, 219 
Giv and, meet Hiim, iv, 263 
hear of Hiim's adventure 
with Afrdsiydb, iv, 263 
gives Kai K.husrau and Kai 
Kdds tidings of Afrdsiy^b, 
iv, 264 

Kai Khusrau remonstrated 
with by, and other nobles 
for refusing audience, iv, 

275 

takes counsel with other 
nobles, iv, 277 
sends Giv to summon Zkl 
and Xiustam, iv, 278 
goes with other chiefs to 
meet ZAl and Rustam, iv, 
282 

audience of, with Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 283 seq. 
holds, with other chiefs, 'Ut 
the bidding of Kai Khus- 
rau, an assembly on the 
plain, iv, 291 seq, 

Kai Khusrau 's charge to, iv, 

' , ‘ ^^94 

' ' gift to, iv, 295 
, ' asks; Kai' Khusrau ‘for a 
' ' - patent for (ifv, iv, 298 » - 


GENERAL 

Giklarz, .c^ocs with Kai Khiisrau 
tjn his pilgrimage, iv, 306 
turns back at the bidding 
t)t I\ai Kluisraii, iv, 307 
lairumts the loss of the ])aia- 
dms, iv, 310, 312 
returns to Irdn, iv, 310 
])romis(‘s fealty to Luhrasp, 
iv, 312 

grandsons of, go with Zarir 
to Rdm, iv, 360 
hail Gusht^isp as Sh4h, iv, 
362 

Giidarz, Aslik^aian king, vi, 197, 
210 

G 6darzians, descendants of 
Ghdarz son of KishwM, 

iii, 108, 115, 200, 214 
Giildr, place, vi, 206 

Gulgiin (bright-bay), steed of 
Gddarz, iii, 366 
steed of buhrdsp, v, 64 
steed of Bahrdm Giir, vii, 57 
CJulshaht, wife of Ffrin, h, 2rK), 
276, 288, 387, 390 
pni)aTes Jarfra’s wedding 
outfit, ii, 270 

pnisents gifts to Farangfs, 
ii, ^275 

announces the birth of Kai 
Khusraii to Pirdn, ii, 326 
referred to, ii, 3^3 
Gulzaryiin, river in TurkisUn 
(Jaxartes)# ii, 35^, 3^^ J 

iv, 187, 189, 

vii, 3i29, 340* 3do 
Gulnir, slave-girl of Ardawin, 
vi, 217 

meaning of, vi, 217 note 
intrigue of, with Ardshfr 
Fipak&n, 'vi, 217 s$q, 
reports the ptesage of the 
astrologers-- to , Ar<3^$hh: 
Pipakin-, vi, 2x9 S' "V - 
•flees, with Ardshhr Bap^4n - 
to P^s, vi, 22b V' 
Gumbad^n, mount ■ aid- 
hold, ,y/ 29b, 8b, 

, i77,'2od-'j ■ 

\;-situaii9h ofbV/,3b‘;'' , 


INDEX 267 

Gund-i-Shapdr (Phapur Gird, Rds 
Shapiir, Kand-i-Shapur, 
Jundd-Sluipur), city in 
Khdzistan, north-west of 
Shhslitar and now repre- 
sented by the ruins of 
Shdhfibad, vi, 295 ; vii. 
219, 276 

built for Roman captives, 

vi, 295 

Mdnf-gate of, vi, 327 
Ndshzdd imprisoned at, 

vii, 264 and note 

Gdr (Jur, Zdr, Ffruzdbdd), city 
in Firs, south of Shfrdz, 
vi, 199, 205, 229 note, 230, 

245 

Gdr, nickname of Bahrain son of 
Yazdagird, vii, 6 
Noldeke on, vii, 6 
Giirdn, king of Kirmin, iv, 
146 

Guraz (Shahrbardz, Fardyfn 
q,v,), general of Khusrau 
Farwfz and Shdh, 174* 
J75, viii, 194, 408, 409 
seq. ; ix, 44 

conspires with Farrukhzdd, 
viii 408 

invites Caesar to take Irdn, 
viii, 408 

rebels, viii, 41 x ; ix, 45 
letters of, ix, 45, 46 
letter of Hrdz to, ix, 47 
account of, ix, 50 
. meaning of, ix, 50 
dual personality of, ix, 

marches on Taisafun, ix, 
51 

confers with frdnian mag- 
nates, ix, 5^ 

' misrule of, ix, 53 
' , ^ . conspiracy against, ix, 34 
' goe$ hunting, ix, 53 
end of,, ix, $5 
. 'Qurdz', son of;M 4 hwi, , 

' referred-, to, ’ix, 107, X15 
'''l^ov-erhor''Of M-arv, Ix, 120 
i ' ' put -tb' dedtb- with his sons, 

' '1 ! X20 '-p 


208 GENERAL 

Giiraza, fraiiian licro, J5J, ii, 

73, 340 ; ill, 20, 25, 34, 45 > 

48, 92, 129, '^53 ; 

15. >24, 34 

takes king ol Barbar prison- 
er, ii, 97 

takes part in the Fight of the 
Seven Warriors, ii, 107 
seq, 

encampment of, described, 

' ii; 155 

goes with Rustam to rescue 
Bizhan, iii, 334 
fights with Farshidward, iv, 

87 

chosen to fight with Siya- 
mak, iv, 97 
slays Siyhmak, iv, 100 

Gurazin (Kav^razem), a relative 
of Gusht4sp, 155, V, 12, 
22, 53, 99, loi, 102, 104 
seq,, 1 71, 205, 261 
envies Asfandiyir, v, 78 
death of, referred to, v, 97 
Asfandiyhr addresses the 
corpse of, V, 105 

Gurdhfrid, daughter of Gazhda- 
ham, 144, ii, ii 9 » 138 
referred to, ii, 131 
encounter of, with Suhrdb, 
ii, 132 seq, 

beguiles Suhrdb, ii, 133 

Gurdgfr, son of Afrisiyib, ii, 
92 

commands the troops from 
Tartary, Khallukh, and 
Balkh, iv, 156 

Gnrdwi, brother of Bahrim 
Chfibfna, X7$, xy 4 » viib 
74, 202, 205, 206, 231, 
'293, 295. 296, 298, 342, 

349, 354, 358 ; i2C, 6 
a legitimist, viii„ 74 
Gustaham and, persuade, '' 
Khusrau Farvvfz not to 
make a night, -attack, viii, 
224 ' ' ; , , - ’ ' 

' ‘.takes charge of baggage, 

, ' viE, 228 - - 

Baht^rh.Chhbfna writes, to,' 
viii, 285 > ; 


INDEX 

Gurdwi, fights with Bahrain Cliii- 
bma, vui, 294 

leceives province, vui, 313 
informs Khusrau Parwiz of 
Gurdya’s doings, viii, 356 
writes to, and sends Khus- 
rau Parwiz’ letter to, 
Gurdya, viii, 360 
wife of, goes with letters to 
Gurdya, viii, 360 
hears of the plight of Rai 
and informs Gurdya, viii, 

367 

Gurdya, sister of Bahram Chii- 

bilia, lyx, 173, xj4, n, 
119; viii, 74, 104 fioie, 
187, 19X, 347, seq,, 358 

365 ; ix, 6 
a legitimist, viii, 74 
present at council, viii, 164 
speech of, viii, 165, 1O7, 
171 

referred to, viii, 221 
counseds Bahrhm Chiibina, 
viii, 22 1 

laments Bahrdm Chiibina, 
viii, 340 

resident at Marv, viii, 346 
seq, 

informs her followers of the 
Khdn's offer of marriage, 
viii, 349 

starts for fr4n, viii, 351 
parleys with Tuwurg, viii, 
352 

arrives at Amwf, viii, 354 
doings of reported to Khus- 
rau Parwfz, viii, 356, 358 
met by Gustaham, viii, 356 
asked in mairiage by Gusta- 
ham, viii, 357 

receives letters from Khus- 
rau l^arwfz and Gurdwf, 
viii,' 360 

‘ plots murder of Gustaham, 
Viii, 560 

justifies , murder of Gusta- 
ham, 3^^ 

; reports dpath' of, Gustaham 
. tb ' Kiharau Parwiz, viii, 

r, ^'i6i " ' ' ' '"4 '' ^ ' ' 


269 


GENERAL INDEX 


Gurdya, dresses np as a warrior 
to please Khusrau Parwiz, 
viu, 363 

prowess of, m drinking, 
viu, 364 

appointed overseer of royal 
bowser, viii, 364 
diverts Khusrau Parwfz and 
saves Rai, viii, 36S 
Gurgdn (Hyreania), province 
watered by the Atrak and 
Gurgan rivers on the 
south-eastern shores of 


the Caspian, 168, iv, 6x ; | 
vi, 373 ; vii, 89, 237, 357 > i 
3i«. 357. 35«. Sfil ; via, 
15. 355 ; IX, 89 
Abi'i’l K^sim of. See Abu 1 
Kdsiin. 

Gurgan j, one of the two capitals 
of Khdrazni (Kht (Khth) 
being the other), situated 
on the Persian aide of the 
Gxus, iv, 6o 

Gurgin, son of Milhd, frdnian 
hero, 150, isr, li, 33, 55> 
6i, 70, 73, 85, 90, 127, 
138,144,316,3^0, 394; i”. 
II, 12, I9» -20, 25, 48, 108, 
115, 126, 145, 182, 211, 

253, 26b 268, 273, 285, 

289, 292, 294 S&7-* 300; 

305, 310 seq., 322, 323, 

331 seq., 345. 34^. 35^ i 

iv, 13, 15. 'H> 147. 

191,292 ; viii, 216 

takes part in the Fight of 
the Seven Warriors, ii, 
107 seq. 

undertakes embassage to 
Airisiy^b, iii, 29 
goes with letter from Kal 
Khusrau, to Rustam, lii* 
274 

accompanies Bfzhan, to, Ir^ 
iii, 292 , ' 

refuses help Bf2;han 
against the wild, ,bo^s, 
ill, 29:^ , ' 

enyies and hognil^^ Bfzhih, 

itl^ aJ9f'. ' ‘ "V 


Gurgi'n, goes with Bizhan in 
quest of Manizha, iii, 296 
searches for Bizhan, iii, 3^® 
finds Bizhan’s steed, iii, 31 1 
questioned by Giv about 
Bizhan, hi, 312 
false account of, about Biz- 
han’s disappearance, iii, 
3^3 

Giv’s wrath with, iii, 314 
appears before Kai Khusrau, 

iii, 316 

imprisoned, iii, 317 
appeals to Rustam, iii, 331 
released, iii, 333 
goes with Rustam to rescue 
Bizhan, iii, 334 
pardoned by Bizhan, iii, 346 
opposes Lahhdk, iv, 83 
chosen to fight Andarimhn, 

iv, 97 

slays Andariindn, iv, 104 
Kai Khusrau remonstrated 
with by, and other nobles 
for refusing audience, iv, 

2 83 seq. 

audience of, with Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 283 seq. 

(hirg^^r, tribe, v, 43 and note 
Gurgsdr, Tiir^nian hero, 15^. 

117, 131 seq., 146, 233 
note 

made captain of the host by 
Arj 4 sp, V, 46 

given command of one wing, 

V, 5^ 

persuades Arjdsp to remain 
and hght Asfandiyir, v, 
108, 109 

made loader of the host, v, 

109 

taken prisoner by Asfandi- 
yir, V, I 'It 

offers to guide Asfandiy^r to 
the Brazen Hold, v, 113 
, , . . goes as guide with Asf andi- 
y4r to Tdrin, v, 12a 
" offered the kingdom of the 
■ , Turkmans by Asfandiydr 
' p / ' in noturn fpr faithful ser^^ 
' , ; ^ vice,, v^ r-49 


GENERAL INDEX 


Gurgs^r, describes tlie route to 
the Brazen. Hold, and the 
Seven Stages, v, 120 seq,, 
124 seq , 128, 132, X34 
chagrm of, at Asfandiy^r's 
successes, v, 124, 128, 

131, 133 . ^ 

reproached by Asfandiyar 
for giving false informa- 
tion, V, 139, 

offered the captainship of 
the Brazen Hold by 
Asfandiyir in return for 
trusty guidance, v, 140 
shows the fr 4 nians a ford, 

V, 140 

questioned by Asfandiyir 
for the lavst time, v, 141 
curses Asfandiydr, v, 141 
slain by Asfandiyar, v, 141 
Giirkin (Jdzjdn), city and dis- 
trict between Marvriid 
and Balkh, iv, 65 
Gurkils, tribe (?), viii, 15 ^ 
Gurdkhin, frdnian hero, iv, 149 
Gurwi, Turanian hero, I 45 > ^ 5 ^* 
j^2, ii, 296, 314, 3 ^ 9 * 338/ 
340 ; iii, I 97 » ^ 99 , 237 ; 
iv, 7, 99, 252; V, 

272 

challenges and is overthrown 
by Siyhwush, ii, 295 
advocates the execution of 
Siydwush, ii, 3x7 
carries out the execution of 
Siydwusb, ii, 320 
chosen to hght with Gfv, iv, 

97 , 

taken prisoner by Giv, iv, 
100 

brought by Giv before Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 127 
executed, iv, X29 
Gurzbin, vi, 394. S0& Gurkin. 
Gushasp, sacred Fire, vi, 20T 
Gushasp, chief scrihe, temp^ 
Bahrim Giir, vii, ii ■ 
bidden to remit the arrears 
of taxes, vii, x t 


Gushasp, nonce-name assiinu'd 
by Bahram Gur, vii, 59 
scq. 

Gushasp, nonce-name assumed 
by Bahrdin Gur, vii, 59 
seq. 

Gdsh-bistar, a savage, vi, 80, 177 
meaning of, vi, 177 note 
interview of, with Sikandar, 
vi, X77 

Gushtdsp (Vistdspa, Vishtasp, 
Hystaspes’), son of Liih- 
rdsp, father of Asfaiidi- 
ydr, and Shah, I 54 -I 5 L 
i, 42, 61 ; ii, 3, 9 ; hi, 
109 ; iv, 314 5^7, 334 

scq., V, 24 seq., 61, 68, 90, 
92 seq., 103 seq., ii 9 » X30, 
148, 154, 155, 159, 

seq,, x8o, 181, 183, 205, 

206, 208 seq., 2x3, 216, 

220, 221, 233 note, 243, 

248 seq., 281, 289, 293 ; 
vi, 20, 49, 55» 200, 213, 
251, 252, 258; vii. 359; 
vih, 41, 68, 95, 148, 213, 
270, 392, 393 25 

son of Lnhrdsp, iv, 318 
jealousy of, respecting the 
grandsons of Kai Kdhs, 
iv, 3x8 

asks Luhrasp to appoint him 
heir to the crown, iv, 318 
departs in wrath for Hind, 
iv, 319 

arrives at Kabul, iv, 320 
overtaken by Zarir, iv, 320 
takes counsel with the 
chiefs, iv, 321 
returns to Buhrdsp, iv, 322 
pardoned by Liihrisp, iv,322 
determines to quit Irdn, iv, 
323 

takes a steed of Luhrdsp’s, 
iv, 323 

story of, in Rum, 11, xo ; 

iii, 2B5; iv, ^324 seq. 
interview of with Hishwf, 

iv, 324 


» The Hysta$pes of legend uot necessarily the father pf Darius I, Stt VoL w, 

V ' - , . , ' ^ 


GENERAL INDEX 


271 


Gushtdsp, vainly seeks work in 
Rum as a sciube, iv, 325 
herdsman, iv, 320 
camel-fhiver, iv, 326 
blacksmith, iv, 327 
dreamed ol by Kalayun, iv, 
3-29 

goes to Cmsar's palace, iv, 

330 

chosen for her husband by 
Katdyun, iv, 330 
marries Katayun, iv, 331 
spends his lime in the chase, 
iv, 332 

makes friends with llishwf, 
iv, 332 and nota 
asked I)y Jlishwi to under- 
take the adventure of the 
wolf of R4skdn, iv, 335 
undertakes to slay tlu^ wolf 
of hYiski'm, iv, 33O 
provided with steed and 
arms by Mfrfn, iv, 336 
goes with Midn and llfshwf 
to the foiest of Fhskiin, 
iv, 337 

prays for help, iv, 337 
gives thanks for his victory, 
iv, 338 

takes the wolf's tusks, iv, 

338 

welcomed by Hfshwf and 
Mfrfn on his return, iv, 

339 

discovers to Katiyiin his 
royal race, iv, 340 
referred to, iv, 343 seq, 
asked by Hfshwf to under- 
take the adventure of the 
dragon of Mount Sakfla, 
iv» M5 

bids Ahran provide a stood, 
sword, and other arins, 
iv>345, 

goes with Ahran and;Hm- 
wf to Mount 'Sakfla#; iv, 
34d ' ' ; ' ‘ , , 

takefe t-v^o of, thd'dr^OA*a 
teeth, iv; 3^46 ■ / 

’ ! gives ' th^hkS'ibr his yiotory, 

: , ' 9 '' 


Gushtasp, welcomed by Hfshwf 
and Ahran on his return, 
iv, 347 

accepts gifts from Ahran 
and bestows x>aTt upon 
I Hshwf, iv, 347 
returns to Katayun, iv, 34S 
got^s to the sports on 
Cmsar’s riding-ground, iv, 

349 

prowess of, at polo and 
archery, iv, 350 
cjiicstiuned by Caesar, iv, 350 
reproaches Cmsar for his 
treatment of Katdyun, iv, 

350 

claim of, to have slain the 
wolf and the dragon, iv, 

351 

confirmed by nfshwf, iv, 
35 ^ 

reconciled to Cmsar, iv, 351 
goes to court and is received 
with honour by CiX'sar, 
iv, 351 

consulted about Ilyis by 
Cmsar, iv, 333 

leads forth the host, iv, 354 
refuses the overtures of 
liy4s, iv, 354 

brings the body of Ilyds to 
Cmsar, iv, 356 

routs the host of Ily4s, iv, 
35b 

rctuniB in triumph to Caesar, 
iv, 356 

recognised by Zarfr, iv, 360 
goes to Zarfr's camp, iv, 361 
hears of Luhrisp's abdi- 
cation in his favour, iv, 

'Saluted 'as: Sh 4 h by the 
‘ chiefs, pv, 3 

invites Cwar to a feast, iv, 

v! 3^2' , ’ ' ' , , ' ,, ' , ' ' 

' - , ' out 'fot with Kati- 
; A . -yi3tn,'iv^ 3d4 \ , 

, ; - ' pastts ' in . . good - wih , ' from 

V'' C^ar,',iy; , -'h 


27 z general index 

GusliUsp, Reign of, 134, v, 9 seq. Gusht jsp, takes up his position 
Noteson, V, , on a height, v, 55, 56, 63 

iGCyseq,, 260 i,eq. referred to, v, 60, 6^ seq., 

division of, v, 9 ^9 , i- r, . 

points of interest in, v, 9 hears of the death of Zarir, 

compared with that of v, 64 ^ 

Darius Hystaspis, v, 10 wishes to avenge Zanr, v, 

diagram to illustrate, v,27 64, 68 

legend of Zarduhsht and, v, dissuaded by Jamdsp, v, 64, 


1 8 

black horse of, v, 18, 28 
sees his place in Paradise, v, 

19 

Ridge of, V, 29 

succeeds Luhrdsp as Sh 4 h, 

V, 31 

sons of, V, 32 

pays yearly tribute to Ar- 
jhsp, V, 32 

converted by Zarduhsht, v, 

33 

helps to spread the Faith, 

V, 34 

establishes Mihr Barzin and 
other Fire -fanes, v, 34 
conversion of, recorded on 
Cypress of Kishmar, v, 34 
advised by Zarduhsht not 
to pay tribute to Arjdsp, 

V, 35 

receives embassage from 
Arj^sp and takes counsel 
with his chiefs, v, 41 
sends answer to Arjdsp, v, 43 
summons the host, v, 47 
marches against Arj^sp, v, 

48 

bids Jdmdsp foretell the 
issue of the tight, v, 48 
distress of, at Jdmisp’s 
prophecy, v, 53 
encouraged to Bght by 
Jimisp, V, 54 

gives Zarfr the standard and 
the oommapd of the cen- 
tre, V,' 55 

one wing to Asfandiyir, 

55 

other wing to Shidasp, v, , : 
55 

the xo^t to Nastur, v, 5$ 


69 

offers his daughter Humai 
to the avenger of Zarfr, 
V, 64 

crown and throne to the 
avenger of Zarfr, v, 66 
gives his steed and arms to 
Nastdr, v, 69 
secs and laments over Zarfr's 
corpse, V, 73 

bids Raster lead the host 
home, V, 74 

marries liiimai to A&fandi- 
ydr, V, 74 

gives Nastiir a command 
and bids him invade 
Turhn, v, 74 

rewards the host, v, 75 
builds a Firc-fane and makes 
Jhmhsp its arch mage, v, 
75 

Mansion of, v, 75 
writes to his governors to 
announce the defeat of 
Arjdsp, V, 75 

receives embassies and tri- 
bute from Cmsar and from 
the kings of Barbaristan, 
Hind, and Sind, v, 75 
makes Asfandiyir chief 
ruler of frdn and sends 
him to convert the world, 
V, 76 

sends the Zandavasta to 
each clime, v, 77 
Gurazm slanders Asfandiyhr 
to, V, 78 

sends J^nxisp io recall As- 
fandiy^r to court, v, 80 
convokes an assembly and 
arraigns Asfandiyir, v, 
82 seq* 


GENEIOIL f.YDEX 


Giisiitasp, puts Asfandiyar in 
bonds, V, 84 

sends Asfandiyar to Gum- 
bad An, V, 84 

takes the Zandavasta to I 
Sfstdn, V, 85 ; 

welcomed by Ku stain and , 
Zal, V, 85 S 

kings revolt frcjm, v, 85 j 
while in Sistan hears fronx . 
his "Wife of the sack of | 
ilalkh and the captivity , 
of his daughters, v, 93 I 
calls together his chiefs and j 
summons the host, v, 94 | 
marches from Sisidn toward j 
Balkh, V, 94 

takes coinniaiui of the cen- 
tre, v, 94 

thirty-eight sons of, slain, 
and defeat of, in fight 
with ArjAsp, v, 95 » 06 
takes refuge on a mountain, 
v, 96, 100 

consults JAmdsp, v, 96 
sends Jdrndsp to Asfandiydr 
with the offer of the crown 
in return for hcljr, v, 
97 

interview of, with, and pro- 
mise to resign the crown 
to, Asfandiydr, v, 106 
commands the centre, v, 109 
makes thanksgiving for vic- 
tory, V, 1 13 

promises to resign the crown 
to Asfandiydr when he 
has delivered, his sisters 
from captivity, v, 114 
summons troops, rewards ' 
Asfandiydr, and sends 
him to invade fiSrdn, v, 
115 ' • ' , 

hears of Asfandiyir^s sncr. ' 
cess and writes to him, v> . 
i6a ’ ' , / A 'A’’ , ' 

gives n .banquet on 
diyir's ireturn, v/ ■ 

' consults ' J imisp'. . ‘-and - , 

: aSttologen ' b® , 

, ^ fntnrb^,"Vpib;l^’;' a;'-.' 

, vob^ «* ' ;> 


273 

Guslitasp, Asfandiyar recounts 
his deeds to, v, 170 seq. 
promises to resign the throne 
to AsfandiyAr when he 
has brought Ku stain and 
his kin in bonds to court, 

V, 173 . 174 

Asfandiyar sends the corpses 
of Nush Azar and Mihr-i- 
Niish, and a message to, 
V, 232 

AsfaudiyAr's last message to, 

V, 2^9 

hears of AsfaiidiyAr's death 
and laments for him, v, 
252 

wrath of the nobles with, v, 

252 

xcj^roached by Bishdtan, v, 

253 - 

HumAi and Bih AMd, v, 

254 

Rustam’s overtures to, v, 
25O 

Ihsluitan testifies in Rus- 
tam’s favour to, v, 257 
reconciled, and writes, to 
Rustam, ¥,257 
advised by Jdmdsp to write 
to Bahman, v, 258 
writes to Rustam and Bah- 
man to recall the latter, 
V, 258 

welcomes and gives Bahman 
the name Ardshfr, v, 259 
tells Jdmdsp of his wishes 
as to the succession, v, 279 
dies, V, 2B0 

Gustaham, son of'.Naudar and 
brother of Ths, i, 90 ; ii, 
127, 336 ; iy . 194 ^ 

Tis pidf sent^ ,by J^audar 
to ^ conduct ' the , Rersian 
' -yromen to Alburn* 

' ' V353 '' - ' 

' hear of '.Waudar's death, i, 

■ ’ ' ^1, I, 304 ' ' ' ' ' 

, b^er Ih ' ' the suc- 

'Khuethh eeads , troops 

b': ’ 0,' 


GENERAL INDEX 


274 

Gustaham, son of Nauclar, at- 
tacks the Tiir^nians, iv, 178 
sent to with troops, 

iv, 188 

reports his defeat of Khur- 
dkh4n, iv, 193 
takes part in the assault on 
Gang-bihisht, iv, 208 
left in command of Gang- 
bihisht, iv, 238 
goes to welcome Kai Khus- 
rau on his return from 
Gang-dizh, iv, 252 
left behind as viceroy on Kai 
Khnsrau’s return to frdn, 
iv, 254 

Gustaham, son of Gazhdaham,^ 
frdnian hero, 132, i, 369 ; 

ii, 12, 58, 107 ; iii, 19, 25, 

33, 45, 48, 59, 92, 93, 127, 
129, 139, 141, 2x1, 247, 
248, 253, 273, 289, 294, 
322, 350; iv, 7, 13, 15, 
24, 33, 93, 132 149, 

191, 292 

takes part in the Fight of 
the Seven Warriors, ii, 
107 seq. 

friendship of, for Bfzhan, 

iii, 15 

lends Bfzhan a steed, iii, 60 
mounts behind Bfzhan, iii, 
95 

attacks Bfddd, iii, 244 
sends Bfzhan to summon 
Rustam, iii, 245 
goes with Rustam to rescue 
Bfzhan, iii, 334 
fights with Andarfmdn, iv, 
87 

made commander in chief 
. pro fern. vUe Gfidarz, iv, 

Gfidarz instructs, iv, 92 
resits his comtnand to 
GMarz, iv,,ixi 
volnnteers to pursue Lahhik 
and Fatshfdward, iv, 116 
wounded, iv, 123 


Gustaham, son of Gazhdaham, 
rescued by Bfzhan, iv, 
124 seq, 

healed by Kai Khusrau, iv, 

133 

Kai Khusrau remonstrated 
with by, and other nobles 
for refusing audience, iv, 

275 

audience of, with Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 283 seq. 

Kai Khusrau 's gifts to, iv, 

295 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 
on his pilgrimage, iv, 306 
refuses to turn back when 
bidden by Kai Khusrau, 
iy, 307 

Kai Khusrau farewells and 
warns, and his comrades, 
iv, 308 

disappears and is sought 
in vain by, and his 
comrades, iv, 308 
end of, iv, 309 

Gustaham, Iranian warrior, temp., 
Yazdagird son of Shdpfir, 
vi, 394 ' 

Hons of, slain by Bahrdm 
Gfir, vi, 410 

Bahrdm Gfir’s commander- 
in-chief, vix, 85 
Gustaham (Bistira 

maternal uncle of Khus- 
rau Parwfz, J7Z-J74, viii, 
199, 200, 202, 204 seq,, 

227, 228, 231, 255, 257, 

259, 269, 282, 289, 293, 

295, 298 ; ix, 4, 6 

imprisonment of, viii, 77, 176 
Bandwf and, escape and 
revolt, viii, 182 
informs Khusrau Parwfz of 
the bliiiding of Hurmuzd, 
viii, 184 

referred to, viii, X89 
revolt of, viii, xgx, 355 
saves Khusrau Parwfz from 
Turk, viii, 220 


^ assumed in aU wliete it 'is doattfni which GuBtatam i$ meaott 

O/v VOK 1* p* 3^, ' . , ‘ ' . ■ , . 


GENERAL 

Gustaliani (Bistam), Giirdwiand, 
dissuade Khiisrau Parwi'z 
irom making a night- 
attack, viii, 224 
treasurer, viii, 229 and naia 
accompanies Khusraii Pai- 
wiz in iiis flight, viii, 
231 

turns back and murders 
Hurmuzd, viii, 232 
reicuns Khiisrau Parwiz, vih, 

233 

Khusrau Parwfz warniid 
against, viii, 255, 256 
deceiv(id by Cmsar's talis- 1 
man, viii, 272 

praised by Ciesar, viii, 279 j 
Bahrdm Cliiibfna writes to, | 
viii, 285 j 

chooses comrades for Khus- j 
rau Parwiz in battle, viii, ; 
29b 

receives Khurdsdn viii, 313 
summoned to court, viii, 355 
hears of execution oi ihuid- 
wi, viii, 355 

hears of Gurdya*s doings, 
viii, 356 

goes to meet Gurdya, viii, 
356 

asks Gurdya in marriage, 
viii, 357 

CJurdya plots murder of, 

viii, 360 

intimates of, beheaded, viii, 

370 

assassination of, roferreil to> 

ix, 16, 104 

Gutschmid, Alfred von, on the 
Cyrus legend in CteSias, 
Vi, 195 

Giizihr, Tribal King, yi, X9B, X99 ■' 


K ' 

II ABASH (Ethiopia), 'Vi*' %49 
people of, ,enconnteted. by 
' Silcandn^f^ 14 ^' [ ' 

Haft^nbhkitt, . 'S00 

Haft khAn*iVfe;' 


INDEX 275 

Haft Kliw4n, ii, 29 j v, 117 and 
note 

of Rustam and Asfandiydr 
compared, v, 117 
Man, ii, 29 

Haftwdd (Haftinbiikht, Asia- 
wadh). Tribal King, j6r, 
VI, 199 

account of, in Tabari, vi, 
205 

daughter of, vi, 205, 206, 
'-^33. 234 

becomes guardian of the 
Worm, vi, 236 
N()ideke and Oarincsteter 
on, vj, 206 
son of, vi, 206 

helps his father against 
Ardshir Phpakdn, vi, 
236 

Story of, i6j, vi, 232 seq, 
seven sons of, vi, 233, 235 
rise to power of, vi, 235 
builds, and migrates to, a 
stronghold, vi, 235 
Ardshir Pdpak^n and, vi, 
236 seq. 

slain by Ardshir Pipakdn, 

vi, 245 

HaiMl, Hait^lians, country and 
people (White Huns), 
dwelling north of the 
Oxus, x 66 , i 6 B^ vii, 6, 
153, 161, 1O4, 171, 174, 
181, X87, ' 197 , 34O1 
390;, viii, 45. 242. 329. 
370, 377 

origin and seat of, i, 19, 
m 

confused with the' Turks, 

vii, 4 

Bahrixn Gdx'S. defeat of. vE, 
4 ' 

, help BWz, vii, 137 ' 

'estp^Mltion 

' ; vii, t59» ' 

, 'tsraaition oi,-'yh/x'6o 
'■'ting of, 'vii, '' '' 
i''. ' ';;,Kel|>^KtiiMd,,vi!,.r'9a' , 

, , i^hb%';aiiht/fd,\vii, £79, 


276 GENERAL INDEX 


Haital Haitalians, Nushirw4n's 
alliance with the Khdn 
against, vii, 317 
Khan's war with, vii, 328 seq. 
Khin’s embassy to Nushir- 
win destroyed by, vii, 330 
host of, levied to oppose the 
Khdn, vii, 331 
defeated, vii, 332 
Niishirwdn's help sought by, 
vii, 332 

Faghdnish made king by, 
vii, 333 

Niishirwan takes counsel 
concerning, vii, 333 334, 
make submission to Ndsh- 
irw^n, vii, 360 

Ha’iy, son of Kutiba, governor 
of Tus and a patron of 
Firdausi, i, 35, 39 
Flajir, frdnian hero, 144, 151, ii, 
I34i 13^. 14O; 349 ; iv, 
103, 147, 191 

taken prisoner by Suhrdb, 
ii, 131 

misleads Suhrhb, ii, 152 seq, 
life of, attempted by Rus- 
tam, ii, 176 
attacks Biddd, iii, 244 
put in charge of the bag- 
gage, iv, 24 

bears letters from Gddarz 
to Kai Khusrau, , iv, 57 
rewarded by Kai Khusrau, 
iv, 58 

bears Kai Khusrau 's reply 
to Gdclarz, iv, 6x, 62 
goes with orders to Giv, iv, 
82, S3 

slays Andarimin's horse, 
iv, 87 

chosen to fight with Sipah- 
ram, iv, 97 

slays Sipahram, iv^ 104 
Halab (Chalybon - Beroea, 
Meppo), city in northern 
Syiia, iv, 339, 360; vih, 
4^b 47 

Halai (Olympia' {?), NiWd), 
daughter, ' in , legend, of 
. ' Philip f I of Macedon, vi, tg 


Halax, reason for her repudiation 
by Ddrdb and her naming 
her son Iskandar (Sikaii- 
dar), vi, 19 

Halai-Sandariis. See Halai. 

Hamaddn (Ekbatana), city in 
'Irak-i-’Ajami, vi, 31 ; vii, 
6 ; viii, 178, 189 ; ix, 68 

Hdmdvardn (Yaman), south- 
western Arabia, 143, ii, 
25, seq,, 94, 96 seq., 
i39> 143 seq., 213, 215, 

218, 250 ; iv, 296, 299 ; V, 
174, 207, 208, 220 ; viii, 
104, 168 

king of, 143, i, 338 ; ii, 85 
seq., 93, 207 and note ; v, 
176 

asks quarter of Rustam, 
ii, 97 

releases Kai Kdiis, ii, 97 

Hamawan, mountain, 148, hi, 

I35» I37» 14^, I44» 

153, 154, 158, 161, 164, 

167, 169, 172, 177 ; iv, 

299 ; V, 1 16 

occupied by the Iranians, 
iii, 132 

Hamddn Gashasp, frdnian chief, 
viii, 122, 163, 204 
speech of, viii, 166 

Hamza, of Jspahdn, tenth cen- 
tury Arabic historian, vi, 

257 

Handgrip, as test of strength, ii, 
66, 67 ; v, 208 

JI4ni bin Mas'dd, Arab chief, 
viii, 190 

Haoma, See Homa. 

asHhm, q.v, 

Haraiti Bareza (Alburz, q,v.), 
mountain, iv, 137 

Hardm, the environs of Mecca, 
vi, 65, 120 and note, 
121 

Haram, of Khusrau Parwfz, ix, 

5 

Harit, city in north-western 
Afghanistan, ii, xoi ; iii, 
222,; viii, 71, 92, no, 
116, 117,^130, 173 


GENERAL 

Haial, early beat ol Aryan i ivili- 

zaiif»n, j, 7 

battle ut, i, .M , 

Firdaiisi ilees to, fruui Alau- 
111 lul, i, 39 

ciesert of, ii, 228 ; viii, 114 1 

niarclilord of. 6 Vt Makli. ; 
bestowed by Mihwi on his i 
son, ix, 115 1 

Hdris, father of Kais. viii. 250 i 
Ilarith, father of Nadr, q.v., v, ' 

1 66 ; 
lldrith bin Jabala, piince of the 
(diassdnians, vii, zij 
protected by Justinhin, vii, 

war of, with Munzir, vn, 217 
blarpagtis, Persian noble, tcynp. 
Astyages, ii, 190 
trzPivhi in legend, ii, KP 
Ilarhm (City of Women), 160, vi, 

73 . 

visited by Sikandar, vi, X53 
seq. 

Sikandar’s correspondence 
with the ruler of, vi, X53 
seq, 

HAruntt’r-Rasldd, Khalffa (A.O. 

786-809), i, 14 
Hiriit. angel, iii, 286, 288 
‘ Harvost of Bahrim,’ viii, 292 
Hasan Sabb&lx (The Old Man of 
the Mountain), v, 30 
HAshim, Arab general, ix, 68 
sent by 'Umar in pursuit of 
Yazdagird, ix, 68 
wins battle of J» 1614 , ix, 68 
takes Hulwto, ix, 68 ^ | 

Hishimf, a descendant of Hishitn 
the great gthiidfather of 
Muhammad, i, *5 J 

HisMmite^sMulhamxhadi ox ' 
and 'note _ ' , y. a ' 

HMiisft, inurd^ret ' 

Codothanus, vl, 

Hatra (Al Hadr)„; " 

s$q, '' ' ' iVii ■ '* ' '''' ■ 

hdeomnt.of, yi'«, 3*'^ ; ' 
'bhsfege?d, 'vi, 3 * 4 ! 

.fill of, ,Mgbsl 4 , 6 f,(yl; 31*4 ■ 


INDEX 277 

I iatra, king of, vi, 32 ^ 

Hang, his Ihoory <d the otigsn ot 
Zoioastrianihin, n, 8 
Haiiz, tank or pool, h 203 and 
wn/r, Vii, 50 and nulc 
Hawk, hawks, domestication of, 
by Tahnu'iras, i, 126 
two white, Kai Kuliad's 
dream of, i, 3*^5 
Hawking. See halconiy. 

Hay, sack f)f, i 3 ahrdm Chubina 
and the, viii, 109 
Hazdr, HayAran, Tdranian hero, 
V, 2.{, 56, 59 

Hayara, fatluir of KiH, vtn, 291 
l lecalaeus, Crec‘k liistorian (bth- 
5th centuries H.C.), vi, 13 
Jlelenopolis, city in Bithynia, vi, 
6I _ 

Hcraclius, Eastern Roman Em- 
peror (A.L). 6x0-642), V, 
30O noie; viii, 187, ipt 1 

ix, 5 . 7 ... 

attempts of, for peace with 
Khusrau imrwlz, viii, 194. 

, ... 

takes JDastagird, vin, 194 
retreat of, viii, X 95 . 

Shirwf's letter to, ix, 7 
alliance of, with Shahtbaraz, 

ix, 43, 44 

Hermit, khusrau Parwfz and the 
17a, viii, 254 

Herodotus, Greek historian (B.C. 

484-425). 9 ; hi 

vi, 13, Id, 68, 72, 73 I 
193 

legend of Cyrus the Great m, 
ii, 190 I vi, 195 , , 

Heroes, chief, of mixed descent, 

: i 55 

, , , Vale, of, vii, 6 
■ l^esperideSi Garden ^ of - the, ; vr, 

b '74 , ' ' "I ' , h 

' ''1 Htes-Pplis* ' Arayiih-i-Rdm. 

' o 'iGrhm^d, vi,- 543; , ' ; 

- : / ^ Shipdps rethtn,'';vi, 

pf, the 


278 GENERAL INDEX 


Hijaz, north-western Arabia, 
viii, 24 and note, 06, 67 
Idilal, Arab, ix, O9 

slayer ot Rustam son of 
Farrukh-Hurmuzd, ix, 70 
Himalaya (Hmiavat), mountain- 
range dividing India from 
Thibet, vi, 74, 81 
Himavat. Sjc above, 

Himyar-— Hhmdvarhn (Yaman), 
ii, 79 

Hind, Hindhstiii, i4y, 

X65, i6g, i, 231, 261 ; ii, 
92, 228, 287, 289 ; hi, 30, 
152, 164, 165, 177, 204, 
221, 222, 235, 237, 238, 
242 ; iv, 14, 60, 65, 133, 
19b, 208, 272, 317, 320 ; 
V, 76, r88, 257, 262, 263, 
277; vi, 80, 81, 91, 98 
and passim 

land of sorcerers, i, 163 
Mai of, i, 232 

king of (Slxangul) temp, Kai 
Khusrau, iii, 162, 210, 
2t8, 25X 

i&wip. Bahrhm. Gdr, vii, 
113,119,126,128 
temp. Nhshfrwhn, viii, 32 
lord of=sShangu.l, hi, 187 
man of=:Shangul, iii, 216 
prince of, iv, 71 
lord ofsssMahmhd, iv, 142 
monarch of, iv, 319, 321 
kings of, send tiibute to 
GnshtAsp, iv, 75 
ambassadors from, come 
to Dir 4 b, vi, 21 
D 4 rd, vi, 33 

ruler of«:Fdr, vi, 51 
Sikandar invades, vi, 98 
silk of, vi, 99 
king ofasKaid, vi, 103 
Sikandar becomes king of, 
vi, 1 18 

people of, help the Sindians 
against Sikandar, vi, 175 
SaeMik 

Bahrim Ghr*s visit to, vii, 

< ,5> fio 

motive of,, ^Vii, 5 


j TTind, Tlahrani Ciiir s visit to, 

! fabulous, vii, 6 

king of, entertained by 
Bahrain Giir, vii, 140 
seq. 

Niishfrwan goes to, vii, 241 
Hindiyh (Amid a ^), city in 
Roman Armenia, vii, 200 
taken by Kubad, vii, 200 
Hindu Kush, mountain-range in 
Afghhnisthn, ii, 80 
Hindustani, vii, 6 

Gipsy language a debased 
form of, vii, 6 

Hiong-Nu, probably the Huns, v, 

13 

Hlra, city west of the Euphrates 
near Mashad 'AH (Nedjef), 
vi, 372; vii, 217; viii, 
188, 191 ; ix, 5, 66 
seat of the dynasty of A1 
Munzir, 1, 55 
kingdom of, ix, 65 
abolished by Klmsrau 
Parwi'z, ix, 66 

attacked by Persians, ix, 67 
Hir 4 (Jebel Nhr), mountain 
north of Mecca, viii, 42 
Hfrbad, keeper of the women's 
house of Kai Kdds, ii, 202, 
206 

Hfrmund (Helmund), river in 
Sfsthn in eastern Irdn, i, 
358; 359; iii, 3^1 ; V, 178, 
182, 186, I9 i,,i96, 219, 
285 

referred to, v, 198, 231 
Hishdm ibn Muhammad ibn 
Al-Kalbf, Arabic historian 
(Sth-gth centuries A.D,), 
vi, 30 ; viii, 73 

Hfshwf, Rhman toll-collector, 
iv, 334 seq. 

interview of, with Gushtdsp, 
iv, 324 

becomes friends with Cush- 
tdsp, iv, 332 

, asks Gushthsp, on behalf of 
' _ 'Mfrfn, to undertake ' the 

. , adventure of the wolf 'of 
: PAskiin, iv, 335 ' 


GENERAL 

Hisbwi, goes with (iushtasp and ^ 
^•viirin to the torcst of ; 
Fa/ikiui, iv, 337 ^ j 

Miriu and, welcome Gush- | 
tasp on liis return, iv, 330 ; 
asks Gushtisp, on behalf of ; 
Ahran, to uncieriake the 
adventure f>f the dragon 1 
of Mount Saldla, iv, 344 ' 

goes with (3ushtasp and 1 
Ahran to Mount Sakfla, | 

iv, 34d t ' 

Ahran and, welcome Gush- : 

tisp on his return, iv, 337 
receives gifts from Gush- 
thsp, iv, 34<^ 

confirms Gushtdsp’s claim 
to have slain the wolf and 
dragon, and produces 
their teeth to Cjesar, iv, 

351 

Hittite, HitUics, vi, 71 
empire, vi, 7 t 

Miuen Tsiaiig, Chinese traveller 
(AJ). 6 o 3”66B), vi, 63 
(pioted, vi, 63, 73 

Hoibaras, IkTsiaii slave, temp. 
Astyages, vi, i<)5 

Hold, The JJraxen. See Brazen 
Hold. 

Holy Ghost, the, vi, 13B and note 

Holy Questions, Mountain of the, 
i, 62 

Homa (Soma)* a plant held 
sacred by the Zoroas- 
trians, i, S and noto^ ii, 8 
juice of, ii, 8 
referred to, iv, r.38 

Homer, vi, ^3, 7^ ^ ' 

epic method 'ot contr^ted 
with Firdausi's, : i ‘ 47 
quoted, vh 66, 73,’ '' ' ’ ■ 

JformisdM ,!• 

of Stiipiir, 

Mormisdas II. ' 

'of Ntof, , ' y'' ' ' , '■ \ . 

Howdsd^' 


INDEX 279 

llurmisclaH, Roes with Julian 

to the Easi, vi, 3*15 

Horoscope, i, 15- , . 

of tin* sons of Eariduu, 1, iBo 
Zal, i. 251, 278 
Rustam, i, 278, 307 
Siyfiwush, ii, 196, 205, 234 
Mfrfn, iv, 334 
Fhaghdd, v, 2G4 
Ardawhn, vi, 218 
]3ahrim Giir, vi. 376 ^ 

Yazdagird son of Shdpur, 
vi, 39® 

Shirwi, vi’i. 372; ix, 16, 17 
Horse, of Persian royalty, how 
distinguished, ii, 4^^ 
(Jushtisp's black. See 

Black horse. 

(steed, knight), piece m 
chess, vii, 285, 423 
position of, vii, 422 

move of, vii, 422 
Hourf, maid of Paradise, i, 272 » 
ix, Bx 

House of Darkness, ix, 7 
Crystal, ix, 25 mid note 
Houses, the Twelve, of the sky, 
i, 103, 186 

good inhuonce of, i, 52 
Hrazdin, river in Armenia, v, 13 
Hitlwin (Arash), town, vii, 187, 
201 

situation of, vii* 187 ^ 

Yazdagird retires to, ix, 67 
taken by Ei^him, ix, 68 
Hiim (ITaoma, f. ??.),. hermit, 'X 5 S* 
iv, 135 ^59 , 

' hears ^’Afrislydb lamenting 
in "the (?ave,rv, 260 ^ 

eapturb of Afrd^y^b by, iv, 

' ' ' , ,, , ' , ' .i 

Earihip^otet dtt, it* 

' .pitiO' andi'Unbinda Mrasi- 

■G' .yib,dv, abd ' ■ 

, 1 'Mteni^te ' t^rth 

GMatz;^ 

' - 36d", ' V ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Hum, recaptures AXrasiyab, iv, 
266 

Hurna. See below. 

Humai (Huma), daughter, of 
Giishtasp, ii, 3 ; v, 12, 
25 

marriage of, with Asfandi- 
ydr, V, 22, 74 
ignored by Firdausi, v, 22 
offered in marriage to the 
avenger of Zarir, v, 64 
taken captive by the Turk- 
mans, V, 93, TOO 
goes with Bill Afrid to draw 
water and meets Astandi- 
ydr, V, 147 

escapes from Arjdsp's pal- 
ace, V, 153 

bewails Asfandiy^r, v, 252 
reproaches Gushtdsp, v, 254 
Hum 4 i (Chihrzdd, q.v.), daughter 
and wife of Bah man, and 
mother of D 4 r 4 b, Sh 4 h, 
A 57 . ^ 5 ^^ ih 3; 9, 10 ; v, 
281, 290 seq. ; vi, 20, 22, 
199 

married to Bahman, v, 290 
Bahman appoints, and her 
issue, to succeed him, v, 
291 

Semiramis (?), v 293 
genealogies of, v, 293 
Feign of. x^S, v, 292 seq. 

Note on, V, 292 seq, 
accession of, v, 294 
Birdb born of, v, 294 
referred to, v, 296 
hears of Rhman invasion 
and bids Eashnawid lead 
forth the host, v, 301 
reviews the host, v, 302 
affected on seeing D4rdb, v, 
302 

hears from Rashnawid 
about ,I) 4 r 4 b, v, 308 
recog'nises that Birdb is her 
son, v, 30S . ' , 

thanksgiving Igrgess of, v; 
309' '' , , 

Rashnawid’ahcl^BArib ap- > 

, ^ ^ 'jpe:ar , before, v, "309 I' 


Humai, crowns, and excuses her- 
sell to, Da rub, v, 330 
proclaims Darab, v, 31 i 
Humai, franian chiel,^ temp, 
Jiahram GOr, vii, 88 
goes as envoy to the Klidn, 
vii, 87 

Humdn, son of Wisa and broilici 
of Pirdn, Turffnian hero, 
X44, 148, I4g, 15J, (j2; 

ii, 129, 130, 132, 148, 150, 
264, 390 ; iii, 90, 91, 93, 
108, 120 seq., T33 seq., 

142, 149, 152, 153, 158^ 

166, 169, 177, 182, X92, 

202, 205, 210, 217, 227, 

232, 234, 252, 250, 350; 

IV, 7, 8, 10, 29 seq, 44, 
55 f 5b, 61, 75, 70, 91, 1 18, 
152 

B 4 rmdn and, join Suhrdb 
with troops, ii, 129 
Afrdsiydb’s instructions to, 
ii, 129 

misleads Siihr 4 b as to Rus- 
tam, ii, 165, 169 
reproaches Suhr 4 b for spar- 
ing Rustam, ii, 171 
throws the blame for Suh- 
r 4 b's death on Hajir, ii. 
176 

withdraws from frdn under 
safe conduct, ii, 176, 181, 
182, 184 

rescues Afrdsiydb from Rus- 
tam, ii, 354, 355 
persuades Afrdsiydb to 
abandon the pursuit of 
Kai Khusrau, ii, 394 
parleys with Tffs, iii, X2i 
leads the host against Tus, 
iii, 127 

counsels Hrdn, iii, 134 
pursuoss the Iranians to 
Mount Hamdwan, iii, 135 
1 allies the Tffrdnians, iii, 

139 

reconnoitres the Irduians, 

iii,’ 174 

informs Pfrin of the arrival 
of Rustam, iii, A 74 


GENERAL INDEX 


281 


jlumaii, X)arleys disgiiisctl vvitli i 
Kusiaii', iii, Kjb 
craninands liic centre, iv, 25 j 
dissuEuied from fighting by ! 

bir^D, iv, 30 ! 

parleys with Jh'zhan, iv, 45 , 
armour of, donned by Bi- | 
zlian, iv, 51 

Turanians’ grief at death of, | 
iv, 51 

Huns, the, i, to ; v, 13 ; vi, 15 ; 
vii, 153 

settlement of, at Samar- 
kand, i, 19 
White, h^'tfllaital. 

Hur, father of Bihrfiz, vii, 72 

Hunnuz (Uimuzd), Ashkdniaii 
king, vi, 197 

Ilunnuz (Ormus), city and island , 
on the south-eastern shore 
of the Persian tlulf, vi, 

» 204 

Hurnuiz (ilormLsdas Hi), Shdh, 
j66, vii, 153, 186 
appointed by Yaztiagird to 
succeed him, vii, 155 
Keign of, vii, 156 
Note on, vii, 156 
defeated by Pirfiz, vii, 157 
pai’doned by Pfrfiz, vii, 156, 

leads the van in the war 
■with the Turkmans (Hai- 
tdlians), vii, 164 
perishes in battle, vii, 168 

Hurmuz, minister of Bahrto 
Gfir, vii, 26 

Ilunnuzd (Hormisdas IV), son 
of NtisWrw^n* Shih, x6g- 
Xf2, vii, 279 ; viii, 56 
SBq., 6g 74 sbcj,, 76* 
87, 147, . 169, 170,, 174, 
198, 209, 2I2> 2%% 222>, 

232, 2^3, ,270^ 304, 322. ' 

338 . 353 . , 

15, X04 

son of tlw , ■ 

vii, 3.^7. ; ' '' 

Sent against 'ti>« 'tnt&s/'iiili / 

' '' 3 l' 7 ' ,■ 7 'dv' 

- if. 


Inimuzd (Shah), coiiuselled by 
NushirwaTj, viii, 25 seg. 
Nfishowfin’s teslnment in 
fervour oi, and last coun- 
sels to, viii, 61 seq. 

Keign of, 170, viii, 70 
Note on, viii, 70 
character of, viii, 70 
system of administiaticu of, 
viii, 71 

justice of, viii, 71 

instances of, viii, 90 seq, 
scribes executed by, viii, 71 
insult of, to Bahiam Chu- 
bfna, viii, 76 

Lazic war renewed by, viii, 
76 

Bahrdm Chfibfna’s gift of 
swords to, viii, 76 
accession of, viii, 78 
turns to evil courses, viii, 
81 

puts to death IzkI Gas- 
hasp, viii, 83 

poisons Zarduhsht, viii, 83 
seq. 

schemes against and puts 
to death Sfmdh Parzfn, 
viii, 85 seq. 

attempts to suborn Bahrdm 
Azarmih^n, viii, 85 seq.^ 
gives audience, viii, 86 
hears state-secret from Bah- 
rdm Azarmih^n, viii, 88 
puts to death Bahr 4 m Azar- 
mihin, viii, 89 
repehtanee of, viii, 90^ 93. 
places of residence of, viii, 
90 

' vsfars of, viii^ ^92 
attacked by S 4 wa, viii, 92 
Sdiya’S'ldtter'td, viii, 93. 
attabked 'by^ Ga^ar^ viii, .93 
.. , viii, ' 9 $ , ' .. 

' Arabs, ' yiii, 63 - ' ' 

„ ' ' , cpUisaft^ thd, Iranians, vi'E, 
/I /' i ^4'"''" ' ,, ; ‘‘i ! - ' , ' 

by hie wazfr, vih, 

; \ b- 94 -'Y , 7 ' 

' ' 'rpakda bwa vifh Caesar* 
;'v' - ' 


282 GENERAL INDEX 


Hiirmiizd (Shah), attacks and de- 
feats the Khazars, viii, 95 
sends for Mihran Sitad, 
viii, 97 

hears prophecy about Bah- 
rain Chubma, viii, 98 
orders search to be made for 
Bahrim Chubina, viii, 99 
discovers and sends for 
Bahram Chhbfna, viii, 100 
consults Bahrdm Chiibina, 
viii, 100 

gives chief command to 
Bahrim Chhbina, viii, 102 
questions Bahito Chhbfna, 
viii, 103 

gives Rustam *s banner to 
Bahram Chhbfna, viii, 105 
sends Mihran with Bahrdm 
Chhbfna, viii, 106 
intelligencer after Bahrirn 
Chiibfna, viii, 107 
to recall Bahrain Chhbma, 
viii, 108 

Kharrdd, son of Barzxn, 
as envoy to S 4 wa, viii, 
no 

hoars of Bahrdm Chhbfna's 
victory, viii, 132 
makes thanksgiving, viii, 132 
rewards Bahrim Cbiibina 
and the troops, viii, 133 
surveys spoils sent by Bah- 
rdm Chhbinh, viii, 130 
grows suspicious of Bahram 
Chhbfna, viii, 151 
* dismisses the Kh 4 n with 
gifts, viii, 152 

hears from Kharrdd of Bah- 
rim Chiibina*s disaffec- 
tion, viii, 160 

consults with' high priest, 
t^hi, 1 61 

, , Ayitt Gashasp, vih, 3; 74, 

m ' ' . 

plans , to I' make away with 
^Khhsrau 3 ?arwiz^ viii, 174 
hoars' ' of ' Khustau ) J^arwiz' 
hi|ht„ yii£,;',i 76 , ' 

, iihprispw Batt'dwf,;and GuSv. 
' taha‘|h,, viii, ■ 


Hurmuzd (Shah), hears of the 
murder of Ayin Gashasp, 
viii, 1 82 

dethroned and blinded, viii, 
1S3, 200 

visited in prison by Khusrau 
Parwiz, viii, 185, 198, 230 
requests of, to Khusrau Par- 
wfz, viii, 199 
referred to, viii, 21 1 
counsels Khusrau Parwiz, 
viii, 230 

murdered, viii, 232 
Hurmuzd Garabzin or Galabzin 
(Kharrdd son of Barzin 
q.v.), viii, 190 
Hurmuzd, priest, vii, 1 88 

assists Nushirwan in his 
disputation with Mazdak, 
vii, 188, 206 

Hurmuzd, frdnian general, vii, 
251 

commands the outposts in 
Nhshirwdn’s army, vii, 251 
Hurmuzd (Hurmuzdshdh, Far- 
rukh-Hurmuzd q-V.)^ 
father of Rustam, ix, 72, 
78, 85, 89, 96 

Hurmuzd Shahr^ngurdz (Shah- 
rdngurdz q.v.), ix, 54 
Hurmuzd, devotee, ix, 102 

pleads with Mdhwi for Yaz- 
dagird, ix, 102 
Hurmuzdagin, vi, 193, 199 

battle of, vi, 193, 199, 202, 
256 

Husain, friend of Firdausi, ix, 
121 

Hiishang, son of Siy 4 mak, min- 
ister of Gaihmaxt, and 
Sh 4 h, XS9, X40, i, 42, 90, 
91, iz6; ii, 204 ; iv, 133, 

' 286, 292, 302 ; V, 180, 
245; vii, 37, 273; viii, 
376 ; ix, 25, 41 
Firdausi’s etymology of, i, 

’ 121 , I ' , 
goes with Gaiiitnart'.to fight 
theBIaok'X)|v.'i,.x2i ' 

, 'slays fhe Black Biy, i, lai 


GENERAL INDEX 


Husliang, Reign of, Note on, i, 

succeeclb Gaiuniart, i, 122 
cultui'c hero, i, 123 
discovers ike, i, 123 
institutes Fire-worship, i,i 23 
founds the Feast of Sada, i, 
1 24 

domesticates animals, i, 124 
dies, i, 124 

Firdausi's reflections on, i, 
_ 124 

rites of, vii, 53 
Faith of, viii, 380 

Hiishdi'v, Thrdnian hero, v, 46 
put in charge of the rear, v, 
46 

Hiishyir, astrologer, vi 372, 375 
takes Bahr 4 m Gkr's horo- 
scope vi, 176 

fliishravah (Kai Khusrau, q.v.), 
iv, 137, X3S 

Hutaosa, wife of Gushtisp, v, ii 
==:Atossa (?), V, II 

Hvy a^omis {Khyoiis, Chionxtae ?), 
people, V, 13 

Hyapates, son of Semiramis, v, 
292 

Hydaspes, id, 

Hydaspes (Jhilam), river in the 
Punjhb, vi, 18, 31, 62, 63 

Hydraotes (llAvi), river in the 
Pimjdb, vi, 64 

Hyperboreans, the, vi, 74 
Klysium of, vi, 74 
Hyphasis (JBeas), river in the 
Punjhb, vi, 64 

Hyrcania (Gurgin, q,vL ii, 27 ; 
xii, 10 ; vi, 373 
Gfv, piince of, hi, 9 

Hystaspes (Gnshtisp, ^4;.), iv, 
314 $eq, 

Hystaspes, father of Darius I, v, 
10 

governor of iWthia, v,. to 

I 

IblIs, the Muhaaunadan Devil, 
X40, X4S, iv, Z06, zBz ; V, 
174, 218 , 


283 

ihlfs, occasional substitution oh 
for Ahriman in the vShah- 
iiama, i, 50, 70 ; ii, 82, no 
tempts Zahhak, i, 136 seq, 
turns cook, i, 137 seq. 
causes serpents to grow out 
of Zahhdk's shoulders, i, 
^39 

counsels, garbed as a leech, 
Zahhhk, i, 139 

Ibn Mu kata', Persian scholar 
and Arabic writer, vi, 373 ; 
vii, 161 

xiccount of, vi, 17 
translator of the Bistdn- 
nhma into Arabic, vi, 17 
Fables of Bidpai (the 
Book of Kahla and 
Dimna) into Arabic, 
vii, 383 

Ibrahim, Abraham the i>at- 
riarch, vi, 119, 120 
house of —the Kaaha, vi, 119 
Ichthyophagi, vi, 81 

Sikanclar and, vi, 69, 147 
Arrian on, vi, 69 
modem accounts of, vi, 70 
city of, described, vi, 177 
go to meet, and are visited 
by, Sikandar, vi, 17^8 
hand over the treasures of 
Kai Khxxsrau to Sikandar, 
vi, 178 

Id-i-Kutdf, Feast of, i, 143 
Tghriras (Aghtadratha, Aghrd- 
Aghriras), brother of 
Afrisiydh and TdrAnian 
hero, X42, i, 92,, 337, 342 
seq,'; ii, iS, 20, 303, 304 ; 
iii, 8 ; iv, 136, 206, 262 
characterised, i, 55, 338 
opposes war with Irln, i, 

343 

Bdrmin's single combat, 
h 347 ' 

over-ruled by Pashang, i, 

344 

Afrdsiydb, i, 347 
; frdhistn ^ captives , saved by, 

'K$% . 

■released by, i, 365 


284 GENERAL 

Ighrxras, upbraided and slain by 
Alrasiyab, i, 367 
Pashang’s griel for, i, 37 ^ 
revival of, m legend, iv, 135 
given a command, iv 156 
head of, sent by Kai Khus- 
ran to Kai Kahs, iv, 185 
referred to, iv, 267 
Ijds bin Kabisa, viii, 188 

governor of Hira, viii, igo 
lih, Turanian king, iv, 182 

hghts with Kai Khusrau, iv, 
182 

Ilyhs, ruler of Khazar q,v., 154, 
iv, 361 

tribute demanded of, by 
Caesar, iv, 352 
refuses tribute and declares 
■war, iv, 352 

makes overtui-es to Gush- 
tdsp, iv, 35^ 

corpse of, brought by Gush- 
tdsp to Czesai, iv, 355 
Imagery, of Shdhn^ma. See 
Slxhhndma. 

Imaus, Greek form of Himalaya 
q,v,, vi, 12 

Indniau, Tn^nians, Arab tribe, 
vi, 3'^4. 330, 33b 333 
Ind. See Hind. 

India, iv, 316 ; vi, 17, 64, Si, 83, 
204 

fr^nians and Aryans of, i, 15 
Palladius on, vi, 61 
Ancient, M’Crindle's, quoted, 
vi, 68 

« Ethiopia, vi, 68 
Indian, Indians, 17^, vi, 81, 375, 
397; vii, 135, 146; viii, 

377 

= Ethiopians, vi, 13, 68 
sages, vi, 61, 83, 91 seq,, 143 
seq., 266 

bells and gongs, vi, 175 ; 

viii, 46, 120 
bane, vi, 259 

king ofps^hangul, vii, 118 
tongne, 'vii, x 17, 3:43 
' sword, iakhi on, scini'itar,viii, 

■ 127, i43, 4?f7;' ^ i'7‘ 

/ ' ;&a|:den of ' the, ^ viii, X96 


INDEX 

Indian, Indiams, Pailh of, 172, 
viii, 275 
set ip t, ix, 17 
scribe, ix, 17 

Indies, Greek idea ol two, vi, 13 
duplicate races in, vi, 68 

Indo-European race, i, 7 
Asiatic branch ol, 1, 7 
Aryans, i, 7 
early seats of, i, 7 
religion of, i, 7 

Indra, Indian god, ii, 25 ; vi, 203 
Viitra and, ii, 25 ; vi, 203 

Indus, river, i, 71, 252 ; ii, 21 ; 
hi, 177, 204, 237, 251 : v, 
293 1 vi, 62, 67, 70 ; vii, 
241 

mistaken for the Nile, vi, 68 

Introduction, to Shhhnama, i, 3 
seq. 

lollas, Alexander the Great’s cup- 
hearer, vi, 82 

Iraj, youngest son of Farid lin 
q,v. and the protagonist 
of the frdnian race, 140, i, 
54 1 90, 91, 21 1 ; ii, 8, 16, 
19, 20, 237, 297, 302 ; hi, 8; 
iv, 146 ; V, 42, 44, 261 ; 
vi, 353 J vii, 73 ; viii, 266, 
376 and note, 392 ; ix, 103 
etymology of, i, 174 
naming of, i, 188 
horoscope of, i, 188 
receives frdn and Arabia as 
his portion, i, 189 
abdication of, demanded by 
Salm and Tiir, i, 192 
offers to go to his brothers, 
i, 196 

visits Salm and Thr, i, 198 
reception of, by Salm and 
Thr, i, 198 

offers to resign his kingship 
to his brothers, i, 200 
slain by Thr and Salm, i, 

201 

head of, sent to Farfdhn, i, 

202 

mourning for, i» 293' seq., , 
daughter ' oh h »h 3 
' ^ ^ inartioh ^ i, 205 


GENERAL 

fraj, daugliter of, gives birth to 
Miiiiichihr, i, 206 
vengeance for, 1, 215 seq. 
referred to, i, 335, 349 
fraj, king of Kabul, iv, 146 
'Irak, ix, 66 

=;’frik 'Arabf (Babylonia), 
vii, 214, 224 

Irani, gardens of, i, 100, 113; 

h, 78 ; vii, 235 and 
note 

trkn, 142-144, 146,148, 150,152- I 
155, 157, J’5'5, l(> 3 , I 

163, x6y, ij2, 173, 175, ; 
17^, i. 3. 1 13. 152. 153 
and passim 
boundaries of, i, 3 
physical features of, i, 3 
gradual desiccation of, i, 3 
and see Brought, 
climate of, i, 4 
flora of, i, 4 
fauna of, i, 5 
land of contrasts, i, 5, 58, 

60 

cosmogony of, i, 5 
peophj of, i, 6 
-vej, region, i, 9 
situation of, i, 9 
Zoroaster’s (Zarduhsht’s) 
birth-place, i, 62 
Arab conquest of, i, 12 
Arabia and, fraj’s portion, 

i, 189 

-Shahr, ii, 81 

fouglxt for by Afrisiydb and 
tlic Arabs, ii, 92 
invaded by SuhrAb, ii, 130 
lord of=-=iMahmdd, iv,^ 142 
monarch ofa=sBArAb, vi, 21, 

26 

and ShAhnima compared, 

vi, 193 

invaded by Munzir and ■ 
Nu’mAn, vi, 397 
RAra’s tribute to explained, 

vii, 187 

IrAnian, frAnians, X44, 147-151, 

158* 163-167, 171* 

176, i, 9 mil passim 
neighbours of, i, 9 


INDEX 285 

Iranians, historical relations of, 
with Semites, i, 10 
Assyrians, i, xo 
Arabs, i, 1 1 ; vi, 1 7 ; ix, 
65 seq, 

Greeks and Romans, i, 14 
Aryans of India, i, 1 5 
TArAniaiis, i, 16 seq. 
Kimraerians, i, 17 
Scythians, i, 17 
Parthians, i, 18 
Alani, 1, 19 
Huns, i, 19 
Turks, i, 20 

traditional relations of, with 
other Indo - Europeans, 
Semites, and TurAnians, i, 
54 > 55* 56 

revolt against Jamslifd and 
summon ZahhAk to IrAn, 
i, 139 

chiefs of, imprisoned at 
San, i, 363 

plot for release with Igh- 
riras, i, 363 
inform ZAl, i, 366 
released by KishwAd, i, 
367 

provided for by ZAl, i, 
367 

bewail Naudar, i, 3^4 
wish to withdraw from the 
Seven Stages, v, 135 
encouraged to persevere by 
AsfandiyAr, v, 136 
provoked to combat by 
ZawAra, v, 225 
Sikandar’s proclamation to, 
vi, 44 

bewail themselves, vi, 48 
counsel DArA to come to 
terms with Sikandar, vi, 

4S ... 

ask quarter of Sikandar, vi, 

51 

hail Sikandar as ruler, vi, 56 
after Yazdagird son of 
ShApAr’s death meet for 
counsel in Firs, vi, 394 
Jawanwf sent by, to Mun- 
ziXf vi, 397 ' 


286 GENERAL 

Irinians, offer prayer at the Fire- i 
fane of Barzin, vi, 400 
loyal, support Bahram Giir, 
vi, 403 

procedure of, to elect a 
Sh 4 h, vi, 403 

decide to reject Bahram 
Gffr, vi, 403 

remonstrated with by Mun- 
zir, vi» 403 

object-lesson of, to Munzir, 
vi, 404 

accept Bahram G fir’s pro- 
j30sal for settling the 
question of kingship by 
ordeal, vi, 406 
ask Munzir to intercede 
with Bahrdm G hr for 
them, vii, 9 

arrears of taxes of, can- 
celled, vii, II 

levied by Bahrhm Gur, vii, 
86 

resolve to submit to the 
Khhn, vii, 87 

send Humdi as envoy to the 
Khhn, vii, 87 

letter of, to the Kh 4 n, vii, 87 
ask for Narsi’s good offices 
•with Bahxhm Ghr, vii, 93 
lament for the death of 
PMz, vii, 169 
revolt against Kubhd, vii, 
^95 

put Kubhd m fetters, vn, 
3C95 

ask pardon of Kubdd, vu, 
200 

pardoned by Kubdd, vii, 200 
take Sakfla, viii, 47 
chiefs received in audience 
by Hurmuzd, viii, 86 
consulted by Hurmuzd, viii, 
^4 

defeat the Khazars, viii, 96 
advise Balirhm Chhbfna, 
viii, 102, fzi, 239 ^^7 

Shjifa ' employs sorcery 
viii, i<!^3 

encouraged ' by 1, .Bahrhtn ^ 
Chhbma,'; ’ 


INDEX 

franian, frdniaiis, defeat the 
Turks, viii, 126 
revolt against Hurmuzd, 

viii, 156 

elect Bahram Chhbiiia 
Shhh, viii, 243 
homage Shirwi, ix, 8 
choose two chiefs to visit 
Khusrau Parwiz in prison, 

ix, 9 

plot against Gurdz, ix, 54 
go hunting with Gurdz, ix, 
55 

race, ix, 65 

enmity of, with Semite, 
i, 54 ; ix, 65 

announces arrival of Shu’ba 
Mughlra to Rustam, ix, 82 
defeat of, at Kddisfya, ix, 84 
retreat to Yazdagird, ix, 85 
-born, ix, 99 

defeat of, at Marv, ix, 116 
ambushed, ix, 118 
Irmd’fl and Karmd'll, Zahhdk’s 
cooks, 140, i, 146 
Irmdn, (Arman q.v.), i, 345 . 35 ^ I 
lii, 12, 285, 292, 296, 
311 

devastated by wild boars, 
iii, 290 

Irmdnians (Armenians q.v.), i$o, 
iii, 286 

complain to Kai Khusrau 
of the wild boars, iii, 290 
Iron steeds, Sikandar's, vi, 115 
fsh (Jesus), viii, 276 note 
Isdigird I (Yazdagird son of 
Shdpdr), Sdsinian king, 
vi, 371 

Isdigird U .(Yazdagird son of 
Bahrdm Gdr), Sdshnian 
king, vii, 153 
Tshmael, vi, 65, 120, 121 
Iskandar, Se& Sikandht* 
Iskandar, herb, vi, 26 ^ 
Iskandarfya (Alexandria) ^ x6o, 

' , ' t-i, X‘85 

Sikandnr buppd at, ,vi* 1S5 
Island, the'wwMerpe, 'vi, , • - 

Mahds, Male,and';Fh 3 nal^. yi^ 7 ^ 
I ■' , oHdh' ofdegend 'bf, - vi, 72 ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Isma'fL See fshmaal. 

!)rothcr of Sultan Malt- 
mild, i, 21: 

Isnapwf. See fspainvl. 

Ispab^m, city in 'Irak-i-*Ajami, 

i-f6, i, 351 ; ii, 304, 399; 

iii, io«) ; vi, 57, ^6, 87, 
199, 201, 202, 210 ; vii, 
b, 84, 214, 224; vHi, 00 
given to Giidarz, ii, 78 ; iv, 
129 

arrival of Kai Khusrati at, 

ii, 39f> 

bestowed on Cifv by Kai 
Khxisrau, iv, 298 
Ispanwf, slave-girl of Tazbdv, 

iii, 14; 27, 77 

tak<m captive by Bfzban, 
iii, 78 

IspuriSz, mountain in tbe neigh- 
bourhood of Mdzaa- 
dardn, ii, 38, 56, 57, iv, 
13^. 230 

Israffl, archangel, i6o> vi, 78 
Sikandar’s interview with, 
vi, 83, 161 

Issedones, tribe situated on the 
Taritn basin in eastern 
Turkistin, iii, 192 
Issue, towUi plain, and gulf in 
Cilicia, vi, 30 
battle of, vi, 30, 31; 

Bdrius' family taken pris- 
oners at, vi, 31 
Istakhr (Persopolis), city in P4rs, 
142, 165, ii, II, 22, 28, 
339; vi, 57, 198, 199* 
202, 211, 223, 225, 231, 
326, 356, 386; vii, 83, 
95, 188; viii, 90, 313; 
ix, 50, 34 

buildings at, attributed to 
HumM, V, 293 
JDiri marches from, to en- 
counter Sikandar, vi, 37, 
46 

tidurns to, vi, 44 
Sikandar crowned Shih, at, 

■^^>59 ' : ; 

taken by ArdsMr Pdpakin, 
vi, 227 , • ' '' ' 


287 

i fstakhr, Arcishfr Fapakan 
iTjarcb(‘s from, against the 
Kurds, VI, 230 
returns victorious to, vl, 
232 

Yazdagird taken to, ix, 64 
; made Shiih at, ix, 65 

; Jstuvegii, See Astyages. 

I Italy, vii, 218 

; Alexander of Epirus* ex- 

pedition to, vi, 12 
I Alexander the Great's 

I legendary expedition to, 

i vi, 12, 30 

i fwdn-i-Kerkh, vi, 327 
; Izads (Yazatas), the, iii, 286 
tzid, viii, 75 

IzM Gashasp, archscribe, 270, 
viii, 74 

confusion in name of, viii, 
75; 7<> 

put to death by Hurmuzd, 
viii, 75, 83 

malicious speech of, viii, 77 
and note, 150 and note 
imprisoned, viii, Bi 
sends for high priest, viii, 81 
Izid Gashasp, irdnian warrior, 
viii, 103, 122, 136, 138, 
I49> 350, 353. 356 
condhets spoil to Irdn, viii, 
148 

; goes hunting with Bahrim 
' Chdbfna, viii, 156 
speech of, vih, 165 

J 

Jabai^a bin S^LIM, viii, 73 
Jacob of Sardg, Syriac poet. 

' Syriac Christian Legend 
of Alexander tka Great 
versified by, vi, 15, 74, 78, ' 
84 ' ' , 

Jdddstdn, vi, log and noU 
Jagatai, mountain-range in 
Khurdste, v* 29 

; Jahn, son , of , Afrisiyib, Tdrdn- , 

; ' _ 'ian he^o, xya, i, 92': ii, 

, ^ &64, ,-268^', iv, 136, 162, 


286 GENERAL 

Jalin, son of Afrasiyab, sent to 
guard Shida’s rear, iv, 155 
advances to the attack 
and IS defeated by Kdrin, 
iv, X78 

stationed at the centre with 
Afrdsiydb, iv, 179 
sent to the left with troops, 
iv, 180 

Garsfwaz and, compel Afrh- 
siyib to quit the held, iv, 
182 

commands the right, iv, 
190 

helps to defend Gang- 
bihisht, iv, 209 
taken prisoner by Rustam, 
iv, 210 

sent to Kai Kids, iv, 

233 

interned by Kai Kdds, iv, 

235 

spurious passage about, iv, 
272 noi& 

Jahn, architect of throne of 
Tdkhdfs, viii, 391 
Jahram (Chahram), x6i, 163, 
city in Pirs, vi, 44, Ii 9 » 
202, 225, 237, 241, 268, 
400 ; vii, 185 ; ix, 29, 0i 
Ddrd goes to, vi, 44 
desert of, vi, 401 
Jdj (? Chdch iv, 150 
Jaldlpdr, city in the northern 
Punjdb, vi, 18 

Jaldld, town north-east of Bagh- 
dM, i, 12, ix, 68 
battle of, i, 12, ix, 68 
Jam, son of Kubdd and brother 
of Kdshirwin, yii, 316 
conspires against Kdahfr- 
w£n, vii, 316 

Jdmdsp^ chief minister of Shdh 
Gushtdsp, 42 ; ii^ .9 > v, 

12, %i, 24 5S, 206, 

2x6, 24S ; viii, l^l, 393 J 

ixj “26 

omnisdepoe of, y, t 9 i 4^ ” 
'ans:^em, in copjunetioxi; x^ith ' 
Zatfr As!&diyir> Ar- . 


INDEX 

Jdmlsp, foretells the death in 
battle of Ardslhr, v, 49 
Shidasp, V, 50 
Giramf, v, 50 
exploits of Nastur, v, 50 
death of Nfvzdr, v, 51 
Zarir, v, 52, 70 note 
triumph of Asfandiydr, v, 

52 

defeat of Arjdsp, v, 52 
encourages Gushtdsp to 
fight, v, 54 
referred to, v, 59, 102 
dissuades Giishtdsp from 
avenging Zarir, v, 64, 68 
made archmage of Fire- 
tcmplo built by Gush- 
tdsp, V, 75 

sent to recall Asfandiydr to 
court, V, 80 seq. 
advises Gushidsp, when be- 
leaguered by Arjdsp, to 
release Asfandiydr, v, 97 
volunteers to go to Asfan- 
diydr, v, 97 

reaches Gumbaddn in dis- 
guise, v, 98 

interview of, with Asfan- 
diydr, v, 99 seq, 
sends for blacksmiths to 
unchain Asfandiydr,v, 10 1 
sets off with Asfandiydr, 
Bahman, and Ndsh Azar, 
V, 103 

foretells Asfandiydr's fate, 
V, 169 

reproached by Bishdtan, v, 
254 

advises Gushtisp to write 
to Bahman, v, 257 
writes by Gushtdsp's orders 
to recall Bahman, v, 258 
Gushtdsp tells his intention 
as to the succession to, v> 

279 , 

propfxecy of, vih, 68' 
additions of, to throne of 
Tdkhdis, viii,' 39'2 
Jdmdsp, son O'f, vi,' 3 

, ■ 'Shpersedes, J&bM temporar- 
^ ‘ •ily;''vii, “X'84, 1 95 -' - . 


GENERAL INDEX 289 


JanUsp, son of PIriiz, title of, 

vii, 186 

fate of, vii, 186, 200 
James, St., bishop of Edessa, i, 
374 

James V of Scotland, vii, 3 

Bahram Cut’s resemblance 
to, vii, 3 

Jamhfir, king of Hind, vii, 395, 
396, 398, 399, 401, 403 
Jamshfd, son of Tahmiiras, SMli 
and culture-hero, 140, 164, 
i, 42, 90, 91, ; ii, 4, 33, 

37, 168, 204, 358, 399; 
iih 7. 57. 257, 273; iv, 
63. 133, 149, 203, 206, 
272, 274, 290 ; V, 32, 34, 

38, 47, 180, 202, 215, 216, 
245, 271, 284 ; vi, 45 
and note, 172, 209; vii, 
3^scq,, 107, 162, 173, 21 1 ; 

viii, 22, 2^2, 269, 310, 

33^. 34B 387 ; 25, 39, 

103 

Reign of, 140, i, 129 seq, 
Note on, i, 129 seq, 
the Jrdnian Noah, i, 129 
meaning of, i, 130 
ascends the throne, i, 131 
greatness of, i, 13 1 
culture-hero, i, 132 
makes armour, i, 132 
raiment, i, 132 
institutes castes, i, 132 
great builder, i, 133 
introduces jewelry and per- 
fumes, i, 133 
leechcraft, i, 133 
ship-building, i, 133 
carried by the dfvs into the 
air, i, 133 

feast held in memorial ol„ i, 

134 

fall of, i, 130, 134, 139 
Iranians revolt against, i, 139 
flight and death of, i, 139 
sisters of, married to Zah- 
h^k, i, 146 

found by Farfd6n, 1410,, i, ' 

162 ' . M / ' ' 

, './..referred, ,to, ir, 304 / 


Jamshid, treasure of, found by 
Bahram Ghr, 164, vii, 36 
described, vii, 36 
Jandal, envoy of Farid do, 140, 
i, 177 

asks Sarv's daughters in 
marriage for Faridun’s 
sons, i, 178 

informs Faridhn of the out- 
come of his mission, i, 182 
Jandal, city in Flind, vii, 140 

monarch of, entertained by 
Bahrain Ghr, vii, 140 
seq, 

Jdnfuruz, Iranian general, viii, 

297 

Jamjisiydr, minister of Ddra, vi, 
52, 88 

mui'dors Ddrd, vi, 52 
informs Sikandar of Ddr^’s 
murder, vi, 52 
arrested by Sikandar, vi, 53 
executed, vi, 56, 88 
Jaranj^s, Ti'ir^nian hero, iv, 156 
Jarfra, daughter of Pirdn, wife 
of Siydwush, and mother 
of Fariicl, 247, i, 92 ; ii, 
3 ; iii. 43 

married to Siydwush, ii, 
268 seq. 

birth of her son Fardd, ii, 
291 

referred to, iii, 39 
advises Fardd, iii, 42 
dream of, hi, 63 
kills herself, iii, 66 
Jarman a, place, ix, 93 
Jasha, king, i, 67, 68 
Jdtakas, vh, 383 
Jats, people of north-western 
India, vii, 6 

fabulous origin of, vii, 6 
Jawdnwf, Iranian magnate, vi, 
373 ? vii, 8, 10 
^ goes as ambassador to Mun- 
, ' zir, ,.vi, '398 

interview of, with Mmuir, 

; . ' vi, 398 

, p . recoghisbs' the divine Grace 
' in ; /Giit, vi, 398 

■ ' . - /;' ; , 


290 GENERAL INDEX 


Jawanwi, suggests a course of 
action to Munzir, vi, 400 
returns to frdn, vi, 400 
bidden by Bahrdm Gdr to 
remit the arrears of taxes, 

vii, II 

Jaz (Gaz), town north-west of 
Ispahan, vi, 337 ; vii, 76, 
79, 80 

tribute of, remitted, vii. 82 
Jerusalem, v, 306 note, vi, 81 ; 

viii, igi, ig6 

Elevation of the True Cross 
at, ix, 43 

Jesus, i, 42 ; viii, igi ; ix, 10 
sayings of, viii, 276 and note 
Cross of, viii, 380 
laughter of, viii, 191, 380 
Jew, Jews, 16S, vi, 356 ; vii, 13, 
273 ; viii, 21, 67, 276 
Faith of, vi, 95 
Bahr4m Gdr’s adventure 
with a, vii, 16 seq. 
persecution of, vii, 153 
Zurdn's plot with a, against 
Mahbdd, vii, 320 seq. 
bewitches Nushfrwdn’s food, 
vii, 321 

makes confession to Ndshir- 
wdn, vii, 325 

Fables of Bidpai, vogue of 
largely due to, vii, 383 
Jewelled tree, Kai Khusrau’s, iii, 
329 

Jeweller, a, 164. See MihiyAr. 

daughter of, 164 
Jewels, discovery of, i, 133* 
Falace of, x6o 

Jhflam (Hydaspes), river in the 
Punjdb, vi, 18, 31, 63 
Jfhun (Oxus q.^*) river, 146, 152, 
i, 215, 219, 345, 373; ii, 
15, 19 seq,, 99, 229, 237,248, 

258. 311. 340- 390, 394. 

399. 4°4; iii. 58, 159; 

iv, xo, 12, 20, 33, 60, 79, 
153. 154. 15% 1S4, 

187, X94> 304 ; V, 12, 

29, 40, 45, 48, 203 ; vii, 

, ‘ 92, ' X'65," 180, , 329, 

,3.^05 ', 9 f:., 99. 


Ji'hun — cont. 

134. I74» 332 ; ix, 77, 115, 
118 

boundary between frdn and 
Tixrdn i, 71, 370, 371 
confused with the Aras, i, 

370 

fords of, viii, 331 
Jins, ix, 81 

Johari Das, Babu, quoted, vi, 81 
Joktan, VI, 65 

==!Kahtan, vi, 65 
Joshua, vi, 77 

Moses and, Muhammadan 
legend of, vi, 77 
Jovian (Bazdnush), Roman Em- 
peror (A.D. 363-4), vi, 
324 seq . ; viii, 41 
confused with Valerian, vi, 

324 

Judaism, vi, 327 
Judda, the port of Mecca, 159, 
vi, 121 

Sikandar arrives at, vi, 121 
Julian (Ydniis), Roman Em- 
peror (A.D. 361-363), i, 
12 ; vi, 325 

confused with Valerian, vi, 

324 

not an emperor in the Shdh- 
ndma, vi, 324, 326 
expedition of, against Per- 
sia, vi, 324 seq, 

Julius Valerius, early Latin 
translator of the Pseudo- 
Callisthenes, vi, 14, 61, 
66 seq., 71, 74, 78, 79, 
81 

Jund-i-Shdpdr (Gund-i-Shdpdr 
q,v.), city, vi, 256 
==;Rds-Shdpdr, vi, 256 
foundation of attributed to 
Ardshir Pdpakdn, vi, 266 
Jupiter, planet, i, 72, 161, 188, 
281 ; ii, , 115 iii, 3x8 ; 
iv, 143, '295 > V, 256;' vi, 
138, 172, 292; vii, '49;, 
248, 357 j ^ viii, 28,' 152, 

, X57i 395 ' ' ,1 

; Justin T, Eastern Roman, Em? 

' ’peror/ vii, -3x6“ ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


291 


Justin II, Eastern Roman Em- 
peror, vh, 212 ; viii, 41 
Justinian, Eastern Roman Em- 
peror, i, 16 ; vii, 212, 219, 
317; viii, 41 

silkworm introduced into 
the West during reign of, 

vi, 204 

bargains of, with Nushfrwan, 

vii, 214, 216 seq. 
protection of Hdrith bin 

Jabala by, leads to war 
with Nhshirwan, vii, 217 
successes of, in the West, 
vii, 217 

closes the schools of Athens, 
vii, 280 

Juyd, a div, ii, 71 

slain by Rustam, ii, 72 


K 

Kaaba, the, 159, vi, 65 
account of, vi, 65 
Sikandar's expedition to, 
vi, 67, 83, 1 19 

Kabdb, small pieces of meat 
skewered together for 
roasting, ii, 103 ; iii, 69 ; 
iv, X2I ; v, 152 ; viii, 250 
Kabisa, viii, 188 
Kabthn, king of Misr and the 
progenitor of the Copts, 
vi, 121 

welcomes Sikandar, vi, 121 
praises Kaiddfa to Sikandar, 
vi, 122 

Kabdda, 147, one of Afr4siyib’s 
herdsmen, iii, 73 
slain by Bahr4m, iii, 74 
Kabul, K4bulist4n (Afghanis- 
t4n), city and country, 
X41, J57, i, 57, 252, .264, 
268, 277, 282, 283, 28b, 
294, 298, 299 nok, $00, 
Zoz seq., 316, 357, 378; 
ii, 12, x8, 21, 92,. 228, 260, 
271, 341 ; iii, 17, 33, X45, 
133, Ids, .1:74,' x86, 190/ 
202, 20b, 32J-; 


Kabul — cont. 

146, 278, 283, 292; V, 
126, 170, 173, 224, 242, 
251, 260, 263 seq., 271, 
273 seq., 284, 287 ; vi, 
207 ; vii, 173 
Buddhism in, 1, 15 
superseded by Brahman- 
ism, i, 16 

dagger of, i, 219 ; vi, 320 
Z41 visits, i, 256 
Beauty of = R4d4ha, 1, 
262, 316 

monarch of==Mihr4b, i, 294, 

3(>5 

rejoicings at, over Z41’s 

successful embassy to 
Minfichihr, i, 314 
preparations at, to welcome 
Sam and Z41, 1, 315 
falchion of, i, 376 ; ix, 98 
Shagh4d sent to be brought 
up at, V, 2C4 

king of, J57, V, 264, 271 
daughter of, marries Sha- 
gh4d, V, 264 
Shagh4d and, plot against 
Rustam, v, 265 seq, 
gives a feast, v, 266 
pretends to quarrel with 
Shagh4d, v, 266 
treachery of, v, 268 seq, 
abases himself before 
Rustam, v, 269 
entertains Rustam and in- 
vites him to hunt, v, 
269 

hypocrisy of, v, 271 
Far4marz sent against, v, 
274, 276 

defeated and put to death 
with all Ms kin, ¥,277 
tribute of, question about, 
V, 265 

Far4mar2: makes 4 ZibuH 
king of, V, 277 
monarch of, entertained by 
Bahr4m G4r, vii, 140 seq, 
K4ch4r 'B4shf, City in T4r4n, ii, 
238, ' 369, 361 ; vii, 330, 

, i, , ix/iiy 


GENERAL INDEX 


Kadisi, Kadisiya, town on one 
of the canals west of the 
Euphrates and south of 
Mashad 'All (Nedjef), vi, 
1 19, 330; ix, 5, 73, 74, 
77, 78 

battle of, i, 12, 143 ; ix, 5, 
67, 69 

date of, ix, 67 
canal of, ix, 69 
Rustam advances to, ix, 73 
KaeAasta (Uxumiah q,v,), lake, 
iv, 137 

K4f, mythical Mount Alhurz 
q.v., ii, 83, 404 ; iv, 65, 
1^9 ; viii, 66 and note 
Kafdr, king of Biddd, zqg, iii, 191 
worsts the Iranians, iii, 244 
slain by Rustam, hi, 245 
Kahtdn, desert of, i, 287 
Kahtdn, the Arabic form of 
Joktan, the progenitor of 
the southern Arabs, vi, 
65, 120 

Kai, meaning of, ii, 8 
Kaian, Kaiinian {see Kai), ii, 8, 
9, 22, ^04 ; iii, 5 seq,, 9, 
14, 43, 67, 112, 147, 307> 

318, 320, 328, 342; iv, 
5 seq„ 24, 33» 35» 65, no, 
127, 150, 166, 175, 234, 
260, 262, 269, 273, 279, 
285, 286, 289, 293, 308, 

319, 324; V, 7 seq., 10, 
47, 49, 5^^, 54, 57, 59, 60, 
67 seq., 73 seq,, 79, 86, 91, 
97, 122, 168 203, 210, 
223, 253, 254, 282, 288, 
2$9, 291, 31 1 ; vi, 9 seq,, 
17. 34, 48. 55. 57. 59. 81, 

112, 125, 141, 179, 180, 

194, 199, 200, 202, 210, 
223, 237 note; viii, 65, 
2X6 

dynasty, i, 49, 373 * 7 

seq. ; ' iii, $ seq, ; . iv, 3 
seq ^ ; y, 7 seq, ; vh 9 
: gene'^lpgioal table, ii,^ 3^ . 

, birth-mark, ii, 372 
Pi:ature, ii,!3:75"|, 

."sayipf, 'iy,.: 3'3 " , ^ 


Kaian, throne, viii, 214 
race, viii, 217 
crown, IX, ii, 105 
Kaidmish (Kataiun), brother of 
Faridun, i, 90, 91, 158 
V, 261 

referred to, i, 147, 165 
Purmaya and, summon the 
smiths to Faridiin, i, 158 
go with Faridun against 
Zahhdk, i, 159 
attempt to kill Faridun, i, 
160 

Kai Arash, son of Kai Kubdd, 
h, 3, 23, 204, 205 ; vi, 
197, 210, 228 ; viii, 216 
Kai Armfn, son of Kai Kubdd, 
ih 3, 23 

Kaid, Indian king, 159, 161, i, 
55 ; vi, 61, 83, gi seq., 
112 

identical with Mandanes 
(Dandamis), vi, 62 
consults Mihr4n about his 
dreams, vi, 92 seq. 
dreams of, interpreted by 
Mihrdn, vi, 94, seq. 

Four Wonders of, 159, vi, 
94, 97 and note, 99 seq. 
daughter, 159, vi, 94, 100, 
102, 104 

described, vi, 100, 102, 
104 

married to Sikandar, vi, 
104 

reference in Sikandar’s 
Will to, vi, 182 
cup, described, vi, 94, 
100 

principle of, explained, 
vi, 109 

leech, vi, 94, loi ^ 
prescribes for Sikandar, 
vi, 107 
sage, vi, 94^ 

sisCalanus, vi, 62 
Sikandaris encounter of 
' wits with,' vi, 62, 104 

explains the principle ' of , 
■ ,, , . th6 cup,' vi, 109. 


293 


GENERAL INDEX 


Kaid, sends Ms Four Wonders 
and other gifts to Si- 
kandar, vi, 103 
revival ot, in legend, vi, 256, 
266 

prophecy of, vi, 256, 257, 267 
consulted by Ardshfr Papa- 
kan, vi, 266 

advice of, to Ardshfr Phpa- 
khn, vi, 267, 273 
Kaiddfa (Cilicia), vi, 294, 297 
Kaiddfa (Kandake, Candace^ v.), 
J59, vi, 83, 121 seq., 325 
obtains Sikandar’s portrait, 
vi, 122 

praised by Kabtun to Sikaii- 
dar, vi, 122 

receives a letter from 
Sikandar, vi, 123 
answers Sikandar's letter, vi, 
123 

welcomes Kaidriish on his 
return from captivity, vi, 
127 

receives Naitkhn (Sikandar) 
graciously, vi, 128 
state of, described, vi, 128, 

130, 133 

gives audiences to Naitkun 
(Sikandar), vi, 128 seq, 
recognises Sikandar, vi, 129 
seq. 

hears Sikandar’s embassage, 
vi, 129 

covenants of, with Sikandar, 
vi, 132, 138 

warns Sikandar against 
Tainhsh, vi, 133 
chides Tainhsh, vi, 135 
takes counsel with Sikandar 
about Tainhsh, vi, 135 
approves of Sikandar’s 
scheme, vi, 137 
takes counsel with her 
nobles, vi, 139 
gifts of, to Sikandar, vi, 140 
Sikandar^s final message to, 
vi, 143 

Kaidrdsh (Kandaros, Candaules), , 
, '' hpu 6f Kaidifa '(Candace)/ 

vi, t34, ?:35' , 


Kaidrush, wife of, vi, 66 

taken with his wife, by 
Sikandar, vi, 125 
brought with his wife before 
Naitkun, vi, 126 
sentenced with his wife to 
death, vi, 126 
pardoned with his wife, vi, 
126 

gratitude of, vi, 127 
returns to Kaiddfa, vi, 127 
presents Naitkun (Sikan- 
dar) to Kaidhfa, vi, 127 
Kaihan. See Kaid. 

Ivai Kalis, son of Kai Kubdd and 
Shah, i 43 -J: 47 > ^ 5 ^, I 53 . 
i, 42, 338 ; ii, 3, 8 seq., 23 
seq., 33 seq., 54 seq., 61 
seq., 109, no, 127, 130, 

233, 243 seq., 264, 269 

seq., 273, 284, 286, 290, 

29b, 301, 31b, 318, 319, 

335» 347. 3bi, 3b4. 37b 

372, 383, 401 , hi, 7, 9, 
13, 14, 20 seq., 24, 30, 45, 
51, 84, 85, 88, 90, 93, 96, 
113,145,147, 166,174,236, 
238, 239, 289, 307. 3^7; 
iv, 13, Oi, 129, 135, 136, 
162, 167 seq., 185, 191, 

199, 201, 203, 217, 218, 

232 seq., 254, 256 seq., 269 
seq., 278, 287, 289, 290, 

292, 295 seq,, 306, 310, 

314, 321 seq. ; v, 29, 30, 

I lb, 173, 174, 190, 203, 

207, 208, 210, 215, 2161 
vii, 74, 107, 1 15; viii, 
22, 104, 168, 270, 341 ; ix. 

Reign of, X43, ii, 25 seq. 
Notes on, ii, 25 seq., 79 
seq., 118, 188^^7,, 335 
visits Rustam, ii, 83 
tempted by dfvs, ii, 30 seq., 
82, 102 seq. 

goes to Mount KM, ii, 83 
defeats AfrMiydb and re- 
gains , ii*, I'^o 
; nuak;es ; !l^pstam. ■ p^adin ,of 
'ii,' 101' 


294 GENERAL 

Kai Kaiis, buildings of, on 
Mount Aihurz, li, 8i, loi 
fiying-niaciiine ol, ii, 103 
iall of, from the sky, li, 104 f 
V, 174 

repentance of, li, 105 
hears of Suhrab and sum- 
mons his chiefs, ii, 136 
seq. 

bids Tds hang Rustam and 
Giv, ii, 143 

apology of, to Rustam, ii, 
147 

encampment of, described, 
lb X53 j 

overthrown by vSuhrab, ii, ! 

160 i 

refuses to cure Suhrab, ii, ! 
178 

attempts to console Rustam, 
ii, 181 

marries the future mother of 
Siyhwush, ii, 194 
receives Siyhwush at court, 
ii, 198 

bestows Kuhistinupon Siyd- 
wush, ii, 199 

conduct of, in the case of 
Siydwush and Siidhba, ii, 

200 seq. 

sends Siydwush to fight 
Afrdsiydb, ii, 225 
rejects terms of peace and 
quarrels with Rustam, ii, 

244 seq, 

hears of the defection of 
^iyiwush, xi, 258 
grief of, at th^ death of 
Siydwush, ii, 337 
hears of Kai Khusrau's 
arrival in Irdn, ii, 395 
receives Kai ' Khusrau, ' ii, 

m 

rewards 'Cfv, ii, 399 
provides for' Karangfs, ii, 

309 ; ' , ' ' 

arbitrates be'tween Ttis and 
' - 'Oddara, iih403 . 

.welconxes Kai' ^u^ratt on 
his rdtfiid^i-Vyirond' , tihe' ' 

; ' ^ 'of' i,- 410/ 


INDEX 

Kai Khus, requires Kai KIius- 
lau to swear vengeance 
on Afrasiyab, iii, 21 
welcomes Giv and hears 
his tidings of Kai Khus- 
rau, IV, 234 
gives a feast, iv, 234 
deals with the captives, iv, 

235 

proclaims the conquest of 
Turhn and Chm, iv, 236 
rewards Giv, iv, 236 
sends Giv back with letter 
to Kai Khusrau, iv, 238 
hears that Kai Khusrau is 
returning and goes with 
the nobles to welcome 
him, iv, 256 

receives gilts from, and hears 
the adventures of, Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 257 
gives a feast in honour of 
Kai Khusrau, iv, 257 
counsels a pilgrimage to the 
temple of Azargashasp, 
iv, 258 

Kai Khusrau and, hear from 
Ghdarz of Hhm's adven- 
ture with Afrdsiyib, iv, 
264 

send for Garsiwaz and 
put him to the torture, 
iv, 265 

make thanksgiving before 
Azargashasp, iv, 269 
go in state to the temple 
of Azargashasp, iv, 270 
prays that he may die, iv, 
270 

obsequies of, iv, 271 
treasure of, called '' The 
Bride ** bestowed by Kai 
Khusrau on Giv, Zdl, and 
Rustam, iv,, 293 
favour shown by Luhr§,sp 
, to the grandsons of, iv, 

: ^318, 321 seq, 

' grandsons of, go with Zarlr 
' 'to Ktim, iv, 360 , 

, . h^d/GU'Shtdsp as Shih, iv, 

' A ' ''302 , i 


GENERAL INDEX 295 

Kai Kalis, Rustam’s patent 1 Kai Khusrau, tells liis story to 


from, V, 203 

Kai Khusraii, son of Siyawush 
and Farangis, Sliah, 1^6- 
JS4, 1^0, i, 42, 369 ; ii, 

3, 9, 25, 104, 189, 190, 334 
seq,, 386 seq. ; iii, 13 seq., 

47» 55> 57^ 

III seq,, 132, 134, 166, 
173, 175, 186, 191, I97f 
198, 202, 205, 211, 226, 
228, 238 seq., 249, 250, 
271, 277, 285, 286, 289, 
294 seq., 326 seq., 338, 
353 f 7 seq., 19, 21, 
30, 31, 36, 56 seq., 65, 66, 
71, 72, 76 seq., 90, 99, 

1 15, 144 seq., 152, 153, 
237 seq., 262, 267 seq., 
3x7 seq., 319, 321 ; v, to, 
12, 21, 39, 173, 2c>3» 

204, 20*8, 215, 284, 289 ; 
vi, 79, 177 \ vii, 120, 173, 
359 ; viii, 148, 219, 270, 
332, 392; ix, 25, 103 
fravaslii of, ii, 82 
identical with Cyrus the 
Great in legend, ii, 9» ^90 
prophesies respecting, ii, 3x0, 

372, 390 ! 

birth of, ii, 325 
account of youth of, ii, 
328 seq, 

questioned by Afrisiyib, ii, 

332 

dwells at Siyiwushgird, ii, 

333 

sent to Khutan, ii, 356 
Michin, ii, 357 note 
described by Surhsh, ii,^ 363 
Ghdarz sends Giv to seek, 
ii, 364 seq, 
recalled, ii,,37<^ 
found by Gfv, ii, 370 
birth-mark of, ■ ii, 372, hi, 
49 note 

saves ' Fftto's life, ii, 38 7 ^ 
at the Jfhin, i|, 39^ 
arrives, u,''394', ■ ,, 

visits ,GMai^^ 'at 

ii, 3# ,/ '■ ■' 


Kai J^aus, ii, 397 
praises Giv to Kai Kaiis, ii, 
398 

goes to Istakhr, ii, 399 
enthroned as Shdh, ii, 400, 
411 

supported hy Ghdarz and 
opposed by Tiis, ii, 400 
seq. 

letter of, to the defenders of 
the castle of Bahman, ii, 
407 

establishes Fire-worship at 
the castle of Bahman, ii, 
409 

pardons Tils, ii, 410 
Reign of, 147, iii, 7 seq. 

Notes on, iii, 7 seq., 108, 
191, 271, 285 seq. ; iv, 
7, 135 seq. 

last link with the Vedas, 
iii, 7 

longest in respect of sub- 
ject matter in the poem, 
iii, 7 

divisions of, iii, 7 
episodes of, iii, 7 
warlike character of, iii, 
8 

subject-matter of, iii, 8 
accession of, iii, 17 
goes on a hunting expedi- 
tion, iii, 19 

to the temple of Azar- 
gashasp, iii, 20 
swears to take vengeance on 
Afrdsfyab, iii, 21; 
prepares for war, iii, 23 
seq, 

offers reward for the head 
of Palhshin, iii, 26 
(^own of Tazhdv, iii, 27 
slave of Xazhdv, iii, 27 
head of Xazhdv, iii, 28 
burning the barricade at 
^ , 'the Edsa rd'd, iii, 28 
' going 'On an embassage to 
_ . y AfrMy4t>r M, 29 , . . 

' yrtof, Xi^s :to,‘ayo^ Kaldf, 

'vi ■ ' 


296 GENERAL INDEX 


Kai Kliusrau, bears of the death 
of Farud and of the defeat 
of the Iranians, iii, 8-:j 
■wrath of, with Ths, iii, 84 
seq., Ill 

writes to Fariburz, iii, 84 
disgraces Xds, iii, 86 
imprisons Tds, iii, 87 
pardons Tiis and the frdn- 
ians, iii, 114 

hears of the peril of the 
Iranians on Mount Hamd- 
wan and summons Rus- 
tam, iii, 142 seg. 
sends Rustam to succour 
the Iranians, iii, 145 
furthers the suit of Fari- 
burz to Farangis, lii, 
147 

hears of Rustam's victory, 
iii, 239 

disposes of the captives and 
spoil, iii, 240 

sends gifts to Rustam and 
the host, iii, 241 
goes to meet Rustam on his 
return in triumph, iii, 
267 

gives a feast to the chiefs, 
iii, 268 

rewards Rustam, iii, 269 
holds a court and hears of 
the doings of the dfv 
Akwin, iii, 273 
writes to summon Rustam, 
iii, 274 

goes to welcome Rustam on 
his return from slaying 
the dfv Akw^n, iii, 282 
rewards Rustam, iii, 283 
hears at a feast of the case 
of the Irpa^nians, iii, 289 
calls for volunteers, iii, 2,91 
sends Bfzhan apd Gnrgfn to 
Irmin, iii, 292 
comforts Giv for the loss 
of ‘Bfzhan, iih 315, 318 , 
imprisons 'Gurgfn^ in, 3x7 , 
promises, Gfv,'to' consult ',1:he ' 
■^i'^iningrcnp' ' abdut B[z- 
' han, hi, 317 


Kai Khusrau sends Giv to sum- 
mon Rustam, in, 319 
sends the host to meet 
Rustam, iii, 327 
welcomes Rustam, hi, 328 
jewelled tree of, iii, 329 
requests Rustam to rescue 
Bizhan, iii, 330 
releases Gurgin at Rustam’s 
request, iii, 333 
equips Rustam for his quest 
of Bfzhan, iii, 333 
welcomes Rustam on his 
return, hi, 354 
rewairls Rustam and his 
comrades, iii, 356 
holds converse with Bfzhan, 

iii, 356 

gives gifts to Manfzha, iii, 
356 

hears that the Tdrdnians 
arc invading frdn, iv, 12 
summons his paladins, iv, 13 
host, iv, 14 

sends Rustam to Hindhstdn, 

iv, 14 

Luhrdsp to the Aldus, 
iv, 14 

Ashkash to Khdrazm, iv, 

15 

Gddarz to Tiirdn, iv, 15 
orders Gddarz to negotiate 
with Pfrdn, iv, 15 
receives letter from Gddarz, 
iv, 58 

rewards Hajfr, the bearer, 
iv, 58 

prays for victory, iv, 58 
sends Hajfr with answer, 
iv, 61 

leads a host to aid GMarz, 
iv, 62 

referred to, iv, 85 
presage of, that Pfrdn would 
be slain by Giidarz, iv, 85, 

88 ' ' , 

reaches Gddarz, iv, in, 126 
, , receives Gddarz and the 
' ' other chanpion's, iy, 126 

Gnrwf, brought by Gfv 
beibre^ iy,n:?7 / ' ' , 


GENERAL INDEX 


297 


Kai Khusrau, laiiieiits over 
Piraii, IV, 127 

buries Piran and tUe Tur- 
anian champions, iv, 12S 
puts Gurwi to death, iv, 129 
rewards the host, iv, 129 
gives Ispahan to Giidarz, 
IV, 129 

pardons the Turanian host, 
iv, 131 

amulet of, iv, 133 
heals Gustaham, iv, 133 
summons reinforcements, 
iv, 134, 145 

Great War of, with Afrasiyab, 
152, iv, 135 seq. 
exemption of, from death, 
iv, 138 

recalls the troops under 
Luhrasp, Rustam, and 
Ashkash, iv, 145 
stations Ths on his right 
with Kdwa’s standard, iv, 
1^6 

gives the right wing to Rus- 
tam, iv, 147 
l(ift wing to Giidarz, iv, 
147 

commands to various 
chiefs, iv, 148, 149 
hears of Afrdsiydb's passage 
of the Jihiin, iv, 157 
sends troops to the aid of 
Gustaham, son of Nau- 
dar, at Balkh, iv, 157 
Ashkash with a host to 
Zam, iv, 157 

marches to Khdrazm, iv, 157 
surveys the seat of war and 
entrenches the host, iv, 
T57 

Shfda's embassage to, iv, lOi 
sends Kiran to welcome 
Sldda, iv, X65 
proposes to fight in. single 
combat, iv, 166 
rejects the Irfinians* sug- 
gestions of a peace, iv, 
167 

accepts Shfdh's challehge^ „ 

iv„ x60 ‘ . ' , ’ 


Kai Khusrau, sends Karan with 
a reply to Slu'd a, iv, 168 
arms to fight with Shida, 
iv, 1 71 

makes Ruhhani his stand- 
ard-bearer, iv, 1 71 
sends instructions to the 
host, iv, 1 71 
parley of, with Shfda, iv, 
172 

accepts Shfda's challenge 
to a wrestling-bout, iv, 

175 

gives Ruhham charge of his 
steed, iv, 1 75 
wrestles and overthrows 
Shida, iv, 175 
instructs Ruhhdm to bury 
Shida, iv, 176 
spares the life of Shida's 
interpreter and bids him 
return to Afrdsiydb with 
tidings, iv, 176 
prays Cor vengeance on, and 
attacks, AfrAsiyfib, iv, 178 
bids Shanimdkh attack, iv, 
180 

attacks with Rustam from 
the centre, iv, 180 
fights with Ustukilfi, and 
Burzfiyalfi, iv, 182 
returns to camp, iv, 183 
hears of Afrdsiyib's retreat, 
iv, 184 

offers praise to God, iv, 184 
pursues Afrdsiy^b, iv, 183 

marches to Sughd, iv, 188 
hears tidings of Afrdsiydb, 
iv, 188 

sends Gustaham, son of 
Naudar, to Chich, iv, 188 
Rustam to encounter 
Xawurg, iv, 188 
marches from Sughd and 
reduces the Turkman 
strongholds, iv, 189 
to the Gulzarydn, iv, 189 

'Oomihands ,th6 centre, iv, 

' ' 

, ’ for victory, iv, 191 


298 GENERAL INDEX 


Ivai Kkusraii, hears of the defeat 
of Kurakliau by Gusta- 
hani, son ol Naudar, iv, 
193 

hears of Rustam’s defeat 
of Tawurg, iv, 193 
warns Rustam to beware of 
AMsiyab, iv, 194 
plunders the camp of, and 
pursues, Afrdsiyhb, iv, 

195 

besieges Gang-bihislit, iv, 
198, 208 seq. 

converses with Rustam, iv, 
198, 199, '222 

receives Jahn in audience, 
iv, 200 

declines Afrisiyab’s pro- 
posals for peace, iv, 207 
with Rustam, Gustaham. . 
son of Naudar, and Gh- 
darz, assails Gang-bihisht 
on all sides, iv, 208 seq. 
prays for victory, iv, 208 
takes Gang-bihisht by storm, 
iv, 209 seq. 

searches vainly for Afr^- 
siyib, iv, 212 
gives the spoil of Gang- 
bihisht to the troops, iv, 
217 

grants quarter to the Turk- 
mans and assumes the 
government of Tdrdn, iv, 
217 

dwells for a while at Gang- 
bihisht, iv, 218 
leaves Gddarz and Farhdd 
at Gang-bihisht, iv, 21*9 
marches against Afrdsiydb, 
iv, ^220 

rejects Afr 4 siy 4 b"s over- 
tures, iv, 223 

fight a general enga|ement 
' against Afrdsiyib, iv, 2251 
226 , ' ' - , , 

entrenches his b^oops and^ 
prepares' ''^th ' Ths dhd’ 
'l^pStam' for a ,night-«Lt^' 
' ' , taek ftpm, Afrisiyib, iv^ 


] Kai Khusrau, repulses Afrasi- 
yab’s night-attack, iv, 225 
defeats Afrasiyab, iv, 227 
receives the submission of 
Afrasiyab ’s army, iv, 228 
gives a feast, iv, 228 
offers praise to God, iv, 228 
returns to Gang-bihisht, iv. 
228 

accepts the submission of the 
Khdn and FaghMr, iv, 229 
resolves to pursue Afrd- 
siydb to Gang-dizh, iv, 
231 

plan of, opposed by the host, 
iv, 231 

supported by Rustam, iv, 

agreed to by the host, iv, 
232 

sends Gfv with Afrasiyab’s 
captive kindred to Kai 
Kdfis, iv, 232 seq. 
leaves Gustaham, son of 
Naudar, in command at 
Gang-bihisht and marches 
to Chin, iv, 238 
demands facilities from the 
Khdn, the Faghffir, and 
the king of Makrdn, iv, 
238 

marches through Khutan, 
iv, 240 

welcomed by the Faghffir 
and the Khdn of Chin, iv, 

240 

stays three months in Chin, 
iv, 241 

leaves Rustam in Chfn and 
marches to Makrdn, iv, 

241 

sends an embassy to the 
king of Makrdn, iv, 241 
gives honourable burial to 
the king of Makrdn, iv, 
243 

stops the pillage of Makrdn, 

' iv, 243 

stays a year in Makr 4 p, iv, 

’ ' : 244 , " ' ^ ' 

; ma|i:es ready' a fieet, 'iv, 244 


GENERAL INDEX 299 


Kai Khusrau, leaves Ashkash as Kai 
governor and inai'ches to 
the duvsert, iv, 2. {4 
voyage of, iv, 2 
wonders of, iv, 245 
lands, iv, 246 

appoints Giv governor, iv, . 

246 ! 
receives the submission of | 

the chiefs, iv, 247 ' 

seeks for tidings of Gang- 
dizh and of Afrasiyab, iv, 

247 

marches to Gang-dizh, iv, | 

247 I 
forbids his troops to injure 1 

Gang-dizh, iv, 247 | 

enters Gang-dizh, iv, 248 i 
searches for Afrdsiyab, iv, j 

248 I . 

remains a year at Gang-dizh, 

iv, 249 

urged by his paladins to 
return to fran, iv, 249 
appoints a governor for 
Gang-dizh, iv, 249 
distributes treasures at 
Gang-dizh, iv, 250 
marches seaward from Gang- 
dizh, iv, 250 

welcomed by Giv, iv, 250 
crosses the sea to Makrdn, 
iv, 251 

welcomed in Makrdn by Ash- 
kash and the chiefs, iv, 

251 

appoints a governor for 
Makrdn, iv, 251 
marches to Chin, iv, 251 
welcomed by Rustam, iv, 

confirms the Faghffir and 
Khdn in the possession of 
Michin and Chin, iy,^252’ 
goes with Rustam to Siyd- ’ , 
wushgird, iv, 253 
rewards Rustam and Giv, 
iv, 252 ' , ' ; I . , 

welcomed by' Gustaham, son . 

' of 'Naudar, iv,,. 253 ^ , , , 

, goes to Cfang-biMsht,,lv»'2'53 d 


Khusraii, prays for satis- 
taction on Afrasiyab, iv, 

253 

dwells for a year in Gang- 
bihisht, iv, 254 
desires to return to Kai 
Ivdiis, iv, 254 
leaves Gustaham, son of 
Naudar, as viceroy, iv, 

254 

carries off treasure from 
Chin and Makrdn, iv, 254 
arrives at Chach, iv, 255 
Sughd, iv, 255 
met by ifhiizan and Tali- 
mdn, iv, 255 

makes oiferings to the Firc- 
tcmplc at Bukhdra, iv, 

255 

crosses the Jilidn, iv, 255 
arrives at Balkh, iv, 255 
welcomed everywhere by 
the people, iv, 255 
goes by Talikan, the Marv- 
rud, Nishdpur, and Ddm- 
aghdn to Kai, iv, 255 
stays two weeks at Kai, iv, 

256 

announces his approach to 
Kai Kdds, iv, 256 
goes to Baghddd and thence 
to Pdrs, iv, 256 
reception of, by Kai Kdfis, 
iv, 256 

presents gifts, and tells his 
adventures, to Kai Kdfis, 
iv, 257 

has a feast given in his 
honour by Kai Kdds, iv, 


257 

rewards the troops, iv, 258 
takes counsel with Kai Kdiis* 
concerning Afrdsiydb, iv, 


, goes with Kai Kdds on a pil- 
grimage to the temple of 
. _ Azargashasp, iv, 2 58 

flnrf hdAT from 


'Gddarz of Hdm's adven- 


ture with Afrisiydb, iv, 


300 GENERAL 

Kai Khiisran, and Kai Kaus, send 
foi Garsi'waz, and put him 
to tlic torture, iv, 265 
slays Afrasiyab, iv, 268 
Garsiwaz, iv, 269 
Kai K^ds and, make thanks- 
giving before Azargash- 
asp, iv, 269 

treasurer of, makes gifts to 
Azargashasp, iv, 269 
sends letters announcing 
his triumph to all the 
chiefs, iv, 270 
holds festival and bestows 
treasure, iv, 270 
goes “With Kai Kdds in state 
to the temple of Azar- 
gashasp, iv, 270 
performs the obsequies of 
Kai Kdds, iv, 271 
assumes the crown as sole 
Sh^h, iv, 272 

becomes world-weary, iv, 
272 

closes his court and with- 
draws to his oratory, iv 
274 

prays that he may be taken 
from the world, iv, 274 
passes a week in prayer, iv, 
274, 279 

remonstrated with by the 
nobles, iv, 275, 279 
replies to the nobles, iv, 276 

279 

passes live weeks in prayer, 
iv, 280 

hears from Surdsh that his 
prayer is granted, iv, 

280 

bidden to appoint Luhrdsp 
as his successor, iv, 28X 
puts off his royal robes, iv, 
281: , 

receives ' Zil, ' Rustam, ' and 
others in audience, iv, 283 

pardons 

orders -an assembly to be' 
'hel4 ' Oh the ’ /plain,; iv; 


INDEX 

Kai Khusraii, treasure of, dis- 
posal of, iv, 29 { 
found by Sikandar, 160, 
vi, 1 70 

charge of, to Giidarz, iv, 294 
gifts of, to Giv, Zal, and 
Rustam, iv, 295 
Gustaham, iv, 295 
Giidarz, iv, 295 
Fariburz, iv, 295 
Bfzhan, iv, 295 
Zai’s companions, iv, 297 
confirms Rustam in pos- 
session of Nimriiz, iv, 297 ; 
V, 203 

bestows Kum and Ispahan 
on Giv, IV, 298 
confirms the charge of 
Kdwa’s flag, and gives 
Khurasdn, to Tds, iv, 300 
summons and crowns Luh- 
rdsp, iv, 300 

Zdl’s protest to, against 
Luhrasp's succession to, 
iv, 301 

justifies his choice of Imh- 
rdsp, iv, 301 

takes leave of the frdnians, 
iv, 3^3 

women of, lament for him, 
iv, 304 

commends his women to the 
honour of Luhrdsp, iv, 305 
dismisses the frdnians, iv, 

305 

* counsels Luhrdsp, iv, 305 
bids Luhrdsp farewell, iv, 

306 

sets forth on his pilgrimage 
with some of his chiefs, 
iv, 306 

Indian parallel, iv, 138 
again appealed to by the 
irtoians,, 'iv, 306 
reply of, iv, 307 
bids his chiefs return, iv, 307 
^ ' rests yrith his remaining 
, oixiefs by a spring, iv, 307 
; ^ prepares for Ins passing, iv, 

' 308 ■ ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 

^ teewells his chiefs, iV, 508^ 


301 


GENERAL INDEX 


Kai Khiisraii, warns liis chiels 
of the coming of the snow, 
iv, 30 B 

disappears, iv, 308 
Kai Kiib4d, Shah and founder 
of the Kaihnian dynasty, 
142, i, 42, 373» 37‘1 J 3, 

8, 12, 14, 16, iS seq., 26, 

33i 34. 3(>. 37. ^7. ^43. 
144, 240, 260, 270, 274, 

327, 33b, 3<33. 390, 394; 

iii, 34. 49, 51. 57. 144; 

iv, 35, 70, 149, 1G8, 201, 

283, '29S. 302; V, 174. 

180, 188, 189, 202, 205, 
210, 221, 272 ; vi, 197, I 
210 ; vii, 37, 74, 120, i 

173; viii, 89, 170, 260, 
270, 310, 332 : ix, 25 
brought by Rustam from 
Mount Albiirz, i, 382 seq. 
tolls his dream to Kustam, 

i, 385 

accepted by Z41 and the 
other chiefs as Shdh, i, 
Reign of, J 42 . “ 

Note on, li, ii 
origin of, ii, i x and note 
makes peace with Afri- 
siyib, ii, 20 

gifts of, to Zil and Rustam, 

ii, 21 

descendants of, commanded 
by Dilifrdz, stationed on 
ICai Khusrau's left hand, 

iv, 147 

Kai Manush, vi, 200 
Kai Pashin, son of Kai Kubad, 
ii, 3, 23. 294, 205 ; iv, 

392 , . 

Kais, Arab chief, eiatertams 
Khusrau Parwfe, viil, 

^59 ... 

Kaiser Friedrich Museum, vui, 
igz 

Kait. See Kaid. 

liai Ugf, vi, 200 ^ 

Kaiwin, Iranian statistiemn, 

11 _ ' ' 


Kaiwan, calculates the arrears of 
taxes, vii, ii 

Kakula, Turhnian hero, iv, 188 
reinforces Afrhsiyab, iv, 188 
Kakwf (cf. Karkwf), grandson of 
Zahh4k, 141. i. 226 
attacks the Iranians, i, 225 
deieated and slain by Minu- 


chihi, i, 227 

Kald-hur, wamor of Mdzandarhn, 


ii, 67 

tries a handgrip with Rus- 


tam, ii, 97 

Kalit, stronghold, iii, 39 J ix, 91 
home of Fanid, iii, 39 
Kai Khusrau bids Tds to 


avoid, iii, 39 
Tus marches to, iii, 40 
captured by the Iranians, 
iii, 66 

Kal4t-i-NMin, stronghold, h, 

189 ; iii, 14 
described, iii, 14 
Ivalc (Nereis), daughter of Alex- 
ander in the Pscudo-Cal- 
listhencs, vi, 77 
Andreas, the cook, and, 
legend of, vi, 77 

KaHla and Dimna, Book of, 109, 
See Fables of Bidpai. 
KMfniyhs (Nicephorium, Callini- 
cus, Warfgh q^v„ Rakka), 
city situated at the junc- 
tion of the Belikh and the 
Euphrates, 167, viii, i 3 S 
taken by Ndshfrw&n, vii, 

'^57 .. o 

KaW, mountain in Thrin, ii, 328 * 
PMn sends Kai Khusrau 
to be brought up on, ii, 
328 

goes to see Kai Khusrau 
at, ii, 3^9 

K^lds,'- Rhman chief, iv, 356 
sent as envoy to llyte> xv, 

352. 35S . 

Euhrasp, IV, 357 

’ ’ ' entertained by Luhrasp, iv. 


GENERAL INDEX 


302 

Kallas, describes Gushtasp to 
Luhrasp, iv, 358 
dismissed with honour, iv, 
359 

Kdmiis, Tiiranian hero, 148, X4g, 

* iii, 107, 151, 152, 161, 162, 
164 S(}q., 168 seq., 172, 176, 
178, 181 seq., 200, 207, 

209, 213, 216, 224, 229, 

232, 235, 241, 242, 251, 

252, 256, 268, 269 ; IV, 

297 ; V, 167, 199, 220 
Story of, of Kashan, 148, iii, 
108 seq. 

Firdausi on, iii, 269 
comes to the aid of PIran, 
iii, 151 

plan of campaign of, 
adopted, jii, 162 
leads the attack, iii, 1G8 
hears of the coming of Rus- 
tam, iii, 175 

Rustam described by Plrdn 
to, iii, 183 

challenges Rustam, iii, 187 
parleys with Rustam, iii, 188 
fights, and is taken prisoner 
by, Rustam, iii, 189 
end of, iii, 190 

Kandbad, mountain, part of the 
Binalhd range north of 
Rish^phr in Khurishn, 
The name may be preserved 
in the modern Gunabad, 
a village to the north of 
that range, iv, 23, 37, 47, 
4S, 55. 5^. 7^> ^12 

occupied by Flrdn, iv, 22 
Kand, S$e Raid, 

Kand4 Gashasp, frhnian war- 
rior, viii, X03, 122, 163 
speech of, viii, x66 
Kandhhdr, city in , southerrx 
„ , , ' Afghinistin, ;i, 286; iv/ 
6^ ; V, ,233 noU ' 

Kandake (Candace,^-?/., Raid^fa 
' : q.v,), 'vf, 'M , 

Randatos.' S'ee Raidrh^h,; ' . - 
Randaul^is. Raidrdsh. ' - ' , " 
RahdrirSkiphr./ i , Onnd-ir 


Kangha (Kharazm q.v.), country, 
11, 189, 190 

Kangde:r (Gang-dizh qx’), 
stronghold, li, 189, 190 
KaniT. See Tainush* 

Kauiiuj (Kanauj), city near the 
west bank of the Ganges 
in the division of Agra in 
the United Provinces of 
British India, i, 261, 357 ; 
iib 35 ; iv, 278, 283, 284 ; 
V, 257 ; vi, 64, 207, 352 ; 

vii, 1 15, 1 1 9, 123, 128, 
129, 134. 137. 3^5> 3S6, 
390, 393. 4A5 

conquest of, by Mahmhd, 
i, 99, 100 and note, 

113 

Sikanilar reaches, vi, no 
river of, vii, 112 and note, 
390 

monarch of=sShangul, vii, 
140 

Bahrhra Giir appointed heir 
to, vii, 143 

Karabagh (Arrdn), district north 
of the Aras, i, 9 
seat of primitive Fire-wor- 
ship, i, 56 

Karakh-Maishhn, town built on 
the lower Tigris by ArdshiT 
Pdpakhn, vi, 199, 291 
note 

R4ran, son of Kiwa, Iranian 
hero and the mythical 
progenitor of a family 
famous in Ashkhnian 
times, X4X, i, 207, 211, 214 
seq,, 344, 345, 365 ; ii, 
tl seq., 18, 22, 1 19; iii, 
9^; iv, 146; vi, 194; 

viii, 168 ; ix, 85 

^ takes the Castle of the 
' Alins, p, 223 seq. 
reports his Success to' MiniV 
, ' chihr, ' i, 235 I , ' ' 

' ' commands Randar's host, 
'' ','b 345"; - . 

' ^ tells'bf his enCfOhn ter 'with' 
A#4siyih/i;„ 350 ' , - , 


GENERAL 

Karan, son of Ivawa, with. 

Sill (lush and Kishwad .pur- 
sues Kuraklian, i, 354 ^ 
defeats and slays Barman, 
i, 354 

defeats Wisa, i, 357 
meets and defeats Shania- 
sis, i, 3di 

bears to Zav the news of 
his election as Shah, i, 
370 

re-appearance of, in legend, 
iv, i35» 

made champion of the host, 
iv 149 

sent by Kai Khusrau to 
welcome Shida, iv, 165 
bears Kai Khusrau's answer 
to Shida, iv, t 68 
opposes and defeats Jahn, 

IV, 178 

family, of, vii, 171 

glorification of, vii, 170 
origin of, vii, 185 
rivalry of, with Mihrin, 
vii, 185 

Kdran, mountain, the name 
given from the above 
hero to part of the Al- 
burz range which lies 
between Mount Dami- 
waiid and Amul and 
formed his principality, 
and that of his descend- 
ants as late as and after 
the Muhammadan con- 
quest, y, 112 

Kiran, Iranian chief, temp. Yaz- 
dagird, son of Shdpdr and 
Bahrdm Cdr, vi, 394 ^ 
vii, 86, 90 

Kiran, mountain-chief, viii, 
189 

Karap (Karpan), v, 17 
meaning of, v, 14 
Kara su, river, v, t4 
K4raz, viii, 2$t and noU. ^ 
Kargaste, a wild tribe,- i, 233 
and'«o% 277^ 

290, 294,. 29$, 3I9> '34b' J 
}i. 98 ,' , , ■ ' 


INDEX 303 

Karimin, frtoian hero and great- 
great-grandfather of Rns- 
tam, 11, A, 125 endnote, 

V, 202 

Kanstdn, viii, 188 ^ 

Karkh, suburb of Baghdad, iv, 
147 , ix, 85 
Arab defeat at, ix, 85 
Karkh = Khurram Abdd (?), vi, 
327 

Karkwf {cf. Kakwf), a descend- 
ant of Zahhak, i, 290 
attacks Sdm, i, 290 
slain by Sam, i, 291 
Karmd'fl and Irmd'il, Zahhak's 
cooks, 14^ 
device of, i, 146 
Karnimak - i - Ardshfr - i - 
Pdpakdn, Pahlavi text, 
vi, 14 note, 6x, 

325 ; vii, 380 
account of, vi, I95_ ^ 
resembles Y^tk4r-i-Zari- 
rdn, vi, 196 
purport of, vi, 196 
portion of Shdhndma cor- 
responding with, vi, 196 
compared with, vi, 200 
seq., 205 seq.f 255 seq. 
Firdausi and, vi, 196 ^ 
polo episode in, vi, 19b 
Karnaprdvaram Is, vi, 80 
Karpan (Karap q.v.), v, 14 
Kdrsdn, viii, 188, 252 

gates of, shut against Khus- 
rau Parwiz, viii, 252 
walls of, fall down, viii, 253 
Khusrau Parwfz stays at, 
viii, 253 

Karshipta. mythical bird, i, 235 
Katsiydn, Tiirdnian hero, iv, 10 
K 4 nm, mountain. See Kiran. 
Kdrdn, river joining the Shat al 
Arab at its delta, vi, 199 
note 

'dam on, vi, 295 

Kisa tM (Kashaf river, 

r^7, iii, 28, 68, 69, 71, 72, 
' ’ 82, ros ; iv* 90 
barrieado at the, ili, 29 
' ' i burnt by Gfv* hi, 75 


GENERAL INDEX 


304 

Kasliaf (Kasa njcl q v.), river in 
nortlx-eastern Khurasdn, 
i, 235, 296 

story of the dragon of, i, 296 
seq. 

Kashin (Kasan, town in Farg- 
hdna, north of the Jax- 
artes ?), iii, 108, 15 1, 170, 
177, 180, 181, 188, 192, 
204, 207, 224, 237, 242 ; 
iv, 1 89 ; V, 39 ; vii, 331, 
334 

Kimus of, Story of, 148, iii 
108 seq. 

in Thrill, iii, 108 
in frin, iii; 109 
man of™Kiraiis, iii, 189 

Kashin, city between Ispahan 
and Kum, iii, 109 

Kashmar. See Kishmar. 

Kashmigin, son of Farrukhzid, 
ix, 92 

Kashmfhan, place north-east of 
Marv, vii, 89 

Bahrim Gir's victory at, 
vii, 90 

Siifarai's victory at, vii, 170 
note, 176 

Kashmir, country, i, 1 13 ; ii, 271, 
338 ; iii, 35, 1 52, 237, 251 ; 
iv, 14, 60, 65 ; V, 263 ; 

vii, 395> 396, 421 
king of, vi, 31 

monarch of, entertained by 
Bahrim Giir, vii, 140 seq. 

Kastantaniya (Constantinople), 

viii, 265 

Kastarit. See Kyaxarcs, 

Kaswfn. See Kazwin. 

Kit (Kith), one of the two 
capitals of Khirazm 
(Gurganj heihg the other) 
situated on the right 
, bank of the Oxus, iii, 152 

Katiyin (Kihid), daughter of 
Caesar, ' wife of Gushtisp, 
and mother of Asfandiyir, 

. 154, i 5<5, ii, '3 ; iv, 348 ; 

' V, ~xi, 253 

deferred' to,, i, ;55';‘ v, ,205,, 

' v'.'' '' ' : 


Katayin, eldest daughici of 
Caesar, iv, 348 
Story of, 154, IV, 329. seq 
marriage of, iv, 329 seq. 
dreams of GushtivSp, iv, 329 
sees and chooses Gushtisp 
for her husband, iv, 330 
marries Gushtisp, iv, 331 
sells a jewel, iv, 332 
discovers that Gushtisp is 
of royal race, iv, 340 
persuades Gushtisp to go 
to the Sports on Caesar's 
riding-ground, iv, 349 
Caesar reproached by Gush- 
tasp for his unkindness to, 
iv, 350 

reconciled to Caesar, iv, 351 
referred to, iv, 358 
receives gifts fi*om Caesar, iv, 

363 

goes to Iran with Gush- 
tisp, iv, 364 
sons of, V, 32 

counsels Asfandiyir, v, 168, 

175 

ancestry of, v, 205 
Asfandiyar's last message 
to, V, 249 

laments over Asfandiyir, v, 
252 

consoled by Bishitan, v, 255 
Katib, Arab chief, vi, 21, 65, 120 
Katmira, frinian hero, iv, 92 
put in command of tbe right 
wing, iv, 92 

Kiis, Shih. See Kai Kids. 

brand-mark of, iii, 291 
Kiis, son of Shih Kubid, vii, 
316 

Kavirazem (Gurazm q^v.), v, 12 
Kavi (Kai), ii, 8 
■Usa,Ji, 25 
Kavi (Kavig), v, 14 
Kavfg (Kavi), v, 17 
meaning of, v, 14 
Kavi .Husravah (Kai Khusrau 
' , p.), iv, 137, 138 

Kivya Ushani (Kai. Kiis, q. v,) 
'ih;25 ,, 

'ICiyy^^n .(Kaian), ' ii|r '8 


GENERAL INDEX 


Kawa, the smith, 140, i, 1 55 seq,, 
207, 214 ; iv, 165, 17S ; 
vii, 185 ; viii, 72 ; ix, 30 
Zahhak and, Story of, 140, i, 
154 seq. 

revolts and goes to Faridxm, 

h 157 

leads Fan'dun’s van, i, 160 
flag of, i, 143, 160, 211, 217, 
218, 237, 332 ; ii, 12, 227, 
341. 3^9, 354» 40o> 402, 
405, 406, 410 ; iii, 25, 38, 
39, 48, 84, 85, 116, 121, 
126, 129, 135 seq,, 149, 
161 ; iv, 2/j, 25, 34, 55, 
59, 92, 1 1 2, 146, 180, 226, 
243, 282, 292, 359; vi, 
347 ; vii, 250 ; viii, 385 ; 
ix, 30, 67 
origin of, i, 157 
Bizhan’s prowess with, iii, 
93 

half of, taken by Pi'rdn, 

iii, 94 

staff of, cloven by Piildd- 
wand, iii, 258 
Tds confirmed in charge 
of, by Kai Khusrau, iv, 
300 

rescued by Girdmf,v, 59,69 
Kdwian, standard, i, 21 1 
Kdziriin, town west of Shlrdz, vi, 
199 

Kazwfn, city north-west of Tih- 
rdn, V, 30 

Kerdtor. See Taindsh, 

Kcresdsp, Keresdspa, frdnian 
hero, i, 234, 235, 373 ; ii,4 
account of, in the Zaxida- 
vasta, i, 172 

later development of, i, X74 
Keresavasda (Garsiwaz q,v,), h, 
189 ; iv, 137 

Khalaj (Kharlikh), a Turkish 
tribe dwelling north of the 
Jaxartes and east ' of 
Xdshkand, vii, 92 
Khdlid, famous, Arab general 
ternp^ 'Muhammad; v,' 12 
begins ^ hostilities ' against 
Persian' Empire, ix,, 66 ' 
vot. m,'' 


Khdlid, recalled to Syrian 
campaign, iv, 

Khallukh {cf, Khalaj), 

156 ; V, 42, 44, 55, 61, 74, 
90, 107, 1 12, 157, 242, 255 
Khdn of Chin, the, iemp. Kai 
Kaiis, ii, 383 

temp. Kai Khusrau, 148, I4g, 
iii, 108, 160 seq., 164 seq., 
172, 175 seq., 18 j, 184, 

187, i()oseq., ig6, 198 seq., 
205, 207 seq , 215, 217, 221 
222, 226 seq,, 235, 241, 

242, 251, 252, 256, 268, 

320 ; iv, 60, 135, 238 seq. ; 

V, 199, 220 

Khdn of Chm=:Arjdsp, v, 47, 51, 
72 ^ 

temp, Sikandar, ambassadors 
from, come to Dard, vi, 35 
temp. Bahrdm Gur, 165, vii, 
49, 91, 93, 97* 3:11 

invades frdn, vii, 84 
responds graciously to the 
Trdnians' embassage, vii, 
88 

gives himself up to pleasure 
at Marv, vii, 88 
fate of, in war with Bahrdm 
Gdr, vii, 5, 90 
crown of, placed in a Fire- 
temple, vii, 95 
Khiishnawdz, son of, vii, 
165 

temp. Nushfrwdn, x68, vii, 186, 

328 seq. : viii, 43, 52, 87, 
89, 97 seq. 

daughter of, married to 
Ndshfrwdn, x68, vii, 213, 
357 

historically ruler of the 
Turks, vii, 317 
relations of, with Ndshir- 
wdn, vii, 88 

the Haiti] ians, vii, 317, 
323 seq, 

embassy of, to Nishfrwdn, 

' Tii, 329’ 

, heat!# of the destruction of 
' ’ ''hiS! embassy by the Hai- 
^ ^ tilians, vii, 33<> 

' 'I ' o 


3 o 6 general index 


Kiian of Chin, leads forth his 
troops, vii, 330 
defeats the Haitalians, vii, 
332 

NusMrwan takes counsel 
about, vii, 333, 334 
descent of, from Afrdsiyib 
and Arj^sp, vii, 33 ^. 
Nrishfrwdn writes to, vii. 


w w / m • 

purposes to invade Irdn, vii, 
337 ' 

hears of Ndshfrwdn's ad- 
vance, vii, 33B 
takes counsel, vii, 338 
sends embassy to Nushfr- 
w 4 n, vn, 339 

hears his envoy's account 
of Ndshfrwdn, vii, 344 
offers to make affinity with 
Niishfrwhn, vii, 345 
attempts to outwit Nushfr- 
w 4 n, vii, 351 

gives audience to Mihrhn 
Sitdd, vh, 351 
invites Mihrhn Sithd to 
choose a wife for Niishfr- 
win, vii, 352 

consults the astrologers, vii, 


entrusts his daughter to 
Mihrdn Sitdd, vii, 354 
gives presents to Mihrdn 
SiUd, vii, 356 
parts with his daughter at 
the Jihdn, vii, 356 
daughter of, j 68 

described, vii, 352, 357^ 
evacuates territory, vii, 
358 

Khin of Chin {see too Parmdda), 
temf^ Hurmuzd, Khusrau 
Parwiz, and Yazdagird, 
17J, viii, 14X seq., 
190, 191, 204, 215, 220, 
263 seq., 306, 3x6 seq., 
342 $$q,, 346 seq,f 35X, 

352. 356^ 357. 363; ix. 

87, X02 ' 

' ^ ^uppofeecl ,war of, - with Hur- 
, / ' ; fptizdi vilip ^^2. ' ^ 


{ Khan of Chin, marriage of 
1 daughter of, with Niishfr- 

I ^ wan refeiTcd to, viii, 72 
I letter of, viii, 77 

dismissed by Hurmuzd with 
gifts, viii, 152 
refuses advances of Bahram 
Chubfiia, viii, 153 
becomes friends with Bah- 
ram Chdbina, viii, 172 
brother of, 173, viii, 190, 191 
reports flight of Curdya, 
viii, 351 

1 ordered to go in puisuit, 

viii, 351 

parley of, with Gurdya, 
viii, 35^ 

daughter of, viii, 190 

killed by lion-ape, J7J, 
viii, 322, 324 
queen of, viii, 190 

asks Bahrdm Chdbfna to 
avenge her daughter, viii, 

disgraced, viii, 344 
welcomes Bahrdm Chdbfna, 
viii, 316 

swears friendship with Bah- 
ram Chhbfna, viii, 317 
dominated by Makhtdra, 
viii, 317 

advised by Bahrdm Chdbina 
to slight Makhtdra, viii, 
318 

views fight between Balirdm 
Chdbfna and Makdtdra, 
viii, 320 

sends gifts to Bahrdm Chd- 
bina, viii, 32 x 
refuses to give up Bahrdm 
Chdbfna, viii, 329 
distrust Bahxim Chd- 
bfna, viii, 334 
impress of seal of, obtained 
by KharrM, viii, 338 
burns Kuldn's kindred, viii, 
3?4 

, seeks , in vain for Kharrdd, 
viii, 344 

' mourns ,for Bahrdm Chd- 
,, bfna, viii, 344 


GENERAL INDEX 3^7 

Khan of Chin, brother of, 173 Kharrad, son of Barzin 

= Bfzhan, ix, 97 muzd Garabzm or GalaD- 

Khanagi, Rhman noble, viii, 375, zfn), 171-X73, viii, 74, 7^> 

3y8 1 58 seq,, 205, 225, 257 seq., 

leads Caesar’s embassy to 269, 270, 331 seq., 381 ; 


Khusrau Parwfz, viii, 374 
Khusrau Parwfz’ gifts to, 
viii, 382 

returns to Riim, viii, 382 

Khdn-i-lrman (Arman q.v.), hi, 
290 

Khan j ast (Chf j ast, Urumiah) , 
lake in Azarb^ijdn, iv, 
136, 264 ; viii, 282 

Khar (Khnvdr) of Rai, district 
and town (now Aradhn), 
so called to distinguish 
it from a town of the same 
name in Pars, situated 
south-east of Tihrdn, i, 
3^>8, 374, 381 

Khdrazm (Khiva), country, 11, 
189, 190; iv, II, 12, 15, 
60, Gi, 72, I57» -^73. 186, 
287 ; vi, 72 ; vii, 238, 
359 

Kharazmians, people, ii, 190 ; 
vi, 72 

Kharijites, Muhammadan sect, i, 

Kharrdd, frdnian hero, i, 3^51 
ii, II, 22, 33, 73> 
hi, 113, 127, 139* 

273, 289 ; iv, 15 

Kliarrdd, nonce name assumed 
by Asfandiydr, v, 146, 

149 

Kharrdd, temp. Ardshfr Pdpa- 
kin, frinian warrior, loi, 
vi, 284 

takes Ardawin prisoner, vi, 

22$ 

temp. Bahrim Gir, Irinian 
chief, vii, 85 

temp. Kubid son of Ffriz, 
archimage, vii, 207 
temp . N ishirwin « (?) the, 

above, vii, 231 , 

' Kharrid, sacred Fire, vi,; 212 
and 'noU, 226 , 391, 
Kharrid^ bower of, vii,,' S3, 


IX, 4, II, 12, 2^ 
sent by Hurmuzd as envoy 
to Siwa, viii, no 
beguiles Sawa and flees, vhi, 

III 

flight of, reported to Siwa, 
vhi, 1 12 

counsels Bahrini Chubiiia, 
vhi, I2T 

seeks, refuge, viii, 123 
counts franian slain, viii, 
127 

blames and counsels Bahrim 
Chflbfna for his behaviour 
to Parmida, viii, 144, 
146 

questions Bahrim Chibfna 
on his adventure with the 
omger, vhi, 158 
flees from Balkh with arch- 
scribe, vhi, 159 
makes report of Bahrim 
Chibfna to Hurmuzd, viii, 
160 

real name of, vhi, 190 
waits on Khusrau Parwfz, 
vhi, 252 

speech of, to Caesar, viii, 259, 
^75 

masters Caesar s talismans, 
viii, 274, 275 
Ccesar’s gift to, viii, 278 
praised by Caesar, vhi, 279 
made chief minister, vhi, 3*4 
speech of, to Khin, viii, 33^^ 
attempts to prejudice Bah- 
rim Chibfna to the Khin, 
viii, 333 

intrigues against Bahrim 
Chibfna, vih, 334 
. cures daughter of queen of 
Chin, viii, 33^ , 

incites Kulin to kill Bahrim 
Chibina, viii, 337 
, ,asks booh of, queen of Chin, 
' ' ' wiii, '33'^^ 


GENERAL INDEX 


308 

Kharrdd, returns to frin and is 

rewarded, viii, 345 
reads out Csesar's letter to 
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 37^ 
end of, ix, 4 

chosen to visit Khusrau 
Parwiz at Taisafun, ix, 9 
Ashtad and, parley with 
Galindsh, ix, ii 
visit Khusrau Parwiz, ix, 
12 

report to Shirwi, ix, 27 

Kharrdd, frinian general, de- 
feats Khazars, viii, 96 

Kharrdd, father of liurmuzd, ix, 
102 

Khash^sh, Tdrinian hero, v, 47 
made leader of the van, v, 
46 

Khath (Cathay), northern China, 
ii, 357 

Khatldn (Khnttal), a general 
name for the non-Muham- 
madan regions to the 
north and east of Khurd- 
sdn (—Haitdl), more 
specifically a district on 
the right bank of the 
upper Oxus west of, or 
forming part of, Badakh- 
shdn, iii, 218, 228; iv, 
65 ; vii, 94. 331, 359 

Khdtfin, consort of the Khdn of 
Chfn, vii, 5 

fate of, in war with Bahrdm 
Gur, vii, 5 

Khdwar, the West or Khnid- 
s4n (?), perhaps «Khdr 
q.v., iv, I47, 148. Cf. 
K^ran (mountain). 

Khazar, Ktiazars, region and 
people north of the Can* 
casus, i, 17 ; ii, 285 ; iv, 
71 ^ 3 x 6 , 35» 35^» 3^x J 

vii, 83, 2x4, 224; 'Viii, 

94. 377, 379 
invasion of, viii, 72, 93 
defeated, viii, 96 , 

Khazarwdn,' Tdrdpian' hero, ^42 
' Shamisds and, invade Zibu- 
distin, 'i,'345, 358/' , 


Khazarwan parleyed with by 
Mihrab to gain time, i, 
358 

slain by Z41, 1, 360 ; ii, 18 
Kihazarwan, temp. Bahrdm Gfir, 
king of Gfldn, vii, 85 
takes the Khdn prisoner, 
vii, 90 

Khazarwdn, frdniaii noble, temp. 
Khusrau Parwiz, speech 
of, viii, 241 

Khazrd, treasure, viii, 406 and 
note 

Khildfat, the, i, 12 seq. 

KhiVat, rohc of honour, i, 82 
Khir, place on the south-western 
shore of Lake Niris in 
Pdrs, vi, 198 

Khisr (A1 Khidr, q.v.), chief and 
prophet, vi, 159 
goes with Sikandar to the 
Gloom, vi, 159 

parts company with Sikaii- 
dar, vi, 160 

finds the Fount of Life, vi, 
160 

Khiva (Kharazm), country, ii, 
190 

Khorasan. See Khurdsdn. 
Khshathr6-saoka (Gang-dizh ?), 
« stronghold, ii, 189, 190 
Khudai-ndma (Bdstdn-Ndma), i, 
66 ; V, 24 

Khurdsdn, province in north- 
eastern frdn, 175, ii, 399 ; 
iv, 148, 203 ; V, 28, 77 ; 
vi, 242, 30X ; vii, 100, 
214, 224, 237, 335 ; viii, 
78, 94, 24X. 3x3. 355. 3^9 ; 
ix, 59; fi9» ^7; 92 

Narsf made ruler of. vii, 
99 

governor of, viii, 75 
prince of, viii, 173 
Mdhwf becomes master of, 
ix, 1 14 

Khurdsdn, chieftain, viii, 241 
, speech of, viii, 240 
KIhurdsdnf. 5^^ Mdkh. 
,Khurdd(i; axneshaspenta, i, 88 ; 
' ' ' dii^ 287, '328 , 


GENERAL INDEX 3^9 


Khurdad, month and day, i, 88, 
T59; vn, 112, 225, 351; 
viii, 23, 173 

Kliurni, seat (jf an oracle, vi, Sz 
meaning of, vi, 82 
oracle ot, consulted, vi, 184 

Khurra-i-Ardshi'r. See Ardshir 
Khurra. 

Khurram Abid (Karkh ?), city, 
vi, 327, 357 and note 

Klmrsin'd, genius and day, i, 88 ; 
V, 9 2 note 

Khurshid, Iranian chief, viii, 
270, 296 

Khushnawais, ruler of the Haita- 
lians, 166, vil, i94> 198, 
359 \ viii, 75, 168, 242, 
245, 267 

Piruz advances against, vii, 
164 

writes to Pi'rdz, vii, 1.6$ ^ ^ 
ajipeals to liahrdm Gdr’s 
treaty, vii, 166 
prayer of, to God, vii, 167 
digs a trench, vii, 67 
defeats Piniz by a feint, vii, 
168 

correspondence of, with 
Siifarai, vii, 174 seq, 
defeated by Shfarai, vii, 
177 

takes refuge in Kuhandizh, 
vii, X77 

sues for peace, vii, 1 78 
releases liub^d, Ardshir, and 
other captives, and gives 
up the spoil, vii, 180 ' 
Khusrau, Shdh. See Kai Khus- 
rau« 

Khusrau, friaian noble, X63, 
x64r vi, 408 

elected Shih in succession 
to Yazdagird son of $h^* 
p dr, vi, 395 7 vii, II 
proposes that Bahrdm Gdr 
shall begin the ordeal, vi, 
409 , , 

does hotnage to Bahrto Gur* 
vi* 410 

honohiecl b)?"', Babirdtn 'Gdr, 
,, vii, 10 . ' ' ' 


Khusrau, father of Khazarwan, 
viii, 241, 296 (?) 

Khusrau Parwiz, son oi Idiir- 
muzd, Shah. 17^-175, v, 
294, 306 note ; vi, 3 ; vni, 
71, 74, 170, 173, I7‘l> 

182, 191 304- 

306, 316, 334, 335) 34-» 
358, 367 seq., 395 '^ote, 
413 note; ix, 4 seq., ii, 
12, 25, 26 7 iote, 30, 31, 33 
seq., 38 seq., 45 ^<^4- 
horse of, story of, viii, 91 _ ^ 
Plurmuzd plots to kill, viii, 

174 

flees, viii, 175 

adherents gather round, 
viii, 175 

swear fealty to, viu, 17b 
goes to Baghdad, viii, 184 
visits Hurniuzd in prison* 
viii, 185, 198, 230 
extensive historical con- 
quests of, viii, 187 
materials for reign of, in 
Shahnama, viii, 187 
flight of, historical, from 
Ctesiphon, viii, 188 
affects Christianity in exile, 
viii, 188 

helped on terms by Emperor 
Maurice, viii, 188 
historical campaign of,^ 
against Bahrain Chdbina, 
viii, 1 89 

visits of, to Elre-temple at 
Shfz, viii, 190 > 283. 307 ^ 
312 

Nu’man bin Munzfr exe- 
cuted by, viii, 190 
triumphal arch of, vm, 
192 . 

Assurbanipal and, reigns 'Oi, 

compared, viii, 193 

fall of, historical account pf, 

viii, 193 

attempts' of Eleraclius to 
■' peace with, viii, 1 94» 

■ ' ',195 ' 

treatment^ of defeated gen- 

' I , .prais by, viw,'i94 


310 GENERAL 

Khusrau IPaxwiz, prediction con- 
cerning, viii, 194 
Reign ot, 196, viii, 186 buq. 

Note on, viii, 186 seq. 
Hurmnzd's requebts to, viii, 

199 

spies’ report of Bahram 
Ctiiibina to, viu, 201 
takes counsel, viii, 202 
marches to meet Bahr 4 m 
Chiibma, viii, 203 
interview of, ■with Bahram 
Chhbina, viii, 204 seq. 
attacked by Turk and saved 
by Gustaham, viii, 220 
dissuaded from making a 
night-attack, viii, 224 
troops of, tampered with by 
Bahram Chdbina, viii, 
226 

sends away his baggage, 
viii, 228 

combat of, with Bahrdm 
Chhbina, viii, 228, 229 
retreats to, and holds, the 
bridge of Nahrawdn, viii, 
228 

worsts Yaldn-sfna, viii, 229 
flees to Taisafdn, viii, 229 
counselled by Hurmuzd, 
viii, 230 

prepares to flee, viii, 231^ 
takes refuge in a shrine, 
viii, 233 

arrives at B 4 bil, viii, 249 
entertained by Kais, viii, 250 
Mihrin Sitid, viii, 251 ^ 
town of K 4 rs 4 n and, viii, 
252 

interview of, with Hermit, 
viii, 254 

warned against, Gustaham, 
viii, 255> 256 

' welcomed, by viii, 

. , 257 ' ' ' 

takes up his abode at 
VVaiigh* viii^ 257 
instructs^ :his_ ei^bassy to 
'/'Cses^r,‘ viii, 257' ' . , , 
',C^s^',,o.|fets /daughter' 'to. 


INDEX 

Khusrau Parwiz, accepts Cmsar’s 
offer, viii, 269, 270 
welcomes Niyaids and 
Maryam, viii, 280 
marche'^ io Diik, viii, 282 
Mausil and, viii, 2 S3 
returns to Ddk, viii, 284 
Ddrd Panah goes over to, 
viii, 286 

forges letter to Bahrain 
Chhbma, viii, 286 
sends corpse of K6t to 
Csesar, viii, 291 
decides to fight without 
Rdman help, viii, 292, 293 
arrays his host, viii, 293 
resolves to fight in person, 
viii, 295 

bodyguard of, viii, 296 
leaves Bahrdm in charge of 
host, viii, 296 

flees from Bahrdm Chdbfna, 
viii, 298 

saved by Surdsh, viii, 299 
returns to Niydtiis and 
Maryam, viii, 299 
suspected of Christian ten- 
dencies, viii, 308 
gives banquet to Niydtds 
and Rdmans, viii, 309 
restores captured cities to 
Rdm, viii, 312 
makes Kharrdd, son of Bar- 
zfn, chief minister, viii, 

proclamation of, viii, 314 
demands cijctradition of Bah- 
. r^m Chdbfna, viii, 328 
advised to send envoy to 
Kh 4 n, viii, 329 
resolves to put Bandwf to 
death, viii, 354 
summons Gustaham, viii, 
355 ' 

hears of Gurdya’s doings, 

' viii, 35^# ,353 
writes to Gurdya viii, 359 
'hehrs of the death of .Gusta- 
hum,' viii, 3^2 - 
wblCom^s Gur^y^ to' court, 
' ' - viii; 362 ' ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


311 


Khusrau Parwiz, Gunlya dresses | 
up to please, viu. 3i'>3 I 

warned by Shirln against 1 

Giirdya, viii, 3O4 | 

makes Gurclya overseer ox j 
royal bower, viii, 364 ! 

oppresses Rai, viii, 3^5 
relieves Rai, viii, ... 
organizes the realm, viii, 369 
seq, 

puts to death adherents ot 
Bandwi and Gustaham, 
viii, 370 , . . , 

consults astrologers on birth 
of Slitrwi, viii, 37^ 
grieved at Shirwi's horo- 
scope, viii, 372 
consults the high priest, 
viii, 372 
writes to Caesar, viii, 373 .. 
Cmsar's embassy to, viii, 

374 

gives Cmsar’s gilts to Shirwf, 
viii, 381 

presents to IGi^nagi, viu, 
382 

and Sldrin, ix, 7 

Story of, T74> viii, 3^2 seq. 
equipage of, for the chase, 

viii, 3^4 ... 0. 

married to Sidriii, vm, 3.80 
justihes his marriage, vm, 
388 

gives gilded chamber to 
Shfrin, viii, 389 
displeasured with Shfrwi, 
viii, 39^ 

and throne of T^kdfs, vm, 
391 $eq. 

palace of, story of, viii, 4^0 

seq. 

Farghin and, viii,, 401 seq. 
imprisons Hhman artiheets, 
viii, 402 

releases Rhman axtincers, 
viii, 4^$ 

treasures of, viii, 406 
Giitkz intrigues against, vm, 
408' , , . 

device of, against GurizJ and 
,C»$aT, viii, 4<^9 ' / 


viii, 


5 , 9 , 


Khusran Parwiz, sends Farrukh- 
zad to the host, vui, 

hears Kubad proclaimed 
Shah, VIU, .lib _ 
arms and hides in garden, 
viii, 417 , , 

palace of, plundered, vni, 

418 

discovered, viii, 419 
holds talk with Farrukhzad, 
viii, 420 

recalls former presage, vm, 

420 

imprisoned, viii,^ 421 
duration of reign of, 

421 

charges against, ix, 4» 

10 

reply of, to charges, ix, 5» 

14 seq. 

Ilaram of, ix, 4, 5 
last days of, Thcophancs 
account of, ix, 6 
Shfrwi’s treatment of, ix, 7 
sons of, executed* ix,^ 7» .35 
imprisoned at Taisafim, ix, 

companioned by Shinn, ix, 

Birbad visits, ix, 2<) 
laments over, ix, 30 
steed of, ix, 30 
sonof, ix, 31 

referred to, ix, 33 and nff 
kingdom of Hfra abolished 
by, ix, 66 

Muhammad^s letter to, ix, 
66 

Khusrau and SMrin, Persian 

poem, viii, 192 

Khusrau, father of Piniz, 175 . 

vii, 44 * 4 ^* 48 * 49i 5 G 57 
Khusrau, a miller, X76, ix, 99- 
See Miller* 

Khutaa,, town and 

eastern Turkistan, X40, 
ii, 277) 288, 357* 

qSH : iii, 107, 242, 247 ; 

' iv^ 26, 219 ; ^vli, 84. 115* 
. , ' 33 ^,^ 334*''359 


GENEBAL INDEX 


312 

Kliiitan, raided by Giv. lii, 247 
monarch of, iv, 1 1 
Afrdsiyab, iv, 230 
Kai J\hiisrau marches 
tlirough, IV, 240 
people ol, make submission 
to Nushirwan, vu, 360 
Khuza' Arab tribe, vi, 65 

rule of, ended by Sikandar, 
vi, 120 

Kiihzin, a king of Pars, iv, 146, 
191 

meets Kai Khiisrau in 
Suglid, iv, 255 

Khhzians, people of Khiizisthu, 
q,v,, iv, 146 

KhhzistAn (Susiana, 'Arabistdn), 
province at the head of 
the Persian Gulf, vi, 290 
and note, 298, 327, 357 ; 
viii, 109 and note, 193 
annexed by Arabs, ix, 68 
Khuzri, treasui’e, ix, 20 
Khvaifchk-das, 1, 60 
Catullus on, i, 60 
Khydns (Hvyaonas), v, 13, 25 
Kibchik, region east of the J ax- 
ates and north of T4sh- 
kand, iv, 254 ; ix, 93 
Kibtfs, vi, 397 and note 
Kfmdk, a river in Kibch 4 k, iv, 
203, 231 

Kimmerians, the, i, 1 7 
Kindm-i-Asfrdn, near to, or iden- 
tical with, the ruins of 
Shds (Sds, Susa), vi, 327, 
357 and note 
King, the ideal, iii, 16 

of kings, title of, vi, 193, 197 
meaning of, in Achae- 
menian and Parthian 
times, vi, 198 
assumed by Ardshfr Pipa- 
kin, vi, 193, 199, 254, 
25 ^, «73 

of the Commons, vii, 3 , 
piece in 'vii, 382,. 385 
- position of, yii, 388, '422 
oheeik. to, vi’, 422 ' , 

' ^ ^,nlate'tOpvii,'423 . d ; 

‘ ^pi#ce_ ip ;nat 4 ^' vii,,, 3f-i, ^ 389 


I Kings, Book of, Firdausi’s, i, 43 
I lAisiaii, viii, 73 

Tribal See Tribal. 

Kirmaii, region in southern Iran, 
iv, 14G ; vi, 31, 47, 
57, 59, 199, 202, 205, 245, 
252; vii, 214; viii, 313 
Dard retires to, vi, 46 
etymology of, vi. 204, 236 
Ardshir Papakan’s invasion 
of, vi, 205, 245 

Kirmdnshdh, title, vi, 313, 368 
Kirmanshdli, city between Bagh- 
dad and Hamadan, vii, 
187 : viii, 192 

Kirmanshahfin, city in Kirman, 
south of Yazd, vi, 368 
Kfrwin (Karwan, district north 
of Jaxarics ?), ix, 93 
Kfrwi, frhnian noble, vii, 23 
story of, vii, 22 

Kishmar, place south of Nishd- 
piir in the Kiihistan dis- 
trict of Khurhsdn, v, 35 
Cypress of, v, 27 
account of, v, 28, 34 
Gushtdsp and, v, 34 
Kishwdd, frdnian hero, father 
of Gddarz, 151, i, 207, 
34 T 365; m 4 » 3 B 12, 
j8, 22, 33, 70, 73, 107, 1 12, 
13^, 31^. 384. 399, 404, 
409; iii, 19, 24, 33, 45, 
100, 121, 123, 126, 143, 
154, 187, 215, 289, 302, 
305, 30B, 31 1, 327, 339; 
iv, 20, 32, 35, 63, 147, 
174, 180, 263, 294, 310, 
360, viii, 104 

Kiran, Shfddsh, and, pursue 
Kurdkhdn, i, 354 
sent by Zkl to release the 
frdnian captives, i, 367 
Kishwaristdn, Irinian hero, iv, 
148 

commands the troops from 
Barbaristin and Rdm, iv, 

' 

,Sh 4 h, / 66 , ' $ee NiisWr- 
. ^ w4ri, ' ^ ' 

KitradMfNask, i,' 373 / 


GENERAL INDEX 


3^3 


Knatliaiti, Pairika, female per- 
soiiification of idolatry, i, 
172 

Kobad, Shall. Sco Kiibad. 
Ktesias, Greek liistoriaa (stli 
century B.C), vi, 13, 68 
legend of Cyrus in, ii, 9 ; vi, 

195 

Gutschmid on, vi, 195 
account of Semiramis in, v, 

293 

Persica of, v, 293 
Ktibdd, frdnian hero, brother of 
Kdran, 142, i, 207 
acts as Minuchihr’s scout, i, 
217 

parleys with Tiir, i, 217 
accepts Birman's challenge 
to single combat, i, 347 
dissuaded by Kiran, i, 347 
reply of, i, 347 
figiits and is slain, i, 348 
Kubid, Shih. See Kai Kubid. 
Kubid, son of Pirdz and father 
of Ni'ishfrwin, Shdh { Ko- 
bad), 166, vi, 3, 208 ; 
vii, 1 79 seq, and note, 226, 
247 ; viii, 25, 46, 72, 168, 
169, 245, 265, 285, 312, 
3()9 ; ix, 22, 25 
captivity of, among the 
Haitdliahs, vii, 160 
leads th(j rearguard in the 
war with the Turkmans 
(Haitilians), vii, 164 
taken prisoner, vii, 168 
released, vii, 180 
made Shih instead of Bal- 
ish, vii, 182, 188 
Reign of, x66, vii, 183 seq. 
Note on, vii, 183 seq, 
historical sketch of, vii, 
183 

title of, viii, 183 and note 
reform of taxation by, vii, 
183 note, 215 

with the help of Shiphr , of 
Rai overthrows ' and pute 
Shfarai.to death, vii, 
seq, /' 

dethrpnodi '/Vh, 3:84, 195 ", 


Kubad, imprisoned, vii, 184 
escapes, vii, 1S4, 197 
marriage of, vu, 184, 186, 
19S 

gives his wife a signet-ring, 
vii, 198 

cedes Chaghan to the Hai- 
talians in return for their 
help, vii, 198 
goes to Ahwhz, vii, 198 
hears of the birth of Nhslih" 
wdn, vii, igg 

marches on Taisaffm, vii, 

199 

pardons the Iranians and 
Jamhsp, vii, 200 
makes Rizmihr chief minis- 
ter, vii, 200 

wars of, with Rum, vii, 187, 

200 

takes cities from Rhm, vii, 

200 

makes his capital at - Ma- 
da'in, vii, 201 

builds a city and hospital, 
vii, 201 

drought m reign of, vii, 201 
Mazdak and, vii, 184, 201 
seq. 

Mazdak's parable to, vii, 

201 

converted by Mazdak, vii, 
184, 204 

presides over the disputa- 
tion between Nhshfrwan 
and Mazdak, vii, 207 
gives judgment against Maz- 
dak, vii, 208 

hands over Mazdak and 
his followers to Nhshfr- 
' win, vii, 208 
repentence of, vii, 209 
testament of, vii, 210, 316 
ago of, vii, 210 
death of, vii, 210 
sons of, vii, 316 
Knbid (Shfryrf q,v,), son of Khus- 
' -xau, iE^arwfz and Maryam, 

' , ” Shih, 17^, viii, J90, 196 ; 
, , ix/z seqy, g, tf, 12, 14^ 

„ ''32,, 47 » ^ 4 " , 


314 GENERAL 

Kubatl (Shi'rwi) , secTct and public 
names ol, viii, 37 
proclaimed Shah, vin, 
imprisons Khnsrau Parwi^, 
viii, 4^1 

accedes to throne, viii, 4^1 
Reign of, J75, 3 

Note on, ix, 3 
tragic, ix, 3 

pestilence during, ix, 3 
boorisbness of, ix, 3 
diflicult situation of, ix, 3 
reproached by Ins sisters, ix, 

7 

Kubid, son of J am son of Kubad, 
vii, 316 

plot to make, Shdh, vii, 31^^ 
Kubard, Tdranian hero, iv, 190 
commands the left, iv, 190 
Kdch, tribe or town (Kuk ?) in 
Kirmin, ii, 226 

Kdfa, city west of the Euphrates 
and in the neighbourhood of 
Mashad ’Ah (Nedjef), viii, 
190 ; ix, 68, 69 
wood of, vi, 381 
founded by Sa’ad,‘ix, 67 
Kdh, nonce name assumed by 
Hiimhn, iii, 198 

Kuhandizh (Baigand q.v,), vii, 

^77 , . 

Khdshnawhz takes refuge in, 

vii, 177 

Kuhfla, Tiirhnian hero, iv, 181 
slain by Mimichihr, iv, 181 
Kuhistdn, generally a mountain- 
ous region, particularly 
that of northern Xrhn, 
Parthia, or of the high 
ranges further south, but 
in the ' $hdhndma=5=Mh 
wara’u'n-Nahr (Xransox- 
ania), fi, ^99 ' . 

Kuhram, Xdrihian Kero, xsx, 11, 

349' 

chosen ' to fight with Barta, 
iv, 97 ; V, 29 ; . . 

' ‘ slain by B«a, iv, to ^5 < ' ’ 
Kphram, brother' , or , $6n, ' of ' Ax-. 

b' : ' rob 1 2i ■ 4 i; * 59 


INDEX 

Kuhram, commands one wing of 
the host, V, 46 
in (diicd, V, 56 
sont by Arja.-^p to attack 
llalkh, V, 90 
troops ol, storm Balkli, burn 
the Fire-temple, and slay 
Zarduhsht and the priests, 

V, 92 

stationed on the left, v, 95 
mortally wounds Farshid- 
ward, V, 95 

appointed by Arjdsp to send 
away the spoil of Balkli 
in the charge of his 
younger brothers, v, 108 
commands the right, v, no 
defeated by Astandiydr, v, 
no 

bidden to prepare for war, 

V, 151 

retreats to the Brazen Hold, 
V, 152 

mistakes Bishiitan for As- 
fandiyhr, v, 152 
hears the cries of the Ir4n- 
ian watch from the Brazen 
Hold and takes counsel 
with Andarimhn, v, 155 
makes for the Brazen Hold 
with his troops, v, 156 
. pursued by Asfandiyhr, v, 
156 

encountered and taken 
prisoner by Asfandiyhr, 

V, 157 

executed, v, 158 and note 
Kujhrdn, city and province on 
the Persian Gulf, vi, 205* 
206, 232 

HaftwM migrates from, to 
stronghold, vi, 235 
Kulbdd, Xhrdnian hero, brother 
of ,Pfrdn, 14^, x^x, i, 92, 
342 ; ii, 18, 264, 388 ; 
iii, 166, 177, 19^* 3:99, 205, 
210, |222,, 231, 234, 252 ; 

, , iv, 10, 26 

wounded 'hy Zil, i, ,361 
’ death' and, revival' of, da 
. C; ' legend,,' db; ; y ' 


GENERAL 

Kulboti, pursues Kai Khusrau, ii, 
J77 se^h 

Lliuseii tr* figiit with Fari- 
biirz, iv, «>7 

slam by ibirfbury., iv, 99 
Kiiiun, Turanian hero, i, 382, 387 
sent by Afrdsiydb to inter- 
cept Rustam, i, 383 
slain by Rustam, i, 386 
Kuli'in, Turk in league with 
Kliarrad against Bahram 
Chiibi'na, jyy, viii, 335 
incited by Kharrad to kill 
Jialiram Qiubina, viii, 337 
arrives at Marv by help of 
Khdii’s S(‘al, viii, 339 
seeks interview with Bah- 
rain Chiibi'na, viii, 339 
stubs Bahr 4 m Chiibma, viii, 

340 

maltreated, viii, 340 
kindred of, burnt, viii, 344 
Kiini, city in Trdk 'Ajanii, 
between Tihrdn and Ka- 
shdn, ii, 399 

bestowed on (iiv by Kai 
Kills, ii, 399 

Kai Khusrau, iv, 298 
Kunidr, city or cape in India, ii, 

303 and note 

Kimdrav, minister of Zahh^k, 

140 

myth ilogical origin of, i, 143 
Farki I'm and, Story of, 140, 
i, 1O4 

goes to Zahhdk with tidings 
of Farid im, x, 165 
Kundur, TiWnian hero, iii, X52, 

185, 2x0, 215, 25X ; v, 
1x2, 

worsted by Rustam, iii, 224 
stationed on the rigixt, v, 94 
Kunduz (Knhandbh, Baigand 
q.v}}, iv, 15X 
Afrisiyib encamps at, iv, 

15X 

marches from, iv, t54 
Knr (Cyrus), river in Tran^oan* 
casia lowing ' into. , 

^ ' ' Caspian sea, k;, r3 
'|<jijraish, Arab bibo,', vi,; 65, - 


INDEX 315 

ICurakhan, son of Afrdsiyab, i, 
92 ; iv, 10 

counsels Afrasiyab, iii, 301 
summoned and sent with 
troops to Bukhara by 
Afrhsiyab, iv, 1 54 
joined by Afrdsiydb, iv, 186 
defeated by Gustaham son 
of Naudar, iv, 193 
defeat of, announced to 
Afr 4 siydb, iv, 194 

Kxxrikhdn, governor of Balkh, 
vixi, 22 

Kuriin, vi, 65 ; viii, 277 note ; 
ix, 81 and nute 
quoted, i, 99 ; v, 166 ; viii, 
42, 192 ; ix, Si and note 
references to Alexander the 
Great in, vi, 15, 78, 84 
legend of Moses and the 
salt fish in, vi, 77 
Gog and Magog in, vi, 78 

Kurd, Kurds, the people of 
Kurdistdn q,v,, 161, i, 9 ; 
vi, 193 > 203, 257 
language, i, 64 
legend of the origin of the, 
i, 146 

Ardshfr Papakdn's war with, 
in Kdrndmak, vi, xgO, 
206, 256 

Shdhndma, vi, 230 seq. 

Kurdistan, mountainous region 
north of Mesopotamia, vi, 
330 

Kurdzdd, daughter of Mihrak 
q,v. 

Kuria Muria Islands, off the 
southern coast of Arabia, 
vi, 72 

Kurfikhin, Tfirinian warrior, i, 
353 

sent by Afrfaiyib to attack 
Pte, i, 353 

Kurus, Indian tribal race, iv, 

Kds, i, ‘See Tammfsha. 
Rdman warrior, 'viii, 

b, . 'Slain' by, Babtdm 'Ch^bina 

" / ^ ; vili,’,2^0i j ' :T , ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


316 

K6t, corpse of, sent back to 
Riunans, viii, 291 
Kutcli (read Kiich q.v.), iii, 34 
Kutib, father of Husain (or 
Hahy) one of Firdausi’s 
patrons, i, 35 ; ix, 121 
Kyaxares (Kastarit), king or 
chief and leader in the 
confederacy that over- 
threw Nineveh, i, iS 


L 

Labarum, the, v, 306 note 

Lidm (Pashan), battle of, iii, 
13 seq,, 80 seq., 89 seq., 
123 ; iv, 27, 37, 90, 120, 

299 

Lagus, Ptolemy son of. See 
Ptolemy. 

Lahh^k, Thrinian hero, brother 
of Pirin, 152, i, 92 ; ii, 
323 note ; iii, 90, 166, 
198; iv, 7, 71, 122, T25, 
133, 160, 162 

summons Pirdn to save 
Farangis, ii, 322 
pursues the frhnians to 
Mount Hamhwan, iii, 135 
commands with Farshid- 
ward the right wing, iv, 26 
attacks the frdnians in 
flank, iv, 82 

opposed by Gurgin, iv, 83 
goes to help Pirdn and 
attacks Giv, iv, 85 
prowess of, iv, 86 
put in chief command with 
Farshfdward, iv, 94 
Pirdn's instructions to, iv, 
95 

Farshfdwar<^ and, heat of the 
death of Pfrin,; and the 
coming of Kai Khusrau> 
iv, 1 12 , 

lament for PMn, Iv, %t^ 
tak^ counsel with the host, 

Iv, ’113, ^ i . : , 
;ighti, an'^ ds'cape , from, ■ 
fritiiah outp6$t, 


Lahhak, Farshfdward and, re- 
ferred to, iv, 1 1 8, 120, 126 
repose themselves, iv, 121 
coipses of, brought back 
by Bfzhan, iv, 126, 
132 

deaths of, announced to 
Afrasiyab, iv, 152 

Lambak, a water-carrier, 164 
entertains Bahrdm Giir, vii, 
13 seq. 

rewarded by Bahrain Giir, 
vii, 20 

Land of Darkness. See Gloom. 

Land-tax, Mahmhd’s remission 
of, vi, 196, 208 
Nushfrwdn’s reform of, vii, 
215, 225 

Latin version, early, of Pseiido- 
Callisthenes. See Julius 
Valerius. 

Laundercr, a, foster-father of 
Ddrdb, 158, v, 292 
finds Ddrdb in the Fardt, v, 
296 

Ddrdb adopted by, and his 
wife, V, 297 

quits his home with wife 
and Ddrdb and settles 
elsewhere, v, 29B 
becomes wealthy but 
sticks to trade, v, 298 
perturbed at Ddrdb’s youth- 
ful escapades, v, 298 
brings up Ddrdb to bo a 
cavalier, v, 299 
Ddrdb's lack of natural 
affection for, v, 300 
wife of, informs Ddrdb of 
his case, v, 300 
Rashnawdd sends for, and 
his wife, v, 304 
informed by, of the case, 
of Ddrdb, v, 308 
visits, with his wife, Ddrdb 
at his accession, v, 311 
dismissed with gifts, v, 312 

Ldzhawardf, , fort, ix, 93 
Laaica,, regipn' pn ' the eastern 
; shbte 'of the' Black Sea, 

, 'viv, 215; yiii, .,194 ’ 


GENERAL INDEX 


Lazic war, renewed by Hnr- 
muzd, viii, 76 

Chi\bma defeated 
in, viii, 76 

Leech of Kaid, 159. See Kaid. 

Legend, Syriac Ciiristian, of 
Alexander. See Syriac. 

Leo, constellation, ii, 405 ; iii, 
81, 318; vi, 172, 180; 
vii, 410 ; viii, 122, 394 

Libra, constellation, i, 310 ; vi, 
97 

Life, Fount of. See Fount. 

Water of, x6o .Id. 

Idutarch's, of Alexander the 
Great, vi, 67 

Lion, lions, slain by Rakhsh, x43, 
ib 45 

Asfandiy^r, 156, v, 125 
liahrdni Giir, i63’-i6s, vii, 
55 > 77 

-ape, J/y, viii, 322 seq, 

Idon's House, constellation of 
Leo, i, 1 88 

lion's Mouth, the, place, iv, 245 

J^oadstoiie, chamber of, viii, 275 

suspended cavalier in, viii, 

Longiinanus (Dirdzdast), title of 
Artaxerxes I, son of Xer- 
xes, V, 281 

Lucerne {Medioa^o sativa), tax 
on, vii, 215 

Liich, perhaps Kiich q.v., vii, 
362 

captives from, settled at 
Sdrsin, vii, 328 

Luhrdsp, Shdh, 154, J55, i, 42 ; 
d, 3 » 9 ; iv, 57» I 35 » 

337. 347. 35<> f v, 10, 
20, 21 and note, 26, 29, 
30, 38, 64, 68, 80, 86, 87, 
90 seq,, 98 seq., 104, 114, 
1,41, 154, 155, 157, 159. 

160, 167, 171, 180, %S$, 

205, 208, 243, 255, 281, 

2H4 ; vi, 55, 200 ; viii, 

95, 148, 213, 270, 392; 
ix, 3:04 

sent to the Alim hy Kai 
Khusmu, iv, ,14 


3W 

Luhrdsp, successes of, iv, 60, 

72: 

troops of, recalled, iv, 145 
nominated by Surdsh to be 
Kai Khusrau’s successor, 
iv, 281 

crowned by Kai Khusraii, 
iv, 300 

Zal's protest against the 
succession of, iv, 301 
succession of, justified by 
Kai Khusrau, iv, 301 
acknowledged by Zal, iv, 
302 

the chiefs, iv, 303 
undertakes to respect Kai 
Khusrad’s wives, iv, 305 
counselled and farewelled 
by Kai Khusrau, iv, 306 
addresses the chiefs, iv, 31 1 
receives the fealty of Zil 
and other chiefs, iv, 312 
praises and rewards Z41, 
iv, 312 

coronation of, iv, 312 
Reign of, 254, iv, 314 seq. 

Note on, iv, 314 seq. 
harangues the chiefs, iv, 316 
makes Balkh his capital, iv, 

3x7 

builds the Fire-temple of 
Barzfn, iv, 318 
shows favour to the grand- 
sons of Kai Kills, iv, 318, 
321 seq. 

refuses to appoint Gush- 
tisp his heir, iv, 319 
sends Zarlr in pursuit of 
Gushtisp, iv, 320 
pardons Gushiisp, iv, 322 
hears of Guslitisp's flight, 
iv, 323 

consults Zarfr and the sages, 
iv, 323 

searches in vain for Oush- 
t4sp, iv, 324 

receives Kdhls, ' Caesar's en- 
voy, in audience, iv, 357 
entertains Kiihs, iv, 337 
nonsuits Zdxir, iy, 358 
(Questions Hil 4 s, iv, 338 ; 


3i8 


GENERAL INDEX 


Lnhrasp, dismisses Kalus with 
honour, iv, 359 
sends Zarii with other chiefs 
on a mission to Riim, iv, 
359 

messasEje of, to Caesar, iv, 361, 
welcomes and crowns Gush- 
tdsp on his return to 
irdn, iv, 364 

resigns the throne to Gush- 
tdsp and becomes a de- 
votee, V, 31 

converted by Zarduhsht, v, 

33 , . . 

advises Gushtdsp to resign 
the kingship to Asfan- 
diy^r, v, 66 
opposes Kuhram, v, 91 
slain, V, 91, 93» 99 
Asfandiy^r’s vow to avenge, 
V, 103 

Lumsden, his edition of the 
Shhhn^ma, i, 76 
Luna. See Moon. 


M 

Ma, Hittite goddess, vi, 71 
B=sCybele, vi, 71 
priestesses of Amazons, vi, 

71 

Macau, his edition of the Sh^h- 
nimai i, 76 ; vi, 60 
Mace, Faridiin's, i, x6i, 163, 165. 
168 

the making of, i, 158 
Macedonia, vi, 8x, S2 
Macedonian invasion of the East, 
vi, 68, 69 

M^chin (Chma), ii, 357 PoU, 37^^ 

394; iii, 46, ;253, 265,; 
: iv, I5L 203* »29, 23t,.!234» 
252; rp ^45; -vin, 
4X7, j t*, 107 '' 

Machine, ’hying# of ^ICai Ifths, ii# 
'103' ' 

Macrianus, Ptaeto^ian^pre^e9ti vi, 

294-; ' " ” . , ; ' '' / 

, treachery'* of# 

, , Yi#'294\: ''' ^ 


M’Crindle, Ancient India of, 
quoted, vi, 68, 80 
Mada. See Medcs. 

Maddln, Ctcsiphon (Taisafun), 
and the neighbouring 
cities, J6y, 1^4, vii, 201, 
244, 266, 272, 337, 363 ; 
viii, 4, 46, 192, 193 
Nusthrwan sends his Riiman 
captives to, vii, 259 
palace of Khusrau Parwiz 
at, story of, viii, 400 
Madik, king of the Kurds, mean- 
ing of, \i, 203, 256 
Madofrya^, mountain, part of 
the Albiirz range, south- 
east of the Caspian, v, 30 
Magi, priests of the Medes 
(Madd), i, 9 ; ih xgo ; vi, 
372, 373 ; vii, 17X, 184 
preservers of tradition, i, 56, 
60 

meaning of name, i, 56 and 
note 

rise to power of, i, 58 
influence of, declines after 
the Greek conquest, i, 59 
principal seats of, i, 60 
literature of, i, 61 
language of, i, 64 
compile the prose Shdh- 
ndma for Abh Mansiir, i, 
69 

advocates of ne^ct-of-kin 
marriage, ii, 189 
Magian, Magians, vii, 60 
chant, vii, 60 
fire, vii, 409 
Magic, i, 5X 

derivation of, i, 5^ 
sympathetic, i, 8 
Magism, v, ii 
Magog. See Oog. 

Magophonia, import of, 1, 59 
Magus. See Magi., > 
'Mahdbhdrata,. Indian ‘Epic, iii, 
’8 i iv, 316 ; yi* ^ 

' , ’ , 'the passing of the five Bin* 

' davas ' im ' compaidi 

;■ X ' 1;haf: qf ,Kai KfiusratiXX 

' ' ',X '' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Mdh Afrid, grandmother of 
Mmhchihr, i, 205 
M 4 h Afiid, daughter of Tur, iv, 

Mah Afrid, daughter of Barzin, 
vii, 53 

married to Bahram Giir, 

vii. 53 

M 4 h Azar, scribe, viii, 8r 
Mdluin, Iranian noble, v, 260, 263 
Mahbud (Mebodes), minister of 
Kubdd and N uslnrwdn, 
168; vii, 213 

instrumental in making 
Nushi'rwdn Shdli, vii, 316 
Niishirwdn’s treasurer, vii, 

319 

sons of, vii, 319 

serve Nushirwdn’s meals, 
vii, 3x9, 321 

wife of, prepares Niishfr- 
w 4 n's food, vii, 321, 322 
envied by Ziirdn, vii, 319 
fall of, vii, 317, 322 
Ndsh{rw 4 n's repentance 
with regard to, vii, 3x7, 

325 

M 4 h i-Azdda Khd, wife of Tdr, i, 
188 

meaning of, i, 188 note 
M^hiyir, minister of l)dr 4 , 
murders Ddrd, vi, 52 
tells Sikandar of the mur- 
der, vi, 52 

arrested by Sikandar, vi, 53 
executed, vi, 56, 88 
Mdhiy^r, frdnian noble, vii, 38 
praises Bahrdm Gdr, vii, 38 
Mdhiydr, a jeweller, 164, vii, 55 
seq. 

daughter of. See Arzd. 
entertains Bahrdm Gdr, vii, 
59 m* 

Mahmdd, Sultin (A,D, 999- 
1030), i, 100; iii, 15; 

viii, H 

account of, i, ei 
brothers of, i, 21, 114 
Firdausis praise of, xsp, 
^5^* 160, ; 

i, 29 1X2 seq', / iy,, 


Mahmud — conf. 

135 seq , 139 ; v, 30, 89, 
1 18, 262 ; vi. 20, 107, 279, 
292, 370 ; vii, 277 ; ix, 
122 

Firdausi's feeling against, 
i, 33 ; vi,62, 92 seq and note 
Satire on, i, 23, 40 seq. 
alleged ill treatment by, 
b 33. 36 seq. , vii, 431 
alleged repentance of, i, 45 ; 

iv, 8 

occasion of, iv, 8 
approves of Firdausi's ver- 
sion of the fight between 
Rustam and Ashkabds, 
iii, 109 

remission of the land-tax by, 
vi, 186, 208 

Mahraspand, father of Adarbdd, 

v, 16 note 
Mahrwf, viii, 248 

Mdhwf (=Shdhwf ?), one of 
Firdausi's authorities, i, 
67 ; vii, 382 

Mdhwf, Persian chief, 176, ix, 
70, 7^, 89, 95, 97, 100 seq.» 
118 

described, ix, 87 
Farrukhzdd entrusts Yaz- 
dagird to, ix, 95 
accepts charge of Yaz- 
dagird, ix, 96 

becomes disaffected to Yaz- 
dagird, ix, 96 
writes to Bizhan, ix, 9b, 116 
betrays Yazdagird, ix, 97, 
98, 116, 117 

quest of, for Yazdagird, ix, 

100 

has tidings of Yazdagird, ix, 

101 

consults his warriors, ix, 106 
son of, counsels, ix, 107 
receives Balkh and Har 4 t, 
ix, 115 

governor of Marv, ix, 120 
/, put'- to death with diis 
spns,' ix, rno 

sends , miller to slay Yaz- 
’ ^ - 'dagird, ' ix, 107, 1 16 , 


320 GENERAL 

Maliwf, sends troops after miller j 
with instructions, ix, 107 j 
troops of, strip corpse of 
Yazdagird, ix, 108 
hears of death of Yazda- 
gird, IX, 108 

bids miller throw corpse of 
Yazdagird into stream, 
ix, 108 

slays monks, ix, 1 1 3 
consults his intimates and 
minister, ix, 113 
advised by his minister, ix, 
113 

claims the throne on false 
pretences, ix, 114 
becomes master of Khurd- 
sdn, ix, 1 14 
evil rule of, ix, 114 
makes war on Bizhan, ix, 

conduct of, to Barsam, ix, 

117 

crosses Oxus and camps at 
Baigand, ix, 118 
dees, ix, 118 

overtaken by Barsdm, ix, 

118 

captured by Barsam, ix, 119 
put to death by Bizhan, ix, 
120 

Mai, city in Turkistin, i, 252, 
256, 12^61 ; iv, 278, 284 
vii, 91, SSit 3 ^ 5 > 421 
Mai, king of Hind, vii, 395. 

399, 401, 403, 404 
Maidin, riding-ground, i, 83 
Maidhyd-ma^unglia, cousin and 
first convert to Zarduhsht, 
V, 17 

Mail of Siyivmsh, iii, 

69, Bi; iv, 40, 4X, 44. 
45. 51 

' referred to, }Vf 4«, 43 
Maishto (Me$^tie), a small state 
on tlielowex Tigris, vi, 199 
Mijdj (Magog), S^Y^jiij. 
Mak^tiira,, Turkipan chief, X73, 
viii, 3t'7' ' , ' ’ ' ... 

dominates ' 'fet® ' KMh, vui, 
^ 318; 


INDEX 

Makatdra, slighted by the Khdn, 
yiii, 318 

challenges Bahram Chd- 
bhia, viii, 319 
fight of, with Bahram Chil- 
bina, viii, 320 
Makh, viii, 71, 78 
Makhzum, place, 93 
Makni Bdd, city, lii, 109 
Makran (Gedrosia, Baluchistan), 
country on the shore of 
the Arabian Sea, ii, 80, 

82 ; iv, 136, 203, 231, 

234. 237 254 ; vi, 

182, 202, 397 i vii, 390 ; 
viii, 393. 4^7 

king of, /55, iv, 238 seq.^ ^ 
refuses facilities to Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 239, 242 
buried by Kai Khusrau, 
iv, 243 

Kai Khusrau marches upon, 
iv, 241 

stops pillage of, iv, 243, 
244 

prepares a fleet in, iv, 244 
sails for Gang-dizh from, 
iv, 245 

returns to, iv, 251 
goes to Chin from, iv, 251 
Alexander the Great’s re- 
turn by, productive of 
marvels, vi, 69 
etymology of, vi, 69 
Malcolm, Sir John, identification 
and description of Mount 
Sipand by, i, 236 ; v, 30 
version of Suhtdb by, ii, 
118 

on the scene of the death of 
Bahrim Gfir, vii, 6 
Mdlika, daughter of T4ir, vi, 3. 

324 

legend of, vi, 323, 33® 
offers to betray her father’s 
’ attonghdld to Sh^pfit, vi,^ 
33X 

' makes the garrison drunk, 

vi, 333 \ ' ' , ' ‘ y 

opens the\gate to ,^hapur, 

I Y " ;.‘vC3^?- ' . \ ,, ; 


GENERAL INDEX 


Malika^ goes to Shdpilr’s camp, 
VI, 333 

I\Iamigonian, Armenian family, 
viii, i8S 

Mamdn, Ivlialifa, i, 14 ; vii, 382, 
430 

Man, the First (Gaiiimart q.v.), 
h 5 

on the nature of, ijp, i, 104 
of Sigz (Rustam), li, 100 and 
note 

Man, weight, i, 290 and note ; 

viii, 148 and note, 314, 399 
Manachihr, i, 206 note 
Manda, nomads, i, 18 

confused with the Mada 
(Med(‘s), i, 18 ; vi, 194 
empire of the —empire of 
the Modes, ii, lyi 
Maudane, daughter of Astyages, 

ii, 190 

— Farangfs in legend, ii, lyx 
Mandanes (Dandamis, Kait, Kai- 
han, Kand, Kaid q-v), vi, 
61 

Oncsicritus and, vi, 61 
identical with Kaid, vi, 62 
Mdnf, hcrcsiarcli, 163, ii, 3 9 note ; 
V, 118 and note ; vi, 307 ; 
vii, t88 

account of, vi, 327 
-gate, vi, 327, 359 
teaching of, vi, 328 
disputation of, with the high 
priest, vi, 358 
executed, vi, 359 
Manicheism, ii, 19 note 
Manfzha, daughter of Afrdsiydb, 
150, iii, 285, 295 seq,i 304, 
308 seq., 348, 349 
Bfzhan and, Story of, X50, 

iii, 7, 12 

historical basis of, iii, 1 1 
Mohl on, iii, 285 
Firdausi on, iii* 287 
referred to, viii, 72 
sends her nurse to i’ifjphan, 
iii, 297 ' ■ 

invites Bf|haa to visit ,her, 
'iii, 298 _ ' ' ' : ' - / , ' 

, drugs Bfajhnhi ' 

/' ' ■ '' / 


Man izha, wakes fiizhan in AfrasF 
yaO’s palace, iii, 300 
holds revel with Bizhan, iii, 
300 

disgraced, iii, 309 
made Bizhan’s attendant, 
iii, 310 

referred to, iii, 318, 319 
hears of the arrival of Rus- 
tam’s caravan, lii, 337 
interviews of, with Rustam, 
hi, 337. 34'^ 

bears Rustam’s ring to 
B/zhan, iii, 340 
kindles signal Jfire for Rus- 
tam, iii, 344 

receives gifts from Kai 
Khusrau, iii, 35O 
Manshur, 'riiranian hero, iii, lOi, 
165, 172, 182, 185, 1(^9, 
205, 210, 213, 22O, 231, 
24 i, 251, 25O 

comes to the aid of ih'rdn, 
iii, 151 

hears of the coming of Rus- 
tam, iii, 175 

Mansion of Gushtdsp, Fire-tem- 
ple, v, 75 

Manshr bin Ndh, S^mdnid prince 
(A.D. 961 — 976), 1, 20, 21 
V, 21 ; vii, 5 

Manhshdn, a king in Pdrs, iv, 
146, iBo, 191 

Mdnhs/dhar (Mindchihr), i, 338 
Mdnwl, viii, 253 

Marathi, Scythian people, iv, 315 
Marchlord, ill-disposed* op- 
presses Rai, 174* viii* 3O6 
destroys gutters and cats, 
viii, 366 

recalled, viii, 368 
Marcian (Bifcarhn viii, 41 
Marco Folo, Venetian traveller 
, (A.p. t 254 '-* 3 ; 3 « 4 ). vi, 74 
MarddnsMh^ ' ( Y alin-sina v . ) , 

viii* 74* 76 ; ix, 3* 6 
^son'of* . 5 ^ b 
, epnspires against Khusmu 
" Barwk, ix* d 
hnntitetion and execution of^ 
'/‘rix, 6\' 


X 


GENERAL INDEX 


322 

Mardinsh41i (Marddsas), son of 
Shfrin, viii, 189, igi, 193, 
196 ; ix, 39 
execution of, ix, 7 
Hard as, father of Zalihdk, Story 
of, 140, 1, 135 seq, 
murdered by Zalxhdk, i, 137 
Mardisas. See Mardanshd.h. 
Mardwi, Tdranian hero, hi, 77 
Mardwi, Persian official, viii, 21 
Mardwi, gardener, viii, 397 
Margh, city in Turkistdn, i, 256 ; 
iv, 278, 284 ; vii, 91, 331, 
412, 421 

Mark, birth. See Birthmark. 
Marriage, next of kin (Khvaitiik- 
, das), i, 60 ; ii, 189 ; v, 17 
Mars; planet, i, 72, 276, 332, 339 ; 
ii, 247, 407 ; hi, no, 159, 
178, 318, 332; vii, 92, 
252, 418 ; vhi, 395 ; ix, 
73. 89 

Martyropolis, ceded by Khusrau 
Parwiz, viii, 188 
Marhsipand, palace, ix, ii 
Mirdt, angel, hi, 286 
Marv, oasis and city in ancient 
northern Khurdsdn, now 
in Turkistdn, i, 45 ; 
ii, loi ; V, 29, 260, 261, 
263 ; vh, 174, 357; viii, 
93. 173. ,336, 337. 346 
seq., 352, 356 ; ix, 70, 89, 
nC, 117 

early seat of Aryan civi- 
lization* i, 7 

as rhyme-word, vii* 88 nate 
Khdn reaches, vii, 88 
Bahrim Gdr marches on, 
vh, 89 

Azdd Sarv finds Biizurj- 
. mihr at, vh, 283 , , ^ . 
traditional scene of Yaz- 
'dagird's death, ix, 70 , . , 
Yazdagifd at; ix, 97, i id 
sage9f,ix, xio, , 

' apothegm hi ix, iio 
conduct of !M^w£i to Bar- 
Sdm atj'ix'xry ''i 
Ghi_r4z^ son' of gov- 

erhQr'of, ik, ^ ^ . 


Marvell, quoted, viii, 399 note 
Marvrdd (Murghab), river in 
Khurasdn flowing into 
and forming the Marv 
oasis, ii, 228 ; iv, 2ss • 
viii, 92 

Mary, Maryam, mother of Jesus, 
vhi, 276 note, 277 note 
Maryam, daughter of Caesar, 173, 
174, viii, 188, 192, 276 
note, 278, 279, 373, 374, 
380, 

murder of, vhi, 193, 389 
referred to, viii, 255, 266, 
269, 270, 371. 381, 389 
counselled by CaDsar, viii, 
279, 280 

Niydtus put in charge of, 
viii, 280 

as peace-maker, viii, 310 
Mashad, city in Khuidsdn, ii, 1 89 
Mdshya and MdshyOi, the off- 
spring of Gaidmart, the 
first man, i, 117, 131 
Masius, Mount, vhi, 41 
Massagetae, tribe, hi, 192 
Mas’ddf, Arabic historian (died 
A.D. 956), v, 293 ; vi, 62, 
<53. S2, 193, 257, 3x3.315 ; 
vii, 3, 4, 6, 153, 280 
version of the death of 
Rustam by, v, 261 
genealogies of Pdpak ac- 
cording to, vi, 200 
' Book of Indication and Re- 
vision' by, vi, 252 
apologue of the owls by, vi, 
3x0 

parentage of Yazdagird son 
of Shdpdr according to, 
vi, 371 

account of the fortifications 
at JDarbapd by, vii, 215 
origin of the game of nard 
according to, vii, 3S2 
' origin of the game of chess '■ 
according to, vii, 362 
■ ,on Bd2urjmihr,'viii, 71 . 
Maundeville, Sir JofimVvi, i;3^ 72, 
Hanrice, Eastern Roman Em-.; 

' peror, ,^ii,/i87..i88 „ ' . 


GENERAL INDEX 


3^3 


Maurice, helps Khiisrau Parwiz 
on terms, viii, i88 
murder of, viii, 1 93 

Mausil, Armenian prmcc, viii, 
188, 189, 248, 282, 295 
entertains Bandwi, viii, 249 
Khusrau Parwiz and, viii, 2% 
referred to, viii, 293 and 
fiote 

Ma wara 'u'n-Nahr (K!iihist^n 
q.v., Transoxania), ii, 19, 
199 ; iii, 15 1 

Maximian, Roman Emperor, viii, 
t88 

Mayam, place, iii, 40, 41, 53, iii 

Mayors of the palace, Oriental, 1, 
14 

Mazaf^a, Indian city, vi, 65 

taken by Alexander the 
Great, vi, 65 

Mdzana (Mizandardn, q,v.), ii,28 

Mdzandardn, region lying be- 
tween the Alburz range 
and the Caspian, X43, i, 

4, 5, 12, 253, 279, 290, 
29^1, 296, 298, 319, 323, 
339, 37S ; ii, 25 $eq,, 33, 
34, 36 seq„ 45, 55, 60 seq,, 
66 s&q,, 75, 76, 78, 81, 93, 
105, 139, 143 seq., 293, 
hi, 144, 167, 207, 215; 
232, 243, 256, 260, 324, 
330; iv, 86, 136, 296, 
299; V, 1 16, XX7, 203, 
207, 220 ; vi, 373 ; vii, 
215 ; viii, 48 ; ix, 74 
approach to, from Trin, ii 
28 

description of, ii, 27 
king of, 143, ii, 39, 43, 54 » 
62 s&q. 

interview of, with RuS'^ 
tam, ii, 67 

fight of, with Rustam, ii, 
73 

transforms himself into a 
rock, ii, 74 
death of, ii, 75 , 

'M&«andar4nian, a hative, df, ot- _ 
pertaining to, 

^arin, hi,, 3^0 


Mazda, Ahura. See Ahura. 
Mazdak, heresiarch, j66, i, 63 ; 
vii, 184, 185 

disputation of, with Ndshlr- 
wan, vii, 188, 206 seq. 
account of, vii, 188, 201 
becomes chief minister to 
Kub^d, vii, 201 
influence of, over Kubdd, 
vii, 201 

parable of, to Kubhd in time 
of drought, vii, 201 
practical application of 
Kub^d's reply by, vii, 
202 

converts Kubdd, vii, 204 
preaching and practice of, 
vii, 204 

attempt of, to convert Nilsh- 
frwan, vii, 205 
Kubdd decides against, vii, 
2oB 

executed with his followers 
by Niishfrwdn, vii, 208 
Mazdakism, vii, 184 
Mazdakites, vii, 184 

great assembly of, vii, 205 
massacre of, vii, 185, 208 
Mebodes, See Mahbhd. 

Mecca, city, v, 31, 166 ; vi, 120 ; 
ix, 69 

Sikandar*s visit to, vi, 64, 
X19 seq. 

account of, vi, 64 
Medea, land of, i, 57 
Mode, Medes (Madd), Aryan 
people, i, 7, 10, 17, 56, 58, 
72 ; vi, X94, 203 
account of, i, 9 
confused with the Manda 
(nomads), 1, iS; vi, 194 
empire of the empire of 
the Manda, i, 17 ; h, xgx 
Media, ir,, 313 ; vi, 33c ; vii, 6 : 

. ; Magna, vi, 201, 203, 256 

pvh, 2X4’ 

M^ediiun^ vi* 195 ^ 

Median, language , (Zend), i, 64 

/ eim;^irn, ii, 9 A vi, 194 

Medil:e'fi;*aheatt, the, vi, ap/j. 


GENERAL INDEX 


Megara, city in Greece, vi, 323 
note 

legend concerning, vi, 323 

note 

l\Icgasthencs, Greek writer, 
temp. Alexander the 
Great, vi, 68 

Mcherdates (Miladj, Parthian 
prince, iii, 10 seq. 
Memphis, Egyptian city, vi, 82 
corpse of Alexander the 
Great taken to, vi, 82 
Merchant, a, 164 

entertains and displeases 
Bahrain Ghr, vii, 39 

made the slave of his own 
apprentice, vii, 42 
Merchants, Iranian, made acces- 
sories to Bahram Giir’s 
flight from Hind, vii, 133, 
134 

Mercury, planet, i, 72 ; iii, 159, 
318 ; V, 243 ; vi, ryx, 224 ; 
viii, 299, 3C)5 ; IX, 73 
Meroe, island and city of, vi, 13, 

<35 

Meru, mythical mountain, iv, 139 
Mesopotamia, vi, 30, 294, 32 x 
Arab invasions of, iii, 14 
annexed by Arabs, ix, 68 
Mesopotamian desert, vi, 322 
Messiah, the, viii, 267 
Mih-Azar-Gushnasp, minister of 
Ardshir, son of Shfrwf, in 
Arabic Tabari, ix, 43 
put to death, ix, 43 
Mihr, month and day, i, 88, 89, 
174. 17 5 > 232 ; vi, 24, 33, 
55 

Mihr, feast, ix, 40 
Mihr, sacred Fire. Se$ Mihr , 
Barrin., ^ 

Mihr Azar, priest, vii, 188, 206 
assists Ndshfrwin in his 
disputation with Mazdak, 
vii, 256 , 

Mihr Barzfn, ' saerdd Fire . and 
, Fire- temple, vi, 201, 212 
and mk ' , . 

established' by Gusht^p, y, 

$ 4 \\ , ' ' ' 


Mihr Barzfn, Iranian wanior, 
temp Bahram Giir, vii, 85 

Mihr Bfdad, Iranian magnate, 
vu, 21 

entertains Bahram Gur, vii, 
22 

Mihr 'Hasis, minister of Ardshir, 
son of Shirwf, 111 Persian 
Tabari, ix, 43 
put to death, ix, 43 

Mihr Hurmuzd, Iranian noble, 
lyS, Viii, 196 ; ix, 34 
account oi, ix, 5 
referred to, ix, 6, 33 
conspires against Khusrau 
Parwiz, ix, 6 
put to death, ix, 7 
described, ix, 33 

Mihr-i-NAsh, second son of 
Aslandiydr, ii, 3 ; v, 80, 
283 

slain by Farfimarz, v, 227 
death of, reported to Asfan- 
diydr by I^ahman, v, 227 
corpse of, sent to Gush- 
tdsp, V, 232 

Mihr-i-Niislx, Persian sage, vii, 
270 

quoted, vii, 270 

Mihr-i~Nush, ix, 103 

pleads with Mdhwf for Yaz- 
dagird, ix, 103 

Mihr Narsf, chief minister of 
Bahrdm Gdr and of his 
son Yazdagird, vii, 4, 153 
sons of, vii, 4 

Mihr Pirdz, Irinian warrior, 
temp. Bahrdm Giir, vii, 85 

Mihrib, king of Kdbul, 141, 142, 
i, 234, 361 ; ii, 12, 14, 18, 21 
visited by Z 41 , i, 256 
tributary to Sdm, i, 256 
daughter 6f (Riiddba),i, 257, 
y. 203 

praises ZM to Sfndukht, i, 
260 

^ hears from Sfndukht of the 
' loves of 241 and. R 4 d 4 ba, 
f . i,' 284 

' reprO'aehes RAddba, i, 289'' 
■' S 4 m, Sent ' against, i, ,292 y 


GENERAL INDEX 


325 


Mihrali, hears of Sam’s coming, 
i, 292, 299 

Miiiiichihr’s assent to 
Zai’s marriage, 1, 314 
felicitates Sindiikht, i, 315 
Siiiduklit and, prepare to 
welcome Sdm and Zk\, i, 
314 

entertain Sdm and Zal, i, 

317 

visit S4m, i, 319 
hears of the birth of Rustam, 

h 323 

goes with Z41 and Rustam 
to meet Sam, i, 324 
parleys with Sham4sds and 
Khazarwan to gain time, j 

h 35S 

writes to summon Zdl, i, 
359 

Mihrak, Tribal King, 16 1, vi, 3, 
i99, 237, 238, 257, 267, 
268, 270, 272, 273 ; vif, 
185, 192 

sr-Mithrak, vi, 206 
slain by Ardshir i^dpakdn, 
vi, 241 

daughter of, 161, vi, 3, 241, 

256, 257, 268 seq,, 272 
escapes, vi, 241, 256, 2G8 
referred to in Raid’s 

prophecy, vi, 267 
discovered by Shdpdr, vi, 
268 seg, 

informs Shdpdr of her 
birth, vi, 270 
marries Shdpdr, vi, 270 
birth of her son Urmuzd, 
vi, 271 

» Mithrak =» Mddik »» Arda- 
w4n (?)* vi, 256 
importance of, in legend, vi, 

257, 267 ; viii, 72, 73 
Mihrak, servant of Nii^hfrwdn, 

viii, 18 tp 

Mihrdn, Indian sage, x$g, vi, 

91, 97 , 

consulted by Kaid, about 
his dreams, vi, 93' , 
interprets Raid’s dreams, 
vi, 94 sfiq* 


Mihran, family, vii, 156 

importance of, viii, 72, 73 
proverb on, vii, 185 
account of, vii, 185 
rivalry of, with family of 
Kdran, vii, 185 
men of mark among the, 

vii, 186, 187 ; viii, 74 
Mihrdn, treasurer to Yazclagird 

son of Slxaphr, vi, 3CS7 
Mihran, frinian general, vii, 251 
commands the centre of 
Nhshfrwan’s host, vii, 251 
Mihrdn, archsciibe, viii, 76 

sent with Bahrdni Ciiiibfna, 

viii, 106 

counsels Rahram Chdbfna, 
viii, 3 22 and nolc 
seeks refuge, viii, 123 
congratulates Bahrdm Chi'i- 
bi'na, viii, 129 

takes counsel with Khar r del, 
viii, 159 

flees from Balkh and is 
retaken, viii, 159 
pardoned by Jkihrdm Chh- 
bfna, viii, 160 
referred to, viii, 163 
speech of, viii, 166 
Mihrln Sitdd, frdnian high priest 
, and envoy, iemp. Nkslifr- 
w4n, 168, vii, 186, 350, 
361, 363 I viii, 96, 100 
attempt of the Kh4n to out- 
wit, vii, 352 

takes charge of the Khdn's 
daughter, vii, 354 
receives gifts from the Khdn, 

vii, 356 

welcomed on his return, vii, 

, 357 

embassage of, referred to, 

viii, 72, 97 

sent for by Hiirinuzd, viii, 97 
tells of prophecy about 
Babrdm CMbfna, viii, 

’ 98, Zt6\ 
death of, viii, 99 

'Mihrin Sitdd, merchant, enter- 
' ' , tains Khusrau , 'Parwiz, 

■ , h ' viii, 251, ' - 


GENERAL INDEX 


326 

Miliris, father of Ilyas ruler of 
Khazar, iv, 352 

MiliraS; Ccssar’s eavoy, vii, 
261 ^ 

negotiates peace with Nusn- 
irw^n, vii, 261 
Mihrddt. See Meherdates. 
Mihrgdn, feast, i, 175 

iv, 313 ; vi, 230 and note, 

245 , 

Mihrmas, vi, 200 
Mil as rhyme word, i, 75 
MilM, friniaii hero, m, n, 12, 
25, 29, I45» 274. 289, 293» 
345 ; iv, 83, I47r 3:91 ; vi, 
394; viii, 72, 21 1 
import of word, viii, 73 
customs of, viii, 216 
MilM (Taxila), Indian city, vi, 
102, 109, no 
situation of, vi, 62 
Sikandar approaches, vi, 

98 

Military obsequies, temp, Niishir- 
wdn, vii, 252 

Milk, bane of, vii, 125 and note, 

324 , „ .. 

easily " turned, vii, 317 
poisoned by the Evil Eye, 
vii, 320 seq., 324, 325 
Mill, 176, ix, 89, 1 16 
Miller, a, daughters of, X64 
becomes Bahr4m Ghr's 
father-in-law, vii, 34 
dignified by Bahrdm Ghr, , 
vii, 34 

Miller, a, J76, ix, 70 

"Yazdagird and, ix, 99 
• inforrns chief of Zark about 
Yazdagixd.-rx, 100. ‘ 
informs MMwf about Yaz- 
dagird, IX, 10 1 

' ' biWen' to >lay , Yaz^^gird,' 

ix, 107 ' ‘ ■ 

^ ding corpse ihio stream, 

' ’ ' , , ix,''roS ^ 

Mihgreliai broyinde.'on, te east-. 

' fern, shbre' ' of; the . Blacl^, 
. ‘_'._Sea,'yii,,2t5';'’; 

' IVjhttfetfeiri ' biOce ; ' ih , ' ch^ss,. 


Minos, king of Crete, vi, 323 note 
legend of, vi, 323 note 
Mind, viii, 253 and note 
Mindchihr, Shah, 140-143, i, 42, 
90, 91, 209 seq., 274, 275, 
319, 337. 339 seq., 348, 
363 ; ii, 19, 29, 33» 3^, 37. 
302, 318, 400 ; iii, 9, 30, 
87, 1 15; IV, 10, 65, 69, 
70, 76, 136, 206, 283, 285, 
298 ; V, 12, 174,252,284 ; 
vi, 200, 353 ; viii, 219, 
223, 392 ; ix, 103 
birth of, i, 206 
etymology of, i, 206 and 
note, 234 and note 
Farid lui's gifts to, i, 207 
goes to hght Salm and Tdr, 
i, 216 

makes proclamation to the 
host, i, 218 

contends against Salm and 
Tdr, i, 219 

prepares for a night-sur- 
prise, i, 220 

sends Tdr's head to Fariddn, 
i, 222 

sends Kdran to take the 
Castle of the Alins, i, 223 
seq. 

hears of Kiran's success, i, 

225 , . 

defeats and slays Karkwf, 1, 
225 seq. 

pursues and slays Salm, i, 
227 

pardons Salm’s troops, i, 229 
sends Salm’s head and a 
letter to Fadddn, i, 229 
return of, in triumph, i, 230 
welcomed by Fariddn, i, 230 
confided to Sim by Farfdim, 

enthroned by Fa4ddn, 1. 230 
moutning Of, for, and burial 
' of, E'arfddn, i, 2,33 , ' 

. Heign of, X^i, 234 
'.'Note on, i 234 
' 'hcees^ph' and inaugural 
' "'f , "address of* i/ 2^7 
I' 'address to,, i, ,23s 


GENERAL INDEX 


327 


Minuchihr, hears of Sam’s find- 
ing of Zal, i, 248 
sons oi, 1, 248 

sends Nandar to congratu- 
late Sam, i, 248 
summons Sam and Zal to 
court> i, 249 

Sam tells the story of his i 
quest to, i, 250 i 

Zal’s horoscope taken by | 
order of, i, 251 
gifts of, to Sdm, i, 251 
hears of the case of Zdl and 
Rfiddba, i, 288 
advises with the archi- 
mages, i, 288 
welcomes Sam, i, 289 
hears of Sdm’s campaign, i, 
290 

bids Sdm destroy Mihrab 
and his belongings, i, 292 
receives 7 A\ well, i, 306 
consults the astrologers as to 
Zdl, i, 307 

Zdl proved by hard ques- 
tions by order of, i, 308 
Zdl displays his accomplish- 
ment before, i, 311 
gracious reply of, to Sdm, i, 
3H 

warned of his death by the 
astrologers, i, 335 
counsels, and gives the 
throne to, Naudar, i, 335 
dies, i, 336 

Mindchihr, son of Arash, iv, 

149 

commands the troops from 
Khurisin, iv, 148 
slays fiuMd. iv, 181 
commands the left, iv, 191 
Mfidn, Rhman chief, 154 

asks Caesar's second daugh- 
ter, Diltojdm, in marriage, 

iv, 333 

bidden by C»sar to slay the 
wolf of b'^skhn, iv, 333 , 
casts, a horoscope, iv, 334 
, asks HIshwi to interest 
Gusht^ in his; 'behalf, 

'' 38.4 , 1 


Mfrin, provides Gushtasp with a 
steed and arms, iv, 336 
goes with Gushtasp and 
Hishwi to the torest of 
Faskun, iv, 337 
Hishwi and, welcome Gush- 
tdsp on his return, iv, 339 
informs Cresar that he lias 
slain the wolf, iv, 341 
marries Cassar's daughter, 
iv, 341 

consulted by Ahran, iv, 342 
refers Ahran to Hishwi, iv, 
344 

letter of, to Hishwi, iv, 344 
Ahran and, display their 
accomplish men t on the 
riding-ground, iv, 349 
Cmsar’s wrath with, iv,35i 
sends a scornful message 
to Cmsar, iv, 353 
set to guard the baggage, 
iv, 355 

Mir Ivhdnd (Mirkhond), Persi n 
historian (A .19 1433- 
1498), V, 30 ; vi, 62, 315 ; 
vii, 3, 4, 6, 156, 159, 17T, 
183, 186; viii, 192 
distich of, quoted, ix, 56 
Miskdl, measure of weight, vi, 24 
and note, viii, 394 
Misr (Egypt), 159, ii, 79, 80, 84, 
94, 96, 143, 286; vi, 114, 
115, 122, 181 ; viii, 381 
king of temp. Kai K4ds, ii, 
94. 95i 98 

king of, defeated by Sikan- 
dar, vi, 37 

welcomes Sikandar, vi, 

tzt 

invaded by Sikandar, vi, 37, 
121 

sea of, vi, 120 

Sikandar stays a year in, vi, 
. 121 

Mithra, Mitra, god, i, 7 
Mithradit- See Moherdates, 
Mithrak,’ vi, 206 
, ttwMihrak, vi, 20b 
,fte|dihraks»Midik*«'Arda- 
iVrin (?), vi, 236 


GENERAL INDEX 


328 

Mithrates. See Melierdates. 
JVUthraclates I, Parthian king, ii. 

So 

h lodes ot speech, viii, 30 
Molil, J ules, his edition and 
translation of the Shah- 
ndma, i, 76, 77 ; vi, 60 
on the Story of Bizhan and 
Manizha, lii, 285, 286 
the Worm, vi, 203 
Wisdom-literature, vii, 280 
Mong, Indian city, vi, 18 
Monks, ix, 109 

find and recover corpse of 
Yazdagird, ix, 109 
lament over and entomb 
Yazdagird, ix, 109 seq. 
sentences of, over Yazda- 
gird, ix, 109 seq, 
slain by Mdhwi, ix, 113 
Monophysite, viii, 195 
Moola Firooz, i, 201 note 
Moon, one of the seven planets, 
i, 72, viii, 395 

on the nature of the, 139, i, 
205 

=Tfir, i, 223 

divided by Muhammad, 
viii, 42, 67 

Moses, Hebrew law-giver, v, 294 
Salt Fish and, legend of, vi, 
77 

Faith of, vi, 95 

Moses of Chorene, Armenian 
historian (5th century 
A.D.), i, 72 

account of Zahhik by, i, 144 
Rustam by, i, 236 
Mosul, city in Mesopotamia, vi, 
322 

Mountain, mountains, sahetity 
of, i, 118 

of the Holy Questions, i, 

62, ; 

^ ---skirt'' (Ditnah-iiKuh), iii, 

^=«Rakhsh, iii, 221,, 25 x 
Old ' man of tlfe^ v, 30 ' 

— she^p, ^‘jpersoiiifica^tion ' of 
thp divide Otace, v|, 201,, 
, 221. Ram. , 


Mu’awiya, Khalifa (A.D. 6(ji- 
679), i, 12, T 3 
Mubid, i, (S3 

Mughfra, son of Shu'ba. SVd? 

Shu’ba Mughfra, ix, 69 
Muhammad, the Prophet (about 
A.D. 571-632), i, 13, 40, 

41 ; ii, 337 note ; vi, 65, 
190, 292 ; viii, ^2, 191 ; 
IX, 69, 81 scq. 

on ’All, i, 12, 106 
praise of, i, 106 
quoted, i, 106, V, 166 
reference of, to Alexander 
the Great in the Kuran, 
vi, 15, 77 

Muhammad, birth of, vii, 213 

Nfislhrwan and, J70, viii, 
68 

divides the Moon, viii, 42, 
67 

letter of, to Khusrau Par- 
wiz, ix, 66 

Flight of, referred to, ix, 122 
Muhammad Khsim, Arab gen- 
eral, vi, 325 

Muhammad Laskarf, friend of 
i^dausf, i, 99 ; iii, 286 
Muhammad Mahdf, his edition 
of the Shdhndma, i, 76 
Muhammad, son of Abdfih-Raz- 
zak, i, 68, 99 

Muhammadan, Muhammadans, 
vi, 78 ; viii, 73 
elements in Shdhnima, viii, 

42 

ethics respected, viii, 74 
Mukaffah See Ibn Mukaffah 
MdMn, city in the l^unjib, vii, 
140 

monarch of, entertained by 
Bahrdm Gdr, vii, 140 
Mumasenni, tribe, i, 237 
Munzir, al, dynasty of, i, 55 
Mnnzir, prin-ce of Hha, tewtp, 
Yazdagird son of Shdphr 
and Bahrim Gfir, xdy, 
164, ,vi, 372, 394,, 406, 
408 ; vii, 9 

visits Y^?ddgird, vt 377,; . 
monarch ,of Ynma’h, vi, '' 3 78 


GENERAL INDEX 


Munzir, returns to Yaman with • 
BahrcOii, vi, 378 j 

chooses luirsc's for JJahrain, | 
vi, 3 78 

dismisses IJahram’s tutors, 
vi, 380 

provides Baliram Giir with 
steeds, vi, 3 So 
provides Bahrani Gdr with 
slave-girls, vi, 381 
goes to the chase with Bah- 
ram Giir, vi, 384 
vSeiids a picture of Bahrdin 
Giir shooting to Ya^Ba- 
gird, VI, 385 

sends j- 3 aiiram Giir with 
Nu'mhn to Yazdagird, vi, 

38^ 

receives a letter from Yaz- 
dagird, vi, 387 
counsels and sends Bahrani 
(hir a slave-girl and pre- 
sents, vi, 388 

■welcomes j 3 ahrdm Giir on 
his return, vi, 390 
supports Bahnim Giir's 
claim to the throne, vi, 
39O seq. 

invades irdn, vi, 397 
interview of, with Jawdnwi, 

vi, 3(>8 seq, 

refers Jawdnwf to Bahrdm 
Gdr, vi, 398 

advises Bahrdm Gdr to 
negotiate with the frdn- 
ians, vi, 401, 404 
intercedes with Bahrdm Giir 
for the Iranians, vii, xo 
rewarded by Bahrim Ghr, 

vii, xo 

Munzir, son of Nu’mdn, prince of 
Hira, Ump, Niishlrwin, 
id;, vii, Z44 ' 

protected by'. NMxirwdn, 
vii, 217 

war of, with Hirith bin 
Jabala, yii, 217 
sent by Ndshfrwdn.to invade 
Riim, vii, 246 

MurdM,, ' ameshaspenta, i, '$S j ■ 
iiii 287', $28 - , , ' ' '' 


329 

Miish, town west of Lake Van, 
viii, 188 

Mushkinab, a niillei’s daughter, 
vu, 32 and noio 
taken to wife by Bahrani 
Giir, vii, 33 

Mushkmak, a miller’s daughter, 
vii, 32 and note 
taken to wife by Bahrdm 
Giir, vii, 33 
Muslim, ix, 85 

Mutawakkil, Khalifa (A.D. 8*17- 
861), i, 14 

Cypress of Kish mar do- 
st r<jycd hy, V, 28 
Mutilation, instances of, vi, 261, 
3-23. 334, 348, 357. 4*^4 
Mytilene, Chares of, Greek writer, 
temp. Alexander the 
Great, ii, 10 ; vi, Oi 
quoted, iv, 314 

N 

Nauauzanes, Persian general, vi, 
32 

pardoned by Alexander the 
Great, vi, 32 
Nddir, Shdh, iii, 14 
Nadr son of Hdrith, v, 166 

recites the story of Rustam 
and Asfandiydr, v, i6b 
fate of, V, 1 66 

Nahdvancl, city, south of Hama- 
ddn, i, 12 ; .ix, 68, 69 
Yazdagird concentrates his 
forces at, ix, 68 
Battle of, i, 12 ; ix, 69 
Ndlifd (Katdyiiu, q,v,) 

Ndhfd (Halai, Olympias ?), 

daughter of Fatlakiis anil 
mother of Sikandar, 259, 
vi, 24 heq,f and note 
married to I) 4 r^.b, vi, 25 
troubled ' by ollcnsive 
breath, vx, 26 

• cured, but repudiated by 
vi, 26 

, returns to Failakiis and 
gives birth to Sikandar, 
■' ' ' fi, 26 


GENERAL INDEX 


330 

Nahid, visits Dilaraiand Rtisha- 
nak, vi, 89 
relerred to, vi, 1S7 
Nahid, the planet Vemis, vi, 21 \ 
Nahrawan, city near Baghdad, 
east of the Tigris ; also a 
canal on the eastern bank 
of that river, quitting it 
about 100 miles above, 
and rejoining it about 100 
miles below, Baghdad, 
vii, 14 1 ; viii, 187, 204, 
206, 231 

bridge of, viii, 223, 228 seq, 
broken down by Khusrau 
Parwiz, viii, 229 
Naisliapur. Sec Nisiiapiir. 
Naitkhn (Antigonus), minister 
of Sikandar, name of, 
assumed by Sikandar, vi, 
66, 125 seq. 

personates Sikandar, vi, 125 
seq. 

Kaidrdsh and his wife 
brought before, vi, 126 
sentenced to death by, vi, 
126 

pardoned by, vi, 126 
=! Sikandar, vi, 131, 133, 
134, 141 

Nakula, one of the five Pdn- 
davas, iv, 138 
referred to, iv, 139 
Names, use of, in sympathetic 
magic, i, 8, 177, 179 
secret and public, viii, 372 
and note 

Nimkhist, Tfirdnian hero, v, 24, 
26 

goes as envoy to Gushtdsp, 
V, 37, 40 

returns with Gushtdsp's 
answer, v, 44- 

given command of the oen- 
'tr^,,v„,56 ' , ' 

worsted by Grrimf, v, 59 , 
Napata, city in Nubia,. Vi, 65 / ' 
Naphtha, , h 56- ' ■' ' ■ 

’ black, iv,' ,,20$, 299 : . ■ 

Use ‘ 'Of, ; in ' sie^^s,, iv, 208, ' 
'209 '' V, " '' 


Naphtha, Sikandar ’s iron steeds 
filled with, J59, VI, 115 
Fur’s edephants and troops 
routed by the use ol, vi, 
n6 

used to vitrify Sikandar ’s 
barrier, vi, 1C5 
Nard, game of, 169, viii, 371 

invention of, vii, 280, 38 1, 
382 » 3^9 

sent by Nushfrwdn to the 
Rdja of Hind, vii, 5, 381 
meaning of, vii, 381 
symbolism of, vii, 381 
Mas’udi on, vii, 382 
described, vii, 389 
Narimdn, Iranian hero, father of 
Sam and great-grand- 
father of Rustam, i, 42, 
174, 207, 212, 239, 299, 
333; 344 ; ii; 4; 49, Ii5; 
1 19, 125, 126, 162, 354 ; 
iii; 17; 35 ;* V, 196, 199, 
202, 242, 262, 264, 266, 
289 

death of, described, i, 329 
Narimanau, epithet of Kere- 
sispa, i, 172, 174 
Narmpdi, name of a tribe, 160, 
ii, 55 and note, 63, 64 ; vi, 
71 and note 

Sikandar and, vi, 150 
Narses (Narsf, son of Bahrdm, 
q*v,), Sdsdnian king 
Narses, Exarch, treatment of, by 
Empress Sophia, viii, 76 
Narses, general, viii, 189 
Narsf, Ashkdnian king, vi, 197, 
2x0 

Narsf, son of Bahrhm, Shdh 
(NarseS), X62, vi, 3, 313, 
31b, 325; 33O; 33B 337 J 
vii, 359 

Reign of, vi, 315 seq. ' 

Note on, vi, 315 
title of, vi, 315- 
inaugural address of, vi, 3x5 
,, ' daughter' of, 162. See 
' NUsha, , ' ' ' ' ; 

Nard,- brother «pf Bahrhm GUti 
vi„ 3''; Vii,' 95,- ipo- 


GENERAL 

Narsf, made captain of the host, 
vii, II 

regent, vii, 86 
fails to persuade the iraii- 
iaiis to resist the Khdii, 
vii, 87 

Bahrani Gdr’s letter to, vii, 

writes to Bahrain Gnr on 
behalf of the Iranians, vii, 

94 

goes with the chiefs to wel- 
come Bahrain Gdr, vii, 96 
made ruler of Khurasdn, 
vii, 99 

welcome's his brother on his 
return ficmx tlind, vii, 137 
Nhrwan, forest of, near Tammisha 
q.v. i, 217, 218; ii, 34T ; 
vih, 35d, 377 1 | 

Nasibin (Nisibis, q,v.), vi, 326 | 

cession of, vi, 355 1 

inhabitants of, refuse to 
submit to Shipur, vi, 35^> 
taken by Shdpdr, vi, 356 
Ndsiru’d-Din, title of Subuk- 
tigin, q.v., i, 21, 100, 114 
Nasr, Amir, brother of SultAn 
Mahrmld, i, 21 ; vi, 196 
account of, 1,100 
referred to, i, 114 
praise of, i, 114 J ^07 
Nasr, Arab chief, vi, 65 

appeals to Sikandar for 
help, vi, 120 

made ruler of Mecca, vi, 121 
Nasr, son of Ahmad, Sdm^nid, 
vii, 340 

patron of Rddagf, vii, 383 
Nastir, Csesar’s master of the 
herds, iv, 325 
refuses to employ Ousht^sp, 
iv, 326 

Nastfhaii, Tdrinlan hero, son of 
Wisa and brother of 
Pirin, xsr, i, m l ii 
264 ; ill, 79^ 31:98, 2 i 0 i 23*> 
252; 

77 ’ ' ' ' 

-pursues JCax ' Khus!iriiti,i 

',377 ' ‘ " 


INDEX 33^3 

Nastihan, slain by Bizlian, iv, 
54, 

Nasiiih, Iranian hero, u, 4 ; ni, 
46; iv, 14B 

Nastuh, 3'uranian hero, iv, 356 
Nastdh, son of Mihran Sitad, 173, 
viii, 225, 303 

advises Hurmuzd, viii, 9^ 
released by Bahrain Chi'i- 
bfna, viii, 306 

Nastdr (Basta-vairi, Bastvdr), 
son of Zarfr, J55> ^12, 

25, 26 

exploits of, foretold by 
Jdmdsp, V, 50 

given command of the rear, 
V, 55 

hghts victoriously, v, 60 
goes in search of Zarir, v, 67 
hnds Zarfr's corpse and 
laments over ii. v, 67 
exhorts Goshtdsp to avenge 
Zarir, V, 68 

goes forth with Gushtdsp’s 
steed and armour, v, 09 
challenges Ih'dirafsh, v, 69 
fights with Bfdirafsh, v, 70 
attacks, with Asfandiyir and 
Niish Azar, the Xdr^n- 
ians, V, 71 

leads the host home, is 
given a command, and 
invades Tdrdn, v, 74 
stationed on the frinian 
left, V, 94 

commands the right, v, 109 
Nastdr, son of Shfrin and 
Khusrau Parwfz, ix, 39 
Nature-worship, of the Aryans, 
i 7» 

Hau*Ardshfrs»Narcl, vii* 381 
KaubaMt/ Fire-temple at Balkh, 
Sp 

3Ltthrisp retires to, v, 31 

Naud^r, ,Sh41:h ^ 4 ^* b 9o; 9*^, 

' Sfi9 ; ib 36,^70, 153* 

33b/, 400, 404; 24, 

'' ' 39> 50# 57* ^7» ^312, 

■ 1 .123, X32, 177* ^^ 7 * 

, ‘ 257*. '3® 7 I 

^ , -'ra., '61, 70, 157, Xb7, 178, 


GENERAL INDEX 


332 


Nanrlar — coni, 

191, 193, 206, 237, 254, 
262, 267; vii, 37, 171; 
viii, 223, 242 

embassies of, to Sam, i, 24S, 

288 

returns ■with Sdm to court, i, 

289 

counselled by Mindchihr and 
appointed his successor, i, 

335 

laments for Miniichihr, i, 

336 

Reign of, 142, i, 337 seq, 
Rote on, i, 337 
accession of, i, 339 
evil rule of, i, 339 
revolts against, i, 339 
appeals to S^m, i, 339 
the chiefs reconciled to, 
by Sim, i, 341 
rewards Sim, 1, 342 
inarches against Afrisiyib 
to Dahistin, i, 34 5 
battles of, with Afrisiyib, 
i, 348 seq, 

takes counsel with Kiran, 
i> 349 

defeated, i, 350, 353 
sends Tus and Gustaham 
to conduct the Persian 
women to Alburz, i, 351 
beleaguered in Dahistin, i, 
353 

escapes from Dahistin, i, 
355 

pursued and taken by Afri- 
siydb, i, 355 
slain, i, 363 

tlxe frinians bewail, i, 364 
Nauriz, Persian Now-year's day 
when the sun enters. Aries, 
vi, 33, 55, 273, 389 ; , viii, 

Natfand, place hr Khurisin on.' 
, the Binaldd Knh 

;ro7 . 

j^iztib, a hiillet's.'datightet, vii, 

i tikon ' 'to ' tHfei , hy, ‘ 

33 ; 


Nearchus, admiral of Alexander 
the Great, vi, 12, 6i, 70 
Ichthyo])i)agi, account of 
by, quoted by Arrian, vi, 
69, 70 

Nectanebus II (Nekht-neb-f), 
the last Pharaoh 
personates Amen-Ra and 
becomes the legendary 
father of Alexander the 
Great, vi, 16 
story of, vi, iS and noie 
Need, personification of. See 
Gi’ced. 

Negroes, the, described, vi, 73, 
157 

cause frost and snow to 
harm Sikandar, vi, 156, 

157 

Nekht-neb-f. See Nectanebus. 
Nereis. See Kal6. 

Nero, Roman emperor (A.D. 51.- 
68), vii, 279 
Nerydsang, ii, 82 
Nestorian, Nestorians, viii, 195 
Metropolitan, vii, 219 
Patriarch, vii, 219 
New Year, Persian, beginning of, 
i, 74, 88 

Feast of (Naurdz, New 
Year’s Day), i, 74, 274 ; 

vii, 94, 200 
origin of, i, 133 

Nicaea, Indian city, vi, 18 
Nicephorium (Callinicus, Kilfni- 
yds q,v,, Warigh, Rakka), 

viii, 188 

Nicolaus of Damascus, Greek 
historian temp. Augustus, 
vi, 195 

Nfl, as rhyme-word, i, 75 
Nile, i, 40, 71, 114, 297 ; ii, 9d> 
153. 217, 310^ 492 ; ' hi, 
. , 38, 41, 58', 208, 2^4,^ 225 ; 

' ' iv, 143 5^^., i8pi 333 'v, 

X76, 188, 191, 245 I . vi, 42, 
, - ^ 169, i7t, 269 ; vib, ,'4^> 
, . 5^5b> ; 344» 4ld . ypi, ' 

‘284, 293, 294, ; ix,‘98. ; 

' '' ,,Blue, vi, 63''^ ' ' ' , ' 

; , , mistake n;''fot;lndus, vii,i ^8; ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Ni'inruz — Sistaii — Zabulistan, ^ i, 
25^, 264, 3.}f), 357 ; h, 21. 
34, 09, 77, 80, 84, 33S, 
395 ; iii, 17, 35, 3 ^<) ; N, 
135, 188 ; V, 85, 248, 288 ; 

vii, 327; viii, iy6, 284; 
ix, 5, b 

confirmed to "itustam by Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 297 
Zal by imlirasp, iv, 312 
Sikandar marclu'S to, vi, 175 
satrapy of, ix, by 
Nineveh, viii, 193 
fall ol, i, 10 

kings of, that attacked 
Irdn, i, 10 

battle iK‘a,r, viii, i<)4 
Ninus, mythical loiiiuUir of 
Nineveh, v, 202, 293 
Ninyas, son of Ninus, v, 2<)3 
Niris, salt lak(‘ in Jte, vi, 17 
x'eferred to, vi, 2i 
Nis 4 , city (Muhaininadabdd ?) 
in Khurdsfin or town in 
Kinnfin, vii, 8<) ; viii, ly 
Nishdpiir, city in Khurdsdn,® i, 
3f), 45 ; ii, joi ; iv, 255 ; 
V, 28 seq., 29 i ; vi, 298 ; 

viii, 173 ; ix, 95 

Nisibis (Nas^bfii cpv.), city in 
northern IVlespotaniia, i, 
374 

sieges of, i, 374, viii, 41 
peace of, vi, 254 ^ 
cession of, by Jovian, vi, 326 
by Khusrau .barwiz {?), 
viii, 188 

Nisus and Scylla, story of, vi, 
323 note 
Nitetis, vi, 16 

Nivzdr, son of Gushtdsp, 155, v, 
2 b 

death of, foretold by Jdm- 
dsp, V, 50 
slain, V, 60 


333 

Niyatus (Thcodobius, son r»f 
Maurice), ryj, viii, 189, 
281, 289 ; IX, 23 
brother of Ciesar, viii, 280, 
310 

put in charge of Maryam, 

VIM, 280 

welcomed by ivhusrau JMr» 
wfz, viii, 280 

wroth with Khusrau Par- 
wiz, viu, 290 

watches fight between Khus- 
rau Parwiz ami Hahrdm 
Chiibiua, viii, 2 <17 
entertained at banquet by 
Khusrau ihirwi'z, viii, 309 
quarrel of, with Kandwi, 
viii, 309 

threat ol, to Kliusraii Par- 
w iz, viii, 310 

reconciled to Handwf, viii, 
31 J 

returns to Knm, viii, 312 
Nizami, Persian po<‘t, viii, 19^ 
Nizdinfd-’Anulf, b(‘rsian wriiiu* 
(12th cmitury I, 

'-ii 

account of Mrduusf by, i, 38 

m/., 45, 4^^ 

Nbldeke, l“*rofessor, v, 20, 21, 
282 ; vi, 19^ note, 199 and 
nota, 253, 313, '37-2 ; viii, 
7X, 188 

on the div Akwdn, hi, 271 
quoted, v, 1 18 

treatise of, on the Alexander 
Koinancc, r/r., vi, 14 and 
note 

on the Story of the Worm* 
vi, 203* 205, 206 
on Hafiwdd, vi, 206 
on the Gipsies, vii, 6 
on Sdfarai, vii, 17T, 183 
on Wisdonvliterature, vii, 


jpfond'ly speaking, ef country 

iipp^r mtim. of the mtm\$ and hhfn 

mani s for thetow lyluK wfeien.hf wafep dt but Ididausl does nut 

S'©em to nmke any ol'itlnGdPini ' ' ^ 

^ The fJity hm in rtVa»a df 'war and earth* 

dwftkfj md tof v,wyto| 8he% 


GENERAL INDEX 


331 

N6lciel<c, on Romance of Balirdm 
Chubina, viii, 73 
North, Sir Thomas (A.D. 1535- 
1603 ?), vii, 383 
version of the Fables of 
Bidpai by, vii, 383 
Northman, the, vi, 19 

found the Russian empire, 

vi, 19 

Note on Pronunciation, preced- 
ing text in each volume 
Nubia, vi, 65 

Ndh bin Nasr, Sdmhnid prince 
( K . T ). 9^2-954), vii, 5 
Ndh II. bin Mansur, Sam 4 nid 
prince (A.D. 976-997), i, 
21, 36 ; V, 21 

Nu’min, prince of FHra, 163, 
164, vi, 372, 396, 404 
visits Yazdagird, vi, 377 
goes to the chase with Bah- 
rim Ghr, vi, 384 
goes to the Persian court 
with Bahrim Gur, vi, 

386 

returns to Yaman with 
letters and presents, vi, 

387 

welcomes Bahr4m G6r on 
his revisiting Yaman, vi, 
390 

invades Trin, vi, 397 
rewarded by Bahrdm Ghr, 

vii, 10 

Nu'm^n bin Munzfr, prince of 
Hfra, viii, 188 ; ix, 5 
put to death, viii, 190 
Nu’min, Arab general, ix, 68 
seat by 'Umar to fight 
Yazdagird, ix, 68 
defeats Pfrfiz^n at Nahi- 
vand, be, 68 . 
slain, ix,, 69 

Nurse, ;I^nfzha'$,,iii, 297 , 

int^rvie'w pf, ^with Bfzhan, 
'ill, 297 ' , ; ' ’ ^ 

^ N6sha ,(Dukhtntish), dapght^tvpf '' 
,^arsf^ 162, , vi, ; 3, ‘ 324^ ' 

: ‘ .carried o’if, the Altabs, vi, 

, V V'. '■ 


Nush Azar, Fire-temple at 
Balkli, V, 92 note, 17^, 
241,255 

burnt by the Turkmans, v, 

Nush Azar, youngest son of 
Asfandiydi, li, 3, v, 166, 
283, 285 

attacks, with Nastiir and 
Asfandiyhr, the Tiirhnian 
host, V, 71 

builder of a Fire-temple, v, 
8x 

with Asfandiy^r at Gum- 
badhn, v, 98 

informs Asfandiydi of Jhm- 
hsp’s arrival, v, 98, 99 
accompanies Asfandiyhr 
from Gumbadan, v, 103 
slays Turkhhn, v, 151 
wrangles with Zaw^ra, v, 226 
slays Alwd, v, 226 
slain by Zawdra, v, 227 
death of, reported to Asfan- 
diyhr by Bah man, v, 227 
corpse of, sent to Gusht^sp, 
V, 232 

Nfishfrwdn (Kisrd, Chosroes I), 
Shdh, 166-J70, i, 27, 42 ; 
V, 260 ; vi, 3, 201 ; vii, 4, 

199, 220, 273 seq,, 279 seq., 
320 ; viii, 3 S0q.^ 71, 72, 
86 seq., 98, 129, 169, 198, 

200, 205, 209, 300, 312, 
313* 377 J 22, 26, 71, 
80, 92, 105, 109, no, 1x9 

collector of frdnian tradi- 
tion, i, 67 

quoted, vi, 208, 209 and 
mU 

origin of name, vii, 185, 21 1 
and 'f^ote 

birth of, stories of, yii, r86, 

, ^'97 seq. ' , ' 

assistant's ^ of, against Maz- 
dah» vii, 188, 206 , 
u pbringi ng of, vii, ' 200 „ ' 

Mazdifc's fttempt coh^' 
'vert; vh,''^;^b5 ' 
dispntatidh 'of, ' ' with , ' ',IdaZ" 
'<lahfvE,,2o6;S^^:i 


GENERAL 

Nubliirwan, Kubad decides in 
favour of, vii, 208 
executes IMazdak and his 
followers, \ii, 208 
Ku bad’s testament in favour 
of vii, 210, 316 
Reign of, j6y, vii, 212 seq. 
Notes on, vii, 212 scq., zyi) 
scq., 316 seq., 380 seq., 
viii, 3 seq., zji seq, 

Roman Emperors contem- 
porary with, vii, 212 
historical events of reign of, 
in tlie Shalindma, vii, 2x3 
marriage of, with tlie daugh- 
ter of the Khan vii, 347, 
seq, 

referred to, viii, 72,97 seq. 
wais of, with Riirn, vii, 213, 
217 

liist campaign of, vii, 218, 
249 

conspiracy against, vii, 214, 
316 

division of empire by, vii, 

214, 224 ; ix, 69 
bargains of, with Justinian, | 

vii, 214, 21 C seq. 
taxation leformed by, vii, 

215, 224 

wall of, in the Caucasus, x6y, 
i, 16; vii, 215, 239 
Mas’ Mi’s account of, vii, 
215 

dealings of, with the Alins, 
vii, 216 

Gflin, vii, 216 
Baldchfs, vii, 217 
Munaiir supported by, vii, 
217, 244 

and conseciucht war with 
Rdm, vii, 2x7, 244 
jealous of Justinian suc- 
cesses in the West, vii, 
217 

promises to rule justly, vii, 
221 seq. 

attends muster at the insist- 
ence of Bdbak, vii, 231 
approves of i3dbak’s conr 
4iict, vii, 232 ' ' 


INDEX 335 

Nushfrwan, method of, in levying 
troops, vii, 233 
wTites to Caesar on Muniir’s 
behalf, vii, 245 
supplies Mnnzir wiih troops 
for the invasion of Riim, 
vii, 246 

goes to Azar Abddagdn, vii, 

disposition of host by, vii, 
251 

addresses his troops, vii, 251 
proclamations ol, vii, 252, 
3<>5 

burial of dead soldieis by, 
vii, 252 

policy of, with enemies, vii, 

253 

takes Shurdb, vii, 254 
Arayisli-i-Rimi, vii, 255 
Caesar’s ti exisures, vii, 
255» 25S 

defeats Farfuriiis, vii, 256 
takes Antdkiya, vii, 258 
disposes of the Rdman cap- 
tives, vii, 259, 327 
Riiman cordwaincr and, vii, 
260 

envoy fiom Caesar comes 
to, vii, 261 

grants peace to Caesar, vii, 
262 

appoints Shfrwf to leccivc 
the Rdman tribute, vii, 
262 ’ 

Christian wife of, vii, 263 
mother of NdshzAd, \ii, 
263, 274 seq. 
helps Nhshzidd, vii, 266 
laments for Ndshzdd, v|i, 
276 

imprisons Nhshxdd, vii, 264 
illness and reported death 
of, vii, 264, 265 
hoars of KhshzM’s revolt, 
vii, 266 

instructs Rdm Barifn how 
to act, vii, 267 seq. 

Seven Banquets 'Of x68, vii, 
2 So, '2S7 seq. 

, , possible origin of, v|ij 280 


GENERAL INDEX 


33f> 

Nitsliirwan, Seven Banquets of, 

E iizurj milir *s discourses 

at, vii, 287 scq. 
dream oi, vii, 282 
consults the archmages, vii, 
282 

seeks loi a dream-interpre- 
ter, vii, 282 

dieam of, interpreted by 
Biizurjmihi, vii, 284 
rewards and honouis Bu- 
zurjmihr, vii, 286, 289, 304, 
311, 315 

relations of, with Singibii, 
vii, 317 

the Jiaitalians, vii, 317 
witli Mahbiid and his sons, 
vii, 319 seq, 
suspects Ziir^ii, vii, 324 
greatness of, vii, 327 
builcliugs of, vii, 327 
embassy of Khan to, vii, 329 
consults the chiefs as to 
Faglidm'sli, the Khdn, and 
the Ilaitdlians, vii, 333 
leply of chiefs to, vii, 334 
rejoinder of, to chiefs, vii, 

prepares for war with the 
Khhn, vii, 337 
writes to his chiefs, the 
Khdn, and Fagh^nlsh, 
vii, 337 

inarches from Madi’in, vii, 
337 

goes to Gurgen, vii, 337 . 
receives embassy from the 
Kh^n, vii, 339 
holds a court, vii, 340 
displays his prowess , before 
the assembly,, vii, 341 
dismisses the KMn*s envoy 
’with, a letter, 'vii, 344 
Khf^h's .• oto of atoity tp, 
.'^^ih 547 ' 

r%ly .of,;viiy '349 ' ‘ ' 

ooenpies Writory . evacuated 
’ ' ' ' >y the' fthin, 'vh, ■' 33^ ''' 

and; othets htiag" '! 
' gifts ''to, vii, / ■ , 

; ' gives. |iraisb 3'^! ‘ 


NusMrwan, leceives the tiitiite 
from Rum, vd, 362 
goes to the temple of Azar. 

gashasp, vii, 363 
greatness of, vii, 36^ 
questions Biizurjmihi, vii, 
367 scq 

receives the game of chess 
fiom Hind, vii, 380, 385 
Raja of Hind's embassy to, 
\ii, 384 

rewards Biizurjmihr for dis- 
coveimg how to play 
chess, vii, 388 
sends Buzurjmihr with pre- 
sents and the game of 
nard to Hintl, vn, 390 
proposes wager with the 
Raja, vii, 391 

welcomes Biizurjmihr on 
his return from Hind, vii, 
393 

ac(piir(‘s the Book of Kalila 
and Dimna, vii, 423 seq. 
sends gifts to the Rdja, vii, 
425 

rewards Barzwf, vii, 429 
precautions of, as to suc- 
cessor, viii, 3 

goes hunting with Biizurj- 
mihr, viii, 4 

suspects ’ and disgraces 
Biizurjmihr, viii, 5 
treats Biizurjmihr with in- 
creasing ligour, viii, 7, 8 
reconciled to Biizurjmihr, 
viii, 9 

questioned by archimages, 
viii, 14 seq., 28 seq, 
gives juclgment against his 
own son, viii, 16 
. chief cook of, aggrieved, viii, 
rS 

counsels Hurmuzd, vni, 25 

writes ' to console Caesar's 
' . , ' son and 'successor, yiii, 

, ; ■ '43 / ' , ' 

wroth at .answer reoOivod, 

' ' / 45 '' , , , ''' 

^ invades \dii,,.4d; 


GENERAL INDEX 


Nushirwan, success of, viii, 47 
checked, viu, 47 
ill want of money, viii, 47 
takes counsel with Buzurj- 
inihr, viii, 47 

refuses advances from a 
shoemaker, vui, 50, 71 
high esteem of, for scribes, 
viii, 50 

grants peace to, and takes 
tribute from, the Riinians, 
viii, 52 

returns to Taisafun, vhi, 53 
sons of, viii, 56, 63 
instructs Bftzurjmihr to 
prove iTurinuzd, viii, 56 
beq, 

testament of, in favour of, 
and last counsels to, 
Ilurnmzd, viii, 61 seq, ; ix, 
22 

directions of, as to inter- 
ment, viii, 65 
hall of, shattered, viii, 6<S 
death of, viii, 69, 71 
system of administration of, 
viii, 71 

ministers of, put to death by 
Hurmuzd, viii, 81 seq. 
choice of Hurmuzd by, story 
of, viii, 87 
palace of, viii, 393 
(beam of, ix, 92 

Niish Z 4 d«Mihr-i-Ndsh, q.v., 

v. 2 85 and noie 

Ni'islizdcl, father of Mihrak, 

vi, 237, 241, 267, 270, 
273 

Ndshzid, son of Ntisbirw^n, 
1 ( 5 /, vii, 213, 26^p seq. 
historical account oi, vii, 2x9 
Firdausi’s account of, vii, 
263 s&q. 

education of,' vii, 263 ' 
imprisonment oi, , vii, 264 
hears report of Ndshirw 4 n*$ 
death, vH, 265 
revolts, vii, 2^6 
helped by Ms mother, vii, 
- add ' 

wfltos to Caesar; vii, 266 
von. rx* 


337 

Ndshzad, goes to fight with Rdm 
Baizm, vii, 272 
exhorted to yield by Piruz, 
vii, 273 

reply of, to Pfrfiz, vii, 274 
vvmunded, vii, 275 
repents, vii, 275 
sends message to his mothei, 
vii, 275 
dies, vii, 275 

lamentation for, vii, 276 
Firdausi’s reflections on, vii, 
276 


O 

Oasis of Ammon, vi, 65 

Alexander the Great’s visit 
to, vi, 65 

Oblivion, CavStle of, vii, 184 

Obsequies, military, in the time 
of Ni'ishirwdn, vii, 252 

Ocoanus, Homeric and Oriental, 
i, 7X 

Odalis, Scythian princess, iv, 315 
legend of, iv, 315 

Odeiiathus, Arab chief, vi, 222 
Sh^pfir son of Ardshfr and, 
vi, 294 » 325 

confused with Valerian, vi, 
324 seq. 

Odorico, Minorite Fiiar and tra- 
veller (A.D. 1286-1331), 
vi, 13 

Old Man of the Mountain, the, v, 

30 

Olives, taxes on, vii, 2x5, 225 

Olympias (Nihfd, Halai ?), wife 
of Philip of Macedon and 
mother of Alexander the 
Great 

legendary relations of, with 
Hectanebus, vi,' 16, 18 ' 

. chqice by, of name for her 
son^ vi, 19 
'intrigues of, vi, St . 

Omartes, Scythian chief, iv, 315 
' . legend of, iv, 3x5 

OmchiM,. 192, V, 177' 

, ' of mO' quince, lx» is, 14' ' 

' ' ' ‘ , Y '■ 


338 GENERAL 

Ompliis, Indian king, vi, 62 j 
Onager, tlie div Akw^n as, iii, » 
273 seq. ^ I 

Bahrain Chiibina guided by, j 
viii, I5^>. 158^ I 

Onesiciitus, diief pilot of Alex- 
ander the Great and 
writer, vi, 67 

untrustworthy, vi, 12, 61, 67 
Fakirs and, vi, 61 
Calanus and, vi, 61 
Mandanes and, vi, 61 
Onnes, minister of Ninus, v, 292, 

293 , ! 

Ordealby fire, ii, 218 

Ormus (Hiirmuz), city on the | 
Persian Gulf, vi, 204 
Osrhoene, kingdom in^ northern 
Mesopotamia, vi, 19^ 
Othello, play of, quoted, vi, 324 j 
Owls, Mas'ddi’s apologue of the, j 
vi, 310 ! 

and Crows, story of, viii, 263 
and note I 

Ox, the Erst, i, 5 

legend of the, i, n?* 

Ox of Kai KMs, ii, 26 
Ox-hide, or skin, filled with gold 
as tribute, v, 265 and 
n6te ; vii, 262, 363 ; viii, 
4^. 5^* 53 

Oxus (Jihfin, q.v.), river, x, 57/ 
ii, igo ; v, 12, 29, J vii, 
^56, ^17 ; viii, 72 
anoient trade-route, i, 57 
confused with-Aras, i, 7^» 

' 370 ' ^ , 

. change in course of, r, 57 
' 'iii, 10 ' ■ ' 

' referred' to, 'ix, and ndU^ 

/'irS ■' ' ' 

' 'Oxyartes, ' ’ , father , of Roxana 
' < , (Ri|shanak),;wife of Alex- ■ 
..■^nd^'fihe/fkeat, viy 32^ , 


INDEX 

Page, of Nfishfrwdn, viii, 5 
seq. 

relative of Buzurjmihr, viii, 

5 

instructed by Bfizuijmihr, 
viii, 6 

takes messages between 
Nfishxrwdn and Buzurj- 
mihr, viii, 6 seq. 

Pahlav, region, ii, 77, 102 ; iii, 
222 

Pahlavdn, i, 83 ; vi, 194 

Pahlavi, middle Persian language 
of Aslikfinian (Parthian) 
and Sdsfinian times, vii, 

6, 113, 188, 380 seq, ] viii, 
73, 74; ix, 50 
meaning of, i, 64, 83 ^ 
Firdausi's use of the word, 
i, 69 

Fables of Bidpai translated 
into, vii, 382 

language (middle Persian), 
V, 24, 26, vi, 194 
texts, ii, 27 ; v, 13, 14, 24, 
30, ; vi, 195, 196, 257 ^ 
version of the Pscudo-Callis- 
thenes, vi, 14, 16, 84 
writing and reading, con- 
fusion in, vi, 62, 205, 
206 

Paidfiwasi, Persian coin « five 
dfnirs, vii, 95 and note^ 
viii, 381 and note; ix, 
X9 

Paighfiw^Tdrdnian, v, 13, 21 
note, 38 note, 41 note, 44 
note ; viii, 190 

Paikir-i-Gurd, melody, viii, 398 
and note 

Pairika. See Parf. 

Palace of Jewels, x6o 
^Paladins,' x 54 

' PaJiahdn, Xiirdniaa hero, 147* 

\ , iii,^ 26* 79 . ' 

surveys the Ir4nian ho$t,^ 

^ 

, , , ' ' slain 'by Bfzlmn, iii, '70 ,/ 

' psUawfna (Cappadocia), vhj 294^ 

■ . ' , 297 i m: 

‘ t'.PaJdfifiiey vi; .50. 


GENERAL INDEX 


Palladios, bishop, vi, 6i, 62 

treatise of, on the Brah- 
mans, vi, 61 
interpolated into the 
Pseud o-Callistlienes, vi, 

61 

Palmyra, city in Syrian desert, 

vi, 294, 322, 324 ; vii, 217 i 
Pains Macotis (Sea of Azof!), vi, 

73 

Pdndavas, the five, iv, 138, 139 
pilgi imago of, compared 
with that of Kai Khxisrau 
and his paladins, iv, 138 
l^and Ndmah, of Moola Jurooz, i, 
201 iwfe 

Pandndniak-i Vadshorg-Mitrd-i 
Jhikhtakan, Pahlavl text, 

vii, 279 

Pdndu, Indian king, iv, 3,16 
l^dpak, Tribal King, 160, vi, 3, 
^94, 195> 19^ seq,, 211 
note and seq., 227, 252, 
254, 256; viii, 214, 219 
and note, 285 
Sds4n and, vi, 212 
daughter of, marries Sdsdn, 
jfdo, vi, 213 

mother of Ardshfr Pdpa- 
kdn, viii, 214 

Ardawdn*s letter to, vi, 214 
dies, vi, 218 

kindred of, support Ardshfr 
Pipakdn, vi, 223 seq, 
PApak^n Ardshfr. See Ardshfr 
Fdpakdn. 

Parable, Mazdak's, vii, 201 
Panidise Lost referred to, vi, 71 
Parf, i, 83, 172 

Paris, city, MSS. of the Pseudo- 
Callisthenea in National 
Library at, vi, 14 
Parmifida {see too Khin of Chfn), 
xyo, 17J, viii, 75, 1 17, 130, 
136 seq,, i4di 149 164, ' 

3:74 

heats of Bahrdnr Chdbfna's 
victory and takes oouhsel, ■ 
viik 13T - ‘ 

marches toward JihAhj , 


339 

Parmdda, approaches Balkh, 
viii, 134 

attacks and is defeated by 
Bahrdm Chdbfna, viii, 

, 13^ seq- 

escapes to Aw4za, viii, 138 
besieged by Bahram Chii- 
bma, viii, 138 scq. 
negotiates surrender of 
Aw^za with Bahrdm Chh- 
bfna, viii, 139 seq. 
surrenders Awdza and sets 
out for frdn, vfii, 143 
insulted by Bahram ChiP 
bfiia, viii, 144 

Bahrhm Chiibina tries to 
placate, viii, 145 
Pdrs (Persis, Fdrsistdn), countiy 
on the eastern shores of 
the Persian Gulf, 242, 15 J, 
160, i, 351, 353, seq., 357, 
368, 371 ; ii, 23, 28, 76, 
101, 226, 275, 286, 362, 
410 ; iv, 1^6, 256, 269, 
270, 3x8 ; V, 293, ; vi, 17, 
■25, 32 note, 37, 45, 1 1 5, 
1 19, 194 and passim ; vii, 
86, 90, 95, 190, 194, 20 X, 
206, 214, 224 ; viii, 109 
note, 112, 216, 241, 393, 
395 ; 

corpse of Darius Codomanus 
sent to, vi, 33 
Ardshfr Pdpakdn flees to, vi, 
220 

marches from, against Ar- 
dawdn, vi, 227 
returns to, vi, 229 
frdnians, after the death of 
Yazdagird son of Shapdr, 
meet to consult in, vi, 394 
Patsfs, ix, 64 

I^art Kings. Ses Tribal Kings. 
Parthia, kingdom, v, xo 

Hystaspos governor of, v, 

to , 

Parthian, Paxthians, i id, 60, 64 ; 
vi, 203, 256, 322 ; vii, 136; 

; oon^^nost of Jrdn by, 1, X 9 
; '' ^ordhitriagfem under, i, 63 


340 GENERAL 

Parthian, dynast^., hi, 9, ii ; v, 

2S1 ; vi, 194, 201 
uses the title of King of 
kings, vi, 197 
Great King, vi, 198 
history, events of, repro- 
duced in distorted form in 
Sh4hndma, hi, ii 
kingdom, ii, 80 

Paxwfz, Xrdnian chief, vi, 394 

Parwiz, meaning of, vhi, 187. 
See. too Khusrau Parwiz. 

Paslian (LMan), battle of, hi, 15, 

80, 89 ; iv, 27, 36, 42, 

90, 206 ; vhi, 397 and 
note 

Pashang, father of Minhchihr, i, 

90 ; hi, 25 (?) ; iv, 136, 
marries daughter of fraj ; 
i, 205 

Pashang, ruler of Tiirdn and 
father of Afr^siyib, 142 ; 
i, 92, 337 ; ih n, i3» 

18, 20, 21, 297, 401 ; ill, 

15 ; iv, 78, 136, 151, 174, 
222, 266, 289 
consults his chiefs as to war 
with frdn, i, 342 
bids Afrdsiyhb invade frdn, 
i, 343, 375 

advised by Ighriras not to 
make wai, i, 344 
overrules Ighriras, i, 344 
Afr4siydb's letter to, i, 346 
wroth with Afrisiydb, i, 
374 

Pashang (SHda, g.v,), son of 
Afrdsiyib, i, 92 ; hi, 15 
pashin, son of Kai Kubid. See 
Kai Pashin. 

Pashin, frdnian noble, vi, 408 
Patashwirgar, region, vi, 202 and 
noie ^ 

Pit-khnsran,, brother of Gnsh- 

' ' ' ; V, 26- , ' 

'' Patrician, iv, 34S , > 

Patrons of FhdansbJ, 29 ■ ) 

'Pittiravha* Indian ;iraoe‘ and,^ dyn- 
; vh ; 

' i', X33' * 


INDEX 

Periods, mythic and historic, of 
Shahnama, i, 49, 53 
Perozes (Piruz), Sasanian king, 
vii, 159 

Persepohs (Istakhr), city in 
P 4 rs, VI, 31, 32 note, 373 ; 
ix, 65 

buildings at, attiibuted to 
Hu mil, V, 293 
Zoroastriaii sciiptuics said 
to have been burnt at, i, 

63 

Persia, i, 30S ; 11,191; hi, 109, 
128 ; iv, 8 ; v, 306 note ; 

vi, 6i, 278 ; vii, 118, 129, 
381 ; vhi, 195 ; ix, 66 

Chess brought to, vi, 20 1 ; 

vii, 280, 2 84 seq. 

Fables of Bidpai brought to, 

vii, 213, 423 seq. 

Persian, Pci si an s, i, 6, 8 seq., 73, 
74 ; ii, T90 ; V, 74 ; vi, 30 
44. 45, 81, 143, 148, 157, 
lyo, 201 and passim 
bard, quoted, vii, 265 
dispute with the lldmans 
over Sikandar’s burial, vi, 
184 

empire, ii, 9 ; vi, 197, ix, 65 
war of, with Rum, vhi, 41 
history and legend in rela- 
tion to Greek history and 
legend, ii, 9 

language, vi, 147, 205 ; vii, 
134, 140, 143, 430 ; ix, 12, 
65 

monks introduce the silk- 
worm into Europe, vi, 204 
mutilation of captives, vi, 
323. 334» 34^; 357. 4O4 
sea or gull,' vi, 204, 205, ix, 
66, 68 

swords, vii,- 135 
wisdom-liteirature, vh, 27$^ 
seq., vhi, 3- 

verso, vii, 383 , " 

■ Fables ,of Bidpai' trahs- 
lated into, v,i!, ' 383 , ’ - 
: oonqnost of "^itaman, vih,; 

i ' '' n&U ' ' ' ' ■ 

taid'Syti^viii, 4 t' ’-9 


GENERAL 

Pcihian, ]\‘rsians, defeat by 
Koiiiaiis refeiied to, viii, 

72 

war with Tuiks, viii, 72 
Book ol Kings, vni, 73 
Tabari. Se& Tabari. 

= Bahrain Chiibina, viii, 1 13 ! 
™Hiirrauzd, viii, 116, 117 j 
|)rinre = Ba}iram Cliubina, i 
viii, 319 

ideas on marriage, ix, 7 i 
= Ashtad and Khair^d, ix, ; 

24 ^ : 

exonerate Shhln, ix, 38 | 

win ‘ The Battle of the 
Bi idge/ ix, 67 

fail in attack on Hira, ix, 67 
defeat of, at KMisfya, ix, 
07, 84 

Jali'ila, ix, 68 
Nahdvand, ix, 69 
Slui'ba Mughfra's embassy 
to, ix, 69 
robes, ix, 94 

transcribe Sh^in^ma for 
Firdausi, ix, 121 
Persica, of Ktesias, v, 293 
Persis Fdrsist^n), vi, 195 

Pcsh6"lanu (Bislnitan q,v,), v, 
12 

Pestilence, in reign of KubM, ix, 

7 

Petroleum, in ancient cult and 
modem industry, i, 56 seq, 
Pharasmancs, King of KMrazm, 
vi, 72 

PMlii^ 11 of Maccdon, (Failakiis, 
B,C. 382-336), fh,ther of 
Alexandei: the Great, i, 
35 note, vi, i 5 , 29 
Neotanebus and, story of, 
vi, 18 

names his son Alexander, 
vi, 19 

Philon, Macedonian noble, vi, 76 
Philosophers, Greek, enter- 
tained by Nhshirwdn, vii, 
280 - \ ' 

Phbeas, Eastern Eoman Em- 
porot, vih, ‘187, 189, 193, 
", ^ ^ 94 ' , , ’’ 


INDEX 34 1 

Plios])hor, moiiiing star, ii, 123 
Phofius, quoted, viii, iot 
Phi antes 11 , Farthi.in king, 

(ihC. I } 8 -i 27 ), ih 
Phraates™imrliad, ni, ii 
Phrygians, the, vi, 71 
Pil, as rhyme-word, i, 75 
Filial, Bahram Giu 's, vii, 92, 160, 
i6t, 164 

Pflsam, Thranian hero, iqq, 146, 
it, 112 seq., 320, 323 note, 
350 seq, ; ill, 204 
plt‘ads for vSiyawush, ii, 315 
summons I *fran to save Far- 
angis, ii, 322 

Pirdn, son of Wisa, Turdnian 

hero, cousin, commander- 
in-cliief, and counsellor of 
Afrdsiy^b, 14 $, 146, 248’- 
J52, i, 92 ; ii, 3, 1X2, 188, 
257 Ej 4 , 277, 29X, 

3 I 5 > 316, 335 . 350 . 

370. 377. 379 seq., 397. 

398 ; iii, 13, 26 note, 39. 
42, 58, 90, 91, 98 seq,, 102, 
108, 120, 122, 123, 125, 

X42, 149 i^eq., 158, 160, 

161, 169, 181 seq., 192, 193, 
199 seq., 216 seq., 222, 

227, 232, 234, 242, 252, 

233. 259, 505 335 

349 , 350. 357 1 7 . 

seq., 15 seq., 29 seq., 36, 
38, 41, 47, 59 seq., 88 seq., 
93 seq,, 103, id6 $eq., 117, 
iiB, 129, 134, 145. 159. 

iGo, 162, 205, 206 ; viii, 

414 

character of, i, 55 
identical with iiarpagus in 
legend, ii, 191 
advises Afr 4 siy 4 b to receive 
Siy^wush, ii, 253 note and 
seq, 

goes to welcome Siy^wush, 
h, 258 seq, 

daughter of, J 

arranges marriages for 
Siydwush, ri. 

, fff * 

'entertains Siydwush, ii» 278 


GENEl^AL INDEX 


3 # 


F/ran, offers to help Siyawush to 
build (iaug-dizh, ii, 278 
piophecy ol Siyawush to, li, 
282 st'i/. 

goes to colU‘C.t tiibute, ii, 285 
visits Siyawush, ii, 287 
Afr^siydb, ii, 2S8 
summoned’ to save Far- 
angis, ii, 322 seq. 
pleads for Farangfs, ii, 324 
takes charge of Farangis, ii, 

325 

dreams o( Siyawush, ii, 325 
protects the infant Kai 
Khusrau, ii, 326 seq. 
advises Afrdsiydb respecting 
Kai Khusrau, ii, 356 
sends Kulbad and Nastfhan 
to pursue Kai Khusrau, 

ii. 377 

overthrown with his host 
by Gfv, ii, 385 
appeals to Kai Khusrau, ii, 
386 

released, ii, 387 
desciibes Gfv^s prowess to 
Afiisiy^b, ii, 389 
disgraced, ii, 390 
retires to Khutan, ii, 390 
apjjointcd to oppose the 
Iranians, iii, 71, . 79 
marches on Giravgard to 
surprise the Irdnians, iii, 
80 

captures the frinians' herds, 

iii, Bt 

defeats the Iranians, iii, 82, 

, 94 ' ■ 

Kuhhim's embassy to, iii, 87 
grants a month's mmistice 
toKarfbur^, iii, 88 
dosses of„ in battle, in, 94 
: takes .half pf Kiwa's s‘tand“ 

' ^ ,ard, dh, 94, ‘ , ' 

, , sends, Rhih, 'tb attack B'ah- 
i .rim, dij, '98:' . ' ' 

,, . 'goes to see ^ Bahrithy iii, >99 
hearts o| ',ttie''feiniaps'/,ie“ 

ror*;; 

f ! ' ;; inrif, 'ih'; tritnhph,,, 'iii;-:, ' 


Pi'ran, goes to Kluiian, lii, loy 
goes lo oppose Tus, ih, 117 
informs Airdsiyab of the 
Iranian invasion, iii, 118 
reinforced, 111, 118 
joins battle with Tus, iii, 118 
sends a wailock to bring a 
snowstorm on the Iran- 
ians, iii, 128 

defeats the Irinians, iii, 131 
takes counsel with his chiefs, 
iib X33 

pursuesdhe Iranians, iii, 134 
sends Lahhak and Ilhman 
on in advance, iii, 135 
reaches Mount Hamdwan, 
iii, 137 

beleaguers the Iranians, iii, 
138 

attacked by Tils, iii, 139 
hears of the approach of 
rcinfoi cements, iii, 151 
harangues his host, iii, 13 1 
goes to meet his allies, iii, 

153 

plan of campaign of, re- 
jected, iii, 162 
hears of the arrival of Iran- 
ian succouis, iii, 164 seq. 
Rustam, iii, 174 
takes counsel with Kdmds 
and the chiefs, iii, 175, 182 
attacks the Iranians, iii, 176 
describes Rustam to K 4 mds, 
iii, 183 

parleys with Rustam, iii, 202 
reports to his kindred his 
interview with Rustam, 
iii, 206 

declines Rustam’s terms, iii, 
217 

retreats, iii, 231 
counsels Afrdsiyib,' iii, 253 
ufges Ahasiyib to with- 
. , draw to CMti, iii, : 2 d 5 . 
oitj* of, iii, 335 ' 
entertains. Rustam in dii- 
.. guise, iii, 335 ' 

/pursues Rustam, 'iii, 349 , ; 
„sent by"Afr.toiydb to inyadb' 
’ fr 4 u, iv, xi,'-'' , ' ‘ 


GENERAL INDEX 


343 


Piran, holds parley/ with Giv, iv, 

20 

informs Afrasiyab, iv, 20 
receives reinforcements, iv, 

20 

rejects Giv’s overtures, iv, ! 

21 I 
occupies Kanahad, iv, 22 I 
arrays his host, iv, 25 j 
gives the centre to Hiimdn ! 

iv, 25 

left to Burjhsp, iv, 26 
right to Lahlihk and 
Farsiud'ward, iv, 26 
sets scouts on the mountain- 
top, iv, 26 

dissuades Human from 
fighting, iv, 30 
heais of Hhmdn's death, iv, 

51 

sends ISFastihan to make a 
night-attack, iv, 53 
luiars of Nastihan‘s death, 
iv, 55 

attacks Gddarz, iv, 55 
proposes terms to Chdarz, 
iv, 63 

sends Hdfn with letter to 
Giidarz, iv, 67 
receives GMarz* reply, iv, 74 
haiangues his troops and 
prepares for battle, iv, 75 
sends messenger to Afri- 
siy^b, iv, 75 

receives AMsiy^b's reply, 
iv, Bo 

becomes despondent, iv, 8x, 
9S 

sends Lahhik and Far- 
shfdwaid to take the 
frdnians in dank, iv, 82 
dghtS' with Gfv, iv, 84 
appeals , to Lahhik and 
FatsMdward4or help, iv, 
85 - 4 , 

announces the . proposed 
^ Battle ^ of 'Eleven li.nkhs, 
iv, 94 ' 4 ^ 

gives ,thfe' chM cointnnnd''to'; 
Lalihik and Fat^idwat^’, 
iv, ^4 ' : : y ' 


Pfrdn, instructs tliem, iv, 93 
holds a parley with Gudarz 
and arranges with him 
the Battle of ilie Eleven 
Ruklis, iv, 95 seq, 
steed of, slain by Gddarz, 
iv, 107 

falls under his steed and is 
injured, iv, 107 
flees from Gddarz, iv, T07 
refuses to surrender, iv, 
108 

wounds Giidarz, iv, 108 
slain by Ghdarz, iv, 109 
lamented for by Lalihdk 
and Farshfdward, iv, 112 
Kai Khusrau, iv, 127 
buried with the Tiirdnian 
champions by Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 128 

death of, announced to 
Af X dsiy kh, i v, 1 5 1 
treasures of, taken pos- 
session of by Afrdsiydb, iv, 
219 

Pirdz (Perozes), Shdh, 166, vi, 3 ; 
vii, 4, X53» ^7^ 335 p 

359 1 viii, 75, 73, 168, 
242, 245, 267, 285 
passed over in the succes- 
sion by Yazdagird, vii, 

3:55 

helped by the Haitdlians, 
vii, 156, 157 

defeats liurmuz, vii, 157 
Hurmusi pardoned by, vii, 
156, 15S 

Raign of, x 66 , vii, 159 s&q, 
Kote on, vii, 159 seq. 
calamities of, vii, X59 
title of, vii, 3:59 
lelic of, vii, 159 
measures of, against drought 
vii^ J59, 162 
, cities of, vii, i59» ^^3 
' Expedition of, against the 
, ' Haitdlians, vii,^ 159, 164 
’ ' seq. ' 

' tradition of^ vii,, x6o 
" in mythical story, vii, 


GENERAL INDEX 


344 

Pi'ruz (Pcrozes), Bahrani Gur*s 
pillar said to liave been 
moved b)/, vii, i6i 
daiiglilcT ol, taken prisoner, 
vii, i6i 

child of, tbo wife of 
Kubdd, vii, i6i, 184 
accession of, vii, 161 
advances against Khush- 
nawaz, vii, 164 
gives the van to Hurmuz, 
vii, 164 

gives the real to Kubad, 
vii, 164 

gives the regency to JBalash, 
vii, 164 

makes Sufarai (Sarkh^n) 
minister to Baldsh, vii, 
164 and note 

replies to the appeal of 
Khdshnawdz, vii, 165, 167 
defeated by Khiishnawdz, 
vii, 168 

death of, vii, 168 
trdnian tradition of the 
revenge for, vii, 170 
Sufarai determines to 
avenge, vii, 173 
Pfriiz, frhnian chief, vii, 85 
Phhz, Iranian general, vii, 187 
Pfrhz, Iranian warrior, vii, 219, 
273 seq, 

exhorts Ndshzdd to yield, 
vii, 273 

Piriiz, father of XJstdd, viii, 
296 

Pirhz, son of Khusran, minister 
Of Ardshfr son of Shfrwf, 
^75 

appointed general, ix, 44 
letter of Gui4z to> ix, 46 ■ 
takes counsel* ix, 46 
writes to Gnriz, ix, 47 
Gnriz marches against, ix, 

, '48 V . , , 

> appeals to ^ukhar,^ ix, 48 
_ feasts mth ,Atdshlr, ix, 48 
, informs GwAz' bf -the death 
' " ;OfArdaklr*.,ix, 51' ' 

' put'tO dbatfeiix* '• ; 


Pfriiz, son of vShapur, ftanian 
noble, takes Sustains 
letter to Sa’ad, ix, 80, 81 

Pfriizan, Persian geueral, com- 
mands Peisian forces at 
Nahavand, ix, 68 
slam, ix, 69 

Pfruz-Kam (Ram-Ihriiz), city 
built by Pfriiz, j66 , vii, 
P5<h 1O3 

Pfriiz Shaphr (Ambar q.v.), vi, 
327. 357 

Pisces, constellation, i, 310 and 
note ; ii, 407 ; ni, 26, 159, 
318; iv, 364; vi, 395; 
vii, 245 ; viii, 51, 342 ; 
ix, 71 

l^ishdaclian, Pishdadians, i, 316, 
373; vii, 161, 171 
Dynasty, i, 49, 135 seq., 
122 ; ii, 9, 336 ; iii, 9, 13 ; 
vi, 194 

Plague. See Pestilence. 

Planets, the seven, vi,2o6 ; vii, 408 
created by Ahriman, i, 52 
evil influence of, i, 52 
symbolized in the game of 
naid, vii, 382 

Plato (Faldtiin), Greek philo- 
sopher (B.C. 427-3^17), vii, 
100 note 

Planisphere, ii, 215, 216 

Pleiads, Pleiades, i, 205, 

244, 245, 267, 332; ii, 
148, 282, 394^ 408 ; iv, 
183, 245, 329; V, no, 
13 1 ; vi, 369, 401 ; vii, 
365 ; viii, 53, 158 

Plutarch, Greek writer (A.D. 46- 
120), vi, 67 

Poll-tax, vii, 215, 223 

Polo, game of, 145, ii, 263 seq,, 
292; iv, 349,350; vi, 329, 
379> 3^2 ; vii, 57, 118, 143, 
235; viii, 246, 247, '258* 
371 ; ix, 16 

episode in *Kdrndmak and 
Shdhnima, vi, 3:96, 257, 
263, 271 

-stick, ii, 292; iv, 350; 'vi, 
27/* 272 ; ' vii, f viii, ; ^247 


GENERAL INDEX 


315 


3'om» (iu'ir qv.), Indian lung, 
vi, ! 7, 02 fcq,, t>o, 76, 83 
son of, vj, 18, f>3 
Darius’ Ifitiei to, vi, 31 
origin of name ol, vi, 31 
kingdo^^ of, vi, 31 
Alexander and, historical 
accfuint of, vi, 63 
in tiic Pseudo-CalUsthe- 
nes, vi, 6.|, 67 
statuie of, VI, 64 
nepliow of, vi, 4S0 
Poiirushaspa, father rd Zai- 
dniishl (/(jroaster), ii, <j; 
v, r4, i3, 17 
Predatory JNot(‘, vii, v 
Prelate, or bishop q.v , iv, 341, 
348 ; vi, 184 

as inihtarist, iv, 107; v, 
30O ; vi, 124; viii, 47 
and note 

Prelinho to Slidliiriuna, i, pp seq. 
Kill Kdiis, ii, 29 
vSuhrdb, ii, xk) 

Siydwush, ii, i<jr 
Kai Khusrau, iii, 15 
t'ari'ul, iii, 37 
KArnds, iii, no 
Akwdn, iii, 272 
Bfzhan and Maid/iia, iii, 287 
Jlattle of liie Twelve Pukhs, 
iv, 9 

Kustam and ShaghAd, v, 261 
NiishfrwAn, vii, 220 
Hurmual, viii, 77 
Presbyter, iv, 348 
Prithi, Indian princess, iv, 316 
Procopins, Byzantine historian 
(6tli century AJ>.), vii, 187 
Prometheus, i, 57 
Pronunciation, Note on, preced- 
ing text in each volume. 
Ihroporty-tax, remission of, x6$ 
Prophet, the, Praise of, -ryp 
Proverb, i, 194, 195/197; vii, 

' 185; viii, 1S7 
l/ 4 dndo - Callisthehes, Greek 
Komanc© of; Alexante 
, the Great, ' 'ii/ 9 ; ■ 

30 .62 ' Sm ** n 1 % 

74 . 


Psendo-Calisthcncs, account and 
vorNimis of, \i, 13 seq., 
17 

vogue of, vi, 17 
treatise of Palladms inter- 
polated in, vi, 6r 
Alexander and Porus in, vi, 
64 

historic elements in, vi, 83 
Egyptian elements in, vi, 83 
Persian elements in, vi, 83 
Aiabic elements in, vi, 83 
diagram to illustrate, vi, 84 
Ptolemy, son of Lagus, one of 
AlexandcT the Great's 
generals, king of Egypt 
(H.C. 323-283), and his- 
torian, VI, 12, 13, 66 
PulAd, a div, li, 44, 54, 55, 64, 
93 ; iii, 256 ; iv, 296 and 
note ; v, 204 
PulAd, frdnian hero, ii, 22 
PdlAd, TurAnian hero, ii, 264 ; 
iii, 199, 234 

PdlAdwand, TdrAnian hero or 
div, Z49 ; iii, igi , 268, 
270 

summoned by AfrAsiyAb, iii, 

254 

goes to help AfrAsiyAb, iii, 

255 

takes counsel with AfrA- 
siyAb, ill, 256 
worsts TAs, iii, 257 

Giv, RuhhAm, and Biz- 
han, iii, 258 

cleaves in twain KAwa's 
standard, iii, 258 
challenged by Rustam, iii, 
^59 

overthrowxx by Rustam, iii, 
'264 , 

withdraws with his army 
from' the field, iii, 265 
Pun-t (Berbera q.u,), ii* 79 , 
l^ArAndukht, ShAh, X75, v, 294 ; 

'' ' -Vl* 'S'; lx, 56 
: , ;ceproAohes KuhAd* ix, 17 
' miakes : S Wit AhguiAjte 'prime 

0fP0ss,'fnd*' 'fx, ' 


346 GENERAL INDEX 


Purmdya (Barmamn), brother of 
Farfclbn, i, 90, 91 ; v, 261 
xefeired to, i, 147, 165 
Kaidnbsli and, suinmon the 
smiths to Faiidun, i, 158 
go with Faridun against 
Zahliik, i, 159 
attempt to kill Farlddn, 
i, 160 

Pusfairukh, ix, 50 

Python, Apollo and the, vi, 203 


Q 

Queen of ChIn (wife of the 
Kh4n), viii, 190 
daxighter of, slain by lion- 
ape, viii, 322 

asks Bahrdm ChdMna to 
avenge her daughter, viii, 
324 

steward of, plots with Khar- 
rM against Bahrdm. Chiibfna 
viii, 335 

daughter of, cuicd by Khar- 
rdd, viii, 336 

grants boon to Khan id, 
viii, 338 

disgraced, viii, 344 
Questions, Mountain of the lioly, 
i, 62 

hard, vii, 102 saq. 

Quince, omen of the, ix, 13, 14 
Quintus Curtins, Roman writer 
(ist ceixtury A,D.), vi, 65 
on the Amazons, vi, 72 


R 

Races, dnpEeat^ in West and 
' East/vi, 68 
fair-hairdd, yi^ 73 
R 4 d, rhler of Zibulist 4 ,jL, vii, 86 
Rida, Mount, 'is:,, 9'li 94 
Ri<divf, ' architoage . ^ ^ 

, ' pleads with' wf ' for , Ynz- 

; ,1 ‘'dagird, ii/ma 1; •, “ ' . , 


Rai, city and district near Tih- 
ran, 174, i, 363, 366 seg, ; 
ii» 23, 399 ; iii, 242 ; iv, 
147, 255, 256 ; V, 14, 18 ; 
vi, 32, 202, 219, 229; vii, 
84, 160, 184; viii, 72, 
155, 166, 171, 173, 174, 
189, 214, 216, 240 ; ix, 
68, 69, 89, 95, 96 
seat of the Magi, i, 60 
Kh4r of. See Khdr. i, 368, 
37b 3S1 

Ardawdn’s capital, vi, 201 
Shax)drof, vii, 184, 185, 191, 
192 

scat of Arsacid power, viii, 
72 

Bahrdm Chubina goes to, 
viii, 306 

Khusrau Parwfz oppresses, 
viii, 365 

misery of, viii, 367 
Gurdya delivers, viii, 368 
Rdi. See Rdja. 

Raibad, town, about twenty 
miles west of Nishdpdi, 
and district east of the 
Jagatai range, in Khurd- 
sdn,*, iv, 17, 22, 23, 47, 
55, 76, 88, 1 1 2, 134 
occupied by Gddarz, iv, 
16 

arrival of Kai Khusiau at, 
iv, III, 126 

Rdja (Rdi) of Hind, temp, Luh- 
rdsp, iv, 321 ; ix, 17 
temp, Ndshfrwdn, i6p, vii, 140 
and note, 143, 424 
proposes wager to Ndshlr- 
wdn, vii, 5, 385, 387 
receives game of nard from 
Kiishfrwdn, vii, 5, 3,81; 
389 seq, 

fails to discover how to play 
the game, ' vii, 392 ■ 

' pays forfeit to Ndshfrwdn^ 

' '^^u,''393 . , , 

. receives . Kdshfrwdn^s gifts 
' . > from ,B,grzwf, '‘vii*M4Z5', 


. ' to 'Wayyethaps indicate what 


GENERAL INDEX 347 


Kdja, assists Barzwi in his mis- 
sion to Hind, vii, 428* 1 

letter ol, ix, 17 ^ j 

put in charge oj Slu'ihi, ■ 
ix, 17 ^ ; 

Rakiish, Rustam’s steed, J42, i, | 
386 ; ii, 13, 42 seq., 67, 74, j 
94, 97, no, 1 16, 139, 143, I 
31 r 354; hi, 146, 177, : 

186, 189, 194, I95» 223, j 

224, 226, 227, 229, 259, j 

264, 275, 276, 278, 279, I 

3i3> 324. 335> 34^» 

344, 34O scq., 35<^, 35'*^; i 
iv, 295 ; V, 1 1 7, 184, 192, ; 
198, 207, 208, 214, 219, I 
22(8 seq.^ 234 seq., 266, 275 
caught by Rustam, i, 378 
seq. 

described, i, 379, 380 
care taken of, i, 380 
slays a lion, ii, 45 
encounters a dragon, ii, 48 
stolen by Turkmans, ii, 121 
seq. 

sire of Shurdb’s charger, ii, 
128 

saddled by Gfv, Ruhh4m, , 
and Tds for the fight with 
Suhrib, ii, i5o 
referred to, hi, 184, 228, 
:253 ; V; ^99 

wounded by Asfandiyir, v, ! 
229 

returns home without Rus- 
tam, V, 229 

Rustam's thought of aban- 
doning, V, 235 
healed by the Sfmurgh, v, 
237 ^ ^ 

tries to save Rustam, v, 
270 

Mis into the pit,, y* 270 . , 

body ol, taken from; pit by' , 

, FarAmai2, v, 273 ^ 
tomb of, V, 276 J . 

lord' of «» Rustam^' - v^ ' 30^’/ 

''' ■ 

Eakka '(C,alEnieus, EilfeiMs . 

; < Eice^hotiuM 

' ''oityi yili, iP' ; 


Ram, personification of the 
Divine Grace, i, 374. See 
mou n tain- sheep , 

Rustam’s life saved by a, ii, 

constellation, ii, 299 ; v, 129 
RAm, Fire-temple, vi, 202, 226 
Ram, frAniaii warrior, viii, 29 x 
RAm Ardslur, city, vi, 202, 290 
and note 

RAm Barzfn, high priest and 
general, xAy, vii, 275 

KubAd’s testament kept by, 

vii, 2 TO 

N ft shir wan’s instructions to, 
conceining NttshzAd, vii, 
267 seq. 

goes to fight with NAsh- 
zAd, vii, 272 

hears of NAshzAd’s last 
wishes, vii, 276 

RAm Barzfn, Persian official, 

viii, 313 

RAmbihisht, wife of SAsAn, vi, 

i RAm Ilurmuz, city in KhdzistAn, 
cast of AhwAz, vi, 199 
plain of, vi, 199 
RAmishn - i - Ardshfr, district, 
vi, 202 

RAm KubAd (AragAn), city, vh, 
r88 

RAm PfrAz. See PfiAz RAm.^^^ 
Raugwf, frAuian warrior, viii, 
295 

Rasafa, viii, 188 
RashnawAd, captain of the host 
to HumAi, 158 
assembles troops, v, 301 
D,ArAb , enlists under, v, 
301 

host of, reviewed by H^mAi, 
-Vr 302 

marehefe on EAm,_v, 302 
mad the ' 'adventure of the 
, , ^ruin^d'. vaulti 'V, 503 < 
gives, pt^sents, to DArAb,' v, 

' ' _ ’ ' , ' , ' 

<luesEe"ns,'BArAfo',„v, 394 
'eeddA-ldtithe tendered and 
J Ws; 3b,4 ' ' 


348 GENERAL INDEX 


Raslmawdd, Darab and, defeat | 
tlic Ri'imans v, 305, 300 | 

praises D 4 rab, v, 305, 300 
oifeis Darab t!ie spoil, v, 300 
grants peace to Caesar, v, 

307 

xcturns to frdn, v, 307 
hears from the launderer and 
his wife about the cavsc oi 
Ddr^b, V, 308 
writes to Tl Hindi about the 
case of Darab, v, 308 
appears with Daidl) before 
i-himdi, V, 309 Bcq. 
Rds-Shdpdr (Gund-i-Shdpi'ir, 
q.v), city, vi, 255, 256 
Rati, weight, vi, 156 and note 
Raven, Raven-head, ix, 91 and 
note, 95 note, 96 

Ravi (Hydraotes), river in the 
I^unjdb, vi, 64 

Rawalpindi, town and distiict in 
the Punjdb, vi, 62 
Rawlinson, Sir Henry, his ac- 
count of Gotarzes’ insciip- 
tion at Bihistdn, iii, 9 
Rawlinson, Professor, vi, 253 
Red Sea, ii, 364 
Reeds (bamboos), vi, 71 

gigantic, seen by Sikandar, 
vi, 148 

used in house-building, vi, 
71, 148 

Religion, War of the, v, 19, 26 
two campaigns of, v, 29 
Renans, See Romulus. 

'ReSeph, viii, r88 
Responses, of-Ndshfrwin, viii, 14 
seq., 28 seq. 

Revellers, Rosary of, ix, 38, 40 ^ 
Rhyme- words, i, 74 ; , ' ii, 228 
%oU ; V, 26X y vi, , 372 ; 
vil, 88 and 89 ,and 
' '■ r74and 245 and 

' b .263_ and npte 

b / Rirdansf ' aad', viic noU 
. Ridge oif, Gttshl^sp,.: y, 29; ‘ 

' RfWAfdshfi:, '.mity ''east 'of 
; \Jat#f;tiydr mar/the 
' ' ^ : pi tjre Gulf, vb' 

id, , vl,' d!?';4 . ' '' ' 


Kfvm'z, son-in-law of Tiis, 147, 
ill, I \, 25, 45, 57, Co, 71 
piepaieti io at lack ibinul, 
iii, 51 

refened to, iii, 55 
burial of, lii, 68 

Rfvihz, son of Kai Kdi'is, ii, 3 ; 
iii, 14, (j6, 1 13, 1 14, 232 
slain, in, 93 

battle for ci'own of, iii, 94 
Rivniz, son of Zarasp, iv, 360 
Zarir and, go to Rimi, iv, 360 
liails Gushtasp as Shah, iv, 
362 

Kfzmihr (Zarmihr), son of Siifa- 
rai, z 66 , vii, 207 ; viii, 169 
identical with Sdfaiai, vii, 

Kubdcl and, go to the Plai- 
tdlians, vii, 186 
fate of, vii, 186 
loyalty of, to Kiibdcl, vii, 196 
helps Kubdd to esca])e fiom 
prison, vii, 197 
nc'gotiatcs a nianiage for 
Kubdd, vii, 197 
made chief minister, vii, 200 
Rizwdn, angel, ii, 39 and note, 
288 

Roc, mythical bird, i, 51, 235 
Roman, Romans, i, 10 ; iii, 286 ; 
vi, 254, 318, 325, 326 ; vii, 
214 ; viii, 188, 189, 395 ; 
ix, 50, 66 

relations of, with the frdn- 
ians, i, 14 

empire, Eastern, i, 373 I vi, 
253 

war of, with Persian, viii, 
41, 193 

Alexander’s legendary ‘ visit 
to, vi, 30 

. ' emperors, vi, 321, 371, 372 
h^glect the defence's of the 
^ Caucasus^ vii, 187 ^ ^ , 
so-called ' tribute of,' ' to 
'' Persia, yii,‘ i'87 , , ' 

, i: , treatment of Munsir by,‘'yii>' 

. 2'I7, ’’ ' "" . ‘ 

: ' ' ' ' leads 'io war with RhsMfr 

\A\ , ' . , wAnV-yiV ' ''' ' " ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


549 


Koinans, defeat BaliTani Cliubina, | 
viii, ■ 

X^oiiiancc of Mexander the Greai j 
(Pbcudn-CaUihUienes, i 

qj}.), vi, 11 seq., Sii 
incorporation of, iu Shah- 
ndina, vi, ifj 
vogiu^ of, vi, 17 
sources of marvels in, vi, 12, 

6 <> 

diagiam to ill us ti ate, vi, .S4 
Home, vi, k>i, 197 > 3<-^B 

3-4 

Sfiapfir son (4 Anlsiiir's wais 
with, vi, '2C)4, 207 
jlahnini (iiir’s war with, vi, 

373 

Romulus and Remus, founulmg 
legend of, v, 203 
Jtook, x>iec.e in chess. Sec Rukh. 
Rosary of Revellers, ix, 38, 40 
Koxaiia (Rfishanak. q.v ), vi, 33 
Alexander aiul, vi, 30 
account of, vi, 32 
Ri'icUiba, clauglitcr of Mihrib 
king o£ Kdlnil, wifn of 7Ai, 
and motlK^r of Kustain, 
I 4 L ^ 57 > h M5> 299 • 3i, 
44, 180 ; V, 182, 184, 190 
note 

Stoiy of 7 A\ and, i, 256 seq. 

referred to, iii, 285 
7 A\ Itears of, i, 257 
description of, i, 237» ®59, 
264, 266, 272 
hears of 7 A\, i, 2do 
falls in love with 7 A\, i, 260 
handmaids of, go in quest of 
Zt\, i, 263' 

interview Z4l, i, 266 ,, 

, invite Zdl visit RMiba, , 
i, 267 1" / ' 

,, rt^i^roaehed „by the' portw, 

' i, 267; , ' '' ' ' , 

describe 'Zil, i,, ■ 

prepares to ,76001^^0 Z^-V b; 
, 2'69 > 

, ' I.;'*?®?' '• "''' 

;-''Z4l- is^aute 


Rndaba. go-betwoon of, with 
Zil, i. 2«o 

Z:il sends Sdni's lettci to, i, 

280 

rewards her go-between, i, 

281 

go between of, discovered by 
Sfnclukht, 1, 281 
xci^roached by her parents, i, 
28 j, 287 

congratulated by Siuduklit, 

h 3^5 

seen and admired by Sim, 1, 
318 

married to Zil, i, 30S 
I Zil and, go to Sihtan, i, 319 
I grievous travail of, i, 3^*^ 

1 saved by the vSimurgh, i. 321 

I Cac‘sarean operation per- 

tormed upon, i, 322 
gives birth to Rustam, i, 
322 

fasts iu sorrow for Rustam, 

V, 278 

fi'onzy of, V, 278 
regains her wits, v, 279 
referred to, v, 190, 289 
lamentation of, v, 289 
Ridagf, Persian poet, versifies 
the Fables of Bidpai, vii, 

3S3* 431 

Rr\dbir, district, v, 30 
Ridyib, father of Fipak (m 
Shihnima), vi, 200, 212 
Ruo, wild, as a prophylactic, i, 

.T' . ^ 

Ruhhim, son of Gidarz, Iriman 
heia, ii, 4^ 62, 73. 144, 158, 

, 340 ; ' iii, X 9 ® $ 3 , ^ 7 * 

115, 1764?^^*, 139 154* 

^ 'x57, tS'2, 287; 21X, 248, 
" ^'259/264, 268, 273,' 3221 
' 350, 352;' N, 13, 15. 

, '31,' 37, 147 ij 

' ' RelpS' 'to , sa^dlo Rakhsh for 
';d, !' tW ^nhrib, ii, 

' 'I',’ ‘ rbo , 

' 'rnortahy' wonhds/Farid, iih 

'' ' ^4/ '.'V ' ' . 

, f ,T' qjmb'S^^' h, iij 87 


GENERAL INDEX 


350 

RubliAm, worsted by Asbkabds, 

iii, 179 

goes to the help of Rustam, 

iii, 227 

worsted by Rillddwand, iii, 
258 

goes with Rustam to rescue i 
Bizhan, iii, 334 * 

commands the left wing, iv, 

sui5erseded pro tern, by 
Faxhdd, iv, 92 
chosen to fight with Bdrmdn 

iv, 97 

slays Bdrmdn, iv, 102 
sent by Gddarz to fetch 
Bhdn’s corpse, iv, no 
acts as Kai Khusrau’s stan~ 
dard-beaicr in his combat 
with Shida, iv, 171 
protests against Kai Khus- 
xau’s fighting on foot with 
Shida, iv, 174 
holds Kai Khusrau's steed, 
iv, 175 

insti acted by Kai Khusrau 
to bury Shida, iv, 176 
Kai Khusrau remonstrated 
with by, and other nobles 
for refusing audience, iv, 

275 

Ruhhdm, king of Rai, temp. 

Bahrdm Gfir, vii, 85 
Ruhhdm, Irfiniao warrior, vii, 
136^ 

helps Pirfizr to gain the 
throne, vii, 156, 186 ; 

viii, 73 

Riiin, son of PWn, h 9^ ; 

- iii, 207, d34 ; iv> 10, yt, 
90, 102, 152, 153, 162 
,suihxtion$ Pfirdn; , to ^,save 
' ,,_^Farangis, 3i,',323 and 
sent' 'by ,Pfr4h . to attack 
" BahJ^ini,; 'iii, '98 ^ / , , ■ ^ , 
'.grounded’ ' foy,^ Bahrim,: 'ijii, 

99 , ' ' V'' ' '' 'V ■' J ' 

'in' ec|!^ito»d of ' wbiish'i', , 

'' V V;';,;, ' : ' 

tout 

‘if’!',';' ■ 


Ruin, entertained by Gfidarz, iv, 

68 

returns to Piran with Gu- 
darz' reply, iv, 74 
goes to help PMn against 
Giv and is defeated, iv, 84 
chosen to fight with Bizhan, 
iv, 97 

slain by Bizhan, iv, 103 
Rhina, place, ix, 91 
Rukh, piece in chess (castle), vii, 

385. A-23 

position of, iv, 8, ; vii, 388, 
422 

move of, iv, 8 ; vii, 422 
Riikhs, Battle of the Twelve, J51; 
iv, 7 se^. 
meaning of, iv, 7 
Battle of the Eleven, 151, 
iv, 88 

arranged by Gfidarz and 
Pfrdn, iv, 95 seq. 
Firdansfs reflections on, 
iv, 7, 98, 106 

referred to, v, 29 ; vii, 156 
Rfira, the Eastern Roman Em- 
pire, J54, X55, 162, I <57, 
Z72, J73, i, 15, 229 ; ii, 
143, 297, 307, 360; iii, 

J06, 151, 164, 296 ; iv, 14, 
133, 148, 196, 197, ^08, 

272, 312, 314, 316, 317, 

323 seq., 330, 33B 333 seq., 
339; 341 seq., 345, 348, 349 
332; 353; 355; 356, 359, 
361, 364, ; V, 75, 76, 102, 

‘ 180, 188, 262, 301, 305,; 
vi, 40, 4B 45; 5B 53, 81, 

. 94, 104, 113 seq., and 

, passim 

king oJt«=Mahmfid, 1, 113 
, «P$ikandar, vi, 172^ ^ 

, : ' , West and, ' Salm's portion, 

189 ' ' , , ' 

" brocade of, i, ' 137; ^83, 210', 

\ ' j3^52, 263, 316 and passim;"' 

: , i'iii,;,26,'235;29r, 297, 335'; 

i /,;/ ' ,'ht, 27X,'364;' ¥^'295,; . 

- ^li,'36i.-89h'-vd,'04Td7?276,:' 

, ,r3y, ;''I73» i 


GENERAL INDEX 


RiSm, helm of, iii, 114 
sea of, iii, 177 

city in, founded by Salm, iv, 

325 

ravaged by RashnawM and 
Ddrdb, v, 307 
ambassadors from, come to 
Ddrdb, vi, 21 
Ddrab wars with, vi, 22 
prince of, vi, 22 
chiefs of, vi, 23, 153 
withdi'aw on Ddrab’s ap- 
proach, VI, 23 
tribute of, to fran, vi, 24 
explained, vii, 187 
ambassadors from, come to 
D4rd, vi, 35 
reed (pen) of, vi, 85 
stuffs of, vi, 143 
philosophers of, vi, 115, 
154 ; viii, 279, 382 
cavaliers of, vi, 167 
Sh^h of— Sikandar, vi, 170 
Sikandar's policy to safe- 
guard, vi, 178 
ArastiHs’ advice to Sikan- 
dar concerning, vi, 179 
invaded by Shdpur, vi, 350 
slave-girls of, chosen by 
Bahrain Gdi, vx, 382 
Bahrdm Gdr's war with, vii, 

4. 5. 84 

Ndshirwdn's wars with, vii, 
213 

robes of, viii, 308 
captured cities of, restored 
to, viii, 312 

monks of, slain by Mihwi, 
ix, 113 

Rdman, Rdmans, x$4, x^S, X60, 
J67, 27;^, 173, iii, 309 ; iv, 
357, 360, 363 ; V, ,173^ 205 , 
292 ; vi, 44, 45, lor seq., 

1 13, xt4, 'i%j, 142, 148, 
168, 170, 179 seq,^ and 
pmdm 

slaves, i, 232 ; vi, 382 vii, 

54.^53^ 

invade Iran,^ v,,,3b3[ , _ ■■ 
defeated' by Rasl^nawid 
, , 'B'ii'ib* V, 3b5 ■ ■ ' 


351 

Riiman, Rdmans, king of— Philip 
of Maced on, vi, 19 
carry out works in Iran, vi, 
21 

= Sikandar, vi, 50, 52, 

. 154 ^ 

Iranians ask quarter of, vi, 

51 

tongue, vi, 160 ; vii, 256, 
261 

dispute with the Persians as 
to Sikandar’s burial, vi, 
184 

sages, vi, 1 85 

their sentences over the 
coffin of Sikaridar, vi, 

, I, 85, seq. 
silk, vi, 280, ; vii, 424 
defeated by Shdpdr, son of 
Ardslifr, vr, 297 
engineeis build bridge at 
Shiishtar, vi, 299 
astrologic tablets, vi, 376 
eunuchs, vii, 67, ; viii, 
279 

pen, vii, 73 

helmet, vii, 89, 272, 274 
bishop, vii, 275, 276 
envoy, viii, 8 seq. 
surrender to Ndshfrwdn, viii, 
47 

entrench themselves, viii, 
47 

sue for peace and pay tribute 
viii, 51 seq. 
architect, viii, 193, 401 
marches, viii, 252 
robes, viii, 253 
helms, viii, 105, 276, 417 
worsted by Balir4m Chd- 
bfna, viii, 292 
artificers imprisoned by 
Kfiusrau Parwfe^, viii, 402 
' ' ' , , released by Khtistau Far- 
‘ , wf2, viii; ' 403 , 

Rfimiya (New Aatioob, Sfirsdn 
; ' subnrbof Cteeipbon^ 

(Taisa|fin)oa the east bank' 

' ' of, the .^igris, irii* dx$\ ' ,7 
Bfis'(Rx:iesiab ih *9 1 
,, ' vkxM 22, ■' '' 


GENERAL INDEX 


352 

Riisliaiiak (Roxana, q.v.), daugh- 
ter of (in Shalinama) 
and wife of Sikandar, J ^S, 
159, ii, 3 ; vi, 86 scq., 188 
account of, vi, 32 
derivation of, vi, 33 
bestowed by Daii^ on Sikan- 
dar, vi, 55 
son of, vi, 81, 181 
visited by N^liid, vi, 89 
married to Sikandar, vi, 90 
reference in Sikandar's Will, 
to, vi, I Si 

Rushan Pfrtix, city, vii, 160 

Russia, vi, 19 

Russian, Russians, vi, 19 
empire, vi, 19 

foundation of, vi, 19 
cloth, ix, no 

Rustam, son of Z41, fi^nian 
national hero, 141-1^0, 
X53. L54, ^57, h ^ 2 , 

68, 90. 174» 235 seq,, 37^> 
seq. ; ii, 4» t8, 25, 34, 35» 
42 scq., 79, 92 seq., 188, 
236, 237, 271, 286, 290, 
31X, 316, 318, 319, 335, 
344 seq„ 349 372, 

380, 394. 400 : iii, 24, 35, 
36, 40, 107 seq,, 121, 134, 
138, 141 seq., i55» ^64 seq., 
182^^27., 294, 307» 308; iv 
II, I3» 27, 30, 65, iS 7 > 
167, 172, 198, ‘'22O, 227, 
277, 285, 289, 292, 319, 
324 ; V, 9. 22, so, 50, 73, 
86, 165, 254 seq., 278, 279, 
281, s&q., 298 ; vi, 3^5. 
395 ; vii, 151 ; viii, 106, 
177, 219, 223, 33^5 i 25 
Caesarean birth - of, i, 
236, 321 S0q- 

account of, ,in Moses of 
Chorene, i, 236 
presage ' of, ' by the astrolo^ 
‘gets, X 278/ 307 
§tehrgb, i, 32X 
otigjh ,of nante, X 

eiigi^ of, 'Sent' tb Mm, i, pz, 


Rustam, goes with Zal and 
MihraL to meet Sam, i, 325 
slays the white elephant, i, 
327, 377 

bidden by Zal to take Mount 
Sipand, 1, 329 
takes Mount Sipand, 1, 331, 
377 

sends the Spoil to Zdl, 3, 333 
sets fire to Mount Sipand, i, 
333 

bidden by Zal to prepare for 
war, 1, 376 
reply of, i, 376 
Zal gives Sam’s mace to, 3, 
37^"^ 

obtains Rakhsh, i, 378 
goes in quest of Kai Kiibad, 
i, 382 seq. 
slays Kulun, i, 386 
first campaign of, ii, ii seq. 
nearly takes Afrdsiy^b 
prisoner, ii, 14, iiG, 354 
rewarded by Keii Kubid, ii, 
21 

Seven Courses of (Haft 
Khwhn) 143, ii, 44 
life of, saved by a ram, li, 46 
song of, ii, 51 

rescues Kai Kids in Mizan- 
darin, ii, 58 
handgrip of, ii, 66, 67 
encounter of, with Kalihdr, 
xi, 67 

Jiiyd, ii, 71 

audience of, with the king of 
Mizandarin, ii, 67 seq. 
encounter of, with the king 
of Mizandarin, ii, 73 
rewarded by Kai KMs,^ii, 77 
entertains Kai Kids, ii, 83 
takes the king of Shim 
' prisoner, ii, 97 
, defeats Aftisiyib, ii, too 
made paladin of paladins by 
Khi Kids, ii, lor ^ 
goes In search of Kai Kids, 
ii, i'04 

, ' ' ' takes part in the Fight of tdd 
Seven .Warriors, ii, t07 
■ iMkds, :il, 1 15 . 


GENERAL 

Kuslani, and Suhrab, Story of, 
ii, I iS seq. 

loses "Raklish, ii, X2i 
Afrasiyab's plot against, ii, 
129 

liolds a drinking-bout, ii, 141 
quarrels with Kai K 4 us, ii, 
142 

reconciled by Gddarz, ii, 144 
seq. 

goes in disguise to see Suh- 
rab, ii, 149 

adventure of, with Zhanda 
Razm, ii, 149 seq, 

Suhrdb described by, ii, 15 1, 
166 

encampment of, described, 
ii, 154 

armed by Tus, Giv, and 
Kuhhdra for his fight with 
Suhrdb, li, 160 
challenges Suhrdb, ii, i6x 
charge of, to Zawdra, ii, 167 
declinCvS Suhrdb's advances, 
ii, 1 69 

saves his life by a ruse, ii, 
170 

prays that his strength may 
be restored, ii, 171 
learns too late that Suhrdb 
is his son, ii, 173 
grief of, ii, 173 seq. 
makes a truce with Hdmdn, 
ii, 176 

tries to slay Hajfr, ii, 176 
himself, ii, 177 
brings up Siydwush, ii, 196 
maiches with Mm against 
Afrdsiydb, ii, 223* seq, ^ 
returns and quarrels with 
Kai Kdds, ii, 242 seq, 
grief and wrath of, at the 
death of ,Siyiwush, ii, 338 

puts Surkha to death, ii, 346 
fights with the Xdrdniaps, ii, 

; 349 'wg* ^ ' ' 

appoihts Xhs' ruler of' Chdeh, 

"d ib 3.5^ ' ' , , * " , ' 

Gfidte tuWt ofv'Sughd ahd^ 
i; 'Sipahjib/ii, 3,58- A . 


INDEX 353 

Rustam, daughtci of, ii, 383, 
384, ill, 323 

wife of, ii, 384, iii, 323 
hears of Kai Khusrau’s 
arrival in frdn, ii, 395 
Xurkman occupation of Za- 
bulistdn, account of by, iii, 
14 

goes to do homage to Kai 
Khnsrau, iii, 17 
witnesses Kai Khusi au ’s 
oath to avenge Siydwush, 
iii, 22 

pioposcs to Kai Khusrau to 
expel Xurkmans from Zd- 
bulistdn, iii, 30 
asks Kai Khusrau to pardon 
Xfis and the Iranians in 
the matter of Faidd, iii, 
113 

summoned by Kai Khusrau, 
iii, 143 

advocates the maiiiage of 
Fariburz and Faiangfs, 
iii, 146 

marches to succour Xds, iii, 
148 

meets Gddarz, iii, 171 
takes counsel with Xds and 
the chiefs, iii, 172 
arrays the host, in, 1 77 
fight of, with Ashkabfis, 
legend about, iii, 109 
leferxed to, viii, 75 
parleys with Ashkdbds, iii, 
180 

slays Ashkabds, iii, 181 
described by Pirdn, iii, 183 
harangues the troops, iii, 
x86, 2i9i 223, 232, 235 ^ 
challenged by Kdmds, lil, 
187 

spear-bearer of, slain by 
^ Kdmds, iii* x8$ 
parleys with Kdmds, iii, l£8 
takes Kdmtis prisonei, iii, 
•189 ' , 

. aad the, Khdn of CMn, Story 
. i of, r#, hi* r 9 r 
' ^refMwd 'to, iii, r 93 
; ; slajfs CMhgiSh, iii, r95 

' ' ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


354 

Rustam, parleys with Hiiradn, 
iii, 196 

conditions of peace offered 
by, iii, 197, 205 
parleys with Pirdn, iii, 202 
proposes peace on terms to 
the franians, lii, 211 
warned by Gudar^ not to 
trust Pirdn, iii, 212 
wrath of, with Pirdn, iii, 218 
nnhoises Shangul, iii, 221 
prowess of, in battle, iii, 222 
seq, 

overthrows Knndur, iii, 224 
slays Shwa, iii, 224 
Gahdr, hi, 225 
attacks the Khdn of Chin, 
iii, 225, seq. 
victorious, ih, 231, seq. 
wroth with Tds and the 
Iranians, iii, 23-^1 
sends Fariburz to Kai Khus* 
ran with tidings of victory, 
iii, 236, seq. 

leads on the host, iii, 238 
reaches Sughd, iii, 244 
sends troops to attack 
Biddd, iii, 244 
slays Khfdi, iii, 245 
besieges and stoims Biddd, 
iii, 246 

sends Gfv to raid Khntan, 
iii, 247 

praised by Gddarz, iii, 24S 
described Dy Afrdsiydb, iii, 

attacks the Tdrhnians, iii, 

^57 

challenges PdMdwand, iii, 

259 

overthrows Piilidwand, iii, 
264 

defeht$ the Ttirdniaiis, iii, 

! 266 ' ' ' 

divides the, spoil, 'iii, ^66 
.ravages in, 266 

':TeturhS in.ttintnph, in, 267 
‘ asks iCkffsran^S'.ldstve.ta’ 

‘ ; , i rdtiith" to 'i Ml,", hi; ,2^9'' ■ , , 

, rewarded '^Kltnsmn,/: 
, i'.,iSb'2dp ' ' ' ' ’ ' 


Rustam, Story of fight of, with 
the div Akwan, xqg, iii, 
271 seq. 

summoned to court by Kai 
Khusrau, hi, 274 
pursues the div Akwdn, iii, 

275 

foiled by Akwdn, lii, 276 
taken at a disadvantage by 
Akwdn, iii, 276 
offered a choice of deaths by 
Akwhn, iii, 277 
outwits Akwhn, iii, 277 
finds Rakhsh among Afrh- 
siyhb’s herds, iii, 278 
encounters AMsiyhb’s 
herdsmen, iii, 279 
defeats Afrhsiyib, iii, 280 
slays Akwhn, lii, 281 
carries off the spoil, iii, 
281 

welcomed by Kai Khusrau, 
in, 282 

tells his adventure with 
Akwhn, iii, 282 
rewarded by Kai Khusrau, 
iii, 283 

returns home, iii, 283 
summoned to court in the 
matter of Bizhan, iii, 319 
seq. 

visited by Giv, iii, 322 
promises to help Giv, iii, 

324 

goes with Giv to court, iii, 
326 

address of, to Kai Khusiau, 
ih, 327 

undertakes the rescue of 
Bfzhan, ih, 330 
plan of, ih, 333 
chooses his comrades, iii, 

334 . ' • 

goes disguised to Xdrdn,, 

^335 ' . ' '' y ' 

gives presents to Hrdn, 

, ’33d , , , ' , . , : 

w'elO'Omed by 'Phdn, ih, 336"" 
opens a marked ih, 337’” 

' ' ; ,interview$of, 

'? 37 / 3 ' 4 *' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Rustam, seucls food and his ring 
to Bfzhan, hi, 340 
lenioves boulder of Akw^n 
from pit's mouth, hi, 3^15 
makes conditions loi release 
with Ih'zhaii, iii, 345 
releases i 3 izhan, hi, 346 
airays his troojjs against 
Afrdsiyab, iii, 350 
mocks AfrAsiydl>, hi, 351 
defeats AMisiydb, ih, 352 
triumphant return of, iii, 
353 

presents Bizhan to Kai 
Kluisiaxi, iii, 354 
rewarded by Kai Khusrau, 
iih 35 h 

goes to Sistdn, iii, 356 
sent to J find list Jin by Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 
successes of, iv, 60, 71 
troops of, recalled, iv, 145 
commands the right wing, 
iv, 147 

attacks with Kai Khusrau 
from tlie centre, iv, 180 
goes with Zawdra to the 
right wing, iv, 180 
sent to the desert to attack 
Tawurg, iv, j 88 
reports his defeat of Tawurg, 
iv, 193 

advances, iv, 3:94 
failure of Afrisiydb's at- 
tempt to surprise, iv, 195 
takes part in the siege of 
Gang-biliisht, iv, X99, 208 
&$q. 

Kai Khusrau 's converse 
with, iv, 198, 199 
captures Jalm and Garsfwaz, 
iv, 2X0 

advises Kai Khusrau to 
/reject: Afr4siy4b*s over- 
tures,, iv/ 222 

.'ordered to prepare for a 
night“'attach;, from^, Afri- 
siyib, iv, 224 / ' 

' '^ppdrte' Kai' Khu^rhu ' a 'pro- ' * 
'^ppsal'tp pursue ' AfrW;fdb, 

: Gan|^0h, /'.l ' ' ' 


355 

Rustam, left by Kai Khusrau in 
Chin, iv, 241 

welcomes Kai Khusrau on 
his return from Gang- 
dizh, iv, 251 

accompanies Kai Khusrau 
to SiyAwnshgird, iv, 252 
summoned by the frhnians 
to remonstrate with Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 278 
with Zai and the sages, sets 
forth for Irdn, iv, 279 
met on arrival by Gudar« 
and other chiefs, iv, 282 
holds converse with the 
Iranians, iv, 282 
audience of, with Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 283 seq. 
holds, with other chiefs, at 
the bidding of Kai Khus- 
rau an assembly on the 
plain, iv, 291 scq. 

Kai Khusrau's gift to, iv, 

295 

confirmed by Kai Khus- 
rau in possession of Nfm- 
rUz, iv, 297 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 
on his pilgrimage, iv, 
306 

turns back at the bidding of 
Kai Khusrau, iv, 307 
laments the loss of the pala- 
dins and returns to Irin, 
iv, 310 

Zdl and, welcome Gushtdsp 
to Sistan, V, 85 
rivalry in legend between 
Asfandiyir and, v, 116 
' Haft Khw^n of, compared 
with that of Asfandiydr, 
V, 1x7 

Asfandiy4r^s fight with, 
i Story of, i$6, v, x65 s&q 
, recited by Nadr, son of 

Hirith, at Mecca, v, x66 
referred to, v, '169, X70, 306 
Gushtksp, bids Asfandiydx 
' goagaipst, V, 173 
' ' A^fandft^'s uxessage to, v, 


GENERAL INDEX 


356 

Rustam, life of, attempted by 1 
Balinian, v, 184 
interview of, with Bahman 
V, 185 

entertains Bahman, v, 186 
great appetite of, v, t 86, 210 
jests with Bahman on his 
small appetite, v, 186 
sends Zawira and Far^marz 
to bid Zil and Rndaba 
prepare to receive As fan- 
diydr, v, 190 

goes to the Hfrmund, v, 

parleys with Asfandiydr, v, 
192, 

invites Asfandiyar to visit 
him, V, 193 

accepts Asfandiyhr's invita^ 
tion to a feast, v, 195 
tells ZAl, of his interview 
with Asfandiydr, v, 196 
indignation of, at not being 
summoned to the feast, 

V, 197 

sets forth to reproach Asfan- 
diy^r, v, 198 

wrangle of, with Asfandiyar, 

V, 198 se^, 

demands his proper seat at 
tho feast, v, 200 
Zil and, vilified by Asfan- 
diy^r, v, 201 

details his ancestry, v, 202 
recounts Sfim's exploits, v, 
202 

his own exploits, v, 203, 
207 

patents of, from Kai Kifis 
and Kai Khusrau, v, 203 
aged six hundred years, v, 
204 

tries a handgrip with Asfan- 
diyitj V, 209 

accepts Asiandiyir's ohal-" 
lepge, V, 269 
asks for heat % 2tr 
ihakes tosh- overtures -to 
Asfandiy^, y, 

, ' ^ddre^^es '' | tent- , 

'' ''enclospre, , 215' ,, j ' 


Rustam, bids Zawara bring him 
his arms, v, 218 
rejects Zdl’s counsels, v, 220 
arms for battle, v, 222 
gives Zawfira charge of the 
troops, v, 222 

goes with Zawara to the 
Hirmund, v, 222 
instructs Zawdra, v, 222 
crosses the Hfrmund and 
summons Asfandiyar to 
the combat, v, 223 
suggests a general engage- 
ment, V, 224 

distress of, at the death of 
Ndsh Azar and Mihr-i- 
Nush, V, 228 

offers to surrender Zawdra 
and Fardmaiz to Asfan- 
diydr, v, 228 

wounded by Aslan diy dr, v, 
229 

flees from Asfandiydr, v, 
229 

sends Zawdra with a message 
to Zdl, V, 230 

parleys with Asfandiydr, v, 
231 

recrosses the Hfrmund, v, 
231 

kin of, grieve over his 
wounds, v, 234 
bids the leeches to attend to 
Rakhsh first, v, 234 
despair of, v, 235 
advised by Zdl, v, 235 
Zil summons the Simurgh 
to the aid of, V, 235 
healed by the Sfmurgh, v, 

^237 

instructed by the Sfmurgh 
how to overcome Asfan- 
diydr, v, 237, seg;, 
cuts the fatal branch' of 
tamarisk, v, 239 
prepares the arrow, v, 240 ^ 
summons Asfandiydr to re^ 
new the fight, v, 240 | - ; 
makes a final effort for' peiee 
with Asfandiiydr, /v," ,243^' 
' " ' ' ' 


GENERAL INDEX 357 


Rustam, bcAvails Asfandiyar to 
liisliutau, V, 24C) 

Astandiyar confides RaUinan 
to, V, 248 

foretells an evil futux’e for, 

V, 248 

laments Asfandiyar, v, 250 
warned by Zawdra against 
Bahman, v, 250 
sends Asfandiydr’s corpse to 
Gusbtdsp, V, 251 
Bahman remains with, v, 
252, 256 

instructs J^ahman, v, 256 
wiitcs to Gushtdsp to excuse 
himself in the matter of 
Asfandiyir, v, 256 
overtures of, to Gusht^sp 
supported by Bishutan, 
V, 257 

Gushtdsp accepts the ex- 
cuses of, and writes to, v, 

257 

requested by Gushtdsp to 
send back Bahman, v, 258 
equips Bahman for his jour- 
ney, V, 258 

Story of, and Shaghdd, 157, 
V, 260 seq. 

provenance of, v, 260 seq. 
death of, v, 261, 273, 289 
versions of, v, 261 
ICibubs tribute to, question 
of, V, 265 

ShaghM and the king of 
EC^bul plot against, v, 265 
takes up ShaghM’s cause, v, 
267 

prepares to occupy K 4 bul 
with a host, 2^8 
persuaded by ShagMd to go 
with Zawira and a stn^U 
escoxh V, 268 

, patdotts king of Kibul, y, 

‘ 269 

entertained ' by 'king_ of 

, ’ Kihnl, V, 269 , ; ' 

goes hunting with ?awlra, 

; y, «70 ^ : 

. , faJlR a, victim, to fere^ohery, 

■' y*'^70' , , ,, ^ 


Rustam, Shaghad, glories over, 

V, 271 

slays Shaghad, v, 272 
last words of, v, 272 
corpse of, taken from the 
pit by Faramarz, v, 274 
obsequies of, v, 274 seq. 
Artabanus and, v, 282 
burial place of, v, 287 
scene of the battle be- 
tween Bahman and Fard- 
marz, v, 287 

personification of the Sacae, 
i, 68 ; vi, 194 

conduct of, in Hamdvardn, 

viii, 104, 168 

banner of, bestowed on 
Bahram Chubfna, viii, 
105, 217 

Rustam, Persian commander in 
chief under Yazdagird III, 
xy6 ; ix, 66, O7, 69, 73, 81 
seq., 90, 95 

brother of Farrukhzdd, viii, 
413 and note 
revolt of, Viii, 413 
overthrows Azarmdukht, ix, 
59 

advances to Kidisfya, ix, 67, 
73 

end of, ix, 69 

finds evil aspects in the stars 

ix, 73 

mites to his brother, ix, 73 
hears of Shu’ba Mughfra’s 
arrival, ix, 82 

Efizbih, Bahrim Gfir's high 
priest, 164, vii, 26 seq., 54, 
67 

bewails Bahrdm Gfir's 
course of life, vii, 56 
reproached by Bahtdm Ghr 
' for his parsimony, vii, 83 
Riizbih, scribe, viii, 252 

S ' 

Sa'ao, sqn of Wakkds, Arab 
geiperal, r7<5, ix, 67, 68, 

;] ' 90 ' • • 


358 GENERAL 

Sa’ad, succeeds AM ’Ubaida, ix, 

67 

at Kadisiya, ix, 67, 09 
Xoiinds Kida, ix, 67 
takes Cieaiplion, ix, 67 
recalled, ix, 68 
seat by ’Umar to invade 
frin, ix, 72 

letter of Rustam to, ix, 78 
taken by Pi'rdz, ix, 80, 81 
Sabbikh, king of Yaman, iv, T46 
Sabz dar sabz, melody, viii, 399 
and noU 

Sacae (Scythians), i, 17, 19 

Rustam a personilicaiion of, 
i, 68; vi, 194 
SacaesUn. See SistM. 

Sacrifice, Imman, and serpent- 
worship, i, 143 

Sada, feast of, 140, i, 23 ; iv, 
317; V, 309 ; vi, 33, 55, 
230 and note^ 245, 273, 
389; vii, II, 94, 200; 

viii, 68, 133, 216, 313; 

ix, 40"' 92 

institution of i, 124 
Sfida, Irinian noble, vii, 312 
Safld Rfid, river flowing through 
Gfiin into the Caspian, 

V, 13, 16 

Sagast^n (Sfstte v, 13 
Sage, sages, J5p, vi, loi, 103 
Indian, vi, 62 
naked (Brahmans q,v.) 
of Kaid. See Kaid. 
sayifig of, viii, 155 
Sagittarius, constellation, i, 188 ; 
M 355 

Sagsir, Sagsirs, district and 
' tribe, i, 279 and note, 296, 

'323,339; ii., 143 ; iii, m 

207 ' ' 

Sahadeva, pne ol the five Bin- 
' ' ' davis,. iy, i'3® ' ' 

’$ahf^ wife of frajid,' xS8 ; ' 

' , neferied* ■’tol -i* ' ' i’ . 

ppdd# ''-sen Ml Irdrii^'u 

‘ , ' - /-'fioWet'v,, d'fio,. dfii, ^63 ’ ■ 

.! of ; 

‘ ' 'y‘- ;; ,/ ■ 


INDEX 

Sakfi, son of Cassar, lamp. 
Imhrasp, iv, 355 
commands the left wing, 
M 355 

Sakila, mountain, i6g, iv, 342 ; 
viii, 41 

dragon of, 154, iv, 342 seq. 
referred to, iv, 343, 351, 
358 

stronghold of, taken by 
Rumans, viii, 47 
Saklab (Slavonia), ii, 360 ; iii, 
152, 164, 177, 185, 204, 

2x8, 221 seq., 235, 238, 

243, 255; vi, 179; vii, 

T12, J15, 364 ; vni, 379 

Salm, eldest sou of Faridfin, 140, 
X41, i, 42, 90, 91, 183 seq., 
335» 342, 344, 362; ii, 
19, 237> 3Ttd ; iii, 37, 115, 
iv, 66, 69, 269, 272 ; V, 
205, 261, 284 ; vi, 353 ; 
vii, 1 01 ; viii, 266, 270, 
300, 376 note, 378, 381 
racial significance of, i, 54 
etymology of, Firdausi’s, i, 
174 

naming of, i, 187 
horoscope of, i, 188 
receives Rfim and the West, 
i, 189 

envies fraj, x, 190 
plots with Tfir, i, 190 
Tfir and, demand the abdi- 
cation of fraj, i, 191 
fraj visits, i, 198 
fraj not welcomed by, 
i, 198 seq, 
slay fraj, i, ,201 
send fraj’s head to Farf- 
dfin, i, 202 

hear of Minfichihi, 208 
^ond ah embassy to Fari- 
dfin, i, 208 * ' - ' ' 

receive Fatfdfin’^ reply, I, 

, ' 213 seq, ^ , ' , - ^ 

prepare for war, i, 215' , ' 
■Worsted by Minfiobihry f, 

-,'' 220 '',,,;/' '■ ' , ''-'I-,' 

, ','i‘piah hi^bt-Sfirprisekli !22b‘ 


GENERAL INDEX 359 

Sal in, hears of Tiir's defeat and ' Sam, son of, restored to him by 


death, i, 223 

retreats on the castle of the 
Alans, i, 223 

prevented by Minuchihr, i, 
223 

dees from Mindcliihr, i, 227 
slain by Miniichihr, i, 228 
troops of, ask quarter of 
Mmdchihr, i, 228 
head of, sent to Farldun, i 
229 

Scimitar of, iv, 335 scq. 

Salt, Rustam's caravan of, i, 
330 seq. 
desert, i, 3 

fish, legend of the, vi, 76 seq. 
S4m, son of Harfmdn, frdnian 
hero, father of Zdl and 
grandfather of Rustam, 
141, X42, i, 42, 207, 212, 
235, 238 seq,, 337. 

344» 375 ; ih 4. 33. 

34, 49, 125, 126, 137, 140, 
173, 182, 183 ; iii, 35, 121, 
202, 2 1 5, 260, 279, 283 ; 
iv, 222, 251, 290, 301, 
319 ; V, 14, 15, 5^. ^2, 63, 
196, 198 seq,, 242, 262 

seq,, 266, 267, 274, 285, 

2S6, J289, 290 ; vii, 74 ; 

viii, 223 

pronunciation of, i, 95 note 
etymology of, i, 171 seq. 
JVliadchihr confided to, by 
Farfdfin, i, 231 
mace of, b 2^35, 290, 297,, 328 
given by ZM, to Rustam, 
i 37^ 

speech of, to MinfioMhr, i, 

238 

casts away hk son. 241 at 

birtfi, i, 

fieats rumours, of Ziil, 1/ 243 
dtaams of, con^sotning^ 
i, 243, 244 , , , 

consults 'tiie aithm^os iuid 
'Wddofl. 'to ' totiJc, ''Ms ton/. 

,243 

finds /„Ws:''«OBi'' 'Mf' 


the Siniurgh, i, 247 
returns home with Zal, i, 248 
congratulated by Mmd- 
chihr, i, 248 

goes with Zal to court, i, 249 
tells of his quest to Mind- 
chihr, i, 250 

Mindchihr's gifts to, i, 251 
public rejoicings at his 
home-coming, i, 252 
goes to the wars and leaves 
Zai to rule in Zdbulistdn, 
i, 253 

Mihrdb tributary to, i, 23G 
Zdl writes to, about Rdddba, 
h 275 

receives ZkVs letter, i, 277 
consults the astrologers, i, 
278 

Rustam's birth foretold to, 
i, 278 

replies to Zdl's letter, i, 279 
returns from the war, i, 280 
summoned to court, i, 289 
welcomed by Mindchihr, i, 
289 

tells of his campaign, i, 290 
slays Karkwf, i, 29 x 
bidden to destroy Mihrib 
and all his belongings, i, 
292 

welcomes and promises to 
help Z4i, i, 293 
writes to Mindchihr and 
"pleads past services, i, 295 
tells of the slaying of the 
dragon of the Kashal, i, 
296 

One blow/^ i, 297, 299 
receives Sindukht in aud- 
ience K 302 

, ^invited by Sindukht to 
visit .K'ibul, .i, 305' 

/. dismisses Sfiadukht ';with 
'gifts, i, 3^5' 

■; h^itrs of. Zil's weess with 
\ l^indchihr, ^nd. ,inforiits, 
3i{ihT4t)^ i,,< 

gqes , with db. Kibul,^ i> 


36 o general index 


Sim, sees Ridiba and felicitates 
Zal, i, 318 

returns to Slstan, i, 319 
entertains Milirab and Siu- 
duklit, i, 319 

leaves Zil the regent of Sis- 
tin and goes on a cam- 
paign, i, 319 

hears of the birth of Rustam, 

h 323 

writes to congratulate Zil, 

h 323 

comes to see Rustam, i, 324 
bids Zil and Rustam fare- 
well, i, 327 

hears of Rustam's success 
at Mount Sipand and 
writes to Zil, i, 334 
Naudar's appeal to, i, 339 
goes to court, i, 3^0 
met and offered the crown 
by the friniau chiefs, i, 

340 

refuses the crown, i, 3^0 
reconciles the chiefs and 
Naudar, i, 341 
counsels Naudar, i, 341 
rewarded by Naudar, i, 341 
departs, i, 34 x 
death of, referred to, i, 345, 
346, 349 
obsequies of, - 358 
mace of, given by Zil to 
Rustam, i, 378 
exploits of, recounted by 
Rustam, v, 202 

Sim, frinian warrior, temp. 
Yaz^dagird son of Shipir, 
Vi, 395 

Sima Keresispa Narimanau, 
Irinian hero, i, icyi seq. 
$amangin, cjty south-east of 
Balkh if?), X44 ii, 121: 

\ , 

king of, 'X44,M, ix$, X40, 1S4 
entet tains S-ustam,- ii, 122 
, father of^Zhanda kaxm, 

. , /' h,' 150:". , 

Simdnid^;'S 4 indnid^>. h ^ 14,', 

^i?th' 0 |'dyjuis^o 4 ^ 


Samarkand (Sogdiana, Sughd), 
city and distiict in Turk- 
istan, ii, 241 ; vii, 1G7, 
358, 359; viii, 377; ix, 
96, 115 

early seat of Aryan civili- 
zation (?), i, 7 
settlement of the Huns at, 
i, 19 

Sambaz, frinian chief, speech of, 
viii, 242 

Samfrin, king, vi, 405 and note 
Samkuran, frinian hero, iv, 149 
Sandar, Sandanis, the Arar tree, 

vi, ig 

Sandal, Sandali, city in Hind, 

vii, 395 * 396, 401 seq. 
king of, entertained by 

Bahxim Gii, vii, 140 seq. 
Sanja, a dfv, ii, 39, 40, 4/j, 55 ; 

iv, 296 ; V, 204 
Sanscrit, vii, 382 
Sapad, mountain. See Spentd- 
dita. 

Sapandiimad. See Sipandir- 
mad. 

Sapfnid, daughter of Shangul, vi, 
3 ; vii, 144 

married to Bahrim Gir, 
vii, 128 

finds out who her husband is, 

vii, 1 31 

plans Bahrdm Gdr's flight 
from Hind, vh, 132 
reproached by Shangul, vii, 
X 35 

converted to Zoroastrian- 
ism, vii, 139 

visited by Shangul, vii, X42 
Sapor I (Ship dr son of Ardshfr 
q.v.)> Sdsdnian king, vi,- 
294, 321 

^apor II (Shipdr son pf thmuzd 
- q,v.)f Sisdnian king, i, 
374 J V, 13 ; vi, 294^ 32X ; 

viii, 4t 

Sapor ',111 (SUpdr son of SU-, 
' pdr q.v .), ' vi,. 365. 
Saralxhs, pity, in Rhurdsin,. he- 
, , ^twepn ‘Rfshdpdr and . 

' roS' '* ' ' ' '' ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


Saraparda, i, 84 

Siinosiemma viminale. See 
Honia. 

Sargc)ii J. of Agani, v, 293 

foundling* legend of, v, 
393 

Sail, city in Mdzandarin, i, 230, 
289, 366; V, 174; vii, 
237 ; viii, 168, 341, 355, 
392 ; ix, 86 

Iranian captives imprisoned 
at, i, 363 
released, i, 367 

Sar-i-pul-i-Zoliab, vii, 187 

Sarkab, Rinnan general, viii, 281, 
292 

Sarkash (Sen gins), minstrel, J74, 
viii, X93, 398 seq. ^06 
Story of, lyq, viii, 396 
<lisgra,ct‘ of, viii, 399 

Sarkhdn. See Siifarai. 

Sa-nich, desert in Ivinndn, ii, 226 
vii, 362 

San'ig, Jacob of, Syriac poet. 
See Jacob. 

Sarv, king of Yaman, 140, i, 21 x, 
28b ; V, 260 ; vi, 73 
daugiit(‘rs of, asked in mar- 
riage by Faiiddn for his 
sons, i, 178 

consults Ids chiefs, i, 179 
agrees, conditionally, to 
Farid Tin's request, i, 181 
attempts to outwit Fari- 
ddn's sons, i, 183 $eq, 
gives his daughters in mar- 
riage to Faridhn'a sons, i, 
185 

Sarv««Az4d Sarv, q,v, 

S4s4n, eponyra of Sdsinian dyn- 
asty, viii, 219, 220, 330* 

341 

S4s4n, son of Bahmarn^ ii' 3 P v, 
290 ' ' , ^ ; 

disihheriie4 and froiri’ 
court, V, i?9i 
' account of, 

'namerif soh;,aad'' 
"severaipl ■' 

ii 3‘;' ' Yi ■ 

’«55 '■ '' 


361 

I Sasan, descendants of, help Ard- 
shir Pdpakan, vi, 224 
House of, vi, 251, 270 and 
note 

lineage of, ix, 56, 105 and 
note 

Sdsan, father of Ardshir Pdpa- 
kdn, x 6 o, vi, 3, 193, 198, 
200, 201, 240 
legend of, vi, 21 1 seq. 
marries daughter of Pdpak, 
vi, 213 

Sdsdnian, S4s4nians, i, ii, 374; 
in, 9 ; v, 13, 281 ; vi, 81, 
209, 225, 253, 257 ; vii, 
85, 185, 212, 237 ; viii, 65, 
72, 73, 214, 262, 330, 413 
note ; ix, 4, 5, 46, 47, 50, 
54. Gs, 72, 73. 7G. 77. 83, 

105 

dynasty, i, 49, 374 ; ii, 10 ; 
v, 10, 282 ; vi, 249 seq.f 
'X53, 257, 321 ; vii, I seq., 
381 ; viii, 73 ; ix, 4 
Tabari on the rise of the, 
vi, 198 

characterised, vi, 249 
Zoroastrianism under, vi, 
251 

Mas'hdi on Church and 
State under, vi, 251 
duration of, vi, 257 
empire, i, 11 ; vi, 193, 327; 

viii, 193 

conquered by the Arabs, 

ix, 65 seq. 

genealogical table of, vi, 3, 
253 

Tabari's history of, vi, 14 
noU 

fictitious genealogies of, v, 
290; vi, 199, 21 1, 256 
view of Sikandar, vi, 15, 224 
and note, 240, and noU ^ 

• , rivalry; with Arsacids, viii, 

' ^ ^ ' , 

, ' hsag^, vihy 190 

aitbhitecture, ‘ viii, 193 
, race.vlii^';;i55%, '$$6, note, 

'‘on, Sitltdn 


GENERAL INDEX 


Satrapy, satrapies, Ntisliirwdn’s 
four ix, 69 

Saturn, planet, i, 72, loo, 161, 
204, 245, 295, 31 1 ; ii, 
183, 208, 215, 247, 263, 
310, 319, 394. 4071 
32,110, 178,232, 237, 254, 
268, 318; iv, 31, 214 ; 

V, 68, 89, 136, 154, 159, 
220, 233 ; vi, 97, 1 1 5, I76> 
281, 318, 385 ; vh, 92, 
151, 252, 267, 346, 418; 

viii, 24, 66, 321, 392, 395 ; 

ix, 73 

splicre of, ix, 92 
Sav (the Sdv'bar of the Pahlavi | 
texts, now Chashmali-i- 
Sabz), a lake, among the 
hills in the neighbouihood 
of Ths and Mashad, xdj, 
vh 373. 39X 

legend of, vi, 372, 391 seq, 
Savalhn, mountain in Azarbhijin 
V, 14 

Shwa, Tdrhnian hero, 149* iih 2:24 
slain by Kustam, iii, 224 
Shwa, frhnian hero, v, 154 

left in charge of the Brazen 
Hold by Asfandiyhr, i, 

154 

S4wa, luler of the Turks, jyo ; 
viii, 74, 94 seq,, 100 $eq., 
107, 108, no seq., 123, 129 
133. 135, 3:37> X39, 
164, 169, 174, 216, 219, 
222, 224, 240 
swChao-wOu, viii, 72 ^ 
attacks Hurmnzd, viii, 92 
letter of, to Hnxmazd, viii, 

... « 

'prophecy. e*hont, yiii, 9^ 
Hurmuzd ' sends Kharrid, 
son of Batzfn, to, viii,' ixo 
hears of Bhhr^m Chhbfnh^s 
asrmy and blames 
viih xxc^ . 

offers of, .'to Bsitrim Chff- 
hfha, VS-^ xx'3 1x7 
employs soroe:^' gainst .’thO' 

., VML'-'xh^ " 

' ■ vhi;' 


S 4 wa, head of, set on lance, viii, 
130 

wealth of, sent to Hurmuzd, 
viii, 133 

Sawurg, Indian king, 159, vi, 64, 
118 

Sayce, Professor, on the Ama- 
zons, vi, 71 
Scandinavians, vi, 73 

found the Russian empire, 

vi, 19 

Scimitar of Salm, iv, 335 seq, 
Scotland, vi, 79 

vitrified forts in, vi, 79 
Scribe, scribes, office of, highly 
esteemed, i, 27 and note ; 

vii, 31 1 ; viii, 50 

put to death by liur- 
muzd, viii; 71, 81 seq. 
Scriptures, Zoroastrian. See 
Zandavasta. 

Scylla, Nisus and, story of, vi, 
323 note 
Scythia, iv, 316 

Scythians (Sacae), their relations 
with the Iranians, i, 17 
wars of, with Darius Hys- 
tapsis, V, II 

Seasons, confusion of the, ix, 77 
note 

Sects, Muhammadan, i, 99 
parable of, i, 107 
Seleucia (Bih Atdshir q.v.), city 
on the right bank of the 
Tigris, opposite to Ctesi- 
phon (Taisaffin), ii, 80 ; 
vi, 254, 291 note, 322 ; viii, 
189, 194. 

Semiramis, legenda^ queen of 
Assyria, historically Sam^ 
muramat, wife (?) of 
Samsi Adad king of 
ria (b.c, 824-804), ii, xo ; 

' . vi,' 66 , 405 note 

legend of, V, .292, ^ 93 ' ' ' , '' 
^Humdi and, v, ' 292, '293 
'Senhtes, the, i, ,9 ^ \ 

\'\ \ ;relati'o'n^' of, with, the 

;■ .,;iana> i,'9 ' 

' ’ Seneca the you,nger, ISh^ro’e.Imfot' 


GENERAL INDEX 


363 


St*f)WJS (Sufarai '''). Persian com- 
niaiider-in-cliic^l, fcmp, 
Kubad, vii, 187 
Sergi(}p(dis, viii, 188 
Sergius, Saint and Martyr, viii, 
188 

patron saint of Khusrau 
Paiwiz, viii, i«88, 195 
Roman leader in Tabari, 
viii, 188 

Sergius (Sarkash), minsticl, viii, 
193 

Serpent, '"serpents, on Zabhdk’s 
shoukiers, i, 139 
Wf^rsliip and human sacri- 
fice, i, 143 

Seven, favourite number in Per- 
sian story, vii, 186, 280, 
Banquets of Niishfrwhn. See 
BaiK|uet. 

Climes. See Climes. 

Courses (Haft Khwan) of 
Rustam. See Rustam. 
Plamds. See Planet. 
JkTsian nobl(‘s, legend of the 
vi, 207 

transferred to Ardshfr 
P 4 phkdn {?), vi, 207 
Stages (Haft Khwin) of As- 
fandiydr. See Asfandi- 
y 4 r. 

Warriors, Fight of the, 
ii, 25, 82, X07 seq. 

Founts, jewel, viii, $ 9 ^ 
and forty Shdhs, viii, 395 
and mie 

Severns, Roman Emperor (A.P. 
X46-211), vi, 322 
Ilatra besieged by, vi, 322 
Sbabihang, FarhM's eteed, iix, 
5^3 * ^ 

Btoan's steed, -iv,, 47 ’ 
Ehabdi^, Babrim, ateed, 

vii,„37. 3o 
'G|v% ste#, „iii^ >57 ! 
tnhr 4 sp> ^teed, . 

'' '-'343 ' '1" ' '''' "" ‘ '' '' 


''! 4 d 7 ’ 


Sliahrang, Bahrain Gur’s steed, 
vii, 37, 80 

Blzban's steed, iii, 296, 302, 
313; iv, 8, 39, 50, 119, 
124 

Shaddn son of Barzin, one of 
Firdausi’s authorities, i, 
67, 69 ; vii, 382, 423 
Shadddd, son of ’Ad, legend of, 
i, 100 

Shddward, treasure, viii, 406 and 
note 

Shaghad, son of Zal, J 57 , v, 
261 

Story of Rustam and, 137, v, 
260 seq. 

provenance of, v, 260 
birth of, V, 263 
astrologers’ evil prognostic 
of, V, 264 

sent to be brought up at 
Ivhbul, V, 264 
marries the daughter of the 
king of Kdbul, v, 264 
king of K^bul and, plot 
against Rustam, v, 265 
seq. 

pretended quanel of, with 
the king of K 4 bul, v, 266 
goes to Zdbul, v, 267 
cause of, taken up by 
Rustam, V, 2O7 
persuades Rustam to go 
with Zawdra and a small 
escort to K^bnl, v, 268 
warns the king of Kibul of 
Rustam’s coming, v, 269 
, glories over Rustam, ^v, 271 
outwitted and slain by 
Rustam, V,, 272 
corpse of, burnt, v, 277 
Ehdh, accession of, ceremony at, 

' vi, 409 ' , ' ‘ ' 

'Sh>h>r <iity in BOmivarin, ii, $9 
-ShlEibMl ,thb niod«n name for 
■'"i - , the ruins of 0 up.d 4 -Sh 4 « 
phr ‘in Rhhristin, yi,'295. 
'SMWi', ,,jriyec, 'tt;,, ^8 ; iii.' Ii. 

P 3 . IS*., 173. 

vh 39 t. 39 ^'' 

' ’ ' b '' pkountain, ' 'ih^ ■ '^»37 ' ' - " . 


GENERAL INDEX 


Slidhiidma (Bastan-nama, Khu- 
dai-nama), 139, i, 66 ; ix, 

4 43. 5 o> 70 

subject-matter of, how pre- 
served, i, 56 
origin of, i, 65 scq. 
put mto writing, i, 66 
Prose, compilers of, referred 
to, viii, 71, 73 
probably compiled by Magi, 
i, 69 

referred to, by Firdausi, i, 
108, 109 ; iv, 141 scq. ; 

vi, 196 

more than one, i, 29, 66, 67, 
Gq 

Dakild and. Sea Baklhi. 

Shdhndma, Firdausi’s, I39» 

3, 23 seq. ; hi, 7, 9, ii, 
14, 271, 286 ; iv, 7, 8, 
136 seq., 316, V.9. srq,, 19, 
20, 22 seq,, 27 seq., 293, 
294 ,* vi, 3 and noie, 30, 
31, 66 seq., 72, 79, 82 seq,, 
194 seq.^ 205 seq., 249 seq,, 
253, 256, 270 vote, 294, 
301, 307, 310, 325, 32O; 

vii, 5, 156, 184, 185, 215, 

217, 317, 3^1 ; viii, 3, 41, 
42, 71, 72, 74 187 seq, 

191, 192 

scene of, i, 3 
theme of, i, 8, 47 
Baisinghar Khin^s edition 
of, i, 23 

completion of, Firdausi on, 
jy 6 ; ijfc, 121 

date of completion of, i, 24 ; 
ix, ' 122 

length, metre, and language 
of, i, 47; iv, 8 ; ix, X'22 , 
anomalies of, i, 4S 
explained, i, 48 
di'vi^iohs and' chief chatac- 
. teis otj,' 49 
machlheiy of, 1, 5^: 
leading motives of, 1, 53 , , ’ . 

> ' oO'Wpldhy , oil i , 7 X ; iv,' 136,, 
o|pi> 7.2 

'edp0tis’ot/i,/7d . ;! i, ", 
"‘tieisklfOM/Ofvi.77,;87 ■ '■ 


Shahnama, principles of the 
present translation of, i, 
77 

certain terms used in, ex- 
plained, i, 80 seq. 

Firdausi on the compilation 
of, i, loS 

historic element in mythical 
period of, iii, 8 seq. 

Greek subject-matter in, vi, 

IX 

derivation of Sikandar given 
in, vi, 19 

historic period of, i, 49; vi, 29 
Trail and, analogy between, 
vi, 193 

portion of, corresponding to 
Kdrndmak, vi, 196 
Kdrndmak and, compared, 
vi, 200 seq.f 255 seq. 
Wisdom-literature in, vii, 
278 seq. 

Shdhndma, of Abd- ’AH Muham- 
mad, i, 69 

Shahra, chief, 165, vii, 92 

made king of Tdrdn by 
Bahrdm Gur, vii, 92 

Shabrdm-PIrdz. See Bdddn 
Phdz. 

Shahrdn, ix, 102 

pleads with Mdhwi for Yaz- 
dagird, ix, 102 

Shahrdn Gurdz, Trdnian warrior, 
speech of, viii, 239 

Shahtdngurdz (Hurmuzd Shah- 
xdngurdz, Gurdz q,v.), 
J75; ix, 50 

heads conspiracy against 
Gurdz; ix, 54 

$hahr-Bdmi-lram, sister of Gfv 
'and wife of Rustam, h, 

3^4 . ' 

■Shahrbardz (Guriz q,v,}, Irdaian 
general, viii, 194,; ix, 43,' 
' ' iSo : , , 
revolt of^ yih, 195 
'Of,, yiii, 19b 

' , ‘ rebellion of^ ix,, 43, 44/ , 

' , '^Hahce ;with B;eracUtts, 

' i 44 ' 

ShhhirB^'Z.: See ' 


GEiVERAL 

Sliaiiigir, warrior in Sikandar’s 
host, vi, 125, 126 
lakes Kaidahi’s son and 
daughter-in-law pi isoncrs, 
vi, X25 

Slialirgir, captain of the host to 
Ardshir Papakaii, vi, 241 
Ardshir's instructions to, vi, 
241 

goes to Ardslnr’s help, vi, 
244 and note 

Shahrguriz; (Slialubardz q.v.), ix, 

50 

Shahrindz, sister of Jamshi'd, 
wife of Zahhd,k and Fari- 
di'in, and mother of Salm 
and Tiir, i, 90, 142, 164 
seq,, 177 

married to Zahh^k, i, 146 
sons of, by h'arkliin, i, 177 

Shahrir, Shahrfvar, annsshas- 
penta, I, 88 ; hi, 286, 328 
luontli and day, i, 88 ; v, 
3x0 : vii, 76 

Shahrwardz (Shahrbardz q.v.), 
ix, 50 

Shahrwf, archimage, vi, 329 
minister daring Sh^phr son 
of Urmuzers minority, vi, 
3^9 

Shahrydr, son of Shlifn and 
Khusran Patwiz, ix, 39 
father of Yazdagird, ix, 
64 

Shihwf, eldest son of HaftwM, 

’ vi, 237 

referred to, vi, m6 
helps Ms father against 
AidsMr Fipakte, vi, 236 
executed, vi, 245 

"Shihwf (*»Mihwl ?), one of Fir- 
daiisPs authoiities, vii, 
382, 394 ' ' ... 

Shakespeare, quoted, ui, 2S6: 
V, 136 na^&'; vii, 383 ; vih, 
X87 

Shake, region, % ^ 77 » *^ 5 . 

192, 204,' 2'22, 223, ^ 228, 

' 237 ' 

■ Shim '(Syria), ii, $0, 84 ; $ 57 '; 


INDEX 36s 

Sham, king of, taken prisoner by 
Rustam, ix, 97 

Shamasas, Titan ian hero, 142 ; 
i, 346 ; ii, 12, 18 
Khazarwan and, invade Ka- 
bnlistin, i, 345, 358 
parleyed with by Mihrib to 
gam time, i, 358 
hccs from Zil, i, 361 
met and defeated by Kiran, 

1, 361 

Sliambahd, daughter of Barzfn, 
vii, 53 

married to Bahrim Gir, vii, 
53 

Shamiran, Tiirinian hero, m, 185 
comes to aid Pfrin, iii, 152 
Shamirin, stronghold noith of 
Harat (?), ix, 91, 94 
Shanxmikh, king of Sir, iv, 57, 
146 

Shammis, legendary founder of 
Fire-worship, vi, 339 note 
Shammis, Nushzid's general, 
vii, 219, 272 
Shamti, vhi, 195, 19^ 

Shangnl, king of Hind, temp. 
Kai Khusran, 149, iii, 161, 
172, 185, 19®, 205, 210, 
2x7, 251 

comes to aid Pfrin, iii, 152 
volunteers to fight Rustam, 
iii, 2og, 2x6 

challenges Rustam, iii, 221 
worsted, iii, 221 
temp, Bahrim Gir, 16$, vi, 
325 ; vii, 109 seq. 
border-raids of, vii, ixo 
gives audience to the trin- 
ian envoy (Bahrim Gir), 
vii, XX2 

state of, described, vii, 
1x2 

brother of, yii, XI3 
vaunts his own greatness, 

’ vii, X14 

■ ’wife of, the daughter of the 

'A, paghfir, vii, 1x5 

.son of, yii,' i-x 5 

' ' . entertains 'Bahrim Gir, vii, 
p' rtf , 


366 GENERAL INDEX 

Shangul, Bahrain Gur wrestles Shapiir, son of Pdpak, vi, 199 

before, vii, 117 Shapiir, son of Ardshir Papakan, 

plays at polo, vii, 118 SMh (Sapor I), j6j, i, 42 ; 

Bahrain Ghr displays his vi, 3, 256, 303, 307, 313, 

raarkmanship before, vii, 315, 321 seq., viii, 265 

1 18 compilation of Zandavasta 

tiics to find out who the under, i, 62, 63 

Persian envoy (Bahrim stories of, in Karnamak, vi, 

Giir) is, vn, 118 seq. 196, 255 

takes counsel with his sages, Tabari, vi, 255, 257 

vii, 126 crowned in his father’s life- 

offers a daughter and great time, vi, 257 

advancement to Bahr 4 m secret birth of, vi, 261 

Giir, vii, 127 origin of name, vi, 262 

marries Sapfniid to Bahrdm note 

Giir, vii, 128 seq. recognised and acknow- 

goes to a festival, vii, lodged by Ardslur Pdpa- 

134 kin, vi, 264 

hears of Bahrhm Giir’s flight <liscovers the daughter of 

vii, X35 Mihrak, vi, 268 seq. 

reproaches Sapfniid, vii, 135 summoned and counselled 

makes a league with Bahrdm by Ardshfr Phjiakdii, vi, 

Giir, 137 286 seq. ^ 

bids farewell to Sapfniid, vii, confused with Shdpiir son 

137 of Urmuzd, vi, 294, 321, 

makes a new treaty with 324, 327 

Bahrdm Giir, vii, 140 Reign of, 161, vi, 294 seq. 

entertained witli seven other Note on, vi, 294 

kings by Bahrain Giir, vii, historical inaccuracies of, 

140 seq. vi, 294 

visits his daughter Sapfniid, wars of, with Rome, vi, 294, 

vii, 142 297 

farewells Sapfruid, vii, 143 Odenathus and, vi, 294 

makes Bahrim Giir his heir, defeats the Riimans, vi, 

vii, 143 297 

Bahrim Giir's parting gifts receives tribute from Caesar, 

to, vii, 144 vi, 298 

sends Gipsies to £rin, vii, builds cities, vi, 298 

149 ■ bids Baziniish build a bridge 

Shapfgdn, treasury of, i, 6i, 62 at Shiishtar, vi, 298 

Shdpiir, Pishdddian hero, i, 2x0, summons and counsels Uiv 

211,^215 , muzd, vi, 299 

slain, i, 332 ^ , Shipdr, 'son of tJrmuzd,' Sh 4 h 

Shipiir, Kaitoian hero,'^' h, 27X, , (Sapor 11 ), x63, /i,' 

, ' 33^. iih 289, 322, ■ - 374; v, 16 noie; vi, 3, 

- ? iv,' 292 , ' 294, 295, $07, 371,, ,373,^ 

hails Gu'shtisp W Shih, iv,. « 405^ (?) ; vii, 359; viii,: 

Sda ,, 4^' ' ' 

SMptir, Ash'kl'hlan;* (Ratthian) ' ' 'pnoyides for uniformity pf, 

" ' ' |:ing,';Vi,; r97,;'2rd;6" \;^?drd^tiiandoo'#ine^''l^''6^*- 


GENERAL 

Shapitr, son of IJrmuzd, Zoroas- 
triaii canon closed under, 
i, 63 

referred to, vi, 31S 
K(‘ign id, 162, vi, 321 seq. 

Note oil, ri, 321 u^q. 
bridge of, at Taisafun, vi, 
321, 329 

lesidcnccs of, vi, 321, 330 
confused with Shdpi'ir, son 
of Ardshir, vi, 294, 321, 

3 '^‘b 327 

triumphant treaty of, with 
tlu‘ Romans, vi, 326, 355 
cities of, vi, 327, 357 
birth of, vi, 328 
crown{xi as an infant, vi, 328 
education of, vi, 329 
Mfilika offeis to betray her 
fatliei's hold to, vi, 331 
opens the gate to, \i, 333 
sends M41ika to his camp, vi, 
333 

treatment of Aiab captives 
by, vi, 323, 334 
receives the title of Zd’l 
Aktdf q,v., vi, 335 
returns to P4rs and receives 
tribute, vi, 333 
consults the astrologers, vi, 
335 

visits Caesar in disguise, vi, 

entertained by Caesar, vi, 
557 

denounced by a Persian resi- 
dent at Cassatts court, vi, 
337 i 

arrested* vi, 337^ , 
sewed up in an ass’s skin and 
imprisoned, vi* 33$ 
pitied by Irdnian slave- 
^Irl, vi, 339 

freed from ass’s ■ skin by 
staye-girl, vi,,34o 
entertained by a ^ gardener, 
vi, 341; ' ' 

sends tie gsrdener ' fo'' tide 
MgEpriest, yn3i44' , > 

dnsoribed , by the'’gar'dennr>; 

/ ' 4344 .,,,: 


INDEX 367 

Sh4p6r, praises the slave-girl, vi^ 
34^ 

prepares to attack Caesar, 
vi, 346 

bends spies to Taisafun, vi, 
346 

sends tidings of his victory 
over Caesar to the piov- 
mccs, vi, 348 

treatment of Caisai by, vi, 
349 

invades Rdm, vi, 350 
defeats Ynnus, vi, 352 
bids Bazamish come to him, 
vi, 354 

dictates terms of peace, vi, 
355 

xeturns to Istakhr, vi, 356 
takes Nasibin, vi, 356 
names and honours the 
slave-girl, vi, 356 
rewards the gardener, vi, 357 
keeps Cmsar captive, vi, 357 
sends Caesar’s corpse to 
Rdm, vi, 357 

arranges a disputation be- 
tween Mini and the high 
priest, vi, 358 
Mini executed by, vi, 359 
arranges for the succession 
with his brother Ardshii, 
vi, 360 seq. 
dies, \i, 362 

Shipdr, son of Shipilr, Sh&h 
(Sapor III), 163, vi, 3, 
251, 360, 371 ; vii, 171, 
186 

Ardshfr, son of XJrmuzd, 
resigns the throne to, vi, 
364 

, Reign of, 163, vi, 365 seq. 
Note on/\i, 365 
death of, vij^ 366 
. Tabari on, vi, 365 
,Sliiptir, 'Son of Yazdagird, king 
of Armenia, vi, 373 
: Sbdpdr of Rai; Kubid’s > com- 
' \ ' Imandm-in-chief, vii, 184, 

; _ ' ,-185 ; viii, '72 

; ^/anmtU'pned ' to 'Ovetthxow 

i' ' '' yi|,' iipf, ' 


GENERAL INDEX 


368 

Shapdr of Rai, conference of, 
with Kiibad, vii, 192 
goes to Shiraz and arrests 
Shfarai, vii, 193 
conveys Siifarai to Sh4h 
Kubad, vii, 194 

Shdpur, frinian noble, temp, 
Nhshirw 4 n, vii, 304, 333 
Shdpdr, frdiiian wairior, 

viii, 202, 225, 257, 259, 
269, 293, 296 
deceived by Caesar's talis- 
man, viii, 273 

praised by Caesar, viii, 
279 

Bahrim Chiibina writes to, 
viii, 285 

receives Istaklir and Bdrdb- 
gird, viii, 313 

Shdpdr, father of Pirdz, ix, 
80 

Shdpdr Gird (Gund-i-Shiphr^/.z;.) 

city, vi, 295, 298 
Shatt-al-Arab, the combined 
streams of the Tigiis and 
Euphrates, ix, 67 
Shdwarin, Iranian hero, 151, ii, 
73, 90, irr, 228, 249, 250, 
255* ; iii, 20, 34, 

43. 45. 4S, 67, 1 1 5, 334 . 
iv, 97, 105, 147, 275 
Shawwil, the tentir Muham- 
madan month, vi, 208 
Sheep's heads, Bahrim Ch^bina 
and the, viii, 74, 107 
omen of, reported to Hur- 
muad, viii, xoS 
Shem, patriarch, vi, 65 
Shepherds, Kai Khusrau brought 
up by, ii, 528 
Sher-kappf, viii, 322 nois 
Shfb&u, vi, 397* 

' SWda (Bashang), son of, AM- 
■ siydb, 92 ; id, 2d2, 

. ; , 350 : iy*' to X35, : 

'156, ',15s 40-6, ,222,' 

'287,' 290; /■' 

';cdnsuit»d by, Ms 'father, 

' ;‘2so/f#ir-, ‘v ''' 
gpe's dn ohibasdy.td Wlid'-' 


Sliida, refuses to interfere in the 
fight between Rustam and 
Pdladwand, lii, 363 
sent by Afrdsiyab to Kha- 
lazm, IV, II 

defeated by Ashkash, iv, 
60, 72 

‘ commands the left wing, iv, 

155 

surname of, meaning of, iv, 
155 note 

urges Afrdsiyfib to attack 
Kai Khusiau, iv, 159 
Afrdsiyab’s reply to, iv, 

160 

wishes io meet Kai Khns- 
rau ill single combat, iv, 

161 

goes on an embassage to 
Kai Khusrau, iv, 161 
skirmish of, with Iranian 
outposts, iv, 164 
welcomed by Kdian, iv, 
165 

mail and steed of, iv, 168 
receives Kai IChusrau's reply, 
iv, 170 

leturns to Afrdsiydb, iv, 170 
goes to fight Kai Khusrau, 
iv, 1 71 

parley of, with Kai Khus- 
iau, iv, 172 

challenges Kai Khusrau to 
a wrestling-bout, iv, 173 
urged by his interpreter to 
tee from Kai Khusrau, iv; 

174 

refuses, iv, 174 
wrestles and is overthrown, 
iv", 175 

Kai KhUvsrau instructs Ruh- 
, 'him to bury, iv, 176 
SMdiap/ minister to TahrnCiris',i 
i* M 7 , ' ' ' . ' . : 

SMdasp^, , son ' of Gushtisp, t 55 ^- 
ir, '3 ; v, 26, $$ : / ; 

\ , death of, foretold by Jim^p; 

„ /; ' 

' V given of one vvihg,.. 

; , 'v, 55 


GENERAL INDEX 369 


Shidiish, Traniaii hero, i, 211 ; ii, 
5S, S5. 340 ; iih 33. 

^5, 48, 127, 129, 130, 139, 
141, 157, 248, 253 ; iv, 

15, 25. 191 

with Kdran and Kishwdd, 
puisnes Kurakhan, i, 354 
put in command of the 
rear, iv, 92 

Kai Khusrau remonstrated 
with by, and other nobles, 
foi refusing audience, iv, 
275 

Shihte, Shidtes, Muhammadan 
sect, i, 13 
origin of, i, 13 
Firdausi a, i, 24 

Shikbdn, Irdman warrior, vi, 
,395 

Sliiknan, place, vii, 359 

Shingdn, region, hi, 228, 238 ; 
iv, 65 

Shiraz, city in Pdrs (Farsistan), 
166, i, 236 ; vi, 198 note, 
210 ; vii, 6, 173, 190, 193, 
19^ 

Shirin, wife of Khusrau Parwfz, 
^74^ viii, 187, 194, 

3 ^ 3 > 383, 407 ; ix, 28, 36 
enmity of, to Shirwi, viii, 
aSg, 191, 193 
account of, viii, 192 
Khusrau and, Persian poem, 
viii, 192 

meaning of, viii, 193 
‘ Maryam murdered by, viii, 
193, 389 

a Christian, viii, 195 
- warns Khusrau Panwfz 
against Gurdya, viii, 364 
Khusrau Parwfz and, ix,' 7 
Story of, xy4, vih, $82 
^marjried' to, viii, 386' 
gilded chamber given- ■ io, 

, ' 'vi-ih 389, , : , ' ,, , 

hears ^ KuMd, ^proclaime^',, ' 
-Shih, viii, 43:6 ' ' I','" 

-'ihfotms, 'Xiluisrap, 'Pa3r^i2?, 

, '';v£i/ 41b . d'i ■; 

cixarge Of ShItwf'S/’jiorO- 
-i\ hOope, lO 


Shirin, has charge of Raja's letter 
ix, 17 

companions Khusrau Par- 
wiz in privson, ix, 29 
reproached and summoned 
by Shirwi, ix, 36 
makes her Will, ix, 36 
goes to Court, ix, 37 
justifies heiself, ix, 38, 40 
exonerated, ix, 38, 41 
sons of, ix, 39 
unveils to the Court, ix, 39 
Shirwd enamoured of, ix, 39 
makes request of Shirwi, ix, 
41 

goes home, ix, 40 
distributes her wealth, ix, 40 
irees her slaves, ix, 41 
poisons herself, ix, 42 
Shirkhan (Shirv4n, district and 
towm west of the Caspian 
between the Kur river and 
Bar band ?), i, 169 
Shirkhi'in, a Zabuli, v, 184 

guides J^.ahman to Rustam, 
v, 184 

Shiifi, son of Gushtdsp, 155, v, 26 
slain, V, 57 

Shirfiya, son of J^izhan, iv, 360 
goes with Zarh* to Rtim, iv, 
360 

Shirwdn (Shirvdn ?) iii 216. 
^See Shirkhdn. 

Shirwi, frhnian hero, i, 207, 215 
hedps to take the Castle of 
the Alans, i, 223 seq. 
conveys the spoil to loan'd fin, 
i, X30, 232 

Shirwi, Kdshirwdn's commander- 
in-chief, vii, 253- 
appointed to '-receive the 
Rhnaan tribute, vii, -262 
Shhrivf '(Kubid q,v.), Shih, J74, 

' , yih,' x88, i$o, , 371 

' ; ' , -ix, 7, 8, ri, 27, 28, 

, 31 m-i 45. 47^' ^4 

,;Shfi^;LV$bhmity'to,Vm^ 3c89# 

'' ' ' .f'93 ' , , \ „ 

I :■ internment- oJ/viii^ 194,796, 

'V-X'- ■' ' 

;’4i5 ' ' ' ' 

'/I j ^ ' Ai^- 


GENERAL INDEX 


Shirwi ( KubM) , secret and public | 
names of, viii, 372, 416 
astrologers consulted at 
birth of, viii, 372 
ill-omened horoscope of, viii, 
372; ix, 16 

referred to, viii, 373, 390 
kept by Shinn, ix, 16 
Khusrau Parwfz gives 
Ca?sar's gifts to, viii, 381 
boorishiicss of, viii, 390 
Khusrau I-^arwfz' displeasure 
with, viii, 390 
sends to take Khusrau Par- 
wiz, vih, ^19 
Reign of, 175, ix, 3 
Note on, ix, 3 
Length of, ix, 42 
tieatment of Khusrau Par- 
wiz by, ix, 7 
writes to Heiaclius, ix, 7 
Ashtdd and Kharrdd report 
their interview with Khus- 
rau Parwiz to, ix, 27 
reproaches and summons 
Shirin, ix, 36, 37 
falls in love with Shirfn, ix, 
39 

grants Shirin s requests, ax, 
40, 42 

poisoned, ix, 42 
son of, ix, 42 

Slilrzid, herald in Ndshirw4n*s 
host, vii, 252 

Shfrzil, frinian warrior, viii, 
296 

Shiz (Xakhtd-Sulaimin), seat of 
' ^ the Magi in Azarbdijin, i, 

■ 60 ; viii, 190 
Fire-temple at, vii, 5 
' ; Khithn sent to, vii, 5' 

Shoemaker, 'Bahripa Ghr ,and, 
the, X'64, via, 24' ,, 

^ ^ " Nhshftvrin ' and the, 

‘ ; ' ; yii, 2t?', 260: ' . ^ ' 

' offer pfi ijb advnhee 
. '' tO'Bdihhwin, viii, ,48 
' ‘ vhb” 'SOf, 71 • 

' Shn 'ba, ^ Mtighiyai ' oompaaibn' , 

• ' /eihhWF '' ■ '/ 


Shuhb, Arab chief, i§8, vi, 21 
attacks Ddrab, vi, 21 
defeated and slain, vi, 22 
Shhlak, Gushtasp’s steed 
(Dakiki), v, 73 
Asfandiyar's steed (Fir- 
dausi), v, 126 

Shhrdb (Sura), city on the 
Euphrates, east of 
Antioch, vii, 217 
place of Gushtasp’s exile, 
vii, 254 

taken by Nhslhrwhn, vii, 

217, 254 
Shiitshn, vi, 379 

Shus (Shs, Susa), city on the 
Karkhah river north west 
of Shuslitar in Khhzisthn, 
vi, 327 

Shushtar, Shdstar, city on the 
Dujayl (Khriin) river in 
Khfizistdn, vi, 199, 295 
and note, 299 ; viii, 381 
dam and bridge at, vi, 298, 
326 

Sicily, vi, 30 

Alexander the GreaFs legen- 
dary visit to, vi, 30 
Siege-operations, hi, 246 ; iv, 208 
seq . ; vii, 254, 257 
Signs, the Twelve (Zodiac), vii, 
408 

Sigz, man of (Rustam), ii, 100 
and note ; hi, 183, 209, 

218, 221 

Sigzian, a native of Sigz, v, 226 
and note 228 

s= Rustam, hi, 209, 225, 227 ; 

V, 241 ' ' , ’ , 

s=Zaw4ra, v, 226, 228 , 

sspardmarz* v^ 228 , 

Sikandar (Iskandar, Alexnndpr '' 

the Great, 

rdo,i, 42,49; 

; , 'v, 30 ; yi, m, [ , 

29, ,30,;* 33, I 93 ^ 240',;' 

''and '325, 

52,;,274,’'',23:,7/,242i' 

39^'; '•iS'- 

paternity:, -of, '.'ir'/SS 

, F kQP;" ' } ' ' ■ 


GENERAL INDEX 


Sikaiidar, derivation of, in Ta- 
bari, vi, 19 

deiivation of, in Shahndma, 
vi, 19, 26 
birth of, vi, 18, 26 
adopted as his heir by Faila- 
kus, vi, 27 

counselled by Arastills, vi, 

35 

refuses tribute to Dari, vi, 

36 

prepares for war with Ddr 4 , 
vi, 37 

invades, and defeats king of , 
Misr, vi, 30, 37 
frhn, vi, 30, 37 seq. 
visit of, to the camp of Ddra, 
vi, 38 

invited to banquet with 
Ddrd, vi, 40 

takes the golden cups of 
Ddrd, vi, 40 
recognised, vi, 40 
escapes, vi, 41 
defeats Ddrd, vi, 43, 44, 46 
issues i)roclamation to the 
frdnians, vi, 44, 47 
gives the spoil to his troops, 
vi, 44, 47 

inarches from Trdk against 
Ddrd, vi, 46 
enters Istakhr, vi, 46 
answers Ddrd's letter, vi, 50 
marches from Istakhr, vi, 51 
hears of Ddri's murder, vi, 

- 5 '-^ 

arrests Odrd^S murderers, vi, 
53 

finds Dird still living, vi, 53 
promises to avenge Ddri, vi,, 
53 

premises to catty out Ddrd's 
last wishes, vi, 34 
Bird ‘ bestows Rfisbanak 
'Upon, vi, 33, 86 
, laments for, ' dnd buries, 
DArd, vi, 43 / 5^ 

, executes X)Ar 4 ^A murdereis* 

' Wlo4% ruler by the, 6^- 

" ,, tans, vi, 36 ' ' ' ' ' , 


371 

Sikandar, sends envoys to Ispa- 
han and to the family of 
Dard, and letters to the 
provinces, to announce 
his accession, vi, 57 
crowned Shah at Istakhr, 
vi, 59 

Reign of, 158, vi, 60 seq. 
Note on, vi, 60 seq. 
diagram to illustrate Per- 
sian Romance of, vi, 84 
inaugural address of, vi, 85 
correspondence of, with the 
the wife and daughter of 
Ddid, VI, 33 86, seq. 
marries Rushan ak, vi, 90 
invades Hind, vi, yS 
Kaid and, vi, 61, 98 
approaches Mlldd, vi, 61, 98 
inquires about the Four 
Wonders of Kaid, vi, 100 
Four Wonders and other 
gifts sent by Kaid to, vi, 

103 

marries daughter of Kaid, vi 

104 

sage of Kaid and, vi, 62, 104 
seq. 

principle of the cup ex- 
plained to, vi, 109 
conceals his treasures, vi, 
no and mte 

advances to Kannfij, vi, no 
troops of, protest, vi, 1x3 
remonstrates with his troops 
vi, n3 

troops of, ask pardon, vi, 

114 

war of, urith Ffir (Porus), vi, 
67, ixo seq. 

hoars of Ffix % elephants, vi, 

115 

his device to overcome, vi, 

challenges Fdr to single 
, ^ combat, vi, n6 
slays 'Ffir, vi, 117 

troops submit to, vi, 

,, n8 ", 

' becQ'hmS' kihg of Hind, vi, 

'nS'’' 


GENERAL INDEX 


372 

Sikandar, bestows Hind on | Sikandar, rsveals himself to Tai- 


Sawtirg, vi, 118 
visit oi to Mecca and tbe 
Kaaba, vi, 64, 67, 119 seq. 
ends the rule of the Khu2;a’ 
in Arabia, vi, 120 
sets up Nasr instead of the 
Khuzd', vi, 120, 
goes to Judda, vi, 121 
marches to Misr, vi, 12 1 
welcomed by king of, vi, 
121 

stays for a year in, vi, 121 
Kaiddfa (Candace) and, vi, 
vi, 65, 12 1 seq. 
portrait of, obtained by 
Kaidafa, vi, 122 
Kaiddfa praised by Kabtdn 
to, vi, 122 

w’lites to Kaiddfa, vi, 123 
Kaiddfa’s answer to, vi, 123 
assumes the name of Nait- 
kdn (Antigonus), vi, 66, 

125 seq. 

pleads (as Naitkdn) for 
Kaidrdsh and his wife, vi, 

126 

goes (as Naitkdn) to Kai- 
difa, vi, 127 

graciously received by Kai- 
difa, vi, 128 

audiences of, with Kaiddfa, 
vi, 128 seq. 

recognised by ICaiddfa, vi, 

129 seq. 

delivers his message, as 

envoy, to Kaidifa, vi 129, 

m , , 

covenant of, with Kaidifa, 
vi, 132, 138 , 

, warned by Kaiddfa against 
Tainhsh, vi,, 133 , , 
inshlted' tiy Tmn^sh, vi, 134 
/counsels' Kaiddfa about Tai- 
V\ 'ndsii, yi, ^ : 

covenant , , #ith ' Xaimish, 

' vi,/ 136' * 

,1x46 
t4'x 


nfish, vi, 142 

entertains at a banquet, 
gives gifts to, and dis- 
misses, Taindsh, vi, 1^13 
final message of, to Kaiddfa, 
vi, 143 

Brahmans hear of the com- 
ing of, and write to, vi, 

143 

interview of, with the Brah- 
mans, vi, 67, 144 seq. 
quits the Brahmans, vi, 147 
Fish-eaters (Ichthyophagi, 
q.v.) and, vi, 69, seq., 147, 

177 

adventure of, with a whale, 
vi, 71, T47 

sees gigantic reeds (bam- 
boos), vi, 71, i-djS 
attacked by snakes, scor- 
pions, and boars, vi, 148 
the people of Habash, vi, 
149 

the Narmpdi, vi, 150 
adventure of, with a dragon, 
vi, 71, 151 

visits the temple of Diony- 
sus, vi, 71, 152, 166 
warned of his death, vi, 152, 
161, 166 

marches toward Harfim, the 
City of Women (Amazons 
q-v.), vi, 153 seq. 
encounters snow and frost, 
vi, 156 

encounters great heat, vi, 

157 

encounters the negroes, vi, 

157 

reaches and inspects Hardm, 
vi, 157 

marches westwe,rd and finds 
a fair-haired race, yi,^ 73,. 
,,158 ' ^ 

hears 'of the Gloom, q.v., and 
of 'the Fount bf Life, 
and' prepares to fedit TOerh', 
Vi,^ ‘158 ^ J,' , L ' ' i' ' /'i, ''i 

^ ' sets, forth ' with ^ ^ 

'giiide^ ,vi^^ ,154' ' ' " '''' 


GENERAL INDEX 373 


Sikandar, Khisr and, part com- 
pany, VI, t6o 

lads to find the Fount of 
Life, vi, x6o 

interview of, with birds, vi, 
i6o 

interview of, with IvSrafil, vi, 
78, 161 

emerges Irom the Gloom, vi, 
162 

maichcs eastward, vi, 163 
hears of Y^jiij and M^juj, 
vi, 163 

barrier of, 160, i, 16 ; vi, 78, 
X64, 249 

Speaking Tree visited by, vi, 
i6y seq. See Tree. 
reaches '' The World^s 
End," vi, 168 
receives gifts, vi, 169 
expedition of, to Chfn, vi, 
80, 169 seq, 

goes as his own ambassador 
to the FaghMr, vi, 
170 

describes himself, vi, 171 
Faghfiir's gifts to, vi, 173 
departs with Faghfiir’s en- 
voy, vi, i73 

identity of, discovered by 
the envoy, vi, 173 
dismisses the envoy with 
gifts and a message to 
Faghfiir, vi, X74 
ariives at Chagixwin, vi, 
174 

marches to Sind, vi, 175 
defeats Banddwa, chief of 
the Sindians, vi, 175 
marches to Nfmriiz, vi, 
X75 

receives gifts from the king 
of Yaman, vi, 175 
meets Giish-bistar, vi, 177 
carries o0 the treasnies of 
,Kai Khusrau,, vi, 178^ 
policy of, fot safeguarding 
liAtti after his decease,, vi, 

8r, X7S, 197 

' .adepts' the advice ,of' Araa-^ 
'f ' tllis, vi, , x8o ' ' 


Sikandar, arrives at Babil, vi, 
x8o 

prodigious birth at, vi, 81, 
tSo 

consults the astrologers 
on, vi, 180 

warned of his end, vi, 180 
sickens, vi, i8x 
Will of, vi, 81, 181 
grief of the troops for, vi, 
183, 1S4 
dies, vi, X83 

dispute as to burial of, \i. 
184 

body of, taken to Iskanda- 
riya, vi, 185 

sentences of sages over, vi, 
82, 83, 185 
cities of, vi, 83, 1 89 ^ 
ZoroasUian and Sasdnian 
view of, i, 59 and note, 61 
seq, ; vi, 15 and note, 224, 
2^0 ; vii, 79 and note 
Silk, account of, vi, 204 

introduction of, into the 
West, vi, 204 
Silk-worm. See Silk. 

Silvia, Vestal, v, 293 
Sfmih Barzfn, scribe, Hnrmuzd 
plots against, 170, viii, 85, 
seq. 

Sxmmas, cliief herdsman of 
Ninus, V, 292 

Sfmurgh, mythical biid, i$6, iS 7 * 
i, SI ; iii, 15B, 313, 330 ; 
V, 1 1 7, 132 seq., 166, 2^6, 
248, 2^55 

described, i, 235 and note, 
253, 276, 302, 326, V, 132 
nest of, on Mount Alburz, i, 
241, 244, 250 

young of* i, 242, 250* V, 132* 
3^53 

finds and brings up the in- 
fant Zil, i, 242 
informs Zkl of his parentage, 
i, '245 

gives zii one of her feathers, 
1,246, '32% 

' ^heir ’ efficacy* i,. 246, 320 
restores Z 41 to Sdm* i* 247 


GENERAL INDEX 


374 


Simnrgh, referred to, 1,^251 

succours Rudaba, i, 320 seq. 
foretells Rustam's future 
greatness, 1, 32r 
slam by Asiandiyar, v, 133 
summoned to Rustam's aid 
by Zdl, V, 235 seq. 
heals Rustam and Rakhsh, 
V, 237 

instructs Rustam how to 
overcome Asfandiydr, v, 

237 

Sind, the river Indus and the 
parts adjacent, i, 113 ; ii, 
285 ; iii, 10 note, 117, 185, 
216, 23S iv, G5, 71 ; V, 
75, 180, 203, 277 ; vi, 113 ; 
vii, no, 1 1 2, 390 
king of, hi, 185; vi, 113, 
entertained by Bahr4m 
Giir, vii, 140 seq. 
kings of, send tribute to 
Gushtdsp, v, 75 
chiefs of, vi, 123 
warriors of, vi, 132, 137 
Sikandar marches to, vi, 175 
Sindbad, the sailor, vi, qi 
lands on a whale, vi, 71 
Sinde, river, iii, 10 and note 
Sindian, Sindians, x6o, vii, 126 
defeated by Sikandar, vi, 

173 

Sfndukht, wife of Mihrdb and 
mother of Riid^ba, 141, i, 
259, ^99 

Milirdb praises Zdl to, i, 260 
discovers the loves of Zdl 
and Rhdiba, i, 281 
reproaches Rddiba, i, 282 
inioripis Mihtdb about Zil 
and Riid4ba, i, 284 
goes with gifts to Sdm, i^ 
,390' ,,, ' , ; 

■/web tedeived by Sim, i; 302 
invites' Sim to', visit 'Kibnl, 

rettirtts, 'tb-'Kibul, i, 3.06, 

‘ ' i * ' . ' , 


Smdukht, Mihrab and, prepare 
to welcome Sam and Zal, 
h 3^5> 317 

entertain Sam and Zal, i, 
317 seq. 

visit Sam in Sfstan, i, 319 
Sinjibu, first historical Khdn of 
the Turks, vii, 317 
relations of, with Ndshir- 
wan, vii, 317 
Haitilians and, vii, 317 
Sipahram, Tfiranian hero, J51 ; 
li, 228, 229, 388 ; iv, 26, 

103 

chosen to fight with Hajir, 
iv, 97 

slain by Hajir, iv, 104 
Sipand (Spewto-dita, q.v., Spen- 
dyad, Sapad, White 
Castle), mountain north- 
west of Nishiphr, 142, i, 
377; ii, 118; V, 30, 116, 
117 

Malcolm's identification and 
desciiption of,i i, 236 
Zdl bids Rustam take, i, 329 
described, i, 329 
taken by Rustam, i, 331 
treasures of, i, 331, 332 
hold of, destroyed by %kVB 
orders, i, 333 

Sipandirmad, ameshaspenta, 
q.v., iii, 287, 328 ; v, 18 
month, i, 89 ; iv, 252 ; ix, 
70, 122 

day, i, 88, 89, viii, 331 
, Sipanjib (Farghina ?), region, i, 
375; ii, 241,342, 344, 345 
358 ; hi, 151 

Sipansdr,£rdnian warrior, viii, 293 
I . Sistin = Mmrfiz Zdbulistin, ^ 
X44, X4g, J55, ; i, 319 J 
ii Bo, 335» 365 ; im 165,^ 
166, I9I, 207,, 321, 336,; 

, ; iv* 14, 278 ; V, I3ix7* 29, 
’85* 86, 89* 94# 'i73i ii'4* 
201, '220, 248, 261* 264; 
,26.7; vi, 32> 198 /,vii,„23;4 
' ^ ■ former capital, of, i;4: 

; ' , / lak^' of,^ i 4'; , 'v^» ,239 ’ '' 

, A ' ' S«e p, ' A 'y ; ;i, 


GENERAL INDEX 


375 


Sistdn, origin of name, i, 19 

invaded by Shamasas and 
Khazarwan, i, 358 
nioiirning in, lor Rustam, v, 
27S 

invaded by Baliman, v, 284 
seq. 

Sitir, Persian measure of weight, 

iii, 184 

Sitiih, Tdranian heio, v, 86, 87 
goes as a spy to fran and 
reports to Arjdsp, v, 86, 

87 

Siyah Chasm, slave of Farrukh- 

zAd, ix, 62 

handmaid of I^'arrukhzad 
and, ix, 62 
imprisoned, ix, 62 
released, ix, 62 

poisons FarrukhzM, ix, 63 i 
Siydmak, son of Gaidmart, xjp, 
i, 117, 119 

slain by the Black Dlv, i, 120 
lamentations over, i, 120 
Siydmak, Tdrdnian heio, 15/, iv, 

97 

chosen to fight with Gurdza, 

iv, 97 

slain by Gurdza, iv, too 
SiyAvakhsh. See Siydwush. 
Siydvashdna. See Siydwush. 
Siydwush, son of Kai Kids, and 
father of Farid and Kai 
Khiisrau, 144-148, ; i, ^5, 

92 ; ii, 3, 25, 82, 104 note 
335 » 33 'S 

seq., 363, 37t, 37^, 374 
38S, 396, 
403, 41 1 ,* iil, 8, X3, 18, X9, 
2r, 22, 29. 39, 42, 43 / 

' 52, 57, 65 , 57, 7X, 72, 87, 
93, 99, «2, 117 / 3Ci8, IS7» 
^46, 148, X49, 155^ 163, , 
183, 197, X99,< 200, 201, 203 ' 
seq ., 2 IX, 2x4, 225, 237, 
238, 256, 283, 289, 297, 
307 / 3 X 5 / 324 / 347 J 7 > 

17 / 34 / 50 / 70, 

89/ 90, 95 / 96/ 102/ ,IP 9 /, . 
120,*. 127^ 129; i 30 /;’^ 37 e 
1:52^; 139;' x 57 ,:,, 25 S;.,, , 


j Fiyawnsh — rant. 

172, 201, 202, 204, 205, 

214, 21=5, 221, 223, 231, 

235, 249, 250, 252, 257, 

2O7, 270, 271, 2S3, 285, 

289, 299, 305, 307, 310 ; 

V, 174, 176, 192, 208, 272 ; 

viii, 104, 349, 395 note; 

ix, 25 and note, 26 note, 
103 

mother of, 144, ii, 3 
Story of, 144, h, 188 scq. 
Note on, h, 188 seq. 
good examxile of Fir- 
dausi’s method, H, 188 
Pieiude to, ii, 191 
identical with Cambyses, 
the father of Cyrus the 
Great, in legend, ii, 191 
adventure of the mother of, 

h, 193 

destined to misfortune from 
birth, ii, 196 

brought up by Rustam, ii, 
196 

horoscope of, ii, 196, 205, 
234 

returns to court, ii, 197 
made ruler of Kuhistin, ii, 
X99 

mourns for his mother's 
death, ii, 199 
temptation of, by Sidiba, 
ii, 200 seq. 

marches against Afrdsiydb, 
ii, 225 seq. 

demands hostages of Afr4- 
siyib, ii, 239 seq. 
goes over to Afrdsiydb, xi, 
238 seq. 

plays at polo y^ith Afrdsiyib 
'ii, 264 

archery of, ii, 266, 293 
marriage of, with Jatfra, ii, 
268 seq. 

marriage of, with Faiangfs, 
h, 270 seq. ' ' , 

entert^ained by.Hrdn^ ii, 278 
'bhilds pities, ii* 'zqB seq, 
PO'siliuiis 'the ; astrologers, ii, 


376 GENERAL INDEX 


Siyawusb, foietells the future to 
Piran, ii, 282 scq. 
entertains Piraii, h, 287 
entertains GarwSiwaz, ij, iyo 
seq. 

plays at polo with Garsfvvaz, 
li, 292 

challenged by Garsfwaz, ii, 

294 

overthrows Gurwf and Da- 
mdr, ii, 295 

slandered by Garsfwaz to 
Afxdsiydb, ii, 296 seg. 
summoned to court by 
Afrdsiyab, ii, 300 seq. 
betrayed by Garsfwaz, ii, 
301 seq. 

excuses himself from going 
to couit, ii, 306 
passion of, ii, 307 seq. 
foretells the future to Faran- 
gfs, ii, 310 seq, 
charges and turns loose 
Bihzdd, ii, 312 
attacked and taken by 
Afr 4 siy 4 b, ii, 314 
execution of, ii, 320 
referred to, iv, 268 
Blood of (plant), ii, 32*1 
birth-mark of, iii, 49 
mail of, iii, 58, 60, 61, 69, 81, 
iv, 40 seq.t 51 

murderer of^asAfrdsiyib, iv, 
198 

garth ofsaSiydwushgiid, iv, 
238 

ghddspf, viii, 148, 1 51 
Siyiwusli, ' frinian dhief, 172 ; 
viii, 128, 163, 187, 233 
son of«Bahr4m, viii, 247 
$iyitvu,sh, , tvild, duck, .ii, 104 
'* naU ' ' , ' 

.Siy^yntshgM/city built by .Siy4- 
' ' 'wush, 145,, 446, x'$3 i}, 

‘ ‘^-39^, '373-;. 'iv, ,250, 

\ ‘ , ' ' ' , 

build, iug and 'description i’bf, . 

ii,' 285 $$f, I '• ^ 

. becotn.es 'iht ' ' boihdi ' of 'iCai 
','10au^ain'.'ii^; 333,' 

: refected' to, , iv > * 23,8 


Skirts, binding together of, in 
battle, iv, 85 and uufe,\yy 
and iiofe, 209 
Slavs, VIII, 10 I 

Smerdis, the false, v, 1 1 ; vi, 207 ^ 
Snakes =: Arabs, ix, 91 
Snowstorm, 111, 108 

Iranian host distressed by, 
iii, 71, 1 28 ; V, 137; vi, 156 
paladms of Kai Khusrau 
lost in, iv, 308 seq. 

Sohrab and Rustam, hlatthcw 
Arnold’s, ii, 118 
Sol, planet, viii, 395 
Soma. See Homa. 

Son of Firdausi, death ol, viii, 
190 

Song, of a dfv, ii, 31 
of Rustam, ii, 51 
of Asfandiydr, v, 129 
of the daughter of Barzfn, 
vii, 52 

of the daughter of Mdhiydi, 
vii, 60, 6r, 66 

Sophia, Empress, her treatment 
of Narses, viii, 76 
Sorcerer, a Jewi.sh, brings about 
the death of Nhshfrwdn’s , 
minister, Mahbiid, vii, 320 
seq. 

Sorceress, Rustam and a, 143, ii, 

50 seq. 

Sudiba and a, Z44, ii, 214 
seq. 

Asfandiydr and a, 136, v, 128 
seq. 

Sdshyans, the Zoroastrian Mes- 
siah, i, 131 

Souterrain, ii, X37 iv, 212 
Spain (Andalds), vi, 66 
Spand-ddt (Spewto-ddta, Asfan- 
diydr), v, 24 seq. 
Span-ddt-irima (Asfandiydrw- 
nhma), V, 26,, 27, 

Speaking Tree, the, z6o, See 
'I Tree. ' 

'Speech, modes of, yiii, '30 
Spendy^d, mountain, ' 'See 
' \ ^ Spe^td^dita. , , ‘ 

. ,, -{SpanWiI:,,, . ^ 

' .',,fahdiy 4 :p' t' 2 ^^ ’"''f** 


GENERAL INDEX 


377 


Spe«t(Vdata (vSpendya^f, Sapad, 
Sipand q.v, ), mountain 
north-west of Nishapdr, 
ii, ii8 ; V, 30, 116, 117 
Spliincs, See Calanus. 

Spica, star, i, 245, 271 ; viii, 379 
Spitama, clan name of Zardiihsht 
(Zoroaster), i, 236 ; iv, 15 
Spityura, brother of Yinia (Jam- 
shfd), i, 130 
Spring, a, 143 

of Sav, qjj., 163 

Srovbar, mythical serpent, i, 172 
Stages, tlie Seven, 1 56. See As- 
fandiyar. 

Statcira. See Baisine. 

Steed, piece in chess. See Hoise. 
Steeds, iron, Sikandai’s, J59, vi, 

115 

filled with naphtha, vi, 115 
Ffir’s elephants and troops 
imted by, vi, Ji6 
Stone, the Black. See Black. 
Strabo, Clrcek geographer (born 
c, 63 B.C,), vi, 68, 8x 
Strength, handgrip as test of. 
See Handgrip. 

Subuktigln, father of Sultfin 
Mahmfid, account of, i, 20 
title of, i, 21 

refeiTod to by, i, 100, 114 
Sfid^ba, daughter of the king of 
Hdmdvardn and wife of 
Kai Kdfis, X43-X46, ii, 3, 
79, x88, 189, 200, seq, 225, 

^57> 335 . 339 
description of, ii, 86 
marries Kai Kdfis, ii, 88 
imprisoned with Kai KMs 
by her fathei, ii, 91 
released by Eustam, ii, 97 
temptation of Siyiwush by, 
Ii, 200 $eq. 

slain by Eustam, ii* 340 ■ 
referred to, V, X74 
Sdfarai (Sarkhin,, Sukhri, 

' Sooses ?), 16$, vii, X70 
and nokf 171* 
viii 72* 75 * 

appointed minister , 'fte 
, regent BaMh*, vC, 1,^4; 


Sfifarai, glorification of, in 
fraiiian tradition, vii, 170 
account of, vii X73, 184, 
185 

resolves to avenge Pfrfiz, 
vii 173 

writes to BaMsh, vii, 173 
marches on Marv, vii, 174 
correspondence of, with 
Khushnaw 42 , vii, 174 
defeats Khfishnawdsj, vii, 
177 

gives the spoil to th6 troops, 
vii, 177 

Khfishnawfiz sues for peace 
to, vii 178 

consults his tioops, vii, 
178 

resolves to make peace, vii, 
179 

replies to Khfishnawfiz, vii, 
179 

returns to frdn in triumph, 
vii, 180 

welcomed by Baldsli and 
the chiefs, vii, 181 
greatness of, vii, 181, 190 
dethrones Baldsh and makes 
Kubdd Shdh, vii, 1 82 
proverb concerning, vii, 183 
identical with Eizmihr, vii, 
185 

fall of, vii, 190 seq. 
Kubiebs letter to, vii, 193 
arrest of, vii, X93 
property of, confiscated, vii, 

194 

conveyed to Sh^h KubM, 

vii, 194 

e^cecuted, vii, X95 
son ’of, (Rizmihr)^ vii, 196 
! vi, ’59 and HQfe 
: Sughd (SugMiana, Samarkand), 
_ district and city in Turk- 
; ‘ ' ist&n between the Oxus 

i ' 'arid Jaxartes, i, 19; ii, 
I; ' /a30, 232, 237, 341, 249, 
' , _ 358 1' 'hi, 244 iv, 65, x88, 

' ■,;'i' 89/>255; ,vii,' 331, 337, 

. ;3'3i58*'‘359; ' ' ' ' , - 

ySdghdiana, ' vi, 'Sfighd. 


GENERAL INDEX 


378 

Sulu'al)^ son of Rustam and 
Talimina (laughter of the 
king of Samangaii, 
ii, 4, 25 ; iv, 296 ; v, 20 j. ; 
vi, 325 

Story of, 144, ii, n8 seq. 
Note on, ii, 118 
purely episodic, 11 , it 8 
Sir John Malcolm’s ver- 
sion of, ii, 118 
Matthew Arnold’s version 
of, li, 1 1 8 
Prelude to, ii, iig 
lament of, for the loss of 
Gurdalrfd, ii, 119, noU 
questions his mother as to 
his father, ii, 126 
chargei of, sired by Rakhsh, 
ii, X2S 

Afrdsiydb’s plot against, ii, 
129 

gifts to, ii, 130 
invades fxdn, ii, 130 
takes Hajir prisoner, ii, 13 1 
beguiled by Gurddfrfcl, 11,133 
described by Gazhdaham, 
ii, 136 

sees from White Castle the 
Iranian host advancing, 
ii, 148 

seen while feasting by Rus- 
tam, ii, 130 

hears of the death of Zhanda 
Razm, ii, 151 
misled by Ilajfr, ii, 132 seq, 
overthrows the camp^en 
closure of K&iis, h, 160 
challenged by Rustam, ii, 
161 

Rustam described by, ii, 
i 54 » X69 

advances of,' tp Rustam, 
ii, tdg 

spares Rustam's' life, ii, 17,0 
again encounters- Rustam, ii, 

3 E 72 ' 

males' himself 'known to 
i Rustam; ii, 17,3 - , ' , ' ■ , 
last rdejuests of, - to Rtihtam, ' 

! ' , ii. .,t7iS 1 


Siikhra. See Sufarai. 

Siikhla, treasuic, viii, 4013 and 
note 

Sultan, See Malmu'id. 

Siimai, viii, 195 

Sun, on the Nature of tiie, jjp, 
i, 105 

one of the seven planets, i, 

72 

m astiology, i, 188, 310 
and note 

total eclipse of, vii, 159 
Sunda39 viii, 378, 380 
Sunnites, orthodox Muhamma- 
dans, i, 13 
oiigin of, i, 13 

Sui, city near Ispahan, 776, iv, 
146, 180 ; ix, 74, 89, 95, 
97, 100, 116, 1 18 
Sura. See Shdrdb. 

Surkha, son of Afrdsiydb, 146, 
i, 92 ; ii, 344 seq, 
taken prisoner by Fard- 

marz, ii, 343 
death of, ii, 347 

Sdrsdn (Zfb-i-Khusrau, Ri'imiya 
q,v ) city built by Nushh- 
wdn, 168, vii, 317, 327, 
328 

Surdsh, angel, the messenger of 
XJrmuzd, 753, 77a, i, 51, 
175, 182 ; ii, 288, 28 (j, 

364, 408 ; iii, 277 ; iv, 

X39. 203, 265, 285, 307 ; 
V, 170, 253 ; vi, 199 
note, 372 ; vii, 38 ; viii, 

X 73 

warns Gaidmart against the 
Rlack Pfv, i, 119 
bids Gaidmart avenge Siyd- 
mak, i, 120 

visits and instructs Faifddn, 

' ' h X59 

. ^counsels Farfddn about Zalv 
hik, i, 169 

, appears to Gddarz in 'h , 
; dream^ ii, 363 - ' ; 

, rejferred ^9, iv, ,273 
' ■ - infothis Kai Khusrau, that - 
' ' r , his pr^a^et 'is '.granted# ' iV, ‘ 

. '' , 2:$F. '' ' ' 


379 


GENERAL INDEX 


Siin'ish, angel, liids Kai Khusrau 
appoint l-ubiu*^p as his 

successor, IV, 'i 8 i 
may be assiuned io have 
accompanied l\ai Khus- 
rau on Ills pilgrimage, iv, 

139, 303, 30^ 

saves Khusrau Parwiz from 
Bahrdm Chhbina, viii, 

189, 299 

Surush, clay, 1, 88 ; vi, 4IX 
Surhsh, astrologer, vi, 37 ^ 

takes BahTtoi (hir's horo- 
scc>p(% vi, 376 

Susaiiak, a iniller’a daughter, 
vii, 32 and note 
taken ‘to wife by Bahr 4 m 
Gi'ii, vii, 33 

Siisiana (Khii/.istdu q.v.), vi, 295. 
321 ; vii, 184 

Sviatoi, island lying off western 
shore of the Caspian, i, 58 
note 

Swat, river in Northern fnclia, 
vi, O5 

Swyamvara, Indian form of 
mairiage, iv, 316 
Sydvarsh^na (Siyiwush q^v.), 

ii, 189 ; iv, 137 

Syria (Shim), country, ii, 80; 
vi, 30 ; viti, 193 
raided by itoians, viii, 4X 
Syriac, version of the Pseudo- 
Callisthenes, vi, 14, 16, 18, 
30, 31 seq,, Ox, 63, 65, 66, 
68, 71, 72, 74 i 7^ 
Chiistian Legend of Alex- 
ander, vi, 14, 15, 74* ^4 

quoted, vi, 15 
metrical version of, vi 
^ ' X5, 7^/ ^4 

Syrian, ix, 66 ' , , 


by ' ArdslA. 


Tabak, justifies himself, vi 22O 
Ardshir Papakaii ami, c!e» 
f<*nl Hah man, vi, jjO 
hurte.s Aulawan, 2J«i 
advises Ardsin'r Papakan to 
marry the daughter of 
Ardawaii, vi, 229 
Tabad, Arabic historian (A.X). 
838-923), iii, xoH ; vi, 14 
no/£, 16, 19, 30, ^98, 200, 
291 wo/6% 310, 313, 33 5 » 
321, 326 ; vii, 3 1561 

159, 160, 170, X71, 185 
ikf), 217 ; viii, 73, 75 
I.ss ; IK, 4, 50, bb 04, 
69 

account of death of Hustani 
by, V, 261 

ctymcilogy of Ddrdb, v, 
297 no/s 

Sdsaniaiis, vi, 14 no/s 
Alexander’s battles with 
Larins, vi, 30 
Ydjh] and xMfiJfij, vi, 78 
rise of Sdsdnian dynasty, 
vi, 1 98 

Ardshh Pdpakdn, vi, lyB, 
203 

genealogies of Pdpak, vi, 
200 

■Worm, vi, 205, 206 
llaflwdd, vi, 205 » 
length of Ar<lsidr X*dpa- 
kdn's reign, vi, 254 
Ardawdn's daughtei, vL 

255 

Sh%6r, son of Ardshfr 
Pipakin, vi, 255, 257 
death of Shipdr, son of 
Shipdr, vi, 365 
Bahrain, son of Shdpdr# 

' ■ vh 368 

' , *S(ra 3 Jdigtrd, 00 nolShdpdr, 

' ' ' ■ '/ .vi,' syi; wp. 

' , " ■ Blnbid'- and NMjfrwiiCs 
' 'reform 'Of taxation, vii, 

, L 215 

' ' vii,, ' 5 * ' , 4** ,73 

; ' ' '* isfr,, ' 4* 5* 43» 

)' ''' 


38 o general 

Tabari, Persian, story from, con- 
cerning Knbad, vii, 183 
note 

Arabic, viii, 42, 73, 187, 190 
195 ; 4, 5, 7, 43, 50 

Tabaristdn (Mazandardn, q,v.), 
i, 39, 40 ; ix, 74 
Firdausi’s stay in, i, 39 
cliief of, i, 39, 40 
patron of Firdausi, i, 39 
Table of Contents, General, ix,i39 
Tables, Genealogical. See Gene- 
alogical. 

Tacitus, Roman historian (A D. 
55-120), iii, TO and note, 
15; vi, 73 

Tahmdsp, father of Zav, i, 90, 
369, 370 ,* ii, II ; iv, 283 
Tahmina, daughter of the king of 
Samangin and mother of 
Suhrdb, 144 ; ii, 4, 118 
precautions of, for her son's 
safety, ii, 127, 140, 149 
mourning of, for Suhrdb, ii, 
184 seq, 

death of, ii, 186 
Tahmdras, Shdh, X40, i, 42, 90, 
91, 214 ; ii, 168 ; iii, 293 ; 
iv, 133 ; vii, 9 and note, 
273 ; \iii, 277, 332, 376 ; 
i>c, 25 

Reign of, 140, i, 125 seq. 

Note on, i, 125 
Binder of the Bfv (Ahri- 
man), i, 125, 127, 214 
Ahriman and, legend of, 1,125 
culture hero, i, 125, 126 
dfvs rebel against, i, 127 
conquers and enslaves the 
divs, i, 127 

taught wiiting by the 
dIvs, i, 127 
dies, i, 128 

Firdausi's reflections on, i, 
128 

horn of, iii, 335 
Taindsh (Chaiogos, Kerdtdr, 

Kanfr), son 'of Kaidifa, 
139 I vi, b7, 134 seq, 

; ns Sikandar 

agalpst, 'yi, 


INDEX 

Tainiish, Fill’s son in law, vi, 

133 

insults Sikandai, vi, 
Kaidafa chides, \i, 133 " 
Kaidafa and Sikandar con- 
sult about, vi, 135 
makes a covenant with 
Sikandar, vi, 136 
accompanies Sikandar on 
his return, vi, 141 
Sikandar discovers himself 
to, vi, 142 

asks grace of Sikandar, vi, 
142 

pardoned by Sikandar, vi, 
142 

entertained at a banquet, 
presented with gifts, and 
dismissed, by Sikandai, 
vi, 143 

Tainusli (Theodosius), 163, vi, 

372, 404 

goes to Yazdagird as ambas- 
sador, vi, 3S9 
asked by Bahrdm Giir to 
intercede with Yazdagird 
for him, vi, 389 
obtains Balirdm Gdi’s re- 
lease, vi, 390, 404 
Tdir (Daizan, q.v), Arab chief, 
162 ; vi, 3, 322, 324, 330 
seq. 

Taisafdn (Ctesiphon, q.v), x68, 
X74; vi, 397; vii, 188, 

194,361,363; viii, 53, 90, 

109 note, 118, 173, 175, 
180, 182, 229, 241 ; ix, 9, 
10, 90 

Ardshir Pipakdn goes to, 
vi, 245 

Shdpdr's bridge at, vi, 321, 

329 . 

sacked by Tdir, VI, 330^ 
Sh^pdr sends spies to, vi, 346 
Caesar defeated and taken 
prisoner by Shdpdr at, vi,' 

Niishfrwdn returns to, viii, 

,53 * ' ' ' 

, ' CMHna mtoclres 

' from!prdvhicepf„^iii,rp6 


GENERAL INDEX 


381 


Taisafiiii, Kliusran Parwiz ira- 
prisonecl at viii, 421 ; ix, 9 
Bar bad visits Evliiisrau Par- 
wiz at, ix, 29 

Taj, viii, 71 

T^kdis, Throne of, 1^4, viii, 391 
account of, viii, 391 
added to by Jdmisp, viii, 
302 

Takht (or T4k)~i-Bhstan, place 
some four miles north- 
east ot Kiniianshah in the 
Pei’sian ])rovince of Arde- 
hiu and famous for its 
Sdsdnian bas-reliefs, vi, 
257 ; viii, 192 
inscription at, vi, 257 

Takht-i-Khusrau. See Madd'iii. 

Takht-i-Sulairndn (Sb fz, q^v,), 
viii, 189 

Talhand, Indian prince, rOg, 
vii, 304. 30b seq. 

Story of (lav and, 169, vii, 

394, seq. 

mother of. See Gav, 
birth of, vii, 396 
tutor of, vii, 397, 39H, 40T, 
402, 408, 410, 414 
rivalry between Gav and, 
vii, 397 seq, 

war between CJav and, vii, 
404 seq. 

rejects GavOs ofTci of accom- 
. modation, vii, 406, 409 
death of, foretold, vii, 408, 
413, 418 

defeatctl t>y Gav, vii, 412 
accepts Gav^s proposal for a 
decisive battle, vii, 415 
dofeal? and death' of, vlf, 

4x6 , : : , 

TiUkin, city Si:rohghold 
oast of Marv, ih Iv** 

' ' " ms , “ ' ’ ’ ' . . '' . ' ' 

, coded to the 

‘ , . , 't6d' ' : ; 

Importknce'oi y|i^; 

i; i!'/ 


Talisman, Csesar’s, J72 

described, viii, 271, 275 
deceives Persian envoys, 
viii, 272 

mastered by Kharrdd, viii, 
274 

Tamaiisk, plant, i, 4 ; v, 240, 
243, 246, 247, 256 
branch of, fatal to Asfandi- 
ydr, V, 239 and noie 
Tammisha (Kus), town in Eastern 
Mizandarfin, formerly a 
seat of hkirldun’s, between 
Sdriyah and Astarabdd, i, 
177, 216, 230 
Tamil z, viii, 77 no}e 
Tanais, river, iv, 315 and note 
Tarak, river (the Atrak, the 
boundary between Giir- 
gdn and Dahistdn, or the 
Turk flowing into the 
Jaxaries west of TdvSh- 
kand ?), vii, 164, 165, 359 
Tataz, city now in ruins, north- 
east of Tdshkand near the 
present town of Aulieh- 
Ata, i, 257, 266 ; v, 157 ; 
vi, 268 ; viii, 370 ; ix, 41 
Cypress ofssRdddba, i, 269 
Idols of, ii, 123, 206 ; Hi, 
248 ; iv, 218 ; viii, 370 
Tartar y, iv, 156 
Taurus, constellation. Hi, 168 ; 

iv, 177; vi, 151 ; vii, 2S2 
Tausar* high pxiest under Ard- 
bUx. Pipakto, i, 62 
letter of, i, 03 

Tawib^, frAnian hero, iii, * 25 
Xawurg, XHrtoian hero, iv, 188 
seat on an , expedition by 
Afcisiy^fo, iv, 188 
. defeated by Rastam^ iv, 193 
Taxatioui xdy,, vii, 224 

.AidauMfs ,exethp,iioa from, 

'''y; - 

„ ; reform/of, 'hy-lChb 4 d, vii, tB$ 

#ip'% 2I5>'22'5 ' ' p ' 

21k, am 

p'!,, ' ' , '' !, • ' 

yi^ d:^'" ' 
hi,' 


382 GENERAL 

Xazh^v, an fiinian deserter to, 
and son-in-law of, Afrasi- 
yab, 148 ; iii, 27, 28 
sends Kabdda to spy out the 
Iranian host, iii,_ 73 
paileys with Giv, iii, 75 
defeated, iii, 77 
fiees with Ispanwl, iii, 77 
pursued by Bizhan, iii,^ 77 
escapes to Afrdsiydb, iii, 7^ 
attacks Bahrdni, iii, 100 
taken prisoner by Giv, iii, 
102 

Temperaments, the four, vii, 381 
symbolised in the game of 
nard, vii, 381 
Tennyson, quoted, v, 28 1 
Tharthai, river in northern 
Mesopotamia, vi, 322 
Theodore, brother of Hcraclius, 

viii, 194 

Thcodosiopohs, city in Armenia, 
vh, 187 

Theodosius II. (Xaindsh, q.v,), 
Eastern Roman Em- 
peror (A.D. 40X-450), vi, 
372 ; vii, 187 

Theodosius (Niydtds, q.v,), viii, 

1^9 ’ . , 

Theophanes, Greek Chronicler, 
account of last days of 
Khusrau Parwiz by, ix, 6 
Thormodon, river on the south- 
ern shores of the Euxine, 
vi, 72 

Thornbiake town, the world, x, 

310 

Thra^taona, i, tji seq . ; u, 81 
Thrita,.i, iqt seq* 

Tiber, river, v, 294 ^ 

Tiberius, IL, Eastern, Roman 
Emperoi,\ii, 212 ; -m, 42 
Tigris' (Arwand), river, vi, 2 P 4 
, ' .322;' t 93 i X94; 

' d7' ' ' ' ' ■■ 

' smalt the,, vb X99 

" ' iower,'vt,; 29 i 

, bridge brer, vi, 3,21 / ,■ ; . 

; T.hxrii, 'city# ii !'2S J „ili, 3^99 \ ' v> 

. ' ' , ' ' ' 

' ; ©difion'ol $b4hjnto4. h '''' 


INDEX 

Tfr, genius, iii, 287, 328 

month and day, i, 88, viii, 

394 

Tin, eunuch of Gdzihr, vi, 198 
Tiimid, city and fortress north 
of the Oxus (Jihun) where 
the route from Balkh to 
Samarkand crosses that 
river, n, 229, 258 ; iv, 65 ; 
vii, 15b, i57» 331 
Tfrddih, village in the neighbour- 
hood of Istakhr (Perse- 
polis), and the birth-place 
of Ardshir Pdpakdn, vi, 198 
Tishtar, Sirius, 1, 235 
Tobit, Book of, iii, 272 
Toll-house and ford of Zark, ix, 
100 and note, 116 
Tollman, Giv and the, 146 ; ii, 

390 

Guslitdsp and the, iv, 324, 
332 and note, 334 seq., 344 

seq^ 351 

Trade-routes, ancient, i, ii, 57 
Traitana, i, q, 8, 171 seq, 

Trajan, Roman Emperor (A.D. 
98-117), vi, 322 
siege of Hatra by, vi, 322 
Translation, the principles adop- 
ted in the present, i, 76 seq. 
Translators of the Shihndma, 
list of previous, i, 87 
Treasuxe, of Jamshfd, 164, vii, 36 
Kai Khisrau, 160, iv, 295 ; 
vi, 178 

Sikandar, vi, iioandno^e 
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 406 
Tree, the Speaking, x6o, vi, 79 
desciibed, vi, 167 seq. 
.Sikandar visits, vi, 167, seq^, 
warns Sikandar of his death, 
vi, x68, 169 

Triad of evil, Zoroastrian^ i,;5b 
■and note 

Tribal, 6r Part, Kiiigs, tW, i6o, 

' vi, iSo, 303. Z04, 235 . 25a. 

' 2-53 ' ' ' . " ' ' '''''' 

origin of. yi, tyg, iSi, 21O'. 

■ / ob^acter' tbeir mlbv.vi#, 

' '.jiumbeir , rsfi.'I. 


GENERAL INDEX 


383 


Tribal, or Part Kings, Ardawdn, 
the chief of, vi, 201 
Firdausi on, vi, 210 
Tribute, Rhiii's to frdti, vi, 24; 1 
vii, 214, 215, 248, 262, 333, 
338, 362 ; viii, 52, 53 
Trita, i, 7, 8, 171 seq. 
Tsliatrang-Namak, i^ahlavf text, 
vii, 380, 381 

Tugliiral, a species of falcon, vii, 
49 

described, vii, 48 
Pahrhm Giir’s, vii, 48 seq. 
Tuldiar, Farad's counsellor, xqy, 

iii, 43 seq. 

tells Kariid the blazons of 
the Iranian chiefs, iii, 44 
counsels Farfid, iii, 47, 52 seq. 
Tukhhr, king of Daiiistan, iv, 148 
commands with Fariburz 
the troops fiom Khhwar, 

iv, 148 

slays a scout from Makrin, 
iv, 242 

Tukhdr, frdiiian chief, viii, 228 
takes letter to Ca;sar, viii, 
263 

Tukhir, frdnian general, con- 
spires against Khusrau 
Parwiz, viii, 414 
releases Shfrwf, viii, 415 
refuses to help Pfrii^: against 
Gur^^i, ix, 48 

Xukhte, fidnian - warrior, viii, 
29,6 

Son of, viii, 314 ' ' 

TiimAspa (Tahmisp, q.p*), i, 369 
'second son of Fariddn and 
ruler of^ Tdrin, X4(^. X4X, 

4, ,42, ,90'5fl^., 335, 337 ^ 
34^* 344. 3^^ i ib t% 

3 f 3 / 3 » 7 ^ 3 % 390.7', dr,' 

" 7r 30. 3 i 7 . ^ 97 *' ^ 45 . 

.1246' iy„ 4 x, 34, W , 69, '%<>/> 

\ 73;x66,.r67> ,3[S.8,,2b4, 203, 

" 2d,&,' * 4 . 69 , V,; 42 , ' 

"" 20#, ' On,' '35^;;^, 

,, ylflv $ 06 '^ 37# 


Tdr, etymology of, i, 174 
naming of, i, 187 
horoscope of, i, 188 
made ruler over the Turk- 
mans and Chin, i, 189 
plots with Salm, 1, 190 
Salm and, demand the abdi- 
cation of fraj, i, 1 91 
fraj visits, i, 198 
reception of fraj by, 1, 
198, seq. 
slay fraj, i, 201 
send fraj's head to Fari- 
dhn, i, 202 

heal of Minhcliihr, i, 20S 
send an embassy to Fan- 
dun, i, 208 

receive Farfdiin's reply, 
i, 213 seq. 

prepare for war, i. 215 
parley of, with Kubdd, i, 2 1 7 
Salm and, worsted by Mind- 
chihr, i, 220 

plan a night-surprise, i, 
220 

worsted, i, 221 
slain by Mindchihr, i, 221 
bead of, sent to Farfddn, i, 
222 

Fire-temple at Bukhdrd 
built by, iv, 255 
" daughter of, iv, 304 
sfeXdrdn, iv, 51, 164 
chief of«Hdmdn„ iv, 51 
.prince of»sShida, h, 164, 
Tdxdn (Xurkistdn), the legendary 
patrimony hi Tdr, q.v* hnd 
a general name, for the 
non-frihian regions north 
of th6 Oxus (Jfhdn),, X42, 
X4S, jrya, xsSr x6s- 
$47; i,,i89, 229, 351,371^ 
'i\, % 18/25. 79 . ,82',.ior, 

, ri2 midpauim ; iii^' 'S, ii, 

' X; 5 ;. ' 29 ',ah<i ; 

iv,„ 40, ; r 7 , 49 / 29 , and 

; n 4^, 25, 

4 ti 43,' '45;. 53 . 04^' 

- ; >i; ' 43, 'iS*, ,'3^8 ; 

■ ■9'2.- 0 ^’ * 78 ; 

HX. 


GENERAL INDEX 


384 

Tdr^E — coTit. 

329> 331. 349, 350, 37«>, 
405, 407 ; ix, II, 89, 99 
monarch, of Chin anci=:Afr4- 
siy4b, li, 99 
host of, ii, no 
lord of— Mahmhd, iv, 142 
Thr^nians (Tuikmans), 143, 148, 
149, X31-J33, J55, 163; 
i, 9, 10, 54 ; li, 11, 81, 265; 
iii, 30, 1 15, 320, 322 ; IV, 

7, 81, 129, 223, 227; V, 

13, 20, 1 16 ; vii, 90 ; vui, 
123, 320 

historical relations of, with 
the frdnians, i, 16 
Turk, Turks, i, 10, 20 ; viii, 95, 
103, 121, 135, 136, 138 
seq., 142, 164, 169, 170, 
189, 31^, 320, 349, 352 ; 
ix, 70, 96 seq,, 103, 114, 

1 17, 120 

confused with the Hait^- 
lians, vii, 4 

historical appearance of, vii, 

317 

Tabarf on, vii, 317 
defeat the Haitdlians, vii, 

332 

described, vii, 332 
War of, with Persians, viii, 

72 

prophesied, viii, 98 
sssSdwa, viii, 98 
defeated, viii, 126 
find Sdwa's corpse, viii, 127 
sorcerer, sends ill dream to ■ 
Bahrdm Chtiblna, viii, 
I2i,n28 ■ 

, put to death, viii, 
heads Qi chiefs of^ sept to 
Hurmu^d, viii, 139 , ' 

xetres-ti^to Tfir 4 n,' yiii, ’131 
three^ ,the,''yiii; '*87, 264’ ; ; , 
' 'I one bh Ehnsrau 

: ' Parwfr^ vip; 

, repioye^,," 'hy - JBahr^m 
’ ' / , , ' ChAWper/z'Mih ■ 


Turk, Turks = Kiihin, viii, 345 
defeated by Yalan-sma, viii, 
353 

Turkhan, Turdnian hero, v, 151 
sent with troops to recon- 
noitie outside the Brazen 
Hold, V, 151 
Turkish, ix, 87 

Turkistan (Thrdn), J47, ii, 19 ; 
iii, 109, 228 ; iv, 233 ; v, 
55 ; vi, 179, 278, 280, 397; 

vii, 84, 92, 1 1 8, 334, 365 ; 

viii, 324, 336, 363, 376, 
377> ^07 

Turkman, Turkmans (Tuian- 
ians), 148, 133, i, 20, 189, 
263, 3^3. 352, 357; h, 
12, 14, 15, 92, 100 and 
fassim ; hi, 30, 63, 81, 93, 
and passim ; iv, 10, 13, 
15, 19, 20, 22, 29 and 
passim ; v, 22, 25, 36, 39, 
40, 44. 47> 51, 52, 61, 72, 
90 seq,, 98 seq., 104 seq,, 
108, no, 113, 114, 116, 

135. 152, 157. 158, 171. 

173, 206, 254 ; vii, 48, 88, 
92, 97, 177, 179, 239, 344, 
364 ; viii, 377 ; ix, 25, 76, 
94 

slave-boy of Zdl meets the 
damsels of Riidiba, i, 263 
seq. 

make peace with Zav, i, 371 
army of, surrenders to As- 
fandiyir, v, 72, 113 
monarch ofs^Arjdsp, v, 74 
led by Kuhram, storm 
. Balkh, burn the Tire- ; 

temple, and slay Zarr' 

- duhsht and tii« priests, y, , . 
92, 93 ■ ; ' ' , ' ' ' ’ 

take Gushtdsp^s daughter^'/ 
^ ; ' chptive, V, 93 \ ' 

'kingdom < ’of, \ offered , by 
afid^yi^ to , Gurgsdr , ' ‘ 

,, return for IkithftilisetSdee,^' 
’'i / ' 'v ‘ 

'prd^^ed''by Atjdip'itd'fd'atA- '> 
i,. ‘‘III';, foi,&' Id' ■, i 


GENERAL INDEX 


385 


Turkman, Turkmans — conf. 

vaders under BisMtan, v, 
152 

licar the cries of the Iran- 
ian watch in the Brazen 
Hold, V, 155 

refused qiia^rter by Asfandi- 
ydr, V, 158 
language, vi, 147 
defeated by Bahram Ghi, 
vii, 90, gr 
sue for peace, vii, 91 
war of Pfruz with, vii, 1C4 
seq. 

inroads of, through the 
Caucasus, vii, 238 
make submission to Niishfr- 
whn, vii, 360 

=.Turk, viii, 87, 89, ^4, 

217 

king^Afrisiyhb, ix, 25 
Xus, son of Naudar, Iranian hero, 
146-149, 154, jy6 ; i, 90 
353» 370 ; ih 33» 35* 38, 
58, 62, 70, 73, 85, 90, 91, 
127, 138, 142, 148, 177, 

188, 193, 197, 199, 226, 

257* 316* 319, 335* 338, 

34o» 349* 353 37i* 

383* 394 ; iii* IB 18, 19, 
24, 25, 37 seq., 45 seq., 60, 
62, 64, 66 seq., 76, 78, 80, 
82 seq., 108, III seq., 132 
seq., X36 seq., 145, 149 

seq,, 154, 155, T59* 3:61, 

163, 166, 167, 169, 170, 

172, 174, 177 seq,, 182, 

183, 187, 206, 211, 213 

seq., 225, 228, 230, 232, 

234, 235, 238, 246, 248; 

253* 254, 255, 257, 259* 

268, 273, 277, 289, 294, 

307* 322, 337* ,329 ; iv, 13,. 

15, 62, 79, gt, 137, 180,' 
191, 224, 226,, 227, i 242, 
293, 296, ' 306 seq , ' y, 
57, 1 1 6, 207, 208; viii, 

' 168 ' - . 

.Qixstaham and, • 

' dar ' to pohduet the| Itihian , 
" wiOipLen to Alburs?^ 'i , ' 35 1 ' „ 

''yoL iX" ' 


j Tds, Gustahani and, hear of 
Naudar’s death, i, 364 
passed over in the succession 
h 3dg, 370 
character of, i, 369 
appointed captain of the 
host, ii, 78 

taken prisoner in lihmd- 
varan, ii, 90 

released by Rustam, ii, 97 
goes in search of Kai Khhs, 
ii, 104 

engaged in the Fight of the 
Seven Warriors, ii, 107 
seq. 

commanded by Kai Khiis to 
hang Rustam and Giv, 

ii, 143 

encampment of, described, 

ii* 153 

summons Rustam to fight 
Suhrdb and helps to 
saddle Rakhsh, ii, 160 
quarrels with Giv over the 
future mother of Siy4- 
wush, ii, 194 

supersedes Siyhwush, ii, 246 
seq. 

loads the host home, ii, 258 
intercedes for Surkha, ii, 
347 

■worsted in hght by Afrdsi- 
jkh, ii, 353 

appointed ruler of Chdeh, ii, 

358 . 

returns to Irdn, ii, 362 
dispute of, with Ghdarz over 
Kai Khusrau, ii, 400 seq, 
advocates the claims of Farf- 
burz, ii, 401 

asks pardon of Khusrau, ii, 
410 

hostility of, to I^arM, iii, 13, 

marches on Kaldt, lii, 40 
sends dhiefg to attack Farhd, 

iii, '47 seq, 

Baiiriin's ' remonstrance 
lyith, iii, 5I' _ 

hor^e' o|, ' slain by Far Ad, iii, 

' '56 ‘ . 'y' ' : 

■ - , " ' , BP 


386 GENERAL 

Tiis, lesolves to attack Kal 4 t, jii, 

62 

xemorse of, for the death of 
Fan'id, iii, 67 

builds a charnel for Fariid, 
Eivniz, and Zarisp, iii, 

68 

marches from Kaldt, iii, 68 
defeats Tazhiv, iii, 77 
occupies Giravgard, iii, 78 
defeated by the Turkmans, 
lii, 82 

deprived of his command, 
lii, 83 

Kai Khusrati's wrath with, 
iii, 84, III, 112 I 

superseded, iii, 86 
returns to Kai Khusrau, iii, 
86 

disgraced, iii, 86 
imprisoned, hi, 87 
pardoned, iii, 114 
challenges Pfrdn to battle, 

hi, 117 

joins battle with .Pirdn, iii, 
1x8, 126 

parleys with Hdmdn, iii, 121 
plays to be delivered from 
the snowstorm, iii, 128 
retreats to Mount Hamd.- 
wan, iii, 132 

makes a night-attack upon 
Pfr 4 n^ iii, I 39 
harangues the host, iii, 143: 
hears of the approach of suc- 
cours, iii, X 59 
takes counsel with the host, 
iii, '167 

arrays the host, hi, 169 
chidfs and, take counsel with 
Rustam, hi, X72 
Rustam’s wrath', with, 'hi, 

''» 34 ' ' , , 

'collects' the spoil* iu, 235 ... 
VorSted by' Pdlidwand, iii, 

,iedds a-'host iv, 

: 

'Sott'dii'fteisp, iv,' 135 ' 

■ pi^wSeOr of the host,; 


INDEX 

Ttis, posted on Khusrau’s right, 
iv, 146 

takes part in the siege of 
Gang-bihisht, iv, 199 
otdered to prepare for a 
night-attack from Afrd- 
siydb, iv, 224 
Kai Khusrau remonstrated 
with by, and othei nobles, 
for refusing audience, iv, 

275 

Gudarz, and other nobles 
take counsel, iv, 277 
audience of, with Kai XChus- 
rau, iv, 283 seq, 
holds with other chiefs, at 
the bidding of Kai Khus- 
rau, an assembly on the 
plain, iv, 291 seq. 

Kai Khusrau’s gifts to, iv, 
295, 300 

asks for fuither recognition 
from Kai Khusrau, iv, 

299 , 

ictains the charge of Kawa s 
flag and receives Khur- 
dsdn, iv, 300 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 
on his pilgiimage, iv, 
306 

refuses to turn back when 
bidden by Kai Khusrau, 
iv, 307 

Kai Khusrau farewells and 
wains, and his comtades, 
iv, 308 

disappears and is sought 
in vain by, and his 
comrades, iv, 308 
end of, iv, 309 

Ths, city, now in xuins, north of 
Mashad in Khutisin^ i, 
39; V, 28; vi, 393-1 

99 > 95 , , ' 

birthplace of Firdapsf; i, 3^^ 
^41, 45 . ; . ■ . " - '' 

goverhor^ of, i, 39 ^ ’ 

,pi,ince i, xoo,^ ti 4 ^ 

, , , legendary pri'gih iiii"x' 4 ' ' 

legend^ eonc'einihg Rndansi;^^ 

' ' ' f'pnrial at,' iliy 


GENERAL INDEX 


3S7 


1 iis, uty, treasure of Kai Kaias 
called “ The Bride"' stored 
at, iv, 295 

Sam and the dragon of, v, 
202 

local legend of, vi, 372, 391 
seq. 

governor of, ix, 92 
Tuwnrg, Tdidnian hero, 1 i, 253 
Tuwiirg, brother of xys, 

viii, 36^ 

reports flight of Gurdya, viii, 
35 r 

sent in pursuit, viii, 351 

parleys with Gurdya, viii, 
35 ^ 

Twelve Rukhs (Champions), 
Battle of the. See Rukhs. 

Signs (Zodiac), vii, 408 
Tyre, city, vi, 30 

siege of, vi, 30 


U 


llhicl, a dfv, 143, ii, 28, 59, 6x ; 
iv, 296 note ; v, 204 note 
Rustam and, ii, 52 seq, 
made king of M^zandarin, 
ii, 7O 

'Umar, Khalifa {A.B. 634*643), 
i, n seq,, 67; ix, 66 
72, 76, 121 
founds Basra, ix, 69 
sends Hdshim in pursuit of 
Yazdagird, ix, 68 
Nu'min to fight Yazda* 
gird* ijc, 68 

' Sa'ad to' invade frdh, ix, 

' ' 7 ^ ' 

/Unitt Khayyim, Persian poet 
and Scientist (died, 

I, ”, xi«3), 'V, 3d‘ ^ , 

Umm,;iiyyads, ' Vuhammad'an 
^ ' '/dyhiity, i, r'3 ' ’ ' 

"l|h4,,<i^d#ter of, Ateahd^ the 


Urmuzd, the Good Principle, i, 
5, 50, 1 16 seq,, 236, ii, 82, 
iii, 271, 286, 317, 327 ; iv, 
185 ; V, 15 seq. ; vi, 
55 > 3^2, 37c, 387 ; vii, 
228, 406 and note ; viii, 
2S5 ; IX, 24 

Unity of, symbolised in the 
game of nard, vii, 381 
day, i, 88 ; hi, 323 ; vi, 302 
and note, 306, 375 
Urmuzd, Ashkamaii (Parthian) 
king, vi, 197, 210 
Urmtizd, son of Shdphr, Shdh 
(Hormisdas i), 161, 162, 
vi, 3, 257, 273, 280, 313, 
327 

discovery of, by Ardshfr I’d- 
pakdn, vi, 257, 271 
birth of, vi, 271 
counselled by Ardshfr Pd- 
pakdn, vi, 2S0 
Shdpur, vi, 299 
Reign of, 162, vi, 30X seq. 
Note on, vi, 301 
title of, vi, 301 
story about, vi, 301 
Urmuzd, son of Narsf, Shdh 
(Hormisdas II), 162, vi, 3, 
294. 295, 307. 3 I 5 > 33:4 

325 ; vii, 359 ; viii, 41 
Reign of, vi, 318 s&q. 

Note on, vi, 318 
sons of, vi, 318 
inaugural address of, vi, 318 
pregnant wife of, enthroned, 
vi, 320 

Urmuzd (Hormisdas), son of 
Urmuzd, Persian Prince, 
vi, 318, 325 
referred to (?), vi, 337 
Urmuzd Ardshfr (Ahwdz), city in 
KfidzistAn* vi* 29c and 
'mte ' ^ 

Urmu'z 4 , friniWi warrior, vui, 29^ 
Uroscppy* vi, loi, X07, 108 
Ummfdh (Khanjast or CMjast), 

. Hake in/Azarbdijdn, 

' ; I, ,£364' viiA* '193 / '/ ''' 

", esOdpes 'froth PIdm" 

y;- '''lnt6,;'iv^ ,262 -^4 


388 


GENERAL INDEX 


Ilstad, traiiian general, \n, 251 
commands Niisliirwan’s 

right wing, vii, 251 
Ilstad, Trhnian warrior, viii, 296 
UstnkM, Turanian hero, iv, 182 
fights with Kai Khusrau, iv, 
182 

^Utbi, Al, secretary to Sultan 
Mahmhd, i, 32 
TJthnidn, Khalifa, i, 12 
XJtterakuri, a legendary people, 

VI, 74 . ^ 

Uzava (Zav), Shah, i, 3^9 


V 


Vale of heroes, vii, 6 
Valerian (Bazani'ish), Konian 
Emperor (A.D. 253-260), 
vi, 323 seq. 

defeat and capture of, by 
Shdpiir son of Ardshir, vi, 
294 » 295 

memorials of, vi, 295 
confused with Odenathus, 
Julian, and Jovian, vi, 
324 seq, ^ 

death of, in captivity, vi, 
326 

Valkash (Vologescs I), Parthian 
(Ashkdnian) king, i, 62, 63 
Vawdaremaini (Andarim^n) , 
brother of Arjisp, v, 13 
Varahran I (Bahrdm son of 
Urmu2d), Sis^nian king, 
vi, 307 

Varahran II (Bahj 4 m son of 
Bahrdm), Sistoian king,, 
vi, 310 

Varahran 111 (Bahrhm Bahr^mi-'. 

' yin)„ , Si^sdnian kipg, ' vi, 
'313. 368 ; ' ", 

VaxaJuraJii IV (Balirim 'soa of" 
' , , SWpiir), Sisiiiiaa.' kixife, 

, vi,' 3 i 3 ,' 3 h$ ' h ’ 

' Vaj^teaa , V/, GiSt)» 

' ,S 4 iStoiato''Un?.A '3 -v 
'Vaidahes 

; , Sag, 


VardancH, wars of, with Gotarzes, 
iii, 10, II 

assassination of, iii, 10, ii 
character of, iii, 15 
Varci2,^ana, the raven, i, 235, 236 
Vedas, i, 129, I 44 . '^ 7 ^ 234, 33 A 
h, H, ji, 25 
Vega, star, vii, 24s 
Vendiddd, Nask, vii, 188 

reference to Mazdak in, vii, 
188 

Venus, planet, i, 72, 100, 194, 
276, 303. 322, 332, 339 ; in 

115. '^ 75 . 345; lib 143. 
159, 254. 318, 332; V, 
159 ; vi, gS, 102, 171, 190, 
212, 224, 332 ; vii, 53, 
151, 263 ; viii, 152, 359 , 
394, 395 ; ix^ 73 
Verethraghna, the raven, ii, 25 
Victory of Victories, The, ix, 69 
Vfdrafsh (Bfdirafsh), v, 24, 26 
Village-chief, 154 
Vineyards, taxes on, vii, 215, 225 
Virgo, constellation, iii, 24 ; viii, 
359 ; ix, 71 

Vishtdsp (Vistaspa, Gushtasp, 
q.v.), V, 24 

VEthspa (Vishtdsp, Gushtasp, 
q.v.), iv, 316; V, II 
Vistisp-sAst, V, II 
Vitrihed fortifications, vi, 79, 165 
Vfvanghat, i, 129 
Vohdman, See Vohu Manau. 
Vohu Manau (Vohdman, Bah- 
man), ameshaspenta, hi, , 
27X ; V, 16, 17 

Volga, river of European Russia, 
falling jnto the Caspian, 
iv, ''3t6, ' ' ' 

Vologeses I (Valkash), Parthfan 
(Ashkinian) king (A.P» 

' ’ -77), i, 62,. 63 , , . ^ . •, 

,yoldgese$, IX, ' Pythian (Ashk^, 
' : , ' ' man king), 4, ^9, 

Vologeses, (Bhlish), king of „ Kit-, 
' , ‘ min, imp. Ardshft, Pip^- 

:■ , vi ;205 ^ 

, 'Vologeses, -(Balishl-pShih, 

" ^^ononeS'I/Pat^hiih '(A^kihian) 


GENERAL INDEX 


Vouru-Kaslia, sea, iv, 137 i 

Viitra, demon, il, 25 ! 

Indra and, vi, 203 1 

Viillers-Laudaiier edition of the I 
vShalniama, i, 77 ; vi, 60 j 


W 

Wahr, region, iii, 177, 228, 235 
Wakkds, fattier of Sa’ad q,v., 
iy6] ix, 72, 78, 82, 90 
Walid, Khalifa, vi, 325 
Walnuts, taxes on, vii, 225 
War of tlie Religion, v, 19, 26, 29 
two campaigns of, v, 29 
Wardzdd, king of Sipanjdb, 

ii, 341 seq., 346 1 

Warigh (Callinicus, Kdliniyiis, 
q.v., Nicephorium, Rakka) 
citj, viii, 188, 253, 257, 
280 

Khusrau Parwiz takes uj) his 
abode at, viii, 257 
Warrions, the Seven, Story of the 
Fight of, 143, ii, 25, 82, 
107 seq. 

WarstoaclasBiddd, iii, 245 
Wash, city, viii, 24 and note 
Water, scarcity of, i, 3 

—courses, underground, i, 3 
— horse, 163, vi, 373, 392 
referred to, vi, 373 
legend of Yazdagird and 
the, vi, 392 

— stealing demons, i, 7, 338 
of Life, x6o, V, 30 ; vi, 159, 
Ido 

Wazir (minister), piece in chess, 
vii, 385, 423 
position 'Of, vii, 388, 422 
move of, 'Vii, 422 
West, Pr* E, W,, retoed to, v, ■ 

' XI , ' '' . '' ' ' 

Wpst, the, Salm’s portxop of the 

- world,, i, 189 

, gate’ivay 'of, 'Viii, $69 and, 

*' ^ ^ 

, sea,' L60', yi,; 15$ ' 

' for ^ an‘ ' 'Mand;, ; 


3^ 

Whale, Sikaiidar's adventure 
with a, vi, 71, 147 
Wheeler, Janies Talboys, quoted, 
vi, 81 

Whip, Bahram Giir’s, vii, 47, 54, 

<>3, G4 

object of reverence, vii, 47, 
54, b3 

White Castle (Mount Sipand, 
q,v.), stronghold north- 
west of Nishdpiir, X44, i, 
369; ii, 118, 131, 138 
Malcolm’s identification 
and description of, 1, 
236 ; V, 30 

besieged by Barmdn, 1, 
354 

evacuated by Gazhdaham 

ii; 137 

Dfv, 143. See Dfv. 
Elephant, 14X, See Elephant. 
Huns (Haitilians, 7.V.), 1, 20 
Will, of Alexander the Great, vi, 
81 

provisions of, vi, 81, 181 
Kubdd, son of Pfrhz, vii, 210 
Wine-drinking, forbidden by 
Bahrdm Giir, vii, 23 
again permitted, vii, 25 
Firdausi's love of. See Fir- 
dausi. 

Wisa, Tdrdnian hero, uncle of 
Afrdsiydb, X42, i, 92, 337, 
342# 353; ; ii, 112 

354 ; iii, 79, 102, 105, 121, 
197, 202, 206 ; iv, 32, 39, 
50; 54* 55; 74; 84, 95; 99; 
103, 113, 115, 122 
pursues Kiran, i, 355 
finds Bdrmin dead, i, 356 
defeated by Kiran, i, 357 
returns to AMsiyib, i, 357 
sayings of, iv, 32 
Wfsagird, city in Ldrim ^5^; iv, 
19, 20, 65; vii, 157, 33R 
Wisdom, praise 'Of, ' vii, 103 
Firdausfs, ~X39 
' refertel^to, vii, 278^ 

, Persian, vii, '278 

. '' " ' viii, 3 

'' '‘.'Mohl' dm,.^;ii,>8o 


GENERAL INDEX 


390 

Wisdom, literature, Noldeke on, 
vii, 28 1 

apportionmeiit of, viii, 202 
Witch, 143, 156. Seii Sorceress. 
Wizard-land, vii, 120 and noie 
Wolf, IS 4, is^> i6s, vii, 121 seq, 
and note 

slain by Bahrdm Gdr, vii, 
123 

of Fiskun. See Fiskiin. 
Women, City of, 160 5e<3Harum. 
Wonders, 160, iv, 245 

the Four, of Kaid, J5p, See 
Kaid. 

World, on the making of the, Z59 
Worm, the, 161, vi, 195, 206, 238 
seq. 

Story of, i6x; vi, 196, 203 
seq., 232 seq. 

Mohl, ISfdldeke, and Dar- 
mesteter on, vi, 203 seq. 
cult of, vi, 235 
Ardshlr PApakin’s strata- 
gem against, vi, 242 
servants of, vi, 242 seq. 
Writing, art of, taught by the 
dfvs to Tahmhras, i, 127 


X 

Xerxjss, Persian king (B.C. 485- 
465), V, 282 
Asfandiydr and, v, 282 
effigy of, falls, vi, 30 


Y 

YAjdi and MAjrdj (Cog and 
Magog, q.u.), 160, vi, 79, 

zxt 

legend of, in the.'Iinrdn* vi, 

' ^ 78 ' 1' I 

I 'Tabarf oh, vi, 78^ 

'/■desptibedi^' vi, ^ 

Ya*khb bin Lais, Per^ismohieftaih 
' ' ■ ' " /and founder of 'theSafif^nf '' 
^-'dyna^^ 68- ^ , 

,Ya%6T!^,; 'Arabic' histoiiah' (died,' 


Yaldn-sfiia (Marddnshdh), bro- 
ther of Jdahram Chubfna, 
viii, 74, 102, 122, 135, i3(S, 
157. 163, i6y, 204, >88, 
291, 296 seq., 303, 316, 
356, 357 ; ia, 6 
goes hunting with Bahrain 
Cluibma, viii, 156 
pursues and brings back 
archscribe viii, 159 
speech of, viii, 165, 170 
worsted by Khusrau Parwiz, 
viii, 229 

commands the centre, ,;iii, 
289 

Bahrfim Chdlnua makes, his 
mandatory, viii, 342 
defeats the Turks, viii, 
353 

negotiates marriage between 
Gurdya and Gustaham, 
viii, 357 

Yama. See Yima. 

Yaman (Hfimfivardn), south- 
western Arabia, 140, 160, 
162, i, x8i seq., 266, 286 ; 
ii, 80 ; iv, 146 ; v, 260 ; 
vi, 73, 120, 121, 324, 331, 
3B5, 3^6, 396, 401 ; vii, 
262 ; viii, q 3 

king of=Sarv, X40, i, 178, 
179, 182 

Yaman, carnelians of, ii, 123 ; iii, 
289 

Canopus of, ii, 203 ; iii, 297 ; 
vi, 382 

onyx of, vi, 128 
striped stuff of, vi, 175 
monarch of, vi, 175 ; viii, 
16 

gives gifts to Sikandar, 
vi, J75 

, assMunzir, vi, 378, ' 387,, 

; , 390 ' , 

' BahrdA Ohr goesto, vi-, 378,^ 

'■ , conquered by Persians, 

, ' 24^ mte , / 1 ^ 'p 

,curiain^ o^ viii, '^48, |sF'. 

' Y^ahs (JuEan), brother oiCs^sar, . 
,V'| ' . /KS^bvi, 3^. 3 « 6 '- 


GENERAL INDEX 39 i 


Yanns, leads a host against Slid- 
piir, >i, 

defeated, vi, 352 
Yasht XX i I, metrical paia- 
])hrase of, vii, 318 
Yatkar-i-Zariran, Pahlavi text, 
V, X3, 24, 27 and note ; vii, 
3^0 

compared with Dakiki's 
work, V, 24 seq. 

resembles Khrnamak, vi, 
I95» 19 b 

Yazates (Izads), the, iii, 286 
Yazd, city m central Persia, vi, 
308 

Yazdagiicl, son of Shaphr, Shdh 
(Isdigerd I), 163, 164, vi, 
3; vii, 4, 10, 109, 1 19, 
359 

referred to, vi, 369 ; vii, 


74 

Keign of, 163, vi, 371 m- 
Note on, vi, 371 seq, 
parentage of, uncertain, vi, 

371 

lover of peace like Aknaton 
of Egypt, vi, 371 
titles of, vi, 371* 37'*^ 

Tabarf on, vi, 372, 373 

coins of, vi, 373^ 

evil administration of, vr. 


374, 404 

makes search for a goverMr 
for his son Bahri,in. Giir, 
vi, 376 seq. 

Nu’mdn and Munzir visit, 

vi#' 377 

puts Bahrim Ghr in Mun- 
zir's charge, vi, 378 
receives from Munzdr a pic- 
ture of Bahrim Qhr shoot- 
ing, vi/ 385 ' ^ , 

Bahrim Qtt returns .to, vi,„ 


386. 

gives presents, to, ^n4 sends 
a. letter by, to 

, "P:unzir, vi, 387 ' / 

disgraces Bahrdm Ghr, vi,' 

' 3% ' I ■ ' ' * ’ \ ' . ' '' , 

seod^ to 

Mnh-ir, .vi,,39b - \ 


Yazdagird, consults the astrolo- 
gers. vi, 390 ■ 

death of foretold, vi, 301 
attacked by bleeding of the 
nose, vi, 390 
death of, vi, 373, 393 
Ndldeke on, vi, 373 
corpse of embalmed and 
taken to Pars, vi, 393 
Yazdagird, son of Bahrhm Ghr 
(Isdigerd IT), Sh4h, 166, 
vi, 3 ; vii, 4, 152, 15b, 160, 
187 

welcomes his father on his 
return from Hind, vu, 

appointed by Bahrhm Gur 
to succeed him, vii, 150 
Reign of, 166, vii, 153 seq. 
Note on, vii, 153 
a blank in Shahndma, vii, 
153 

historicall> important, vii, 

153 

•wars of, vii, 153 
fortifies passes in the Cau- 
casus, vii, 153, 187 
title of, vii, 153 
sons of, vii, 153 
appoints Hurmuz to suc- 
ceed him, vii, 155 
dies, vii, 155 

Yazdagird (Isdigerd III), Shih, 
176, y, 294 I vi, 3 ; viii, 
55» 73 ; m, 5, 61, 64 seq,, 
68 seq., 72, 81. 90, loi, 
105, 106, ti3, ii5> 1x6,122 
Reign and Era of, 3:^6, ix, 
64 

Note on, xx, 64 
taken for safety to Istakhr, 
ix, 64 

age of, at accession, ix, 65 
diffi-cult position of, ix, 65 
Yazdagird. historical importance 
' ot reign of, ix, 65 
flight of, from Ctesiphon, ix, 
67 ' . 

, , -Hnlw^n, ix, 6B 
. , '^toempt , of , to recover 

i ' ' ’’ M^empirb, iXi 68 , ^ > 


GENERAL INDEX 


392 

Yazdagird, concentrates Ins 
forces atNahavand, ix, 68 
defeated and a fugitivn, ix, 

69 

death of, referred to, ix, O9 
host returns to, after Kadi- 
sfya, ix, 85 

hears of Rustam's death, ix, 

85 

quits Baghddd, ix, 88 
makes for Marv, ix, 89 
entrusted to M4hwf by 
Farruklizhd, ix, 95, 96 
at Marv”, ix, 97, 116 
hears of the coniing of the 
Turks, ix, 97 
betrayed by Mahwf, ix, 98 
defeated, ix, 98, 116 
miller and, ix, 99 seq, 
described, ix, 99, 101 
Mdhwi bids miller slay, ix, 
107, 1 16 

slain, stripped and flung into 
stream, ix, ro8, 109 and 
note 

corpse of, recovered, .la- 
mented over and en- 
tombed, ix, 109 seq. 
Firdausi on, ix, in 
Yazdagird, chief scribe, temp. 
Ndshfrw4n, vii, 304, 307, 
3«, 333. 337. 339. 391 
discourse of, vii, 303 
questions Bdzurjmihr, vii, 
308 

Yazdin, viii, 75 
Yazd^nbakhsh {Ayfn Gashasp 
q,v.), viii, 73, 76 
Yazdfn, viii, 193, 196 
Year, New, festival at, i, 164 
Yima (Yama, Jamshid), i, 7. 

' X30, 374 , 

legend' of, i, 129 
Yokel, a, 164 . 

‘ entertains ‘Baludm "Gdr, vii, 

43; $4q. ' ' , , 

ndfO'* of/ hot converse with 
\ ’BahrAm'Oiit, yii ,45 

,tev^dod''' by .<5fiir, 

' 


Youths, two, bid Ardshir Papa- 
kan not to tarry in his 
flight from Arclawaii, vi, 
201, 222 

Y'ouths, two / entertain and coun- 
sel Ardshir Papakan in 
the matter of the Worm, 
vi, 207, 239 seq. 
help Ardshir Papakan to 
slay the Worm, vi, 242, 
244 

Yudhislithxra, eldest of the five 
Pandavas, iv, 138 
renunciation of the world, 
and jiilgrimage to heaven 
of, compared with that of 
I Kai Khusrau, iv, 138 

I Yunaii, vi, 95 and note, viii, 258 
; Faith of, vi, 95 


Z 

Z'Cr, lesser, tributary of Tigris, 

vhi, 189 

Z4bul, Z4bulist4n=sNlmrdz= 
Sfstdn, ® X4X, X42, 144, 

x$6 ; i, 248, 232, 254, 264, 

282, 324, 332, 357, 361, 

364. 3b6, 3<37. 371. 373. 
381 ; ii, 21, 28, 42, 61, 
83, 92, 126, 138, 141, 142, 
136, 16S, 227, 228, 243, 

260, 338, 362, 363, ; hi, 
14, 134, 141, 145, 153, 163, 
171, 174, 175, 186, 190, 

199, 200, 202, 206 seq.^ 217 
246, 250, 269, 274, 321, 
326, 343, 347. 354. 35^1 
iv, 147, 279, 283, 29b, 31 1 ; 
V, 85, 86, 167, X69 seq., 
175, 175 seq,, j8i seq., 

193. t94. 312, 215, 219. 

223, 224, 235, 248, 231, 

252, 255, 256, 258, "265i 

266, 273, 275 seq^ 281, 

283, 283 s&q.;\ vi, 2071 

vii, ,173. 74. t95'h‘'V|ih 
369.: fe7 75 '' ' 

inyndod;' by Slmm 4 ^ 4 s -and 
'jKi'bazatwin,; i, 343^ 35^ / 


GENERAL 

Zabul, vintage of, ii, no 

occupied by the Turkmans, 
i, 10 ; ill, 30 
(iushtasp goes to, v, 85 
Moon of™Riidaba, v, 190 
and note 

called “ J^abblcslcad " by 
Asfandiyar, v, 216 
Bahmants sojourn in, v, 252, 
256 

pillaged by Baliman, v, 287 
Bahman quits, v, 290 | 

ZdbuH, a native of Zdbul, iii, ( 
1B8, 201, 257, 326 ; v, 212 I 
a, made king of Kabul, v, 1 
277 ^ ; 

Zad Farrukh, suggests Babram | 
Chubina to Hurniuzd, i 
viii, 90 I 

speech of, viii* 241 ' 

Zddsham, king of Tdr^n and 
grandfather of Afrdsiydb,i, 
92, 342 seq., 376 ; iv, 149, 
1O3, 1 06 , 203 

offspring of “«^Afrdsiy 4 b, iv, 

1 78 

Zagros, mountain-range in wes- 
tern Irdn, viii, 189 
ZaMidk (Azlii Dahdka), son of 
Mardds, Arab king and 
Shdh, I4<^, X41 ; i, 42, 90, 
91 ; ii, 33, 81, 318 ; iii, 
257 ; iv, 89, 20O, 272, 274, 
290 ; V, X2, 180, 203, 204, 
284 ; vi, 15, 45, 172, 209, 
240 and noU ; vii, 185, 
199; viii, 218, 239, 24X, 
387, 39 x; 25. ^ 5 . 

103 

protagonist of idolatry^ and 
of the Semitio race, i, 54^ 
J43, 226, 256 ' ^ ' 

one of tlie Zoroastrian triad 
of evil, i, 59 apd mt$ ' , ' 

' "referred to hy ’Mpses of C^o-' 
mm, i, 72, 144 
; Story oh X4d, i.X3d 
' ■ teihptod ' by , I - h x sd t 
fetlret 

i' ^ 


INDEX 393 

Zalihak, becomes king of the 
Arabs, i, 137 

serpents grow out of the 
shoulders of, i, 139“ 

IbHs' advice to, i, 139 
invades frhn, i, 139 
captures and slays Jamsliid, 
i, 140 

Reign of, 140, i, 14 1, seq. 
Note on, i, 141, seq, * 
not destroyed, i, 143 
feast in celebration of over- 
throw of, i, 143 
dream of, i, 147 

Arnawaz' advice to, con- 
cerning, i, 148 
takes counsel with the archi- 
niagcs, i, 149 
warned by Zirak, i, 149 
seeks for Faridun, i, 150 
slays Abtin, i, 151, 153 
Birmdya, i, 152 
burns Fadddn's palace, i, 
152, 158 

Kdwa and, Story of, 140, i, 
X54 seq. 

Kdwa levolts against, i, 156 
Farfddn resolves to war 
•with, i, 157 
marches against, i, 159 
capital of, i, 161 

entered by Farfddn, i, 161 
talisman of, overthrown by 
Farfddn, i, x6i 
sought for in vain by Farf- 
ddn, i, 162 

minister of, 140, i, 164 seq. 
hears from Kundrav of Farf- 
cldn's doings, i, 165 
gocS' to hght with Farfddn, 
h 166 

enters his palace, i, 167 
overthrown by Farfddn, i, 
tdS 

, Sdtdsh's cptmso} to Farfddn 
'.ebneer'nittg^ i, x 68 ,, 169 ' 
fetterod^^.,to Mount ' Fatnd- 

';fn1xjre: hital destruction of, 

''sijjrfng of, iii'iyx and 


GENERAL INDEX 


394 

Zahhak, an Aryan myth, ix, 65 
king of Babylon, ix, 65 
an Arab, ix, (>5 

Zahir, Iranian hero, iv, 148 

commands the Bedouins in 
Kai Khusrau’s army, iv, 
148 

Zainig'nx, Zaimgdv, ii, 81 

Zairi-vairi (Zariadrcs, Zarir, q.v.), 
iv, 316 ; V, 12 

Zdl (D^stdn, Ddsthn-i-Sam, D4s- 
tdn-i-Zand, Zdl-i-zai), son 
of Sam and father of 
Rustam, 141, 142, 15J, 
J54, is6, 157 ; i, 145, 235, 
384, 387 ; ii, 4, II scq., 
18, 19, >r, 33 seq,, 49, 58, 
61, 62, 69, 77, 140, x68, 
169, 180, 182, 227, 228, 
271, 286, 290, 318, 319, 
338, 362, 371 ; in, 8, 17, 
18, 2X, 22, 35, 121, 132, 
138, 141, 147, ioo» 202, 
221, 245, 269, 274, 279, 
2^3, 307, 321, 322, 325, 
33b 347. 35b 354> 
355; iv, 13, 147, 222,251, 
277, 319; V, II, 14, 15, 
58, 86, i6g, 173 $eq,, 197, 
200, 204, 210, 212, 219 
seq., 23 X, 240 seq,, 246, 
255, 256, 261, 277 seq., 
281, 283, 290; vi, 79; 
viii, 223 ; ix, 25 
various names of, i, 84, 245 
and note, 2^8 and note 
born "with white hair, i, 
240 

cast away by Sdm, i, 241 
found and brought up by 
the Sfmiitgh, i, 242 
seen, by a caravan, i, ■ 
242 

informed of his parentage by 
tlxe Sfmnrgh, i, 245^ ^ , : 

given' ^ a', feather hy the ' 
'SfxhU'rgh, i,, '246 ' . 

mtored' /to S 4 m by ' ,the '' 

' , 247 

goes ‘t^th':;$to to editt* ' i, 

',,249 ' , ,' 1 '’' '/ ' 


Zal, horoscope of, taken, i, 251 
made regent ol Zabul by 
vSam, i, 253 

])rogrcHSof, in the arts, i, 255 
makes a progress through 
his realm, i, 256 
Riiddba and, story of, i, 257 
seq. 

referred to, iii, 285 
hears of, and falls m love 
with Mihrab’s daughter, 
i, 257 seq. 

described, i, 260, 268 
sees RUdaba’s handmaids, 
i, 263 

interview of, with Ruddba’s 
handmaids, i, 266 
invited to visit RUddba, i, 
267, 269 

goes to RUddba, i , 270 seq. 
plights his troth to RUddba, 
i, 272 

consults the archimages on 
the matter of RMdba, i, 

273 

writes to Sdm, i, 275 
go-between of, with RUddba, 
i, 280 

sends Sdm’s letter to RU- 
ddba, i, 280 

goes to plead his cause with 
Sdm, i, 292 

bears a letter of appeal from 
Sdm to Mimichihr, i, 295 
. well received by MinU- 
chihr i, 306 

astrologer's presage con- 
cerning, i, 307 
questioned by the aroh- 
imagesi i, 308 

answers the archimages^, i, 

309 

displays his accomplishmeiit 
' before HinUchihr, x, 3 ^ : 

returns to Sdm, i; 3x6 
goes with Sim to Kibul, i, 

' ,, ielicitatecbby Sim, i,,33:3\, ,, 

^ , nmrri^d 'todiUdiha,i,3t,S, 

' ' ' , and, Ridiba ge to 'Sis^n^ 


GENERAL INDEX 


3Q5 


Zal, l(‘ft regent of Sistan by Sam'* 
h 3^9 

stiininons the Simurgh to 
Kiicconr Rudaba, i, 320 
goes with Rustam and Mili- 
rdb to meet S^m, i, 324 
bids Rustam take Mount 
Sipand, i. 329 
hears of Rustam’s success, 
h 33 ^ 

bids Rustam destroy the 
hold of Mount Sipand, i, 
333 

informs S 4 m of Rustam’s 
exploit, i, 334 
buries Sam, i, 358 
hears from Mihrdb that 
Shaoiasas and Khazar- 
wdu are invading Zibu- 
listin, i, 359 

goes to the help of Mihr^b, 
h 359 

slioois arrows into the ene- 
mies’ camp, i, 359 
slays Khazarwdn, i, 360 
wounds Kulbdd, i, 361 
puts Shamdsds to flight, i, 
361 

hears of the death of 
Naitdar, i, 364 
fights with Afrdsiydb, i, 
3O8 

proposes the election of a 
new Shdh, i, 370 
reproached by the frdn- 
i$,ns, i, 375 
reply of, i, 375 
bids Rustam prepare for 
war, i, 376. 

gives Sdm’s mdee 'to Rus- 
tam, i, 378 ' - 

collects horses for • Rustam, ; ' ' 

i, 37a> ' ^ ‘ , 

■marches Afr^iydh, /, 

, i, 381 . ' ■ ' : r' ' ' , ; 

urges' the.Iriulani tp choose ' ' ■■ 
',a Shdh„,i*; 

^#nhs' ' ' 'h)'' 

jifoes' tb ": 3 o " 10 '^ , 
''d'-Khwma^i ‘I'ii'. b: 


;dl, witnesses Kai Khusrau’s 
oath to avenge Siyawush, 
hi, 22 

son of —Rustam, hi, 132 
meets Giv, lii, 321 
sayings of, iii, 316, 351 
summoned by the f rani an s 
to remonstrate with Kai 
Khusrau, iv, 278 
sets out for frdn with Rus- 
tam and sages, iv, 279 
met on arrival by Gddarz 
and other chiefs, iv, 2S2 
holds converse with the 
frdnians, iv, 282 
audience of, with Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 283 seq. 
asks pardon of Kai Khus- 
rau, iv, 390 

holds, with other chiefs, at 
the bidding of Kai Khus- 
rau, an assembly on* the 
plain, iv, 291 seq, 

Kai Khusrau 's gift to, iv, 

295 

companions of, rewarded by 
Kai Khusrau, iv, 297 
returns thanks, iv, 298 
protests against Luhrdsp's 
succession, iv, 301 
acknowledges Luhrdsp as , 
Shdh, iv, 302 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 
on his pilgrimage, iv, 
306 

turns back at the bidding of 
Kai Khusrau, iv, 307 
laments the loss of the pala- 
dins and returns to- frdn, 
iv, 310 . 

' promises fealty to Luhrdsp, 
iv, ^311 

/ Rustam and/'«?'eloome Gush- 
,fdsp to„ Sfstdn, , V, 85 
hearS'‘ of 'Rahman's ap- 

' mterylew/of, with. Rahman, 

K ''43\V ' 

Rahad» ,gnide to' ' 
him ,to' Ru$ta#, . - 


GENERAL INDEX 


396 

Zal, Ri'idaba and, bidden by 

Rustam to prepare to 
receive Aslandiyar, v, lyo 
Rustam recounts his inter- 
view with Asfandiyar to, 

V, 196 

Rustam and, vilified by 
Asfandiyar, v, 201 
receives a message from 
Rustam by Zawdra, v, 
230 

grieves over Rustam’s 
wounds, V, 234 
summons the Sfmurgh to 
Rustam's aid, v, 235 
goes to Rustam and Asfan- 
diy4r, v, 24 7 

forebodes Rustam’s future, 
V, 247 

father of Shagh^d, v, 260, 
263 

sends Shaghdd to be brought 
up at Kdbul, v, 264 
laments for Rustam, v, 273 
sends Fardmarz against 
Mbul, V, 274 
bids Rdddba to cease to 
mourn for Rustam, v, 
278 

receives and replies to Bah- 
man’s hostile message, v, 

285 

goes to meet Bahmaii, v, 

286 

palace of, sacked, v, 286 
Bishdtan intercedes for, v, 
28S 

released and returns to Ms 
palace, v, 289 

Z4U-2ar (Z^l, q.v,), i, 84, 248 and 
nQte 

Zam (now KarkM)^ tpw on the 
, left bank - of thb Oxm 
beween . Amwi' (Chatjni) 
and'Tirnaid, whdre, tMo 
was a crossing-place, ii, 

' ' • ' , 394. 39'5 1 Jv, 65, X'Sy ; vii, 

' < . ' 35 , 0 '' ' ' 

U '' ' 


Zand, comment, i, 65 
Zandavasta, i, ti6, 129, 144, 171 
scq., 231, 337, 338, 3^9; 
ii, 8, 25 seq , 81, 118, 189, 
tyo ; iii, 8; iv, 151, 228, 
253, 259, 308 ; V, II seq., 
30, 36, 41, 43, 51, 82, 85, 
100, 173, 176, 216, 241, 
294> 299, 309; vi, 17, 55, 
226, 252, 343, 356 ; vii, 
200, 207, 283, 302 ; viii, 
96, 246, 283, 312 
traditional origin of, i, 61 
discussed, 1, 62 
language of, i, 63 seq. 
meaning of, 1, 65 
origin of chief characters in, 

i, 65 

diffusion of traditions in, i, 
65 

extant portions of, i, 70 
note 

quoted, i, 901 130, 14b 142, 
X72, 235, 369; viii, 218, 
240 

sent by Gushtisp to every 
clime, V, 77 

burnt by the Turkmans at 
Balkh, V, 92 

passage from, metrically 
paraphrased, vii, 31S 
Zanga, Xrdnian hero, 14$, 151, 

ii, 73, 90, 228, 249, 271, 
318; iii, 20, 34, 43, 45, 
48, 67, 92> It 5, 350; iv, 
13, 15, 24. X05, 147 

takes part in the Fight of 
the Seven W$xriots, 'ii, 
107 seq^ 

accompanies S i y 4 w u s h 
against Afrisiy^b, ii, 
226 

sent on an ennbassy to Afr4*r 
siyib* ii, 250 seq. 

• , gpes^With Rustam to. rescue 
BMan, hi, '334 ' '' 

opposes ' Farshfdward, . iv^, 

, ’83, ' ' ' ' ; 

, , chosen to %ht ' Akh^'tpiv, 

' : 97 ' ' . . 

, slays, Akh4st, pr, ,19^' ; ; / 


GENERAL INDEX 


397 


Zanga, Kai Khusraii remon- Zurcluhsht, account of, i, 62 
strated with by, and meaning of, v, 13 

other nobles, for refusing legend of, v, 14 seq, 

auflieuce, iv, 275 converts Gusht 4 sp, v, 18, 

Zangi'ila or Zangiila, Tiirdnian 33 

hero, 15J, iv, 26 success of evangel of, v, 3^} 

chosen to fight with Furd- plants the Cypress of Kish- 

hil, iv, 97 mar,, v, 27, 34 • 

slain b}? Furuhil, iv, loi advises Gushtdsp not to pay 

Zarang, former capital of Sfstdn, tribute to Arjasp, v, 35 

situated some twenty referred to, v, 36, 38, 41 

miles from the north- slain at Balkli, v, 92, 93 

eastern shores of Lake amulet given to Asfandiydr 

Zirih, i, 4 by, v, 130 

Zardr, vi, 200 religion of, under the S 4 sd- 

Zarasp, sou of Minuchihr, i, 248 ; nian empire, vi, 251 

iv, J47 (?)^ girdle of, v, 16 ; vi, ^yznoie. 

kindred of go to the Fire-fane of, vii, 139 

temple of Azargashasp, high priest of, converts 

iv, 270 Sapfnud, vii, 139 

go to meet 7 M and lius- saying of, viii, 218, 240 

tain, iv, 2H2 Zarduhsht, high jiriest, 170, viii, 

go with Zarfr to Rdm, iv, 81 

360 visits fzid Gashasp in prison, 

Zar^isp or Zarasp, son of Tiis, 14^, viii, 82 

iii, 24, 54, 57, 59, 60, 67, visit of, reported to Hur- 

72, 113, 114; iv, 135 muzd, viii, 83 

goes against Farhd, hi, 53 poisoned by Hurmuzd, viii, 

referred to, hi, 55 ; iv, 149 83 seq. 

burial of, hi, 68 Zariadres (Zairi-vairi, Zarfr, q,i\), 

Zarasp, treasurer of Kai Kims- v, 26 

ran, iv, 269 legend of, iv, 314. seq. 

makes gifts to Azargashasp, Zarfr (Zariadres, Zairi-vairi), 
269 brother of Sh 4 h Gushtisp, 

Zarasp, Iranian hero, iv, iSo, soi 134, 133, i, 42 ; h, 3 ; ; iv, 

Zarathu^tra, Zarathushtra'; S&e ■ 3 X 5 ; 316; 31^; 347 ;' V; X2, 

' ^ • Zarduhsht ' I3; 24 $ 7 > 4X seq., 49 

Zarduhsht (Zarathushtra, Zero- ' ‘ seq., 60 seq>, 73, 94, 109, 

aster), prot)hct, law-giver, , 169, iSx, 193, 254, 261 

and .evangelist of „ ancient , ■ sent by Luhr^p in pursuit. 

Iran,' XS 3 , i, 53., ri6, 235, of Gushtdsp, iv, 320 

,236 . h, ' S, <9 ; iv, 272, ; ' charger of, iv, 32 x 
' 9 s$q^,^%7,‘"zB, ' returns with ,Gusht 4 sp, iv, 

42, 5t/77.'..xrS^''-^o6,,2’f^> , ,‘.3^^."', ' .' 

2x7, 241*255 ;i';vi, 55, 252, ' consulted by Liihrisp, iv, 
528,; xii, 9, 267; 264, 31,8"; ''' ’ 32 ;^ 35^ ' ' ' 

viii, '67, .,,2X3; 308 , . ' ad^^ises Luhrdsp, iv, 358 

Zapdavasta revealed „ ,! ■ • with'dthcr chiefs ^on a 

'title' 'of ,a d'ihe-'pf, pr^* , , 'A.'rhis^toatoRto, iv, 3,59, , 

d-x',''' „ '' /ttaches Xdaiab,; iv„ 360 ' 


398 GENEI^AL INDEX 


Zarir entrusts the host to 
Bahrdm, iv, 360 
goes to Caesar’s court, iv, 360 
audience with Caesar of, and 
recognition of Gushtdsp 
by, IV, 360 

gives Luhrdsp’s answer to 
Caesar, iv, 361 

visited in his camp by Gush- 
tdsp, iv, 361 

informs Gushtdsp of Liih- 
rdsp's abdication in his 
favour, iv, 362 
Love-story of, v, 26, 27 
Death-story of v, 26, 27 
converted by Zarduhsht, v, 
33 

answers, in conjunction with 
Asfandiydr and J dmdsp, 
Arjdsp’s letter, v, 42 
death of, foretold by Jdm- 
dsp, V, 51 

receives the standard and 
the command of the cen- 
tre frorn Gushtdsp, v, 55 
prowess of, v, 61 seq. 
slain by Bfdirafsh, v, 63 
Zarfr-ndma, v, 26, 27 
Zark, town south-east of Marv, 
ix, 98 

canal of, ix, 98 
corpse of Yazdagird flung 
into, ix, 109 
recovered from, ix, 109 
ford and toll-house of, ix, 
100 and note 
chief of, ix^ 100 
hears from miller about 
YaSfdagird, ix^ 109 
Zarmxhr. $$4 Kizmihr 
Zarmisb, city in Khdzisfdn, ,vi, 35 
Zartusht ' Balxrdm. Pazdhfl, 
authbr of the ,, Z^ushtr- ' 
nima, y,;- ! ' 

ZartushW'4ma,.,poem, t,_ r-S ; ; ' ' / 

Zav,^^ Shdh, i,' 90, -91,' 

: , , 381 ii, xi, 30,; iy, ^283 
,;lleign'Ol, 3'^9 seq. , , 

; ' ifote^ 'Oh, i, '309 ^ ' ■' '' , 

./ ; 'ih ■ 


Zav, accession of, i, 370 

drought and famine in the 
time of, 1, 371 

concludes peace with the 
Turkmans, i, 371 
dies, i, 372 

Zawara, brother of Rustam, iq6, 
^57> ih 4. 96, 228, 347’ 
349 ; hi, 30, 202, 325, 
328 ; iv, 24, 34 ; V, 173, 
174, 182 seq., 187, 191, 
231, 260, 261 

engaged in the Tdght of the 
Seven Warriors, ii, no 
seq. 

worsted by Alkds, ii, 113 
rescued by Rustam, li, 115 
made leader of Rustam’s 
host, ii, 142 

left in charge of Rustam’s 
host, ii, 1 61 

goes on embassy to Hdmdn, 
ii, 176 

safe-conducts Hdmdn from 
frdn, ii, 176, 181, 182 
incites Rustam to avenge 
Siydwush, ii, 360 
given a command, iv, 149 
goes with Rustam to the 
right wing, iv, 180 
referred to, v, 186, 228, 
261 

Fardmarz and, sent by Rus- 
tam to bid Zdl and 
Rdddba prepare to re- 
ceive Asfandiydr, v, 190 
brings Rustam's armour, v, 
218 

, put in charge of the troops, 
V, 222 

goes with Rustam to the 
Hirniund, v, 222' 
Rustam’s instructions t‘o, v, ^ 

' 222 ^ , I \ 

, ' provokes ihe frdhians' to 
■ ' combat, v, 225 ■ ^ 
'sJays;Nd:sh Azar, w,' 227,/' 

; goes in <ju^st of Rustam,.;, v,- 
'■ , 

- ^ 'take^irom Rustam .la' 

' : / , ; ' a|,e 'for ZB.7 % ‘ . ;; ,■ ^ ''' 


399 


GENERAL 

Zawara, grieves over Rustam’s 
wounds, V, 234 
goes to Rustam and Asfan- 
diyar, v, 247 

warns Rustam against Bah- 
nian, v, 250 

Rustam and, with small 
escort, go to Kdbul, v, 268 
goes hunting with Rustam, 

V, 270 

falls a victim to treachery, 

V, 270, 273 
death of, V, 273 
body of, taken fiom the pit 
by Far^raarz, and buried 
V, 275 

Zend, language, i, 64 

improper use of term, 1, 04 
Zeus, Babylonian, vi, 22 

oracle of, consulted, vi, 22 
Zhanda Razm, maternal uncle of 
Suhr^b, I 44 > ib 
accompanies Siihrdb to ir^n, 
ii, 150 

death of, ii, 150^ 
referred to, ii, 160 
Zhangwf, Turkman noble, viii, 
331 

Zib 4 -Khusrau (Rdmiya, 
city, i< 57 , vii, 259 

Zij4nak, daughter of Ardawhn, 

q.v,, x6x, vi, 255 
Story of, in Kirndmak, vi, 

Tabari, vi, 255 
Shihnima, vi, 259 m- 
Zfnfgiv, ii, 81 

Zira, lather of Gtirwf, i 5 ^> ib 295. 
3i:4;iii, 120, 197. I 90 ;tv, 
97^,99, 127,219; V, 272 
' ; Zirak, an archimage, b 

, warns Zahhak, 4 , 149 
Zirili,seaoriahe,i,4i ^^80; 

13^'' , ' ' , V ' .. ' 

'' the Bate of BlSt^n, 1, p a, 

- '' Bo ' ; ' ' ' ' ‘ ' 

Zirih, son of’Sh^h Hrdz,,:vii, X70 
Zddiac, vEi, '$94 ' , ' / 

Zoroastetv 1' ^ , ■ 

t' ‘ ^ ' vi, 23% '3^8 ^,1 ' '"--1— 


INDEX 

Zoroastrian, cosmogony, i, 5 

view of Buddhism as idola- 
trous, 1, 16 

conception of destiny, i, 52 
propaganda, i, 58 
triad of evil, i, 59 and note 
scriptures. See Zandavasta. 
calendar, 1, 88 

adopted by Darius Hys- 

tasiiis, i, 59 

Zoroastrianism, i, 49 ; '^ 9 f > 

251, 252, 327, 328 ; vii, 
188, 317 

conceptions of, i, 5, 5^ 

original seat of, i, 5^ 

62 

becomes the state religion, 

b 59 , , 

declines after Alexander s 
conquest, i, 60 
scriptures of, See Zanda- 
vasta. 

under the Parthians, i, 60, 

63 

revival of, i, 63 ^ ^ 

based on nature-worship, 1, 
ixG 

existed before Zoroaster, i, 
116 

under the Sdshnian empire, 
vi, 251 

millonia of, vi, 252 
Ziil Aktdf, titie of Shdpdr, son 
of Urmuzd, 162, vi, 323 
meaning of, vi, 323 
ZEEfakar, ii, 337 and note 
Zdl-karnain (Sikandat, Alex- 
ander the Great), vi, 5^ 
legend of, in Kurhn, vi, 78, 
84 

barrier of, vi, 78 
site of, 'vi, 79 
Zdr, See Q<ix. 

' ' NdshirwdnV chamber- 
lain, ' x 68 '' 

I envies Mahbhd, vii, 3^9 
plots ' with a Jew against 
idb , 

, . ; ; piates confession to NusMr- 

'win, yiv,s^4 ' ’ '
