The Shahnama of Firdausi, Vol. 2 (Arthur George Warner and Edmond Warner (trans.), 1906)
==========================================================
Completes the Warner brothers' 9-vol first complete English Shahnama (vol. 1 live) — the Persian national epic. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

VOL. V[|.


TRUBNER’S
ORIENTAL SERIES


Seven Volumes now Heady, Post 8vo, cloth, inice los. 6d. each

THE SHAHnAmA of FlRDAUSt.

Done into English by
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A.,

AND

EDMOND WARNER, B.A.

The year a.D. ioid saw the eomijletiuii uf the Shahnama, the great
Persian epic. Its author, the poet Firdausi, spent over thirty labori-
j ous years in its compiosition, only to exx^erienco, when the hvsk had
heen achieved, a heart-breaking disapx^ointnient well worthy of in-
clusion in any record of the calamities of authors. His work luis
survived the test of time, and by general consent is accmintud in bo
one of the few gi*eat epics of tho world. GcogTaphically, and in sonio
other respects, it may be said to stand half-way botwoon the epics of
Europe and those of India. Tn its own land it has no i>ccr, while in
construction and .subject-matter it is nuicxuc. Other epics centre
round some heroic charaetor orinciilontto wdiicli fill else is .suliscrvieiit.
lu the Shahnama there is no lack cither of heroes or of incidents, hut
its real hero is the ancient Ponsian ijeople, and itiJ theme their whole
surviving legendary history from the days of the First Man to Ihe
death of the last SAsanian Shdh in the middle of tho seventh century
of our era. It is the glory of the Persian race that they alouo iinmng
all nations po.sscss such a record, based as it is on their ow'ii traditions
and set forth in the w'ords of their greatest poet. Jii another sense,
too, the Shahnama is nnir[uc. Tho authors of the other trro[i,t epics
tell us little or nothing of their own iiersontilitica or of their stjiirces
uf information. Their works are fairy italaccs sus)ieudeLl in mid air ;
w'e see the result, but know not how it was achieved. Tho author of
the Shahnama takes us into his contidence from the lirst, .so that in
reading it we are let into tho secret of epic-making, and can apply
the krmwdddge thus gained to .solve ihe iirohlom of the construction
of its groat cungoiiers. To the student of comparative mythology
nnd folk-loro, to the lover uf historic rumnnee nr romantic lii-lory,
and to all that are fund of talcs of high auhievoiucuts and the gusts
' of heroos, tho Shahnama is a .storehonsG of rich and abumlant inateriiil.
To .sot forth a crmiplete prc.scntmoiit of it wdth the ncLMlful notes a, ml
elucidations is the object of the present translation, inaile from two
of tho best printed texhs of the original — that of Vullcrs ami Ijan-
dauor, and that of Turner Macan.


THE


SHAHNAMA OF FIEDAUSf


DONJS INTO ilNSLIsir I) Y

ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A.

AND

EDMOND WARNER, B.A.


“ 'r/i.fi hiyttLfH that nrv the (liorlliiiris of
W'i/t sink, 'nenth shower and snohshinr to dvva\i,

Ihii storm, and rain, shad 'ju'rrr 'mtrr ir/atf /

//lire hniit —the /ir/Arrc of m\i portr)!."'

Kikdai'sf


|((gOL. /'ll


LONDON

KBGAN PAUL, TRENCH. TRURNER & CO. L’’"

UIIOADWAY UOUSM, UAUTKR DANK, K.C.

lOlf)


The righu of translation and of retired iicti on arc rcscrird.


Printed by Ballaktynk, IlANaow Co,
at the Ballantyne PresH, Edinburf^h


PREFATORY NOTE


The publication of this translation has advanced
sufficiently to enable me to state that it will be
completed in nine volumes, the last of which will
include a General Index to the whole work.

E. W.


CONTENTS


PARE

PR13FATOKY NoTE V

AiiimEViATiONS xvi

Note on Pronunciation xviii


THE SASANIAN DYNASTY (cv^itmued)

BahrAm Gull—

SECT.

1. How Bahriim asconded the Throne, charged the

Officers, and wrote Letters to all the Chiefs . 7

2. How Bahrain pardoned the Fault of the Iranians,

farowelled Munzir and Nuhniin, and remitted
the Iranians’ Arrears of Taxes .... 9

3. How Biiliram went to the House of Lambak, the

Water-carrier, and became his Guest . . 12

4. How Jiahriiiii wont to the House of Barsihani, the

Jew, who treated him BCurvily . . , .16

5. How Dahriim bestowed the Wealth of Barilhrun

upon Lambak .19

6. How Bahrain slow Lions and forbade Wine-

drinking 21

7. The Story of the young Shoemaker, and how

Bahn'iiu allowed Wine again .... 34

8. U(iw Uiizbih, Bahram’a High Priest, ruined a

Village by a Stratagem and restored it , 26

9. How I Jalinim married a Country-miller’s Daughters 31
TO. How Jkilinlm found the Treasures of Jauislud and

liestowed tliom upon the Poor ... *34

11. How Baliriim, returning from Hunting, went to

the Ilouae a Merchant and departed dis-
pleased ♦ • ■ 39

12, How Ihihrum slew a Dragon and went to a Yokel’s

House 43

vii


CONTENTS


Bahram Gt 5 r (continued)

SECT.

13. How Bahrain went to the Chase and espoused the

Daughters of the Thane Barzui

14. How Bahram slew Lions, went to the House of a

Jeweller, and married his Daughter .

15. How Bahram went to the Chase and passed the

Night in the House of Farsludward .

16. How a Bramble-grubber revealed the Case of Ear-

shidward, and how Bahram bestowed that
Householder’s Wealth upon the Poor

17. How Bahrdm went to the Chase and slew Lions .

18. How Bahrilm went to hunt the Onager, showed

his Skill before the Princes, and roturned to
Baghdad and Istakhr

19. How the Khiln of Chin led forth a Host to war

with Bahrain, and how the Iranians asked
Quarter of the Khan and submitted to him

20. How Bahriim attacked tho Host of the Khan and

took him

21. How Bahram took a Pledge from tho Tdranians,

how he set up a Pillar to delimit tho Bealui,
and placed Shahra upon the Throne of Tdran .

22. How Bahrdni wrote to announce his Victory to his

Brother Narsi and returned to Iran .

23. How Bahram wrote a Letter of Directions to his

Oihcials

24. How Bahram called before him tho Envoy of

Ciesar, and how the Envoy questioned and
answered the Archmages

25. How Bahrain dismissed Caesar’s Envoy and

charged his own Officials

26. How Bahram went with his own Letter to Shangul

King of Hind

27. How Shangul received tho Letter from Bahram and

made Reply

28. How Shangul prepared a Feast for Bahram, and

how Bahram displayed his Prowuss .

29. How Shangul suspected Bahram and kept him

from Iran

30. How Bahram fought with the Wolf at tho Bidding

of Shangul and slew it


PAGE

48

55

67

70

74

80

84

89

90
92
96

lOI

106
109
114
1 16
ri8


121


CONTENTS


IX


Bahram Guh (coyitinmd)

SEOT.

31. How ]iahnlm slew a Dragon

32. How Shangul became troubled about Bahram

and gave a Daughter to him . . . .

33. How Faghfiir of Chin wrote to Bahram and how he

replied

34. How Bahriiui fled from Hindiiatan to Iran with

the Daughter of Shangul

35. How Sliangul followed Bahram, learned who he

was, and was reconciled to him . . . .

36. How Shangul went back to Hind and Bahram to

Iran

37. How Shangul with seven Kings visited Bahram

38. How Shangul returned to Hindiistiin, and how

Bahram remitted the Property-tax to the
Landowners .......

39. How Bahram summoned Gipsies from Hindustan .

40. How the Time of Bahram came to an End

YAZDAfnRT), Son of Bahram Gi5r —

I. How Yazdagird sat iipon the Throne and exhorted
the OaplaiiiR of tlie Host

Hurmltz —

T. How Iluriiiiiz, Son of Yazdagird, ascended the
Throne


Pj'ruz —

1. How Piriiz sat upon the Throne ^and mado an

Oration

2. How Piriiz built the Cities of Piriiz-Bslm and Bildfln-

Plniz, and how he went to war with Turan

3. The Letter of Khiishuawj'iz to Pi'ruz

4. How Pfriiz fought with Klu'ishiiawilz and was slain

Balahh— -

1. How Balash ascended the Throne and harangued

the Inlniaiis ,

2. How Sdfarai had Tidings of the Slaying of Piniz,

how he wrote a Letter to Klu'ishuawaz, and
how Klnishnawiiz replied

3. How Sdfarai fought with Khi'ishnawjiz, and how

Kubad WHS released from his Bondage


PAGE

124

126

129

131

135

137

140

144

148

150

154

157

i6j

163

165

167

171

173

176


X


CONTENTS


KubXd, Son of Pikuz—

SECT. PAOE

1. How Kubi'id sat upon the Throne and made an

Oration to the Iranians i8S

2. How Sufarai went to Shirilz, how the Iranians

slandered him to Kuhad, and how Kubiid slew
him 190

3. How the Iranians put Kubad in Bonds and com-

mitted him to Rizmihr, the Son of Siifarai,
and how Jiimasp, the Brother of Kubad, was
set upon the Throne 195

4. How Kubad escaped from Ward with Kizmihr, how

he wedded the Daughter of a Thane, and how
he took Refuge with the Haitilliaiis . . -197

5. How Kubad returned from Haital to Inin, how ho

had Tidings of the Birth of his Son Nushirwiiii,
and reascended the Throne . . . -199

6. The Story of Kubad and Mazdak, and how Knbjid

adopted the Faith of Mazdak . . . ,201

7. How Ntishirwan rejected tho Faith of Mazdak and

slew him and his Followers .... 205

8. Mow Kubdd nominated Kisni as Successor, and

how the Great gave him the Name of Nushir-
wiin 209

KuSHlRWi-N—

Part I. NuSHiRwi.N’s Adbiinistration of the Realm,

HIS Wars with Frontier-Tribes and
WITH RiJm, and the Revolt of NdsiizAn

1. The Prelude 220

2. How Nushirwan ascendod tho Throno and made'

an Oration to the Iranians . . . .221

3. How Niishirwan divided his Realm into four Parts

and wrote a Decree to his Oliicors on the Ad-
ministration of Justice 224

4. How Nushirwan required Biibak to muster tho

Host 230

5. How Kiishirwiin harangued tlio Iranians, and how

the Kings acknowledged his Supremacy , .234

6. How Niishirwan went round his Empire and ImilL

a Wall in the Pass between Inin and Tiiriin . 236

7. How Niishirwan chastised the Alans and tho Men

of Baliich and Gildn 239


CONTENTS


XI


Part I. N^jshjrwXn’s Administration, etc. {continued)

ST3CT. PAOE

8. How Munzir, tho Arab, came to Ndshirwuii for

Succour against the Injustice of Caoaar . . 244

9. The Letter of Shah Nuslhrwan to Csesar of Rtlm . 247

10. How the Letter of Niishirwan reached Coesar and

how he replied 248

11. How Nushirwan went to war with Caesar . . 249

12. How Nushirwan took divers Strongholds in his

March to Riim 254

13. The Battle of Niishirwan with Farfuriyiis, the

Loader of Caesar’s Host, the Victory of Niishir-
wan, and his Capture of Kaliniyiis and Antiikiya 255

14. How Nushirwan built the City of Zib-i-K.husrau in

the Likeness of Antakiya and settled the
Riiman Captives therein 259

15. How Ctesar wrote to Nushirwan and sent Tribute . 261

16. The Birth of Niishzdd, the Son of Nushirwan, by a

Woman who was a Christian .... 263

17. The Sickness of Niishirwan and the Sedition of

Niishziid 265

18. Tho Letter of Niishirwun to Rain Barzin, the

Warden uf the March of Madti’in, respecting
the Taking of NushziUl ..... 267

19. How Ki'un liarziu fought with Niishzad, and how

Niishziid was slain ..... 272


Part H. Tiiu Story B^zurjmthr and of the
Sevion Feahth oe Nushirwan

1. TIow Nushivwiln had a Dream and how Biizurjmihr

interpreted it 28 1

2. The iirst Baiupiet of Niishirwiiii to the Sages, and

tho Counsels of Biizurjmihr .... 287

3. The second Banquet of Niishirwan to Biizurjmihr

and the Archiniages 290

4. The third Jkinquot of Niishirwan to Biizurjmihr

and tho Archimagos 296

5. The fourth Baui(uot of Nushirwiin to Biizurjmihr

and the Archimages 301

6. Tho fifth Jiauquetuf Niishirwan to Biiziirjmilir and

the Archimages 304


CONTENTS


Part II. The Stout oe Bijzuujmihe, etc. (contimied)

SECT. PAUE

7. The sixth Banquet of Niishirwan to Buzurimihr

and the Archimages . . . . . 307

8. The seventh Banquet of Nuslnrwi'm to Biizurjmihr

and the Archimages 312


Part III. The Story of MahbiJd and other

MATTERS

1. The Story of Mahbiid, the Wazir of Niisliirwrui,

and how Mahbud and liis Sons were slain by
the Sorcery of Ziiran and a Jew

2. How the Sorcery of Zurdn and the Jew in the

Matter of Mahbud was discovered, and how
both were slain by Command of Niishirwiln

3. In Praise of the Wisdom of NVishirwan, and how ho

built the City of Sursd,n . . . .

4. The Story of the War of the Khan with Ghiltkar,

the Prince of the Haitalians, the Defeat of
Ghatkar, and how they sot Faghilnish upon the
Throne

5. How NdshirwLin had Tidings of the Battle of the

Khan with the Haitalians and how he led a
Host against the Khan

6. How the Khan had Tidings of the Coming of the

Host of Nushirwan to Gurgiln and wrote a
Letter in the Cause of Peace ....

7. How Nushirwan answered the Letter of the Khan

8. How the Khan bethought himself and wrote oH'er-

ing his Daughter in Marriage to Niisliirwan

9. How Niishirwan answered the Letter, and sent

Mihraii Sitad to see and fetch the Daughter, of
the Khan

10, How the Khan sent his Daughter, escorted by

Mihran, with a Letter and Treasures to
Niishirwiln

11. How the Khan withdrew, and how Niislu'rwiln

marched from Gurgan to Taisafiin ,

12. Discourse on the Justice of Nushirwan and how

Mortals had Peace under his Usages

13, How Biizurjmihr counselled Niishirwiln and dis-

coursed on good Deeds and Words .


318

323

326

328


337

342

345


349

354

358

3^H

366


CONTENTS


Pabt IV. The Introduction of the Game of Chess
INTO IeXn. The Legend of the In-
vention OF the Game. The Discovery
OF THE Book of Kalila and Dimna

SECT.

1. How the Eaja of Hind sent the Game of Chess to

Nhshirwan .

2. How Bi'izurjmihr invented Nard, and how Nushir-

wdn sent it with a Letter to the Eiija of Hind

3. The Story of Gav and Talhand, and the Invention

of Chess

4. How Ni'islnrwaii sent Barzwi, the Leech, to Hindu-

stan tt) fetch a wondrous Drug, and how Barzwi
brought back the Book of Kalila and Dimna .

Index


xiii

PAOE

354

389

394

423

433


THE SHAHNAMA


ABBKEVIATIONS


BLRB,

DZA.

EHI.

EP,

GDF.

GIP.

HS.

JFB.

MHP.

MM.

NIN.


0 . — Macau’s edition of the Shiihntuna


L, — Lumsden’s do.

P.— MohPs do.

T. — Tihrdn do.

V.— Vullei-s’ do.


History of the Lower Roman Empire. By J. B. Jiuvy.

Professor DarmestetBr’s Trans, of the Zaiidavasta in tho
Sacred Bonks of tho East. Roferenco to Farts ' and
pa^es.

The History of India as told by its own Historians. By
Sir H. M. Elliot, K.C.B.

Eastern Persia, an Account of tho Journeys of the
Persian Boundary Commission, 1870^71-72.

The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire. By Edward Gibbon, Esq. ^Vith Notes by
Dean Milman and M. Guizot. Edited, with additional
Notes, by William Smith, LL.D.

Grundriss der Iranisclien Philolof^io . . . von Willi,
Geiger uiid Ernst Kuhn.

Syntagma Dissertationum rpias uliin aucLnr doctissiinns
Thomas Hyde S.T.P. soparatim odidit.

The earliest English version of the Fables of Bidpai . . .
now again edited and induced by J(jseph Jacobs.

History of Persia. By Sir John Malcolm, (J.(bB

Magoudi: Les Prairies d’Or. 'Pexto ot Traduction par
0 . Barbier do Meyiiard ot Pavut de Court eillu.

Das Irauische Nationalepos von Tliot)dor Niildoki'.


^ The second edition of Part 1 is rcfeiTed to unless othcn-wlsc
specified.


XVI


NPS.

NT.

KM.

RSM.

WPT.

ZT.


A BE RE VIA TJONS x vii

Nijldtsko: Porsisclio Studion. IT. Sitzmi^sboriclito der
Kaiacrlichen Akademie der Wissouschaftcn. CXXVl.
Band.

doscliiolito dor I'orser und Araber ziir Zoit der Sasiiiiiden
... von Til. Nrddoke.

The Rauzat-us-nafa ; or, Garden of Purity . . . By . . .
Mirkhond . . . Translated . . . by E. Kehatsek.

The Seventh Ch'Gat Oriental Mmiarehy. Ry Geurge
Kawlinseii, M.A.

Dr. E, W. West’s Translation of the Pahlavi Texts in the
Sacrod Books of the East. Referoueo to Parts and
pilous.

Ohronique do Abou-I)jafar-Mu‘hanuuod-]ien-Djarir-Boii-
Yezid Tabari, tradnite . . . Par M llerinann Zoten-
burg.


NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION


a as in water.’’

{ as in pique.”

'ft as ill “ rude.”
tt as in servant.”

•h as in sin.”

n as in “ foot.”

ai as in “ time.”

an as in ou in cloud.”

g is always hard as in ^dve.”

Jeh as di ill the German “ hucli.”

rj/i as c: in “ azure,”


IV

THE SisANIAN DYNASTY

(Continued)


VOL. VII.


A


XXXV

BAimAM GtR

HE REIGNED SIXTY-THREE YEARS


ARGUMENT

Biilii'i'mi’s ar.cesaion aud inaugural iiiciaftiires. Ilis adventures,
amorous and otlierwise, among his suhjecits. His relations witli
foreign potentates. Hia instructions to liis officials, and remission
of taxation. HLs introduction of tlie Gipsies into Inin, and his
death.


NOTE

Tahi'ilni Ciur (Varahraii Y., a.d. d*20-4r18) is said hy Taharf and
MasTidi to have Ijeen twenty years tdd at the time of his accession.^
According to Taharf lie reigned eitliei* eighteen or twenty-three
years.“ Mas’iulf says the latter.® On the other hand Mfr Klnind,
who tolls us that he followed the most generally received account,
perhaps Firdausi’s own, states that Bahrain reigned sixty-three
years.^ No doulit ])opiilar tradition lovingly prolonged to the
utmost the reign of this Slnlli who, like James V. of Scotland, was a
“ King of the Commons.” The poet was at no loss for material in
thi.s part of his work, and the reign is the most diverting in the
Sliahiiiima. Its interest with regard to the rpiestion of the
provenance of the Arahian Niyhls has been noted already.® .As is
to 1)0 expected in the cireumstanees the subject-matter is largely
legendary, though some authentic features have been preserved, and
there can be little doubt l)ut that BahriUu’s own character as
depicted hy Firdausi is in the main historictally correct. He
Jill (ill eil the promises made hy him when a candidate for the throne,

“ NT, p. 112. ® MM, id.

® »Sce Vol. vi. p, 250.


^ NT, p. 98; MM, ii. 190.

^ RM, Ft. I., Vol. ii. p. 302.


3


4


THE ShAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt

but gave himself up largely to pleasure, though this does not seem
to have impaired his activities at critical moments. He apiiears, too,
to have been fortunate in his administrntors. His chief minister,
Mihr Harsi, who is not to be confounded with Narsi, the Shah’s
brother, and three of his sons were at the head of affairs. One
was the principal, or nearly so, of the official hierarchy, another
was chief superintendent of the taxes, and the third was corn-
man der-in-cliief.^ Mihr Narsi and his father Buraza are stated to
have held office under Yazdagird, Bahrain’s father, and the former
was reappointed chief minister when Yazdagird, Bulirilm’s son,
came to the throne.® He was himself a prince and an Arsacid, so
it would seem that the supplanted family had regained a great
position for itself under the new dispensation, and that the state of
things fully justified the pronouncement put by later legend into
the mouth of Raid.® Bahram Giir began his reign with a persecu-
tion of the Christians, which led to war with the Eastern Homan
Empire. There is a slight allusion to such a war in the poem/ but
the chief incident recorded to have taken place is a pacific oiie.-''

§§ 1 and 2. Bahrtlm devotes the first days of his reign to
carrying out his promises of reform made before bis accession, “
and to the relief of taxation.

§§ 3-16. Wo have here a series of po])ular legends of Bahram’s
adventures when going about unrecognised among various classes
of his subjects,'^ The story of the miser occurs twice.®

§§ 19-22. We have here the story of Bahrain’s moat faiufiiis
exploit, which is historical, though as much cannot he said of the
various details with which poiJiilar appreciation has embellislieil il.
Historically, the foes over wliom Balirdni won his great triiiin])li
were the HaiUUiaiis, or White Huns.® This is clear ou Finlausi’s
own showing wdieii he comes to the reign of Piriiz.'® Later ou
again, in the reign (jf Nilshirwan, ample distinction is made
between the subjects of the Khan of Uliiu and the Hait;ilian.s.'*
In substituting the former for the latter ou this occasion Firdausi
errs in good company. Tabari, Maa’udi, and hi ir Kliand all name
the Turks as the enemy,’® anil sinf*-e they did not I'ome n])on the
scene for another century and more,’® we learn approxiiuatidy the


’ NT, pp. lUd, 108 spq.

® See Vol. vi. pp. 2/36, 267.

® See Vol. vi. p. 406.

® §§ 4 and 15 . 9 C 17 .

See p. 164 .sc^.

’= NT, p. 09; MM, ii. 190;
See Vol. i. p. 20.


® ZT, ii. pp. 122, 127; NT,jip. II.L
* Sen p. 84. Sco p, l(M) ficq.

(If. Vol. vi. ]). 250.

9 See Vol. i. p. 19.

“ Sec }). IJ28 Req.

BM, Ft. T., Vol. ii. p. 957.


BA HR Am GtrR


5

earliest date at wliicli the story of Baliriim’a exploit could Lave
been edited in its existing form. According to the Persian Tabari ^
— the version ada^ited from the original Arabic by Bal’ami, the
minister of the Samtlnid prince Mansur, son of Niih (a.d. 961-976),
about A.D. 9G3 — the Kluin was imt to flight, according to the Arabic “
slain in the battle by Bahrain’s own hand. Both agi'ee that the
Khati'iu, or wife of the Khan, was taken prisoner and sent to serve
in the famfjiis Fire-temple at Shfz, wliither Bahram had gone to
pray for success in his expeilitiun.® According to the Arabic
Tabari, Bahram, as an act of thanksgiving for his victory, relieved
liis subjects of taxation for three years.* This ]>robably is the
popular version of the fact that great reforms in that connexion
were effected during his reign, but they could not have been
justified, one would think, to the extent stated by the amount of
plunder taken from the Plaitfjians, and still less to the extent
described in the Shahmlma, which affirms that he almost reformed
taxation away altogether. It may be added that the various
accounts of Balirdm’s expedition against the Haitillians are in
substantial accord though they differ in detail, e.g. as to how far
the enemy had advanced at the time of the battle, the route that
Bahrsini followed iu his march, and the number of troops that he
took with him.

§ 24. Bahram’s war with the Eastern Roman Empire, in which
he was not very successful, came to an end in a.d. 422, but Firdausi
(§ ID) makes it synchronise with that against the Jrlaitiilians which,
according to the Persian took place five years later. Next

we hear of au envoy sent by Otesar (§§ 19, 23), and then of his be-
lated audience with the Shrih. The points discussed are not the
terms of peace, but certain ‘Miard q[uestions,’^ * and it is only inci-
dentally that the envoy mentions that Riim is ready to pay tribute
to Iran. We have a similar case in the reign of Niishirwitn when
the Rilja of Hind sends the game of chess to that Shah, who
returiiH the compliuieut with the game of nard,’ while iu the next
volume we shall find the disgraced counsellor Buzurjmihr regaining
the favour of the .same Shah by his success in solving another
problem set by Coosar.

§§ 26-38. For instances in the Shahnama of kings going
incognito to visit foreign courts, see Vol. vi. })p. 325, 335. In the
Arabic Tabari, Bahnlm’s motive for visiting Hind is to see whether
by annexing a portion of it he could lighten the taxes of his own


* ZT, ii. 120.

« Soop. 86; ZT, ii. 121; NT, 104.

® ZT, ii. 119. * As to which see p. 102 se.q.


= NT, p. 101.

* NT, 105.

’ See p, 384 aeg.


6


THE ShAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI


subjects.^ Unlike his expedition against the Kliiin of Chin, as
Firdaiisi puts it, and historically against the Haitillians, the one to
Hind appears to be -wholly fabulous. It is given, however, at
length by Tabari and Mir Khand, and mentioned by ]\Ias’uili.2

It will be seen that Balmlin in the course of his well meant eflbrts
to promote the welfare of his subjects does not iind it (|uite so easy
as he expected to make evei'ybody happy by legislation.

§ 39. Professor Hold eke is inclined to consider Bahrain’s im-
portation of Gipsies from Hind to Iran historical.^ The details of
course belong to the province of iiopular legend, but are delight-
fully characteristic of both parties concerned. The Gipsy language
appears to be a debased form of Hindustani. According to JMir
Khand the Gipsies intermarried with the Persians, and the Jats
were said to be their offspring. Conseipicntly nearly every Jat is a
musician.*

§ 40. Firdausi is almost alone in his statement that Bahnim
Gdr died in his bed. The comuioii account is t.hat he was killed
when out hunting by falling into one of the underground water-
courses, so common in Persia, and that his body never was re-
covered. Popular tradition plac.es the scene of his death in a
valley between Shiraz and Ispahan and known as the “ Vale of
Heroes,” where there are numerous springs supposed to be iutev-
communicating and of great depth. Sir John Malcolm states that
one of his escort was drowned in 1810 when bathing in the
identical spring in Avdiich Bahram is said to have perished.'^ Tabari
lays the scene of the accident in Media, and it took place, if it
took place at all, probably not far from Iliiinadaii at a spot
called, according to Dlnawarl, Diii Marj. Nuldeke, however, con-
siders that the whole story was made up to account fur the nick-
name “Gur” bestowed upon Bahrain. The word in question
means both “onager” and “tomb.”® The same collocation of
letters also means a “Fire-worshipper,” and it is possible lliat
some Muhammadan translator from the Pahlavi may have thought
lit to dispatch the guehre to the gi'ave.


1 NT, p. 106.

^ NT, p. 99 note.

® MHP, i. 04 and note.


2 a;. KM, I, ii. 3G0 ; MM,u. 191.
* KM, I, ii. 357.

8 NT, 103 and note.


BAHRAm GtR


7


§ I


How Bahrdm ascended the Throne, charged the Officers^
and wrote Letters to all the Chiefs

Whenas Bahrain Gur sat upon tho throne
The sun acclaimed him while the Shah adored
The Maker — ^thc all-seeing, watchful World-lord,

Tho Lord of victory and majesty, C. 148S

Tho Lord of increase and of loss — ^then said : —

From Him have I received tho throne and crown,

For He hath fashioned fortune, and my hopes
And fears are all in Him. 1 give Him thanks
For all His benefits ; do yo too praise Him,

And strive to keep His covenant unbroken.’’

The Iranians answered : “ Wo are girt for service.

May this crown prove right glorious to the Sh^h,

And may his heart and fortune live for over.”

Their praises done, all scattered gems before him,

Thus said Bahram : “ O chiefs experienced
In daily good and ill ! wo all are slaves.

And God is One, solo-worthy to bo worshipped.

From fear of evil days wc will secure you,

And not expose you to noalignant Need.”

Ho spake. They rose and homagod him anew.

They spent tho night in converse, and at sun-rise
The ShS^h sat peacefully upon his throne,

The fr^nians came to audience, and he said : —

“ Ye chieftains famed and favoured by the stars !

Put wo our trust in God and joy in Him,

Boast not and root out of the world our hearts.”

He spake and then those Glories of his court —

His chiefs — called for their steeds. The Shdh, the
third day,

Sat on the throne, and said : Religious usage


8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Must be observed. We witness to God’s being,

And make our souls familiar with the Faith.

There is a Resurrection, Heaven, and Hell,

And we can not escape from good and ill.

Ascribe not Faith or Imowledge to the man
That doubteth of the Day of Reckoning.’’

The fourth day, donning on the ivory throne
The well-loved crown, he said : “ Men, not my

treasures,

Are my delight. This Wayside Ion I ask not,

And grudge not going, for the other world
Is everlasting and this transitory.^

Abstain from greed and trouble not thyself.”

The fifth day he said thus : I have no joy
In others’ toils for mine aggi‘andisement ;

We toil in quest of jocund Paradise ;

He that hath sown but seed of good is blest.”

The sixtk day said ho to his subjects : “ Never
May we ensue defeat ; we will protect
Our troops from foes and make malignants tremble.”

The seventh day, when he took his seat, he said : —
“ Ye chiefs wise, wary, and experienced !

Since with the vile we practise villainy
We will have conversation with the wise.

Ye that are cold to mo shall faro still worse
Than with my sire, but ye that do my wiU
Must not experience sorrow, pain, and toil.”

The eighth day, when ho took his scat, ho bade
CaU Jaw^wi of those about the court,

And said to him : To every mighty man,

To every chief and clime, indite for mo
A letter couched in just and loving terms.

And say ; ^ Bahrim hath mounted on the throne
With joy — a lord of bounty and of right,

A shunner of all fraud and knavery —

^ Beading with P.


BA HR AM GtlR


9


For ho hath Grace and stature, love and justice :

The Judge all-holy is in all his thoughts.

'' I will accept,” he saitli, “ the obedient,

But fault-condoning maketh faults increase.

I sit upon my glorious father’s throne,

I keep the customs of just Talimtiras/

And treat all justly howsoo’er perverse.

I will be juster than mine ancestors,

And guide you to the Faith — ^that of Zarduhsht,

The prophet — quitting not my fathers’ path.

I put the Faith of old Zarduhsht before mo ;

The way of that true prophet is mine own.

Bo ye all sovereign in your own affairs,

And guard your marches and your loyalty,

Kings of your children and your women-folk :

Blest is the man that is both wise and pure.

If God accord us life and favouring stars
We will not fill our treasury with gold ;

Such treasures keep the poor in travail. Bead
This joyful letter which assuroth you
Of lasting wealth and honour. To all kings
Our greeting, most to those whose warp and woof
Are love.” ’ ”

They sealed the letters and made choice
Of glorious envoys. Archmage, man of lore,

And wary cavalier, those letters boro.


§ 2

How Bahrain 'pardoned the Fault of the frdnians, farewdled
Munzir and Nu^mdn^ and remitted the Irdnians^ Arrears
of Taxes

Next day wlien Sol rose, when the hills bulked large,
And sleep was broken, to Munzir there came
^ For Tahmiiraa see Vol. i. p. 125.


10 THE ShAhnAmA of FIRDAUSf

A panic-stricken throng and said to him : —
c. 1490 Make intercession for us with the Shah
To pardon our offences, for the crimes
Of Yazdagird so wrought us that the blood
Froze in the nobles’ hearts ! So much of foul
In word and deed, iniquity, distress.

And anguish chilled our hearts toward Bahram
Because we suEered so beneath his sire.”

Munzir’s warm pleadings mollified the Shah,

Who being just and noble pardoned aU,

Whatever the fault. Ho decked the imperial palace,
And aU the good and great rcsoited thither.

When they had got the place of majesty
In readiness they seated there the worthy,
hi every place they spread the board and called
For wine and harp and minstrels3^ Next clay
Another crowd assembled, yet the chief
Was wearied not of giving. On the third
There were both revels and festivities,

And grief was banished from the world-ldng’s palace.

He told the offices done by Nu’m4n

And by Munzir — those men of stainless birth —

On his behalf, and all the chiefs acclaimed
Those desert dwellings and those men of war.

The Shah next oped his treasury and filled

His palace with brocade and gold, steeds, trappings,

Mail-coats and scents ^ and gems of every hue.

He, gave all to Nu’mto and to Munzir,

And Jawanwi told o’er to them the gifts.

None matched the Shah in bounty and in travail.
He gave the other Arabs many presents,

So that they left the royal halls, rejoicing.

He then had brought a royal robe of honour,

A steed, and raiment of a paladin ;

These gave they to Khusrau, made much of him,

1 Beading with P.


BA HR Am gur


II


Aiid scaled him upon the glorious tlirone.

Then, turning ffom Kliusrau/ the king o£ kings,

Descending tfum his throne, approached the seat
Where sat Narsi — a xirince, his younger bjnther.

And ojie with him in heart and tongue. He made

Narsi the captain of the liost to sot

The land in order, gave up to Ihs keeping

The liost at large, and ravished all the realm

With bounty, oped the treasury, and paid

Tlie troops who gladdened with dinars. The Shah,

That man of lore, then bade Gushasp, the scribe,

Witli prudent Jawanwi, the chief accountant,

Approach, and ordered tliem to cancel all
Arrears of taxes for the franians.

These two wise scribes went to their registers, o. 1491

And in this matter called in aid Kaiwan
Because he was the export of the day.

And kept the world’s statistics in his breast.

They added up the sum of the arrears,

And found it ninety and a hundred times

Three hundred thousand drachms.^ These he forgave,

And bunit the registers, and all Iran
Rejoiced tliereat. Whenas all folk wore ware
Of that event tluy praised him mightily.

They all flocked to the Fire-fanes, to the halls
Where Now Year’s Day and Sada feast wore kept,

Flung musk upon the Fire and blessed Bahrdm,

The Shah. Thereafter ho dispatched officials
To go about the world. He sought and gathered
Within a certain city all tlie exiles
Of Yazdagird that thus the .monarch’s letter
Might reach those noble Persians, and inquire
Their wislies, sent each chief a robe of honour,

And gave to each a province that befitted
His station. Noble, archimago, and marchlord,

1 /cZ. 2 Cf. p. 215, note.


12 THE SHAHHAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Whoever heard Bahrain’s deliverance,

All visited his court with open hearts,

And blithe of countenance. Ho bade each suitor
Repair to the high priest and, when the world
Had recognised his bidding, ho let stand
A herald at his gate thus to proclaim : —

‘‘Ye subjects of the watchful ShMi ! abstain
From sorrow and from sm, and praise henceforth
Hi m through whose justice earth is prosperous.
Take refuge from the Avorld with God alone,

For He possesseth all and holpeth all.

The man that givoth heed to our comrdand,

Not turning from our path and fealty,

To him will we increase our benefits,

And clear our mind of hate and covetiso ;

But whosoever shunneth what is just
Shall suffer retribution at our hands.

If God hereafter shall vouchsafe us strength.

And matters turn out to our heax‘t’s content,

We will add benefit to benefit,

And ye shall utter praise on our account.”

At these words aU the people of fran
Went full of joy and bright of countenance,

And, as the sovereignty became secure,

Joy waxed and sorrow minished, while the Shah
In feasting, horsemanship upon the Ground,

In sport and polo, full employment found.


§ 3


Eow Bahrain wmi to the House of Lamhah, the Water-
carrier, and hecame his Guest

0. 1492 It happened that Bahr^m Gur went one day
With certain warriors to hunt the lion.


BA HR Am GtrR


All old man, staff in hand, drew near to him,

And said : '' God-fearing Shah ! within our city
There are two men, one rich, the other poor.

Now Baraham, the Jew, a miscreant knave,

Is rich in silver and in gold. Lambak,

The water-carrier, is of noble nature.

Fair-spoken, hospitable.”

So Bahram

Inquired about the two, their words and ways.

A worthy said : “ Lambak, the water-carrier,

0 great, famed, noble king ! is generous,

Doth keep a table, and is well disposed.

He passeth half the day in water-carrying.

The other half in entertaming guests,

And leaveth nothing over for the morrow.

While Baraham is but a barren Jew,

And grasping, and his greed should bo exposed.

He hath drachms, treasure, and dinars, brocades^
And goods of all kinds, but none seeth his bread,
And he is ever wrathful at a guest.” ^

The Shall then bade a herald : Go, proclaim
Before the court : ' To every one concerned :

The water of the water-carrier,

Lambak, is bad to drink.’ ”

He stayed till Sol

Grow pale, then mounted a fleet steed and came.
Like wind, toward the dwelling of Lambak,
Knocked with the ring against the door, and cried
“ A captain of the Iranian host am I,

The night is dark, and I have far to go.

Lc^t me lodge here lo-iiight. I will behave
With hoiiour and discretion.”

Then Lambak,

Pleased with tJu^ voice of one tliat spake so fairly,
Made answer siraight : “ Come in, 0 cavalier !

1 This lino is inserted from P.


14


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And may the king approve thoc. If ten others
Were with thee it were better : each had been
A moon above my head.”

Then Shah Bahram

Dismounted, and Lambak saiv to the steed.

He gladly rubbed it down and haltered it,

Then, when Bahram was seated, ran and brought
A chess-board ^ and made shift to furnish food.

And all things needful, saying : Noble sir !

0 . 1493 Put by the chess-men and begin thy meal.” ^

The eating done, the host in high dehght
Brought out a cup of wine. The Shah was all
Amazement at that feast of his, kind speech,

And cheery mien, passed night there, and at dawn
Woke at the salutation of Lambak,

Who said : “ Thy steed, good sooth, fared iU last

night.

Stay just this one day with me, and if thou
Wouldst have a comrade we will summon one,

And find the needful. Joy with mo one day.”

The king made answer to the water-carrier : —

I have not much on hand to-day.”

Lambak

Departed, taking divers water-skins.

But nobody appeared to buy his Avater.

In dudgeon he put off his vest and, taking
His porter’s knot and bucket in Ins arms,

Went and procured instead at tlio bazar
Meat and dried curds, and in duo course put on
The pot. His guest took note of all his troubh^.
Lambak prepared tlic meal ; tlicy ate and drank.

And had another sitting. All that night
Bahram had wine in liand ; Lambak too loved it.

1 According to the pool’s own showing later on, chess was not intro-
aucod into Persia till the reign of NushSrwan. ,yec t). 384 saa

2 Couplet omitted.


BAHRAM GIJR


IS


When it was day ho hurried to Baliram,

And said : "'Bo merry night and day, and franked
From trouble, grief, and toil. Consort with me
For yet another day, for, know, thy presence
Is life and goods to me.”

Now God forbid

That wo should not bo happy for a third day,”

Bahrani said, while the water-carrier blessed him : —

Be merry in thy heart and mate with fortune.”

He took to the bazar his water-skins
And tackle, which he pledged to some rich man,

Bought what ho needed and returned in haste
Rejoicing to Bahram, and said to him : —

‘‘ Help with tho food, for man must eat.”

Bahram

Took the meat promptly from him, cut it up,

And then proceeded with the cookery.

Wlien they had eaten they took wme and goblet,

And first of all di'ank to the king of kings.

Lambak, wlien they had drunk, prepared for sleep,

And set a candle by Bahram Gur’s couch.

The fourtli day, wlieJi tho sun shone and Bahram Giir
Aw^oke, his liost approached and said : Famed sir !

Thou hast resided in tliis small, dark house,

And doubtless in discomfort ; still if thou c. 1494

Foar’st not the Shah stay in my moan abode
Two se’nights more if so thou hast a mind.”

Then Shah Bahr^im blessed him and said : Live
thou

Tliy years and months in mirth and happiness.

We have been jolly in this house three days,

While quaffing to tho monarchs of tho world,

And elsewhere I will speak a word for thee

That shall make bright tliy heart and plans, for why

Thy hospitality shall yield thee fruit,

And, if thou persovorest, thrones and crowns.”


i6 THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Dust -swift ho put the saddle on his steed,
Departed merrily and sought the chase.

He hunted on till night the hills ’gan ride,
Then lightly from his meiny turned aside.


§ 4


How Bahrdm went to the House of Bardhdm^ the Jew,
who treated him scurvily


He stole away and made toward the liouso
Of barren Bar^h^m, knocked at tho door.

And said: ‘'The Shah hath come back from the
chase.

But I was left behind. ’Tis night and I
Know not the way, can find not SJial\ and escort.

If I may sojourn in this house to-iiigixt
I will not trouble any one.’’

A slave

Went and reported this to Bar^h^m,

Who answered : “ Trouble not thyself horoat,

But say : ‘ Thou wilt not got a lodging hero/ ”

The messenger departed to Bahram Gur,

And said : “ There is no shelter hero for thee.”

Bahram replied : “ Return to him and say :

‘ I mean to stop. I ask tlioe for a lodging
To-night and I will trouble tlioe no furl luu*.’

The servant, hearing this, ran back and said : —

'' This horseman will not budge to-night and saith
As much in many words.”

Said Barahiiin : —

Go instantly and say : ‘ Tliis lioiisi^ is small.

The Jew is very poor and (wery night
Reposeth, bare and hungry, on the. ground.'* ”

They gave tlio message, and Bahram Gur said : —


BAHRAm GtiR


17


“ If here my lodging will prove troublesome
I will not enter but will sleep outside
The door, ’tis aU I want.”

Said Baraham : —

" Brave horseman ! thoughtlessly ^ thou troubles! me,

Were any one to rob thee in thy sloop
I should be plagued enough on thine account.

Como in if thou art in distress and want, i495

But on condition that thou askest naught.

I have not e’en a napkin wherewithal
To wipe my body when ’tis washed at death,

Or shroud wherein to wind it.”

My good sir ! ”

Bahram rejoined, “ I will not trouble thee
In any way. Thy portal will suffice.

I will be watchman, barring bell and cry.”

Then BarS^ham was troubled, and his soul
A brake of cares. Ho thought : “ This saucy fellow
Will not depart. How can I cause him trouble
About his steed '? ” then said again : Groat sir !

Thy many words afflict mo. If thy stood
Shall leave its droppings here and stale or break
The tiles, thou shalt remove its dung at dawn.

Sweep up, bear off its refuse to the plain,

And pay for any breakages at once.”

Bahrd,m replied : I pledge my head to this.”
Dismoimthig from his steed he tethered it
With its own bridle and unsheathed his sword.

Ho spread his saddle-cloth, used as his pillow
The saddle, and reposed upon the floor.

The Jew secured the door, brought victuals forth,

And sat him clown to oat. 0 cavalier ! ”

Ho said, remember, liaving heard, this saw : —

' Who hath may eat and who hath iiot look on.’ ”

He answered : I have lieard so from of old,


VOL. VII.


1 Or “grievously.”


B


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSl


And now T liave beheld made manifest
What thou hast quoted from a sago’s words.”

The Jew brought wine forth and, when satiate
With food and blither for the drinking, bawled : —

0 toilful horseman ! list this ancient saw : —

' He that hath food and purposeth to eat
WiU offer his thanksgiving for the meat.

For one of substance hath a happy mind.

And in his wealth a coat of mail will find ;

But Empty Pockets is a dry -lipped wight,

And, like thee, ravenous at mid of night.’ ”

Bahr 4 m replied : ’Tis passing wonderful
What I have seen, and must not bo forgotten.

And if thy goblet give thee good at last
Then heigh for drinker, wine, and genial cup ! ”
When o’er the mountains Sol displayed its swortl
Bahram Gur shunned more sleep and put the saddle
On his fleet grey. His saddle ! Nay, hard pilloAV.
Came Baraham and said : 0 cavalier !

Thou art not faithful to thy word. Thou saidst : —
0. 1496 ' ^ sweep up the droppings of the steed

At once.’ Away with them as thou didst promise.

I am annoyed by a dishonest guest.”

Bahram Gur answered : Go and fetch a slave.
He will remove the droppings fast enough,^

And I will give him gold for sweeping up,

And bearing off, the refuse to the plain.”

No one have I,” he said, lo sweep up refuse,
Take it away, and fling it in the ditch.

Break not thy promiKses deceitfully ;

Let me not say that thou hast played the knave.”

Bahram Gur, hearing, took another course.

Ho had a dainty handkerchief of silk
Inside his boot, all musk and spicery ;

He took it out and put therein tlie droppings,

^ Reading with R,


BAHRAM GtlR


19


Then flung them all together in the ditch.

Away went Bar4ham and snatched it up
While Sh^h Bahrain stood dazed. '' Oho ! ” said he^
Thou scrupulous ! If the groat king shall hear
Of all thy nobleness he will secure thee
From want in this world, and will set thee high
Among the chiefs.”

He went back to his palace,
And aU night long was planning what to do.

Within his halls thought banished all repose,

He laughed himself but kept the matter close.


Next mom he donned his crown and held an audience,
Then called to him Lambak, the water-carrier.

Who came before him with enfolded arms.

They brought withal and quicldy Baraham,

That curst, malicious Jew. When he arrived
They made him sit and called an honest man,

To whom the Shah said : “ Take some baggage-beasts
And, acting with the utmost honesty,

Go to the house of Baraham forthwith,

And look thou bring what thou find’st hoarded there.”

That honest man went to the Jew’s abode.

The house was all brocade, dmfe, and raiment,

All carpetings, and draperies, and hoards.

There was a caravanserai attached,

And no room too on earth for aU the goods —

Gold, silver, every gem, and, on the top
Of every bag, a lofty diadem.

The archmage’s reckoning failed. Ho called for camels,


20


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


A thousand from the desert of Jahram,

C. 1497 And packed the baggage but much still remained.^
That good man drove apace the caravans,

And, when the bells resounded from the couii-gate,
Went and informed the Shah : As many gems
Are here as hi thy treasury, yet arc left
Two hundred ass-loads ! ”

Thought the Shah, amazed : —
The Jew hath greatly toiled, but to what profit
Since food hath failed him ? ”

Then the Shah, the world-lord,
Bestowed a hundred camel-loads of gold,

Of drachms, of carpets, and things great and small
Upon the water-carrier. Lambak
Departed with his treasures. Then the Shah
Called Baraliam and said to him : 0 thou

Consorting in thy meanness with the dust !

Dost tell mo that thy prophet was long-lived,

And yet bewail life’s superfluities ?

A horseman came and quoted me this saw.

Out of the sayings of the past, which saith : —

‘ Hath will enjoy and Hath not withereth.’

So now withdraw thy grasping hand and watch
Henceforth the enjoyment of the water-carrier.”

Then to that vile Jew of the synagogue
He spake at large of droppings, handkerchief
Gold-woven, and tiles, bestowed upon the knave
Four drachms, and said : “ Take this as capital ;

No more befitteth thee. To mendicants
Thy wealth, to thee thy head.”

He gave the poor

All that there was. The Jew departed wailing.

The Shah gave up the house to plundering ;

’Twas well that other folk should have their fling,

1 Reading with P.

2 If youT prophet managed to live long on little so can you.


bahrAm gvr


21


§ 6

How Bahrain slew Lions and forhade Wine-drinking

He found employment for the hunting cheetah,

Bestirred him and was minded for the chase.

He mounted him upon a speedy steed,

And pricked forth to the plain with hawk on hand.

He found a wood that was a rich man’s scat.

It was as verdurous as Paradise,

And there was neither man nor beast in sight.

He said : ‘‘ Here lions should be found. No man
Of prudence would sleep here.”

He entered in,

And rode about surveying it. He saw

A lion there and that he must employ

The scimitar. He shouted at the beast

And, when it bravely charged him, rode outside

The forest, blazed forth like Azargashasp, C. 1498

Aird, when the lion followed, strung his bow,

A hero ho, shot and transfixed the creature
Through side and heart ; that of the lioness
Grew all a-flamo, and she too charged Bahrdm,

Roared out and clawed at him. The cavalier
Smoto with his sword her loins, and that brave beast
Gave up the fight. Now in the wood there dwelt
A country magnate, a God-fearmg man.

Whose name was Mihr Bfdad. That sword-stroke
charmed him.

With sweet words on his tongue that old man left
The wood, drew near the Sh^h, blessed him, did
reverence,

And said : 0 famous chief ! may fortune’s star

Be at thy beck. A rural chief am I,

0 holy one ! and owner of this march,


32 THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

This tilth, and mansion, ox and ass and sheep.

Those lions caused me sorrow and despair ;

Now by thy hand, thy thumb-ring, and thy hilt
God hath removed them. Tarry in our wood,^

And I will bring thee milk and wine and honey.

I have as many lambs as thou canst want
With trees fruit -laden that will furnish shade.''

The Shah alighted and surveyed the forest ;

He found it verdurous, supplied with streams,

And fitted for a young man’s dwelling-place.

Then Mihr Bidad went and fetched minstrelsy
As well as divers of the village-chiefs.

He slaughtered numbers of fat sheep and came.

Gold cup in hand. When they had eaten bread
The servants set on cups of wine with roses
And fenugreek. The host quailed one and gave
Another to Bahrain and took all pains
To set him at his ease. When Mihr Bidad
Grew bhthe with wine he said : Fair-fortunod hero !
Thou favourest the Shah or the full moon
At midnight.”

Said Bahr^m : Yea, that is so ;

The King of kings designed this face of mine.

He maketh as Ho willeth, waxing not
Nor waning, but if I am like the Shah
Then I have given thee this seat and forest.”

This said, he mounted, sought his pleasure-palace,
Bemused, but sleepless in the garth all night
Romanced about the lips of the beloved.

C. 1499 Next morn he took his seat and called for wine.

The captains of tho host approached rejoicing,

And with the others came a noble man
Who from his village brought a gift of fruit —
Pomegranate, apple, quince, in camel-loads.

And posies fashioned for imperial use.

^ Beading with V.


BAHRAM GBR


23


The world-lordj seeing him, saluted him,

And seated him among the paladins.

The lord that brought the posies and the fruit
Bore in the olden tongue the name Kirwi.

While he was joying to behold the Shah,

The nobles, and the banquet-hall, ho spied
A crystal goblet filled with wine which proved
His ruin. Reaching out among the lords
He grasped it, rose, and drank “ The king of kings !
Then cried : A toper I, my name Kirwi.

Since in the presence of the king of kings
I drain the goblet I will drain again.’’

This said, he drained the goblet seven times,

And distanced all the other revellers.

Then by the Shah’s permission he departed
To learn if he could bear off all that wine.

He left the jovial city for the plain,

And when the wine was warm within his breast
He galloped from among his retinue
Toward the hills, dismounted, chose him out
A quiet, shady spot, and slumbered. Came
A black crow from the mountains and pecked out
His eyes ! His escort following found him dead
And eyeless with his roadster by his side.

And wailed o’er him and at such revelry.

Now when Bahram had wakened in his chamber
A courtier came to him, and said : A crow
Hath pecked out both Kirwi’s bright eyes while he
Was lying drunk among the hills.”

The world-lord

Grew pale of cheek thereat and sorrowful,

And from the palace proclamation issued : —

Ye men of name endowed with Grace and sense !
Wine is a thing forbidden in the world
Alike to paladin and artisan.”

Thus passed a year while all held wine forbidden


24 THE SH^HNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

E’en when the Shah himself held revelry,
Or called for tales from old time legendry.


§ 7


The Story of the young Shoemaher, and how Bahrdm
allowed Wine again


1500 Now at that time a young shoemaker wedded
A virtuous wife, rich and of good repute,

But failed in nuptial duty, and his mother
Lamented bitterly his grievous case.

Howbeit she had some wine in store. She took
Her son to her own house and bade the youth : —
Drink seven cups to hearten thee. Perchance
Thou mayest break this stubboiii seal to-night.

How can a woollen mattock mine in stone ? ”

He quaffed cups seven or eight, and verily
His feet and hide waxed strong. The cups had made
The young man confident ; he came, achieved
His purpose, and then went back to his mother
In high delight thereat, and thus it chanced :

A lion of the Shah’s had broken loose.

And came along the road. Now at the time
The shoemaker was still in drink — a sea
That made his fingers thumbs. Ho ran, bestrode
The roaring lion, and then reaching out
He clutched its ears. The lion had bccji fed ;

The youth maintained his seat. Post-haste tlie keeper
Came running after them, a cluiin in one hand,

A lasso in the other. He behold
A shoemaker upon the lion’s back,

Perched there like some bold rider on an ass,

Ban to the palacc-gatc, caino unabashed
Before the Shah, and told about the wonder


BA HR Am gj^^r


25


That he had sociij with his own eyes, and none
Beside had hoard. The world-lord all amazed
Called the high priest and chiefs, and bade the former:-
‘‘ See what the stock of this shoemaker is.

If he shall prove a paladin by birth
’Tis well, for courage fitteth paladins.”

They sought and asked his mother : “ Is his rank
Above his station ”

When the talk grow long
She hurried to the Shah and told him all,

First doing her obeisance and exclaiming : —

“ Live happily till time shall be no more.

This youth, who had not come to man’s estate,

Must take himself a partner and keep house.

And then prove impotent ! His wife, she said : —

' This weakling was self-sown ! ’ All privily
I gave to him three cups of wine, and none
In all the world was ware thereof. Forthwith
It flushed his cheeks and made a man of him.

Three cups of wine are his nobility ;

Who could imagine that the ShMi would wish
To hear thereof ? Shoemaker was liis granddad,
And so is ho, and not by birth above
His trade.”

The Shah smiled on the crone, and said :■
This is no tale to hide.”

He thus addressed

The archmago : ” Wine is now permissible,

And wo should drink thereof to his extent
Who in liis cups still can bestride a lion,

And not bo overthrown, but not to his .

Who lieth all dead-drunk upon the road
What while some black crow pecketh out his eyes.”
A proclamation wont up from the gate : —

0 paladins who wear the golden girdle !

Drink wine in moderation, all of you !


0. 1501


26


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


Considering the end when ye begin,

And when the wine hath led you to delight
Then go to sleep but not in helpless pligM.”


§ 8

How Ruzhihj BahrdrrCs High Priest, ruined a Village
hy a Stratagem and restored it

The third day at the dawn the Shah wont forth,

He and his men, to hunt upon the plain ;

Hurmuz, his minister, was on his loft,

And on his right the holy archimage.

They told him talcs, discoursing of Jamsliid
And Faridun.^ Before them were the hounds,

The cheetahs, hawks, and falcons. Thus they shortened
The tedious day. Bright Sol was high, but still
They saw no trace of deer or onager,

And so Bahram Gur, troubled by the heat,

Turned back in dudgeon from the hunting-field.

He came upon a verdurous spot fulfilled
With houses, men, and cattle. Many folk
Came from the settlement to see the troops,

But no man did obeisance ! Thou hadst said : —

The earth hath tethered every ass of them ! ”

The monarch, vexed and overcome by heat.

Had fixed upon that village for a lialt.

Its folk disgusted him, ho viewed them not
With favour, and in anger thus addressed
The high priest : “ What an ill-starred spot is this !
Be it a lair for wild beasts and for game,

And may its streams rim pitch.'’

The archimage,

Who took this for an order, turned aside
^ Soo Vol. i. pp. 129 seq, U7 aaq.


BAHRJM GtR


27


Toward the village and informed the folk : —

This verdant spot — all fruitage, men, and cattle —
Hath greatly pleased Bahram, the king of longs,
Who hath a new design respecting it.

He raiseth all of you to noble rank
To turn this pleasant village to a city.

Here, lord and hireling, ye shall be all equal.

Men, women, children, ye shall bo all chiefs.

Each of you be the master of the village.”

Glad shouts rose from that prosperous settlement
Because the people were all lords alike.

Thenceforth, man’s redo or woman’s, ’twas all one,
And slave and hireling were their master’s peers.
The village-youths, no longer checked by awe,

Cut off their elders’ heads, then fell upon

Each other and, where roads wore not, shed blood.

At that to-do folk fled incontinent.

The helpless aged remained, but there remained not
The implements of culture, goods, and crops.

The settlement had ruin in its face.

The trees wore withered and the streams ran dry,
The land and houses wore all desolate.

And shunned of man and beast. Now when a year
Had passed and spring returned the monarch went
A-hunting in those parts and reached that spot
Erst populous and blithe, and saw the place
O’erturned, trees withered, habitations waste,

And not a man or beast throughout the march.
Thereat the Sh&h turned pale, the fear of God
Came on him, he was grievously distressed,

And thus addressed the archmage : 0 Ruzbih !

Alack ! this place so jocund once is ruined !

Go to now and restore it with my treasures,

And take such order that the folk henceforth
Be scathless.”


0. 1502


Going from the royal presence


28


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


The archmage sped forth to that scone of ruin.

From street to street he hurried and at last
Came on an old man unemployed. Dismounting
He spake the elder fair, made him sit down
Near by, and said to him : “ Old, honoured sir !

Who wrecked this district once so populous ? ”

The old man answered thus : Our monarch once
Was passing through our parts, and thereupon
There came to us a witless archimago.

One of those useless people with big names,

And said to us : ' Ye all are chieftains here :

See that ye pay respect to nobody.

Be masters, all of you, both men and women,

And great among the great.’ Such were liis words,

0. 1503 And all the towmship was comoilsed thereat,

All rapine, murder, stick ! May God befriend him
In like proportion, may grief, death, and hardship
Ne’er stale with him. Our case is gi*owing worse,

And such that folk must weep for us.”

Ruzbih,

Grieved for that old man, asked : Wlio is your

chief ? ”

The other answered : “ Who will have a place
Where there is naught excepting seed and grass ? ”
Ruzbili replied : ‘‘ Be thou the governor.

Be as the cro^vll upon the head in all things,

Make requisition from the world-lord’s treasures
For money, oxen, asses, grain, and produce ;

Bring to the village all the unemployed ;

They all are subjects, thou alone art chief,

And curse no more the ancient archimage,

Who spake not as he would in what ho said.

If thou wilt have assistants from the court
I will dispatch them. Ask for what thou wilt.”

The elder joyed to hear this and was freed
From longsome grief. Ho hied him home forthwith,


BA HR Am GVR


29


Brouglit others to his Cistern and bc^gan
To people and apportion out the lands.

They borrowed from tlieir neighbours ox and ass,

And furnished all the plain. Ho and his settlers
Worked hard and planted many trees on all sides,

And, when his labour had restored one piece,

The hearts of those that dwelt tlKU’em rejoiced.

Those that had fled, their heart’s blood in their eyes,

Flocked back on hearing of that restoration,

And of the toils of that white-headed chief,

And reinstated street and water-course.

While fowl, ox, ass, and sheep all multiplied
Upon the cultured parts, and everywhere
Folk planted trees till that waste spot became
Like Paradise. The third year he restored
The town : the chief was blessed in all his labours.

When jocund spring came round the Sh^h wont forth
Upon the plain a-hunting with Rtizbih,

The high priest. When the pair drew near the hamlet
Bahrain Gur suddenly beheld the world
All crops and cattle, lofty mansions rose,

And all the township thronged with sheep and oxen.

’Twas all streams, pleasaucos, and growing crops,

And fenugreek and tulips filled the hills,

Whereon roamed sheep and lambs, for hilhand dale

Had grown to bo a paradise. The Shah

Said to tlie high priest : "0 Ruzbili ! what didst thou 0. 1504

To make this verdant village waste and scatter

Its men and boasts, and what hast thou dispensed

In thus restoring it ? ’’

The high priest answered ; —

This ancient scat was ruined by a word.

And by a word restored, to please the Shah.

Ho bade mo ; ' Take thou treasure and dinars,

And make this verdant spot a wilderness,’

But I feared God and blame from groat and small.


30 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

When friends, though ono m heart, are two in aim
’Tis ruin, as I have perceived, to both ;

So when there are two rulers in a state
Their land will be o’erturiied. I went and said
Thus to the elders of this settlement : —

‘ 0 men ! there is no ruler over you

Trom this time forth, but women, children, slaves,

Hirelings and husbandmen, arc lords ahke.’

Wlien those who had been underlings became
Lords too the nobles’ heads were all brought low,

And all the place was ruined by a word.

Thus was I far removed from all reproach.

And apprehension of God’s chastisement.

Thereafter, when the Shah had ruth on them,

I went and pointed out another course ;

I made a wise, old man and eloquent,

A man of leading and informed, the ruler.

He laboured and restored the waste, rejoicing

His subjects’ hearts. When one man ruled, the counsel

Was good, prosperity increased, ill waned.

I, unobserved, had shown them what was bad,

And opened afterward the way of God.

Discourse is better than fine-watered gems
When ’tis employed aright. Lot wisdom bo
The Sh4h, the tongue the paladin, if thou
Wouldst have thy spirit easy. May thy heart
Be glad for aye and free from wile and waste.”

The Shah, on hearing, cried : “ Well done, Kuzbih !
Thou’rt worthy of a crown ! ”

Baliram Gur gave

That old man worshipful and prescient
A purse all filled with gold dinars. For him
A robe of honour too they fashioned
Of royal stuffs, and cloud-ward raised his head.


BA HR Am GIJR


31


§ 9

Row Bahrdm married a C ountry -miller^ s Daughters

Another week the monarch of the world
Went forth to hunt with lords and archimages,

Prepared to spend a month upon the chaso,

To revel with his ineiny, and to take
Illimitable game on waste and mountain. i

He and his escort readied in merry pin
A town. The night came on, and all was dark.

The chiefs dismissed the escort and recited
Tales of the Shahs. He saw afar a fire,

Such as Sh4hs Ivindlo on Bahman’s high day.^

The Idng of kings gazed at the light and spied
A pleasant village with a mill before it.

Where sat the viUage-chiofs, while all the maidens,
Each with a crown of roses on her head,

Were feasting by themselves beside the fire.

The minstrels sat about, the maidens sang
Tales of tho royal wars, and every one
Began to tell a story in her turn.

They all w^ere moon-faced, all had looks a-curl,

All were sweet-spoken, and all savoured musk.

They sat ranked on the gi*ass and close before
The mill-door, singing, with a posy each,

And half bemused with wine and merriment.

Then from that scone of revel rose a cry,

And one exclaimed : The toast of Shah Bahrdm !

Ho hath Grace, stature, mien, and love. Before him
The rolling sphere upstandoth. Thou wouldst say : —

' His face distillcth wine, the scent of musk
Proccedeth from his hair,’ Ho only himteth
The lion and the onager, and so
Folk title him ' Bahram Gtir.’ ”

This ho heard,

^ The day Bahman of tho month Bahman was a time of festivity.


J. 1505


32


THE SHIhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


And rode toward them. Drawing near the girls
He scanned the plain, behold it filled with Moons,
And Saw that ho should stop short of the city.

He bade, and from tho road cup-bearers canio,
Provided wine and boon-companions,

And handed him a crystal cup. Meaiwhilc
Four of the girls, those chief in rank, came forth —
One Mushkinab/ the otheis Mushldnak,

Naztab, and Susanak. With chocks like spring,
With stately mien, and hand in hand, they wont
Before the Shah and sang about Bahram,

The king of kmgs, the wise and prosperous.

Bahram Gtir asked, for they perturbed his heart : —
“ Who are ye,^ rose-chooked ? Wherefore is this fh’o?

One said : '' 0 cavalier of cypress-height,

So like a king in evorything ! our father
0. 1506 Is an old miller who is shooting game

Upon this mountain and whl come anon
Since it is night, and he can see no longer.”

With that the miller and his men came bringing
Their quarry. When his eyes fell on Bahram Ghr
He rubbed his face upon the dust and bare him
With awe and reverence. The Sh^h bade give
That old man just arrived a golden cup,

And said to him : '' Why keepost thou these four
With sunny faces thus ? Ts it not time
For them to wed ? ”

Tho old man oderod praise.
And said : There is no husband for them ; they
Are maidens still and pure in chastity,

But that is all the property they have,

And this is all that I catr say for them.”


1 Mushkindz in 0 . and P. Miishkindb means Pure Musk’" ; Musli-
kinak is a spcoics of l>ird ; Naztab is “ Charmer,” and SUsanak “ Little
Lily.”

2 Reading with P.


BAHRAM GtfR


33


Bahrain said : '' Give me all the four, and henceforth
Regard them not as daughters.”

Quoth the ancient : —

Do not as thou hast said, 0 cavalier !

No cups have we, no land, no crops, no silver,

No mansion, ox, and ass.”

Bahram Gur said : —

’Tis well, for I would have them portionless.”

The miller said : The four shall be thy wives,

The handmaids of the dust within thy chambers.

Thine eye hath seen their good points and their ill,

And, seeing, hath approved.”

Bahrain Gtir said : —

From holy God, the All-giver, I accept them.”

He spake and rose. Steeds neighed upon the plain.

He bade the eunuchs of his escort bear
Those Idols to the royal women’s house,

And through the night the troops filed o’er the waste.

The miller marvelled, mused aU night, and said
Thus to his wife : This moon-like lord so tall
And masterful, how came he here by night ? ”

She answered : "‘He perceived the fire from far,

The noise the girls wore making, and the sound
Of minstrels, harp, and revelry.”

The miller

Said to his wife : “ Advise me, 0 my spouse !

If this affair will turn out well or ill 1 ”

She ansAvered : “ It is all God’s providence.

The man, on seeing them, asked not their race.

Thought not of dowry. On earth’s face ho sought
For Moons and not for money or kings’ daughters.

If idol-wor shippers saw these in Cliia
There would be no more idol-worshipping ! ”

Thus tiU above the Raven’s back the sun 1507

Rose, and the Avorld groAv like a shining lamp.

They talked at largo of base and upright men,

VOL. VII.


0


34


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


But with the day the village-chief arrived,

And said to that old man : '' 0 brave of luck ! ^

Good fortune visited thy couch last night !

The verdant branches of thy tree bear fruit.

One looked, beheld the merriment and fii'e.

And, having tuined his horse about, drew near ;

So now thy daughters have become his wives,

And rest securely in his women’s house.

By giving them such faces, hair, and carriage
Thou didst prepare them for the Sh4h ! Bahram,
The king of kings, is now thy son-in-law !

Henceforth thou wilt bo famous through the realm.
He hath bestowed upon thee all this provmce
And march, so sorrow not, for thou hast ’scaped
From cares and fears. Command. ’Tis thine to bid.
We all of us arc thralls and bound bo thee ;

We all of us arc subject to thee now,

Are subject ! Bather we are all thy slaves.”

The miller and his wife in their amaze
Invoked God’s name. The vdlago-chioftain said : —

‘‘ Such locks as those and countenances too
Would bring the sun from his fourth heaven to woo.”


§ 10

How Bahram found the Treasures of Jamshid and
bestowed them upon the Poor

Another week he went forth to the chase
With favourites from the host and archimages.
Swift as the wind there came a loyal diege
With spade in hand and asking of the troops
Wliere was Bahram, the Shah, amid the throng ?
An archimage rephed : “ What wilt thou ? Speak.

^ “ 0 vaillant nouzbeli.” Molil.


BA HR Am GtfR


35


Thou canst not see the monarch of the world.” ^

The man said : ” Since I may see not his face
I will speak not before his followers.”

They brought before the Shah that seeker — one
Both learned and eloquent — who seeing him
Said : ” I have words to speak to thee in private,”

Bahram Gur turned his horse’s head aside.

And rode some distance from his followers’ sight.

Then said the man : '‘0 world -possessing Shah !

Thou must observe my words. A countryman
Am I, and landlord here. I own the soil,

The homestead, and the crops, I was engaged

In making water-courses on my land

To benefit my property, and when

There was much water, and the stream ran strong.

In one place there was formed an orifice,

A wondrous clamour reached mine ears, and I C. 1508

Came crying out in terror of my life.

The ylash of cymbals issued from the stream —

A sound denoting treasure.” ^

Hearhig this

Bahram Gur went and saw a plain all verdure,

And watered, bade bring labourers with spades
From far, and lighted frono. his steed. They pitched
His tent among the crops. Night came. The warriors
Lit lamps and everywhere enkindled fires.

Now when the sun sot up above the deep
Its banner, burnishing the violet air,

The workmen mustered from all sides, as though
A mighty army, and began to dig.

That portion of the plain was excavate,

And, as the workers wearied, there appeared
Out of the dust a mount-like place — ^a mansion
Of mortar and burnt brick — ^lilco Paradise.

They plied their picks ; far down a doorway showed,

1 Reading with P. ® Cf. Vol. vi. p. 250.


36 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

An arcliinage; seeing, entered by the door,

He and another uninvited guest.

They found a single chamber long and wide,

And many cubits high. Within it stood
Two buffaloes of gold and, fronting them,

A golden laver strewn with emeralds
And rubies mixed. They seemed two Signs of Taurus,
Were hollow, and were filled up with pomegranates,
With apples, and with quinces that contained
Fine-watered pearls, each like a water-drop.

The buffaloes had jewel-eyes, and heads
Decayed with age. Ranked round them there were
lions

And onagers, some having ruby eyes,

And others crystal. There were golden pheasants
And peacocks, with their breasts and eyes all gems.
The minister, whose wisdom was a crown
Upon the moon, on seeing that spectacle.

Went to the Shah and cried excitedly : —

Arise. Enough to dower thy treasuries
Is here ! A chamber filled with precious stones
Is manifest, whose key high heaven hath kept ! ”

His lord said : One of counsel and of might
Would write his name upon his treasures. See
Whose name is there and when they were amassed.

On hearing this the high priest went and saw
The impress of the signet of Jamshid
Upon the buffaloes, and notified
The monarch of the world : I have beheld,

And ' SVah Jamshid " is on the buffaloes.”

0. 1509 The Shah said : “0 high priest in all regards

More learned than sages ! wherefore make mine own
The treasures that Jamshid laid up of yore ?

May nothing o’er be added to my wealth
Unless by justice and the scimitar.

Bestow the whole upon the poor. God grant


BAHRAM G^R


That no mishap befall ns. For my troops
No share is requisite, our valour openeth
The earth to us. As is the use of kings
’Tis needful that we count up all this wealth,

Sell all the gems for cash, and then assemble
From desert and from settlement the widows,

The orphans, and the impoverished men of name —
Those lost to aspiration, fame, and ease —

Then take the sum of such, includmg those
That, troubled by their debts, should have a share,
And give to them the money and the goods
To assoil Jamshid the world-lord’s soul, but I
Am youthful still, and sound in wind and limb ;
Why should I seek his treasures ? Let one tenth -
Be for the jfinder, who sought out the Shah,

But never let him hope for joy hereafter
That beareth off the cerecloth from Jamshid.

To compass toil in consort with my troops.

And treasure and renown from Rum and Chin,

That is for me and for my steed, Shabdiz,

And for my trenchant scimitar. No shifts.

Or shirks, for mo ! ”

He wont back to the treasure
Won by his sweat and toil, assembled all
The warriors of the realm, and gave his troops
A whole year’s pay. He held a feast that spring,
Adorned his hall of jewelled tracery,

And, when the red wine shone m crystal cups,

And he himself was jocund and right glad,

He thus harangued his friends : Exalted ones.
Who know the token of the throne of kings !

Down from Hushang as far as famed Naudar,

Who was a memory of Faridun,

And on again right up to Elai Kub^,

Who placed the crown of greatness on his head,

See who of all these mighty men is left,


38 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

And who remaincth to applaud their justice ?

Now, since the circle of their years is cut,

Their reputation is their monument,

Which saith that this had spirit, that had not,

And one doth blame them, and another praise.

We all shall pass in turn, and not to walk
C. 1510 The world for ill is well. Why should I need

The treasure of those gone Why should my heart
Expand toward dinars ? I will not set it
Upon this Wayside Inn, or make my boast
Of crown, or clutch at treasure. If the days
Pass in delight why should the wise cat grief ?
Whene’er a liege of mine, a countryman
Or courtier, shall complain of mine oppression
Then may my head and crown and treasure perish.”

There was an ancient man, hight Mahiyar,

Whose years had reached eight score and tour. He
rose,

On hearing this, and spake thus : 0 just lord !

Tales have we heard of Earidiin, Jamshid,

And others more or less renowned, but none
Hath heard of Sh 4 h like thee — ^the lowly’s hope.

The Glory of the great — and were the sea
Large as thy heart ’twould rise in waves of gems,

For from thy soul the radiance of Surush
Proceedeth, dwarfing all a wise man’s wit.

Thou hast so lavished treasure in the world
That no one great or small hath seen the like.

When men spake of the era of Jamshid,

And of the treasure of the buffaloes,

None wotted where it was — beneath the dust,

Or in the dragon’s breath — ^but having found it
Thou didst not look thereon, for thou didst scorn
This Wayside Hostelry. Good sooth ! no king
Hath seen, nor will a hundred see, such jewels
As these in any sea, yet these and all


bahrJm gur


39


The buffaloes and onagers thou gavest
Without exception to the poor ! May crown
And girdle never lack thee. Health bo thine,
Be victor thou and fortune’s favourite.

The ink would blacken many a royal roll
To tell this tale and yet not reach the end.
Thou being gone thy name will live in praise
When folk recount the story of thy days.”


§ II


How Bahrdm, returning from Hunting, went to the House
of a Merchant and departed displeased

One day, another week, he wont to hunt.

When indisposed, and took his bow and arrows.

The plain grew sultry with the blazing sun.

He came back from his hunting leisurely,

And reached a merchant’s house, to whom he said,

On looking round and seeing none beside ;

Caiisb give us lodging since thou wilt not find us
A trouble ? ”

Having helped him to dismount 0. 1511

The merchant found a place for him. The Shah,
Complaining of the colic, gave the merchant
Some drachms, and said : Toast some old cheese

with almonds.”

The merchant did not do as he was asked,

Not having almonds by him, but, at night-fall
And at his leisure, got a hot roast fowl,

And served it to BahrjJtm upon a tray,

Who said : “I asked thee for old cheese, besought thee
To bring it, and thou hast not brought it me
Although I gave thee drachms and had complained
Of colic.”

Said the merchant : '' Foohsh fellow I


40


THE SHAhnAma of FIRDAUSI


Thy soul is starving through thy lack of wit.

Since I have brought to thee this hot roast fowl
Mere shame should stay thoc asking aught beside.”

Baliram thereat ceased longing for old cheese.
Grieved at his words ho ate, reforrmg not
To what had passed. When it was sleeping-time
He slept and said naught further to the merchant.

Now when the sun rose o’er the hoavmg deep,

And when the Cloak pitch-hued had disappeared,

The wealthy merchant said to his apprentice : —

0 simpleton ! why didst tiiou buy a fowl
Not worth a drachm for more and wrong mo so ?
Had’t been a proper fowl then he and I
Had fallen not out last night, or hadst thou spent
A quarter of a drachm in buying cheese
He would have been to mo like milk and water
To-day.”

The apprentice answered : ‘‘ ’Tis all one.
Know that the fowl is at my charge. Be thou
And he my guests, so quarrel not with mo
About the bird,”

Now when Bahr4m arose
From pleasant sleep he sought his docile steed
To saddle it and go back to his palace,

And from his palace raise his crown to Saturn.

The apprentice, seeing him, said to Bahram : —

'' Give to thy slave thy company to-day.”

The Sh4h returned, sat down again, and mar*
veiled

At fortune. Then the youth wont out and fetched
Two hundred almonds and addressed his master : —
Bestir thee, sir ! and have these almonds toasted,
Make ready too some cheese and some new bread,

For such the cavalier asked yesterday,

Bring food and spread the board.”


Ho went before


41


BAHRAm GtR

Bahrain and said : 0 cavalier ! I bring thee

All hot what yesterday thou didst require, C. 1512

And there is more to follow in due course/'

Thus saying he set off to the bazar,

A different sort of purchaser. He bought
More almonds, sugar, fowl, and lamb to make
An ample meal, wine, saffron, musk, rose-water,

And hurried home. He brought the board all spread
With dainty meats. A sprightly youth was he
And well disposed. The eating done, he brought
Forth cups of wine, first serving king Bahram,

And thus, till blithe and jocund, they proceeded
From eating to the cup. The Shah addressed
His entertainer thus : “ Bahram will be
Inquiring for me, but do ye drink on,

Grow drunk, and budge not till ye prove yourselves
Wine-worshi pper s . "

Then rubbing down and saddfing
Shabdiz he started, bhthe with wine, for court.

First saymg to the merchant : '' Toil not so
111 quest of gain, O thou that sellcst dear !

Thou wouldst have sold me for a quarter drachm
Yestreen, sewn up the eyes of thine apprentice
Because he bought a fowl above the price.

And have put me within the dragon's maw."

He spake and sped back to his royal seat.

Now when the sun displayed its crown in heaven
The guardian of the world sat on his throne
Of ivory and bade the chamberlain
Seek out the merchant and conduct him thither
With his apprentice. One of them was glad,

The other glum. Bahr&m, on seeing the apprentice,

Made much of him and seated him rejoicing
Among the lords. They brought to him a purse.

And made his awe-gloomed spirit like the moon.

Then to the merchant said Bahrtoi : “ Know this :


42 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Thou shalt be slave for life to thine apprentice,

And, further, pay him twice in every month
Three score ' drachms from thy savmgs. With thy
goods

He shall be entertainer and make laugh
The hearts of noble men.”

Then to the high priest : —
'' The king that disregardoth this world’s doings,

How can he know what man is truly groat.

Or how discern the evil from the good ? ” ^

So now, 0 sago that seekest wisdom’s way !

If thou must have a saw hear wliat I say : —

Avoid all avarice if man thou be.

Or be indeed below humanity.”


§ 12


How Bahrdm slew a Dragon and went to a YoJceVs Home

0. 1513 Bahr4m abode a season with his lords,

With sparkling wine, with cup, and minstrelsy.

Spring came, the ground seemed Paradise, the air
Sowed tulips on earth’s face, all tracts grew full
Of game, and in the brooks the waters seemed
Like wine and milk. The deer and onager
Paced in the dales or clustered on tlie sward,

The blackbirds haunted all the rivcr-l^anks,

And all around them bent pomegranate-blooms.

“ ’Tis long,” the nobles said to Shah Bahrain Gur,
Since we have hunted onager.”

Ho auswca’cd : —

“ Choose we a thousand horsemen from the host,

And let thorn bring the cheetahs and the hawks,


^ In 0 the next section begins hero. Wo follow the arrangement in P*


bahrAm gur


43


The falcons and the noble peregrines,

Go to Tuian and pass a month in hunting.”

The royal hunter went. He found the world
All hues and scent. His gallant chieftains swept it
For onager, gazelle, and niountain-sheop —

A labour that extended o’er two days —

What while Bahrain had wine in hand ; the third.
When Sol illumed its crowm, when earth grow golden,
And hill and stream became as ivory,

The valiant Shah went to the chase and saw
A dragon like a lion. From its head
Hair hung down to the ground, and it had breasts
Like those of women. Then Bahrain Gur strung
His bow and shot forthwith a jioplar arrow
Against the dragon's chest. He shot another
Straight at its head, and gore and venom flowed
Adown its front. The king dismounted, drew
His sword, and carved up all the dragon's breast.

It had gulped down a youth and frozen him
In blood and bane. Bahrain bewailed him sorely
What while the venom blinded his own eyes.

He took the corpse out of the dragon's maw,

Ne'er may its head and breast unite again.

He rode off dizzied, suffering, and longing
For sleep and water, reached a settlement,

Arriving at a house-door from the waste,

And saw a woman shouldering a pitcher.

She veiled lier face from him. He said to her : —

Can I lodge here or must I toil on still ? ”

She said : “ Brave liorsemau ! treat this house as
thine.”

On hearing this ho rode his courser in.

His hostess called her husband. “ Bring a wisp,”

She said, '' and rub his stood. At feeding-time
Feed from the sack.”


She went to her own chamber, 0. 1514


44


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Swopt out the house and laid down mat and pillow,
With blessings on Bahram, went to the cistern,

Drew water, and berated to herself

Her spouse the while : '' The fool will ne’er bestir

Himself on seeing some one in the house.

This is not women’s work, but for my part
I, soldier-liko, can only grin and bear it ! ”

She brought and spread the board with vinegar
And salad, bread and curds. Went Shah Bahram,
And bathed his face, for he had been o’erwrought
In fighting with that dragon. So ho ate
A little, then lay down and groaned, his face
Concealed beneath a kerchief made in Chin.

The woman, when she woke, said to her spouse : —

0 knave with unwashed face ! thou shouldest slay
A lamb because this cavalier is great,

And of the royal seed, hath kingly bearing,

And moon -like Grace, and he is like to none
Save Shah Bahram.”

Her mean spouse said to her : —
“ Why such to-do ? Thou hast no salted meat,

No fire-wood, and no bread, and spinnest not
A-nights as others do. When thou hast killed
A lamb, and he — ^this cavalier — ^hath eaten
And gone, then go, buy, mingle with the throng ;

The winter, cold, and blast undoubtedly
Will come on thee no less.”

So spake her spouse.

She hearkened not, for she was good and wise.

And in the end her husband slew a lamb
At her entreaty for the cavalier.

When it was slain she made a pot of broth,

And lit a fire with half -burnt sticks, then brought
The tray with eggs thereon and water-cresses,

A roasted leg of lamb and everything

That she had cooked. Bahram, when he had washed


BAHRAM GtR


'45


His hands, his dinner done, felt indisposed
For slumber and still ailed. Now when the night
Foregathered with the sun the woman fetched
Wine and a harp. “ 0 woman of few words ! ”

The Shah said, tell to me some old-world tale
That while thou art reciting I may quaff
To chase away my pain and cares. I give thee
Free speech about the Shah for praise or blame.’’

That woman of few words said : “ Yea, ’tis well,

For he is first and lasb in everything.”

Bahram responded : ” He is so indeed,

But he is just and good to nobody.”

That dame of spirit said : 0 honest man !

This place hath many folk and many homes,

And always cavaliers arc passing through c. 1515

From public offices and ministers.

If one of them shall call a man a thief

The accused will have much trouble afterward.

The cavalier to compass some few drachms
Will make the poor man’s life a misery,

Or one may smirch some honest woman’s fame.

And make her fall to folly. This is loss.

Because the treasury is none the richer.

This is our trouble with our ShWi, the world-lord.”

The king grew full of thought at that account —

How those in power were wronging his good name —

And then the pious Sh4h thought with himself : —

“ No one doth praise the just. Henceforward I
Will play the tyrant for a while that love
And justice may grow manifest from ill.”

Vexed by dark thoughts he passed a sleepless night,

His heart allied to tyranny the while.

Now when Sol rent its musky-scented veil,

And showed its face in heaven, the woman left
The house and bade her spouse : “ Bring pot and fire.

And in the water put all kinds of grain


46


THE SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI

Before the sun shall see it. Mind it well
While I go milk the cow.”

She brought the cow
From pasture, got much grass, and threw it down
Before her ; then she tried the udders, crying : —

” In God’s name who hath neither mate nor peer ! ”
She found the udder milkless, and the heart
Of that young hostess aged. She told her husband : —
” Good man ! our monarch’s heart hath changed in
purpose,

The world’s king hath become tyrannical !

A secret change came o’er his heart last night.”

He said : '‘What words are those ? Why go and
croak 1 ”

She thus replied : " My dear one ! wJiat I say
Is sober truth, for wheji the Siiah, the world-lord.

Hath grown unjust the moon may shine not forth
In heaven, the udders are dry, the musk-bags lose
Their scent, adultery and guile are rampant,

The tender heart beoomotli flinty, wolves
Devour folk on the waste, the sage doth flee
The fool, and eggs are addled ’neath the hens
What time the Sh 4 h becomoth tyrannous.

The pasture of this cow had minishod not.

Her watering-place supplied licr as before.

Yet is her udder dry, her lowing changed.”

On hearing this tho Sh^h fortliwith repented,

0. 1516 And prayed to God : " 0 Thou who art supieme,
Almighty, and the Arbiter of fortune !

If e’er my heart shall turn away from justice
Then be the throne of kings no longer mine.”

That blessed dame, who worshipped holy God,

Tried with her hand tho udder once again,

She tried it in tho Lord’s name, saying thus : —

Cause Thou the milk to flow.”


Tho milk flowed forth.


bahrJm gur


47


The good wife cried : '' O God, our Succourcr !

Thou hast recalled to justice the unjust,

For, if not so, this virtue Avere not his.”

Then said she to the master of the house
The justice of the unjust is restored.

Laugh and rejoice ; this is the Mak(a‘’s boon
To us.”

Now when the porridge had been cooked,
And man and wife had done that chare, the good dame,
And after her the master of the house.

Who bare the tray, wont to their guest. Upon it
There was a bowl of porridge, oh ! how good
Had it been but some broth ! The Shah ate somoAvliat,
Then spake thus to that kindly dame : '' Take thou
This whip outside and hang it where folk pass.

Choose out a proper bough because the wind
Must harm it not, then note the passers by
With one eye on the whip.”

The good-man wont

Forthwith, he hung the whip upon a tree.

And kept his eye thereon a while. There came
Innumerable troops along the road.

And all that saw the whip there hailed Bahrain.

They lighted down before that lengthy Avhip,

And passed saluting. “ ’Tis the Shah, none else !”

The good-man told his spouse. “Naught but the
throne

Could fit a face like that ! ”

Then full of awe

Both ran to him and cried : “ 0 Shah ! 0 great !

0 mighty one ! 0 sage, high priest and world-lord !

A humble woman and her gardener-spouse
Have been thy poor hosts in this house. Withal
They did not do their best. We ne’er suspected
That ’twas the Shah, that such an one as he
Would come to this place as a guest, would come


48 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

To this poor home of ours/’

Bahram replied : —

“ Good friend ! I give to thee this march, the land,
And village. Be thou ever hospitable ;

Be that, and give up garden-work.”

He spake,

And laughing left the house, gat on his steed
C. 1517 Wind-footed, and from that poor village reached
His jewelled halls. The nobles of Iran
Went thither for the chase, three hundred strong,
And each with thirty servants in his train
Of Turkman, Human, or of Persian strain.


§ 13


How Bahram went to the Chase and espoused the
Daughters of the Thane Barzin

The third day after this the Sbah wont forth
With escort, the equipment for the chase,

Ten camels all in housings of brocade
With stirrups silver and with dossers gold,

Ten camels with the Shah’s pavilion,

And his brocaded seat. In front of these
Were seven elephants which bare the throne
Of turquoise hued like Nile ; its feet were all
Of gold and crystal ; ’twas the throne itself
Of Shah Bahram Gur. Every swordsman there
Had thirty pages who had golden belts
And bridles, while a hundred camels served
To bear the minstrels wearing massive crowns.
The falconers had eight score hawks with them,
And ton score noble peregrines and falcons.
Among them there was one bird black of hue,


BA HR Am gur


49


More precious m the Shali’s eyes than the rest,

With sable talons and with yellow beak,

Liko gold a-gleam on lapis-lazuli.

They called it a tugliral. Its eyes were liko
Two goblets full of blood. Tlio Khan of Chin
Had sent it with a throne and crown, with amber,

A golden torque inlaid with emeralds,

With two score armlets, and with thrice twelve earrings,

Three hundred camel-loads of rarities
Of Chin, and liftoen score of ruby signets.

Bc^hind tlie falconers they led eight score
Of cheeiahs for that Lustre of the world —

The Shah — willi jewelled torques and chains of gold.

Thus came the king of kings upon 1 h(^, plain,

And raised his crown o'er Jupiter. The sportsmen
Made for t-ho riven* whither used the Shah
Auspiciously to taro (^aeh sevonih year.

As they drew near tjiey found the rivcu’ full
Of water-fowl. He had the tabor beaten.

And the tugliral flow off. The imptirious bird

Was all impatieneo ; in its elaws a eraiio

Was helpless quarry, and a pard had been

Its prop(u‘ prey. At length it soared from sight, C. 1518

And bound a cratio, then soared again and How

Liko shaft from bow, the falconer pursuing.

The Sliah was vc^xod that it had flown away,

And followed by the tinlding of its bells.

Ho came upon a spacious pleasure-ground,

With mansion rising in a coign tluu’c^of,

And thillier wont with oerlain of his men,

The r(‘.st remaining on the liuutiiig-field.

On entering Bahram Gur saw a garch^n
As 'twore a mountain-skirt. Upon the ground
Brocade was spnuxd, and all th<^ jilacu'. was full
Of slavt'.H and wealth. A pool was in tlio cu^ntn^

Wherdiy an old man sat. Thn^) girls liko ivory
VOL. VII. r>


50 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Sat by bim wearing turquoise crowns. Thoir chcolcs
Were like the spring, their statures tall, thoir eye-
brows

Arched, and thoir tresses lassos ; each girl held
A crystal goblet, and Bahram Gur saw them.

His eyes were dazzled at the spoctaclo
Just as his heart was gloomed for his tughral.

On seeing him that wealthy thane grew pale
As fenugreek with fear. A wise old man
Was he, Barzin by name, but ill-affocted
Toward the Shah. As swift as wind ho loft
The hauz,^ approached the Shah, and kissed the
ground,

Then Said : " 0 monarch of the sun-like face !

May heaven revolve according to thy will.

I do not dare to say to thee : ' Abide

With thy two hundred horsemen on my march.’

Still, if the Shah take pleasure in my garden,

The glory of Barzin hath reached the moon.”

To-day,” the world’s king answorod, “ the tughral
Escaped us. I am vexed about that fowler,

Wliich hunted birds as leopards hunt their quarry,”
Barzin replied : I saw a sable bird
Just now with golden bells and pitch-hued body,

Its beak and talons turmeric in hue ;

It came and settled on yon walnut-tree :

By thy good fortune it is come to hand,”

The Shah said to a servant : Go and look.”

He went like wind and cried : “ Glad ever bo
The world-lord ! The tughral is on a bough ;

E'en now the falconer is taking it.”

The hawk thus found, the old man said ; 0 Shah

Without a mate or equal on the earth !

Oh ! may thine entertainer prove auspicious,

And all the wearers of a crown thy slaves.

^ Sec Vol. i. p. 203 note.


BAHRAM GtfR


51


Call for a winc-eup in our present joy, c, 1519

And, when thou art roireshod, ask what thou wilt.'^

The king of kings dismounted at the pool,

And old Bai’zln grew glad. With that there came
Bahrain’s chief minisLer and therewithal
The captains of the liost and trciasuror.

Bavzin brought forlli a goldoii cup and fij'st
Drank to tlie monaroli of (lui world, then brought
And offered to the Whah a cup of crystal,

Who seeijig look and drained the prolfered draught
Below the inscription-line, whereat Barzin
In high delight had wijie-jars set about
The place, and in his cups said to his daughters : —

'' My clever chicks ! no chieftain of the host,

But Shah Bahrain hath visited this garden !

So come, thou songsLniss ! let us have a song,

And tliou, my moon-faced daughter! bring thy
harp.”

All throe drew near the Slnili, and on their lieads
Were jewelled crowns. One danced, another played
Upon the harp, tlie third possessed a sweet
And soothing voices Wiiilc! they made minstrelsy
The king of kings in higli contentment diained
His goblet dry. said thus to Barziu : —

WJiat girls are ilieso who live witli thee in joy ? ”

Barzin thus answered him : '' 0 Shall I may none
Behold the age witJiout thee. Ivuow that these
Are mine own daiightcu’s and my heart’s delight.

Oik's is a caroler, another liarpeth,

The third observelh measure in i]\r. dance.

I m^od not aught , 0 Shah ! for I have money,

Domain, and pleasure-ground, and rny three daughtors
Are, as the Shah perceiveth, like gla,d siiring.

O mooii-faee I ” said lie to the songstress, '' fear not,

But sing a song about tlui Shah.”


Tlio Idols


0. 1520


52 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Took heart to sing and play. The songstress sang

“ 0 moon-faccd king ! the moon in heaven
Alone is like to thee,

The royal throne thine only seat.

Thou with thy moon-like bloe,

And teak-like stature art the pride
Of throne and crown. Oh ! rare

For those that sec thy face at morn,

For those that scent tliy hair !

Thy loins are tiger-like, thy limbs
Ai'e mighty, thy crown’s Grace

Is as the cloud-rack liigh, and like
Pomegraiialo-bloom thy face.

For rapture of thy love hearts laugh,

Like ocean is thine owoi ;

Like cloud thy hand. As thy lit prey
I see the lion alone.

Thou splittest with thy shaft a hair,

And by thine equity

Convertest water into milk.

Wlien hostile armies see

Thy lasso and thy puissant arm
Their hearts and brains are r(uit

However mighty their array,

Howe’er on battle bent.”

Bahram Gur, having heard the ditty, drained
The massive crystal cup and thus addressed
Barzin : 0 noble sir, experienced much

Is this world’s heat and cold ! thou wilt not find
A better son-in-law than mo who am
’Mid kings a hero and the king of men.

Bestow thy daughters on me — ^all the tliree —


53


bahrAm GVR

And I will raise tliy ooroiiot to Saturn/’

0 Idng ! ” Barziii replied, '' may wine and bearer
Find favour in thy sight. Who will dare say
That ho hath such a Venus in his house ?

If now thou wilt accept mo as a slave
To servo before the throne of king of kings
Then will 1 pay my service to thy crown,

Thy throne, thy Grace, thy fortune, and thy state ;
Moreover my three daughters arc thy handmaids
To stand before thee as tJiy slaves. The Shah
Approved of them as such or ever he
Saw these three Moons afar. As teaks are they
In stature and as ivory in hue.

Fit for the throne and to adorn the crown.

Now will I toU the monarch of the world
What fortune I possess for good and ill :

Of clothes and carpets, stuffs and draperies,

Good sooth have I stored up in mine abode
Two hundred camel-loads or more as well
As necldaces and bracelets, crowns and thrones,

All for my daughters' i)leasuro,”

Hearing this

Bahram replied : ‘ ' Leave what thou hast in store,
Where now it is, and sock mirth with the wine-cup.”

The older answered ; ‘‘ My tliroe moon -like daughters
I give thee by thci rites of Gaiumart
And of Hushang. Dust are tlusy ’neatJi thy feet,

And all the three live but to do thy will.”

TJio eldest daughter’s name was Mah Afrid,

The second’s Favanak, and the ead(;tte’s

Was Shambalid. Approving them at sight

The Shah prefen'red them ’mongst Ixis lawful wives,

And bade a noble of his escort bring

Four goldt^u litters,^ and, when all tliree Idols

Were set tlierein, they were encircled there

^ Tho fourth was for himself and noodful. Seo holow.


54 the SHAHNAma OF FIRDAUSI

By forty Ruman slaves — ^their devotees —

Vhio called down praises on tliem as they wont.

C. 1521 While they departed to their golden henne
The glorious Shah caroused. A servant hung
His whip above the court-gate, for the escort,

Save by the token of the whip, ne’er knew
Where Shah and nobles were. When any one
Beheld the handle and its lengthy thong
He used to run thereto and do obeisance.

Bahram drank on until ho was bemused,

Then glorious took his scat within a Utter,

And went back to his women’s golden house —

The house that was perfumed with ambergris.

On his return ho tarried for a week,

And much he feasted, lavished, and Jield convt^rse.
The eighth day ho went hunting with Rtizbih,

And with a thousand cavaliers. Ho saw
That all the plain was full of onager,

Drew from its case his royal bow, and strung it,
Invoking God who givoth victory.

’Twas springtide and the onager wore pairing.
Prom all the world they met confronting there,
And rent each other’s hides, the face of earth
Was reddened with their blood. Bahram al)odo
While two bucks fought together furiously,

Then when the valiant buck that gained the day

Was covering a doe ho laughed to sec^-

The onagers, took hold upon his bow-string,

Shot, piercing the buck’s flank so that tlu^ arrow
Went home up to its plumes, and sk(nv(^red buck
And doe together, thrilling all his escort.

All who behold that shot acclaimed the Shah : —
Oh ! be the evil eye far from thy Grace,

And may thy whole life be a festival.

Such might as thine the ago ne’er saw till now ;

At once Shah, warrior, and king art thou.”


bahrAm gvr


55


§ 14


How Bahrdm slew Lions, we7it to the House oj a Jeweller,
and married his Daughter

The Shall, on urging theiioo lu8 stood Sliabraiig,

Camo on a forest and bohold boioro it
Two savago lions, strung and drew his bow.

Tho arrow, striking 011 the lion’s breast.

Was buried to the plumes. Forthwith Bahrain
Turned to the lioness and, shooting, pinned
Her breast and loins together, but exclainiod : —

Tho shaft was foathorless, the point was blunt, c. 1522

If point there wore.”

Tho escort praised hina, saying : —

0 famous king of earth ! none ever saw,

Or will SCO, on the throne of king of kings

A Shah like thee, who with unfoathored arrows
O’orthrowest lions, and with plumed uprootost
A mount of hint.”

Tho monarch with his moiny
Rode on along the meadow-land and saw
A forest full of sheep, their lierds in lliglit
For fear of harm. Tho chief herd, 11 (‘.’or at ease
For terror of wild boasts, perceived Bahrain,

Who said to him : What man is driving shoep
To this unlikely spot ? ”

The head man answered : —

Great sir ! none comoth to this pasturage
Except myself. They are a jeweller’s :

1 drove them from the mountains yesterday.

Tho owner is a wealthy man not l.roublod

By fear of loss."^ He owneth gems by ass-loads,

Gold, silver, trinketry. He hatli withal
One only daughter, skilful on the harp.

Her tresses cluster on her head in curls.


^ Koading with P.


56 THE ^HAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

He will take wine from lior liaiid only, None
Hath seen an old man like him. How eould he
Have kept his propcaty bnt by the justice
Of Shdh Bahiam ? The great king of the world
Is not concerned for gold, and his archmages
Are not unjust ; but say wlio slew tliese beasts,

For may the Ruler of the world uphold him ? ”
Bahram replied : '' This pair of lions fell
Beneath the arrows of a valiant man,

Who, having slain these gallant beasts, departed
With seven other gallant cavaliers.

Where is tho jeweller’s mansion ? Bo bit the way,
And hide it not from us.”

The chief hind said : —

Proceed and thou wilt reach a brand-new seat.

The jeweller thence faroth to tlui city.

To Shah Bahram’s own palace, but, what time
The sun doth don its Sable Silk, rcturnoth
To banquet. Revelling and sound of lyre
Will reach thine ears if thou wilt bide a while.”

Bahram, on hearing this, called for his steed,

And for apparel suited to a king.

Then parted from his minister and escort.

Good sooth ! but he was full of eagerness !

Ruzbih said to the chiefs : ” So now the Shah
Is going to the village, there to kjiock
Upon the portal of the jeweller !

0. 1523 And, mark my words ! will ask of him his daughter,
And crown her doubtless with a crown of gold,

Will take her to his ladies’ golden house,

And send that other three back to Barzin ! ^

He never hath enough of chambering ;

His consort flitteth ere the night is over !

He hath above a hundred ladies’ bowers !

’Tis ill to have a king of kings like this.

^ ScD previous section.


BA HR AM GUR


57


Just now a ounuch reckoned up nine hundred
And thirty damsels wearing jewelled crowns
Within the palace, all provided for !

The Shall dcmandeth tribute from all lands,

And Riiin will be exhausted in a year.

Alack ! for shoulders, breast, and height like his,

And face that brightened all the company !

None will behold his like in strength and stature,

Who pinneth with one shaft two ojiagers ;

But dalliance with women marroth him,

Ho soon will bo as feeble as a ghost !

His eyes will darken and his looks grow wan,

His body slacken and his cheeks turn blue.

To sniff at women makcth hoary heads,

And hoary heads have naught to hope on earth.

As polo-playing maketh stoop the upright,

So womanizing causeth every ill.

Once in a month is intercourse enough,

While more is waste of blood. A wise youth too
Should husband vigour for his children’s sake.

In this excess there is excess of loss,

Atid slackness is afflictive to a man.”

They went back to the palace, talking still.

And one remarked : The Bun hath lost his way.”

Bahrani Gur, with one slave to mind his horses,

Fared through the gloom of night and, when ho neared
The jeweller’s abode, Inward sounds of harping,

Whereto lie urged Gulgun, his steed, forthwith
Toward the mereluint’s house. He knocked and asked
Admittance, all ilie wliile invoking Him
Who mad(^ the sun. A kindly liandmaid said : —

‘‘ Wlio’s there 'i Why knock tlius at this time of
night 'i ”

Bahram rc^plicul : '' This morning as the Bliah
Was coming from tlie hunting-ground my horse
Wont lame, and 1 perforce got left behind.


58 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Here in this thoroughfare the folk will steal
A steed like this and my gold harness too.

So I need help.’’

The handmaid wont and told
Her lord ; A man requesteth shelter, saying :

‘ My steed with its gold harness will be stolen,

And I shall go away undone.’ ”

He answered : —

“ Then ope the door. Hast never soon a gin^st
Come here before ? ”

0. 1524 The maid made haste to open,

And said : Como in, my son ! ”

The Shall on eni(^ring.

And seeing such a place and sucli attondanee,

Said to himself : “ 0 just and only God !

Thou art Thy servant’s Guides to what, is good.

Ne’er may I bo but just in conduct, never
Be covetise and arrogance my creed,

Let every act and deed of mine bo just,

And let my subjects’ hearts rejoice in mo :

Then, if my knowledge and my justice wax,

My memory will shine when I am dead.

May all my subjects, like this jowollor,

Enjoy, the sound of harp and revelry.”

On entering the lofty hall he saw
The jeweller’s famed daughter from the door.

The thane, on seeing him, arose and came

With bows profound, and said : ‘‘ Good ov’n to tlu^o.

May all thy foemen’s hearts bo rooted out.”

The host spread out a mat and laid ilieroon
A cushion, gazing at his guest with joy.

One brought a sumptuous board with viands liot
And cold thereon. One came — a faithful liege —

And was instructed to secure the steed.

’ Elsewhere they lodged and fed Bahram Gur’s servant.
They set a low seat for the host himself,


bahrAm gvr


59


Wlio took his place close to his guest the Shah,

And then began to olTor his excuse,

Thus saying to Bahrani : '' Brave paladin !

Since tliou art entertained within my house
Conform thyself to niy rough usages.

When we have eaten wo must drink and then
Rest sweetly. 'Tis dark night, tjio wine is royal ;

When thou hast drunk thy quantum ihou shalt sleej),

And, when thou wakost at the break of day,

Must haste back to the sorvicc of the Shah.”

Bahrain I'oplied : '' Night dark when one alightoth
On clioery host like thee ! We must not iirovc
Ingrato to Cod ; the hearts of thanldess men
Are full of fear.”

The handmaid, who was all
Astoniod at the aspect of the guest.

Brought water, bowl, and napkin. Hands were washed.

Then came the wine-cup’s turn, and with the wine
Came mirth, contentment, and tranquillity.

The handmaid brought a Hagon and strong drink.

Red wine, a cuii, and llowers of ftMiugreek.

The thane first reached out for the cup and drank.

Then washed it out with musk and with rose-water.

And gave thc^ cu}) that cheereth to Bahrain.

What,” said he, is my boon-comiianion’s name ?

Now will X make a covenant with thee.

And i will take Bahram, the Shah, as surety.”

The king lauglud lu^artily thereat and said : — 0. 1525

Gushasp, the cavalier, am I, and hither
Came I attracted by the sound of harp,

And nob to drink or wliile away the time.’'

'' Tliis girl t)t mine,” his host replied, exaltoth
My head i-o lioavcm and is at once my harper.

And my cuj)-boarer, and witlial sht^ singeth,

And dissipatoth care. My Heart’s Delight
Is named Axzn — my heart’s delight and server.”


6o THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

He said to that tall Cypress : ‘‘ Bring tliy liarp,
Come in thy loveliness before Gushasp.”

The harpist, tall as a pomegrauate-lreo,

Moved stately to the king of kings and said : —

0 chosen cavalier who hast in all
The semblance of a king ! know that this house
Of feasting is thine own, my sire thy liost
And treasurer. May thy dark nights bo joyous,

And be thy head exalted o’er the rain-clouds.”

He said to her : “Sit down, take up thy harp,

And let us have a song immediately.

To-night old Mahiyar shall be a youth,

And pledge his soul as hostage for his guest.”

The harpist clasped her harp and first she played
The Magians’ chant, and as the silken chords
Rang out an odour as of jasmine filled
The room. She sang to Mahiyar, her sire,

And thou hadst said : ” How plaintive is her harp ! ’

‘‘ Thou art as a cypress
That lippeth a stream,

And white locks encircle
Thy cheeks’ rosy gleam.

Thy tongue is warm-spoken,

Thy heart lovetli peace,

Oh 1 ne’er may thy foemen
Of ill have surcease.

Thy soul’s food bo wisdom.

Thy bent is as great
As Farfdun’s. On thee
As handmaid I wait.

Arzu am I titled,

I joy in our guest,

Like monarch whose troops are
With victory blest.”


bahrAm G'UR


6i


This ditty dono, toward the guest she turned,

Turned toward him with a song and plaintive chords : —

'' Sincere and brave, liigh-starred and king-like one !

They tliat ne’er saw Baliram, the cavalier,

The well approved, to every ])osoin dear,

Should look upon thy face, and all is dono.

His only semblance in the host thou art,

Tall as a eypre^ss with a reed-like waist,

A cypress with a pheasant’s carriage graced,

All elepiiant in bulk with lion’s heart.

Two miles in light thou flingest forth thy spear,

Thy cheeks as though pomegranate-blossoms shine
(Who was it washed, say’st thou, those blooms in
wine ?)

And as a camel’s thighs thin© arms appear.

Thou tramplcst Mount Bistun. Heaven toiled to

mould '526

A man like thee. None scio I to compete
In slrift^ witli thee. As dust beneath thy feet

Oh ! may Arzu s 1‘orm bii while lib^ shtill hold.”

The girl’s prolieieney with song and harp,

Her looks, her stature, and accomplisliiments,

So wrought the world-lord that thou wouldst have
said : —

His Jieart hath grown a magazine of woes,”

And at the time wlieu Mahiyar gnnv drunk
Before him lie atldress(*.d liis liost, thus saying : —

” Give me thy daughticn* as my lawful wife
If thou wouldst be commended for just dealing.”

Wilt thou atfoept,” said Mahiyar to her,

“ The presents of this lion-hearted man ?

S(^e if ho ph^aseth thee, and if ’tis well
Bor ihoo to go with 1 dm.”

Arzu replied : —


62 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

“ Goods noble father ! ^ if thou wouldwt bestow me
On any then my partner is Gushasp,

The cavalier. One that dot]\ look upon
A man like this will bid Bahrain ^ Avaunt ! ’ ”

His daughter's words misliked him and ho said
Thus to Bahrain : “ 0 horseman of the fray !
Regard her carefully from head to foot,

Her industry, her knowh^dge, and discretion ;

See if she bo approved of thee at heart ;

Repoii: of her is bettor than assumption.

She is at once accompli slied and no beggar ;

I do not specify exact amounts,

But shouldst thou count the gems of Mahiyar
They would exceed those in the royal colTers.

Bo not precipitate, take rest to-night.

And, if needs must, another cup of wine,

For great men make no comiJaots in tlieir cups
Especially about their lady-loves.

Wait therefore till the sun shall ris(^ on high,

And till the nobles’ heads have I'ousc^d from
sleep,

Then will we call far-seeing elders in —

Disinterested men and scholarly.

At night ’tis out of order and ignoreth
The precedents of Faridun, the Shah.
lU-omened ’tis to marry in one’s cups
Or handsel any business.”

Said Bahrain —
Absurd ! ’Tis ill to draw, or go by, omcais.

This harpist ploaseth me to-night, so strive
To deem the matter an auspicious one.”

The sire said to his daughter ; “ 0 Ai’zu !

Dost thou approve him as to looks and manners ? ”
She said : '' Yea, I approved of him when 1
Far off beheld him with such head and eyes.

1 Beading with P.


BA HR Am GUR


63


Complete the work and leave the rest to God :

The sky is not at feud with Mahiyai*.’’

Her father answered : TJiou art now his wife.

Know tJiis that tlioii art under coverture.’’

Ho gave lior to Bahrain Gur who espoused her ; c. 1527
By dawn thc^ inatler had beoji consummate.

The Sliah’s attejidant hung the royal whip
Upon the door of Mahiyar, Arzii
Went to lier cliainber \v\u\v. on every side
Folk still were slt^eping. Mahiyar departed
To make all ready for the cavalier,

Gu.shasp, and told a servant : '' Shut the doors,

And send off some one to the flock in haste.

They must not servo the board without a lamb,

And one well fattened too. Wait on Gushasp,

And, when ho waketh, bring him ice and sherbet,^

Take too a bowl of camphor and rose-water
To scent his chamber. As for me, my cups
Have left mo just as I was yesterday ;

Old jewellers sliirk nut their wine.”

He spalvo,

And, drawing up his cloak about his liead,

Wooed rest and slc^ep.

Wheji bright fclol showed its crown.

And earth became like shining ivory.

Troops armed with shields and doublo-headcd darts
Wt^nt to stalk traces of tlio royal whip.

The escort gathered round the door as though
The Shah’s own eourt, and all that recognised
The whip earno forward and saluted it.

Tlio portei’, seeing that great gathering,

The throng of swordsmen and of javtdin-men.

Went, roused his slt^epiiig lord, and sol)ored him,

Thus saying to him : ilise, bestir thyself ;

This is no time to sleep or place to sit,

* FakktV. Soo Vol. i. p. 43 note.


64 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Because the world’s king is thy guest within
This sorry house of thine ! ”

The jewoUor’s heart

Throbbed wildly at the words. He cried : “ What
say’st thou

How tracest thou the footsteps of the king ? ’’

Then fully realising what was said
He sprang up from the bed-clothos witli a shout,
Enraged against the porter, '"Those,” he cried,

" Are not the words of wisdom and of age.”

" Experienced man ! ” the slave said, who on earth
Made thee the monarch of Iran ? So vast
A host is at thy gate that, wouldst thou pass,

There is scant room, and every Jack of them,

On coming up, saluteth our old curtain ! ^

At dawn, before the sun began to shine,

The cavalier’s attendant came and hung
A whip all gold and jewels o’er our entry,

Where we pass through it, and round that long whip
0. 152S There is a world of folk from hill and dale.

So now bo up and doing, bo not slack,

And let not wine aSect thee.”

Hearing this.

The shrewd old man was troubled : " Why did I
Get drunk last night before the king of kings,

And let my daughter share the wine with us ? ”

Then going to the chamber of Arzu
He said : “ My gracious Moon ! it was Bahram,

The king of kings, that last night visiUd
The jeweller ! On coming from the chase
He hither turned his rein. Now up and don
Brocade of Rum and set upon thy head
Thy last night’s crown. Make him an ollering
Of jewels worthy of a king — ^tlireo rubies
Of royal worth — and, when thou shalt behold

1 Tho felt curtain at the door- way. Cf. p. (>!).


6s


bahrAm gur

His sun-like face, enfold thine arms before him,

Keep thine eyes fixed on him and think of him
As thine own soul and body. Answer meekly
Wlien ho shall question thee, and let thy words
Bo modest and discreet. I shall not como
Unless ho calleth mo and givoth me
A place among his followers. I sat
At table with him like his peer ! Oh ! would
That 1 had no bones in me ! Furthermore
I cottoned with the Shah when in my cups !

Wine makotli old and young to misdomean.”

Just then a slave came hurrying and said : —

‘‘ The Shah, that ardent spirit, is awake.’'

Now when the Shah woke safe and sound, ho wont
To bathe him in the garden, went to pray
Before the sun, confiding all to God.

Returning thence to the reception-room
He bade a server bring a cup of wine.

Heard that his retinue had como, dismissed it,

And called Arzu on whom his lieart was set.^

Arzu appeared with wine and offerings —

A handmaid with her necklace and her eanangs —

And with a lowly reweronco kissed the ground.

The Shah smiled on her greatly pleased and sirid : —

Whenee such behaviour — ^first to make mo drunk,

Then run away ? Thy song and harp suffice
For me, a wojuan’s presents are for others.

Come sing to me thy ditties of the chase,

Of spearhead-blows, and royal combatings.”

Anon he said : Where is the jeweller,

For we got drunk together yesternight ”

The daughter, when she heard this, called her father,

Mazed at the Shah’s good-nature. Carnes her sire t). 1529
With folded arms before the sun-liko king

^ Arzi'i moans “ Desiro,” ami tlioro is a doublo uso of the word in tho
original : “ IJocauso lie had a dosiro for Dcairo.”

VOL. VII.


E


66 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

Of kings, and said : 0 Shah ! 0 chief ! 0 wise !

0 great ! 0 mighty one ! 0 warrior !

0 archimage ! may this world ever bo
At thy dispose and everywhere thy name
Associate with the crown. The man that quali'etli
The draught of foolishness should hold his tongue.

My fault was due to ignorance. Methiiiketh

That thou must deem me mad. Vouchsafe to i)ardon
My fault and make my face and faring bright.

1 stand — a foolish slave — before thy door ;

The king of kings will deem me loss tlian man.’'

Bahram replied : The wise man never takctli
The drunkard seriously ; one should not eye
Or Savour wiire if it make sad the face.

I saw thee not ill-tempered in thy cups.

Now hsten to the singing of Arzu,

And proffer as thine own apology
The tulips and the jasmine of her song.

Let her descant what while wo quail, not counting
The ill of days not come.”

He kissed the ground,

Did Mahiyar, then brought and spread the board,
And, good man that he was, he fetched withal
The nobles that were stationed at the gate ;

Howbeit Arzu went off to her own bower,

Her visage puckered at those stranger-guests,

And stayed till heaven grew sombre, and the stars
Came out around the moon. The eating done,

Arzu was called and set upon a seat
Of golden work. The Shah bade her to take
Her harp and sing to him the song that he
Had asked of her already. Thus she sang : —

“ 0 monarch undaunted ! the lion in shame
Will slink from the wood at the bruit of thy name.
Shah, victor, host-breaker art thou. In thy mien


67


BAHRAM GJJR

The tints of the tulip on jasmine are seen.

In stature no ruler on earth is thy peer,

In looks thou transcendest the moon in her sphere.

A host on the war-stead, beholding in fight

Thy helmet, will rive, heart and brain, with affiight,

And longer discern not the depth from the height.”

When they wore blithe with wine and, eating done,
Wore quaffing draught on draught, Riizbih appeared
Before the Shah. They lodged him in the village.
Ruzbih had brought a litter and withal
Two score of eunuchs, all moon-face and charming.
Those Rumaiis' faces seemed brocade of Rum,

And freshened all the country round. Arzu,

A crown of jewels set upon her head,

Toward the bower of Shah Bahram Gur sped.


§ 15

How Bahrcm went to the Chase and j^o^ssed the Night
in the House of Farshidward


The king of kings, attended by Ruzbih,

Went f3'om the chief’s house with a gladsome heart.
He passed the night and wont at dawn to hunt.
Troops fared o’er all the roads and trackless wastes,
And thus abode a month. They pitched the tents
And camp-enclosure, and swept all the field
Of game. None slumbered there, it was all wine,
Game, flesh, and harp, and lyre. They kindled fires
About the plain and burned Avood green and dry.
There came a swarm of dealers from the city.

Who tarried at the camp for trafficking :

The crowd made bright the waste. At quarter price
They bought one onager or ten gazelles,

And whosoever was in want of moat,

For cooking for his guests or for his children,


0. 1530


6t THE SHAhnAma OF FIRDAUSI

Might carry home ground-game and water-fowl
By ass-loads.

Wlien a month had passed Balirani
Grew eager for his wives’ society,

And led his people from the hunting-gruiind.

Folk could not sec the way, the cavaliers
Raised such a dust ! hut swift as dust they sped
Till day’s cheeks turned to la})is-]a7Adi.

The Shall observed a town in front of Jiiin
With groups of houses, roadways, and bazars,

And ordered that his escort with the baggage
Should push on, leaving not a soid behind.

He asked : ‘‘ Whore is the chief man of tlu^ place ? ”
And then made thitluu* straiglitway. lie bcdicld
A shattered entry broad anti deep. Tlu^ ownin'

Came and saluted him. The yiiah inquired ; —

Whose ruin is this and whcrefori^ in such plight
Amidst the town '? ”

The mastei' said : ’'Tis mine.
And ill luck is my guide. 1 have not here
Kine, raiment, victuals, manhood, understanding,

No feet, no wings. Me thou hast seen, now view
My house — one fitter for a curse than blessing.”

The aspiring Shah alighted, scanned tlu^ house,

And hands and foot both failed him, for the place
Was all sheep’s droppings though l)olh great and
vaulted !

c. 1531 Bring me,” he said, thou hospitable mail !
Somewhat whereon to sit.”

The oilier ar.swert^tl : —

“ Why mock thy host so wantonly, 0 marchlord !

Had I some draperies my guest woidd praise me,

But I have none, no clothing, food, or carpets.

Pray lodge thee somewhere else ; here all is pour.”

The Shah said : “ Fetch a cushion then that I
May sit awhile.”


“ The place is ill,” he answered.


bahrAm gvr


69


'' Good sooth ! wouldst thou have bird’s milk ? ”

Said Bahrain : —

'' Bring fresh milk and new bread if thou caiist get it/’
'' Imagine/’ said the other, “ that thou hast
Partaken and gone off with ' Fare thee well.’

I should not bo so lifeless had I broad,

Thougli life were better far tlian bread to me.”

Bahram said : “If thou hast no sheep how come
These droppings here ? ”

’Tis night,” the other answered.
“ My head is all a muddle with thy talk.

Select some mansion with a curtained entrance ;

The master of it will commend thy choice.

Why shouldsb thou be with an unfortunate,

Who maketh leaves his pillow for the night ?

Thou hast a golden sword and stirrups, thou
Shouldst sojourn not whore there is fear of thieves,

For thieves and lions haunt old hulks like this.”

The Shah said : ''If a thief should rob me now
Thou wouldst not be responsible, but give me
A lodging for tlie night, ’tis all I need.”

" Then need it not,” the owner made I'oply ;

‘‘ None lodgeth in my house.”

“ U wise old man !

Wliy art thou,” said the Shah, '' so short with me ?
Still thou wilt give me, I presume, cold water,

0 noble one ! ”

“ Didst thou not see,” rejoined
The householder, more than two bow-shots long^
The pool ? There drink and take whate’er thou wilt.
Why seek tor aught in this impoverished house 'i
Good sooth ! hast never seen a poor man barred
From working by decrepitudo ? ”

Bahram

Rejoined : Thou art not one of the first water.


1 Or “ hence.” f:)0 Mohl.


70 THE SHJhnJMA OF FIRDAUSI

Chief though thou he ; so strive not with a soldier.
What is thy name

He answered ; “ Fanshidward .
A man without land, raiment, sleep, and food.”

Bahram asked : “ Why endeavour not for provand
And comfort ? ”

Said the master of the house : —

” He that bestoweth all may end my days.

0 . 1532 If only I can see my desolation

Relieved of thee I will make prayer to Him.

Why cam’st thou to an empty house that never
Saw good condition and a high estate ? ”

Wlien he had spoken thus he wci)t so sorely
That Shah Bahram fled from his cries. He lauglu^d
At that old man and took the road again,

While all his escort followed in his train.


§ 16

How a Bramble-gruliber revealed the Case of FarsMdward, and
how Bahram lestowei that Householder's Wealth upon the
Boor

1

Bahram, on quitting that famed township, came
Upon a bramble-brake. A man, who hold
A mattock in his hand, was grubbing there.

The monarch left liis retinue, drew near him,

And said : 0 enemy of brambles ! whom

Know’st thou of most account in yonder town ? ”

He answered : Farshidward — a man of greed

That doth not suffer him to sleep or eat.

He hath, may be, a hundred thousand sheep,

More camels, steeds, and asses. Earth is full
Of his amassed dinars, but would that he
Had neither skin nor marrow to his body !


BAHRAM G(JR 71

A famished pauneh and nakedness are his ;

He hath no child, no kin, no friends, no goods.

A captive in the hands of Greed and Need
His person is all misery and wasted
Through eating not, but if he were to sell
For gold his tilth ’twould purchase gems enough
To fill a hoiise ! His shepherds swill down flesh
With milk, but he himself hath millet-bread
Without e’en cheese ! He never saw two coats
At once ; he is a tyrant to himself.”

The Shah said to the grubber : Thou dost know
The number of his sheep, but knowest thou
Where those flocks are and likewise where his steeds
And camels are at large ? ”

The grubber said : —

0 thou ! it is not far from here to where
His camels and his sheep are, but my heart
Is troubled at the ill that ho may do me.”

Bahram Gur gave the grubber some dinars,

And said ; ” This day shall gentle thy condition.”

He bade one of his escort come to him,

A man that know liis way about, by name
Bihruz, a horsomaia bravo and popular,

And sent with him a hundred cavaliers,

Selected men well suited to tho work.

Ho chose withal a scribe, an honest man
And skilled accountant. “ Go,” ho told the grubber, 0. 1535
“ Thou didst grub brambles, now reap gold. One
hundredth

Of all that wealth is thine. Show to theso men
Tho way.”

Tho grubber’s name was Dilafruz,

A man of stately mien and stalwart form.

Bahram bestowed on him a noble steed,

And said : Thou must companion with the wind.”

He was tho Light of hearts but ho became


72


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The Lustre of the world ^ and carried out
His task triumphantly. He led the troop
O’er hill and plain past countless flocks of sheep.

Upon the mountains were ton caravans
Of camels, each with its own caravaneer.

The scribe wrote down of draught and of milch cattle
Twelve thousand, and the number of the camels
And steeds as twice ten thousand. All the waste
Was dinted with their hoofs. Beside the stream
There were three hundred thousand camel-loads
Of potted butter and curds fresh and dried.^

Height, waste, and level were one mighty eaohe^

But none had heard thereof. Bihriiz, the sun
Of Hur, reported to the king of kings,

Bahram Gur, praising first almighty God,

The All-victorious and All-nourishc'V,

And next the king of kings who had roloased
Men’s hands from toil, and then proceeded thus : —

“ 0 monarch of the world ! thou art the joy
Of all folk great and small because thy justice
Surpasseth bounds. Our treasury hath sufiered
Through silence as to this man’s wealth. ’Tis well
That “all things in the w^oiid sliould have their
bounds,

Well that the Shah be boundlessly rejoiced.

A wretch there is named Barshidward, ujiknown
In feast and fight to great and small alike
Throughout the world, not fearing God or SJiali,

And thankless in respect of what ho hath.

While thus he streweth o’er the world liis wealth
He is a lack-all, wretched, secretive,

Who is as unjust as the Shah is just.

Blame not my words and counsel. Let this wealth
Inaugurate a treasury ; ’twill need

^ He was, i.e. his name was, Dilafrilz, but ho hccamo Gitmfrilz.

- For winter use.


73


bahrAm gvr

Three years to order it. I have invoked
To mine assistance certain other scribes,

And settled them upon this fertile mount,

But, though the writers’ backs are bent, not yet
Is manifest the sum of this man’s treasure ;
Moreover he possesseth, so foUi say,

Still greater buried hoards of gold and jewels.

Hero in the mountain am I with both eyes
Upon the road to know tho Shah’s commands.

My salutation to him. May he live
What while his name is all in all to all.” i
He sent a cameleer post haste to boar
Tho letter to the Shah. Whenas Bahram Gur
Had read it he was troubled in his heart,

Grew downcast, wept, and bent his warrior-brows.
Ho called for Human pens and silk of Chiu,

And bade a scribe approach. Ho first gave thanks
To God almighty, tho omniscient Guido,

“ The Lord of Icnowledgo and of Grace, the Lord
Of diadem and kiiig.ship,” then wrote thus ; —

“ I should by rights attach this man. Ho hath not
Amassed these hoards by thievery and bloodslicd.
Hath not incited others to do wrong.

But ho hath been ungrateful and not had
Tho fear of God within him, hath kept ward
O’er all this treasure to tho detriment,

By such amassing, both of heart and soul.

Wolf is as good as sheep upon yon plain
Since neither yieldeth profit 'or return.

A buried gem is nothing but a stone,

Affordhig no one either food or raiment.

We shall not found a treasury on his toils.

Or fix our heart upon this Wayside Inn.

Evanished from the world arc Faridun,
fraj withal, Tiii’, knd , amidst tho mighty.


0. 1534


^ Lit. “10 (both) warp and woof.’*


74 the SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

Sam, Sli§^h K 4 us, and Kai Kubadj besides
The other potentates whose names we cherish,

And mine own sire who filled my heart with pain
As being neither just nor generous.

None of these great men is in evidence ;

Herein there is no striving with the Lord.

Collect this treasure and distribute it,

But touch not thou one hair. To every one
That hideth his necessities and lookoth
. : Long vainly for remission from his ills ;

To old men past their work and despicable
In rich men's eyes ; to those that have spent all,

And now in trouble breathe forth chilling sighs ;

To those that have renown but not dinars ;

To traders reft of friends ; to little ones
Whom thou beholdost orphans, their sires dead,

And they themselves in want of gold and silver ;

To women that have neither spouse nor raiment,

That know no handicraft and no employment,

Give all these treasures and irradiate
The lives of those poor souls. This done, neglect not
The hidden treasures, but bestow the hoards
Of Farshidward upon the mendicants
1535 For their relief. Dinto and gems are dust
To him since he must needs go bury them.

May turning heaven bo thy companion,

All justice mayst thou be and self-restraint."

They set the Shah's seal on the document,

And thereupon the courier turned and went.


§ 17

How Bahrdm went to the Chase and slew. Lions

Bahram bade slaves set up the imperial throne
Within the pleasance, then in spring-tide beauty.


75


BAHRAM GilR

They brought the turquoise throne at his command,
And set it 'neath a blossom-shedding tree,

They brought forth wine and cups, and minstrels went
Toward the pleasance with the chiefs. The king
Said to his counsellors : This is the time
Of jollity for men. We all must couch ;

Death treadeth under foot the rolls of fame,

The hall and palace. We shall have enough
Of our own company within the charnel,

Men both of mien and stature though wo be.

The king and beggar carry when they die
Naught but their good and ill away with them.

Wliat toil soo’er men bear is only loss,

For, when they perish, that will perish too.

That praise of us remaineth is enough,

For crown and girdle arc another’s share.

Thou needest innocence and uprightness
That thine enjoyments prove not scath to thee.

My years exceed already eight and thirty,

And many a day hath fleeted in delight,

But, after two score years, grief for the day
Of death is instant with us. If one hair
Turn white upon our lieads we must forgo
All hope of joy ; wlien musk becometh camphor
’Tis ruined ; camphor suiteth not the crown.

Two years more will I spend in feast and sport,

Then, when my strength is somewhat broken, go
Before God’s presence, don the woollen robe,

And bo not thankless for His mercies to me.

For I have passed my days in joy and had
My share of royal crown. Now for the rose,

The apple, the pomegranate, and the quince !

Let not the golden goblet fail of wine ! ^

^ Tho Eittporor Babar (a.d, 1483-1530) in liia diary made similar
good resolutions, which ho did not keep : “ As I intend, when forty
years old, to abstain from wino ; and as I now want aomowhat loss than
ono year of being forty, 1 drinh wine mo6't copioiwZy.’* EHI, iv. 220.


76 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

But when I see the apples amber-cheeked,

The heavens dappled like a leopard’s back,

The fragrant camomile producing seed,

And wine as ruddy as the reveller,

When air is pleasant, neither hot nor cold.

Earth fresh and water blue, what time we don
Our autumn furs, I must to Jaz to hunt,

1536 And hold a hunting-bout upon that plain
To make me a memorial in Iho world.

Meanwhile the onager will grow plump-necked,

And compass lion’s heart and tiger’s strength.

We must take dogs and cheetahs, hawks and falcons,^
For that far faring since it is the spot
For onager and archery, and there
No moment will wc rest from chevying.

The plain that I have set mine eyes upon
Is lower Jaz. There tamarisks are tall
As spear-shafts, there too we shall find the lion,

And have a hunting if we bide our time.”

He waited tiU the clouds of Shahrivar
Arose, then all the world was filled with troops.

From every chme an army keen for strife
Set face toward the monarch of fran.

Who chose among them chiefs of note as hunters,

And carried with him to the chase a force
Of thirty thousand mounted Scimitars.

They took with them pavilions, tent-enelosurl^s,

Tents, beasts, and shielings, while the underlijigs
Went on before Bahram Gur to dig wtJls,

To furnish them withal with wheel and buck(‘t,

And run the water into troughs. The Shah
Came later with his meiny to the chase.

He saw the plain well stocked with onager,

The woods alive with lions, and thus said ; —

^ Two sorts of falcons aro mentioned in the text — the charkb and
the shahfn (falco sacer and falco peregrinator V).


BA HR Am gj)r


77


Wine is our quarry to-iiight, for on tho sand
Aro many lion -tracks, and wc must havo
A lion-hunt to-morrow. Ecst yo thou
In health of body and in merry pin,

And let us drink till daybreak, till tho sun —

The lustre of tho world — ^is bright again.

Our scimitars shall foil the lions first,

Shall fell those valiant dragons. When the woods

Are cleared of lions then tho onager

Shall yield himself a servant to my shafts.”

He 'stayed that night and, when tho morning dawned,
Approached the forest with his men, whereat
A lion, lusty-grown with battening
On onagers, rushed forth, and bravo Bahram
Said to his friends : Though I havo bow and arrows,
And mastery thca'owith, I will assail
Yon lion with the scimitar that none
May call me coward.^’

Donning a shrunk vest
Of wool he mounted on his battle-steed.

Now when that, dragon of a lion saw him
It reared, brought- clown its claws, and sought to strike
The eliargc'r ou tho lu'ad.i The warrior heeled
His steed ajul with his trenchant scimitar.

What- while the lioness made off apaec,

Stnick at llu^ lion's head and clave tho beast 0 .

Down to its middle, filling lions’ hearts

With fear ; yc^t gallantly another one

Oanu^ roaring, one wdiose mate was suckling cubs.

H(^ smote that lion’s neck and parted head

From trunk. One said to him : 0 sun-faced Shah !

Hast thou not any mercy on thyKself ?

Tho wood is full of lions and their young —

^ Blauforrl clesuribo^ a lionosy attacking liiu horse much in this way,
and remarks that Pernian aj)orting pictures goncxulJy represent tho lion
as leaping, not rearing. EP, ii. 33.


75, THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Cubs that are sucklings. Let the lions be,

For in the autumn-time they breed. This forest
Is three leagues deep, and if thou wert to spend
A year in taking lions wouldst not clear it ;

So why impose such labour on thyself ?

The Shah, when first ho sat upon the throne,

Tought lions only as the compact was.^

Now thou art Shah, the world is thine, so why
Fight with them still ? Thou cam'st for onager.”

Old sage,” the Shah said, “ let to-morrow dawn.
And heigh for onager and shaft and me !

But cavaliers and nobles now alive
Can rival me in archery, so when
We give its due to manhood we must take
Accomit of iron mace and scimitar.”

The archmage said : “ Hadst thou ten hoi\S(uncui
with thee.

And like thee in the fight, then Rum and Chin
Would have no crown and throne, and men of wisdom
Would ship their goods oflE. Be the evil eye
Far from thy Grace, and be it thine to feast
Among the roses.”

Then with archimages,

And captains of the host, the Shah departed

Toward his tent-enclosure from the wood

What while the troops acclaimed him, saying thus : —

“ Ne’er may the crown and signet-ring lack thee.”

That paladin then entered his pavilion,

His escort quitting him, and washed his hands
Of sweat. He had with him a tiusty steward,

Who draped a fresh tent for him. There they st^t
Musk, camphor, and rose- water, and spread musk
Withal upon the sleeping-place. Each tent
Had golden tables laid with services
Of ware of Chin where lamb and other meats

^ See Vol. tI. p. 405 acq.


BAHRAM GUR 79

Were served by the chief server. Shah Bahrain Gur,

The eating done^ called for a mighty cup
Of crystal, which a fairy-faced cup-bearer
Brought and consigned it to the just king’s hands,

Who said : “ Ardshir, the groat king, he whose fortune
Made old folk young, was founder of our house,

And we are underlings if we be worthy
E’en of that title. Both in fight and feast,

At counsel and at board, give none but him

The title of world’s lord. What time Sikandar 0. 1538

Came to tvkn. from Rum and wrecked the land,

Since ho was both ungenerous and harsh,

And slew kings six and thirty, monarchs’ lips
Are full of curses, and earth’s surface full
Of vengeance, on him.i Faridun they praise,

And he is cursed by stirrers up of strife.

Throughout the world may only good proceed
From me to small and great. Bring me a herald,”

Ho added, ” one of goodly voice and leading,

Let him go round the host and thus proclaim
O’er way and waste alike ; ‘ Whoe'er shall lay
Within the region of Barkuh and Jaz -
Unlawful hands on augh^; from jewels, gold,

Dinars, and furs to mean and worthless chaff,

Him will 1 horse faeo 1 ail-wards and will have
Two of the soldiery to lead him henee.

His foot shall be made fast beneath his steed,

And to the temple of Azargashasp

Will I dispatch him there to supplicate

All-holy God and worship in the dust

Before tho Fire. I will bestow his goods

On those whom ho hath robbed and wronged withal.

If any horse shall injure growing crops,

Or harm fruit-bearing trees, tho horse’s owner,

Tho Poreiaii pro-Muhainmadan Tiew of Siltandar. Cf. Vol, vi. p. 16.

® Reading with P.


8o THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Be he a noble or of no account,

Shall not escape a year’s imprisonment.

My work is but to carry from the desert
My portion, then go home again rejoicing.’ ”
The more part of the traffickers of Jaz,

And of Barkuh, went out upon the plain,

And with their various packs produced a scone
About the host like a bazar in Chin.


§ i8

How Bahrdm went to hunt the Onager, showed his Skill hefore
the Princes, and returned to Baghdad and Istahhr

Whenas the sun next day displayed its crown
The world-lord' wont to hunt the onager ;

The soldiers strung their bows, the Shah himself
Rode in the rear. He said : If one should take
His bow to shoot at any boast the arrow
Should strike the buttocks and come through the
breast.”

A paladin replied : '^0 king ! consider
Who in this noble host can shoot like that
Among thy friends or foes unless indeed
1539 Thou shoot in person. May thy head and crown
Bor over live. Wlien thou tak’st mace and arrow,

And scimitar, thy warriors are awe-struck
At thy commanding height and royal Grace,

While other archers’ hands lose all their slvongih.”

The Shah said : ’Tis of God. If Ho withdraw it
What strength hath then Bahram ? ”

Ho urged SJuibdlz,

And, nearing a buck onager, lot fly

His arrow, when the moment came, and skewered

Together chest and buttock. As it died


BAHRAM GIJR


8l


The nobles of the golden belt came up ;

They marvelled at his shot, and all applauded ,

They could not see the arrow’s point and feathers,

For they were hidden in the onager.

The warlike cavaliers and soldiers bent
With faces to the ground before Bahr^m,

What while a paladin exclaimed : 0 king !

Ne’er may thine eye behold the ill of fortune.

Thou art a horseman but all we ride asses.

And are but ill at that ! ”

The Shah replied : —

Not mine the arrow, for the AU-conqueror
Assisteth me. None in the world is viler
Than one whoso prop and helper God is not.”

He urged his charger onward, thou hadst said : —
Yon courser is an eagle in its flight ! ”

A gallant onager appeared. Forthwith
The Lion reached out for his scimitar,

And with a sword-stroke clave the beast asunder
In equal halves. Chiefs, nobles, and attendants
Armed with the scimitar, came up to him,

And, when they saw that stroke, a sage exclaimed : —
What swordmanship and might are here I Oh ! may
The evil eye ne’er look upon this Shah.

He hath no semblance save the moon in heavon,i
Beneath him are the heads of this world’s chiefs,
While heaven is lower than his scimitar.

And arrow-point.”

The troops that followed him
Cleared all the plain of onager. He bade
Make rings of gold and grave his name thereon.

He ringed the creatures’ oars and lot them go ;

Six hundred too he branded in a batch,

Then freed them for the honour of his name,

And for his will and pleasure, while a man

1 “ il no laiascra pout-6fcro pas la luno dans lo ciol.” Mobl.

VOL. VII. F


82


THE SHIhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Went round the host proclaiming thus : '' Let none

Sell to the merchants any onagers

On this broad plain but give thorn as a gift,”

They brought him from Barkuh and from the chiefs
Of Jaz abundance of brocade and furs.

1540 These he accepted and then bade rcmiit

Those countries’ tax and toll though both could pay.
Thoir poor and those that earned their bre^ari grow ricli
By reason of his bounty. Mairy too
Had thrones and crowns. Ho wont home from the
chase,

And passed a week in mirth among lus men.

It was his wont to hold an open court
Upon the riding-ground, and thither used
To fare the troops, the men of eloquence,

The wise, the needy, and the suppliants.

” 0 yo that seek your rights ! ” he used to say,

Take shelter from your oxiemics with God,

While ye that have not slept through toil for mo,

And yet have had no portion of my wealth,

Come to the king upon the riding-ground,

And haply he wiU make your fortunes now.

If any one is old, past work, and weak,

Or, being young, is crippled by disease ;

If any of the people be in debt,

And worried by the stress of creditors ;

If any children are left fatherless,

And yet ask not of those possessed of wealth ;

Or if the children’s mothers are in want
In secret and conceal thoir poverty ;

Or if, again, a wealthy man hath died,

And left behind young children in this land,

Whom an executor, devoid of fear
And reverence for God, is plundering,

Keep nothing of this kind conce^iled from mo ;

I want not people that conceal their wants.


bahrAm G^JR 83

I will emich the poor; I will restore
The souls of misbelievers to the Faith ;

I will defray the debts of those who have
No money and whose hearts are sad, and open
My treasury’s door to modest indigence.

If wrong befall from officers of mine
Defrauding children that have lost their sires,

Those doers of injustice wiU I gibbet
Alive for wronging one of noble race.”

The Shah, advanced in wisdom and glad-hearted,
Went from the hunting-field toward Baghdad,^

And to his presence came the haughty chiefs,

Both alien and those akin to him.

He bade his retinue disperse and sought
His own dehghtsome palace. They adorned
The bower of Barzin, the handmaids there
Were clamorous for musk and wine, the Idols
Got ready song and harp, the hall was cleared
Of strangers. What with harp and wine and pipe,
And sound of song, the vaulted heaven seemed
To greet the air. All night from every chamber
They brought forth bands of dancers that the Shah
Might be not sad of heart. He spent two weeks
In mirth, and oped his treasury day and night,

Gave largess, and departed for Istakhr,

Placed on his head the glorious, royal crown,

Unlocked the bower of Kharrad, and furnished
The Idols there with treasure and with drachms.

If any in that golden women’s house
Had not a crown aloft an ivory throne
The monarch of fran growled mightily,

Bit at Kuzbih his lip in indignation.

And said : “ The tribute from Khazar and Rum
I give, when paid, to these, but for the nonce
Now requisition ass-loads of dinars,

1 Cf. Vol. Vi. p. 254 .


U. 1541


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


84

And treasure-loads from Ispah^i and Rai.

A women’s house when in such case as this
Will grow all desolate and not befit
The fortunes of the monarch of Ran.”

They spread brocade upon the floor, and caused
Fresh tribute to be paid in every lands
The world thus passed awhile an easy life —

No war, no toil, no conflict, and no strife.


§ 19

How the KJidn of Chin led forth a Host to war mill BalirtuH,
and how the Iranians asked Quarter of the Khan and
submitted to him

Anon news came to Hind, Rum, Turkistan,

Chin, and all parts inhabited : Tho heart
Of Shah Bahram is given up to sport,

He taketh no account of any one,

He hath no outposts, no men are on guard,

And on the marches aro no paladins.

For love of sport he sufieroth all to drift.

And knoweth nothing of the world’s affairs.”

Now when the Kh4n of Chin heard this he levied
Troops from Khutan and Chm, paid them, and set
His face toward frto. No one took thought
About Bahrtoi while Caesar for his part
Marched forth in force from Rum. When tidings
reached

Iran from Rum and Hind, from Chin and all
The settled regions : Caesar hath assembled
And led an army forth while troops aro soon
Advancing from Khutan and Chin,” the chieftains,

The warriors old and young within Iran,

All came before BahrW Gur, full of wrath.

Of rage, and bitterness, and bluntly said : —


bahrAm g^r


S5

Thy glorious fortune hath displayed its back.

The heads of kings should be intent on fighting.

But thy heart is intent on sport and feasting ;

The crown and throne are worthless in thine eyes,

So are Iran, the treasure, and the host.’’

The Shah, the ruler of the world, thus an severed 0. 1542
Those archimages, his admonishers : —

“ My helper is the Master of the world,

One who is wiser than the wisest sages.

I by the conquering virtue of great kings
Will guard Iran against the claws of Wolves ;

By fortune, host, wealth, scimitar will I
Avert this pain and travail from the realm.”

Ho toyed on just the same, his nobles’ eyes
Were full of blood through him, and all folk said : —

This Shah will alienate all good men’s hearts.”

Yet Shah Bahram’s heart was awake and full
Of trouble at the tidings. Secretly
Ho organised the host while folk at largo
Eaiew not his privy purpose. All Iran
Was in dismay at what they saw of him
Their hearts wore riven by anxiety ;

Tiioy all were in despair about the Idng,

And hold his rule and person in contempt.

Now when the Khan was drawing nigh Iran
News of him reached the monarch of the brave,

Who called to him the aspiring Gustaham,

And spake much of the Khto and of his host.

This Gustaham was paladin in chief,

And minister, and fight came as a feast
To him. The Shah called Mihr Phuz withal,

Son of Bihzad, ho called too Mihr Barzin,

Son of Kharrad, Bahram, son of Piruz,

Son of Bahrtoi, Ruhham and Kliarzarwan,

Which twain were of Sasanian lineage,

One king of Rai, and of Gilan the other,


86


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

Who stood up stoutly on the day of battle.

With Rad, son of Barzin, approved in fight,

Who was the ruler of Zabulistan,

Karan too and Burzmihr and Dad the grim,

Son of Barzin, while of the franians
He chose him out a hundred thousand men,

Men of discretion, well besecn in war,

Committing to a scion of the race
In power — ^Narsi, the brother of the Shah
So pure of Paith — ^those cavaliers and throne
And crown that he might guard the treasury
And realm. Narsi, that man of noble mien,

Possessed of Grace and Faith and loving looks,

Took up the charge, and thereupon the Shiih
Chose from the host twelve thousand cavaliers
Fit for the day of battle — ^veterans
With ox-head maces and in coats of mail —

And marched thence to Azar AbSdagan ;

But, as he took from Pfe so small a host,

The mighty and the common folk alike

Thought : Shdh Bahrtoi is fleeing from the fight,

And making off toward Azargashasp.”

What time Bahram set face toward the Fire
From Caesar came an envoy swift as wind,

1543 Narsi received and lodged him fittingly
Within the palace.

Now the host approached
The high priest to got knowledge of Bahram,

And said : “ Wliy scattcreth ho his treasures thus
Instead of heaping them like other Sh&hs ?

He squandereth gold evorywhoro because
He knoweth not its woi*th. Both citizens
And soldiers are dispersed, and all have sought
Some course of betterment.”

At length, when vnrds
Had waxen old, all folk agreed to send


BAHRAM GtlR


A man of reputation to the KJidn
Of Chin, Because/’ said they, “ ere evils come
With war and pillage we must try all means
To save Iran : the master of the house
Is lost.”

Narsi replied : “ This is not well ;

The world hath not a bed for such a stream.

Shall I ask quarter of the king of Chin ?

I will clothe earth with men and elephants.

There are arms, treasure, and courageous men,
Whose swords would send dust out of fire itself.
WTiy this despair concerning Shah Bahram
Because he started with a little band ?

Wliy have your thoughts turned evil thus ? If ye
Think ill then ill will come.”

The frdnians heard,
And answered him perversely, saying : “ Bahram,
Departing hence, took not a host with him.

And must we not resign our hearts to grief,

For when the lOian shall come to fight Iran
Our land will lose both scent and hue ? The foe
Will trample on us shamefully, Narsi
And all the host will be o’orthrown. All means
Will wo endeavour to maintain our place
And standing here.”

There was an archimage,
A skilful, learned, single-hearted man,

Hum^i by name, and him the Iranians chose
To gird his loins and undertake their cause,

Then wrote tho Kli^n upon their own behalf
A cringing letter which began : “ Thy slaves
Are we and bow down to thy will and pleasure.
We send thee of tho produce of Ir^n
Together with our homage and excuses,

With gifts too, toll and tribute, for we have
No power to stand against the king in war/'


88


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

So from frin the blest Humai arrived
With certain nobles — men of honest counsels —

And gave the Kian the message of the chiefs,

Whereat his heart rejoiced. Humai withal
Spake of the swift remove of Shah Bahram,

And of his hasty flight without a host,

• 1544 Before the noble Khan whose heart and soul

Expanded like a rose. He told the Turlmians : —

‘‘ Now we have saddled the revolving sky !

Who ever took tan without a fight

As we have by our counsel, wit, and patience ? ”

He gave great presents to the messenger,

Drachms and no few dinars, and wrote this answer : —
May wisdom company the pure of soul.

I do agree to what hath been proposed
By this ambassador of honest men.

Wlien with my host I reach Marv 1 will make
The clime like pheasant’s plumes,^ and streams i‘uji
milks

By justice, prudence, and magnificence.

I will await the tribute from frdn —

The Lions’ gifts and taxes. I shall como
To Marv, or rather I shall pass it by.

Not wishing to cause damage by my troops."

The messenger returned in haste and told
His converse with the Khan who led his host
To Marv, the world was black with horsemen's dust.
When he had rested he concerned himself
With feasting ; no one thought about Baliram.

At Marv there was no rest or sleep for sound
Of harp and lyre, the troops were all abroad.

There was no watch, no prospect of a shock,

But all was sport., wine, parties, twang of lyre,

And feeling night and day secure from war.

^ Because “tadarv,’’ pheasant, rhymes with “Marv.”

* Reading with P. and T.


89


bahrAm GUR

The Khan was looking for the Iranians’ tribute,
Wroth that it came so late. Bahram for liis part
Slept not but guarded well his host from foes,
Kept his spies busy both by night and day,

And threw in feast and wine no time away.


§ 20

How Bahram attached the Host of the Khan and took him

As soon as tidings came to Shah Bahram : —

'' The Klian and his great host are all at Marv,’'

He led his soldiers from Azargashasp,

Each with two horses but no baggage-train.

With Ruman helmet, morion, and cuirass
He hurried on like wind by day and night,

His soldiers rushing like a mountain-stream,

And reached Amul by way of Ardabil.

Departing thence he marched on to Gurgan,

Enduring all the chieftains’ toil and pain,

And thence came to the city of Nisa ;

One from Bisa preceded him as guide.

O’er mount and waterless and wayless tracts, 0, 1545

At times unwonted, through the night till moxn,

He marched and had the watch out night and day.

Thus swifter than a pheasant ^ in its flight
He drew toward Maiv. A runner from his scouts
Arrived and told : “ The Khto attondeth not
To state-affairs but followeth the chase
At Kashmihan with wicked Ahriman
As minister.”

Bahram rejoiced to hear it ;

His travail seemed but wind. There for a day
He rested and, when steed and Shah and troops

^ Sco p. 88, nott.


90 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Were all refreshed, reached Kashmihan. At dawn,
What time the Lustre of the world arose
Above the hills, all ears were filled with blast
Of trumpet and all eyes with glint of flag-tops,

The din of battle went up from the chase,

And filled the ears of Shah and troops. The clamour
Split mighty lions’ ears. Thou wouldst have said : —
“The clouds are hading,” wouldst have said : “The
moon

Is raining blood,” so sanguine was the dust
Upon that battlefield ! The Klian, aroused
And dazed, was ta’en by Khazarwto. Withal
Three hundred of the noblemen of Chin
Were captured and fast bound on saddlc-back.

The Shah advanced on Marv from Kashmihan,

Thin as a reed with riding for so long.

The few of Chin that yet remained at Marv
They slew. He followed up the fugitives
For thirty leagues ; behind him was Karan
Of Pars. Returning to the hunting-ground
He gave the booty to the troops. When thus
He raised his head in triumph over Chin
He recognised in all the power of God,

Who to his other good had given the boon
Of might, and is the Lord of sun and moon.


§ 31

How Bahrdm tooh a Pledge from the T'Ardnians^ how he set uy
a Pillar to delimit the Realm, and 'placed Shahra upon the
Throne of T'drdn

Bahram Gur stayed to rest at Marv and when
Both Shah and war-steed wore refreshed ho chose
Bukh&r^i for the next attack, for ho


bahrJm gur


91


Had changed from gentleness to bitterness.

He reached Amwi ^ in one day and one nighty
Intent on conquest not on chase and sport.

He reached it in the night’s first watch and crossed ^ 54 ^
The river ^ and the dcvsert of Farab.

Whenas the air was golden with the sun,

And doffed its skirt of lapis-lazuli,

The world was like a falcon’s wing with dust
Wliat time tlfe world-lord j)assed by Mai and Margh.

He smote the Turkman host and sot on fire
Their fields and fells, the stars coiicoalod thoinsolvos
Behind the moon’s skirts while the fathers made
Their way across the bodies of their sons.

All of the Turkmans that were loading men,

Both veteran and youthful swordsmen, came
Afoot in evil case before Bahram,

With full hearts abjectly, and said : '' 0 Shah !

0 mighty one ! 0 favoui*ite of the stars !

0 chief of all the nobles of the world !

Since now the Klian is captive that broke faith
Shed not the blood of those that did no wrong.

For tyranny becometh not the gre^at.

If thou dcinandest tribute it is well,

But why behead the guiltless ? All of us.

Both men and women, are thy slaves and are
Thy vanquished in the fight,”

The Shah’s heart burned

For them. Ho sewed up with the liand of wisdom
The eye of his displeasure. In concern
That man of God restrained his warriors’ hands
From shedding blood. His favour thus secured,

The man of wrath appeased, the leading chiefs
Agreed to pay a heavy tribute yearly.

The Shah was well content ; ho took the tribute.

And further sums in lieu of pillaging.

^ Probatly the modern Charjui. ^ The Oxus.


92 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

He turned and reached the city of Farab,

His cheeks were flushed and smiles wore on his lips.

He paused, allowed his troops to rest a week,

And called to him the potentates of Chin.

He reared a column of cement and stone,

Which none, save by the Shah’s command, might pass
Out of Iran, Khalaj, and Turkislan.

He made the line between them the Jihiin.

There was among the troops ono Sliahra hight,

A man of wisdom, rank, success, and fame.

Bahram made him the ruler of Turan,

And made his throne the crown upon the moon.

When Shahra sat upon the silver throno
He girt his loins and opened wide his hands,

Set too the golden crown upon his head,

And through the land joy universal spread.


§ 22

How Bahram wrote to announce his Viciorj/ to his
Brother Narsi and rctumed to trin

0 . 1547 The business of Tur^n achieved, and when

The Shah’s heart was released from care, ho bade
A scribe attend him, called for pen and ink
And silk of Chin, and wrote Narsi a letter
About the Turkman war and what his troops
Had done. It thus began : The nobles praise
Through me — a slave — ^tho Maker of the world —
The Lord of victory and mastery,

The Lord of Saturn, Mars, and Moon, the Lord
Of lofty, circling heaven, the Lord of moan
And miserable dust. The great and lowly
Are underneath His governance, and all
That is to be is subject to His word.


93


BAHRAM GtfR

I have indited from the coasts of Chin
A letter to my brother in fran,

And this same letter, writ on painted silk,

Is meant too for our chiefs and folk at large.

Those that were not engaged against the Khan
Must hear the tale from us who fought with him.

His army was so vast that thou hadst said : —

‘ The dust thereof hath smeared the sky with pitch ! ’
The coasts became as ’twere a sea of blood,

The unjust’s fortune drooped, and ho was taken
Because ^ the tanning sky was weary of him.

Now have 1 brought him on a camel bound.

With wounded liver and with blood-filled eyes.

The necks of all the proud arc bent, their tongues
Are gentle, and their hearts are hot withm them.
Those now pay tribute who were enemies.

And they that erred have come back to the way,

I and my host, as my well-wishers would.

Will follow this di,spatch.”

The wind-foot camels,

Foam-scattering, parted like a thunder-clap,

And when the letter reached Narsi the heart
Of that prince throbbed with joy. The high priest
came

With all the heroes of the royal race
Before Narsi, the palace rang with joy.

And all gave car to that report. The nobles
Were pricked at heart for shame before the ShMr
By reason of their fault. Among the chiefs
Six score and ten and more went to Narsi
To proffer their excuses, saying thus : —

” Perverse suggestions and the Div’s behest
Have led us to transgress the World-lord’s way.

To such a host as that one would presume

That God would ope Heaven’s gate. ’Tis marvellous,

^ Beading with P.


94 the SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

c. 1548 Surpassing thought and all the providence
Of wise and learned men ! In thy reply,

’Mongst matters fair and foul, vouchsafe to give
A place to our excuse. Although the chiefs
Have erred the illustrious Shah may pardon them.’’

Narsa agreed and said : So will I do
As to release the Shah's heart from revenge,”

He wrote at once an answer to the letter.
Disclosing matters fair and foul, and said : —

The Iranians in their pain and misery,

And for the sake of country, children, treasure.
Went for protection to the Khan of Chin,
Despairing of their own illustrious Shah ;

’Twas not through enmity, offence, or strife ;

No other Shah had gained their proforence.

Now if the conqueror, the king of kings,

Will pardon he will make their dark night day.

Me they selected as the advocate
To urge their cause, and bade me : ' Plead for us.' ”
An archimage, by name Burzmihr, agreed
To go upon that embassage, approached
The monarch of the world, and told him all.

The Shah was well contented by the words,

The fire of his fierce anger ceased to fume.

Then from Chaghto, IChatlan, Balkli, and Buldiara
The chieftains went with tribute, and the archmages
From the GbarcMs with sacred twigs, and pleaded
Before the worshippers of Fire, and thus
From year to year all those that had the means
Went to the court with taxes and with tribute.

When the Fire-fane was ready and the place
To hold the feasts of New Year and of Sada
The Shah approached Azar Abadagan,

He and his nobles and his men of name ;

They went to make their prayers before tbo Fire,
And all the archmages offered reverence.


bahrAm gjjr


95


The Shah gave largess to the worshippers.

And passing thence proceeded to Istakhr,

Which was the glory of the king of kings.

From ox-hides and from sheep-skins, home before him
Upon the backs of elephants, were scattered
A thousand quintals and eight score of largess ;

Part was in drachms, the rest in gold dinars —

Coin that an archimage of Pars would call
In ancient Persian paidawasls.” ^ Then
Ho brought his scented leather bags of coin,

And lavished gold and silver. If he saw
Upon a journey any broken bridge.

Or heard of any hostelry in ruins
From his ojS&cials, he would give command
For their repair out of his treasury
Without forced labour. On the poor withal,

And those that toiled to earn their daily bread,

He lavished drachms, for bounty never irked him, o. 1549
While, thirdly, on the honest folk, the widows,

And infant orphelins, he showered silver.

Fourthly, on those too old for work or warfare,

And, fifthly, on all those of noble birth
That were despised by wealthy folk, and sixthly
On folk that coming from a lengthy journey
Paraded not their poverty, ho lavished
A treasure, and looked round him to do good.

All booty he made over to his troops,

And had no notion of amassing wealth.

Ho bade a pious archimago to bring him
The croAvn worn by the Khan of Chin. They took
The jewels out and u»sed them and the gold
To grace a Fire-fane’s walls and decorate
The throne-top of Azar. Thence ho departed
To Taisafun where dwelt Narsi with those
Archmages that advised him. All the chiefs,

1 Tho “ paidawasl ” was a Hilver coin = to five dinars.


96 THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The great men of Iran, and governors,

Came forth to meet the Shdh, and when Narsi
Beheld that royal head and crown, the flags
Resplendent, and that mighty host, ho lighted,
With aU the great men and august archmages.

And did obeisance to Bahram who bade him
To mount again, and grasped him by the hand,
Then went up to the golden throne and sat
What while the chiefs stood girded in his presence.
He lavished treasure on the indigent,

They opened wide the prison’s narrow doors,

The age was filled with jollity and justice,

The hearts of all were strangers to distress.

He banished toil and grief from every clime,

He made a banquet for the great, and all
That hasted to attend the royal board
Received a preso^nt worthy of a lord.


§ 23

How Bahram wrote a Letter of Directions to Ms Officials

The third day at a feast made for the nobles
A scribe was brought and set before the Shah,

Who, when his visage was relaxed with wine,

Wrote, joying in his lovingkindlincss,

A letter which began with praise of one
That hath with knowledge laved his soul, made
wisdom

The jewel of his heart, won opulence
By his own toil and hardihood, aclmowledgcd
That all good is from God, hath sought for wisdom,
c. 1550 Made friends of sages, knoweth that from justice
Naught will proceed but good, and knocketh not
Upon the portal of malignity ; —


BA HR Am gjjr


97


If one complaineth of mine officers.

My noble chieftains or my men of war;

They have no prospect but the cell or gibbet,

And, if slain, vile committal to the dust.

Endeavour to make others’ travail small.

Give joy and happiness to mourners’ hearts.

Because the world hath stayed, will stay, with none ;
Be just and inoffensive, that sufficeth.

I am exemplary of what I say,

And an incentive to all righteousness,

Eor what a multitude of troops assailed
Me and this noble company, while I
Departed with a little host, and those
Who were mine enemies are now my friends !

One noble personage — ^the Kh^n of Chin,

A world-lord having signet, crown, and throne —

I captured, and the Turkmans’ fortunes fell.

AU-holy God made me victorious,

My foemen’s heads have come to dust. Be service
My sole employ, mine every thought bo right.

I will impose no tax for seven years
On subject or compeer. I write this letter
In our old tongue to ohiefs and to officials
That they may treat my subjects in accord
To righteous precedent and take no thought
Of doing wrong. Dispatch to me the names
Of those that are in want within your towns,

And in their portion have no day of joy,

And well will I content them. Furthermore,

If there be any men of noble birth.

Who can recall to memory bettor days.

Them also with my treasures set past need,

And magnify the wise. The folk in debt.

And empty-handed, who are everywhere
Looked down upon and scorned, them too relieve
Of debt and write their names upon the roll.

VOL. VII. G


98 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Pray yc to God to keep our heart thus true
To custom and the Faith, joy in this precept,

And well entreat the underlings. Moreover,
Despise not your own slaves, for they, like you,
Are God’s. Let one of wealth, and fit therefor,
Entrust to learned men his children. Make
Their spirits rich in knowledge and encrown
Their heads with wisdom. Keep your hands afar
From others’ wealth, be ye without offence.

And worshippers of God. Be diligent,

Break not our fealty,^ and eradicate
The stumps, the suckers, and the roots of evil.
0.^1551 Seek not to do your neighbours injury.

Especially the magnates and the rich :

Make God your refuge, keep His ordinance,

And your souls pledges of your love for Him.
Whoever hath grown gi’oat from nothingiioss,

And raised himself to independency,

Call him not great, such greatness dwindloth soon.
Be just, be worshippers of God, and wash
Perverseness and injustice from your hands.

All ye that have ! withhold not from the poor ;
Incline to holiness and act aright ;

Break not the hearts and baclcs of suppliants ;
Mishap is nigh to all things done amiss.

God’s favour be upon the soul of him
To whom humanity is warp and woof.”

When they had written thus on lustrous silk
The scribe dipped into musk his pen and wrote
The heading thus : ” The monarch of the world,
The heart of justice, knowing good and ill,

The lord of pardon, Grace, and puissance,

Bahram Gur, the all-bounteous king of kings.

To his marchlords and those beneath his rule —
The wise and understanding, warlike chiefs.”

1 Reading with P.


bahrAm gvr


99


Then runners, caraliers, and cameleers
Went with the letter everywhere with guides,

And when it came to all the provinces.

To every nobleman and chief, all said : —

Thanks be to God, the world-lord is devout.’'
Thereat the women, men, and children went
In all lands from their houses to the plain,

And all invoked a blessing silently
Upon that upright monarch of the world.

Then set themselves to feast and called for wine,
And harp and minstrelsy. They feasted half
The day, the other half they toiled.

At springtide

It was proclaimed before the court at dawn : —

Let those of substance eat and give away.

Let them thank us for that which they enjoy,

And let the poor come to the treasury.

And carry thence five drachms of proper weight.
Together with throe mans ^ of bright, old wine
Hued like pomegranate-blossom or like gold.”

The world disposed itself to merriment,

The shouts of revellers filled town and hamlet

Until they bought a coronal of roses

For two dinars and gave without complaint

A drachm for a narcissus-spike. The old

Grew young of heart with joy, the streams ran milk.

The Sh^ thanked God on seeing all the world

Thus glad.

One day he thus addressed Narsi : —
Depart hence with the signet and the crown.

I have bestowed upon thee Khur^s§,n ;

Cause it to flourish ; joy our subjects’ hearts ;

Be nothing if not just ; stint not thy hand
Within this Place of Passage.^ If our father

^ (7/. Vol, i. p. 290 note.

“ “ n’intoTiomps jamais lo passage 4 travors oo pays.” Mobl.


0. I5S2


loo THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI

Sought ill he quaked therefor like naked men
Beneath an autumn-blast.”

He bade prepare

A robe of honour for Narsi, thus voiding
An opulent treasury, and said to him : —

'' God shelter thee, and be the sun’s throne thine.”

The journey took two se’nnights, then Narsi
Assumed in peace the rule of Kiiur^an.

When he had gone one week the Shah, whose heart
Was freed from care, bade, and the high priest went
Before him, bringing certain of the nobles.

The Shah addressed him, saying : '' Caesar’s business
Is dragging on, and his ambassador
Is waiting long for his dismission.

What sort of man is he, and from the standpoint
Of wisdom where is ho, for wisdom straiglitenoth
The soul ? ”

The high priest answered : Blest be thou,
Lord of the world, and dowered with Grace divine.

He is advanced in years, discreet, and modest,

A man of goodly speech and gentle voice,

A pupil of the school of Falatun,^

A man of wisdom, learned, and nobly born.

He left Bum, full of energy, but now.

Since he hath been here, he hath grown depressed,

And torpid like a snake in winter-time,®

With weak frame and with cheeks of reod-like hue.

His servitors are all like sheep before
A hunting cheetah, but regard not us ;

Such are their manhood and their valiancy
They think none in this land a maia at aU.”

Bahram Gur answered thus the high priest : God
Bestoweth Grace and diadem and might.

If He hath given me victory, and turned
My fortune’s night to day, still Caesar too

^ Plato. 2 Literallj^ “ in tho month of JDai.”


BAHRAM G^R lot

Is of imperial race, is great, is sprung

From Salm whose head was crowned by Faridun,

And can recount his lineage sire by sire.

He acteth in a manly, prudent way,

And hath not turned to madness like the Khmi.

At audience we will call the envoy in,

To see if what he saith be to the point,

And then I will dismiss him graciously.

For men are useful to me in this world ;

One is for war and bringeth troops, another
For feasting and doth bring a golden crown.

I must maintain the honour of fran.

The man that treat eth with great men is great.”

The high priest praised him lovingly and said : — 0. 1553

Live happily so long as heaven revolveth.

He shall not speak save to exalt thy fame :

May St thou be chief among the men of name.”


§ 24


How Bahrdm called hefore him the Envoy of Cmsar^ and how
the Envoy questioned and answered the Archmages

The next day when the sun displayed its crown,

And rays proceeded from the vaulted sky,

The monarch of the world sat on his throne,

And called the envoy in before his lords.

That old man sage, experienced, eloquent,

Of understanding and retentive mind.

Approaching with dejected head and arms
Enfolded, kneeled before the monarch’s throne.
Bahram both greeted and made much of him,

Set him upon the turquoise throne and said : —

” Here thou hast sojourned long ; art thou not weary
Of looking on this land ? War with the Kh&n,


102


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Which closely partnered me, withheld me from thee ;
Now all our case is altered, and thy sojourn
Exceedeth bounds. To that which thou shalt say
We will reply, deriving from thy words
Good rede.”

The ancient envoy praised him, saying : —
May time and earth ne’er lose thee. Every king
Possessed of wisdom joyeth in the words
Of sages ; sages are more nigh to God ;

Those that think evil have the darker day.

Midst this world's chieftains thou art chief, who art
At once Shah, chief, and best. Thy tongue’s a balance,
Thy words are jewels, and who o’er wnll see
Gems weighed ’gainst gold 1 Thou art possessed of
knowledge,

Of counsel, sense, and Grace, and all the methods
Of conquering kings ; thou art possessed of wisdom
And holy redo, and master of the wise.

Though Csesar’s envoy I am thy slave’s slave.

I carry Caesar’s greeting to the Shiih : —

‘ May this head, throne, and crown for over be.’

And furthermore I have it in command
To ask seven questions of thy men of lore.”

The Shah replied : Proceed ; the highest honours
Await the eloquent.”

Ho bade the high j)riest
Come to his presence with the famous sages,

But sighs were on his lips the while in view
Of what the man might ask. ‘‘ What arc,” ho thought,
0. ISS 4 The seven mysterious things whereof this Ruman
Would question us '? ”

The high priest with the learned,
Men mighty in all lore, came, and the spokesman
Revealed the secret, telling to the high priest
The words of Caesar : What is ' the within ’

In thy nomenclature, what ' the without,’


bahrAm gur


103


0 guide, who hast no other name therefor ?

What is " the above,' my lord, what ‘ the beneath ’ ?
What is ‘ the infinite ’ and what ' the vile ' ?

What hath most names and ruleth everywhere ? ”

Haste not,” the high priest answered thus the sage,
And turn not from the path of understanding.”

He then proceeded : 0 thou man of wisdom !

Give ear to each reply that I shall make :

There is one answer only to thy words.

As to thy question touching ^ the without,'

And ‘ the within,' it is an easy one :

The heaven is ^ the without,’ air ^ the within ' ;

They are the Glory of the Omnipotent ;

God, touching this world, is 'the infinite/

For lore to turn thee from Him is ' the vile ' ;

‘ The above ’ is Paradise, Hell ' the beneath,'

And he is wicked that doth fear not God.

Next as to that with many names whoso will
Prevaileth everywhere : 0 ancient ! wisdom
Hath many names, and wisdom compasseth
The will of kings. One man may call it love,

Another faith, but in its absence all
Is pain and tyiunny. The eloquent
Term it uprightness and the fortunate
Astuteness ; 'tis at whiles long-suffering,

At whiles trustworthiness, for speech therewith
Is safe. So divers are the names of wisdom
That they exceed accompt. AUow that naught
Surpasseth it ; it is the chief of goods,

And Imowcth this world’s hoarded mysteries,

Which mortal vision cannot penetrate.

Again, the stars that glitter in the sky
Are what the master can afford to slight
For understanding of the Maker's work.

The eye that gazeth cannot reckon them,

And heaven above is unattainable


104 the shah NAM a OF FIRDAVSt

‘ As being measureless, so thou mayst scorn
Such reckonings and processes of Fate.

One that can follow not an arrow’s course,

Shrewd though he be, will marvel still thereat ;

Then what can be more futile, favoured sir !

Than to compute heaven’s stars '? This much I know,

And if another replication be

’Tis that the Maker’s mysteries are vast.”

0. isss Wlien Csesar’s spokesman heard he kissed the
ground,

And offered praise. “ World -ruling Shah,” ho said.
Ask nothing more of God, for all the world
Is thine to bid, the heads of all the gi‘eat
Are under thy control, the world hath not
A king like thee in mind, thou praised by all
The high-bom nobles ! while thy minister
In knowledge passoth sage and archimage.

All the philosophers are slaves to him,

And at his wisdom hang their heads.”

Bahrain,

On hearing, showed his pleasure, his heart brightened.
He bade a robe of honour be made ready
Of things most valued in his treasury,

And gave the archimago withal ten purses
Of drachms with raiment, steed, and much besides,
And then the envoy of illustrious Csesar
Went from the royal presence to liis lodging.

When Sol displayed its hand upon the sky
The king of kings sat on his golden throne,

And Caesar’s envoy came to court, and with him
The high priest wise and worshipful. They went
With joy before the king of kings, conversing
On many matters, and the Shah’s high priest
Said to the envoy : Matchless, peerless sago !

What thing is so injurious that we

Must weep at its occurrence 1 What know’st thou


bahrAm gjjr


105


So useful to the world that men become
Exalted when it chanceth ?

Said the envoy : —

The wise aye will be great and powerful.

The person of the foolish is more vile
Than clay and undeserving of all good.

Thou spakest of the unwise and of the wise.

And hast received^ maybe, the right response.”

The high priest said to him : '' Consider well,

Reflect, and put not fish upon the dry.”

The envoy said : ” 0 man approved by all !

One well may quote the sayings of the wise.

But, if thou loiowest another answer, speak,

For knowledge giveth increment to fame.”

The high priest answered : ‘‘ Think, for speech

resulteth

From thought and brain, and know thou that the death
Of one least harmful is the greatest loss
Of all, but thou mayst joy when bad men die,

Albeit death is common to us all.

This then is profit and the other loss :

Let wisdom judge the answer of us both.”

The Ruman gave assent to what he heard ;

Those words seemed excellent to him ; he smiled,

Did reverence to the Shah and said to him : —

“ How happy is the country of fr^n !

For others look not on a king of kings
Like thee, or on a high priest such as thine.

Thou art the world’s high crown in understanding,

In priests thou art the greatest of the great.

Wouldst thou from Csesar tribute ? Be it so.

Because thy minister is sovereign
In wisdom,” and his words rejoiced the king.

Whose heart grew fresh as roses in the spring.


0. 1556


io6


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§ 25


How Bahrdm dmnissed Ccesar^s Envoy and charged his
own Officials

The envoy left the presence of the Shkh,

The night came on, the Sable Banner rose,

The men of lore were weary of discourse,

The valiant monarch sought his ladies’ bower.

The circhng vault of heaven rested not,

But roused the sleepers from their, dr owsihead.

The fountain of the sun set up its flag,

The world-Shah’s head woke lightly from repose.

The chamberlain unlocked the audience-door.

The king sat down uj)oxi the throne of gold.

He bade a robe of honour be made ready,

The envoy summoned. Indian seijuitars
With golden scabbards noble steeds beti‘apped
With gold, dinars, gems, musk, and spiceiy,

Beyond that ancient man’s imaginings,

The shrewd Shah gave the envoy, then was busied
With his own folk’s affairs. By his command
The high priest, who was counsellor withal.
Approached him with a noble company,

And he apportioned all the land among
Those warlike paladins, gave drachms and steeds
And signet -rings and casques, and, to the greatest.
Thrones, crowns, and provinces. He filled the world
With right, and small and great rejoiced in him.

He banned the unjusfc with chilling words, uulargessed,
And, after, thus harangued the archimages : —

Ye sages worshipful and pure of heart !

The world for us hath many memories
Of doings of the Shahs unjust and just,

Whose hands oft-times were stretched for ill what while
Their persons lurked mid case and luxury.^

^ Reading with P.


BA HR Am GUR


107


The world was frighted by these evil men,

The hearts of all the good were rent in twain *,

All hands were occupied with evil-doing,

And none was instant in the cause of God ;

The Div’s work everywhere prevailed ; hearts ceased
To fear the Master of the world. The head ^557

Of virtues and the hand of ill, the door
Of understanding and the quest of wisdom,

Are laid upon the Shah's neck, and in him
Especially are seen both right and wrong.

My sire, who stretched his hand out to injustice,

Was not a holy man, wise or devout.

Hold not his actions strange, for rust attacked
The bright steel of his heart. Consider too
The experience of Jamshid and Shah Kaus
For having sought the guidance of the Div.

My father in like manner followed them,

And washed not his dark soul in wisdom’s stream.

His subjects writhed, and many lost their lives
Through his severity. Now he hath gone.

Hath left behmd him but an evil name,

And hath no praise from any, yet let us

Give blessings to his so\il, for God forbid

That it should writhe through our vindictiveness ; ^

And now that I am seated 011 his throne
His way will doubtless be to Paradise.

I ask the world's Lord to bestow upon me,

Alike in public and in private, strength
To treat my subjects with humanity,

And make pure musk out of the darksome dust,

That when therewith my body shall conjoin
None wronged by mo may pluck mo by the skirt.

Put ye too on tlio robe of uprightness,

With hearts washed clean from wrong, for none is born
Unless to die, bo he of Persian, Arab,

Or Euman race ; death's charge is lion-like,


io8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And from its claws none can withdraw the neck ;

It maketh quarry of the rending lion,

The dragon’s body ’scapeth not its toils.

Where are the heads and crowns of kings of kings '?
Where are the mighty and the glorious chiefs ?

Wliere are the cavaliers and haughty ones ?

I see no trace of them within the world.

Where are its fair who joyed those chieftains’ souls ?
Know thou that all whose cheeks are ’neath the shroud
Are wedded to the dust. Let all of us
Have hands both clean and good, and not commit
The world to evil ways. I swear by God,

The Lord of all, who gave to me the Grace,

With crown and throne, high birth and quality,

That if an officer of mine shall wrong
The mean or mighty by a pinch of dust
I will consume his body in the fire,

Or hang him to a gibbot by the neck.

If in the watches of the night a thief

Shall steal a poor man’s quilt I will make good

His loss from mine own treasury with brocade,

And wash the hearts of mourners from their woe ;
While if a sheep be taken from the flock
In dark night or in snow-storm I will give
C. 1558 Instead thereof a steed of noble race,

And God forbid that I should ask for thanks*

If in a war against mine enemies
A cavalier is wounded in the fight
I will assign him yearly maintenance,

I will not leave his children in distress.

Praise ye the Judge that knoweth what is good

Throughout eternity. Let none lay hand

On water or on fire except the priests

That are fire-worshippers. Slay not draught-oxen,

For they are of avail in husbandry,

Unless past work and worthless to their owner.


BAHRAm GtR


ID9

Pack-oxen too must not be slain, the land
Else will grow void of grace. Deliberate
In all things with the men of loro and break not
The hearts of children that are fatherless.

Be alien from the promptings of the Div,

In fight ensue not feast. If I require

My subjects to pay taxes I abjure

God, throne, and crown. Since Yazdagird, my father,

Did evil, to redress that wrong have I

Disseminated justice. Let your hearts

All joy to do it and in gratitude

Observe the Cult of Fire. God may forgive him.

And guide him out of Hell to Para^se.

Give pleasure to the young, break not the hearts
Of lieges, keep from drunkenness in age,

For ’tis unseemly in the old to tope ;

Sin ye not therefor, for in age ’tis well
To make your preparations to depart.

If God, the righteous Judge, approveth us
Let not the future trouble you to-day ;

Let there be pleasure in my subjects’ hearts,

And let the nobles’ heads be free from grief.”

The chiefs, on hearing and considering well
His words, all wept that such an one was theirs,

A Sh^ so wise and shrewd, acclaimed his worth,

And hailed him as the groat king of the earth.


§ 26

How Bahrdm went with his own Letter to ShanguJ,
King oj Hind

A wise wazh' rose to his feet and said : —

0 judge of what is just and right ! the world
Hath ceased to fear malignants, toil and stress
Have left our coasts. Howboit famed Shangul


no


c. 1559


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Among the folk of Hind is still perverse ;

His bands of plunderers infest the earth
From Hindustan up to the coasts of Chin.

He will lay hands for ill upon frin.

And thou shouldst apprehend this. Thou art Shah ;
Shangul but wardeth Hind, so why should he
Take toll of Sind and Chin ? Consider this,

And note his plans, for ill must not ensue.”

The Shah, on hearing this, was full of thought.
The world before him seemed a tangled brake,

And thus he answered ; I will deal herewith
In secret, not consulting any one.

I will myself alone observe his troops,

The conduct of his kingship and his throne,
Approaching him an as ambassador,

And not acquaint the Iranians and the lords.

0 holy archiniage ! wi’ite to Shangul
A firm but courteous letter.”

Thereupon

His pious minister went with a scribe.

And others that were indispensable,

And canvassed all the case, brought paper, ink,

And pen, and wrote a letter full of counsel,
Instruction, knowledge, and the praise of God.

It thus began : From God bo praise on those
That seek His praise who is the Lord of all
That is and is not. All things have their peers,

But God is One. Of all that He bestowoth
Upon His slaves, on sovereign and subject,

Naught is more great than wisdom which illumoth
Both. He whom wisdom gladdcnoth will walk not
The world for ill, and ho that chooseth right
Ne’er will repent thereof ; he cannot savour
111 from the stream of knowledge. Wisdom loosoth
Man from mishap ; may none bo wrung therewith.
Wisdom’s first token is that one should dread


BAHRAm GVR jn

Ill-doing all one’s years and Imow oneself.;

Then must he search the world with wisdom’s eye,

For wisdom is the diadem of kings,

And jewel of the men of name withal.

Thou know’st not thine own measure but dost plunge
Thy soul in blood. Now, seeing that I am
The monarch of the ago, both good and ill
Are laid to mo. Do thou so reign that right
May be preserved, for ill is manifest
On all sides. ’Tis not kingly to make raids.

And cotton with the ill-disposed. Thy grandsire
Was vassal to us and thy sire a slave
Before our Shahs, and none of us allowed
Arrears in tribute out of Hindustan.

Now mark the fortune of the TOika of Chin, C. 1560

Who came thence ’gainst frdn. He gave to spoil
All that he brought, and writhed for his ill deeds.

I see thee also thus disposed, the same
Perversity, same Glory, and same Faith.

Now I have arms and treasures for the war,

My soldiers are devoted and arrayed ;

Thou canst not stand against my gallant men,

Aid there is not a general in Hind.

Tl]Ou art conceited of thy might, preferring
Thine own rill to the river. Now behold !

1 have dispatched an envoy to thee, one
Of knowledge, eloquence, and high degree.

Send tribute or make war and fortify
The passes. Be our blessing on his soul
Whose warp and woof are equity and wisdom.”

Whenas air’s breath had made the writing dry
The writer of the letter folded it,

And then the scribe addressed it on this wise : —

'' From this world’s king, the monarch shrewd of wit,

The lord of government, the lord of might,

-The world’s possessor, generous Bahr^m Gur,


1 12 THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI

Who on the day of Ard in month Khnrdad
Received from Yazdagird the royal crown,

Chief of the marches, guardian of the realm.

To whom Saklab and Rum are tributary.

This to Shangul, who ruleth over Hind
From Sind up to the river of Kannuj.” ^

The monarch sealed the letter with his signet,

And then made ready for the chase, but none
Of all the host knew of his purposes
Except the nobles of his company.

Thus he drew nigh to Hindustan and crossed
The river of magician -land.® On nearing
The palace of Shangul ho gazed upon
The hall of audience with its gate and curtain.

It rose aloft in air, and at the gate
There was no lack of arms and equipage.

For there stood cavaliers and elephants
Amid a din of gongs and Indian bells.

He stood there all amazed and lost in thought.

Then on this wise addressed the curtain-kcepors,

The servants and officials of the gate : —

An envoy to this court am I, deputed
By conquering Shah Bahram.”

The chamberlain

Went to the royal presence from the curtain.

They raised it by the king’s command and brought
The envoy in with all respect. Bahram Gur
Advanced with stately step, and saw a chamber
With crystal roof. On drawing near Shangul
o. 1561 a Bahram beheld him seated on his throne

Of majesty, and crowned. The steps that led
Up to that golden throne were all of crystal.

There sat the king in all hivS Grace and might,

1 The Uangea Is moaiit. a HindUatan. Cf. Vol. i, p. Jo:i.

® The first fivo couplets on this page are read, as in P, in tho following
order : 4, 5, 1, 2, 3.


bahrJm gtjr


Arrayed in silver broidered with gold thread
Beset with many a gem. Bahr^m beheld
The monarch’s brother on an ante-throne,

And wearing on his head a jewelled crown.

The minister sat by : the monarch’s son

Stood there before the throne. The Shah drew nigh

Thereto, did reverence, and paused awhile,

Then quickly loosed his tongue. I have,” he said,

A letter written in our tongue on silk,

Sent to the king of Hind by Shah Bahr^m —

The world’s lord who possesseth crown and throne.”

The king, on hearing what Bahram said, bade
To bring a golden ante-throne. They set him
Upon that seat of gold, and from the gate
Called in his comrades. Seated thus he said : —
Exalted king ! I will unloose my lips
When thou commandest. May both good and greatness
Be ever thine.”

Shangul replied : Proceed,

For heaven’s blessing is on those who speak.”

Bahram rejoined : That Shah of royal race,

Whose like no mother in the world hath borne.

The exalted prince, the glory of the state.

Whose justice tumeth bane to antidote,

To whom all potentates are tributary,

Whose prey is lions in the chase, and who.

On taking up the scimitar in fight,

Converteth deserts into seas of blood,

In generosity like clouds in spring,

In whose sight treasures and dinars are vile,

Hath sent the king of Hind an embassy,

And letter writ on silk in Pahlavi.”


VOL. vii.


H


THE SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSI


1 14


C. 1562


§ 27


How Shangul received the Letter from Bahrdm and made Refly


The king, on hearing this, asked for the letter,
And marvelled at that chief. A noble scribe
Read it, whereat the monarch’s face became
Like gall. He said : ‘‘0 man of eloquence !
Haste not to speak, and act not haughtily.

Thy Sh^ displayeth his imperiousness.

Witness thy journey hither. Should one ask
For tribute out of Hindustan the wise
Would disavow him. If thy master speakcth
Of host and treasure, and of giving land
And cities up to woe . . . well, other kings
Are cranes, I am an eagle ; they are dust,

I am a sea. None fighteth with the stars.

Or seeketh fame by warring with the sky.

Worth is much better than the useless talk
That maketh wise men hold thee in contempt.

Ye have not manhood, knowledge, realm or city ;
Your share of sovereignty is only loss.

My whole land is a hidden treasury
Whereon mine ancestors have laid no hand,
Beside my store of mail for man and steed,
Which, if my treasurer should bring it forth.
Would ask for elephants to bear the keys.

If mighty elephants could carry them ;

And should I count my swords and coats of mail
The stars would seem contemptible in sum
To thee. The earth will not sustain my host,

My throne, and mighty elephants. If thou
Shouldst multiply a thousand thousand-fold
’Twould be the sum of those that call me king.
Mine are the jewels of the hills and seas,

I am the present mainstay of the world.


BAHRAM GtlR


I


Tlie founts of aloe, musk, and ambergris,

The hoards of undried camphor and the drugs
That cure the suffering, whoe’er shall ail
Throughout the world, are plenteous in my realm,
As well as silver, gold, and jewelry.

While fourscore kings with crowns of gold up-gird
Their loins at my behest. My land is full
Of mountain, stream, and chasm ; not e’en a div
Would find his way across it. From Kannuj
Up to the marches of tdn and thence
Right to Saldab and Chin the chiefs are all
My men and cannot choose but homage me.

The watchmen of Bhutan, of Hind, and Chin
Use in their challenges no name but mine ;

All speak the praises of my crown and grow
More serviceable. In my women’s bower
The daughter of Faghftir of Chin invoketh
God’s blessing on me — ^me of all the world.

By her I have a lion-hearted son,

Whose scimitar despoileth mountains’ hearts.

No one since Kai Kaus and Kai Kubad
E’er hath concerned himself about this land.

Three hundred thousand warlike troops withal
Acclaim me. Of alhes I have twelve hundred,

Who all are whoUy in my confidence ;

All are my kith and kin by long descent,

And stand before me here in Hind. Their war-cry

Would make the lions of the jungle gnaw

Their claws. If there were any precedent

For chiefs to slay an envoy out of wrath

Thy head and body would I part, and let

Thy raiment wail for thee.”

Bahr^m rephed ; —

As thou art great, 0 king ! sow not the seed
Of wrath. My Sh&h said : 'Say to him: If thou
Art wise choose not the pathway of perverseness.” ’


n6 THE SHAhNAMA OF. FIRDAUSI

Produce now from thy court two men of lore.

Of fluent tongue, and happy in discourse,

And if in rede and wisdom they excel
One of these men with me then I have done
With this thy land, for wise men spurn not words ;
Or else choose out among the warriors
That wield in Hindustan the massive mace
A hundred horsemen to fight one of us.

And we, what time thy wit and worth shall stand
Revealed, will ask not tribute from thy land.'"'


§ 28

How Shangul prepared a Feast for Bahrdm, and liow
Bahrain displayed his Browess

Shangul, on hearing this, said to Bahrain : —

‘‘ Thy counsel sortoth not with manliness.

Abide a season and relax thyself,

Why parley to no purpose % ”

They made ready

A splendid hall. Bahram reposed till noon,

And when the Crown that lighteneth the world
Had reached its height the feast was all prepared
According to the bidding of the king,

And zealous servants were about the hall.

When they had spread the board before Shangul
He bade a servant : Summon to the feast
The envoy of the tfanian king, the man
Of fluent utterance and novel aims.

Bring his companions too and scat them wliere
Ambassadors are placed.’’

Bahram came (3[uick]}\.

Sat at the board and oped his hand to bread,

But shut his lips to speech. The eating done,


BAH R Am GtR


117

They set themselves to quaff and called for harpists
And wine. The scent of musk rose from the feast,

The haU was spread with golden carpetings.

Now when the lords were merry in their cups,

And recked not of the future, Idng Shangul
Bade two strong men attend, men fit to wrestle
Against the Div. These noble athletes came,

And girt their loin-cloths round them. Those two
youths

Contended lustily and strained and writhed
Together. Now Bahram took up a cup
Of crystal and the wine confused his brain.

He spake thus to Shangul : O king bid me C. 1564

To gird me for a bout, for when I wrestle
Against the strong I am away from harm
And drunkemress.’’

Shangul said smiling : '' Rise,

And, if thou shalt o’ercome them, shed their blood.”

Bahram, on hearing this, rose to his feet.

And boldly bending down the upright form
Of him whose waist he clutched (a lion so
Might seize upon wild onager) he flung
His foeman down so that his bones were broken,

And all the colour left his cheeks. Shangul
Was in amazement at the victor’s mien.

His stature and his shoulders and his strength.

Invoked God in the Indian tongue and deemed
Bahram to be a match for forty men.

When they were all bemused with pleasant wine
They left the hall of jewelled tracery
And, when the vault of heaven donned musk-hued Sills,

Both young and old slept after banqueting.

Shangul went to his sleeping-place, the wine

Had turned his looks and thoughts from king Bahram.

Now when the musky-scented Veil was changed
To gold, and in the sky the sun appeared,


ii8 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The king of Indians mounted on his steed,

And went forth to the Ground with polo-stick
In hand. His servants bore his bow and arrows,
And for a while he rode to please himself,

Then ordered Shah Bahram to mount and take
His royal bow in hand. Bahram replied : —

I have a number of Iranian horsemen
With me, 0 king ! and they arc fain to ply
The arrow and the polo-stick when bidden
By the most noble king.”

Shangul replied : —

The arrows and the bow are doubtlessly
The mainstays of the cavalier. Do thou,

Who hast such limbs and neck and might of hand,
String up thy bow and shoot.”

Bahram Gur strung
His bow and urged his steed with shouts. He took
And shot an arrow that destroyed the mark.

The sportsmen and the warriors ’gan to call
Their blessings down upon him, one and all.


§ 29

How Shangul suspected Bahram and hept him from Iran

Shangul, misdoubting of Bahram, thought thus —

“ This stature, Grace, and skill in archery
Resemble not a mere ambassador’s
Of HindustS,n, of Turkistan, or Persia,

But, be he of the Shah’s race or a noble,

’Twere well I call him brother,” smiled and said
0. 1565 Thus to Bahram : “ Famed, high-born prince ! thou
art

No doubt the Shah’s own brother, being dowered
With vigour, strength, and skill in archery,


bahrAm gur


I


Because the Grace of kings, the might of lions.

Axe thine. Art thou then but a gallant chief ? ”
Bahrdm said : '' King of Hind ! discredit not
Ambassadors. I am not of the seed
Of Yazdagird or Shah. To call him brother
Would be a crime in me. A stranger I,

Come from Iran, no seeker after knowledge,

No sage. Dismiss me for the way is long,

And I must not incur the Shdh’s displeasure.”

Shangul replied ; ‘‘Be not importunate,

Tor I have somewhat still to say to thee.

Thou must not be so eager to depart,

For hasty going prospereth not. Abide
With us and set thy heart at ease. If thou
Wilt have not mellowed wine then take it crude.” ^
He said thereafter to his own adept : —

“ I have a secret for thee. If this man

Be not sib to Bahram, or in degree

Above his paladins, ’twill prove a marvel

To wise men’s hearts. We must not trust his words

Address him courteously and say : ‘ Abide ;

There is no cause for thee to leave Kannuj.’

Sayst thou : ‘ He will detect deceit herein ? ’

If words of mine may terrify his heart
It will be better far for thee to speak.

And talk to him in convenable terms.

Say thus to him : ‘ ’Tis well for thee to gain
More estimation with the king of Hind,

Now if thou will abide with him, and further
His subtle policy, thou shalt possess
The goodliest march of Hind because the king
Hath thee in high esteem. ’Twill be a land
Of never ending springtide where the streams
Breathe of the rose. The fortunate ne’er quit
Kannuj where twice a year the fruit-trees bear,

^ Couplet onxitted.


120


THE SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSt

Where there are treasures, gems, dinars, and drachms,
And where drachms can be had hearts arc not sad.

The king is gracious and for love of thee
He smileth when he looketh on thy face.’

AVhat time ye meet speak thou whate’er thou knowcst
To this effect and then inquire his name.

For that will joy my heart. Should our land please
him

Our favours would surpass his excellence.

We would appoint him captain of the host
Anon, in favour highest in the land.”

C. 1566 The king’s experienced minister departed,

Informed Bahram, and pointed him his way,

Then asked his name because without his name
No answer would suffice. Bahram changed colour,

On hearing this, perplexed for his reply.

At length ho said : 0 man of eloquence !

Make me not wan of visage in two realms.

I will quit not the Shah for any treasure
However much I may be pinched by want.

The teachings of our Faith are otherwise,

As. are our estimations, wonts, and ways,

And every one that turneth from his king
Is lost by such revolt. No man of wisdom
Is eager for addition ; bad and good
Are transient with us. Where is Faridun,

The master of the crown, he that restored
The age ? Whore are those chiefs of royal race,

The world-lords Kai Khusrau and Kai Kubad '!l
Thou hast withal some knowledge of Bahram,

The young, ambitious, and imperious,

Who, if I cross his purpose, will avail
To bring the world in ruins on my head.

Leave Hindustan not field or fell but bear
Off to IrS^n the dust of Wizard -land


^ Of. p. 112 and note-


BAHRAm GtR


121


My better plan is to return to courts
And to the purview of the conquering Shah.

If thou wouldst have my name it is Barzwi ;

My monarch and my parents call me so.
Communicate mine answer to Shangul,

For I have stayed long in an alien realm.”

The minister, on hearing this reply,

Told all that he had heard before the king,

Who frowned and said : “ He holdeth him aloof,
But I will take such order that this Light
Of hosts shall end his days.”

There was a wolf ^

Within the monarch’s coasts of bulk so vast
That it withstood the wind. The lions fled
The woods before it, and the swift-winged vultures
The sky. Thereat all Hind was full of fear :

Its bowlings deafened those most keen of ear.


§ 30

How BaJirdni fought with the Wolf at the Bidding of
Shangul and slew it

Shangul said to Bahram : ‘‘0 man approved !

AU enterprises prosper in thy hands.

A wood near by my city troubleth me.

There is a wolf there like a crocodile,

And rendeth lions’ hearts and leopards’ hides.

Let it be thine to go against this wolf, 0. 1567

And pierce its hide all over with thine arrows.

The world may find rest then and by thy Grace,

Victorious one ! Thenceforth in mine esteem,

And that of all this noble company,

^ Perhaps for gurg,” wolf, we ought to read '‘karg,” rhinoceros.

The word is spelt both with g and k in C. and is mado to rhyme with
marg,” death, and “ tagarg,” hail. Cf NIN, p. 55,*nofe.


122


THE SH Ah NAM A OF FIRDAUSi


Thy station shall be such that evermore
The folk of Hind and Chin all shall acclaim thee/’
Bahram, the honesty said : I need a guide ;

Then by God’s strength, when I behold the beast,
Thou shalt perceive its garment ^ soaked in blood/’
Shangul provided him a guide that knew
The creature’s lair and haunt, and then Bahram
Went with his trusty guide toward the wood
Of that blood-shedding wolf. Much spake the guide
About its lair, its height and breadth and bulk,
Showed where it was and went back while Bahram
Approached apace. Iranians thronged behind him
With loins girt for the fray, but when they saw
Afar BO vast a wood, the monster’s bulk,

And lair that it had made, all said : “ 0 Shah !
Adventure not ; thou wilt surpass the bounds
Of hardihood because, however bravo
Thou art in fight, none hath fought rocks and moun-
tains.

Say to Shangul : ‘ This may not be. I have
No sanction for this combat from the Shah.

I fight when I am bidden so that he.

On hearing of it, may advance my rank.’ ”

Bahr4m replied : If holy God hath given
My dust to Hindustan how can I die
Elsewhere ? That is beyond mo.”

That bravo youth

Strung up his bow, and thou hadst said : ''Ho holdoth
His O'wn life cheap ! ”

He sped toward the wolf
With head all rage and heart resigned to death.

He grasped his royal bow and, having drawn
Some poplar arrows from his quiver, poured
His shafts like hail till by that token anguish
O’ercame the wolf. On seeing the boast’s end nigh,

^ Garment for skin as in Job xli. 13.


bahrAm gjjr


123


Bahr^im, exchanging bow for swordj smote off
Its head, exclaiming : '' In the name of God,

Who hath not mate or peer and gave to me
Such Grace and might ! By His command the sun
Is bright in heaven.”

He bade bring wain and oxen
To carry that wolf’s carcase from the wood.

They bore it. WTien Shangul saw it afar
He had his banquet-hall decked with brocade,

And when the mighty king sat on his throne

He set Bahr4m upon the seat of honour

While all the chiefs of Hind, and cavaliers C. 156S

Of Chin, applauded him. The lords all came

With offerings and spake thus to Bahram : —

“ None ever did a deed to equal thine ;

Its brilliancy is more than eyes can bear.”

As for Shangul he was both glad and grieved,

Appearing cheerful and depressed, by turns.

There was a dragon, an amphibious beast,

Which haunted streams and sunned itself ashore ;

It, with its breath, could suck huge elephants
Down,^ and raise waves upon the dark blue sea.

Shangul spake thus to his companions,

His clever confidants : By turns this envoy,

This lion -man, doth please and trouble me.

If he remained he would be my support,

The ruler of Kannuj and of my realm,

But if he goeth from me to fran

Bahram will devastate Kannuj ; with such

A servitor to such a lord this land

Will lose both hue and odour. All the night

Have I been musing o’er his case and framing

A fresh device — ^to send him to that dragon,

Which surely he will ’scape not. Then shall I

^ “il enveloppait avoc sa qiucuo un 61ephant do guerro” (Mohl).

(7/. Vol. V. p. 233 and noifi.


124


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Be censured not on his account if he ■

Will fight with dragons.”

So he called Bahrain,

Told stories of the mighty men, and said : —

God, Author of the soul, hath led thee hither
Out of the country of fr4n to purge
The ills of Hindustan as is the way
Of men of name. A matter fraught with pain
And travail is confronting us, of travail
At first but treasure in the end. If thou
Accomplish this depart on thy return
With my good wishes home.”

The Shah replied

I may not leave the way of thy behests.

But will perform thy bidding faithfully
Unless the heaven itself shall turn awiy.”


§ 31

How Bahrdm slew a Dragon

Shangul said to Bahram : “ Within my realm
There is a dragon — an exceeding bale —

Which fareth both by land and stream to hunt
The lashing crocodile. Thou mayst devise
A scheme to rid thereof the realm of Hind,

Whose tribute thou shalt carry to Iran,

For all the country will assent thereto,

1569 And likewise gifts therefrom of aloe-wood,

Of swords, and goods of all kinds, with the iribiit
Bahram replied : “ Groat king and sovereign, '
Whose word is law in Hind ! by God, the Just
And Holy One’s, command I will cut off
The footing of the dragon from the earth,

But must bo shown its lair whereof I know not.”


bahrAm gvr


125


Shangul accordingly dispatched a guide
To show it to Bahrain who went his way
With thirty horsemen, nobles of tan
And swordsmen. Hasting to the stream he saw
The dragon mid the gloom, its form, its writhing,

And furiousness, fire flashing from its eyes.

The nobles of tan with loud exclaims,

And shrewdly troubled at that dragon, said : —

'' Hold not this dragon as thou didst the wolf,

0 king ! the other day. By one mishap
Give not tS-n up to the wind, rejoice not
Thy foemen here.”

The bold Bahram replied : —

I must entrust my life to all-just God.

If I am doomed to perish by this dragon
My time will be not lengthened or decreased
By hardihood.”

He strung his bow, he chose
Shafts dipped in bane of milk,^ and ’gan to shower them
Down on the dragon, wheeling all the while,

Like horsemen in the fray, to left and right.

He sewed up with steel points the dragon’s mouth,
Whose venom scorched the brambles, then he shot
Four arrows at its head, and blood and poison
Poured down its breast. The dragon’s body failed
By reason of those shafts, and all the ground
Ran with its gore and bane. Then lightly drew
Bahram his sword of watered steel and pierced
The dragon’s heart right dourly, hacked its neck
With sword and battle-ax, and flung to earth
Its lifeless form. The dragon overthrown,

He turned in duty to the Lord and said : —

“ 0 Judge who judgost righteously ! ’tis Thou
That slowest this great dragon, for who else

^ Corni^ptio optimi pessima. Wo shall have an instance later on, in the
reign of N^hirwan, of milk being turned to poisonous uses. See p. 320 seq.


126 THE SH Ah NAM A OF FIRDAUSI

Hath might enough ? Thou art Thy servants’ refuge
From every ill,”

He sought the king of Hind;

The noble chieftain of the Sindian host,

And said : The long is freed from these attacks
By His decree — the Judge and Nourisher’s.”

Shangul grieved, hearing this, because Bahram
Was in the saddle still. He bade that wains
And oxen should convey the dragon’s carcase
To plain from forest, while all Hindustan
Invoked upon Iran the AU-Just’s blessing : —

0. 1570 For there a cavalier like this was born

To fight with dragons. One who hath such limbs.
Such stature and such bearing cannot be
But equal to the king in his degree.”


§ 32

How Shangul hecame troubled about Bahram a'nd
gave a Daughter to him

All men rejoiced except Shangul whose heart
Was pained, the matter made his visage wan,

And when night came he summoned his wise men,
Both those of his own kin and aliens.

And thus he said ; This man of Shah Bahram’s,
Who hath such might, such limbs, and mastery,

Do what I may, is worsted by no toil !

Now if he goeth from us to triin,

And cometh to the monarch of the brave.

He wiU depreciate my host and say

That here in Hindust6.n there is no horseman,

And so my foemcn may grow insolent.

I will behead the envoy, will destroy him
By stealth. What say ye ? What do ye advise ? ”


127


BAHRAM GtR

‘‘Bring not thy heart, 0 king!” the wise men
answered,

To sorrow by such deeds. For thee to slay
The ambassadors of kings would be an act
Unwise and senseless. No one e’er conceived
A thought on this wise. Compass no such plan.

Thou wilt be execrated by the chiefs,

And people should respect their sovereign.

By putting this man’s head within the shears
Thou wilt bring longsome trouble on thy land.

Forthwith will come an army from fran,

And with a potentate like Sh^ Bahram ;

None of us in these regions will survive,

And thou wilt have to wash thy hands of kingship.

This man is our deliverer from the dragon,

And slaying should compensate not his toils ;

Here hath he killed the dragon and the wolf ;

Give him more life, not death.”

On hearing this

Shangul grew gloomy, for the sages’ words
Perturbed him. Passing thus the night, at dawn
He sent a messenger to Shah Bahram,

And, when they were together privily
Without a minister or counsellor,

Said : “ 0 thou Joy of hearts 1 thou hast prevailed.

Attempt no greater feat. I will bestow
My daughter on thee as thy wdfe, for thus
Shall I be profited in word and deed.

This done, abide with me, for thou wilt have C. 1571

No colour to depart. I will appoint thee
The captain of the host and give thee kingship
In Hindustan.”

Bahram was in amaze.

And mused upon his throne, his birth, and glory,

“ There is no remedy for one’s own acts,”

He thought, “ and this thing cannot bring reproach ;


138 THE SHAH N Am A OF FIRDAUSI

Besides by this I may preserve my life.

And look again upon fianian soil,

For, as the case is, we have tarried long ;

The lion is taken in the fox’s net ! ”

Thus said he to Shangul : I will obey
Thy hest and make thy word my rule of life.
However of thy daughters choose me one,

Who, when I see her, may obtain my praise.”

The king of Hind, on hearing this, rejoiced,

And decked his halls with painted silk of Chin,
Shangul’s three daughters came like jocund spring
In all their bravery, their scents, their colours,

And looks, and then he bade Bahram Gur : '' Go,
Prepare thy heart to see a novel sight.”

Bahram Gur went immediately, beheld
The hall, and of those moon-faced maids chose one
Like jocund springtide, Sapinud by name,

All grace and modesty, all wit and charm ;

On him Shangul bestowed her — one that seemed
A straight-stemmed cypress and a smokeless lamp —
Then chose the richest of his treasuries,

Gave to the moon-faced maid the key thereof,

Called for Bahram’s companions, cavaliers
Of noble rank and masterful, and gave them
Dinars and drachms and every kind of wealth,

With camphor, aloe-wood, and ambergris,

Steeds, golden trappings, girdles, and for those
Of highest rank, gold crowns, while for Bahram
He had a turquoise crown and glorious throne
Of ivory prepared, and decked his palace
Of jewelled tracery. All men of name
Within Kannuj resorted to that place
Of feasting, waiting on their king with joy.

They spent a se’nnight thus with wine in hand,

All glad and jocund in the banquet-hall,

With Sapinud beside Bahram, the king,

Like wine in crystal goblet glittering.


BAHRAm GtR


129


§ 33

How Faghfur of CMn wrote to Bahrcim and how Jie replied

Intelligence came to Faghfur of Chin : —

'' A man of Grace and courage from fran
Hath reached Shangul as an ambassador,

And verily is of heroic race.

Great exploits have been wrought in Hind and by C. 1572
The hand too of this valiant lion-man
Through resolution and the might of fortune.

Naught but the crovm and throne befitteth liim^.

And on him hath Shangul bestowed a daughter,

So that his diadem might reach the moon.”

That mighty world-lord wrote to Shah Bahram
A letter superscribed : From him that is
The monarch of the world, the head of nobles,

And crown of chiefs, to that ambassador
Of Persia who with thh^ty comrades reached
Kanntij,” and then proceeded : I have had
Accovmts of thee, thou famed and glorious man !

About thy wisdom, prudence, and advice,

And how thou standost steadfast everywhere.

So that the wolf and that notorious dragon
Could 'scape not from thy shafts and scimitar.

The lady given to thee is my kin,

Her dust is worth the whole of Hindustan,

And thou hast raised thy head on high by thus
Affining with this mighty potentate,

While in fcan 'twill magnify the Sh^h,

Whose crown well may bediadem the moon.

Because his envoy took fit comrades, reached
Kannuj, and clasped a Moon upon his breast.

Now bear the toil, come hither, and abide
Within this land so long as thou mayst wish.

I will illume mine eyes with seeing theo,

VOL. vn.


1


130 THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

And make thy xede the breastplate of my soul.

Thou shalt go hence at will. I will not bid thee *.

' Abide awhile.’ So with a robe of honour.

And wealth, depart with joy, thou and thy chiefs,

Well furnished. ’Tis no shame for thee to come
To me ; I have no quarrel with the Shah.

On no wise be remiss in coming hither,

And, when thou wouldst depart, then tarry not.”

This letter reached Bahram Gur and perturbed him.
He called a scribe, wrote his reply, and planted
A tree within the orchard of revenge.

The letter thus began : I have received

Thy words. Thou canst have seen no land but Chin,

For thou hast superscribed thy letter thus ; —

‘ From him that is the monarch of the world,

The most exalted of the glorious chiefs.’

It is not so ; new-fangled majesty

Like thine I do not recognise. Bahram Gur

Alone is king of kings ; we know none other.

No man remembereth any king like him
In courage, Imowledge, Grace, and lineage.

Him I acknowledge, as victorious world-lord,

And know him greater than all other kings.

Again, for what thou saidst about my deeds,

And of my toil endured in Hindustan,

0. 1573 That too was aU the star of Shah Bahram,

Who hath Grace, throne, and fame. Accomplishment
Is the fr^ians’ own, they hold fierce lions
Of no account. They all are single-hearted,

They worship God, and in their blest estate
They fear no ill, Again, if king Shangul
Bestowed his daughter on me I achieved
That honour by my courage. Ho is great,

By his own courage driveth wolf from sheep.

And, thinking good to make afJSnity
With me, bestowed on me his worthy child.


BAHRAM GlIR

Again, for what thou saidst : ^ Arise and come,
And I will guide thee unto ©very good,’

The Sh4h sent me to Hind, and shall I go
To Chin for painted silk ? If I propose
A course like that he will approve it not.

Thou sayest further : ' I will send thee home
Enriched with treasures.’ God hath set me past
The need of clutching after others’ goods.

I praise Bahram for all his bounty to me,

And offer up thanksgiving to my God
Three watches of the day and of the night.

And fourthly, all the praise that thou hast lavished
Upon me in excess of my deserts.

This I accept from thee, 0 king of Chin !

And will report it to the Shah. May God
Give thee, so many blessings that the sky
May not distinguish ’twixt their warp and woof.”

Bahram dispatched this letter to the king
Of Chin when he had scaled it with his ring.


§ 34

How Bahram fled from Hindustan to Irdn with the
Daughter of Shangul

When with the daughter of Shangul Bahram
Consorted she found out that he was Shah ;

By night and day she wept for love of him,

And kept her eyes upon his face. Her father
Heard of her love and ceased to doubt Bahram.

One day the pair sat happily, discussing
Things groat and small, and Shah Bahram spake thus
” I know that thou dost wish me well, so I
Will tell to thoo a secret ; keep it close.

I would quit Hindustan. Dost thou consent


132 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Thereto 1 I will take thee withal, but none
Among this folk must know. Within Iran
My state surpasseth this and, furthermore,

^574 The Almighty is mine aid. If thou wilt go
Thy wise decision will promote thy weal.

In every place thy title shall be ‘ queen,’

And thine own sire shall kneel before thy throne.'’

She said : Exalted one ! seek what is good,

And turn not from the way of understanding.

The best of womankind is she through whom
A smile is always on her husband’s face.

If my pure purposes are not conformed
To thy command I joy not in thy life.”

Bahram replied : “Then frame a scheme but tc^ll it
To none.”

She said ; “0 worthy of the throne !

I will, with fortune’s aid. Not much removed
There is a place where festivals are held,

Eor in the forest there my father foastoth.

It is a place that men deem fortunate,

And thither gather idol-worshippers.

Hence to the forest is a score of leagues,

And one must weep before the idols there.

That is a place for hunting onager,

A place too for the worshippers of God.

Both long and host will set forth to the feast ;

He will not leave a soldier in the city.

Go then if thou art minded to depart :

Let feasts grow old but be thou young for ever.

Wait for five days, then when the world’s Light shineth,
And he shall quit the city, get thee ready
To go thyself.”

His wife’s words pleased Bahram,
Who slept not till the dawn for thought.

The sun displayed its hand upon the sky,


Now wlwn


BAHRAM GtlR


133


Aiid dark night packed, he mounted on his steed.

And rode forth with his weapons to the chase.

He told his wife : “ Make ready and tell none ;

Let us prepare and set out on our way.”

Bahram departed, neared the stream,^ and saw
The baggage of some merchants on the road.

They recognised him, and he bit his lip,

For they were of frail — ^bold travellers

O'er sea and land. He bade them offer him

No reverence ; not even had he told

His comrades what he purposed. To the merchants

He said : Shut fast your lips ; on that depend

Our profit and our loss, for if in Hind

This secret be divulged the fr^nian soil

Will be as seas of blood. Enlarged is he

Whose lips are shut, the tongue must be confined,

And both hands open. By a mighty oath
Will I bind fast your tongues till I regain
My throne. Say thus then : ' May wo turn away
From God, the Holy and Supreme, and follow'

The Div if ever we desert the counsel 0 . 1575

Of Shah Bahram and contemplate ill-doing.' ”

Wlien this oath had been taken and confirmed.

So that the Shah’s heart was relieved from care,

He said : Guard well my secret, tendering it
Like life itself, if ye desire to turn
My bondage ^ to a crown ; but if the throne
Bo void of me armed hosts will come from all sides.

And leave no merchants here, no Shah, no thane,

No host, no throne, no crown.”

When they perceived

The import of his words they came -with cheeks
All wet with weeping. May the nobles' lives
Thy ransom be,” they said, “ and youth and kingship
Thy habit. If the treasure of thy secret

^ Thp Indus, according to Mohl. ® Reading with P.


134


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Slaoiild be revealed our country would resemble
A sea of gore ! Who dareth contemplate
Such things and turn his wisdom to an ax.

His counsel to a hatchet ? ”

Hearing this.

The Shah ’gan praise those honourable men
Of Grace and Faith, and fared home ill at ease,
Committing to God’s charge his soul and body.

He tarried till the banquet-hall was decked,

And till the nobles had departed thither.

But when Shangul himself prepared to go
Bahr&m’s wife said to him : Barzwi is sick.

Would be excused, and saith *. ‘ Be not concerned
For me, 0 king ! The banquet -hall to one
That aileth is distasteful, and the king
Must know thus much.’ ”

Lot none,” Shangul replied,
“ That aileth think of banqueting.”

At dawn

He left Kannuj and hurried to the place
Of feasting. When ’twas night said Shah Bahram : —
’Tis time to go, good wife 1 ”

He seated her

Upon her palfrey and invoked God’s name
O’er her in ancient Persian, donned his mail,

And mounted too, his lasso in the straps,

And mace in hand. Ho hurried to the river.

And found the merchants sleeping. Rousing them
He gat a skiff in readiness wherein
He seated SapinM. With day begun
They came to land, and brightly shone the sun .


BAHRAM GtR


§ 35

How Shangul followed Bahrdm, learned who he was,
and was reconciled to him

A horseman from Kannuj sped with the tidings
Of Sh^h Bahrain’s departure, and Shangul,

Who heard it from that loyal servant, quitted
The chase as swift as fire. He hurried on
Until ho reached the river where he saw
Both Sapinud and brave Bahram. He grieved,
Crossed o’er in dudgeon, and upbraided thus
His child : 0 wicked wanton ! thou hast passed.

Bold as a lioness, across the river
To go fran-ward with this lusty Imave,

To desert waste fi’om cultured paradise,

Without my knowledge. Now thou shalt behold,
Since thou hast left my pillow secretly,

The impact of my double-headed dart.”

Bahr^^m replied : '‘0 thou of evil mark !

Why didst thou urge thy steed as madmen do ?
Thou hast had testimony that in war
I am as with the cup and boon-companions.

A hundred thousand men of Hindustan
Before mo would not equal, as thou loiowcst.

One horseman like mo and my thirty comrades,
Pamed, clad in mail, and wieldmg Persian swords.
I will fulfil the Indians’ eyes with blood,

And will not spare a soul.”

Shangul was ware
That he had spoken sooth because his prowess
And valiancy could not be overlooked,

But answered him : I have foregone my children,
My kindred, and allies, have held thee dearer
Than mine own eyes, and as the diadem
Upon my head, and given thee her whom thou
Thyself didst choose. The right is on my side,


136 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The wrong od thine. Instead of good faith thou
Hast chosen outrage. Ever hast thou heard
Of good faith paid thereby ? Shall I tell thee : —

‘ One of my kin and wise in mine esteem
Hath gone off cavalierly, gone conceiving
Himself a king ^ ’ What hath a Persian’s heart
In common with good faith ? He sayeth ^ yea ’
And meaneth ' nay ’ ! Thou’rfc such a lion’s whelp,
In good sooth, as would bathe in their hearts’ blood
Its nurses and, when fanged and sharp of claw,
Would purpose combat with its fosterer ! ”

Bahram made answer : '' When thou Imowest me
How shalt thou call me ill in thought and deed ?

I shall be unreproached for having gone,

Thou wilt not term my heart and conduct evil.

^577 The king of kings am I both of tan
And of Ttiran, the leader of the folk,

The mainstay of the bravo, and will requite
Hereafter thy deservings and behead
Thy foes, hold thee as father in Iran,

And vex thee not with tribute for thy realm.

Thy child shall be the Lustre of the West,

And Crown of dames.”

Astounded at his words
Shangul took off his Indian turban, spurred
His steed, and from the front of that great host
Approached the Shah to make excuse, embraced
The king of kings with joy, and sought to amend
What had been said. He was rejoiced to see
Bahram, prepared the board, and brought the cup.
Bahram revealed the secret to Shangul,

Discoursed of the concernments of ir&n,

And said : Such circumstances and such thoughts
Were those that guided me in this affair.”

They both of them arose, the drinking done.

And each asked pardon of the other one.


BAHRAM GtR


137


I 36

How Shangul went back to HM and Bahrdm to Iran

These two kings — one a worshipper of God^

The other an idolater — joined hands.

And pledged themselves : “ Henceforth we will not
sever

Out hearts from right, will raze each root of guile,

Keep faith for aye, and listen to the words
From sages’ lips.”

Shangul too bade farewell
To Sapinud, he made his breast the warp
And hers the woof. The two kings quickly turned
Their backs on one another and flung down
The rancour of their hearts upon the dust.

One land- ward went, the other river-ward.

Apace and glad.

When tidings reached Iran : —

“ The Shah himself with those escorting him
Hath come back from Kannuj,” the people all,

As they were minded, docked the roads and cities.

And everywhere strewed money, musk, and saffron.

Wlron Yazdagird received the news he gathered
The scattered troops. He and Narsi, the high priest,

And all the sages, wont to meet the Shah.

When Yazdagird beheld his sire BahrS^m
He lighted down and bent him to the dust.

Narsi, the monarch’s brother, and withal

The high priest had cheeks dust-stained but glad hearts.

On such wise Sh4h Bahram came to his palace,

Committing soul and body both to God.

Ho rested when the world grew dark and while c. 1578

The moon was like a silvern shield, but wdien
Day rent night’s raiment, and the world’s Light
showed,


138 THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The king of kings sat on his golden throne.

Gave audience but refrained his lips from speech.

Came all the nobles with the men of lore,

And princes of the empire, then the world-lord
Eose on his throne and spake words just and holy,
First spake of the Creator, then discharged
His debt ^ to wisdom, and thus said ; Eevcrc
The Almighty in whose ken the manifest
And hidden are. Him praise, and unto Him
Address thy supplications midst night’s gloom,

For he hath given power and victory,

And is the Lord of shining sun and moon.

All ye that would gain Paradise abstain
From evil and foul deeds. Where there is justict^

With bounteousness and righteousness the heart
Will turn from guile and loss. Let none henceforth
Fear me though he possesseth hills of gold,

And mines of silver. From your hearts expel
All fear and seek addition of all good.

The peasant and the thane are one to us
When we are judge. When wo gave crown and
throne

To any know that 'twas from God and fortune.

I will strive not to fill my treasury,

I would drive not my people from their homes.

One treasure only — justice — ^will I hoard
That after death my spirit may rejoice.

Thus too, God willing, will my heart grow bright,

And fortune smile. Hereby I shall increase
Our blessings and direct you to fair fortune.

He who hath borne oppression from my troops,
Officials, kin, and cavaliers of war, ‘

And doth acquaint me not, but keepoth hidden
That knavery, is guilty of the crime ;

Will one so futile o’er endeavour greatness ?

^ Reading with. P.


bahrAm gur


139


I call to God for justice on the man

That hath concealed the moon behind a cloud ;

But if your will is other, for men’s motives

Are diverse, tell me boldly ; haply I

May bring to pass your long-conceived desires.

Attend to me, do what I bid, and find
Your souls’ peace in my counsels.”

Thus he spake,

Resumed his seat upon the throne, rejoicing,

And set the crown of greatness on his head.

The nobles praised him, saying : May the crown

And signet ne’er lack thee. Realm, crown, and throne C. 1579

All glory in a Shah that is both wise.

And of victorious fortune, but with thee
Thy hardihood, thy knowledge, and thy Grace
Are greater than the throne of king of kings.

A Shah like thee the world remembereth not
For manliness, for treasure, and for justice.

To bless thee is incumbent on us all,

Both young and old, and we will glorify thee
To God and in the presence of our folk.

No Shah hath sat upon this throne of gold
Like thee in justice, victory, and might.

Thou raisest from the dust the dead by justice,

By goodly speech, and by munificence.

May God almighty be thiiao aid, and may
The head of foi'tuno’s star bo in thy lap.”

The mighty men and sagos prosperous
Went from the monarch’s throne with songs of joy.

Then mounting with his troops he drew anear
The precincts of Azargashasp. Ho lavished
His gold and jewels on the mendicants.

On those especially that hid their want.

The high priest of the Fire-fane of Zarduhsht
Came muttering prayers with sacred twigs in hand.

The Shah brought Sapinud to him, and he


140 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Instructed her in custom. Faith, and rite,

In limpid water and the good religion
Bathed her and banned from her dust, rust, and soil.^
The Shah unlocked the prisons and began
Bestowing gifts of drachms on every man.


§ 37

How Shdngul with seven Kings visited Bahrctm

Now from his child — the consort of the Shah —
Shangul heard of the doings of her spouse,

And was desirous to behold fr^n —

The dwelling of the noble monarch’s daughter.

He sent an Indian eloquent and noble
As envoy to request the Shah to grant
Another treaty to be stored away
For record, and the world’s lord had one drawn
Like shining Sol in jocund Paradise.

The envoy took withal a letter written
Li ancient Persian by the Shah’s own hand,

And went his way.^ Now when he reached Shangul,
And when the monarch of Kaimuj had seen
Bahram Gur’s letter, he prepared to journey
From Hindustan, but hid it from his kindred
In Chin. Seven monarchs followed in his train,
Escorting Eai ^ Shangul upon his way —

The monarch of Kabul, the king of Hind,

The king of Sind with troops, the famous king
15S0 Who ruled Sandal, the monarch of Jandal,

A potent prince, the monarch of Kashmii',

A man of mastery, and last of all

The great and glorious monarch of Multan,

^ “ la debaiTassa de la i)0ussi6rc oi do la rouillo dc. Vidoldirie ” (Mnhl).

® Reading with P. Rai vtRdja.


bahrAm gvr


I4I

All coveters of honour, all with crowns,

All wearing torques and earrings, all with escorts
And camp-equipment, all of them renowned,

Of high estate and rank, all exquisite
With silver, gold, and gems ; their parasols
Were all of peacocks’ plumes, their elephants
Had housings of brocade, their escorts glittered
O’er miles with offerings for the Sh^h and gifts,

Such that dinars seemed worthless in his eyes.

Thus king Shangul and those seven kings withal
Proceeded stage by stage, and, when they neared
'tiku with all their precious equipage.

The Shah, informed of their approach, arrayed
A host to go to meet them while the chiefs
Of every city went to welcome them.

The king of kings in wisdom old, and wary
Though young in years, advanced to Nahrawan.

The two illustrious and exalted kings
Drew near to one another, both of them
Alighted from their steeds and, as they met.

Both offering greetings and apologies.

Embraced. Both retinues alighted too :

The world was full of babble. Much talk passed
On matters great and small when thus the kings
Of these two kingdoms met. They both remounted.
As did their worshipful and famous troops.

Bahrdm Gur sot him up within his halls
A golden throne draped as the custom was,

Set wine upon the board and furnished minstrels.

The wliolo place rang with song. He spread a board,
An arrow-flight in length, with roasted lambs ^

And fowls. The eating done, he held a revel
In royal wise — all colour, scent, and beauty.

The handmaids and the slave-boys stood around,
Throne, hall, and palace were like Paradise,

1 Cf. Vol. vi. p. 238 and note.


142 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSt

The wine-cups were all crystal, there were chargers
All golden, musk, and scents. The revellers
Wore jewelled crowns and shoes depict with gems.
Shangul was in amazement at the palace.

And as he drank he pondered : Is Iran
A paradise or garden where one’s friends
Exhale the scent of musk ? ”

Thus to the Shah
Said he in private : '' Let me see my daughter.”

C, 1581 Bahr^ bade eunuchs of the company

Conduct hjm to that Moon. The noble king ^
Went with them and beheld another palace
Like spring. When he beheld her on her throne
Of ivory, crowned with an amber crown,

He came and kissed her on the head, and laid
His cheek to hers and wept exceedingly
For love of her as did the Fair o’er him.

He stroked her hand and speaking of that hall,

That palace, and reception-room, he said : —

“ Behold a paradise ! Thou hast escaped
A wretched palace and a foul abode.”

The gifts that he had brought with him — ^tho
purses,

The crowns, and slaves withal, the gems and raiment,
Whose value none knew how to estimate.

He gave to her. He gave great largess too,

And that blithe home was like a garth in spring.
Departing thence he went back to the Shah,

Disposed for drinking by his happiness.

Now when the lords wore merry with the wine
Shangul departed to his couch to sleep,

And, when the Veil of musky hue appeared
With stars to spot it like a leopard’s back,

The revellers betook them to sweet slumber,

While aU the attendants stood with folded arms.

Thus was it till that golden Cup appeared,


BAHRAm GtR


143


Which thou wouldst call the sun^ flung off the cloak
Of lapis-lazuli, and strewed the waste
With topazes ; then valiant Shah Bahram
Went forth to hunt and took the Indian kings,

Went to the chase with cheetahs, hawks, and falcons ^
Imperious, For a while they did not irk
Their hearts, not one of them felt pam and grief
As for a month they hunted on the waste
Gazelle and onager. Then they returned
With instancy to wine and festival.

Thus king Sliangii], when hunting and when feastmg,

Ne’er was long absent from the world-lord’s side,

Or at the riding-ground, at merrymako,

At banquet and at polo, turned his face

For one day from the Shah. A long while passed,

The Indian king prepared to journey homo.

He sought his daughter with a loving heart,

And stayed with her a while. Ho bade a slave-boy
Bi’ing pen and pai3or to him, then ho sought
For phrases scented with black, pounded musk,

And wTote in Indian a righteous rescript,

As it were ancient Persian. First ho praised
Him who had washed the world of its distress.

Had spread abroad integrity and right, 0. 158

And flung black lies and loss upon the Div : —

‘‘ I servo upon the way of use and Faith,

Not that of angor or for vengeance sake.

I have bestowed my daughter Sapinud
As wife oji Shih Bahram, that noble prince.

May he live ever as the king of kings,

And be the great ones of the world his slaves.

As soon as I shall quit this Wayside Imi
Let long Bahram become Rai of Kannuj.^

Transgress not the commandment of that king.

And carry my dead body to the fire.

1 Cf. p. 7Gj note. ® Cf. p, 140, note.


144


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSt


Give up my treasury to Shah. Bahram,

And therewithal crown, kingdom, throne, and casque.’"

This deed of gift in Indian characters
On silk he gave to Sapinud as hers.


§ 38


How Shangul returned to Hindustan, and hoio Bahrcm
remitted the Property-tax to the Landowners

Shangul abode for two months in fr4n,

And then dispatched a noble to the Shah
To ask permission to depart, both he
And his illustrious counsellors, for home.

The king of kings consented that Shangul
Should start on his return to Hindustan,

And bade an archimage to choose among
The treasures of fran — dinars, gems, silver,

Gold, thrones and crowns, swords, girdles and brocade,
And -stuffs uncut — ^unbounded, countless gifts
To give Shangul while for his suite he furnished,

To each in his degree, steeds and brocade
Of Chin, dismissed them happy and content,

And went three stages with Shangul. Besides
The gifts he gave them provand to the coasts
Of Hindustan.

When Shah Bahram returned
He sat in peace upon- the throne, but mused
Of death and of ill fortune till his heart
Ached and his face grew wan. He bade a scribe —

A noble archmage who was his vizir —

To come to him and bade him to inspect
The treasury and reckon up the gold.

The gems, and raiment, for astrologers

Had told him, and the words had troubled him : —


BA HR Am GIJR


145

Thy life will last three score of years, the fourth score
Will make thee weep at death/’ and he had said : —

The first score years will I devote to pleasure, C. 158

Will set joy as a shoot within my soul,

And in the next will justify the world
By equity and liberality
In public and in private. I will leave
No comer waste and will provide for all.

Jii the third score I will entreat the Lord ;

Perchance He will direct mo on my way.”

The astrologer said sixty years and three,

But of the throe the reckoning was not clear,

And so the Shah desired sufficient treasure
To meet the presage of the astrologer,

Else would he have not self-reproach and travail ?

The treasurer went to the treasury,

On hearing this, and laboured at the account.

He toiled exceedingly till he had told
The total to the monarch’s minister,

Who thereupon went to the famous Shah,

And said : ” Eor throe and twenty years to come •

In sooth thou wilt need naught. I have allowed
For provand, largess, and thy famed troops’ pay,

For envoys that arrive from other kings,

And from thine own famed provinces, and thou
Possesscst tor these years a treasury fiUod
With silver, gold, and goods.”

On hearmg this

Bahram took thought, ho was too wise to sorrow
Beforehand, and replied : My sway is ending.

This world, if thou roflectest, hath three days.

Since yesterday is over, and to-morrow
Not come, to-day I stoop not under care.

As I have moans of largess and a throne
Of ivory I will have no more tax.”

He bade that no tax should be asked thencefoifh.

VOL. VII,


K


146 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

From small and great. He set up in each city
A man to rouse the drowsy and check strife
Wherefrom proceedeth naught save evil deeds.

He gave those wise archmages what was needful
By way of provand, clothes, and draperies
Out of his treasury, and said to them : —

Ye must hide nothing good and bad from me.

Be ye the arbitrators of disputes,

Make no demands that make yourselves vexatious,
Eeport both good and ill, and cut my fears
Concerning evils short.”

This thing obtained

Throughout the world, and nothing good and bad
Eemained concealed. Those sages ordered aU,

But stiU from every province letters came,

Which said : Through bounty,^ idleness,^ and wealth
The brains of men are ceasing to be wise.

. 1584 There is such strife and bloodshed in the world
That young men set no value on the great ;

The young men’s hearts are filled with many things,
But hot with thoughts of ShS;h and archimage.

Their faces they have turned from gain to guile,

They have grown troublesome and combative.

The peasants, landowners, and unemployed,

AU give themselves to battle and contention.”

When letters of this kind arrived the Shah
Was heart-pierced at the bloodshed. In each province
He chose officials, wise and understanding
As was befitting, and provided them
Out of his treasury with food and raiment,

The means for largess, and its aUocation,

And for six months established offices,

Eequiring of his subjects drachms in payment,

And stamping “tax ” on silver thus received.

The officers wore crowns and had great state.

^ Or, with Mohl, “ les dons du roi.” 2 noading with P.


BAHRAM GtfR


147


For six months he received, for six gave back
To wretched mendicant and man of birth.

He strove in this way to keep men of war
From bloodshed and inaugurating ill.

Again his agents wrote : Munificence
Hath robbed the world of its security.

For they that have the money pay no tax,

But only meditate more bickerings.

Instead of being crass they have grown cruel.

They are all troublesome and quarrelsome.”

Now when Bahram Gur had perused this letter
His heart was troubled at such deeds. He bade : —
Treat in accord to God’s decree all those
That shed blood or employ deceit, that all
May find the means of livelihood.”

He chose

A marchlord full of justice and of knowledge
For every province as was fit. He gave them
A court-allowance for a year, invoking
The Giver of all good. Much time passed by,

And then the monarch had a letter sent
To those truth-speaking men and correspondents,
Whom he had scattered through the world, to ask : —
What is there in the world unprofitable,

And bringeth injury upon this realm ? ”

They wrote in answer: Through the monarch’s
gifts

No man observeth rule and precedent.

There is no thought or care for tilth or toil
Wherefrom man’s worth derivoth. We behold
Draught-oxen straying and the herbage lush
In tilth and springing crop.”

The Shah rejoined : —
Till midday, when the world-illuming sun
Is at its height, the tiller of the soil
Must rest not from his work. The other half


148 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Is for repose and sleep. If mon are fools
We can but weep for them. If any lacketh
0. 1585 Fruits, seed, and oxen be not stern and harsh

Toward him but kind and aid him from my treasures
That none may be distressed by indigence.

So likewise if the weather causeth loss.

And nobody is sovereign o’er the w^eather,

Or locusts anywhere conceal the earth.

And eat the herbage to the naked soil,

Give compensation from the treasury.

Proclaim this edict in the provinces.

If there are sterile routes or if the land
Be but a waste and all uncultivato,

And whether it be owned by rich or poor,

From such as I describe demand not aught,

And if a man, one of my servitors,

Or mine own foster-sire, shall take one mito
Him will I hmy on the spot alive :

God give him neither home nor dw^elling-placo.’^

They sealed the letter with the royal ring.

And sent the camel-posts a-hurrying.


§ 39

How Balirmn summoned Gijisies from Hindiistdn

Thereafter he sent letters to eacli archmago,

Gave clothing to the mondicants, and asked : —

“ In all the realm w'hat folk are free from toil,
And who are mendicants and destitute ?

TeU me how things are in the world, and load
My heart upon the pathway toward the liglit.”

An answer came from all the archimag(^s.

From all the nobles, and the mon of loro : —

The face of earth appeareth prosperous,
Continuous blessings are in every part.


BA HR Am GIJR


149


Save that the poor complain agahist the ills
Of fortune and the Shah. ' The rich/ they say,

' Wear wreaths of ros.^s in their drinking-bouts,

And quaff to minstrelsy, but as for us
They do not reckon us as men at all.

The empty-handed drinkoth with no rose
Or harp.’ The king of longs should look to it.”

The Shah laughed heartily at this report,

Ajid sent a camel-post to king Shangul
To say thus : “0 thou monarch good at need !

Select ten thousand of the Gipsy -tribe,

Both male and female, skilful on the harp,

And send them to me. I may gain min© end
Through that notorious folk.”

Now when the letter

Came to Shangul ho raised his head in pride

O'er Saturn’s orbit and made choice of Gipsies, 0 . 1586

As bidden by the Shah who, when they came,

Accorded them an audience and gave each
An ox and ass, for he proposed to make
The Gipsies husbandmen, while his officials
Gave them a thousand asses’ loads of wheat,

That they might have the ox and ass for work.

Employ the wheat as seed for raising crops,

And should besides make music for the poor,

And render them the service free of cost.

The Gipsies went and ate the wheat and oxen,

Then at a year’s end came with pallid cheeks.

The Shah said ; Was it not your task to plough,

To sow, and reap ? Your asses yet remain,

So load them up, prepare your harps, and stretch
The silken chords.”

And so the Gipsies now,

According to Bahram’s just ordinance.

Live by their wits ; they have for company
The dog and wolf, and tramp unceasingly.


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


ISO


§ 40

How the Time of Bahrdm came to an End

Thus passed he three score years and three, and had
No equal in that age. With New Year came
The scribe — the wise archmage, his minister —

And said to him : “ The treasury of the king
Of mighty men is void, and I have come
For thy command. Those that enjoyed this wealth
Expect us not to levy any tax.''

The monarch answered : Take no further pains,
For I have passed beyond the need thereof.

Resign the world to its Creator — ^Him
Who manifested forth His works. The heavens
Will pass away, but God abideth ever
To guide both thee and me to what is good."

He slept that night, and early in the morn
A countless crowd resorted to his court.

They brought together all that were required,

And young prince Yazdagird approached the Shah,
Who gave him in the presence of the lords
The crown and bracelets, torque and ivory throne.
Intending to devote himself to God
He oast away the crown, he left his seat,

And hasted to resign the world's affairs.

At night-faU he was eager for repose,

And, when the sun displayed its head above
The deep, fear filled his archimage's heart.

Who thought : The Shah ariseth not from sleep
Unless he hath withdrawn him from the lords."

1587 Then Yazdagird drew near his sire and spied
What froze the breath upon his lips — Bahrain
With faded cheeks lay dead on gold brocade !

The day of gloom is as it was of yore.

Sear not thy heart with greed and lust of more.


BAHRAM GtfR 151

At death the cores of stones and iron quail,

And here thy strivings are of no avail.

Thou shouldst be inoffensive and humane ;

Why seek addition with its biting bane ?

Woe for that great Shah and his equity !

Oh ! never derogate his memory.

Of fifty monarchs of seed royal sown,

Who girt their loins upon the Iranian throne,

Bahr^m Gur had no like in eminence.

In justice, puissance, and excellence.

Thou wouldst have called king Rustam but vizir
To him though Rustam sent his arrows sheer
Through mounts of iron, yet was there no delay
When Shah Bahram Gur’s term had passed away.
What profit had he from his valour’s day ?

For forty days the Shah bewailed his sire,

The host wore raiment black and blue, and when
The charnel closed o’er that famed warrior Shah
He bore off bounty,” thou hadst said, with him.”
Sun, moon, and Venus, Saturn, crown, and throne,
A Sh^h, like this one, ne’er will look upon.

Woe for that royal mien, that height, and Grace !

Woe for that lofty star, that hand, and mace !

He decked the throne and crown, from Rum and Chin
Took toll and tax, yet passed as he had been
Some starving mendicant ! When all was done
What profited his halls aloft the sun ?

He and the pauper fare the selfsame path,

And each of grief and pain a scantling hath.

The dear delights of earth, the sovereign sway.

What hoot they ? Soon thy rule will pass away.

Blest is the pious mendicant and wise.

Whose ears oft feel the world’s rough pleasantries,
For, when he passeth, he will leave behind
A good name and a good conclusion find.

His portion is in heaven, and in God’s sight


153 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSl

He will have honour, not be in my plight,

In miserable case, calamitous,

With all that I possess sent Hell-ward thus
Beyond recall ! No hope in heaven I see,
lly hand is void, both w^orlds have ruined me
Now, if I can collect my thoughts again,
The rule of Yazdagird shall be my strain.


XXXVI

YAZDAGIED SON OF BAHEAM GUE

HE REIGNED EIGHJ’EEN YEARS


NOTE

The length of the reign of this Shilh (Isdi.i^erd II, a.d. 43B-457),
as given by Eirdansi, appears to he about correct. From the i)oint
of view of popular tradition he seems wholly to have been over-
shadowed Ly his famous father, and his reign conseqtiently is all
hut a blank in the Shahnama. Historically it was full of incident,
and Firdausi’s statement —

“He sent out countless hosts on every side,

And kept the world secure from enemies,’’

though it may be only a conventional statement, is correct enough.
He began his reign with a war wdth Rum. This was soon over,
but was followed by long wars witli the Huns and the Haituliaus.
Within the empire there were persecutions of the Jews and
Christians, and about a.d. 450 serious trouble in Armenia.
Yazdagird, as we have seen,i continued his father’s minister, Mihr
Narsi, in power. According to Mashidi he fortified the passes in
the Caucasus.*’ He was known to his subjects by two titles —
“ The Clement”® and “ The soldier’s friend.”

Of the two sons of Yazdtigird it is not certain historically which was
the elder, hut as Piruz was successful in the struggle for the throne
that followed on the death of his father, he in any case would have
been made out to be the elder in order to regularise the succession,
and the elder he is according to all the Oriental authorities. In
dating his coins he ignored the .short reign of his l)rother Hurmuz.®

^ MM, ii. lf)3. Cf. Vol. i. pp. 10 and note.
* RM, I, ii. 303. ® NT, p. m.

T53


^ Sco'p. 4.

® ZT, ii. p. 127.


154


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


§ I

How Yazdagird sat upon the Throne and exhorted the
Captains of the Host

158S When Yazdagird became the world’s great king
He gathered unto him the scattered troops.

There was a conclave of the wise and noble.

The great men and the princely archimages.

The atheling sat on the golden throne,

He shut the door of toil, the hand of evil,

And thus began : “ He that committeth not
A wrong is not in danger of the avenger.

But when a heart is darkening with envy
The Div will be called in to medicine it,

For en^y causeth greed and grief and want,

And is a cruel and revengeful div.

Impute not to a foeman’s heart and hand
That which displeaseth thee. Humanity
Is wisdom’s brother. Wisdom is the crown
Upon the head of knowledge. What time thou
Conferrest benefits on any one
Din it not into him and break his heart.

If thou dost good and art longsuffering
Thou art not worthless in a wise man’s eyes.

If now victorious fortune shall assist me
In furthering my wishes in the world
I wfil prepare a roll of righteousness
Without an entry of deceit or wrong.”

He ruled the world in justice for a while ;

The age rejoiced in him and he rejoiced.

He sent forth countless hosts on every side,

And kept the world secure from enemies.

When eighteen years had passed above his head,

He grieved because his fortune was bedimmed,
Convoked to him the magnates and the sages,


YAZDAGIRD SON OF BAHRAm GUR 155

Caused them to kneel before the golden throne,

Aad thus addressed them : ‘‘ This untoward sky,

Not knowing fosterling and fosterer,

And heeding not the crowns of potentates,

Pursueth every quarry in its path ;

So now my time is drawing to its close,

And all my strength is broken. I bestow
The crown, the signet-ring, the host, and all
The treasures of fr^ upon Hurmuz ;

Pay due observance, execute my bidding,

And make my will the music of your souls.

Although Piruz hath Grace divine and stature,

And is the elder brother of Hurmuz ;

Yet see I in Hurmuz dehberation,

With wisdom, modesty, and aptitude.”

He spake and lived a se’nnight afterwards ; C. 1589

Then passed ; the throne wept over him awhile.

Be thy years twenty-five, be they five score,

Soon will this fieeting show be thine no more,

Begard then as a transitory thing
Whatever falleth to thy reckoning.


XXXVII

HUEMUZ

HE EEIGNED ONE YEAR
NOTE

The erai'liest coins of Pimz date from his third year as he
reckoned it, counting from his father’s death, so the rei^^m of
Hurmuz (Hormisdas, a.d. 457-459) lasted about two years. ^
Hiirmuz probably had the advantage of being on the spot at the
time of Yazdagird’s death, but Piriiz may have had the better
right to the throne, ^ and seems to have owed much to the services
of a leader named Ruhhdm — a scion of the great Miliriln clan
which was of Arsacid descent.® The name is a familiar one to
students of the Shahnama as that of one of those secondary heroes
many of whom— real personages in the Parthian epoch — have been
reflected back to the mythical periods of the poem.'^ Ruhbamj as
we have seen, was one of the Twelve (eleven) Champions.®
Wliether Ph'iiz also received formal help from the Haitiilians is
doubtful, but plenty of nomad tribes would be willing to take
service with him for a consideration, and if they happened to be
within tlie Haitalian s^diere of influence w’ould be regarded as
Haitdlians themselves by tradition. For the consideration required
in the text Tabari substitutes Talikan.® This is much more
probable. Tirmid is mentioned because it Avould represent the
traditional notion of the Oxus being the boundary between Inin
and Turdn. On the other hand settlements in the desert, such as
Tdlikdn, were valuable both for trade and in war."^ Firdausi’s
statement that Piriiz pardoned Hurmuz is siipported by Dinawari
and Mir Klidnd, but two out of the three accounts in Tabari say
that Hurmuz was i^ut to death. The third says that he was
imprisoned. In all probability he \vas executed.®

^ NT, p. 426. “ See p. 153. ® NT, pp. 114, 139 and notea.

See Vol.iii. p. 9. ® SeeVol.iv. p. 102. ® NT, p. llC.Sf’Q'. and notes.

‘ Id, ® Id, 117 seq. and notes, RM, I, ii. 364.


HURMUZ


157


§ I


Hoiv Hurmuz, Son of Yazdagird, ascended the Throne

Hurmuz succeeded to his father’s throne.

And set upon his head the crown of gold,

While, thou hadst said, Piruz was all one rage
With tears of envy mounting to his eyes.

He went incontinent with troops and treasures.

And many chiefs, to the Haitalian king,

Who was a prmcelmg of Chaghan, a man
Of high ambition and possessed of troops,

Of treasure, and of power, hight Paghanish.

To him Piriiz said : 0 good friend of mine !

Two sons w^ere we — ^the glories of tho throne.

Our father gave the younger of us twain
The royal crown and, having acted thus
Unjustly, died. If thou wilt give me troops
I have myself wealth, weapons, majesty,

And might of hand.”

Tho monarch of Chaghan
Replied : ” ’Tis well, thy sire was king himself.

I will point out the way to get thy rights,

And furnish thee with troops upon these terms :

That I shall have Tirmid and Wisagird,

To which effect I hold a covenant
From Yazdagird.”

Piruz said : ” Yea, ’tis well,

And thou desorvest greater sovereignty.”

The monarch gave him thirty thousand swordsmen —
A noble army of Haitalians —

Wherewith Piruz, the Shah, arrayed a host
That darkened sky and moon with flying dust.

He fought with king Hurmuz who could not long

Endure the stress of war but presently

Was taken, and his father’s crown and throne


1 58 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Grew worthless to him. When Piruz beheld
His brother’s face he yearned for love and union,
Bade him remount and sped to grasp his hand,
Dispatched him to the palace and declared
His own conditions. Said Hurmuz to him : —

'' Thank God that those who worship Him are wise.
My brother taketh from me crown and throne ;

Be victory both in name i and deed his own.”


1 Piruz means victorious.


XXXVIII

p1rt)z

HE REIGNED ELEVEN YEARS


ARGUMENT

Piri'iz becomes undisputed Shab. His inaugural speech. T
land is troubled by a severe drought which Pirdz takes measures to
mitigate, The breaking of the drought. Pfruz builds cities and,
in violation of the treaty of Shdh Bahrdm Gdr, makes war upon
the HaitalianSj is defeated, and killed.

NOTE

The reign of Pirdz (Perozes, ad. 459-484) lasted much longer
than eleven years, and seems to liave made a deep impression on
the popular mind by reason of its accumulation of mishaps. The
expedition against the llaitalians was preceded by a few months by
a total eclipse of the sun ^ — a portent of disaster that well may have
helped to bring about its own fulfilment. Mir Khund tells us that
this Shtih’s sobriquet was “ The Valiant.”

A relic of PIruz — a cup engraved with a representation of that
Shdh engaged in hunting — is said to be still in existence.®

§ I. Drought is common enough in Iran, and the record shows
that this particular one must have been of exceptional severity.
According to Tabari the relief measures adopted by Pirdz to cope
with the emergency were so efficient that only one man perished
through want.* Tabari of course is merely giving the statements
of his authorities without comment.

§§ 2-4. According to the account in Tabari, Pinlz built three
cities — Rflm-Pirdz (the Pirdz-Rdm of Pirdausi) in the territory of


^ On Saturday, January 14th, a.d. 484. NT, p. 425.

® RM, T, i. 308. ® RSM, p. 329. * NT, pp. 119, 122.


i6o THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSt

Rai, another called Riisliaii Pirdz, and a third named Shahram-
Piruz (Firdausi’s Badan Pln'iz) in Azarhaijan.^

The tradition given in the Shahiuima of the war between Plriiz
and tlie Haittilians is dominated by the memory of the beloved and
popular Bahram Gur. We have seen how that Shah, after his
triumphant campaign against that people, set up a pillar that was
to mark the boundary betu-een them and the Iriinians.^ The pre-
sumption in the poem is that the arrangement then made continued
in force till Plriiz refused to be bound by it any longer. His refusal
brought death upon himself and disaster on his host, (,'learly this
was a judginent up)on him for violating the treaty maile by his
grandfather. Naturally if Plriiz had been successful a dilferent
popular estimate would have been formed upon his conduct, but as
matters turned out he was manifestly a wrong-doer fur having left
his grandsire’s way and he merely got his deserts. Uunsequently
on this occasion right was on the side of the enemy, and for a time
the tradition becomes almost pro-Haitalian. Between the memory
of a great popular Shall and the occurrence of a great national disast^cr
practically nothing remained, and the two are linked together as
cause and efiect. Historically, as we know from other sources, the
case was very didcrent. Bahrain Guv’s son and successr)r, Yazdagird,
had plenty of trouble with the Haitalians,^ and so had, it would
seem, Plruz himself before the final disaster overtook him. Once,
if not twice, he had been forced to conclude an unfavourable peace
with them, had-found himself in their power, and his son, Kuhiid,
had on one occasion to remain two years in captivity until a heavy
ransom had been i^aid. If the story of the help given by the
Haitalians to Plriiz against his brother, Hurmuz, at the price of the
cession of Tillikan he unhistorical it was probably at one of these
conclusions of peace- that the place was ceded.'^ Popular tradition
may have preferred to represent Tiiiikaii as being yielded to secure
the throne for the rightful heir rather than as the consideration
for a disgraceful treaty later on. Plruz violated his own compact,
not Baliriim’s, and perished in consetpience. There are three
accounts of the disaster in Tabari. They are in accord in essentials,
and two of them attribute the proximate cause of the overthrow of
Plriiz to the trench dug by the Haitalian king who in these accouuts
is called Achshunwar or Akhsliuuwar approximately, but in the
absence of diacritical and vowel points the precise form is uncer-
tain. According to one account it was the evil practices of the


1 NT, p. 123. 2 p. J)2. 3 p 153^

* pp. 156, 157, NT, p. 119, note.


PtR'&Z


i6i

Haitdlian king tliat impelled Pinlz to declare war, and four sons
and four brothers perished with him.^ The second, which comes
from Ibn Mukaffa,*^ states that there were two campaigns. In the
first of them Piriiz was led astray by an Haitalian chief, who had
had himself purposely mutilated in order to deceive the Shah, and
'forced to sue for peace. Subsequently wounded honour induced
him to tear up the treaty and renew the struggle in spite of the
advice of his counsellors ; he perished, and his baggage, women,
money, and papers fell into the hands of the enemy.® In the
third account mention is made of Bahram Gdr’s pillar, and Pfrdz
is said to have had it thrown down and dragged in front of him
by fifty elephants and three hundred men that he might not be
charged mth passing it. This account also states that a daughter
of Pirdz was among the captives taken by the Haitalians. Their
king put her into his haram, and she had a daughter who afterwards
married her uncle Kubdd.* There can be no doubt but that a
terrible disaster befell the Iranian arms in this campaign and, as
we shall see presently,® the memory of it was reflected back upon
the mythical past and the story retold in connexion with the
overthrow of a Pishdadian Shah.


§ I

How Piricz sat ufon the Throne and made an Oration

Piruz, at ease about Hurmuz and free
From care, came, sat upon the royal throne,

As well became a Shah that worshipped God,

And at the outset thus harangued the chiefs : —

Ye worshipful and noble lords ! I ask
The Judge that needeth naught to grant to me
Long life, a due regard for great and small
As their conditions are, abundant wisdom,

And happy days, Longsuffering is the crown
Upon humanity ; the hasty man
Is ever in abasement. Wisdom’s pillars

1 NT, p. 120.

3 For whom see Vol. vi. p. 17 ; NT, p. 121, %oU
* Id, p. 128 seq. and notes,

VOL. VIT.


® Id. p. 123 scq.
®'p. 171.

L


1590


i 62 the SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSt

Axe equity and mercy, its adornment
Is bounty’s gate, the tongue of eloquence
Its glory, while its plumes are hardihood
And fortitude. How shall mere high estate,

If wisdom fail, enjoy the throne of greatness ?

E’en sages are but mortal and possess not
More Grace than had Jamshid who died, what time
His crown had reached the moon, and gave another
His royal scat. None can abide on earth
For aye. Take refuge then with God from ill.

And all is said.”

Wise and untouched by evil
He ruled one year with justice and good counsel.
Next year the face of heaven was dry, the water
Shrank in the streams till it became like musk.

The third and fourth year it was even so.

And all men were in misery through the drought ;
The mouth of heaven became as dry as dust,

And river -water was a precious drug ;

There was no room to stand, such multitudes
Of men and beasts lay dead. The king of kings
Beheld that portent, took off tax and toll,

And in each city where he kept his stores
Bestowed them freely on both small and great.

A proclamation issued from the court : —

'' Distribute, 0 ye men of name and might !

Such grain as ye possess and heap instead
Your treasuries with coins struck by Piruz.

Whoe’er possesseth hoarded stores of grain,

Or sheep or oxen roaming at their will,

Let him dispose thereof at his own price.

For lives are perishing for lack of food.”

C. 1591 He sent another letter in all haste
To every officer and potentate : —

“ Ope wide your bams to all folk everywhere
That are in need. Should young or old and feeble


PiRtz


163


Die lacking bread — victim to the famine —

I will pour out his blood that hath the bam,

For he hath scorned God’s work. His waist will I
Cleave with the trenchant scimitar and wreck
'His life.”

He ordered folk to quit their homes,
And coming plainwards lift their hands in plaint.

A cry of bitter weeping and distress,

Of pain and consternation rose to heaven ;

On hill and waste, in desert and in cave,

They called on God for mercy. On this wise
For seven years both small and great beheld
No verdure anywhere. With Farwardin,

The eighth year, rose a glorious cloud which rained
Pearls on the parched up soil. The scent of musk
Rose from the gardens while the hail that fell
Lay in the mud like pears within a bowl ;

The rainbow was resplendent in the sky,

The age escaped the iU of evil men,

And everywhere the bow was strung again.


§ 2


Hoio PMiz huilt the Cities of Pir'&z-Rdm and Baddn-Pirdz,
and how he went to war with T'drdn


Now when Pirtiz had ’scaped that day of stress
Ho sat in peace upon the throne of kingship,^
He built himself a city which he bade
Call Piruz-Ram, the world hath good thereof,
For ’tis the pleasance of the glorious Shahs.

He built withal Bad^in-Piruz, far-famed,

A place of peace and joy, now Ardabil,

Where Csesar hath of right his boundary.

^ Tbo previous section ends here in C.


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


164

Whenas Piruz had prospered all these parts,

And made thereby the hearts of wise men glad,

He gave a largess to his noble troops,

And gat him ready to attack the Turkmans.

In that campaign Hurmuz was in the van
With troops new-levied ; after Shah Piruz
Kubad led ^ on the army like a blast ;

Piruz’ pure son was he, wise, and a bough
That brought forth fruit. Balash, the younger son,^
A man of Grace and justice, sat rejoicing
C. 1592 Upon the throne while one of Pars, a man

Of high renown called by the king Sarkhan,^

Was bidden by Piruz : “ Abide thou here
As upright minister before Balash.” ^

Piruz set forward with his troops, his treasure,

And gear of war, to fight with Khushnawaz.

Now br^ve Bahr^m had marked the boundary

By setting up a column on the plain

With this inscription by the king of kings : —

Let not a Turkman or Iranian
Transgress this boundary on any wise,

Or pass across the river.”

When Piruz,

The lion-queller, reached that spot he saw
The mark set by the monarch of fr^^n.

And thus addressed his chiefs : “ By this same token
Will I erect with scimitar and treasure
A tower against the Turkmans so that none
May suffer from the Haitalians. When ’tis raised
On the Tarak, and when their chiefs shall bring
The former treaty, I will say : ' Bahram Gur
Did thus by manhood, wisdom, might, and Grace,

But I will leave no trace of Khushnawaz,

Haitalian or Turkman, high or low.’ ”

1 Reading with P. 2 17 q

3 Stifaiai, for whom see pp. 170, 173 seg., 185. * Couplet omitted.


PIRJJZ


When KhushnawaZj son of the Khan, had heard
“ The Shah and all his host have crossed Jihtin
Against bhe treaty that Bahram Gur made :

Fresh war and strife have come upon the land/^

A veteran scribe was called by his command.


§ 3

The Letter of Kh'^hnawdz to Firdz

He wrote a letter to the king of earth,

With ^ praises of him from the righteous Judge,
Then said : “ Since thou departest from the pact
Made by just kings I will not call thee royal.
Thine ancestors had acted never so,

Those rulers of the world elect and pure.

By breaking thus the compact of the Persians,
And flinging to the dust the mark of greatness,^
Thou forcest me to break bhe treaty also,

And draw the scimitar in self-defence.”

He wrote at large and sent too many gifts.

A noble cavalier and eloquent
Went with the letter which when Shah Piruz
Had read he raged against that famous prince,
And bade the envoy : Rise and get thee gone,
Return to that base man and say to him : —

' Bahrto concluded terms of peace whereby
The country was your own to the Tarak,

But now thou hast the whole to the Jihun,

Hill, dale, and desert, all alike are thine.

Behold ! I lead a vast, a noble host.

And warriors bent on fight, and I will leave not
For long on earth the shade of Khushnaw^z.’ ”

1 Reading with P.

“ “ Ja marq[ue de la frontitn 6tabh*e par Jes grands ” (Mohl)..


i66 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

The envoy came like flying dust and told
What he had heard , When IChushnaw had hearkened
Thereto, and read what had been writ to him,

He called his scattered followers to horse,

Led forth the army to the battlefield,

And set upon a lance’s point the treaty
Accorded to his grandsire by Bahram
To this effect : “ Our frontier is Jihun.”

He chose a man of mark among the troops —

One who was shrewd of heart and eloquent —

And said : “ Approach Phtiz with courteous words,
Hear his reply, and say : ' I will confront thee
Upon the march with thine own grandsiro’s treaty —
That man of lofty fortune, thine own guide —

Set on a spearhead like a shining sun
Before the host that all possessed of wisdom
May look upon the patent of the just.

I shall be praised while thou wilt be condemned.

And called "The impious Shah.” God and his wor-
shippers,

And subjects everywhere, will not approve
That any one should seek to do injustice,

And break the treaties of the kings of khrgs.

None like to Shah Bahram for equity
And manhood e’er set crown upon his head,

God is my witness, and it is not well
To have to make appeal to Him, that thou
Art with injustice seeking war with me
In falling thus upon me with thy host.

Herein thou wilt be not victorious,

And likewise get no fruitage from good fortune.
Henceforward I shall send no messengers :

God will avail to aid me in this fight.’ ”

The envoy came dust-swift with this dispatch,^

And to Pixuz repeated all these words.

1 We have not been told that Khitshnawdz wrote one.


PlRtlZ


1S7

WHqii that haughfc Shah had read what Khiishnawaz
Had written in the letter he was wroth.

And said thus to the envoy : “ One of years
And world-experience would speak not like that ;

But if from Chach thou comest o’er the river
My spearheads are prepared to welcome thee.”

The messengur returned to Khushnawaz,

Spake with him privily at large, and said : —

I see not in Piruz a reverence
For God ; he hath not wisdom for his guide ;

He careth only for revenge and strife.

And walketh not according to God’s will.”

When Khushnawaz had heard these words he sought c. 1594
To God for shelter, making supplication,

And saying : ”0 Thou Judge that judgest right,

And art the Master both of wind and dust !

Thou knowest that iniquitous Piruz
Is not in prowess better than Bahram.

He speaketh words unjust and fain would win
Addition by the scimitar. Break Thou
His foot -hold from the earth. Oh ! may he have
No strength, no wit, no heart ! ”

Around his host ^

He dug a trench which he made shift to hide ;

’Twas lasso-deep and twenty cubits wide.


§ 4

How Pir^cz fought with Khushnawaz and was slain

This done, he called on God and marched his powers
From Samarkand. On that side Shah Piruz,

The frantic, led his troops on like a blast ;

On this side KhushnawS-z with fearful heart


^ i.e. where he intended to make his stand.


1 68 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Prayed privily before the holy Judge.

The drums and trumpets sounded in both hosts.
The air was ebon with the armies’ dust,

And from them both such showers of arrows rained
That blood ran down like water in a stream.

Then, like a dust-cloud, Shah Pfruz advanced
With mace and Ruman helm, and as he drew
Anear to Khushnawaz,^ the Turkmans’ chief
Retreated, turned his rein, and showed his back.
The foeman followed fiercely. Shah Pirfiz
Spurred forward with few followers and fell
With others — chiefs and Lions of the day
Of battle — ^in the fosse, such as Hurmuz
His brother, glorious Kubdd and others —

Great men and princes of the royal race —

Till seven had fallen headlong, men of name
With golden casques. Then Khushnawaz returned
Rejoicing to the fosse and lifted thence
The living while the throne bewailed their fortune.
Now Sh§-h Piruz, that chief of chiefs endowed
With Grace and state, had broken head and back,
While of the princes, save Kub6;d, none lived :

Thus host and empire went adown the wind.

Then Khushnawaz advanced with heart content,
And head exalted with his warrior-host,

And gave to spoil the baggage and the foe.

For right and left were indistinguishable.

They made some prisoners and what numbers more
Were stretched by arrows on the sombre soil !

0- 1595 ’Tis not for world-lords to be covetous.

For hearts that covet are the dark dust’s mate ;
The never-resting sky ordaineth thus
Alike for subjects and for king’s estate,

And wringeth its own fosterling, be he
A fool or wisdom’s pillar. None can stay

^ Tlxe sentence thus far has been translated from P,


169


PlRtfZ

Upon this earth of ours eternally.

Make right thy provand ; naught is left to say.
When Khtishnaw^z had crossed the fosse his troops
Lacked not for wealth. They bound Kubad with
fetters

Of iron, heedless of his throne and race.

When tidings reached the people of fran
About the fosse and how Piruz had fought,

A wail of anguish went up from the land
For all those princes — ^men of high degree —

And when the tidings had been certified
Baldsh descended from his golden seat,

Plucked out his royal locks and strewed sad dust
Upon the throne. Within Iran the host,

The cities and the women, men, and children.

All waded, all rent the hair and tore the face
For grief, talked of the Sh^ and yearned for him ;

All sat in dole and woe while great and small
Took thought what course to choose and whether they
Should quit fr^n and see where fell the fray ?


XXXIX

BALlSH

HE REIGNED FIVE YEARS AND TWO MONTHS
ARGUMENT

Balush becouiBS Shdh. Sufarai leads forth a host against the
Hait^ilians to avenge the death of Piniz and defeats them. Terms
of peace are arranged, Kub^d and the other captives are released,
and Siifarai returns with them in triumph to frdn. After some
years Sdfarai dethrones Bahish and makes Kubdd Shdh.

NOTE

“ Baliiah (Balas, a.d. 484-488) seems to have been the brother, not
the son, of Piriiz and the uncle of Kubdd.^ The name is identical
with the more familiar Vologeses. Baldsh being on the spot and
regent at the time of the death of Piriiz naturally became Shdh.
Tabari says that he had to fight for the throne with his brother
(really his nephew), Kubad, who lied to the Haitdlians. The real
struggle however appears to have been with Kubdd’s brother, Zirih,
who was defeated and slain.®

§§ 2 and 3. Piruz having expiated by his own death his violation
of the treaty made by his grandfather, Shah Bahram Giir, with the
Haitalians, popular tradition is at liberty to resume a x^atriotic
attitude and set forth how Piriiz was avenged and franidn honour*
vindicated. Unfortunately the account does not appear in the
oldest authorities and seems to be unhistorical. fran at that time
was much oppressed by, if not actually tributory to, the Haitdlians.®
Siifarai’s triumphant campaign seems to have been invented as a
salve to the national honour and, incidently, as a glorification of

1 NT, p. 133 note.

3 7cZ. 119 9Wie. That the scene of Sdfarai’s victory should bo laid
at Kashmihan, where Bahrdm Gdr had triumphed, is in itself sus-
picious. See pp. 89, 90.


170


balash


I7I

the great family of Karan to which he belonged. The story of
his success appears, as Noldeke has pointed out, to have been
reflected back into mythical times and told in connexion with
Naudar, the Pishdadian Shdh. ^ Certainly the parallel is very
complete. In both cases the , Irsiniaii host is overthrown by a
Northern foe ; in both the Shdh perishes ; in both the scene is laid
in the same neighbourhood ; in both the defeat is avenged by a
Kdran, and in both cases the prisoners are rescued.^ In Tabari’s
account Siifarai appears as Sdkhrd.’^ As a leading frdnian of the
time he may have been instrumental in bringing about a peace
with the Haitdlians after the death of Piruz, and this perhaps may
be regarded as the historical measure of his achievement.®

Baldah appears to have been somewhat after the type of
Yazdagird, son of Shdpur, in character, ‘ mild and tolerant,
approved by the Christians and hated by the Magi who, it is
said, were scandalised at his attempt to introduce the Boman
fashion of public baths, which of course involved a profanation of
the sacred element. As his treasury was exhausted he was unable
to look to the army for support, and after a reign of four years was
dethroned and blinded. According to other accounts he died
a natural death.® Mir Khdnd says that he was known as
^^the beloved.”®


§ I


How Baldsh ascended the Throne and harangued the frdnians


Whonas Balash had mourned one month, with dust
Upon his head and lacerated cheeks.

The people and the high priest came to him
With valiant warriors and famous sages.

They spake with him at large by way of counsel
In profitable words, then seated him
Upon the throne of kingship, showering gold
And jewels over him abundantly.

When seated on the throne he said ; “0 chiefs !
Acquire the secrets, of the sages’ hearts,

^ See Vol. i. p. 345 seq., and NIN, p. 9. ® NT, p. 120 note.

^ Id, t and RSM, p. 332. * Soc Vol. vi. p. 371.,

® NT, pp. 133 seq. and mtea; ESM, p. 336 and Tiote.

« EM, Pt. I, Vol.ii. p. 371.


172 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAVSt

And ye shall have advancement at my hands
When my dark counsels brighten. Frustrate not
The purpose of well-doers in the world -
As for the wicked and mahcious man,

He shall not partner me, but first will I
Enrich him with advice and, if that faileth,

C. 1596 Crown him with blood. When any subject plaineth
. To us ’gainst some one of this loyal host
The heart of the unjust one will I break,

And rase him utterly, both root and branch.

See that ye take no freedoms with your Shdh,

Aiad in especial one that is devout,

For he by turns is bane and antidote ;

So choose the antidote and leave the bane.

Of all things seek to please the Shah and never
Approach his throne unless with joyful looks.

When he is wroth excuse thyself and bless him,

Just or unjust. Whene’er thou sayest : ^ I
Am wise, and I am mighty in all knowledge,’

Know that thou never wast more ignorant,

So be not thine own enemy. If now
Ye shall obey the counsel that I give
By hearkening to my profitable words,

Ye shall receive the treasures of wise Shdhs :

I never yet saw knowledge injure any.”

The chieftains marvelled at his understanding,

And called down praises on him, while the troops
Spake thus to one another : “ From this Shah
WiU fall a lustre on the throne and crown.

God grant that he escape the evil eye.

And ill befall the persons of his foes.”

They went forth from his palace well content,
Committing to God’s care his soul and body.

Their hearts were full of love, their tongues of praise : —
May such a Sh^h have endless length of days.”


balAsh


173


§ 2


How SiLfarai Tiad Tidings of the Slaying of Firuz, how he wrote
a Letter to Ehitshnawdz, cmd how Khushnawdz replied

What time Piruz was going to the war

He sought a paladin — a man of counsel

And weight — ^to watch o’er crown and throne, and be

A friend to young Balash. Now Sufarai —

A man of great estate and good withal —

Was fitted for that task, experienced,

A native of Shir&z, a general,

A man exalted both in heart and head.

And likewise marchlord in Z4bulist4n,

K&bulistdn, Ghaznin, and Bust. When tidings
About Pirfiz, uncounseUed and unguided,

Came his eye-lashes drenched his cheeks with tears,

He rent his raiment of a paladin,

The warriors doffed their helmets and sat mourning
Through sorrow for the Sh^h, while Sufarai
Exclaimed : How shall Bal4sh, youth that he is,

Seek vengeance for Piruz ? ” for well he knew

That that would naught avail and that the throne C, 1597

Of kingship was in evil case. He gathered

His scattered soldiers, beat the kettledrums,

And dust rose from the plain. There came to him
A hundred thousand warlike, vengeful swordsmen.

He paid, equipped the host, and joyed the hearts
Of all that sought for vengeance. Then he called
A sweet-tongued envoy watchful, wise, and shrewd,

And, seared and sorry, wan and weeping, wrote
A letter of wise counsels, instancing
Jamshid and Kai Kdiusrau and Kai Kub4d,

Dispatched it to Bal&sh, and said : “0 Sh4h !

Be not aggrieved at death ; it is a grief

That all must taste ; choose patience and choose fame.


174


THE SHAhnImA of FIRDAUSI


What came from wind retnmefch with the breath
Some call it justice and some tyranny.

Now with the approbation of the king
Will I make ready for revenge and strife
Because the sun and moon cry out in heaven
For vengeance for the blood of Sh&h Piruz.'’

With that the envoy went upon his way,

And Sufarai, all wreakful, for his part
Arrayed his army like a pheasant’s plumes,^

And from Zibulistan advanced toward Marv,

He chose him out a wary messenger,

Who by his words could mollify the heart.,

And spake on this wise to a scribe : “ Arise,
Because thy pen hath stirring work to do,

Indite to I^ushnawi-z and say ; ^ 0 fool,

And knavish doer of the work of divs !

Thou art in God’s sight guilty, and thy shirt
Shall wail for thee. Whoe’er did deed like thine,
Thou faithless one ? Thou shalt behold anon
The sword of tribulation. Thou hast slain
A man without offence — the king of kings,

The grandson of the world-lord Shih Bahr^lm —
And hast set up a new feud in the world,

A feud to be forgotten nevermore.

Why, when the din of tymbals rose, didst thou
Not come and fawn upon him like a dog ?

Thy grandsire was a poor man of thy tribe.

Thy sire was like a slave before Bahri^m.

Lo ! I have come to Marv to seek revenge.

And I will waste the Hait&lians utterly.

The captives and whatever booty came
Within thy grasp upon that battlefield,

I will exact aU with the sword of vengeance.

And bear to Marv Turin’s dust, suffer not
The world to be thy son’s, burn all thy kith
^ Gf. p. 88, note.


balAsh


175


And kin, cut off thy head by God’s command,

And make thy kingdom like a sea of blood.

But this is not revenge ; why talk I long ? C. 1598

When Khhshnaw&z, in that he slew Piruz,

Shall rot in darksome dust his soul shall plead
His cause from Hell.’ ”

The envoy with the letter
Of Sdfarai went like a mighty lion.

Came in an angry mood to Khushnawdz,

Appeared before his throne, did reverence,

And gave the letter, while the captains present
Withdrew. The monarch gave it to a scribe.

And said : “ Read out to me in confidence
Both good and ill.”

The scribe thus answered him : —

“ This letter is all arrow, mace, and sword,”

And sorely grieved was valiant Khushnawaz
At that long letter writ by Sfifarai,

Then set himself without delay to answer
The good and ill there written and began : —

“ I live in fear of God and fortune’s changes.

A worshipper of His would not have broken
The compact of the Sh&hs. I sent Piruz
A letter of advice besides the treaty
Of that great king,^ but he despised my words, '

And spumed the old king’s pact. When he assailed me.

And put me to a shift, and when the hosts
Met face to face, the stars raged at Piriiz,

And by no wiU of ours thy Shlih was slain.

Or e’er he broke the pact of righteous ShShs
His youth had not another day of joy ;

He found ® no favour in the Maker’s eyes ;

Thou wouldst have said : ‘ Earth took him by the
heel.’ »


^ Bahrdm Giir. Soo p. 166 .
3 “ Foot ” in the original.


* Reading with P.


176 THE SHJhnJMA OF FIRDAUSI

The man that breaketh his forefather’s treaty,

And flingeth underfoot the head of right,

Is like Pirnz upon the battlefield,

Pashed in a dusty ditch. So shalt thou be

If thou shalt come ; my wealth and warriors fail not.”

Departing with the letter and apace
The envoy in a week reached Sufarai,

Who read and loosed his tongue in malisons.

Then from the plain the people heard the blare
Of trumpets and the clash of brazen cymbals.

And Sufarai led forth to Kashmflian
A host so great that Sol was lost in heaven.

’Twas thus they crossed the stream — ^an armament
That made itself at home where’er it went.


C. 1599


§ 3


How S'ifarai fought with Kh'^tshmwdz, and how KuMd
was released from his Bondage


When tidings came to Khushnaw^ he marched
Out to the desert and prepared for war.

He reached Baigand and chose a battlefield
That hid the wilderness from circhng heaven
With troops.

On his side vengeful Sufarai
Came onward like .a blast. When it was night
That leader of the army occupied
All the approaches with fresh elephants.

The outposts wont their rounds in both the hosts,
The world resounded with the warriors’ shouts,

The challenge of the sentries and the clang
Of bells rose from both armies, front and rear.

Till Sol rose o’er the peaks and made the dales
And deserts like white crystal. Both arrays
Prepared for strife ; each raised the flag of greatness.


balAsh


177


Then dragons’ livers sundered at the shouting
Of valiant warriors while feathered shafts
Made air all vultures’ plumes, and earth became
A bath of chieftains’ blood. Where’er one gazed
Lay heaps of warriors slain. Then Sufarai
Charged from the centre with his troops amain,

While Kliushnaw&z on his side with his sword
Of vengeance spurred down from his vantage-ground ;
But when he saw that fortune proved unkind
He turned his rein and showed his back, pursued
By Shfarai as ’twere a raging blast,

Who followed with a head -transfixing spear.

He captured many nobles ; many more
Were slain by arrow and by scimitar.

He sped till he reached Kuhandizh and saw
No lack of slain and wounded on the way.

Then from the ramparts .Khlishnaw&z beheld
His troops spread o’er the desert’s hills and dales ;

The way was strewn with dead and things of price
So that the plain was docked out like a garden.

The soldiers carried oft' to Sufarai
The harness, lances, coronets of state,

The battlo-goar, the girdles, steeds, and slaves,

And made a heap as high as Mount Alburz.

He paid no hoed to all that Turkman spoil,

But gave the whole in largess to his troops,

And thus harangued the host : “ To-day’s affair
Hath prospered for us to our hearts’ content
Through fortune’s favour, but what time the sun
Shall lift its hand in heaven we must not bide
Inactivo on the plain but march like lions
Upon yon hold to avenge the king of kings.”

His troops agreed and each man spako his mind.
Thus fared it with them till in arching heaven
The sun’s resplendent diadem appeared,

Whereat the tymbals sounded in the camp,

VOL. VII. ' M


0. 1600


178 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

And SMarai bestrode his steed. An envoy
Reached that proud chief from KhtishnawSiZ to say : —

Erom battle, strife, and bloodshed naught resulteth
But travail and contention. Shall we then.

Who are two men of wisdom, young, and brave,

Send bot^h our souls to Hell If thou wilt seek
Again the way of wisdom thou shalt learn
That all that happened was the work of God.

It was not through the blast that Sh^h Piruz
Was slain but rather that the stars foreclosed
For him his years and months. He was to blame
For breach of pact, for choosing colocynth,

And spuming honey. Now what was to be
Hath come upon our heads. Blest is the man
That walketh not the round of violence.

The captives and whatever spoil there was,

The gold, the silver, and the uncut gems.

The steeds, the weapons, and the crowns and thrones.
Left by Piruz when fortune quitted him,

Both his own treasures and his troops’ as well,

Will I send to the general of the Sh&h
That thou mayst go victorious to fr&n,

Mayst go back to the monarch of the brave.

I wiU not trespass on fr&n ; do you.

For your part, keep the treaty of Bahrdm.

The king of kings apportioned earth aright :

Ttir^n and Chin are ours^ tiaiia is thine.''

When Siifarai had heard the embassage
He called the soldiers to his tent-enclosure.

And in their presence bade the messenger : —

'' Repeat before the host the fooman’s words,”

■ He came and gave them, keeping nothing back.
Then Sufarai addressed his army thus : —

” What in your view should be our policy
Herein ? ”

The troops replied : ” 'Tis thino to bid,


balAsh


179


And thine to stipulate the terms of peace.

None Imoweth better in fr&n than thou :

Thou art our king, our leader, and our lord.”

Thus to his noble chiefs spake Sufarai : —

The only policy for us to-day
Is this — to seek no more to fight with them.

I will lead back the army to t^n
With speed, because Kub4d,^ son of PIruz,

One of the royal race, is in their hands
With the high priest Ardshir and army-leaders.

Both young and old. If we fight Khushnaw§/Z
The matter will be long and profitless.

And they will slaughter their frdnian captives, C, i6oi

Kub^d, the world’s heir, and Ardshir. Howbeit,

Unless Kub&d had been in jeopardy,

Ne’er had my heart and brain recalled to mind
The high priest ; but if evil from the Turkmans
Befall KubM ‘hixi will be all outcry,

And this shame current with our warriors
Until the Eesurroction. We will give
A courteous answer to the mossonger,

And take fair counsels in the cause of peace.

Wo then perchaned may see Kub4d again,

(God grant that no one else be long of kings !)

Ardshir iho high priest and the other captives,

Both young and old.”

His soldiers blessed him, saying : —

“ That is the treaty, precedent, and Faith
For us.”

The paladin then called the envoy,

And thus addressed him with a dulcet tongue : —

It was the act of God — enough ! This world
Designeth evil and appriseth none.

The gr(iat men of frdn that have been taken
Are those — Kub&d and the high priest Ardshir

1 Kaikiibtlrt in tho original. ® Reading with P.


i8o ' THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAVSl

These with the rest that have their feet in fetters
Dispatch to me in honourable fashion.

Moreover all the booty in your hands —

Din&cs and crowns and wealth of every kind —
Dispatch in fuU to me, and let it come
In presence of the chieftains of this host.

We will not stretch our hands to spoil and slay
Because we have no need and worship God.

Within ten days we will recross Jihun,

And take no w^arlike step thenceforth. Give ear
To that which I have said and tell it all,

On thy return, to Khushnawaz.”

The envoy

Returned forthwith to Khushnawaz in triumph,

And gave the message. Khushnawaz rejoiced,

And instantly^released Kubad from bonds
With the high priest Axdshir and all the other
frinian prisoners, collected all
The booty found upon the day of battle,

Besides the throne and cro^^oi of Sh&ti Piruz,

And what was scattered ’mongst his troops, and sent
All by a trusty man to Sufarai.

Now when the soldiers looked upon Kubad
They joyed to see him, the high priest Ardshh,

And all the other captives young and old.

The mighty men came from their tents and all
Stretched out their hands to heaven in gratitude
That they beheld the king of kings’ own son
Unhurt with all the rest that most they prized.
Forthwith the chief broke up the camp, took horse,
1602 And glad and triumphing repassed Jihun

With that renowned high priest and with Kubad
When tidings reached the country of frdn
About that fortunate and glorious chief,

About his war and strife with Khushnawaz,

1 See p. 179, note.


balAsh


i8i

Aiid all his wonder-working policy ; —

He hath returned glad and victorious
From war, Kubad hath been released from fetters,

And Sufarai hath brought withal Ardshir,

The high priest, and the franian prisoners ;

Just now he crossed o’er the Jihun, his host
Is on the plains and mountains of frS^n,”

Such shouts ascended that thou wouldst have said : —
" They deafened those that heard.” The prudent
'magnates

Arose and gat themselves in readiness
To go forth with their welcome while Bala^h
Prepared a golden throne to seat Kub4d,

And that chief paladin. When Shfarai
Arrived within the realm the great men all
Met, while the Shah prepared the welcoming,

Set forward with such forces as he had,

And when he saw Kubad released from bonds,

Glad and victorious, embraced him quickly
With joy and cursed the people of Haital
And Cliin. They passed within the royal palaco
With hearts still sore and eager for revenge.

Bal&sh commanded and they spread the board,

And called for wine and harp and minstrelsy ;

But there was little gladness at th^t feast
Through sorrow for magnanimous Piruz.

The singers lauded Stifarai and sang
Upon bhe harp the war against TlirSn.

He was the Cynosure of all the chieftains,

entertained high hopes and joyed in him.

The country rallied to him, those at least
That longed to take revenge on Khtishnaw^iz,

The hearts of all the paladins rejoiced
In Sufarai ; they freed their souls from care-
Thus was it till four years had passed away.

And he had not his equal in the world.


r82 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Naught happened but acoording to his will,

And what he would he did. Now when his word
Prevailed throughout the world he had Balash
Removed, albeit gently, from the throne,

And said to him : Tliou rulest not the realm ;
Thou knowest not the good men from the bad ;
Thou tumest all the empire to a jest
Through thy perversity and carelessness.

KubSd is wiser far than thou and hath
Much more authority within the realm.’’

Bal^h withdrew to his own house, for he
Dared not make answer : “ Get thee gone,” but said:-
This throne will vex not when I sit thereon ;

’Tis free from travail, pain, and malison.”


KUBAD SON OF PtRtfZ

HE REIGNED FORTY-THREE YEARS


ARGUMENT

Kiibiid ascends the throne and harangues the chiefs. Si'ifarai
continues for a time at the head of affairs and then is disgraced and
executed. The Irdniana revolt in conse([uence, hand Kiibad over
to Slifarai’s son, Rizmihr, and make Kubitd’s brother, Jdmtlap,
Shiih. Rizmihr acts with extreme loyalty, protects Kubdd, and
escapes with him to the Haitdlians. On tlie way thither Kubiid
marries a thane’s daughter who becomes the mother of Kisrd.
Provided with an army by the king of the Haitdlians Kubdd
regains the throne. He wars against Rum, builds cities, and be-
comes a convert to the teaching of Mazdak who, however, is
worsted in a public disputation by Kisrd and put to death with his
followers. Kubdd appoints Kisrd, to whom the folk give the name
of Nxishirwdn, his successor and dies.

NOTE

According to Mir Khdnil, Kubdd (Kobad, a.d. 488-'53I) was
known as “ the well-intentioned.” ^ Historically the events of his

^ RM, Pt. I., Vol. ii. p. 371. The moknamo may be illustrated by
the following story from the Persian Tabari. Kub^d was engaged onoo
in hunting at vintage-time and reached a village where ho saw a very
beautiful vino. Near by was a woman, engaged in baking broad,
who had with her a child some throe years old. Suddenly the child
entered the garden whore the vino was, picked a bunch of grapes, and
was about to oat them. Tho woman slapped the child, took away the
bunch, and rofastoned it to tho vine. Kub&d, astounded at hor parsi-
mony, approached tho vino and asked the woman whoso it was. She
answered that it belonged to hor. Ho then inquired whoso the child
was, and she told him that it was hors. Then he said : “ Why have


1 84 THE SHAhnA'MA OF FIRDAUSt

reign, as set fortli in the Shahndma, may he revised as follows.
Siifarai remained at the head of affairs until the revolt occurred
that drove the Shah to take refuge with the Haitalians. This
revolt was brought about by the conversion of Kubad to the
doctrines of the heresiarch Mazdak, who had a large and increasing
following. Knbad seems to have been sincere in his adoption of
Mazdakiam, but at the same time used its subversive principles as
a means of reducing the power of, and of humbling, the great
nobles. The official hierarchy, however, took alarm, Kubdd was
dethroned and shut up in the “ Castle of Oblivion in Susiana, and
Jamasp, his brother, reigned in his stead. Kubdd, however, by
the help of his sister, wife, or both, or of Sufarai himself, managed
to make good his escape to the Haitalians with whom he had
stayed for some two years as a hostage during the lifetime of his
father.^ During his second sojourn among them he married his
own niece— the offspring, hy the^'Haitdlian king, of the captive
daughter of Piniz.^ Helped by his royal father-in-law Kuhdd
managed to recover his throne and placed Sdfarai again at the head
of affairs, but at length, finding him too powerful, called in the aid
of his rival — Shdpdr of Eai, the captain of the host— and had him
put to death. Kubdd never seems to have abandoned his personal
regard for Mazdakisni, in spite of the fact that it had cost him the
temporary loss of his crown, until nearly the end of liis long
reign. Probably after his restoration he was content to hold it
as a pious opinion only, no longer as a weapon to be used against
the nobility or in a manner provocative of the Magi. The Maz-
dakites, however, not unnaturally became concerned about the
future — what would happen on Kuhad’s death ? Accordingly they

you taken the hunch of grapes away from it, beaten it, and refused to
your own child a paltry bunch.” She replied : “ We are not free to
dispose of our own, for the Shah has a share, and before some one comes
on his behalf to deduct his portion we dare not put hand to it.” Kuhad
said : “Do you only or do all folk act thus ? ” She answered : “ Not
I alone, but all in the realm of Kubad.” The Sh&h was full of pity for
his subjects, narrated the story to his ministers, and bade them ’find a
less oppressive way of raising revenue. They recommended that the
whole realm should be surveyed and taxed in proportion to its fertility,
remoteness, and distance from water. Then the revenue would he in
money which could be demanded at any time. The Shdh gave orders
accordingly, and the work was begun, but finding that it could not be
completed in his own lifetime he charged his son and destined successor,
Nushirwan, to see that it was carried through, which he did (p. 224 .?eg )
— ZT, ii. 152 seq.

^ See p. ] 60.


2 Id, p. 161.


KUBAD son of PIRtfZ 185

attempted to secure the succession for one of Kubdd’s sons whom
they knew that they could trust. Kuhtld, however, had made up
his mind already in favour of another heir, and a great massacre
of Mazdakites ensued. This seems to have taken place at the end
of A.D. 528 or the beginning of a.d. 529. Kisni in consequence of
the share that lie took in exterminating the Communists received
the name of Niishirwdn.^

This account, from which all irrevelant history has been omitted,
differs widely, as will be seen, from that given in the Shahnama :
Mazdak and his evangel have been replaced in their proper his-
torical context, the story of the birth of Kisrd has been omitted,
and so has all reference to Rizmihr, Sufarai’s son.

§§ 2 and 3. Tabari tells us that when, at the instance of Kubad,
Shd,piir of Rai overthrew SdkhrA (Sufarai), a saying, which became
a proverb, grew current and ran thus : “ Sdkhra^s wind is gone ,*
now a wind has risen for Mihrdn.” Mihriln was the name of one of
the great Araacid families that played an important rule, and held
high office, in Saadnian times, and its employment in the above
proverb has led Noldeke to suspect that “Sukhrd” also must be
the title of a family, not the name of an individual, as otherwise
the two halves of the proverb would not have balanced properly.
He is inclined therefore to the opinion that Sdkhrd and Zarmihr—
the Rizmihr of Firdausi — were not two individuals standing in
the relation of father and son to each other, hut one and the same
person — Zarmihr of the family of Sdkhrd of the house of Kdran.®
This house, like that of Mihrdn, was probably of Arsacid descent,
but in frdnian tradition, as we learn from the Shdhndma, claimed
a much older origin and looked upon Kdwa, the smith, who raised
the standard of revolt against the tyranny of Zahhdk, as the founder
of its fortunes.^ However this may he, the rivalry between two
great families, and the employment by the Shdh of one of them to
deliver himself from the overgrown authority of the other would
he natural enough. It is to be noted that Shilpxir of Rai is described
in the poem as being descended from Milirak — the mortal enemy of
Ardshlr Pilpakan and evidently for some reason or other a very
important personage iii fnlnian legend. He is said to have been of
Jahram in Pdra, while Rai, with which his descendant Shilpilr is
associated, was the centre of Arsacid power in popular tradition.*
Not very long ago we had a Mihrdn as treasurer to Yazdagird son


1 MM, ii. ]9(>. Of. p. 2U and note.

2 NT, pp. 120 note, 140 and note. ^ j p

Vol. vL pp. 201, 237, 241, 256, 206 Jicq.


i86


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDA USt

of Shdpiirji quite lately we found another — Ruhliam — helping
Pirilz in his struggle against his brother Hurmuz,® presently we
shall come upon a third as the opponent of Belisarius,® a fourth as
a general in Nushirwdn’s host,* while a fifth — Milir^n Sitdd — goes
on a mission to the Khan.®

In Kubad’s plans for escape to the Haitdlians he associates him-
self with six others. Seven is a favourite number in Persian story.
We have the Seven Climes, the Seven Courses or Stages of Rustam
and Asfandiyar, the Fight of the Seven Warriors, the Seven Feasts
of Nushirwdn, and other instances.®

§ 4. According to Tabari, Kubad fled twice to the Haitdlians,
once on the occasion of his unhistorieal contention with Balash’
and again, historically^ here. On both occasions he is said to have
contracted a marriage on his j oiirney and to have been accompanied
by Zarmihr (Rizmihr). This is stated by Tabari with regard to the
first flight and by Dinawari and Firdausi as to the second.®

§ 5. In the above accounts the birth of Kisra is chronicled in
connection with both flights. This duplication does not make the
story any the more probable, and, as a matter of fact, Kisrd appears
to have been the son of the sister of one of Kubdd’s generals who
served in the Roman war, a.d. 502-506.° In view of the subsequent
importance of Kisra it was incumbent that Kubdd should ask and
receive satisfactory assurances as to the descent of the mother of his
son. The name Kisrd is the Arabic form of the Persian Khusrau
which, with the exception of twelve years, was the name of the
Slidhs from a.d. 531 to a.d. 627, if we leave out of account the
usurper Bahrdm Chubina.

Jamasp who, according to Mir Khand, was known as “the
proud, appears to have reigned for two years, a.d. 496-498, and
it is to be feared that his brother’s treatment of him after his
deposition was not so amiable as Firdausi would have us believe.
The same remark would apply to Jamasp’s adherents, whom also the
poet tells us were pardoned. One account at all events states that
Kubdd “killed the Great ” when he regained the throne.^^

According to Tabari, Zarmihr (Rizmihr) was put to death by
Kubad some time after his restoration.^® The story of the Shdh’s
ingratitude to the father is duplicated in the case of the son, which


' Id. p. 387. » p. 156.

3 p. 187.

* p. 251. Cf. NT, p. 139 note.

® p. 350.

® See Vol. vi. p. 207.

’ p. 170.

® NT, pp. 135, 145 and note.

® Id. and cf. p. 187.

RM, Pt. I, vol. ii. p. 371.

NT., p. 461 and note.

Id. p. 142.


KUBAd son OB PtRtZ


187


in itself is suspicious, as is the almost superhuman loyalty displayed
by the latter in § 3. It may he laid to the account of the legitimist
view that obtains in this part of the poem.^ If Sufarai be the
Persian commander-in-chief called Seoses in Procopius he was not
put to death till about a.d. 519.®

Until war broke out in a.d. 503 there had been, with one slight
exception in the reign of Yazdagird son of Bahram Giir,® a period
of peace for eighty years between the Persian and Eastern Roman
Empires. To both the defence of the passes in the Caucasus
against the incursions of northern Barbarians was ec|ually important,
and the understanding was that both should contribute equally to
that end. This arrangement formed one of the terms of the peace
concluded by Yazdagird with the younger Theodosius after the
brief war, above mentioned, in a.d, 442. The Romans, however,
were very remiss in carrying out their part of the undertaking, and
their money contribution was in arrear. Both parties seem to have
been inclined to look upon the money as tribute to be exacted or
refused according to circumstances, and this added to the difficulty
of an agreement which probably is responsible for the notion often
foirnd in ^rllnian legend that RVim was tributary to fnln. Kubdd,
after his restoration, found himself in want of money to pay his
Haitdlian allies and applied to the Emperor Anastasius for the
arrears due for the defence of the passes. Anastasius refused, his
motive being, it is said, the hope of embroiling Kubiid with liis
northern mercenaries, and the Shdh declared war. At first he was
very successful, taking Theodosiopolis in Roman Armenia and
Amida in northern Mesopotamia, but the generals whom he left
to carry on the war, when he himself was called off to resist an
Haitillian invasion, were less successful, and Kubtld commissioned
his brother-in-law, the uncle of Kiaril, to negotiate a peace.* The
Persians received a lump sum and gave up the captured cities.
Towards the end of Kubdd’s reign war again broke out, a.d. 526,
and lasted till his death. It was in this war that Beliaarius rose
to fame and fought twice with one of the Mihruns named Pirdz.®
Procopius, who had become secretary to Belisarius in a.d. 527,
gives a correspondence purporting to have passed between the
two generals.®

Hulwdn was situated north-west of Kirmilnshilh at Sar-i-pul-i-
Zohab.'^ Kubtld merely renamed it as he also renamed a town

1 See Vol, vi. p. 251. y NT, p. 145 note.

8 See p. 163, * NT, p. 146 note; RSM, p. 360 and note.

® Cf. p. 186. ® RSM, p. 308 fseq. and note,

’ Id. 564 note; NT, p. 138 and iwie.


i88


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

called Aragan.on the borders of Ahwaz and Pars not far from the
present Bihhihan. He changed Aragdn to Bimknbdd.^

§§ 6 and 7. In the Vendfd^d there is a reference to “the ungodly
fasting Ashemaogha” (heretic), to which the Pahlavi commentary on
the Zandavasta adds : “ like Mazdak, son of Bamdat.” ® In the
late Pahlavi Text known as the Bahman Yasht the names are given
of six priests whom Niishirwan summoned to his aid in his disputa-
tion with Mazdak.® Two of them are recognisable in Firdausi’s
Hiinnuzd and Milir-Azar. Mazdak’s place of birth is quite uncer-
tain, and his historical importance began and ended with the reign
of Kubdd. The poet omits to mention two of Mazdak’s principles
— the prohibition of bloodshed and of flesh-eating — but in other
respects his account of that heresiarch’s doctrines seems to be sub-
stantially correct — Zoroastrianism with private property and the
family abolished. To this anarchical Faith doubtlessly he did his
best to win over Kubad’s recognised heir, failing in which he schemed
to alter the succession and perished in the attempt. This seems
to be the obvious explanation of the catastrophe. Mdni and his
followers in their time fared no better,^ NiSshirwiin was far too
able and practical to be led away by Mazdak, and on coming to the
throne tried his best to repair the mischief that had been dune.®


§ I


How Kuhdd sat ufon the Throne and made an Oration
to the Iranians


C. 1603 When glorious Kubad sat on the throne,

And doimed the crown of majesty, he went
To Taisaftin, departing from Istakhr —

The glory of the great. Now when he sat

Upon Piruz’s ® seat he said : Conceal

Naught from me. By bright day and darksome night

^ Id. 13 and note, 1-46. = DZA, i. 48 and note.

3 WPT, i. 194. ^ See Vol. vi. p. 359 ; NT, 465.

® NT, p. 163. For Mazdak and the Mazdaldtes generally see id.
p. 455

® Or “ victorious or, with a slight change of reading (P), “ tur-
quoise,” but the translation given is most in accord to the legitimist
tendency in this part of the Shdhndma. CJ. Vol. vi. p. 251.


KUBAd son of PIRTJZ 189

The way to me is open unto you.

The man is great who ordereth his tongue
To right discourse and seeketh not deceit.

While since he wOl be merciful in wrath
The best of men will welcome him as guide.

He setteth up the throne of acceptation
Within the world, receiving from the great
Just commendation. If thou keep’st thy heart
Far from revenge both great and small will praise
thee,

But when the great king is a double-dealer
His double-dealing is a call to strife.

First hear a matter through for thus apprised
Thou wilt reply aright. "WTien any sage
Is covetous his knowledge will not fruit ;

When he is headstrong it will be to him
Like water in a. salt marsh. Furthermore
'Tis well to get a soldier’s heart and boar
Reproach submissively.^ The rich, hard man
Is lower even than a mendicant ;

But when a foolish mendicant hath sway
His rule is simple madness. He that knowefch
His owD. defects will not be eloquent
On those of others. Patience is the pillar
Of wisdom : to be wroth is but to make
Oneself despised. Submission to God’s justice
WiU make thee rich, sincere, and honourable,

For thou art freed from care. The body of him
That hath no greed is better than a treasure,

While that man whoso viaticum is knowledge
Will die in person but in name live over ;

So put ye all your hands to good alone,

And walk not on this whirling world for ill.”

1 Mohl, with a yory slight change of reading, translates : “ Oelui qui
recherche I’afEection do rarm'6o prond un ton modeate, m6nio on
bltoant,” Gf. p. 44 .


190 THE SHAHNImA OF FIRDAUSI

The nobles all called blessings down on him,
x\nd showered emeralds upon his crown.

He was a youth of sixteen years, ard bore
As yet but little part in government,

0. 1604 While Sufarai took order for the world.

Kubad ruled in the palace ; all affairs
Were managed wholly by the paladin.

He suffered no one to approach the Shih,

Who had no archmage and gave no command
Or counsel. Sufarai ruled all the land.


§ 2

How Sufarai went to Shiraz, how the Iranians slandered
him to Kuhdd, .and how Kubad slew him

Thus in the cup the wine was tulip-hke
Until Kubad was twenty-one ^ years old ;

Then Sufarai came in before the king
For licence to go home and thereupon
He gat him ready with his retinue,

Struck up the drums, and started for Shiraz,
Returning to his country, full of joy,

As one that had obtained his whole desire.

All Pars was as it were a slave before him,

And, save the throne of empire, all was his.

His thoughts were these : “I have set up the Shah,
And done him homage as my sovereign,

So now if’ any man shall slander me
He will rebuke that man and banish him.”

He levied tribute on the provinces.

On all the men of name and all the chiefs.

When tidings of his just and unjust deeds
Came from Shir§,z to glorious Kub^d,

^ Reading with P,


KUBAD son of PlRtfZ 191

The people said : The Shah hath but the ciown.

And not the troops and treasure in fr&n,

Hath no authority, is not consulted ;

The world is all the slave of Sufarai.”

All those that shared the secrets of Kub^d
Repeated to him what the people said,

And added : “ Why, exalted king ! art thou
Contented merely to be king in name ?

His treasury is better filled than thine :

Thou shouldst release the world from his oppression.

All Pars hath grown as ’twere a slave to him,

The great men have become his thralls.’’

. These words

Seduced Kubad’s 1 heart, which became forgetful
Of aU the services of Siifarai ;

He said : '' If I shall send an army forth
He will revolt and seek to be avenged,

I shall but use my wealth to make a foe,

While he will cause much trouble and much toil.

The people all are talking of liis deeds,

Unwitting of his secret purposes.

I know not any warrior of ^x&a

To march against him with a host to battle.”

A wise man answered thus : “ Think not that ho
E’er will be recognised as king. Thou hast
Both lieges and a leader of the host C.

That can lay hand upon the circling sky ;

So when Shipur of Rai is on the march
The heart of wicked Stifarai will rive.”

The Sh^^h took courage when he heard these words,
Forgot the merit and presumed the guilt ;

Then bade a veteran mount as swift as wind,

And, on the plea of faring forth to hawk,

Go to Sh&pur of Rai, cause him to mount
Forthwith upon his steed, and summon him
1 Sco p. 179, note.


192


THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI


Trom Rai to court. The messenger, who took
A spare steed, went, swift as an autumn-blast
To Rai as he was bidden by the king.

The chamberlain there saw and questioned him,
Took the king’s letter, went before Shapur,

Gave it, and introduced that noble horseman.
Shapur, who was descended from Mihrak,

Smiled when he read the letter of Kub4d,^

For Sufarai had not a foe like him
In public and in private. Thus apprised
Shapur convoked his lieges and led forth
His army in all haste to Taisafun.

When he had brought his army to the Sh&h
They gave him audience instantly. The world -lord,
On seeing him, received him graciously.

Caused him to sit upon the turquoise throne,

And said : “I have no portion in this crown,

Am noted ’mongst the foolish in the.world.

All power is with Sufarai ; I see
But sovereignty in name. Late in the day
My body shrinketh from the weights that press
With justice or injustice on my neck.

E’en were my brother master of Ir^n
’Twerc better than this unjust Sufarai.”

Shapur replied : 0 king ! be not aggrieved

At heart on this account. Thou shouldest write
A letter in harsh terms to him, for thou
Hast Grace and fame, high lineage and support.

Say : ‘ Of the crown of king of kings my share
Is travail and an empty treasure-house.

Thou takest tribute, and I bear the blame.

I will not have theo call me Sh4h henceforth.

Lo ! I have sent to thee a paladin
In that thy conduct causeth me to wail.’

When he shall get a letter thus conceived,

1 Id,


KUBAD son of PIRtlZ


195


And I am there with troops prepared for fight,

I will not leave him time to wink an eye,

Or speak a word to him unless m wrath.”

They called to them a scribe and seated him
Before Sh 4 pur, who said again the words
As spoken in' the presence of the Shah :

The writer wrote them, grieving secretly,

Shapur, whenas the Shah had sealed the letter,

Led forth his host, then added famous chiefs, C* 1606

Disbanded from the armies of the king,

And with those nobles eager for the fray
Set face toward the city of Shir^iz.

When Stifarai had tidings of the matter
He marched at once, and with a mighty host —

Picked cavaliers in mail — went out to meet
Shapur. They met, and those two haughty chiefs
Alighted from their steeds. Now when Sh&pur
Sat down with Stifarai they talked at large
Of projects good and ill. Shapur then gave
The letter of the king, and matters reached
A cruel, shameful pass ; the paladin,

When he had read the letter, changed his favour.

Was stunned and dark of soul. Then said Shapur,

The letter being read : “I must be plain :

The world-lord ordered that thou shouldst be*
bound,

Complaining much of thee before the nobles,

And thou wilt gather, having read his letter,

That he is resolute.”

The paladin

Replied : “ The monarch of the world is ware
What toil and hardship I have borne for him^

That marching from Z&bulistin with troops
I set him free from bondage by my valour,

And suffered no calamity to come
Upon-him. I had influence with the Sh&h,

VOL. vn.


K


194 THE SHAhnImA OF FIRDAUSI

And with the chiefbains of the fr&nian host,

But since bonds are to be my recompense,

And my resistance will be troublesome
To thee, I ask no respite. Biud my feet :

The fetters of Kub^ will profit me.

Doth he not shame before God and the host,

For I shed freely my warm blood for him ?

What time the Shah was in captivity
I swore by God a mighty oath, and said : —

^ My hand shall look but on my falchion's hilt,

And I wiU cloud the sun in fight, tiU I

Shall give my head or bring down from the throne

The head of Klaushnawaz between the shears.'

And now he biddeth me be bound ! Is't right '?
Beceive I but derogatory words ?

Still turn not aught from his commands, for know
That bonds but ornament a hero’s feet.”

Shdpfir, on hearing this, made fast the fetters,
Then bade the trumpet sound and gat to horse.
From P^rs he carried Sufarai before
Kubad, who thought not of past services,

But bade men bear him to the prison-house,

Near where the madmen were, and gave command

To carry from Shiraz to Taisafun

What wealth soever he possessed — his folk.

His treasures, and the produce of his fields —

By those appoiuted to the treasurer,
c. 1607 Now when a week had passed Kubad consulted
The archmages how to deal with Sufarai,

And thus a counsellor addressed the Sh^h : —

The whole of Taisafun is on his side —

Troops, courtiers, thanes, and populace alike.

If he abideth in fr4n unscathed

Thou mayest wash thy hands of sovereignty.

The foeman of the Shkh. is best when killed,

Has hater's fortune best when overturned.”


KUBAD SON OF PIRUZ 195

Now when the Shdh had heard the archmage’s
counsel

He took a new course and despised the old,

Gave his command that Sufarai be slain,

The hearts of all his kindred wrung with pain.


§ 3

How the Iranians jput Kuhdd in Bonds and committed him to
Rizmihr, the Son of Sufarai^ and how Jdmdsj), the Brother
of Kuhdd, was set upon the Throne

Now when these tidings reached tho franians : —

He of the elephantine form is dead,”

A cry of anguish went up from £can,

Men, women, children, all alike bewailed ;

The tongue of every one was steeped in curses,

And secret thoughts found public utterance,
fr^ was all convulsed, the dust wont up,

While all folk made thorn ready for the fight.

And thus they said ; Since Sufarai is goiao
Let not Kubad’s throne be within Ldn.”

The soldiers and the citizens agreed,

They would not bear the mention of Kub4d,

But marched upon tho palace of the Shfi/h,

Vexed at his ill advisors, for redress.

These men — all malice and intent on evil —

They took, dragged from tho palace, and then sought
With diligence for traces of Jamasp,

His younger brother and a noble youth,

One whom Kubad had cliorishod tondorly.

They chose him, seated him upon tho throne,

And called down blessings on him as their ShS/h ;

But mad© Kub&d’s foot fast in iron fetters,

Unheedful of his Grace and noble birth.


196 THE SHAhnAma OF FIRDAUSI

Now Sufarai had one son well beloved,

A wise naan, holy and illustrious,

A youth without ofEence, Rizmihr by name.

Whose fame had made his father well content.

To him the people gave KubM in bonds,

As unto some malicious enemy,

And thought : “ Through grief the loving son wiU take
Revenge upon the king for Sufarai.”

The good Rizmihr, the worshipper of Grod,

Laid not his hand for ill upon the world-lord,^

0. i6o8 But did obeisance to Kubad and spake
No words to him about his evil deeds,

Whereat the world-lord marvelled much, began
To bless Rizmihr, and thus excused himself : —

“ My foes have troubled much my star and moon.

But, if I find deliverance from bond,

I will reward thee for all iUs endured,

For I will banish anguish from thy heart,

And cause the eyes that look on thee to shine.”

Rizmihr made answer to him thus : 0 king I

Let not thy soul be grieved on this account,

For when a father acted not aright

His son should bear the sorrow of his death.

As touching mine own self, I am thy slave ;

I stand before thee as a servitor,

And at thy bidding I wiU swear that never
Will I break off my fealty to thee.”

So spake Rizmihr and as the monarch heard
Eds heart began to throb for very joy,

His soul regained its confidence and grew
Right joyful at the words of that wise man.

He made Riznaihr his confidant and said : —

I wiU not hide my thoughts from thee. Five men
Are sharers in my secrets. None besides
Hath listened to my voice. Now we wiU summon
1 Cf. p, 1S7.


197


kvbAd son of PtRtZ

These five and ope to them our secret plan
If it appears that we have need of them.
While if from fetters thou shalt set me free
Know this — ^my policy shall profit thee.”


§ 4

How Eubad escaped from Ward, mth Rizmihr, how he wedded
the Daughter of a Thane, and how he took Refuge with the
Haitdlians

The good Eizmihr, on hearing this, anon
Released Kubid from fetters. From the city
They fared forth to the plain by night, unseen
By foes, and made toward the Haitfilians,

Wrung with anxiety and hurrying.

On this wise sped the seven like flying dust
Until with dizzy heads they reached Ahw4z,

And entered on their steeds that wealthy town —

A town wherein a famous chieftain dwelt.

Dismounting at the dwelling of the thane

They tarried there and breathed themselves awhile.

He had a daughter moonlike, crowned with musk,

And, when KubSd beheld her face, aU wisdom
Fled from his youthful brain. He went forthwith.

And told Rizmihr : “I have a privy word
For thee. Haste to the thane. TeU him from me : — c.
‘ This- moon-faced damsel — could she be my wife ? ’ ”
Rizmihr went instantly, informed the thane,

And said : “ If thy fair daughter is unmated
I will provide her with a noble spouse.

And thou shalt be the master of Ahw&z.”

The illustrious thane made answer to Rizmihr : —

“ My pretty daughter hath no husband yet.

And, if she please thee, she is thine to give ;

Give her to him that longeth after her,”


198 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The wise Eizmihr came to Kub^d and said ; —

May this Moon bring good fortune to the Sh§;h-
Thou sawest her unawares and didst approve.

Thou didst approve of her just as she was.”

Kubad then called to him that fairy-faced ;

The gallant warrior set her on his knee,

And having with him one, and but one, ring —

A signet-ring whose worth was known to none —

He gave it to her, saying : Keep this signet ;

The day will come when I shall ask for it ”

He stayed a se’imight for that fair Moon’s. sake,
And parted on the eighth day with the dawn,

Went to the king of the Hait^lians,

Told what had chanced, the Iranians’ deeds, and how
They all had girded up their loins for iU.

The king rephed : The 'wrongs of Khushnaw&z
Have surely brought thee to this strait to-day.

On these conditions will I give thee troops,

Who are crown-wearers, every one of them,

That if thou shalt recover crown and treasure,
Chaghto, its wealth and state, its march and rule,
Sh?bll be all mine, and thou shalt keep my terms
And stipulations.”

Said Kub4d while smilmg
At him who thus dictated terms : I never
WlQ give that land a thought and, when thou wishest,
Will send thee troops in numbers numberless.

What is Chagh^jU that I should look that way ? ”
When they had made their pact the Hait^han king
Unlocked his treasury and gave KubM
Din&rs and arms, and two score thousand swordsmen,
AH famed as warriors and cavahers.

Thus to Ahw&z from the Haitihans went
Kubad ; the whole world rang with that event.


KUBAd son of PtRtfZ


199


§ 5

How Kubdd returned, from Haitdl to frdn, how he had Tidings
of the Birth of his Son, NusMrwdn, and reascended the
Throne

Kub4d approached the bhane’s abode and saw
In every street a scattered populace.

Who all apprised him of the joyful news ; —

'' Thy spouse brought forth a son to thee last night C. 1610
But little less resplendent than the moon,

And may he bring good fortune to the Sh4h/’

Kub4d, on hearing, went within the house
In great content. They named the boy Kisra.

Now afterwards Kubad asked of the thane : —

“ From whom art thou descended, noble sir ?

He said : From valiant* Faridiin who took
The kingship from the kindred of Zahh4k :

Thus said my father and my mother too : —

' We give our reverence to Faridun.’

Kub§,d was pleasured yet more at the words,

And instantly resumed the royal crown.

He had a litter brought and, when his spouse
Was seated there, departed on his march ;

He led the army on to Taisafun
In high displeasure with the fr^inians.

Now in Ir&n the while the ancient chiefs
Sat with the sages and the notables.

They said : " Between these two— both Shfihs and
proud —

The matter wUl prove wearisome for us.

Hosts are upon their way from Ehm and Chin,

And they vsdU cause much bloodshed in the land/’

Then one of that assembly said : Ye chiefs.

Exalted and heroic warriors 1

’Tis needful that we go out to Kubfid^


200 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDA USt

Who, it may be, will not recall the past,

And bring to him Jamasp, the ten years’ child,

To turn the hailstones of his wrath to pearls ;

So haply we may swerve aside and ’scape
From pillaging, from bloodshed, and from war.”

All went to meet Kubad and said to him : —

'' 0 Shah of royal race ! if thou hast hurt
Men-s hearts, and they have washed their hearts and
eyes

In petulance, now act as pleaseth thee
Because the world-lord ruleth o’er the world.”

They aU drew near to him in haste, afoot,
Bust-covered, and with gloomy souls. The Shih
Forgave the evil doings of his lords,

Accepting their excuse in lieu of bloodshed ;

He pardoned too J4m^p : the nobles blessed him.

He came and sat upon the royal throne r
Jdmasp became his liege. Kubid bestowed
The conduct of the realm upon Bizmihr,

And gave him great advancement. By his means
The kingship was well ordered, and the world
Fulfilled with justice and prosperity.

Thus matters fared until Edsr^j grew tall —

A stripling bold and lusty. * Then Kub^wi^

Entrusted to wise governors his son.

That fresh and fruitful Bough. Kub^ directed
All matters in ti&a and in Tur^,

And raised his crown of greatness to the sky.
Thereafter he led forth his host to Biim,

Which proved as ’twere a lump of wax to him :

C. i6ii He made a thorn-brake of those fields and fells.

Two cities asked for quarter at his hands,

One Handfy^j, the other F&rikin.

He taught the Zandavasta there, established
The Faith, and instituted Fanes of Fire,

His power, the feasts of New Year’s Day and Sada.


kubAd son of pirjjz


He fixed his royal seat at Madi’in,

And wrought much good and ill. He built a city
Betwixt Ahwaz and P4rs, and founded too
A hospital. He called the city’s name
Arash ; the Arabs call it now Hulwto.

They opened everywhere canals that fiowed
A-brim, and peace and rest on earth abode.


§ 6


The Story of Kuhdd and Mazdah,' and how Kuhdd
adopted the Faith of Mazdah


Then there arose a man by name Mazdak,

Learned, eloquent, judicious, and commanding,

Of noble birth, a trafi&cker in knowledge,

And brave Kubad gave ear to him. This man
Became the king of kings’ chief minister,

The treasurer and the guardian of the treasure.
Then famine visited the world through drought,

A famine that afflicted great and small ;

No sign of snow appeared upon the sky,

And none saw snow or rain -fall in Ir&n.

At length the nobles of the world begged bread
And water at the portal of Kub&d,

Mazdak returned them this reply : “ The Sh&h
Will manifest to you a way of hope,”

Then came himself in haste before the king.

And said to him : ‘‘ 0 upright Shdh ! I fain
Would question thee upon a point if thou
Wilt condescend to answer.”

Eloquent

Kubdd replied : “ Say on and make my lustre
Fresh in the world.”

A man,” Mazdak rejoined,
‘‘ Is bitten by a snake ; his life is passing ;


202


THE ShAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


C. 1612


Another man hath got the antidote
Whereof the bitten can obtain no share.

Whafc then should be the guerdon of the man
That hath it '? Money will not purchase it.”

The Sh4h replied ; He is a murderer,

And should be slain to avenge the other’s blood
Before my gate whenever the pursuer
Shall take him.”

Hearing this Mazdak went forth
To those petitioners and told them thus : —

I have discussed the matter with the Shah. .

Wait till the dawn, and I will show you how
To right yourselves.”

They went away, returning
At dawn with stricken hearts in deep affliction.
Mazdak, when he beheld those chiefs from far,

Ran from the portal to the Shah and said : —

0 thou victorious Shlih and eloquent,

Unsleepmg, and the glory of the throne !

Thou gavest me an answer, when I spake,

And by that answer oped my bolted door,

So now with thy permission I will speak
A word to guide thee.”

Speak,” the Sh4h repHed,

“ Lock not thy lips because thy words will help me,”
Mazdak said : Noble king ! suppose a man,
Whom thou hast bound, but they withhold from him
All food until he dieth, thus perforce
Surrendering sweet life. Now how should one
Be punished who had bread yet left that captive
In destitution ? Will the great king say : —

' This man was wise and holy ? ’ ”

Said the Sh&h : —

“ Rend such to pieces, for through his neglect
He is a murderer.”


On hearing this


kvbAd son of PIRtZ


203


Mazdak, when he had kissed the ground, went forth.
And from the portal thus harangued the crowd : —
Go to the magazines where grain is stored,

And help yourselves while if the owners ask
Its value give them gold.”

His own possessions
Within that city he gave up to pillage
In order that all folk might have their share.

Then all the hungry rabble fared in haste
To plunder every magazine of com,

Owned by the citizens or by Kub^d,

Who had none left to bless themselves withal.

The officers, when they perceived this, went
Before the watchful world-lord and thus said : —

The mob have sacked the Shah’s own granaries,
But aU the fault recoileth on Mazdak,”

Kub4d bade call that man of eloquence,

And talked with him about the pillaging.

Mazdak replied : Mayst thou be fortunate,

And may thy words be wisdom’s daily food.

I only told the wretched market-folk

The words which I had heard the monarch speak.

I asked the Sh4h about the snake and poison,

And of the man who had the antidote.

The Shkh. returned this answer to his servant
Concerning him that had and him that sought it : —

‘ If any die of snake-bite in the city,

Unhelped by one who hath the remedy,

For such they shall require that niggard’s blood.’
The Shah’s authority must not be slighted.

Bread is the antidote for hungry men —

An antidote not wanted by the full. ,

If thou art one that judgest right, 0 Sh^ih !

Shall not the com in store be put to use ?

To hunger have a multitude succumbed,

Whose deaths are due to idle granaries.”


C. 1613


204


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAUSI

KubM was muoli affected by the words ;

These righteous words aroused his brain bo action .
Then, questioning Ma 2 dak and hearing him,

The Sh4h perceived him learned in heart and brain
In aU things that the prophets, the arohmages —
Those righteous dealers — and the great had spoken.
The teaching of Mazdak perverted him,

And exercised unbounded influence.

The multitude came thronging to Mazdak —

The many that had wandered from the way :

He said to them : “ The man of empty hand
Is equal to the man possessed of wealth. *

NTo one should have a superfluity,

The wealthy is the warp, the poor the woof ;

To right the world all men must have sufficient ;

The rich man’s plenty is abominable ;

The women, goods, and houses are for aU ;

The empty-handed and the rich are one.

I will take order that the holy Faith
Be manifest, the lofty from the low.

Whoever is of other Faith than this.

The malison of God is on that dlv.”

He treated mendicants, both old and young,

As though they were the equals of himself,

He took from this man and bestowed on that ;

The archmages were astonied at his doings.

Kub^id himself gave ear and was converted,

And of all things was joyful in his words.

He set Mazdak ab his right hand although
An archimage unknown to all the host,

And unto him the mendicants resorted
With those that earned a living by their toil ;

His Faith began to flourish in the world,

And no one dared to seek revenge on him,

The rich renounced the things that made them glad,
And gave to mendicants what wealth they had.


kvbJd son of pirjjz


205


§ 7

How N'^Jiirwdn rejected the Faith of Mazdak and slew
him and his Followers

It happened that Mazdak at dawn one day
Went from his house and came before the Sh^,
And thus he said ; ‘'Of those that hold our Faith,
As well as of our lieges pure of heart,

A crowd of chiefs are at the door ; shall I
Admit them or shall they depart 1 ”

Kub^,

On hearing, bade the chamberlain admit them,
Whereat Mazdak said to the noble Shih : —

" This house is narrow and the crowd is great,

In sooth the audience-haU will hold them not ;

Let the Sh4h go and see them on the plain.’’

Kub4d commanded that his throne be brought.
Brought from the royal palace to the waste,

And there a hundred thousand Mazdakis
Proceeded joyfuUy before the Sh4h,

And thus Mazdak addressed the king of earth : —

“ 0 thou above all knowledge and acclaim !

Know that Kisra acoepteth not our Faith,

But is it fit that he should turn therefrom ?

We must obtain from him an undertaking
In writing to give up his evil course.

There are five things that turn men from the right,
And e’en the sage can add no sixth. Now these
Are anger, vengeance, jealousy, and need ;

The fifth is greed, which is predominant,

And i£ thou conquer these five divs the way
Of God will be made manifest to thee.

From these five things it cometh that our women
And wealth work havoc with the good religion,

But will not meddle more if thou wilt keep it


0. 1614


2o6 the SHIhnAMA of FIRDAUSI

Intact. The twain cause jealousy, greed, need,
While anger and revenge conspire with them,

And thus the Div perverteth wise men's heads ;
The twain should be a common property.”

This spoken, by the hand he grasped Kisra,

What while the Shah looked on in wonderment.

The noble prince in wrath withdrew his hand,

And turned his eyes in anger from Mazdak,

To whom Kubad said smiling : Why art thou
Concerned for the religion of Kisr§. ? ”

Mazdak rejoined : The way of righteousness
Is not in him. He is not of our Faith.”

The Shah then questioned of Kisra and said : —

‘‘ What way is there except the good religion 1 ”
Basra replied : If I shall have the time
Allowed me I will prove this theory false.

When both the fraud and falsehood shall appear
M!y truth will show out more conspicuously.”

Mazdak rejoined : ‘‘ Thou askest of the Shah —
The lustre of the world — ^how many days ? ”

He said : I ask a period of five months.

The Shah shall have his answer in the sixth
On all points.”

They agreed and so departed.

The exalted Shah returned to his own palace.

Basra dispatched a man to every quarter
To look for sages and auxiliaries.

An envoy went to Khurra-i-Ardshir
To cause the old Hurmuzd to come to court.

While from Istakhr came Mihr-Azar of Pars
With thirty friends. These seekers after knowledge
Held session and discussed the case at large,

And then these men of lore and ancient sages
Presented their conclusions to Kisri^,

C. i6is While he, when he had heard, went to KubS^d,
Discoursed with him about Mazdak, and said : —


KUBAD SON OF PlRtz

“ The time now hath arrived w^hen I would make
Investigation of the good religion.

If then Mazdak be right, and if the Faith
Delivered by Zarduhsht shall prove in fault,

I will accept the true Faith of Mazdak,

And make my soul’s choice his,^ for when the way
Of Faridun, of Esdras, and of Christ,

And all the Zandavasta, shall prove wrong,

And when the doctrine of Mazdak shall stand,

The world must take him for its only guide.

If, on the other hand, bis words are false.

And he ensueth not God’s holy way,

Then turn thee from the pathway of his Faith,

Put far from thee this sorry Creed of his,

And give him with his followers to me ;

God grant that none of them keep brain and skin.”

He took as witnesses Rizmihr, Kharrad,

Bihzlid, Bandwi, and Fara’in, and thence
Departed to his palace and observed
The righteous covenant that he had made.

At dawn, what time the sun displayed its crown,
And earth was like a sea of ivory,

The world-king’s son, that man of eloquence,

Set forth with chieftains and with archimages.
They went together to the royal palace.

Their speech was fluent and their quest the Way.
That youth — ^the Joy of hearts — came to KubSd,
And oped the case, whereon an archimago
Addressed Mazdak before the throng and said : —

0 seeker after wisdom ! thou hast framed
A new religion in the world and made
Community of women and of goods.

How will a father recognise his son,

The son in like wise rocogniso his father ?

When every man is equal in tho world,

^ “ j’arrachorai do mon dma ootto ortie” (MoM).


2o8 the ShAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI

And great and little are no more disoemed,

Wlio then will serve, and how can any rule ? ^

Who th^ will labour for us, thee and me.

And how shall good men be discerned from bad ?
When one shall die to whom will appertain
His house and goods when toiling slave and ShS/h
Are equal ? This will desolate the world ;

Such evil must not come upon fran.

When all are masters who will be the servant ?
When all have treasure who be treasurer ?

None of the leaders of the Faith spake thus,

And thou art mad although thou hidest it.

Thou leadest aU mankind to Hell, and thou
Accountest not aU evil-domg wrong.’'

Kubi;d, when he had heard the archmage’s words,
Was wroth and then gave sentence on the case.

The illustrious Kisra supported him,

The impious one grew fuU of fear at heart,

0. i6i6 While aU the people there assembled cried : —

Let nob Mazdak remain before the Sh^h *,

He hath made havoc of the Faith of God ;

Let him not tarry at this famous court.”

The Sh^ became abhorrent from that Faith,

The heads of all its chiefs grew full of care.

He gave up to Kisr4 Mazdak forthwith
With aU that held that doctrine and that way —

As many as three thousand men of name.

The kmg at that time thus addressed his son : —

” Do with those chiefs as seemeth good to thee.

And henceforth mention not Mazdak.”

KisrSi

Had at his court a pleasure-ground whose wall
Was higher than a crow could fly. Around
The circuit of that wall he dug a trench
Wherein he set those men at intervals.

1 Tor an exemplification of this see p. 26 seq.


KVBAD son of PlRtz


209


They planted them like trees and firmly fixed
Their feet aloft, their heads below. Kisra^
Addressed Mazdak on this wise ; “ Visit thon
The entrance of my noble garth. The seed
That thou hast scattered all this while hath brought
Fruit forth to thee, 0 thou insensate one !

Thou shalt see trees such as none e’er beheld,

Or heard described by shrewd men heretofore.”

Mazdak went, oped the portal of the garden,

And thought maybe to see fruit-bearing trees,

But seeing what he did he gave a cry,

And then all consciousness abandoned him.

Kisra gave orders for a lofty gibbet
To be set up and at the top to fasten
A twisted lasso. Thereupon he hung
That impious wretch head-downwards and alive,.
And after slew him with a shower of arrows.

If thou art prudent foUow not Mazdak !

The chiefs felt reassured about their wealth,

Their women, children, and their pleasancos.

Kubad remained ashamed for many days,

And cursed Mazdak, gave mendicants much largess,.
And offered gifts before the Fane of Fire.

He gladdened at Kisrd exceedingly
Because that Bough of his bare fruit of gems.

From that time forth the father sought alway
The son’s advice and hoard what he would say.


§ 8

How Kuhdd nominated Kisra as Successor, and how the
Great gave him the Name of N4sMrwdn^

Now when Kubdd had reigned for foit-y years
The grief of death’s day came upon his heart.

^ Reading with P.


VOL, VII.


310 THE SHAHnAmA of FlRDAUSt

He had a writing fairly drawn on silk
In that befitting and engaging script,i
C. 1617 And first he offered praise to that just Judge,

“ Who gave us Faith, accomplishment, and wisdom,
Whose word is certain, whatsoe’er He saith,

Alike in secret things and manifest.

None hath beheld His height of sovereignty,

And His elect ne’er are contemptible.

All ye that see the writing of Kub^ !

Give heed but to the counsel of the wise,

I have bestowed the honourable throne
Upon Kisr4. Fair fortune will be his
WTien I am dead. May God accept my son,

And may his foes’ hearts be fulfilled with smoke.

By this our signet-ring we do require
Of archimages, chiefs, and other subjects
That ye in no wise shall transgress his bidding,

But joy in him and fill your treasuries.”

He set his golden signet on that writing.

And placed it with the archmage R&m Barzin.

XubSd. had come to four-score years and yet.

Old as he was, he did not wish for death,

Is any in the world content to die

Since no man knoweth what wiU come thereby ?

He died and left the world as his bequest ;

His travail, ease, and pleasures passed away.

Who profiteth by what he hath amast
Since empty-handed go he must at last ?

They draped the body with brocade and called
For rose and musk, for camphor and for wine.

They made for him a royal charnel-house,

A golden throne and crown of majesty,

'They set the Sh&h upon the throne of gold,

Barred up the way thereto for evermore.

And thenceforth looked not on him. Thus he passed

* Pahlavl.


2II


KUBAD son of PIRIJZ

O’er this world, as thou mightst have said, like wind !

How canst thou trust then iu this ancient sky
Since it wlQ end thee irremediably ?

The mourning being o’er, the high priest spread
The royal document upon the throne,

The magnates and archmages of fr^.

And all the famous sages, met in conclave.

The document was read before them all.

And with rejoicing they enthroned the heir.^

Now when Kisr^ ascended his new throne
The people hailed him as their new-made Sh&h,

Called praises down on him as sovereign.

And time and earth submitted to his sway.

His throne revived the world, and at the stream C. i6i8
The sheep drank water with the wolf Folk said : —

May this Shdh live for ever. May his Grace
Surpass Jamshid’s.”

His goodness and his justice.

His institutions. Faith, and far-famed knowledge
Were such that people called him Nushirw^^n,®

For love and signet were both young with him.

The story of Kub^d is at an end.

And henceforth to Kisr^ my thoughts I bend.

1 In the text the reign of Nfishirw&n begins here, and there is no
division before § 3.

2 Reading with P.


3 “ Of immortal soul.” Cf. p. 186.


XLI

NT^SHlRWlN

HE REIGNED FORTY-EIGHT YEARS
ARGUMENT

The poet tells of the accession of Nushirwan, his internal
administration, his repression of marauding tribes, Ids first TOr
with Rum, the revolt and death of his son Nhshzdd, of the rise
to power and wisdom of Bdzurjmihr, the fall of Malibdd, the
Shdh’s marriage with the daughter of the Khan, Bdzurjmihr 's
discourse on good words and deeds, the introduction into Persia
of the game of chess and the Fables of Bidpai, the legend of the
invention of the former and that of the game of nard, the fall and
the restoration to favour of Bdzurjmihr, the wisdom of Ndshirwdn,
his last war with Rdm, his appointment of his successor, and death.


NOTE

Kisrd, surnamed Ndshirwdn (Cliosroes I, a.d. 531-578), ruled
contemporaneously with three Eastern Roman Emperors — Justinian
(A.D. 527-565), Justin II (a.d. 565-574), and Tiberius II (a.d,
574-582). Justin resigned the rule to Tiberius, the captain of the
guards, in a.d. 574, but did not die till a.d. 578, the year of
Ndshfrwdn’s death. Ndahirwitn was perhaps the greatest of the
twenty-nine Sdsdnian Shdhs, at least it is not easy to assign that
title to any other unless we reserve it for the founder of the
dynasty, Ardshir Pdpakdn, who has to his credit the overthrow of
a long-atandiug foreign domination, the re-establishment of a
national dynasty, and all the toil of political reconstruction that
his successful revolt against the last Arsacid involved.

It will be seen that the poet had plenty of 'material for this
portion of his undertaking. The subject-matter falls naturally
into certain well-defined divisions ; accordingly we have broken

312


NtSHIRWAN


213

U 23 the reign, as in the case of that of Gushtdsp,^ into Parts, hut
there is no such arrangement in the original.

Kisra will be referred to throughout by his popular title of
Nushirwan,

The principal historical events recorded by Firdausi in his
account of the reign may be placed in approximate chronological
order as follows : —

The fall of Mahbud.

The reorganisation of the kingdom, finances, and army.

The chastisement of barbarous frontier-tribes.

The fortification of Darband.

The first war with Eilm (a.d. 540-562).

The revolt of Niishzad (a.d. 551).

Niishirwdn’s marriage with the daughter of the Khan.

The introduction into Persia of the Fables of Bidpai (about
A.D. 570).

The birth of Muhammad (about a.d. 571).

The second war udth Riim (a.d. 572).

The first eight of these are included in the present volume*


^ Vol. V. p, 9 ,


PART I


NdSHIRWAN’S ADMINISTRATION OF THE REALM,
HIS WARS WITH FRONTIER-TRIBES AND WITH
RtJM, AND THE REVOLT OF nCtSHZAD

ARGUMENT

NusliirwdrL ascends the throne and makes an oration to the people.
He divides the realm into four provinces, and takes order for all
matter civil and military. He builds a wall in the Caucasus and
represses the AUna and the men of Baldch and Gildn. He espouses
the cause of Munzir, the Arab, against Caesar, invades Riim, takes
cities, and compels Caesar to sue for peace and to pay tribute. On
a false report of the Shdh’s death his son^ Ndshzdd, a Christian,
attempts to seize the crown. Hdshirwdn writes to his general, Rdm
Barzfn, instructing him how to proceed, and Ndshzdd is defeated
and slain.


NOTE

§ 2. Ndshfrwdn^s accession to the throne was not universally
popular and gave rise to a formidable conspiracy in favour of one
of his nephews.^

§ 3. Ndshirwdn’s division of his empire into four satrapies differs
in details in the different authorities, but seems to have been
suggested by the names of the four winds. According to Dinawarl
the East included Khurdaan, Sistan, and Kirmdn ; the North
Ispahdn, Kum, Media Magna, and Azarhdijdn ; the South Pdrs and
Ahwdz; the West ’Irdk to the Roman frontier.® Firdausi in-
cludes the Khazara in the South division — a mistake. They lived
beyond the Caucasus.® He includes too Riim in the West division
on the assumption, for which there was certainly some justification
at this time, that Rfim was tributary to frdn. A peace or truce
concluded between Justinian and Niishirwdn involved almost as a
matter of course a money-payment from the former to the latter.
It did not follow that Justinian always got the worst of the bargain,
For instance, in the definite treaty of peace between the two

^ See p. 316. ® NT, p. 156, note. ® See Vol. iv. p. 316.

314


NtfSHIRWjN


215-.

empires in a.d. 562, Niishirw^n’s renunciation of Lazica (Mingrelia
and Imeritia)3 and consec[uently of his dream of a fleet and of assail-
ing Eiim by sea, was well worth, the thirty thousand pieces of gold
to be paid annually by Justinian though it did lay the Emperor
open to the imputation of being tributary to the Shdh. Traditional
instances of such payments crop up in the Shdhndma as far back
as the days of Dardb and Failakfls.^

The popular version of the origin of Kubad’s resolve to alter the
system of taxation has been given already.^ It was left to
Niishirwan to carry it out. According to Tabari the taxes imposed
were as follows : — On every garib of corn-land, i.e, sown with
wheat or barley, a ground-tax of one drachm was imposed, on
every garib of vineyard eight, and of lucerne seven ; on four
Persian date-palms, six common date-palms, provided that they
grew in plantations or in numbers, and on six olives, one drachm.
Single, scattered trees were not taxed. On all men between the
ages of twenty and fifty a poll-tax varying, according to the
fortune of a man, was imposed. The people were arranged in classes
and paid twelve, eight, six, or four drachms according to their means.
The taxes were paid yearly in three instalments at intervals of
four months. Schedules of the taxes were drawn up, one of which
was kept at the royal chancery, one sent to each collector, and one
to each district-judge. The judges were priests and were charged
particularly with the duty of seeing that the collectors did not
exceed the tariff, and also, in cases where the crops had been
damaged, with the duty of remitting taxation to a proportionate
amoimt. The nobility, soldiers, priests, scribes, and others in the
royal service, were exempt from the poll-tax.® They were sup-
posed to render their due to the State in other ways.

§ 6. Faridfin had his capital in MdiZi^ndariin. See Vol. L pp,
177, 230. For the vegetation of that region, which is very luxu-
riant, see Vol. ii. pp. 27, 31.

For the fortifications at Darband, see p, 187 and Vol, i. p, i6,
Mashidi’s two accounts of Niishfrwdn’s wall, as given in the
French translation, are as follows; — “Appeld dans le pays d’El-
Bab et dans le Oaucase par les incursions des rois du voisinage, il
b^tit sur le mer (Caspienne), a I’aide d’outrea de cuir gonfl^es, une
muraille de rochers, q^u'il consolida avee le fer et le plomb. Oes
outres s’enfon9aient dans Beau, 6. mesure que le construction
s’elevait; lorsqu’elles s’arrctferent sur le fond et que la muraille

1 See vol. vi. p. 24. 2 p, X8I^, note,

® NT, p. 244. A garib is said to have been equal to 3600 square
ells and a drachm to 88 centimes. Id. pp. 242, 246, notea.


2 i 6 the SHIhNAMA of FIRDAUSI

depassa le niveau de PeaiT, des plongeurSj armds de poignards et
de coutelaa, crev^rent les outres ; la muraille, entrant profondeinont
dans le sol soua-marinj atteignit alora la hauteur du rivage. Bile
exists encore aujourd’hui, en 332/ et toute la partie de cette '
muraille dont les assises plongent dans la mer est nomee el-kaid
(la chaine), parce qu’elle arrete les Ibatiments ennemis qui ten-
teraient d’aborder sur cette cote. On continua le m&nie travail
le long du rivage, entre le Caucase et le mer; on pratiqua des
portes dounant sur le territoire infidfele, et Pon prolongea la
muraille sur le mont Oaucase, ainsi que nous Pavons dit ci-dessus,
en ddcrivant cette inontagne et la ville d’El-Bab/' ^

The other account referred to is this: — ‘^Le Kabkh est une
grande chaine de montagnes qui renferme, dans sa vaste ctendue,
un nombre considerable de royaumes et de tribus: en effet, on
n’y compte pas moins de soixaiite et douze peuplades, qui ont
chacune leur chef et parlent une langue qui leur est propre. Ces
montagnes sont sillonncies de gorges et de vallees ; c’est a la tete
de Pun de ces d(itil4s que se troiive la ville de Bab-el-Abu’ab, batie
jjar Kosrocs Enouchirwan, sur un point intennediairc entre le pays
montueux et la mer des Khazara. Le meme soiiverain construisit
cette celcbre muraille qui, d’une part, s’avance dans la mer, jusqu’k
une distance d’environ un mille des cdtes, et, d’autre part, s’61feve
sur les sommeta abrupt es des montagnes et descend dans leur
gorges profondes, sur une longueur de quarante parasanges, jusqiP'i
■ce qn’elle aboutisse h. une place forte nomm6e Tabarestan. De
trois milles en trois millea pen pres, suivant Pimportance de la
route sur laquelle elle s’ouvrait, il plaga une porte de fer, priis
de laquelle il installa, dans Pintdrieiir de Penceinte, une peuplade
•chargee de veiller sa garde et h celle de la muraille. Oe rempart
devait oi^poser une barri^re infranchisable aux attaques des tribus ‘
voisines du Kabkh, telles que les Khazars, les Alains, les Turcs, les
■Serirs et les aiitres peuplades infidides.” ®

One of the terms of peace made between Ndshirwdn and
Justinian, after the death of Kubdd, was that Persia should be
paid the sum of eleven thousand pounds of gold towards the
maintenance of the defences in the Caucasus and should undertake
the actual defence herself.*

For •Sikandar’s wall, built, according to the legend, with a similar
purpose, see Vol. vi. p. 163,

§ 7. Niishlrwdn’s dealings with the Alans and the folk of GlUn


^ A.D. 943.
3 n., p. 1.


3 MM, ii. 196.

* RSM, p. 382.


NtSHtRWlN 217

are Listoricalj but Firdausi substitutes tlie BaKichis, who made
themselves very troublesome in his time, for another tribe,
mentioned in his authorities but unknown to him, which dwelt
north of the Caucasus.^ It is very unlikely that any of the
S^sdnian Shahs ever got as far East as Hindustan.

^ §§ 8 - 10 . The accession of Niishirwtln found Persia and the
Eastern Roman Empire at war, hut a year or two later he concluded
what was known as the ‘^the endless peace ” with Justinian. The
title was somewhat unfortunate, as in a.d. 540 war again hruke out
owing, according to Firdausi and Tabaj’i, to the treatment of
Munzir, prince of Hira (a.d. 505 - 554 ), by the Romans. He was
Niishirwan’s protdge and had a dispute with Hdritli bin Jabala,
the Ghasadnian and Justinian’s protege, about a pasturage for
sheep south of Palmyra. Hdrith, as Tabari states, attacked Munzir,
made a great' slaughter of his people, and carried off much booty.
Munzir appealed to Niishirwan, who could get no accommodation
from Justinian, and war ensued between the two empires.*^
Historically of course there were other reasons, one of the chief
being that Justinian, secured on his Persian frontier by the
“ endless peace,” had availed himself of the opportunity and the
services of Belisarius to extend and almost double his possessions
by conq^uests in the West. “ Both his friends and his enemies said,
with hate or admiration, ‘The whole earth cannot contain him;
he is already scrutinising the mther and the retreats beyond the
ocean, if he may win some new wmrld.’”® Justinian’s success
threatened to upset the balance of power. Probably, too, there were
alwa^'S “pin-pricks” going on between the two empires.

§ II. The Fire-temple visited by Ntishlrwdn before beginning his
campaign was probably not one at Tabriz but the more famous one
at what is now Taklit-i-Sulaiman, about one hundred miles to the
South, It was to this latter that the Sdsdniaii Shdhs were wont to
resort at important epioclis in their lives.*

It will he noticed that a Mihriin commands the centre of
Ndshlrwiln’s host — another instance of the prominent part played
by this family of Arsacid descent in Silsslnian times. Gf. p, 185.

§ 12 . Crossing the Euphrates Ndshlrwdn marched along its
western bank till he reached Sura, the Greek ri Z’ouga and the
Shi'iriib of Firdausi, which was taken without difJiculty, sacked, and
burnt. The Slrih then advanced to Hierapolis, the Arilyish-i-Ri\m
of the SlnlhnAma, which was allowed to ransom itself for two


^ NT, p. 157, note.
3 Id,


2 Id, p. 238; BLRE, i. 418.
* a. pp. 5, 86 , 94.


2i8


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

thousand pounds of silver.^ Hierapolis sounds somewhat like
Ardyish, which means ‘^ornament,” so it would seem that the
poet converted the name of that city into Ardyish-i-Riim or
“Ornament of Riim”

§ 13. On leaving this city Ndshirwdn, according to Firdausi,
encountered and defeated a Riiman army led by Farfdriyils.
Historically, the Persians in their advance on Antioch, in the course
of which they held Chalybon-Beroea (Aleppo) to ransom, appear to
have been unopposed. The occupation of Kdliniyiis (Callinicus)
did not take place till the third campaign (a.d. 543) when the city
made no resistance, and the inhabitants were led away captive.
It was situated on the eastern bank of the Euphrates. In a.d. 531,
however, Belisarius, after foiling an attempt of a combined force of
Persians and Arabs to raid Antioch, was worsted in a battle at
Callinicus ; so the two campaigns /may have become confused in
tradition. Germanus, Justinian’s nephew, had been at Antioch
before the Persians reached and stormed it in a.d. 540, but had
withdrawn as he considered the existing fortifications could not
be held with success. The taking of AnUkiya (Antioch) was
HiisMr wan’s crowning achievement in this his first campaign
against Rfim, and he returned home by another route, compelling
various cities to ransom themselves on his way. FarMriyiis is
probably Firdausi’s rendering of a Byzantine title. Belisarius took
no part in the campaign of a.d, 540 ; he only returned from Italy
in that year.

§ 14. That Niishlrwdn built a new Antioch on the Tigris, not far
from Ctesiphon, as a residence for his Roman captives is no doubt
historical, though we need not commit ourselves to Tabari’s state-
ment that the new town was so exactly a reproduction of the
original that the captives, on arriving, went to their own houses as
naturally as if they never had left home.^ The cordwainer from
Callinicus would be a later arrival.® The new Antioch was also
known as Rdmiya or “ The Ruman” and by other names,

§ 15, Negotiations for peace had been going on even during the
first year of the war, though they came to nothing, but five years later
a suspension of hostilities was agreed upon for five years. Justinian
had to give Niishlrwdn two thousand pounds of gold.^ Firdausi
does not carry the story of the war further. Peace was made, after
the resumption of the war which was followed by another five
years' truce, definitively in a.d. 562.


1 RSM, p. 387.
3 See above.


a NT, p. 165.

* RSM, pp. 391 seg., 404.


NtrSHIRWAN ' 319

§§ 16-19. The revolt of Nilshzad, “ Iimnortal-born,” is liistorical,
and the circumstances attending it may be stated fairly correctly
perhaps as follows. He seems to have been Ndshirwan’s eldest son,
and to have been brought up as a Christian by his mother, who was
in that Shah’s seraglio and of course a Christian herself. On
account of his religion, or for some other reason, he was interned
by his father at Gund-i-Shapdr,^ which contained a strong Christian
element and was the seat of the Hestorian Metropolitan — the next
in rank to the Patriarch.® When the news, false as it turned out,
of his father’s death reached him he had every reason to bestir him-
self. In the circumstances there was a likelihood of his being
passed over in the matter of the succession. His father’s known
disapproval, the rivalry of his brothers, and his own religion, were
obstacles which had to be faced promptly if at all, while as the
eldest-born it was only natural that he should aspire to the vacant
throne. At the time when his rising occurred ( a . d . 551) there was
a five years’ truce in force between Persia and the Eastern Roman
Empire, so it is not likely that he got much help from that qLuarter.
Probably Justinian never heard of the affair till it was all over.
The Christian inhabitants of Gund-i-Shdpfir naturally would
support Ndshzad, and it is interesting to find that the leader of his
troops is Shammas — a word meaning a Christian priest or deacon.
The general Persian opinion of Christians is shown by the word
"tarsd,” which means a Christian because its primary meaning is

cowardly,” but it does not appear that Firdausi shared that view ;
on the contrary, when obviously putting his own words into the
mouths of his charac\;ers, he treats the Church militant, especially
the episcopacy, with much respect.® It is very unlikely therefore
that the derogatory words concerning Christianity in the utterances
of Nfishlrwan and Plruz were the poet’s o^vn. Neither are they
characteristically Muhammadan. Firdausi found them in his
authorities translated from the Pahlavi. Historically, Niishziid does
not appear to have fallen in the fight: he fell into his father’s
hands, was blinded probably, imprisoned, and disappeared from his-
tory. The concluding scene of the story may be regarded therefore
as the poet’s ovn contribution to it. There is nothing polemical
there, but all is characterised by dignity and good feeling.*


^ See ‘Vol. vi. p. 296. 2 p, 41,

3 e.gr. Vol. i. p. 378. (7/-, too, tho parable of the korohiefa whore

Christianity is meant by the {'Faith of Yfin&n,” which is described as
being “ good.” Vol. vi. p. 96.

* For NOshzfi-d generally see NT, p. 407.


220


THE SH Ah NAM A OF FIRDAUSI


' § I

The Prelude

0 lofty Cypress, thou that ravishest

The heart ! oh ! wherefore art thou thus opprest
With pleasure, Grace, and luxury anear
Why is thine ardent heart fulfilled with fear ? ”
Said to the questioner the Cypress-tree : —

1 was in joy ere ago o’ermastered me.

I yield me to the puissance of three-score.
Forbear then and contend therewith no more.
For it hath dragon’s breath and lion’s claw,

And whomsoe’er it flingeth it will gnaw.

It hath the might of wolf, and thunder-breath,

In one hand care and in the other death.

It maketh stoop the Cypress that subdued
All hearts, it maketh jasmine amber-hued ;

It giveth saffron’s tint to cercis-bloom,

.^d, after saffron’s tint, a toilful doom.

The runner’s foot is bound though fetterless,

The precious body turned to wretchedness ;

The lustrous pearls begin to fail with me,

And stoopeth too the noble cypress-tree ;

My melancholy oyes bewail and run ,

Through their debility and travail done ;

My blithe, glad heart is fuU of pain, and thus
These days of mine have grown ungenerous.

Or ever man is weaned his death is nigh,

And people call him old ! The sovereignty
Of Nushirw^n was forty years and eight ;

To look for youth at sixty is too late
For thee, so seek an end to thine affairs,

And wound thy heart no more by gainful cares.”

^ There is no break here in the original.


nj^shirwJn


221


§ 2

How N'iishiTwdn ascended the Throne and made an Oration
to the Iranians

When Nushirwan ^ assumed the ivory throne,

And donned the crown — the lustre of the heart —

The great men of the world were gathered there
WTiat time the Sh^h sat with his counsellors.

That chief of famous men then loosed his tongue,

Invoked the righteous Giver of all good,

And said : Be our hearts filled with praise and love
Toward the almighty Euler of the sky.

From whom are good and ill, fame and desire,

By whom I am made sorrowful and glad.

Of whom are Grace and strength. By His command
The sun is bright in heaven. We will not qxiit
His counsels and His covenant, or reckon
Our breaths but at His bidding. He that doth
That which is just upon the throne of power
WiU have fruition of good fortune here ;

But he that harboureth an ill intent 0. i6i^

WiU bring disaster on himself at last.

Whatever ye ask of us we wiU reply.

And in our answer wiU advise you well.

None wotteth of the secrets of the heart ;

That is a way too strait for me to find ;

But stUl if justice be the Shah’s employ
It surely will rejoice the hearts of all.

Delay not till the morrow this day’s work ;

How know’st thou what to-morrow wiU bring forth ?

The rosary in bloom to-day will have

But worthless flowers for thee to cull to-morrow.

In days when thou art hale be not unmindful
Of malady, of suffering, and of loss ,•

^ Kisrd in the original, but henceforth we write hICishirw6n.


222


THE SHAhnImA of FIRDAUSt

Think of the day of death which closeth life,

And how with death we are as leaves with wind.
When thou art slack to act thou makest all
Thy policy unsound. When envy swayeth
The heart of man no leech can cure that ache.
When passion mastereth wisdom is’t not proof
Of madness ? Furthermore none honoureth
The quarrelsome and talkative. The path
That leadeth thee to guile is gloomier,

To right is straiter. Skilful as thou art,

Ji thou arfc lazy and perfunctory

Thy work will turn out ill. Whene’er the tongue

Is wedded to deceit it hath no lustre

From heavenly fortune. Feckless folk resort

To lying, and we can but weep for such.

Whenas the Sh&h is first to rise from slumber
He will be safe from foes and hale of body.

Be wise and have withal enough bo eat,

But more than this is anguish, toil, and greed.

Whenas a Sh§.h is just and liberal

The world is fuU of goodness and of peace,

But if he thwarteth justice in its course
He eateth colocynth and drinketh blood.

All ye in this assembly ! hear what I
Proclaim to you, learn it, observe it well,

And all your years fare side by side with fortune :
FuU many a crowned monarch have we scanned,
And our choice is the path of right and wisdom ;
Yet must ye listen to my minister,

For good and iU appear not save through him.^
Whoever cometh to this court of mine
With just cause whether in or out of season,

No minister of mine wiU I approve
That keepeth such a matter hid from me.

As for the officers about my court,

* Reading with P.


NtSHIRWjN


223


Aad valiant cavaliers among my troops,

As we stint not the stipend due to them
So must they tender mine own name and fame.
Let all be done humanely and uprightly
Without defect of justice. Every one,

That, being an frS-nian, girdeth him
To do his service in this court of ours.

Shall have both treasure and kind words from us
If he shall prove a shrewd and modest servant ;
But if his underlings shall be oppressed,

And he shall be unwise and fear not God,

He shall be punished for his wickedness.

And we should grieve not o’er the fall of one
So despicable. Keep within your hearts
The laws of holy God and fear not us.

For He is King of kings. Lord of the world,
Victorious, and One whose word is law,

The lUuminer of crown and sun and moon,

Who showeth us the way of righteousness.

Lord of the world is He, the Judge of judges.

And higher than the thoughts of every\man.

He hath created heaven, space, and time.

And hath adorned our souls and hearts with love.
He is the Guard of crown and lofty throne,

And when thou seekest help wiU succour thee.

’Tis He hath fitred your hearts with love of us.

His will hath blinded, heart and eye, our foes.
Well-being is all subject to His hest,

All goodness underneath His providence.

All from the stubble to the seventh heaven —

Air, fire, and water, and our gloomy earth —

Bear witness to His being and afiord
Thereof a clear assurance to thy soul.

Whatever we praise is under His command.

And all our worship dedicate to Him.”


C. 1620


224 the SHAhnAma of FIRDAUSI

When Nushirw^n had spoken all the world
Was lost in wonder at him. To their feet
All rose with praise anew the Shah to greet.


§ 3


How NiAsMrwdn dividei his Realm into four Parts and wrote
a Decree to his Officers on the Administration of Justice

The king of kings called unto him the wise,

And settled the affairs of all the world.

The world itself he parted into four,

Assigning that which was inhabited.

He first of all for Khurasan took thought,

And filled thereby the nobles’ hearts with joy.

The second part was Kum and Ispahan —

The seat of magnates and the place of chiefs —

Wherewith Azar Ab^dagan, whereon

The franians lavished offerings, was comprised.

That Sh4h of wary heart ^ included too
Armenia up to Ardabil and Gfl.

0, 1621 The third from east to west was formed of Pars,
Ahwaz, and of the marches of Ediazar.

’Irak together with the land of Rum

Came fourth — splendid realm and populous —

And in these marches to the indigent,

Who had to toil to satisfy their needs,

The Shdh made largess of his hoarded treasures,

And all folk blessed him.

Now of former ShS^hs —
Shahs greater or inferior to himself —

All had required a portion of the crops,

And no man thitherto had ’scaped the tax.

The royal portion was a third or fourth

^ Rcadiug with P.


j^jjshirwJn


225


Until Kubd»d came and required a tenth.

He meant to have reduced it further stillj
And strove to make the lowly like the lord,

But fortune gave him not the timo.^ Whilst thou
Art in the stream ne’er trust the crocodile.

The crown of worship came to Nushirw^,

And he remitted all the tenth forthwith.

The sages, chiefs, great men, and archimages,

The shrewd of heart, assembled — all the rulers.
They had the land partitioned and surveyed,

And laid thereon a land-tax of one drachm
So that the owners might not be distressed.

All that lacked seed or beast, when they should be

Preparing for the crops, were subsidised

Out of the treasure of the king of kings

So that they might not let the ground lie fallow.

Land, if untilled, was left out of account ;

The previous usages were done away.

On each six fruiting vines a drachm was levied.
Date-palm plantations paid an equal tax.

While each ten stems of olives and of walnuts,

And other trees that bear their fruit in autumn,
Brought one drachm to the treasury, and this
Was made the only burden of the year.

To fruits that ripened in the month IQiurd^

No heed was paid in taxing. From the men
Of means who neither owned nor tilled the soil
The tax-collector every year received
A payment varying from ten drachms to four ;

But no one was oppressed because the money
Was paid in three instalments annually.

And thus a third part of the tax was paid
Each four months to the exchequer of the Sh&h.
The royal scribes and officers employed
Within the taxing-office passed all count.

^ Cf. p. 183, note,

VOL. VII. i:


226


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


C. 1622


The Shah had these above-named tolls and imposts
Recorded by the archmages in three ledgers,
Whereof he gave one to the treasurer,

And made that minister account for it ;

The second was for sending through the realm
To all officials and the men in power ;

The third was handed to the archimages
To keep account of all the revenue.

All that concerned tax, toll, and husbandry
Was done by order of tho Shah himself,

And he had agents scattered everywhere
To keep him cognisant of good and ill:

He filled with justice all the face of earth,

And cultivated all the barren lands ;

Both great and small slept safely on the waste,

And sheep and wolf came to one trough. He bade
To draw up in the olden tongue a letter —

One that will pleasure thee to hoar from me.

It thus began : From Nushirwdn, the chief — -
The king of kings, the worshipper of God,

A Bough fruit-bearing from the Tree Kub^d —
Wlio hath assumed the crown of majesty,

And in especial prospered all the land,

For God, the just Judge, gave him Grace divine,
To all the officers of revenue —

Thralls of the shadow of our Grace and throne —
Our well weighed greetings unto you whose birth
Hath boen exceeded by your own desorts.

Here at the outset of our task we first
Give praises to the Maker of the world.

Know that the man is wise and shrewd of heart.
Whose praise is of the righteous Judge of earth.
Well knowing that He hath no need of us,

And that all secrets are revealed to Him,

Who when He willeth to exalt a man
First maketh him superior to all want.


NtSHIRWAN


237


He bade me judge, but He is Judge Himself,

And higher than all height eternally.

In God’s sight king and subject are as one,

And saving service none hath aught to do ;

From the abyss of earth to heaven above,

And from the sun to dark and sorry dust,

The ant’s foot bearoth witness that He is,

That we are bondslaves and that He is king.

All His commands to us are righteousness ;

It is the Div that causeth lies and loss.

Now if my portion of the spacious world
Had been a garden only, park, and palace,

My heart had chosen naught but love and justice.
And kept a smiling face for everything ;

But now the expanse of all the world throughout
From east to west hath God, the Holy One,
Bestowed upon me as my sovereignty —

AU from the bright sun to the darksome dust —
And I must practise naught save love and justice
Although I furrow mine own face thereby.

If careless be the shepherd and the waste
Thus vast the sheep will ’scape not from the wolf.
As for my subjects, whether country-folk
Or those devoted to. the Cult of Fire,

Be they in drouthy dust or ship at sea
By day or night alike, or be they merchants,
Engaged in voyaging over wet and dry
With monies and with lustrous pearls and musk,
The sun must shine not from the arch of heaven
Upon thorn save in justice and in love.

Now this hath been the custom of our race
That son should have his father’s crown and this
The world hath recognised as just and right
With one consent in public and in private.

We have imposed a land-tax and a tree-tax
For sustentation of the throne and crown.


C. 1623


228 ' THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Now when they bring this letter to you may
Urmuzd prove fortunate to you. Whoever
Herein transgresseth by a single drachm,

Or doth injustice for a single breath,

I swear by God, who hath bestowed upon me
The diadem of Grace, that I will saw
That man m twain ; such is God’s chastisement
On those whose evil seed hath come to fruit.
Observe this letter and this ordinance,

And turn not from the glorious Way and Faith.
Demand with justice and with courtesy
The instalment of the tax due each four months ;
But where the locusts have been ravaging,

Or sunbeams beaten on the parched-up earth.

Or where the blast or lightning of high heaven
Hath brought disaster on the cultured fields.

Or if rain falleth not at the New Year,

So that the jocund crops are vexed with drought.
Demand no tax upon those fields and crops,
Because the spring-clouds have not watered them.
And pay the seed sown and the labourers’ hire
Back to the farmers from the treasury.

The lands whose owner is deceased and hath
No kith and kin must lie not waste, for they
Are underneath the shadow of the Sh^h ;

Else will the foe make scorn of my resources
With such a pretext ready to his hand.

Give what is needed from the treasury.

For God hath set me out of reach of need.

If lands within my power lie desolate,

Unsheltered by the shadow of my wing,

Whoe’er he be that is responsible.

And doth neglect the task, hard though it be,

Him, whether lord or underling, will I

Hang from.th© gibbet on the spot. The great —

The Sh4hs of yore — had other usages,


NjySHtRWAN


22g


With their officials rested right and wrong,

The world lay open to the cavaliers,

Who wantonly mocked wisdom and ne’er rested
From adding to their wealth. My wealth is justice ;

The people of the land compose my host ;

I will not cast a glance upon din to.

To win by equity the world’s regard,

And to respect the worth of men of birth,

Are dearer to me than the wealth of foes 0. 1624

That seek to win my kingdom and my throne.

The general that selleth men for gold
Shall get no entry to my court whereat
They are esteemed that follow justice, love,

Law and the Way. When my shrewd officers
Assemble at the office of the archmage,

And falsehood showeth in the words of any,

He shall receive no grace from us henceforth.

I do not love the man that is unjust ;

The leopard and the oppressor are as one.

All they that have ensued the way of God,

And bathed their dark souls in the stream of wisdom,

Shall have a lofty station at our court,

High estimation with the archimages.

And from their God for that which they have sown
The recompense of jocund Paradise.

We are ourselves exempt from need of wealth
Whereby the soul is minishod and accursed.

He that doth eat the flesh of mendicants
Will find, no doubt, some nurture in their skins.

A pard is better than a king like that,

Who hath no modesty, no rule, no Faith.

The way of right is open to us. Why
Knock we in folly on the door of loss 1
To do ill closely, justice openly,

So that the fame thereof may come to us,

Will have not God’s approval, or be held


230 THE ShAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

In high consideration at our court ;

But he hath God’s approval and our own
Wliose love and justice are as warp and woof.”

If thou art just, 0 monarch ! thou wilt give
The world a record of thee that will live,

For every one will praise eternally

The Shah that brought the world prosperity.


§ 4

How NikMrwdn required Babah to muster the Host

Of aU the Shahs that erst had throne and crovui,
And had been great in treasure and in troops,
There was not one more just than Nushirwan,
And may his soul be young for evermore.

None was more worshipful for manhood, throne,
For diadem and knowledge. He possessed
An archimage, B4bak by name, a man
Of wisdom, shrewd of heart, and fortunate,

Made him the muster-master of the host,

And bade him to prepare himself an office
Of ample size before the palace-gate,

And higher than its top, and furnish it
1625 With carpets that were worthy of a king
To seat the clerks engaged upon the work.

A proclamation issued from his office,

And all the folk gave ear : “ Famed warriors !
Mount and attend the portal of the Shah,

AU ye that would have guerdon at his hands !
With iron helmets set upon your heads,

Arrayed in mail and bearing os-head maces.”

The troops came to the office of Babak,

The air was darkened by the horsemen’s dust.
Now when Bdbak reviewed the host he missed ^

^ Reading with P.


NtfSHIRWAN


The standard and the chief of all the noble.

He leftL.th© office, mounted on his steed,

And bade the soldiers go back to their quarters.

The turning sky continued on its course.

And when the radiant sun displayed its face
It was proclaimed before the palace-gate ; —

Ye mace-men of the army of Iran !

Go all in full array with arms and bows
And lassos to the office of Babak.”

They went with lances, helms, and coats of mail ;
The army’s dust ascended to the clouds.

Babak looked round upon the host but, since
The Shah appeared not in his Grace and state,

Thus spake : Return glad and victorious
In love and duty, each man to his quarters.”

" Again the third day rose the proclamation : —

” Ye men of name, of Grace divine and wisdom !
Let there not be one horseman of this host
Without his helmet and cuirass of war,

And let him come and pass before this gate,

And see his name upon the muster-roll.

Let those that are distinguished by a crown,

By Grace, by majesty, and lofty fortunes.

Know that this muster is without respect
Of persons, reticence, and modesty.”

The king of kings gave ear thereto and heeded
The proclamation from B^bak’s divdn,

Then smiling called for coat of mail and helm,

And held erect the flag of majesty:

The Sh&h, with iron helmet on his head,

Proceeded to the office of Babak.

The chain-mail hung down from his Ruman helm.
And was secured by many a fastening.

Within his hand heffiad an ox-head mace.

Within his belt four shafts of poplar-wood,

A bow on arm and lasso on the saddle-


232 THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

While round his loins he had a golden girdle.

He urged his charger, gripping with his thighs,

And laid the massive mace upon his shoulder ;

Then, lightly wheeling both to left and right,
Displayed both steed and rider to BS^bak,

Who when he had inspected them approved,

And, having come up to the king of kings,

€. 1626 Said thus to him : “ 0 Shah ! mayst thou be blessed !
May wisdom be the provand of thy soul !

Thou hast adorned the kingdom’s face with justice,
Such that with us ’tis thy memorial.

What I have said was boldness from a slave.

But never must thou turn from what is just ;

So now, I prithee, wheel thee to the right
With all the skill whereof thou art the master.”

Then Nushirwan again urged on his steed
To right and left as ’twere Azargashasp.

BS.bak looked on amazed and oft invoked
The Maker of the world. A horseman’s pay
Ran from a thousand to two thousand drachms ;

Four thousand wore the most that any had.

Babak paid to the Shah just one drachm more.

Then from the ofifice-door ’Iwas cried : “ Exhibit
The charger of the first of warriors —

The horseman of the world, the famous Shah,”

While Ndshirw^n laughed heartily, for fortune
Was young with him and he a youthful king.

Now when Babak had left the royal office
He came before the noble Sh^h and said : —

“ Great Shah ! if I, thy slave, made bold to-day
The purpose of my heart was right and just :

Let not the ShS^h take notice of my harshness ;

It is not harshness to discharge one’s duty.

And blest is he who meant not to be harsh.”

” 0 man of wisdom ! ” said the ShAh to him,

Keep thyself ever in the path of right.


NUSHIRWAN

Whereof thou break’s! the heart by self-regard.
Know that thou art the dearer in mine eyes ;

But mine anxiety is for myself —

How, when the army is engaged in hght,

I shall comport myself upon the field.”

Babak made answer to the noble Sh§^h : —

‘‘ No crown and signet will behold thy like,

While painter hath observed not limned in hall
A hand and rein like thine, 0 king ! Oh ! may
High heaven accord to thee thy full desire,

Oh ! may thy heart be glad, thyself unscathed ! ”
Thus to the archimage said Nushirwan ; —

'' Our justice shall make old folk young again.
The king must leave as his memorial
Within the world but righteousness alone.

What need have we for such a treasury,

Such toil and greed, and to confine our soul
Within this Wayside Inn 1 The need, since here
Is no abiding, is to eat and drink.

I have been troubled with the world’s affairs,
Although I kept these matters to myself,

Because my royal croAvn hath enemies.

And Ahriman doth compass me about.

Methought : ‘ I will bring troops from every side,
And summon warriors from every province,

But for the levy I have need of treasure.

Which I have but to labour to amass ;

StUl if this bringeth evil on the poor
I must refrain my heart from this desire.’

So I revolved this matter in my heart,

And, having come upon a wise resolve,

I wrote a letter to the paladins.

The mighty men, and prudent archimages,

To all the nobles and the potentates
In all the provinces, and thus it ran : —

‘ All ye possessed of wisdom and of sense !


334 THE SHAHNAma OF FIRDAUSI

Bring up your sons for military service.

Dispatch them to the field equipped for war,

And look to me for honour and reward.

They must he able to distinguish hand
And rein from stirrup on the hills and dales,

And learn to battle with the enemy
With mace and scimitar, with bow and arrow,
Because a j^-outh unskilled availeth naught
Although he be descended from Arisli.’ ^

The muster-master wont forth from the court,

With money for the chiefs, to every province,

And now in sooth I have adorned the face
Of earth with men prepared to take the field.

I have more Imowledge, policy, and method
Than former Shahs, and greater armaments.’’

The archmage, when he heard the Shah speak thus,
Called praises down upon the crown and throne.

The payment was delayed for forty days,

And then the athelings, equipped for war,

Went to the office and received their pay
While joyanco was the order of the day.


§ 5


Hoiv Nushinodn harangued the Iranians^ and how the
Kin^s acknowledged his Supremac7j


Now when the sun displayed its shining face,

When circling heaven unlocked the garden-gate,

And when the Mound of Fenugreek appeared
While dark night’s tresses vanished, Nushirwto,

All smiles, glad-hearted, and of youthful fortune,

Sat on his throne, while all that sought redress
Flocked to his court. The king harangued them
thus : —


1 For whom see Vol. v. n, 12.


NtSHfRWAN


235


Acknowledge that ye have not any helper
Save holy God, the Lord of all, our Guide,

Who leadeth us in both worlds by the hand.

Fear not the throne and crown, the court is open
To all, and ye soe’er that come thereto
By day and night keep not your lips from speech.
If we are quaffing wine in company.

Or busied with advisers, or at polo,

Or on the hunting-field, the way is open
For you to us. Let access be withheld
From none because I am asleep, awake,

At work or play. Let none of you withdraw
From us to sleep with wants unsatisfied.

My heart will be rejoiced and bright whenever
I break the travail of the oppressed. Please God,
No officer of mine, no man at arms.

No servitor, shall sleep with heart aggrieved.

For from his grievance harm will come on me.
However trifling or obscure the matter
The Maker will require it at my hands.

For tolls and imposts, other than the archmages
Are now concerned with in mine offices,

No gold or silver shall be asked of you.

So sleep all unafraid of me henceforth/’

Then sunward from the face of earth applause
Rose from the hall : May Niishirw^in have Grace,
And aU his years the crown of king of kings !

Ne’er may the throne, the state, and famous crown
Of sovereignty be void of him ! ”

They went

Their ways, glad and rejoicing, and earth’s face
Grew like the garden of Iram.^ Thou hadst not
Seen any one despondent in the world,

While from the clouds came seasonable rain.

The world resembled jocund Paradise,

^ Seo Vol. i. p. 100.


0. 1628


236 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The clouds sowed tulips in the pleasances.

The daleSj the plains, and orchards shone like lamps,
The uplands were like garths, garths like the sun.

Thereafter tidings came to Rum and Hind : —

'' fran is like fine painted silk of Rum ;

The Shah hath decked with armaments and justice
The earth till it is like the shining moon.

No one in aU the world doth know the sum
Of all his forces save the Sh^ih himseK.

They all are blithe of heart and dight for war,

Have fame and glory and illume the world.”

The kings of all the realms were sore amazed
At heart ; their souls were dark through Nushirwan.
Ambassadors arrived from Hind and Chin,

And all kings called down praises on the Shah ;

They saw that they could counter not his might,

And hasted to pay tribute with good will,

Bare them as underlords to Nushirwan,

And gathered slaves and purses for his service.

With golden maces and with golden crowns
The envoys went upon their way. They reached
The court -gate of the monarch of the world,

And brought the toll and tribute of their lords.

The court appeared adorned like Paradise
Through all those purses, slaves, and audience-seekers.
Thus for a while the heavens turned above.

Consorting with the franian king in love.


§ 6


How Nushirwan went round his Empire and huilt a Wall
in the Pass between Iran and T^rAn


C. 1629 Then Nushirw6;n, the wise, made this resolve —
That he would sojourn for a while abroad


NUSHtRWJN 237

To make the circuit of the jocund world.

And bring whate’er was hidden to the light.

He beat the kettledrums, marched forth the host,

And sun and moon were both astound at him.

What with the troops and jewels, gold and silver,

The golden girdles and the golden shields,

Thou wouldst have said : “ No gold is left within
The mines, no gems or lustrous pearls remain ! ”

He led his host toward Khur^4n at leisure,

All heedful of B banian precedent.

Whenever he passed sebtlements he pitched
His camp and camp-enclosure on the waste,

And when the blare of clarions rose there went
A herald first afoot who thus proclaimed : —

“ Ye subjects of the monarch of the world !

Is any privily aggrieved at us ?

Sleep not despairing of the Shah, allow not
Your souls to fail with care.’’

He led the host

Thus to Gurgen and bare with him the crown
And throne of chiefs. Enow, justice is no loss :

Sh&hs should have prowess, rede, and noble birth.

Now when the nightingales were full of song
They went thence toward Sari and toward Amul,
Where bill and plain were clothed with forest-trees,
Which filled the frSinian monarch’s heart with thought.
He left the plain and mounting to the heights,

Still seated on his Arab bay looked out
O’er mountain and o’er forest, and observed
Rose, hyacinth and game, and water there.

And thus he said : ''0 Thou almighty Judge,

The World-lord, Conqueror, and Fosterer !

Thou art the Maker of the sun and moon,

The Guide and the Revealer of the way.

Thou mad’st the world of such delightsomeness
That we distinguish not ’twixt earth and Heaven.


238


THE SHAUN AM A OF FIRDAUSI


Whoe’er shall worship any save Thyself
Will send his soul to Hell. It was for this
That pious Faridun forwent fran,

And made his dwelling here, so passing fair
Is this place and delightsome to the heart.

Where water is rose-water and-the soil
Is spicery.”

One said : ‘‘0 righteous judge !

If this were not a highway for the Turkmans
Our hearts would be not empty of delight,

Such are the wealth and glory of this place ;

But as it is we cannot raise our necks
For constant murders, sack, and harryings.

C. 1630 There are not many left or even few
Of fowl or men or cattle on this spot.

This is the only route between the realms,

And causeth loss to the Iranian folk.

There came much toil and strife in former times,

But then the Turkmans’ route was through Kliarazm,
Now for the merchant or blio thane to raise
His head would be in vain. However, now
That thou hast led an army to these parts,

Avert this ill fi‘om us and bar the way.

Thy treasures will be more, not less, thereby :

Now is the time to render us a service.”

The Shah, whenas ho heard the suppliant,
Showered tear-drops from his eyes and thereupon
Addressed his minister and said to him : —

'' A very grievous toil confronteth us.

Henceforth ’tis not for us to faro and feast,

Or even tender our own crown, for God
Will sanction not the wrong in us that we
Shall be in happiness while thanes are grieving.

Such mountains as these arc, such spacious plains,

All fit for gardens, grounds, and palaces,

And filled with cattle, game, and running water,


NtSHlRWJN 239

So that the soul is freshened by the sight —

We must not let the Turkmans lay them waste;

And desolate the country of fran.

My kingly office, prudence, policy,

Humanity itself, will brook it not.

Men will invoke not blessings on our heads
What time trkn is lying desolate.”

He bade his minister : From Hind and Rum
Select men famous in those cultured lands
From all the provinces, foreseeing men,

Such masters in their craft as thou canst find,

And build me from the sea a lofty wall,

On broad foundations and ten lassos high,

Of stone and mortar, starting from the deep,

And rising to the fountain of the sun.

In this way surely we shall form a bar,

And loss from foes will come not on Iran.

Use no forced labour, ope our treasury,

And pay to every one what he dcmandeth.

The labourer, the thane, and man of birth
Must not be incommoded by the blast.”

He made an old archmage the overseer,

And shut out aU the desert by the wall.

Wherein they set a mighty iron door.

And aU the flock grew fearless of the wolf.

Of frontier-guards he stationed many a post,

And, having made all safe, led on the host.


§ 7


How NMlrwdn chastised'^ the Alans and the Men of
BaMch and Gildn


Thence from the sea he went toward the Aldus,
And finding there a ravaged, barren march


C. 1631


^ Literally, “rubbed the eara of.”


240 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

He thus addressed his chiefs : It is a shame
For regions in frSn to lie thus waste,

And we must suffer not our foes to say so.”

He chose an envoy from among the troops,

One, as was fitting, wise and eloquent,

To whom he said : Depart hence with the dawn.
And say thus to the marchlords of yon folk : —

‘ From mine intelligencers have I heard
All that hath passed in pubhc and in private.

And that ye say : “ Why fear we Nushirwan ^

As for Iran it is a pinch of dust.”

Now have we come anigh you and set up
Our camp, our camp-enclosures, and our court.
Your wastes are spacious and your mountains high,
Your troops are armed with arrow, macp, and lasso
Your gorges are the place for ambuscades.

Land, mountain, field and fell, are aU your own.
We — general and soldiers — challenge you.

We who are strangers in a foreign land.’ ”

The envoy went his way and spake the words
Dictated by the monarch of fr^n.

The host of the AUns assembled — ^all
The great, the sages, and the counsellors —

A host that found employ in pillaging,

And recked but little for the Iranians.

Iran was wont to stand in awo of them ;

Folk had no raiment, gold, or silver left.

And men and women with their babes and beasts
Were wont to quit their homes and seek the plains.
The envoy told the Alms, withholding naught.

The message of the monarch of the world.

Whereat the faces of the chiefs grew black ;

The words of NlishirwS^n amazed their hearts.

The great men and the chieftains of that march
Went forth with contributions and much tribute,
With slaves and raiment, and with gold and silver,


NtSHIRWJN


341


And many a noble steed, while of the folk
All that were men of years and eloquence,

And wisdom-seekers, came to Niishirw4n,

BewaiUng their past doings. When they reached
The tent-enclosure of the Shdh with presents,

And gifts, they cried and wallowed in the dust.

Their eyes fulfilled with tears, their hearts with blood.
!For shame and self -excusing is no need
When wisdom and the valiant are agreed.

The prudent Shah was gracious unto them,

And pardoned aU that they had done amiss ;

Then ordered that upon the wasted lands —

The lurking-place of lion and of leopard —

They shoilild erect a city with aU speed.

With room for sowing and for harvesting.

The whole surrounded by a lofty wall
That iU might not befaU from enemies.

The Alains made answer to the noble king.

And said : “ With earrings on as slaves of thine.

And, as the Shdh hath bidden, we will raise
The ramparts of a noble scat.”

The Shah

Marched thence to Hindtist^Ln and sojourned there..

At his commandment all folk came to him.

Came seeking to mgratiate themselves.

And for two noiles beside the Ihdus-bank
Were horses, elephants, brocade, and coin.

The great men ah with honesty of heart
And loyalty appeared before the Sh4h,

Who questioned them and well entreated them.

And placed them in accordance to their rank.

With jocund heart the Shdh departed thonoc :

Troops, steeds, and elephants fulfilled the world.

He wont his way, and tidings came to him : —

“ The world is wasted by the Baluchis,

TUI from exceeding slaughter, piUaging,

VOL. VII.


Q


242 THE SHAhnImA OF FIRDAUSI

And harrying, the earth is overwhelmed, -
But greater ruin cometh from Gfl^n,

And curses banish blessings.”

Then the heart

Of Nushirwan, the Shd.h, was sorrowful,

And grief commingled with his joy. He said
To the fr^inians : “ The Alans and Hind
Were, in their terror of our scimitars,

Like silk. Now our own realm is turned against us :
Shall we hunt lions and forgo the sheep ? ”

One said to him : ‘‘ The garden hath no rose
Without a thorn, 0 king ! So too these marches
Are ever troublesome and treasure-wasting.

As for Baluch the glorious Ardshir
Tried it with all his veteran officers,

But all his stratagems and artifices,

His feints, his labours, arms, and fighting failed,

And though the enterprise succeeded ill
He cloaked the failure even to himself.”

This story of the thane enraged the Sh&h,

Who went upon his way toward Baluch.

Now when he drew anear those lofty mountains
He went around them with his retinue,

And all his host encircled them about,

And barred the passage e’en to wind and ant.

The troops, hke ants and locusts, occupied
The mountain-outskirts to the sandy desert.

^^33 A herald went his rounds about the host,

Proclaiming from the mountains, caves, and plains : —
Whene’er the Baldchis are seeking food,

If they be warriors and carry arms.

However many or however few,

Let not a single one of them escape.”

The troops, ware of the anger of the Shah,

Stopped every outlet with their horse and foot ;

Pew of the Baluchis or none survived,


N'&SHIRWJn


243


No women, children, warriors, were left.

All of them perished by the scimitar.

And all their evil doings had an end.

The world had quiet from their ravaging :

No Baluchi, seen or unseen, remained.

While on their mountains, so it came to pass,

The herds thenceforward strayed without a guard ;

' Alike on waste and lofty mountain -top
The sheep required no shepherd. AH the folk
Around thought nothing of past sufferings.

And looked on vale and mountain as their home.
Thence toward Gfl&n marched Nhshirw&a, for there,
And in Dflam, was trouble manifest.

The army stretched from sea to mountain-top.

The air was full of flags, the earth of troops.

The army was extended round Gfldn,

And hght departed from the sun and moon.

Thus spake the Sh4h : “ Among the small and great
No trace of Wolf and Lion must be left.”

So mighty was the slaughter in the land
That all the region’s face was bathed in blood.

At aU the slaying, pillaging, and burning
The men and women sent up wails of woe.

On every side the slain were piled in heaps.

The grasses smirched with brains. The warriors —
The just, the prudent and the men of weight —
Remaining in Gfl4n bound their own hands.

And with their women-folk behind, their ohfldxen
Before them, came lamenting to the king
With bosoms rent and dust upon their heads.

They all assembled at the monarch’s court

With bounden hands and wounded bodies, saying : —

“ We have turned back upon our evil courses ;

Oh ! that the Sh4h would cease from his displeasure !
If he is vexed at heart against Gfl&n
Wo will behead ourselves with our own hands.


244 the SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

It may be that the Shdh then wiU relent
When he shall see the heaps of severed heads.’’

When such a cry rose from the court, and when
The Shah had listened to their supplication,

He pardoned them ; the past was blotted out,

But he required two hundred hostages
Both from Gflan and from Dilam that none
Thereafter might pursue the path of Ul.

He left a paladin with them to stay,

And, having ordered all things, marched away.


§ 8

Eow Munzir, the Arab, came to N'^ishirwdn for Succour
agamst the Injustice of Ccesar

0. 1634 Next from Gil 4 n he marched toward Mad&’in,

Not knowing his troops’ number or extent.^

Now as he journeyed on appeared afar
A boundless host of wielders of the spear.

A cavalier — one of that great array —

Approached as quick as dust on their behalf,

And, having lighted from his charger, said : —

“ Behold Munzir the Arab.”

When Munzir

Drew near the Shah all chiefs made way for him.
The Sh^h saluted him with signs of joy,

And brightened at his looks. That veteran
Set loose his tongue, discoursed of Rum and Caesar,
And said : If thou art monarch of Ir^,

The guardian and the backbone of the brave,

Why do the Etimans lord it so and prance
Upon the desert of the cavaliers ?

While if the Sh&h be Caesar’s overlord


^ They were so many.


ntjshirwJn


245


That haughty potentate should lose his head.

Now if the noble Shdh will give permission
No more will ho behold us asking aid,

And in the fight the horsemen of the desert
Shall triumph o’er the cavaliers of Rum.”

The Shah was wroth that Caesar should exalt
His crown, as said Munzir, and, having chosen
Among the troops a man of eloquence.

And learned in Caesar’s tongue, said thus : Go thou
To Rfim, take not thine ease in peopled parts.

And say to Caesar : ‘ If thou lackest wisdom
Thy brains will sorrow for thy policy.

The warrior-lion chasing onager

Will batten on them even in a salt-marsh.

Tor thee to have thy just dues from Munzir
SuflSceth seeing that Vega is his throne.

Discern then ’twixt thy left hand and thy right,

And, when thou knowest, claim what march is thine.

Since I am the distributor of lands

And realms, am highest in the world and chief,

My conduct shall be worthy of myself :

I will let not the wind blow on Munzir.

Since thou hast stretched thy hand upon the Arabs
In fight take privy heed for thine own self.

Moreover aU that sovereignty is mine,

And mine is aU between the Bull ^ and Pisces.

If I shall send an army into Rthn

Thy sword of steel wiU prove a sword of wax.’ ” ^

The ambassador came forth from Nushfrwdn
As ’twere a torrent, came and gave the message 0. 1635

To Caesar, but that worthless one recoiled
Prom what was just, replied evasively,

Imagining a fall from power remote,

And answered thus ; “ As for that fool Munzir,

Take what he stateth at its proper worth.

^ See Yol.i. p. 71. ® Booauso “mi'im, ’ wax, rhymes with “Bi5m.”


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt


246

If he complaineth out of wantonness,

Exaggerating thus the evil done,

Or if a single man complain within
The desert of the wielders of the spear,

I will convert the heights of earth to breadths,

And that unwatered desert to a sea.”

The envoy heard, came swift as dust, and told
The words of Csesar. Nushirwdn enraged
Said to his minister : The brains of Csesar
Are wedded not to wisdom. I will show him
Who hath authority, the power to conquer
The world, to levy war, and make a pact.

His overweening and his haughtiness,

His labour, pillaging, and harrying.

He sTiall repent more dearly than the drunkard,^
That thrusteth both hands in the fire at night.”

He then bade blow the trumpets, and a host
Was gathered unto him from every side ;

The dm of tymbals went up from the court-gate,
Earth was pitch-hued and air was ebony.

He chose of cavaliers from that famed host
A hundred thousand armed with scimitars,
Entrusted that great army to Munzir,

And bade him : “ From the desert of the spearmen
Lead unto Rum an army of the brave
To set the frontier and the land afire,

For youthful monarch though I be and though
I am but newly famoused in fight,

Yet fear not Rum or Rtiman, thou ! for I
Regard the Ruman as a pinch of dust.

Now will I send me an ambassador —

A man of eloquence — ^to him. Henceforth,

If thou experience naught calamitous,

That Csesar should keep Rum would pleasure us.^

^ Bieading with P. 2 Ending section with P.


N^SHiRWAN


247


§ 9

The Letter 0/ Shah N'Miirwdn to Ccesar of Rdm

The Shah then called a scribe that was at court,

And bade to write a letter unto Osesar : — ^

From NushirwS/nj the Shah of glorious birth.

The world-lord and successor of KubSd,^

To Csesar, the exalted lord of Rlim —

Guard of the marches of that prosperous land.”

The Jetter opened with the praise of God
From whom alone aU greatness must be sought —
The Master of the circling sun and moon,

The Source of victory and mastery,

Who is above the will of turning heaven
As touching justice, love, and strife. Though thou
Art Caesar and the lord of Rum dispute not
Aught with the Arabs, for if thou shalt take
The sheep out of the clutches of the wolf
Thou wilt, as thou art ware, have grievous toil ;
While if thou sendest troops against Munzir
I will not leave thee host or crown or throne.

If any underling grow masterful
He shall be punished by our scinoitar.

Step not a single cubit past thy bounds
If thou desirest that our pact shall stand.

If thou shalt pass thy bounds we will pass ours,

And trample under foot thy head and throne.

The greeting of the lord of diadem

And might to those that seek not to cause trouble

By their injustice.”

Unto this they set

The Shdh’s seal and then chose a cavalier,

Such as was needful, from the court, a man
Persuasive, valiant, shrewd, and veteran.

1 In C. tho previous section ends hero. ® Of. p, 179, note^


248


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


-§ 10

How the Letter oj N'l^sMrwdn reached Ccesar and how
he replied

The envoy with the letter of the king
Came to famed Caesar, gave it, greeted him,

And told him all the mind of Nushxrw^n.

When Caesar heard and had perused the letter
He writhed and was astound. His brow grew wrinkled,
Hjs visage wan at what the exalted Shah
Had said. He called a scribe, wrote his reply,

And made his meaning clear for good and ill.

The letter first grew musky with the ink
Wkat time he offered praise to God almighty —

The Artist of the heavens over us,

The Source of warfare, peace, and amity.

He giveth in the world one man a crown
With slaves before him better than himself.

Though turning heaven itself be under thee,

And Jupiter beneath thy scimitar,

Search out thy records, for no son of Rum
E’er hath paid tribute to thy royal race.

King as thou art I am no less than thou ;

I too possess a head, a crown, and realm.

Why must I take so much abuse in fear
Of foot of elephant or din of drum ?

I now ask you for tribute and for toll,

And who is there with power to fight with Rum ?

The doings of Sikandar in fr^n

Thou knowest, and we claim that noble Shah.

C. 1637 Sikandar’s sword is still in evidence,

Why pickest thou a quarrel with us thus ?

The javelin-wielding horsemen of the waste
Have pillaged our possessions in their raids :

No longer will we bear thek wrongs but raise


NtfSHIRWAN 249

The dust in all their borders. Nushirw^n
Was neither Maker of the sun, nor hath
He seized the key of the revolving sky,

That there must be no other king of kings,

And his will only current in the world.”

He gave the envoy no reply in speech.

Not recking of the wrath of Nushirw4n,

But, when he set the seal upon the letter,

He spake these words : “ Christ and the Cross are
with me,”

The envoy spent no breath on him, perceiving
With grief the answer, and wdth grief departed ;

Swift as a dust-cloud to the Sh4h he sped,

And told him all that Caesar purposed.


§ IX

How Niishirwdn went to war with Ccesar

The king, when ho had read the letter, raged
Against the turn of fortune. Then he called
The archmages and the chieftains, one and all,

And spake to them at large about that letter. .

He sat for three days with his counsellors
And paladins — ^the shatterers of hosts —

And on the fourth day was resolved to lead
His troops to fight with Caesar. At the gate
Arose the blare of trumpets with the din
Of brazen cymbals and of drums. He paused not,
But went to battle in a righteous cause,

Assembled troops, made up the haggage-train,

And called on God, the Giver of all good.

A dust rose such that thou hadst said : ‘‘ The sky
Hath smirched its visage in a sea of pitch ! ’’

He clad the surface of the earth with horse-shoes,


2SO THE SHIhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

While silken flags incamadiaed the air.

There was no room on earth e’en for a gnat,

No room for wind left in the firmament.

The hubbub of the horsemen and the dust
Of elephants made earth seem like the Nile.

The world-lord marched with K4wa’s flag, with crown,
And golden boots. The army’s din was heard
Two miles away. Before the host were drums
And elephants, and on this wise the Shah,

With chiefs behind him and with chiefs before him.
Sped onward to Azar Abadagan.

Now when his eyes beheld Azargashasp
AEar he hghted down and went afoot,

Ee quested of his pious minister

The sacred twigs and bathed his cheeks with tears.

1638 He made his entry of the Fane of Fire

With wailing. They set up a throne inlaid
With gold, and spread thereon the Zandavasta,
Wherefrom an archimagus read aloud,

According to the ritual, while priests

And chieftains wallowed in the dust before it.

And rent their skirts. The great men showered jewels
Upon the book and muttered laud thereon.

The Sh§h approaching offered praise and prayer
Before the Maker of the world, and asked
For victory, for mastery, and guidance
Upon the path of justice. He bestowed
Gifts on the attendants and on mendicants
Wherever seen. He pitched his tent before
The Fire-fane, and his troops arrayed their ranks
Upon each side. He called a prudent scribe,
Discoursed at large, dictating fitting words,

Bade him address by letter graciously
The marchlords of the country of io&n,

And say : Fear God^ be vi^ant, and guard
The world against the enemy. Ye lords


Nt SHIR WAN


251


And paladins ! be just to those beneath you,

And keep such forces as will foil the foe.

None while my standard shall be out of sight
Must think to slumber in security.”

As from the Fane of Fire he marched towards Rum
The bruit of him was spread throughout the land,

And all the faithful lieges flocked to him
Until the warriors ^ hid the fields and fells,

And many an aspirant came with gifts
And offerings to the kmg. Where’er he lighted
There reached him salutations and addresses
From all sides, while where’er he led his host
He still had feast and chase before his eyes,

And ’twas the custom for a thousand chiefs
To come each night to banquet with the king.

When he was near the frontier he made ready
For war and in the first place paid his troops.

His general was Shtrwi, son of Bahr§.m —

A man of rede and self-possessed in battle.

He gave the army’s left wing to Farh&d,

To whom he proffered many prudent counsels.

'UstS<d, son of Barzin, was on the right,

Garshasp, the atheling, was o’er the baggage.

Mihr&n ^ was at the centre, for his heart
Was steadfast in the fray. The outpost duty
The Sh^th gave to Hurmuzd, son of Kharr&d,
Enjoining wisdom to his soul and heart,

While everywhere intelligencers wont

That nothing might be hidden. Then the Sh&h

Called and advised his veterans much and well.

He said to them : Ye numbers numberless
Of men of high estate and warriors !

If any one of you shall quit my way.

Or draw a breath without my privity,

Shall cause affliction to the mendicants,

1 Beading with P. ® Cf, p. 185.


0. 1639


252 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSl

Or to the mighty men possessed of treasure,

Shall injure any tree that beareth fruit,

Or do an act unseemly, trample down
The cornfields, or leave station to advance
Before the troops, I swear by God, the Lord
Of Mars, of Saturn, and of Sol, who gave me
The diadem and might, forthwith to cleave him
Asunder with my sword though like a star
He hide him in the clouds. I am the scout
Before the host, aspirant, central stay.

Guard of the elephants, of troops, and baggage,
Am now upon the left, now on the right.

I fare o’er land and sea, I seek no rest
And sleep in war.”

A herald named Shirzad
Laid up at heart the words of Nushtrwan,

And made in haste the circuit of the host,

Went round about tent and pavilion,

And cried : '' Ye troops in numbers numberless !
The bidding of the watchful Shah is this :
Whoever, save in justice, love, and wisdom.

Shall look upon this gloomy earth of ours,

Men shall pour out his blood thereon as one
That hath departed from the will of God.”

A proclamation did not satisfy
The Sh^h who night and day employed himself
In going on his rounds about the host,

Observing everything both good and bad,
Receiving tidings of the world’s affairs,

And slighting nothing whether good or fil.

When any soldier died upon the march
The Sh^h prepared a charnel at the place,

And aU the man’s belongings — silver, gold.

His bow, his helm, his lasso and his belt,

Or good or bad, were buried with the dead,

Who in the grave hsid still his goods with him.


NtSHtRWJN

The world was lost in wonder at the height
Of majesty attained by Nushirwan.

In every place where he engaged in battle
He showed his counsel, caution, and good sense,
And used to call a trusty messenger,

Who went to foes preparing for resistance,

And if they entered on the path of right
The wise Shah treated them with clemency ;

But, if they fought, that valiant Crocodile
Was very wroth, went forth to fight with them,

And gave their fields and crops to spoil. He wooed
The world with justice and the scimitar.

The conduct of the Sh4h was like the sun’s.

Which shineth in its course on wet and dry,
Denying unto none its radiance.

When banishing the clouds from circling heaven.
But giving all its justice and its bounty,

Its hue and scent, its lustrous pearls and waters,
Obscuring unto none its light and height.

But joying hearts and simply shining on.

The king of kings by justice, policy,

And Grace took all the world beneath his wings ;
Both war and bounty were mere play to him,

And thus it was that he attained his greatness.
Confronted by the elephant and hon
He ne’er deferred the combat for a day.

And when a foe was instant to appear
In helm and mail before the host for fight,

Him would they slaughter or in scorn would fiing
Bound in the dungeons of the conquering king.


254


THE SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI


§ 12


How N^Mrwdn took divers Strongholds in his
March to


He marched upon this wise until he reached
A busy city which was named Shurab,

Wherein Gushtasp dwelt when he went to Rtim.^

The Shah beheld it rising in the air,

Fulfilled with men and goods, with harp and song,
With stone-foundations springing from the deep,

And battlements up-builded to the clouds.

The troops beleaguered it but saw no means
Of access to the gate. The Sh&h set up
The catapults on all four sides, and then
The ramparts of the Christian crumbled down.

From every quarter came the breath of doom ;

Men saw no place of refuge or escape.

And when the shining sun set in the sky
The castle-waUs were level with the plain.

The shouts of cavaliers, the dust of troops.

And fume of fire ascended to the moon.

The strong-hold was all trunkless heads and feet.
Elsewhere were headless trunks. The cries for quarter,
And women’s shrieks, rose o’er the drummers’ din.

The magnates eminent for wealth or valour
They bound and laid upon the elephants.

While wails of woe and cries for quarter rose.

The Sh4h spared none in battle-tide, he spared not
His treasures and dlnto in banquet-time.

He marched thence till another hold appeared,
Wherein were Caesar’s treasures, and it had
A mighty man for castellan. ’Twas called
Ar^yish-i-Rum tiU that Nushirw&n
C. 1641 Hi-ended it. The watchful Sh^h surveyed

1 See Vol. iv. p. 325 .


NtSHIRWAN


255


That hold, unentered yet by hostile troops,

And bade shoot showers of arrows till the air
Was thick with them as ’tis with hail in spring.
The chieftains bravely stormed the walls and flung
rire on the city and the citadel,

Wherein no living thing remained alive
Or, in the country round, a thorn or briar.

The Shih gave Csesar’s treasures up to spoil.

And all the crowns and purses to his troops.

He brought the Day of Doom upon that city,

And all folk fled. Men, women, children, wailed
Till old and young assembling came before
The noble Sh^h and cried aloud for succour : —
The ministers, the treasurers, and treasure,

Are thine, and thine the gain and toil in Rum ;

We only beg of thee to spare our lives,

We bondslaves of the Glory of thy crown.’’

The Sh4h bade cease the slaughtering, and he
Provided for these people bounteously.


§ 13

The Battle of N'l^hirwdn with Farfdriy^ts, the Leader of Goesafs
Host, the Victory of N'itAhirwdn, and his Capture of KdK-
niyiis and Antdkiya

Departing thence the Sh§;h led on his troops.

And loft Ar4yish-i-Rum in his rear.

One cam© and told him : “ Caesar hath dispatched
A host and lo ! it draweth nigh.”

On hearing

Of that groat power’s approach — all spears and mail —
The Sh^h proclaimed the tidings to the troops
That all thehost might bo prepared. They marched
As ’twore an iron mountain ; battle-cries


2 s 6 the SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSI

Ascended and the blast of clarions.

A courier with tidings from the scouts
Appeared before the monarch of the world.

And told him : “ Caesar hath dispatched an army
Formed of his famous men and warriors.

Their leader is a mighty paladin,

Whose name in Ruman is Farfuriyus —

A haughty cavalier with trump and drum —

And all his troops long for the fight like wolves.”

While thus he spake before the watchful Sh^h
The dust-clouds of the advancing host appeared.

He smiled and answered thus the messenger : —

The thing is not unknown to us, for we
Already have prepared the host for battle :

Such thoughts ne’er have been absent from our minds.”

Then with his lips afoam he gave command
That all the army should draw up in line.

0. 1642 So host with host confronted, and the air
Was hindered in its passage by the dust.

It was a glorious gathering of troops,

Proud chiefs and wielders of the scimitar,

All with loins tightly ghded for the fray —

The great, the sages, and the seed of khigs.

The swords of all were reeking with fresh blood,

And trenchant of the clouds. The enemy

Had no more respite than the quarry hath

From leopard sprmging. Ruman slain lay heaped

On all sides while the wounded turned from fight.

Farfuriyus himself thus stricken fled

The field with banner rent and drums o’ert brown.

The horsemen of fr 4 n like pards, when they
Clutch on the waste the mountain -sheep, pursued
The Rumans, sweeping them from dale and desert..

The ShAh marched on again, equipped for war,

The soldiers all with mace and sword in hand.

He led his army on along a plain


NJJSHIRWAN


257


Until another lofty hold appeared —

A citadel with soldiers, trump, and drum,

And hight K 41 iniyus. The eagle saw not
Its battlements, a full moat girdled it.

And all around it stretched a fair domain
Of halls and gardens, grounds and palaces.

’Twas strongly garrisoned by Ruman troops —

All famous men and eager for the fight.

The Shah encamped his powers two leagues aw’ay,

Earth blackened with the dust-clouds of the host,

And war-cries went up from Kaliniyus —

A clamour that bedwarfed the tymbals’ din.

The Sh^h marked well that city whereunto
His troops for ever thronged increasingly ;

They battled at the gates and showered down
Their shafts and hand-grenades, and when bright Sol
'Gan pale, and half revolving heaven was dark,

No portion of the castle-walls remained :

That city was all level with the ground.

Then from the Shah's gate proclamation issued : —

Ye famous men of the Iranian host 1
Come from the city, every man, and pass
The night upon the plain. If any cry
. Shall rise from women and from aged folk,^

Or any sound of pillage, rioting, •

And combating, shall reach mine ears at night,

So that but one complain of evil usage.

As soon as such appealeth ye shall see
The skin of the offender stuffed with hay." ^

When Sol was stretching out its hand from Cancer,

Had put away fatigue and banished sleep,

The tymbals sounded at the monarch's gate,

Those that were highest in esteem sot forth,

And from that hold and seat the men aiad women 0. 1643
Assembled at the gate of Nushirwan :

^ Reading with P. ® Cf. Vol. vi. p. 1^50,

VOL. VII. R


258 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSt

No cavalier of all our warriors
Is left/’ they said, or magnate in this city ;

They all, though guiltless, have been slain or wounded,
And it is time for pardon from the Sh&h,

Because God’s justice never will approve
That women, babes, and elders should be captive.

The citadel and city’s walls are such

That henceforth thou wilt see but thorn-brakes here.

Since Csesar was the offender how are we —

The people of Kaliniyus — to blame 1 ”

The Sh4h gave pardon to those Humans : both
The guilty and the innocent escaped.

He left with them an ample store of wealth.

And marched his army with all speed away ;

But all the folk that he saw fit for arms
They bound on elephants and carried off.

Then news to Ant^ya came : “ The Sh4h
Is on his way with elephants and troops.”

Now at that city was a boundless host
Of Human warriors and mighty men.

The Sh^ accorded to them three days’ grace
That he might war not on them wrongfully,

But on the fourth his host came mountain-like —

The warriors of Iran in close array —

"While for the sake of women, children, land,

And wealth the cavaliers of Hum advanced.

They fought three mighty battles in three days.

But on the fourth day when the sun arose
The marches of that prosperous land lay open,

The Iranians saw no Hhman cavaliers,

The soldiers took possession of the place,

And filled it till there was no room to stand.

The great men that had thrones and coronets,

And those that were the treasurers of Caesar,

Gave up the treasure to the Sh^h — ^the world-lord —
The treasure unto him that bare the toil.


I^tSHiRWJN 259

The franiaiis set in bonds on elephants
All that were warriors among that folk.

The Shah dispatched to Madd’in the captives.

And all the wealth of Caesar, then went round
The city and beheld a country-side
More brilliant than the orbed moon. The gardens,
The parks, and streams, restored old age to freshness
And youth. The long addressed his nobles thus ; —
Can this be Ant^kiya or young spring ?

Whoe’er hath seen not jocund Paradise
Whereof the soil is musk, the bricks are gold,

Whose waters are rose-water and trees jewels,

Whose country is the sky, whose heaven the sun.
Should look on this fresh land, and may it be —

This land of Bum — in full prosperity.”


§14

How NusMrwdn built the City of Zih-i-Khusrau in the Likeness
of Antdkiya and settled the R'Ctman Captives therein

Then Nushirwan gave orders to construct C. 1644

A city having palaces and streams,

Like Antaldya, radiant as a lamp —

All rosaries and mansions, parks and gardens,

The great men, bright of heart and happy, called it
Zib-i-Khusrau.^ ’Twas like the jocund spring —

A paradise all colour, scent, and beauty.

The captives taken in the towns of Rum,

Whose hands and feet were galled with heavy bonds.

Were set at large by Nhshirwan’s command,

And sent to dwell in joy in that new city.

He said : We have erected this new seat —

All gardens, rosaries, and palaces —

1 The Ornament of Khusrau.


26 o the SHAhNAMA of FIRDAUSI

That each might have a dwelling to his mind
And worthy of his name.’’

He gave to each

Goods, and the earth was decked like Paradise.

At sight of aU the mansions, streets, and marts
Thou wouldst have said : “ Each space is occupied.”
A clamorous cordwainer came and said : —

0 unjust Shah ! there was a mulberry
Within my dwelling at Kaliniyus
Before my courtyard ; from Zib-i-Khusrau
I have not any such advantages,

Eor there is no such tree before my door.”

So Nushfrwan bade men to plant green trees
Before the door of that misfortuned one.

The Sh^h then chose a Christian unto whom
He gave authority, wealth, troops, and said : —

" Zib-i-Khusrau is thine and thine the charge
Of all the stranger-folk and their new home.

Be like a tree that beareth fruit and be
The city’s sire at whiles, at whiles its son.

Be bountiful and beautify the place,

Not covetous, and keep the mean in aU.”

The Shah marched forth from Ant^kiya, leaving
A Christian and experienced man in charge.

Farfuriyus thereafter brought to Csesar
Intelligence about Kaliniyus,

And said to him : “ The experienced NushirwS-n
Cam© in his state with troops and elephants.

So naighty is his host that seas and mountains
Are aU confounded by the horses’ dust.”

Then Csesar writhed for that which he had spoken,
And called to him his prudent chiefs. His heart
Was full of fear because of Nushirw^ ;

All day and through three watches of the night
He canvassed what to do. Thus spake a priest : —

C. 1645 Thou’rt ill-advised because thou hast not power


NtfSHlRWAN 2ti

To fight with Nushirwan. The foe will raise
The dust from this fair realm and bring to naught
The achievements of the Caesars. In debate
The feeble-tongued endangereth the state.”


§15

How Gmar wrote to N'((,shirwan and sent Tribute

Now Caesar heard this and his heart was troubled,

His counsels were overcast by Nushirwan.

He chose of the philosophers of Rum
From regions scathless of the enemy,

A man of eloquence and understanding,

While of the priests three score unsmirched in soul
And wisdom volunteered. He sent tho Shah
An embassage. Those magnates took Ibcir way.
Their leader was that man of wits, Mihras —

A warrior old in wdsdom, young in years.

There went before them treasures of all kinds
Past reckoning, while Caesar, who repented
His language in the past, dispatched no stint
Of adulation, counsels, and fair words,

With heavy tribute and with hostages
Both of his own and of his nobles’ kin.

Mihras, when ho had come to Nushirwan,

Pronounced his praises in the Rtiman tongue,

And thou liadst said : '' So shrewd and just is he,

Ho will produce stars from his sleeves ! ” ’Twas thus
He spake to Nushirwan : Set not, 0 Idng !

Such value on tho world. Thou art in Rum
Now and fr4n is void ; it hath not worth
Or Glory. So, when Caesar is away
From R*um, this country valueth not one gnat.

The worth deriveth wholly from the man ;

When he is lost the value is lost too.


262 THE SHAHNAma OF FIRDAUSI

If this commotion be but for wealth’s sake —

That miner of wisdom and contentment —

Lo ! I have brought thee all the wealth of Rum,

For more than land and treasure is a soul
Serene.’'

The king’s heart, when he heard this, grew
As jocund as a garden in the sprmg,

And he accepted what the envoy brought —

The purses of gold coin, and hostages —

Gave commendations to the ambassadors,

Enlarging on the value of the gifts,

And said : ‘‘0 clear in wisdom ! any one
Whom wisdom feedeth is a mighty man.

If all the soil of Rum were turned to gold
Thou wouldst outvalue sbilL that noble land.”

They set as tribute on those fields and fells
A hundred ox-hides brimming with dinars
0. 1646 To be dispatched by Caesar to the king
Each year with other gifts and offerings.

His troops were not to ocupy Yaman,

Or to require aught of the people there.

Therewith was heard the blare of trump and clash
Of brazen cymbals, and the prudent world-lord
Led back his host. He went his way to Sh 4 m,

And tarried there awhile. He brought with him'

So many implements of war and troops.

So many captives, purses, crowns, and thrones,

That earth’s back bent beneath the elephants,

And purses full of drachms. When he resolved
To quit that land he set in charge thereof
Shirwi, son of Bahram, and said : ” Demand
The tribute due from Csesar and accord not
Remission for a month or day,”

Shirwi,

Who kissed the ground, blessed and addressed the
Shah


NI/SHIRWAN 263

“ Mayst thou be happy and victorious,

And may the royal Tree ne’er pale its leaves.”

When at the monarch’s portal had begun
The drum-roll flag and troops fared toward Arman.


§ 16

The Birth 0/ N'&shzddj the Son of N'OMrwdn^ by a
Woman who was a Christian

Like to the sun was Ntishirwan, the king —

The world’s hope and its fear. Just as above
Sol speedeth on its pathway carrying

A sword in this hand and in that hand love,

Is all relentless in its hour of rage,

But in its day of ruth all clemency,

So was this Sh^h of royal lineage,

Who had adorned the world with equity.

Know this — ^ui my regard the monarch’s state
And subject’s, if they holy be and pure,

Requireth of necessity a mate,

Dress, provand, and a privacy secure ;

While if the wife be pious and discreet

A heaped-up treasure will she prove, and all
The more if looks musk-scented to her feet
Descend, and she be more than common tall,

Wise, learned, well coimselled, chaste, and can express
Herseh in fair discourse with gentleness.

The noble Shdh possessed a wife like this,

In height a cypress and in looks a moon,

This, Moon -face was a Christian, and her beauty
Engrossed the tongues of aU. She bare a babe
Sun-faced, out-shining Venus in the sky.

The noble mother called the child Ndshzdd,

And no fierce blast assailed that lovely boy.


264 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

r. 1647 He grew up as he were a straight -stemmed cypress —
A youth of parts, the glory of the realm.

He knew of Hell, the path to Paradise,

Of Christ, of Esdras, and Zarduhsht, but he.
Believing not the Zandavasta, bathed
His visage in the fount of Christ, preferring
His mother’s to his father’s Faith : the age
Was lost in wonderment at him. The king
Was grievously concerned about his son,

Because that Rose bare only fruit of thorns.

They shut the portal of Nushzad’s fair palace.

And there imprisoned him. His prison-house
Was at Guild -i-Shapur ^ far from his home
And father. Many criminals and captives
Were with him in that city and in ward.

Now when the Shah was on his way from Rum
The turmoil and the journey tried him sorely ;

So weak was he that he could hold no court.

One bare the tidings to Nushz^d and told him : —

“ The Glory of the empire, is bedimmed ;

The watchful world-lord Nushirwdn is dead,
Bequeathing to another earth and time.”

His father’s death rejoiced Nushzad. Oh ! may
No pleasure and enjoyment e’er be his !

He that doth joy when just kings pass away
Must have a gloomy temper. As to this

A famous ancient said : ” If thou art glad
At my decease see that thou never die.”

From death thou know’st no succour can be had,
The past is one here with futurity ;

But never death will wreck the soul of one
Whose toil hath favour in the sight of God.

Call we a reprobate and fool that son
Who in his father’s footsteps hath not trod.

Wet be the seed of colocynth or dry

^ Kand-i-ShdpCiT in the text. For this city seo p. 219.


Nt^SH^RWJN 26 s

It will not savour musk, then where the need
That it should change from what should spring
thereby

By nature if the gardener sow its seed ?

When any plant is predisposed to earth.

It parteih with the sunshine and pure air,

Therefrom no foliage or fruit hath birth.

It liveth for the earth and dieth there.


§ 17

The Siohness of N'^shirwan and the Sedition of N^shzad

I have made mention of Ndshzad. Take hoed
That thou quit not the path of equity.

If heaven possessed a father then indeed
He would resemble Nushirwan, so why
Should his own son quit the paternal way.

And seek the royal dignity and throne ?

Accord thine ear to all that I shall say, 0. 1648

And I will keep back nothing, 0 my son !

I have well ordered that I did receive
From rustic bard, and by that token too
Am fain some memory of myself to leave,

So be the honour unto whom ’tis due.

This is my wish that after I am dead
My fame as poet evermore shall last.

On this wise spake a Persian bard whose head
A hundred years and twenty had overpast : —

“ He that is hostile to the world’s great king
Not of man’s stock but Ahriman’s must be.”

Now of Nushzid they tell that very thing
As handed down by ancient legendry,

Whenas the son of NushlrwS^n had heard : —

'‘The throne of that right royal Tree is void,”


266 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

He oped his palace-door, and from all quarters
Troops gathered unto him — aU that had ’scaped
From wisdom’s bonds and had been put in ward
By Nushlrwto. Nushzdd unchained the mad,

And all the city was in consternation ;

But he assembled of the citizens

All that were Christians, whether priests or prelate

ALSsembled many haughty cavaliers

And swordsmen, while his mother gave him wealth —

The treasures lavished on her by the Shah.

There gathered to him thirty thousand men,

All famous and prepared to fight. He took
The cities round ; his fame was noised abroad.

He wrote a letter to his kinsman ^ Caesar,

Made known his dark designs, and said : Airise
0 king ! for thou art lord, friend, of one Faith
With me, and Csesar. As ’twere Rum, Iran,

Its worship and its settlements, are thine,

My father hath been sick and now is dead,

His wakeful fortune hath boon overthrown.”

The tidings reached the towns of Mada’m
Of what the son of Nushirwan had done.

Whereat the warden of that march dispatched

To Nushirw&n a cavalier to whom

He told what he had heard and what was secret.

The messenger went like a rapid stream,

And came to Nushirwan to whom he gave
The letter, telling all that he had heard.

And of the overt actions of Nushz^.

The Sh^h, when he had listened and had read
The letter, grieved thereat and was confounded,

Held session with the noble archimages.

Debating much with them in privacy,

And, when the consultation reached its end
In resolution, bade a scribe attend.

1 In the Faith. Cf. p. 269.


NtrSHiRWJN


267


§18

The Letter of N4sMrwdn to Ram Barzin, the Warden of the
March of MaddSn, respecting the Taking of Nushzdd

The Shah, both seared and sore, with frowning face C. 16^19
And sighing lips, then had this letter written
Wherein he first of all gave praise to Him,

Who fashioned the heavens, time, and earth,

The Artificer of Sun and Moon and Saturn,

The Uluminer of Grace, of crown, and throne ; —

“ From worthless stubble up to elephant
And lion, from the dust on emmet’s foot
Up to the Nile, though men shall roam from earth
To turning heaven they roam beneath God’s sway.

No limit can be seen to His behest,

And none will rob Him of the sovereignty.

Of that unpleasing letter have I heard,

Sent by that most injurious son of mine.

And of the criminals who brake from ward,

And are assembled now about Nushz^.

’Twere better one should quit the world than sec
A day like this, for all are born to die ;

First Nushirwdn and then Nushzad must go.

From gnat and ant e’en to rhinoceros,

And elephant, none can escape the claws
And beak of death. If earth revealed its secrets.

Displaying everything from first to last,

Its bosom would be found fulfilled with kings.

Its breast with blood of cavaliers, its skirts
With men of lore, the creases of its robe
With fair-cheeked dames. Then wherefore set a crown
Or helmet on thy head when death’s plumed shaft
WiU pierce them both '? No one rejoiceth much
At death of son, albeit all must die ;

But as for those consorting with Nushzad,


268 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Who reckon on the death of Nushirwan,

The death of them would be a cause for joy
If but Nushzd.d should "scape the evil day.

Moreover none but misbegotten knaves
Would count upon the death of righteous Sh^s.
Now though Nushzad hath turned his head from us,
In that the Div thus hath conspired with him,

His purpose is not firm in this regard ;

He was inflamed when he obtained his wish.

He could not have the post as well as we,

And thus was rumed by a false report,

For had the crown been void of Nushirwan
Nushzad had been the glory of the realm.

Still such an act is worthy of his Faith,

And suited to an evil soul like his.

C. 1650 I am not moved or fearful in this matter.

In that our son’s rehgion is impure :

Moreover for the wealth that he hath wrecked.

That matter weigheth nothing on my heart ;

While as for all that have combined with him.

And banished from their hearts their awe of us —
The ill-doers, the malignant, and base-bom,
Unworthy to be subjects to myself —

We look upon them also with contempt :

Let not their doings make thy heart afraid.

My fear is of the Master of the world.

Who is in wisdom wiser than the wise.

We must not grow unthankful in our souls
To God who is omniscient in good.

Me hath He given triumph and success,

Grace and the diadom of king of kings.

And had my praise been worthy of His gifts
It would have bettered my prosperity.

My son hath found a home and rest elsewhere ;

No single drop of him came from my loins.

With his awakening my foe arrived.


269


NJJSHIRWAJSf

And, I do fear me, toil. StiU if the World-lord
Hath no occasion to be wroth with me
I reck not of such things. In my regard
All they that are confederate with my son
Are vile and despicable. ’Tis his letter
That, if it bringeth Caesar, will befoul
My stream. The twain must be akin, methinketh,
Since they are one in Faith and policy.

The man that quitteth his forefathers’ Faith
Is one whose wits are much to seek. That son
Is best who is of one Faith, not at war,

With his own sire. Albeit though that insensate
Turn from the right no lip must ope to curse him.
To curse him is in essence to curse us,

Because he is of our own flesh and blood.

Array the host, take order for the war.

But act with moderation and hold back,

While if the matter cometh to a pass.

And if he offer battle, be not fierce.

To capture him is better than to slay :

Perchance he will turn back from evil doing,

And then the stream that reared that noble Cypress
Must come not on it in a bath of dust ;

But if he hold his honoured person cheaply,

If that taU Cypress shall demean itself,

And if he spurn the pillow of delight,

Withhold not thou the mace and scimitar.

A man of rank indulging base desires
Can nofc be freed from that propensity.

And such a high-bom man is base indeed
When he doth fight the monarch of the world.

Fear not to slay him if he would pour out
His own head’s blood upon the dust. He hasteth
To give his faith to Caesar and put off
Allegiance to our crown, whereby his greatness
Hath grown vile, wretched, and calamitous.


0. 1651


370


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSl


And he hath chosen ruin from high heaven.

In this regard said Mihr-i-Nush — a sage

Who worshipped God and wore the wooUen vest : —

‘ The man that joyeth in a father’s death,

May his be neither happiness nor breath.’

Seek not for light from darkness, else wilt thou
But mingle fire and water in the stream.

Man’s only rest is when his toil is done :

It is fate’s law and we must acquiesce.

Be not in friendship with the turning sky,

For whiles thou art the kernel, whiles the shell.

Why seek from its pomegranate hue and scent,

For it will rob thee of them both at sight ?

Whene’er the turning sky exalteth thee,

Then is thy time for travail, fear, and loss.

As for the soldiers that are with Nushzad,

And err so greatly from the path of duty,

Know that they are but wind and sport to us,

The mockery of the wise, no mystery.

As for the Christians that are in his host.

And have revolted for religion’s sake.

The regimen of Christ is such that they
Are frighted if one lifteth up one’s voice, ^

Desert his precepts and his path, and end
By turning into foemen of the Cross.

As for the other folk — the common herd,

Ll-taught, ill-minded, and adventurous —

They wiU not fright the heart of any man :

Their counsel and a breath of air are one.

Now if Nushzdd be taken in the fight,

Discourse not with him touching these affairs ;

His person must not suffer injury,

His raiment must not show the rents of blows.

Because his women -foll^ wiU slay themselves.

His palace will afford the best of prisons
^ The Persian -worcl for a Christian also means a coward. Of. p, 210.


NfJSHIRWjN


271


Both for himself and those that follow him.

Bar not to him the portal of my treasures.

Albeit one so dear hath grown so vile,

And as for raiment, victuals, tapestries,

And carpets there must be no stint at all.

For he is fitted but for things like these.

As for those marchlords of the Iranians —

Those that have girded up their loins with him —

When thou hast conquered do not hesitate,

But cleave them through the middle with the sword,

For all that are the great king’s enemies
Thou rightly flingest to the crocodiles.

Besides these, all that are opposed to me
At heart — ^the seed of wicked Ahriman —

Who have forgotten all our benefits,

Thou now wilt test in dealing with Nushzad.

AH acted as our watchmen heretofore, ^^52

And were in terror of our punishments.

For those on-lookers who have vifified,

And wagged their tongues against, Nushzad, Imow thou
That they have in especial cursed ourselves,

Preparing trouble in mine evil day.

Do not thou too as they ; thus foemen speak.

Unworthy as he is he is mine own,

Such is the truthful witness of my heart.

The tongue of each man that hath spoken ill.

Or acted with injustice toward him, brand
Bi presence of the folk. May such an one
Have neither tongue nor mouth. As for the man
That warreth to o’erthrow the Sh4h, employing
Guile, enmity, hostility, and faith
In Ahriman, such, as the famed Sh4h’s foe,

Must not be suffered in the realm.”

They set

The Shah’s own seal upon the letter. Then
The messenger departed with all speed,


272 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

And, when to Ram Barzin lie made his way,

Told all that he had heard the great king say.

§ 19

How Ram Barzin fought with N'iishzdd, and how N'dshzdd
was slain

That done, he gave to Ram Barzin the letter
With its behests for dealing with Nhshz^d,

To levy troops, make war, and banish ruth.

When the old man had read it, and had heard
The messenger at large, the din of tymbals
Arose at cock-crow at the palace-portal,

A mighty host marched forth from Mada’in,

And Ram Barzin went swiftly to the war.

News reached NushzM who called and paid his host,
While all the Christians and grandees of Rum
That dwelt along the march of that fair land
Assembled with Shamm^ as general :

Those warriors’ hands all had been bathed in blood.

A shout rose from the portal of Nushzad,

And then the army, like a wind-tossed sea,

Moved from the city out upon the plain,

Their heads all war, their hearts revenge and venom.
When Ram Barzin beheld that army’s dust
He blew the trumpets and arrayed the host.

The dust of cavaliers, the charge of chieftains,

The brandishing of mighty maces, rent
The hearts of flints ; none saw the bright sun’s face. >
0. 1653 Then in the centre of the host Nushzad

Set on his head a Ruman helm. His host
Was full of Christian clericals from Rum ;

The soil was hidden by their horses’ hoofs.

Thou wouldst have said : Earth soetheth, and tho air
Is shrieking over it.”


A warrior,


nushirwJn


273


Beclad in mail and hight Piruz the old.

Came boldly forth and cried : ‘‘0 famed Nushzad !
Who wantonly hath turned thy head from right ?
Contend not with the army of the king
Because thou wilt repent thee of this strife.

Thou hast abjured the Faith of Gaiumart,

The pathway of Hushang and Tahmuras.

The arch-deceiver Christ was put to death
Because he had renounced the Faith of God ;

So choose not him, of all that founded Faiths,

Who so mistook the aspect of his work,

For if the Grace of God had shone in him
How could the Jews have gained the upper hand ?
Heard hast thou what thy sire, that noble man,

The world-lord, did to Caesar and to Bum,

Yet now thou wouldst contend with him and raise
Thy head to heaven ! For all thy mo on -like mien,
Thy Grace and stature, neck, limbs, hands, and
mace,

I see no wisdom with thee anywhere.

Such recklessness possesseth thy dark soul !

Woe for this head of thine, crown, name, and birth,
Which now thou wouldst abandon to the blast !

For son to seek his living father’s throne.

How should this be ? ’Tis neither use nor right.

To seek the crown, if he be dead, is well ;

To seek to fight him now is criminal.

Save thou be snorting elephant or lion

Thou canst not match Sh4h Nushirwin, and though

I have not seen, 0 prince ! a bridle-hand

Like thine limned in the palace of the Sh^s,

Such foot and stirrups, such a breast and neck,

Such ardour in the fight and such a macc,

Though painter never looked on such a picture.

Or any age on such a prince, yet bum not
The soul of Nushirw&n by childishnese.


274 the SHAhnAmA op FIRDAUSt

Or stultify the world-iHuming crown,

For hostile howsoe’er a son may be
His father will lament when he is slain.

Dismount, ask quarter of the Sh§h, and fling
This mace and Euman helmet to the ground ;

Then if far hence some chiUmg blast should make
The dark dust settle on thy countenance,

The Shah’s heart would consume for thee, the sun
Weep o’er thy face. Sow not throughout the world
The seed of enmity, for hastiness
Becometh not a prince. If thou dost swerve
From mine advice and trust to violence.

And to thy might, the counsel of Piruz
C. 1654 Oft will recur to thee, and then the words
Of thine ill counsellors will seem but wind.”

Nushzad made answer : ” 0 wind-pated dotard !
Ask not my troops — exalted warriors —

Or me — ^the Shah’s son — to cry out for quarter.

The Faith of Nushirwan is naught to me ;

My heart incUneth to my mother — ^her
Whose constant practice is the Faith of Christ.

I will not quit her Grace and Faith. Although
Its Founder — Christ — was slain, the World-lord’s
Grace

Hath not forsaken Him. That Holy One
Hath passed from this earth back to holy God,

Such was His aspiration when on earth.

I may bo slain but shall not fear to die,

For to that bane there is no antidote.”

He answered thus the old Phtiz and veiled
Air’s face with shafts. The warriors of the host
Advanced, the battle-cry and clarion’s blare
Went up, Nushzad, the chief, spurred on like fire,
Came as it wore Azargashasp, and brake
The left wing of the army of the Shah,

Where none remained to fight with him. He slow


NJJSittRWJN 275

Full many a lion of the host, whereat,

Grown wrathful, Ram Barzin bade shower arrows,

And fill the air as 'twere with hail in spring,

The din of battle went up on both sides
From all the valiant soldiers there engaged,

Nushzad was wounded in the mellay. Oft
He called to mind the counsel of Piruz,

And reached in pain the centre of the host,

Pierced by a shaft and pale with agony.

Thus said he to the warriors of Rum : —

To fight one’s sire is wretched, vile, accursed ! ”

Bewailing and lamenting thus he summoned
A bishop and confessed his heart’s desires.

He said : The evil fortune caused by me
Hath fallen rigorously upon myself.

Now, since my head will pass beneath the dust,

Dispatch a horseman to my mother. Say
To her ; ‘ Ndshzad hath left this world. For him
The days of right and wrong are at an end.

I prithee be not grieved at heart for me ;

Such is the fashion of this Waysido Inn !

Since I have been allotted this dark day

How could my heart be glad and brighten earth ?

All living creatures are but bom to die ;

Grieve not for me, for thou art mortal too.

’Tis not my slaying that confoundeth me.

But worse— my sire’s displeasure. Let me have
No mausoleum, throne, or stately rites,

But bury me with Christian burial.

I need no camphor, musk, or spicery,

For arrow-stricken I depart the world.’ ”

He spake and shut his lips. Thus passed Niishz&d, C. 1655
That no bio. Lion “heart. Now when his troops
Heard of his death they fled the battlefield.

The fr^nian leader, hearing that the prince
Was slain, went weeping to his couch in haste.


276 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The troops ceased slaying on the field of fight,

And neither joyed nor spoiled. They saw the prince
Slain and overthrown with ignominy, his head
Upon a Ruman bishop’s breast : the field
Was filled with wailing for him. Ram Barzin
Was troubled to the heart and asked the prelate : —
What know’st thou of the prince’s dying wishes ?
Except his mother,” thus the bishop answered,

“ None must behold his head exposed. He, seeing
That he was wounded by a shaft, forbade
All obsequies and musk and spicery,

Or coronet, brocade of Rum, and throne,

Perceiving his to be the slave’s dark lot.

His mother now will shroud him and provide
A tomb and winding-sheet with Christian rites,

While his condition now is that of Christ’s,

Although he did not die upon the Cross.”

Of all the Christians that were in the land
There was not one but had his visage tom.

A cry rose from the country. Men and women
Assembled. From the plain they raised the corpse
Of that young, gallant prince — ^the Heart and Eyes
Of Nushfrwan, the Shd-h — ^upon a bier,

Transporting it three leagues by hand, then set it
Upon two mules which bare it to his mother.

Now when she was aware of what had chanced
Her head and crown descended to the dust.

She came forth to the street unveiled. A crowd
Assembled round her in the market-place.

They set a camp-enclosure round about,

And all the folk cast dust upon their heads.

They laid him in the earth. He passed. He came
From wind and suddenly to wind returned.
,Gund-i-Sh^ptir ^ was all in tears, consumed
With sorrow for the anguish of the Sh4h.

Why writhe so madly in the bonds of greed 1
1 Soe p, 219.


NtSHtRWJN


^11


Thou know’st that here thou canst not long remain .
Seek to escape, give not the world such heed.

Smell not its rose so fondly, ’tis but bane.

From Faith and righteousness turn not thy head,

Or else the wrath of God will chasten thee ;

A father’s wrath,” a pious Arab said,

” Will bring upon thy life calamity.”

When sire shall be displeased with son in aught
Know that in seed and fruit that son is bad.

Oh ! never make thy father’s soul distraught
Whatever trouble thou from him hast had.

When thou’rt secure refrain thy heart from woe.

Nor on thy heart the fire of trouble fling,

Let not thy passions master wisdom so,

But act with seemliness in everything.^

Now be the world’s king happy all his days,

And may he bear these words of mine in mind.
Mahmud, the world-lord, who ensueth praise,

A niche therefor in every heart wall find.

Love ever shineth from his Grace divine,

His crown’s top is the pillar of the sky.

Now ask, if cup thou hast, for amber wine,

And hold not quaffing acting sinfully.

Seek joy and mirth but never be bemused,

Npr think that talk — ^wise talk — ^should be abused,

^ Four couplets omitted.


C. 1656


PART II

THE STORY OF BIJZURJMIHR AND OF THE
SEVEN BANQUETS OF NtiSHIRWAN

ARGUMENT

The Shah, being diatiiheted by a dream, sends emissaries through
the empire to find an interpreter. One is discovered at Marv in the
person of Biizurjmihr, then a youth, who having been brought
before the Shdh interprets the dream and is advanced to great
honour. The Shah subsequently gives a series of entertainments
at which discussions on wisdom and morals are substituted for the
usual diversions of Oriental banquets, and Biizurjmihr again greatly
distinguishes himself.

NOTE

Persia, like other nations, has its Wisdom-literature. This com-
prises apologues, apothegms, proverbs, parables, the interpretation
of dreams and dark sentences, astrological forecasts, the solution of
problems, the supplying the correct answer to questions relating to
religion, morals, conduct, and expediency, and longer discourses
thereon, reflections on fate and fortune, on the uncertainty of all
terrestrial affairs, on the vanity of striving after wealth and fame,
and the importance of leaving behind one a good name after death.
All these forms of wisdom find expression in the Shahndma, and
the poet himself has been not backward in contributing his quota.
At the first available opportunity in his work he utters his Praise
of Wisdom” — the first created of God and His best gift to nian.’^
A collection of all the passages dealing with such themes and
subjects as are mentioned above, and including Firdausi’s own
reftections on such matters, as have occurred in the poem up to
this point, would amount to something considerable, but scattered
through a mass of narrative they are apt to be overlooked. In this
reign, however, we are confronted by formal collections of primitive
Persian Wisdom associated for the most part with the name of
Biizurjmihr but to some extent with other great officials and with


NtSHlRWAN


279


Ni'ishlrwdn himself. Firdausi availed himself of the opportunity of
the conjunction of the just Shdh with the wise counsellor to bring
together all that he could find in hia authorities and elsewhere on
some of the subjects mentioned at the beginning of this note. That
a large Pahlavi literature once existed on such matters, and arranged
sometimes in the form of question and answer, we know from what is
extant. Thus the sage in the “ Dhid-i Maln6g-1 Khiracf ” Opinions
of the Spirit of Wisdom’^) consults the Spirit of Wisdom on sixty-
two points and receives answers, e.g. “ The sage asked the spirit of
wisdom thus: ‘Which man is the mightier?’ . . . The spirit of
wisdom answered thus : ‘That man is the mightier who is able to
struggle with his own fiends; and, in particular, he who keeps
these five fiends far from his person, which are such as greediness,
wrath, lust, disgrace, and discontent.’ ” ^ The concluding question
is : “ Which is that good work which is greater and better than all
good works, and no trouble whatever is necessary for* its per-
formance ? ” The answer is : “ To be grateful in the world, and to
wish happiness for every one. This is greater and better than every
good work, and no commotion whatever is necessary for its per-
formance.” These questions and answers are quite of a piece with
the sages’ gnomes in the poem. There are also extant in Pahlavi
the “Pandndmak-i Vadsh6rg-Mitr6-i Bdkhtakun” or “Bakhtagan,”
-i.e. the “Book of Counsels of Biizurjmihr the son of Bakhtagan,”
the “ Characteristics of a Happy Man,” and other texts dealing with
similar subjects.® There can be no doubt but that Firdausi derived
the sententious, gnomic, parenetic, or whatever one chooses to call
them, portions of the Shahutmia, like the narrative, indirectly from
the Pahlavi. Four series of such passages occur in the present
reign. The first and longest is in the present Part. The second is
Bfizurjmihr’a Discourse on good deeds and works in Part III. The
third is Nfishirwiln's answers to the questions addressed to him by
the archmages. The fourth is the vivd voce examination that
Hurmuzd, Nixshirwdn’s son, has to pass at the hands of Buzurjmihr,
by order of the Shdh, before being nominated as his father’s suc-
cessor. One cannot help feeling a sneaking sympathy, reprehensible
though it be, with him when we find him signalising his advent to
the throne by making a clean sweep of his father’s ministers from
whose “wise ^aws and modern instances” doubtlessly he had
suffered much in the days of his youth. Nero acted similarly in
the case of Burrus and the younger Seneca. Of these four aeries
the third is concerned only partly with Wisdom-literature, some


1 WPT, iii. 81. ® /d. 118. ® GIP, ii. 113 aeg.


280 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAVst

of tlie questions dealing witli Nvialurwan’s own conduct on specified
occasions. Tliis and the fourth series will appear in Volume VIII.

Bfizurjmihr, the son of Bakhtagsln, of Marv, the man chiefly-
associated with the Wisdom-literature of the Shdhndma, is but a
semi-historical figure hardly mentioned by any historian before
Firdausi’s time with the exception of Mas’ddi who died when the
poet was a youth. Mas’iidi gives twelve maxims of Buzurjmihi-’s
and little else,^ so that practically we are dependent on what
Firdausi tells us, and this, with regard to the incidents recorded,
generally has something of the prseternatural about it. Bi\-
zurjmihi'’s career begins with a dream, and while sleeping on his
journey to the court a snake, which seems an Arab rather than a
Persian touch, comes and breathes over him. Moreover, his fall
from power is preceded by an omen and his restoration to favour
accomplished by another. We never hear of him as being
associated with any of Ni\sliirwan*s great achievements in adminis-
tration or in war. He is employed, it is' true, upon two missions,
once to expound a game — chess — and to propound another of his
own invention — nard — and once to negotiate in time of war a loan
for his master, which falls through owing to the fact that
Ni'ishirwiln has a higher conception of the dignity of the ofiice
of the scribe than Biiziirjmihr himself. His repute seems largely
due to Firdausi, who used him as a peg whereon to hang all the
old clothes of the Wisdom-literature that the poet was too con-
scientious to discard but could not dispose of elsewhere. There is,
however, a thanksgiving couplet to testify that he was not sorry
when the worst of his task was over.® If the number seven were
not such a favourite in Persian story one might suggest that the
Seven Banquets of Nfishliwdn originated in a perverted reminiscence
of the seven Greek philosophers who were entertained for a while
at his court when Justinian closed the schools of Athens,® and that
Bilzurjmihr himself is not much more than a native composite
reproduction of those hapless and disillusioned sages.

Mohl has some apposite remarks on the Wisdom-literature:

'' Ce qui a le plus contribue b, la gloire du rfegne de Nouachirwan,
c’est la reputation de son vizir, Buzurdjmihr, qui est en Orient
le repr^sentant de toute la sagesse humaine, comme Nouschirwan
lui-mime est la representation de la justice. On les a entourds
tons les deuxAhme aurdole de fables, et I’on a mis sous leurs noms
tous les contea qui se rattachent par leur nature b la renommde
particuli^re de chacun. On a done attribu^ {“i Buzurdjmihr tous


^ MM, ii. 206 vii. 164.


* See p. 379.


® GDF, V. 93.


NtrsHiRWlN 281

les traits de sagesae et toutes les moralites qu’on a pu trouver, et
rirdousi les rapporte au long les ima et lea autres. Quant aux
moralitds, le poete avait ^videmment d^coiivert quelques collections
oti on les avait reunies, et il nous en donne a trois reprises
differ entes, on des traductions completes, ou d’amples extraits.
Je crois que les originaux ont du etre composes en pelilewi, et
que ces sentences ont eprouve quelque dommage, soit.de la part
des copiates, soit de celle des tradueteurs, car les questions et
les reponses ne paraissent pas ton jours s’accorder suffisamraent.
De plus, les copistes du Liire des Rois on dvidemment et^ arrOtes
par le texte et ont fait pour le redresaer beaucoup d'effort mal-
heixreux. ... II est tres-probable encore que lea sentences que
nous trouvons dans les moralistes arabes et persana sont des restes
de cette antique sagesse des Perses. Les observations et les rbgles
qu’elles contiennent nous paraissent en g^n^ral bien simples et
parfois bien pueriles ; mais cela m6me parle pour leur origine
reculee. Elies ont dte une fois neiives et frappantes et ont dtd
transmises aux nouvelles generations, entourees du respect qu’-
inspire en toute chose la rciputation d’antiquitd. Oe n’eat certaine-
ment pas dans une monarchie comme celle de la Perse sous
Nousehirwan, que comniengait k tomber de vdtuate, qu'on avait
besoin d’inventer des moralites eldmentaires.” 1

On the same subject Ndldeke says : In the discourses on vdsdoin
and riddles which take up so much space in the story of the first
Chosrau (Kisr^) are probably to be found many duplicates of
whole passages j to settle these questions much material besides
the Shdhndma is available, but truly to investigate these wearying
fragments would require an unusual amount of patience I ^


§ I

How N'&sMt'wdn had a Dream and how Biizurjmihr interpreted it

Now in the tale of Btizurjmihr will we
Reveal a cheerier visage. Do not deem
That there is naught but foUy in a dream ;

Know that a dream may smack of prophecy,

And in especial when such visitings

> V, Vol. Vi. Preface. » NPS, 11, p. 20.


282


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


Impress the clear mind of a king of kings.

The stars with sky and moon hold conference,

Their words are whispered and dispersed through
space,

And clear souls dreaming see the future thence
As fire is inirrored in the water’s face.

One night Sh^h Ntishirwan, the wise and shrewd,

That lucid spirit, lay asleep and dreamed :

A royal tree grew up before the throne.

And joyed his heart. He called for harp and wine
And minstrelsy, but on his throne of peace
And joy there sat with him a sharp-toothed boar,

Sat ready-dight for revelry and claimed
To quaff the wine from Nushirwan’s own cup.

Sol rose in Taurus and the skylark’s note
Was heard on aU sides yet the monarch sat
Upon his throne in dudgeon at that dream.

They called the interpreter of dreams and held
A session of the magnates at the couit.

The Sh 4 h narrated to those archimages,

The counsellors, his dream. The .interpreter
0 . 1657 Made no reply, he knew of no such case,

And one that pleadeth ignorance is excused.

The Shah, thus left unanswered by the sages.

Was instant what to do in his concern,

And sent to every side an archimage.

One enterprising, shrewd of heart, and wise.

He made each take a purse and entertained
High hopes from their return . Li every purse
There were ten thousand drachms that every envoy
Might seek out some interpreter of dreams,

Some man of understanding, some adept,

To solve the world-king’s dream and to reveal
The mystery, and then bestow on such
A full purse and the royal compliments.^

1 Reading with P.


NtSHIRWJN 283

So to all parts a veteran archmage went —

A prudent cavalier and man of lore.

One of these chiefs — Azad Sarv ^ — came to Marv,

Went through the town and saw an archimage,

Wlio taught the Zandavasta to some youths

With harshness, anger, and raised voice. The tallest,

An earnest student of the Zandavasta,

One whom they used to title Buzurjmihr,

Was poring lovingly upon the roll.

Azid Sarv turned his rein, drew near, and sought
An explanation of the great king’s dream.

The scribe repHed : ’Tis not my business ;

The Zandavasta is my help to knowledge.

I teach these children but I do not dare
To breathe of aught beyond,” but Buzurjmihr
Said blushing to his master, having heard
The envoy’s words : “ This quarry is for me ;

It is my business to interpret dreams.”

His teacher bawled : Hast thou thy roll by heart
That thou shouldst thus exalt thy neck in pride.

And set up as a dream-interpreter ? ”

The envoy said to him : 0 learned man !

He may possess this skill ; abash him not.

This youth’s lot may be high through fortune’s teaching, *
Not thine,”

The master wroth with Buzurjmihr
Cried: '‘Tell then what thou knowest,” but he
answered : —

" I' will speak not till set before the Sh§;h.”

The envoy gave him money and a steed
With all things needful. They set off from Marv,

As pheasants pace ’ncath roses, and discoursed
About the Sh^h, his power, Grace, crown, and state 0.
Till at the hour for provand and repose
They reached a spot with water, lighted down
1 Of. Vol. V. p. 260.


284 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Beneatli a tree and, having eaten, rested.

While Buzurjmihr slept in the shade, his mantle
Drawn o’er his face, his noble way -mate saw,

Being stiU awake, a snake which drew away
The mantle from the sleeper, vehemently
Breathed over him from head to foot, then clomb
The tree. When that black snake had scaled the stem
The youth awoke, and when the serpent saw
The youth’s discomfiture it disappeared
Amid the dusky boughs. The envoy stood
Astound, invoking oft the name of God,

And thought : “ This wise youth will attain to great-
ness ! ”

They left that wood, pushed on, and reached the
Sh4h.

The envoy hurried first before the throne
Of Nushirwan, and said : “ Oh ! may thy fortune
Be ever young, 0 Sh^ih ! From court I went
To Marv and roamed about as pheasant doth
Within a rosary. Amid the sages
I found a wise youth and have brought him hither
In haste.”

He told withal what Buzurjmihr
Had said and of the portent of the snake.

The world-lord called and told the dream to him.

He heard, grew full of matter, and replied : —

“ There is a youth disguised in women’s garb
Within thy bower. Now put aU strangers foxth,

That none may know our purpose, and command
Thy ladies all to pass before thy presence
With measured tread, and then I will demand
Of that bold reprobate how came he thus
Within the Lion’s lair, for God will show
The secret fact to be as thou hast dreamed,”

The ShS-h put forth all strangers, closed the palace
Of king of kings, and bade the eunuchs bring,


NlJSHtRWjN 285

As swift as smoke, the Idols dwelling there.

They came, those Idols of his bower, in aU

Their perfumes, tints, and beauty. All these fair ones, C.

Exhaling jasmine, dainty, modest, passed

With leisured tread before him, but no man

Appeared among them, and like angry lion

Raged Nusharwan. Then said the interpreter : —

“ This should not be ; there is a youth among them.

Bid them to pass a second time all bare.

And probe their practice to the uttermost.”

The Sh^h spake thus ; '' Cause them to pass again,
And put away the veil of modesty.”

They passed the second time and, when all thought
The dream an empty one, a youth appeared
Of cypress-stature and of kingly looks,

But quaking like a willow and despairing
Of his dear life. Now in the great king’s bower
Were seventy girls, aU noble Cypresses,

And one of them, with cheeks of ivory,

Was daughter to the governor of Chach.

The youth with jasmine-face and musk-perfumed
Had been her love at home. He followed her
Where’er she went and served her like a slave.

The Sh4h inquired of her : “ Who is this man
So cherished by my slave, so favoured, young,

And daring, in the bower of Nushirwto ? ”

“ He is not,” said the girl, “ as old as I. ,

He is but young. One mother bare us both.

Our sire was different, our mother one.

There is naught wrong between us. He assumed
This kind of habit, for through modesty
He did not dare to look upon the Sh4h.

Oh ! make it not a pretext that my brother
From shamefastness before thee veiled his face.”

Tlie Sh&h said to the youth : Thou worthless dog !
Both race and family are smirched by thee.”


286


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


0. 1660


He frowned. He was amazed at that yomig pair,
Then bade in wrath the executioner : —

Let the dust hide them.”

So he haled them back
Behind the curtains of Shah Nhshirwan,

And hung them there — a warning to the rest.

The Sh^h gave that interpreter of dreams
Purse, steeds, and robes, and, wondering at his know-
ledge,

Observed his sayings. They inscribed his name
Among the counsellors, the archimages.

Thus prospered Buzurjmihr, and circling heaven
Showed him its face, while ever day by day
His fortune greatened, and the Shah’s heart joyed
In him exceedingly.

That heart was full

Of right ; the ShS/h was cultured, heart and brain.

He had residmg at his court archmages.

And sages understanding in aU knowledge.

Three score and ten — ^all men of eloquence —

Were lodged and entertained continually.

He used, when not engaged with justice, largess,
Festivity or war, to question them,

And deck his heart with knowledge. Buzurjmihr,
Though still a youth, was eloquent and shrewd
And fair to look upon, surpassing all
The famed archmages, readers of the stars,

And sages, in his knowledge, and became
Exalted over those philosophers.

None was so leam 6 d in astrology.

La leechcraft he excelled 1 and spake with ease
Of conduct, government, and policies.

^ Heading with P.


NtrSHtRWJN


287


§ 3

The first Banquet of N'oshirwdn to the Sages, and the
Counsels of B'taurjmihr

The board was spread one day. The Shah com-
manded : —

Bid the archmages come, the learned, the curious,

The eloquent, the prudent, and observing/’

The archmages vigilant of heart, the chiefs
That Avere accomphshed in all knowledge, came.

And, having feasted, called for wine and drank
Until their spirits rose, not bringing wisdom
To disrepute but to refresh their souls.

The prudent Sh^h said to those men of lore : —

Display the hidden knowledge that ye have ;

Let every one possessed of understanding
Within his heart hold forth and pleasure me/’

The wise men bold and mighty in discourse
Set loose their tongues in presence of the king,

Both young and old, as he required of them.

When Buzurjmihr had listened to thoir words.

And noted that the Shah hold knowledge dear,

He rose, did reverence, and said : Just judge !

Be earth the bondslave of thine ivory throne,

Heaven lustrous with the Glory of thy crown.

If now the Shah shall bid his slave unlock
His tongue then I will speak although unworthy,

And, in respect of knowledge, least of all.

No wise man can be blamed for liaving loosed 0. 1661

His tongue in presence of Shdh Ntishirwd/n.”

The monarch looked upon the sage and said : —

What reason can there bo for hiding Imowledge* ? ”

The youth forthwith displayed his mastery,

And spread light round him while his eloquence
And counsels fixed the archimages’ hearts.


288 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

He first displayed his gifts in praise of God,

And then proceeded : One whose mind is clear
Will utter much in little ; hasty folk
Are talkative and tedious. When fools’ talk
Endureth long the speaker is despised.

Seek worth and not addition, for the world
Is fleeting, and we are but sojourners.

Were our days to endure for evermore
The world would have too many candidates.

While here below humanity is best,

And knowledge in that view will not gainsay thee.
Our inward light we owe to righteousness,

And we must weep o’er darkness and chicane.

The heart of every one is slave to passion ,

Which differeth with each, and in the world
Each hath his humour ; it is well that thou
Conform therewith. All foremost in affairs
Still will be scheming and endeavouring more,

But sages, scholars, and the inly blest
Dwell here below and set thoir hearts above.

Vex not thyself about the unattained ;

’Tis toil of body and distress of soul.

He that is strong will act straightforwardly,

Bub lies and double-dealing come of weakness.

If thou lack knowledge silence is the jewel,

Whilo if thou art in love with thine o\vn knowledge
Debate will take that wisdom out of thee.

Rich is the man that hath not greed, and blest
Is he that hath not covetise for mate.

Humanity is brother unto wisdom.

Which is as ’twero the crown upon the soul.

To have a sage for mortal enemy
Is better for thee than a fool for friend.

The man content is rich ; he putteth greed
And care in bonds. Thou wilt give ear to sages
If thou art humble in thy wish to learn.


NtSHIRWAN 289

When one is masterful in counselling

Men falter not in action. Let the man

That hath forgot his knowledge hold his tongue.

When thou hast wealth in hand with gold and silver,

And steeds caparisoned, in daily cost C. 1663

Be neither close nor lavish. Choose the mean,

And let thine only guide be rectitude.

The wise man keepeth foes afar, and they
Become his servants. Know thou, he that doth
His best will win in war. Speak not vain words,

For from that fire ensueth naught but smoke.

Spend not thy thoughts upon what ne’er can be,

Because with water thou canst pierce not iron.

A king if he be learned is humble too

Though knowledge make him great and powerful.

He that acknowledgeth God’s handiwork
Hath passed the ills of fortune ; he will serve
God more and more, cast out the Div’s suggestions,

Refrain himself from what should not be done,

Afflict not those that should be unafllicted,

And in the last resort incline to God,

Who is our Nourisher and Fosterer.”

Now at that goodly speech of Buzurjmihr
The doctors all grew fresh of countenance,

Rose in the presence of tho king of kings,

And proffered praise anew. Tho company
Were all astound at Buzurjmihr, that one
So young should rise so high. The world-lord mar-
velled

At him, then summoned tho chief registrars,

And bade them sot his name first on the roll :

His fortune shone forth like tho sun in heaven.

Again tho archmages entered on discourse,

While all tho sages were in wonderment ;

Tho youth set loose his tongue, for ho was pure
Of heart and of an ardent soul, and thus

VOL. VII.


T


290


THE ShAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


He said : We must not even in our thoughts
Turn from the king, the righteous judge, for he
Is as the shepherd and we are the sheep ;

Again, we are the earth, he is high heaven.

We must not quit our fealty to him,

Must not renounce his way and ordinance,

But joy when he is glad, if we are fain
To proffer to him all the age’s due.

Diffuse his excellences in the world,

But keep his confidence inviolate.

Presume not thou upon his dignity,

Por e’en the lion’s heart is frayed by fire.

We should call e’en a mountain that despised
His bidding foolish-hearted and fight-witted.

All evil and all good come from the Sh4h,

From him come bond and dungeon, crown and throne.
The world hath from his love its worth and Grace,
While at his wrath our hvers seethe within us.

0- 1663 The crowned head is the Grace of God, the sage
Hath joy and mirth therefrom. Of Ahriman
Is he that joyeth not ; his heart and brain
Are cultured not with knowledge.”

They gave ear

To what the young man said, and those outworn
Revived in soul. With tongues and mouths all praise
That mighty convocation went its ways.


§ 3


The second Banquet of N'dshirwdn to Buzurjmihr and
the Archimages

A se’nnight passed. That king of ardent heart
Convoked the wise and shelved the world’s affairs
Because he wished to hear the words of sages —


NtfSHIRWJN 291

Those that were worbhy to be called to court,

And were approved by knowledge to the Sh^.

They came, the wise in utterance, both young
And elders of experience. With the doctors
Of ardent soul fared youthful Buzurjmihr,

The exalted one. These doctors sage and shrewd
Sat near the lofty throne and turned their looks
On Buzurjmihr because at him the face
Of Ndshirw^n grew bright. One of the wisest
Then questioned him concerning fate and fortune : —

" What is their character and who ordained them ? ”
He answered : One aspireth, being young.

He toileth night and day, and yet his path
Is dark and narrow and his conduit low,

While some mere dolt will sleep on fortune’s throne.
And rose-trees scatter roses over him.

Such is the character of fate and fortune,

No toil avoideth their apportionment ;

The World-lord, the All-wise, our Fosterer,

Hath fashioned thus the star of destiny.”

Another said : “ What man attainoth greatness ?

To whom is high estate the most becoming ? ”

He said : “ The man that hath the better know-
ledge

Of what is good and putteth it in practice.”

Another said : '' What is there best in us ?

Who from the world is worthiest of good ? ^

He answered : '' Gentleness, munificence,

With magnanimity and courtcousness.

The humble man who boweth down his neck ;

His hand will give, expecting no return ;

Ho toileth and by toil would win the world,

And keopeth stop with follow way-farers.”

“ What is the special virtue of the sage,”

Another said, “in moments of dispute ? ”

^ Reading with P.


292


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

0. 1664 He answered : '' To discern when he is wrong,
And modify his methods and his views.”

Another one inquired : “ How should one act
To make existence more endurable ? ”

He thus made answer : Whensoe’er the heart
Is fraught with wisdom there is gladness too.

Then will the man both give and take aright,

And shut the door of fraud and knavery,

WiU pardon faults whene’er he hath the power,

And not be hasty or irascible.”

Another asked of him : '' Among the folk
Who is best able to command himself ? ”

He said : The man that is not led by passion
Away from nobleness and native worth,

And likewise he that can command his weakness,
Aware that evils follow on excess.”

Another said : “ Is there aught anywhere
More excellent than bounty and good nature ?

Who bringeth speedily his crop to fruit.

And fumisheth two springtides in a year ? ”

“ One,” thus he made reply, “ that all unasked
Doth deck his soul with generosity,

But one that hath the praise of the receiver
Eegard him not as giving but as trading.”

One said ; “ What are the adornments of a man,
And which is noblest ? ”

Buzurjmihr replied : —

“ He that is bounteous toward a worthy object ;

He towereth like a cypress in a garden,

And never withereth, but one unworthy,

Though he be set in musk, will savour not ;

Ho flower wfll grow upon that arid thorn.

To question of the dumb or of the deaf,

Though thou art justified, is profitless.”

“ Within this Wayside Inn,” another said,

“ The sage is not exempt from pain and trouble.


NtrSHtRWJN


393


How shall we act that we may win fair fame,

And so begin that nobly we may end ? ”

He answered : “ Keep from sin ; treat all the world
As though it were thyself ; what thou mislikest
Inflict not on another — ^friend or foe.”

Another said : “ Which sayest thou of the twain
Is better — ^labour moderate or great ? ”

He answered thus : “ From wisdom’s standpoint
thought

Alone is worthy. If thou needest fruit
Toil in proportion to the work in hand.”

“ If we must weep o’er those that are to blame,”

Another asked, “ who can deserve our praise ? ”

He answered thus : “ Whoever hath the most
Of hope and fear and awe of holy God.”

Another said : “0 thou illustrious
In wisdom and whose head out-toppeth heaven !

What is the goodliest destiny for me
From this exalted and unstable sky 1 ”

That man of eloquence made answer : “ His C. 1665

Who is secure and is exempt from need ;

Him fortune treateth with benevolence
So long as he is just in all his ways.”

“ Wlrat is the knowledge,” asked another one,

“ Whereby I may be happy in the world ? ”

He answered thus : “ That of the patient man,

Who holdeth in contempt the impudent.

And his whose brain is not perturbed by wrath.

And who, though wroth, will wink at others’ faults.”

Another asked ; “ What man is he, 0 sage !

That winneth the approval of the wise ? ”

Said Blizurjmihr : “ The man whom wisdom

feedeth.

Who moumeth not the lost but giveth up
His darhng to the dust without regret,

Pain, or dismay, rejecteth empty hopes


294 the SHAHnAmA of FIRDAUSI

Like willow’s fruit, is always glad and gay,

And careless of the processes of time.”

Another said : What are the faults of kings
Whereby the hearts of righteous men are saddened ? /
He answered : “ Wise men say that there are four
The first is terror of the foe in fight ;

The second being niggardly in giving ;

The third rejecting wise advice in war ;

The fourth is hastiness of temperament,

And sleeping not upon their purposes.”

Another one inquired : “ What man is faultless,
And what is there to blame in noble men ? ”

“ We call one upright,” thus said Buzurjmihr,
When wisdom beareth witness to his words,

While those that seek by cunning and injustice
To shine are blamed for falsehood and deceit.

Between them is the man of violence,

Abusive, with his head fulfilled with strife.

And who, though meek and humble with the king,
Yet madly persecuteth holy men.”

Another said : “ What kind of character
Will profit him that seeketh not mishap ? ”

“ The speaker of the truth is true in all
His deeds,’" he answered, '' govemeth his tongue.

Is modest, and soft-voiced amidst of clamour.

Best is the sage who holdeth it unmeet
To banish wisdom for the sake of passion.”

Another sage inquired : '' Who is the man
That can without mishap transact affairs,

Tend his own life, and profit kith and kin ? ”

He thus made answer : ” He that from the first
Hath known and sought the door of holy God —

The Source of thy thanksgivings and thy Refuge,

The Lord of day and night, of sun and moon.

Moreover heartily he must obey

The ShAh’s behests in public and in private,


NtSHfRWlN 295

Tend his own person dearly and shut fast C

Thereon the door of travail and of greed,

Must care for his own kindred, feed the poor.

And give his children teachers, for the world
Must not be trusted to the ignorant.

And when a son is docile to command
’Tis for the father to make much of him.”

“ What is the place an upright son should hold,”
Another asked him, “ in his sire’s esteem ? ”

He thus made answer : “ In his father’s eyes
A glorious son is dear as life itself :

The father’s name abideth after death

Because the son will say ; ‘ My father taught me.’

Another asked ; “ What dost thou see in riches
To grace the heart ? ”

He made reply : “ The man
Of wealth is honoured though the wealth is vile ;

But there is much that is bound up therewith,

Take heed that thou misprize not these my words,

For, first, whate’er thou hast a mind unto
Will by its nature show if thine be good ;

And, next, for thee to have and not employ
Is to treat stones and royal gems as one.”

“ Among the kings with fame and lofty crown,”
Another said, ” whom callest thou the best ? ”

“ That king,” he made reply, ” with whom the good
Dwell safely while the bad quake at his voice :

Tlio earth reposeth underneath his throne.”

Another said : “ What makoth a man rich.

And who in this world is distressed and poor ? ”

Ho thus replied : “ The man that is content
With what the Master of high heaven bestoweth.

While for the man whom fortune favoureth not
There is not any evil worse than greed.”

The famous men were full of wonderment
At him and lauded him with one consent.


. 1666


¥


296


THE SHAhnAMA of FIRDAVSt


4


1667


§ 4


The third Banquet of N'O^hirwdn to B'^zurjmihr and
the Archimages


A se’nnight passed. The eighth day with the dawn
The all-conquering jShah sat on his throne and sum-
moned

Before him all the men of understanding,

The wise and eloquent, who all discoursed
At large, but truly none much pleased the Shah,

Who after said to Buzurjmihr : Unveil
Thy shamefast face.”

That fluent sage set loose
His tongue, displayed his varied lore, and first
He blessed the Sh4h, and said : Be this crowned head
Victorious,” adding : “None becometh great
Unless he shun the pathway of mishap.

If thou wouldst rise to greatness by thy knowledge
Thou needest wisdom in thy choice of words.

In quest of fame one must be brave, the age
Rejecteth faint-hearts. If thou seek’st the throne
Accomplishments are needed since the bough
That putteth forth its green must bear thee fruit
When folk make question of accomplishments
’Tis vain to cite mere aptitude,^ for that,

With these to seek, is not approved and worthless.

In dealing with this point a wise man said : —

^ If roses savour not forbear to speak
Of colour ; none in fire a stream will seek.'

A king is all the richer for his bounty,

And hath no credit for his secret treasures.

If thou hast claimed attainments justify
What thou hast fairly spoken by thy deeds.

The sage is happy beiug fed by heaven


1 Or “ high lineage.”


NtSHIRWAN 297

With wisdom, and the man of simple heart
Because ’tis free from all deceitfulness.

In this world wisdom is a trusty tree,

And the great king’s heart is its first of fruits.

Thou wilt bo easy if thou art content,

But practise greed and thou wilt quake therefor.

Do not thy kindness in the sight of meii.

For thou wilt have small kindness in return.

Good fortune favoureth the open-hearted.

And he is blest who beareth patiently.

Still if a man would rise he must be furnished
With certain things to aid him in the struggle.

First, rede and erudition ; secondly,

A ripe experience ; thirdly, friends to help

In time of action and to estimate

The chances every way for good and iU,

And to be profitable afterward
Li every-day life and emergencies.

He needeth, fourthly, rectitude and wisdom
To purge his heart of falsehood and of fraud,

And, fifthly, if thou art possessed of strength
Toil with thy body ; greatness will result.^

The strong unless they labour ne’er wiU reach
The height of their desires, but over-toil.

Know, endeth in despair. I will set forth
The five characteristics of the sage.

Which to observe involve him not in trouble.

With seven too of the fool, and ’tis no marvel
If ho bo irked thereby : and, to begin.

No sage is vexed at loss or prematurely
Is glad, for disappointment wiU perturb him.

He countoth not upon the unattained
So as to break his heart if ho should miss it.

He neither hopeth that which ne’er can bo.

Nor saith : ‘ The wUlow-bough wiU bring forth fruit.’

^ Couplet omitted.


298 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSl

When at his ease from travail and from ill
He recketh of the future, wherefore when
Time bringeth hardship on him he will prove
Beforehand and not slack in enterprise.
i66S The fooTs way, as I said, is sevenfold :

His wrath is kindled with the innocent.

His treasure opened to the unworthy man
Without return of meed or recompense,

While, thirdly, he is an ingrate to God,

And is not wise and cognizant of good,

But, fourthly, talketh loudly of himself

To every one and, fifthly, is involved

In pain and loss through his own feckless words ;

He trusteth, sixthly, to untrusty folk.

Expecting thorns to bear him painted silk,

And, lastly, uttereth lies in argument.

Endeavouring to shine by impudence.

Know this, 0 thou exalted sovereign !

That no man getteth aught but harm from ill.

When any one is mute in company
That silence is melodious to the heart.

By hearing some one wise and eloquent
Thou wilt get provand for thy body, counsel
And prudence for thy heart. Eorgefc not thou
Such words because they crown the throne of knowledge.
If thou wouldst bring that knowledge into bearing
Eelease thy jewel from its case by speech.

And if thou wouldst extend thy fame draw forth
Thy tongue as 'twere a falchion from its sheath ;

But if thou boldest session with the unwise ^

The under then will have the upper hand.

By knowledge are the soul and heart illumed ;

Bee thou go not about to compass lies.

When one of eloquence is holding forth
Abide his words, be not impatient ;


^ Reading with P.


NtSHtRWAN


299


Thou mayst get wisdom from his utterances,

And afterwards repeat what thou hast heard.

Use not thy wisdom as a means of gain
Though not to do so may result in hardship.

With heart and tongue in an accord of right
The door of loss is barred on every side.

Oh ! may the heart of Nushirwdn, the Shdh,

Be open to instruction evermore.”

An archimage of subtle intellect
Then asked : “ What are the good and seemly things
That give a man a lustre in the world,

And quittance from the troubles of the time ? ”

He answered thus : “ Whoe’er attaineth wisdom
Win gain thereby the fruitage of both worlds.”

“ But if he hath not wisdom,” said the archmage,

“ Since wisdom is God’s radiant robe of honour ? ”

Said Bhzurjmihr ; ” Then knowledge is the best,

The learned is mighty midst the men of might.”

“ But if,” the archmage said, “ he hath not sought
That stream and never bathed his soul therein ? ”

Thus Buzurjmihr replied : “ The warrior
Must count his body as a worthless thing.

And if he striveth in the day of battle.

And layeth foemen’s heads upon the dust.

He win be cherished in tho great king’s heart.

For ever happy and in good command.”

“ But if one is not valiant,” said tho archimage, c.
Nor soeketh after knowledge, law, and Faith ? ”

Then Bfizurjmihr replied : “ ’Twere well that death
Should set tho helm of darkness on his head.”

Another asked : “ How shaU wo act that aU
Of us may eat tho fruitage of the tree
Sot by the sago within the garth of spring.

Anil waUi moreover underneath its shade ? ”

Said Buzurjmihr : “ The man that barreth up
His tongue from evil vexeth not his soul.


300


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI

And rendeth not in talk another's skin.

He will be likewise friends with all the folk,

All troubles will be smoothed away for him,

And enemy and friend will be as one.”

Another asked him, sa3dng : “ Are the men
That shun the way of failure great or good ? ”

Thus Buzurjmlhr replied : “ An evil deed
Is hke a tree that beareth evil fruit.

Thus if a man speak gently with his tongue
But little harshness will befall his ear,

For know it is the tongue that troubleth men ;

So if thou wouldst be easy weigh thy words.

The man of few words and a loyal subject
Hath only one fit post — ^before the throne.

Moreover he escapeth ills not come,

As bird or beast escapeth from the net,

While furthermore he triumpheth o'er evil,

Is self -controlled and wise exceedingly.

He leaveth well alone and troubleth not
The inoffensive, letteth no good 'scape him,

And counteth not upon the days to come.

He shunneth foe with more than quarry's speed.
And cleaveth unto friend hke shaft and feather.

For any pleasure that will end in grief
The man of wisdom hath but little yearning.

Put ease and indolence afar from thee,

Take pains and make a feast of toil ; without it
Thou wilt win not addition in the world ;

There is no treasure for the indolent.^

May this world five in Nushirwin, be he
Its world-lord ever and his fortune young.”

They held discourse at large upon this theme :
The hearts of those grown drowsy were awakened.
The archimages, magnates, and shrewd sages
Blessed Buzurjmihr and gave the Sh&h great praise,
Then went rejoicing on their several ways.

1 The two iollowing couplets are transposed.


NtSHtR fVAN


301


§5


The fourth Banquet of N'&shinodn to B‘(izur]mihr and
the Archimages


Two se’niiigh.ts passed away and then the Shah
Relinquished public business for a day,

And bade the archimages and great men
Assemble at the palace with the sages.

He asked about the body and its birth, C. 1670

About wrath, peace, the intellect, and justice,

About the sovereignty, the crown, and power.

And how good fortune doth begin and end.

He questioned those archimages and inquired
Concerning that which pleased him. When the others
Had spoken as their knowledge was, but failed
To gratify the Sh4h, he next addressed
Himself to Btizurjmihr and said : “ Bring forth
The splendid jewel from its hiding-place.”

Then Btizurjmihr gave praises, saying thus : —

“ 0 Sh4h most loving and serene of heart !

Know that in all the world no king like thee
For justice, understanding, crown, and throne.

For Grace and mien, for counsel and for fortune.

Hath sot the diadem upon his head.

The king that exerciseth self-control
Will bo at rest from vengeance and from war
Because to shun unwarrantable deeds
Is better than to get a sorry heart.

How goodly is the saying of the sage : —

‘ Self-discipline is goodly in a king.’

In seasons of dispute he feareth God,

IncUneth not to vengeance and to prowess.

And makoth wisdom ruler of his passions
When he is choleric. A monarch’s thoughts
Should not displease the Master of the world


303 THE SHAhnAmA OF FJRDAUSt

Tkrougli whom he doth discern ’twixt good and
evil,

And seeketh Paradise as virtue’s meed.

A tongue truth-speaking and a reverent heart
Will be his glory in the world for aye,

While every one that is his counsellor
Will be a man of weight among the people,

Be eloquent, serene of heart, and just,

And give to small and great alike their due
According to the measure of their states.

The man that is the servant of the Sh^h
Should not be damnified on that account,

And while a monarch holdeth sages dear
His crown will be exalted ; but if he
Shall take the counsel of the ignorant
He wiU bring down his crown’s head underfoot,

For knowledge frighteneth the fool away,

Who in his ignorance is combative.

The world-lord, whose informants are all wise,

Aware of what is going on at court,

And able thus to foil the malcontent,

WiU be still glorious. None must sleep aggrieved
Lest iU befaU the Sh4h from that mishap,

Who should ban him deserving chastisement,

The misbegotten and the Ul-disposed,

Lest such should trouble those that are offenceless.

AU captives in the prisons of the Sh^h,

The guilty and the innocent alike.

Should be enlarged by the decree of God,

Who thus directed in the Zandavasta,

1671 If one be an ill-doer black and base

The face of earth should be relieved of him,

For while his evil day continueth
He wiU bring ruin on the homes of men.

The world-lord must rejoice in faith and right
So long as he is in the world as Shih.


NtSHtRWjN


303


’Tis his to cleanse it from the wicked Div
In public and in private by the sword.

The king that ruleth his troops weU wiU be
Untroubled by the griefs of suppliants.

When thou art wary of thy foes in counsel
Thine evd-widiers will lose heart. Man aU
The breaches of the realm ere war betide.
Whenas the Shdh is blamed for anything
Reproach too falleth on the crown and throne,
Through grief the wish is to be quit of him,

And to make wisdom testify thereto.

Let grow the love thou bearest to thy son.

Who is as ’twere the reflex of thy face
In water. Teach him wisdom and good sense.
And seek but to illuminate his soul.

Unlock for him the portal of thy treasures ;

He must have no cause to bewail himself,

And when he putteth forth his hand to wrong
There is no need to break the prince’s heart.
Recall him to the way with gentleness.

And keep a hold upon him from the first.

If in his heart thou find hostihty

It is an ill weed ; pluck it from his plot,

For if it bideth ’twill grow strong and fill
The garden of the sovereignty with tares ;

But when the atheling hath Grace and sense
He must not hear the words of evil speakers ;
Still when the hand can reach the miscreants
Haste not to bloodshed save at God’s command.
Destruction oometh on the royal crown
Through rascal-ministers and wicked wives.

Give fools a hearing, but when they propose
An unjust action do not thou consent.

’Tis needful to fulfil all righteousness.

And clear thine own heart of perversity.

The solo adornment for the mighty ShSh.


304 the SH Ah NAM a OF FIRDAUSI

Is right, for ’tis the Div that causeth wrong.

Now when the Shah shall hearken to these words
He in his heart will witness nnto wisdom,

The crown will gall down blessings on the king,
The throne of empire be confirmed to him,

Both will rejoice in him, his foes despair
Of fortune ; while this restless sky revolveth
His good name wiU be his memorial.

Now may the accomplished soul of Nushirwan
Be young while day endureth.'’

At his words

The assembly was amazed, compared with them
The counsels of the wise seemed lustreless.

When Nushirwdn had Hstened to this speech
His greatness greatened great although it was.

I 1672 The counsels given filled his eyes with tears :

He filled the speaker’s mouth with lustrous pearls.
Then from the palace with their lips all praise
The company departed on their ways.


§6

The fifth Banquet of Nushirwan to B'^kurjmihr and
the Archimages

Thus seven days passed away. Upon the eighth,
Whenas the world-iUuming sun blazed forth,

Put off its robe of lapis-lazuli,

And decked the world with golden-hued brocade,
The king of kings safc with the archimages.

The veterans, and officers of state —

Ardshir, the high priest and the chief of nobles,
Shapur and Yazdagird, the scribe, the men
Of science and the readers of the stars.

The wise, the enlightened, and the eloquent.

The youthful Buzurjmihr, the orator,


njjshirwIn

Came to the presence of Sh 4 h Nushinvfi,n,

And did obeisance to his sovereign,

Who joyed at him and thus addressed the sages
“ Who wotteth aught whereby the Faith of God
May be confirmed, the royal throne kept scathless ? ”

Thereat the high priest loosed his tongue amid
The chiefs and said : “ The justice of the Sh^Lh
Will cause his Grace, his crown, and throne to shine,

And when it openeth his treasury-door
His high renown wiU last when he is dead.

Moreover he should purge his tongue of lies.

And seek not lustre in the world by guile.

Next he will be both just and merciful,

And make his throne the glory of the age.

Then too the head of the illustrious Sh&li
Should be not wrathful with an erring liege,

And, fifthly, he will speak so that his fame
In this world never will grow obsolete ;

Ho will speak truth in all things small and great,

And never derogate in any thing.

Ho will esteem withal as his own fortune
The servant of his throne. If wise in words
His speech will be convincing, and his heart
Ne’er satiate of learning and consuming
His brains with thought. All men are set at large
By wisdom and have little eause to wail
At fortune. Wisdom nourisheth the souls
Of sages, wisdom pointeth out the way
To those that seek. Tear not thy heart, 0 Sh&h !

From wisdom’s path, for wisdom fostereth
Fame and a noble end. Base and a fool
Is ho that ever said : ‘ I am the man.

Because there is no peer to me in loiowledge.’ ”

Then Ya2dagird, the scribe, spake thus and said : — c. 1675
“ 0 wise and wisdom-loving Sh&h ! in Sh&hs
It is a thing unseemly to shod blood,

VOL. VII. n


3 o 6 the SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUsi

Or suffer trifles to disturb the heart.

Moreover when the king is light of wit
He putteth hand to matters thoughtlessly.

While, further, he is hasty with the wise,

And all the more so through his ignorance.

When lust for vengeance hath possessed his heart
The Div is the associate of his soul ;

So too a judge’s words, if he be hasty,

Lead not to fair results. The warrior,

Moreover, that is fearful of his hfe
In battle-time, not of disgrace, and he
Whose heart, though he be rich, is mean and narrow,
Were better hidden underneath the ground.
Authority beopmeth not a beggar,

Since he himself becometh not high rank.

A guileful elder is a hateful thing,

And after death his soul wiU be in fire.

When any youth is slack in business
The heart of fortune wiU grow sick of him.

Disease will make him prematurely old,

And may his vigour and his spirit cease.”

When Bfizurjmihr had heard these goodly words,
And had adorned his brain with wisdom’s lore,

He said : “0 Shkh whose face is like the sun’s !

May shining heaven be at thy dispose.

Emow this : that men of wisdom will sustain
Their souls with knowledge since the hearts of stones
And mountains sorrow o’er the ignorant.

For none respecteth him. He knowcth not
End from beginning, fame from infamy.

The common folk, stUl more the wisdom-seekers,
bespise the doings of such men as those —

The lying judge unhonoured by the sago ;

The general who guardeth weU his treasure.

And is abandoned by his toil-worn troops ;

The sage that feareth not to do amiss


NtrSHtRWlN


307


If lie can have enjoyment therewithal :

The leech that aileth ; how can he cure others ?
The mendicant that braggeth of his wealth
While that whereof he talketh is but naught ;

A Sh4h who letteth not his people rest)

Or sleep at night, disquieting their hearts,

And yet when favouring breezes blow on thee
Assumeth all the merit for himself ;

A choleric sage who eyeth others’ goods,

And lastly he that counselleth a fool.

Or giveth the indolent authority.

They that lack wisdom and acquire it not
Will have occasion to repent their words.

The heart of any man, my gracious lord !

That hath not wisdom wrestleth with desire
In such wise as a flame devoureth brimstone.

Or maketh provand of a bed of reeds.

Long live the heart of Nushfrw4n, may he
Have this world’s chiefs his servitors to be.”


§7


The sixth Banquet of N'usMrwdn to B’dzurjmihr and
the Archimages


The Shah allowed another week to pass,

Then issued orders to prepare the court.

Came and assumed his seat upon the throne
Of gold, with armlets, crown, and golden girdle.

On one hand was the archmago that was vizir,

And on the other Yazdagird the scribe,

Wliilo round him were the other archimages,

The chiefs, and Buzurjmihr the eloquent.

To whom the Shdli : ” Why keep the jewels hidden —
Those words which are a profit to the soul.

And make the unprized man of high estate ?


0. 1674


3o8 the SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The speaker’s treasure is not minished.

While ’tis a pleasure to the listener.”

Thus spake the archimage to Buzurjmihr : —

0 thou more famous than the turning sky !

Know’st thou the thing whose more wiU harm, whose

less

Will strengthen thee ? ”

He thus made answer, saying : —
" By eating less thou wilt be easier
In body and withal feed up thy soul,

But by too much weU-doing wilt advance
Thy rival.”

Then said Yazdagird, the scribe : —

“ 0 man of eloquence and heedful mind !

What are the heart’s three ^ secret blemishes
Which men retain although they need them not 1 ”

He answered : In the first place thou must purge
Thy heart of all censoriousness, for none
In this world publicly or privily
Is free from fault. A chieftain, jealous of thee,

Will weep “ on growing thine inferior,

While, thirdly, he that is a slanderer —

The man of double face — endeavoureth
To raise dust e’en from water.” ^

Then the archmage
Inquired : '‘0 thou that art supreme in knowledge !
None in this world is franchised from desire.

Which may be hidden or exposed to all.

Supposing ways to gratify it open,

So that ’tis manifestly in one’s power,

In my case which way will advantage me.

And which result in travail, pain, and loss ? ”

He answered thus and said ; “ The ways are twain,
And thou canst journey either at thy choice,
c; 1675 One is the way of rashness, full of ill,

1 Beading with P. * With envy. ^ eouplcts omitted.


NlJSHiRWAN

The other that of wisdom and well-doing,^

And therein wisdom is the guide for thee —

A fact that is beyond all questioning.

God’s robe of honour is upon the sage ;

Observe what man is worthy of that gift.

No one will purchase one of giant strength
Devoid of wisdom. In defect thereof
It is not well to live, for God is witness
That wisdom is the very life of life.

The man that hath acquired a base of knowledge
Is fitted for the warfare and the struggle.’

First, let thy knowledge make thee turn to God,
Who is and who will be for evermore.

By faith in Him thou hast thy heart’s desire.

And hast attained the goal whereto thou spedest.
Another point of knowledge is that thou
Shouldst use discretion in the choice of food.

Strive after purity in food and raiment,

And thus uphold the ordinance of God.

When thou hast need to earn thy daily bread
Run not to misers for their help and treasure.

But let thy choice be of some business
Whose reputation will not sink repute.

Make to thyself a friend of some great man.

Who can assist thee when thou art in straits.

Be silent when thou art in company
If thou wouldst win the praise of every one,

But if thou speak’ st speak that which hast learned,
And branded on thy liver. Weigh thy words.

Not the dinars within thy treasury.

For to a wise man treasures are but vile.

When thou art speaking lot thy tongue be shrewd,
Make it thy shaft and let thy bow be wisdom.

Be not imprudent when a fight is toward,

But guard thy body from the enemy,

1 Coupbt omitted.


310 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Aiad when he hath arrayed the host against thee
Be prudent and preserve thy self-control.

When thou heholdest thine antagonist

Thy face must pale not. Thou wilt be victorious

If thou art prompt, but slackness will undo thee.

Be wary as thou urgest on thy steed,

And watch the weapons of thine opposite.

If he is eager do not turn away,

And choose thee prudent fellow-combatants ;

But strive not and have sense to quit the fight
On finding that thou art no match for him.

Thus tender too thy body when thou eatest ;

Food should not harm thee ; eating much will do it.
While taking little will increase thy strcnglh.

Make not thyself a carfax at thy meals,

But always leave off with an appetite.

Use wine but use it for refreshment only,

For drunkards hear no praise from any one.
c. 1676 If thou adore God thou wilt be commended,

The world will be a head and thou the eye.

Let all thy converse be of the Creator
With adoration for the base thereof.

Profoundly watch the occasion when to act,

And when to take repose by night and day.

Select the mean in every enterprise,

In making peace as well as waging war.

All wind and water blent with dust art thou ;

Forget not thou the w^ay of holy God.

Think more about thy worship than thy meals ;

Be stiU a novice though the law is old ;

Incline to good ; acknowledge benefits ;

Attribute all to Him who made the world ;

Prefer not lust to wisdom and advice,

Or wisdom will regard thee not thenceforth ;

Go not about to compass wickedness,

But being wise adorn thyself with virtues.


NtfSHIRWlN 31 1

He that is good in public and in private
Is most to be commended in the world.

Teach to thy son the business of the scribe
That he may be as life to thee and thine,

And as thou wouldest have thy toils bear fruit
Grudge not instructors to him, for this art
Will bring a youth before the throne and make
The undeserving fortune’s favourite.

Of all professions ’tis the most esteemed,

Exalting even those of lowly birth,

A ready scribe who is a man of rede
Is bound to sit e’en in the royal presence,

And, if he be a man of diligence,

Will have uncounted treasure from the Sh4h,

While if endowed with fluency and style
He will be studious to improve himself,

Use his endeavours to be more concise,

And put his matter more attractively. . *

The scribe hath need to be a man of wisdom,

Of much endurance and good memory,

A man of tact, accustomed to court-ways,

A holy man whose tongue is mute for evil,

A man of knowledge, patience, truthfulness,

A man right trusty, pious, and well-favoured.

If thus endowed he cometh to the Sh^h
He cannot choose but sit before the throne.”

Whenas the king had listened to these words
His heart grew fresh as roses in the spring,

And he addressed the high priest thus : Go to,

Give Bdzurjmihr advancement. Claim for him
A robe of honour fitted for his state.

And money : he hath made our hearts elate*”


313


THE SHAhnIMA of FIRDAUSI


0. 1677


§8


The seventh Banquet of N4$Mnvdn to Buzurpnihr and
the Archimages

A se’nniglit passed, the Sun lit up his crown,

And came and sat upon the ivory throne,

Together with the high priest, the grandees,

The world-aspiring and shrewd-hearted sages,

With Sada and with Yazdagird, the scribe.

And as their leader the astute Bahman.

Then spake the Sh4h to Buzurjmihr and said : —

“ Adorn our hearts and show to us the way.

Speak truth about me as thou knowest it,

And seek not this world’s honours by deceit.

How should men give obedience to my hest.

Observe my counsels, and act loyally ?

Speak at thine ease and speak without reserve :

Dress not plain words with colour and with scent.”
Thus Buzurjmihr, the shrewd, said to the Sh4h : —
0 more exalted than the azure vault !

The service of the monarch of the earth
Is, saith the sage, the path -way of the Faith.

The orders of the ShS/h brook no delay.

Because the Shah’s heart never must be straitened,
And every one that is his enemy
Is in his soul the liege of Ahriman.

The heart that loveth not the monarch’s person
Should forfeit brain and skin. Know that the Sh4h
Is the world’s peace, and when thou dost aright
He will advance thee. Both for good and ill
The power is his, he tabeth not revenge,

And injureth none. Wish not his son to fill
His room but hold his dear face as thy life.

Want never findeth entrance to the soil
Of states whose monarch is their weU-beloved.


NUSHtRWJN 313

His Grace will fend thee from all ill, for why

His fortunes nurse all virtue. When a king

Hath God’s Grace on his face the world’s heart laugheth

For joy. As thou partakest of his favours

Strive ever to give ear to his commands.

If thou shalt grow disloyal, e’en in thought,

That moment fortune will abandon thee.

If he associate with thee be not proud.

And if he banish thee revile him not.

Mark that a subject toiling for his king
Will m the toil find treasure and renown.

He that shall praise the monarch is of God,

And he that is of God will praise the monarch.

The liege must neither weary of his work,

Nor yet be slack in fight, must keep concealed
The counsel of the Sh 4 h and tell it not
To sun and moon. One that is slack to do
The Shdh’s commands doth outrage to himself.

Accursed are the blossoms of the tree
That scattoreth naiight but leaves o’er crown and
throne.

Calumniate not his lieges to the ShSh, •

Or thou wilt minish thine esteem with him :

Groat liars get small lustre in kings’ eyes.

Let no one utter in the royal presence
Words that are not conformable with wisdom ;

But, if the Shdh shall ask thee, speak, not losing
Thy credit with him by loquacity,

Because there is more knowledge in the world 0. 1678

Than ears can hoar in public and in private.

He whom the monarch of the world misprizeth.

That soul will bo in pain for evermore,

Wliile he will be in high esteem on whom

The Shfi-h’s lips smile. If he shall show thee favour

Hug not thyself, old servant though thou be,

For, though thy service may have'lasted long,


314 the SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

Ejiow that thou art not indispensable.

And if he favoureth another man
’Tis doubtless one as loyal as thyself.

If he shall be displeased with thee in aught
Make thine excuses ere thou drawest breath.

And if thou wottest naught of thine offence
Lay bare thy heart in presence of the ShS/h,

While if thou hast a grievance in thy heart
Break it but show not unto him thy face.

Lest by God’s Grace he should discern thy secret,
Discern thy heart perverse and clouded mind.
Thereafter thou wilt get no good of him,

Not hearken to his accents warm with love.
Account the Shah’s court as a sea where lieges
Are sailors, and accomplishments are vessels
With words for anchors and with wits for sails.

A wise man, who is voyaging o’er that sea,

Will make his sails robust because they are
A source of strength and shelter to himself.

The accomplished man, whose wisdom is to seek,
Should tread not on the portal of the Sh&h.
Although the Sh&h should be a mount of fire
Still would his servants find existence good,

For if such fire bum at the time of wrath
It will but shine the more when gratified.

The Shah at whiles is milk and honey, whiles
A biting bane. His acts are like the sea ;

The moon is bright in heaven at his behest.

One getteth from the sea a pinch of sand,

Another hath the pearl within the shell.

Be aU the world alive in NffshirwS^n,

And circling heaven aye subject to his will,

For he doth head the monarchs of the world,

And ornament the empire with all good.”

To Buzurjmihr’s oration Nushirwan
Gave heed, heart-joyed to look on him. The king


nushirwJn


Was wont to give his largess on this wise :

If he said Good ! ” the largess was four purses,
But whensoe’er he said *. “ Good ! very good ! ”
The gift amounted in that case to forty,

And when the treasurer reckoned with the Sh&h.
Each purse was taken at ten thousand drachms.^
The king of kings had said : “ Good ! very good
A speech equivalent to all that coin.

The treasurer brought with visage sunny-clear
The purses full of drachms to Buzurjmihr.

^ Of. p. 215, note.


PART III

THE STORY OF MAHBTJD AND OTHER MATTERS


ARGUMENT

The poet tells how Mahbiid, sometime chief minister of Niishirwan
and a virtuous and blameless man, was done to death by tlie
machinations of Ziirdn, the chamberlain, and of a Jewish sorcerer,
how too late Niishirwitn discovered the plot, put the chamberlain
and the Jew to death, and made all the amends in his power.
The poet then tells how the presents sent by the Khdn of Chin
to Nushirwdn were plundered on the way by the Haitdlians, of
the wars that followed and how Niishirwan married the daughter
of the Khiin. Firdausi then discourses of the justice of Niishirwan,
of the happiness and prosperity of the ivorld under his adminis-
tration, and of the tribute paid to him by Ooesar and other
potentates. The Part ends with a discourse of Btizurjmihr’s on
good words and good deeds


NOTE

§§ I and 2. Shdh Kubiid had left several sons, of whom
Niishirwdn was not the eldest, but he was the heir to the throne
by his father’s appointment, who appears also to have made some
arrangement for his recognition as such with the Emperor Justin,
or at all events to have suggested it. On Kubdd’s death his eldest
son, Kdiis, claimed the throne, but the prime minister Mahbdd
(Mebodea) was in a position to indicate what Kubad’s wishes on
the subject had been, and Niishirwdn became Shdh. Another
brother of his, however, Jam by name, was very popular but
disqualified for the throne by a personal defect. In these circum-
stances a conspiracy was formed to overthrow Nfishirwiiii and
make Jam’s son, Kubdd, Shdh with Jam himself as regent, Kubiid
being still a child. The conspiracy, which had much iiifiuential
support, was discovered, and a clean sweep — the usual course in
such cases — made of the conspirators and all tlieir male relations
with the exception of Kubdd, who ultimately escaped to Con-


NJJSHtRWAN 317

stautinople and was well received by the Emperor Justinian.
There is no account of the conspiracy in the Shdhnama, but it has
been mentioned here because the poisoning incident and the
drastic vengeance that followed may have been transferred from
it to the story of the fall of Mahbiid as given in the poem. The
Western account of the fall of Mahbiid is entirely different.^

§ I. Milk, which “turns” so easily, especially in a hot climate,
would be regarded as more sensitive to evil influences than other
foods. Cf. Burton’s Supjplemental Nights, vol iv. p. 243 and note.

§ 2 . In view of Nhshfrwdn’s tardy repentance and his reparation
to the kindred of Mahbi'id it is interesting to find a Mebodes in
high command in the Persian army in a.d, 578 .®

§ 3 . The accoirnt of the building of Sfirsiin is a doublet of that
of Zfb-i-Kliusrau.®

§§ 4 - 11 . At this point the Turks come historically upon the
scene under the leadership of their Khiin, whom Tabari calls
Sinjibi'i. In A.n. 569 or 570 they threatened to invade fran, and
Ndehirvvun sent hia son Hurmuzd against them. As Hurmuzd
was the son of the daughter of the Kluln it is evident that the
alliance between Sinjibi'i and Nilshirwiln must have been entered
into at a considerably earlier period. The object of the alliance
was to crush the Haitiilians, and this was done. Ni'ishirwiin
occupied their territory up to the Oxus — the old traditional
boundaty of Inin — while the Khdn annexed all to the north of
that river, but, according to Persian accounts, withdrew on the
approach of Hurmuzd. EirdauHi does not mention hTi'ishirwan’s
wars with the Haitulians, and represents them as being the
aggressors. "Nfo doubt they would do their best to prevent friendly
relations between their two formidable neighbours. Later on the
Klium as Tabari tells us, hearing from the vamiuished Haitdlians
that frdn had been tributary to them, wished to assert his claim to
a similar payment and marched southwards, as mentioned above,
with that object, He found, however, the frontier of frdn too well
guarded and soon withdrew.^

§ n. Por the so-called tribute paid by Ri'im to frdn see p. 187,
and for the temple of Azargashasp, p. 5.

§ 13 . Seep. 278, The formula of Good Thoughts, Good Words,
and Good Heeds plays an important part in Zoroastrianism. One
of the most heautiful pa85wiges in the Zandavasta, Yasht XXII,


» See KT, p. 147, note ; 01)Jb\ v. 183 ; RSM, p. 377
^ Id. p, 438. ® Soo p. 2Ct), • NT, p. 159 and notes.

» HZA, ii. 314 bcq.


3i8 the SHAHNAMA OF FJRDAVSt

deals with the subject and may be paraphrased briefly and
metrically thus : —

Once Zoroaster asked, so Text and Comment saith,

‘^How fares the good man’s soul when he has tasted death ? ”
And this was Heaven’s reply ; “ The soul still sits anigh
Its tenement of clay for thrice a day and night,

And chants the sacred hymns in uttermost delight.

It sings : ‘ Oh ! happy he, the man whoe’er he be,

To whom the Great God grants all that he longed to see ! ’

And after that third night, at breaking of the dawn,

Mid lovely plants and scents that good man’s soul is borne,
And from the South will come a perfume-laden air,

The sAveetest breath e’er breathed; and then Avhite-armed and
fair,

Bright, beautiful, and young, a Maid will meet him there ;
Whereat the good man’s soul will rj^uestion : ‘ Who art thou.
For never have I looked on loveliness till now ? ’

And she will make reply : ' Thy Conscience, youth ! am I.
Good Thoughts, Good Words, Good Deeds, have made me thus
to be,

And they were all thine own, and I grew thus through
thee.’ ”


§1

The Story of Mahhi!cd, the Wazir of Nitshirwdn, and how
MahiM and his Sons were slain hy the Sorcery of Z^rdn
and a Jew

c. 1679 This matter ended, I proceed to tell
The story of Mahbud, the minister.

Cease not from learning for a moment’s spell,

And let not knowledge cause thy heart to err.

When thou shalt say : My lust for wisdom I
Have satisfied and learned all needful lore,”

Fate playeth off some pretty trickery,

And putteth thee to discipline once more.

Now hearken to a rustic minstrel’s lay,


NtfSHiRWlN


319


Ta’en from the legends of a time long sped ; ^

I questioned him of ages past away,

And this is what of Nushirwdn he said : —

He had an upright minister, a man
Of vigilance, who was his treasurer.

Whose heart was full of wisdom and whose redo
Was right, whose sole ambition was fair fame.

This man so well disposed was named Mahbud :

His soul and heart were full of good discourse.

He had two sons like jocund spring who served
Continually before the king, for he.

What time he was about to mutter prayer,

Or use the archimages’ sacred twigs,®

Ate only what Mahbud himself provided.

And trusted those two sons. He used to have
His kitchen in Mahbhd’s house and demeaned
Himself as guest, and that good, famed man’s sons
Themselves brought in the great king’s meal. The
nobles

Were wont to weep for envy of Mahbud
At court. There was a magnate, one Ziir^n,

Whose aspirations all were centred there.

Ho was an old man and Shell’s chamberlain.

Conspicuous at feasts and audiences ;

His visage ran with tears the whole year through iggo

In envy of Mahbdd and his two sons.

’Twas his endeavour to incense the Shdh
Against the doings of that holy man.

Yet failed to find an opening for slander
To sot the monarch’s mind against Mahbtid ;

But how should ho — ^that man of wisdom — ^know
That he possessed an enemy at court
Since never had he cause to pale one whit
For all the words and practice of that knave 1 ,

^ fjoven oouj[)lcl-ts omittod.

® fijoo Vol. i. p- 80 fi.v. Bdj and Barsarrw


320 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

A Jew, it happened, borrowed of Ztir&n
One day some money to employ in trade,

He came and went, his influence grew, and he
Became that gloomy sours associate.

Thus, as familiar with the chamberlain,

He came to be at home about the court,

And there one day conversed in confidence
Of spells, of court, the monarch of the world.

Of magic, necromancy, and black arts.

Of crook(^d practices and villainy.

Zuran, attending to the Jew’s discourse,

And hearing of the secrets of his craft.

Told his own secret to the Jew, and said : —

“ Discourse not of it save with me alone.^

Thou must perform a deed of sorcery.

And give the age its riddance of Mahbud,

Because he hath attained to such high state
That he will dominate the age itself.

He careth not for any. Thou wouldst say,

To put it shortly : ' He is Nushirwto.’

How he — ^the world-lord — ^will not take of food
Save only at the hands of this man’s sons,

Who hath become so great through royal favour
That heaven Msseth evermore his skirt.”

The Jew replied : This cause need not increase
Thy grief. What time the Sh^h and world-lord taketh
The sacred twigs mark well what meats are served,
And see if there be any milk therein.

Meet thou the serving-man and sniff the meats ;

’Twill serve if I but see the milk from far.

Then thou shalt see Mahbdd and his two sons
No more alive. Though he be brass or stone
That eateth he will perish instantly.”

Ztirdn attended to these words. His heart
Was freshened as he gazed upon the Jew ;

^ Beading with P.


321


NJJSHIR WAn

Whene’er he went to court the Jew went likewise ;
They had their secrets, joys, and feasts in common.
A season passed with matters in this stay :

The court was haunted by that evil teacher,

That court whereto each dawn Mahbud’s two sons
Were wont to turn their steps so joyfully.

Behind the curtains of their noble father
There was a pious dame and well advised,

Who, when Shah Nushirwan desired some food,

Was wont to spread a golden tray for him,

And lay thereon three platters set with jewels ;

The whole was covered with a golden napldn,

And used to come before the exalted Shah,

Served by the two sons of the good Mahbud.

The food consisted of rose-water, milk,

And honey. Nushirwan would eat and sleep.

One day it happened that the two young men
Were going with the tray to Ntishirwan ;

It was conveyed upon a servant’s head
To whom ’twas usual to entrust the food.

Zurdn, the chamberlain, beheld the tray
When coming to the palace of the Shah,

And with a smile addressed the two youths thus : —
Ye trusty lieges of Sh&h Nushirw^ !

Reveal for once the colour of those meats —

The Sh^Lh’s repast — ^because they savour well :
Withdraw the silken cover just this once.”

The young men readily displayed the food.

Zuran, who kept his distance, gazed thereon,

And in like manner did the Jew, who came,

When he had marked the colour of the meats.

And said thus to the chamberlain : “ The tree
That thou hast planted comoth into fruit.”

The two young men, both wise and vigilant.

Then carried in the tray fco NushirwAn,

While after them Zuran came quick as dust,

VOL. VII.


C. i68n


X


322 THE SHJHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And thus addressed the Sh^h, that noble man ; —

'' 0 Sh§»h, the just, the' favoured by the stars !
Touch not these meats till they be tasted firsts
The cook hath mingled poison with the milk,

And may thine enemies partake thereof

Shah Nurshirw4n, on hearing, turned his gaze
On those two youths whose mother was the cook —
A prudent dame affectioned of her kin.

They in their innocence and rectitude

Rolled up their sleeves. Howbeit when they ate

Some of that milk and honey thou hadst said : —

" Both have been stricken by an arrow.” Both
Swooned on the spot and died there in the presence
Of Nushirwdn ! The monarch of the world
Beheld, his cheeks hke flower of fenugreek,

And gave commandment : Let them raise in dust
The mansion of Mahbud, respecting none,

Upon that dust let them cut off his head,

And 3nay he and his cook both cease to be.”

None in the palace of Mahbud, and few
Among his kindred in the world, survived.

The Sh§,h gave all his goods, his women, children,
And hoarded wealth, to spoil. In that affair
Zur&n attained his wish, since Nushirw^n
16S2 Was ^quit of that good man, and held the Jew
In high esteem who cloudward raised his head.
Heaven turned awhile with matters in this stay
While from the Sh&h right hid its face away.


1 Couplet omitted.


NtfSHtRWAN


323


§2

How the Sorcery of Zikdn and the Jew in the Matter of Mahhitd
was discovered^ and how both were slain hy Command of
Nushirwdn

The Shah, the world-lord, purposed, as it chanced.

To hunt the wolf and bade thab many a steed,

Used in the chase, should pass before his eyes,

Scanned them, and saw the brand -mark of Mahbud.
His cheeks flamed at those Arab horses, love
Still had a place within him, and he burned.

He wept for pain and with heart sorely seared
Recalled to mind Mahblid, and thus he said : —

How much the wicked Div made to transgress
That man of counsel and of high degree !

With that devotion and that rectitude
Why did his spirit seek the path of loss ? ^

The Master of the world alone can teU
The hidden truth beneath the outward show.’’

He thence departed to the hunting-ground,

Seared at his heart and followed by his men.

Upon the route he talked with aU and cheered
His heart with words. He took full many a minstrel,
And with their fascinations docked the way.

Now as the ShS/h’s chief minister and scribes
Were journeying with Zur4n in company
Their converse ran on spells and magic arts,

On witchcraft and pernicious Ahriman.

The king said to the archmages : “ Trouble not
Your hearts concerning sorcery, but let
Your talk bo all of God and of the Faith ;

Look not for marvels in black arts and magic.”

Ztirin said : ‘‘ live for ever, and may wisdom
Feed on thy words. All that they say of witchcraft
1 Beading with P.


324 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Is true, though this is known but to adepts.

If food have milk therein they by a look
Can from a distance turn it into bane.”

On hearing this a bygone time recurred
To NushirwSn. He thought upon Mahbud,

And those two sons of his, and deeply sighed.

He looked upon Zurm but held his peace,

And quickly urged his prancing charger on.

His mind was in a fume with thought because
Zurin had been the foeman of Mahbud.
c. 1683 He said : ” I know not what this miscreant
Had done upon the day whereon I slew
Mahbud, and that great house was overthrown.
Would that almighty God would make all plain,
And give my heart and brain tranquillity,

Because I spy this fellow’s marks hereon,

And am fulfilled with sorrow for the past.”

He journeyed on with sad and aching heart,

With lowering visage and wibh tearful eyes,

And, having reached the ending of the stage,

Set up his camp-enclosure by a stream.

Now when Zur§;n had reached the tent they cleared
The place of strangers and the converse ran
Upon the means of witching milk and honey.

“ It is my favourite subject,” said Zurdn.

The Sh 4 h then questioned him about Mahbud,
And by what means his sons were done to death,
And heard the quaver in Zurto’s reply.

His crime became apparent. Nushirwdn
Addressed him, saying ; “ Tell to mo the truth.
Conceal it not and act not knavishly.

For knavery but causeth evil deeds,

And evil comrades will corrupt good hearts.”

Zur§n told all the truth, revealed the secret,
Threw all the blame upon the Jew, and made
As though he were possessed by grief and anguish.


NtfSHIRWJN 325

The great Mng, having listened, fettered him,

And sent to that enchanter of a Jew,

As swift as smoke, a rider with two steeds.

Whenas the Jew had reached thfe lofty court
The exalted monarch questioned him with mildness,

And said : “ Inform mo how the matter went,

And lie not to me touching this affair/’

The Jew asked for protection from the world-lord
If ho revealed the mystery of black art,

And then told what Ztiran had said with aU
The matter of their secret conference.

The world-lord heard with wonder and convoked
The marchlords, potentates, and archimages.

And in their presence for the second time
Investigated every circumstance.

The evil-minded Jew told everything

Till naught was hidden from the chiefs. The Shah

Then bade the deathsman rear two lofty gibbets,

From each whereof a twisted lasso hung.

Before the palaco-portal in the presence
Of all the host. The executioner
Haled to the gibbets and suspended there
Zhr^n on one, the Jew upon the other,

In savage wise, ’Neath showers of stones and arrows
They gave their heads up for bewitching milk.

Tread not the world for evil, for it will,

Past doubt, befall the practiser of 01.

The Sh4h long sought for kindred of Mahbud, 0 . 1684

If so he might find one that had escaped.

And found one damsel of unsullied name,

And three men eminent and excellent.

To these ho gave all that Ztiran possessed,

As well as all the fortune of the Jew.

His soul kept burning on Mahbud’s account,

And in the night he wept till it was day.

Would pray to God for pardon and pour forth


326 THE SHJHNJMA OF FIRDAUSI

His heart’s blood on his bosom. He bestowed
Much largess on the mendicants and made
ffis tongue moreover prayerful unto God
That He might pardoit what was done amiss,
And call him not tyrannic and unjust.

The worshipper of God, the pure of heart,
Will in no evil doings bear a part,

For though ill actions are not hard to do,

Yet in the end the heart is sure to rue.
Although thy heart shall be a flinty stone,

Yet in the end its secret will be known,

And low soever as thy voice may be
Time also will reveal the mystery.

While, even if the world shall not regard,

Good done in secret is its own reward.

If thou art innocent and pure of rede
A portion in both worlds will be thy meed.


§3

In Praise of the Wisdom of N^hirwdn, and how he
built the> City of S'drsdn

The matter of Zuxan and of the Jew
Is done, to wisdom now thy praise is due.

Just though thou art here is no tarrying ;

Thy fame will be thy memory, O king !

The unjust sovereign, when aU is done,

Will have but sepulchre and malison.

But a in heart thou dealest righteously
Know that the world hath gained new grace by thee ;
So if, 0 chief ! thou wilt have praise in death
Let wisdom be thy leaf that flourisheth.

Thus, through my words, though Nushirw&n is dead,
His justice hath achieved fresh lustihead.


NUSHtRWJN


327


As soon as all the world acknowledged him
He used his greatness only to win praise,

Both great and small reposed in peace while wolf
And sheep were watered at one fount. The mighty
Did service to him and were fain to have
Hds name upon their diadems, the neck
Had respite from the clasp of habergeon,

The warriors loosed their coats of mail, the shoulder
Had ease from sparth and sword, and naught was heard
But sounds of mirth. None strove against the world-
lord,

The tribute and the taxes everywhere

Were paid. He took toil easily and loved C. 1685

The gear of chase and riding-ground. He sat
Within his palace arabesqued with gold.

And uttered counsel even in his cups.

He built a city on the road to Rum

About two leagues in length. Within were mansions,

And halls and gardens, on on© hand a river
And, on the other, heights. He built himself
A palace in the city with a haU
Of audience arabesqued with gold ; the vaulting
Was all in gold and silver, with the gold
Inlaid with divers kinds of precious stones.

He built a cupola of ebony

And ivory with figures of the same

And teak. Artificers from Rfim and Hind,

Whoever was a master in his craft,

And had inherited his master’s skill, ^

With all the illustrious artists of fr4n.

As well as from the province of Nimruz,

He gathered in that city, for it was
At once a great seat and a place of trade.

The prisoners of war brought from Barbar,

From Rlim, and from the parts laid desolate,

1 perhaps “ Or had hoon rocommondod by his master.”


328 THE SHJHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

He fumislied with a dwelling-house apiece.

And made the city one of aliens.

The Shdh, the glory of the provinces,

Made of that city an attractive spot.

And, when complete, encircled it with hamlets.
The Shah provided tracts of arable ;

The soil was fruitful and the trees bore well.

He settled there the hostages from Luch,

Gflan, and other ravaged provinces,

Assigning occupation to each man,

And gave to each a helper if alone.

He furnished artisans, field -labourers,

And men to measure and survey the land.
Along with traders and with devotees,

With men of station and with underlings.

He decked that city as ’twere Paradise ;

The eye marked no unseemly spot therein.

He called the city by the name Sursan,

For world-lords take delight in festivals.^

His only aim in public and in private
Was justice and the improvement of the world.
Smee from the kingship time bare him away,
And made his crown another’s to possess,
’Twill grant not thee an ever-during stay.

So purge thy heart of deeds of wickedness.
Know that this world is but a tricky show ;
Man keepeth nothing be it high or low.


§4

The Story of the War of the Khan with Ghdthar, the Prince of
the Haitdlians, the defeat of Ghdtkar, and how they set
Faghdnish^ U'pon the Throne

C. 1686 Hear how the Kh^in and the Hait^hans fought.

And since a fight is toward take thy mace.

^ Siir, a feast. ® FagMni (Chaglidni ?) in original, (7/. p, 3!i3,


NtfSHtRWJN 329

Thus said the rustic bard, that noble one ;

Keep thou in mind what thou shalt hear from him : —
Of all the chiefs possessed of Grace and justice,

Of men of war, of treasure, and high birth,

Omitting Nushirwan, there was not one
To match the Khan of Chin in all the world.

All people from that realm to the Jihun
Paid homage to him as their sovereign.

That chief with troops, with treasure, and with crown,
Was camped on the Gulzaryun upon
The further side of Chach. Reports had spread,
Among the great men and throughout the world,

Of Nushirwdn, his manhood, knowledge, Grace,

His greatness and imperial usages.

Then was it that the Klian, that prudent man,

Desired to win the friendship of the king.

He sat awhile with his own counsellors.

And all the men of name were gathered there.

In his desire for amity ho sought

The counsel of the nobles and the priests.

Got ready presents that exceeded count —

All keepsakes worthy of a king’s acceptance —

Of Rtiman chargers and brocade of Chin,

Of thrones and crowns and swords and signet-rings ;
He got him ready fivo-scoro camel-loads
Of sundry trinkets that the land produced,

And bade his treasurer provide as largess
A hundred thousand of din&rs of Chin.

He also brought and added to the present
Ten camel-loads of drachms out of his treasures.

Ho then chose out a man of eloquence
Among his chiefs — ^a wise and travelled man —

And called a scribe before him with command
To write a letter from the Khin of Chin
On silk, as was the custom of the country,

Profuse in courteous greetings to the ShS^h.


330


THE SHAHNJMA of FIRDAUSI

The envoy’s way lay through the Haitdlians’ land—

A route beset by shaft and battleax —

Before whose ruler stood a host whose lines
From Sughd extended down to the Jfliun.

That people’s ruler hight Gh§.tkar the brave —

The most distinguished of their warriors —

Who when he heard of what the ElhSn had done,

And of his presents to the Iranian king,

Called from the host his veterans, discoursed
To them at large about the case, and said : —

0. 1687 ‘‘ 111 hath befallen us from the stars. If now

The monarch of frto and Khto of Chin
Negotiate and thus become good friends.

That friendship wiU hold menace for ourselves,

And this our state be wasted on two sides.

We needs must make a foray and deprive
The envoy of his life.”

He chose among

The troops a man of name, of rank, and prowess.

Such as befitted, gave up aU that wealth,

The camels and the steeds caparisoned,

To plunder and cut off the envoy’s head.

One horseman of those warriors of Chin
Escaped. Now when the tidings reached the Kh&n
His heart was fiUed with grief, his head with vengeance.
He marched an army from K&ch^ B&shi ;

No chief was left in Chin or in Khutan,

He let no scion of Afr&siy^ib,

Or of Arj^p, partake of rest and sleep.

They all marched forth to the Gulzaryun
With full hearts and with heads set on revenge.

The captain of the army of the Khdn

Of Chin was Funj, who made dust reek to heaven.

At Ch4ch the fury of the horsemen flushed
The waters of Gulzaryun rose-red.

Ghfttkar heard of the doings of the Kh&n,


NtSHtRWjN 331

And chose an army from the Hait^hans,

An army that obscured the sun, and called

For treasure, money, troops, and arms from Balkh,

Shakndn, Amwi, the Zam, Khatl^n, Tirmid,

And Wisagird ; he gathered troops from all sides ;

From mount and waste, from sands and places bare,

They seethed like ants and locusts. When the Kh^n
Had passed the mighty river with his host,

With drums and lusty elephants, he massed
His powers round M^i and Margh ; the sun became
As dusky as a falcon’s plumes^ Bukh^rS.

Was all fulfilled with mace and ax, for there
The ruler of the Hait^lians was encamped.

Ghitk^ had come forth with a mighty host,

And gathered all the native chiefs. The troops
Advanced from every quarter to the war,

And left the wind no way. What with the flashing
Of chieftains’ swords and play of massive maces,

Thou wouldst have said : “ Now iron hath a tongue.

And air a mace for its interpreter ! ”

A wind arose, rose too the army’s dust.

And light departed from the sun and moon.

Men of Kashin and Sughd were gathered there.

Tears filled the eyes of aU — ^men, women, children —

As to the issue of that battlefield, G. 1688

And whom the circling sun and moon would favour.

For one whole week those battle-loving hosts
Were opposites. On all sides lay the slain
In heaps, and dust and stones were cerois-hke
With blood. So thick were spear, mace, sparth, and
sword

That thou hadst. said : The clouds are rainiag
stones ! ”

The sun evanished in the reek ; dust filled
The eyes of eagles as they flew. It veered,

^ Couplet omitted.


332 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Upon the eighth day, ’gainst Ghatkar, the world
Was all bedarkened hke night azure-dim,

The Haitalians were o’erthrown, irreparably
For years, the wounded scattered everywhere,

And all the march was full of slain and captives.

The living from their hearts invoked God’s name.

And said to one another : Ne’er have we

Seen such a stubborn fight. Good sooth ! yon host

Is not of men ; ’tis ill to look on them ;

They have the faces of wild boasts and divs,

And heed not right and wrong. Thou wouldst have
said : —

^ They know not what it is to flee away
From scimitar and spear, from mace and sword.’

They all have dragon-faces and could pierce
A mountain with their spears, they all have claws
Like pards and hearts insatiate of war
And strife, ne’er take the saddle off their steeds,

And think a battle naught. Their chargers batten
On thorns, their riders sleep not but are watchful ;
They pass the nights in foray and attack,

And hazarding their persons in the flames.

They know not food or sleep. Would that the Div
Would challenge them to fight ! We cannot strive
Against the Kh&n, and we must seek fr^n.

If now Gh^itkar will carry out our wishes
He will submit to Nushirwan, surrender
The Haitalians’ land to him, and think no more
Of mace and sparth ; but if not we will choose
Some bold chief of the race of IQiushnaw6;Z,

Some man acceptable to Ntishirwi.n,

One that can make our state renew tts youfch,

To tell the Khdn’s proceedings to the Sh4h.

The whole world praiseth Nushirw&n, for he
Hath Grace, high bearing, destiny, and wisdom,

And wisdom is the cherisher of right.


NUSHIRWJN 333

He hath made Csesar tributary. None
Can strive with Ntishirwan.”

The Haitalians — '

Men, women, children — ^werc at one herein.

There was a high-bom warrior of Chaghan, c. 1689

Aspiring, youthful, fortunate, and just —

A man of wisdom, Faghanish by name,

Possessing troops and treasures of his own ;

The chiefs and warriors ^ called him to the throne.


§5


How NijLsMrwdn had Tidings of the Battle of the Khan with
the Haitalians and how he led a Host against the Kh6m^


Thereafter to the great king tidings came
About the Khdn, who was a valiant chief.

The Haitalians and the warriors of that folk,

And how he had o’erthrown them in the fight ;
Moreover of the monarch of Chagh§-n,

Just seated by new fortune on the throne.

How he had taken that imperial seat,

And, while the brave and glorious warriors
Stood, one and all, before Iris throne, was over
Engaged in consultation with his magnates.

The monarch of the world sat full of care
At these his wary emissaries’ words,

Then in his palace had a hall prepared
For session, and the warrior-lieges came
With the high priest Ardshir, with Yazdagird,
The scribe, and with Sh&plir, These counsellors,
And sagos, all held session at the throne
Of Nushirwdn, who said : Ye archimages
Experienced and ye ministers of state !

I have discomfortable news — accounts


1 Reading with P.


334


THE SHAHnAMA of FIRDAUSI


At once unpleasant and injurious —

About tlie Haitalians and what the Kh4n
Of ChiQ and marchlords of Tur^n have done.

Troops gathered past all count from Ch§iCh, from Chin,
Khutan and Turkist^. They bore their helms
And vengeful scimitars for one whole week,

And never once unsaddled. In the end

The Haitalians were discomfited and most

Were slain or wounded. With renown hke theirs —

A folk whose world is mace and partisan —

'Tis wonderful that they were worsted thus :

Defend me from a foolish general !

Had but Ghatkar had prudence and good sense
The sky itself had routed not his host.

The Haitalians, since their land is thus distraught,
Have sought a man descended from Bahr^m Gur,

Have placed him on the throne as their new king,

And done obeisance to him, one and aU.

The Kh4n is posted on this side of Ch4ch
In aU his pride with treasure, host, and crown ;

C, 1690 ig descended from Afr4siyS/b

And from Arj^p, and dreameth of Irka.

His triumph o’er the army of Gh§.tkar
Exalteth him in head above the sun.

It is not well for us that we should be
At one in such a story with the Khdn.

Kash^-n, the land wherefrom this folk of Chin
Derive their strength, pertaineth to our realm.

Our subjects are oppressed by them and yield
To them their persons, boundaries, and treasure ;

What are your views herein, and how shall we
Deal with the Turkmans and the Khdn of Chin 1
The prudent magnates rose and made reply,

First praised the Sh4h, and said ; 0 fortunate

And prescient Shdh ! all the Hait^ilian march
Is very Ahriman, the folk thereof


NtfSHiRWAN


335


Are double-faced and hostile to our coast.

They merit any iU that they may get,

Although the Sh&h is right to speak them fairly.
Had we no grievance, nothing to avenge
In their case save the blood of Shah Piruz,

That noble man whom suddenly they slew.

And such a king — ^the lustre of the world !

May they joy not one day, for right from wrong
Resulteth never. Such is God’s requital :
m cometh on the heads of all iU-doers.

Now if the Sh4h referreth to the KhSn
As one vindictive with an ancient grudge,

It may be that he hath iU counsellors —

Some tearful scions of AfrSsiy4b.

Success too may have heartened him : no marvel
If thou dost fear him. As for the Haitilians,
And for Ghdtkar’s host, neither think nor trouble
Concerning them, but let thy shrewd mind turn
To what the kindred of Afrisiyib
And of Arjdsp, and what the who now

Is stablished on our bank, are doing. Thou art
The world’s exalted king, both soul and wisdom
Derive their light from thee, and he is blest
Whom wisdom nourisheth. Thou art more wise
Than this great concourse and thou hast no need
Of sage or counsellor. The crown and throne
Become thee best of all the world, for thou
Hast Grace divine and might, thou fortunate !
Still if the Sh&h shall go to l6iur§s4n
He will have cause to tremble for his realm.
Hosts ever and anon will come from Rthn,

On seeing that our land is left unkinged.

Exact revenge upon the frtoians.

And leave not to frin or field or feU.

None yet hath set his foot upon our land.

Or meditated evil on this realm,


336 THE SHAhnJMA OF FIRDAUSI

Yet if the Sh^^h show fight the crocodiles
Will stir not m the streams for fear of him.”

0. 1691 On hearing what they said of peace and war
That master of the world agnized full well
The feeling that those sages had at heart —

That none of them had any wish for war,

Preferring rather feasts and pleasuring —

And answered : “ God be praised, whom I revere
In both worlds, that Iran through quiet, sleep,

And feasting, hath forgotten how to fight !

Preferring peaceful times and banquet-hall
Ye have become indifferent to war ;

Yet ease should follow toil, the body's travail
Hath treasure for its fruit ; so in God’s strength
WiU we at this month’s end prepare to march.

I win lead forth a host to Khurasan,

Will summon troops from all the provinces —

The men of name and warriors — and bind
The drums upon the lusty elephants.

I will not leave Haitahan or Khan
To call down blessings on Iranian soil,

But I will weed the world of all the wicked.

And by my largess and mine equity
Regenerate the realm.”

The nobles marvelled.

Applauded him, excused themselves, and said : —
Triumphant Sh^h, endowed with Grace and justice !
Oh ! may this age rejoice in thy commands.

We chiefs are all thy thralls and bow our heads
To thy behest and cotmsel. When the king
Shall bid us fight he wiU not find us wanting.”

So when the Sh^ sat with his counsellors
The conclave held debate a while thereon.

Thus was it till the new moon rose and sat
On its new throne. They saw the moon withal
Upon the Shah’s own face, and acclamations


NtfSHIRWAN 337

Rose from liis court. Whenas the shining Lamp
Overtopped the mountains, and the earth resembled
A golden saddle-cover, thou hadst said : —

“ They have set a topaz cup upon a robe
Of lapis-lazuli. vv A shout and blare
Of trump arose. They bound the kettledrums
Upon the elephants, the soldiers trooped
To camp, and with them went the tymbal-players.

Then Yazdagird, the scribe, came to the court
With counselling archmages and Ardshir.

They wrote a letter unto every province,

To every man of name and every chief : —

The Sh4h hath marched forth with the host to war,

So out of loyalty forgo your f eastings.”

The Sh4h bade send a letter to the Kh^n,

He offered greetings too to Fagh^inish,

And marched an army forth from Mada’in
That covered all the world except the sea ;

Earth was all troops from mountain unto mountain, c. 169
And at their centre was the world-lord’s flag.

The monarch led forth to Gurgan a host
That hid the sun. He rested for a space
O’er mount and meadow to pursue the chase.


§6

How the Ehdn had Tidings oj the Coming of the Host oj
N'dshirw&n to Gurgan and wrote a Letter in the Cause oJ
• Peace

The Sh4h took counsel with his troops what while
The Kix&a abode at Sughd, which everywhere
Was like a sea with kinsmen of Arjfep
And of Afr§siy&b. The Kh§,n said : “ Earth
Will not support this host and throne of mine.

I will lead hence the army to frdn,

VOL. VII.


Y


338 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And onward to the cities of the brave,

Will bear the very dust away to Chin,

And set the heaven warring with the earth.

I will allow not any to possess

Crown, throne, or kingship, dignity or fortune.”

Such was the language that he held awhile,
Ambitioning the world with troops and fame,

Until the tidings came about the Sh^,

How he had marched forth from fr^n in state,

Of his victorious fortune and his might,

And how his army stretched from sea to sea.

The Kh4n was troubled when he heard the news
That stayed his purposed inroad, and he sat
In anxious conclave with his counsellors.

The great men of the army were assembled,

And he addressed his nodnister : We cannot
Afford to blink these tidings. Nushirw&n,

I hear, hath reached Gurgen and spread the realm
With troops. Good sodth, he hath not news of us,
Or hath a witless head. Mine army stretcheth
From Chin to the Jihiin, the world is ’neath
The glory of my crown. I needs must go
And face him in the fight. Delay will shroud
The lustre of my name. Himself he deemeth
The limit and that none is king but he.

Now shall he learn of mine own warriorship.

For I will face him with the cavaliers
Of Chin.”

A wise man thus addressed the IQi^n : —
0 monarch of the earth ! think not to fight
Against the Sh4h, and give not to the winds
Thy realm and host. None of the kings, unless
His heart and counsel lour, ambitioneth
c. 1693 The Sh4h’s seat, for none hath his Grace and fortune
The moon in heaven hath not such a mien.

He claimeth tribute both from Hind and Rum,


NIJSHIRWJN 335

Wherever there is wealth or peopled land.

He is the lord of crown, the ornament
Of throne, the conquering master of the world,

And fortunate.”

The Khan took fitting order,

On hearing this, and asked his shrewd adviser : —
What aspect hath this matter to the wise ?

Two points confront us which we may not shun,

And cannot readily pass o’er in silence :

If war with him is toil and nothing more
There is no better course than spending treasure.
Din&rs can not be used to purchase raiment,

Or food or carpetings when war is toward.

But can procure peace, provand, fair attire.

And carpetings. Let all afraid of iU
Spurn drachms and be at ease.”

Then from the host

He chose ten fluent speakers apt for parle ;

A learned man of Chin too wrote a letter.

All compliments, decked like his idol-houses,

And to the king’s court those ten prudent horsemen
Set forth with much to say. Now when men brought
The news to Nushirwan he decked the palace
Of king of kings, then bade to raise the curtain,

And introduce the envoys joyfully.

The ten went in before the king, and took
With them the letter, offerings, and gifts.

The world-lord, when he saw, received them well.
Inquired about the Khdn and made them sit.

Thdy bent their heads before him to the ground,

And gave the message of the IQiin of Chin.’

There was a letter written in that tongue
On silk, and this the envoy laid before
The scribe. When Yazdagird began to read it
The company were filled with wonderment
Thereat. It first of all invoked the blessing


340


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


Of God, the All- just, upon the king of earth,

Next manifested forth the eminence,

Wealth, army, arms, and greatness of the Edian,

And thirdly said : “ Faghfur of Chin himself
Acclaimeth me, unasked bestowed upon me
Eds daughter, and his host is mine to bid.

’Tis for the presents that I sent the Shah,

Which the Hait^lians stopped upon the way,

That I came forth from Ch^h to take revenge,

To take the crown and treasure from Ghatkar,

So came from the Gulzaryun that all
The waters of Jihun grew red with blood,

For when in Chin news reached us of the Shah,

I praised the teller of his victories,

1694 His manliness, his wisdom, modesty,

And learning, and in secrecy desired

All friendship with the monarch of the world.”

Now when the Sh 4 h discovered from the letter
The power, the might, and purpose of the Kh&ia,

They made a lodging ready for the envoys.

Praised and made much of them. Whene’er the board
Was spread for feast and revelry the king
Invited them, and for a month they shared
With him the hall, the banquet, and the chase.

One day he held his court upon the plain,

The air was darkened with the horsemen’s dust.

And all the marchlords with their golden girdles.

Men of Baluch and Gil with golden bucklers.

Attended in a body at that court.

Attended to do service to the Sh^h,

And brought three hundred steeds caparisoned
With gold, and scimitars with golden scabbards.
Swords, double-headed darts, and javelins ghttered :
Thou wouldst have said : “ Gold is compact with iron.”
Upon one elephant, whose back was all
Housed in brocade, they set a turquoise throne,


NtSHtRWJN 341

Nile-blue, and bruit and stir filled earth and air.

Enough to deafen even the best of ears.

The ambassadors from Barda’, Hind, and Rum,

From every sovereign and peopled realm.

And from the spear-armed horsemen of the desert,

Went in a body to the king who thus
Proved to the men of Chin ; Mine is the sway.

Mine from the sun down to the Fish’s back.” ^

Air was all stir and dust of horsemen, earth
All armature of war. They made mock-battle
Upon the plain whereon there sallied forth
The warlike cavaliers and wheeled awhile
In pride with sparth and arrow, mace and bow.

The plain was full of spear and javelin-men,

And here were foot, there horse. The envoys, sent
From every clime by every chief and ruler,

Astonied at his host and equipage.

His coxmtenance, his glory, and address.

Held talk with one another, saying thus
In whispers ; “ This is an exalted Shah !

He seeketh honour, showebh horsemanship,

Displayeth to the warriors of the host

His spear-point, and the skiU that he hath shown us

Wo ought to lay to heart that on returning,

Each to our king, we may remember it,

And say : ‘ None, young or old, hath seen one like
Sh&h Nushirw&n.’ ”

They told to the world’s king
The sayings of the ambassadors in private.

Ho bade his treasurer bring upon the field 0. 1695

His battle-gear, had body-armour brought,

With holm and mail, and bade undo the buckles.^

No lusty warrior, though broad of breast.

Could lift tho breastplate oven from its place 1

1 Seo Vol. i. p. 71.

® IcB boutons (qui joignaiont lo casquo d la cuirasao) ” (Mohl)*


342


THE SHAHNAMA of FIRDAUSI


The Shih alone had chest and neck to bear
The body-armour, mace, and morion.

There was no archer in the host like him,

And no such warrior among the nobles.

Like some fierce elephant he sought the field
With ox-head mace in hand and under him
A fiery steed ; his stature ’mazed the throng.

A shout rose and the blast of clarions,

While bells resounded from the elephants’ backs,
And drummers with their cymbals led the way ;
Earth was in travail ’neath the horses’ hoofs.

The king of kings, helmed on an armoured steed.
Wheeled to the left and right. The ambassadors
Applauded him and louted to the ground.

The world-lord sought his palace from the plain,
And all the chieftains followed in his train.


§ 7

How Nikhirwdn answered the Letter of the Khan

The Sh4h then bade a scribe come with Ardshir,
The high priest, and the scribe drew up on paper
A royal letter in the olden tongue.

He bathed his pen’s two cheeks with ambergris,
And first gave praises to the Judge of all —

The Maker of the sky, height, d^pth, and love : —
We all are thralls. He is the King of kings,

And wisdom beareth witness to His might.

No breath can pass, no emmet tread the ground,
Unless by BDis command. Him have I prayed
To further, if He will, my benison
Upon the Kh4n. Now, first, for what thou saidest
About the Hait^ilians : ' They have girt up,

As I have told to thee, their loins for ill ;

They have shed blood unjustly, wantonly.


NtSHlRWjN 343

And have been taken in their proper toils : ’

The evil-doer, though of lion’s strength,

Must not be bold with God. Though these men bare
Themselves like leopards thou hast conquered them.

Again, for what thou said’st about thy treasure.

Host, puissance of Faghfdr, his throne and crown :

The sage is not at one with him that speaketh
Of his own greatness. Never hast thou seen c. 1696

The crown and throne of greatness, and the host
And march of Ch&ch to thee are wonderful.

AH greatness is a question of degree :

What star is higher than all other stars ?

Such is the language to be held with one
That seeth not treasure, army, march, or travail.

The mighty of the world have seen or heard.

If they have seen not, me, that I aocount not
The sea of Chin as water, and that mountains
Flee from my wath. Earth is my treasury.

My care extendeth over sea and land.

Now, in the third place, thou wouldst be my friend,

And hast at heart to make with me a league.

Since thou art fain to feast I will not fight.

For no one e’er preferreth fight to feast.

An d furthermore a wise man never seeketh
To fight against a man of high renown,

StiU less with one compact of war, no laggard
Upon the day of battle, used to strife.

In battle-time requiring no instructor.

And one that in the fiercest of the meUay

Is as heart-calm as when enthroned and crowned.

May He that made the world be thine ally.

Thy crown and signet still continue bright.”

They sealed this with the Shdh’s seal, gave new
lustre

To royal crown and throne, prepared a robe
Of honour, as the royal usage is.


344 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

And bade the envoys come before the Shah,

Who gave them verbal messages withal
In further explication of the letter.

The envoys well content then left the palace,

Set forth with acclamations on their way,

And came with tongues all praise before the Khan.
That world-experienced one put all folk forth ;

His minister attended at his throne.

The Edidn called in the envoys and inquired
At large of them concerning Nushh'wan,

First of his sense, his knowledge, and his counsel,
His mien, his conversation, and his stature ;

And secondly : How many troops hath he.

And who of them hath crown and signet-ring ?
Inquired about his rule, if just or not,

About his realm, his treasure, host, and crown.

The spokesman of the envoys loosed his tongue,
And answered touching all that he had seen.

He told the IQian : Account not Nhshirw^n,

0 king ! as one inferior to thyself.

A hundred ages see but few like him

For leadership, for statesmanship, and favour.

At home, at feast, at war, and at the chase
We never looked on such a sovereign.

In height he is a cypress-tree, in strength
An elephant ; his hand is like the Nile
c. 1697 For bounty ; throned he is a trusty sky,

In battle-tide a baleful crocodile.

When he is wroth he roareth like a cloud ;

The mighty lion quaileth at his voice,

But gentle is it when he reveUeth,

And his warm utterances ravish hearts.

In state and throne he is the blest Surush ;

He is a royal and fruit-bearing Tree.

The whole folk of fran compose his host,

And are the adorers of his diadem.


NtSHIRWjN 345

What time he holdeth court upon the plain
The world itself containeth not his troops.

His mace-men all have golden belts and all
His ministers decore and Grace divine.

As for the steps up to his ivory seat,

His elephants, thrones, armlets, torques and crowns.

No one in all the world can estimate

His state except the almighty Judge of all.

Although his foeman were an iron mount
’Twould be a needle’s eye before his wrath.

Lot him that is aweary of his hfe

Wax fierce and counter Nushirw^Ln in strife ! ”


§ 8


How the Khan hethought himself ani wrote offering his
Daughter in Marriage to N'kshirwan


On hearing this the Kh^n turned wan and like
The flower of fenugreek, his heart grew full
Of terror at the words, his brain was rent
By his solicitude. He sat in dudgeon
With his advisers, and he thus addressed
Tliat noble company : “ Ye men of wisdom !
What is our rede herein ? Who can be more
Concerned and hurt than I by this mischance ?
Ho must not conquer in the fight or all
Our fame will turn to infamy.”

The sages

Took cognisance of all the affair and spake,
Suggesting divers fines of policy.

Then said the Khdn : " Our policy is this —

To send a pledge of good faith to the Sh^h,

To take a doopor view and to arrange
That he shall bo affined to me. I have
Pull many a daughter in my ladies’ bower —
All crowns upon the heads of noble dames —


0. 1698


346 THE SHAHNJMA OF FIRDAUSt

And I will wed one to the king of kings,

And thus cut short my cares in that regard,

If we make blood-relationship with him
None will advise him to our detriment.

On his side it will be a joy and honour,

While war with any other is a jest.” ^

The chiefs approved the counsel of the king,

And cried : “ That is the course.”

He chose three men

Of rank out of the host, men that could speak.

And grasp an answer. He unlocked his hoards
Of coin and said : Why should we treasure jewels
Save to win fame, shun shame, or occupy
In largess, feasting, and expedient ? ”

He had a gift made ready such as none.

Or great or small, e’er had beheld, and calling
A well experienced scribe declared his mind.

He first of aU gave praises to the Maker,

All-wise, all-powerful, and all-sustaining,

The Lord of Saturn and of Sun and Moon,

The Lord of victory and mastery,

Who asketh from his slaves but righteousness,

And brooketh not that justice should be balked : —

“ His blessing be upon the Ir&nian king,

The Lord of scimitar, of mace, and helm,

The Lord of understanding, crown, and throne,

And dowered by the God of victory

With fortxme and content. The king of kings,

Of royal race, wise, weighty, learned, and just.

Is ware that men, albeit great and noble.

Fain would be dear in other men’s regard.

Now when my sage ambassadors, the men
That are both mine associates and allies,

Had come back from thy court to mine and told me
At large about the Shih — his justice, wisdom.


^ Beading with P.


Nj!rSHtRWAN 347

Good fortune, crown, pre-eminence, and throne —

His Grace divine caused to arise in me
A great desire to shadow ’neath his wings.

Now naught is dearer than our own heart’s blood.

And prudent children and our hearts are one ;

So let him, if he will, demand of me
One of my stainless daughters — ^her that is
Most gentle, fair, discreet — ^and she in sooth
Shall profit him, the marches of Ir^

And Chin shall meet, our worship he the more.”

This was all written out on silk of Chm,

And carried with the seal to the wazir.

The ICh^ selected from among his kiu
Three men of noble rank and eloquence.

And they departed from the exalted court
Ir^in-ward to the exalted Shdh who, when
He heard thereof, prepared his crown and sat
Upon his royal throne of ivory.

So those three men of prudence and high rank
Arrived before the exalted throne. They brought
Three turbans, of dinars some thirty thousand,

And laid them as a gift before the Shih.

The gifts of gold and silver, the brocade
Of Chin, made earth more brilliant than the sky.

Now when the envoys duly had been seated
They called down blessings in their native tongue.

And then the Sh^’s chief minister prepared
Fit lodging for them. Heaven revolved one night.
And when tho bright sun rose above the mountains
The Shih sat down upon tho turquoise throne.

And sot a crown of jewels on his head.

He ordered that the archmages and the chiefs
Should sit in conclave with the famous sages,

Aird said thus : ” Bring and lay before the scribe
Tho letter writ on silk.”


C. 1695


The nobles all


348 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

t

Sat round while Yazdagird drew near the Shah,

And read the letter which amazed the throng,

Such good will, fair excuse, and compliment
Were patent in the utterance of the Khan.

All those illustrious and prudent chiefs
Began to praise the king : Thanks be to God,

With whom our refuge is, that He hath set
Upon the state a Shah endowed with Grace,

With victory, and majesty, a Shah
Good, kind, and prudent, one that is in fight
A mighty, raging elephant, in feast
A gallant host. All foes are underlings
Of thine, if they be worthy of that title.

We all were fearful of this power from Chach,

And of the Khan, who hath both crowm and treasure,
By the imperial Grace is now our friend,

And seeketh with the Sh4h afiBinity.

One that is' wise among the warrior-chiefs
Will tender peace and justice. Since the Kh&n
Is ware that he can not withstand the S§;hh
He seeketh for affinity to him-
There should be no delay in this affair,

For such affinity disgraceth none.

His troops extend from Chin up to Bukh4r^,

And all the chiefs are under his protection.”

Now when the Sh&h. heard what those sages said —
Those magnates and archmages shrewd of heart —
They cleared the haU of strangers and then brought
The ambassadors in haste before the Sh^ih.

The king of kings received them graciously,

And set them near the throne. Those chosen men
Of Ch^h beheld the chief in all his pomp
Of troops, wealth, crown, and gave their master’s
message,

Protesting that their words were true. The Sh&h,
When he had heard the fervent words thus uttered


NtSHIRWJN


349


In gentle accents by the chiefs of Chin,

Rophed ; “ The Klian is great, wise, worshipful,
Desircth kinship with us through his child,

And illustrateth thus his own good wiU.

The man whom understanding maketh wise
Will look upon affairs with wisdom’s eye ;

We will take order, will advise us weU,

And make response to all that he hath said
On this condition — ^that the Khan of Chin
Shall give our heart the liberty of choice.

I wiU dispatch a wise man who shaU look
On aU his women-folk and shaU select
The most iUustrious and dear to him.

See what her own maternal grandsire was,

And her own quality of royal birth.

When what we name shall have been done the Khan
Will have performed his portion of the pact.”

The envoys called down praises, saying thus : —

“ The Kli^in of Chin rejoiceth in the Shdh,

And were his ladies’ bower a cloud of jewels
Ho would withhold it not from Nushirwto.

Select among the sages one to go
Before the Kh4n whose ladies shaU not fail
In that one’s sight their faces to unveil.”


§ 9

How N'&shirwdn answered the Letter, and sent Mihrdn
Siidd to see and fetch the Daughter, of the Khdn

The king of kings heard what they said ; the age.
Outworn, revived for him. Ho caUed a scribe,
Spako of the Khdn at largo, and bade indite
An answer couched in choice and gracious terms.


C. 1700


350


THE SHAHNAmA of FIRDAUSt


He first gave praises to almighty God,

“ The World-lord, Conqueror, and Nourisher,
The world is ’stablished by His ordinance ;

He is our Guide to good. He giveth worth
To whom He will and from abasement raiseth
Such to high heaven, the while another man
Is left in luckless case because unfavoured
By Him to Whom I own that thanks are due
For every blessing, and of Whom my heart
Is fearful when I do amiss. I would
That life should cease within my heart if I
E’er should desist from hope and fear in Him.
The worshipful ambassador hath come,

And brought a gracious message from the Khdn.
Heard have I what was said about a league,

And of the virtuous daughters of his house :

My heart would joy to be allied to him,

And in especial through his own chaste child.

Lo ! I have sent to thee a prudent man,

A man whose mind esteemeth wisdom dear.

On coming he will tell thee all my views
As touching this alliance first and last.

C. 1701 Mayst thou for ever have a reverent mind,

Be happy-hearted and our warm friend still.”

The writer, when the pen was out of work,
EmbeUished all the paper, rolled it up,

And, when the last tears of the pen were dry,
Affixed a seal of musk. The Shah bestowed
A robe of honour on the ambassadors,

Such as amazed the company, and chose
A wise old chief, by name Mihr^n Sitdd,

And five score famed frSnian cavaliers,

AU men renowned, discreet, and eloquent,

And said thus to Mihran Sit4d : ‘‘Go forth
Glad and triumphant, and with love and justice.
Be thine the fluent tongue of chiefs, be wisdom


NtrSHtRWlN

Thy guide, thy heart all lovingkindhness.

Scan well the women’s quarters of the Khan,

And throughly search out all their good and ill.
They must not fool thee with a mere display
Of countenance, of grace, and ornament.

The Eian hath many daughters stately, taU,

And crowned, behind his curtains, and of these
The offspring of his slaves are not for me.
Although they have a king to father them ;

Look thou for one that is both meek and good,
Whose mother is descended from the Khans.

If she hath gifts according to her birth
She will rejoice the world and live in joy.”

Mihrin Sit4d, when he had heard, invoked
Much blessing on the crown and throne, and left
The portal of the world-illuming ShSh
At a propitious season on the day
Khurd^d. News of his coming reached the IQidn,
Who sent out troops to welcome him, and when
Ho reached the presence of the Kh^ he kissed
The groimd and proffered praise. On seeing him
That world-aspiring Idng received him well,
Assigning him an honourable room,

But, being much concerned at the affair.
Withdrew to the apartments of the queen.
Declared to her the words of Niishirw4n,

Spake of his treasures and his host, and “ This
Sh5,h Nushirwdn,” he told her, “is still young.
And wary, and his fortune is young also.

Fain am I to bestow on him a daughter
To magnify our worship in his sight.

One such I have, concealed behind the veil —

A Crown upon the head of lady-hood,

The fairest of the fair throughout the world,

And many a chief hath sought her at my hands.

I love her so that never would I cease


352 THE SHAHnAMA OP FIRDAUSI

To gaze upon her face. I have four others —

The offspring of my slaves, themselves both slaves
And handmaids, clever girls — ^and one of them
Will I bestow on him, and rest from warfare.

And from dispute.”

The queen replied to him : —

“ None in the world wiU oust thee, thou’rt so wise ! ”
In such discourse they passed the night away
Until the sun ascended o’er the mountains.

And then MihrSn Sit^id arrived, drew near
The throne, and gave the letter. When the Kh a.Ti
Had read he smiled upon the union
And goodly choice proposed, gave up the key
That oped his ladies’ bower, and said : “ Go look
On what is hidden there.”

Four trusty slaves
Came to accompany Mihrdn Sitdd,

Who, when he heard the Khan, went with the key
And them withal. He oped the doors. They entered,
The slaves protesting to him : “ Never star
And sun and moon have seen the sight that thou
Art on thy way to see [ ”

The ladies’ bower
Was Paradise adorned — aU Suns and Moons
And goodly havings — while upon the throne
Five fay-faced maidens sat crowned and arrayed
hi treasures, save the daughter of the queen,

Who wore no crown or bracelet, torque or jewel,

But only had on her a well-worn robe.

And for a crown her musky locks divine.

Her cheeks were made not up : she only wore
What God had given her — a Cypress she.

Surmounted by a new moon that diffused
A lustre o’er the new throne where she sat.

Now when MihrS/U SitM came and beheld
He saw none like to her, and, being shrewd


NJJSHIRWJN 3S3

Of heart and counsel, knew that king and queen
Were fooling him. The damsel used her hands
As kerchief for her eyes. Mihran Sit ad
Grew wroth anew and told the slaves : “ The Shah
Hath many a bracelet, crown, and throne, and I
Choose her that lacketh crown and ornament,

For these will make her still more beautiful.

I came to show discretion in my choice ;

I came not to procure brocade of Chin.”

The queen replied : '' Old man ! thou speakest not
One gracious word and art not well advised
If thou preferrest such a child as this
To these princesses who are gracious, fair.

And w^se, have reached a marriageable age,

And kindle hearts — girls tall as cypress-trees,

With cheeks like spring and very well aware
Of all the worship that is due to kings.”

Mihran Sit4d said ; If the Khan shall act
Unfairly in this matter let him know
That Nushirw^n, the monarch of the world,

Will term me an old knave. The one that sitteth,

All unadorned by bracelet, torque, and crown,

Upon the ivory throne best pleaseth me ;

But, if your Highnesses will not consent,

With your permission I will go my ways.”

The queen observed his words. His policy
And conduct made her muse. The crafty envoy
Then left her, went back to the Khto, and told
All that had passed. The IOi4n saw him perturbed.
And Imew : “ This shrewd old man is great and apt
For delicate affairs.”

The prudent king

Sat with his counsellors, put forth the throng,

And, when the place for conclave had been cleared,
The readers of the stars who bore in hand
Their Ruman astrolabes, tho mighty men,

VOL, VII. z


!. 1705


354 the SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAVSt

And all the chiefs, attended. Then the Kh&n
Commanded every loyal liege to mark
The aspect of the sky. The sages scanned
The stars to find out how the Kh4n should act,

And as to his alliance with the Shah,

And at the last said thus : “ Let not, 0 king !

Thy heart be vexed by evil any whit,

Because, this matter can but end in good,

And time will count thy foemen’s counsels ill.

This is the purpose of high heaven herein —

The horoscope and prosperous event —

That from the daughter of the Kh4n and from
The Shah's loins a throne-gracing prince will come ;
The country of the men of name

And worth in Chin, his praises shall proclaim.”


§ 10

How the Khan sent his Daughter , escorted hy Mihrdn,
with a Letter and Treasures to N'dsMrwd/n

The Kh§r] , on hearing this, was glad of heart.

Smiled too the sunlike queen. When they had purged
Their hearts of artifice they set the envoy
Before them and told all that he should know
About the queen’s child kept secluded thus,

Whom from her sire Mihr^in Sitdd received
On the victorious king of kings’ behalf.

The deputy received, the Khto. bestowed,

The only daughter that the queen had bomo.

The handmaids came with gifts, came joyfully
Before the king, and afterwards a treasure.

Comprising goods of all sorts, was prepared —

DfnSxs, gems, torques, and crowns, a turquoise fitter,

^ Beading ■with P.


NtfSHtRWlN


355


An ivory throne, and one of aloe-wood
From Hind, with gold and divers jewelry
Inlaid, and with each throne a royal crown ;

A hundred horses and a hundred camels, •

The horses saddled and the camels bearing
Brocade of Chin, and forty tapestries
Of cloth of gold enriched with emeralds.

Of carpets too he laid a hundred loads

On camels, and brought forth three hundred handmaids,

And saw that all were mounted for the journey,

Each with a flag in hand — the use in Chin.

The Kh4n, victorious of fortune, bade
To set up on an elephant a throne
Embossed with gold and silver all incrusted
With gems unworn, and rear a flaunting flag
That made the ground all viewless with brocade.

It took a hundred men to carry forth.

And raise, that standard skyward from the plain.

A litter tricked out with brocade and gold
Contained the maiden Gem. Three hundred hand-
maids,

All blithe of heart and bright of countenance.
Accompanied that moon-faced one. He sent
His daughter to the Sh^h with troops for escort.

And forty eunuchs to precede the slaves,

And march before her with rejoicing hearts.

The preparations over, came the scribe.

And brought with him rose-water, musk, and silk.

The Khdn then wrote a letter like the Artang,^

All illustration, colour, scent, and beauty,

And first of all gave praises to the Maker,

Lord of the world, all-watchful and all-seeing : —

“ fashioned all things by divine decree
To guide His servants to predestined ends.

1 Arzhang, another form of tho same word, in the original For
Artang, eoo Vol ii. p. 19 and note.


3 s 6 the SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

My cromi is tke Iranian king of kings.

Not for my daughter’s sake have I desired
A league with him, but hearing from the wise,

The great men and the wary-hearted priests.

About his Grace, his majesty, and throne,

I sought for intercourse and league with him
Because so just a ruler girdeth not
TTi'fl loins in aU the world, or one so great
In manhood, victory, and mastery,

In Grace, mien, throne, and crown, while holy God
Sustaineth him with justice and with knowledge,
With Faith and wisdom. Lo ! we have dispatched.
According to our rites, our very Eye
To Ndshirwan the Sh 4 h, commanding her
To serve him as his slave when she shall pass
Behind his curtains. From his Grace and insight
She will learn wisdom and acquire his wayis
And usages. May wit and fortune guide thee,

Be majesty and knowledge thy supports.”

They set the seal upon that musk of Chin,

An d gave the letter to the ambassador
C. 1705 With compliments. The EihSn prepared for him
A robe of honour past all precedent
As given by the great ones of the world
In public or in private to an envoy.

The Khdn gave presents also to the suite.

And made them happy with dinSrs and musk.

He travelled with his daughter and the goods,

The beasts and elephants caparisoned.

Until he reached the bank of the Jihiin,

And poured his heart’s blood from his eyes the
while ;

He thence betook him homeward with full heart
And, in his daughter’s stead, had pain for comrade ;
Howbeit he delayed tiU they had crossed.

And reached dry land upon the further side.


nushirwAn


357


When tidings came about Mihr^ Sitad ^

The folk presented gifts and offerings,

And all with one consent called blessings down
Upon the Shah and on the chief of Chin.

With hearts rejoiced with largess and with gifts,

And aU disposed for hospitality

And amity, the folk decked road and city.

And showered drachms upon the royal bride.

Toward Amwi and Marv’s unwatered ways
All earth was like a pheasant’s plumes, and thou
Hadst said of all the journey to Bastam,

And to Gurgan : The earth saw not the sky
For decorations and triumphal arches
In waste and town wherethrough the progress lay.”
Men, women, children, from the palaces,

Met where that Idol brought from Chin would pass,
Showered on her escort drachms from overhead,

And sifted o’er them musk and ambergris.

The scents were mixed on salvors, and the world
Was fuU of din from trump and kettledrum.

The horses’ manes were drenched with musk and
wine,

And sweets and drachms wore scattered under-foot,
While through the din of rebeck, harp, and pipe.

There was no room on earth for rest and sleep.

Now when the Idol reached the royal bower,

And Nushirwan had looked within the litter,

He saw a Cypress with the orb6d moon
Above it and upon the moon a crown
Of ambergris. There was another too
Of musky coils joined chain-wise, link on link,

The links ontrammellcd, plaited daintily,

And curiously entwined like civet ring-work
Upon a rose’s petal, while beneath
The ring-work shone the planet Jupiter.

*■ Roading with P.


358 THE SHAhnImA OF FIRDAUSI

Shih Nuehirwin was all astound thereat, .

And o’er her oft invoked the name of God, .
Assigned her a fit dwelling for her own,

And they made ready for that Moon a throne.


§ II

How the Khan withdrew, and how NiIsMrwdn marched
from Gurgdn to Taisafun

1706 When of txkn and of the Iranian king

News reached the Kh^n of Ohm, and of the joy
Wherewith his child had been received, and how
The alliance caused good cheer and happiness,

He gave up Sughd and Samarkand and Chach,

And sent his crown on to Kach^ Bdshi.

Now when the hosts of Chin had left those states
The Shdh sent marchlords thither. He renewed
The world by equity, and old and young
Could sleep upon their backs. AH everywhere
Called blessings down on him with hands upraised
To heaven : ^‘0 Ruler over space and time !

Keep in Shfi-h Nushirwin this justice still,

And turn the ills of fortune from his life,

For by his Grace divine and majesty
Both public ills and private have been banned.
What time he reached Gurgto to hunt none saw
The Khdn’s face smile ; the cavaliers of Chin
Forwent their food and sleep, and none off-saddled ;
Three hundred thousand Turkman troops dispersed
Instead of striving and of combating ;

There is no need to string the bow, for none
Of Chin, or small or great, remaineth here,

Such were the Grace divine and royal mien
Wherewith the savage Lion sought the chase ;


NtSHIRWAN 359

Such were his reputation and his star
That fortune was the comrade of his throne.”

Then from the regions lying ^twixt Amwf,

Chdch, and Khutan^ the nobles met and said : —

These spacious regions full of pleasances,

Of riding-grounds, of palaces, and halls,

Prom Ohach and the Tarak to Samarkand
And Sughd ^ are wholly waste — the home of owls.

They of Chaghan, Shikn^n, Kkatldn, and Balkh,

Have all experienced dark and bitter days.

Great are our pain and sorrow when we name
Bukhara and Kharazm, Amwi and Zam.

Once none gat rest and sleep, so tyrannous
And cruel was Afrasiyab ! Howbeit
We found deliverance when Kai EZhusrau
Came, and the world had peace from bickering.

Then when Arjasp gained lustihead these marches
Wore filled with anguish and calamity,

But when Gushtfep marched from tan to battle

Arjfcp perceived no tarrying-place, and then

Tlio world had quiet from his enterprises. 0. 1707

May heaven ne’er befriend him ! Afterwards,

What time Narsi became the chief, these coasts
Were full of misery, but when Shapur,

Son of Urmuzd, usurped, and '^llien Narsi
Discerned not liand from foot, the world found justice,

And quiet, and the hand of Ahriman
Was stayed from evil. When the Kh^ bore ofi
The world from Yazdagird, and had acquired
Dexterity in ill, there came the world-lord,

Bahram Giir, to afflict and trouble him,

To make the states like Paradise with justice,

And scatter the unseemly and the foul.

So Khdahnawaz, what time Piruz was Shfih,

Filled all the world with bloodshed, heat, and anguish,

^ Reading with P.


36 o the SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

And perish Fagh^ish that son of his
With all his unjust kith and kin ! And now
The world-lord Nushirw4n hath occupied
Our marches and hath made us rich indeed !

For ever may his policy endure.

And may the whole world be at one with him.

Now that the earth beholdcth justice we
Will contemplate no travail, shed no blood.’’ ^

Then from the Hait Lilians, Turkmans, and Khutan
The people met by the Gulzaryun
From every quarter where some shrewd priest lived,

Or other potentate good, learned, and wise.

While all the Turkmans that were well advised
Drew to the Shah — a mighty company.

It was the policy of all these troops
To come before the Sh4h with offerings,

And when they came before him, when they came,

AU with one heart and tongue, the monarch’s court
Was so fulfilled with people that they barred
The way to ant and gnat ! All louted low,

Called praises down upon the ShSh, and said : —

“ 0 Shah I we are thy slaves and live to do
Thy bidding in the world. We all of us
Are nobles dight for and rend the hides
Of leopards on the fiela.”

The king of kings

Received their gifts, and then they left the presence,
Their leader Faghanish. Behind him came
A troop of youthful warriors. When thus
They had found favour in the monarch’s sight
The chamberlain went to the palace-gate
With formal greetings and with compliments.

And lodged them through the city. Afterwards
The king of kings, that worshipper of God,

^ The historical reminiscences put into the mouths of dwoUers beyond
the Oxua and even the Jaxartes are of course valueless.


NtrSHIRWlN


361

Passed from the audience-chamber to the dust,

Ahd offered up thanksgivings to the Almighty ; —

“ 0 Thou above vicissitudes of fortime !

Thou gav’st me Grace, accomplishment, and counsel.

And art my Guide in all things good and ill,

For all that hear of me seek not thereafter 0 . 1708

The crown of majesty, but all submit
To bo my lieges. None hath pluck to fight.

Birds on the mountains, fishes in the water.

Remain awake to watch what time I slumber j
All the wild creatures are my sentinels.

The mighty of the world mine underlings ;

No abject he whom Thou dost choose who art
The world’s solo Lord and giv’st me strength therein
That not an ant may sleep aggrieved by me.”

’Twas thus he spake with many tears to God :

Canst find within the world a king like him ?

Tlion from his place of prayer he sought his throne.

And they prepared to quit Gurgin. The blast
Of trumpets and the din of brazen cymbals
AstKUided from the court. He called to horse.

And loaded up, invoking the All-giver.

He took dinars, brocade, crowns, belts, and treasures
Of drachms and gems, steeds, |emale slaves, and
crowns,

Tire turquoise litter and the ivory throne.

The heart-alluring handmaids and the thraUs
Of all desciiptions mounted on the saddle.

Tlie Shfi-li dispatched them all to Taisaffin,

Preceded by the womcn-folk of Chin,

Wlio fared auspiciously and cheerfully
Surrounded by the eunuchs. As high priest,

Mihrto SitM accompanied the queen,

TIk' daughter of the Khto, and thus the treasures
And baggage went toward Taisaftm. A band
Composed of warriors only — all the best


362 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

And noblest of the mighty men — approached
Afoot Azar Abadagkx while troops
Came from each province, soldiers from Gilan
And Dilaman,^ the mountains of Baluch,

And deserts of Saruch, and warriors
From Luch, all came with gifts and offerings
Before the tent-enclosure of the king,

Whereat the famous chiefs rejoiced and thought : —
“ The wolf's claws grow too short to reach the sheep
World without end strife with Baluch had raged,
And filled the cities with distress and anguish,

But by the Grace of Nushirw6.n the sky
Had changed its use and |avour.^ Wheresoever
The host was wont to pass it did not use
To harm a crop, to ask for bread and water,

But made its sleeping-quarters on its route.

The Shah on this wise went about the world,
Surveymg every place, both field and waste.

He saw that all the world was full of crops,

While sheep and oxen filled the hills and plains.

Oi 1709 A region ne’er before inhabited,

Where none had looked on sowing and on reaping,
He now surveyed and found it bearing fruit,

Found too a family in every house.

The trees were laden through the Grace divine
Of that victorious master of the world.

At one stage of the progress of the Shah
The ambassador of Csesar came with presents.

With silver and withal a throne of gold,

And Human jewels and brocade — a, gift
That covered all the surface of tho ground :

So great a tribute ne’er had come from Rum.

Ten ox-hides had been filled up with dinars —

The tribute and the taxes of three years —

And with the presents Csesar had dispatched
1 =iDnain. ® Seo p. 241 seq.


nCshIrwAn 363

A letter to the famous king. They set
The envoy in the presence, and the Sh^ih
Was all attention while they read the letter.

’Twas full of warm expressions of good will
About tho gifts that had been sent to him : —

" Hereafter will I send thee greater gifts,

For these are merely meant for largessing.”

The Shah received them, mounted on his steed.

And sought tho temple of Azargashasp.

When, still afar, he saw the place of worship
His cheeks were hidden by his tears. He lighted
Down from his steed and, sacred twigs ^ in hand,

Made prayer with bated breath ; 2 then drawing near
The Fire ho worshipped and adored the Maker.

He gave tho temple-bursar all the gold.

And all the many gems that ho had brought.

And showered gold and silver on the archmages.
Bestowing on them likewise gems and raiment.

All were enriched by him and sought tho Fire
To oiler up their thanks in muttered tones,®

And blessed w'ithal the righteous judge of earth.

He partc'd thence for Taisaftin ; the host

Made earth a Mount Bistun. That righteous Sh^h,

On reaching any city, used to give
Much gold and silver to the mendicants.

Through all the wealth that he disposed of thus
Tho realm was stuffed with treasure and with drachms.
From Taisaftin ho drew toward Mad4’in,

For there ho wont to keep his treasuries’ key.

Ho took tho Rose of Chin * and forty more
Withal. Mihr4n Sit4d fared on before.

1 Soo Vol. i. p. 80, a,v. Barsam,

* Lit ® IL * Literally “RoBD-gardon.*'


364


THE SHAhNJMA of FIRDAUSI


§ 12


Discourse on the Justice oj NusMrwdn and how
Mortals had Peace under his Usages

When Nushirwan ascended to his throne
In pomp, with his good fortune for his mate,

The world was decked like Paradise with justice,
c. 1710 With goodliness, and wealth, had rest from strife,
Inequity, and bloodshed, everywhere,

And was renewed by Grace divine. They have,”
Thou wouldst have said, bound both the hands of
evil.”

None knew of pillage, raid, or putting forth
The hand to ill ; all came at his behest
From darkness and perverseness to the way.

If any dropped a drachm upon the road
A thief would shun that wealth ! As for brocade
And for dinS^rs, on land and sea, by daylight,

And in the hours for sleep, the ill-disposed
Would look not to that quarter out of fear,

And through the justice of the Sh^h, the world-lord.
The world was pargetted like Paradise,

And dale and desert were fulfilled with wealth.
Dispatches went to all the provinces,

To every man of name and potentate,

While from the Turkman merchants and from Chin,
Sakl^b and every province, came such store
Of musk-bags and of silk of Chin, of trinkets
Of Rum and of the land of Hind, as made
fran like jocund Paradise ; its dust
Was ambergris, its bricte were gold. The world
Turned toward frin and rested from distress
And bickering. “ The breezes shed rose-water,”

Thou wouldst have said, and men had peace from pain
And leech. The moisture showered upon the rose


NtJSHtRWAN 365

In season, and the farmer was not sad

Through lack of rain. The world grew full of herbage

And cattle, plains and valleys were aU flowers,

Rooftrees, and dwellings, all the streams seemed seas.

And roses Pleiad-like within the gardens.

Men learned to speak new tongues within lean.

Illumed their souls with knowledge, and returned
Thanksgiving to their guide, the Shih, for all
The traffickers that came from every march
And land, from Turldstdn, Chfn, Hind, and Rum,

While cattle multiplied amid the herbage.

All learned men and ready speakers found
A place at court. The great, the men of lore.

And archimages were esteemed, the wicked
Shook fearful of calamity. What time
Tlie sun adorned the world a proclamation
Would go up from the court : “ All ye that are
The servants of the monarch of the world I
Keep not ill hidden, any one of you !

Wlioe’or hath toiled at any task shall have
A treasure in proportion to his travail.

Prefer your claims before our chamberlain
That ho may sock your recompense from us.

If any creditor shall come and ask

For payment from the poor, my treasurer

Will pay the debt .because the destitute

Must not bo troubled. Whosoe’er shall look C- 1711

Upon another’s wife, and his accuser

Appeal to us, the offender shall see naught

But pit and gibbet, bondage in the pit.

And arrows on the gibbet. If men find
A horse at large, and any husbandman '

Comi)lain thereof at court, lot it be slain
Upon that tilth, and he shall have the carcass
Who had tho scath, the horseman shall be horseless,

And faro afoot before Azargashasp


366 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

To tender his excuse, the muster -master
Shall strike his name off from the muster-roll,
They shall lay low his dwelling, and the offender,
Whatever his rank may be, shall be degraded.
The Shdh can not be of one mind with such,

Will have the righteous only at his court,

And at our court God grant there never be
Those that approve not of our policy.”


§ 13

How B'uzurjmihr counselled N'^shirwdn and discoursed
on good Deeds and Words

One day the world-lord, as he sat rejoicing,

Gave audience to the mighty men of wisdom.

He spake with smiles and open countenance,

And seated Buzurjmihr upon the throne,

Who offered to the king such praise as made
His heart like jocund spring, and thus he said : —

‘‘ 0 righteous judge so fresh of visage ! may
Fault-finders never find a fault in thee.

Blest king of kings, whose fortune prospereth,

The wise, triumphant master of the world !

I erst recorded in the olden tongue
Some thoughts upon a roll of royal paper,

Which I entrusted to thy treasurer
Till there might come a season when the Shah
Would read it, but I see the mystery
Is one that laggard heaven will disclose not.

What though a man shall quit his seat at feasts,

And take his life within his hands in fight.

Shall sweep the earth of enemies and be
Secure against the toils of Ahrimans,

Shall be the great king over all the world,

And consummate his wishes one by one,


NtJSHlRWAN 367

Shall win the wide world by his bravery,

Make rosary and pleasance, park and palace.

Shall lay up wealth, have sons surrounding him.

And reckon many days of happiness.

Shall bring together warriors and wealth.

Shall decorate his palaces and halls.

And, while the poor are toihJig for his sake.

Amass on all sides treasure and renown.

Still willy nilly he but gathereth dust ; 0 . 1712

His lifetime will not last a century.

He will be dust, his toils will bear no fruit
For him, and all his wealth will be his foe’s.

No children, throne or crown or royal haU,

Or treasury or army will be his.

And when he ceaseth to pursue the wind
None in the world will give a thought to him.

Of all his doings when his time is over
A good name will be his memorial.

In this world there are two things that endure.

And only two, the rest will last with none —

Choice sayings and good doings : these will last
Until the world shall end, auspicious Shih !

Time’s course is such that fame and honest speech
Spoil not through sun and water, wind and dust.

The modest man and virtuous is blest.

Avoid, 0 king ! with all thy might the faults
That shame the soul. Harm not but help ; thus Faith
And precedent proscribe. I leave behind me
Words that, I ween, ne’er will grow obsolete.”

Ho opod the king’s shrewd heart who questioned him
On many points : “ Who is the glorious man.

Whose heart is glad, who sigheth not ? ”

He answered : —

“ The innocent, the man whom Ahriman
Hath caused not to transgress.”

The Sh^ih then asked him


368 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Conceming guile, the Div’s way, and the way
Of Grod, the world’s Lord, Buzurjmihr replied : —

To do God’s will is best, for in both worlds
The Grace is His. The door of evil leadeth
To Ahriman who is the enemy
Of those that worship God, The high-souled man
Is blessed in the world, for his adornments
Are holiness and modesty. Since knowledge
Safe-guardeth him his life is one of ease,

He hath nobility and righteousness,

And knocketh not upon the door of guile,

And loss. When he is dead his soul will be
A foe to what pertaineth to the body.

He is not negligent about them both,

But is concerned for either sword or scabbard.” ^

0. 1713 Then Nushirw^n inquired : Among the chiefs
What man attaineth to the highest standard ? ”

Said Buzurjmihr : “ The man that hath most know-
ledge,

And most controlment over his desires.”

Who is the man of knowledge,” said the Sh^h,

“ For knowledge is a matter hid in men ? ”

The man that neither severeth heart from God,”
He answered, at the bidding of the Div,

Nor out of wantonness obeyeth one
That is the foe of souls and wisdom’s snare.

Ten Ahrimans there are with lion’s might,

Who lord it over wisdom and the soul.”

What then are these ten divs,” said Nushirwan,

” Since wisdom hath good reason to bewail them ? ”
He thus made answer, saying : “ Greed and Need
Are two o’orweening divs and puissant
The rest arc Anger, Envy, Strife, Bevongo,

Backbiting, Treachery, and Faith Impure,

The tenth div is Ingratitude to men

1 JFivo oouplots omitted, - Of. Vol. vi. p. 14C.


NT^SHtRWlN


369


For benefits and Ignorance of God.”

The Shah said : “ Of these ten divs, ruinous
And black, which Ahriman is lustiest 1 ”

He answered Nushirwan thus, saying : “ Greed
Is a tyrannic div, the last to go .

Him never wilt thou see content in aught.

But ever labouring for something more.

All those that look on Need behold him blind.

And sallow with anxiety and pain.

The div of Envy is the next, 0 king !

And is an ailment that no leech can cure.

His soul is pauied to see one prosperous.

Strife is another div and passionate,

For ever quick to put his hand to iU ;

Revenge, another, wrathful, turbulent,

And instant to arouse the battle-cry
In men, unloving and ungenerous —

A div malignant and with frowning face ;

Another, Slander, knowing naught but lies,

And doing all his traflftc in the dark ;

Another, Treachery, with double face.

Who feareth not the Master of the world.

But flingeth strife and vengeance ’twixt two men,

And toileth to break up alliances :

The last, Ingratitude and Ignorance —
t A witless div unconscious of all good.

Contemptuous of rede and modesty,

And in whose sight both good and ill are one.”

The king then asked the sago : “How doth the
Div

Make war against the heart, and what hath God
Bestowed upon His servants so that they
May counteract the Div ? ”

That man of Faith

Replied : “Wise, glorious Sh4h ! against the sword
Of divs the coat of mail is wisdom ; that

VOL. VII. . 2 A


370 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

niuminetli the sage's heart and mind,

1714 Recordeth what is passed and nourisheth

The soul with knowledge. Oh ! may wisdom be
The guider of thy mind because the way
Is long before thee, and if wisdom prove
A second nature, as the saying is,

So that the heart is fearless of the Div,

The good heart will find pleasure in the world,
And not frequent the portal of desire.

Now will I utter words of hope to guide
The heart to joy : the sage is always hopeful,

And seeth naught but happiness from time,

Not for a moment meditateth ill,

And chooseth not the bow's path but the arrow's.
Moreover one contented doth not stretch
His hand to treasure or fatigue himself ;

He that despiseth drachm and treasury
Will fleet his sum of days in happiness.

Moreover one that is devote to God ^

In all will turn not from His ordinance
For toil or treasure or the fear of man ;

He hath no strain of evil in his nature,

And by that token he is virtuous too
Because he will sell not God's way for aught."

Said NushirwSn ; “ Which is the royal way
Conducting us to good ? "

He answered thus : —
The way of wisdom doubtlessly surpasseth
All knowledge. Likewise being weU disposed
Will keep a man in honour all his days ;

While of the qualities the mightiest

Is in my view contentment with one’s lot ;

The most agreeable, which refresheth most
In travail, and the seemliest, is hope.

In greed I see the weariest of all,

1 Eoading with P.


NtSHIRWlN


371


For that is never satiate of wealth.”

The Shd.h said : “ Which accomplishment is best,

The one whereby aspirants win to greatness 1 ”

He answered : “ Knowledge, for the sage is greatest
Among the great as clutching not at treasure,

And holding of himself aloof from travail.”

The Sh^h then asked him : “ How shall we proceed
To overcome the might of enemies ? ”

” Ill-doing is the enemy,” he answered,

“ Alike of wisdom and the soul serene.”

The righteous judge then asked the sage and said : —

“ Is talent or is application better 1 ”

The sage made answer, saying : “ Application
Is more than natural abihty,

For application fumisheth the mind,

While talent only maketh talking easy,

And, when untrained, is wretched, vile, and weak,

But application strengtheneth the soul.”

” How can the mind be poHshed,” said the Shdh,

“And what accomplishments commend the body ? ”

“ Now,” said he, “ will I make a full reply, 0. 1715

If thou wilt take it from me point by point ;

Since wisdom is itself God’s robe of honour
No thought can gain it and no .evil touch it ;

So one accomplished but withal conceited
Should have no credit for accomplishments.

While no wise man regardeth with disdain
The merest peasant well-disposed by nature.

And though a sage join bounty to high birth.

Join knowledge, conduct, equity, yet will
His greatness, his addition, and uprightness
All suffer if his natural bent be vicious.”

Then Nhshirwta inquired : “ Illustrious scholar !

Doth greatness come from toil or doth the world-lord
Got crown and throne from fortune. ? ”

He rephed : —


373


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


“ The fortune and accomplishment of men
Are mates allied and joined like soul and body.

The body visible, the soul concealed.

The body is man’s instrument for toil,

When wakeful fortune shall bestir itself,

But by his travail ne’er will he attain
To greatness if good fortune guide him not.

Again, the world is all deceit and wind,

Or memory of a dream that vanisheth
When one awaketh, whether he beheld
A pleasant vision or a painful one.”

A question then occurred to Nushirwdn ;

He asked the sage : “ Who should be praised ? ”

He answered : —

“ A king that doth adorn the throne and hath
His strength from fortune will, if he doth justly,

And is of fair repute, attain his end
In word and deed.”

What man is sorrowful,”

The Shah said, “ luckless, and unprofitable ? ”

The sage replied : “ The wicked mendicant,

Who loseth both this world and Paradise.”

Who is the luckless one,” rejoined the Sh§;h,

For whom we must weep always bitterly ? ”

And Buzurjmihr replied: "'The man of know-
ledge,

Whose face is sallow through his evil deeds.”

The Sh4h asked further : “ Who is the contented,
And who is anxious to increase his store ? ”

He made response : “ He that regardeth not
The revolutions of the turning sky.”

Then Nushirwan : “ What man best suiteth us ? ”
And Buzurjmihr replied : The gentlest man.”

“ But who is gentle,” asked the ShSh, for why
The hasty give us cause to weep ? ” , -

He answered ; —


NtfSHIRWAN


373

Mark him that shunneth converse with fault-
finders ;

That man hath modesty and gentleness.

With wisdom, counsel, and propriety.”

The famed king asked him : Who is hopefuUest
Of men ? ”

'' The most industrious,” he said,

Whose ears are open unto knowledge most.”

The monarch of the world inquired of him
Of privy rumour as to good and ill.

He thus returned reply : '' It is the cause
Of ample chatter but an empty brain.

Say what they will the earth is still in place ;

I loiow not how the other world doth fare.”

Then Nushirw^n : “ What land most prospereth,
And how have we contributed therein ? ”

“ The justice of the world-lord,” he replied,

“ Establisheth a land’s prosperity.”

Then Nushirwto inquired : “ Inform me this :

What man is shrewdest, most approved, and prudent
Within the world because the adept increaseth
One’s lustre ? ”

He replied : An ancient sage
That hath been mindful of experience.”

Said Nushfrw&n : '' Who is the happy man
That liveth upright, and right glad ? ”

He answered : —

“ One free from apprehension and possessed
Of gold and silver 1 ”

Nushirw^n inquired : —

Which of us best deserveth praise, and who
Is most approved by all ? ”

He answered thus : —

He that can hide his need and can suppress
Strife, envy, greed, revenge, and jealousy :

That man will find approval in the world.”


374


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


0 , 1717


The Sh&h inquired of the long-suffering.

Whose crown is patience.

Buzurjmihr replied : —

'' That is the man grown hopeless, with heart dark,
And yet his counsel is sun-bright, or else
The man that hath but little time to live.

And yet hath entered on some vast employ.”

The Shah said : ‘‘ Who hath grief so much at heart
That he is weary of his life through care ? ”

And Buzurjmihr made answer thus : '' The man
Fall’n from a throne and desperate of fortune.”

The exalted king inquired of him and said : —

Who of us hath his heart in sorry plight ? ”

The sage replied : '' The man that is not wise.

And rich man childless.”

''Whose heart,” asked the Shah,
" Is sad through trouble and calamity 1 ”

He answered thus: '^The upright man of know-
ledge

O’er whom besottedness is sovereign.”

The Shd-h said : “ Who is fullest of despair
Although possessing power and reputation ? ”

“ The man that falleth from a lofty throne,”

He said, “ retaining stiQ his pride of birth.”

Sh§h Nushfrw4n inquired of him and said : —

" 0 man of foresight and of ardent soul !

Whom knowest thou unfamed and lustreless.

And yet deserving both of love and pardon 1 ”

He answered thus : “ The man of many faults.

The culpable, the mendicant, and needy.”

The Shih inquired and said : " Now teU me truly :
Who is it that repenteth of the past ? ”

He said : " The great king who, when he shall put
The black cap on upon his dying-day,^

Repenteth with a heart all terror-stricken

1 Cf. Vol. i. p. 109.


NtSHIRWlN 375

Of all his life’s ingratitude to God,

And he moreover who hath undergone
Abundant travail for ungrateful men.”

The Shkh inquired : ''0 sage that dost combine
All excellence ! know’st thou of aught that maketh
The body profitable and is dear
To all men’s hearts withal ? ”

He made reply : —

In health the heart wiU seek but happiness,

But when through suffering the life is failing
The body’s one desire is then for health.”

The Shdh rejoined : “ Good man ! expound to me
Which is the strongest of the appetites ? ”

Said Buzurjmihr : The great are not exposed
To such solicitings and, since their bodies,

WTiich have no wish unsatisfied, fare well.

Have only need to seek their heart’s desire.”

The SMh then asked his guide: '‘WTiat is the
heart’s
Chief care ? ”

“ The sage,” he answered, “ would inform
His questioner that there are three chief cares —

First, apprehension of the evil day.

Lest ill then should befall tjie innocent ;

Next, of the practice of a treacherous friend,

"Who fain would have brain, life and blood and skin ;
And thirdly, of a great but unjust king,

WHio knoweth not the worthless from the good.

How happy is the course of time with him
That hath a prudent friend and counsellor !

A bright world and a great king who is just —

Thou ’It get from heaven no greater excellence.”

The Sh^ih next asked of Faith and right — ^the means
Of banning fraud and falsehood. He replied : —
Incline, 0 Sh4h ! to one of Faith whose mind
Is filled with thoughts of God — the man averse


376 THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSt

From guile and from the Div’s way through his awe
Of holy Godj the Master of the world,

And hearkening to His law. None such will barter
The Faith.’’

The Shah then asked concerning kings,
Whose rule is o’er the holy : Which of them
Is of victorious fortune and throne-worthy ? ”

He answered thus : “ The just possessed of

wisdom,

Of counsel,^ modesty, and excellence.”

The Sh 4 h then questioned him about old friends,
Such as are one with us in ear and speech.

He made this answer : “ Magnanimity
And generosity are good in them ;

They will wish thee no ill to please another,

But aid and succour thee in thy distress.”

Ui 1718 Said Nushirwan to him : Who hath most

friends

That are to him as his own blood and skin ? ”

He thus gave answer : Save the faithless man
All would be joined to him whose heart is good,

And all the more the kinder that he is,

The more obliging, and conformable.”

The Shah inquired : Who hath most enemies
And most antagonistic ? ”

Euzurjmihr

Returned him this reply : “ The insolent.

For he incurreth many a malison.

And also any one that speaketh harshly,

Is ever frowning, and is close of fist.”

Then said the Shah : “ Who is the constant

friend,

One who will weep for pain of severance ? ”

He answered : ’Tis the friend that faileth not,

Is never vexed, and feareth not to suffer.”

^ Beading with P.


NtSHtRWAN 377

"'What lasteth,” said the Sh^, “and doth not
waste ? ”

He made reply : “A benefit conferred
Is ever present to a worthy friend/’

“ What hath the chiefest lustre/’ said the Shah,

“ And is a crown upon the head of all ? ”

He said : “ The sage’s mind which mastereth
His passions.”

Said the Shah : “0 lord of love !
What is there wider than the turning sky ? ”

He answered : “ First, a king with open hand.

And next, the heart of one devote to God.”

The Shdh inquired : “ What is the goodliest way
Wherein a wise man may exalt his head ? ”

“ 0 great king ! ne’er bestow,” he made reply,

“ Thy treasure on unholy men. For thee
To deal with the unthanlrful is to fling
Bricks unbaked into water.”

Said the ShSh : —

“ What toil diminish eth man’s greed for treasure 1 ”
Then Buzurjmihr rephed : “0 king ! for ever
Be thy heart like young spring. For very travail
The servant of a king of evil nature
WiU cease to care for person, life, and wealth.”

The Sh^th inquired : “ What wonder hast thou seen
Than which a greater cannot be conceived 1 ”

And Bfizurjmihr made answer to the Shdh : —

“ The turning sky is always wonderful.

Thou seest one possessed of mastery.

With crown exalted to the darksome clouds.

Who camiot tell his loft hand from his right,

Or forbuno’s gain from loss discriminate ;

Another man wiU read the lofty sky,

And tell the why and the wherefore of the stars,

Yot heaven still will lead him into straits,

And evil fortune be his only lot ! ”


378 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

“ What thing know’st thou, as heaviest/' asked the
Shah?

He thus returned reply ; “ The weight of sin.”

The Shah inquired : Of matters most unseemly,
Including in the question words and deeds,

.1719 Which is the greatest cause of shame and blame,

So that all folk pronounce it done amiss ? ”

He thus made answer : '' Harshness in a king ;

The persecution of the innocent ;

The nearness practised by the man of wealth
That is a niggard as to dress and food ;

In womankind the loud and strident voice
Of those whose modesty is forfeited ;

The infamy of men that do oppression,

And are high-handed with the indigent ;

While falsehood in a king or in a man
Of no account is ugly, foul, and vile.”

Of all things in the world, apert or secret,

” What is that goodly one,” said Nushirw^,

Whereof the sage wiU fashion him a breastplate,

And therewithal illuminate his soul ? ”

The sage made answer : “ Earnestness of Faith
WiU have but approbation from the world,

And secondly thanksgiving unto God
Charaotereth a wise and holy man.”

Said Nushirwan : What is it best for kings
And mighty men to do and to avoid ?

What is there better than to rule, possess.

And look on others as inferiors ?

From what do we do wisely to refrain.

And what is good to seize upon and keep ? ”

The sage replied : “ Safeguard thy wrath as

knowing

That other folk wiU keep their eyes on thee ;

Next, let thy soul be ever on the watch,

And do thine utmost to abstain from iU.


NtsHtRWAN 379

The soul of him that will forgo revenge,

And hope instead, will shine as doth the sun.

By means of sin thou wilt have many pleasures ;
Rejeet such pleasures and avoid the sin.”

Thanks to the Master of the moon and sun
The parle of Buzurjmihr and Shih is done.


PAST IV


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE GAME OF CHESS
INTO IRAN. the legend OF THE INVEN-
TION OF THE GAME, THE DISCOVERY OF
THE BOOK OF KALIlA AND DIMNA

ARGUMENT

The Raja of Hind sends an envoy to Nilshirwan with the
game of chess, proposing certain conditions which the Shd-h
accepts and, with the help of Buzurjmihr, carries out. Biizur-
jmihr invents the game of nard, and the Shd,h sends him with
it to the Rdja, proposing similar conditions. The poet then tells
the legend of the invention oE chess — how two sons of an Indian
queen quarrelled about the succession to her throne, how one of
them perished and how the other, to console his mother, invented
the game. Lastly the poet tells how a prince tributary to
Niishirwan was sent at his own request to Hind to find the herb
that restores the dead to life, and returned bringing instead the
Fables of Bidpai.


NOTE

§§ 1-3. Here, as in the case of the Y^tkdr-i-Zariran ^ and the
Kamamak,^ we are brought into contact with an extant Pahlavi
Text — the Tshatrang Ndmak — ^which was undoubtedly one of
Firdausi’s indirect authorities. It was written, probably, about
the seventh century A.D., and tells how the king of Hind —
D^wasdrm — sent an embassy to Niishirwdn with gifts and the
game of chess which he had invented, The chess-men were one
half of emeralds and the other half of rubies. If the Iranians,
he writes to Niishirwdn, cannot explain the meaning of the game
they must pay him tribute or mot versd. None can find the mean-
ing till Bfizurjmihr, who has been keeping himself in reserve,
appears on the third day, expounds the principle of chess,


^ See Vol. V. p. 24.


380


2 Id. Vi. 195.


NtfSHtRWAN 3B1

and proceeds to win twelve games against DewasAnn^s envoy.
Biizurjmihr then invents nard, which is a form of backgammon,
takes it to Hind, puzzles the sages there with it, and returns
triumphant with double tribute. The similarity of the Pahlavi
Text to the Shahndma therefore is obvious. Probably in the
original story, no longer extant, the problem set was compara-
tively a simple one : “ What did the board and pieces represent ? ”

And the answer would be: “A battlefield.’' The misplaced
ingenuity of later redactors, however, has added impossible
details. A clever man of the time might guess by what the
game had been suggested, but the greatest that ever lived could
not have evolved the method of play from his inner consciousness,
assuming of course his complete previous ignorance of the game.
The Pahlavi Text gives the answer correctly and then proceeds
to make Biizurjmihr win twelve games right off! In the
Shdhnama the Indian envoy himself gives away the whole thing
by stating what the game represents, and then Buzurjmihr in
retirement discovers the powers of the various pieces and the
way in which they are manipulated — an impossible achievement.
It will be observed that Firdausi describes two forms of the game
— that introduced into Persia for a board of sixty-four squares,
and that, which he considers to be the original, for a board of one
hundred squares. The powers of most of the pieces have altered
since those days. The tethered minister has changed his sex,
become the king’s better half, and has acquired as much liberty
and preponderance as the most emancipated lady could desire,
but the knight’s ingenious move has passed unchanged through
all vicissitudes,

The Persian word “nard” means a tree-trunk, and it seems not
unreasonable to imagine that the game got its name from the re-
semblance of the pieces on the board to tree-stumps. The author
of the Tshatrang-Namak, however, tells us that the game was
named after the founder of the Sdsilnian Dynasty, Nau-Ardshir,
which became contracted into nard. Like chess it is symbolical
and represents human life as swa^’^ed or moulded by fate or fortune
whose decrees are written in the aspects of the stars and planets.
Thus the board represents the earth, the thirty pieces the days of
the* month, the colour of the pieces the nights and days, &c.
Each throw of the dice too had its proper symbolism. The first
roprosented the Unity of Urmuzd, the second the duality of
heavou and earth, the third the triad of Good Thoughts, Good
Words, and Good Deeds, the fourth the four temperaments— dry,
clamp, warm, and cold, and so forth. Later Arabic writers


382


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


elaborated the symbolism considerably. The dice were taken to
represent the heavens and their motions, and the markings on
the dice the seven planets in as much as the numbers on the
opposite sides added together always make up the number seven,
one being opposite to six, two to five, and three to four. The
result of a throw was the decree of fate, &c. Nard may be said
therefore to surpass chess in sublimity of conception as much as
chess surpasses nard in its demands upon the intellect.

Firdausi does not tell us how nard was played, and the intro-
duction of the two kings, apparently on the analogy of those at
chess, is quite beside the mark. The poet’s whole story of the
way in which chess was brought into Iran^ and the invention of
nard, is quite unhistorical. We have had already in this volume ^
an instance of one king propounding hard questions to anotiher,
and in the next volume we shall have the problem of the mysteri-
ous box, on the elucidation of which a wager depends as in the
present case. According to Mas’fidl, nard was invented before
chess and before the days of Porus, and chess in the time of one
of that king’s successors, but he also states that the invention of
nard has been attributed to Ardshlr Pdpakan,'^ Elsewhere
Mas’iidl tells us that Niishlrwdn had the book of Kallla and
Dimna, chess, and a black hair-dye, brought from Hind.®

§ 3. Shahwl, Firdausi’s authority for his story of the invention
of chess, perhaps may be identified with the Mdhwl who collabor-
ated with four others in the work of putting the Biistdn-ndma
into modern Persian in the tenth century A.D.‘

§ 4. Shdddn, son of Barzln, was, it would seem, another of the
five above-mentioned collaborators.®

We appear to be here on much firmer historical ground than in
the corresponding stories of the introduction of chess and the
invention of nard. That the Fables of Bidpai were brought
from Hind to Persia in the reign of Niishlrwdn, and translated
from the Sanscrit into Pahlavl by Barzwl, seems to be admitted
generally, though of course we need not accept all the details of
Firdausi’s version of the transaction. He is not very accurate in
what he says with regard to the later literary history of the
famous book. It was not translated into Arabic for the first
time in the reign of the Khalifa Mdmiln (a.d. 813-833) but in lilie


1 See p. 102, 2 MM, i. 157 set?.

® Id. ii. 203. For the above generally see NFS, IT, p. 20 seq. ;
HS, ii. 250 seq.

* See Vol. i. p. 67 ; NIN, p. 16, ® Id.


NtsHtRWAN


383

previous century by Ibn Mukaflfa.^ Firdausi is correct, however,
in stating that the Fables were translated' into Persian verse by
the first great modern Persian poet, Ri'idagi, who enjoyed for
many years the munificent patronage of the Sdmanid prince,
Nasr son of Ahmad (a.d. 914-943), and of the minister Abd-1
Fazl, and died in a.d. 954. Unfortunately only fragments of
Rddagi’s translation survive. The poet is said to have been
blind.

To compare small things with great, the Fables of Bidpai rival
the Pomance cycle of Alexander in the extent of their diffusion.
They are said to have been translated into thirty-eight languages.®
It is not possible to enter into the subject here, but one illustra-
tion of the way in which the Fables passed from one language
into another may be given. The earliest English version of them
is that of Sir Thomas North — the translator of Plutarch^ s Livea^
which Shakespeare put to such good account — and it was published
in 1570 under the title of TJieMoraXl Plvilo&o^pMe ofDoni, It comes
to us as Sir Walter Blunt came to Henry IV,

“ Stain’d with the variation of each soil ”

through which it has passed, and its provenance is as follows :

It is the English version of an Italian adaptation of a Spanish
translation of a Latin version of a Hebrew translation of an
Arabic adaptation of the Pehlevi version of the Indian original.’^ “
In Sir Thomas North’s version, owing, it is said, to a misunder-
standing of the letters when the Fables were translated from the
Hebrew, Niishirwdn appears as Anestres Castri.* It is interesting
to find that the wish expressed to Nfishirwdif by Barzwl ^ has
been gratified. After all the vicissitudes through which the
book has passed his name and the story of his discovery of the
Fables still survive. In the English version he appears as
Berozias.® We may add that apparently the Fables themselves
may be traced back to the Indian Jdtakas or Birth Stories of
Buddha,'^ and that the Jewish race, to which the world is indebted
for at least three religions, was the chief agent in the wide
dissemination of the fables and the scientific study thereof.®

^ For whom soo Vol. vi. p. 17. ® JFB, p. xii.

'■* Id^ p. xi. * hL p. xxxii. ® See p. 429.

® JFB, p. 34 fiCQ'. ’ /cZ., pp. xiii., xlix. “ lit p. xxv.


384


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


§ I

How the Raja of Hind sent the Game of Chess to
NusMrwdn

Since this discourse, which so delighted thee,

Hath reached its end let chess our next theme be.
Thus said the archimage : The Shah one day
Adorned his throne with the brocade of Rum,

And hung the crown above the ivory throne —

A throne compact of teak and ivory.

The palace seemed all throne, the throne all Sh&h,
And all his court an army. All the palace
Was occupied by marcblords and archmages
From Balkh, Bukhara, and from every side.

The monarch of the world received these tidings.
Brought by his vigilant intelligencers : —

C. 1720 '' The envoy of the king of Hind hath come

With elephants, with parasols, with horsemen
Of Sind and laden camels fifty score,

And seeketh to have access to the king.”

The watchful Sh^h, on hearing this, forthwith
Sent certain troops to go and welcome him.

The envoy of that famed and puissant prince,

On coming to the great king's presence, did
Obeisance, as the use of nobles is.

With praises of the Maker of the world.

And gave the ShS-h abundant gems as gifts,

With earrings, elephants, and parasols.

These Indian parasols were decked with gold
With many sorts of jewels set therein.

He oped the bales within the court itself,

And brought their whole contents before the Shah.
There were much gold and silver in the bales
With musk, fresh aloe-wood, and ambergris.

Gems, diamonds, and burnished Indian swords ;


NJjfSHiRWAN 385

The R^tja had amassed from every hand

The products of Kannuj and Mai. They laid them

Before the throne. The prince of sleepless fortune

Viewed and dispatched to his own treasury

All that the E^ja had so toiled for. Then

The envoy brought a letter which the Raja

Had written upon silk to Nushirwan,

And also, what had made a treasury void,

A chess-board wrought with cunning workmanship.
The man of Hind thus gave the Rija’s message : —
Mayst thou abide so long as heaven endureth !

Bid those much travailed in the quest for knowledge
To place this board, used in the game of chess,

Before them and set all their wits to work
To find out how that goodly game is played,

To find out what the name is of each piece,

The way to move it and its proper square.

To find out footman, elephant, and host,

Rukh, horse, and how to move wazfr and king.

If they discover all this goodly game.

And prove themselves the betters of the wise,

Then, as the Shah commandeth, I wUl send
Full tribute to his court with all good will ;

But if the nobles of the frtoian folk
Have not the knowledge to resolve the point,

Then, since their knowledge is no match for ours,

Let them not seek for tax and tribute hence.

But rather pay a tribute unto us.

Since knowledge is of all famed things the best.’’

Both heart and ear gave Nushirwdn to him
That on this wise discharged his embassage.

They set the board and men before the Shdh,

Who looked upon the pieces for a while.

Half of the set was made of ivory

And bright, the other half of teak. The Sh4h,

Whose fortune never slumbered, then inquired

voii. vn. 2 B


0 . 1J2T.


386 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSf

About the pieces’ shapes and that fair board.

The envoy thus replied : “ ’Tis all, 0 king !

An emblem of the art of war, and thou

Wilt see, when thou hast found it out, the tactics,

The plan, and order of a battlefield/’

The Shah said : “ I require a se’nnight’s space :

The eighth day we will play right willingly.”

They had a pleasant residence prepared
To lodge the ambassador, and then the chiefs
And archimages that were counsellors
All came before the ShSh and with the chess-board
In front of them considered it at large,

Examined it, tried every device,

And played with one another in all ways.

One spake and questioned, and another heard,

But none discovered how the game was played,

And aU departed louring. Buzurjmihr
Came to the Shah, perceived him vexed and
troubled,

And saw ere he began the ^sk its end.

0 great king,” thus he spake to Ntishirwto,
World-lord and vigilant whose word is law !

I win discover all this goodly game,

Employing wisdom as my guide therein.”

The ShSh rephed : “Be this affair thy task,

And thine moreover health and happiness,

Else now the Eija of Kannuj will say : —

‘ The Sh^h hath not a single counsellor,’

Which were a mighty slur upon the archmages.

Court, throne, and men of wisdom.”

Buzurjmihr

Then took away with him the board and men,

And sat down with his thoughts intent thereon.

He tried to play the game in every way,

And sought to find the place for every piece.

He found the game out in one day and night,


NtfSHIRWAN


387


Then hastened from his palace to the Shah,

And said : ‘'0 Shih whose fortune triumpheth !

These pieces and this goodly board have I
Well studied and I understand it all,

Helped by the fortune of the world’s great king.

’Tis fitting that the king of kings should be
The first to see it played. Thou wilt declare : —

' It is indeed a battlefield ! ’ Then call
The Riija’s envoy and spectators also.”

The Idng joyed at his words, saluted him
As prosperous and fortunate, then bade
The archimages, nobles, and famed sages
Attend. He called the envoy of the R§-ja,

And seated him before the famous throne.

Said Buzurjmihr, that man of eloquence : —

‘‘ Priest of the Raja of the sunJike face !

What were the words thy monarch said to thee
About those pieces ? Wisdom be thy mate.”

The illustrious R^ija,” he replied, when I C. 1722

Was quitting him said thus to me : ^ Convey
These teak and ivory pieces to the throne
Of him that is the master of the crown.

And say : “ Assemble to thee thine archmages
And counsellors, and set before them these.

If they find how to play this clever game
In the approven way, and master it,

We will dispatch unto thee purses, slaves,

And tribute to the utmost of our powers.

The king’s worth will arise from knowledge then.

Not from his treasures, men, and lofty throne ;

‘But if he and his wise men fail herein.

As being dark of counsel, then must he
Demand no tribute from us and no treasure.

His knowing soul then will regret past toils,

Since, realising our shrewd hearts and counsel,

He will dispatch stiU greater wealth to us.” ’ ”


388 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Tlien Buzurjmihr brought and set up before
The throne of him whose fortune never slept
The board and men, and said to archimage
And chief : “Ye sages pure of heart and wise !

Heed well his words and his shrewd lord’s proposal.”

The sage then fashioned him a battlefield,

Whereon he gave the kings the central place,

And drew their forces up to left and right,

The footmen eager for the fray in front.

Beside the king his prudent minister
Was posted to advise him in the fight.

The warrior-rukhs impetuous on their steeds
Were at the wings and fought on right and left.
Adjoining these the battle-chargers stood,

So that the great king proved the Edja’s match,

And then the elephants of war arrayed
On either side both eager for the fight.

When Bfizurjmihr had thus disposed the host
The whole assembly stood amazed thereat,

The ambassador of Hind was sorely vexed.

And marvelled at that man of sleepless fortune.

He marvelled at that warlock of a man,

And thus his musings ran while plunged in thought : —
“ He never saw the board and game of chess,

Or heard about it from the adepts of Hind !

How hath he learned the fashion of the game ?

None else could take his office.”

NushirwSn

So treated Buzurjmihr that thou hadst said
That fortune had unveiled its face before him.

The king thereafter gave commands to fill
A cup with royal gems. This and a purse,

Dinars and steed with saddle on, gave he
To Buzurjmihr and praised him mightily.


NtSHIRWlN


389


§ 2


How B'OjZurjmihr invented Hard, and how NusMrwdn
sent it with a Letter to the Raja of Hind

The sage, upon returning to his home,

Arranged a board and compasses before him,

Selecting first of all a darkened room

To make his wits more keen, then mused on chess

And Indian subtlety, and mustering all

His powers made wisdom wed his ardent heart,

And meditating thus invented nard.

He bade to make two dice of ivory
With dots the colour of teak-wood thereon,

Arrayed a field of battle as in chess,

And drew up the opposing hosts for war,

Arranging them in eight battalions,

All ready for pitch-battles or for sieges.

The ground was dark, the battlefield foursquare,
Two noble, clement kings were in command,

Who had a common movement on the field.

But neither sought the other’s injury.

The troops arrayed beneath their leadership
For battle on both sides were keen for fight.

If two friends catch an unsupported foe,

The twain inflict defeat upon the one.

He made the two kings move about the field
In pomp surrounded by their several hosts.

Each wheeling round about upon the other,

And combating by turns on hill and plain.

On this wise till one side was overthrown
The armies of both monarchs kept the field.

’Twas thus that Buzurjmilir, as I have said.
Invented nard, then went and told the Sh^h
How from the moves of those imperious kings
Came praise or blame, what powers the pieces had,


c. 1723


390


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSI


And how the armies fought ; these he set forth.

And showed in detail to the Shah whose heart
Was all astound ; he needed all his wits,

And said : “0 man of ardent soul ! mayst thou,
And may thy fortune, still continue young.”

He bade the keeper of the camels bring
Two thousand to him and then loaded them
With contributions raised from Rum and Chm,

The Haitians, from Makr^n, and from frdn,

And from the treasury of the king of Idngs.

The caravan departed from the court.

Whenas the camel-loads were all arranged,

And that concern was off the monarch’s heart,

He called the Raja’s envoy unto him,

And of his knowledge uttered many words,
c. 1724 He wrote a letter to the Raja full

Of learning, pleasantry, good sense, and counsel,
And in the first place gave great praise to God,

Who was his refuge from the lusty Div,

Then R&ja, high renowned, of Hind,” he said,

“ Down from the river of Kannuj ^ to Sind !

Thy wise ambassador hath come to us
With parasols, with elephants, and escort,

With tribute and with chess, and I have heard
The RSija’s embassage. The task is done.

We asked the Indian sage for time, we decked
Our soul with knowledge, and an archimage,

A very prudent sage of holy rede,

Hath sought and found out how the game is played.
Now that wise archimage hath come before
The exalted R&ja at Kanndj and brought
Two thousand heavy camel-loads of things ^
Acceptable — a keepsake for thyself —

And we have substituted nard for chess.


^ Gf. p. II2, note,
“ Beading "with P,


NJjfSHtRWAN

What man now will adventure on this game ?

There must he many a Brahman well advised,

Who by his learning can discover it.

The Raja may consign to treasury

The riches that have been the envoy’s care,

But if the Raja and his counsellors
Shall try to find out nard, and fail therein,

He must according to our covenant
Load up as many camels as we sent,

And send them back with ours and all their loads ;
Such is our pact and bargain.”

Buzurjmihr,

What time the sun was radiant in the sky.
Departed from the portal of the Shih
With baggage,^ letter, and the game of nard,

His heart absorbed by thoughts of his campaign.
On coming to the R&ja from tan,

The Brahman acting willingly as guide,

He went before the Raja’s throne, beheld
His head, his fortunes, and his diadem,

Praised him no little in the olden tongue,

Then gave the royal letter, and repeated
The verbal message of the king of kings.

The Indian R&Ja’s face bloomed like a rose.

The message spake of chess, the Raja’s pains,

His tribute, how the game of chess had fared,

The play, the pieces, and the king’s right moves,
And those moreover of his counsellors.

It told withal the achievement of the sage,

Who had invented nard in rivalry,

And ended thus : '' Now let the R&ja read
The letter, act, and swerve not from the right.”

The R&ja’s face grow pallid at the words.

On hearing that accormt of chess and nard.

There came a great official and assigned
1 Reading with P.


392 THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

A fitting lodging to the ambassador.

They had a jocund residence prepared.

And called for wine and harp and minstrelsy.

C- 1725 The R^ja asked a space of seven days.

And aU the Lights of learning came to him.

He gathered aU the elders of the realm,

And laid the game of nard before them there.

For one whole se’nnight aU the shrewdest men
Among the nobles, whether old or young,

Sought to discover out of emulation,

For fame and triumph, how the game was played ;
But to the Raja at the se’imight's end
A sage said : No one can make aught thereof,
And wisdom must be wedded to his soul.

Who from these pieces can invent a game.’’

The RS^ja’s heart was troubled at those sages,

His soul was sorrowful, his brow contracted.

Upon the ninth day Buzurjmihr arrived.

With eager heart and furrowed face, and said : —

“ The Shah accorded me no tarriance here,

And he must not be straitened in his heart/'

The learned magnates went aside and owned
Their ignorance, while Bfizurjmihr, on hearing,

Sat down, and aU the sages gave good heed
While he set out the board of nard before them,
And told the movements of the various pieces,
Displayed the leader and his warlike troops.

The king’s power and the order of the fight.

The R^ja and his counsellors were all
Astound, the company in wonderment.

At Blizurjmihr, the chiefs aU lauded him,

And hailed him as a holy sage. The RSija
Interrogated him upon all lore,

And he in each case gave a fit response.

Then from the sages, from the searchers out
Of knowledge, and the scholars rose a cry : —


NtrSHtRWAN


393


Behold an eloquent and leam6d man,

Not merely skilled in games like chess and nard ! ”

The Rdja had two thousand camels brought,

And laid on them the tribute of Kanniij,

Gold, camphor, ambergris, and aloe-wood.

As well as raiment, silver, pearls, and gems,

With one year's tribute, and dispatched it all
From his court to the portal of the Shfi;h.

The R§;ja had a coronet and robe,

That reached from head to foot, of his own wear
Brought from his treasury and then bestowed them
On Buzurjmihr, gave him much praise withal,

And to his retinue abundant gifts.

So from Kaimuj departed Blizurjmihr
With head exalted to the turning sky,

With those two thousand camels brought by him,

And all the gifts and tribute in his charge.

No one had looked on such a caravan
Before, and never had been greater wealth.

He joyed at heart as bearing from the king

Of Hind a script in Indian characters

On silk : The R4ja and his mighty men

Attest for good will, not for fear, that none

Hath looked on any like Sh^bh NushirwSn, C, 1726

Or ever heard of one such from the priests,

Or met one wiser than his minister,

The treasurer of whose knowledge is the sky.

The tribute for the year was sent before,

And more shall be if thou demandest it.

While in the matter of the games the stakes
Have been sent likewise as agreed upon.”

Now when the ShS.h gat tidings of his sage *

” Ho hath arrived well satisfied and glad,”

He was rejoiced at that intelligence,

And bade the chiefs of city and of host.

With elephants and kettledrums and tymbals,


394 * the SHHANAmA OF FIRDAUSt

To sally forth to welcome Buzurjmihr.

That honoured sage’s entry of the city
Resembled that of some great conquering king,

And when that man of lore approached the throne,
And proffered praise exceedingly, the Shdh,

Lord of the world, embraced him and inquired
About the Rija and the weary way.

While Buzurjmihr told his experiences,

His sleepless fortune and the love of heaven,

Then brought the conquering Raja’s letter forth.
And laid it down before the throne. The Shah
Then gave command for Yazdagird, the scribe,

To come before the knowledge-seeking king,

And when he read the R§;ja’s letter all
The company were in astonishment
Both at the wit and rede of Buzurjmihr,

And at the fortune of his sun-faced Sh4h,

Who spake on this wise, saying : '' God be praised
That I have such a wise and holy sage.

The great are servants of my crown and throne,
And love of me hath fOled their hearts and minds.”

Thanks to the Lord of sun and moon, for He
Bestoweth victory and mastery.

That which I next shall utter will appear
A tale more strange than that of Bhzurjmihr,
WTbom heaven with such intelligence did bless :

I tell the legend of Talhand and chess.


§ 3

The Story of ffau and Talhand^ and the Invention of Chess'^

Thus spake Sh4hwi, the ancient sage, so be
Attentive to the tale of old Sh&hwi : —

Once on a time there lived a king in Hind,

^ This heading is taken from P.


N'dSHlRWAN 395

One puissant in treasure, troops, and arms.

And everywhere renowned, Jamhur by name.

And passing Fur himself in fame for valour.

Such was this king, of such an ardent spirit.

So vigilant and prudent, that from Bust

And from Kaslimir down to the march of Chin C. 1727

The chieftains homaged him, and all the world

Was in his grasp, so mighty was his prowess.

He had his dwelling-place at Sandali ;

Here was his throne, his treasures, and his troops,

Here were his signet-ring and here his crown.

Jamhur was worshipful, a man of lore.

Pre-eminent in knowledge and distinction.

And all his lieges, whether of his court
Or of his city, joyed alike in him.

Ho had a worthy wife, a prudent dame.

Accomplished, learned, and one that injured none.

One night a son was bom to him just like
His sire, who when he saw the youthful prince
Bade call him Gav, but soon and suddenly
The monarch Sickened, told the queen his will,

And died bequeathing unto Gav a world,

Whore justice ruled, though yet he was unfit.

By reason of his infancy, for throne.

For crown and girdle. All the chieftains’ heads ,

Wore full of dust, their hearts were sorrowful
By reason of Jamhiir, and all the world
Still kept in mind the memory of his bounty,

His feasts, and justice. Troops and citizens —

Men, women, children — ^met and thus took counsel : —

This little infant wotteth not of host.

Of justice, rigour, throne, and crown. The sway
Will suffer if the ruler bo not great.”

The monarch had a brother who was wise.

And fitted for the throno : his name was M4i.

The dwelling-placo of that idolater


396 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Was at Dambar, and all the veteran chiefS;

In looking for a king, turned to Dambar
Their face from Sandali, while of Kashmir
The potentates up to the march of Chin
Did homage to him as their sovereign.

The exalted Mdi came from Dambar and set
His feet upon the throne of majesty,

Placed on his head the crown worn by Jamhur,
And ruled with justice and with bounteousness.

He took to wife Gav’s mother, cherished her,

And held her aU as dear as his own life.

The fay-faced dame became with child by M^i,

And that illustrious lady bare a son,

Whom MAi, that mighty monarch, named Talhand,
And loved with aU his soul. Now when the babe
Was two years old and Gav was seven, and grown
A lusty warrior dowered with Grace and stature,
Mai ailed, his glad heart was espoused to care.

He languished for two se’nnights’ space, then died,
And passing left the world to other’s hands.

C. 1728 ^ Sandali was sorrowful and wept,

And burned with pain of heart because of him.
They spent a month in mourning for the king.

And at the end thereof the whole host met,

The great men and the warriors of the state —

All that had part in wisdom. Much talk passed
In that assembly on all points. At length
A wise man thus addressed the counsellors : —

“ This lady, who was once spouse to Jamhur,

Hath kept herself at aU times from ill-doing.

In both her marriages hath sought the right.

And followed after justice aU her days.

The lady is of noble lineage.

Just, upright, and inspireth confidence.

’Tis best that she should be our queen, for she
Remaineth — ^the memorial of two kings.”


NtfSHIRWAN 39:

The assembly all assented thereunto,

And then the sage addressed the wise queen thus : —

“ Take thou the throne of thy two sons, for this
Will make for greatness, and there is no choice.

When they grow worthy of the throne resign
To them the majesty, the wealth, and host,

And be from that time forth their counsellor,
Companion, minister, and best of friends.”

The lady — ^fortune’s favourite — at these words
Gave lustre to the crown and graced the throne,

Grew kinder, more considerate, and just,

And all the realm rejoiced in her. She chose
Two men wise, holy, travelled, and accomplished,

And to their charge entrusted both her sons —

Those princes of high lineage and wise.

Withal she never left them for a day,

And found her happiness in seeing them.

Now as they grew in lustiness and lore,

Becoming mighty men in that regard,

One or the other used to come alone
To his good mother, ever and anon.

And ask : Which is the fittest of us twain,

Most high of heart, most likely, and most shrewd ? ”
And thus the mother would reply to both : —

“ That I may know which is more excellent,

Show prowess, counsel, self-control, and Faith,

Fair speech, and an ambition to be praised ;

For wisdom, modesty, self-governance,

And justice, are required since ye are both
Of royal birth.”

When one of them would come
Alone at whiles before her and inquire : —

“ Which of us twain will have the sovereignty,
Which of us have the treasure, throne, and crown ?”
Then would she answer him : The throne is thine.
For wisdom, counsel, fortune, are thine own.”


398 the SHAHNAUA OF FIRDAUSI

She said the same thing to the other also
Until the saying grew inveterate,

And thus she made the heart of each expectant
Of throne, wealth, host, fame, fortune. They attained,
1729 Each with a baleful tutor for his guide.

To man’s estate, and through their mutual envy
Both suffered, both were hot for crown and treasure,
The whole realm and the host were rent in twain,
While good men’s hearts grew fearful. Both the sons.
Impassioned by their baleful tutors’ talk.

Came to their mother, crying : Which of us
Is best and meekest under good and ill ? ”

That prudent lady made them this reply : —

First it is needful for you both to sit
In counsel with the sages pure of heart,

And solve this question in content and peace.

And after do ye and your tutors ask

The great men most renowned throughout the state,

All those possessed of counsel as their portion,

As to your right procedure in this case.

Whoever seeketh crown and throne hath need
Of wisdom, treasure, counsel, and a host.

For when a tyrant hath the. sovereignty
He fiUeth all the world mth heat and ruin.”

Shrewd Gav made answer to his mother thus : —
Seek not to parry so my questioning.

If I am not the lustre of this realm,

Say so, but say not aught that is untrue.

Dehver to Talhand the throne and crown.

And I will be a loyal hege to him,

While if as older, wiser, and by birth
Sprung from Jamhiir, I am to be the king.

Forbid him in his folly to attempt
Strong measures for the sake of crown and throne,”
His mother answered : “ Act not hastily :

Thou shouldst push not these matters to extremes.


NtSHtRWlN

Whoever sitteth on the throne must have
His two hands open and his girdle girt.

Must keep his pure soul guarded too from evil,
And walk with knowledge in the sage’s way.

Must too be wary of the foe in fight.

And heed what maketh for his reputation.

The Master of the sun and moon will judge
His acts just and unjust to state and host.

And if the king oppresseth but a gnat
His spirit will be left to mourn in Hell.

The world is more obscure than night itself.

And hearts must be more subtle than a hair
To keep the soul and body ^ free from evil,

And recognise that guile will profit not.

When one is crowned and sitteth on the throne
Of justice aU the world will joy thereat,

Yet is his end a couch of brick and dust,

Or else cremation in the funeral pit.

Of such a stock as this Jamhur was sprung.
Whose counsels were remote from deeds of ill.

He died before his natural time to die,

And left his younger brother as the heir

To aU his world. Great Mdi came from Dambar,

StiU young, shrewd-hearted, and a counsellor.

All Sandali went out to welcome him
With full hearts and aU eager for a king.

He came and sat upon the throne of power
With girdle girded and with open hands.

He sought me as his spouse, and we were wedded
That so state-secrets might be secrets stiU,

Now since thou art the elder of the twain,

The elder both in wisdom and in years.

Strive not to Vex thy spirit for the sake
Of eminence, of treasure, and of crown.

If I choose one of you the other one
Will be fulfilled with pain and with revenge
^ Reading with R.


400


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


At me. Shed no blood for the sake of crown
And treasure, for this Wayside Hosteby
Abideth not with any.”

When Talhand

Had heard his mother’s words he liked them not,
And thus replied : Thy sentence is for Gav,
Because he is the elder, but although
My brother is mine elder as to years
Still every elder is not better too.

Within this host and realm is many a man
As ancient as the vultures of the sky,

And yet such never sought for place or host,

Or diadem or treasure, throne or crown.

My father died when young and did not give
The throne of majesty to any. I see
Thy heart in foolishness disposed toward Gav,
And that thou wilt give him the preference,
Though I could make as good as him from clay 1 ,
God grant that ne’er I shame my father’s name.”
His mother sware a solemn oath and said : —
May I forgo the azure vault of heaven
If ever I desired of God to make
Gav king or ever set my heart thereon.

Think with all charity concerning bhis,

And rail not at the process of the sky,

Because it doeth good to whom it will :

So look to God alone and trust none other.

I have advised you to the best I could.

But if my cotmsel be of no avail
Consider what is better and that do :

Strive and make that the provand of your lives. ”

The queen thereafter summoned aU the wise,
And laid before them all that she proposed.

She brought the keys that oped the treasury
Belonging to those two kings wise and good,
Displayed the wealth therein reposited


NtSHtRWAN


401


Before those raen of much experience,

Gave both her sons an equal share and sought
To satisfy the claims of both of them.

Thereafter Gav spake to Talhand and said : —

“ Thou, good of heart but bent on novel schemes !
Jamhur, as thou hast heard, was greater far
Than M^i^ alike in counsel and in years.

Thy sire, that virtuous and noble man,

Showed not the least ambition for the crown.

It was no shame to him to be a subject :

He sought no kind of lordship o’er the lords.

Mark if the just Judge will approve that I
Shall gird myself before my younger brother.

Our mother spake but justice, wherefore then
Should thy heart joy in that which is not just ?

Now summon we the leaders of the host,

Wise men and well acquainted with the world,

And having listened to the sages’ words,

Assent to their decision and advice ;

We shall learn knowledge from them and illume
Our hearts with understanding.”

Those two sages-

Men of good counsel — ^met and much talk passed.
Gav’s sage required that Gav should be the king
In Sandali and take the foremost place ;

The other, who was tutor to Talhand,

And wisest of the wise, spoke up for him ;

They wrangled till the princes were at odds.

Within one hall two thrones wore set whereon
Those princes of victorious fortune sat,

Each with his lusty sage upon his right,

And covetous of his inheritance.

They summoned all the nobles to the hall.

And seated them to right hand and to left.

Then those two sages loosed their tongues and said :
0 yo illustrious a::.d famous men 1
VOL. VII. 2 0


0 . 1731


402 THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Of these two chiefs of glorious lineage,

Who keep the customs of their sires in mind,

Which will ye have as ruler over you ?

Which youth do ye esteem the holier ? ”

The priests, the nobles, and the wise men shrewd
Of heart, were lost in wonderment thereat.

The two young princes sat, each on his throne.
While those ill-omened sages both harangued,

And citizen and soldier knew full well
That only war and strife could come of it,

That all the empire would be rent asunder.

The wise man left in travail and dismay.

Then from the company one raised his head.

Rose to his feet, and said : How dare we speak
What profiteth before two famous kings ?

• Assemble we to-morrow and discuss
The case among ourselves without reserve.

And then announce our sentence to them both :

It may be that they both will be content.’’

They left the hall with murmurs and in dudgeon,
Sighs on their lips and sorrow in their souls,

And said : “ This business hath grown troublesome
Beyond the handling of experienced men.

We never saw two kings confronted thus,

With two bad ministers upon the dais.”

0. 1732 All night their faces had a careworn look,

And when the sun arose above the mountains
The great men of the state, the wise, assembled,

On all sides Sandali was filled with clamour,

And every man spake that which liked him best.
One warrior was the partisan of Gav,

Another for Talhand was advocate.

Tongues tired of talking, there was no accord.

At length that great assembly was dissolved.

And citizens and soldiers went their ways,

One to give in adherence to Talhand,


NtSHtRWlN 403

And utter malisons on Gav, another

To go to Gav with mace and sword, and cry : —

I will begrudge not life to serve the king.”

Confusion filled the realm of Sandali
Through honest partisanship. Saith the sage : —

” When two command within one house ’twill fall.”
Then tidings came to Gav and to Talhand : —

Bach quarter hath a leader of its own,

Who layeth waste the city at his will :

The princes must not suffer it.”

The news

Filled both of them with fear, and they kept watch
Both night and day, and thus it came to pass,

One day, that both young princes chanced to meet
Without their paladins or any escort.

They sot their tongues loose, each against the other,
Frowns on their brows and warlike thoughts within.
The noble Gav was full of lamentation,

The tidings moved him deeply, and he said
Thus to Talhand : My brother! act not thus,
Because for us the thing hath passed all bounds,

But be content and follow not mad schemes,

For they have no allurement for the wise.

As thou hast heard, M4i, while Jamhur still lived,

Was as a slave before him. When he died,

And loft mo still a miserable babe,

They could give not the throne to one so young.

The world had grown so just beneath his rule
TJiat no one dared to seek to fill his place.

His brother was as body is to soul

To him, and all wished M^i to be their king.

If then I had been fitted for the throne
None over would have looked at him. Let us
Ensue the precedents of kings of yore,

And hoar the wise on points of right and wrong.

I am thy better both by years and father.


404 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

Thou sayest : ' I am both the chief and better/

But say not so . Seek not unworthily
The throne of kingship, or fulfil the realm
With strife/’

Talhand thus answered him : Enough !
None ever compassed power by subtleties.

This crown and throne received I from my sire,
Received it as the seed that he had sown,

C. 1733 And henceforth I will guard the sovereignty.

The host, and treasure, with the scimitar.

Prate not to me of Mai and of Jamhtir :

If thou wilt have the throne then fight for it/’

They turned away with heads fulfilled with strife,
And went within the city to prepare.

The soldiers and the citizens aU keen
For war betook them to the princes’ courts.

One faction was in favour of Talhand,

The other favoured Gav. The battle-cry
Rose at the princes’ doors. No standing-room
Was left within the city for the throng.

Talhand was first to arm him for the fight,

Because his courage would brook no delay.

He oped the portal of his father’s hoards,

And served out helm and mail to all his troops.

The state was rent asunder, and the wise
Were full of fear at heart, and thus they said : —

‘‘ What is the end that heaven purposeth,

And which of these young men will lose his life ? ”
News of both kings was bruited through the
realm,

And from all sides hosts gathered troop on troop.
Talhand was first to put his armour on,

And bathe his hands in blood. Gav also donned
His coat of mail and helmet, and invoked
The spirit of his sire. Embittered thus
They both took action, housed the elephants,


NtSHIRWlN ■ 405

And saddled them. Thou wouldst have said i\^The
earth

Is eager for the combat.” All the city
Was filled with din of gong and Indian bells,

All ears were charged with blare of clarions.

These two young kings departed to their camps,

And every one took his own life in hand.

That battlefield filled heaven with amaze,

And eyes were darkened by the dust of hosts.

The flourish of the trumpets and the clash
Of brazen cymbals went up from both lines.

The wings were drawn up to the right and left,

And thou hadst said : “ Earth is all mountain-like.”

The armies’ fronts extended o’er two miles.

Those two great kings rode each his elephant.

Their standards waved above their heads. One bore
A tiger, one an eagle, as device.

The footmen were in front equipped with spears
And bucklers, and all ready for the fight.

Gav looked upon the field and saw the air
Streaked like the markings on a savage pard.

Each throat ^ was full of dust, the plain all blood,

And midst the dust the lances led the way.

Gav, though Talhand had angered him, and wisdom
Had stitched not up the hps of his ambition^

Yet chose him out a man of fluent speech —

The chiefest of his nobles — ^and thus said : —

“ Go to Talhand and say to him : ‘ Ensue not
War with thy brother in this unjust fashion.

Since thou wilt suffer in the other world f'- 1734

For aU the blood shed in this strife of ours.

Give oar to Gav’s advice and err not thou
Through what an evil counsellor may say.

In this conjuncture ne’er must this reproach
Remain as our ^ memorial — that this realm
1 Reading witli P. ®


4o6 the SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Of Hind is desolate, the lurking-place
Of lions and of pards. Forbear this war
And strife, and wantonly to shed this blood
Unjustly, Joy my heart with peace and save
Our necks by making use of wisdom’s net.

Stretch out thy rod from this march unto Chin,
And let whate’er thou wilt of earth be thine,

I will esteem thy love as mine own soul,

And set thee as a crown upon my head.

Share we the kingship as we shared the wealth ;
Throne and tiara are not worth such pains ;

But if thus wholly thou art bent on strife,

Lajustice, and the scattering of the flock,

Now gathered, in this world thou wilt be blamed.
And judged in that to come. Incline not, brother
To wrong ; it cannot stand against the right.’ ”
Now when the envoy came before Talhand,
Came with the prudent embassage of Gav,

Talhand returned this answer : " Say to him : —

‘ Employ not so much subterfuge in warfare.

I call thee neither brother nor a friend ;

Thou art not, brain or skin, akin to me.

And wilt but make the empire desolate
By thus assailing these my gallant troops.

The knaves are with thee and are thine Urmuzd
Upon Bahrdm’s day.’- Thou art guilty too
In God’s sight as ill-famed, misgot, and curst. ^
For all blood shed by thee in fight henceforth
The curses will be thine, the blessings mine.

Thou said’st moreover : Let us share the realm,
The land, the worship, and the ivory throne,”

But treasure, power, and kingship all arc mine,
Mine from the sun down to the Fish’s back.^

As long as thou dost play the king, dost share

i.e. thy leaders on the day of action. 0/. Vol. iii. p. 287.
• See Vol. i. p. 71.


NtSHtRWiN 4P7

The land -with me, and wouldest be my mate,

I wish my body and my soul may part
Or ever I shall look on throne and crown.

My host have I arrayed, and even now
The air is like brocade all shot with gold ;

So many are the arrows, darts, and spearheads
That none can tell his stirrups from his reins.

Heads will I scatter on the battlefield,

-Will bring a wail of woe from all Grav’s troops.

And in such fashion lead my host to fight
That I will sate with war that Warrior-pard.

I will lead Gav himself with bounden hands,

His troops shall see the dust of overthrow.

Their loaders shall be lifeless by my sword, C- 1735

Their wounded men shall writhe in misery,

For none of them from bondslaves up to prince
Shall don again his breastplate for the fight.’ ”

The prudent envoy having heard his answer.

Returned and gave it word for word. Gav’s heart
Was sad at hearing it because he saw
No Imowledgo in Talhand, and full of care
Called his own sago, discoursed of the response
At largo, and said : “ Suggest a remedy.

Thou seeker after wisdom ! for this case.

The desert is all blood and trunkless heads.

And souls pass to the Judge of all the world.

This battle must not bring, when all is done,

D1 fortune on us.”

Said the sage : ”0 king !

Thou ncedost not a teacher to teach thee,

.But if thou wilt have mine advice herein. . . .

In fightmg with thy brother bo not fierce.

And send him yet another messenger,

A man of high rank, learned, and eloquent.

To give yet one more message. He still may
Abate hostility. Resign to him


4o8 the SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

The treasures gathered by the toil of others,

Preferring thereunto thy brother’s life.

Since both the crown and signet-ring are thine
Forbear to wrangle with him as to pelf,

For I have seen from heaven’s processes
That his time endeth shortly, and that none
Of all the seven planets favoureth him.

Moreover he will perish on this field

Of strife. Thou hast no need to press him. Give him

Whatever he shall ask of steeds and wealth,

So that thou mayst repent not at his death,

The royal signet, crown, and throne excepted.

For fear the troops may call thee faint of heart ;

But thou if king and fortune’s favourite

Art versed yet more in heaven’s purposes.” >

The prince, when he had heard his tutor’s words,
Made yet a new endeavour. With wet face.

Through anguish for his brother’s sake, he chose
One favoured by the stars and eloquent,

And said to him : “ Go to Talhand and say : —

' Gav is fulfilled with trouble and with pain
As touching heaven’s purpose and this fight,

And prayeth that the almighty Judge of all
Will stir up love and prudence in thy heart,

So that thou mayesb yet renounce this strife
Against thy brother. If ’tis through thy sage,

Who haunteth thee, deceiving thy dark soul,

That thou art grown so fierce and quarrelsome
Still thou canst not escape the course of heaven.

Ask the twelve signs and seven planets how
1736 This unjust work will fare. Foes compass us.

And all the world is full of wicked men ;

Moreover by the monarch of Kashmir,

And by FaghMr of Chin, who even now
Are pressing on our realm, we shall be flouted
On two sides, and by other warrior-chiefs.


NlJSHtRWAN 409

How they will say : “ Why are Talhand and Gav
Contending for the sake of throne and crown ?

Are they not then of common stock by birth,

Not each the offspring of a holy sire 1

And yet when counsellors of evil heart

So prompt them they must put their hands to blood ! ”

If thou wilt leave thy host and visit me,

And so illume this darkened soul of mine,

I will bestow on thee dinars, brocade,

Steeds, treasure ; I would have thee all untroubled.
Thou shalt have also jewels, province, signet.

And crown, with armlets and an ivory throne.

These from an elder brother are no shame.

And I desire not battle, but if thou
Wilt hearken not my rede thou wilt repent
At last.’ ”

The envoy, speeding torrent-like,

Came to Talhand, the dark of soul, and told
What Gav had said to him and added more
Concerning kingship, wealth, din&rs, and goods.
Whenas Talhand had heard the envoy’s speech.

His wisdom, and his prudent policy.

Ho would assent not to his brother’s words.

Because the heaven purposed otherwise.

But made this answer, saying : “ Say to Gav : —

‘ Bo thou a schemer stdl, and may thy tongue
Be severed by the scimitar of ill.

Thy body burnt up in the Magians’ fire !

Thy crude proposals have I heard and see
That all thy stock-in-trade is subterfuge.

How wilt thou give to me the royal treasure.

For who art thou amongst this mighty people ? .

Good sooth ! thy life must be nigh o’er since thou
JDisplaycst such prolonged anxiety !

The armies’ ranks extend two miles, the world
Is full of men, of steeds, and elephants.


4T0 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

March forth and set the battle in array ;

Then earnest forth to fight ; why dally then ?

Thon’lt see such prowess from me that the stars
Will have to tell the total of thy days.

Thou knowest naught but practice, craft, and lies,
Perceiving that thy downfall is at hand.

Thou art afar from counsel, crown, and throne,

And no wise man will call thee fortunate.’ ”

The envoy came charged with these blustering
words,

And told the prince’s answer. Thus, until
Dark night displayed it s face, the envoy fared
Between the twain who, camping on the field.

Dug out a trench before their several hosts.

U37 The outposts went their rounds. Thus passed the
night.

Now when Sol rose in Leo, making earth
As ’twere a sea of splendour, and, all golden,

Enrobed the dome of lapis-lazuli,

From both the camp-enclosures rose the blare
Of clarions and the roar of kettledrums,

The flags of both young princes were displayed,

And both the hosts deployed to right and left,

While at their centres those exalted princes
Were stationed, each with his sage minister.

Gav bade his to proclaim thus to the chiefs : —

“ Raise ye your standards, every man of you !

Let. every one draw forth his blue steel sword,

But not a warrior advance a stop,

Or any of the foot-men quit his post,

For none is sober, wise, and well advised,

That is impetuous on the day of battle :

I would take note of how Talhand deployeth.

The counsel of all-holy God alone
Prevaileth from bright sun to darksome dust,

And I am hopeful that Almighty God


NtrSHtRWAN 4-ti

Will grant to us a glorious destiny.

Tried have we counsel and in loving fashion
Have pleaded, but Talhand is sbill averse.

If now our host shall be victorious,

And if the process of the sun and moon
Afford us fruit, shed ye not blood for spoil.

Because ye shall receive a treasure-hoard ;

And if some famous warrior of our host.

Who ohargeth on their centre, shall perchance
Confront Talhand in fight he must not cast
The dust upon him. Praying as we go.

And with our girdles girt, confront we now
Yon mighty elephants.”

The soldiers shouted : —

“We will perform thy bidding and wiU make
Thy counsel the adornment of our souls.”

Upon the other side Talhand harangued
His troops and said : “Ye warders of the throne !

That we may be victorious, and the star
Of our good fortune bring forth fruit for us,

Draw, all of ye, your swords, confide in God,

And slay the foe. When ye have ta’en Gav captive
Ye must not kill him or address him harshly.

But take him from yon raging elephant,

And bring him to me with his hands in bonds.”

Thereat the blaring of the clarions
Rose in the court before the royal tent.

At all the neighing of the steeds, the dust
Raised by the chiefs, and whirl of massive maces.

The hills and streams re-echoed. “ Circling heaven
Recoiloth,” thou hadst said. At all the shoutings, C. 1738
And crash of axes, “No one,” thou hadst said,

“Know head from foot.” The sun withdrew its
skirt

From those bright arrow-heads and eagles’ plumes.

Earth seemed a sea of blood where heads and hands


412 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI

Were pebbles in its depths. The royal princes
Came from the centre, like huge elephants,

And from them both a shout arose : Avoid
The wind of my two-headed javelin.

0 brother ! be not forward in the fight,

And guard thee from my sword.”

Thus shouted they,

Each to the other, while the earth seemed all
A sea of blood, The vahant swordsmen wheeled
About the field, and streams of blood and brains
Ran from the blows of those two warlike princes.
Thus till the sun had left the sky the strife
Surpassed all bounds. Then from the field a shout
Rose, and the voice of Gav cried : “ Combatants,
And youthful warriors ! exact not vengeance
On those that would have quarter at our hands.
Know that my brother shrinketh from the fray,

And may abide not, being left unaided.”

Then many chiefs asked quarter, many more
Were slaughtered on the field, Talhand’s whole host
Was scattered, and the flock was shepherdless.

The shepherd flockless. When Talhand was left

Alone upon his elephant, Gav called

To him and said : Go to thy palace, brother !

And have regard to that and thine own court.

Good sooth ! thou shalt not suffer in thy person
From me or at the hands of this famed host
Of swordsmen. Know that all good is from God,
And give Him thanks so long as life shall last
That thou hast left this battlefield alive. . . ,

But ’tis no time for counsel or delay.”

Now when Talhand had heard his brother’s words
He writhed with shame, his face ran tears, he left
The battlefield for Margh. Troops flocked to him
From every side. He oped his magazines,

And gave supplies. His host was well equipped,


nj^shirwAn


413


Content, and glad. He gave a robe of honour
To each that in his eyes so merited.

When all the soldiers had received their pay,

And when his warlike heart was freed from dudgeon,
He sent to ,Gav a message : “ Thou that art
To throne as weed to garden ! thou shalt bum
Anon, thy spirit shall be stricken, thine eyes
Sewn up. Thou deem'st that I can harm thee not,
But girdle not thy heart with self-deceit.”

Gav, when he heard that savage message, washed
Affection for his brother from his soul.

His heart was filled with dudgeon, and he said
Thus to his sage : Behold this monstrous thing ! ”

The sage replied : '"0 king ! upon the throne
Thou art the memory of thy sire, more learned
Than seekers after lore, and mightiest
Of kings. I told my lord the truth, as vouched
By circling sun and shining moon, that till
This famous prince be overthrown, and snake-like
Writhe on the darksome dust, ne’er will he rest, \
Or turn away from strife. In this contention
Thy policy is to affect delay.

Reply not harshly, seek the way for union
And peace with him. All his endeavouring
Is to work evil. What is he to^do 1
It is God’s will. If he shall fight again,

We too will fight. Ho is in haste while we
Can wait.”

King Gav then called the messenger,
Hold talk with him at large^with courteousness,

And said to him : ''' Go to, say to my brother ; —

* Be not so brutal and so violent,

For violence becomoth not a king.

Thy sire was noble ; thou art noble likewise.

I see this clearly that thou dost reject
My counsels and alliance, yet am fain


C. 1739


414 the SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI

To have thee fair renowned and well disposed.

Now will I show thee all my heart and tell
The matter that my mind is purposing.

Thine evil minister hath sundered thee
From quiet, good advice, and wisdom’s way.

Speak not but what is just because the world,

My brother ! is but mockery and wind.

Incline to peace that I may send thee all
The wealth in full and loyal lieges also
Forthwith, and thy misdoubting soul will see
That there is naught but justice in my heart.

May every one be joyful in thy life !

My purpose is according to my words,

If thou, self-willed one ! wilt attend thereto.
Howbeit if thou art intent on war.

And overtures for peace and pact are vain,

I will array my warriors for battle,

And they suffice to occupy a realm.

Let us go forth beyond these peopled lands,

And lead our two hosts onward to the sea.

Dig we a trench about them there to shut
Our warriors in, then fill it with sea-water,

And urge them to the fray, so that the worsted
May not escape by reason of the trench,

1740 While he of us that is victorious

Shall shed not. blood upon that straitened spot.

But take the foemen captive. God forbid
That we should use our scimitars and arrows.’ ”

The envoy went his way and came like wind.

He told Talhand the words of Gav. The prince,
When he had listened to that embassage.

Bade summon to his presence all the men
Of leading in his host and seated them.

Each one in due accordance to his rank,

Repeated to them Gay’s response, disclosed
The matter, and thus said : What are your views


NtfSHtRWlN


41S

On this new-fangled battle by the sea
Proposed by Gav 'I How shall we deal therewith.

And shall we turn his fancy into fact ?

If ye are one with me then not a man
Will draw back for a moment from the fight.

What matter whether it be sea or mountain
When we seek battle in the ranks of war ?

If ye will be my comrades in the strife
Tile leopard shall fear not the fox’s voice.

All those of us that seek for high renown
Shall win their chief ambition from the world.

The aspirant rather should be slain with fame
Than live to grace the triumph of the foe.

Whoe’er shall bear him stoutly in the fight,

His bearing shall not disadvantage him,

For such shall have of me unstinted wealth
With servants and with steeds caparisoned.

Tliren from Kashmir down to the sea of Chin
The folk in every state will homage us ;

I will bestow their cities on my troops
Or ever kingship, crown, and throne are mine.”

In answer all the chieftains bowed their faces
Before him till they touched the ground, and said : —
Our choice is fame, and thou, who art our king,
Shalt see a turn of fortune.”

Then a shout

Rose from the portal of Talhand, and all
The province was astir with troops. He led
His whole host toward the sea, the troops of Gav
Appeared on their side, and the two kings lighted,
Confronting, for they each would be avenged
Upon the other. Round the hosts they dug
A trench and, when ’twas deep, let in the water.

Both armies drew up face to face, and foam

Was on the horsemen’s Ups. The wings were ranged

To right and left, the baggage was bestowed


41 6 THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSt

Ariigh the sea^ and those illustrious kings,

All dudgeon and vindictiveness, then saddled
Two elephants, each at his army’s centre
Took up his station, and assumed command.

The earth grew pitch-like, heaven azure-dim
With all the spears and silken bannerets,

• 1741 While air was ebon with the armies’ dust.

What with the trumpet’s blare and tymbal’s din
Thou wouldst have said : “ The sea is all a-boil,

The crocodiles therein call out for blood ! ”

While at the thud of battle-ax, of mace,

And sword, a red reek went up from the deep,

And as that veil was drawn athwart the sun
The world’s face vanished from the eyes of men.

Thou wouldst have said: ''The air is raining
swords,

And planting tulips in the dust ! ” The world
Was heaped so with the fallen that the vulture
Durst fly not overhead. Some lay within
The trench, which ran with blood, while other some
Were flung down headless on the field. The sea
Rose with the wind, and still the hosts advanced,
Troop after troop, while all the plain was filled
With livers, brains, and hearts. The horses’ hoofs
Were clogged with gory mire. Talhand looked forth
Upon his elephant and saw the earth
O’erflowing like the Nile ; the wind withal
Was in his face, and he had need of meat
And drink, but saw no peace and no escape
From wind and sun and trenchant scimitar,

And, swooning, died upon his golden saddle.

Resigning all the realm of Hind to Gav.

When loss betideth one, whose eyes are set
On gain, how great his passion and regret !

And since both gain and loss must pass away
Enjoy, old sage ! the pleasures of to-day,


nXjshIrwAn


417


For howsoever much may be thy gains

The world's whole treasure is not worth the pains.

Gav looking from the centre failed to spy
The prince’s flag, so sent a cavaher
To wheel before the elephants, and search
The foemen’s front for miles, to find out whither
Had gone the bright red banner that had shadowed
The horsemen’s faces, for the fight is stayed
Unless mine eyes are blinded by the dust.”

The horseman came, looked everywhere but saw
not

The standard of the chief, howbeit he saw
The foemen’s centre all confused cries.

And all the horsemen looking for their prince.

Thereat he turned away, came quick as dust,

And told the news to Gav. That general
Alighted from his elephant and went
Two miles afoot and weeping bitterly.

Whenas he looked upon the dead Talhand,

And saw the soldiers’ faces woebegone.

He keenly scanned the corpse from head to foot,

But saw not any wound on breast or skin.

Then that exalted monarch wailed aloud.

Sat grieved and heavy by the corpse, and said : —

“ Alack ! thou youthful warrior ! thou hast gone
Fulfilled with anguish and with wounded soul,

Slain by the process of thine evil star,

Else had the cruel blast not smitten thee.

Thou didst reject the counsel of thy teachers,

Hast gone, and darkened is thy mother’s heart.

Much did I warn thee in all kindliness.

But yet my counsel could avail thee naught.”

Now when the sage of Gav arrived and saw
Talhand, the world-aspirant, dead, his brother
Bewailing him on that wide plain with cries
That pierced the sky, he likewise wailed and wallowed

VOL. vn. 2 n


41 8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Before Grav, saying : “Woe for thee, yonng world-
lord ! ”

Addressing then his lips to give advice
He said to Gav : “ Exalted king ! what profit
This grief and mourning ? He hath passed away ;
What was to be hath been. Thou mayst thank God
In one regard — that thy hand slew him not.

I told my lord aU that would be as vouched
By Mars and Saturn, sun and moon : ' This youth
Will bear him so in fight that he wiU end
His days/ and now his work is as the wind.

And he hath gone through ignorance and haste,

While all this mighty host is fuU of grief
And anger, and all eyes are fixed on thee.

Content thyself, make us contented too.

And thus contenting do what wisdom would ;

For when the soldiers shall behold their Mng
Afoot and weeping on the way for grief,

His lustre will be minished in their eyes,

And e’en the basest will wax insolent

Toward him, for the king is like a cup

Filled with rose-water ; may the blast not strike him !”

Gav hearkened to that prudent sage’s rede.

A proclamation went forth from the host : —

“ Ye men of name and warriors of the king !

Let no one tarry on the battlefield,

For yon host is disjoined not now from this ;

Both must be one in act and in acclaim.

Be all ’neath my protection and preserve
For me the memory of my high-souled brother.”

Then called he all the chiefs, on his eyelashes
Let fall his own heart’s blood, made for Talhand
A narrow coffin out of ivory

And gold, of turquoise and teak-wood, and swathed
His brother’s face with glossy silk of Chin.

Thus passed away that famous chief of Hand.


NtSHtRWlN 419

They sealed the cof&n-hd with gums and pitch.

With musk and camphor. Then Gav marched away
In haste and tarried at no stage for long.

The princes’ mother slept not, rested not,

And farted after they had chosen their field
Of battle. Ever on the road she kept
A watch and passed each day in bitterness.

So when the host’s dust went up from the road 0 . 1743

The wakeful watchman saw it from the look-out,

And thence too saw the flag of Gav appear.

While all the realm’s face was o’erspread with troops.

He gazed from two miles off in hope to see
The elephant’and standard of TaUiand,

But failed to recognise them mid the host.

He hurried off a horseman from the look-out
To say : The army cometh from the mountains,

And &v is there with all his company,

But I see not Talhand, his elephant,

Or flag, or yet his chiefs with golden boots.”

His mother poured down blood, which drenched her
breast,

From her eyelashes. When news came : That Light
Of empire is bedimmed, the atheling,

Talhand, hath died on saddle-back and left
To Gav his seat upon the throne of kingship,”

She hurried to the palace of Talhand,

And ofttimes dashed her head against its walls.

She rent her raiment, tore her cheeks, flung fire
On hall and treasury, and burnt up all
The palace and the throne of majesty.

Thereafter she upreared a mighty pyre
To bum herself, as is the use of Hind,

And by her sorrow illustrate its Faith.

When tidings of his mother came to Gav
He urged his speedy charger on and came,

Embraced her closely, and entreated her,


420


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


With blood upon his eyelids, saying thus : —

0 loving mother ! hearken to my words,
Because we have transgressed not in this fight.

It was not I or my companions,

Or warrior of this noble host, that slew him.

None durst breathe harshly on him : he was slain
Beneath the process of his evil star.’’

Has mother answered him : Thou wicked man
On thee wiU come high heaven’s malison ;

Thy brother hast thou slain for crown and throne,
And no good man will call thee fortunate.”

0 loving mother ! ” thus he answered her,
Thou oughtest not to think such ill of ihe,

But be content and I will tell thee aU
The case of king and host and battlefield.

For who would dare to go to fight with him I
Who ever contemplated such dispute ?

Now by the Judge that fashioned sun and moon,
Night, day, and all the process of the sky.

The signet-ring and throne, the steed and mace.
The sword and crown, shall see me never more
Unless I clear this matter up, and turn
Thy heart from harshness into tenderness.

By proving to thy clear soul that the hand
Of none hath put a period to his life.

What man in all the world can ’scape from death,
Though he be clad upon with steel and helm ?

C. 1744 when the bright lamp fafieth none may count
Another breath however brave he be.

If what I prove to thee content thee not,

By God, the Lford of all, my purpose is
To bum my body in the fire and gladden
My foemen’s souls,”

On hearing this, his mother
Had ruth upon his form majestioal,

Lest that young hero should consume in fire


NJJSHIRWAN 421

His body barely handselled of its soul,

And therefore said to him : “ Show me the way
That prince Talhand died on his elephant.

Unless the matter be made clear to me
My fond heart still will burn.”

Grav sought his palace
In sorrow, summoned his experienced sage,

Told what had passed and how his mother’s words
Had angered him until he swore to burn.

They sat down and took counsel by themselves.

The sage spake thus : “ My gracious sovereign !

We cannot by ourselves achieve thy wish.

Call we the f^med and wise, both old and young,

Among the shrewdest seekers of the way

From every side — ^Kashmir, Dambar, Margh, M&i.”

Grav sent oflE cavahers to every quarter,^

Wherever there was any sage of leading.

They all came to the portal of the king,

Came to that famous court. He held a session
Of wise men and of magnates learned and shrewd,
Gav’s sage described the battlefield and how
The prince and host had fought. They all conversed
With that sharp-witted man about the sea,

About the trench and letting in the water.

That darksome night not one among them slept.

But aU held talk together. When the din
Of kettledrum ascended from the plain
Those men of wisdom called for ebony,

And two of them — ^ingenious councillors —

Constructed of that wood a board foursquare
To represent the trench and battlefield,

And with both armies drawn up face to face.

A hundred squares were traced upon the board.

So that the kings and soldiers might manoeuvre.

Two hosts were carved of teak and ivory,

^ BiOading -with P,


422 THE SHAhnImA OE FIRDAUSI

And two proud kings with crowns and Grace divine.
Both horse and foot were represented there.

And drawn up in two ranks in war-array,

The steeds, the elephants, the ministers,

And warriors charging at the enemy.

All combating as is the use in war,

One in offence, another in defence.

The king was posted at the army’s centre,

With at one hand his loyal minister.

C. 1745 Next to the twain were placed two elephants,
Supporting thrones the hue of indigo.

Next to the elephants two camels stood,

Whereon two men of holy counsel sat.

Next to the camels there were placed two steeds,
With riders vahant on the day of battle,

And each wing ended in a warrior-rukh,

His liver’s blood a-foam upon his lips.

The footman’s move was always to advance,

That he might be of aidance in the fray.

Till, having passed across the battlefield,

He sat — a minister — ^beside the king ;

The minister might quit not too in battle
His king by more than by a single square.

While o’er three squares the noble elephant
Could move aijd for two mQes survey the field.

The camel likewise moved three squares and raged
And snorted on the field of fight. The horse
Made too a three squares’ move, but in the move
Alighted on a square of diverse hue.

The warrior-rukh might traverse every way,

And charge across the battle at his will.

They all contended in their proper fists,

And each observed the limits of his move.

When one of them beheld the king in fight,

Then w^ould he shout and say : “ Avaunt, 0 king ! ”
Whereat the king would change his square till he


NtfSHIRWAN


42s


Was straitened where he stood . When rukh and horse,
And minister and elephant and troops,

Had blocked the way for him on every side

The king would look forth o’er that field foursquare,

And see his men o’erthrown, their faces lined.

Escape cut off by water and by trench,

With foes to right and left and front and rear,

And being moveless and fordone would die,i
For so the process of the heaven decreed.

King Grav, the great and good, affected much
The game of chess suggested through Talhand ;

His mother studied it. Her heart was filled
With anguish for that prince. Both night and day
She sat possessed by passion and by pain,

With both her eyes intent upon the game.

Her whole desire and purpose centred there ;

Her mind was full of anguish for Talhand.

She kept for ever shedding tears of blood,

With chess to medicine her sufferings,

And thus she fared and neither ate nor stirred
Until her hfe had reached its period.

So now my tale is done that I heard told
With other stories of the days of old.


§4

How N^hirwdn sent Barzwi, the Leechj to Hind'&stdn io fetch a
wondrous Drug^ and how Barzwi brought hack the Book of
Kalila and Dimna

Mark what Sh&d^n, son of Barzin, revealed — 1746-

A matter that till then had been concealed : —

When Nlishfrw 4 n was king of kings, and may
His fame endure throughout eternity,

He sought for sages learned in all lore

1 SlMili mi.t (check mate).


424


THE SHAhnAmA of FIRDAUSt


To give a greater lustre to his court.

The whole world was beneath his sovereign rule —
The great men and the much experienced chiefs,

The doctors, with the eloquent and brave,

The interpreters, proved leaders, and withal ^

A famous chief, the wearer of a crown.

This was Barzwi, the eloquent physician,

An orator and stricken well in years,

A man proficient in each branch of learning.

And for each branch acclaimed throughout the world.
One day Barzwi at audience-time drew near
The famous king, and said : ‘^0 Sh&h, the friend
Of knowledge, apt to seek it and retain !

I scanned with heed an Indian scroll to-day.

And there within ’twas written : ^ On the mountains
Of Hind there is a herb hke Human silk,

Which if the expert shall collect, prepare
According unto knowledge, and then strew
Upon the body of one dead, the corpse,

Good sooth, forthwith will speak.’ Now if the king
Permit I wiQ adventure this hard journey.

And, with much lore to guide me on my way,

Achieve perchance this wondrous enterprise.

’Tis fitting that the dead should come to life
When Nushirwto is monarch of the world.”

The Sh&h made answer : “ Hardly this may be,

But ne’er the less the endeavour should be made.
Convey my letter thither to the Edja,

And look upon the attractions of that land.

Seek for a comrade in the enterprise,

As well as wakeful fortune’s comradeship.

Thou wdt reveal some wonder to the world.

Because the words are enigmatical.

Bear to the ES;ja worthy offerings,

Por doubtless he must furnish thee with guides.”

^ Reading "with P.


NlJSHtRWllSf 425

Then Nushirw^ unlocked his treasury,

And of the havings that are fit for kings ^ —

Dinars, brocade, silks, beaver-skins, and signets.

Crowns, musk, and spicery, with armlets too, 0. 1747

With royal jewelry, and torques and earrings —

He had three hundred camel-loads made ready.

The envoy left the presence and, on reaching
The R 4 ja, gave the letter, and unpacked
The bales before him, who, when he had read
The letter of the ShSih, said thus : “ Good sir !

Hath not my wealth been given by Nushirwto ?

Our persons, troops, and royal treasuries

Are one. ’Twere not strange if the pious world-lord.

By reason of his justice, throne, and Grace,

His splendid fortune and his high achievement,

Should raise the dead. The Brahmans on the moun-
tains

Are all at thy dispose. My minister,

An idol-worshipper of high degree,

My noble treasurer and hoarded wealth,

With Hindustan and all its good and iU,

And all my power o’er great and small, are thine.”

They lodged the envoy with magnificence
Hard by the RS;ja as his rank required.

Providing him with provand, tapestries,

With dainty raiment and with carpetings.

All night the R&ja held talk with the priests.

The great men ojE Kanniij and with the sages,

And when the daylight showed above the hills,

And when the world-illuming Lamp appeared,

He called the learned physicians and all those
Best qualified by knowledge to advise,

And bade them wait upon the learned Barzwi
To hear his statement. All the erudite,

Adept in leechcraft, went to him and, when
^ Reading with P.


426 THE SHIhnAmA OF FIRDAUSt

He set forth to the mouiitains, fared with him.
Barzwi roamed all the mountam-tops afoot,
Companioned by his leam6d guides, and culled ]
The divers herbs — ^the dry, the succulent.

The withered, and the flourishing, He brayed
Herbs succulent an,d dry of every kind,

And spread them on the dead, but none revived
For any herb, and verily it seemed
That all the virtue had gone out of them.

The company roamed aU the heights afoot,

But had no fruit from travail, and Barzwi
Then understood : This task is for the King
That hveth and that reigneth evermore.”

Thoughts of the Shih, of those illustrious chiefs,
And that long journey, moved his heart to shame.
He thought too of the wealth that he had brought,
And was concerned at aU his senseless talk.

He was chagrined about the scroll and said : —

“ Why did that ignorant and stupid man

Write in his folly and his levity

That which produceth travail and foul words ? ”

*0. 174S Thereafter he addressed those sages thus : —

“ Ye chiefs experienced and worshipful !

Know ye of one more learned than yourselves,

One eminent in every company 1 ”

The troop of sages said with one accord : —
There dweUeth here a very ancient man,i
Surpassing us in wisdom and in years,

And in his knowledge besting every chief.”

Thereat Barzwi said to those men of Hind : —

‘‘ Ye men of high renown and ardent soul !

Exert yourselves yet more on my behalf,

And point me out the way to him. Perchance
That eloquent old sage may succour me
La this affair.”

They led Barzwi to him,

1 Reading with P.


NtSHiRWlN


427


Full of solicitude, with much to say.

Now when Barzwi, that man of eloquence,

Approached the sage and told all his own toils,

About the writing that he had discovered.

And of the experts’ words, the ancient sage
Rephed, informing him at large, and said : —

“ We in those writings found the selfsame thing,

We too were instant in the same desire.

Now wdll I tell thee our discovery :

The noble heart must hear to understand.

The herb then is the sage, the mountain know-
ledge,

As being ever distant from the throng ;

The corpse the man whose knowledge is to seek,
Because the unwdse are kill-joys everywhere.

In sooth ’tis knowledge that doth make men live ;

Blest is the constant toiler for its sake.

When men are stupefied through ignorance ^

Kalila ^ is the herb, and understanding
The mountain. In the monarch’s treasury,

On making quest there, thou wilt find a book
Of knowledge that wiU point thee out the way.”

Barzwi, when he had heard, rejoiced thereat,

And aU his travail seemed like wind to him.

He blessed the sage and sped back to the king,

Like fire. Arrived he praised the Rdja, saying : —
^‘Live thou while Hind shall last. There is a
book,

0 potent R^ija ! that in Indian
Is called Kalfla.® It is under seal,

And fondly treasured in the monarch’s hoards —

A guide-book both to knowledge and to counsel.

Kalila is the herb in mystic parlance ;

So now, 0 king of Hind ! be thou mine aid,

1 Reading with P,

® Being, liko tho sago, a teacher of knowledge.

^ Reading with P.


428


THE SHAHNImA of FIRDAUSI


And, if I be not troublesome, command
Thy treasurer to hand the book to me.”

The Raja’s soul was sad at that request,

He writhed upon his throne and answered thus
Barzwi : No one has sought of us this thing

In times of yore or in these latter days.

However if the world-lord Nushirwm
Shall ask of me my body or my soul
1749 I will withhold not from him aught that is
In being whether high or low ; albeit
Thou shalt peruse it not save in my presence,
That spirits iU-disposed to me may say not
Within their hearts : ^ Some one hath copied it.’
So read and learn and mark it every way.”

Barzwi made answer thus and said : “0 king !
Thou hast expressed my whole intent herein.”

The Raja’s minister then brought Kalila ;
Barzwi perused it with a sage’s help,

And, as he read each chapter of the book,

He spent the day in learning it by heart.

For, having read as much as he could learn,

He read no further tiU the morrow came,

But, writing to the monarch of the world,

Sent privily a chapter of Kalila.

The Indians’ book by this expedient
Was introduced to royal Nushixwan,

What while Barzwi continued hale and happy,

By laving thus his ardent soul in knowledge,
UntU the answer to his letters came : —

“ The Sea of Lore hath come to hand for us.”

Then from his palace he approached the Raja
To ask for leave to go. At that request
The R&ja graciously entreated him,

And had prepared an Indian robe of honour —
Two valuable armlets and two earrings,

A torque of jewels worthy of a king,


NtSHIRWAN 429

An Indian turban and an Indian sword.

Whereof the blade was watered steel, Barzwi
Came from Kannnj, rejoicing, having gained
Much knowledge there. On his return to court
He went before the Shah and did obeisance,

Then told about his converse with the Raja,

How knowledge had been found instead of herbs.

The Shdih replied : “0 man approved in aU !

Kalfla hath restored my soul to life.

Take from my treasurer my treasury’s key.

And make thy choice according to thy needs.”

So to the treasury the sage departed.

But gave small trouble to the treasurer.^

There drachms and jewels lay to left and right,

And yet he chose him but a royal robe,

Put on that costly raiment and went forth
Back to the court of Nushirw&n in haste.

When he approached the throne he did obeisance,

And praised the king, who said : “0 man of toils !

Why hast thou left the treasury and brought
No purses with thee and no royal gems.

For treasure is the meed of them that travail ? ”

Barzwi replied : 0 thou whose crown is higher

Than sun and moon ! the wearer of king’s
raiment

Hath access to the crown and throne of might,

And furthermore, when people shall behold 0. 1750

Mine own unworthy self in royal robes,

My foes’ hearts will be strait and overcast,

My friends’ cheeks keep their lustre and their
bloom.

Still there is somewhat I would ask the kiiig
That I may leave my memory in the world —

Let BTizurjmihr, when copying the book,

Show favour to Barzwi’s endeavourment,

1 Koading with P.


430 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And give account of me in Chapter One,

By order of the conquering king, that so,

When I am dead, my travailing may be
Forgot not by the sages in the world.”

” A great thing this to ask ! ” the Sh&h replied,

“ And one beyond the heence of a liege,

And yet thy labour hath deserved as much,
Although thy standing warranteth it not.”

Then said the Shah to Biizurjmihr : ” This wish
Of his is not to be ignored.”

So when

The fashioning of pen from kex was done
The scribe wrote of Barzwi in Chapter One.

As for the royal book which thus was writ
’Twas in the script of bygone centuries ;

Among the royal hoards men treasured it,

But ’twas beheld not by unworthy eyes.

It was perused not, tiU the people took
To Arabic, save in the ancient tongue ;

But when M^miin had made earth fresh and young
He dealt in other fashion with the book.

For he had clerkly lore, was pohtic

In kingly wise, and learned in every way.

’Twas then translated into Arabic,

Just as thou mayest hear it read to-day.

In Arabic, till Nasr was king, it stayed ;

Then noble Abii’l Fazl, his minister
And, in respect to lore, his treasurer.

Gave orders, which were readily obeyed,^

For folk to speak in Persian and Dari.2
Thereafter precedent and policy
Conducted Nasr in wisdom’s way when he
Was fain by whatsoever means might be
To leave within the world his memory.

^ " mais son pouvoir fut de courte dur^e (Mohl).

® TIlo more ornate Persian used at cotirt.


NtrSHtRWAN

They held a session with interpreters,

Who read the whole book oat to Rudagi.^

That poet linked the scattered words in verse,
And threaded ^ thus those pregnant pearls, that he
Who is a scholar might new graces find.

And one unlearned more facility.

For words in prose escape us, but combined
In metric guise possess the brain and mind.

Life to Mahmud, the world’s great potentate !

May earth and time as slaves before him wait.
How it would joy the heart if but the bad
From Sh^h Mahmiid less free allowance had !

Yet be not thou concerned thereat. Anon,

Since life is far advanced, thou must be gone.

Thou hast thine ups and downs from day to day,
At whiles assistance and at whiles dismay ;

But neither of them will for aye remain
With thee ; the hope of tarriance here is vain.

Etidaki in the original.


T:^?4Jjiterally “ pierced.”


INDEX


This Index and the Table of Contents at the hegimimg of the 'volume are
complementary. References to the latter are in Roman numerals.


A

Abbeeviations, list of, xvi
Abti’l Fazl, minister under the
Silmdnids and father of
the Persian translator of
Tabai-i, 383, 430
patron of Kiidagi, 383
Achshunwar. See Akhshunwar-
Afrdsiyiib, ruler of Tiirdn, 330,

334. 335. 337, 359
the Khtin of Chin descended
from, 334

Ahmad, son of Ismd’il, Sdmdnid,

/ 383

Ahriman, the Evil Principle, 89,
233, 265,271, 290,312, 323,
334, 359, 366, 367, 369
AhwAz, city in Khiizistdn (Susi-
ana), 197, 198, 201, 214,
224

Akhshunwar (Achshunwar), Hai-
tlilian king, t6o
Aldus (Alani), people, x, 216
Niitthirwdu’s dealings with,
216, 239 seq.

Alburz, Mount, 177
Aleppo (Chalybou-Beroea), city,
218

Alexander, the Great, 383
Amida (Diarbckr), city on the
upper Tigris, 187
Amuli city in Mazandardn, 89,

237

VOL. VII.


Amwi, place on the Oxus, 91 and
331, 357, 359

Anestres Castri = NTishirwdn,

383

Antdkiya (Antioch), city on the
Oroutes, xi, 218
taken by Ndshirwdn, 218, 258
' seq.

Antioch. See Antdkiya.

New, 218, 259

Apothegms, 17, 18, 42, 270, 277,
296, 301, 403

Apprentice, a merchant's, enter-
tains, and finds favour
with, Bahrdm Gtir, 40 seq.
Arab, Arabs, 10, 107, 201, 218,
244, 245, 247
sage, quoted, 277
Arabian Nights^ The, 3, 317
provenance of, 3
Arabic, 381

Fables of Bidpai (Kalila and
Dimna) -translated into,
382, 430

Aragdn (Rdmkubdd), town, 188
Arash, city. See Hulwdn.
jCrdyish-i-Rfini (Hierapolis), city
west of the Euphrates and
north of Aleppo, 217, 218,

254. 255

taken by Nfishlrwdn, 255
Ard, day, 112

Ardabil, city in Azarbdijdn, 89,
163, 224

2 E


433


INDEX


434

Ardshir, high priest tem^), Piriiz,
179 seq,

released by Khiishiiaw^z, 180
Ardshir, high priest temp, Niishir-
w^n, 304, 333, 337, 342
discourse of, 305
q^uestions Btizurjmihr, 308
Ardshir Khuita (Khurra-i-Ard-
shir), city, now Firiiz^h&d,
and district in Farsistd-n,
206

Ardshir Pdpakdn, Sbiih, 79, 185,
212

his failure to conquer Bald-
chistfin, 242

the invention of nard attri-
buted to, 382

Arish, rrdnian archer, 234 and note
Arjdsp, king of Tdrdn, 330, 334,
335. 337. 359

the Khdn of Chin descended
from, 334

Arman, Armenia, or a district in
Azarbdijdn, 263
Armenia, 153, 224
Roman, 187

Arsacid, Arsacids, 156, 185, 212
Artang, Mini’s house, 355 and
note

Arzhang. See Ai'tang.

Arztl, daughter of Mdhiyir, 59
referred to, 55, 59
sings to Bahrim Gdr, 60
asked in marriage by, and
married to, Bahrim Gdr,
61 8 eq,

meaning of, 65 note
Ashemaogha, 188
Astrologer, astrologers, 144

foretell Bahr&m Gdr’s term
of life, 144

birth of Hm-muzd, 354
death of Talhand, 408, 413,
418

Athens, city, 280

schools of, closed by Justi-
nian, 2 So


Azdd Sarv, archimage, 283
goes to Marv, 283
discovers Buzurjmihr, 283
retunis with Bdzurjmihr to
court, 283

Azav=Azargashasp, q,v.

Azar Abddagan, Fire- temple at
SMz, 86, 224, 362
visited by Bahrdm Gdr, 86,
94

visited by Nushirwd,n, 250
Azarbdijdn, 160, 214
Azargashasp, spirit of the light-
ning, 21, 79, 232
fire-temple at Shiz, 89, 317,

365

visited by Bahrdm Giir,

86, 139

high priest of, converts
Sapliiiid to Zoroastri-
anism, 139

visited by Niisliirwdn,

363

B

Babak, muster-master of Niishir-
wdn, X, 230

bidden to enroll the host, 230
insists on NdsMrwan’s at-
tendance for enrolment,
231

asks pardon of the Shah, 232
Bdhar, Emperor, on wine-drink-
ing, 7.5 note

Bdddn Pii-uz (Shahrdni-Pinlz),
city built by Pirdz in Azar-’
bdijdn, ix, 160, 163
Baghdad, city, viii, 83 and note
Bahman, Irdniau magnate, 312
Bahman, month and day, 31 and
note

Bahman Yasht, Pahlavi Text, 188
Bahrdm, son of Pfrdz, Trdnian
wamor, 85

Bahrdm, Trinian chief, 251, 262
Bahrdm, genius, 406 and 7 iote


INDEX


BahrfCm Giir, Shd,L (Varahran V)i
vii sef?. 3 seg^., i6o, 164,
165, 170 and 174, 178,
187, 334, 359
Reign of, 3 seg.

Note on, 3 seg,.
length of, 3
largely legendary, 3
character of, 3

resembles James V of
Scotland, 3
ministers of, 4
his war with Rdm, 4, 5
adventures of, vii seq,, 4,
12 scg.

his. historical defeat of the
Haitalians 4, 5
his alleged reduction of taxa-
tion ill consefiueuce, 5
accession of,. 7

holds his court for eight
days; 7 S€g,
summons Jawdiiwi, 8
holds three days’ festivities,
10

rewards Nu’mctn and Munzir,

10

honours Khusrau, 10
makes Narsi captain of the
host, IX

burns the registers of taxes,

11

applauded by the folk, ii
restores the nobles exiled by
his father to their honours,

II

makes proclamation to the
people, X2, 79, 8.2
forbids wiiie-driuking, 23
allows wine-drinking again,

25

his whip, 47, 54, 63, 64 i
his equipage for the chase,

48, 76

loses and finds his tughral,

49, 50

his visit to Barzin, 49 eeg^


435

Bahrdm Giir, marries Barzln’s
daughters, 53

hunting-feats of, 54, 55, 77,
80, Si

visits a jeweller, 56 seq,
his course of life bewailed by
Rtizbih, 56
his many wives, 56
asks and obtains ifrzu in
marriage, seg.
his visit to Farshidward,
68 8 eg,

goes hunting, 76 sag.
forbids all plundering, 79
ear-marks and brands ona-
gers, Si

remits the tribute of Barkiih
and Jaz, 82
visits Baghdad, 83
holds revel at Baghdad, 83
goes to Istakhr, 83, 95
reproaches Riizbih for parsi-
mony, 83

reported to be given up to
pleasure, 84

reproached by his chiefs, 84
his s e cr et pr ep arat i ons against
the Khan, 85
summons his chiefs, 85
, levies a host, 86
makes Narsi regent, 86
goes to Azar Abttdagiln, 86,
94

his march to Marv against
the Khtiu, 89

defeats the KHn at Kashmi-
,han, 90, 170
marches on Bukhtird, 90
defeats the Turkmans, 91
grants peace to the Turkmans,

91

his boundary-pillar, 92, 160,
161, 164

makes Shahra ruler of Tfirdn,

92

makes gifts of treasure, 95,
96


INDEX


436

Babrdni Giir, deposits the Khdn’s
crown in a Fire-temple, 95
goes to Taisafdn, 95
welcomed by Narsi and the
chiefs, 96

remits taxes for aeyen yeaars,
97

happiness of the world under,
99

bestows Khurdadn on Narsi,
99

inquires about Csesar’s en-
voy, 100

gives audience to Caesar’s
envoy, loi

Caesar’s questions to, 102
his parting gifts to Caesar’s
envoy, 106

addresses the archmages,
106

a wazir complains of Shangul
to, 109

writes to Shangul, no
his visit to Hind, 5, 112
seg[.

motive of, 5
fabulous, 6

bears his own letter to Hind,
1 12

his audience with Shangul,
112

entertained by Shangul, 116
wrestles before Shangul, 117
displays his marksmanship
before Shangul, iiS
calls himself Barzwi, 12 1
slays monsters, 121 aeg^,
ojffered a daughter and great
advancement by Shangul,
127

takes to wife one of Shangul's
daughters, 128
receives an invitation from
Faghfdr, 129
his reply, 130

tells Sapimid of his wish to
, quit Hind, 131


Bahrdm Giir, meets some Trdnian
merchants and pledges
them to secrecy, 133
feigns sickness, 134
escapes with Sapindd, 134
reproached by Shangul, 135
makes aleague with Shangul,

137

his welcome on his return,

137

addresses the nobles, 13S
praised by the nobles, 139
makes a new treaty Avith
Shangul, 140

entertains Shangul and seven
other kings, 140 seg,
appointed Shangurs heir, 1 43
his parting gifts to Shangul,
144

takes account of his treasures,

* 144

his term of life foretold by
the astrologers, 144
resolves to levy uo more
taxes, 145

his unsuccessful attempts to
benefit his subjects, 146 seg,
his introduction of the Gipsies
into Trdn, 6, 149
appoints Yazdagird his suc-
cessor, 150
death of, 6, 150
Firdausi’s reflections on, 150
mourning for, 151
Baigand (Kuhandizh, Kunduz),
a city in Afghtin Turkistdu,
176

Bakhtag^n, the father of Bdznrj-
uiilir, 279

Bal’ami, compiler of the Persian
Tabari, 5

Balas (Baldsh), Sdsdniau king, 170
Baldsh (Balas), Shdh, ix, 169 seg,
appointed regent by Pirdz,
164

hears of the ovevthroAV of
Piriiz, 169


INDEX


Baldsh, Reign of, 170 seq.

Note on, 170
character of, 171
introduces public baths, 171
end of, 171
title of, 1 71
accession of, 17 1
Sdfarai’s letter to, 173
welcomes Siifami on his re-
turn from Tdrdn, 181
dethroned, 182
Balkh, city, 94, 331, 359, 384
BaWch (Baldchistttii), x, 242, 340,
362

Ardshir Papakan’s ill success
with, 242

Baliichis, people, 217

Ndshirwiu and the, 217, 241
seq,

Bamddt, father of Mazdak, 1S8
Bandwi, Wnian chief, 207
Banquets, the seven, of Ndsliir-
Wi(u, 280

possible origin of, 280
Barifhttm, a Jew, vii, 13

entertains Bahram Gxir sciir-
vily, 16 acq.

his goods confiscated, 20
Barbar, town and country (British
Somaliland), 327

Barda’, city on the borders of
Azarbdijan and Armenia,

341

Barkiih, city in Persian ’Irdk,
79> 8 d, 82

tribute of, remitted, 82
Barzin, Triinian noble, viii, 50 5cg.
visited by Bahrdm Giir 49
and his datighters entertain
Bahrdm Gdr, 50 seq.
gives his daughters to Bahrdm
Giir in mardage, 53
Barzin, bower of, 83
Barzin, Tr^nian chief, 86
Barzin, father of Ustiid, 251
Barzin, father of Shddtln, 382,

423


437

Barzwi, nonce-name assumed by
Bahrdm Gdr, 121, 134
Barzwi, fi-dniau sage, xiii, 382,
383, 424 seq.

introduces into Persia, and
translates, the Fables of
Bidpai, 382

goes on a mission to Hind,
424

' consults a sage, 427
hears of the book of Kalila
and Dimna, 427
transcribes and sends it to
Niishirwdii, 428
returns to Niishirwdn and
asks a boon, 429
Bastdm, city, 357
Biistdii-n^ima, 382
Baths, public, introduction of,
by Baldsh, 1 71

Belisarius, Roman general, 186,
187, 217, 218
Berozias= Barzwi, 383
Bidpai, Indian sage, 213, 382,

383

introduction of his Fables
(Book of Kalila and
Dimna) into Persia, xiii

213, 3S2

Bihbihdn, town, 188
Bihriiz, a scribe, 72
Bihzdd, Trdnian chief, 85
Bihzdd, Irdnian noble, 207
Bisd, city, 89

Bishop, receives Niishzdd’s last
requests, 275

Bistdn, mountain, 61, 363
Boundary -pillar, Bahrdm GiVs,
92, 160, 161, 164
Brahman, 425

Bramble-grubber, a. See Dili-
friiz.

Buddha, 383

Bukhdrd, city, 90, 94, 331, 348,

359, 384

Bdkhtakdn. See Bakhtagdn
Bull, mythological, 245


438


INDEX


Btirdza, father of Milu* Navsi, 4
Burrus, Praetorian prefect, 279
Burzmihr, Irdnian warrior, 86
bears Narsi’s letter to Bahi-dm
Ghr, 94

Bust, fortress and district in
Sistdn, 173, 395

Biizurjmihr, counsellor of Nd-
shirwdn, xi 5, 278 segf.
associated with the Persian
Wisdom-literature, 27S
a semi-mythical personage,
280

found by Aztld Sarv at Marv,

283

undertakes to interpret Nd-
shirwdn’s dream, 283
goes with -i.zid Sarv to
court, 283

his adventure with a snake,

284

interpretsNdshir wain’s dream,
284

rewarded and honoured by
Niishirwdn, 286, 289, 304,
311, 315, 388
his accomplishments, 2S6
his discourses at the Seven
Banquets of Ndshirwdn,
287 seq.

on fate and fortune, 291
on the attainment of great-
ness, 291, 296
on what is woithiest, 291
on sages, 288, 291, 292, 294,
296 seq,, 309
on fools, 297, 398, 306
on conduct, 28S, 291
299. 309

on kings, 290, 294, 295, 301,
312

on the wise administrator,
294

on sons, 295, 303, 31 1
on riches and poverty, 295
questioned by Ardshir and
Yazdagird, 308


Bdzurjmihr, on scribes, 31 1
on loyalty, 312
a discourse of, 366
questioned by NdsMrwdn,
367 seq,

expounds the game of chess,

380, 388

invents the game of nard,

381, 389

welcomed on his return from
Hind by Ndslnnvdn, 393
Byzantine title, 218


C

CjlSAR, viii, xi, 5, TOO, 163, 244
seq.<t 258 seg'., 269, 273
his embassage to Bahram
Gilr, 5, 100
marches on Tran, 84
propounds questions to Bah-
rain Gdr, 102

his envoy q^uestioiied by tlie
high priest, 104
his reply to Ndslnnvdn con-
cerning Muuzir, 245
his treasures taken by Nil-
shfrwdn, 255, 258
sues to Ndsliirwdu for peace,
261

sends tribute to Ndsliirwifn,
362

Callinicus. Set Kah'niyxis.

Camel, piece in chess, 422
position of, 422
move of, 422

Cancer, constellation, 257

Castle of Oblivion, 184

Caucasus, 153, 214, 217

passes in, fortified, 153, 187,
216, 239

Mas’iidl’s account of, 215

Chdch (Tdslikand), city in Tdrdn,
167, 329, 334 , 340, 343 »
348, 358, 359


INDEX


439


Chdcli, daughter of governor of,
285

her intrigue, 285
put to death, 2S6
Chaghan, place or city in TiirJi.n,

94, I57> 333) 359
ceded by Kubitd to the
Haitfiliuns, 198
monarch of^Faghitnish, 333
Chalybon-Beroea (Aleppo)' 218
Champions, The twelve, 156
Characteristics of a Happy Man,
Pahlavi text, 279
Charjui, place 011 the Oxus, '91
note

Chase, the, eiiuipage for, 48,
76

Chess, game of, xiii, 5, 14 and
note, 280, 385 seq.

Note on, 380

sent by the liiija of Hind
to Ndshirwdii, 5, 380, 384
seq.

expounded by Bdzurjmihr,
380, 38S

symbolism of, 381
two forms of, 381, 388, 422
changes in the powers of the
pieces in, 381
Mas’iidi on, 382
invention of, Story of the, 394

Chess-board, 14, 385, 388
Chess-men, 14, 380, 388
Chin, country (often =Tilrdn),
viii, ix, 33. 37» 78, 80, 84,
90 and_;5t5Wfif/n
Khdn of. See Khdn,
rarities of, 49

silk of, 73, 92, 347, 364, 418
ware of, 78
king of^Klnlii, 87
s= Faghfiir, 13 1
brocade of, 329, 353, 355
sea of, 343

Bose of -daughter of the
Khdn, 363 and note


Chosrau, Chosroes I (Kisrd Niish-
Irwdu), Sdsanian king, 212,
281

Christ, 207, 249, 264, 270, 273,
274, 276

Christian, Christians, 153, 171,
254, 270, 276
persecution of, 153
Firdausi’s view of, 219
■wife of Nusliirwdn, xi, 263,
274

mother of Niishziid, 263
helps Niishzdd in his re-
volt, 266

laments for Niishzdd,
276

support Niishzdd, 266, 272
Christianity, polemics against,
219, 270, 273
Colic, cure for, 39
Commons, King of the, 3
Communists (Mazdakites), 185
Constantinople, 316
Contents, Table of, vii
Cordwainer, the Riiman, and
Niishirwdn, 260
Corn-land, taxes on, 215
Cross, the, 249, 270, 276

D

DAd, iTranian warrior, 86
Ddi Marj, 6

Danibar, city in Hind, 396, 399,
421

Ddnib, Sbiih, 215
Darband, town and pass between
the Caucasus and the Cas-
pian, 213, 215

MasMdi’s account of the fpr-
tihcatioiis at, 215
Dari, 430 and 7 iote
Date-palms, taxes on, 215, 225
Ddwasdrm, king of Hind, 380,
381

sends the game of chess to
Niishirwiln, 380


440


INDEX


Dice (used in the game of nard),

389

DiMfnlz, a bramble-grubher, viii,
70 seq,

employed by Bahrdm Gdr,
70 seq.

Dilam, city in Giltln, 243, 244,
362 and note
Dilam dn. jS'ee Dilam.

Dijnua, Kalila and. See Fables
of Bidpai.

Diud-i Maindg-i Kliira^?, Pahlavi
text, 279
quoted, 279

Dinawari, historian, 6, 156, 186,
214

Div (Dadva), demon, 115, 154,
174, 36Sseq.

= Ahriman, 93, 107, 109, 117,
M3» 154, 206, 227, 26S, 289,
303* 304. 323. 332. 368 seq .,
376, 390

Mazdak’s five, 205
Biizurjinihr’s ten, 368
Doni, The Morall Philosophie of,

383

Dragon, vii, ix

slain by Bahrdm Giir, 42, 123
seq,

described, 43, 123
Dreams, Firdausi on, 281
Drought, 159, 201

measures to alleviate, 159,
162

breaking of, described, 163
Mazdak’s parable concerning,
201


E

Eclipse of sun, total, 159
Elephant, piece in chess, 385, 422,

423

position of, 388, 422
move of, 422
Endless peace, the, 217


Esdras, 207, 264
Euphrates, river, 217


F

Fables of Bidpai (Book of Ka-
lila and Dimiia), xiii, 213,
427 seq.

introduction of, into Persia,
213, 382

translations of, 3S2, 383

Firdausi’s account of,

430

vogue of, 383
origin of, 383

Ndshirwiin’s acquisition of,
423 fiCJ.

Faghdniah (I), king of the Hai-
tdlians, 157

helps Piriiz for a considera-
tion, 157
(II), xii, 350

made king instead of Ghdt-
kar, 333

Ndshirwdn takes counsel
about, 333

his descent from Baliram
Gdr, 334

Ndshirwiln writes to, 337
makes submission to Niishir-
wdn, 360

Faghfdr, the dynastic title of the
princes of Chin and Md-
chin, ix, 115, 129, 340, 343,
408

his daughter the wife of
Shangul, T15

hears of Bahram Gur’s ex-
ploits in Hind, 129
invites Bahrdm Giir to visit
him, 129

Bahrdm Gdr’s reply to, 130

Failakds, Philip II of Macedon,

215

Faldtdn (Plato), 100

Fal(ibniy, 48 eeq.


INDEX


441


Farab, city and desert, 91, 92
Fard’in, rninian chief, 207
Favtlnak, daughter of Barzin, 53
married to Bahram Gdr, 53
Farfiiriyus, Ktinian general, xi,

218

defeated by Niishirwiln, 256
makes report to Caesar, 260
Farhild, rnliiian general, 251
commands Nilshliwdn’s left
wing, 251

Farfddn, Slnih, 37, 3S, 60, 62, 73,
79, loi, 120, 199, 207,
his capital, 215, 238
Fdrikln (Maiy^lfdrikin), city in
Mesopotamia, 200
taken by Eub^d, 200
Farshldward, a miser, viii, 67
seq.

Bahrtlm Giir visits, 68 seq.
his miserly habits, 68 seq.
his wealth described, 70, 72,
73

Farwardin, month and day,
163

Firdausi, 3, 4, 6, I 53 > iS6, i 59 i
185, 186, 188, 213, 214, 217

317,

bewails his misfortunes, 152
his opinion of Christianity,

219 and note

bewails the advent of old age,

220

and Persian Wisdom -litera-
ture, 278
on dreams, 281
his authorities for chess, 380
Fish, mythological, 341 and note,
. 406

Footman (pawn), piece in chess,
385, 388, 422
position of, 3S8
move of, 422
promotion of, 422
Funj, leader of the Khdu’s host,
330

Fvlr (Porus), 395


G

GaitJmaet, Shdh, 53
rites of, 53
Faith of, 273

Garib, surface-measure, 215 and
noife

Garshasp, trilnian general, 251
put in charge of Niishlrwan’s
baggage-tiain, 251
Gav, king of Hind, xiii , 395 seq,
mother of, 395 seq.
her two marriages, 395, 396
her two sons, 395, 396
becomes queen, 397
tries to keep peace between
her sons, 397 seq.
hears of the death of
Talhand, 419
reproaches Gav, 420
chess invented to appease,
421

death of, 423
birth of, 395

tutor of, 397, 398, 401, 402,

407, 408, 410, 413, 417, 421
rivalry between Talhand and,

397 seq.

war between Talhand and,
404 seq.

his attempts at accommoda-
tion with Talhand, 405,

408, 413 "
defeats Talhand, 412
proposes a decisive battle to

Talhand, 414
victory of, 416

invents chess to console his
mother for the death of
Talhand, 421
Germanus, 218
Gharchls, Georgians, 94
Ghdtkar, ruler of the Haitdlians,
xii, 330 seq., 334, 335
hears of, and destroys, the
Khdn’s embassy to Niishlr-
wdn, 330


442


INDEX


Ghatkar, prepares to oppose the
Kh^n, 330
defeated, 332

Ghaznin, city in Kdbulistdii, 173

Gil, Gilun, region on the south-
western shores of the
Caspian, x, 216, 224, 340,
362

Niishir\vdn*s dealings with,
216, 242 seq.

captives from, settled at
Stirs iin, 328

Gipsies, the, ix, 6

their introduction into Tran, 6
Nbldeke on, 6
their language, 6
brought into Tran by Bahrdm
Giir, 149

Glory. See Grace.

Good Thoughts, Words, and
Deeds, 317, 318
symbolised in the game of
nard, 381

Grace, or Glory, the divine, 9, 23,

38, 53 j

Grapes, bunch of, Story of the,
183 note

Greek, Greeks, 280

philosophers, entertained by
NilshirwAn, 280

Gulgiiii, Bahrdm Giir’s steed, 57

Gulzarydii, liver (the Jaxartes ?),
329. 340, 360

Gund-i-Shdpiir, city, 219, 276
Ndshzdd impiisoned at, 264
and note

Giir, nickname of Baliram, son of
Yazdagird, 6
N old eke on, 6

Giirgdn, city and region in eastern
Mdzandardn, xii, 89, 237,
337, 338* 357, 358. 361

Gushasp, nonce-name assumed by
Bahrdm Giir, 59 seq.

Gushasp, the chief scribe, 11
bidden to remit the arrears
of taxes, II


Gushtdsp, Shdh, 254, 359

his sojourn at Shurdb, ,254
Gustaham, Babrhm Giir’s com-
mander-in-chief, 85


H

Haital, Haitdlians (White
Huns), X, xii, 4, 6, 153,
i6i, 164, 171, 174, 181, 187,
197) 330 seq., 340, 342, 390
confused with the Turks, 4
Bahrhm Gur’s defeat of, 4
help Phaiz, 156, 157
Pirtiz’s expedition against,
159, 164 seq.
tradition of, 160
king, 160, 184

helps Kubdd, 19S
Kubdd’s flight to, 170, 184,
198

tlie alliance of Ndshirwdn
with the Khdn against, 317
war of thcKhdnwith, ^2$ seq,
destroy the Khdn’s embassy
to Niislnrwdn, 330
host of, levied to oppose the
Khdn, 331
defeated, 332

decide to seek help of Niishir-
wdn, 332

make Paghdiifsh king, 333
Ndshirwitn takes counsel
about, 333, 334
make submission to Ntishir-
wdn, 360
Hamaddn, city, 6
Hdritli bin Jabala,, prince of the
Ghassanians, 217
protected by Justinian, 217
his war with Munzir, 217
Hanz, 50 and note
Hawking. See Falconry.

Heroes, Vale of, 6
Hierapolis (Artiyish-i-Runi), city,
217, 218


INDEX


443


Hindj Hiudiist^n, viii» ix, xiii,
S, 84, no 1 14 aeg'.,

1 18 passim
Rjtja of. See> Rtlja.

Bahrain Giir’s visit to, 5,
no

motive of, 5
fabulous, 6

kin^if of, entertained by Bah-
rain Giir, 140 seq.

= Sliangul, 1 1 3, 119, 126,
12S

Ndshxrwdn goes to, 241
Hiudiyd, city of Rilm, 200
taken by Kubdtl, 200
Hindtistdiii, language, 6
Gipsy a corruption of, 6
Hira, city in western ’Irdk, 217
Horse (steed, knight), piece in
chess, 385, 422, 423
position of, 3S8, 422
move of, 422

Hulwitn (Arash), city, 187, 201
Humiii, fritnian chief, 87, 88
goes as envoy to the KliiCn,

87

Huns, the, 153

White. Ses HaittUiaiis.

Hhr, father of Bihrdz, 72
Hurnmz, minister of Bahrdm
Gxlr, 26

Humiuz (Horniisdas), Shlih, ix,

IS 3 , i86

appointed by Yazdagird to
succeed him, 155
Koign of, 156
Note on, 156
defeated by Plriiz, 157
his pardon by Plrdz, 156, 158
leads the van in the war
with the Turkmans (Hai-
tdlians), 164
perishes in battle, 168
Hurmuzd, priest, 188

assists Ndshirwan in his
disputation with Mazdak,
188, 206


Hurniuzd, Irdnian general, 251
commands the outposts in
Ndshirwan’s army, 231
Hurmuzd, Shdh, 279

son of the Khdn’s daughter,

317

sent against the Turks, 317
Hiishang, Shdli, 37, 273
rites of, 53

^ I

Ibn MukafFa, 16 1

translates the Fables of
Bidpai (the Book of Kalila
and Dimna) into Arabic,

383

Imeritia, 215

Indian, Indians, 118, 135, 146
king of=Sliangul, 118
tongue, 1 17, 143
Indus, river, 241
Traj, sou of Fnridiin, 73
Triik (Babylonia), 214, 224
Iram, 235 and noU
Trdn, viii jcg., 5, n, 12, and
•passim

Rdm’s tribute to, explained,
187

I'rdnian, ^rdnians, vii, ix, x, 7,
13, 89, no, 122, 130, 151,
160, 17 1, 198, 224
ask Munzir to intercede
with Bahrdm Gdr for
them, 9

their arrears of taxes can-
celled, II

levied by Bahrhm Giir, 86 .
resolve to submit to the
Kliin, 87

send Humiti as envoy to the
Khdn, 87

their letter to the Khdn, 87
ask for Narsfs good ofiices
with Bahrdm Giir, 93
lament for the death of
Pirdz, 169


INDEX


Iranians, levolt. against Kub^d,

195

make Jdmdsp Shdh, 195
put Kubdd ill fetters, 195
, ask pardon of Kubad, 200
pardoned by KuMd, 200
Isdigerd II (Yazdagird, son of
Bahr^tn Gilr), SaSilnian
king, IS3

Ispahan, city, 6, 84, 214, 224
Istakbr (Persepolis), viii, 83, 95,
18S

Italy, 218

J

JahrAM (Chaliram), city in Pdrs,

Jam, son of Kubdd, 316

conspires against Niishirwdn,
316

Jdmdsp, son of Piruz, x, 184
supersedes KubCid temporar-
ily. 184, 19s
title of, 186
fate of, 186, 200
James V, of Scotland, 3

Bahrdm Giiv’s resemblance

to, 3

Jamliur, king of Hind, 395, 396,
398. 399, 401,403
Jamshid, Sliiili, vii, 36 jeg., 107,
162, 173, 211

treasure of, found by Bah-
rim Giir, 36
described, 36
Jandal, city in Hind, 140

monarch of, entertained by
Bahrjim Gdr, 140
Jdtakas, 383
Jats, Indian people, 6
fabulous origin of, 6
JawEtuTvi, TrAniau magnate and
minister of BalirAm Gilr,

8, 10 , II

bidden to remit the arrears
of taxes, 1 1


Jaz, Mesopotamia, 76, 79, 80, 82
tribute of, remitted, 82
Jew, Jews, vii, xii, 13, 273

Balirdm Gdr’s adventure
with a, iSseq,
persecution of, 153
Ziirjiiris plot with a, against
Mahbiid, 320 seq,
bewitches Ndshirwtin’s food,
321

makes confession to Niishir-
wAn, 325

and the Fables of Bidpai,

383

Jeweller, a. .S'ee Mahiydr.

Jihiin, river (the Oxus), 92, 165,
166, i8d, 329, 338, 340
Jupiter, planet, 49, 248, 357
Justin I, Emperor, 316
Justin II, Emperor, 2 12
Justinian, Emperor, 212, 219, 317
his bargains with Niishfr-
wan, 214, 216 seq.
his protection of Hdrith bin
Jabala, 217

leads to war with Nd-
sMiwdn, 217

his successes in the West,
217

and the school of Athens,
280


K

Kabul, KAbulistdii, 140, 173
monarch of, entertained by
Bahi'Am Gdx, 140 seq,
KAclidr Bdshi, city in Tdrdn, 330,
358

KaiKdds, Shdh, 74, 107, 115
Kai Klmsrau, Shdh, 120, 173, 359
Kai Kubdd, Slidh, 37, 74, 115,
120, 173

Kaiwdu, TrAniau statistician, ii
calculates the airears of
taxes, 1 1


INDEX 445

Kallla and Dimna, Book of. See I Khdn of Chin, gives himself up to
Fables of Bidpai. pleasure at Marv, 3$


Kdliniyiis (Callinicus), city, xi,
218

taken by Ndshirwdn, 218,
257

Kiiud-i-Shdptir. See Gund-i-Shd-
pdr.

Kannd], city in India, 112, 115,
119, 123. 128, 129, 134, 137.
38s, 386, 390, 393. 425
river of, 112 and note, 390
monarch of=Shangul, 140
Balirdni Gdr appointed heir
to, 143

Kilran, ti'diiian family and war-
rior, 86, 90, 17 1, 185
glorilication of, 170
origin of, 185

rivalry of, with Mihrdn, 185

Kdrndmak, Pahlavi text, 380

Kashdn, city and region in
Tdrdu, 331, 334

Kaslnuihan, place near Marv, 89,
90

Bahrdm Giir’s victory at,
90

Siifarai’s victory at, 170 note,
176

Kashmir, 140, 395, 396, 421
monarch of, 140 se^.

entertained by Bahrdm
Giir, 140 seq.

Kdiis, Shdh. See Kal Kdds.

KAiis, son of Kubdd, 316

Kdwa, the smith, 185
flag of, 250

Khalaj, a Turkman horde, or city,
92

Khdn of Chiu, viii, xii seq,, 49,
9i» 93i 97, loii ni, 186,
328 scq,

fate of, in war with Bahrdm
Giir, S

invades trdu, 84
responds graciously to the
rrdnians’ embassage, 88


defeated and taken prisoner
by Bahrdm Giir, 90
his crown placed in a Fire-
temple, 95

his son Khiisbnawdz, 165
his daughter’s marriage to
Niishlrwan, 213, 357
historically ruler of the
Turks, 317

his relations with Niishlr-
wdn, 317

the Haitdlians, 317, 328
seq.

his embassy to N-dshlrwdn,

329

hears of the destruction of
his embassy by the Hai-
tdlians, 330

leads forth his troops, 330
defeats the Haitdlians, 332
Niishirwdn takes counsel
about, 333, 334
his descent from Afrdsiydb
aiidArjdsp, 334
Nxishirwdn writes to, 337
purposes to invade IVdn, 337
hears of Niishirwdn’ s ad-
vance, 338
takes counsel, 338
sends embassy to Niishirwdn,
339

hears his envoy’s account of
Niishirwdn, 344
offei-s to make affinity with
Niishirwdn, 345
attempts to outwit Niishir-
wdn, 351

gives audience to Mila-du
Sitdd, 351

invites MiUrdn Sitdd to
choose a wife or Niishir-
wdn, 352

consults the astrologers, 354
entrusts his daughter to
Mihrdn Sitdd, 354


446 INDEX


Klidn of Chin, ^^ives presents to
Mihrdn Siiad, 356
parts with his daughter at
the Jihiin, 356
his daughter described,
357

evacuates territory, 358

Kharazm (Khiva), 238, 359

Kharrtld, bower of, 83

KhaiTad, Tidnian chief, 85, 207,
251

Kharzarwin, king of Gililn, 85
takes the Khdn prisoner,
90

KhatUn, district in. Badakhshdn,
94, 331, 359

Khdtiin, consort of the Khdn, 5
fate of, in war with Bahrdni
Gdr, s

Khazar, district and people north
of the Caucasus, 83, 214,
224

Khurds^n, 99, 100, 214, 224, 237,
335

Narsi made ruler of, 99

Khurdad, mouth and day, 112,

225, 351

, KhuiTa-i-Ardshir. See Ardshfr
Khurra.

Khiishnawdz, son of the Khdn
and ruler of the Haitdlians,
ix, 164 6 tq., 174 sej., 194,
198, 359

Plriiz advances against, 164
writes to Piniz, 165
appeals to Bahrdm Gilr’s
treaty, 166

his prayer to God, 167
digs a trench, 1 67
defeats Pxniz by a feint,
168

his correspondence with Sii-
farai, i^^seq.
defeated by Silfarai, 177
takes refuge in Kuhandizh,

177

sues .for peace, 178


Khiishnawdz, releases Kubdd,
Ardshir, and other oap-
. tives, and gives up the
spoil, 180

Khusrau, Shdh. See Kai Khus-
rau.

Khusrau, I'rdnian noble, ii

honoured by Bahrdm Gilr,
10

Khutan, city and district in
Turkistdn, 84, 115, 330,
334, 359

people of, make submission
to Niisliiiwdn, 360

King of the Commons, 3

King (piece in chess), 382, 385,
422

position of, 388, 422
check to, 422
mate to, 423

King (piece in nard), 382, 389

Kirmdn, region in southern Triin^f
214

Kirmdnshdh, city, 187

Kirwi, Traniau noble, 23
Story of, 22

Kisrd. See Ndslurwdu.

Kobad (Kub&,d), Sdsdnian king,
183

Kubdd (Kobad), Shdli, ix, x, 160,
168 seq.i 179 seq. and note,
226, 247

his captivity among the Hai-
tdliaus, 160

leads the rearguard in the
war with the Turkmans
(Haitdlians), 164
taken prisoner, 168
his flight to the Haitdlians,
170, 1S4, 186

released by Khdshnawdz, 180
made Shdh in the place of
Baldsh, 182
Keigu of, 183 s^q.

Note on, 183
historical sketch of, 183
title of, 183


INDEX


Kubdd, his reform of taxation, 183
notCi 215

his conversion to Mazdakism,

1 84, 204
dethroned, 1S4
imprisoned, 184
escapes, 184
his marriage, 1S4, i86
regains the throne, 184
puts Sdfarai to death, 184
his massacre of the Mazda-
kites, 185

his first war with Riim, 187,
200

reason for, 187
makes peace, 187
his second war .with Riim,
1S7

accession of, 188
summons Shilpiir of Rai to
overthrow Sufarai, 191
his conference with Shdpilr,
192

sends Shilpfir to Shirdz to
arrest Silfarai, 193
confiscates Sfifarai’s goods,

194

adopts the archmage’s advice
concerning Siifarai, 194
the rrtlniaiis revolt against,

195

helped to escape hy Rizmihr,

196 SCQ,

his marriage, 197
gives his wife a signet-ring,
1 98

cedes Chaglnln to the Haitd'
Hans in return for their
lielp, 198

marches on Taisafdn, 199
pardons the Tranians and
Jdmdsp, 200
regains the throne, 200
makes Rizmihr chief minister,
200

takes cities from lixim, 200
fixes his seat at Madd’in, 201


447

Kuhdd, builds cities and a hospi-
tal, 201

Mazdak’s influence over, 201
drought in the reign of, 20 1
MazJak’s parable to, 201
his reply, 202

presides over the disputation
between Ndslhrwiiii and
Mazdak, 207

gives judgment against Maz-
dak, 208

hands over Mazdak and liis
followers toNdshirwdn, 208
repentance of, 209
testament of, 210, 316
his age, zio
his death, 210
his sons, 316

Kubad, son of Jain, son of Kubad,
316

plot to make, Shdli, 316

Kuhandizh (Kunduz, Baigand),
city in Afglidii Turkistdn,

177

Klidshnawdz takes refuge in,

177

Klim, city between Ispabdn
and Tihrdn, 214, 224


L

Lambak, a water-carrier, vii,

13

entertains Bahrdm Gdr, 13
seg[-

rewarded by Bahrdm Giir, 2 q
L and-tax, 225
Lazica, 215

Loo, constellation, 410
Lions, slain by Bahrdm Giir, vii,
viii, 55 , 77

Lucerne {Medicago sativa), taxes
on, 213

Liich, region, 328, 362

captives from, settled at
Siirsdn, 328


0


448


INDEX


M

Mada’in, Ctesiphon (Taisafiin),
and the neighbouring cities,
xi, 201, 244, 266, 272, 337,

363

Nilsliu-wdn sends his Riiman
captives to, 259
Magi, 171, 184
Magian, Magians, 60
chant, 60
fire, 409

Mdh Afrid, daughter of Barzin,
53

maiTied to Bahrdm Gdr, 53
Mahbrid (Mebodes), minister of
Kubdd, xii, 213, 316 seq.
instrumental in making Nii-
slnrwdn Shdh, 316
fall of, 317, 322 '

Niishir’wdn’s repentance with
regard to, 317, 325
Ndshirwdn’s treasurer, 319
his sons, 319

serve Nilshlrwdn’s meals,

319, 321

his wife prepares Niishfrwdn's
food, 321, 222
envied by Zdrdn, 319
Mdhiydr, franian noble, 3S
praises Bahrdm Gfir, 38
Mdhiydr, a jeweller, viii, 55 seq.
his daughter. See Avzii.
and his daughter entei-tain
Bahi-dm Giir, 59 seg.
Mahmild, Sultdn, 277, 431
Mdhwi (= Shdhwi?), one of Fir-
dausi’s authorities, 382
Mdi, city between the Oxus and
Bukhdrd? 91, 331, 385,
421

Mdi, king of Hind, 395, 396, 399,
401, 403, 404

Makrdn (Gedrosia, Balficliisttin),

390

Malcolm, Sir John, 6
Mdmiin, Khalifa, 382, 430


Mdui, heresiarch, 188
Mansiir, son of Nuh, Sdmdnid, 5
Margh, city between the Oxus
and Bukhdrd? 91*331,412,
421

Mars, planet, 92, 252, 418
Marv, city and distiict, 88 seq.,
357

as rhyme-word, 88 note
the Khdn reaches, 88
Bahrdm Gdr marches on,
89

Azdd Sarv finds Biizurjmihr
at, 283

Mas’iidi, historian, 3, 4, 6, 153,
280

his account of the fortifica-
tions at Darband, 215
on the game of nard, 382
chess, 382
Mdzaniardn, 215
Mazdak, heresiarch, x, 1S4, 1S5,
188

his disputation with Niishir-
wdn, 188, 206 seq.
account of, 1S8, 201
becomes chief minister to
Kubdd, 201

his influence over Kubdd,
201

his parable to Kdbad in
time of drought, 291
his practical application of
Kubdd’s reply, 202
converts Kubdd, 204
his preaching and practice,
204

his attempt to convert Nfi-
shirwau, 205

Kubdd decides against, 20S
and his followers executed
by Niishirwan, 208
Mazdakisni, 184
Mazdakites, 184

massacre of, 185, 208
great assembly of, 205
Mebodes. See Mahbiid.


INDEX


Media, 6

Magna, 214
Merchant, a, vii

entertains and displeases
Bahrdm Giir, 39
made the slave of his own
apprentice, 42

Merchants, Iranian, made ac-
cessories to BahrAm Gtir’s
flight from Hind, 133, 134
Mihrak, Tribal King, 185, 192
Mihran, family, 156
proverb on, 185
account of, 185
rivaliy of, with Kdran, 185
men of mark among the, 186,

187

Mihran, Trsiiiian general, 251
commands the centre of Nii-
slnrwiiu’s host, 251
MihrAn Sitd-d, Irduian high priest
and envoy, xii, 186, 350,

361. 363

the Khan’s attempt to out-
wit, 352

takes charge of the Khdn’s
daughter, 354

receives gifts from the Khdn,

356

welcomed on his return, 357
Mihrds, Csesar’s envoy, 261

negotiates peace with Nii-
shfrwdn, 261
Mihr Azar, priest, 1 88

assists Nxishfrwdn in his dis-
putation with Mazdak,
188, 206

Mihr Barzin, rranian warrior, 85
Mihr Biddd, I'nlniaii magnate, 21
entertains Bahrdm Giir, 22
Mihr-i-Ni'ish, Persian sage, 270
quoted, 270

Mihr Narsi, chief minister of
Bahx’am Giir, and of his
son Yazdagird, 4 j I 53
his sons, 4

Mihr Piruz, rrdnian warrior, 85
VOL. VII.


449

Military obsequies, in the time
of Nushfrwdn, 252

Milk, easily “turned,” 317, 324
bane of, 125 and notej 324

Miller, a, vii

becomes Bahram Giir’s fa-
ther-in-law, 34

dignified by Bahrdm Giir, 34

Mingrelia, 215

Minister (piece in chess). See
Wazi'r.

Mir Khdnd, historian, 3, 4, 6,

156, 159* 171, i 83 » 186

Mohl, Jules, on Wisdom-litera-
ture, 280

Muhammad, Prophet, 213
birth of, 213

Mukaffa. See Ibn hhikaffa.

Milltdn, city in the Punjdb, 140
monarch of, entertained by
Bahrdm Giir, 140 seq,

Munzir, prince of Hira, vii, 9
intercedes with Bahrdm Giir
for the Tranians, 10
rewarded by Bahrdm Giir, 10

Munzir, xi, son of Nii’mdn,
prince of Hira, 217, 244567.
protected by Niishirwdn, 217
his war with Hdrith bin
Jabala, 217

sent by Niishirwdn to invade
Riim, 246

Mushkindb, a miller’s daughter,
32 and note

taken to wife by Bahrdm
Giir, 33

Miishkinak, a miller’s daughter,
32 and note

taken to wife by Bahrdm
Giii’, 33

N

Naheawan, a city below Bagh-
ddd, east of the Tigris ; also
a canal on the east bank
of that river, quitting it
2 F


450


INDEX


about lOo miles above, and
rejoming it about loo miles
below, Baghdad, 14 1
Nard, game of, xiii, 5, 389 seq.
invention of, 280, 381, 382,

389

sent by NiisMi-w^n to the
Rhja of Hind, 5, 381
meaning of, 381
symbolism of, 381
MasMdi on, 382
described, 389

Narsi, brother of Bahrdm Giir,
viii, 4, 95, 100

made captain of the host, 1 1
regent, 86

fails to persuade the Ti'diiians
to resist the Khan, 87
Bahr^m Giir’s letter to, 92
writes to BahrSim Giir on
behalf of the franians, 94
goes with the chiefs to
welcome Bahrain Giir, 96
made ruler of Khuxdstln, 99
welcomes his brother on his
return from Hind, 137
Narsi, Shdh, 359

Nasr, son of Ahmad, Sdmdnid,

383, 430

patron of Riidagi, 383
!Nau-Ardshir=Nar(l, 381
Naiidar, Sh^h, 37, 171
Ndztdb, a miller’s daughter, 32
and note

taken to wife by Bahrdm
Giir, 33

Nero, Emperor, 279
Nestorian Metropolitan, 219
Patriarch, 219
Nile, river, 48, 250, 344, 416
Nimimiz,^ 327

NisA, city in Khurfisin, 89
Nbldeke, Professor, 6
on the Gipsies, 6
on Siifarai, 171, 185


Noldeke, on Wisdom-literature,
281

North, Sir Thomas, 383

his version of the Fables of
Bidpai, 383

Note on Pronunciation, xviii
Prefatory, v

Niih, son of Nasr, Sdmdnid, 5

Nu’mdn, prince of Hfra, vii, 10
rewarded by Bahrdm Ghr,
10

Nii^hirwdn (Kisrd, Chosroes I),
Shdh, X seq., 4, 199, 200,
220, 273 seq., 279 seq., 320,
423 seq.

origin of name, 1S5, 21 1 and
note

birth of, stories of, 1S6, 197
seq.

his assistants against Maz-
dak, x8S, 206
upbringing of, 200
Mazdak’s attempt to convert,
205

his disputation with Mazdak,
2d6 aeq.

Kubad decides in favour of,
20S

executes Mazdak and his
followers, 208

Kuhad’s testament in favour
of, 210, 316
Reign of, 212 seq.

Notes on, 212 seq.^ 279
seq., 316 seq., 380 seq.
Roman Emperors contempo-
rary with, 212

historical events of his reign
in the Shdhndma, 213
his marriage with the daugh-
ter of the Khdii, 213, 317,

347 seg. _

his wars with Riim, 213, 217
first campaign of, 217,
218, 249


^ See Vol, i, p. 396 note.


INDEX


Ntishirwiiii, conspiracy against,
214, 316

his division of his empire,
214, 224

his bargains with Justinian,
214, 216

his reform of taxation, 215,
224

his wall in the Caucasus, 215,

239

Mas’tidl’s account of, 21 5
his dealings with the Aldus,
216

Gildn, 216
Bahiclus, 217

his support of Miinzir, 217,
244

leads to war with Kiim,
217, 244 seQ.

jealous of Justinian’s suc'
cesses in the West, 217
accession of, 221
promises to rule justly, 221
seq.

attends muster at the insis-
tancc of Baliak, 231
approves of Bdbak’s conduct,

232

his method of raising troops,

233

his message to Caesar on
Munzir’s behalf, 245
supidics Munzir with troops
for the invasion of Rtrin,
246

goes to Azar Abddagdu, 250
his disposition of his host, 251
addimses his troops, 251
proclamations of, 252, 365
his burial of dead soldiers, 252
his policy with enemies, 253
takes Sluirdb, 234

Ardyish-i-Rdin, 255
Csesar’s treasures, 255,
258

defeats Farhiviyds, 256
takes Antdkiya, 258


451

Nrishfrwdn, disposes of the Riiman
captives, 259, 327
and the Rdman cordwainer,

260

envoy from Caesar comes to,

261

grants peace to Caesar, 262 ‘
appoints Shlrwi to receive
the Ruman tribute, 262
Christian wife of, 263

mother of Ndshzdd, 263,
274

helps Ndshzdd, 266
laments for Ndshzdd, 276
imprisons Ndshzdd, 264
illness and reported death of,
264, 265

hears of Ndshzdd’s revolt,
266

instructs Rdm Barzin how to
act, 267 seq.

Seven Banq^uets of, 280, 287
$eq.

possible origin of, 280
Bdzurjmilir’a discourses
at, 287 seq.
dream of, 282

consults the archmages, ‘282
seeks for a dream-inter-
preter, 282

his dream interpreted by
Btizurjmihr, 284
re^vards and honours Biizur-
jmihr, 286, 289, 304, 311,

31S

his relations with Sinjibti,

317

the Haitdlians, 317
with Mahbiid and his
sons, 319 seq,
suspects Zdrdn, 324
greatness of, 327
his buildings, 327
the Khdu’s embassy to, 329
consults the chiefs as to
Faghdnish, the Khdn, and
I the Haitdlians, 333


INDEX


452

Niishirwdu, the chiefs’ reply to,
334

his rejoinder to the chiefs,

336

prepares for war with the
Khtlii, 337

writes to his chiefs, the
Khsin, and Fagh^nfsh,

337

inarches from Mada’iii, 337
goes to Gurgfin, 337
receives embassy from the
Khdn, 339
holds a court, 340
displays his prowess before
the assembly, 341
dismisses the Khdn’s envoy
with a letter, 344
the Klisln’s offer of affinity
to, 347
his reply, 349

occupies territory evacuated
by the Khdn, 358
Haitdlians and others bring
gifts to, 360, 362
gives praise to God, 361
receives the tribute from
Riim, 362

goes to the temple of Azar-
gashasp, 363
the greatness of, 364
questions Bdzurjmihr, 367
seq.

receives the game of chess
from Hind, 380, 385
the Ihija of Hind’s embassy
to, 384

rewards Btizurjmihr for dis-
covering how to . play
chess, 388

sends Biizurjuiihr with pre-
sents and the game of
nard to Hind, 390
proposes wager with the
H^ja, 391

welcomes Bdzurjmihr on his
return from Hind, 393


Ndshfrwiin, acquires the Book of
Kalila and l)imna, 423 seq.
sends gifts to the Bija, 425
rewards Barzwi, 429
Niishzad, sou of Ndshirwiin, xi,
213, 265 seq.

historical account of, 219
Firdausi’s account of, 263
seq.

education of, 264
imprisonment of, 264
hears report of Ndshirwiiu’s
death, 264, 265
revolts, 266

helped by his mother, 266
writes to Caesar, 266
goes to fight with Rtim
Barzin, 272

exhorted to yield by Piriiz,

273

his reply to Piriiz, 274
wounded, 275
repents, 275

sends message to his mother,
275

dies, 275

lamentation for, 276
Firdausi’s reflections on, 276


0

Oblivion, Castle of, 184
Obsequies, military, in the time
of NiishirwAii, 252
Olives, taxes on, 215, 225
Oxua (Jihiin), river, 156, 317


P

PAHLAVf, 6, 1 13, 18S, 380 seq.
Fables of Bidpai translated
into, 382

Paidiiwasi, coin, 95 and note
Palmyra, city in Syrian desert,
217


INDEX


Pandodmak-l Vadsli6rg-Mitr6-i
Bdklitakdii, Pahlavi text,
279

Parable, MazJak’s, 201
Pilrs, 86, 90, 95, 190, 194, 201,
206, 214, 224
Parthian, Parthians, 156
Perozes (Piniz), Sasdnian king, 159
Persia, 118, 129, 213, 381

Fables of Bidpai brought to,
213, 423 seq.

Chess brought to, 3S0, 384 seq.
Persian, Persians, 6, ii, 4S, 107,
136, 165, 187, 2X8
language, 134, 140, 143, 430
swords, 13s
bard, q^uoted, 265
wisdom-literature, 278 seq.
verse, 383

Fables of Bidpai trans-
lated into, 383

Philosophers, Greek, entertained
by NiiaUirwan, 2S0
Pillar, Bahrilm Giir’s, 92, 160,
161, 164

Pfriiz (Perozes), Shah, ix, 4, 153,
156 seq., 173 seq., 178 seq.,
335. 359

passed over in the succesaion
by Yazdagird, 155
helped by the Haitdliaiis,

156, 157

defeats Hurniuz, 157
his pardon of Hurniuz, 156,
158

Keign of, 159 seq.

Note on, 159 yc(?.
calamities of, 159
title of, 159
relic of, 159

his measures against drought,
159, X62

luH cities, 159, 163
his expedition against the
Hoittllians, 159 seq., 16^ seq.
tradition of, 160
in mythical story, 16 1


453

Pirdz, and Bahrdm Giir’s pillar,
161

his daughter taken prisoner,
161

her child the wife of
Kubdd, 1 61, 184
accession of, 161
advances against Kliiishna-
waz, 164

gives the van to Hurniuz,
164

rear to KubiCd, 164
regency to Baldsh,
164

makes Sarkhjln (Siifarai)
minister to BaMsh, 164
an d 7 iote

replies to the appeal of
Khiishnawiiz, 165, 167
defeated by KluishnawS-z,
168

death of, 1 68

I'rdnian tradition of the re-
venge for, 170

Siifarai determines to avenge,

173

Piniz, rrdnian chief, 85
Pirdz, rrdnian general, 187
Pirdz, rrdnian warrior, 2x9, 273
seq.

exhorts Nxishzdd to yield,

273

Piniz - Rdm (Bdm - Pirdz), city
built by Pirdz, ix, 159,
163

Pisces, constellation, 245
Pishdddiau, 161, 171
Planets, the seven, 3S2, 408 '
symbolised in the game of
nard, 382

Plato (Faliitdn), 100 note
Pleiads, constellation, 365
Poll-taxes, 2x5
Prefatory Note, v
Procopius, historian, 187
Pronunciation, Note on, xviii
Proverb, x8s


454


INDEX


Q

Questions, hard, 102 seq,

R

Bi^D, ruler of Zahulistan,. 86

RtU. See Raja.

Rai, city and district near
Tilir^n, 84, 160, 184
Sliapiir of, 184, 185, 191, 192

Raja (Rai) of Hind, xiii, 140 and
note, 143, 385 seg., 424,

42S

sends game of chess to
Nushirwan, 5, 385
proposes 'v^^ager to Niishir-
>van, 385, 38 7j

receives game of nard from
Nrishirwdn, Si 3^9

seq.

fails to discover how to play
the game, 392

pays forfeit to ]Sdshinv«in,
393

receives Ndshirwdii’s gifts
from Barzwi, 425
assists Barzwl in his mission
to Hind, 425, 428
R^m Barziii, high priest and
general, xi, zio, 272, 275
has charge of Kiibiid’s testa-
ment, 210

Niishirwdn’s instructions to,
concerning NiislizAd, 267
seq.

goes to fight with Niishziid,
272

hears of Niishzdd’s last
wishes, 276

Rdmkuhdd (Aragan), town, i88
Rdni-Piniz. See Plruz-Rdm.
Rizmihr (Zarmihr), son of Sd-
farai, x, 185, 207
identical with Sdfarai, 185
goes with Kubdd to the
Haitdlians, 186
fate of, 1 86


Rizmihr, his loyalty to Kubdd, 196
helps Kubad to escape from
prison, 196 aeq.
negotiates a marriage for
Knbdd, 197

made chief minister, 200
Roman, Romans, 1S7, 214

neglect the defences in the
Caucasus, 18/

their so-called tribute to
Persia, 1S7

their treatment of Munzir,2i7
leads to war with Niiahir-
wdn, 217

Riidagi, Persian poet, 383, 431
versifies the Fahles of Bidpai,

383^ 431

Riihhdm, king of Rai, 85
Riihhdm, Tranian hero, 156
Ruhlidni, rrdniau warrior, 156
helps Pirilz to gain the
throne, 156, 186

Rukh (castle), piece in chess, 385,
422, 423

position of, 388, 422
move of, 422

Riim, the Eastern Roman Empire,
xi, 5 » 37 . 57 . 78, 79 , 83, 84,
100, 151, 153, 199. 213
passim

Bahrdm Gi'ir’s war with, 4,
S, 84

brocade of, 64, 67, 276, 384
its tribute to Tran explained,
187

Nrishlnvdu’s wars with, 213
Riiman, Rdmans, xi, 48, 107,
244, 246, 256 scq., 329
slaves, 54
eunuchs, 67
pen, 73

helmet, 89, 272, 274
tongue, 256, 261
captives, Niishfnviln’a, 259,

327^

bishop, 27s, 276
' silk, 424


INDEX


Riimiya (New Antiocli), 218
Kiiahan Piniz, city, 160
Rustam, Trsinian hero, 151
Ri^zbih, Bahnim Giir’s high
priest, vii, 26 seq., 54, 67
bewails Bahnim Giir’s coarse
of life, 56

reproached by Bahram Gilr
for his parsimony, 83


S I

Sada, feast of, ii, 94, 200
Siida, I'rdnian noble, 312
Sakhib (Slavonia), 112, 115, 364
Salm, son of Faridxiii, loi
Sslui, rrdnian hero, 74
Samdnid, Siimiinids, 5, 383
Samarkand (Sughd), city and
district in Tiirkistan, 167,
3 SS. 3 S 9

Sandal, Sandali, city in Hind, 140,
39 S» 396, 401 see-
king of, entertained by Bah-
nim Giir, 140 seq.

Sanscrit, 382

Sapiiuid, daughter of Shangul,
128 seq., 144

married to Bahrain Giir, 128
finds out who her husband
is, 131

plana Bahnim Giir’s flight
from Hind, 132
reproached by Shangul, 135
converted to Zoroastrianism,

139

visited by Shangul, 142
Sari, city in Milzandanin, 237
Sar-i-pul-i-Zohab, place, 187
Sarkhiin. See Siifarai.

Sariich, desert in Kirman, 362
Siiadnian.Siisanians, 85, 185, 212,

237, 381

dynasty, vii, i seq.

Saturn, planet 92, 151, 252, 267,
346, 418


455

Seneca, the younger, Nero’s tutor,
279

Seoses, Persian commander-in-
chief, 187

Seven, favourite number in Per-
sian story, 186, 280
Ban(iiiets of Niishirwdn, 280
possible origin of, 280
planets, 382, 408

symbolised in the game
of Hard, 382

Shahdiz, Bahrdm Gdr’s steed, 37,
80

Shahrang, Bahrdm Giir’s steed,
55

Shdddn, one of Firdausi’s autho-
rities, 382, 423

Shdlindmo, 5, 156, 184, 185, 215,

317, 317, 381

Wisdom-literature in, 278
seq.

Sbahra, chief, viii, 92

made king of Tiirdn by
Bahrdm Giir, 92

Shahrdm-Plriiz. ^SeeBdddnPlrtiz,

Shahrlvar, month and day, 76

Shiihwl (= Maiiwl?), one of Fir-
dausi’s authorities, 382,
394

Shakespeare, 383
(quoted, 383

Shamballd, daughter of Barzln,

53

married to Bahrdni Gdr, 53

Shammas, Ndshzdd’s general,
219, 272

Shangul, king of Hind, viii, ix,
109 seq.

his border -raids, no
gives audience to the Iranian
envoy (Bahriim Gdi’), 112
his state described, 112
his brother, 113
his son, 1 13, 1 15
on his own greatness, 114
his wife the daughter of the
Faghftir, 115


456 INDEX


Shangiil entertains Bahrdni Giiv,

11 6

BahitCm Giir wrestles "before,

117

plays at polo, 118
Bahrdm Giir displays his
marksmanship before, 118
tries to find out who the
Persian envoy (Bahrdm
Giir) is, 1 18 563-.
takes counsel with his sages,
126

offers a daughter and great
advancement to Bahriim
Gdr, 127

marries Saplmid to Bahrdm
Gdr, 128 seq.
goes to a festival, 134
hears of BahrsCm Giir’s flight,

13s

reproaches Saplmid, 135
makes a league with Bahrim
Giir, 137

bids farewell to Saplntid, 137
makes a new treaty with
Balirdm Giir, 140
and seven other kings en-
tertained by Bahrdm Giir,
140 seq.

visits his daughter Saplmid,

142

farewells Saplmid, 143
makes BahrW Giir his heir,

143

Bahram Giir’s parting gifts
to, 144

sends Gipsies to Ti-tln, 149
Shdpiir, son of Shtlpiir, Shilh, 17 1,
186

Shdpdr, son of Urmuzd, Slulh,
359

Shdpdr, of Rai, Kub^d’s com-
mander -in-chief, 184, 185
summoned to overthrow Sd-
farai, 191


Shdpdr, of Kai, his conference
with Kubdd, 192
goes to Shlrdz and arrests
Sdfarai, 193

conveys Sdfarai to Shdh
Kubdd, 194

Shdpdr, rrdnian noble, 304,
333

Shikndn, place, 359

Shiraz, city, x, 6, 173, 190, 193,

194

Shirwl, Niishlrwiln’s commander-
in-chief, 251

appointed to receive the
Biiinan tribute, 262
Shlrzdd, herald in Ndshlrwan’s
host, 252

Shlz (Takht-i-Sulainnin), in Azar-
biiijan, 5
Fire-temple at, 5
‘ Khdtiin sent to, 5
Shoemaker, young, vii, 24
Story of, 24

Shiirdb (Sura), city, 217

place of Gushtilsp’s exile,

254

taken by Niishi'rwitn, 217,

254

Signs, the Twelve (Zodiac), 408
Sikandar (Iskaudar, Alexander
the Great), 79, 248
Sdsduian view of, 79 and
note

Sind, region and river (Indus),
no, 1 12, 390

king of, entertained by Bah-
ram Gdr, 140 seq,

Sindian, 126

Sinjibil, first historical Khiln of
the Turks, 317

his relations with Nfishir-
wdn, 317

and the HaitiUiaiis, 317
Sistdn,^ 214

Steed (piece in chess). See Horse.


^ Sea Yol. i. p. 396.


INDEX


Stifarai (Sarkhiin, Sukhrd, Seo-
aes ?), ix, x, 170 and notej
171, 173 seq.

appointed minister to the
regent Baldsh, 164
glorification of, in Tranian
tradition, 170
account of, 173, 184, 185
resolves to avenge Piiilz, 173
writes to Baldsh, 173
marches on Marv, 174
his correspondence with
Khiishnawilz, 174 seq.
defeats Khiishiiawdz, 177
gives the spoil to the troops,

177

Khilshuawiiz sues for peace
to, 178

consults his troops, 178'
resolves to make peace, 179
replies to Khiishnawilz, 179
returns to Trctix in triumph,
180

welcomed by Balilsh and the
chiefs, iSi

his greatness, 1 81, 190
dethrones Baldsh and makes
Kilbild Shah, 182
proverb concerning, 185
identical with Rizmihr, 185
fall of, 1 90 aeq,

Kubdd’s letter to, 193
arrest of, 193

his property confiscated, 194
convoyed to Shdli Kubdd, 194
executed, 195
his sou, Bizmihr, 196
Sughd, district and city, (Sa-
markand), 331, 337, 358,
359

Siikhrd. See Sdfarai.

Sun, total eclipse of, 159
Sura. See Sluintb.

Sfiradn, city, xii, 317, 327, 328
Sunlsh, angel, 38
Sdsanak, a miller’s daughter, 32
and note


4*57

Sdsanak, taken to wife by Bahrdm
Gdr, 33

Susiana (Khuzistdn), 184


T

Tabari, historian, 3 seq.j 156,
159, 160, 170, 171, 185, 186,
217

the Persian, 5

story from, concerning
Kubdd, 183 note
his account of Kiibdd and
Niishlrwdn’s reform of the
taxation, 183 note, 215
on the Turks, 317
Table of Contents, vii
Tahmt^ras, Slidh, 9 and note, 273
Taisafiin (Ctesiphon), xii, 1S8,
I 94 » 361. 363

Talhand, Indian prince, xiii, 394,

396 seq.

Story of Gav and, 394 seq.
mother of. See Gav.
birth of, 396

tutor of, 397, 398, 401, 4D2,
40S, 410, 414

rivalry between Gav and,

397 seq.

war between Gav and, 404
aeq.

rejects Gav’s offers of ac-
commodation, 406, 409
his death foretold, 408, 413,
418

defeated by Gav, 412
accepts Gav’s proposal for a
decisive battle, 415
defeat and death of, 416
TillikAn, city and stronghold
between Marv and Balkh,
156

ceded by Plrdz to the
Haitdlians, 156, 160
importance of, 156
Tarak, river, 164, 165, 359


458


INDEX


Taurus, constellatiou, 282
Taxation, vii, ix, 224

Kubdd’s reform of, 183 note,
215, 225

Niishirwiln’s reform of, 215,
225 seq, .

Temperaments, the four, 381
symbolised in the game of
nard, 381

Tlieodosiopolis, city, 1S7
Theodosius, the younger, Roman
Emperor, 187

Tiberius II, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 212

Tirmid, place where the route
from Balkh to Samarkand
crosses the Oxus (Jihiin),

156; 157, 331

Treasure, hidden, discovery of,
vii, 36

Tribute, Rdm’s to rrdn, 214, 215,
248, 262, 333, 338, 362
Tshatrang-Ndmak, Pahlavl text,
380, 381

Taghral, a species of falcon, 49
described, 48
Bahrdm Gdr’s, 48 seq.

Tur, son of Faridiin, 73
TdrAu, viii seq., 43, 92, 136,
156, 178
Tdraniaiis, viii

Turkistan, 84, 92, 118, 334, 365
Turkman, Turkmans, 48, 88, 92,
97, 177, 179, 23S, 239, 334,

364

defeated by Bah ram Gi'ir,
90, 91

sue for peace, 91
war of Pliiiz with, 164 seq.
their inroads through the
Cauc*asus, 238

make submission to Niishir-
wdn, 360
Turks, 4

confused with the Haitd-
liaus, 4

historical appearance of, 317


Turks, Tabari on, 317

defeat the Haitalians, 332
desciibed, 332

Twelve Champions, the, 156
Signs (Zodiac), 408 j


U

Urmuzd, the Good Principle,
22S, 406 and note
Unity of, symbolised in the
game of nard, 381
Urmuzd, sou of Narsi, (Hor-
niisdas II), Shdh, 359
Ustdd, Tranian general, 251

commands Niishirwan’s right
wing, 251

V

Vale of Heroes, 6
Varahran V (Balirdm Giir), 3
Vega, star, 245
Veudiddd, Nask, 1S8

reference to Mazdak in, i8S
Venus, plane b, 53, 151,^63
Vineyards, taxes on, 215, 225
Vologeses, 170

W

Walnuts, taxes on, 225
Wazlr (minister), piece in chess,
3S5, 422, 423
position of, 388, 422
move of, 422

Whip, BaUrjim Giir’s, 47, 54, 63,
64

an object of reverence, 47,
54. 63

White Huns. See Haittllians.
Wine-drinking, forbidden by
Bahrdm Giir, 23
again permitted, 25
Wisdom, praise of, Firdausi’s,
378


INDEX


459


Wisdom-literature, Persian, 278

Mohl on, 2S0
Noldeke on, 281

Wizagird, city in Tiirtln, 157, 331
Wizai*d-land, 120 and note
Wolf, viii, 121 8 cq. and note
slain by Bahrslm Giir, 123


Y

Yaman, 262

Yasht XXII, metrical para-
phrase of, 318

YdtkAr-i-Zaririin, Pahlavl text,
380

Yazdagird, sou of Shdpur, (Isde-
gird I), Shdli, 4, 10, 109,
119,171,185,359
referred to, 74

Yazdagird, sou of Bahrdm Giir,
(Isdegird 11 ), Shdh, ix, 4,
152, 156, 160, 187
welcomes his father on his
retuni from Hind, 137
appointed by Bahrdm G\ir to
succeed him, 150
lleign of, 153 seq.

Note on, 153
a blank in Shdhndma,
153

historically important,
153

wars of, 153

fortifies passes in the Cau-
casus, 153, 187
his title, 153
his sons, 153

appoints Hurmuz to succeed
him, 155


Yazdagird, dies, 155
Yazdagird, chief scribe Ump.
Niishlrwdn, 304, 307, 312,

333. 337. 339. 394
discourse of, 305
questions Biizurjmihr,
308

Yokel, a, vii

entertains Bahrdm Gilr, 43
seq.

wife of, her converse with
Bahntm Gdr, 45
her presage, 46
rewarded by Bahrdm Gdr, 48


Z

ZiCBULISTAN,! 173, 174, 193
Zahhak, Shdh, 185, 199
Zam, river and city (between
Tirmid and Amwi?), 359
Zandavasta, 200, 207, 2S3, 302
passage from, metrically
liaraphrased, 318
Zarduhsht (Zarathushtra, Zoro-
aster), 9, 207, 264, 318
Fire-fane of, 139

high priest of, converts
Saplinid, 139
Zarmihr. See Rizmihr.
Zib-i-Khusrau, city, xi, 259
Zirih, son of Shdh Pirdz, 170
Zoroastrianism, 188, 317
Zdrdn, Ndshirwdu’s chamberlain,
xii, 319

envies Mahbfrd, 319
plots with a Jew against
Mahbiid, 320 seq.
makes confession to Nushlr-
wdn, 324


See Vol. i. p. 396 note.


END OF VOL. VII.


Printed \>y Balla'ntynb, BLanson &* Co.
Edinburgh & Loudon
