The Shahnama of Firdausi, Vol. IV (Arthur George Warner & Edmond Warner, 1909)
==============================================================================
Volume IV of the first complete English verse translation of Persia's national epic. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1909 Kegan Paul edition.

SHlHNAMA OF FIKDAUSt 

DONE INTO ENGLISH BY 
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A. 

AND 

EDMOND WARNER, B.A. 

" The homes that are the dwellings of to-day 
Wilt gink 'neath shower and sunshine to decay. 
But storm and rain shall never irutT what I 
Have burilt — the palace of my poetrg. " 

FlRDAVSl 

VOL. IV 

LONDON 

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO. L TD 

DRYDKN HOUSE, QBRRARD STREET, W, 

1909 

The righu of translation and of reproduction are reserved 

Printed by Ballahtynk, Hanbof &• Co. 
At the Baliantyne Prew, Edinburgh 

CONTENTS 

"PAGE 

Abbreviations 3 

Note on Pronunciation . . 4 

THE KAIANIAN DYNASTY (continued) 

KaI Khusbau (continued) — 
Part VI. The Battle of the Twelve Eckhs, 

SECT. 

1. The Prelude g 

2. How Afrasiyab called together his Host 10 

3. How Kai Khusrau sent Giidarz to tight the Turanians 12 

4. How Giv was made the Bearer of Overtures from 

Giidarz to Piran 16 

5. How Oiv visited Pirnn at Wisagird .... 19 

6. The Arraying of the Hosts 22 

7. How Bizhan went to Glv to urge him to right . 26 
8- How Humin aaked Piran for Leave to light . . 29 
9. How Hum&n challenged Ruhham .... 31 

10. How Human challenged Fariburz .... 34 

11. How Human challenged Giidarz 35 

12. How Bizhan heard of the Doings of Human . - 39 

13. How Giv gave the Mail of Siyuwush to Bizhan . 44 

14. How Human came to Battle with Bizhtin 47 

15. How Human was slain by Bizhan .... 49 

16. How Nastihan made a Ni^ht-aitack and was slain . 53 

17. How Gudarz asked Aid of Khusrau .... 56 

18. The Answer of Khusrau to the Letter of Giidarz . 58 

19. How Khusrau arrayed the Host .... 61 

20. How PirAn wrote to Gudain Son of Kishwiid . . 63 

21. The Answer of Giidarz to the Letter of Piniii . « 68 

22. How Piran asked Succour from Afrfcjiyab. . 75 

23. The Answer of Afnisiyab to the Letter of Pinin . 78 

v 

CONTENTS 

Part VI. The Battle of the Twelve Rdkhs (continued) — 

SECT. FAQl 

24. How the frAniatiB and Turanians fought a pitched 

Battle 81 

25. How Giv fought with Piran and how Gfv's Horse 

jibbed 84 

26. How Gudarz and Piran arranged a Battle of Eleven 

Rukhs 88 

27. How Piran harangued his Men of Name . 93 

28. How Gudarz and Piran chose the Warriors for thfc 

Battle of the Eleven Rukhs 95 

29. How Fariburz fought with KulMd .... 99 

30. How Giv fought with Gurwi ..... 99 

31. How Guraza fought with Siyamak .... 100 

32. How Furuhil fought with Zangula .... 101 

33. How Ruhham fought with Barman . . , .102 

34. How Bizhan fought with Ruin ..... 102 

35. How Hajir fought with Sipahram .... 103 

36. How Gurgin fought with AndarLmiin . . 104 

37. How Barta fought with Knhram . 105 

38. How Zanga, Hon of Shawaran, fought with Akhast ■ . 105 

39. How Gudarx fought with Piran ..... 106 

40. How Gudarz returned to the Warriors of Iran . . 109 

41. How Lahhak and Farshidward bewailed Piran . .112 

42. How Lahh&k and Farshfdivard took the Road to 

Turan -115 

43. How Guataham pursued Lahhak and Farshidward . 1 17 

44. How Bizhan followed after Guataham . . .119 
4;. HowLahhakandFarshidwardwereslainbyGiiataham 121 

46. How Bizhan beheld Guataham in the Mead . .123 

47. How Kai Khusrau built a Charnel-house for Piran 

and for the other Chiefs of Turan, and how he slew 
Gurwi the Son of Zira 126 

48. How the Turanians asked Quarter of Kai Khuarau . 129 

49. How Bizhan returned with Guataham . , .133 

Part VII. The gheat War of Kai Khusrau with 
Afrasuab — 

1. In Praise of Sulfein Mahmtid 139 

2. How Kai Khusrau arrayed his Host against Afrdsiyah 145 

3. How AfrasiyAb heard that Piran was slain and that 

Kai Khuarau had arrayed his Host . .150 

CONTENTS vii 

Part VII. The great "War of Kai KnuaRAtr with Afrasiyab 

(continued) — 

SECT. PAGE 

4. How Kai Khusrau had Tidings that AfrasiyAb ad- 

vanced to fight with him 157 

5. How Shida cauie before his Father At'raeiyab . .158 

6. How Afrasiyab sent an Embassage to Kai Khuarau . 161 

7. How Kai Khusrau sent an Answer to Afrasiyab . 168 

8. How Kai Khusrau fought with Shida the Son of 

Afrasiyab 171 

9. How Shida was slain by Klmsrau . . .175 
10. How the Battle was joined between the Hosts . . 177 
ti. How Afrasiyab fled 183 

12. How Kai Khusrau announced his Victory to Kaiis . 185 

13. How Afrasiyab went to Gang-bihisht . . . . 186 

14. How Khusrau crossed the Jiliun . . .187 

15. How Kai Khusrau fought with Afrilsiyab the second 

Time 1 90 

16. How Afrasiyab took Refuge in Gan^-bihisht . . 193 

17. The Letter of Afrasiyab to the Faghfur of Chm . 196 

18. How Kai Khusrau arrived before Gang-bihisht . . 198 

19. How Jahn came to Kai Khusrau with an Embassage 

from Afrasiy&b ....... 200 

20. How Kai Khusrau made Answer to Jahn . . 204 

21. How Kai Khusrau fought with Afrtisiyab and took 

Gang-bihisht 207 

22. How Afrasiyab fled from Gang-bihisht . . .211 

23. How Kai Khusrau gave Quarter to the Family of 

Afrasiyab 212 

24. How Kai Khusrau exhorted the Iranians . . . 216 

25. How Kai Klmsrau wrote a Letter with the News of 

his Victory to Kai Kaus . 217 

26. How Kai Khusrau had Tidings *>i the Coming of 

Afrasiyab with the Hoat of the Faghfur . .219 

27. The Message of Afrasiyab to Kai Khusrau . .221 

28. How the Iranians and Turanians fought . . . 223 

29. How Afrasiyab made a Xight-attack upon Kai 

Khusrau and was defeated 224 

30. How the Faghfur of Chin sent an Envoy to Kai 

Khusrau 229 

31. How Afrasiyab crossed the Sea « .... 230 

32. How Kai Khusrau sent the Prisoners and Treasure 

to Kaus with a Letter 232 

viii CONTENTS 

Part VII. The great War of Kai Khusrau with Afrasiyab 

(continued) — 

SECT. pj.se 

33. The Answer of" Shah Ka.u.9 to the Letter of 

Khusrau ........ 237 

34. The Embassage of Kai Khusrau to the Faghfur of 

Chin and the King of Makran .... 238 

35. How Kai Khusrau fought with the King of Makran • 

and how the King of Makran was slain . . 241 

36. How K;ii Khusrau crossed the Sea .... 245 

37. How Kai Khusrau reached Gang-dizh . . 247 

38. How Kai Khusrau returned from Gang-dish to 

Siyawushgird ....... 250 

39. How Kai Khusrau returned from Turan to the Laud 

of Iran . . . . . .254 

40. How Kai Khusrau returned to his Grandsire . . 256 

41. How Afrasiyab was captured by Hum of the Race of 

Faridun 259 

43, How Afrasiyab escaped from Hiim .... 261 

43. How Kaus and Khusrau came to Hum . . 264 

44. How Afrasiyab was taken the second Time and how 

he and Garsiwaz were slain . 266 

45. H«av Kaiis and Khusrau returned to Pars , , . 269 

46. The Death of Kai Kaus 270 

47. How Kai Khusrau fell into Melancholy . . . 272 

48. How the Nobles inquired why Khusrau had closed 

his Court 275 

49. How the f nmians summoned Zal and Kustam . . 277 

50. How Kai Khusrau saw Suriish in a Dream . 280 

51. How Ziil admonished Kai Khusrau. .... 282 

52. How Kai Khusrau answered Zsi.1 . . . 284 

53. How Zal rebuked K.ii Khusrau 286 

54. How Kai Klm-it-an answered and how Zal excused 

himself . 288 

55. How Kai Khusrau gave his last Ciiarge to the 

Iranians 291 

56. How Kai Khusrau appointed Giidarz to be his 

Mandatary 294 

57. How Zal asked of Kai Khusrau a Patent fur Kustam . 296 

58. How Kai Khusrau gave a Patent to Giv . . . 298 

59. How Kai Khusrau gave a Patent to Tiis . . . 299 

60. How Kai Khusrau gave the Kingship to Luhriisp . 300 

61. How Kai Khusrau fare welled his Women . . . 304 

CONTENTS ix 
Part VII. The great War of Kai Krubkau with Afrasiyab 

(continued) — 

SKCT, PAflK 

62. How Kai Khusrau went to tbe Mountains and 

vanished in the Snow 305 

63. How the Paladina were lost in. the Snow . 308 

64. How Luhrasp had Tidings of the Disappearance of 

Kai Khusrau . , . . 311 

LUHRASP 

1. How Luhrasp built a Fire-temple at Balkh . . 316 

2. How Gushtagp quitted Luhrasp in wrath. . 318 

3. How Gusht&sp returned with Zarir .... 320 

4. How Gushtasp set off for Riim 323 

5. How Gushtasp arrived in Rum 324 

6. How a Village-chief entertained Gushtasp . . 327 

7. The Story of Katuyun the Daughter of Csesar . . 329 

8. How Csesar gave Kahi.yti.Ti to Gushtasp . 33 1 

9. How Mirin asked in Marriage Csesar'3 second 

Daughter 333 

10. How Guslitasp slew the Wolf 337 

1 1. How Ahran asked Ceesar's third Daughter in Marriage 342 

12. How Guslitasp slew the Dragon and how Caesar gave 

his Daughter to Ahran 346 

13. How Guahtaap displayed his Prowess on the 

Riding-ground 349 

14. How Ctesar wrote to Ilyas and demanded Tribute . 352 

15. How Guslitasp fought with Ilyaa and slew him . . 355 

16. How Ccesar demanded from Luhrasp Tribute for 

frdn 356 

17. How Znrir carried a Message from Luhrasp to Ceesar 359 

18. How Gushtiiap returned with Zarir to the Laud of 

Iran and received the Throne from Luhrasp , 361 

INDEX 367 

THE SHAHNAMA 

VOL. IV, 

A 

ABBREVIATIONS 

C. — Macan'a edition of the Shahnama. 
L.— Lumsden's do. 
P.— Mohl's do. 
T.— Tihran do. 
V.— Vullers' do, 

DEL J. Darmesteter, Etudes Iraniennes. 

DZA. Professor Darmesteter' s Trans, of the Zandavasta in the 
Sacred Books of the East. References to Parts 1 and 
pages. 

EHL The History of India as told by its own Historians. By- 
Sir H. BL Elliot, K.G.B. 

MZA. Rev. L. H. Mills' Trans, of the Zandavasta in the Sacred 
Books of the East. Reference to Part and pages. 

RM. The Mahabharata translated into English Prose (by Ki&ari 
Mohan Gangtdi). Published by Prat.ipa Chandra Rai, 
CLE. 

WPT. Dr. E. W. West's Trans, of the Pahlavi Texts in the 
Sacred Books of the East. Reference to Part and 
pages. 

1 The second edition of Part I. is referred to unless otherwise 
specified. 

3 

ff 

NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION 

a as in " water. 1 ' 
I a& in u pique." 
ft a& in " rude.' 1 

as in " servant." 

1 as in " sin." 
it as in " foot."' 
ai as i in " time."' 
au as ou in " cloud. ,; 

y is always hard as in " give." 
M- as ch in the German " buch." 
as 2 in "azure." 

11 

THE KAIANIAN DYNASTY 

( Continued) 

XIII 

KAI KHUSRAU (continued)- 
PART VI 

THE BATTLE OF THE TWELVE RUKHS 
ARGUMENT- 

Afraaiy&b and Kai Khusrau continue the war with renewed 
vigour, Piran and Gvtdarz being in chief command on the Turanian 
and Iranian Bides respectively. After some abortive negotiations 
the campaign opens, Human and Blzhan fight in single combat, 
and the former is slain. A general engagement between the two 
hosts follows, but the result is indecisive and both generals send 
for reinforcements. In the interval they arrange a combat of 
eleven champions a side in which the Iranians are completely 
victorious, all the Turanians, including Piran himself, being slain 
with the exception of Gurwi — the executioner of SiyAwush — who 
is taken alive by Giv, Kai Khusrau comes up, and Lahhdk and 
Farsbidward — Piran'a two surviving brothers — abandon their army 
and take to flight. They are pursued and captured by Gustaham, 
who is himself severely wounded but is saved by Bizhan and 
cured by Kai Khusrau, to whom also the Turanian army capitu- 
late^ and Gurwi is put to death. 

NOTE 

The Battle of the Twelve Rukhn or Champions is one of the 
most celebrated and favourito passages in the Shiihnama from 
the Persian point of view, probably owing to the completeness of 
the Iranian triumph, the poet being determined, in spite of some 
evident qualms of conscience, that the Tdr&nians should not get the 
best of it in any way. The English reader being unprejudiced 
probably would prefer a more equally balanced result. 

The word Rokh ia the familiar Rook of the game of chess, and 

8 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAVSt 

is usud metaphorically by the poet as an equivalent for Champion. 
The word really means cheek, the two sides of the chess-hoard 
where the Rooks or Castles are placed being looked upon as its 
two cheeks. Formerly, moreover, the Castles moved as the Queen 
does nowj and were therefore by far the most powerful pieces or 
Champions of the board, the piece which we call the Queen being 
then restricted to close attendance on the King and to a single 
move, as appears from the poet's own account of the game when 
he gives the legend of its origin, after describing its introduction 
into Persia during the reign of Nushirw&n. 

The reader will notice that there are really only eleven com- 
batants on each side in the battle of the champions. To make up 
the full number the preliminary struggle between Human and 
Bizhan must be included, and even then there are only eleven 
combatants on the lr&nian side to twelve on the Turanian, as 
Blzhan fights twice. 

Hi'zhan appears to have been a special favourite of the poet, who 
never loses an opportunity of putting him forward. 

§ I. The Prelude is translated in the metre of the original, 
which, the reader may be reminded, is uniform throughout the 
Shahnama. 

§ 4. " We will not reBt and sleep, my mace and I, 
The field of battle and Afraaiyab." 

These lines, which form a couplet in the original, are said to 
have been quoted to Mahmiid on a certain occasion by one of 
his ministers, and to have caused the Sultan to &eek too late for a 
reconciliation with Kirdausi. 1 The tradition goes hack to within 
a century of the poet's death. The reading of the first hemistich 
of the couplet varies. 

§§ 8-1 1. The time of the usually prudent Human being at 
hand he becomes fey, as Bahrdm did on a previous occasion. 3 

§ 14. Shabilhang (Sirius) is given elsewhere as the name of 
Farhad's steed, 3 Bizhan's steed was called Shahrang. 1 Shabahang 
seems used metri causd for Shabrang. One would gather from 
another passage, taken alone, that Bizhan used Giv's steed in the 
battle with Human/ 

1 See Vol. i. p. 45. s See Vol, iii, p. 95, 3 Id. p. 313. 
4 Id. and pp. 296 and 302. 6 See p. 45. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

9 

The Prelude 

The world, while thou anguishest, passeth away, ~ v. 1141 

Abate both the woe and the weal of the day, 

But if thou adventure the pathway of greed 

The process of this world is longsome indeed ! 

One view is — 'Tis well after greatness to seek 

All be that it lurk mid the Dragon's own reek, 

And servants of ^reed and provokers of strife 

Will hear not comtnendment from any in life: 

The other — What reck if, since none can abide, 

Our Hostel of Sojourn be narrow or wide ? 

Whenas the tall Cypress is bent in the grove, 

And darkened the light of the Lustre above, 

When leafage is withered, when roots are unsound, 

And top is beginning to nod toward the ground, 

From dust having issued to dust it will go, 

While all is dismayment and horror and woe. 

Man's nature, when prudence and wisdom are his, v. '1142 

Accepteth untroubled the world as it is, 

Yet travail of body, if long be thy stay, 

Enforceth the need for thy passing away. 

Life's ocean is deep, and no bottom we see ; | 

A hoard 'tis of secrets whose door hath no key. 

Thy wants will but greaten what while thou remain, 

And each day's provision prove provand for pain. 

But three things are needful — food, raiment, and bed : 

For these no reproaches descend on thy head. 

Content thee, for all else is travail and greed, 

And greed is a torment no lighter than need. 

Thou knowest that this world is fleeting, why let 

Thy soul and thy spirit with covetise fret ? 

Enjoy what thou hast, seek not more to possess, 

For greed will but make thine own glory the less. 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSf 

How Aftasiy&b called together his Host 

The Turkman monarch's heart, as I have heard, 
Was ever vexed by greed. When he had quitted 
The field where Rustam gloomed the world for him 
He fared apace until he reached Khallukh, 
Avoiding other kings in his disgrace, 
And entered with a heart fulfilled with anguish 
His palace with his prudent veterans — 
Piran and Garsiwaz, his counsellor, 
And Shfda, Kurakhan and Karsiyun, 
Human, Kulbad, Ruin son of Pfran — - 
A warrior-crocodile— and Farshfdward. 
He spake with them at large of what had passed, 
Recalling every circumstance, and said ; — 
" Since I assumed the crown of sovereignty, 
And sun and moon bestowed on me their light, 
V. 1143 I have held sway among the potentates, 
And nobody hath turned aside my rein ; 
Thus ever since the war with Minuchihr 
fran hath not laid hand upon Turan. 
Now from Iran they make a night-attack 
Upon my life at mine own palace-door ! 
The craven hath become courageous, 
The Stag hath ventured to the Lion's lair : 
We must be up and doing in this strife, 
Or they will make our marches reek. 'Twere well 
To scatter messengers about the realm, 
And gather of the Turkmans and from Chin 
A thousand thousand girded for the fray 
To compass all the army of Iran, 
And make a battlefield on every side." 

Then all the priests advised him shrewdly, saying: — 
" Gross we Jihun and beat the royal tymbals 

KAl KHUSRAU 

ii 

On yon wide plain, and, speeding night and day, 

Camp at Xmwi ; that is the place for battle, 

For bloodshed, and for fighting Giv and Rustam — 

Those haughty, city- taking warriors, 

Who privily have dipped their hands in bane." 

Thereat the monarch's face and fortune brightened, 
And, as the great are wont, he praised the priests 
And paladins, then called and charged a scribe. 
He sent ambassadors to the Faghfur 
And monarch of Khntan, sent through the realm, 
Moreover, letters to all chiefs and nobles, 
And summoned troops because he purposed war, 
Enraged at Rustam's doings. Two weeks passed, 
Then from the Turkman states, Chin, and Khutan, 
A host assembled ; like a troubled sea 
Earth heaved ; it was so that the waste was hidden. 
Afrasiyab collected in the city v. 1144 

All horse-herds running wild, undid the sacks 
Of treasures closely kept and handed on 
For generations since the time of Tiir, 
And parted with dinars by night and day. 
When all the army was equipped for war, 
So that there was sufficiency for all, 
He chose out fifty thousand warriors, 
Arrayed for strife and eager to engage, 
And said to Shfda, his heroic son, 
Exalted o'er the Lions of the fight ;— 
"I give to thee this well-appointed host: 
Prepare to march toward Kharazm ; there guard 
The borders and be ever girt for battle." 

He bade Pfran choose fifty thousand men 
Of Chfn, and said : " Go thou against Iran, 
And set a throne above the young Shah's throne ; 
Seek not in any wise the door of peace, 
And speak no word unless of war and vengeance : 
To mingle fire and water spoileth both." 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAVSI 

Those two illustrious, prudent paladins 
Went at the bidding of Afrasiyab, 
The old at leisure and the young in haste, 
With iron mace and sword and golden gong, 
And, like a cloud that thundered, roared along. 

§ 3 

How Kai Khusrau sent Gudars to fight the Titrdnians 

Thereafter tidings reached the conquering Shah : — 
" A Turkman host hath marched upon Iran. 
Afrasiyab, that tyrant-miscreant, 
Can neither rest nor slumber in his vengeance, 
But fain would raise his head from its disgrace, 
And from all sides hath sent forth troops to war ; 
He rubbeth poison on his lance's point, 
If so he may turn rein upon Iran. 
Three hundred thousand warlike cavaliers 
Will cross Jihun and thence send up the dust 
In battle-time to heaven. The warriors 
Can sleep not at his court for tymbal-din. 
What with the blare of brass and clang of bell 
Thou wouldst have said: 'Men's hearts are in their 
months!' 

If that host cometh to Iran for battle 
No lion, lusty though he be, will meet them. 
Piran is posted by Afrasiyab 
With no small army on the Iranian coasts, 
While fifty thousand girded for the fight 
Have marched toward the borders of Kharazm. 
Their chief is Shida of the lion-heart, 
Whose scimitar will pluck the core from lire. 
The troops resemble maddened elephants, 
Such as would level mountains in the strife." 
The monarch at the news sat full of thought, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Then said : " Ye wise ! the archimages say : — 

' The Turkman moon, when heaven's height is won, 

Shall meet disaster from the Iranian sun. 

Strike the black snake that cometh from its bed 

Toward the cudgel with uplifted head. 

The king that shall unjustly plant a tree 

Will lose his fortune and his sovereignty.' " 

Then, having summoned all the archimages, 
He laid before them that which he had heard. 
The great men and the warlike sages sat 
In secret with the monarch of Iran, 
As Zal and Rustam, as Gudarz and Gfv, 
Shfdush, Farhad, and brave Rnhham, Bizhan, 
Ashkash and Gustaham, Gurgm and Zanga, 
And Gazhdaham, great Tus, son of Naudar, 
And Farfburz, blest scion of Kaus, 
With all the other nobles of the host, 
Who were the worldlord's flock. He thus addressed 
The paladins : " The Turkmans seek to war 
Against my throne, so we too must prepare." 

He gave command and at his palace-gate 
The trumpets blared and brazen cymbals clashed. 
He went forth from the palace to the plain. 
They set his throne upon an elephant; 
He mounted, dropped the ball within the cup, 
And ''smeared earth," thou hadst said, "with indigo," 
Such was earth's hue; the air was black with dust ; 
The brave troops of the host resembled leopards, 
With maces in their claws and war at heart ; 
The land heaved like a sea with warriors. 
A proclamation went f'oi th from the court : — 
"Ye paladins of the Iranian host ! 
None that can ply the stirrup and the rein 
May now abide at home in idleness." 

The monarch gave command : " We need," he said, 
" Three hundred thousand warlike cavaliers, 

14 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAVSI 

With warriors and mighty men from Rum 
And Hind, and gallant Arabs of the desert, 
Accoutred well — tierce Lions girdle-girt. 
Those that reach not the presence of the Shah 
In forty days shall not obtain a crown." 

They sent out horsemen with the royal letters 
On all sides. Two weeks passed ; throughout the realm 
Troops were in motion at the Shah's command, 
And battle-cries went up from all the world. 
One morn at cock-crow rose the tymbals' din 
On all sides, and the chiefs of provinces 
Arrayed their troops before the monarch's gate. 
He oped his ancient treasures and bestowed 
Such largess that all heads were crowned with gold, 
While with horse-armour and men's coats of mail 
The massed array looked like a hill of iron, 
v, 114; As soon as this equipment was complete 

The Shah made choice among the cavaliers 

Of thirty thousand armed with scimitars, 

Put them in Rustam's charge, and said : " Famed hero! 

Lead these toward Sistan and Hindustan. 

When at Ghaznfn make for the upper road, 1 

So thou mayst win a signet, crown, and throne ; 

But when thou hast achieved the sovereignty, 

And pard and sheep are drinking at one trough, 

Give Faramarz the signet and the crown 

Together with such troops as he may choose: 

Then sound the kettledrums, the horns, and pipes, 

And stay not in Kashmir or in Kabul, 

Because this war against Afrasiyab 

Depriveth me of provand, rest, and sleep." 

He gave the Alans and Gharcha to Luhrasp,- 
And said : " O hero of illustrious race ! 
Go with a mountain-like array. Select it 
Out of the host, and lead thy seasoned horsemen 

1 l£ la route dunord" (Mohl). * The fntore Sh4h. 

KAI KHVSRAU 

To rob the Turkmans of the breath of life." 

He bade Ashkash march forth with thirty thousand — 
Impetuous Lions, brandishers of spears, 
An army that was like a ravening wolf — 
Toward Kharazm with mighty kettledrums, 
Set up his place hard by the entering in, 
And challenge Shida to the battlefield. 
He gave a fourth host to Gudarz and said : — 
" O hero of a race of paladins ! 
Go with the great men of Iran, with Zanga, 
Gurgin and Gustaham, Shfdush, Farhad, 
Kharrad and Grv, the general Guraza, 
And brave Ruhham." 

He bade them arm for war, 
And hasten to the marches of Turan. 
Gddarz, son of Kishwad, the general, 
The paladins and nobles, all obeyed 

And mounted, and Gudarz assumed command. v n^s 

The Shah then bade him ; " Thou art bound for battle ; 

See that thou do not aught injuriously : 

Destroy no house that is inhabited, 

And see that no non-combatant be harmed 

Since God approveth not our evil deeds ; 

Here we have no abiding but pass on. 

In leading forth the host toward Turin 

Keep head and heart both cool. Be not agog 

Like Tus, mount not the drums on all occasions- 

Be just to every one in every thing, 

Remembering God — -the Source of good. Dispatch 

Some wise and heedful veteran to Pi'rdn, 

Thus by much counsel gain that general's ear, 

And clothe him in the raiment of good will." 

The captain of the host said to the Shah ; — 
" Thy hest is higher than the orbed moon. 
I will go even as thou biddest me, 
For thou art worldlord and I am a slave." 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Then from the portal of the paladin 
Shouts rose ; the earth rocked with the din of drums ; 
The soldiers trooped to camp, and all the scene 
Grew dark with horsemen's dust. Before the host 
Three score fierce elephants weighed down the world, 
And of those mighty elephants of war 
Four were caparisoned for royal use ; 
Upon their backs was placed a throne of gold 
Whereon a Shah might sit encrowned in state, 
But there the monarch bade Giidarz to sit, 
And, as he urged the elephants, the dust 
Suggested this conceit of happy presage : — 
v. 1 145 " Piran's soul will we make go up in smoke 

As these beasts send the dust up with their feet." 

Then by the Shah's command the host moved on 
From stage to stage, inflicting harm on none. 

§ 4 

How Giv was math the Bearer of Overtures from 
G&ilaT?. to Pzrdn 

Now when Gtidarz was drawing near Raibad 

He chose him captains out of all the host — 

A thousand valiant wielders of the spear, 

Exalted and renowned, and furthermore 

Ten famous horsemen of the Iranians, 

All ready speakers well beseen in fight. 

The chief next summoned Gfv, told what the Shah 

Had said, and added this : " My prudent son, 

Whose head is lifted over many a head ! 

I have selected for thee worthy troops — 

Men who are chieftains in the provinces — 

That thou mayst make a journey to Pfrdn 

To speak to him and to receive his answer. 

Thus say to him • ' I with a host have reached 

KAl KHUSRAU 

'7 

Raibad according to the Shah's commands. 

Thou knowest what thy words and deeds have been, 

What peace and toil and trouble have been thine, 

And how the country of Turan hath girt, 

With its illustrious kings, its loins for ilL 

The glorious Farfdun had cause to weep, 

While in this world, for pain and misery, 

Iran was full of pain, the Shah of grief, 

The moon shone not through mourning for Iraj. 

Thou only of the people of Turan 

Dost pride thyself on kindness and good faith, 

Though that word kindness is a lie with thee ; 

I see not peace and kindness in thy heart ; 

Howbeit that courteous Shah of ours said thus v. 1150 

To me: "Address him with all gentleness, 

For in the days of noble Siyawush 

He built no ill, and hath a claim upon me 

As being guiltless of my father's blood." 

The Shah condoneth all thy past misdeeds, 

And holdeth evil on thy part as good, 

Since thou hast wronged not any of our Shahs. 

Thou art not to be slaughtered by my hand 

Because thy many faults are overlooked : 

Else in this warfare with Afrasiyab 

Thy destiny would make short work of thee. 

The great men of fran and this my son 

Will tell thee mine advice. Hold parle with them ; 

Then, if thou art persuaded, thou art quit 

Of care and sure of life, thy land and kindred 

Will flourish, and thy neck escape my sword ; 

But if the fault be thine thy life will be 

In danger from the Shah, and in this strife 

We will not rest and sleep, my mace and I, 

The field of battle and Afrasiyab, 

To take revenge on whom our sovereign 

Hath no need to array a mighty host ; 

VOL. iv, U 

IS THE SHAHNAMA OF F1RDAUSI 

But if thou wilt attend to mine advice, 
And wilt give credit to my prudent words, 
Then first : all those that brought about the feud, 
Those that rolled up their sleeves for shedding blood, 
Put forth their hands to murder Siyawush. 
And wrecked the world by their unrighteousness, 
Thou shalt dispatch to me in chains like dogs 
That we may send them to the Shah, for him 
To take their heads or to forgive their crimes. 
My Shah, who is the warden of the world, 
Hath given me a list of all their names, 
v. 1 151 Hast thou not heard that which the mighty lion 
Said to the wolf — a pregnant utterance ? 
IC Fate hath no place except the dust in store 
For him whose hand hath shed a monarch's gore.' 
Moreover all the treasures that thou hast 
Are but the enemies of thy dark soul ; 
So thou shalt send to me thy noble steeds, 
Thy gems, dinars, brocade, crowns, scimitars, 
Horse-armour, coats of mail, casques, Indian swords, 
The equipment of thy troops, thy gold, and silver. 
With that which thou hast gained by force or fraud 
Thou mayst buy life and see the pathway opened 
To safety. What is worthy of a king 
Will I send to the monarch of the world, 
And give the rest as booty to the troops 
Instead of taking vengeance for wrong done ; 
And furthermore when thou shalt have dispatched 
Thy favourite son — the guardian of thy throne 
And signet — with those leaders of thine army, 
Thy brethren twain, who ever lift their necks 
Above the moon — all three as hostages 
That I may feel assured — to this famed host, 
Then will thy tree of honesty bear fruit. 
Consider now and choose between two courses. 
By taking one thou wilt approach the Shah, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Wilt go with kith and kindred to Khusrau, 

And rest beneath the shadow of his love, 

Wilt put away that of Afrasiyab, 

And never even dream of him again. 

I will give pledges to thee that Khusrau 

Will raise thy head above the shining sun ; 

Thou knowest best the kindness of his heart, 

And that he will entreat thee royally. 

Or if from terror of Afrasiyab 

Thou art not willing to approach Iran, 

Go from Triran and lead thy troops to Chach, 

Take thy teak throne and set thy crown on high ; 

But if thy heart is with Afrasiyab 

Depart to him and battle not with us, 

For in regard to those with whom I strive 

I have a lion's heart, a leopard's claws, 

And I will leave the Turkmans naught of throne: 

My bows are clouds that pour down showers of bane 

If thou wilt none of this but wiliest strife, 

And thy head be all ill advice and guile, 

Rise and come hither all equipped for war 

If thou canst face the lion ravening. 

When both the hosts shall be arrayed for battle 

Will those in fault appear as innocent ? 

Nay, and unless thou hearken to my words 

Thou wilt repent at last, but then repentance 

Will profit naught, fate's sword have reaped thy head 

The paladin with these words charged his son, 
" Repeat them to Piran," he said, " each one." 

§ 5 

Hp to Glc visited Pirdn at WUagird 

Gfv left his father's presence, and departed 
To Balkh, with all those bitter words in mind. 

20 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Alighting there he sent a messenger 

Before him as directed by Giidarz, 

On that same night assembled all his troops, 

And left the gates of Balkh for Wi'sagird, 

The city where Pi'ran was with his powers, 

And menaced the franian crown and throne. 

The messenger in audience of Pmin 

Said thus to him ; " Gfv hath arrived at Balkh 

With nobles and with gallant warriors. - " 

Pfran pricked up his ears on hearing this, 
While shouts rose from the warriors of the host. 
He blew the trumpets and bound on the tyinbals; 
The horse-hoofs turned the earth to ebony 
As five score and ten thousand cavaliers 
Came forward dight for war from his array, 
v. 1153 He left the more part, called his veterans, 

Advanced to the Jihiin and ranked them there, 

Made by the stream a wall of spears, and held 

An interview with Gi'v. Two weeks they parleyed 

In order that they might not war unjustty ; 

The Iranians spake on all points, and Pfran 

Heard; but the Turkmans did injuriously, 

For while the Iranian chiefs employed their tongues, 

And grew more instant with their enemies 

In speech, Piran dispatched a messenger 

To hasten to Afrasiyab and say : — 

,; GudarZj son of Kishwad, hath with his troops 

Placed his own helmet o'er the Iranian throne, 

And Gi'v, his favourite son — the shatterer 

Of hosts — hath reached me with an embassage . 

But I attend to thy commands alone, 

And stake my life upon my loyalty." 

Now when this reached the monarch of Tunin 
He chose him thirty thousand mighty men 
Among his troops who drew the scimitar, 
And sent them to Pira.ii, the cavalier, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

With these words : tf Draw the scimitar of vengeance, 
And rid the earth of them ; spare not Gudarz 
Or Giv, Farhad, Gurgm or brave Ruhham, 
For troops, whose object is the Iranian throne, 
Flock from all sides. These will I lead, will make 
The whole land of Iran a stream of gore, 
And by the counsels of the wise and brave 
Send up this time the dust from Kai Khusrau," 

Piran, when he beheld that mighty host, 
Each man as thirsty as a wolf for blood, 
Was, being reinforced, inclined to war. 
He washed his heart of honour and chose ill : 
That heart so well disposed grew overbearing, 
Grew full of thought and passionate for strife. 
He said to Gi'v : " Arise and go thy ways 
Back to the paladin and say to him : — 
' Seek not from me what sages will condemn — 
First to surrender to thy hands these chiefs 
Of high renown ! How is this possible ? 
And for thy next demand — the arms and troops, 
The noble chargers and the throne and crown, 
A brother who is my bright soul, a son — 
My well-beloved and my paladin — 
" These things/' thou sayest, " put afar from thee !" 
Can words so crude be uttered by the wise ? 
Death would be better fcr me than such life : 
Shall I that am a prince do slavishly ? 
In this regard the leopard coming near 
To battle with the fearless lion said : — 
"To have thee shed my blood and keep my fame 
Is better than to live a life of shame." 
Besides instructions from the king have come 
To me, and troops, with orders to engage.' " 

Giv with his chiefs on this reply departed, 
Whereon Pi ran, the captain of the host, 
Prepared for fight, sent up the battle-shout, 

22 THE SHAHS AMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Pushed on to Kanabad and set his ranks 
Tn war-array upon the mountain-flanks. 

§6 

Tfie Arraying of the Hods 

Giv, when he reached the presence of his sire, 
Informed him of the answer word for word, 
And said : " Array the host upon the spot 
Where thou wilt fight ; Pi'ran hath no idea 
Of peace, no room for justice in his heart. 
I told him all thy words, appealed to him 
In all ways. When the fault proved clearly theirs 
He sent the king a camel-post to say : — 
' Gudarz and Giv are come to fight, and troops 
Must be dispatched to me forthwith.' Thereat 
v - 1 1 55 Came reinforcements from Afrasiyab, 

And crossed the river while we were returning. 
Now bind the drums upon the elephants 
For battle since Pi'ran forestalleth us." 

Gudarz said : " He is sick of life. I thought 
No other of the miscreant, and yet 
By order of the monarch of the world 
I had to send — there was no remedy— 
And now the Shah hath proved him to the heart. 
I spake to that effect before the Shah 
When he gave orders for the troops to march : 
I said to him : ' Put from thy heart the love 
Of one whose heart and tongue do not accord. 
Pi'ran's whole love is for the Turkmans ; let 
The Shah wash hands of him.' " 

The brave Pi'ran 
Led in GiVs tracks his array lion-like, 
And when Gudarz knew that the host approached 
He beat the tymbals, marched out from Raibad, 

KAI KHUSRAV 

i 

And drew his army up on that broad plain 

With mountains in the rear. The day's light failed 

What time Firan marched forth from Kanabad. 

A hundred thousand Turkman cavaliers 

Went girt for battle, mailed, and carrying 

Long spears and Indian swords. The embattled hosts 

Looked like two mountains with their iron helms. 

Then there arose the sound of clarions, 

And thou hadst said : " The^ mountains are astir ! " 

The hosts stretched from Raibad to Kanabad : 

The vales and plains were black and blue with them. 

The lances' heads were stars, the swords were suns, 

The clouds were dust-clouds and the ground was iron. 

The earth re-echoed with the warriors' shouts, 

The sky was iron with the helms and spears. 

Giidarz surveyed the army of Turin, 

Then all in motion like a heaving sea, 

Flag following flag and troop succeeding troop 

Without a break till night rose from the hills. 

Both hosts placed elephants to bar the way, 

Lit up the watch-fires, and thou wouldst have said 

At all the shouting of the eager chiefs : — 

"The world is Ahriman's and full of foes 

From skirt to sleeve ! " That darksome night the rock 

Were riven to their cores with tymbal-din ! 

The dawn ascended from the sombre mountains, 
And then the leader of Iran bestrode 
A fresh horse in the presence of the host, 
And made his dispositions on all sides. 
The army's right wing rested on a hill, 
Undaunted mid the battles of the brave, 
While to the left a river ran, as apt 
As soul for body. In the front were ranged 
The spearmen with the footmen in their rear 
With coats of mail and iron-piercing shafts, 
And bows flung o'er their arms. The soldiers' blood 

24 

THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDA USt 

Boiled in their veins. Arrear of these there came 

The warlike cavaliers, whose falchions robbed 

The fire of lustre, then the elephants 

Like mountains; earth was wearied with the tramp. 

Full in the centre of the host and shining 

Moon-like with jewels stood the glorious standard. 

What with the flashing' of the blue steel swords 

Beneath the shadow of the flag of Kawa 

Thou wouldst have said: "The sky, this darksome 

night, 
Is shedding stars ! " 

Giidarz arrayed the host 
Like Paradise and planted in the garden 
Of loyalty the cypress of revenge. 
V, 1 1 57 He gave the army's right to Fariburz: 
Hajir was with the baggage in the rear. 
Guraza, chiefest scion of Givgan, 
And that o'er-looker of the Kaian throne, 
Zawara, went to aid, and ranked themselves 
With, Fariburz. Giidarz then bade Ruhham :— 
11 thou, the inspirer of crown, throne, and wisdom ! 
Go with the cavaliers toward the left. 
Like Sol from Aries on New Year's Day 
Illuminate the army by thy Grace, 
And nurse it tenderly, but like a lion 
Smite foemen with thy chief-consuming steel." 

Ruhham went forth with his companions, 
With Gustaham, and matchless Gazhdaham, 
And Furuhil whose arrows pierced the sky. 
Giidarz then bade ten thousand cavaliers 
Ou barded steeds to go with Glv, committing 
The rear to him, a post for men of war; 
Gurgfn and Zanga bare him company. 
A banner and three hundred horse to guard 
The army's river-flank, as many more 
To guard the mountain-flank, Giidarz dispatched. 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

25 

A •watchman went upon the mountain-top, 

And kept his neck outstretched both night and day 

Above the army, with his eyes intent 

To watch the movements of the Turkman troops, 

And shout, if he perceived an ant's foot move, 

To rouse Gudarz, who ordered so that field 

That sun and moon were eager to engage. 

The valiant crocodile will not affright 

The host whose leader is well seen in fight. 

Gudarz then took the post of chief command 

To guard the army from the enemy. 

He raised the flag that gladdeneth the heart, v. 115S 

And gave the chiefs that battled at the centre 

To each his station, summoning them all. 

Behind him was SMdush, Farhad before. 

Thus posted in their midst Gudarz, their leader, 

Had Kawa's standard over-shadowing him, 

And dimming sun and moon. 

Pi ran from far 

Looked forth upon that host, upon that pomp 

And circumstance of war, and hearts whence care 

And travail ebbed. Dale, desert, mount, and waste 

Were full of spears, and rein was linked to rein. 

The chieftain of Turau was sorely grieved, 

And raged at fortune's gloomy sun. Thereafter, 

Surveying his own host, the battlefield 

Displeasured him; he saw not room to tight 

Or rank his troops, and in his anger smote 

His hands together, being forced to form 

As best he might since he must charge the brave. 

Then of his own chiefs and his men of war, 

And of the warriors of Afrasiyub, 

That longed for fight, he chose him thir ty thousand, 

Men fit for war and armed with scimitars. 

He gave the centre to Human— a host 

Of Hon -fling ing > battle-loving troops. 

2b 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Andan'inan he summoned with Arjasp, 
He gave Burjasp the chief command of both, 
And put the army's left wing in their keeping 
With thirty thousand gallant warriors. 
The brave Lahhiik and Farshi'dward drew up 
With thirty thousand heroes of the fray 
Upon the right r and earth turned black with iron, 
v. 1159 He sent the brave Zangula and Kulbad, 
Along with Sipahram, the good at need, 
And spearmen twice five thousand, to support 
The cavaliers, the wielders of the sword. 
Then with ten thousand warriors of Khutan 
Ruin in brazen panoply marched forth 
To ambush like a lion in the wood, 1 
With outposts on the river and the mountain 
To threaten the Iranian general, 
On whom, if he advanced beyond his lines 
And ventured forward on Pinin himself, 
Rum the chief should fall, as 'twere a lion, 
And take him boldly in the rear. Piran 
Placed likewise scouts upon the mountain-top 
To watch by day and count the stars by night, 
That if a horseman of the Iranians 
Should turn his reins toward the Turkman chief, 
The keeper of the watch should raise a cry, 
And all the battlefield be roused thereby. 

§ 7 

How Birhan went to Giv to urge him to fight 

Three days and nights the opposing hosts — all men 
Of name and eager for the fight — remained 
Embattled face to face : thou wouldst have said 
" No one's lip moveth ! " Quoth Giidarz : C1 If I 
1 Reading with P. 

KAI K HUSH A U 

Yield to the foe my station, and advance, 
They will assail my rear ; I shall but grasp 
The wind." 

Both night and day before the host 
He stood in quest of favourable signs 
From sun and moon. " Which is the auspicious hour, 
He thought, " for action when the wind of battle 
Will blow and blind the Turkman horse with dust? 
Then haply I may get the upper hand, 
And lead the army onward like a blast." 

Piran on his side waited anxiously 
Until Gtidarz should seethe at heart with rage, 
And by advancing leave his rear exposed 
To those in ambush. 

Came Gfv's son, Bizhan, 
The fourth day, from the rearward to the centre, 
Came to his father's presence with his clothes 
Rent, flinging up the dust to heaven and crying ; — 
" Why tarriest thou thus indolently here, 
My veteran sire ? The fifth day now approacheth, 
Yet all is peace by day and night. The sun 
Beholdeth not our warriors' scimitars, 
And no dust riseth to obscure the sky. 
Our cavaliers are in cuirass and helm, 
And yet the blood hath stirred in no man's veins ! 
Once, after famous Rustam, in Iran 
No cavalier was equal to Gudarz ; 
But ever since the battle of Pashan, 
And all the carnage of that mighty field, 
When at Ladan he saw so many sons 
Slain and Iranian fortune overturned, 
He hath been liver-stricken, all distraught. 
And indisposed to see another fight. 
We must consider that the man is old, 
And that his head is turned toward heaven above, 
As one who counteth not his followers, 

28 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAVSl 

But reckoner h the stars around the moon. 
Know that he now is bloodless and hath grown 
Too feeble for the battles of the brave. 
I wonder not at veteran Gudarz, 
Whose heart is no more set upon this world, 
My wonder, my father ' is at thee, 
From whom fierce Lions seek accomplishment. 
Two hosts are looking at thee. Rouse a little 
Thy brain to action and display thy wrath. 
Now when the world is warm and air serene 
The army should be ordered to engage, 
For when this pleasant season shall be gone, 
And earth's face bound as hard as steel with frost, 
What time the hand is frozen to the spear, 
With war in front of us and snow behind, 
What warrior will come before the host 
To challenge combat on this battlefield ? 
While if thou art afraid of ambushes, 
Then of the soldiers and the men of war 
V. 1161 Thou shouldst commit to me a thousand horse 
Of mine own choosing, apt for fight, and we 
Will raise our foemen's ambuscade in dust, 
And send their heads cascading o'er the moon." 

Gi'v smiled to hear Bizhan, praised his brave son, 
And said to God : " I give Thee thanks that Thou 
Hast granted me a son so excellent, 
And made him strong, God-serving, and discreet, 
"Versed in affairs and eager for the fray. 
In this brave youth restored to me 1 I have 
The typic offspring of a paladin. 
Thus said the lion to the lioness : — 
1 Suppose our cub should prove a coward, we 
Will own no love or consanguinity, 
His dam shall be the dust, his sire the sea. 1 
Yet, my son, impetuous in thy speech ! 

1 After his captivity in Part V. 

KAI KRUSRAU 

29 

Loose not thy tongue against thy grand sire thus, 

For he is wiser and experienced, 

And is the leader of this noble host. 

The veteran needeth not in aught a teacher. 

If our own cavaliers have much to bear 

The Turkmans are not very bright and fresh, 

But luckless and dejected, with their eyes 

Suffused with tears and livers full of blood. 

This ancient veteran would have the Turkmans 

Advance to battle. When they leave the hills 

He will attack in force, and thou shalt see 

How he will ply the whole march with his mace. 

He watcheth too the aspects of the sky, 

And, when the auspicious time shall come, will void 

Earth's face of Turkmans." 

" Chief of paladins 1" 
Bfzhan said, " if my glorious grandsire's purpose 
Be such we need not carry Ruman mail. 
I will depart, put off my tigh ting-gear, 
And make my shrunken face rose-red with wine, 
But when the chief of paladins hath need 
Of me I will return in battle-weed." 

§ 8 ■ 

Hozv Huvti'm asked Phxm for Ltave to jiyht 

Within the Turkman army brave Human v. 1162 

Came like a lion to his brother, saying : — 
" paladin of great Afntsiyab ! 
We long for fight. The tilth day is at hand 
That all these cavaliers have borne their mail; 
Their loins are chafed with iron, their hearts with ven- 
geance, 

Their eyes are on Iran. Why keep the hosts 
Confronting thus ? What is thy purpose ? Speak \ 

30 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

If thou intend est to engage, engage, 

And if thou meanest to retreat, retreat, 

For 'tis a shame to thee, O paladin ! 

And old and young will laugh at thy proceedings. 

'Twas this same host that fled from us in battle, 

Disgraced and pale ; their slain filled all the field ; 

The whole earth ran with blood ; but, as for us, 

We lost not any cavalier of name ; 

Moreover Rustam is not in command. 

If thou distastest fight and bloodshed choose 

Some troops, give them to me, and be spectator." 

Pi'rdn, on hearing, answered : " Be not hasty, 
And harsh. Know, brother ! that this man of war, 
Who thus hath come against me with a host, 
Is of the chiefs of Kai Khusrau the choicest, 
The greatest noble, and a paladin. 
Now in the first place Kai Khusrau is higher 
Amidst all peoples than my sovereign ; 
Next, of the paladins of Kai Khusrau 
I know not any equal to Gudarz 
In dignity, position, manliness, 
In prudent counsel and sagacity ; 
Then in the third place he is inly seared, 
And full of anguish, for his many sons, 
Whom with their heads dissevered from their trunks 
We left, and laid the earth's dust with their blood ; 
v. 1 163 So long as life is in him he will writhe 
In serpent wise to compass his revenge; 
And fourthly he hath brought and massed two hosts 
Between two mountains. Seek where'er thou wilt 
There is no way to him. Perpend, for this 
Is no brief toil. We must induce the foe 
To quit their station on yon walls of rock, 
And haply they may make through weariness 
Some weak nianceuvre and attack us first; 
Then, when the foes have left their vantage-ground, - 

KAI KHVSRAV 

We will pour showers of arrows on their heads, 
Enclose them as with walls and, like fierce lions, 
Prey on their lives, appease our lust on them, 
And our renown shall go up to the sun. 
Thou art the army's stay, our monarch's chief; 
Thy crown is raised o'er Saturn and the sky, 
Should one so famous hanker still for fame ? 
Moreover none among their famous men 
Will venture forth against the roaring Leopard ; 
Gddarz will send out from among his troops 
Some one of small renown, and much ambition 
To fight with warriors, to contend with thee ; 
And then if thou shouldst roll earth over him 
'T would not enhance thy fame, while to the Iranians 
It would be no great loss, but should he shed 
Thy blood the Turkman host would be dismayed." 

Human gave heed to what Piran was saying, 
Yet thought his conduct foolish and replied: — 
" What cavalier among the Iranians 
Will come to fight me ? Thou art bent on kindness, 
But lust of fighting hath come over me. 
If thou art not desirous to engage, 
And hast no fire of battle in thy soul, 
I will go saddle me my gallant gray, 
And challenge combat at the break of day." 

§ 9 

Horn Human I'lmllitng&i lluhhdm 

Human on reaching his encampment gnashed 
His teeth as wild boars do. When morning came 
He mounted on his steed, like some fierce lion, 
And, taking with him an interpreter, 
Approached the Iranian host. His heart was full 
Of fight, his head of vengeance on Khusrau. 

32 

THE SHABNAMA OF F1RDAVSI 

Grief made the world seem narrow to Pi'ran 
On learning that his brother had gone forth 
To battle, and in deep distress of heart 
He called to mind some sayings of his sire's : — 
" The wise deliberateth every way, 
And hasteth not to mingle in a fray ; 
The fool exhibiteth both dash and go 
At first, but in the end thereof is woe. 
Although the tongue within a brainless head 
Should shower pearls none would be profited." 
" I know not, 1 ' said he, " what Human will gain 
By showing 1 so much temper in this fight- 
May God, the Judge of all the world, assist him, 
Because I see not any help besides." 

Now when Human, the son of Wi'sa, bent 
On challenging the brave, drew near to where 
Giidarz, son of Kishwad, lay with his host, 
The captain of the watch encountered him. 
The outpost— horsemen of Iran and all 
Suspicious — came to the interpreter, 
And asked ; " Why doth this eager warrior 
Display himself as freely on the plain 
As he had been a herald and yet carry 
A mace in hand and lasso at his saddle ? " 

He said : " The time for sword and mace and bow 
Hath come, for this famed, lion-hearted man 
Desireth to encounter you in fight. 
He is the head of Wisa's sons, Human 
By name ; his scabbard is the lion's heart." 

Now when the Iranians saw his mace, equipment, 
And royal stature, all their spear-armed hands 
Refrained from action through that chieftain's Grace, 
v. r 165 All turned from him to the interpreter, 

And said : " Go tell Human our words in Turkman : — 
' We have no purpose to contend with thee 
For want of leave to combat from Gudarz; 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

But to the famous leader of our host 
The way is open if thou seekest battle." 

They told Human at large about the chiefs 
Of that proud host, told "who the soldiers were, 
And who commanded on the left and right. 
The outpost sent a cameleer in haste 
To tell Gudarz ; " The leopard-like Human 
Hath come to combat with the paladin." 

Human passed by the outpost, came apace 
Toward Ruhham, and shouted lustily 
" Son of the chief whose fortune is discreet ! 
Ply now thy reins upon this battlefield 
Between the hosts arrayed. Thou dost command 
The left wing and thou art the Lions' Claws, 
A guardian and a captain of Iran ; 
Thou shouldest fight me. Be the where thy choice 
Stream, mountain, desert. If not, Gustaharn 
And Furuhil perchance will charge together. 
Who will fight me with sword, spear, massive rnace 
Whoever cometh, fortune will make earth 
Reel under him. Pards' hides and lions' hearts 
Burst in the battle when they see our sword." 

Ruhham replied : " O famous warrior ! 
Among the Turkmans we considered thee 
As wise ; but thou art other than we thought, 
For thou hast come alone upon this field 
To brave a host, and weenest that no swordsman, 
Nor any cavalier, can be thy match. 
• Recall to mind a saying of the Kaians, 
And, being snared by wisdom, save thy neck: — 
1 No need for him who leadeth an attack 
To settle by what road he will go back.' 
All whom thou challengest by name are keen 
For fight but, since the general of the Shah 
Hath not so bidden, will not volunteer. 
If thou art fain to combat warriors 

VOL. IV. C 

34 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Why dost thou not accost the paladin ? 
Get licence for the combat from Giidarz, 
And then ask us to prove our readiness," 

Human said : " Ply me not with fond excuses, 
But take a spindle and put down the spear; 
Thou art not one for war, no cavalier." 

§ io 

Hoir Human challenged Fartburz 

Human, departing toward the centre, sped 
To the other wing. With his interpreter 
To Farfburz, like furious elephant, 
He came and shouted : " Wretch, degraded one ! 
Erst horsemen, elephants, and golden boots 
Were thine with Kawa's flag, but on the day 
Of battle thou didst yield them to the Turkmans. 
Iranian chieftains hold thy manhood cheap, 
v. c 167 Thou wast the leader ; but hast been reduced, 
And shouldest wear the girdle of a slave. 
As brother of the noble Siyawush 
Thou rankest o'er thy chief. I am from Tur, 
King of Ti'iran, perchance in composition 
Thine equal. Since thou art of worth to challenge 
Thou shouldst prepare for fight ; so now for once 
Come forth with me upon the battlefield 
That we may wheel in presence of the hosts. 
Thou wilt be famous to the shining sun 
Through meeting me. If thou wilt not, so be it. 
See where Zawara and Guraza are ; 
Bring to encounter me some warrior 
That hath a name among the Iranians." 

Then Farfburz replied : "Forbear to fight 
The rending lion : days of battle end 
For this in triumph, and for that in woe. 

KAI KBUSRAU 

When thou hast conquered, fear calamity, 
Because high heaven keepeth not one stay, 
And angry men bring things to such a pass 
As to lay desolate their own old home. 
The king deprived me of the flag, 'tis welh 
He gave to whom he would the elephants 
And host. Since Kai Kubdd, in Kaian wars, 
If any one hath donned the crown of power, 
And girt himself to make earth prosperous, 
It is the chief Gudarz, son of Kishwad, 
Whoever fighteth foremost. His forefathers 
Have been the chiefs and champions of the Shahs, 
And through his mace no doubt thy leader's day 
Will end. 'Tis for Gudarz to give command. 
If he shall bid me fight with thee, and leecheth 
The sear upon my heart, thou shalt behold 
How I will raise my head from shame to heaven 
Upon the battlefield." 

Human replied : — 
" Enough ' I see thee great in talk. What fighter 
Hast thou e'er hurt when girded with that sword '( 
Contend then with that despicable mace; 
On helm and breastplate it will leave no trace, 11 

§ II 

How Hunt tin challenged (Jndarz 

Human, returning thence triumphantly, 
"A Lion," thou hadst said, ''intent on mischief," 
And keen for vengeance on the noble chiefs, 
Approached Gudarz, son of Kishwnd, and shouted 
" O haughty chieftain, binder of the Di'v ! 
I heard abou£thy converse^ with the Shah, 
And thereupon thy leading forth the host, 
About the Shah's gifts and about thy pledge 

3 6 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS1 

And exhortations to Pi'ran our leader. 

An envoy reached the army of Turan — 

Giv, thy dear son, the refuge of the troops — 

And afterward thou swarest by the Shiih, 

By sun and moon and throne and diadem : — 

'If e'er mine eyes shall light upon Pfran 

In battle I "will take away his life/ 

Fierce as a lion hast thou ranked thy powers 

hi thine anxiety to tight with us, 

Then why sulk thus behind a mountain-range 

As though thou wast a wretched mountain- sheep ? 

Thus doth the quarry in its headlong course, 

When fleeing from the lion's bold pursuit, 

Make for some narrow co-vert in the wood, 

Forgetting honour in its fear for life. 

Lead just for once thine army to the plains. 

Why keepest thou the host behind the heights? 

Was this thine understanding with Khusrau — 

To make a hill thy stronghold in the war ? " 

Gudarz replied : " Attend to ine: 'tis right 
That I should speak. That none took up thy challenge 
Thou thoughtlessly imputest unto me. 
V. 1 169 Hear that I proffered oath and covenant 
By order of the Shah, but now that I 
Have come with this great host — the pick of all 
The valiant chieftains of fnin — ye lurk 
Like old fox in a brake, frayed by the hunter] 
Ye practise cunning, artifice, and guile 
To 'scape mace, spear, and lasso. Brag not thou, 
Nor challenge us, for foxe3 meet not lions." 

Human, on hearing what Gudarz replied, 
Raged like a lion on that scene of strife, 
And answered : " If thou comest not to fight 
'Tis not that fight with me disgraceth the* 1 , 
But ever since the battle of Pashan 
Thou hast avoided Turkmans in the fray. 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

Thou didst approve me at Ladan and praise 
My prowess on the field, and therefore now, 
If it is even with thee as thou sayest, 
And thou art eager to make good thy words, 
Choose thee a champion from among thy troops 
To counter me upon the battlefield. 
I like a lusty crocodile have challenged 
Ruhham and Farfburz, and passed along 
Before thy host, not one opposing me. 
They were restrained from fighting by Giidarz ; 
Twas waste of time to listen ; but thou art 
The man that saith : ' In battle with my sword 
Will I make tulips on the yellow hills .' ' 
So let some warrior with his massive mace 
Confront me here. Thyself hast many sons, 
O man of name ; and all have girt themselves 
To fight with us ; set one of them against me, 
For if thou seekest fight why this delay ?" 

" Which of the warriors," Gudarz considered, 
** Shall go ? If I oppose some famous man, 
Some raging Lion, to this enemy, 
And if Human be slain upon the field, 
None of the Turkmans will come forth to fight : 
Their general will writhe for grief of heart, 
And will not take the offensive in the war ; 
His host will tarry on Mount Kanabad, 
And we shall have to fight at disadvantage ; 
While should one of the nobles of this host 
Be lost so would my fame. The warriors 
Would have but broken hearts for this campaign, 
And would not tarry on the waste. 'Tis best 
Not to engage and foil the ambuscade. 
His troops may grow adventurous, seek fight, 
And march against us from their cramped position 

Then to Human : " Depart, thou art a boy 
Inaction, and intemperate of speech. 

33 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Thy words have made me know thee in and out. 

Hath none among the Turkmans wit to think 

Aright ? Know'st not that on the day of battle 

The savage lion smircheth not his paws 

With fox's blood ? Besides both hosts are ranked, 

All necks arc stretched for war, and all the chiefs 

Will gnaw their hands if only two engage. 

Let all advance and combat, host with host. 

Now go back to thine army and exalt 

Thy head before thy boyish chieftains, saying :— 

'I challenged oftentimes the Iranians, 

But no one stirred unless to heave a sigh,' 

This field of battle will exalt thy name, 

Piran too will fulfil thy whole desire." 

Human exclaimed : " What sort of chieftains then 
And warriors are all these ? I am reminded 
Of what a king said — one that ruled the world : — 
« Thou longest for a throne — stop that desire ! 
Or still long on resolved to face the fire.' 
Thou wishest not for war ; but know that one 
Who plucketh roses must encounter thorns. 
Thou hast no lion-man to counter me 
Before the host and wouldest by a shift 
Dismiss me, but to know me is to know 
That I reject thy guile." 

The warlike chiefs 
V. 1171 Said to Gudarz: "Thou shouldst send one of us 
To fight him," but Gudarz said : " Not to-day." 

Human, when he had had his fill of speech, 
Raged like a valiant lion; laughed and, turning 
His back upon the chief, sped toward an outpost. 
He strung his bow and flung four cavaliers 
Upon the meadow. When they saw from far 
The shots of that Turanian chief the guards 
Gave way and fled, attempting no resistance. 
He went toward the heights like one bemused, 

KAI K HUSH A U 

And laid the mountains prostrate with his shouts : 
He brandished round his head his spear and cried 
" Human, the son of Wis a, triumpheth ! " 

When his spear waved the blare of clarions rose 
Above the desert, and the exulting Turkmans 
Touched with their helms the orbit of the moon. 

Now when Human departed thus in triumph 
Giidarz was troubled at his insolence, 
And sorely vexed at that indignity. 
Rage and vexation tyrannised o'er him 
Whose warriors sweated under such disgrace, 
But still he drew this augury of good : — 
" The eagerness for blood is on their side, 
111 will be his who unto ill is guide." 
Then, casting round his haughty chiefs his eyes, 
He sought the fittest for the enterprise, 

How Bizhan heard of the Doings of Humdn 

Bfzhan was told : " Human the lion-like 

Came boldly to thy grandsire, having challenged 

The chiefs of both the wings. Not one went forth 

He then withdrew in anger and disdain, 

First having slain four horsemen of the host, 

And flung them to the ground despitefully." 

Bfzhan raged like a leopard ; his hands itched 
For combat with Human. He bade to saddle 
His favourite elephantine charger, donned 
His Ruman war-mail, quickly girthed Shabrang, 
And came, full of resource, before his father, 
To whom he spake about his grandsire, saying: — 
" My father ! said I not so, point by point ? 
' Giidarz, 1 I said, ' is failing in his wits ; 
Dost thou not see the change in him ? His heart 

* 4<> THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAVSI 

Is full of fear, his liver full of blood 
Through his exceeding grief for all his sons 
Slain and beheaded on the battlefield/ 
For proof — this Turkman boldly, lion-like, 
Came midst our "warriors to Gudarz, with spear 
In hand and shouting like a drunken man, 
And yet no horseman of this noble host 
Was fit to fight, to loft him on a spear, 
And make him like a bird upon the spit ! 
Array, my loving and most prudent sire ! 
My shoulders in the mail of Siyawush, 
For none but I may battle with Human, 
And cause his manhood to go up in dust." 

Gi'v said, " My prudent son ! give ear a while. 
I said to thee : ' Be not impetuous, 
And say not aught untoward to Gudarz, 
Because he hath experience and more wisdom. 
And is the leader of this noble host.' 
His cavaliers would fight an elephant, 
Yet bade he none to battle with Human ; 
But youth, as it would seem, hath made thee rash ; 
Thou hast set up thy neck and come to me 
With this request ; I am not of thy mind, 
And therefore let me hear no more thereof." 
v. 1 173 Bfzhan replied : ,; If thou accedest not 

To my desire thou wouldst not have mc famous, 

I will go girded to the general, 

And smite my breast for leave to fight Human." 

He wheeled his charger, hurried to Gudarz, 
Saluted him, and told him all with sorrow:— 
" paladin of our world-ruling Shah, 
Versed in affairs, thou glory of the throne ! 
I see this cause for wonderment in thee, 
Though I am one of little wit, that thou 
Hast made a pleasance of this battlefield, 
And purged thy heart of warfare with the Turkmans ! 

KAl KHUSRAU 

41 

The seventh day is hard at hand : but day 

And night bring rest, not action, for the sun 

Beholdeth not the warriors' scimitars, 

And no dust riseth in the face of heaven ! 

More wonderful than that- — from yonder host 

One Turkman— one misguided wretch — came forth, 

Whom God who giveth good, but bringeth ill 

On evil men, led from Tiiran in arms 

In order to be slaughtered by thy hand, 

And thou didst spare the netted onager ! 

I do not understand thy policy. 

Supposest thou that, if Human were slain 

E'en now, Piran would not come forth to fight ? 

Think not that ever he will be the first 

To move his army to the open field. 

Behold now I have bathed my hands in blood, 

And girded up my loins to fight Human, 

Whom, if the paladin will give me leave, 

I will encounter like a furious lion. 

Now let the general order Gi'v to give me 

The arms of valiant Siyawush, the helm 

And Ruman mail, unbuckling them himself." 

On hearing what Bizhan said and perceiving 
His courage and his wise advice Gudarz, 

Rejoicing, mightily applauded him, v. 11 74 

And answered : " Fortune ever prosper thee. 
Since thou bestrod'st the pardskin, crocodiles 
Have held their breath and lions sheathed their 
claws. 

Thou never restest but art first in tight 

And in adventures, faring gallantly 

And, like a lion, always conquering. 

Still ere thou challengcst Human think well 

If thou canst meet him on the battlefield, 

For he is a malignant Ahriman, 

And like a mail-clad mountain in the fray, 

42 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USI 

While thou art but a youth. Heaven scarce hath 
turned 

Above thy head. Thou lovest not thyself. 
Wait, and I will dispatch to tight with him 
Some veteran Lion, like a thundering cloud, 
To shower arrows down on him like hail, 
And pin his steel casque to his head." 

Bizhan 

Said : " Paladin ! a gallant youth should have 

Accomplishment. If thou saw'st not my fight 

Against Farud now is the time to prove me. 

I rolled up earth when fighting at Pashan. 

None hath beheld my back upon the day 

Of battle, and I am not fit to live 

If I have not such prowess as the rest. 

Now if thou dost deny me this, and say : — 

1 Adventure not thyself against Human,' 

I will complain of thee before the Shah, 

And give up belt and helm from this time forth." 

Gudarz smiled joyfully upon the youth, 
So like a noble cypress-tree, and answered : — 
" How fortunate is Gi v in such a son ! 
And may I ne'er forget the glorious day 
Whereon a virtuous mother gave thee birth. 
Pards' claws have proven impotent since thou 
Didst stretch thy hands to fight. Thou mayest meet 
Human, and may good fortune be thy guide. 
Now in the name of God who ruleth all, 
And by the triumphs of our warriors' Shah, 
Endeavour that destruction may o'erwhelm 
This Ahriman, God willing, by thy hand, 
v. 1 175 Now will I say to Giv : ' Give to Bi'zhan 
The suit of armour that he asketh for.' 
If thou shalt vanquish thine antagonist 
Thou shalt receive addition at my hands, 
And shalt be greater than Farhad and Giv 

KAl KHUSRAU 

43 

In treasure and in troops, in throne and crown." 

Thus spake the grandsire to the grandson— one 
Full of resource and ruse — who, lighting, kissed 
The ground and praised him. Then the paladin 
Called Giv. Talk passed about the youth and how 
He fain would combat in that royal mail. 
" Chief paladin ! " said to the sire the son, 
' This one is mind and soul and world to me ; 
His life is not so worthless in mine eyes ; 
I would not lose him down the Dragon's maw." 

" Fond one ! " Gudarz said, " think not thus of him. 
BlzhaiL though young and fresh, is led by wisdom 
In all things, and besides we should fight here, 
And purify the world of Ahrimans. 
We, whom the Shah commanded to take vengeance 
For Siyawush, may not heed kin or spare 
Our lives although the clouds rain swords of steel. 
We must not break Bizhan's heart for the fight, 
Or veil his hopes of fame. A youth if slothful 
Will prove but mean of spirit, dull of soul." 

Gfv t left without resource by such reply, 
Made yet one more endeavour to persuade 
His son, if haply he would shun the strife. 
The son replied : " Thou wilt disgrace my name.' 1 

Then Gfv said to Gudarz : '■ Chief-paladin ! 
When our own lives are put in jeopardy 

We cease to care about son, host, and treasure, v. 1176 

Bespect for, and command of, chief and Shah. 

I have a rugged time in front of me : 

Why should I sacrifice my life for him i 

Where are his own arms if he fain would fight ? 

He hath his mail : why should he ask for mine ? " 

The champion said : " I do not want thy mail, 
Think'st thou that all the warriors of the world 
Will seek for fame in thine accoutrements, 
And no chief aim at glory and renown 

44 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Unless he hath the arms of Siydwush ? " 

He spurred his charger from the troops around 
That he might quit them for the battleground. 

§ 13 

How Gic gave the Mail of Siyawush to B'&han 

Now when Bizhan had vanished from the host 
Gi'v's heart swelled up with sorrow, and repenting 
He wept blood in his anguish. See what grief 
And love a son may cause ! He raised his head 
To heaven with full heart and with liver stricken, 
And said to God : " Judge of all the world ! 
Vouchsafe to look upon this wounded heart. 
Oh ! burn it not with anguish for Bizhan, 
My feet are in the mire made by my tears ! 
Thou, the Omnipotent ! restore me him 
Unhurt." 

He went in sorrow for the youth, 
His son, and thought : " I pained him wantonly : 
Why did I thwart- his wishes ? Should ill come 
Upon him from Human, what good to me 
Are armour, sword, and belt ? I shall be left 
All anguish, care, and wrath: on his account 
My heart will ache, mine eyes will weep." 

He went 

Like dust, approached his son upon the field, 

And said : " Why dost thou grieve us thus and haste 

When thou shouldst tarry ? Doth the black snake rage 

So greatly on the battle-day that so 

The crocodile may issue from the deep ? 

And is the shining of the moon so bright 

As to eclipse the radiance of the sun ? 

Now thou art rushing on Human and turnest 

Thy head from my behest, adopting thus 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Thine own course, knowing not the task before thee J 

Bizhan replied : " Turn not, my valiant sire ! 
My heart from its revenge for Siy;iwush. 
Human is not of brass or iron, not 
A mighty elephant or Ahriman. 
He is a man of war. T challenge him, 
And backed by thy good fortune will not shrink. 
My fortune may be written otherwise 
Than I desire, the Judge disposeth all ; 
Since what must be will be grieve not nor trouble 
On mine account." 

Gfv, hearing his brave son 
Whose loins were girt for battle like a lion, 
Dismounted, gave to him the steed and mail 
Of Siyawush, and said : " If thou art bent 
On fight, and self-will lordeth thus o'er wisdom, 
Mount on this rapid charger, which will roll 
Earth under thee. My mail too will be useful, 
Since thou wilt have to fight an Ahriman." 

When he beheld his father's steed before him 
Bi'zhan alighted from his own like wind, 
Put on the mail and made the buckles fast ; 
Then, having mounted on that royal charger, 
Bound tight hia girdle, took his mace in hand, 
Chose from the army an interpreter — 
One well acquainted with the Turkman tongue — 
And went, like some huge Hod, with his loins 
Girt up to take revenge for Siyawush. 

Bi'zhan, or ever he approached Human, 
Beheld an Iron Mountain— one that moved — 
The desert all a-gleam with the cuirass, 
And under the cuirass an Elephant. 
He bade the interpreter shout to his foe : — 
" Turn back if thou art eager for the fray, 
Bfzhan is ready to contend with thee, 
And thus he saith r 1 O vuteran cavalier '. 

4 6 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

AVhy urgest thou thy steed about the field, 

Sent by Afrasiyab to come to ill ? 

Thou shouldest have the curses of Turan ; 

Thou art the miscreant that made the feud, 

And art the guiltiest in all the land ; 

I look to God for succour and I thank Him 

For bringing thee to meet me on this field. 

Draw in the reins of thine impetuous steed : 

My blood is boiling for revenge upon thee ; 

Select a spot whereon we may engage, 

And wheel with me on desert, dale, or mountain, 

Or else between the hosts' embattled lines, 

For name and fame, where friend and foe alike 

May look upon thee and of all the chiefs 

Approve thee most.' " 

Humiin laughed long and loud, 
And answered : " Luckless one ! thou trustest much 
Thy body haply weary of its head ! 
I will dispatch thee to the host so mauled 
That ChV shall be in pain and grief for thee, 
Soon will I separate thy head and trunk 
Like those of many of thy gallant kin. 
Thou wilt be in my clutches as a pheasant, 
When borne with shrieks and weeping tears of blood 
Above the cypress- branches by a hawk, 
Which sucketh at the gore and teareth out 
The plumes; but what availeth? Night is near. 
Go sheltered by its murk and T will go 
Awhile to mine own host, present myself 
At daybreak to the chief, and hurry back 
With head erect and dight to counter thee." 

" Begone," Bizhan replied, " and may a ditch 
Be in thy rear and Ahriman in front ! 
To-morrow, if thou comest to the field, 
Thy king and host shall ne'er behold thee more, 
And I will bear thy head so far away 

KAl KHUSRAU 47 

That thou shalt cease to trouble for thy troops." 

They wheeled and sought their camps and paladins, 
Then passed in troubled, vexed repose that night 
With hearts that were impatient for the tight. 

§ r 4 

How Htimdn came to Battle icith Btskan 

When morning breathed above the mountain-tops, 
And dark night's skirt was no more seen, Human 
Equipped himself, and told Piran: "I challenged 
Bfzhan, the son of Gi'v, and spent the night 
Preparing." 

Calling an interpreter, 
He mounted on his wind-swift bay and reached 
The appointed place, expectant of Bi'zhan, 
Who with his own interpreter anon 
Came dight for combat, riding Shabahang, 
Girt tightly, and advancing haughtily 
Like warrior-pard to battle. He was mailed 
Withal on his heroic breast, his head 
Shone with his royal casque. He thus addressed 
Hiiman : " O light of wit ! but yesternight 
Thou didst bear off a souvenir from me — 
Thy head ! To-day my hope is that my sword 
Will part it from its body in such wise 
As with thy blood to turn the dust to clay. 
Thou mayest take to heart an apologue : 

The mountain-sheep once said to the gazelle : — v. nSo 

'Though all the plain were silk no more again 

The snare once 'scaped for me ! Be thine the plain.' " 

Human replied : " To-day Gfv's heart shall break 
For his bold son. Wilt thou contend with me 
Upon Mount Kanabad, or make the scene 
Raibad, and far from aid 011 either side ?" 

48 THE §fiAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Bi'zhan said : 41 Why this talk ? Fight where thou 
wilt." 

They left Mount Kanabad, rode toward the waste, 
And reached a desert-spot where they beheld 
No footprints left, by man, where vultures flew not, 
And lions trod not, far from host and help. 
There they agreed : " Whichever shall survive 
Shall spare the fallen man's interpreter 
To bear his king the news of what befell." 
This done, they lighted from their steeds, made 
fast 

The divers straps and buckles of their mail, 
And fixed their saddles firmly: then the twain — 
Those wrathful warriors with vengeful hearts — 
Next gat their bows in order for the fray, 
And hurried forward to the battleground, 
v. usi They strained their bows until the notches touched, 
Discharged their poplar arrows tipped with steel, 
Then took their spears, and wheeled to left and right 
While bits of armour flew and spearheads gleamed. 
Watch how the fortune of the day inclined ! 
Their mouths gaped like a lion's with the heat ; 
Both longed for rest and water ; presently 
They damped their burning rage and stayed to breathe, 
Then took their shields and trenchant scimitars : 
Thou wouldst have said : " The Day of Doom hath 
come !" 

But steel was foiled by steel, though in the fight 
The flashing sword-strokes showered down like fire ; 
Each hero failed to shed the other's blood, 
And both their hearts were still insatiate. 
They took their maces, having done with swords, 
And passed all measure in their combating ; 
Thereafter they essayed each other's strength : 
Each grasped his foeman's girdle and endeavoured 
To drag him from his steed and fling him down. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

49 

The stirrup-leathers in the violent strain 

Snapped, but each rider still retained his seat, 

And neither of them had the mastery. 

Then both the warriors lighted from their chargers, 

And breathed themselves a while. The interpreters 

Held the two steeds. Anon the combatants 

Rose like fierce lions, wearied as they were, 

And gat them ready for a wrestling-bout. 

Thus from the morning till the shadows lengthened 

These champions, on the poise of hope and fear, 

Contended with each other; neither turned V. 1182 

His head away ; their mouths were parched, their bodies 

A-sweat with toil and with the blazing sun : 

Then by consent they hastened to a pool. 

Bi'zhan, when he had drunk, arose in anguish, 

All shaking like a willow in a gale, 

And, in his heart despairing of sweet life, 

Called upon God and said : " Omnipotent ! 

Thou knowest all within me and without. 

If thou perceivest justice in my cause, 

Both in my challenge and my purposes, 

The strength which I possess take not away, 

And give me self-possession in the fray." 

§ '5 

How H&m&n was slain by Btzhan 

Human, distressed and raven-black with pain, 
Advanced. All wounded as they were both came 
Like pards to fight again, strove mightily, 
And first one, then the other, touched the ground. 
They put forth all their strength and artifice 
Until high heaven's own artifice was seen, 
For, though Human was mightier, all prowess 
Is but defect in him whose sun is set. 

VOL. IV. D 

THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDA USt 

Bi'zhan put forth his hands like leopard's claws 
To catch upon Human where'er he could; 
His left hand gripped his foeman's neck, the right 
His foeman's thigh, he bent that mighty Camel, 
Raised him aloft, and flung him to the ground ; 
Then holding down Human, and drawing forth 
A dagger, swift as wind beheaded him, 
And flung away his carcase like a dragon's. 
Human lay rolled in dust, the waste ran blood. 
Bfzhan surveyed that elephantine form, 
Fall'n like a stately cypress in a meadow, 
v. 1 183 With great amazement, turned away, looked up 
To Him who ruleth o'er the world, and said : — 
" O Thou that art above both place and time, 
Above the revolution of the sky ! 
Thou and Thou only rulest o'er the world — 
A matter which no wisdom can gainsay. 
I have no portion in this doughty deed, 
Not having pluck to fight an elephant, 
Yet have cut off Human's head in revenge 
For Siyawush, and my sire's seventy brothers. 
Now may his spirit be in thrall to mine, 
His body rent to pieces by the lions." 

He bound Human's head to the saddle-straps 
Upon Shabrang and thing the trunk to dust, 
With armour shattered and with girdle snapped, 
His head in this place and his trunk in that. 
The world is ail imposture, nothing more, 
It will not help thee when distress is sore ; 
It showeth fairly, but it doth not so, 
And therefore let thy heart its love forego. 

Human, the son of Wisa, being slain, 
The two interpreters ran to Bfzhan 
To worship him as Brahmans do an image 
In Chin. He looked around the battlefield, 
And saw no way save past the Turkman host t 

KAI KHUSRAU 

And fearing lest that murderous multitude, 
When they perceived the upshot of the fight. 
Should come forth in a mountain- mass to battle 
While he was not prepared to fight alone. 
He put from him the mail of Siyawush, 
And donned instead the armour of Human ; 
Then mounted on the elephantine steed, 
And took in hand the banner* of that prince. 
He went his way with blessings on the place, 
His wakeful fortunes, and the glorious field. 
Human's interpreter, when he beheld 
His master's fate, was fearful of Bizhan, 
Who said : " Fear not, I will observe the pact. 
Go tell thy host what thou hast seen me do." 

He went what while Bfzhan with bended bow 
Rode rapidly toward Mount Kanabad. 
Now when the Turkman outposts aaw afar 
The lance and standard of that chief of Tur, 
They sprang up cheering in their joy and sped 
A cameleer like smoke to tell Pfran : — 
" Human, such is our king's victorious fortune ! 
Ia hasting from the place of combating, 
The standard of the franian chief is down, 
His corpse defiled in dust and drenched in gore," 

The whole host shouted and their leader listened 
To hear Human's approach — a short-lived joy, 
And then the hail descended on their heads ! 
Anon the interpreter returned and told 
What he had seen, and tidings reached Pfran : — 
"The glory of the empire is bedimmed." 

From the Turanian army rose a cry. 
The warriors unhelmed themselves; the world 
Grew overcast ; there was no brightness left, 
And all their frantic words availed them not. 

Now when Bfzhan in crossing 'twist the hosts 
Approached the shadow of tho great king's throne, 

52 

THE SHAHNAma OF FIRDAUSl 

At once that warrior of lion-heart, 

The army's refuge, dipped the sable standard* 

The watchmen of the Iranian host, perceiving 

The sable banner thus inverted, turned 

Their faces toward the paladin and raised 

A shouting from the watch-tower. They dispatched 

Post haste a cameleer to tell Gudarz: — 

" Bizhan is come in triumph, lionlike. 

And carrieth the sable flag reversed." 

Gfv bare himself meanwhile like those distraught, 
All clamorous and restless everywhere, 
In quest of news of his heroic son, 
And sorrowed greatly at a time of joy. 
Then tidings came. He hurried forth. He saw 
The well-loved face. He lighted from his steed — 
v - Il8 5 His fitting course — and wallowed, head in dust, 
Returning thanks to God, then clasped his son 
Upon his breast, that youth so wise and brave. 
Thence, still returning thanks, they sought Gudarz, 
Whose grandson lighting from his steed, which bare 
Human's head in its saddle-straps, presented, 
With mail besmirched with blood and head with dust, 
The armour, steed, and head of brave Human. 
" The paladin," thou wouldst have said, " will pour 
His soul out," he rejoiced so o'er Bfzhan, 
And then began to praise the Judge of all 
For that good omen and unsleeping fortune. 
He next gave orders to the treasurer, 
And said : " Bring forth a crown and royal robe 
With patterns jewelled on a golden ground, 
The crown and belt with pendent pearls like suns." 
He likewise brought ten chargers with gold bridles, 
And ten boy-slaves fay-faced and girt with gold, 
Bestowed them on Bizhan, and said : *' Brave Lion ! 
None else had laid this Dragon low. Our host 
Hast thou delivered by thy sword and hand, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

53 

And broken too the Turkman monarch's heart, 

While our own warriors like lions ride 

On steeds which plunge and caracole in pride." 

§ 16 

How NasUhan made a Night-attack and was slain 

On the other side Piran all pain and wrath, 

With heart grief-stricken and with eyes all tears, 

Dispatched a messenger to NasUhan 

To say : " O famous warrior, good at need ! 

Make ready to engage and dally not 

O'er this our brother's blood, attack the Iranians 

By night and make earth a Jihun with gore. 

Lead forth ten thousand cavaliers of proof, 

Armed for the fray. Thou mayst avenge Human, 

And bring our foemen's heads between the shears." 

Then NasUhan : " So will I do for I v. 1 186 

Will make earth like Jihun." 

Two-thirds of night 
Passed, then the plain shook with the tramp of horse- 
men — 

The Turkmans eager to exalt their necks 

By that emprise. As Nastihan led on 

His vengeful powers toward the Iranian host 

He came, as dawn was breaking, to a place 

Where from the look-out the Iranian watchman 

Saw him, and shouted to the scouts : " A force 

Is on us from Turan ! " 

They lightly sped 
Toward Gudarz to say: "A host approacheth 
As 'twere a gliding stream ; thou wouldest say:— 
' They have not speaking tongues.' The general knoweth 
How men are wont to make a night-attack." 
Gudarz said to the troops : " Be vigilant 

54 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSl 

And bright of heart, let every ear be open 
To any indication of the foe." 

With that he called the son of Giv — Bizhan, 
The swordsman and heroic paladin — 
And said : " Success and fortune are thine own, 
The hearts of foes are shivered at thy name. 
Take whom thou needest of my famous troops, 
Go lion-like, receive the foemen's charge, 
And by thy courage bring the heavens down." 

Bfzhan chose out a thousand cavaliers, 
And, when the two hosts met, they drew their maces ; 
Murk gathered overhead wherefrom dark dust 
Descending veiled the Turkman soldiers' eyes. 
Bfzhan, when he perceived the Turkman host 
Thus hidden, bade his warriors string their bows, 
v, 1 187 The war-din rose. Encountering Nastihan 
He saw the flag of Wfsa's family 
Borne by that chief whose steed an arrow reached 
Sent from the broad breast of Bizhan. The charger 
Fell in its anguish, then Bizhan came up, 
And with his mace smote Nastfhan's helmed head, 
Brained it, and there an end. Then cried Bfzhan : — 
" If any soldier handle aught but mace 
And scimitar, then will I break his bow 
Across his head because although the Turkmans 
Have fairy faces they are naught in fight." 

His warriors took courage at his words, 
And every one unsheathed his glittering glaive ; 
The air seemed rusty, earth a sea of blood. 
Most of the Turkman troops blood-boltered fell 
Beneath the chargers' feet, the others fled 
Toward their host, the Iranians in pursuit. 
Pfran missed Nastihan, the earth turned black 
To him, he bade the scouts : " Dispatch at once 
A cameleer to the Iranian host 
That he may get me news of Nastihan, 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

55 

Or if not I will pluck out both his eyes." 

They instantly dispatched a cameleer, 
Who went, beheld, returned to them in haste, 
And said : " Lo ! Nastfhan is on the field 
With other chieftains of the Turkman host, 
Beheaded, lying like an elephant, 
His body blue with bruises from the mace I" 

Pfran swooned at the news, then tore his hair 
And wept, rejecting food, repose, and sleep. 

He rent his Human vest, and wailings rose, y. n88 

He said : " Almighty Ruler of the world ! 

In sooth I must unwittingly have sinned 

Against Thee, for Thou hast deprived mine arms 

Of might, so darkened are my star and sun ! 

Alas ! that lion-quelling hero-taker. 

That cavalier so young and brave and goodly — 

My brother dearer to me than my life — 

The head of Wfsa's race, my brave Human, 

And Nastfhan, that Lion fierce in fight, 

To whose claws any leopard was a fox ! 

Whom have I left upon the field ? My course 

Is to lead out the host." 

He blew the trumpets, 
Bound on the drums, and with the heaven murky, 
The earth like ebon, sun and moon obscured, 
Marched from Mount Kanab&d. G-udarz too sounded 
His clarions, marched, and took up his position. 
Full in the centre, guarded by blue falchions, 
Was Kawa's flag, while chiefs intent on strife 
Stood ready with the lance and ox- head mace. 
As morning dawned the hosts advanced, and battled 
Till daylight failed, then both, still fit for fight 
And eager for revenge, returned to camp. 
The Iranian general occupied Rafbad, 
And could not rest for his anxiety. 
"A mighty battle have we fought to-day/' 

56 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

He said, " and slain the leaders of the foe, 
And now methinketh that Piran will send 
His king a cameleer and ask for succours 
In this campaign against me, and I now 
Will send intelligence to Kai Khusrau." 

§ 17 

How Gddarz asked Aid of Khusrau 

V. 1189 Giidarz then called to him a letter- writer, 
And said : " I have some secrets to impart, 
And if thou openest thy lips thereon 
Thy tongue will bring disaster on thy head." 

He had a letter written to the Shah 
About the host, the parley with Piran, 
The ambassage of Giv to proffer league 
And love, and show Piran heaven's purposes, 
The answer that Piran had made to Gfv, 
And to the wise and valiant chiefs, and how 
A Turkman host had pard-l'tke followed him 
Up to Mount Kami-bad to battle there; 
Then how they had prepared a battlefield, 
And had relieved their hearts by combating. 
Gudarz gave to the Shah a full report 
About Human and valiant Nastihan, 
And how Bizhan upon the day of fight 
Had served the mace-men of Turan ; that done, 
Gudarz spake thus about Afrasiyab : — 
" He hath approached the river ; should he cross 
Thou knowest that we cannot stand against him, 
O monarch of fran, lord of the world ! 
Unless Khusrau shall come to our support, 
And set a crown upon his warriors* heads; 
But if Piran shall come alone the troops 
Will need no help; Khusrau shall learn how I — 

KAI KHUSRAU 

57 

His slave — have by his fortune used Piran ; 
And furthermore the conquering Shah perchance 
Will condescend to let his servant know 
What Rustam — binder of the DiV — hath done, 
And what Luhrasp hath done, and wise Ashkash." 

The letter being tied and sealed, Gudarz 
Bade bring out many rapid courier-steeds 

With royal saddles. Then he called Hajfr, v. u^o 

Who though a youth, was prudent as an elder, 

And said : " Wise son ! give alt thy heart hereto, 

For thou, if ever thou desire my favour, 

Canst win it now. Charged with this missive speed 

Forth like a blast, repose not night and day, 

Nor pausing e J en to scratch thy head, and bear 

The Shah my letter," 

He embraced Hajfr, 
Who came out from his glorious father's presence 
And, calling from the host two of his kindred, 
And mounting them upon swift-footed steeds, 
Left his sire's camp-enclosure. With relays 
Of horses for each stage they ate, reposed, 
And slept upon their steeds both day and night, 
And on the seventh day approached the Shah. 
One went to tell Khusrau, who sent Shammakh 
With many haughty chiefs to welcome them, 
" lion-taking son of paladins ! " 

Shammakh said, "what hath chanced that thou hast 
come 

Thus all unlooked for to the worldlord's court?" 

Then at the Shah's command they raised the curtain, 
And let Hajfr ride through, who, when the Shah 
Perceived him, rubbed his visage in the dust. 
Khusrau much greeted him, then made him sit 
Beside the throne, and asked about Gudarz, 
The leaders, and the rest. The prudent youth 
Of ardent soul gave him the great men's greetings, 

55 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUS1 

Informed him fully of the host's affairs, 
Then gave the letter of the paladin, 
v. 1 191 Xhe monarch called a scribe and had it read, 

Then filled Hajfr's mouth with bright gems and ordered 

The treasurer, " Bring dinars forth and brocade," 

Who, when he heard the order, brought forth sacks 

Of coin and emptied them upon Hajfr 

Until his head was hidden ; then produced 

A suit of king's apparel — cloth of gold — 

And crown inlaid with jewels. Furthermore 

They led before Hajlr ten noble steeds 

With golden saddles, while Hajir's companions 

Were clad in robes of honour and received 

Dinars and drachms and goods of every kind. 

They left the throne-room with the Shah and sat 

A night and day with wine and revelry. 

Khusrau considered every circumstance. 

And, having bathed his head and body, went 

First, freshly garmented in robes of service, 

While both his eyes were raining like a cloud, 

At dawn before the Ruler of the world ; 

Then, stooping lowly with his head abased, 

He offered praises to the righteous Judge, 

To whom he prayed for Grace and victory, 

And pleaded for the crown and throne of might. 

He plained to God about Afrasiy&b, 

And in his grief poured water from Ms eyes ; 

Then, like a stately cypress, left the place, 

And sat upon the throne in all his Grace. 

§ 18 

Tlie Answer of Khusrau to the Letter of Gtidarz 

The Shah then called a wise scribe and dispatched 
A fair reply yet harsh in some regards. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

59 

He lauded first the paladin and said : — 
" Live evermore and may thy soul be bright ! 
Blest be the prudent captain of the host, 
The heedful and discerning warrior> 

Lord of the iron mace and blue steel sword, v. 1192 

Who brighteneth Kawa's flag". Praise be to God, 

The Worldtord, that our troops have been triumphant. 

When fortune shone on thee it quickly raised 

Smoke from the foe. Thou sayest first : ' I sent 

Some noble, prudent warriors with Giv 

As envoys to Piran. What good advice 

I gave him ! But his ill-conditioned mind 

Kejected alL He would not league with me ! 1 

A king whose officer made war on him 

Gave utterance to a saw in this regard : — 

' When subjects turn from right, and do instead 

Such ill as this, their lives are forfeited.' 

Piran, I knew, would not give up the struggle ; 

■Still for past kindness' sake I did not seek 

War to the death with him. Now time hath shown 

That all his sympathies are with Turan ; 

Afrasiyab is all the world to him, 

So strive no longer to divert his love, 

For he preferreth sentiment to wisdom. 

And no endeavour will bring grass from flint. 

That thou didst speak the foeman fair is good ; 

Fair speech befitteth well the noble race. 

And next, from thy description of the encounter 

Between the warriors with their massive maces, 

Of our good fortune, of the favouring sun 

And moon, and efforts made, I am persuaded 

That thy might will secure the victory ; 

But know that strength and courage are from God ; v. 1193 

Acknowledge this and give Him all the praise. 
And thirdly, thou hast said: ' Afrasiyab 
Will cross the river, having marched thereto 

60 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Because Pi'ran hath sent to ask for aid/ 
The matter is so, and we thus reply: — 
1 Know, my thoughtful sage, mine officer 
Approved in all things ! that Afrasiyab 
Abideth not by the Jihun to fight 
With us ; the Khan is marching forth from Chfn 
Upon him ; he is ambushed on both flanks, 
Or rather, through the innumerable host, 
Whose chiefs are now disposed around Turan, 
As Rustam — refuge of the warriors 
On battle-days — Luhrasp and deft Ashkash, 
Afrasiyab is threatened on all sides, 
And therefore marcheth to the river-bank 
If he advanceth from his present ground 
He will resign his country to the foe. 
And fifthly, since thou askest me for tidings 
About the chieftains whom thou lovest well, 
Know, and may fortune ever go with thee, 
That on the road that lion Rust-am took 
The dust hath risen from Kashmir and Hind, 
While from Kh&razm, whereto the shrewd Ashkash 
Went, hath gone up the battle-cry, and Shida 
Defeated sought Gurganj ; and where Luhrasp 
Marched all the chieftains gave him passage, yielding 
The Alans as well as Ghuz which now are ours. 
So if Afrasiyab shall cross Jihiin 
These noble chiefs will take him in the rear, 
And leave him nothing but the wind to grasp. 
He will not then advance, be well assured, 
And leave to foes the towns and broad champaign, 
His fair support, whate'er Pfran may urge. 
V. 1 194 He openeth not his lips by day or night 

Unknown to me. May that day ne'er be blest 
When he shall lead his host across the river, 
And may none see the day of gloom and straitness 
When he shall get the upper hand of us. 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

Now will I order Tiis, that ardent chief, 

To mount the drums, seize Dahistan, Gurgan, 

And lands around, and thus exalt his head 

High as the sun ; ourself will follow Tiis 

With throne and host and elephants to aid thee. 

Meanwhile cosfront Piran, array thy troops, 

And offer fight; Human and Nastihan 

Are gone ; regard his hands as full of grief, 

And if he challengeth our chiefs to combat 

Decline not thou. If he should offer battle 

Be of good courage, meet him like a lion. 

Dread not a conflict with Afrasiyab; 

Take heart and turn not from him ; thou wiLt win 

If thou hast confidence, and God, I trust, 

Will favour me. Methinketh that when I 

March to support you ye will have your will 

Upon your foes and raise your own names sunward." 

He sent the host much greeting from Kaus 
And Tiis. The letter with his seal imprest 
He handed to Hajir whom too he blest. 

How Khuartm arrayed the Host 

Now, when Hajir had left the' presence, Khusrau 
Took counsel with a scribe. The Shah's great love 
Toward his troops turned all his thoughts to war. 
He said thus : " If Afrasiyab bestir 
Himself and cross the river he will drive 
My troops back; my course is to go myself." 

Thereat he called to him the head of all 
The scions of Naudar, commanded him 
To lead a host to Dahistan forthwith, 
To occupy the whole waste of Kharazm, 
Watch o'er Ashkash upon the day of battle, 

62 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI 

And enter into combat like a pard. 
Then from the court of Tus the tymbals, trumpets, 
And kettledrums resounded, chief and host 
Marched forth, and earth was hidden by the horse-hoofs. 
" The circling sun/ 1 thou wouldst have said, " stood still, 
Frayed by those cavaliers !" Tus marched two weeks, 
And light departed from the sun and moon, 
While news about the Shah's own movements spread, 
For, when Tus left, Khusrau prepared to march. 
With five score thousand of the chosen chieftains, 
Toward Gudarz with elephants and drums, 
The Grace and crown and throne of king of kings. 
Hajir sped proudly on before Khusrau, 
Glad, with a robe of honour, and in favour ; 
Thou wouldst have said: "He rolleth up the earth." 
As he approached the camp the clarions blared, 
And all the golden-girdled chiefs went out 
V. 1196 To welcome him, In presence of Gudarz 
He told of his reception by the Shah, 
What graciousness and interest were shown, 
What magnanimity and statesmanship, 
Spake of the Shah's affection for his troops, 
And how his face cleared when he heard the message. 
Hajir then gave the letter of Khusrau, 
With greetings from the nobles, to Gudarz, 
Who, hearing of the monarch's graciousness, 
And having pressed to his own eyes and face 
The. letter, broke its seal and handed it 
When open to a scribe to read to him. 
The chieftain called down blessings on the Shah, 
And kissed the ground on hearing his commands, 
Spent all the night consulting with his son. 
And took his seat at dawn for audience. 
Then all the men of name throughout the host 
Came helmed before the throne, anon Hajir 
Produced the letter of the glorious Shah, 

KAl KHUSRAU 

63 

And gave it to a scribe who read it out. 

Gudarz brought into camp all steeds at grass, 

And bade the quarter-masters do their office, 

Allowing them the keys of all his hoard 

Of mail, dinars, gold casques, swords, crowns, and girdles ; 

For since the moment for revenge had come 

He poured that wealth out on the host till horse 

And foot were furnished ; thus an army gathered 

As 'twere a mountain; earth shook at the tramp 

Of wind-foot steeds, the hearts of lions quaked 

At troops so whelmed with iron, gold, and silver. 

He bade them to prepare for strife and give 

Their hearts and ears to compassing revenge. 

They marched past their brave chief by companies — 

A mountain-mass of men — while he reviewed them, v. m 

Saw earth obscured and heaven azure-dim, 

And said thus ; " From Jamshfd's days until now 

None hath arrayed the like with steeds and arms, 

Gold, silver, elephants of war, and Lions. 

Hence with God's aidance wilL I ride to Chin." 

This said he called the noble and the wise 
To entertain them at a drinking-bout 
With harp and pipe, and with the men of might 
Discussed the manner of the corning fight. 

§ 20 

How Pirdn wrote io Gudarz Son of Kuhwdd 

News of the Shah's proceedings reached Pi'ran 

And filled his heart with terror ; he took refuge 

In knavery, deceit, and artifice, 

And then — his sole resource— he bade a scribe 

Indite a letter to the paladin, 

Wherein he proffered first great praise to God — 

His refuge from the potent Div — then said : — 

6 4 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

" In public and in private my one prayer 
To God, the All-ruler of the world, is this — 
To bail this scene of strife between our hosts. 
If it be thou, Gudarz ! that hast desired 
Thus to fulfil the world with thy revenge, 
Thy lust is sated. Say, what wouldst thou more ? 
Behold how many of my gallant Hearts, 
Of mine own nearest kindred and my Lions, 
Hast thou flung — headless trunks — upon the dust ! 
Hast thou no reverence, no fear of God ? 
From love and wisdom thou hast turned thy face, 
And now that thou hast gained thine end 'tis time 
For thee to sicken of revenge and be not 
Henceforward bold in bloodshed. Do thou mark 
v. 1 198 How many of the horsemen of Iran, 

And of Tiiran, have perished in this war ! 

It is high time that ruth should come to thee, 

With some remission in the quest of strife. 

In seeking vengeance for one dead and gone 

How many living ones wilt thou behead ? 

Now, since the past will not return to us, 

Sow not fresh seed of vengeance in the world, 

Vex not thy spirit nor expend thy body. 

But cease from bloodshed, for the dead are cursed 

That leave a long-enduring name for ill, 

And whensoever sable locks turn white 

Small hope of life is left. If our two armies 

Again encounter on this field I fear 

That thou wilt see none left on either side ; 

Lives will be lost, but vengeance will survive, 

While after all who knoweth which will win, 

Which be the luckless, which the illustrious ? 

But if thy resolution to shed blood, 

And make a fight of lions with me here, 

Is all to win advantage for Iran, 

So sa}- and I will send a messenger 

KAI KHUSRAU 

To ask Afrasiyab for his commands 
That so we may divide earth, and lay by 
The strife as in the days of Mindchihr 
When every one observed the settlement. 
Declare what lands thou elaimest for Iran 
That we may move the Turkmans out of them, 
From settlement and desert, field and fell, 
Aa Kai Khusrau, the righteous judge, shall order. 
First will I draw toward the hills, and quit 
fran from Ghareha to the land of Bust, 
Quit Talikan as far as Fariy;lb 
Including Andarab, and cities five 
As far as Bainiyan, and all the coasts, 
And Kaian dwelling-places, of Iran, 
The country of Giirkan, that favoured spot, 
Thus titled by the master of the world, 
With all from Balkh as far as Badakhshan 
That beareth indications of his sway ; 
While, lower dowrn, the desert of Aimri 
And Zam shall be included with Khatlan, 
Besides Shingan, Tirmid, and Wisagird, 
Bukhara and the cities round about. 
Proceed moreover to the land of Sughd ; 
None will claim aught thereof. To valiant Rustam 
I yield Nimruz and will withdraw the troops. 
Allowing him free access to the East, 
And all as far as Hind ungrudgingly. 
Kashmir, Kabul, and Kandahar with all 
That fronteth Sind shall likewise bo included. 
The Alans and parts invaded by Luhrasp, 
And all between them and Mount Kat', I yield, 
Without strife or contention to Khusrau, 
With all the region threatened by Ashkash. 
This done I will recall from every side 
My troops, and swear to be thy foe no longer. 
Thou ktiowest that I have bocn friendly, true, 
VOL. IV. E 

66 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

And upright. I will send Afrasiyab 
Intelligence that we have ceased from strife; 
Do thou moreover look on us with favour, 
And in thy kindness write Khusrau a letter 
To say that I have made thee overtures, 
And vie with thee no more in shedding blood. 
When we have ratified the covenant 
I will dispatch the treasures which Khusrau 
Demanded, and he too perchance will stop 
His warlike operations. Afterward 
V. 120P I will send hostages with goods of all sorts. 
And by a friendly, just, and sacred treaty 
Will sew the eye of feud up with the hand 
Of good faith, broken in the great Shah's time 
By evil-natured Tur and savage Salm, 
When Faridun was well-nigh crazed with grief 
Because the illustrious Iraj was slain. 
What thou requirest else be good enough 
To state, then write and tell the Shah of all. 
Think not because I speak thee fair : ' These people 
Are giving way/ I only speak in love ; 
Mine object is to make a happy ending. 
My treasures, troops, and military fame 
Surpass thine own, but this persistent strife, 
And impious bloodshed, cause my heart to burn 
Upon the troops' account, and I would stop 
The feud : besides I stand in awe of God 
Both in my public and my private life, 
Who as the Judge will not approve ill deeds, 
But utterly destroy our fields and fells. 
Now if thou turnest from these words of mine, 
Arid seekest war against me to the death, 
Condemning me though I am innocent, 
And not regarding aught that I can say, 
Since justice and injustice are all one 
To thee, and thou wouidst further spread the feud, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

67 

Choose out some chiefs that wield the massive mace, 

And I too will select among - my troops 

Such warriors as are needful for the strife. 

These will we pair for combat. Let us twain 

Encounter likewise on the battlefield. 

Those innocent of bloodshed then perchance 

Will find repose from strife. Those whom thou holdest 

As guilty, those that grieve thy heart, will I 

Bring forth to thee upon the day of battle. 

Moreover thou shalt make a covenant 

That if thou shalt prevail to shed our blood, 

And if the Turkman warriors' fortune sinketh, 

Thou wilt in no wise harm my host or burn 

My country and my throne, but give my troops 

Free passage home and ambuscade them not. 

If I prevail, my good star bear me fruit, 

I will not ambuscade the Iranians : 

"We will not be injurious or vindictive, 

But give them access to their king and country 

Without the loss of property or life. 

If thou consentest not, but wouldst prefer 

A general engagement, set thy host 

In order and the blood shed in the fight 

Shall rest upon thee in the other world." 

He tied the letter and then called his son, 
A chief of brazen body hight Ruin, 
To whom he said : " Go to Gudarz ; address him 
In prudent words and list to his reply," 

Rum, when he had left the chieftain's door, 
Came with ten horsemen and inspired by wisdom 
In haste to where the paladin was camped, 
And, when he saw Gudarz, drew near to him 
With folded arms and head inclined. That chief 
Rose, clasped Ruin, and asked about Piran, 
The host, the mighty men, the king and realm. 
Rufn then told his message and delivered 

68 

THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI 

v. 1202 The letter, -which a scribe approached and read 
With all its goodly language and advice, 
And wise Firan's proposals for a peace. 
Then said Giidarz : " Son of the general, 
And happy youth ! first thou must be our guest, 
And then thou mayest ask for ray reply." 

They cleared a camp-enclosure for his use, 
Providing 1 him a lodging fit for kings. 
Gtidarz, filled with anxiety of heart, 
Sat with his counsellor — the twain, no more — 
While they prepared an answer, picking out 
The fairest words. A sennight thus elapsed 
While minstrels, wine, and harp were in request, 
And daily when the sun sank in the sky 
Ruin was called to share the revelry. 

§ 2' 

The Ansicer of Gudarz to the Letter of Pirdn 

Giidarz upon the eighth day called a scribe, 
And bade him writ© the answer, planting thus 
Another tree of feud. He offered praise 
To God, then point by point made this response : — 
" Thy letter I have read and understand 
v. 1 20 j Thy purposes. Ruin too hath delivered 
Thy message, but I wonder at thy writing 
Such goodly words, because thy tongue and heart 
Accord not, and thy soul is poor in wisdom. 
In all affairs thou speakest courteously, 
And usest phrases so instinct with grace 
That any one that is not really wise 
Would rest with confidence on thy good will; 
Yet art thou like those salt-marsh tracts which look 
Afar like water when the sun is on them ; 
But lies and trickery are no avail 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

69 

When it is time for mace and. spear and lasso. 

I will have naught with thee but war and strife, 

This is no time for parley and rejoinder, 

For glozing, league, and love, but to discern 

The aspect of the sky, and mark to whom 

God will give strength, the sun, and conquering fortune. 

Still hear me, and let wisdom be thy guide; 

First for thy saying : ' I, through loving kindness, 

Through fear of God, and recent happenings, 

Wish not for war; my heart is strait and darkened 

By all this coil.' Thy tongue and heart agreed not 

What time these words were passing through thy lips, 

Because if justice had possessed thy heart 

Thou hadst not been the foremost to shed blood, 

When Giv first came to thee with prudent nobles, 

Brave officers, and other clear-brained chieftains, 

With fair discourse and prudent counselling^, 

Thou didst array thine army for this fight, 

And leave thine own land to invade another. 

In every conflict thou hast been aggressor. 

This tardy wisdom should have come before, 

And peace been thy beginning not thine end ; 

But thine ill disposition and ill strain v. 1204 

Are forcing thee to quit the path of wisdom, 

Because the nature of thy race is evil — 

A race that is inured to treachery, 

Thou knowest how high-born Iraj was used 

By Tur in envy of the crown and throne ; 

How ill came on the earth through Tur and Salm, 

How vengeance and injustice spread around ; 

How Faridun in agony of heart 

Had open lips to curse them night and day ; 

And how by help of God who giveth good, 

Who tendered and supported Minuchihr 

In seeking vengeance and in justifying 

The world by Grace of his supremacy, 

7o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USt 

Tur was requited for his wickedness. 
Thus much time passed until the evil strain 
Had reached Afrasiyab through men of name 
But little wit; he sought a new revenge 
On Minuchihr, Naudar, and. Kai Kubad, 
Did that whereof we wot to Kai Kiius, 
Seat dust up from the homesteads of Iran, 
And lastly with the blood of Siyawush 
Prepared the base of new and lengthy strife. 
Thou hadst no thought of justice at the time 
When Siyawush though guiltless yielded up 
Sweet life. How many great men of Iran 
With crown and state have perished in this feud ! 
Thou sayest next : ' thou with hoary hair ! 
How long wilt thou be girded to shed blood ? ' 
Know, veteran deceiver who hast witnessed 
The ups and downs of life ! that God hath given me 
A length of days and an illustrious fortune 
That I, in vengeance on the day of battle, 
Might send the dust up sunward from Turan ; 
And all mine apprehension is that God. 
May end my life ere I have been revenged, 
And trodden underfoot your fields and fells. 
Thou sayest thirdly: ' I see not in thee 
The heart-felt fear and awe of holy God. 
v. 1205 Dost thou not realise that wanton bloodshed 
Will be thine own undoiDg in the end V 
If for thy gentle words I turn from fight 
Almighty God will ask at Question-time 
About the days that I have spent on earth, 
And say : ' I gave thee leadership and strength, 
AVith manhood, wealth, and skill; why didst not thou 
Gird in the presence of the Iranians 
Thy loins in wreak for Siyawush ? ' And when 
The just Judge asketh me about the blood 
Of all those seventy noble sons of mine, 

KAl KHUSRAU 

How shall I tell the Maker of the world 

The motives that seduced me from revenge ? 

And fourthly as to wreak for Siyawush 

Thou s'ayest, ancient prince ! ' For one now dust 

*Tis wrong to take the lives of living men.' 

Remember all the foul deeds which have been 

Most grievous to the heart iu every way, 

The deeds which ye have wrought upon fran, 

What numbers of our monarchs ye have wronged, 

What treaties have been broken, feuds begun, 

And your eternal instancy in ill ! 

How can I think of these things and make peace, 

For all along thou bast held evil good ? 

Thou sayest fifthly : ' I will covenant 

With thee, will give the chiefs as hostages, 

Send treasure to Khusrau and end my travail.' 

Know then, chieftain of the Turkman host ! 

That we have no such orders from the Shah. 

He bade me fight, avenging Siyawush 

With blood for blood, and if I disobey 

My soul will shame before him. If thou hopest 

That he will look with favour on thy words 

Send him Lahhak and that stanch liege Rum 

As hostages, with treasures such as may be, 

At once ; the road is open to Iran. 

And sixthly for the lands, the* populous 

And fertile provinces, of which thou said'st : — 

'We will evacuate and surrender them,' 

God hath forestalled thee ; if thou knowest not 

I will explain. Luhrasp hath all the west 

As far as to the marches of Khazar ; 

Toward the south, aud all the way to Sind, 

The world is like a glittering Ruman glaive. 

For gallant Rustam with his trenchant sword 

Hath raised therefrom a Resurrection -blast, 

And hath despatched the prince of Hindustan, 

72 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Together with his black flag, to the Shah. 
In Dahistan, Kharazm, and in those parts 
Where Turkmans ruled, the plains are cleared of those 
Who made the raids; Ashkash hath hailed on Shfda, 
Hath brought him down nigh unto death, and sent 
Khusrau withal the captives and much spoil. 
Now here the contest is betwixt us twain. 
Thou hast beheld these famous Lions' prowess 
And mine ; if thou wilt meet me face to face 
I will release thee from all further parley, 
For by God's power and at the Shah's command 
Will I submerge this battlefield in blood. 
Observe, O famous leader of the host ! 
The revolutions of the sun and moon, 
For heaven hath nigh enthralled thee and the head 
Of Turkman fortune is within the shears. 
Mark what the Maker will bring down upon thee 
For thine ill deeds ; time hath uncloaked thy crimes, 
And ill is manifest, requiting ill. 
Be very heedful, ope thine ears and hearken 
To wise men's words. Know that this host so famed, 
These hundred thousand horsemen drawing swords, 
And all in quest of honour and revenge, 
Will not be charmed oft' from this battlefield. 
I reach the seventh point. Thou 'stablishest 
v 1207 Thine honest} 7 by oath. *Twixt me and thee 
There is no talk of league : no dealings hath 
Thy soul with wisdom since in all thy compacts 
Thou leavest honesty in tears. Thine oath 
Wrecked Siyawush. May no one trust thy words. 
Thou didst not save him in his evil day, 
Much as he called on thee in his distress ! 
The eighth point is, thou say'st : ' My crown and throne, 
My valour and my fortune, are more great 
Than thine, and I possess more men and treasure. 
But out of love for thee rny soul is sad.' 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Methinketh that thou hast without a doubt 

Proved me in war ere this. Thou know'st if thou 

Hast found me wanting in the day of battle. 

Now scan me well again : in wealth and crown, 

In throne and prowess, haply I exceed thee 

At every point. And lastly thou hast said 

* Choose champions for the fray ; I too will bring 

Exalted horsemen from the Turkman host, 

For, out of tenderness toward my troops, 

I would not spread injustice and revenge,' 

Thou dost not proffer this in tenderness, 

Because thou knowest thine own heart and purpose. 

The Shah, the world-lord, will be wroth with me 

If I shall cause our armies thus to part ; 

Before me is a guilty host wherewith 

My people are aggrieved, the Shah will never 

Allow me to shun tight on such a plea. 

First in full force our armies like two mountains 

Must shock in battle. Let them be arrayed 

In line upon the space which is between them, 

And haply victory may declare itself ; 

But if not, we will choose a ground and champions, 

And my word shall be kept though thine be broken. 

But if thou wiLt not with thy present force 

Encounter me, then ask thy king for more, 

And carefully consider thy position, 

As for the wounded absent from the ranks, 

Among thy kith and kindred and allies, 

Wait till the leeches make them whole, for now 

To gain time is of consequence to thee. 

If thou wouldst have of me delay or respite 

Well— but if battle set thy host in order. 

I speak thus that upon the day of fight 

Thou mayst not dare excuse thyself and say 

'Thou earnest on us unexpectedly, 

Didst lie in wait, and gavest us no time.' 

74 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

If I shall seek revenge a hundred years, 
Or now at once, 'tis all the same to me. 
There is no hope that I shall leave this feud ; 
Tis ever present to me night and day." 

Whenas the letter of reply was done 
The envoy fairy-like appeared therefor 
With girded loins upon a rapid steed, 
Escorted by a band of cavaliers. 
Ruin the warrior lighted from his horse, 
And introduced his escort to Gudarz. 
The chieftain ordered that the archimages, 
And all the famous sages of the host — 
Wise men and shrewd — should come to him forthwith. 
The paladin bade read to them his answer. 
The great men, having heard that cogent letter 
Recited by the well-graced scribe, ignored 
The sense and counsel of Piran, and thought 
His rede but shallow, while they praised Gudarz, 
And hailed him as the paladin of earth. 
He sealed and gave the letter to Ruin, 
Son of Piran of Wisa's race, and bade, 
What time they rose to go, prepare a robe 
Of honour — Arab steeds with golden trappings, 
And crowns and scimitars with golden sheaths, 
v. 1209 He gave Ruin's companions gold and silver, 

With crowns and belts to those of rank for them. 

Ruin departed with his little troop 

Back to his host. Arrived, he came before 

His sire, as was his duty, and bent low 

Before the throne. The veteran Piran 

Embraced him. When Ruin had given the answer, 

Sent by the general of the Shah, he told 

What he himself had witnessed. Then a scribe 

Read out the letter to the paladin, 

Whose cheek upon the instant grew like pitch. 

His heart became all pain, his soul all dread ; 

KAl KHUSRAU 

He recognised that his decline was near, 

But took it patiently and silently, 

And kept it from his troops whom afterward 

He thus harangued : " Gudarz is obstinate ; 

His heart is instant with him to avenge 

The slaughter of his seventy sons beloved. 

If on the past he base revenge anew 

Shall I not gird me to avenge forthwith 

My brothers and nine hundred famous heads 

Lost to their bodies on the day of battle, 

For in Turan there is no cavalier 

To gird him like Human and Nasti'han— 

That shadowing cypress-tree which in a breath 

Evanished from the copse ? And now to arms 

I will not leave the Iranians field or fell, 

But, by God's strength and our sharp scimitars 

Bring down upon that folk the Day of Doom." 

Such in the herds of horses as were fit 
He brought at once to camp from every side. 
He mounted all the infantry and gave 
To each of them two chargers fit for service. 
Then, opening a hoard laid up of yore. 
Began to make disbursements from his store. 

§ 22 

IIqw Ptr&n asked Sua- our from Afnmtjdb 

This done, Pfrdn, about the hour of sleep, 

Sent to Afrasiyab a messenger, 

Shrewd, well advised, and old, of ready speech, 

A warrior, a cavalier, and brave, 

Thus saying : " Go, say to the Turkman king :— 

' righteous king who seeketh diadems ! 

Since first the vault of yonder lofty sky 

Revolved above the sad, dark dust of earth 

76 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAVSI 

No king like thee hath sat upon the state ; 
The name of king hath not pertained to any ; 
None else is worthy of the throne, to bind 
The girdle on, and compass crown and fortune. 
The Ruler of the world will send up dust 
From those that meet thee on the day of battle. 
A slave am I and guilty in thy sight 
In that I did not follow thy shrewd counsels. 
The Shah hath been much plagued by Kai Khusrau, 
And all through me, but yet I am not conscious 
That I did wrong ; it was the will of God ; 
What hath been hath been, much talk will not profit. 
The monarch, if he seeketh good in me, 
Will spare and pardon. Now I send him tidings 
How heaven hath been dealing with his slave. 
I led mine army to Mount Kanabad, 
And checked the progress of the Iranians : 
Upon their side a mighty host advanced, 
Led by Gvtdarz and other generals ; 
No greater host since Minuehihr was Shah 
Hath issued from Iran against Turin. 
They took up their position at Raibad 
Upon the mountains. For three days and nights 
The hosts faced one another like two leopards. 
We did not take the offensive for we thought : — 
' Perchance the foe will march out on the plain.'' 
V. mi Gudarz however was content to wait, 

And would not leave the mountains ; then Human, 

My brother, that world -conqueror, longed for fight, 

And went to challenge the Iranians ; 

1 know not what possessed that lion-man. 

The son of Giv came out, encountered him, 

And having slain him turned my head with sorrow. 

Who ever knew a lofty cypress-tree 

Killed by a blade of grass ? This broke the hearts 

Of our chief men, and happiness was dashed 

KAI KHUSRAU 

77 

By grief ; moreover noble Nastihan, 

With twice five thousand proven cavaliers, 

Departed from me at the break of day, 

And perished by the mace- blows of Bi'zhan. 

Grieved to the heart I led the army on, 

And went forth shouting to the battlefield. 

We fought in force till night rose o'er the hills, 

But when nine hundred of the king's great men 

Were headless on the field, and of the rest 

The more part had been wounded to the heart 

With grief, their bodies by the scimitar, 

The Iranians gat the upper hand of us. 

Their purpose of revenge is absolute, 

And I am fearful that the turning sky 

Will wholly cease to favour us. Since then 

111 news have reached me and perturbed me more, 

That Kai Khusrau is coming with a host 

To aid his general in this campaign. 

If this prove true the king is ware that I 

Can not encounter them unless he set, 

With his fierce troops, his face toward Iran, 

Take part in this campaign, avert this evil, 

And make revenge the girdle of his loins, 

For if we perish by the Iranians' hands 

None will be left to take revenge for us ! " 

The messenger on this went like a blast. v, 1212 

He mounted swift as fire upon a courser — 
A mighty beast whose feet were like the wind — 
And journeyed, till he reached Afrasiyab, 
Without a halt for breathing, rest, or sleep. 
He came swift as a blast before the king, 
First kissed the throne, then told his tale. The 
monarch, 

On hearing from Pfran such woeful tidings, 
Grew sorely troubled and his colour changed. 
He was heart-broken, grieving for the slain, 

78 

THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSl 

Whose hap became to him a lasting sorrow ; 
He grieved too that his army had been worsted, 
And country harried. War pressed everywhere, 
The world was strait to him in his distress ; 
Still, having heard the message of Pi'riin, 
And seeing that his troops maintained their ground, 
He blessed the general and showed joy. His heart 
Grew brighter. Then he called the messenger, 
Bestirred himself, took counsel all that night. 
And when at dawn he donned the crown anew 
He gave the messenger an interview. 

§ 23 

Tht Answer of Afrd&iy&b to the Lette}' of Pirdn 

The monarch bade the messenger return 
To brave Pfran, that man of prosperous counsels, 
With this reply ; " warrior famed and true ! 
Since thy pure mother bare thee thou hast made 
Thyself my shield. Thou standest first with me, 
And rankest o'er the other paladins, 
V. 121 3 Still choosing toil in all affairs with all 

Thy wealth for me, conducting hosts Iranward 

From Chin, and blackening foes' hearts and fortunes. 

Prince and the paladin of earth art thou ; 

A thousand blessings be upon thy soul ! 

Thy friendship dateth from Pashang and Tiir ; 

The heaven raiseth not a paladin, 

The army seeth not a general, 

And no sage girdeth up his loins, like thee. 

First for thy saying : ' I was most to blame 

For Kai Khusrau's escape and his revenge/ 

Know thou that I, the king, am not aggrieved, 

And never laid the matter to my heart, 

So let not thine be straitened for this cause 

KA! KHUSRAU 

Or fear disgrace. God will accomplish what 

He hath decreed, and needeth not a teacher. 

Call not Khusrau my grandson : it is false, 

Because his Grace deriveth not from me. 

I will not ever be a grandsire to him, 

Or take advantage of our kinsmanship. 

In this affair of his none is to blame ; 

Nor do I strive against the Omnipotent: 

What happened was according to His will ; 

Why then should my heart be aggrieved at thee ? 

And secondly thou speakest of the army, 

And of the bias of sky, sun, and moon ; 

But heaven's bias is not all one way, 

It giveth sometimes sorrow, sometimes joy ; 

Be not heart-broken then on this account, 

Impose not chains like these upon thy soul. 

Thus is it written in respect of warfare : 

The sky abandoneth all sides in turn, 

It raiseth to the sun and easteth down. 

To talk about the slain is but to dream ; 

Forgo not to take vengeance for thy brother; 

The heart in anguish for a brother's loss 

Will not be cured by leeches' remedies. 

Thou sayest thirdly : ' Kai Khusrau hath left 

His throne and cometh with his army hither.' 

The tidings that have reached thee : ' Kai Khusrau 

Is coming from his kingdom,' are not true, 

For it is Tus, the general, with his troops 

That is upon the march to Dahistan ; 

May no one ever look upon the day 

When he shall outstrip us, for I myself 

Will lead the host o'er the Jib tin at dawn. 

I will not spare Gudarz, Khusrau, or Tus, 

Or throne, or crown, or troops, or kettledrums, 

But so attack Iran that none shall see 

The Shah's throne more. I will not leave the world 

8o 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USt 

For Kai Khusrau, but take him unawares, 
And let his mother mourn a headless son, 
Unless the will of heaven be otherwise. 
Oh noble veteran ! God hath suffered thee 
To lack for naught ; all that thou wouldst is thine 
Of men f of treasure, and of might of hand. 
A splendid force of thirty thousand men— 
Intrepid, shrewd, and gallant cavaliers — 
Behold ! I have dispatched to reinforce thee, 
And brighten thy dark mind, for ten Iranians 
Would look but small compared with one of these. 
On their arrival tarry not a day, 
Deprive Gudarz of both his head and crown, 
Drag off with thine own steeds the very mountains 
Whereon he hath entrenched his host, and when 
Thou hast the victory be not slack in bloodshed." 
v, 1215 The envoy, having heard the monarch's message, 
Came to the captain of the host. Piran, 
On hearing, called the troops. The messenger 
Repeated all the words, which gave good heart 
To all and freed them from their griefs, albeit 
Pmin was inly sorrowful of soul, 
His heart was full, his fortune soiled, he saw 
His king's host shrunk by battle everywhere, 
He feared withal an onslaught by Khusrau, 
And thus he prayed : <f Thou, the Omnipotent ! 
What marvels happen in this life of ours ! 
No outcast he whom Thou hast set on high ! 
Save Thee there is no world-lord, none abiding. 
Khusrau for instance ! Who supposed till now 
That he would be a king ? How turning fortune 
Hath helped a self-made man! From withered thorns 
He bringeth forth fresh roses, and for him 
His sleepless fortune turneth dust to musk ! 
Do one more marvel: let that toble man 
Possess his soul in sorrow evermore ! 

KAl KH VSR A U 

Si 

Between two kings — a grandsire and a grandson — 
I know not why this battlefield is needed. 
What with two warlike monarchs of two realms, 
What with two armies serried face to face, 
How can I tell the issue of this strife 
And fortune's trend ? " 

Then wailing bitterly 
He prayed : " O glorious and almighty Judge ! 
If on this battlefield Afrasiyab, 
With other nobles of the Turkman host. 
Shall perish in the struggle, and the head 
Of all our fortunes shall be overthrown 
When Kai Khusrau shall come forth from fran 
For vengeance, and the world be turned to him, 
I am content to have my breastplate pierced, V, 1316 

And that the Omnipotent should take my soul. 
Ne'er may these eyes of mine behold the man 
That followeth the course that I have followed, 
For unto him whoso daily course is run 
In disappointment life and death are one." 

§ 24 

How the Irdniam and Turdniam fought a pitched Battle 

Now when the sun spread out its gold brocade 
The ocean of the plain of battle heaved, 
A war-cry rose from both contending hosts, 
And earth shook underneath the horses' hoofs ; 
On every side the troops advanced in force, 
And all the plains and hills were clad in mail. 
Both chieftains, both like leopards, mustered all 
Their powers for that encounter. Arrows showered 
Like rain descending from a darksome cloud. 
The world was like a winter's night 1 for murk, 

1 Mere literally " Like night (in the month) of lialmuiti." 

VOL. IV. F 

82 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

But what a murk ! Its rain was shafts and swords ! 

The earth was iron with the horses' hoofs. 

The warriors* breasts and hands were red with. gore. 

So many headless corpses strewed the field, 

That there remained no longer room to turn, 

Or passage for the horses' feet ; the earth 

Was tulip-hued, the air liky indigo, 

And waves ran high upon that sea of blood. 

Both chiefs said : " If our warriors thus maintain 

The fight by nightfall nothing will be left 

Save heaven, the world, and God !" 

Now when Piran 
Saw how the battle went he bade Lahhak 
And Farshidward: "Dispose in three divisions 
What troops ye have efficient to restore 
The fight, and let the shrewdest of the three 
Compose our rear while } r e march to our flanks." 
V. f2i; He bade Lahhak to lead his troops in mass 
Toward the heights, and FarsMdward withal 
His toward the stream, and raise dust o'er the sun. 

As those Turanian chiefs led on their men, 
Intent on fight, a watchman of Iran 
Sent forth a messenger to tell Gudarz, 
But he was with his army, on the watch, 
And when, along the route whereby they came 
To fall upon their foemen unawares, 
Lahhak and Farshfdward sent up the dust 
From both the flanks the Iranian cavaliers 
Closed with the foe and mixed the dust with blood, 
While messengers from all sides came in haste 
To tell the paladin, who looked to see 
What warriors he had still keen for fight. 
His noble son, Haji'r, that angry Lion, 
Was in reserve with shaft and sword ; Gudarz 
Bade him to go to Gfv, the army's Stay, 
Bid him send reinforcements toward the mountain 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

83 

And river, and withal leave in his stead 
Some valiant man and hurry to the front. 
Thereat the brave Hajfr girt up his loins, 
And sped forth to his brother with that charge. 
Gfv chose at once a man of high renown — 
A warrior named Farhad — and having called him 
Committed to his hands the chief command ; 
Then ordered Zanga, son of Shdwaran, 
With ten score valiant veterans to fall 

On Farshidward and raise the dust from stream v. 1218 

And mountain. Swift as wind he gave Gurgi'n, 

Son of Milad, two hundred with a standard, 

And said : " Lead hence thy glittering spears and maces, 

Display thy prowess and assail the foe, 

For their supports are broken and their chiefs 

Downhearted in the strife." 

Then to Bfzhan 
He said : " O lion-man ! a rending Tiger 
Art thou upon the battle-day, and now 
Thy lion-manhood will bestead thee well, 
For thou must fight the foe. Our army's hopes 
Are set on thee and thou must take the field. 
Spare not the enemy, expose thyself, 
The time for battle and revenge hath come. 
Go to the centre and engage Pfran, 
For all his country hath its stay in him, 
And he will burst his skin at sight of thee. 
If thou shalt conquer him our work is done ; 
May God and thy good fortune be thine aid. 
Then will our soldiers rest from toil and stress, 
Our world-possessing Shah will be rejoiced, 
Thou wilt obtain much treasure and much goods, 
And thy prosperity will be assured ; 

'Twill break the backbone of AfrUsiyab, V. 1219 

And fill his heart with blood, his eyes with tears." 
When Gfv had ceased, his son girt up his loins, 

8 4 

THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

And urged his steed on like Azargashasp. 
Those heroes fell upon the foemen's centre, 
As they were lions on a hunting-day, 
Bestriding windfoot steeds with outstretched necks, 
And satisfied the vengeance of their hearts. 
The horsemen and mailed chargers of Turan 
Were scattered by the onset o'er the plain. 
What numbers fell beneath the horses' feet, 
Their grave the lion, mail their winding-sheet ! 

§ =5 

How Qiv fought taith Pirdn and l\ow Giv's Horse jibbed 

When, from the rear, Rum, son of Piran, 
Observed the onset with its cloud of dust 
He issued from the mighty Turkman host 
With other nobles, as they had been wolves, 
And like a stout pard grappled with the foe. 
He struggled but prevailed not in the strife; 
Then flung away his Indian scimitar, 
And showed his back despairing of the battle. 

Pfran the chief with none of his own kin 
Stayed at his post amazed. Giv, seeing him, 
Wheeled to attack, and of the body-guard 
Speared four and flung them vilely to the ground. 
Pfran, the son of Wisa, strung his bow, 
And showered arrows on his enemy, 
While bold Gfv held his shield above his head, 
And with his spear came charging like a wolf, 
But, when he sought to fall upon Piran, 
v. 1220 His charger jibbed. Enraged he lashed his steed, 
And seethed, and cursed the foul, malicious Dfv ; 
Then with his shield of wolf-skin o'er his head, 
He dropped his spear, strung up his bow and drew it 
In hope to pin Pfran s hand to his shield. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

85 

Four times he hit Pfran's breast, thrice his steed. 
But neither horse nor rider suffered aught. 
Piran, on Gfv's companions drawing near, 
Fought yet more fiercely, charging him like smoke, 
To wound him and defeat his valiant troops. 
Giv too rushed forward and dishelmed Piran, 
But hurt him not, and Giv was vexed at heart. 
Bfzhan approached and said : " My glorious sire ! 
I heard our monarch say : ' Piran will fight 
In many a fierce engagement and escape 
The clutch of sharp-clawed Dragons, but Giidarz 
Will take his life at last.' Strive not so fiercely 
With him, my sire ! His time hath not yet come." 

Gfv's troops, brave men and full of wrath, came up 
Whereat Pfran turned toward his own array 
With groans, in dudgeon, and with livid face, 
And, when he reached Lahhak and Farshidward, 
Said : " my men of name, brave Hearts, and swords- 
men ! 

It was because of moments such as these v - "at 

That erst I fostered you upon my breast. 

Now when the host hath come forth to the fight, 

And when the world is black to us with foes, 

I have not seen one come before the host, 

And battle there for glory ! " 

At his words 

The chieftains' hearts breathed vengeance. As they 
fared 

They said : " If we have not unsullied souls 
We need not bo in terror for our bodies. 
Bind we our skirts together, 1 ne'er must wo 
Relax our girdles from this strife.' 1 

They went, 
Lahhak and Farshidward, to challenge Gfv, 
And brave Lahhak thrust at his girdle, hoping 
Cf, EHI, i. 537, and the passages there quoted. 

86 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

To bring him from his saddle headlong down. 
The coat of mail was shivered by the shock 
Yet Giv lost not his stirrups, and his spear 
Pierced the swift charger of Lahhak. It fell 
In agony. Lahhak regained his feet 
While Farshidward rode up and with his sword 
Struck at the spear of Gfv as quick as wind, 
Clave it in twain and gloried in the stroke. 
Giv, when he saw the blow of Farshidward, 
Drew from his girdle his huge mace and bellowed 
Like some fierce-breathing dragon. With one blow 
He sent the falchion from his foeman's hand, 
Struck him another blow upon the neck, 
And rained a fiery shower upon his body, 
Which made his blood from mouth to liver tingle, 
Took all his strength away and dazed his head. 
While Gfv was thus engaged Lahhak bestrode 
As rapidly as smoke a wind-foot steed, 
And those two warriors with mace and spear 
All Lion-like attacked Giv, many a blow 
Rained on him from those valiant chieftains' maces, 
V. 1222 Yet sat he firmly on his pard-skin saddle, 
And that contention frayed him not a whit. 
Now when Lahhak and Farshidward encountered 
Such stout resistance from that lion-man 
They said to one another in fierce wrath : — 
" 111 hath descended on us from the stars ! 
He on yon saddle hath a brain of brass," 
Thou wouldest say, " on chest but lion's hide ! " 

Giv called to his companions for a spear, 
And wheeled to right and left in his attack, 
But neither of the twain was overthrown. 
He thought : " A novel task confronteth me ! 
The chiefs have come not from Turin, but di'vs 
Out of Mazandaran ! " 

Upon Giv's right 

KAI KHUSRAU 

87 

Guraza with a mace of Ruman steel 
Came dust-swift to encounter Farshldward. 
He rode a charger camel-like inbuilt, 
And aimed a blow ; the wary Turkman ducked, 
And with his spear struck at Guraza's belt, 
But failed to pierce the mail. Then sword in hand 
Bizhan came lion-like to help Guraza, 
And smote upon the helmet Farshidward, 
Whose prowess rent the earth. Bizhan then sought 
To clutch his foeinan's helm with his right hand ; 
His foeman stooped ; Bizhan's attempt was foiled. 
Behind Bizhan came Gustaham in haste, 
And other nobles of f ran withal 
Nigh the Turanian host, with anxious hearts 
And eager for the fight. Andan'man 
Came rushing dust-like to encounter them. 
And let fly with the mace at Gustaham 
To break his ribs ; be parried with his sword, 
Which snapped in twain and filled his heart with 
fear. 

Hajir came up to aid those warriors, 
And showered arrows on Andariinan, 

Whereof one struck the saddle, piercing through v. 1223 

The horse's mail, and horse and life grew strangers, 

The rider disengaged himself, held up 

His shield above his head, and rose crestfallen. 

The Turkmans shouted, and their cavaliers, 

Who charged like divs, made shift to bear him off 

In presence of the foe. From morn, till night 

Rose o'er the hills, the horsemen on both sides 

Kept sending up the dust of war, and mixed 

The earth with blood until all spirit went 

From steeds and cavaliers > and mouths gave o'er, 

For they could raise the battle-cry no more. 

»8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

§26 

How G&darz and Pirdn arranged a Battle of Eleven Rukhs 1 
Now, when earth's face turned ebon, from both hosts 
The drums and trumpets sounded, and the drummers 
Upon their elephants made haste to leave 
The scene of action. Both the hosts agreed : — - 
" Since night hath fallen we will quit the field, 
And in the morning choose us valiant men, 
Men that would send dust from the ocean's depths. 
Men of renown and eager for the fray, 
To meet in single combat ; thus our troops 
Will be relieved and shed no more the blood 
Of guiltless folk." 

This settled, they withdrew, 
And thought that they had made the long road short. 
The two chiefs, both perturbed at that last fight, 
Turned from the strife, one toward Mount Kanabad, 
The other toward Raibad, Gudarz sent out 
His scouts. The troops were galled by mail and helm, 
Their hands and falchions were adrip with blood ; 
They loosed the fastenings, put oiF mail and casque, 
V. 1224 And, with their bodies freed from iron burdens, 
Began to feast and drink. Then young and old 
Alert went to the paladin for counsel. 
Gfv said : " My father ! what strange hap was mine 3 
When I had broken through the foemen's ranks, 
And come upon Pi'ran, my charger jibbed, 
And would not stir a foot. Thou wouldst have said 
That in my wrath I should behead my friend. 
Then was it that Bizhan recalled to mind, 
And told me of, a presage of the Shah's 
That by thy hand Piran will die." 

" My son I " 
Gudarz replied, " my hand will take his life 

1 See p. 7. 

KAI KHUSRAV 

89 

Assuredly, and in God's strength shall I 
Avenge on him my seventy sons beloved." 

Gudarz then viewed the host and saw it worn 
With bloodshed, stress of war, and combating, 
And, grieved to see his noble folk thus wan, 
Dismissed them to recruit. They "went their ways, 
And at the dawn returned equipped and vengeful. 
They greeted him : ** Famed paladin of earth ! 
Hast risen refreshed by sleep ? Dost purpose fight ? " 

He answered : " Noble and illustrious chiefs ! 
Be instant, all of you ! by night and day 
In blessings on the Maker, for till now 
The war hath met our wishes, Many a marvel 
Have I experienced, and known this world 

As one of changes. Many men like us V. 1225 

The sky hath fashioned, reaping what itself 

Sowed with delight. I instance first Zahhak, 

The unjust, who rose to kingship. How he straitened 

The world and yet its Maker suffered him ! 

Vile as he was, and noted as a tyrant, 

The breezes wafted Mm supremacy ! 

Thus many years passed over his ill-doings ; 

Then God sent evil on the miscreant, 

The Judge endured no longer his injustice, 

And raised a just man to dispose of him. 

The glorious Faridiin, that righteous Shah, 

Girt up his loins to win the empiry, 

Unloosened all the coil of Ahriman, 

And decked the earth throughout with righteousness. 

From miscreant and ill-disposed Zahhak, 

A man vituperated by our Shahs, 

The taint descended to Afrasiydb, 

Who looketh not upon the face of good. 

When he enlarged his vengeance on Iran 

He left the path of justice, law, and Faith ; 

At last he slew the noble Siyawush, 

go 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

And robbed our country of the breath of life. 
When Gfv came to Tiiran how many hardships 
Awaited him ! his bed was dust, his pillow 
A stone, he lived on game, wore leopard-skin, 
And wandered like a madman till he found 
The traces of Khusrau and did him homage. 
When they had set their faces toward Iran, 
And news reached fierce Pirdn, he with his host 
Sped after to destroy them by the way. 
And did what harm he could, but Gods protection 
Sufficed. Then in revenge for Siyawush 
Our army marched toward the Kasa rud, 
v. 1226 And at Ladan, when mighty hosts had gathered, 
And at the camisado of Pashan, 
How many of my sons were slain before me 
While all our chiefs lost heart ! Piran again 
Hath come to fight and now confronteth us, 
But feeling weak he will procrastinate 
By ruse and parle till reinforcements come. 
Now he is challenging our chiefs to combat, 
And we must be prepared, for if we show 
Unreadiness or weakness he will find 
Excuse of some sort to avoid a battle. 
If they will fight us let us send the dust 
Out of their men of name : and if Piran 
Will keep his word and meet us on the field 
I swear to you that I will fight and give, 
White-headed as I am, my body up 
For slaughter in the presence of our troops. 
I and the brave Piran, Ruin, and Giv, 
Will quit ourselves like men, for none abideth 
For ever here, our fame alone will stay, 
And best it is to leave a lofty name, 
Since death will fling its lasso at us all ; 
The end is one to die or to be slain, 
We can but little trust the turning sky ; 

KAI KHUSRAU 

9 

And by the self-same token do ye likewise, 

Armed with your lances and man-slaying swords, 

Gird, all of you of any name, your loins 

For vengeance, for our foemen's fortune falleth, 

And we must strike at once. Human who fought 

With brave Bfzhan had no peer in Turan ; 

But since when fortune turned he was o'erthrown, 

Beheaded wretchedly, and rolled in blood, 

We need not fear them or withdraw ourselves. 

If single combat pleaseth not Piran, 

And he shall lead his army forth like dust, 

We too must go forth like a mountain-mass, 

And counter him for, since our foes are downcast 

And fearful, sure am I that we shall gain 

The mastery and make them reek to heaven." 

The noble veterans blessed him, saying thus : — 
" O chieftain, true of heart and pure of Faith ! 
Ne'er since God made the world hath man beheld 
A paladin like thee. E'en Faridim — 
The ruler of the world — had no such servant. 
Thou art the army's stay, the Shah's chief captain, 
Through thee the warriors exalt their holms. 
Thou hast devoted children, life, and goods, 
And what can Shahs ask more of their commanders? 
All that the Shah required of Fariburz, 
And Tus, he will behold achieved by thee. 
We are thy slaves; our hearts are full of love 
For thee. If now Pfrdn shall bring a thousand 
Against our ten, see which will turn from strife ! 
But should he come to fight on plain and mountain 
In full force we are all heart-sore for vengeance, 
Our loins are girt for war. Oh ! may wc give 
Our lives for thee ! To that we all are pledged." 

Gudarz was bright of heart at this, and cried : — 
" paladins of our earth-ruling Shah ! 
Such ever is the wont of warriors, 

92 run shAhnAma of firdausi 

Of noble Lions and brave cavaliers." 

He bade the troops to mount and gird themselves 
For fight, dispatched sun- faced Farhad to lead 
The left wing, where Ruhham had been, and sent 
v. 1228 Katmara, a descendant of Karan's, 

In haste to lead the right wing in the stead 
Of Farfburz, and ordered thus Shidush : — 
" My son and ready minister in all ! 
Be thy place in the rear with Kawa's flag, 
And troops to give support to all the rest," 

He then commanded Gust ah am : " Go to, 
Lead for the nonce, assume the chief command, 
Be watchful, prudent, and the army's stay." 

He issued orders : " Let no man advance 
Beyond his post, look ye to Gustaham, 
And be both night and day upon the saddle." 

A cry rose midst the host, the soldiers mourned, 
And hastened to Gudarz, dust on their heads, 
Because their leader with his hoary hair 
Had girt his loins, and went to fight in person. 
Gudarz called Gustaham, gave him advice, 
And said to him : " Be thou a trusty guard 
Against the foe, be watchful night and day 
In mail and ready for attack, unhelm not, 
For, if thou shalt begin to be remiss, 
Sleep will assail thee, and the sleepless foe 
Will fall upon thee while thy head is nodding. 
Maintain a watchman on the mountain-top, 
And let the soldiers feel themselves secure. 
If from Turan by night and unawares 
They fall on us by way of ambuscade 
Thou must display the valour of a man 
And warrior's prowess. Should ill tidings come 
About us from the army of Turan — 
That they are slaying us upon the field, 
And bearing to Turan our trunkless heads — 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

Avoid a battle and abide three days, 

For on the fourth will come the famous Shah 

To help with Grace and power." 

Gustaham 

Received the proffered counsels and, resolved 
To act with loyalty, this answer gave : — 
"I will obey thy bidding like a slave." 

I 27 

How Pirdn harangued liis Men of Name 

Since that last fight disastrous to Turan 

The troops were sorry and dispirited, 

Sons with wan cheeks lamented for their sires, 

And brothers were in grief for brothers slain ; 

Thus were they full of mourning and in dudgeon : 

High heaven loured above them. When Pi'ran 

Perceived that all his host was as a flock 

Bent by a ravening wolf he called the chiefs, 

And spake at large : " Experienced warriors, 

Worn, young and old alike, with combating ! 

What majesty, what rank and dignity, 

Are yours in presence of Afrasiyab ! 

Ye have a name for glory and success, 

Ye had the world at will, but now, because 

Defeated once, ye will not fight at all ! 

Know that if we retreat in cowardice 

The lusty leaders of fran will come 

With missive maces in pursuit, and lord 

And liege see none of us alive again. 

Now put away these terrors from your hearts, 

And bear your griefs with equanimity. 

There is a saying current with archmages : — 

' It is the part of God to conquer always. 1 

As for the world 'tis full of ups and downs, 

94 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

And such that we walk fearfully therein. 

This host that now attacketh fled from us 

Erewhile, Let all of you that have regard 

For country and for child, for life and kindred, 

Gird them for vengeance on the Iranians, 

Gudarz hath made a compact with me, saying : — 

' 1 will make choice of chieftains from the host, 

Then let us set our champions face to face, 

Allowing both the armies to repose.' 

If he shall keep his compact, and produce 

His chieftains at their stations, be it so ; 

Or if he shall advance to fight in force 

We will go forth with eagerness to battle. 

Then if we give our heads up to the sword 

There is a day for birth, a day for death ; 

Or if not I will set their heads on stakes ; 

The turn of fortune may be either way. 

I will behead the man that disregardeth 

These words of mine." 

At once the warriors answered : — 
" paladin of great Afrasiyab ! 

Though from of old thou hast had throne and treasure 

Still hast thou chosen travail for our sakes, 

Girt up thy loins before us like a slave, 

And givest son and brother to be slain. 

Why then should we, thy slaves, avert our heads ?" 

They spake and left the presence of Pfran, 
And every one made ready for the fray. 
They spent the livelong night in taking order 
For all things as their prudent chief had bidden. 
At dawn the sound of trump and pipe arose 
Before his tent- enclosure, and the chiefs 
Were in the saddle with their bows and arrows. 
Thou wouldst have said : " Earth maketh for itself 
An iron veil of horseshoes." Then Piran 
v. 1231 Said to Lahhak and Farshi'dward : " Great chiefs ! 

KAI KHUSRAU 

95 

The safety of the army of Turan 

Must be your care upon this battlefield. 

Set ye a watchman on the mountain-top 

To watch by day and count the. stars. If ill 

Should come upon us from the turning sky, 

And it shall wholly cease to favour us, 

Be ye not hasty to engage in battle, 

But fall back swift as smoke upon Turan, 

Since none, or few, except yourselves are left 

Of Wisa's seed, for all the rest are slain." 

With bitter tears and heart-felt grief they clasped 
Each other to the breast and then departed 
With lamentations on their several ways. 
Piran the chief, full of revenge, rode out 
Upon the field and raised his battle-shout. 

§ 28 

How Gudarz and Pir/tn chose the Warriors for the Battle 
of the Eleven Rukh$ 

Rran perceived Gudarz and held a parley. 

"Wise paladin," he said, "how many souls 

Thou torturest! But will it benefit 

The soul of Siyawush to cause Turan 

To reek ? His soul is with the good in heaven ; 

Now that he resteth why not rest thyself ? 

Two armies hast thou flung upon each other 

Like elephants beheaded. All the troops 

Of two realms have been slaughtered, and 'tis time 

For thee to quit the battlefield. The world 

Is void of men. We battle coldly. Why 

Must thou destroy the guiltless ? Let us make 

A pact. If thou desirest so revenge v. 123: 

Advance thy soldiers from the mountain-foot, 

And come thyself before them j then perchance 

96 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIR DA USt 

Thou wilt attain the vengeance that thou seekest. 

We — thou and I — will wheel upon this field 

Of battle and the others in like manner, 

And those of us who gain the victory 

Shall sit on thrones with every wish fulfilled. 

If I shall perish by thy hand forbear 

Revenge upon the soldiers of Turan, 

"Who shall submit to thy commands and give 

Their chiefs as hostages for their good faith ; 

But shouldst thou perish by this hand of mine, 

Together with the nobles of thy host, 

I tight not with thy troops, and they have naught 

To fear from me." 

Giidarz, on hearing, marked 
How fortune darkened all Piran's endeavours, 
First offered praises to the Omnipotent, 
Then, calling to his mind the noble Shah, 
Made answer : " I have heard thee, famous chief! 
Throughout, In that way did Afrasiyab 
Get profit from the blood of Siyawush — 
Speak out, turn not away — when they cut off 
His head as 'twere a sheep's what time his heart 
Was full, his liver pierced ? Afrasiyab 
Thereafter sent a cry up from f ran 
With all his slaying, raiding, strife, and turmoil. 1 
'Twas on thine oath that Siyawush relied, 
And lightly didst thou give him to the wind ; 
Then when my son approached thee afterward 
Thou didst reject my counsel, and make ready 
In fiery haste for war. My prayer hath been, 
Both publicly and privily, to Him, 
Who ruleth o'er the world, that I some day 
Might meet thee in the fight ; and now that thou 
Hast come there is no room for tarrying, 
So let us twain, with our hoar heads, contend 

1 Cf. Vol. ii., p. 363. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Upon this battlefield. Do thou now choose 
A band of champions to encounter mine, 
Experienced chiefs with maces, swords, and lances, 
And let them strive together till they bring 
Their foe men's heads to dust," 

The Turkman chief 
Made ready and chose out ten cavaliers, . 
Who sped forth from the centre to the place 
Of combat, where no eyes were watching them. 
This was the compact made between the chiefs — 
That every Turkman warrior should encounter 
One from iran. They matched Gi'v with Gurwf 
As peers in strength and pluck — Gurwf, the son 
Of Zira, whom of all the foe the Shah 
Most loathed, Gurwi who, seizing by the beard 
The spotless Siyawushj beheaded him. 
With Farlburz, the son of Kai Kaus, 
Kulbad, the son of Wfsa, hastened out, 
Ruhham, son of Gudarz, went with Barman L 
In company but as antagonists, 
Guraza went with Siyamak, fierce Lion 
With snorting Crocodile. The old Gurgfn, 
A Lion too, went with Andarftnan. 
Ruin the brave, who robbed the world of lustre 
In fight, went with Bfzhan, the son of Gfv, 
Akh&st with Zanga, son of Shawaran, 
And Barta with Kuhram, the good at need, 
While Furuhil came forth with Zaogula 
With all speed from the centre of the host. 
Hajfr and Sipahram, as 'twere two dfvs. 
Sent up the war-cry on the battlefield, 
Gudarz, son of Kishwiid, paired with Pi'ran, 
And all were ready for revcngo and strife. 
The generals, as much opposed by duty 
As by religion^ were athirst for blood, 

1 Id. p. 119. 

VOL. IV. G 

9 8 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA (JSi 

And sware together not to quit the field 
v. 1234 Jill one of them had proved victorious. 

Between the armies and commanding them 
There were two hills, the one was toward iran, 
The other toward Turin, and to the plain 
Betwixt them went the lucky and the luckless. 

Giidarz said: "Let each warrior and man 
Of blood that conquereth his Turkman foe 
Bring from the spot his banner to this hill." 

Pi'ran, the chieftain, had his standard raised, 
And gave like orders, on the other height. 

Then they descended to the level ground, 
With girdles tightly girt for shedding blood, 
And with their lassos, falchions, bows, and arrows, 
Essayed all modes of fight. As for the Turkmans — 
Those gallant chieftains — had a mountain faced them 
They would have levelled it anon, so well 
They plied their heavy maces, swords, and shafts, 
And yet their hands were slack, for God had barred 
The door of might against them, they were trammelled 
"Within a net of bale for having shed 
Much blood without just cause, their chargers jibbed,' 
And thou hadst said of them ; " Their feet are hobbled." 
Among the Turkmans everything went wrong 
Because their day was over, and their blood 
Quaked. Thus the Maker of the world ordained, 
And thou hadst said : " Earth hath them in its grip." 
With all the manhood that they had they strove 
'Gainst fortune for the honour of their throne, 
And in their fight for sovereignty surrendered 
Their heads without reserve for fame and glory. 

Both sides came rushing to the battlefield, 
And strove together, yet Piran the chief 
Knew inly that the evil day had come, l 
^ 1235 (Such is the process of high heaven above — 
The source to thee of grief and happiness ! ) 

KAI KHCSRAU 

But saw that fighting was his only course; 
The tyrant's turn it was to suffer force. 

§ 29 

How Fatihurz fought with Kulbdd 

First, Fariburz, that gallant warrior, 

Came speeding lion-like and, having strung 

His bow, attacked Kulbad, the son of Wi'sa. 

He wheeled about but, since his arrows failed, 

Unsheathed with his right hand his glittering sword, 

And clave his foeman's body to the waist. 

Alighting he undid his royal lasso, 

Secured Kulbad upon his charger's back, 

And, having loosed the fastenings of his mail, 

Rode to the hill triumphantly, exclaiming : — 

" Oh ! may our leader be victorious, 

And all our Shah's foes liver-stricken thus !" 

§ 30 

How Giv fought with Gunci 

Next there went out Gurwi, the son of Zira — 

A valiant div — with Gfv 3 son of Gudarz. 

They fought long with their spears and mixed the du 

With blood till with the horsemen's combating 

Their spearheads dropped affrighted at the fray. 

They took their bows and arrows and fought on. 

Gfv purposed to dismount his foe alive, 

And carry him still living to Khusrau — 

A novel present to him from the Turkmans. 

Gurwi, when GKv was closing, dropped his bow 

In terror and laid hold upon his sword, 

But gallant Giv came charging furiously, 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

While grasping in his hand an ox-head mace, 
And, roaring like a mighty leopard, struck 
His foeman's casque and drenched his face with blood. 
GKv, keeping his own seat, put forth his hand 
And, seizing, strained Gurwf against his breast, 
Who, fainting in the saddle, fell to earth 
Insensible. The warrior-pard alighted, 
Bound his foe's hands firm as a rock behind him, 
Then, mounting, made his prisoner run in front, 
And rode toward his comrades. Flag in hand 
He scaled the hill ; his shouts brought down the moun- 
tains. 

The king of earth had given him grace to win 
That triumph and he blessed the paladin. 

§ 31 

Hoic Guraza foughi tciili Siydmak 

Next Siyamak of the Turanian host 
Went with Guraza to the battlefield, 
Both spear in hand and both with eries like those 
Of maddened elephants. The chiefs were all 
Wrath, rancour, and revenge. Anon they took 
Their massive maees, raged like warrior-lions, 
And smote each other on the head. Their tongues 
Were cracked with thirst, they closed in furious fight. 
Alighted, clutched, and raised the dust of strife. 
Guraza put his hands "forth like a lion, 
And as a storm-blast bent his foeman down, 
Then dashed him to the ground with violence 
That brake his bones ; he yielded up the ghost* 
v. 1117 Guraza in the same breath bound the corpse 
Upon his steed, swift as Azargashasp 
.Remounted, took the horse of Siyamak, 
And scaled the hill like one bemused with wine. 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

He held the glorious flag and proudly went 
Rejoicing o'er his conquered enemy, 
The victory of the Shah, and that high fortune 
Achieved beneath the shadow of the throne. 
Dismounting then he prayed to God to bless 
The fortune of earth's monarch with success. 

§ 3= 

How Furtihil fought -with Zangula 

The fourth fight — FuruhU's with Zangula — 

Was that of combatants like lions loose. 

In truth there was no warrior in iran 

To match in archery with Furuhil, 

Who, seeing that grim Turkman from afar, 

Strung up his bow and, bending it, began 

To shower shafts on Zangula, employing 

The horsemen's ambuscade. One poplar arrow, 

Which fiew with wind-like swiftness, struck his thigh, 

Transfixing horse and rider. The fieet steed 

Came to the ground headforemost with the smart, 

Unseating Zangula whose face was wan ; 

His head sank and he yielded up the ghost ; 

Full surely he was born for evil days. 

Then Furuhil leaped down, beheaded him, 

Stripped off the Ruinan armour that he wore, 

And made his head fast to the saddle-straps, 

Then took with him the steed of Zangula, 

And scaled the hill, as he had been a leopard, 

With breast and hand and sword all drenched with gore. 

He raised the glorious flag, glad-hearted he 

At having gained his end triumphantly. 

102 

THE SHAHNAMA OP FIRDAUSi 

§ 33 

Ifoir Rulihdm fought with. Bdrmdn 

It was Ruhham, son of Giidarz, that made 
The fifth, assay, and fought against Barman, 
v. 123S Both seized their bows and shafts of poplar-wood, 
The war-cry as of valiant horsemen rose. 
Their bows both shivered and they took in hand 
Their spears and scimitars. Both warriors, 
Both brave, both horsemen, shrewd and veteran, 
Fought long till e'en the combative Ruhham 
Quailed, yet by thrusting at his foeman's thigh 
Dismounted him and had him at command. 
Barman made off like dust, but from the reek 
Of battle came Ruhham and from behind 
Thrust yet again and pierced him through the liver. 
Ruhham trailed him along, rubbed his own face 
With his foe's blood in wreak for Siyawush, 
Raised him upon the saddle and there bound him 
Firm as a rock, with hanging head and feet 
Below the girths, then mounting brought the corpse 
Swift to the trysting-place. Ruhham thus won 
High fortune through the Shah's victorious grace 
And throne exalted, and began to call 
Down praise upon him and his kin withal. 

§ 34 

How Bhhan fought ivith It-din 

In the sixth fight — Bizhan, the son of Gi'v, 
Against Ruin — the warriors rushed forth, 
Strung up their bows and wheeled to left and right. 
But shot in vain. Then, brazen mace in hand, 
Bfzhan manoeuvred for the vantage-ground, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

And, with a rush earth-rending, smote Riii'n 

Upon the head ; his helm ran brains and blood. 

There on the saddle gave he up sweet life, 

While calling on Pirau, the son of Wfsa, 

And from the steed came headlong to the ground — 

An iron body with a mouth all gore. 

Ere he had had full joyance of his youth 

He ventured all for gain and lost it all. 
The world is full of cark and care, good sooth ! 

And after every rise there is a fall. 
Bfzhan dismounted lightly from his steed, 
Like Ahriman upon his fallen foe, 
And cut his head off with a scimitar ; 
For him was neither grave nor winding-sheet. 
Bfzhan next with his lasso bound the corpse 
Upon the saddle : there was none to mourn ; 
Then, mounting like a furious elephant, 
And seizing in his hand his foeman's reins, 
Bizhan took up his own swift charger's bridle, 
And hastened hill-ward with his lion-flag, 
With rusty blue steel rings, in hand, and cried ; — 
" In every contest may our monarch win, 
And crowned for ever be his paladin." 

§ 35 

Hovt Hajlr fought with Sipahram 

Hajfr rushed seventh from among the heroes — 

A famous warrior and noble horseman — 

While Sipahram, AfrasiyaVs own kinsman, 

A hero high in rank and estimation, 

Essayed tight with the offspring of Gddarz — 

A cavalier unequalled in the host. 

They went upon the ground, dark dust-clouds rose, 

They fought together with their scimitars, 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USi 

And made sparks stream from iron. Lion-like 
The brave Hajfr confronted Sipahram 
Right manfully and, in the Maker's name > 
And by the fortune of the youthful monarch, 
Struck with his sword the helmet of his foe 
Upon the crest, and death came then and there. 
The Turkman tumbled headlong from his steed 
In miserable plight and drenched with blood, 
v. 1240 The fortunate Haji'r, alighting, bound 

His foe's corpse firmly on the saddle, mounted 
His own steed, led the other and departed. 
He clomb the hill, he blessed his lucky star 
And glorious country, but acknowledged still 
In his bright fortune and his might God's will. 

§ 36 

How Gurgin fought with Andarimdn 

Gurgi'n was eighth and he went out to fight 

Andarfman, one of the Turkman host. 

Experienced both and veteran they went 

And chose a battlefield. They wheeled with spears. 

When these broke down they took their bows, and arrows 

Rained while the chiefs held up their wolf-skin shields 

To save their faces. Arrows showered like hail 

On wolf-skin buckler, helm, and casque. At length 

Gurgfn shot at Andarfman a shaft 

That pinned the Ruman helmet to his head, 

And as the cavalier reeled with the smart, 

Gurgfn. shot yet another, pierced his side, 

And brought the blood-drops from his eyes with anguish. 

Gurgfn gat down like wind, took his foe's head, 

And strapped it to the saddle. Having mounted 

He led the Turkman's charger, and then scaled 

In haste the hill, his bow slung on his arm, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

10$ 

By God's strength who had sheltered him from hurt, 
And the victorious fortune of the Shah — 
The world-lord. Thus returned triumphantly 
He set the heart-illuming flag on high, 

§ 37 

How Barta /ought with Kuhram 

The ninth fight was 'twixt Barta and Kuhram, 

The swordsman : both were men of blood and chieftains. 

"When they had tried all other ways they took 

Their Indian swords in hand, Then all at once 

Kuhram turned face from Barta. Barta smote 

Kuhram's helm-top and clave him to the chest : 

Fear filled foes 1 hearts at Barta, who, alighting, 

Fast to his corken saddle bound Kuhram, 

And mounted. Shouting up the hill he went 

Like some fierce leopard. In one hand he grasped 

His Indian sword, and in the other held 

His conquering flag, Head-downward on his steed 

Was flung Kuhram. He cried : "The Shah hath won. 

His crown is ever higher than the sun," 

§ 33 

How Zanga,, Son of Sh&war&n, fougltt with Akhdst 

Tenth went forth Zanga, son of Shawaran, 
Armed from the warriors and mighty men, 
And his opponent chanced to be Akhast, 
Whom none had ever worsted in the fight. 
Both took their massive maces, and their strife 
Surpassed all bounds. At length both were o'ercome 
With their belabourings. Their Arabs jibbed ; 
Thou wouldst have said : " They have no pulses left." 

106 THE SHAHS AHA OF FIRDAUSI 

The warriors when the sun began to sink, 
And when the desert was a-glow like iron, 
Were so exhausted that thou wouldst have said : — 
" They cannot stir a step." " Our livers now," 
v. 1242 They said, " are scorching ; let us stay to breathe 
Awhile, and afterward renew the combat." 

They went accordingly and led their chargers 
Apart, and then securely hobbled them. 
Thereafter, having taken rest, they rose 
For fight again, and with their lances wheeled 
Like fire about the centre of the ground, 
Till Zanga got the better : rending earth 
He charged and struck Akhast upon the waist, 
Then flung him headlong from his steed face- downward, 
And shouted like a rattling thunder-clap : 
Thou wouldst have said : " He split the battlefield ! " 
Alighting, Zanga went and dragged his foe 
Face-downward through the dust> made shift to lift him, 
And flung him prone across the saddle-back, 
Then, mounting his own charger, led the other. 
Strange ! what misfortunes fell upon the Turkmans ! 
He left the plain and reached the glorious hill, 
Wolf-blazoned flag in hand. He set it up 
Before his mates with blessings therewithal 
Upon the Shah and his chief general. 

§ 39 

How Gudarz fought tcith Pirdn 

When as the ninth hour of the day had passed 
There was no Turkman left on that broad plain, 
Their lives had been dissevered by the sword. 
Thou wouldst have said : "The world is pitiless ! 
For one, whom it is tending with all care, 
And dowering with days, it will prepare 

KAI KHUSRAU 

107 

A night-surprise amid his happiness, 
And bring upon him obloquy and stress- 
Both first and last we are the wind's possession, 
We ask for justice and behold oppression ! " 

Whenas the Turkmans in those luckless combats 
Had struggled fruitlessly Pi'ran descried 

None of his champions left upon the field ; v - 12 43 

The leaders of Iran and of Tiiran 

Advanced together for their grim revenge, 

And set earth's surface rolling as they came, 

Grief in their hearts and vengeance in their heads. 

The sun paused dust-stayed on that day of battle. 

Those cavaliers tried every kind of sleight 

With sword and brand, with lasso and with mace, 

But Heaven's purposes were brought to pass, 

Disaster came upon Pi'ran from God ; 

Against that will he had no remedy — 

The will that made his steed fail under him. 

Pfran saw well enough how matters stood, 

And knew that God had caused that change of fortune, 

Yet he acquitted him right manfully, 

And strove against the purposes of fate. 

The two chiefs of the host, those shrewd old men, 
Then took their bows and arrows in their hands. 
Giidarz chose out a poplar arrow — one 
That would pierce iron — shot it mightily, 
And pierced the armour of his t'oeman's steed, 
Which shivered, gasped, and fell. Pfran fell under ; 
His steed rolled o'er him ; his right hand was broken. 
He struggled out and rose upon his feet. 
Though knowing well that his last hour had come, 
And that he could not scape from that dark day, 
Yet fled he from Giidarz toward the hill, 
Distressed by running and his injured hand, 
And gained the top if so the paladin 
Might not pursue. Giidarz, perceiving this, 

THE SHARNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Wept bitterly. He feared a change of fortune, 
Well knowing its inconstancy and how 
Tis ever prone to tyranny. He shouted : — 
V. 1244 ,f O famous paladin ! what aileth thee 

That thou dost foot it thus like game before me ? 
Where are thy troops, O captain of the host ! 
Where all thy might and manhood, arms and heart, 
Thy treasure and thy wisdom ? Prop of heroes ! 
Afrasiyab's main stay ! the sun is louring 
Upon thy king, and fortune utterly 
Hath turned its face from thee. No room is here 
For guile, attempt it not. Since thus bestead 
Ask quarter for thy life that I may bear thee 
Still living to the Shah. That conquering one 
Will pardon thee because, like me, thou art 
A hoary paladin." 

" Now God forbid ! " 
Pi'ran replied, " God grant that no such ill 
Befall my latter end and I survive. 
To beg my life were heaviness indeed ! 
Born was I in the world for death, and I 
Thus fighting put my neck within thy power, 
A saying have I heard among the great : — 
'In this fair world, though many days be past. 
Inevitable death will come at last.' 
Herein I have no reason to complain." 

Gudarz rode round the hill and grieved to find 
No road. He lighted, took his shield and went, 
Like those in quest of quarry, up the mount, 
His shield before him and a dart in hand. 
Piran descried him, leaped up on the crest, 
And, arrow-fashion, hurled a javelin 
Which struck the ancient chieftain on the arm. 
Gudarz thus wounded by Pi'ran's hand raged 
For vengeance and sped forth a dart. It hit 
Pi'ran upon the breast, crashed through his mail, 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

Transfixed his liver, and came out behind, 
Pfran reeled and his head became distraught ; 
His liver's blood came pouring from his mouth, 
His soul departed to rejoin his comrades. 
Thus fortune changeth sides from day to day, 
It heareth not what counsellors may say, 
But rendeth, having dipped its hands in bane, 
The lion's heart and leopard's hide in twain. 

Now when Giidarz had clambered to the summit 
He saw Pfran o'erthrown in sorry plight, 
With broken arm and heart, his head in dust, 
His armour riven and his girdle snapped. 
'* O Lion," said Giidarz, e< chief paladin, 
And warrior bold ! the world hath looked on many 
Like me and thee but will have peace with none ! " 

He stretched his hand out, horrible to tell, 
Drank of his foeman's blood, smeared his own face 
Therewith, lamenting bitterly the murder 
Of Siyawush, then praised the Omnipotent, 
And mourned before the just Judge for the death 
Of his own seventy well-beloved sons. 
He was about to take his foeman's head, 
But deemed the act unworthy of himself, 
So raised the banner of Pfran beside him, 
His head and body lying in its shade, 
And went back to his warriors, while the bloocf 
Poured from his wounded arm as 'twere a flood. 

§ 40 

How G&darz returned to (he M'arriom 0/ frthi 

Meanwhile the vengeful warriors of Iran 
Descended from the hill toward the host, 
Their slain opponents bound upon their saddles 
According to the usages of war; 

no THE SH AH NAM A OF FIRDAUSt 

But since the paladin was not with them 
A cry ascended both from old and young : — 
V. 1246 " Perchance Gudarz hath steeped his head in blood, 
And perished by Pfran's hand, through old ftge." 

The troops wept bitterly, beholding not 
Their paladin, but soon amid the dust 
They saw his flag come flaunting from the field. 
The drums beat in the camp, dust kissed the sky, 
The great men, smiling and rejoicing, went 
To meet him. Said the troops : " The paladin 
May be returning worsted by Piran, 
Because he is a lion-hearted hero, 
And hath been courting combat all his life," 

Then, while both young and old gave ear, Griidarz 
Spake, pointed with his finger to the field, 
And told how fortune had entreated him, 
Then bade Ruhhain to mount and fetch Pi'ran. 
" Bind him upon the saddle, bring him down," 
He said, " from yonder height ; and bring besides 
His armour and his flag, just as they are, 
But lay no hand upon his belt or loins." 

Ruhham departed like a rushing wind, 
Laid on the saddle that illustrious form, 
Whose mail was drenched with gore, with lasso-coils 
Bound it securely and conveyed it down. 
Whenas the warriors and haughty chiefs 
Beheld Pfran's flag from the trysting-place 
All of them blessed the chief of paladins, 
And said : " Grand back-bone of the Iranians, 
And servant of the Kaians' crown and throne ' 
Thou hast made both thy body and thy soul 
A ransom for the host in victory, 
And in defeat." 
V. 1247 Gudarz replied : " When war 

Began to press methought : ' Afrasiyab 
Will lead his host to this side of the river. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

His troops have been at rest from strife and toil 
While mine are spent with hurry.' So I sent 
A prudent man and gave the Shah much counsel. 
I said ; ' If now the Turkman king shall bring 
His host we cannot hold our ground.' Methought : — 
' Khusrau will hasten to this battlefield, 
And when we take the bodies of the slain 
Upon this scene of vengeance to the Shah, 
Just as ye have them now upon the saddles, 
He will rejoice and we shall be advanced, 
Because this feud of the Iranians 
And Turkmans came from these now passed away.' " 
All praised him: "Ne'er may earth and time lack 
thee. 

Whate'er we gain we gain it from thy words, 
And sun and moon take lustre from thy looks." 

They went and bore the slain just as they were, 
But forced Gurwi to walk, a lasso bound 
His hands, a halter was about his neck. 
As soon as .they approached the main encampment 
The troops turned out to meet their general 
With Gustaham the Lion leading them. 
He came before the gallant paladin, 
Then kissed the ground and offered praise. He said : — 
"Behold thine army safe and sound. As thou 
Committed'st it to me so I restore it." 

With that the watchman's shout came to their ears v. 124S 
From Mount Raibad : " The plain is dark as night 
With dust. A wondrous din of kettledrum 
And clarion ariseth ; thou wouldst say : — 
' The desert is in motion ! ' Glittering, 
As 'twere the azure sea, a throne of turquoise 
Is borne on elephants, the air is glowing 
With hues of yellow, red, and violet, 
As 'twere a silken banner, while afar 
A glorious standard like a cypress-tree 

ii2 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Appeareth, round it are mailed cavaliers, 

And earth, throughout is violet-hued with steel 

Flag followeth flag, and some are charged with dragons 

And some with eagles. In another day 

They will be here if thus they keep their way." 

§ 4i 

How Lahk&k and Far&Mdimrd fowailed Pirdn 

The Turkman watch upon Mount Kanabad 
Beheld that wonder and came in apace ; 
He said : " Unless mine eyes are dim, unless 
This sight of mine be dazed exceedingly, 
God hath wrought havoc on the Turkmans, all 
Their toils have turned to dust. The Iranians - 
Have come down shouting from their height, and each 
With flag in hand. That of Piran the chief, 
I see, is down, his body drenched in gore, 
While as for those ten warriors who went hence 
With him, I see them far away o'erthrown, 
And flung with bloody bodies o'er their steeds, 
v. 1249 Toward Raibad a cloud of darksome dust 
Appeareth and the plain is azure-dim. 
Amidst the warriors is Kawa's standard, 
While in the vanguard glitter blue-steel swords. 
The standard of the king of kings appeareth 
With trump and drum, and earth is ebon-hued," 
Lahhak and Farshi'dward went to the look-out, 
And saw with their own eyes Piran the world-lord, 
Their chief and brother, slain, and with him those 
Ten chosen cavaliers, the Turkman champions. 
There, in the watch-tower, grievously distraught, 
And wailing for their brother's blood, they cried 
In their affliction : " O thou Lion, chief 
Of Turkmans, and undaunted cavalier! 

KAl KHUSRAU 

What do thy greatness and thine uprightness 

Avail since thou hast willed to quit the world ? 

Our foes have everything for which they toiled ; 

The world hath ended for thee evilly. 

Who is there to take vengeance for thy sake, 

And who now will ensue thy precedents ? 

Calamity hath come upon Turan, 

And on Afrasiyab, and all is lost. 

We must behead ourselves and whelm in blood 

Sword, hand, and body." 

When they called to mind 
Pfran's last charge to them they acted not 
Upon their own wild words, for he had said 
To Farshidward, when challenging Giidarz : — 
" If I am slain abide not with the host, 
For earth will prove too narrow for our nobles 
When I am gone, and none of wits be left 
Of Wfsa's race, and if the Iranians 
Slay us and bring Iran our trunkless heads 
Our army will ask quarter of Giidarz ; 
But do not ye demean yourselves so much : 
Make for the waste and ye may yet survive." 

They went back to their camp, their eyes all tears V, 1250 

Of blood, their bodies failing. All the host 
Knew that the flock was wandering shepherdless. 
All were exceeding sorrowful and wept ; 
They burned as though upon consuming fire. 
They came before Lahhak and Farshidward 
With lips that breathed forth deep, cold sighs, and 
said : — 

"What shall we do now that our paladin, 
The back-bone of our host, hath left the field I 
Whom will he hearten more to gird his loins, 
And set an iron helmet on his head ?" 

They answered : " Who hath limited God's will ? 
He brought it on PMn thus to be slain 

VOL. IV. H 

H4 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

In battle wretchedly and miserably, 
To be beheaded by the scimitar, 
And have no winding-sheet but grimy dust, 
What while his foemen hale him here and there 
With head and mail and raiment drenched in blood. 
What was to be hath been— Piran hath gone, 
And all his work and toil have turned to wind. 
Alive he was the pillar of the host, 
His soul full of affection for his troops ; 
He was their guardian from the enemy, 
And under-prized that noble head of his. 
The other world is his for good or ill, • 
But surely God hath set him with the just. 
His care for us surviveth his departure ; 
He made this compact with Gudarz, and said : — 
* If I am slain upon the battlefield 
Thou shalt not punish the Turanian host, 
But let them have free passage to Tiiran, 
Not doing them a mischief in revenge.' 
The franians will respect the covenant, 
We feel no apprehension on that score. 
There are three courses open, only three, 
So hearken all of you, both old and young ! 
V. 1251 If ye will ask for quarter so resolve 

Forthwith ; if ye will make for home set forward 

For good or evil ; but if ye propose 

To fight, then let your spears be dipped in blood. 

Discuss we these then from all points of view, 

But God's will only can prevail at last. 

If ye intend to fight delay a while 

Because Piran asked succour, and the king 

Hath raised an army which may come in sight 

At any time, and we shall be avenged. 

If ye are purposed to return to land, 

And throne, the Iranians surely will not hinder. 

If ye would ask for quarter from the Shah 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Ye must bestir yourselves and go at once ; 

Each man of you is master of his fate> 

And if your hearts are set upon Iran 

Be not enraged against us brethren twain, 

For never will we purge our hearts of wrath, 

And there hath ne'er been one of Wfsa's race 

Whose waist the girdle's buckle hath not galled. 

Obedient to Pi'ran's last words we go 

To journey through the desert to Turan, 

And if the frauians occupy the road 

We will contend with them while strength reuiaineth.' 

Mark what the Turkmans, hearing this, rejoined ; — 
" Our leader and ten noble warriors 
Have been slain vilely thus. On the other side 
Khusrau is seen approaching ! Who dare tarry ? 
We have not steeds or arms or feet or wings, 
We have not treasure, leader, field or fell, 
We have not strength for fight or road for flight, 
And have no cause to spite ourselves. If we 
Retreat, and if Gtidarz and Kai Khusrau 
Come after us with elephants and troops, 
Not one among us will escape with life, 
Or see again his home and family. 
To ask for quarter is no shame for us, 
Who, great as is our host, are leaderless. 
Who now will fear the monarch of Turan ? 
Afrasiyab is but a pinch of dust. 
Why was he not like Kai Khusrau, who showed 
What great affection to his troops he owed ? " 

^ 42 

How Lahhdk and Farshldward iook tJte Road to Tttr&n 

Now, when the host thus answered, those two chiefs — 
Lahhak and Farshfdward — arose. They knew : — 

n6 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS1 

" 'Tis not their time for war, the troops are right: — 
A flock without a shepherd periaheth." 

They bade the rest farewell aod then they took 
The longsorae desert route, with flag in hand, 
With hearts all grief and eyes all tears of blood. 
They journeyed with ten noble cavaliers — 
Brave warriors and ready for the fray. 
Upon the road were horsemen of Iran — 
An outpost-party and a gallant one. 
The Turkmans charged, the outpost held its ground, 
Strife rose unlooked for, earth grew tulip-like 
With blood. Of those Iranians eight were slain — 
Brave men and Lions on the day of battle — 
While of the Turkmans none escaped with life 
Except those two illustrious warriors, 
Who went — a gallant pair — upon their way, 
Like Lions, on their journey through the waste. 
Then from the look-out cried the Iranian watch ; — 
" Ye nobles and ye gallant fighting men 1 
Two chieftains with ten noble cavaliers 
Have issued from among the Turkman host ; 
They have engaged our outpost and have mixed 
v. 1253 The earth with blood. Two Turkmans with their arms 
Have ridden oft', and eight of ours are slain." 

Thereat Gudarz said : " These must be Lahhak 
And Farshfdward, gone with their necks unbent 
And hearts as yet unbroken by the fight; 
If from Iran they journey to Turan 
Loss will assuredly befall our host ; 
Let him that seeketh honours from the Shah 
Now set upon his head a Ruman helmet, 
Pursue Lahhak and Farshidward, and send 
The dust up from them with his scimitar." 

Not one among the Iranians volunteered, 
For they were spent, their reins were galled with iron, 
Save Gustaham, in fight a lion grim, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

117 

Who said : " thou who dost deserve a throne ! 
On going forth to combat with the Turkmans 
Thou gavest me the drums, the camp -enclosure, 
And chief command. While others sought renown 
I had no share. Now will I compass fame 
Herein, go forth, and take them in my toils." 

Gudarz rejoiced and smiled on Gustaham; 
His cheeks grew fresh, care left him and he said : — 
" The sun hath given thee a happy fortune ! 
A Lion thou, thy prey the onager. 
Go forth, God give to thee His help, and may 
Three hundred like Lahhak become thy prey," 

§ 43 

How Gustaham ■pursued Lahhdk and Farshidward 

Then Gustaham put on his mail, farewelled 

Such warriors as he saw, and hurried forth 

To fight those two proud Turkmans, while the troops 

Among themselves said : 11 Evil will befall him." 

Now, like a ship at sea, a Turkman host v. 1254 

Came from Afrasiyab to aid Pfran, 
But when they neared the desert of Daghwi', 
And tidings came to them : " Pi'ran is dead I 
Thus went the combat of the champions," 
They all returned lamenting to their king. 

Bfzhan, informed that Gustaham had gone 
To fight against Lahhak and Farshidward, 
Thought : " If he reach Daghwf they must not send 
The dust up from him on the day of battle/' 

Then with heart wrung with grief for Gustaham 
He went, like lion grim, to seek his grandsire, 
And, seeing him, spake loudly and at large : — 
" paladin ! it sorteth ill with wisdom 
Thus to surrender every man of name 

i iS THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USi 

In thy command to wanton massacre, 
And make the turning sky responsible ■ 
Two lusty warriors of the Turkman host 
Have hurried on their way like lions. Both 
Are braver than Piran or than Human, 
And nobles of their land by native worth. 
Now Gustaham hath gone to fight the two ! 
He must not be defeated. All our joy 
Will turn to grief if from our host we lose 
That lion-man." 

On hearing this, Giidarz, 
Perceiving his distress, mused much and long, 
Took the same view and told the warriors : — 
" Whoever is in quest of name and rank, 
Let him go after Gustaham with speed 
To give him aid against his enemies." 

None of the company returned an answer, 
None cared for him and none was rested yet. 
v, 1255 Said to Giidarz Bizhan : " Except myself 
None of the warriors will succour him, 
For no one is aweary of his life. 
I must depart myself since at his case 
My heart is full of grief, my face of tears," 

Giidarz replied to him : " O lion-man, 
Unused as yet to this world's heat and cold ! 
Dost not thou see that we are conquering ? 
Rush not upon this enterprise, my son ! 
For Gustaham will triumph and behead them. 
Abide and I will send a cavalier, 
Like lion grim, to help him in the fight, 
And lay upon the dust his foemen's heads," 

" O prudent, wise, and ardent paladin ! " 
Bizhan replied, ,( he must be helped while living, 
Not when the foes are sending up his dust. 
When he is slain, and all is over with him, 
What profit will it be to send a horseman 

KAI KHUSRAV 

I 

To find him slaughtered and his head in blood ? 
So order me, who am concerned for him, 
To gird my girdle tightly in this quest ; 
But if thou sayest : ' Go not/ I forthwith 
Will cut my head off with this watered steel, 
For if he dieth I will not survive ; 
So seek no pretext for refusing me." 

Giidarz replied : " Go after him at once 
If thou hast no regard for thine own life. 
Since thou art still insatiate of fight 
Gird thee and stay not e'en to scratch thy head. 
Good sooth ! thy heart is cold toward thy sire 
Though thou dost burn his liver constantly ; 
Thou wilt but cover thine own head with dust ; 
How much I dread thy passion for the fray ! " 

Bfzhan bent, kissed the ground, and went his way. 

§ 44 

How Btzhan followed after &u$taham 

Bfzhan girt up his loins, armed him for strife, 
And put the saddle on his steed Shabrang. 
News reached Gfv of the doings of Bfzhan, 
How he had armed to fight with Farshidward. 
Gfv sprang up, mounted swift as smoke his Arab, 
Went to Bfzhan, seized on his bridle, dragged him 
Aside, and said : " How often have I warned thee 
In vain ! Thou givest me no moment's pleasure. 
Now whither wouldst thou hasten ? Grieve me not 
By every act. What wouldst thou have me do, 
Hoar as I am ? I have no son but thee, 
And know no happiness when thou art sorry. 
Ten days and nights hast thou been in the saddle, 
And borne the vengeful sword against the foe ; 
Thou hast been galled by coat of mail and helm : 

l2o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Wilt thou be never satiate with blood ? 

Since He that giveth good hath given us 

The victory, we ought to rest with joy. 

Why stake thy head before its time ? Too much 

Thou trustest to thy sword. None is successful 

In this world save he seek his proper end. 

Forestall not fate so fast, for even now 

Its eye is on us ; for thy father's sake 

Abandon this ; thou shouldst not vex my heart." 

" O full of wisdom ! " thus Bfzhan replied, 
" Men think not thus of thee. Hast thou forgotten 
The past ? Why fondly turn away from justice ? 
Know, father ! what thou sayest is unjust. 
Hast thou forgot the battle of Ladan, 
v. 1257 The deeds which Gustaham and I performed, 
And our companionship in weal and woe ? 
If in God's providence the evil day 
Is imminent no caution will avert 
What is decreed, and further talk is useless. 
So strive not to divert me from the fight, 
For I have pledged my life to this emprise," 

Then Gfv : " If thou art fixed it will be best 
For us to fare o'er hill and dale together, 
And I will give thee aid in everything/' 

"Now God forbid that we three warriors," 
Bizhan said, " of the chiefs of royal race 
Should chase two craven Turkmans all that way ! 
So by our bright-souled monarch's life and head, 
By that famed paladin my grandsire's life, 
And by the blood of Siyawush, return, 
And let me go. I will not do thy bidding, 
Because thou sayest : ' Turn away from light.' " 

Giv, hearing this, relented and bestowed 
His blessing on his son, then left him, saying : — 
" Go conquering and come again with joy, 
Heart-eased, having bound the hands of evil." 

KAl KHUSRAU 

121 

Bfzhan made haste to follow Gustaham 
Lest ill should come upon him from Tiiran. 

Now when Lahhak and Farshi'dward had passed 
The river, speeding onward like the dust, 
They journeyed in an hour seven leagues, 
And felt in safety from the Iranian host. 
They caught sight of a forest and a stream — 
A shady resting-place for warriors. 
Inside the wood were lions, fowl, and game. 
Trees overhead with grass and stream below. 
They halted there to hunt, and being thirsty 
Went to the stream, but still they needed meat, v. 1258 

For grief and joy stay not the appetite. 
They went among the pastures, dropped much game, 
Then lit a fire and, having eaten kabab, 
Went to the stream. There Farshidward kept watch, 
Lahhak reposed. Bright is no warrior's day 
Whene'er he hath been worsted in the fray. 

§ 45 

Hqw Lahh&k and Farthidward -were slain by Gudahmn 

Now Gustaham meanwhile was drawing nigh 

The spot. His charger smelt the other steeds, 

Began to neigh, and hurried on apace. 

The charger of Lahhak by that same token 

Neighed back again as though it had been mad, 

While Farshidward came rushing to Lahhak, 

And roused him from sweet slumber, saying thus : — 

"Bestir thee from thy pleasant sleep and slay 

The head of evil fortune like a man, 

Because a sage once spake this weighty saw : — 

' Whenas the lion from the wolf shall tleo 

Let not the wolf go in pursuit, for he 

Will bring upon himself calamity.' 

122 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Ho ! rouse thee, for an army from Iran 
Hath cut us off ! " 

Both mounted, left the meadow, 
And scanned the plain to see what course to take, 
v. 1259 They sighted Gustaham far off alone, 

And, having craned their heads and recognised 
The foe, spake thus together: "One approacheth. 
It cannot be but Gustaham that cometh, 
The banner of the brave in hand, to battle. 
We need not flee unless to draw him on 
Out to the open ; there he shall not 'scape 
Unless our evil fortune play the tyrant." 

Thence turned they toward the plain with Gustaham, 
The vengeful, in pursuit, who drawing nigh 
Roared like a furious Hon, raining arrows 
Of poplar, and when Farshidward advanced 
To combat smote him on the head — a sword-stroke 
That mixed his brains with blood. He tumbled head- 
ing. 

And yielded up the ghost. So passed away 
That famous warrior of Wfsa's seed. 
Whenas Lahhak beheld his brother's face, 
And knew that he was then at peace from strife, 
He trembled and became distraught with grief, 
While all turned black to him. His ardent soul 
Grew sick of life, he strung his bow, came on 
With weeping eyes and shot at Gustaham. 
First one shot, then the other. Not an arrow 
Fell to the ground. Both cavaliers were wounded, 
Then fought with scimitars, till suddenly 
The advantage came to Gustaham, who twitched 
His reins, charged, smote Lahhak upon the neck, 
And brought upon him Doom's Day in a moment. 
His head rolled under foot as 'twere a ball. 
And all his battles and his warfare ended. 
Such usage hath the turning sky above, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

123 

Withdrawing from its fosterlings its love ! 

Wouldst thou its head ? A foot will offered be ! v - 1260 

Wouldst thou a foot ? The head affronteth thee ! 

So hurt was Gustaham, though not unhorsed, 
That thou hadst said : " The man will break in 
pieces ! " 

Bent down upon his saddle he advanced, 
And, as he urged his charger, dripped with blood. 
He came anear a spring, saw stream and shade, 
Alighted, tied his charger to a tree, 
And, having drunken largely of the water 
That he had chanced upon, gave thanks to God, 
But thou hadst said : " The earth hath bound him 
down," 

So writhed he wallowing in the grimy dust, 
His form all gashes with the scimitar. 
And said ; " Almighty Ruler of the world I 
Of all mine army and my family 
Inspire affection for me in Bizhan, 
Gfv's son, or other famous warrior, 
That he may carry me alive or dead 
Hence to the host that they may know that I 
Have died with glory, and I ask no more." 

He moaned till morning and throughout the night 
Writhed snake-like on the dust in painful plight. 

§ 46 

How Bizhan lefiehl Gustaham in the Mead 

Now when the world grew radiant with the sun 
Bizhan arrived and roamed the mead to find 
Some trace of his lost comrade. He descried 
Far off a dun steed like one ridden post. 
It pranced and grazed, like leopards at their ease, 
With saddle underneath and broken reins. 

124 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Bfeh&n descried the saddle upside down, 
The stirrups and the lasso drenched with blood, 
A sight whereat his wits abandoned him, 
And like a roaring lion's was his cry, 
Thus said he : " O my comrade kind and good E 
Where hast thou fallen in the pasturage ? 
v. 1261 My back-bone hast thou broken, bruised my heart, 
And as for dear life I have done with it. 
What shall I say ? Where shall I seek thee now 1 
What tricks hath yonder sky played off on thee ? " 

He followed up the horse-tracks to the spring, 
And there saw G-ustaham upon the mead, 
His mail and helmet smirched with dust and blood, 
Himself flung headlong down — a mass of wounds. 
Bi'zhan alighted swiftly from Shabrang, 
And pressed his comrade in a close embrace, 
Removed the Ruman breastplate that he wore, 
And took the helmet from his wounded head, 
Surveyed his body in its stricken plight, 
Saw that the wounds, whence matter ran, were mortal 
If left undressed, and that his heart and soul 
Were filled with grief and anguish. Scanning well 
These wounds Bizhan lamented o'er him saying : — 
" my good comrade ! thou hast gone, and I 
Have striven but ill. I should have sought thee sooner, 
And come upon the scene when thou wast fighting. 
I might have helped thee at the time of need, 
When thou wast combating with Ahriman, 
But now the foe hath satisfied his lust 
And done whate'er he would." 

The wounded man 
Was roused and breathing hard replied : " Good friend I 
Grieve not for me ; thy pain is worse to me 
Than mine own death. Re-helm my wounded head, 
And make some shift to bear me to the Shah. 
God grant that I may live to look on him, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

125 

And then I shall not fear the approach of death, 

For none of us may couch save in the dust. 

The man who dleth having won his will, V. 1262 

And compassed all his purpose, is not dead. 

Next aa for these two cowards, craven foes, 

Whom God hath slain through me, thou mayst perchance 

Make shift to carry them upon a saddle, 

Or, if not so, behead them, and convey 

Their noble heads and weapons when thou goest 

That men may understand about this combat ; 

Tell too the Shah, the ruler of the world, 

That, not in vain, I gave my head to wind, 

But roughed it everywhere in quest of fame." 

He pointed out those Turkmans to Bfzhan, 
Far in the distance, slain, and cast away ; 
Then faintness seized his soul. Bfzhan, distraught 
With grief, went to his charger, loosed the girths, 
Laid, wailing bitterly, the saddle-cloth 
Beneath the wounded man, tore up his shirt 
For bandages, and bound the wounds with care. 
Grief-gloomed of soul he hurried to a hill, 
Thence spied some scattered Turkman cavaliers • 
Upon the desert, came down swift as lightning, 
Distraught by dread that Gustaham might die, 
And all at once of those fear-stricken horsemen 
Saw from afar two speeding on their way, 
He loosed his lasso, noosed a Turkman's neck, 
Flung him, but gave him quarter for his life, 
And thus obtained a helper for himself. 
Thence hasting on like dust before the wind 
He went toward Lahhak and Farshidward, 
And found them on the ground and drenched with blood, 
While at their heads their chargers grazed at ease. 
Bizhan saw all and lauded Gustaham 
Because he had achieved complete revenge. 
He bade the Turkman, who had begged his life, V. 1263 

ia6 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

To place those two commanders of the host 

Upon a saddle, then, like some fierce pard 

Returned to Gustaham, raised him like wind 

Upon the saddle gently with no pain, 

And bade that Turkman mount upon the steed, 

And clasp the wounded man about the waist. 

The Turkman travelled at an easy pace, 

Invoking fervent blessings on Bfzhan, 

"Who rode in pain and grief, all soul-distraught 

For Gustaham — would he avail to bring 

The wounded man still living to the king ? 

§ 47 

How Kai Khusrau built a Oiamet-lwme for P'irdn and for 
the other Chiefs of T&rdn, and how he slew Gurvfi. the 
Son of Zira 

The day was nine hours old, the sun was leaving 
The vault of heaven, what time Khusrau, the world-lord, 
Approached in state his army on the field. 
■ The chiefs, the nobles, and the warriors 
All went afoot to welcome him, the sages 
Blessed him and said : " Hail, monarch and high 
priest I " 

Khusrau was mounted that the troops might see him, 
And in return saluted, saying thus: — 
" May earth be ever peopled with the brave." 

Behind the army like a mountain came 
Giidarz, such was the custom, with his comrades — 
These same ten champions, who upon the field 
Of light had sent the dust up from their foe— 
V. 1264 And brought the slain whose heads were hanging down, 
Whose bodies, arms, and mail were smirched with blood. 
The champions followed thus behind the host, 
And in their turn saluted Kai Khusrau, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

i 

Gudarz went on his way toward the Shah, 

And lighted on beholding him far off ; 

Then, having drawn anigh, did reverence. 

And wallowed in the dust before his lord, 

Exhibited the corpses of the slain, 

And told him how the champions had been paired. 

Giv brought Gurwi, the son of Zira, running 

Before the valiant leader of Iran ; 

Khusrau beheld him, deeply sighed, dismounted, 

And offered praises to the Almighty, saying : — 

" Praise be to God, to Him who is our refuge, 

And gave to us both might and victory ! " 

The Shah stood up while uttering his praise, 
And lifted from his head the Kaian crown. 
He called down blessings from the righteous Judge 
Both on the paladin and on his troops, 
And said : ** famous men and fortunate ! 
Ye are the fire, your foes are only reeds. 
Gudarz the chieftain and his kin — those men 
Aa fierce as fire — have given soul and body, 
And ta'en the very life-breath from Tiiran. 
Now will I share with you my royal treasures, 
And will not grudge you e'en mine own right hand." 

He then surveyed the slain and, when he saw 
The Turkman general, shed tears of sorrow, 
Remembering Pfran's good offices ; 
Hia heart burned so that thou hadst said r " It flameth 
With visage stained with blood-drops from his eyes 
He made oration o'er that chieftain's death ; — 
" 111 fortune is a Dragon grim and snareth 
Great lions with its breath ; none may escape 
Through valour, so this sharp-clawed Dragon came. 
Thou hast been troubled for me all my life, 
And hast for my sake laboured strenuously. 
This man deplored the blood of Siyawush, 
And in that matter gave offence to none. 

128 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

So friendly was he yet became a foe, 

And filled the country of Iran with fear, 

For Ahriman seduced his heart and turned 

His rede to other ends. Full many a time 

I counselled him, but he misprized my words. 

He would not leave Afrasiyab, and now 

His sovereign hath thus requited him ! 

We wished for him another recompence, 

Prepared for him a throne and diadem, 

But matters have gone further than we purposed, 

And heaven hath turned above him otherwise. 

Wrong took the place of love within his heart, 

So that his countenance was changed toward us. 

He came to fight against you with his host, 

And slaughtered many of the Iranians, 

Rejected all the counsels of Gudarz, 

Mine own injunctions, and my warriors' words, 

Made havoc of his honest heart's affection, 

Mixed up together bane and antidote, 

And when he hasted from Turan to fight 

His fate was on the javelin of Gudarz. 

He gave up son and brother, crown and girdle, 

Arms, men of war, and station, field and fell, 

All in the quarrel of Afrasiyab, 

And fate hath come upon him suddenly." 

He ordered that the body should be washed 
With musk, pure camphor, and rose-water mixed 
With spices, and embalmed with musk and camphor, 
And clad it stainless with brocade of Rum. 
The mountain was Pfrans grave, and Khusrau 
In his affection had a charnel built, 
And raised its summit to the turning sky. 
V. 1266 Within it there were set up princes' thrones, 
Such as befitted men of high degree. 
They placed the Turkman paladins thereon 
With belted waists and crowns upon their heads. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

129 

Such is the world in its perfidiousness ! 
It raiseth oft and bringeth down no less, 
So that the sage's heart must ever be, 
At this world's process, in perplexity. 

Khusrau then looked upon Gurwl, the son 
Of Zira, eursing him as he deserved, 
Looked on that loathly face wherefrom the hair 
Hung down like dfvs', and said: "0 God ! Thou knowest 
The manifest and hidden. Of a truth 
Kaus had done amiss and grieved the Maker 
In that He raised up such a dfv as this 
'Gainst Siyawush. I wot not why Gurwf 
Should hate that faultless one, but by His might 
Who ruleth all and giveth good — the Guide — 
I will have vengeance on Afrasiyab 
For Siyawush and soon," 

He bade disjoint 
Gurwi with cords and fling into a stream, 
First cutting off, as 'twere a sheep's, the head. 
"So must I treat Afrasiyab/' he said. 

§ 4& 

Now the Ttir&nians asked Quarter of Kai Khusrau 

The Shah abode upon the battlefield 

Awhile, employed upon the host's affairs, 

Bestowing kingdoms, crowns, and robes of honour 

On those that had deserved them ; Ispahan, 

The crown of greatness, and the throne of chiefs, 

Was given to Gudarz, while those that shared v, 1267 

With him the toil and glory of rovenge 

Had robes of honour equal to their meed. 

Then from the Turkman troops still on the field, 
O'er whom Piran had held command, there came 
A prudent envoy to the Shiih, and said : — 

VOL. IV. I 

130 THE SHAHNAmA OP FIRDAUSI 

" We are the slaves and servants of the Shah, 
And take no step unless at his command. 
None can escape the providence of God 
E'en though he be within the Dragon's breath. 
The monarch is aware what men we are, 
And for what cause we girded up our loins. 
The case of Siyawush was not our fault, 
But Ahriman seduced our monarch's heart. 
He is a headstrong man and ill-advised, 
With no respect for chiefs or fear of God, 
And we have suffered from that day till now, 
And washed our cheeks in heart-felt tears. At home 
Our kindred is all sorrowful, our wives 
And children mourn us. Not through lust of fighting, 
Not for field, fell, and throne, have we come hither, 
Yet evil hath befallen us herein, 
And sires have lost their sons, and sons their sires. 
If thou wilt give us quarter we will gird 
Our loins as slaves before thee. We are all 
Within the gullet of the Crocodile 
In that we are at warfare with thy host ] 
But in our army there are many chiefs 
Well worthy of the service of the Shah. 
We are in fault and he is sovereign \ 
Whate'er we suffer at his hands is well. 
We will bring all our chiefs to him, but not 
With any thought of strife or murmuring. 
If in his heart he harboureth revenge 
On us, use warranteth beheading foes, 
While well it is if he shall pardon us : 
Let him do that which seemeth good to him." 
v. 126S Whenas the Shah, that noble man, had heard 
Their lamentable speech he pardoned them, 
And bade them come before him. So they came 
At his desire to seek to clear themselves, 
And as they laid their heads upon the ground 

KAI KB VSR A U 

Their hearts were full, their eyes shed vengeful tears. 

Then looking up to heaven the monarch said : — 

"Almighty Judge, our Help ! these are the troops 

That with their heads full of revenge desired 

To bring the country of fran to dust, 

That scatter everywhere the bane that biteth, 

And fling therein the heads of noble chiefs ; 

But now the Almighty hath so dealt with them 

That they lack rede and knowledge, foot and head. 

To Him I stretch my hands, for He sufficeth ; 

I want no other helper in the world. 

In this regard a wise man spake a saw, 

When mounting on his saddle for the fight : — 

' This charger is a shining throne to me, 

The rest is left to sleepless destiny. 

In this campaign a crown and throne we seek, 

Or else the customary bier of teak ; 

Or I may fall within the leopard's claws, 

Or with my brain replenish vultures' maws.' 

Your evil deeds recoil upon yourselves 

As every man of wisdom is aware. 

I have not washed my hands in blood of yours, 

Nor will I aggravate your evil plight. 

Ye are in my protection, one and all, 

However hostile to my throne ye be. 

Whoever doth desire to stay can stay ; 

He shall experience neither gain nor loss ; 

And whosoever of you would return 

To his own king, I will not hinder him, 

For I have no occasion through God's strength 

For more or less, for labour or for greed." 

The Turkmans, having heard the Shah's harangue, 
Bemoved their casques and owned themselves o'ercome ; 
Though warrior-leopards they became like deer. 
The monarch of the world bade them surrender V. 1269 

Their armour, falchions, spears, and javelins. 

THE SHAHKAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Those haughty Turkmans piled up to the moon 

Their armour for the steeds and Ruman helms, 

And then they set up all around the heap 

Their flags of yellow, red, and violet, 

And sware great oaths : " We all through life will be 

The servitors and bondslaves of the Shah, 

And charge our hearts with love for him." 

Thereon 

The watchful Shah forgave them their misdeeds 
Completely, and dispersed them out of hand 
In various settlements throughout the land. 

§ 49 

Row Bizhan returned icitk Gmtaham 

Thereafter from the look-out came a cry : — 
" The dust of horse hath risen from the way ; 
I see afar three steeds, each with a corpse 
Bound wretchedly upon it, and therewith 
One cavalier." 

The Iranian chieftains all 
Turned to the road their eyes in wonder, asking: — 
" Who is this warrior of Iran that cometh 
So hardily across the battlefield ? " 

Anon Bizhan came riding up ; his bow 
Hung on his arm ; Lahhak and Farshfdward 
Were flung across two steeds, all blood and dust, 
While on another steed was Gustaham, 
In pain and grief, borne in a Turkman's arms. 
Bizhan drew mgher still. He laid his face 
Upon the ground and kissed it when he saw 
His monarch's head and crown and lofty throne. 
Khusrau joyed at the sight of him and asked ; — 
" lion-man ! how went it on the field ? " 

Bfzhan then told the tale of Gustaham, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

133 

Lahhak, and valiant Far shfd ward, the plight 

And wounds of Gustaham, the fight between v . 1270 

The cavaliers, and all things great and small. 

He added : " Gustaham hath one desire, 

And one not grievous for the Shah to grant : 

He hath a wish to look upon the Shah, 

And then is ready to give up the ghost/' 

Thereat the Shah commanded in his kindness 
That Gustaham should be produced before him. 
Now Gustaham was hurt so grievously 
That thou hadst said : "He barely draweth breath," 
Yet at the perfume of the king of kings 
The warrior writhed and turned toward Khusrau 
His eyes wherefrom he showered drops of love; 
The monarch bathed his countenance in tears 
Of blood, the nobles wept as they had been 
Consuming in fierce fire. Khusrau was grieved 
To lose a chief whose head beneath his helm 
Was battle's anvil. From Hushang, Jamshfd, 
And Tahmiiras, the Slmh inherited 
An amulet — the hope of wounded men — 
And ever bare it on his arm but, since 
His heart was yearning upon Gustaham, 
He took the precious jewel off and bound it 
Upon the warrior's arm, and stroked his wounds. 
He placed by Gustaham physicians brought 
From Hind, Rum, Chin, Turun, and from iriin 
By world-wide quest for such contingencies, 
Recited over him all manner of spells, 
And thence departing to the place of prayer 
Much communed with the Maker of the world. 
Two sennights thus passed o'er the wounded man, 
"Who was restored to health and happiness. 
They carried hirn on horseback to the Shah ; 
The monarch of the world, on seeing him, 

Said to the Iranians ; " Through the grace of God V. 1271 

134 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDA USi 

We all are fortunate and happy now ; 
When we had gained the day did not our grief 
For Gustaham subdue our mirthfulness ? 
This is in brief the All Provider's love, 
And not man's knowledge or solicitude." 

He called Bizhan, the son of Giv, and set 
In his the hand of gallant Gustaham, 
And said: " Know that good fortune is of God : 
So take not any credit to thyself, 
Because He ever is the Succourer, 
And only He can help us in our need. 
If any dead man ever came to life 
The World-lord hath so dealt with Gustaham." 

To Gustaham he said : " In these our days 
I have not seen a helper like Bfzhan. 
Had he not chosen toil on thine account 
Who would have seen thanksgivings such as these ? " 

The Shah stayed yet a sennight at Raibad, 
Bestowing drachms, dinars, and various gifts, 
While sending messengers on every side 
To great men and to nobles with commands 
That they should come to court equipped for war, 
" Tor we intend to fight the king of Gang/' 

Now that the battles of Pfrun are told, 
The combatings of Kai Khusrau unfold, 
And marshal, poet ■ in thine expert brain 
The choicest words to tell the vengeance ta'en 
By that impetuous Shah — the wreak that he 
Sought on Afrasiyab laboriously. 

PART VII 

THE GREAT WAR OF KAI KHUSRAU 
WITH AFRASIYAB 

ARGUMENT 

The poet begins with an elaborate prelude wherein he eulogizes 
M&hmud and then continues his story of the reign as follows; 
Kai Khusrau and Afrasiysib both resolve to cany on the war with 
vigour. Their preparations are described. The armies meet, fruit- 
less parleys follow } Shida challenges Kai Khuarau to single combat 
and is slain. A general engagement en sue a, AfnUiyab is defeated 
and takes refuge in Gang-bibisht, which is stormed by Kai Khuarau. 
Afrasiyab escapes and, helped by the Khin and the Faghfurj renews 
the struggle, is again defeated, flees to Gang-dizh, whither he is 
pursued by Kai Khuarau, again escape?, becomes a fugitive, and 
finally takes refuge in a cave, where he is made prisoner by the 
hermit Hum and put to death with his brother Garsiwaa by Kai 
Khusrau. Kai Kaus dies. Kai Khusrau falls into melancholy, 
persists in giving up the throne, appoints Luhnisp to be his 
successor, rides with his paladins into the mountains, and dis- 
appears. Those who remain with him till the end are lost in 
the enow, Luhrdsp becomes Shah. 

NOTE 

On this Part as a whole see Vol. III., p. 8. 
§ i. See VoL I., p. 30 seq. 

§§ 2 and 3. It will be noticed that in this part of the poem 
several names reappear that have been long absent from its pages, 
e,g, Ighriras and Knran. The son of Tus is also mentioned, and 
it is probable that the Zariisp slain by Farud in Part I. of this 
reign is intended, Such names are the common property of 
different and often inconsistent traditions. 

Afrasiyab's son Shfda is also called Pashang. We keep invari- 

»3J 

'36 

THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

ably to the former name, as there are other Pashangs — the father 
of Afrasiyab and the father of Minuchihr. 

§ IZ. Afnisiyub's brother, whose head Kai Khusrau sends to 
Kai Kalis, is apparently the Ighriras mentioned on p. 156. Accord- 
ing to another tradition Afrasiyab had slain his brother Ighriraa 
long before for treachery. 1 

1 3t 3 l r 3&\ 38* I 11 these and other sections the reader will 
note that there are two Gangs — Gang-bihisht, in the original 
Bihisht-i-Gang, and Gang-dizh — due to the existence of variants 
of the same legend. For Gang-dizh see Vol. II., p. 189. 

Mount Ispuruz was the scene of the defeat of Kai Kails by the 
White Div,' and therefore must be identified with some mountain 
of the Alburz range bordering Miizandaran, while the sea crossed 
by Afrasiyab in his flight from Kai Khusrau can be no other than 
the Caspian, yet Kai Khusrau is described as sailing from and 
returning to the sea-shore of Makrdn, i,e. Baluchistan, so that 
we may have here a survival of the old cosmogony (Vol. I., p. 71). 
The sea crossed by Afrasiyab and Kai Khusrau is called " the water 
of Zirih," and this expression, like the corresponding one in the 
account of Kai Kaiis' expedition to Barbaristan, is merely equiva- 
tsnt to " sea." * 

40-44. The old epic story of the feud that began with the 
murder of Iraj ends appropriately in Azarbaijan. In Firdausi's 
version Kai Khusrau and Kai Kaiis, in despair of catching Afrasiyab 
after his flight from Gang-dizh, go on a pilgrimage to the temple 
of Azargashasp and pray that he may be delivered into their 
hands. In the meantime Afrasiyab has taken refuge in a cave 
near lake Khanjast * (Urumiah) in Azarbaijan, making it, as the 
poet says, his palace and his home. Here he is overheard bewail- 
ing himself and is captured by the hermit Hum, but escapes by 
a subterfuge and plunges into the lake. Giidarz and Giv happen 
to be passing at the time, and the former is said to have recalled 
an old story to mind when Hum informs them of the state of 
affairs. They communicate with Kai Khusrau and Kai Kaiis, 
Afrasiyab is induced to come forth from the water by a stratagem, 
and is put to death with his brother Garsiwaz. Most of these 
incidents appear in the older authorities but, as Darmesteter has 
pointed out,* not in the connexion in which they appear in the 
Shahmima. In these the story may be pieced together thus : 
Afrasiyab, we are told, made his residence in Mount Bakyi'r.* We 
learn from the Aogemaide— a Pahlavi discourse on death— that 

1 See Vol. i. p. 367. 
3 Id. p, 80. 
5 DEF, ii. 225. 

2 See Vol. ii. p. 3S seq. 

1 Properly Chtjast. See DZA, ii. 66, note. 

8 WPT, i. 38. 

KAI KHVSRAU 

137 

this palace was an iron one, underground, a thousand times the 
height of a man, and with a hundred columns. In that palace 
he made the Btars, the moon, and the sun go round, making the 
light of day. In that palace he did everything at his pleasure, 
and lived the happiest life, but with all his strength and witch- 
craft could not escape Astivihiid (the demon of death). 1 Here too 
he sacrificed a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen and ten 
thousand lambs that he might seize the Glory that was in the 
sea Vouru-Kasha and belonged to the Aryan people. 8 Three 
times he sought to seize it in the sea Vouru-Kasha, stripping 
himself naked in his desire to seize that Glory that belongs to 
the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and to the holy Zarathustra. 
But the Gloiy escaped, the Glory (led away, the Glory changed 
its seat. Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan (Afrasiyab) 
rushed out of the sea Vouru-Kasha, thinking evil thoughts : " I 
have not been able to conquer the Glory." 3 

We read farther how the gallant Husravah (Khu&rau) offered 
up a sacrifice behind the A'aeA'asta lake, the deep lake of salt waters. 
He begged a boon saying : " Grant me this, O great Ashi Vanguhi ! 
that I may kill the Turanian murderer, Frangrasyan, behind the 
K aefcasta lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge the murder 
of my father Syavarshana (Siyawush), a man, and of Aghrae'ratha 
(Ighriras), a semi-man." The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to 
his side. The gallant Husravah, he who united the Aryan nations 
into one kingdom, obtained that boon.* So that . . . the lord Kavi 
Husravah prevailed over all; he put in bonda Frangrasyan and 
Kereeavazda {Garsiwaz), 5 

Of the god Haoma (the hermit Hum of the Shdhnuma) we read 
that he offered sacrifice, Haoma, the enlivening, the healing, the 
beautiful, the lordly, with golden eyes, upon the highest height 
of the Haraiti Bareza. He begged ... a boon, saying : " Grant 
me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvuspn ! that I may bind 
the Turanian murderer, Frangrasyan, that I may drag him bound 
. . . unto king Husravah, that king Husravah may kill him, behind 
the -fiTaefasta lake, the doep lake of salt waters, to av<?nge the murder 
of his father Syavarshdna, a man, and of Aghranrat ha, a semi-man." 
The powerful DrvaBpa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvuflpa, the main- 
tainor, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations, 
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would give him 
that boon,* Elsewhere we read : " Quick, cut on" then Haoma's 
portion, gift of flesh for doughty Haoma - Heed lest Haoma bind 

1 DZA, i. 380. 
n Id. 3CO. 
6 id. 304. 

" Id. ii. 64 and note. 
1 Id. 278. 
8 Id. 114. 

I3S THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI 

thee fettered, as he bound the fell Turanian Frangrasyan (the 
murderous robber) fast in iron close-surrounded in the mid-third 
of thia earth ! " 1 

The original version o£ the story therefore would seem to have 
been that Afrusiyab built himself an underground palace where 
he offered sacrifice to obtain the Glory of the Iranian race, but 
vainly, He then attempted three times to seize it by force and 
again failed. Haoma then captured him in his palace and handed 
him over to Husravah, who slew him. Firdausi, it will be observed, 
represents Afrasiyub's attempt to seize the Glory as an attempt to 
escape from Hum. Haoma is of course the personification of the 
ancient Aryan drink-offering 7 and a god of the old nature- worship. 
It is one of the instances in which such divine beings have become 
human in the Shahnania. Another instance is that of Kai Khusrau 
himself, in whom a trace of his divine origin is to be found in his 
passing without death to heaven. This trait is found in the 
Zandavasta : " Mayest thou be freed from sickness and death, like 
king Husravah ! ,f 3 

47-63. The legend of Kai Khusrau's melancholy, his expe- 
dition into the mountains, and his attainment to Heaven with> 
out having tasted death, has its parallel in the great Indian 
epic the Mahiibbirata, where Yudhishthira, the eldest of the 
five Ptindavas, becoming weary of the world, resolves to retire 
from the sovereignty and acquire merit by pilgrimage. On 
hearing of his intentions his four brothers — Bhima, Arjunat 
and the twins Nakula and Sahadeva — resolve to follow his 
example and accompany him. Yudhiahthira appoints succes- 
sors to his various kingdoms, and makes a distribution of his 
treasures. He then once more summons his subjects and in- 
forms them of his intentions. " The citizens and the inhabi- 
tants of the provinces, hearing the king's words, became filled 
with anxiety and disapproved of them. 'This should never be 
done ' — said they unto the king. The monarch well versed with the 
changes brought about by time, did not listen to their counsels. 
Possessed of righteous soul, he persuaded the people to sanction 
his views. . . . Then Dharma's son, Yudhiahthira, the king of the 
K.urus, casting oft" his ornaments, wore barks of trees. Bhima and 
Arjuna and the twins, and Draupadi also of great fame/ similarly 
clad themselves in barks of trees. . . . The ladies, beholding the 
princes in that guise, wept aloud- - - - The five brothers, with 

1 MZA, Hi. 245, Darmesteter translates bien qu'il fut em-eloppe 
d'une forteresse d'arrain." DEI, ii. 227. 

* See Vol. i. p. 8. 3 DZA, ii. 327. 

* Draupadi was the joint wife of the five P&ndavas. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

139 

Draupadi forming the sixth, and a dog forming the seventh, set 
out on their journey. . . . The citizens and the ladies of the royal 
household followed them for some distance. . . . The denizens of 
the city then returned *' to their new ruler and to the new situation 
caused by the renunciation of the Pandavaa. The seven pilgrims 
meanwhile had set out upon their journey. They first wandered 
eastward, then southward, and then westward. Lastly they faced 
northward and crossed the Himavat. Than they beheld before 
them a vast desert of sand and beyond it Mount Meru. One by 
one the pilgrims sank exhausted and expired, first Draupadi, then 
the twins, then Arj una, and then Bhima ; but Yudhishthira, who 
never even looked back at his fallen comrades, still pre&ged on and, 
followed by the faithful dog, who turns out to be Dharma, the 
god of righteousness, in disguise, entered Heaven in his mortal 
body, not having tasted death. 1 

On comparing this legend with that of the text it will be seen 
that, in epite of natural differences of detail, the resemblances are 
too numerous and close to be wholly accidental. In both legends 
two kings, after triumphing over their mortal foes in a great war, 
become world-weary and determine to renounce the sovereignty. 
In both the people protest in vain. Both kings appoint their 
successor, whom the people accept. Both bestow gifts and other 
favours on their chiefs. In both we have the lamentations of the 
kings' wives. Both journey into the mountains with a devoted 
band, the number of which is the same in both cases, and both are 
accompanied by a divine being, for the part of the dog in the 
Indian legend is indicated in the Iranian as being taken by Surush, 
the angel of Urmuzd. 2 In both the leaders pass deathless into 
Heaven, and in both their mortal comrades perish. One legend 
therefore must be derived from the other, or else, and this seems 
to be the better opinion, they must be referred to a common 
origin of great antiquity. 

In Praise of Sultan Mahnik'l 

God bless the Shah, the pride of crown and throne V, 1372 

And signet-ring, bless him whose treasuries groan 
With his munificence, what while the fame 

1 RM t Mahiiprastbanika Parva. There is a more accessible English 
version in the late Sir Edwin Arnold's "Indian Idylls," p. 244. 

2 Of, pp. 273, 303, 308. 

140 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Of majesty is heightened by his name. 
From sea to sea hosts answer to his call, 
The Glory of his crown is over all ; 
No gold is in the mine, to men unknown, 
That fortune hath not reckoned as his own ; 
And, God assisting him to all his ends, 
He spoileth foemen to enrich his friends. 
At feasts he scattereth treasure, while in fight 
The Elephant and Lion feel his might. 
And when he dominateth lands in war 
He bringeth Doomsday with his scimitar ; 
But, whether jewels with his hand he fling, 
Or wield a sword, he seeketh one sole thing — 
That heaven at feast shall hail him as a Sea, 1 
In fight as sun-faced Lion. All agree — 
Earth, water, and the heavenly Fount of light — 
That such another Shah ne'er was for fight, 
For gifts and toil, for glory and renown. 
Mixed he not love with war he would bring down, 
When wroth, the stars. Strong is he, his array 
Such that therein the wind is barred of way. 
Seven hundred elephants of mighty size 
Bring up his army's rear, and his allies 
V. 1273 Are God and Gabriel. From all the great 
He claimeth tribute, and from every state ; 
While, if they pay not, all is lost to them — 
Their country, treasure, throne, and diadem. 
Who dare break fealty with him or slight 
His bidding who at feast is this world's Light, 
And Mountain with the breastplate on in fight ? 
Abu'l Kasim ! may that brave king — the cause 
That freeth onager from lion's claws, 
World-lord Mahmud, who bringeth to the ground 
Chiefs' heads in fight — be Shah, the moon be crowned 
By his high star, world without end, forwhy 

1 "une mer de rjinerositt" (Mohl), 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

He is the Adornment of the radiant sky, 
At feasts a Cloud bestowing bounteously, 
And dowered with wisdom, justice, and renown. 
May this world never lack his head and crown. 
He hath host, courage, minister, and treasure, 
And one to him are fight and scenes of pleasure. 
O'er all the world one carpet hath been placed — 
His token nevermore to be effaced— 
And on it are a cushion and a seat — 
For Fazl, son of Ahmad, a man replete 
With justice, prudence, rede, and godly fear ; 
No Shah before had such a minister. 
In his hands is the peace of all the state, 
For he is good and chief of all the great, 
Frank-spoken, with clean hands and single heart ; 
To serve God and his sovereign is his part. 
With this wise, upright minister for friend 
My far-extending labour reached its end. 

I framed this story of the days of yore, 
Selected from the book of men of lore, 
That it in mine old age might yield me fruit, 
Give me a crown, dinars, and high repute, 
But saw no bounteous world-lord ; there was none 
Who added to the lustre of the throne. 
I waited for a patron patiently — 
One whose munificence required no key, 
A Guardian of the Faith and crown, a Light 
To make the crown and ivory throne more bright* 
Strong in the battles of the brave* acute 
In why and wherefore, one to bring to fruit 
The bough of Faith and wisdom, and confute 
By mere conjecture other sages' lore, 
Should think no ill and rest in God secure. 
While three score years and five were passing by, 
Like spring-winds o'er the desert, poverty 
And toil were mine; next year like one bemused 

i 4 2 THE SHAfJNAMA OF FIRDAUSl 

I leaned upon a staff, my hands refused 

The rein, my cheeks grew moon-like pale, my beard 

Lost its black hue and camphor-like appeared, 

Mine upright stature bent as age came on, 

And all the lustre of mine eyes was gone. 

When I was fifty-eight, and when in truth 

I still felt young though I had lost my youth, 

A proclamation reached mine ears at last 

Whereat care aged and all my troubles pass'd. 

It ran : " Ye men of name who long to find 

Some trace of Faridiin still left behind ! 

See bright-souled Faridun alive again 

With earth and time for bondslaves. He hath ta'en 

The world by justice and by largessings, 

And is exalted o'er all other kings. 

Bright are the records of his earlier day, 

And may he flourish, fruit and root, for aye ! " 

Now since that proclamation reached mine ear 
I wish not any other sound to hear ; 
In his name have I fashioned this my lay, 
And may his end be universal sway, 
For he — this lord of sword and crown and throne — 
Will be mine aid now that my youth hath gone. 
I ask of God almighty and most high 
That I so long may 'scape calamity 
That in the world-king's name I may tell o J er 
These tales, omitting naught of ancient lore j 
v. 1275 Then let my worthless corpse be dust, but rise 
My quick soul to the mines of Paradise. 
The righteous judge and bounteous lord of earth, 
In whom it seeth every kind of worth, 
The lord of Chin, the lord of Hindustan, 
Lord of Iran and country of Turan, 
The lord of splendour and exalted aim, 
Beyond the reach of calumny and blame, 
At whose voice crocodiles in water crack 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Their skins, and leopards on the desert-track, 

Mahmiid, the world-lord, like the sun in light, 

A Lion with a scimitar in fight* 

From every want on earth will set me free, 

And rank me high in his nobility. 

For ever may his throne endure, and still 

May fortune turn according to his will ! 

At feasts what are dinars to him but dust ? 

His bounty causeth not his heart distrust. 

Bold is the man that praiseth him, I wis 

Such praisers do not know what praising is, 

Because the world's king passeth thought. 'Tis his 

As Jupiter's own diadem to be. 

I have endured, king ! a slavery 
That some memorial may be left of me. 
The homes that are the dwellings of to-day 
Will sink 'neath shower and sunshine to decay, 
But storm, and rain shall never mar what I 
Have built — the palace of my poetry. 
As years pass o'er the tale that I have writ 
Each man possessed of wisdom reading it 
Shall bless the world-lord Shah and say: " May none 
Behold unfilled by him the royal throne ! " 

His own achievements celebrate his name, 
And all the world is witness to his fame. 
For me, I cannot offer praises meet, 
But I will laud the dust upon his feet. 
May this age live for him alone and may 
His fortune be illumed by wisdom's ray, 
As merry be his heart as jocund spring, 
May time no scath upon his person bring 

May he he all his people's hearts' delight, V. 1276 

Victorious ever, and a man of might. 

So long as round the earth the heaven shall spin, 

And Jupiter pursue its course therein, 

May he continue in his grace and pride — 

144 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USt 

No evil eye, no want unsatisfied t 

I now resume mine old-world legendry 
From true traditions. As time's course I see 
I need none other to admonish me. 
The combatings of Kai Khusrau arise 
Before me : ye must hear my witcheries, 
For I shall shower pearls as I descant, 
And in among the rocks my tulips plant, 
Now have I got a theme long known to me, 
Such that the marrow of my speech 'twill be. 

O thou who lookest on a bygone age ! 
Joy sometimes filleth thee and sometimes rage, 
And wondrous 'tis how many novel smarts 
Yon turning sky reserveth for our hearts ! 
One's lot throughout his years is grief and fret, 
And he must taste of sorrow and regret; 
Another's portion is all honey, sweet, 
Indulgence, luxury, and lofty seat; 

Another hath to walk a treacherous way, 
Whiles up, whiles down. Such fosterage we meet 

From fortune, but the thorn-prick will out-stay 
The blushing of its rose, and at three score 
The hand should be withheld from grasping more, 
While to survive to three score years and ten 
'Neath heaven's vicissitudes is not for men, 
Or if, worse hap ! one live so many years, 
Existence then is but a cause for tears. 
If three score years were but a fishing seine 1 
A wise man would not seek escape in vain, 
But through the turning sky or through the net 
Spread by the sun and moon I cannot get, 
V. 1277 A king may labour and deny himself 

The gust of vengeance and delight of pelf. 
Yet must he pass hence to the other land, 
And leave his toils behind just as they stand. 

1 The same word in the original means & net and sixty. 

KAI KHVSRAU 

»45 

Think of Shah Kai Khusrau, for now thou hast 
To treat as new the doings of the past. 
He, having slain his grandsire, passed away ; 
The world peruseth not his grants to-day. 
This Wayside Inn doth ever treat us so; 
Use thine endeavours to escape its woe. 

§ 2 

How Kai Khusmu arrayed his Hod against Afrdsiydb 

The warfare of Gudarz and of Piran 

Being ended, the victorious Shah prepared 

For war again, and chiefs with countless troops 

Flocked from all sides ; the sound of clarions 

Arose. They pitched the camp upon the plain, 

And set upon an elephant a throne 

Of turquoise, and the world's face grew like Nile. 

The Shah sat throned and crowned, from plain and court 

Shouts rose, no room was left to move on waste 

Or sleep in city. When the noble Shah, 

Thus seated, dropped the ball within the cup, 

And girt his loins, there was tarrying 

Throughout the realm save at the great king's gate, 

Such was his ordinance for all the kingdom. 

Of those whom he had strictly charged, and sent 
Out to the marches, with Luhrasp and Rustain, 
The strong of hand, who could despoil the deep 
Of crocodiles, and with far-famed Ashkash, v. 1278 

The paladin, approven, great, and ardent, 
He bade the efficient to return to court. 
He oped his treasury to pay the troops, 
Spake often of the spirit of his sire, 
Chose envoys fluent, shrewd, and well advised, 
And sent this letter in the ancient tongue 
To all the chiefs and nobles: "Kai Khusrau, 

VOL. IV. K 

146 THE SHAHNAMA OF F1RDAUSI 

The victor, seated on his elephant. 
Hath dropped the ball; the land is like the Nile. 
Let there be neither rest nor sleep for you, 
But only vengeance on Afrasiyab." 

When all the men of leading in the realm 
Had read the letter of the Shah a shout 
Ascended from the warriors of the world, 
The earth began to heave as 'twere the sea, 
The chieftains out of all the provinces 
Marched court-ward with their troops, and when a host 
Had formed war-worthy he inspected it, 
And drew it up as on the field of battle. 
He chose out thirty thousand cavaliers, 
Who drew the sword, among those famous troops 
To occupy with him the army's centre, 
And bathe their hands in blood in every fight. 
He further chose three persons from the host, 
Great men and prudent, having forms of brass ; 
The three were Rustam, that great paladin, 
Gudarz, the ancient, cunning Wolf, and Tus, 
The paladin, who wore the golden boots, 
And had the custody of Kawa's standard, 
v. 1279 On his right hand the Shah placed Tus, with whom 
Were Manushan and well advised Khuzan — 
Both kings in Pars and helmed with helms of gold. 
Beyond these were Arash — a Fire in fight — 
And king Giiran — the Lustre of the host — 
The one the monarch of the Khuzians, 
And fortunate in battle-time, the other 
King of Kirman, impetuous in strife — 
Sabbakh, the wary monarch of Yaman, 
fraj of lion-heart — an Elephant 
For bulk — who was the ruler of Kabul, 
A worldlord and a man both wise and holy, 
Shammakh, who was the native king of Sur, 
Girt for the fray, and, greater still, Karan, 

KAI KHVSRAV 

U7 

The figh. ting-man, victorious everywhere, 

The shatterer of hosts, who ruled Khawar, 

A worldlord, wary, and imperious. 

All those that held descent from Kai Kubad — 

Great men of understanding and high birth — 

The Shah set on his left with Dilafruz 

To marshal them. The chiefs sprung from Gudarz, 

Who plied the sword by night despite the gloom — 

Bi'zhan, the son of Gi'v, and brave Ruhham, 

Both reckoned by the Shah among the great — 

Gurgm, Mflad's son, and the troops from Kai, 

All marched as bidden by the Shah. Moreover 

The scions of Zarasp, who gave new lustre 

To glorious Azargashasp, kept guard 

Behind the Shah with cloud -transfixing spears. 

He gave the right wing into Rustam's charge, 

Where all the troops were one in heart and body, 

For all those from Zabulistan — the chiefs, 

And kin of Zal — he stationed on the right, 

Retaining for himself the chief command. 

Then for the left wing he selected troops, 

Like Sol in Aries, led by Gudarz, 

Son of Kishwad, Hajfr, and by Farhad. v. 1280 

The chiefs from Barda' and from Ardabfl, 

When ranked before the ruler of the world, 

Requested that Gudarz might be their leader, 

And drew up on the left. The monarch bade 

To hold the way before the central host 

With elephants of war with towers thereon ; 

The earth was like the Nile. Within the towers 

He stationed archers valiant in the fray, 

And thousands strong, and round each elephant 

Three hundred horse — famed fighting-men — as guards, 

The warriors from Baghdad who were with Zanga, 

The son of Shawaran, picked men of Karkh— 

He ordered with their arbalists to take 

148 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Their place afoot before the elephants, 
And had two miles of mountain fronted them 
They would have pierced the rocks' hearts with their 
arrows ; 

No one was able to withstand their shots. 
Behind the elephants he placed the footmen 
With head- transfixing spears nine cubits long. 
They held in front their bucklers of Grflan : 
The blood seethed in their livers. After these 
Came foot in line with breastplate-piercing shafts 
And shields, then warrior-horsemen with full quivers. 
Out of the army of Khawar 1 the Shah 
Chose thirty thousand warriors and chiefs 
Equipped with armour, shields, and K rim an helms, 
And made that gallant horseman Fariburz 
Their chief in consort with Tukhar, the king 
Of Dahistan, who scorned all enemies, 
And was by birth of noble Dashma's seed — 
A family of puissance in those days. 
Nastuh was at the side of Fariburz, 
Supported by a crowd of warriors. 
The great men and the war-experienced chiefs, 
Brought from the desert of the Bedouins, 
Were all commanded by Zahfr, who used 
To pluck gazelles away from lion's claws, 
v. 1281 And bidden by Khusrau to join Nastuh, 
Thus piling up the left wing of the Shah. 
There was a host from Barbaristan and Rum, 
Whereof the leader hight Kishwaristan. 
These, thirty thousand strong in horse and foot, 
Set forward likewise to the king's left wing. 
There was another host from Khurasan, 
Men of ambition and experience ; 
Their leader and their guardian in the quest 
Of fame was Minuchihr, son of Arash. 

1 " fle t 'Occident " (Mohl). 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

149 

There was a man of name too of the race 
Of Gunikhan — a king and of the seed 
Of Kai Kubad: his name was King Firuz — 
A chief, the lustre both of heart and host. 
There was the king of Gharcha too who used 
To spring on elephants as lions do. 
The Shah assigned them posts by Hinuchihr, 
And made the head of all their house their captain. 
Moreover from Mount Kaf the mighty men — 
The offspring of Jamshid and Farfdun — 
Advanced in all their pride with spear and mace, 
Incensed against the offspring of Zadsham. 
Khusrau selected thirty thousand swordsmen — 
Men of ambition and of royal seed — 
And gave that force to Giv, son of Gudarz, 
In whom the marches joyed. Supporting him, 
With troops in single and in double file, 
Was Awa, son of Samkunan ; his warriors 
Were brave and wary. To the right the Shah 
Dispatched ten thousand sworders — gallant horsemen — 
And to the rear of Giv, son of Gudarz, 1 
Ten thousand more brave troops. The swordsman 
Barta 

Marched with his mountaineers amid that throng — 

A noble band and gallant combatants — 

In Giv's support. The Shah sent thirty thousand 

Picked cavaliers of battle to the left, 

All warlike youths commanded by Zawara, 

And next selected from among the troops v. 1282 

Ten thousand well equipped, and made their head 

Karan the fighting man that he might urge 

His steed between the embattled hosts as champion. 

To Gustaham, the son of Gazhdaham, 

The Shah said : "lie Karan the fighter's comrade," 

And bade the son of Ttis to make the rounds 

1 P. has ; — " And to support Giidarz, son of Kishwrfd." 

THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSl 

Throughout the host with trump and kettledrum 

To stay from unjust deeds the hand of him 

That did not worship God, to see that none 

Among the soldiers was in want of food, 

And also that no person was oppressed. 

He was to ask the Shah for what was needful. 

And be in all the mouthpiece of the host. 

The world was full of wains and buffalos 
Sent forward with provisions by the king ; 
His scouts were visible on every side, 
He roused the heads of sleepers from their slumbers, 
Appointed watchmen's stations on the mountains, 
And left behind no stragglers from the army. 
To every quarter he sent spies and sought 
With diligence to know how matters stood. 
Caves, deserts, hills, and plains on every side 
Were filled with dust raised by the troops, while rein 
Was linked to rein, all necks were craned for fight, 
And none was either fearful or distressed ; 
The Shah took treasure with him on the march. 
On this wise when he had arrayed the host 
He sky-ward raised his Kaian diadem, 
And friend and foe alike forbore to have 
A purpose save the battles of the brave. 

§ 3 

How Afrdmjdh heard that Pirdn was elain and thai Kai 
Kkusrau had arrayed his Host 

The Turkman king reposed upon his throne 
Of ivory on the further side of Jaj, 
v. 1283 And of his myriads of troops meanwhile 

The more part were in arms, prepared for war. 
Whate'er existed on that hilly march, 
Upon the trees or growing on the ground, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

The troops consumed it all — both fruit and leaf. 

The "world was bent on death. The Turkman king 

Was at Baigand, surrounded by his kindred 

And his allies, for all the chiefs of Chin 

And of Machfn were present there. Pavilions 

And camp- enclosures occupied the world ; 

No room remained. Afrasiyab. that wise, 

Ambitious man, was at Kunduz and there 

He feasted and reposed, selecting it 

Because it had been built by Fan'diin, 

Who had erected there a Fane of Fire 

With all the Zandavasta limned thereon 

In gold. The name Kunduz is ancient Persian ; 

Thou hast may be some knowledge of that tongue, 

But now the name is altered to Baigand, 

So light and fickle is this age of ours ! 

Afrasiyab was sprung from Farfdiin, 

And was unwilling to desert Kunduz, 

But with his rneiny camped upon the plain, 

Confounding with his host the heavenly sphere. 

His camp-enclosure, thronged with multitudes 

Of servitors, was of brocade of Chin; 

The tents within it were of leopard-skin — 

A usage of the Turkman king Pashang. 

The royal tent contained a throne of gold 

Adorned with gems and golden ornaments; 

There sat the monarch of the Turkman host 

With mace in hand and diadenl on head. 

Outside stood many standards of the chiefs, 

And at the monarch's portal were the tents 

Of those whom most he honoured — brethren, sons, 

And others not akin. 'Twas his desire 

To reinforce Pir&n, but with the dawn 

A cavalier came swift as dust with tidings 

About him, and the wounded straggled in, 

Withal lamenting, dust upon their heads. 

152 

THE SHAHnAmA OF FIRDAUSI 

Each with his own account of injuries 
Inflicted by Iran upon Tiiran, 
Told of Pi'ran, Lahhak, and Farslridward, 
And of the nobles on the day of battle, 
How they had fared both in the van and rear, 
And how they had been worsted on the field, 
How also Kai Khusrau arrived one day, 
And with his host filled earth from hill to hill. 
" Our troops all asked for quarter " thus they said ; 
" The flock was frightened behag shepherdless. 1 ' 
The monarch, when he heard it, was aghast, 
His face was gloomy as his heart was dark, 
He came down wailing from the ivory throne, 
And cast his crown down in the magnates' presence, 
A wail of anguish went up from the troops, 
The nobles' cheeks were wan with misery. 
They cleared the place of strangers and assembled 
The monarch's kin. Afrasiyab in anguish 
Wept, rent his locks, and wailed : " Ye Eyes of mine, 
My noble cavalier Ruin, Human, 
Lahhak, and Farshfdward, horsemen and Lions 
Upon the battle-day < no son or brother, 
No chief or leader, hath survived the fight !" 

He thus lamented. Then his humour changed, 
He sorrowed for the soldiers, then he sware 
A mighty oath and cried in grief and anguish : — > 
" By (rod, I will have none of ivory throne, 
My head shall have no commerce with the crown, 
My tunic shall be mail, my throne a steed, 
My crown a helmet and my tree a spear. 
Henceforth I wish not feast and banqueting, 
Or e'en provision for the crown itself; 
v. 12S5 I want but vengeance for my famous men, 

My swordsmen and my men of high emprise, 
On base-born Kai Khusrau, and may the seed 
Of Siyawush be lacking to the world." 

KAI KHUSRAU 

1 53 

While he bewailed those tidings news arrived 
Of Kai Khusrau : " A host is near Jihun, 
And all the realm's face is overspread with troops." 

In grief and wretchedness he called his powers, 
Spake of Pi'ran at large and of the slaying 
Of Farshfdward, his brother, of Ruin 
And other heroes of the fight, and said : — 
" Ensue not slumber and repose henceforth ; 
Our foes have mustered and have come sharp-clawed. 
This is no time for dallying and debate, 
But for revenge, for bloodshed, and a struggle 
For very life. Our task is love and vengeance, 
This for Piran and that on Kai Khusrau." 

With tearful eyes the chieftains of Tiiran 
Replied : " We all are servants of the king, 
And will not quit this vengeance while we live. 
None hath borne children like Pfran, Ruin, 
And Farshfdward — the seed of Farfdun. 
We, great and small, are at the king's disposal, 
And though the hills and dales become a sea 
Of blood, we have our bodies' length of earth, 
Not one of us will quit the battlefield 
If He who is the moon's Lord aideth us." 

Thereat the Turkman monarch's heart revived ; 
His humour changed ; he was himself again. 
He oped his treasury's door, he paid his troops, 
His heart all wreak, his head vainglorious, 
And gave up to his soldiers all the herds 
That he possessed upon the hills and plains. 
He chose him thirty thousand Turkman sworders, 
Equipped for war, and sent them to patrol 
Jfhun in boats that none might cross the river 
By night and make a foray unopposed. 
He sent his forces out on every side, 
Employing much resourceful stratagem, 
But 'twas the ordinance of holy God 

'54 

THE SHAHNAmA OF fIRDAUSi 

That that unrighteous king should be destroyed. 
At night he sat in conclave with the wise, 
With world-experienced, prudent archimages : 
They bandied earth's affairs about among them, 
And settled that the king should send his host 
Across Jfhiin. The king, who sought a means 
To counteract the mischief of the foe, 
Then parted all his army into two, 
And ordered Kurakhan, his eldest son. 
To come to him. For valour and for state, 
For mien, for looks, for prudence and for counsel, 
Thou had at declared the son to be the sire. 
The monarch gave him half of that great host — 
Experienced men of name and warriors — 
And sent him to Bukhara, there to be 
Behind his father like a mount of flint. 
The king kept on dispatching arms and men, 
Provision trains ne'er ceased* He left Baigand 
And hastened to Jfhiin. The army lined 
The bank throughout. Above a thousand boats 
Were ferrying for a week until the hills 
And plains were naught but warriors. The crowd 
Of elephants and troops of Lions made 
The passage of the stream a busy one. 
Boats covered all the water and the host 
Marched toward the desert of Amwf. The king 
Brought up the rear and crossed intent on war. 
He sent on all sides speedy cavaliers- 
Men shrewd and ardent — and commanded them 
V. 1287 " Survey the country both to right and left 

For some spot large enough to hold the host." 

Whenas the scouts returned from every side 
They thus reported to the exalted king : 
t! The many troops engaged in this campaign 
Will need supplies and grass and halting-places. 
There is beside the river of Gflan 

KAI KHUSRAU 

A route with fodder and encam ping-grounds 
Where men of vigilance may bring provisions 
By water to the army. On the way 
Are sands and ample room for pitching tents 
With palace-like enclosures." 

This refreshed 
His heart. He heightened on the imperial throne, • 
A general was he expert in war, 
And went not by the words of any teacher. 
He ranged the centre and the wings thereof, 
The outposts to observe the enemy, 
The rear, and station for the baggage -train, 
He ranged the left and right. He made a camp 
In royal wise, with five score thousand swordsmen 
To form the centre, inaking that his station 
Because he took the chief command himself. 
Pashang, whose hands were strong as leopard's claws, 
Commanded on the left, in all the host 
A peerless noble, and unequalled horseman 
In any land. His sire surnamed him Shi'da, 1 
For he was like bright Sol, would urge his steed, 
Seize, and pluck out by force, a leopard's tail ; 
He wont to use an iron spear and pierce 
A mountain in the fight. To him the king 
Committed five score thousand troops and chiefs 
For that campaign. He had a younger brother — 
His glorious peer, a warrior Jahn by name, 
A potent prince, his father's counsellor, 
Raised by his understanding o'er the throng. 
His sire gave him a hundred thousand horsemen 
Equipped for battle — Turkmans of Chigil — 
To guard the rear of Srrida and not turn 
Their heads away though stones rained from the 
clouds. 

The king chose of his grandsons one who used 

1 i.e. The shining one. 

1 5 6 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

To cut his collops out of lions' backs 
As leader of the right wing of the host, 
Which hid the sun itself in clouds of dust. 
The cavaliers of Tartary, Khallukh, 
And Balkh, all paladins who used the sword, 
Had for their chief Afrasiyab's fifth son — 
A famous warrior eager for the fight, 
One whom they used to call Gurdgfr the valiant — 
A man whose sword and shafts would pierce a moun- 
tain. 

With him went thirty thousand warriors — 
Men of the fray and armed with swords for battle. 
Damiir and Jaranjas were his companions 
In rendering support to noble Jahn. 
Their leader was the veteran Nastiih, 
Whose own superior was valiant Shida. 
Of Turkman warriors thirty thousand men 
Marched forth with maces and artillery, 
Led by brave Ighrfras who counted blood 
As water. Next the king chose forty thousand 
Whose chief was elephantine Garsiwaz — 
A leader of ambition midst that folk, 
The chief of nobles, and the army's stay ; 
The exalted king entrusted to his charge 
v. 12S9 The elephants. He next chose from the troops 
Ten thousand men insatiate of fight, 
And bade them place themselves with lips afoam 
Between the lines upon the battlefield 
To charge the foe dispersedly and break 
The hearts and backs of the Iranians. 
The rear was toward the east. At night they barred 
The road with elephants. Afrasiyab, 
The world-illuming monarch, kept before 
His soldiers' eyes Nfmruz as Cynosure. 

KAl KHUSRAU 

u 

How Kai Khuerau had Tidings that Afrdsiy&b advanced 
to fight with him 

Now when Khusrau heard from his watchful spies 

About the Turkmans and Afrasiyab : — 

" He hath conveyed such hosts across Jlhiin 

That neither sands nor rocks are visible ! " 

He called his warriors and declared to them 

What he had heard, chose from among his troops 

The fittest of the mighty of Iran, 

Men that had tasted this world's salts and sours. 

To succour Gustaham, son of Naudar, 

At Balkh, and bade Ashkash to lead to Zam 

A host with treasure, elephants, and drachms 

That none might take him in the rear and frustrate 

The purpose of the Lions of fran ; 

He ordered next his warriors to horse, 

Struck up the tymbals and led on the host, 

But marched with counsel, prudence, and no haste, 

For that in warfare leadeth to repentance. 

The Shah, when he had reached the waste, inspected 
The bearing and equipment of his men. 
The army's route was toward Kharazm, where sands 
And plains were fit for strife, with Dahistan 
To left, the stream to right, the sands between, 
Afrasiyab in front. The Shah in person, 
With Rustam, Tus, Giidarz, Gfv, and a staff 
Of noble warriors, went round the field 
To view the approaches and the pathless waste ; 
Then, having heard about his grandsire's force, V. 1290 

He made his dispositions craftily, 
And, having not expected such a host, 
So many elephants and men of war, 
He strengthened his position with a fosse, 

158 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

And spread his scouts about on every side. 
He filled the fosse with water when night came 
Upon the side toward Afrasiy&b, 
And scattered caltrops all about the plain 
So that the foemen should not traverse it. 

When Sol was shining out of Aries, 
And gracing all the surface of the world, 
The Turkman general reviewed his host, 
Struck up the tymbals and arrayed his ranks. 
The world was filled with din of trump and troops, 
The warriors put on their iron helms. 
Thou wouldst have said : " Earth's face is iron, and air 
Empanoplied with spears ! " 

Three days and nights 
The hosts abode thus and none stirred a lip. 
The cavalry were mounted on both sides, 
The footmen stood in front. Thou wouldst have said : — 
" Earth is an iron mountain, heaven is mailed," 

Before the two kings the astrologers, 
Much musing and with tables on their breasts; 
Sought out the secret purposes of heaven 
With astrolabes to find the favoured side, 
But heaven looked on with a spectator's eye, 
And left the gazers in perplexity. 

§ s 

How S/itda came before his Father Afr&giy&b 

Upon the fourth day when the strain was great 

The valiant Shida came before his sire, 

And said to him : " famed throughout the world, 

And most exalted of all potentates ! 

No monarch under heaven hath Grace like thine, 

And neither sun nor moon opposeth thee ; 

An iron mount would run as 'twere a river 

KAI KHUSRAU 

'59 

If it should hear the name Afrasiyab. 

Earth is not able to sustain thy host, v - I2 9' 

Or yon resplendent sun thy casque. Of all 

The kings none fronteth thee save Kai Khusrau, 

Thy kinsman but a base-born miscreaut. 

Thou didst bold Siyuwush as son, didst bear 

A father's pains and love for him, beteeming 

No noxious blast from heaven to visit him. 

Thou didst distaste him when assured that he 

Aimed at thy crown, thy throne, and diadem, 

And if the king of earth had spared his life 

The crown and signet both would have been his. 

The man that now hath come to fight with thee 

Shall not have long of this world. Father-like 

Thou didst encourage this black reprobate, 

Forbearing to consign him to the dust ; 

Thou didst support him till he spread his wings, 

Fit through thy favour for the throne of gold, 

And bird-like flew Iranward from Tiiran ; 

Thou wouldst have said : ' He never saw his grandsire.' 

Look at Piran's own deeds of kindliness 

Toward that faithless and unworthy man ; 

Yet he forgot Piran's love and fulfilled 

His heart with vengeance and his head with strife, 

And when ho caught Pi'ran as he desired 

He put that kindly paladin to death. 

Now hath he issued from Iran with troops 

To make a fierce attack upon his grandsire. 

He seeketh not dinars or diadem, 

Not treasures, horses, scimitars, or soldiers, 

But aimeth at the lives of his own kindred, 

And that is all the burden of his talk. 

My father is a king, a most wise monarch, 

And will bear witness that my words are true. 

What need have armies for astrologers ? 

The brave seek honour with their scimitars. 

\6o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS1 

The horsemen on the right are all for battle, 
V. 1292 And, if the king permitteth, I will leave 

The foe no cavaliers, but pin their helmets 
Upon their heads with shafts in spite of fosse 
And reservoir." 

Afrasiyab replied; — 
"Be not impetuous. What thou say'st is true, 
And never should one listen save to truth ; 
Yet, as thou know'st, the warrior Piran 
In this world trod the path of excellence ; 
There was no fraud or falsehood in his heart, 
He sought for nothing but the good and right, 
He was an elephant in strength in battle, 
He had a sea-like heart and sunny face : 
Human his brother was a warrior-leopard, 
So was the brave Lahhak, so Farshfdward. 
A hundred thousand Turkman cavaliers, 
Ambitious men accoutred for the fight, 
Departed hence all seething for the fray, 
Though I in secret sorrowed and bewailed.' 
They perished on the battlefield ; the ground 
Whereon they lay was puddled with their gore. 
The marches of Turan are broken-hearted 
With sorrow, all men dream of dead Piran, 
And no one speaketh of Afrasiyab ; 
So let us tarry till our men of name, 
Our great men of the host, our cavaliers, 
Have gazed awhile upon the Iranians, 
And have not hearts impassioned, grieved, and sore. 
The Iranians too will see this mighty host 
With all its treasures, thrones, and diadems. 
It is not good for us to fight in force ; 
Defeat will corne and we shall grasp the wind, 
But warriors will I send dispersedly, 
And fill the wastes with our foes' blood." 

Then Shfda:— 

KAI KHUSRAU 

161 

" Sire ! fight not thus. First of onr warriors 

Am I — a brazen-bodied cavalier — - 

And have seen none who in the battle-day 

Could scatter wind-borne dust upon my steed. 

I passion for a combat with Khusrau 

Because he is the new king of the world, 

And if he shall encounter me, as I 

Doubt not, withal he shall not scape my clutch, 

The Iranians shall be broken — heart and back — 

And all their projects marred, while if another 

Come forth I soon will lay his head in dust." 

The king replied : " O inexperienced one [ 
How should the king of kings encounter thee ? 
If he would fight I am his opposite, 
'Tis mine to trample on his name and person, 
And if we meet thus on the field both hosts 
Will rest from strife." 

"Experienced one," said Srrfda, 
" Inured to this world's heat and cold ! thou hast 
Five sons before thee still. We will not suffer 
These thoughts of fight. No worshipper of God, 
Nor army even, could approve that thou 
Shouldst go in person to confront Khusrau." 

s 6 

How Afrdmjdb sent an Embassage to Kai Khusrau 

Then unto Shfda said Afrdsiyab : — 
" Imperious son ! ne'er be mishap thy lot. 
Though thou wouldst fight with Kai Khusrau thyself 
Take not this present matter in ill part : 
Go forth and be the Maker thine ally, 
And may thy foemen's heads be overturned. 
Convey a message unto Kai Khusrau 
Forme and say: 1 The world is changed indeed! 
VOL. IV. L 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSl 

The grandson waging war upon his grandsire 
Must have a head all guile and wickedness. 
Was it the Maker's aim to till the world 
With fight and feud ? When Siyawush was slain 
The fault was his for heeding not advisers ; 
v. 1294 B u t if the blame was mine what had Pfran, 
What had Ruin, Lahhak, and Farshidward, 
Done that they should be bound to horses' backs, 
Blood-boltered, and like maddened elephants ? 
Now if thou say'st : " Thou art a miscreant, 
A villain of the seed of Ahriman," 
Behold thou art descended from my seed, 
And castest an aspersion on thyself. 
Leave fighting to Giidarz and Kai Kaus, 
And let them come against me with their troops. 
I have not spoken thus as fearing thee, 
Or as grown recreant in mine old age. 
My troops are as the sand upon the shore, 
Brave warriors and Lions all prepared 
At my command upon the day of battle 
To make Mount Gang an ocean, O my son J 
Still I am fearful of the Omnipotent, 
Of bloodshed, and calamities to come, 
For many an innocent and noble head 
Will be dissevered on this battlefield. 
If thou renouncest not this strife with me, 
Good sooth, thine own disgrace will come of it ; 
But if thou wilt agree with me by oath, 
And keep it, I will point thee out a way 
Whereby thy troops and treasure may be saved : 
When thou shalt have forgotten Siyawush, 
And made another Siyawush of me, 
Then Jahn and valiant Shfda, who in battle 
Turn Mount Gang to a sea, shall be thy brothers, 
And I will bid the Turkmans to withdraw 
From all tracts that thou claimest for Iran, 

KA1 KH VSR A U 

And such ancestral treasures as I have — 
Dinars, crowns, horses, thrones, and battle-gear, 
Left to me by my father's sire Z&dsham, 
Crowns for grandees, thrones, coronets, and all 
That thou requirest to supply thy troops — 
Will I dispatch just as they are to thee. 
My son shall be thy paladin, his sire 

Thy kinsman ; then both hosts shall rest from strife, v. 1295 

And this our fight shall issue in a feast : 

But now if Ahriman shall so pervert 

Thy mind that thou wilt don thy winding-sheet, 

Wilt make thine only object war and bloodshed, 

My good advice not rooming in thy brain, 

Come forth in presence of thy host, and I 

Will likewise come forth from my station here ; 

Let us encounter while our troops repose. 

If I shall perish all the world is thine, 

.My soldiers are thy slaves, my sons thy kin, 

While if I slay thee I will injure none 

Among thy folk, thy soldiers shall have quarter, 

And be my chiefs and comrades. Furthermore 

If thou wilt not come forth but art unwilling 

To struggle with the veteran Crocodile, 

Then Shlda shall oppose thee girt for light, 

So be no laggard when he challengeth. 

The sire is old; his substitute is young — 

A youth of prudence and of ardent soul. 

He will contend with thee upon the field, 

And bring a lion's heart and leopard's claws, 

Then shall we see whom fortune favoureth, 

And whom it crowneth with a crown of love ; 

While if thou wiliest not to fight with him, 

Preferring action of another sort, 

Wait that the troops may rest them for the night. 

Then when the mountains don their golden crowns, 

And when the dark night, drawing back its skirt, 

164 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSt 

Shall hide its head beneath a veil of hair, 
Let us make choice of warriors from the host — 
Men of exalted rank with massive maces — 
Make earth the colour of brocade with blood, 
And give our foes their bodies' length of earth. 
The second day at cock-crow let us bind 
The kettledrums upon the elephants, 
Bring forth a reinforcement of the chiefs, 
And make blood run like water down the streams. 
V. 1296 The third day we will bring forth both the hosts, 
In mass like mountains, for revenge and strife, 
And find out who is loved and who rejected 
By heaven above.' If he refuse to hear 
My counsel given, challenge him thyself 
To single combat in some distant spot 
Beyond the sight of either of our hosts." 

Then Shfda chose him of the wise men four 
Experienced much in this world's heat and cold, 
Did reverence, and went forth. The father's heart 
Was full, his eyelids overflowed with tears. 
A thousand of the troops escorted Shfda — 
Men of discretion well equipped for fight — 
And presently the Iranian scouts descried 
The flag and lances of the prince of Tur, 
Anon the Turkmans that were in the van — 
Young cavaliers and inexperienced — 
Fell on the Iranian outposts and shed blood 
In Shfda's absence and against his wishes. 
There were some wounded on the franian side, 
And still the conflict was continuing, 
When Shfda came himself upon the spot, 
And saw the Iranian outpost-guards. His heart 
Was sorely grieved, he called his warriors back, 
And said to the Iranians: "Dispatch 
A horseman, in due form to Kai Khusrau 
To say : ' An ardent spirit, Shfda hight, 

KAI KH VSR A U 

Hath brought a message from the king of Chin — 
The father of the mother of the Shah.'" 

A horseman galloped from the Iranian outpost, 
Approached Khusrau in haste, and said to him : — 
" An envoy from the monarch of Turan — 
A noble hero with a sable flag, 
Who saith: 'My name is Shida' — doth demand 
Permission to discharge his embassage." 

The Shah's heart filled with shame, and as he wept 
Hot tears he said : " This is my mother's brother, 
My peer in height and valour." 

Looking round v - 1 2 97 

He saw none but Karan of Kawa's race, 
And said : " Go thou to Shi'da with good cheer, 
Greet him from us and hear the embassage." 

Whenas Karan approached the company 
He caught sight of the waving sable flag, 
Came up to Shfda and gave greeting, adding 
That of the Shah and of the Iranians, 
The young man's answer was in honied tones, 
For he was shrewd of heart and bright of mind, 
Delivering what Afrasiyab had said 
Concerning peace and feast and war and strife, 
And when Karan had heard the goodly words 
He came and told the monarch of Iran, 
For wisdom and that message wore well paired. 1 
When Kai Khusrau heard this he called to mind 
Old times and, laughing at his grandsire's action, 
His machinations and diplomacy, 
Exclaimed: " AfrfLsiyab repenteth crossing 
The stream, and though dry-eyed hath much to say ; 
But my heart is fulfilled with ancient griefs. 
May be he striveth to affect my mind, 

1 V. has a fresh heading here ; but, as it occurs again in its proper 
place later on, the arrangement of the test as given in C, which 
makes no break here, has been adopted. 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

And fright me with the greatness of his host, 
Unwitting that high heaven turneth not 
As we desire when evil days are toward. 
Mine only course is to encounter him 
With vengeful heart upon the battlefield, 
And, when I should be striving, dally not." 

The wise men and the captains of the host 
All spake out, saying : " This must never be : 
Afrasiyab is wise and veteran, 
And never dreameth but of stratagems j 
He knoweth naught but sorcery, black arts, 
Deceit, malignity, and wickedness, 
v. 129S Now he hath chosen Shi'da from the host 
Because he saw therein the key to loose 
The bonds of bale. He challengeth the Sh;ih 
To fight that he may fill our day with dust. 
Adventure not thyself against his rage, 
Or weary of Iran and of the crown. 
Engage not rashly in a fight with him, 
And let us not be left in grief and anguish. 
If Shfda now shall perish by thy hand 
Their host will merely lose one man of name, 
But if thou perishest in some lone spot 
The darksome dust will go up from Iran, 
And none among us will be left alive : 
Iran will perish — city, field, and fell. 
We have none other of the Kaian race 
To gird himself to execute revenge. 
Thy grandsire is an old experienced man 
Of high repute in both Turan and Chin, 
Who offereth excuses for ill done, 
And will not fight unless he be compelled ; 
He will, he saith, transfer the steeds, the treasure, 
And drachms which Tur erst hoarded for Zadsham, 
Besides the golden throne, the princes' crowns, 
The golden girdles, and the massive maces, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

167 

To thee, if so he may avert this trouble. 
He will abandon too all lands which thou 
Lay'st claim to as belonging to Iran ; 
Let us withdraw glad and victorious, 
Dismissing bygones from our memory." 

So spake both old and young, save famous Rustam, 
Who wished revenge not peace in that he grieved 
For Siyawush. The monarch bit his lip, 
And turned a troubled look toward the speakers ; 
Anon he said : " 'Tis not for us to quit 
This battlefield and march back to Iran. 

Where now are all the counsels and the oaths v. 1299 

Whereby we pledged ourselves to Kai Kaus ? 
What while Afrasiyab is on the throne 
He will not cease to devastate Iran. 
How can we look upon Kaus, and how 
Excuse ourselves before him ? Ye have heard 
Of what befell illustrious fraj 
From Ttir all for the sake of crown and state ; 
And how Afrasiy&b dealt with Naudar 
In murderous haste ; and further how he slew 
The noble Siyawush, though innocent, 
And still because of treasure, throne, and crown. 
A crafty Turkman out of yonder host- 
Hath formally approached and challenged me 
To single combat. Why are ye so pale ? 
I marvel at it thus affecting you 
While making me still keener after vengeance. 
I never thought : ' The franians will unbind 
The girdle of revenge.' I have not seen 
One of Iran o'erthrown so that the rest 
Should be ao anxious to avoid the fight 
For mere words spoken by AfrAsiyab." 

The Iranians, sorry for their fault, excused 
Themselves and said to him : " We are but slaves 
And speak as love dictateth. High renown 

1 68 THE $HAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

Is all the object of the king of kings, 
The noble outcome of his enterprises : 
Let not the worldlord, the supreme, reproach us 
Since no Iranian cavalier, they say, 
Is able to contend against this man. 
The troops are shouting on the battlefield 
That none can do this brave deed save their Shah, 
Who, as the archmages' king, will not consent 
That we shall be disgraced for evermore." 
v. 1300 Khusrau replied : " Know, counselling archmages 3 
That Shida on the day of battle holdeth 
His father as no man. Afrasiyab 
Made armour for his son by magic arts 
Perversely, darkly, and malignantly. 
The arms which ye possess are not sufficient 
To pierce that breastplate and that helm of steel. 
The charger is of demon pedigree 
With lion's action and the speed of wind* 
A man that is not dowered with Grace from God 
Would lose both head and feet in fighting Shfda; 
Besides he cometh not to fight with you, 
For that would shame his Grace and birth. The 
scions 

Of Farldun and of Kubad are twain 
As warriors, but one in heart and habit, 
And I whTburn his father's gloomy soul 
As he burnt Kai Kdiis for Siyawush." 

Those lion-horsemen of Iran *gan call 
Down blessings on their monarch, one and all 

§ 7 

How Kai Khusrau sent an Answer to Afrdaiyab 

Khusrau then bade Karan, his faithful liege, 
To go back with this answer from the Shah : — 

KAI KHUSRAU 

" ' Our controversy hath grown long and stubborn 

Till matters now have reached a pass indeed ! 

A man of honour and a warrior 

Is not in war a laggard. I demand not 

Thy treasures or the country of Tiiran, 

For none abideth in this Wayside Inn. 

Now mark to whom the Lord of sun and moon 

Shall give success upon this battlefield, 

For by the Maker's might, the Omnipotent, 

And by the diadem of Kai Kaiis, 

Who cherished me, I grant you no more time 

Than roses can withstand the autumnal blast. 

We need not wealth acquired by tyranny 

And wrong, for heart and fortune ever smile 

On one that hath the warm support of God. 

Thy land, thy treasures, and thy host are mine, 

So are thy throne, thy cities, and thy crown. 

Now Shida armed, with troops, in warlike wise, 

Hath come to us and challenged us to fight. 

Him will I entertain at break of day, 

And he shall view my sword that streweth heads. 

I see none in the Iranian host to wheel 

With him upon the battlefield, and therefore 

'Tis plain and scimitar for rne and SMda 

Until I bring on him the Day of Doom. 

If I shall prove the victor in the tight 

I will not rest upon my victory ; 

We will set champions shouting on both sides, 

The plain shall shine and savour with their blood 

And afterward will we lead forth our hosts 

In mass, as they were mountains., unto battle.' 

When thou hast spoken thus, to Shfda add : — 

■ full of wisdom and aspiring chief! 

Thou hast come here alone within the net, 

Not come in quest of fame, or to deliver 

Thy father's message, but by adverse fate : 

170 

THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI 

The Worldlord hath impelled thee from the host, 
And here will be thy shroud and sepulchre ; 
Harm will befall thee for that harmless head, 
Which they struck off as though it were a sheep's ; 
Thy sire will weep o'er thee as bitterly 
As Kai Kaus is weeping for his son.' " 

Karan went from the presence of the Shah 
In haste and, drawing near the sable flag, 
Told all the message of Khusrau to Shfda 
With frankness, not concealing anything, 
And he, -with heart like roast before the fire, 
Went to his father and reported all. 
The monarch gloomed, grew sad, and heaved a sigh. 
The dream which he had dreamed in days of yore, 
And had preserved a secret of his own, 1 
v. 1302 Now turned his head and filled his heart with fear: 
He knew that his decline was close at hand. 
Then Shida said : " To-morrow on this field 
The ants shall find no way between the fallen." 

The monarch answered : " Take no thought, my son ! 
Of fight for three days hence, because my heart 
Is, as thou mayst say, broken by this war ; 
I am in case to pluck it from my body." 

" monarch of the Turkmans and of Chin ! " 
The son replied, " fret not thy heart so much, 
For when bright Sol shall raise its glittering standard, 
And light the visage of the violet sky, 
Upon the field shall meet Khusrau and I, 
And from him will I make the dark dust fly." 

1 See Vol. ii. p. 232. 

KA I KHUSRAU 

171 

§3 

How Kai Khmrau fought irith Shula the Son of Afrdziytib 

Whenas the azure Veil grew bright, and when 

The world was like a topaz, Shfda mounted 

His battle-steed. Youth's vapours filled his head 

With strife- He set upon his shining breast 

A breastplate and a royal helm of iron 

Upon his head. A Turkman warrior bare 

His standard. Shi'da went forth like a leopard. 

Now when he drew anear the Iranian host 

One of the nobles went and told the Shah : — 

" A cavalier hath come between the lines 

With shouts and gestures and with sword in hand, 

A noble bent on fight, who biddeth us 

Inform the Shah that Shfda hath arrived." 

The monarch laughed, called for his eoat of mail, 
And set aloft the flag of majesty. 
He put a Ruman helmet on his head, 
And gave Ruhham, son of Giidarz, his flag, 
But all his soldiers were distressed, and wept 
As though they were consuming in fierce fire. 
They cried : " king ! let not the iron gall 
Thy sacred form ; the wonted place for Shahs V. 1303 

Was on the throne. May he 'gainst whom thou girdest 
Thy loins for fight be laid in darksome dust, 
His purposes and efforts be confounded." 

The monarch, armed with girdle, mace, and helmet, 
Dispatched a message to the army thus : — 
" Let no man quit his post on left or right, 
Upon the centre or upon the wings ; 
Let none attempt to bring on fight or skirmish, 
But hearken to Ruhham, son of Gudarz, 
By noontide ye shall see which will be worsted : 
If Shfda then shall prove the conqueror 

172 THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI 

Look for instructions for the fight to Rustam, 
Be all of you obedient to his word, 
And keep in trouble near your remedy, 
For troops beneath the eye of such a man 
May face with calmness all the sleights of warfare. 
Let not your hearts be straitened ; first and last 
War's wont is this — at whiles a rise or fall, 
At whiles rejoicing and at whiles dismay." 

He urged his charger on — night-hued Bihzdd, 
Who rolled the wind before him as he sped. 
Khusrau was armed with breastplate, helm, and lance, 
His steed's hoofs sent the dust up to the clouds, 
While Shida, seeing him between the lines, 
Heaved from his breast a deep drawn chilly sigh, 
And said : " Thou art the son of Siyawush, 
A man of prudence, wise, and self-controlled, 
The grandson of the monarch of Turan, 
Who grazeth with his helm the orbed moon ; 
But thou art not what one experienced, 
A man whose food is wisdom, would expect, 
For hadst thou brains thou wouldst not go about 
To fight against thy mother's brother thus. 
If thou desirest fight avoid the host, 
And choose thy ground in some sequestered spot 
Where no Iranian or Turanian 
May look on us : we need no help from any." 

The Shah replied : " Lion ravening 
v. 1304 In fight ] I am indeed the heart-seared son 
Of blameless Siyawush, whom thy king slew, 
And I have come for vengeance to this plain, 
Not for the sake of throne and signet-ring. 
Since thou hast moved this matter with thy sire, 
And challenged me of all the host to battle, 
I may not send a meaner opposite. 
So now do thou select a battleground 
That shall be far removed from both the hosts." 

KAI KHUSRAU 

173 

They made this compact : " None shall fight in aid 
From either side, and for our standard-hearers 
Day shall not darken with calamity." 

The twain departed from the hosts afar, 
Like merrymakers going to a feast, 
And reached a barren spot and waterless, 
Untrod by lion and pard, a waste within 
The marches of Kharazm and fit for fight ; 
The soaring eagle flew not over it ; 
Part was hard, arid earth and part mirage. 
There those two warriors like ravening wolves 
Made for themselves an ample battlefield. 
The cavaliers, as lions full of rage 
Leap from the covert on a hunting-day, 
Wheeled with their mighty lances round and round 
Till, when the shining sun had passed its height, 
There were no heads remaining to their spears, 
And bridle and horse-armour reeked with sweat. 
They then renewed the battle vehemently 
With Human mace and trenchant scimitar 
Until the air was darkened by the dust ; 
Howbeit neither wearied of the combat. 
When Shida saw the valour and the might 
Of Kai Khusrau the tears fell on his cheeks : 
He felt : " This Grace hath been bestowed by God, 
And I have reason to bewail myself." 
His steed moreover was distressed by thirst ; 
The man's own strength was failing. In his straits 
He thought : " If I say thus to Kai Khusrau : — V. 1305 

' Come let us try a wrestling-bout afoot, 
And make ourselves run down with blood and sweat,' 
He will not for his honour's sake dismount ; 
His person as a Shah would be disgraced ; 
Yet if I 'scape not by this artifice 
Good sooth I am within the Dragon's breath !" 

He said : " All warriors fight with sword and lanco. 

174 

THE SHAhnAma OF FIRDAUS1 

And wheel about, but let us fight, O Shah ' 
Afoot and stretch our hands out lion-like." 

Khusrau, the ruler of the world, perceived 
That which was passing in his foeman's mind, 
And thought thus : " If this Lion strong of hand, 
This scion of Pashang and Faridiin, 
Shall once be rested he will scatter heads, 
And cause full many a lion-heart to wail, 
While if I shall contend with him afoot 
It may go hard with the Iranians." 

Then said Ruhham : " O wearer of the crown ! 
Disgrace not thus thy birth. If Kal Khusrau 
Must fight afoot in person to what end 
Are all these cavaliers upon the field ? 
If any must set foot upon the ground 
Let me who am descended from Kishwad, 
But thou art the exalted king of earth." 

The Shah replied : " loving paladin 
And cavalier ! brave Shi'da will not fight 
With thee, he is the grandson of Pashang, 
Nor hast thou prowess to contend with him : 
The Turkmans have not such another chief. 
'Tis no disgrace for me to go to battle 
Afoot, so let us strive like pards together." 

Upon the other side the interpreter 
Said thus to Shfda : " Flee the foeman's danger, 
v. 1306 Thou hast no other course but to withdraw 

Because thou canst not stand against Khusrau. 
To flee before the enemy in time 
Is better than to do oneself despite." 

Then Shida: " But the voices of mankind 
Will not be hushed. Since first I girt myself 
I have maintained my head sun-high, but never 
Beheld a warrior of such strength, such Grace, 
And mastery on any field, yet still 
A grave is better for me than retreat 

KAI KHUSRAU 

When once I am engaged in fight ; moreover, 

Though we may tread upon a dragon's eyes, 

We cannot 'scape the process of the heavens. 

If death is to befall me by his hand 

Twill not be let by friend or enemy. 

I recognise this might and manliness; 

This noble warrior hath the Grace divine, 

Still I may be the better man afoot, 

And as we struggle make him stream with blood." 

Then spake the monarch of the world to Shida; — 
" famous offspring of a noble race ! 
Of all the men of Kaian seed not one 
In sooth hath e'er assayed to fight afoot, 
But notwithstanding if thou wishest I 
Hold it a wish that I shall ne'er deny." 

§ 9 

How Shida was slain hy Kftusrau 

The Shah dismounted from his night-hued steed, 

Removed his royal helmet and, entrusting 

The noble charger to Ruhham, advanced 

As 'twere Azargashasp. When Shida saw 

From far Khusrau approaching him on foot 

That warlike Crocodile dismounted likewise, 

And there upon the plain the champions closed 

Like elephants, and puddled earth with blood. 

When Shida saw the stature of the Shah, 

The breast, the Grace divine, and mastery, 

He sought some shift whereby he might escape ; 

Such is the purchase of a shifty heart ! 

Khusrau, when ware of this, though not expressed 

In words, reached out, strong in the strength of Him 

By whom the world was made — the Omnipotent — 

And, as a lion putteth forth its paws 

l 7 6 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS1 

Upon an onager and flingeth it, 

Clutched with left hand the neck, with right the back 
Of STrida, raised him, dashed him to the ground, 
And brake his legs and back-bone Like a reed. 
Then, drawing forth his trenchant blade, Khusrau 
Clave Shida's heart in twain and, having shivered 
His breastplate and thrown dust upon his helmet, 
Said to Ruhhain ; " This matchless miscreant, 
Brave but unstable, was my mother's brother ; 
Entreat him kindly now that he is slain, 
And fashion him a royal sepulchre ; 
Anoint his head with precious gums, rose-water, 
And musk, his body with pure camphor; place 
A golden torque about his neck, a casque 
With ambergris therein upon his head." 

The interpreter of Shida looking forth 
Beheld the body of the famous prince, 
Which they had raised blood-boltered from the sands 
To carry toward the army of Khusrau. 
The interpreter drew near and cried aloud : — 
"0 thou illustrious and just-dealing king! 
I was no more than Shfda's feeble slave, 
No warrior, cavalier, or paladin : 
Shah ! forgive me in thy clemency, 
And may thy spirit be the joy of heaven." 

" Tell my grandfather," thus the Shah replied, 
" Before the troops what thou hast seen me do." 

The nobles' hearts and eyes were on the road, 
Awaiting Shfda's coming from the field. 
A cavalier sped o'er the yielding sand, 
Bare-headed, weeping scalding tears of blood, 
And told Afrasiyab, who in despair 
Plucked out his locks all camphor-white and scattered 
v. 1308 Dust on his head, His paladms drew nigh, 

And all who saw the Turkman monarch's face 
Kent hearts and garments for hiin ; such a wail 

KAI KHUSRAU 

177 

Of lamentation went up from the troops 
That sun and moon were moved to pity them. 
Then said Afrasiyab in his distress : — - 
" Henceforth I seek not quiet or repose, 
And be ye my companions in my sorrow ; 
Our sword's point shall not see the sheath, and I 
Will ne'er know joy again. Bind we our skirts 
Together, 1 leave Iran no field or fell. 
Account him not a man but div or beast, 
Whose heart shall not be pierced by agony ; 
Let shamefast tears be never in those eyes 
That tears of hot blood fill not at our woe 
For that moon-faced and warlike cavalier — 
That Cypress-tree upon the streamlet's lip." 

Afrasiyab wept tears of blood for grief 
That leeches cannot cure. The men of name 
All loosed their tongues before the king and answered : — 
" May God, the just Judge, make this light for thee, 
And fill thy foemen's hearts with sore dismay ; 
Not one of us will tarry day or night 
In this our grief and our revenge for Shfda, 
But raise the war-cry in our soldiers' hearts, 
And scatter heads upon the battlefield. 
Khusrau, who hath not left an ill undone, 
Now addeth feud to feud," 

The warriors 
Were broken-hearted, grief possessed the king, 
The field was filled with stir and clamouring. 

% 10 

How the Battle teas joined between the Host* 

When Sol was rising in the Sign of Taurus, 
And when the lark was singing o'er the plain, 

1 Cf. p. 85 and note. 
VOL. IV. M 

178 THE SHAHNAMA OF F1RDAUSI 

A sound of kettledrums arose in camp, 
A din of tymbals and of clarions, 
v. 1309 As Jahn led forth ten thousand valiant swordsmen 
Equipped for war. Khusrau, beholding theirs 
Commanded, and Karan of Kawa's race 
Led like a mountain from the central host 
Ten thousand veterans, while Gustaham, 
Son of Naudar, rushed with his battle-flag 
Like dust-cloud to the fray ; the world grew dim 
With horsemen's dust, troops filled the earth and banners 
The air. Khusrau was instant in the centre, 
Afrasiyab was active on the field, 
Till heaven dusked and warriors' vision failed ; 
Then when the brave Karan had routed Jahn, 
And when the moon set o'er the mountain-skirt, 
The warriors came back from the field. Khusrau 
Exulted over the Iranians 
Because they had prevailed, yet they prepared 
All night for war and neither slept nor feasted. 

When Sol arose in Cancer, and the world 
Was full of hostile sounds and purposes, 
The armies of both realms arrayed themselves, 
And every lip was foaming for the fight. 
Khusrau, attended by one faithful liege, 
Withdrew behind the rear, and there dismounted 
To proffer much thanksgiving to the Maker. 
He laid his face upon the tawny dust, 
And spake thus ; " Thou justly dealing Judge ! 
If, as Thou know'st, I have experienced wrongs 
And borne them patiently for many a day, 
v. r3io Requite the doer of the wrong with blood, 

And be the Guide of him that was oppressed." 

Thence with grieved heart, and head full of revenge 
Against the offspring of Zadsham, he came 
With shoutings to the centre of the host, 
And set his glorious helm upon his head. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

179 

The battle-cry arose, the din of horn, 

Of brazen trumpet and of kettledrum. 

The opposing forces came on mountain- like, 

Troop after troop astir — a sea-like host. 

Jahn and Afrasiyab were at the centre. 

Aa those two hosts advanced thou wouldst have said : — 

" The valleys and the desert are afoot." 

The sun was darkened by the armies' dust, 

While at the flashing spear-heads, eagle's plumes, 

The din of trumpets, shouting warriors, 

And heroes' maces on the battlefield, 

The crocodile in water and the pard 

On land, the iron and the rocks and mountains. 

Dissolved with fear. Earth heaved and air was full 

Of shouts; the ears of savage lions split; 

Thou wouldst have said ; " The world is Ahriman's I 

Tis naught but enemies from sleeve to skirt!" 

While everywhere lay slaughtered, heap on heap, 

The warriors of Iran and of Turan. 

The sands were naught but blood, heads, hands, and feet ; 

Earth's heart was shaken ; underneath the hoofs 

The fields and fells seemed linen stiff with gore. 

Anon the warriors of Afrasiyab 

Advanced like ships upon the sea, attacking 

The archers' towers— defensive citadels — 

Borne by the elephants before the centre, 

Amid a rain of arrows from the towers 

There rose the clamours of the battlefield, 

As spearmen and the elephants came onward 

With many a warrior from the central host. 

Afrasiyab two miles away descried 

That vast array and towered elephants, 

And with his own huge elephants and troops 

Advanced; the world grew dark, no light was left. 

He shouted : " O ye famous men of war ! v. 131 1 

Why do ye cramp yourselves and crowd about 

iSo THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USt 

The elephants ? The fight extendeth miles. 
Draw from the centre and the towers, spread wide 
To right and left." 

He ordered Jahn, no novice, 
To quit his post with mighty men and lead 
Ten thousand cavaliers and veteran, 
All lancers dight for combat, toward the left, 
And thither sped that lion-warrior. 
When Kai Khusrau perceived that Turkman battle, 
And how it hid the sun, he turned toward 
His own chiefs — heroes of the fray — and bade them 
Shine on the left like Sol in Aries. 
They set off with ten thousand noble troops, 
Mailed and with ox-head maces. Next he bade 
Shammakh of Siir : " Among our men of name 
Select ten thousand youthful combatants, 
Unsheathe your swords between the embattled lines, 
And stoop your heads upon your saddle-bows." 

The hosts so grappled that thou wouldst have said : — 
" They are one mass ! " From both sides rose a crash, 
Blood ran down from the fight in streams; they led 
The elephants with towers aside ; the world 
Became like Nile. When both to right and left 
Dust rose, that refuge of the host — the worldlord — - 
Called for his armour and advanced with Rustam 
With shouts and fury from the centre. Trump 
And tymbal sounded. On one hand was Tiis, 
V. 1312 The chief, with Kawa's flag. The paladins, 

That wore the golden boots, all left their stations 

With smarting hearts and formed the Shah's left wing, 

While battle-loving Rustam and Zawara, 

His brother, set their faces toward the right. 

The veteran Giidarz, son of Kishwad, 

With many noble chiefs, supported Rustam, 

As did Zarasp and prudent Manushan. 

The din of war rose from the scene of strife. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

iSi 

None will behold a fight like that. The sand 
Was strewn with killed and wounded — those whose day 
Was done, Men saw not how to cross the field 
For slain. The waste was as Jihun with blood, 
One man lay headless and another headlong. 
The cries of horse and rider rose above 
The tymbals' din. " The mountains' hearts are split," 
Thou wouldst have said, "and earth is fledged with 
horsemen." 

Here heads lay trunkless, there were headless trunks, 
While massive maces clashed. The sun was fain 
To flee before the flash of trenchant swords 
And falchions. Thou hadst said ; " A murky cloud 
Hath risen raining blood upon the field." 

Fartiis was slain upon the Turkman left 
By Fariburz, the son of Shah Kaiis, 
While on the right Kuhila, who himself 
Was equal to a hundred elephants, 
Fell by the hand of Minuchihr. With noon 
Came storm and cloud. The world-illuming sun 
Was veiled, earth darkened and the eyes of men 
Were troubled. As the sun began to sink 
The Turkman monarch's heart was moved by terror 
As cavaliers from every kingdom, march, 
Domain, and principality, pressed on, 
While with the various mail and diverse flags 
The world was yellow, red, and violet. 
When Garslwaz behind the king saw this 

He brought his troops up ; to the right he sent v. 131 3 

A noble band — men one in soul and body — 

Another to the left, and spread his chiefs 

On all sides — forty thousand cavaliers, 

And chosen mighty men, that drew the sword. 

He hastened to Afnisiyab who, seeing 

His brother's face, took courage and advanced. 

Rose war-din, air was veiled with feathered shafts. 

i82 THE SHAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI 

When darkness came in rearward of the sun : 
And day was almost night, false Garsfwaz, 
That miscreant, 1 hurried to his brother, saying : — 
" Who of our warriors still desireth fight ? 
The earth is full of blood, the air of dust. 
Withdraw the army since the night hath come, 
Bestir thee, for the troops will wail anon, 
And soon thou wilt be fighting while they flee ! 
Do not thyself such wrong." 

The king was wroth, 
And would not hear a word, but urged his steed 
Forth from the host ; he rushed upon the field, 
And slew some nobles of the Iranians. 
Khusrau perceived this, went out in support, 
And both kings of both realms, thus bent on battle, 
Fared ill-attended by their cavaliers. 
Howbeit Garsfwaz and Jahn allowed not 
Afrasiyab to challenge Kai Khusrau ; 
They seized their monarch's reins, turned round his 
steed, 

And hurried toward the desert of Amwt 
On his withdrawal Ustukila came 
Like smoke to offer battle to the Shah. 
King ila too rushed forward like a leopard, 
And Burzuyala eminent in fight. 
The bodies of those three were rocks of flint, 
They were all fierce and ruthless warriors. 
V. 1314 The Shah, perceiving them, urged from the throng 
His charger, came upon them mountain -like, 
Smote with his lance the valiant Ustukila, 
Unseated him and cast him on the earth. 
King lla rushed be'fore the line and struck 
Khusrau upon the girdle with a spear, 
Which failed to pierce his breastplate or affray 

1 From the irinian standpoint* becanse he had brought about the 
death of SiysLwush. See Vol. ii. p. 292 seq. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

183 

His glorious heart. He saw his foeman's pluck 

And strength, unsheathed forthwith his trenchant sword, 

And clave the spear asunder with a blow, 

Which Burzdyala seeing, and withal 

The monarch's courage, might, and mastery, 

Made off amid the gloom ; thou wouldst have said : — 

li He burst his skin." The Turkmans, when they saw 

The prowess of the Shah, fled one and alt. 

As for Afrasiyab himself, the plight, 

So bare and hopeless, was as death to him, 

And when the Turkman horse were ware thereof 

They charged no more. When they returned in shame 

Afrasiyab commanded them to shout :— 

" This lion-courage cometh of the night, 

Which causeth our retreat but, though the wind 

Sought thee to-day and gave a glimpse of joy, 

Expect us with our banner, our heart's lustre, 

When daylight cometh back ; then will we turn 

The surface of the desert to a sea, 

And smash the bright sun into Pleiades." 

Thereat the several monarchs of these two 
Contending hosts each to his camp withdrew. 

§ i> 

Houj Afr&siydb fled 

When half dark night had passed, and heaven half 
turned 

Above the hills, 1 the Turkman leader packed 

His baggage, gave out helms and mail to all 

His troops, and bade ten thousand Turkman horse v 1315 

On barded chargers to be outpost-guards. 

He spake thus to the host ; " When I have passed 

The river follow me, troop after troop, 

1 Reading with P, 

1&4 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSI 

Leave day and night unreckoned." 

From A.mwi 
He crossed Jfhun that night with all his host, 
While all the country, road and waste alike, 
Was naught but empty tents and tent-enclosures. 
When dawn brake forth upon the mountain-tops 
The outposts saw no soldiers on. the plain, 
And brought the joyful tidings to Khusrau : — 
11 The Shah hath no occasion for more strife : 
We see the tent-enclosures and the tents, 
But not a horseman of the foe remameth." 

Khusrau forthwith fell prostrate on the ground 
While giving praises to the All Just and Holy, 
And saying : " Thou glorious and almighty, 
The Worldlord, the Provider, and the Judge, 
Who gavest me Grace, strength, and diadem, 
And now hast blinded my foes' hearts and souls ! 
Oh ! banish this oppressor from our world, 
And burden him with terror all his years." 

Whenas the sun took up its golden shield, 
And night assumed its hair of turquoise hue, 
The world's lord sat upon the ivory throne, 
And donned the crown that brighteneth the heart. 
The army praised him : " May he live for ever, 
This Shah who is so worthy of the state." 

The soldiers lacked no booty ; it was there, 
Left by the army of Afrasiyab, 
But all the people said : " We have been tricked ; 
He hath departed with host, trump, and drum ; 
The famous monarch hath escaped unhurt 
At night-time from the clutches of the free ! " 

The shrewd Shah said : " Chiefs of the Iranian host ! 
'Tis good whene'er the Shah's foe hath been slain, 
And good when he retreateth in confusion. 
Since God, the Arbiter, hath given us Grace, 
Crown> majesty, and kingship over kings, 

KAI KHVSRAU 

Give ye thanksgiving everywhere to Him 
With benedictions offered day and night, 
Because He maketh luckless whom He will, 
And setteth up the worthless on the throne ; 
We cannot question or advise or move 
Therein, for no slave can withstand His word. 
Here shall I tarry for five days ; the sixth 
Is sacred to Urmuzd, the light of earth ; 
Upon the seventh we will march ; the foe 
Provoketh me and I desire revenge." 

Five days they searched for their Iranian slain, 
And having washed the dust off gave them all, 
As they deserved, a worthy burial. 

I T2 

How Kai Khu$rau announced his Victory to Ktius 

Khusrau then bade a scribe to come to him, 
Supplied with paper, musk, and spicery. 
They wrote a letter from the battlefield, 
Couched in befitting terms, to Sh;ih Kaus. 
The scribe began it with the praise of God r 
Who is the Guide, and Object of all praise. 
And then Khusrau dictated : " May the power 
Of my gTeat sovereign, fearful for my life 
As though he were my sire, last like the hills, 
And be his foes' hearts stricken. From Iran 
I reached the sandy desert of Farab, 
And fought three mighty battles in three nights. 
The horsemen of Afrasiyab were more 
Than sages dream of. I have sent the king 
Three hundred of our noblest foemen's heads — 
That of the brother of Afrasiyab, 
His son, his honoured uobles, and his kin — 
Together with two hundred men of name 

186 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAVsl 

In bonds, and each a hundred lions* match. 
We fought upon the desert of Kharazin. 
In that great conflict heaven blessed our efforts, 
Afrasiyab hath fled and we have crossed 
The river in pursuit, and wait the issue." 
They sealed the letter with a seal of musk, 
v. 13 17 And after, as he marched across the waste, 
" Be blessings on this battlefield," he cried, 
" And be each year to prosperous stars allied." 

§ '3 

How Afrdsiydb went to Gang-bihi&kt 1 

Now when Afrasiyab had fled the field 
He crossed the river like a rushing wind ; 
His own troops joined the troops of Kurakhan, 
And told their tale. How bitterly their monarch 
Wept, with those still surviving of his race, 
For his illustrious son, for his great men, 
His kinsmen and allies ! There rose a wail 
Of anguish and thou wouldst have said : " The clouds 
Are drawing tears of blood from lions' eyes." 
He lingered in Bukhara for a while, 
And wished his Lions to renew the struggle. 
He called to him the great and haughty chiefs 
Of those who still survived but, when they came, 
The advisers of the army loosed their tongues, 
And said, for they were left without resource 
By that campaign : " The great men of our host 
Have passed away ; our hearts are wounded for them. 
In sooth of every hundred there survive 
Not twenty ! Those departed claim our tears. 
Now for a while we have renounced our treasures, 
Our children, and our kin, and fought beyond 
1 Gang-dizh in the original. See p. 136. 

KAl KHUSRAU 

Jfhun as we were bidden by the king, 

And what unwisdom brought on us thou knowest, 

For thou art king and we perform thy hests. 

If now the monarch will be well advised 

He will withdraw the army hence to Chach, 

And, if suggestions may be made to him, 

Cross the Gulzaryun and wait a while 

At Gang-bihisht, because it is a place 

As fit for recreation as for fight." 

No other plan was mooted, all agreed. 
They marched to the Gulzaryun, with eyes 
Wet and full hearts ; there spent the Turkman king 
Three days, recruiting with his hawks and cheetahs, 
Thence on to Gang-bihisht where, though he had 
But short repose, he thought it Paradise ; 
To him its soil was musk, its bricks were gold ; 
There he was happy, laughing in his sleep, 
Thou hadst said : " Safety is his bedfellow." 
He summoned countless troops from every side, 
The great men, haughty chiefs, and potentates, 
While he was drinking wine among the bowers 
And roses with companions, harp, and rebeck. 
He sent his spies abroad to every quarter, 
And revelled with his chieftains day and night, 
Awaiting what time's course should bring to light. 

§ i4 

How Khwau crowd the J'llmn 

As soon as Kai Khusrau had passed the river 
He banished banqueting, repose, and sleep, 
And, when he had transported all his troops 
Across, he sent this proclamation forth; — 
" Let no man be in terror at our coming, 
But offer prayer for us to holy God." 

1 88 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

He gave great largess to the mendicants, 
Especially to those who welcomed him. 
v. 1319 He thence departed to the march of Sughd, 
And saw a novel world — the home of owls. 
Upon that country too he lavished treasure 
In eagerness for its prosperity, 
And, whereso'er he halted, cavaliers 
Came seeking quarter. Tidings reached Khusrau 
About the doings of Afrasiyab 
And of his army ; " Kakula is with him 
With reinforcements like huge lions loose. 
He is by race from Tiir, revengeful, injured, 
And seeketh all occasions for a fight. 
Afrasiyab hath sent some troops to Chach, 
For he would seek the Iranian throne and crown, 
And many with Tawurg toward the desert, 
Where all are hostile to the Shah, to hold 
The road against the Iranians." 

Kai Khusrau 
Was not perturbed, for wisdom ruled his thoughts. 
The troops from Barda 1 and from Ardabil 
He ordered to approach by companies, 
To march before him, and return the number 
Of leaders, frontier-chiefs, and archimages. 
They marched ; their general was Gustaham, 
A man who never blenched where Lions fought. 
Khusrau next bade the army of Nfmruz 
To march with Rustam, burner up of chiefs, 
On fiery camels and to lead their chargers ; 
Then, changing from their camels to their steeds, 
To make a joint and sudden night-attack 
Upon the foe. So both these crown- adorn ers 
Marched forth, one to the desert, one toward Chach. 
The Shah continued for a month in Sughd — 
A district well affected to himself — 
Gave to his troops their pay and rested them, 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

And sought occasion both, for fight and fame. 
He gathered all the warriors skilled in leaguers 
To aid him and dismayed the evil-doers. 

Thence proudly, girdle-girt, and dight for battle v. 1320 

He led a host from Sughd and from Kashan ; 

The world was lost in wonderment at him, 

And tidings reached the Turkmans : " Kai Khusrau, 

The aspiring Shah, hath come in quest of vengeance." 

Then all of them took refuge in their holds ; 

The world was full of bruit and turbulence. 

Anon the Shah harangued his host and said : — 

" In that our task is different to-day, 

As for the Turkmans who submit themselves, 

And in their hearts repent of making war, 

Fight not against them, and shed not their blood. 

Lead none the way to evil, but if any, 

Whose vengeful heart remaineth recusant. 

Shall seek to strive against you with a host, 

Then bloodshed, harrying, and combating 

In any quarter are permitted you." 

A shout rose from the army of Iran, 
And all obeyed the orders of the Shah ; 
The warriors went up against the holds, 
Against all holds held by ambitious chiefs, 
And razed the walls. No dwelling-place was left, 
No slaves or cattle, nothing good or bad. 
He traversed in this way a hundred leagues, 
Depopulating stronghold, hill, and plain. 
He marched to the Gulzaryun, explored 
The land with guides, and saw a world like gardens 
In spring, the dales, wastes, hills, and earth all fair, 
The mountains stocked with game, the plains with 
trees — 

A world for favoured folk. He sent out scouts V. 1321 

And spies to learn whate'er was left to know. 

They pitched the youthful monarch's camp-enclosure 

igo THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

Beside a stream. The worldlord took his seat 
Upon the golden throne with his famed lieges, . 
And held at night a feast till day. The dead 
Rose from the dust ! 

Upon the other side 
Afrasiyab at Gang, by day and night, 
Spake with his wise, experienced, prescient nobles, 
And said : " Now that the foe hath reached our couch 
How is it possible to rest at Gang ? " 

They answered : " Since the enemy is nigh 
We see no course except another battle : 
It is not well to yield with such a host." 

With this they left the presence, and all night 
Prepared their forces for the coming fight. 

§ '5 

How Kai Khmrau fought with Afrdsiydh the second Time 

At cock-crow, when the dawn began to break 

And when the tymbal's din rose from the court, 

An army inarched out to the waste from Gang, 

And cramped the very ants and gnats for room. 

Approaching the Gulzarydn the host 

Made earth like Mount Bistun. The army marched 

Three days and nights. The world was full of turmoil 

And din of war. The column stretched seven leagues, 

And soldiers were more plentiful than ants 

Or locusts. On the fourth day they drew up 

Tn line. From stream to sun the flash of arms 

Ascended. Jahn, son of Afrasiyab, 

Whose spears o'ershot the sun, was on the right. 

Afrasiyab took station at the centre 

With chieftains, sages, and proud cavaliers. 

Kubard, the lion-warrior, held the left 

With cavaliers brave and experienced. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Revengeful Garsfwaz was in the rear v - i3 2 2 

To guard the army from the enemy. 

Full in the centre on the other side 
Khusrau supported like a hill his host. 
With him were Tus, son of Naudar, Gudarz, 
And Manushan, high born Khiizan, Gurgin, 
Son of Milad, the lion Gustaham, 
Hajfr and brave Shidush. Upon the right 
Was Fariburz, son of Kaus. The troops 
Were one in soul and body. On the left 
Was Minuchihr, who held his own in battle. 
Gfv, offspring of Gudarz, the guard and stay 
Of every march, was in the rear. The plain 
Became a sea, the earth an iron hill 
Of horseshoe -nails, the hoofs were tulip- hued. 
A cloud of black dust gathered overhead, 
The hearts of flints split at the tymbals' din, 
Earth heaved like murky clouds; thou wouldst have 
said : — 

" It will not bear the hosts ' " The air resembled 
An ebon robe, the drumming frayed the stars. 
The field was naught but heads, brains, hands, and 
feet : 

Good sooth, no room remained. The chargers trampled 

On lifeless heads and all the waste was filled 

With trunkless heads and hands and feet. The wise 

Were not in evidence and both hosts owned : — 

" If on this field of anguish and revenge 

The troops continue thus a further while 

No horsemen will survive, and in good sooth 

The sky itself will fall ! " At all the crashing 

Of ax on helmet souls farewelled their bodies. 

When Kai Khusrau observed the battle's stress, 

The world grown straitened to his heart, he went 

Apart and prayed to God to do him right : — 

" Thou beyond the ken of saiots," he said, 

192 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USi 

i( The Lord of this world and the King of kings ! 
v - J3 2 3 If I had never been a man oppressed, 
And tried like iron in the crucible, 
I would not ask to be victorious, 
Or urge my cause upon the righteous Judge/' 

He spake and laid his face upon the ground ; 
His bitter lamentations filled the world. 
At once there came a furious blast, -which snapped 
The green boughs, from the battlefield raised dust 
And blew it in the Turkmans' eyes and faces. 
Afrasiyab, apprised that any one 
Had turned his back on fight, beheaded him, 
And made the dust and sand his winding-sheet. 
Thus was it till the heaven and earth grew dark, 
And many Turkmans had been taken captive. 
Night came and donned its musk-black garniture, 
Preventing fight. Then both the kings recalled 
Their hosts, for heaven and earth alike were dark. 
The mountain-skirt down to the river-bank 
Was naught but troops in breastplate, mail, and helm, 
Who set the watch-fires blazing round about, 
While outpost-guards went forth on every side. 
Afrasiyab took order for the fight, " 
But tarried till the fountain of the sun 
Should rise, light up the faces of the hills, 
And make earth like a ring of Badakhshan ; 1 
Then would he bring his noblest cavaliers 
To strive for glory on the battlefield ; 
Howbeit God appointed differently, 
And everything must yield to His decree. 

1 I.e. like rabieF. 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

§ 16 

Sow Afrdsiyah took Refuge in Gany-bihisht 

When night was dark, dark as a negro's face, 

One sent by Gustaham, son of Naudar, 

Came to Khusrau and said : " Long live the Shah ! 

We have returned in triumph joyfully. 

We made an unexpected night-assault 

Upon the foe, who had no mounted outposts ; 

Not one of them had wit enough for that. 

As soon as they were roused from sleep they drew 

Their massive maces and their scimitars, 

And when the day dawned none but Kurakhan 

With certain of the soldiery was left. 

The field is covered with their headless trunks, 

Earth is their couch and dust their coverlet." 

A cameleer moreover with good news 
Of Rustam came about the dawn, and said ; — 
"We gat intelligence upon the waste, 
And thereupon we hasted. Rustam held 
Upon his way alike by day and night, 
Insisting on the march with all dispatch. 
We reached the place by daylight as the sun, 
The lustre of the world, rose in the sky ; 
Then matchless Rustam strung his bow and set, 
When he was near, the helmet on his head, 
And all the plain or ever he had thumbed 
A shaft was freed from Turkman combating. 
Now he hath marched for vengeance to Turan, 
And tidings verily will reach the Shah." 

A shout of joy ascended from the host, 
Whereat the Turkman leader pricked his ears, 
And called his faithful followers to horse. 
A cavalier moreover came in haste, 
With lamentation to Afnisiyab, 

VOL. IV. N 

194 

THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSi 

And said thus : " Kurakhan hath left our troops, 
And now is nigh at hand with sixty men ; 
There is a host too marching on Tiiran, 
Exhausting all the water in the streams." 

The monarch thus addressed his counsellors: 
" A fearful struggle now confronteth us ; 
If Rustam layeth hand upon our throne 
We shall be lost indeed ! But at this present 
He thinketh that we have not heard of him, 
And are in grievous travail with Khusrau, 
So let us fall like fire on hiin by night, 
And make the plain as 'twere Jihiin with blood." 
v - >32j The warriors and prudent counsellors 

Agreed thereto. The monarch left his baggage, 
And led his army from the plain like fire. 
Anon an outpost from the waste reported 
That heaven was gloomy with the dust of troops ; 
He saw that all the Turkmans had withdrawn, 
And brought these tidings to the king of men ; — 
" The plain is full enough of huts and tents, 
But there is not a Turkman left inside." 

Khusrau knew why the prince of Chin had gone 
Precipitately from the battlefield, 
That he had tidings as to Gustaham, 
And Rustam, and that that had made him speed. 
Khusrau sent off in haste to say to Rustam : — 
" Afrasiyab hath turned away from us, 
And surely hasteth to contend with thee. 
Array the host and be upon thy guard, 
Keep to thy shaft and quiver night and day/' 

The monarch's messenger was one who skilled 
To cross that pathless tract. Arrived he found 
The lion-hearted Rustam girt for fight, 
The troops with maces shouldered and their ears 
All strained ; he thereupon declared to Rustam 
The message purposed to secure his safety. 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

■95 

Revengeful Kai Khnsrau upon his side 
Abode in quiet free from bruit of war, 
He gave his soldiers all the Turkmans' tents, 
Enclosures, thrones, and crowns. He sought the 
slain 

Iranians, washed away the blood and mire, 
And gave them sepulture befitting princes. 
Then, passing from the dust and blood of battle, 
He packed the baggage, called the troops to horse, 
And with all speed pursued^the Turkman king. 

Whenas Afrasiyab was near the city 1 
He thought thus : " Rustam hath had sleep enough, 
I will surprise him in a night-attack, 
And make the dust fly from his soldiers' hearts." 
But in the gloom he noticed outpost-guards, 
Heard how the chargers neighed upon the plain, 
And wondering at Rustam's work marched off, v. 1326 

Reflecting that his troops had been defeated, 
And had to struggle for dear life ; that Rustam, 
The deft of hand, was in the front, the Shah 
Behind with all his warlike cavaliers. 
Afrasiyab called any that were near, 
Discoursed at large in his anxiety, 
And questioned them : " What seemeth good to 
you ? " 

A chief replied : " The treasure of the king 
Is all at Gang-bihisht. What profiteth 
A toilsome march like this ? Gang is eight leagues 
In length and four in breadth; men, women, children, 
And troops are there; thou wilt have wealth, the foe 
Will still toil on. No eagles soar above 
Its battlements, none dreameth of such heights 1 
There are provisions, palace, treasure, crown, 
And majesty, command, and throne and host. 
The country round about is called Bihisht,* 

1 "sa ville de Gaitgue " (Mohl). 2 i.e. Paradise, 

196 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

Where all is pleasure, peace, and happiness. 
On all sides there are fountain-heads and pools 
An arrow's carry iu their length and breadth ; 
And sages have been brought from Hind and Rum 
To make that fertile land a paradise, 
While from the battlements the eye beholdeth 
All that is on the plain for twenty leagues. 
Is fighting all thy business in this world, 
Where every man is but a sojourner ? " 

Whenas Afrasiyab had heard these words 
They pleased him and, relying on his fortune, 
He entered Gang-bihisht exultingly 
With all his arms and implements of war. 
He went about the city and beheld 
Not e'en a hand-breadth of waste ground therein ; 
There was a palace lifted to the sky, 
Built by himself — a king whose word was law. 
Alighting there he held an audience. 
And gave out money for his soldiers' pay. 
v - 1327 He sent a band of troops to every gate, 

And put each quarter in a chieftain's charge, 
AVhile sentinels all round the battlements 
Held watch and ward alike by day and night. 

The king, upon whose right hand were installed 
Both priests and nobles, bade a scribe be called. 

§ <7 

27ie Letter of Afrasiyab to the Faghfdr of Chin 

They wrote to the Faghfur of Chm a letter, 
And, after paying countless compliments, 
Thus said Afrasiyab : " Revolving time 
Affordeth naught to me excepting war. 
Him whom I should have slain I tendered dearly, 
And now through him my ljfe is one of hardship. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

If the Faghfiirof Chin would come himself 
'Twere well, my soul is protestant of friendship ; 
But if he cannot still let him dispatch 
A host to march with us against the foe." 

The messenger arrived in Chin by night ; 
The great Faghfur received him graciously, 
And decked for him a pleasant residence. 

Afrasiyab for his own part at Gang 
Abandoned quiet, banqueting, and sleep, 
Arranged his catapults upon the walls, 
And fitted up the towers to stand a siege. 
He bade magicians 1 bring up mighty stones 
Upon the walls, he summoned many experts 
From Rum, and stationed troops upon the ramparts. 
A prelate shrewd of heart 2 set up thereon 
Ballistas, catapults, and arbalists, 
And shields of wolf-hide. All the towers were filled 
With coats of mail and helms. ' Ho kept a troop 
Of smiths at work to fashion claws of steel 
On every side and bind them to long spears 
To grapple any that adventured nigh, 
Or, if not that, to make him shun the hold. 
In all his dealings he was just ; he gave 
His troops their pay and well entreated them. 
He gave moreover helms and scimitars, 
Mail for the chargers, shields from Chin, with bows 
And arrows to his men past reckoning, 
Especially to all the warriors; 
When that was done he and his faithful lords 
Reposed. A hundred harpers fair of face 
Met daily in his halls to make him mirth, 
And day and night while holding festival 
He called for native Turkman songs and wine. 
Each day he threw a treasure to the winds, 
And recked not of the morrow. So away, 

1 "mdcaniciens" (Molil). ■ Cf, Vol. i. pp. 373. 37S. 

THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSi 

Since fate is fixed, with sadness and be gay ' 

He lived two sennights thus exempt from sorrow. 

But who can tell who will rejoice to-morrow? 

§ 18 

How Kai Khusvau arrived before Gang-hihisKt 1 

Three sennights passed, Khusrau arrived at Gang, 
And, listening to the sound of flute and harp, 
Laughed and went round the circuit of the hold, 
Astonied at the inconstancy of fortune. 
He was amazed at seeing such a place — 
A heart-alluring heaven — standing there, 
And said : " The builder of these walls built not 
As one expectant of calamity, 
Yet now the murderer of Siyawu&h 
Hath fled for refuge to these walls from us ■ " 
He said to Rustam : " Mark, paladin ! 
Discerningly the bounties and the triumphs 
In fight accorded us by God, the Worldlord! 
This wicked man pre-eminent in ill, 
Rage, folly, and deceit, hath made this hold 
His refuge, here obtained a rest from fortune, 
And, worst of villains, groweth worse with age. 
v. 1329 If I would thank God for His mercies here 

I must not sleep all night ; success and power 

Both come from Him who fashioned sun and moon." 

There was a mountain on one side the city, 
Preventing all attack, upon another 
A river ran, one to rejoice man's soul. 
They pitched the camp-enclosure on the plain, 
The paladins took station round the hold. 
The host extended over seven leagues; , 
And earth saluted the Iranians. 

1 Gang-dizh in the original 

KAl KHUSRAU 

The camp-enclosure on the right was Rus tarn's, 

Who asked the Shah for troops, while Fariburz, 

Son of K&iis, and Tus, with trumpets, drums, 

And heart-illuming standard, marched and pitched 

Upon the left, and, thirdly, Gfv took station: 

Night came; from every quarter shouts arose; 

Earth was all strife and stir, its heart unseated 

By din of trumpet, kettledrum, and fife. 

Whenas the sun had cleared the sky of rust, 

And rent in twain heaven's sable stole, the Shah 

Went round the host upon his night-hued steed. 

And spake to elephantine Rustam thus : — 

" O thou illustrious leader of the host ! 

Afrasiyab, I hope, will have no longer 

The world to look on even in his dreams, 

But whether I shall take him dead or living 

He shall behold the sword-point of God's slave. 

Methinketh that a host will come to him 

From every side, so mighty is his sway ; 

They fear him and will succour him through fear, 

Not of their own wills and for vengeance- sake ; 

So ere he call up forces let us seize 

The roads, moreover raze the castle- ramp arts, 

And sink their dust and stones in yonder river. 

The day of stress is over for the troops, 

A day of ease succeedeth one of toil ; 

No army feareth vengeance or attack 

From foes withdrawn for shelter to their walls. 

The city, where Afrasiyab is now 

Heart-broken, shall become a brake of thorns. 

As we recall the words of Kai Kaus 

We are reminded of our righteous cause, 

He said: 'Time shall not clothe in rust and dust 

The boughs and trunk of this revenge of ours. 

'Twill be an evergreen, and not a heart 

Will shrink from dying in this royal feud, 

zoo THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

But sire to son for three score centuries 
Will hand it on and, when the sire shall pass, 
The feud shall stay, the son take up the woe.' " 
The mighty men called praises down on him, 
They hailed him as the monarch of pure Faith, 
And said ; " Thou shalt avenge thy father thus ; 
Be ever happy and victorious." 

§ 19 

How Jahn came to Kai Khusrau with an Embassage 
from Afrasiy&b 

The next day when the sun rose o'er the hills, 
And set its golden lantern in the sky, 
There went up from the hold a mighty shout, 
Which caused Khusrau to ponder. Thereupon 
The portal of the hold was opened wide, 
And then the mystery was unveiled, for Jahn 
Came with ten cavaliers, all men of wisdom, 
Estate, and knowledge, to the royal entry. 
And there alighted with the other nobles. 
The chamberlain went in before the Shah, 
And said : "'Tis Jahn with ten more cavaliers." 

The king of kings sat on the ivory throne, 
And donned the crown that gladdeneth the heart, 
While Manushan, the warrior, went forth, 
And brought wise Jahn to audience. At his coming 
The face of Kai Khusrau was tear-be dimmed, 
The valiant Jahn, lost in astonishment, 
Removed his royal helm and drawing nigh 
v. 1331 Did reverence, and said : " O famous king ! 

Be goodness aye thy partner through the world, 
Be prosperous in our land, and may the hearts 
And eyes of all thy foes be rooted out. 
Live ever happily and serving God, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

201 

Thou that erst stretched thy hands upon our soil ! 
Blest was thy sojourn, happy is thy coming, 
Kind hath been all thine intercourse with us. 
I bring a message from Afrasiyab, 
Provided that the Shah will bear with me." 

Thereat Khusran bade bring a golden stool. 
They set it 'neath that prudent man who took 
His seat, recalled the message of his sire, 
And thus addressed the Shah : " Afrasiyab 
Is sitting with his eyes fulfilled with tears. 
I first convey this greeting to the Shah, 
Sent by the heart-seared monarch of Turin : — 
' Praise be to God, our Befuge, that a son 
Of ours should have attained such eminence. 
The Shah upon the father's side is sprung 
From Kai Kubad, upon the mother's side 
From Tur; thy head is higher than earth's kings 
Because thou comest of this noble stock. 
The swiftly flying eagles in the clouds, 
And in the streams the lusty crocodiles, 
Are guardians of thy throne, and in thy fortune 
The beasts rejoice; earth's great men with their crowns 
And coronets are thine inferiors. 
I marvel that the curst Div never willeth 
Me aught but harm. Why went my heart astray 
From sense of right and loving-kindliness 
So that my hand slew noble Siydwush, 
The son of Kai Katis, and for no fault ? 

My heart is sore thereat ; I sit apart v. 1332 

In anguish taking neither sleep nor food. 

I slew him not ; it was the wicked Div, 

Who ravished from my heart the fear of God ; 

His time had come and that was mine excuse, 

I was illuded. Both a sage and king 

Art thou, approving men of holiness ; 

Mark then how many cities and how great, 

202 

THE SHAHXAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

With gardens, spaces, halls, and palaces, 
Have been destroyed in vengeance and the plea 
Hath been Afrasiyab and Siyawush ! 
Mark too the fights of cavaliers, as huge 
As elephants and strong as crocodiles, 
Whose heads are trunkless and whose only shrouds 
Are Hons* maws ; the desert hath no hostel 
Remaining, every city here is ruined. 
Till Doom's Day nothing will be told of us 
Save that we fought with trenchant scimitars, 
The Maker of the world will be displeased, 
And we shall writhe in anguish at the last. 
If thou seek'st fight thy heart assuredly 
Will never have a moment's peace from feuds. 
Observe time's changes and no other teacher, 
For though thy heart be full, thy head all vengeance, 
We have the hold while thou art on the plain. 
I speak of Gang ; it is my paradise, 
Its seed-time and its harvest are mine own ; 
Here are my hoards, my host, my crown, and signet ; 
It is a place for sowing and for feasting, 
A place for Lions on the day of battle. 
The summer- warmth is past, the rose and tulip 
No longer bloom, cold, wintry days confront us 
When hands are frozen to the hafts of spears. 
Well know I how the clouds will lour above, 
And rivers be tirm ground. From every side 
Troops at my call will come ; thou canst not strive 
V. 1333 Against the sun and moon. If thou supposest 
That time will render unto thee the fruits 
Of war, then heaven will belie thy thoughts, 
And others eat the produce of thy toils. 
If now thou sayest : " I will take the Turkmans 
Of Chfn, will dash the heaven upon the earth 
And pierce this people with the scimitar,'* 
Shall I become a captive in thy hands ? 

KAI KHUSRAU 

203 

Presume it not, for this shall never be ; 

None will erase a man indelible. 

The grandson am I of Zadsham the king, 

Descended from Jamshid and Faridun, 

My knowledge and my Grace are both from God, 

And I possess a pinion like S 11 rush. 

When destiny oppresseth me my heart 

Requireth not a teacher ; I will go 

At slumber-time, as God commandeth mc, 

Like stars before the sun, cross the Kimak, 

And yield thee realm and crown. Then shall Gang-dizh 

Be thine abode, both land and troops shall lose me ; 

But when the day of vengeance shall arrive 

I will array, hoar-headed as I am, 

This host, will come to execute revenge 

On thee, and everywhere restore my Faith ; 

But if thou wilt put vengeance from thy thoughts, 

And charm the realm with loving-kindliness, 

I will unlock my hoard of girdles, crowns, 

Gold, jewels, and dinars — whatever Tur, 

The son of Faridun, took from Iraj. 

Them take and never think again of vengeance. 

If thou wilt have Chfn and Machin, 'tis well, 

Seize all according to thy heart's desire. 

Before thee are Makran and Khurastm ; 

Take less or more and I am satisfied. 

By that same route which Kai Kails hath traversed 

I will dispatch thee what thou wilt of troops, 

I will enrich thy whole host and bestow 

On thee the golden throne and diadem. 

I will be thy support in every war, v. 1334 

And hail thee king in presence of all folk. 

Say what thou wouldest have — all thy desire — 

And by the past and future judge thine end ; 

But if thou shalt reject this rede of mine, 

And wilt wage war upon thy mother's father, 

204 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAVSt 

Array thy host as soon as Jahn hath gone, 
Fit as a pard am I for fighting on.' " 

§ 2d 

How Kai Khusrau made Answer to Jahn 

At this the Shah looked smilmgfy on Jahn, 
And answered him : " thou that seekest fame ! 
We have heard all thy words from end to end. 
First for the blessing that thou gavest me, 
So be it on my signet, crown, and throne : 
Then for the greeting of Afrasiyab, 
Whose eyes by thine account are full of tears, 
Let that too be upon my throne and crown : 
May they be happy and victorious. 
And further that thou gavest praise to God 
Is pleasing to the Shah, His worshipper — 
The happiest of the monarchs of the earth, 
The most approven, glad, and conquering. 
God hath bestowed on me what thou hast said ; 
May wisdom still accompany each grace. 
Fair words are thine at will ; but thou art not 
Pure-hearted or a worshipper of God, 
For wise men's deeds are better than their words. 
The glorious Farldun did not become 
A star ; his head is in the dark earth still, 
Yet say'st thou : ' I am higher than the sky.' 
In such wise hast thou purged thy face from shame. 
Thy heart is given up to sorceries, 
And words are but a trinket on thy tongue. 
A glozing tongue and lying heart reflect 
No lustre on a sage ; so never call 
My murdered father monarch of the world 
Now that the hones of Siyawush have perished. 
"V. 1335 Moreover from her bower thou haled'st down 

KAI KHUSRAU 

205 

My mother to the street, thou hadst become 

So full of vengeance, and didst kindle fire 

Upon my head while I was yet unborn, 

And everybody present at thy court 

Cried shame upon that wayward soul of thine, 

For no one of the kings, the warriors, 

And mighty men e'er did such deeds as haling 

A woman out before the folk, consigning 

A great dame to the executioners, 

A daughter to be scourged until she cast 

Her babe. The wise Pfran, when he arrived, 

Beheld what he had never seen or heard 

Before. It was God's ordinance that I 

Should be exalted over all the folk; 

He saved me from thy bale and mischief, fate 

Had secrets for me ; soon as I was born 

Thou didst commit me to the shepherds* charge 

As 'twere a worthless brat, a meal for lions. 

So fared I while the days passed o'er my head 

Until Pfran conveyed me from the waste, 

And brought me to thy presence ; I was fit, 

As thou didst see, for throne and crown, and thou 

Wouldst have beheaded me like Siyawush, 

And left my body naked of a shroud, 

Had not all-holy God restrained my lips, 

And left me standing dazed before the court. 

Thou thoughtest that I had not heart or wit, 

And didst not execute thy foul design. 

Keflect on Siyawush and his just acts ; 

What was the evil that thou sawest in him ? 

Thou wast his chosen refuge in the world ; 

He acted as befitteth men of name ; 

He came, for thee resigning throno and crown, 

And hailed thee only in the world as king, 

Put trust in thee and quitted his own folk 

Lest thou shouldst say that he had broken faith ; 

2o6 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

v. 1336 But when thou saw'st his breast and girdlestead, 
His greatness, might, and mien, thine evil nature 
Was roused, thou didst o'erthrow that holy man, 
And like a sheep behead a prince so dear ! 
Thou from the time of Mimichihr till now 
Hast been but miscreant and malevolent. 
Our troubles had their origin with Tur, 
Who bathed his hands in ill against his sire, 
And so it goeth on from son to son 
Against all kingly usage, law, and Faith. 
Thou didst strike off the head of king Naudar, 
A man of royal birth and lineage, 
And slay thy brother, righteous Ighriras, 
Who lived for honour ; "thou hast ever been 
A villain, vile, and led by Ahriman. 
Thy crimes, if one should count them, would surpass 
The revolutions of the sky in number. 
Thou hast sent down thy roots to Hell, and thou 
Wilt not declare thyself of human birth. 
' The loathly Di'v,' thou hast gone on to urge, 
' Inclined toward Hell my heart and ways.' Zahhak 
Put forth, so did Jamshid, that very plea, 
In moments of despair, and said : ' IWis 
Misled our hearts and severed us from good. 3 
'Twas their ill nature and their teacher's promptings 
That gave them no surcease of evil fortune, 
For when one is averse from what is right 
Then fraud and falsehood ruin everything. 
Moreover at the battle of Pashan 
How many troops were slaughtered by Piran ! 
The blood of those descended from Giidarz 
Turned earth to mire and loss was piled on loss ; 
E'en now thou didst come forth with myriads 
Of Turkman cavaliers in war-array, 

V. 133? Didst lead thy host for battle to Ainwf, 
And Shfda came forth as mine opposite ; 

KAI KHUSRAU 

207 

Thou sentest him that so he might behead me, 
And thou thereafter mightst lay waste my realm, 
But God, the Lord of earth, was mine ally, 
The fortunes of my foes were overthrown. 
And now thou say'st : ' Thy throne illumineth 
My heart, thy fortunes make me glad.' Consider; 
Can I recall thine acts and think it true ? 
Henceforth till Doomsday I have naught to say 
To thee save with the trenchant scimitar, 
And I will strive against thee in the strength 
Of treasure, host, fair fortune, and the courses 
Of sun and moon, will make my prayer to God, 
And ask no guide but Him. The world perchance 
May then be purged from evil men while I 
Will gird myself with justice and with bounty ; 
With them will I regenerate the world, 
And haply clear the garden of ill weeds.. 
Tell to my grandsire all my words and seek 
No pretest to avoid so great a strife." 

He gave to Jahn a crown of emeralds, 
A pair of earrings, and a golden torque, 
Who thereupon departed to his sire, 
And told him everything. Afrasiyub 
Raged at that answer ; grief and haste possessed him ; 
He gave the troops a largess from his hoards, 
And furnished maces, helmets, casques, and swords. 

§ 2' 

Sow Kai Khusrau fought with Afrdsiydb and took 
Gamj-hihiaht 1 

All night until the sun rose in the sky, 

And made the mountains like white elephants' backs, 

Afrasiyab was ordering the host : 

1 Gang-dizh in tbo original. 

203 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USI 

What Turkman cavalier took any sleep ? 
Whenas the din of tymbals rose from Gang; 
While earth grew iron, heaven ebony, 

v. 133s The famous Shah — magnanimous Khusrau— 

Bestrode his steed at dawn, rode round the hold, 

And noted places open to attack. 

He ordered Rustam to assail one side 

With forces like a mountain, Gustaham, 

Son of Naudar, to occupy another, 

And wise Gudarz the third, while he himself, 

Who prospered everywhere, attacked the fourth 

With tymbaK elephants, and cavalry ; 

Thus he disposed his forces and, resuming 

His seat upon the throne, required the troops 

To excavate entrenchments round the fortress. 

Then all who had experience in sieges 

From Rum, from Chm, and Hind, with veteran chiefs 

From every quarter, rode around the place, 

Like couriers, devising plans to take it. 

The monarch made a trench two spears in depth, 

And stationed guards that none might make a sally 

By night and slay his troops ere they could draw. 

Around were ranged two hundred arbalists, 

And, when a foe's head showed above the ramparts, 

Those engines showered like hail thereon ; behind 

Were Rurnan troops engaged in working them. 

The Shah then bade that elephants should draw 

Shores to the hold. He undermined the walls 

And shored them up; upon the wooden props 

He smeared black naphtha, such was his device, 

V. 1339 Whereby the walls were stayed and overthrown. 
When all had been prepared the king of earth 
Drew near the Maker of the world in prayer, 
Writhed in his quest of vengeance like a serpent 
Upon the dust, and praised the Almighty, saying : — 
" Thine is it to abase and to exalt ; 

KAI KHUSRAU 209 

In every strait we look to Thee for succour. 
If Thou perceivest that my cause Is just 
Make not my foot to slip, hurl from the throne 
This sorcerer-king, and give me joy and fortune." 

When he had prayed he raised his head, arrayed 
His shining breast in armour, girt his loins, 
Sprang up, and rushed as swift as smoke to battle, 
Commanding onslaught on each gate in force. 
They set the wood and naphtha all ablaze, 
And hurled stones on the heads of the besieged. 
Then twanged the arbalists while in the smoke 
The sun's bright visage gloomed, the scorpions, 
The catapults, and flying dust turned heaven 
To azure dimness, earth to indigo. 
Chiefs shouted, trumpeted the elephants, 
Flashed swords and massive maces. From the showers 
Of arrows and troops* dust thou wouldst have said : — 
14 The sun and moon contend ! " The world was hidden 
To clearest eyes so viewless grew the sky 1 

The woodwork, covered with black naphtha, blazed, v, 1340 

And burned like firewood, for God willed it so, 

The walls, thou wouldst have said, came headlong down 

From their foundations like a mount in motion. 

With them fell many a Turkman, like a lion, 

Surrendered to ill fortune, when its head 

All unawares is taken in the toils. 

The franians' war-cry rose victoriously; 

They made with warlike Rustain for the breach. 

Afrasiyab, on hearing that the ramparts 

Were shattered, rushed to Jahn and Garsfwaz, 

Like dust, and shouted : u What are walls to you ? 

The army's hold must be the scimitar. 

Now for your country and your children's sake, 

For treasure and for kin, bind ye your skirts 

Together, 1 leave no foeman anywhere." 

1 Cf. p. 85, and note. 
VOL. IV. O 

210 

THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUS1 

Then mountain- like the Turkman troops advanced 
In rank toward the breach ; they closed like lions, 
And both sides raised a shout, but in the strife 
The Turkman horsemen shook like willow-trees, 
And gave up land and country in despair. 
The Shah bade Rustam bring up. to the breach 
The spear-armed footmen followed by two bands 
Of archers eager for the fray on foot, 
And armed moreover both with sword and shield, 
With mounted warriors as their support 
Where'er the stress of battle proved severe. 
The horsemen and the footmen on both sides 
Came onward like a mountain to the fight, 
And warlike Rustam, like a mighty lion, 
Led forward all his forces to the breach, 
v. 1341 He mounted on the walls like flying 1 dust, 

Struck the black flag and set up on the rampart 
The ensign of the Shah, the violet ensign 
Charged with a lion, while the Iranians 
Hailed with a shout the triumph of Khusrau, 
A multitude of Turkman troops were slain, 
The fortunes of the foe were overthrown, 
And Rustam at the crisis of the fight 
Gat in his grasp brave Jahn and Garsiwaz, 
Those two supporters of the Turkman throne, 
The glorious son and brother of the king, 
Such was the evil fate that fell on them ! 
The Iranian troops on entering the city — 
An army full of vengeance and heart-seared — 
Gave up themselves to pillaging and slaughter, 
While shrieks arose and lamentable cries ; 
The women and the children wailed aloud, 
And left their dwellings to the conquerors. 
What multitudes of women and of babes 
Were lost beneath the feet of elephants ! 
The people fled like wind and none took thought 

KAI KHUSRAU 

11 1 

Of country more. In woeful plight all eyes 
Wept blood. The Turkman warriors' fortunes fell. 
The treasuries were given up to spoil, 
The women and the children captive borne, 
Their souls by heaven, their'flesh by arrows, torn ! 

# 

§ 22 

How Afrdsiydb fled from Gang-bihisht 1 

Afrasiyab departed to his palace, 

With full heart, weeping ; having gained the roofs 

He looked upon the city. There he saw 

The more part of his warriors slain, the rest 

Withdrawing from the battle. There arose 

Cries from the cavaliers, shouts from the leaders, 

Din from the drummers on the elephants, 

Which trod from sight all that they saw alive. 

The place was full of smoke and shrieks for succour, V. 1342 

And all was conflagration, sack, and storm. 

One side rejoiced, the other was in woe, 

And in this Wayside Inn 'tis ever so. 

Afrasiyab, beholding matters thus, 
Such terror and defeat, no Jahn, no brother, 
No land.no throne, no realm, no gems, no treasure, 
Cried out in very earnest, seared and sore : — 
" How wantonly heaven's vault hath dealt with us ! 
Mine eyes have looked upon a day when death 
And slaughter seemed to me of small account 3" 

He came down woeful from the palace-roof, 
Farewelled his throne of sovereignty, and said : — 
" When shall I ever look on thee again 
Upon a day of pleasure, ease, and joy ? " 

He thence departed dazed, and disappeared ; 
His wits and counsel flew away like birds. 

1 Gang in the original. 

212 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Now when he built the palace in the hold 

He made a secret passage underground, 

And not a soldier of the army wotted 

That there was such a by-way underneath 

The castle. He made choice of ten score chiefs, 

And vanished by that secret souterram. 

Emerging he betook him to the waste, * 

While all his kingdom wondered after him, 

None knowing where he was because he vanished 

So suddenly. Khusrau approached the palace, 

Trod down his foe's star, and assumed the throne 

Amid the paladins with golden helms. 

They made abundant quest, but failed to trace 

That chief of nobles ; then the Shah inquired 

Of Jahn and Garsiwaz about their king : — 

" How did he go and whither hath he gone ? 

He vanished hence ; where hath he taken shelter ? " 

They answered fully and Khusrau gave ear, 
But not a trace showed of Afrasiyab. 
v. 1343 The conquering Shah said to the Iranians: — 

" Now that my foe hath vanished from the throne 
His name and purpose matter not a jot ; 
'Tis one to us be he alive or not." 

§ 23 

Hoxo Kai Khusrau gave Quarter to the Family of Afr&xiy&b 

Khusrau then chose out sages from the host- 
Chiefs veteran and practised in affairs — 
And said thus: " Hail ! May ye be filled with justice. 
The portal of this ill-starred Turkman's hoards 
Intrust I unto you. Be diligent. 
The sun from yon high heaven must not pierce 
The palace of Afrasiyab, nor would I 
That thence his women's voices reach the street." 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

213 

He sent out keepers for the herds that were 
At large about the hold and, being kingly, 
Harmed not the kindred of Afrasiyab, 
The troops marked this and clamoured : " Kai Khusrau 
Hath entered in such wise that thou wouldst say: — ■ 
c 'Tis to the portal of a host ! ' No thought 
Of sire beheaded by the sword unjustly, 
Of mother haled down naked by the hair 
From throne and high place by AfrAsiyab, 
Occurreth to his mind ! This harmless Shah 
Was shepherd-reared and suckled by a sheep. 
Why doth he not in sharp-clawed leopards' wise 
Awake the Day of Doom in this man's home, 
Bring to the ground his halls and palaces, 
And make a bonfire of his kith and kin ? " 

The Shah, apprised of all the Iranians' words, 
Sent and convoked the sages, spake at large, 
And said to them : " We must display not harshness, 
Or praise heads void of wits. We must be just 
In vengeance, and in passion think of fame, 

For fame is our memorial in the world V. 1344 

Since life continueth not, and this same sky 
Which turneth over us may play the tyrant." 

He ordered : " Bring tho women forth unseen, 
Those that are royal, have been always veiled, 
And never left the bower for the street." 

Now when the Iranians were ware of this 
They hurried full of vengeance to the palace. 
The warriors thought: "Khusrau will slay these 
women," 

So wished to bear them off with ignominy, 
And were prepared to pillage and to slaughter. 
Then from the palace rose this wail : " Thou knowest, 
Most just, wise Shah ! that we are powerless, 
And no fit objects of contempt and insult." 
The chiefest of the ladies with her daughters, 

2i4 THE SHAHNAMA OF F1RDAUSI 

Carne wailing to the Shah ; each daughter had 
A hundred slaves with ruby crowns before her, 
Their jewelry was like the shining sun ; 
The raiment that they wore was cloth of gold. 
All carried golden goblets in their hands, 
Their hearts were awe-struck at the king of kings; 
The dames were all musk, rubies, gold, and gems, 
And hung their heads down in their shamefastness ; 
They carried cups and censers, and the fuel 
Was ambergris and undried aloe-wood. 
Thou hadst said : " Saturn out of highest heaven 
Is showering constellations on the earth." 
The chiefest lady drew anear the throne, 
Invoking fervent blessings on the Shah, 
While all her delicately nurtured daughters 
In like wise offered up their supplications. 
Oh ! pity those fail'n in their day of stress 
From all self-pleasing and luxuriousness ! 
y. 1345 The ladies mid their anguish praised Khusrau : — 
"O man of royal birth and blessed steps ! 
How well it were had not thy heart been grieved 
And vengeful with Turan I Then thou hadst come 
To feast and mirth, the accredited of kings ; 
Thou hadst been lord and master of this land, 
And crossed thy feet upon the royal throne; 
Then Siyawuah would never have been slain 
In wantonness, but sun and moon decreed it, 
And base Afrasiyab hath acted so 
That he will never dream of thy forgiveness. 
I gave him counsels but without avail ; 
He rashly turned his head from mine advice. 
I call upon my Maker to bear witness 
That blood hath fallen in showers from mine eyes, 
While here upon the earth thy kinsman Jahn, 
Galled by thy fetters, will bear testimony 
How in my palace both my heart and soul 

KAl KHUSRAU 

Were full of grief because of Siyawush, 

And that Afrasiyab, thine enemy, 

Heard much advice, but nothing profited, 

Until his days have ended as we see, 

All his dominions being overthrown, 

His crown and girdle given up to spoil, 

His day obscured, himself flung headlong down. 

His present life is even worse than death, 

And fate hath burst the skin upon his body. 

Now look on us as being innocent, 

And treat us with a kingly clemency. 

We are dependent wholly on Khusrau, 

And hear no name but his. So let him not, 

For wrongs done by Afrasiyab the warlock, 

Act hastily to those, who did no wrong, 

With bloodshed, outrage, and indignity, 

Or lightly persecute those not in fault ; 

Unworthy 'tis for monarchs to behead 

The innocent. Thou hast another home, 

For none may tarry in this Wayside Inn, 

So act as God require th at thy hands, 

And hold in awe the Day of Reckoning." 

Khusrau, on hearing this, was greatly moved 
For those fair ladies in their fallen fortunes ; 
His cheeks glowed like a lamp at their distress 
And anguish, and the sages' hearts were troubled, 
For all of them remembered child and wife, 
And all the captains and the valiant chiefs 
Invoked much blessing on the Shah and said : — 
" Now for the Maker's sake let not the Shah, 
That man of name, exact revenge on them." 

The prudent Kai Khusrau made answer thus : — 
" In spite of all that hath displeasured me 
I will not cause a like distress to any, 
However much my heart dosircth vengeance, 
And, though aggrieved am I when I recall 

216 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

How that great monarch wronged my noble mother, 
Yet will I bring the like on no one's head." 

The master of the world, the holy-born, 
Then sent the ladies home, first saying to them : — 
" Be at your ease ; hear what I say in person : — 
No miscreant that breaketh faith am I ; 
Henceforward ye have naught, to fear from me, 
And none shall entertain the wish to harm you, 
Or otherwise his own life shall be brief. 
Now in your palaces at ease abide, 
Your souls and bodies unto God confide." 

§ 24 

How Kai Khusrau exhorted the frdniana 

Khusrau addressed the Iranians : " Conquering fortune 
Hath given us the kingdom, crown, and throne ; 
The whole realm of Turan, which we have captured, 
Shall, like fr;in, be yours to dwell therein. 
Put ye away all vengeance from your hearts, 
And charm the land with loving-kindliness, 
For in their hearts the people fear us greatly, 
And all the dust is turned to mire with bloodshed. 
V. 1347 I give to you the treasures of Turan, 
And look not even for your gratitude. 
Be strenuous and be instant in well-doing, 
And where ye found it winter make it spring. 
My soldiers shall be satisfied anon 
With treasures and dfnars, but let us keep 
Our hands from bloodshed, not behead the guiltless ; 
It sorteth not with manhood to be moved 
To anger lightly or to strike the fallen. 
Avert your faces from the women — all 
That veil themselves when going forth abroad ; 
Respect too others' wealth since for its sake 

KAI KHUSRAU 

217 

Friends are made foes; the Maker disapproveth 
Of those that seek to harm the innocent, 
And all that would assist my policy 
Must not lay waste the land which now is mine. 
Besides men call a prince who layeth waste 
A peopled land unjust and sinister." 

The Shah commanded then his troops to open 
The treasures of the army of Turan, 
Save great Afrasiyab's own privy hoards, 
Which he reserved, but gave his men the rest— 
The treasures and the weapons, thrones and crowns. 
The scattered countless host of Turkmans flocked 
From all sides to the Shah, who gave them quarter, 
Made much of them, and ordered their affairs 
With all dispatch. He gave the chiefs their portion 
Of Turkman lands, a city to each noble, 
But in each province those that were rebellious 
Received no quarter at his warriors' hands. 
The country of Turan was overcome, 
And, when the letters to the chiefs arrived, 
From every quarter messengers set forth 
To carry to the Shah the offerings 
And letters of the potentates who now 
Were one and all the servants of Khusrau. 

§ 25 

Hoto Kai Khusrau tcrote a Letter with the News of his 
Victory to Kai Kdus 

Khusrau then called and charged a trusty scribe. 

First in the letter he gave praise to God V. 1348 

That He had purged the earth of wickedness, 

Had overthrown the chief of sorcerers, 

And waked the fortune that had slumbered so — 

God, Source of might, of knowledge, and of justice, 

2iS THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSJ 

And everywhere the Joy of the oppressed — 
Then : " By the fortune of Shah Kai Kaus, 
The great, the experienced, the benevolent, 
This Gang that was Afrasiyab's was stormed, 
The head of his good fortune fell on sleep. 
In sooth upon a single battlefield 
Full forty thousand of his warlike chiefs, 
Illustrious men who wielded massive maces, 
Fell in their ranks by the Gulzaryun, 
And afterward there came a hurricane, 
Which rent the trees asunder, root and bough, 
And drowned a multitude that still opposed us. 
Afrasiyab escaped to Gang-bihisht, 
A place of arms completely garrisoned, 
And of a truth in the ensuing siege 
There perished thirty thousand warriors. 
The tyrant showed himself to be a man, 
But was not helped by wisdom or by fortune. 
His troops are scattered over all his realm, 
And he himself hath vanished from the world. 
Hereafter I will send the Shah reports 
Whenever further glory shall be mine." 

He sealed the letter with his golden signet, 
And, having gladly sent it to Kaus, 
Disposed himself for mirth with fairy-faced ones 
To bring him wine. 'Twas thus till spring, the world 
Became a paradise of hue and scent, 
The plain resembled painted silk, the sky 
A leopard's back ; the onager and deer 
Roamed o'er the waste, and time passed blithely on 
v - 1349 With hawk and cheetah in pursuit of game, 
With musky wine and Idols of Taraz. 
The cattle like so many onagers 

Spread far and wide ; their necks grew full of 
strength 

Like lions' and their ears and heads like stags'. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

219 

Khusrau moreover sent forth those that spied 
Upon the world's affairs to every side. 

§ 26 

How Kai Khusrau had Tid'mgs of the Coming of Afrdsiydb 
with the Host of the Faghfur 

Then tidings came from Chin and from Khutan 
How that Afrasiyab was with that folk :— 
" His cause is taken up by the Faghfur, 
And clamour filleth all the land of Chin 
Whence troops extend to the Gulzaryun; 
The Khan of Chfn himself is in command. 
None knoweth how much wealth, how many slaves, 
And steeds with harness, the Faghfur hath sent 
Afrasiyab. A host acelaimeth him, 
And he hath all the treasures of Piran — 
Enough dinars to load six thousand camels — 
And as he bare them from Khutan an army 
Flocked round him." 

All that had been given quarter 
Thereat revolted from the franians, 
And girded up their loins to take revenge. 
Now when Afrasiyab came from Khutan 
He brought with him an army- shattering host ; 
" Earth," thou hadst said, " wilt not sustain them all, 
The stars will not avail to reckon them ! " 
In dudgeon., with this warlike host, he set 
His face from Chm to go against Khusrau, 
Who, when he heard, sent scouts out on the road, 
And bade Gudarz and lion-bold Farhud : — 
" Abide ye here, be just and politic, 
And let your scouts be out both night and day." 

Then said he to Gudarz: "This host is thine, V. 1350 

Thou art its refuge both by day and night. 

220 THE ShAHNAMA OF PIRDAUSt 

Hang every Turkman, whom thou shalt perceive 

To be in favour of our enemies 

In aught, forthwith alive upon the gibbet, 

Head downward, feet aloft ; forbear to vex 

The inoffensive. Watch o'er host and treasure.' 3 

Drums sounded from the monarch's tent-enclosure, 
There was a blare of gong and clarion. 
An army such that it embroiled the sun 
Marched forth from Gang. When he had left the city 
The Shah arrayed his men against the foe. 
Two leagues divided host from host. Khusrau 
Convoked his noble chiefs, and said : " To-night 
Let matters rest, yet be not las or slothful." 

The scouts, distributed upon the waste, 
Went all night long their rounds about the host. 
He stayed one week preparing for the strife, 
And on the eighth day, when the scouts fell in 
Reporting to him that a host had come, 
He had his troops arrayed in such a fashion 
That sun and moon grew eager for the fray. 
Afrdsiyab beheld this, ranked his powers 
To face the enemy, and told his sages: — 
" This battlefield is sleep and feast to me ; 
I would have welcomed it at sleeping-time, 
And had provoked it had it not been offered. 
Long have I been a fugitive, and now 
My heart and head are full of strife and vengeance. 
If Kai Khusrau's Grace, or mine own new fortune, 
Constraineth me I know not, but I purpose 
To fight with him come triumph, death, or sorrow." 

The sages of his kin and alien 
Replied : " What need for host and combating, 
If kings must fight in person ? All of Chin 
v. 1351 And native Turkmans, of thy race as well 
As alien, acknowledge thee. Oh 3 may 
Our souls and bodies be a ransom for thee ! 

KAI KHUSRAU 

221 

Our loyalty hath never wavered yet ; 
If hundreds perish, thousands shall come on : 
Hold not thyself so cheap. We are thy lieges, 
And live but in the glory of thy crown." 

Then from the army there arose a shout, 
And earth and time grew full of strife and stir ; 
Stars shone through tawny dust, and to the eye 
Sol's yellow face was lapis-lazuli. 

§ 27 

. The Message of Ajrti&iytib to Kai Khus)-au 

The Turkman chief selected from the host 

Two veterans and sent the Shah a message : — 

" Thou hast destroyed a multitude of troops. 

In truth between Iran and Gang, O king ! 

There are a thousand leagues of hill and plain, 

Of sandy wastes and hard, and our two armies 

Have been like ants and locusts while the soils 

From Gang and Chin until thou reach fran, 

Are like an ocean with the blood of feud ; 

So that if holy God drew from the dust 

To some abyss the blood of all the slain 

'Twould make a Red Sea that would drown both hosts ! 

If thou wilt have my treasure or my troops, 

The country of Ttiran, the throne and crown, 

I will resign them to thee and be gone, 

But yield my life up only to the sword. 

Attempt not that ; I am thy mother's sire, 

Descended from the warlock Fan'dun, 

And if thy heart is troubled to avenge 

Thy father, and thou hast no reverence left 

For me, the- fault was all with Siyawush 

In that he filled my heart with grief and care ; 

Besides the stars which circle over us 

222 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSt 

Are both our shelter and our bane at whiles, 
v. r 352 Now sixty years hare passed above my head 
Since I went out with chiefs upon the plain, 
While thou art young, Shah of Iran, in fight 
The Lions' Claws ; so choose a battlefield 
Remote, not on thy lieges' skirts, and we 
Will wheel in combat far from either host. 
If I fall by thy hand thy hook will serve 
To draw forth crocodiles from waterways. 
But strive not with my kindred and allies ; 
Refrain thyself, seethe not with such revenge ; 
And if thou shalt be slaughtered by my hand, 
As God shall help me, I will suffer not 
One of that folk of thine to feel a pang, 
Or look upon the darksome dust of battle." 

Khusrau, when he had listened to the message, 
Said to the son of Zal, the son of Sam : — 
"This evil Turkman, who beguileth men, 
Discerneth not between the ups and downs, 
And talketh so of battle that perchance 
He fain would lie in Shfda's sepulchre ! 
'Tis no disgrace for me to fight with one, 
Whose ancestor was Farfdun, and sire 
Pashang." 

But Rustam answered him : " Shah ! 
Have not the flame of battle in thy heart : 
'Tis a dishonour for the Shah to combat 
Although a Leopard be thine opposite. 
As for his saying : ' Fight not with my host, 
Nor yet against my family and realm,' 
Thine army stretcheth out from sea to sea, 
And never will consent. If thou wouldst make 
A treaty with thy grandsire in God's Bight 
'Tis needful that his heart be free from guile- 
Now let a general attack be made 
In force ; speak not of things that cannot aid." 

KAI KHUSRAU 

§ 2S 

How the fr&nians and Turanians fought 

Khusrau, on hearing ancient Rustam's -words. 

Approved thereof and answered thus the envoy : — 

" So this malignant man would fight with me ! 

He gave with guileful tongue and heart intent 

On wrong a greater pledge to Siyawush. 

Go hence, and say thus to that evil-doer: — 

' Speak not henceforth in such a strain as this : 

Chiefs get no glory out of knavery; 

Thy mind is strangely warped, thy heart deceitful. 

If thou art set on fight, and fight alone, 

There are antagonists besides myself ; 

There are the matchless Rustaro and brave GiV, 

Who both are eager to contend with Lions ; 

Besides if inonarchs are to challenge monarchs 

What need is there for army and for mellay ? 

Henceforth I will not fight with thee myself, 

But thou shalt see a day of gloom and straitness.' " 

The messenger withdrew, returned like wind, 
And advertised his lord of what had passed, 
Who in his dudgeon made no haste to battle, 
But when the Shah moved forward to the attack 
The other army was obliged to stir ; 
One host was eager, one had fain delayed, 
While earth was all in motion like the sea. 
Such were the showers of shafts that thou hadst said 
" The clouds rain hail from mighty lions' maws ! " 
From dawn until the sun grow dim the earth 
Was soaked with blood beneath the warriors' feet. 
When night was closing in the hosts withdrew 
Because the horsemen's sight was failing them, 
And, when the king of kings returned to camp 
In all his glory, pomp, and circumstance, 

224 THE SHAHNAma OF FlRDAUSl 

He said to Tiis : " Afrasiyab to-day 
Did not engage in battle willingly. 
Methinketh be will make a night-attack 
To free his heart of long-enduring griefs." 

He bade a trench be dug across the road, 
Whereby the army of Turan would come, 
And issued orders : " Let none kindle tires, 
And let no jingling camel-bells be heard." 

Then from the host Khusrau chose cavaliers 
Of valour, putting them in Rustam's charge, 
v. ij54 And chose moreover from the Iranians 
Another force of men girt up for Avar, 
Committing them to Tus the general 
With orders to set forward toward the hills, 
While matchless Rustam's way was toward the plain. 
The Shah bade : " Let them march with all dispatch 
To left and right still keeping on the level, 
One toward the plain the other toward the heights, 
And not make use of outposts, lamps, or torches; 
So if it chanceth that Afrasiyab 
Shall fall upon us at the time of sleep, 
Our warriors may take his in the rear 
To cut him off from help. Our troops will be 
Behind him and the ditch in front, and then 
The Shah with all his elephants and men/' 

§ 29 

Hmc Afrdsiydh made a Night-attack upon Kai Khusrau 
and teas defeated 

The Turkman leader, when the night closed in, 

Made ready with his soldiers to attack, 

And, having summoned all his veterans, 

Spake of the past at large : " This knave accursed 

Hath triumphed greatly o'er his grandsire's troops: 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

Now yonder host no doubt are fast asleep, 
And scattered widely over hill and plain ; 
So let us put misgiving from our hearts, 
And make an onslaught on the toe at dawn, 
For if we overcome them not to-night 
We shall be humbled to the very dust. 
Unless good fortune shall regain its lustre 
Resource is wind, and manhood but a lie." 

They all agreed thereto and, having risen, 
Made preparations for the night-attack. 
Afrasiyab chose fifty thousand men 
Among the host, all veteran warriors 
And fit for combating. Spies went on first — 
Experienced men and lovers of the fray. 

Their chief approached the encampment of Khusrau v. 1355 

Where he perceived no challenge of the watch, 

And everything appeared to him at rest — 

No scouts, no watch-fires, not a breath of wind, 

No thought about Turin in any heart. 

On seeing this he turned, went back in haate, 

And said : " Not one is wakeful • AIL of them 

Are dead asleep ! Thou wouldst have said : ' These men 

Have drunk all day ! ' No outposts are in sight, 

And only brambles stand up on the plain ! " 

Afrasiyab heard this, was cheered of heart, 
Sent his host forward, mounted on his steed, 
And girt him with his warriors to attack. 
They came on, like the waters of the sea, 
Apace but silently, without display, 
No trumpet-call, no shout ; but when they neared 
The camp-enclosure rose the clarion's blare. 
Rose roll of tymbal from the saddle-backs, 
The sable standard was unfurled, and those 
That were the foremost of the assailant band 
Urged on their steeds and raised the battle-cry ; 
But many cavaliers fell down the fosse, 

VOL. IV. P 

226 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSl 

While others turned away their heads from fight. 
On this side Rustam came up from the plain, 
And dimmed the heaven with his horsemen's dust ; 
On that side Gfv } son of Giidarz, and Tiis 
Came on ; in front the drums and trumpets sounded. 
The ting of kings with Kawa's flag was there ; 
The air was violet with horsemen's sabres. 
The cry was "give" and "take" and "bind" and 
" slay," 

The steeds were jaded and their riders dazed; 
Two seas of blood were heaving and their waves 
Gave earth the hue of tulips, while the host 
Of steel-clad army-breakers made the mountains 
Shake to their centres. On that Day of Doom 
Those who would flee found no way to escape ; 
Among a hundred chiefs not ten were left ; 
The slain themselves blocked in the fugitives. 
V. 1356 Whenas accounts came from that battlefield 
The leader of Tiiran was so distressed 
That all his troops lamented, wept, and burned 
At that great anguish of their monarch's heart, 
Who spake thus : " Verily a sage himself 
Escapeth not the process of the sky ! 
But since the foe is fainer for our lives 
Than for our wealth we can but strive once more, 
And either give our bodies to be slain, 
Or set the crown of kingship on our heads." 

From both the camp-enclosures shouts arose, 
The world was filled with blare of clarions. 
The troops marched, shouldering double-headed darts 
And scimitars, in lines three leagues in length. 
That field was like the sea. Bright sun and moon 
Shone not. The hosts came onward, rank on rank, 
As in the ocean wave pursueth wave. 
Thou wouldst have said : " The vales and hills are full 
Of blood. The sun hath left the turning sky." 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

227 

Heaven's face was smeared with pitch and no one 
tendered 

His person. Then arose a mighty blast — 

A storm whose like is not in memory. 

It raised the dust, it blew against the heads 

And eyes of the Turanians and bore off 

Their helms. Afrasiyab was all astound. 

The desert was all brains and blood, the rocks 

Were red as jujubes to their very cores I 

The Turkman cavaliers, who in their days 

Of ease thought lightly of a leopard-hunt, 

Declined to battle with the turning sky 

What time the blast uplifted man and horse, 

Khusrau, on seeing this and that the hearts 

And fortunes of the Iranians were joyous, 

With Kustam, Grfv, son of Gudarz, and Tus, 

Advanced the tymbals from the army's centre, 

And battle-shouts arose. Upon one hand 

Was Rustam, on the other hand the Shah. 

The dust hung in the air as 'twere a cloud, v. 1357 

And what a cloud ! One raining shafts and swords ! 

On every side were mountain -heaps of slain 

With springs of blood within them from both hosts. 

The air was like a robe of indigo, 

The earth appeared to be a sea of gore, 

And heaven was like an eagle's wing with arrows, 

Afrasiyab looked on with glooming heart, 

Descried the waving flag of violet. 

And showed his flag no longer at the centre, 

But left his host embattled, and himself 

Retreated with his chiefs and men of name. 

He took with him a thousand of his kin, 

And choicest of his troops — all fit for fight — 

And, taking to the pathless waste, preserved 

His life from foemen by his body's toil. 

The Shah sought for his grandsire in the host, 

23$ 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Advancing to the centre with all haste, 
But, though he urged his charger to the utmost, 
He found no traces of Afrasiyab, 
Whose soldiers, "when they looked toward the centre 
And missed the sable flag, laid down their arms 
And asked for quarter. Kai Khusrau received them 
With graciousness, gave them a separate camp, 
Then bade his men set up the golden throne, 
And deck the tents with broidery of Chfn, 
Brought forth the wine and summoned minstrelsy, 
Inviting many captains of the host. 
He made a feast which lasted till the dawn, 
A feast which made the dead rise from their graves. 
Whenas the sun's hand showed upon the sky, 
And wounded with its nails the dark night's face, 
The franian monarch bathed his head and body> 
And with the Zandavasta sought a spot 
Where he was hidden from the Iranians' eyes, 
And where wild creatures could not hear his voice. 
From break of day till in the Dome of Teak 
The moon assumed her heart- illuming crown, 
v - 1358 He offered praises to the Omnipotent 

For that glad turn of fortune, rubbing oft 

His visage in the dust and pouring down 

Two rivers from his eyes upon his cheeks. 

Thence he departed to his crown and throne 

With stately step, glad-hearted, fortunate. 

All who had fallen of the Iranians, 

Alive or dead, they carried oft" the field, 

But left with scorn the bodies of the foe. 

They turned the whole field into charnel-houses, 

And, when they had disposed of all the slain, 

The Shah bestowed the booty on his meD, 

And thence toward Gang-bihisht he made his way 

With troops at all points ready for the fray. 

KAl KHUSRAU 

239 

§ 30 

How the Faghfur 1 of CMn sent an Envoy to Kai Khmrau 

Now when the tidings reached Machm and Chin 

About the Turkmans and the Iranian king, 

The Khan and the Faghfur both writhed with anguish ; 

Each was concerned about his mighty throne, 

Repented of the aid that he had furnished, 

And diligently sought a remedy. 

Said the Faghfur : " Now will Afrasiyab 

Hereafter never even dream of greatness, 

And therefore doubtless wc shall suffer loss 

Through having sent the treasure and the troops. 

Repentance is the one resource for us 

Since this is matter to destroy our realms." 

He called to him a faithful messenger, 
And gave him full instructions. What was fitting 
Among his hoards — dinars and uncut gems — 
He sent with his excuses to the Shah. 
The messengers departed on their journey ; 
Those mighty men of Chm made no delay, 
And in one sennight they arrived at Gang. 

The conqueror received them graciously, v. 1359 

And seated them according to their rank, 

Accepted that which they had brought with them— 

The rarities, the purses, and the slaves — 

And thus addressed the envoy : " Say to him : — 

'Accord us not an empty reverence, 

Afrasiyab must never visit thee 

E'en in thy dreams at night.' " 

The envoy left 
Like wind and told the words to the Faghfur, 
Who, when he heard them, sent Afrasiyab 

1 The Khiin in the original, but the context seems to require the 
Faghftir. 

230 

THE ShAhnAmA OF FIRDAUSI 

A messenger by night to say to him. ; — 1 
" Avoid the frontiers of Khutan and Chin, 
And grieve for all the evil done by thee. 
All those who quit the path and go astray 
Encounter tribulation on their way." 

§ 31 

How Aff&siy&b crossed the Sea 

Afrasiyab, when he had heard the message, 
Repenting of his deeds of yore, betook him 
Across the pathless desert, and resigned 
The style of monarch to preserve his life ; 
But, seeing that his days were spent in pain, 
Distress, and toil he made all haste to reach 
Mount Ispuruz, and both by day and night 
Avoided foes. His provand everywhere 
Was game. Thus fared he till he reached the sea, 
His loins all galled with travail, belt, and buckle. 
Now when he reached that deep, whereto he saw 
No middle and no end, he bade the shipman 
Prepare a ship to carry him across. 
The old Salt said : " Great monarch of Khutan 
And Chm! although iny years are seventy-eight 
I ne'er saw ship cross hither." 

Said the mighty 
Afrasiyab : "Ohl well is he that dieth 
V. 1360 By water, not by foeman's scimitar ! 

The world accepteth him as one not slain." 

He issued his commands to all the captains 
To launch sufficient vessels and set sail 
Toward Gang-dizh away from good and evil. 
Arriving there ho ate and slept in peace, 
And rested from the fortunes of the war. 
" We will be happy here," 'twas thus he spake, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

231 

"And not concern ourselves about the past; 
When my dim star hath brightened I will cross 
The sea, take vengeance on my foes, and make 
My policy and institutions flourish.*' 

When Kai Khusrau was made aware thereof — 
The new departure of that ancient man — 
He spake to Rustam thus : " Afr&siyab 
Hath crossed o'er to Gang-dizh, and thus made good 
His words to me: 'High heaven is with us.' 
His crossing turneth all our toils to wind. 
Ne'er will I hold a parley with my grandsire 
Save with the sword, ne'er hold this feud outworn, 
But in the might of God, the Conqueror, 
Gird me to take revenge for Siyawush, 
Will cover all Makran and Chin with troops, 
And traverse the Kfmak. When both Machi'n 
And Chfn are mine I shall not ask Makran 
For aid, but bear, if heaven will favour us, 
The host across the sea. Although the task 
Prove long I yet may take that man of blood. 
Ye have endured much travail, and have passed 
O'er field and fell and cultivated tracts, 
And yet to lay this travail on ourselves 
Is better than to give our foes the world. 
Our fame shall last until the Day of Doom 
For conquest and for foemen put to flight." 

Thereat the paladins were sorely downcast, 
Sighs were upon their lips, frowns on their brows. 
" The sea is rough," they said ; " with ail these troops v. 1361 
The business with fair winds would take six months ! 
Who knoweth which of us will 'scape the waters ? 
Afrasiy&b hath brought ill on the host : 
On land we have to fight, and when at sea 
Are in the gullet of the crocodile !" 

Each had his plan, and after much debate 
Thus Rustam spake: "Ye world-experienced, 

232 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Ye puissant princes, and ye veteran chiefs ! 

The toils that we have borne must not be fruitless, 

Or made sport for the wind of indolence ; 

Moreover this victorious Shah should gain 

The fruit of his good star. We never halted, 

Unless to fight, between fran and Gang. 

The Shah would eat the fruit of all his toil ; 

For this he came, for this he will march on/' 

Whenas the army heard the words of Rustam 
They framed their answer in an altered tone. 
The mighty men, the men of wisdom, rose 
With tongues prepared to answer pleasantly, 
And said : " We all are servants of the Shah, 
And he that hath our service hath our love. 
Thine is it to command on land and sea ; 
We all of us are slaves and bound to thee." 

§ 32 

How Kai Kkusrau sent the Prisoners and Treasure to 
K6,us with a Letter 

The Shah rejoiced thereat, made much of them, 
And seated them, each as his rank deserved, 
Then oped the portal of his grandsire's hoards, 
Unmindful of the bonds of love and kindred. 
They put upon a thousand lusty camels 
Loads of brocade, of jewels, and dinars. 
There were ten thousand oxen drawing wagons 
With implements of war, and camels laden 
With drachms past counting from the treasury. 
When night had come he issued orders, saying : — 
"Bear the kinswomen of Afrasiyab, 
v. 1362 And household, whether they be slaves or daughters, 
In litters from the palace by the road 
Down to the royal park, and furthermore 

KAI KHUSRAU 

A hundred famous and illustrious chiefs, 

Each one of them renowned for gallantry, 

And all the kindred of Afrasiyab, 

Whose eyes are filled with tears of grief for him, 

Such men as Jahn and noble Garsfwaz, 

In litters with their feet made fast in bonds, 

Besides a thousand hostages from Chin 

And Turkistan as pledges for those states." 

The Shah then chose him from the Iranians 
Ten thousand men. He put them in Gfv's charge, 
And. said : " O thou whose steps are fortunate ! 
Go with this company to Kai Kails," 

He ordered next a scribe to come prepared 
With paper, musk, and spicery, to write 
A letter with rose-water, musk, and ink 
About the matter of Afrasiyab, 
The scribe, whenas his pen was wet with musk 
And ink, praised first of all the righteous Judge: — 
" He is the Upholder and the Finisher, 
He is the Artificer of earth and time, 
The Maker of the ant and elephant, 
Of trifling mote and of the dark blue sea, 
The Lord of that which is and that which is not, 
To whose supremacy all things submit. 
The sky will not turn harshly o'er the man 
Whom He hath fed with loving- kindliness. 
His blessings be upon the king of earth, 
The Maker of the warp and woof of peace. 
I reached this fortress which Afrasiyab 
Kept for his season of repose and ease. 
Within it were his throne and coronet, 
His greatness, diadem, his crown, and host. 
'Twas forty days before the ramparts fell, 
And we could reach the enemy ; but Giv 
Will give the Shah the full particulars 
Of all that chanced upon the battlefield. 

234 

THE SMAHNAMA OF F1RDAUSI 

V. 1363 When in God's presence thou shalt ope thy lips 
Give thanks on my behalf both day and night. 
I will lead on the army to Machm 
And Chin, and thence will march upon Makran, 
And after with the aid of holy God 
Will cross the sea." 

Forthwith Giv left the presence 
With many troops and gallant warriors. 
The journey passed like wind ; he neared Kaiis, 
Who, when he heard of that auspicious offspring 
Of paladins, sent many troops to meet him ; 
The nobles too set forward on the way. 
When gallant Giv was coming to the Shah 
That warrior-band looked like a plain of lions. 
Gfv, entering the presence, kissed the ground 
Before the state. Kads, on seeing him, 
Arose with smiles and stroked him on the face, 
Asked touching king and host, and how they fared 
Beneath the circling sun and shining moon. 
The gallant Gfv told all that he had seen, 
About the great king and the warriors, 
In words whereat the ancient Shah grew young, 
Then gave the letter to a scribe to read, 
Who read it to the monarch of Iran, 
And filled the whole assembly with amaze. 
Then Shah Kaiis descended from his throne, 
Took from his head the Kaian coronet, 
And, wallowing upon the darksome dust, 
Returned thanksgiving to all holy God, 
And thence departed to his dwelling-place, 
Escorted by his loyal paladins. 
Gfv told what he had seen and what Khusrau 
Had said. Kaus brought wine and summoned min- 
strels, 

Inviting the brave princes of Iran, 
v. 1364 And spent in converse all the livelong night; 

KAI KHUSRA U 

235 

Thus did the hours of darkness fleet away 

Until with lights the guests went from the presence, 

And made for home with glad and merry hearts. 

Now when the sun shot from its radiant orb 
Its arrows and night turned its gathered reins, 
There rose a din of tymbals at the court, 
The warriors went in to audience. 
The ruler of the world then summoned Gi'v, 
Placed him upon the famed, imperial throne, 
And ordered that the spoils should be brought forth, 
The haughty and illustrious warriors, 
Together with the guiltless womenfolk — 
The unseen victims of Afrasiyab — 
With Jahn and Garsfwaz — the man of guile, 
Who had tripped up the feet of Siyawush. 
Kaus, beholding wicked Garsfwaz, 
Cursed him as he deserved. They brought both him 
And Jahn in gyves before the lofty throne, 
With all the prisoners and hostages. 
The Shah dealt with them after their deserts, 
Put one in ward, another into bonds ; 
One was all hope, another in distress. 
Kaiis beheld with eyelids full of tears 
The daughters of the great Afrasiyab, 
And made the royal bower their dwelling- place, 
With handmaids to attend them. All the spoils 
Of every kind, dinars and uncut gems, 
He gave to the Iranians that they 
Might call down blessings on the king of earth. 
He made the captives over to his chiefs, 
Retaining neither groat nor small himself. 
They then prepared a residence for Jahn, 
Providing food, attendants, and a guard. 
There was a gloomy dungeon in a ^old, 
Repulsive, with a charnel-house hard by, 
And this became the lot of Garsiwaz : 

236 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSi 

Such are time's changes ! Blest are they that rule 
With open hands and hearts devout and pure, 
v. 1365 Who reckon that the world will not endure, 
'And never haunt the portal of the fool; 
But he whose wits are small and lusts 1 debased 
Is by a leech among the madmen placed. 

Whenas the Shah had made an end of these 
He cleared the hall of every stranger there, 
And then the scribe prepared himself to write, 
And made his pen's point like a diamond. 
They wrote a letter to the provinces, 
To all the men of name and all the chiefs : 
It ran: " Turan and Chin are now the Shah's, 
The sheep and leopard water at one cistern." 
He made a gift of money to the poor, 
And to his own attendants and his kin. 
Before his portal for two sennights' space 
Men saw no passage through the crowds that sought 
For largess. The third week Kaiis reposed 
In Grace upon the throne of majesty, 
While mid the sound of flute and song the cup 
Was welcomed. From the goblet of the Shah 
Hose for a sennight waves of ruddy wine. 
When New Moon came he made a gift to Gfv — 
A gift of gold plate set with turquoises, 
Of golden chargers and of turquoise goblets, 
Of golden girdles and of silver harness, 
Of female slaves with torques and earrings on, 
Of bracelets and of crowns of jewel-work, 
Of raiment also, thrones, and carpetings, 
Of bright stuffs, perfumes, and embroidery. 
The monarch sent for Giv ; they seated him 
Upon a golden throne and then presented 
The gifts before him, After that was done 
Giv with his face caressed the royal throne. 

1 Reading with C and P. 

KAl KHUSRAU 

237 

§ 33 

The Answer of Shah Kails to the Letter of Klnwau 

A scribe with paper, musk, and spicery 

Approached Kaus, and wrote ; "I am rejoiced 

And well content with this God-given fortune 

In that my son hath proved victorious, v - 1366 

And worthy of the greatness, crown, and throne. 

That bad man, who oppressed and used the world 

To no end but for war and harrying, 

Is now a fugitive therein through thee, 

And no one uttereth his name aloud. 

He was a man of bloodshed all his years, 

Unstable, passionate, and evil-natured ; 

'Twas he who struck the neck of crowned Naudar— 

That living monument of Shahs of old. 

He is a fratricide, a miscreant, 

A regicide, malicious, vile, insensate. 

Let him not set his foot within Tur;ln, 

Makran, or by the sea of Chin. Perchance 

The world may be delivered from the villain. 

Now if the upright Judge, the only God, 

Guide thee to cleanse the earth of bad men's troublings, 

And of fools' pratings and performances, 

Be joyful in the justice of the Maker, 

And be a new foundation for the world. 

If I shall see thee come again in joy, 

While grief shall fill the bosoms of our foes, 

Thenceforth will I devote my days to prayer 

To holy God, from whom are hope and fear, 

That thou mayst be victorious and glad. 

May thy head nourish, justice fill thy heart, 

Be the Creator of the world thy Guide, 

Thy seat upon the throne for evermore." 

They sealed the letter with the Shah's own signet, 

238 THE SHiHNAMA OF FIRDAUSl 

And Giv went from the palace to return ; 
He loitered not in going to Khusrau 
At Gang-bihisht, did reverence and delivered 
The letter and the message of Kaup. 
The Sh;ih was joyful at his grandsire's words, 
Called minstrelsy and boon-companions, 
Exulting as a victor for three days. 
The fourth day, when the World-ilium iner shone, 
He gave out helm and mail to all the troops, 
Gave as it is the wont of Shahs to give* 
v. 1367 With Gustaham, son of Naudar, he left 
A world — a noble host of warriors — 
Then quitted favoured Gang-bihisht for Chin, 
And won a fresh world with the scimitar. 
He battled both by day and darksome night ; 
He was a watch by night, a scout by day, 
And thus it was until in tears, with dust 
Upon his head, he reached his father's city. 
He went about the garth of Siyawush, 
Went where the bason overflowed with blood, 1 
And said : <; If now the Judge, the only God, 
Will but vouchsafe to guide me on the way, 
Then by this self-same token will I shed 
Afrasiyab's own blood like water here ' " 

He left the spot, departing to his throne, 
And communed with the holy Judge alone. 

§ 34 

The Embassage of Kai Kkusrau io the Fayhfur of Chin 
a?id the King of Mohan 

Khusrau chose envoys good at parleying, 
And sent some to the Khan, to the Faghfur, 
And to the ruler of Makran, to say : — 

1 See Vol. ii. p. 321. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

" If ye will choose the right, perform my best, 
And in your hearts repent of your ill deeds, 
Dispatch provisions on before my troops, 
For ye must needs behold me on my march, 
But him that turneth from these words of mine, 
Or faileth to present himself before me, 
Will I behead with trenchant scimitar, 
And on his palace bring the Day of Doom," 

These envoys went to all the provinces, 
Wherever there was any famous chief. 
And grieved were the Faghfur and Khan of Chin, 
Grieved too the potentates of all those climes, 
But gave warm greetings to the messengers 
In dulcet voices and with honied words ; 
They said : "We all are servants to the Shah, 
And only tread the earth to do his will. 
We will survey the passes where the road 
Is bad for troops, provision barren places, 
And furnish all the aidance in our power," 

Those that were wise said : " If he pass us by, 
And leave us scathless, we will give the poor 
No little largess both of food and money." 

Each gave large presents to the messengers, 
Who came back to the court content and glad ; 
But when the noble envoy reached Makran, 
Approached the throne, delivered up the letter, 
And gave the oral message that he bore, 
He found the heart all other of that king, 
Who thoughtlessly misprized the messenger, 
To his folk's grief, and answered : " Tell the Shah : — 
* Assume not o'er us novel powers The age 
Is'neath my fortune, and my crown and throne 
Illume the earth, and when the bright sun shineth, 
Such is its love, it shineth first on us. 
Moreover I have knowledge and much wealth, 
With greatness, manliness, and might of hand. 

24o THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUS1 

If any asketh leave to pass 'tis well, 

Because the earth is every creature's realm. 

If thou wilt pass I will not bar the way : 

Do thou no damage with thy troops in passing ; 

But if thou enter cities with thy host 

Thou hast no portion in this sovereignty, 

I will not suffer thee to cross our soil, 

Or even to set foot upon our marches, 

Nor will I let thee come off conqueror, 

However much thy good stars favour thee." 

Now when the Shah hoard such an answer given 
He moved forth from his quarters with the troops, 
And took the way that leadeth through Khutan — 
A world-lord followed by a famous host. 
Then the Faghfur and Khan of Chin came forth 
To meet the Shah with blessings and excuses, 
Came with their chiefs to meet him on his way, 
When he was still three stages short of Chin, 
V, 1369 The route was cleared as bare as any hand, 

The dales and plains were like a dwelling-place, 
The road was well supplied with clothes and victuals, 
With halting-places, feasts, and earpetings; 
And when the troops were drawing near a city 
The folk put decorations everywhere. 
They fastened up brocade upon the walls, 
And sifted musk and spicery o'erhead. 
Then the Faghfiir, when confidence returned, 
Went first to lead the way toward the palace, 
Thus saying : " We are subjects of the Sh;ih — 
If we are worthy even to be subjects, 1 
May thy good fortune civilize the world, 
And may thy friends' hearts be rejoiced in thee. 
Unworthy though my halls be of the Shah 
I hold them not inferior to the road." 
Illustrious Khusrau went to the palace, 

1 Reading with P. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

241 

And took his seat upon the famous state, 
While the Faghfur presented unto him 
A hundred thousand coins — dinars of Chin — 
And stood there in the presence of Khusrau, 
Together with the prudent frontier-chiefs. 
In Chin Khusrau continued for three months 
With all the nobles of the Iranian host ; 
Each morning the Faghfur attended him, 
And made the Shah new gifts continually, 
Who in the fourth month marched from Chin like 
wind 

Upon Makran; but Rustam stayed behind. 

§ 35 

How Kai KhusrOM fought with the King of Makrdn and 
how the King of Makrdn was slain 

Khusrau departed and when near Makriin 

Chose one of much experience from the host, 

And sent him to the monarch with these words : — 

" May kings and wisdom be companions. 

Consider from what regions we have come : 

We are not drunk and dozing o'er our purpose. 

My fortune and my crown illume the world ; 

My throne is based on chieftains' heads. Prepare 

A road and provand for my host ; let plenty 

Adorn my throne for no one fareth well v. f2 y 

When rations fail, and save I furnish them 

The troops will combat and will make the world 

Strait to their foes ; but if thou wilt not hear me 

Thou shalt wade through the blood of multitudes, 

And make a desolation of Makran 

If thou attack the Lions unprovoked." 

The envoy came and did his embassage, 
But no advice or justico found a place 

VOL. IV. Q 

242 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USl 

In that king's heart. His foolish head was angered ; 

He raged and there was mischief in his thoughts. 

He concentrated all his scattered troops, 

Prepared a battlefield upon the plain, 

And bade the messenger ; " Go get thee hence ! 

Return to that malicious man and say : — 

1 By change from daj T s of darkness thou hast grown 

Thus prosperous and world -illumining, 

Yet, when thou comest, shalt behold our might, 

And learn what men and warriors really are,' " 

Whenas the envoy of the Shah had gone 
The whole state of Makran was filled with clamour, 
The land from mount to mount and all the marches 
Were occupied by troops. The monarch brought 
Two hundred elephants of war. " No room/ 1 
Thou wouldst have said, " remaineth on the earth !" 
While at the chargers' neighs and soldiers' shouts 
The moon strayed from its pathway in the sky. 
The scouts approached the Shah and said to him ; — 
" Makran is darkened with the dust of troops, 
The realm is full of flags and elephants ; 
The Shah can see them now two miles away." 

The monarch bade his troops draw up in line, 
And take their maces and their swords in hand, 
While from Makran a scout came on the plain, 
And all the livelong night went round the host. 
Upon the Iranian side Tukhur kept watch, 
Who thought a fight a small thing. Those two met — 
A noble Lion and fierce Elephant, 
v. i37> Tukhar struck with his falchion, clave his foe 

In twain, and filled Makran's king's heart with fear. 
The two hosts in the ordering of their ranks 
Made heaven viewless with the clouds of dust, 
They drew toward each other mountain-like, 
And closed ; the leader Tiis came from the centre, 
While din of trump and tymbal filled the world, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

With Kawa's flag before him, while behind 

Were warriors with their golden boots, The air 

Was full of arrows, earth of elephants; 

The world was heaving like the dark blue sea. 

The monarch of Makran at the army's centre 

Died smitten by a double-headed dart. 

One asked ; " Shall we cut off his head, Shah ! " 

Who answered: " We will treat him with respect. 

Who cutteth off kings' heads unless he be 

A villain of the seed of Ahriman ? 

Prepare a charnel-house, musk, and rose-water — 

A sleeping-chamber worthy of a king — 

And, seeing that the wound is through his mail, 

By that same token strip ye not the body, 

But veil his visage with brocade of Chin, 

For he hath died the death that heroes die." 

Now of that host there were ten thousand slain 
Of cavaliers and warriors wielding swords ; 
Of prisoners there wore seven and fifty score, 
And the survivors' heads were filled with anguish. 
The Iranians carried off the camp-enclosure, 
The spoil, the elephants, and splendid throne, 
And all the nobles of fran grew rich, 
While many had a crown and throne besides. 
Anon the warriors, lovers of the fray, 
Proceeded to the pillage of Makmn ; 
The wail of women rose from town and waste, 
The land was full of cries: the Iranians fired 
The holds and towns, dashed heaven upon earth, 
Transfixing many with their archery, 
And making women and young children captives. 
As soon as the Shah's wrath had been appeased 
He ordered that his army should withdraw, 
And also that Ashkash, the shrewd of wit, 
Should cease from pillage, strife, and harrying, 
And suffer nobody to do an outrage, 

244 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Or treat the wretched with severity. 
Thou all the upright people of the state 
Approached to plead their cause before the Shah, 
Thus saying: "We are innocent and helpless, 
And aye oppressed by tyrants. It would be 
Well worthy of the Shah to pardon us 
If he shall recognise our innocence." 

A proclamation went forth from head-quarters : — 
" Ye paladins whose counsel prospereth ! 
If through injustice, pillage, strife, or tumult, 
Henceforth an outcry riseth anywhere, 
Then will I cut in two the outragers 
That have no fear of God before their eyes." 

The worldlord tarried one year in Makran, 
And requisitioned great ships everywhere ; 
Then when the spring arrived and earth grew green, 
When tulips filled the hills and grass the waste, 
When steeds could pasture, hunters go afield, 
And gardens were adorned by flowers and fruit-trees, 
He bade his faithful liege Ashkash remain 
To govern leniently and uprightly 
Withal, maintaining justice unimpaired, 
And marched out from the country to the desert. 
Light-heartedly accepting all the toils. 
'Twas holy God's decree that in the waste 
They should not look on dust. The firmament 
Was full of cloud, the earth of springing corn, 
The world of tulips and of fenugreek. 
v - r 373 Provision- trains went on before the host 
In wagons drawn along by buffalos. 
The waste gave herbage, room to camp was there, 
Earth was all moisture, and all clouds the air. 

KAI KHVSRAU 

% 36 

How Kai Khusrau crossed the Sea 

The warriors, when Khusrau had reached the sea, 

Put off their mail ; the Shah had taken with him 

The mariners from Chin and from llakran, 

And made those preparations on the shore 

That men are wont to make before a voyage; 

He bade prepare provisions for a year 

To last till he should reach the other side. 

The prosperous Shah, the seeker of God's way, 

Withdrew in all his glory from the strand, 

And, in the fervent importunity 

Of pleading with the Maker of the world, 

Besought of the Almighty and most High 

To bear him scathless to dry land again. 

He said : " Almighty Ruler of the world, 

Who knowest both the secret and the open ! 

Thou art the Warden both of land and sea, 

The Lord of heaven and the Pleiades, 

The Guardian of my life and of my host, 

The Guardian of my treasure, throne, and crown." 

The sea was rough and all hearts were distressed, 
Yet for six months the vessels were their couch. 
The seventh month, when half the year had passed, 
The north wind blew against them, and the sails 
Were ta'en aback; the vessels moved stern-fore most. 
They wandered from their proper course and reached 
A place which sailors call " The Lion's Mouth," 
Yet God so ordered it that wind and storm 
Dealt gently with the fortune of the Shah. 
The soldiers on the voyage pointed out 
To Kai Khusrau in great astonishment 
How lions fought with oxen in the waves; 
They sighted men with hair like lassos, men 

246 THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUS2 

Completely covered, as sheep are, with wool ! 

There was a troop with heads like buffalos, 

Their hands behind their backs and feet in front ! 

There was a fish that had a leopard's head, 

A crocodile that had an onager's, 

A lamb a hog's ' The water teemed with them ■ 

The frdnians showed each other those strange sights. 

And called upon the Maker of the world, 

Till by the mercy of the Lord of heaven 

The wind abated and the storm was hushed. 

In seven months the voyage was completed, 

They were not visited again by storms. 

Khusrau on landing saw a spacious plain, 
Then came before the Maker of the world, 
And chafed his face upon the dusty ground. 
He drew his ships and boats up from the sea, 
And tarried not, there was no time to lose. 
Before him were the desert, plain, and sands, 
The shifting sands o'er which he passed unhurt. 
The cities there resembled those of Chin ; 
The tongue was like that spoken in Makran : 
He rested in those cities and required 
A great provision from them for his host. 
The Shah committed all that land to Giv, 
And said to him : " Partake of fortune's fruits. 
Treat even evil-doers leniently, 
For wealth and goods are worthless to my heart. 
Henceforward hold I no man of account, 
But worship God who is the Succourer." 

He chose out from the host a man of name, 
Acquainted with the language of the folk, 
To take a message to their kings, it ran : — 
" Whoever seeketh peace and satisfaction, 
Let him attend this court in merry guise, 
With jocund heart, rich gifts, and right good will; 
But he that shall transgress mine ordinance 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

247 

Shall bear the penalty of his ill counsels." 

Whenas the messenger had come to them 
He gave the message of the king of kings, 
And every one replied : " We are his subjects 
If we are worthy even to be such." 

No chief refused ; they, old and young alike, 
Came to the audience of the Shah with gifts, 
The njarchlord and the monarch equally, 
Khusrau, on seeing this, received them well, 
And raised their necks until they reached the sun, 
Then sought intelligence about Gang-dizh, 
The throne of power, and Afnisiyab. 
The spokesman of the company replied ; — 
" No seas or mountains are before thee here, 
And, reckoning all roads, both good and bad, 
Hence unto Gang is but a hundred leagues. 
No life is left in that unrighteous king, 
But few of his unrighteous men remain, 
And ever since he came across the sea 
He and his followers have been at Gang." 

The Shah was glad at that intelligence, 
And thought the labour light. He gave the chiefs 
A robe of honour each, called for their steeds, 
And then dismissed them homeward while he went 
Toward Gang-dizh with all his armament. 

§ ?7 

How Kai Khuxrau reached tiang-rtizh 1 

He drew the army up, gave rations out, 
And, mindful of the Giver of all good, 
Proclaimed: "Whoe'er ensueth wickedness 
Shall writhe beneath the chastisement of God. 
Ye must not so conduct you in this city 

1 Gang in the orig-inal. 

248 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSf 

That e'en an ant shall be a sufl'erer." 1 
v. 1376 Whenas the worldlord looked upon Gang-dizh 

His cheeks were veiled by tears. Then from his steed 

Alighting and with head upon the ground 

He praised the Maker, saying : righteous Judge ! 

A slave am I whose heart is filled with awe 

And reverence. Thou hast given me strength and rule, 

Grace, army, courage, fortune, feet, and "wings, 

That I might see my father's city- walls 

Arising from the ground. 'Twas Siyawush 

Who raised these battlements from their foundations 

By Grace of holy God, and when a tyrant 

Stretched forth a hand against him wickedly 

His murder wounded all men to the heart." 

The troops with one consent wept o'er those ram- 
parts, 

Wept for the blood of blameless Siyawush, 

Who perished by his adversary's hand — 

An act which sowed the world with seeds of feud. 

Now when these tidings reached Afrasiyab : — 
" The world-subduing Shah hath crossed the sea/' 
He kept what he had heard concealed till night. 
And then without a word to any one, 
And leaving all his veterans behind, 
Fled unattended, full of wretchedness. 

When Kai Khusrau had entered into Gang 
His head was troubled and his heart was fulL 
He saw a pleasance that rejoiced all hearts, 
With meadows like the lamps of Paradise ; 
Each corner had its fount and rosary, 
The ground was hyacinths, each bough a perch 
For nightingales. All said : " Behold a place 
Where we could live in happiness till death ! " 

The wary king thereafter gave command 
To seek the leader of the Turkman host. 

1 Cf. Yol. 5. p. 201, and note. 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

They searched the gardens, plains, and palaces, 
Employing guides to point them out the way. 
The searchers roamed about like maniacs, 
If haply they might rind a trace of him, 
And in the prosecution of the quest 
They captured no small number of his folk, 
And slew full many who were innocent, 
But of the unjust king they found no trace. 

Khusrau abode a whole year at Gang-dizh, 
With minstrels and with revellers; the world 
Resembled heart-enthralling Paradise, 
All gardens, rosaries, and pleasances. 
The Shah's affection would not let him leave ; 
He tarried there victorious and glad. 
The paladins of the Iranian host 
Appeared one day before him and said thus : — 
" Grant that the Shah*s heart be at perfect rest, 
And not a thought be turned toward Iran, 
Still in good sooth our foe Afrasiyab 
Hath left this shore and gone across the sea, 
And Shah Kaus upon the throne is old 
Without an army, treasure, Grace, and power ; 
So if Afrasiyab shall reach Iran, 
Full of revenge, who will watch o'er the land ? 
Should he recover throne and diadem, 
Then all our travail will produce no fruit.' 1 

The Sh&h replied : " The counsel that ye give 
Is mated to advantage." 

He convoked 
The chief men of the place, spake much to them 
Of travail past, and him that was the fittest— 
The first in honour and most capable — 
The Shah presented with a robe of honour, 
Intending to make Gang a marehlord's castle. 
And said to him : " Abide here in all joy, 
But never careless of the enemy." 

250 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSi 

He then distributed what wealth there was, 
Distributed both steeds and hoarded treasures, 
Enriching all the townsfolk with their shares; 
What armlets, thrones, and coronets were theirs ! 

§ 38 

How Kai Khusrau return&i from Gang-dizk to 
Siydwuskgird 

Now at the hour when chanticleer awake th 
The tymbals sounded in the palace-court, 
Whereat the army eager to depart 
Turned toward the desert. All the local chiefs, 
Wherever there was any mighty man, 
v. 1378 Went forth to furnish victuals for the way, 
Such as were worthy of the Shah and host. 
Along the route whereby the army marched 
The valleys and the plains were like bazars ; 
No man could venture to withhold his hand 
Upon the mountains, wastes, or camping-grounds. 
The great men, who with gifts and offerings 
Kept coming to give welcome to the Shah, 
Upon beholding such a glorious monarch 
Approached in crowds to do him reverence, 
While he excused them from attending him 
Upon the march and gave them robes of honour. 
Giv eame forth with an army and with all 
The leaders of that land to give him welcome. 
The prudent Shah received Gfv graciously, 
With honours such as Siyawush had paid, 
And, lighting when he reached the sea, inspected 
The sails, and stayed two sennights on the shore 
In talk with Giv of all that he had seen, 
And said : " Whoe'er hath viewed not Gang hath naught 
To make him wish to tarry on the earth-" 

KAI KH VSR A U 

The Shah, then bade his men to load the ships 
And, sending first two boats, launched after them 
A thousand vessels. He bade all that skilled 
In seamanship, and showed a dauntless heart 
Upon the depths of ocean, to set sail. 
They crossed the sea, the voyage of a year, 
In seven months ; so speeding was the breeze 
That Shah and army made their way across, 
And not a sleeve was turned by hostile winds. 
Whenas the leader reached dry land onee more, 
And disembarking looked upon the plain, 
He came and chafed his face upon the dust, 
Invoking holy God, He lavished food 

And raiment on the mariners and steersmen, v - r 379 

And ordered robes of honour and dinars 

For those that had endured the toil aboard; 

Then took the desert-route while all men marvelled. 

Ashkash on hearing brought a host to meet him, 

And lighting from his charger kissed the ground, 

And did obeisance. They bedecked Makran 

Throughout, and summoned minstrelsy, the harp 

Was heard in all the ways and wastes, and thou 

Hadst said : " The harp is warp, the air is woof." 

They decked the walls with hangings of brocade, 

And scattered drachms and sweetmeats underfoot. 

The magnates of Makran — both men of name 

And mighty warriors — appeared before 

The conquering Shah with gifts and offerings. 

Ashkash presented all the land's best products. 

The Shah approved all that Ashkash had done 

As ruler of Makran, and chose a chief, 

Bestowing on him many gifts and blessings. 

When with the noble chieftains of Iran 
Khusrau had left Makran and drawn toward Chin, 
Came Rustam, son of Zal, the son of Sam, 
To meet him with a glad, contented host. 

252 THE SHAH NAM A OF F1RDAUSI 

That noble cavalier, when Kai Khusrau 
Appeared afar, beheld the parasol. 
Alighted from his steed, and did obeisance. 
The noble Shah clasped Rustam to his breast. 
Told of the wonders seen by him at sea, 
And how Afrasiyab, the sorcerer, 
Had disappeared. He stayed as Rustam's guest 
One sennight and then left Machin and Chin, 
Bestowing them on the Faghfur and Khan, 
Who ofttimes blessed him. Many a gift and counsel 
He gave them and released their hearts from care, 
v. 13&J Then took his way toward Siyawushgird 
Upon the Ard of month Sapandarmad. 
His eyes and heart were full on entering 
His father's city. When he reached the spot 
Where Garsiwaz, the man of evil mark, 
Gurwi, the accursed, and executioners 
Had shamefully beheaded Siyawush, 
He poured that dark dust on his head and rent 
His face and breast while Rustam rubbed his face 
In that dust too and cursed Gurwf s soul black. 
Theu Kai Khusrau exclaimed : " Thou, my lord ! 
Hast left me here as thy memorial ; 
I have forgone no jot of vengeance for thee, 
And will ensue it while the world endureth. 
I made the throne quit of Afrasiyab, 
And I will seek no rest or sleep henceforth 
In hope that I may get him in my clutches, 
And make the world both black and strait to him." 

Next turning to his father's treasure-hoard, 
As he had been instructed by his mother, 
He opened it and furnished forth supplies. 
He stayed two weeks with gladness in that city, 
And gave two hundred purses of dinars 
To Rustam and abundant gifts to Giv. 
Now Gustaham, son of Naudar, on hearing : — 

KAI KHUSRAU 

25 

" The Shah is visiting his father's city," 
Set forth to meet him with a mighty escort 
Of chieftains and of warriors of Iran, 
And, seeing in the distance the Shah's head 
And crown, alighted and fared far afoot, 
While all the host acclaimed the earth's just king, 
Who ordered Gustaham to mount his steed, 
And thus they went rejoicing, hand in hand, 
To Gang-bihisht, The troops received high honour. 
Their loyalty was like a fruitful tree 
In constant bearing. Shah and cavalier 
Were busy at the banquet and the chase, 
While all the Turkmans of exalted rank 
Had every favour that they could desire. 
By day-time and by night-time equally 
Khusrau sought tidings of Afrasiytib, 
But nobody could show a trace of him ; 
There was no mention of him in the world. 
One night the Shah, when he had bathed himself, 
Went with the scriptures of the Zandavasta. 
Apart, and all night wept and laid his head 
Upon the ground before the Maker, saying : — 
" This feeble slave of Thine hath evermore 
Some trouble in possession of his soul. 
The world — its mountains, deserts, wastes, and waters- 
Will I thresh out to find Afrasiyab 
Ho cau tie he walketh not Thy way, Judge ! 
Contemning every one on earth as vile. 
Thou knowest that he is neither just nor true, 
A shedder of much blood of guiltless heads. 
Oh! that the righteous Judge, the only God, 
Would guide me to that doer of ill deeds, 
For though I am but an unworthy slave 
I am the Maker's worshipper. I hear 
No fame or rumour of Afrasiyab 
On earth : I see him not but Thou secst all. 

254 THE SHAHNAMA OF F1RDAUSI 

If Thou art pleased with him, righteous Judge ! 
Divert my thoughts from any further strife, 
Quench in my heart the fire of my revenge, 
And make my purposes conform with Thine." 

Then from the place of prayer he sought his throne, 
A noble youth and of unsleeping fortune. 
At Gang-bihisht he lived a restful life 
For one whole year exempt from war and strife. 

§ 39 

Now Kai KJiusrau returned from Turdn to the Land of frdn 

When he had tarried long at Gang-bihisht, 
And yearned to look again on Kai Kaiis, 
He put the country from the sea of Chin 
Up to Kibchak in charge of Gustaham, 
Son of Naudar, gave him a countless host, 
And said to him : " Be ware of heart and glad. 
Stretch forth thy hand o'er Chin and o'er Makran, 
Dispatching letters unto all the folk, 
And seeking tidings of Afrasiyab; 
It may be that the world is rid of him." 
V. 1382 Whatever was of value in the land- 
Such as dinars and precious stones uncut, 
Musk, camphor, golden trappings for the steeds, 
Slave-hoys and horses, thrones and necklaces, 
Brocade of Chin and carpeting, and all 
The produce of the country oi Makran — 
The monarch drave before him on the way, 
In wagons drawn by forty thousand oxen, 
While all men said : " None ever saw such wealth, 
Nor hath there been such wealth as this before !" 
The army was so great that day and night 
The troops were passing over hill and vale, 
And they who reached a station saw no break 

KAI KHUSRAU 

255 

In those behind them. Thus Khusrau reached Chach, 

And hung the crown above the ivory throne ; 

Then as he tarried one week more in Sughd 

Khtizan and Tah'man appeared before him; 

He marched thence to Bukhara while the earth 

Was hidden by his troops. In rest and feasting 

One week was spent, the next, lamenting sore 

Past times, he donned new raiment and approached 

The Fane of Fire built with its towers by Tur, 

The son of Fan'diin. He showered gold 

And silver on the archmages and flung jewels 

In numbers on the Fire. Then, fain to go, 

The happy Shah went with contented heart, 

And crossing the Jihun arrived at Balkh, 

Experienced in this world's salts and sours; 

Then, after he had tarried there a week, 

Pursued his march, and left in every city 

A noble of exalted rank with troops. 

The people decorated way and waste 

Where'er the Shah was passing with his host. 

As he neared Talikan and the Marvnid v. 138? 

The world was full of sounds of flute and harp, 

The people decorated all their cities, 

And called for wine and harp and minstrelsy ; 

They poured down drachms and saffron from above, 

Musk and dinars were strewn from end to end. 

Thence by the road to Nishapur the Shah 

Conveyed the treasure, troops, and elephants. 

On all the mendicants within the city, 

And all that lived by toil, he lavished drachms; 

Two score and fifteen purses were expended. 

He went thence on the road to Damaghan, 

And all the way he scattered drachms and gold. 

The monarch rested for a sennight there, 

Inspecting horses, elephants, and troops, 

And at the week's end went to Rai by roads 

2 5 6 

THE SHAHS AM A OF FIRDAUSI 

Filled everywhere with minstrel, harp, and wine. 
For two weeks he did justice and gave gifts, 
And with the third departed to Baghdad, 
Dispatching camel-posts from Rai to go 
To Kai Kaiis at Pars to let him know. 

§ 40 

How Kai Khusrau returned to his GrawJsire 

The heart of Sh:ih Kaus revived thereat, 
And thou hadst said ; Cl He is another man ' " 
He set up in the halls his golden throne, 
And decked his palace with the gauds of Chin. 
They decorated all the towns and ways, 
The streets, bazars, and quarters of the city, 
And all the nobles went to meet Khusrau, 
The great men and the chieftains of Iran. 
They put up cupolas on way and waste ; 
The world seemed all brocade of gold. The folk 
Mixed musk and gems, and from the cupolas 
Poured them upon the heads of those below. 
When Kai Katis with his illustrious chiefs 
Had come outside the city the young Shah 
Beheld his grandsire while a long way off, 
V. 1384 And gave his steed the spur. The two embraced 
With many a kiss upon the face and head, 
And both of them shed tears of bitterness 
For having lived disconsolate so long, 
While Kai Kaus applauded that young Shah, 
So favoured by the stars and fortunate, 
And said : " Ne'er may the world, the crown of great- 
ness, 

And throne of nobles be deprived of thee, 
Because the sun hath seen not such a Shah, 
Such steeds, such mail or such a throne and helm, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

257 

Among the mighty none hath borne such toils t 
Or viewed so much earth's sights and mysteries. 
If Siyawush could quit the charnel-house 
He would desire the Grace that, now is thine ■ 
Since he is gone be thou the world's delight 
And be thy foes uprooted, heart and soul !" 

Khusrau replied : "All was by thy good fortune, 
Thine Offshoot fruited, and the grass would grow 
From flint for any grandson born to thee." 

His grandsire kissed him, teeth and lips, exclaiming : — 
" May I be with thee ever, day and night." 

Khusrau brought rubies, gold, and emeralds, 
And showered them upon the old Shah's head 
In such a manner that the jewelled throne 
Had all its feet concealed with offerings. 
Kaiis commanded : " Call the company, 
And spread the board within another hall." 

The potent chiefs being seated with the Shah 
Within a rosary bedecked with gold, 
Khusrau recounted all that he had seen — 
Things seen and heard by none before that time. 
His talk was of the sea and of Gang-dizh 3 
Which filled the lips of all the chiefs with sighs 
For that delightful city, plain, and upland, 
With meadow-lands and plcasances like lamps. 
Kaus was lost in wonderment at him, 
And, estimating what he had achieved, 

Said thus to him : " A young Shah's youthful words v. 1385 

Make month and day both young. None in the world 

Hath ever looked upon a Shah like thee, 

No ear hath heard these tales. Come let us pledge 

This youthful star and drink to Kai Khusrau." 

He decked that rosary of golden work, 
Brought wine and revellers with ruby lips, 
And for a week a wave of wine o'erflowed 
The goblet in the halls of Kai Kiius. 

VOL. IV. R 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

The Shah, the eighth day, oped his treasury, 

And made a recompense for toils achieved. 

For those gre.it men that were with him in fight, 

In feast and joy and grief, there was prepared 

A robe of honour suited to their ranks, 

And that the choicest in the treasury. 

Then all departed, each to his own province, 

Each noble followed by his famous troops. 

The monarch dealt next with the common soldiers, 

And from the treasury gave them one year's pay. 

The grandsire and the atheling next sat 

In conclave with the counsellors, and thus 

Khusrau addressed Kaus the Shah, and said: — 

" Of whom shall we seek guidance save of God ? 

We crossed the desert, spent a year at sea, 

And journeyed seared of heart o^er mount ain-ranges. 

But nowhere on the mountain, sea, or desert 

Saw any traces of Afrasiyab, 

If he shall suddenly arrive at Gang, 

And gather troops, toils will confront us stilly 

Although the righteous Judge he on our side." 

The grandsire, giving an old man's advice, . 
Replied : " We two will mount our steeds and seek 
In haste the temple of Azargashasp, 
Will bathe our heads and bodies, hands and feet, 
As well becometh worshippers of God, 
And to the almighty Maker of the world, 
In this our trouble, proffer muttered praise. 1 
Then, as we stand in presence of the Fire, 
It may bo holy God will be our Guide, 
v. 1386 And He that showeth justice show the way, 
To where Afrasiyab is lying hidden." 

This counsel they agreed to act upon, 
Not swerving either of them from the path, 
And, mounting swift as wind upon two chargers, 
1 Bee Vol. i. p. 80, t.v. Zamsam. 

KAt KHUSRAU 259 

Sped to the temple of Azargashasp, 

In white robes, with hearts filled by hope and fear. 

Whenas they looked upon the Fire they wept, 

As though they were consuming in fierce flames, 

Before the Master of the sun and moon ; 

They called upon the Maker of the world, 

And showered jewels on the archhnages. 

Khusrau, while bathing still his face in tears, 

Let fall dinars upon the Zandavasta, 

And thus they passed a sennight in God's presence ; 

But think not that they used in days of yore 

To worship fire, 'twas but their cynosure. 

Tears from the eyes of worshippers might pour. 

Yet, though thou ponder long, when thought is done, 

All holy God is still the needful One. 

Thus at Azar Ab&dagan the two 

Remained one whole month with their retinue. 

§ 4i 

How Afrdsiydb was captured by Hlim of the 
Race of Farxdun 

Now thus it came to pass : Afrasiyab 

Roamed to and fro foodless and slumberless, 

His soul on thorns, his body but a curse, 

Through constant terror of calamity. 

He sought for some spot somewhere in the world 

Where he might have repose of mind with health, 

And found a cavern near Barda', a cavern 

Upon a mountain-top concealed from men. 

He saw no room for hawks to fly o'erhead, 

No lion's trace, or boar's haunt, underneath. 

'Twas far from cities and with water near : 

Call it the cavern of Afrasiyab. 

The king in his despair took to the mountain 

26o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSf 

As being such an unfrequented spot, 
V. 1387 Conveyed food thither, fearing for his life, 

And made the cave his palace and his home, 
Wherein he sojourned for a certain time 
With full heart and repenting of his deeds. 
Whene'er a monarch is athirst for gore 
His tenure of the throne is well-nigh o'er, 
So when this king, this master of the state, 
This lord of earth, well-starred and fortunate, 
Shed blood then enemies grew manifest ! 
The king that never saw kings' blood is blest. 

Now in those days there lived a holy man, 
One of the seed of Fan'dun, the teacher, 
A devotee of Kaian Grace and mien. 
One who was girded with a royal girdle, 
And used the mountain as his place of worship 
As being far from pleasures and from men. 
The name of that illustrious one was Hum, 
A man of prayer who shunned society. 
A cavern that was on the mountain-height 
Far from the throng was very near to him. 
It happened that one day he climbed the mountain 
That he might worship G-od > the righteous Judge, 
And as he prayed upon the top before 
The all-sustaining Ruler of the world. 
And worshipped, vestured in his woollen robe, 
A wailing from the cavern reached his ears : — 
v, 13S8 " Alas ! prince ! famous sovereign ! 
O mighty man exalted o'er the nobles, 
Whom Chin, Tiiran, and all the world obeyed, 
Whose stipulations ran in every place ! 
Yet now thy portion is a cavern here ! 
Where are thy mighty men and men of war ? 
Where are thy treasure and thy manliness, 
Thy valour, courage, and sagacity ? 
Where are thy majesty, thy throne, and crown? 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Where are thy country and thy mighty host 
Now that thou dwellest in this narrow cavern, 
A fugitive within this rocky hold ? " 

Hum as he listened to the Turkman dirge 
Forwent his prayers and, going from the spot, 
Said thus: "This lamentation in the night 
Must be the utterance of Afrasiyab ! " 

Whenas he felt assured thereof at heart 
He sought the entrance of the gloomy cave, 
Discerned the cavern which Afrasiyab 
Had made his place of slumber and repose, 
And then advancing like a savage lion 
Put off the woollen garment round his loins, 
And with the lasso that he used as girdle, 
And which assured him of the World lord's aid, 
Grasped in his hand, gained entrance to the cave. 
The king, as Hum approached, leapt to his feet. 
They struggled long and Hum prevailed at last. 
Threw down Afrasiyab and tied his hands, 
Then going from the cavern dragged him forth 
With frantic efforts such as madmen use. 
This is a matter that is wonder-worth ; 
But let whoever is a king on earth 
About his own fair reputation think 
Naught else — excepting only meat and drink. 
Thus after all his luxury and ease, 
His power, his army, and his treasuries, 
Afrasiyab to choose a cave did well ; 
If 'twas a net of bale how could he tell ? 

S 42 

How Afr&siydb escaped from H&m 

Hum, after having bound the monarch's arms, 
Bore him from his retreat. Afrasiyab 

262 

THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDA VSI 

Exclaimed: "0 pious man, thou devotee, 
Who knowest holy God ! what wouldest thou 
With me— a monarch of the world although 
I live concealed in this unfathomed cave ? " 

Hum said : " For thee it is no resting-place. 
Thou art reported through the world as one 
Oppugnant to the fear of holy God, 
Who slew midst kings his brother Ighriras, 
Illustrious Naudar, and Siyawush, 
That heirloom of the Kaians. Shed not thou 
v, 1390 The blood of kings nor flee from throne to cave 1 
Unfathomed." 

" Man of might ! " the king replied, 
" Whom knowest thou in this world free from fault ? 
Such was the process of high heaven above me 
That I have brought forth travail, loss, and anguish ; 
Though one may catch a lion by the neck 
He cannot thwart the purposes of God. 
Oh ! pity me who am in hopeless plight, 
And am, however much I be a tyrant, 
The grandson of the glorious Faridun ! 
Oh ! free me from thy lasso's bondage ! Whither 
Wouldst bear me vilely bound ? Hast thou no fear 
Of God upon the Day of Reckoning ? " 

Hum said : " Malignant one ! good sooth, thy days 
Are few, thy words as weeds within a garden : 
Thy fate is in the hands of Kai Khusrau." 

Albeit Hum was sorry for the wretch, 
And loosed for him the royal lasso's coils, 
While he, on finding that the holy man 
Felt pity for a king's bewailings, writhed, 
And wrenched his body from his captor's clutch, 
Then plunged into the lake 2 and disappeared ! 

1 There is a play of worda In the original between Gin (throne) and 
Grhftr (cave). 

1 I.e. Uramiab, Seep. (36. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

It happened that Gudarz, son of Kishwad, 
Was on his way with Oiv and other nobles 
In state with expedition to the Shah, 
And gazing from a distance at the lake 
Observed Hum with the lasso in his hand 
Disconsolately wandering on the shore, 
Saw too the water troubled and, observing 
The sorry looks of Hum, said in his heart : — 
" This holy man is fishing on the bank. 
Perchance his net hath caught a crocodile, 
And he is in amazement at the sight." 

He spake to Hum and said : fl holy man I 
What is thine object ? Make it known to us ! 
What wouldst thou of the lake unless to wash 
That dusky form of thine ? " 

Hum answered him : 
" noble man ! consider what hath chanced : 
I have my dwelling on yon mountain's top 
Afar from men and 'tis mine oratory. 
I passed the night, the livelong nightj in prayer 
Till at the hour when birds begin to sing 
A sound of lamentation reached mine ears, 
And thus I thought in my shrewd heart : ' Now I 
Will rase the root of vengeance front the world. 
This bitter wailing in the hours of slumber 
Can be from no one but AfrasiyaW 
I rose, searched all the mountain and the caverns, 
And saw in one the famous man himself; 
That luckless one was lying in the cave, 
Lamenting bitterly o'er crown and throne. 
He sprang up at mine entry from his place, 
And gained a footing on the flinty floor, 
Yet bound I with my girdle both his hands 
Firm as a rock, so that they dripped with blood, 
And brought him from the mountain in all haste, 
What while he wailed and shrieked as women do. 

264 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

Moved by his great and lamentable cries 
And promises, I somewhat loosed his bonds. 
Then on this very spot he slipped my grasp, 
And pierced my heart and soul by his escape. 
He vanished in these waters of Khanjast. 
Now have I told thee all about the case." 

Gudarz, when he had heard the whole account, 
Recalled to mind a legend of old times, 
And full of thought went to the Fane of Fire, 
Just like a man o'erwrought, and there began 
To pray before the Fire, and offer thanks 
To Him who made the world ; then told the Shahs 
The secret and the things that he had witnessed, 
Whereat they mounted on their steeds again, 
And full of joy departed from the Fane. 

§ 43 

How Kdus and Khusrau came to Hum 

V. 1392 The monarch of the world in grave concern 
Went instantly to Hum who, when he saw 
The crowned heads of the two Shahs, offered them 
The reverence that was due, while they invoked 
God's blessing on him. Then said Shah Kaiis 
" Thanks be to God in whom our refuge is 
That I have seen the face of this good man, 
This man of knowledge, power, and mastery." 

Hum answered : "Through thy justice may the land 
Be prosperous, may the days of this young Shah 
Be bright, and thy foes' hearts be rooted out. 
I offered prayer upon this mountain- top, 
What time the Shah was passing to Gang-dizh, 
That He who made the world would prosper earth 
Through him. When he returned I laughed for joy, 
1 id. 

KAl KHUSRAU 265 

And sought God's presence, offering my praises. 

At night-time suddenly the blest Suriish 

Made that which had been secret known to me : 

A cry went up from yon unfathomed cave ; 

I heard it and attended to the voice. 

One bitterly lamented ivory throne, 

Realm, army, state, and crown. Down from the peak 

To that strait cave I came and grasped a lasso — 

My girdle. I beheld the head and ears 

Of him that sojourned there — Afrasiyab. 

I used my lasso as a cord and tied him 

Firm as a rock, then haled him forth all helpless. 

He bitterly complained of those tight knots, 

And said in anguish : ' O beloved of fortune ! 

Relax for me the tightness of these bonds.' 

But when I did so he escaped my grasp, 

Plunged, and is hidden in the water there ! 

We must cut off his foothold from the world. 

If he be still as heaven fashioned him V. 1393 

His blood will stir with love for Garsi'waz 

What time the exalted Shah shall give command 

To bring that brother with his feet in fetters, 

And sew him to the neek in raw ox-hide, 

Depriving him of power to help himself. 

Afrasiyab, when he shall hear the voice 

Of Garsfwaz, will come forth from the lake.'* 

The Shah bade those who mounted guard that day 
To go with swords and bucklers of Gilan, 
And fetch the miserable Garsfwaz — 
The cause of all the trouble in the land. 
The monarch bade the executioner: — 
"Drag him along and show him no respect." 
They put him in an ox-hide to the neck 
So that he could not stir. His skin burst on him, 
He begged for mercy, and asked God for aid, 
Afrasiyab, whenas he heard that voice, 

266 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USt 

Rose quickly to the surface of the lake, 
And swimming onward with his hands arid feet 
Came to a spot that "was within his depth. 
And listening to his brother's cries on shore 
Saw what was worse to him than death itself. 
When Garsfwaz beheld him in the water, 
With eyes fulfilled with blood and troubled heart, 
He cried and said ; "0 monarch of the world, 
The head of nobles and the crown of chiefs ! 
Where are thy customs, state, and policy ? 
Where are thy head and treasure, crown and host ? 
Where all thy knowledge and thy might of hand ? 
Where are the mighty men that were thy lieges? 
Where are thy glory and thy fame in war ? 
Where are thy joys in goblet and in feast 
v. 1394 Since thou hast need to hide thee in the lake, 
And such ill fortune hath befallen thee ? " 

Afrasiyab thereat shed tears of blood, 
And answered : " I have roamed the world at large 
Both publicly and privily withal 
If haply I might 'scape mine evil lot, 
But ill and worse than ill befalleth me ! 
Now is my life grown loathsome and my soul 
Fulfilled with anguish for thy sake that one 
Sprung from Pashang and Faridun erewhile 
Thus should be netted by the Crocodile ! " 

§ 44 

How Afrasiydb teas taken the second Time and how 
he and G&rslwaz were slain 

While these two princes were exchanging words 
The mind of Hiiin, the devotee, devised 
A scheme ; he went upon a spit of land, 
And, when he saw Afrasiyab anear, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

267 

Undid the royal lasso from his waist, 

And came on stalking like a savage lion, 

Then flung the lasso that was ready coiled, 

And took the monarch's head within the noose. 

Hum dragged him forth in miserable plight, 

And loathing life itself, from lake to land, 

Resigned him to the Shahs and went his way ; 

Thou wouldst have said : " He and the wind are mates ! " 

The world-lord with a trenchant sword approached, 

His head all vengeance and his heart all wrath, 

And thus Afrasiyab, the insensate, spake : — 

" This is the very day whereof I dreamed ! 1 

The sky hath long turned o'er me, and it now 

Hath rent the veil that hid its purposes. 

wicked seeker of revenge I" he cried, v . 1395 
" Why dost thou wish to slay thy grandsire ? Speak ! " 

" evil-doer," answered Kai Khusrau, 
" Well worthy of reproach and infamy ! 
First I allege the murder of thy brother, 
Who never sought to injure noble men; 2 
Next of Naudar, that famous sovereign — 
That world-lord and memorial of Iraj — 
Whose neck thou clav'st with thy sharp scimitar, 
And brought'st a Day of Doom upon the world; 3 
And thirdly that of Siyawush, like whom 
None seeth any horseman to recall him, 
Whose head thou didst cut off as 'twere a sheep's, 4 
And didst exalt thyself above high heaven. 
How was it possible to slay my sire 
And not expect an evil day like 1 his ? 
Thou wast in haste to work iniquity, 
And hast for ill a recompense of ill." 

He said : " Shah ! that which hath been hath been, 

1 cannot choose but listen to thy words; 

1 See Vol. ii. p. 232. 
1 See Vol. i. p. 362. 

1 See Vol. i. p. 367. 
* See Vol. ii. p. 320. 

26$ THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Yet suffer me to see thy mother's face, 
And then speak on." 

But Kai Khusrau replied : — 
" Instead of asking for my mother, think 
What evil thou hast wrought upon my head ! 
My sire was guiltless ; I was still unborn ; 
Yet was thine evil rampant in the world ! 
Thou didst behead a king for whom the crown 
And throne of ivory wept bitterly ; 
Now is the day when God will recompense ; 
He payeth ill with ill." 

With Indian sword 
He smote Afrasiyab upon the neck, 
Then flung upon the dust the swarthy form, 
v. 1396 Whose ears and hoary beard were red with blood, 
While Garsiwaz his brother lost all hope ; 
Afrasiyab's imperial throne was void ; 
The day of his good fortune reached its close ; 
111 came on him for ill. Seek not, my son, 
A key whereby ill's bonds may be undone. 
Why shouldest thou 1 Thou knowest that from ill 
111 will befall the evil-doers still ? 
A king possessed of Grace divine will vent 
His wrath in bonds and in imprisonment, 
For if he sheddeth blood his life will be 
Forlorn, high heaven exact the penalty. 
To fierce Bahram thus said an archimage : — 
" Shed not the blood of guiltless heads. If thou 
Wouldst keep that crown of thine upon thy brow 
Be clement, let good thoughts thy mind engage. 
Consider what the crown said to the head : — 
' head ! in thee let brains and wisdom wed.' " 
The cheeks of Garsiwaz were wan, his heart 
Was full of trouble for Afrasiyab. 
They dragged him from the jailors shamefully 
In heavy bonds, on that his evil day, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Begirt with, guards and executioners 

As such a noted miscreant deserved. 

When in sad plight he came before Khusrau, 

With tears of blood upon his livid cheeks, 

The Shah, the king of kings, set loose his tongue, 

Discoursing of the dagger and the bowl. 

Of Tut, the son of Faridiin, fierce Salm, 

And of Iraj, that most illustrious prince ; 

Then called an executioner who came 

With trenchant sword unsheathed, and cruel heart, 

And clave the chief asunder at the waist 

While all the soldiers' hearts were terror-stricken. 

They flung those two like mountains side by side 

While folk stood round beholding far and wide. 

§45 

How Kdvs and Kkmrau returned to Pdrs 

In all haste from the lake, when he had won 

His whole desire from God, the Shah departed 

Toward the temple of Azargashasp. 1 

He and his grandsire offered to the Fire 

Much gold and murmured many a benison. 

One day and night they stood before the Judge 

Of all the world, the Guide, and when Zarasp, 

The treasurer of Kai Khusrau, had come 

He gave Azargashasp a treasure, clad 

In robes of honour all those archimages, 

And lavished drachms, dinars, and precious things. 

Within the city to the mendicants, 

And those who earned their living by their toil, 

The Shah gave wealth as well, and made the world 

Alive by justice and munificence, 

Then took his seat upon the Kaian throne, 

1 See p. 258. 

27* THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Undid the audience-door and shut his lips. 
They wrote dispatches to the provinces, 
To every man of name and every chief ; 
From west to east went letters to each place 
Wherein there was a chieftain known to fame: — 
" The scimitar of Kai Khusrau hath freed 
Earth's surface from the evil of the Dragon ; 
v. 139S The Shah, sustained by God the Conqueror, 
Hath neither rested nor relaxed his girdle ; 
The soul of Siyawush hath gained new life 
In him, the world's whole surface is his slave." 

The Shah bestowed much wealth upon the poor, 
Upon the devotees, and his own kin, 
Then said : " Ye men of name, illustrious lords I 
Bring from the city wife and little ones, 
With minstrels and provisions to the plain." 

Therewith he gave himself to minstrelsy. 
Then all the nobles of the royal seed, 
And all the kindred of Zarasp withal, 
Went to the temple of Azargashasp, 
And there spent forty days with Kai Kaus, 
With minstrels, harp, and wine. When the new moon 
Shone like a gold crown on a young king's head, 
The mighty men betook themselves to Pars 
To rest from war and strife. In every city 
Along the road men gathered round the throne, 
Meanwhile the Shah oped treasure-bags till all 
The folk grew rich, except the prodigal. 

§46 

TJie Death of Kai Kdus 

Kaiis, assured of peace of mind, declared 
The secrets of his heart to God : " O Thou 
Above all fortune and the Guide to good ! 

KAI KHUSRAU 271 

I had from Thee Grace, state, and majesty, 

With fortune, valour, throne, and diadem ; 

None else, as Thou hast me, hast Thou endowed 

With treasure, throne, and an exalted name. 

I asked of Thee that some illustrious man 

Might gird his loins in wreak for Siyawush, 

And saw my grandson, who is mine own Eye, 

Achieve at once my vengeance and his own. 

This atheling surpasseth other kings 

In wisdom, Grace, and height. Since fifty years 

Thrice told have made these musky locks of mine v - 

Like camphor, and the graceful Cypress boweth, 

I take it not amiss that life should cease." 

But little time elapsed and then his name 
Remained as his memorial in the world. 
Khusrau, the worldlord, left his throne and sat 
Upon the grimy dust. The franian nobles 
Went in funereal robes of blue and black. 
Without bright colours or perfumes, afoot, 
Arid spent two sennights mourning for the Shah. 
They built a lofty hall ten lassos high 
To be the mausoleum of Kaiis ; 
This done, the royal officers brought out 
The finest lawn with black brocade of Rum, 
And, having poured upon them aloes, musk, 
And camphor, wrapped the shrivelled corpse therein. 
They set him on a throno of ivory, 
Placed on his head a crown of musk and camphor, 
And when Khusrau had turned and left the throne 
They locked the portal of the place of sleep, 
And no man looked on Kai Kaiis again : 
He rested from revenge and battlefield. 

Such is the fashion of this Wayside Inn ! 
Thou wilt not tarry here in toil for ever. 

The man of lore, the mailed paladin, 
Obtain remission from Death's clutches never ; 

272 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSt 

Be we Zarduhsht himself, or be we king, 
Brick is our pillow, dust our cushioning. 
Be merry then, ensue what pleasureth thee, 

And afterward, when thou hast made that sure, 
Seek fame, but know this world thine enemy, 
The earth thy bed, the grave thy garniture. 
The Shah bewailed his grandsire forty days, 
Refraining from all pleasure, crown, and state. 
The next day on the ivory throne he donned 
The heart-illuming crown. The troops assembled 
At court, the chiefs and magnates helmed with gold 
v, 1400 Blessed him with joy and strewed the erown with jewels. 
There was a festival throughout the world 
Because he sat victorious on the throne, 
And thus, till sixty years had passed away, 
The whole world was obedient to his sway. 1 

§47 

How Kai Khusrau fell into Melancholy 

V. 1405 The Shah's great soul became solicitous 

About God's dealiDgs and his own high state : 

He said : " From Hind and Chin to Rum each place 

Is prosperous ; withal, from west to east, 

Mount, desert, land, and sea have I made void 

Of foes ; the rule and throne of might are mine ; 

The world no longer dreadeth enemies. 

Full many a day hath passed above my head, 

And I have gained from God my full desire, 

Besides the vengeance that I had at heart, 

Yet let me not grow arrogant of soul, 

Corrupt in thought, an Ahriman in faith, 

And bo an evil-doer like Zahhak, 

Jamshid, or such an one as Tur or Salm. 

1 A spurious passage, describing how Kai Khusrau made Jahn ting 
of Turtin, is omitted here. 

KA1 KHUSRAU 

273 

Sprung from Kaus on one side, on the other 

Sprung from Turin — all rancour and vainglory— 

I, like Kaus and like Afrasiyab, 

That warlock froward even in his dreams, 

May grow an ingrate unawares to God, 

And fray mine own pure soul. His Grace will quit me, 

I shall incline to falsehood and unwisdom, 

And when I pass within the gloom, and when 

My head and diadem shall come to dust, 

I shall but leave a bad name in the world, 

And make an evil ending in God's sight. 

This face of mine, this colour of my cheeks 

Will fade, my bones be clad in dust, and all 

Accomplishment be lost. Ingratitude 

Will come instead, and in the other world 

My soul be dark. Another will assume 

My crown and throne, and tread my fortune down. 

A bad name will be my memorial ; 

The roses of mine ancient toils will turn 

To thorns. Since now I have avenged my sire, V. 1406 

And have adorned the world with goodliness, 

Have slain who should be slain, because they were 

Perverse and hostile to all holy God, 

No place remaineth — settlement or desert — 

That hath not read the legend on my sword ; 

While all the mighty of the world obey me 

Albeit they be monarchs throned and crowned. 

Thanks be to God who gave to me the Grace, 

With feet and wings amid the change of fortune. 

And now 1 deem it better to depart 

To God in all my glory, and perchance 

The Almighty's messenger may, though unseen, 

And while I still am flourishing, convey 

My spirit to the dwelling of the just, 

Because this Kaian crown and throne will pass. 

None will excel me in success and famo, 

VOL, IV, S 

274 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

In greatness, welfare, peace, and revelry, 

For I have heard and witnessed this world's secrets, 

Its good and ill both privy and apert ; 

But still for husbandman and king alike 

There is a common end— the way to death." 

The Shah gave orders to the chamberlain 
On duty : " Whoso cometh to the court 
Refuse admittance to him with fair words, 
Be courteous to him and refrain from harshness." 

Thus saying he departed to the pleasance 
With lamentations and with loins ungirt, 
Bathed, ere he prayed, his body and his head, 
And sought by wisdom's lamp the way of God, 
Then donned a new white robe and all devout 
With heart of hope paced toward the oratory, 
There prayed in secret to the holy Judge, 
And said : " O higher than pure soul, the Maker 
Of fire, of air, and dust ! behold and grant me 
Much wisdom, and to know both good and ill. 
I will give praises to Thee while I live, 
And strive to better what I have done well. 
Forgive whatever I have done amiss; 
Let me not use my power frowardly ; 
v. 1407 Keep from this soul of mine the ills of fortune, 
And all the machinations of the Div, 
So that unlike Kaus, Zahhak, Jamshfd, 
I may not yield to passion's tyranny; 
And if he shut on me the door of virtue, 
And fraud and guile grow strong, let not his power 
Avail to the destruction of my soul, 
But bear it to the mansions of the just. 
Look down on me in answer to my prayer." 

He stood thus for a week both day and night 
In body, but his spirit was afar. 
Now when the sennight ended Kai Khusrau 
Began to totter, for his strength had failed, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

And with the eighth day's coming he had gone 
From oratory back to royal throne. 

§48 

How the Nobles inquired tohy Khusrau had dosed 
his Court 

The paladins of the Iranian host 

All marvelled at the conduct of the Shah, 

And divers were those famous warriors' thoughts. 

Now, when the illustrious Shah resumed the state, 

The chamberlain came to the door and bade 

Remove the curtain and admit the host. 

Then came with folded arms the mighty men — 

The cavaliers and men of lion-looks — 

Such men as Tus, Gudarz, and gallant Gfv, 

Gurgin, Ruhham the Lion, and Bfzhan, 

Shtdiish and Zanga, son of Shawaran, 

"With Farfburz and Gustaham and others, 

Who, having seen the Shuh and done obeisance* 

Disclosed to him their secret thoughts and said : — 

" Shah 1 O brave ! O head ! O cypress-tree ! 

ruler of the world and chief of chiefs ! 

No Shah like thee hath filled the ivory throne ; 

From thee both sun and moon derive their light, 

Thou dost exalt steed, mail, and saddle, and give 

To glorious Azargashasp fresh lustre. 

Not fearing travail, toying not with wealth, 

Thou makest toils more numerous than treasures. 

We paladins are all of us thy slaves. 

Dependent for our lives on sight of thee, 

Who hast trod all thine enemies to dust, 

And in this world hast no one left to fear. 

Thine are the troops and treasure of all realms : 

Where'er thou settest foot thou labourest. 

We know no reason why the monarch's thoughts 

276 THE SHAhnAma OF FIRDAUSi 

Have grown so gloomy at this present time ; 

This is thy season to enjoy the world, 

Not to be sorrowful and fade away. 

If now the Shah is vexed by any fault 

In us, so let him say that we may please him, 

And fill our cheeks with blood, our hearts with fire ; 

Or if he tell us of some secret foe 

All those that wear a royal crown themselves 

Will pledge their thrones and crowns to take the head 

Of that man off him, or to lose their own, 

What time they don the helmet of the brave. 

Let him inform us what the secret is, 

And then devise with us." 

The noble Shah 
Replied : " paladins, who seek the way ! 
I am not harassed in the world by foes, 
My treasure is not squandered anywhere, 
The army doth not trouble me at all, 
Nor is there one in fault among yourselves. 
When on his foemen I avenged my sire, 
And decked the world with justice and the Faith, 
No single foot of darksome earth was left 
That had not read the inscription on my signet ; 
Return ye then your falchions to their scabbards, 
And wield the goblet not the scimitar ; 
Instead of twanging bows make ready flutes 
And harps with wine and colour and perfume, 
For we have done what there was need to do, 
And cleared the world of foes. For one whole week 
V. 1409 Have I been standing in the sight of God, 
Fulfilled with contemplation and good rede. 
I have a secret longing which I ask 
The Maker of the world to gratify, 
And will declare it when He answereth, 1 
And by His answer maketh glad my days. 

1 Reading with P. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

V7 

Do ye too offer praises unto God, 
Entreating Him, -who is the Source of power 
For good and ill, to grant this boon and blessing : 
Praise be to Him who hath revealed the way. 
When this is done ensue all happiness, 
And banish thoughts of evil from your hearts. 
Know that the restless sky, discerning not 
Twixt fosterer and fostered, cherisheth 
The old and young alike, and we are witness 
Both to its justice and its tyranny." 

The paladins departed from the Shah, 
Their hearts distracted with their griefs. He bade 
The chamberlain : " Sit down behind the curtain, 
And let none, kin or alien, come to me." 

At night he went forth to the place of prayer, 
Unclosed his lips before the almighty Judge, 
And said to Him : " O higher than the height, 
Thou who exaltest purity and goodness ! 
Vouchsafe to be my guide to Paradise 
Or ever I shall quit this Wayside Inn ; 
May no perverseness turn my heart aside, 
But let my soul among the blest abide." 

§ 49 

How the trdniam summoned Z41 and Rust am, 

Now when a week had passed, and Kai Khusrau 

Showed not his face, there rose much talk and clamour. 

The paladins assembled to a man — 

The lords, the sages, and the counsellors — 

Such as Gudarz and Tiis, son of Naudar, 

And there was much dispute of right and wrong, 

About the ways of autocratic Shahs — 

Those that served God and those that did amiss — 

And all narrated stories of the great, 

2;8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USt 

The nobles and the sages of the world. 
V. 1410 Gudarz said unto Gi'v : " fortune-favoured, 
The servant ever of the crown and throne ! 
Thou didst sustain much travail for frdn, 
Abandoning thy country and thy kindred. 
A sorry matter now confronteth us — 
One that we cannot hold of small account. 
Thou needs must set forth for Z&bulistao, 
Dispatch a mounted courier to Kabul, 
And say to Zal and Rustam : ' Kai Khusrau 
Hath turned himself from God and lost the way, 
Hath closed the door of audience to the nobles, 
And surely is in conclave with the Dtv. 
We have asked questions and have made excuses, 
Appealing to his justice in the case; 
He listened much but answered not ; we see 
His heart distraught, his head fulfilled with vapours, 
And fear that he will grow; like Shah Kaiis, . 
Perverse, and that the Dfv will make him err. 
Now ye are paladins more wise than we, 
With greater influence in all affairs, 
So whatsoever counsellors ye have — 
Men of Kannuj, Dambar, and Margh and Mai, 
Star-readers of Kabulist&n and all 
The sages of Zabul — bring to fran 
To treat this matter. All the realm is full 
Of rumours since the Shah denieth speech 
And audience. Now that we have tried all means 
We look to Zal to set the matter right.'" 

G-fv, hearing this, chose out some valiant men, 
And went in dudgeon, brooding moodily, 
Toward Sistan. Arrived he told to Zal 
And Rustam those strange things that he had seen 
And heard ; to noble Zal he sadly said : — 
" We have espoused much grief." He said to Rustam : — 
" Call from Kabul and summon from Zabul 

KAl KHUSRAV 

279 

The wise, the astrologers, and archimages 
To bear us company." 

Then all set face v. 1411 

Toward Zal and they departed for fran. 

The worldlord stood seven days in prayer, but "when 
The world -illuming sun shone on the eighth 
The audience-chamberlain removed the curtain, 
And Kai Khusrau sat on the throne of gold. 
Then all the paladins and archimages 
Approached. A multitude of prudent nobles 
And counsellors stood there before the worldlord, 
Who looked on them, received them graciously, 
And, as the Kaians used, assigned them seats ; 
But of those famous, loyal lieges none 
Would take his seat or loose his folded arms ; 
They oped their lips and said : " turning Heaven ! 
worldlord full of justice, bright of soul ! 
Thine are the power and Grace of majesty ; 
From earth to sun and Fish all, all is thine, 
We stand as slaves before thy presence, we 
Thy paladins and faithful counsellors, 
To ask why thou hast shut thy court to us. 
Now time hath passed thus and our hearts are sore 
And sad. If then the Shah will tell this secret 
To us his marchlords, who are all astray, 
We will turn seas to land if they annoy him, 
And change the robe of dust thereon to musk, 
We will rase mountains if they be the cause, 
And with our falchions cleave the hearts of foes, 
While if the cure be wealth let not the Shiih 
Be troubled in respect of cash and treasure ; 
We all keep watch upon thy treasury, 
And full of anguish weep at thy distress.' 1 

He made reply : " I need my paladins 
Although my heart hath no anxieties V. '4' 2 

Respecting mastery and men and treasure. 

2 8o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

No foeman hath appeared within the realm 
To cause me any care on his account; 
B\it yet mine ardent heart hath one desire 
That I will not uproot therefrom, and now 
Throughout the dark night till the dawn of day 
I wait the consummation of my hopes, 
And when that cometh I will tell you all, 
And utter what as yet I leave unsaid. 
Go ye your ways victorious and glad, 
Dismissing such thoughts from your memories." 

Then all the paladins, those noble men, 
Called blessings down on him, and grieved again. 

§ 50 

How Kai Kkusrau saw Surusli in a Dream 

As soon as they had gone the wakeful Shah 
Gave orders to the chamberlain, who closed 
The curtains and sat down beside the portal, 
Despairing of victorious Kai Khusrau, 
The worldlord went before the Lord most high, 
Entreating Him that He would be his guide, 
And said : " Almighty Ruler of the heaven, 
Who kindlest goodness, charity, and justice ! 
This sovereignty advantageth me not 
Unless I am in favour with my Lord ; 
But whether I have acted well or ill 
Bestow on me a seat in Paradise." 

Thus stood he pleading for five sennights' space 
Before the presence of the Lord most high. 
One night the Shah slept not for suffering 
Until the moon had risen, then he slept 
But with his mind awake — that spouse of wisdom — 
And dreamed that blest Surush thus whispered him : — 
11 Shahj the favourite of the stars and fortune, 

KAl KHUSRAU 

281 

Who much hast handled armlet, crown, and throne ! 

Now hast thou won thy whole desire, if thou v. 1413 

Art instant in abandoning the world. 

Near to the throne of God, the holy Judge, 

Shalt thou have place ; abide not in this gloom. 

Bestow thy treasures on the worthiest, 

And let another have the Wayside Inn. 

Thou shait grow rich by bounteously entreating 

The mendicants and those of thine own kindred. 

Know that the man who hath escaped the clutch 

Of misadventure, or the dragon's breath — 

Each that hath suffered travail for thy sake — 

Endured the toil that he might win the spoil. 

Give then thy havings to the worthiest, 

Because thou wilt not tarry here for long, 

And choose as ruler for the throne a man 

That will not hurt an ant upon the ground. 1 

When thou hast given away the world rest not, 

Because the season of dispatch hath come 

To thee. Luhrasp hath fitting excellence ; 

Resign to him the kingship, throne, and girdle. 

The place that thou hast sought from God is thine, 

Ascend without death and depart thou thither." 

He spake much else in secret to the Shah, 
Who marvelled at the message and, what time 
He wakened from his slumber, all fordone, 
Saw that the oratory ran with sweat J 
He wept and, with his face upon the ground, 
Made his thanksgiving to the Omnipotent, 
And said : " If I shall pass away forthwith 
I shall attain from God my heart's desire." 

He went to occupy the ivory throne, 
And carried in his hand a robe unworn, 
And, having donned that raiment, sat him down, 
A Shah without an armlet, torque, or crown. 

1 Cf. Vol. i. p. 201 and note. 

282 

THE SHAhNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

I Si 

How Zdi admonished Kai Khusrau 

v. 1414 Now on the sixth week Zal and Rustam came 
In discontentment and distress of heart. 
The Iranians when they were advised thereof 
Made haste, heart-broken too, to go to them. 
"When Rustam had appeared in sight with Zal, 
Together with the prowest archimages, 
All those who were the kinsmen of Zarasp 
Urged on their steeds to go and welcome them, 
While all the nobles with the golden boots 
Advanced with Kawa's standard. When GiSdarz 
Reached matchless Rustam tears ran down his cheeks ; 
The faces of the advancing troops were wan ; 
All hearts were seared and troubled for Khusrau. 
The Iranians spake to Zal and Rustam thus : — 
" The Shah hath erred by counsel of Iblis. 
The audience-chamber is completely thronged, 
But none beholdeth him by night or day. 
They ope the door of audience once a week, 
And thither go we but, O paladin ! 
Quite other now is Kai Khusrau than when 
Thou usedst to behold him bright and happy 
Of soul. The straight- stemmed Cypress-tree is bent, 
The red Rose hath the colour of the quince. 
I know not that the evil eye hath seen him, 
Or why his rosy face is withered so, 
Unless the Iranians' fortune hath grown dim, 
Or stars have brought on him this decadence ; 
Or whether 'tis the fear of holy God 
That causeth in his heart such melancholy ; 
Or if the Di'v hath made him err and wrecked 
Once and for all the world." 

Brave Zal replied : — 

KAI KHUSRAV 

" The Shah hath grown aweary of the throne. 
There are such things as health and suffering, 
Distress and gladness too have each their time. 
Have not your heart so greatly sorrowful, 
For sorrow casteth down the blithest soul. 
We will speak much to him and counsel him, 
And by our counsel bring his star success. 3 ' 

The wayfarers made haste to court. The curtain 
Was drawn aside. They were admitted gladly 
In order due — Zal, elephantine Rustam, 
Tiis and Gudarz and all their company, 
And then Gurgfri, Bizhan, and Gustaham 
With all the warriors of their retinue. 
The king of kings, when he beheld ZnTs face, 
And heard the voice of Rustam at the curtain, 
Rose to his feet in wonder from the throne, 
And standing greeted Zal and clasped his hand.- 
As for the wise men from Zabul, Kannrij, 
Dambar, and from Kabul, he greeted each, 
And courteously entreated them, assigning 
To each his place and to the Iranians 
The highest. Zal did reverence and spake thus : — 
"Live happily while month and year endure ! 
Of all the famous chiefs that we can call 
To mind from Minuchihr to Kai Kubad, 
As well as Zav, aon of Tahxnasp, Kaus — 
Great men and Shahs whose steps were fortunate — 
And Siyawush, who was as mine own son, 
Endowed with stature, dignity, and Grace, 
None have I seen with Grace, renown, and wisdom 
Such as the Shah's, and may he reign for ever 
Victorious, intrepid, just, and wise. 
Thou hast pervaded all the world with justice, 
And come again in triumph and in joy. 
What king but is as dust beneath thy feet ? 
What bane for which thy name is not a cure ? 

284 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

Received have I some most unwelcome news, 
And thereupon have made all haste to come, 
v. 1416 One from iran declared : * The conquering Shah 
Hath bid the audience-chamberlain to leave 
The curtain down and hide our monarch from us.' 
T like an eagle or a ship at sea 
Have come in all haste, since the franians grieve. 
That I might ask the monarch of the world 
About the secret matter on his mind. 
The readers of the stars, the mighty men 
Whom I saw chief within their provinces, 
Have come with Indian tablets from Kannuj, 
Dambar, and Margh and Mai to ascertain 
The secret of the sky, and why the Shah 
Withdraweth his affection from Iran. 
Now all well-being resteth on three things, 
With which the throne of royalty is safe ; 
The three are treasure, toil, and valiant men : 
Without them glory, rule, and fight are not. 
A fourth is that we offer praise to God, 
And make our prayers before Him night and day, 
Because He is His servant's succourer, 
One who restraineth the injurious. 
We will bestow much wealth upon the poor, 
Though it should cost us what we value most, 
That He may make thy spirit bright again 
With wisdom for the armour of thy brain." 1 

§ 52 

How Kai Khmrau answered Zdl 

Khusrau gave ear, then made a sage reply : 
" Old man of honest brain ! " he said to Zal, 
"Right goodly are thy counsels and thy speech. 

1 Reading with P. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Since Minuchihr was on the throne till now 
Thou hast been kindly and benevolent, 
While Rustam of the elephantine form, 
That man of name, the pillar of the Kaians 
And people's joy, became the fosterer 
Of Siyawush and source of good to him. 
Troops that have looked on Rustam's iron mace, 
His breast, his helmet, and his lion-limbs, 
Have often fled before the fight, and dropped 
Their bows and arrows on the plains and dales ■ 
He helped mine ancestors to seek revenge, 
And was their glorious minister and guide. 
Were I to tell thy toils the tales would last 
A hundred generations and be fresh, 
And were inquiry made of thy good deeds 
My praise would only be disparagement. 
Next, as to what thou askest of my case 
In thus refusing audience and lamenting, 
I will inform thee of each circumstance 
That thou mayst know the matter point by point : 
By God, I have no wish on earth but one — 
To quit this wretched world. Five sennights now 
Have passed while I have stood to supplicate 
The Judge and Guide to pardon past offences, 
To brighten my dark moon, convey me hence, 
And leave on earth no pain or grief through me. 
I must not quit the right and turn aside 
Like former Shahs. I have attained my wish* 
And must dispatch because glad news hath come. 
Whenas mine eyes were sleeping yester-morn 
Surush, the blessed, came to me from God, 
And said : ' Prepare, for 'tis thy time to go, 
Thy watching and distress are overpassed.' 
So now mine audiences, care for the host, 
For crown and throne and belt, are at an end." 
The paladins were troubled in their hearts 

286 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

About the Shah and knew not what to do. 
Zal, when he heard the monarch's words, was wroth 
And from his liver drew a deep, cold sigh ; 
He said to the Iranians : " This is bad ! 
No wisdom still abideth in his brain ; 
Since first I girt a girdle round my loins 
I have attended at the Kaians' throne > 
v. 1*18 But never saw I one who spake like this ! 

Yet may we not ignore what he hath said, 
Or give assent thereto in any way, 
When he is holding forth in such a strain. 
He may have been in conclave with the Div, 
And thus his head is turned away from God. 
Hdshang and Farfdun, God's worshippers. 
Ne'er laid their hands on such a branch as this. 
I will declare to him the honest truth 
E'en at the cost of life." 

The Iranians said: — 
" No Kaian e'er spake thus ! We are with thee 
In what thou say'st to him. May God prevent 
His wandering from use and precedent." 

§ 53 

How Z41 rebuked Km Khusrau 

Zal heard their words, then rose and said : <r Khusrau, 

Thou upright chief! list to the words of one 

Advanced' in years, one who hath seen the world, 

And answer not if he adviseth ill. 

Though honest speech be bitter it will bar 

The door of ruin by its bitterness. 

Take therefore in good part the honest words, 

Which I will speak before this company : 

Born wast thou in the country of Turan ; 

There was thy fountain-head and there thy home ; 

KAl KHUSRAU 

2S7 

Thou hadst on one side great Afrasiyab, 
Who never dreamed of aught but sorcery, 
For grandsire, on the other base Kaiis 
With wrinkled visage and deceitful heart. 
From west to east the greatness and the sway, 
The crown and belt, were his. Now he was fain 
To pass the sky and count the circling stars, 
And though I counselled him at large thereon, 
And spake with bitterness as I do now, 
He was not profited by all my counsels, 
And seared and grieved I turned away from him. 
He soared and came down headlong to the dust, 
But holy God vouchsafed to spare his life. 

On coming home he was ungrateful still; v. 1419 

His heart was awed, but war was in his thoughts. 

Thou with a hundred thousand swordsmen mailed, 

And armed with ox-hcad maces, didst go forth, 

As 'twere a lion roused, to levy war, 

And rank upon the desert of Kharazm. 

Thou wentest forth, the champion of thy host, 

To tight afoot against the valiant Shida. 

If he had got the upper hand of thee 

Thou wouldst have brought the great Afrasiyab 

Upon fran ; the Iranians' wives and children 

Had perished ; none had girt him for revenge ; 

But God vouchsafed deliverance from his hand, 

Had mercy on thee and confirmed thy counsels. 

Thou slewest him whom there was cause to fear, 

Him who was thankless to the almighty Judge; 

But when I said : 1 It is the time for peace, 

The time for robes, for largess, and for goblet ; 

The king and host will rest from toil, and we 

Shall have our souls refreshed for months and years,' 

This grievous business came upon Iran, 

And more than ever filled our hearts with sorrow, 

For thou hast put from thee the way of God, 

2S8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

And ta'en to evil paths and frowardness. 
Thy person will not profit by this wrong, 
Nor will it please the Maker of the world. 
If thou art bent on such a course, O Shah ! 
No one will go about to do thy bidding, 
And then thou "wilt repent thee of thine acts. 
Consider ! Do not what the divs command. 
Moreover if thou seekest thus their way 
The Worldlord will withdraw from thee the Grace, 
Thou wilt be left in misery and sin, 
And men will never hail thee Shah again ; 
God is our Refuge ; therefore turn to God, 
Because He is our Guide to what is good. 
If thou rejectest this my counselling, 
And trustest unto wicked Ahriman, 
Thou wilt retain no homage and no fortune, 
No royal majesty, no crown, no throne. 
V. 1420 May wisdom be the leader of thy soul. 
Because the way in front of us is long, 
Mayst thou be prudent, may thy counsels prosper, 
And may thy brain be steadfast and devout." 

Whenas the words of Z41 had reached their end 
The heroes all assented, saying thus 
" The old man saith what we too think is best, 
It is not right that truth should be supprest." 

§ 54 

How Kai Khusrau answered and how Zdl excused himself 

When Kai Khusrau had hearkened to their words 
He was a while anangered and breathed hard, 
Then spake deliberately : " veteran Zal, 
Whose manhood reacheth countless years ! if I 
Speak coldly to thee here before the folk 
The Worldlord never will approve that wrong 

KAI KHUSRAU 

289 

In me. Moreover Rustam will be grieved. 

And through his grief loss will befall Iran ; 

Moreover should I reckon up his toils 

They would be more e'en than his famous treasures. 

He hath enshielded rne with his own body. 

And suffered not our foes to eat or sleep, 

So I will answer thee with kindliness, 

And will not break thy heart with cruel words." 

Khusrau then cried aloud : " noble men 
Whose fortunes never slumber ' I have heard 
What Zal hath said in presence of you all. 
By God, the almighty Lord, I am afar 
Both from the way and bidding of the Div ; 
My soul inclineth God-ward, for in Him 
I have beheld my remedy for care. 
Mine ardent heart hath looked upon this world, 
My breast is troubled by the woes thereof." 

He said to Zal : " Forbear thine anger, thou 
Shouldat speak in measured words. First, for thy 
saying 

f None wise and shrewd hath issued from Turan,' 
Worldlord and son of Siyawush am I f v. 1421 

A prudent monarch of the Kaian stock, 
The grandson of the worldlord Kai Kaus — 
The love-inflaming, wise, and fortunate — 
And through my mother from Afrasiyab, 
Whose wrath deprived us both of food and sleep. 
Sprung thus from Faridun and from Pashang, 
I shame not at iny birth because the sea 
Could not have purged the Lions of iran 
Of fears inspired by Afrasiyab. 
Next for the carriage which Kaus once made 
To raise his head above the sovereignty, 
Know that no blame attacheth to a king 
For lofty aims. Now that I have avenged 
My father and have decked the world with goodness, 
VOL. IV. T 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USf 

Have slain my foes, and all who were on earth 
The common source of outrage and injustice, 
No work reinaineth for me here below ; 
The miscreants have not a monarch left. 
Now whonsoe'er I meditate awhile 
On kingship and long rule I go the way 
Of Kai Kdus and of Jamshid, and lose 
My footing as they did. I fear that I, 
As soon as icy age shall come upon me, 
Shall, like impure Zahhak and daring Tur, 
Whose outrages revolted all the world, 
Be haled to Hell. Again, thou saidst : ' Thou foughtest 
With Shida like a lusty crocodile.' 
The reason was — I saw no cavalier 
In all fran who would engage with him, 
Or on engaging would not shrink and prove 
Of little worth with Shida as a foe, 
And so I battled for Iran in person ; 
Bright is his star who hath the Grace divine. 
For these five sennights both by night and day 
Have I unclosed my lips with orisons 
v. 1422 If so the Worldlord, the all holy God, 

Might free me from this grief and this dark earth, 

And now aweary of host, crown, and throne 

I have returned in haste to make all ready. 

Thou son of Sam, old and illustrious, 

Said'st that the Di'v had laid a snare for me, 

That darkly and perversely I have left 

The way, grown vile of soul and black of heart 1 

I do not know what chastisement divine 

Thou think est due to me for life misspent." 

Zal was confounded when he heard these words, 
And could not look the monarch in the face. 
Then with a cry he rose upon his feet, 
And said : " Shah, thou worshipper of God ! 
I have been rash and foolish while thou art 

KAI KHVSRAU 

29 1 

A holy man, and one divinely wise. 

Forgive me if the Div hath led ine wrong, 

I have been living for unnumbered years 

With loins girt up in presence of the Shahs, 

But never saw I one who sought of God, 

The Judge of sun and moon, what thou hast sought. 

Now Kai Khusrau hath come to be the teacher: v. m 2 3 

Be evil fortune ever far from him. 

I would not lose Khusrau ; yet, though my soul 

Is dark, let wisdom witness to my words 

That to his faithful lieges of Iran 

The Shah's act overrideth all their grief, 

So that with us there is desiro to part 

From our just judge, beneficent Khusrau." 

The Shah, when he had heard Zal's words, approved 
The excuse thus proffered by his loyal liege, 
Reached forth and clasped in his the old man's hand, 
And made him take his seat upon the throne ; 
The sun-faced Shah was ware that naught could move 
His liege to speak such words excepting love. 

§55 

How Kai Khusrau gave his last Charge to the Irdniam 

The Shah spake afterward to Zal } and said : — 
" Now gird ye ( every one of you, your loins, 
Thou, Rustam, Tus, Grudarz and Giv and all 
The others that are men of name and courage ! 
Bea^ye the camp-enclosure from the city 
Out on the plain with our victorious standard ; 
Take thither all the tents and the pavilions 
To furnish an encampment ; there assemble 
The chieftains' flags, the elephants, and troops, 
And make a splendid feast-stead." 

Rustam did 

292 THE SH AH NAM A OF FIRDAUSf 

As said the Shah. They brought the camp-enclosure 
Forth to the plain, and all the Iranians 
Girt up their loins to do as they were bidden. 
The earth was tilled with tents from hill to hill — 
Tents white and sable, violet and blue — 
While Kawa's flag was in the midst and made 
The world look yellow, red, and violet. 
They pitched Zal's ten t-en closure on the plain 
Hard by the Shah before the army. Rustam, 
The paladin, was stationed on the left 
With shrewd chiefs from Kabul. In front were Tus, 
Gudarz, and Giv, Bi'zhan the warrior, 
v. 1424 And brave Gurgin, and, in the rear, Shapiir 
With Gustaham and nobles in attendance. 
The king of kings sat on the golden throne, 
With ox-head mace, on one side Zal and Rustam— 
A stately Elephant and Lion grim — 
Upon the other Tns, Gudarz, and Gi'v, 
Gurgi'n, Farhad, and valorous Shapur, 
While every eye was fixed upon the face 
Of Kai Khusrau to know what he would say 
About the host. He raised his voice and said : — 
" Ye famous men of action ! every one 
That is possessed of rede and wisdom knoweth 
That good and ill will pass away alike ; 
We all must go, and this world passeth too : 
What need for all this travail, grief, and care ? 
Tis well to go now while we have our troops, 
Wc must not go as though impuissant; 
For us the bull is still within its hide, 
And elsewhere are reward and retribution. 
Be all of you in fear of holy God, 
And put no confidence in this dark earth, 
Because the day of each of us will pass, 
And time is reckoning our every breath. 
From glorious Hushang to Shah Kaus 

KAI KHVSRAU 

293 

Of all that had the throne, the crown, and Grace 

Naught but the name remaineth to the world, 

And no one readeth rescripts from the dead. 

Of them full many showed ingratitude, v - '4*5 

And trembled for their error in the end. 

A bondslave am I even as they were ; 

And striven though I have with pains, and I 

Have striven and endured exceeding toil, 

I realise that here is none abiding. 

Now from this Wayside Inn have I uprooted 

My heart and soul, and lifted them o'er care 

And toil; now have I won my whole desire, 

And turned my back upon the Kaian throne. 

To every one that hath borne toil with me 

Will I give treasure equal to his wish, 

And speak to God, who heareth what is good, 

For them whom I approve. I give the Iranians 

My treasures and mine implements of war. 

To every prince among you I will give 

A province. Of my purses, slaves, and steeds 

Have I bethought me ; I produce a list 

And now bestow them, for I go my way, 

And clear my heart of this obscurity. 

Put forth your hands in gladness to the feast, 

One sennight eat and drink, and pray that I 

May quit this Wayside Hostel and abide 

Afar from toil." 

When he announced his purpose 
The warriors were all astound at him, 
And one among them said : " The Shah is mad, 
And wit is as a stranger to his heart ! 
I know not what will come to him, or where 
The crown and throne will find repose ! " 

Anon v. 1426 

The warriors departed band by band ; 

Plains, dales, and mountains were all troops. The sounds 

294 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSl 

Of piping and of neighing steeds ascended 
Above the very sky, as thou wouldst say ; 
Thereat the spirits of the Iranians rose. 
And for one week none thought of griefs and woes. 

§ 56 

How Kai Khttsmu appointed Gwlarz to be his 
Mandatary 

The Shah the eighth day sat upon the throne 
Without his armlets, mace, and golden helm, 
Acid since the time when he must pass was near 
They oped the portal of the treasury, 
Which done he made Gudarz, son of Kishwad, 
His mandatary, saying : " See to all 
The world's affairs — the public and the secret. 
There is a season for amassing wealth 
With labour, and a time for lavishing. 
Look to the ruined caravansaries, 
As well as to the bridges on our borders ; 
The dried up cisterns, those within Iran 
And those constructed by Afrasiyab ; 
The children motherless, the womenfolk 
That have no husbands and are destitute, 
With those that come to want in their old age ; 
Moreover close not thou the treasury's door 
To such as strive to hide their sufferings. 
Bestow and live in fear of evil days ; 
See to the cities that are lying waste — 
The lurking-dens of leopards and of lions, 
Next as to places where the Cult of Fire 
Prevailed, but which are waste and priestless now, 
As well as every one in indigence t 
Who in his early days gave liberally, 
V. 1427 And all the wells grown old and waterless, 

KAI KHUSRAU 

295 

Make all these flourish through this hoard of gold 
And silver. Think drachms vile; remember death." 

As to the treasure which was called " The Bride," 
Stored by Kaiis within the town of Tiis, 
He bade Gudarz : " Give it to Gi'v, to Zal, 
And to the lord of Rakhsh." 

He reckoned up 
His wardrobe and bestowed the whole on Rustam. 
The armlets also and the chieftains' torques, 
The massive maces and the coats of mall, 
He gave to Gustaham — a just award. 
Then, choosing from the steeds and saddlery, 
He gave a herd of horses highly bred, 
And then at large, to Tus the general. 
He gave Gudarz his gardens, rosaries, 
And certain palaces the which he named. 
The body-armonr that he treasured so — 
That precious armour worn in his campaigns — 
He had bestowed complete on gallant GIv 
What time he grew aweary of the throne. 
A palace, camp-enclosure with the tents, 
Pavilions, stalls, and horses he presented 
To Farfburz, son of Kaiis, as well 
As coats of mail and helms and Human casques, 
A torque which was more bright than Jupiter, 
Together with two radiant rings of ruby, 
Engraven with the worldlord's name and known 
Throughout the world, "These," said he to Bizhan, 
" Keceive as a memorial of me, 
And sow not any seed but that of good.' 3 

Then said he to the f ranians : " My time 
Approacheth, and I long afresh to go ; 
Make your requests of me for what ye need, 
For this assembly must be broken up," 

The chiefs were overcome by grief, they wept- 
And burned in anguish for the king of kings. 

296 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

" To whom now will the Shah " inquired they all, 
" Bequeath the crown as his memorial ? " 

§ 57 

How Zdl asked of Kai Khusmu a Patent for Rustam 

v. 1428 When Zal, that loyal liege, had heard the Shah 
He kissed the ground, then springing to his feet 
Spake out, and said : " monarch of the world ! 
Let me disclose to thee my heart's desire. 
What for Iran's sake Rustam hath achieved 
In combats, travails, and campaigns thou knowest. 
When Kai Kaus went to Mazandaran — 
A lengthy march of many toilsome leagues — 
And when the divs had put him into ward, 
Together with the proud Gudarz and Tus> 
Then matchless Rustam, having heard thereof, 
Went to Mazandaran in haste alone. 
Through desert and through gloom, midst divs and 
lions, 

Enchanters and fierce dragons, in distress 

And toil he cut his way, and reached the Shah ; 

He rent the White Div's flank, he tore the reins 

Both of Piilad, 1 son of Ghundi, and Bid, 

And plucked off Sanja's head. His war-cry reached 

High heaven. Kaiis went to Hamavaran, 

And there folk made him fast in heavy bonds 

With Tus, Giidarz, and Giv— those gallant hearts 

And wary warriors. But matchless Rustam 

Marched thither with a mighty host and chieftains, 

The chosen of Irin and of Zabul, 

And freed Kaus, Giidarz, and Giv and T&s. 

When Rustam slew Suhrab — a son unmatched 

Mid high and low alike throughout the world — 

1 The texts have lIHd, bat cf. Vol. ii. pp. 44, $4, 64, 93. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

When waging battle for Kaiis, the Shah, 
He wept in agony for months and years ; 
And when he fought Kamiis in after-times 
His valour sent the dust up to the clouds. 
However I might speak about Ms acts 
The tale of them would never reach an end. 
Now if the Shah is tired of crown and throne 
What leaveth he this loyal lion-heart ? " 

"His actions," such was Kai Khusrau's reply, 
" On our behalf, his fightings and his toil, 
Who knoweth save the almighty Lord of Heaven — 
He that revealeth justice, peace, and love ? 
Yet Rustam's fame is manifest to all, 
And he hath none to match him in the world." 

He ordered that a scribe should come to him 
With paper, musk, and spicery. They wrote 
A patent from the monarch of the earth, 
The exalted Kai Khusrau, the pure in Faith, 
For elephantine Rustam, that brave chieftain, 
Praised for his valour in all companies, 
The foremost of the world, a lord thereof, 
A chieftain, vigilant, and valiant, 
A conquering leader and the Light of hosts, 
Assigning him the province of Nfmruz. 
They sealed the patent with the golden signet, 
As was the usance of just Kai Khusrau, 
Who gave the deed to him, commending him, 
And saying : " May the earth be blessed in Rustam." 

Then to the chieftains that had journeyed thither 
With Zal, the son of Sam the cavalier, 
And astrolabes upon their bosoms bare, 
He gave robes, gold, and silver — each his share. 

2gS THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSf 

§ 5S 

How Kai Khmrau gave a Patent to Qiv 

Zal, seeing this, gave thanks exceedingly 
To that victorious and discerning Shah. 
When Zal resumed his seat Giidarz arose, 
He urged a just request, and thus he said : — 
" Victorious Shah ! we never yet have seen 
A master of the throne to equal thee. 
Prom Minuchihr as far as Kai Kubad, 
And from Kaiis until thy noble self, 
We have girt up our loins before the chiefs, 
And have not had a single day's repose. 
My sons and grandsons numbered seventy-eight ; 
Now eight remain ; the rest have passed away, 
v. 1430 Moreover watchful Grv for seven years 

Was in Turan, deprived of food and rest ; 
Upon the waste he lived on onager, 
And wore the skins of game. The Shah, when he 
Came to Iran, had seen what toils Gfv bare 
For him. He wearieth of crown and throne, 
And Giv expecteth kindness at his hands." 

Khusrau replied : " He hath done better still, 
And may a thousand blessings rest upon him, 
The Master of the world be his ally, 
And may his foemen's rose be full of thorns. 
My havings great and small are in thy hand. 
May health of body and of mind be thine." 

He made a grant of Kura and Ispahan— 
The seat of nobles and the home of chief's. 
The scribe wrote out with musk and ambergris 
On silk the great king's letter, who impressed 
His golden seal thereon, blessed it, and said : — 
" May God be well contented with Gudarz, 
And may his foemen's hearts be filled with smoke ! " 

KA I KHUSRAU 

He thus addressed the franians : " Know ye this, 
That gallant Grv, who hath the thews of chieftains 
And lion's claws, is my memorial 
To be your succour after I am gone. 
Submit yourselves to his authority, 
And not transgress the counsels of Gudarz." 

The chieftains of that race with one accord 
Renewed their blessings on their sovereign lord, 

§ 59 

Hcnc Kai Khusrau gave a Patent to Tus 

Whenas Gudarz resumed his seat Tiis rose, 

Came, kissed the ground before Khusrau, and said :- 

(< O monarch ! live for ever. May ill's hand 

Be ever far from thee. Of all these nobles 

I only am derived from Farfdun ; 

We were the royal house till came Kubad. 

Before the Iranians have I girt my girdle, 

And never loosed that bondage from my loins. 

Upon Mount Hamawon the breastplate galled 

My body; it was all I had to wear; 

And in that war of wreak for Siyawush 

I was each night the watchman of the host. 

I could not save the army at Ladan, 

But wag myself within the Dragon's breath. 

When in Hamavaran Kaus was bound 

There were chains also on the neck of Tus, 

And in Mazandaran I was in bonds 

With him, and was in dudgeon for his sake. 

I, whether I behaved me well or ill, 

Served in all places as his general. 

I never anywhere dispersed the host, 

And no one ever made complaint of me. 

The Shah is tired of treasury and throne, 

3M THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA U$t 

And is about to quit this Wayside Inn ; 

What dost thou bid me do ? What power is mine ? 

Thou knowest both my virtues and my faults." 

The Shah made answer : " Thou hadst greater hard- 
ships 

Than these from fate. Keep Kawa's standard still, 
Be'general and wear the golden boots. 
Thy portion of the world is Khurasan ; 
None of these nobles will molest thee there." 

They wrote a patent out to that effect 
Before the magnates and the mighty men; 
Khusrau then sealed it with the golden signet, 
And gave to Tils a golden torque and girdle, 
Invoking blessings on him fervently: — 
" May my heart never more be wroth with thee. 1 ' 

§60 

How Kai Khusmu gave the Kingship to Luhrasp 

The king of kings, when he had ordered thus 
The matter of the chiefs, went to his throne. 
Now of the chiefs Luhrasp remained, whose name 
None read upon the roll of royalty, 
And him the Shah required Bfzhan to bring 
Before the presence with his helmet on. 
The worldlord when he saw Luhrasp arose, 
Saluted him with outstretched hands and then, 
V, 1432 Descending from the famous ivory throne, 

Took from his head the heart-illuming crown, 
Resigned it to Luhrasp and hailed him Shah 
Of all the Iranian realm, and said to him ; — 
" May this thy crown prove fortunate to thee ; 
Be all the world thy slave. On thee have I, 
Since mine exceeding toil and pain are over, 
Bestowed the crown of kingship and the treasure. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

Speak naught but what is just henceforth, for thou 
Through justice wilt be conquering and glad. 
Make not the Dfv the comrade of thy soul 
If thou wilt keep thy fortune vigorous ; 
Be prudent and without offence, and set 
For evermore a watch upon thy tongue." 

He said to the Iranians : " Let your hearts 
Be joyful in his fortune and his throne." 

The Iranians were amazed, they raged like lions, 
And said : " Must we salute Luhrasp as Shah ? " 

Then from among them Zal rose to his feet 
To speak the righteous counsels of his heart, 
And said on this wise : " exalted king ! 
Thou mayest make dust precious, but may dust, 
Dust only, fill the head of that man's fortune, 
And antidotes prove poison in his mouth, 
Who sayeth that Luhrasp is Shah by right. 
We never will consent to such injustice. 
Whenas he came Iran-ward with Zarasp 
I saw him poor, and owning but one horse ; 
Thou sentest him to battle with the Alans, 
Providing him with army, flag, and belt. 
His birth I know not ; I have seen no merit 
In him ; I never heard of such a monarch. 
Though nobles of the royal race abound 
The Shah hath not remembered one of them ! " 

When Zal, the son of Sam, had spoken thus 
The whole assembly sided with the speaker. 
And from the franians rose a shout ; " O Shah ! 
Henceforth we will not gird our loins or seek 
To tight at all upon the battlefield 
If now the king exalteth thus Luhrasp." 

Khusrau, when he had heard the words of Zal, 
Replied : " Restrain thyself and be not wroth, 
For whoso speaketh that which is not just 
Will only get the smother of the fire, 

302 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Since God approveth not of ill from us, 
And bad men writhe 'neath time's vicissitudes, 
While he whom God createth for high fortune, 
Fit to be monarch and adorn the throne, 
Endowed with modesty, Faith, birth, and Grace 
Will flourish, conquer, and rejoice injustice. 
The Maker is tay witness when I say 
That all these qualities are in Luhrasp. 
He Is descended from Hiishang the worldlord, 
A noble of discernment and clean hands, 
A scion of Pashm and K.ai Kubad, 
Well stocked with knowledge, righteous in his 
thoughts. 

He will cut off the sorcerers from the earth, 
And manifest the way of holy God, 
His counsels will renew the age's youth, 
And as he is his stainless son will be. 
God said to me : ' Look thou upon Luhrasp,' 
And I have acted only as He bade. 
Now do ye homage to him as your Shah, 
And as ye love me slight not mine advice, 
For if a man transgress my parting counsel 
I shall esteem his past exertions wind. 
One such as that will give no praise to God, 
And fear from all sides will assail his heart." 

As soon as Zal had heard these righteous words 
He reached out, set his fingers to the ground, 
And in the act of homage smeared his lips 
With grimy dust, then hailed Luhrasp as Shah, 
And said to that world's lord: " Mayst thou be 
happy. 

Far from thee ever be the hand of ilL 
Who save the Shah, victorious and noble, 
Knew that Luhrasp was of the royal race ? 
V, H34 As I swore fealty my lips got smeared 

With grimy dust: account it not a fault." 

KAI KHUSRAU 

303 

The great men showered jewels on Luhrdsp, 
And hailed him as the Shah. When Kai Khusrau 
Had thus achieved the matter of the kingship 
He thought next of the folk and told the Iranians ; — 
'^To-morrow ye will go the selfsame path, 
And I, on quitting this vile dust, will pray 
To holy God that we be reunited." 

In taking leave he kissed the face of each ; 
The. lashes of his eyes were full of tears ; 
He pressed each warrior closely to his breast, 
And bitterly exclaimed : " Oh ! would that I 
Could bear this company along with me ! " 

A cry rose from the army of Iran : — 
" The sun hath wandered from its way in heaven ' " 
Men, children, and the women in their bowers, 
On mountain, in bazar, and midst the throng, 
Were raising wails and lamentable cries, 
And every quarter sorrowed for the Shah, 
While all the chieftains bent them with their heads 
Upon the ground and rent their robes in grief; 
The earth was in convulsion everywhere, 
And all the mighty men were in amazement. 

The Shah then spake to the Iranians, 
And said: "Heed, every one of you, this counsel, 
All ye that are possessed of Grace and birth ! 
Be happy in the justice of your lord. 
And now will I take order for my soul 
That I may pass with honour, for my heart 
Hath not been set upon this Wayside Inn: 
Know that Suriish hath come to be my guide." 

He spake and bade to bring night-hued Bihzad, 
While lamentations went up from the host; 
He reached the palace, overcome with woe, 
His noble cypress -statu re bending low. 

3<H 

THE SHAHNASdA OF FIRDAUSl 

§6l 

How Kai Kkmrau faretcelled his Women 

v. 1435 He had four sun-like damsels ; none had seen • 
Their faces e'en in dreams. He called those Idols 
Forth from their bowers and told his purpose, 
saying : — 

" I am about to leave this place of sojourn, 
But be not sad or sorry. Ye henceforth 
Will see me not, for tired of this ill earth 
• I shall depart to God, the holy Judge, 
And see no way whereby I may return." 

Thereat the sun-faced four became distraught, 
And wailed for anguish, misery, and love ; 
They tore their faces, they plucked out their hair, 
And broke their gay and scented ornaments, 
Then as each one regained her self-control 
She cried out with a lamentable voice : — 
" Remove us also from this Wayside Inn, 
And guide us to the attainment of this good." 

The noble Shah made answer to them thus : — 
" Ye too will go upon a way like this. 
Where are the sisters of Jamshid the worldlord ? 
Where are the nobles with their gloryings ? 
Where is the daughter of Afrasiyab — 
My mother who came hither o'er Jihun ? 
Where is Tiir's daughter, Blah Afrid, whose like 
None ever saw ? Their beds are brick and dust ; 
I know not if they be in Heaven or Hell. 
The talons and the teeth of Death will close 
On crown and helm alike, wear which we may ; 
Hence one should be adorned with righteousness. 
For that not even death will take from us. 
v. J436 Seek not to make me sorry to depart, 

Because the way is bright before mine eyes." 

KAI KHUSRAU 

3<>5 

He cried aloud and called to him Luhrasp 
To whom he spake much of the womenfolk, 
And said : " These are mine Idols, and they are 
The glory of my garden. Keep them here 
Together in this home while thou remainest, 
And when God calleth thee let not thy soul, 
Through any act of thine, be shamed before Him, 
Or feel itself disgraced before two kings 
When thou beholdest me with Siyawush " 

Luhrasp assented unto Kai Khusrau 
In all, and answered : " How should I behold them 
la their seclusion ? " 

Kai Khusrau then girt 
His loins, and went back to the Iranian chiefs ; 
He said : " Go home again with all dispatch ; 
Let not your hearts be seared and smoked for me, 
Nor feel at home with this world, for it hath 
Its glooms though yet unseen. For evermore 
Be ye both great and happy. Never think 
Of me except for good. Be jocund all, 
Rejoice in God, and when ye have to pass 
Be it a day for smiles and happiness/' 

Then all the nobles of the Iranian host 
Bent to the ground before him, saying thus : — 
" The counsels of the Shah will we hold fast 
As life itself as long as life shall last." 

§62 

How Kai Khusrau went to the Mountains and vanished 
in the Snow 

Khusrau commanded that Luhrasp should come, 
And said to him : " My day hath passed. Go thou, 
Maintain the usage of the royal throne, 
And in the world sow but the seed of good. 
VOL. IV. u 

306 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAUSt 

Whenever thou hast any times of ease 
Boast not about thy treasures and thy crown ; 
Know this that when thy day of darkness cometh 
The way before thee is the way to God. 
Seek after and perform whate'er is just, 
And hold the persons of the great in honour." 
v. 1437 Luhrasp alighted quickly from his steed, 

And kissed the ground with signs of sore distress. 
Khusrau said : " Fare thee well and be thyself 
The warp and woof of justice." 

From fran 

Went chieftains with the Shah, great, shrewd, and 
valiant, 

As Zal and Rustam, as Giidarz and Giv t 
The brave Bfzhan and gallant Gust ah am ; 
The seventh was Farfburz, son of Eaus, 
The eighth famed Tus. The host marched troop on 
troop 

Till from the waste they reached a mountain- top, 
And tarried there a sennight to draw breath 
And wet their lips, exclaiming at the Sh&h, 
And labour which they could not understand, 
While every archimage said privily : — 
"None in the world e'er told of such a case !" 

Whenas the sun arose above the hills 
A multitude collected from all parts, 
And five score thousand of the Iranians, 
Both men and women, went before the Shah 
In grief ; the mount was full of wails and cries, 
And e'en the flints were moved. The people all 
Said to Khusrau : " O Shah ! what aileth thee 
That thy shrewd heart is seared and full of smoke ? 
If thou hast taken umbrage at the host, 
Or boldest this crown worthless, tell us so, 
Quit not Iran nor give this ancient world 
A youthful Shah. We are thy horse's dust, 

KAI KHUSRAU 307 

And worship thine Azargashasp. Oh ! whither 

Are all thy knowledge, rede, and senses fled ? 

Surush came never thus to Siyawush ! 

We all will offer up our prayers to God, 

With supplications in the Fane of Fire, 

If haply holy God may pardon us, 

And thine own priestly heart illume us still." 

The king of kings astonied called the arch mages 
Forth from the throng, and said : " Here all is well ; 
Ye must not weep at happiness like this. 

Praise God, be happy, and acknowledge Him, V- 1438 

For soon we meet again ; mourn not my going." 

Then to the chiefs he said : " Turn, all of you, 
Back from this mountain-top without your Shah, 
Because the way is longsome, waterless, 
And hard, devoid of grass and foliage. 
Relieve yourselves of going to and fro, 
And make your souls a path toward the Light. 
Yon desert none may pass who hath not Grace 
And lofty stature." 

Three proud warriors 
Attended to the bidding and turned back — 
Zal, Rustam, and the old Giidarz — all men 
Of lofty aims, farsightedness, and heed, 
But Tiis and Glv and Farfburz, Bfzhan, 
And gallant Gustaham, would not return. 
They went together for one day and night, 
Distressed by reason of the waste and drouth ; 
At length a spring was seen upon the way, 
And thither went the aspiring Kai Khusrau. 
They lighted from their steeds by that clear spring, 
Partook of food, and drew their breath awhile. 
The Shah addressed the marchlords thus, and said : — 
" Here let us make our sojourn for the night, 
And talk at large together of the past, 
For henceforth nobody will see me more. 

3o8 THE SHAHNAMA OF F1RDAUSI 

What time the radiant sun shall raise its flag. 
And turn the darksome earth to liquid gold, 
Then is the time when I shall pass away, 
And haply with Surush for company ; 
My heart will I pluck out if darkening 
It turneth from this path." 

As night advanced 
The famous Kaian went before his God, 
Bathed, head and body, in the limpid stream, 
Reciting to himself the Zand avast a, 
And thus addressed those famous men of lore : — 
" Farewell for ever ! When the sky shall bring 
The sun again ye shall not look on me 
Henceforth save in your dreams. Moreover be not 
v. 1459 Here on the morrow on these arid sands, 

Although the clouds rain musk, for from the moun- 
tains 

Will rise a furious blast and snap the boughs 
And leafage of the trees, a storm of snow 
Will shower down from heaven's louring rack, 
And toward Iran ye will not find the track." 

§63 

How the Paladins were lost in the Snow 

The chieftains' heads were heavy at the news, 
The warriors slept in pain, and when the sun 
Rose o'er the hills the Shah had disappeared. 
They roamed thence seeking him and set their faces 
Toward the sands and waste. They saw no trace 
Of Kai Khusrau and turned back from the way 
Like men insane, heart-straitened all and anguished, 
The ground well trodden but the Shah not found. 
Lamenting, sorrowful of heart, afflicted, 
They came back to the spring and lighting there 

KAI KHUSRAU 309 

They each farewelled the monarch of the world. 

Then Fariburz repeated what Khusrau 

Had said. " Be wisdom and his pure soul mates," 

He added, but the heroes answered thus, 

Not doing honour to his words at heart : — 

" The earth is soft and warm, the sky is clear. 

We cannot travel wearied as we are. 

When we have rested, eaten, and reposed 

Beside the spring, it will be time to go." 

They all of them alighted by the spring, 
And made Khusrau the subject of their talk. 
" None will behold a wonder such as this," 
They said, " however long his life may last ! 
When saw we such a passing of a Shah ? 
We have not heard the chiefs e'en tell of such. 
Alas for his high fortune and his counsel, v. 1440 

His majesty, his mien, and noble bearing ! 
The wise will laugh at such a tale as this, 
That any one should go alive to God ! 
Who knoweth what on earth hath chanced to him ? 
What shall we say ? Ears will not bear to hear I " 

Griv thus addressed those chiefs : " No warrior 
Will hear of one like him for manliness, 
For justice, generosity, and parts, 
For stature and demeanour, fame and birth. 
He was an Elephant amid the host 
In battle, and in feast a crowned moon." 

Thereafter they partook of what there was, 
And, having eaten, quickly went to sleep. 
Meanwhile there came up storm and cloud, the sky 
Became as 'twere a lion's hide, and when 
The snow had hoisted sail upon the earth 
The lances of the nobles disappeared ] 
They tarried in the snow, I know not why, 
And under it they struggled for a while, 
And made a hollow space, but at the last 

3 io THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

Strength failed them and they yielded up sweet life. 

Now Rustam, Zal, and divers cavaliers 
Abode for three days weeping on the mountain, 
But on the fourth day when the world's light shone 
They said : " A long affair — this tarrying 
Mid rocks and mountains ! If the Shah hath vanished, 
Blown from among us like a breath of air, 
Where are the other nobles gone ? Perchance 
They heeded not the counsel that he gave." 
v. 1441 They stayed a sennight on the mountain-height, 
And by the sennight's end were all distraught, 
All woe-begone, lamenting, and consuming 
As on fierce iire. Giidarz, son of Kishwad, 
Shed tears, plucked out his hair, and tore his cheeks, 
Exclaiming : " None e'er saw such ills as come 
Upon me from the offspring of Kails ! 
I once possessed a host of sons and grandsons ; 
Each wore a crown, and they were worldlords all. 
They all were slain avenging Siyawush ; 
My race hath had its day, for now the rest 
Have disappeared. Whoever saw such marvels 
As have befallen me ? " 

Zal spake at large : — 
" Be God's just dealing and thy wisdom mates ! 
Perchance they may return and find the path 
Whenas the highway showeth from the snow ; 
But we may not abide upon the mountain, 
There is no food and we must needs depart ; 
We will dispatch some on the way afoot ; 
One day they will find traces of the band." 

They left the mountain, weeping for distress, 
And every one had some one to recall — 
A kinsman, son, or friend, or else the Shah, 
Himself as 'twere a cypress in the garden. 
The world is always thus ; it will not stay 
E'en with the best for ever. This it may 

KAI KHUSRAU 

3 

Exalt from dust, that from the throne remove, 

Not that in anger and not this in love; 

'Tis but the fashion of the sky above ! 

"Where are those warriors and world-ruling kings ? 

Oh ! banish if thou canst such questionings. 

§ 64 

How Imhrdsp had Tidings of the Disappearance of 
Kai Khusrau 

When from the troops escorting Kai Khusrau 

Luhrasp had tidings how the Shah had fared 

He sat with crown of gold upon the throne, 

The heroes with their golden girdles came, 

And, when the illustrious men and chief estates 

Had ta'en their seats, Luhrasp looked round, arose, 

Spake with good feeling and straightforwardness, 

And said : " leaders of the host ! ye all 

Have heard the parting counsels of the Shah, 

Whoe'er rejoiceth not at mine accession 

Hath not the counsels of Khusrau in mind. 

All that he said and bade mo will I do, 

Will strive for good, and carry out his will. 

Do ye too not reject his last request, 

Or keep your secret counsels hid from me. 

The man is guilty in the sight of God, 

That heedeth not the last requests of Shahs, 

And therefore whatsoe'er ye have in mind 

Of good and ill ye must reveal to me." 

Zal answered : " Kai Khusrau gave thee the name 
Of Shah. Accepting his last words and bidding 
My foot shall stray not from the limits set. 
Thou art the Shah ; we are thy lieges all, 
And we will not transgress thy rede and orders. 
I, Rustam, and tho people of Zabul, 

3 I2 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USt 

Will never wash our hands of love to thee. 
Whoe'er he be that taketh not this course 
Shall find no good thing left within his reach." 

Luhrasp, when he had heard the words of Zal, 
Applauded him, and then embracing him 
Spake thus : " God grant that justice and the right 
May never prove your loss and injury, 
For He created you with this intent 
That toils and ills might vanish. Kai Khusrau — 
v. 1443 The worldlord, the beloved of time and fortune — 
Ere he departed gave to you Nimruz. 
Now in addition take what else ye need. 
'Tis not for me to share with you my wealth ; 
I and my kin and kingdom are all yours." 

Then said he to Gudarz : " Speak out thy mind, 
Whate'er it be, thou chief of paladins !" 

Gudarz made answer : " I am left alone, 
For I have lost Bahram, Bizhan, and Gfv." 

Then overcome by anguish for his kin 
He cried out in a lamentable voice : — 
" Woe for the hero Giv of brazen form, 
And that aspiring wielder of the sword 
Bfzhan ! " 

He spake and rent from head to foot 
His robe of Chin and tunic made in Rum, 
And said thus to the nobles : " Blest is he 
Whose mate is dust. I give assent to all 
That Zal hath said, I have no secrets from him. 
Thou art the Shah, and we are all thy lieges : 
We will keep fealty and do thy will." 

The chiefs with one eonsent called blessings down, 
And bent their heads in homage to the ground, 
While at their words Luhrasp, refreshed at heart, 
Drew himself up and was another man. 
He chose himself a most auspicious day 
Whereon to set the crown upon his head. 

KAI KHUSRAU 

And, just as Farfdun of glorious birth 

First put the crown on in the month wherein 

They celebrate the hock tide of Mihrgan, 

Luhrasp selected that same day and month— 

The time of the Autumnal Equinox. 

Ho had the hall of Kai Khusrau adorned, 

And in his hands fran took added lustre. 

Such is the "world — all ups and downs — and so 
One man is glad, another is brought low ; 
From it are joy and grief; its How and When 
And Why are all beyond our human ken. 
Completed is the tale of Kai Khusrau, 
The acts of Shah Luhrasp engross us now ; 
His crown and court alike I celebrate, 
And place him in his seat upon the state 
By the triumphant grace of our great king. 

The author of our hopes and fears is he, 
To his well-wishers' hearts all good doth bring, 

And to the ill-disposed calamity. 
Hearts that have been rust-eaten by the brine 
Of speech will be refurbished by old wine. 
When eld hath stolen on a man good sooth ! 
Wine that hath waxen old will give him youth. 
Faint hearts when quaffing turn to men of might, 
And foxes in their cups like lions fight ; 
In wine too thou wilt show thy quality, 
And to thine own locked door thyself be key. 

XIV 

LUHRlSP 

HE REIGNED ONE HUNDRED AND 
TWENTY YEARS 

ARGUMENT 

Gushtasp, the Bon of Luhrasp, dissatisfied with bis position at 
the court of his father who, mindful of his obligations to Kai 
Khusrau, reserves his chief favours for the descendants of Kai 
Kaus, quits Iran in dudgeon and takes refuge in the land of Rum, 
where Caesar's daughter falls in love with him and marries him. 
Gushtasp achieves great quests in his adopted country and, re- 
turning to Iran, is reconciled to his father who resigns the throne 
in his favour. 

NOTE 

For Luhrasp see Vol. II. p. 8 seq. 

The romantic legend that occupies practically the whole of this 
reign was partially extant with certain variations in the days of 
Alexander the Great, Borne thirteen centuries before Firdausi wrote. 
Athenreus in his Deipnosophistce 1 quotes the following story from 
Chares of Mytilene, who was an official (iaayyf\fh) at the court 
of Alexander the Great, and wrote an anecdotal history of him 
and of his campaigns in ten books, of which only fragments are 
extant in the writings of Athenfeus and other authors: "We 
must not be astonished at some folk having fallen in love with 
others upon mure hearsay of their beauty when Chares of Mytilene 
in the tenth book of his anecdotal history of Alexander affirms 
that some have dreamt of those whom they never saw and fallen 
in love with them in consequence. He writes as follows : 
' Hystaspes had a younger brother named Zariadres and they 
were both very good-looking. The people of the country say that 

1 JJook xtii. c. 35, ed. A. Meineke. 
314 

luhrAsp 

they were the children of Aphrodite and Adonis. Hyataspes was 
king of Media and of the lower lands thereabout, while Zariadres 
ruled over the country above the Caspian Gates up to the river 
Tanais. 1 Now the daughter of Omartes, the chief of the Marathi, 
a people that dwelt beyond the Tanais, was named Odatis. She, 
as the histories tell us, dreamt of Zariadres and fell in love with 
him while in like faahion he fell in love with her. Thus for a long 
time they loved each other through the phantasies of sleep alone. 
Odatis was the most beautiful woman in Asia, and Zariadres too 
was very good-looking ; but when he sent to Omartea to ask 
Odatis in marriage her father refused because he had no aons and 
desired to marry her to some one at his own court. Soon after 
he convoked the magnates of the realm, his kindred and his friends, 
and held a marriage-feast without announcing on whom he in- 
tended to bestow his daughter. When they were revelling he 
sent for Odatis and aaid to her before all the guests : "O Odatis, 
ray daughter ! we are engaged in celebrating your marriage- 
festival, so now look about you, scan those who are here, then 
take a golden goblet, fill it and give it to him unto whom you 
would like to be married, for you shall be his wife." But Odatis, 
having looked about her, went away in tears, for she wanted to see 
Zariadres whom she had informed concerning her marriage- festival. 
Meanwhile Zariadres, who was encamped on the Tanais, had left his 
army there, had crossed the river secretly with his chariot-driver 
only, had driven through the city by night, and covered a distance 
of some eight hundred stadia without a pause. When he reached 
the town where the marriage-festivities were taking place he left 
the chariot with the charioteer hard by and went on alone dressed 
in Scythian garb. When he reached the palace he saw Odatis by 
the table in tears and tilling the goblet very slowly. He got 
close to her and said: "Here am I as you asked me, Odatis — I, 
Zariadres 1 " She looked and saw a handsome man, like him of 
whom she had dreamed, and overjoyed gave him the goblet. He 
seized her, bore her off to his chariot, and fled away with her. 
The attendants and handmaids, who wotted of the love between 
the pair, held their peace, and when her father called fur her said 
they knew not whither she had gone. This love-story of theirs 
is rife among the barbarians of Asia and greatly admired. They 
have pictures of it in their temples, palaces, and private houses, 
and many magnates in those parts give their daughters the name 
of Odatis.' " 

It seems clear that in the brothers Hyataspes and Zariadres 
of the story we have the brothers Gushtasp and Zarir of the 

1 The Don. 

316 THE SHAfiNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Shahnama, In the poem the framework of the story is different 
and the account has become much elaborated. The scene is 
changed from Scythia to Rum and the chief actor is Gushtasp 
himself. The dream is confined to the lady's side and a posy is 
substituted for the goblet, bo that we lose the pretty picture of 
Odatis standing by the table in tears and pouring out the wine 
as slowly as possible in the forlorn hope of her lover appearing. 
Still the identity of the legend in Athenseus with that in the 
Shiihnama seems fairly obvious. 

The method of contracting marriage as illustrated by the above 
story was known in ancient India as " Swyamvara " or " Self" or 
" Maiden's Choice." We read in the Mahabharata : " The large- 
eyed daughter of Kuntibhoja, Pritba by name, was endued with 
beauty and every accomplishment. . . . Her father . . * invited 
. . . the princes and kings of other countries and desired his 
daughter to elect her husband from among his guests. . . . The 
amiable daughter of Kuntibhoja, of faultless features, beholding 
Pandu — that best of men — in that assembly, became very much 
agitated. And advancing with modesty, all the while quiver- 
ing with emotion, she placed the nuptial garland round Pandu's 
neck. . , . Then , . . the bride's father caused the nuptial rites 
to be performed duly." 1 

§§ 14 and 15. The Khazars, who dwelt between the Caucasus 
and the Don and Volga rivers, had frequent political relations with 
the Eastern Roman, the S&sanian, and the Muhammadan empires 
till they were absorbed by Russia in Firdausi's lifetime. 

The principal Iranian characters of this reign — Luhrasp himself, 
Gushtasp, and Zarir — appear in the Zandavasta as Aurvafc-aspa, 
Vistaspa, and Zairi-vairi respectively, but the allusions to them in 
that work are concerned with the events recorded in the next 
reign, that of Gushtasp, which will appear in Vol. V. of this 
translation. 

§ 1 

How Luhrdsp built a Fire-temple at Balkh 

v. 144s Now when Luhrasp sat on the ivory throne, 

And donned the crown that brighteneth the heart, 
He praised the Maker and besought Him. much, 
Then said : " Have hope in God, the righteous Judge ; 

1 RM r Adi Parra, % CXII. See too § CII. 

LUHRASP 

Hold Him in fear and awe ; the Artist He 

Of yon revolving sky, and magnifieth 

The Glory of His slave- When He created 

Earth, with its seas and mountains, He outspread 

High heaven over it, one turning swiftly, 

The other fixed ; the Artist gave thereto 

No feet to move withal. The sky is like 

The polo-stick, we, handied to and fro 

By profit and by loss, are like the ball 

Amid thy pleasures Death with sharpened claws 

Is crouching like a fierce and angry lion ; 

So let us quit the lust of covetise, 

Acknowledging our ignorance meanwhile, 

And from this crown of kingship, this high throne, 

Ensue but justice, peace, and goodly counsels, 

Lest haply in this Wayside Inn our lot 

Should prove but vengeance, travail, and a curse. 

I will do more than Kai Khusrau enjoined, 

And banish from my heart revenge and greed. 

This do and justice will bring happiness, 

Be peaceable and have no thoughts of vengeance." 

The mighty of the world called blessings down 
Upon him, hailed him monarch of the earth, 
And great Luhrdsp had quiet, wisdom, wealth, 
And all his heart's desire continually. 
Thereafter he sent envoys unto Rum, 
To Hind, to Chin, and other peopled lands, 
And all the men that were possessed of knowledge, 
And those that practised divers useful arts, 
From all the marches and the provinces 
Went to the Shah's court and abode at Balkh 
A while at leisure tasting of the salts 
And sours of knowledge. He erected there 
A city with its streets, bazars, and quarters, 
In each whereof there was a place to hold 
The feast of Sada, round a Fane of Fire, 

3i 8 THE SHAH NAM A OF FIRDAUSI 

And there he built Barzfn, for so they call 
That glorious temple and magnifical. 

How Gushtd&p quitted Luhrdsp in Wrath 

He had two sons, as 'twere two moons, well worthy 
Of sovereignty, of throne, and diadem, 
One hight Gushtasp, the other hight Zarir, 
Who conquered lions, in all knowledge passed 
Their father, and in valour raised their heads 
Above the other troops. There were besides 
Among those in attendance on Luhrasp 
Two princes, both of whom he held in honour, 1 
Men of high rank whose steps were fortunate, 
The grandsons of the worldlord Kai Kaiis. 
The soul of Shah Luhrasp rejoiced in them, 
And thereby grew neglectful of Gushtasp, 
Who took it in bad part, but folly still 
v. 1447 Possessed Luhrasp, and so as time went on 
The son was full of dudgeon with the father. 
It was so that one day in Pars they set 
The throne 'neath blossom-shedding trees. Luhrasp 
Invited certain chieftains of the host, 
Who at the table called for cups of wine, 
And made his heart rejoice. Gushtasp too drank, 
Then rose and said : " just and righteous Shah ! 
Blest be thy sitting on the royal throne, 
And may thy name live on for evermore ! 
God hath bestowed upon thee casque and girdle. 
Besides the crown of upright Kai Khusrau. 
Now I am here a slave before thy gate, 
A servant of thy star and diadem, 
I hold not one a man of those that come 

1 Inserted from T. 

luhrAsp 319 

Before me on the day of fight save Rustam, 
The son of Zal, the son of Sam the horseman, 
For none is able to contend with him. 
Now when Kkusrau grew weary of the world 
H© gave the crown to thee and passed away. 
If then I am of noble birth appoint me 
Successor to the crown and Kaian throne, 
And I will be a slave before thee still, 
As I am now, and hail thee sovereign." 

Luhrasp made answer : " my son ! give ear, 
For vehemence commendeth not the noble, 
While I recall the advice of Kai Khusrau, 
That thou mayst acquiesce in what is just. 
' If, 1 said that righteous king to me, ' a weed 
Infesteth any garden in the spring, 
And findeth water, it will grow and spoil 
That garden utterly/ Thou art still young : 
Aspire not thus ; speak weighty, measured words." 

Gushtasp, on hearing, left his father's presence 
With dolorous heart and livid face, exclaiming: — 
" Then cherish strangers and neglect thine offspring." 

He had three hundred horsemen as retainers, v. r4 4 s 

All warriors and ready for the fray. 
Alighting from his steed he summoned these 
To tell them all the secrets of his heart ; 
He said : " Make ready to depart to-night, 
And cease to think, or look, upon this court." 

One asked him saying : " Whither goest thou ? 
Where wilt thou shelter when thou settest forth." 

He said : " With those of Hind. The monarch there 
Affecteth me. I have his letter written 
On silk with ink musk-scented. Thus he saith : — 
' If thou wilt come to me I am thy servant, 
Will do thy bidding and be thine ally.' " 

Whenas night came he mounted with his men, 
And started, full of choler, mace in hand. 

330 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Luhrasp, who had the news thereof at dawn, 

Was grieved and all his joy was at an end. 

He summoned to him veterans from the host, 

And told the case to them in fitting terms. 

" Behold," said he, " that which Gushtasp hath done, 

And filled my heart with pain, my head with dust ! 

I cherished him until he had grown up, 

And was unparalleled in all the world, 

But even as I said * He beareth fruit/ 

The tree itself departed from my garden ! " 

He spake and for a while sat deep in thought, 
Then ordered that Zarir should come and said ; — 
" Choose out a thousand valiant cavaliers, 
Equipped for war. Toward Hindustan speed ye, 
And may that land of warlocks cease to be." 

§ 3 

How Gushtdsp returned with Zarir 

Gushtasp, the atheling, with tearful eyes 
Fared onward wrathfully before his men 
In haste until he reaohed Kabul, and looked 
Upon its trees and blossoms, grass and streams, 
v. 1449 Alighting at that jocund place they stayed 

One day and breathed themselves. The mountain-tops 

Were full of game, the streams like wine and milk. 

At night he bade the drawers bring forth wine, 

And carry lights down to the river-side; 

But when the world-illuming sun o'ershone 

The mountains they departed from the woods 

With hawk and cheetah. 

In hot haste Zarir 
Went in pursuit, with scarcely halts for rest, 
Till, as the warriors with Gushtasp returned 
From hunting, rose the neigh of steeds. He heard, 

luhrAsp 

321 

And said : " Tis from the charger of Zarfr — 
None other — for it hath a lion's voice. 
If he hath come he hath not come alone, 
But with a gallant host in company." 

Now as he spake dust azure-dim appeared, 
A standard too charged with an elephant. 
And leading all the rest Zarfr the chief 
Came onward as it were a rushing wind. 
He saw and hurried weeping toward G-ushtasp 
Alpot with thanks and praises to the Maker. 
The brothers clasped each other tenderly, 
And as they fared along the field they wept. 
Then prince Gushtasp, the warrior, called the captains, 
Who sitting with him canvassed all the case, 
And one said : " Hero of the golden girdle ! 
The readers of the stars, all whom we know 
To be expert among the Iranians, 
Foretell in thee another Kai Khusrau 
Predestined to ascend the royal throne. 

We cannot then consent that thou shouldst be v. 1450 

The subject of the king of Hindustan. 

His people are not worshippers of God, 

And thou and they will ne'er be in accord, 

Consider then if wisdom could consent 

To make the Shah the subject of the Rdja ! 

Thou hast the fairest treatment from thy father; 

I know not wherefore thou shouldst feel aggrieved." 

Gusht&sp replied : " O seeker of renown ! 
I am not held in honour by my sire, 
Who keepeth for the offspring of Kaiis 
His kindness, majesty, and royal crown. 
There is no place with him for us ; he meaneth 
No better for us than complete subjection, 
Yet for thy sake will I return although 
My heart is full of choler at Luhntsp. 
If he shall give to me the Iranian crown 

vol. IV. X 

322 THE SHAHNAmA OF FIRDAUSI 

I will adore him as idolaters 

Adore their idols, but if otherwise 

I will desert his court, no moon of his 

Shall light my heart. I will elude his search, 

And will abandon everything to him — 

Both land and wealth." 

This said, he left that land, 
And went back to the noble Shah. Now when 
Luhrasp had news thereof he with the chiefs 
And many followers went to meet Gushtasp. 
The atheling beheld his father's face 
Again and, having lighted from his steed, 
Did reverence. Luhrasp embraced him warmly, 
And readily accepted his excuses, 
Exclaiming : 14 May the moon's crown be thine own, 
The Div's hands shortened that they may not reach 
thee, 

For, like a bad king's evil minister, 

He is for ever teaching thee bad ways. 

As for the kingship — crown and throne are mine 

In name, but love and fealty, rule and fortune 

Are thine." 

Gushtasp replied : " My sovereign ! 
I am but as a servant at thy gate. 
If thou abasest me I will obey, 
And stake my heart upon my fealty." 
v. 1451 The great men that were with him on his journey 
Went to the palace of the Shah rejoicing. 
He had his jewelled banquet-hall prepared, 
They spread the board and served delicious wines ; 
They made a feast so splendid that the stars 
Rained from the firmament upon the throne, 
And every chieftain was bemused and wore 
A coronal of roses on his head. 
Yet still Luhrasp found pleasure in the race 
Of Kai Kaus, remembering J£ai Khusrau, 

LUHRASP 

323 

And still Gushtasp aggrieved shed tears of blood, 
Consulting on all points with his adviser, 
To whom he said : " Strive wisely as I may 
I cannot find a remedy herefor. 
If I depart with horsemen then my father 
Will send a chieftain after me with troops, 
Will in some way divert me from my journey, 
And ply me with appeals and with advice, 
While if I go alone I shall be shamed, 
And have besides a grudge against Luhrasp, 
Who joyeth in the offspring of Kails, 
And loveth not his own. If I depart 
Without an escort, and a questioning 
Arise, will any take me for a king ? " 

§4 

How Gushtagp get off for Mum 

At night he put the saddle on Shabdiz, 
A charger of his father's, donned a tunic 
Of cloth of gold of Chin, stuck in his crown 
An eagle's plume, and took whate'er he needed 
Both of dinars and royal jewelry. 
He left fran for Rum, for since the father 
Preferred to reign the son preferred to range. 
On hearing what Gushtasp had done Luhrasp 
Was troubled, all his joy was at an end. 

He called to him Zarfr and all the sages, v * '45 2 

Held talk with them at large about Gushtasp, 
And said to them : " This lion-man will bring 
Crowned heads to dust. What are your views herein ? 
What course do ye advise ? Treat it not lightly." 

An archmage said: "0 fortune's favourite ! 
A crown and throne are very dear to men. 
None else hath had a son such as Gushtasp, 

3=4 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

No man of name e'er heard of such an one. 
Dispatch in quest of him to every quarter 
Some valiant nobles that are good at need ; 
Then, if he shall return, deal gently with him, 
Do what is right, and banish selfishness, 
Because the Kaian crown beholdeth many, 
Such as thou art, but lov&th no one long. 
Bestow upon Gushtasp a host of men, 
And set the noble crown upon his head. 
We nowhere see a cavalier like him, 
Save Rustam that illustrious paladin, 
While in respect of stature, wisdom, looks, 
And sense, ear hath not heard of such another.' 

Luhrasp sent chiefs and sought through all the world 
To find his son. They went their various ways, 
But in the end returned despairingly. 
Because they journeyed under sluggish stars, 
Luhrasp had all the censure for his share, 
The grief and travail were Gushtdsp's affair. 

§ 5 

How Gusht&sp arrived in Rum 

Gushtasp dismounted when he reached the shore, 
And there Hi'shwi — a man advanced in years, 
Frank, vigilant, respected, prosperous, 
Who was employed as toll- col lector — saw him. 
Gushtasp saluting said : " May thy pure soul 
Be wisdom's mate ' A rising scribe am I, 
Come from Iran, discreet, of ardent spirit, 
V. 1453 And heedful. It will be a lasting favour 
To ferry me across." 

Hishwf replied : — 
" Crown, mail, and plunder are the things for thee ; 
Tell me the truth and try not thus to cross ; 

LUHRASP 

325 

Give me a present or declare thyself ; 

Where are the mien and manners of a scribe ? " 

Gushtasp said : " I have nothing 1 to conceal ; 
* Moreover I will give thee what thou wilt — 
This coronet, sword, charger, or dinars." 

The man accepted some dinars with joy, 
Set sail, and took across the atheling. 

There was a city in the land of Rum 
Above three leagues in breadth. Salm was the founder 
Of that great seat where dwelt the valiant Ceesars. 
Gushtasp, as soon as he arrived thereat, 
Sought out a lodging in that busy place, 
And walked about the district for a week 
Among the people there to seek .employment 
Till, having eaten or bestowed his all, 
He went in dudgeon, sighing heavily. 
He tramped the city for a while, passed through 
A hall, and entering a public office. 
Addressed the chief clerk thus : " friend in need I 
A scribe of some pretensions from Iran 
Am I, and can perform the office-work 
To thy content." 

The scribes in that department 
Looked one upon another saying thus: — 
" A pen of steel would weep, a sheet of paper 
Scorch, at a man like this J A lofty charger 
Is what he needeth under him, with bow 
Upon his arm and lasso at his saddle." 

They cried : " We want no scribe here. Go thy 

Ways," v. 1454 

Gushtasp departed thence heart-sorrowful 
With pallid cheeks and, heaving deep, cold sighs, 
Sought Csesar's master of the herds, a man 
Brave, wise, and generous, by name Nastar. 
Gushtasp saluted him, was well received 
And seated by the master, who inquired: — 

326 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

" Who art thou that in mien and countenance 
Art like a king ? " 

Gushtasp said ; " Noble sir ! 
A horseman am I and a bold rough-rider. 
If thou, wilt take me I will prove of use, 
• And stand beside thee too in stress and trouble." 
Nastarsaid: " Go thy way. Thou art a stranger, 
And hast no standing. Here are desert, sea, 
And steeds at large ! How then can I entrust 
The herds to one unknown ? " 

On hearing this 
Gushtasp went off in dudgeon. Thou hadst said : — 
" His skin hath burst upon him ! " He exclaimed : — 
" A man will fare the worse for his desire 
To be a source of trouble to his father," 

He went in haste to Caesar's cameleers, 
Saluted him that was the chief and said : — 
" Be thine an ardent and discerning mind ! " 

That wise man, when he saw Gushtasp, advanced 
To meet him, offered him a place, and spread 
A carpet, bringing out what food he had. 
Gushtasp said : " Prosperous, bright-hearted friend ! 
Entrust to me one of thy caravans, 
Assigning me such wages as thou wilt." 
v. t45 5 " lion-man ! " replied the camel-keeper, 
" This occupation is not fit for thee; 
Shouldst thou engage in such a work as mine ? 
'Tis better to apply to Caesar's court, 
He will enfranchise thee from such a business, 
And if the way is longsome I have camels, 
Such as thou wilt approve, and men as guides." 

Gushtasp gave thanks to him and turned away. 
Full of distress he started for the city, 
His sufferings lying heavy on his heart, 
And turned his steps toward the smiths' bazar. 
There was a noted smith by name Burab, 

LUHRASP 

327 

Skilled in the trade, the farrier to the court, 

Of influence with Csesar ; he employed 

Some thirty-five apprentices and workmen / 

Accustomed to the hammer and the iron, 

Gushtasp sat in the shop until the master 

Grew weary of him, and exclaimed : " Good fellow ! 

What wouldst thou in my shop 1 " 

Gushtasp replied : — 
" prosperous man ! I am not one to turn 
My head away from hammers and hard work. 
If thou wilt make me one of thine assistants 
I will excel them all at smithery." 

Biirab, when he had heard Gushtasp thus speak, 
Received him in apprenticeship, and heating 
A mighty mass of metal in the fire 
Made haste to place it glowing on the anvil. 
They gave a heavy hammer to Gushtasp, 
And all the smiths flocked round, but when he smote 
He smashed the iron and the anvil also, 
And made himself the talk of the bazar. 
Biirab, alarmed, exclaimed : " Young man 3 no anvil, 
Stone, fire, or bellows will withstand thy blows ! " 

Gushtasp, on hearing this, flung down the hammer 
In dudgeon, left the smith and went off hungry, 
Without a glimpse of food or where to lodge ; 
But neither do the days of toil and stress, 
Nor those of ease and wealth and happiness, 
Abide with any. Good and evil here v - '45* 

Are transient, and the sage is of good cheer. 

§ 6 

How a Village-chief entertained timhtdsp 

Gushtasp was sorrowful and railed at heaven 
Because in this world he had nought but bane. 

328 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USt 

Hard by the city he beheld a hamlet, 
Trees, flowers, and streams — a gladsome spot for 
youth. 

Beside the "water was a mighty tree, 
Its shade impervious to the sun's bright rays, 
And in that shade the young" man sat him down, 
And fretted in his trouble and depression. 
He spake on this wise : " almighty Judge ! 
Grief is the lot assigned to me by fortune. 
My star, I see, is evil, but I know not 
Why 'tis that evil cometh on my head." 

A nobleman of that fair hamlet passed, 
Beheld the outcast weeping tears of blood, 
His chin supported by his hand, and said : — 
" noble youth ! why art thou sorrowful 
And dark of soul ? If thou wilt visit me 
Thou for a while shalt be my gladsome guest ; 
These sorrows may be lessened to thy heart, 
And dried the arrowy lashes of thtne'eyes ." 

Gushtasp replied : " My lord ! first let me know 
Thy lineage." 

The householder made answer ; — 
" What is the purpose of thy questioning ? 
Descended am I from Shah Farfdun, 
The warrior — no paltry ancestor." 

Gushtasp, on hearing this, arose and went 
With him. The chief reached home and had his 
hall 

Decked to receive his guest, he held Gushtasp 
As though he were a brother, and the time 
Passed leaving not a wish unsatisfied. 

A while elapsed with matters in this stay 
Until month after month had passed away. 

LUHRASP 

I 7 

The Stoy^y of Kafaytin the Daughter of Cxsar 

Now at that time 'twas Csesar's policy, 

Whenever he possessed a daughter grown 

To womanhood, well favoured by the stars. 

And he perceived that she was fit to wed, 

To gather to his palace all the magnates, 

The sages, and the counsellors — all those 

Of competent degree and high estate 

Among the nobles — and the moon-faced damsel 

Would roam her father's hall to seek a spouse. 

But so surrounded by her waiting-maids 

That men could view not e'en her lofty crown. 

He had three daughters then within his bower, 

Like roses in the spring, tall, fair, and gentle, 

Wise, modest, and well seen in everything. 

The eldest was the princess Katayun, 

The wise, the merry, and high-spirited. 

One night she dreamed that all the country shone 

With sunlight. There appeared a throng of men, 

The Pleiades among them and a stranger — 

A wanderer of mournful heart and wise, 

In height a cypress and in looks a moon, 

Whose seat was as a king's upon his throne — 

And Katayun held out to him a posy, 

A posy bright and sweet, which he accepted. 

As soon as day dawned, and tho sun arose, 

The nobles woke, and Cresar called together 

A vast assembly of the great and brave, 

Who sat rejoiced. The fairy-faced princess 

Was summoned, and appeared with sixty handmaidi 

A bunch of fresh narcissus in her hand, 

And roamed about until she grew aweary, 

But no one of the throng found favour with her. 

330 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

V. 145* She went back from the hall to her apartments 

In state, but wept ; her heart yearned for a husband. 
Meanwhile earth grew as dark as ravens' wings 
Until the Lamp rose o'er the mountain-tops ; 
Then Caesar bade that all the wealthy nobles 
Among his lieges in the land of Rum 
Should meet together in his lofty palace, 
That some one might find favour by his beauty. 
Now when the tidings came to every chieftain, 
To high and low alike, the same good friend 
Said to Gushtasp ; " How long wilt thou be hidden ? 
Come ! It may be that looking on the palace 
And throne of greatness may abate thy grief 
Of heart." 

Gushtasp thereat set forth with him, 
And sat down in the palace but apart, 
Aggrieved, and sore. Shrewd-hearted slaves appeared, 
Then Katayun with rosy-cheeked attendants. 
She roamed the hall with slaves before and after, 
And when from far she saw Gushtasp she said : — 
££ The meaning of my dream is manifest," 
And set the rich and splendid coronal 
Upon his glorious brow. On seeing this 
The minister, her tutor, came in haste 
To Caesar, saying : " She hath chosen one 
In stature like a cypress in the orchard, 
With cheeks like rosebuds, and such neck and shoulders 
That whosoever seeth is astonied ! 
Thou wouldest say : ' Here is the Grace of God,' 
And yet we do not know him ! " 

Caesar answered : — 
" Forbid it, Heaven ! that a child of mine 
V. 1459 Should wrong her race. If I give him my daughter 
My head will be abased in ignominy ; 
We must behead them both within the palace." 
The bishop said : ' Tis not so grave a case, 

L UHRASP 

33 1 

And hath occurred to many chiefs before thee. 

Thou saidest to thy daughter ; 1 Choose a husband.' 

Thou snidest not: 'Choose an illustrious prince,' 

And she hath taken him that pleaseth her ; 

Show then submission to the will of God. 

This was the custom of thine ancestors, 

Those eminent, God-fearing, holy men, 

And Rum hereon is founded ; take not thou 

A new way when the land is prospering ; 

It would not be auspicious. Speak not so, 

And by untrodden paths forbear to go," 

§ 8 

How Cxsar 'gave Kai&yiin to Gushi&sp 

As soon as Ccosar heard this he determined 
To give his precious daughter to Gushtasp, 
To whom he said : " Go with her as thou art, 
I will not give thee treasure, crown, or signet." 

Gushtasp,, on seeing that, was all astound ; 
He oft invoked the Maker of the world, 
And spake to that exalted damsel, saying : — 
" O thou who hast been delicately nurtured 3 
What hath induced thee to make choice of me 
Amid these many chiefs and famous crowns ? 
Thy chosen is an alien, and thou 
Wilt have no wealth with him but live in travail. 
Select an equal from these noble men, 
And so retain the favour of thy father." 

But Katayun replied : " Misdoubting one J 
Rage not against the process of the sky. 
If I am satisfied with thee and fortune 
Why seekest thou crown, throne, and diadem ? " 

They left the palace, Katiiyun in pain, 
Gushtasp with sighs, and reached the village-chief 

332 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FFRDAUSI 

v. 1460 In grievous plight ; he made a home for them 
Within the village, furnished it superbly, 
And said : " Content you and be prosperous." 

Gushtdsp, beholding these things, offered thanks 
To that kind friend of his, the pious chieftain. 
Now Kat&yun had trinkets numberless, 
And ample stores of gems and jewelry. 
From these she chose a stone, such that the eye 
Of expert never had beheld the like, 
And this they carried to a jeweller, 
Who lavished on it praises numberless, 
And gave therefor six thousand gold dinars. 
They purchased what was suitable or needful, 
And lived upon the cash that they had raised, 
At whiles rejoicing and at whiles in tears, 
Gushtasp's whole occupation was the chase ; 
He spent all day with arrows in his quiver. 
Once, when returning from the hunting-field, 
His road lay by Hfshwl He had with him 
All kinds of game. He pricked along. His quiver 
Was full. AH that he had of great and small 
He carried to Hfshwi' 1 who, when he saw, 
Ran forth in high delight to welcome him, 
And, having spread a carpet, brought out food. 
Gushtasp reposed him for a while and ate, 
Then went back swift as dust to Katayun. 
Since he had formed a friendship with Hishwi, 
On whose discretion he relied, he used, 
Whenever he went forth to hunt gazelles, 
To give that friend two-thirds ; the other third 
Went to the chief or other village-magnate, 

V. 1461 And thus the master of the house and he 
Lived in the closest bonds of amity. 

1 Gushtdsp, with an eye to the future, wisely ingratiates himself 
■with HJshwI. Cf. p. 340. 

luhrAsp 

333 

§ 9 

How M\rln asked in Marriage Cmar^s second Daughter 

There was a certain Riiman hight Mn*m, 

Rich, noble, wise, and prosperous withal. 

He sent a message unto Csesar saying ; — 

" A man am I of rank, wealth, and renown. 

Bestow on me thy daughter Dilanjam, 

And give thy name and crown new life through me." 

" No more such marriages for me," said Cses&r, 
" For Katayun and that ignoble man 
Have stayed me. Now who seeketh such alliance. 
Or wisheth to exalt his head before me, 
Must carry out some mighty enterprise 
That folk may call him brave among the great ; 
So will he prove both famous in the world 
And helpful to ourselves. Let such an one 
Go to the forest of Faskun and bathe 
Heart, hand, and thoughts in blood. There will he see 
A wolf as huge as any elephant, 
Of dragon-form and mighty as the Nile. 
It bath two horns ; its tushes are like boar's. 
The elephants themselves dare not approach it, 
But they, the lions, tigers, and the brave 
Among the people, all avoid the wood. 
Whoe'er shall rend that wolf 's hide shall become 
My son-in-law, my comrade, and my friend." 

MWn said thus : £( Within this noble land, 
Since first the Maker laid the base of Rum, 
Mine ancestors have ne'er engaged in combat 
Unless with chiefs and with the massive mace. 
Now what with mo would Caesar 1 Spcaketh he v. 1462 

Thus out of malice ? I will practise craft, 
And take all prudent counsel." 

So that worthy 

334 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Departed to his palace, and considered 
The matter every way. He brought and set 
Before him writings, tables of the stars, 
And his own horoscope, and there he saw 
Upon this wise : " At such and such a time 
A famous man will come forth from Iran, 
And by his hand three weighty enterprises, 
That balk the chiefs of Rum, will be achieved. 
He will become the son-in-law of Ciesar, 
A diadem on that imperial head. 
Within the realm two wild beasts will appear, 
Inflicting general calamity, 
And both of them will perish by his hand : 
He will not be afraid for all their might." 

Mirfn had heard the case of Katayun, 
How she had mated with the bold Gushtasp, 
And how Hishwf and that famed village-chief 
Were both of them regarding him with favour, 
So hurried to Hishwi, told what had passed 
And of the wonders that philosophers 
Of Rum predicted would befall the land. 
Hishwf replied : " Be pleased to tarry here 
With us to-day in friendship and good will. 
The man whereof thou speakest is a person 
Illustrious mid the great, and all his days 
He giveth to the chase, he heedeth not 
The throne of him who ruleth o'er the West, 
He came not yesterday to me to gladden 
My gloomy soul, but presently will come 
Back from the hunting-field and doubtlessly 
His way will He by us." 

He furnished wine 
And boon-companions. Mid perfumes and flowers 
They sat with golden goblets. Now when they 
Had drained four cups that valiant cavalier 
Appeared afar. The twain descried his dust, 

LUHRASP 

335 

And went to meet him on the field. MMn, 

"When he beheld Gushtasp, said to Hishwi: — v. 1463 

" This man hath not his equal in the world ! 

He is a noble warrior by birth 

To have such limbs, such neck, and excellence." 

Hfshwi returned reply : " This noble man 
Is lion-hearted on the battlefield. 
His prowess, modesty, high birth, and wisdom 
Surpass his looks," 

When he drew near, the twain 
Advanced afoot dust-swift to welcome him ; 
Hishwi prepared a place where they might sit 
Beside the water and then called in haste 
To spread the board afresh and brought out wine 
To have another bout with his new comrades. 
When cheeks were flushed with rosy wine he thus 
Addressed Gushtasp : " Great man [ thou call'st me 
friend 

On earth, and knowest not another such. 

Mfrin the warrior — a man of name 

And puissant — hath just appealed to me. 

He is a scribe both learned and well-advised, 

He t&keth reckoning of the stars above, 

Discourseth of philosophers of Riim, 

Of regions populous and desolate, 

And furthermore is of the stock of Salm, 

Can tell his ancestors from sire to sire, 

And hath the sciraitar that Salm was wont 

To carry all his years. He is right valiant, 

A gallant rider t and a hero-taker, 

And bringeth down the eagle with his arrow. 

He wisheth further to obtain distinction 

By making an affinity with Cajsar, 

To whom he spake ; but when he heard the answer 

His heart was verily perturbed thereby, 

For ' In the forest of Faskiin thou'lt find,' 

336 

THE SHAHNAMA OF PIRDAUSi 

So Ciesar said, ' a wolf huge as a camel, 
And if it shall be slaughtered by thy hand 
Thou shalt be my most honoured guest in Rum, 
V. 1464 Shalt be a worldtord and my son-in-law ; 

Then all the world will yield to me my rights/ 

Now if thou wilt assist us I will be 

Thy slave and he will be thy noble kinsman." 

Gushtasp said: "Good! Agreed. Where is the 
forest ? 

What is this beast that frayeth small and great ?" 

" It is a savage wolf," replied Hfshwf, 
" Whose head is higher than a lusty camel's. 
It hath two tusks like elephant's, with eyes 
Like jujubes, and a hide like indigo ; 
Its horns are like two beams of ebony, 
And in its rage it will bear off a horse. 
Upon this quest full many famous chiefs 
Have gone with heavy maces, but returned 
Successless, worsted, and with melting hearts." 

Gushtasp replied : " Bring me that sword of Sahn's 
Together with a noble, fiery steed, 
I call that beast a dragon not a wolf, 
Do thou too deem it so." 

Mi'rfn departed, 
And chose a sable charger from his stalls, 
With costly mail and Rdman casque ; he took 
That splendid sword of diamond-sheen which Salm 
Had tempered both in poison and in blood, 
Chose also many presents from his treasures, 
And five of every kind of precious jewels, 
Whenas the sun had rent its pitch-hued robe, 
And left its bower, Minn, the ambitious one, 
Departed from his palace in all haste, 
And reached Hishwi just as Gushtasp returned 
From hunting, and Hfshwl observing him 
Went with Mi'rin to welcome him. Both marvelled 

LUHRASP 

337 

To see his charger and his scimitar, 

Gushtasp, when he had looked upon the presents, v. 1465 

Chose for himself the steed and sword, and gave 

Hishwf the rest which pleased his soaring soul. 

Gushtasp arrayed himself as quick as dust, 

And mounted on the charger with his bow 

Upon his arm, his lasso at the saddle — 

A noble cavalier and stately steed, 

Hfshwf went with him and Mfrm withal, 

The aspiring one, who had invoked his aid. 

Their hearts were full, they hurried on and soon 

Were hard upon the forest of Faskun, 

§ 10 

Hoiv Gushtd&p slew the Wolf 

When forest and wolfs haunt were near, Mirfn, 

Who feared that fierce beast, showed Gushtasp its lair, 

Then turned back with Hfshwi, grieved, with full heart, 

And weeping tears of blood. Thus said Hlshwf : — 

,f We shall not see that noble man return. 

Woe for that breast and arm and neck of his ! 

Woe for his courage, puissance, and mace ! " 

Now when Gushtasp was drawing near the wood 
His warlike heart was full of anxious thought ; 
He lighted from his noble charger, prayed 
Before the Master of the world, and said : — 
" holy Fosterer of all, who sheddest 
Thy lustre o'er the processes of time ! 
Do thou assist me to o'ercome this beast. 
Have mercy on the soul of old Luhrdsp, 
For if this monster, which the ignorant 
Have termed a wolf, shall triumph over me, 
My sire will wail when he hath heard the tidings, 
Will never rest again but be distraught, 

VOL. IV. Y 

338 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Like those that are insane, and everywhere 
Be questing and lamenting ; while if I, 

V. 1466 In sheer dismay, shall shun this evil beast 
I may not face the folk for very shame." 

He mounted, raised the battle-cry, and grasped 
The scimitar of Salm ; with bow hung ready 
Upon his arm he made his way with caution 
And throbbing heart till he was near the spot, 
And then he thundered like a cloud in spring. 
Now when the wolf beheld him from the wood 
It sent a roar up to the darksome clouds, 
And like a lion or a savage leopard 
Tore with its claws the ground. Gushtasp, on seeing 
The monster, took in hand and drew his bow, 
And showering arrows from it swift as wind 
He made it as it were a cloud in spring. 
When wounded by the arrows of Gushtasp 
The beast became yet fiercer for the pain. 
It fell, but leaping to its feet came on — 
A lusty monster — butting with its horns, 
Stag-like, with smarting body and in wrath, 
Closed with the charger, gored its sable loins, 
And ripped it up from testicles to navel. 
The atheling drew from his waist the sword, 
Dismounted, smote the beast full on the head, 
And clave asunder back and breast and shoulder ; 
Then in the presence of the Lord of beasts, 
Lord of omniscience and of good and ill, 
Made his thanksgiving to the Omnipotent, 
And thus he said : " Thou who madest fortune ! 
Thou pointest out the way to them that err, 
And art the just, supreme, and only God. 
We prosper and we triumph in Thy name ; 
All Grace and knowledge are at Thy disposal." 
He left the place of prayer, wrenched out the tusks, 

v. 1467 The two long tusks, and going from the forest 

LUHRASP 

339 

Alone fared onward till he reached the sea 
Whereby Hishwf was sitting and Mfrm 
In anguish, deep in converse of the past ; 
Their talk was of Gushtasp and of the wolf; — 
" Woe for that brave and gallant cavalier 
Now in his arduous fight and stained with blood 
In that wolfs clutch ! " 

Whenas Gushtasp appeared 
Afoot, all bloody, and with cheeks like flower 
Of fenugreek, they rose with sad exclaims, 
Embraced him mournfully, their cheeks all wan, 
The lashes of their eyes like clouds in spring, 
And cried : " How went thy battle with the wolf ? 
Our hearts were bleeding at thine enterprise." 

Gushtasp made answer saying : " My good friends ! 
Is there no fear of God in Rum, that thus 
A savage monster is allowed to live 
Within the kingdom for a length of years, 
Destroying all the people in its path, 
And holding Caesar as a pinch of dust ? 
But I have cleft it with Salm's scimitar, 
So now all fear and dread for you are over. 
Go and behold this wonder while yet warm, 
See how the hide is rent upon the monster ! 
Thou'lt say : ' There is a mighty elephant 
Inside, as long and broad as is the forest I ' " 

Then both ran thither brightened by his words, 
And saw the wolf as 'twere an elephant 
With lion's claws and indigo in hue, 
But cleft from head to midriff by the blow ; 
That one skin would have held two mighty lions. 
Thereafter they invoked full many a blessing 
Upon that glorious Sun of earth, and went 
Glad-hearted from the wood, and came again 
Before that Lion of the fight to whom 
Mirin brought many presents, such as he 

340 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USI 

. v. 1468 Esteemed befitting, but Gushtasp accepted 

Naught but another steed and made for home. 

When, journeying from the sea, he reached his dwelling, 

Observant Katayiin came forth to him, 

And asked : " Where didst thou get that coat of mail, 

Because thou wentest out to hunt ? " 

He said : — 
" A wealthy company from mine own city 
Gave me this coat of mail, the sword, and helmet, 
With many a greeting from my kith and kin ." 

Then Katayiin brought wine as 'twere rose-water 
For scent, and feasted with her spouse till bed-tima 
The happy couple slumbered happily, 
But constantly he started in his sleep, 
While dreaming of his battle with the wolf 
That seemed a lusty dragon. Then to him 
Said Katayiin : " What aileth thee to-night 
To be thus terrified when no one touched thee ? " 

He said : " I dreamed about my throne and fortune." 
Then Katayiin perceived that he was born 
Of royal race — a king by heart and nature, 
A grandee, but concealed the fact from her, 
And would not look to Caesar for advancement. 

Gushtasp said : " Moon-faced one of cypress stature, 
With silvern breast and odorous of musk ! 
Prepare for us to journey to fran, 
To journey to the dwelling of the brave, 
Thou shalt behold those glorious fields and fells, 
And therewithal the just and generous Shah." 

" Speak not so foolishly," said Katayiin, 
" Nor rashly undertake such enterprises, 
But have an understanding with Hi'shwi 
When going. He may ferry thee. The world 
Renewed its youth when he conveyed thee hither ; 
But I shall tarry here in longsome grief, 
Not knowing how I shall behold thee more!" 

LUHRASP 

341 

They wept upon their couch o'er what might chance, v . 1469 
No tire was needed, they were burned with sorrow ; 
Yet when the circling sun rose in the sky 
The young folks, wide awake and full of hope, 
Arose from that soft couch and questioned saying: — 
" What aspect will the heaven wear for us, 
And will the world prove harsh to us or loving ? " 

Mfrm for his part went as swift as wind 
To Caesar, saying : " illustrious lord ! 
Our losses by the wolf have reached an end, 
The monster's body filleth all the forest, 
And thou mayst see the wonder if thou wilt. 
The beast attacked me with a furious charge, 
And gat a sword-stroke from my hand, whereby 
From head to midriff it was cleft asunder, 
And terror filled the Dfv's heart at the blow." 

The words made Caesar heighten, his shrunk cheek 
Glowed as he bade men go with wains and oxen 
To fetch the wolf. They found the mighty beast 
Cut down from head to midriff with the sword, 
And when they haled it forth among the meadows 
Thou wouldst have said the very hill-tops shook. 
The world was there to gaze upon that wolf, 
That wolf ? That monstrous, tierce, and lusty dfv \ 
When Cce&ar saw the elephantine form 
Of that tierce brute, he clapped his hands for joy, 
And, summoning the bishop to the palace, 
Bestowed his daughter on Mfrfn that day. 
They wrote to the patricians, notables, 
And prelates of the kingdom thus : " Mirin, 
That Lion and that man of high degree 
In Rum, hath set it from that fierce wolf free." 

342 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt 

How Ahran asked Cceaar's third Daughter in Marriage 

v. 1470 Exalted mid the warriors of Rum 

Was one — a chieftain younger than Mfrfrij 

A man of haughty nature named Ahran, 

Of brazen body and illustrious race. 

He sent a message unto Caesar saying : — 

" O famous monarch ! I surpass Mirin 

In treasure, prowess, swordsmanship, and all ; 

Give me thy youngest daughter as my spouse, 

And make thy realm and crown revive through me." 

But Caesar said : i4 Thou surely must have heard 
What I have sworn by Him that watcheth o'er us 
That this girl shall not choose her spouse, but I 
Will quit the custom of mine ancestors. 
Thou must perform some action like Mirfn's 
That we may stand on an equality. 
Infesting Mount Sakila is a dragon, 
Which is that region's bale the whole year through ; 
If thou wilt rid the land thereof, my daughter, 
My treasure, and my kingdom are thine own. 
It matcheth with the lion-quelling wolf : 
Its venom-breath is Ahriman's own snare." 

Ahran replied : " I will perform thy hest, 
And pledge my soul to execute thy will." 
Then to his friends ; " The blow that slew the wolf 
Was from the scimitar of one of valour. 
How could Mirin accomplish such a deed ? 
But Gesar thinketh one man like another. 
I will go ask Mirin ; that shifty one 
May haply tell the shift that he employed." 

So to the palace of Mirfn he went 
Like dust, with one before him to announce him. 
Mirin sat in a chamber, which the Moon 

luhrIsp 

Throughout her orhit hath not one to match. 
The ambitious man was In a warrior's garb, 
And crowned with an imperial diadem. 
The servant said : " Ahran, the elephantine, 
Is coming with a train of followers." 

Mirfn thereat adorned his chamber more, 
While all his worthiest servants went to meet 
Ahran. Mirin, on seeing him, embraced him, 
And then began to pay him compliments. 
When nobody remained within the hall, 
Save those two chieftains sitting on the throne, 
Ahran said to Mfrm; "Come tell me this, 
And, whatsoe'er I ask, dissemble not. 
My heart is set on making Ctesar's daughter, 
Who is the chief princess of Rum, my wife ; 
But when I asked him he returned this answer : — 
* First battle with the dragon on the mountain.' 
If thou wilt tell me how thou didst destroy 
The wolf thou wilt assist me mightily." 

Mfrfo. was troubled and considered thusr — 
" If I tell not Ahran what that young hero 
Achieved, the matter still will get abroad. 
The sum of manliness is being upright, 
And dark, deceitful ways are cuuse for tears. 
I will inform him. Haply that brave horseman 
May lay the dragon's head upon its breast. 
Ahran will be my friend and back me up, 
Our enemies will only clutch the wind ; 
Then will we raise this horseman's heart in dust, 
And this affair will for a time be hidden." 1 

He thus addressed Ahran : " I will inform thee 
About the wolf, but first of all require 
A mighty oath that thou wilt not reveal 
This secret night or day, but shut thy lips." 

Ahran accepted what Mfrm proposed, 
1 Reading with P. 

344 THE SHAhNAUA OF FIRDAUSI 

And swore the mighty oath. Mfr£n set pen 
To paper, wrote a letter to Hishwii, 

V. 1472 And said: "Ahran, who is akin to Csesar, 

An atheling possessed of throne and treasure, 
And just withal, deniandeth Caesar's daughter, 
The youngest and the only one remaining, 
In marriage ; Csesar maketh of the dragon 
A snare to catch Ahran and take his head ; 
Ahran hath come to me to ask assistance, 
And I, to help Jjim, have revealed the secret 
About the wolf and that brave cavalier, 
Who, having done so well for me, no doubt 
Will do as well for him too, will create 
Two princes in the land, and crown two Suns." 

Ahran departed with the schemer's letter 
And sought Hlshwf. As he approached the sea 
The veteran ran to meet him, welcomed him, 
Received the nattering letter, loosed the band, 
And said thus to Ahran : " Dost thou not know 
That 'tis our friends who desolate our gardens ? 
A youth — an alien and a man of name — 
Made his own life a ransom for Mirm, 
And yet may not escape, strive as he will, 
Against the dragon. Be my guest to-night, 
Here set thy candle, and enjoy the sea. 
When that fame-seeking hero cometh hither 
To-morrow, I will tell him what thou wilt." 

They lit the surface of the sea with candles, 
And called for wine and meat, till topaz dawn 
Rose in the vault of lapis-lazuli ; 

y, 1473 Then by the sea the famed Ahran beheld 

A warrior- horseman coming in the distance. 

As he drew near both went with joy to meet him. 

Dismounting he requested meat and wine 

From famed Hfshwl who made all haste to say : — 

" Rejoice, illustrious man, both day and night ! 

luhrAsp 

Behold this warrior of Caesar's kindred — 

The darling of the ever turning sky. 

Not only is he of imperial race, 

But he hath wealth, Grace, fame, and everything. 

He fain would be the son-in-law of C«sar, 

And would have one to guide in that emprise. 

He hath no equal save in Caesar's kindred ; 

A youth is he with Grace and thews and stature. 

He asked for Ceesars daughter's hand in marriage. 

And he was answered by a new expedient, 

For Caesar said: ( Be thou a dragon-catcher; 

If thou art of my race display thy prowess/ 

Before the mighty men by night and day 

No name except Minn's is on his lips, 

And only those will illustrate his throne 

Who are in fame and fortune like Mfrin. 

Near is a lofty mountain, once a place 

For mirth and feasting ; now upon the summit 

There is a dragon feared by all in Rum. 

It draweth down the vulture from the sky, 

Up from the deep the savage crocodile ; 

Its poison and its fume consume the ground, 

And all the region is unblessed by heaven. 

Now if by hand of thine it should be slain 

The deed would be a wonder in the world ; 

Nathless, if holy God shall be thy helper, 

And if the sun revolve as thou desirest, 

Thou with thy stature, form, and might of hand 

Mayst lay that dragon with the scimitar." 

He said : " Go make a sword five cubits long, 
Including hilt, toothed liko a serpent's teeth 
Upon both sides, and pointed sharp as thorn. 
The sword must be of finely tempered steel, 
Of watered metal and exceeding keen. 
Provide me too a mace, a barded steed, 
A gleaming glaive and royal garniture. 

346 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 

By GoxTs victorious fortune and decree 
Will I suspend that dragon from a tree." 

§ 12 

How Gushtdsp slezc the Dragon and how Cmar gave his 
Daughter to Akran 

Ahran departed and prepared whatever 
Gushtasp required of him. When all was ready 
The hero mounted, and with his companions 
Set forward. When Hi'shwi saw Mount Sakila 
He pointed with his finger, breathing hard, 
And when the sun shot out its rays on high 
He and Ahran turned and retraced their steps. 
Gushtasp remained before the mountain-lair 
Of that fierce worm and, having hung his helmet 
Upon his saddle, thinking dragon's breath 
And death but trifles, drew anear the mountain, 
And gave a shout that made the dragon quake. 
Now when it looked upon that lofty form 
It. strove to suck Gushtasp in with its breath, 
While he rained arrows on it swift as hail, 
And thick as petals from pomegranate- bloom, 
v, 147? It closed with him. Invoking all his powers 

The young man thrust his sword adown its jaws. 

And called upon the Judge who giveth good. 

The dragon gnashed its teeth upon the sword 

Deep in its maw, while blood and venom flowed 

And drenched the mount until the brute grew weak. 

Then, scimitar in hand, the Lion clove 

The dragon's head and strewed the rock with brains. 

Dismounting next that lucky warrior 

Prized out a couple of the dragon's teeth, 

And thence departing washed his head and body ; 

Then as he wallowed in the dust he raised 

LUHRASP 

347 

His voice before the Lord, the Victory-giver, 

Who had bestowed on him such mastery 

O'er wolf and lusty dragon, saying : " Luhrasp 

And glorious Zarfr had had enough, 

Both soul and body, of G-ushtiisp, yet I 

By shrewdness, courage, and sheer strength hare flung 

A dragon such as this upon the dust ! 

My lot from fortune is but travail, hardship, 

And bane spread out instead of antidote. 

If the Omnipotent shall grant me life 

To look once more upon the monarch's face, 

Then will I say : 4 What hath the throne availed me ? 

I sought the throne and fortune disappeared.' 3 ' 

With tearful cheeks he mounted on his steed, 
Still grasping in his hand his glittering sword, 
And coming to Hi'shwf and to Ahran 
Informed them of that marvel, saying : " The dragon 
Proved naught before this trenchant blade of mine. 
Ye were afraid of that great dragon's breath, 
And in the matter of the wolf, but I 
Am more distressed by fight with valiant captains, 
Exalted and equipped with massive maces, 
Than by contending with a crocodile 
That Cometh from the depths to fight with me. 
Seen have I many a dragon such as this, 
And never turned my back thereon in fight." 

They heard him — young in speech but old in know- 
ledge — 

And those two nobles came and reverenced him : — 
" Lion ! never will be born of woman 
One brave as thou. The Master of the world 
Aid thee whose might hath done the deed for us." 

Ahran produced abundance of rich gifts, 
With noble steeds caparisoned. Gushtasp 
Accepted for himself a sword, a bay, 
A bow, ten wooden arrows, and a lasso, 

348 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSf 

Bestowing everything that still remained — 
New raiment and dfnars — upon Hishwf. 
Gushtasp said : " Nobody must know this matter, 
Or be aware that I have seen the dragon, 
Or hearkened to the howling of the wolf." 

He went thence merrily to Katayun. 
Ahran fetched wains and oxen, and consigned 
The carcase of the dragon to his servants. 
He said : " Convey it unto Csesar's court 
In presence of the great men of the host." 

He went himself before the wains and oxen 
To Csesar. When they gat the news in Rum 
The veterans hurried forth and, when the oxen 
Descended from the mountain to the plain, 
A shout rose from the concourse at that stroke, 
And that grim dragon burdening ox and wagon, 
v. 1477 They cried : " This is a stroke of Ahriman's, 
And not Ahran's own sword and scimitar !" 

They brought forth from the palace Ctesar's throne, 
And called the great and wise. Then o'er the dragon 
They held high revelry from dawn till dark. 
The next day when the sun had crowned the sky, 
And when the teaks were gilded with its rays, 
The bishop came at the command of Ceesar, 
Who seated him upon the golden throne. 
Then the patricians and the presbyters, 
So far as they were men of any standing. 
Assembled in the presence of the prelate. 
Of Csesar, of his veterans, and advisers, 
To marry Ceesar's daughter to Ahran, 
Her loving mother giving her consent. 

Then Ciesar, after all the folk had gone, 
Spake thus, his heart still thrilling with delight : — 
" This is my day of days ! High heaven illumeth 
My heart, for none will see in all the world 
'Midst great and small two sons-in-law like mine." 

luhrAsp 

349 

They wrote a letter unto all the chiefs, 
Possessing throne and diadem, and said : — 
" The dragon fierce and towering wolf are slain ; 
Two mighty heroes' hands their lives have ta'en." 

§ J3 

Sow Gushtasp displayed his Prowess on the Hiding-ground 

In Ciesar's palace was a belvedere 
As lofty as his own resplendent throne, 
And on the riding-ground both sons-in-law 
Were wont to entertain his gladsome heart 
With polo, javelin-play, and archery, 
And wheeling to display their horsemanship ; 
Thou wouldst have said: "They are consummate 
riders." 

It came to pass at length that Katayun, 

Who always took the lead, came to Gushtasp, 

And said : ** thou that sittest moodily ! V. 1478 

Why is it that thy heart is plunged in grief ? 

There are two chieftains in the land of Rum, 

Enjoying treasures, crowns, and diadems; 

One slew the dragon mid no little peril, 

And never showed his back, the other rent 

The wolfs hide ; Rum is ringing with his fame. 

Now on the riding-ground these two send dust 

To heaven ! Go see, for Caesar will be there : 

It may perchance relieve thy melancholy." 

Gushtasp replied : " My beauty ! what remembrance 
Or interest can Cassar have in me ? 
He keepeth thee and me outside the city, 
How then should he be friendly if we meet ? 
Yet notwithstanding if it be thy counsel 
I will not disregard it, O my guide ! " 

Gushtasp bade put the saddle on a steed 

350 THE SHAhnAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

That rolled the earth, up under it. He came 
To Ccesar's riding-ground and watched the polo, 
Then asking for a stick and ball he cast 
The ball amid the throng and urged his steed ; 
The warriors paused, not one could see the ball, 
His stroke had made it vanish in mid air ! 
How could the cavaliers recover it ? 
Not one was minded to renew the game, 
The Humans' faces paled and all was din 
And clamour. Then they turned to archery. 
Some gallant cavaliers advanced, and when 
Gushtasp the hero saw them, " Now," he said, 
" Must I display my prowess." 

So he flung 
The polo-stick away and gripped the bow. 
Both string and arrow were astound at him. 
v. 1479 When Csesar looked upon that noble man, 

With such a grasp, such shoulders, and long stirrups, 
He asked and said: " Whence is this cavalier, 
Who wheeleth on such wise to right and left ? 
Pull many noble warriors have I seen, 
But never heard of cavalier like that. 
Call him that I may ask him who he is — 
An angel or a mortal seeking fame," 

Thoy called Gushtasp to Ctesur whose ill mind 
Was troubled. Caisar said : " Brave cavalier, 
Head of the proud and coronal of war ! 
What is thy name ? Tell me thy race and country." 

Gushtasp made no reply concerning this, 
But answered thus : " A wretched stranger I 
Whom Cassar drave aforetime from the city. 
When I became his son-in-law he banned me, 
And no one readeth on his roll my name, 
For Cassar treated Katayun with harshness 
Because of all the world she chose a stranger, 
Yet only followed custom in the matter, 

LUHRASP 

351 

And was disgraced albeit she did well 

Within the forest that pernicious wolf, 

And on the mountain that ferocious dragon, 

Lost through my blows their heads, to which emprises 

My prompter -was Hishwi. The teeth moreover 

Are at my house, the blows that my sword dealeth 

Are proof besides. Let Caesar ask Hfshwf ; 

The matter is still recent, not outworn." 

Whenas Hfshwf had come and brought the teeth 
He told to Csesar what had passed, who framed 
His tongue to make apology: "Injustice 
Is over, youth ! Now where is Katayun, 
My well-beloved ? Well mayst thou call me tyrant ! " 

Indignant with Mrrm and with Ahran 
He said : " Things cannot be concealed for ever." 

Then mounting on his windfoot steed he went v - mSo 

To ask forgiveness of his prudent daughter, 
And said : " pure, well-fortuned child of mine ! 
Thou art my right eye in the world. My heart 
Hath no wish but for thee. I prithee ask 
Of him who is thy husband and companion 
To tell the secret of his home and kindred, 
For otherwise he wilt not speak the truth 
To us." 

She answered : " I have questioned him, 
But never saw him on the skirt thereof. 
He talketh not before me of his secret, 
And he is reticent to every one. 
He answereth not with candour to my questions, 
And only saith : ' My name is Farukhzad.' 
But I suspect that he is nobly born, 
For he is fond of fight and valiant," 

Then Caesar parted palace- ward and heaven 
Turned for a while with matters in this stay 
Until the morning when Gushtasp, whose head 
Was full of wisdom, rose and went to him, 

552 THE SHAHNAma OF FIRDAUSI 

Who, when he saw Gushtasp, was mute but gave him 
A seat upon the famous golden throne, 
v. 1481 Called for a signet, belt, and jewelled crown, 
Befitting princes, from the treasury, 
And having kissed him placed it on his head, 
Recounted his achievements in the past, 
And said to those concerned : " Be diligent, 
Both young and old ! Do fully the commands 
Of Farukhzad and not transgress herein." 

This order was dispatched on every hand 
To all the ruling men throughout the land. 

§ 14 

How Ceesar wrote to Hyds and demanded Tribute 

Now Ceesar's nearest neighbour was Khazar, 

Whose folk made dark his days. Ilyas, the son 

Of veteran Mihras, was chief thereof, 

And CaBsar wrote to him, thou wouldst have said:— 

" He dipped his pen in blood " ; " Thou, O Khazar ! 

Hast lived on us and flouted us for long, 

But now the day of thy delight is over. 

Send me a heavy tribute and a fine, 

With many of thy chiefs as hostages, 

Else Farukhzad like some mad elephant 

Will come and make the surface of thy realm 

Bare as my hand." 

Ilyas perused the letter, 
Then dipped his pen-point into gall and answered : — 
" Such power was not in Rum in days of yore, 
And if I ask not you to pay me tribute, 
Why then rejoice therefor, both Meld and fell. 
Are ye so heartened by this single horseman, 
Who sheltered with you ? Know him for a snare 
Of Ahriman's and, though an iron mountain, 

luhrAsp 

353 

Still but one man ; so do not trouble him 
With this campaign for I shall not be long." 

When news came to Mirin and to Ahran v. 14&2 

About Ilyas, and how he spread his toils 
Mirin dispatched a message unto Ctesar : — 
" No dragon this to let himself be snared, 
Nor yet a wolf to perish by a sleight, 
And be convulsed by being smeared with poison ; 
Ilyas, when he is raging in the battle, 
Will make the atheling weep tears of blood. 
Mark how completely this proud warrior 
Will quail before him on the battlefield," 

Concerned was Caesar when he heard their 
words ; 

He withered at their dark designs and said 

To Farukhzad ; " A man of might art thou, 

As 'twere a gem upon the head of Rum. 

Know that Ilyas is one to conquer lions, 

A brazen-bodied, elephantine horseman. 

If thou hast strength to fight against him say so, 

But seek not to deceive me through vain-glory. 

For if thou art not able to withstand him 

I will deal with him in a kindly sort, 

Divert him from his purpose by mine unction, 

And lavish on him words and subsidies." 

Gushtasp said : " Why this talk and questioning ? 
When I shall plunge my charger in the dust 
I shall not fear the marches of Khazar ; 
But in the day of fight we must not reckon 
Upon Mirfn and on Ahran, for they 
Will show their hatred, devilry, and guilo ; 
So, when the foe arriveth from that coast, 
Do thou with one son guard me. Then will I, 
Strong in the only God — the Conqueror — 
Lead on the troops, annihilate Ilyas, 
His throne, his crown, his host, and majesty, 

VOL. IV. z 

354 THE SHAHNAMA OF FlRDAVst 

Will grasp his girdle, take him from his saddle, 
Raise him aloft and dash him to the ground." 

One day what time the sun was up, and streams 
Reflected in their depths its golden, shield, 
v. 1483 The brazen trumpets sounded from Khazar, 
And dust rose sunward. Noble Csesar bade 
Gushtasp : " Lead forth the host." 

He left the city, 
Marched with his peers and warriors to the plain, 
Armed with an ox-head mace, and as he went 
Looked like a lofty cypress by a stream ; 
He chose upon the plain a battlefield, 
And sent the dust to heaven. Anon Ilyas 
Observed the breast and bearing of Gushtasp, 
His whirling mace and battle-ax, and sent 
A horseman to beguile his subtle mind. 
The horseman came and said : " Exalted chieftain ! 
Be not so proud of Csesar for thou art 
Thyself his cavalier, his Spring, and hero. 
Withdraw thee from between the embattled lines. 
Why art thou thus with lips afoam ? Ilyas 
In battle is a lion, one that sendeth 
The dust up cloudward with his scimitar. 
If thou desirest presents he hath treasure; 
Gall not thy hands with travailing for wealth. 
Choose where thou wilt to rule, it shall be thine ; 
I will be thy companion and thy subject, 
And never break my faith " 

Gushtasp replied : 
" It is too late and things have gone too far. 
Thou wast the person to begin this quarrel, 
And now thou turnest back on thine own word; 
But nothing that thou sayest will avail, 
'Tis time for battle and the grip of war." 

The messenger returned like wind and told 
The answer to Ilyas, but time for fighting 

LUHRASP 

Was not, the sun was sinking rapidly, 
Night hid the pallid orb with ebony. 

§ 15 

Sow Gushtdsp fought icith Ilyd* and slew him 

When Sol had issued from his bower, and mounted V. 1+84 

Upon the throne of Sagittarius, 

The realm of Rum became like sandarach, 

The roar of trump and drum and clash of arms 

Rose from the armies on both sides, the field 

Of battle was as 'twere a stream of blood ; 

Then Caesar came on quickly on the right, 

Set his two sons-in-law to guard the baggage, 

And his own son Sakfl upon the left : 

The elephants and drums remained with Gesar. 

The din of battle went up from both hosts : 

Thou wouldst have said : " The sun and moon contend." 

Gushtasp kept moving up and down the line, 

His steed a Crocodile, his sword a Dragon ; 

Thereat Ilyas said to his warriors : — 

" This is why C<esar hath demanded tribute ; 

He hath a Dragon such as this at court, 

And therefore is thus minded." 

When Gushtasp 
Beheld Ilyas he said : 11 Now is the time 
To show accomplishment," 

Both cavaliers 
Rushed on with lances and mail-piercing shafts. 
No sooner had Ilyas discharged an arrow, 
In hope to give the first wound, than Gushtasp 
Struck at his foeman's hawberk with a spear, 
And in a moment pierced his warrior-form, 
Dismounted him like one bemused, reached out, 
And, having clutched his hand, haled him along, 

356 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS1 

Bore him away before the cavaliers, 
And gave him up to Cajsar. Then Gushtasp 
Led on the host in mass against the foe, 
Advancing like a blast. What multitudes 
He slew and captured, while the world looked on 
v. 1485 Astound ! Perceiving all the Riiman forces 

In full pursuit he turned and came with triumph 

And exaltation into Csesar's presence, 

Who, seeing him approaching, went attended 

To welcome him, right gladly kissed the hero 

On head and eyes, and greatly thanked the Maker. 

Thence they returned with joy. The general 

Assumed the crown of greatness while all Rum 

Came gladly to the presence of the king, 

And brought him many a gift and offering. 

§ 16 

How Cmar demanded from Luhrdsp Trilnde for Irdn 

Heaven turned awhile with matters in this stay, 

Concealed its purposes, and made no sign, 

Till Csesar spake thus to Gushtasp : " Great chieftain ! 

Consider wisely what I say; 'tis matter 

Requiring thought, I will dispatch an envoy, 

Experienced and noble, to Luhrdsp 

To say to him : ' Thou hast without dispute 

The treasures of the great and half the world. 

If thou wiit pay me tribute for thy land 

Both wealth and worship shall continue thine ; 

But if not I will send a host from Rum, 

Such that thou wilt not see the land for horse-hoofs.'" 

" 'Tis thine," Gushtasp made answer, "to determine, 
For all the world is underneath thy feet." 

There was a nobleman Kdlus by name, 
Wise, learned, well advised, and powerful ; 

luhrAsp 

357 

Famed Csesar called that sage and said : " Depart, v. 1486 

And tell the Shah : £ If thou wilt pay me tribute, 

Perform my bidding, and submit thyself, 

Thou inayest keep the iranian crown and throne, 

And thou shalt be a conquering worldlord still ; 

If not, behold forthwith a mighty host 

Of Rinnans and the spearmen of the desert ! 

Their battle-shout shall rise above the plain, 

Victorious Farukhzad shall be their leader; 

I will make all your country desolate, 

The lurking-place of leopards and of lions.' " 

The envoy came as swift as wind ; his head 
Was full of wisdom and his heart of justice ; 
On drawing near the mighty Shah he saw 
The portal and the splendid audience- chamber, 
And when the chamberlain was 'ware he came 
With stately step before the monarch, saying; — 
" There is an ancient statesman at the gate ; 
In sooth he is an envoy sent by CiEsar, 
A cavalier with whom are many spearmen, 
And seeketh audience of the Shah." 

Luhrasp, 

On hearing this, sat on the ivory throne, 

And donned the crown that gladdeneth the heart, 

While all the great men of the kingdom sat 

Below him, happy in their high estate, 

The monarch gave command to raise the curtain, 

And introduce the envoy cordially, 

Who, coming near the throne, called blessings down 

Thereon, did reverence and, himself a man 

Of wisdom and of justice, gave the message 

Of noble Csesar. At his words the Sh&h 

Was grieved and raged against this turn of fortune. 

They had a splendid banquet-hall prepared, 

And called for wine and harp and minstrelsy. 

The Shah sent tapestries of cloth of gold, 

35S 

THE SHAHS AMA OF FIRDAUSI 

With raiment and with provand ; but at night 
Lay down, distracted by anxiety, 
" The spouse of pain and grief," as thou hadst said, 
v. 1487 Now when the sun sat on the golden throne, 
And dark night tore its visage with its nails, 
The monarch called Zarfr who spake at large. 
They cleared the hall of strangers, introduced 
The envoy for an audience, and Luhrasp 
Addressed him thus : " man fulfilled with wisdom ! 
Hay thy soul have no other sustenance. . 
I will interrogate thee. Answer truly, 
And pander not to guile if thou art wise. 
Such puissance was not heretofore in Rum, 
And Csesar was submissive to the Shahs, 
Yet now he sendeth and requireth tribute 
Of every realm, demanding throne and state ! 
Ilyas. who ruled the kingdom of Khazar, 
A warrior with the Grace, hath Caesar taken 
A captive, binding him and all his host. 
From whom hath Ctesar learned the path of glory ?" 

The envoy said : " I went, wise Shah ! to ask 
For tribute to the marches of Khazar, 
And bare much travail in the embassage, 
But no one ever questioned me in this wise. 
Yet hath the Shah entreated me so kindly 
That I must not essay to misinform him. 
A cavalier, who taketh with his hands 
The lion from the wood, hath come to Cresar ; 
On battle-days he laugheth at the brave, 
In banquet he is mighty at the goblet. 
In fight, in feast, and on the hunting-day 
The eye ne'er looked on such a cavalier. 
Upon him Caesar hath bestowed his daughter, 
The goodliest and dearer than the crown. 
This cavalier hath made his mark in Hum 
By vanquishing a dragon ; furthermore 

luhrAsp 

359 

A wolf, like elephant upon the plain, 

Such that e'en Ciesar dared not pass that way, 

He overthrew, prized out the teeth thereof, v - J 4^8 

And kept Rum scathless." 

Said Luhrasp : " Truth-speaker ! 
Whom doth that lover of the fray resemble ? " 

The envoy answered: " Thou wouldst say at once: — 
' In countenance he favoureth ZarnV 
And further : ' It is brave Zarfr himself 
In height, appearance, courtesy, and counsel' " 

Whenas Luhrasp heard this his visage cleared. 
He showed much kindness to that man of Rum, 
And gave him many slaves and many purses, 
So that on leaving he was well content, 
But said the Shah : " Give Caesar this reply : — 
* I march against thee as an enemy.' " 

§ 17 

Sow Zarir carried a Message from Luhrasp to Gsesar 

Luhrasp mused long, then called Zarfr, and said :— 

" This man must be thy brother, therefore take 

Thy measures instantly and tarry not. 

If thou delayest all is over with us; 

Rest not and order out no halting steed. 

Take throne, a led horse, and the golden boots, 

Take Kawa's standard and the crown withal, 

For I will give to him the sovereignty, 

And lay no obligation on his head. 

March on thy saving mission to Halab, 

But speak before the troops of battle only." 

The worshipful Zarir said to Luhrasp: — 
" I will discover all the mystery ; 
If 'tis Gushtasp he is both liege and lord, 
And all the other lords are but his lieges." 

3 6o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAVSI 

This said, lie chose a noble company, 
The great, illustrious grandsons of Katis 
And of Giidarz, son of Kishwad, as well 
As those who were descended from Zarasp — 
Bahrain the lion-queller and Rfvm'z — 
v. 1489 And those exalted grandsons of brave Gfv 
The athelings Shiriiya and Ardshir, 
Two doughty Lions, offspring 1 of Bfzhan, 
Both haughty warriors of stainless birth. 
These chieftains went, each with two steeds, and shone 
Bright as Azargashasp. None stopped to rest 
Until they reached the inarches of Halab, 
And filled the world with trumpets, gongs, and tumult. 
They raised the glorious standard, pitched the tents 
And tent-enclosures, then Zarir committed 
The host to proud Bahram, and journeyed on 
As one that is the bearer of a message, 
Or bringeth monarchs tidings of great joy, 
With five wise, prudent warriors of his meiny, 
And when he had arrived at Caesar's court, 
The chamberlain descried him from the gate. 
Now Caesar with the wise Gushtasp was sitting 
In dudgeon in the palace and, on hearing 
The chamberlain's announcement, granted audience. 
Gushtasp joyed at the coming of Zarir, 
"Who at his entry seemed a lofty cypress, 
And sitting by the throne gave Caesar greeting, 
And complimented all the Ramans present. 
Then Csesar said : " Thou slightest Farukhzad, 
And heedest not the rules of courtesy." 

The blest Zarir replied : " He is a slave, 
Who, weary of his service, left our court, 
And now he hath attained position here." 

Gushtasp made no reply, but of a truth 
His thoughts were on Iran, Shrewd-minded Caesar 
Grew serious as he heard the young man's words, 

LUHRASP 

And thought : " He must be speaking truth and yet 
The truth alone is hidden." 

Then Zarfr 

Declared to him the message of Luhrasp, 

Which ran thus: "If just judges grow unjust 

I will make Rum my seat, and leave behind 

A scanty population in fran. 

Set forth, O warrior ! prepare for battle, 

And tarry not when thou hast heard my words. 

triii is not Khazar and I myself 

Am no Ilyas, whose people thou hast robbed 

Of him." 

Then Caesar answered : " I am ready 
For battle always. Since thou art an envoy, 
Depart. We will prepare to take the field." 

The glorious Zarfr was sore diatrest 
At hearing this, and stayed not long to rest 

§ 18 

How Gushifep returned with Zartr to the Lund of frdn 
and received the Throne from Luhrdup 

On his departure Ctesar asked Gushtasp : — 
" Why madest thou no answer to Zarir ? " 

Gushtasp replied : " When I was with the Shah 
What deeds I did both troops and people toll. 
The best course is for me to go and hold 
A parley with them. I will get for thee 
All that thou wishest, and will make thy fame 
Shine in the world." 

" Thou art more wise than I." 
Said Caesar, " and canst best achieve our ends.'* 

Gushtasp on that bestrode his eager steed, 
And, crown on head, approached Zarfr his brother. 
Now when the Iranian host beheld Gushtasp, 

362 

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIR DA USI 

Luhrasp's most glorious son, they went afoot 
To welcome him, but in distress and tears, 
V. 1491 Yet thankfully for their long toils were shortened, 

Zanr, of discord weary, came to him 
Afoot. Gushtasp embraced his well loved brother, 
And with his first words sought to make excuse, 
They sat upon the throne in company 
With warriors, chiefs, and great men of Iran, 
And blest Zarfr said to Gushtasp : " Mayst thou 
Companion with the throne while life shall last ! 
Our father's head is hoar, thy heart is young. * 
Why dash the expectations of the old ?- 
The throne is but affliction at his age, 
He hath become a devotee of God, 
And herewithal he sendeth unto thee 
The crown and treasure ; let thy hardships cease. 
His words were these : 1 Iran is all thine own, 
The throne, the army, and the crown are thine. 
For me a corner of the world suffieeth, 
Because the throne of greatness is another's ; 
Thy brother bringeth thee the glorious crown, 
The earrings, torque, and throne of ivory.'" 

Gushtasp rejoiced to see his father's throne, 
And, sitting down upon it, crowned his head. 
The grandsons of the worldlord Kai Kaus, 
And all the prosperous scions of Giidarz, 
Bahram too and Shapur, 1 Rfvniz, and such 
As were of high degree, with brave Ardshfr, 
Son of Bfzhan, who was their general, 
A lion-taking chief, and all the host, 
Hailed him as Shah and named him king of earth, 
While all the warriors stood before his presence 
With girded loins. Gushtasp perceived their love 
And earnestness, and sent to Cassar saying : — 
" Thy business with Iran hath been achieved, 
1 Reading with P. 

LUHRASP 

For matters have attained a pass indeed ; 

Zarir and all the army are in hopes 

That thou wilt come alone and feast with us. 

We all will join in league with thee and make v. 1492 

Our souls the pledges of our loyalty ) 

So, if it irk thee not, come to the plain, 

For fortune hath accomplished thy desire." 

The envoy, having entered Cesar's presence, 
Declared what he had seen and heard ; then Ciesar 
Bestrode without delay a windfoot steed, 
And sped as swiftly as an autumn-blast 
Until he reached the warriors of Iran. 
He saw upon the ivory throne and crowned 
With turquoise crown Gushtasp who, coming forward, 
Embraced him tenderly, and spake at large. 
Then Caesar, knowing him to be Gushtasp, 
The lustre of the Shah's throne, praised him greatly, 
And showed him all respect. They took their seats, 
And Csesar made excuses for the past , 
In great amazement at that wondrous fortune. 
Gushtasp accepted all the monarch's words 
And, having clasped his head in fond embrace, 
Said to him : " When tho sky becometh dark, 
And it is well to set the lamps alight, 
Send to me her who chose me for her husband, 
For she hath borne exceeding pain and travail." 

Ashamed and weary Ca;sar went away 
To reckon with his own ill bent at large. 
He sent to Katayun a store of wealth — 
A ruddy coronet, five gems, a thousand 
Young Human slaves, both boys and girls, a torque 
That was one mass of jewels fit for kings, 

Five camels' burden of brocade of Rum, v. 1493 

And, in the charge of all that wealth, a sage, 
Who, having carried them before Gushtasp, 
Accounted to his treasurer for all. 

364 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 

Upon the troops and chieftains of fran, 

Upon the scions of the mighty men, 

And every notable and valiant swordsman, 

Did Ciesar then bestow both arms and money, 

With presents to the captains every one. 

He oped the portal of the treasuries, 

With praise to Him who made both earth and time. 

As soon as Katayun had joined the Shah 

The roar of kettledrums rose from the court, 

The troops began to march toward Iran, 

And horses' dust to overcast the sky. 

The Shah turned Csesar's rapid charger round 

When he had gone two stages on the march. 

Made him retrace his steps with oaths of friendship, 

And sent him Rum-ward with good wishes, saying: — 

" I will not while I live ask any tribute 

Of Bum ; that country is a joy to me." 

He journeyed on till he approached fran, 
.Approached the monarch of the brave. The Shah, 
On hearing that Zarir came with Gushtasp, 
His brother, that fierce Lion, went with all 
The chiefs, great men. and warriors of Iran 
To welcome them. Gushtasp alighted quickly, 
And homaged joyfully Luhrasp who seeing 
His son embraced him, grievously deploring 
The tyranny of heaven. Whenas they reached 
The royal palace at their journey's end, 
V. 1494 Like Sol in Pisces, said Luhrasp to him : — 
" Look not askance, the Maker so ordained, 
And thus perchance 'twas written o'er thy head 
That thou shouldst be an exile from thy kingdom." 

Luhrasp then kissed Gushtasp and, having crowned 
him, 

Did homage to him and rejoiced in him. 

Then said Gushtasp : " Shah ! God grant that time 

May never look on me deprived of thee. 

lvhrAsp 

Thou art the king ; I am thy liege and I 
Will trample on the fortune of the foe. 
May all thine ends be prosperous, God grant 
Thy fame may never perish, for the world 
Abide th not with any. one and each, 
While in the body, hath full many a toil* 

Such is this fickle world ! With might and 
From sowing seeds of ill therein refrain. 
One day a man may be in want of bread. 
Another day may be a king instead. 
The righteous Judge, and only God, I pray 
That from this world I may not pass away 
Till in my goodly tongue I shall have told 
This story of the kings in days of old ; 
Then let mine honoured body go to dust, 
And my poetic spirit join the just. 

INDEX 

This Index and the Table of Contents at the beginning of the volume are 
complementary. References to the latter are in Roman numerals. 

Abbreviations, list of, 3 
Abu'l 'Abbds Fazl bin Ahmad, 
minister of Mahmiid, 141 
Flrdausi's praise of, 141 
Abu'l Ktoim, Firdausi, 140 
Adonis, 315 

Afrisiyib, Tiller of Turin, v, vi, 
vii, viii, 7, 8, io seq., 17, 
19 seq., 25, 29, 46, 56, 58 
65, 66, 70, 75 seq., 
83, 89. 93, 94. I0 3, 108, 
no, 113, 117, 128, 129, 134 
H5i [ 4^, 150 teq., 190, 
192 »eq., 235, 247 seq., 252^ 
253. 273. 2 S7. 289, 

294 

flees from Sustain to Khal- 

lukh, 10 
addresses his nobles, 10 
Bends Shida to Khdrazin, 1 1 
Pirdn against I'tin, 1 1 
reinforcements and 
bids him break off 
negotiation* with 
Giv, 20 
receives tidings from Pinln, 77 
referred to, 114, 130, 237 
= king of Gang, 134 
Kai Khusrau's great war 

with, 135 
eucamped at Baigand (Knn- 

duz) f 151 
hears ill tidings of Pfran and 

of the host, 151 
his distress, 152 

Afr«siyab, swears to be avenged 

on Kai Khusrau, 152 
hears of the advance of Kai 

Khusrau, 153 
harangues and equips Ms 

host, 153 
patrols the Jilidn with, boats, 

153 

holds a council, summons 
Kurdkhan, and crosses the 
Jihun, 154 

sends Kurukliun with half 
the host to Bukhara 1 , 154 

marches to A'mwi, 154 

encamps in Gildn, 155 

arrays his host* 155 

takes his post at the centre, 

gives Shida command of the 

Jeft wing, 155 
semis Jalin to guard Shida's 

rear, 155 
gives a grandson command 
of the right wing, 1 56 
commands to Giirdglr, 
Nastrib, Ighrlraa, and 
Garaiwaz, 156 
proposes to invade Nlrtmiz, 
156 

reviews the host and pre- 
pares to encounter Kai 
Klmsi'au, 1 58 

urged by Shida m-t to delny 
the attack. 159 

his reply, 160 

wishes to meet Kai Khusruu 
in single combat, 161 

368 

INDEX 

Afrasiyab, sends Sliidaon an em- | 
bassage to K:ii Khusrau, 1 
161 i 
hears of Shida's death, 176 I 
his grief, 176 J 
commands in person against 

Kal Khusrau, 179 
semis Jahn to the left, 1S0 : 
reinforced by Garslw.az, rSi I 
forced by Garshvaz and Jahn : 

to quit the field, 1S2 
returns to cainp, 183 
abandons his camp and re- 
crosses the Jibuii, 184 
join* forces with Kur&khaln, 

186 j 
stays at Bukhara, 186 ! 
withdraws to Gang-bihisht, j 
1S7 

reinforced by Krfktila, 188 
sends troops to Clutch, 188 
under Tamirg desert- 
ward, 1S8 . 
marches to meet Kai Khus- 

rau, 19a 
commands the centre, 190 
hears of Kurakhitn's defeat 

and return, 193 
hears that Rustam is ad- 
vancing, 194 
fails ill attempt to surprise 

Rustam, and withdraws 

to G-aiig-liiliisht, 194^3. 
asks aid from the FaghfiVr, 

196 ■ 
prepares Gang-bihisht for a [ 

siege, 197 | 
besieged In Gang-bihisht, ! 

198, 20S seq. \ 
offers terms of peace to Kai ■ 

Kbiisrau, 203 
rallieshLstrnopsatthestorm- | 

ing of Gang-bihisht, 209 , 
escapes, an 

gets possession of the tren- 1 

sures of Piran, 219 
arrays his host to fight with 

Kai Khusrau, 220 

ydb, offers Kai Khusrau. 
peace or single combat, 221 
fights a general engagement 
against Kai Khusrau, 223, 
226 

defeated and escapes by 

flight, 227 
his army surrenders to Kai 

Khusrau, 22S 
takes refuge at Gang-dizh, 
230 

bis captive kindred sent to 
Kai Kdus by Kai Khusrau, 
232 

Khusrau's inquiries concern- 
ing, 247 
hears of Kai Khusrau's ap- 
proach and quits Gang- 
dizb, 248 
searched for by Kai Khusrau, 
248 

the Iranians' fears of, 249 
Kai Khusrau takes counsel 
with Kai Kiius concerning, 
258 

his wanderings and wretched. 

plight, 259 
takes refuge in a cave near 

Barda', 259 
his lament overheard by 

Hum, 260 
Iiis capture by Hum, 261 
Darinesteter on, 136 
pitied and unbound by Hum, 
262 

escapes into lake Urumiah, 

262 and note 
attracted by the voice of 

Garsiwaz, 265 
holds converse with Garei- 

■waz, 266 
hia recapture by Hdra, 
266 

slain by Kai Khusrau, 26S 
daughter of=Farangi8, 304 
Aghraeratha (Ighriras), 137 
Ahmad, Fazl, son of. Bee Abu'l 
'Abbas Fazl 

INDEX 

369 

Ahran, Ruhiaii chief, is, 342 *eq., 
353 

bidden by Ciesar to slay the 
dragon of Mount Sakiln, 
342 

takes counsel with Mirin, 
342 

referred by Mirin 10 Hlshwi, 
344 

required by Gushtslsp to fur- 
nish him with arms, 345 

goes witli Gushtasp and 
Hislrwi to Mount Saklla, 
346 

and Hlshwi welcome Gush- 
tisp on his return, 347 

gives gifts to Gushtfep, 
347 

has the dead dragon con- 
veyed to Cesar's court, 
348 

marries Cesar's third daugh- 

ter, 348 
and Mirin display their 
accomplishment on the 
riding. ground, 349 
and Mirin, Caesar's wrath 
with, 351 
send a scornful message 

to Csesur, 353 
set to guard the bag- 
, _ B n H e . 355 
Ahrinian, the Evil Principle, 2$ t 
41 teq., 45, 46, 89, 103, 
124, 128, 130, 162, 163, 
179, 243, 272, 288, 

342, 34S, 352 
Akhast, Turanian hero, vi, 97, 

chosen to fight with Zauga, 
97 

filain by Zatiga, 106 
AUns (Alani), people, 14, 60,65, 
301 

Alburz, raoun tain-range, 136 
Alexander the Great, 314 
Amulet, 133 

of Kai Klmsrau, 133 
VOL. IV. 

Anrwi, city on the Oxus, 11, 65, 

154, 184, 206 
Andanib, city ill Afghanistan, 65 
Andarlman, Turininn hero, vi, 26 
lights with Gustahaiti, 87 
his steed slain by Hajir, 87 
rescued by the Turkmans, 
87 

chosen to fight with Gnrgjn, 
97 

slain by Gurgin, 104 
Aogemaide\ Pahlavi treatise, 116 
Aphrodite, 315 
Apologue, 18, 28, 47 
Apothegm, 13, 32. 33. 38. 39. 59- 

93, 10S, 121, 131, 268 

Arabs, 14 

Arash, king of the Khuzfans, 

146, 148 
Ard, day of, 232 

Ardabll, citv in Azerbaijan, 147, 
iSS 

Ardshiv, son of Bizluin, 360 

goes with Zarlr to Rum, 360 
hails Gushtasp as Shall, 362 

Aries, constellation, 24, 147, 158, 

Arjdsp, Turdnian hero, 26 
Arjuna, one of the live Piindava?, 

'3 8 ^ '39 
Aryans, 137 

Ashi Vatiguhi, the gen ins of 

piety, 137 
Ashkash, frrinian liero, 13, 57, 

60, 6i, 65, 
sent by Kai Khusrnu to 

Kharazm, 15 
defeats Sliula, 60, 72 
his troops recalled, 145 
sent with a host to Zam, 157 
bis pillage of Makinii 

stopped by Kai Kliiiariui, 

243 

appointed governor of Mak- 

ran, 244 
welcomes Kai Klmsrau on 

his return from Gang- 

dizh, 251 

2 A 

37° 

INDEX 

Asia, 315 

Astivihid, demon, 137 ' 
Atlmnfuos, 314, 316 

Deipnosophista of, quoted* 
3H 

Aim-af-aspa. fLtihnfep), 316 
Autumnal Equinox* 313 
Awa, Iranmu hero, 149 
Azar AMil&gan, Tabriz or 1 he 

Fire-temples there, 259 
Kai Kliusruu and Kai Kaiis | 

go 011 a pilgrimage to the 

Fire-temple at, 258 1 
Azarbaijiin, province, 136 ' 
Azargashasp, spirit oi tlie light- , 

ning, S4, 100, 147. 175. 2 75> J 

307, 360 ! 
temple of, 136, 258, 259 ; 
Kai Khusrau and Kai 
Kaus go on a pilgrim- 
age to the, 258 
referred to, 264 
Kai Khusrau and Kai Kaus 
make thanksgiving before, 
269 

Zarnsp, Kai Khusrau's trea- | 
surer, makes gifts to, 269 j 

1 

B 

BAPAKHSHAN, region in northern ■ 
Afghan ist in, 65, 192 

Baghdad, city, 147, 256 

Bahman, mouth and day, Si note 

Eahrau< (Vardanes), Iranian hero 
and Parthian king, 8, 312 1 

Bahrain, son of Zarasp, 360 1 
goes with Zarlr to Rum, 

36° i 
commands the host in Zarir's 

absence, 360 \ 
hails Gtishtasp as Sliu.li, 362 | 
Bahram, Iranian hero or king, ' 

26S : 
Baigand (Kunduz), a, city in 

Turin, I5r 
Afrasiy£b encamps at, 1 5 1 
marches from, 154 

Bakyir, mountain, 136 

Balkh, city, ix, 19, 20, 6$ y 156, 

157. 255- 3i6 
capital of Luhrfisp, 317 
Baluchistan, country {Makrao), 

136 

Bamiyan, district iu Afghanistan, 
65 

Barbari&tdn, country, 136, 148 
Barda', city on the borders of 

Armenia and Azarbaijan, 

147 

Afrasiydb takes refuge in a 
cave near, 259 
Barman, Turanian hero, vi, 97 
chosen to fight Kuliham, 97 
slain by Ruhham, 102 
Barta, franian hero, vi, 97, 149 
chosen to fight with Kith ram, 
97 

slays Kuhram, 105 
Barzin, Fire- temple, 31S 

built by Luhrdsp, 318 
Battle of the Twelve Ruths, v, 
vi, 7 acq. 
Eleven Raichs, 88 

arranged by Gtidarz and 

Pintn, 95 &eq. 
Firdaual'a reflections on, 
7, 98, 106 
Bedouins, 148 

commanded by Zahir in Kai 
Khus rail's host, 148 
Bhinia, One of the fire Pandavjw, 

138. 139 
Bid, a dlv, 296 

Bihisht (Paradise), the name of 
the country round Gang, 
195 

Bilizid, the horse of Siyawueh 
and subsequently of Kai 
Khusrau, 172, 303 

Blstun, mountain, 190 

Bizhan, franian. hero, v, vi, 7, 8, 
13, 26 acq., 39 seq-, 5 6 > 77. 
S3 aeg., 87, 88, 91, 102, 117 
jeg.j 123 seq., 132 
147, 292, 306 aeq. 

INDEX 

371 

Bizhan, a favourite with the 

poet, 8 
desires to fight Humdn, 39 
asks Glv to lend him the 

mail of Siyrtwush, 40 
seeks Gfidarz' permission td 

fight Humrfn, 41 
receives the mail of Siyawush 

front Glv, 45 
parleys with Human, 45 
returns after the fight in 

Humitn's armour, 51 
defeats night-nttackaiid slays 

Nastlhan, 54 
referred to, 76 

attacks with Giv Pintn's 

centre, 83 
fights with Farshidward, S7 
chosen to fight with Ruin, 97 
slays RtUn, 103 
asks Gfidarz for help for 

Giiatnham, 1 17 
rescued Gustaham, 124 esq., 

132 

brings back the corpses of 
Lahhdk and Farshidward, 
136, 152 

and other nobles remonstrate 
with Kai Khusrau for re- 
fusing audience, 275 
have audience with Kai 
Khusrau, 283 seq. 

Kai Khusrau's gift to, 295 

brings Luhntep before Kai 
Khusrau, 300 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 
on his pilgrimage, 306 

refuses to turn back when 
bidden by KaiKhuarau, 307 

anil his comrades fare welled 
aud warned by Kai Khus- 
rau, 308 
lose all trace of Kai 
Khusrau, 308 

hits end, 309 

Gudarz' grief for, 310, 312 
his sons go with iiarir to 
Rum, 360 

Bizhan, his sons hail Gushtasp 

as Shdh, 362 
Boot, golden, 34, 180, 243, 282, 

300. 359 
Brahman, 50 

Bride, The, name of one of Kai 
Katus' treasures, 295 
given by Kai Khusrau to Giv, 
Zil, and Rustam, 295 
Bukhara, city, 6$, 154, 255 
KurttkhSn sent to, 154 
Afrasiyab joins Kurdkhin at, 
186 

Fire-temple built by Tiirat, 
255 

Bdrab, court-farrier to Caesar, 326 
refuses to employ Uushtasp, 
327 

Burjrfsp, Turanian hero, z6 

commands the left wing, 26 

BurzuyaU, Tunf-Dian hero, 182 
fights with Kai Khusrau, 1S2 

Bust, fortress and district in Sistan, 
65 

C 

CjESAE, ix, 314, 325 eeq., 333 

339 , 34S seq, 
daughter of = Katuyun, 314 
capital of, founded by Salm, 

325 

NaBtdr, master of the herds 
to, 325 
refuses to employ Gush- 
tdsp, 326 
Buntb, conrt-farrier to, 326 
refuses to employ Gusli- 
tasp, 327 
proposes to give his eldest 
daughter in marriage, 329 
hjs wroth at her choice of 

Gushtasp, 330 
yields to bishop's counsel, 331 
refuses to provide for his 
daughter and Gusht4sp P 33I 
bids Mfrln slay the wolf of 

Fftskdn, 333 
inspects the slain wolf, 341 

372 

INDEX 

Ciesar, marries his second daugh- 
ter to Mirin, 341 

bida Ahran slay the dragon 
of Mount Sakila, 342 

his third daughter, 342 a&£. 
married to Ahran, 348 

rejoices hi his two sons-in- 
law, 348 

proclaims the tidings of the 
slaughter of the wolf and 
the dragon, 349 

his sons-in-law display their 
accomplishment on the 
riding-ground t 349 

sees CJushtitsp's prowess and 
questions hi.111, 350 

learns the truth about the 
wolf and the dragon, and 
asks pardon of Gushtiisp 
and Katayun, 351 

is wroth with Mirin and 
Ahran, 351 

seeks to find out through 
Katilyun who Gufahtitsp is, 
351 

receives Gushtasp with hon* 

our at court, 352 
IlysXs refuses to pay tribute 

to, 352 

receives a scornful message 
from Mirin and Ahran, 353 

takes counsel with Gushtdsp, 
353 

bids Gushtasp lead forth the 
host, 354 

arrays the host, 355 

Gushtdsp brings the dead 
body of Iiyas to, 355 

welcomes Gushtasp after hfe 
victory, 356 

consults Gushtasp about de- 
manding tribute from Ti&n, 

Sends an envoy to Luhrasp, 
356 

gives audience to Zai ir, 360 
replies to and dismisses Zarlr, 
361 

Gesar, questions GushfcEsp, 361 
sends Gushtasp to Zarlr's 

camp, 361 
goes to feast with Gushtasp 
ftnd discovers who he is, 363 
gives gifts to Katayun, 363 
the Iranian chiefs, 364 
parts in good-will from Gush- 
tasp, 364 
Caspian Sea, 136 

Gates, 315 
Caucasus, 316 

Cavern of Afrasiyab, 1 36 seq., 259 
seq, 

Chach (Tashkand), eity in Tdran, 

19, 187, 1S8, 255 
Chares, of Mytilene, 314 

quoted, 314 
ChigiJ, city in Turkistan, 155 
Chijast (Khanjast), lake (Uru- 

miah), 136 note 
Chin, country (often = Turin), 10, 
II, so, 00, 63, 78, 133, 151, 
166, 196, 197, 202, 203 h 208, 
219 teq., 228 seq., 233, 234, 
236^?., 245, 246, 251, 252, 
256, 260, 272, 312, 317, 323 
KhfLii of, 60, 219 
lord of = Mahmrid, 142 
brocade of, 151, 243, 254 
king of=Afi-aaiyab, 165, I?0, 
230 

prince of— Afrisiyrib, 194 
Faghfur of. See Faghftlr 
Sea of, 237, 254 
dinars of, 241 
Contents, Table of, v 

D 

Daghwi, desert in Turk is tan, 117 
Dahistan, city in Tabaristd'ii, 61, 

72. 79. 148. 157 
Ditnaghiui, city in Tabaristdn, 

255 

Dambar, city in Hind, 278, 283, 
2S4 

Damur, Turanian hero, 156 

INDEX 

373 

Darmesteter, Professor, Oti AfrasI' 
yab's capture by Hum, 136 
Dashma, Fnlnian hero, 148 
Deipnosi&hi8tfE,oi Athenians, 314 

quoted, 314 
Dliarma, Indian god of righteous- 
ness, 138 
follows in the form of a dog 
the Ptfadav&s in their pil- 
grimage, 739 
Dilafruz, friniaa hero, 147 

stationed on Kai Khusrau's 
left hand, 147 
Dilinjim, Caaar's second daugh- 
ter, 333 
asked in marriage by Mtrfn, 
333 

married to Minn, 341 
Div, demon (Daeva), 86, 87, 177, 
288, 296 
binder of the = Gfidarz, 3.5 
binder of the=Rustam, 57 
= J£hriman, 63, 84, 201, 206, 
278, 282, 286, 289 seq., 3.01, 
322. 341 
"White, 136, 296 
Don, river, 315 note, 316 
Dragon = Hamdn, 43, 52 
=AinJsiy£b, 270 
of Mount Sukila, ix, 342 teq., 
35i 

Gushtasp keeps two teeth 

of, 346 
teeth of, produced by 

Hiahwi to Caesar, 351 
referred to, 358 
Draupadi, joint wife of the five 
Pitndiivas, i38and»o(e, 139 
Drvdapa, genius of cattle, 137 

E 

Eleven Rukhs, Battle of the, 88 
a rra aged by G udarz an d 

Pirdn, 95 seq. 
Firdausi'a reflections on, 7, 
98, 106 
Equinox, autumnal, 313 

F 

Faohfuk, dynastic title of the 
princes of Chin and Mdchi n , 
vii, viii, n, 135, 196, 238 
seq. 

helps Afiiisiydb, 219 

and Khdn sue to Kai Khusrau 

for peace, 229 
orders Afrasiy£b to quit 

Khutan and Chin, 230 
grants facilities to Kai Khus- 
rau on his march through 
Chin, 239 
and the Khim of Chin, wel- 
come Kai Khusrjiu, 240 
confirmed in the posses- 
sion of Mdcliin and 
Chin, 252 
Farab, desert, 185 
Faramarz, son of Rustam, 14 
Farangis, daughter of Afnisiydb, 
wife of Siystwush, mother 
of Kai Kliusrau, 
referred to, 205, 213, 216 
death of, referred to, 304 
Farhrid (Phraates), Tninian hero, 
13, 15, 21, 25, 42, 147, 292 
left in command by Gtv, 83 
put in command of the left 

wing, 92 
left at Gang-bihisht, 219 
Farihurz, son of Kai K litis, v, vi, 
*3- 34, 37< 9i. 3o6 seq. 
commands the right wing, 24 
superseded pro tern, liy Kat- 

1 intra, 92 
chosen to tight with Kultutd, 
97 

slays Kulb&d, 99 
commands with TuktiAr the 

troops from Khriwar, 148 
stays Fartus, 181 
commands the right, 191 
takes part in the siege of 

Gnng-bihiaht, 199 
and other nobles remonstrate 

374 

INDEX 

■with Kai Khusrau for re- 
fusing audience, 275 
Kai Khusrau's gift to, 295 
seta out with Kai Khusrau 

on his pilgrimage, 306 
refuses to turn, back when 
bidden by Kai Khusrau, 
307 

and his comrades fare welled 
and warned by Kai Khns- 
rau, 308 

lose all trace of Kai 
Khusrau, 308 
vainly rem i nda h is com- 
rades of Kai Khusrau's 
warning, 309 
his eml, 309 
Faridiin, Shah, viii, 17, 66, 69, 89, 
91, 142, 149, 151, 153, 168, j 
174,203,204,221,222,255, j 
259, 260, 262, 266, 269, 2S6, 
2S9, 399. 313, 328 j 
Fariyab, city between Balkh and 1 
Jlat-v, 65 I 
Farshidward, Turanian liero, vi, | 
7, 10, 85 seq,, 112 seg-, H9, 
121, 122, 125, 132, 133, 153, 
160, 162 

commands with Lahlu'ik the 

right wing, 26 
attacks the frdniana in Hank, 

82 

opposed by ZangA, S3 

goes to help Piran andattacks 

Giv, 85 
his prowess, S6 
fights with Gurdza, 87 

BLzhan, 87 
and Lab 1 1a k h put in join t 
command, 94 

Plrnn's instructions to, 
95 

hear of th e d eath of 
Pi rin and the coming j 
of Kai Khusrau, 112 
lament for Piran, 112 I 
take counsel with the I 
host, 113 \ 

Farshidward and Lahhak, tight 
and escape from Iranian, 
outpost, 116 
referred to, 11 8, 120, 126 
repose themselves, 121 
their corpses brought 
back by Bizlian, 126, 
132 

their deaths announced 
to Afrisiyab, 152 
Fartus, Turanian hero, 181 
slain by Fariburz, ijfj 
Faru d , sou of Siy i wual 1 and 
half-brother of Kai Khus- 
rau, 42, 135 
Farukhzad, name assumed by 
Gushtasp in Rum, 351 seq., 
357, 3&o 
Faskun, forest of, 333, 335 seq. 
wolf of, ix, 333, 336 teq. 

description of, 333, 336 
Mirin bidden by Csedar 

to slay the, 333 
Gushtasp undertakes to 
slay the, 336 

keeps the tusks of, 
338 

tusks of, produced before 
Caesar by Htahwi, 351 
Fazl, son of Ahmad. See Abu'l 

'Abbas Fazl 
Firdausi, 8, 136, 13S, 314, 316 
occasion of Mahmild's al- 
leged repentance for his 
treatment of, 8 
his reflections on the Battle 
of the Eleven Riikks, 7, 98, 
106 

praises Mahmud, 139 seq, 
autobiographical references 
of, 141 seq. 
Firuz, TranLan king, 149 
Fish, mythological, 279 
Frangrasyan(Afrasiyab), 137, 13S 
Furuhil, franiaii hero, vi, 24, 33 
chosen to fight with Zangnla, 
97 

slays Zangula, 101 

INDEX 

■ G I 
Gabriel, angel, 140 j 
Gang, mountain, 162 | 
Gang, stronghold, 154, 136, 258 ! 
king of =Afr£siyab, 134 
two places known as, 136 
=Gang-bihieht, 190, 195, 197, 
198, 202, 2oS, 2iS, 220, 221, 
229, 232 
description of, 195 
besieged by Kai Khus- 
rau, 198, 208 seq. 
taken by storm, 209 seq. 
=Gang-dizli, 247 seq. 
Gang-bihisht, stronghold, vii, 135, 
136, 1S7, i9S«eg M 20? ' 
218,228, 238 
Afrasiyab at, 187 

marches from, 190 
returns to, 196 
description of, 195 
prepared for a siege by Afra- 
siyab, 197 
besieged by Kai Khusrau, 

198, 208 seq. 
taken by storm, 209 seq. 
occupied by Kai Khusrau 

for a while, 21S 
Gudarz left in command of, 
219 

Gustahani, son of Naudar, 

Left iti coiumaud of, 2 58 
Kai Khusrau dwells a yuar | 

i». 254 j 
Gang-dizh, stronghold, viii, 135, , 

136, 186 note, 203, 247 J 

seq,, 257, 264 
Afrasiyab takes refuge at, 

230 

Kai Khusrau resolves to pur- 
sue Afrasiyab to, 231 
marches to, 247 
forbids hia troopa to in- 

jure, 247 
enters, 248 

remains a year at, 249 

G&ng-dizh, Kai Khusrau advised 
by liia paladina to leave, 
249 

appoints a governor for, 
249 

distributes treasure at, 
250 

Garshvaz, brother of Afrdsiyab, 

viii, io, 135 seq., 209 seq., 

252, 268 
put in charge of the ete- 

phants 1 156 
reinforces Afrasiyab, iS r 
and J ah u compel Afrasiyab 

to quit the fieEd, 182 
commands tiie rear, 191 
at the storming of Gang- 

bihisht, 209 
taketi prisoner by Rustan], 

210 

referred to, 211 

aent to Kai Kaus, 233 

imprisoned, 235 

dent for by Kai K&ua and 
Kai Khusrau and put to 
the torture, 265 

his voice attracts Afrasiyab 
from lake Urunilali, 265 

holds converse with Afra- 
siyab, 266 

slain by Kai Khusrau, 269 
Gazhd&baoi, Iranian hero, 13, 24, 
149 

Ghfti-clia, country (Georgia), 14, 
6 5» 149 
king of, 149 
Glntznfti, city in KAbulistan, 14 
Ghundi, a div, 296 
Ghuz, a Turkman tribe, 60 
GUan, region in Tran on the 
south-western shores uf 
the Caspian, i48 f 265 
river of, 154 
Afrasdyib's camp in, J55 
Giv, frriniun hero, v, vi, viii, 7, 
8, 11, 13, 15 seq., 24, 26 
seq., 39 seq., 52, 54, 56, 59, 
69, S2 seq., 90, 99, 102, 

37& 

INDEX 

136, 147, 157, 223,226,227, 
233 seq., 292, 296, 306 seq. 

holds parley with Pirrin, 20 

hie overtures rejected, re- 
turns to Gudarz, 21 

commands the rear, 24 

referred to, 39 

tries to stop Bizhan from 

fighting Human, 40, 43 
over-ruled by Gudarz, 43 
refuses to lend Bizhan the 

mail of Siyawush, 43 
repents of his refusal, 44 
son of=Bizhan, 76 
ordered to dispatch troops to 

oppose Lahhak and Far- 

sh Ed ward, 82 
sends Zanga and Gurgin, S3 
leaves F&rhdd in command 

and attacks with Bizhan 

Piraii's centre, 83 
defeats Ruin, 84 
fights with Pirai], S4 
attacked by Lidihak and Far- 

shidward, 85 
superseded pro tem. by Shf- 

diish, gz 
chosen to fight with Gurwi, 

97 

takes Gurwi prisoner, 100 
opposes Bizhan's going to 

help Gustaham, Jig 
consents to Bizhan's going to 

help Gustaham, 120 
brings Gurwi before Kai 

Khusrau, 127 
given a command, 149 
commands the rear, 191 
takes part in the siege of 

Gang- bih [slit, 199 
goes with the captives to Kai 

Kins, 233 
gives Kai Kaiis tidings of 

Kai Khusrau, 234 
rewarded by Kai Kaus, 236 
returns to Gan^-Mhisht with 

letter for Kai Khusrau, 238 
made governor of the country 

between the sea and Gang- 

dizh, 246 
welcomes Kai Khusrau on his 

return from Gang-dizh, 250 
rewarded by Kai Khusrau. 

2 52 

and Gudarz meet Htim, 263 
hear of Hum's adventure 
with Afrjtfiiyab, 263 

and other nobles remonstrate 
with Kai Khusrau for re- 
fusing audience, 275 

sent by Gudarz to summon 
Zal and Ruatam, 27S 

and other chiefs make, by 
Kai Khusrau's orders, an 
assembly on the plain, 
291 seq. 

Kai Khusrau's gift to, 295 

receives grant of Kum and 
Ispahan, 29S 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 
on hia pilgrimage, 306 

refuses to turn back when 
bidden by Kai Khu&rau, 
3°7 

and his comrades farewelled 
and warned by Kai Khus- 
rau, 308 
lose all trace of Kai 
Khusrau, 308 
hia end, 309 

Giidarz" grief for, 310, 312 
Givgan, Iranian hero, 24 
Glory, the divine. See Grace 
Golden boot, 34, 180, 243, 2S2, 
3°°, 359 

Grace, or Glory, the divine, 24, 32, 
69. 79> 93» I37 r 138, 168, 
1 1$ seq., 184, 203, 220, 236, 
248, 249, 257, 260, 268, 
271, 273, 279, 283, 288, 
290, 293, 302, 303. 307. 
317. 33°» 338. 34Sr 35S 

Gudarz, Iranian, hero, v, vl, viii, 
7, 13, 15 seq., 52 seq., 79, 
So, 85, SS seq., 102, 103, 
106 seq.t 113 seq., 126 seq., 

INDEX 

377 

136. 145 seq., 149, 157, 162, 1 

171, 180, 191, 206, 226, 227, I 

292, 294 seq., 298, 299, 306, j 

3°7r 310, 312 
sent to invfl.de Turin by Kai 

Ehusrau, 15 
ordered to negotiate -with 

Putin, 15 
negotiations failing, marches 

from Raibad to meet Pfitin, 

22 

arrays his host, 24 

gives the right wing to Fari- 

burz, 24 
gives the baggage to Ha] Lr, 24 
gives the left wing to Ruli- 

ham, 24 
Gives the rear to Giv, 24 
posts a watchman on the 

mountain- top, 25 
takes his station at the 

centre, 25 
counsels Bizhan as to his 

fight with Hiimdn, 41 
over-rules Giv's objections,43 
rewards Bizhan, 52 
prepares to resist a night- 
attack, 53 
gives a force to Bizhan, 54 
joins battle with Piran, 55 
writes to Kai Kliuarau, 56 
sends Hajir with the letter, 

57 

receives Kai Khuarau's reply, t 
62 

prepares to renew the fight, 
63 

receives Rfiio with a letter 

from PSran, 67 
entertains Kutu, 68 
dismisses Ituiu with presents 

and the reply to Plrrin's 

letter, 74 
prepares fur the flunk-attack 

of Lalihak and Farshid- 

ward, 82 
sends Hajlr with orders to 

GIv f 82 

darz, harangues the host, 89 
resolves tb £glit in. person, 

90, 92, 96 
gives the left wing to Far- 

hdd, 92 
gives the right wing to Kat- 

mara, 92 
gives the rear to Shidosli, 

92 

gives the chief command to 

GustaJiam, 92 
instructs Gustaham, 92 
holds a parley witli Pinto 

and arranges with him 

the Battle of the Eleven 

Rtikhs, 95 seq, 
slays Pirrfii's steed, 10? 
pursues Putin, 108 
ca!l8 on Pir,in to surrender, 

10S 

is wounded by Piran, 108 

slays Pirtfn, 109 

drinks Pinto's blood, 109 

se nds K 1 1 h hrim to f e tch 

Piritii's corpse, no 
harangues the host, no 
renames his command, m 
calls for volunteers to pursue 

Lahhak and Farahldward, 

116 

Senda Gustaham, 1 1 7 

Ilizhau to help Gusta- 
ham, 119 
comes before Kai Klmsrau 
with the other champions, 
126 

receives Ispahan, 129 
commands the left wing, 147 
takes part in the assault on 

Gang.biliisht, 208 
left in command at Gaug- 

bihisht, 219 
and Glv meet Hum, 263 

hear of Hum's adventure 
with A f rasi)- Ah, 263 
gives Kai Khusrau mid Kai 

Kaiis tidings of AfnLsiydb, 

264 

378 

INDEX 

Gi'ularz, and other nobles remon- 
strate with Kai Khusrau 
for refusing audience, 275 

Tua, and other nobles take 
counsel, 277 

sends Giv to summon Z&l 
and Rustam, 27S 

goes with other chiefs to 
meet Zal and Rust am, 282 

Ins audience with Kai 
Klmsrau, 283 aeq. 

and other chiefs make, by 
Kai Khusrau's orders, an 
assembly on the plain, 291 
seq. 

Kai Khusrau's charge to, 

294 
gift to, 295 
asks Kai Khusrau for a 

patent for Giv, 29S 
his numerous descendants, 

298 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 

on his pilgrimage, 306 
turns back at the bidding of 

Kai Khusrau, 307 
lament. 1 * the loss of the 

paladins, 310, 312 
returns to Xiiti, 310 
promises fealty to I.uhrasp, 

312 

his grandsons go with Zarlr 
to Rum, 360 
hail Gushtasp as Sh£h, 
362 

Gulzarytin, river (the Jaxnrtes!), 

187, 180, 190, 218, 219 
Quran, king of Kirmfdi, 146 
Guraza, Fiduian hero, vi, 55, 
24, 34 

fights with Far*hidward, 8/ 
chosen to light with Siyamuk, 
97 

slays Siyamak, 100 
Gnrdgir, son of Afntsiy&b, 156 

commands the troops from 
1 The Hystaspes of legend (see pp. 
Dnriua I, 

Tar tar v, Khallukb, and 

Balkh, 156 
Gurgan, city in eastern Mizmt- 

daran, 61 
Gurganj, capital of Khdiazm, 60 
Gurgin, frdnian hero, vi, 13, 15, 

2T, 24 t 147, IO/I, 292 

opposes Lahbik, S3 

chosen to fight with Andarf- 

man, 97 
slays Andsrimihi, 104 
and other nobles remonstrate 

with Kai Khusrau for 

refusing audience, 375 
has audience with Kai 

Khusrau, 283 seq. 
Gurkan (? Gurgan, q.v.), 6$ 
Gurfikhan, friniaii hero, 149 
Gurwl, Turanian hero, vi, 7, 99, 

lit, 252 
chosen to fight with Giv, 97 
taken prisoner by Glv, 100 
brought by Glv before Kai 

Khusrau, 127 
executed, 129 
Gushtasp (Hystaspes 1 ), Shall, ix, 

314 seq., 318 seq., 334 «9-, 

343 «?• 
son of Lnhrasp, 31S 
big jealousy of the grandsons 

of Kai Kalis, 31S 
asks Luhrasp to appoint him 

heir to the crown, 318 
departs in wrath for Hind, 

arrives at Kdbnl, 320 
overtaken by Zarlr, 320 
takes counsel with the chiefs, 
321 

returns to Luhnisp, 322 
pardoned by Luhiasp, 322 
determiues to quit Iran, 323 
takes a steed of Luhrasp's, 
323 

his interview with Hishwl, 
324 

314 seq. ), not necessarily the father of 

INDEX 

379 

Gushtasp, vainly seeks work in 
Rfim as a Bcribe, 325 
as & herdsman, 326 
cam el- driver. 326 
blacksmith, 327 
dreamed of by Kutdyun, 329 
goes to Caesar's palace, 330 
chosen for her husband by 

Katayon, 330 
marries Katayun, 331 
spends his time in the chase, 
332 

makes friends with Hishwi, 
332 and note 

asked by Hishwi to under- 
take the adventure of the 
wolf of Fasktin, 335 

undertakes to stay the wolf 
of Ffekun, 336 

provided with steed and jirms 
by Mirin, 336 

goes with Mirin and Hishwi 
to the forest of F£akun, 337 

prays for help, 337 

gives thanks for his victory, 
338 

takes the wolf's tusks, 338 

welcomed by Hishwi and 
Mirin 011 his return, 339 

discovers to Katayiin his 
royal race, 340 

referred to, 343 *eq. 

asked by Hishwi to under- 
take the adventure of the 
dragon of Mount Sakila, 
345 

bids Ahran provide a steed, 

sword, and other arms, 345 
goes with Ahran and Hishwi 

to Mount Sakila, 346 
takes two of the dragon's 

teeth, 346 
gives thanks for his victory, 

347 

welcomed by Hishwi and 
Ahran on his return, 347 

Gushtesp, accepts gifts from 

Ahran and bestows part 

upon Hishwi, 347 
retuniB to Katayiin, 348 
goes to the sports on Caesar's 

riding-ground, 340 
his prowess at polo and 

arcliery, 350 
questioned by Caesar, 350 
reproachee Gesar for his 

treatment of Katayun, 350 
claims to have slain the wolf 

and the dragon, 351 
his claim confirmed by 

Hishwi, 351 
reconciled to Cseaar, 351 
goes to court and is received 

with honour by Cfesar, 351 
consulted about IlySs by 

Caesar, 353 
leads forth the boat, 354 
refuses the overtures of Ilyis, 

354 

brings the body of Ilyis to 

Csesar, 356 
routs the hoat of Ilyas, 356 
returns in triumph to Cfesar, 

356 

recnynised by Zartr, 360 
goes to Zarir'a camp, 361 
hears of Luhntsp's abdication 

in his favour, 362 
saluted as Shah by the chiefs, 

362 

invites Caesar to a feast, 362 
sets out for frin with 

Kataytin, 364 
parts in good- will from Caesar, 

3*4 

welcomed and crowned by 
Luhntsp, 364 
GustaJiam, the son of Gazh- 
dahani, 1 vi, J, 13, 1 5, 24. 
33. 93. 1 16 aeq., 132 «y„ 
149, 191, 292, 295, JOOiivy. 

tights with Andarinun, 87 

1 Cf. Vol, ii. p, 418 note. 

38a 

INDEX 

Gustaham, made commander-in- 
chief pro tern, vice Giidarz, 
92 

his instructions, 92 

resitrim his command to 

GfidarZ, III 
volunteers to pursue Lahhak 

and Farslifdward, ti6 
wounded, 123 
rescued by Bizhan, 124 seq. 
healed by Kai Khusrau, 
133 

and other nobles remonstrate 
with Kai Khusrau for re- 
fusing audience, 275 

lias audience with Kai 
Khusrau, 283 seq. 

Kai Khusrau' s gifts to, 295 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 
011 his pilgrimage, 306 

refuses to turn back when 
bidden by Kai Khusrau, 
3°7 

and his comrades farewelled 
and warned by Kai Khus- 
rauj 308 
lose all trace of Kai 
Khusrau, 308 
his end, 309 
Gustaham, son of Naudar, 15/, 
194 

Kai Khusrau sends troops to 

succour, 157 
attacks the Turanians, 178 
sent to Chj£ch with troops, 

188 

reports his defeat of Kura- 
khan, 193 

takes part in the assault on 
Gang-bihisht, 20S 

left in command of Gang- 
bihisht, 23S 

goes to welcome Kai Khus- 
rau 011 his return from 
Gang-dizh, 252 

left behind as viceroy on Kai 
Khusrau's return to Iran, 
254 

H 

HAJiR, fraiiian hero, vi, 24, 103, 
147, 191 
put in charge of the baggage, 
34 

hears letter from Giidarz to 

Kai Khusrau, 57 
rewarded by Kai Khusrau, 

58 

carries Kai Khusrau's reply 

to Giidarz, 61, 62 
goes with orders to Giv t 82 t 

83 

slays Andariman's horse, 87 
chosen to fight with Sipah- 

ram, 97 
slays Sipahram, 104 
Halab, city {Aleppo}, 359, 360 
Hdmavaran, country (Yamau}, 

296, 299 
Hamawaii, mountain, 299 
Haoma(Hum), 137, 138 
Haraiti Bareza (Alburz) moun- 
tain, 137 
Himavat {Himalayas), 139 
Hind, Hindustan, 14, 60, 65, 133, 
196, 208, 272, 317, 319, 
320 
prince of } 71 
lord of — Matimfid, 142 
monarch of, 319, 3*1 
Hishwl, Rilmau toll-collector, 
324, 334 stq., 344 seq. 
his interview "with Gushtdsp, 
324 

becomes friends with Gush- 

tasp, 332 
on behalf of Mirin asks Gush 

titsp to undertake the ad- 

venture of the wolf ol 

Faskfin, 335 
goes with Guahtasp and 

Mirin to the forest oi 

Faskun, 337 
and Mirin welcome Gush* 

tasp on his return, 339 

INDEX 

Hfshwi, on behalf of Ahraii, asks 
Gush bis p to undertake the 
adventure of the dragon of 
Mount Sakila, 344 
goes with Gushttisp and 
Ah ran to Mount SftkiJa, 
346 

and Abran welcome Gushtisp 

ou hi* return, 347 
receives gifts from CJushtdsp, 

confirms Gushtasp's claim to 
have slain the wolf and 
dragon r and produces their 
teeth to Cassar, 351 
Homa, referred to, 1 35 
Hum (Haoma), hermit, viii, 135 
seq., 259 seq. 
hears Afrasiyab lamenting in 

the cave, 260 
his capture of Afnisiyab, 261 

Darmesteter on, 136 
pittes and unbinds Afrasiytlb, 
262 

tella hia adventure with Afrit- 
siyab to Gfidarz and Giv, 
263 

Kai Krius and Kai Khus- 
rau, 264 
suggests how Afrasivab may 

be recaptured, 265 
recaptures Afriiaiyib, 266 
Hdmiin, Turanian hem, v, 7, 8, 
10, 29 seq., 44 seq., 55, 56, 
61, 75. 76, 9 1 . J 18, 152 
Commands the centre, 25 
dissuaded from fighting by 

Pfran, 30 
hia parley with liizliaii, 45 
his armour worn by Bizhan, 51 
grief of the Turanians at his 
death, 51 
Hfishnhg, Sbih, 133, 286, 292, 
302 

Husruvah (Khusrau), 137. 138 
Hystuspes 1 (Gushtjfup}, 3145^5, 

I 

iBLfs, tlie Muhammadan Devil, 
206, 282 

Ighriras, brother of Afrsisiyd'b, 135, 
136, 206, 262 
given a command, 156 
liis head sent by Kai Khusrau 

to Kai Kaua, 185 
referred to, 267 
Fla, Turanian king, 1S2 

fights with Kai Khnsiau, 182 
Ilytfs, ruler of Khazar, ix, 352 seq. 
361 

tribute demanded of, by 

Csesar, 352 
refuses tribute and declares 

war, 352 
makes overtures to Gushtdsp, 

354 

Ilia dead body brought by 
Gusht&sp to Desar, 355 
India, 316 

Iraj, youngest son of Farldun, 17, 
66, 69, 136, 167, 203, 267, 
269 

IT raj, king of Kabul, 146 
fran, vi, viii, ix, 10 seq., 19, 21, 
23, 32, and passim 
lord of= Mahmiid, 142 
frtinmiis, t-iie,. vi, vii, viii, 7, io, 

20, 32, 34, and passim 
Ispahan, city, 129 

given to Gudurz, 129 
bestowed on CIS v by Kui 
KliuHiiLii, 298 
tspurtiz, mountain, 136, 230 

J 

JAHN, soti of Afrilsiyitb, vii, 155, 
156, j6z, 200 seq., 209 seq., 
214 

sent to guard Shida's rear, 
'55 

1 Cf- P- 378 note. 

3B2 

INDEX 

J aim, advances to tltc attack and 
is defeated by Kiran, 178 

stationed at the centre with 
Afrasiyab, 179 

sent to the left with troops, 
180 

and Garsiwaz compel Afnt- 
siydb to quit the field, 182 
commands the rLht, 190 
at the storming of Gang- 

biliisht, 209 
takenprisoi 1 er by Rustam, 2 1 o 
sent to Kai KdiSfc, 233 
interned by Kai K^us, 235 
spurious passage about, 272 
note. 

.Taj (? Chach, q.v.), 150 

Juinslrid, Shah, 63, 133, 149, 2Q3t 
206, 272, 274, 290, 
siatera of, referred to, 304 

Jaranjas, Turanian hero, 156 

Jihun, river (the Oxus), vii, 10, 12, 
20, 53, 60, 79, 153, 154, 157, 
iSi, 184, 187, 194. 255. 304 

•lupiter, plnnet, 143, 295 

K 

KabXb, small pieces of meat 
skewered together for 
roasting, 121 

Kabul, KabuUetan, city and 
country, 14, 65, I46, 278, 
283, 292 

/iTaeVjasta, lake (Urumiah), 1 37 

Kaf, mountain, 65, 149 

Kaian, Kaianian, race and dy- 
nasty, v, 5 seq., 24, 33. 35, 
6$, no, 127, 15°. ' 75> 
234, 260* 262, 269, 273, 279, 
2S5, 2S6, 289, 293, 30S, 319, 
324 
saying, 33 

Kai Kdfis, Shah, vii, viii, 13, 61, 
129, 135, 136, 162, 167 geq,, 
185, 191, 199, 201, 2O3, 217, 

2 1-8, 232 seq., 254, 2;6se?., 
269 seq., 278, 287, 289, 290, 

292, 295 seq., 306, 310, 314, 

321 seq. 
welcomes GW and hears his 

tidings of Kai Khusrau, 234 
gives a feast, 234 
deals with the captives, 235 
proclaims the conquest of 

Turan and Chin, 236 
rewards Giv, 236 
sends Giv back with letter to 

Kai Khusniu, 238 
hears that Kai Khuarau is 

returning, and goes with 

the nobles to welcome him, 

256 

receives gifts from, and hears 
the adventures of, Kai 
Khusrau, 257 
gives a feast in honour of 

Kai Khusrau, 2$"J 
counsels a pilgrimage to the 
temple of Azargashasp at 
Azar Abutiagan, 2 58 
and Kai Khusrau hear from 
Gudarz of Hum's adventure 
with Afrdsiyab, 264 
sendforGarslwazand put 
him to the torture, 265 
make thanksgiving be- 
fore Azargaahasp, 269 
go in state to the temple 
of A'zargaahusp, 270 
prays that he may die, 270 
obsequies of, 271 
his treasure called " The 
Bride" bestowed by Kai 
Khusrau on Giv, Zal, and 
Rustam, 295 
favour shown by Luhrasp to 
the grandsons of, 318, 321 
eeq. 

his grandsons go with ZariT 
to Rum, 360 

hail Gushtasp as Shah, 
3<5i 

Kai Khusrau, Shah, v, vi, vii, 
viii, ix, 7 seq., 19, 21, 30, 
31, 36, 56 seq., 65, 66. 71, 

INDEX 

383 

72, 76 seq., go, 99, 1 1 1, 115, 
126**5., 144 seq. t 152, 153, 
161 seq., 182 iff., 198 seq,, 
212 seq., 231 seq., 237 seq., 
262, 267 seq., 317 319, 
321 

heat's that the Turanians are 

invading Iran, 12 
summons his paladin?, 13 

host, 14 
Bends Rtiatam to Hindustan, 

14 

Luhrfap to the Aldus, 1 4 
Ashkash to Kharazm, 15 
Gaidars to Tfiran, 15 
orders Gudarz to negotiate 

with Plrdn, 15 
receives letter from Gudarz, 
58 

rewards Hajlr, tlie bearer, 58 
prays for victory, 58 
sends Hajlr with answer, 61 
leads a host to aid Gudarz, 
62 

referred to, 85 , 
his presage tluit Pi ran would 1 

be slain by Gudarz, 85, 8S I 
reaches Gudarz, m, 126 
receives Gudurz and the 

other champions, 126 
Gurwl brought by GEv before, 

127 

lament* over Pirdn, 127 
buriea Pirdii and the Turanian 

champions, 12S 
puts Gurwi to death, 129 
rewards the host, 129 J 
gives Ispahan to Gudarz, 129 j 
pardons the Turanian host, 

131 I 
amulet of, 133 

heals GuBtuhaln, 1 33 I 
suinmonsreiuforceiiieiits, 134, 
145 

his great war with Afrdsiyab, 1 

135 «S- I 
his exemption from death, 
138 1 

Klmaran, passing of, its 
parallel in Indian legend, 
13* 

recalls the troops under Lull- 
rasp, Ru&tam, ami Ash- 
kash, 145 

stations Tiia on his right 
with Kilwa'a standard, 146 

gives the right wing to Rus- 
tam, 147 

gives the left wing to Gudarz, 
147 

gives commands to various 

chiefs, 148, 149 
hears of Afrsfeiyiib's passage 

of the Jiiiun, 157 
sends troops to the aid of 

Gnwtaham, son of Naudnr, 

nt B&lkh, 157 

Ashkash with a host to 
Zam, 157 
marches to Klutnizm, 157 
surveys the seat of war and 

entrunches the host, 157 
ShEila'a embassage to, 161 
sends Kanvn to welcome 

Shida. 165 
pto[iose4 to fight in single 

combat, 166 
rejects the Iranians' sug- 
gestions of a peace, 167 
accepts Shida'e challenge, 

168, 169 
Bends Karun with n reply to 

Shidu, 16S 
arms to fhjlit with Shhla, 

171 

makes Ruhlidm his standard- 
bearer, 171 

sends instructions to the 
host, 17 1 

his parley with Shida, 172 

accepts Shldu's challenge to 
u wrestling-bout, 175 

gives Ruhtiiini charge of his 
steed, 175 

wrestles and overthrows 
Shhln, 175 

3^4 

INDEX 

Kai Klmsrau. instructs Rnhham 

to bury Shida, 176 
sparer the life of Shida's 

interpreter, and bids him 

return to Afrasiyab with 

tidings, 176 ! 
prays for vengeance on, nod j 

attacks, Afrisiyib, 17S 
bids Shaniindkh attack, 180 
attacks with Rust am from 

the centre, 180 
fights with Ustukila, Til and 

Burzuyalii, 182 
returns to camp, 183 
hears of Afrctsiy&Vs retreat, 

184 

offers praise to God, 184 
pursues Afrasiyab, 185 seq. 
marches to Sughd, 1S8 | 
hears tidings of Afrasiyab, 1 

!8S 1 
sends Gustaliam, son of 1 

Naudar, to Chach, 188 
Rustam to encounter j 
Tawnrg, 188 ! 
marches from Sughd and re- \ 

duces the Turkman strong- ! 

holds, 189 
to the GulzaryiSn, 1S9 ', 
commauds the centre, 191 | 
prays for victory, 191 1 
hears of the defeat of Kara- j 

khan by Gustaham, son of 

Naudar, 193 
hears of R us tain's defeat of 

Tawurg, 193 
■warns Rustam to beware of 

Afrasiyab, 194 
plunders the camp of, and 1 

pursues, Afrasiyab, 195 
besieges Gang-bihtsht, 198, ' 

zoS seq. j 
converses with Rustam, 198, , 

199, 22* I 
receives Jalin in audience, ' 

200 

declines AfrasiyiVs proposals 1 
for peace, 207 

ii Khusrau, with Rustam, Gub- 
taham, son of Naudar, and 
Gudarz, assails Gang- 
bihisht on all sides, 208 

seq, 

prays for victory, zo8 
takes Gaug-bihiebt by storm, 

209 stq. 
searches vainly for AfnUiyab, 

2iz 

gives the spoil of Gang- 
bihtsht to the troops, 217 

grants quarter to the Turk- 
mans and assumes the 
government of Turin, 2tj 

dwells for a while at Gang- 
hihisht, 218 

leaves Giidarz and FarhaM at 
Gang-bihisht, 219 

mareh.cs against Afrasiyab, 
220 

rejects AfriaiyaVa overtures, 

22J 

fights a general engagement 
against Afrasiyab, 223, 226 
entreuches bis troops and pre- 
pares with Tub and Rustam 
for a nijjht- attack from 
Afrasiyab, 224 
repulses Afrasiyrfb's night- 
attack, 225 
defeats Afnfeiyab, 227 
receives tlie submission of 

Afrdsiyab's army, 228 
gives a feast, 22S 
offers praise to God, 228 
returns to Gang-bihisht, 226 
accepts the submission of the 

Khan and Faghitir, 329 
resolves" to pursue Afrasiyab 

to Gang-dizh, 231 
his plan opposed by the host, 
231 

supported by Rustam, 
23 r 

agreed to by the host, 

232 

sends Glv with Afr&siyab's 

INDEX 

385 

captive kindred to Kai 

Kaus, 232 
leaves Gu.sta.ham, son of 

Naudar, in command at 

Gang-bihisht and marches 

to Chin, 238 
demands facilities from the 

Khan, the Faghf&r, and 

the king of Makran, 23S 
marches through Khutan, 

240 

welcomed by the Faghfiir 
and the Khan of Chin, 
240 

stays three months in Chin, 
241 

leaves Rue tarn in Chin and 

marches to Makran, 241 
sends an embassy to the king 

of Makran, 241 
gives honourable burial to 

the king of Makran, 243 
stops the pillage of Makran, 

243 

stays a year in Makran, 244 
makes ready a fleet, 244 
leaves Ashkash as governor 

and marches to the desert, 

244 

his voyage, 245 

marvels of, 245 
lands, 246 

appoints Giv governor, 246 
receives the submission of 

the chiefs, 247 
seeks for tidings of Gang- 

dith and of Afrasiydb, 247 
marches to Gang-dizh, 247 
forbids his troops to injure 

Gang-dizh. 247 
enters Gang-dizh, 248 
searches for Afr&siyab, 248 
remains a year ut Gang-dizh, 

=49 

urged by his paladins to re- 
turn to fran, 249 

appoints a governor for Gang- 
dizh, 249 
VOL. IV. 

Kal Khusrau, distributes treasures 

at Gangdizh, 250 
marches seaward from Gang' 

dizh, 250 
welcomed by Giv, 250 
crosses the sea to Makran, 

251 

welcomed in Makran by 
Ashkash and the chiefs, 
251 

appoints a governor for Mak- 
ran, 251 
marches to Chin, 251 
welcomed by Rustam, 251 
confirms the Faghfdr and 
Kltdti in the possession of 
Mtfchin and Chin, 252 
goes with Rustam to Siya- 

wushgird, 252 
rewards Rue tarn and Giv, 
252 

welcomed by Gnstabam, son 
of Naudar, 252 

goes to Gang- bill isht, 253 

prays for satisfaction on Afra- 
(iyftb, 253 

dwells for a year in Gang- 
bihisht, 254 

desires to return to Kai Kd.t'19, 
254 

leaves Gustaliam, son of 
Naudar, as viceroy, 254 

carries off treasure from 
Chin and Makran, 254 

arrives at Ch&ch, 255 
Sughd, 255 

met by Khftzan and Tallmau, 
=S S 

makes offerings to the Fire- 

temple at Bukhara, 255 
croases the Jihun, 255 
arrives at Balkh, 255 
welcomed everywhere by the 

people, 255 
goes by Talik&n P theMarvn'id, 

NishapGr, and Damnghan 

to lint, 235 
stays two weeks at Rai, 256 
2 B 

386 

INDEX 

Kai Khusrau, announces his ftp 
proach to Kai K&us, 256 
goes to Baghd&d and thence 

to Pars, 256 
his reception by Kai Kdus, 
256 

presents gifts, and tells his 
adventures, to KaiKdfis, 257 

has a feast given in his 
honour by Kai Kdus, 257 

rewards the troops, 258 

takes counsel with Kai Kids 
concerning Afrasiyab, 258 

goes with Kai Kaiis on a 
pilgrimage to the temple of 
Azargashasp at Azar Ab£- 
dagan, 25 S 

and Kai Kdus hear from 
Gadarz of Hum's adven- 
ture with Afrasiyab, 264 
send for Garsiwaz and 
put him to the torture, 
265 

slays Afrasiyab, 268 
Garsiwaz, 269 

and Kai Kiua make thanks- 
giving before Azjtrgashasp, 
269 

his treasurer makes gifts to 

A'ziirgashasp, 269 
sends letters announcing his 

triumph to all thechiefs, 270 
holds festival and bestows 

treasure, 270 
goes with Kai Kills in state 

to the temple of Azarga- 

shasp, 270 
performs the obsequies of 

Kai Kdus, 27 1 
assumes the crown as sole 

Shah, 272 
spurious passage about, 272 

■note 

becomes world-weary, 272 
closes his court and with- 
draws to his oratory, 274 
prays that he may be taken 
from the world, 274 

Kai Khusrau, passes a week in 

prayer, 274, 279 
remonstrated with by the 

nobles, 275, 279 
repliea to the nobles, 276, 279 
passes five weeks in prayer, 

280 

hears from Surush that his 
prayer is granted, 280 

bidden to appoint Luhrasp 
as his successor, 2S1 

puts off his royal robes, 281 

receives Zal, Kustam, and 
others in audience, 283 seq. 

pardons Zal, 291 

orders tin assembly to be 
held on the plain, 291 

makes disposal of his trea- 
sures, 294 

his charge to Gudarz, 294 

his gifts to Giv, Z&l, and 
Rnstam, 395 
Gustaham, 295 
Gtidarz, 295 
Fariburz, 295 
Bizh&n, 295 
ZiVs companions, 297 

confirms Ru statu in posses- 
sion of Nimruzt 297 

bestows Kum and Ispahan 
on Giv, 298 

confirms the charge of KAwa's 
fla?, and ftfves Khur&san, 
to Tfis, 300 

summons and crowns Luh- 
rasp, 300 

Zal's protest against Lnli- 
ragp'a succession, 301 

justifies his choice of Luh- 
rasp, 301 

takes leave of the frAuians, 
30J 

his women lament for htm, 
304 

commends his women to the 

honour of Luhrasp, 305 
dismisses the Iranians, 305 
counsels f.uhrasp, 305 

INDEX 

387 

Kai Khusrau, bids Luhrasp fare- 
well, 306 

sets forth on his pilgrimage 
with some of hia chiefs, 306 

again appealed to by the 
Iranians, 306 

lib reply, 307 

bids his chiefs return, 30? 

rests with his remaining 
chiefa by a spring, 307 

prepares for his passing, 30S 

farewells his chiefs, 308 

warns his chiefs of the com- 
ing of the snow, 308 

disappears, 308 
KaiKubad, Shah, 35, 70, 147, 149, 
r68, 201, 283, 298, 302 

hie descendants, commanded 
by DUafruz, stationed on 
Kai Khusrau'a left hand, 
147 

Kai. Pashm, son of Kai Kubad, 
302 

Kakula, Turanian hero, 188 
reinforces Afrasiyab, 188 
Kalus, Ruman chief, 356 

sent as envoy to Ilyas, 352, 
358 

Luhrasp, 357 
entertained by Lull rasp, 357 
describes Guslit&gp to Luh- 

rasp, 35S 
is dismissed with honour, 359 
Kamus, Turanian hero, 297 
Kanabad, mountain, 22, 23, 37,47, 
48, 51, 55, 56, 76, 88, 112 
occupied by PirAn, 22 
Kandahar, city, 65 
Kannuj, city in Hindustan, 27s, 
283, 284 

Karan, Iranian hero and ruler of 
Khawnr, 135, 146, 
made champion of the host, 
149 

sent by Kai Khusrau to wel- 
come Sluda, 165 

bears Kai Kliusmu'B answer 
toShida, 168 

Karan, opposes and defeats Jahn, 
178 

Karkli, suburb of Baghdad, 147 
Karsiyun, Turanian hero, IO 
K&sa nid, river, 90 
Kashan, city in Turin, 189 
Kashmir, country, 14. 60, 65 
Katayun, eldest daughter of 
Csesar, ix, 329 aeq. t 348 
story of, 329 aeq. 
marriage of, 329 aeq. 
her dream of Gusbtasp, 329 
sees and chooses Gushtesp 

for her husband, 330 
marries Gushtasp, 33! 
sells a jewel, 332 
discovers that Gushtasp is of 

royal race, 340 
persuades Guslttasp to go to 
the sports 011 Cresar's rid- 
ing-ground, 349 
Ctesar reproached by Gusli- 
tAsp for his uuk indues* to, 
35° 

reconciled to Ctesar, 351 
referred to, 358 
receives gifts from Caesar, 
363 

goes to TrAn with Gtishtasp, 

Kiitmara, Iranian hero, 01 

put in command of the 
right wing, 92 
Kaiis. See Kai Kaus 
Kavi Husravah <Kai Khusrau), 

137. 138 
KAivn, the smith, 165, 178 

Hug of, 24, 25, 34, 55, 59, 9?, 
1 12, I46, I SO, 226, 243, 282, 
292, 359 
Tun confirmed in charge 
of, by Kai Khusrau, 
300 

Keres&vnsda (0arsi«--az), 137 
Khiillukli, city in Turan, 10, 156 
Kh*n of Chin, the, 60, 135, 238 

Beq. 

anil tlie FujjhfOr sue 10 

388 

INDEX 

Kai Kliusraufor peace, 

229 

grant facilities to Kui 
Khusrau on Ills march 
through Chin, 239 

welcome Kai Klmarau, 
240 

confirmed in tlie pos- 
session of Chin and 
Machin, 252 
Khiilljast (Chijaat), lake (Uru- 

miah), 136, 264 
Kharazm, country (Khiva} r 1 1 , 
12, 15, 60, 61, 72, 157, 173, 
1 86, 287 
Kharrad, Iranian hero, 15 
KhatlaiijdistrtctinBadakhshaii^ 
Khawar, district in Khurasan, 
J 47, 148 

Khazar, Kliazars, district and 
people north of the Cau- 
casus, 71, 316, 352 sej., 358, 
361 

Khurasan, 148, 2O3 
Klmarau, See Kai Khusrau 
Khu.tan } region in Turan, n, 26, 

219. 230 
monarch of t 1 1 

= Afrasiyab, 230 
Kai Khusrau marches 

through, 240 
Khuzan, a king of Pars, 146, 191 

meets Kai Klmsrau, in 

Sughd, 255 
Khuzians, people of the land of 

the sugar-cane { khuz}, the 

ancient Susiaua (Khuzis- 

tan), 146 
Klbchak, region and people, the 

Golden Horde of Jater 

times, 254 
Kinnik, sea or river in Turan, 203, 

231 

Kirman, region in southern fiatt, 
146 

Kishwad, Iranian hero, v, 20 P 3 2 > 
35, 63, 147, 174, 180, 263, 
294 1 3*°. 3 60 

Kisbwaristau, Iranian hero, 148 

commands the troopa from 
Barbaristan and Rum, 14S 
Kubard, Turanian hero, 190 

commands the left, 190 
Kubila, Turanian hero, 181 

slain by Mmuchthr, 181 
Kuhram, Turanian hero, vi, 97 

chosen to fight with Barta, 
97 

slain by Barta, 10$ 
Kulbad, Turanian hero, vi, 10, 

26 

chosen to fight with Fariburz, 
97 

alain hy FaTiburz, 99 
Kuni, city and district in 
Iran between Tihran and 
Kashan, 298 
bestowed by Kai Khusrau 
on Giv, 298 
Kunduz (Baigand), city in Turin, 

Afrasiyab encamps at, 1 51 
marches from, 154 
Kurakhau, son of Afrasiyab, 10 
summoned and sent with 
troops to Bukhara by Afra- 
siyab, 154 
joined by Afrasiyab, 186 
defeated by Gustaham, fcon 
of Naudar, 193 
Kurua t Indian tribal race, 13S 

L 

Ladan (Pashan), battle of, 27, 

37, 90, 120, 299 
Lahhak, Turanian hero, vi, 7, 71, 
86, 112 seq., 121, 122, 125, 
m 3 2 j l 3i* 1 ^°< 
commands with Farsludward 

the right wing, 26 
attacks the Tramatis in flank, 
82 

opposed by Gurgln, 83 
goes to help Pirin and attacks 
Oiv, 85 

INDEX 

Lahhak, his prowess, 86 

put in chief command with 

Farshldward, 94 
his instructions, 95 
and Farshidward hear of the 

death of Pirtfn and the 

coming of Kai Khusrau, 

112 

lament for Piran, 112 
take counsel with the 

host, 113 
fight, and escape from, 

friniau outpost, 116 
referred to, 118, 120, 126 
repose themselves, 121 
their corpses brought 

hack by Bizhan, 126, 

132 

their deaths announced 
to AfnrisiySb, ijz 
Lion's Mouth, The, place, 245 
Luhrisp, Shrfh, viii, ix, 14, 57, 
60, 65, yi, 135, 300 aeg., 
305, 306, 311 seq. t 337, 347, 

356 m- 

sent to the Aldns by Kai 

Khusran, 14 
Mb successes, 60, 71 
his troops recalled, 145 
nominated by Surush to be 

Kai Khusrau' s successor, 

281 

crowned by Kai Khusrau, 
300 

Zdt'g protest against the suc- 
cession of r 301 
his succession justified by 
Kai Khusrau, 301 
"acknowledged by Zrtl, 
302 

the chiefs, 303 
undertakes to respect Kai 

Khusrau's wives, 305 
counselled and farewelled by 

Kai Khusrau, 306 
addresses the chiefs, 311 
receives the fealty of Ztil and 

other chiefs, 312 

389 

Luhrasp, praises and rewards Zdl, 
313 

his coronation, 312 
his reign, 314 a&q. 
harangues the chiefs, 316 
makes Balkh his capital, 317 
builds the Fire- Temple of 

Barzin, 318 
shows favour to the grandsons 

of Kai KjHlb, 318, 321 ««<?. 
refuses to appoint Gushtisp 

his heir, 319 
sends Zarir in pursuit of 

Gushttfsp, 320 
pardons Guehtdsp, 322 
hears of Gushtitsp's flight, 323 
consults Zarir and the sages, 

3=3 

searches in vain for Gush- 

tisp, 324 
receives Kilus.Cfesar's envoy, 

in audience, 357 
entertains Kiiliis, 357 
consults Zarir, 358 
questions Kill us, 35S 
dismisses Kaltis with honour, 

359 

sends Zarir with other chiefs 

on a mission to Rum, 359 
his message to Cffls&r, 361 
welcomes and crowns Gush- 
fcisp on his return to frAn, 
364 

M 

MicHlN (China), 151, 203, 229, 

231. 234. 252 
Mahiihliitratti, Indian Epic, 138, 

316 

the passing of the five Prtn- 
davas compared with tlmt 
of Kai Khusrau, 138 
Mitli Afrld, daughter of Tur, 304 
Mahnu'td, Sultdn, vi, S, 139^7. 
occasion of his alleged re- 
pentance for his treatment 
of FirdausU 8 

39° 

INDEX 

Mabmud, Firdausi's praise of, 

135- i39 
Mai, city in Hind, 278, 284 
Mail of Siyriwush, v, 40, 41, 44, 

45. 5' 
referred to, 42, 43 
Makrds, country (B&lfichistfin), 
viii, 136, 203, 231, 234, 237 
adj., 254 
king of, viii, 338 seq. 

refuses facilities to Kai 

Khtisrau, 239, 242 
buried by Kai Khusran, 
243 

Kai Khusrau marches upon, 
241 

stops pillage of, 243, 244 
prepares a fleet in, 244 
sails for Gang-dizh from, 
245 

returns to, 251 
goes to Chin from, 251 
Maniishau, a kiny in Pais, 146, 

180, 191 
Marathi, Scythian people, 315 
Margh, city in Hind, 278, 284 
Marvrud, river (the Murghdb), 
2 55 

MAzandartin, country (Hyrcanta), 

86, 136, 296, 299 
Mazda {Urntuzd), 137 ' 
Media, 315 
Meru, mountain, 139 
Mihrcts, father of IJyas the ruler 

of Khaziir, 352 
Mihrgito, feast of, 313 
Mildd, Iranian hero, 83, 147, 191 
Miniichihr, Shrth, ro, 65, 69, 70, 

76, 136, 206, 2S3, 285, 

298 

Minuchihr, sort of Arasb, J48, 149, 
1S1 

commands the troops from 

Khurasan, 148 
slays Kuhiht, 1S1 
commands the left, 191 
Mirin, Ruman chief, ix, 333 seq., 

353 

Minn, asks Csesar's second daugh- 
ter, Diliinjdrn, in marriage, 
333 

bidden by Csesar to slay the 

wolf of Faskun, 333 
casta a horoscope, 334 
iiakB Hishwi to interest Gush- 

taap in his behalf, 334 
provides Grtshlisp with a 

steed and arms, 336 
goes -with Gushtisp and 

Hishwl to the forest of 

Fisktin, 337 
and Hishwi welcome Gu&h- 

tiap on his Tetura, 339 
informs Csesar that he liae 

slain the wolf, 341 
marries CasBar's daughter, 341 
consulted by Ah ran, 342 
refers Ahran to Hishwi, 344 
his letter to Hishwi, 344 
and Ahran display their 

accomplishment on the 

riding-ground, 349 
Caesar's wrath with, 351 
send a scornful message 

to CiBflfir, 353 
set to guard the bug^age, 
355 

Mytilene, Chares of, 314 
quoted, 314 

N 

Nakxjla, one ot the five Pin- 
davas, 13S 
referred to, 139 
Naphtha, black, 208,209 

its use in sieges, 208, 209 
NasttCr, Ciesar's master of the 
herds, 325 
refuses to employ Gushtasp, 
326 

Nastihan, Turanian hero, v, 53 
seq., 6i, 75, 77 
slain by Bizhan, 54 
Nastuh, fntnian hern, 148 
Nastiih, Turanian hero, 156 

INDEX 

Nandar, Shrill, 13, 61, 70, 157, 167, 
T78 t 191, 193, 2 »6» 237, *54» 

Nile, 145 seq., 180, 333 
Nfmrtlz, country,i 156, igg 

confirmed to Rust-am by Kai 
Khnsran, 297 
to Zctl by Luhrdsp, 312 
Nishapftr, city in Khurasan, 255 
Note on Pronunciation, 4 

O 

O&Atxs, Scythian princess, 315 

legend of. 315 
Omartes, Scythian chief, 315 

legend of, 315 

P 

Pandavas, the five, 13S, 139 
their pilgrimage compared 
with that of Kai Khusrau 
and hia paladins, 138 

Pitudu, Indian king, 316 

Pars, country, viii, 146, 256, 269, 
270, 318 

Pashan (Laaaii), battle of, 27, 36, 

42, 90, 206 
Pashatig, father of Afntsiyib, 7S, 

'3 6 > iS'i i74, 222. 266, 289 
Pashaiig (Shlda), son of Afrd- 

siydb. See Shida 
Pashang, father of MinUchihr, 

Pashln. See Kai Pashin 
Persia, 8 

Pirdn, Tiirdnian hero, v, vi, 7, 10 
seq., 15 seq., 29 seq., 36, 38, 
4i. 47. S3 59 &3 
acq., 88 eeq„ 93 seq., 103, 106 
seq., 112 seq., 117, 118, 129, 
134, 145, 151 seq., 159, 160, 

162, 205, 206 
sent by AfrfiaiyAb to invade 
IVrfn, II 

Plran, holds parley with Glv, 20 
informs Afrdsiydb, 20 
receives reinforcements, 20 
rejects Giv's overtures, zi 
occupies Kanabad, 22 
arrays his host, 25 
gives the centre to Human, 
25 

left to Burj&p, 26 
ri gh t to Lah h£k and 
Farthidward, 26 
sets scouts on the mountain- 
top, 26 

dissuades Human from light- 
ing, 3° 

hears of Human's death, 51 

sends Naslihan to make ;i 
night-attack, 53 

hears of Nastihan'a death, 55, 

Attacks Gudarz, 55 

proposes terms to Gudarz, 
63 

sends Rum with letter to 

Gudarz, 67 
receives Gudarz* reply, 74 
harangues his troops and 

prepares for battle, 75 
sends messenger to Afr&- 

fiiyab, 75 
receives Afrdsiyitb'a reply, 80 
becomes despondent, 8t, 98 
sends Lahhak and Fa rabid - 

ward to tako the Iranians. 

in flank, 82 
fights with Giv, 84 
appeals to Lahhak and Far- 

shidward for help, 85 
annonnces tlic proposed 

Battle of Eleven Kukhs, 

94 

gives the chief command to 
Luhh&k and Farshidward, 
94 

instructs them, 95 
holds a parley with Gudarz 
and arranges with him the 

Sea Vol. i. p. 396 note. 

392 

INDEX 

Bat tie of the Eleven Rukhs, 

95 m- 

his steed slain by Gudarz, 
107 

falls under his steed and is 

injured, 107 
flees from Gudarz, 107 
refuses to surrender, 108 
■wounds Gudarz, 108 
is slain by Gudarz, 109 
lamented for by Lahliak and 

FarBhidward, 112 
Kai Khusrau, 127 
and the Turanian champions 

buried by Kai Khusrau, 

128 

his death announced to Mrt- 

siyiib, 151 
his treasures taken possession 
of by Afntsiyab, 219 
Pisces, constellation, 364 
Pleiades, constellation, 183, 345, 
3 2 9 

Pritha, Indian princess, 316 
Pronunciation, Note on, 4 
PuHd, a div, 296 and note 

R 

Rai, city near Tihnin, 147, 255, 
256 

Raibad, mountain, 16, 17, 22, 23, 
47, 55. 76, 88, in, ii2, 
134 

occupied by Gudarz, 16 
arrival of Kai Khusrau at, 
in, 126 
lUja, Indian prince, 321 
Rakhsh, Rustam's steed, 295 
Rivniz, son of Zarasp, 360 

goes with Zarir to Rum, 360 
hails Gushtasp as Shfth, 362 
Rook. See Rukh 
RuhhSm, Iranian hero, v, vi, 13, 
15. 21, 31, 37, r 4 7 
commands the left "wing, 24 
superseded pro tern, by Far- 
hid, 92 

Ruhham, chosen to fight with 

Barman, 97 
slays Barmrfn, 102 
sent by Gudarz to fetch 

Piran's corpse, 110 
acts as Kai Khusrau's stan- 
dard-bearer in his. combat 

with Shida, 171 
protests against Kai Khus- 

rau's fighting on foot with 

Shida, 174 
holds Kai Khusrau's steed, 

175 

instructed by Kai Khusrau 
to bury Shida, 176 

and other nobles remonstrate 
with Kai Khusrau for re- 
fusing audience, 275 
Ruin, son of Pirin, vi, io, 71, 90, 
102, 152, 153, 162 

put in command of ambush, 
26 

bears letter from Piriu to 

Gudarz, 67 
entertained by Gudarz, 68 
returns to Pirinwith Gudarz' 

reply, 74 
goes to help Piran against 

Giv and is defeated, 84 
chosen to fight with Biznan, 

97 

slain by Bizhan, 103 
Rukhs, Battle of the Twelve, v, 
vi, 7 atq. 
meaning of, 7 
move of, in chess, 8 
Battle of the Eleven, 88 

arranged by Gudarz and 

Pirttn, 95 seq. 
Firdaus'i's reflections on, 
7, 98, 106 
Rum, the Eastern Roman Em- 
pire, ix, 14, 133, 148, 196, 
197, 208, 272, 312, 314, 316, 
317, 323 seq., 330, 331, 333 
339; 341 345, 348, 
349.352,353.355.356, 359. 
361- 3 6 4 

INDEX 

393 

Rum, brocade of, 128, 271, 364 

city in, founded by Salm, 325 
Roman, 357, 360, 363 

Russia, 316 
Rustam, Iranian hero, viii, 10, 

Hi 13. 27. 30, 6o, 65. M5 

seq., 157, 167, 172, 198, 222 
' seq., 226, 227, 277, 285, 289, 

292, 295 seq. t 311, 319, 324 
sent to Hindustan by Kai 

Khusrau, 14 
his successes, 6o f 7 1 
his troops recalled, 145 
commands the right wing, 147 
attacks with Kai Khusrau 

from the centre, i$o 
goes with Zawara to the right 

wing, 1S0 
sent to the desert to attack 

Tawurg, 188 
reports his defeat of Tawurg, 

T93 

advances, 194 

failure of Afrasiyib's attempt 
to surprise, 195 

takes part in the siege of 
Gang-bihiaht, 199, 208 seq. 

Kai Khusrau' s converse with, 
19S, 199 

at the storming of Gang- 
hihislit, 209 

takes Jahn and Garslwaz 
prisoners, 210 

advises Kai Khusrau to reject 
Afrdsiyab's overtures, 222 

ordered to prepare for a night- 
attack from Afni&iyiib, 224 

supports Kai Khusrau'H pro- 
posal to pursue Afrasiyab 
to Gang-dizh, 231 

left by Kai Khusrau in Chiu, 
241 

welcomes Kai Khusrau on 
his return from Gang-dizh, 

accompanies Kai Khusrau to 

SLy&wuBhgird, 252 
summoned by the Iranians 

to remonstrate with Kai 

Khusrau, 278 
with Zal and the sages, sets 

forth for Iran, 279 
met on arrival by Gfidarz and 

other chiefs, 282 
holds converse with the 

frail lans, 282 
his audience with Kai Khiis^ 

rau, 283 seq. 
and other chiefs make, by 

Kai Khusrau's orders, an 

assembly on the plain, 291 

seq. 

Kai Khusrau's gift to, 295 
confirmed by Kai Khusrau 

in possession of Nimruz, 

297 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 

on his pilgrimage, 306 
turns back at the bidding of 

Kai Khusrau, 307 
laments the loss of the 

paladi ns and returns to 

Iran, 310 
promises fealty to Lnhr&sp, 

31* 

S 

SabbAkh, king of Yaman, 146 
Sada, feast of, 317 
Sagittarius, constellation, 355 
Sahadevu, one of the live V&n- 
davas, 138 
referred to, 139 
Sakil, son of Caesar, 355 

commands the left wing, 355 
Sakila, mountain, 342 
dragon of, ix, 342 seq. 

referred to, 343, 351, 35S 
Salm, eldest son of Faiitluii, 66, 
69, 269, 272, 335 
city in Ruin founded by, 325 
sword of, 335 acq. 
Sitm, Iranian Irto, father of 7A\, 

222, 251, 290, 301, 319 
Samkunitii, Iranian hero, 149 

394 

INDEX 

Sanja, a div, 296 
Sapandirmad, month and day, 252 
Saturn, planet, 31, 214 
Scyfchia, 316 

Sliabahan^, Farhitd's steed, also 

Bizliau's, 8, 47 
Shabdfz, charger of Luhrdsp, 323 

taken by Gushtasp, 323 
Shabrang, Bizhan's steed, 8, 39, 

50, 119, 124 
Shrtlmania, 7, 8, 136 seq., 316 
editions of, 3 
metre of, S 
cosmogony of, 136 
Firdausi'sreferencest-Q,l4ise5. 
Shainnuikh, king of Sur, 57, 146 
Shapftr, Iranian hero, 292 

hails Gnahtasp as Shall, 362 
Shawaran, Iranian hero, vj, 97, 

105, 147, 275 
Strida(Pashang), son of Afrasiyab, 
vii, iaseq„ 15, 60, 135, 156, 
158 seq., 168 seq., 206, 222, 
28 7, 290 
sent by Afrasiyab to 

Kharazm, 11 
defeated by Aahkash, 60, 72 
commands the left wing, 155 
his surname, meaning of, 155 
note 

tiroes Afrasiyab to attack 

Kai Khnsrau, 159 
Afrasiyab's reply to, 160 
wishes to meet Kai Khnsrau 

in single combat, 161 
goes on an embassage to Kai 

Khusrau, 161 
has a skirmish with the 

Iranian outposts, 164 
welcomed by Karan, 165 
his mail and steed, 168 
receives Kai Khusrau's reply, 

170 

returns to Afrasiyab, 170 
goes to fight with Kai Khus- 
rau, 171 

Sliida, his parley with Kai 

Khnsrau 172 
challenges Kai Khusrau to a 

wrestling-bout, 173 
urged by his interpreter to 

flee fronj Kai KUusrau, 174 
refuses, 174 

wrestles and is overthrown, 

Kai Khuaran instructs Ruh- 
ham to bury, 176 
Shidusli, Iranian hero, 13, 15, 25, 
191 

put in Coin mand of the rear, 
92 

and other nobles remon- 
strate with Kai ELhusrau 
for refusing audience, 275 
Shingin, place or district, 65 
Sh'iruya, son of Bizhan, 360 

goes with Zartr to Rum, 3,60 
Sind, region and river (Indus), 
65. 7i 

Sipahram, Turanian hero, vi, 26, 
103 

ehosen to fight with Hajir,97 

slain by Hajir, 104 
Sistan, country, 1 14, 278 
Siyamak, Turanian hero, vi, 97 

chosen to fight with Guraza, 
97 

slain by Guraza, 100 
Siyawush, son of Kai Katis, v, 7, 
17, 18, 34, 43 seq., 50, 51,70 
seq., S9, 90, 95, 96, 102, rog, 
120, 127, 129, »3o, 137. *5 2 « 
159, 162, 167, 168, 172, 201, 

202, 204, 205, 214, 215, 221, 
223, 231, 235, 248, 250, 352, 
257, 267, 270, 271, 283, 285, 
289- 20Q, 305, 307, 3IO 
mail of, v, 40 seq., 51 

referred to, 42, 43 
murderer of = Afrasiyab, 198 
garth of = Siyawushgird, 238 
execution of, referred to, 268 

1 See Vol. 1. p. 396 note. 

INDEX 

395 

Siyttwushgird, city, viii, 250, 252 

referred to, 238 
Snghd, district and city (Samar- 
kand), 65, 188, 189, 255 
Suhrab, son of Rnstarn, 296 
Sultan, Mahratid, vi, &, 139 seq. 
occasion of his alleged re- 
pentance for liiB treatment 
of Firdausi, 8 
Flrdausi'a praise of, T39 
Sftr, city Hear Ispahan, 146, 180 
Suruah, angel, viii, [39, 203, 265, 
28 5 > 3*>3. 307 
referred to, 273 
iuforms Kai Khusrau that 

his prayer is granted, 281 
bids Kai Khusrau appoint 
Luhrftsp us his successor, 
281 

may be assumed to have ac- 
companied Kai Khusrau on 
his pilgrimage, 139, 303, 
308 

Sword of malm, 335 seq. 
Swyamvara, Indian form of mar- 
riage, 316 
Syavarshina (Siyawush), 137 

T 

Table of Contents, v 
Tahmasp, Iranian hero, 283 
Tahmuras, Shah, 133 
T&likan, city or region between 

Balkh and Marv, 65, 255 
T&Hmin, Iranian hero, 255 

meets Kai Kliuarau in Sughd, 

Tanais, river, 315 and note 
Tantz, city in Turkistan and dis- 
trict in Bodakhshan, 218 
Idols of, aiS 
Tartary, 1 56 

Taurus, constellation, 177 
Tawurg, Tfiranian hero, 188 

sent on an expedition by 
Afrisiviib, 188 

defeated by Rustum, 193 

Tirmid, place where the route 
from Balkh to Samarkand 
crosses the Oxus {Jlhun), 
65 

Tnkhar, king of Dahistan, 148 
commands with Farfburz the 

troops from Khaw-ar, 148 
slays a scout from Maknin, 

242 

Tur, second sou of Farldun, 1 1, 34, 
66, 69. TO, 78, 166, 167, 188, 
201 , 203, 206, 269, 272,290 
Fire- temple at Bukhara built 

»y. 2 5S 

daughter of, 304 
TT*r = Turan. 51, 164 

chief of=Human, f 1 

prince of=SMda, 164 
Turin, vi, viii f 10, 15, 17, 19. 20, 
and passim 

lord of=Mahmud, 142 
Turanians (Turkmans), the, v, vi, 

vii, 7, 81, 129, 223, 227 
Turkistan, 233 

Turkmans (Turanians), 10, 13, 15, 

19, 20, 22, 29, andjwariJH 
Tus, son of Naudar, viii, 13, 15, 
61, 62, 79- 91, 135. 157. 
180, 191, 224, 226, 227, 242, 
292, 296, 299, 300, 306 sf.q. 
leads a host to Kharazm, 61 
son of = Zards{>, 135 

madeoverseerof the host, 
149 

stationed an Khusrau 's right, 
146 

takes part in the siege of 
Gang- bib isht, 199 

ordered to prepare for a 
night-attack from Afra- 
siyab, 224 

and other nobles remonstrate 
with Kai Khusrau for re- 
fusing audience, 275 

Gudarz, and other nobles 
take counsel, 277 

his audience with Kni Klms- 
rau, 283 Mq. 

39& 

INDEX 

Tus, and other chiefs make, by 
Kai Khusrau's orders, an 
assemblage on the plain, 
291 seg. 
Kai Khusrau's gifts to, 295, 
300 

asks for further recognition 
from Kai Khusrau, 299 

retains the charge of Kawa's 
flag and receives Khurasan, . 
300 

sets out with Kai Khusrau 
011 his pilgrimage, 306 

refuses to turn back when 
bidden by Kai Khusrau, 
307 

aud his comrades farewelled 
and warned by Kai Khus- 
ran, 3.0S 
lose all trace of Kai 
Khusrau, 30S 
his end, 309 
Tus, city in Khurasan, 295 

the treasure of Kai Kalis 
called ' The Bride ' stored 
at, 295 

Twelve Kukhs, Battle of the, v, 
vi t 7 se%. 

U 

Ulad, a div, 296 note 
TJrmuzd 1 , the Good Principle, 139, 
185 

Unimiah (Khanjast or Cbijast}, 
lake, 136 
Afrasiyab escapes from Hum 
into, 262 and note 
U&tukila, Turanian hero, 1S2 

fights with Kai'Klmsrau, 182 

V 

VlsTASIPA (Gushtasp), 316 
Volga, river, 316 
Vouru-Kasha, sea, 137 

W 

White Div, the. See Div 
Wisa, Turanian hero, 32, 39, 50, 

54, 55. 74, 84, 95, 99, 103, 

"3. i'5, 122 
sayings of, 32 
Wisagird, city in Turan, v, 19, 

20, 65 

Wolf of Faskun, ix, 333, 336 

Seq, 

Mirin bidden by Ctesar to 

slay the, 333 
Gushtasp keeps the tusks of 

the, 338 
tusks of, produced by Hishwi 

to Caesar, 351 
referred to, 359 

Y 

Yaman, region in south-western 

Arabia, 146 
Yudhishthira, eldest of the five 

Pandavas, 13S 
his renunciation of the world 

and pilgrimage to heaven 

compared with that of Kai 

Khusrau, 13S 

Z 

ZABUL.Zabulist^n, country, 1 147, 

278, 283, 296, 31 r 
Zadsham, king of Turin, 149, 

163, 166, 178, 203 
offspring of = Afrasiyab, 178 
Zahhak, Shah, 89, 206, 274, 274, 

290 

Zahir, Iranian hero, 148 

commands the Bedouins in 
Kai Khusrau's army, 
14$ 

Zairi-vairi (Zarfr), 316 

Za], father of Rustam, viii, 13, 

1 See Vol, i, p, 396 noU, 

INDEX 

397 

147, 222 . 2 Sit 2 77, 282 
295 seg., 301, 302, 306, 
307, 310 seg., 319 

summoned by the Iranians 
to remonstrate with Kai 
Khusrau, 27S 

with Rustam and the sages, 
sets out for Iran, 279 

met on arrival by Gudarz 
and other chiefs, 2S2 

holds converge with the Ira- 
nians, 282 

his audience with Kai Khus- 
rau, 283 etg. 

asks pardon of Kai Khusrau, 
290 

and other chiefs make, by 
Kai Khusrau's orders, an 
assemblage on the plain, 
291 seq. 

Kai Khusrau*s gift to, 295 

his companions rewarded by 
Kai Khusrau, 297 

returns thanks, 298 

protests against Luhrasp's 
succession, 301 

acknowledges Luhrasp as 
Shah, 302 

sets out with Kai Khus- 
rau on his pilgrimage, 
306 

turns back at the bidding of 
Kai Khusrau, 307 

laments the loss of the pala- 
dins and returns to fran, 
310 

promises fealty to Luhrasi>, 
3" 

Zam, river and city (between 
Tirmidaiid Annvi?), 65, 157 

Zamzaui, 258 note 

Zandavnsta, 151, 228, 253, 259, 
308 

Zanga, Iranian hero, vi, 13, 15, 
24, 105, 147 
opposes Farshidward, S3 
chosen to fiVht with Akliast, 
97 

Zanga, slays Akliast, 106 

and other nobles remonstrate 
with Kai Khusrau for re- 
fusing audience, 275 
Zangula or Zangttla, Turanian 
hero, vi, 26 
choseu to fiyht with Furiihil, 
97 

slain by Fu nihil, 101 
Zarasp, franian hero, 180, 301 
Zarasp, treasurer of Kai Khusrau, 
147, 269 
makes gifts to Azargashasp, 
269 

goes with his kindred to 
the temple of Azargashasp, 
270 

his kindred go to meet Zal 

and Eustam, 283 
his descendants go with Zaiir 
to Rum, 360 
Zanisp, son of Tus, 135 

referred to, 149 
Zarathustra (Zardnhsht, Zoro- 
aster), 137 
Zarduhsht (Zoroaster), 272 
Zariadres (ZaiTi-vairi, Zarir), 314 

ttq. 

legend of, 314 aeq, 
Zarir (Zairi-vairi, Zariadres), son 

of Luhrasp and brother of 

Oushtasp, ix, 315, 31 <5, 31S, 

347. 358*62- 
sent by Lulira&p in pursuit 

of CiushtAsp, 320 
charter of, 321 
returns with Gush t asp, 322 
consulted by Luhraap, 323, 

358 

advises Luhr&p, 358 

goes with other chiufs on a 

mission to Hutu, 359 
reaches Halab, 360 
entrusts the host to Bahrain, 

360 

goes to Chjsbt's couTt, 360 
has audience with C&sur and 
recognise* (Jushtisp, 360 

398 

INDEX 

Zarir, gives Luhiisp's answer to 
Caesar, 361 
visited in his camp by Gush- 

tisp, 361 
informs GushttSap of Luh- 
rfep's abdication in his 
favour, 362 
Zav, Shrth, 285 

Zawara, "brother of Rustam, 24, 
34 

given a command, 149 

Zaw&ra, goes with Ruut&m to the 

right wing, 1S0 
Zira, Tdrdnian hero, vi, 97, 99, 

127, 129 
chosen to fight with Giv, 97 
taken prisonerby Giv, ioo, ill 
brought by Glv before Kai 

Khusrau, 127 
executed hy Kai Khusrau, 

129 

Zirih, sea or lake, 1 36 

END OF VOL. IV. 

Printed l)y BAI.I.AKTVHE, HANSON & Co. 
Edinburgh London